I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jun12.pdf

============================================================

Some  Basic Realities Israels  Military   Success  Cannot Alter, Pps.  1-2-3
The War and the  Reconciliation  As the  Greatest  of  the  Hebrew  Prophets   Foresaw  It
"And  the  land of  Judah  shall  be  a  terror  unto  Egypt  .  .  .
And  the  Lord  shall  smite  Egypt;  he  shall  smite  it  and  heal
it  ...     In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  highway  out  of  Egypt
to  Assyria;  and  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  Egypt,  and
the  Egyptian  into  Assyria;  and  the  Egyptians  shall   serve
with  the  Assyrians.   In  that  day  shall  Israel   be  the  third
with  Egypt  and with  Assyria,  even  a  blessing  in  the  midst
of   the  land;  whom  the   Lord  of  Hosts  shall  bless,   saying,
Blessed  be  Egypt  my  people,  and  Assyria  the  work  of  my
hands,  and  Israel  my  inheritance."         —Isaiah  19:17-25
L F. Stones  Weekly
VOL.  XV,  NO.  21
JUNE  12,  1967
'<"       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Harder  Battle  and  the  Nobler  Victory
Israel's  swift   and  brilliant  military  victory  only  makes  its
reconciliation  with   the  Arabs  more  urgent.     Its  future  and
world  peace  call  for  a  general  and  final  settlement  now  of  the
Palestine  problem.    The  cornerstone  of  that  settlement  must
be  to  find  new  homes  for   the  Arab  refugees,   some  within
Israel,  some  outside  it,  all  with  compensation  for  their   lost
lands  and  properties.    The  world  Jewish  community,  already
girding  itself  for  a  huge  financial  effort  to  aid  Israel,  should
be  thankful  that  its  victory  has  come  with  so  little  loss  of  life
or  damage  to  either  side.    The  same  funds  may  now  be  di-
verted   to  a  constructive  and  human  cause.    It  was  a  moral
tragedy—to  which  no  Jew  worthy  of  our  best  Prophetic tradi-
tion  could   be  insensitive—that  a  kindred   people  was   made
homeless  in  the  task  of  finding  new  homes  for  the  remnants
of  the  Hitler  holocaust.    Now  is the  time  to  right  that  wrong,
to  show  magnanimity in  victory,  and  to  lay  the  foundations of
a  new  order  in  the  Middle  East  in  which  Israeli  and  Arab  can
live  in   peace.
The  Only  Way  to  Security
This  alone  can. make  Israel  secure.    This  is the  third  Israeli-
Arab war  in  20  years.   In  the  absence  of  a  general  settlement,
war  will  recur  at  regular  intervals.    The  Arabs  will  thirst  for
revenge.    The  Israeli  will  be  tempted   again  to  wage  preven-
tive  war,  as  in  1956  and  now  again.    The  Israeli  borders  are
so  precarious,  the  communications  between  Jerusalem  and  the
coast,  on  the  coast  between  Tel  Aviv  and  Haifa,  and  up  the
finger  of  Eastern  Galilee,  are  so  narrow,  so  easily  cut,  as  to  be
untenable  in  static  defensive warfare.  A  surprise  attack  would
cut  Israel  into  half  a  dozen  parts.    A  long  war  woud  be  sui-
cidal  for  a  community  of  not  much  more  than  2,000,000  Jews
in  a sea of  50,000,000  Arabs.   Only  total  mobilization  can  de-
fend  it,  and  total  mobilization  is  impossible  for  any  extended
term  in  Israel  since  it  brings  the  wheels  of  the  economy  to  a
crawl.    The  strategic  and  demographic   circumstances   dictate
blitzkrieg,  and  blitzkrieg  is  a  dangerous  gamble.  To  be  forced
to  keep  that  weapon  in  reserve  is  ruinous.
It  is  ruinous  financially  and  it  is  ruinous  morally.    It  im-
poses  a  huge  armament  burden.  It  feeds  an  ever  more  intense
and   costly  arms  race,  as  each   side  seeks  frantically  for   ever
newer  and  more  complex  weapons.    It  brings  with  it  a  spiral
of  fear  and  hate.    It  creates  within  Israel  the  atmosphere  of
a  besieged   community,  ringed  by  hostile  neighbors,   its  back
to  the  sea,  skeptical  with  good  reason   of  the  world   commu-
nity,  relying  only  on  its  own  military  strength,  turning  every
Grim  Summation After  18  Months in  Vietnam
"This  war  is  not  being  won,  and  by  any  reasonable
estimate,  it  is  not  going  to  be  won  in  the  foreseeable
future.   It  may  be  unwinnable  .  .  .  The  Americans  and
the   Saigon   government  have  not  been  able  to   dispel
what  one   official  calls   'the  revolutionary  atmosphere'.
It  persists  and  it  is  the  property  of  the  Communists.
Non-Communist  Vietnamese refuse  to  place  themselves
in  the  center  of  the  struggle  .  .  .  The  roots  of  revolu-
tion  are  deep  in  the  peasantry  .  .  .  The  middle  class
sees  the  country  being  torn  apart  by  a  war  machine
fitted   not   to   counter  insurgency   but   for   what  Gen.
Westmoreland   correctly  calls   a   war  of   attrition.   To
Vietnamese,  it   seems   a  case  of   killing  a  man  in  an
auto  accident  to  save  him from  cancer ...  'If  we  keep
on  going  like  this,'  said  a  young  Marine  lieutenant  at
the  Demilitarized  Zone  last  week,  'my  kids  are  going
to  be  fighting  this  war'  .  .  .  Half  the  province  chiefs
in  the  country  are  corrupt,  half  the  Vietnamese   army
won't  fight,  so  you  bomb  Hanoi."
—Ward  Just,  from   Saigon   summing   up  his   impres-
sions  after   IS  months  covering  the  war,  in  the  Wash-
ington  Post,  Sunday,  June  4.
man  and  woman  into  a  soldier,  regarding  every  Arab  within
it  distrustfully as  a  potential  Fifth  Columnist,  and  glorying  in
its  military  strength.    Chauvinism  and  militarism  are  the  in-
escapable  fruits.  They  can  turn  Israel  into  an  Ishmael.   They
can  create  a  minuscule  Prussia,  not   the  beneficent  Zion   for
which  the  Prophets   hoped  and  of  which  the  Zionists   once
dreamed.    The  East  will  not  be  redeemed  by turning  it  into  a
new  Wild  West,  where  Israel  can  rely  only  on  a  quick  draw
with  a   six-shooter.
In  justice  to  Israel  no  one  can  forget   the  terrible   history
that  has  turned  the  Jewish  State  into  a  fighting  community.
Events  still  fresh  in  living  memory  illustrate  how  little  reli-
ance  may  be  placed  on  the  conscience  of  mankind.    Long  be-
fore  the  crematoria  were  built,  in  the  six  years  of  Nazi   rule
before  World  War   H,  refugees  met  a  cold   shoulder.     Our
State  Department   like  the  British  Foreign  Office  distinguished
itself  in  those  years  by its  anemic indifference to  the  oppressed
and  its  covert  undertone  of  admiration  for  the  Axis;  our  few
anti-Fascist  Ambassadors,  like  Dodd  in  Berlin  and  Bowers  in
Madrid,  were  treated  miserably  by the  Department.   The  wel-
come  signs  in  the  civilized  world  were  few,  and  even  now  if
events  were  reversed  and  Israel  were  overrun  it  could   expect
little  more  than  a  few  hand-wringing  resolutions.     Both   sides
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  12,1907
(Continued   from   Page   One)
would  play  up  to  the  Arabs  for  their  oil  and  their   numbers.
If   the   upshot  of   this  new   struggle   is  the   expropriation   of
Western  Europe's  oil  sources  in  the  Middle  East,  it  will  only
seem  to  history  a  giant  retribution  for  the  moral  failure  that
forced  the  survivors  of  Hitlerism  to  seek  a  refuge  in  the  in-
hospitable   deserts,   drawn   by  a  pitiful   mirage   that  pictured
them  as  an  ancestral  home.
A  Dangerous  Precedent  Indeed
The  precedent   of  the  cease-fire  resolution  at  the  UN   is  a
most  disturbing  one.    It  accepts  preventive war  and  allows  the
one  which  launched  it  to  keep  the  fruits  of  aggression   as  a
bargaining  card.    But  Israel  has  a  right  to  ask  what  the  UN
was  prepared  to  do  if  Nasser  had  been  able  to  carry  out  his
threats  of  total  war  and   the  complete   destruction  of   Israel.
Who  would  have  intervened  in  time?    Who  would  take  the
survivors?  These  are  the  bitter  thoughts  which  explain  Israel's
belief  that  it  can  rely  on  itself  alone.    But  to  understand  this
is  not  to  accept  it.    The  challenge  to  the  world  is  the  creation
of  a  better  order  and  first  of  all  to  remove  the  Middle  East
from  the  arena  of  great  power  rivalry;  this  alone  can  keep  it
from  becoming  sooner  or  later  the  starting  point  of  another
World  War.    The  challenge  to  Israel  is to  conquer  something
more  bleak  and  forbidding even  than  the  Negev  or  Sinai, and
that  is  the  hearts  of  its  Arab  neighbors.    This  would  be  great-
er  and  more  permanent  than  any  military  victory.   Abba Eban
exultantly  called  the  sweep  of  Israel's  armies  "the  finest  day in
Israel's  modern  history."     The  finest  day  will  be  the  day  it
achieves  reconciliation  with  the  Arabs.
To  achieve it  will  require  an  act of  sympathy worthy  of  the
best  in  Jewry's Biblical heritage.    It  is  to  understand  and  for-
give  an  enemy,  and  thus convert  him  into  a  friend.    A certain
obtuseness  was  unfortunately  evident  in  Abba  Eban's brilliant
presentation  of  Israel's  cause  to  the  Security Council.    To  rest
a  case  on  Jewish  homelessness  and  refuse  at  the  same  time  to
see  the  Arabs who  have  been  made  homeless  is  only  another
illustration  of  that  tribal  blindness  which  plagues  the  human
race  and  plunges  it  constantly  into  bloodshed.    The  first  step
toward  reconciliation  is  to  recognize  that  Arab  bitterness  has
real  and  deep  roots.    The  refugees  lost  their  farms,  their  vil-
lages,  their  offices,  their  cities  and  their  country.    It  is human
to  prefer  not  to  look  at  the  truth,  but  only  in  facing  the  prob-
In  Salute  to  Captain  Levy
It  is  not  necessary  to  feel  that  all  Green  Berets  are
monsters  to  honor  the  impulse  that  led  Capt. Howard
Levy  to  refuse  to  teach them  medicine. This  elite corps
of   counter-revolutionaries  has   its   origin   in   French
theory  about  la   guerre   revolutionnaire   which  sprang
up  in  the  wake  of  Dienbienphu, was  tried  in  Algeria,
and  has  since  been  abandoned  by  France.   Not  all  the
Frenchmen  who  applied  it   in  Algeria   were   monsters
either.   There  were  misguided  idealists  among  them  as
there  are  among  our  own  Green Berets.   But  the  whole
idea  of  reconciling  Algerians  to  colonial  domination  by
digging  a  few  wells,  treating  a  few  sick  children, and
building  a  few  schools  was  pathetic  nonsense  at  best.
At  worst  it  degenerated  into  counter-terror,  and torture.
So  it  is  in  Vietnam.   What  we  call  "nation-building"
is   nation-destroying.    The  Green  Berets   are  not  only
its   most   prestigious   symbol  but  a  model  for  similar
action  elsewhere  in the  world.  In refusing  to collaborate
with.it,  Dr.  Levy  lived  up  to  the  Hippocratic  oath,  and
history  will  vindicate and  applaud him.
lem  in  all  its  three  dimensional  frightful   reality  is  there  any
hope  of  solving  it  without  new  tragedy.
Just  as  Jews  everywhere  sympathize  with  their  people,  so
Arabs  everywhere  sympathize and  identify  with  theirs.    They
feel   that   anti-Semitic  Europe   solved   its  Jewish   problem   at
Arab  expense.    To  a  rankling  sense  of  injustice  is  now  added
a  third  episode  in  military  humiliation.    Zionist   propaganda
always  spoke  of  the  role  that  the  Jews  could  play  in  helping
to  modernize  the  Arab  world.     Unless  firm  steps  are  taken
now  to  a  general  and  generous   settlement,  this  will   become
true  in  a  sense  never  intended.  The  repercussions  of  the   1948
war  set  off  seismic  tremors  that  brought  a  wave  of  nationalist
revolutions  in  Egypt,   Syria  and   Iraq.     The   repercussions  of
this  new  defeat  will  lead  a  new  generation  of  Arabs  to  mod-
ernize  and  mobilize  for   revenge  inspired   (as  are  the  Jews)
by  memories  of  past  glory.
Considering   their  numbers  and  resources   and  the   general
rise  of  all  the  colonial  people  in  this  period,  the  Arabs  must
eventually  prevail.    Those  who  shudder   to  think  that  Israel,
with  all  it  cost  in  devotion  and  all  it  won  honorably  in  marsh
and  desert,  might  be  destroyed  after  a  short  life  as  were  the
Maccabean  and  Crusader  kingdoms  before  it,  all  who  want  it
to  live  and  grow  in  peace,  must  seek  to  avoid  such  a  solution.
Israel  cannot  live  very  long  in  a  hostile  Arab  sea.    It  cannot
The  Next  Terrible  Escalation  If  Peace  Is  Not  Made  Between Arabs  and Israeli
LORD  CHALFONT (Minister of  State,  Foreign   Affairs)
—There  was  a  more  serious  menace  lurking just  below  the
surface.    Israel   was   one  of   the   most   advanced  countries
in   the   world  in   development  of   nuclear   technology.    He
had  no  doubt  that  Israel  would  be  in  a  position  to  explode
a   nuclear  device  within  a  very  few   years   of   taking   the
political  decision  to   do  so.   If   this   was   done,  everything
would  be  violently  and  irrevocably  changed.   Whatever  we
say   now,  if. nuclear  weapons  come  into  the  picture  there
can  be  very  little  doubt  that  we  would all  become involved
in  nuclear  war.
LORD   CARRINGTON   (Cons)   —  If   Israel  felt   herself
isolated  and  had  suffered  a  reverse  of  considerable  magni-
tude,   there   would   be   increasing   temptation   for   her   to
develop  her  own  nuclear  weapons  as  a  deterrent,  and  per-
haps  in  the  last  resort  to  use  them.   If  she  let  it  be known
that  she   intended  to  do  this,  the   consequences   would  be
catastrophic.    He  hoped  this   would  be  forcefully   brought
home  at  the   United  Nations  and  that  the   possible   conse-
quences  of  inaction  would  be  underlined.  For  it  might  be
that  out  of  this  crisis  the  most  dangerous  result  would be
the  proliferation of  nuclear weapons.
THE   EARL  OF   AVON   (Anthony   Eden)—Lord   Chal-
font's  warning  was  fully  justified.  I  feel  myself  .  .  .  very
much  in  the   1930s  at   present.    If   we  were  to   try   to  do
something,  as  we  did  in  the  1930s  in  respect  to  Czechoslo-
vakia,  at  the  expense   of   Israel,  we   w.ould  deserve  all  we
got,  and  all  we  got   would  be  the  very  nuclear  danger  to
which   Lord  Chalfont  referred.   I  think  it   has  a  message
for  us  all—that  we  must  not  only  do  justice,  but  must  take
our  part  in  seeing  that  justice  is  done,  or  we  shall   suffer
as  others   will  suffer  too.    Perhaps  the  most  tragic   aspect
was  the  attempt  to  make  a  holy  war  out  of  the   situation.
It  was  terrible  that  it  should  be  thought  a  Godly  deed  to
butcher  a  whole  people, or  to  call  by  radio  for  genocide.
—House  of  Lords  debate,  The  Times  (London)  Jime  2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  12, 1967
set  its  face  against  that  renaissance  of  Arabic unity  and  civil-
ization  which  began  to  stir  a  generation  ago.     It  cannot  re-
main  a  Western   outpost  in  an  Afro-Asian  world  casting  off
Western  domination.     It  cannot  repeat  on  a  bigger  scale  the
mistakes  it  made  in  Algeria,  where  Israel  and  Zionism   were
allies  of  Soustelle  and  Massu  and  the  French  rightists.  It  must
join  the  Third  World  if  it  is  to  survive.   No  quickie  military
victories  should  blind  it  to  the  inescapable—in  the  long   run
it  cannot  defeat  the  Arabs.    It  must  join  them.    The   Jews
played  a  great  role  in  Arabic civilization in  the  Middle  Ages.
A  Jewish  State can  play  a  similar  role  in  a  new  Semitic renais-
sance.     This   is  the   perspective  of   safety,   of   honor,   and   of
fraternity.
Make  a  Friend  of  Nasser
One  crucial  step  in  this direction  is,  in  the  very  hour  of  vic-
tory,  to  heal  wounded  Arab  pride  as  much  as  possible,  and  in
particular  to  reach  a  new  understanding  with  Nasser.     Both
American  policy  and  Israeli  policy  have  sacrificed  long  range
wisdom  to  short-sighted  advantage  in  dealing  with  the  Egyp-
tian  leader.    He  is  a  military dictator,  he  wages  his  own  Viet-
nam  in  Yemen,  he  uses  poison  gas  there  against  his  own  peo-
ple,  he  runs  a  police  state.    But  he  is  also  the  first  Egyptian
ruler  to  give  Egypt's   downtrodden   jellahin   a  break,     It  is
fascinating  to  recall  that  Egypt  has  been  ruled  by  foreigners
almost   since  the   days  when   David   and   Solomon   ruled   in
Israel.    Not  until  Nasser's  time,  and  the  eviction  of  the  Brit-
ish  and  French  at  Suez, have  the  Egyptians at  long  last  become
the  master  in  their  own  ancient  house.    Nasser's  program  has
given  Egypt  its  first  taste  of  reform,  on  the  land,  in  the  fac-
tory,  in  health  and  educational  services.    His   accomplishments
certainly  surpass  those  of  a  comparable  military  figure,  Ayub
in   Pakistan.     The    U.S.   oil   interests,   Johnson's   animosity
and  Israel's  ill-will  have  been  united  in  recent  years  in  efforts
to  get  rid  of  him.     They   have  all  favored  feudal   monarchs
like  Saudi  Arabia's  whose  day  is  done.    It  is  Nasser  who  rep-
resents  the  future  and  who  can  create  the  internal  stability  so
necessary  to  peace.    The  alternative  if  he  is  overthrown   will
ultimately  be  some   far   more   fanatical  and   less   constructive
force  like  the  Moslem  Brotherhood.     If  war  makes  sense  only
as  an  extension  of  politics  by other  means  then  Israel's  victory
will   make  political   sense   only   if   it  leads   to  a   new   era  of
friendly  relations  with  Nasser.    This  is  the  biggest   challenge
A  New  Areopagitica  Out   of  Moscow
Solzhenitsyn's  appeal  to  the  Union  of  Soviet  Writers
was  smuggled  out  to  France,   published  by  Le  Monde
(May  31)  and reprinted June 5  in  the  New  York  Times.
There  are  passages  in it  whose  anguished  truth  will  live
forever   in  the   literature   of   struggle   for   freedom  of
expression.    The  author   of   One   Day   in   the   Life   of
Ivan   Denisovich  has  written  a  letter   which  stands  in
the  ever-fresh  tradition  that  reaches  back  to  Milton's
Areopagitica   and  Spinoza's  Tractatus  Theologico-Poli-
ticus.   As  the  Soviet  Union  approaches  its  50th  birth-
day,  it  could  take  no  more  fitting  measure  than  aboli-
tion  of  censorship,  that  obscene  blight  on  the  idea  of
socialism.    Solzhenitsyn   lays   his  stress  on  the   social
function   of   literature.    Literature,   he   writes,   "that
dares  not  pass  on  to  society  its   pains  and  fears,   that
does  not  warn  in  time  against   threatening   moral  and
social   dangers,   such   literature   does   not   deserve   the
name   of   literature."     Soviet   "socialist   realism"   has
been  neither  realist  nor  socialist  but  abject  submission
to  the  bureaucracy's philistine  desire  for  prettyfication.
Solzhenitsyn   has   written  a   burning  memorial  to  the
great  writers who  ended  up  among  the  dishonored  dead
in   Stalin's   concentration   camps.   How   long   will   his
successors   fail  to  see  the  evils  that  might  have  been
avoided  if  they  had  been  free  to  speak?
of   all   to   objectivity  and   insight   in   both   Washington   and
Jerusalem.
The  bigger  picture  as  we  write  is  ominous.    The  price  of
bogging   down  American  military  power   in  a  peripheral  and
irrelevant  theatre  like  Vietnam  is  a  huge  shift  in  the  balance
of  power   in  Europe  and  the  Middle  East.    If  the  Arabs  go
through  with  nationalization  of  oil  resources  the  effect  on  the
pound   sterling   will   be  catastrophic.     This   will   be   another
giant   step   in  the   disintegration  of  West   European   empire.
Western  Europe  in  a  sense  has  already   lost  the  third   world
war.    To   avert   its  outbreak   steps  are  needed   as  quickly  as
possible  to  reduce  world  tension.    The  U.S.   could  contribute
mightily  by  calling  off  our   barbarous  and   futile  bombing  of
North  Vietnam  and  making  peace  in  South   Vietnam.     One
crisis  at  a  time  is  enough,  indeed  too  much.    The   superpow-
ers  have  taken  a  first  step  in  the  UN   cease-fire  resolution  to
damp  down  the  dangers  of  a  wider  war  in  the  Middle  East,
at  least  temporarily.    Can't  the  same  initiative  be  widened  to
the  Far  East?                                                     6:30  a.m.,  June  7
An  Estimate  With  Which  Most  Washington's  China  Watchers  Agree
Hong  Kong  —  Communist  China's  downward  spiral   in
recent  weeks toward  anarchy and warlordism  is  viewed  here
as  a  strong   argument  for   another   try   at  negotiations   in
Vietnam.   Veteran  American  and  British  analysts   in  Hong
Kong  are  agreed  that  even  the  start  of  peace  talks  would
enormously    strengthen     the    hand    of    Mao    Tse-tung's
opponents  .  . .
They  are  now  convinced  political  moderates  and  economic
pragmatists   are   in   the   vast   majority   in   China's   badly
shaken  Communist  party  hierarchy,  but  are  too  weak   to
stem  a  seemingly   irreversible   slide   toward    disintegration
until  Mao is  either  dead or  deposed  .  .  .
Against    this    picture   of   a   drastically    altered   China,
analysts   are   convinced  an   American   ground   invasion   of
North   Vietnam   is   the   worst   thing   that   could   possibly
happen.   They   maintain  anything  that   could  be  made   to
look   like  a  threat   to   China's   national   independence   runs
the  danger  of  cutting  the  ground  from  under the  moderates
and  rallying  700  million  patriotic   Chinese   behind  a  frus-
trated,  wildly  idealistic  and fanatic  73-year-old  man ...
The  Russians   have   been   saying   all   winter   and   spring
they   think  Hanoi  can  be  persuaded  to  negotiate   a   peace
settlement    based   on   the   continued   existence    of   a   non-
Communist  neutral   South  Vietnam.   The  key  issue,  accord-
ing   to   Communist  informants   last   March   in   Saigon,   is
whether   the   U.S.   will   guarantee   the   survival   of    some
popular    front   movement   behind   which    the    Communist
organization  can  be  salvaged   to  operate  legally   and  com-
pete   at   the   polls   in   1971.   If   such   a   compromise   were
accepted,  the  U.S.  might  have  to  provide  refuge   somewhere
for   those   Vietnamese   who  feel   they   could  not  live   with
such  a settlement  . . .
What  alternative  foreign  policy  the  [Chinese]   moderates
would  pursue  was  hinted  at  this  week  when  Peking  attacked
President  Liu  Shao-chi,  for  seeking  reconciliation  with  the
West,  including  the  U.S.;  abandoning  "people's   wars"  and
accepting  peaceful  co-existence.
—Richard  Critchfield   in  Washington  Sunday  Star June  4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  U, 1967
But  An  SPS-er  Sees  "Marches"  Diverting  Energies  from  the  Task  of  Selling  Peace
Dr.  Otto  Nathan  Says  We  Did  the  Peace  Movement  A  Great  Disservice
"Dear   Editor:  Your   report   about  the   recent   Washington
conference  of  the  Spring  Mobilization  Committee  gives  a  re-
grettably  inaccurate  account.    You  call  the  postponement  of  a
decision  on  political  action  the  outstanding  deadlock  of   the
conference,   obviously   implying  that  various  other  deadlocks
occurred.    Since  you  did  not  mention  at  all  the  many  positive
decisions  for  future   activities,  you  are  giving  the  impression
that  the  Conference was  completely fruitless.    Yet  the Confer-
ence  established a  record  none  of  us  needs  to  be  ashamed  of:
it  decided  to  organize  a  new  mass  demonstration in  Washing-
ton  in  October  and   to  coordinate  local  activities  throughout
the  country  on  July  4,  August  6  and  Labor  Day  week-end;  it
moved  into  new  ground  by  its  decisions  on   draft  resistance
and  non-violence,- and  reorganized  and  improved  its  own  ad-
ministrative  and  decision-making structure.   The  decisions  on
draft-resistance   and   non-violence  are  a   significant   departure
with  great potentialities.
Black  Racists   An  Insignificant  Handful
"It   is  true  that  no  decision  was  made  on  political  action,
which  chiefly  means  action  with  regard  to  the  1968  presiden-
tial  election  and  which,  in  my  view—not  shared  by  many—
was  the  least  urgent  business  of  the  Conference.    The  perti-
nent  proposals  were  tabled  but  merely  because adjournment
had   become  unavoidable  and- no  time  was  left.     All   these
decisions  were  made  after  long,  partly  heated,  but  always  or-
derly  discussion  in  which  every  conceivable  position  was  ex-
pressed.    You  were  completely  misinformed by  being  advised
of  a  'dominant  feeling'  of  futility,  of  Lilliputian all-night  cau-
cuses  of  far-out  leftists  and  far-out  Black  Nationalists,  and  of
a   fight   for   control  of   the   peace  movement.    Anyone   who
knows  this  peace  movement  knows  that  no  one  single  group,
nor  several  single  groups   together,   can  possibly  'control'   it.
I  deplore,  as you  do,  the  hatred  of  all  that  is white  which  was
expressed  by  a  few  Negroes.    But  you  exaggerate  their   sig-
nificance  tremendously  by  suggesting  that  this  is  possibly   a
way  to kill  the  peace  movement.   These were  a handful  among
700  delegates.
"You  are  doing  a  great  disservice  to  the  peace   movement
From  a  Reader  in  the  Army  Reserve
"Dear  Sir—In  your  past  two  issues  you  have  com-
mented   quite   negatively   over   the   Government   not
taking   some  action  to  call  to  active  duty  the  Army
Reserve  forces.   You  should  know  more  about  the   Pri-
vates  and  Corporals  who make up  such  forces.   To  most
of  us,  the  Reserves  simply  represent   a  substitute   for
going  to   prison   or   Canada.   The  Army  knows   (evi-
dently  you  do  not)   that  we  are   an  alternative  form
of  draft  dodgers.   I  have  served  (involuntarily)  for  two
years  in  the  ROTC  in  College  and  am  now completing
my final sixth  year  in the  Reserves.  For  nearly  8  years
now  I  have  been  in  the  direct  shadow  of  the  military
and  I  am  sick  of   it."
by  calling  the  Washington   Conference  'an  unrepresentative
bedlam.'    I  wonder  whether  a  similarly  representative  peace
meeting  was  ever  before  held  in  America.   The  Spring  Mob-
ilization  Committee,  a  non-exclusive  organization  modeled  af-
ter  the  Fifth   Avenue  Parade  Committee  in  New   York   City,
demonstrated   its  great  potentialities   on  April   15.    No   one
should  try  to  minimize  its  significance  or  undermine  its  con-
tinued  existence.   It  is  still  badly  needed."            Otto  Nathan
[Our  comment  on  the  Mobilization  had  only  elicited   four
letters  by  Saturday,  June  3,  the  end  of  the  week  in  which  it
appeared.  Two private  notes  from  old-timers  were  approving.
The  most  important  letter  was  from  Dr.  Otto  Nathan,   the
respected   economist  and  Albert  Einstein's  literary   executor.
The  fourth  letter,  from  a  member  of  Students  for  A  Demo-
cratic    Society,    explained   why   SDS   opposed   the    Spring
marches.    "Too  often  we  find  ourselves  completely  alienating
people  who want  to  oppose  the  war  but  are  not  comfortable
about  demonstrations   and  finding  ourselves  with  no  time  to
go  out  and  reach  as  yet  uninformed  people  and  get  them  to
oppose  the  war.    But  the  'Trots,'  SWP,  DuBois  Club  people
were   obsessed  with  their  mobilization.     The   S.F.   mobiliza-
tion  was a  joke.   Radicals,  are  they?    They  refused  to  spon-
sor  civil  disobedience.    They  wouldn't  let  people  have  a  mass
card  burning.    They  staged  a  march  to  a  silly  football   sta-
dium  and  had  peaceniks  sitting  for  hours  staring  at   peace-
niks  and  listening   to  too  many  speakers.    The  Mobilization
siphoned  off  much  money  and  energy  from  efforts  locally  to
reach  really  new  people."]
The   1966   Index   Is  Ready—You  Can  Have  One  Free   If   You  Send  A   Stamped   Long   Envelope   For  It—Please   Renew,   If   Overdue,
or   Send  a  Gift  Sub  With  Your   Request
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or   enter)
Street   .................................
r*itv
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street   .................................
City
5618  Nebraska   Aye.,
Washington,   D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for   the  enclosed  $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
7in                  fitato
6/12/67
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday   except  in  August,  the  last  week   in   December  ?nd   the
first   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618   Nebraska  Ave..   N.W..    Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in   Canada;   $10   elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:
91
1
?  trt   17>.,,-*.>i.-    t'(>r  f~  T^-"^l     Ao!..  alr^    A^,.:.*;,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED