I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jan09.pdf

============================================================

The  Phoney  World   of  Foundations,  P.  3
Why  Not  Make  Westmoreland  A  Cardinal  and  Spellman  A  General?
'Gen   Wm.  Westmoreland,  commander  of   U.S.  troops  in
Vietnam ...  in  an  editorial  written  at  the  request  of  the
Charleston,  S.C. Evening  Post  .  .  .  called  for  this  Christmas
to  be  rededicated  to  the  principle  that  'every  human  being
has  the  right  to  seek  his  identity  without  fear  of  intimida-
tion.'   This,  he  said,  was  Christ's  message  and  is  what  the
U.S.    is  fighting  for  in  Vietnam,  adding  'Christ's  wish  for
peace  on  earth  may   be  moved  closer  to  reality  if   Amer-
icans  continue  to  support  that  cause'."
—UPJ  in  Washington  Post, Christmas Day  1966.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  1
January  9,  1967WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Harrison  Salisbury's  Dastardly  War  Crime
The  animosity  in  Washington  to  the  New   York  Times  and
Harrison  Salisbury  is  more  than  resentment that  they  added
to  the  dimensions  of  the  credibility  gap.    The  deeper  reason
is  that  they  put  a  spoke  in  the  wheels  of  the  Pentagon's  plans
for   intensifying  the  air  war.    A  week  before  the  New   York
Times   published   Salisbury's  first  dispatch   from   Hanoi,   the
military  were  already  worried  by  acceptance  in  the   Western
world  and  at  the  Vatican  of  Hanoi's  charge  that  residential
areas  had  been  hit  and  civilians  killed  in  our  air  raids of  Dec.
13  and  14.   These  were the  heaviest on  the  North Vietnamese
capital  since  its oil  facilities  were bombed  last June  29.   Henry
L.  Trewhitt  reported  to  the  Baltimore  Sun  from  Washington
(Dec.  20)   that  the  Pentagon   feared  the  effect   of  the  world-
wide outcry on the White  House  "where targeting is  approved."
The  military  had  been  hoping,  Mr.  Trewhitt  wrote, to  expand
the  list  of  approved  targets  to  include  "more  of  North  Viet-
nam's  industrial  potential"  and  of  its  electric generating  plants
although  these  were  "in  many  cases  surrounded  by  relatively
dense  population."    The  military  feared  the  world-wide  out-
cry  had  put  the  White  House  "on  the  defensive"  and  made
approval  of  these  targets  less  likely.    To  have  these  charges
confirmed  by an executive of  America's No.  1 newspaper, him-
self  a  reporter  of  long  experience, made it  impossible to  down-
grade  criticism  abroad  as  enemy propaganda  or anti-American
prejudice.
Air  Force  Aspirin
Thus  this  feat  of  free  journalism is  to  be  measured  not  by
the  exposure  of  civilian  deaths  in  the  past  but  by  the  possible
saving  of  civilian  lives  in  the  future.    The  myth  that  we  have
been  bombing the North  with  surgical precision is  dead.    Any
stepup  in  the  air  war  can  only  be  taken  now  against  a  general
recognition  that  it  will  carry us  further  along  the  path  toward
a  war  of  extermination.  Hanson  Baldwin's  efforts  in  the  New
York   Times  Dec.   30  to  counter  the   effects   of  the  Salisbury
dispatches  ("Bombing  of  the  North:  U.S.  Officers  Call  It  Ef-
fective  and  Limited")   only  made  matters worse  for  the  Pen-
tagon.     It   disclosed  that  in  our   little  limited  war  we  were
dumping  a  half  million  tons  of  bombs  per  year  on  Vietnam
North   and   South.     This,   Baldwin   admitted,   is   "somewhat
more"  than  those  expended  against Japan  in  the  entire  Pacific
area  during  the  four  years  of  World  War   II.    He  did  not
add  that  South  Vietnam  is  not  supposed   to  be  an  enemy  but
This   Might   Be   Called   Ponji   Stick   Journalism
Gee  Whiz  How  Wicked  Can  Ho  Get?
"Ho  Chi  Minh,  master  of  guerilla  warfare  and  poli-
tical  propaganda, is  now  embarked  on  one  of  his  most
daring  exploits.    But  whether  he  will  win  or  lose  it  is
at   this  moment   any   man's  guess.     Having  failed   to
subvert   and   militarily   defeat   the   South  Vietnamese,
he  came  close  before  the  massive  American  interven-
tion—Ho  tried  frontal  assault  on  U.S.  forces  with  his
own  troops  from  the  North.    But  that,  too,  failed  be-
cause   of   Gen.   Wm.   Westmoreland's  spoiling  tactics.
Now  he  is  using  another  weapon,  one  as  cleverly  con-
ceived   as   the   poison-tipped   bamboo   spikes   his   men
emplant  underfoot  for  the  unwary  enemy. At  long  last,
he  has  opened  his  country,  or  part  of  it,  to  an American
journalist ...  to  force  a  halt  in  the  American  bombing
of   his  country.  .  .  .  Harrison   Salisbury   of   the  New
York  Times  is  Ho's  chosen  instrument."
—Chalmers  M.  Roberts, Washington  Post Jan.  2.
an  allied  country.    The  sheer  tonnage  we  dispense  may  make
other  countries  with  guerrilla  problems   decide  American  aid
is  worse  than  the  disease.    It  looks  as  if  the  U.S.  Air  Force
remedy  for  an  aching  head  is  to  shoot  it off.
The  disturbing  aspect  of  the  Salisbury trip  is  the  reaction
of   the   Washington   press   corps.     That   America's   foremost
paper  could  send  a  correspondent  to  an  enemy  capital  in  the
middle  of  a  war  and  expose  the  misleading  character  of  our
own  government's  pronouncements  was  extraordinary.    It  has
few  parallels  in  history  and  it  should  make  Americans  proud
of  our  free  institutions and  their  continued  vitality.   This  was
something   one  would   expect   every  newspaperman   to   boast
about,  no  matter  how  he  felt  about  the  war  itself.    This  was
freedom   of  the  press  in  the  best  Jeffersonian   tradition.    But
the  Salisbury  exploit  instead  of  being  greeted  by  applause  has
evoked  as mean,  petty  and  unworthy  a  reaction  as  I  have  ever
seen  in  the  press  corps.    Part  of  it,  no  doubt,  is  jealousy,  for
Salisbury's  passport  was  validated  for  North  Vietnam  last  year
it  now  appears  along  with  several dozen  other  newspapermen.
Part  of  it  is  something  worse;  the  State  Department,  we  may
be  sure,  did  not  pass  the -word  along  to  so many  of  its  favored
correspondents   that  they  could  go  to  North  Vietnam   in  the
hope  that  they  would  turn  in  any  such  report   on  what  our
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  9, 1967
No  Time  to  Exacerbate  Racial  Feeling  by  Expelling  Clayton  Powell
Though  some  of  the  statements  from  the  Negro  supporters
of   Clayton  Powell  are  sheer  demagogic  racial  nonsense,   the
character  of  others  command   respect  and  the  general  unanim-
ity  of  the  Negro  community on  the  subject  should  give  pause.
We   think  this  is  a  poor  time  to  exacerbate  racial  feeling  by
action  against  the  one  militant  Negro  chairman  in   Congress.
.  .  .  There  were  scare  stories  by John  W.  Finney  in  the  New
York   Times  Dec.   30  and  George  C.  Wilson   in  the   Washing-
ton   Post   the   same   day  to   the   effect   that   the   underground
nuclear  blast  in  a  Mississippi  salt  dome  Dec.   3  may  make  im-
possible  an  international  agreement  to  end  underground   test-
ing.    This   is  another   of   those   leaks   in   the   Edward   Teller
tradition  which  have  from  the  beginning  bedevilled  all  efforts
at  curbing  the  nuclear  arms  race.    It  would  be  well  to  wait
for   the  formal   report   on   the   test   before   jumping   to   con-
clusions.    The  test  was  only  350-TNT  tons  equivalent  or  one-
third  of  a  kiloton  yet  it  had  to  take  place  in  a  110-foot  sphere
a  half  mile  down   in  salt.    It  would   take  a  hole  420   feet   in
diameter—or  one  and  a half  times  the  size of  a football  field—
to   muffle   a   20-kiloton-shot   for   a   300-fold   decoupling.      It
would  take  300  trips by  100  trucks  to  cart  away  the  earth.   An
effort   to  use  muffling  on  any  significant  scale  would   be  easily
detectible  and  fantastically  expensive.   .  .  .
Walter  Reuther's  "revolt"  against  George  Meany  only  high-
lights  the  degeneration  of  the  labor  movement.    The  UAW's
letter   (Dec.   29)   on   its  differences   with  the  AFL-CIO  went
out   of   its  way  to  avoid  any  criticism  of   foreign   policy   and
did  so in  words  Holy  Warrish  enough  for  Jay  Lovestone.  .  .  .
A  kind  word  for  Castro's  Cuba  is  so  rare  in  the  U.S.   press
that   we   applaud   Herbert   L.   Matthews   for   his   courage   in
marking  the  ninth  birthday  of   the  Cuban   revolution  with   a
friendly  article  on  the  editorial  page  of  the  New   York   Times
Jan.  2,  and   Playboy   Magazine   for  its  15-page  interview  with
the   Cuban  leader  by  Lee  Lockwood,   whose   book,   "Castro's
Cuba,   Cuba's   Fidel"   is  to   be   published   in   March   by   Mac-
millan.     The   interview  shows   how   different   Castro   is  from
the  caricature  in  the  American  press.
One   day   Castro   will   be   recognized   as  one   of   the   most
.istute  revolutionaries  of  our  time,  and  a  man  who  would   be
a  moderate  if  we  gave  him  half  a  chance.    Mr.  Matthews,   in
The  Smog  That  Walter  Lippmann  Flees
TKough  we  have  little  conception of  what  life  is  like
in  those  high  reaches  of  the  Establishment where  Wal-
ter  Lippmann  dwells,  we   sympathize  with  his  decision
to  leave  Washington  for  New   York.    The  social   pres-
sures  for  conformity  in  the  capital   are  enormous,   ex-
cept   for   the   rare   few   content,  like   Diogenes,   with   a
solitary  tub  in  the  sun.    The  purity  of  Mr.  Lippmann's
style  and  the  lucidity  of  his  insight  have  grown  with
the  years.    He  has  never  been  so  much  in  opposition,
as  he  has  to  the  Vietnamese  war.    We  are   sure   this
has  exacted   an  unpleasant  price  from  one   accustomed
to  universal  respect.    This  is  a  nasty   town  for   those
who  dare  deviate  too  sharply  from  party  line.    In  an
interview   with   the   Washington   Post    (Dec.   30),  Mr.
Lippmann  said  he  no  longer  sees  the  President  a  great
deal,  as   he  used  to,  because   he  found  that  Mr.  John-
son   misled  him.    "Cronyism  is   the   curse   of  journal-
ism,"   Mr.   Lippmann   said.     "It   is   impossible   for   an
objective  newspaperman  to  be  a  frieno!  of  a  President.
Cronyism  is  a  sure  sign  that  something  is  wrong  and
that   the   public  is   not   getting   the   whole  journalistic
truth.     He  shouldn't  be  calling  us   up  and  asking   for
advice.    That  sort  of  relationship  is  very  corrupting."
The  corruptions  of  cronyism  are  not  limited  to  contact
with  the   President.     Newspapermen  become   satellites
of   lesser   officials   as   well.    The   most   dangerous   con-
spiracy   in  the  country  is   the  conspiracy  in   falsehood
of  the  respectables.    Washington  is  its  center,  and Mr.
Lippmann—after   three  decades   in  this  smog   of   sham
—deserves  a  season  in  purer  air.
speaking  of  his  achievements  in  education,   added   regretfully
"Marxist   indoctrination  accompanies  education  at  every   stage,
but  considering   the  Cuban   character   it  is  unlikely  to  stick."
What  may  make  it  stick  is  the  character  of   American   policy
toward  Cuba.    There  is  hardly  a  Marxist  cliche  too  crude  to
find  justification   in  the  crudity  of   U.S.   policy  toward    Cuba.
The   latest   example   is  our   effort   to  keep   the   British   from
building  a  new  fertilizer plant  in  Cuba.    The  AP  from  Wash-
ington   (Baltimore   Sim,  Jan.   2)   said  Washington   feels   this
would  undercut   its  effort   "to  keep  an   economic   squeeze   on
Castro  to  foster   internal  pressures,"   i.e.   to  use  hunger  as  a
political   weapon.
How  Castro Once  Hoped for  U.S.  Comprehension and  How  He  Sees  Us  Now
Playboy:  When  you  came  to  power  in  1959  did  you  think
that  Cuba  and  the  U.S.  were  going  to  get  along  better  than
they  actually  have?
Castro:  Yes,  that  was  one  of  my  illusions.    At  that  time
we  believed,that  the  revolutionary  program  could  be  car-
ried  out  with  a  great  degree  of  comprehension  on  the  part
of  the  people  of  the  U.S.    We  believed  that  because   it  was
just,  it  would  be  accepted.  .  .  .  What  we  didn't  see   clearly
was  that  the  North  American interests  affected  by  the  revo-
lution  possessed  the  means  to  bring  about  a  change  of  pub-
lic  opinion  in  the   U.S.   and  to  distort   everything  that   was
happening   in   Cuba   and   present   it   to   the   U.S.   public  in
the  worst  form.  .  .  .
Playboy:   Did  the   subsequent   hostility  of   the  American
government   have   much   to   do   with   creating   a   receptive
atmosphere  for  communism  in  Cuba?
Castro:  I  think so,  in  the  same  way  that  the  friendly acts
of  the  Soviet  Union  also  helped.  .  .  .  The  policy  of  the  U.S.
is   accelerating   the   radicalization   of   revolutionary   move-
ments  not  only  in  Cuba  but  throughout  the  world.  .  .  .  Un-
questionably  the  U.S.  today  represents   the  most  reactionary
ideas  in  the  world.    And  I  think  that  they  cause  great  dan-
ger  both  to  the  world  and  to  the  people  of  the  U.S.   them-
selves.
Playboy:  What  do  you  mean  by  "reactionary   ideas?"
Castro:  I  mean  especially  its  self-appointed  role  of  world
gendarme,  its  desire  to  impose  outside  its  frontiers  the  kind
of   government  system   it   thinks  other  states   and   peoples
should  have.  .  .  .
Playboy:  Our  government's   position  is  that  the  goal  of
international  communism  is  to  enslave   peoples,  not  to  lib-
erate  them.
Castro:  .  .  .  Tell  me,  for  what  purpose  did  the  U.S.   come
to  liberate  us  at  the  Bay  of  Pigs?    To  reestablish  the  power
of  the  landowners,  of  thieves,  of  torturers,  of  the   managers
of  its  monopolistic  businesses?    In  what  sense  can  that  be
called  liberty?
—Lee  Lockwood's  interview  with  Castro, Playboy,  Jan.  '67
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  9, 196?
What   McGeorge  Bundy  of  Ford  Foundation  Didn't  Tell  on  Meet  the Press
Mr.  SPIVAK:  Mr.  flundy,  from  time to  time  it  has  been  sug-
gested   that   foundations   like  the  Ford  Foundation  should  be
taxed.  .  .  . What  good  reason  can  you  give  us  for   not  paying
a   tax?
Mr.  McGeorge   BUNDY,  president,  Ford  Foundation:  Well,
if  we  were  in  the  business  of  trying  to  make  money,  then   I
would  think  we  obviously would   pay  a  tax.
Mr.   SPIVAK:  Well,   aren't  you  in  the  business  of   making
money?    You  may  be  giving  it  away,  but  you  are  making   it
too.
Mr.   BUNDY:   We   have  a  portfolio  which  brings  in  money
which  we  then  give  away.    We  are  not  making  money  in  any
normal   business  sense.     It   seems   to  me  the   question   is  the
balance  of  advantage  [in]   our  being  classed  like  schools  and
colleges  and  churches. ...  It  seems  to  me  that  we   belong
on  the  charitable  side  of  the  line.    But   I  should   add,   Mr.
Spivak,  that  my  friend  Dean  Rusk,  who  used  to  be  the  head
of  the  Rockefeller  Foundation,  once  made  an  elaborate  study
of  what  the  Rockefeller Fundation  would  in  fact  pay  in  taxes
if   it  were  to  treat  itself  as  a  business  and  discovered   that   the
sum  involved  was  not  very  large.
—On  Meet   the  Press,  Dec.  25
"One   of   the   most   apparent   loopholes   in   the  foundation
business   involves   the   abuse   of   capital  gains.     According   to
the  pliable  laws  that  supposedly  regulate  foundations,   capital
gains  not  only  escape  taxation  but  they  also  do  not  have  to
be  given  away  to  charity  if  they  are  reinvested  within  a  rea-
sonable  time.  .  .  .  Many  foundation  executives  spend   a  great
deal  of  their  time  jockeying  their  assets  via  unrestrained  trad-
ing  in  the  stock  market—a  far  cry  from  'charity.'    The   effect
of   this  privileged  gaming  with  stocks   is  that   sometimes   the
foundations   lose.     But  they  care  little  about   that  since  they
are,  at  bottom,  using  the  public's  money  for   stakes.
"By  and   large  the   575  foundations   covered   in  this   study
have  done  very  well  in  their  market  play.   During  the  4  years
1961    through   1964,    they   had   capital   gains   (mostly    from
stock  market  transactions)   of  $1.3  billion—a  fancy  piece  of
profit  indeed  when  compared   to  the  capital  gains  of  $1.4   bil-
lion  which  it  took  these  foundations  10  years  (1951    through
1960)   to  accumulate.
"Here  is a  huge  amount  of  income,  this  capital  gains  moun-
tain—growing  and  growing   year  after  year,  as  if  from   some
volcano   of   bullion—which   should   be   distributed   to  charity
on   a   reasonably   current   basis.     The   country's   antipoverty
Love  Tax  Exempt
"The  creator of  the  St.  Genevieve  Foundation,  Spen-
cer  R.  Collins,  a  millionaire  in  his  late  60s,   supported
twin  sisters   through  several  years  of  parties  and  gay
living,   spending  an  estimated   $100,000  on  them;  part
of  the  expenses  being  paid  by  the  tax-exempt  founda-
tion.    One  of   the  twins  lived  in  a   posh   duplex.    The
other  twin,  esconced   in  a  5-bedroom  mansion  on  Lake
Oswego,  was  paid  $36,000  as  a  'caretaker  of  the  house.'
Collins'  defense  for  the  tax  evasion—for  which  he  was
convicted—was   that   he   needed  companionship."
—Patman's  report  on tax  exempt  foundations  Dec.  21
needs  ,  .  .  and  all  other  worthwhile  causes  demand  that   Con-
gress  force  these  funds  into  charity  by  law.   .  .  .
"The   generosity  of  the  Federal  Government   goes  further:
It   not   only  fails   to   require  foundations  to   disburse  capital
gains  to  charity  if  they  are  reinvested within  a  reasonable  pe-
riod  of  time,  but  it  also  gives  them  credit  for  capital  losses.
.  .  .  According  to  the  Treasury   there  is  nothing   wrong   with
spending   the   widow's   mite  on  Wall  Street.
"The   crediting of  speculative  losses  to  a  foundation's  books
in   the  same  way  that  charity  is  credited   can  only   encourage
wildcat  speculation.     Certainly  there  is  no  evidence  that   the
investment  losses  affect  the  corporate  conscience  of  the  founda-
tions.  Treasury  officials  admitted  during  our  hearings  in    1964
that  they  knew  of   no   case  where   directors  or   trustees   have
reimbursed   a  foundation   for   losses   incurred   in   speculation.
Since  conscience   is  obviously  unable   to   do   the   job,   invest-
ments   should   be  made   rigorously   subject  to  whatever   statu-
tory   rules  are  needed   to  protect   the  public's  interest   in  the
assets  of   foundations.
"It  is  all  very  well  for  the  Ford  Foundation   and  the  Helen
Hay  Whitney   Foundation   of  New  York  City  to  say  that  they
are  sorry  to  be  among  the  'sophisticated   investors'  caught   in
the  collapse  of  the  Atlantic  Acceptance   Corp.  of   Canada   in
1965—Canada's  biggest  financial  failure—but   apologies  will
not  bring   back  the  $6.7   million  which  the  Ford   Foundation
may  lose  and  the  $338,400  which   the  Helen  Hay  Whitney
Foundation    may   lose.      U.S.    taxpayers   trusted    these    two
foundations  with  over  $7  million  that  they  tossed  into   specu-
lation."
—Rep.   Wright   Patman's   4th   report  since   1962  on  tax  ex-
empt   foundations   to  the   House   Small   Business   Committee,
Dec.  21.
A  Form  of  American  Financial "Know How" Europe  Could  Well  Do  Without
It   is   a   pity   the   reporters   who   interviewed  McGeorge
Bundy  on  Meet  the  Press  Christmas Day  were  too  polite or
too  uninformed  to  question  him  about  the  Patman  report  on
tax-exempt  foundations,  which  had  been   made  public  four
days  earlier.   This  is  where  the  loftiest  and  most  respect-
able  tax  evasion  and  stock  deals  in  our  society   take  place.
The  report  notes  that  John  J.  McCloy,  "for  many  years
allied  with  the  Rockefeller and  Ford  Foundations,"  recently
told  European  leaders  they  ought   to  erect   "a  complex  of
foundations"  to  "exchange   thoughts  with  those   of  Ameri-
can  foundations  and  thus  form  a  sort  of  international  ap-
proach   to   some   of   the   great   problems  of   the   day."     He
praised  Germany's   Volkswagen   and  Thyssen   foundations.
Recalling  the  way  Thyssen financed Hitler's  rise, we  shud-
der  to  think  of  what  sanctimonious  moneyed  men  could  do
with  American methods.   Thyssen  never  thought  of  deduct-
ing  his  contributions  to  the  Nazis  from  his  tax   bill  while
they  were  undermining the  German Republic.    The  Patman
report  warns  Europeans  not  only  of   the  tax   dodges   these
foundations  make  possible  but  of  the  "dictatorial  element"
they  are  imposing  on  U.S.  business.   The  report  shows  Nel-
son  Rockefeller  paid  political  expenses   via  his   foundations
and   that   some   of   New   York's   biggest   banks   used   their
foundations  for  sales  of  property  at  rigged   prices  without
paying  capital  gains  taxes.     One  feature  of   these  founda-
tions,  the  report  noted,  is  "a highly  structured  and well-paid
bureaucracy."    Over   10   percent    of   total   receipts   in   the
foundations   studied  went   for  their  salaries  and  expenses!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   9,1967
Maybe  It  Would  Be Easier  Just  to  Repeal  the  First  Amendment
(Continued  from   Page   One)
bombers   had   been   doing.
Goebbels  Would  Have  Been  Charmed
So a barrage of  slander  has been  laid  down.   Time  (Jan.   6),
which  can  always  be  counted  on  for  well-rounded  views,  at-
tacks    Salisbury's   reports    as    "uncritical,    one-dimensional".
Neii'su'eek   (Jan.  9)  said  of  Salisbury's observation that  "Amer-
ican  bombing  has  been   inflicting  considerable  civilian  casual-
ties  in  Hanoi"—"To  American  eyes,  it  read  like  the  line  from
Tass  or  Hsinsha"  [misspelling  in  the  original].    The   Wash-
ington  Post,  which   had  hitherto   kept   its  fervent  support  of
the  war  to  its editorial  columns,  was  frenetic.    Two  days  after
the  first  Salisbury  dispatch  appeared,   its  main  page  one  story
with  a  four  column  headline  was  "Hanoi  Seen  Exploiting  Its
Civilian   Casualties".     Since  the   civilian  casualties  could   no
longer   be   denied,   since  the   Pentagon   itself   was  admitting
them,  Hanoi  was  now  accused  of  "exploiting"  them—a  clear
violation  of   the   rules  of   war:   apparently   civilian  casualties
should   be  quietly  buried  in  unmarked  graves.    The   story,   by-
Murray  Marder,  said  "North  Vietnam  will  admit  more  West-
ern  newsmen  in  an  evident  attempt  to  undermine  the  Johnson
Administration's  claims  that   its  policy  is  to   avoid   bombing
civilians."    This  was  a 'double  twist  which  would   have  de-
lighted   Goebbels.
Another  bit  of  frenzied  journalism followed  on  New  Year's
Day   when   the   Washington  'Post's   Pentagon    correspondent,
George  C.  Wilson,  turned   up  with   a  Communist   pamphlet
issued   last  November  on   the   bombings   of  Nam-dinh.     He
said  "intelligence  sources  here  .  .  .  have  copies  of  it."   After
somehow   obtaining  a  copy,  Mr.   Wilson   checked    (1)    with
"intelligence   sources"  who  "said  it  was  authentic"   and   then
(2)   asked  Arthur   Sylvester,  the  Pentagon's  top  press   officer,
"if   the  pamphlet  was  indeed   an  authentic  one".   Sylvester
replied,   "Yes,   so  far  as  I  know."    After  this  passionate  exer-
cise  in  verification,  Mr.   Wilson   then   proceeded   to   discover
that  figures  in   the   pamphlet   were   the   same  as  the  figures
given  Mr.  Salisbury  in  Nam-dinh.     "It   is  probable,   but  not
certain,"  Mr.  Wilson  hinted  darkly,  "that   President   Johnson
has   been   told   about   the   relationship  between   the   casualty
When  "Enemy Propaganda" Was  U.S.  Boasting
"A  representative  of  the   U.S.  peace  movement   said
today  she  and  three  other  American  women  now  visit-
ing  Hanoi  had  seen  North  Vietnamese civilian  victims
of   the   U.S.  air   raids  who  were   maimed   by  weapons
not  designed  for  military  targets.  ...  .  'They  were  in-
jured  by  weapons designed  for  use  against  people,' Miss
Barbara  Deming  said.    '.  .  .  Things  like  fragmentation
bombs'."
"(Defense   Department  spokesmen   declined  to  com-
ment   on   Miss   Deming's   charges,   adding   that   they
'never  commented  on  enemy  propaganda.'    Other  Pen-
tagon  sources  noted that  'all  bombs  fragment'  and  said
they  had  no  knowledge  or  comment on  any  use  of  spe-
cial    fragmentation    bombs—employed   against   enemy
soldiers   in   South   Vietnam—in   missions   over   North
Vietnam.)"                         —Washington  Post,  Dec. 29.
"Saigon,  June  1  (UPI)—US  Air  Force  planes  using
a  new  secret   type  bomb  turned  eight  square  miles  of
North  Vietnam  into  a  raging  inferno  yesterday  in  the
greatest  bombing  mission  of  the  war,  it  was  disclosed
today.     Reliable   sources    said   the   American   planes
dropped   a   powerful   anti-personnel  bomb  among   their
explosives.     It   had   been   used   before   against   North
Vietnam  but  its  use  was  not  made  public  until  today.
The  bomb  shoots  out  thousands  of  lethal  pellets."
—Washington  Daily  News June  1, 1966.
figures  in  the  Times  and  the  pamphlet."     Maybe  he'll  cancel
his  subscription.     The   climax  of  the  Washington   Post's  im-
potent   fury  was  a  story  next  day,  "Ho   Tries  A  New  Propa-
ganda  Weapon"   by  Chalmers   Roberts.     Its  quality  is  indi-
cated   by  the  turgid  sample   in  our  box  on  page  one.  Even
this   was  topped   by   Crosby   Noyes   in   the   Washington   Star
Jan.   4,  where  this   ordinarily   civilized  journalist  seemed   to
have  gone  completely  off  his  rocker.    He  said  this  was  the
first  U.S.   government    in   history   to   permit  "the systematic
subversion"  of  its  military  commitment   abroad.    He  attacked
"an   important  segment   of   the  press"  for   its  "utter   lack  of
identification   .  .  .  with   what  the  government   defines  as  the
national  interest."    He  thought  it  strange   if  not  sinister  for
the  government  to  allow  any  visits  to  Hanoi  at  all.    Poor  Joe
McCarthy!    He  died  too  soon.
Why   Not   Introduce  A   Friend  to  the  Weekly   By  Letting  Us  Send  Him  A   Free  Sample  Copy  of  This  First   Issue  of  the   New  Year?
Just  Send  Us A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly
         56
18  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........  ......................  ..... ................................................
Street   ...........................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State.......
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub   to:
(To)    Name   ................................................................
Street   ...........................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................  State......
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted
Indicate  if   announcement  wished   Q
1/9/07
Fifties
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618     Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   in   August,   the  last   -week   in   December   and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618   Nebraska  Ave..  N.W., Washington,   D.  C.    An   independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  1.  F.   Stone:   Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:   $5   in   the  U.S.:  $6   in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;  20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED