I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967dec18.pdf

============================================================

An  Arab  Moderate  on Israel's  Dilemma, P. 4
When  Even  Nixon  Begins  to  Sound  Like  A  Voice  in  the  Wilderness
"Even  as  American  troops  attempt  to  pacify  hamlets  in  Vietnam,  special  Army  teams  are  now touring scores  of  our
cities,  making  contingency plans  for  their pacification  next  summer."
—Nixon  in  New  York  Dec. 18  to  the  National  Association  of  Manufacturers.     "The  ultimate  test  of  America,"   Nixon
said, is  not  Vietnam  "but  America  itself."     The  test  of  Nixon  is  just  where  he  now  stands  on  the  Vietnam   war.
L F. Stonefs   Weekly
VOL.  XV,  NO.  31DECEMBER  18,  1967'»«      WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15   CENTS
A  Lost  Political Opportunity  For  Peace
Several  issues  need  to  be  clarified   in  the  growing  conflict
between  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  and  the  Ad-
ministration   over   the  Vietnamese  war,  and   particularly  the
role  of  the  NLF  in  any  peace  talks.    The  first  concerns  the
real  meaning  of  Secretary  Rusk's  refusal  to  testify   in  public
before  the  Committee.  The  public hearing  is the  nearest  equiv-
alent  to  the  question  time  in  the  British  House  of  Commons,
when  a Cabinet  officer  can  be  subjected  to  interrogation  by  the
opposition.  The  public  has  a  right  to  know  the  answers.  Giv-
ing  those  answers  in  private  to  the  committee  is  no  substitute.
How  can  there  be informed,  democratic decision  on  such  basic
issues  if  discussion  is  kept  within  a  small  circle,  behind  closed
doors?    The   State  Department   has  always  preferred  captive
audiences,   one-sided   briefings, - off-the-record   meetings.      Its
whole  system of  private  conferences  for  specially  chosen  audi-
ences  is  to  keep   decision-making   processes   within   a   closed
group,   and  to  give  that  group  only  its  own  point   of  view.
This  is  very  much  like  the  system  used  in  Communist  coun-
tries,  where  changes  in  the  party  line  are  expounded  to  closed
meetings  within  the  Party,  and  without  real  debate.
They  Learn  Mere  From  the  Newspapers
The  second  point  to  be  made  is  that   even  behind   closed
doors  the  State  Department  tells  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee  very  little.  Though  the  Senate  is  supposed  to  share
in  many foreign  policy  decisions  and  the  Committee  is  its  in-
strument   for   that  purpose,   Committee   members   have  com-
plained  over  and  over  again  that  they  learn  less  from  these
private  briefings  than  from  the  newspapers.    The   Department
shows  as little  candor  with  the  Committee  as  it  does  with  the
selected  groups  of  citizens  it  brings  to  town  from  time  to  time
for  special  foreign  policy  conferences.    Two  recent  examples
will  illustrate.    Ambassador  Bunker  was  less  candid  with  the
Committee  than  he  was with  the  specially  chosen   correspond-
ents  he briefed;  he  at  least  admitted  to  the  latter  that  the  U.S.
could  not  afford  to  deal  with  the  NLF  because  it  was the  only
cohesive   political  force  in   South   Vietnam,  an  admission   at
considerable  variance  from  the  Department's   public  view  that
the  NLF  is  only  the  tool  of  Northern  invaders  and  that  there
is  now  a  viable  government  in  the  South.
The  other  example  has  just  come to  light  in  the wake  of  the
news  leak  that  last  October  the  NLF  put  out  a  feeler  to  the
UN  about  sending  representatives  to New York.   Not  a word
Was It  Worth  158 American  Lives?
"Dak   To,   South  Vietnam,   Dec.   3—Hill   875,  which
was  captured 10 days  ago, after a 5-day  battle that  cost
158   [by   a  typographical  error  this  was  erroneously
printed  as  58—IPS]  American  lives  has  already  been
abandoned.  U.S.  parachute troops  who  had  been  guard-
ing  the   peak   about  4  miles  from   Cambodia,  have  re-
turned  to  Dak  To  after  blowing up  the  massive bunkers
and  fortifications  on  and  around  the  summit.   No  ex-
planation  has  been  given  for  the withdrawal.
"OF   ALL   THE   NUMBERED  RIDGES    WHICH
EARNED     FLEETING      FAME     DURING     LAST
MONTH'S   BIG   BATTLES,  ONLY   HILL   1338   RE-
MAINS   IN   AMERICAN  OR  SOUTH VIETNAMESE
HANDS  [emphasis added].  The others have been  aban-
doned  after  attempts  to  destroy  the  bunkers which pro-
tected  them.   The  territory  is  vast  and  the  impressive
number  of  American troops  is  not  sufficient  to  hold any
of  it  for  long."
—This   Agence   France   Presse   dispatch   from   the
London   Times   of   Dec.  4  provides   the   sequel   to   the
article  we  ran  in  our  issue  of  the  same  date,  "West-
moreland's   Bloody   Folly   on  Hill   875."   We   saw   the
same  dispatch  in  the  Paris  Le  Figaro  but  in  no  U.S.
wire  service  or  newspaper,   not   even   the   New  York
Times  which  subscribes   to  the  French   press   service.
Why  is  this  news  withheld  from  the  U.S.  public?  So  it
cannot  ask  why  so many  lives were spent  on taking  hills
the   enemy  can  now   reoccupy?     If    they   aren't   worth
holding,  why  were  they  worth  capturing?   What   hap-
pens  to  the  fable  that  they  were  of  such  strategic  sig-
nificance   they  had  to  be  taken  at  any   price?—IFS
(I   have  learned)   was  said  about  this  to  the  Committee  by
Ambassador  Goldberg,  when  he  appeared  before  it  on  No-
vember  2,  though  one  of  the  main  questions  in  that  session
was  about  NLF  representation  at  the  UN   in  any  attempt  to
have  the  Security  Council  act  on  the  Vietnamese  war.    Gold-
berg's  lack  of  candor  has  angered   Committee  members  who
praised  him  for  his  presentation—only  to  discover  now  that
he  had  withheld  such  important  information  from  them.    "At
the  time,"  Hedrick  Smith  reported   in  the  New   York   Times
Dec.  6,  "Goldberg's  declaration  of  U.S.  readiness  to  have  the
NLF  invited  to  attend  any  Security  Council  debate  on  Viet-
nam,  was  regarded  as  a  shift  in  the  administration's   public
(Continued  On Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'8  Weekly,  December 18,1987
(Continued  from  Page  One)
position  to  make  future  approaches  to  the   Security  Council
more  meaningful.'"    Now  it  appears  that  the  State  Depart-
ment  had  already turned  down a  feeler  from  the  NLF  to  send
a  delegation  to  the  UN.
Semantic   Smoke-Screen
Senator  Morse,  for  one, might have been  less  eager  to  praise
Goldberg  for  "a  historic  statement"  to  the  Committee  if  he
had  known  the  information  being  withheld  from  it.   In  Janu-
ary  1966  the  U.S.  put  a  resolution  into  the  Security  Council
to  have  it  take  up  the  Vietnamese war.   This  made  it  look  as
if  the  U.S.  were loyally working with  the  UN  at  the  very  mo-
ment  the  U.S.  was rejecting U  Thant's  3-point  peace  proposal,
which  called  for  an  end  to  the  bombing  of  the  North  as  the
first  step  toward  a  cease-fire  and  peace  talks.    Now  it  looks
as  if  in  November  Goldberg  talked   of  U.S.   willingness  to
have  the  NLF  invited  to  a  Security Council  session  as a  public
ploy  while  privately the  U.S.  was  rejecting  a  proposal  to  give
an  NLF  delegation  visas  for  New  York  under  its  headquar-
ters  agreement  with  the  UN.    A  decade  ago,  despite  French
objections,  the  Algerian  NLF  was  given  U.S.  visas  to  estab-
lish  an  unofficial  mission  at  the  UN  in  New  York  while  fight-
ing  the  French.    The  excuse  then  was that  the  Algerian  ques-
tion  was  on  the  UN  agenda.    But  so—as  a  matter  of  fact—is
the  Vietnamese  question.    It  was  put  on  the  agenda  of  the
Security  Council  by Goldberg  in  January  of  1966,   though  the
other  members are  reluctant  to  act upon  it.
The  U.S.  objected  to  the  Vietnamese  NLF  presence  on  the
ground  that  they  would  carry  on  "propaganda"   at  the  UN.
Doesn't  everybody?   Doesn't  the  U.S.  mission?    Isn't  propa-
ganda  only  a  bad  word  for  the  other  fellow's  effort  to  put  his
case?    Isn't  that  what  an  international  forum  is  for?    That
feeler  from  the  NLF—they  said  they  would  deny  it  if  made
public  prematurely  and  they have  denied  it  now—was  a  poli-
tical  opportunity.   The  Chinese  are  against  a  UN  role  in  set-
tling  the  Vietnam war.    That  feeler  went  contrary  to  Peking's
policy.  The  NLF  could  have argued with  Peking  that  a  chance
to  be  represented  in  New  York  and  present   its  case  to  the
world  press  and  radio-TV  at  the  UN   justified  the  move.   If
the  U.S.  wants  the  UN  to  take  a  hand  in  settling  the  Viet-
The Kind  of  Pot  LBJ  Smokes
"Washington,   Dec.   6   (UPD—David    IE.    Lilienthal,
chairman  of  the  Development  and  Resources  Corpora-
tion,  told  President  Johnson  today  that  the  South  Viet-
namese  people  considered  economic  and  social  develop-
ment  their  first  priority,  with  peace  'way  down  on  the
list.'
—New  York  Times,  Dee. 7.
"Lilienthal  gave  President  Johnson,  the  Cabinet  and
the  press a rosy  report  on the  politics  and  economics of
South  Vietnam.   Just  back  from  a  Saigon  trip,    [he]
offered  these  observations:
'The  new   government  in  Saigon   is  run  by   young,
able  dedicated  men.    Energetic  young  men  in  the  Na-
tional  Assembly  are building  new popular  constituencies
to  replace  the  discredited  political  partiea  of  the  past.
The  countryside  is  not  physically  ravaged  by-the  war
and  is  ripe  for  immediate  economic  development.   The
people  are  not  dispirited."
—Washington  Pest, Dee. 7.
namese war, this was a  chance to draw the NLF  into  the  UN's
orbit,   and  well  worth  the  admission  price  of  letting  them
"make  propaganda"  at  UN  headquarters.
Today  the  Soviet  bloc,  the  Afro-Asians and  even  our  own
allies  are  dubious  about  UN  intervention  in  the  Vietnamese
war because the other side  is opposed.  An NLF mission in New
York  would  change  the  picture.    The  ability  of  a   belligerent
to  state  its  case  in  New  York  even  though  it  was  fighting  the
American  government  would  help  to  change  the  view  that
the  UN  has  become  in  too  large  a  degree  an  instrument  of
American  policy.    Of  course  if  the  French  had  had  their  way
10 years ago the  Algerians  would  never  have  been  represented
at  the  UN  either.    The  U.S:  gave  at  least  limited  support  to
the  Algerian  cause  because  it  wanted  an  aid  of  the  Algerian
war,  just  as  France  today  gives  limited  support  to  the   NLF
because  it  wants  an  end  of  the  Vietnamese  war.   We  should
have  taken  up  that  NLF  feeler  in  October  and  granted  visas.
This  would  have helped  to  rehabilitate  the UN's  reputation  as
a  truly  independent   forum.    The   Senate   Foreign   Relations
Committee  had  a  right  to  know  about  this  from  Goldberg,
and  ought  to  air  the  issue -fully  now.
Former Naval Lieut. Says No Shots Were Fired  At  the  Maddox  in  Tonkin  Bay  "Incident"
"I maintain that  President  Johnson,  Secretary  McNamara,
and  the  Joint   Chiefs   of   Staff   gave  false  information   to
Congress  in  their  report   about  U.S.  destroyers  being   at-
tacked  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin.
"In  August  1964  I  was  serving  as  a  commissioned  naval
officer  aboard  the  'USS  Pine  Island'  (AV-12)  in  the  Pacific.
Pine  Island  was  the  first  U.S.  ship  to  enter  the  war  zone  in
response  to  the  'attack'  upon  the  destroyers  'Maddox'  and
Turner  Joy'.   I  recall  clearly  the  confusing  radio  messages
sent  at  that  time  by  the  destroyers—confusing  because  the
destroyers  themselves   were  not  certain  they  were  being  at-
tacked.    Granted  that  some  North  Vietnamese  motor  tor-
pedo  boats  were  in  the  area  and  used  harassing  maneuvers,
the  question  is  this: did they  actually  fire  shells  or  torpedos
at   U.S.  warships?    The  answer  is  no.
"I   learned   this   by   speaking   with  the   chief   sonarman
of   the   Maddox  who  was  in   the   sonar   room  daring   the
'attack'.    He  told  me  that  Ms  evaluation  of  the  sonarscope
picture  was  negative,  meaning  that  no  torpedos  were  fired
through  the  water,  at  the  ship  or  otherwise.    And  he  also
said  that  he  consistently   reported  this  to  the  commanding
officer  during  the  'attack'.   My naval  experience  as  an  anti-
submarine  warfare  officer  makes  it  clear  that  a  chief  sonar-
man's  judgment  in  such  a  situation  is  more  reliable   than
that  of  anyone  else  on  the  ship  including  the  commanding
officer.    No  one  is  in  a  better  position  to  know  than  the
chief,  and in  this  case  his  judgment  was  that  there  was  no
attack.
"Yet  the  Pentagon  reported  to  the  President  that  North
Vietnam  had  attacked  us,  and  the  President   reported  it  to
Congress.    Why?    Was  it  simple  misundemtanding,  or  a
deliberate  attempt  to  test  our  position  in  Asia?    Whatever
the reason, in a  moment of  panic,  based  on fakie  information,
the  President  was  given  unprecedented  powers  which  today
enable  him  to  conduct   an  undeclared   war  involving   over
half  a  million men and costing  billions  of  dollars.   That's  a
pretty  high  price  to  pay  for  a  bad  radio  report.   Let's  hope
our  warships  aren't  attacked  by  Chinese  sampans  next."
—Letter  to  the  Editor,  New  Haven  Register,  Dec.  6,  by
former  Lt.   (j.g.)   John  W.  White,  of  Cheshire, Conn.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 18, 1967
The  Supreme  Court  Throws  Out  A  Silly  Law  In  A  Silly  Witch-Hunt
The  Case  of The  Known  Communist  in  The  Seattle  Shipyard
It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  sillier   piece  of  witch-hunting   than
that  involved  in  the  Robel  case.    Eugene  Victor  Robel  is  a
known  Communist  party  member.    He  has  been  working  as a
machinist  in  the  Todd  Shipyards  in  Seattle  for  the  past  10
years.    As  a  known  Communist  in  a  plant  working  on  naval
contracts,  he  was  certainly under  surveillance.    Had  he  done
anything  in  that  time  which  remotely  smacked  of  sabotage  or
espionage,   he   could   not   only   have   been   discharged   but
prosecuted.
Ten  Years'  Satisfactory   Employment
Robel  got  caught  in  the  works  of  the  Internal  Security  Act.
In   1961   under  that   Act  the   Subversive  Activities   Control
Board  issued an  order  requiring the  Communist Party to  regis-
ter.    Under  the  terms  of  that  act  any  members  of  a   "Com-
munist  action"  organization which  has been  ordered  to  register
are  forbidden  to  work  in  a  "defense  facility."    In   1962   the
Todd   Shipyards  were  formally  designated  as  such  a  facility.
In  1963  Robel  was  indicted  for  working  there.    The  funniest
part  of  the    story  is  that  after  being  arrested  and  released  on
bond,  he  went  back  to  work at  the  shipyards  and  is still  work-
ing  there  while  his  case  is  being  prosecuted.
Under  all  the  circumstances it  is hard  to  believe  that  Robel
is  a  menace  to  the  national   defense.     On  the  contrary,  ma-
chinists  being  in  short  supply,  his  foreman  probably  considers
the  whole   case  a  nuisance.    A  Federal  District   Court   dis-
missed  Robel's  indictment.    It  held  that  there  was  no  proof
of   "active   membership  and  specific  intent"   to  do   anything
wrong.    The  Supreme  Court,  6-to-2  (Thurgood  Marshal  took
no  part,  since  he  was  not  on  the  bench  during  the  argument)
has  now  declared  the   "defense   facility"  portion  of  the  Act
unconstitutional  on  the  ground  that  it  bars  a  man  from  em-
ployment  purely  on  the  basis  of  associations,  with  no  require-
ment  of  proof  that  he  personally  was  engaged  in,  or  planned,
any  illegal  action.    Only  White  and  Harlan  dissented.    The
majority's  reasoning  followed  that  in  the  Aptheker  case  where
the  Court  threw  out  another  section  of  this  Act  which  would
have   denied   passports   to   Communists.     In   both   cases   the
Court  held  that  such  sanctions  would  be  an  interference  with
First  Amendment  rights.
Little  is  now  left   of  this  Act  except  the  registration  pro-
visions.    The   Court  has  already  held   that  under   the   Fifth
amendment  Communists  cannot  be  forced  to  register.    A  bill
before  Congress  would  allow  the  Attorney General  to  register
Shall  We  Lose  Freedom  In  "Defending"  It?
"The   Government   asserts  that  5(a)(l)(D)   [of  the
Internal  Security  Act]   is  an 'expression  of  the  growing
concern  shown  by  the  executive  and legislative branches
of  government  over  the  risks  of  internal  subversion  in
plants  on  which  the  national  defense  depend(s).'   Yet,
this  concept  of  'national  defense'  cannot  be  deemed  an
end in itself,  justifying  any exercise of  legislative  power
designed  to  promote  such  a  goal.    Implicit  in  the  term
'national defense' is the notion of  defending  those values
and  ideals  which  set  this  nation  apart.    For  almost  two
centuries,  our  country  has  taken  singular  pride  in  the
democratic  ideals  enshrined  in  its  Constitution,  and  the
most  cherished  of  those  ideals  have  found  expression
in  the  First  Amendment.    It  would  indeed  be  ironic  if,
in  the  name  of  national  defense,  we  would  sanction  the
subversion  of   one  of   those  liberties—the  freedom  of
association—which   makes  the  defense   of   the  Nation
worthwhile."
—Chief   Justice  Warren  holding  unconstitutional  that
portion  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  which  forbids   em-
ployment  of  Communists  in  defense   plants.
Communist  organizations  and  members  on  his  own  initiative,
thus  establishing  a  kind  of  blacklist.
The  government   is  now  going  through  the  motions  of  try-
ing  to  see  if,  in  the  case  of  the  DuBois  clubs,  it  can  force
an   alleged   "Communist   front"   to  register.     The   Court   last
Monday  refused  to  throw  the  case  out  on  the  ground  that  the
DuBois  clubs  had  not  yet  gone  through  SACB  hearings  and
lower  court  appeals.    Two  Justices,  Black  and  Douglas,  voted
to  throw  the  case  out  now  (see  box  below).    There  is  little
doubt  that  the  Court  will   do  so  eventually.
As  we  write  the  new  bill  is  buried   in  the  murky  depths
of  a  conference  committee,  on. which  the  conferees  from  both
House   and  Senate  are  all  right-wingers  anxious  to  save  the
SACB  at  least  as  a  means  of  blacklisting  radicals.    This  too
is  almost  sure  to  be  held   unconstitutional   under   the   First
Amendment.   Senator  Proxmire  who  led  the  fight  against  it  in
the  Senate  has  threatened  to  resume his  battle  if  the  bill  is  re-
ported  out without the  Mansfield amendment under  which  the
Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  would  go  out  of  existence
in  1969  if  no  new  cases  are  filed with  it  by the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  before  the  end  of   1968.    It  looks  as  if  the  bill  may  be
held  over  until  the  next  session,  unless  the  right-wingers  can
slip  it  through  unnoticed  in  the  hectic  closing  days of  this  one.
Douglas   (With  Black)  Argues  Jeffersonian  Doctrine   in  Defense   of  the  DuBois   Clubs
"I  believe  that  the  provisions  of  the  Act  now  challenged
are void on their face.... Jefferson  expressed  the  American
constitutional  theory:  '(T)he  opinions  of  men  are  not  the
object  of  civil  government,  nor  under  its  jurisdiction.  .  .  .
(I)t  is  time  enough  for  the  rightful  purposes  of  civil   gov-
ernment   for  its   officers  to  interfere  when   principles  break
out  into  overt  acts  against  peace  and  good  order.  .  .  .'
I  see  no  constitutional  method   whereby  the  Government
can  punish  or  penalize  one  for  'being  & Communist'  or  'sup-
porting  Communists'  or  'promoting  communism.'  .  .  .  The
members  of  the  DuBois  Clubs  may  or  may  not  be   Commu-
nists.    But  as  I  said,  I  gee  no  possibility  under   our  Con-
stitution  of  penalizing  one  for  holding  or  expressing  that
or  any  other belief.   The DuBois  Clubs  may  advocate  causes
that   parallel    Communist   thought   or   Communist   policies.
They   appear,  for  example,  to  advocate  the  termination  of
hostilities  in  Vietnam.   But so  far  as  advocacy  is  concerned,
I  see  no  constitutional  way  of  putting  restraints  on  them
so  long  as  we have  the First  Amendment.  .  .  .
"If   Government   can  investigate  ideas,  beliefs,   and  ad-
vocacy  at  the  left  end of  the  spectrum,  I  see  no  reason  why
it  may  not  investigate  at  any  other  part  of  the  spectrum."
—Douglas  dissenting   (urith  Black)   from   the  refusal    to
dismiss  the  SACB'e   action  against  the  DuBois  Clubs.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  18, 1967
How  Israel  Treats  The  Arabs  Under  Its   Control  Will  Be  Decisive
A  Liberal  Arab  Points  the  Way  to  Peace  and  Reconciliation
By  Cecil  Hourani
Israel's  military  victory  was  not  a  political  one:   it  has  not
led   her   any  nearer  to  that   peace  on   her   terms  which   she
would   like,  or  any  nearer  to  the  negotiating  table  with   the
Arabs. ...   It  has  on  the  contrary   brought   against  her  a
coalition   of   international   pressures   which   never   existed   be-
fore,   and  liquidated  the  fruit   of  twenty  years'  work  to  win
friends   in   Africa   and  Asia.
Military  Force  No  Solution
If   military  force  is  not   the  Arabs'  best  card,  neither  is  it
Israel's.  .  .  .  Firstly,  let  us  suppose   that  international  pres-
sures   do  not   succeed   in   forcing  Israel   to  withdraw  to   her
pre-5  June  frontiers.    By incorporating the  Gaza  Strip  and  the
West  Bank  into her  territory, the  proportion  of  Arabs  to  Jews
in  Israel  will  be  radically changed.    The  higher  birth  rate  of
the   Arabs  will  give  them  equality  in  numbers,  then   a  ma-
jority,  in  a  few  years.    And  as  the  proportion  of  'Arab'  Jews
to  European   Jews   is  also  changing,  the   total  population   of
Palestine will  eventually,  and  before  long,  take  on  an  oriental
character.    As  we  acquire  some  of  their  virtues,  and  they  ac-
quire  some  of  our  defects, the  gap  between  Arab  and  Jew  will
narrow,  and  in  fifty  years  could  almost  disappear.
Secondly,  it  is  clear  that  the  Zionist  movement  as  a  whole
and  the  Israeli  leaders  in  particular, must  now  face  a dramatic
dilemma  as  a  result  of  their blitzkrieg  on  5 June.   This dilem-
ma  is  the  following:   If   the   Israeli  Government   accepts   the
Arabs  within  the  territories she  controls  as  full  Israeli citizens,
with   equal   civil   and   political  rights,   the   concept   of   Israel
which  has  hitherto  been  incorporated  into  her  laws  will  have
to  be  changed.     Israel  will  no  longer   be  a  Jewish   state,  in
which,  as  it  does  now,  full .citizenship  requires  not  only  mem-
bership  of   the  Jewish  religion,,  but  Jewish  ancestry.    It  will
become   a  Jewish-Arab   state   in  which  nationality  will   be   a
.function   of  residence  or  citizenship.   Israel,  in  other   words,
as  she  has  been   since  1948,   will  no  longer   exist,  and   Pales-
tine,  with  Jews  and  Arabs  living  together,   will  have  been  re-
stored.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Israeli  authorities  refuse  to  accept
The  selection  on -this  page  is  from   an  article,   "The
Moment  of  Truth:  Towards  A  Middle  East   Dialogue"
by   the   distinguished    Arab  writer,  Cecil   Hourani,   as
translated   in   the  November   issue   of   Encounter    from
the  Lebanese   paper,  El  Nahar.    Mr.  Hourani   was  for
ten  years  adviser   to  President   Bourguiba  of  Tunis,  the
only   Arab   leader   who   has   dared   suggest    a   peaceful
approach   to  Israel.     We  recommend   this  article   to  all
who   would   understand    the   Arab   point   of  view,  and
we  believe  it   offers    a  basis  on  which  peace  and  recon-
ciliation are  possible.
the  Arabs  as  full  citizens with  equal  civil  and  political   rights,
she  will  have  on  her  hands  a  large  population  which  she  will
be  unable  to  liquidate or  to  govern.
If  Israeli  Extremists  Succeed
It  is  the  perception  of  this  dilemma  which  is  now   leading
some  of  the  Israeli  leaders  to  force  the  hands   of  the  others
and  to  try  to  have  it  both  ways:  to  keep  the  territories  they
have  conquered,   and  try  to  reduce  the  Arab  population   in
numbers  by  encouraging  their  exodus  across  the  Jordan.    It  is
not  difficult  to  foresee  that  the  next  step  will  be  to  encourage
a  new  wave  of  Jewish  immigration  into  Israel,  to  replace  as
many  Arabs  as  possible  in  as  short  a  period   as  possible.
If  the  extremists within  Israel  succeed  in  forcing  the  hand
of  the  more  reasonable,  and  getting  the  world  Zionist  move-
ment  to  follow,  then  they will  in  fact  make  forever  impossible
their  dream  of  an  Arab-Jewish  rapprochement.     For  the  way
in  which  the  Arabs  are  ultimately going  to  judge  the  advan-
tages  of  peace  or  war  in  their  relations  with  Israel  will  depend
on  the  way  Israel  treats  the  Arabs within  its borders.    If   there
is  a  genuine  attempt  to  live  together  with  the  Arabs  on  terms
of  complete  equality  and  within  the  same  juro-political  frame-
work,  the  way  to  an  eventual  conciliation  between   Israel,  or
Palestine,   and   the   rest   of   the   Arab  world   will   have   been
opened.    But  if  the  Arabs  are  excluded  from  full   citizenship,
and   reduced  to  the  status  of  a  colonized,   dependent   popula-
tion,  no  peace  will  ever  be  possible,   either   inside  or  outside
Palestine.
The  Weekly  Is  Not  Published  The  Last  Monday  in  December  or  the  First  in  January—Next  Issue  Dated  Jan.  8
I. F; Stone's  Weekly
For  the  enclosed   $6.95
(To)   Name  ..................
Street   ............................
City
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new book:
Zin         ...      State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished  D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  .   .... .......  ..........---   ---              --    --. ..-.......-..---.-..---....
Street   .............................
City  .................................
..  Zip................  State....................
12/18/67
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday   except  in  August,  the  last   week  in   December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July   at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:     16   in   Canada;   $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED