I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967feb06.pdf

============================================================

Black  America  Prepares  to Aid  Black  Africa,  P.  2
"The   Most  Hateful  War  We  Have  Ever  Fought"
"After   nearly   two   months   in   Vietnam   I  find  this   the
most  hateful war we have  ever  fought  .  . . We find  ourselves
supporting  a  government  of  mandarins  with  little   basis  of
popular  support,  fighting  for  an  army  that  has  little  inclina-
tion  to  do  its  own  fighting."
—Robert  Sherrod  in  Life Magazine  Jan.  27.
"Are  you  likely,  really,  to  win  the  hearts  and  minds  of
people  whose  sons  you  have  to  kill  before   you  can   begin
the   wooing?    Or  the   hearts   and   minds   of   peasants   you
uproot   from  their  homes—and  from  the   spiritual   comfort
of  their  ancestors'  tombs  .  .  .?"
—Gavin  Young  in  the London  Observer,  Jan.  29.
I. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  5
FEBRUARY  6,  1967
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Great  Society  for  the  Military-Industrial  Complex
Director   of   the   Budget   Charles  Schultze  made   a  curious
boast  about  the  new  budget  on  Congressman  Frank  Horton's
Sunday  show  (Jan.  29  on  Channel  13, New  York).  No  doubt
to  appease conservative criticism  of  Johnson  as  a  spender,  Mr.
Schultze   said  that  if   the   costs   of   the   Vietnamese  war   are
excluded,  it  can be  seen that  the  new fiscal  1968  budget  "takes
the  smallest proportion  of  the  national  output  of  any  budget
since  1948."    Twenty  years  ago  the  budget  was  13.5%  of
the  gross  national  product;  this  coming  fiscal  year,  minus  the
cost  of   the   Vietnam  war,  it  will  again  be  less  than    14%.
This  led  us to  do  a little arithmetic on  our  own.   If  you deduct
total  national   defense   costs  in  both   years,  you  will  see  that
we  will  be  spending  a  lower  percentage  of  the  gross  national
product  on  non-military  purposes  in  fiscal  1968  than  we  were
20  years  ago—8.6%  in   1948   but  only  7.3%   in   1968   (esti-
mating  GNP   at  $810   billion).    On   the  other  hand  while
"defense"-took  4.6%   of  GNP  in  1948,  in  the  next fiscal year
it  will  take  9.3%   of   GNP.
The  Pentagon's  Portion   Doubled
So  for  all  the  talk  of  the  Great  Society,  the  proportion  of
the   nation's   output   devoted   to   the   Federal    government's
civilian  activities  has  fallen   by  one-sixth   while   the   portion
devoted  to  war  has  doubled.    Even  these  figures  understate
the   case.    Net   interest  payments  rose   from  4.2   billions  to
14.2  billions  in  those  20  years.    These  are  largely  due  to  debt
accumulated  by war  but  they  are  included  in  civilian  payments.
So  are  payments  to  veterans,  which  are  close  to  $5  billion.
No  matter  how  you  look  at  it,  civilian  public  needs  are  the
stepchild   of   the   Treasury.    The   revised  GNP   for   1948   is
$243.5  billions and  the  unofficial  expectation  for  1968  is  $810
billion;  it  has  more  than  tripled—at  least  in  dollar  terms—in
20  years.    In  that  same  period,  the  expansion  of  population
and   industry  has  generated   enormous   new  problems.      We
are  polluting  our  air  and  our  water,  exhausting  our  soil  and
permitting  a  youth  of  desperate  savagery  to  grow  up  in  our
decaying   cities   and   rural   slums.    While  private  wealth   is
spilled   away  in   all  kinds  of  conspicuous  and   wasteful  con-
sumption,  and  the  military eat  up  more  and  more  of  the  Fed-
eral  budget,  laughably  little  is  set  aside for  these  public  needs,
despite  their  urgency.    Ours  is  a  spendthrift  society,  wasting
2
On  A  Small   Country   of   30  Million
"One     of   the   major   aerospace    procurement   items,
which  last  year  was  glaringly  deficient . .  .  was  the  iron
bomb  .  .  .  McNamara  said   procurement  of  iron   bombs
will  dominate  Fiscal   1967-68  Air  Force  ordnance  pro-
curement.    For  these   two   years,   he   said,   $1.4   billion
will   be   spent   on   250-lb.   500-lb,   750-lb   [the   last   two
are   those   carried   by   the   B-52]   and   2,000-lb   bombs.
Another  $31  million  will  be  spent  for  napalm  and  $463
million  for  2.75 inch  rockets  and 20-mm  ammunition  .  . .
He  said   the   rate   of   bomb  production  in   the   supple-
mental   and  in  Fiscal   1968  'will  provide  for  a  rate  of
consumption   almost   equal   to   the   total   air   ordnance
consumed   by   U.S.   forces   in  the   peak  year   of   World
War  2  in  Europe  and  almost  four  times  the  consump-
tion  in  the  peak  year  of  the  Korean  war.'"
—Aviation  Week on the  new  budget  Jan.  30.
its  substance,  much  of  it  in  war.
The   Democrats  have  been  more  sensitive  to  these  public
needs  than  the  Republicans.   But  the  military have  been  the
chief   beneficiaries  of  greater  Democratic  readiness  to  spend.
In   the   last  five  Elsenhower   budgets,   military  spending   rose
from  $43.4  to  $47.6  billions.   Kennedy's  first  military budget
was  $51.4,  almost  $4  billions  higher,  and  Johnson's  latest  is
$76.8,  or  $19  billions  bigger  than  Elsenhower's  biggest.     In
the  seven  Democratic  fiscal  years  1962-68   inclusive,  we  will
have    spent    $63   more   than   we   would    have   spent   had
military  costs  been  held  at  the  peak  rate  of  the  Eisenhower
Administration.  Kennedy  expanded  spending  in  every military
sector  from  strategic  nuclear  weapons  through   conventional,
down  to  Green  Berets  and  preparation   for  bacterial  war;  he
also  launched   (see  page  three)   a  campaign  to  export   more
arms  abroad  by  gift  or  sales.    Johnson's  war  in  Vietnam  is
adding  more  than  $40  billions  to  the  budget  in  fiscal  '67-'68.
The  war  industries never  had  it  so good, as under  the  Demo-
crats.    For  them  it  has  truly  been  a  Great  Society.    Neither
General  Dynamics  nor  Boeing  has had  to  fear  poverty.   Profits
have  never  been  so high..  Profit  rates  have  never  been  higher
since  1950  when  the  Korean  war  began,  and  the  real  earnings
of  capital  are  at  an  all-time  high  because  depreciation  allow-
ances  have  been  made  so  generous  in  recent  years.     Hubert
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F,. Stone's  Weekly,  February   6, 1967
The  Need  to  Contain  Our  Own Fanaticism
"Almost  everywhere   in  the   Communist  world   there
are  forces   more  inclined  to  appreciate  the  values  of  a
peaceful  world  .  .  .  and  there  are  forces  less  inclined.
We  have  it  in  our  power,  by  the  manner  in  which  we
frame  our  policies,  to  encourage  or  to  discourage  either
of   these   conflicting   forces.    International   communism
is  thus  not  entirely  just  what  we  find  it  to  be.  It  is  in
part  what  we  make  of  it  ...    If  we  fail  to  take  account
of  the  encouraging  elements—if  we  act  as  though   they
did  not  exist   and  carry  our  differences  against   indi-
vidual   Communist   powers   as   though   we   were    still
dealing   with   the   naive   world-revolutionary   force   of
Lenin's   day  or  with  the  grim  monolith   .  .  .  that  con-
fronted  us  in  the  days  of  Stalin—we  may  be  discarding
the  only  chance  that  I  can  see  to  spare  ourselves  or our
children  the  immeasurable  catastrophe   of  a  world  war
among  nuclear   powers."
—George  Kennan  to Senate Foreign  Relations  Jan.  30
The   Unexpected   Militancy  of   A   Conventional   Middle  Class  Negro   Conference
Pan-Africanism    Makes  Its  Debut  in  American  Domestic  Politics
By  Richard   Thomas
.The  third  meeting  in  six years of  the  American Negro Lead-
ership  Conference here  last week-end turned into a  full  fledged
exercise  in  Pan  Africanism.    The  older,  conventional, middle
class  Negro  organizations  dominated  the  Conference.    It  was
held—with  apt  symbolism—in  the  Colonial  Room  of  the May-
flower.    CORE  and  SCLC  were  barely  represented  and  SNCC
not  at  all.   ("What  conference?"  SNCC's  Atlanta  office  asked
when   I  called  to  inquire  why  it  had   no  delegate   present.)
But  the  outstanding  personality,  A.  Philip  Randolph,   in  the
opening   address,  struck   a   militant   note.     He   proposed   "a
strong,  aggressive  and  dedicated  Negro  movement"   to   "exer-
cise  effective  and  meaningful  influence"  on  American foreign
policy  "in  behalf  of  Black  Africa."     He  called  on American
Negroes   to  give  "help  and  hope"  to  black  African   "freedom
fighters"  in  South  Africa,  Angola,  Rhodesia  and  Mozambique.
White  Supremacy  Also   "Pan"
Meetings  are  no  longer  to  be  biennial.   To  underscore  the
new  sense  of  urgency, the  conference  agreed  to  meet  again  in
90  days.    The  struggle  for  Southern  Africa  is  spreading  into
American   domestic  politics.    White   supremacy  forces,   too,
have  become  "pan-continental."    The  immediate  focus  of  the
struggle   is  Rhodesia,  and   the   Friends   of   Rhodesia   (white
Rhodesia,  that  is)  have  become  one  of  the  most  active  lobbies
this  session.on  Capitol  Hill.    The  foremost   Friend   in   Con-
gress,  not  unexpectedly, turns out  to  be  Senator  Eastland,  who
has  already introduced  a  bill  to  recognize  the  Ian  Smith  gov-
ernment  and  lift   sanctions  on  Rhodesia.    Thus  old   enemies
meet  again on this new  barricade, and  the  struggle  for  Mozam-
bique  is  linked  to  the  struggle  for  Mississippi.
Representatives  of   Ghana,   Zambia   and   Tanzania  and   of
Liberation  movements  in  Zimbabwe  (Rhodesia)   and  Mozam-
bique  spoke   at  the  three  day  session.    In  one  of   the  first,
Prof.  St.  Clair  Drake  of  Roosevelt  University, Chicago,  warned
that  American  Negroes   would  soon  have  to  consider  provid-
ing  weapons  and  volunteers  to  these  movements.     Analogies
were  made  with  outside  aid  to  the  Stern   Gang   in   Palestine
and  to  the  Irish  Rebellion. •  One  of  the  most  moving  speakers
The  Senate  and  Bobby   Baker
We   have  no  way   of   knowing   how   much  of   Bobby
Baker's  story   was" true,  but  one  part  of  it  was   unques-
tionable.    Senator   Kerr  did  put  into  the   1962  tax   bill
that   amendment   which   would   have   cost    California's
three  biggest  savings   and  loan  holding  companies   sev-
eral  millions  a  year  extra   in  taxes.   And  Kerr,  as  the
Senator   in  charge  of  the  bill  in  conference   committee
two   months   later,  did  take  the   amendment  out   again
when  the  S  and  L  executives   agreed  to  pay  $100,000  in
"campaign   contributions."     More   important   than   the
complicity  of  either  man  is  the  Senate's  indifference  to
the   implications.    Even   at   the   height"  of   the    Baker
scandal   two  years   ago  it   voted   62  to  25  against  the
Clark-Case  bill  to  require  financal  disclosure   by   Sena-
tors  and  Senate  employes.   It  shelved  the  subject  with
a   Committee   on  Ethics   under  Stennis  of   Mississippi.
This  committee's   fervor  is  indicated  by  its  slower-than-
molasses   pace   in   dealing    with   the   charges   against
Senator    Dodd.
was  Dr.  Eduardo Mondlane,  a  Northwestern  Ph.D.,  who  gave
up  a  Syracuse University Professorship  to  become  the  leader  of
the  guerrillas  in  his  native  Mozambique.    "LJ.S.  policy  toward
us has  steadily worsened,"  he  told  the  conference.   He  charged
that  the  Portugese  use  B-26s,  "supplied  by the  CIA,  to  bomb
and  strafe  our  African  villagers."
The   Johnson   Administration  sent  two  speakers  but   both
irritated   the   Conference.    . Though   Randolph   praised  John-
son's  Rhodesia  policy  and  Ambassador  Golctberg's   "brilliant"
answer  to  the   foes  of   sanctions,  Goldberg   himself  annoyed
the  conference  by criticizing the  "impatience"  of  some African
leaders  in  the  UN  and  suggesting  the  possibility of  a  "genuine
dialogue"   between  Portugal   and  the  Africans  "on  the  prin-
ciple  of  self-determination."    Dr.  Mondlane  responded  angrily
that  it  was  "nonsense  to  think  that  100,000  whites  in  Mozam-
bique   will   ever   share  power."     Under   Secretary   of    State
Katzenbach  stirred  hostility  by  his   effort   to  explain   the  air-
craft  carrier  Roosevelt's  call  at  Cape  Town  on  its  way  back
from  Vietnam.    He  said  it  would   cost  an  extra  quarter  of  a
million  dollars  to  refuel  the  carrier  at  sea,  and  that  this  time
(unlike  1965  when  a  call  was  cancelled)   South  Africa  would
allow  Negro  servicemen  to  go  ashore.     Randolph   called   the
visit  an  insult  to  Negroes  and  Cleveland  Robinson  said  a quar-
ter  million  was  a  small  price  to  pay  "for  Negroes  giving  their
lives  in  this  supposed  fight  for  freedom  in   Vietnam."
There  was  criticism  of  the  State  Department   for   refusing
a  visa to  the  South  African  "colored"  poet  and  teacher,  Dennis
Brutus,  to  visit  this  country  on  a  speaking  tour;  he  is  a  perma-
ent   exile.     There   was   also   sentiment   for   stronger   action
against  Rhodesia.    While  Roy  Wilkins  of  the  NAACP  kept
the   word   "force"   out   of   the   Rhodesian   resolution,   it  still
clearly  implied  a  desire  for  stronger   measures.    Simon  Kap-
wepwe,  Foreign  Minister  of  Zambia,  who  fled  to  Washington
for   the   Conference,   said  it  was  fortunate  that  the   Wilson-
Smith  talks  on  the  Tiger  had  broken  down  because  Wilson's
compromise   would   have   left   the   whites  with   50   seats   in
Parliament  and  the  blacks  with   17;  the  whites  would   have
voted  at  21,  the  blacks  not  till  thirty.    Rhodesia  is  no   longer
a  far   off  country  in  U.S.   politics.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  27, 19U7
Correspondents  in  the  provinces  north  and  northwest   of
Saigon  said,  however,  that  the  highways  were  much  more
crowded  than usual with U.S.  convoys.   Officers  in  the  Amer-
ican  First  Infantry  Division  and 25th Infantry Division  con-
firmed   that  they   were  moving  extraordinary  amounts   of
food,   fuel   and  ammunition  to  forward  positions."  *
Our  Poor  Helpless  Military
But  before  the  truth  had  thus  begun  to  leak  out,  the   U.S.
press  was  treated  to  a  tidal  wave  of  misrepresentation   about
what  was  going  on  in  the  North.    The  day  after  Rusk's  press
conference,  the  U.S.  military  in  Saigon  pulled  out  all  the  stops.
Their  propagandistic  purpose   was  faithfully   mirrored   in  the
night  lead  from  Saigon  by  Alvin  B.  Webb,  Jr.,   on  the  UPI
wire  Feb.   10.    He  cabled  that  "U.S.   scout  planes   and   ships
Friday  reported   helplessly  watching  North  Vietnam   take  ad-
vantage  of  a  4-day  truce  to  build  up  their  forces  with  massive
supplies,"  and  "American  sources  said  the  Communist  'satura-
tion  push'  has  all  but  killed  hopes  of  extending  the  cease-fire."
The  military  didn't  want  the  cease-fire  in  the  first  place,  and
were   afraid   Johnson   might   somehow   be   drawn   into   peace
talks.    It  was not  surprising that  U.S.  officials  "added,"  accord-
ing  to  Webb,  that  "any  hopes  for  extending  the  truce  to  allow
for  peace  talks"  had  "vanished  in  the  dust  of  the   Communist
supply  convoys."    One  commander  became  so  alarmed  Webb
reported  "that  he  urged  American planes  break  off their  cease-
fire  'stand-down'  and  immediately  resume  bombing   the  flood
of  North  Vietnamese  ships,  trains  [this  was  the  only  dispatch
I  saw  that  implied  the  trains  were  again  running  down   the
North   Vietnamese  panhandle]   and   trucks  ferrying   arms   to
South   Vietnam's   Communist  guerrillas."     One   could   almost
* It  may  be  that  troops  were  also  moved  during  the  truce.
The  weekly   casualty   report  issued   Feb.   16  in  Saigon   "also
showed,"  according  to  a  summary  in  the  Washington   Post
Feb.  17  "an   addition of  2000  U.S.  troops,  bringing  the  total
in  Vietnam  as  of   Feb.   11  to  412,000."    That   was   the  third
day  of  the  truce.    The  same  communique,  according   to  the
AP  ticker  Feb.  16,  showed  that  South  Vietnamese  forces   de-
clined  that  week  by  3,000.   They  seem  to  desert  faster   than
we  can  replace  them.
Generals   as  Tricky  as  Shyster  Lawyers
Gen.  Westmoreland's  command  hated  even  the  word
"truce"  and  substituted  "stand-down"  and  "curtailment
of   offensive  operations."     These   vague   terms   enabled
the   military   to   blur   the   picture  and   harder   for   the
press  to  determine  what  was  a  violation.    It  helped  to
cover  offensive patrolling  sure  to  provoke  more  clashes,
and   it  also  bolstered   the   totals   of   truce    "incidents."
There  never  was   a  clear  explanation  of   what   consti-
tuted  an  "incident."    At  the   end  of   the  truce  a   U.S.
spokesman   said   there   had   been   269   cease-fire   "inci-
dents"   but  only  86  were  considered   "significant."     If
they  weren't  significant, why  were  they  counted?    How
insignificant  could  an  "incident"  be  and  still  be  added
to  the  totals?     In  avoiding  even  the  term   "violation,"
almost  anything  could  be  classed  as  an  "incident."  The
bigger  the  count  the  worse  the  truce  could  be  made  to
look  in  the  headlines  back  home.
see  the  guerrillas  waving  happily   from   the  ferry  slips  as  the
boats  came  in.
The  figures  given  out  in  Saigon  on  Feb.   10  produced  head-
lines  that  the  North  Vietnamese  were  pouring  35,000  tons  of
supplies   "southward"  [but   still,  as  few  paused  to  realize,  in
North   Vietnam].     The   UPI   that   morning    in   its   enthu-
siasm   even   said   the   barges   and   the   "trucks   stacked   up   at
enemy  infiltration  routes  .  .  .  could  handle  up  to  70,000  tons
of  supplies"  but  the  figure  on  which  the  military  settled  was
35,000.    By the  time  Saigon  had  to  put  it  in  writing  this  was
reduced   to  25,000   with  many  qualifications   (see  text  in  box
at  bottom  of  p.  2).    But  the  press  generally  showed  a  happy
capacity  for  ignoring   the  fine  print.    The   traffic  was  declared
to  be  five  times  heavier   than  "normal"  but  nobody   stopped
to  point  out  that  "normal"  has  been   a  condition   of   constant
bombardment   in   which   trucks   and   ships   dared   only   move
under   cover  of  darkness.    No   American   dispatch   that  I  saw
raised  the  question  of  how  the  military  could  be  so  sure  that
none   of   the   truck   and   ship   loads   carried   civilian  supplies.
There  are   17  million   people  in  North  Vietnam  and  perhaps
{Continued  on  Page  Four)
Why  We  Had  More  "Incidents", Casualties and  Excuses  for  Resumption of  the Bombing
"A  U.S.  spokesman  in  Saigon   said  that  under  the  truce
declaration,  the  allies  would not  initiate  any  offensive  oper-
ations.    But  he  said  because  of  numerous  violations  of  pre-
vious  truces,  the  allies  assumed  a  'full  alert  posture.'    This
entails  increased  patrol  and  security   activity  and  air  and
naval  reconnaissance,  he  explained."
—AP  from  Saigon  in Wash. Star  Feb.  8 as truce  began.
"As  reported   by   the   American  military  it   seems   clear
that  the  Vietcong  were  responsible   for  starting   some  inci-
dents.   In  others,  the  nature of  the  allied  'full  alert  posture',
in   which  patrolling  is   justified   on   the   grounds   of   many
previous  cease-fire  violations  by  the  Vietcong,  seems  bound
to  be  provocative.     At  least   four   of   the   [10]     significant
incidents   [the  first  day  of  the  truce]   themselves   intercon-
nected,   appeared  to   have  resulted   from   patrols,   close   to
allied  perimeters, which the  Vietcong  can  hardly be  expected
to   recognize   as   'defensive'.   .   .   .  The  American  military
commanders  are  known  to  have  great   reserves   about   the
definition  of  where  defensive  action  action,  which  is  not  a
violation  of  this  bizarre  truce  ends  and  where  offensive  ac-
tion  begins."
—Its  own man  in Saigon  London  Times  Feb.  9
"Given  the  nature of  South  Vietnamese  and  allied  patrols,
such  incidents  seem  impossible  to  avoid.    According  to  the
official  American  account,  the  company,  8  miles  from  Bien
Hoa,  'while  moving  to  a  position  was  contacted   by  an  esti-
mated  enemy  platoon  in  bunkers  and  trees.'    By  any  stand-
ards  that  looks  as  if  the  Americans  were  moving  and  the
Vietcong  were  static.    As  no  further  details  were forthcom-
ing  from  the  official  spokesman,  no  one  can  know  why  the
Americans  were  moving  there."
—Same  from,  Saigon, Feb.  10
"In  a  departure  from  precedents  established   during   the
truces  marking Christmas  and  the  Western  New  Year  holi-
day,   a   U.S.   military   spokesman   yesterday   disclosed  that
18  American  soldiers   had  been  killed  and  145  wounded  in
the  first  40 hours  of  the  cease-fire over  the  lunar  New  Year.
.  .  .  American  sources  suggested  that  the  figures  had  been
made  public  in  contradiction  to  usual   security    regulations
in  an  effort  to  prepare  world  opinion  for  the  resumption  of
air   strikes  against   North  Vietnam  today.     One  American
source  said,  'The  word  has  been  passed  from   Washington
that  we  have  to  provide them with  a  proper  rationalization:"
—R.  W.  Apple,  Jr.,  from  Saigon,  N.  Y.  Times  Feb.  12.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  27, 1967
Nonsensical  Figures   the  U.S. Press   Swallowed  Without  A  Grimace
(Continued  from   Page  Three)
2,000,000  live  in  the  area  between  the  17th and  19th parallel.
Keeping   them  supplied  under  bombardment  cannot  be  easy.
Could  it  be  that  none  of  this  was  food  and  fuel  for  civilians?
The  only  dispatch  I  saw  which  touched  on  this  point  was  in
the  London  Times  Feb. 11.    Its  man  in  Saigon  said  the  mili-
tary  "conceded"  (apparently when  he  asked  them)   that  "some
of  the  supplies  could  be  for  civilians".    "Quite  a  few  people
after  all,"  he  noted  dryly,  "live  in  the  southern  'panhandle'.
However,"  he  added,  "American  sources  are  'persuaded'  they
are  mostly  military."
The  Pentagon  Pleaded  Ignorance
The   Pentagon   press   office   claimed  it  knew  no  more   than
was  contained  in  the  communique  reproduced   on  page two,
when   I  tried   to   raise  these   and   other   questions   about   the
figures.   The  communique  claims  the  sighting  of  2200  trucks,
though  admitting nervously  in  two  places  that  there  may  have
been   duplication.    North   Vietnam   has   been   getting   trucks
from   Soviet   bloc   sources,   but   that   is  still   a   lot   of   trucks.
Total  U.S. truck  and  bus  exports  to  all  of  Europe  East  and
West  in  1965 was  2,752.
Most  of   the  Soviet  trucks  are  2l/
2
  tons—so  I  learned   at
second  hand  from  government  sources  here—some  are  4  tons.
How   did   military   intelligence  estimate  their  loads?     In   the
U.S.,   where  single  trucks  go  as  high  as  15  tons,  the   average
load  per   truck  carried  in  1965  (Motor   Truck   Facts,  1966)
was  only  2.65  tons.     If   they  average   two   tons   per   load   in
North  Vietnam  they  are  doing  miraculously well.    This  would
mean  4400  tons  carried  by  those  2200  trucks.    Let  us  make
it  5,000  tons  to  even  it  off.   This  still  leaves  20,000  tons  to
be  accounted  for.
The  communique  says  about:  1570 vessels  were  spotted   be-
tween   the  17th and  19th  parallel  but  admits  that  600  were
"moving  north,"   while   "approximately    970   were    observed
moving   south."  '  Obviously  ships   heading   north   were   not
carrying   supplies   for   the   guerrillas   in   the   south.     So  this
leaves  20,000  tons  to  be  carried  by  970  vessels.    Let  us  round
this  off  to   1,000  vessels,   which   means   20  tons   per    vessel.
But  from  all  I  can  learn  most  of  the  vessels  in  Vietnam  are
sampans  which  do  well  if  they  carry  500  pounds  or  a  quarter
Signs  of  De-Escalation
'We  ,had   been  told  by   MACV   [Military   Assistance
Command  Vietnam]  in  November  a  year  ago  they  ex-
pected   about    4500   a    month    [infiltrated    from    the
North].    I  think  perhaps they had  around 5300  a month
in  the  first  9  months.   My  guess,  and  it  is  only  a  guess,
based  on  very  fragmentary  information,  is  that  it  has
fallen   off   in  the   last   3  months,  and   I   would   be sur-
prised  frankly  if  it  was   much  over  4500  a  month  for
the  year.    [This  means  McNamara estimates  infiltrees
during  the  past  three  months  at  only  2100  a  month.]
—McNamara  to Senate  Armed  Services  op cit. p. 6S
"Instead  of  infiltrating  units,  which  are  substantially
easier  to  detect  and  to  identify  than  individuals, they
are   now  infiltrating   individuals.    The   specific  number
of  these  is  hard  to  determine."
—McNamara  at  press  conference  Feb. IS
ton.    They  would  have  to  make  80  round  trips  in  four  days  to
deliver  20  tons.    Not   even  MACV  in  Saigon  claimed   these
sampans  had  speedboat   motors  with  which  to  scurry  up  and
down  the  100  miles  between  Dong  Hoi  and  Vinh  that  fast.
It  turned  out  in  addition  that  waterborne  supply  was ham-
pered  by  bad  weather  and  heavy  seas.    When  the  truce  ended
the  U.S. command   admitted   there  had   been   a   "considerable
decline"  in  the   southward   movement   of  North   Vietnamese
supplies  but  did  its best  to hide the  cause.   "This  could  mean,"
the  AP   from   Saigon   said  the  military  explained   (5V.   Louis
Post-Dispatch   Feb.  12),  "that  with  extra  munitions  [nobody
had  turned   up   proof   of  munitions  at  all]  piled   up  on  the
border  [nor  that  any  shipments  had  actually  been  spotted  at
any  border],  President  Ho  Chi  Minh's   regime  did  not  want
its  trucks  and  boats  exposed  unnecessarily—loaded  or  empty—
after  Sunday's  dawn"  when  the  truce  ended.     It  was  only  in
Wm.   Tuohy's   dispatch   from   Saigon   next   day  in   the   Los
Angeles  Times  that  I  learned  "the  level  of  waterborne   ship-
ments   down   the   coast  of  North  Vietnam   decreased    because
of  high   surf."
Between  the  high  surf  and  the  tall  tales,  the  truth  was  easily
lost  to  sight.    The  U.S. military—with  the  State  Department
and  the  White  House—have  never  pulled  off  a  more  success-
ful  Operation   Brain  Wash.
This   issue  is  dedicated   to  my   dear  friend   Bernard  Fall  who  was  killed  by  a  mine  in  Vietnam
as  we  were  going  to press.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly       5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  .C. 20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name    ..........................................................................................
2/27/67
Street    ......................................................................
City   .................................... Zip................   State..
For  the  "enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name    ..............................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................   State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished   D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED