I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967feb27.pdf

============================================================

4-Page  Special:  A  Study  in  Successful   Brain   Washing
Insurrection?    But  Johnson  and  Rusk
"To  exert  pressure  on  the  Government  of  North Vietnam
to  cease   its   direction   and  support   of   the   insurrection   in
South  Vietnam."
—Secretary   McNamara,   explaining   our  military     objec-
tives   to   the   Senate   Armed   Services   and    Appropriations
Say   We're  Just  Repelling  An  Invasion
Committees  Jan. 2:1 in   a   closed   door   hearing    011,  the 1967
Vietnam  supplemental   war  bill  released  Feb. 20,  p.  11.
"Insurrection:  Act  or  instance  of  revolt  against  civil  or
political  authority,  or  the  established  government."
—Webster's  Unabridged  Dictionary
I. K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  8
FEBRUARY  27, 1967
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The Fraud With Which Bomb Resumption Was  Excused
The   principal   excuse   for   resuming   the   bombing   of   the
North  will  turn  out, when  the  full  truth  is  available,  to  be  a
fraud.    President  Johnson  said  he  had  "no  alternative but  to
resume   full-scale  hostililities"   because  North   Vietnam   had
used  the  4-day  Tet  truce  for  "major  resupply  efforts   of  their
troops  in  South  Vietnam"  rather  than  to  seek  a peaceful  settle-
ment.    In  London  Prime  Minister  Wilson  went  even  further
and  told  the  House  of  Commons  next  day  that  "the massive
southward  movement  of  troops  and supplies  in the north  .  . .
threatened   to  create  a  severe  military  unbalance."     Neither
Saigon   nor  Washington  had  claimed  that  troops   as  well  as
supplies  had  been  moved  south,  much  less  that  the  movement
was  such  as  to  create   a  "severe  military  unbalance."     This
would  have  been  too  silly  an  exaggeration  for  our  military  to
venture.    Even  if  we  loaned  McNamara  and  the  Seventh  fleet
to  Hanoi,   it  couldn't  change  the  military  balance  of   power
in  the  South—in  four  days yet!   Harold  Wilson  was  the  fore-
most  victim—and  the  most  far-out  echo—of   a  U.S.  propa-
ganda  campaign.
Orchestrated  by  Rusk
This  campaign  was  initiated  by  Secretary  Rusk  at  his  press
conference  Feb. 9,  the  second  day of  the  truce.    He  said  "we
have  seen  large  numbers  of  boats  and  other  vessels  dashing
south   along   the   coast   of  North  Vietnam   to  resupply   their
forces   in  the  southern  part  of  North   Vietnam   [our  italics}
and  in  the  demilitarized  zone."    He  declared  this  "indicates
that  it   is  their   intention   to  continue  the  operation."    Few
stopped  to  notice  that  the  Secretary  did  not  say  the  supplies
were  crossing  the  17th parallel.    Nor  did  anyone  ask  whether
supply   was  a  violation  of   the  truce,  especially  when   it  oc-
curred   on  North   Vietnam's   own  territory.    The   Secretary's
remark  that  the  North  was  resupplying  troops  in  the  DMZ
was  not  true.    Raymond R.  Coffey  of  the  Chicago Daily  News
Service  cabled  from  Saigon  next  day  that  "for  all  the  road,
sea  and  air  traffic  sighted  in  the  north,  U.S. officials  acknowl-
edge  that  they  still  do  not  have  any  reports  of  men  or  ma-
teriel  moving  into  the  demilitarized  zone  of  South  Vietnam
(sic).     The   farthest   south   any   traffic   has   been   sighted   is
around  Dong  Hoi,  20  miles  or  so  [It's  closer  to  40—IFS],
above  the  zone."  *    But  for  every  reader  who  saw   Coffey's
Even  If  North  Vietnam  Were  Knocked  Out
Sen.   DOMINICK  (R.  Col):    It  is  my  understanding
that  the  troops  of  the  North Vietnamese  and  the  Viet
Cong   who   are   operating  in   South  Vietnam   are   not
mechanized.    They  are  largely  foot,  bullock  cart,  and
things  of  that  type;  is  that  correct?
Secretary  McNAMARA:    That  is correct.
Sen.  DOMINICK:    Could  you  tell  me  then  what   is
the  importance  of  the  petroleum  and oil  supplies we  are
talking  about  to  the  fight  of  South  Vietnam?
Secretary  McNAMARA:   Yes;  the  petroleum  and  oil
supplies  are  used  for  military  purposes, for  example,  to
fuel  the  jets,  but  more  importantly  to  fuel   the  trucks
that  are  used  to  move  supplies from  the  north.  .  .  .
Sen.   DOMINICK:    You  feel  that  to  be  enabled to  cut
this  off, would have  a  significant  effect  on  the  continued
fight   in  South  Vietnam?
Secretary  McNAMARA: No  . .  .  (a)  because  they  are
not  going  to  be  effective  in  stopping the  flow  of  petro-
leum,  and  (b)  if  they  were,  the  enemy would  move it  by
bicycles,  and backpacks.
Sen.   DOMINICK:    If  we  could  cut  off  the  weaponry,
the  armament  and  petroleum  reserve  from  North  Viet-
nam,   moving  into  South Vietnam  would  the  South Viet-
namese  continue  to  have  a  war  on  their  hands?
Secretary  McNAMARA:  ...  If  we  could  cut  off the
flow  of  men  and  materiel from  the  North to  the  South,
it   is   my  belief   that   the   South   Vietnamese   OVER   A
PERIOD    OF    TIME,    DURING    A     PORTION    OF
WHICH  THEY  WOULD  NEED  OUR  HELP  [empha-
sis  added],  could  stop  the  aggression  against  them.
—Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  hearings  on  the
1967   supplemental  for  Vietnam, released  Feb. 20.
*  This  passage  was  omitted  from  the  dispatch as published
in  the  Washington  Post  Feb.  11.   A  reader  sent  me a  clipping
from  the  Toronto  Star  Feb. 11  which  ran  the  full  dispatch.
dispatch  there  were  millions who  got  the  intended  picture of
the  Communists  crassly  violating  the  truce  to  move  massive
supplies  across the border.   Time,  for  example, said  (Feb. 17)
that  Hanoi  used  the  truce  "for reinforcement and  replenish-
ment   of   its  troops   below   the   17th  parallel.    Army  trucks
rumbled  down  canopied  jungle trails  into  South  Vietnam  and
cargo  vessels  sped  down  the  coast with  impunity. .  .  ."    Like
an  orchestra  leader  striking  his  baton,  the  Secretary  of  State
had  launched  a  theme  that  was  to  be  repeated  and  amplified
from  Washington  and  Saigon  to  prepare  the  public mind  for
a  resumption  of  the  bombing.
The   day  after   Rusk's  press  conference,  State  Department
spokesman   Robert  McCloskey  was  asked  whether   supply  ac-
(Continned  on  Page  Tivo)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  27, 1967
tivities  were  a  violation   of  the  truce.    He  replied  coyly  that
he  did   want   to  get  into   that   "since  I  don't  have   sufficient
information   to  specify  what  are  violations  and  what  are  not
violations   in  the  technical  sense."    When  one   correspondent
recalled   that  elements  of  the  U.S.  9th  Infantry  Division   "be-
gan  to  debark  during  either  the  Christmas  or  the  New  Year's
truce  this  past  time  around"  and  asked   whether   that   was  a
truce  violation,  McCloskey  answered,  "I  can't  say  yes  or   no."
Like  Rusk,   McCloskey   created   the   impression   that   this  was
a  violation  without  saying  so  explicitly  since  that  would   have
been  palpably  untrue.     It  was  not  until  the  end  of  the  truce
that   the   AP   ticker   carried   a   story   from   Bob   Gassaway   in
Saigon   saying   that   both   sides   had   "agreed   only   to   refrain
from  staging  offensive  operations"  but  "retained   the  right  to
continue   the  movement  of  supplies."    One  has  to  be. pretty
gullible   to  believe   that   Rusk   and   McCloskey   did  not   know
this  all  the  time.
A  Strange  Kind  of   "Normal"
According   to   the   Coffey   dispatch   from   Saigon   we   have
already  quoted,   "while  questioning  North  Vietnam's  activity,
U.S.   military  authorities   also   were   trying   to  quietly   ignore
the  U.S.   movement   of  men  and   supplies  that  has  continued
all  through  the  cease-fire."     Coffey  reported  that  the  first  full
day  of  the  truce  "a  new  one-day  record  of  2,762  tons  was  set
for  cargo  delivered  by  air  to  units  in  the   field."   He  said  the
daily  air   force  communique   had   in  the  past  routinely  listed
the  volume  of  cargo  and  passengers  carried."    But  the  day
after  the  Rusk  press  conference—the  day  the  U.S.  military  in
Saigon  first  issued  its  sensational  charge  that  supply  missions
in   the  north   were   "five  times  the  normal"—the  figures  on
cargo   and   passengers   carried   were   missing   from   the   daily
air   force   communique.     "When   asked   for   the   figures   and
why  they  were  missing,"   Coffey   reported,  "an   Air   Force   of-
ficer  said   the  top   U.S.   headquarters   command   had   'told  us
not  to'   release  them."    When   Coffey  finally  got  the  figures
"they  showed   that  U.S.  planes—not  counting   truck  and  ship
movements  at  all—carried  7,042  tons  of  supplies  and  more
than  17,000  men  during  the  first  three  days  of  the   cease-fire."
The  most  vivid  glimpse  of  U.S.  supply  efforts  was  printed
in  Le  'Monde   (Feb.   12-13)   that  week-end,  it  said:
While  the  American  services  report  a  considerable  inten-
If  The  Words  Don't  Mean
What  They  Seem  to  Say  Isn't
An   Honest  Explanation Overdue?
Sen.  YOUNG  (R.  N.D.)—As  I  recall,  President John-
son  said  at   the   Manila   Conference   that  we   would   be
withdrawing   from   South   Vietnam   6   months   after   a
settlement  was  reached.    Is  that  substantially  correct?
Secretary  McNamara:  The  Manila  conference state-
ment  was  very  carefully  worded,  and  it  wasn't phrased
exactly  that  way.
Sen.  YOUNG:    Let  me  ask  a  question that  bears  on
this.    [Deleted].
Secretary  McNamara:  [Deleted].
Senator  YOUNG:  [Deleted].
[Colloquy  deleted].
—New  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  hearings.
. 'They   ["the  7  nations  gathered  in  Manila"]  declared
that  allied  forces  are  in  the   Republic  of  Viet-Xam  be-
cause  that  country  is  the  object  of  aggression  and  its
Government  requested  support  in  the  resistance of   its
people  to  aggression.    They  shall  be  withdrawn   after
close   consultation,  as   the   other   side   withdraws    its
forces  to  the  north,  ceases  infiltration,   amd  the  level  of
violence  thus  subsides.   These  forces  will  be  withdrawn
as  soon  as  possible  and  not  later  than  six  months  after
the  above  conditions  have  been   fulfilled."
—The  Manila  Declaration, Oct. 25
sification   of   road,  rail,  river  and  coastal   traffic   in   North
Vietnam,  press  correspondents Friday  were  able  to  verify,
on  the  road  from  Saigon  to  Tay-Ninh, that  American sup-
ply  missions had  also  been  able  to  profit  from  the  Tet  truce
to  increase  the  resupply  of  troops -in  combat  rations  and
munitions.    Long  files  of  trucks  belonging  to  the  military
transport  companies  were  stretched  out  along  this  Novi'.-
vi-cst  road.    They  were  protected by  tanks  and  by  helicopr
ters  flying  along  at  treetop level.   In  the  town  of Tay-Ninh
itself,  huge  trucks and tractors  were  hauling loads  of  shells
for  105-mm  and  155-mm  cannons  to  American  units  estab-
lished  on  the  outskirts of  the  Vietcong's  Zone  C.
This  did  not  appear  in  the  U.S.  press  but  R.  W.  Apple,   Jr.,
cabled   from   Saigon   Feb.   12  in  the  New   York   Times  of   the
same  date,  that  while  U.S.  briefing officers  said  resupply   efforts
in  the  North  "called  into  question  the  good  faith  of  the  North
Vietnamese  high  command"   and  "asserted  that  the  allies  had
made  no  move  to  take  advantage  of  the  truce"—
The  Actual  Text   of   MACV's   Communique  in  Saigon  on  the  North's   Supply  Activity
"According  to  military  estimates  during  the  96-hour  pe-
riod  of  Feb.  8-11  Tet  truce approximately  1570  vessels  were
sighted  along  the  coast  of  North  Vietnam  between  the  17th
and   19th  parallels.     Approximately  970  vessels   were  ob-
served   moving   south   and   600   moving   north.     Observers
spotted   2200   trucks   (probably   some   duplicate-   counting)
[paren  in original]  either  being  loaded along  the  Kien Giang
and  Song  Giang  rivers,  25  and  50  miles  north of  the  demili-
tarized  "one  respectively,  or  moving  south  or  west  toward
the  DMZ  or  Mu  Gia  pass.    Spotters   reported  that  during
the  first  48  hours  of   truce,  roads   in  Quang  Binh  province
just  north  of  the  DMZ  were  crowded  with  trucks  and  that
mouths  of   three  rivers  between  Vinh  and  the  DMZ  were
jammed  with  water  craft.    Vessel   traffic   slackened  during
the  last  two  days  of  TET  partly  due  to  bad  weather  and
also   because   North  Vietnamese   were  undoubtedly  dispers-
ing  or  hiding   their  boats  in  anticipation   or  resumption   of
air  strikes.
"The   foregoing   estimates  were  formulated  on  the   basis
of   aerial  observation  of   North  Vietnam  between  the   17th
and  19th  parallels  plus  coverage   of   coastal   areas   by  de-
stroyers.    IT  IS  POSSIBLE  THAT  ESTIMATES  OF  VES-
SEL  AND  TRUCK TRAFFIC  ARE  ON  THE  HIGH   SIDE
DUE  TO  MULTIPLE  COUNTING  BY  SPOTTERS.    IT  IS
ALSO   DIFFICULT   TO  ARRIVE  AT   FIRM   TONNAGE
FIGURES  for  the  amount  of  supplies  moved  during  TET.
However,  more  shipping  and  trucking  actually  occurred  in
Southern  North  Vietnam  during  the  single   96-hour  period
than  in  any  previous  one-month  period.    [Not   surprising:
any  month  would be a month of  bombing—IFS.]  The  vessels
and  trucks  had  A   CAPACITY  TO  TRANSPORT  an   esti-
mated  25,000  tons   of   supplies   and  equipment  to  Southern
Vietnam  and  the  Laos  panhandle.    IF   THE  FIGURE  OF
25,000  WAS  ACTUALLY  REACHED,  it  would be  sufficient
to  supply  a  division  for  an  estimated  250  days."
—MACV's  communique  Feb.  12 (emphasis    added).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  6, 190?
Uncle  Sam's  Increased  Activity  Since   1961   As   "Merchant  of  Death''
How  We  Forment  Arms  Races  and  Encourage  Militarization  Abroad
The   U.S.  has  become   the  world's   leading   "Merchant  of
Death",  as  armament  salesmen  were  called  30  years  ago.    A
staff   study,  "Arms   Sales  and   Foreign   Policy",   released   last
week  by  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  shows  the
drive  to  expand  the  export  of  weapons  began  with  the  return
of   the  Democrats  to  power  under  Kennedy.    In  October   of
1961   McNamara   established   an    office   pretentiously   named
the  International Logistic  Negotiations  Agency.    Its   purpose
was  to  boost  military  sales  abroad.    Its  director  Henry  J.  Kuss,
was   promoted    in    1964    to   Deputy   Assistant   Secretary   of
Defense.
An  Arms  Evangelist
Mr.   Kuss  is  evangelical  about  his  job.    In   a  speech   last
October  to  the  American  Ordnance  Association he   suggested
lyrically   that   shipping   more   arms  abroad   somehow   was   a
way  to  eliminate international misunderstanding!    He   scolded
American  companies  for  "their  tendency ...  to  refrain   from
entering  into  the  international  arms  market."     He   disclosed
the  Pentagon's  interest when  he  said  "From  the  military  point
of  view  we  stand  to  lose  all  of  the  major  international  rela-
tionships  paid  for  with  grant  aid  money  unless  we  can  estab-
lish   professional    military   relationships    through    the    sales
media."    More  plainly put,  this  means  that  as  Congress  begins
to  tighten   the  purse-strings  of  military  aid,  our  military  seek
to  circumvent this  change  in  public  policy  by  substituting  cash
sales.    But  arms  sold  for  cash  are  as  noxious   as  arms  given
free   in  fermenting  little  wars  and  military  dictatorships.
The  staff  report  does  not  point  all  this  up  sharply.   But  the
facts  are  there.     Its  conclusions  do  not   always  match   them.
It  quotes  a  McNamara  news  conference  two  years  ago  on  the
importance  of   our   arms   exports   and   says  "it   is  difficult   to
fault  the  objectives  and  logic"  of  the  policy  he  outlined.   But
this  objective  and  this  logic  are  exactly  what  needs  to  be  at-
tacked.  McNamara  said  one  purpose  was  to  get  the   developed
nations,  especially  West  Germany,  to  raise  the  level  of  their
arms  expenditures  and  the  size  of  the  armed  forces.    But  is
it  to  our  interest  in  this  way  to  set  off  races  in  conventional
arms   and   to   stimulate   more   militarism   in   countries    like
Germany  where   it  proved   so  recently  a  menace  to  ourselves
and  the  world?
How  A  Supposed  Development  Bank
Develops  Arms  Races  Instead
"The  Eximbank  (Export-Import  Bank)  has  taken  an
active  interest  in  the  financing  of  military  export  sales
only  since  1963 when  the  Defense  Department  was  given
authority  to  insure  credits.   The  Eximbank  role  is  one
of  providing  a  service   function  for  the  Department  of
Defense   and  bringing  to  military  sales  on  credit   the
advantages   of   the   Bank's   experience   in  the   interna-
tional  credit field ...  In  addition  Eximbank  makes  so-
called   'country-loans'.    Such   loans   are   the   result   of
Eximbank   establishing  what  amounts  to  an  accounts
receivable   fund   for   the   use   of   the   Department    of
Defense  in  arranging  loans  to  underdeveloped  countries.
THE  EXIMBANK DOES  NOT  KNOW  OR  WANT  TO
KNOW   WHERE   THIS   MONEY   GOES.    [Emphasis
added].   The  Department   of  Defense   guarantees  these
funds  through  the  military  assistance  account  .  .  . The
bank  therefore  avoids  the  problem  of  directly  financing
military  sales  to  underdeveloped  countries."
—Arms  Sales  and  Foreign  Policy:  A  Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee   staff    study,  released   Jan.   30.
McNamara's  other  purpose,  as  he  outlined  it,  was  to  gain
influence  among  underdeveloped   nations  by  giving  or   selling
them  more  arms,  and  then  use  that  influence  to  get  them  to
spend  less  on  arms  and  more  on  social  improvement!    This
seems  to  set  a  new  high   in  naivete.
McNamara's   defense  of  arms  transfers  to  poorer   countries
appears  all  the  more  specious  in  the  light  of  what  this  report
reveals  about  our  "military  assistance credit  account"  for  arms
sales  to  nations  which  cannot  afford-to  pay  cash.    This  began
with   a  fund  of   $15  million  in  the   Mutual   Security  Act  of
1957.     In   1961   the   Democrats   made  this  a  permanent  re-
volving   fund.     Through   yearly   appropriations,   it  has   now
grown  to  $300  million.    In  1964  the  Pentagon  slipped  a new
gimmick   into  the   law  by  allowing   the  funds   to   guarantee
100  percent  of  the  credit  extended  for  arms  sales  "while  only
obligating   25%   of  the  amount  from  the  credit   account  as  a
reserve  against  default."    This  automatically made  it  possible
to  arrange  for  $1,200,000,000  in  credits  with  this  $300,000,-
000  revolving  fund.    This  triples  the  credits  for  arms   sales
to  the  poor.
Arms  Cast  Upon   The  Waters—Come  Back  in  the  Shape  of  Trouble  For  The  Givers
"The    U.S.   has   insisted   that   the   West   Germans   buy
approximately   $775  million  in  arms   per  year  to  offset   the
cost  of  maintaining   U.S.  troops  there  .  .  .  The cost  is  rising
.   .  .  while  West   Germany's   .  .  .  ability   to   absorb   such
equipment  is  rapidly  declining  .  .  .  West   Germany  is  [sell-
ing]   surplus   military   equipment   of   American   origin  .  .  .
Total   U.S.   arms   sales  have   now  reached   something  over
the  $2  billion  per  year  level—not  including  grant  aid.   The
problem  of   the   disposal   of   surplus   military  equipment   is
certain   to   grow   with   this   increase   in  sales.   The  surplus
arms  of  the  industrial  nations  may  provide  the  ingredients
of  an  arms  race  in  the  underdeveloped  regions  of  the  world.
It  should  also  be  noted  that  some  of  the  arms  used  by  Latin
American  guerrillas   today  were  exported   for  the  U.S.—for
quite  different  reasons—yesterday."
—Same Senate Foreign Relations  staff    study.
"Let  me  take  note  in  passing  of  the  recurring   argument
that  if  we  do not  provide  arms  to  a  country  it  will  get  them
from  the  Soviets  or  possibly  China.  This  is  another  example
of   that   curious   obtuseness   which   excessive    preoccupation
with  cold war strategy  produces  in otherwise  excellent   minds.
It  was  Soviet   tanks  that  surrounded   Ben  Bella's  palace  in
Algiers  when  that  Soviet-supported  leader  was  thrown   out.
It  was  a  Soviet  and  Chinese  equipped  army  which   deposed
the  Indonesian  Communists,  destroyed  the  Communist  party
in  that  ruthlessness   on  which  one  hates  to  dwell  and  which
left   Sukarno's  vision  of   an  Asian  socialism  in  shambles.
One  can  only  conclude  that  those  who  worry  about   Soviet
arms  wish  to  keep  the  Russians  out  of  trouble.   This  could
be  carrying   friendship  too   far."
—J.  K.  Galbraith,  foreign   aid  testimony,  quoted  in  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  new  study   of   U.S.   arms  sales.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F,  Stone's  Weekly,  February   6,1967
The  Price  We  Will  Pay  At  Home
(Continued   from   Page   One)
Rowen  on  the  financial  page  of  the   Washington    Post   (Jan.
29)   estimated that  if  depreciation  allowances  are  taken  into
account  then  the   return  on  capital   reached  an   all-time  high
in   1966  of  21  percent.    Yet  instead  of  an  excess  profits  tax
to  meet  the  cost  of  the  war  and   stem  the  threat  of   inflation
Johnson  proposes  a  surtax  on  everybody's income.    Even  his
tax  program  is  tailored  to  the  comfort  of  the  military-indus-
trial  complex.
The  Truth   From  A  Southern    Democrat
It  was  left   for   a  Southern  Democratic  Senator  to  tell   the
truth  about  this  budget.    Senator  Ellender  in  a  report  to  his
constituents  called  attention  to  the  fact  that,  aside  from  the
Vietnamese  war   costs,   the   Defense   Department   was  to  get
$50.4  billions in  1968  as  compared  to  $47.5  billions in   1967.
Like  other   Southern  Democrats,  Ellender  supports  cutbacks
in  the  domestic  programs  but  he  said:
I  cannot   see,   however,  that   the  President  can  expect   to
cut  back  and  reduce  necessary  domestic  programs  for  the
benefit   of   the   people   without  expecting   some    reductions
in   the   regular   expenditures  of   the   Defense   Department.
The  truth  of  the  matter  is that  in  many  important  respects,
the  Congress  and  the  nation  are  in  the  hands  of  the  mili-
tary.   Add  to  this  group  the  Department  of  State  and  you
have  a  combination  that  calls  the  shots.   The  Admirals  and
the  Generals,  strongly  backed  by  the  Department   of  State,
seem   to  have  the  ways   and  means  of  letting  ju.st  about
what   they   want,   regardless   of   the    11    etary    difficulties
afflicting   the   nation.     In  contrast  to     «   immensity  of  a
$75.5  billion  budget  for  the  military,  we  need  only  take  a
glance   at   the  budget   estimates  for  the   conservation   and
development  of  our  natural  resources.    We  find  here  a  na-
tional  commitment  of  only   $3.5  billions.    It  is  to  the   con-
servation   of  its  land  and  water  that  the  nation  must   look
if  we  hope  to  remain  strong  and  prosperous  in  the  decades
ahead,  but  our  investment   in  this  field  will  represent  only
a  tiny  portion  of  the  huge  sums   to  be  expended   by   the
.  military  during   fiscal   1968.
Billions   for    destruction,   peanuts   for   improvement—this
about  sums  up   the  Johnson  budget.    The  President  sends  an
eloquent  message  to  Congress  on  air  and  water  pollution;  he
for  the  Cruelty  We  Do  Abroad
Still  Not  Telling  The  Truth
"McNamara  said  losses  of  fighter  and  attack   aircraft
in  Vietnam  in  Calendar  1966  totalled  500.   The  Defense
Department   had  estimated   these  losses  at  534  at  the
beginning   of   the   year.    Combat   losses   through    1966
totalled  851 aircraft,  including 463 over  North  Vietnam."
—Aviation  Week  on the  new  budget,  Jan.  30.
"Saigon,   Jan.  30  (UPI)—U.S.  military   officials   dis-
closed  today  that  American  aircraft  losses  in  the  Viet-
nam  war  have  been  greater  than  reported  in  the  past.
The  disclosure  left  the  actual  cost  of  the  U.S.  air  war
in  doubt  .  .  .  (In  Washington   the   Pentagon   said   the
total  number  of  planes  lost  in  the  war  was  'classified')
.  .  .  The  North  Vietnamese  government  has   repeatedly
claimed  that  U.S.  aircraft  losses  far  exceeded  the  num-
ber  given  by  U.S.  officials."
—Washington  Daily  News,  Jan.  30.
warns  that  in  10  years  we  shall  have  lost  the  battle  for  pure
air,  but  neither  in  the  air  nor  the  water  pollution  battle  does
he  show  any  readiness  to  spend  the  kind  of  money necessary
to  win.    A  meeting  of  Mayors  hears warnings from  Cavanagh
of  Detroit  that  any  further  cuts  in  the  poverty program   could
trigger  rioting  in  the  streets,  but  everywhere the  poverty  pro-
gram  is  being  cut  down  and  Congress  is  likely  to  cut  it  down
further.     It  is  not  that  the  nation  hasn't  wealth  enough   to
fight  the  Vietnamese  war  and  meet  the  growing   social   and
environmental  crisis  at  home.    The   fact  is  that  the  war  pro-
vides  a  new  excuse  for  domestic cutbacks to  those  forces which
are  hostile  to  the  poverty  program  and  see  it  only  as  raising
the  price  of  labor  on  the  plantation  and   in  the  city.    Even
Roosevelt,  with  far  greater  gifts  and  far  deeper   commitment
than  Johnson,  had  to  shelve  reform  once  the  conflict   broke
out  abroad.    The  war  shifts  the  internal  balance  of  forces  at
home  against   fruitful   social  change.    This   is  the  price,   this
is  the  retribution,  for  the  cruelty  we  impose  with  such  com-
placency  on  a  distant  and  helpless  people.    We  will  pay  with
decay  at  home, for  all  that  destruction our  bombers  rain  down
abroad.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or   enter)
Street   .................................
City   ....................................
For   the   enclosed   $5  send
(To)    Name   .......................
Street    .................................
Citv
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
7in                 State. .....
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement    wished   D
2/fi/(i7
Fifties
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except  in   August,   the  last   week   in   December   and   the.
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during   July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An   independent   weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:    55   in   the    U.S.;      $6  in   Canada;    510   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
515  to  Europe;  20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED