I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967feb20.pdf

============================================================

Bobby  Kennedy  Coquettes  With  the Anti-War   Forces, P.  3
Peace  Corps  Appeal to  the  White House
"Every  bomb which falls  in  Vietnam  destroys  the  dialogue  between  men  which  we  work  so  hard to  achieve."
—One  of  the  former  400  Peace  Corps  and  other  U.S.  volunteers  abroad  (including  five  who  served  in  South   Vietnam)
who  sent  the  President  a  letter  last  week  asking  him  to  stop  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,  to  accept  direct  participa-
tion  of  the  NLF  in  peace  talks  and  to  discontinue  the  present  military   buildup  with  a  view  to   disengagement.
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  7
'  FEBRUARY  20,  1967
">'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The Funny Things That Happened Before Bombs  Resumed
In  private  the  White   House   is  telling   critics  that  it  dare
not  end  the  bombing  of  the  North  without  a  military  quid
pro  quo  lest  it  be  caught  in  an  ambush  by  the  Republicans.
The  fact  is that  if  the  Johnson  Administration had  -wanted  an
excuse  to  extend  the  bombing  pause  while  peace  explorations
continued,  it  had  a  way  to  do  so  which  would  have  kept  do-
mestic  opponents  off  base  and  imposed  just  those  conditions
on  a  bombing  pause  the  White  House  says  it  wants.    It  need
only  have  focused  attention  on  the  apparent  decline  in  infiltra-
tion  from  the  North.    It  could  have  treated  this  as  a  possible
signal  of  Hanoi's  readiness  to  reduce  its  military activity.    It
could  have  extended  the  bombing  pause  while  this  signal  was
investigated.    And  it  could  thereby  have  notified  Hanoi   that
the  bombing  would  be  resumed  if  the  evidence  showed  that
this  levelling  off'had  not  continued.    Washington  in  this way
could  have  made  cessation  of  the  bombing  dependent   on  a
reciprocal   and  continued   diminution  of  the  North's  military
effort,  and  left  itself  free  to  resume  if  the  price  were  not  paid.
No  Major  Contact  Since  November
The  Kennedy  Administration  "conned"  Khrushchev  out  of
the  Cuban  missile  impasse  on  far  less  tangible  grounds.    The
failure  to  engage  in  a  similar  operation   in  this  case  reflects
not  a  difference  in  diplomatic  skill  but  a  difference   in  will.
The  Kennedy   Administration  desperately  wanted   a  peaceful
way  out.     The   Johnson  Administration   is  trying  to  avoid  a
peaceful    way  out  because  it  thinks  it  can  achieve  a  military
victory.   This  is why  the  White  House  and  the  Pentagon  have
been  doing  their  best  to  discourage  the  many  reporters,  my-
self  included,  who  have  tried  to  check  on  the  fragmentary  re-
ports  which  indicate that  Hanoi  has  in  fact  been  de-escalating.
One   of  the  stories  which  precipitated   a  flood  of   frustrated
inquiries  was  a  cable  by Jim  Lucas  from  Saigon  (Wash.  Daily
News,  Feb.  6)   that  the  North  Vietnamese  had  "pulled  all
but  one  of  their  main  force  divisions"  back  across  the  border.
He  reported  that  this  "in  large  measure  accounts for  the  sharp
decrease  in  enemy  infiltration  and  the  odd  fact  that  they  have
had  no  major  confrontation  with  Americans  since  Operation
Attleboro  near  the  Cambodian  border  last   November."
This  story  elicited   a  wide  variety   of   skilful  diversionary
statements  at  the  Pentagon  but  no  denial.  An  effort  was  made
instead  to  argue  that  this  showed  the  efficacy  of  the  bombing.
This  was  reflected  two  days  later  in  a  Joseph   Alsop  column
Farewell  to  A.  J.  Muste
A.  J.  Muste  was  a  wanderer on  the  face  of  the  earth,
a  Witness  in  the  ancient  sense,  driven by  an impossible
compulsion,  to  fulfil  a  truly  Christian  mission.   Every
Minister  at  all  worthy  of  his  calling  knows  the  daily
agony  of  compromise.    Muste  refused  to  compromise.
He  resigned   his   first   pastorate   out   of   opposition  to
World  War  I,  declaring  simply  that  wars  were  not  'in
the  spirit  of  Christ.   He  left  the  Church  for  the  labor
movement.    Like  that  carpenter's  Son,  he  was  a  life-
long   agitator,  a  radical   pacifist.    He  once  estimated
that  in  50  years  he  had  been  arrested  30  times.    He
was  a  friend  of  Gandhi's and  he  brought  back  the  tac-
tics  that flowered in  the  students' non-violent  campaign
against  segregation  in  the  South,  the  most  successful
application  in  the  Western  world  of  non-violence.   He
lived  a  life  of  poverty,  and  in  the  Middle  Ages  would
have  been  recognized  as  a  saint.   His  latest  pilgrimage
for  peace  was  to  Hanoi.    "The  world  needs  a  revolu-
tion,"  he  once  wrote,  "in  feeling,  in  sensitivity,  in  ori-
entation,  in  the  spirit  of   man."    He  was   the   kind  of
racist  we  desperately  need—his  concern  was  the  race
of  man.   It  is  a  measure  of  his  worth, and of  his  place
in  the  peace  movement,  that  though  he  died  at  82,  he
leaves  so  sharp  a  sense  of  loss,  a  gap  in  the  leadership
there  is  no  one  to  fill.
which  reported,  with  jubilation,  that  "the  flow  of  North Viet-
namese  troops  into  South  Vietnam  has  been  reduced  by  75%
in  the  last  six months."    Alsop  said  this was  "almost  certainly
because of  the  bombing—there  is no  other  imaginable reason."
It  is  not  impossible  to  imagine  that  this  was  Hanoi's  way of
signalling   its  readiness  for  reciprocal  de-escalation.    All  this
throws  some  light  on  the  cryptic reply  made  by Secretary Rusk
at  his  press  conference  three  days  later  when  he  was  asked
whether  the  rate  of  infiltration  from  the  North  was  "signifi-
cantly  lower  than  it  was  last  year."    Rusk  did  not  deny  a  fall-
off  in  the  rate  of  infiltration.    Instead  he  replied  that  he  did
not   "know   of   any   information   that   the   infiltration    has
stopped"   (our   italics)   "or  that  they  have  themselves  under-
taken  a  level  of  infiltration  that  bears  with  it  political  conse-
quences."     It  is  a  pity  he  was  not  pressed  to  explain  what  he
meant  by  "political  consequences?"    Did  he  mean  there  -was  a
point  at  which  the  de-escalation  would  be  accepted  by  us—
a  signal  that  Hanoi  was  already—as  we  insist—reciprocating?
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  20, 1967
The  U.S.  Votes  Against  CB War in  the  UN  But  Still  Uses  Gas in Vietnam
The  Senate  In  No  Hurry  to  Prevent  Future  Bobby  Baker  Incidents
MOLIERE  WOULD  HAVE  enjoyed  the  Senate  debate  last  week
on  the  "Bobby  Baker"  rule  reforms  put  forward  by  Senator
Clark   (D.  Pa.).    One  called  for   full   financial   disclosure by
Senators  and  Senate  employes.     The  other  would  have  for-
bidden  Senators  or  Senate  employes  to  have  any  interest  in
any  lobbying,  and  it  would  also  have  forbidden  any  employe
of  the  Senate to  take  part—as  Bobby Baker  did—in  allocating
campaign  contributions among  Senators,  an  easy  way  to  repay
favors  and  even  to  buy  votes.
An  Anthology  of   Hypocrisy
The  objections  raised  would  make  a  delicious anthology  of
hypocrisy.     Stennis,  chairman  of   the   Senate's  slow  moving
ethics   committee,   objected   that   Clark's  proposals   were  too
blunt:  "This  matter  must  be  worked  on  and  put   to  micro-
scopic  treatment,"  he  said.    "Much  of  it  is  as  delicate  as  a
Swiss  watch."    Bennett  of  Utah,  vice  chairman  of  that  same
committee,  thought  Clark's  proposals  "come   perilously  close
to  infringing  upon  the  private  affairs  of  the  Senators."    Scott
of  Pennsylvania  objected   that  "professional   and   confidential
relationships"  might  be  breached.  Curtis  of  Nebraska  thought
they  might  make  "individuals  of  high  standing"  reluctant  to
serve  in  the  Senate.    Monroney  of  Oklahoma  wanted  to know
why  the  Clark  rules  would  allow  gifts  of  less  than  $100  to  a
Senator.    "I  think—and  I  say this  seriously—"  Clark respond-
ed  at  one  point  with  asperity,  "that  it  takes  more  than   $100
to  bribe  a  Senator."     The  disclosure  rule  was  shelved  45  to
30,  the  rule  against  lobbying  was  tabled  next  day  37  to  22.
The  majority  excuse  is  that  the  Senate  must  wait  for  a  report
from   the  Stennis  committee.     It   is  more  than   three   and  a
half  years  since  the  Baker  case  broke  and  the  Senate  is  still
waiting,  quite   patiently.
IN  DECEMBER  THE U.S.  voted  for  a  resolution  adopted  by
the  UN  General  Assembly  calling  for  strict  observance  of  the
. Geneva  Protocol  of  1925  prohibiting  the  use  of  asphyxiating,
poisonous  or  other  gases,  and  of  bacteriological  warfare.  This
seems  to  have  had  no  impact  whatsoever  on  our  use  of  gases
in  Vietnam.    This  began  with  the  use  of  tear  gas  .to  "flush
out"   civilians  from  shelters  in  which  guerrillas  are  suspected
of  hiding.     It  has  moved  on  to  the  spread  of  tear  gas  over
Cleared  for  Top  Secret—and  Nude  Photos
'The   trial  of   three   adults   in   their   early   20s   who
pleaded  guilty  in  Arlington County  (Va)  Juvenile  Court
on  a  total   of   10  counts   of  contributing  to   the   delin-
quency  of  two  teen-age  girls  was  excluded  to  the  pub-
lic   yesterday    'in   the   interest    of   national   security.'
Juvenile  Court  Judge  Berton  V.  Kramer  iruled  in  favor
of  the  exclusion  motion after  hearing  the  defense  attor-
ney   argue   that   the   persons   had  'no  previous  record',
'occupied   very   sensitive   positions'   and  had  access   to
'top  secret  information.'    No  official  information beyond
the  specific  charge  was  released   on  the  cases.
"It  was  learned, however, that  the  three  persons,  two
men  stationed  at  Arlington  Hall  *  and  the  civilian  em-
ploye  wife  of  one  of   the  men,  were  accused  of  taking
nude  photographs  of  two  girls,  aged  16  and  17.   Judge
Kramer  said  that  no  disposition  was  made  at  the  trial
and  that  the  case  had  been  continued  two  years  on  the
good  behavior  of  the  defendants."
—Washington  Post,  suburban  news,  P. Bll,  Feb. 10
* Arlington  Hall  houses  many  military  men.
large  areas  in  so-called  "bomb-free  zones"  to  force  the  whole
population  out  of  their  shelters  and  into  the  open  where  our
bombers  can  "work"  on  them.    More  than   5,000  American
scientists,  including  17  Nobel   prize  winners  and   129  mem-
bers  of  the  National  Academy  of   Sciences,  last  week  sent  a
petition  to  the  President  declaring that  a  dangerous precedent
is  being  set  by  our  use  of-riot  gas  and  anti-crop chemicals  in
Vietnam.    The  President  was  urged  to  end  their  use  in  Viet-
nam,   to  reaffirm  the  policy  of  not  initiating the  use  of  chemi-
cal  and  biological  weapons,  and  to  institute  a  White   House
study'"with  a  view  to  maintaining and  reinforcing  the  worlJ-
wide  restraints against CB warfare."   Dr.  Matthew  Meselson,
professor   of   biology   at  Harvard   and   one   of   the   petition's
initiators,  told  a  press  conference  that  perhaps  6  percent  of
South   Vietnam's   rice   crop   area   had   been   "dusted"    (how
lovely  are  our  euphemisms!)   by  crop  killers.    The   spectacle
will  not  add  to  our  reputation  for  benevolence  with  Asia's
hungry  millions.
The War in  South Vietnam  As  Pictured In A Letter Home  From The  Field
"Why  talk  about  the  war  or  the  weather?     It's  just  one
tawdry  incident   followed   by  another   followed   by   another.
We  medivacced  a  woman  yesterday  who  had  been   burned
by  a  white  phosphorus  grenade   perhaps  five  days   earlier.
She  could  not  move  because  grenade  frags  were  imbedded
in  her  body  'from  head  to  toe  along  her  left  side.  .  .  .  She
was  about  three  months   pregnant   and  we  were  able  to  find
the  clearing  by  listening  to  the  sounds  of  her  mother  weep-
ing  over  her.  .  .  .
"A  27-year  old  Buck  Sergeant  who  loves  to  read   Dennis
the  Menace  comic  books  (after  pistol  whipping  an   elderly
man,   breaking  his  neck   and  leaving  him  to  die):   'If   that
s—————  e-————  interpreter  hadn't   come  along,   I  could
have  finished  the   m—————   f—————   off  with  my  45!'
"Our   platoon  medic:  'I  don't  want  to  treat  any  gooks  for
wounds—everybody  understand?'
"My  fire  team  leader:  'Remember  back  in  November  when
we  raided  that  village  at  night  and  found  that  family  with
that  Schwinn  bicycle?     They   looked  so   goddamned   funny
crying  after  we  kicked  the  spokes  in  I  liked  to  bust  a  gut
laughing.'     The   average    annual    income   around   here    is
about  $85;  that  Schwinn  is  probably  several  years  of  labor.
How  the  VC  would  utilize  it  I  do not  know.  .  .  .  The  policy
of  our  gang  in  treating   every   Vietnamese-Cook   as  a  VC
terrorist   with  a  grenade   secreted  in  his  trachea   that   he's
ready   to  burp  up  when   your   back   is   turned   is   surely   a
self-fulfilling   prophecy.  .  .  .  The  villages   that  I  have  seen
raided  in  the  last  six  months  may  or  may  not  have.harbored
VC  before   we  raided  them;  they   all   did  by  the  time  we
had  finished."
—From  a  letter  recently   received  by  a  member  of   the
Contra  Costa  (Calif)    Citizens  Against  the  War  in  Vietnam
from   a  young  man  serving  in  the  war.    It  was  published
in  the  CCCAWV   Newsletter.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  20, 1967
On  China  As  on  Vietnam,  Bobby  "Teases"  the  Anti-War   Forces
Even  Javits  Now  More  Outspoken  Than  Kennedy  on  the  Bombing
A  POLITICAL  "TEASER":  When   I  was  a  boy  a  certain kind
of  girl  was  known  as  a  certain kind  of  tease.    She  promised
•A  lot  but   she  never  delivered.    Robert  Kennedy  seems  to   be
that  kind  of  a  politician.  He's  always  flirting  with  the liberals
but  manages to  avoid  coming  to  the  point.   On  Vietnam he's
been  titillating  opponents  of  the  war  at  home  and  abroad  by
saying  cryptically  that  he  has  "reservations"  about  the  bomb-
ing  of  the  North.    This  was  his  line  at Oxford  recently. Ken-
nedy   seems   to   feel   that   a   "reservation"—like   an  advance
phone   call  to  a  busy  night  club—will  save  him   a  seat  with
the  anti-war  forces.     But  everybody has  "reservations"   about
the  bombing  of   the  North.     Some  think   it's  too  little  and
some  that  it's  too  much.     In   the  Senate  the  other   day  six
Democrats  called  for  an  end  of  the  bombing.    Kennedy  was
not  among  them.    They  were  Morse,  Gruening,  Hartke,  Pell,
Clark   and   McGovern.    Now   Kennedy  has  been   outflanked
even  by  his  Republican fellow  Senator  from  New   York,  the
unctuous  and  usually  ambiguous  Javits—even  Javits  has  come
right  out  and  said  we  ought  to  stop  the  bombing  or  restrict
it  to  supply routes leading  South.   Where  does  Kennedy stand
on   the   bombing?*
The  Illusion  of  Dissent
We   recommend  the  vivid  picture  of  the  Senator  and   his
entourage  by  the  New   Left's  Robert  Scheer   in  the  February
issue  of  Ramparts  Magazine.  "The   Kennedy  rhetoric  is  dan-
gerous,"  Scheer  writes,  "precisely  because  it  provides  the  illu-
sion  of   dissent  without  its  substance."     An   example  is   the
Senator's   address  on  China  policy  at  the  University  of  Chi-
cago,  Feb.  8.    Months  of  mountainous  effort  by  a  whole  bat-
talion   of   experts  went  into   the  delivery  of   this   slick   little
mouse.    The  language  is  brilliant,  the  quotations  marvellous,
the  subtleties  a  delight:  the  Kennedys  may treat  writers  capri-
ciously  but  they  have  a  flair  for  picking  the  best.    But  while
the  speech  skillfully  needles  Johnson   it  does  not  venture  any
alternatives   of   its   own.
McNamara  Boasts of Rising Arms Sales  Abroad
"During  the   period   FY   1962   through   FY   1966,   the
total  program   has  resulted  in  sales   [of  arms  abroad]
of   $8.1   billion. ...  In  addition  we  have  outstanding
sales  commitments   amounting   to  about   $3  billion.   .  .  .
For  the  domestic  economy  these  sales  will   ultimately
mean    about    1.4    million    man-years    of    employment
spread  throughout  the  50  states  and  over  $1  billion  in
profits  to  American   industry."
—McNamara   to  Senate  Armed  Forces  Com.  Feb.  23
* He  finally  deplored  resumption.
"If  we  choose  to  remain  an  Asian  power  .  .  ."  Kennedy
says  at  one  point  and  begs  the  biggest  question  of  all.     "Of
course,"  Kennedy  said  at  another,  "the   shadow  of  the  Viet-
nam  war  hovers  over  all  these  deliberations.   That   is  itself
an, immense  and  complex  subject.  .  .  ."    Indeed   it  is.    We
are  asked  to  marvel  at  the  speech   because,  as  the   Baltimore
Sun  pointed  out,  it  represents  a  "180   degree  turn"  from  the
days  when  Kennedy  was  helping  McCarthy  hound  those   still
trading  with  China.    But  Kennedy  in  Chicago  could  still say
"Out  of  those  long  years  emerged   the  China  we  see  today—
a  China  suffering   from  all  the  monstrous  injustice  and   cor-
ruptions  which  a  Communist  regime  inevitably  imposes."  This
cliche  is  nonsense.     Whatever   the   injustices   in  China,  they
can  hardly  match  the  recent  Nationalist  past.    As  for  corrup-
tion—this  is  the  least  corrupt  regime,  virtually  all   observers
agree,  that  China  has had  in generations.    A  regime  that  could
go  through  the  recent  famines without  mass  starvation,  though
it  had  (unlike  India)  no  outside  aid,  is a mighty  step  forward
from   the   past,   whatever   its   current   convulsions.
What  needs  most  to  be  said  is  that  we  can  no  more  be  an
Asian  power  than  China  can  be  a  Pan-American  power.     The
slower  we  are  to  learn  that  lesson  the  greater  the  cost  in  life
and  treasure.    The  Johnson   Doctrine  of  the  Manila   Confer-
ence  was  as  dangerous  as  if  Peking  were  to  declare  a  protec-
torate  over  Latin  America.    This  needs  to  be  challenged  but
Kennedy  did  not  challenge  it.
When  They  Do  It—It's  Sinister: But  When We  Do  The  Same  Thing  It's  Beneficent
"We  have  seen  large  numbers  of  boats  and  other  vessels
dashing  south  along  the  coast  of  North  Vietnam  to  resupply
their   forces  in  the  southern  part  of   North  Vietnam  *  and
in  the  demilitarized  zone.    Now,  this  and  the  large  number
of  incidents  indicates  that  they  are  not  particularly  inter-
ested  in  an  actual  cease-fire."
—Secretary  of  State  Rusk  at  press  conference    Feb.   9
"Saigon,   Feb.    11—In   making   their  case  for  resumption
of  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,  U.S.   officials  here  and  in
Washington   reported   with   considerable  detail   that   North
Vietnam  was  moving  supplies  closer  to  South  Vietnam   dur-
ing  the  Tet  holiday  cease-fire—evidence,  they  said,  that  the
enemy  is  not  genuinely  interested  in  a  de-escalation  of  the
war.    But  American  military   authorities  neglected  to   men-
tion  that  on  Thursday,  the  first  full  day  of  the  cease-fire,  a
one-day  record  of   2,762  tons  was  set  for  American  cargo
delivered   by  air  to  units  in  the  field.
' Not  in  South  Vietnam,  note,  but  in  their  own  country.
"The   daily   Air   Force  communique   in  the  past  has   rou-
tinely  listed  the  volume  of  cargo  and  the  number  of    pas-
sengers  carried.    But  yesterday,  the  same  day  the  report
on  the  increased  flow  of  materials  in  North  Vietnam   was
released,  these  figures  were  missing  and  there  was  only  a
line  about  'normal  resupply  missions.'    An  Air  Force  officer
said  the   U.S.    headquarters   command   had  'told  us  not  to'
release  the  cargo  figures  yesterday.    When  the  Air  Force
was   questioned   again,   the   figures   finally   were   supplied.
They  showed  that  U.S.   planes,  not  counting  truck  and  ship
movements,  carried   7,402   tons  of  supplies  and  more  than
17,000  men  during  the  first  three  days  of  the  cease-fire."
—Chicago  Daily  News Service  in Wash.  Post  Feb.  12
"In Washington  a  State  Department  spokesman  confirmed
the   U.S.    was   continuing    resupply   missions   in   Vietnam.
Asked  how  this  differed  from   North  Vietnamese  efforts,   he
said  the  North  Vietnamese  activity   was   'clear  evidence  of
their  intent  to  continue  their  aggressive  action'  while  the
U.S.   was  committed   to  combat  aggression."
—Added  by  the  Washington  Post  to  the  story  above
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  20,1967
What  Johnson  Really   Means  When  He  Talks  of  His  Desire  for  Peace
(Continued   from   Page  One)
Why  Did  Rusk  Go  So  Far?
Why  did  Rusk have  to  go  that  far  in  his  reply  to  what  was,
after  all,  a  simple  question  of  fact?    Was   it  perhaps  because
this  more  qualified  reply  was  made  necessary by the  diplomatic
and  intra-Administration  dialogue going  on  behind  the  scenes?
Through  Prime Minister  Wilson,  the  U.S.  apparently had  been
telling  Premier   Kosygin   that  the   bombings   would   "not   be
called   off  permanently"    (as   the   Washington   Star   reported
Feb.   13  just  before  the  bombings  resumed)   "unless   North
Vietnam  takes  some  reciprocal  step  on  the  ground—such  as
reducing  its flow of  men  and  supplies  to  the  South,  or pulling
back  some  of   its  regular  troops  already  in  South  Vietnam."
There  are  people  in  the  government  who  believe  just  such  a
scaling  down  of  activity  has  been  underway.    It  is  as  if  Rusk
were  saying  to  them  and  to  the  other  side  that  only  if  the  de-
escalation  were  greater,  or   movement  of   men   and   supplies
stopped   altogether,   would   we  be   ready  to  grant   "political
consequences",    i.e.   reciprocal  concessions.    There   are  other
people  in  the  government who  wanted  to  rush  resumption  of
the  bombing  before  this  scaling  down  became  so  obvious  as
to make it  difficult  to start  bombing  again.  "There  is evidence"
the  latest  issue  of  U.S.  News  &  World  Report  (Feb.  20)  said
"that  Hanoi,  while  not  willing  to  make  any  open  deal  with
the  U.S.,  has  already  started  cutting .down  its  infiltration  of
the  South—perhaps  hopeful  that  the  U.S.  will  finaHy  decide
to  end  the  bombing  without  a  public  discussion  in   return."
It  reported  that  the  rate  had  fallen   from  7,000  a  month  in
the  first  six  months  of  last  year  to   1600   a  month  from  July
through   October.     Instead   of   focussing  attention  on   these
hopeful   signs  the  U.S.  military  has  done  its  best  to  blur  or
hide  them.    "Figures  for  the  past  three  months,"   U.S.  News
&  World   Report  continued,  "have  been  deliberately held   up
by  military  officers  in  Saigon."     The  excuse  is  that  the  figures
•are  not  yet  conclusive.   Westmoreland's  command  is  not  so
scrupulous  about  figures  when  they  serve  its  purposes.
The  crux  of  the  issue  is  not  the  reliability  of  the  statistics.
Howard  Walk-Out  on  Goldberg  Speech
"They  expect  us  to  fight  for  peace  in  Vietnam  when
we  don't  even  have  peace  in  Washington.    They've  got
a  lot  of  gall  to  send  somebody  here  to  talk  to  us  colored
people  about peace.  .  . . They are drafting all  the  young
black   men.    We  don't  have  any   business   fighting   in
Vietnam  when  we  don't  have  any  rights  here."
—From   TV  interviews  with  the  40  students  and  5
faculty   members  who  walked  out  just  as  Ambassador
Goldberg   began  his  speech  on  "America's   Peace  Aims
in  Vietnam"   Feb.  10  at  Howard    University.
It   lies   in   deeper   political  and.  psychological    considerations.
U.S.   News  &  World   Report  put  its  fingers  on  these  when  it
said   some   top   officials   believe  that  while  Hanoi   wants  the
bombings  to  end  "and  will  reduce  their  infiltration  in  return,"
it  will  not  "publicly  announce  any  reduction  for  fear  of  dam-
aging   Viet   Cong   morale  in  the  South."    The   U.S.   on  the
other  hand—no  doubt  for  that  very  reason—wants  an  "open
confirmation"   from   Hanoi.  The   U.S.   is  waiting  for  "North
Vietnam  to  admit  before  the  world  that  it  has  not  only  been
directing  but  actually  feeding  the  fires  of   aggression   in   the
South."     As  the  Washington   Star  reported   (Feb.   10)   after
the  Rusk  press  conference,  "What  is  lacking  in  Hanoi's  pro-
posal,   U.S.   officials   say  privately,  is  North  Vietnam's   utter
refusal   to  acknowledge  formally  its  involvement  in  the  war
in  South  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Until  Hanoi   does  take  responsibility
for   its  role  in  the  war,  any  talks  with  its  leaders  would   be
futile,   officials   believe."     But   if   Hanoi   takes   responsibility
for  the  war,  it  excuses  the  U.S.  bombings  and  declares  itself
guilty  of  aggression.    More  important,  it  would  thereby  open
itself  to  a  demand  not  only  that  it  stop  sending  men  and  sup-
plies  but  that  it  call  off  the  rebellion  in  the  South  as  the  price
for   an  end  to  American  attacks  upon   it.    The   U.S.  has  in
effect  upped  the  ante  for  peace  because  it  thinks  that  its  mili-
tary  juggernaut  can  crush  the  opposition,   especially  at  a  time
when  the  Sino-Soviet  split  makes  supply  more  difficult.  When
Johnson   says  he  wants  peace,  he  means  surrender.
LAST  CHANCE:   Holiday  Gift  Subscription  Rates  Still  In  Effect:  2  for  $9;  3  for  $13;   4  for  $17;   5  for  $20
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Name
2/20/67
Street      ......................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State..
For  the  enclosed   $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   .............................................................:..........................
City   ....................................   Zip................    State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  D
/  E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.   D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,   the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington,   D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:    $5   in   the   U.S.:    $6  in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
$16  to  Europe;   20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED