I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967mar13.pdf

============================================================

Debunking  Readers  Digest  on  Vietnam's  Civilian Dead,  P.  3
Now  If  We  Can  Only  Capture  A  Picture of  Mao, Our Victory Will  Be Complete
"The     search   for   installations   of   the   central   guerrilla
headquarters,  which  is  one  of  the  objectives  of  the  [Junc-
tion  City]  operation,  may  have  borne  fruit  at  last.    Units
of   the   173rd  Airborne  Brigade  reported   the   discovery  of
an   enemy   base   camp  .  .  .  apparently   used   for   training.
The  booty,  the  spokesman  said,  included  portraits   of  Com-
munist  leaders  and  plaster  busts of  Ho Chi Minh  and  Stalin."
—Tom  Buckley  from  Saigon  in  New York  Times  March  2
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
VOL.  XV,   NO.  10MARCH   13,   1967
=>'<"       WASHINGTON,    D.   C.
15  CENTS
To  Punish  Hanoi  and Humiliate  Moscow
The   most   revealing  remark   in   the   several   days  of   fitful
Congressional  debate  here  on  the  Vietnamese  war  was  made
by  Senator  Jackson  of  Washington,  who  has  come  to  be  John-
son's  main  spokesman  on  NATO  as  well  as  Vietnam.    This
remark,   on   the   Senate  floor  Friday,   Feb.   24,   deserves  close
study.     For  it  indicates  that  the  Administration's  real  attitude
toward  the  Russians  is  quite  different   from  what  one  would
suppose   in   the   light   of   its   "bridge-building"   campaign   in
Eastern  F.urope.    This  is  what  Jackson  said—
There   are   some   reasons   for   thinking  that   the   Soviet
leaders   would   prefer   a   settlement.    The   bombing   of   the
Xorth,   for   example,   is   probably  a   source   of   embarrass-
ment,   for   it  demonstrates  that  the   Soviet   Union  cannot
prevent   the   United  States   from   bombing  a  brother  Com-
munist   state.     One   can   surmise  that   the   Russians   are
having  to  do  a  lot  of  explaining in  other  Communist  capi-
tals.    FOR  MOSCOW'S  SITUATION IN  VIETNAM PUTS
1N  DOUBT  WHAT  SHE  COULD  DO  TO  PROTECT  THE
INTERESTS    OF    OTHER    COMMUNIST    STATES     IF
THEY  SOMETIME  FOUND THEMSELVES IN  SIMILAR
JEOPARDY   [Emphasis  added].    In  this  sense,   the  bomb-
ing  has  political  significance—control  over  it  is  one  of  the
few   political  assets  and  bargaining  levers  we  have  in  en-
couraging   the   Russians  to   pressure   Hanoi   to   deescalate
militarily   and   to  negotiate.
The  U.S.S.R.  as  Paper  Tiger
This   says,   indiscreetly,   what   the   Administration  has   not
publicly  acknowledged—that  it  sees  the  bombing  of  the  North
not  only  as  a  way  to  "punish"  Hanoi  but  to  humiliate   Mos-
cow,  to  show  it  up  as  a  paper  tiger  in  the  eyes  of  its satellites.
"Here,"  Jackson  elaborated  a  few  minutes  later  in  a  colloquy
with  Miller  of  Iowa,  "is  the  leader  of  the  Communist   world,
the  country armed with  nuclear  rockets  and  weapons,  the  coun-
try  with  a  great  submarine  fleet,  the  country  with   enormous
ground   forces,  and   yet   it  cannot   stop  the   bombing   of   the
North."    Jackson  repeated   that  this  "embarrassing"   situation
"is  an  important  factor  in  inducing  the  Soviets  to  get   Hanoi
to  the  conference  table"—and  presumably  to  surrender  on  our
terms.
In  this  perspective  the  Vietnamese  war  must  no  longer   seem
a  distant  and  peripheral  affair   to  Moscow   but  a  threat   to  its
hegemony  in  Eastern  Europe.    We   offer   trade  and   tariff   con-
cessions  to  its  satellites  and  at  the  same  time  by  our   bombing
of  Hanoi  make  them  wonder  whether  they  can  count  on  Mos-
cow  in   the   event   of   some   similar  confrontation   in   Europe.
Thus  we  may  seem  to  be  trying  by  fear  and  favors  to  weaken
the  bonds  which  unite  the  Soviet  bloc.    This  may  seem  devil-
3  *
Winning   the  Hearts  of   the  People   Dept.
Lang   Vei,  Vietnam,   March  3—A  village   official   of
Lang  Vei  whose  two  sons  were  among  more  than  100
South  Vietnamese  killed  when  the  village   was  bombed
—apparently  by  mistake—wept  tonight,  saying:   "Now
I  have  no  sons,  no  home,  no  rice."  .  .  .  Many  of  the
population  of   2,000  had  come  in  from  outlying   areas
for  protection  from  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  war.   They
thought  they  were  safe  until  last  night,  when  two  dark-
colored  delta-wing  jets,  unidentified  but  believed  to  be
American   or   South   Vietnamese,    killed   an   estimated
105  people  and  wounded  175  in  a  25-minute   bombing
and   strafing    attack.    The   villagers    scrambled   into
bunkers  underneath  their  homes  but  many  died,   some
suffocated   .   .   .   An   American   civic   action   company
commander,  Major  Wm.  Morley,  said  gratuities   would
be   paid  to   the   villagers   at   the   rate   of   $50  for   each
dead  person,  and  $10  to  $40  for  each  wounded.   "This
does  not  admit  liability,"  he  said.
—Reuters  in  The  Times  (London)   March    U.
ishly  clever  to  White  House  Macchiavellis  like  Walt   Rostow
but  it  is  also  very  dangerous.    This  is  the  kind  of  threat  mili-
tary  men  seize  upon  as  an  argument   against   "appeasement."
Just  as our  military men  say that  if  we  do  not  defeat  the  Com-
munists  in  Vietnam,  we  may  have  to  do  so  on  the  beaches  of
California,  so  the  Russian  military must  be  saying  that  if  they
let  the  U.S.  have  its  way  in  Vietnam,  Washington  may  be  en-
couraged   some  day  to  risk  forceful  intervention  in  the   event,
let  us  say,  of   a  new  uprising  in  East  Germany   or   Hungary.
Eisenhower  and  Dulles  were  afraid   in   1953  and   1956   to  at-
tempt   the  "rollback"  they  had   promised   in  Eastern   Europe.
They  signalled  Moscow  we  would  not  interfere  either  in  East
Berlin  or  Budapest.     But  if  the  Russians  let  Hanoi  go   down
in  ruin—so  the  military  may  be  arguing  in  the  Kremlin—the
U.S.  next  time  might  be  bolder.    It  may  be  as  far-fetched  to
equate  Vietnam   with   East  Germany   as  with   California.    But
this  is  how  Sarajevos  spiral  into  world  wars.
The   strategy  of  humiliation  disclosed   by  Jackson   has   been
encouraged   by  the  uncertain  responses  of  the  Soviet  Union  in
the   Vietnamese    conflict   and   by   the   convulsive    disorder    in
China.    Our  military  are  emboldened   to  believe  that  we  can
eventually  mine  Haiphong  and  endanger  Soviet  shipping with-
out  provoking   a  military  showdown   with   Moscow,  and  that
perhaps   we  can   even   invade  North   Vietnam—at   least   the
southern  panhandle—without   bringing   China   into   the   war.
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  13,  19(17
(Continued  from   Page  One)
New  escalations  foreshadow  more  to  come.    One  military  offi-
cial  in  Saigon  indicated  to  Ward  Just  (Wash.  Post,  March  1)
that   if  the   harbor   of   Haiphong   is  ever  mined,  this   can   be
made  to  seem  just  an  extension  of  the  mining  we  have  begun
in  the  rivers  and  estuaries  of  the  North  Vietnamese  panhan-
dle.     Such  inch-by-inch  "salami"  tactics  are  characteristic  of
Johnson's  constant  escalation  of  this  war.
Getting   Ready   for  Invasion?
The   artillery   and   naval  bombardment   of   southern   North
Vietnam   between   the   17th   and   19th   parallels  looks   like  a
"softening  up"   process  in  preparation  for  an  invasion, as  does
the  news  that  Westmoreland  has  been  given  "carte   blanche"
to  direct  air  and  naval  bombardment  as  he  sees  fit  from  the
17th    parallel   60  miles  northward  to  Donghoi    (same   Wash.
Post  dispatch  and  Le  Figaro   from   Saigon   Feb.   28).  Alarm-
ist  reports  are  being  leaked  of  some  35,000  North   Vietnamese
troops  concentrated  above  the   17th  parallel  as  if  for  invasion
of  the  south,  though   other  sources,  according  to  the  AP  from
Saigon  (Wa.ih.  Star  March  3)  said  "a  major part  of  the  North
Vietnamese  force  is  digging  conventional defense  positions  as
if  they  feared   the  large  Marine  force  south  of  the  demilitar-
ized  zone  would  attack  north."    Johnson  sees  the  Vietnamese
war  in  terms  of  the  Korean  war,  and  may  be  thinking  of  an
"Inchon  landing," like  the  daring  stroke  by  which  MacArthur
landed  troops  north  of  the   38th   parallel  behind   the   enemy's
lines.     A  serious  expansion  of  the  war  may  be  in  the   offing.
An  invasion of  North  Vietnam  may not  make  sense  to  sober
people.     It  may  look  like  attempting   to  alleviate  a   headache
by  adding  a  second  head  equally  afflicted  with  migraine.     An
invasion   would   double   the   war   overnight   by   bringing   the
North   Vietnamese army  into  the   field.   But  our  military  are
not  so  sober.    Their  sensational  "search  and  seize"   operations
in  South  Vietnam  are  turning  out  to  produce   remarkably  few
seizures,  though  these  are  the  most  expensive  searches  of  mili-
tary  history   (see   box  bottom  of  p.  2).     The   latest   issue  of
U.S.  News  &  World   Report   (March   13)   already   headlines
"Failure  of   A  Strategy?"     It  quotes   one  veteran   observer   as
saying,  "the   U.S.  is  thrashing  about  like  an  elephant   chasing
.'nice."     Casualties  are  rising  sharply  though   the   enemy  re-
duces  the  scale  of  his  operations.     In  such  a  situation,  when
we  cling  all   the  more   desperately  to  the   myth  that  we  are
That  Myth  Goes   Marching  On
The  myth  of  what  happened   during  Tet  goes  march-
ing   one.    Even   Joseph    Kraft,   who   often    shows   an
admirable  independence,  wrote  in  his  column  March  4
(New   York  World   Telegram  Journal),   "The   decisive
fact   [in  Johnson's   resumption  of  bombing]   is  that   as
soon  as  the  Tet  truce  started  last  month,  the  military
came   running   to   the   White   House   with   pictures   of
supplies  being  sent  from  North   to  South  Vietnam  by
ship  and  truck."  Neither  State  nor  Pentagon  charged
that   any   supplies   actually   crossed   the   17th   parallel
during   the   truce.    If   there   were   any   such    pictures
available,  they  would  have  been  printed  on  the   front
pages.   If  Mr. Kraft  does  not  believe  this,  let  him  ask
Senator   Jackson  why   he   made   three   changes   in   his
colloquy  with  Senator   Robert  F.  Kennedy  on  p.  S3004
of   the   March  2   Congressional    Record.    On  the   floor
Jackson  said   (1)   that  the  North   shipped  supplies  into
South   Vietnam  during  the  truce  but  changed   this   to
read   "southward   [i.e.    in   North   Vietnam   itself]   into
areas  where  they  could support  forces  fighting  in  South
Vietnam",  (2)  that  the  Northerners   were  invading  the
South  during  Tet  but  changed  this  to  read  "backstop-
ping  the  invasion  of  another  country"  and  (3)  that  the
North   was   pushing  supplies  into   South   Vietnam  but
changed  this  to  read  "they  were  getting  into  an  im-
proved  position  to  push  supplies  into  South   Vietnam."
Kraft  will  find  Jackson  realized  he  could  not  back  up
the  charges  he  made  on  the  floor.
fighting   a  foreign   invasion  and   not   a  popular   insurrection,
the   temptation   for   the   military   to   ease   their   frustration   by-
staging   a  conventional   land   invasion  of   the   north   must  be
very  great  indeed.    No  doubt  contingency  papers  already  plan
to  describe  this  not  as  an  escalation  but  as  a  temporary   move
to  seal   off   the   supply   approaches   to  the   17th   parallel   from
the  North.
The  kind  of  advice  the  White  House must  be getting  on  the
risks  of  such  a  "temporary"  and  "preventive"  foray  into   the
southern  panhandle   of  North  Vietnam  was  disclosed   by  Sy-
mington  in  a  colloquy  with  Fulbright  on  the  Senate  floor  Feb.
28.    Symington  said  that  on  a  recent  visit  to  the  Far  East  he
found   in  talking  with  CIA,  military  men  and  diplomats   that
only  half  of  them  thought  the  Chinese  would   intervene  if  we
confined   the  landing  of  our   troops   to  the  southern  part  of
North  Vietnam!    We  are  out  to  see  just  how  far  we  can  go
without  a  clash  with  China  or  Russia  or  both.    We  are  ven-
How  the  Biggest  and  Most  Costly  Offensive  of  the  War  Has  Fizzled  Out
"War    Zone  C ...  75  miles  northwest  of  Saigon  has  for
20   years   been   Communism's   major   stronghold   in    South
Vietnam,  and  is  believed  to  contain  the  national   headquar-
ters  of  the  Viet  Cong ...  To  launch  Operation   Junction
City,  which cost  $25,000,000, the  U.S.  threw  in  30,000  troops,
the  equivalent  of  two  entire  army  divisions."
—Time Magazine,  March  3  (dated    ahead)
"Minh  Thanh,  Vietnam—The  biggest  U.S.  military  opera-
tion  of  the  Vietnamese  war  closed  out  its  first  week   Tues-
day    [i.e.    Mon.,  Feb.   27,   U.S.   time]—a   bust   in   a   way.
Specific   U.S.  casualty   figures   cannot   be  reported,  but   the
number  of  American  dead  and  wounded  so  far  in  Operation
Junction   City   exceeds    the   number   of   confirmed   enemy
dead.   About  55  U.S.  battalions  and  two  Vietnamese  Marine
battalions   have  been  poured  into  the  operation,  a  massive
sweep   through   the   enemy   stronghold   in   War   Zone  C  in
northern   Tay   Nihn   province  near  the   Cambodian  border.
In  addition,  bombs  and  artillery  shells  in  staggering  volume
have  been  expended.
"The  total  number of  enemy  dead confirmed as  of  Tuesday
was  only  89.   "This  could  be  a  costly  operation   if  we  don't
find  them   (the   enemy),"  a  senior   U.S.   officer   said:    "Our
casualties  keep  going  up—a  tank  knocked  out  here,  a  booby
trap  there,  snipers  picking  off  our  people  one  or  two  at  a
time  and  we  don't  have  much  to  show   for   iit  yet."
"Some  of  the  troops  and  junior  officers  in  the  field  think
that  the  VC  have  fled  into  Cambodia.   But  a  senior   intelli-
gence   officer   said   he  believed  there  were   still   five   enemy
battalions   in  the   immediate   operational   area   and  4  to  6
battalions  more  within  reinforcing  distance.   'They  may  still
get  away,'  he  said.   'There's  a  lot  of  jungle  to  slip  through
but   as   for   now   we're   convinced  they're   still   here   some-
where.'  .  .  .  But  except  for  small  and  infrequent  contacts,
they  have  not  found  any  enemy  troops."
—Raymond  R.  Coffey    in  Chicago  Daily  News,  Feb.  28
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  P\ Stone's  Weekly,  March  13,  19U7
turing  over  a  quicksand.   There  may  be  a  limit  to  the  humili-
ation  the  Russians  will  take,  and  China's  instability  is hardly
a  guarantee that  its  decisions  are  predictable.     The  longer  this
war  goes  on  the  greater  the  risk  that  it  will  suddenly  flare  up
into  a  bigger   conflict.
Only  Morse  and   Nelson
Against   the   signs  of   this  gathering  storm,   the   efforts   in
Congress   to   reassert  some   control   over   the   war   seem   puny
indeed,  and  the  Kennedy  speech  belated' and  almost  irrelevant
as  he  himself   seemed   to  fear   in  one   passage.     Only  Morse
and  Gaylord  Nelson  of  Wisconsin  dared  vote  against the  sup-
plemental  Vietnamese  war   appropriation,  though   it  was  an-
nounced  in  the  Senate  that  Gruening  had  he  not  been  absent
on  official  business  would  also  have  voted  "no."     Nelson  said
he  did  so  to  express  his  opposition  to  "the   escalation  that  is
certain  to  follow,"   and  Morse  with  that  common  sense  which
always  looks  treasonable  in  wartime  said,  "The    best  way  to
support  the  troops  is  to  deny  the  President  the  money  to  kill
them."    In  the  House  there  were  none  who  dared  vote  against
the  appropriation  and  only  18  who  voted   for  an  amendment
that  no   funds   could  be  used   for   "military  operations   in   or
over  North   Vietnam."  *
This   was  in  substance  the  same  rider  Clark  tried  hard   to
attach  in  the  Senate.    But  there  he  was  supported   in  the  de-
bate  only  by  l-'ulbright,  Morse,   Hartke  and   Young   of   Ohio.
Neither  of  the  Kennedys  spoke  up,  and  Robert  Kennedy  told
reporters  later  he  would   have  voted   against  this  amendment
because  he  feels  it  would  interfere  with  Presidential  preroga-
tives—in  this  case,  apparently,  the  right  to  make  and   widen
war  without  the  consent  of  Congress.    This  was  also  the  posi-
tion  later  expressed  by  Javits.    Mansfield,  fearing  that  if   the
"The   18  all   Democrats:   Brown,  Burton,   Edwards,   Rees
and   Roybal   of   California;   Bingham,   Farbstein,   Helstoski,
Kosenthal,   Ryan   and   Scheuer   of   New   York;  Conyers   and
Diggs   of   Michigan;   Fraser   (Minn);  Green  (Oregon);  Kas-
tenmeier  (Wis);  Mink  (Hawaii),  and  Yates   (111).
Bernard  B.   Fall
There  is  hardly  a  writer  on  Vietnam  in  Washington
or  elsewhere  who  will  not  miss  Bernard  Fall.   No  one
in   the  country  knew  as   much  as   he   about   the   Viet-
namese  war,  and  none  was   so  generous   with  all  who
consulted  him.  These  ranged  straight  across  the  spec-
trum  from  right  to  left.   He  was  the  most  tireless  and
productive   writer   I   have   ever   known.    He   worked
passionately   to   produce  as   much   as   he  could   in   the
few   years   allotted   him.   He   was   not   a   peacenik  but
his    hatred    of    official    doubletalk    often    made    him
the  ally  of  the  peace  forces.   He  himself   prized  above
all   the  respect   of   the  soldiers.   He  had  fought   in  his
teens   against   the   Nazis   in   the   French   maquis,  and
the   experience   gave   him   an   ineradicable   interest   in
things  military,  especially  in  guerrilla  war.   His  latest
book  on  Dienbienphu  was   more   than   anything  else  a
memorial   to   the   lost   and   hopeless    bravery   of   the
French   defenders.    Like   Mr.   Justice    Holmes,    whose
experience  in  the  Civil  War  left  a  similar  mark  upon
him,  Fall   understood  the  soldier's   devotion.   He  could
say  with  Holmes  "in  our  youth  our hearts  were  touched
with  fire."  In  Vietnam  he  avoided  the  high  brass  to  be
with   the   troops,   and  he   would  much  have   preferred
to  die  as  he  did,  with  the  Marines,  on  combat  patrol
along  that  road  one  of  his  earlier  books  made  famous
as  the  "Street  Without  Joy".   His  was  truly  a  meteoric
career—short   and  dazzling—but   he  will  long   be  read
and  remembered  as  a  soldier-scholar,   and  I  will  miss
him  as  a  friend.
Clark   amendment    were   overwhelmingly   defeated    Johnson
might  take  this  as  a  mandate  to  escalate  the  war,  seized  on  a
second  "fall-back"  resolution  of  Clark's  and  carried  it  to  vic-
tory.    It  put  the  Senate  on  record  for  negotiations.    Weak  as
it  was  it  had  the  advantage  of  demonstrating  how  small  is  the
minority  of  "hawks"  in  the  Senate  and  how  wide  would   be
the  support   of  peace  talks  if  Johnson   chose  to  embark  upon
them.    Only  19  Senators  voted  against  negotiation  and  one  of
these—Russell—said  he  was  only  doing  so  for   constitutional
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Answering  Readers  Digest's  Question:  Who  Speaks  for  the  Civilian  Dead  in  Vietnam?
"News   of   civilian   casualties   caused   by   U.S.   air   raids
over  North  Vietnam  recently  swept  the  world  .  .  .  Yet  in
capitals  where  indignation  ran  highest,   there   was   silence
about  a  different  kind  of  killing—the  purposeful   slaughter
committed  by  Communists  .  .  .  While  civilian  deaths  in  the
North  have  run  to  a  few  hundred,  the  number  of  civilians
killed   by   Red   attacks   in   the   South   since    1957—by   the
Communists   in   South   Vietnam   and   by   those   sent   from
the.  North—runs  to  11,000  actually  counted."
—Readers  Digest:  Who  Speaks   for  the  Civilian  Dead  in
South  Vietnam?,  March   1967.
"Not    much   is   said   about   how   much   more   we   have
destroyed   there   [in  South  Vietnam]  than  we  have   created.
Most  tragic  are  the  lives  we  have  taken  with  our  military
power,  lives  estimated   at  1,000  South  Vietnamese  a  month
[or  more  in  one  year  than  Readers  Digest  claims   terrorists
have  killed in  the  ten  years  since  1957—IPS],   These  casual-
ties  make  a  mockery  of  our  claim  that  we  are  saving   the
people   of   Vietnam   from  Vietcong    terrorists."
—Morse  (D.  Ore)  in  the Senate  Feb.  28, p.  S277S
"Nor  did  the   NLF   pursue   terror   in  a  random  or  indis-
criminate   pattern.    On  the   contrary,   the   killing  of   indi-
viduals   was   done  with  great   specificity,   as   for   example,
pinning  a  note  to  the  shirtfront  of  an  assassinated  govern-
ment   official   explaining  his  crimes  .  .  .  The  NLF  made  a
concerted   effort   to   make   sure   that  there   were   no   unex-
plained  killings ...  NLF  cadres   regarded  the  proper  use
of    terror   as   terror    applied   judiciously,   selectively    and
sparingly ...  In  general,  however,  the  NLF  theoreticians
considered  terror  to  be  the  weapon  of   the  weak,  the   des-
perate  or  the  ineffectual  guerrilla  leader.    They   held  that
most  objectives  could  be  reached  without  its   use."
—Douglas  Pike:  Viet  Cong,  MIT  Press 1966
"Wave   after   wave   of   B-52s   have   destroyed   some   28
square  miles  no  farther  than  30  miles   from  Saigon.    This
destruction   with  magnesium   bombs  and  with  our  artillery
has  been  so  tremendous  that  an  American  military   spokes-
man  said  triumphantly that  our  attack  looked  like  a  Fourth
of  July  celebration.   What  it   looked  like  to  the   people  of
four  little  villages  within  30  miles  of  Saigon  is   something
else.   As  one  peasant  woman  said,  'I  was  very  poor  in  my
village,  but  I  did  not  mind  that.   I  wanted   to  stay.   First
the   planes   passed   over   our   fields.   My   husband   did   not
know  what  to  do.   He  stood   up.   They  killed  him.   I  wish
I  had  stayed   and'been  killed,  too.'  .  .  .  Every  hut  in  that
little   village   has   been   destroyed.    This   is   an   American
offensive   that   will  be  bitterly  remembered  and  spoken   of
in  Asia  100  years  from  now."
—Young  (D.  Ohio)  in  the Senate, Feb.  27, p. S2648
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  13, 1967
When  Kennedy  Is Willing  to  Risk  His Future  For  His Country
(Continued  from   Page  Three)
reasons.**    The  fact  that  the  Administration forces  prevented
the  Clark-Mansfield  amendment  even  from  coming  to  a  vote
in  the  House  indicates  that  this  was  a  mandate  Johnson  did
not  want.
Johnson  "A  Man  of   Peace"?
The  disappointing  thing  about  Bobby  Kennedy's  speech  is
that  he  shot  off  his  long-awaited   big  gun  after  the  battle  was
over.    He  wants  to  lead  an  opposition  but  he  does  not  want
to  be  identified  with  the  oppositionists.   He  wants  to  draw  a
section  of  the  party  away  from  Johnson  but  he  also  wants  to
be  a prima  donna,  and  to  play  a  lone  hand;  he  makes  no  effort
to  work  with  others  in  the  Senate  or  the  House.    He   wants
the  camera  to  himself.    This   is  good   publicity  but   it  is  not
effective  politics.    After  months  of  silence  on  the  war,  when
even  Javits  had  come  out  against  the  bombing  of  the  North,
Kennedy  wanted  to  make  a  record  that  would  redound  to  his
credit   later   as  Johnson   plunged   deeper   into  war.     But   he
shows  no  readiness  for  the  dust  and  heat  of  battle,  and   the
only  team  he  organizes  is  with  his  brother  Teddy.    He  even
wants  to  be  against Johnson  and  yet with  him.    So he  can  call
Johnson   "a  man  of  peace"  and  say,  as  he  did   in  his   speech,
"The   fault  rests  largely  with  our  adversary.   He  has  pursued
relentless  and   unyielding   conquest   with  obdurate    unconcern
for  mounting  desolation."  That  fits  our  policy  far  more  justly
than   it  does  that  of   the   rebels.    One   could   as  easily  blame
London's  desolation  on  its  stubborn  resistance  to  Der  Fuehrer.
Kennedy's  formula  is  tricky.   What  it  boils  down  to  is that
we  would  have  a  right—and   greater   world   support—to  re-
sume  bombing  if  the  North  did  not  eventually  agree  to  what
we  considered  a  reasonable   and  honorable   settlement.     The
other  side  can  hardly  be  blamed  for  not  wanting  to  negotiate
under  this  threat.     Johnson   could   easily  seize  on   Kennedy's
formula  and  turn  it  into  another  of  his  phony  "pauses."    It
makes  one  despair   of  negotiation   altogether   because   there  is
no  reason  to  believe  that  our  government  would  either   agree
to  a  decent  compromise   coalition   or  honorably  abide  by  the
**The  others  were  Allott,   Byrd  (W.Va.);  Cotton,  Curtis,
Dominick,  Eastland,   Griffin,  Hansen,   Hill,   Rollings,  Hruska,
Long    (La);     McClellan,   Murphy,   Stennis,   Talmadge,   Thur-
mond  and  Tower.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly         5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
3/13/67
Street   ......................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State..
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name   .............................................................:................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished   D
How  Times  Change—And  Judges  With   Them
Fifteen  years  ago  a  U.S.   Court  of  Appeals  panel  in
the   District   of   Columbia  split  2-to-l   when   the    Com-
munist  Party  asked  it  to  reverse  a  Subversive  Activi-
ties  Board  registration  order  on  the   ground  that  this
violated  the  5th  Amendment.   The  majority,  Prettyman
and   Danaher,   turned   down   the   appeal.    Bazelon   was         ,
then  the  dissenter.   Now  Prettyman  and  Danaher  have
been  joined  by  a  third  conservative  judge,   McGowan,
in   unanimously   adopting   Bazelon's   minority   opinion
and  ruling  in  favor  of  the  Communists.   The  view  now
upheld   by   the   Court   was  that   put   forward   17  years
ago  by  President  Truman  when  he  vetoed  the  Internal
Security  Act  as  in  conflict  with  the  Fifth  Amendment.
Congress   passed   this   thought   control    act,    the   old
Mundt-Nixon   bill,   over  his   veto.   This  latest  decision
just   about   dismantles   its   elaborate   machinery.   The
decision   is   all   the   more   welcome   because   anti-war
organizations   might   conceivably   have   been   brought
under   these   provisions   —   and   blacklisted   as     Com-
munist—if  registration  had  been  upheld.
terms  of  a  settlement,  anymore  than  we  did  in  1954  when  the
rebels  were  promised  the  same  package—amnesty,  democratic
liberties,  a  vote  on  reunification.    They   must  feel  that  their
best  bet  is  to  hang  on  until  some  other   "Vietnam"   (one  of
them  threatens   in  Arabia,  where  Nasser  casts  a  shadow  over
our   oil  investments)   forces   us  to   scale  down   our   effort   in
Southeast  Asia.    To  go  along  with  a  formula  like  Kennedy's,
however  well  intentioned,  might  be  for  Americans  of  consci-
ence  to  find  themselves  trapped   later  either  in  resumption  of
bombing  or  in  another  chapter  of  duplicity like  that  we  wrote
with  Diem.     We   have  no  business  being   in  Vietnam.    We
have  no  right  to  impose  our  views  or  our  puppets  upon   it  in
war   or  negotiation.     We   are  destroying   the   country,  like  a
raging  plague.     By  right  we  ought   to  get  out,  and  pay  repa-
ration  for  our  crimes.
Johnson   is  not  a  man  of  peace.    He  wants  a  military  vic-
tory  and  a  political  surrender.     All  the  rest  is  eyewash.     The
other  side  knows  it  and  is  digging  in  for  a  fight  that  will  cost
us  dearly  even  if  we  should  win  a  peace  of  devastation  in  the
end.    When  Robert  Kennedy  is  ready  to  risk  his  political   fu-
ture,  as  others  in  Southeast  Asia  are  risking  their  lives,  to  do
his  duty  by  his  country  and  say  these  things  clearly,  he  will
deserve  the  leadership   he  so  desperately   wants.
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  'Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday   except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December   and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekiy  during  July  at   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     $6  in   Canada;    $10   elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates
515  to  Europe;  20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED