I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967dec04.pdf

============================================================

On McNamara's  Leaving, P.  4
Progress  Note
"The   need   for   blood   for  wounded  and  ill   Americans   in     of  blood  were  used^for  3  patients  among  American   troops
Vietnam   has   risen   from   an   average   of   5   pints   _tp_5jOOO _in_V_ietnam  anjUre  added,  'The  escalation  of  the  conflict  has
pints  a  week  in a little over  two  years,  the  Army  reports ...     been  matched  by  an  increase  to  5,000  to  10,000   transfusions
Lt.  Col.  Frank  W.  Xiel,  of  the  Army's  Office  of  Intelligence      per  month  in  1967'."
at  the  Pentagon  .  .  .  said  that  in  April  1965  only  8  pints                        —Associated  Press  in  Washington  Star, Nov.  21.
L P. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  29
DECEMBER  4,   1967
'<"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Westmorland's  Bloody  Folly -  On Hill  875
For  several  weeks  it  has  been  hard  to  tell  whether   Gen.
Westmoreland  was  acting  as  a  press  agent  or  a  military -com-
mander.   The  Battle  of  Dak  To  gives  one  a  chance  to  judge
his  capacity  in  either  role.   It  showed  that  as  a  press  agent,
ballyhooing   the   enemy's  decline  in  Vietnam,  he   is  a  flop.
Last  week's  5-day  battle  for  Hill  875  flooded  the  U.S.   and
world   press   with   pictures    of   grimy,    exhausted    American
wounded  clambering down  the  slopes  for  aid,  and  with  stories
which   showed   that  the   enemy,  despite   all   Westmoreland's
optimistic  reports,  had  been  able to  inflict  on  American  troops
—crack  seasoned  paratroopers,  at  that—the  heaviest  casualties
of  the  war.  The  latest  figures  as  this  is  written  are  287  U.S.
dead  and  1,000  wounded  (plus  78  South  Vietnamese  killed).
The   2nd   and   4th   Battalions  of   the   173rd   Airborne  were
chewed   up.    The   result  has  been   to  make   Westmoreland's
optimism  look  very  foolish  indeed.
Was  That  Attack  Necessary?
From  a  public  relations  point  of  view,  the  attack  on  Hill
875  was—to  put   it  mildly—badly   timed.    From   a  military
view,  the  question   is—was  it  necessary?   There  are  strange
mutterings  in  Washington.    I  heard  one  important  newsman
say  privately,  "The  commander who  ordered  that  attack  should
have  been  court-martialed."   I  heard  a military man  with  long
experience  in  Southeast  Asia  say,  "The   Viets  are  playing  the
same  tricks  on  us  that  they  played  on  the  French,  and  in  the
very   same  places."   I  have  neither  the  military  background
nor  contacts  to  check  all  this  out.*  I  have  no  private  sources
at  the  Pentagon.   But  from  the  little  I  have  been  able  to  pick
up  in  conversation  and  reading,  this  terrible  battle  for  Hill
875   is  questionable  from  a  military  point  of   view,  as  were
the   predecessor   battles   in   November    for   Hills   1,338   and
1,416.   The  month   of  fighting   around   Dak  To  makes   one
wonder   whether   Westmoreland    is  any  better   as  a   General
than  as  a  public  relations  man.
The  newsmen  and  the  public  have  been  given  to  understand
that   these  hills   were  strongpoints   dominating   passes   which
">  How  I  miss  my  dear  friend,  Bernard  Fall.   He  knew   the
terrain,  the  tactics  and  the  military  intimately.   There  is  no
one  to  take  his   place  and  analyze   this  bloody   battle  as   it
should   be  analyzed.    No   one  else   either   in  journalistic   or
military  circles  has  his  knowledge  and  independence  of  mind.
Voices  From  Hell
"Reflecting   the  general   frustration   at  the  base   [of
Hill  875  near  Dakto]  at  the  slow  and  costly  course  of
the  fighting,  one  officer   who  had  volunteered  to  fly  into
the  perimeter  in  a  helicopter  said:   'I  don't   care   any
more  if  I  get  back  to  the  world,  a  world  too  stupid  to
stay  out  of  war,  too  stupid  to  know  how  to  fight  it,  too
stupid  to  know  how  to  end  it'."
—Washington  Post  roundup  from  Dakto,  Nov.  22
"I  ain't  going  to  reenlist  and  I  hope  they   bring  all
the  U.S.  boys  out  .  .  .  'cause  it's  not no  war  over  there.
It's  a tragedy."
—Pfe.    John   Guinn,   falsely    reported   killed   in   on
Army  body  mixup,  on  his  return  home  to  Elizabethton,
Term.   Walter   Crcmkhite's   CBS  News,  Nov.   2t.
lead   from   Laos  and   Cambordia   into  South   Vietnam.    They
were   pictured   as   fortresses  whose   guns   commanded   valley
roads  below  them.    But  I  am  told  these  hills  are  but  a  few
of  hundreds in  the  Anammite chain along  the  borders  and  that
the  elephant  grass,  the  trees  and  the  jungle  growth  below  and
around  them  is  so  deep  that  large  bodies  of  military  men  can
be  moved  through  them  even  by  day  without  being  observed.
The  most  striking evidence  of  this  is  that  some  5,000  men  of
the  173rd  Airborne had  been  based  for  several  months  close
to  these  hills  at  the  very  time  the  enemy  moved  troops  onto
them   and   built  their   fortifications—and   built   them   strong
enough  to  resist  even  direct  hits  from  105-mm.  shells.    "The
situation  had  been  judged  so  reassuring,"   Francois   Nivolon,
one  of  the  most  experienced  correspondents  in  Saigon,  wrote
in  Le  Figaro   (Nov.   25-26),   "that   the   173rd   Brigade  had
been  moved  out  to  other  theatres  in  October.   Only  some  light
elements  were  left  behind."
The  picture  I  get  is  that  the  enemy  commanders  in  the
war   against  the  French,   as  against  ourselves,  prepared   such
hilltop   fortresses  as  traps.    They   can  be  held   by  relatively
small  numbers  of  troops.   To  attack  such  strongpoints  must
always  be  costly.   The  enemy  prepares  his  escape  route.   He
knows  he  cannot   hold   such  points  permanently   once   their
existence  becomes  known.   Our  aerial  and  artillery  firepower
is  too  great.   He  plans  to  hold   on  for  a  few  days,  impose
(Continued  on Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 4,1967
Our  Generals  Seem  to  Have  Learned  Nothing  from  Years  of  Guerilla  War
(Continued  from  Page
maximum  casualties  on  the  attacking  forces,  and  then  with-
draw.   In   the   case  of  Hill   875,   the  trap   was   well-baited.
Airborne  units  moved  out  in  October  were  hastily flown back
for   the  attack.   The   2d  Battalion  was  ambushed  on  its  way
to  the  hill.   The  4th  Battalion,  sent  next  day  to  relieve  it,
was  also  badly  cut  up.    For   two  days  the   remnants   were
subjected  to  murderous  machine  gun,  mortar  and  rocket  fire.
In   such  close  fighting,  aerial  strikes  are  hazardous  and   one
of  our  own  strikes  killed  30  men  and  wounded  many  others
in  the  2d  battalion.   When   the  hilltop  was  finally  stormed
and  taken,  the  enemy  had  slipped   away.   They  seem  to  have
carried   off   most   of   their   dead,   their   wounded   and   their
weapons.   The  attackers met  not  even  token  resistance.
Questions  For  Westmoreland
Gen.   Westmoreland   at  once  called  this  a  victory.    "Dak
To,"   he  said,  "was  the  beginning  of  a  great  defeat  for  the
enemy."   It  was  a  victory  in  that  we  took  the  hill.   But  was
the  hill  worth  it?   Le  Figaro  Nov.   25  reported  from  Saigon
that   U.S.   intelligence   believes   there   are   dozens,    perhaps
hundreds   of   hilltops   in   the   same   area   which   have   been
fortified    and   manned   by   the   enemy.    The   London   Daily     ,
Telegraph  correspondent  in  Saigon  wrote  (Nov.  24)  that  the  £
costly  "victory"  on  Hill  875  raised  three  questions:
"(1)—Considering  that  the  enemy  were   well-entrenched
on   higher   ground,   and   that   the   Americans    have   ever-
ready   air   power,   were   infantry   attacks   of   this   nature
really  necessary?
"(2)—Could  the  hill  be  considered  sufficiently   important
to  sacrifice  over  100 American  lives  for  it?
"(3)—Will  it  be  worth  controlling  a  week  from  now,  or
will  it  quickly revert  to  the  status  of  countless  other  peaks
throughout  the  Central   Highlands,   forgotten  and  unoccu-
pied by either  side?"
These  are  questions  someone  ought  to  put  to  Gen.   West-
moreland.  He  may consider  Dak  To  a  victory,  but  apparently
American  military  on  the  spot  believe  that  we  cannot   afford
such  victories.  M.  Nivolon  in  his  Le  "Figaro  dispatch  of  Nov.
25-26  says, "In  effect,  American tactics have  been  newly  modi-
fied  in  the  light  of  what  the  last  few  days  of  combat  have
taught.   The  American  command,  at  least   for   the   moment,
has   no   intention  of   engaging   its   infantry   in   new  attacks
analogous  to  those  of  Hill  875."    I   asked  a  military  man,
"If   these  hills  are  of  no  real  military  importance,  why  did
the  U.S.  command  take  the  bait  and  rush  so  many  troops  in
for  the  attack?"  His  answer was  "vanity."   I  don't  know how
much  weight  to  give  that  answer  but  I  do  know  that  the
enemy   succeeded   in   his   purposes.     These,   as  explained   by
Conventional  Military  Minds  At   Work
Dak  To,  Vietnam—"If  this  were   conventional   war-
fare,  this  hill  would have  strategic  value.   It  commands
that  valley  .  .  .  No,  it  isn't  conventional  warfare.   So
that  valley  doesn't  have  any  strategic  value.   Neither
does   the   hill."    So   said   a  weary   American  infantry
officer  standing  atop  the  charred,  rubble-iitrewn summit
of   Hill   875,   a   hump  of   jungle   on   which   102   U.S.
soldiers  died.
—Peter R. Kann in  the Wall  St. Journal, Nov. 88
South  Vietnam's  General-President  Nguyen  Van  Thieu  a  few
days  before the  battle  ended,  were  to  bloody  American  troops
sufficiently   to  have  an   impact   on   American   public   opinion
and  to  draw  troops  away from  the  delta  and  the  coastal plain
(where  the  rice  is now  being  harvested)  into  the  empty  high-
lands.   The  enemy  succeeded.  Whose,  then,  was  the victory?
Gen.   Westmoreland   seems  to  be  operating   on  the   simple
minded   theory  that  he   is  waging  a  war   of   attrition.    But
storming  fortified  enemy hilltops  is  attrition  in  reverse—deci-
mating   some  of   our   own  best  combat  troops.    Among   the
half  million  U.S.  troops  and  the  600,000  South  Vietnamese
troops,   real   combat  soldiers   are  in  short   supply.   Even  this
minor   engagement   was   a   drain   upon   them.    "The    First
Cavalry  Division,"  said  the  New  York  Times  summary  of  the
battle   in  its  Sunday  review  of   the  news   Nov.   26,  "which
only  a  month  ago  had  three  brigades  in  Binh  Dinh  [where
it  had  been  "pacifying"   the  locals—IPS]  now  has  only  one.
That's   barely  enough   to  guard   its  landing   zones  and   base
areas."   So the  area  is wide  open  to  guerrilla  attack.
This   is  the  way  Gen.   Giap   fought   the  war   against   the
French,  keeping  them  on  a  whipsaw.    If  they  dispersed  their
troops  for  "pacification",  his  regulars would  launch or  threaten
an  attack  on  a  poorly  manned  outpost   (like  Dak  To)   and
draw   the   French   into   an   ambush  and/or   a   costly  hilltop
assault.   When   the  French  concentrated  troops  to  hit   Giap's
regulars,   his   guerrillas   would   attack   in   the    ill-defended
countryside,  as  has  been  happening   all  over  South  Vietnam
in   the   days  which  followed   our   occupation   of   that  empty
hilltop.   Gen.  Giap only attacked where he had  local superiority
and  withdrew  when  that   superiority  was  -threatened,  as  his
troops  and  the  guerrillas  are  doing  today.   He  has  the   U.S.
spread  thin  as  he  had  the  French  spread  thin,  and  he  seems
to  have our  Generals  making  the  same  mistakes  as  the  French
and   issuing  the   same  silly  optimistic  statements.    If   West-
moreland  couldn't   judge  the  situation  around  Dak  To  better
than  that  after  four  years  in  South  Vietnam,  we  need  a  new
commanding  General.
Why  UN  Observers  Fear  Senate  Passage  of  the  Mansfield  Resolution  on Vietnam
"The  prospect  that  Washington  will  decide  once  again  to
bring  the  Vietnam  issue  to  the  attention  of  the  Security
Council  is  causing  some  concern  in  UN  circles.   Observers
do  not  believe  that  a  debate  at  this  time  will  advance  the
cause  of  peace  in  Vietnam  since  no  meaningful  resolution
can  hope  to  get  the  votes  required  for  acceptance.
"The  alternatives,  in  the  opinion of  experienced  observers,
are  a  decision  so  vague  in  content  that  it   will   only  add
confusion  to  an  already  confused  issue—or  one  that  will  be
tabled  for  the  sole  purpose  of  showing  the  'doves'  that  a
solution  for  Vietnam  does  not  lie  with  the  UN.
" 'President  Johnson,'  a  skeptical  Western  diplomat  com-
mented,  'is  quite  capable  of  welcoming  a  U.S.  defeat  in  the
UN  in  order  to  silence  the  doves  and  support  the   further
increase  in  military  pressure  the  hawks  demand."
—Mono  Rossi  from   the   UN  in   The  Christian   Science
Monitor,  Nov.  55.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 4,1967
Three Leading Senators Declare Optimism Unjustified  and Stress NLF Strength
It   was  an  index   of  how  deeply   disturbed  Senators  are
about  the  optimism  being  orchestrated  by  the  White  House
on   Vietnam    that    the   Administration's    own    majority
leader,   Mansfield,     and   the   senior   Republican   Senator,
Aiken  of  Vermont,   both  made  Senate  speeches  Nov.  SO to
disagree  and  to  stress  the  strength  of  the  NLF.    Two  days
later   Gore  of   Tennessee  made  a  similar  speech   (see   box
below).  Of  particular  importance  were  the  hints  in  Aiken's
speech  that  Johnson  may   be  preparing   for   a   crackdown
at   home  next  year.   Here   are  the  key   passages  in   the
Mansfield   and  Aiken  speeches:
"The   National   Liberation   Front   [Mansfield   said]  is  the
dominant  force  in  South  Vietnam,  with  a  total  of  main  forces
and   paramilitary   forces   numbering   in   excess  of   a   quarter
million  men.  This,  of  course,  is  exclusive  of  the  some  50,000
North   Vietnamese  regulars,   out  of  a  total  of  470,000   men
in  the  North  Vietnam  Army,  who  are  now  located  in  South
Vietnam.
No  Sign  Viet  Cong  Weakening
"In   my   opinion   there   is   very   little,  if   anything,  in   the
pattern  of  combat  operations  to  indicate  any  weakening of  the
ability  of  the  Vietcong  to  keep  on   fighting.   [Italics  added.]
They  are  in  no  position   to  and  cannot   prevent  the  steady
consolidation  of  American  forces  along  the  coast  and  among
the  major  cities,  but  they  still  control  the  Mekong  Delta  .  . .
"It  would  be  well  to  consider  that  our  original   intent  in
relation  to  South ^Vietnam  was  to  maintain  its  integrity  and
its  independence.   I  would   assume  that  in  that   context  all
the  people  of  South  Vietnam  would  be  included  .  .  .  While
the  morale  of  the  South  Vietnamese  government  may  have
been  restored  [by  the bombing  of  the North]  the  factor  of  the
morale of the people  of  South  Vietnam  is another  matter  .  . .
"In  line with  our  original  commitment,  it  would  be  well  to
consolidate  and  concentrate  in  South  Vietnam  itself   and  for
the  Saigon  government  to  try  to  establish   contact  with  the
National  Liberation  Front.   In  this  manner,  all  of  the  Viet-
namese   who   live   in   South   Vietnam   will   be   represented.
Perhaps  among  themselves  they can come up with a solution'...
"In  relation  to  South  Vietnam,  the  Mekong  Delta,  which  is
the  stronghold  of  the  NLF  and  the  Vietcong,  has  hardly  been
touched.   In  that  area  lie  80%  of  the  farmland  and  around
7  million   or   approximately   one-half   of   the   population   of
South  Vietnam.   The  Vietcong  has  an  extensive  organization
there  and  is,  for  many  of  the  people  who  inhabit  the  area,
the   sole   Vietnamese   government   they   have   ever   known,
trusted, or feared  . . .
Bunker  Admits  NLF's  Strength   (Privately)
On  NBC's  Today  show  Nov.  23  I  was  asked  whether
heretical  Washington  reporters  like  myself  were  invited
to  private  press  briefings.   I  replied  that  I  wasn't  and
that  it  was  an  advantage,   since   much  of  what  one  is
told  is  untrue.   What  is  true  one  is  bound—as  "off  the
record"—not  to  print.  I  gave  an  example.   Amsassador
Bunker  at   private   briefings   has   been   giving   a   more
sober  view  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam  than  his  opti-
mistic  public  statements.   When  asked  why  we  could
not  deal   with  the   NLF,  he  answered   that   the   NLF
was  the  only  cohesive   political  force  in  South  Vietnam!
If  this  ia  so  what  happens  to  the  public   propaganda
line  that  the  war  is  only  an  invasion  from  the  North,
that   we  have   a   popularly   based   government   in   the
South,  and  that  the  enemy  is  demoralized  and  on  the
run?   To be  told  such things  in  private  yet  not  allowed
to   print  them   is   to   be  drawn  into  a  conspiracy  of
silence,  to  be made  "one  of  the  gang"  or  Establishment.
"Gen.   Westmoreland   .  .  .  said   that  we  may  hope   for
improvement  [Aiken  declared] ... in two years.  I  personally
believe  he  is  optimistic.    The  Senator  from  Montana  [Mans-
field]  has  been  referring  to  the  situation  in  the  Delta,  which
our  administration  would  rather  not  talk  about  .  .  .  but  it  is
apparent  to  all  of  us that  the  Delta  is  an  extremely  important
part  of  South  Vietnam.   South  Vietnam  is  now  run  in  Saigon
officially   by  a  government  which  was  supported   by  35%  of
the  voters  and  the   U.S.   government.    I  would, hardly   call
that  a  majority   rule.    But   what  concerns  me  most   is  that
while  we  are  focusing  attention   in   Southeast   Asia,  we  are
really  neglecting   the  situation  here  at  home,   and  I   believe
it  is  in  the  United  States  that  our  greatest  danger  of   totali-
tarianism,  whether  from  the  right  or  the  left,  lies.
"I  hope that the Administration will face  up to the situation,
which  they  have  not  done  so  far.  We  hear  rumors.   We  hear
rumors  of  a  very  substantial  increase  in  the  number  of  our
Armed  Forces  next  year.   So  far  as  I  know  they  are  merely
rumors;  but  if  there  is  such  an  increase,  is  this  increase  to  be
used  in  Asia?   Is  it  to  be  used  in  the  U.S.,   guarding   the
polls...?
"We  also  hear  rumors  that  the  Administration  may  request
some  rather  drastic  rules  and  regulations  which  go  with  the
conduct  of  a  major  war  here  in  the  U.S.,  some  time  within
the  coming  year  .  .  .  May I  say again,  let  us  not  forget  that
the  real  danger  to  our  democratic  institutions  lies  in  the  U.S.
and  not  10,000 miles away."
What  The  U.S.  Really  Fears  Is  The  Self-!
"Mr.  President,  a  few  days  ago  President  Johnson   held
a  press  conference  in  which,  in  response  to  a  question,  he
said  the   United   States  is   resisting  aggression  in   South
Vietnam.    The  day  before,  I  believe,  I  was  in  communica-
tion  with  a  high   administration  official.   I  inquired  as  to
what   is   the   organized    military   strength   of   the    North
Vietnamese  military   now  in  South  Vietnam.    The  answer
was  55,000  troops.   I  asked  him  if   the   United   States  of
America  did  not  have  approximately   500,000  troops  there.
That  was  affirmed.
"I  asked:  Under  what  circumstances  could  we  have  peace
there,  in  light  of  this  aggression  which  we  are  resisting?
His  answer  was  that  if  North  Vietnam  would  withdraw   its
troops then there can be peace.
Determination  We  Claim  To  Be  Defending
"I   asked  a   second  question:   If   North   Vietnam   would
withdraw  her  55,000  troops,  would  the  United  States  with-
draw  her  500,000  troops,  and  permit  self-determination   by
the  South  Vietnamese.    The  answer  was  equivocal.
"I  asked:   If  North  Vietnam  would  withdraw  her  55,000
troops,  what  portion  of  our  500,000  troops,  or   thereabouts,
would  we  withdraw?   Again,  the  answer  was  equivocal.
"So,   Mr.  President,   if   500,000  troops,   with   the   great
mobility  we  have,  with  our  air  power,  with  the  overwhelm-
ing firepower we  have,  cannot  in  some  way  deal  with  55,000
less-equipped,   less-mobile  troops,  then  there  must  be  some
other   element   present.   There   is.    That   other   element  is
the  civil-war   element.
—Gore in  the Senate, Nov. 22
8*
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 4,1967
What  Counts Is  His  Public  Record  on  Vietnam,  Not  His  Private  Misgivings
McNamara  Put  Decorum  Ahead  of  Decency  By  Going  Out  in  Silence
I  do  not   believe  any  newspaperman  is  going   to  be   able
really  to  dig  out  the  story  of  what  Robert  McNamara  did  at
the   Pentagon.     The   issues  involved   in   the  management  of
the  war  machine  are  too  complicated,  the  inner 'relationships
—institutional  and  personal—too  well  hidden  from  view.  But
I  am  inclined  to  think  that  this  does  not  really  matter  be-
cause  I  believe  that  McNamara's   impact   is  overrated.     He
and   his  whiz  kids   may  have   house-broken   the   monster   a
little,  forced  it  to  keep  its  nose  clean  in  public,  saved  it  from
making  a  worse  spectacle  of  itself,  but  it  remains  a  monster.
They  put  a  little  computer  cosmetic  on  it.    That's  all.    Mc-
Namara  may  have  made  it  a  little   less  costly  to  keep   than
would  have  otherwise  been  true—though  the  present  $80-bil-
lions  plus  is  hardly  a  model  of  economy.
His  One  Chance  to  Purge  Himself
Liberal  establishment  types—academic  and  journalistic—are
quite   sentimental   about   McNamara.     Privately,  he   is   sup-
posed   to  have  been  a  dove.    There  have  even  been   rumors
around  for  a  year or  so that  he  might  resign  in  protest  against
the  war.    I  am  quite  willing   to  believe  that   McNamara   is
a  civilized  and  sensitive man.   But  if  so  he  owed  it  to  himself
and   to  the  country  to  do  something  better  than   remain   in
the  Johnson   official   family,   to  let  himself  be  quietly  kicked
downstairs  from  Secretary  of  Defense  to  head  of  the  World
Bank.    It  is  said  that  he  declared  many  months  ago  that  he
would  never  "go  out  in  a  huff".    All  this  means  that  he  puts
gentlemanly   decorum  ahead   of   human   decency—for   much
of  the  blood  being  shed  in  Vietnam  is  on  his  hands,  what-
ever  the  qualms  he  may  have  expressed   in  private.    It  has
been  McNamara's  war  as  much  as  Johnson's  war  and   Ken-
nedy's  war.    He  could  have  purged  himself  in  public.     He
deserves  no  credit  for  what  he  may  whisper  in  private.
I  do  not  doubt  McNamara's  great  ability.    His   statement
to  the  Stennis  committee  last  August  on  why  the   bombing
of   North   Vietnam    was   fruitless    was   masterly.     Within
the   limits  of   the   official   line,  he  said  things  which   under-
mined  the  whole  mythology  of  the  war.    It  is  a  pity  it  was
not  delivered  before  a  different   committee,  where  its  impli-
LBPS  Big  Red  Plot
"Shortly  after  the  peace  march on  the  Pentagon  last
month,  President  Johnson  met  with  Republican  leaders
of  the  House  and read  to  them  a  secret  report  asserting
the  march was  organized  by  international  communism.
This   was   disclosed   yesterday   by   House  Republican
leader   Gerald   Ford  in  a   House   speech.   Ford   urged
the  President  to  make  'a  full  report  to  the  American
people  .  .  .'   The  White   House   news   office   in  Texas
had  no  comment  on  Ford's  remarks  .  .  .  Cliff  Sessions,
director  of  public  information  for  the  Justice  Depart-
ment,  was  asked  what  evidence the  Administration  had
to  show  the  march was  planned in  Hanoi.   'The  answer
to  that  is  none,'  he  said  .  .  .
"Ford   asked   the   President   at   the   unusual   White
House  session  for  Republicans, 'Why  are  you  sitting  on
this?'  He  immediately urged  Mr. Johnson  to  make  the
information   public.   Later  Ford  requested   a  copy  of'
the  report  for  himself.   On  Oct.  26,  five  days  after  the
march,  Ford  received   a  memo  from  Walt  W.  Rostow,
the   President's   national   security   assistant,   who  had
attended  the  President's  meeting.   The  memo  was  based
entirely  on  monitored  broadcasts  from  Hanoi,  voicing
support  for  peace  demonstrations  in  the   U.S."
—Andrew  J.  Glass  in  the  Washington  Post,  Nov.  S3
(with  a  hat's   off  from  us  for   his   story).
cations  could  have  been   fully   developed.     -It  is  hard   to  see
how  McNamara  could  support  the  war  and  say the  things  he
did  in  that  statement,  but  it  is  possible that  he  tJoes  still  cling
to  the  Kennedy   era  notion   that   a  combination   of   military
force   and   "pacification"   could   do   the   job.     Unfortunately
Green  Berets  and  feeble  little  attempts  at  social  reform  proved
their  bankruptcy  under  Kennedy.    The  truth  is  that  we  have
no  right  to  be  in  Vietnam  at  all,  and  that  our  presence  has
only  made  its  tangled  'problems  more  insoluble.     The   slow
destruction  of  the  country  under  Johnson  is  the  logical  result
of  the  boy  scout  buttinskyism  which  began  -under   McNamara
and  Kennedy.
Worse  certainly  lies  ahead.    I  believe  McNamara's   going
signals  escalation.    He  could  help  mobilize  die  country  against
it  by  speaking   out.    He  is  silent   instead.
Tickets  for  Hie  Joint  Birthday  Party  at  Town  Hall  Next  Jan.   19   (Stone's  60rh,  the  Weekly's  15th)   Are  Going  Fast.    Better  Get  Your
Reservations  In   Early.    Only  $1.     Please  Send  Addressed   Return  Envelope  With  Your  Order.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
For  the  enclosed   $6.95
(To)   Name  ..................
Street   ............................
City  ................................
Indicate  if    gift
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
send  I.  F.  Stone's new book:
...  Zip................  State....................
announcement  wished  D
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
Street   ............................
City  .................................
...  Zip................  State....................
12/4/67
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stomped,  Addressed  Envelope*
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED