I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967mar20.pdf

============================================================

The  No.  1  Issue  in  the Powell  Case, P.  2
Let's  Just  Hope  They  Don't  Improve  Too  Much
"Policy-makers  .  .  .  fear  headlines  about  'highest  losses      hard  to  explain  to  people,'  concedes  a  high  officer,  'that  the
of  the  war'  will  fuel  the  arguments of  U.S.  doves.  .  .  .  'It's     higher  casualties  mean  we're  doing  a  better  job'."
—The  Wall Street Journal's weekly  Washington  Wire, March  10.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  11MARCH  20,  1967
">'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
It  Wasn't  For  Lack  of  Spies  That  The  Czars  Fell
Our  public   controversy   over  the  CIA   coincides  with   the
50th  anniversary of  the  Czar's  overthrow.    There  couldn't  be
a  better  time  to  remember  that  it  wasn't  for  lack  of  spies  that
the  Russian  monarchy  fell.    No  government—except  Stalin's
—had  a  more  widespread  network  of  secret  intelligence  opera-
tives  at  home  and  abroad   than  the   Romanoffs.     The   Tsars
felt,   as  do  American   apologists   for   our  own  network,   that
they  were  up  against  a  sinister,  Godless  and  crafty  foe,  against
whom  any  tactics  were  justified  to  save  Holy  Russia.    Those
who  exposed   police  practices  were  regarded   as  disloyal.
Savening  Wolves?
In  my  library  is  a  book  published   in  1930   in  London   on
The  Ochrana,  The  Russian Secret Police by its  last chief,  A.  T.
Vassilyev,  who  died   in   exile.   When  I  read   the   apologetics
being  offered   for  the  CIA,  I  pulled   Vassilyev's  memoirs  off
my  shelf.    I  thought  the  vigorous  going-over  that  press,  radio
and  TV  have  given   the  CIA  a  wonderful  manifestation  of
health   in  our  own  body  politic.    I  was  appalled  to  see  even
so  good  a  liberal  as John  Kenneth  Galbraith  turn  out  a  subtle
defense  of  "the   Agency"  and  speak  of  "the   ravening  wolves
which   in  Washington   pounce   on   any  individual  or   agency
which  has  problems"    (Washington    Post,  March  12).    Vas-
silyev,     like     Katzenbach     whitewashing     the     CIA,     de-
fends  the  Ochrands  activities  as  "always  strictly  legal."    Vas-
silyev  attributes  its  bad  reputation  to  its  adversaries.     "It   is
to  be  ascribed  to  the  propaganda   of  these   scoundrels,"   Vas-
silyev  wrote,   "that  the   Secret  Political  Police  acquired   such
an  evil  reputation,  for  the  revolutionaries  naturally  did  their
utmost  to  bring  discredit  upon  their  bitterest  enemy."    This
is  the  line  today  of  the  CIA,  the  FBI  and  the  ten  other  as-
sorted  if  less  glamorized   spy  organizations—a  dozen,  no  less
—represented  on  the  U.S.  Intelligence  Board.    We  have  but
scratched  the  surface of  their pervasive and  corrupting  influence
in  eroding  the  foundations of  American  freedom.   These  pro-
fessional  hunters  of  subversion  are  our  No.   1  subversives.
Just  as  Central  Intelligence   was  established  under  Truman
in   1947   (when   the  cold  war  began)   to  keep  the   President
posted,  so  the  Ochrana  was  the  Czar's  eyes  and  ears.    Twice
a  month  the  Ochrana  provided   the  Czar  with  a  publication
of  which  only  a  single  copy  was  ever  printed—for  his  august
eyes  alone.    "His  Majesty  was  always very  desirous,"  Vassilyev
recalled,   "of  being  minutely  posted   on  all  the  details  of  the
revolutionary   movement  and  of  the  fight  being  waged  against
it.    He  attached  great  value  to  complete  accounts  of  the  dis-
LBJ's  Freudian  Slip:  Invasion of  the  North
At  his   press  conference  March   10,  President  John-
son  for  the  first  time  spoke  of  our  action  against  the
North  as  an  invasion.    "We would  be  glad  to  stop  our
invasion    of    the    North,"   he   said,    "if   they    would
stop   their  invasion  of   South   Vietnam."    Was  this  a
Freudian  slip,  or  deliberate?    If  what  we  are  doing  is
already  decribed  as  an  invasion, then  sending  in ground
troops  could  be  described—in  the  familiar  Johnson  era
style—as  no escalation! The  Guam  conference  also  sug-
gests that  an invasion  may  be  in  the  works.   One point-
er   is   the   belated   invitation   to   Marshal    Ky.     Our
military   do  not  trust  their  puppets:  from   a  security
standpoint,  they  leak  like  a  sieve.    They  are  fine  for
propaganda  powwows,  as  at  Honolulu  and  Manila,  but
not  for  serious  business.    Another  pointer  is  that  (ac-
cording  to  the  Wash.  Post  March  13)  Westmoreland is
to  be  made  area  commander, with  direct  control  of  air
and  naval  operations  against  the  North.    Coordination
would  be  necessary  for  an invasion.
The  risks  are rising.   The  attack  on  the  Thai  Nguyen
steel  works was  an  attack on  the  only  major industrial
plant  in  the  North, a  25-square mile  showpiece financed
by   the   Soviet  Union.    This  was   an  economic,   not  a
military,  target—and  another  humiliation  for  Moscow.
The  Russians can,  if  they  choose,  escalate  on  their own.
They  have  never  given  the  North  SA-3s.    Malcolm  W.
Browne  told  the  recent  Nation  conference  in  Los  An-
geles   (see   L.A.  Times   March  5)   that   "U.S.   experts
believe  this  would  make  continued American raids  over
the  North  so  costly  as  to  be  impractical."    They could
also   supply   surface-to-surface  missiles,   Browne  said,
"with  which  the  North  could  knock  out  a  selection  of
South  Vietnamese  targets   and  perhaps  even  make  it
hot  for  the  7th   fleet."   An  invasion  would  sharply  in-
crease  the  possibility  of  a  confrontation  with  Moscow,
Peking  or  both.    The  time  to  protest   is   now.    Once
invasion  starts,  it  will  be  too  late.
covery  of  secret  printing  presses,  of  plots,  forbidden  libraries."
The   Czar  was  even  supplied  with   copies   of  private  letters
in  which  Tolstoy   "had  given  expression  to  his anti-militarist
views."    For  just  as  the  U.S.  has  "mail-covers"   (as  Senator
Long  of  Missouri discovered)  so the  Ochrana  had  an  elaborate
system  for  reading  private  correspondence,  including  invisible
ink  and  codes.    This  practice,  Vassilyev  assured  his  readers,
"was  never  directed  against  orderly  subjects  of  the  Czar  but
only  "seditious  elements."    The  "real  honest  Russians"  (like
the   real   honest   Americans?)    "were   really   proud   of   their
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  20,1967
The  Legal  Morass  Into  Which  the  House  Fell  in  Its   Haste  to  Punish
The  No.  1 Issue  in  the  Exclusion  of  Adam  Clayton  Powell
If  Adam  Clayton  Powell  were a white  member  of  the  House
of  Representatives,  we  would  all  agree  without   difficulty  that
he  deserved  some  form  of  punishment  for  his  conduct.    But
Congressman   Gonyers  of  Detroit,  the  one  Negro  on  the  com-
mittee  which  investigated  Powell,   sought  very  wisely  to  dis-
•  tinguish  two   different   powers   of   the   House.     One   was   its
power  to  punish  a member  for  misconduct,  the  other  its  power
to  exclude  a  duly  elected  Representative.
Sentence   Without  Trial
The   committee   investigating   Powell    recommended   fines
and  censure  and  loss  of  seniority  as  a  way  of  appeasing   the
anti-Powell  sentiment  in  the  House  and  saving  his  seat.    But
fines  are  a  form   of  punishment  for  courts  to  impose   after
trial,  and  censure  seemed   to  us   (as  to  Conyers)    offensively
disproportionate.     There  have  been  only  three  cases  of  cen-
sure   in   the   history   of   the   House   and   these   all   involved
bribery.    The   offenses  of  which  Powell  is  accused  are  neither
so  major   or  so  clear   (see   the   Comptroller   General's   letter,
pps.  H934-6,  Con.  Rec.  March  1)   as  to  warrant  so  humili-
ating  a  punishment.    The  House  is  still  unwilling   to  deal
effectively  with  the  far  more  serious  abuse  involved  in  con-
flicts  of  interest.
It  seems  to  us  unfair  to  punish  Powell  by  censure,  fine  or
otherwise  without  a  trial.    The  charges  against  him  fell  into
two  categories.     One  was  the   misuse  of   public  funds;   the
other,   his   disobedience   of   New   York   court   orders.     The
former   involved  a  violation  of  the  law,  to  be  tried  like  any
other  crime  in  a  court  of  law;  the  House  could  not  properly
act  as  judge  and  jury,  without   the  semblance  of  trial.    The
latter  was  even  more  a  question  for  adjudication  in  the  courts,
since  it  involved  alleged   contempts.    The  tangle  in  the  New
York   Courts  has  yet  to   be  firially  unravelled,   and   Powell
seems  to  be  winning.on  certain  crucial  aspects.
•     The   House  decision   to   exclude   Powell   sets  a  dangerous
'precedent,  as  Congressman  Celler  warned.     It  is  unfortunate
that  the  intent  of  the  Framers,  the  language  of  the  Constitu-
tion  and  the  existing precedents  are  fuzzy.    The  only  qualifica-
tions  for   admission  to  membership  are  age,   citizenship  and
residency,   according   to   one   provision   of   the   Constitution.
But  another  says  "Each  House  shall  be  the  judge  of  the  elec-
tions,  returns  and  qualifications  of  its  own  Members."     How
to  reconcile  them  is  a  puzzle.
Gruening:  No  Draftees   for  Vietnam
"President   Johnson's   request   of   March  6,  1967,  that
the  Selective  Service  Law,  due  to  expire  on  June  30,  be
extended  for  four  years,  should  give  the  Congress   an
opportunity  to  examine  the  moral  and  legal  bases  for
sending  draftees   to  fight,  against  their   will,  in  Viet-
nam—in   an   undeclared   and   illegal   war   10,000   miles
from  our  shores.    As  I  did  in  the  last   Congress   it   is
my  intention to  introduce  an  amendment  providing  that
no  draftee  can  be  sent   to  Southeast   Asia  without  his
consent.  .  .  .  The  President  has  not  asked  Congress  for
a  declaration  of  war  yet   he  seeks  authority   to  draft
American   boys   and  send   them   to   Southeast   Asia   to
fight  in  bloody,  cruel  military  battles   unsanctioned  by
law.    Is  it  any  wonder   that   many  thousands  of   Amer-
ican  boys  are  morally  tormented  about  fighting  in  Viet-
nam?  The  Johnson  Administration is  telling  the  Amer-
ican  people  repeatedly  that  the  dangers  from  the  Soviet
Union  are  less  and less.  .  .  .  Yet  the  same  Administra-
tion  tells  the  American  people  the  dangers  of   Soviet
aggression   in  Europe  are  so  great  and  continuing  that
it  cannot  risk  reducing  its   troop  commitments  in  flu-
rope—over  250,000  men—but  must  instead  draft  Amer-
ican  boys   to  serve   against  their   will   in  Vietnam.    If
men   are  needed   to   replace   them,  let   the   draftees   be
sent  to  Europe. ...  In  1965  there  were  96,000 desertions
from  the  South  Vietnamese  Army.   In  1966  that  figure
had  climbed  to  110,000  men.    No  one  knows  how  high
it  will  go  in  1967.  .  .  .  Are  we  drafting  American  boys
to  replace  the  South  Vietnamese  draft  dodgers?     That
is  directly  contrary  to  President  Johnson's  own  state-
ment  of  Sept.  28,  1964,  in  which   he  said,  'We  are  not
going  north  and  we  are  not  going  south;  we  are   going
to   try  to  get   them   to  save  their   own  freedom   with
their  own  men'."
—Gruenmg  (D. Ala)  in  the Senate  March  10
But  it  is certainly  true,  as  Mr.  Celler  argued,  that  it  is  "in-
compatible  with   democratic   elections"   to  add  qualifications
beyond   those   enumerated.      The   precedents   for    excluding
Powell  indicate  the  danger.    They  were  set  in. periods-of  popu-
lar  passion  against  Mormons,  Confederates  and  anti-war  radi-
cals.    As  Congressman  Ryan  of  New  York  said,  "If  today  the
House  is  able  to  exclude  a  member  because  it  disapproves  of
his  conduct,  tomorrow  the  House  may  feel  free  to  do  so  be-
cause  it  disapproves   of  his  opinions,  philosophy  or  political
action."   This  has  become  the  No.  1  issue  in  the  Powell  case.
Another  Item  for  Collectors  of  Plain and Fancy  Lying  in  the  Vietnam  War
"Robert  J.  McCloskey,  the  State  Department   spokesman,
was   asked   by  newsmen   whether   the   attack   on   the   Thai
Nguyen   [steel  plant  in  North  Vietnam]  represented   escala-
tion  or  a  change  in  bombing  policy.    'No,  it  does  not,'  he
replied.    'It's  a  plant  that  is  involved  in  fabricating  steel
that  is  used  for  barges.    That  is  used  to  increase   infiltra-
tion.    It's  steel  that  is  used  in  bridges,  all  of  which   falls
into  the  category   of  legitimate  military  targets'."
—New  York  Times,  March  11 from,   Washington
"Completion  of  the  Thai  Nguyen  plant  had  been  scheduled
for  late   this  year.    As   of   June  1966,  intelligence  sources
said,   the  plant  was   capable   of   producing  200,000  tons   of
cast  iron  a  year.    The  steel  furnaces,  which  have  not  been
completed  [emphasis  added]  had  been  expected  to  turn  out
250,000  tons  of  steel   annually."
—New  York  Times,  March  11  from  Saigon
"Dear  Mr.  Stone:  I  am  a  metallurgist  by  profession.   The
cast  iron  which  is  being   produced  at   this   (or  any  other)
plant  is  not  usable   in  bridges,   barges  or  oil  drums.    It  is
a  casting,   not  a  rolled  product.    If   you  roll   it,  it   cracks.
You  can't   make  girders   or  beams,   plate   or  sheet,  out   of
cast  iron.    The  huge  steel-making  furnaces   (necessary  for
melting  steel)  are  evidently  still  inoperable,  since  they  are
not  completed  yet.    You  can't  use  half  a  furnace  to  make
stee1
-"                                                              —A   Reader
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  20, 1967
Why   the  Constituent   Assembly  Is  As  Undemocratic  A  Farce  as  The  Military
What  "Pacification"  Really  Means  to  Vietnam's  Landless  Peasantry
In  Vietnam,  as  in  Washington,   semantic trickery  is  the  or-
der  of  the  day.   "Pacification"  means  subjugation,  and  "Revo-
lutionary  Development  Cadres"—the  agents  of  pacification—
are  really  counter-revolutionary police  teams  to  subjugate  the
peasant.    "Absentee  landlords are still  riding in  with pacifying
troops,"   writes   Fred   Emery,   Saigon   correspondent   of   the
London   Times   (March   10),  "not   merely  to  grab  back  their
lands  but  to  extort  back  rents  for  the  time  they  fled  the  Viet-
cong."    Though  a  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  law  of  1955  limits  rents
to  25%  of  the  crop,  Emery  notes  that  "landlords  still  extort
rents  as  high  as 60%  of  the  product  of  a  rice  field"  and  adds
"it   is  not  hard  to  see  why  peasants  keep  their   arms."
A  Subject  They'd  Rather  Avoid
Emery   says   "It   may  seriously  be  questioned   whether   any
progress  of  lasting  nature  can  be  expected,   in  spite  of  mili-
tary  successes,  so  long  as  pacification  continues  without  a  real
revolution  in  the  Government's  attitude  towards  land  reform."
He  notes  that  "it  is possible  to  listen  to  a  senior  OCO   [Office
of  Civilian  Operations,  which  handles  the  civilian  end  of  the
U.S.   effort   in   South   Vietnam]    official   talk   for   90   minutes
without   once  mentioning  land—just   as  the   subject  has   not
found  favor  in  the  new  Constituent  Assembly."     Emery  fails
to  recognize  that  the  Constituent  Assembly   is  dominated  by
landlords,   and   that  the   American   government   has  no   real
enthusiasm  for  land  reform,  especially  since  it  would  undercut
the  only  class  which  supports  the  U.S.  in  the   countryside.
The  spectacle  of  landlords  returning  with  the  "pacification"
teams  to  take  back  the  land  and  collect  back  rents  can  hardly
endear  us  to  the  peasants.    "Senior   American  officials   recog-
nize  the   problem   only   too  well,"  Emery  writes,   "and   say,
rather  nervously,  they are  hoping  the  Government  will  shortly
come  up  with  a  decree  abolishing  back  rents."    The   "govern-
ment"  is  the  military  junta.    The  Generals  are  either  of,  or
linked  to,  the  landlord  class.    To  expect  them  to  abolish  back
rents  is  as  foolish  as  to  expect  them  to  decree  land   reform.
Richard  Critchfield  in  the  Washington  Sunday  Star   (March
5)  recalls that a year  ago in  Honolulu  Johnson  pledged   "social
revolution,   including  land   reform",   [Critchfield  writes  that
the  last  three  words  were  not  in  the  original  State  Department
draft  for  the  Honolulu   declaration  but  were  added   on   "the
insistence  of  the  American  counter-insurgency  expert,   Major
General  Edward  G.  Lansdale,  Jr."]
Land  reform  was  supposed  to  be the  cornerstone  of  the  new
"revolutionary   development  program,"   but  when   Dr.   Phan
The  Kind  of  Regime  Washington  Likes
"Rio  de  Janeiro—This  is  the  country  that  less  than
three  years  ago  threatened  to  become  not  merely  an-
other  Cuba  but  perhaps something close  to  another Red
China. ... To be sure  the military  regime .  . . has been
no  model  of  democratic  permissiveness.   Brazilian  jour-
nalists  deemed  too  unfriendly  to  the  government  may
find themselves  behind bars.  .  .  .  More  important  than
dictatorial  benevolence  are  the  clear  signs  of  improv-
ing  health  being  shown  by  the  economy.  .  .  .  Price  in-
creases  on  everything from  chicken  feed  to  newspapers
still  occur  regularly.   The  government printing  presses
continue  to  spin  out  cruzeiros  .  .  .  but  U.S.  firms  are
leading  the  investment  parade.  .  .  .  Under  a  new  in-
vestment   guarantee  agreement  with   the   U.S.,   Brazil
since   1965   [when   the   military   took  over—IPS]   has
approved  more than  $120 million  worth of  new  projects
by   U.S.  firms  .  .  .  beside  the  rules  limiting  pay  in-
creases  to  percentages  well  below  the  rate  at  which  the
cost  of  living  is  rising,  there  is  an almost  total  prohibi-
tion  against   strikes."
—Wall  Street  Journal, March  9
Quang   Dan   last   December   proposed    that   the    Constitution
guarantee  every  Vietnamese  peasant  the  right  to  own  the  land
he  tilled,  the  measure  got  only  3  out  of   117  votes.    "Many
deputies,"   Critchfield  writes,"  said  it  sounded   'too  much  like
communism.'    He  says  later  Dr.  Dan  "succeeded   in  getting  a
much  milder  proviso  adopted  pledging  government   help  to
the  landless."     But  this   (we   discovered  recently)    says  only
(Art.  XX)   "The  State  advocates  raising  the  standard  of  living
of  rural  citizens,  and  especially  helping  farmers  to  have  farm-
land."    Just  how  is  left  unclear.    Article  XVIII   guarantees
the   right   of   private   property   and   says   "expropriation   or
requisition   for   the   common   good   must  be   accompanied   by
speedy  and  just  compensation  at  price  levels  existing  at  the
time  of  expropriation   or  requisition."    This  makes  it  impos-
sible  to  pay  for  land  reform  in  bonds  nor  to  buy  land  at  its
original  cost  or  tax  valuation  or  even  to  take  into  account  that
it  may  have  been   acquired   unlawfully.     Such   constitutional
provisions  are  an  obstacle  to  peaceful   land   reform   in  Latin
America.
In  the  Mekong  Delta,  Critchfield  writes,  50  percent  of  the
peasantry  is  entirely  landless  and  80  percent   rents  all  but  a
small  part  of  their   ricelands.  Thus  for   the  majority  of   the
people   the  .landlord-dominated   Constituent   Assembly   is  as
unrepresentative  a  farce  as  the  military  junta.
In  Latin  America,  Too,  Talk  of  Land  Reform  Doesn't  Match  the   Realities
"Men  whose  fathers   for   generations  have  worked  land
owned  by  others  now  work  it  as  their  own."
—LBJ's  message  to Congress  on Latin America  March  13
"The  implementation  of  legislation affecting  the  agrarian
structure  is  still  slow;  the  distribution  of   land   and  other
productive  resources  among  the   rural   population   remains
very   unequal,   and  potentially   productive  land,  water  and
human   resources  are   seriously   underutilized   in   the   rural
areas.  .  .  .  Among  the  various  types  of  land  reform,  slow-
est  progress  in  1966 was  land  redistribution.     Tn  Colombia,
the  land reform  agency  acquired  or  expropriatpd with  com-
pensation   only   21,000  hectares  .  .  .  and  established  little
more  than  2,000  families. ...  In  Chile  only  1800  families
received  family-size  parcels. ...  In  the  Dominican Repub-
lic,  although  several  hundred  thousand  hectares  of  fertile
land   are  in  the  possession  of   the  Agrarian  Institute,  the
rate  of  systematic  settlement is  currently  only  1,000 fam-
ilies  a  year,  or  less  than  0.5  percent  of  the  number  of  fam-
ilies  working  on  subsistence  tracts  of  one  hectare  or  less.
—Sixth    Annual   Report,    1966,   Social   Progress    Trust
Fund,  Inter-American  Development  Bank,  released  Mar.  16.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  20, 1967
From  Cuba  to  Southeast  Asia,  the  CIA  Has  Been  Wrong  Consistently
(Continued  from   Page  One)
Police."     Critics,   whether   Russian   or   American,  are   tin.
The   Ochrana   carried   on   not   only  intelligence  but   cloak-
and-dagger   activities.    It  had   so  thoroughly  penetrated   sub-
versive  and   terrorist  organizations  that   in   some  cases,  as  in
that  of  the  double  agent  Azef  and  the  murder   of  the  Prime
Minister  Stolypin,  no  one  knows  to  this  day  whether   it  was
the   secret  police  using   the   terrorists  or  the   terrorists   using
the  secret   police.    Those  who  naively  marvel   at  the  CIA's
use  of  liberal  and  left  organizations  will  find  that  the  Czar's
operatives   were  way  ahead   of   it.     In   Nineteenth   Century
Europe   the   ranks  of   the   Anarchists  were  so  full  of   Czarist
agents   that   Anarchism  was   regarded   as   a  kind   of   Czarist
Comintern   to  subvert  Western  Europe.    Kerensky  in  his  own
memoirs,   "Russia   and   History's  Turning   Point,"   complains
that  the  secret  police  in  1917  were  "almost  openly  supporting
the  propaganda   of  Bolshevik  defeatist   organizations."    Vas-
silyev  in   turn   (like   our  own  j.  Edgar   Hoover   sneering  at
"pseudo-liberals")   scornfully   attacks  the   Russian  "Liberals"
(his  quotation  marks)   for   an   "ihtellectualism"  which   "was
absolutely  opposed  to  the  national spirit."    For  him,  Kerensky
was  only  a  more  subtle  menace  than  Lenin.
Only  Good at  Murder
Vassilyev   could    boast   that   his   network    had    informers
everywhere,  including members  of  the  Russian  Duma  or  Par-
liament.    It  could  be  said  of  the  Ochrana,  as  it  has  been  said
of  the  CIA,  that  it  knew  everything  and  understood   nothing.
The   cops   never   see  the   underlying  grievances.     For   them,
their      nigras   are   always   happy   and   contented   until   secret
agitators  upset   them.     It   is  said   in  our   present  controversy
that  CIA  should  be  limited  to  intelligence  and  its  cloak-and-
dagger  operations  curtailed  or  ended.   But  its  clearest  successes
have  been  its  assassinations.  There  hasn't  been  a  critical  situa-
tion,  from  Cuba  to  Vietnam,  in  which  the  President  couldn't
get   a  clearer  view  of   the   real  situation  by  carefully   reading
the  newspapers   (inadequate   as  they  often  are)   than  by  read-
ing  his  CIA  reports.    The  CIA  has  been  consistently wrong.
Clarity  of  insight  is  not  to  be  expected  from  the  weird  col-
Just  Relaxing
"That  reported Johnson-Kennedy rift  got  short  shrift
from   the   Kennedy   brothers  at   the   reception  for   the
Democratic  National Committee in  the  Washington  Hil-
ton  last  night.  'It's  a  myth,'  said  Sen.  Ted  Kennedy of
Massachusetts.     'It's  a  mistake,'  said   Senator  Robert
Wennedy   of   New   York,   adding,   'I   support  President
Johnson  and  Vice  President  Humphrey.'    The  reception
drew  hundreds  of  Democratic  Party   loyalists,  a  num-
ber  of   Senators  and  Congressmen,  and,  of  course,   the
National    Committeemen    and    Committeewomen    who
were  'just  relaxing' after  two  days  of  speeches  and  seri-
ous  politicking.   But  whenever  the  crowd  was  thickest,
you  were  sure  to  find  one  or  another  of  the  Kennedy
Senators."
—Society  page  of  Washington  Post  March  11
lection  of  renegades,   scholar-mercenaries,  Ivy  League   adven-
turers,  superannuated  military  men,  glorified  hotel  dicks  and
just  plain  corkscrew  types  that  bulk  so  large  in  all  our  intel-
ligence  services.
If  an  omnipresent  and  well-heeled  secret  police  makes  for
safety,  the  Czars  should  still  be  on  their  throne.    If  what  the
secret  police  call  "naivete",  and  others  call  the  democratic  or
libertarian  tradition,  is  the  real  danger,  then  the   Revolution
when  it  came  should  have  burst  out  not  in  Moscow   but  in
London,  where  the  British  were  "naive"  enough  to  allow  the
arch   revolutionaries   of  our   time   to  work,   study,  write   and
agitate  unmolested.    By  all  the  rules of  CIA  and  FBI,  Britain
could  not  have  made  a  greater  mistake than  to  give  Marx  and
Engels  asylum.    The  lesson  that  revolutions  are  not  made  by
conspiracies,  nor   stopped   by    assassins; that  you  cannot  sup-
press  revolutionary  agitation  without  crippling  the  debate  so
necessary  to  healthy  change,  is  one  that  every  generation  has
to  learn  afresh.    We   are  back  again  to  fundamentals.    The
CIA,  the  FBI  and  the  other  networks  would  exchange  those
traditions  of  which   the   First  Amendment  is  the   symbol  for
the   practices  that   have   sickened   the   younger   generation   in
Soviet  society  and  alienated  it,  as we  are  in  danger  of  alienating
the  best  of  our  own.
We'll  Be  Clad to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped   Addressed   Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or   enter)
Qf roof
C'Hv
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name   ........................
Street      ..................................
City
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
/in................  State......
For  $5.35  extra  send   I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement   wished   D
3/20/67
Fifties
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.   I
1
.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   in   August,   the  last  week   in.  December   and   the
first  week   in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W.,    Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the   U.S.;     $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;  20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED