I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967nov27.pdf

============================================================

Money  Crisis May  Put  Wall  Street  On  The  Picket  Line for  Peace,  P.  2
Let's  Get  An  FBI  Rundown  Right  Away  on  This  Storm Trooper
"(White  House  Press  Secretary)  Christian said  his   office
had  been  'flooded  with  telegrams' yesterday from  TV  view-
ers  who  also  were  enthusiastic  about  the  President's   press
conference   performance.     Only   one   dissenting   telegram
came  in,  he  said,  from  a   man  who  complained  the  presi-
dential  broadcast  was  'full  of  platitudes'."
—From   the   Women's   Page  of   the  Washington  Sunday
Star  Nov.  18  all  aglow  over  "the  new  Johnson".
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XV,  NO.  28NOVEMBER  27,   1967
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Coming  Campaign  As  America's  Tragedy
With   the   Romney  announcement,   the   1968    Presidential
campaign  is  now  underway.    Though  political  prediction   is
always  hazardous,  that  campaign  from  all  present   indications
promises  to  be  enormously  disappointing  for  those  who  hope
to  see  peace  abroad  and  effective  action  on  the  Negro  prob-
lem  at  home.    The  campaign  is  almost  certain  to  deepen   the
despair  which  is  driving   more  and   more  of  our   best  youth
and  Negro  leadership   to  fantasy  and   hysteria,  wild  talk  of
guerrilla  war  and  the  partition  of  our  country into  two  nations,
one  white  one  black.   Never  was  there  greater  need  to  make
normal  politics  effective,  to  restore  faith  in  the  possibility  of
peaceful  reform.    Never   has  this  seemed   less  likely.
Cancelling   Himself  Out
At  a  breakfast  meeting  with  600  Republican  leaders  in  De-
troit  just  before  his  candidacy  was  announced,  Governor  Rom-
ney   was   capable   of   summing   up   the   internal   situation   as
starkly  and  passionately  as  it  deserves  to  be.    "I  say  to  you
in  all  solemnness  and  reality,"  he  told  those  Republicans,  "that
most  Negroes  are  waiting  to  see  if  we  mean  what  we  say  in
America,  or  whether  they've  got  to  have  a  national  war  of  lib-
eration  in  America."    But  that  same  day  in  pre-taping  his
Face  the  Nation   appearance  of  Sunday,  Nov.   19,  he   declined
to  criticize  the  Republican  record  on  the  poverty  program  and
the  alliance  with  conservative  Democrats  which  has  just  cut  it
back  so sharply  in  the  House.   He  even  curried  favor  with  the
conservatives  by  implying  that  the  job  could  be  done  for   less
money.    Though  he  is  the  hope  of  many  moderate   Republi-
cans,  he  was unwilling  to  admit  that  he  did  not  support  Gold-
water  in   1964   and  that  he  would  not  support   a  Reagan  in
1968.     Of  course  all  this  is  explainable  in  terms  of  conven-
tional  politics.    But  conventional   politics  is  not  going  to  be
good   enough.
A  similar  disappointment  is  shaping  up  on  the   Democratic
side.     Two   headlines   in   the   papers   of   Sunday,   Nov.    19
summed  up  the  situation.    One  in  the  Washington   Star  said,
"McCarthy  Sees  Primaries  As  Viet  Policy  Testing  Ground."
But  it  is  very  difficult  to  determine  where  McCarthy,  the  only
Democrat   who  is  talking  of  risking  such  a  test,  really  stands
on  the  issue  of  war  and  peace.     The  other  headline   in  the
Baltimore  Sun  said,  "Kennedy   Waits   to  Join  Winner,  Will
Not  Side  Now  With  Johnson  or   McCarthy."
Bobby  Kennedy  was  shocked  when  many  if  not  most  of  the
girls  and  nuns  he  was addressing  at Marymount  College  raised
From  "Phase-Out"  to  "Phase-Down"  to
Climb-Down
"Gen.    Westmorland   reportedly  told   Congress   this
week  that  it  might  be  possible   to  start   phasing  out
American  forces  within  two  years   [i.e.  after  the  1968
elections*].      Actually,    he    used   the    term    'phasing
down'  rather than  'phasing  out*.    He  hopes  for  a  level-
ling   off  of   the  U.S.   total  military  commitment  after
stockpiles  have been built up, followed  by  a phase-down.
In  its  initial  stages,  this  phase-down  probably  will  be
token,  he indicated."
—Gen.  Westmoreland's  exclusive  interview   with  Jim
G.  Lucas  in  Scripps-Howard   papers  Nov.  18.
"This   recalls   the   pre-election   phase-down   (though
they  did  not  use  the  word)  forecast  by  Secretary  Mc-
Namara   and  Gen.  Taylor  .at  the  White  House  Oct.  2,
1963,  for  President  Kennedy, predicting  that the  "major
part"  of  the  U.S.  effort  in  Vietnam  would  be  over  by
1965  and  that  troop  withdrawals   could  begin  by   "the
end  of  this  year,"  i.e.,   1963.
their  hands  when  he  asked  how  many  favored  an  increase  in
the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam.     The  New   York   Times  re-
port  (Nov.   19)  said  that  "with  an  edge of  anger  in  his  voice"
he  asked  them  to  realize  what  this  was  doing   "to  a  lot  of
innocent  people.    Hundreds  and  thousands  of  people  in  Viet-
nam  are  being  killed  on  your  responsibility.    You've  go  to
think  of  the  implications to  your  own  conscience."
But  what  of  the  implications  for   his  own  more  sensitive
conscience  and  better  informed  mind?    How  can  he  say  in
advance  that  if  Johnson,  who  began  that  bombing  and  carries
it  on,  is  renominated, he  Kennedy  will  support  him ?   Where
is  his  conscience  when  he  is  prepared   to  support  either   the
architect  of  the  war  or  McCarthy,  depending  on  whoever  gets
the  nomination ?    If  he  thinks,  as he  said  at  Marymount,  that
it  would  be  "healthful"   for  the  Democratic  party  and  for  the
country  if  McCarthy  gave  anti-war  sentiment  a  chance  to  ex-
press  itself  in  the  Democratic  primaries,  why  doesn't  he  him-
self  run?
If  Kennedy  feels  so  deeply  about  Vietnam  and  its  adverse
effect   upon   the  war  on  poverty,  how  can  he   speak   in   such
tepid  terms  of  a  primary  contest  on  the  issue?    He   said  a
McCarthy  candidacy  "would   add   a  great  deal  of   excitement
and  interest"   to  the  primaries.    These  are  the  terms  one  ap-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  27, 1967
The  World  Money  Crisis   May  Put   Wall  Street   on  The  Picket  Line  for   Peace
Devaluation  of  the  Pound  Is  Also  Devaluation  of  Lyndon  Johnson
The   devaluation   of   the   British  pound   further   devalues
Johnson's  hopes  of  reelection.   As  recently as  last  April  7  the
Federal  Reserve  Board  had  dropped   its  rediscount  rate  from
41/2%
 to
  4%  as a  business stimulant. Now  it has  been  pushed
back  up  again  to  prevent  too  sharp an  outflow  of  funds,  -which
may  be  set  off  by  Britain's  increase of  its  own  rediscount  rate
to  8%   and  by  a  loss  of  confidence  in  the  dollar.    Some  for-
eign  investors,  looking  at  our  own  enormous  unfavorable  bal-
ance  of  payments  and  the  less  obvious  but  equally  real   "de-
valuation"   of   the   dollar   by   inflation,   may  liquidate  dollar
holdings.     At  home  all  this  spells   a  credit  squeeze,   higher
interest  rates,  further  contraction  of  the  home  building  mar-
ket,   decline  in  business  and  employment.     The   only  certain
rise  is  in  Republican   prospects.
Some  Measures  of  the  Money  Crisis
A  few  figures  illustrate  the  dimension  of  the  money  crisis.
England's  new  rediscount  rate—8%—is  the  highest  since  the
money  panic  in  1914   just  before  World  War   I.    Prime  cor-
porate  bonds   here  only  a  few  days  before  devaluation  were
selling  at  their  lowest  prices  since  the  post-Civil  War  Recon-
struction  period;   long-term  government  bonds  could  be  mar-
keted  only  at  the  highest  yields  since  the  sharp  recession  after
World  War  I  in   1920.    The  short  interest—i.e.  those  gam-
bling  on  a  decline—was  at  record   levels  in  the  New   York
and  American  Stock  Exchanges  for  the  month  ended  Nov.  14.
The  President  himself  at  press  conference  Nov.   17  said   the
deficit  might   reach   $35   billions.    An   index  of   the   loss  of
confidence   among   investors  is  that  the  U.S.  Treasury 4^4%
bonds  of  1987-92  could  be  bought  last  Friday  for  little  more
than  $81—or  $19   less  than  par.     Money  has   lost   faith   in
Lyndon   Johnson.
Britain's  devaluation was  brought  on  by  the  Mideast  war—
it  raised  the  price  of  oil  and  stimulated  a  flight  from  sterling
—and  by  the  business  downturn  in  West  Germany  and  the
United   States.     But  our  own   difficulties   arose   independently
of   Britain's,  though   devaluation  will   add   to   them.     Their
prime  cause  is  the  Vietnamese  war.    Its  mounting  costs  have
adversely  affected   the  U.S.  balance  of  payments,  the  internal
price  level  and  Johnson's  popularity.    As  a  result  he  cannot
get  from  Congress  even  the  minor  10%  personal  income sur-
tax  he  has  asked  to  combat  inflation.    The  danger  to  the  dol-
Why  Not  LBJ  and Ho On A Space Platform?
"Hanoi's    recent    rejection    of    President    Johnson's
ridiculous  offer  to  negotiate  on  a  seagoing   vessel   was
hardly   surprising.     I  suppose   now   the   President  can
otter  to  negotiate  on  an  airplane.   If  Hanoi  rejects  that
proposal,   the   President   can   offer   to   negotiate   in   the
New   York  subway.    Is  this  what  is  called  'exploring
all  possible   avenues  of  negotiation'?"
—Donald  M.  Trapp   to  the  Washington  Post,  Nov.  18.
lar  has  been  increased  by the  devaluation  of  the  pound.  Britain
will  have  to  cut  down  military  expenditures and  imperial pre-
tensions;  this  spells  a  heavier U.S.  military  burden  in  Western
Europe  and  East  of  Suez.    The  prospect  is  not  improved  by
the   fact  that  the  devaluation  of   the  pound  was  minimal;  it
should  have  been  twice  as  sharp  a  cut  to  meet  Britain's real
needs.    Any  further  deterioration may  easily  bring  on  a  new
crisis.
While   the  Johnson  Administration has  focussed   so  much
attention  on  domino  effects   in  Southeast  Asia,  the  dominoes
are  falling  in  the  money markets  of  New  York,  London, Paris,
Tokyo  and  Frankfurt.     The  best  news  for  peace  is  that  from
Wall  Street's  point  of  view  it  looks  as  if  both  Johnson  and
his  war  must  go  if  stability  is  to  be  restored.    The   suffering
we  impose  abroad  is  exacting  a  just  price  at  home.
I.  F.  Stone's
In  A  Time  of  Torment
"Let   me  just  say  its  pages  contain  the  finest
political   reportage   and   analysis   being   written
today."
—Personal  note  from  the  senior  editor  of  a
nationally  famous  scientific  institution.
Published  by  Random  House  at  $7.95
Now  Available  to  Readers  of  The Weekly  at  $6:95
Just  use  the  coupon  behind  the  flap  or  the  order  blank
on  Page  4
Another  Exhibit for  The  Gullible  Who  Think  We  Have  Softened  Our  Peace  Terms
MR.  (Crosby)   NO YES   (Washington  Star):  What  would
be  the  attitude  of  the  United   States  to  a  negotiation   with
the  NLF,   which  did  not  include   Hanoi?
AMBASSADOR  BUNKER:  Well,  I  think  that  as  far  as
we  are  concerned,  we  would  be  glad  to  see  the   Vietnamese
[sic—not  South  Vietnamese—IFS]  approach  the  Front  in-
dividually,   on   an   individual   basis.     President    Thieu   has
made  it  quite  clear,  as  have  all  the  Vietnamese   [all?]  that
they  are  not  willing  to  negotiate  with  the  Front  as  a  poli-
tical  entity.
MR.  NO YES:  We  are  saying  at  this  point  that  we  could
accept  the  representation  of  the  Front   in  any  possible  ne-
gotiation  as  a  legitimate   member  of  a  negotiation?
AMB.  BUNKER:   Right.
MR.  NO YES:  Does  this  imply  we  would  also  accept  them
as  a  legitimate  party  to  a  political  settlement   7  In  other
words,  some  kind  of  a  coalition    government?
AMB.  BUNKER:   I  don't  think  that  the  Vietnamese    gov-
ernment  will  accept  them  as  a  political  entity.    I  think  they
have  made  that  quite  clear.                                    ,
MR.  NOYES:  Will  they  accept   them  at  a   conference?
AMB.  BUNKER:  They  will  do as  we  have  said,  that  their
position  can  be  represented   at  a  conference.    It  will  be  no
problem   having  their   views   presented  at  a  conference.
—On NEC  TV's  Meet  the Press, November  19.
This  means  that  iri  any  conference  we are  willing  to  listen
to  the  NLF's  views  but  not  to  negotiate  with  it,  nor  to  give
it  any  place  in a  settlement.   We showed  last  week  that  our
terms  call  for  the  disarming  of  the  Viet  Cong.   This   shows
we  also  ask  the  dissolution  of  the   NLF.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  27, 1967
Victor  Reuther:  On  the  Meany-Lovestone  Thumbs-Down  on  the  Chicago  Labor  Peace  Rally
Okay  For Labor  to  Collaborate With Far Rightists But  Not  With Peaceniks?
George  Meatty   and  Jay  Lovcstone  did  their  best  to  dis-
courage  AFL-C1O   officials    from  attending  the  Labor  Lead-
ership   Assemblage  for   Peace  held  in  Chicago   Nov.   11-12
under  the  aiispices   of   Trade   Union  SANE.     Their      efforts
evoked  a  reply   from   Victor   Reuther  in  his  address   to  the
rally   ivhich   ive   thought   our   readers    would   like   to   see.
523   union   officials     and    staff     members   from    GO interna-
tional   unions   and   38  states   attended    this   first   national
meeting   oj  its  kind.    It   condemned   the  Vietnam  war  as
immoral,  urged   an  unconditional  end  to  U.S.   bombings  of
the  North  and  negotiations  with  Hanoi  and  the  NLF.    Here
are  Reuther's  remarks  in  abridged   form:
The   AFL-CIO  leadership  remains  obsessed   by  no  longer
relevant  cold-war  objectives   and  the  negative   aspects   of  anti-
communism—an   obsession   which   has   led   it   repeatedly   into
open   collaboration   with   elements   both   at  home   and   abroad
which   are   essentially   anti-democratic.     Intervention   by   the
AFL-CIO  in  the  internal  affairs  of  labor  movements   in  other
lands   has   occurred   with   a   frequency   and   through   methods
which  U.S.  labor  would  never  accept  as  proper  were  such  in-
tervention  practiced   by  others   in  our  own   country.
Even  With  "Christian  Crusaders"
In  June,   1964,   the  late  Serafino  Romualdi,   Inter-American'
Representative   of   the   AFL-CIO,   spoke   as   director   of   the
American  Institute  for  Free  Labor  Development  to  the  Wash-
ington    School   of   Anti-Communism,   a   subsidiary  of   Fred
Schwarz's  Christian  Anti-Communist  Crusade.    Romualdi  was
on  the  national  advisory  board  of  the  Cuban  Freedom   Com-
mittee  formed   in   1960   to  broadcast   anti-Communist  propa-
ganda   to   Latin   America.      It   concentrated    on    denouncing
Castro  but  was  also  very  active  in  denouncing  Juan  Bosch  as
a  Communist  in  its  broadcasts  to  the  Dominican   Republic  dur-
ing  the  elections  in  that  country.
On  May  6,   1963,   a  Citizens  Committee   for   a  Free  Cuba
was  set up.  Among  the  founding  members  were  Irving  Brown
and  Jay  Lovestone  of  the  AFL-CIO  plus  a  long  list  of  right-
wing  spokesmen.     Mr.  Lovestone  also  appears  as  a  member  of
the   American   Security   Council,   one   of   the   most    important
groups  on  the   far   right,   with   an  annual   budget  of   over  a
quarter-of-a-million  dollars.    The  Council  was  founded  to  op-
erate  a  loyalty-security   blacklist.
The  Poor  Mustn't  Suffer  More  Than  The  Rich!
"What  happened  in   Brazil   on  April  1  did  not  just
happen—it   was   planned—and   planned  months   in  ad-
vance.   Many  of  the  trade  union  leaders—some of  whom
were  actually  trained  in  our  institute—were  involved
in   the   revolution,  and   the   overthrow  of   the  Goulart
regime."
—William  C.  Doherty,  Jr.,  of  the  AFL-CIO's  Ameri-
can  Institute  for  Free  Labor  Development,  on  the  mili-
tary   takeover  in  Brazil,  Mutual  Broadcasting,  July   12,
1964,  as  quoted  by  Victor  Reuther  in  Chicago.   Reuther
also   quoted   Doherty's   reply   when  asked   whether   the
unions  were   prepared    to  cooperate   with  the   military
in   accepting    a   wage   reduction   as   an     anti-inflation
measure.
"Frankly  the  labor  unions  of  Brazil,  as  long  as  they
can  protect  the  purchasing  power  of  the  workers,  are
perfectly  free  to  accept  any  type  of  wage  freeze  neces-
sary  in  order  to  control   runaway  inflation.  .  .  .  When
these  freezes  and  controls  are  put  on  the  Brazilian  peo-
ple,   they  have  to   suffer   equally.    You  can't   have  the
poor  suffer   more  than  the  rich,  or  the   poor  less  than
the  rich."
It  certainly  would  be painful  if  the  poor  were to  suffer
more  than  the  rich—IFS.
I  call  this  to  your  attention   because   many  of  you   queried
the  AFL-CIO  before  coming  here  and  you  may  have   received
answers  from  Mr.  Meany  or  Mr.  Lovestone.    Here  is  a  reply
from  Mr.  Lovestone:  "It  is  not  the  practice  of  our  organiza-
tion  to  send  representatives  to  participate  in  such  conferences
organized  under  the  auspices  of  other  bodies.  We  discuss  such
questions  at  meetings  which  we  organize  for  the  specific  pur-
pose."    I  want  to know  when  the  AFL-CIO  Executive  Council
authorized  participation  in  these  right-wing,  anti-labor  groups!
The  American  Institute  for  Free  Labor  Development,  whose
budget  comes  90  per  cent  from  direct  government  grants,  has
a  board  which  includes  the  AFL-CIO,   the  government,    and
employers  such  as  Peter  Grace  of  Grace  Lines  and   Standard
Oil.     Its  main  responsibility  is  to  train  Latin  American   labor
leaders.    There  is  something  immoral  in  training  trade  union-
ists  under  conditions  which  are  repugnant  to  us  at  home.  Talk
about  a  corporate  fascist-state  approach,  there  it  is.
No  Wonder  Some  Asians  Are  So  Enthusiastic  About  Our  War  In  Vietnam
'•'The  assistance   being  given  to  South  Vietnam  seems  dis-
proportionately  small  when  compared  to  the  money   being
earned  from  the  war  in  Vietnam.   For  example,  Japan  has
provided  a  total  of  $2,250,000  worth  of  assistance  to  Viet-
nam  in  the  period  June   1964  through   December   1966  ac-
cording  to  the  State  Department.    But  at  the  same  time,
Japanese  exports  to  South  Vietnam—and  most  of  these  ex-
ports  were  either  purchases  by  the  U.S.  Government  or  by
the   South   Vietnamese    Government   with   U.S.   funds—to-
talled  $138 million  in  1966,  compared  to  $36  million  in  1965.
.  .  .  Japanese  economists   believe   that   Japan's   exports  in
fiscal  year  1967  to  the  United  States,   South  Vietnam  and
other  Southeast  Asian  nations  directly  related  to  the  con-
flict  will  total  between   $1.4  and  $1.7  billion.
"Assistance   to  Vietnam  from  the   Republic  of   China  to-
talled  $775,000  in  June  1964  through  December   1966.    Yet
the  Republic of   China's  exports  to  South  Vietnam  in  1966
totalled  $89  million,  compared   to  $50  million   in  1965,  and
in   addition,  that   country   is   making  about   $1   million   a
month  from  American soldiers  on  leave.
"South  Korea's  earnings  in  South  Vietnam as  a  result  of
the  war—from  remittances   from  Korean  soldiers  and  civil-
ians  in  South  Vietnam,  from  construction  and  service  con-
tracts  and  from  commodity  procurement—totalled  $59,540,-
000  in  1966  and  $83,853,000  in  the  first  8  months  of  1967.
And  Singapore,  which  apparently  is  not  providing  any  as-
sistance  to  South  Vietnam,  saw  its  exports  to  South   Viet-
nam  increase  to  $85 million in  1966, from  $37 million in  1965.
"The  old  proverb that  one  cannot  make  a  silk  purse  out
of  a  sow's  ear  seems  to  me  particularly  applicable  to  the
State  Department's  claims  regarding  free  world   assistance
to  Vietnam.   The facts  are  that  very  few  countries  are  sup-
porting   us   in  any   meaningful  way   and  that   most   Asian
countries   are   profiting   from   the   war   while   we   and,   of
course,  the  South  Vietnamese,  do  the  spending   and  dying."
—Fulbright  in  the Senate,  Oct.  31.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November   27, 1967
"Dump  Johnson" and McCarthy Only Hopeful  Focal Points for Political Action
(Continued   from   Page One)
plies  to  a  sporting  event.    He  said  it  would  enable  Americans
"to   take  out   their   frustration   in   talk   instead   of    violence."
These  are  terms  one  uses  of  psychiatric  therapy.    It's  not  a
new  headache  powder,  it's a  new  leadership  the  country  needs.
Bobby's  readiness to  support  the  winner,  whether  pro  or  anti-
war,  hardly  meets  that  need  or  measures  up  to  his  ambitions
and  pretensions.
McCarthy  Shifts  Bobby—A  Little
Again,  of  course,  all  this  is  explicable  in  terms  of   conven-
tional  politics.    To  challenge  an  incumbent  President   in  his
own  party  primaries  is  to  risk  one's  political  future.    But  the
alternative, to  this is the  risk  of  national suicide.   John  F.  Ken-
nedy  at  his  inaugural,  said  we  were  not  to  ask  what  the  coun-
try  could  do  for  us  but  what  we  could   do  for  the  country.
But  the  Kennedys,  despite  this  rhetoric,  have  rarely  shown  a
taste  for  risky  politics.    It  is  in  the  pattern   that  Bobby—for
all   his   understanding  of   the   war   and   his   genuine   feeling
against  it—only  begins  to  hint  at  a  slightly  more  independent
political  course  when   McCarthy  threatens   to  take  leadership
away   from  him.   Noiv   he   says  that  his  pledge  to   support
Johnson  only  applies  to  the  general  election  and  not  the pri-
maries.    Now   he  says  that  a  McCarthy  challenge  in  the pri-
maries  would  be  "healthful"  though  he  himself  does  not  want
to  risk  his  political  health  by  entering  the  primary himself.
When  it  comes  to  the  crunch,  Bobby is  no  better  than  Rom-
ney.      Both  aspire  to  be  regarded   as  renovating  figures  but
neither   is  willing  to   risk   the   abandonment   of   conventional
politics.    Both  talk  moral  values  but  neither  is  really  willing
to  apply  them  politically.   Men  who  claim  to  be  as  religious
as  these   two  men   cannot  under   any  circumstances—for   na-
tional   interest   or   anything  else—support   the   burning   and
maiming  of  the  Vietnamese people.    They  bring  conventional
religion  as  well  as  conventional  politics  into  disrepute.    But
it  would  be  wrong  to  believe  that  this  is  a  problem   of per-
sonalities.    The  tragedy  of  the  coming  campaign   is  that   the
candidates,  like  the  country,  are  the  prisoners  of  circumstances
which  render  our  problems  almost—but  not  quite—insoluble.
Not  Much  Of  A  Testimonial
"Administration  claims  5,188 South  Vietnamese  ham-
lets,  with  a  population  of  8,000,000,  are  now  under gov-
ernment  control.    This  compares  with  3,000,000  hamlet
residents   under   Viet   Cong   control,   down  20  percent
in  two  years.
"Not   all  these   8,000,000  are   friendly   or  even   fully
'pacified'.    U.S. officials   put  them  in  three  categories:
friendly  (201  hamlets  with  600,200 population),  pacified
(1895  with  4,000,000  people),  and  protected   (3,092  with
3,500,000).      Last    category    means   hamlets   are    safe
enough   to   hold   elections,   but   occasionally    are   under
fire."
—Scripps-Howard   "Washington  Size-Up"   Nov. 18
So  even  we  only  classify   7%   percent   of  the   South
Vietnamese   under   government   control   as   "friendly."
How  does  one  achieve  nomination  in  the  Republican   party
without  the  calculated   ambiguities  necessary  to  reconcile   the
divergent  opinions  in  it?    What  does  one  do  politically  about
peace  in  a  country  which  probably  is one-third  for  withdrawal,
one-fifth  for  wider  war  and  mostly  hawk-dove,  i.e. anxious  to
get  it  over  with  as  rapidly  as  possible,  preferably  by   beating
the  enemy  to  his  knees?    How   does  one  get  effective   action
on  the  Negro-slum   poverty  problem  when  the  white  majority,
including  a  majority  of  the  organized  white  working  class,  is
morally  indifferent   and  indeed   increasingly  hostile  to  Negro
demands?    The  failure  of  conventional  politics  is  the  failure
of   the   majority  itself.    The   paralysis  which   has   locked   us
into  the  war  reflects  the  absence  of  a  consensus  for  peace,  just
as  the  failure  of  Congress   on  the  poverty  program   reflects  a
numbed   national  conscience.    This  is  the   tragedy.    Perhaps
only  some  miracle  of  leadership,  like  de  Gaulle's  in  France  on
Algeria,  can  save us.    And  nothing  like  it  is in  sight.   Yet  de-
spite  that  gloomy   perspective   I'm  for  working  in  the  "dump
Johnson"  movement  and  for  McCarthy,  if  he  declares  himself
a  candidate.   Neither  movement  may  succeed  but  the  dynamic
side-effects  may  yet  clear  the  way  for  peace  as  the  war  drags
on.    These   seem   to   me  the   only   hopeful   focal   points   for
effective  political  action.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed   Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  n
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ......................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State..
11/27/67
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week   In  December   and   the
first   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.W.. Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  1.  F.   Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   15   in   the  U.S.; $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED