I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967mar27.pdf

============================================================

How  The  Pentagon  "Snowed"  Press  and  TV,  P.  3
Nobody  Can  Say  We're  Not  Doing  All  We
"My  most  hopeful  report  came  from  David  Lilienthal  who
discovered   in  Vietnam   an  extraordinary air   of   confidence
among  the  farmers  and  villagers.   He  concluded,  'to  .have
been  through 20  years  of  war  and  still  have this  amount  of
"zip"   almost  insures   their  economic  development.'"
—From  Johnson's  speech  in  Nashville  March  15  (abr).
"Last  month Air  Force, Navy  and  Marine  planes dropped
Can  To  Bomb  That  "Zip" Out  of  Them
68,000  tons  of  bombs on  North  and  South Vietnam  targets.
This  compares  with  a  peak  of   80,000  tons  in  an  average
month  of  the  most  intense  action  in  Europe  in  World  War
II,  a  29,000  ton  monthly  peak  in  the  fight  against  Japan and
some  17,000  tons  a  month  in Korea."
—Washington  Post,  March  17,  The  figures  were  released
at  a  "backgrounder"   to  rebut  charges  of  bomb   shortages!
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  12MARCH  27,  1967
«"      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
They'd Do Anything For The  Peasant But Get Off His Back
On  the  eve  of  the  Guam  conference,  Vice  President  Hum-
phrey  delivered  a  speech   to  the  National  Farmers  Union  in
Oklahoma.   Nothing  better  attests  the  phoniness  of  Johnson's
talk   at   Nashville   and   Guam   about   our   "pacification"   and
"revolutionary  development"  programs  in  South  Vietnam.  For
Humphrey,  an  American  liberal  speaking  to  the  most  progres-
sive  of  the  three  big  farm  organizations  in  this  country,  de-
voted  a  third   of  his  speech  to  Vietnam  without  mentioning
the  issues most  vital to  its  people,  85%  of  whom  are  peasants.
Through  LBJ's  Looking-Glass
The   fundamental   problem   of   land   reform  was  not   men-
tioned  once.    Neither  was the  problem  of  the  exorbitant  rents
which  absentee  landlords  continue  to  exact  despite  laws  more
than  a  decade  old  which  were  supposed  to  limit  them  to  25%
of  the  rice  crop.    To  speak  as  Humphrey  did  of  the  desire  to
become  "free  citizens  rather  than  virtual  serfs"  without  men-
tioning   the  conditions  which  keep   them  serfs  marks  a  new
stage  in  Humphrey's   degeneration.  He  even  had  the  effrontery
to  quote  Tolstoy's  famous  remark  about   regimes   which  are
walling  to  do  anything  to  lighten  the  peasant's  burden  except
get  off  his  back.    That  exactly  describes  the  alliance  of  land-
lord  and  militarist  we  are  imposing   by  force  on  South  Viet-
nam,  and  seek  only  to  hide  behind  a  facade  of  new'  elections
rigged  like  last  year's  to  keep  out  any  elements  not  satisfac-
tory  to  landlord  and  general.     Our   "revolutionary   develop-
ment"  program  is  designed  to  prevent  the  development  of
that  revolution  in  distribution  of  the  land  we  were   supposed
to have promised  Vietnam's  landless  at  the  Manila  conference.
Like  everything  else  in  Johnson's  program,  it  must  be  read  in
reverse,  as  the  opposite   of  what  it  seems  to  mean.
It  will  not  escape  the  sharp-eyed that  the  final  communique
at  Guam,  instead  of  repeating  the  Manila   promise  of   land
reform,   which   implies   land  for   the  landless,   refers  vaguely
to   "reform   of   land   policies   and  tenure  provisions."     This
implies   only  some  improvement   in  the  conditions  of  share-
croppers   and   tenants.     This,   too,   has   been   talked   of   for
months  without  results.    It  is  the  scaling  down  even  of   the
promises  which  is  significant.    Equally  so  is  the  appointment
of  Robert  W.  Komer  as the  President's  No.  2 man  for  Saigon.
Komer  was  for   14  years  a  CIA  man   before  he  became  as-
sistant  to  McGeorge  Bundy  under  Kennedy.    Last  March  he
Those  Who Said No to the War
Mr.  BROWN  (D.  Cal):   "The  circumstances ... are
such  that  it  is  impossible,  with  any  reasonable  expen-
diture  of   men  and  money,  to  win  a  military  victory,
much  less  a  political  victory."
Mr.  REUSS  (D.  Wis):   By  any  measure  of  benefits
and  costs,  we  are  devoting  too  much  to  militarism and
Vietnam.
Mr.  FRASER  (D.  Minn):   The  U.S.  Government  is
not  dealing with  the  realities  of  Vietnam  but  with  self-
manufactured  myths.
Mr.   KASTENMEIER  (D.   Wis):     The   world   has
become  the  'Alamo'—"after  a  very  penetrating debate."
Mr.   RYAN    (D.   N.Y.):    Peace   through   honorable
negotiations  has  not  been  pursued  with  the  same  deter-
mination  as  prosecution  of  the  war.
—These   House  members   plus   5  other   Democrats—
Burton  and  Edwards   (Cal),  Rosenthal  and  Dow  (NY),
Conyers   (Mich)—and   one  Republican   Mosher   (Ohio)
voted  against  the  Vietnam  war  bill  March  16.   Brown's
amendment  barring  funds  for  an  invasion  of  the  North
came  up  when  other  dissenters  were  not  on  the   floor
and   only   Rosenthal   joined  him  in   the  123  to  2  vote.
Morse,   Gruening  and  Nelson  voted  against   the   ap-
propriation  in  the  Senate  March  20.
was  named  Johnson's   $30,000-a-year  assistant  for   "peaceful
reconstruction"  in  South  Vietnam.   Six months  later he  turned
in  a  report  on  rural  progress  so  spurious  in  its  optimism  that
even  Johnson  seemed  to  be  embarrassed  by  it  and  denied  that
"pacification"   was  going   anywhere  near  so  well.    The   im-
pression  Komer  has  created  in  Washington   and  Saigon  is  of
an   abrasive  opportunist.     His   razzle-dazzle   style  of   opera-
tion  accords  perfectly  with  Johnson's  own  which,  ever  since
he  called  Diem  "the  Churchill  of  Asia"  in  1961,  has  been  to
lay  it  on  with  a  shovel.    The  self-delusion  which  has  marked
official   reports  on  Vietnam  since  our  involvement  began  may
now   be  expected   to   reach   ecstatic  heights   with   Komer   in
charge.     If   he's   an   example   of   CIA   training,  the  Agency
must  be  run   by  retired  circus  press  agents.
Next  to  land  reform,  the  main  question  is  political  liberty.
Among  the  urban  middle  class,  this  was  the  chief   source  of
dissatisfaction  with  the  Diem  dictatorship.   "We  do  not  seek
to  impose  our  political  beliefs upon  South  Vietnam,"   Johnson
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  27,1967
Russell  Vetoes  A  New  Type  Vessel  to  Make  Far-Flung   Interventions   Easier
A   Temporary   Setback   to  the  Military   Technology  of  the  Pax  Americana
Contrary    to   that    famous   Roman   maxim,   if   you   want
peace,  don't  prepare   for  war.  The  larger   the  military  estab-
lishment,  the  more  trouble  it  will  get  you  into.   Ideologically
the  postwar  start  of  the  Pax  Americana  was  the  Truman doc-
trine.    It   set  forth   the   concept   of   unilateral   and  universal
interventionism.     But    technologically     the    Pax    Americana
began   with   Kennedy   and  McNamara.   Until   then   the U.S.
—though  none  dared  attack  us—was  a  muscle-bound  nuclear
power.    It   was   under   Kennedy   and   McNamara*    that   we
began  to  develop  "options"—from  "tactical"  nuclear  weapons
to   Green   Beret-ed   counter-guerrillas.     This   made   Vietnam
possible.
Billion  Dollar  Shipping  Bonanza
Thanks  to   Senator   Russell,   who   makes  no   secret   of   his
dislike  for  Vietnam   and  fears  similar  interventions,  a  minor
victory  has  been  chalked  up  against  the  drift   to  making  the
U.S.   the   world's   policeman.     To   the   dismay   of   Secretary
McNamara,   Russell  and  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee
he   chairs   have   turned   thumbs   down   on   a  $301.1  million
request   from   the   Pentagon    to   build    7   Fast    Deployment
Logistics   ships,  the  first  installment  of  30,  to  cost  a  total  of
more  than  a  billion  dollars.   These  ships,   fully  loaded,   could
be  kept  at  strategic  spots  abroad,  ready  for  swift use.
McNamara   still   hopes    to   outflank    Russell's   opposition
through   the  House,  where  the  Committee  on  Armed  Services
is   holding   separate   hearings   on   these   DPL's   as   they   are
known.  The  clearest  exposition  of  DPL  potentiality  for  getting
us  into  trouble  may  be  found  in  the  testimony, by  the Com-
mandant  of  the  Marine   Corps.    He   said   the  Navy  and   the
Marines,   through   their   ability  to   move   anywhere   over   the
oceans  which   make  up  71%  of. the  earth's  surface,   provide
"this  Nation  with  an  opportunity  to  exert  its  influence   over
most   of  the  land   areas  of  the  earth."    The   deployment  of
• DPL's  loaded   with   equipment   too   heavy   for   air   transport,
* Actually  credit  for  this  goes  to  Nelson   Rockefeller  and
the   Rockefeller  Brothers  Fund  whose   earlier  blueprint  for
mobile  striking  forces  to  fight  "limited" wars  the  world  over
was  ideally  suited  to  protect  the  family  holdings  in Standard
Oil  and  the  far-flung   interests   of   the  family's   Chase  Man-
hattan  Bank.
Checking  on  LBJ's  No.  1  Smoosher  for  Latins
"Ambassador   Sol   Linowitz,  who  is   the   President's
adviser   on   the   Alliance  for   Progress   in   addition   to
his   OAS   duties,   said   the   Alliance   has   never   been
stronger  than  it  is  today.   'There  has  never  been  so
much  body  to  the  Alliance as  there  is  today,'  he  said.
'Never  as  much  spirit  as  there  is  now.'"
—Washington  Post  Society  Page  March  17  on  News-
paper   Women's   Club  reception   for  Linowitz.
"It is  disheartening  to  have  to  acknowledge  that  after
five   years   of   the   Alliance  the   same   basic   problems
exist:  food  shortages,  inadequate   housing,   insufficient
industrial  production  .  .  ."
—Sen.  Javits  in  Foreign  Affairs  released  same day.
"Less  than half  of  the  Latin American countries  have
started  serious  programs  of  agrarian  reform.   Drastic
changes  in  the  tax  system  are  even  scarcer,  while  the
number  of  democratic regimes,  far  from  'increasing,  has
actually   declined   .   .  .   the   ultimate  objective   of   the
Alliance—the  formation  of  just,  stable,  democratic and
dynamic  societies—is  as  distant   today  as  it   was  five
years  ago."
—Pres.  Fret  of  Chile  in  the  same  Foreign  Affairs.
would  give  us  global  striking  power  without  foreign  bases.
Our   Army  Chief   of   Staff   Gen. Johnson   said  that   if   the
Lebanon  affair   in  1958 had   not  been  resolved  by  diplomacy,
the   crisis   would   have   found   "our  air   and   sea  lift    forces
inadequate  to  mount  quickly  a  show  of  force  from  the  United
States."   Maybe  that's  why  we  fell  back  on  diplomacy  instead
of  plunging  into  a  Middle  Eastern war.
At  pages  359-60  in  the  newly  released  Senate  1968 military
authorization   hearings,   there   is   testimony   from    McNamara
and   Gen.  Wheeler   on   how   we   could   "pre-position"   such
DPLs  in  the  Far  East, the  Middle  East  and  the  Indian  Ocean.
"That   suggests,"    Russell   commented   tartly,   "we  are  going
to  be  drawn  into  war  in  new  places."   On  March  21  he  told
the  Senate,   "we  should   not  unilaterally  assume  the   function
of  policing  the  world ...  if  it  is  easy  to  go  anywhere  and
do  anything,  we  will  always  be  going   somewhere  and  doing
something."    This  is  a  project  to  watch,  especially  since  it  is
backed  by  the  shipbuilders'   lobby.
Don  Edwards Questions  HUAC's Right
"The    House    Administration   Committee    has    a    clear
responsibility   to  examine  with  the   utmost   care   the  uses
to  which  the  funds  here  involved  are  put.  At  a  time  when
racial  tensions  are  exacerbated, it  seems  to  me most  unwise,
for  example,  to  give  your  imprimatur  to  an   investigation
of  alleged  Communist  infiltration  of  civil  rights  organiza-
tions   and  demonstrations.    It   is   instructive   to  remember
that  the   House   Un-American  Activities   Committee's   files
were  the  source  of  30  pages  of  material  put  in  the  Record
on   July   29,   1961, which   purported   to   prove   that    the
NAACP  was  subversive  and  infiltrated  with  Communists.
Among  the  NAACP  leaders  whose  reputations  for  loyalty
were  questioned  was  A.  Philip  Randolph, Secretary  Robert
C.  Weaver,   Ambassador  Ralph   Bunche,  Solicitor  General
Thurgood  Marshall  and  Clarence  A.  Mitchell.
"Extensive   raw  files  have  been  made  available  to  inves-
tigative  agencies,   members   of   Congress  and  their   staffs.
to  Operate  As  A  Rumor  and  Blacklist  Mill
The  Committee  is  proud  of  this  activity,  for  it  states:
" 'In  1966,  information  checks  were  made  on  4,775  indi-
viduals  and  3,149  organizations   named  in  those    requests.
Written  reports  were  compiled  on  3473  subject  items.'
"Is  this   a   proper  function?    There   is   nothing   in   the
authorizing  resolution   for  the  Committee  granting   it   the
authority  to  create  and  maintain  a  library containing rumor
and  gossip  regarding  American citizens."
—Edwards  (D.  Cat.), head  of  the  ADA, testifying    (abr.)
March  16  before   the  subcommittee   on  accounts  of  the  House
Administration  Committee  against  the  $400,000  budget  ask-
ed   by  the  House   Un-Americans.   Five  other   Congressmen,
all   Democrats,   also   testified    against   HUAC:   Ronan,  An-
nunzio,  Yates   and   Barrett   O'Hara   of   Chicago   and   Don
Fraser   (Minn.).  As  a  result  the  subcommittee  for  the  first
time   cut  HUAC's   request   by  $50,000.   The  full    committee
and  the  House  were  to  vote  on  it  as  we  went  to  press.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  27,1967
Some   Revealing   Admissions  by   the  Pentagon  Went  Unreported
How   TV  and  Press  Were  Led  to  Rehash   Those  Tet  Supply  Lies
Just  how  uncritical,  and   indifferent   to  the  truth,  most  of
the   press,  TV-radio  and   magazines   are,   was  demonstrated
again  by  the  results  of  the  briefing  the  Pentagon  held  March
17  on   the   eve  of   the  Guam  conference.   Thirty-two  recon-
naissance  photos   and   charts  (hitherto  shown  only  privately
to  equally gullible  Congressmen)  were  released.   News  stories
and  TV-casts  thereupon  rehashed  the  myth  that  we  had   to
resume  the  bombing  of  the  North   because  the  Communists
took   advantage  of   the   truce  for   massive  resupply  to   their
troops  in  South  Vietnam.  "How  Reds  Cashed  In  On  Bombing
Pause"    (US   News   &   World   Report,   March   27)    was   a
typical  headline.
Nothing   Seen  Crossing  the  Parallel
We  were  not  invited  to  the  briefing  but  were  able  next  day
to  see  the  text  and  the  photos  at  the  Pentagon.   Few  report-
ers  seem  to have examined either carefully.  The  heading  itself
was  a  give-away.   It  said  "Briefing by  Defense  Spokesman  on
Tet   Resupply   Activities   Within    North    Vietnam."     (Our
italics.)    It  did  not  allege  a  violation  of  the  truce  nor  deny
that  we  had  stepped  up  supplies  during  Tet,   too.   No  claim
was  made,  and   no  photos   showed,   that  supplies   had   been
observed  crossing   the   17th   parallel.    The   nearest  point   of
heavy  supply  activity  was  at  Quang   Khe,  "about   55  miles
north  of  the  demilitarized zone."   Trucks  were  shown  moving
"toward  Mugia  Pass"  but  none  actually  in  the  pass,  which  is
supposed  to  be  the  entrance  to  the  "Ho  Chi  Minh"  trail  in
Laos.
Perhaps   in  response  to  critical  analyses  like  those  in  this
Weekly   (Feb.   27  and  March  3),  the  Pentagon   briefing  for
the  first  time admitted,  "some  of  this  activity  was  believed  to
be  associated with  the  redistribution  of  food  and  other  non-
military  products  required  by  various  segments  of   the   econ-
omy,"  and  to  "military  forces  stationed  in  that  general  area
of  North  Vietnam."  (our  italics).   No  military  supplies  were
identified  in  any of  the  photos  and  No.  9's  caption  said  of  the
"containers,   baskets,  boxes  and  bags  .  .  .  clustered  near  the
shoreline"   that   "many  of   the  bags  and   baskets  presumably
contained   food   .  .  .  and  other  non-military  products."    It
added,  "It  must  be  emphasized  that  this was not  all  bound  for
South  Vietnam."    These   admissions  were  not  mentioned   in
any  news  stories  or  TV-casts  we  saw.
Originally  the  press  was  told  the North  moved  35,000  tons
"southward"  during  the  truce.  Now  the  Pentagon   scaled  this
What  Time  Didn't  Tell  Its  Readers
"Exploiting  the  Feb.   8-11  bombing  pause  during  the
Tet  truce,  North  Vietnam  massively  stepped  up   sup-
plies  to  troops  in  the  South,  as  shown  by  these  photo-
graphs  released  by  the  Defense   Department  .  .  .  An
estimated   23,000  tons  of   enemy   supplies   were  safely
shunted  southward  under  the  4-day  truce  umbrella."
—Time  Magazine  caption,  March  24,  pps.  22-2S.
"Many  of  the  bags  and baskets  presumably  contained
food.   Some  of  this  activity  seen  here  was  unquestion-
ably   associated   with   the   redistribution   of   this   food
and  other   non-military   products ...  IT  MUST  BE
EMPHASIZED   THAT  THIS  WAS  NOT  ALL  BOUND
FOR  SOUTH  VIETNAM".   (Emphasis  added).
—Defense   Dept.  caption  on  Photo  No.  9.
"In  addition  to  the  movement  of  military  supplies,
some   of   this   activity   was   believed   to   be  associated
with  the  redistribution  of  food  and  other  non-military
products  required  by  various  segments  of  the  economy,
INCLUDING  THE  MILITARY  FORCES  STATIONED
IN  THAT  GENERAL   AREA  OF  NORTH  VIETNAM."
(Emphasis  added.)
—Text  of  Pentagon  briefing,  Release  No.  230-67.
down  to  23,000  tons.   It  appeared   from  Chart  No.   25  that
this   23,000   was  "estimated"   from   "a   detailed   analysis"  of
"photographic   and  visual  sightings."   Just  how  the  estimate
was  made  was  not  explained.
Chart   No.   32   said,   "the   largest   logistic   resupply    effort
ever   detected"   took  place  during  Tet.   This  sounded   pretty
sensational  until  the  figures  were  examined.   Chart  No.   25
said   1400   water   craft   were   sighted   during   the   truce   "an
average  of   350  craft  per  day  or  28  times  the  daily  norm."
This  puts  the  "daily  norm"  i.e.  under  bombing  and  shelling,
at  an  average  of  12l/
2
  ships  per  day.    Traffic  "normally"  must
be  almost  dead  if  that  is  all  the  ships  we  sight  a  day  along
230  miles  of  coastline  between  Haiphong  and  the  DMZ.
A   second   figure   claimed   "sightings   of   2200   trucks,"   an
average  "of  550  per  day,  or  22  times  the  daily  norm."   That
makes  the  "daily  norm"  only  25  trucks—in  a  country  of  17
million   people!     This   figure   gives   one   some   idea   of   the
economic strangulation  imposed  by our  bombing  and  blockade.
The   surprise  is  not  that  the  North  took   advantage   of   the
truce—as  we  did  in  the  South—to  speed  up  supplies,  but  that
the  volume  observed  was  so  small.
Fires  Dotted  the  Countryside As  We Burned  Their  Homes,  Their  Wagons  and  Their  Rice
"Saigon   (AP)—U.S.   troops   are   scouring    100   square
miles   of   swamplands   along   Cambodia's   Ixrrder   in   a   new
operation  to  deprive  the  guerrillas  of  a  stronghold  threaten-
ing  Saigon,  the   U.S.   Command   reported  yesterday.    Any-
thing   useful   to  the   guerrillas—homes,  livestock,   gardens,
even  dogs—is  being  destroyed.
"After  the  announcement  in  Saigon  of  the  scorched  earth
operation   a   broadcast    dispatch    from   Hanoi   reported   the
guerrillas   accused   the   United   States   of   carrying   out   a
policy  of  "burn  all,  destroy  all,  kill  all"  in  South  Vietnam.
"Col.   Marvin   Fuller,    commander    of   a   brigade   in   the
operation,   said   anyone   living   in   the   operational    area   is
presumed   to  be  an  enemy.
"Fuller  said  water  buffalo,  ducks,  chickens  and  pigs  were
being    slaughtered   to    deny    fresh    meat   to   the    enemy
battalions.   Dogs  were  killed  because  in  a  pinch  the  guer-
rillas  slaughter  them  for  food,  he  said.
"Associated   Press   correspondent   John   T.   Wheeler   re-
ported  from  a  command   post  of  the  operation  in  the  Plain
of  Reeds  that  fires  dotted  the  countryside  as  U.S.   infantry-
men  set  the  torch  to  home,  farm  wagons,  and  piles  of  rice
straw.   Hundreds  of  tons  of   rice  have  been  destroyed  or
removed.   Some  GIs  snatched  up ducks  for  their  own meals."
—York,  Pa.,  Gazette  & Daily, March  14.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  27, 1967
Will  Saigon's  Press  Stay  Gagged  Through  the  Next  Elections,  Too?
(Continued  from   Page  One)
said  grandiloquently  at  Nashville.    "Our   Republic  rests  upon
a  brisk  commerce  in  ideas."  *
But  the  last  elections  in  Vietnam,  for  the  Constituent  As-
sembly,  were  held  reluctantly and  only to  quiet  Buddhist  agita-
tion.   There  was  neither  freedom  of  party  organization  nor  of
nomination,   nor   of   the  press.     Two   reactionary  parties,  the
Dai  Viets  and  the  NQQVD,  one  an  old  stooge  of  the  Japanese
and  the  other  of  the  Kuomintang,  were  the  only  ones  allowed
to  operate.    Ky  promised  that  for  seven  days  before  the  elec-
tion  there  would  be  freedom  of  the  press—but  he  never  kept
that   promise.     It   is  a  black  mark   for   American  journalism
that  no  reporter   seems  to  have  raised  the  question  of  a   free
press  with  either  Johnson  or  Ky  during  the  Guam   conference.
When  Will  Censorship   End?
How   do   you  have   a   free   election   without  a  free  press ?
When   will  the   censorship   be  lifted  on  the   Saigon   papers?
The  most  independent English language  paper  in  Saigon,  The
Guardian,   was   suspended   last   December    after   only   a   few
months  of  publication  when  its  editor  dared  question  the  of-
ficial   story   of  how  Tran  Van   Van,   Ky's   chief   civilian   rival
for   the  Presidency,  was  murdered.    Its  managing  editor,  Ton
That  Thien, was  seen,  and  his  cry of  anguish "We  have become
a  nation  of   thieves  and   beggars"   heard,  on   the   vivid  CBS
documentary  about  Saigon  March  14.    His  life  is  believed  in
danger.     His   friends   are  trying  to  get  him   an  invitation  to
America.     Why   does   no   reporter  raise  the   question   of   his
fate   and   the   future   of   the   press  with   Ky   and   Johnson?
Nothing  could  bring  the  ideals  of  America  into  greater  dis-
repute  among   Asian  intellectuals  than   the   contrast   between
our  constant  talk  of  defending  freedom  and  our  complacent
acquiescence   in   the   total. absence  of   a   free   press.
The   chief  question  raised  by  the  Guam  conference  is  why
it  was  held  at  all.    The  first  natural  reaction  is  to  dismiss  it
• as  another  publicity stunt  were  it  not   for   the   fact  that  origi-
Irrepressible  Questions   of  Law  and   Conscience
"Petitioner   did  not  report   for  induction  as  ordered,
was  indicted, convicted, and sentenced  to  five  years  .  .  .
His  defense  was  that  the  'war'  in  Vietnam   was  being
conducted  in  violation  of   various  treaties  .  .  .   espe-
cially  the  Treaty   of   London  (1945)  .  .  .  which  .  .  .
declares  that  'waging  a  war  of  aggression'  is  a  'crime
against     peace'    imposing    'individual    responsibility'.
Article  8  provides:  'The  fact  that  the  Defendant  acted
pursuant  to  an  order  of  his  Government .  .  .  shall  not
free  him of  responsibility  .  .  .'  Petitioner   claimed  that
the   'war'  in  Vietnam  was  a  'war  of  aggression'  .  .  .
and  that  Art.  S makes  him  responsible  for  participating
in  it  ...     Mr. Justice  Jackson,  the  U.S.   prosecutor  at
Nuremberg,  stated:   'If   certain   acts  .  .  .  are  crimes,
they  are  crimes  whether  the   U.S.   does  them  or  Ger-
many  does  them,  and  we  are  not  prepared  to  lay  down
a   rule   .  .   .   against   others    v.-hich   we   would  not   be
willing  to  have  invoked  against   us.'  .  .  .  There  is  a
considerable   body  of  opinion  that  our  actions  in  Viet-
nam   constitute ...  an  aggressive   'war.'    This   case
presents    the   questions:    (1)   whether   the   Treaty   of
London  is  a  treaty  within  the  meaning  of  Art.  6     ...
(2)  whether  .  .  . the  waging-of  aggressive  'war'  is  .  .'.
a  justiciable  question;  (3)  whether the  Vietnam  episode
is  a  'war'  .  .  .  (4)  whether  petitioner  has  standing  to
raise  the  question;  (5)   whether,  if  he  has,  it  may  be
tendered  as  a  defense ...  or  in  amelioration  of  the
• punishment.  These  are  extremely  delicate  and   sensitive
questions.   But  they  should, I  think,  be  answered.   Even
those   who  think  that  the  Nuremberg  judgments  were
unconstitutional   [as]  ...  ex  post   facto   laws  would
have  to  take  a  different  view  of  the  Treaty  of  London
that  purports to  lay  down a  standard  of  future conduct
for  all  the  signatories.   I  intimate  no  opinion  on  the
merits.   But  I  think  the   petition   for  certiorari   should
be   granted.    We   have   here   a   recurring   question   in
present-day   Selective  Service  cases."
—Mr.   Justice  Douglas  dissenting  from   the   Supreme
Court's   refusal   to  hear  the  Mitchell   case.
*  A  brisk  commerce  in  standardized ideas—those  who  have
non-conformist  views  to  offer  are  lucky  with  precarious  stalls
on  the  edges   of  the  market-place.
nally  there  were  no  plans  to  include  Ky  or  the  other   South
Vietnamese  leaders;  that  sounded  as  if  something  serious  were
afoot.     Or   could   this  merely  have  been   another   instance  of
Johnson's  frenzied  desire  for  "action"?
We'll  Be Clad to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Street   ...........................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................  State......
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name ................................................................
Street   ...........................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State.......
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement  wished   Q
3/27/67
fifties
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except  in   August,   the  last   week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:    $5   in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   ?16  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
815  to  Europe;  20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED