I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967nov20.pdf

============================================================

Exposing  A  Crooked Little  Game  in  The Senate and  at  The  UN
Marching  With Jefferson?
"According   to   the   President,   the   thousands   of   young
Americans  now  in  Vietnam  are  'marching  with  Jefferson'."
—Baltimore  Sun from  El  Toro, Cal., November  1.
Marching  with  Jefferson—in  defense of  an  Asian  military
regime   which  gags  the  press,  rigs
v
 its   elections   and  still
holds  under arrest  without  charges  the  peace  candidate  who
came  in  second  for   President   last  September?    Marching
with  Jefferson—under  an  American President  who broke  his
election  pledge  not  to  get  us  into  a  land  war  in  Asia, who
embarked  on that  war  without consulting  Congress,  who  is
making  unquestioning support  of  that  war  a  test  of  loyalty
and  threatening   to  induct  into  the  Army  any  young  men
who  dare  to  oppose  it?    Is  this  marching  with  Jefferson—
or  steadily away  from  him?
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XV,  NO.  27
NOVEMBER  20,  1967
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
All  We  Ask  of the  Viet  Cong  Is  Their  Surrender
Ambassador  Goldberg's   appearance  before  the  Senate  For-
eign  Relations  Committee  Nov.   2  created  the  impression  that
the United  States had  softened  its position  toward  the  National
Liberation  Front   and  taken  a  new  step  toward   a  negotiated
settlement.    The   truth,   as  will   be  'seen   when   the   printed
record  is available,  is that  this  was another  in  the  many phoney
peace  performances  of  the  Johnson  Administration.   It  will  be
seen  that  we  are  asking  nothing  less  than  the  disarming  and
demobilization  of  the  Viet  Cong  as  the  price  of  peace.
The  New  Pre-Condition
If  anything, the  U.S.  attitude  toward  the NLF  has  hardened.
On  Jan.   31,   1966,   Goldberg  submitted   a  resolution   to  the
UN   Security  Council  calling  for  a  cease-fire  in  Vietnam  and
"immediate    discussions   without   preconditions."     The   new
UN  resolution  he made  public  for  the first time  at  the  Novem-
ber  2  hearing  would  have  the  Security  Council   lay  down  as
a  pre-condition,   "That  there  should  be  no  military  forces  or
bases  maintained  or  supported   in  North  and  South.  Vietnam
other  than  those  under  control  of  the  respective   governments,
and  all  other  troops  and  personnel   should  be  withdrawn  or
demobilized   [emphasis  added]."   Though  Goldberg  read  the
text  of  both  resolutions   to  the  Committee,   no  Senator   called
attention   to  this  vital  difference   between   them.    It  was  not
until  the  hearing  was  almost  over  that  Pell  of  Rhode  Island
asked  Goldberg—
Would  it  be  conceivable  in  your  view  that  that  portion
of  South  Vietnam  which  is  under  Communist  discipline  or
Viet  Cong  discipline  would  willingly  drop  its  weapons  and
demobilize  while  those  portions  which are  under  the  Thieu
government's  regime  maintain their  weapons?
Goldberg   never  answered  the  question.    He   said,   "This   is
what  the  Geneva  Accords  in  our  view  provide."
No  one  asked  Goldberg  whether  he  thought  there  was any
chance  at  all  of  the  Security  Council  underwriting   any  such
preposterous    and   one-sided   a   condition   for   a    settlement.
Even  the  earlier  resolution,  as  Goldberg  admitted  in  his  open-
ing  statement   to  the  Committee,  had  obtained  the  necessary
nine   votes   for   inscription   on   the   agenda   of   the   Security
Council   only  "on  the  understanding   [as  Goldberg  said]  that
the   Council   would   not   proceed   forthwith   to   consider   the
matter   substantively."   Three   weeks   later   Matsui   of   Japan,
A  Question  Rusk  Would  Rather  Not  Discuss
Sen.   McCarthy    (D.   Minn.):    The   consideration  of
whether  you  would  withdraw  is  limited to  what  might
happen  in  Vietnam.  Does  this  have  reference  to  other
parts  of  southeastern  Asia  or  not?
Amb.   Goldberg:   We   are   also   very   interested   in
observance  of  the  1962 accords in  Laos,  very  much  so.
We  would  like  the  Laos  accord  to  be  complied with.
Sen.    McCarthy:   Where  would  this  leave  us  in  the
light  of  what  the  Secretary  of  State  said  in  his  rather
well-publicized   press   conference  of   October   12  when
he  talked  about  the   threat  of   a  billion  Chinese  with
nuclear  weapons  to  all  Southeastern  Asia  and  beyond
that  to  the  U.S.  itself?    Are  we  going   to  leave  this
critical  area  open  to  a  billion  Chinese  if   the  question
of   South  Vietnam  should  be  settled   within  the  limits
you  have  defined  or  not?
Amb.    Goldberg:   I  think  that  question  ought  to  be
addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
Sen.  McCarthy:  All  right,  I  will  ask  the  Secretary.
Sen.  Pell:  When?
Sen. Morse:  Where?  (Laughter)
—Before  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  Nov  2.
then   President   of   the   Council,  shelved   the   U.S.   resolution
altogether,   reporting   "a   general   feeling   that   it   would   be
inopportune  for   the  Council  to  hold   further  debate  at  this
time."   The   fact  is,  as  Goldberg  well  knows,  that  no  one  at
the  UN  takes  seriously the  idea  of  UN  intervention.   Neither
North  Vietnam  nor  Communist  China,  as  non-members,  will
accept  the  jurisdiction  of  the  UN.   Only  a  reconvened  Geneva
conference  can  be  the  forum  for  a  negotiated  settlement.   The
Jan.  31,  1966,  resolution  was  seen  at  the  UN  as an  attempt  to
divert  attention  from  U.S.  unwillingness  to  accept  U  Thant's
3-point  plan  for  peace,  which  called  for  unconditional  cessa-
tion   of   the   bombing   in   the   North   as  the   necessary  first
step  toward  negotiations.
Goldberg   disclosed   at  the   November   2  hearing   that   the
new  UN   resolution  was  prepared   last  September   "largely   at
the  initiative of  Senator  Mansfield  and  Senator  Morse."   One
wonders   why   they   would   lend   themselves   to   this   empty
charade.   Goldberg  admitted  in  his  prepared  statement  that  a
"recent  canvass  once  again  shows  a  general  unwillingness   for
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  20,  1967
(Continued  from  Page    One)
the  Security  Council  either  to  resume  its  consideration  of  the
agenda  item  and  draft  resolution  which  we  proposed  in  early
1966,  or  to  consider  the  new  draft,   or  to  take any  other action
on  the  matter."    [Emphasis  added.]   At  the  UN   the  whole
idea  is  a  dead  duck.   There   the  new  resolution  is  made  the
more  distasteful  by  the  recollection  of  the  proposal   Goldberg
put   forward   in  his  address   of  Sept.   22,   1966,   to  the  UN
Assembly.   Then  he  said  that  the  U.S.  was prepared  to  accept'
"a  time  schedule  for  the  supervised  withdrawal  of  all  external
forces  [emphasis  added]—those  of  North  Vietnam  as  well  as
those  from  the  U.S."    Now  Goldberg   is  asking  the  UN   to
require   not  just  the  withdrawal  of  the  Northern   forces  but
the   disarming   of   the   indigenous  Southern   Viet   Cong   as  a
precondition  for  peace.
G.O.P.  Hawks  Reassured
That  earlier   speech  by  Goldberg  proved   to  be  tricky  and
disingenuous   in  its  use  of  the  term  "external   forces".   It  was
assumed   that   this  referred   to  the  North   Vietnamese.    This
assumption   was  strengthened   by  a  speech   a  few   days  later
(Oct.    12,   1966)    in  which   Secretary  Rusk   said  that   if   the
invaders   from   the  North  were  withdrawn,  the    "indigenous
element"  in  the  Viet  Cong  would  be  "well  within  the capacity
of   the   South   Vietnamese  to  handle."    Laird  of   Wisconsin,
chairman  of  the  House  Republican  Conference,  was so  alarmed
by  the  Goldberg   speech   that  he  wrote  a  letter   to  Secretary
McNamara  six  days  later  asking  whether   the   views  of   the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  had  been  sought  before  the  speech  was
made  and  what  was  "the  current  estimate  of  the  Joint  Chiefs
regarding   the  ability  of  the  South  Vietnamese  Army  to   cope
with  Viet  Cong  elements  which  apparently  would  be  free  to
continue   the  war."     The  reply,  almost  a  month   later,   from
McNamara's   office,   said   the   views  of   the   Joint   Chiefs  of
Staff  had  not  been  sought  on  this  latter  question  because   "the
Department    of    Defense    believes    Ambassador     Goldberg's
speech  includes  the  intent  that  Viet  Cong  military units  would
be  deactivated  in  any  proposed  withdrawal  of  external  forces
from  North  Vietnam."  *   It  is  against  this  background   that
one  should   read  the  phrase   "all   other  troops  .  .  .  should  be
withdrawn  or  demobilized"  in  the  new  UN   resolution  and
the   phrase   which   follows   "and    all   other    military   bases
abolished   as  quickly  as  possible  and   in  accordance  with  an
agreed   time  schedule."     The  U.S.  would  withdraw  from  its
bases   in  South  Vietnam  only  after  the  Viet   Cong  had   laid
down  its  arms.   This  is  what  the  UN  was  asked  to  ratify.
* Little' attention   was   paid   to   this   exchange   of   letters
when  it  was  finally  made  public  by  Laird.   Their  text  was
published  in  this  Weekly  for  Nov.   7,   1966.
.   The   Propaganda  Ploy
Sen.   Aiken:  I  think  it  is  perfectly  obvious  that  there
is  a  substantial   percentage  of  the   UN   members  who
think   that  the   U.S.   is  to  blame,   and  wholly   to  blame,
for  the  war  going  on  in  Southeast  Asia,  and  what  I
wanted  to  ask  you  next  is  if  we  take  this  matter  to
the  Security  Council  and  indicate  beyond  a  doubt  that
we  want  a  political  settlement  of  this  trouble,  would
that  in  your  opinion  change  the  minds  of  any  of  these
countries  that  now  think  the   U.S.   alone  is  to  blame,
assuming  that  our  efforts   are  blocked  by  other  coun-
tries,   other   members,   particularly   Russia   or  France.
Arab.  Goldberg:   I  think  it  would  be  helpful.
—Before  Senate Foreign Relations Nov.   2.
Perhaps  one  reason  the  committee  let  Goldberg  get  away
with  this  comedy  is  that  so  many  Senators,  like  the  Admin-
istration  itself,  are  using  appeal  to  the  UN  as  a  way  to  make
it  look  as  if  they  are  for   peace.   No   less  than   55  members
of  the  Senate  are  sponsoring  S.  Res.  180  by  Mansfield.  This
empty  piece  of  fluff  merely  expresses  "the  sense  of  the  Senate
that   the  President  consider  taking  the  appropriate  initiative
through  his  representative  at  the  UN  to  assure  that  the  U.S.
resolution  of   January   31,   1966,    or  any  other  resolution  of
equivalent   purpose   be  brought  before   the   Security  Council
for  consideration."  *
Even   Morse,   though   not   a  co-sponsor,  has  endorsed   the
Mansfield   resolution  while  introducing  a  UN   resolution   of
his  own,  S.  Con.  Res.  44.   His  discussion   with  Goldberg  at
the   hearing   leads   one   to   fear   that   he   is  shifting  from   a
critic  of  Johnson  on  the  war  to  a  collaborator.    Morse  said
that  he had  discussed  taking the war  to  the UN  with  Goldberg
after  his  appointment,  as  Ambassador  and  then  again  at  the
time  of  "the   steel  case"  when  they  were  both   at  the  White
House  "and   the  President  asked  us  to  talk  about  it   further."
Morse  said  he  endorsed  the  Mansfield   resolution  because   "I
thought  it  was  important  that  we  build  a  bridge  between  the
Congress  and  this  Administration in  trying to  resolve  some  of
these  foreign   policy  differences."   Morse  declared  that  many
* The  co-sponsors,  beside  Fulbright,  Bobby  Kennedy,  Mc-
Carthy,   McGovern,    Hartke,   Church,   Aiken,   Clark,   Cooper,
Morton,   Pell,  and  Young  of  Ohio,  all  of  whom  should  know
better,  includes  Anderson,  Bartlett,  Bayh,  Boggs,  Brewster,
Brooke,   Burdick,   Byrd   of   W.   Va.,   Cannon,   Carlson,  Case,
Ervin,  Griffin,  Harris,  Hart,  Inouye,  Javits,  Jordan  of  Idaho,
Teddy   Kennedy,  Lausche,  Long  of   Missouri,  Metcalf,   Mon-
dale,   Monroney,   Montoya,   Moss,   Muskie,   Nelson,   Pastore,
Pearson,  Prouty,  Proxmire,  Randolph,  Ribkoff,  Spong,  Sym-
ington,  Talmadge,  Tydings,  Williams  of   N.J.,   Yarborough,
Young  of   North  Dakota   and  a  hawk  like  Tower  of  Texas
whose  willingness   to   co-sponsor   this   "peace   move"  shows
how  meaningless  it  is.
The  Administration's  Foremost  Authority  on  Southeast  Asia  In  Action
Saigon—Vice  President  Humphrey  showed  flawless  politi-
cal  finesse  when  he  adroitly  sidestepped  a  loaded  invitation
to  comment  on  South  Vietnam's  biggest  and  sorest  internal
problem—government  corruption.  But  the  Humphrey  magic
failed  badly  later  at  a  protocol-stiff   diplomatic  gathering
when  he  mixed  up  a  couple  of  kings  and  presidents  .  .  •
Going  up  to  the  Laotian  delegate,  Prince  Outhong  Souvan-
navong,  chairman  of  the  Laotian  Royal  Council,  Humphrey
inquired   enthusiastically:    "And    how   is   your   wonderful
President?"    The   Prince   was   momentarily   taken   aback,
hesitated  and  then  replied,   "But   Mr.  Humphrey,   we  still
have  our  king  you  know."  A  moment  later  Humphrey  said
almost  the  same  thing  to  the  Thai  delegate—who  similarity
was  compelled  to  point  out  that  Thailand,  too,   was  still  a
monarchy.   Unabashed,  Humphrey  tried  it  again  with   For-
eign  Minister  Narciso  Ramos  of  the  Republic  of  the  Philip*
pines—and  finally  hit  the  jackpot.
—John  Randolph  in  the Los Angeles Times  Oct.  SI.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's   Weekly,  November  20, 1967
people   did  not  know   that   Johnson   had   favored   UN   inter-
vention  "from  the  very  beginning"  and  "has  always  welcomed
appropriate    [our   italics]  UN   participation  and   intervention
in  trying  to  seek  a  peace  in  Southeast  Asia."     In  this,  as  in
hailing  Goldberg's  statement  to  the  Committee  as  "historic",
Morse  made  himself   a  partner  in   deception.
Morse's  own  resolution   is  very  different   from   Mansfield's.
Morse's   would   direct  the  President   to  ask  the  UN   Security
Council  to  end  the  war  in  Vietnam,  "pledging  the  U.S.   in
advance  to  accept  and  carry  out  any  decision  on  the  matter  by
the   Council."    But   there   is—as   Morse   should   know   better
than  anyone  else—not  the  slightest  chance  that  Johnson  would
accept  a  UN   Security  Council   decision.   On  the  contrary,  as
the  new  U.S.  resolution  at  the  UN   shows,  we  are  not   even
willing  to  let  the  Security  Council  act without  tying  its  hands
by   making   it   accept   our   own   preconditions,     preconditions
which  require  a  Viet  Cong  surrender.
Goldberg's  Evasive    Language
The  supposed  concession  to  the  NLF  which  made  the  head-
lines  never  appeared   in  Goldberg's  statement  at  all.   It  came
up  under   questioning   by  Gore,  who  is  not  a  co-sponsor   of
the  Mansfield  resolution   and  subjected  Goldberg  to  the  only
thorough  grilling   that  he  got   (see  bottom  of  p.  3).      Gore
wanted   to  know   what   the   position   of   the   U.S.   would   be
about  inviting   the  NLF   to  participate   in  a  Security   Council
discussion.   Goldberg  said  "we would  not  stand  in the way ...
We  would  not  prevent  it  from  happening."   Gore  wanted   to
know  what  would   happen   if  there  were  eight  votes  for   the
invitation,  would   the  U.S.   supply   the   necessary  ninth   vote?
Again   Goldberg   was   unwilling   to   give   a   direct    answer.
"Well,"  was  all  he  would   say,  "in  light  of  the  statements   I
have  filed  with  you,  Senator,   the  U.S.   would   not  initiate  an
invitation.    But  if  the  Security  Council,   there  was  a   feeling
in  the  Security  Council  that  they  ought  to  be  invited  we  would
join  in  that  invitation."   That  does  not  say we  would   supply
the  missing  vote.  *
As  for  the  NLF's  position  at  a  Geneva   conference,   Gold-
*  The   invitation   wouldn't   be   worth   much  anyway   since
groups   or  individuals   invited   to   present   their   case   under
Rule  39 have  no  vote.
Hush-Hush  Briefings  Behind  Closed  Doors
"Those  of   you  who  have  attended  briefings  held  by
the  State  Department  or the  Defense  Department   know
the  pattern.   You  are  instructed  by  the   briefer   to  be
sure  to  keep  the  information  to  yourself  because   you
are  going  to  be  allowed into  the  inner  holy-of-holies  of
the   information   establishment.     The   presentation   is
labelled  'Top  Secret'  so  you  listen  intently  to  what  is
being  said  and always  waiting  to  hear  that  bit  of  news
that  is  so  hush-hush, but it  doesn't  come; and when you
ask  questions,  the  answers  are  classics  of  evasion  and
marvels  of  end  runs.   You  leave  the  meeting  wondering
how  the  briefers  could  think  you  could  be  so  stupid  to
think  you  have  been  thrilled  with  the  information  you
have  received  from  them,  trying  to  figure  out   what's
new,  what  has  been  said  you  don't  already  know,  and
then  you  stop  at  a  newsstand  to  read  the   paper  and
you   get   a   more  complete  and  detailed   account   than
you  heard  in  the.  secret   briefing.   Actually,  insofar   as
Vietnam  is  concerned, we  in  Congress  have  no informa-
tion that  is  not available to  you."
—From,  a  speech  by  Rep.  Schadeberg   (R.  Wis.),  in-
serted  in  the-Congressional  Record  Nov.   7.
berg   said  in   answer  to   a  question  by  Symington   that   "we
would  recognize  the  competence  of  the  conference  to   decide
the   invitees,  the   scope   and   to  enter  into   resolution   of   any
disputed  question   of  interpretations."    At  a  State  Department
press  conference   next   day,   however,   it  was  made  clear  that
this  did  not  mean  we  would  actually  accept  the  decisions  of
a  Geneva  conference  on  disputed  questions.   "Just  for   clarifi-
cation,"  State  Department  spokesman  Robert  McCloskey  was
asked,   "you   said,   quoting   the   Ambassador,   that   the    U.S.
government   would   accept   the   judgment   of   the   conference.
Concerning  what?   Concerning  the  invitation  or  the  participa-
tion?   Or  concerning  the  whole  question?"   This   followed—
A.  Participation  and—
Q.  Only?
A.  —and  the  form that  participation would take.
Q.  So  this  statement  is  restricted  only  to  the   participa-
tion,  that  the  U.S.  would accept judgment.
A.  That's  right.
Even  the  willingness  to  have  the  NLF  participate  was  con-
siderably  attenuated  by Goldberg's  only  other  reference  to  the
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Gore   Shows  How  Johnson  and  Goldberg   Misread   the   Geneva  Accords
Sen.   Gore   (D.  Tenn):   In  order  that  I  put  the   point,  I
refer  to  a  speech  which President  Johnson  made  before  the
Tennessee   General  Assembly  in  March  of  this  year  and  I
quote:   "We  believe  that  the  Geneva  accords  of   1954  and
1962   could   serve   as   the   central   element   of   a   peaceful
settlement.    These   accords   provide  in   essence   that   both
South   and  North   Vietnam  should  be  free   from   external
interference   while  at   the   same   time  they   would  be   free
INDEPENDENTLY   to   determine   their   position   on   the
question  of  reunification."  [Emphasis   added.]
Now  that  seems  to  be  the  position  which  both  you  and
the  President  and  the  State   Department  have   consistently
taken.   Yet  I  do  not  find  it,  as  the  President   has  said,  in
accord  with  the  Geneva  Agreement.   Let  me  read  you  this,
this   is   the   final   declaration   of   the   Geneva   Conference,
July  21,  1954:   "The  Conference  recognizes  that  the  essen-
tial   purpose  of  the  agreement   relating  to  Vietnam   is   to
settle  military  questions  with  a  view  to  ending  hostilities
and  that  the  military  demarcation  line  is   provisional  and
should   not   in   any   way   be  interpreted   as   constituting   a
political  or territorial  boundary." . . . Yet you and  President
Johnson   refer   to   the   two   political   entities   acting   inde-
pendently.   This  .  .  .  appears  to  be a  contradiction.
Ambassador   Goldberg:   .  .  .  What  I  am  saying  is  that
under  the  Geneva  Accords  as  we  understand  them,  and  we
have  not  heard  Hanoi  dispute  this,  there  would  be  an  elec-
tion  in  the  South  as  to  whether  they  want  to  be  reunified
.  .  .  (and)  there  would  be an  election  in  the  North ...  If
the  two  peoples  North  and  South  decide  they  want  to  be
reunified  we  would  not  interpose  any  barriers.
—Before  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  Nov.  2.
So  the   Thieu-Ky   government,   which  has   just   come   to
power  through  rigged  elections,  would  run  the  election  in
the  South  to  determine   whether   the  people  wanted  reunifi-
cation!   The  new  U.S.  resolution  at  the  UN  does   provide
for   "international   supervision    of   the   foregoing    through
such  machinery  as  may  be  agreed  upon."  But  how  effective
that  might  be is  problematical.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  20, 1967
The  Simple  Reply  the  State  Dept.  Declined  to  Give
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
NLF's  role  and  by  McCloskey's gloss  on  it  next  day.   Toward
the  close  of  the  hearing  Senator  Pell  told  Goldberg,  "I  think
we  have  made  a  great  step  forward   in  my  mind  here  today
in  the  assertion  of  our  willingness,  if  necessary,  to  deal  with
it  [the  NLF],   not  deal  with,  but  negotiate with  the  represen-
tatives  of  the  NLF."   Goldberg's  reply was  "Well,  I  think  the
President  has  frequently   said  that  is  not   an  insurmountable
problem,   and   I   was  repeating  it   in   that   context."    [Italics
added.]   But  in  that  context  the  U.S.  has  never  said  it  was
ready  to  negotiate with  the  NLF.   The  President's  exact  words
as  quoted   by  McCloskey  at   the   State  Department  next  day
were  from  the  speech  of  July  28,  1965,  in  which Johnson  said,
"The  Viet  Cong  would have no  difficulty  in  being  represented
and   having  their  views  presented   if   Hanoi   for   a   moment
decides  to  cease  her  aggression."   McCloskey  said  Goldberg's
statement  was  to  be   read  in   the   light   of   that  Presidential
declaration.  The  colloquy that  followed  left  the  matter  murky:
Q.  Bob,  to  clarify  the  business  of  the  relationship   with
these  statements  to  previous  ones  in  your  statement.  The
Sen.   Pell:    I   think   the   record   should   show   very
clearly  that  every  witness  who  has  come  here  on  this
[Mansfield]  resolution  [to  refer  the  Vietnam  war  to  the
UN  Security  Council]  has  specifically  stated  that  the
resolution  did  not  have  a  Chinaman's  chance  or  to  use
more  diplomatic  words  to  that  effect  unless  there  was
a  cessation  of the bombing.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  Nov.  2.
emphasis—at  least  in  private—has  always  been  that  the
Viet  Cong  participation  and  the  presentation  of  VC  views
would  be through  Hanoi,  the  North  Vietnamese   delegation.
Is that what Mr. Goldberg means?
Mr.  McCloskey:  Look,  I'm  just  not  going  to  add  to  the
multiplication  of  language  on  this  subject.   I've  made  an
effort  to clarify  . . .
Q.  Are  you clarifying or reiterating  what he said?
A.  Both.
Q.  You did a better  job at  the latter than  the  former.
The   simple,  the  clarifying,   answer  would  have  been   that
Goldberg  meant  the  U.S.  was  now  prepared   to  accept  direct
NLF   participation  if   the   conference  so   decided.    Mr.   Mc-
Closkey  was  unwilling to  give  that  answer.
OWNERSHIP,   MANAGEMENT    AND    CIRCULATION
(Act  of  October  23,  1962;   Section  4369,  Title  39,  United  States  Code)
1.  Date  of  Filing  November  9,  1967.
2.  Title  of  Publication:  I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.
3.  Frequency  of  issue:   Every   Monday   except  last  in  December  and   first
in  January:   bi-weekly   in  July:   not  published   in  August.
4.  Location  of  known   office  of  publication:   5618  Nebraska  Avenue,   N.W.,
Washington,  D.  C.  20015.
5.  Location  of   the   headquarters  or   general  business   offices   of  the    pub-
lishers:   5618   Nebraska   Avenue,   N.W.,  Washington,   D.  C.   20015.
6.  Names  and  addrnses  of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:  I.  F.
Stone,  same  address.
7.  Owner   (If   owned   by  a  partnership   or  other  unincorporated   firm,   its
name   and   address,   as   well   as   that   of   each   individual   must   be   given):  •
I.   F.   Stone,   5618   Nebraska   Avenue,'  N.   W.,   Washington,   D.   C.   20015;
Esther  M. Stone,  same  address.
8.  Known   bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or
holding  1  percent  or  more  of  total  amount  of  bonds,  mortgages  or  other
securities   (If   there  are   none,   so  state):   none.
9.  Paragraphs  7  and  8  include,   in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  secur-
ity  holder   appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustee  or   in   any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation  for  whom
. such  trustee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full   knowledge  and  belief   as  to  the   circumstances  and   conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold   stock  and  securities  in  a  capacity
other  than  that  of  a  bonafide  owner.
Average No. Copies
Each  Issue During   ' Single Issue Nearest
Preceding 12 months        To Filing Date
34,500                                38,500
A.  Total   No.   Copies   Printed
B.  Paid  Circulation
1.  Sales  Through  Agents,  News
Dealers  or   Otherwise                         1,570
2.  To  Term  Subscribers by
Mail,  Carrier  Delivery,  or  by
other  means                                        32,053
C.  Total  Paid  Circulation                                33,623
D.  Free  Distribution  (including
samples)  by  Mail,  Carrier  De-
livery,   or  by  Other  Means                    400
E.  Total  No.  of  Copies Distributed               34,023
F.  Office  Use,   Etc.                                             477
G.  Total                                                                34,500
2,054
86,871
37,425
500
37,926
575
38,500
I   certify  that  the  statements  made  by  me  above  are  correct  and   com-
plete.   I.  F.  Stone,  editor.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends If  You  Send  Us  Stamped,  Addressed   Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F,  Stone's  new  book:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished  D
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
11/20/67
F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week  in  December  and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..    Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall  rates:
$17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED