I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967may22.pdf

============================================================

How  Did  Lovestone  Get Marshall  Plan Funds For Hanky-Pank  ? P.  2
Just  A  Suggestion
Now  that  the  Greek  Army, in  taking  over  and  renovating      dox   Church,   couldn't  the   CIA,   perhaps  working  through
Greece   (possibly  with  the   aid  of   our  CIA),  has  removed     the  Swiss  Guard,  get  that  peacenik  out  of  the  Papacy and
the  Primate  and  put  its  own  man  in  as  head  of  the  Ortho-      replace  him  with  somebody  reliable  like  Spellman?
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  18
MAY  22,  1967°
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
If  Daddy Keeps At It, Luci, One Day You Won't Wake Up
The  President's  now  famous  "World  War  III"   bedtime  re-
mark  to  his  daughter,  Luci,  deserves  closer  examination.  The
story  has  been  circulating  in  the  press  corps  on  an   off-the-rec-
ord  basis  for  months.     Mr.  Johnson  has  told  it  so  often  that
it  is  surprising  it  did  not  get  into  print  sooner.    It  seems  to
have  become  one  of  his  favorite  anecdotes.    One  can  under-
stand  a  worried  President   telling  his  daughter   the   nigJit  of
the  first  air  raids  in  the  immediate  viciniy  of  Hanoi  and  Hai-
phong,  "Your  Daddy  may  go  down  in  history  as  having  un-
leashed  World  War  III,"   adding,  in  case  that  was not  enough
to  get  her  attention,  "You  may not  wake  up  tomorrow."     But
it  is  hard  to  understand  the  mentality  that  can  tell  and  retell
the  story  as  if  it  were  some  kind  of  creditable  escapade.     A
James  Reston  column  last  November  4  quoted  Johnson  as say-
ing  he had  been  on tranquillizers  since his heart  attack  in  1955.
If  this  is  how  lightly  Johnson  risks  a  world  war,  the  rest  of
the  country  had  better  start  taking  them  too.
The  Very  Next  Day
The   most  extraordinary  aspect  of  this   affair   has  gone   un-
noticed.    The  day  after  the  remark  to  Luci,  Johnson  flew  out
to  Omaha  for  a  speech  in  which  he  told   the  people  of  this
country,  "peace  is  more  within  our  reach  than  at  any  time  in
this  century."    This  should  add  a  few  miles  more  to  that  cred-
ibility  gap.     Ever  since  Johnson   made  his  first  major   escala-
tion   in   February,   1965,   by  beginning   the   bombing   of   the
North,  there  have  been  repeated  hints  in  the  press  that  Hanoi
and  Haiphong  were  to  be  left  alone  because  Peking  or  Mos-
cow  or  both  might  intervene  if  the  capital  and  the  main  port
of  North  Vietnam  were  smashed.     It  has  been  impossible  to
ascertain  if   these  hints   reflected   discreet   warnings   from   the
Russians  and  Chinese  or  discreet  reassurances  from  Washing-
ton.    Now  we  learn  from  the  Luci  anecdote  that  Johnson,  in
authorizing  air  strikes  for  the  first  time  within  the  immediate
vicinity   of   Hanoi   and   Haiphong   felt   that   he   was   risking
World  War  III.    The  country  was  neither   consulted  nor  ad-
vised  on  the  gravity  of  that  step.    On  the  contrary  it  was  de-
ceived.    The  only  sense  in  which  it  could  truthfully  be  said
that  peace  was  then  "more  within  our  reach  than  at  any  time
in  this  century"  was  if  those  air  raids  had  set  off  a  full-scale
nuclear  confrontation  between  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  and  with  it
a  peace  of  extinction.
The  only  charitable  explanation  is that  when  Johnson  spoke
of   peace  that  day  in   Omaha   and   again   at  Des  Moines,   he
meant  the  surrender  of  the  other  side  and  had  been  sold  the
idea  by  the  Joint   Chiefs   of   Staff   that   these   bombings   were
worth  the  risk  because  they  offered  a  quick  victory.    The  June
5  *
If  A  Chinese  Army  Were  On  Our Border
Sen.    MORTON   (R.   Ky)    —   If   500,000 Communist
Chinese  troops  were  within  400  miles  of  the  U.S.,  say
in  Mexico or  Canada, and  they  started  moving towards
the  borders  of   our  country,  we  certainly   would   react
very    strongly,    without   worrying   too    much   about
whether  we  were  wrong  or  right.
Sen.   COOPER   (R.  Ky)—There  would  be  an  imme-
diate  reaction.
Sen.   MORTON—And   without  any   consideration  of
our  strength  as  compared  with  theirs  .  .  .
Sen.   CHURCH   (D.   Idaho)—When  American  troops
were  moving into  North  Korea, ever  closer  to  the  Yalu,
President   Truman  was   repeatedly   advised   by   those
highly   placed  in  the  Pentagon   and  the   State   Depart-
ment—one  of  whom  was  Dean  Rusk—that  the  Chinese
would  never  intervene  .  .  .  The  Chinese  did  choose  to
intervene  .  .  .  (though)   we  were  the  only  country  in
the  world  then  possessed  of  nuclear  weapons ...  if  it
(escalation)   is  to  lead  us  into  a  war  with  China,  then
we  face  a  tragedy  the  costs  of   which  are  impossible
to  calculate  and  the  end  impossible  to  foresee.
—In  the Senate, May  15.
29  raids  opened  three  weeks  of  savage  attack  on  the  oil  in-
stallations  in  and  around  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.  The   briefings
in  Saigon  and  the  press  conference  held  by  Secretary  McNa-
mara  the  day  they  began  created  the  impression  that  this  was
a  swift  and  easy  way  to  dry  up  North  Vietnam's  aid  to  the
guerrillas.    McNamara  said  the  raids  were  ordered  "to  coun-
ter  a mounting  reliance  by North  Vietnam  on  the  use of  trucks
and  powered   junks  to  facilitate  the  infiltration  of   men   and
supplies   into   South   Vietnam."      Triumphant   headlines   ap-
peared  next  day  over  the  Navy's  claim  that  two  miles  from
the center  of  Haiphong  its fliers had  hit  installations  represent-
ing  40%  of  North  Vietnam's  oil  storage  capacity  and  95%  of
its  tanker-unloading  capacity  and  left   them   80%   destroyed.
From   these   first   headlines   one   would   have   imagined   that
henceforth  only  a  trickle  of  light  arms  transportable  by bicycle
and  foot  would   reach  the  South  while  the   economic  life  of
the  North  would  be  crippled.*
Now  almost  a  year  later,  it  is  clear  that  the  sequel  of  these
raids  was  a  sharp   escalation  in  the  volume  and   size  of   the
arms  and  ammunition  supplied.   There  has  been  an extraordi-
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
*  Few  noticed,  however,  that  8  days  later   reconnaissance
photos  showed  70%  of  the  installations  were  still  in  opera-
tion,  Facts-on-File  July  7.   These  sober  revisions  never  seem
to  catch  up  with  the  original  claims  in  this  fallaciously  pre-
cise  numbers  game.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May Z2,1967
An  Open  Letter   to  Senator   Fulbright   From  A  Noted   Crusading   Labor   Leader
How  Did  Lovestone  Obtain  Marshall  Plan  Funds  For  CIA-Xype  Activities?
Dear  Senator   Fulbright:
As  a  union  official   for   a  quarter  of  a  century  and  author
of  many  books  on  foreign  affairs  and  labor,  I'd  like  to  draw
your  attention  to  a  recent  statement  (May  9)   by  Jay  Love-
stone,  director  of   the  AFL-CIO  international  affairs  depart-
ment.    In  denying that  his  organization accepted  money  from
the  CIA,  Mr.  Lovestone  admitted  receiving  "generous"   sums
from   Marshall  Plan  counterpart   funds.     If   true,  this  is  as
shocking  as  the  CIA  charge,  for  it  means  that  the  Marshall
Plan  was  secretly  involved  in  intelligence  activities.
Behind   the   Iron   Curtain
In  mid-1965  Irving  Brown,  Mr.   Lovestone's  closest  asso-
ciate,  told  me:  "We  had  relations with  people  behind the  iron
curtain  through  men  such  as  Hans  Jahn  of  the  German  rail-
road  unions."    Donald   Robinson,  in  a  laudatory  article  on
Brown  in  the  Readers  Digest,  records  that  Hans  Jahn  "told
me about  an  undercover  organization  he has set up  ...    Irving
Brown  helped  us.  ...     Much  of  what  he  [Brown]  has  done
in  the  cloak-and-dagger realm  cannot  be  recounted.    If  would
endanger  the  lives  of  his  associates  and  jeopardize  their mis-
sions."    The  New  York   Times   (October   10,  1948)    reported
that  the  Free  Trade  Union  Center  in  Exile,  formed  with  the
help  of  the  AFL,  "appears  to  have  at  its  disposal  a  working,
intelligence  system."
Counterpart  funds  were  supposed   to  be  spent  exclusively
by  agreement  with  the  specific  nation  receiving  Marshall  Plan
aid,   and  within  that  nation's  borders.     It  would  have  been
illegal  to  spend  it  on  such  activities as  those  of  Herr  Jahn  or
the  Free  Trade  Union  Center  in  Exile,  first  because  it  was
international  in  scope  and  secondly  because  it  was  of  an  in-
telligence  nature.   The  Marshall  Plan  was  formulated  to  in-
crease  national  production  and  living  standards,  not  to  engage
in  intelligence.
Mr.  Lovestone's  claim  of  receiving  counterpart  funds  needs
review  for  other  reasons.    A  major  activity of  the  Lovestone-
Brown  team  was  to  split  the  French  and  Italian  labor  move-
ments.    It  is  well-known  too  that  Mr.   Brown  aided  a  man
named  Ferri-Pisani  in  smashing  a  strike  of  dockers  in  Mar-
seilles who  refused  to  unload  munitions. Was  this  too financed
Despite   All  That  Bombing
"Saigon—Despite   the   recent   escalation   of   the   air
war  against  North  Vietnam,  Communist  troops  now  are
better    supplied   with    heavy   ammunition   than    ever
before.    The  enemy's   ability  to   move  his   supplies  is
being  demonstrated   daily  in  the  current  fierce  fighting
between  U.S.  Marines  and  North  Vietnamese  regulars
along  the  DMZ  (demilitarized  zone).   Less  than  a  year
ago  a  mortar  barrage  of  50  or  60  rounds  was   unusual.
But  since  early  February  the  U.S.-Vietnamese  positions
at  Gio  Linh  have  been  hit  with  nearly   15,000  rounds
of   mortars,   rockets   and   artillery.    One  of   the   main
reasons  is  that   heavy   concentrations  of   enemy   anti-
aircraft   batteries  in  and  near  the   DMZ  have   reduced
U.S.   aerial   observation.    Anti-aircraft  fire  is  so   thick
that    light   aircraft   are   barred   from   the   area   and
observation   is   handled  by  jets  that  fly   7,000  feet  up
to  avoid  being   shot   down.   The  results  are  much  less
satisfactory.   An  even   greater   problem  is  that   Navy
vessels have  failed  to  stem  the flow of  supplies   arriving
by  sea.   Another  factor  is  that  the  latest   intensification
of   the   air-  war  has   not   been   aimed   at   the   flow   of
material   to   the  south—hitting   North   Vietnamese   jet
airfields,  the  steel  mills,  the  power   plants—have  been
more  'punitive.'"
—Ray.  R.  Cofiey,   Chicago  Daily  News,  May  IS  (abr.)
by  Marshall   Plan  monies?    Did   France  and  Italy   approve?
Furthermore,   Mr.    Lovestone's   statement   refers   only   to
Italy,  Germany,  and  France.    It  does  not  account  for  the  im-
pressive   sums  made   available  to   union    officials    in   Japan,
Africa,   India,  Vietnam,  Latin  America,  nor   for   the   monies
given  to  unionists  in  British  Guiana  during  the  1963   general
strike  aimed  at  overthrowing  the  .Cheddi  Jagan   government.
All  of  this  is  highly  disturbing.    It  implies  that  not  only
the  CIA  but  agencies  set  up  for  economic  aid  are  involved
in   intelligence  and   in   clandestine  activities.     If   Mr.   Love-
stone's  claim  is  valid  it  means  that  private  individuals  and
private  organizations  are,  in  part,  making  American  foreign
policy,  and  doing  it  secretly without  any  possibility  of   review
either  by  the  rank  and  file  of  the  American  trade  unions  or
the  American  people.    I  hope  you  will  investigate.
Sidney   Lens
Guaranteeing  Freedom  of  Choice, Ky's  Choice,  That  Is,  In  South  Vietnam
Premier   Ky,  a   Hitler   admirer  whom  we   are  trying   to
retread  as  a  democratic   leader,  seems  to  have  novel  views
of  constitutionalism.   He  has  not   omly   announced   his   can-
didacy  for  President,   but  his   readiness   for  a  coup   should
he   lose.    He   told   reporters    during   a   visit   to   a   refugee
village   near   Saigon  that  if   he  were   defeated   by  a  Com-
munist  or  a  neutralist,   "I  am  going  to  fight  him  militarily."
Ky   has   already   shown   a   gift   for   defining  these   terms
broadly.
Ky's  excuse  for  a  coup  is,  as  he  put  it,  "In  any  demo-
cratic   country   you   have   the   right   to   disagree   with   the
views  of  others."   This   right,  if   you  are  a  military   man,
apparently   includes   the  right  to  overthrow   them   if   they
defeat  you  in  an  election.   The  right  of  disagreement,  how-
ever,  does  not  (in  Ky's  book)  extend  to  civilian  disagree-
ment  with  the  military.   For  in  the  same  talk  with   reporters
he  announced  that  press  censorship—and  the  censors  are
Ky's  military—would  continue  during  the  election  campaign
now  beginning.    So  Ky's   men  will  control   the  press  while
he  is  running  for  President.
South    Vietnam's    new    Constitution     was    unanimously
adopted   by  the   Assembly   on   March   18  and  unanimously
approved  by  Ky  and  the  military  council  next  day,  to  take
effect  in  30  days.   Though   its   guarantee   of  press   freedom
is   full   of   loopholes   none   envisaged   continuation   of   press
censorship   by  the   military.   We   ask   again:   how   do  you
have  a  free  election  without  a  free  press?
We  are  continually   astonished   at   how  insensitive   U.S.
editors   are   to   this   issue.    Of   the   four   Sunday   May   14
papers   in  which  we  saw  the   AP   dispatch   from   Laithieu,
South   Vietnam,   reporting   these   statements   by   Ky,   only
one—the  New  York  Times—left  in  the  paragraph  in  which
Ky  said  press  censorship   would  continue  during  the   presi-
dential  campaign.     Neither   the   Washington   Post  nor  the
Washington   Star.nor  the  Baltimore  Sun  printed  this  part
of  the  AP  story,  though  in  our  opinion  the  most  important
part  of  all.   Is  this  how  we  stand   guard  over   freedom   of
choice  for  the  people  of   South   Vietnam?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  22, 1967
McNamara  Turns  Up  for  The  Miners  and  the  First  AEC  Negro   Member  Against  Them
The  Snail's  Pace  of  Action  Against  Lung  Cancer  in  Our Uranium  Mines
The  oldest  hazard  associated  with  nuclear  industry  was  ob-
served  long  before  the  atom  bomb  but  the  U.S.  government
has just  issued  its first order  dealing  with  it.   This  is  the  high
incidence  of   lung  cancer  among  uranium  miners.     A   high
death  rate  was  noticed  centuries  ago  in  certain  famous  Ger-
man  and  Czech  mines  which  have  been  producing  silver  and
cobalt  since  1500,  but  also  contain  uranium  and  radium.  The
cause  was  first  identified   as  lung  cancer  in  -1880.     Scientific
studies  in  the  30s  found  that  about  half  the  miners  had  died
of  it  and  traced  this  to  radioactivity.    As  a  result  the  Interna-
tional  Commission  on  Radiation  Protection   set  strict   health
standards  for  uranium  mines.    The   ICRP  standard  has  just
been  made the  legal  one  in  this  country for  mines working  on
government  uranium  contracts, by  Secretary  of  Labor  Wirrz —
over  the  objections  of   the   Atomic  Energy  Commission   and
the  industry.
Wirtz  Treated  As  Dangerous  Innovator
Four   days   after   taking  this  long   overdue  step,  Secretary
Wirtz  was  called  before  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic En-
ergy  and   treated  as  a  radical  innovator.    Uranium   interests
have  been  fighting  against adequate  health  standards  since  the
cold  war  boom  in  uranium  began  in  1948.*    The  U.S.  Public
Health  Service reported  in  1955  that  of  400  samples  taken  in
75  mines,  radon  concentrations were  20  to  230  times  the  ac-
ceptable  level  set  by  the  ICRP.    The  AEC  used  a  technicality
to  avoid   responsibility.    The   Joint   Committee   went   along,
though   Leo  Goodman,   the  tireless   and  devoted  nuclear  ex-
pert  of  the  UAW,  called  the  dangerous  situation  to  the  Com-
mittee's' attention  in  1959.    Goodman  cited  the  success  of  the
French  government  in  reducing  these  hazards  to  safe  limits by
a  ventilation  and  control  system  which  added  only  1  percent
to   operating   costs.     The   problem   was  left   to   the   mining
States,  which  are  under  the  thumb  of  the  mining  interests.
A  series  of  articles  by  J.  V.  Reistrup  in  the   Washington
Post  this  spring  and  some  tart  editorials   in  the  same   paper
seem  finally  to  have  put  a  burr  under  the  saddle  of  the  bu-
*  In that  year  the  AEC to  induce  expansion  set  an  effective
price  of  $18 a  pound  for  uranium  oxide,  then  selling  at   $1.60.
The  AEC still  guarantees  $8 a  pound  as  against  a  world  price
of  $4.30,  though — as  Chairman  Pastore  of  the  Joint  Commit-
tee  admitted  at   the  Wirtz  hearing — "We  have  enough   ura-
nium  coming  out  of  our ears" and the  AEC — as a  Washington
Post  editorial  observed  tartly  the  same  day — only  buys  ura-
nium   "as  an   economic   favor   to   the   mines."    Our  nuclear
stockpiles  are  scandalous   for  their  "overkill"  capacity.   One
high  nuclear  official   said  ruefully  in  a  private  conversation,
"We  have  turned  on  the  faucet  and  don't   know  how  to  turn
it  off."
The  Story  That  Sparked   Action
"More  than  a  thousand  uranium  miners  in  this  coun-
try  can  be  expected  to  develop  lung  cancer  by  the  end
of   1985,   according   to   a   study   now   receiving   highly
restricted  circulation   in  the   Executive   branch   of   the
government ...  A  secret   briefing   paper   within  the
Department    of   Health,   Education   and   Welfare   says
that   even   the   standards    for   limiting   radiation   now
being  considered  by  the  interagency   Federal   Radiation
Council  would  result   in  a  cancer   rate  double  that  of
the  rest  of  the  country."
—J.  V. Reistrup  in  the  Washington  Post,  April  H.
reaucracy.    The  Federal  Radiation  Council  which  was  estab-
lished  by  Eisenhower   in  I960 'presumably  to  focus  authority
in  these  matters  met  on  the  problem  May  4.    Of   the  seven
members  of  the  FRC,  the  representatives  of  AEC, Agriculture
and  Defense  voted  against,  and  those  of  Labor,  HEW  and  In-
terior   for   the  ICRP  level,  as  proposed   by  Secretary  Wirtz.
The   seventh  member,   Commerce,  evaded  the  taking  of  any
position.    An  FRC  decision  would  have  been  a  toothless  "ad-
visory"   recommendation   only.
Next  day Wirtz,  reminded  by  the  Washington  Post  that  he
had   power   to   act  under   the   Walsh-Healey   Act,   issued   an
order  on  May  5  making  it  mandatory  for  mines  working  on
government   contracts   to  abide  by  the   safety   level  set  years
ago  by  the  ICRP.    The   Interior  Department   was  given  au-
thority  to  set  such  standards  for  all  mines  in  an  act  passed
by  Congress  last  year  but  has  been  waiting  for  a recommenda-
tion  by  the  FRC.    The  surprise  of  Wirtz's  appearance  before
the  Joint  Committee   May  9  was  his  revelation  that  Secretary
McNamara  had  reversed  the  action  taken  by the  Pentagon  rep-
resentative  on  the  FRC  and  was supporting  Wirtz.    This  gives
him  a  majority.
The  Joint  Committee  gave  Wirtz  a  rough  going  over.    Its
senior  House  member,  Holifield,  who  rotates  in  the chairman-
ship  and  was  once  a  liberal,  sneered   at  Wirtz's  *high  and
noble  sentiments"   (see  box  below)   and  commented  that  we
could   also  "stop  every  death   on  the   Washington-Baltimore
highway  by  closing  down  that  highway."    The  nuclear estab-
lishment  trotted  out  the  first  Negro  member  of  the  AEC,  Dr.
Samuel  M.  Nabrit,  Jr.,  of  Texas  Southern,  to  testify  in  favor
of  an  alternative  health  standard  favored  by  the  mining  in-
terests   and   proposed   by  Dr.   Paul   C.   Tompkins,   the   AEC
smoothie  who  became  executive  director  of  the  FRC.    Wirtz
said  the  Acting  Surgeon  General  had  testified  that  this  stand-
ard  would  mean  a  future  lung  cancer  death  rate  among uran-
ium  miners  of   3  times  the  normal  rate.
Noble  Words Rendered Ironic  By  A  17-Year  Delay Which Means Death  for  Many  Miners
"After   17  years  of   debate   and  discussion  regarding  the
private,   State   and  Federal   responsibilities   for   conditions
in  the  uranium  mines,  there  are  today   (or  were  when  these
hearings   were  called)  no  adequate   and  effective  health  and
safety    standards    or   inspection    procedures    for    uranium
mining  .  .  .  The  best  available  evidence   is  that  over   two-
thirds   of   the   approximately    2500   underground    uranium
miners  are  working  under  conditions   which  at  least  triple
their  prospects  of  dying  from  lung  cancer  .  .  .
"The   ultimate   question   here   is   whether   an   economic
enterprise  is  to  be  required  to  satisfy   the  human  values  it
affects  or  whether   these  values  are  to  be  compromised   to
serve   the   enterprise.    This   issue   rarely   arises   in   such
clear,  sharp  outline.    When  it   does,   there   is  no  more—or
any  more  time—for  compromise."
—Secretary  of  Labor  Wirtz  to  the  Joint  Committee  May  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 22,1967
The   "Pacification"  Effort  Was   on  the  Verge  of  Collapse
(Continued   from   Page One)
nary  increase  in  the  firepower  of  the  guerrillas  (see box  on
p.  2).    SAMs have  appeared  as  far  south  as  the demilitarized
zone  where  they  recently shot  down  a  Skyhawk jet  and  forced
suspension  of  B-52  flights  in  that  area;  the  B-52 flies too  low
and  too  slowly to  evade  the  SAM.    The  l40-mm  rocket  made
its  appearance  in  the  attack  on  the  Danang  air  base  last  Feb-
ruary  and  on  May  12  as  far  south  as  Saigon  where  it  was  used
in  the  attack on  Bien  Hoa  air  base.  There  six Americans  were
killed,   100  wounded   and   29  planes  destroyed   or   damaged.
American   casualties  are   increasing.    The   number   of   both
guerrilla  and  conventional clashes  seem  to  have  risen  and  the
so-called  "pacification"  has  had  to  be  shifted  to  U.S.  military
control  to  save  it  from  collapse.    The  South  Vietnamese  have
failed  to  provide  security: as  against  25  attacks all  last  year  on
"pacification"  teams  there  have  been  "more  than  300  attacks
this  year  on  pacification  teams  and  more  than  500  team  mem-
bers  have  been  killed  or  wounded."     (Raymond   Coflfey  from
Saigon  in  Chicago  Daily  News,  May  5).    These  CIA-trained
teams  have  the  job  of  "rooting  out" suspected  subversives  in
the  villages;  it  is  easy  to  imagine  the  injustice  they  commit
and  the  hatred  they sow.
Another   Gamble  Ahead?
What  all  this  spells   is  the  coming  end   of   the   politically
comfortable  war  Johnson   has  so  far  waged—a  war   without
special  taxes  or  wage  and  price  controls,  a  war   of  one-year
tours  of   duty,  fought   by  the   less  fortunate  of   our   society,
white  and  Negro,  while  the  junior  executive  types  of  the  poli-
tically  powerful  Reserve  forces  have  escaped  a  call-up.     Now
the  military  forces  are  crying  out  for  more  troops   or  "we'll
be  here  forever"  as  Hanson  Baldwin's  anonymous  source  put
it  in  the  New   York  Times,  May  17.    Here  again  it  is  worth
looking  back  at  the  events  of  last  June  29.    Again   there  is
the  temptation  to  "go  for  broke"  in  one big  new plunge,  then
at  the  oil  resources  of  the  North,  this  time  perhaps  to  shut off
Haiphong  harbor  altogether,  again  at  the  risk  of  a  confronta-
tion  with  Russia—anything  rather  than   face  the  reality  of  a
long,  painful  war  of  attrition  on  the  ground   against   resolute
The  Stumbling  Block  to  Peace  Talks
Sen.  AIKEN  (R.  Vt.)—There  is  no  question  that  the
present  policy of  escalating  higher and higher  is bring-
ing   us  pretty   close   to  a  world  calamity  .  .  .   Since
escalation   has   not   succeeded,   I   think   it   is   entirely
possible  that  deescalation  might  have  a  better   effect,
because  no  one  can  tell  me  that  the  North  Vietnamese
people,  and  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  his  friends  would  not  like
to find some  way  out of  this  war themselves  .  .  .
Sen.  MORSE  (D.  Ore)—We  never really  made uncon-
ditional  offers  to  negotiate  .  .  .
Sen.   PELL   (D.   R.I.)—The   basic   reef   upon  which
negotiations   between  us,  the  NLF  and  the  North  Viet-
namese  founder  is  that  our  adversaries  do  not  believe
that  we  will  accept  a  government  that  represents   all
the   various  factions   of   that   unhappy  country,   South
Vietnam  .  .  .  We  did  not  accept  with  good  grace  the
results  of  the  Geneva  conference ...  I  think  we  will
have   to   publicly  agree   to   accept   the   results   before
going  into  a  conference.   I  hope  that  we  will  do  so.
—In  the  U.S. Senate,  May  15.
guerrillas.     Again   Johnson   would   rather   gamble   on  World
War  III  than  face  elections  next  year  with  a  country  awakened
to  the  painful  costs.
McNamara   said  June  29  in  announcing  the  new  stepup  in
air  raids  that  one  of  the  purposes  was to  punish  the North  for
continuing   its  attempt  "to   subvert  and  destroy   the   political
institutions  of  the  South."    This  is  the  myth  that  leads  to  dis-
aster.     If  this  is  not  a  rebellion   but  a  conspiracy  and  an  in-
vasion,  why  limit  the  punishment  to  North  Vietnam?    Why
not  hit  at  the  sources  in  China  and  Russia?    Why  not  make
it  painful   for  the  Kremlin?     The   theory   of  the  war  as  an
external  conspiracy  which  can  be  shut  off  like  a  faucet  leads
straight   to  a  confrontation  with   Moscow.     This  is  the  ines-
capable   logic  of  the  Johnson-Rusk-McNamara  theory  of   the
war.    This  is  the  reason  for  the  fresh  outcries  in  the  Senate.
This  is why U  Thant  warns  that  we may be  in  the  first  stages
of  World  War  III.   This  is  why  the  Pope  spoke  in  anguish
at  Fatima.    Desperation,  impatience,  the  oversimplification  of
a   complex   struggle   are  leading  Johnson   straight   to   a con-
frontation   that  would   put  world   civilization  in  jeopardy.
"The   Haunted  Fifties"  Is  Out  of  Print  But  Random   House  Will  Publish  A  New  Collection  of  IIFS  Pieces,   "In
A  Time  of  Torment"  in   November
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Street   .................................
Pitv
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name   .......................
Street   .................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington,   D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
Zin..... ...........  State......
5/22/67
Indicate   if   announcement   wished   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Glass  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last   week   iti   December   and  the
first  week   in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.W., Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation    Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone:    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;   510  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$17  to  Europe:  ?20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED