I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jun19.pdf

============================================================

A  Plan for  Permanent  A rab-Israeli  Peace, Pps. 1-2
Words  Neither   Israel  Nor  the  World  Should  Ignore  Though  Spoken  In  Defeat
"The   forces  of   imperialism  imagine  that   Abdel   Nasser     try   to   picture   it   as   Abdel  Nasser's  empire.   That  is  not
is  their   enemy.    I  want  it  to  be  clear  to  them  that  it  is      true,   for   the   hope   for   Arab   unity   began   before   Gamal
the  entire  Arab  nation  and  not  Gamal   Abdel   Nasser.   The      Abdel  Nasser.   It  will  remain   after   Gamal   Abdel  Nasser."
forces   hostile   to   the   Arab   nationalist   movement   always                     —From  the  speech  offering    his  resignation  June  9
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
XV,  NO.  22
JUNE   19,  1967'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The Place for LBJ To Practice The Reconciliation He Preaches
There  is  no  doubt  that  Johnson's  stock  has  risen  with  the
end  of  the  Arab-Israel  war.   It  has  risen  because  he  did  not
intervene  militarily.    All  the  sensitive  political  seismographs
in  Washington  indicate that  the  country  is  fed  up  with  uni-
lateral  interventions, with  trying  to  be  the  world's  policeman
and  indeed  with  the  whole  conception—so  dear  to  the  Penta-
gon  and  the  State Department—of  imposing  a  Pax  Americana
upon  a  refractory  globe.   The  overwhelming  mood  is  that  one
Vietnam   is  enough.   Just  as  the   Vietnamese  war   has  over-
extended   U.S.   military  power   so  it   has   also  exhausted   the
American  people's   tolerance  for   foreign  adventures.   It  may
well  be  that  Johnson   did  not  practice  gunboat  diplomacy  in
the   Arab-Israeli  crisis  because  he   is  short   of   "gunboats"—
U.S.   naval  power   was   on   the   wrong   side   of   Suez   to   be
effective,   U.S.  airpower  elsewhere  has  been  stripped  of  pilots
and  planes  by  Vietnam,  and  it  would  have  taken  at  least  a
partial  mobilization  to  find  troops  for  the  Middle  East.   What-
ever  the  reason,  Johnson  for  the  first  time  acted  like  the  dove
he  claimed  to  be  in  the  Goldwater   campaign.
VC  Too  Strong   For  Us  In  Two-Thirds  of  Vietnam
Perhaps  he  may be  encouraged  now,  despite  Rusk's  rigidity,
to  apply  in  the  Far  East the  restraint  he  showed  in  the  Middle
East.   The  White   House  is  busy  preaching   reconciliation  to
the  Israelis  and  the  Arabs.   It  ought  to  set  an  example   by
practicing  what  it  preaches.   The  quarrel  between  Hanoi  and
Washington   is  a  minor  scratch  compared  to  the  deep  wound
of   the  Arab-Israeli  feud.   We  want  the  Arabs  to   recognize
realities  in  the  Middle  East.  Why  not  recognize  a  few  realities
on   our   own   in  the   Far   East?   Our   failure  after   so  many
years  of  effort,  so  many billions  of  dollars  and  a  half  million
troops  was  evident  again  last  week  when  elections  for  hamlet
chiefs  in  South  Vietnam  ended  with  the  admission  (New   York
Times,  June  13,  p.  4,  city  ed)   that  voting  had  to  be  limited
Some  Sobering   Figures
Two  polls  on  the  Middle  East,  one  by  Louis  Harris
in   the   Washington   Post   June   11  and   the   other   by
Gallup  in  the  same  paper  June   12  deserve  close  atten-
tion   from    American   Jewry.     Both   polls   were   taken
before  fighting   ended.   Both  show  sympathy  for  Israel
but   overwhelming   opposition   to   U.S.    military   inter-
vention   in   its   favor.    Gallup   showed   55%   pro-Israel
only  4%  pro-Arab;  Harris   showed  41%  pro-Israel,  1%
pro-Arab  but  48%  with  no  strong  feelings  either  way
and  15%  undecided;   63% thought  the  Arabs  wanted  to
start  the   war,   only   16%  Israel.   But  Harris  reported
56%   opposed   to   sending    U.S.    troops   and   77%   for
working   through   the   UN.    Gallop   reported   41%   for
staying   out   of   the   conflict   and  only   16%  for   aiding
Israel.    Harris   noted   that   those   most  militant   about
escalating  the  war  in  Vietnam  (lower  income,  Catholic
and  Southerners)   are  least  willing  to   commit   troops
to   Israel.    On  the   other   hand   Harris   showed   a  73%
Jewish  vote  for  sending  troops.   It  is   clear  that  the
country  while  pro-Israel  wants  no  more  foreign  adven-
tures  at  this  time.   The  good-will  for  Israel  may  easily
be  destroyed  by   pushing  too   hard   for   U.S.   action  in
its  favor  which  risks   war.
to  only  one-third  of  the  country's  hamlets!   The   Viet   Cong
were  too  strong  in  two-thirds of  the  countryside.   Could  there
be  a  more  striking  indication  of  how  deep-rooted  and  wide-
spread  is  the  rebellion   we  have  been   trying  to  crush?   Is  it
not  time  to  recognize  this  reality,  to  make  peace,  and  to  stop
burning   up   Vietnam,   North   and   South,   in   our   blind   and
stubborn  frustration?  The  relief  with  which  the  country  has
greeted   the  Israeli  victory  in  the  Middle  East  is  as  nothing
compared   to   the   relief   it   would   register   if   there   were   a
Vietnam  cease-fire.  And  the  task  of  making  a  stable  peace  in
the  Middle  East would  be  made  easier  if  we  stopped  outraging
the  whole  Third  World  of  Asia and  Africa  in  Vietnam.
Proposing  An  Arab-Israeli  Confederation  in  Palestine
Until   1922  the  territory  now  known   as  Transjordan   was
part   of   Palestine;   the   British  lopped   it   off   to   create   the
Arab   Kingdom    Hussein   inherited.    Hussein's    grandfather,
King  Abdullah,  annexed  the  West  bank  of  the  Jordan  and
part   of   Jerusalem   in    1948    in   tacit   agreement    with    the
Israelis.    Both   sides  preferred   this   solution   to  the   establish-
ment  of  an  Arab  State  in  Palestine  as envisaged  in  the  original
6  *
partition  plan  voted  by  the  United  Nations  in  1947.   A return
to  the  main  idea  of  this  plan  may  offer   a  way  out  for   both
sides.    The   original  plan   called   for   an   Arab   State  and  a
Jewish  State  in  Palestine  west  of  the  Jordan,  the  two  to  be
linked   in   a  customs  union,  with  a  common   currency,  joint
communications  and   a  joint  economic  board   of   3  Arabs,  3
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  19,1967
An  Opportunity  to  Build  A  Life  in  Common  for  Arab  and  Israeli
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Jews  and  3 UN  members  appointed  by the  UN  Economic and
Social  Council.   This  board  would  handle  development,  irriga-
tion,  land  reclamation  and  soil  conservation.  The  plan  came
to  naught  because  while  the  Jews  already  had  a  state  in  all
but   name,   the   Arabs   opposed    the   whole   plan   and   hoped
instead   to  drive  the   Jews  out   of   the  country  altogether   in
the  1948  fighting.  Most  of  the  Arabs were  driven  out  instead.
Now  most  of  these  refugees  are  back  in  a  Palestine  once
more   united   by  the   Israeli   victories.   Zionist   literature  has
dwelt   on   "the   ingathering   of   the   exiles".    Suddenly   Israel
finds  that   its  armies  have   gathered   in   the   Arab   exiles  of
Palestine.    In   this  reunited  Palestine,  the  Arabs  are  concen-
trated  just  about  where  they  would  have  been  by  the  original
partition   plan;   in  the  Gaza  strip,  on  the  West   bank  north
and  south  of  Jerusalem   and  in  Central  Galilee  (which  Israel
had  seized  in  the  1948  fighting  but  in  that  area  without  dis-
lodging the  bulk  of  the  Arab population).  The  Arab  refugees
are  back.   The   Israeli  out  of  sheer  necessity  are  asking   the
Arab  Mayors,  police  and  other  municipal   officials   to  stay  on
the  job  on  the  West  Bank  where  most  of   the  Arabs   live.
Moshe  Dayan  in  his  interview  on  Face  the  Nation   June  11
spoke  cryptically  of  Arab  "autonomy"  in  those  areas.   He  has
on  several  occasions  spoken  vaguely  of   "confederation."
From  Threat  To  Shield
Why  not  make  a  virtue  of  necessity  by  offering   to  set  up
an  Arab  state  in  these  areas,  linked'  in  a  confederation  with
Israel  and  perhaps   also  with  Transjordan?   Why   not  do  it
with  grace  and  magnanimity instead  of  grudgingly  and  in  this
context  provide  reparation  and  resettlement?   Why  not  build
a  bi-national  Palestine  of  this  kind  which  could   be  a  bridge
to the  Arab world  and  a means  of  permanent  reconciliation ?
To  return  to  the  Grand   Design   of  the  original   partition
plan  would  give  Israel  the  security  of  strategic  borders  in  a
reunited  Palestine.   It  would  turn  the  refugees  from  a  threat
to  a  shield,  from  enemies  to  allies.   It  would  right  the  wrong
done  these  refugees  in  1948.    It  would  make  Israel  a  collabo-
rator  in  Arab  development  rather  than  a  neo-colonial  intruder.
Paul  Goodman  on  Israel  and  the  Arabs
Dear  I.  F.  Stone:   I  am  disturbed   by  your  sentence,
"In   the   10  years   since   (1956),   instead   of   bringing
about  a  final  peace  between   Israel  and  its  Arab  neigh-
bors,  the  superpowers  supplied  arms  for  the  new   out-
break."   This  is  true,  but  it  too  easily  lets  Israel  and
the  Arabs  off  the  hook.   As  a  Jew,  I  am  concerned  about
the  immoral   neglect  by  Israel.
Out  of  historical  need,  the  Jews  invaded  the  region
under   the   British.   In  the  time  of   Hitler   and   imme-
diately  afterward,  they   had  no  psychological  alterna-
tive  than  massive  immigration;  and  Israel  has  been  an
indispensable   refuge   for   North   African   and   Arabian
Jewish   exiles.    Despite   injustices,   there    is-  nothing
immoral  in  these  necessities.   But  it  has  been  grossly
immoral   for  Israel  to  have  neglected  for  20  years  the
plight  of   the  displaced  Arabs  and  not  to  have  taken
all  initiatives  for  a  settlement  with  its  Arab  neighbors,
however  painful  and  despite  rebuffs.   In  some  respects,
the  Israel  attitude  toward  the  Arabs has  been  miserably
reminiscent  of  the  American  treatment  of  the  Indians.
It   was   just   this   kind   of   self-centered   statism   that
Buber  warned  against.
—Paul  Goodman
It  would   open   to  Israel  acceptance  in  the  Third   World  of
Asia   and   Africa   where   its   only   safe   future   lies.    If   the
General  Assembly now  meets,  it  will  be  hostile  to  Israel.   The
bulk  of  the  world's  colored  people  see the  Israelis as  a  belated
Western   intruder,  practicing   a  new  colonialism  and  treating
the  Arabs  as "natives".  That view  and  that  sense  of  identifica-
tion  with  the  Arabs  create  deadly  difficulties  for  Israel.
All  that  could  be changed  if  world  Jewry  and  Israel  pitched
in  now to  create  a viable life  for  the  Arab  refugees  in reunited
Palestine;  offered  them  self-government  in  the  Arab  areas  and
joint  institutions with  the  Israeli  for  the  whole  of  the  country.
All  the  problems  of  access  to  Aqaba  and  of  viable  frontiers
would  be  transformed  in  such  a  setting.   It  would  also  be  a
solution  worthy  of  the   best  Jewish  traditions  and   setting  a
new  pattern   in  human  relations.    Can  Jewry  and   Israel  rise
to  so  great  a  challenge?   Can .they  see  the  "recapture"   of  the
Arab  refugees  not   as  a  burden   but   as  an  opportunity  for  a
unique  and  rewarding  'act  of  statesmanship ?
How  Mendes-France  Saw  the  Middle  Eastern  Situation  Before  War  Broke  Out
"I  have  received  your  appeal.   I  share  your   anguish  in
these  grave  hours.   How  could  one  not  be  moved  when  a
country,  member  of  the  UN,  sees  even  its   right  to  exist
contested?    When   the   life   of   a   people   is   threatened  by
those  who  surround  it?    I  would  like  still  to  hope  however
that  a  peaceful   and  honorable  solution,  respecting  the  vital
interests  of  Israel,  may  be  found.
"For   20  years  it   has   been  explained  that  the   internal
rivalries   of   the   Arab   world  constitute   an   almost   insur-
mountable  obstacle  to  the  pacification   of  the  Middle  East.
'If   I  made   peace  with  Israel,'  one  of   them  said  recently,
'I  would  be  denounced  by  all  my  neighbors  as  a  traitor  to
a  sacred  cause,  and  overthrown  by  their  demagogy.'
"But   now  circumstances—though  truly  in  the  worst   con-
ditions—have  practically   realized  Arab  political  and  mili-
tary  unity.   Paradoxically  the  dialogue   which   was  impos-
sible  yesterday  is  conceivable  today.   Not  only  on   specific
problems   (Aqaba,  the   control  of   frontier   zones,  the  fate
of   the   refugees,   military,  de-escalation,   etc.)    but  on  the
problems  of  Israel  as  a  whole.
"It  is  a  global  negotiation  between  the  Arab  States,  now
joined,   and   Israel,   that   those   responsible   for   the   peace
of  the  world  should  seek  to  bring  about.   This  is  the  only
way  to  an  equitable  settlement,  inspired  by  the  rights  and
dignity  of  all  peoples,  a  settlement  in  which  they  may  all
find  the  tranquility  and security  they  need  for  their  develop-
ment  and progress.
"To this  end  is  it  too  much  to  ask  the  governments   con-
cerned  to  end  their  invectives   and  incitements,   and  calm
their  people  instead  of  whipping  up  hatreds  it  will  later  be
difficult  to  control?   And  is  it  too  much   to  ask  the  great
powers   to   end  the   arms  sales  by   which   they   constantly
aggravate  the  dangers  of  war in  the  Middle  East?
"It  is  in  this  spirit  that  I  address  you  with  the  warmest
wishes  for  the  peace  and  security  of  Israel."
—Letter  from  Former  Premier  Pierre  Mendes-France  to
Mapam,  the  Israeli  Left  Labor, party  in  Le  Monde  June  4-5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  19,  1967
Why  the  Peasants  Prefer  the  Viet  Cong  to  the  Saigon  Government
By  John  T.  Wheeler
Saigon  (AP)—"To  the  tillers  belongs  the  soil."    "Destroy
the  feudal  land  barons."   "Food  grown  by  the  people's  sweat
belongs  to  the  people,  not  the  capitalist  landlord."    Through-
out   the   underdeveloped   lands   of   the   world,   Communists
make powerful use  of  these  and  similar  slogans  in  bidding  for
the  popular  support  vital  to  any  Vietnam-style insurgency.
The   figures   are  subject   to  challenge,   but   the  Viet   Cong
claims  to have  seized nearly 2.3  million  acres  from  prosperous
landlords  and  turned  them  over  to  the  peasants.   The   power
of  the  slogans  is  perhaps  as great  as  the  "No  taxation  without
representation"   that  helped   turn   American  colonialists  into
armed  insurgents.  One  American source  argues  that  the   effect
of   the  Viet  Cong  land  reform  has  been  more  dramatic  and
meaningful  than  "1,000  Boston  Tea  Parties."
Little   Done  Since  Diem   Fell
Farmers  make  up  80  percent  of  Vietnam's  population   and
without  their  support  no  meaningful  victory  is  possible  here.
Despite  Saigon  claims  of  action  in  land  reform,  U.S.   officials
cite   figures   to   indicate  that  Premier   Nguyen   Cao   Ky   has
turned  over  only  about  20,000   new  acres  during  his  nearly
two  years  in  office.   The  evidence  is  that  little  has  been  done
about  land  reform  since  Diem  fell  in   1963.
Diem  expropriated  229,000  acres  from  French  estate  own-
ers  and  another  1.12  million  acres  from  landlords  who  held
in  excess  of  247  acres.   He  distributed  much  of  the  best  land
to  government figures and  those  whose  loyalty  seemed  import-
ant  in  the  countryside.  In  all  some  645,000  acres  were  passed
out.   Many  men  with  large  holdings  split  them  among   their
families  and  turned  over  to  the  government  mostly  marginal
or  nonproductive  land.   Ky's  regime  has  issued  some   200,000
titles  confirming  Diem's  reform.   The  recipients  only  had  tem-
porary  title  before.   There  are  still  about  800,000   acres  of
land  to  be  sold  from  the  Diem   edicts  before   1963.     About
half  is  rated  as  cultivable.
"What  has  never  been  but  must  now  be  recognized  by  the
Vietnamese  government  is  that  only  a  real  revolution   in  the
countryside   can   bring   victory   over    the   Communists,"    an
American  source  has  commented.
Maj.   Gen.   Nguyen   Due  Thang,   head   of   the    embattled
pacification  program,  echoed  this  and  said:   "It  is  no  good  to
try  to  tell  the  people  that  the  Communists  are  bad.   We  must
show  them  we  can  do  more  for  them  and  give  them  a  better
life."
Ky  is  given  good  marks  for  intentions  by  some  Americans.
They   point  out  that  he  must  battle  centuries-old  mandarin-
style  economic  exploitation  in  the  countryside.   The   members
of   this   society  are   powerful   men   and   pay   money   in   the
right  places  to  ensure  that  reforms  don't   threaten   their  way
of   life.    These   elements   were   strong   enough   to   emasculate
efforts  to  write  tough   land-reform  legislation   into  Vietnam's
new  Constitution.
U.S.  sources  are  not  certain  how  much  of  the   Communists'
claimed  2.2  million  acres  really  have  been  turned  over  to  the
peasants  or  how  much   they  firmly  control.   The  government
has  issued  titles  to  thousands  of  acres  of  land  in  Viet  Cong
areas  where  the  titles  are  worthless.    Perhaps   the  Viet  Cong
do  the  same.
The  Communists  do  not  charge  for  the  land  as  the  govern-
Too  Radical  To  Print?
The  dispatch   here  printed  is  one  of  the  most  illumi-
nating  ever  filed  out   of   Saigon  but   it   seems   to  have
died   on  the  spike  of  most   V.S.  news  editors.    We   saw
a  bit   of  it   buried  in  the   shipping   news  on  page  78  of
the  New  York  Times,  June  6  and  suspected  it  was  part
of    a  much  longer  story.    A  friendly    editor   on  an   AP
paper   obtained   the   full   text   for   us   and   we   thought
readers  would  like  to  see  it  for  themselves.   It's   worth
filing  for  future  reference.
With  all  due  respect  for  Mr.  Wheeler,  he  still   misses
the  real  point.   To  see  it   would  be  to   apply   a  radical,
even  a  Marxist,  analysis,  and  this  of  course  is  taboo  in
respectable  American journalism.  The  real  point  is  that
the    Saigon   government    represents     the    Vietnamese
landed   gentry.   The  rigged   system   by   which  the  Con-
stituent   Assembly   was   elected   gave   them   control  of
the  Constitution   writing   process  and  that   is   why  Dr.
Dan's  proposal  to  give  the   land   to  the   tenants   tilling
it  was  able  to  obtain  only  three  votes.   If  the  V.S.  really
backed  land  reform,   it   would  seem  as  big  a  menace  to
the  gentry   as  the   Viet   Cong   itself,    and  indeed  hardly
distinguishable.   Mr.  Wheeler  seems  unaware  that   land-
lords  have  been  riding  back  with  our  troops  to  recover
their   land  and  rents.   The  idea  that   you  can  carry  on
a   "revolutionary   program"  while   fighting   a   counter-
revolutionary  war  on  behalf   of  the  landlords  is  nonsense.
Even  Mr.  Wheeler  does  not  see   that.—IFS
ment  does,  but  they  tax  it  heavily  to  keep  their  war  machine
in   operation.    The   Communists   in   the   main   do   not   issue
permanent   titles.   Theirs  run   for   the   duration   of   the   war.
One   implied   threat   is  that   the   land   will   be   formed   into
collectives  on  the  North  Vietnamese  pattern   with   state  own-
ership  after  the  war.   Ho  Chi  Minh's  home  province  of  Nghe
An   revolted   temporarily   against   the   Hanoi   regime   because
of  its  land  policies.   Few  peasants   in  the  south  are  aware  of
government  land  policies  in  Saigon,  let  alone  those  of  North
Vietnam.
Interviews  with  peasants  in  an  area  where  the   government
recently   distributed   a  batch  of  titles   showed   many  feel  that
land  reform  is  only  for   those  with  money  or  power.    Most
said   they  knew   of  no  one  who  had   actually   received  land.
They   were   certain   neither   they   nor   their   sons   would   ever
get  any.
The  government   sells  its  reformed   land  on  an  average  for
about  $80  an  acres,  a  sum  few  peasants  could  hope  to  amass
under   the  present   tenant   farming  system.    Few  realize   that
Saigon  gives  farmers  12  years  to  pay  for  the  land  and  charges
no  interest.    Despite  a  law  setting   rent   ceilings   at  25%  of
the  annual  crop,  rents  commonly  are  30-50%  or  higher.
Not  all  this  violates  the  spirit  of  the  law.   Most  peasants
are  too  poor  to  buy  fertilizer  and  some  have  to  eat  their  seed
to  stay  alive.   The  landlord  has  to  provide  it,  at  a  price,  or
the   peasant   can   borrow   money.    Interest   rates   of   10%   a
month  are  common.
Billions  of  U.S.   aid  dollars  since   1954   have  altered   little
for   the  peasants.   Half   of  the  7  million   acres  of  farm   land
are  worked   by  tenants.   There   is  some  running   room  in  the
land  problem  for  many  areas.   The  war  has  become  so  fierce
that   the   peasants   caught   in   the   middle   worry   most   about
staying  alive.   But  the  issue  is  certain  to  flame  anew.
An  old  Vietnamese  saying  holds,-"He  should  own  the  land
who  rubs  it  between  his  hands  each  season."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  19,1967
Not  A  Cooling  Way  to  Start  Off  Another  Racially  Hot  Summer
It   is  not  a   cooling  preface   to  another  hot  summer  that
eight   of   the  country's  leading  Negro  ministers,  including
Martin  Luther  King,  will  now  go  to  jail   for  five  days  in
Birmingham  and  pay  $50 fines as  a  result  of  a  5-to-4 decision
by  the   Supreme   Court  last   Monday.   The   decision  upheld
their  convictions  for  contempt because they  held mass demon-
strations  in  Birmingham during the  Easter  week-end  in  1963
in  defiance  of  an   injunction   issued  by  the  Alabama  courts.
These  demonstrations, and  the  police  brutality  they  protested,
helped  to  bring  about  enactment  of  the   1964  Civil  Rights
Act,  ending  segregation  in  public accommodations.
Bull  Connor  Said  No
The  spectacle  will  not  be  made  the  sweeter   for   Negroes
by  the  circumstances.  There  could  hardly  be  a  clearer   case
or  arbitrary  police  and  judicial  action.   When  Rev.  Fred   L.
Shuttlesworth,  one  of  the  eight,  asked  then  Police  Commis-
sioner  "Bull"   Connor  for   a  permit  that  worthy  replied  in
his  engaging  fashion,  "You  will  not  get  a  permit  to  picket
in   Birmingham.   I  will  picket  you  over  to  the  city  jail."
Connor   obtained   an   injunction  forbidding  them   to   demon-
strate.   The  Ministers thereupon  issued  a  statement   saying,
"This  is  raw  tyranny ^under  the  guise  of  maintaing  order"
and  announced  that  they  would  parade  anyway,  not  to   defy
the  law  but  "to  purify   the  judicial  system  of  the  state  of
Alabama."   The  judicial  system  thereupon  demonstrated   its
impurities  by  refusing  to  let  them  challenge  the  injunction
as  unconstitutional  under  the  First  and   14th  Amendments.
The  courts  held  that  the  only  issues  were  whether  they  had
power  to  issue  the   injunction   and  whether   the   petitioners
knowingly  violated  it.   On  this  basis  conviction  was  a  fore-
gone  conclusion.  This  is  exactly  how  labor  leaders  in  strikes
used   to  be  "put   away"   in  jail   a   half   century   ago   under
"temporary"  labor  injunctions ex  parte,  i.e.  without  a  hear-
ing.    Both   the   Alabama   courts   and   the   Supreme    Court
majority,    in   upholding   the    convictions,   fell   back    on •  a
notorious  labor  decision   of  the   pre-Norris-La   Guardia   Act
era.   This  is  the  kind  of  precedent  I  can,remember  attacking
more  than  30 years  ago  in  the  successful  campaign  to  outlaw
labor  injunctions.  This is the  weapon now trotted  out against
the  Negro.   Such  ex  parte  "temporary"  injunctions  may  now
be  used  to  restrict  First  Amendment rights.  But  Mr. Justice
Black,  though  a  lifelong  champion of  the  First Amendment,
chose "order"  above  liberty, and  broke with  his  fellow liberals
to  make  possible  a  5-to-4  decision upholding the  convictions.
That  is  the  most  painful  part  of  the  story.
In   much   the   same   spirit   Mr.  Justice   Black  joined  with
Harlan  and  White  in  dissenting  from  the  6-to-3  decision  by'
From  the  Birmingham  Case  Dissents
"The   rich   can   buy   advertisements   in   newspapers,
purchase   radio  or   television   time,  and  rent  billboard
space.   Those  less  affluent  are  restricted   to  the  use  of
handbills  or petitions  or parades  or mass  meetings  . . .
Even  when  an  ordinance  requires  a  permit  to  make  a
speech,  to  deliver  a  sermon,  to  picket,  to  parade,  or  to
assemble,  it  need  not  be  honored  when  it  is  invalid  on
its  face ... If  a  person  must  pursue his judicial remedy
before  he  may  speak,  parade,  or  assemble,  the  occasion
when  protest  is  desired   or.  needed  will  have  become
history  and  any  later  speech,  parade  or  assembly  will
be  futile  or  pointless."
—Douglas  dissenting  in  the-Birmingham  cases  June
12, with  Warren,  Brennan and Fortas  concurring.
"We  cannot   permit   fears   of  'riots'   and   'civil   dis-
obedience"  generated  by  slogans   like  'Black  Power'  to
divert  our  attention  from  what  is  here  at  stake—not
violence  or  the  right  of  the  State  to  control  its  streets
and  sidewalks,  but  the  insulation  of  attack  of  ex  parte
orders  .  .  .  even  when  patently   impermissible   prior
restraints  on ...    First  Amendment  rights."
—Brennan for  the  same  dissenting  four  Justices.
Mr. Justice  Clark  restricting  police  use  of  "bugging"  devices.
The  issues  are   too  complex  for   exposition  in  limited   space
but  the  motor  force  lay  in  the   different   emotions   aroused.
Black's  dissent  was  emotional  about   the   menace  of   crime.
His  old  liberal  comrade-in-arms   Douglas  turned  up  on  the
other  side  with  a  concurring  opinion  in  which  the  anxieties
were  about  the   effect  that  electronic   Big  Brother   practices
could  have  on  a  free   society.   Even  constitutional   law  has
its  hidden  de  gustibus.                                                ,
It   was  a   pleasure   to   have   Black  and   Douglas  together
again  dissenting  in  the  Butts  and  Walker  cases.   Here  they
warned  in  Black's  words  "that  the  Court  is  getting  itself  in
the  same  quagmire  in  the  field  of  libel  in  which  it  is  now
helplessly  struggling  in  the field of  obscenity"  i.e.  by  deciding
every   civil   libel  case   "on  the   merits"  instead   simply   of
holding  "that  a  law  which  seriously  menaces   the  very   life
of  press  freedom  violates  the  First  Amendment."
We  welcome  with  deep   satisfaction   the   appointment   of
the  first  Negro  to  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  and  believe  that
Thurgood  Marshall  will  serve  both his  race  and  his  country
with humanity  and  distinction.
'  We   Are   Now  Going  on  Every  Other  Week   Schedule  Until  the   End  of  July—The  Next   Issue  Will  be  Dated  July  3
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or   enter)
Street   .................................
City  ....................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street   .................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State.......
a  gift  sub  to:
7An. ...............  State.......
6/19/67 .
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published   every  Monday  except   in  August,  the  last  week  in   December  and   the
first   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:
$17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED