I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967may01.pdf

============================================================

Comedy  for   Us,  Tragedy  for  the  Greeks,  P.  2
We  Don't  Recall  Washington  and  His  Generals  Running  Night  Clubs  On  The  Side
"Except  for  the  Continental  Army  of  our  earliest  years,
never  before   in  history  has  a  young  military  force   been
subjected  to  such  a  challenge."
—Gen.   Westmoreland    praising    Marshal    Ky    and     Ms
forces   at   the   Waldorf-Astoria    April   24-
"Ky  himself   has  moderated  his  playboy  activity,  but  it  is
common  knowledge  in  Saigon  that  he  has  kept  a  table   per-
manently  reserved  at  Maxim's,  an  elegant  Saigon  night  club
owned   by   ARVN    [Army   Republic   Viet   Nam]   Generals,
where  a  single  drink  costs  more  ($3)   than  a  peasant  earns
in  a  week.   An  exceptionally  moral  people,  the  Vietnamese
often   refer  to  Ky,  in  private,  as  Cao  Boi  (cowboy)."
—John  Mechlin's  new  report  from  Saigon  in  Fortune  for
April.    He  was   chief    U.S.   press   officer     there  in   1962-64.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XV,  NO.  15
MAY   1,    1967
'°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
The Mindless Momentum of A Runaway Military Machine
The  central  thesis  of  Gen.  Westmorland's  debut  on  the
home  front   is  the  oldest  alibi  of  frustrated   Generals—they
could  have  won  the  war  if  it  hadn't  been  for  those  unpatri-
otic  civilians  back  home.    This  was  how  the  Kaiser's  ex-Gen-
erals  consoled  themselves  over  their  beers  after  World  War  I
and  this  was the  soothing  syrup  the  French  Generals  spooned
up  after  Dienbienphu.    But  the  former  lost  the  war  despite
all  their  monocled  splendor  because  they  invited  exactly  what
they  had  always  told  themselves  they  ought  to  avoid—a  war
on  two  fronts,  against  France  and  Russia  at  the  same  time.
The  latter  lost  because  their  perpetual  talk  of  how  they  were
really  winning,  when   year   after   year   they  were  losing   the
finest  cadres  of   the   French   officer   class  in   the   Indochinese
morass,  finally  made  the  French  people  realize  their  Generals
were  first  class   liars   and  their  dirty  little  colonial   war  not
worth  the  cost.    Both  cases  provide  obvious  parallels  in  our
own  predicament,  headed  as  we  are  for   that  major   war  on
the  Asian  mainland  we  were  always  told  to  avoid,  and  led  by
Generals  who  have  claimed  to  be  winning  ever  since   1961,
and  still  claim  it,  though,  as Westmoreland   also  said,  they  see
no  end  in  sight!    We  wonder  what  kind  of  logic  they  teach
them  at  West  Point.
Is  the  Enemy  Discouraged?
The  heart  of  Gen.  Westmorland's  opening  speech  at  the
AP  luncheon  came  when  he  said  the  enemy  was  "discouraged
by  repeated   military  defeats"   but  hanging   on   because   "en-
couraged  by what  he  believes  to  be  popular  opposition  to  our
efforts  in  Vietnam."    One  does  not  need  to  be  a  military ex-
pert  to  question  this  assessment.    From  the  enemy  point  of
view,  they  are  doing  far  better  than  they had  a right  to  expect.
An  undeveloped   nation  of  30,000,000   people,  with  little  in-
dustry  of  their  own,  has  defied  the  world's  greatest  military
power  for  six  years.    The  rebels  have  grown  from  a  handful
to  a  formidable  army  despite   (or   perhaps   because  of)    the
constant  stepup  in  our  bombardment  North  and  South.     In
recent  months  a  whole  series  of  enormously  expensive  and
glamorously  named  U.S.  military  sweeps  have  done  little  but
tear  swaths  in  the  jungle.    While   our  casualties  have  risen
sharply,  the  enemy  has  managed  to  elude  us,  and  to  strike
back  at  times  and  places of  his  own  choosing.   We  are  switch-
What  Freedom,  Gen.  Westmoreland?
"They   [our   troops]   know   that  they  are  helping  to
stop  the  spread  of  Communism   in  Southeast  Asia  and
to   give  the   people  of   South   Vietnam   a   freedom   of
choice."
—Gen. Westmoreland  at  the  Waldorf   April  24
"All  media  are  controlled  or  heavily  censored.   Radio
and  TV belong  to  the  government.  .  .  .  The gaps in
the  front   pages  of  Saigon's  newspapers  are  constant
and  sometimes  laughable.  .  .  .  The Saigon  Guardian,
an  English  language  paper,  was  closed  four  months ago
by  junta  order.   Its  editor, Ton That  Thien,  who writes
frequently   for   the   London   Economist   and   the    Man-
chester  Guardian  was  director  of  public  relations  at  one
time  in  the  Diem   government.    He  finds  it  difficult   to
understand  the   U.S.   attitude  toward  press  repression
in  Saigon.   'We  only  had  7000  circulation,'  he  told  me.
'We  were  the  only  paper  even  slightly  critical  of  Ky
and  the  Generals'."
—Hunton  Downs, assistant  to  the  editor  of  the  Hono-
lulu  Advertiser,  from  Saigon  April  14.
ing  troops  from  the  Mekong  Delta  to  handle  a  swiftly  deteri-
orating  military  situation  in  the  northern  part  of  South  Viet-
name.    It  is  no  secret  that  Westmoreland  wants  more  troops
and  that  we  are  going  to  need  a  limited  mobilization  to  get
them.    Add  the  billion  dollar  losses  of  our  air  war,  and  the
growing   difficulties  of  the  no  longer  almighty  dollar,  as  the
mounting  costs  of  this   "little  war"   undermines  it,  and  ask
yourself  whether  the  other  side  may  not  feel  downright  exu-
berant,   indeed  overconfident.
Let  us  put  the  case  in  the  most  hard-boiled  terms.    The
United  States  can  win  this  war  in  Vietnam  ;/  it  is  prepared
to  put  in  a  million  men,  or  more,  and  then   to  slug  it  out
patiently  year  after   year  until  the  guerrillas  are  worn   down.
It   can  win   if   it  deliberately  de-escalates  the   firepower   and
meets  the  guerrillas  on  their  own  terms,  in  close  combat,  in-
stead  of  alienating  the  entire  population  with  indiscriminate
artillery  and  airpower.    A  nation  of  30,000,000  cannot  defeat
a  nation  of  200,000,000  if  the  bigger  nation  cares  enough  to
pay  the  price  of  victory  and  has  the  patience   to  pursue   it.
The  key  is  patience,  and  patience  is  what  the  United  States
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly  May 1,1967
Adenauer's  Real  Function  In  Postwar  West  Germany
How  The  U.S. Plays  Out  A  Banana  Republic  Comedy  in  Greece
A  capsule  history  would  say  that  German  capitalism  gam-
bled  on  Hitler  and  fell  back  in  defeat  on  Adenauer.    It  suc-
ceeded  (with  the  help  of  its  opposite  numbers  in  U.S.  finance
and  industry)  in  regaining  power  behind  the  facade  of  a  Re-
public  as  far  to  the  right  as  was  feasible.    To  head  it  West
Germany's   masters   found   in   Adenauer   as   authoritarian   a
figure  as  ever  presided  over  a  parliamentary  system.    John
Foster  Dulles,  lifelong  counsel  for  German  big  business  in-
terests  and   an   apologist   for   Nazi   expansion   turned  up   to
mold  U.S.  policy  in  their  favor  after  the  war.   He  and  Aden-
auer  became the  Siamese twins of  the  cold  war,  a continuation
in  new  guise  of  Hitler's  holy  war  against  Communism.    Two
major  decisions  set  West  Germany's  course.    In   1949  Aden-
auer  turned  to  the  right,  including  the  far  right,  rather  than
to  the  Social  Democrats  for  the  votes  he  needed  to  become
, Chancellor.     In  1952  he  rejected  Soviet  proposals  for  a  uni-
fied  but  neutral  Reich  with  an  army  of   its  own  and  chose
instead  the  road  of  division  and  NATO.    Perhaps  the  best
that  can  be  said  of  Adenauer  was  that  he  was  slightly  less
unlovely  than  his  equally  rigid  and  humorless  old  antagonist,
Ulbricht.
Charade   in   Greece
Greece,  the  first  "frontier  of  freedom"  in  the  cold  war  and
its  starting  point,  is  like  West  Germany  another  example  of
the  U.S.   tendency  to  restore  the  Old   Order,   or  as  close  a
simulacrum  as  possible,  under  cover  of  fighting  Communism.
There  the  U.S.,  the  world's  oldest  republic,  has  been  doing  its
best  to  maintain  Europe's  last  ^constitutional  monarchy.  U.S.
propaganda  pictures  the  Greek  monarchy  as  a  unifying   force
between  the  politically  turbulent  Greeks,  but  its  record  is  one
of  rightist  intrigue.  When  the  monarchy was  restored  in  1935
after   11  years  of  republicanism,  the  King,  the  present  one's
Uncle,  proceeded  within  a  few  months  to  impose  a  military-
. Fascist   dictatorship   on   the   country  which  lasted   until   the
Axis  invaded  in  World  War  II.    The  pattern  seems  now  to
be  repeating  itself.    The  monarchist  oligarchy  ruled  Greece
with  U.S.   help  until  the  elections  of   1963-64  gave  Papan-
dreou's  new  middle  class  liberal  Center   Union   an   absolute
Bouquets,   Bombs   and  Brickbats
WE  CONGRATULATE   the  faculty   and  students  of
Catholic    University    for   their   victory   in   forcing    the
retention  of  Father  Charles   E.  Curran  as  a  professor
of  theology   and  in  making   Cardinal  Spellman  and  the
other  trustees  back  down  in  this  opening  struggle  for
more   academic  freedom   in   Catholic   colleges.
WE  CONDEMN  the  Tito  government   for  its  coward-
ice  in  imposing  four  more  years  of  prison  on  the  writer
Mihajlo  Mihajlov.    What   moral   significance   is   left   in
Tito's  revolt   against  Stalin   if  a  Yugoslav   writer   can-
not  tell  the  truth  about  Stalinism  without  falling   afoul
of  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Belgrade  and  his  own   gov-
ernment?     Mihajlov  is  a  martyr  in  the  struggle  to  re-
store  freedom   of  opinion  in  the  Soviet  bloc.
WE   ENDORSE   the   appeal   by   Rabbi   Abraham    L.
Feinberg  to  the  West  European   Communist   leaders  at
the   European   Communist    Conference    April   24-27   in
Czechoslovakia  to  save  Soviet  Jewry  from   cultural   ex-
tinction.    Rabbi  Feinberg  was  recently   in  Hanoi   with
the  late  A.  J.   Muste  and  Pastor   Martin   Niemoeller.
The  Soviet   Union   prides  itself   on  cultural    autonomy
for   its   diverse   peoples,   but   denies   this   to   Russian
Jewry.    It  is  a  black   mark  on  the  USSR  that  a   com-
munity   which  was  able,  under   Czarism,  to  produce   so
rich  a  culture  in  Yiddish,  Hebrew  and  Russian,  is  being
asphyxiated  by  prejudice   and  hostility.
majority.    But  the  King  soon  forced  him  out  of  office  when
Papandreou  tried  to  end  the  system  which  made  the  Army
officer  class the  tool  of  the  throne and  the  preserve of  a right-
ist  upper  class.   Months  of  intrigue and  tension  were  to  have
ended  with  new  elections  May  28  but  the  Army  has  seized
power  for  fear  that  Papandreou  would  win  them.
One  has  to  be  pretty  credulous  to  believe  that  this  coup
was  pulled  off  without  consulting  the  King,  the  U.S. military
mission  and  the  Cl A.    Our  guess  is  that  they  decided  to  pre-
serve  the  appearance  of  royal  detachment.   It  is  reported  here
that  the  U.S.  Ambassador,  in  this  well-planned  charade,  even
warned  the  military  the  U.S.  would  break  off  relations if  they
dethroned  the  King!    There  are no  reports that  we threatened
U.S.  action  unless  the  Constitution  were  restored.
De  Gaulle Knuckles Under  to  the  U.S.  and  Bans  the  Russell  War  Crimes Trial
Jean-Paul   Sartre,   chairman   of   the   Russell   war  crimes
tribunal,   wrote  General  de  Gaulle  April  13  to  protest   the
refusal  of  a  French  visa  to  Vladimir  Dedijer,   who  was  to
preside  over  a  session  of  the  tribunal   opening  on  April  26.
The  General's  reply,  the  text  of  which  was  published  April
24  in  Le  Figaro,   finally'shuts   the  doors  of  France  to  this
war  crimes  trial.
De  Gaulle  addresses  Sartre  as  "Mon  cher  Maitre."   The
letter   is  written  with  that  distinction   for  which  de  Gaulle
is  famous.     Yet  it  must   make  his  admirers  blush.    It  ad-
mits  the  views  held  by  the  organizers  are  close  to  the   offi-
cial  French  position  on  Vietnam.    De  Gaulle  says  he  does
not  question  the  motives  of  Lord  Russell  and  his   collabora-
tors.    But  he  does  not  think   their   moral   weight  enhanced
by  assuming  the  robes  of  a  court.    He  says  he  cannot   per-
mit  an  ally  like  the  U.S.  to  be  the  object  of  so  extravagant
a  proceeding  on  French  soil.   It  is  not  for  me to  teach   you,"
de  Gaulle  writes  Sartre,  "that  all  justice,  in  its  principles
as  in  its  execution,  belongs  only  to  the  State."   This  is  not
how  the  men  of  the  Resistance  felt.
De  Gaulle  denies  that  freedom   of  expression  is   involved.
But  the  fact   is  that   under   U.S.   pressure  the  doors  of  one
country  after  another  in  "the  free  world"  have  been  closed
to  the  Tribunal.    If  its  pretensions  are  as  ludicrous  as  the
U.S.   claims,  why  is  Washington  so  fearful   of   allowing   it
to   proceed?     The   fact   is   that   our   conduct    in   Vietnam,
North  and  South,  cries  out  for  examination   in  the  light  of
the  principles   we  established  at  Nuremberg.    If  any  other
big  power  were  doing  to  any  other  small   power,  what   we
are  doing  to  Vietnam,  the  roar  of  condemnation  here  would
be  overwhelming.   I  wish  there  were  a  more  august  tribunal
to  try  the  charges,  but  this  is  the  only  one  there  is.  We're
glad   Sweden  will  give  the  Tribunal  a  home.    Our  country
which  invoked  a  decent  respect  for  the  opinion  of   mankind
in  setting  forth  its  declaration  of  independence,   now  fears
that  same  opinion.    As  well  it  should.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly  May 1,1967
Behind  the  New  Reports  of  Starvation   in  the  Rural  South
How  the  Surplus  Food  and Food  Stamp  Programs  Have  Been  Hobbled
By  Robert  Sherrill*
For   16  months   Congressmen   have   been   going   into   the
Deep  South  and  returning  with  reports  of  starvation.    First,
it  was New  York's  Joe  Resnick,  in  December   1965.   He  wrote
Agriculture  Secretary Orville  Freeman  and  President  Johnson
of  "terrible"  conditions; but  nothing  happened.    This  month
Sen.  Joseph  Clark  and  his  anti-poverty  subcommittee went  to
Mississippi  and  found  blacks living on  rice  and  soybeans.   So
what  else  is  new?    Gene  Roberts,  writing  in  die  New   York
Times,  Feb.  6,  1966,  told  of  eating  with  a  family  of   11  on
the  Delta  who  were  surviving on  "pork   neckbone,  water,  sy-
rup,  and   'flourbread'."     Freeman,  responding  to  dark's  re-
port  as  if  this  were  the  first  he  had   heard  of   such  things,
now  has  a  study  team  in  the  South.
Where  the  Fault  Is  Freeman's
More  might   be  expected   from   Freeman   if   the  starvation
conditions  had  not  been  created  in  the  first  place  by  him  and
the  Southerners  who  run   the  farm  committees  in   Congress.
The   federal   food   stamp   program   requires   impoverished
people   to  pay  a  part,  which  is  sometimes  impossible.    Fam-
ilies with no  income—and  they  are  common  on  the  Mississippi
Delta,  where  unemployment  runs  between  60  and  90  percent
—must  pay  $2  a  person   (maximum  $12   a  family)   to  get
bonus  stamps.    It's  a  good  deal:  $12  in  stamps  can  be  traded
for  $70  in  food.  But  where  does  a  "broke"  Negro  get  $12?
For  months,   Freeman's  own  Civil  Rights  Advisory  Commit-
tee  has  been  trying  to  persuade  him  to  drop  the  minimum  to
50  cents  a  head,  but  he  refuses,  just  as  he  has  refused  to  use
the  emergency  provisions  of  USDA   Sect.   32,  which   for   30
years  have  given  the  secretary the  authority  to  give  free  food
to  poor  people  anywhere.
Instead,  Freeman  has  crimped.    The  distribution  of  surplus
commodities   (flour,   cheese,   oats,   whatever   the   farmers  had
too  much  of)   is  still  the  system in  some  areas.  When  counties
shifted   to  the   food   stamp   program   (stamps   good   for   any
* Author   of  that  newly   published   acid   and  ribald  portrait
of   Lyndon   Johnson,   "The   Accidental   President."
Just  Soul  Brothers  on  Surplus   Food
"You  know,  I  have  a  colored   friend  down  home  who
gets   commodities.    He  does  not   care   anything   about
that  powdered  milk  they  give  him.    He  does  not  like  it.
So,  you  know  who  he  gives  it  to?     He  gives  it  to  me.
We  like  it.    He  gets  some  dried  beans   every  now  and
then—the  same  kind  that  goes  into  the  bean   soup   in
the  House  Restaurant.    He  says  he  does  not  eat  those
beans.    You  know  who  he  gives  them  to?     He  brings
them  to  my  house.    He  says,  'Would  you  like  to  have
these  because   if   you  don't  want  them  I  am  going  to
throw   them   away   anyhow.'    Well,   he  gets   so   much
cheese  .  .  .  every  now  and  then  he  brings  that  to   me."
—Rep.   John   Bell   Williams   (Miss)    on   the   surplus
food   program,  House  speech,  Feb.  9,  1S66.
food  on  the  shelf),  sometimes  up  to  39  percent  of  the  needy
had  to  drop  out.    (Freeman  lobbied  against  permitting  both
programs  to  operate  in  the  same  county.)     In  eight   counties
that  switched  from  surplus  to  stamps,   36,000   needy  did  not
have  the  $2  a  head  to  go  along.    So  they  go  hungry.
Now   there  is  a  new  threat.    Rep.  Poage   of  Texas,  chair-
man   of  the  House  Agriculture  Committee,   is  pushing   legis-
lation  requiring  the  states  to  put  up  20  percent  of  the  cost  of
bonus  food.    Poage's  district  doesn't  have  the  stamp   program,
and   the   same  is  true  of   15  other   committeemen's   districts.
If  it  gets  through  Congress,  few  of  the  41  states  now  in  the
program  are  expected  to  stay  in.
The  purpose  of  the  forced  hunger   is  obvious:  The  whites
want  the  Negroes  to  move  out.    Field  hands  are  in  oversupply
everywhere.     Mississippi   conditions   are  good,   compared   to
some  other  states.     All  Mississippi  counties   have  some   food
program,  but  South  Carolina  allows  stamps  in  only  10  of  32
counties  and  it  gives  away  no  surplus  commodities.
You   can't  keep   'em   down   on   the   farm   when   they   are
starving.    Mississippi  lost   40  percent  of   its  tenant  farmers
between   1959  and   1964,   and  since  then   the  rate  of   exodus
has  not  diminished.   A  Congress  that  won't  overrule  Freeman
and  the  Dixiecrats will  get  .its  payoff   in  the  slums  next  sum-
mer  and  for  many  summers.
The  Agriculture  Dept.  More  Concerned  With  Farm  Profits  Than  Hungry  People
"Where  there  is  no  existing  food  program,  we  urge   that
one   be  inaugurated  immediately  with   USDA   Section   32,
OBO   or  funds  from  the   President's   emergency   budget   or
other  source. ...  As  the  stamp  law  was  written,  a  county
could  not  have  both  a  commodity and  a  stamp  program  ex-
cept   in  an  emergency.    In  areas  where  income  levels   are
so  low  as  to  preclude  the  purchase  of  stamps,  an  emergency
should   be   declared,  under   Section   4   (b)    of   Public   Law
88-525   and  direct   distribution   of   surplus   commodities  be
re-established  alongside  the  food  stamp  program  until  cor-
rective  action  has  been  taken.
"USDA  charges   a  minimum  of  $2  per  month  for  stamps
for  one  person  up  to  a  maximum of  $12 a  month for  a  fam-
ily   of  six   or  more.    In  Congressional  consideration  of   the
bill  it  was  made  clear,  explicitly, that  food  stamps  could  and
would  be  given  free  where  there  was  lack  of  income.     The
USDA  has  disregarded  this  legislative  history  and  banned
all  free   stamps.  .  .  .
"We  urge  that  the  administration  of  the  direct  food  and
food  stamp  and  school  lunch  programs  be  transferred  to  the
Department  of  Health,  Education,  and Welfare ...  the basic
orientation   of   the   program  should   be  in  the   direction   of
nutrition   and   not   for   subsidizing   agricultural    producers.
The   Department   of   Agriculture,  bound   as   it   is   and   has
been   by  its   primary  responsibility  to  commercial   agricul-
tural  producers,  restricted  by  laws  aimed  at  prices  rather
than  nutrition,  and  strongly   influenced  by  the  geographical
makeup  of  the  Congressional  committees  which  control   its
authorizations   and  appropriations  has   piled   up   a   record
which  leaves  a  great   deal  to  be  desired.   .  .  .
"It  is   an  immense  irony  that  while   most   of   us  eat   so
well  and  so  cheaply,  several   million  of  our  fellow  citizens
suffer  not  just  from  inadequate  diets  but  even  from  actual
hunger."
—Internal   report   on   which   Citizens'   Crusade   Against
Poverty   based  its  recommendations   of  April  4,  1967.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  May 1, 1967
"If  the  Northern  Hemisphere
(Continued    from   Page   One)
lacks.    It  is  not  just  the  signs  of  popular  opposition   to  the
war  which  encourages  the  other   side.    It   is  the  visible  im-
patience.    Even  our  hawks don't  like  the  war  and  want  to  get
it  over  with  as  quickly  as  possible.    For  us  the  war  is  a nuis-
ance.    For  them  the  war  is  a  matter  of  life-and-death.     They
are  prepared  to  die  for  their  country.   We  are  prepared  to  die
for   our   country  too—if   it   were   attacked—but   not   for   the
mere  pleasure  of  destroying  theirs.   This  is why  they have  the
advantage  of  morale,  and   for  this  General  Dynamics  cannot
provide  a  substitute.
The  Same  Self-Deception
Self-deception  has  been  the  characteristic  of  our   leadership
in  this  war  from  its  beginning.    Self-deception  is  still  the  key
to  Westmoreland's  presentation.    Even  after   so  many  years
he  still  refuses   to  recognize  the  popular   roots  of   the   Viet-
namese  rebellion.    He  prefers  to  see  it  as  something   essen-
tially   artificial   and   imposed,   which   Hanoi   can   turn   off   on
some  magic  spigot.    First  we  were  going  to  end  the  war  by
bombing  Hanoi,  but  now  that  we'll  soon   be  running  out  of
meaningful  targets  in  the  North,  we  are  in  effect  promised  a
quick  victory  if  only  we  can  bomb  Berkeley  into  submission.
The  General  who  couldn
;
t  defeat  the  enemy  abroad  now  re-
turns  to  take  it  out  on  the  peaceniks  at  home.    Our  country,
he  says,  is  founded  on  debate.    But  now,  though  we  may  be
blundering  toward  a  world  war,  we  are  told  that  debate  is
treasonable.    The  greatest  issue  in  our  country's  history  must
be  decided  by  momentum  and  default.    Our  Generals   would
like  to  suppress  peace  sentiment  here  as  they  do  in   Saigon.
Free'discussion  is  to  be  made  suspect.
A  "high  government   source"   told   an  equally  anonymous
Baltimore  Sun  (April  21)   reporter  (we  suspect  it  was  John-
son  himself  talking  to  his  friend  Philip  Potter),  the  U.S.  had
to  avoid  the  buildup  of  a  war  psychology  at  home  and  con-
.duct  the  Vietnamese  war  "rather  coldly"   because  our   power
is  so  "beyond  comprehension"  that  we  mustn't  let  it  got  out
of   hand   "if   the  Northern   hemisphere   is  not   to  go  up   in
smoke."     This  is  the  awful   truth  a  solemn   joint  session  of
Is  Not  to  Go  Up  in  Smoke"
Westmoreland  and  the  AP:  Civilian Casualties
"But  civilian  casualties  do  not  result  from indiscrimi-
nate  use  of   our   firepower.   They  are   caused  by   me-
chanical   failure   or   human   error.     This   is   in   sharp
contrast   to  the  Vietcong  policy  of   calculated  attacks
on  civilians.  .  .  .  During  the  last  nine  years,  53,000
Vietnamese—a   large   share   of   them   teachers,  police-
men,  and  elected  or  natural  leaders—have  been  killed
OR  KIDNAPPED.    [Our  emphasis.]"
—Westmoreland:  AP  lunch  in  the  Waldorf   April 24
"In  the   South  where  the  enemy  deliberately  mixes
with  the  population, a  massive  toll  is  taken  among civil-
ians   by   artillery   and  aircraft.     There   are  estimates
that  up  to  5,000  casualties  die  each  month,  with  10,000
wounded.  .  .  .  The  American  command  estimates   that
up  to  40,000 Viet  Cong  and  North  Vietnamese regulars
have   been  slain  this   year   alone.     But   the   figure   is
known  to  contain  a  large  number of  civilians.   After  a
battle,  all  the  dead  other  than  allied  troops  are  counted
as  enemy,  even  women  and  children."
—Full   page  survey   based  on  a  dozen  of   its   corre-
spondents   by  the  AP   on  the  eve  of  the  Manila    confer-
ence,   Milwaukee  Journal   (and   many   other     papers)
Oct.  24.
According   to   Westmoreland's   figures,   the   VC  have
killed  or  kidnapped  53,000  civilians  in  9  years,  or  not
quite  6,000  a  year.    According  to  the  AP's  figures,  we
kill  almost  that  many  every  month.
Congress  ought  to  hear.    Yet  Johnson   is  doing  what  his  bet-
ter  judgment  tells  him  not  to.    Westmoreland   is  stepping  up
war  fever  at  home  while  abroad  the  wraps  are  taken  off  Hanoi,
Haiphong  and  the  Mig  air  bases  in  a  way which  brings  nearer
that   final   confrontation   with   China   and   perhaps   also   the
Soviet  Union.    As  Senator  McGovern  told  a  Washington  Post
reporter   (April   26)   after  a  brilliant  and   courageous   Senate
attack   on   the   growing   war   madness,   "They   [i.e.    Johnson
and  the  Generals]  are  really  going  for  broke."     As  the  fog
of  war  closes  in,  and  the  drums  beat  louder,  which  is  patriot-
ism,  which  is  love  of  country,  to  fall  silent  or  to  try  and  speak
some  sobering  word?.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelop
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
City  ....................................
For  the   enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name   .......................
Street    .................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed  $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
7in                 Statp
5/1/67
Indicate   if  announcement  wished  d
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except  in  August,  the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first   week  in  January  and  Bi-Wcekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W.,    Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the   U.S.;     $6   in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;  20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED