I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jun05.pdf

============================================================

How  Sartre  Demonstrated for  Freedom  in  Moscow,  P.  2
Words  That  Flicker  Like  A  Candle  In  A  Gathering  Storm
"Pope  John  recognized  that  the  age  of  hiding  places  had
come  to  an  end.   For  the  first  time  everyone  inside  the  world
enclosure  was  vulnerable   .  .  .  Pope  John  saw  nuclear  war
as  an  assault  against  future   generations  .  .  .  their  right
to  a  good  earth  unclotted  by  radioactive  poisons  .  .  .  Pope
John  saw  in  the  fact  of  a  common   humanity  reason  enough
for  reaching  out  beyond  national  differences  to  new  impera-
tives.   Nowhere  in  the  Pacem  in  Terris  Encyclical  do  I  find
a   single   word   of   fulmination   or  castigation   against   any
nation  or  its   institutions.   I  find  only   the   vocabulary  of
human   reconciliation."
—U  Thant  to Pacem in  Terriss  11 in  Geneva  May  28.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XV,  NO.  20JUNE  5,  1967'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  Not  A  Global  Settlement  Before  It's  Too  Late?
The  first  glimmer  of  hope  in  the  Middle  East  crisis  may
be  extinguished   by  the  news  that  the  U.S.  is  again  bombing
within   the   cities  of   Hanoi   and   Haiphong.    Only   joint  ac-
tion  by  the  two  superpowers  can  enforce  peace  in  the  Mid-
dle  East,  and   the   Soviets  will   hardly  cooperate   in  the   one
area  unless  offered   concessions  in  the  other.  This  may  hold
the  key  to  the   secret  messages   which  have  been   exchanged
between   Washington   and  Moscow.   The   latter   seems  to  be
taking  out  on  Israel  the  humiliation  Washington  has  imposed
on  it  in  Vietnam.
The  U.S.   As  Poor  Example
An   editorial  in  the  New   York   Times   (May   31)    seems
to   suggest   that  we   de-escalate  the   war   in   the   Far   East  in
order   to   escalate  it   in   the  Near   East.     It   says  there   is  at
stake  control   of  the  area's  oil   resources   in  which   American
firms  have  $2,500,000,000    invested,   that  we  have   "nothing
comparable"   in  Southeast   Asia  and  that  every  argument  ad-
vanced  for  the  Vietnam  intervention—"commitments,  honor,
security,  interests,  consistency,  the  self-determination  of  small
nations"—"could  be  used  in  favor  of  helping  Israel."    A  bet-
ter  way  of  helping  Israel  would  be  to  prove  by  our  actions  in
the  Far  East  the  sincerity  of  our  desire  for  peace  in  the  Near
East.    A  new  world  war  isn't  going  to  help  anybody.    It  is
Israel's  misfortune  that  the  one  great  Power  on  which  it  can
call  for  help  has  been  setting  such  a  poor  example.   How  can
Johnson  call  for  restraint  when  he  has  shown  so  little?    How
can  the  U.S.  champion  freedom  of  the  seas  in  Aqaba  when  it
has  done  its  best  to  destroy  the  principle  by  blockades   around
Cuba  and  North  Vietnam?    How  can  we  try  to  calm  down
Arab  calls  for  jihad  against  Israel  when  we  have  been  build-
ing  up  a  holy  war  spirit of  our  own  in  years of  cold  war  prop-
aganda?    How  can  we  expect  effective  action  from  the  United
Nations  when  we  ourselves  have  weakened  the  organization's
effectiveness ?
These  are  some  of  the  specifics which  lie  behind  the  softly
worded  indictment  of  U  Thant's   message  to  Pacem  in  Terris
II   in  Geneva,  when  he  spoke  of  a  growing  anarchy  in  the
world.    The  United  States  is far  from  being the  only  power  in
the  world   today  which   shows  a  disregard   for  international
commitments.    But  we  have  certainly  been  providing  the  big-
gest  and  most  terrifying  examples   of  a  readiness  to  shoot  it
out.    We  know  too  little,  really,  of  how  wars  arise.    We  pay
An  Ominous   Leak
We   invite   attention  to   the  disclosure   in  the   Globe
&  Mail  (Toronto,  May  23)  that   WHY.  Bundy,  Assistant
Secretary   of   State   for   Far   Eastern   Affairs,   told   a
briefing   for   editors  here  May  22  that  if   the  Chinese
entered   the   Vietnamese   war   the   U.S.    would   attack
China   with   "everything  we  have".   This  was  taken   to
mean   all-out   nuclear   reprisal   and   "constituted"    (as
Canada's   largest   paper   said)    "one   of   the   most   far
reaching  threats  ever   voiced   by  a  senior   U.S.    official
on  the  question."  The  rules  of  the  conference  stipulated
"background,   not  for  attribution".   When  an  NEC  cor-
respondent   asked   about   Bundy's   remark   at   a  subse-
quent  on-the-record  State  Department  briefing,   he  was
sharply   reprimanded   by  the   spokesman   for   doing   so.
Publication  in  the  Globe   &  Mail  frees  those  who  were
there  to  discuss  it.   We  don't  think  so  ominous  a  remark
should  go  unreported  in  this  country.   Is  such  a  threat
in   America's   real   interest?     Would   not   a   "no   first
strike"  pledge  be  wiser?    A  resolution  and  debate  in
Congress  might  shake  the   mood   that  leads  all  of   us
to   acquiesce   fatalistically   in   such   Strangelovian   an-
nouncements  of  genocidal  policy.
too  much  attention to  the  rationalizations,  too  little  to  the  un-
derlying psychic drives.   What  bodes  ill  is a general rise  in  the
level  of  tension  and  fear.   The  peoples  move  toward  war  as  a
relief  from  the  tension—"to  get  it  over  with."    The  relentless
bombing  day  after  day  of  one  small  power  by  one  big  super-
power  has  certainly  raised  that  level  of   taut   readiness.     It's
like  a  fight  in  a  barroom  that  becomes  a  general  brawl because
everyone  jumps  in  to  relieve  their  own  fears  and  aggressions.
The  Arabs  fear  Israel,  Israel  fears  the  Arabs; Nasser  fears  the
fate  of  Sukarno; Russia fears  the  ascendancy of  a  war  party  in
the  United  States.    In  this  atmosphere  only  a  general  de-esca-
lation  can  save  the  peace.
No  nation  is  free  from  blame  in  this crisis.    Nasser  is  risk-
ing  world  war  to  establish his  dominance in  the  Arab world.
The  Soviet Union  has  been  playing with  dynamite,  in  the  clas-
sic  fashion  of  power  politics,  by  pouring  arms  into  the  area.
Israel  has  been  too  ready  to  engage  in  military  reprisals. Every-
body  has  been  looking   for  a  "situation   of  strength"   and  the
search  has  created  the  conditions for  a  general  collapse.    At
such  a  moment  it  is  every  human being's  duty  to  help  restrain
his  own  nation,  tribe or  grouping,  not  to  add  to  the  stampede
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  5, 1967
A  Demonstration  for  Freedom  in  Moscow  and  A  New   Propaganda  Line  on  Greece
A  Hair's  Breadth  Escape  From  Legalizing  Discrimination  in  Housing
BY  THE   HAIR'S   BREADTH  margin   of   only   one   vote,   the
country  has  just   been   saved   from   an   appalling   demonstra-
tion  of   White  Power.   The   Supreme   Court   split   5-to-4  in
declaring   California's   Proposition   14   contrary   to   the   14th
Amendment.    This   State   constitutional   amendment,   which
would  have  barred  any  governmental  measures  against  racial
discrimination  in  housing,  was  adopted  2-to-l   in   1964,  and
later  held  to  be  in  violation  of  the  Federal  Constitution  by
California's  Supreme  Court  7-to-2.   A  shift   of  one  vote  on
the   U.S.  Supreme  Court   would   have  opened  the   door   to
similar  constitutional  measures  in  other  States.   Black  joined
Harlan,  Clark  and  Stewart  in  dissenting;  the  majority  opinion
by  White  was  weak  and  wobbly.   Douglas,  concurring,  really
grappled  with  the  realities  and  ended with  a  prescient  quota-
tion  from   Madison,  warning  that  the   real  danger  of   future
oppression  lies  in  the  majority,  in  this  case  white  and  racist.
' What  happens  if  the  Court  some  day  reverses  itself,  or  if  a
racist  majority  amends  the  Federal  Constitution  to  make dis-
crimination  legal?
Sartre  Demonstrates  in  Moscow
The   U.S.  press  missed   the   drama   at   the   Soviet  Writers
Congress   when   Armand   Lanoux,   spokesman   for   a   French
delegation  of  two  Communists  and  two  non-Communists pro-
. tested   the   Siniavsky-Daniel   trial.   The   two   most   important
members  of  the  delegation, Jean-Paul Sartre and  Louis  Aragon,
stayed   away   from   Moscow  altogether  to  demonstrate  their
displeasure.    (Perhaps   the   U.S.  press  hated   to   give   Sartre
credit   for   his   independence).    M.   Lanoux   also   called   for
peaceful   co-existence  in  literature,  contrary  to  Soviet  dogma,
and  told  the  Congress  "Unity  is  passe.   Divergences are  the
future.     Cherish   your    differences."     Sholokhov,   the    great
Cossack  writer,  turned  up  again  as  a  defender  of  party  line
conformity;  in  his  old  age  he   is  riding  herd  on  his   fellow
writers  as  Cossacks  once  rode  herd   for  the  Czars  on   their
fellow   workers.   His   special  target   was   Ehrenbourg,   who
pointedly went  abroad  instead  of  attending,  also as a  Siniavsky-
Daniel protest.
A  Victory  for  Freedom
Ten  years  ago  the  Supreme  Court  speaking  through
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  in  a  5-to-4  decision  ruled  that
a   native-born   Texan   of   Mexican  parentage   could  be
deprived  of  his  citizenship  for  having  voted  in  a  for-
eign  election,  in  that  case  Mexican.   Last  Monday  the
surviving   dissenters—Warren,   Black   and   Douglas—
were  joined  by  Brennan  and  Fortas   in  a  new   5-to-4
decision   which  reversed   that   ruling  in  the  case  of  a
naturalized   American   of    Polish   Jewish   origin   who
voted   in  an  Israeli   election   in   1951.   We  believe   the
reversal  is  a  landmark  victory  for  civil  liberties.   The
philosophic  roots  lie  in  the   American  Revolution  and
the   War  of   1812.   It   was  the   position   of   the   British
Crown   that   a  subject   could  never   renounce   his   alle-
giance;  it   was   the   American  position  that   any  man
could  choose  his  country,  that  expatriation   was  a  fun-
damental  right.   In  recent  years,  with  the  rise  of  Com-
munism   and  Fascism,   expatriation   became   a   weapon
of  the  State  against  dissidents   or  outlawed  minorities;
they   were  deprived  of   their   passports    and   rendered
"Stateless".   Those  who  lived  through  the  Hitler  period
know  what  a  terrible   weapon  that   was.   In  a  milder
form  the  idea  has  grown  up  here  that  American  citi-
zens,   even   native-born,   might   be   deprived   of    their
citizenship   for  certain   acts.    In  the   McCarthy  period
there  were  even  proposals   to  impose  statelessness  as
a  penalty  for  "subversion."   Mr.  Justice  Black  ruled  in
this   new   case   that   the   Fourteenth    Amendment,   in
guaranteeing  the  citizenship  of  the  newly  freed  Negro,
protects   all   Americans   from   denaturalization.
A    COMING   PROPAGANDA    LINE   was   foreshadowed    by   a
speech  in  the  House  last  Monday  by  Derwinski  (R.,  Ill),  a
member   of   the  Foreign  Affairs   Committee,  urging  complete
support   of   the   Greek   dictatorship   "as   a   necessary   step  to
deter   Soviet-encouraged   Egyptian   aggression  in   the  Middle
East."   He  accused  the  Administration  of  "pursuing  a  short-
sighted   policy   towards   Greece   thus   adding   to  Free  World
complications   in   the  Middle  East."   What  could   be  more
"complicating"  than  a  Latin  American  style  military  dictator-
ship  in  NATO  Europe?
How  the  Committee  of  Responsibility's  Investigation   in  Vietnam  Was  Hampered
"Every  attempt  of  the  group  to  break  the  schedule    [set
up   by   the    South   Vietnamese    Ministry   of    Health   and
USAID]   was   met   with   obstacles.    The   group   was   not
allowed   to   separate   nor  to   conduct   investigations   of   its
own.   In  Pleiku,  Peter  Franklin,  former  newspaperman  who
was  the  non-medical  member  of  our  team,  was  invited  by
a  Vietnam  Christian  Service   (VNCS)   doctor  to  lunch  and
he  went.   This  created  a  big  stir.   Later  he  went  to   visit
the  VCNS  workers  at  Ban  Me  Thuot  and  again  there   was
an  argument  with  a  doctor  of  the  Ministry  of   Health.
"As   a   result,   there   were   threats   of   breaking   up   the
mission  and  sending   us  home.    Dr.  Lu-y   [the   Minister  of
Health]  told  us  he  could  not  give  carte  blanche  to  the  free
inquiry  we  had  in  mind.   He  said   all   persons   interviewed
should  be  within  MOH facilities  and  in  the  presence  of  an
MOH   escort.    The  group  went   where   it   was   taken,   saw
what   it   was   shown.    We  were   kept  so   busy   we  did  not
have  adequate  time  to   put  together   a  meaningful   report.
Valuable   hours   were   taken  'up   with   irrelevant  briefings.
We  were  in  only  one  area  where  there  was  heavy  military
action,  namely  Danang.    Due  to   recent   changes,   affecting
civilians,   permission   to   visit   Quang   Tri   arid   Hue   where
action  was  heaviest,   was  cancelled.   Only  in  passing   com-
ments  from  medical  workers  could  we  begin  to  glimpse  the
reality  of  the  entire  medical  situation.
"As  for  the  war  burns,  we  observed  that  no  burn  cases
in   hospitals   were   over   20%  third   degree   of    the    body
surface.   This  means  that  few  of  those  with  any  burns  of
over   20%  make  it   to   the   hospital.    Wherever   there   had
been  war  action,  napalm victims turned  up  in  large  numbers
in  the  records  shown  us.   Of  the  38  war  burns  we  saw,  13
were  children.  A  doctor  told  us  of  two  children  fishing  in
Bac  Lieu  province  when  a  plane  returned  the  fire  of  a  VC
and   hit   them   with   phosphorus   fire.   They   were   covered
from   head  to   foot,   jumped  into   the   water   for   an   hour.
Picked  up  by  a  local  bus  and  brought  to  the  hospital  still
smoking  and covered with  mud, they  died  that  night.   There
are  children in  Vietnam  we  saw  who  need  care   desperately
and  we  must  bring them  to  the   U.S."
—Committee  of  Responsibility  press  release  May  15  (abr).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  5,1967
Like  More  Whiskey  For  A   Drunkard
"Who  are  the  people  who  have  neglected  the  children,
that  made  the  Federal  government   get  into  this  field?
The  states.   My state  is  the  6th  or  7th  richest  in  the
_ country  and it  is  39th  in  what  it  does  for  education  .  .  .
the  state  department   of   education   tried   to  vet  every
single  grant  for  the  deprived  areas  of   Ohio  and  the
grants  had to  be  made  around  (it)   .  .  .  When  we  pass
these  amendments  to  give  the  job  of  administering   the
Federal   money  back  to  those  state  administrators,    at
least  in some  states  I  know,  it  is  like  taking  a  drunkard
who  is  convicted  of  neglecting  his  children  and  giving
him  an  extra  $100  a  month  to  spend  on  whiskey,  so  he
can  neglect  them  some  more."
—Rep.  Wayne   Hays   (D.,  O.)  during  ESEA   debate,
The  Strange   Role  of  Oregon's  Edith   Green  and  Her  "Mini-Quie"   Amendments
A  Close  Brush  With  Disaster  on  The  New  Aid  to  Education  Bill
By  A  Capitol  Hill  Observer
For  a  few  harrowing  hours  during  the  recent  House  debate
on   Federal   aid   to  education,  it   looked   as  if   the   members,
professing   nothing  but   the   loftiest   motives,  were  about   to
wreck  the  Elementary  and  Secondary  Eduction  Act   (ESEA)
and   repeal  Title   VI   of   the   Civil  Rights  Act  of   1964,    the
section  that  empowers  the  government  to  withhold  funds  from
any  Federally-assisted  program  that discriminates.
The  House  stopped  far  short  of  that.   And  the  grave  faults
it  wrote   into  the   bill  may  still  be  corrected   in  the   Senate.
But   the   close  brush   with   disaster  marks  how   far   we  have
come  from  the  bright  days  of  the  89th  Congress.
States  Rights   Republican
The  ESEA  was  enacted  in   1965,   by  detouring  around   the
church-state   controversy  that   had   blocked   Federal   aid   for
more  than  20  years.   It  did  this  through  a  formula  that  gives
the  funds  directly to  deprived  children  in  local  school  districts,
whether   they  go  to  public  or  parochial   schools.    This  year,
when  the  House  Education  and  Labor  Committee   sought   to
improve  the  Act  and  extend  it  through  fiscal  1969   it  faced
opposition   from  one  of  its  Republican  members,  Albert  Quie
(Minn.).    An  amiable,  well-meaning  man,  Mr.  Quie  sought
to  mold  the  Act  closer  to  his  party's  ideal.   He  proposed   to
scrap  the  present  system  of  grants  for  specific  programs  and,
instead,  make  funds  available  in  block   grants   to  the   states
to  spend  on  education  as  they  saw  fit.
Overnight,   the   Quie   amendment   became   a   test   of   the
Administration's   ability   to   get   its   Great   Society   programs
through   Congress.   Consideration   of  the  bill  was  put  off  for
weeks  while  the  Administration  rallied  opposition.    Catholics
who  feared  they  would   lose  ESEA  funds  in  33  states  whose
constitutions  prohibit  aid  to private  schools;  civil rights  groups
that   feared  Negro   children   would   suffer   if   Southern   state
officials  decided  how  to  spend  the  money;  educators  who  hated
to  see a promising  program  tampered  with  all  lined  up  against
Quie.   It  was  enough  to  beat  his  amendment  but  not  all  the
other  threats  to  the  bill.
These,   too,   came   from   members   passionate   about   states
rights:    Southern  Democrats   and  that  liberal  maverick,  Edith
Green  of  Oregon.   All  that  happened   to  the  ESEA  cannot  be
blamed  on  her.   But  she  did  serve,  as Rep.  Joelson  (D.,   N./.)
aptly  put  it,  as "drum  majorette"  for  that  coalition  of  Repub-
licans  and  Dixiecrats  that   is  always  being   pronounced   dead
and,  like  the  South,  always  seems  to  rise  again.
On  final  passage   the  bill   was  saddled  with   troublesome
amendments,   most   of   them   harmful   to   civil  rights   if   they
stay   in:    one  by  Rep.   Fountain   (D.,   N.C.)   would  bar   the
Office   of   Education   (OE)    from   deferring   funds   for   new
programs  in  any  school  district  it  believes  discriminates  until
it  completes  a  hearing  in  the  matter;  one  by  Rep.  Erlenborn
(R.,  ///.)   would  strike  from   the  ESEA  an  authorization  to
continue  the  Teachers   Corps  beyond  June  30;  one  by  Mrs.
Green  requires  OE  to  apply  rules  such  as  its  desegregation
guidelines  uniformly  to  all  50  states;  two  other  Green  amend-
ments,  derisively  termed  "mini-Quies"  in  the  corridors,  would
give  the  states  control  over  some  $600  million  earmarked  for
innovative   programs  and  grants  to  strengthen  state  education
departments.
None  is  necessarily  a  mortal  blow.   The  Fountain  amend-
ment  would  deprive  OE  of  one  of  its  few  weapons  for  com-
pelling  districts  to  comply  with  the  law.   It  was  added  to  the
ESEA  last  year  but  a  House-Senate   conference   compromised
it  into  harmlessness  and  the  Senate  may  knock  it  out  again.
Requiring  uniform  application  of  guidelines  may  turn  out  to
be  meaningless.    Indeed   if   OE  is  not   too  cowed,   it   might
conceivably   use   the   amendment   to   require   a   speed-up   of
desegregation   all   over   the   country.    The    Teacher     Corps
authorization  may  be  saved  in  the  Higher  Education  Act  now
before   Mrs.   Green's   subcommittee.    And   giving   the   states
control  over  two  programs  does  not  touch  Federal  control  of
the  big  money  in  the  bill,  the  $2.6  billion  authorization  for
deprived  children.   Another  Fountain  amendment  that  would
have  virtually  repealed  Title  VI  was  beaten.
What   suffered   graver   damage   than   the   bill   was   morale.
Government   officials   already   cringing   under    Congressional
criticism  will   be   less   ready  than   ever  to   push   civil   rights
enforcement.   The  pity  is  Mrs.  Green  doesn't   seem  to  know
that.   Her   record  on  civil  rights  and  education   is   excellent.
But   her  antipathy  to  anything   she  feels   smacks  of   Federal
control  of  education  appears  to  affect  her  judgment.
When  it  comes  to  school   desegregation,   the  states  cannot
be  treated   alike.    Southern   states  with   dual   school   systems
mean  to  keep  them.   Far  from  being  punitive,  the  OE  deseg-
regation  guidelines  were  meant  to  help  some  2,000   Southern
districts   out   of   the   25,000   school   districts  in   the   country,
move  toward   a  single  school   system  without  losing   Federal
money.   By aligning  herself  with  the  Southerners,  Mrs.  Green
feeds  the  fallacious  notion  that  they  are  being  treated  badly,
when  the  mistreated  ones  are  the  Negro  children—threatened,
insulted   and  beaten   when   they  try  to  go  to  white   schools.
By  implying  that   the   guidelines  are   administered  unfairly,
she  strengthens  the  Southern  argument  that  they  are   illegal,
even  though   the  Fifth   Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,   in   March,
upheld  their constitutionality.
But  Mrs.  Green  is  not  the  House.   Timid  leadership  must
share  responsibility  for  what  happened   to  the  ESEA.   One
trembles  at  what  the  House  will  do  now  with  the   poverty
program   and  what  this  may  precipiate  among  the  frustrated
and  disillusioned  of  the  ghettoes  and  plantations.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  5,1967
The  Black  Sea and  the  Baltic  Are  The  Soviet  Union's  Aqabas
(Continued   from   Page   One)
of  emotionalism.    It  is  in  this  spirit  that  we  say  the  U.S.  has
set  a  bad  example  and   it  is  in  the   same  spirit  that   we  urge
sober  second  thoughts  in  the  world  Jewish  community.    Even
a  week   of   war  between   Israel  and   the  Arab  States  will   cost
more  in  suffering  than  decades  of  oil  supply  through   Aqaba.
The  Old  Enemy   of   Both
Ben  Gurion  once  said  Israel   could  win  two  wars,  perhaps
three  but  no  more;  this,  after   19-18  and  and   1956,   would  be
the  third.   What  if  Israel  destroys  Aswan  and  Egypt  destroys
Tel  Aviv?  Even  if  Israel  "wins,"  what  a  mountain  of   hatred
and   humiliation   this   would   leave  behind!     Israel's  survival
depends   on   reconciliation   with   its  Arab  neighbors;  without
that,  there  can  only  be  a  series  of  wars,  ending  in  its  extinc-
tion.     It  may  have  to  fight  again,  but  restraint  and  restraint
and  more  restraint  is the  path  of  wisdom.    Hysterical  compari-
sons  with  Hitlerism  will  not  help.  Nasser   is  not  Hitler.  This
is  another  chapter  in   the   struggle  between   Isaac  and   Esau,
Jacob  and   Ishmael,  and   it  will  be  fought  with   Biblical   and
fratricidal   ferocity   if  once  unleashed,  and   end   nowhere   else
but   in   a  net  gain   for   the   immemorial  enemy  of   both,   the
desert.
A  terrible  military  overconfidence  is  Israel's  greatest   weak-
ness.  It  was  disturbing  that  Ben  Gurion  at  this  moment  should
have  to  warn  the  Israeli  army  that  in  democratic  countries  the
military  must  remain  subject  to  the  civilian  power.     The   at-
mosphere   is  like  that   in   an   old-fashioned  American  movie
where  the  landing  of  the  Marines  sets  all  things aright.     The
greatest  weakness  in   efforts   for  peace   is  the   general  feeling
that  in  a  showdown  the  world  will  always  sacrifice  the  weaker
to  the  stronger,   that  the  troublemaker  gets  the   dividend  of
the  fait  accompli.   This  is  how  Israel  made  its  gains  in   1956
and   fears   that  Nasser   will   make   his  now.
The  rights  and   wrongs  of  the  Arab-Israel  conflict   can  be
argued  forever.  As  in  the  quarrels  of  children,  for  each  griev-
ance  there  is   a  counter-grievance.   But   in   the   tangle   some
threads  may  usefully   be  singled  out   for   a  settlement.    Israel
opened   Aqaba  by  force  in   1956   because  Nasser  had  shut  the
On  The  Pro-Israel   Left
Fifty    leading   French    intellectuals    and    university
professors  led  by  Jean-Paul  Sartre  have  issued  a  mani-
festo   (Le  Figaro,  May  29),  affirming  "that  the  security
and   sovereignty   'of   Israel,   including   free   navigation,
are  the  bases  of  peace;  that  this  peace  is   attainable;
and  ought   to  be  assured   by   negotiations    among   sov-
ereign   states."    The   signatories    declared    themselves
"friends  of  the  Arabic  peoples  and  opponents  of  Ameri-
can  imperialism" but  affirm  Israel's  wish  for  peace  and
think  "incomprehensible  the  identification  of  Israel  with
an  imperialist  and  aggressive   camp."
Americans  for  Progressive  Israel—Hashomer  Hatzair
and  Canadian  Friends  of  Pioneering  Israel,  both  linked
with   the   Left-labor   Zionist   party,   Mapam,   which   is
part  of  the  Eshkol  coalition  government,   were  holding
a  convention  in  Montreal as  we  went  to  press.   A  draft
resolution  jointly  adopted   said   that   while  Israel   was
"harassed"   by  "marauders  and  terrorists",  retaliatory
action  had  failed.   "The  answer  lies  not  in  retaliatory
force,"  the  draft  resolution  said,  but  in  steps  toward  a
four   power  pact  to   guarantee   all  the   Middle   Eastern
State,  and  end  their  arms  race.
Suez  to  Israeli  ships  in  defiance  of  a  UN   resolution  both  East
and   West  approved   in   1951.     The   right   of   access  to  open
waters  for  an  enclosed  sea  is  a  fundamental  one.    It  would  be
the  ultimate  irony  if  the  Russians  refuse  to  see  this  as  their
own  warships  come  through  the  inland  waters  of  the   Turkish
Straits  into  the  Mediterranean  in  virtue  of  just  that  right,  as
embodied   in  the  Montreux  treaty  and   in   international  law.
The  Black  Sea  and  the  Baltic  are  to  Russia  what  the  Gulf  of
Aqaba  is  to  Israel.   Here  too  is  a  common   interest  diplomacy
may 'exploit  if  there  is  de-escalation  of  tension.
Toward  that  end,  is  it  too  much  tor  the  world  community
to  ask  Cairo  and  Damascus   to  end  their  flamboyant  declara-
tions  of  total  war  in  which  Israel  is  to  be  destroyed?     Such
talk   is  itself  a  crime  against  peace.    But   the  greatest  crime
against  peace  remains what  we  ourselves  are  doing  in  Vietnam.
Mediation  might   become   possible   if  we  showed   a   readiness
for  a general  settlement  in  both  the  East  and  West  of  Asia.
9  a.m.,  May  31
The   1966    Index   Is  Ready—You  Can  Have  One  Free   If   You   Send  A   Stamped   Long   Envelope   For  It—Please   Renew,   If   Overdue,
With   Your   Request
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or   enter)
Street   .................................
Pi*
 v
For   the  enclosed  $5  send
Street     .................................
City  ....................................
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington,   D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................   State......
a  gift  sub  to:
Zip................  State......
6/5/C7
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  Q
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  P.   C.    Published   every   Monday   except   in   AuKust,   the   last   week   in   December   and   the
first   week   in  January  and   BU\\VekIy  during  July  at    5G18  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.   L\   Stone;   Circulation   Manager.   Ksthor   M.   Stone.     Subscription:   $5   in   the    U.S.:      $6   in   Canada;   $10   elsewhere.     Air    Ma.il   rates:
S17  to  Kurope;   SiO  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED