I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jul17.pdf

============================================================

The  Uproar  Over  Uncle  Sam As   World  Cop In   The  Congo, P.  2
And  What  Have We To Show For  It—Except Casualties?
"North   Vietnam  is   paying   a  tremendous   price  with  nothing  to  show  for  it  in  return."
—Gen.  Westmoreland,  opening  the  first   briefing   of  McNamara's   ninth  visit  to  Vietnam   in  six  years  July   7   (AP)
IR  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  24
JULY   17,  1967
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Proposing  An  American   Negro  Congress
The  biggest   news  in  the  country  is  getting  the  least   atten-
tion.    The  Negro  riots  sweeping  American  cities  have  reached
the  stage,  if  not  of  revolution,  then  at  least  of  a  racial  revolt.
But   the   main   response   in   a   sense   is  to   turn   on   the   fire
hydrants.    This  is  probably  the  first  time  in  history  that  an
attempt  has  been  to  "cool  off"  a  revolution  literally by  sprin-
kling  it  with  cold  water.    An  open  hydrant here,  a  new  port-
able  swimming  pool  there,  these  seem  to  be the  main  reactions
to  a  leaderless,  spontaneous,  unorganized  rising,  like  a human
earthquake,  shaking  with  a  deep  and  long  buried  racial  an-
guish.    Unless  more  fundamental  steps  are  taken  to  cope  with
it,  we  may  find  it  necessary  one  day  to  call  out  troops  to  deal
with  this  rumbling  Africa  at  home  instead  of  rushing  them
to  the  Congo  or  Nigeria.    The  Negro  rising  should  be  the
No.  1 business  of  the  nation,  not  Vietnam  or  space  or  the  oil
resources  of  the  Middle  East  or  the  uranium  of  Katanga.  For
what  threatens  us  is  a  new  kind  of  civil  war.
Their  Separation  Reflects Ours
We  believe  deeply  in  the  American  dream  of  a  nation  of
nations  and  a  people  of  peoples.     Our  pluralism  is  the  best
answer  to  the  murderous  particularism  of  mankind.    But  in
all  honesty  this  has  so  far—like  the  great  affirmations  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence—carried  an  invisible  but  none-
theless   tangible   sign,   "for   whites  only."     The  Negro,  the
Mexican  American,  the  Puerto   Rican  and  the  American  In-
dian  have  been  the  regurgitated   rejects  of  the  melting   pot.
Their  assimilation  is  the  challenge  and  necessity  of  our  time.
But  we  don't  believe  it  will  be  brought  about  without  enor-
mous  pressure  on  satisfied  whites  by  dissatisfied  colored   peo-
ples.    Every  society  has  its  "untouchables"  to   do  its  dirty
work  cheap  at  low  wages.    Every  society  has  some  device  to
enslave  or  demean  part  of  its  people  to  get  them  to  serve  the
rest.    This  has  been  the  fate  of  the  Negro  and  the  function
of  color  in  our  society.    Either  this  is  ended  or  it  may  tear
the  country  apart.    The  wave  of  Negro  separatism  is  only  a
reflection  of  the  veiled  but  real  apartheid   of  our  society;  the
cry  of  black  power,  only  an  expression  of  black  powerlessness.
It   would   be  better   to   give  Negro   frustration   organized
form  and  voice  than  to  let  it  rage  on  from  city  to  city  with
incalculable   consequences.     Other   multi-racial  societies  have
found   organized   diversity  the  path   to  a  fundamental  unity.
We  believe  the  time  has  come  for  an  American  Negro  Con-
gress,   representing   every  geographical   and   class  section   of
Why  Not   Land  Reform  in  Mississippi?
A  sensitive  account  of  a  Negro  family  moving  out  of
rural  Mississippi   to  the  urban  north  has  been  written
by   Ben   H.   Bagdikian,   for   the   July   15  issue   of   the
Saturday   Evening  Post.    It  displays  his  characteristic
sympathy   for   the   poor  and  the  dispossessed.     II   oc-
curred  to  us  in  reading  it  that  the  human  problems  of
the   Mississippi   delta  are  not  so   unlike   those  of   the
Mekong  delta.   In  the  latter  (as  in  so  many  other  dis-
tant  places)  our  government  constantly  preaches  land
reform,  though  it  usually  turns  up  in  any  showdown on
the  side  of  the  landlords.    But  we  wonder  why  no  one
has   suggested   land  reform   for   the   Mississippi    delta.
There  the  monoculture of  cotton  and  the  concentration
of   land  ownership  has  long   rested   on  a  peasantry   in
near-serfdom.    Now  mechanization is  making  this  peas-
antry   landless   and   pushing   it   into   overcrowded   city
slums.    Would  it  not  be  more  humane  and  less  expen-
sive  socially  to  buy  up  land  and  give   "40  acres  and  a
mule"  to  many  of  these  "tractored  out"  croppers  and
tenants?    They  are  farmers.    They  have  a  feeling  for
the  land.    To  uproot  them  is  creating   formidable  hu-
man  deterioration  in  our  cities.    Why  can't  some  group
of  young  radical  scholars   do  a  thoughtful  Fabian  So-
ciety-style  study  and come  up with  a  practical  program
for  a  land  reform  which  will  alleviate  the  human  ero-
sion  in  the  Mississippi  Delta?
American   Negro   life,   chosen   where   possible   by  elections,
where  impossible   by  informal   organizational  representation.
Such  a representative body organized  on  a national  scale would
give  dignity  and  drama  to  the  Negro's  needs  and  aspirations.
In  the  South,  as  James  Meredith's  new  march  has  shown,  the
Negro  still  lives  in  a  realm  of  racial  terror  imposed  by white
supremacy.    In  the  North  he  is  cooped  up  unwanted  in slums
whose  degradtion  are  leading  to  racial  decay.    It  is  time  to
recognize  that  Negro  nationalism is  the  reflection  of  an unde-
niable  reality.   This  is  a  people  apart,  a  suppressed  nation  in
our   midst,   still   unaccepted   fully   as  American   though   they
have  been  here  longer—as  Malcolm  X  said—than  any  racial
stock   except   the   very   first   settlers   in   Virginia   and   New
England.
A  Congress   which  can  speak   for   this  people,  which  can
focus  attention  on  its  problems  North   and  South,  which  can
draw  up  a  statement  of  grievances  and  a  program  of  aspira-
tions,  may  seem  a  step  backwards  toward  disunity  but  could
in  practice  prove  a  step  forward  to  an  ultimate  reconciliation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  17,1967
The  Deeper  Issues  Which  Need  Examination  in  the  Uproar Over  the  Congo'
Why  the  Military  Tail  Tends  to  Wag  the  Dog  in  U.S.  Foreign  Policy
The  uproar  in  the  Senate  over  the  Congo  illustrates   once
more  how  poorly  informed   even  the  best  informed   Senators
are  on  military  policy.    It  is  gratifying  that  men  like  Russell
and  Stennis  should  have  responded  so  quickly  to  the   danger
of   our   becoming   involved   in   another   interventionist   affair.
Their  response  reflects  the  misgivings  they  first  voiced   and
then  quickly  repressed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Vietnamese  en-
tanglement   seven  years  ago.    It  also  reflects  a  growing  sensi-
tivity   to   the   ease   with   which   the   Congressional    right   to
declare  war  can  be rendered  nugatory  by military  actions  which
create  situations  from  which  it  is  difficult  to  withdraw with-
out  loss  of  prestige.
How  and  When  It  All  Began
But  the  essential  element  here—and  the  one  which   most
_  needs  investigation—is  our   military  policy.     The   Rockefeller
Brothers   reports   during   the  Eisenhower   years  advocated   the
creation  of  mobile  strike  commands  which  could  be  used   in
limited  warfare,  nuclear  or  non-nuclear,  in  colonial  areas.  This
was   gunboat   diplomacy   modernized   to   meet   the   needs   of
global   American  interests  in  oil,  copper,  uranium  and   other
raw  materials.    It  was  made  to  order   for  Chase   Manhattan,
Standard  Oil   and  the   Rockefeller   family.     (Nelson   Rocke-
feller  in  I960  was  ready,  as he  phrased  it  then  in  an  indiscreet
moment,  to  make  the  Congo  "another  Korea"  rather  than  see
its  control  lost  to  American  and  West  European  capitalism).
The  ideas  advanced  by  the  Rockefeller  Brothers  fund  were
adopted   by  the  Kennedy  Administration,   in  the  shape  of  its
.famous   "military  options"  policy.     Instead   of  being  muscle-
bound   by  nuclear  "massive  retaliation"  we  were  to  have   at
our  disposal  swift  cargo  planes  and  mobile  units  which  could
be  deployed  wherever   U.S.  interests,  real  or  fancied,  were  in
danger.    This  is  how  we  got  involved   in  Vietnam.     Russell
showed  his  awareness  of  this  aspect  of  the  problem  when  he
•  recently  opposed  McNamara's   plan   for   a  fleet  of   new  cargo
vessels  which  could  be  deployed  as  floating  bases  and   stocked
Where  Even  Richard  Nixon  Was  Subversive
'The  most  crippling  aspect  of  censorship  is  not  dele-
tion,  but the positive compulsion to  publish  Government-
supplied   material   word   for   word   and   submission   of
newspapers  to  orders  which dictate their  contents down
to  the  size  of  type  used  for  various  items,  their  posi-
tion  in  the  paper,  and  the  wording  of  headlines.    The
censor's   instructions   to   newspapers  after   the   recent
visit  to  Greece  by  former  U.S.   Vice  President  Nixon
gave  five  points  which  had  to  be  included  in  the  head-
lines  and  the  introduction,  and  ended  with  a  footnote:
'Warning—:the  main  headline  must  not  include  any  ref-
erence  to  Mr.  Nixon's   statement  about   a  rapid  return
to  parliamentary  democracy,  etc.    This  can  only  appear
in  the  body  of  the  text'."
—The  Observer  (London)   from  Athens July  2
with  supplies   at  various   parts  of  the  world   in   emergencies.
This  was  to  have  been  a  device  for  "instant  interventionism."
As  Russell  saw  then  in  miniature,  military  technology   can
become  the  determinant  of  foreign  policy  instead  of  its  tool.
If  you  have  instruments   which  make   intervention   easy,   the
State  Department   will   reach   for   military   instead  of   diplo-
matic  means  in  any  crisis.    The  military, on  thez  other   hand,
must  seek  a  world  policeman  role  in  order  to  prove  that  its
huge  assortment  of  weapons  and  its  huge  appropriations  are
justifiable.     The   bigger  the  military  establishment  the   more
trouble  it  will  get  you  into—just  to  prove  its  "usefulness."
Now  that  the  Congress  and  the  country  are  increasingly  fed
up  with  the  Vietnamese  war,   is  the  time  for  a  really  sober
and  thorough  study  of  how  we  have  drifted  into  the  role  of
world  gendarme.     The  military  tail  has  become  so  huge  that
it's  very  hard  for  the  dog  not  to  be  wagged   by  it.     Behind
that  huge  military  establishment  is  the  desire  of  our  big  busi-
ness   interests  to  have  mobile   Janissaries  to  protect   their  in-
vestments  everywhere.     Big  as  -we  are  as  a  nation,  we  can't
police  the  world.    We  can  only  harvest  universal   suspicion.
Jean-Paul   Sartre  has  just  published  a  special  992-page   issue  of   his  monthly,   Les  Temps   Modernes,   devoted   to   an   historic    con-
frontation  between   Arab  and  Israeli  intellectuals.     I.   F.  Stone  reviews  this  in  an  8,000-word  essay  for  the  Aug.   3  forthcoming   issue  of
the  New  York  Review  of  Books,  250   W.   57th  St.,   New  York.    You  can  get  it  on  the  newsstands  for  40<  or  a  copy  free  with  a  $7.50
subscription   to  the  New  York   Review.     Please  mention  the  Weekly  in  writing  them.
British  House of  Commons  Turns  Down A Motion to Ban  The Sale of  War Toys
Mrs.   Kerr   (Labor)   moved—"That  this  House,  conscious
of  the  need  to  create  the  environment  in  which  a  sense  of
world community can develop, which is  impossible at  present
due  to  the  dangerous  cult  of  violence  and  militarism, is  of
opinion  that  the  sale,  manufacture, import,  export  and  ad-
vertisement  of   war  toys  should  be  banned."    Her  mother
had  toured  the  shops  and  had  brought  home  a  horrifying
armoury  of  war  toys,  including guns,  bombs,  flame-throwers
and  booby-traps,  modelled on  weapons  now  used  in Vietnam
and   the   Middle  East.    TV,  horror  comics,  every  form  of
mass  media  was  being  used.    Young  minds  w'ere  being con-
ditioned   to   accept   war,  cruelty  and   violence   as  normal.
How  is  it  that  when  we  have  a  Minister  for  Disarmament
he  cannot  say  something  about  this  key  subject?
Mr.  Tilney  (Conservative)—Mankind,  unfortunately,   was
pugnacious,   destruction  to   many  people  was   fun.    At   a
church  fete  they  would  pay  sixpence  to  break crockery.
Mr.  Darling  (Board  of  Trade)—The  United  Kingdom  toy
industry  was  one  of  her  most   flourishing.   Last  year £16m
worth  of  British  toys  were  exported.    The  industry  has  a
reasonably  sensitive   social   conscience.
Mr.   Parkyn   (Labor)—Parliament   should   not   interfere
with  the  rights  of  ordinary  people.
Mrs.   Kerr—They  do  not  have  free  choice.    Children  have
been  brain-washed.
Mr.   Hogg    (Conservative)—Mrs.   Kerr   had   begun   her
speech  by  saying  this  might  be  one  of  the  last  occasions  on
which  they  could  discuss  violence  before  the  Third   World
War  broke  out.    How  were  they  to  survive  by  preventing
children  buying  war  toys?     He   did  not  feel   much   safer
after  hearing  her  proposals.
Mr.  Emrys  Hughes  (Labor)—Mrs.  Kerr  was  an  optimist
in  believing that  a  Government  whose  policy  was  to  export
as  many  arms  as  possible  would ban  toy  gums.
The  motion  was  negative.
—In  the  House  of  Commons,  The  Times  (London)   July  4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  July  17,1967
The  Votes  of  the  National  Assembly  and  the  Desire  for  Peace  Both  Ignored
Johnson's  July  4 Rhetoric  Can't  Hide  the  Naked  Military  Rule  in  Saigon
Lyndon  Johnson's  Fourth  of  July  statement  tan  the  risk  of
being  distributed by the  Viet  Cong  in  South Vietnam  as  prop-
aganda  and  bitter humor.   "Freedom  is a gift  to  be  cherished,
yes,"   said  the  statement  from   the   ranch,   "but   it   is  also  a
gift  to  be  shared;  and  in  sharing  it,  we  strengthen  it  every-
where,  at  home  and  abroad."    The  kind  of  freedom we  share
in  South  Vietnam  is  very  different  from  the  kind  we  or any-
body  else  cherishes.
Big  Minh  Got  the  Biggest   Vote
ITEM:   When   the   South   Vietnamese  National   Assembly
met  July  2  to  pass  on  18  candidates  for  President  and  Vice
President,  it  validated  all  but  one.    The  one  that  go  the  big-
gest   vote—95%   of   those   present—was   Gen.   "Big   Minh",
hero  of  Diem's  overthrow.  (Saigon  Post,  July  3.)     Yet    the
military  junta  has  declared  his  return  would   endanger   "na-
tional  security"  and  won't  let  him  come  back  from   exile  to
run.    His  return  would  certainly hurt  the  chances  of  the  new
Thieu-Ky  ticket.
ITEM:  There   would   have  been  no  election  for  the  Na-
tional  Assembly  or  the  Presidency   except   for   the  Buddhist
agitation  led  by Thich  Tri  Quang  last  year.  Now  the  Buddhist
leader  is  backing  the  first  overt  peace  candidate  to  appear  in
the  race  for  the  Presidency,  Au  Troung  Thanh,  Ky's  former
Economics  Minister  and  one  of  the  Cabinet  members  who  re-
signed  at  the  end  of   1966  to  protest  domination  of  the  gov-
ernment  by  Northern  military  men  and  refugees.     "Vietnam
has  two  choices,"   Thanh   said  in  announcing  his  candidacy,
"We  can achieve peace  or  our  country  can  be  destroyed.    The
people  should  be permitted  to make  that  decision.    The  junta,
represented  by Thieu  and  Ky,  offers  a  platform  of  more  war;
We  offer  a  platform  of  peace."    Though  Thanh  has  been  a
Cabinet  Minister  since  1964  under  three  regimes  and  is  being
attacked  by  the  Viet   Cong   radio  as  "playing  the  American
game,"  the  junta  is  trying  to  smear  him  as  a  Communist.
Thanh's   prospects   are  not  good.    "Thanh's   slogans   and
platform   promises  are  audacious,"  Richard  Harwood   cabled
Triumphant   Demonstration  of  How  Those
Revolutionary    Development   Teams
Maintain  Basic  Services
"About  5,000  revolutionary   development   workers  had
been  assembled  in  an  open  field  for  the  Premier's  visit
to  Tunghia.    Several   complained  that  they   had  been
without   food   and   water   for   36   hours,   awaiting   his
(Ky's)   arrival.     Revolutionary   development    workers
are  the   mainstay   of   the   pacification   program   which
seeks  to  maintain  basic  services  and operations  in  areas
controlled  by  the  Government."
—New  York  Times  dispatch  from  Danang,  July  8
the   Washington   Post  from  Saigon  July  4.    "Writers,  intel-
lectuals,  professional  men  and  journalists  are  being  arrested
each  week  for   their  dissent  from   the  policies  of  the  junta.
'Neutralism'  is  considered  a  political  crime  in  Saigon.  Three
days  ago  five  businessmen  and  intellectuals  were  seized  by  the
secret  police  for  allegedly  advocating  a  coalition   government
with  the Viet  Cong." Thanh  was in jail under  Diem  and fears
a  similar  fate  under  Thieu  and  Ky.
For  those  who  want  to  see  just  how  bad  the  military situa-
ation  is  in  Vietnam  we  call  attention  to  the  box  below  and  to
Wendell  S. Merick's  latest  report  in  17.5.  News  &  World  Re-
port   July   17.     Can  there  be  a  clear-cut  military  victory?"
Merick  was  asked.    "Would  another  250,000   troops   insure
that?"  His  answer  was,  "No.   Another  250,000  troops  might
not  even  bring  the  war  under  control,  much  less  guarantee
victory."    This  in  a  pro-war  paper!    The  one  hopeful  pos-
sibility  Merick  sees  is  negotiations  with  the  NLF  by  the  new
government  to  be  elected  in  Saigon  in  September.    This  is  the
direction  most  South  Vietnamese  would   favor   if  given  that
freedom  Johnson  says  he  wants to  share  with  them.    But  the
prospect  is  for  the  election  of  the  military  ticket  by  a  rigged
and  minority  vote  (the   Assembly's  proposals   for   a   run-off
election  to  provide  majority  rule  was  rejected  by  the  junta).
In  our  opinion  the  U.S.  is  headed   for  a  political  defeat  as
disastrous  as  the  military stalemate.
Will McNamara Dare Give Johnson As Frank  A Report As  These  AP  Prize-Winners?
"Saigon—In  1962  no  one  seemed  to  doubt   that  the  war
could  be  won.    It  is  now  five  years  later.    Delusions  still
crowd   realities.     In   answer   to   a   particularly   pessimistic
report  on  pacification,  a  U.S.   official  in  Saigon  is   informed
by   Washington,   'Your  report  is   too  leftist   and  defeatist.
Please  look  for  more  encouraging  aspects.'
"In  statistical   language,  there  are  never  any   American
military  defeats   in  Vietnam.    No   matter   how  severe   the
U.S.  casualties,  the  enemy  usually  takes  far  more.    If  the
bodies   were  not  actually   left   on  the  battlefield,  then  they
were  'dragged  away" or  'killed  by  air  and  artillery  too  deep
in   the   jungle   to   investigate.'    The   ability   of   many   'de-
stroyed'  enemy  units  to  return   to  the  fray   disputes   allied
claims.    But  even  now  the  official  impression  is  given  that
with   'just   a   few   more   troops'  the   job  can   be  done,   say
200,000  more.
"There  never  seems  to  be  quite  enough  American   troops
to  do  the  job.    One  reason  is  that  hopes  of  stopping   enemy
infiltration  have  not  been  realized,  either  by  border   fighting
or  by  bombing  North   Vietnam.     With  only   about   20%  of
its  regular  army  committed,  Hanoi  can  raise  the  ante.  The
war,   then,   can  get   very   much  bigger  but  remain  just   as
inconclusive.
"A  military  machine  tries  to  justify  its  role.    Gen.  West-
moreland,  seeking  indices  of  progress,  will  cite  enemy    cas-
ualties.    Authorities  have  been  stating  for  years  that  the
guerrillas  are  demoralized,   have  been  denied   recruits  and
are  ineffective.  Yet  the  enemy  seems  as  obstinate  and daring
as  ever.  It  breaks  up  big  concentrations  of  American  troops
and  scatters  them  by  staging  battles  that  burst  like  blisters
across  the  anatomy   of   Vietnam.
"Units  sorely  needed  for  battles  along  the  borders  are
often  tied  up  'securing  the  victories'  gained  months  earlier.
In  only  a  handful  of  areas  has  the  guerrilla   organization
been  adequately  destroyed.   The  cost  of  holding  this  ground
makes  the  prospect  of  spreading  such  security   throughout
the   country    almost   a   tactical    impossibility.      Millions   of
American  troops  would   be  required."
—On  the   eve  of   McNamara's   visit,  two  Pulitzer   Prize
winning  AP  men,  Peter  Arnett  and  Horst  Pass, summed  up
their five years  in  Vietnam  in  a dispatch  we  saw  only  in  the
York,  Pa.,  Gazette  &  Daily  and  present  abridged   here.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  17,1967
Though  the  World  Grows  Ever  Hungrier,  Profit  and Politics  Take  Precedence  Over  Food
Bugging  Banned  in  Crime.Detection  But  Dissenters  Still  Fair  Game
THE   BIG  LOOPHOLE   left   in   Attorney   General    Ramsey
Clark's  order  banning  wiretapping  and  electronic   eavesdrop-
ping  is  that  it  does  not  apply   to  "investigations  directly  re-
lated   to  the  protection   of   the   national  security."      Nobody
knows  just  what  that  means.    FBI  Chief   J.  Edgar  Hoover's
annual   testimony   before   the   Appropriations    Committee   of
Congress,   for  example,  has  referred  to  more  than   2,000  or-
ganizations   as  Communist-infiltrated.     Presumably   he   keeps
them  under  surveillance  to  safeguard  "national   security."  But
anyone  who  knows  the  state  of  the  American  Left  must  know
that   to  get  a  total  of  a  few  hundred,   much  less  more   than
2,000,  one  must  count   in   some  pretty  pale   and   respectable
organizations.    The  various  branches  of  military   intelligence
also  have  had  their  own  gumshoe   men  in  domestic  organiza-
tions.    CIA  is  supposed   to  keep  out  of  domestic  affairs   but
is  up  to  its  neck  in  "ethnic  groups"  and  the  academic  world.
Unlike  Justice  Department,  these  other  agencies  almost   never
turn  up  in  court  and  can  ignore  judicial  standards.
Tax  Returns  for  HUAC  Snoopers
We   are   impressed   with   the   new   Attorney  General,   and
wish  the  American  Civil  Liberties Union   could   open   a  dia-
logue with  him  on  this.   There  are  11  other  outfits  beside  the
FBI  on  the   U.S.   Intelligence  Board.     Does   the   new  order
apply  to  all  of  them?    Are  they  free   to  interpret  "national
security"  as  they  please?    Enforcement  of  the  espionage  act
is' one  thing;   the  mushroom  growth   of   a  huge   and   largely
uncontrollable  political  police  another.    Any  ACLU  talk  with
the  Attorney General  might well  cover  in  addition the  obscene
habit   of   giving   the   Un-American  Activities  Committee   the
right  to  inspect  all  tax  returns.    John  Herling  deserves  a  tip
of  the  hat  for  calling  attention,  in- a  Scrips-Howard   column
June  27,  to  the  fact  that  the  President  had  again  signed   such
an  authorization  June  6.
AN    UGLY   FOOTNOTE   ON   FOOD:   When   the   President's
Science  Advisory Committee  issued  its  report  last  February  on
the  Post-Apollo  program   (i.e.   after   reaching  the  moon)   it
suggested   budgets  of  up  to  $7  billion  a  year  after   1972   for
space.     But   the   new   3-volume   science   advisory   on   world
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Street   .................................
City  ....................................
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street   .................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Are
Washington,   D.  C.
,  N. W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................   State.....
a  gift  sub  to:
7in                    Stfltp
7/17/87
Indicate  if   announcement   wished   D
First  CIA  Step  Toward  Honest   Labelling?
The  current  issue .of  The  China  Quarterly,   the  lead-
ing  scholarly   journal  for  China-watchers,  contains   an
article  on  Mao  Tse-tung's  cultural  revolution  written
by  Philip  Bridgman.  What  is  noteworthy  is  that  in  the
biographical   notes   about  its   contributors,  the  journal
identifies  Bridgman  as  "a  reserve  analyst,  for  the  CIA."
This  is  believed  to  be  the  first  time  that  one  of   the
CIA's  analysts  has  been  allowed  to  state  his   affiliation
in  an  article  under  his  name.    Usually  such  articles  in
scholarly  journals  carry  the  euphemism,  "a  student  of
Chinese  affairs" or  the  like.
—In  Capitol  Corridors:  Washington  Star, July  9
food   needs  carries  no  recommendations   whatever.     Space   is
another  gravy-train  for  the  military-industrial  complex;    food
is  just  human   need.     In  the   same   vein  was  the  President's
decision  last  week  to  cut  back  wheat  acreage  by  13%,  despite
protests   from  his  food   study  group  and  AID   that  a   world
on  the  edge  of  starvation  needs  more  U.S.  wheat.     Agricul-
ture  Department   was  for  the  cut  to  shore  up  sagging  wheat
prices.    The  farm  country  rings  with  idealistic  cries  of   "food
for   peace"  when   it  sees  a  way  to  unload   surpluses  but   the
idealism  is  forgotten  when  wheat  prices  require  acreage  cuts.
Secretary  of  Agriculture  Freeman  reported  that  less  wheat  was
needed   in  the  Food  for   Peace  program.     Two  countries   he
mentioned  as  off  the  wheat  list  were  Yugoslavia,   to  be  pun-
ished  for  aid  to  North  Vietnam,  and  Algeria,  for   expropriat-
ing  American  property.
How   TIMES  CHANGE  (FoR  THE BETTER)—The  Pentagon
is  upset  but  others  will  cheer  West  Germany's  decision  to  cut
back  its  armed  forces  and  to  shift  from  an  offensive  (nuclear)
to  a  defensive  strategy.     Foreign  Minister  Willy  Brandt  in  a
radio  talk  even  sees  a  new  European  security  pact  as  a  way
to  eliminate  all  standing  armies  by  1987.     Similarly the  State
Department  is  upset  by  Japan's   refusal  at  the  Asian  and  Pa-
cific   Council   meeting   in   Bangkok   to   allow   a   joint   com-
munique   taking   a  strong   stand   against   Communist   China's
H-bomb  and  on  Vietnam.    This  Council  was  intended  to  be
the  Asian  equivalent  of  NATO.
/  R  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
On   Summer   Schedule  —  Next   Issue  July 31st
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED