I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967feb13.pdf

============================================================

A  Wiretap  Inquiry  That  Exempts  FBI  and  CIA!  P. 4
Don't  Look  Now,  J.  Edgar,  But  We  Think  We've  Spotted  Another Subversive
"In 1959 Vice  President Nixon suggested  to  Soviet officials      and  the  Soviet  Union   would   be  well  served  if   consulates
that  the  interest of  peace and  the  interests  of  both  the  U.S.     were  established  in  New   York  and Leningrad."
—Morion   (R.  Ky.)  speech  in  support  of  the  pending  U.S.-Soviet  Consular  treaty  in  the  Senate,  Jan,  SI.
I. F. Stonefs   Weekly
VOL. XV, NO.  6
FEBRUARY  13,  1967
°'
0
'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
More  Than  Steel  and  Chrome  Can  Bear
At  this  tense  moment,  when  there  is  hope  everywhere that
peace  may  emerge  from  the  Vietnamese  New  Year  cease-fire,
the  rest  of  the  world  may  spare  a  little  time  to  consider what
it  is  asking  of  us  Americans.     If  men  live  by  symbols,  then
all  we  live  by  is threatened.  This  can  be  seen  if  we  strip  away
non-essentials  and  get  down  to  the  sensitive and  painful  layers
of  the  mind,  where  the  decisions  are  really  made.    To  start
with,  the  President  wants  peace,  and  he's  more  hopeful  than
he  has  been  in  months  of  getting  it,  even  if  it  is  only because
of  the  growing  Sino-Soviet  split.    He  is  looking  for  a  signal
from  Hanoi,  but  it  must  be  the  signal  that  Hanoi  is  ready  to
toss  in  the  towel.    The  signals  we  have  been  getting  are  sig-
nals  of  a  readiness to  negotiate  a  peaceful  settlement.   But  for
us that  would  be a defeat,  and  that's how  Johnson  sees  it.    To
call  off  the  bombings,  to  sit  down  with  the  rebels,  to  accept
some  kind  of  coalition  regime,  open  or  disguised,  would  be
to  admit  that  we had  lost  the  war.  And  that,  the  world  should
recognize,  is  very  hard  indeed.
The  Prestige  of  The  Machine
Everything  America  stands  for  is  at  stake.    And  not  just
America,  but  everything  the  modern  world  admires.   And  not
just  the  capitalist  world,  but  all  that  Lenin  and  his  comrades
aspired  to  ever  since  the  days  when  Fordismus  was  the  magic
word  of  Bolshevism,  its  gleaming  goal,  a  future  of  mass  pro-
duction,  brought  at  last  to  the  muddy villages  of  Mother  Rus-
sia.    It  is  the  Machine,  it  is  the  prestige  of  the  machine,  that
is  at  stake  in  Vietnam.    It  is  Boeing  and  General  Electric  and
Goodyear  and  General  Dynamics.    It  is  the  electronic  range-
finder  and  the  amphibious  truck  and  the  night-piercing  radar.
It  is  the  defoliant,  and  the  herbicide,  and  the  deodorant,  and
the  depilatory.    It  is  the  products  and  the  brand  names  we
have  been  conditioned   since  childhood  to  revere.    It  is  the
ideal  of  our  young  men.    This—do  not  be  deceived  by  the
cowboy  tall  in  the  saddle  smoking  Marlboroughs   on  TV,  as
distant  a  figure  from  our  lives  as  Tarzan  of  the  Apes—this
ideal  is  to  be  an  Ivy  League-suited  executive  in  one  of  those
chrome  and  glass  skyscrapers  which  are  our  Cathedrals.    It  is
to  be  a human  particle  as  shiny  and  antiseptic  and  replaceable
as  any  machine  part,  in  the  world  of  business.    This  is  more
than  a  drive  for  money.    It  is  the  veneration  of  efficiency.     It
is  faith  in  technology,   in  mechanical  solutions  for  every  prob-
lem,  in  the  Gadget  as  God.    This  is  the  faith  those   uncouth
From  the  Clergy  Who Marched on  Washington
"A  time  comes  when  silence  is  betrayal. .  .  .  We add
our  voice  to  those  who  protest  a  war  in  which civilian
casualties  are  greater  than  military;  in  which  whole
populations  are  deported  against  their  will;  in  which
the  widespread  use  of  napalm  is  killing  and maiming
women,  children  and  the  aged;  in  which  the combatants
are  systematically destroying the  crops  and productive
capacity  of  a  country  they  profess  to  liberate. .  .  . Our
anguish  is  deepened  by  the  discrepancy  between what
we  are  told  by  our  government  and  what  we  discover
is  actually  taking  place.    We  are  told  that  the  other
side  gives  no  indication  of  desire  to  negotiate   and  we
then  discover  that  such  negotiations  have  been  given
but  that  we  have  responded either with  rebuff  or  mili-
tary  escalation."
—From  the  manifesto   by  the  Clergymen's  March  on
Washington  (text,  Con. Rec.  A405-7  2/1/67)   asking  an
end  to  bombing  of  the  North  and  talks  with  the   NLF.
guerrillas  in  Vietnam  have  placed  in  jeopardy.
When  Gen.  LeMay  said  we  could  win  the  war  by  bombing
them  back  to  the  Stone  Age,  he  was  speaking   up  from  the
depths  of  our  deepest  horror.   What  fate  could  be  worse  than
to  put  people  back  in  the  Stone  Age—without   refrigerators,
Supermarkets,  even  toilets?    Now   we're  frantic  because   for
our purposes  these  Vietnamese  peasants  were  in  the  Stone  Age
already,  and  had  never  heard  of  the  comforts  we  were  going
to  blast  away  from  them.    Down  there  in  the  jungles,  unre-
generate,  ingenious,  tricky,  as  tiny  as a  louse  or  a  termite,  and
as  hard  to  get  at,  emerged  a  strange  creature  whose  potency
we  had  almost  forgotten—Man.    To  sit  down  now  and  deal
with  him  is  to  admit  that  the  Machine  lost  to  Man,  that  our
beautifully  computerized  war,  with  the  most  complicated  de-
vices  for  killing  ever  assembled  and  the  most  overwhelming
firepower  ever  mustered,  had  failed.    To  ask  us  to  give  up
our  faith  in  General  Motors  is  like  asking  a  Joan  of  Arc  to
give  up  her  faith  in  God;  we,  too,  may  prefer  the  fire,  for
this  really  shakes  the  foundations  of  our  security.    These  are
the  invisible  blows  that  rain  down  on  Detroit   while  every-
body  worries about  Hanoi.    We  ask the  world:  Dry  your tears
about  those  uprooted  peasants—if   you  look   closely  you  will
see that  they  are  still  there.   And  think  of  our  poor  frustrated
bulldozers.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  13,1967
Nicaragua   As  A  Successful   Example  of  "Pacification"  by  U.S  Marines
The  Big Money  Establishment  Takes  Its  Quiet  Revenge  on  Patman
THREE  MEMBERS  of  the  House  are  being  disciplined.    The
least  justifiable  case  is getting  the  least  attention.    Adam  Clay-
ton   Powell  is  in  trouble  for   using  his   office   to  further  his
career  as  an  international  playboy,  this  has  Negroes  aroused,
since  they  fee!  with  justice,  that  more  serious  peccadilloes   by-
other  (white)  members  pass  unreproved.    John  Bell  Williams
of  Mississippi  has  lost  his  seniority;  his  crime  was  deserting
his  party  for  Barry  Goldwater  in  1964—this  has  other  South-
erners  aroused  since  Williams  only  did  openly  what   most  of
them  did  privately.   The  third  case  is that  of  Wright  Patman,
the  one  member  from  Texas  who  (unlike  that  multi-million-
aire  from  the  Pedernales)   is  really a  Populist.    Patman's   pow-
ers  as  chairman  of   House   Banking  and   Currency  are   being
cut  down  by  a  bipartisan  cabal.    His  crime is that  he  has  been
exposing  the  manipulations  of   the   Big  Money   crowd,   most
recently   in   their   tax-exempt  foundations,  and   was  about   to
investigate  interlocking  controls  in  Big  Banking.    A   genera-
tion   ago  this  would  have  created  an  uproar;  today   it  passes
unnoticed.    That  model  of  anemic  liberalism,  the  Democratic
Study  Group,  so  active  in  the  Powell  and  Williams'  cases,  is
silent  in  Patman's.
It  Began  With  A  Chamorro
NOWHERE   IN   LATIN   AMERICA   does   our   world-wide   cru-
sade  for   freedom   look  more  sour  than  in  Nicaragua.     Forty
years  ago  Cooliclge's  Secretary  of  State  Kellogg  pulled  a  Red
scare  and  called  out  the  Marines  to  prevent  the  Liberals  from
ousting  ihe  Conservative  General   Chamorro,   long  a   faithful
tool  of  the  U.S.  and  the  United  Fruit  Company.     A  Liberal
mining  engineer,  Sandino,  led  a  revolt  against   U.S.  interven-
tion   which  ended  only  in   1932   with  the  establishment   of   a
U.S.  trained National  Guard  to  take  over  the  country's  "paci-
fication."    Just  as  in  the  Dominican  Republic, the  Guard  lead-
er  we  trained,  Somoza,  soon   overthrew   the  government   and
established   a  family  dictatorship  which  built  a  $150   million
fortune  in  this  poverty-stricken  little  .country.    The   Somozas
have  just  won  another  of  their  rigged  elections,  this  time  over
another   Chamorro,   leader   of   the   Conservative    opposition.
Though  60  people  have  been   killed,  a  leading  editor   jailed
and  the  unsuccessful  candidate  (with   20  of  his   supporters)
arrested   on  charges   that  could   bring   the   death   penalty,   the
U.S.  looks  on  with  indifference,   amusement  or   complacency.
Who   cares  about  freedom  so  long  as  a  Central  American  re-
gime  plays  ball  with  U.S.  interests?
How  the  Senate  Faced  Up  To  the  Baker  Case
Sen.   CLARK    (D.   Pa):   Mr.   President,   the   Bobby
Baker   case   broke   on   Oct.   10,   1963—3   years   and   4
months  ago.    A  voluminous investigation  of   the   case
was  made  by  the  Committee on  Rules  and Administra-
tion.  .  .  . The  Senate  has  had 3  years  and  4  months  time
to  put  its  house  in  order,  and  to  correct  .  .  .  procedures
dealing  with  ethical  standards  of  employes. ...  In not
wishing  to  face  up to  this  matter,  the  entire  matter  was
referred  to  a  new  committee  on  ethics  .  .  .  chaired  by
the  junior  Senator  from  Mississippi  (Mr. Stennis). Dur-
ing  the  course  of  this  debate,  the  Senator  from  Miss-
issippi  stated  that  his  committee  had  not  yet  given  any
serious  consideration  to   [the   Baker  case]  .  .  .  and  he
did  not  know  when  that  would  be.  .  .  .  The  Senate  has
an  opportunity this  afternoon  to  face  up  to  its  respon-
sibilities.        —In  the Senate,  Feb.  2, Con. Rec.  p.  S1408.
The  Senate  thereupon  faced  up  to  its  responsibilities
by  voting   49-28  to  shelve  Clark's  "Bobby  Baker"  bill
which   would  have  forbade   employes   of  the   Senate  to
engage  in  outside  business  without  permission.
REUTHER'S   RESIGNATION   would   stir  more  enthusiasm   in
those   who'd   like   a   less   reactionary   labor   movement    if   it
weren't  for  the  suspicion  (1)  that  it  was  largely  motivated  by
disappointed   personal   ambition  to   succeed   Meany   and    (2)
that  if  he  hadn't   resigned   Reuther  would   have  had  to   stage
a  fight  at  the   coming   AFL-CIO  Executive  Council   meeting
Feb.  20  or  stand  accused  of  again  chickening  out  into   silence
after  publicly  calling  so  often  for  "democratic  discussion"   in-
side  the  labor  movement.     Reuther  wants  to  support  Johnson
on  foreign  policy  and  the  Vietnam  war;  Meany  regards  John-
son,  as  Meany  regarded  Eisenhower,   as  too  soft  on   Commu-
nism.  In  foreign  policy  Meany  is  close  to  Goldwater,  but  Reu-
ther  lacks  to  nerve  to  come  out  and  say  so.
TIP  TO  DER  SPIEGEL:  A   1st  Infantry  Division  photograph
released  Jan.  10  in  Saigon   (Rel.  No.  P1975-1-67)  shows  two
U.S.  soldiers  with  this  caption   under   it,  "Keeping  A   Sharp
Eye  Out.     Patrolling   the  Saigon  River,  PFC  Ronnie  Daniels
and  Sgt.  Michael  Yazwinsky  of  Giessen,  West  Germany,  keep
alert  as  they  watch  for  any  VC  attempting  to  escape  the  Iron
Triangle   area  during  Operation  CEDAR   FALLS.    The  men
are  with  Co  E,  1st  Engr  Bn,  1st  Inf  Div."    This  is  the  first
proof  we  have  seen  of  Germans   serving  in  Vietnam.    Could
Der  Spiegel  find  out  if  this  is only  an  odd  German   enlistment,
or  by  arrangement  with  West  German  authorities?
The  Satirical  Arithmetic  of  Our  "Success" in  Bombing  North  Vietnam
"Instructed  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  let  us  apply  to
our  supposed  'defense'  in  the  skies  over  North  Vietnam  the
cost-benefit   analysis  that  figures  so  largely  in  the  present
style  of  the  Department of  Defense.    The  primary hard  aim
of  the  bombing program  is  to  stop  the  infiltration  of  men
and  supplies  from  the  north  to  the  south.    The  results  are
these:  When the  bombing began  there  were  some  400  North
Vietnamese  soldiers  fighting  in  South  Vietnam.  Today  there
are  said  to  be  90,000.    If  this  kind  of   infiltration-stopping
continues  we  shall  soon  have  the  entire  northern military-
age  population  in  the-south.  .  .  .
"One  final  cost   of   the  bombing  is   the   most   subtle  and
quite   possibly   the   most  hurtful  of  all.    The  bombing  de-
prives  us  of  the  opportunity to  negotiate  with  the  National
Liberation   Front,   the  organization   that   is   actually   doing
most  of  the   fighting.   The  bombing  supports  the  myth  that
there  is  no  such  thing,  that  the  Vietcong  is  just  the  puppet
of  the  North.   Until we  open  our  eyes  to  the  reality  of  our
enemy,  we  cannot  make  peace  with  him.    The  bombing  of
Hanoi  reinforces  our delusion  that  it  is  Hanoi  we   fight.   We
are  indeed  confronted  with  the  active  opposition  of   Hanoi
but,  as  the  figures  show,  much  of  that  has  been  generated
since  our  own  attacks  on  the  north  began."
—Reuss  (D. Wis.)  in  the House  Feb.  1.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  13,1967
The  Folly   of   Tax-Sharing   and  the   Maddest   Idea   Yet  in  Counter-Insurgency
Hardly  the  Most  Tactful  Time  for  A  New  "Peaceful  Uses"  Nuclear  Test
ONE   OF  THE  OSTACLES  in  getting  West  German,   Indian
and   Swedish   acquiescence  in   non-proliferation  is  their   fear
that  this  may  mean  giving  up  not  only  nuclear  weapons  but
nuclear  technology  for  peaceful  uses.    Willy  Brandt  is already
talking  of  a  "technological  gap."     These  fears  will  figure  in
the  Geneva   Disarmament  talks  which  reopen   Feb.   21  in  an
atmosphere  of  considerable  "middle  power"  resentment.  Two
events  will  add   to  it.    The   first   is  the  scheduling  for   early
this  month  in  Nevada  of  a  "peaceful   uses"   test  which  is  ex-
pected   to  crater   and   inject   radioactive  Iodine,   Caesium-131
and  Strontium 90  into  the  atmosphere  in  possible  violation of
the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty.    The  other  irritant  is  a  State  De-
partment  note  to  Mexico  City  objecting  to  the   inclusion  in
the  pending  Latin  American  "nuclear-free  zone"  treaty  of  a
provision  allowing  for  peaceful  uses.    The   Department   in  a
note  released  Feb.  6  says  the  treaty would  be  rendered   ineffec-
tive  "if   it  permitted  the  development  of  nuclear  explosive  de-
vices  for  peaceful   u-.es  since  such  devices  are,  for  all  practical
purposes,  indistinguishable  from  weapons."    This  is  a remind-
er  that  a  "peaceful  uses"  test  will  provide   results  which  are
also  valuable  in  developing  weapons.     No   matter  how  you
look  at  it,  this  new  test  seems  neither  tactful   nor   timely.
A  Raid  on  The  Treasury
PLANS  FOR TAX-SHARING  between  the  States  and   the   Fed-
eral  government  ought  to  be  attacked by  all organizations seek-
ing  to  aid  the  poor.     We   were  glad  to  see  that  Collins  of
Boston  led  a  group  of  Mayors  in  testifying  against  the   idea
before  a  Senate  subcommittee  under  Muskie  of  Maine.    At  a
time  of  rising demands  for  revenue  and  social  vision,  it  would
be  disastrous  to  turn  back  more   Federal   funds  to  the   State
capitals.    Most  of  the  State  governments  are  in  the  hands  of
the  reactionary rural  well-to-do,  and  they  are  more  apt  to  use
Federal  funds  to  lighten  their  own  taxes  than   to  spend   it  in
welfare.    The  idea  was  dubious  enough  when  it  originated  in
the  Kennedy  Administration with  Walter  Heller,   as  a  means
of  disbursing  "surplus"   Federal  revenues.     But  that,  as  Moss
(D.   Utah)   pointed   out  to  the  Senate  in  a  thoughtful   speech
For  the   4th   Time—Just   Outside   Saigon
"Saigon    (UPI)—A   massive   American  ammunition
dump   hit   three   times   recently   by   Viet   Cong   suicide
squads   rocked  with  explosions   and  raged  with  flames
today.  .  .  . Waves  of  flames  still  licked  near  the  stacked
tons  of  untouched explosives  nine  hours  after  the  first
blast  lit  up  the  sky  11  miles  north  of  Saigon.     Spokes-
men  said  two  U.S.   servicemen  suffered  injuries, appar-
ently  while  fighting  the flames.  .  .  .  Past  explosions  at
the  Long  Binh  dump  came  Oct.  28,  Nov.  18  and  Dec.  10
in  Viet  Cong  satchel  charge  and  mortar  attacks.    Al-
though  near  Saigon,  the  dump  area   is   in  'Viet   Cong
territory'  where  the  guerrillas  prowl  at   night."
—Washington  Evening Star, February  4.
Feb.   1,  was  "before  the  Elementary  and  Secondary  Education
Act,  before  Medicare,  before  we  really  faced  up  to  the  hercu-
lean  tasks  of  curbing  air  and  water  pollution   and  before  we
were  so  deeply   involved  in   the   Southeast   Asian  war."      In
present  circumstances  tax-sharing  is  no  better  than  a  raid  on
the  Treasury  and   a  further  weakening  of   Federal    leadership
and  planning  in  dealing  with  problems—like  air  and   water
pollution—that  transcend  State   boundaries.
THE  WACKIEST  IDEA  YET  for  winning  the  war  in  Vietnam
was  brought  to  light  by  Bryce  Nelson  in  Science   (Jan.    20).
It  is  to  orbit  a  space  mirror  which  could  light  up   much  of
South  Vietnam  it  night  and  thus  hamper   nocturnal  guerrilla
activities!    The  article  was  illustrated  with   a  NASA  mirror-
in-orbit  diagram  showing  how  an  area  from  Washington  to
New   York   City  could   be  brightly  lit   at  night.     Five  com-
panies,  including  Boeing,  Westinghouse  and  Goodyear,   have
$490,000  in  contracts  for  preliminary  work.     Expressions  of
alarm  have  come  from  astronomers.    "Other  scientists,"   Nel-
son  reports,   "have   suggested   that  the   rhythms  of  plant  and
animal  life  would  be  disturbed."     One  reads  of  prisoners   tor-
tured  by  being  forced  to  sleep  in  brightly  lit  cells.     Imagine
keeping  a  whole  nation,  or  a  major  part  of  it,  brightly  lit  all
night  for  the  convenience  of  our  .counter-insurgency!
Two  Cries  of  Anguish  from  Vietnamese "On Our  Side"  About  the  Iron  Triangle
"I  speak  as  a  representatives  of  the  Vietnamese  Overseas
Buddhist   Association.     I  believe  the  military   operation   in
the  Iron  Triangle  has  created   a  devastation  which  is  not
only  physical—beyond  what  American  money  and  know-how
could  repair—but  devastation   on  the  psychological   an3  so-
cial  level.    You  know  in  this  country  when  we  say   moving
a  man  from  his  home,  we  just   mean  to  take  a  suitcase,  a
pack  of  cigarettes,  hop  into  a  car  and  go.    Then  we  have
another  home.    But  in  Vietnam  when  you  take  a  man  out
of  his  home,  especially   a  peasant,  you  take  him  out  of  his
past,  his  present,   and  very   surely   his  future.     A  man  in
Vietnam  is  born  a  part  of  the  land.  Remember  the  strategic
hamlet  which  was  less  disastrous  but  brought   down  Presi-
dent  Diem's  regime.    Suppose  you  are  a  Vietnamese   peas-
ant  seeing  all  these  huge  bulldozers  and  planes  devastating
—would  you  see  these  people   as  benefactors?"
—Tran  Van  Dinh,  former   Charge   d'Affaires     of  Saigon's
Embassy,  at  a  press  conference   here  in  Washington,  -under
the  auspices   of  SANE,   Feb.  2,  few   papers    covered.
"You  read  how  the  operation   of  the  Iron  Triangle  was
done.    We  evacuate  6,000  people.    Yet  I  read  today  in  the
newspapers   that   the   Viet   Cong   are   still   there,   and  one
American  platoon  has  suffered  heavy  casualties.   And  in  the
coming  days  you  may  learn   that  the  Viet   Cong  are  still
there.    When   you   move   6,000   people   out,   they   have   no
house,  no  medical  care.   They  are  not  rich  like  you.    They
have  a  very  small  house.    But  they   must  spend  their  lives
to  build  this  house,  and  that  house  may  be  lived  in  by  their
grandparents  and their  parents.   They  are  glad  to  have  this
house   and  normally   they   are   not   dependent   on   U.S.    aid.
They  are  dependent  on the fish  pond,  the  rice field, the  trees.
So  they  live  with  their  land,  for  many  thousands  of  years.
But   now  when  we  move  them,   we  ruin   them.    We   burn
everything.     Now  they  become  angry  and   more   favorable
with  the  Communists.    And  more,  excuse  me  to  say,   I  am
very  friendly  with  you,  they  become  more  anti-American."
—Col.  Nguyen   Khuong,  formerly    Saigon's   military   at-
tache  here,  same  presse   conference.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  13,1967
Electronic   "Big   Brotherism"   Stirs   A   Wide-Ranging  Protest   in  the   Senate
But  Why  Should  FBI and Cl A Be Exempt From An Inquiry Into "Bugging"?
Senator   Morce  called   for   an   investigation  of   the  Justice
Department   in  a  Senate  speech   Feb.   2  in  which  he  dwelt
on  the  expanded  use  by the  government of  all kinds of  snoop-
ing  devices.    He  called  attention  to  the  findings  being  made
by  the  Senate Judiciary  subcommittee under  Long  of  Missouri
which  has  been  investigating  electronic  eavesdropping  in  law
enforcement.     His   speech   provoked   comment   and   approval
from   Senators  as  diverse  as  Talmadge   of  Georgia,  Fong  of
Hawaii,  Cotton  of  New  Hampshire,  Proxmire  of   Wisconsin,
Cooper  of  Kentucky,  McCarthy  of  Minnesota,  Hart  of  Michi-
gan,  Young  of  Ohio  and  Gruening  and  Bartlett  of  Alaska.
Using  Fake  Telephone  Company  Trucks
Electronic   discoveries  have  made  Big  Brotherism  an   un-
seen   plague.     Long   of   Missouri   said   listening   devices   had
been  reduced  to  the  size  of  an  aspirin  tablet  and  that  a  year
ago  he  found  the  offices  of  two  Senators  had  been  "bugged."
Gruening  said  the  Internal  Revenue  Service was  disguising  its
agents  as  Bell  Telephone  employes  and  using  fake  Bell  Tele-
phone  trucks.    Morse  agreed  when  Proxmire  asked  whether
all  this  "bugging"  was  not  a  clear  violation  of   the  Fourth
Amendment  which  guarantees  "The  right  of  the  people  to  be
secure  in  their  persons,  houses,  papers  and  effects  against  un-
reasonable  searches  and  seizures."
Two  points  call  for  wider  investigation.    The  first,  as  Fong
pointed  out,  is  the  extensive  use  of  electronic  devices initiated
by  Bobby  Kennedy  as  Attorney  General  in  his  drive  on  or-
ganized  crime,  despite   the   fact   that   Congress   in   1961   and
again  in  1963  had  refused  his  request  for  legalized  wiretap-
ping.  Kennedy  operated  on  the  principle  that  the  end  justifies
the  means.    Once  a  suspected  racketeer  was  given  an   OCD
(Organized  Crime  Division)   number,  he  was  accorded  what
Long  called  "saturation  treatment."     Normally,  Long  said,  a
crime  is  investigated  to  find  the  criminal.    In   OCD   proce-
dure,  Justice  decided  that  a man  was a  criminal and  then  gave
him   "massive  investigation,  with  no  holds   barred"   to  find
something  on  which  he  could  be  convicted.   This crime-buster
zeal   is  closer   to   comic  strip   jurisprudence  than   to  normal
constitutional  standards.
Uncle  Sam's  School  for   Burglary
"The  record  reveals   that  illegal   wiretapping  by  the
Internal  Revenue  Service  is  not  an  occasional  action  of
an  over-zealous  agent,  but  is  the  logical  and  reasonable
consequence  of  a  well-defined  program   which  begins  in
the  special  school   on  wiretapping  and  bugging,  which
graduates  approximately  30 agents  each  year,  and upon
graduation  the  agent  receives  a  wiretap  kit,  including
burglar  tools  for  illegal  breaking  and  entry."
—Morse   (D. Ore.)  in  the Senate  Feb. 2.
Sen.   LONG  .(D.  Mo)—Is   there   a   special   course   in
that  school  on  teaching   the  use  of  burglar   tools?
Mr.  Owen  B.  YUNG,  Sr.  (Intelligence  Div.,   Internal
Revenue  Service):  There  is,  or  was,  up  until  this  year
a  course  in  lockpicking.
Sen.   LONG:  What  would  you  use   the   art  of   lock-
picking  for?    Mr. YUNG: For  surreptitious  entry.  .  .  .
Sen.   LONG:  Well,   that  would  still  be  breaking  and
entering   wouldn't  it?
Mr.  YUNG:  Technically,   I  guess  so,  sir.
Sen.  LONG:  Violation  of  the  law?
Mr.  YUNG:  I  wouldn't  know  sir.    I  am  not  a  lawyer.
—From  the Long  committee  wiretap   hearings.
The  biggest  gap  in  the  Long  investigation,  as  Senator  Cot-
ton  pointed  out,  was  that  it  exempted  the  so-called   "security
community"  the  FBI,  the  CIA,  and  the  various  intelligence
divisions  of  Defense  and  State.    "If  we  are  to  face  up  to  this
matter  of  bugging  and  wiretapping  in  man  fashion,"   Cotton
told  the  Senate,  "it   seems  to  me—even  though  it  might  be
wise  to  have  certain  proceedings  in  executive  session—that  no
Department  in  this  government  and  no  individual in  this  gov-
ernment  should  be  exempted."
The  worst  abuses,  those  most  dangerous  to  liberty, occur  in
the  so-called  "national  security"   field.   This  is  the  excuse  for
placing  a  network  of  informers  and  "bugs"  in  all  kinds  of
radical   and   liberal   organizations—the   "do-gooder"   is   ipso
facto  suspect  to  the  thought  police.    It  is  here,  more  than  in
tax  snooping   or  crime-busting,  that   Big  Brother  lurks,  and
the  shadow  of  the  police  state  originates.
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Street   ...........................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................   State......
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ................................................................
Of WAAf
City  ....................................  Zip................   State......
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  D
2/13/67
Fifties
/ E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in   August,   the  last  week  in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.;  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;  20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED