I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967apr10.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive  — A  First  Look  at  Saigon's  New  Constitution, P.  2
Air  Marshal  Walter  HoChiMaoTse  Mitty  Ky:  From  Hitler  Fan  to  Old Bolshevik
"I  am   not   a  true   politician.    I   am   a   revolutionary."
—Ky  to  correspondents   who  flew  with  him  in  his  private
plane   to  Quang   Tri,  London  Times  March   28.
"Premier  Ky's  sharply  pointed  black  shoes  rested  on  a
magnificent  Chinese  rug.   He  was  drinking  tea  from  a  cup
held  delicately   in  a   hand  whose   little   finger   was   capped
by   an   inch-long   mandarin   fingernail.   'The   philosophy   of
my  government  is  100  percent  social  revolutionary.'"
—Interview  with  John  B.  Oakes,  editor   of  the  editorial
page,  New  York   Times,  April  3.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,  NO.  14
APRIL   10,   1967
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The Universal Monster the World's Youth Must Join to Slay
Some  years  ago  a  minor  Soviet  diplomat  defected  in  Japan.
One  passage  in  an  interview  he  gave  was  unforgettable.     He
said   it  was  terrible  to  live   in  a  society  where  you  couldn't
confide  even  in  your  best  friend.     I  thought  of  it  again  when
I  read  the  joint  statement  issued  here  by  50  former  National
Student   Association  officers   rejecting   the   Katzenbach  report
on  the  CIA.    They  said  they  did  not  doubt  some  good   things
may  have  been  done  during the  period  when  the  CIA  secretly
subsidized  and  guided  the  international  operations of  the  NSA.
But  they said this  was outweighed by  "the  negative by-products
—of  false  association,  of  friendships  built  for  the  purpose  of
informing   the   government.   .   .  ."     The   basic  issue   is  not
whether   "certain  activities"   are  to  be   financed   by  public   or
private,  covert  or  open,  means.    The   basic  issue  is   whether
on  both  sides  youth  is  to  revolt  against  a  Statist  monster  bred
by  the  cold  war,  fed  on  each  side  by  the  doctrine  that  the  end
justifies   the  means,  and   making  men   the   tools-  of   the   State
though   it  was  meant  (whether  under  socialism  or  capitalism)
to  be  their servant.
A  Loophole  for   Lovestone
We  hope  these  50  younsters will  not  confine  themselves  to
a  brief  protest  against  the  Katzenbach  report.    We  urge  them
to  organize  a  public  investigation  with   like-minded   groups
into  the  full  implications of  the  CIA  affair.     The   Katzenbach
report   was  more  than  a  fraud.     It   was  a  symptom  of   how
corrupted   public  standards  have   become.     The   idea   that   a
governmental   agency   under   attack   should   investigate  itself
runs   contrary  to  good   sense.     It   began   when   Allen   Dulles
took  part  in  investigating  the  CIA's  fiasco  in  the  Bay  of  Pigs
and   it  was  continued   when   his   successor,   Helms,   turned   in
his  own  whitewash  with  an  Under  Secretary  of  State  and  the
Secretary  of  HEW   to  support  him.    Their   recommendations
contain   ample   escape   clauses,  notably   in   footnote   B   which
allows   some  future  hanky-pank  but   says  it  must  in  no   case
involve   "any   education,   philanthropic   or   cultural   organiza-
tion".    This  is  a  loop-hole  for  Lovestone.     It  omits  the   labor
unions  whose  CIA  activities are  exposed   again  by  Paul   Jacobs
in  the  April  Ramparts.     It  should  not  be  forgotten   that  John-
son  as  majority  leader  sprang   to  the  CIA's  support   in    1954
in  its first major  exploit,  the  overthrow  of  the  Arbenz  govern-
ment  in  Guatamala.     Its  dirty  tricks  seem  wholly  justified  in
4  *
As  Subversive  As  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount
"As   I   have   walked  among   the   desperate,   dejected
and  angry   young  men  I  have  told  them  that  Molotov
cocktails  and  rifles  would  not  solve  their  problems  .  .  .
But  they  asked,  and  rightly  so,  what  about  Vietnam?
...  If  America's  soul   becomes   totally   poisoned,   part
of  the  autopsy  must  read  Vietnam ...  A  nation  that
year   after   year   continues   to   spend   more   money   on
military  defense   than  on  social   uplift   is  approaching
spiritual  death  .  .  .  This  need  to  maintain  social   sta-
bility   for   our  investments   accounts   for   the  counter-
revolutionary  action  of  American  forces  in Guatemala
.   .  .  tells   why  American  helicopters   are  being   used
against   guerrillas    in   Colombia    and   why    American
napalm  and  green  beret  forces  have already  been active
against   rebels  in  Peru  .  .  .  The  U.S.   has  become  the
greatest  purveyor  of  violence  in  the  world  today."
—The  Rev.  Martin  Luther  King  in  New  York   April
4  in  a  call  for  an  end  to  the   war.
his  melodramatic  view  of  a  world  in  which  greedy  foreigners
grasp  for  our  property.    For  a  Texan  of  his  outlook  no  moral
precept   could   outweigh   the   duty   to   protect   our   oil,   fruit,
surphur,  cattle  and   copper   companies   abroad.     The   CIA   is
only  a  more   ingenious  device  for  dollar  diplomacy.
Establishment  liberals are  ready  as  usual  to  defend  illiberal
practices.    William  Attwood,  as  former  Ambassador  in  West
Africa,   smears  Ramparts   and  conjures  up   a  fearsome picture
in  Look  (April  18)  of  Soviet  machinations on  that  Continent.
But   the   real   questions   are:   Is  there   a  single  African   State
they  have  taken  over?    Is  there  a  single  African  elite  they—
like   our   CIA—have   not   failed   to   antagonize?     Nasser   is
Africa's  admired   symbol  of   a  ruler  who  has  taken  both   the
Americans  and  the  Russians  for  a  ride  at  their  own  expense.
The  chief  corruption  has  been  at  home.     How  many  intelli-
gence  services  do  we  need?     How   many  billions  are   CIA,
DIA,  FBI,  NSA  and  the  others  spending?    How  many  thou-
sands  of  agents  serve  them?    How  far  do  they  duplicate  and
spy  on   each   other?     How   deeply   do  they  penetrate   all  our
organizations?    Truman,  under  whom  the  CIA  began,   wrote
in   1953   that  he  thought   it  should  be  stripped   of   its  "dirty
tricks"  department.    Unless  we  act  soon  our  children will  find
that   agencies   supposed   to  defend   freedom   abroad   have   per-
manently  poisoned  it  at  home.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  10, 1967
Censorship   "Abolished"   But  Still  in  Force—Only  Property  Rights  Firmly   Guaranteed
Saigon's  New   Basic  Law  Has  A  Bill  of  Rights  As  Full  of  Holes  As  Diem's
In  Saigon,  after  the  regular  5  p.m.  briefing, there  is  a  "deep
backgrounder"   in  which  an  information   officer,   not   for  attri-
bution,   broaches   ideas  which  the  reporters   are  free   to   use,
but  only  as  if  these  were  their  own.    This  is  how   propaganda
is  fed  out  to  the  press.    These  "backgrounders"   were  recalled
when  we  read  a  "think"  piece  on  South  Vietnam's  new  Con-
stitution  from  Saigon  in  the  Christian  Science  Monitor   (April
3).     "Observers,"   it  said,  "wonder  about  the  effect  on  Amer-
ican  opinion.   What  will  be  the  stand  of  American liberals?
.  .  .  Many  have  urged  a  withdrawal.    But  it  will  not  be  easy
for  these  people  to  urge  that  the  U.S.  abandon  a  new stripling
democracy."
Not  A  Very  Fragrant  Baby
The   Monitor's    correspondent   would   have   done   better   to
take  a  £ood  look  at  the  baby.    It  bears  striking  resemblances
to   the   "stripling  democracy"   launched  by  Diem's   Constitu-
tion  in  1956.    At  the  very  outset,  Art.  12  (2)    says  "censor-
ship  will  be  abolished  except  for  motion  pictures  and   plays."
But  96  hours  after   the  Constitution  was  promulgated  with  a
21-gun  salute,  the  Saigon   Guardian   was  still  suspended   and
the   other   papers  were   still  being   censored.     The   very  next
provision  of   the  Constitution  says,  cryptically,  "press  regula-
ions  will  be  prescribed  by  law."    No  correspondent  in  Saigon
seems  to  have  bothered   to  ask  what  this  meant  and  why  cen-
sorship  continued.   Presumably the  key  lies  in  Article  12  (1)
which   says.  "The   State  respects   freedom   of  thought,  speech,
press  and   publishing,  as  long  as  it  does   not  harm   personal
honor,   national    security   or   good   morals."      [Our    italics.]
This  takes back with  one  hand  what  was  just granted  with  the
other,  and  resembles  Article  16  of  Diem's  Constitution  which
said,  "Every  citizen  has  the  right  to  freedom  of   expression"
but  then  added,  "This  right  must  not  be  used  for  false  accusa-
tions,  slander,  outrages   against  public  morals,   incitations  to
internal  disturbances,  or  for  the    overthrow  of  the  republican
form   of  government."
In  the  U.S.   Constitution   future   laws  are  restricted   by  the
Bill  of  Rights.    In  the  new  Vietnamese  Constitution,  the  Bill
of  Rights  is  subject  to  restriction  by  future  laws.    One   exam-
ple  are  the  "press  regulations"  mentioned   above.    Another  is
"freedom  to  join  labor  unions  and  to  strike"  which  "will  be
respected   within   the   framework   and   regulations   prescribed
by  law."     "Freedom  of   religious  belief"   is  likewise  guaran-
teed  "as  long  as  it  does  not  violate  the  national  interest  and
is  not  harmful to  public  safety  or  order",  a  qualification  which
must   disturb  the   Buddhists,   many  of   whose   leaders   are   in
prison   or  hiding.     The   right   to   freedom   of   residence   and
movement,   to  form   associations,  to  vote,  to   run   for   public
office   and   to   privacy   of   correspondence   are   all   subject   to
regulation.
Art.  29  says  "Any   restriction  upon  the  basic  rights  of   the
citizens  must  be  prescribed   by  law  and   the  time  and   place
within   which   such   a  restriction  is  in   force  must   be  clearly
specified."     This   seems   to   invite  restriction  of   many  kinds
although  the  next  sentence  says  vaguely,   "In   any  event  the
essence  of  all  basic  freedoms  cannot  be  violated."    What  this
essence  may  be  is  nowhere  defined.    In  practice  the  most  im-
Saigon's  Censors  and  the  CBS  F'eace  Poll
Saigon's  censors, mostly  military men, are  notoriously
clumsy  and  stupid.   One  of  the  latest  examples  of  this
was  on  the  front  page  of  the  Saigon  Post   (March  23)
which  has  just  arrived  in  this  country.   The  Post   put
on  its  page  one  the  same  AP  story  we  used  in  a  front
page   box  of   our  own   last   week,  reporting  the   CBS
poll  of   public  opinion  in  South  Vietnam.   The  headline
in  the  Saigon  paper  said,  "Poll  Survey  in  SVN   Shows
Peace   Desire   Predominant."   The   censor   left   in   the
headline   and  the   first   half   of   the   first   sentence,   but
forced   the   editors   to   tear   out   the   type   which   said
"81%  of   those   questioned  want  peace   above  all   else.
Only  4%  listed  victory  over  communism, 2'/«   reunifica-
tion  of  north  and  south"  as  aims  preferable  to  a quick
peace.   This   left   a   large   white   blank  in   the  middle
of  the  story  on  page  one.   But  further  down the  censors
left   in  type  the  fact  that   "63%  said  they  would  like
the  U.S.  to  make  greater  efforts  for  negotiations  with
the  Communists"-  while  only  "15%  said  military  action
should  be  stepped  up."
It  is  important  to  remember  that   no  candidate  and
no  party  advocating these  majority  views,  were  allowed
in  the  last  election  or  are  at  all  likely  to  be  in  the  next.
portant   provision   may  prove   to  be  Art.   5   (2)    which   says
"Every   activity  designed   to  propagandize  or  carry  out   com-
munism   is  prohibited."     This  recalls  the  provisions  for   the
election  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  which  barred  candidates
the  military  considered  in  any  way  helpful  to  communism  or
neutralism.     This   was   broad    enough    to   exclude   militant
Buddhists,  though  it  was  their  agitation  which  had  forced  the
government   to  call  those   elections.
Art.  99  recognizes  the  right  to  form   political  parties  and
says  they  "may   operate   freely"  but   again   "according   to   the
procedures   and  conditions  prescribed  by  law"   while  Art.   81
(2)    gives   the  Supreme   Court   power   to   dissolve   any  party
"whose  policy  and  activities  oppose  the   republican   regime."
Diem's  Constitution,  too,  provided  for  loss of  rights  (Art.   22)
where  these  were  abused  "with  the  object  of  jeopardizing  the
republican   form   of  government."    These  loopholes   proved
broad  enough  to  fill  his  concentration   camps.
While  the  new  Constitution   omits  the   emergency   powers
which  so  facilitated  the  Diem  dictatorship,  its  guarantees  of
fundamental   rights   are  so  full   of  holes  as  to  be  easily  dis-
regarded   by  a  new   military   dictator  in  civilian  garb.    The
place   where   there   are   no   loopholes    is   in   Art.   19   which
guarantees  private  property   and   says  any   "expropriation    or
requisition  by  the  State  for  the  common  good  must  be  accom-
panied  by  speedy  and  just  compensation  at  price  levels  existing
at  time  of  expropriation   or  requisition."     This  bars   payment
in  bonds  or  at  original  cost.     The  landowner-dominated   As-
sembly  which  framed  this  Constitution  (and  voted  down  land
reform)  knew  how  to draft  a firm provision  when  it wanted  to.
Above  all  it  is  important  to  note  that  this  new  Constitution
in  almost  the  same  words  as  Diem's,   purports  to  be  the  Con-
stitution  not  of  South  Vietnam  but  of  the  entire  country.    Its
preamble,  like  Diem's,  makes  reunification  a  fundamental   pur-
pose.   The  conquest  of  the North  is again  set  down  as  Saigon's
aim.    This  is  where  we  came  in  before.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  10, 1967
Expropriation  for   Land  Reform   Upheld  and  Colonialism  of  Monoculture  Assailed
Pope's  New  Encyclical  Read  in  Latin  America  As  Attack  on  U.S.   Policy
It  is  a  pity  Lyndoti  Johnson   did  not  go  through  with  his
plan  to  tjivc  10-gallon  hats  to  all  the  Latin  American  Am-
bassadors  when  they   visited   his  ranch.    A   photo  of   these
assembled   ivorthies,   ludicrous   in   their    Texan    headgear,
would  have  been worth volumes  in  teaching  the Latin Amer-
ican  masses  what   the  O.A.S.  really   represents.    It   would
have  been  an  unforgettable    bit  of  self-caricature.     It   bore
all  the  earmarks  of  being  Johnson's   own  idea;   it  had  his
exuberantly   ci/otistical   naivete  and  his  desire   to  pitt  his
brand  on  everyone  and  everything   near   him.
Warmed-Over  Marxism?
More  important than  Johnson's  barbecue  to  the  Latin sum-
mit  meeting  in  Punta  de  Este  was  Pope  Paul's  encyclical   On
The   Development   of   Peoples.     It   may   be   a  disappointment
to  those  who  had  hoped   for  a  new  and  more  permissive  atti-
tude toward birth control,  but  it  is being read  in  Latin America
as  support  for  the  non-revolutionary   Left  and   as  a  criticism
of   U.S.   policy.     This   aspect   of   the   encyclical   has   escaped
notice  here,  though  the  Wall  Street  Journal   (March   30),  at-
tacked   it   as   "warmed-over   Marxism."     There   was   similar
criticism  in  Italian  business papers  like  //  Globo  and  Let  Notte,
and  as  far  away  as  India  where  the  right-wing Express  head-
lined  the  encyclical,  "Pope  Sounds  Like  Marx."
In  Latin  America  the  encyclical  took   on  special  meaning.
One  of  those  Latin  clerics  the  Pope  cited  was  Bishop  Manuel
Larrain  of  Talca,   the  first  and   one  of   the  few  members  of
the  Chilean  hierarchy  to  support   Christian  Democratic  social
reform.      Another    significant   citation  was   the   late    French
Father  Lebret  who  had   long   been  preaching   a  new  Catholic
humanism,   particularly   in  Brazil,  where  he  helped  to  inspire
Archbishop   Helder   Camara   of   Pernambuco.     The  military
dictatorship  we  support  in  Brazil  is  said  to  have  brought  pres-
sure  on  the  Vatican  to  remove  this  'Red  prelate"  from  the
"powderkeg  of  the  Northeast"  (Le  Monde,  March  31).     The
encyclical  will  strengthen  the  Brazilian  Catholic  Left   against
Brazil  as  Bargain  Basement  for  Investors
"The  principal  error  committed  by  Roberto   Campos
[Minister  of  Economic Planning  in  the  Brazilian  mili-
tary   dictatorship],   many  economists   believe,   was   his
overemphasis   on   monetary   steps   to   fight    inflation.
These  may  have  been  successful  in  economically  devel-
oped  countries  but not in  Brazil  where  the  vast  majority
of  business  entities,  due  to  years  of  inflationary drain,
are   short   of   working   capital  and  depend  heavily  on
credits.   Scarcity  of  bank  credit  merely  forced  the  bor-
rowers  to  resort  to  high-cost  finance  companies,   many
owned  by  banks,  whose  effective  rate  averaged  around
60%   per   year.    This   not   only   drove   manufacturing
costs   up  and  reduced  production  but   was   responsible
for   a  record  increase   in  bankruptcies.   This   has   per-
mitted  foreign  interests  to  pick  up  Brazilian  companies
at  bargain  prices.  There  has  been  very  little  industrial
or  agricultural  expansion."
—Christian  Science  Monitor  from  Brazil,  March   Z9.
the   McCarthyite   right   which   supported    the   military   coup.
By  upholding  the  right  of  expropriation  where  huge  landed
estates  "bring  hardship  to  peoples",  the  Pope  will  help  land
reform   in   Chile  and   elsewhere.     The   Pope's  criticism  of  a
colonialism  which  fosters  monoculture  in  the   underdeveloped
areas  will  be  read  as  an  attack  on  what  U.S.  sugar  and   fruit
interests  have  done   in  many  parts  of   the  hemisphere,   from
Cuba   southward.     Par.   31   even   in   some  instances   upholds
the  right   of   revolution,  while   Par.   26  attacks   "the   interna-
tional  imperialism  of  money."
Could  it  be  that  Che  Guevara,  instead  of  being  in  Bolivia,
is  hiding  out  in  Rome?    Maybe  we'd  better  put  a  Green   Beret
on  Cardinal  Spellman  and  drop  him  by  parachute   in  Vatican
City,  fully  equipped  for  counter-insurgency,  including  if  neces-
sary  our  favorite  form  of  baptism—by   napalm.
Text  of  the  Manifesto  in  Which  Martin  Luther King's SCLC  Declared  War  on  The  War
"The  sound  of   battle   from  Vietnam  has   muted  the  cry
of  the  Negro  in  America  to  seek  equal  rights.   The  people
of  this  nation  from  the  President   to  every  man  on  every
street   have  turned  their  eyes   to   a  small   land,  thousands
of  miles from  the  ghettoes  of  America.  Far  from  the  tenant
farmer's  shack  in  South  Alabama,  the  nation  is  engaged  in
a  battle   which   includes  pacification  programs  and  aid   to
war-struck  civilians  in  a  war-torn  land.    At  home  we  fight
a  war  on  poverty—abroad  we  fight  a  war  against  the  poor.
"The  war  in  Vietnam has  confused the  public  and drowned
the  Negro's  cry  for  equal  rights.   Too  long  have  the  Presi-
dent,   the   Congress   and   non-Negro    Americans   failed   to
understand   the  frustration   of  a  people  asked  to  fight  with
all   their  life   at   stake   for   a   nation   which   grants   them
only   a   partial  life   at   home.   For   Negroes   the   first   and
most  urgent  fight  is  for  absolute  unqualified  equality  in  a
nation   of   peers.    Watts,   Harlem,   Chicago,   clearly   reveal
that   this   frustration   is   spilling   over   into   a   dangerous
bitterness  that  threatens   American  democracy  from  every
side.    The  President   and  the   nation   must  not   commit  us
to  suicide  by  pretending  not  to  see  that   the  war   against
inequality,   racism   and   poverty   is   the   foremost   need   of
the  nation  at  this   crossroads   of  history.
"The  Vietnam  conflict itself  is  being  fought  by  America's
young  men  who  have  been  lifted  from  society   by  racially
exclusive  Selective  Service  boards  in  a  system   of   selection
that   discriminates  against   the   poor   and   places   Negroes
in   the   front   line  in   disproportionate  numbers   and   from
there  to  segregated  cemetery  plots  in  the  Deep  South.
"To  win  the  world  to  the  cause  of   freedom  this  nation
must  practice  at  home  what  it  preaches  abroad.   The  free-
dom   which   we   seek   in  this   land  can   be   made   a   reality
abroad  only  by  its  application  to  every  ghetto   dweller  in
America,  to  every  tenant  farmer  in  the   South,   for  every
American  whether  he  be  white  or  black.
"Nor  do  we  believe  that  we  can  long  tell  Americans   to
practice  nonviolence at  home  while  our  nation  is  practicing
the   very  essence   of   violence  abroad  in  this  morally  and
politically  unjust  war.
"Therefore   the   board  of   directors   of   SCLC   recognizes
that  the  voice  of  the  poor  in  America  cannot  be  heard  over
the  sounds  of  battle.   Primary thrust  is  still  to  secure  equal
rights   for   all   men  in   this   land.   Rather  than   have   the
American  dream  slain  in  the  jungles  and  swamps  of  Viet-
nam,   we  pledge  ourselves   to  do  everything   in  our  power
to  end  that   war."
—Board  of  Directors  of  the  Rev.  Martin  Luther  King's  Southern  Christian  Leadership   Conference   March  30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  10,1967
John  Kenneth  Galbraith's  Odd  Conceptions  of  Innocence  and  of  Disaster
Murray  Kemptpn's   Astringent  View  of  the  Latest  ADA   Convention
We  tverc  laid  up  with  a  cold  during  the  ADA  convention.
Hut  the  brilliant.  Murray   Kempton  has  expressed   our  feel-
ings  about  it  better  than  we  could,  so without  time  for   per-
mission  but  with  admiration,  we  present  this  excerpt    from
his  New York  Post  column  April  4.   It  was  Kempton  at  Ins
most  perceptive   and  courageous  best:
By  Murray  Kempton
Yesterday's  accounts  of  the  Americans  for  Democratic  Ac-
tion  convention in  Washington  last  weekend  suggest  that  this
organism  is both  healthy  and  incurable.    Vice  President  Hum-
phrey  was  peddling  General  Ky  to  the  Europeans  and   thus
unable  to  attend  the  convention  banquet  at  which  he  was  to
have  presented  awards to  various  ADA   laureates  deserving of
the  public  gratitude.   The  list  of  these  laureates was  not  pub-
lished,  and  once  again  ADA   may  have  cause  to  be  grateful
for   its  neglect  by  the  commercial  press.
Perhaps  An  Award  for  Dubinsky?
Last  year,  as  a  measure of  its  sensitivity  to  the  urban  crisis,
it  gave  an  award  to  Robert  F.  Wagner;  this  year,  no  doubt,
David   Dubinsky  was  anointed   for   the   20-odd  years  he  has
provided  a  mail  drop  for  Jay  Lovestone on  the  occasions  when
that  delightful   schemer  had  dived  into  the  War   College,   the
Institute  for  Strategic Studies  or  the  CIA.
The  election  of  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  as  president  of  the
ADA  is  a  heartening  promise'of   charm  and  acuity in  an   office
where  they  have not  often  been  combined  before;  but  it hardly
crashes  upon  us  as  a  revolutionary tocsin.   "When  I  hear  gen-,
erals,   or   high   State   Department    officials,"   Galbraith   said,
"speak  rather  briskly  of   a  five   or  ten  years'  war,  I   am  also
willing  to  believe  that  they  have  not  considered  the  political
consequences.    But,  for  the  rest  of  us,  there  is  no  excuse   for
Innocence.    This  disaster  could,  indeed,  mean  the  death  and
burial  of  the  Democratic  party."
Innocence?    Is  Dean  Rusk innocent?
When  we  talk  about  five  more  years  of  war,  we  are  talking
about  murder.    We  are  talking  about  five  years  of  a  govern-
ment  which  tells  lies,  about  five  years  in  a  nation  which  gets
up  every morning knowing  that  it  makes  its  wars  on  women,
five  years  of  thinking  about people  who  must  wonder  whether
Another  Phoney  Johnson  Panacea
There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  post  office  that  more
money  won't  solve.   Its  difficulties  are  another  example
of  starving public  services  to  maintain private  affluence,
and  to  meet  the  rising  costs  of   the  Vietnamese   war.
The  idea  of  turning  it  over  to  a  "non-profit"  corpora-
tion  is  a  typical  bit  of  Johnsonian  razzle-dazzle, a  way
to  pretty  up  the  budgetary  picture  and  perhaps   even
a  plan  ultimately to  turn  postal  services  over  altogether
to   "free   enterprise."    No  one  is   more  simple-minded
in   their   devotion  to   it   as   a   universal   panacea   than
our  pseudo-Populist from  the  Pedernales.   An  obligation
to  maintain post  offices  and  post  roads  was  written  into
the  Constitution.   It  is  our  oldest  form  of  public  own-
ership.    It   maintains   many   services—like   rural   free
delivery—that   no   private   enterprise    would   provide.
There  is  no  country  in  the  world  which  does  not  own
its  own  post  office.   Ours  is  starved,  of  funds  for  mod-
ernization    and    for    the    retention    of    skilled    help.
Example:   A  bus  driver  here  in  Washington  starts  at
$6900   a  year.   It   takes   a  letter   carrier   15  years   to
reach   that   level.   If   money   is   needed   for   a   decent
postal  service,   why  not  an  excess  profits  tax   on  war
contractors?
they  would  not  rather  be  dead  than  under  our  protection,  five
years  of  being  torn  between  agony  for  our  own  soldiers  and
agony  for  the  cheated  and  despoiled  farmers  who  fight  them.
And  what  is  the  one  disaster  the  new  president  of  the  Ameri-
cans  for  Democratic  Action  sees  at  the  end  of   these   events?
The  death  and  burial  of  the  Democratic  party.  .  .  .
In  any  case  who  is  ADA  kidding?    Mr.  Johnson  will  be
unanimously  renominated   by  a  convention   which   includes   a
number   of   delegates   who   are   members   of   Americans   for
Democratic  Action.    The  ADA  will  then  go  into  the  campaign
unenthusiastically  but  abjectly  supporting  President  Johnson.
Twenty-one  years  ago,  they  announced  that  they  would  for-
ever   be  responsible   anti-Communist  liberals.     The   Vietnam
war  is  tne  logical   consequence   of  anti-Comraunist   liberalism.
The  road  ended  there.    What  they  think  of  it  makes  no  dif-
ference;   they   are  enlisted;   and   they   will   march   when   Mr.
Johnson  sounds  the  advance.
I  am  exhausted  and  taking  a  two-week  vacation.   I  urge  readers  to  support  the  Vietnam  Day   mobilization.—IPS
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)
Street   .................................
City   ....................................
For   the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street   .................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington,   D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
Zin       ...        State......
4/10/67
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED