I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967dec11.pdf

============================================================

A  Blacklist Like  South Africa's   to Stifle   Dissent, Pps. 3-4
Semper  Fidelis
"Goldwater  Backs  Shift  of  McNamara"—Associated  Press  dispatch  from  Phoenix,  Arizona,  Nov.  &9.
1. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  30DECEMBER  11,  1967
'»'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16   CENTS
A  Graceful  Patsy  Against  A  Dirty  Fighter?
We  have  ourselves  a  candidate  against  Lyndon  Johnson  in
the  Democratic  primaries  but  unless  he  picks  up  steam  he's
not  going  to  set  any voters  on   fire.  Senator  Eugene  McCarthy
was  supposed  to  be  the  main  attraction  at  the  Conference  of
Concerned   Democrats   in   Chicago   last   week-end.     But   his
speech—like  the  one  he  delivered  a  few  weeks  earlier  before
SANE's  national  meeting  in  Chicago  for  labor  leaders  against
the  war  in  Vietnam—fell   flat.   He  has  wit,  charm  and  grace.
But   he   seems   to   lack  heart   and   guts.    This   may   seem   a
strange  thing  to  say of  the  only  Democrat  willing  to  step  out
and   challenge  Johnson   for   the   nomination.     Unfortunately
it  seems  to  be  true.    Watching   him  at  the  press   conference
here  at which he  launched  his  candidacy, one  began  to  wonder
why  he  was  running  at  all.    A  certain  cynicism  and  defeatism
seems  basic  to  the  man.    This  is  no  way  to  embark  on  a
fight.    His  hero,  Adlai,  was  a  Hamlet.    McCarthy  gives  one
the  uneasy  feeling  that  he  doesn't  really  give  a  damn.
A   Half-Hearted   Battle  Won't  Do
The   dreadful  thing,  about  presidential   campaigns   is  that
they  make  liars  of  us  all.   We  join  up,  and  stop  saying  what
we  think,  for  the  good  of  the  cause.    I  suppose  I'll  be  swept
up   in  this  same  kind  of   nonsense  myself.    But  at  least   at
the  beginning  a  few  honest  words  may  be  useful.    We  have
to  support  McCarthy.    A  poor  showing  in  the  primaries  for
McCarthy  will  be  a  poor  showing  for   peace.     But  he's   also -
got  to  support  us.    And  himself.    It's  no  easy  matter  for  a
politician   to  challenge   the   head   of   his   party.     It   may  be
political  suicide.   To  embark  on  so  risky  an  undertaking  half-
heartedly  is  the  worst  possible  policy.    The  only  safety  lies
in  shooting  the  works.    There's  no  other  way  to  a  long-shot
victory  and  anyway  that's  the  way  to  enjoy  a  wonderful,  even
if  losing,  battle  in  a  good  cause.    If  McCarthy  couldn't  evoke
enthusiasm  from   dissident  laborites  and  dissident   Democrats
just  dying  for  a  new  hero  to  cheer—how's  he  going  to  do
out  in  the  sticks?    Where  the  audiences  are  cold?    Or  half
hawk?    Or  just  curious?
One  purpose   of  the  intra-party  fight  against   Johnson,  as
McCarthy  and   Bobby  Kennedy  have  been   saying,   is  to   re-
store  the  faith  of  youth  in  normal  politics  and—as  they  might
put   it   privately—"get   them   off   the   streets."     McCarthy's
going  to  have  to  do  a  lot  better  than  he  has  so  far  if   he's
going  to  make  much  of  a  dent  among  the  disaffected   youth
and  Negroes—though  at  least  he,  unlike  Bobby,  is  willing  to
lay  his  political  future  on  the  line  to  fight  the  war.    What
has  to  be  improved  first  of  all  is  how  McCarthy  says  it.    He
Does  LBJ  Want  A  New  McCarthyism?
LBJ's  itch  for  a  new  era  of   McCarthyism  may   lie
hidden  behind  the  new  bill  just  passed  by  the  House
to  enable the  Attorney General  and  the  Subversive  Ac-
tivities  Control  Board  to  set  up  a  public  blacklist  of
radical   organizations  on   the   Left    (though   not   the
right).    The  bill  would  revive  in  new  form  the  powers
of  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  which  had
been  rendered  moribund  by  adverse  Supreme Court  de-
cisions.    Behind  the  passage  of  HR  12601 by  the  House
Nov.   28  lies  a  dramatic  contrast  between  Truman  and
Johnson.   The  Internal Security Act  of  1950,  which  set
up  the  SACB,  was  passed  in  the  wake  of  anti-Leftist
hysteria  during  the  Korean  war.    Truman  vetoed  it.
Johnson,  then in  the  Senate,  voted to  override the  veto.
Now   under  cover  of   the  Vietnamese  war   and  racial
disturbances  this  bill  to  revive  the  SACB  and  estab-
lish   a   blacklist   turned   up   under   strange   auspices.
(Continued  on  Page   Three)
just  doesn't   transmit  any  sense  of  passion.     Secondly  what
he  does  say isn't  good  enough.    The  Chicago  speech  was  full
of  insincere  hokum.    A  sample:  "John  Kennedy  set  free  the
spirit  of  America.    The  honest  optimism  was  released."    Mc-
Carthy  doesn't   believe  it,  so  why  say  it?     And  poor  Adlai
reduced   to   the   role   of   Kennedy's   UN   errand   boy  would
have  been  surprised  to  learn  that  his  ideas  were  revived  by
Kennedy.    Where?     At  the  Bay  of  Pigs?    We  would   also
be  glad  to  spare  some  of  McCarthy's  fancy  quotes  at  Chicago
from  Peguy  on  Dreyfus  and  Toynbee  on  the  Punic  wars  for
a  little  more  clarity on  Vietnam.    It's  Ho,  not  Hannibal,  who
concerns  us  now.
McCarthy  is  remarkably  unclear  about  Vietnam.    The  Chi-
cago   speech   showed   lazy   staff   work  when   he   invoked   the
names   of   Eisenhower   and   Bradley  among   those  who   had
warned  us  against  a  land  war  in  Asia—although  these   two
dippy  old   duffers   only  a  few  days  before  were  calling   for
an  invasion  of  North  Vietnam!    Most  revealing  of  all  were
his  answers  at  the  Washington   press  conference.    Little  at-
tention  was  paid   these  by  the  press   (1)    because  the  chief
interest  seemed  to  be  in  politics  and  personality and  (2)   most
of  the  Washington  press  corps  is  for—or  indifferent  to—the
war.    At  the  bottom  of   page  two  we  give  the  answers  in
which  he  discussed  the  substantative  issues.    These  are  pretty
appalling.     The   clearest  and   simplest   appeal   McCarthy  can
make  is  to  say  that  Johnson  broke  his  1964   pledges  and  has
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December 11, 1867
(Continued  from  Page   One)
adopted   more   and   more   of   Goldwater's   policies.    That  is
true.    Everybody  can  understand   it.     It's   effective.    Indeed
there's  little  else  he  needs  to  say.    But,  as  the  reader  will  see,
McCarthy  said  "I'm   not  going  to  talk  about  that  in  the  cam-
paign."    That  one  remark  really  tells  the  whole  story.    Is  he
going  to  run   a  cream-puff  campaign   against   as  tough   and
dirty  a  fighter  as  Lyndon  B. ?
All  Fuzz  on  Bombing
McCarthy  will  stir  no  enthusiasm  if  he  goes  around  being
a  graceful  patsy.    One  of  the  main  functions  of  the  campaign
is  to  educate  the  electorate  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  wiser
policies.   One  main  line  is  evident  and  needs  to  be  hammered
on  over   and   over   again.     The   choice   is  not  between   isola-
tionism  and  internationalism.    It's  between  wasting  our  blood
and  wealth   in  the  attempt   to  enforce   a  Pax  Americana  or
becoming  a  loyal  member  of  the  United  Nations.    Somebody
has  to  say  out  loud  that  we  can't  take  over  the  white  man's
burden   in  the  new  Kennedy-era  guise   of  Green  Berets   and
counter-insurgency.    Over  and  over  again  somebody  must  say
clearly  as  the  way  to  peace  "stop  the  bombing"  and  "nego-
tiate  a  coalition  government"   in  South  Vietnam.     It  is  John-
son  strategy  to  ignore  the  fact  that  U  Thant  and  others  have
said  over  and  over  again  that  talks  will  follow  if  the  bombing
ends.    McCarthy's  reply  on  bombing  was  all  fuzz.    It  is  also
Administration    strategy   to   distract   attention   from   the   fart
that  the  new  NLF  program  offers  a  viable  compromise  solu-
tion.    I  suspect  McCarthy's  never  even  seen  it.    He  needs  to
The  Silly  Effort  to  Equate  Ho  With Hitler
"The  wicked  war  in  Vietnam  is  the  natural  fruit  of
the  turn  to  the  right  in  foreign  policy.    It  is  only  a
symptom  of  a  sick  and  misguided  view  of  our  role  in
the  world.   Unless  a  new  direction  is  taken,  there  will
be  other  Vietnams.      Our  foreign  policy  today  reverts
to  a  simplistic  view  of  an  aggressive,  monolithic, world
communist  conspiracy,  a  view  little  revised  since   the
days  of  Stalin.  .  .  .  We heard  the  President  cite  South-
east  Asia  as  'the  area  where  communist  expansion  is
most  aggressively   at  work in  the  world  today.   I would
rather  stand  in  Vietnam'  he  declared,  'in  our  time,  and
by  meeting  this  danger  now,  and facing  up  to  it,  there-
by  reduce  the  dangers  for  our  children  and  our  grand-
children'.
"Can  the  President  and  his  Secretary  of  State   seri-
ously  believe  that  Ho  Chi  Minh,  with  his  ragged  bands
and  ruined  cities,   without  an  air  force  or  navy,  pre-
sents  America  and  the  world with  a  threat  comparable
to  Hitler  in  the  30s  or  Stalin  in  the  40s?"
—Keynote  Address,  Conference   of  Concerned  Demo-
crats,  Chicago,  Dec.  2  by  Don  Edwards   (Calif.),   only-
member  of  Congress  who  had  the  nerve  to  take  part.
do  some  hard  thinking  and  fresh  study  if  he's  to  be  effective.
His   most   alarming   reply   was   on   containment   of    China.
There  he  said  we  didn't  need  Vietnam   because  we  now  have
a  new  base  in  Thailand!    That  is,  a  second   Vietnam,   sim-
mering  on  the  burner ?_
We   enlist   in   McCarthy's    army   but   we  intend   to   keep
stirring  up  mutiny  until  the  General  stops  yawning.
Sen. McCarthy's Replies to  Questions  At  His  Washington  Press  Conference  Nov. 30
Q.  Senator,   do  you   think   President   Johnson   has   gone
back  in  any  way  on  his  1964  campaign  pledge  not  to  send
American  boys  to  do  the  work  of  Asian  boys?
A.  I'm  not   going   to  talk   about  that   in  the  campaign.
I'd  hesitate  to  say  he's  gone  back  on  a  pledge.    I  think
there's  been  a  significant  change  in  policy  from  what  was
indicated  in   1964,  but  I  don't  want  to  make  the  case  in
terms  of   any  kind  of  betrayal  or  deception,   deception  of
the  public  in  terms  of  what  he  said  in  1964.
Q.  Senator,   if   elected,   how   would  you   end   the   war?
A.  That  is  rather  a  big  question.  What'we  are  concerned
about  now  is  trying  to  indicate  a  change  of  policy  at  this
point.    I  see  no  indication  of   a  change   of   policy.    Once
you've  turned  the  policy  around  then  you  have  to  talk  to
the  Defense   Department  and  look  at  the  tactical  situation
but   I   think   there   is   sufficient   reason   to  believe   that   a
scheduled   withdrawal  with  pauses   [sic]  and  try  to  nego-
tiate,  that  this  is  entirely  feasible  and  we  could  work  out
some  kind  of  negotiation  or  settlement.
Q.  Senator,  if  we  withdraw from  Vietnam,  where  do  you
believe  we  ought  to  take  a  stand  against  communism?
A.  I  think  that  there  are  many  places  where  yon  could
take  a  stand  against  communism.    If   we  are  really  con-
cerned  about  the  expansion  of  Chinese  communism, it  seems
to  me  that  to  waste  our  manpower and  resources  where  we
are  doing  it  in  Vietnam  would  be  the  worst  of  all  possible
choices.    We  still  have  the  fleet,  we  still  have  the  position
in  Japan,  we  still  have  a  position  in  South  Korea,  we  have
built  up  a  strong  base  in  Thailand;  the  fear  of  some  kind
of  great  Chinese  expansion  into  Southeast  Asia  is  of  less
significance  than  it  was  before  that  base  was  established.
I  don't  see any  danger  of  being  engulfed  and overrun by  the
Communists  in  Southeast  Asia.
Q.  Senator,  could  you  give  us  your  views  on  the  bombing
of the  North?  Do you differ from the Administration  on that?
A.  I  thought  that  the  bombing  should  not  have  been  re-
sumed  as  it  was  in  January  1966.  . As  Sen.  Kennedy  and
others   have   indicated,   there   was,   I   think,  a    reasonably
good  chance  to  negotiate  something  at  that  time,  and  if  we
had  not  resumed  the  bombing,  the  prospects  of   negotiation
would  have  been  improved.    So  far   as  the  bombing   last
January,  I  did  not  particularly join  in  urging  that  bombing
not  be  resumed  or  that  it  be  stopped  at  that  time,  because
I  thought  there  was  no  evidence  of  an  intent  to  negotiate,
and  that  simply  stopping  the  bombing  without  some  other
movement  on  our  part  by  way  of  a  unilateral  limitation  of
our  military  effort   in  South  Vietnam  would  not  have  any
meaning.    I  would  be  glad  to  have  them  stop  bombing  the
civilian  areas  and  concentrate   on  supply  routes  today,   if
they   could   be  persuaded  to   do  that.     But  I   don't   think
that  just  stopping  the  bombing is  a  significant  kind  of  offer
that  might  lead  to   negotiations.
Q.  Do  you  think  that  President  Johnson  has   deliberately
overlooked   opportunities  for   negotiation?
A.  I  think  as   Sen.  Kennedy  has  said,  that  there  were
occasions  when  there  were  some  openings  for  negotiations.
So  far  as  the  public  position  taken  by  the  Administration
as  a  basis  for  negotiations,   I  don't  think  that  these  have
really  been  negotiable   positions.    When  you  say  "If  you
stop  supplying  your  troops  and infiltrating, well  stop bomb-
ing,"  this  is  not,  in  my  judgment,  really  a  negotiable   offer.
A.  Senator,  could  you  clarify  the  change  in  policy  since
1964,  as  you see  it?
A.  It's  no  qualitative  difference,  I  think  it's  just  been  a
kind   of   quantitative-  escalation   and   at   some   point   you
make  a  prudential  judgment  that  what  good  you  can  get
out  of  the  war  is  not  proportionate  to  destruction  of  life
and  property  and  the  draining  away  of  moral  energy  which
goes  along  with  the  pursuit  of  the  war  in  the  way  in  which
we  are  now  pursuing   it.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 11,1967
The  Mansfield  Amendment  Was  No  More  Than  An  Exercise  in  Liberal  Self-Delusion
Sneaky   Tactics — As  If  the  White  House  Was   Ashamed   of  the  Bill
(Continued  from  Page  One)
In    the    Senate    it   was    introduced    by   the    Republican
lea.icr,  Dirksen,  and  in  the  House  by  Willis  (D.  La.)   of  the
Un-American  Activities  Committee.    It  represented  the  handi-
work  of  this  committee   and  of   its  witch-hunting  twin,   the
Senate   Internal   Security  Committee.     Dirksen   claimed   that
it  had  the  President's   support.    So did  Willis.    "I  happen  to
know,"  he  told  the  House,   "that  the  President  is  personally
for  the  bill. ... He  said  that  to  a high  official  of  the  govern-
ment."    McCormack  and  Carl  Albert,  in  lining  up  votes  for
it,  also  said  privately  that  Johnson  was  for  the  bill.
Father  and  Son  Contrast
There  is  something  sneaky  about  the  whole  affair,  as  if   the
White  House  were  ashamed  openly  to  support  the  bill.    After
all,   it  hardly  fits  the  claim  of  Johnson's   official   biographers
that  he  helped   to  defeat  McCarthy   (a  boast  for  which  there
is   no   tangible   evidence).    The   suspicion   that   Johnson   is
behind  the  bill  draws  strength  from  the  silence  of  the  At-
torney  General.     His  father,  Tom  Clark,  as  Truman's  Attor-
ney  General,   testified   against  the   original   Internal   Security
Act.     Ramsey  Clark  is  far  more   of  a  civil  libertarian  than
his  father.    But  it  now  appears  from  the  debate  in  the  Senate
that  as  long  ago  as  last  April   13,  Chairman  Eastland  of   In-
ternal   Security   sent   the   Attorney   General   a   letter    asking
whether  he  objected  to  the  bill.    Clark  never  replied.
The   silence   of   the   Attorney   General    casts   considerable
doubt   on  the  value  of   the   compromise   accepted   by  all   the
Senate  liberals  except  Bartlett  of  Alaska  and  Bobby  Kennedy.
This  was  an  amendment  by  Mansfield  that  the  law  would  die
on  June   30,   1969,   if  its  powers  had  not  been   used   before
A  HUAC Rebel  Protest
"The  very existence  of  the  Subversive Activities Con-
trol  Board  compromises  the  First  amendment. ... To
grant   such  frightening  power   [to   establish   a  public
blacklist  of  organizations  deemed  Communist  or  'Com-
munist  infiltrated']  to  a  bureaucrat,. to  five  men  or  in-
deed  to  [any]   Government  official ...  is  most danger-
ous   and  irresponsible   because  it   may   only   serve   to
stifle  dissent—it  may  only  serve  to  kill  expression  of
controversial  views  in  this  Nation.
"To  the  extent  that  it  denies  political  vitality  and
vigor  of  our  own  free  institutions,  then  it  clearly  aids
and   abets   the   Communist   movement.    As   President
Truman  said  in  his  veto  message  of  the  Internal  Secu-
rity  Act  setting  up  the  SACB  in  1950  'We  need  not
fear  the  expression  of  ideas—we  do  need  to  fear  their
suppression.'   Because in  a  democratic society, freedom
of   expression  permits  criticism  and  criticism  permits
progress."
—John  C.  Culver  (D.  Iowa)  opposing  passage  of  the
SACB  "blacklist  bill" in  the  House  Nov.  28. Mr.  Culver,
a  member  of  HUAC,  voted  against  the  bill when  it  was
reported  out  of  that  Committee  8-to-l  on  Oct.  4.
then   by  the  Attorney  General.     It  is  the  Attorney   General
under  the  new bill  as under  the  original  Act  who  would  have
to  initiate  any  new  proceedings  before  the  SACB  to  blacklist
"Communist   action",  "Communist   front"   or  "Communist   in-
filtrated"   organizations.     The   Amendment   was   accepted   by
Proxmire  of  Wisconsin,   who  led  the  fight  against   the  bill,
on  the  ground   (as  he   told   the  Senate)   that  the  Attorney
General  because  of  "his  dedication  to  our  traditional  freedom
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
An  Irresponsible  Charge  Against  the  Communists In  A  Very  Dangerous  Situation
"Every  informed  citizen  is   aware  that  just  last  month
the  Communist  Party  openly  came  out  in  support  of  Negro
violence  and rioting—and  that it  had been covertly agitating
to  provoke  racial  violence."
Tuck   (D.  Va.)  of  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee
during  debate  on  -new  SACB   "blacklist"   bill  Nov.   US.
"Communists  believe  in  the  use  of   violence  to  achieve
political  objectives  only  when  reaction  has  closed  off   the
channels  whereby a  majority  of  the  people can  realize  their
objectives  by  peaceful  means.     As   we  see   it   today,  the
overwhelming  majority  of   the  American  people,  including
black  people,  are  not  yet  convinced  that  the  system  must
be  changed,   much  less  that  it  is   necessary   to  do  so  by
armed  force.  .  .  .  We  therefore  reject  today  the  organiza-
tion  of  armed uprisings  in  the  black  communities. .  • .  We
believe   that   conspiratorial,   terroristic   actions   .  .   .  are
reckless  and  adventurous,  provocative  and  politically  irre-
sponsible  .  .  .  inviting reprisals  upon  the  black community.
"Black   communities,  of   course,  have  the  right   to   take
all  measures  to  defend  themselves.  .  .  .  But  the  real  task
at   hand  is   to  rally  nationwide  support,  particularly  the
support  of  all  truly  democratic white Americans,  especially
white  workers,  to  stop  the  annual  'summer  slaughter'  and
to  aid  the  struggle   for  survival  of   the  black  Americans.
The  Open  Letter by  the  Communist Party,  USA,  addressed
to  the  President  before  the  'hot  summer'  of  1967 exploded,
called  for  'united  action  of  all  forces  on  the  Left  regardless
of  differences'  and ...  to  'unite  all  Americans of  conscience,
black  and  white',  .  . .
"It  is  wrong  to  conclude,  as  some  do,  from  the  stubborn
refusal  of  the  power  structure  and  the  Johnson  Adminis-
tration   to   deal   adequately  with   the   crisis   in   the   black
ghettoes,   that   the   channels   for   democratic   change   are
closed  to  the  black  people. ... On the  contrary, in  the  past
decade   the   Negro   people   have   achieved   the   strongest
political  position  ever attained in  our country. .  .  .
"The  costly  experience  of  Hitler  fascism  should  serve  to
remind  revolutionaries and  democrats alike  of  the  terrible
price  paid  for  failure  to  defend  each  precious  democratic
right  to  the  bitter  end.    Many  white  people  .  .  .  have  re-
sponded  with  fear  to  the  uprisings  in  the  black  ghettoes.
The  racists  have  been  quick  to  seize  on  these  fears ...  a
dangerous situation is  developing which  can turn our streets
into  bloody  battlegrounds  of  racial  strife.     But  there  are
also  developing among  increasing  numbers of  white  people
significant  new  levels  of  understanding  of  the  meaning  of
full  equality  for  black  people..  . .  Thus the basis  for achiev-
ing  higher  levels  of  black-white  unity  exist."
—Policy  statement  on  the  Negro  question  by Henry   Wins-
ton,  chairman  of  the  Communist  Party,  Nov.  6, after  a  spe-
cial  conference   called  by  the  Party's  Negro  Affairs    Commis-
sion  headed   by  Claude  Lightfoot.     Both  Mr.  Winston  and
Mr.  Lightfoot   are  Negro  Smith  Act  victims.   Mr.   Winston
lost  his  sight  due  to  prison  negligence.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 11,1967
Brooke,  First  Negro  Senator  Since  Reconstruction,  Tried  to  Abolish  the  SACB  Altogether
A  Blacklist  Like  South  Africa's  to  Stifle  All  Protests  Against   Apartheid
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
and  cherished  personal  liberties"  would  not  use  the  Act  and
thus  allow  it  to  die.
But  at  this  point  Dirksen  pulled  from  his  pocket  a  cryptic
three-sentence  letter  sent  him  by the  Attorney General  in  reply
to  a  letter  asking  what  course  of  action  Clark  would   follow
if   the  bill  were  passed.     Clark   said  proceedings   would   be
initiated  "as  evidence  warrants,  consistent  with  the  Constitu-
tion   and   the   standards  of   the   Act."     This   is  pretty   slim
grounds   for   hope.    Truman's   then   Attorney   General,   Mc-
Grath,  filed  the  first  action  under  the  Act  two  months  after
it  was  passed  over  Truman's   veto,  even   though   Truman  de-
clared  that  it  was unconstitutional.    It  is  hard  to  believe  that
Ramsey  Clark  would   defy   White  House   and   Congressional
pressure  to  enforce  the  new  bill  if  and  when  it  becomes  law.
Proxmire's   Last  Minute  Stand
Even  this  wistful  hope  is  threatened  now.    The  House  bill
contains  no  such  amendment.    The  Senate  conferees  are  all
right-wingers:    Eastland,    Ervin,   McClellan,    Dirksen    and
Hruska.    They  could  easily  agree  to.accept  the  House  version.
Last   Monday  Proxmire  warned   the   Senate   that   he   would
fight  any  conference report  which  recommended  the  omission
of   the  Mansfield   amendment.    It   thus  may  play  some  role
as  a  last-minute delaying action,  if  Proxmire  gets  enough  sup-
port  on  the  Senate   floor.   The  next  step  would  bs  a  public
campaign  to  put  Johnson  on  the  spot  and  demand  that  he,
like  Truman,  veto  the  bill.
Supreme Court  decisions enforcing Fifth  amendment  guaran-
tees  against  self-incrimination  make  it  impossible  any  longer
for   the  SACB  to  enforce  self-registration  of    "communistic"
organizations.    The  new  bill  would  direct  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  and  the  SACB  to  maintain  instead  a  public  blacklist  of
organizations   they   deemed   subversive.    This   resembles   the
"naming"   provisions  of  South  Africa's  Suppression  of  Com-
munism  Act under which virtually  all  opponents  of  apartheid,
whether  Communist  or  not,  have  been   effectively   ostracized
and  silenced.
Have  We  Learned  Nothing   From  That
Recent  Past?
"The  most  serious  aspects  of   this   bill  involve  not
what  it  alters  but  what  it  leaves  unchanged.   The  re-
strictions   on  freedom  of   association   inherent  in   the
original  act  are  unchanged.   The  definitions  of   'Com-
munist  action'  and  'Communist  front'  are  so  vague  as
to  raise  serious   questions.   'Communist   infiltrated'   is
(indefinable   on  its   face.    If   one  Communist  joins  an
organization  and  seeks  to  influence  its  policies,  is  the
organization  thereby  permanently  polluted?    Commu-
nists  have  sought  to  influence every  progressive  move-
ment.  .  .  .  Let  us  look  closely  at  this  bill  before  we
vote.    The  witch  hunts  of  the  1950s  are  over.    Did  we
learn  nothing from  them?   Have we  forgotten  the deg-
radation,  the  denial of  democratic freedoms,  the  smear-
ing    of    the   reputations,   and   destruction   of   human
dignity  that  took  place?    Have  we  no  faith  in  the  in-
telligence  and  integrity  of  the  American  people?"
—Ryan   (D.N.Y.)   against  the  blacklist  bill  Nov.  28.
There  was  a  satisfying  symbolism  in  the  fact  that   Brooke
of  Massachusetts,  the  first  Negro  Senator  since  Reconstruction,
should  have  submitted  a  bill  to  abolish  the  SACB  altogether.
But  this  was  defeated   58  to  17.    The  Dirksen   bill  with   the
Mansfield  amendment  passed  65  to  10.    The  opposition   did
better  in  the  House,  where  the  vote  was  269  to  104,  thanks
largely  to  the  eloquent  and  principled   opposition  of  a  mav-
erick  member  of  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee,   Cul-
ver  (D.  Iowa)   who  filed  a  dissenting  report  within  the  com-
mittee  and  made  a  strong  speech  against  the  bill  on  the  floor
(see  box  p.   3).
Another   difference   between   the  battle  now  and   in   1950
is  that  then  young  John  F.  Kennedy  (like  Richard  Nixon)
voted   to   override   Truman's   veto   of   this   thought    control
measure.    This  time  the  two  Kennedy  brothers  voted  against
final  passage  and  Robert  Kennedy  made  one  of  the   strong-
est  speeches  in  opposition.     Only  Johnson   seems  to  be  un-
changed.
Tickets  for  the  Joint  Birthday   Party  at  Town  Hall  Next  Jan.  19   (Stone'i  60th.  the  Weekly's  15th)   Are  Going  Fait.     Better   Get  Your
Reservations  In  Early.    Only  $1.     Please  Send  Addressed  Return  Envelope  With  Your  Order.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
For  the  enclosed   $6.95
(To)   Name  ..................
Street   ............................
Citv
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book:
/in......
......  ..  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please  renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
Street   ............................
PUw
..   Zip......
..........  State....................
12/11/67
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED