I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jan30.pdf

============================================================

Fulbright's  8-Point  Peace Plan, P,  2
Again  Goldwater  Blurts  Out  The  Policy  Johnson  Would  Rather  Hide
"You've  got  to  forget   about  all  this  civilian  stuff."  —Goldwater  to  an  Air  t\ircc  Assoc. luncheon  Jan.  .
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,  NO.  4JANUARY  30,  1961     <^|
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15   CENTS
The  Essence  of What  Is  Happening  in  China
We  do  not  claim  to  understand  what  is happening  in  China,
nor  to  know  which  faction  in  its  titanic  struggle  is  right.     But
looked  at  within  its  own  Marxist  frame  of  reference,  certain
aspects   are  striking.    Mao  seems  to  have  reversed  Marx  as
Marx  reversed  Hegel.    For  Hegel  the  dialectic of  history  was
the  unfolding  of  an  immanent  Idea.    Marx  turned  Hegel  up-
side  down  and  found  the  ultimate  cause  in  material   circum-
stance.    As  Engels  said  in  his  essay  on  Feuerbach,  Hegel  as-
serted  "the  primacy of  spirit  to  nature"  while  Marx   "regarded
nature  as  primary.".    The   very  metaphors   of  Maoism   are  a
return   to   idealism.     Thus  the   basic   impact  of   "the    Great
Proletarian   Cultural   Revolution"   as  explained   in   the   docu-
ment  which  launched  it  officially,  the  decision  of  the  Central
Committee   of   the  Chinese   Communist   Party   last  August   8,
is  that   it  "touches  people   to  their  very  souls."    This  is  the
language  of  theology;  it  is  mystical  and  evangelical.     It  is  a
kind  of  Marxist  Methodism.    Its  aim,  as  the  Central  Commit-
•ee  then  said,  "is  to  revolutionize  people's   ideology"   and  "as
a   consequence   to   achieve   greater,    faster,   better   and    more
economical  results  in  all  fields  of  work."
Where  Mao  Contradicts  Marx
This   gives   ideology   primacy   over   material   circumstance.
It  is  in  contradiction  to  Marx.     "It  is  not  the  consciousness
of  men  that  determines   their  existence,"   Marx  wrote  in  his
Critique   of   Political   Economy,    "but   on   the   contrary   it   is
their   social   existence   that   determines   their    consciousness."
The   Maoists   are  aware  of   this   contradiction.     One   of   the
documents  being  sent  out  by  Peking  is  a  People's  Daily  edi-
torial  of  June  2,  1966.      In  it  Mao  is  quoted  as  saying—
.  .  .  while  we  recognize  that  in  the  general development
of  history  the  material  determines  the  mental  and  social
being  determines  social  consciousness,   we  also—and  in-
deed  must—recognize  the  reaction of  mental  on material-
things. ...
In  emphasizing  "the   reaction  of  mental  on  material  things,"
Mao  is  returning  to  the  primacy  of  the  Idea.
In  this  new  Marxist  system  it  is  not  strange  that  the  main
enemy  is  "economism."    The   "reactionaries"   are  accused  of
offering  the  peasants  more  economic  incentives and  the  work-
ers—horror  of  horrors!—higher  wages.    It  is  no  accident that
the  main  reliance  of  Mao   is  on  students  and   intellectuals—
on  those  who  can  be  moved  by  ideas  and  ideals  as  against  the
peasants   and   workers  who   want   a  higher   return   for   their
labor.     Marx    wanted    to   utilize   economic   motivations   to
transform   society.    Mao   wants   to  eliminate  them   in   order
to  transform   man  himself.     This  is  the  tremendous  dream  of
his  old  age.    It  is  in  keeping  with  this  that  the  main Maoist
"Gospels"   read   like  early  Christian  homilies.    The   oldest,
"In   Memory   of   Norman    Bethune"   urges   Mao's   followers
to  learn  "the   spirit  of  absolute  selflessness"  from   this  Cana-
dian  surgeon  who  served  the  Loyalists  in  Spain  and  then  the
Communist   guerrillas   in   China.     The   latest,   "The    Foolish
Old  Man",   says  again  that  faith  can  move  mountains.    Mao's
belief   is  that   if   he   could   mobilize  China's   industrious   and
gifted   people   to   work   together   for   more   than   self,   under
the  impulse  of  revolutionary  fervor,  they  could  make  a  Great
Leap  Forward   and   eradicate  backwardness   overnight.
The  Need  For  Drama
To  stimulate  this  fervor,  Mao  has  made  another  break  with
Marxism.    Hegel,  a  truckler  to  the  powers-that-be,   saw  the
Prussian  State  as  the  final  product  of  the  Dialectic,  its  ultimate
resolution   and  perfect   embodiment.     The   Marxists   saw  the
fulfilment   of   the   dialectic   in   the   Communist   State,   which
would  be  classless,  without  exploitation  of  man  by  man,  and
therefore   in  no   need   of   coercion   by  police   or  soldiers;   the
State  itself  would  thus   "wither   away."    There  would  be  no
more  "contradictions."    But  Mao,  in  the  words  of  that   same
Peking   Daily   editorial,  affirms   that   even   in  socialist society
"there  will  still  be  contradictions  after   1,000   or   10,000   or
even  100 million  years."   It  says struggle  alone  "can constantly
propel  our  socialist  cause  forward."    The  psychological  truth
hidden  here  is  that  only  an  enemy,  something  to  hate  as  well
as  something   to   love,   can  energize  the  younger  generation
and  the  people  to  greater  effort.     Hence  they  must  be  sup-
plied  with  "monsters"   to  slay.    This  epic  conflict   is  to  pro-
vide  greater  satisfaction  than  any  mere  material  reward.    For
man  cannot  live  by  bread   alone;  he   needs  drama.
To  miss  all  this  is to  miss the  essence  of  what  is  happening,
and  its  appeal  to  the  best  youth  of  China.    It  is that  same  call
to  struggle   and   sacrifice  that  has  recruited  the  first  followers
of   all   great   religions  and   revolutions.     To   his   exasperated
opponents,  trying to  keep  a  huge  country together  with baling
wire,   Mao's   call   for   supermen   must  seem,   like  Nietzsche's,
genius  streaked  with  lunacy.    It  will  probably   prove  as  im-
practicable  as  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.     If  Mao  fails,  as  all
his  great  predecessors  have  failed,  it  is because  man,  still  half-
monkey,  cannot  live  at  so  high  a  pitch,  and  when  the   bugles
die  down  prefers  a  quiet  scratch  in  the  warm  sun.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   30,  19C7
A   Key   Senator  Offers   A  Program  to  Which   All  Men  of   Good  Will  Can  Rally
A  Majority  for  Peace  Could  Be  Mobilized  Behind  Fulbright's  8  Points
We   respectfully   suggest  that  peace  groups  in  this country
form   a  joint  committee  to  support  the  8-point  program   for
a  settlement  in  Vietnam  put   forward  by  Senator  Fulbright
in  his  new  book,  The  Arrogance  of  Power   (Random  House:
$4,95).    We  do  not  ordinarily  review  books  in  these  pages
and  we  have  had  time only  to  read  Chapter  9,  "Toward  Peace
in  Asia."    But  we  believe  its  good   sense,  its  moderation  and
its  humanity  provide  a  common  platform  to  which  all  men
of  good  will  can  rally.     To  have  this  program   set  forth  by
the  chairman  of  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  is  a
political  asset.   This  is a  moment  which  should  be  seized  upon.
That  "Other  War" Delusion
Senator  Fulbright,   before  outlining  his  eight-points,   seeks
to  dispose  of  the  illusions  about  the  "other  war"  as  an  alter-
•  native  by  which  we  can  win   "the  hearts  and   minds"   of   the
Vietnamese  people.     "The   level  of   violence  has   become  so
high,"  he  writes,  "as  to  negate  the  concept  of  'counter-insur-
gency',  which  purports  to  win  the  war  by  combining  limited
military  activity  with  social,  economic  and  political  reform."
The  level  of  violence  reached  in  1966,  Fulbright  says,  "reduces
social   and   economic   measures  to   irrelevance."
Fulbright's  first  point  is  of  especial  urgency  now  when  the
Constituent  Assembly  is  still  at  work.    He  wants  the  U.S.  to
suggest   that  the  Saigon  government  open   negotiations  with
the  National  Liberation  Front.    Cowed   though   it  is  by  the
military,  the  Constituent  Assembly seems  to  be  thinking  along
similar  lines;  it  wants  to  give  the  new  National   Assembly
"broader  legislative powers  than  is usual  in  a  strong  executive
government"    so   that   it   could   "decide   on   the   holding   of
peace  talks."    (Baltimore   Sun  Jan.   20.)
One   way  to  help  this  trend  is  to   support   the  Assembly
against  the  military  junta  and  to  insist  on  a  full investigation
.into  the  murder  of  its  foremost  leader,  Tran  Van  Van.     His
widow  in  a  letter  asking clemency for  the  alleged  slayer scath-
ingly  pointed  out,  "the  Viet  Cong  would  have  been  foolish  to
select  a  pock-marked   and  half-blind  man  as  the  murderer   to
provide  easy  identification  by  the  police."     (AP   in   Washing-
ton  Star,  Jan.  20).     She  said  her  husband  feared  he  would
be  murdered  for  opposing  the  military  veto  over  the  drafting
of  a  new Constitution.
Such  an  investigation  would  be  a  means  to  cut  our  puppet
military  down  to  size,  and  thus  remove  the  main  Vietnamese
Bobby  Still Evasive on Vietnam
Dear  IFS:  I  don't  think  you  should  be  too  harsh  on
RFK; he  may  not  be  ideal  but  we've  got  nothing better.
—Letter  from   Reader.
Jefferson    once    questioned   whether    a   legislature
"which  said  nothing  and  did  much" was  not preferable
to  "one  which  talks  much  and  does  nothing."    I  think
the   90th  Congress  will  be  doing  a  great  deal  of  both
in  1967.   Talking  about  how  we  can  meet  our  defense
needs   in   Vietnam.     Talking   about   how   we   can   also
make  our  cities  livable. .  .  .  Our  most  urgent  question
perhaps   is   whether   we   must   raise   taxes   to   ensure
enough   resources  for   the   war  in  Vietnam  and  for   a
progressive  program  at  home.
—Sen. Robert  F. Kennedy's   latest  newsletter.
"Reducing   crime  involves  far   more  than   reform   of
law  enforcement. .  .  .  We  [must]  vastly  multiply  our
efforts  against  poverty,  for  education,  for  jobs,  for fun-
damental  justice.  .  . .  But the  new order will  not be  with
us  'for  some  time,  and  the  longer  the  war  in  Vietnam
persists,  the  longer  that  time  will  be.    So  immediate
improvements  in  our  law  enforcement  system   are  im-
portant."
—RFK   at   Columbia   Law   School   Forum   Jan.  19.
stumbling  block  to   peace.
Fulbright's  other  points  are  (2)   cease-fire  negotiations  be-
tween  the  U.S.  and   Saigon  on  the  one  side  and  Hanoi  and
the  NLF  on  the  other,  (3)   an  end  of  the  bombing  of  the
North  and   a  reduction  of   fighting  in  the  South   "consistent
with  the  security  of  American  forces"   while  peace  initiatives
are  underway, .(4)  a  pledge  eventually  to  remove  U.S.  forces
from   Vietnam,   (5)    negotiation   among   the  four  belligerent
parties  to  aim  at   a  cease-fire  and   self-determination  in   the
South,   (6)    an   international  conference   including  China   to
guarantee  the  results  and  a  future  referendum  on reunification
of  North  and  South,  (7)   neutralization of  South  Vietnam  and
if  possible  all  Southeast  Asia  and  (8)   if  agreement  cannot  be
reached,  consolidate  U.S.  forces  "in  highly  fortified  defensive
areas  in  South  Vietnam  and  keep  them  there  indefinitely,"  as
an  inducement  to  negotiate.     We  are  not  sure  about  the  last
point,  since  it  might  also  be  an  inducement  to  the  military on
our  side  not  to  negotiate.    But  we  think  this  represents  a  pro-
gram   on   which   something  like  majority   opinion  might  be
coalesced   for  peace.
The  Overdeveloping  Girl  Industry In  Underdeveloped Asia
Singapore—Whatever   its    political   and   military   conse-
quences,  the  American  military   buildup  in  South  Vietnam
last  year  spelled  opportunity  for  alert  Asian  business  men
.  .  .  the  designation  of  cities  from   Penang,   Malaysia,   to
Taipei,   Taiwan,  as   "rest   and   recuperation"  centers   for
American   troops   on   leave   from   Vietnam   turned   hotels,
bars  and  'massage  parlors' into  especially  lucratice  invest-
ments."
—"War   Turning   Vietnam  Into  Major   Market"   in  Asia-
Far  East  Business   Review,  N.  Y  .Times  Jan.  SO.
Even  as  he  urged  new  foreign  investment,  Finance min-
ister   Pole  Sarasin  noted  that,  so   far,  most   Thai  capital
had   been   put   into   quick-return   projects—notably   hotels
and  massage  parlors.  .  .  .
—From  Bangkok,  same  N.Y.  Times  survey.
Q.  What  do  you  mean mistakes?
A.  Well,  take  Thailand.  .  .  .  Thee  hotels  in  Bangkok  are
furnished  with  girls  just  for  the  entertainment of  GI's,  and
now  girls  are  being  brought  in  from  the  provinces to  meet
the  growing  demand.   It's  only  natural  that  Thai  families,
and  especially  the  men,  get   resentful.
—Interview,  with  Rene  Dabernat  of  Paris-Match  on  his
trip   to  Asia  in  U.S.   News  &  World   Report   Jan.   23.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  .10, 1(H:T
A   Rare  Moscow  Demonstration   and  A  Cheering   Supreme  Court   Reversal
One  Man's  Sedition  May  Be  Another  Man's  Loyal  Good  Sense
The   day  before  the   Supreme   Court   last  Monday   handed
down  its  decision  on  the  New  York  State  anti-subversive laws
there  was  an  unusual  event  in  Moscow.     Fifty  young  Russians
unfurled  hand-painted  banners  near  Pushkin's  monument  and
held  a  demonstration.     They  demanded  the  repeal  of  Article
70   of   the   Russian   Federal   Criminal  Code   as   "unconstitu-
tional."    This  is  the  law  which  provides  up  to   10  years  in
jail  for  "anti-Soviet  agitation  and  propaganda,"  and  was  used
to  send  the  writers  Sinyavsky  and  Daniel  to  prison.
We  link  this  with  the  Supreme  Court  decision  because  they
have  a  common   background—the  use  of  alarming  but   vague
phrases  in  the  law  to  cover  the  persecution  of  non-conformist
opinion.     Under   Stalin,  an  ill-defined  law  against   "counter
revolutionary"  crime was  used  to  put  suspected  critics in  labor
camps;  the  equally  vague  law  about  "anti-Soviet  agitation  and
propaganda"  is  being  used  today  against  writers  who  do  not
toe  the  party  line.    The   Supreme   Court   in  its  decision  was
striking  at  a  similar  evil  in  our  own   country.
That   Hobgoblin  Word  "Subversion"
Here  the  target  of  the  majority  were  laws  designed  to  keep
"subversives"  out  of  State  employment,   to  punish  teachers  or
other   State  employes   for   "any  treasonable   or  seditious   word
or  words"  or  for  advocating  "criminal   anarchy."     The  Court
struck  them  down  as  unconstitutional  for  a  vagueness  danger-
ous  to  fundamental  liberty.   This  is  what  the  Russian  youth
also  meant  by   "unconstitutional."
One  of  the  New  York  State  laws  struck  down  goes  back  to
the  anti-radical hysteria  in  World  War  I.    The  others  are  the
products  of  the  anti-Red  hysteria during  the  late  40s  and  dur-
ing  the  Korean  war.    Some  of  the  "loyalty  oath"   regulations
involved  have  already  been  rescinded   in  New  York  but   this
decision   will  invalidate  the   use  of   similar  devices   in   other
States.     The   cases   arose  when   four   college   teachers   and   a
librarian  refused  on  principle  to  sign  certificates  under   oath
that  they  had  never  taught  revolutionary doctrine  or   belonged
to  any  party  which  did.    These  oaths  were  part  of  a  program
for   keeping   teachers  under  surveillance.
Just  15  years  ago  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Adler  case  up-
held  this  system  of  regulation  6-3  under  the  so-called   Feinberg
law.    Black,  Douglas   and  Frankfurter  dissented.    Last   Mon-
day  Black  and  Douglas  were  in  a  new  majority  of  five  which
reversed  that  old  decision.    Clark,  the  last  survivor of  the  six
who  then  upheld   it,  wrote  the  minority  dissent,  with   Harlan,
Stewart   and  White.    The   Adler  decision   reflected  the  Mc-
Painful  Story
Kalman   J.   Berenyi   was   a   Hungarian  who   fought
against  the  Russians  in  1956 and  then  fled.  He  finished
his   medical  education  here   and  became  an  instructor
at  Tufts   Medical   School.    He   was   denied  naturaliza-
tion  on  the  ground  that  he  made a  false  statement when
he  said  he  had  never  belonged  to  the  Communist  Party.
Dr.  Berenyi  denied  past  membership  and  brought  for-
ward  witnesses  to  prove  he  had  been  an  oppositionist.
But  the  adverse  naturalization  decision   was  based   on
two  witnesses,  both  former  Hungarians,  one  a  former
Communist.     A   dissenting   opinion  by   Douglas   with
Warren  and  Brennan  described  one  witness  as  specula-
tive  and  the  other  as  hazy.    But  the  Supreme  Court
majority   last   Monday  upheld  denaturalization   on   the
ground  that   when  an  alien  applies  for  citizenship  the
burden  of  proof  is  on  him.    He  is  in  effect   considered
"guilty"  until  he  can  prove  himself   "innocent".     This
is  characteristic of  our  Immigration and Naturalization
Service  which  regards  every  alien  as  suspect.    It  would
have  barred  Lafayette  and  Kosciusko  had  it  been   set
up  in  time.
Carthyite  climate  of  that  time  and  upheld  the  right  to  protect
schools   from  the   bogey   of  "infiltration".
Mr.   Justice  Clark   based   his   dissent   on   the   government's
right  to  "self-preservation."    This  is  close  kin  to  the   argu-
ment  used  by  Soviet  jurists  like  Vishinsky for  their  repressive
legislation  against  "counter-revolutionaries."    Mr.  Justice  Bren-
nan  for  the  majority  spoke  more  wisely  when  he  said    "Our
experience   under   the   Sedition   Act  of   1798   taught   us   that
dangers   fatal   to   First   Amendment   freedoms   inhere  in   the
word  'seditious'.    And  the  word  'treasonable'  if  left  undefined
is  no  less  dangerously  uncertain."
In  a  joint  dissent  12  years  ago  Justices  Douglas  and  Black
said  the  New  York  law  "inevitably  turns  the   school   system
into  a  spying  project.  .  .  .  Ears are  cocked  for  tell-tale  signs  of
disloyalty.  .  .  .  Why  was  the  history  teacher  so  openly   hostile
to  Franco  Spain?  .  .  .  What  was  behind  the  praise  of   Soviet
metallurgy  in  the  chemistry  class?  .  .  .  What  happens  under
this  law  is  typical  of  what  happens  in  a  police  state.  .  .  .  Fear
stalks  the  classroom. ...  A  deadening  dogma  takes  the  place
of  free  inquiry."
Soviet   readers   who   come   across   that   quotation   will   be
startled  by  its  aptness  to  their  own  lives.    A  State  which   sets
out  to  "preserve   itself"   by  forbidding  thoughts  it   considers
dangerous  ends  by casting  a  pall  over  all  free  discussion.   This
is  universal  experience  in  every  form  of   society.
From  Mr. Justice Douglas's  Burning  Protest  Against  Injustice  to  Indigent  Tenants
"The   Georgia  summary  eviction  statute   provides  that   a
landlord  may  oust  a  tenant  in  a  very  swift,  expedient   man-
ner.  .  .  .  But  in  order  to  remain  in  possession   the  tenant
must  'tender  a  bond'  .  .  .  [or be]  summarily  evicted.   The
effect  is  that  the  indigent  tenant  is  deprived  of  his  shelter,
and  the  life  of  his  family  is  disrupted—all  without  a  hearing
—solely  because  of  poverty.  .  .  . The  effect  of  the  security
statute  is  to  grant  an  affluent  tenant  a  hearing  and  to  deny
an  indigent  tenant  a  hearing.  .  . . We have  recognized  that
the   promise   of  equal  justice  for   all   would  be   an   empty
phrase   for  the  poor,  if  the  ability  to  obtain  judicial   relief
were  made  to  turn  on  the  length  of  a  person's  purse.  It  is
true  that  these  cases  have  dealt  with  criminal  proceedings.
But  the  equal  protection  clause  of the  14th  Amendment is not
limited  to criminal proceedings.  . . . The problem  of housing
for  the  poor  is one of the  most  acute  facing  the  nation.  .  . .
Default  judgments  in  eviction  proceedings   are  obtained  in
machine-gun  rapidity."
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas  with  Warren  and  Brennan  protesting  the  refusal   of  a  hearing  in  a  Georgia  eviction  case.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  30, 1907
Green  Berets  and  Bacteria:  CH  Warfare  Expanded  Under  JFK  for  Counter   Insurgency
Science  Magazine  Warning:  Pax  Americana  May  Become  Pox  Americana
We   hope  peace  groups  will   circulate   the   two   articles  on
Chemical  and  Bacteriological  Warfare  by  Elinor  Langcr  in  the
Jan.   13   and   20   issues   of   Science,   organ   of   the   American
Association   for   the   Advancement   of   Science.     This   is   the
most  authoritative  survey  yet  published   of   the   new   horrors
being  cooked  up   in  our   laboratories.     It  raises  urgent  ques-
tions  in  two  quarters.    One   is  among  scientists:  the  time  has
come  for  those  with  conscience   to  face  up  to  their  moral  re-
sponsibilities  and   refuse   to  take  part   in  the  development  of
new  means of  warfare.    Those  who  do  not  do  so  must  recog-
nize  that  they  are  accessories  in  mass  murder.    This  is  especi-
ally  true   for  medical   men   in  the  CBW    field.    For   as  Miss
Langer  wrote,  "Much   of  the  work   inescapably  has  a  special
character,  an  inverted  quality,  like that  of  medicine  turned  in-
side  out."     One  of  the  efforts  in  the  laboratories the  military
has  subsidized,  Miss  Langer  reveals,  is  "to  breed  into  patho-
genic  organisms precisely the  characteristics—such  a  resistance
to  antibiotics—that  medical  researches  would  like  to  see  eradi-
cated. "    Objectively  considered,  such  medical  work  should  be
regarded   as  criminally  insane.
A  Cheap  Weapon  for  Colonial  Revolts
The  other  quarter  in  which  these  articles  raise   inescapable
issues   is  (he  Third   World.     The   Langer   articles  show   the
extent  to  which  CB  Warfare  is  aimed  at  what  an  earlier  gen-
eration,  in  the  language  of  Western  imperialism's  poet-laureate
Kipling,  called  "the   lesser  breeds  without  the  law."     Today
chemical  and  bacteriological  warfare  is  being  tailored  for  use,
in  the  more  cryptic  phraseology   now  fashionable,  in   counter-
insurgency   and   limited   war.     Miss   Langer's   survey   shows
that   CB  warfare,   long  starved  for   funds,   began   to  expand
under  the  Kennedy  Administration.    It  was  (she   writes)—
concerned  about  the  military  inflexibility  imposed  by  over-
reliance  on  nuclear  weapons.   New  Frontiersmen  were  in-
tercsted  in  acquiring  a  more  versatile  weapons  "mix".   And
they  were  especially interested  in  systems  that,  like  CBW,
seemed  Io  offer  particular promise in  fighting  limited  wars.
In  the  unclear  stalemate  between  the  great   powers,  there
began  (o  be  a  reorientation  in  the  conceptions   of  how  the
U.S.   would  conduct  its   war   against   smaller  nations,  and
They  Only  Destroy  People
A  useful  quality  of  biological  weapons, according to
the  unclassified  military  field  manual  FM-310,  is  their
ability  to  "accomplish  their  effects   .  .  .  with  little  or
no   physical   destruction.     This   constitutes   an  advan-
tage  both  in  combat  operations [presumably the  clutter
on  the  battlefields  is  thus  limited  to  corpses—IFS]  .  .  .
and—from   a   longer   range  viewpoint—in   postwar  re-
habilitation,  where overall  building  requirements would
be  reduced."   The  utility  of   chemical   weapons  is   de-
scribed  in  similar  language.
—Elinor  Langer  on  CB  Warfare    in  Science  Jan.  20.
CBW  was  just  one beneficiary  of  the  reorientation.  . . The
relative  cheapness of  CBW systems  played a  role as well.
The  Green  Beret  and  bacteria went  hand  in  hand.    Between
fiscal '61  and  fiscal  '64,  the  appropriations  for  research  and
development  in  CB warfare  almost  tripled.   So, in  that period,
did  the  appropriations for  procurement.    Since  1964  the  latter
have  been  classified.     All  this  is  intended   to  subdue  smaller
nations  and  revolts  of  which  we  disapprove.     It  is  therefore
of   terrible   significance  to   Asia,  Latin  America  and   Africa.
One  sample  of  what  we  have  in  store  for  the  underdeveloped
and  the  underfed,  if  they  act  contrary to  our  wishes,  was  the
award  of  the  Army's Distinguished  Service  Medal,  the  highest
given   civilians,   to   a  Fort  Detrick   researcher   "for   her   con-
tribution  to  development  of  rice  blast  fungus,   a  disease  that
in  its  natural form  has  repeatedly  damaged  Asian  rice  crops."
A  small  new  firm  in  Washington,  Research  Analysis  Corpora-
tion,  eager  for  government  contracts,  advertises its capabilities
in  the  field  of  "agricultural warfare"  and  gives  as  an  example,
"Evaluation  of   counter-insurgency  requirements  in   Southeast
Asia."'   We  think  such  activities  should  be  brought  forcibly  to
public  attention in  the  United  Nations  by  the  smaller  neutral
nations  before  research  becomes   reality.    Should   any  nation
have   the   right   to  prepare   means   to   destroy   the   food   and
health  of  other  nations?    Our  CB  laboratories  are  preparing
to  enforce a  Pax  Americana with  a Pox  Americana, our  politics
by  our  man-made  plagues.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped   Addressed  Envelope
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Please   renew  (or   enter)
Street    .................................
City  ....................................
For   the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name   ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub   for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
City   ....................................  Zip................  State......
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement  wished    D
1/JJO/G7
Fifties
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
i.   i'.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in  August,   the  last   week  in   December  and   the
first  week   in  January   and  Bi-Wcukly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washinuton,  D.   C.    An   independent  weekly  published  and   edited
liv   I.   !•'.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,   Esther   M.   Stone,    Subscrintion:    S3   in   the   U.S.:     S6   in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe;   20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED