I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jan23.pdf

============================================================

What  Our Napalm  Does to  Vietnam's  Children,  P.  2
Alice  in  Pentagonland:  The  Victim  Is  Punished  For  Trying  to  Defend  Himself
"American  statements  justifying  damage  to  civilian  tar-      Vietnamese  explained,  'sit  with  hands  crossed  when Ameri-
gets  on the  ground that  Americans are  seeking to  silence ad-     can  bombers  come over  to  bomb  us?   It  seems  to  us  a  curi-
jacent   anti-aircraft   batteries   arouse   indignation   among     ous  philosophy  to  justify  an  attack  on  the  ground  that  the
Hanoi  residents.  'What  are  we  supposed  to  do,'  one  North      person  attacked  is  trying  to  defend  himself.'"
—Harrison   Salisbury,    jitst   out   of   Hanoi   but   writinh   from  Homj   Konij   in  the  New  York  Times, Jan.  13.
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  3JANUARY  23,  1967
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Monster  With  Little  Brain  and  No  Heart
Two  words  sum  up  the  beginnings  of  our  military  campaign
to  subdue  the  Mekong  Delta.    One  is  futility   and  the  other
brutality.     The   first   invasion,   launched   with   a  tremendous
air  and  naval bombardment, and  an  equally sensational  splurge
of  publicity, was  Operation  Deckhouse  V.    It  has  just  fizzled
out.     "The   ten  day  sweep,"   a  sentence  buried  in  the   AP's
daily  military  roundup   from   Saigon   admitted  (Wash.   Star,
Jan.  16),   "proved  unproductive."     This  force  of  4,000  U.S.
and  South  Vietnamese  Marines  could  claim  no  more  than  21
Vietcong  killed  and  14  captured  "during   10  days  of  slogging
through   thigh-deep   delta   mud   68   miles  south   of    Saigon"
(N.Y.    Times  Jan.  17).    That  is an  average  of  two  VC  killed
a  day.    We'd   like  to  see McNamara's  cost  effectiveness  figures
on  this  operation.    U.S.  intelligence  must  be  pretty  dismal  if
such  a  vast  panoply  of  power  was  brought  to  bear  in  an  area
where  nobody  seemed  to  be  around.    A  companion   invasion
a  few  days  later  10  miles  away  by  South  Vietnam's  9th  Divi-
sion  was  also  preceded  by  a huge  outpouring  of  firepower  and
ballyhoo.    A  detachment  of  reporters  and  cameramen  were  on
the  heavy  missile  cruiser  Canberra  as  it  poured  high   explosive
shells  for  an  hour  and  a  half  into  the  landing  area.    One  of
them wrote  (Wash.  Post, Jan.  10),  "It  sounded  like  a thunder-
storm   with   lightning   striking   every  few   minutes."     Since
nothing  more  has  been  heard  of  that  invasion,  obviously  its
results  weren't   anything  to   boast   of  either.    Any  time  the
Pentagon   runs  out   of   the   glamorous   names   it   gives   these
operations,  we'd  suggest  a  code  name  suited  to  this  combina-
tion   of   monstrous   power  with  dim   intelligence.     Why   not
Operation   Dinosaur?
The  Idiot  Arithmetic  of  This  War
While the Marines were  still chasing  phantoms  in  Operation
Deckhouse  V,  30,000  U.S.  troops  launched  Operation   Cedar
Falls,  the  biggest  of  the  war,  against  the  so-called  Iron  Tri-
angle.    The  name  was  another  triumph  for  our  military men,
who  seem  nowadays to  be graduates  of  Madison  Avenue  rather
than  West  Point.    The   name  conjures  up  the   impregnable
fortress.     It   was  another   area   where   the   troops   met  more
peasants  than  guerrillas.    It  is  or  was  a  fertile  60-mile  square
area  of  forest,  paddy  fields,  orchards  and  rubber  plantations
long  dominated  by  the  Vietcong  under  tacit  agreements  with
French  rubber  companies  and  local  officialdom.    By  the  end
of  the  fifth  day,  U.S.  infantrymen  had  "fired  their  rifles  only
Outspokenly   Yes,  No,   But   and   Maybe
Washington,  Jan.  13—Gov.  George   Romney  has  ex-
pressed   concern   that   President   Johnson's   policy   of
prosecuting   the   war   in   Vietnam   and  simultaneously
seeking  peace  may  have   prolonged   the   conflict.     The
Michigan  Republican,  a  potential  Presidential candidate
in  1968,  has  charged  in  private  conversations that  an
ambivalent   Administration  has   not   shown   the   same
degree  of  determination  to  end  the  Vietnam  war  as  it
could  have  done.    Mr.  Romney  believes  that  the  talk
about   a  negotiated  settlement  in   Vietnam   may   have
made  it  more  difficult   to  win  the  war.   He  quotes  well-
informed  sources  as  maintaining  that  North  Vietnam
considers  such  discussion  a  show  of  weakness  on  the
part  of   the  U.S.     The  Governor  does  not  dispute  the
necessity  for  the  presence  of  American  troops  in  Viet-
nam.     He  tries  to  limit  his  criticism  to  what  he  sees  as
mistakes  in  the  conduct  of   the  war  without  taking  a
personal  position  as  a  'hawk'  or a  'dove.'"
—New  York  Times  Jan.  H,  off-the-record-talk     with
Romney,  in  town  for  a  Women's  Press  Club  dinner.
occasionally"  and  "one  intelligence  officer"  found  it  necessary
to  explain  that  "he  thought  it  unlikely  that  more  than  100
enemy   soldiers  were   ever  in  the   target  areas  at  one   time"
(N.Y.  Times  Jan.  13).     But  10,000  peasants  live  there.    It
was  decided  that  they  were  all   "at   least   passive  Vietcong"
(same)    and  must  be  uprooted   and  resettled  and  the   whole
area  razed.   To  make  10,000  peasants  homeless  in  order  to  get
at  100 guerrillas  is  the  idiot  arithmetic  of  this war, guaranteed
to  create  10  new  rebels  for  every  one  we  kill  or  capture.
Imagine  30,000  Chinese  troops  uprooting  Iowa  villagers  to
save  them  from  Republicanism and  you  get  some  idea  of  how
likely  this  is  to  win—as  our   sentimental  Generals  say—the
hearts  of   the  people.     This   operation  in  the  Iron   Triangle
was  pictured  by  the  London  Sunday  Times  (Jan.  15)   in  all
its mindless technology.   Its  correspondent flew over  the  scene
with  the  Engineer  Colonel  in  command.    "Below  us  a  22-ton
armored  bulldozer  named  'Hogjaws'  leads  a   clearing  column
on  a  compass  course  through  the  jungle,"  he  cabled.    "Above
Hogjaws   a  'talkout'   helicopter   circles,  broadcasting   through
loud-speakers  a  tape-recorded  message calling  on  the  Vietcong
to  surrender.    Hogjaws  is  leading  a  column   of   two   tanks,
four   14-ton   bulldozers   and   12  armored   personnel   carriers.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   23
t
  19U7
Committee  Formed  to  Help  Vietnamese  Child  Victims  of  Our  Napalm...
To   HELP  THE  CHILDREN:  In  the  box  below   are  excerpts
from  three  eye-witness  reports  in  three  leading  monthly  maga-
zines  of  what  our  napalm  is doing  to  Vietnam's  children.    We
suggest  that  those   concerned   see  that   all  three   articles  have
the   widest   possible   circulation;  no   one  who   loves   children
can  read  them  without  tears.    A  Committee  of  Responsibility
(777  United  Nations  Plaza,  New  York  City)  has  been  formed
by   some   100  physicians,   clergymen,   scientists  and   others   to
bring  war-burned   and  war-injured   Vietnamese   children  here
for  treatment.     The  honorary  chairmen  are  Rev.  John  C.  Ben-
nett   of   Union   Theological   Seminary;   Prof.   Bentley    Glass;
Methodist   Bishop  John  Wesley  Lord;  Episcopalian    Suffragan
Bishop  of  Washington,  Rt.  Rev.  Paul  Moore,  Jr.;  Dr.   Albert
Sabin,  Dr.  Benjamin  Spock,  Mrs.  Philip  Stern  and  Dr.  Helen
Brooke  Taussig.    The  biggest   obstacle   is  Administration   hos-
tility.     Obviously   it  does  not  want   the   American   public   to
see   child   victims.     The   kind   of   facial   surgery   the   worst
burned  need  is  only  available here.   We'll  report  on  the  cam-
paign  as  it  unfolds.
WHAT'S  A  LITTLE  MURDER  BETWEEN  FRIENDS?     On   the
CBS  Cronkhite   show  Jan.   16  there  were   shots  of  Tran  Van
Van's  furneral.     His  widow  said  she  asked   one  of  the  junta
leaders,  "Why   did  you  let  Ky  murder  my  husband?"     John
Hart,   the   CBS  news   correspondent,   sought   to   smooth   this
over  with  the  official  U.S.   propaganda   line  in  Saigon  that  the
Viet   Cong   murdered   Van   to   cause   dissension    between   the
Constituent  Assembly,  in  which  Van  was  the  foremost   South-
ern  leader,  and  the  military.   But  I  am  told  that  off-the-record
in  U.S.   circles  in  Saigon  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  Van  was
killed  by  the  military  to  get  rid  of  Ky's  No.   1  civilian  rival.
In  the  Jan.  21  issue  of  The  New   Republic,  Tran  Van  Dinh,
who  was  South  Vietnam's  Acting   Ambassador   in   1964,   ex-
The  Solemn  Mendacities  of  the  Baker  Trial
"The  procession  of  savings  and  loan  association   of-
ficials  who  testified   [at  the  Bobby  Baker  trial]  raised
almost  as  many questions as  they  answered.   One  Cali-
fornian  said  Baker  listed seven  Senators—four  of  them
Republicans—as   potential   recipients    of    the    money.
There  was  no  explanation of  why  the  Secretary  to  the
Senate   Democrats  would  be  raising  funds  for   Senate
Republicans.     However,  all   four   GOP  Senators   were
members  of   the   Senate   Finance  Committee   which  at
the  time  was  considering  an  omnibus  tax   bill  that  in-
cluded   a   tax   hike  for   savings   and  loan  associations.
The  Congressmen listed  10 men  who  provided the  money
in  amounts ranging  from  $1500  to  17,300.    In  all  cases
it  was  in cash,  mostly in  $100 bills.  Those  asked  why  the
contributions  were  in  cash   rather  than  check   said   it
was   more   expedient   to   collect   currency  because   the
money  was  to  be  divided  up  among  so  many  Senators."
—Robert  Walters:  Washington  Sunday  Star  Jan.  15.
plains  why  people  in   Saigon   do  not  believe  the  Viet   Cong
killed  Van  and  reveals  that  Van  had  told   friends  he  hoped,
if   elected   President  in   late   1967,   to  "start   a  dialogue   with
the  National   Liberation  Front  to  end  the   war."
JUNTA   NOT   GETTING   POORER:   The   Saigon   junta  is   not
doing  badly.    The  Saigon   Post   (Jan.   12)   reported  the   theft
of  10  million  piastres  worth  of  gold  and  pearl  valuables  from
a  customer's  safe  in  "a  foreign   owned  bank"  in  Saigon.    The
valuables  belonged  to  Mrs.  Tran  Thi  Kim  Dung  "wife  of  a
noted  personality."     The   noted  personality  is  head   of   Ky's
"CIA".    She  claimed   to  have   deposited   30  million   piastres
worth   of  jewelry,  gold  and  pearls  in  the  bank.    That  is  the
equal  of  about   $300,000—in  one  vault  alone,  no   doubt   on
her  husband's   salary.     Another   wife  safe  from   malnutrition
What  Our  Napalm  Does  to  Vietnam's  Children—From  Three  Leading  Monthlies
"In  the  children's   ward  of  the  Qui  Nhon  provincial  hos-
pital  I  saw  for  the  first  time  what  napalm  does.    A  child  of
7,  the  size  of  our  4-year  olds,   lay  in  the  cot  by  the  door.
Napalm  had  burned  his  face  and  back  and  one  hand.    The
burned  skin  looked  like  swollen,  raw  meat;  the  fingers  of
his   hand   were   stretched   out,   burned   rigid.     A   scrap   of
cheesecloth   covered  him,  for  weight  is  intolerable,  but  so  is
air.     His   grandfather,   an   emaciated   old   man   half   blind
with  cataract,  was  tending  the  child.    A  week  ago  napalm
bombs  were  dropped  on  their  hamlet.    The  old  man  carried
his  grandson  to  the  nearest  town.  .  .  .  Destitute,  homeless,
sick  with  weariness   and  despair,  he  watched  every  move  of
the  small  racked  body  of  his   grandson."
—Martha  Gellhorn  in  Ladies'  Home  Journal  Jan.   1967.
"In  the  American  press  the  Vietcong   are  almost   always
presented   as  indiscriminate  terrorists.     The  reality  is  not
so  simple.   At  certain  times  and in certain  villages  the Viet-
cong   are  in  fact   terrorists.     But  often  they   are  trying  to
win  the  hearts  and  minds  of  the  general  population.  .  .  .
Frequently  the  Vietcong  carry  out  the  public  execution  of  a
government   official   and  this  is  reported  as  a  'terrorist  at-
tack'.    But  the  truth  sometimes  seems  to  be  that  the  official
was  oppressive,   his  execution  a  welcome  event.  .  .  .  Their
savagery   is   personal—and  primitive.    Ours  is   impersonal
and  sophisticated.    We  and  the  South  Vietnamese  use  artil-
lery   to   shell   villages;   we  don't   see   what   happens   at   the
other  end  when   the  shell   explodes,   killing  and  mutilating
women  and  children.  .  .  .  The  Vietcong  do  not  use napalm;
we  do. ...  I  have  been  an  orthopedic  surgeon  for  a   good
number  of  years.  .  .  .  But  nothing  could  have  prepared  me
for   my   encounters   with  Vietnamese  women   and  children
burned  by  napalm.    It  was  sickening,  even  for  a  physician,
to  see  and  smell   the   blackened   flesh.   One  continues   for
days  afterward  getting   sick  when  he  looks   at   a  piece  of
meat  on  his  plate  because  the  odor  of  burned  flesh  lingers
so  long  in  memory.    And  one  never  forgets   the  bewildered
eyes  of  the  silent,  suffering  napalm-burned child."
—Richard  E.  Perry,  M.D.  in  Redbook  January   1967.
"Napalm,  and  its   more  horrible  companion,  white  phos-
phorus,  liquidizes  young  flesh  and  carves  it  into  grotesque
forms.    The  little  figures  are  afterward  often  scarcely  hu-
man  in  appearance,  and  one  cannot  be  confronted  with  the
monstrous   effect   of    the   burning   without    being   totally
shaken.  .  .  .  The  initial  urge  to  reach  out  and  soothe   the
hurt  was  restrained  by  the  fear  that  the  ash-like skin  would
crumble  in my  fingers. ...
"American   soldiers   in   Vietnam  who  accidentally  suffer
serious  burn  injuries  from  napalm  are  rushed  aboard  spe-
cial   hospital   planes—equipped  to  give  immediate  first  aid
treatment—and  flown  directly  to  Brook  Army  Hospital  in
Texas,  one  of  the  world's  leading  centers  for  burn treatment
and  for   the   extensive   plastic   surgery   that   must   follow.
Burnt  Vietnamese  children  must  fare  for   themselves."
—Wm.  F.  Pepper   in  Ramparts  magazine  January   1967.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  23.1967
Sixty-Three Votes  Against  the  House  Un- Americans in Democratic Caucus
is  Mme.  Ky.    The  Tokyo  Yomiuri   (Dec.   14)   reported    that
430,000  yen  (about  $1,200)  was  stolen  from   her  handbag
while  she .was  shopping  in  a  Tokyo   jewelry  store.     Her  hus-
band's  salary  is  supposed   to  be  $200-a-month!
THE  FIGHT  AGAINST  THE  UN-AMERICANS:  Year  after  year
the  fight  goes  on  to  get  rid  of  the  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee.   There  is  no  stranger  phenomena  in  American
legislative  history  than  the  survival  of  this  tough  and   noxious
•weed.    In  the  name  of   Americanism,  this  Committee   carries
on  the  most  un-American  activity  in  Congress.     It  is  an   In-
quisition,  a  heresy  hunt,  a  pillory  for  non-conformity;  it  be-
longs  in  medieval  society  or  in  a  totalitarian state  of  right  or
left.     Yet  most  members  are  either  afraid   to  vote  against  it,
or   themselves   have   so  little  understanding   of   what   a   free
society   means  that   they  enthusiastically  support   it.     As   the
new   Congress   opened,  Edwards  of  California  and   17   other
members   petitioned   the   Democratic   caucus  to   take   up   the
question  of  HUAC  with  a  view  to  its  abolition.    They  were
defeated   128  to   63.     But   63   votes  is  more   than   the   anti-
HUAC   forces   have   gotten   since   it   was   almost    abolished
at  the  end  of  World  War   II.
The  next  round  will  come  over  the  appropriation.    In  the
first   two   days  of   the   session,   anti-HUAC   resolutions   were
introduced   by   17  members,   including   four   of   the   five   re-
maining   Negroes   in   the   House:   Diggs   (Midi.),    Conyers
(Midi.),   Hawkins   (Cal.)   and  Nix   (Pa.);  Dawson    (111.)
was  the  only  Negro  who  did  not  join  them.*     Hawkins   in
an  extension  of  remarks  opening   day  said  he  had   predicted
last  year,  when  the  Committee  asked  funds  to  investigate   the
Klan,  that  it  would  turn  next  to  the  civil  rights   movement.
He  warned  against  a  witch  hunt  in  the  Negro  ghettoes,  say-
ing  that  the  leaders  of  the  uprisings  are  "just  plain   frustrated,
angry  and  tired  of  being  poor."    Edwards  spoke  of  the  use
made  of  the  Committee's  files  as  an  instrument  of  blacklist-
ing.    All  kinds  of  McCarthy-style  rubbish,  which  would   nor-
mally  be  libelous,  is  surreptitiously circulated  by  the   Commit-
*  The  others   who  put   in  anti-HUAC  resolutions   the   first
week   were  Edwards  (Cal.),   Bingham   (N.Y.),   Dow   (N.Y.),
Fraser  (Minn.),  Kastenmeier  (Wis.),  McCarthy  (N.Y.),   Ro-
senthal   (N.Y.),   Annunzio    (111.),   Brown   (Cal.),    Farbstein
(N.Y.),  Scheuer   (N.Y.)   and  Yates   (III.),  all  Democrats  and
one  Republican,  Bradford  Morse  (Mass.).
Grenville  Clark
Grenville  Clark overcame  a  handicap  worse  than  pov-
erty.    He  was  -born  into  the  highest  circles  of  wealth
and  social  position.   Yet  he  became  a  maverick  of  the
noblest   type,  and  he   grew  more   radical   as   he   grew
older.    His  84  years  covered  a  wide  span  of  American
politics.    He  began  as  a  Bull  Moose  Republican  before
World  War  I.    A   generation   later   he  performed   the
miracle  of  getting  the  overstuffed  American  Bar  Asso-
ciation  to  create  a  Bill  of  Rights  Committee.   He  used
it   to   defend   the   liberties   of   the   CIO,  then  still   a
struggling  labor  movement,  and  to  help  block  the  de-
portation  of  Harry Bridges  as  a dangerous  Red.   It  took
moral  stamina   of   a  high  order  for   a  man  of   Clark's
upper  class  connections  to  do battle  for  such  disreputa-
bles.    The  passion  of  his  later  years  was  world  federal-
ism.     With   Louis   B.   Sohn   he   wrote   "World   Peace
Through  World  Law", sketching  out  a  charter  to  which
mankind  must  some  day  come  or  perish.    We  believe
he  would have  liked  us  to  mention  that  he  was  a  reader
of  the  Weekly.    His  encouraging  notes  were  deeply  ap-
preciated.    We  salute  in  his  passing  a  great   gentleman
who  lived  by   our  country's   finest   traditions   of   social
conscience  and  of  freedom.
tee  to  rightist  and  police  organizations.     Annunzio   asked   the
House  to  recall  Wayne  Hay's  testimony  last   year   about   the
paid   informers   used   by  the  Committee.     Farbstein   said   the
Committee   operates  in  such  a  way  that  the  "mere  service  of
a   subpoena   immediately   surrounds   the   one  served  with   an
aura  of  guilt."    Edwards   agreed   that   "Its   hearings  have  all
of  the  wrappings   of  a  criminal  trial,  with  none  of   its  safe-
guards."     We   hope   there   will   be   pressure   on  the   House
leadership  to  force  the  Rules  committee  to  hold  open  hearings
on  these  resolutions.
NOBEL    PEACE   PRIZE:   It   would    invigorate   the    anti-war
forces  in  Congress  if  the  Nobel  Peace  Prize  (unawarded  last
year)  went  this  year  to  Senators  Morse  and  Gruening,  the  only
two   consistent   voices   against   the   Vietnamese   war   and   war
appropriations.     Nominations  have  to  be  in  by  Feb.   1  so im-
mediate  action   is  necessary.     Peace  and  church  organizations,
members   of   Congress,   professors    of   political   science,   law,'
history  and   philosophy,   and  persons   who  have  received   the
prize  in  the  past  may  submit  nominations  to  the  Nobel  Com-
mittee  of  the  Norwegian  Parliament,   Nobel  Institute,   Oslo.
McGeorge  Bundy  vs.  Galbraith,  or  Complacent Sophistry  vs.  Astringent Realism
"It   is  therefore  an  act  of   folly   for   any  true  liberal   to
argue   that   we   must   choose   between  Vietnam  and  social
progress."
—McGeorge  Bundy   in  Foreign  Affairs  for   January.
Q.  Do  you  think  because  of  Vietnam  the  non-defense  sec-
tor  could  become  more  starved  than  in  the  1950s?
A.  There  is   a  very  real  danger.    The  Vietnam  burden
plays  into  the  hands  of  those   who  do  not  quite  have   the
courage  to  say,   "Let's  cut  Head  Start,  let's  cut  the  Youth
Corps,   let's   cut   school   construction."    But   they   can   say
"We  have  a  war  on  our  hands,  so  we  must  postpone  this
kind  of  civilian  construction."   It's  an  outrageous  argument
because  personal income after  taxes  is  at  an all  time high  in
part  as  a  result  of  the  Vietnam war.   So  what  they  are  say-
ing  is,  because  we are  getting rich with  the  help  of Vietnam,
we  must  cut  down  spending  for  the  poor.
Q.  Do  you  think that  President  Johnson  can  build  a  Great
Society   here   and  fight  a  war  in   Southeast   Asia   without
raising  taxes?
A.  I  have  never  been  a  friend  of  the  Vietnam  conflict.    I
have  been  opposed  to  our  expanding  involvement  there  ever
since   President   Hennery   sent   me  to  Saigon   in   1961.    As
long  as  we  are  there  it  is  certainly  going   to  be  difficult   to
give  our  nondefense   public  services  the  kind  of  money  they
require.    Men  who  are  capable  of  worrying  about  commu-
nism   and  insurrection  in  a  basically  bad  social  structure
in  South  Vietnam—one  that  encourages  a  great  deal  of  dis-
satisfaction—are  not  so  good  at  worrying  about  social  un-
rest  in  the  United  States.                                              .
—Interview   (abridged)    with  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  in
Challenge   Magazine,  inserted  in  the  Congressional    Record
pps.  H  156-8  Jan.   12  by  -Rep.  Wright  Patman  (D.,   Texas).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  23,1967
Our  Pacification  Campaign  Finds  Its Fitting Symbol in Hog jaws  the Bulldozer
(Continued  from   Page   One)
As  the  bulldozers clear  a  wide  road  across  the  triangle,  the
Colonel  says,  'We  are  developing   a  new  style  of  jungle  war-
fare   here—we  remove  the   jungle.' "    This   is  not   warfare.
It's  a  demolition job.
An  Artillery  Accident  Prone  General
While  bulldozers  destroy  the  jungle,   the  rubber   trees,   the
rice  paddies and  the  villages, fire rains  down  on  the  area  from
the  skies.    In  seven  days,  Maj.  Gen.  de  Puy,  commander  of
the  First  Infantry  Division,  had  requested  and  received  more
than  660  air  strikes  in  support  of  his  troops  (N.Y.    Times,  Jan.
15).     There   were   12  thunderous   raids  by  B-52s  and   "30
artillery  batteries with  upward  of  130  cannon  had  been  ham-
mering"  the  area  all  week   (N.Y.   Times,  Jan.   14).     It  was
in  this heavy artillery  fire  that  8  American soldiers were  killed
and  34  wounded,  the  fourth  case  of  accidental  artillery  shell-
ing  of  his  own  men   among   the  troops   Gen.   De   Puy  com-
mands.*     The   South   Vietnamese  military   man   who   is  the
province  chief   told   the   London  Sunday   Times  man  he  was
delighted   with   the   progress   of   the   operation.      "The    big
thing,"  he  said,  "is  that  the  Iron  Triangle  will  never  threaten
Saigon  again—within  two  weeks  it  will  be  a  big  bare  field."
This   recalls  that   earlier  pacification   campaign   described   by
Tacitus.    We  cannot  forbear  quoting   again  his  familiar  con-
demnation  of  his  fellow  Romans,  "When  they  make  a  wilder-
ness,  they  call  it  peace."    So  do  we  in  the  Mekong   Delta.
The  strategy  of  the  campaign  now  unfolding  is  simple  and
repulsive.     An   anonymous  General  explained   it  to  a   corre-
spondent   in  South  Vietnam  months  ago.     Mao  Tse-tung,  in
his  book  on  guerrilla  war,  says  the  guerrilla  lives  among  the
people  like  a  fish  in  water.    "We're   going   to  dry  up   the
water,"  was  how  this  General  put  it.   We're  going  to  remove
the  people,   and  make  the  area  in  which  the  guerrillas  have
hitherto   lived,  literally   unlivable.    This  is  what   we  see  in
the  Iron  Triangle  campaign.     Peter  Arnett,  the  AP's   prize-
winning   correspondent,    described   the   process    unforgettably
Only  The  Rats  Thrive
".  .  .  what  years  of  terror  have  done  to  South   Viet-
nam's  once-rich  wild  life.  .  .  .  Wild  elephants,  which
once   roamed  in   herds   through   the   now  bomb-pitted
jungles  of  Central  Vietnam have  altered  their breeding
habits.     'It   appears   in   many  cases   that   they   have
stopped  mating,'  said  Dr.  Vu  Ngoc   Tan,  quiet-spoken
43-year-old  director  of  Saigon's   zoo.    'They  have  been
terrorized  by  the  bombing and  the  artillery attacks  and
armored   vehicles  crashing   through  the  forests.'    Re-
cently  Tan  spotted  three  injured  young  elephants  while
driving  through  the  wooded,  hilly  countryside  between
Saigon  and  the  mountain  resort  town  of  Dalat.    'They
had  very  bad  wounds,  probably  the  result  of   shelling,
and  there  was  nothing  I  could  do  for  them,'  Tan  said.
'They   had  obviously  been  abandoned  by  the   herd  and
had  come  to  that  spot  to  die'.  .  .  .  Tigers  and  panthers
also  have  suffered.   .  .  .  Chemical  sprays   have  played
havoc  with  bird  life,  destroying  vegetation   and  the  in-
sects  on  which  the  birds  feed.    Monkeys  and  deer  have
also  been  affected.    The  one  breed  of  animal  which  has
thrived  on  the  war  is  rats.    Rats  the  size  of  cats  can
be  seen  any  night  in  the  more  squalid  streets  of  Saigon.
These  rodents carry  a  flea  which  transmits  the  bubonic
plague,  the  'black  death'  that  scourged   Europe  in  the
Middle  Ages."
—Reuters  from  Saigon  in  the  Baltimore  Sun  Jan.  15.
* This  brought  to  400  the  number of  our  own  troops  killed
by  U.S.  bomb  and  shell-fire,  otherwise  so  surgically   precise
in  avoiding   civilians.
in   a   dispatch   published   in   many   Sunday   papers   Jan.   15:
"Burning   homes,   crying  children,  frightened   women,   devas-
tated  fields,  long  lines  of  slowly  moving  refugees."     He  said
it  "brought  back  memories  of  the  resettlement   of   thousands
of   peasants   during  the   era  of   the   late  Ngo   Dinh  Diem."
That,  too,  was  supposed  to  "pacify"   the  countryside.     The
refugees   were  herded   into   camps  without   latrines  or   water.
"On   arriving   at  the  camp,"  Reuters   reported   (Wash.   Post,
Jan.  -15),  "a   few  of  the   peasants   spat   in   disgust   but   most
were  glad  to  escape  the  bombs  and  the  defoliation   chemicals
sprayed    from   the   air."      An   American    official    commented
complacently,    "They  don't  love  us  but  their  attitude  is  im-
proving."    As  Lyndon  Johnson  said  in  his  State  of  the  Union
message,   "They  know  that  it  is  possible   for  them   to  choose
their   own   national   destinies—without   coercion."
Holiday  Gift  Subscription   Rates  Still  In  Effect:  2  for  $9;  3  for  $13;   4  for  $17;   5  for  $20
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)
Street   ..................................
Pifv
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)    Name   .......................
QtvOAt
Citv
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
Zin                State .....
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement  wished   D
1/23/67
Fifties
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except  in   August,   the   last   week   m   December   and   the
first  week   in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington    D.  C.    An   independent   weekly   Published  and  edited
by   I    F    Stone-   Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the   U.S.;    $6   m   Canada:    $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED