I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jul31.pdf

============================================================

Ben Bagdikian  on Land  Reform  in  Mississippi,  P. 3
A  Cry  It  Would  Be  Best  Not  To  Ignore
"What  are   they   saying?    Guys  were  saying   I'd  rather
die  here  than  get  it  in  Vietnam.  They  feel  they  have  more
to  gain  by dying  here."
—David  Hardy,   a  Negro  reporter   for  the  Plainfield,    N.J.,
Courier-News,  interviewed—on  emerging  from   the  riot  area
of   that  city—by   Mike  Pappas,   CBS  News,  AM,  July   17.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,  NO.  25
JULY  31,  1967WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Second  Secession  and  Second  Civil War?
"It   is  as  if  a  flight  of  bombers   had   passed  over  Detroit,"
said   a  TV   reporter   on   the   CBS  11   p.m.   news   last   night,
describing  the   smoke  and  flame  that   billowed   up   from   no
less  than  seven  different  areas  of  our  No.   1  industrial  center.
If  I  were  religious  in  any  conventional  sense,  I  would  see  the
hand  of  God  in  the  spreading  devastation  of  our  cities,  exact-
ing  retribution  for  the  mindless  cruelty  with  which  our  bomb-
ers  day  after  day  have  been  setting  the  cities  and  villages  of
Vietnam  ablaze.   Suddenly  the  guerrilla  warfare  we  have  tried
to  suppress  by mass destruction abroad  has  made  its  appearance
at  home;  the  asphalt  jungle  of  metaphor  has  taken  on  a  new
dimension  of  reality;  guerrilla  snipers  appear  on  the   rooftops
who  are  as  elusive  as  their  counterparts  in  the  underbrush  of
Southeast  Asia.   It  is  to  Ft.  Bragg,  home  of  the  Green   Berets,
and  the  "Screaming  Eagles"   of  the   101st   Airborne   that  the
President  turned  at  midnight  when  Detroit  asked  for   Federal
troops.   The  Special  Forces  we  have  trained  in  the  belief  that
they  could  provide  a  military solution  to  the  revolt  abroad  of
what  Gunnar  Myrdal  has  called  the  "under-class"   now  have
work   to  do  at  home.    The  tanks  of  colonial   war  appear   in
our   streets   and   the   helicopters   in   our   skies.    We   reap   the
whirlwind;  the  bitter  taste  in  our  mouth   is  the  taste  of  our
own  sins.  The  bill  for  racial  humiliation  has  come   due.
Not   Marx  But  Merchandising
In  the  ghettoes  and  the  barrios  the  striking  change  is  that
where  the  people  once  feared  the  cops,  the  cops  now  fear  the
people.   The  mob  has  clashed  with  the  man  in  uniform  and
discovered  his   impotence.    The   looters   carry  off  their  booty
under  his  very  eyes.   "We   arrest  ten  guys,"  said  one  weary
police  sergeant  in  Detroit,   "and  while  we  are  taking  them  to
jail,   100  others   join   in   the   rioting."    The   sheer   power   of
numbers  makes  itself  felt.   This  is  the  real  breakdown  of  law
and   order,   the   appearance   of   anarchy,   the   eruption   of   a
human   volcano.    What   is  thrown   up   from   below   is  very
different  from  what  any  radical  or  intellectual  imagined.    "We
are   now   dealing,"   Congressman   Conyers   told   a  TV   inter-
viewer   last  night,  "with  a  part   of  the  population   we  have
known  only  in  statistics.   They  do  not  relate  to  us."    This,
from   the   ablest   and   most   radical   Negro   representative   in
Congress,  was  quite  a  confession.   No  abstract  issue,  not  even
the  war  on  which  Conyers  has  tried  to  rouse  them,   brought
these  mobs  into  the  streets.    The  carnival  atmosphere  which
so appalled  observers  in  Newark  and  Detroit  and  East  Harlem
was  not  the  reflection  of  any  ideology,  racist  or  political.   This
was  a  mob  joyful  with  the  chance  to  loot,  as  exuberant  and
mindless  as  any  mob  in  an  Asian  or  African  bazaar,  at  one
moment   friendly   and   the   next   bloodthirsty.    The   agitation
which  had  mobilized  them  was  the  steady  indoctrination  of
advertisement   in   the   good   things   of   life   just   beyond  their
reach.   The  commercials   had  a  lot  more  to  do  with  this  than
Stokeley  Carmichael.  Not  Marx  but  merchandising  bears  fruit
in  this insurrection.
Black  Militants  on  White  Payrolls
The  Newark  Black  Power  conference,  like  any  other  gather-
ing  of  ideologists,  was  an  attempt  to  ride  and  rationalize  the
whirlwind.   But  there  was  a  big  gap  between  even  the  most
far-out  Black  Nationalist  raising  the  ante  of  demagoguery  in
Newark's   finest   air-conditioned  hotel   and  the  mob  in   those
shattered   streets  into  which  so   few   of   these  self-appointed
spokesmen—many  of  them  on  white  payrolls—ventured.   The
revolt  is  not   simply  racist.   In  Detroit   whites  joined  blacks
in  looting.   Nor  was  it  simply  a  class  phenomena;  many  well-
to-do   people   in   good   cars  turned   up   to   "shop."    At   the
Newark   conference  any  "soul   brother"   from  the  most   reac-
tionary  press   was  welcome  while  white   reporters  who   have
tried   sympathetically to  interpret   the  Negro's  struggle   were
barred  or  beaten.   But  in  the  streets  the  pattern  was  not purely
racist.   "Look  at  him,"  one  Negro  cried  out  to  a  newsman  in
Detroit,  pointing  derisively at  the  portly  Negro  Congressman
Diggs.   "He  ain't  never  been  hungry."   Even  Conyers,  a  very
different  breed  from  Diggs,  only  got  rocks  in  return  when  in
his  effort   to  make  peace  he  tried  to  tell  the  crowd,  "We're
with  you."   These  are  people  who,  in  a  real  sense,  had  never
heard  of  politics,  conventional  or  radical.   The  human  depths
had  been  churned  up,  not  just  within  society  but  within  each
participating individual.
This,  in  the  seventh  of  our  successive  hot  summers,  is  the
black  spiral  cloud  of  an  oncoming  tornado  that  is  beginning
to  tear  our  country  apart.   Two  years  after  Watts  there  is  still
no  sign  that  the  country  is  awake  to  the  proportions  of  the
challenge.     After   Watts   even   an   investigating   committee
headed  by  a  man  as  far  to  the  right  as  John  McCone  said  a
social  revolution was  necessary to  avoid  the  explosion  brewing.
But  on  Capitol  Hill  one  can  hear  the  same  comforting  self-
delusions  that  have  blinded  other  societies  and  ruling  strata
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  31, 1967
A  Damning Documentary  Gathered From  Conventional  Press  Sources
Widening Gap Between What Our Leaders Say and The Truth About the War
"Gen.   Westmoreland  at  a  White  House   press  conference
spoke   of   'tremendous   progress'   in   military   operations.    He
labelled   reports   that   the   war   is  a   stalemate  as   'completely
unrealistic.'    President   Johnson   commented:    'We   are   gen-
erally  pleased  with  the  progress  we  have  made  militarily.'  .  .  .
But  in  Saigon  one  could  have  heard  recently  another  exchange
between  a  reporter  and  a  top  U.S.  official  who  in  the  past  has
been  regularly  hopeful  on  the  war.
"Reporter:   How  would  you  sum  up  the  outlook  for  ending
the  war?
"Official:    Well,  it's  bleak.   Very  bleak.
"Reporter:    Wasn't  this  the   time  we  were   looking   for   a
breakthrough ?
"Official:   Yes,  but  there's  no  sign  of  it  coming.
"Reporter:   Do  you think  our  Generals have  underestimated
the  determination of  the  North  Vietnamese?
"Official:   Haven't  they  always?"
-^John  Dillin (Saigon):  Christian  Science  Monitor, July  17.
*       *       *
"He  (McNamara)   pointed   to ....  a  'very  substantial  im-
provement'   in   the   economy,  which,  is  no   longer   in   danger
of  being  overrun  by  inflation."
—At  White  House  briefing,  Washington  Post, July  13.
"Saigon,  July  13  (AP)—Rising  food  prices  have  given  the
South  Vietnamese economy  'quite  a  jolt'  in  the  last  two  weeks,
an   economic  source  said   today.   Some  prices   have  gone   up
almost  30  percent while overall  prices  are  up  5  percent."
—Same  paper,  next   day.
*        *       *
"Mr.   McNamara   found   'most   dramatic  progress'   also   in
the  opening  of  ever  larger  sections  of  major  roads  for  both
military  and  civilian   traffic."
—Max  Frankcl  at  the  White  House,  N.Y.  Times,  July  13.
"The   actual  situation, according  to  other  American military
and  civilian  officials  is  less  hopeful   .  .  .  1st,  the   classifications
["secure",  "marginal"  and "closed"]  are highly  subjective .  . .
Sometimes  the  assessments  are  contradicted.   A  20-mile  stretch
of  Highway  1  northwest  of  Danang,  for  example,  is  labelled
'secure'  but  July   3  a  Vietnamese   army  convoy  was  smashed
in  a  Vietcong  ambush  there;  20  trucks were  destroyed  and  14
others   damaged.    Second,   the  military  figures   apply   only  to
military   travel,   in   which  weapons   are   always  carried   .   .   .
American   civilian    officials   are   discouraged   from    travelling
anywhere   outside   Saigon   by   road,   except   to   Bienhoa,   just
north  of  the  capital.and  the  site  of  an  American  base.   Third,
the  military  flatly   refuses   to  classify   any  road   in  the  country
as   safe   at  night—not   even   the   4-lane,   15-mile   expressway
that  links  Saigon  with  Bienhoa  .  .  .  In  most  of  the  country
.  .  .  traffic  disappears  from  the  roads  about  6  p.m.    Fourth,
the  military  statistics  cover  only ...  a  fraction  of  the national
total  .  .  .  Excluded  are  other  important arteries .  .  .  The  high-
ways   omitted   from   the   tabulations  are   for   the   most   part
impassible  to  all  military   traffic."
—R.  W.  Apple,  Jr.,  from  Saigon, same  paper,  same  day.
*       *       *
"During  two  days  of  field  trips,  Mr.  McNamara   was  given
When  You  Can't  Trust   Your  Main  Ally
"The   suggestion   (by   McNamara)  that  Vietnamese
nationals  be  used  in  such  jobs  as  transport  and  ship
unloading  (to  release  Americans  for  combat)  also  was
questioned.    'The   black   market  is   full   of   U.S.    goods
now,'  one  source  said.  'All  we  need  is  for  81-mm  mortar
ammunition  to  get  fed  into  the  system   as  well."
—AP  from  Saigon in  Baltimore  Sun,  July  17.
reports  ranging  from  optimistic  to  glowing  by  U.S.  field  and
Corps   Commanders."
—Associated  Press  from  Saigon  in  New  York  Times,  July  11.
"The    majority   of   American  troops   in  Vietnam   are   now
fighting  Viet   Cong  guerrillas  rather  than   major   Communist
units   .  .  .  American  commanders  are   finding   .  .  .  that  the
Vietnamese   seem  happy  to  leave  the  work   to  the  Americans.
U.S.    infantry   companies  spent   3   arduous   days   and   nights
searching   out   a  VC   force   in   a  Delta  district.   The   district
chief  then  asked  that  a  U.S.  company  be  sent  south  to  set  up
ambush   positions   against  another   VC   force.    An   American
adviser   asked   the   district  chief,  'What   about  your  own   two
Popular   Force  companies,  who  have  been   sitting  around  here
doing   nothing   for   two   weeks?'    The   district  chief    replied,
They  are  tired.   Let  the  Americans  do  it.' ...  Of  the  25
American   ground   units  of   regimental   or   brigade   size  now
deployed   in  Vietnam,   14  are  committed   to  the  guerrilla  war
.   .  .  they  seldom   engage   in  headline-making  battles.   These
American   'pacification'   units  are   suffering  a   steady   toll   of
casualties.   A  brigade of  the  US  Army's  9th  Division  operating
in  the  northern   Mekong  Delta  has  had   150  men  killed  and
1,000   others  wounded   since  February ...  At  least  half  the
population   is  under   Communist   control,   yielding   taxes   and
young  men  to  the  cause."
—AP  from  Saigon in  Baltimore Sun,  July  22.
*       *       *
"South  Vietnamese  Chief  of  State  Nguyen  Van  Thieu  today
ruled  out  a  general  mobilization  of  South  Vietnamese   because
of  equipment  and  training  problems.    He  said  that  what  was
needed  was  more  American  troops.
—Washington  Post,  July  13.
"Saigon   (Chicago   Daily  News  Service)—South  Vietnam's
monthly  draft  calls  are  now  lower  than  the  number   of   U.S.
casualties  per  month   in  Vietnam.   Over   the  last  six   months
the  U.S.   has  poured   almost  twice  as  many  additional  troops
into  this  war  as South  Vietnam  has  drafted  or  enlisted  .  .  .
"Whenever  the  subject  comes  up,  U.S.  officials  rush  in with
explanations  that  Vietnam  is  desperately  short  of   manpower
.   .   .  'They've  hit   the   bottom   of   the   manpower  barrel'   has
become  a  cliche  .  .  .  But  in  Saigon  and   in  any  of  the   larger
cities  there  are  more  young  men  visible  in  ponited-toe  shoes
and  hippie  haircuts than  in  combat  boots  and  fatigues.  There
are   battalions —  literally   battalions —  of   able-bodied  pimps,
black   market   money   changers,   pornography   peddlers   and
motor  scooter  cowboys  roaming  the  streets."
—Raymond  R.  Coffcy    in  New  York  Post,  July   IS.
And  what's the  "tremendous  progress"  in  the  coming elec-
tions,  Secretary  McNamara, when  under  pressure  from  the
military,   the  Constituent  Assembly  was   forced  to   veto   a
peace  candidate and  approve  the  Thieu-Ky  ticket?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  31, 1967
A  Noted  Saturday  Evening  Post  Writer  Takes  Up  A  Proposal  In  Our Last  Issue
A  Forgotten  New   Deal  Experiment  in  Land  Reform  in  Mississippi
By  Ben  H.  Bagdikian
The  Diaspora  of  the  rural  American,  especially  the  Southern
Negro,   to   the   cities   is  considered   an   unalterable   tide   that,
despite  the  catastrophe  of  ghetto  living,  is  a  necessary  step  in
our  social evolution.
It  isn't.    Most   farm  people  now  in  the  ghetto   prefer   the
country  if  they  don't  have  to  starve.  If  public  money  spent  in
the  city  to  overcome  the  traumas  of  the  ghetto—welfare,  law
enforcement  and  criminal  procedures,  etc.—were  spent  on  the
family  while  still  in  its  native  rural  land  the  result  would  be
a  sounder society.
Good  Results  Visible  30  Years  Later
Though  it  isn't  a  tactful  term  to  use,  land  reform  is  needed
in  American rural  areas,  especially in  places  like the  Mississippi
Delta.    What   most   Americans  have   forgotten    is   that   such
reform   was   once   practiced   in   its  classical  non-violent  form
only  30  years  ago  and  with   visibly  good  results  a   generation
later,
In  rural  Mississippi  the  sight  of  the  unpainted  leaning  shack
subconsciously  brings   to  mind,  "Negro"  and  of  the   painted
clapboard   farmhouse  with  awnings,   "white".   This   is  almost
completely    accurate—except   in   an   area   of   Holmes   County
which  has  the  best  organized  Negro  rural   community   in  the
state.    Its   backbone   is   over    100   independent,    land-owning
Negro  farm   families  who  are  the  nucleus  not  only  for  civil
rights  and  educational  reform   but  of  economic    development.
Their  families  for  the  most  part  are  solid,  their  children  well
educated,  their  homes  hopeful   places   for  the  young  to   grow
in.   Their  outlook  is  as  secure  and  full  as  a  Negro  can  expect
in   the   state   of   Mississippi.    The   cost   to   government?    An
average   of  $6,200  per  farm,  long  since  paid  off.
In   1944,   former   Rep.  Harold  Cooley,  not  a  wild  Populist,
studied  the  effect  of  such  programs.   He  reported  that  in   1940
the   Farm    Security   Administration,    predecessor    to    Farmers
Home   Administration,   bought   up   9,350    acres   of   land    in
Mileston,   Mississippi  (Holmes  County),  divided  it  into  106
farms,   70  of   them   transferred   to  individuals  and   36  to  co-
operatives,  all  for  formerly  landless  tenant  farmers.   The   land
and  farm  equipment  was  paid  for  by a  40-year  3 per  cent  loan.
Cooley's   conclusion   2i/
2
  years  later   was,   "As   an  example   of
the  progress   that  families  on  this  project  are  making,   it  will
be  noted   that  principal   repayments   exceed   the  amount    due."
Today,  23  years  after  that  report,  these  former   sharecroppers
and  their  sons  are  independent,  productive  farmers  who   form
the  heart  of  the  most  vigorous  rural  community  in  their  state.
The  Holmes  County  project  was  only  one  of  many   started
by  the  New  Deal.   It  began   in   1935   with   the  Resettlement
Administration  which,   under   executive   order   from   Franklin
Roosevelt,   bought  up  large  plantations   and  parcels  that   were
on  the  market  or  defaulting  on  taxes,  and  redistributed  them.
Ten   thousand   families  were   resettled   in   152  projects,   some
with  help  to  build  community  facilities.   In  1937   Resettlement
became  Farm  Security,  and  in  1946,   FHA.
More   important   than   the   change   in   name   is  the  dreary
history  of  these  projects.    First,   conservatives  forced   the  gov-
ernment  to  stop   buying   and  redistributing   the  land   directly.
Instead,   the  poor   farmer  had   to  buy  the   land   himself—in
something   less  than  an  equal   bargaining  position  with   local
landlords.   Second,  direct  government   loans  were  replaced   by
government  guarantees  of  private  loans.    In  the  Deep  South
this  meant  that  the  Negro,  unrepresented  on  local  agricultural
committees   that   control   FHA    loan   guarantees,    seldom   was
approved.    If  here  and  there  the  Negro  received   a  grant   he
then  had  to  arrange  loans  from  white  banks,  the  same  political
forces   that  fought   his  civil  rights   and  were  in  no  mood  to
help  him  gain  economic   independence.
The   G.O.P.  Ended  It
World  War  II  damped  down  New  Deal  land  reform.   After
the  war,   Republican   congressional  control   kept   the   program
at  an  almost  meaningless  level  of  $15,000,000  (the  need  had
been  calculated  at  a  minimum  of  $500,000,000).   The  Eisen-
hower   years  spread   anaesthesia  over   rural   as  well   as   urban
areas.   In  1961  FHA   loans  began  to  climb  again  and  in fiscal
1966  reached  $233,000,000.
But  this  still  does  not  reach  significant  numbers  of  Southern
Negroes.   They  cannot  penetrate  white  supremacist  state   gov-
ernments  and  more  effective  measures  are  killed  by  the   South-
ern-cum-big-agricultural   bloc.    When   the   Economic   Oppor-
tunity   Act   was   originally    framed    it   included    a   fund    for
non-profit  corporations  that  could  buy  arable  land  on  the  open
market  and   sell   it   on   favorable  terms   to   formerly  landless
tenant  farmers,  at  less  than  market  price,  if  necessary.   It  was
one  of   the  first  items  knocked   out   of   the   bill  by  the   anti-
poverty-program  Southern  bloc.
Even  programs  to  help  rural  white  Appalachia   suffered   the
same   fate.    A   month   before   his   death,   President    Kennedy
directed  FHA   to  grant  special  loans  to  make  the  worst  rural
homes   of   eastern   Kentucky   weather-proof    and   safe.    More
than  10,000  applications  were  received,  2,700  approved   (aver-
age  cost,   $852   each),   but  a  year  later  the  program   was  ter-
minated  with  6,000  valid  applications  and  unfilled.
The  cost  of  creating  a  small  viable family  farm  for  presently
landless  tenants  is  about  $18,000  each,  with  the   cost   in  the
Deep  South   closer  to  $10,000.   This   would   be  with  40-year
loans   at  low   interest.   Welfare   payments   in   the  ghetto  are
outright  grants  whose  usual   dividend  is  dependency,   frustra-
tion,   degrading   game-playing  with  the  authorities,  and   in  a
few  years  they  consume  more  public  money  than  the   cost  of
keeping   the  same  family  in  its  original  environment  but  in  a
new  home  with  a  brighter   future.    The   $500,000,000   cost
years   ago   was   considered   visionary.    Most   big   city   mayors
would   weep   in   gratitude   if   they   could    solve   their   ghetto
problems  for  $5  billion.
The   odds   of   such   land   reform    are   small.     Agricultural
programs    benefit   large    operators,    not    small.     Agricultural
economists  concentrate  on  efficiency  with  size.   But  they  usually
ignore   gains   in   social   policy   that   come   from   providing   a
satisfactory  life  for  the  desperate  farm  worker   forced   against
his   better   judgment   into   the  ghetto,   and   from   the   overall
benefit  of  diluting  the  growing   oligopoly   of  big  agricultural
operators   who   are  not  very  far  from   direct   control   of   agri-
cultural  policy  and  consumer    economics.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  31,1967
The  Next  Step  Could  Be  From  Race  Riot  to  Race  War
(Continued  from  Page  One)
on  the  eve  of  upheavals.   To  listen  to  the  House  debate  over
the  anti-riot  bill  was  to  believe that  Stokeley  Carmichael  was
a   Black  Batman  who   need   only  be  shot  down   to  end   the
trouble;   it  is  as  if  unconsciously   the   House  was  seeing   the
crisis  in  terms  of  TV  and  newspaper  comic strips  about wicked
Supermen.   To  hear  the  insipid  and  inhuman  jokes  next  day
in  the  debate  which  defeated  the  rat-control  bill  was  to  see
again  how  shallow  was  the  reservoir  of  sympathy  and  under-
standing  on  which  we  can  draw.   It  was  appalling   to  hear
young Herman  Talmadge  of  Georgia,  by no  means  a benighted
race-baiter,  tell  the  Senate  yesterday,  "Lest  there  be  any  mis-
understanding,  however,  I  do  submit  that  I  do  know  where
blame  should   not   [his   emphasis]   be  blamed.    And   that  is,
on   poverty,  poor   housing   or   unemployment."    This   is  the
classic  voice  of  social  bankruptcy,  the  authentic  and   familiar
blindness.
The  Negro's  Strategic   Power
It  is  time  fully  to  recognize  the  Negro's  powerful  position.
The  core  of  the  cities  have  become  Negro  and  the  destruction
in  the  cities  hits  at  those  urban  property  values  on  which  so
much  of  our  basic  financial   institutions  rest,  particularly  the
insurance  companies  and  mutual  savings  banks.   The   city  is
the   inner  nerve  ganglion   of   our   society.   The   Negro  can
destroy  it.   A  handful  of  snipers  can  do  in  the  ghetto  what  a
handful   of  guerrillas  can  do  in  the  countryside.   The   anger
that  might  turn  against the  militant  few  as  the  pitiful  belong-
ings   of   the   poor   themselves  go   up   in   arson  turns   instead
against  the  occupying power  when  incoming  police  or  troops,
in  their  search  for  that  hard-to-get  handful,  kill  the  innocent
and  mobilize  the  whole community behind  the  guerrillas.  This
is  what  happened   in  Newark   and   Plainfield   and   it   is  this
polarization  which  most  needs  to  be  understood  and  avoided
if   order  is  to  be  restored.   The  best  results,  it  is  already clear,
are  obtained  when  police  restraint and  troop  withdrawal make
it  possible  for  the  saner  elements  of  the  community  in  revolt
to  take  over  the  task  of  calming  the  mob.
A  race  is  on,  and  the  outcome  will  determine  the  future  of
our  beloved  country.  On  the  one  side  are  the  forces  of  reason
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)
Name  ...................................
Street   .................................
City   ....................................
For  the   enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street    .................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Are.,
Washington,  D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed  $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
7in.. ..........      State.
7/31/67
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  Q
and   compassion,   prepared   to   understand   the   agony  of   the
Negro  and  the other  "colored" components  of  our white-domi-
nated  society.   On   the  other  side  are  the  forces  of  fear  and
hate  which  have  been  building  up  in  the  white  community,
so  far   expressed  only  privately.  This  can  easily  turn  orgies
of   ghetto   self-destruction  and   looting   into   real   race   war
between  white  and  black.   The  unwillingness  of  Congress  to
enact  gun   control   is  of   terrible  significance.   As   the   social
fabric   frays,   more   and   more  households   are  stocking  arms,
like  suspicious nations  in  the  tense  wider  world.   "We   gonna
burn  America  down,"  a  Negro'  rioter  cried  on  TV  last  night.
It's  not  going  to  let  itself  be  burned  down.   The  Negro  need
to   hate   after   so  many  years   of   oppression   has   evoked   a
counter-hate.   The   secessionist  and  separatist  slogans  of   that
Newark  conference,  where  moderates  were  afraid  to  be  mod-
erate,  can bring  us  to  a  second  civil  war.
Dick  Gregory's   Heretical  Insight
The    Newark    program    of   partition,    violence   and    race
hatred  can  destroy  the  moderates  on  both  sides  and  burn  the
bridges  to  reconciliation.  We  cannot  fight  apartheid  in  South
Africa  and  advocate  it  in  the  United  States.   We  cannot  fight
white  racism  and  applaud   black  racism.   Perhaps   the  wisest
words  spoken  at  Newark   came  from  Dick  Gregory   after  the
conference   was  over  when  he   said,  "This   is  what  happens
in  a  revolution.   The  oppressed   have  assumed  the  personality
of  the  oppressors."   But  there  is  no  way  out,  except  to  learn
to  live  together.   The  other  way lies  Negro  suicide and  mutual
destruction.   You   need   only  look  around   at  the   realities   of
the world—Nigeria's  tribal  civil  war,  for  example—to  see-that
America's  pluralism  and  social  conscience  makes  the  fight  for
its  preservation  in  a  peaceful  solution  a  duty  not  only  to  our
selves  but  to  a  world  poisoned  by  fratricidal  irrationality.  For
the   black   man,   too,   America   offers   something   better   than
Africa.    Out   of   this  turmoil   let   us  together   build   a   better
America,  at  last  fulfilling   the  great  egalitarian  vision  of   its
founders.   The  first,  the  essential  step,  must  be  to  end  that
insane  and  costly  war  in  Vietnam  before  it  engulfs  us  in  the
final  cataclysm  of  war  with   China.
9  a.m.,   July   25.
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
The  Weekly  Is Not  Published  in August  -    Next  Issue  Dated  Sept.  4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED