I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967apr03.pdf

============================================================

One  Way  to Put  A  Spoke  in  the  CIA's   Wheel,  P.  2
So  The  Vietcong  Are  Too  Strong  For  Us  In  Most  of  Rural  South  Vietnam
"The    elections  beginning  April  2  will  take  place  in  only     lets,   because  the   threat   of   Vietcong  interference   is   too
a  third  of  the  country's  villages  and  a  fourth  of  its  ham-     great elsewhere."
—"U.S.  Aides  Shifting   View  on  Pacifying    Vietnam   Villages"—R.  W.  Apple,  Jr.,  from  Saigon:  N.  Y.  Times  March  25.
Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,   NO.   13
APRIL   3,   1967
»ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Dove  That  Turned  Out  To  Be  Frozen  Vulture
Writing  at  press  time,  before  any  reply  from  Hanoi,   it  is
difficult  to  understand  U  Thant's  new  revision  of  his   3-point
peace   proposal   nor   why  he  chose  this  moment  to   make   it
public.     The   original  called  for   a  cessation  of   bombing  as
the  first  step;  the  revised plan,  for  a  general  stand-still.  •This
would  mean  that  the  American  bombing  forced  the  North
to  strain  its  relations  with  the  Liberation  Front  by  ordering  a
cease-fire   in   the   South.     It   would  also  mean   the   threat  of
renewed   bombardment   during   negotiations.     This   is   the
price,  and  these  are  the  conditions,  to  which  the  North  has
always  objected.    In   its  view,  as  U  Thant  has  himself  ex-
plained,  the  only  reciprocity  for  suspension  of  bombing  the
North  would  be  a  suspension  of  bombing  the  United  States—
if  the  North  were  able  to  retaliate  as  a  major  power  would.
Under  the  circumstances,  it  sees  this  as  big  power   blackmail
and  it  refuses  to  pay  the  price.
Mow  Rusk  Revised  U  Thant
The  tricky  use  to  which  the  U.S.  at  once  put  the  new  U
Thant  plan  was  evident  in  the  press  conference  summoned  a
few  hours .later  by  Secretary  of  State  Rusk.    U  Thant  called
for  a  cease-fire without  supervision; he  felt  supervision  would
be  impractical.    His  second  step  called  for  preliminary  talks
to  reach  an  agreement  "on  the  modalities  for  the  reconvening
of  the  Geneva  conference,  with  the  sole  purpose  [our  italics]
of  returning  to  the  essentials  of  that  agreement."     The  U.S.
note   of   "acceptance"  proposed   on  the   contrary  preliminary
talks  to  see  "if  an  effective    cessation  of  hostilities,  as  the   first
element   in  the   3-point  proposal,   could  be  promptly  negoti-
ated."   [Our   italics.]   This  means  negotiations  on  the  terms
of  a  cease-fire   before   the  bombing  has  stopped  and   a  cessa-
tion  of  bombing  only  on  conditions  satisfactory  to  the  U.S.
This  brings  us  straight  back  to  Johnson's  Feb.  2  letter  to  Ho,
demanding   assurances  in   advance   of   any  bomb   suspension.
Even  if  Hanoi  conceivably  accepted  U  Thant's  new  proposals,
it   is  inconceivable   that   it  would   accept  Rusk's   revision  of
them.    Rusk  made  sure  Hanoi  would  say  no.
The  reader  may  ask,  "Didn't  Hanoi  say  no  in  a  broadcast
the  day before?"    U  Thant  didn't  think  so.   Neither  did  the
State   Department's   spokesman   at   his   noon   briefing  before
Rusk  met  the  press.     McCloskey,  when  asked  if  the  Hanoi
broadcast  constituted  a  rejection,  declined   so  to  characterize
it.    Rusk  was  fuzzy  on  the  point.     Curiously,  the  text  was
not  in  the   official   U.S.  monitoring  service  that  afternoon,  a
day  after   the  broadcast.    This  service  often  withholds   texts
What  the  South  Vietnamese  Really  Want
"New     York   (AP)—A   survey   of   public  opinion   in
South  Vietnam  from  a  population sampling the  pollsters
admit  had  to  be  sharply  restricted,  reported  yesterday
that   81%   of   those   questioned  want   peace  above  all
else.    Only   4%   listed   victory   over  communism,  2%
reunification  of  north  and  south,  and  45% independence
as   aims  preferable  to   a   quick   peace.   The   poll   was
organized   by   the   Opinion   Research   Corporation   of
Princeton  and  conducted by  the  Center  for  Vietnamese
Studies  in  Saigon,  for  the  Columbia  Broadcasting  Sys-
tem  which  televised  them  last  night.   CBS  said  it  was
the   first   independent  opinion   survey   ever   taken   in
South  Vietnam  .  .  .  Organizers  of  the  survey  said  it
was  held  only  among  persons  living  in  secured  areas
controlled  by  the  allies  .  .  ,  Interviewers,  the  organ-
izers  said,  also  took  into  account  reluctance  of  those
questioned   to   get    themselves   in   trouble   with   the
authorities."
—York,  Pa.  Gazette & Daily, March  S2.
that  run  counter  to  U.S.  propaganda   purposes.
We  see here  the  same  tactic as Johnson's  letter  which  upped
the   ante—as   Robert  Kennedy   immediately  noted—to   make
rejection  certain.    Clayton  Fritchie  in  a  recent  column  asked
about  the  letter's  timing.    There  is  something  fishy  about  the
date.    It  is  dated  Feb.  2  but  Ho  says  he  received  it  Feb.  10.
Pope  Paul's  appeal  to  Johnson  and  Ho  for  an  extended  truce
was  sent  to  Johnson  Feb.  7.    The  Johnson  letter  made  it  pos-
sible  for  U.S.  diplomats  to  inform  His  Holiness   Feb.  8  that
we were making "intensive  efforts"  toward  that  end.    It  served
for  similar  assurances  to  buttress  Harold  Wilson  in  his  talks
with  Kosygin  Feb.  8  to  13,  and  enabled  Wilson  to  tell  the
Commons   Feb.   14  that   "one   small  move"   would  have  set
talks  in  motion.    Ho's  broadcast  March  21  and  Johnson's  re-
lease  of  his  text  in  reply  disclosed  how  tricky  was  Johnson's
real  offer.    Under  its  terms  Ho  would  have  had  to  stop  send-
ing  supplies  to  his  comrades-in-arms,  though  we—while  not
"augmenting"  the  number  of  U.S.  troops—would  still  be  free
to  supply  our  own.
Johnson  has  again  succeeded  in  getting  credit for  extending
an  olive  branch,  while  making  certain  that  it  would  be  unac-
ceptable.   Mansfield,  in  terming  Johnson's  crafty  welcome  to
U  Thant's  proposal   an  "unqualified"   acceptance  and   calling
on  all  war  critics  to  rally behind him,  only  shows  how  gullible
the  best  Senators  are  in  Johnson's  supermarket.    This   fresh-
killed  dove  is  only  quick-frozen  vulture.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  3,1967
Foundations   Would  Be  Afraid  to  Act  As  "Covers"  If  They  Could  Be  Sued  For  It
Stephen Spender  — One  of the Deceived  — Would Make CIA  Lies  Actionable
We  hope  some   member   of   Congress   concerned   with   the
CIA   scandal   will   act   on   the   proposal    made   by   Stephen
Spender   in  a  letter   to  the  New   York   Times   June   27.    He
suggests  that  people  who  had  been  assured  that  the  organiza-
tions  for  which  they  worked  were  not  the  recipients  of  CIA
or  other  secret  funds  be  given  the  right  to  sue  those  who  lied
to  them,  and  the  foundations  which  acted  as  covers   for   the
CIA.    The  distinguished  British poet  writes from  bitter  experi-
ence.    For  years,  as  an  editor  of  Encounter   and  a   travelling
lecturer   for   the   Congress  of   Cultural   Freedom   which   sup-
ported   it,  he   denied   in  good  faith  that   these  were  secretly
financed  by  the  CIA  only  to  learn  in  the  end  that  the  assur-
ances  given   him   by  his   American  collaborators   were   false.
Better  Than  Occasional  "Leaks"
A  law  allowing  suit  for  damages  to  reputation  in  such  cases
would   serve   a  double   purpose.     It   would   give  individuals
some  protection   against   deception.     And   the   trial  of   such
suits  would   make  it  possible  to  put   the   spotlight   on   these
arrangements  far  more  thoroughly  than  can  be  done  in  occa-
sional  journalistic  exposes   based   on  random   leaks  from   the
disenchanted.    AH kinds  of  plans  are  afoot  to  substitute  open
foundation   or   other   support   for   CIA   funds.      "But   since
there  has  been   deception  in  the  past,"  Mr.  Spender  writes,
"what  guarantee  is  there  that  the  deception  will  not  merely
become  more  guileful,  and  individuals will  be  deceived   into
playing  the  role  of  deceivers"—just  as  he  was?
The  Congress  of  Cultural  Freedom  was  taken  over  by  the
Ford   Foundation  last  year   after   Max   Frankel   in   the   New
York   Times   exposed   its  CIA   financing.   The   Congress   has
financed   a  whole  string  of  intellectual  magazines  in   French
(Preaves),   German   (Der  Monat),   Italian   (Tempi   Present!)
and  Spanish  (Cuadernos)   as well  as  Quest  in  Bombay.   These
provided   slick  outlets  for   U.S.   cold  war  propaganda,  and   a
Congressmen  Afraid  to  Appear  on  Campuses?
"A  Democratic National  Committee program to  bring
members  of  Congress  to  college  campuses  has  run  into
resistance   on  Capitol  Hill  because  a  number  of  Con-
gressmen  fear  such  appearances  .  .  .  The  'Congress  on
Campus'  program ...  is  motivated ...  by a  desire to
offset   the  hostility   .  .  .  toward  the  Johnson  Admin-
istration  .  .  .  One  Congressman,  who  asked  not  to  be
identified,    explained:     'I'm   going    to    have    enough
trouble  defending  the  Administration  position  on  Viet-
nam  when  I  run next  year.'  .  .  .  Another  Congressman,
who  also  asked  to  remain  anonymous,  said:   'The  war
is  unpopular enough  in  my  district  now.  The  last  thing
I  need  is  to  have  a  college  debate  reported  in  the  local
newspapers.   If   I  accepted  the  invitation,  I'd  have  to
defend  the  administration against  some  irrational argu-
ments.'   He  suggested  he  might  agree  to  appear  on  a
campus  located   somewhere   distant   from  his  congres-
sional   district   so   his   constituents    would   have   less
chance  of  knowing  what  transpired."
—P.  1 Story:  Robert  Walters,  Wash.  Star  March  24.
profitable  market  for  intellectuals  and  scholars.
Encounter  has  a new  angel.    The  others  presumably  will  go
on  being  financed  by  the  Ford  Foundation  for  the  Congress
of  Cultural  Freedom.     Frankly  we  don't  think  the  shift  from
CIA  to  Ford  makes  much  difference.    The  Ford   Foundation,
with  McGeorge Bundy at its head,  like the  Rockefeller  Founda-
tion,  which  Dean  Rusk  long  ran, are part  of  the  same  pompous
American  Establishment.    Rusk  took  his  Rest  and  Relaxation
in  the  Rockefeller  Foundation  in  between  his  two  stints in  the
State  Department.     Bundy  may  see  the   Ford   Foundation  as
his  own  stepping   stone  from  White  House  to  State.    These
stuffed   shirt   institutions   are  no  more   likely  to  finance  inde-
pendent   and  critical  writing  on  American  policy  in  Vietnam
or  Latin  America  than  would  the  CIA.
This  Letter  from  Vietnamese Students Was  Blacked  Out  by  The  U.S.  Press
"We  are  students   and  professors   in  the   universities  of
South   Vietnam   (Saigon,   Hue,   Dalat,   Can-Tho  and  Van-
Hanh)  and  we  thank  you  for  trying  to  stop  this  dreadful
war  in  our  country.   We  cannot  act  officially,  as  you  have
done,  because  the  government  does  not  permit  our univer-
sities   to   express   themselves   freely.    We   have  launched
petitions  and  appeals,  but  we  cannot  allow  our  names  to
be  published because  we  would be  arrested  and  imprisoned.
We  write  to  thank  you  and  to  exhort  you  to  continue.   We
beg  you  to  take  into  consideration  the  following   facts:
"(1)   In   the   South   Vietnamese   cities,   American  power
in  support  of  the  Ky  government  is  so  great  that  no  one
can  protest  the  war  without  risking  his  life  or  liberty;
"(2)   If  this  were  not  so,  millions  of  people  would  raise
their   voices.    The  Vietnamese   people  ardently   desire   the
end  of   the   war,  but  they  have  lost  hope.   They   are   not
Communists   but  if   the   war  does  not   end  soon   they   will
join   the   National   Liberation  Front   because   they   see   no
other  way  out;
"(3)   The  Americans  should  not   believe  they   are  pro-
tecting  the  South  Vietnamese  against  Communism.  We  are
persuaded  for  the  most   part  that  it  is  only  to  prepare  a
war  against  China  that  the   U.S.   desires  to  dominate  our
country;
"(4)   The  present   government  of   South  Vietnam  is  not
our  government  and  does  not  represent  our  people.   It  has
been  imposed  upon  us  by  the  U.S.  and  is  run  by  military
men  who  fought  for  France  against  the  Vietnamese  before
1954.   If  we  were  allowed  to  vote  freely,  this  government
could  not  last  a  single  day.   We  want  a  government  of  our
own,  so  we  can  solve  the   problems  of  Vietnam  ourselves
on  a  basis  of  national  fraternity:  negotiate  peace  with  the
National   Liberation  Front  and  North  Vietnam,  and  nego-
tiate  the  withdrawal of  American  troops  with  the  U.S.;
"(5)   Don't  believe  that  the  danger  of  a  Communist take-
over  justifies  continuation  of   the   war.   We  are  convinced
that  we  are  strong  enough  to  form  an  independent  govern-
ment.    But   it  is   for   us,  not   you,   to   make  the   decisions
because  it  is  our  lives  and  our  country  which  are  at  stake;
"(6)   We  endorse  the   [peace]   proposals  in  the   book  of
our  friend,  Thich  Nhat  Hanh,  "Vietnam:  Lotus  in  A  Sea  of
Fire,"  and  ask  that  you  help  us  put  them  into   effect."
—This   open  letter  from   70  South   Vietnamese    students
and   professors    to  the   U.S.  student   movement- was   trans-
mitted  through  the  Fellowship   of  Reconciliation.   It  was  of-
fered   to press, radio  and  TV  at  a  New  York  City  press  con-
ference  March  20  and  though  every  press  desk  to  which  the
FOR  spoke  expressed  interest, no  one appeared.   We  did  not
learn  of  this  extraordinary    blackout  until  we  saw  the, letter
in  Le  Monde,  March   23,  and  queried  the   FOR.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  3, 1967
The  Question  in  The  Arrest  of  Richard  Sobol,  A  Volunteer   Lawyer,  in  Louisiana
Will the New Attorney General Uphold Negro Rights to Counsel in The South?
We  have  been  favorably  impressed  with  the  debut  of  the
new  Attorney  General,  Ramsey  Clark,  and   look  forward   to
seeing  how  he  reacts  in  the  Richard  Sobol  case.    Sobol  is  one
of   a  handful   of   volunteers  who   have  gone   south   for   the
Lawyer's   Constitutional   Defense   Committee   to   provide   aid
to  Negroes  and   civil  rights  workers.     Every  effort   is  being
made  to  drive out  these  young  lawyers.   The  only  such  volun-
teer   in  Alabama  has  recently  been   forced   out   of   the  State.
Sobol—the   one   volunteer   working   in   Louisiana—has   been
arrested  on  charges  of  practicing  law  without  a  license.     A
counter-action  has  been  filed  in  the  Federal  courts  to  enjoin
the  State  prosecution.    The   Attorney  General   has  authority
to  intervene  under  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of   1964.     It   is  his
duty  to  do  so.
A  Typical  Scene  in  A  Mixed  School
At  stake  is  not  only  the  right  to  counsel,  but  whether   the
Justice  Department  will  lend  support  to  volunteer  counsel  who
go  south   to  see  that  government  orders  in  civil  rights   cases
are  implemented.     Sobol   is  a  member   of  the   U.S.   Supreme
Court   bar   and   an   associate  on   leave   from   the   Washington
firm  of  Arnold  &  Porter.     His  arrest  grew  out  of  a   Federal
court  order  to  desegregate   the  schools  in  Plaquemines  Parish,
the  stronghold   of  Leander  Perez.    A  Negro,  Gary  Duncan,
driving  home  past  the  desegregated   schoolyard,  saw  two  of
his  cousins  being  harassed  by  a  group  of  the  few  white  boys
who  still  remain  in  the  school.    He  picked  his  cousins  up  in
his   truck  and   rescued  them.     The   ringleader   of   the   white
boys  charged  that  Duncan  slapped  him  on  the  elbow.     Duncan
claimed  that  he  merely  took  him  by  the  elbow  and  told  him
to  go  home.    Duncan  was first  charged  with  cruelty  to  a juve-
nile.   When  Sobol  got  this  charge  quashed,  Duncan  was  con-
victed   of  simple  battery  and   sentenced   to  6  months   in  jail
and   a   $150    fine.    In   appealing   this,   Sobol   was   himself
locked   up.
Since  July,  1966,   Sobol  has  had  the  temerity  to  work  with
a  Negro  law  firm  in  New   Orleans.     The  newspapers   have
been   full,   even   in   that   supposedly   civilized   community,  of
sensational   stories   about   this   "mix-lawyer".     His   work   in
While  Negro  Churches  Burn,  FBI  'Takes Notes'
"The  bombing  and  burning  of  black  churches  in  the
American   South   has   become   one   of   the    traditional
methods  used  by  white  racists  .  .  .  That  this  method
has  the  approval  of  white  America  is  best  exemplified
by  the  continued  refusal  of   the   Federal   government,
FBI  and state  and local  police to  ...     make  even  mini-
mal   efforts   to  apprehend  the  perpetrators   .  .  .  This
past  week-end saw  a  new  outbreak  of  church bombings
in    Lowndes    County,    Alabama,    the    same    'Bloody
Lowndes' where Viola  Liuzzo  and Rev. Jonathan  Daniels
were   murdered.    On   Sunday    morning,    a    renovated
church  which  had  been  rented  to  the  Lowndes  County
Christian   Movement  for   the   Anti-Poverty   program,
burned  to  the  ground ...  As  usual  the  FBI  made  a
routine  investigation  and  'took  notes'.   The  Macedonian
Baptist   Church  in  Fort  Deposit,  Alabama,  was  burned
early   Monday   morning  following  a  mass   meeting  on
Sunday  night  for  the  Lowndes County  Christian  Move-
ment.   Whites  had  warned  they  would  burn  the  church
if   it  was  used  for  such  meetings.    Again   the  FBI  is
making  a  routine investigation  and is  'taking  notes'."
—Stokeley  Carmichael,  SNCC   Chairman,  March  15.
Plaquemines   County  has  been  the  first  of  its  kind   since  Re-
construction.
The  charge  of  practicing  law  without  a  license  is  about  as
flimsy  as  one  could   imagine.     Louisiana  law  permits  out-of-
state  counsel  to  appear  in  its  courts  if  they  do  so  as  associates
of   local    firms.    Sobol   has   been   working   as  an  associate  of
Collins,   Douglas  and  Elie,  perhaps   the  only  Negro  firm  in
the  State  willing  to  represent   CORE   and  other  civil   rights
groups.    They  introduced  Sobol  to  the  court  as  their  associate
in  the  Duncan  case.    But  thereafter  he  appeared   in  the  pro-
ceedings   alone.     It  is  on  this  that  the  prosecution   is  based.
If   Sobol   is  forced   out   of   Louisiana,   as  Donald   Jelinek,
another   LCDC  volunteer   recently  was  out  of   Alabama,   the
effect   on  civil  rights   actions,  private  and  governmental,   will
be  deadly.    The  Attorney  General  has  the  power  to  intervene
against  such  frame-ups  under  the  1964  Act.    This  is  a  funda-
mental   test   of  his  mettle.
The  Deeper  Latin  American  Issues   Our  Congressional  Liberals   Fail  to   Discuss
Three  issues  stand  out  in  the  fight  between  the  Admin-
istration   and  Chairman   Fulbright  of   the   Senate    Foreign
Relations  Committee over  the  resolution of  support  Johnson
asked   for   the   Latin   American   "summit"  to   be   held   at
Punta  del  Este  April  11.  The  first  involves  the  President's
methods  in  trying  to  stampede  the  Congress  into  a  blank
check  of  support on  the  basis  of  a  big  White  House  party—
a  kind of  social  lobby—and  a  few  days  of  cursory  hearings.
Fulbright   and   a   majority  of   his   committee—except   for
Morse,  who  is  supporting  Johnson  on  this   one—are  leery
of   blank  checks  and  resent   methods  which  turn  the   Con-
gress  into  a  Presidential   rubber  stamp.
The  second  issue,  reflected  in  Senator   Gruening's  testi-
mony  against   the  resolution  before  Fulbright's  committee
March  21,  is  whether  the  U.S.  ought  to  be  increasing   aid
to  Latin  America  at  a  time  when  domestic  aid  programs
are  being  cut  back  because  of  the  war  in  Vietnam.
The  third  issue  has  hardly  been  touched  on  either  by  the
liberals  critical  of  Johnson  in  the  Senate,  or  by  the  liberals
in  the  House,  most  of  whom  voted  for  the  resolution.   This
is   whether  the  new  conference  is   really  oriented   toward
the   needs  of   the   Latin  masses.    We  note   that   the  main
objective,  the  creation  of  a  Latin  common  market,  has  the
fervent   support   of   David  Rockefeller's   Council   for   Latin
America   which  represents   85%  of   U.S.  investment   there.
We  also  note  that  even  the  Latin  labor  leaders  linked  with
our  own  CIA-tainted   Latin   division   of   the   AFL-CIO  are
protesting   (N.Y.  Times,  Mar.  27)   the   irrelevance  of   the
"summit"   agenda   to   "unemployment,   maldistribution   of
income  and  lack  of  basic  liberties"  which they  call  the  main
problems   of   the   hemisphere.   Even   Senator   Javits,   in   a
plea  for  the  common market  and  salvation-by-private-enter-
prise,   wrote  in  Foreign   Affairs  (April),   "It  is   true   that
the  private  sector  in  Latin  America  has  yet  to  demonstrate
that  it  can  meet  the  material  needs  of  the  people  or  that
it  is  ready  to  accept  its   obligations   to  society."   That  is
quite   an   admission.    The   liberals   in   Congress   ought   to
examine  these  basic  questions.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  3,1967
What  Most  Papers,  Including the  New  York Times,  Ignored  in  His  Report
Symington's  Gloomy  View  of The  Vietnamese  War  Unfit  to  Print?
While  the  headlines  focussed   on  the  recommendation  for
wider  air  raids  on North  Vietnam  in  Senator   Symington's
report   (March   27)   on  his   trip   to  Southeast   Asia,  most
newspapers—including   the  New  York  Times—omitted  the
gloomy  assessment  of  the  political  and  military   outlook  in
the  following  paragraphs:
"There  is  now  less  certainty  in  my  mind  than  there  was  a
year  ago that  the  present  government  in  South  Vietnam  speaks
for   a  majority  of  the  South  Vietnamese  people.     It  is  clear
that  the  current  composition   of  the  government  exacerbates
religious  and  political  differences.
"Much  of   the  victory  obtained   by  U.S. and   South  Viet-
namese  forces in  the  daytime is lost  at  night,  primarily because
we  do  not  seem  to  be  able  to  obtain  a handle  on  the  problem
of   the  guerrillas.
"During   recent  months  the  North   Vietnamese  have  made
major   improvements  in  air   defenses.     Their   operations   are
more  integrated;  their  pilots  more  skilful.    Many  of  our  air-
craft  are  now  forced  to  jettison  their  ordnance  off  target,  in
order  to  survive  MIG  attacks;  result,  lost  mission.
"The  Other  War" We  Can't  Win
"It   is  our  understanding   South   Vietnam's  army  has  been
assigned  primary responsibility for  conducting  the  vital  'pacifi-
cation'  operations  in  those  limited  areas  of  their  country  con-
trolled  by  their  own  army  and  ours.   This  is  a  job  which  the
U.S.  military, regardless  of  the  degree  of  our  investment,  can-
not  do  for  this  war-torn  and  harassed  nation.*
"//  the  South  Vietnamese  do  not  achieve  this   pacification,
there  is  no  point  in  this  country  continuing  to  pour  out  lives
and  treasure  in  order  to  protect  a  government  that  can neither
consolidate   nor  control  what  has  been  taken  from   them   by
their  own  citizens  and  the  North   Vietnamese.
"If   the  United  States  decides to  become the  major  factor   in
Chalk  Up  A  Victory—For  Bubonic  Plague
"As  persons  in  the  health  professions,  we  have  been
especially  aware  of  the  medical  aspects  of  the  war  in
Vietnam.   Observations  of   medical  facilities   estimate
six  civilian casualties  for  each  military  casualty.  The
majority   are   children.   Children  burned   with  napalm
will   be  deformed   and  crippled   for   the   rest   of   their
lives.   Yet  a  new  and  'more  adhesive'  napalm  is  being
developed.    Herbicidal   crop   destruction   is   spreading
disease    and   death   from    malnutrition:;   the   elderly,
children   and  pregnant   women   are   its   chief   victims.
Cholera,  malaria and other  diseases  have  ravaged large
numbers  of   the  civilian   population.   How  can   we   so
devastate  a  people  whom  we  say  we  are  aiding?"
—From  an   appeal   by   6,000  doctors,  nurses,   health
and   social  workers   March   22  to  Dr.  Philip  Lee, As-
sistant   Secretary    of   HEW,    protesting    diversion   of
welfare    funds   to  the  war   and  supporting    U   Thant's
S-step   plan   to  end  it.
At  a  press  conference   held  by  the  group,  Dr.  Jean
Mayer,  Harvard  Prof,  of  Nutrition,  said  bubonic  plague
cases  in  South  Vietnam  had  jumped  from  8  in  1961  to
4500  in   1966  to  2500  in  the   first   two  months  of  this
year,  and  that  cholera   cases  had  risen  from   a  few
hundred  a  year  to  25,000  last  year.
* General  Dayan  and  I  fin  Tel  Aviv]  discussed  .  .  .  his
recent   trip   to   Vietnam.    He   was   emphatic  that  non-Viet-
namese  troops  could  never succeed  as  leaders  of  the  pacifica-
tion  program  in  South Vietnam,  because  the  villagers would
not   accept   their   recommendations."—P.  125, Symington's
diary-report.
this  pacification  program  as  well  as in  the  fighting  of  the  war,
it  can  only  become an  extended  war  of  the  white  man  against
the  Asians,  on  the  mainland  of  Asia.   {Our  italics.]
"Countries   in  the  Middle  East  and  Europe  simply  cannot
understand  why  this  nation,  with  a  population   of  some  200
million  people  and  a  $750  billion  gross  national  product,  con-
tinues  to  have  so much  trouble in  the  conduct  of  a war  against
an  underdeveloped  country  that  has  a  population   of  some  17
million  people.    They  continue  to  ask:  'What  are  you  trying
to  do—what  is  your  definition  of  success?'
"If   political   agreement  or  military  action   does  not   bring
this  South  Vietnam  venture  to  termination,  and  at  a  relatively
early  date,  after  noting  again  on  this  trip  the  progress  in  the
degree  of  the  cost  involved,  it  is  my  considered  opinion   that
unless  our  major  domestic  and  international  programs  are  sub-
stantially  curtailed,  the  financial  position  of  the  United  States
will  become  serious  indeed."
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send  A Sample  Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
/ E  Stone'sWeekly
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)
Name  ...................................
Street   .................................
Pirv
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street   .................................
Citv
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,
Washington,  D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
Zin  .........    ..  State......
4/3/67
Indicate  if   announcement   wished  Q
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  in  August,   the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington   D   C     An  independent  weekly  Published  and  ed,ted
by  I   F   Stone-   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:    SB   in   the  U.S.;   S6  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
y
                      '                                                                      SIB  to  Europe:  20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED