I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967may29.pdf

============================================================

The  Nuremberg  Issue  In  The Levy  Trial,  P.  2
The  ADA   Threatens  to  Go  Republican  in   1968  If   Offered   "Genuine"  Hope  for   Peace
"How  ironically   absurd  it  would  be  if  the  fate  we  have
feared  for  so  long  [destruction  of  our  civilization]  were  to
come  not  from  some  titanic  confrontation of  great  principle
but  from  the  wasteful   and  shortsighted   pursuit  of  a  con-
flict  in  a  remote  part  of  Asia."
—The   ADA   National   Board   May   20  criticizes   Johnson
for   "reckless  escalation"   and  threatens   to  back   a   Repub-
lican  for  President  in  1968.
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,  NO.  19MAY  29,  1967
'»'       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15   CENTS
"For What Can War  But Endless  War  Still Breed?"-Milton
Where  does  one  begin   to  untangle   the  web  in  which  all
mankind  is  caught   in  the  Middle  Eastern  crisis?    From  one
point   of   view   this   is   another   episode   in   a   3,000-year-old
struggle  between  kindred  peoples  for  the  same  strip  of  earth.
From   another   it  is  part  of  a  world   rivalry  between  the  two
super-powers.     So  many  conflicts  impinge  on  this  area,  it  will
be  a  miracle   if  an   explosion   is  averted.     If   there  were   no
America  and  no  Russia,  no  communism  or  capitalism,  it would
make  not  the  slightest  difference—as  the  Bible  attests—to  the
conflict  of  Arab  and  Jew.    If  there  were  no  Israel,  it  would
make  no  difference  to  the  conflict  of  Arab  with  Arab:  in  the
midst  of  the  Arab-Israeli   crisis,  Jordan  breaks  relations   with
Syria  over  a  terrorist  action;  Nasser  rejects  a  suggestion   that
the  Arab  League  Defense   Council  meet   because  he  does  not
trust  his  Arab  rivals;  and  while   Jihad   (Holy   War)    is  pro-
claimed   against   Israel   in   Cairo's   mosques,   Cairo's   Ilyushin
bombers   drop  poison   gas  and  high   explosives  on  Northern
Yemen  (London   Daily   Telegraph,  May  22)  in  the  civil  war
between   Saudi-backed   Royalists  and   Egyptian-backed  Repub-
licans.    The  Angel  of  Death  is  overdue.
At  Both   Ends  of  the  Red  Sea
There  is  layer  upon  layer  of   conflict.    While  Nasser  has
shut  off  Israel's  lifeline  to  the  Red  Sea,  a  covert   duel   is  al-
ready  underway  between  Russia  and   America   for   control  of
the   narrow   straits   through  which  the   Red  Sea  itself   pours
into  the  Indian  Ocean.    The  U.S.  has  been  arming  the  Ethio-
pians   and   the   Russians  the   Somalis   in   the   exploitation    of
another   ancient   feud   for   the  African  shore  of   these   straits.
The  impending  withdrawal   of  British   power   from  Aden  on
the   Asian   shore  has  stimulated   Russian   aid   to  Nasser   and
U.S.   aid  to  Saudi   Arabia  in  the  Yemenite   civil  war.     Each
superpower  has  its  puppet  in  this  proxy  struggle  while  on  the
secondary   level  each  Arab  imperialism  exploits  the  fratricidal
passions  of  the  Yemenis.    China   has  declared   her  solidarity
with  the  Arabs  in  what  Peking  sees  as  a  world  struggle  of
colored  races  against  white  imperialism,   but  on  the  other  side
of  the  Red  Sea  in  the  Sudan,  a  half   million  Negroes  in  the
pagan  and  Christian  South  have  been  killed  in  a  10-year   "war
of   national   liberation"   against   the   Arabs   of   the   Moslem
North.*    If  there  is  a  race  problem  in  the  Middle  East,  it  is
4
 A  reporter-photographer  team  has  just  published  a  vivid
account  of  this  little  known  war  in  the  April  30  issue  of  Ger-
many's  leading  picture  magazine,  Stern.
On  The   Spring  Mobilization Meeting
I  spent  a  day,  its  final  session,  at  the  Spring  Mobili-
zation  here  last   week-end,  and  I  want  to  say   a   few
plain   words   about   it.     The   dominant   feeling  among
many,  young and  old, was  that they  came  (in  contempo-
rary  lingo)  to  be  switched  on,  but  were  only  switched
off.    The  New  York  and  San  Francisco  parades brought
out  people   who  had  never  participated  before.    They
marched  to  express   their  concern.    They   would   have
done  so  even  if  the  parade  were  led  by  Holy  Rollers or
Fresh   Water   Baptists.     Because   radical   elements,   to
their  credit, organized  the  parades when more moderate
leaders  hung  back,  some  of  the  radical  groups  got  de-
lusions  of  grandeur.    They  thought  they  were  leading
a   mass   movement  for   their  own   particular  nostrum.
And  at  the  Washington   conference  they  fought  among
themselves  for  control  of  this  peace  movement, in  Lilli-
putian  all-night caucuses  of  far-out Leftists and far-out
Black   Nationalists  who  had  trouble  agreeing   on  any-
thing.     The  outstanding  deadlock  was   the   failure  to
agree  on  any  program  of  political  action.    The  worst
aspect   was   the   contempt  and  hatred  of   white—their
white   allies,   not   their   white   enemies—expressed   by
many  of  the  Black  Nationalists.    This  is  a  fine  way  to
kill  the  peace  movement.   This  is  how  agents  provoca-
teur  operate.
The  peace  movement has  to  make  up  its  mind.   Does
it  want  to  persuade  as  large  a  section  of  the American
people   as   possible,   or   to   antagonize  them?     Martin
Luther  King  speaks   in  terms  of  black   and  white  to-
gether,  and  in  terms  of  conscience  and  love  of  country.
Those  who  want  to  use  the  peace  movement  to  preach
hate,  race  war  and  revolution  ought  to  get  out  of  the
peace  movement  and  back  to  their  own little  war  move-
ments.    We  are  not  going   to  sell  peace  by  spreading
hate  and hysteria.   Everybody is  busy  drawing  parallels
with  German experience.    But  the  most  important one
is   passed   over.    Nazism   came  to   power  because   the
moderate  Left  and  the  extreme  Left  were  so  busy  fight-
ing  each  other,  and  so  full  of  fratricidal hate,  that  the
(Continued   in  Column  2,  Page   4)
the  human   race,   with   its  tribal  animosities  and   murderous
proclivities,  its  immemorial  love  of  war.
Only  the  two  superpowers,  acting  in  concert,  tacitly  or  ex-
plicitly,  can  possibly  prevent  war  between  Israel  and  the  Arab
States,  or  stop  one  if  it  breaks  out.    The  failure  of  the  super-
powers  to  fulfil   their  responsibilities  in  the  past  is  a  funda-
mental   factor.    In   1947,   both   the  Western  and  Soviet  blocs
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  29,1967
The  Meaning  of  the  Nuremberg  Issue  in  the  Capt.  Levy  Court  Martial
Will  the  Next  Step  Be  Just  A  "Temporary"  Foray  Into  North  Vietnam?
THE   LOGIC  that  led  U.S.  forces  into  the  demilitarized zone
now  supports  pressure  for   invasion  of  the  North—the  guns
which  shell  U.S.  strong  points  south  of  the  DMZ  are  placed
to  the  north  of  the  DMZ  zone.    The  next  step  may  be  "pre-
emptive  forays"  against  gun  emplacements  and  then  a  wider
invasion,  but  accompanied—in  the  Johnson Administration's
familiar  style—by  assurances  that  this  will  be  limited  to  the
southern  part  of  North  Vietnam!    So we  inch  our  way toward
war  with  China.
Fair  Challenge  or  Trap?
As  WE  UNDERSTAND  it from  afar,  the  crux of  the  defense  in
the  trial  of  Capt.  Howard  Levy  at  Fort  Jackson,  South  Caro-
lina,  is  that  he  was within his  moral  and  legal  rights to  refuse
to  train  in  medicine  men  who  carry  arms—in  this  case  medical
aid  men  attached  to  the  Green  Berets.    But  when  his  counsel,
Charles  Morgan,  Jr.,  offered  to  prove  Capt.  Levy's  assertions
that  the  Green  Berets  were  killers  of  peasants,  the  Judge  de-
clined  to  hear  such  evidence,  ruling  that  truth  was  not  a  de-
fense,  that  the  court  martial  was  concerned  only  with  whether
his  "intent"  in  making  such  statements was  to  sow  disaffection
among  the  troops.    The  Judge  did  rule however  that he  would
admit,   as   a   defense,   evidence   of   crimes  against   humanity
within  the  rulings  made  at  the  Nuremberg   trial.
This  looks  like  a  trap.   The  full  meaning  of  the  Nuremberg
precedents   is  still  murky;  their  applicability  to  the  Vietnam
war  is  a  matter  of  controversy.    It   is  hardly  fair   to   expect
single-handed  counsel,  in  the  one  week  allowed   him,  to  put
the  U.S.  in  the  dock.    This  is  an  easy  way  to  win  a  quickie
victory  in  the  headlines  as  a  counterbalance  to  the  Russell  war
crimes  trial; it  is no  way seriously to  deal with  the  issues raised.
For  the  average  person  "Nuremberg"   connotes  genocide  and
crematoria.     In   this  oversimplified  sense,   Vietnam  offers   no
parallel.     But  legally  Nuremberg   stands  for  the  proposition
• that  a  soldier  cannot  plead   "superior   orders"   if   he  commits
a  crime  against  the  laws  of  war,  or  against  humanity,  but  is
under  obligation  to  refuse.
This  is  embodied  in  the  U.S.  Army's  rules  of  land  warfare.
Under  them  a  soldier  may well  plead  that  the  war  in  Vietnam
is  itself  a  violation  of  the  UN  Charter;  that  the  napalm  "anti-
personnel"  fragmentation   weapons   and  indiscriminate   bomb-
ing  used  against  villages  violate  the  1907  Hague  convention;
that   the   mistreatment   of   prisoners   contravenes   the    1949
The  One  Dove  Who  Would  Not  Growl
Just  before  the  demilitarized  zone was invaded,  16  Sen-
ators,  all  doves  though   some  of  them  coo   infrequently
released  a  letter  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  assuring  him—in  case
he  didn't  know—that   they   were  opposed  to  unilateral
withdrawal  and  warning  that  failure  to  negotiate  would
lead   to   "a   prolonged    and   intensified   war."     Senator
Church,   its   original   framer,   more   chicken   than   dove,
submitted  it  in  advance  to  Secretary  Rusk  for   approval.
The  latter  must  have  been  pleased  to  have  it  appear  on
the   eve   of   a  new  escalation.    The  Washington  Star
May  IS   praised  these  Senators  for  "responsible  states-
manship"  and  mistakenly  included  Gruening  of  Alaska
as  one  of  the  signers.*    On  May  20  it  published  a  letter
from   Gruening  saying  that  he  had  not  signed  because
he  regarded   the  conflict   as  a  civil  war  "in  which  the
U.S.   interjected  itself  unilaterally."    Gruening  declared
the  peace  overtures  made  by  the  Administration    were
not   "realistic"  because   they   "offer   incompatible    and
contradictory    solutions   (1)    That   we    return   to   the
Geneva  agreements,  which  predicate   a  united  Vietnam
after   nationwide   elections  and   (2)   insist   on  an  inde-
pendent  South  Vietnam."
* The   others    were    Cooper,   McGovern,   Fulbright,
Moss,  Bartlett, Metcalf,  Hartke,  Nelson, Burdick,  Clark,
Young  of  Ohio,  Robert  Kennedy,  Hatfield,  Morse   and
Pell.
Geneva  convention;  that  the  use  of  toxic  gases  violates  the
1925  Geneva  treaty  against  gas  and   bacteriological  warfare;
and  that  the  wanton  destruction  of  cities  and  villages   north
and  south  fall  within  the  crimes  declared by  the  Charter  of  the
Nuremberg  tribunal.
You  do  not  have  to  prove  that  Johnson  is  a  Hitler  or  that
the  U.S.  set  out  deliberately, as  did  the  Nazis,  to  exterminate
a  whole  people.  It  is  the  disproportion  between  our  declared
ends  and  our  means  which  is  at  the  heart  of  the  crimes  which
may  be  laid  at  our  door.    We  are  destroying  South   Vietnam
though  we  claim  to  be  rescuing  it.    Even  if  our  claim  were
wholly  true,  the  means  are  beyond  justification.    A parent  may
discipline  an  unruly  child;  he  may  not  torture  or   dismember
it.     You   don't   liberate  a   supposedly   friendly   country   with
napalm  and  saturation  bombing.    But  this  is  not  a   question
which  can  adequately   be  adjudicated   in  a  few  days,  with  a
week's  prepartion,  by  one  ovei burdened  lawyer  without  access
to  the  military files  where  the  full  truth  is  hidden.
Washington's  Most  Conservative   Paper   Calls  for  An  End  to  the  Bombing  of  the  North
"The  time  has  come  in  The  Star's  opinion,  for  the  United
States  to  stop  bombing  in  North  Vietnam.    We  say   this
without  the  slightest  apology  for  the  Administration's   con-
duct  of  the  war  up  to  now.    The  decision  to  start   bombing
was  necessary  and  right.  .  .  .  But  every  military   strategy
must  be  subject  to  constant  review.  .  .  .  The  bombing   has
not  stopped  the  infiltration.  .  .  .  [It]   has  not  produced  any
evidence  that  Hanoi's  will  to  fight  has  been  impaired.    On
the  contrary ...  if  anything,  it  has  hardened  the  enemy's
determination...  . Assuming  we continue  to limit  our strikes
to  specific   military   and  industrial  targets  .  .  .  very   few  if
any  worthwhile   targets  remain   available.
"Most  important,   we  cannot  escalate  the  bombing  beyond
present  levels  without  real  danger.  .  . .  North  Vietnam  must
be  maintained   as  a  going  concern,  since  China  and  Russia
cannot  permit   it  to  be  crushed.    If  we  cut  much  closer  to
the   hone,   China   may   well   move.     Much   more   certainly,
Russia  will   step  up  her  supply  to  Hanoi  of  sophisticated
weaponry,   accompanied  by  Russian  technical  crews.  .  .  .
"It  is  true  that  bombing  'pauses'  in  the  past  have  failed.
.  .  .  The complaint  in  the  past  has  been  that  the  announced
temporary  nature of  the  cessation—and  the  public  insistence
on  reciprocal  de-escalation  by  Hanoi—constituted  an  ulti-
matum.     This  time,   there  would  be  nothing   that   in  any
sense  could   be  made  to  look   like  an  ultimatum.   .  .  .   With
the  bombing  stopped,  the  world   will  have  been  pulled  back
from   a  brink   which  looks  daily   more  ominous.  .  .  ."
—Washington  Star, Sunday,  May  21.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  29,  1967
A  Phoney  Facade  for  the  Greek  Takeover:  Wasted  Billions  in  Space  and  Arms
Why  Should  Members of Congress Practice Law or Do Business on The  Side?
IF  SENATOR  LONG  of  Missouri  thinks  someone  is  trying  to
do  a  smear  job  on  him  for  exposing  the  "bugging"  activities
of  government agencies, he  could find no better way to  counter-
act  it  than  by  taking  the  advice offered  by  Williams  of  Dela-
ware  and  making  full   disclosure  to  the  Senate  Ethics  Com-
mittee  of  the  clients and  the  fees  he  has  shared  in  "referrals"
from  other  lawyers.    Long's  receipt  of  $48,000  in  such  fees
from  a  lawyer  for  Jimmy  Hoffa,   as  exposed  in  the  St.  Louis
Post-Dispatch  and  Life   Magazine,  has  brought  disrepute  on  a
most  valuable  investigation.   The  fault,  in  our  opinion,  lies
with  Long   and  with  the  well-established   practice  of  letting
Senators  and   Congressmen   practice  law  on  the  side.    This
opens   the'  door  wide  to  all  kinds  of  abuse  and  conflicts  of
interest.    Why   should   a  member  of   Congress   have  outside
business  interests of  any kind which  he  can  serve  in  his  official
capacity?    The  Long  revelations,  on  the  heels  of  the  weak  and
dilatory  way  the   Senate   is  handling  the   Dodd   affair,   must
deepen  Negro  resentment   over  the  expulsion   of  Powell   for
comparitively   trivial  infractions  which   did   not   involve  con
flicts  of   interest.
The  Greek  Military  Imitate  Brazil's
EVENTS  IN  GREECE  follow  the  Brazilian  pattern:  A   coup
with  U.S. connivance  destroys  constitutional   government  and
the   military  then   improve   their   "image"  by  proceeding   to
frame  a  new  constitution  designed  to  keep  the  right  in  power
while  giving   the   regime  a  pseudo-democratic   facade.     The
International  Commission  of  Jurists  in  Geneva,  which  gets  so
much  publicity  here  when  it  denounces  left  dictatorships,  is-
sued  a  strong  condemnation  of  the  new  Greek  regime (May
13)   and  called  on  the  Council  of  Europe  to  investigate   the
Greek  military for  violating  the  European  Human  Rights  Con-
vention.    But we did  not  see a line  about  this  in  the U.S. press.
ORCHIDS,  as  Walter  Winchell   used  to  say, to  Wm.  Hines
and   the   Washington   Star  for   their   account  of   "Apollo:  A
Shining  Vision  in  Trouble"  (May  21)  which  links  the  moon
project  with  the  Bobby  Baker  scandal  and  graphically   shows
how  the  five  main  contracts  (two to  North  American,  one
each  to  Boeing,  Grumman  and  Douglas)  have  rocketed  from
their  originally  announced  cost  of  $1,240  millions  to  current
estimates  of  $9,564  millions.    Isn't  it  time  that  organizations
concerned with poverty  follow  up  Congressman  Wm.  F. Ryan's
action  forcing  out the long suppressed  Phillips  report  on North
American's  inefficiency?     The   spotlight   ought   to  be  thrown
Not  Much  Of  A  Testimonial  to  LBJ's War
"I just  do  not  know  how  much  you  would  have  to  pay
a  man  to  pick  up  a  gun  and  go  over  to  the  mud  of
Vietnam. ...  If  we  are  to  put  up  signs  reading  'Men
Wanted  for  Government Employment.   Join  the Army.
Free   Food.     Free   Clothing.     Free   Lodging.    Go   to
Vietnam',  how  much  does  the  Senator  think  we  would
have  to  pay  them  a  month?  .  .  .  The  defense  budget
today  is  more than half  of  the  largest  budget this coun-
try  has  ever seen.   If  we are  to  go  into  the  open market
and  hire  men  to  constitute  an  armed force  of  3,500,000
men,  there  would  hardly  be  enough  money  to  carry  on
the  other  operations  of Government."
—Senator   Russell   arguing    against   a   professional
army  in  the  Senate   draft    debate  May  11.
in  a  big  way  on  this  space  gravy  train  for   Texas-Oklahoma
multimillionaires  which  gets  more  and  more  lush  while  our
slums  decay into  human  jungles.    Everybody knows  about  this
but  the  full  magnitude  has  never  been  spelled  out  in  a  graphic
way  as  part  of  a  campaign  to  divert  these  funds  to   poverty.
THIS  MIGHT  BE  COUPLED  with  a  fresh   look   at  the   arms
race.    As  we  move  toward  a  decision  on  the  anti-ballistic mis-
sile  which  may end  by  costing  up  to  $50  billions,  it  might  be
well  to  glance  back  at what has  been  spent  in  the  past  on  other
supposedly  impregnable  defenses.    The  latest  House  defense
hearings  disclose  that  we  have  spent  $50  billions  since  World
War   II  on  anti-aircraft  defenses   now  made  obsolete  by  the
missile;  this  includes  the  cost  of  the  highly  publicized  DEW
line  and  the  SAGE  system.    The  same  hearings  show  that  on
missiles  themselves   we  have  spent  almost   $20  billions.    Of
the  intercontinentals  a  Pentagon   official   said   recently,   "We
not  only  don't  know  whether  they  will  work  but  we'll  only
have  30  minutes  in  which   to  find  out."    Two  Democratic
members  of  House  Armed   Services   (Otis  G.  Pike  of   New
York  and  Lucien  N.   Nedzi   of  Missouri)   have  just  filed  a
minority  report   warning   against   embarking   on  a  new   arms
race  with  a  so-called  "thin"  anti-missile  defense  before  every
effort  is  made  to  negotiate  a  standstill  with  the  Soviet  Union.
Another  multi-billion  dollar  item  was  Polaris,  supposed  to  be
an  "ultimate"   second  strike  weapon  hidden  under  the  seas  on
nuclear  submarines.    The   latest   (May) issue  of  Air   Force
magazine  says  new  reconnaissance  techniques  will  soon   make
it  possible  for  aerial  satellites  to  spot  and  track  Polaris.    All
those  billions   could   have  rebuilt   every  slum  in  America.
The  Privileged  Classes  Who  Evade  The Vietnam War  in  The Well-Paid  Reserves
"It  is  quite unfair  to  take  young  men  for  two  years  and
put  them  under  selective service,  when we  know  that  there
is  a  'policy'—I  put  the  word  in  quotation  marks  because  I
could  not  raise my  right hand and testify that  it  is  an  official
policy,  I  only  judge  by  the  results  of  what  has  occurred—to
use  draftees  out  of  all  proportion  to  their  numbers and  let
reservists  stay  at  home  and  collect  the  millions  of  dollars
we  are  paying  to  the  Reserves  in  order  to  maintain a sys-
tem  that  was  supposedly estabishcd by  law  for  men  to  come
to  the  assistance  of   the  country  in  time  of  emergency.
"If  anybody  has  any  doubt  about  the  most  effective  way  .
to  change  our  policy  in  Southeast  Asia,  let  me  remove  the
doubt  by  suggesting  that  Congress  pass  a  law,  or  that  the
Administration  merely  adopt  a  policy,  that  of  those  called
into  military service  from  now  on,  50%  shall  be  reservists
and  60% shall  be  draftees.  .  .  .
"If  we  started  to  take  several  thousand  doctors,  lawyers,
dentists,  business  men,  service  station  operators  and  farm-
ers   who  are  in   the   Reserve  and  who   are   the  recipients
monthly  of  Reserve pay,  and  were  to  say, 'We  are  going  to
call  up  your  units  and  send  them  to  Vietnam',  it  would  not
take   long  to   get   an  entire  change   of   American  foreign
policy  vis  a  v'is  Vietnam; for  then  at  the  very  grass  roots
of  our  economy and  at  the  very  grassroots  of  our citizenry,
a  dialogue  would  start."
—Morse  in  the Senate debate  on the  draft,  May  11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  29, 1967
(Continued   -from   Page   One)
joined   in  the  two-thirds  vote  of   the  UN   General   Assembly
which   partitioned    Palestine   into   Arab   and   Jewish    States.
Next  year,  when  the  Jewish  state  was  declared,  there  was  a
race  between   Moscow   and   Washington   to   see  which  would
recognize  it  first.    The  obligation  was  on  both  sides  to  force
a  final  peace  and  stabilize  the  area.    This  was  possible  only
if   it  were  neutralized  and  withdrawn   from   the  great   power
rivalry.
The  Cold  War  Interfered
Unfortunately   at  that   very  time  the  cold  war  began,   and
with  it   a  little  arms   race  in  the  Middle   East  to  match   the
bigger  arms  race  in  the  world.    In   1956,  seeing  a  huge  build-
up  of  Soviet weapons  in  Egyptian hands  for  a  war  of  revenge,
Israel  struck  in  the  Sinai  and   destroyed  or  seized  the  arma-
ment  ready  for  its  destruction  while  England  and   France  at-
tacked  Egypt  in  an  effort   to  recover  the  Suez  Canal.     Again
the   superpowers    acted   in   tacit   concert.      Khrushchev    and
Eisenhower  forced  Anglo-Erench  withdrawal  from  Egypt  and
Israeli   from   Sinai.     But   again   an   opportunity   was   wasted.
In  the   10  years  since,  instead  of  bringing  about   a  final  peace
between   Israel  and  its  Arab  neighbors,  the  superpowers   sup-
plied  the  arms  for  the  new  outbreak.    A  survey  in  the  London
Times  May   19  showed   that  almost  $3  billions  in  'armament
have   been   poured   into  this   volatile   area   since   the   Second
World  War  not  only  by  Britain,  America,   Russia  and  France
but  also  from  Canada,  Italy,  Holland,  Formosa   and  elsewhere.
The   Times  questioned   the   ethics  and  wisdom   of   this  huge
arms   trade.     The   whole   world   may   suffer   from   the  tinder
it   supplied.
The   Arab-Israeli   conflict   is  too  profoundly  human   to   be
susceptible  to  easy  solution.    But .then  so  is  that  over  Kashmir
and  so  was the  Greco-Turkish,  but  populations  far  larger  than
those   displaced   in  the  Palestine  war   have  been   resettled  in
the  past  and   peace   made.     But  it  has  to  be  imposed    from
outside.    The  Arab  refugee  looks  in  bitterness  across  the  bor-
der  and   sees  lands  he   lost.    The   Israeli  feels   besieged   and
sees  home  and  children  menaced  by  a  recrudescence  of  terror-
ism.     Reprisal   has   proven  ' a   poor    long-range   remedy.     It
was  the  fear  of  an   Israeli  reprisal  action  against  Syria,  with
the  blow  that  might  have  struck  Nasser's  prestige  in  the  Arab
On The  Spring  Mobilization  Meeting
(Continued  from  Column  2,  Page  1)
Hitlerites  were  able  to  take  over  even  though  they  did
not  have  a  majority.     To  drive  away  the  middle  class
moderates  or  to  immobilize  them,  and  then  to  provoke
the  country with  extremist  hot  air  and  riot,  is  the  best
way   to   bring   a   Fascist-style   repression.     We   don't
blame  the  voices  of  anger  and anguish  rising  from  the
ghetto,  but  these  are  not  the  best  guides  to  sober politi-
cal  action.    How  are  we  going   to  have   peace   in  the
world,  when  a  budding  little  peace  mobilization  can't
even  make  peace  among  its  own  rival  splinter   factions,
when   discussions   turn  into  a   kind  of   vicarious   war,
satisfying  the  aggressive   impulses  and mutual  animosi-
ties  of  the  participants?
Yet  I  could  not  help  thinking,   as  I  listened  to  this
unrepresentative  bedlam,  that  if   the  American  people
knew  what  a  nuclear  war  would do  to  them, if  they  had
any  real  conception  of  the  suffering,  chaos,  panic  and
madness  it  would  unleash,  they  and  their children would
be  demonstrating  by  the  millions,  not  leaving  the  task
to   this   few   who—despite   all   their   shortcomings   and
contradictions—are  still  the  prescient,  the  handful  who
sense  what's  coming,  and  try  in time  to  raise  the  alarm.
In  this  they   deserve  applause.    But   that's   no  reason
not  to  try  to  make  them  and  the  peace  movement  act
more  sensibly.
world,  which  led  to  the  demand   that  the  UN   forces  be  with-
drawn  from  Sinai  and  the  new  crisis.    Israel  was  created  by
the  UN,  the   1956   war  was  stopped  through  the  UN,  this  is
a  UN   problem.     But  all  the  powers,   great   and   small  alike,
have  defied  and  ignored  the  UN  when  their  purposes  seemed
served   thereby.    Now   when   the  UN   is  so  badly  needed,   it
may  have  become  too  weak.    And  the  smoke  which  rises  from
burning   Hanoi    and   Haiphong    darkens   the   scene,    making
international  cooperation  between  the  superpowers  more  dif-
ficult  than   ever.    The   effort,   at  whatever  cost  to  the  people
of  Vietnam,  to  substitute a  Pax  Americana  for  a  world  order,
now  exacts  its price  in  the  Middle  East,  when  an  overextended
America—and  an  anxious  world—suddenly  look  again  to  the
United   Nations.
This  is  the  consequence   of  a  world   without  law,  in  which
every  nation  is  armed  for,  and  insists  on  the  right  to,  murder.
Our  prayer  for  peace  goes  out,  for  Arab  and  Jew  alike,  and
for  all  mankind.                                                       May  24.  7  a.m.
The   1966    Index   Is  Ready—You  Can  Have  One  Fres   If   You  Send  A   Stamped   Long   Envelope   For  It—Please   Renew,   If   Overdue,
With  Your    Request
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Street   .................................
Citv
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)    Name   .......................
Street   .................................
Citv
5618   Nebraska  Ave
Washington,   D.  C.
,  N. W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State.....
a  gift  sub  to:
Zin               State   ....
5/29/67
Indicate  if   announcement  wished  d
/ E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except  in   August,   the   last   week   in   December   and  the
first   week   in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An   independent    weekly   published   and  edited
by  I   F    Stone-   Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5~in   the   U.S.:    $6   in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
.517  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED