I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967may08.pdf

============================================================

Why   The  Senate  Hesitates  to  Censure Docld,  P.  3
The  Real  Question  in  Johnson's  Deployment of  Westmoreland on  the  Home  Front
"What  kind  of  men  have  we  at  the  helm  of  government
who  would  deliberately  coerce  the  public  into  accepting  their
policies  on  the  threat  of  being  branded traitors?"
—Senator  Hat field (R.  Oregon)  at  Yale,  April  26.
F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,  NO.  16
MAY  8,   1967
»«"       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  G.OP.'s  Gift  to  The  Summer  Project
The  youthful  workers  preparing  to  fan  out  into  the suburbs
and  the  slums  this  summer  to  mobilize  support  for  peace  could
carry  no  better   ammunition   than   the  91-page  "Blue  Book,"
The   War  in  Vietnam,  issued  last  Tuesday  by  the  Senate  Re-
publican  Policy  Committee.    Its  appearance  within  a  week  of
Gen.   Westmoreland's  first  speech   to  the  AP  and   four  days
after  his  address  to  Congress  finishes  off  a  political  defeat  for
Johnson's  biggest  offensive  yet  on  the  home  front.    There was
first  the  distinctly sour  reaction,  even  among  many hawkish  on
the  war,   to  Westmoreland's    attempt   to  equate   dissent  with
treason;  as  a  result  this  theme  was  reduced,  in  his  speech  to
Congress,   to  a  muffled  warning  about  "resolve."     Now   it  is
clear  that  Westmoreland's   Boy  Scout  style  pep-talk  didn't  go
down  too  well  with  Congress.    The  report  approved  by  the
Senate  Republican   Policy  Committee—its  chairman  the  con-
servative  Hickenlooper  of  Iowa,  ranking  Republican  on  For-
eign    Relations—rebuts   the   whole    oversimplified    Johnson-
Rusk-Westmoreland  theory  of  the  war  as an  invasion from  the
North,  which  can  be  ended  if  only  the  North   is  "punished"
enough  to  make  it  call  off  its  troops  and  surrender.
The  War  "An  Incurable  Disease"?
Before  Westmoreland   spoke  there  were  peace  marchers  in
New  York  and  San  Francisco.    Now  the  Republicans seem  to
be  joining  the  parade.    "What  precisely,"  this  Blue  Book  asks
tartly,  "is  our  national  interest  in  Thailand,  Cambodia,  Viet-
nam  and  Laos?"    How  far,  it  continues,  "are  we  prepared  to
go  in  support  of  this  interest?"    It  contrasts  the  record  of  es-
calation  under  Kennedy  and  Johnson  with  Eisenhower's  will-
ingness  "to  cash  in  his  chips  in  1954,   no  matter  how  humili-
ating  it  might  be  to  admit  we  had  backed  a  loser,  rather  than
throw  good  blood  after  bad  money."  Eisenhower,   the  report
says   pointedly,   "realized   the   application   of   military   power
could  not  resolve  a  hopeless   political  situation  in  Vietnam."
The  implication  was  clear  enough  for  Sparkman  of  Alabama,
Johnson's   leading   supporter   on   the  Foreign   Relations  Com-
mittee,  to  cry  out  that  the  GOP  report  would  be  "a  powerful
weapon  in  the  hands  of  Ho  Chi  Minh."    By coincidence,  the
day  the  report  appeared,  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  in  a despair-
ing  editorial,  compared   the  Vietnamese  war  to  an   "incurable
disease."    The  Blue  Book  is the  first  sign  that  the  Republicans
for  all  their  confusion,  are  moving  away  from  the  idea  that
the  best  way out  is  the  euthanasia of  constant  escalation, bring-
ing  ever  closer  the  national  suicide  of  war  with  China   and
perhaps  also  the  Soviet  Union.
The  Republican  Blue  Book  abandons  flag-waving  nonsense
The  Other  Dead-End  Street
The  Pentagon  likes  to  have  plans  ready  for  any  con-
tingency.    We  wonder whether plans  have  been  drawn
up  for  what  may  happen  in  the  Negro  community  if
the  government decides  that  Martin  Luther  King,  like
the  saintly  Socialist  leader  Debs  in  World  War  I,  has
to  be  prosecuted   for   urging  resistance   to   the  draft.
Cassius  Clay  is  already  on  the  last  lap  of  court appeals
before  going  to  jail.    It  is  no  small  national  problem
when  the  foremost   Negro  preacher  and  the  foremost
Negro   sports   idol   are   united   in   urging  Negro   (and
white)  youth  not  to  serve.    Clay  has  lost   his   world's
heavyweight  title  for  opposing  the  war  and  King  is  on
his   way   to   earning   another  Nobel   Peace   Prize,  this
time   more  hazardously.    "Every  young  man   in   this
country  who  believes  this  war  is   abominable  and  un-
just,"  Dr.  King  said  in  Atlanta  April  30,  praising  Clay
and  criticizing  the  Westmoreland visit,  "should  file  as
a   conscientious   objector."    The   silence   of   the  hawks
on  this  increasingly open  challenge  testifies  to  the  fear
of   what   any   effort   to  prosecute  King   might   set  off.
King  is  not  the  leader,  as  was  Debs,  of  a  badly  split
minority  party.   He  is  both  the  foremost spokesman of
America's  better  conscience   and  the  Moses  of   20  mil-
lion   Negroes,   a  submerged  nation  in   an  ugly  mood.
When  and  if  the  jail  doors  close  on  Clay  and  prepare
for  King,  those  Reservists  we  have  been  holding  back
from  Vietnam  had  better  stand  by.    The  domino  effect
could  be  far  more  costly  than  the  distant  fall  of  some
Oriental  despot.    Not   the  least  argument   for  getting
out  of  Southeast  Asia  is  that  the  war  is  driving  us  at
home,  too,  down  a  dead-end  street,  toward  a  head-on
racial  collision.
for  astringent  fact.    The  war, it  says—
means  greatly   increased   American  conscription  at  a  time
when  the  rest  of  the  Western  world  has  done  away  with
the draft. ...  It  means  spending over  $300,000  to  kill  each
enemy  soldier. ...  It  means  a  war in  which  religious  con-
troversy  between  Catholic minority  and  Buddhist majority
has  come dangerously  close  to  causing  collapse  of  the  suc-
cessive  governments in  South Vietnam.   Here  at  home  .  .  .
confusion ...  to  a  degree  not  experienced  .  .  .  since  the
Civil  War.   Conscientious  objectors  today  outnumber their
Korean  counterparts 4  to  1.
It  says  Vietnam  is  a  country  2,000  years  old  with  "a  strong
common  tradition of  fighting  outsiders"  and  the  fresh  memory
of   "oppressive  occupation ...  by  France,  a  white,  western,
capitalist,  Christian power."    It  warns that  "America,  no mat-
ter  how  pure  its  motives,"  cannot  overcome  the  weight  of  this
history.
(Continued    on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 8,1967
After  20  Years  and  $2  Billions—The  End  of  Democracy  in  Greece
The  Pax Americana  Brings  Fascism  to  Our  "First  Frontier  of  Freedom"
In  modern,   as  in  ancient,  times  the  Greeks  have  shown   a
genius   for   civil  war.     Fraternal  feuds  have  made   them   the
prey  and  the  protectorate   (it  is hard  in  practice to  tell  the  two
apart)  of  foreign  powers  from  the  days of  the  ancient Persian,
to  those  of  the  modern  American,  Empire.    The  liberation of
Greece  from   the   Nazis,   like   its  struggle   for   independence
from  the  Turks  a  century  earlier,  broke  down  at  the  moment
of  success  into  civil  war.  The  British  reimposed  the monarchy
in  1945   and  backed  the  right  (including  those  who  had  col-
laborated   with  the  Nazis)   against  the   Resistance  movement
and  the  Communists  as  part  of  a  strategy  designed   for  more
than  a  hundred  years  to  keeping  the  Russians  from  access  to
the  Mediterranean.    The  U.S.  took  over  in  1947  from  the  ex-
hausted   British  with  the  Truman   Doctrine,   carrying  on   the
classic  British  policy  under  the  new  name  of   "containment."
.This  is  when   and  where  the  Pan  Americana   began.     Greece
was  our  first  Vietnam.
Colonels  With  Birchite  Minds
Now  20  years and  $2  billion  later  the  facade  of  success  has
crumbled  and  Greek  politics  face  polarization  again   between
a  monarco-Fascist  military dictatorship  and  the  threat  of  a  new
Communist-led  Resistance.    Not  all  of  this  is  America's fault.
You  have  to  go  to  Latin   America   to  find  parallels  for  the
Greek   oligarchy,   with   its  propensity   for   making   money  on
America's  obsession  with  anti-Communism and  salting  the  pro-
ceeds  away  in  foreign  countries.    And  you  have  to  go  to  the
John   Birch  Society  to  understand  the  political  mentality  be-
hind  the  coup.  Only  the  kind  of  paranoid  who  suspects  Eisen-
hower  of  being  a  Communist  tool  could  see  a  Red  menace  in
Papandreou   and   his   Centre   Union   party.     Papandreou  was
Churchill's   tool  and  Prime  Minister   in  the  restoration  of   the
monarchy  and  in  launching   the  civil  war  to  crush  the   Com-
munists.    To  a majority of  the  Greek  people  he  now  seems  an
' elderly  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  though  Papandreou  *  is  really
about  as  liberal  as  Herbert  Hoover.  The  clocks  of  convention-
al  Greek  politics  still  run  on  19th  century  time.
Until  1964,   rigged  elections,  fear  of  a  new  civil  war  and  a
conservative  peasantry  kept  the  oligarchy  in  power.     In   1964
* His  son,  Andreas,  whom  Cyrus  Sulzberger   in  the   New
York  Times  has  smeared  so  shamelessly   as  a  Red,  is  about
as  far  Left  as  our  ADA.    We  note  (in  Le  Monde,  April  28)
that  the  new  head  of  the  ADA,  John  Kenneth  Galbraith,  and
his  colleague,  Carl  Kaysen,  another  New  Frontiersman   (both
men  knew  Andreas  as  an economics  professor  in this  country)
have   cabled   his   American-born   wife   that   they   asked   the
White  House  to  intervene  for  her  husband.    He  faces  death
on  trumped-up charges  of  treason  in  a  military  court  martial.
To  Help  the   Greek  People
We  propose  that  a  national  committee  be  formed  to
act  on  the  lead  given  by  Walter  Reuther   to  demand
that  U.S.  military  aid  to  Greece be  ended  until  its  Con-
stitutional  liberties  are  restored.    It  was  that  aid,  as
Senator  Morse said  in  the  Senate  last  week,  that  made
the  coup possible.    It  was  done with  our  planes  and our
tanks.    In  one  country  after  another  U.S.  military  aid
has   been   the   instrument  for   destroying  all   hope   of
democracy.    The  other  way  to  strike  a  blow  for  free-
dom  in  Greece—and  one  that  lies  in  our  hands  and  not
that  of  our  double-dealing bureaucracy—is  to  boycott
tourist  travel  to  Greece  until  it  is  free  again.    Unless
there  is  swift  action  now—and  a  tourist  boycott  would
hurt   most—we  may  see   the   Greek   people  condemned
for  a  generation  to  the  kind  of  corrupt  and  stagnant
dictatorship  the  U.S.  also  supports  in  Portugal.
a  revived  and  growing  middle  class  made  it  possible  for  Pap-
andreou   to  obtain  an  absolute  majority   and  give  Greece   its
first  taste  since  the   last  war   of   genuinely  free  institutions.
These  threatened  control  of  the  Army  by  the  King  and   the
right.    For  months  Greek  political  life  has  been  thrown   into
convulsions  as  the  Crown  sought  by  bribery  and  U.S.  pressure
to  destroy  Papandreou's  majority   in  Parliament  and   now  to
establish  a  dictatorship  rather  than  risk  the  May  28  elections
he  might  have won.    Apparently the  quick  takeover plan  used
by  the  military  was  drawn  up  months  ago  (the   best   account
is  in  the   reports   Bernard  Nossiter  filed   to   the    Washington
Post  April  30  on  his  return  from  Athens)   by  the  King   and
the  Army  for   the  eventuality  of   a  Papandreou   victory  or  a
Communist  coup.     They   equated   the   two,   and   so—there  is
every   reason   to  believe—did   the   U.S.  military  mission,  the
CIA  and  the  American  Embassy  which  have  treated   Greece
as  a  protected  province  since  1947.    We  have  neither  broken
relations  with,  nor  ended  military  aid  to,  the  military dictator-
ship.    For  this  the  thousands  they  have  imprisoned  and   the
press  they have gagged  can  justifiably  blame  the  United  States.
The  result,  by  forcing, opposition  into  illegal  channels  and
giving  the   leadership  to   those   skilled   in   illegal   ways,  may
ultimately  benefit  the  Communists.     Thomas  T.  Fenton,   in  a
dispatch  from  Athens  to  the  Baltimore   Sun   (April   30)   re-
ports  a  conversation with  a  Western   diplomat  who  was  there
during  the  civil  war  and  estimates that  in  those  days the  insur-
gents  had  the  support  of  only  30  percent  of  the  Greek  people.
"He  now  estimates,"   Mr.  Fenton   cabled,   "that  if  a  counter-
revolution  develops  against  the  military  regime,  it  might  en-
joy  the  support  of  60  percent  of  the  population."     So  after
20  years  and  $2  billion  in  aid,  a  new  rebellion  would  have
twice  as  much  support  as  before.
Hot  Summer  Advice  Which  Ought  to  Be  Posted  in  Every  Police  Station  of  the  Land
"The  use  of  racial  eptihets,  such  as  'nigger',  'coon',  *boy',
and  'Pancho*  appears  to  be  widespread,  even  though   their
use  is  condemned  by  responsible  police  administrators.  The
President's  Commission  on  Crime in  the  District  of  Colum-
bia   found   that  'offensive   terms  such  as   1»oy'  or  'nigger'
are  too  often  used  by  officers  of  the  Department. ...  It
is  precisely  this  type  of  language  which  solidifies  the  con-
flict  between  minority  groups   and  the  police.  .  .  .   Police
should  not  base  decisions  to  arrest,  stop,   use  force,  or  the
like,  in  whole  or  in  part,  on  race,  poverty,  or  civil  right
activity."
—White  House  Task  Force  Report  on the  Police April  29.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  8,1967
Too  Many  Other  Senators  Helped  Him  and  His   German  Lobbyist  Friend
Why   It's  So Hard  for  the  Senate  to  Censure  Thomas  J. Dodd
By  Robert   G.  Sherrill
The   Senate   Ethics  Committee's   report   on  Thomas  Dodd
leaves  out  or  slips  over  most  of  the  really  big   questions.
Contrary  to  the  Committee's  emphasis,  Sen.  Dodd's  greatest
mischief  was  not  in  misusing  at  least  $150,000  (three  times
what  Adam  Clayton  Powell  got  in  kickbacks  from  his  staff),
but   in   promoting   a   foreign   agent   hired   by  West   German
right-wingers  to  drag  this  country  deeper  into  the  Cold   War.
Klein's  Other   Friends
The  Committee  report  brushes  this  off as  being  "indiscreet"
but  not  deserving  punishment,  and  fails  to  mention  that  its
hearings  had  found  this  indiscretion  being  shared   in  varying
degrees  by  Hubert  Humphrey,  Speaker  McCormack,  and  Sen-
ators  Dirksen,  Javits,  Morse  and  Symington.    All  helped   pro-
tect  the  smudged  career  of  Maj.  Gen.  Julius  Klein  (ret.),  who
was  paid  not  only  by  Bonn  hardliners but  also  by  major  Ger-
man   bankers  and   industrialists  (the   Ethics  Committee   deli-
cately  agreed  not  to  ask Klein  to  identify  them). What  Klein
had  to  sell  these  German   clients  were   his  friendly   relations
with  these  liberal  Senators  and   his  position   as  head   of   the
Jewish  War  Veterans.    This  last  detail  is the  most   nauseating.
Letters  and  memos  introduced   at  the   hearings   show   that
Klein   looked   upon   the   Senators  as  lackies   (Humphrey   and
Symington,  he  thought,  would  hop  over  to  Europe  any  week-
end  to  do  him  a  favor)   and  that  he  had  some  grounds   for
feeling  that  way.    After  Senator   Fulbright's    1963    investiga-
tion  of  foreign  agents  had  revealed  Klein  to  be  something  of
a  pest  around  the  capitol,  his  German  industrial  clients  began
quitting  him.    To  win  them  back,  Klein  put  his  Senate  pals
to  work.
Obediently  Dodd  visited  Adenauer,   Erhard  and  other  key
German   politicians  in   1964   to  discredit   Fulbright   and   tout
Klein  as  one  of  Congress's  most  valued  councillors  and  there-
fore  worthy  of  Germany's  continued  hire.    Apparently  Klein
had  doubts   about  his  stooge's  capabilities;  before  Dodd   left
for  Europe  he  received  a  memo  from  Klein  advising  him  to
"let   Jack  Javits  brief  you  again!     Also  Dirksen,  Humphrey,
Morse  and   Symington."
Javits  had  preceded  Dodd  on  the  same  sort  of  Klein-polish-
ing  mission.    Morse,  meanwhile,  was  writing  letters  of  advice
and  praise  to  neutralize  the  "Fulbright  blight"  on  Klein's  ca-
reer.     Humphrey   too   wrote   gushing   letters   for   "my   dear
friend"  which  Klein  was  not  only  authorized  but   encouraged
to  show  to  his  client's  abroad   (clients  who  favored  a  tougher
If  Dodd  Had  Only  Done  What  Javits  Did
SEN.  MCCARTHY  <D. Minn.):  I  gather  .  .  .  that you
would  have  been  quite satisfied  had  Senator  Dodd  come
to  Germany  and  said  in  your  behalf  or  done  in  your
behalf  whatever  it  was  that  Senator  Javits  said  or did
in  your  behalf  in Germany.
GEN.  KLEIN:  That  is   right.
MCCARTHY:   Whatever   that   was,   it   would   have
satisfied   you?
KLEIN:  I  wouldn't  say  whatever  that  was.    I  mean
I  think  the  Senator  should  be  kind  enough  to  be  more
explicit.    I  wouldn't   ask  any  Senator  to  do   anything
wrong... .
MCCARTHY:  I  wasn't  asking  you  to  tell  what  Sena-
tor  Javits  did.    But  you  would  have  been  satisfied  if
Senator  Dodd  had  come  to  Germany and  done whatever
Senator  Javits  did?
KLEIN:  That  is  right.
—Stennis  Committee  Hearings  on  Dodd:  p.  537.
NATO,  a  hard  policy  in  Vietnam  and  in  the  Congo,   an  in-
flexible  enmity   toward   Russia),   letters   attesting   to   Klein's
"host  of  friends  in  Congress ...  in  both  poltical   parties."
Speaker   McCormack,   drawing  on  their  mutual  ties  with   the
Vatican,  put  in  a  good  word  with  Dr.  Ludger  Westrick,   then
Erhard's  under  secretary  of  commerce  whom  Klein   described
as  "important  to  me  to  [keep]  my  commercial  clients."   Klein
compared   Westrick    to   Robert   McNamara   in   this   country.
Dodd  was  not  the   only   one  to  spend   taxpayers'  time   and
money  to  help  a  foreign  agent,  though  the  Ethics  panel   acts
as  if   he   were.
Considering   its  dripping  apathy,  one  wonders  if  the  panel
would  have  acted  at  all  without  constant  pressure  from  Drew
Pearson   and   Jack  Anderson,  who  first  exposed   the   scandal.
It  refused   to  judge   charges   that  Dodd  had   accepted   money
from  drug,  firearm  and  insurance industries  he  was   supposed-
ly  investigating  or  about  to  investigate.     Like  Powell,  Dodd
was  also  accused  of  deadheading  his  payroll—but  this  wasn't
investigated   either.
Even   in  dealing   with   the   bogus  fund-raising  affairs,   the
Committee's   report  leaves  much  to  the  imagination.    Of   the
seven   testimonial   occasions,   Johnson   was   featured   guest   at
four,  Humphrey  at  another.    Thus  five  times  in  less  than  four
years  a  vice  president   took   time  off  to  help  Dodd  pass   the
hat,  but  the  Committee   fails   to  see  any  unusual   compassion
in  that.    Was  ever  a  Senator  so  loved?
Klein  to  Dodd:  Tell  the  Germans  I'm  Offsetting  the  Effects  of  Auschwitz
"Senator  Javits  visited  you  on  behalf  of  the   Republicans,
and  brought  you  the  special  message  of  support  from  my
good  friend,  the  Senate   Minority  Leader,  Senator  Everett
Dirksen   who   comes   from   the   state   of   Illinois—General
Klein's  home  state.    I  am  here  on  behalf  of  my  Democratic
colleagues.  . . .  There  are  a  lot  of  appeasers  and  do-gooders.
The  wounds of  the  Hitler  era  have not  healed  and  never will
heal,  as the  present  Auschwitz  trials  show.   The communists
and   left-wingers   are   taking  advantage   of   this,   and   are
utilizing  the  trials  and  the  Hitler period  for  propaganda  in
the  United  States.    To  offset  this ...  the  help  of  General
Klein   and  his   organization   has   been   of   great   assistance
to  us.  ...     He  deserves  not  only  our  gratitude  but  yours—
and  your  continued  support.   This  is  the  reason  I  am  here
to  explain.   We  hope  this  pleasant  relationship will  contine.
"The   city   of   Berlin   headed   by   Socialist   Mayor  Willy
Brandt  is  doing  a  splendid  job  through an  American  public
relations  agency  in  the  United  States. ...  A  huge  amount
is  spent  by  the  Berlin  city  council  but  it  is  of  course  neces-
sary  not  to  overlook  the  importance  of  the  national  public
relations  for  the  entire  Federal  Republic. .  .  ."
—From  Hearings   Exhibit  17:  script   prepared   by  lobby-
ist  Major  Gen. Julius  W. Klein for  Senator  Thomas  J.  Dodd
to  recite  when  meeting  Chancellor  Erhard  in  1964.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 8,1967
Why   Must  We   'Pacify'  Them,  If  They're  Victims  of  Aggression?
(Continued   from   Page   One)
One   passage   of  Westmorland's   speech   to   Congress   was
downright  idiotic—his  assertion  that  "in  three  years  of  close
study  and  daily  observation"  he  had  seen  "no  evidence"   (our
italics)   "that  this  is  an   internal   insurrection."    This   ignores
the  overwhelming  weight  of  scholarship, all  that  was  learned
from  Diem's  downfall  and  the  plain  implication of  our  own
"pacification"  and  "revolutionary development"  program.     If
this  is  simply  invasion  from   the  North,   why  do  we  have  to
"pacify"  its  victims  in  the  South?    Who  ever  heard  of  having
to  placate  a  people  saved  from  aggression?    Did  we  have  to
pacify   Paris  after   driving  the  Germans  out?    Or   offer   land
reform  to  the  French  peasantry  to  reconcile  them  to  the  defeat
of  the  Nazi  occupiers?    Even Generals have  rarely indulged  in
more  palpable  nonsense.
Viet  Cong  Not  All  Red
An  altogether  different  picture  is  drawn  in  the  Republican
Blue   Book.     It   begins  by   saying   that   Eisenhower's   aid   to
Diem,  far  from  being  an  open-ended  commitment  to  military
involvement,  was  predicated  on  the  creation  of  a  government
(in  the  words  of  Ike's  letter,  Oct.   23,  1954)    "so  responsive
to  the  nationalistic  aspirations of  the  people"  and  "so  enlight-
ened  in  purpose  and  effective  performance"  as  to  win   popular
support.    It  was  failure  to  achieve  these  objectives that  led  to
the  collapse  of  the  Diem  regime;  its  undoing  was  a  growing
discontent Westmoreland's  three years of  "close study and  daily
observation"  managed  not  to  see.    The  GOP   Blue  Book  says
a  renewal  of  guerrilla  activity  was  made  "both  inevitable  and
successful"  not  only  by  the  refusal  to  hold  the  elections  prom-
ised  at  Geneva  but  by  the  suppression  of  "all  political  opposi-
tion  in  the  south, and  not  just the  Viet  Cong";  by  Diem's  reli-
ance  on  Catholic  refugees   from   the  North   to   govern    "the
largely  Buddhist population  of  the  south"   and  by  his  aboli-
tion  of  village  elections.    "Many  of  the  revolutionists in   the
South,"  the  GOP   report  says,  "were  not  necessarily  Commu-
nist  to  begin  with,  but  rather  anti-Saigon and   anti-Diem."
The  report  challenges Rusk's assertion that  Hanoi  could  end
the  war  "literally  in  24  hours."     It   says  the  NLF   has   been
Bulletin  From  That  Frontier  of   Freedom
Saigon—Strict   censorship  of   South  Vietnam's  press
remains  in  effect  despite  the  new  April  1  constitution
guaranteeing   freedom   of   the   press.     In   the  view  of
both  U.S.  officials   and  Vietnamese  observers,   the  pro-
visional   military  regime  of   Premier  Ky   has   cracked
down  even  harder.  .  .  .  Legislative  Assembly   debates
continue  to  go  either  unreported  or  are  given perfunc-
tory  or  distorted   treatment   in  official   handouts. ...
The  civilian  candidates  for  the  Presidency   .  .  .  have
been   targets   of   a  concerted   campaign  of   smear   and
ridicule.  .  .  .  "When  an  American  reporter  protested
the  prolonged  closure   [of   The  Guardian  "the   English
language  newspaper  which  refused   to  toe  the  govern-
ment  line"]  to  Philip  Habib,  the  former  political  coun-
sellor  [of  the  U.S.  Embassy],   Habib  reportedly  replied,
'Who cares about The  Guardian ?  There's  plenty  of  other
papers.    Besides  they  provoked  the  government.'"
—Richard   Critchfield   in  Washington   Star  May  1.
"southern  oriented"  and  that  "40  of  their  senior  leaders  were
native  South  Vietnamese."  It  accuses  President  Kennedy  of  re-
verting  "to  old-fashioned  gunboat  diplomacy"  in  dealing  with
this  insurrectionary problem  and  Johnson  of  ignoring  an   offer
of  peace  talks  from  Hanoi  after  Kennedy's  death.    It   exposes
the  false  assurances  with  which  Johnson   obtained   his   blank
check  for  escalation  in  the  Tonkin  Bay  affair,  which  it  traces
back  (as  we  did  in  the   Weekly")    not  to  an  "unprovoked  ag-
gression,"  but  to  a  South  Vietnamese   naval  raid   on  North
Vietnamese  radar  and  naval  installations.
There  is  little  the  critics  of  the  war  have  said  that  is  not
supported   and  documented   in  this  91-page   study.    It   makes
the   same  points  we  did   in  reply  to  the   State  Department's
mendacious  White  Paper  of  1965.    It  criticizes  current  failure
to  keep  promises  of  land  reform  and  it  spells  out  the  history
of  opportunities   for  peace  talks  we  rebuffed.     It  asks  in  con-
clusion,   "Does  the  Republican   Party   serve   America   best  by
saying  that  politics  stops  at  the  water's  edge?    That  we  must
rally  behind   the  President?     Does  bipartisanship  mean   that
Democratic   mistakes  are  Republican   responsibilities?"    Here
from  right  of  center,  is  new  support  for  the  peace   campaign.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Street   .................................
City  ....................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name   .......................
Street    .................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington,   D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
7in                 State.  ....
5/8/67
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,    N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except  in   August,   the  last   week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..   Washington,  D.  C.    An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED