I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967may15.pdf

============================================================

Andrew  Kopkind:  The  Confessions   of  the CIA's  Arch-Seducer,  P.  3
Twelve  U.S.  Religious  Leaders Put  Some  Questions  to  Gen. Westmoreland
"Do  you  believe  national  decisions  which  might  lead  to  a
Third  World  War should  not be  discussed  and debated?  .  .  .
Would  it  be  patriotism  on  the  part  of  those  who  dissent  to
say  nothing?  . .  . We are  told  this  is  a  limited  war, yet  limit
after  limit  is  being  exceeded.   How  can  we  believe there  is
any  limit  beyond  which  U.S.  escalation  will  not  go?"
—Letter  by  Methodist   Bishops  Lord  (DC),  Stuart   (Den-
ver),   Grant   (Portland)    and  Alton   (Madison);    Episcopal
Bishops   Corrigan  (NY),    Davidson   (Kansas),   Moore   (DC)
and    Butterfield     (Vt)     and   Rabbis   Lelyveld      (Cleveland),
Prim   (Newark),     Gittelsohn   (Boston)    and   Schwarzchild
(St.   Louis).   Released  May  3, but  ignored  by  the  press.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,  NO.  17MAY  15,  1967»'
01
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Dangerous  Time  to  Dream  of  Dangerous  Games
There   never  was  a  more   deceptive  headline  in   the   U.S.
News  &  World  Report  than  the  "How   to  Prevent  A  Nuclear
War"   on  its  cover  May  15.    This  turned  out  to  be  another
example  of  the  propaganda  being  put  out  by  the  milita'ry-in-
dustrial  complex  in  its  campaign  for   an  anti-ballistic  missile
system.    This  would  be  a  $50  billion  bonanza  for  the  arma-
ment   makers,   a  sharp  spiral  upward   in   the   arms  race  but
money  down  the  drain as  far  as  real  security is concerned.  The
article  reprinted  Gen.  Wheeler's  statement  in  favor  of  build-
ing  an  anti-ballistic  missile  system  to  the  House   Appropria-
tions  Committee  in  the  Defense  Budget  hearings  just  released
May  3.   Gen.  Wheeler  spoke  as chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs
of   Staff   in  their  united  opposition   to  the  views  of  Secretary
McNamara.    The  Joint  Chiefs  are  trying  to  sell  the  view  that
there  is  a  defense  against  the  ICBM,  and  that  if  we  had  one
we  could  successfully  risk  a  nuclear  first  strike  in  defense  of
our   "interests."
Pied  Pipers  of  The  Nuclear  Age
The  Joint  Chiefs  say they  fear  that  the  Soviets  by  deploying
anti-missile  defenses  and  hardening  their  ICBM  bases  (as  we
have already done)  "would  reduce  U.S.  confidence  in  our  abil-
ity  to  penetrate  Soviet  defenses,   thereby  reducing  the   possi-
bility  that  the  U.S.  would  undertake  a  pre-emptive  first  strike
against  the  Soviet  Union,  even  under   extreme   provocation."
The  verbiage  is  as  corkscrew  as  the  mentality.   What  neither
they  nor  U.S.  News  do  not  discuss  candidly  is  that  we  are  far
from  knowing  definitely  whether  and  on  what  scale  the  Soviets
are  building an  ABM  system.   Nor   does  U.S.  News  give  its
readers  from  the  House  hearings   the  statement   by  Marshal
Chuykov,  the  Soviet  Chief  of  Civil  Defense,  admitting  as  re-
cently  as  Feb.  22  that  there  is  no  way  to  "guarantee   complete
security  .  .  .  from  the  blows  of  the  enemy's  weapons  of  mass
destruction."     U.S.  News   does   not   deal   with   McNamara's
contention  that  any   ABM   system  can  be  countered,   at   less
cost  than  the  system  itself,  by  increasing the  number  and  size
of  the  other  side's warheads.   And  it  does  not  give  its  readers
this   illuminating  bit   of   testimony  after   the   committee  had
heard  both  Wheeler  and   McNamara:
Mr.  MINSHALL   (R.   Ohio):  I   think   the  result   of   the
whole  colloquy  is  neither  the  Soviet  Union  nor  the  United
States   would   survive   as   a   nation   in   an  all-out  nuclear
attack.
Secretary  McNAMARA:  I  think  that  is  a  fair  conclusion.
Mr.  MINSHALL:  If  we  had  a  reasonably  sophisticated
'    5
Helpful  Hint  to  the  New  Greek  Regime
In  the  old  days  before  there  was   a  Red  menace  to
provide   a   blanket   excuse   for   U.S.   interventionism,
every  leader  of  a  liberation uprising  against  American
domination  was  immediately dubbed  a bandit.  Aguinaldo
in  the  Philippines  was  a  bandit  and  Sandino  in  Nica-
ragua  was  a  bandit.    But  we  don't  recall  as  genuinely
a  case  of  banditry  as  the  interview in  which  a  member
of   the  new  military   junta  ruling  Greece  (New  York
Times  from  Athens  May 6)  hinted  that  the  fate  of  An-
dreas  Papandreou  might   depend  on  whether  the   U.S.
resumed  the  economic  aid  it  discontinued in  1963  and
increased  the  military  aid  which is  running  at  $70 mil-
lion   a   year.    The  military  are  preparing  to   try   the
younger  Papandreou on  charges  of  treason  and  assume
that  the  U.S.  has  "a  special  interest"  in  him  because
his  wife  is  an  American.
If  this  doesn't  work,  why  not  try  holding  the Ameri-
can Ambassador for ransom?
ABM  system   in  effect   as  would  the  Soviet   Union, would
that  change  the  picture in  any  way  to  survive  as  a  nation?
You  say  you  are  going  to  save  120  million  lives  [McNa-
mara  nowhere  makes  so  huge  a  claim—IFS].    Could  we
survive  as  a  viable  nation?
Secretary  McNAMARA:  Not  if  they  maintained, as  we
think  they  would,  their  deterrent power.
The  best  answer  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   can  give  in  the
excerpt  published   by  U.S.  News  is  that   "nobody   can  say  at
what  point   of   nuclear   destruction   a  nation   is  no   longer   a
viable  society."    We'd   hate  to  see  a  try-out.    They   say  that
the  Soviets  lost  25  million  people  in  World  War   II  yet  sur-
vived.    "These  losses  are  not  exactly  comparable,  of  course,"
the  Joint  Chiefs  admit,  to  what  would  happen   in  a  nuclear
war,  "because  they  lost  25  million  people  perhaps   over  a  pe-
riod  of  some  four  to  five  years"  while  a  nuclear  war  would
involve  "the  loss  of  25-or-more million  people  in  a  matter  of
hours,  and  the  psychological  shock  and  other  effects  would  be
considerably  different."    That  is  a  model  of  understatement.
With  25  million  dead,  there  could  easily be  25  or  50 million
sick  and  wounded.   Who  would  care  for  them?    And  in what
hospitals?    "Nevertheless,"  the  Joint  Chiefs  insist,  "one  na-
tion  will  probably  survive  best  in  a  nuclear  exchange.     The
30,  40  or   50  million  American  lives  that  could  be  saved  by
Nike-X,   1'ierefore  are  meaningful."    But  how  meaningful, if
there  we'  • still  90,   80   or  70  million  dead—for   that  is   the
(Continued    on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 15, 1967
What  An  Industrialized  Country  Like  Ours  Finds  So  Hard  to Understand
McNamara  Tries  to  Explain:  Shutting
Rep.  MINSHALL  (R.  Ohio):  The  Secretary  and  others  who
testified  before us  here  said  it  does  not  do  any  good  or  won't
do  any  good   to  close  down  the  Port  of   Haiphong  or  shut
down  the  rail  lines  because  they  only  need  this  small limited
tonnage  in  South  Vietnam.  .  .  .
Oil  Port  Facilities  Already Destroyed
Sec.  MCNAMARA:  I  said  that  closing  the  port  of  Haiphong
[deleted}  would  not  deter  the  North  Vietnamese  from  bring-
ing  in  whatever  war  associated  supplies  they  required,  such  as
POL  [petroleum].    For  all  practical  purposes  we  had  already
closed  off  the  Port  of  Haiphong  to  POL  in  the  sense  of  hav-
ing  destroyed  their  unloading  facilities.   But  they  continue  to
import  essentially the  same  POL  today  as  they  did  before  our
POL  campaign  was  initiated  on  June  29.    I  think  they  would
do  the  same  thing  for  any  other  critical  supplies.    They  could
bring  those  over  the  beaches.    When  one  thinks  of  the  econ-
omy  of  North  Vietnam,  one  must  recognize  that  it  is primar-
ily  agriculturally oriented. ...  ,1  think  they  could  all  be  cut
off  with  the  exception  of  a  few  supplies  associated  with  mili-
tary  operations,  such  as  petroleum,  without  forcing  them   to
stop  their  operations  in  the  South.  .  .  .
Rep.  MINSHALL:  Fine,  but  you  can  put  pressure  on  the  peo-
ple  of  North  Vietnam  and  make  them   feel  the  pressure  at
home.
Sec.  McNAMARA:  That   is  right.     Another  point,   I  agree
that  the  interference with  imports  would  put  additional  poli-
tical  pressure  in  effect   on  the  political  leaders  of  the  North.
However,  it  also  brings with  it  great  potential  risks  of  widen-
ing  the  war.   The  question  is balancing one  against  the  other.
Up  to  the  present  it  has  seemed  unwise  to  incur  those  addi-
tional  risks.    (Discussion  off  the  record.)-.
—Before   House  Appropriations,  March  1, released May  4
Rep.  SIKES  (D.  Fla):  I  have  been  puzzled  by  your  insist-
ence  that  we  are  doing  all  that  we  can  possibly  do  in  the  way
of  bombing  to  stop  the  movement  of  supplies. ...  It  would
seem  .  .  .  that  the  greater  pressure  on  North  Vietnam  would
be  productive  of   a  change   in   their  attitude  toward   a  con-
tinued  war.
Sec.  McNAMARA:  I  think  you  are  quite  correct  in  saying
that  the  load  will  become  greater.    The  problem  from  a mili-
tary  point  of  view  is  that  their  capacity  is  still  substantial  in
relation  to  the  load  for  the  Southern  guerrillas.  Although  the
load  will  become  greater,  it  will  still  be very,  very  small.  .  . .
Rep.  MINSHALL:  How  about  supplies  to  the  civilian  popu-
lation  of  North  Vietnam ? Couldn't  we  put  pressure  on  them ?
Sec.  MCNAMARA:  There  again  the  principal  supplies  are  of
local  origin—rice  which  is  grown  locally  and  fish  caught   Io-
Off  Haiphong  Not  Worth  The  Risk
29  Who  Spoke  Out
A  letter  urging  President   Johnson  not   to  bomb  or
mine  the  port  of  Haiphong  was  made  public  May  5  by
29  House  Democrats, worried  by  reports that  action  to
close  the  harbor  was  under  consideration.   They  were
Bingham   (NY),   Brasco  (NY),   Brown   (Cal),   Burton
(Cal),   Cohelan   (Cal),   Conyers   (Mich),   Dow   (NY),
Edwards   (Cal),  Farbstein  (NY),  Eraser   (Minn),  Gil-
bert   (NY),   Green   (Ore),   Hawkins   (Cal),   Helstoski
(NJ),   Kastenmeier  (Wis),   Leggett   (Cal),   McCarthy
(NY),   Mink   (Hawaii),  Moorhead   (Pa),   O'Hara   (111),
Ottinger   (NY),   Rees   (Cal),  Reuss   (Wis),   Rosenthal
NY),  Roybal  (Cal),  Ryan  (NY),  Scheuer  (NY),  Tenzer
(NY)   and  Yates   (111).
cally  and  charcoal  and  items  of  that  kind  which  are  produced
locally.     It   is  not   a  highly   industrialized   society  depending
upon   imports  or  exports.
Rep.   MINSHALL:   Why   then   are  they  shipping   so  much
into  the  port  of   Haiphong   and   by  rail   then   from  China?
What  is  that  total  tonnage?
Sec.  McNAMARA:  Actually  their  tonnage  is quite  small.  .  . .
in  the  month  of  December   we  put  through   more  dry  cargo
into  South  Vietnam  through   the  ports  than  was  put   through
the entire  year  in North  Vietnam.    We  shipped  into  the  south
[deleted]  times  more  wet  cargo  in  1  month  than  the  North
received  in  a  full  year.
Rep.  MINSHALL : How  much  of  this total  tonnage  is  shipped
south  into  South  Vietnam?
Sec.  MCNAMARA: ...  It  is  a  very  small  quantity.    Do  you
think  that  is  a  fair  appraisal;  General?
Gen.  WHEELER:  Yes. ...  If  they  can  move  in  ah  average
of  a  couple  hundred  tons  a  day  of  supply,  they  will  be  able  to
sustain   the  tempo   of   operations  that  they  are  doing  today.
Rep.   MINSHALL:  What  would  happen,  Mr.   Secretary,  in
view  of  these  imports  of   over  [deleted]  tons  a  year  by  all
sources—if  we  successfully, or  with  90%  success,  sealed  off  or
stopped  the  flow  of  these  imports  into  North  Vietnam—what
effect  would  that  have  on  the  war  effort  and  the  economy  and
the  morale  of  the  civilians  in  North  Vietnam?
Sec.  MCNAMARA:  I  think  that  the  economy  of  North  Viet-
nam  could  continue  essentially without  imports.  .  .  .
Rep.   SIKES:   But   it   would   be  more   difficult   for   them   to
supply  the  war  in  Vietnam.
Sec.  MCNAMARA:  Yes,  that  is  correct.  .  .  .  The   problem
is  that. ...  it  is  very  small  in  terms  of  the  North's capacity.
It  is  extremely  difficult   no  matter  how  skilled  the  air  attack
may  be  to  stop  such  a  small  flow.
—Testimony  Feb. 20  in same hearings,  pps.  74-77.
New  Glimpses  of  the  Costs  and  Magnitude  of  Our Bombing  in  Southeast  Asia
Relevant  to  this  picture  of  the  frustrations  which  occur
in  trying  to  bomb  a  non-industrialized  society  and  a  guer-
rilla  force  into  submission  are  new  disclosures  in  the  same
House  hearings  on  plane  losses.    These   show   (p.  112)   a
loss  of  2,083  planes  in  Southeast  Asia  from  January  1961
through  June  30  of  this  year  (the  last  five  months being an
estimate).    Of  these  1,411  were  fixed  wing  planes  and  672
helicopters.    In  dollar  terms  these  losses  probably  repre-
sent  close  to  $2  billions.   Related  figures  were  disclosed  by
Senator   Stennis   May  5   at   a  Preparedness subcommittee
hearing  on  pilot  shortages.  The  Marines  are  short  851  pilots
now  and  projected  a  shortage  of   1,021  in  the  next   fiscal
year.    The  Chief  of  Naval  Operations  said  the  Navy  was
short   2,430  aviators.    The  Army   (it   flies   the  helicopters)
has   not   yet   been  heard  from   and  the   Air   Force   figures
have  not  yet  been cleared.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 15, 1967
An  Impresario  of   Political  Seduction   "Tells  All"—But  Why  the  Confession?
He  Claims  to  Have  Fought  With  Ideas  But  He  Bought  Them  for  Cash
By  Andrew  Kopkind
Whether  or  not  Tom  Braden  personally won  the  cold  war,
he  was  certainly  its  most  energetic  impresario.    As  the  found-
er  and  director  (from  1950  to  1954)   of  the  CIA's Byzantine
system  of   subsidies  to  anti-communist fronts,  Braden  started
magazines,   promoted   conferences   of   intellectuals,  and    ar-
ranged  concert  tours,  like  a  Sol  Hurok  out  of   Ian   Fleming.
"I  remember  the  enormous  joy  I  got  when  the  Boston  Sym-
phony  Orchestra  won  more  acclaim for  the  U.S.  in  Paris  than
John   Foster  Dulles  or   Dwight   D.   Eisenhower  could  have
bought with  a hundred  speeches,"  Braden  says in  the  course of
his  misty-eyed defense  of  CIA  covert-action  programs  in  the
current  Saturday  Evening  Post.    Such  were  the  joys:  the  suc-
cess  of  Encounter  (an  "agent"  was  editor),  the  impact  of  the
Congress  for   Cultural  Freedom,   the   recruitment  of  Eleanor
Roosevelt  (for  a  women's  committee  front),  the  subversion of
student  councils,  youth assemblies, and  labor  unions.
$50,000  in  $50  Bills
Braden  did  not  confine  his  interests  to  culture.    He  gave
Irving  Brown  of  the  American  Federation  of  Labor  $15,000
to  bribe  dockers  in   France  to  unload  American   "supplies"
(that  is,  arms).    He  says  he  shelled  out  $2  million  annually
to  the  AFL's  Jay  Lovestone,  who  used  it  to  split  the  French
and  Italian  labor  movements.   On  one  occasion,  he  gave  Vic-
tor  Reuther of  the  United  Auto  Workers  $50,000  in  $50  bills
to  buy  off  West  German  labor.
There  was  nothing  "immoral"  in  all  of  that,  Braden  says,
because  morality  does  not  apply  in  wartime,  and   "the   cold
war  is  a  war,  fought  with  ideas  instead  of  bombs."    Exactly
what  ideas  were  in  his  arsenal  is  unclear.     Presumably,   he
meant   to   bombard  naive  foreigners   with   the   notions   that
American  institutions  were  independent,  that  the  society  was
open,  that there was  fundamental democratic control  of  policy-
making.   "We   started  with  nothing   but  the  truth,"  Braden
writes with typical modesty.     But if  there was any truth to  those
ideas  at  the  beginning,  covert-action  soon  dissipated  it.  Every
major  organization  in  the  US with  foreign  policy  interests was
subsidized,  manipulated  or  neutralized. The  society was  closed
to  organized opposition;  resistance  was  impossible.    No  demo-
cratic  body  had  the  slightest  knowledge  of  what  the  CIA  was
doing,  nor  could   any  exercise  control.    And   the  only  truth
the  CIA  could  disseminate  was  the   absolute   value   of   cash.
That   medium  was  its   message.
Braden's  familiar  rationalization is  that  covert-action  was  a
"I  told   [Allen  Dulles]  I  thought  the  CIA  ought   to
take  on  the  Russians  by  penetrating  a  battery  of  inter-
national  fronts.  . . .  'You  know,' he said ...  'I  think  you
may   have   something  there.    There's  no  doubt   in  my
mind  that  we're  losing  the   cold   war.    Why  don't  you
take  it  up  down   below?' ...  It  was  decided   that   I
should  pitch  my   argument   to   [Frank]   Wisner     [CIA
Director   of  Policy  Coordination]  ...  I  thought,   when
I  finished,  that   I  had  made  a  good  case.    Wisner    ges-
tured  at  the  Chief,  Western  Europe.    'Frank,'  came  the
response,  'this  is  just  another  one  of  those  goddamned
proposals  for  getting  into  everybody's  hair.'"
^-Thomas  W. Braden,  in  the S.E.P., May 20.
Battle  for   Men's  Minds—With  Blackjacks?
"It  was  my  idea  to  give  the  $15,000  to  Irving  Brown
[the  A.  F.  of  L.'s  overseas  operative].    He  needed  it  to
pay  off  his  strong-arm   squads  in  Mediterranean  ports,
so   that   American   supplies  could  be  unloaded  against
the  opposition  of  Communist   dock  workers."
—Thomas  W.  Braden,  in  the S.E.P., May SO.
purely  defensive  weapon.    But  one  side's  defense  is  the  other
side's  aggression   (the  "Defense"   Department,   after  all,  runs
the  war  in  Vietnam).    In  the  early  Fifties,  the  CIA  tried  to
buy  Europe,  if  only  on  the  cheap,  as  it  has  Lately  tried  to  buy
the  Third  World.    The  CIA  fronts  may  have  been   bulwarks
against  Stalinism, but  they were  also  ways to  render  ineffective
serious   opposition    to   the    economic   and    political   system
through  which  the  U.S.  exercises  its  modern,   liberal   version
of   the  imperial  mandate.    Dissent—within  the  system—was
not   only  allowed;   it  was  encouraged.    After  all,  as   Allen
Dulles   (according  to  Braden)   once  told  Senator  Knowland:
"in  many  European  countries,  a  socialist  is  roughly  equivalent
to  a  Republican."    The  trick  was  not  to  destroy  dissent  but  to
de-fang   it.     After   that,   the   dissenters—like   the   natives  in
Africa—became  the  most  effective  colonial  agents.
Braden's  apologia  is  really  a  significant  contribution  to  an
understanding  of  the  colonizing  process.    Why  he  chose  to
tell  all,  or  almost  all,  remains  somewhat  of  a  mystery.  Until
now,  there  have  been  only  two  indirect  ways  of   establishing
the  connection  of  the  CIA  with  front   groups.     One  was  by
deduction   from   records   of   contributions  made   to  organiza-
tions  exposed  in  congressional  investigations as  CIA  conduits.
The  other  was  the  evidence given  by Mike  Wood,  a  National
Student  Association  staff   member  who  heard   about  the  CIA
operations   second-hand,    from   his   "witting"   roommate,   the
NSA   president.     Braden  supplies   the   first   direct  testimony.
It  is  hard  to  kick  the  habits  of  complicity.    The  CIA  not
only  spread  its  value  system  abroad;  it  infected  all  it  touched,
or  trickled  down   to,  at  home.     Braden  neatly  exposed   the
hypocrisy  of  the  Reuther  brothers;  they  have  been   sounding
off   on  the  sins  of  others  for  a  long  time.    George  Meany's
petulant  press-conference  denials  were  self-discrediting.    He
chopped   logic  with  words:  the  AFL-CIO  "never  received  any
CIA  money,"  but  individual labor  leaders  "will  have  to  speak
for   themselves."
The   best  that  can  be  expected  from  the  spy  game  is  that
it  will  discredit  itself  and  its  players.    But  before  that  hap-
pens,  a  pattern   of  thinking  is  established  that  is  difficult   to
break.     Washington    is  full   of   high   and   low   officials   with
various   "intelligence   backgrounds."      Like   Braden   himself,
most  are  liberal,  bright,  active.    He  was  a  battling   California
Education  Board  chairman  (for   ].  D.  Salinger,  against  Max
Rafferty),  a  fearless  newspaper  publisher,  and  the  liberal  can-
didate  for  lieutenant  governor   in  last  year's  Democratic  pri-
mary.    But  Braden  and  his  fo-operatives   have  absorbed   all
the  predictable  attitudes.   They  covet  the  status  of  inside-dope-
sterism.    They  know  how  hard  it  is to  work  through  the  open
democratic  process,   and   how   easy  to  short-cut.     They   have
once  been  agents  of  empire,  and  they  are  not  likely  to  forget.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 15,1967
An  Additional  $50  Billions  The  Vietnamese  War   May  Cost  Us
(Continued  from   Page One)
obverse  of  these figures ?    And  what  of  the  net  effect  if build-
ing   Nike-X,   and   then   Super-Nike   and   then   Super-Duper
Nike,  were only  to  encourage  fresh  increases  in  offensive  pow-
er   until   we   reach   the   point   of   saturation   where   no   one
survived ?
As  MacArthur  Warned
What  the  Joint  Chiefs  will  not  face  up  to  is  that  nuclear
war  is no  longer  a  feasible instrument  of  national  policy  even,
as  they  say, "under   extreme   provocation."     As   MacArthur
warned  in  one  of   the  final  speeches  of  his  life   before   the
Filipino  Congress  in  Manila,  July  5,  1961, "If   you  lose,  you
are  annihilated.    If  you  win,  you  stand  only  to  lose.    It [nu-
clear  war] contains  now  only  the  germs  of  double  suicide."
This  is  what  the  Joint  Chiefs  are  reluctant  to  admit,  for  to
admit  it  is  to  admit  the  obsolescence  of  their  own   professions
and  the  urgent  need  for  a new  world  order,  in  which  national
armies  will  be  abolished   as  a  common   menace  to  mankind.
Twice  in  their  presentation  they  speak   of  keeping  alive  the
possibility,  the  threat  or  the  option  under  certain  circumstances
of  a  first strike by the  U.S.    This  is a  dangerous  state  of  mind.
Thermonuclear  weapons,  unlike  sabres,  cannot  be  rattled  safe-
ly.   They  talk  of  losing  25 million  or  more  lives  in  the  process
as  if  this  were  some  statistical  trifle.    They  do  not   envisage
a  nation  in  ruins,  without  power,  communications  or  govern-
ment,  a  prey  to  panic  and  banditry.    To  have  a  Joint  Chiefs
willing  to  consider  the  unleashing   of  nuclear   war  is  to  risk
this  reality,  not  to  prevent  it.
A  less  complacent  view  of  the  potentialities  came  from  that
high  government  official  who  said  here  recently  that  we had  to
conduct   the   Vietnamese   war   "rather   coldly"   because   our
thermonuclear  power   is  so  "beyond   comprehension"  that  we
dare  not  let  it  get  out  of  hand  "if  the  Northern   hemisphere
is  not  to go up  in  smoke."   We  guessed  in  our  issue  of  May 1
that  this  anonymous  report  in  the  Baltimore  Sun  (April   21)
might  have  been  President  Johnson  himself  talking  to  Philip .
Potter.     We   have  since  learned  it  was  Secretary   Rusk  in  a
backgrounder   on   Capitol   Hill   for   constituents   of    Senator
Percy.    The   remark   is  a  measure   of   the   dangers—dangers
Another  Vietnam  High  in  The  Andes?
Those  members of  Congress  who say  we  should never
have  gotten  involved  in  Vietnam,  but  now  that  we're
there,  etc. .  .  .  should  be  challenged on  our  first  steps
toward   involvement  in   Bolivia.     We   have   in   mind
especially   Senators   Stennis   and  Russell.    They  have
the  power  to  halt  intervention  before  it  takes  on  such
dimensions  as  to  put  American  prestige  at  stake.    A
regime  that  is  thrown  into crisis  by  30  to  120 guerrillas
in   one  inaccessible  corner  of  the   country  isn't  worth
much.    The  impact  of  the  guerrillas is  on  the  prestige
of  the  military.    "The  open  snickering" at  their  "inept-
ness"  is   described  by   John   M.  Goshko  (Washington
Post,  May  9).     He  writes  from   La  Paz, that  for  the
average  Bolivian  the  army  "has  managed  to  lose  every
war  in  the  nation's  history  and  has  functioned  mainly
as  a  private militia  that  enables  a  tiny  white oligarchy
to  keep  the  Indian  majority  in  virtual  servitude."  We
are  sending  in  arms  and  U.S. Rangers.    The  more  we
send  the  greater  our  identification  with  the   oligarchy
and  the  military.
beyond  our  worst  imaginings—in  the  steady  escalation  of  the
Vietnamese  conflict.
On  the  one  hand  the  growing  intensity  of  the  war  makes
it  more  difficult  to  reach  any  kind  of  agreement  with  the  Rus-
sians.    The  hopes  of  Johnson   and   McNarnara  to   negotiate
a  standstill   with  Moscow   in  offensive   and  defensive  nuclear
weapons  may go  up  in  smoke  over  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.     A
$50  billion   dollar   anti-ballistic  missile  race  may  be  another
of  the  costs  of  the  Vietnamese  war.  On  the  other  hand,  as
escalation  rises,  what  if  we  bomb  a Russian vessel  in  Haiphong
or  Russian  ground-to-ground   missiles  sink  a U.S.  carrier  in  the
Gulf   of  Tonkin?    Would  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   see  the
former  as  occasion   for  a  "pre-emptive"  first  strike  before  the
Russians  could  react,  or  the  latter  that  "extreme   provocation"
which  would  justify  a  nuclear  surprise  attack  on  the  Russians ?
These  are  questions  which  should  be  raised  before  some  irre-
parable  incident  occurs,  even  if  the  Joint  Chiefs  were  sure  it
would  end  in  one  of  those  bargain  basement  nuclear  victories
—with  only  25  million   dead!
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes—
I. P. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Of roAf
atv
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street   .................................
City
5618  Nebraska Ave.,
Washington,  D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a  sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
7in           ..      Statp   ...
5A5/67
Indicate  if   announcement   wished   D
I. R  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,   the  last   week   in   December   and  the
t  week   in  Jan'                                                                                ~               '  '    ~ '       '       '                               - -             -             —    ~
by  I.  F.   Ston
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
one;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.:  $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$17  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED