I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jan16.pdf

============================================================

The  Dixiecrat  Comeback  in  Powell's Fall,  P.  2
Barry  Goldwater Makes It  Practically Unanimous
"Johnson's  stock  promises  to  recover  part  way  from  its          "Taipeh, Taiwan, Jan. 8 (AP)—Barry Goldwater said today
current  low  level.  .  .  .  But  basic  sources  of  public  discon-      .  .  .  that  if  the  Vietnam war  was  still  on in  1968  the  Demo-
tent  .  .  .  will  persist  if  there's  no  Vietnam  peace."                     crats  would  lose  the  White  House  and  probably  Congress."
—Wall  Street Journal:  Washington  Wire, Jan.  6.                                                             —New  York  Times, Jan.  9.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XV,  NO.   2
JANUARY   16,   1967
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15   CENTS
A  Strategy  Only  Fellow  Con-Men  Can Appreciate
The  State  of  the  Union  message  was  a  half-hearted  affair,
delivered  to  a  half-hearted  audience.    The  warmest   applause
greeted  the  reference  to  lower  interest  rates  and  revival  of  the
home  building  market.    This  touched   the  profit   nerve  in  a
Congress   dominated  by  small  town  business  men   and   their
lawyers,   many  of   them   engaged    in   real   estate   speculations
dependent  on  cheap  money.    The  most  revealing  reaction  was
the   tepid  applause   when   the  President   quoted   Gen.   West-
moreland   as  saying  the   enemy  could   no   longer   succeed   on
the  battlefield.     Congress  has  heard  too  many  predictions  by
too  many  Generals  in  this  war.    Something  more  deadly  than
unpopularity  has  overtaken  this  conflict—it  has  become  a  bore.
Congress   is  tired  of   it.    It  wasn't  particularly  thrilling  any-
way  to  hear  that  the  world's  most  powerful  military  machine,
and  certainly  the  most  costly  and  the  most  boastful,   couldn't
be  knocked  out  on  the  battlefield  by  a  ragged  army  of  under-
fed  coolies.    If  that  negative  proposition  was  the  Pentagon's
best  sales  talk,  the  war  was  a  poor  buy.    Westmoreland  may
yet  go  down  in  history  as  the  first  General  to  be  saluted  by
a  yawn.
Nothing  Big  Enough
Nothing  in  the  Johnson  program  has  dimension.    The  tax
boost  is  too  small  to  end  the  deficit.    The  social  program   is
too  small  to  do  more  than  provoke   the  poor.    The  old  age
pension   increase  is  too  small  to  save  the  elderly  from   slow
starvation.    The  war  is too  small  to  enthuse  the  hawks.    John-
son  is like  a speaker  who  has  begun  to  lose his  audience.    The
audience  senses  that  he  knows  it.    This  is  the  moment   when
people  begin  to  feel  around  for  their  overshoes  and  to  nudge
their  way  out  to  the  aisles.    Johnson's  strategy  is  too  slick  to
talk  about  and  so  subtle  that  only  a  few  fellow  con-men  can
appreciate  it.    Johnson  must  keep  his  European  flank  quiet
when  so  much  of  his  military  force  is  bogged  down  in  this
fifth-rate   colonial   war.    This   dictates   friendly   overtures   to
Moscow  and  the  East  European   Communists   lest  they  stir  up
some  new  Berlin-type  crisis.    The   overtures   have  the   virtue
of  intensifying  suspicion  between  Moscow  and  Peking.    They
undermine  guerrilla  morale   and   seek  to  buy  Communist   ac-
quiescence   in  the   crushing   of   the  South  Vietnamese   revolt.
Johnson   makes   overtures   even   to  Peking   and   Hanoi.     He
wants  to  isolate  the  Viet  Cong.    If  he  had  the  nerve  to  stop
the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,  he  might  even   succeed,   for
Winning  People's   Hearts
We  would like  to  focus  on  an  incident  which  occurred
as  our  troops  began their invasion of  the  Mekong Delta.
After  three  days,  on  Monday,  Jan.  9,  the  Marines  had
still  failed   to  make  contact  with  hostile  forces.    The
Washington  Post,  like  most  papers  that  day,  said  "U.S.
Marines reported only  three enemy dead, one  a woman."
A  fuller  report  in  the  New  York  Times  said   two  of
the  three  local  Vietnamese  killed  in  the  operation  so
far  were  officially  described  as  "two  VC  who  had  been
sniping  at  Marine  positions,"  but  added  that  when  the
bodies  were  examined  "they  appeared  to  be  those  of
an  unarmed  young  man  and  woman." Their  real  story
was   in  the  UPI's  first  account  of   the  invasion  in  the
Washington  Daily  News  Jan.  7.   This  said  the  landing
was   unopposed  and  that   the   first  Americans  to  land
were  13  newsmen  but  that  two  Vietnamese  teen-agera
were  killed.   "The boy  and  girl  walked, holding  hands,"
the  UPI  said,  "into  a  Marine  position.    Sentries  saw
them  approaching and  not  knowing  who  they  might  be,
cut   them  down  with  a  burst  of   gunfire.    They   died
together,  their  heads  still  joined."   So  our  first victims
were  a  couple  of  strolling  sweethearts.    Our  sentries
were  nervous  or  stupid.    And  Marine  Corps  HQ  tried
to  lie  out  of  it  later  by  describing  the  boy  and  girl  as
snipers.    This  combination of  stupidity  and mendacity
will  prove,  we  suspect,  a  fitting  prologue  to  this  cant'
paign  to  win  the  hearts  of  the  people  in  the  Mekong
Delta.
P.S.   An   endearing   footnote   was   supplied   by   the
week-end  Le  Monde  (Jan.  8-9)  which  has  just  arrived.
The   French   correspondent  with   the   Marine   landing
said   the   U.S.   commander   had  declared  the   sector   a
"free   kill   zone".     It   was   explained  this   meant   "we
have  the  right to  shoot  on sight  anything which  moves."
Let's  hope  the  natives  take  to  these  instant  legalisms.
it  is  the  bombing  of  another   "socialist   country"  not  the  up-
rising  on  the  other  side  of  the  containment  line  which   really
has  upset  the  bloc  and  led  it  to  pour   supplies   into   Vietnam.
Johnson's  Grand  Design  is  too  corkscrew.    It  is  to  end  the
cold  war  while  fighting  a  hot  one.    This  is  too  complicated   a
strategy  for  either   side.    Most  people  are  too   simple-minded
for   such   crafty   tactics.   , The   guerrillas   ask  themselves   how
Moscow  can  make   deals   with  Washington  while   American
napalm  burns  them  up.    The  ordinary  American  asks  why  he
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  16, 1967
The  Republican-Dixiecrat  Coalition  Vote  Against  Powell
Bad  omen:  The  significance  of  the  votes  in  the  House  on
opening   day  is  that  the  right  has  closed  ranks  while  the  left-
of-centre   is  deeply   split.     The   vote   of   332   to   185  which
knocked  out the  21-day  rule  was the  signal  that  the Republican-
Dixiecrat   coalition   is  back  in  power.    Instead  of  liberalizing
the  rules  as  planned,  they  have  again  been  tightened  to  make
the  Rules  committee  under   Colmer   of  Mississippi  the  citadel
of  reaction.    Against   this  background   one  can  see  the  tragic
significance  of  the  305-to-126  vote  against  the  Udall   resolu-
tion  to  seat  Powell  while  his  record  was  investigated  and  the
364  to  64  vote  for  the  Ford  resolution  to  bar  him  from  his
seat  pending   a  5-week  inquiry.    Granted  that  Powell  invited
this  by  his  contemptuous   effrontery,  the  vote  and  his  removal
as  committee   chairman   still   had   racist  overtones.     If   every
Congressman   who  used  his  prerogatives  to  go  woman-chasing
around   the  world   at  public  expense  were  to  be  purged   there
would  be  a  lot  of  empty  seats  in  the  House.    The  Negro  will
now  feel  betrayed  by  both  parties,  altogether   forget   that  the
first Negro  since  Reconstruction  entered   the  Senate  the  same
day,  and  create  more  antagonism  by  flailing  around  wildly  at
white  friend  and  foe  alike.    The   result  is  the  breakdown  of
the  liberal  coalition,  and  a  rise  in  a  hate  and  bitterness  that
can  only  lead  us  all  down  a  blind  alley.
Not  the  First  Profligate  to  Be  A  Political  Hero:  As  an  anti-
dote  to  racial  generalizations  about  the  career  of  Adam  Clay-
ton   Powell,   the  character  of   the  demonstration  in  his  favor
on   Capitol   Hill   and   his   tasteless   demagogy    in   comparing
himself  with  Christ,  it  may  be  useful  to  glance  back  200  years
at  the  great  popular  hero  of  the  equally  riotous  lower  classes
in  England.    John  Wilkes,  like  Powell,  was  a  dissolute  play-
boy   and   an   impudent   rebel.     The   disfranchised   and   semi-
literate   mobs  who   cheered   "Wilkes   and   Liberty"   when   he
was  expelled   from  Parliament  were,   if   anything,   more  dis-
orderly  than  the  Negroes  who  burned   draft   cards  and   cried
"Burn,  baby,  burn"  on  the  steps  of  the  Capitol.    But  Wilkes
in  his  violent  career  in  and  out  of  Parliament  and  jail  cham-
pioned   our   war   of   national   liberation  in   the   midst  of   the
British  attempt  to  crush  it,  widened  freedom  of  the  press  and
prepared   the  way  for  those  reforms   which  were  to  give  the
disfranchised   poor   in   England   the   political   equality   long
denied   them.     The   gentleman's    feeling   against   the   lower
classes   then   was   as   "racist"   as   the   worst   white    suprema-
cist's  attitude  toward   the  Negro.    The  Gordon  riots  in  Lon-
Lodge   Wooly  on   Walls
Mr.  Eric  SEVAREID:  Senator   Mansfield   suggested
the   other  day   that   we  ought   to   think   about  putting
some  kind  of  a  wall ...  on  the  17th  parallel,  cutting
off   the  North  [of  Vietnam]  from  the  South.   What  was
your  personal  reaction  to  this?
Ambassador  LODGE: A  tremendous engineering task
but   it  takes  a  tremendous  amount  of  labor.    And  we
have  a  great  labor  shortage  in  Vietnam  and  to  put  one
across  here   [in  Vietnam],  if  they  are  going  to  take  it
around   there   [in   Laos],   isn't   so   terribly  attractive.
But'  these   barriers   have   proven   to   be   very   useful.
They  were  used  in  North  Africa  between  Algeria  and
Tunisia,   you   remember  the   French   used  them.    And
this—you  have  barbed  wire  and  a  mine  field  and  elec-
trified  wire and  a  ditch—and  World War  II  you  remem-
ber  in  Libya  the  British  laid  a  mine  field  40  miles  long
from  the  Mediterranean to  the  Sahara,  and  it  was  very
effective.     And   Rommel  came   through  and   lifted   up
the   mines.    He   came  through  the   middle   and   pulled
the  British  [mines]  up  and  then  came  around  the  side.
Do  you  remember  that  in  1942?    So  there  is  a  lot  to
be  said  for  it.
—CBS-TV  "Lodge  on Vietnam"  Jan.  8.
Since  both  the   French   and  the   British  lost   despite
these  "walls",  what  IS  to  be  said  for  them?
don  were  as  bloody  and  sprang  from  a  resentment  as  deep  as
Watts.    These  are  the  similar  birth   pangs   of  emancipation,
and  deserve  our  patience  and  our  sympathy.
Another  right-to-trarel  battle  in  Congress:  The  unanimous
decision  by  Mr.   Justice  Fortas  in  the  Laub  and  Travis   cases
is good  news  not  only  for  the  defendants,  who  made unauthor-
ized  trips  to  Cuba,   but  for  recent   visitors  to  Vietnam.     The
Supreme   Court  held  that  the  law  making  it  a  crime  to  leave
or  enter  the  country  without  a  valid  passport   in  time  of  na-
tional  emergency  must—like  all  criminal statutes—be  narrow-
ly  construed.    The  law  does  not  say that  the  holder  of  a valid
passport   may   not,   after   leaving,  go   to   a   country   declared
"off  limits"  by  the  State  Department.     The  Court  held,  how-
ever,  that  it  was  merely  interpreting  the  statute  and  the  regu-
lations.    The  Zemel  case  two  years  ago  held  area  restrictions
constitutional.    It  thus  opened  the  way  for  enactment  of  legis-
lation   which   would   make   travel  to   a  blacklisted   country   a
criminal  offense.    The  State  Department   has  been  trying  since
Brazil's  U.S.  Supported  Military  Dictatorship  Regressive  in  Race  Policy,  Too
"It  is  both  an  article  of   national  political  faith  and  an
international  cliche  that  racial  discrimination does  not  exist
in  Brazil. ...  It  is  equally  true  that  a  Negro  is  nearly  as
rare  as  an  Eskimo  in  the  halls  of  the  Brazilian  Congress,
the  officer  corps  of  the  Navy,  the  foreign  service,  the  religi-
ous  orders,  the  best  clubs,  the  higher  priced restaurants,  and
even  in  the  universities. ...  35  percent  of  Brazil's  80  mil-
lion  people  can  be  considered  non-white,  but  the  percentage
having   at   least   one   African   ancestor   probably   is   much
higher.  .  .  .
"When  abolition  came  in  1888,   the  Brazilian  Negro  found
himself  in  much  the  same  situation as  his  American  brother.
He   had   no  capital,   few   skills,   less   education   and  small
chance  of  acquiring  any  of  these.    He's  been  trying  to  dig
himself   out  of   this   hole  ever  since.     Poor   Brazilians  are
not  necessarily  black,  but  most  black  Brazilians  are  poor,
many  of  them  desperately  so.    They  lack  political  leverage
because   as  illiterates  (half  of   all  Brazilians  and probably
90   percent   of   the   black   cannot  read   or   write)  they   are
denied  the  franchise.  .  .  .
"President  Janio  Quadros in  1961 openly  declared Brazil's
ethnic,   political   and  economic  identification   with   the   new
African   nations,  a  policy  followed  by  his   successor,   Joao
Goulart,  but  reversed  by  Humberto  Castelo   Branco's  revo-
lutionary     [i.e.     counter-revolutionary—IFS]  ' government
which  took  over  here  in  1964." *
—Smith  Hempstone  from  Brazil:  Wash. Star  Jan.  4.
* Goulart  was  overthrown  by  the  military   with  U.S.  en-
couragement  two  weeks  after  he  asked  Congress  for   land
reform   and  universal    suffrage.—IFS
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   16, 1967
State  Dept.  Already  Wonders  Whether  to  Intervene  in  China
1957   to  get  such  a  statute  and   may  try  again  this  year.     It
would  be  well  to  prepare  for  that  battle  now.     The   U.S.   is
the   only  country  in   the   "free   world"   which   imposes   such
travel  restrictions.   Another  aspect  of  this  situation  also  de-
serves   protest.     Current   travel   restrictions  are   based   on   a
declaration  of  national  emergency  issued  by  Truman   in   1950
at  the  outbreak  of   the   Korean   war.    That   "national   emer-
gency"   ended   long  ago   but   the   semi-dictatorial   powers   as-
sumed   under   it  are  still   in   force.    These  perpetual   "emer-
gencies"  erode  America's  freedom.
Intervene   in   China?     A  question   already  being   discussed
at  the  State  Department   is  what   the  U.S.   should   do  if  civil
war  should  break  out  in  China.    Those  old  enough  to  remem-
ber  the  costly  and  self-defeating   character  of  the  intervention
during  the  civil  war  which  followed  the  Bolshevik   revolution
in  Russia will  not  think  it  too  soon  to  begin  the  buildup  of
an   informed   public   opinion   against  any   such   adventure   in
China.    The  first  step  is  to  make  sure  that  Chiang   is  kept
firmly  leashed.     We   find   ourselves  completely  at   a   loss   in
trying  to  understand  what  is  going  on  inside  China.    A  mid-
dle-of-the-road   French  politician,  Jacques  Duhamel,  who  was
in  China  last  Fall  and  two  years  before  that,  has  written  two
brilliant  articles in  Le  Figaro  (Jan.   5  and  6)   from  a  point  of
view   sympathetic  to   Mao   whom   he   knows   well.     They're
worth  reading,  whether  you  agree  or  disagree.
Spain  Also  a  Potential  Trouble  Spot:  It  is  not  too  soon  also
to  begin  to  think  about  what  the  U.S.  should  do  if  there  were
to  be  a  popular  uprising  in  Spain  against  Franco.     The  dis-
content  is  widespread—not  only  in  Catalonia  and  the  Basque
country,  where  animosity  to  Madrid   has  deep   nationalist   as
well   as  social   roots,   but  within   the   "company   unions",   the
Falangist  movement  and  the  Church   itself,  where  Franco  is
no   longer   regarded   as  a  favorite   son.    The   Spaniards   fear
civil  war  and  revolution;  they  hope  for  peaceful  change.    But
the  possibility of  the  regime's  provoking  trouble  by  some  par-
ticularly  brutal  action  in  dealing  with   unrest   cannot   be  ex-
cluded.    Would  the  U.S.  then,  because  of  our  bases  in  Spain,
give  armed  support  to  Franco  against  the  Spanish   people.
Maybe  We  Soon  Won't  Need  Stockpiles  At  All
"Washington,   Jan.   6—The   Government   announced
today  that  the  stockpiles  of  77  scarce  or  imported ma-
terials   considered   high   enough   to  meet   the  needs  of
conventional  war  were  high  enough  for  a  nuclear  war,
too.    There  was  one  exception—opium   [for   pain-kill-
ers].     For   the   great   majority   of   the   materials  the
stockpile  needs  for  nuclear  war  were  found  to  be  lower
than  for  conventional  war.    The  reason,   officials   said,
is  primarily  that  the  population  would  be  lower."
—New  York  Times, January   7.
No  Way  to End  Suspicion:  The  suspicion  that Tran Van Van
was  killed  by  the  military   rather  than  the  Viet  Cong  will  be
intensified  by  the  swift  way  his  alleged  killer  has  been  tried
and  condemned.     The   Vietnam   Guardian   is  still    suspended
for  airing  these  doubts.    Defense   counsel  in  the  two  day trial
was  refused  the  right  to  call  as  witnesses  any  members  of  the
12-man  committee  set  up  by  the  Constituent   Assembly  to  in-
vestigate  the  murder.    The  head  of  the  committee  complained
that   its  members  knew   nothing   of  the  trial  until   they   read
about  it  in  the. newspapers.    The  committee's  efforts  to  investi-
gate  were  stymied  when   the  police   arrested   a  young   writer
and  Southern   Assemblyman  on  the  investigating   commission
after  he  talked  with  the  accused  slayer.    The  police   accused
the  Assemblyman  of  trying  to  get  the  accused  man  to  change
his   confession.      The    effect   was   to   intimidate   the   investi-
gators.   Tran  Van  Van,  a  wealthy  landowner,   was  an  oppon-
ent  of  the  military junta as he  was earlier  of  the  Diem  dictator-
ship.    He  was  Ky's  leading  civilian  rival  for  the   Presidency,
and  a  man  who  favored  negotiations  for  peace.
George  Meany's   Pravda:  There  was  not  a  single  word   in
the  AFL-CIO  News  about  the  UAW's  blast  against  the  AFL-
CIO  leadership,  though  this  was  the  year-end's  biggest  labor
story.    Walter  Reuther's   name  appears   on  the  paper's  mast-
head  but  he  seems  to  be  an  un-person  insofar  as the   AFL-CIO
News   is  concerned.     As  under   Stalin  so  under   Meany:  any
criticism  of  the  No.   1  Boy  is   unprintable.
Black  Aspiration Has  Always Seemed A  Red  Plot  to  HUAC and  the  White Supremacists
"We,  the  undersigned,  petition  the  House  of   Representa-
tives   to   stop   the   Committee  on   Un-American  Activities
from  carrying  out  its  plan  to  investigate  uprisings  in  the
black  ghettoes  of  this  country.    The  Committee  claims  to
be  looking for  'subversive  elements',  'Communists  doing  the
work  of  Moscow  or  Peking',  It  says  it  will  not  investigate
the  civil  rights  movement  unless  it  finds  a  '.  .  .  civil  rights
group  is  actually  controlled and dominated by  Communists,'
Yet,   as   Southerners,   we   know   from   experience  that   the
Committee's  viewpoint is  that  Communists are   responsible
for  all  movements  for  social  change.
"For   28   years,   Southerners   working   for   political   and
economic   democracy   have   been   labelled   Communists   or
Communist  dupes  by  the  Committee.   It  has  always  pro-
posed  legislation  to  repress  activists  rather  than  to  remedy
social  injustice.    The  Committee  insinuates  that  ideas  and
movements  concerned  with  ending  the   problems  of   racial
injustice  in  our  society  are  treasonous.    This  attitude  has
resulted  in  an  atmosphere  in  which   unknown  numbers  of
Southerners  have  hidden  their  desire  to  end  racism  because
they  feared  harassment  and  loss  of  their  jobs  or  lives.
"Therefore   we  feel   it  is  our  responsibility  to  warn  the
rest  of  the  country  about  this  Committee.   We  see  no  rea-
son   why   its   investigation   into  urban  disturbances  would
have   different   results.     Two   Southern  segregationists    on
this  Committee will  be  in  charge  of  overseeing  the  prelimi-
nary  investigation.    One  of   them,  Rep.  Buchanan  of   Ala-
bama,  recently  called  the  use  of  civil  disobedience  by  the
civil   rights   movement  a  cause   of   outbreak  in  the   urban
ghettoes.
"If  the  civil  right  movement  has  had  any  part  in   these
uprisings,  it  is  by  reminding  America  of   what  it  says  it
is—a  land  of  equal  opportunity  and  justice—and  what  it
truly  is  for  one-fourth  of  its  people—one  of  poverty,  unem-
ployment,   unequal  education  and  injustice.     For  a  fourth
of  these  poor  people,  there  is  the  added  torment  of  hatred
and  discrimination  against   them   because   they   are   black.
"These,  not  some  vague  external  conspiracy,  are  the  prob-
lems  our  government  should  be   investigating."
—From  a  petition  to  Congress  Jan.  6  by  200  civil  rights
activists   including    Martin   Luther   King,   Julian   Bond,
Stokeley  Carmichael,  Myles   Horton,  and  Floyd   McKissick.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's   Weekly,  January   16, 1967
How  Can  The  World  Relax  When  A  Military  Monster  Is  Loose?
(Continued   from   Page One)
should  give  trade  and  other  concessions to  Moscow  and War-
saw  and  Prague  when  they  are  supplying  the  planes  and  the
radar  and  the  guns  to  shoot  down  American  fliers.  One  side
asks—  if  imperialism  is  so  black  an  enemy,  why  compromise
with  it?    The  other  side  substitutes Communism for imperial-
ism  and  asks  the  very  same  question.    If   Communism  is  so
total  an  enemy  that  it  must  be  burned  out  in  Vietnam,  why
strengthen  it  in  Europe?     Or,  some  may  ask, if  we  can  get
along  with  it  in  Europe,  why  not  in  Vietnam?
Truman's  Strategy  Different
Truman   had  a  much  easier  way  to  sell  his  limited  war  in
Korea.    He  could  argue,  as  he  did  through   General   Bradley,
that  to  let  that  war  widen  into  a  war  with  China  would  be  the
wrong  war,  at  the  wrong  place,  at  the  wrong  time  and  "with
the  wrong  enemy."    We  had  to  keep  our  nuclear  powder  dry
for  the  Soviet  Union.    Truman's  little  hot  war  fit  quite  easily
into  his  global  cold  war.  Johnson's  proposition  is  far   differ-
ent:  To  try  and  end  the  global  cold  war  with  Communism
while   mercilessly  bombing   a   Communist   country   in   Asia.
Those  on  the other  side  must  ask:  If  we  let  the  Americans  get
away  with  this  in  North  Vietnam,  what  is  to  stop  them   from
handing  out  the  same  treatment  to  us  next  time?    The   rest
of  the  world  must  ask: who  is  this  mountebank  who  talks  of
relaxing  world  tension  while-he  pours  death  and  destruction
on   a  tiny  country?
How  can  Johnson   talk  of  slowing  down  the  world's   arms
race  while  he  shows  how  helpless  a  country  is  which  has  no
means  of  retaliating?    How  can  we  blame  China  for  spending
its  bread  on  nuclear  arms  when  we  demonstrate  on  its  borders
what  we  can  do  to  thtm,  too, if  they have  no  means  of  hitting
back?    The  inner  logic  of  the  Vietnamese  war  for  our  mili-
tary-industrial  complex  is  to  let  the   desperate,   the   hopeless
and  the  hungry  elsewhere  in  Asia,  Africa  and  Latin  America
know   what  we  can  do  to  them   if  they  dare  to  rise  against
their   privileged  oligarchies   and   our   investments.     The   Pax
America  is  at  stake  in  the  Mekong  Delta.    This  effort  to  im-
pose  our  will  by  blood  and  fire  wherever  we  chose  to  do  so  is
hardly  calculated  to  make  the  rest  of  the  world   feel   relaxed.
Memo  to  Student Leaders
Their Terror  and Ours
"We  recognize  that  people  living  or  working  in  close
proximity  to  military  targets  may  have  suffered.    We
recognize,  too, that  men  and  machines  are  not  infallible
and  that   some  mistakes   have  occurred.    But  there  is
a   vast   difference   between   such   unintentional  events
and   a   deliberate   policy   of  attacking   civilian  centers.
I  would  remind  you  that  tens  of  thousands  of  civilians
have  been  killed,  wounded, or  kidnapped  in  South  Viet-
nam,  not  by  accident  but  as  the  result   of  a  deliberate
policy  of  terrorism   and  intimidation  by  the  Vietcong."
—Secretary  Rusk  Jan. 6  replying   to  the  100  student
leaders  who  protested   the  war  to   Johnson.
"Saigon   (AP)—National   police  statistics  show  that
the  Vietcong  during  the  last  three  years  have  assassi-
nated  roughly  2100 South  Vietnamese  civilians  because
they  were  connected  with  the  government  or  too  close
to  the  terrorists'  targets.   The  assassinations  show  a
steady  increase—from  479  in  1964  to  608 in  1965 to  an
estimated  1000  last  year.  . . . These  deaths  are distinct
from  civilian fatalities  caused  by  conventional  warfare.
NO  STATISTICS   ARE  KEPT   ON  THESE  [our em-
phasis]  but  the  best  available  information   from  U.S.
and  Vietnamese  sources   points  to  an  average   overall
death  toll  of  1,000  South  Vietnamese  every  month,  due
to  action by both  sides  in  the war."
—Washington  Post, Jan. 8.
So, if  these  figures  are  correct,  the  war  in  the  South
takes  as  many  civilian  lives  in  a  month  as  we  claim
the  terrorists  took  in  all  of  last  year.    And  most  of
these  civilians  die  from  our  bombings.
The  figures,  however,  are  open  to  question.    Saigon
tends  to  understate   civilian  casualties  (1)  because  we
hate  to  admit  them  and  (2)  because,  like  the  French,
we   tend   to   count   every   dead   body   as   enemy,  thus
padding  out  the  kill  ratio.    Student   leaders   would  do
well  to  check  Rusk's   unctuous  phrases   and  the  AP's
figures  against  Douglas  Pike's  new  book  on  the   Viet-
eong.   Pike  says terrorist  actions  have  been  declining in
recent  years.    He  had  access  to  classified  information.
The  last  year  for  which  he  gives  figures  is  300 killings
in  1965, or  half   the  AP's   figure.   Pike   says  the  VC
uses  terror   "judiciously,   selectively   and   sparingly"—
hardly  a  description  of  our   bombings.
Holiday  Gift  Subscription   Rates  Still  In  Effect:  2  for  $9;  3  for  $13;  4  for  $17;  5  for  $20
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)
Name  ....................................
Street   ..................................
City  ....................................
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)    Name   ........................
Street    ..................................
City
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State.......
a  gift  sub  to:
Zin  ...  .......  .  State. ......
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement    wished   Q
1/16/67
Fifties
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  "Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last   week   in   December   and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during   July  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:    $6  in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;  20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED