I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967nov13.pdf

============================================================

A  Message  to  the Soviet's  Best  Youth  on  Its  50th  Anniversary
The  Figures  The  Censor  Tried  to  Hide  on  The  Cost  of  Our  Air  War  Against  North  Vietnam,  P.  3
Maybe  A  Plain  Little  Old Foxtrot  Would  Be  Safer
"Most  of  these  people,  not  even  intellectuals  or  the  edi-
torial  writers  or  the  columnists,  pro  or  con,  have  had  the
benefit  of  the  hundreds of  cables  that  come  from  110 coun-
tries,  or  from  the  men  in  charge,  or  men  who  really  have
the  responsibility  for  the  planning  and  execution  of  some
of  the  most  intricate,  detailed,  dangerous  and  complicated
steps  that  we  have  ever  taken."
—LBJ,  answering  critics  of  the war,  November  1,1967
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  26
NOVEMBER  13,  1967
10
<       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Mujik  as The  Negro  of  The  Russian  Revolution
The  historic  task  which  faces  the  best  of   the  new  youth
in  the  Soviet Union  is  how  to  establish  free  institutions-under
socialism.    This   will   require   a   double   revolution,   first   in
thought   and   then   in   action.    The   first   must   scrap  all   the
evasive   banalities   of   Communist  Party  talk   since   the   20th
Congress   about   "cult   of   personality"—and   embark  instead
on  a  reexamination  of  the  Soviet  system  and   its  past  which
spares  neither  Lenin  nor  Marx;  all  idols  must  be  overthrown,
all  sacred  dogmas  exposed  to  criticism,  the  windows  thrown
open,  the  cobwebs  swept  away.  This  task  will  have  the  value
of   separating   Soviet  accomplishments  from   those  cancerous
malformations   which,   50   years    after    the   Great    October
Revolution,   still   keep   the   Soviet   system   a   dictatorship  in
which  neither worker nor  peasant  dare  speak  freely.
Slaves  A  Century   Ago
For  American  youth  our  current  racial  crisis  offers  a  fresh
perspective  from  which  to  understand  the  real  roots  of  what
the  20th  Congress  called  the  "cult  of  personality."    We  are
learning  from  bitter  experience  what  a  terrible  price  can  be
imposed  on  a  society  by  slavery  and   its  aftermath.    Perhaps
the  most  important  single  fact  in  understanding Soviet realities
is  that  a  century  ago  most  of  the  people  in  Russia  were  little
better   than   slaves.    The   mttjik,    the   peasant,   was   Russia's
Negro.    Their   emancipations   occurred   at   the   same   time:
Alexander  II's  edict  freeing  Russia's  slaves  was  issued  two
years  before  Lincoln's.    Both   left   the   intended  beneficiaries
in   a  limbo  somewhere   between   bondage   and   real  freedom.
Russia,   like  America,  though   in   a   different   way,  failed   to
provide  40  acres  and  a  mule.   The  freed  mujik,  like  the  freed
Negro,  remained  at  the  mercy  of  the  master  class.    All  the
worst  traits  attributed  to  the  Negro   were  attributed  to  the
mnjik.    In  America  little  more  than  a  tenth  of  our   people
bear  the  marks of  that  crippling  past.   In  Russia it  is  the  over-
whelming  majority  that  is  of  peasant  or  recent  peasant  origin.
I  once  described  the  American  Negro  as  a  case  of  internal
colonialism,  a submerged  people  exploited  like  those  of  distant
colonies  for  their  cheap  labor  power,  an  idea  which  Stokeley
Carmichael   has   developed   in   his   new   book,   Black  Power.
This  is  also  true  of  the  mujik.    For  the  Russian  peasant,  the
Revolution  was  indeed  a  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat.    The
capital  the  Soviet  Union  needed  for  its  industrialization  was
7  *
Quite  A  Confession
"We are  not  about  to  send  American  boys  9  or  10,000
miles  away  from  home  to  do what  Asian  boys  ought  to
do  for  themselves."
—LBJ  campaigning  Oct. 21,1964
Q.  Mr.  President,  sir,  one  of  the  main  points  in  the
domestic  arguments  about  the  war  has  been  that  in
1964    when  you   were  campaigning  you   spoke   of   not
wishing   to  send  American  boys   to  fight  a  war  that
Asian  boys  should  fight. ...  I  wonder  if  you  could
give  us  your  thinking  on  that  change  in  policy.
A.  There  has  not  been  a  change  of  policy.  .  .  .  That
did not  imply .  . . that  we would not  do what we needed
to  do to  deter  aggression.     As  a  matter of  fact  before
that  statement  was  made,  we  began  discussing  at  this
table  in  May of  that  year  the  desirability  of  asking  the
Congress  to  join  with  us  in  deterring   aggression.
—LBJ  at  press  conference  Nov. 1,1967
So  six  months  before  he  made  that  campaign  pledge
he  had  already  begun   planning   to   do  what   he  was
publicly  promising   not  to  do.
sweated   out   of   the   peasantry—by   the   huge   expropriations
which   accompanied   the   liquidation   of   the   kulaks   and   the
middle  peasantry,   by  the  work   extracted   from  them   in   the
huge  labor  camps  to  which  they  were  driven   in  Siberia  and
the  North,  and  by the  low  prices  at  which  the  poorer  peasants
were  forced  to  deliver  their  products  from  the  collectives  and
state   farms   into   which  they  were   forced.    The   mujik   was
Bolshevism's   internal  empire.
The  Revolution  was  consolidated  first  by  letting  the  peasant
keep  the  lands  he  had  seized  and  then  by taking  back  the  land
in  order   to  get  the  capital   for   industrialization.    The  basic
fault  of  the  new  peasant  proprietors  was that  they were  eating
well  for  the  first  time  in  their  lives  and  selling  less.   By  1927
Russia's   global   production   of   wheat   had   recovered   to   the
prewar  level  but  it  produced  only  half  as much  for  the  market
and  exported  only  5  percent  as  much  as  before  the  war.   The
problem  was  how  to  get  more  out  of  the  peasant.   The  right
opposition,  led  by  Bukharin,  suggested  the  carrot.   He  was
impressed   by  American  agriculture.    He  wanted   to  stimulate
greater   farm  production   by  offering   the   peasant   more   con-
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  13, 1967
(Continued   from  Page   One)
sumer  goods  and  expanding  industry  on  the  basis  of  a  pros-
perous  agriculture.  The  left  opposition  led  by  the  Trotzkyists
suggested   the  stick.   Stalin  adopted   the  program   of  the  left
but  in  practice  it  took  on  a  ferocity  not  even  he  had  foreseen;
it  became  a  new  civil  war  against  the  majority  of  the  peasants
and  it  was  carried  out  with  the  clumsy  and  wasteful brutality
characteristic  of  Russia's  past.
Police  State  Practice   Revived
The   worker   as  well   as   the   peasant   suffered.    The   war
against  the  peasant  brought  on  a  famine.   The  Russian worker
as   well   as   the   peasant   had   to   be   subjected   to   Draconian,
discipline  to  keep   the   economy  going.    The   symbol  of   the
change   was  the   internal   passport.    This  was  established   by
Peter  the  Great  to  keep  the  serf  tied  down  on  the  farm  and
in  the  state  factories.  It  had  been  abolished  by the  Revolution
as  "a  police  instrument  of  oppression  of  the  masses."    At  the
end   of   1932   internal  passports   were   reestablished   to  keep
workers  from  changing  their  jobs  and  peasants from  fleeing  to
the  .cities.   Soviet  citizens  must  still  carry  them.   In  America
the  passport  was  used—until  the  Supreme   Court   ended   the
practice—to    restrict   the    movement    of    suspected    citizens
abroad;  in  the  Soviet  Union  it  is  used  to  keep  police  control
of  everybody's movements  at  home.
This  relic  of  the  past  is  a  reflection  like  so  much  else  of  the
fundamental    if    disagreeable    fact    that    the    collectivization
campaign,  like  the  Bolshevik  Revolution  from  the  very  begin-
ning,   was   impressed   by   a   minority  of.  the   revolutionaries
themselves   from   above   and   by   terror.    All   those   terrible
crimes,  "distortions  of  socialist  legality"  and  "departures   from
Leninist  norms"  which  the  20th  Congress  attributed  to  Stalin
and  the  cult  of  personality  flow  from  this  fundamental  fact.
Until  it  is  recognized  no  fundamental  reform  can  be  achieved.
The  backwardness  of  the  country  led  the  Bolsheviks   to  deal
with  it  by  the  backward  methods  to  which  it  was  habituated
—reform   from   above,   an  omnipresent   secret   police   system,
suppression   of  dissent,   denial  of  the  freedoms  of  press   and
speech.
In  the  view  of  Marx  and  Engels  socialism  was  to  be  the
natural  outgrowth  of  capitalism,  the  end  result  of  that   evolu-
tion  by which  capitalism  collectivizes  the  processes  of  industry
and   the  sources  of  capital  while   clinging   to  conceptions   of
private  property   it  was  itself   rendering   obsolete.  "The  prop-
Some   People   Think  of   Everything
"Mt.  Logan,  Yukon   Territory—An  experiment  that
had   its   genesis   in   the   Himalayan   fighting   between
India  and  China  in  1962 is  under  way  here  at  the high-
est   research  station  in  North  America.    When   Indian
troops   went   into  battle  against   Chinese   Communist
forces  in  the  southern  reaches  of  the  world's  highest
mountains,  the  Indian forces  were afflicted  by mountain
sickness.    Crippling  headaches,  nausea,  breathing dif-
ficulty  and  feelings   of  depression   and  physical  weak-
ness.  .  .  .  The  Chinese  soldiers  appeared  to  be  much
better  acclimatized.  .  .  .  Western  military  authorities
were  disturbed.   The  U.S.  wanted  to  be  prepared  for
a  possible  war  with  China,  a  war  that   could  involve
operations  in  the  Himalayas.  .  .  .  They  established  a
research   station  17,000  feet   up  on   North   America's
highest  mountain.  .  .  .  Money  for  the  program  is  com-
ing  from  the  U.S.  Army  and  Arctic  Institute."
—Canadian Press  in  New York  Times  Oct. 31 p. 75
ertyless  working   class  created   by  capitalism   was   to   be   the
natural  inheritor  and  administrator  of  the  new  society.   This
was   the   Grand   Design   the   Communist   Revolution   was  to
fulfill.  But  Lenin  at  least  as early as  1905  said  that  the  working
class  left   to  itself   would   only   develop   a  trade  union—and
not  a  socialist—consciousness.   The   Socialist   revolution   was
to  be  imposed  from  above  by  an  elite  of  professional   revolu-
tionaries  which  knew  better  than  the  workers  what  they  really
wanted.   This  grandiose  vision,  itself  the  product  of  Russian
realities  and  the  Russian  past,  implied   not  a  dictatorship  of
the  proletariat,  but   over  the  proletariat.   This  is  where   the
so-called   evils   of   the   "cult   of   personality"    began,   not   in
Stalin's  personal   character.
It  is  true  that  Lenin  and  Trotsky,  before  they  took   power,
sometimes  spoke  in  terms  very  similar  to  that   "participatory
democracy"  which  our  own  New  Left  cherishes.   In  The  State
and  Revolution,   in  August   1917,   Lenin  sketched   in  the  out-
lines  of  a  society  in  which  every  official  whether  of  the  factory
or  the  state  would  be  subject  not  only  to  election   but   "to
instant   recall".    "Having   conquered    political   power,"   he
wrote,    "the    workers    will   break   up   the   old    bureaucratic
apparatus"  and  move  immediately  "to  a  state  of  things  when
all  fulfill  the  functions  of  control  and  superintendence   so  that
all  become  'bureaucrats  for  a  time,  and  no  one  therefore  can
become  a  bureaucrat':"   But  once  Lenin   took  power,  the  new
State—as  Martov,  the  greatest  of  the  Menshevik  leaders  noted
The  First  Review of  I.  F.  Stone's  New  Book—Available  at  $1  Less  Pre-Publication
On  November  23  Random  House  will  publish  In  A  Time
of  Torment,  a  new  collection  of  pieces  by  I.  F.  Stone  from
the  Weekly and  the  New  York  Review  of  Books.   This  was
the  first  pre-review as  sent  out  to  librarians and  editors  by
the  respected  Virginia  Kirkus  Book  Service:
"America  has  never  been blessed  with  a  great  many  first-
rate  political  journalists.   It's  an  ephemeral art,  almost  like
that  of  the  entertainer.    'He  was  a  New  Dealer  when  that
was  the  road  to  power, he  became a  conservative  when  that
was  the  way  to  stay  in.'    This  is  I.  F.  Stone  on  Johnson
and  the   remark  combines  Stone's   two  gifts,   accuracy  of
judgment  and  pithiness  in  phrasing.    Stone  began  covering
Washington  during  the  Roosevelt  years.    He's  a  seasoned
performer,  and  though  there's  been  a  marked mellowing  in
his  own ideological  stance,  Stone  remains basically  a  radical
('one  saw  that  for  the  lower  third  of  our  society,  white  as
well  as  black,  the  search  for  answers  must  lead  them  back
—though  Americans still  start  nervously  at  the  very  word—
toward   socialism')—but   a   radical   quite   without  Jacobin
sympathies.     Indeed,   engaged   and   humane   as   Stone   is,
what  he  finds  truly  upsetting  is  the  moral  muddle  of  our
times,  the  inane  chicanery  of  our  leaders,  the  obtuseness  of
their  vision.   Like an  enlightened  conservative,  he  warns  us
of  the  deluge:  'We  are,  let  us  remember,  the  rich  man  in
a  huge  hemispheric  slum'—and  the  audience  nods  and  does
nothing.     Malcolm  X,  Vietnam,  China:  the   reportage   is
shrewd,  lively,  combative,  completely  readable.'   Yet  there's
an  underlying  mournful  strain,  as  if  Stone  doubted  now  the
power  of  common  sense  or  'facts.'"
The  publication  price  will   be   $7.95.     But   readers   may
obtain  a  copy  in  advance  of  publication  at  $1  less.    Just
use  the  coupon  on  Page  4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  13, 1967
8
in   1919—showed   a   "tendency   toward   the   utmost   possible
strengthening  of  the  principles  of  hierarchy  and  compulsion
.  .  .  toward  the  development  of  a  more  specialized apparatus
of   repression  .  .  .  toward   the  greater   independence  of  the
usually  elective  functions  and  the  annihilation  of  the  control
of  these  functions  by  the  elector   masses."
A  Plea  From  Prison
A  year  earlier  the  great  Polish  Jewish  revolutionary  Rosa
Luxembourg  from   her  prison  cell  in  Breslau  also  saw  what
was  coming.   Trotzky,  she  pointed  out,  had  written  that  in
"the   open  and  direct  struggle  for  governmental   power,   the
laboring  masses  accumulate in  the  shortest  time  a considerable
amount  of  political  experience  and  advance  quickly  from  one
stage  to  another  of  their  development."    Rosa   Luxembourg
wrote  that  "the   very  giant  tasks  which  the  Bolsheviks  have
undertaken   with   courage   and   determination"   required    the
fullest  possible  development  and  participation  of  the  masses
for  their  accomplishment.   "The  public  life  of  countries  with
limited  freedom,"  she  wrote  with  an  insight  rare  among  those
supporting  the  Communists,  "is  so  poverty-stricken,  so  miser-
able,   so  rigid,  so  unfruitful,   precisely  because,   through   the
exclusion  of   democracy,  it  cuts  off  the   living  sources  of   all
spiritual  riches  and   progress."    She  said   no  one  knew   this
better  and  repeated  it  more  often  than  Lenin  yet  "the   means
he  employs:  Decree,  dictatorial  force  of  the  factory  overseer,
draconic  penalties,  rule  by  terror"  were  depriving  the  masses
of  all  voice  in  the  process.   "Without  general  elections,"  she
declared,  "without  unrestricted  freedom  of  press  and  assembly,
without  a  free  struggle  of  opinion,  life  dies  out  in  every  public
institution   .  .  .  only  the  bureaucracy  remains  as  the  active
element."    And   in   words   which   link   the   revolution   with
Jefferson   and  point  the  way  to  a  free  socialism  she  sketched
a  reality  the  Soviet leadership  still  refuses  to  recognize—
Freedom   only   for   the   supporters   of   the   government,
only   for   the   members  of   one   party—however  numerous
they  may  be—is  no  freedom  at   all.   Freedom  is   always
and  exclusively  freedom  for  the  one  who  thinks differently.
Not   because   of   any   fanatical   concept   of   'justice'   but
because  all  that  is   instructive,  wholesome  and  purifying
in   political   freedom   depends   on   this   essential   charac-
teristic,   and   its    effectiveness   vanishes   when   'freedom'
becomes  a  special  privilege.
Two   years   later   Bertrand    Russell   after   a   visit   to   Russia
described   in  his  The  Practice  and  Theory  of  Bolshevism   the
consequences   of   the   course   which   Rosa   Luxembourg    had
deplored.     "The    necessity   of   inculcating   Communism,"    he
wrote,  "produces  a  hot-house  condition,  where every breath  of
fresh  air  must  be  excluded:  people  are  to  be  taught  to  think
in  a  certain  way,  and  all  free  intelligence  becomes  taboo.   The
country   comes   to   resemble   an   immensely   magnified   Jesuit
College."
Every   regime   must   take   a   choice   of   risks—the   risk   of
freedom   with   the   danger   of   popular   rejection,   even   mis-
understanding,   or   the   risks   of   a   dictatorship   which   must
increasingly,    however   well   meaning   its   founders,   become
rigid,   despotic   and   encrusted   with   careerist   barnacles.    The
Bolsheviks  chose  the  latter,  and  so  it  is  that  50  years  after
the  Revolution,  there  is  still  neither  free  discussion  nor  free
press  in  the  Soviet  Union.   It  has  become  a  gigantic  caricature
of  what  socialism  was  meant  to  be.
The  work  of  the  20th  Congress  has  been   aborted   because
the  Party  and  its  leaders  fear  that  full  discussion  of  the  "cult
of  personality"  must  become  a  menace  to  their  own  monopoly
of   power   and   to  their  habits   of   ruling   by  coercion   rather
than  persuasion.   The   bourgeois   state  borrowed   from   feudal
experience  in  Magna  Charta  principles  which  were  developed
into  a  means  of  protecting  the  individual from  oppressive  state
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Figures  the  Censor  Tried  to  Hide:  Dollar  Cost  of  Damage  We're  Doing  North  Vietnam
"Secretary   of   Defense   McNamara,   testifying   before   a
Congressional  committee  in  August,  estimated  the  damage
to  North  Vietnam  by  U.S.  bombing  raids  at   $320  million
between  February  1965  and  July  1967."
—Hedrick  Smith in  the Sunday  New York  Times  Nov. 5
The  New  York  Times  might  have  added  that  the  same
hearing  (Stennis  committee August  25,  released  in  censored
form  Oct. 11)  also  revealed  that  it  is  costing  us  at  least  $5
for  every $1 of  damage done.   This information was brought
to  light  by  Senator  Smith  of  Maine.    She  recalled  to  Mc-
Namara  that  last   February  before  House  Appropriations
he   testified   that   the   cost   of   replacing   the   fixed   targets
destroyed  up  until  that  time  in  North  Vietnam  was  $180
million.    Mrs. Smith  pointed  out  that  the  Pentagon   Comp-
troller,  Joseph  Hoover,  disclosed  in  a  memorandum  a  few
days  later  that  the   value  of  all  types  of  aircraft  lost  over
North   Vietnam   during  that  period  was   $911  million,   or
more  than  five  times  the  value  of  the  targets  destroyed.
"I  was  told," Mrs.  Smith  added,  "that  this  did  not  include
aircraft  hit  by  North  Vietnamese  firepower  that  may  have
fallen   outside  North   Vietnam."    Mrs.  Smith   asked  Mc-
Namara  how  he  could  "justify  continuing  such  an unfavor-
able  ratio  of  loss."
McNamara  evaded  the  question.    He  said  a  more  perti-
nent  figure  was  "the  number  of  U.S.  lives  lost.  .  .  .  That
frankly   is   one  of   the   standards   I   use   in  recommending
targets  for  attack."    But  he  did  not  give   any  figures  on
lives  lost  nor  the  cost  of  replacing  pilots.    The   Secretary
then  said  that  through  last  July  the  value  of  North  Viet-
namese   facilities   destroyed   was   $320  million.    The  dele-
tions  which  follow  seem   to  have  blacked  out  the  value  of
planes  lost  during  that  same  period.
But  a  phone  call  to  the  Pentagon  elicited  figures  as  of
August  3,  when  the  U.S.  had  lost  630  planes   over  North
Vietnam.    The  average  cost  is  given  as  $2  million,  a  total
of  $1,260,000,000,  or  four  times  the  value  destroyed.    This
does   not   include   what   the   Pentagon   calls   the   "second
category"   of  losses.    This   covers   planes   hit   over   North
Vietnam  which fell  outside  it  or  "limped" back.   The  figure
for   this  "second   category"  lumps  losses  for  all  Vietnam.
If  the  ratio  of  losses  is  the  same  as  in  the  first  category
(196  planes  lost  over  the  South  as  compared  with  the  630
lost   over  the  North)   then  two-thirds  of  these  losses  are
also  due  to  the  air  war  against   the   North.    This  would
mean  another  400  planes  lost,  or  $800 million,  bringing  the
total  to  $2  billion  or  six  times  the  damage  done.
This  does   not  include  the  cost   of  replacing  pilots  lost.
These  figures  are  hard  to  come  by.    No  figures  are  avail-
able  on  airmen  killed.    The  Navy  and  the  Air  Force  list
473  men  as  missing  and  195  as  captured,  a  total  of  668  in
the  air  war against  both  North  and  South.   Pentagon  news-
men  estimate  90  percent  or  more  of  the  missing   and  cap-
tured  are  pilots.    This   would  mean  600  pilots  lost.    The
Air   Force   figures   $76,000  to  train  a  helicopter   pilot  and
$284,000  for  a  jet  pilot.   If  400 jet  pilots  have  been  lost  in
the  air  war  against   the  North  through  death,  wounds  or
capture,  that  would  add  another   $400,000,000  to  the  cost.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  13,  1967
The  Soviet  Constitution  Remains  A  Cruel  Hoax
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
action.   There  is  no  reason  why  the  proletarian  state  should
not   borrow  from   bourgeois  experience.   There   is  no  reason
why  habeas  corpus  should  not  exist  under  socialism as  under
capitalism,  why  a  man's  lawyer  may  not  get  him  out  of  jail
and   force   the   state  to  explain  why  he   is  being  held   and
subject  its  accusations to  public  trial.   Had  this  right  existed
in  the  Stalin period  some  of  the  best  Communists might  have
been   saved—for   it   was   the   lickspittles  who   survived,  the
brave   and   the   concerned   who   were   liquidated.   The   only
reason  for  denying  so  fundamental  a  right  is  to  retain  over
the  heads  of  the  masses  and  the  intellectuals,  the  shadow  of
the  old  terror,  the  fear  that  arbitrary  arrest  is  still   possible.
The  most  important  change  of  all, if  the  Soviet  Union  is
to  evolve   toward   a  good   society,   is  freedom   of   the   press.
I  well  remember  30  years  ago  how  the  Communists  boasted
that  freedom  of  the  press  in  Russia  under  the  Constitution
newly  promulgated  by  Stalin  was  broader  than  in  the  United
States  because  it  not  only  guaranteed  freedom  of  press   and
assembly   but   also   ensured   these   rights   "by  placing   at   the
disposal  of  the  working  people  and  their  organizations  print-
ing   shops,   supplies   of   paper,   public  buildings,   the   streets,
means  of  communication and  other  material  requisites  for  the
exercise  of   these  rights."   Thirty   years  later   this   is  still   a
bitter  hoax.
As  in  the  Fascist  States
The   Soviet  regime's  vast  apparatus  for  propaganda   serves
today  as in  Stalin's time to hide  these  realities from  the  outside
world  and  from  many  of  its  own  people.    All  that  is  worst
in  the  practice  of  the  "bourgeois"  states  exists  in  magnified
form  within  the  Soviet  Union.   Despite   all  the  promises  of
law  reform  since  Stalin  died,  the  law  of  counter-revolutionary
crimes—many  times  worse  in  its  sweep  and  vagueness   than
our  Smith  Act—is  still  on  the  statute  books  and  can  still  be
used  to  stifle  any  real  discussion.   It  is  only  in  the.  worst  of
the   "bourgeois"   states—in   those  of  a  Fascist  character   like
Spain,   Greece,   South   Vietnam,   Brazil   and   Portugal—that
writers   are  exiled,  silenced   or  imprisoned   as  Sinyavsky  and
Daniel  are  in  the  Soviet  Union.   Eleven  years  after  the  20th
Congress,  14 years  after  the  death  of  Stalin,  "corrective  labor"
Personal  Note
More  than  1,000 letters  and  get-well  cards  came  in
from  readers.    We  were  only  able  to  answer  100.  We
deeply   appreciate   them   and  ask   those   who  have  not
had   a  personal   reply   to   accept   this   acknowledgment
instead.    We're  just  back  from  a  week  in  London  and
a  week  in  Paris   and  a  sea  voyage  going   and  coming
and  feel  very  chipper.
On  January  19  at  Town  Hall  in  New  York  there  will
be  a  meeting   to  celebrate   my  60th  birthday  and  the
15th.  birthday  of  the  Weekly.   We  hope  for  an informal
meeting.    There  will  be  no appeals  and  no  set   speeches.
Those   who  wish   to  send  messages  to  be  read  at   the
meeting  should  get  them  in  as  early  as  possible.    The
admission   will  be  $1.    Only  1,498 seats  are   available
and  readers   might   do  well   to   get   their   requests   in
early.  We   look   forward  to   a   joyous   get-together   at
which  brickbats   as  well  as  bouquets  will  be  welcome.
camps  are  back  in  operation  and  these  two  gifted  writers  are
serving  savage  sentences  of  seven  and  five  years  respectively
in   them.    Characteristically  no   one   can   find   out   from   the
bureaucracy  whether  or  not  these  sentences  have  been  short-
ened  by  the  limited   amnesty  declared   in  commemoration  of
the  Revolution.
It  is  for  a  new  generation   in  the  Soviet  Union  to  change
these  realities.   Hegel  declared  the  dialectic  had  ended  in  the
creation  of  the  despotic  Prussian  State;  the  Communists  say
it  ended  with  the  creation  of  the  despotic  Soviet  State.   But
truly  understood  the  dialectic  goes  on  forever,  and  the syn-
thesis   of   the   contradiction   between   socialism  and   freedom
must  be  a  new  state  which  combines  the  advantages  of  both.
The  great  Western  tradition  which  comes  down  from  Spinoza
and  Milton  and  Jefferson  is  fully  applicable  to  socialist society
and  must  be  combined  with  it  if   Soviet  man   is  to  be   free
and  if  the  socialist  ideal  is  to  regain  its  attraction  for  youth.
The  Soviet  people  who  have  suffered  so  much  and  created  so
much,  who  in  50  years  have  made  such  giant  strides,  owe  it
to  themselves  and  the  world  to  strike  out  boldly  on  this  new
road  to  the  freedom  which  has  so  long  been  denied  them.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed Envelopes
IE  Stone's Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly       5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    .......................................'..............................•..•.......»——
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ...
Zip..
State..
11/18/67
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in  August,   the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week   in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:    $5  in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;     SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
SI 7  to  Knronp;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED