I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967jul03.pdf

============================================================

And  Now  The Arab  "Invasion"  of  Israel  P.  4
If   True,  The  Most  Hopeful  News  of  the  Week
"Reliable  information  convinces  me  that  there  is   now—
or   will   be   shortly—a   renewed  effort   by   civilians   [Mc-
Namara?]  in  high  places  to  persuade  the  President  to  halt
or  suspend the  air  war  against  North Vietnam.   I fervently
hope  he  will  resist  this  pressure."
—Senator Stennis  (D.,  Miss.)  in  a speech at  Biloxi,  Miss.,
June   23.   As   chairman  of   the  Senate   Preparedness   Sub-
committee,  Stennis  is  close  to  the  Joint   Chiefs    of     Staff.
L K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XV,  NO.  23JULY  3,  1967
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Opportunity  Johnson  Lost  At  Glassboro
What  the  President  should  have  done  at  Glassboro  was  to
announce that we had  stopped  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,
and  hoped  that  Chairman  Kosygin  in  return  would   arrange
for   peace  talks  with  Hanoi.   Over  and  over  again  Hanoi  has
said  that   it  would   talk   peace   if  the  bombing  were   ended.
This was Johnson's  opportunity, and  he  did  not  take  it.  Instead
we  were  treated  to  another  episode   in  public  relations  flim-
flam.  An  exchange of  grandfatherly banalities helped  to  divert
attention  from  the  inability  of  the  two  men  even  to  agree  on
the  wording  of  a  joint  communique.   The  kind  of  statement
the  Russians  favored  was  read  by  Kosygin  at  his  UN  press
conference.   It  did  not  go  beyond  saying  that  the  joint  talks
were  "useful."   This  is  the minimal  adjective  in  the  diplomatic
vocabulary.   Its  astringent  realism  did  not  suit  Johnson   who
preferred   a   saccharine  summation.    In   concluding   that   the
talks  had  made  the  world  "a  little  less  dangerous",  he  fed  the
country's  hopes  and  gave  himself  the  aura  of  the  peace-maker
without  the reality.
De  Gaulle's  Advice  Was  Good
The  word  from  Paris  was  that  the  Russians  were  prepared
to  do  all  they  could  to  reestablish  stability  in  the  Middle  East
if  once  America  stopped  the  bombing  in  the  Far  East.   This
is  what  lay  behind   de  Gaulle's  statement  of  June  21  which
received  so  frenetically  hostile   a  reception   in  the  American
press.    When   the   hysteria   dies   down,   its  wisdom   will   be
acknowledged.   It  is certainly true,  as de  Gaulle  said,  that   "one
conflict  contributes  to  the  creation  of  another."   How  can  we
deter  international  lawlessness  when  we  ourselves  practice  it
in   the   skies  over  North   Vietnam?   Nor   can  one  seriously
dispute  the  force  of  his  observation  about  "the   fundamental
sterility"   that  is  "the  hallmark"  of  our  war  effort   "however
powerful  the means employed  and  however  terrible its effects."
The  pressure  from  Saigon  for  more  men  is the  best  evidence
of  this  military sterility.  Westmoreland  wants  140,000  men—
an  increase  of  30%,   no  less,  in  the  460,000  he  already  has.
There  are  indications  that  in  the  highest  civilian  circles  of  the
government  there  is growing  opposition.   These  civilians  argue,
according   to  a  perceptive   report   by  Frederick   Taylor   from
Saigon  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal  Nov.   27,  that  the military
"who   now  are  saying  600,000  men  will  do  the  job  are  the
same  who  once  said  400,000  would."  This  way lies  mobiliza-
tion   and  invasion  of  the  North,  risking  war  not  only  with
China   but   also  Russia.   This  is  the  quiet  warning   brought
Ben  Gurion  Agrees  With  Us  On  Nasser
"If  war  makes  sense  only  as  an  extension  of  politics
by  other  means then  Israel's  victory will  make  political
sense  only  if  it  leads  to  a  new  era  of  friendly relations
with  Nasser."
—The  Weekly  (shocking   some  readers)   June   12.
"I   have   great   respect   for   Nasser.    Nasser    is   a
patriot.   We  should  make  an  effort  to  talk  with  him.
If  Nasser  agrees  to  talk,  we  should  give  up  the  Sinai.
Without  Egypt,  no  other  Arab  state  will  talk."
—Ben Gurion, in  the New York  Times,  June  18, p.  Id.
back  from   Moscow  by  Wm.  Attwood  in  the  latest  issue  of
Look.
In   this  perspective   Glassboro  may  be  seen   not   just  as  a
way  to  "buy"  Soviet  cooperation  in  the  Middle  East  but  as  a
dramatic  moment  for   disengagement   in   the   Far   East  with
minimum   risk   in   domestic   politics.    The   Arab-Israeli   war
certainly  demonstrated   the  geopolitical   folly   of   tying   down
so  much  of  our  military  power  in  Vietnam.   The  time  to  act
on  this  was  while  the  lesson  was  fresh   and  when  the  dis-
engagement   itself   could  have  been  sold   at  home,   and  used
abroad,  as a bargaining  point  in  a wider  settlement.   In  Wash-
ington,   Johnson's   failure   to  seize  this  opportunity   is  taken
as  evidence  that  he  is  pretty  much  a  prisoner   of  the   Joint
Chiefs  of   Staff.   The  ascendancy  of  the  military  in  the   U.S.
is  what  the  Russians  fear.   To  them  it  may  spell   the   need
for   larger   military  expenditures,  for   an   anti-missile  system
and  for  stronger  support  of  Egypt  and  Syria  lest  these  coun-
tries   too   fall   under  Western   domination   in   the   wake  of
Israel's  victory.
"For  ten  hours,"  Johnson  said  at  Baltimore  of  his  meeting
with  Kosygin,  "we looked  at each other." We  don't  know what
Kosygin   saw  but   that   demagogic  speech,   in   one   revealing
phrase  about  "rucking  tail  and  running  in  Vietnam,"  showed
how  puerile  is  Johnson's   attitude.   How  make  peace  with  a
man  who  sees  that  complex  conflict  in  such  schoolboy  terms?
Kosygin   may   feel   that   those   pictures   with   Johnson   cost
him   suspicion  in  China  and   the  Third   World  without  any
compensating   progress.    His   sudden   decision   to   visit   Cuba
looks  like  an  effort,  by  provocative  pantomime,  to  show  that
Moscow   is  not   collaborating   with  Washington.   When   the
score   is  added   up,   Glassboro  may  prove   to  have  left   the
world  a  little  more—not  less—dangerous  than  it  was  before.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  S, 1967
An  Historic   Moment  for  Israel  and  World  Jewry—It  Will  Shape  the   Future
Suppose  Those Were  Jewish  Refugees  From  Arab  Armies?
(Continued  from  Page  Four)
by  Egypt.   Now,  if  it  cannot  rally  support  at  an  Arab  summit
neither  Nasser  nor  the  oil  potentates   want,  Jordan  may  be
forced  to  negotiate.   If  Israel  were  to  return  Arab  Jerusalem
as  part  of  such  a  Confederation,   and  make  the  Holy  City  a
condominium   as  a   symbol   of   Arab-Jewish  friendship,   the
atmosphere  might  be  changed.   But  I  see little  chance  of  such
far-sighted  magnanimity  in  Israel's  present  mood  of  military
elation   and   religio-national   fervor   about   Jerusalem.    Their
minds   are  shut   to   any  suggestion   that   Jerusalem   was   for
centuries  an  Arab  city,  too,   and  holds  Islam's  second   most
holy  shrine.    This  is  the  blindness  of  high  tragedy.
Hussein  Earned  His  Crown  at  Last
Jordan   is  a   fiction.   The   British   created   Transjordan  by
cutting  it  away  from  Palestine  in  1922  and  making  the  Emir
Abdullah  a  satellite  desert   king.   When  he  took   the  West
Bank  in  1948,  he  brought  together  in  one  kingdom  two  very
different  peoples.   The  Palestinian  Arabs  were  the  most  liter-
ate,   urbanized   and   advanced   of   all   the   Arabs  except   for
Lebanon.   The  TransJordanians  were  mainly  Bedouins,  living
a  tribal  life  under  their  Cadis  or  Judges  like  the  Jews  did  in
the   days  before   their  first  Kingdom.    Abdullah's  rule  was
oppressive  and  undemocratic.   His  grandson   Hussein   earned
his  crown  by  his  speech  last  week  to  the  UN.   It  v/as  by  far
the   most   impressive  address  made  at  the  session;  the  Arab
world  had  a  worthy  spokesman  at  last.   But  apart  from  the
drama   his   is  still   an   anachronistic  kingdom,   a   Hollywood
production   of   British   imperialism   and   American   aid.    For
Israel   to  join  with   Jordan   is  again  to  link   itself  with   the
backward  against  the  progressive  elements  in  the  Arab  world,
and  with  Western   imperialism.   This  spells  trouble   for   the
future.
The   best   that  can  be  said   for   Israel   is  that  the   troubles
of  victory  are  better  than  those  of  defeat.   Few  expected   so
swift   an   outcome.    Many  feared   Jerusalem,  Haifa   and   Tel
Aviv  would  be  smashed  by  air  raids  before  it  was  over.   Now
that  they  survive  almost  intact,   is  it   not  a  happy   outcome
that  the  millions  which  would  have  been  needed   to  rebuild
An  Unexpected   Lack  of   Compassion
"There  is,  as  I  have   said,  no  xenophobia   here.   The
Arabs  are  not  hated  or  even  despised.   No  one  has  the
time   to   spare   to   burn  Nasser   in   effigy.    What   does
strike   a   chill,   however,   is   an   apparent   insensitivity
to  the  fate  of  the  pawns  in  this  terrible  game.   There
is   plenty   of   evidence   that   the   aftermath   of   war   is
being   cleared   up  in  an  entirely  civilized  way.    All  the
humane  conventions  are  being  observed.  All  the  humane
conventions    are    being    observed,     and   the    nation's
strained  resources  are  being   used  to  save  the  lives  of
Egyptian  stragglers  in  the  Sinai  desert  and  to  keep
the    remaining    refugee    camps    supplied    with    food.
Brigadier  Herzog,  the  wealthy   business  man  called  to
the  colors  as   Military   Governor   of   the   Jordan  west
bank,  can  be  observed  cooperating  admirably  with  the
Jordanian   authorities.   But  when  he  or  any  other  high
Israeli   official  talks   about   the  homeless,  they  become
cyphers,  statistics,   and  not  people  at  all.  .  .  .   Yes,
says  the  official,  those  Arabs   who  remain  can  perhaps
be  allowed   a  limited   amount   of  self-government.   No,
those  who  have  fled  cannot   be  allowed   back   for   the
present;  the  security  risk   would  be  too.  great.   There
is  no  hint  of  revenge  for  19  centuries  of  persecution—
only,  at  least  at  this   moment,   a   lack   of   compassion
among  the  one  people  where   we  might  have  expected
to find it."   —Douglas   Brown   from   Tel  Aviv   in   the
London  Sunday  Telegraph, June  IS.
them  can  be  turned  (if  Israel  and  world  Jewry  wishes)   to  the
noble   fraternal   task   of   building  a   new   life   for   the   Arab
homeless  now  back within  the  borders of  their  old  homeland?
Only  a  big  plan  and  a  generous  politics,  launched  in  a  big
way,  can  undo  the  damage  done  by  those  terrible  pictures  of
Arab  refugees fleeing in  terror  from  victorious  Jews  across  that
damaged  Jericho  bridge.   And   Israel's  use  of  napalm  must  lie
heavy   on   every   Jewish   conscience;    Let   us   ask    ourselves:
Suppose   we  had   lost   the  war,  and   these   were  our  people
fleeing?   Suppose   Israel   loses  the   next  war,  who  will   care
about  our  refugees  if  we  care  so  little   about  theirs?   This
is   an  historic  moment,   in  which   Israel   and   Jewry   can  lay
foundations   for   the  future  of  war  or  peace,  hate  or   recon-
ciliation.  I  beg  every fellow  Jew  to  think  upon  it.
A  Great  Christian  Historian  Maps  a  Plan  for  Reconciliation  in  the  Mid-East
"If  Israel  were  assured  that  the  Arabs  inside  Israel  were
not  going  to  be  used  as  a  'fifth  column,'  she  could  afford  to
treat  them  as  first-class  citizens.   If  she  were  assured  that
any  refugees  could  not  be  used  as  a  'fifth  column'  either,
she  could  afford  to  readmit  some  at  any  rate.  To  be  assured
of  this  Israel  must  be  convinced  of   the  genuiness  of   the
indispensable  Arab  undertaking  to  accept  the  existence  of
Israel  and  no  longer  to  seek  to  destroy  her ...  If  the
hitherto   unsurmonnted  political  obstacle   could   be  cleared
out  -of  the  way,   modern  technology  could  provide  a  liveli-
hood  not  only  for  the  whole  present  population  but  for  the
Arab  refugees,   too.    We  are  on  the  verge  of  desalinating
sea-water  at  an  economic  price,  and this  is  going  to  trans-
form  deserts  into  fertile  fields.
"The  ideal  solution  would   be  to  repatriate  all  the   refu-
gees. This  would be the  surest  road  to  reconciliation  because
Palestine  is  a  country  that  keeps  its   hold   on  the  heart-
strings  of  any  people  that  has  ever  lived  there.   The  Jews'
longing  to  return  has  never   died.   The  Arab  Palestinian
refugees  have  the  same  feelings.    When  I  have  talked  to
them  in  the  Gaza  strip,  I  could   have  fancied  that  I  was
talking  to  the  Jewish  refugees  of  the  first  generation  who
wept  when  they  sat  down  by  the  waters  of  Babylon.
"However,  it  seems  improbable   that  many  of  the  present
Arab  refugees  will  wish  to  return  now  that  this  will  mean
coming   under   Israeli   rule ...  It  also  seems  improbable
that  the  Israelis  would  be  willing  to  readmit  all  the  Arab
refugees ...  A  possible  region  for  rehousing  Palestinian
Arab  refugees  who wish  to  preserve  their  corporate  identity
as  a  community  would  be  the  part  of  Syria  lying  to  the
northeast  of  River  Euphrates.   This  fertile  territory  is,  so
far,  only  sparsely  populated ...  It is  important  that  Israel,
when  once  the  Arabs  have  genuinely  made  peace  with   her,
should  take  the  initiative  .  .  .  The hour  of  military  victory
is  the  moment   for  being  magnanimous."
—Arnold  J.  Toynbee  in  Wash. Sunday Star June 18.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  S, 1967
Abridged  From  Letters  Put  Into  the  Congressional  Record  of  June  16
Soldiers  In  The  Field  Cheer  Fulbright  for  Opposing  The  War  In  Vietnam
Dear  Senator Fulbright:   I  have  been  meaning  to  write  this
letter  to  you  for  a  long  while.   This  evening  the  pressures  are
too  great  to  be  ignored.   Last  evening  I  listened  to  a  VOA
[Voice  of  America]   broadcast  on  "Vietnam   War   Dissent   in
the  US."   The  essential  theme  was  that  those  who  protest  the
war  were  either   Communists  or   cranks.   And   coupled   with
this  was  a  sly  reminder  that  we  have  our   share  of   lunatics
who  wish  a wider  war,  and  that  they  also  dissent  from  present
policy.  Not  one word  about  responsible,  reasoned  objections—
we  couldn't  admit  that.
Following   the  VOA  broadcast  I  turned  to  Radio  Peking.
The  usual  inanities  about  the  "glorious  thought  of  Chairman
Mao"   sounded   somehow   different—because   I   realized  how
close   the   two  distortions  were,   in   their   joint  disregard   of
truth  while  pursuing  doctrine.   I  am horrified  that  my  govern-
ment  is  unable  to  admit  any possibility  of  "error".
The  Villagers  Heard  A  Different  Music
But  this  is  really  a  small  point.   This  evening   it  is  fairly
quiet   but  Monday,  while  at  the  province  chief's  house   the
large  party  enjoyed   good  food  and   loud   music,  in  the   next
valley   over   the   ridge   the   500-pounders   fell   steadily.    The
villagers  get  a  different   sort  of  music—B-52  style.   I   won-
dered   then   if   we  can  ever  put   these  people  back  together
as  fast  as we  are  blowing  them  apart.
In  the  past  few  months  as  an  adviser  to  the  VN   Coastal
Force,  I  have  seen  too  often  the  real  casualties  of  this  con-
flict—the  farmers  and  their  families  in  the  Delta  mangled  by
air  strikes,  and  the  villagers  here  killed   and  burned   out  by
our  friendly  Korean  mercenaries.   Of  course,  I  do  my  share
in  the  lunatic  ward.   I  have  even  been  reprimanded   for  over-
enthusiastic  pursuit  of  VC.   Part  of  it  is  just  compensation—
it  is  refreshing,  after  seeing  so  many  innocent   people   suffer,
to  meet  real,  live  hostile  forces  capable  of  striking  back.
This  evening  they  showed  the  JFK  documentary  film  here
The  Ky  Clique's  French   Decorations
Dear  Senator  Fulbright:   Don't  let  Gen.  Westmore-
land  and  President   Johnson  erode  your  will  to  dissent
with  the  argument  that  all  the  soldiers  "over  there"
staunchly  support  the  war.   They  don't.   Most  of  them
are  apathetic  and  I  am  by  no  means  the  only  one  who
is  vehemently  opposed  to  it.
Gen.  Ky's  government  has  virtually  no  popular  sup-
port;  most  of  his  top  aides  sport  French  decorations
on  their  uniforms.  The  Vietnamese  people  identify  us
with  the  hated  French  imperialists  because  we  support
the  Ky  regime.  By  occupying  and devastating  Vietnam
we  have  gained  few  friends.
The  President   must  know  that  the  VC are  a  largely
indigenous   group   who   have   had   legitimate     gripes
against   the   many  "miracle-working"  governments   of
South   Vietnam  and  that   in   our  bombings  of   North
Vietnam   we  have  committed  outrages   for   which  we
once  condemned  the  Nazis.   With admiration.
in  the  MACV  [Military  Assistance  Command  Vietnam]  com-
pound.   I  could  not  help  but  feel  a  great  sense  of  loss  as  I
listened   to  the  richly  rolling  phrases—whatever  has  become
of  our  dream?  Where  is  that  America  that  opposed  tyrannies
at  every  turn,  without  enquiring  first  whether  some  particular,
form  of  tyranny might  be  of  use  to  us?
I  wish  I  had  more  answers.   But  the  obligation  to  oppose
evil  is pretty  absolute—it  doesn't  necessarily  depend  on  having
an  exact  blueprint   for  entering   the  Promised   Land.    As  you
are  probably  aware,  I  am  possibly  violating  17.000   directives
in  writing  you.   But  it  is  not  possible  to  keep  silent,  as  you
so  amply  demonstrate.   You  remind  me  of  Kent,  in  Lear,  who
in  the  face  of  dire  threats  from  his  King  replied,  "Whilst my
tongue  can give  vent  to  clamour,  I'll  tell  thee  thou  dost  evil."
I  pray  that  you fare  better  than  Kent.   And  as a  certain  come-
dian   less   than   half-jokingly   pleads:    "I   want   my   country
back."   Good  night,  sir.
A  Marine  2d Lieut.  Says  We, Not  the  Viet  Cong, Are  The Terrorists  in Vietnam
Dear   Senator   Fulbright:    I   went   to   Vietnam  a   hard-
charging  Marine  2d Lt,  sure  I  had  answered  the  plea  of  a
victimized   people.   That   belief   lasted   about   two   weeks.
Instead  of  fighting  Communist  aggressors  I  found that 90%
of  the  time  our  military  actions  were  directed  against   the
people  of   South  Vietnam.   We  are  engaged   in  a  war  in
Vietnam  to  pound  a  people into  submission  to  a  government
that  has  little  or  no  popular support.
Much  has  been  written  about  the  terror  tactics  used  by
the   Viet   Cong.   The  real   terrorists   in   Vietnam  are   the
Americans  and  their  allies.   I  don't  deny  that  some  of  the
accusations  against   the   VC  are   true   but   from   my   own
experience  the  terror  and  havoc  that  we  spread  makes  the
VC  look  like  a  Girl  Scout  picnic.
Can  you  image  what  an  isolated  village  looks  like  after
it  has  been  hit  by  over  500  750-pound bombs  in  a  matter
of   seconds?   Women,  children,  old  men,  cattle   and  every
living   thing  is   struck  down   without   ever  knowing  from
where  their  destruction  originated.   This  particular  village
ceased   to  exist   because  it   was  in  a  VC  dominated  area.
Intelligence  reports  said it  might have been used  as  a North
Vietnamese  regiment  headquarters.   We  never  found   any
dead  soldiers  but as  it  is  the  custom  in  VC controlled  areas
all  the  dead  were  listed  as  VC  killed  in  action.
I  also  saw  thousands  of  pounds  of  rice  dumped  in  rivers
and   otherwise   destroyed   because   some   small   unit   com-
mander  decided  there  was  too  much  rice  in  this  particular
village  for  the  number  of  people  living  there  and  therefore
the  surplus  must  be  going  to  the  VC.  Here  is  some  2d  Lt.
with  a  degree  in  Literature  suddenly  making  himself   an
expert  on  Asian  agriculture  and  family  consumption   pat-
terns.   These  people  had  worked  for  months  to  bring  in  a
rice   harvest   and  their   "defenders"   had   come  along   and
destroyed  it  in  a  matter  of  minutes.   They  certainly   aren't
going   to   be  thinking  of   us   as   saviors.    This   scene   was
repeated  dozens  of  times  during  my  tour.
I  wanted to  tell  you  that  there  are  many, many  of  us  in
the   military   who   oppose   this   war   and   appreciate   your
efforts  to  bring  out  the  truth  and  get  this  thing   stopped.
We  are  not  very  vocal  because  it  is  alright  for  a  military
man  to  speak  out  in  support  of  the  war  but  to  speak  out
in  opposition would  subject  us to  very  serious   repercussions.
All   three  of   my  friends  who  went   to  Vietnam  with  me
came  away  sharing  my  feelings.
At  one  time  I  thought  I  would  make  the  military   my
career.   But  I  could not  live  with  myself  if  I  stayed  in  the
service  of  my own  free  will  and was  sent  to  Vietnam  again
to  brutalize  those  poor  people.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  3,1967
Sobering  Realities  and  Sharp  Headaches   of  The  Morning   After
The  Arab  "Invasion" With  Which  Israel  Must  Now  Cope in  Victory
From  all  I  can  learn   the  first  flush  of  military  elation  in
Israel  has  given  way  to  sober   reflection.    In  a  sense   Israel's
successful   invasion   of   her   neighbors  has   been   accompanied
by  an  Arab  "invasion"  of  Israel.   Its  borders  with  Syria,  with
Jordan  and  with  Egypt  now  give  it  greater  military  security
than  it  has  had  before.   But  the  price  turns out, on  examina-
tion,  to  be  a  greater  insecurity  within.   When  you  live  in  an
Arab  sea, the  Arabs  seep   in,  win  or   lose,  and   a  victorious
Israel  finds   itself   with   a  million  Arabs  more  than   she  had
before.   Her  armies occupy  Gaza  and  the  West  Bank.   But  so
do  these  Arabs.   She  cannot  forcibly  convert  them   into  Jews
as  Jews  and   Christians  in  Palestine  were  once  forcibly con-
verted   into   Muslims.   And   except   for   a   relative  few, she
cannot  drive  them  out.  What  to  do?    In  a  sense  the  Arab
refugees  have  been  carrying on  a  sit-down  strike  for   19  years
on  Israel's  borders.   Now  the  sitdown  strikers  are  inside.
No  Blitz  Will  Disperse  Them
This  is  a  much  more  difficult   problem  than  was  the war.
Israelis  are  awakening  to  the   fact   that  they  themselves  may
be  glad  in  negotiations  to  get  rid  of  much  of  the  land  they
annexed.
There  seem  to  be  roughly  three   main  attitudes  in   Israel
toward  the  newly  occupied  territories.  On   the  right,   leaders
like  Menachem  Beigin,  want  Gaza  and  the  West  Bank  even
if   it  means  almost  half  the  people  of   Israel  will  be  Arabs;
even  the  rightists  admit  the  Arabs  cannot  be  expelled;   even
if  they  could,  there  are  no  new  Jewish  immigrants  available
to   replace   them.    In   the   nationalist  centre,   men   like  Ben
Gurion  and  Moshe  Dayan,  are  talking  of  an  autonomous  Arab
"state"  on  the  West   Bank,  perhaps   also   linked  with   Gaza
but  not  with  central  Gallilee  where   most  of  Israel's  present
Arabs  live.   That,  they  say,  is  irrevocably  Israel,  though   the
original  partition  place  would  have  given  it  (and some  other
.areas)  to  the  Arab  state.  Where  the  1947 plan  called  for  an
independent   Arab  state   linked   economically  with   an   inde-
pendent  Jewish  state, they envision an  Arab  state  which  would
be   an   Israeli   satellite.    Israel   would    control   security   and
foreign   relations.  This  has  already  been   derisively  termed  a
"Bantustan"   arrangement   by   some   British   correspondents.
Unusual   Frankness  Dept.
"I  am  unalterably  opposed  to  the  so-called   give-away
programs,  the  so-called  poverty  programs,  the  so-called
do-good-here  and do-good-there  programs—so  I  suggest
that   we   examine   the   differences   between   those  and
these  of  which  we  are  speaking  .  .  .  Whether  we  like  it
or   not,  we   cannot   deny   that   this   economy   is   now
geared,    hand   in   hand   and   arm   in   arm,  with    the
Defense  and space  programs.  These  are  the  two  biggest
spenders   in  the   country   .   .  .  Within   the   bounds   of
classification  .  .  .  one  cannot,  under  any  circumstances,
separate  the  value  of  the  space  program   in  any  area,
in  any  field,  in  any  realm  from  our  defense   program."
—Hebert    (D.,  La.)  fighting   proposed   cuts   in   the
space  program  in  the  House  June  22.
Even  if  it  were  not  that  bad,  it  would  still  be  a  captive state.*
The   Arabs  would   never   accept   this   disguised   ghetto.
On  the  Left,  in  Mapam,  there  is  talk  of  a   Confederation
with  Jordan.   The  West  Bank  would   be  returned   to  Jordan
and  with  it  access  to  the  Mediterranean  by  free  port  privileges
either  at  Haifa  or  Ashdod.   Mapam,   once  bl-nationalist,  now
feels   that   only  minimal   ties   between   the   two  peoples   are
possible.   It  speaks  of  a  Confederation   because  that   denotes
looser   ties  than   a  federation.   It   is  felt   that   Jordan   is   the
Arab  neighbor  hardest  pressed   by  the  defeat;  Egypt   is  little
affected   by  the   loss  of  Gaza,  Sinai  and   the  Gulf   of   Aqaba;
Syria  has  lost  no  vital  interest  in  the  heights  that   command
the   upper   Jordan;   but  Jordan   has  lost   the   best   part   of   its
territory  and  the  most  advanced  portion  of  its  people.    Israel
asked  Jordan  to  stay  neutral;  Jordan  fought  but  was  let  down
(Continued   on  Page Two)
*  A -device  for  keeping   the  West  Bank   without   having   to
give  full  citizenship  to  its  Arab  inhabitants..   The  basic  atti-
tude   is   revealed   in  Dayan's  Diary   of  the   Sinai   Campaign
where  he  says,  in  speaking  of  the  Gaza  strip,  that  Egypt had
never    annexed   Gaza   because    it   did   not   wish   to    become
responsible  for  its  Arab  refugees   and  adds  "Ben  Gurion, too,
feels  that  Israel   should  not  agree—if  she  is  ever  offered  the
proposal—to  attach   the  Gaza  strip   to  her  territory   because
of  its   numerous   refugees   whom  Israel  cannot   accept."    Vic-
tory  has  now  given  Ben  Gurion  what  he  didn't  want.'
On   Summer   Schedule  -    Next   Issue   July  17th
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
I. P. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Name  ...................................
Street   .................................
Pitir
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street    .................................
Pitv
5618  Nebraska   Ave
Washington,  D.  C.
,  N. W.
20015
a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State.....
a  gift  sub  to:
7in      .....     State.....
7/3/07
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  Q
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday   except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W., Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by   I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the  U.S.;  »6   in   Canada:   J10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
*1T t
n
  F.nrone:  S20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED