I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1967
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1967mar06.pdf

============================================================

The  Truth  About  the Cl A,  P. 2, and  Gen. Shoup  on  Vietnam,  P.  3
A Word to the Unwise From  America's Greatest  Living Historian
"We   do   not   have   the   resources,    material,    intellectual
or   moral   to  be  at   once   an  American   power,   a  European
power,  and  an  Asian   power.   Justice   Holmes   used   to   say
that   the   first   lesson   a   Judge   had  to   learn   was   that   he
was  not  God.   It  is  a  lesson  every  man  has  to   learn  and
a  lesson  every  nation  has  to  learn ...  It  is  not  our  duty
to  keep   peace  throughout  the  globe,  to  put  down  aggres-
sion   wherever   it   starts   up,  to   stop  the   advance   of   com-
munism  or  other  isms  which  we  may  not  approve   of."
—Henry  Steele  Commayer:  Senate  Foreign  Relations Feb. 20
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XV,  NO.  9MARCH  6,  1967
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15   CENTS
The  Mendacities  Go  Marching  On, Truce  or  No  Truce
The  U.S.  used  the  Tet  truce  in  Vietnam  to  bring  up  sup-
plies  for  the  biggest  ground operation of  the  war.   This  is  the
truth  hidden  from   the  American  public,  which  is  still  being
fed  the  myth  that  massive  supply  operations  in  North'  Viet-
nam  gave  Johnson  no  alternative  but  to  resume  his  bombing.
The  brain-washing  that  afflicts  most  Americans was  deliriously
summed  up  by  a  cartoon  in  the  Montreal   Star  (reprinted  in
the  Saturday  Review,  Feb.  11).    This  showed  two  U.S.   offi-
cers  beside  a  huge  battleship  being  loaded  with  troops  while
cranes  swung  tanks  aboard  overhead.  One   officer   says  to  the
other,   "Just   watch   those   Congs   use   the   truce   for   a   big
buildup."
The   Offensive  We  Prepared  During  Tet
In  last  week's   issue  we  exposed   the  fraudulent   campaign
about  a  huge  and  illegal  supply  buildup  in  the  North.     No
sooner  had  we  gone  to  press  than  it  was  announced  Feb.   23
that  some  30,000  troops  had  launched "Junction  City,"  a giant
search-and-destroy  operation   against   the  Viet   Cong  Zone  C
in  Tay  Ninh  Province,  the  biggest  yet  in  this  war.    Readers
will  recall  that  last  week  we  quoted  an  Agence  France  Presse
dispatch  from   Saigon  in  Le  Monde   (Feb.   12-13)   which  de-
scribed  the  "long  files"  of  military  trucks  stretched  out  during
the  truce on  the  road  from  Saigon  to  Tay  Ninh  and  the  loads
of  shells  for   105.mm  and   155.mm  cannons  being  hauled   to
American  units  on  the  edge  of  Zone  C.    When  the   offensive
was  unleashed   from   there  the   following  week   AFP   in   Le
Monde   (Feb.  25)   reported  that  this  offensive  "had   been  pre-
pared   during   the   Tet   truce."     Not   one  word   of   this   has
appeared  in  the  U.S.  press.    I  managed  to  break  through  the
Iron   Curtain  that   shelters   government   propaganda   here   by
making  available  advance  proofs  of  last  week's  issue  to   The
Guardian  in  London  and  Manchester  which  printed  a  resume
of  our  story  under  a  four-column  headline  on  page  one,   Fri-
day,   Feb.  24.    This  produced  so  many  queries  from  London
that  the  Pentagon  that  day was  forced  to  issue  a  denial,  which
appeared  on  the  UPI  wire  but  was  printed   only  in  London.
We  give  it  slightly  abridged  in  a  box  on  this  page.     It  isn't
much  of  a denial  and  it  embodies  a new  falsehood.
The  Pentagon   denies  that  it  ever  charged   that  the  North
Vietnamese  were  violating  the  truce  by  their  supply  activities
(all  north  of  the   17th  parallel  so  far  as  our  own  reconnais-
sance  observed  it)  and  that  it  never  denied  that  we  were  using
the  truce  for  movement  of  supplies,   too.    Literally  this  may
The  Pentagon's  Reply  to  the  Weekly
"Washington—The  Defense   Department    commenting
on  charges  in  I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  said  the   Department
has   never   charged   that   the   North    Vietnamese    had
violated   any  truce  arrangements   by  vastly  increasing
their   movement   of   supplies    [during   the   Tet   truce].
Neither   has  it  denied  that   U.S.   forces   continued  their
movement   of   supplies.    All   that   it   has   done   was   to
stress   that   the   truce   has   been   seized    upon   by   the
North   Vietnamese   as   a   golden   opportunity   to   move,
in  the  four  days  of  the  truce,  as  many  supplies  as  they
are  normally  able  to  move  in  a  month  because   of   the
handicaps  imposed   by  the  bombings.   'All  that  the  Tet
truce  meant  to  us  logistically   was  that  we  had  to  pay
holiday  pay  to  the  longshoremen   who  worked  and  that
many   civilian   employes    preferred   to   celebrate,'   the
spokesman  said.   'The  point  that  Mr.  Stone  is  missing
is  that  we  have  air  and  naval  supremacy  and  have  no
need  of  a  truce  of  any  kind  to  move  supplies.'"
—Abridged  from  the  UPI  ticker  Feb.  24
be  so.    But  the  White   House,  the  State  Department  and  the
Pentagon   certainly  did  their  best,  to  create  a  contrary impres-
sion  without  explicitly stating  a  falsehood.   Indeed  its  spokes-
men  continue  to  foster  that  false  impression.    Senator  Russell
repeated  this myth  when  debate  opened  in  the  Senate  Feb.  23
on  the  supplemental  Vietnamese  war  appropriation.    Arthur
Goldberg  in  Tokyo  went  even  further.    Three  days  after   the
Pentagon  issued  its  denial  here,  Goldberg  was  repeating  the
same myth  in  Tokyo  (New   York  Times,  Feb.  28)  and  adding
a  new  embellishment:  he  claimed  a  violation  not  only  of  the
truce  but  of  the  Geneva  accord,  though  even  our  military  did
not  claim  that  supplies  had  actually  been  spotted  crossing  the
17th  parallel!
It   is  frustrating  to   feel   so  powerless   as   these  myths   go
marching  on.     I  feel  as  if   I  were  being  smothered  under  a
blanket.    The  new  falsehood  in  the  Pentagon  reply  was  in  its
smug  assertion that  all  the  truce meant  to  us  was higher  wages
for  longshoremen  since  we  have  air  and  naval  supremacy  "and
have  no  need  of  a  truce  of  any  kind  to  move  supplies."     Let
us  put  aside  for  a moment  the  Double-Think  character  of  this
remark,  which  implies that any time our  bombing  of  the North
stops  it  is  somehow   not  cricket  for   people   there  to  breathe
freely   and  move  around  normally,  while  the  cessation  lasts.
The  hidden  falsehood  lies  in  the  fact  that  while  we  do  domi-
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  6,  1967
With  Our  Paternal  Salute  to  Michael  Wood,  and  Complete  Agreement  on  The  CIA
Trying  to  Put  the  Student  Who   Spilled  the  Beans  on  the  Griddle
FRANK   REYNOLDS  (ABC  White   House   Correspondent):
Once  again  there  is  a  great  hue  and  cry  in  this  country  and
abroad  about  the  Central Intelligence Agency. The  story  broke,
of  course,  with  the  disclosure  in  Ramparts  Magazine  that  the
CIA  had  been  subsidizing  the  National  Student  Association.
With  us  today  are  three  young  men  who  have  been  involved
in   the   affair.     First,   Michael   Wood   who   was   Director   of
Development  for  the  NSA.    Mr.  Wood  is  the  man  who,gave
the   story  to   Ramparts.     Mr.   Wood  you  are  the   man   who
started  all  the  fuss.     In  that  magazine  you  say  that  to  break
the  story  was  the  most  agonizing  decision  of  your  life.    Now
I  am  sure,  Mr.  Wood,  that  you  are  aware  there  are  a  great
many  people  who  are  not  necessarily  rightwing  extremists  or
professional   cold  warriors  who   are  disturbed  by  what  these
disclosures  have  meant  to  the  CIA.    Carl  Rowan *  in  today's
Washington   Star  writes:
The  harsh  truth  is  that  these  exposures  have  destroyed
the  CIA  as  an  effective  instrument   in  many  arenas  of  the
cold  war  that  is  still  being  waged  furiously  despite  the  re-
cent   talk   about  detente.    So  what  the  Communists  spent
billions  unsuccessfully   to  do,  we   Americans   out   of   ideal-
ism  have  delivered  to  them  as  a  gift.
What  do  you  say  to  that?
MICHAEL   WOOD:   If   the  U.S.  is  going   to   be  engaged   in
a  world  struggle of  ideas,  I  think  we  have  to  compete  on  our
own   terms  which means that  we  have  to  be  true  to  our  own
values,  by using an  open,  democratic public society, as  opposed
Io  any  sort  of   society  that  practices  totalitarianim or  restric-
tions  on  people's   freedom.    The  argument   that  the   Commu-
nists  use  the   same  sort  of   techniques  doesn't   wash,   in   my
mind.     If  you  accept  their  rules,  you  play  their  game,   then
you  simply  bow  to  their values.
Mr.   REYNOLDS:  Do  you  believe  you  have  destroyed   CIA
as  an   effective  "instrument  of   the   cold  war?
Mr.  WOOD:  Unfortunately  I  think  the  CIA  and  the  people
who  support  the  CIA  are  both  more  clever  and  more  cynical
than  to  be  destroyed  by  this  sort  of  operation.  .  .  .
Mr.    REYNOLDS:   You   don't   expect   anything    worthwhile
from  your  point  of  view  from  the  Katzenbach  investigation?
Mr.   WOOD:  Surely  not.     It  strikes  me  that   if  there   is  a
cancer  in  the  society,  you  don't  go  to  the  cancer  itself  and  ask
it  to  perform  surgery.  .  .  .
Mr.   REYNOLDS.  In  the  report  the  Under  Secretary  filed  to
the  President  he  mentioned  that  the  CIA  was  not  acting  on
its  own  initiative,  but  in  accordance  with  policies  established
by  the  National   Security  Council  and   in   effect   under   four
Presidents.    What  you  are  really  doing  is  setting  your  judg-
ment  against  that  of  four  Presidents.
Mr.   WOOD:  The   great   beauty   of   this  country,  as  I  was
taught  it,  was  that  it  is  a  country which  in  fact  allows  what
you  think  is  arrogant,  that  a  citizen  can  advance  an  independ-
ent  viewpoint with  respect  to  public  issues.    That  it  was  ap-
proved  at  the  highest  level  of  government   only   indicates   the
extent  to  which  the  corruption  that  the  CIA   was  involved   in
has  spread.    I  am  sure  that  the  requisitions for  the  gas  cham-
Last  to  Know  Dept.
"Miami   Beach,  Fla.,   Feb.   24   (AP)—George   Meany
said  today ...  he  had no  personal  knowledge  of  any
CIA  money  going  to  labor   unions  and  .  .  .  also  said
that    Jay    Lovestone,   AFL-CIO   international     affairs
director,  was  not  involved  in  any  way  with  the   CIA."
—Baltimore  Sun, Feb. 25
*As  director   of   the   U.S.   Information   Agency,  Rowan   put
forward  the doctrine of  "the  people's right not to know."—IFS
bers  in  Nazi  Germany  were  approved  at  the  higher  level  of
government.
Mr.   REYNOLDS:  'Quite  apart  from  what  is  involved   here
in  terms  of  morality  and  with  respect  to  the  secrecy,  the  posi-
tion  that  seems  to  be  developing  is  that  of  a  very  rich,  gener-
ous  and  benign  uncle.    The  CIA  didn't  seem  to  bother  you
too  much.
Mr.  WOOD:  I  think  my  analysis  is  a  little  more  thorough-
going.    At  the  18th   Congress,  two  former  alumni  who  were
agents  of  the  CIA  were  at  the  Congress   and  organized   the
moderate  position   on   Vietnam    They   were   concerned   that
certain  elements  not  be  in  the-Vietnam  resolution.    For  ex-
ample,  no  permanent  cessation  of  bombing—this  is  in   1965
—and  a  stipulation  that  the  opposite   side  had  to  respond  in
kind  to  any  gesture  of  the  U.S.    These  people  played  a  very
active  role.
Mr.   REYNOLDS:  Were  there  any  pressures  on  you?
Mr.  WOOD:  There  were  immense  pressures  exerted  on  me.
There  were  pressures   placed   on  other   people   in  attempts  to
get  lawyers  to  drop  cases,  attempts  to get  lawyers  to  feed  Cl/,
lines  to  their  clients,  threats  to  forge  psychiatric records.    All
of  this  out  of  the  so-called  enlightened  wing  of  the  CIA.
Mr.  REYNOLDS:  What  is  this  about  psychiatric  threats?
Mr.  WOOD: There  was  a  threat  against  one  individual  to
forge  psychiatric  records  and  place  them  in  strategic  spots  in
the  government  in  order  to  discredit  his  character  and  to  ex-
clude  him  from  a  responsible  role  in  the  government.   .  .  .
Mr.  REYNOLDS:  What  would  have  happened   to  the   NSA,
gentlemen,  in  its  overseas  activities,  had  there  not  been  a  sub-
sidy—let's  forget  for  the  moment  that  it  came  from  the  CIA
—had  you  not  been  subsidized  by  the  Federal   government?
MR.    RICHARD   STEARNS   (Int'l     Affairs      V.P.,   NSA):        I
doubt  if  NSA  would  have  had  an  international  program.  .  .  .
.Mr.  REYNOLDS:  In  1952  you  think  it  might  have  been   diffi-
cut,   considering  the   mood   of   Congress,   to   get   support   for
NSA?
Mr.   STEARNS:  Exactly.  .  .  .
Mr.  WOOD:  The  argument  is  a  very  elitist  argument.    The
people  of  the  U.S.  are  not  intelligent  enough;   they  are  not
well  informed  enough   to  make  any  sort  of  judgments  with
respect  to  foreign  policy.    Therefore   you  have  to  place  it  in
the  hands   of   certain  elites.     Therefore   you  have   to   make
these  decisions in  a  sub  rosa  organization which gets  only very
limited  review  by  the  Congress.     Now   that  is  the   argument
that  CIA  types  use  in  trying  to  justify  the  subsidy:  that  the
Congress  wouldn't  do  it.    Therefore   you  have  to  do  it  with-
out  the  Congress'  knowledge.    Now  that  strikes  me  as  being
highly  anti-democratic.
—Abridged   from   Issues  and  Answers  ABC-TV  Feb.  26
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March   li, 1967
Retired   U.S.   Marine  Commandant   Advises   Youth   To  Get  Out  And  Demonstrate
Southeast  Asia  Not  Worth   "The    Life  or  Limb  of  A  Single  American"
Sen.  Hartkc  (D.  hid),   a  critic  of  the  Vietnamese  war,   put
into  the  Congressional  Record  Feb.  20  (at  p.  S2270)   the  text
of   an  extraordinary   speech   made  at  the  10th  annual  Junior
College  World   Affairs    Day   in  Los  Anr/cles   last  May   by   Gen.
David   M.  Shoitp,   retired   Commandant   of   the   U.S.    Marine
Corps   from   which   iff   present   these  excerpts   of   Iiis   advice
to  American  youth:                              '
Are  you  just  going  to  reproduce  excessively ...  or  will
you  also  sincerely  and   actively  participate  in  what   I   believe
to  be  man's  most   noble   efforts   on   earth—first,   his   struggle
to   free  mankind  from   the   affluent   who   gorge  on   delicacies
while  children  starve  for   the   lack   of  milk  and   bread;   and,
second,  his  striving  for  peace  on  earth? ...
You   read,   you're  televised  to,   you're   radioed   to,   you're
preached   to,   that   it   is   necessary  that   we   have   our   armed
forces  fight,  get  killed  and  maimed,  and  kill  and  maim  other
human  beings  including women   and  children  because  now  is
the  time  we  must  stop  some  kind  of  unwanted  ideology  from
creeping  up  on  this  nation.   The  place  we  choose  to  do  this
is  8,000  miles  away  with  water  in  between.
The  Excuses  Are  Shallow
The  reasons  fed  to  us  are  too  shallow  and  narrow  for  stu-
dents  as  well  as  other  citizens.    Especially  when   you   realize
that  what  is  happening,  no  matter  how  carefully   and  slowly
the   military  escalation   has  progressed,   may  be  projecting   us
toward  world  catastrophe.    Surely  it  is confusing.
Particularly   is  this  true  when   we  know   that   a  great   deal
closer  there  are  essentially the  same  situations:
(1)    Since  last  July,  Peru's  national  army  has  been  battling
red  guerrillas  in  more  than  half   its  states.
(2)    Red  guerrillas run  areas  in  several  states  of   Colombia.
(3)    Many   businessmen  are  leaving   Guatemala   following
ransom  kidnappings  by  Communist  bands.   .  .  .
It  must  be  a  bit  confusing,   too,   to   read   and   hear   about
fighting  for   freedom.     Supposedly   we  have  it,  and   I   don't
think  aayone  is going  to  take  it  awav  from  us  by  playing  cops
and   robbers   in  Southeast   Asia.    Even  so  we  urge   others   to
fight   for   freedom.   .   .  .  The   people   we   urge   this  upon   in
Southeast   Asia,  South   America  and  many  other   places   have
no   idea  of   our   meaning   of   freedom.   .  .  .
These  masses  of  people  have  always  lived  where  the   few
have  everything.   Everything that  is  produced   by  the  burden-
some  labor  of  the  many.    And   the  many  have  nothing   but
the  barest  subsistence  and  not  always  that.  .  .  .
/   want   to  tell  yon,   I  don't   think   the   whole  of   Southeast
China  Called  Our  Greatest   Blunder
"From   my   experiences   over   parts   of   five   years  in
China  and  what  I  know  of  conditions  there  today,  I'm
sure  that   more  Chinese   know  where   tomorrow's   food
is  coming  from  than  ever  in  the  history  of  living  man.
To   what   must   go   the   credit?     The   system    they're
serving  under.
"The   alienation  of   the   friendship  of   the   great  and
wonderful  Chinese  people  will  surely  vie  for   centuries
to  come  as  the  greatest  blunder  this  country  ever  made
in   her  relations   with   other   nations,   unless   the  final
results  from  our  Vietnam  commitment  overshadows   it.
You  say   what  about  the   Republic  of   China  vis   a   vis
Red   China?   I  reply,  time  is   on  the  side  of   the  one
with  the  bigger  hunk  of  earth.  And  that's  not  Taiwan."
—From  the  same  Shoup  speech  excerpted   on this  page
Asia,  as  related  to  the  present   and  future   safety   and    freedom
of   the   people   of   this  country,   is  worth  the   life    or  limb  of
a  single  American.  .  .  .
I  believe  that  if  we  had  and  would  keep  our  dirty,  bloody
dollar-crooked  fingers  out  of  the  business  of  these  nations  so
full  of  depressed,  exploited  people,  they  will  arrive  at  a  solu-
tion  of  their  own.    That  they  design  and  want.    That   they
fight  and   work   for.     And   if   unfortunately   their   revolution
must  be  of  the  violent  type  because  the  'haves'  refuse  to  share
with  the  'have-nots'  by  any peaceful  method,  at  least  what  they
get  will  be  their  own  and  not  the  American  style,  which   they
don't  want  and   above   all  don't   want   crammed   down   their
throats  by  Americans.
Time  and  history  have  proved  how  wrong  we  were   about
Mexico  in  the  second   decade  of  the  century.  .  .  .
Until  you're  21  you can't  vote.  .  .  .  But  you can make  your
voice  heard.    You  don't  have  to  be  a  vegetable  'til  you're  21.
Historically,  demonstrations   intended   to  bring  unrealistic re-
gimes   to  heel,   have  on   balance   produced   good   for   the  ex-
ploited  masses.    Brought  to  mind  are  Magna  Charta,  Joan  of
Arc,  India,  South   American   countries,  China,   the  Buddhists
in  South  Vietnam,  and  where  would  the  Negro  be  today with-
out   the   demonstrations   of   the   recent   past   which   awakened
many  sleeping  American  whites?     It  may  well   be  that   this
technique  has  finally  come  in  an  exploding  fashion  to  Amer-
ica  and  American  students.    It  shows  you  are  thinking.
Don't  let  yourself  get  too  shook-up   by  the  over-advertised
encroachment   of  communism.    Help  people  to  get  things  and
Communism  will  strangle  by  its  own  umbilical  cord.
We  Risk Our National  Substance  If  We Fail  to  See  The  Nature  of  War  Has Changed
"The  advent  of  nuclear  war  has  brought  about  a  funda-
mental   change    in   the   very   nature   of   war   itself.    The
Clausewitzian   orthodoxy  that   war   is   a   continuation   of
politics   by  other   means,   no   longer   applies.    The   concept
that  if  you  destroy  enough   people  and  property  you  over-
come   an   enemy's   will   to   resist   is   equally  fallacious.   A
corollary   to   this   is   that   a   nation   should   use   as   much
force   as   is   necessary   to  win  since  there  is   no  substitute
for   victory.   Actually   the   nature   of   conflict   being   what
it   is   and   the   danger   of   a   nuclear   holocaust   being   ever
present,  it  is  compelling that  solutions  less  than  total  war
be  found  .  .  .  This  change  in  the  nature  of   war  is   quite
fundamental  and  should  be  reflected  in  our  policy.   Other-
wise   we  shall  expend   our  national   wealth   and   manpower
in  never-ending  conflicts  all  over  the  world  .  .  .
"A  small  part  of  what  we  have  spent  in  Vietnam  in  the
last   10  years  if   applied  to  our  own  problems  would  have
improved  tremendously  the  conditions  in  our  own  country
while,  at  the   same   time,   we   would  be  in   a   much  better
position  to  help  others.    For  we  cannot  live  in  an  enclave
of   affluence   in  a  world  in  which  a  third   of  its   people   is
very  poor,  with  a  per  capita  gross  national   product  of  less
than  $100,  and  another  third  not  much  better  off."
—Lt. Gen.  Gavin  to Senate Foreign Relations Feb.  21
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  6, 1967
A  Blackout  Here,  But  Questions  Were  Askgd  in  the  House  of  Commons
(Continued   from   Page    One)
nate  the  air  and  the   sea,  we  do  not  dominate  the  toads  in
South  Vietnam.    "Normally"—to  use  the  word  our  military
apply  to  the  constant  bombing  of  the  north—we  cannot  move
supplies  on  most  of  the  roads  in  the  South  without  a  heavy
investment  of  armor  and   troops.
How  Tet  Helped  Us,  Too
In  the  truce,  supply  was  not  a  violation  by  either  side.     To
fire  upon   a  convoy   (or   an  air  strip)   was  a  violation  of   the
truce.    It  was  therefore  easier  and   less  costly  for  us  to  move
on  the  roads  (and  far  less  dangerous  to  land  and  drop   sup-
plies  upcountry).*    Tay  Ninh  has  been  an  air  supply  area.  It
is  much  more  costly  and   difficult   to  move  heavy  supplies   by
air,    especially  when   small   air  strips   ("normally"    subject   to
enemy  fire)  limit  landings to  helicopters and  the  smaller  cargo
planes.    To  get  from  Saigon  to  Tay  Ninh   city  on  the  edge
of  Zone  C  one  goes  about  45  miles northwest  on  Route  1 and
then  about  35  miles  north  on  Route  22  to  Tay  Ninh.    Few
Americans  are  foolhardy   enough   to  venture  very  far   out  of
Saigon  on  Route  1  even  by  day  without a  military  escort,  and
fewer  still  on  Route  22,  where  peasant  and  commercial  traffic
—as  our   military   admit—pay   road   fees  to   the   Viet   Cong.
Helicopters   and   tanks   protected   the   trucks   which   went   up
those  roads  during  Tet,   but  they  didn't  have  to  fear  the  kind
of  traps,  ambushes  or  blocks  of  "normal"   times.
When  Saturday's Le  Monde    (Feb.  25)   reached  me  Sunday
with  its  reference  to  the  use  of  Tet  by  U.S.  forces  to  prepare
the  "Junction  City"  operation,  I  called  this  to  The   Guardian's
attention.    It  published this  in  London  Monday  morning.    As
a  result  there  were  questions  from  Laborite  backbenchers   in
the  Commons  that  day,  notably   by  Sidney  Silverman,   James
Davidson  and  Michael  Foot.     Foot   asked  the   Foreign   Min-
ister  whether  the  new  offensive  had  not  been  made  possible
in   part  by  resupply  during  the   truce.     But  this  and  similar
Iron  Triangle  Epilogue
"When  the  Army decided  the  Iron  Triangle  had  to  be
obliterated,  there  were  great  expectations.   The  enemy
would  be  bagged  and  their  burrows  blown  to  kingdom
come.   But  it  didn't  quite  work  out  that  way.   A  rela-
tively   few   enemy   were   either   snared   or   killed.   The
tunnel  systems   were  not  destroyed  but  only  damaged.
The  panorama is  now  scarred  from  end  to  end,  not  only
by  bomb craters  but  by  ribbons  of  turned  red  soil  where
fleets  of  bulldozers  did their  work.  Still  it  remains  true
that  not  one  B-52  crater   and  none  of  this  bustle  and
bang  over  the  surface  hit  deep  enough  to  damage  even
slightly   any  one  of   the  tunnel   systems,   according  to
engineers    who   explored   the   tunnels.    They   found   it
impossible   to   destroy   them.    The   best   that   could  be
done  was  to  interrupt  them  here  and  there  by  blowing
them  up  or  saturating   them  with  chemicals  that  might
last  a  while  longer.   It  is  not  simply  that  the   tunnels
are  too  far  below  the  surface.   But  rather  nowhere  do
they   maintain   a   straight   line.    It   is   always   zig-zag
to  thwart   any   weapon  or  chemical.   Baffle   doors  and
vents   are   numerous.    The  effect   is   to   limit  the   area
of   destructiveness.    Furthermore   the   evidence   shows
that  before  our  combat  troops  had  completed withdraw-
ing   from   the   triangle,   the   Viet   Cong   were    moving
back  in."
—Gen. S.  L.  A.  Marshall   from  Bien  Hoa,  Vietnam,  in
the  New  York  World  Journal  Tribune  Sunday,  Feb.  26.
* This  may  explain  the  sharp  increase  in  air  cargo  during
Tet  which  we  also  reported last  week.
questions  drew  evasions  rather  than  denials  from  the   Foreign
Minister  George  Brown.     All   this,   too,   was  blacked   out  in
the  U.S.  press.    No  one  reported  either  the  questions  or  the
answers  and  it  was  only  by  telephoning  London   that   I  was
able  to  learn  about  it  in  time  for  this  issue.    Here  the  initia-
tion  of  naval  shellfire,  river  mines  and  artillery  barrages   across
the  Parallel   is  accompanied   by  the   usual   escalation   in   men-
dacity.    Mr.  Johnson  summoned.an  impromptu   press  confer-
ence  to  deny  that  these  new  moves  constituted  escalation  at
all.    He  said  he  wouldn't  describe  them  as any  kind  of  step-up
because,  as  he  said,  "I  wouldn't  want  to  put  my  credibility  in
doubt."     Nobody   had   the   temerity   to   suggest   this   was  a
maidenhead   he  had  lost  a  long  time   ago.
We'll  Send  Free  Copies  of  TKis  and  the  Previous  Two  Issues  on  the  Truce  to  Your Friends  If  You  Send  Stamped
Addressed  LONG  Envelopes—Help  Us  Get  Out  the  Truth  in  This  Way
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub   for   the   enclosed   $5'.
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Name
Street
City    ...
Zip................   State..
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name    .....................................................
Street    ...............................................................
3/6/67
City   ....................................  Zip................   State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished   Q
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618     Nebraska  Ave.,   N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
last   week   in   December   and  the
L  weekly   published    and   edited
swhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED