I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958may05.pdf

============================================================

The  Heikkila  Case, P.  4
Was  All  That   Clean  Bomb   Talk  Just  A   Hoax   and  A  Smoke-Screen   for  Testing?   Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  17
MAY  5,  1958
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why   the  Inspection  Debate   at  the  UN   is  Obsolete
The  important  point  about  the  flights  of  the  U.  S.  Stra-
tegic  Air  Command  seems  to  have  been  missed  in  the  angry
debate  at  the  UN   and  the  proposals  for  Arctic   inspection.
The  important  point  is  what  can  we  do  now  to  meet   the
situation  which  will  arise  within  a  few  years  if   we  allow
intercontinental  ballistic  missiles  to  go  into  mass  production
on  both  sides.   The  current  argument  takes  place  within  the
context  of  bomber  flights  requiring  some  five  hours  between
the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.   We   ought  to  be  concerned
about   the   impending   technological   shift   to   missiles  which
will  take  only  30  minutes.   This  will  completely  transform
the  problem  and  make  the  inspection  approach   obsolete.
Missiles  Cannot  Be  Turned  Back
Let   us  spell   out  what   the   shift   will   mean.    A  bomber
which  needs  5 hours  for  the  trip  allows  two  and  a  half  hours
for   consultation  and   decision  before  it  is  half   way  to   the
other   side.   A  missile  will   be  halfway   in   15  minutes.    A
bomber   can  be  recalled.    A   missile  cannot.    False  "blips"
on  a  radar  screen  are  no  problem  in  the  bomber  age;   they
provide  the   occasion  for   a  training  flight  from   which   the
planes  can  easily  be  recalled  as  the   error  becomes   obvious.
False  "blips"  may  be  fatal  in  the  missile  age.
Our   Distant   Early   Warning   Line  on   the   Arctic  rim   is
roughly   halfway   between  U.   S.  and   U.   S.   S.  R.    Fifteen
minutes  have  already  elapsed  by  the  time  it  "sights"  an  on-
coming  missile.   Only  a   few   minutes   remain  in   which   to
determine   whether   the   radar   screen   is  registering   missiles
or  electronic ghosts.   There  is,  then,  no  time  to  consult  the
President,  even  if  he  is  in  his   office   and  not  on  some  golf
links  in  Georgia.   Indeed  the  anti-missile missile  will  depend
entirely  on   an  intricate   electronic   network   of   devices  acti-
vated   by  the   radar  screen  into   automatic   computation   and
firing.   What  if  this  is  set  off  by  a  "blip,"  as  SAC  flights
have  been?
Now   let   us  turn   to   the   question   of   inspection   in   the
missile  age.   Airdromes  can  be  spotted  from  the  air.   Missile
bases  can  be  hidden.   Indeed  missiles  will  soon  be  mounted
on   movable  platforms   and   shifted   from   place   to   place.
Aerial  inspection  will  not  meet  the  missile  problem.   Neither
will   on-the-ground   inspection.    In   the   age   of   the   5-hour
bombing  plane,  reports  from  inspectors  at  airdromes   several
times  a  day  might  be  enough  to  reassure  both  sides,  though
what  is  to  stop   a  training  flight  aloft   from  shifting   to  a
real  attack?   But  inspectors  at  missile  bases  .  .  .   ?   If   the
enemy  played  fair   and   let  them  telegraph   news  of   an  im-
pending  strike,  that  would  only  add  15  minutes  to  the  DEW
line  warning.   But  what  if  they  seized  the  inspectors?    How
would  we  know,  or  the  other  side  know,  whether  the  omis-
sion  of  an  every-half-hour  "all's  well"  was  due  to  a  break-
down  in  communications  or  signalled  an  impending  attack?
How   decide  in  those  few  fateful   minutes  whether   to  wait
or  press  the  buttons  for  mutual  suicide?
Not  Too  Far  Apart  on  Inspection
This  is  the  nightmare  that  lies  ahead,  and  it  is  this  pros-
pect  which  gives  an  unreal  air  to  the  UN  debate  over  Arctic
inspection.   A  close  reading  of  the  Security  Council   debates
of  April  21  and  April  29  show  that  the  two  sides  are  not
as  far  apart  as  the  headlines  seem  to  indicate.   In  the  debate
of   April   21,  the   Soviet  representative   claimed   that   it  was
his  country  which  on  May  10,  1955,   took  the  initiative  in
proposing   inspection   against   surprise  attack.   This  was  the
proposal  for  establishing  mutual  ground   inspectors   at  ports,
railway   junctions,  main   motor   highways  and   airdromes   to
report   any  tell-tale  signs  of  mobilization.   The   Soviet   reso-
lution  of  April  29,  in  asking  for   discussion  at  the   summit
instead  of  the  UN,  referred  to  "the  question  of  drawing  up
measures  to  preclude  the   danger   of   surprise   attack."    Mr.
Lodge  quoted   Eisenhower's  letter  to  Bulganin  of   Oct.   11,
1955,  offering   to  include  the  Soviet  ground  inspection   pro-
posal  with  our  "open  skies"  or  any  variant  of  it.   The  real
difference  on  this  issue  is  that  the  Soviets  want  to  use  it  as
the  bargaining point  in  a  package  proposal  of  their  own  at
the  summit,  perhaps  swopping  inspection  for  liquidation  of
foreign   bases,  while  the  U.  S.  now  turns  up  for  separating
this  one  item  from  the  rest  of  disarmament.  Surely  the  two
sides  should  be  magnanimous  enough   to  bridge   this   space
between   them.   But  where  attention   ought   to   be   focussed
is  not  so  much  on  an  inspection  which  will  soon  be  obsolete,
but   on   negotiations   now   for   an   international   anti-missile
agreement  to  keep  the  new  monsters  from  going  into  mass
production  and  raising  the  curtain  on  a  new  nightmare.   It
will  soon  be  too  late.
Imagine  the  Situation  Reversed
We  ought  to  press  our  own  government   to  contribute  to-
ward  this  by  a  different   attitude  at  the  UN.    Mr.   Lodge's
conduct  is  coarse  and  overbearing.   The  Soviet  complaint  on
April  21  was  given  "the  bum's  rush"  treatment   by  our  pre-
fabricated  majority  without  adequate  discussion.   If  the  roles
were  reversed,  would  we  be  content  to  be  told  by  Moscow
that   Soviet   bombers   on   "alarm"   flights   toward   us   were
practically   fool-proof,   and   could   not   go  on  to   drop   their
load  unless  Krushchev  himself   gave  the  word?   Imagine   the
uproar  in  this  country  if  we  were  on  the  receiving   end.
And   should   not   some  Congressional   committee   find   out
why  the  Pentagon   cleared   that   provocative   story  about   the
SAC  flights just when  it  was certain  to  poison  the  atmosphere
of  pre-summit  talks?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 5,1958
Was  All  That  Clean  Bomb  Talk  Just  Hoax  and  Smoke-Screen?
A  series  of  disclosures indicates  that  the  government's   talk
of  a  clean  bomb  has  been  most   deceptive.
1.  On  Meet  the  Press  (April  27)   Anderson  of  New Mex-
ico,  the  senior  Senator  on  the  Joint  Congressional   Committee
on  Atomic Energy,  charged  that  this  summer  "the  number  of
clean  bomb  tests  will  be  relatively  small"  and  that  "the  mili-
tary  is  steadily  stockpiling  dirtier  bombs."   (See excerpts  box
below).     Senator   Anderson   has   access  to   much  classified
information.   If  what  he  says  is  true  then  talk  of   developing
clean  bombs  has  been  a  smoke-screen  for  developing   dirtier
ones  than  ever.
2.  Even  the  so-called   clean  bombs  are  terribly   dirty.    In
Asilomar,   California,   April   19,  just  before   addressing   the
World   Affairs   Council  of  Northern   California,   AEC Com-
missioner W.  F.  Libby  admitted  to  reporters  that  the  so-called
clean  bomb  to  be  fired  in  the  Pacific  next  summer,  though
"about   96  percent   clean,"   will  actually  put   twice  as  much
radioactive  "dirt"  into  the  atmosphere  as  the  "100   percent
dirty  bomb"  exploded  over  Hiroshima.   (This  crucial  admis-
sion,  covered  by  the  Washington  Star  April  20  did  not  ap-
pear  in  the  New   York   Times  but  when  two  other   speakers
at   the   same  conference  next   day  defended   AEC   policy   it
appeared    in    that    paper,    "Radiation    Damage    to   Genes
Doubted.")
Radioactivity   from  Neutrons
3.  Even   if,   in  Dr.   Libby's  terms,  we   achieved   a   bomb
which  was  100  percent  instead  of  only  96  percent  "clean,"
it  would  still  have  a  serious  residue  of  radioactivity.    The
Libby  computations  are  based  on  the  reduction  in  the   ratio
of   the  fissionable  material  to  the  fusion   it  triggers  in   the
big  H-bombs.   But  it  appears  from  expert   testimony   taken
by   the   Humphrey   disarmament   subcommittee   that   even   a
100   percent   fusion   bomb   would   produce   radioactivity   in
the  shape  of  neutrons.  This  new  revelation  came  the  after-
noon  of  April  17  when  it  heard  two  witnesses,  Dr.  Edward
Teller   and  Prof.  Jay  Orear,   on  the   opposite   sides   of   two
questions—the  possibility  of  policing   a  test  agreement   and
the   possibility   of  a  clean   bomb.    Unfortunately   when   Dr.
Teller   finished   testifying   the  press   marched   out   almost   in
a  body,  and  Prof.  Orear's  testimony appeared  in  few  papers;
the  New   York  Times  was  among  those  which  did  not  think
it  fit  to  print.
Dr.  Teller  had  testified,  "We  must  have  the  clean   bomb
to   save  the  innocent  bystander."   Senator  Humphrey   asked
Prof.  Orear,  a  physicist, whether  he  and  his  colleagues  of  the
Columbia   University   Inspection   for   Disarmament    Project
thought  a  clean  bomb  possible.   Dr.   Orear   replied   that   he
doubted  the  possibility  of  building  an  H-bomb   without  any
fissionable  material  to  trigger  it.   "But  even  if  it  could  be
done,"  he  added,  "the  fusion   process   gives  you   neutrons.
These  neutrons  very  quickly  are  absorbed  by  nuclei  and  this
makes  the  nuclei,  most  of  them,  radioactive,  as  you  do  have
radioactivity   from   the   neutrons,   and   there   is   no   way  of
getting  rid   of   the  neutrons."    So  the   100  percent:  "dean"
bomb,  in  the  sense  that  it  was  clean  of  all  fissionable  ma-
terial,  would  still  be  radioactively  "dirty."   Prof.  Orear   said
he  would  "roughly  estimate  that  a  100  percent  fusion  bomb
is  the  equivalent  to  a  100  percent  fission  bomb,   completely
dirty  bomb,  which  is  one  hundredth  as  large.   In  other  words
a  ten  megaton  completely  clean  bomb  is  just  as  dirty  as  a
100  kiloton  completely  dirty   bomb."
A  New  Menace  Worse  Than  Sr  90
4.  The   radioactive  danger   has  largely   been   discussed   in
terms  of  Strontium  90.   But  at  a  press  conference  here  last
Monday  (April  28)   after  an  Academy  of  Sciences  meeting,
Dr.  Linus  Pauling  called  attention  to  a  new  danger   in  nu-
clear  fallout—that  of  the  long  Lived  radioactive  atom  known
as  carbon   14  which   has  a  half   life   of   5,000  years.    Dr.
Pauling  said  he  was  shocked  to  learn  from  some  new  fallout
figures  disclosed  by  Dr.  Libby  that  every  megaton  of  nuclear
explosion  produces  17  pounds  of  radioactive  carbon  for  every
one  or  two  pounds  of  strontium.   He  said  the  danger  to  the
human  race  if  it  survives  over  the  next  5,000  to  10,000  years
would  be  200  times  as  great  from  radioactive  carbon  as  from
radioactive   strontium,   saying  that   the   former   could    cause
muscle  and  skin  as well  as  bone  cancer  and  also  affect  genetic
cells.   Perhaps  the  most  important  point  Dr.  Pauling  stressed
is  that  Carbon  14  is  generated   by  fusion  as  well  as  fission,
i.e.  by  "clean"  as  well  as  "dirty"  bombs.
On  March   12  Brig.  Gen. Alfred  D.  Starbird,  director  of
military  application  -for  the  AEC, told  the  Humphrey  sub-
committee  in  executive  session,  "I  should   emphasize  that  as
of   now   we   see  no   way  of   making   a  weapon   completely
clean."    Apparently  this  was  a  gross   understatement.    The
clean  bomb  talk  seems  to  have  perpetrated   a  fraud   on   the
American  public.
Senate's  No.  1  Atomic   Authority  Says   Military   Want   Dirtier   Bombs
Senator  Clinton  P.  Anderson:  "I  do  not  agree  that   it
would  be  dangerous   to   stop   testing   before   we   achieved
them  [clean  bombs].   I  think  we  know  now  far  more  than
the   Russians   do  about  clean   bombs  and  I   think   if   the
Atomic  Energy  Commission really  believed  the  story  about
clean  bombs  they  would  have  some  clean  bomb  tests  and
a  series  of  tests.  I  think  the  number  of  clean  bomb  tests
will  be  relatively   small   in   proportion   to  the   number  of
testings. ...  I  believe  our  State   Department  does  want
cleaner  bombs,  but  I  believe  the  military  is  steadily  stock-
piling  dirtier  bombs  and  I  think  any  investigation  would
show  that.   They  are  not  only  supporting   them,  but  they
have  pulled  bombs  out  of  the  stockpile  and  inserted  some-
thing  which  makes  it  dirtier. ...  We  talk  clean  on one
side,  and  we  stockpile  dirty  on  the  other  side.
Mr.  White: Why  do  our military want  dirty  bombs?
Sen.  Anderson:  They  want  it  effective.   You  don't  have
bombs  in  order  to  have  Fourth   of  July  explosions.   You
have  them  for  destruction.
Mr.  White:  Is  the  clean  bomb not  going  to  be  effective?
Sen.   Anderson:  I   don't   know   what  it   is   going   to  do.
It  would  be  all  right  if  you  are  going  to  have  very  limited
warfare  and  if   you  can  be  sure  you  can  just  pinpoint  a '
target,   but  if   atomic   war  starts,  in  the  opinion  of   men
like   Curt   LeMay   for  example,  who  plays   his   war   game
before  the  Joint  Committee, and  I  think  makes  a  wonder-
ful  case  for  it,  he  points  out  a  war is  going  to  be  destruc-
tive  and  if   you  are  going  to  be  engaged  in  destructive
war,   you better  have  the  instruments  of  destruction.  .  .  .
—Meet  the. Press, April  27,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, May 5,1958
The  SCEF;  A  Handful  of   Brave   People   Spark  A   New  Emancipation
Report  on  the  Negro's  Slow  Uphill  Battle  for  the  Vote  in  the  South
The   bravest,  most   isolated   group  of   individuals   in   this
country  met  here  in  Washington   last  week-end.    They   are
the  handful   of  white  and  Negro  Southerners  who  run   the
Southern  Conference  Educational  Fund.    They  held  a  Con-
-ference   on  Voting  Restrictions  in  the   Southern   States   and
their  one  public  session  drew  a  mixed  audience  of  800  to  a
local  church  on  a  cold  rainy  Sunday  afternoon.
The  keynote  speaker  was  Aubrey  Williams,  of   Montgom-
ery,  Alabama,  publisher  of  Southern  Farm  and  Home,  once
FDR's  National   Youth   Administrator,   a   human   Gibraltar
among  the  intimidated  "good"  people   of  the   South.    Like
James   Dombrowski,   the   devoted   executive   director  of   the
Southern  Conference,  Williams   is  one  of  the  few  whites  in
the  South  who  still  speaks  up  against   segregation.
Williams   admitted  in  his  speech   that   race  relations   had
so  changed  for  the  worse  since  the  Supreme  Court's  school
decision   that   there   are   "few   channels   of    communication"
still   open   between  the   races.    But,   unlike  most   others,   he
found   "something   healthy"   in   this   picture.    He   said   the
harmonious  race  relations  of  the  past  were  more  appearance
than   reality,   "a   degraded   peace"   purchased  by  the  Negro
"at  the  price  of  his  self-respect,"  a  price  the  Negro  was  no
longer  willing  to  pay.
Worst  of  the  Southern  States
The  reports  to  the  conference  showed  that  while  the  situa-
tion  for  Negro  voters  in  the  South  was  everywhere  bad,  it
was  worst  in  Mississippi,  Alabama  and  Georgia.    In   Missis-
sippi,  Negroes  vote  freely  in  only  six  of  the  82  counties.    In
Alabama,  Negroes   represent  a  third  of  the  total   population
but   only  6  percent   of   the   registered   voters.    In   Georgia,
with  a  million  Negroes,  only  160,000  are  registered,  mostly
in  urban  areas.
The  Rev. Ben  F.  Wyland,  executive  secretary of  the  Florida
Council   for  Racial  Cooperation,   reported   that  five  counties
in  Northern  Florida  were  as  bad  as  the  deep  South.   "There
are  16,533  Negroes  old  enough  to  vote  in  those  counties,"
he  told  the  Conference,   "only   110  have  been   able  to   reg-
ister."   But  in  Jacksonville,  where  half   the  eligible   Negroes
are  registered,  a  Negro   attorney  was  elected  Justice  of   the
Peace  two  years ago  only  to  have  his  election  declared  illegal.
Dr.  Wyland  was one of  three  white  delegates  who  reported
from  their  home  States.   The  other  two  were  Miss  Willson
Whitman,   the  writer,   from   North   Carolina,   and   Kenneth
To  Help  Free  the   South
Those  who  would  like  to  help,  and  keep  in  closer
touch  with,  the  fight  against  racism  in  the  South  can
do  so  by  writing the  Southern  Conference  Educational
Fund  at  822 Perdido Street,  New  Orleans.  Its  excellent
monthly,  the  Southern  Patriot,  is  sent  to  all  contribu-
tors  free.
Walker,   publisher  of  the  Colfax,   La.,  Chronicle, which  suc-
cessfully  fought  a  wholesale  purge  of  Negro  voters.   Walker
summed   up  the   situation   in   Louisiana   by  saying  that   the
Long  faction  favored,  the  anti-Longs  opposed,  Negro  voting.
The  best  known  of  the  Negro  delegates  to  the  conference
•  was   the   redoubtable  Mrs.   Modjeska  M.   Simkins   of   South
Carolina,  who  has  been  waging  a  fight  for   equality  there
for   20  years.   She  reported   there  were  now  no  blatant   re-
strictions  on   registration,   except   in   one   county,   Williams-
burg.   There  a  Howard   University  graduate  and  the   entire
faculty  of  a Negro  school  were turned  down  on a  literacy  test.
Mrs.  Simkins  had  the  most  optimistic  report.    She  com-
plained  of  "lethargy  and  disinterest"  on  the  part  of  Negroes
themselves.   Austin  T.  Walden  of  Georgia,  another  old-timer
in  the  civil  rights  struggle,   also  spoke  of  "indifference  and
timidity  on  the  part  of  too  large  a  segment  of  the  Negro
people  in  Georgia.  .  .  .  Our  biggest  job is one of  education
among  our  own  people."
The  Quiet  Terror  in  the   South
On   the  other   hand   the  Negro   militant   faces  a   difficult
time.   Voting  registrars  have  an  almost  endless  repertoire  of
delaying   actions.    It   took   E.  D.   Nixon,   the   Montgomery
pullman  porter  whose  bravery has  made  him  a  legend,  eight
years  to  register.   Registration   often   costs   Negroes  heavily
in   economic  reprisals.   The   conference  heard   tragic   stories
of  farms  and  livelihood  lost.   This  new  struggle  for  emanci-
pation  has  its  unknown  heroes  and  obscure  martyrs.
Dr.  James  M.  Nabrit,  Jr.,  of  Howard  University,  summed
up  "the  gauntlet  of  apathy,  ignorance,  fear,  bodily  harm  and
racial  discrimination"  the  Negro   voter  must  run.   Much  de-
pends  on  how  effectively  the  slow  starting  Civil  Rights  Com-
mission  does  its  work.   But  in  the  longer   perspective  even
these  astringent  reports   showed   that   the   Negro  was  win-
ning,  however  slowly.   His  victory  will  give  the  South  new
vitality  and  national  politics  a  more  progressive   orientation.
A   Warning   Parallel  and  the   Broader  Meaning  of  the  Negro's  Struggle
"There  are  disturbing parallels between conditions  in  the
South  in  the  year  of  1958  and  in  the  year  of  1858.  I  sin-
cerely  believe  that  the  devastation  and  the  horrors  of  the
Civil  War  could  have  been  avoided  if  we  had  been  willing
to  deal  openly  with  slavery.  .  .  .  But  we  were  not.   There
was  almost  a  complete  blackout  of  discussion  by  legisla-
tures  as  well  as  by  social  and  economic pressures  put  upon
people.   School  teachers  were  silenced  or  sent  back  to  New
England,  where  they  came  from.  .  .  .
"Today  a  blanket  of  silence  lies  over  the  whole  South.
Men  no  longer  discuss  the  race  question  in  the  white com-
munity  except  to  view  with  alarm  and  deplore;  they  fear
even  to  talk  about  a  different  point  of  view.  .  .  .
"However,  with  our  preoccupation with  the  treatment  of
the  Negro, we may  tend to  overlook  the  greater  significance
of  the  struggle.  .  .  .  The  issue  of  the  political emancipa-
tion  of  the  Negro could be  the  activating agent  that  threat-
ens  to  explode  the  present  ill-mated political  setup.  .  .  .
The  right  wing  of  the  Republican  party  and  the  Southern
oligarchy  have  everything  in   common  except   the   names
by   which   they  are  called.  .  .  .  We  must   recognize   the
Negro's  struggle  for  what  it  is—the  spearhead  which  is
challenging   the   hypocrisy   of   American  political   party
alignment  and  which,  if  it  succeeds,  can  clear  the  ground
of  the  creeping  fascism.  .  .  ."
—Aubrey  Williams, Washington,  April  27.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  5,1958
If   An  Einstein   Medal   for   Teller,   Why  Not   A  Jefferson  Award  for  Eastland?
The  Harsh  and Unworthy  Fictions  No  One  Mentions  in  the  Heikkila  Case
By  any  common  sense  definition,  William   Heikkila   is  an
American,  not  a  Finn.   His  parents  were  American  citizens.
Though  born  to  them  in  Finland,  he  left  there  when  he was
two  and  a  half  months  old.   He  had  never   been  back  until
his  "kidnapping"   and  deportation  by  the  U.  S.  Immigration
authorities  at  the  age  of  52.   He  has  lived  all  but  two  and
a   half   months   of   his  life   in   America.     For   most   of   his
life   he   thought   he  was  an   American  citizen.   What  kind
of  legal  fiction  makes  him  a  Finn?
As  a  legal   resident   of   the   United   States,   Heikkila   was
subject  to  the  law.   If  he  did  anything  wrong,  he  could  have
been  imprisoned.   The  truth  is  that  the  activities  for   which
he  is  being  deported  were  activities  for  which  he  could   not
be  legally  punished.   He  was  a  member  of  the   Communist
parry  from   1928  to  1939,  but  that  was  not  illegal.   He  was
also   a   member   of   certain   organizations   on   the   Attorney
General's  list,  but  that  was  not  illegal,  either.
One  of  the  Crudest  Punishments
The   most  pernicious  of  the  legal  fictions  in  this   case  is
that   deportation—another   word   for   exile—is   only   a   civil
not  a  criminal  procedure.     Heikkila  can  be  torn   from  his
American  wife,  his  livelihood,  his  lifelong  associations,  and
his  country,  on  charges  for  which  he  could  not  be  sent   to
jail  for   ten  days.   One  of  the  crudest  of   punishments  can
be  imposed   for   acts  protected  by  the  Constitution.
It   is  a   recognition   of   these   harsh   fictions,   unworthy   of
a   free   country,   which   I   find   missing   in   newspaper   com-
ment  on  the   Heikkila   case.    If   our  vindictive   Immigration
Service  had   been  a  little  more  decorous   and  waited  a  few
days  for  a  final  order,  few  would  have  protested.   The  big
blank   in  the   press   matches  the  big   blank   in  our   numbed
national  conscience.   We  take  the  hounding  of  "aliens"  for
granted,   no  matter  if   they  have   lived   here   all   their   lives,
and   no  matter  if  they  are  being  deported   only  for   having
acted  as  if  this  were  really  a  free  country.   The  whole   idea
of   denaturalizing   and   deporting   people   for   their   political
activities  is  an  ugly  fungus  growth   on   a  free   society,   and
this  is  the  point  of  the  Heikkila  case,  not—as  so  many  news-
Send   A   Stamped    Self-Addressed      Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name      .......,....................................................................——•—•
Street     ...................................._..-............................................
City    .........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
S/S/S8
(To)   Name  .................................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Tes  D    No  D
Explanation   and   Apology
There  was  no  issue  of  the  Weekly  last  week  because
my   wife   and  I   ran  into  terrible  weather  conditions
flying   up  to  Boston  for  the  birth  of   our  first  grand-
child  and  were  unable  to  get  back  in  time  to  get   the
issue  out.   Everybody's  subscription  will  be  lengthened
by  a  week  to  make  up  for  this  regrettable  lapse.
P.  S.  It  was  a  boy,  John  Richard  Gilbert.—IFS.
papers  say—the  need  for  making  deportation   easier.
THE   CHICAGO   TRIBUNE,  which  opposed   the   Jenner   bill
on  the  Supreme  Court,  also  attacked  that  provision   of   the
Butler   substitute  which  would   restrict  the  Court's  right   to
hear   Congressional   committee   contempt   cases.    In   an   edi-
torial  (April  25)   the  Tribune  said  that  to  allow   committees
to  decide  what  questions  were  "pertinent"  was  to  make  them
"judges   of  their  own  cause"  and  warned  "those  who  think
that  the  only  persons  who  may  be  victimized  by  this  arrange-
ment  are  Communists"   that  in  a  future   Congress   "with  a
radical  majority"  conservative  citizens  "could   expect   to   be
bounced  around. ..."
Now   THAT  DR.  EDWARD  TELLER  has  been  given  an  Ein-
stein  medal  by  Lewis  Strauss  we  expect  any  day  now  to  hear
that  a  new  Thomas   Jefferson   award  has  been  conferred   on
Senator  Eastland  by Cardinal  Spellman.  .  .  .  One  award  that
will  give  pleasure  to  the  man  it  is  intended  to  honor  is  the
conferring  of  the  first  Alexander  Meiklejohn  award  for  aca-
demic  freedom  by  the   American  Association  of   University
Professors  to  the  University  of  New  Hampshire   for   permit-
ting  Paul  M.  Sweezy,  co-editor  of  Monthly   Review,   to  ad-
dress  its  students  while  free  on  bail  for  a  First  Amendment
contempt  conviction.  .  .  .  We  also  note  with   pleasure  that
the   Appellate  Division   of   the   New   York   State   Supreme
Court  has  unanimously  upheld  the  State  Education  Commis-
sioner's  ruling  that  teachers  do  not  need  to  inform  on  others
to  prove their loyalty.  .  .  .  Maybe  the  New  York  City  Board
of  Education,  which  is  fighting  this  ruling,   should   establish
an  annual  Judas   Iscariot   award  for   the  most   "cooperative"
school-teacher.  . . .
for    A   Free   Copy    of   the   1957     Index
/  F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED