I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958mar03.pdf

============================================================

The  Inside  Story  of  Harold  Stassen's  Talks  With  the  Russians,  Pages  2  and 3
. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  9
MARCH  3,   1958«°«       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
How  Gullible  Senate  Liberals  Arc  Doing  the  State  Dept/s Handiwork
A  Bill  to  Undermine  the  Right  to   Travel
For  three years  the  State Department  has  been working with
Chairman  Walter  of  House  Un-American to  get a  bill  through
Congress  which  would  validate  its  restrictions  on  the   right
to  travel.    The  last  time  public  hearings  were  held  on  that
bill  of  Walter's   in  May,  1956,   the  only  two  witnesses  who
turned   up   in   favor   of   it  were  Scott   McLeod   and   Frances
Knight of  the  passport division.  The  bill was buried  in  House
Judiciary.   Now  the  Department  is  trying  to  achieve  the  same
purpose  through  liberals  in  the  Senate.   It  has  succeeded  in
getting  Hennings of  Missouri  to  front  for  it  and  he  has  per-
suaded  almost  the  entire  liberal  membership  to  join  him  in
sponsoring  the  equivalent of  the  old  Walter   bill.   The  Sena-
tors  gullible  enough  to  fall  for  this  crafty  strategem  are  An-
derson,   Carroll,   Clark,   Flanders,   Humphrey,   Ives,    Javits,
Langer,   Magnuson,   Morse,   Murray,   Neuberger,    Proxmire,
Symington  and  Chavez.  We  have  too  much  respect  for  these
Senators  to  believe they really know what  they're  doing.
Walter and Hennings Bills Agree
Walter   called  his  a  bill   to  guarantee  passport   applicants
their   day  in   court.   Hennings   introduced   his   last   Monday
(S3344)   as a  bill  to  guarantee  the  right  to  travel.   Both  com-
mercials  were  phoney.   Both  bills  pick  up  verbatim  the  lan-
guage   of   the   State  Department's   passport   restrictions   now
awaiting  adjudication  on  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court.   If  the
liberal  Senators  who  so  hastily  put  their  names  behind   this
new  measure  will  compare  its  language  with  that  of  the  old
Walter  bill  and  the  department  regulations,  they  will  see how
completely  they,  have  been  taken   in.   All  three  contain   the
identical   phrasing  which   allows   the   Department   to   refuse
passports  not  only  to  members  of  organizations    determined
to  be  communistic under  the  Internal  Security  Act  of   1950
but  also  to  persons  "who  have  terminated   such   membership
under  such  circumstances  as  to  warrant  the   conclusion   that
they  continue  to  act  in  furtherance   of  the  Communist  move-
ment"  or  "who,   regardless  of  the  formal  state  of  their   af-
filiation with  the  Communist  party,  engage  in  activities  which
support  the  Communist  movement"  under   circumstances  the
Department   may  deem   indicative   of   Communist    direction.
This   is  sweeping   enough   to   cover  people  who  agree   with
Morse  on  China  policy  or  with  Humphrey  on  nuclear  testing.
At the  Mercy of  Faceless  Informers
The   Hennings   bill   is  as   bad   on   procedure   as   on   sub-
stantive  rights.   The  departmental  regulations  say  the  Board
of  Passport  Appeals  shall  conduct  hearings   "in  such  manner
as  to  protect  from   disclosure  information  affecting   the   na-
tional  security.  .  .  ."   The  Walter  bill  carried  a  similar  pro-
vision.   So  does  the  Hennings  measure.   It  says,  "The   Board
shall   insure,  consistent   with   national  security,  that   all   evi-
dence  and  witnesses  relied  upon   are  produced   and  made  a
part  of  the  open  record."   The  italics  are  added  to   indicate
the  ample  loophole.   How  can  lawyers  like  Morse  and  Javits
support  a  measure  so  contrary  to  traditional  standards  of  due
process  and  fair  trial?   This  means  that  a  man  may  lose  his
right  to  travel—and  bear  the  stigma  of  a  citizen  his  govern-
ment  does  not  trust  with  a  passport—on  the  basis  of  undis-
closed  allegations  from  faceless  informers.
Worse Than The  Oath Requirement
The  Hennings  bill  enters  a  third   area  now  under  litiga-
tion.    The   Department's   requirement   of   a   non-Communist
affidavit  for  the  right  to  travel  also  awaits  examination  in  the
Supreme  Court.  The  Hennings  bill  would  authorize  not  only
a  non-Communist  affidavit   but   "a  written   application,   duly
verified  by  oath  or  affirmation   .  .  .  containing  a  true  recital
of  each  and  every  matter  of  fact  which  may  be  required"  by
the  Department.    This  opens   every  applicant   to  inquisition
on  that  wide  range  of  activities  and  opinions  needed  to  judge
whether   a  man,   though   no   longer   or   ever   a   Communist,
may   seem  to  the  Department   to  be  supporting   Communist
causes  under  Communist  direction.   To  permit   such   inquisi-
tion  under  oath  is  to  force  applicants  to  run  the  gauntlet  of
perjury  in  an  area  broad  enough  to  cover  topics  on  which  the
State  Department   regards  many  of  these  liberal  Senators  as
themselves   suspiciously   misguided.    How   can   they   present
this  as  a  bill  to  safeguard  the  right  to  travel?
The  One Fig-Leaf
The  one  liberal  fig-leaf  on  this  naked  fraud  is  a  provision
which  would   allow   persons   to  enter   areas  like   Communist
China  if  they  signed  an  affidavit  waiving  the  protection  of
the  United  States  while  in  such  countries.   But  the  price  of
this  solitary  reform  is  to  freeze  into  law  the  restrictions   the
Department  imposes  both  on  the  right  to  travel  and  on  the
right   to  a  fair   hearing   just  when   there  is  hope   of  a  final
ruling  on  them  by  the  Supreme   Court.   Since  not  a  single
newspaper   seems  to  have  reported   the  introduction   of  this
bill,  there  is  danger  it  might  slip  through.   We  urge  readers
to  write  these  Senators,  to  demand  a  public  hearing  and  to
do  all  they can to  block  the  Department's  effort  to  do  through
unthinking  Senate  liberals  what  it  was  unable  to  do  through
Walter  in  the  House.   This  bill  might  undo  the  effect  of  a
passport  victory  in  the  Supreme   Court.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, March 3,1958
Stassen's  Chief  Assistant  Lifts  the  Curtain on Their Talks with the Russians ...
By  Robert  E.  Matteson
Mr.  Matteson  was  Stassen's  chief   assistant  and  is  still
director  of   the   White  House  Disarmament   Staff    pending
an  expected  reorganization.  This  is  taken from  a  speech  he
made  at  the  University  of  Minnesota  Conference   on  "Na-
tional  Security  in  the  Nuclear  Age"  on  Feb.  18  to  which
little  attention  has  been paid, except  by  the  alert  Chalmers
Roberts  of  the  Washington  Post.  A  United  Press  dispatch
in  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  (Feb.  24)  said  the  speech
with  its  hopeful    emphasis  on  negotiation  and co-existence
"is  known  to  have  angered  Mr.  Dulles."
During  the  past  11  years  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of
talking   to  many  Russians   not   only  in  the   Soviet   Union
but  in England, and in the  United  States.   I was fortunate  to
be  able  to  sit  in  on  the  long  conference  that  Mr.  Stassen
had  with  Generalissimo  Stalin  on  a  winter  night  in  1947  in
the  Kremlin  and  that  same  year  sat  in  on  the  conference
with  Krushchev,  Mikoyan, Vosnessensky,  Zhdanov and  Molo-
tov.   We  visited  Russians  peasants  in  their  cottages  and  on
their  collective  farms  in  the  Ukraine,  and  Russian   workers
in  their  living  quarters  in  western  Siberia  and  in  their  fac-
tories  in  Sverdlovsk,  Stalingrad,   Moscow,  Kiev,  and  Lenin-
grad.   Particularly   during  the  last  two  years,  we  have  had
—through  the  disarmament  negotiations   in  London  and  in
New  York  —  an  exceptional  opportunity  to   observe  their
methods  and their  personalities  at  close  range.   For  example,
there  was  the  2%  hour  conference  we  had  with  Krushchev
at   Claridge's   in  London  in   April   1956.    There   have   been
a  great  many  bilateral  conversations  with  members  of  the
Soviet   Delegations   in  London  and  at   the   United   Nations
carried  on  with  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  our  Western
partners.    Likewise,  I  have  read   the  reports  of  others  on
Russia  and  have   talked   with  or  listened   to   many  of  our
experts  on the  Soviet  Union, including  our  Ambassadors.
From  all  of  these  experiences  and  information,  I  have  the
following  personal  impressions:
The Russian  People
First,  the  most  surprising  thing  about  the  Soviet  Union
is  how little  their  people resemble  their  government  and how
much  more  like  us  they   are.    Yet,  because  they  are   fed
constantly   only   the   Communist  creed,  most   of   them   are
favorable  to  their  government  and  believe  only  what  they
are  told.
Second,  I  believe  there  is  today  in  Russia  great   pressure
from  the  Russian  people  on  the  leaders  of  the  Soviet  Com-
munist  Party  and  government  for  peace  and  for   agreement
with  the  United  States.
Third,   the   Soviet   Communists   (in   number   they   equal
about  3%  of  the  population)  are   supremely  confident  that
Communism  will  in  the  end  triumph  in  the  world,  and  it  is
unmistakably  evident  that  they  will  do  everything   in  their
power  short  .of  general  war  to  see to  it  that  it  does  triumph.
Fourth,  the  Soviet  leadership  would  like  to  negotiate   an
More Afraid  They Might  Be  Sincere
"High  officials  of  the  State Dept. are  saying privately
that  because  of  the  pressure  from  world  opinion,  Mr.
John  Foster  Dulles feels  that he  must  give  the appear-
ance  of  being  receptive to  the  idea  of  a  properly pre-
pared  summit  meeting,  but  that  in  fact  he  is  anxious
to  avoid  such a  meeting.  He  objects  to  a  summit meet-
ing  not so  much because  of  his  conviction  that  the Rus-
sians  are  insincere; he  would  be  much  more  worried if
he  thought  a  summit  meeting  could  lead  to  disengage-
ment.  .  .  ."
—Philip  Deane, from  Washington  in London Observer
News  Service, Jerusalem  Post,  Feb. 14.
agreement  with  the  United  States  primarily  for  the  purpose
of  relaxing  tension.
Fifth,  the  area  of greatest interest  to the  Soviet  Union  for
such  an  agreement  appears  to  be in  the  disarmament  field.
Sixth, Russia  suffers  from  a  real feeling  of inferiority  and
this  is  a  key  to  many  of  their  attitudes,  for  example,  their
great  desire  to  be  accepted  as  an  equal  power  and,  to  some
extent,  their   insistence   on  a   recognition   by  the   West  of
the  status  quo.
Collapse  Unlikely
Seventh,   the   Soviet   Union  is  a  powerful  nation   and  is
not  likely  to  collapse  either  from  external  pressure  or  from
internal  difficulties.    The  evidence  thus  far  is  that  even  the
shifts   in  leadership   at   the   top   seem  to  have  resulted   in
greater  strength  rather  than  in  greater  weakness.
Eighth,  and  possibly  the  most  important  of  all,  there  is
increasing  evidence  that  the  Soviet   Union  under  the  right
circumstances   will   gradually    evolve   toward   greater   and
greater  freedom,  both  with  respect  to  its  internal  domestic
relations  and  also  in  respect  to  its  relations  with  the  outside
world.
This  favorable  prospect  for  gradual   evolution  appears  to
be  the  result  of:  the  death  of  Stalin  and  the  emergence  of
a  somewhat  different  type  of  leadership;   a  greater  sense  of
security   resulting   from   the   Soviet   nuclear-missile-satellite
developments;  the  spread  of  education;  the  improved  stand-
ard   of  living;  increasing   contacts,   by   one  method   or   an-
other,  of  an  increasing   number  of   Russians  with  the   free
world;  the  rise  in  the  lower  echelons  of  Government  of  more
open-minded,  less  dogmatic  leaders,  the  fact  that  the  urge
for  freedom cannot be rooted  out  either be force  or  by  fraud;
and,  not  the  least,  the  fact  that  the  Russian  people,  on  the
whole, are human beings  with human  reactions.   For  the  most
part, the  Russian  people, as  I  have  found  them,  are  friendly,
warm hearted,  and generous  people.   In  saying  this, I  realize
it  goes  against  a  stereotype  that  has  been  built  up  by  some
of  our  newspapers,  leaders,  and  even  educators.   But  it  is  a
fact  that  until  some  of  our  misconceptions  about  them  are
Are  We  Really Ahead  of  the  Russians  Only  in  Tomahawks  and  Scalping  Knives?
"We  are  caught  today  in  the  most  ominous  armament
race  of  all  time  with  little  more  than  a  niblick  and  a  fleet
of   white  elephant  carriers.  .  .  .  America  today  is  in  the
greatest  danger  since  Valley  Forge.  .  .  .  We  are  behind
the  Russians  today  in  the  intercontinental  ballistic  missile
race. . . .  But we are ahead of  the  Russians in  supercarriers,
tomahawks  and  scalping knives."   .
—Cong.  Clarence Cannon  (D.  Mo.),  speech,  "Not   A
Minute  to Lose", in  the  House, Feb. 18.
"The  United States will  have in  the next  fiscal  year some-
thing  like  4,000  to  5,000  aircraft  . .  .  each capable of carry-
ing  a  thermonuclear  weapon  of  megaton  range  .  .  . And
our  atomic  armory  has  at  least  two  such  weapons for  every
available  plane  in  addition  to  thousands  of  smaller  so-called
tactical weapons.
"This  represents  collectively a  tremendous factor  of  safe-
ty  and a  gigantic  'over-kill' capability.  There  are  less  than
200  cities  with  populations of  more  than  50,000  in  the  So-
viet  Union;  of  these  many  are  industrially  and  militarily
inconsequential.   There actually are  no  more  than  about  60
to  100 prime  targets  in  the  Soviet Union.
"Thus,  the  United  Sttaes  has  today  the  theoretical capa-
bility  of  wiping out  each  prime  target  in  Soviet  Russia  40
to  50  times."
—Hanson   W.  Baldwin,  survey  of   U.S.  military
strength,  New  York  Times,  Feb.  S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  3, 1958
. . . and  Sets  Forth  the  Case  for  Peaceful  Co-Existence With  Them
corrected—as  well  as  their  misconceptions  about  us—there
will  not  be  a  sound basis  for  improved  relations  between  us.
In  this  regard,   it  is  possible  that  the  road  from  the  grey
world  to  the  white  world  may,  at  this  particular   time,  more
easily  be  traversed   by  way   of  expanding  East-West   con-
tacts,  particularly   the   exchange   of  personal   visits   at   all
levels, than  by any  other  procedure.   For  this  reason  the  Ex-
change   Agreement   with   Russia   signed   three   weeks   ago
could  prove  to  be  a  significant  beginning.
Why  They Fear  War
Above  everything  else,  the  Russian  leaders  are   confident
that  time  is  on  their  side;  that  the  dialectic  of  history   will
move  the  people of  the  world inexorably,  scientifically toward
acceptance  of  a  Communist world.  The  one  thing  they  seem
to  fear  is that  a  minor  incident,  a  miscalculation,  or  the  con-
tradictions  of  "the  imperialist,  capitalist  system"  will  set off
a  general  war  that  will  devastate  the  world—including,  of
course, themselves.  Therefore,  the  Soviet  leadership  sees  it  in
their  interest  to  avoid  a  general  nuclear  war,  to  stress  peace-
ful   coexistence  and  competition,  and  to  seek  and  use  every
opportunity   at   hand—whether  it   be  disarmament    negotia-
tions,  the  Brussels  Fair, a  chess  match,  a  Summit  conference,
student  exchanges,  or  even  a  private  dinner  conversation—to
advance  the  ball  toward  the  goal  of  world  Communism.  To
the  Communist the  end justifies the  means  and  he  will,  with
skill  and  determination,  use  any  means  to  achieve  this  goal.
At  the  same  time,  he  is  recognizing  that  technology  is  im-
posing  its   own  changes   on  Communist  doctrine   by   fixing
limits  to  the  means  which  can  be  safely  used  to  achieve  its
ends.
However,  there  is  hope  in  all  of  this  for  it  is  bringing
Krushchev  and  the  Soviet  people  out  from  behind  their  Iron
Curtain  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  permitting  some  relaxa-
tion  on  the  movement  of  people  and  information  from   the
free  world  into  the  Soviet  Bloc  territory.    To  an   increasing
extent,  the  Soviet  intelligentsia—the  writers,  the  scientists,
the  younger  leaders—  are  beginning  to  see  and  reflect   the
first  direct  rays  of  sunlight—rather  than   viewing   through
Stalin  spectacles  the  distorted  shadows  on  their  cold  prison
walls.  To an  increasing  extent,  the  Soviet  mind—twisted  and
frozen  into  an  iron  mould—is  beginning  to  thaw.  And  it  is
the  scientists,  I  believe, who are  leading the  way.  For  if they
are  to  be  effective  in their  contribution  to  the  Soviet  military
might,  they  must  be  permitted  to  seek  out  the  truth,  where-
ever  it  is.  When  science  and  Communist doctrine  are  in  con-
flict, the  present  Soviet  leaders  have  allowed  science  to  win.
To  an  increasing  extent,  therefore,  through  the  cracks  and
crevices  of  the  Iron  Curtain,  the  winds of  freedom  are  begin-
ning  to  penetrate.
If  We Have Confidence
If  we  have  confidence  in  our  system,  if  we  are  wise  and
vigilant  in  our  policies  and  actions,  we  should  welcome  and
encourage  this  change  from  the  Stalin   period  as  an  oppor-
tunity  to  evolve  the  Soviet   system  toward   freedom—rather
than,  as  we  too  often  do,  view  it  more  as  something  to  be
feared  and as a threat  to the  very  existence  of the  free  world.
If  we  have  no  confidence  in  ourselves  and  in  our  system,  we
had  better  start  digging  holes  in  the  ground,  excavating  our
Paradise  for Junkmen
Military  spending  is  now  too  astronomical  really   to
be  grasped.    Some  idea  of  its  magnitude  may  be  ob-
tained  from   the  figures  on  the  value  of  the   military
equipment  we  scrap  each  year.   This  may  be  found  in
the  budget  for  each  military  service  under  the  head-
ing,  "Preparation  for  Sale or  Salvage  of  Military  Prop-
erty."   This  gives  the  tonnage  and  dollar   cost  of  each
year's   scrapped  equipment,  plus   the   cost   of  getting
rid  of  it  and  the  net  amount to  be  recovered.
For  fiscal  1957,  1958  and  1959  the  total  dollar  value
of  the  equipment scrapped  is  $13,295,556,000,  an  aver-
age  of  more  than  $4  billion  a  year  or  just  about   the
amount  it  cost  to  run  the  entire  Federal  government,
defense  and  all,  in  the  1920's.  The  total  net   recovery
for  the  three  years  is  figured  at  $390,739,280,  or  about
3 cents  on  the  dollar.
cities,  putting  our  children in  subterranean   vaults,  and  wear-
ing  asbestos  and  decontamination   suits.
The  central  question  of  our  time,  stripped  of  all  its  masks,
is  whether  the  free  world is  capable  of  successfully  competing
with  the  Communist  world  for  the  very  existence  of  a  free
world. . . .
If  one's  answer  to  this  question  of  competition  is  that  the
free  world  has  the  capability  of  competing  successfully  with
the   Communist  world   despite   those  advantages  which   the
Communist  world  has  in  such  competition,  the  general  policy
adopted  toward  Russia  would  be  one  of  permitting  and  en-
couraging   Communism  to   come  out  from   behind  the   Iron
Curtain  and  of  gradually  opening  and  exposing  the  Commu-
nist  world to freedom. . . .
Time for  Boldness
On  the  other  hand,  if  one's  answer  to  this  question  is  that
the  free  world  stands  a  poor  chance  of  competing   success-
fully  with  the  Communist  world  because  of  the  various   ad-
vantages  the  Communist  world  has  in  any  such   competition
—then  the  general  policy  adopted  toward  Russia  would  be
one  of  bottling   up  communists  and  communism  within   its
present  Iron  Curtain  area  and  seeking  by  outside  pressures
and  inside subversion to  so disrupt  and weaken the communist
regime that  it  would fall  from  within—and  thus  prevent com-
munism  from flowing out to  contaminate  and  subvert  the  free
world.
Such  a  statement  of alternative  policies represents  a  neces-
sary   oversimplification   of   two   opposing   conceptions.    The
fact  is,  of  course,  that  these  policies  cannot  be  painted  in
black  and  white  terms—that  there   are   in  practice   in   the
policies  of  free  governments  elements  of  each.   But  it  is  true
that today  in Washington and in the  other  free  world  capitals,
there  exists  in  the  policy formulation  process  within  govern-
ments  a  day-to-day  competition  between  the  major  emphases
of  these  two  different  concepts.   One  cannot  be  dogmatic  and
wise  enough  to  know that  one or  the  other  is  right,  but  it  is
my  belief  that we may  very  well  be  at  one of those  great  his-
torical  divides where  a boldness  in  exploration  of the  "relaxa-
tion  of  tension"  concept  might  pay  greater  dividends  than
we  now  suspect  for  the  future  of  world  peace.
What   We  Spend  on  Armament  and  Disarmament  Compared
Fiscal  Year                                   Defense  Spending                          Disarmament   Staffs*
1956                                           $41,825,000,000                                           $489,190
1957                                           $44,414,000,000                                           $571,448
1958                                           $44,871,000,000                                               $425,000
1959                                          $45,836,000,000
$176,946,000,000                                          $1,485,638   •
— Compiled  by  Committee  for   World  Development  and  World  Disarmament.
* White  House  (Stassen  Disarmament  Staff)   plus  Senate   (Humphrey)   Subcommittee  on  Disarmament.
3    .'
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  3, 1958
Chicago  Tribune  Reports  Pressure  on  Witch  Hunters  to  Pipe  Down
Watch  Indonesia:  It  Fits  the  Rockefeller  Report  Pattern  for  Intervention
ALARUM:  The  counter  revolutionary uprising  in  Indonesia
fits the patern for  interventionism  outlined  in  the  Rockefeller
Brothers  report.  From  an  oil company point  of  view  the  sit-
uation  may  well  be  regarded   as  an  example  of  what  the  re-
port mystically  terms "non-overt  aggression".  On the  surface
it  is  not  aggression  at  all  but  an  effort  by  force  and  violence
to overturn  the  constituted  government.  But  the  oil companies
may  fear  that  the  Indonesian  regime's  "guided   democracy"
might  easily  guide  it  toward  nationalization  of  oil  resources.
The  heart  of  the  revolt,  Central  Sumatra,  is  also  the  site of
the  oil  fields.  Mr.  Dulles  has  already   given  the  revolt   his
blessing  and  it  would  be  interesting   to  know  what   Brother
Allen  W. has  been  doing  to'help  it  along  through  the  secret
funds  and  operatives  of  CIA.   These  distant  isles  would  seem
an  ideal  testing  place  for  limited preventive  war  in  support
of  the  rebellion.  Those  members  of  Congress  who  believe,  in
peace  would  do well  to  turn  the  spotlight  on  Indonesia  .now
before  some  incident  occurs  or  is  manufactured.
ADD  OUR  LAST  WEEK'S  STORY   ON   LACK   OF  INSTRUCTIONS
To  OUR Moscow  EMBASSY:  "The  drive  toward  a  summit  con-
ference,"  said  an  Associated  Press  dispatch  from  Moscow  in
the  Baltimore  Sun  Feb.  24, "appeared  stalled. ... A survey of
Western  diplomats in  the  Soviet  capital  Showed  none  had  in-
structions  from  home  to  initiate  any  move  to  get  the  diplo-
matic  work  started."
WITCH  HUNTERS  IN  TROUBLE?  The  Chicago  Tribune's  well-
informed   Washington  correspondent,   Willard   Edwards,   re-!
ported  (Feb.  24)  that  the  Senate  Internal  Security  subcom-
mittee's annual  report  has  been  held up  by the  failure  of two
Senators  to  sign  it.  Watkins  (R. Utah)  "has  refused  to sign"
but won't  explain  why and  Chairman  Eastland says he hasn't
signed  because he's  been "too busy  to  read it." The  subcom-
mittee has  an unwritten  rule  7 years  old requiring  unanimous
reports.   Edwards  said  the  circumstances  suggest  "political
pressures  by both  Democratic  and  Republican  leaders" on  the
subcommittee  and  added that  in the  House,  Chairman  Walter
of   Un-American   Activities,   has   also  been   asked   to   "play
down"  investigations  this  year  but  has  refused.
ARGENTINA:   The  Frondizi  election  was  a  defeat   for   the
Catholic  Church  (which  once  supported  Peron  against  him)
and  for  U.S. oil  companies   which  fear   his  nationalization
program.
PORTENT:    The   new   Soviet   Ambassador  Menshikov  gave
Marguerite  Higgins an  interview  (Neiv  York   Herald-Tribune,
Feb.  21)  in  which  he  denied  Krushchev  was  a  one-man  dicta-
tor.   "These things," he said  of  the  shakeup  in which  Molotov,
Chicago Tribune Rebukes Jenner
It  is  unusual  for  the  Washington  Post  and  the Chi-
cago  Tribune  to  agree.   It  is  pleasant   to  record  that
on  Feb. 24  by  a  remarkable  coincidence  both   publica-
tions  led  off  their  editorial  pages  with  attacks  on  the
Jenner  bill  (S2646) to  curtail  the  power of  the  Supreme
Court  to  hear  appeals  in  contempt  of  Congress  convic-
tions  and  similar  cases  involving  radicals.
The  Washington  Post  denounced the  bill  as  an   effort
by  the  Senator  to  punish  the  Court  for  handing  down
decisions  with  which  he  disagreed.    The  Chicago  Trib-
une  recalled  that  the  rightist  Rumely  also  benefitted  a
few  years  ago  from  a  Supreme  Court  decision  revers
:
ing  a  contempt  of  Congress  conviction  on First Amend-
ment  grounds.
The  Chicago  Tribune  said   the  fact  that   Joseph  L.
Rauh,  Jr., of  the  ADA, had  been  the  chief  witness  so
far   against  the  bill  made  the  opposition  to  it   appear
"essentially  left-wing"  but   added,   "Nothing   could  be
further   from   the  truth.   A  conservative  must  be  very
short-sighted  indeed  to  uphold  the  Jenner  bill."
Malenkov  and  Kaganovich were  demoted "are not  decided by
Mr.  Krushchev  alone,  by any  means. ...  It  is  a  mistake  to
think  that  Krushchev can  act  without  consultation  and  con-
sent  of others.  . . . He is very  much  a  collective  leader.  . . .
These  things  are not decided by any one man.  . . "
POLAND   STILL   "DIFFERENT":   A  little   noticed    agreement
was  signed  Feb  12 between  the  U.S! and  Poland  for  the pur-
chase  by the  latter  with  its  own currency  of  $1,000,000  worth
of   U.S. books,  films,  periodicals,   recordings   and   authors'
rights.  .  .  .  Poland  is  still  the  only  place  in  the  Soviet  bloc
(and  Yugoslavia)  where  Western  periodicals and  newspapers
are  freely  available.  .  .  .  Since  Pravda  and  Izvestia  can be
bought  on  public  newsstands  in  New  York,  why  doesn't  the
U.S.  ask  for  public  sale  of  the  New   York   Times   and   the
Washington   Post  in  Moscow? ...
QUICKLY  SUPPRESSED  BY  MOST  PAPERS:  Russ  Nixon's  letter
to  Senator  McClellan released  here  Feb.  24 charging  that one
of  the  Senator's  committee  counsel, John  J.  McGovern,  asked
Nixon,  the  U.E.'s  Washington  representative,  to  supply  the
McClellan  committee  secretly  with  material  which  could  be
used   against  the   United  Auto  Workers   leadership   in   the
forthcoming  Kohler  strike  hearings.
Send  A  Stamped   Self-Addressed    Envelope    If    You   Want  Our  1957 Index.   Now  Ready  Free  of  Charge
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street    .............................
City    ....................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street    .............................
City
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
......Zone............State....................
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
3/3/58
--...-Zone. ..       State  ..................
Shall  we send  gift  announcement?       Yes  D    No  D
LE Stem's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  n.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5(UR  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15. n.   C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription
K   in   fh   tj.  S.;    Srt  In  Canada;  J10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $1.1  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and    Afrli-n
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED