I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958mar10.pdf

============================================================

Special  4-Pages  on  Nuclear  Testing
Inside;  Stassen's  Testimony   on  How  A. Soviet-American  Agreement  Could  Be  Policed  and  Inspected
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,   NO.  10
MARCH   10,  1958
'°'      WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS'
Dr.  Teller's  Campaign   Against  A  Ban  on  Testing
Dr.  Edward  Teller's  first  victory  in  his  fight  to  continue
nuclear  testing  occurred  last  year  when  an  agreement  seemed
imminent.   This  was  in  June,  a  few  weeks  after  the  Russians
for   the  first  time  agreed  at  London  to  the  establishment  of
inspection  posts  on  their  territory.  Harold  Stassen  alluded  to
this  when  he  told  the  Humphrey  disarmament subcommittee
here   that  a  Presidential  press  conference  last  June   showed
that  Ike  himself  was  then  prepared  to  go  along  with  Stas-
sen's  plan   for   an  agreement  with   the   Russians  to  suspend
nuclear  tests  for  two  years  as  a  first  step  toward disarmament.
Mr.  Stassen  discreetly forbore  to  mention  the  swift  aftermath
of  that  press  conference.
The  "Clean Bomb" Intervenes
It  was  held  on  Wednesday,  June  19.   The  transcript  bears
out  Mr.  Stassen's  claim.    The  President  that  day  expressed  a
willingness  to  break  up  the  unwieldy  disarmament  package
and  negotiate  a  suspension  of  tests  apart  from  more   difficult
problems.   This  was  the  high-point  of  Mr.  Stassen's  career,
and  also  the  beginning  of  his  decline.   The  following  Mon-
day,    Admiral   Strauss   of   the   Atomic   Energy   Commission
turned  up  at the White  House  with  Dr.  Teller  and  Dr.  Ernest
O.  Lawrence.   The  visit  produced  sensational headlines  about
the  possibility  of  a  clean  bomb.   When  Mr.  Eisenhower  met
the  press  again  two  days  later,  he  had  begun  to  waver.   He
said  the  scientists  had  told  him,  "give  us  four  or  five  years
to  test  each  step  of  our  development'and  we  will  produce
an  absolutely  clean  bomb  .  .  .  there  will  be  no  fallout  to
injure   any   civilian   or   anyone,   any   innocent   bystanders."
Thanks  to  this  visit,  as  the  New   York   Times  reported   next
day,   the  President  "had  had  some  second  thoughts  about  the
wisdom    of    ending    nuclear    bomb   tests."   These    second
thoughts  finally  prevailed,  and  Mr.   Stassen   lost  his  job  in
the  effort  to  overcome  them.
Now  that  world  pressure  is  rising  for  an  agreement,   Dr.
Teller   is  campaigning  again,   but   has   changed   his   line  of
argument;  world   reaction   last  year  to  talk  of  a  clean   bomb
which  would  not  hurt  "innocent  bystanders"  was too  derisory.
This  time  Dr.   Teller  is  arguing  that   inspection  cannot   be
relied  upon  because  secret  tests  are  possible.   "Actually,"  he
wrote  in  the  January  issue  of  Foreign  Affairs,    "a  nuclear  test
is  easily  noticed  only  if  it  is  performed   in  the  most  obvious
manner.   There  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  a  nation  wants  to
carry  out   tests   in   secrecy,  observation  will   become   difficult
and   uncertain."    He   added,   "Of   course,   it  will   cost   some
money  and  effort  to  hide  nuclear  explosions.    But  the  Soviet
Union  has  never  been  stingy  where  a  military  advantage  has
been   at  stake."    (We're  not   exactly   parsimonious   either).
This  line  was  echoed  almost  in  the  same  words  in  his  article
for   Life    (Feb.   10)   and  in  the  Rockefeller  Brothers   report
Dr. Teller's Point of  View
"I  believe  that  disarmament   is  a  lost  cause."
—Meet  the Press,  Sunday,  March  2.
"We  must  overcome  the  popular  notion  that  nuclear
weapons are  more immoral than  conventional  weapons."
—This  Week  Magazine,  Oct. 13,1957.
3   3
for  which  Dr.  Teller  was  the  scientific  adviser.
Dr.  Teller   created   the   impression   that  the   possibility  of
secret  tests  was  a  known   fact.   But  a  more  careful   reading
of  those  documents  and  of  his  interview  on  Meet  the  Press
(March  2)  will  show  that  this  is  not  quite  so.  "If  they   [the
Russians]  are  determined  to  continue  testing,"  he  said  in  that
TV  interview,  "and   if  they  are  intelligent  enough  to   elude
the  check  which  we  are  discussing,  I  am  virtually  certain  that
they  will  find  methods  to  cheat."   (Our   italics).    "Virtually
certain"   is  not   the   same  as  his   earlier   statement   in    Life,
"There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  possible."   The  ambiguity
became  more  apparent  when  Mr.  Spivak  asked  him,  "are  you
saying  that  we  ourselves  have  secret  methods  of  testing  or
that  we  ourselves  can  devise  secret  methods,  or  do  you  just
think   that   the  Russians  can?"   To  this  Dr.   Teller   replied
that  "we  have  not  given  a  great  deal  of  attention  and   effort
to  devise  secret  methods  of  testing"  because  we  would   abide
by  any  agreement.   "At  the  same  time,"  he  continued,   "the
question   has   arisen   and   there   have   been   discussions   and
these   discussions  convince  me   that   there   are   very   serious,
very  effective  possibilities  of  hiding  nuclear  tests."
How Prove  Two  Negatives?
A  witness  who  testified  so  vaguely  in  a  court  of  law  would
get  into  difficulties.    But  as  propaganda   Dr.  Teller's  line  is
deadly  in  the  one  field  where  there  seemed  firm  hope  of  an
enforcible  agreement.   Those  who  would  rebut  him  have  the
impossible  task  of  proving  two  negatives—that  the  Russians
would   not  try  to  cheat  and  that  they  could  not  find   some
way  of   evading  inspection.   At  the   same  time  there   is  no
way  to  put  Dr.  Teller  in  the  witness  chair  and  ask  him  to  be
more  specific.   Is  he  speaking   of  large  explosions   or  only
small?   And  if  small  (there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  any
large  explosions  can  be  kept  secret),  how  small?   If  he  is
speaking  of  explosions  high  up  in  the  stratosphere   or  deep
underground,  how  useful  would  such  tests  be?
When  the  AEC  tried  its  first  underground   test  in  Nevada
last   September   19   (using  a  bomb   Mr.   Stassen's   testimony
reveals  was  "smaller  than  even  the  earliest  bombs  we had"),
it  seemed   to  hope  that  this  would   prove  the   possibility   of
secret  tests.   The  New   York   Times  story  next  morning  from
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 10,1958
Stassen's  Testimony  Feb.  28  on  the  Feasibility   of  Inspection  Machinery. . .
Mr.  STASSEN: ....  an  agreement   to  open  up  mutually  on
both  sides  to  the  establishment  of  the  necessary  inspection
stations to  monitor  and  assure  a  cessation  of  nuclear testing.
These  inspection  stations  would  require  approximately  11 or
12 within  the  territory  of  the  Soviet  Union, an  even number
in  the  territories  of  the  United  States,  both  continental  and
extra-continental,   and   these   inspection  stations   should  be
equipped  with  the  essential   scientific  instruments  which  are
seismic,  acoustic,  electromagnetic  and  radiation  measuring  in
their  nature,  and  be  manned  by  competent  personnel  under
the United Nations. . . .
Senator   HUMPHREY.  So you  openly  disagree  with  the  Pres-
ident's  position  in  his  cablegram  to  the  Prime  Minister  of
India?
Mr.  STASSEN.  I today  to  you recommend a  first  step  agree-
ment  that  consists  of  four  parts  as  I  have  outlined,  and  I
point  out  to  you  that  in  the  President's  press  conference in
June  of  1957 he  expressed  a  view that  was  entirely  consistent
with   and  of  the  same  spirit  as  the  recommendation  I  am
making to you this morning.  . . . Let me also  give the genesis
of  the  recommendation that  I  make.   It  springs  out  of  the
negotiations  and  studies  over this period of years.
You  will find that  the  first  important  recommendation for
a  short  term  suspension  of  nuclear  tests,  which  is  the  one
of  the four  parts,  came from  Prime  Minister Nehru. . . .
Mr.  STASSEN.   That  was  one  of  the  cardinal  points  in  our
recommendations  that  we publicly made, that  is  to  the  Pres-
ident,  and  publicly revealed, that  any  commitment the United
States makes  should have  attached  to it  the  necessary  inspec-
tion.   And  these  inspection  posts  I  speak  of  are  an  absolute
essential  of the  first  step  agreement.
If Tests Held Underground
And  with  these  scientific  instruments,   the  seismic  instru-
ments  are  very  sensitive,  so  are  the  acoustics,  the  electro-
magnetic  and  the  radiation  measuring  one,  you  can  have  a
very  effective  inspection  system.   In  fact,  it  is  a  matter  of
public information and I  can say to you, that that very  small
nuclear  shot  that  was  put  out  underground  in  last  year's
test  was  recorded  in  every  seismic instrument  within  a  thou-
sand  miles.
Now  when  the  seismic  instruments  record  that  shot,  it  of
course  does  not  say that  it  is  a  nuclear  shot.   It  shows  that
something  caused  a  tremor   from   a  certain   location.   Then
these  inspectors  must  have  the  right  to  go  to  the  area  indi-
cated  on  their  instruments  to  see whether  or  not  the  seismic
or  acoustic  or  electromagnetic  indications  came  from   a  nu-
clear  test  that  was  not  authorized,   or  whether   they   were
caused  by  an  earthquake  or  some  other  kind  of  natural  phe-
nomena.
If Tests Held In  Stratosphere
•   That  would  be  a  part  of  the  inspection  system,  and  the
delicate  electromagnetic  and  acoustic  instruments   pick  this
up  at  a  great  range,  and  with  the  radar  approach,  if  the
shots  are  sent  up  into  the  upper  atmosphere,  why  you find
How   Soon  It   Could  Be  Done
Mr.  STASSEN.   It  is  my  view that  this  first  step  [a
two  year  cessation  of  nuclear  testing]   could  be  nego-
tiated  within  the  next  six  months  successfully  with  all
the  states  concerned.  I  believe  it  would  best  be  con-
summated  at  a  summit  meeting between  the  heads  of
government.  I  feel  such  a  summit meeting,  if  we begin
to  prepare  for  it  along  these  lines  now,  could  be  held
within  four  or  five  months, that  it  I  think  could  best
be  held  at  the  United  Nations with  the  Secretary  Gen-
eral  as  sort  of  a  moderator  and  manager  of  it,  so  that
all   fhe   other  nations  felt   that  this  was  within  the
United  Nations  context,  was  not  something  that  was
pulling  away  from  the  United  Nations,  and  I  believe
that   a  treaty  along  these   lines   could  actually  come
before  the   U.  S.  Senate  before  this  session   ends,  BE-
CAUSE  ALL   OF  THE   TECHNICAL,  THE  LEGAL,
THE   SCIENTIFIC  WORK   IS   IN   AN  ADVANCED
STAGE.   [Emphasis  added.]
—Before   the Senate  Disarmament  Subcom. Feb.  28.
the missile going up.
So  I  think   11  or   12  inspection  stations  properly  placed
throughout  the  Soviet  Union  territory  and  the  United  States
and  our  Alaskan  and  Pacific  islands  will make  it  as  certain
as  anything  on  earth  can  be  certain  that  unauthorized  and
illegal  tests  could  not  be  conducted without  being  observed.
No Absolute Certainty Possible
Now  you  cannot  of  course  say  with  an  absolute  scientific
certainty,   because  nothing  on  this  earth  can  be   absolutely
scientifically  certain,  but  it  can  be as  certain  as  any  matter
with which human beings are concerned.. . .
Senator   SALTONSTALL.   The  Soviets  never  showed  any  in-
clination  to  agree  to  let  any  inspectors   from  these  stations
to travel  in areas of Soviet territory, did they?
Mr.  STASSEN.  Yes, they  did.
Senator   SALTONSTALL.   I  thought  they  limited  it  to  a  500
mile radius from  their  borders.
Mr.   STASSEN.   No; "that  is  the   other   type  of   inspection,
Senator.   That  was  in  the  open  sky  zones  that  were  under
negotiation.   That  is  a  matter  of  other  steps  to  take  up.  But
they  did  not  put  any  geographic  limitation  when  they  re-
sponded, to  our  requirements  of  inspection  posts  and   scien-
tific  instruments  in  the  London negotiations  in  regard  to  the
suspension  of testing.
Now  of  course  when  you  come  down  to  specifically  out-
lining  those  11 or  12 posts  and  what  instruments  they  would
have  and  what  personnel  they  would have,  it  is  possible  that
you  would  find  an  intransigeant  point  of  something  essential
on  the  part  of  the  Soviet  Union, and  that  you  could  not  go
forward.   But the  indications are  that this  is  the  most  favor-
able,  sound  and  mutual   move  that  could  be  made  in   the
armaments  control field.
What About  The Need for  Developing A  Clean  Bomb  for  Peaceful Uses?
Sen.  HUMPHREY.  Another  argument,  Mr. Stassen,  that
has  been  presented  against   suspending  weapons  tests  re-
lates  to  the  need  for  testing  in  order  to  reduce  the  amount
of  fallout  resulting  from  explosions,  radioactive fallout. . . .
Mr.  STASSEN.   It  is  not  a  valid  argument.  There  is  no
scientist  who  claims  that  they  are   going  to  have  a  com-
pletely  clean  .weapon  within  two  years.   They  speak  of  it
us  something  where research  in  process  in  five  or  six  years
might  prove it  out, so  it  does  not  affect  the  first  two  years,
anil  I  do  not  believe  any  scientist  would  come  before  you
and  claim   that   he  is  going  to  be  ready  to  test   a  com-
pletely  clean  weapon  in two  years.  . . .
But   going  on  beyond,  in  the  longer  range  term,  if   the
scientists   in  any  country  develop  a  completely  clean  nu-
clear  explosion,  that  has  peaceful  potential  to  move  great
mountains  of  earth,  to  open  up  harbors,  to  dig  canals,  the
international  tests  of  such  a  clean  explosion  could  be  in-
cluded  in  any  future  treaty  under  international participa-
tion,  because  then   you  would   want  that  knowledge  of   a
clean  explosion  to  be  known  by  all  countries,  and  you would
want  to  turn  it  to  peaceful  uses.
—Testimony,  Senate  Disarmament   Subcommittee,   Feb.  28.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 10,  1958
. Provides  the  Answers  to  Teller's  Campaign  Against  A  Nuclear  Test Ban
Not Enough Inspectors Available?
Senator   HUMPHREY.   You  are  familiar,  Mr.  Stassen,  with
the  attitude  expressed  before  this  subcommittee and  in  pub-
lic  statements  by  Admiral  Strauss  wherein he  has  indicated
that  we  do  not  have  enough  trained  inspectors  to  supervise
this  type of agreement.  . . .
Mr.  STASSEN.  Just  let  me  interject  that  there  would  not
be  a  personnel   problem.   In  other  words,  these  12  inspec-
tion  stations  with  international  personnel,  there  are  ample
competent  men  in  the   world  to  man   these   12  stations  on
both  sides.
Why  So Much Secrecy About the  Inspection Studies?
Senator   HUMPHREY.  You recall that  one of  the  task  forces
that you were to appoint was one that  related  to development
of  plans  and  proposals  for   inspection.  Am  I  correctly  in-
formed  on that?
Mr.  STASSEN.   We had  nine  task  groups. ...  All  had  to
do with  different  types  of inspection.
Senator   HUMPHREY.  We  have  tried  to  receive  some  infor-
mation  concerning  the  work  of  those  task  forces,  Mr.  Stas-
sen.   Has  the  work  of  those  task  forces  been completed?
Mr.   STASSEN.   I  think   any  question  now  of  the   activity
within  the  Administration  should not  be put  to  me.
Senator    HUMPHREY.   Were   they   completed   up   to   last
month?
Mr.   STASSEN.   Those  task  forces  served  very  ably  during
the time that I had the  responsibility.
Senator  HUMPHREY.  What  is  so  secret  about what  a  task
force   is  doing  in  the  field  of  inspection,  for   example?   I
frankly   cannot  understand  this.   The  American  people  are
vitally  concerned,  No.  1,  that  if  we  enter  into  any  type  of
disarmament  agreement,  that  it  is  one that  has  reasonable
assurances  and  guarantees  of  success,  and  of non-violation.
In   other   words,  that  it   will   be  reasonably   secure  and
trustworthy.   Therefore  it  appears  to  me that  the  discussion
of   these   matters  is   of  the   utmost   public  importance  and
should be as much as  possible public.
Now  I  can  understand  where  the  AEG   [Atomic  Energy
Commission]   may  have   some  very   delicate  instrument   or
some  delicate  scientific  device that  it  may  not  for  the  mo-
ment  want  to  divulge  or  expose  to  public  view,  but  I  must
say  that  if  we  can  have  discussions  before   committees  of
Congress   as  to  the  latest  missiles  and  rockets  and  discus-
sions  as  to  anti-missiles   and  submarine  missiles  and  all  of
the   most  fantastic   technical   developments,  why  can't  we
have  this  discussion  as  to  what  is  being  recommended by  a
task  force  in   so  far   as  inspection   devices  and   inspection
programs  are  concerned.
Mr.  STASSEN.   There  is  no  reason  why  you  could  not  have
testimony  on  any  of  these  inspection  and  scientific  matters.
The  Tactical  Weapon  Argument
Sen.  HUMPHREY.  A  third  argument   against   the
suspension  of  nuclear  explosions  is  that  tests  of  small
nuclear  weapons are  essential  in  order  to  perfect  weap-
ons  for   tactical   use  in  the  eventuality  of  local  con-
flicts. . . . What  is your  response  to this  argument?
Mr.  STASSEN.    We  already  have  tactical  weapons
that  are  very  efficient.   It,  of  course,  is  true  that  con-
tinued  testing   will  refine  and  spread   the  weapons  on
both  sides,  but  that  specifically  is  a  thing  that  should
be   reciprocally   stopped   in   the   interest   of   the   best
prospects  for peace. . . .
—Sen. Disarmament Subcommittee,  Feb. 28.
Could They Cheat by Satellite  Testing?
Senator   HUMPHREY.  I  imagine  some people will  ask  under
these  arrangements   would  it  not  be  possible for  one  of  our
friendly  allies  to  conduct  a  test  for  us  of  our  weapons, even
though  they  did  it  in  their  name,  and  we  might  well  ask
might  it  not  be  possible  for   one  of  the  satellite  states  to
conduct  tests  for  the  USSR,  conducting  them  in  their  name
but  using  a  Soviet  weapon.   How  do  we  get  around  that?
Mr.  STASSEN.  It  would not be possible for  them  to  do it with-
out  it  being  detected.   By that  I  mean  if  there  is  a  devious
avoidance of the  two-year  commitment on either  side,  it  would
be  known promptly  by  the  other  side  and  by  the  world  with
this   inspection   system,   and   with   our   continuation   of   our
regular   intelligence  methods,  and   consequently  you  would
then  know, that  is  if  we  cheated  in  this  manner,  they  would
know that  there  is  no  use trying  to  go beyond  the  two years
into  further  steps.  If  they  cheat  in  the  first  two  years, we
will  know it  is  no  use  trying  to  go further   in  further  steps
with  them,  and  that  is  a  very  important  thing  to find out on
each  side.
Therefore,  it  is  my view that  since  there  is  such  a  mutual
interest  in  avoiding  the  kind  of  a  future  that  otherwise  will
face  both  sides  that  the  agreement  would be respected.  . . .
More on Underground and Stratospheric  Shots
Mr.  STASSEN. ... If  you put  the  shot  down  under,  it  has
been  proven  that  seismic  recordings   can  be  picked  up  even
on  the  smallest  shot,  and  that  test  shot   [underground  last
year  in  Nevada]  is  known  to  have  been  much  smaller  than
even  the  earliest  bombs we had,  and  if  they  try  to  put  it  up
out  of  the  atmosphere,  then  the  process  by  which  the  rocket
goes  up  itself  can  be  recorded  by  radar  and  then  the   air-
plane  can  fly  up  to  see  or  test  rockets  can  be  sent  to  see
whether  there  was  a  nuclear  explosion  on  the  end  of  that
rocket.
So  that  if  you  put  the  competent  scientists  to  work,  and
they  are  international,  they  are  not  limited  to  the   Soviet
Union  and  the  United  States,  an  inspection  system  can  be
put  in that  is  as  certain  as  anything  human  can be.
The Danger in Insisting  from  The Start  on  A  Cutoff  in  Nuclear Production
Mr.  STASSEN.   There  is  no  question  that  the   cessation
of  production  of  nuclear  material  for  weapons  purposes  is
a  very  important  thing  to  attain.   It,  however,  is  not  the
most  important  thing  to  attain,  and  it  is  impossible  to  at-
tain  it  in  a  short  range  because  it  requires  a  most  compre-
hensive  inspection  system that  I  feel  could  only  be  designed
and  installed  in  three  or  four   years  of  time,  because   to
inspect  a  cutoff  of production  of  nuclear materials  for  weap-
ons  purposes  you  would  need  inspectors   in  every,  nuclear
installation,  including power  plants  and  production  on  both
sides.
You  would  need  the  right  to  look  for  other  plants  that
were  not  reported.   In  other  words,  to  inspect  the  whole of
the  Soviet  Union  from  end  to  end,  and  you  would  need  the
right   to  keep  track  of  the  nuclear   material  that  is   pro-
duced,  account  for  it,  follow  it  and  audit  it  from  the  time
it  was produced on  through  its  use  in  various  power  plants
or  ships  and  so  forth.
Therefore  if  you  make  the  complete  accomplishment   of
that  kind  of  an  inspection  system  a  prerequisite  for  taking
any  step,  you  in  effect  make  it  impossible  to  make  any  in
the  years  immediately ahead,  and  in  the  meantime   nuclear
weapons  spread  around  the  world  and  the  danger  to  man-
kind  goes  to  very  extreme  limits.
—Testimony,  Senate   (Humphrey)   Disarmament  Subcommittee,  Feb.  88.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly, March  10,1958
Stassen  Provides  An  Authoritative Answer  to  Teller  in  A  Hush-Hush  Area
(Continued  from   Page   One)
Las  Vegas   (City  Edition)   said  "the experiment  seemed  to
have  conformed  with  predictions  of  AEC  scientists  that  the
explosion  would  not  be  detectible  more  than  a  few  hundred
miles  away."   But  that  same day's paper  already  carried  cables
from  Toronto  and  Rome saying  the  shock  had  been  recorded.
Detected and Measured  Same  Day
The  Sunday before  Dr.  Teller  appeared  on  Meet  the  Press,
the  Russians  let  off  a  nuclear  explosion  and  by  7:10  p.  m.
that  same  day  the  Atomic Energy  Commission  here  in  Wash-
ington  telephoned  the press  that  it  was "a  weapons  test  .  .  .
in  the  megaton  range."    If  the  occurrence,  the  character  and
the   magnitude   of   a   Russian  test   could   be   determined  so
quickly  on  the  other  side  of  the  globe   in  Washington   the
same  day  it  took  place,  methods  of  detection  must  be  mar-
vellously  refined.   Indeed,  despite  strict  censorship,  a  whole
range  of  detection  devices  have  been  mentioned.   We  have
seismic  instruments  to  measure  the  earth  tremor.   We  have
others  which  register  the  electromagnetic  waves  set  off.   We
can  determine  the  kind  of  explosion  from  the  dust  particles
it  spreads  around  the  world.   We  have  radar  near  the  Rus-
sian  border  which  can  "see"  into  a  considerable  part  of  their
territory.   These  are  only  the  known  devices.
Is  it  possible  that  inspection  stations  set  every  500  miles  or
so  across  American  and  Russian  territory  and  equipped  with
such  devices  could  fail  to  detect  a  nuclear  explosion?   Mr.
Stassen   believes   such   stations   manned   by   scientists  under
UN   direction  could  provide  a  system  of  detection  as  fool-
proof   as  human  ingenuity  can  devise.   Dr.  Teller  has  been
able  to  wage  a  hint-and-run  campaign,  casting  a  deadly  pall
on  the  hopes  of  mankind,  without  ever  being  required  to
discuss  this  question  specifically.  Mr.  Stassen's  detailed  testi-
mony  on  this  very  problem  before  the  Humphrey  subcom-
mittee  two  days  before  Dr.  Teller's  appearance  on  Meet  the
Press  is  the  first  authoritative  answer  to  the  scientist,  and  we
think  it  a  pity  that  so  little  attention  was  paid   it  by  the
press.   The  reports  turned  in  by  the  task  force  teams  which
Mr.  Stassen  set  up  at  the  White  House  to  study  every  aspect
of  the  inspection  problem  have  not  been  made  public.    The
whole  subject  is  being  kept  under  wraps  by  the  AEC,  which
wants  testing  to  continue.   Mr.  Stassen  could  not  discuss  the
Is Fallout  as Negligible as Dr. Teller Says?
"World-wide  fallout  is  as  dangerous  to  human  health
as  being  one ounce  overweight  or smoking  one cigarette
every  two  months."
—Dr.  Teller on Meet  the Press, Mar. S.
"Collecting   the  uncertainties  inherent  in  any  attempt
to   evaluate    the   biological   consequences   of   nuclear
weapons  tests,  past  and  future,  one  loses  confidence   in
all   prediction.
"If  tests   stop,   or  do  not  increase  in   fission   yield,
and  if  stratospheric  fallout  proves  to  be  uniform,  and
if  the  estimates  of  'average  soil'  prove  correct  (or  too
pessimistic),  and  if   Sr-90  distribution  in  human  bone
proves   to  be  Gaussian,   and  if   there  proves  to  be  a
threshold   dose   for  radiation,   then   there   will  be  little
to  be  concerned  about  for  the  next  five  or  ten  years.
"On  the  other  hand,  should  the  'test  rate'  increase,
should  stratospheric   fall-out  prove  very  varied,  should
the  estimates  of   discrimination  factors  and  the con-
cept  'average  soil'  prove  too  optimistic,  should  the   dis-
tribution   of   Sr-90   in   human   bone   prove   to   be   log
normal  or  worse,   should  small  amounts  of  radiation—
10  to  100  rads—prove  to  be  carcinogenic  [cancer   pro-
ducing]—should  all  these  possibilities  prove  true,  then
the   consequences   of   even  another  five  years'  testing
could  be serious. ...
"Thus,  from  the  purely  scientific  point  of  view,  many
uncertainties   preclude   the  drawing  of  final  conclusions
concerning   the  hazards   of  weapons  testing.   AH  judg-
ment  is  essentially   moral  in  character.   From   what   I
suppose,   then,  to  be  a  'moral  bias,'  my  own  conclusion
is  that  nuclear  tests  should  be  stopped,  if  it  is  at  all
possible  to  do  so  with  safety."
—Dr.  Wm.  F.  Neuman,  "Uncertainties  in  Evaluat-
ing    the    Effects      of    Fail-Out   from      Weapons
Tests",  Bulletin  of   the  Atomic  Scientists,  Jan.
1958,  a  "paper   based  in  part  on work    performed
under   contract  with  the  U.  S.  Atomic   Energy
Commission  at   the   University   of  Rochester."
specific  content  of  these  reports  but  his  testimony  is  to  be
read  as  reflecting  the  knowledge  thus  acquired.   In  this  testi-
mony,  which we  reprint  inside  this  week's  issue,  he  discusses
v
publicly   for   the  first  ti*
116
  the  whispers   about   secret   tests;
high  in  the  sky  and  deep  in  the  earth  and  how  they,  too,'
could  be  detected.  We  believe  this  testimony  deserves  close
study  and  wide  distribution  in  the  fight  for   peace.
Extra  Copies  of  This  Issue  May Be  Obtained  at Bulk  Rates for  Wider  Distribution
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or enter)
Street   .............................
City   ..................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
......Zone... ......... State.. ..................
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
City   .................... ......................Zone............ State.. ..................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Tea  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March   3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
W  la  «i  U.   M.;  16  In  Canada;  (10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  *15  to  Europe;  »20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED