I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958dec01.pdf

============================================================

The
    <(
Gore  Plan"  Was  Dr.   Teller's,  P.  4
Exclusive  Documentary:  The  Protestant  Church  Statement   Advocating  Recognition  Red  China,  Pages  2-3
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  47
DECEMBER   1,   1968
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Those  Berlin  Pin-Pricks and  Krupps' New  Line of Goods
The   average   American   probably   regards  the   new  uproar
over  Berlin  as  another  bit  of  mischief   making  by  that  fellow,
Krushchev.    In  the  coffee  bars  of  the  Pentagon,  it  is  regarded
gratefully   as  another  of  those  Soviet   "blunders"  committed
just  in time  for  the  annual wrangle  over  military  expenditures;
it  will  be  hard  to  cut  the  Army,  as  planned,  with  alarm  bells
ringing  in  West  Germany.    Very  few  Americans—in  the  State
Department  only  those  studious  experts  who  seem  to  be  con-
sulted  only   by  the   charladies—will   associate   Soviet  pressure
on  that  exposed  Western   nerve   in  Berlin   with  the  NATO
discussions   to  be  held  in  Paris  this  month.   These  were   sup-
posed  to  ratify  what   we  regard  as  a  foregone  conclusion—
revision  of  treaty  restrictions  to  clear  the  way  for  giving  nu-
clear   arms   to   the   Germans.    It   should   not   be   difficult   to
imagine  that  the  Russians  and  Poles,  who  have riot yet finished
cleaning   up  the  mess  left  by  the  Germans  last  time,  may  be
nervous  about  giving  them  bigger  and  better  means  of  demo-
lition  so soon.  Maybe we ought  to  be a little  thoughtful  about
it,   too.
Nuclear   Arms  Next  for  Red  China?
This  is  what  Senator  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  (D.   Minn.)
tried  to  suggest  in  a  press  conference he  held  at  Geneva after
sitting  in  on  the  nuclear test  negotiations  and  talking  with  the  •
Soviet  delegates.   He  said  Soviet  policies  on  nuclear  tests  and
surprise  attacks  depended  to  a  great  extent  on  whether   the
U.  S.  provided  nuclear  arms  for  West  Germany.  This  made
more  sense than  anything which has  come  out  of  the  Geneva
deadlock,  but  it  was  ignored  or  brushed  aside  in  most Ameri-
can  papers  last  Sunday, as  they  tend  to  brush  aside  whatever
does  not  fit   official   cold   war   stereotypes.   The   New    York
Times  (Nov.   23)   carried  the  best  and  most  complete  story,
from   Drew  Middleton  in  Geneva,  putting  it  on  page  one
for   the  first  edition  but  then  burying  it  inside  on  page  42
for  its  main  run,  badly  jumbling  the  type  in  the  process,  as
if   someone  had  phoned  from  upstairs  to  get  that  story  off
page  one  before  Mr.  Dulles  saw it  and  called  Mr.  Sulzberger
personally.   Mr.  Middleton  reported  that  the  Senator's  views
"are  known  to  be  close  to  those  reported  by  diplomats  here
who  have  become  increasingly  apprehensive  about  the    effect
in  Europe  of  the  suggested  United  States  action."   The  Sena-
tor  noted  that  it would  be a  strange  thing  to arm the  Germans
with  nuclear  weapons  "while  talking  about  restriction  of  nu-
clear  arms."   A  source  Mr.  Middleton  did  not  identify  added
that  if  we give  such arms  to  the  Germans,  the  Russians would
give  them  to  the  Chinese.   If  public  opinion  here  were  not  in
such  an  induced  stupor,  it  would  be  recognized  that  this  is
a  serious  threat  and  a  high  price  to  pay  for  Mr.  Dulles's
dream  of  a  nuclear  Reich,  able  to  resume  its  historic   push
eastward  with  improved  firepower.
13                                                                                                    1
No  Evidence  of  Disagreement?
When  Mr.  Dulles  got  back  from  Duck  Island  last  Monday
he  insisted   to  reporters   who  met  him  on  arrival  that  there
was  "no  evidence  at  all"  of  disagreement  on  Berlin  among
the  Allied  powers.  This  is only  true  in  the  limited  sense  that
no  one  is proposing  to  march  out  of  West  Berlin  under  Soviet
pressure.   Even here  inside the  government  there  is  no  agree-
ment  on  what  to  do  if  and  when  the  Russians  hand   over
control  of   traffic  to  the  East  Germans.   The  West  Germans
already  deal  with  the  East  Germans  on  a  wide  range  of  trade
and   traffic  problems,  including  civilian  access  and  supply  to
West  Berlin.  Some  officials  here  see  no  reason  why we  cannot
do  likewise.   As  for  'the  air  lanes,  "even  if  the  East  Germans
were  to  assume representation  at  the  Air  Safety  Centre,"   the
London   Times  reported   from   Berlin  November   14,  "there
would  be  no  question  of  recognition.   The  procedure  at  the
Centre  is unilateral to  the  extent  that  the  allies  do  not  request
permission  to  land  aircraft,  but  merely  file  flight  plans  stat-
ing  where  aircraft  will  be at  a  specific  time."   Those  are  pins,
not  bayonets,  which  are  pricking  us.   The   disproportionate
howls,  even  before  we  know  what  the   Russians  are   really
going  to  let  their  East German puppets  do,  merely  reflects  our
sensitivity  at  a  point  of   soft   and  comfortable  but  obsolete
policy.
Brand  New  Variety   of  "War   Criminal"
The  objectives  of  the  pressure  on  Berlin  were  indicated  in
the   Krushchev-Gomulka  statement  of  November   11,  which
called  again  for  a  summit conference  and  endorsed  the  newly
revised  Rapacki  plan.   This  would  open  the  way  to  a  denu-
clearized  zone in  Central  Europe  and  the  East  European  satel-
lite  States,  coupling  this  with  reduction  in  conventional   arms
and  a  system of  inspection.   In  such  a  context  Germany  could
safely  be  reunited.   This  Polish  initiative  has  been  welcomed
in  England  by  publications  as  diverse  as  the  London  Times
and   the   Manchester   Guardian,   The   New   Statesman,  The
Economist   and   the   Observer.   It   is  supported   in   the   new
British  Labor  Party  election  manifesto.   British  opinion,  like
Scandinavian,  regards  the  prospect  of  nuclear  arms  for   Ger-
many  with  foreboding.   It  is  only  along  the   Bonn-Washing-
ton,   Adenauer-Dulles   axis,   that   it   is  welcomed.    Western
Europe  stirs  uneasily  at  the  sight  of  the  Krupps  in  the  con-
sortium   now  building   Germany's  first  atomic  power   plant
(London  Sunday  Times,  Nov.  2)  and  at  the  characteristically
obtuse  and  abusive way the  German  Defense  Minister  Strauss
stigmatizes  as  "war  criminals"   (Die   Welt,   Hamburg,   Nov.
10)   those  who,  by  backing  the  Rapacki  plan,  would   keep
nuclear  arms from  the  Germans!  Isn't  it  time we  remembered
that  German  arms  have  a  habit  of  shooting  West  as  well  as
East?
B   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Sterne's  Weekly,  December 1,1868
U. S. Protestant  Church  Study  Group  Calls  For Red China  Recognition  . . .
"From   churchmen   assembled  in  Cleveland  at   the    Fifth
World  Order  Conference   of  the  National  Council of  Church-
es;   to   the   Churches   of   Christ   in   the   United   States  of
America.    The  peace  of  God  be  with  you,  and  His  grace  be
with us  all  while  we  study  the  peace of  his  world.
"The  five  years  since  the  last  such  conference  on  inter-
national  relations  have  brought  no  noticeable  adjustment  of
the   moral   and   ideological   conflict   between   communist  and
non-communist  nations,  no  noticeable  abatement  of  the   sus-
picions  and  dubieties  that  set  them  still  at  such  dangerous
odds.   Instead,  more  and  more  frightening   scientific  discov-
eries—ever  vaster  destruction   guaranteed   ever   swifter  de-
livery—are  still  advanced  as  military   reassurance.
"Should  either  the  U.  S.  or  the  Soviet  Union  commit  its
full   power  to  all-out   international   war,  mutual   destruction
would  ensue.   Great  cities  would  lie  in  ruins;  whole  popula-
tions  would be  annihilated;  a  radioactive  plague  would  settle
on  the  earth;  the  well-being,  perhaps  even  the  existence,  of
future  generations   would  be  placed  in  grave  jeopardy.
We  Cannot  Wait  for  The  'Bad'  to  Be  Converted
"The   immediate  task  of  every   Christian   is  to   seize   the
initiative   in  the  prevention  of  war  and  the   achievement  of
peace  in  a  world  of  intercontinental   ballistics,  thermonuclear
weapons,  and  platforms  in  outer  space  for  missile   launching
sites.   We  cannot  sit  complacently  and  hopefully  behind  the
moral  subterfuge  which  divides  the  world into  'good  and bad'
peoples,  waiting  for  the  'bad'  ones  to  be  converted  to  our
position.   To  do  this  is  to  insure  the  inevitability   of  war.
"Lulled    by   well-worn   phrases    of   'deterrence,'   'limited
war,'  'massive  retaliation'  and  'the  power  to  win  a  war'  the
people  of  the  United  States  may  still  not  realize  the  magni-
tude  of  the  destructive  weapons  at  the  instant  command  of
Washington   and  Moscow.   The   power  to  win  a  war'  has
lost  its  significance  when  used  in  connection  with  such  weap-
ons.
"Thus  we  find  ourselves  always  on  the  brink  of   annihila-
tion.   In  case  of  a  real  or  imagined  attack  the  decisions  that
may  lead  to  ultimate  war  will  have  to  be  made  in  a  few
moments.   There  is  real  danger  that  error  in  judgment,  born
of  panic,  may  precipitate  the  war  no  one wants  and  that  no
one  can  hope  to  survive.
Reliance  on  Limited  War  Precarious
"Limited   wars  have  in  the  past  been  conducted  with  the
expectation  that  they  could  be  contained  in  time,  space  and
violence  by  the  will  of  the  powers  involved.  While  such  wars
may  continue  until  means  for  prevention,  including  more  re-
liable methods  for  the  peaceful  solution  of  disputes  have  been
effectively   developed,  the   advent   of   nuclear   weapons   and
their  increasing  availability  for  all  forms  of  conflict  pose  a
danger  of  utmost  gravity.
"The  new weapons now in  being  and  the  even more  fearful
ones  now  in  prospect  both  on  this  planet  and  in  outer  space,
underscore  the  imperative  need  of  concentration  on  the   pre-
vention  rather  than  the  limitation  of  war.
"Progress  toward  universal  disarmament   is  of .major  im-
portance   (1)  in  the  achievement  of  world  order,   (2)  in  re-
ducing the  threat  of war,  (3)  in lessening  the  tension  between
nations,   (4)   in  curbing  the   spreading  influence   of  military
establishments  on the  entire  life  of  nations,  (5)  in  lifting  the
staggering  cost  of  armaments  from  peoples  everywhere,  thus
freeing  them  for  constructive  purposes.
The  tendency  of  the  press  to  muffle  voices  of  peace
was   again   evident   last   week  in  the   scant   attention
given  to  the  Message  adopted  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  by
the   Fifth   World   Order  Study  Conference  of   the   Na-
tional   Council   of   Churches  of   Christ.    Not   the   least
striking  aspect  of  this  Message  was  its  adoption  after
an  address  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   It  opposes  vir-
tually  every  aspect  of  the  policies  associated  with  John
Foster  Duties.   We  print  here  a  slightly  abridged  ver-
sion  of  the  full  text  as  finally  approved,  though with
slight   changes  of   phrasing  still  to   be  made  by   the
Drafting  Committee.   We  believe  it  deserves  the  high-
est  praise  for  courageous  application of  religious  prin-
ciples,  and  that  it  can  be  a  potent  weapon  in  public
education  for  peace.
Cessation  of  Nuclear  Testing  As  First  Step
"Disarmament  is  a  process  involving  spirit  and  will  as  well
as  conference  and  treaties.   We  urge  Christians  to  exhort
their  government  to  continued  willingness  to  meet  and  dis-
cuss  the  means  of  disarmament   by  multilateral   agreement
involving  satisfactory  inspection  and  control  of  nuclear  weap-
ons  as well as  the  progressive  reduction  of  conventional  arms.
It  is  highly  important  that  the  U.  S.  which  gave  initial  im-
petus  to  international  action  for  the  peaceful  uses  of  atomic
energy  should  fully  and  faithfully  support  the   International
Atomic   Energy   Agency.    The   suspension   of  nuclear   tests
under  appropriate   control  and  inspection  is  a  first  step  to-
ward   halting   the   manufacture   and   stockpiling   of  nuclear
weapons.   We  renew  the  plea  made  by  the  National  Council
of  Churches  for  the  abolition  of  Universal  Military  Training.
"Disarmament   conferences   are   an  essential  part  of  the
continuing  process   of  building  world   law   and   order.   The
alternative  confronted  in  the  breakdown  of  any  given   con-
ference  is  not  a  renewal  of  the  arms  race,  but  a  renewal  of
negotiations.   The  patience  to  persist  must  be  equal  to  the
urgency  of  the  need.   We  deplore  the  tendency  to   discredit
the  motives  and  proposals  for  disarmament   when  made  by
anyone  but  ourselves.  Vigilance  and  realistic  precautions   are
necessary,  but  cynicism  about  the  good  faith  of  each  other
on  all  counts  is  a  poisonous  atmosphere  in  which  to  try   to
conduct   negotiations.
Praise  for  the  United  Nations
"The  record  of  the  UN  to  date,  even  though  it  nece_ssarily
reflects  the  weakness  of  a  divided  world,  proves  that  it  lives
and  grows  in  this  time  of  troubles.    As  a  world  forum,  as
&  means  to  peaceful  settlement,  as  a  method  of  harmonizing
the  actions  of  nations  for  human  welfare,  the  UN  has  made
important  headway.   Chiefly  in  the  field  of  security  has  the
original   plan   envisaged   in  the   Charter   broken   down.   Yet
even  here,  the  existence  of  the  UN  has  made  a   difference.
"The  General  Assembly  has  made  important    contributions
in  this  field.  The  programs  to  further   economic  and" social
development,  to  promote  the  advancement  and  emancipation
of  dependent  peoples,  and  to  help  care  for  those  uprooted  by
war  and tyranny,  stand  in the front  rank  of  efforts  for  peace-
ful   change.   We  would  particularly   congratulate  the   Secre-
tary  General   on  the  initiative  he  has  shown  in  helping  to
bring  about  the  peaceful  settlement  of  disputes  through  the
exercise  of  'quiet  diplomacy'  and  the  powers  inherent  in  his
office.
Why  We  Ought to  Recognize Red  China and Admit  It  Into the  United  Nations
"With  reference  to  China,  Christians  should .urge  recon-
sideration  by  our  government of  its  .policy  in  regard  to  the
People's  Republic  of  China.  While the  rights  of  the  people
of  Taiwan  and of  Korea should be  safeguarded, steps  should
be  taken  toward  the  inclusion  of  the  People's  Republic  of
China  in  the  United  Nations  and  for  its  recognition  by  our
government.    Such  recognition  does   not   imply   approval.
These  diplomatic  relationships  should  constitute  a  part  of
a   much  wider  relationship  between  our  peoples.   The  ex-
clusion   of   the   effective   government  on   the   mainland  of
China,  currently  the  People's  Republic of   China,  from  the
international  community is  in  many  ways  a  disadvantage.
It  helps  to  preserve  a  false  image  of   the  United  States
and  of  other  nations  in  the  minds  of  the  Chinese  people.
It  keeps  our  people  in  ignorance  of  what  is  taking  place
in   China.    It   hampers  negotiations   for   disarmament.   It
limits  the  functioning  of  international  organizations.
"We  have  a  strong  hope  that  the  resumption of  relation-
ships between the  peoples  of  China  and of  the  United  States
may  make  possible  also  a  restoration  of  relationships  be-
tween  their  churches  and  ours."
—Final  Recommendations  to National  Council Churehee.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, December 1,1968
... In Plea For Co-Existence and Disarmament Abroad, Racial Justice At Home
We Must Reassess the  Assumptions  of  the  Cold War
"There  is  need  for  reassessment  of  the  attitudes  of  Amer-
ican  Churchmen with  reference  to  relationships   with  coun-
tries  having  Communist  parties  in  control  of  government.
In  such a  review the  Christian  proceeds  from  boundless _faith
in  the  overwhelming  power  of  God's  love  and  the  ultimate
triumph  of  His  righteousness.   The  Marxists  hold  that  Com-
munism  will  ultimately  prevail.
"The  'cold  war'  of  today  is  a  result  of  the  tensions  which
spring  both  from   ideological  differences   and  from   conflict-
ing  national   aspirations.   It  had  its   roots   in  the   Russian
Bolshevik  Revolution  of   1917,   and  its  intensity   has  grown
with  the  extension  of  Communist  domination.  In  Russ_ia_and
China,  Communist  philosophy  has  endeavored  to   assimilate
the  deep traditional  sense  of  national  destiny.   The  struggle
has  thus   assumed  realistic   geographical   dimensions   with
roots  as  well  as  objectives  in  national  economy, culture  and
social  organizations.   However,  this  process  of  assimilation
of  ancient  religiously  imbued cultures  into  a  Godless  culture
is  not  complete;  in  fact,  there  is  evidence that  God continues
to  live  in  the  hearts  of  millions  in  countries  where  the  Com-
munist  party  has  achieyed  control.  It  cannot  be  said,  there-
fore,  that  the  cold  war  is  one of  geographic  dimensions only,
for  both  sides  claim  moral  objectives  in  terms  of  the  well-
being  of mankind.
"Factors entering  into the  cold  war  are  highly complicated.
There  is  a  moral  challenge  to  conviction  and  principle,  to
which  we cannot yield.  There  is  also  a threat  to  our  national
security,  heightened  by  the  almost  limitless  destructiveness
of  modern weapons, but  to  reduce  the  total  tensions  to  moral
terms  is  unjustifiable.
"Where  Communism  is  strong  in  its  power  -of   attraction,
military  power on our  side may  be  quite irrelevant  and  much
brandishing  of  it  on our part  may  weaken  our  cause.  Though
military  power in the  non-Communist world remains  a  neces-
sity,  its  limits  should  be  more  clearly  recognized,  and  far
more  of  our  attention   and  of  our  resources   should  go  into
the  task  of  helping  nations  find  their  own  way  to  solutions
of  their  social  and  economic problems.
The  Search  for  Co-Existence
"Stronger   efforts   should  be  made  to  break  through   the
present  stalemate  and  to  find  ways  of  living  with  the  Com-
munist  nations.   Sometimes  this  is  called  'co-existence,'  but
we  are  concerned with  something  more  than  the  minimum
meaning  of  the  word.  Our  relationship  with  the  Communist
nations   should   combine  competition  between  ways   of   life
with   cooperation   for   limited   objectives,   our   resistance   to
Communist  expansion  goes  with  recognition  of  the  fact  that
Communist  nations  as  nations,  have  their  own  legitimated
interests   and  their  own  reasonable  fears.   We  should  avoid
the  posture  of  general  hostility  to  them  and  cease  the  prac-
tice  of  continual moral  lectures  to  them  by  our  leaders.
"In  the  cold  war  we  allow  ourselves  to  drift  into  a  defen-
sive  position in which we hesitate  to  admit  any imperfections
in  our society,  lest  it  confirm  the  Communist indictment;  thus
we  inhibit  the  self-criticism   which  is  essential  to  the  health
of  a  democracy.  We tend  to  make  opposition  to  Communism
the  touchstone  for  policy  both  in  domestic  life  and  hi  inter-
national   relations.
Hope  in  New  Communist  Generations
"There  is  real  hope that  new  generations  within  the  Com-
munist  countries  will  be  less  fanatical   in  their   ideological
convictions   and  that   they   will  be  more  preoccupied  with
peace,  with  economic  well-being  and  with  tentative   experi-
ments  in  cultural  freedom  than  with  the  effort  to  dominate
other  nations.  It  is not to be expected  that they will  formally
renounce  what  we  consider  to  be  their  errors.   It  is  enough
Reprints  of  this  issue  available  for  mass  distribution
at  3  cents  a  copy  in  orders  of  100  or  more,  and  at  5
cents  in  smaller  quantities.
for  the  kind  of  living  together  described  above  if  their  em-
phasis  and  priorities  change.   The  establishment   of  good  re-
lations   will   require   tireless   negotiations   with   them   and
imaginative  programs  of  communication,  cultural   exchange
and  personal   contacts.
"We  should  welcome the  fact  that  the  world  is  not  divided
into  two  solid  political  blocs.  The  effort  of  our  own  govern-
ment  to  drive  every  nation  into  one  bloc  or  the  other  has
been  as  mistaken  as  it  has  been  unsuccessful.
In  the  New  Underdeveloped   Countries
"During  the  last  fifteen  years  more  than  20 nations  have
achieved  political  independence.  Significant  economic  changes
have  come  about  in  parts  of  Africa,  Asia  and  Latin  Amer-
ica,  especially in  the  villages  in  which  the  bulk  of  the  people
dwell.   Agricultural   reform  in  respect   of  land  tenure   and
methods   of   cultivation  have  taken   place.    The   impact  of
Western  civilization  has  brought  about  increased   industriali-
zation  and  urbanization  in  many  lands.   Vast   increases  in
population  have  taken  place.   All  these   economic  changes
have   brought   in   their   train   radical   social   and   cultural
changes.   More  than  150 years  of  the  Christian  mission  have
been  at  least  partly  responsible  for  some  of  the  present  tur-
moil.
"We  must  discover  the  real  needs  of  others;  not  what  we
want  to  give  but  what  they  must  have.   Such  aid  must  be
mutually   agreed   upon   in  the   interest   of  helping   the   re-
cipient  himself  and  without  compromising  his  political   in-
dependence.   It  will  not  do just  to  subsidize  other  countries
for  our  defense.  Support  for  economic fulfillment,  spiritual
freedom,  national  justice—this  is  defense  indeed  for  us   all.
A  relatively   small  enlargement  of  our  Gross  National   Pro-
duction  given  to  such  aid  would  cover  all  the   governmental
and  private  aid  which  could  now  be  effectively  absorbed  by
the  underdeveloped countries.
Democracy,  Like  Charity,  Must  Begin  at  Home
"We  cannot  separate  the  policies  of  our  country  from  the
quality  of  our  life  as  a  people.   Often  what  we  do  within
our  own  borders  contradicts   our  professed   convictions  con-
cerning  justice   and  freedom   for   all  men.   We  have   made
great  progress  in  overcoming  poverty  and  in  securing  eco-
nomic  opportunities for  our  people  as  a  whole.  We have  also
come a long  distance from  the  atmosphere of fear  and intimi-
dation  in  relation  to  the  expression  of  opinions  which  pre-
vailed  a  few  years  ago.   But  we face  a  grave  crisis  in  rela-
tion  to  the  civil  rights  of  Negro  citizens  and  other   racial
minorities.
"We  reaffirm  the   declarations   of  the   National   Council  of
Churches  and  of  many  denominational  bodies  which  express
strong  support  for   the  implementation  of  the   decisions  of
the   Supreme  Court  concerning  school  integration.   We  are
aware  of  the  delicate  problems in  many  communities  but  we
call  upon the  churches  to  give  strong  support  for  policies  in
each  state  which provide for  positive  steps  towards  the  inte-
gration  of  schools  and  the   overcoming  of   all   interference
with  political  rights  and  of  all  other  disabilities  from  which
any  racial  group  now  suffers.
"The  Churches  must  begin  with  themselves.   There  is  a
great  gulf  between  what  they  say  on  a  national  or  denomi-
national  level  and  what  they  do  or  encourage  or  permit  in
many  communities.  The  Churches  should  call  upon  the   Fed-
eral  Government,  both  the  President  and  the  Congress,  to
give  strong  leadership  in  favor  of  policies  of  desegregation."
The  Churches Must  Oppose  'Massive  Resistance',  Discrimination  and  Genocide
"A)  We  ask  our  fellow  churchmen  to  give  careful  con-
sideration  to  the  selection of  political leaders who will chal-
lenge  the  forces  of  massive  retaliation and  other  forms of
the  .defiance  of  the  Supreme  Court's  decision.
"B)  We  also  call  upon our  fellow  churchmen to  work  to
overcome  segregation  in  all  areas  including  housing, public
services  and  economic or  occupational  opportunities.
"O  Also  we  believe  that  Churches  should  support  the
ratification  of  the  genocide convention  and  be  prepared  to
support  the  ratification  of  adequate  covenants  relative  to
human   rights.
—Final  Recommendations  to National  Council  Churches.
1  3  *
1   9      'i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, December 1,1958
The  Gore  Proposal  Is  A  Teller  Idea  the  White  House  Rejected  Last   Spring
Will  the  Democrats  Turn  Up  to  the  Right  of  Ike  on  Nuclear   Testing?
In  his  unsuccessful campaign  earlier  this year to  block nego-
tiations  for  an  agreement  to  end  nuclear  tests,  Dr.  Edward
Teller  put  forward  several  alternative  suggestions.   One  was
the   idea  now  advanced  by  Senator  Gore   (D.   Tenn.)   that
testing   be  limited  to  underground   explosions.   This  would
make  an  international  inspection  agreement  unnecessary,  since
atmospheric  blasts  can  be  detected  from  great  distances.
Limiting  tests  to  the  subsoil  would  end  pollution  of  the  air
by  radioactive  fallout.   But  the  Gore-Teller   plan  would  allow
the  nuclear  arms  race  and  development  of  new  nuclear  weap-
ons  to  go  on.   This  is  its  virtue  in  the  eyes  of  the  AEC,  the
Pentagon  and  the  State  Department.
Dr.  Hans  Bethe  of  the  President's   Science  Advisory  Com-
mittee   called  this  proposal   "very   dangerous"   when  he  ap-
peared   in  executive  session   before  the   Humphrey  disarma-
ment   subcommittee  last  April   16.   "This  I  consider   not  a
solution  of  our  main  problem,"   Dr.  Bethe  says  in  the  pub-
lished  transcript,  "because  our  main  problem  is  to  stop  their
development."    At this  point  (see  Part  17, page  1544  of  those
hearings),   the   record   bears  the  tantalizing   notation   "[De-
leted]."
What  the  Security  Censor  Cut Out
It  is  not  difficult  to  guess  at  Dr.  Bethe's  security-censored
objections  if  one  goes  back  and  studies  the  testimony  given
earlier  that  day by Dr.  Teller.
In  the  first  place,  limiting  tests  to  small  underground  ex-
plosions   does   not   mean   limiting   nuclear   development   to
smaller  weapons.   "With  the  help  of  small  tests,"  Dr.  Teller
testified   (p.   1456),  "One  can  improve  one's  big  weapons."
In  the  second  place,  continued  testing  may  develop  ways
to  stage  nuclear  explosions  in  secret.   At  present,  with  inspec-
tion,  even  small  underground  tests  can  be  detected.  But,  as
Dr.  Teller  testified,  "by  testing  small  explosions,  one  is learn-
ing  more and  more  about  the  way How [sic]  bigger  explosions
can  be  hidden."   Dr.   Bethe  may  not  think  it  to  mankind's
advantage  to  make  an  enforcible  test  cessation  agreement  im-
possible  by  discovering  methods  for  eluding   inspection.
Another  important  point  emerges  from  Dr.  Teller's  testi-
mony.   The  present  stage  of  development  makes  limited  nu-
clear  war  a  dubious  proposition.   Dr.   Teller   disparages  the
danger  of  radioactive fallout  from  tests  but  that  from  nuclear
weapons  in  war-time,  he  admitted,  "can  have  and  I  think  will
have  devastating  consequences."    The   fallout  might   destroy
our  own  troops  and  the  land  and  people  they were defending.
Do  We  Want  That  "Clean"  Bomb?
Limited   nuclear  warfare   requires  a  "clean"  bomb,  i.e. a
thermonuclear  fusion  bomb,  which  can  be  exploded   without
a  trigger  of  "dirty"  fissionable  material.   We  have  yet  to  find
a  way  to  make such  a  bomb,  nor  are  we  sure  it  can  be  done.
"If  we stop  nuclear  tests,"  Dr.  Teller  testified,  "then  we  have
made  a  further  step  in  the  direction  of  making  the  use  of
nuclear  explosives  very  difficult  and  virtually  impossible  even
in  a  limited  way."  But,  to  paraphrase  those  war-time  travel
ads,  is  this  further  step  necessary?
Dr.  Bethe  may  feel  that  we  would  be  better  off  if  spared
this  new  model  bomb.   For  one  thing,   its  cleanliness   is  in
doubt;   fusion   also   produces   radioactivity.    For   another,   it
would  put  limitless  boom-boom  in  the  hands  of  the  smallest
nations.    Thermonuclear  raw  materials  are  cheap  and  wide-
spread;  the  facilities  for  production,  unlike  the  huge  plants
required   for   fissionable   materials,   could   be   easily  hidden.
Policing  of  output  will  be  impossible.
Dr.  Teller's  idea  is  that  by  giving  out  small  nuclear  weap-
ons  to  our  small  allies  they  could  hold  off  attacks  by  "hordes"
of   Russians  or   Chinese.    But  what   if   the   hordes   are   also
equipped,  as  they  will  be  if  testing  continues,  with  the  same
weapons?   And  what  if  our  allies  use  these  weapons  in  feuds
with  their  own  neighbors?    Life  on  this  plant   will  not  be
safer  when  these  new  firecrackers  are  available.
The  Bethe  and  Teller  points  of  view  were  argued  out  at
the  White  House  last  spring.   The  President  decided  that  the
safer   course  was  to  try  and  negotiate   an  end  to  tests   alto-
gether.   The  Geneva  talks  were  initiated  as  a  result  of  that
decision.  Will  the  Democrats  now  take  up  the  arguments  Ike
rejected  and,  without  persevering  in  the  current  talks,  ditch
them  for  the  Teller-Gore  proposal?
I.   F.   Stone   Speaks   on:   Can  We   Stop   The   Drift   to   World   War   III?
Milwaukee:  Turners   Hall,  1034 N.   4th   St.,  Dee. 5,  8:30 p.m.
Detroit:  McGregor   Center,  Wayne  State   Univ.,  2d  Blvd.  &  Ferry,  Dec.  6,  8:30  p.m.
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,
renew  (or  enter)
.................................
gift  sub  for  $2  (6
Name  .....................
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
...... Zone..._.. .....State.. ..................
moe.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
12/1/08
................................ .........Zone.. ....... ...State.. ..................
we  send  gift   announcement?       Yes  D    No.  Q
I. E  Stones  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED