I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jun30.pdf

============================================================

Nuclear  Give-Away  Passed
How  A  Bill  to  Speed  Up  the  Atomic  Arms  Race  Went  Through  An  Indifferent  Congress,  Pages  2  &  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  25JUNE  30,   1958
•>«>'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Did  Attorney   General  Rogers   Make  A  Deal  on  Civil  Rights  to   Get   Confirmation?
How  to  Meet  the  New  Crisis  Arising  Over  Little  Rock
Five  years  ago,  when  Mr.  Justice  Douglas  stayed  the  execu-
tion  of  the  Rosenbergs, the  Supreme  Court  was  specially con-
voked  by  Chief  Justice  Vinson  on  application  of   the  Attor-
ney  General.  The  Justices were  hastily  recalled  from  vacation
and  met  within   24  hours;  the   stay  was  overruled  next  day.
A  decade  ago,  in  the  war-time  summer  of   1942,  when   the
eight  Nazi  saboteurs appealed  from  their  death  sentences  on
habeas  corpus,  Chief  Justice  Stone  called  the  Supreme  Court
into  special  session within  48  hours  and  handed  down  a  final
decision  two  days later.  We  propose  that  a  group  of  eminent
lawyers  petition  the  President  to  instruct  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  to  intervene in  the  Little  Rock  case  and  ask  the  Supreme
Court  to act with  similar  dispatch this summer upon  the  school
board  appeal.   The  Republic  would  not  have  been  shaken  if
the  blood  lust in  the  Rosenberg  case  had  gone  unslaked  a  few
months  longer.   But  there  are  compelling  reasons  to  settle  the
Little  Rock  litigation  once  and  for  all  in  our  highest  tribunal
before  the  new  school  year  opens.   The  Lemley  decision,  for
the  first  time  allowing  deliberate speed   backu'tird  on  integra-
tion,  may  otherwise  set  off  a  chain  reaction  that  could  end  by
tearing  this  country  apart.   To  hand  the  racists  a  victory,  to
undermine  what  is  left   of   the   Southern  moderates,  to  em-
bitter  the  Negro,  to  make  hoodlums  and  juvenile  delinquents
believe  they  can  overawe  the  law—this  is  what  Judge  Lemley
did.    This  is what  the  Supreme  Court  alone  can  reverse.
Explosive   Potentialities
A  stay  of  the  Lemley  order  by  the  Eighth  Circuit  Court  of
Appeals  pending  argument  on  the  merits  next  Fall  will  not
meet  the  crisis.   So  long  as  there  is  any  chance  that  the  Lem-
ley  order  suspending  integration  in  Little  Rock  for  two  and  a
half  years might  be  upheld  on  appeal,  it  will  be  hard  to  keep
discipline  within  and  without  the  Little   Rock   high   school.
A  Federal  District  Judge  has  ruled  that  somehow,  when   the
law  is  defied   long  enough,  the  defiance  becomes  lawful.   In-
tegration  will  be  enforcible   nowhere   in  the  South,   with   or
without  Federal   troops,   so  long  as  it  is  felt  that   racist  stu-
dents  within  the  schools  can  force  suspension  of  court  orders
by   terrorizing  Negro  students   and   disrupting   school   work.
The  mob  within  the  school  becomes  more  effective  than   the
mob  without.    Southern   white   moderates   who,   up   to   now,
have  had  left  the  one  argument  of  obedience  to  law,  are  un-
dercut   by  the   possibility  that   Federal   judges   may  in   some
cases   reward   disobedience.    The   integration   fight   entered   a
new  and  more  dangerous  phase  with  the  Lemley  decision.   It
is  hard  to  see  how  the  explosive  potentialities  can  now  be  re-
pressed  unless  the  highest   organs   of  government,   the  Presi-
Warning  on  the  Right  to  Travel
Our  first  reports  last  week  on  the  passport  situation
in  the   wake  of  the  Supreme  Court  decision  were  too
optimistic.   There  is  danger  that  restrictive  travel  leg-
islation  will   pass  at  this  session.    The  State  Depart-
ment's   action   to    drop    the    non-Communist    affidavit
without   waiting  for  the  Court's  formal   mandate  is  a
red  rag  to  the  rightists.   Five  different  Congressional
committees   now  have  bills   to   curtain   passports  and
friends  of  the  right  to  travel  had  better  bestir  them-
selves.   The  Senate  Foreign  Relations   Com mi ltd
1
  will
hold  two  days  of  public  hearing  on  the  subject  July  9
and  10  (not  July  7  as  incorrectly reported  in  the  daily
press).    East land  has  introduced  the  most  sweepingly
restrictive  measure of  all  and is  in  position to  report  it
out   without  hearings  from   his  Senate  Judiciary Com-
mittee.   Walter  has  a  similar bill  in  the  House.   Racist
and  reactionary feeling  against  the  Supreme  Court  is
so  great  that  any  bill  which  seems  to  hit  the  Court  is
likely   to  pass  once  it  gets  out  of   the  floor  of  either
House.   Watch  next   week's  issue  for  a  full   report  on
the  new  travel  bills.
1  0
dent,  the  Attorney  General  and  the  Supreme  Court,  act  with
dignity  and  decision.
No  Need  to  Wait  for  the  8th  Circuit
There  is  no  need  to  wait  for  action  by  the  Eighth  Circuit.
Rule  20  of  the  Supreme  Court  provides  for  direct  appeal   to
our  highest  tribunal  "upon  a  showing  that  the  case  is  of  such
imperative  public  importance  as  to  justify  the  deviation  from
normal  appellate  processes   and   to  require  immediate  settle-
ment  in  this  court."   This  rule  was  invoked  for  direct  appeals
to  the  Supreme  Court  when  Truman   seized  the  steel  indus-
try   and   again   when   John   L.  Lewis  and  the   mine  workers
refused  to  obey  an  anti-strike  injunction.   It  was  used  during
the  New   Deal  period   in   suits   to   test   the   validity  of   the
Guffey  coal  act,  railroad  retirement  pensions  and  the  suspen-
sion  of  gold  payment.   None  of  these  cases  called  as  urgently
as  does  Little  Rock  for  swift  final  action  in  our  highest  court.
The  situation  in  Little  Rock  is  peculiarly  the   responsibility
of  the  bar.   A  widening  breakdown   of   law  and   order  may
be  a  consequence  and  there  is  no  sign  visible here  of   leader-
ship  from  the  White  House  unless  lawyers  whose  names  com-
mand  public  respect  focus  attention   on  the  danger  and   press
for  action.   The  President  was  his  most  charming  self   during
his  conference  last  Monday  with  the  four  Negro  leaders  but
they  got  nothing.    Martin  Luther  King  told  the  press   after-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  30, 1958
Administration  Mendacity,  Public  Apathy  and  Liberal  Timidity
The   Congress  of  the  United  States  probably  never  passed
more  important  legislation  with  less  debate  upon  it  than  in
the  case  of  the  so-called  nuclear  give-away bill.   Though  this
lays   the   legal   foundations  for   establishing  nuclear  missile
bases  in  Europe  and  training our  allies  to  fight  a war  in  which
nuclear   weapons   would   be   "conventional,"   and   though   it
will  speed  up  the  process  of  initiating  more  nations  into  the
nuclear  arms  club,  it  passed  the  Senate  June  23  on  a  voice
vote with  about  a  dozen  Senators  present.   A  few  days  earlier,
on  June  19,  it  had  passed  the  House  after  a  short  debate  in
which  some  misgivings  were  expressed  to  the  few  members
(not   more  than  50  to  70  at  any  one  time)   in  attendance.
When  the  membership  was  hastily  summoned  for  a  roll-call,
the  vote  was  345-12  in  favor  of  the  bill.
Humphrey   and  Morse  Silent
This   meagre   discussion   and   lopsided   vote   reflected   the
mendacity  with  which  the  Administration  presented  this  bill
last  January as  a  mere  matter  of  sharing  scientific  information,
the  numbed  apathy  of  public  opinion,   and   the  timidity  of
Four  Wars   In  One  Lifetime   Enough
"I  am  76  years  old,  and  in  my  lifetime   the  youth  of
my   country   has   four   times  responded  to  the  call  of
arms  in  four  major  wars. ...  I  do  not  know  that  the
vote  I  shall  cast  today  will   be  the  right  vote,  but  I
know  that  I  can  vote  in  no  other  way  and  continue  to
live  with  myself. ...  I  do  believe  in  the  sharing  of
scientific  knowledge.  . . .  But I  read  in this  bill  nothing
to  indicate  that  this  to  be  a  sharing  in  knowledge  for
anything  except  military  application.  .  .  .  What  is  pro-
posed  now is  to encourage  other  nations  to  load  up  with
atomic  weapons  and  to  increase  their   power  of   pro-
ducing  them. ...  At  the  present  time  we are  reaching
'for  an  understanding  so  that  the  atomic  weapon  can
be  outlawed   forever.    It  may  be  that  the  progress  is
slow,  but  we  are  not  going  to  help  that  progress  by
encouraging   other   nations   to   get   into   the   race   of
building   more   and  more   atomic  weapons."
—O'Hara   (D.    111.)  against   the  nuclear   give-away,
before   the House  voted, June  19.
most  liberals  in  Congress  who  fear  to  go  beyond  safe  cliches
in  challenging  the  Administration   on  military  policy.   So  in
the  House,  Reuss  of  Wisconsin,  who  leads  a  maverick  group
on  foreign  policy,  sat  silent  and  voted  for  the  bill.   In  the
Senate,  Humphrey—who  has  made  a  reputation  during  the
past  six  months  as  chairman  of  a  disarmament subcommittee
The  Senate  as  Rubber  Stamp
"I  believe   we   can   understand   how   conditions   have
changed  when  we  realize  that   only   a  few  years   ago,
when  the  Cole-Hickenlooper  bill  was  before  the  Senate
for  consideration   we  spent  13  days  debating  the  Dixon-
Yates  contract,   which  was,  at  most,   a  question  of  the
loss  of  some   money   and  perhaps  the  loss  of   a  little
property.
"Today,   when  the   proposal  is   made   to  transfer   to
other  nations  a  substantial  number   of  atomic  secrets,
we  have   reached   the  point   where  we  have  present  in
the  Senate  only  four  or  five  members  of  the  Joint  Com-
mittee   on   Atomic   Energy   and   they   are   already    so
familiar  with  the  subject   that  there  may  be  very  little
discussion  of  it,  and  it  is  desired  to  pass  the  bill  in  a
matter  of  a  few  minutes,  without  any  debate  or  recall."
—Anderson,    to   the   almost    empty    Senate   which
passed  the  atomic  give-away  bill,  June  23.
—was conspicuous  by his  absence.  Though  this  bill will  speed
up  the  arms  race,  Humphrey  has  said  not  one  word  on  the
matter  in  all  the  weeks  it  has  been  before  Congress.   Morse
was  also  silent.   Hennings  of  Missouri  was  the  only  liberal  in
the  Senate  who  rose  in  support  of  Anderson's  one-man  fight
to  write  more  safeguards  into  the  bill,  and  tried  to  add  an
amendment  of  his  own.  The  text  in  the  Congressional  Record
in   its  bareness  nakedly  reveals  the   abdication   of   those   to
whom  we  have  looked  in  the  past  to  express  the  better  con-
science  of  the  country.
To  Congressman   Frank  Thompson,   Jr.   (D.  N.  /.)    goes
the  honor  of  waging  a  one-man  fight  in  the  House  for  two
amendments  which  would  have  added   important  safeguards
to  the  bill.   One  would  have  written  directly  into  the  bill  a
strict   definition   of  the  vague  phrase  "substantial   progress,"
evidence  of   which   is  required   before  another   country   can
qualify   for   nuclear   weapons   materials   and   restricted   data.
The   other   would   have   required   the   Joint   Committee   on
Atomic  Energy  to  make  a  report  to  the  Congress  within  30
days  on  any  nuclear  sharing  agreement  submitted  to  it  under
this  legislation.   Both  amendments  were  defeated.
A  major  reason  for  the  weak  position  taken  by  the  liberals
in  the  House,   notably  Congressmen   Porter   of   Oregon,   and
James   Roosevelt   of   California,   who  voted   for   it   after   ex-
pressing  doubts,  was  the  reassuring  attitude  of  Congressman
Holifield  of  California.   The  latter  performed  a  public  serv-
ice in  focussing  attention  on  the  dangers  in  this  bill,  but  sup-
ported  the  bill  on  the  floor  after  winning  certain  changes  in
Legislating  in  the  Dark  for  New  Horrors  of  Nuclear-Bacteriological  Warfare
Mr.  ANDERSON.    What  is  meant  by  the  words  'other  ap-
plications   of   atomic   energy'   [in   the   nuclear   give-away
bill] ?
Mr.  PASTORE.   .  .  .  Subsection  114 b  (5)  has  to  do  with
information   pertaining  to  biological  and  isotopic  elements
within  the  atomic   energy   field.   When  we  tried  to  tie  the
military   witnesses  down   precisely  as  to  what   it  meant,  I
will  admit  to  the  Senator  from  New  Mexico  they  could  not
be  too certain,  because  it  was  rather  speculative. ...  I had
in  mind  particularly   the  testimony   of  General  Loper.  .  .  .
Mr. ANDERSON.   No.   The  general  said  it  applied  to  iso-
topes  in  medicine.  .  .  .
Mr.  PASTORE.    The  witnesses  .  .  .  were  a  little  fearful,
now  that  we  have  reached  the  stage  of  using  isotopes  and
are  talking  about  bacteriological  warfare,  that  there  might
be  involved   something  which   might  come  close  enough  to
the  line  of  restricted  data,  so  that   they  might  not  legally
be  able  to  discuss  it  with  an  ally.  .  .  .
Mr.  ANDERSON. AH over  the  world  we  are  telling  people
how  we  are  trying  to  use  atomic  energy  for  medical  pur-
poses  and for  all  sorts  of  other  useful  purposes.  .  .  .  When
we   asked   them    [the    Defense   Dept.   witnesses]   what   it
meant,   they   said  there  might   be  some  biological   warfare
connected   with   it.
—Senate debate  June  23 on the  atomic give-away  bill.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  30,  1958
.  Explain  Why   Congress  Rubber-Stamped  the  Nuclear  Give-Away  Bill
committee.    The  original  bill  would  have  given  the  Admin-
istration   a  blank-check  to  give   out  what   Senator   Anderson
called  "nuclear  make-it-yourself  kits"  to  any  country  it  chose.
One   amendment  won   by  Holifield   and   Anderson   in   com-
mittee  was  the   "substantial   progress"    clause   added   to   the
provisions  authorizing  the  sharing   of   nuclear  materials  and
restricted  weapons   data.   The   other  was  a  clause   providing
that  any  sharing  agreement  could  be  vetoed  by  Congress   if
it  passed  a  concurrent  resolution  within  60  days.   If   Congress
does  not  act within that  period,  the  agreement  goes  into  effect.
Sixty  Days Too Little
Without   the   defeated   Thompson   amendment,    however,
there  is  nothing  to  keep  an  agreement  from  being  bottled  up
in  committee until  it  is too  late  to  act  on  it,  nor  to  prevent  the
leadership  in  either  house  from  blocking  a  vote  until  the  60
days  are  past.    Since  few   members  of   Congress  understand
what  this  bill  is  all  about  even  after   six  months,  it  is  un-
likely  that  they  would  prove  so  curious  and  militant  about  a
complicated  agreement   framed  under   it  as  to  force   passage
of  a  vetoing  resolution  in  60  days.
Unlike  Holifield,  Anderson  did  not  feel  obligated   to  sup-
port  the  bill  on  the  floor  in  return  for  the  concessions  won
in  committee.   He  introduced  three  amendments  in  the  Senate
and  got  two  accepted  but  with  the  understanding  that   their
The  12  Who  Voted   "No"    in  the   House
Abernethy   (D.  Miss.),   Bennett  (D.  Fla.),  Cunning-
ham   (R.  Nebr.),  Dent   (D.  Pa.),   Dooley   (R.  N.   Y.),
Dowdy  (D.  Tex.),  Mrs.  Green   (D.  Oreg.),  O'Hara  (D.
111.),   Wharton   (R.   N.   Y.),   Whitten   (D.   Miss.),  Wil-
liams  D.  Miss.),  Winstead  (D.  Miss.).
ultimate  fate  would   depend   on   action   in   conference   com-
mittee.   The  conference  committee,  which  will  have  the  task
of   reconciling  the   House   and   Senate  versions,  will   almost
certainly   reject   the  Anderson   amendments.    The   important
amendment  of  the  two  would  make  the  "substantial  progress"
clause  applicable   to  the  transfer  of  non-nuclear   components
of  atomic  weapons  as  well  as  to  the  nuclear  parts.   The  Ad-
ministration,  which  has  the  support   not  only  of  both  party
leaderships   but   of   the   liberals,   too,   will   fight   this   for   it
would   impede   the   establishment    of   atomic   missile   bases
abroad.   The  missiles  are  non-nuclear  components   to  which
nuclear  war  heads  would  be  fitted  if  war  breaks  out.
Only   Russell   and  Dworshak   Protested
"I  shall  vote  against  the  pending  bill. ...  I  have
consistently    rejected   the    argument   that    it   would
strengthen  the  free  world  to  disseminate  more  widely
information   about  the   making  of   atomic  weapons  or
by  distributing  atomic  weapons  to  those  who  are  asso-
ciated  with  us  in  various  pacts  or  treaties.  .  .  .  The
Senate,  by  a  substantial  majority,  has  accepted  every
thesis  of  sharing  or  giving  which  has  been  advanced
by  the  Department of  State.   It  is  bad  enough  in  other
fields,  Mr.  President,  but  in  this  field  I  regard  it   as
being  particularly   tragic."
—Russell,  chairman Senate  Military   Affairs,    on  pas-
sage  of   the   atomic  give-away   bill,  June   25.
Only  Two  Newspapers   Spoke  Out
The  fight  against  this  bill  was  impeded  by  the  attitude  of
the  press.   Except  for  the  Chicago  Tribune  and  the  St.  Louis
Post-Dispatch,  no  other   major   newspaper   to  my   knowledge
opposed   the  bill  or  even  covered  its  provisions   adequately.
The  ADA,  by  supporting  the  bill,  largely  due  to  the   influ-
ence  of   former   State  Department   Counsellor   Benjamin   V.
Cohen,  affected  the  attitude of  Senators  like  Humphrey   whom
it  influences.    The  National   Committee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear
Policy,  the  Women's  International  League  for  Peace  and  Free-
dom,  and  the  Friends  Committee  on  National  Legislation  de-
serve  a  salute  for  their  hard  work  against  the  bill.   We  our-
selves  were  immensely heartened  by the  flood  of  letters  asking
extra  copies  of  our  special  issue  of  June  23  on  the  legisla-
tion;  close  to  10,000   extra  copies  were   circulated.
All  that  was  done  in  the  fight  against  the  bill  may  help  to
alert  more  people   for   an   effective   campaign   when   the  first
nuclear   sharing   agreements   come   before   Congress.      Gen-
erally  speaking,  we  see  no  objection  to  sharing  with   Great
Britain,  which  is  already  a  thermonuclear  power.    But   there
will  still  be  a  fighting  chance  to  slow  up  the  emergence  of
new   nuclear  powers  when   agreements  with   other   countries
come  up  under  the  60-day  provision  next  year.  There  is  also
the  possibility,  foreshadowed  by  a  New   York   Times  editorial
June  21  that  the  Administration  might  be  emboldened  by  the
indifference  of  Congress  to  ask  next  year  for  the   restoration
of  the  "blank  check"  in  the  original  bill.  The  fight  is  not  yet
over.   Now  is  the  time  to  intensify  public  education   on  nu-
clear  issues.
A  Supporter  of  the  Atomic  Give-Away Bill  Explains  How  It  Will  Cut  Down  Testing
Mr.  FARBSTEIN. Is  it  the  opinion of  the  gentleman that
the  passage  of  this  bill  will  very  likely  reduce  the  number
of  nuclear  test  explosions?
Mr.   HOSMER   [a   member  of   the   Joint  Committee  on
Atomic  Energy].   Let  us  look  at  it  this  way.  .  .  .  The  rea-
son  we  possessed  the  [nuclear]  weapons  earlier  than  any-
body  else  was  because we  had  the  resources,  the  money and
the  manpower to  go  ahead  and  do  the  job.  These  other  na-
tions  can  do  it  on  a  slower  basis.   A  lot  of  them  feel  that
with  an  atomic  armed  enemy,  such  as  the  Soviets,  if  they
are  not  made nuclear  capable by  us  they  are  going  to  have
to  go  out  and  do  it  on  their  own  and  to  do  it  on  their  own
they  are  going  to  have  to  test.   If  we  give  them  that  nu-
clear  capability,  they  will  not  have  to  go  out  and  do  that,
they  are  not  going  to  have  to  have  these  tests.   By   'nu-
clear  capability'  I  do not  mean  the  capability  to  blow  up  a
bomb  whenever  they  feel   like  it.   That  is  not  the  point.
We  keep  possession  of  these  weapons.   But  with  their  de-
livery  systems  and  these  weapons  of  ours,  if   the  whistle
blows,  the  two  can  be  hooked  together   and  used  for  our
mutual  defense  against  the  other  fellow  who  already  has
them.
Mr.   PARBSTEIN.   Then,  I   understand,  the   gentleman
draws  the  reasonable  conclusion  that  the  passage   of   this
bill  will require less  nuclear tests;  is  that  correct?
Mr.  HOSMER.   Undoubtedly.  .  .  .
—House  Debate  on the  Nuclear  Give-Away,  June  19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  30, 1958
Harry   Ashmore,   Courageous   Arkansas   Editor,   Puts  the   Spotlight   on  A  Strange   Scene
What  Made  Eastland,  Ervin  and Johnston  So  Happy  With  Rogers?
(Continued   from   Page    One)
ward   there  were  still  white  Southerners   who   did   not   dare
act on  the  local  level  but  would  respond  to  an  invitation  from
the  White  House   for  an  inter-racial conference.    This  could
break   the  pall  of  fear  settling  on  the  South,  cutting  off  not
only   communication   between   the   races   but   free   discussion
among  white  men  themselves.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Mr.
Eisenhower  will  act  in  this  sphere  or   in  any  other   without
pressure.   A  dozen   leading  lawyers  could   by  a  dramatic  ap-
peal  now  save  the  country  much  agony  later.
More  Precious  Than  Vicuna
There  is  a  further,  disturbing, reason  for  applying  pressure.
It  lies  in  the  new  Attorney General,  the  young  man  with  the
closed   and   non-committal  face   in   that   group   picture  of   a
smiling   President   ami   his   four   gratified   Negro  visitors   at
the  White  House.   Harry  Ashmore,  the  courageous   executive
editor  of   the  Arkansas  Gazette,   in   a   recent   speech   to   the
Nieman   fellows  at  Harvard   (now   printed   in  the  June  issue
of   Harpers)    implies  that   something   more   precious  than   a
vicuna  coat  or  an   orient.il   rug   passed   between   Mr.   Rogers
and  the  dominant  Southerners  on  the  Senate  Judiciary  Com-
mittee  as  the  price  of   his  unexpectedly  smooth  confirmation
earlier  this  year  as  Attorney   General.
Nfr.   Ashmore  says  that  the  most   important  part  of   what
he   calls   "The    Untold   Story   Behind   Little   Rock"   occurred
here  in  Washington.    He  accuses  the  Administration  of   leav-
ing  to  the  Little  Rock  School   Board   "the   entire  burden  of
carrying  out  the  court  order  against   impossible  odds."    He
notes  that  Mr.  Rogers  after  taking  office  said  there  were  no
plans   for   further   legal   action   in   Little   Rock   and   that   the
Administration   would   not   ask   for   additional    civil    rights
legislation  this  session,  "a  matter  of  some  moment   since  the
Justice   Department    had   previously    used   as   an   excuse   for
inaction  at  Little  Rock  the  failure  of   the   enforcement    pro-
visi-Mis  in  the  last  civil  rights  bill."   Mr.  Ashmore  notes  that
following   these   assurances  Mr.   Rogers   appeared   before   the
Senate  Judiciary  Committee  "and   was  recommended   for  con-
firmation  without  a  single  question  being  addressed   to  him
regarding  his  past  or  future  course  in  the  Little  Rock  case."
Mr.   Ashmore   refers   to   this  as   "one   of   the   most  singular
political  deals  in  recent  years."
A Striking  Contrast
At   the  Senate  Judiciary   Committee  rooms   this  week,   we
read   the   (as   yet   unpublished)    transcript   of   Mr.   Rogers'
hearing  and  of  that  accorded W.  Wilson  White,  still awaiting
confirmation   as  Assistant  Attorney  General   in  charge  of   the
new  civil  rights  division.    Mr.  White  was  subjected   to   two
days  of  fierce  questioning  on  Little  Rock  by  Senators  Ervin,
Eastland  and  Johnston,  and   is  still  awaiting  recall   for   more
of   the   same  from   McClellan.   But  his  superior   officer,    Mr.
Rogers,  did—as  Mr.  Ashmore charges —receive  strikingly dif-
ferent   treatment.   His   one   day  hearing  was  taken   up  with
questions  by  liberal  Senators  on   anti-trust  and    Dixon-Yates
and   Sherman   Adams's   peculiar  claim  of   executive   privilege
in  that  scandal.   Ervin,  Eastland and  Johnston  asked  no  ques-
tions  of   Rogers.     The   only  remark  was  by  Frvin  who  said
he  would  not  ask  Mr.  Rogers  any  questions  "because  it  would
be  too  much  to  hope  for,  to  hope  that  the  Attorney  General
would  undertake  the  same  sound  views  on  all  subjects   that
I  am  Liking."   The  transcription  at  this  point  notes  laughter.
It  would  be  good  to  know  exactly  what  was  the  joke  that
kept  Ervin,  Eastland  and  Johnston  so  happy  that  day   about
the   new   Attorney  General.   That   scene   is,  if   we   may  mix
our   metaphor,  the  Achilles  heel   of   the   Administration.   By
pressing  on  it,  the  Attorney  General  may  be  forced   to  inter-
vene  as  a   friend   of   the   court   in   the  Little   Rock   litigation,
to  bring  some  action  against  the  mob  leaders   who  acted  in
contempt  of  the  Court's  orders   last  Fall,  and  to  speed  swift
action  by  the  Supreme  Court.   Is  there  a  liberal  Senator  with
the  nerve  to  violate  Senatorial  de  rigeur  and  invite  attention
to  that  cozy  scene  last  January  22  before  the  Senate  Jfudiciary
Committee?
We'll   Supply   Extra  Copies   of   This   Issue  Free  to  Any  Lawyer  You  Think  Should  See  It
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ...........
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street    ...........
City      .............
Shall   we  send
Weekly,   5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.............. .............Zone...... ......State........ ........_
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)   additional:
6/30/5S
................... ........Zone........... .State..................
gift   announcement?     Yes  Q    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
F    Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Seconii   Clasa   Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  niuler  the  Act  of   March  3,  1870.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  oi  August  and  December  fit   5f!18  Nebraska  s ve..  N.  W..  Washington  15, D.  C.
An    Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
f,   In  th   U.  H.;  $0  In   Canada;  $10  elsewh-'e.     Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED