I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958mar17.pdf

============================================================

Will   We  Give  Out Nuclear  Arms  Wholesale?  P.  2
Scientist  Accuses  Dr.  Teller  of  "Willful  Distortion"  in  "Blind  Hatred"  of  the  USSR,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's Weekly
VOL.   VI.  NO.  11
MARCH  17,  1958
i'<"      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  the AEC Retracted  that  Falsehood on Nuclear Testing
On  Thursday night,  March  6,  the  AEC  released  its  first  of-
ficial  account  of  the  underground  nuclear  test  last  September
19  in  Nevada.   On  page  6  there  appeared  this  description:
"When  the  device  was  detonated,  only  a  few  persons  of
many   who  witnessed   the   event  from   the   forward   control
area,  2'/o  miles  from  the  ground  zero,  felt  any  earth  shock,
and   off-site   the  earth  movement  was  so  slight  that  it  could
be  recorded  only  on  extremely  sensitive  seismological   instru-
ments.   The  earth  waves  were  recorded  at  seismological  sta-
tions  at  Los  Angeles, about  250  miles,  air  line,  from  the  shot
mesa.     This  was  the  maximum  distance  at  which  the  shot
was   recorded."
Was Stassen  Wrong?
The  italics  are  added.   If  that  italicized statement  was  true,
then  Harold  Stassen had  seriously misinformed the  Humphrey
subcommittee   the   preceding  Friday.    For   in   his  testimony
(as   reprinted  in   our   last   week's   issue),   Mr.   Stassen  said
"that  very  small  nuclear  shot  that  was  put  out  underground
in  last  year's  test  was  recorded  in  every  seismic  instrument
within  a  thousand  miles."    If  the  AEC  was  right,  Mr.  Stas-
sen  was  also  wrong  in  asserting  that  inspection  stations  at
500  mile  intervals  could  detect  secret  underground   tests.
On  Friday  morning  I  phoned  the  AEC  press  office  to  ask
how  it  reconciled that  250  mile  claim with  dispatches carried
hy  the  New   York  Times  the  morning  after  the  underground
test   from  Toronto   and  Rome  reporting  that  seismic  stations
an  those  cities  had  picked  up  the  Nevada  explosion.   I  was
promised  an  answer  later.
As Far North  As  Alaska
In   the   meantime,  in  the   Coast   and   Geodetic   Survey  at
the  Commerce  Department,   I  was  told   that  U.  S.  govern-
ment   seismologists   doubted   the  Rome  and  Toronto  claims.
I  was  told  that  the  Nevada  underground  test  was,  however,
detected  as  far  away  as  Fairbanks,  Alaska,  about  2300  miles
north  and  at  Fayetteville,  Ark.,  about  1,240  miles  east.   Coast
and  Geodetic seemed to  be unaware of  the  AEC release.  When
told  that  their  records  conflicted  with  the   AEC  claim,  of-
ficials  would  not  discuss  the  matter.   But  shortly  afterward
the   AEC  press   office   phoned   to  say  "there  certainly  were
seismic   signals   at   greater   distances"   than   250   miles,   that
Coast  and  Geodetic  claimed  to  have  picked  up  the  test  in
Alaska,   that   perhaps   misunderstanding   had   been   created
because the  AEC release  spoke  of  "shocks"  rather  than seismic
signals  but  that  I  would  be  given  a  definite  answer  Monday.
While  waiting  for  the  AEC's  answer  on  Monday,  I  got  a
list  of  19  seismic  stations  in  the  United   States  and   Canada
more  than  250  miles  from   the  Nevada   test  site  which  are
definitely   known  to   have   recorded   that   underground   test.
Armed  with this,  I  set  out  to  get  the  reply promised  by AEC.
A  Reluctant  Correction
At  the  AEC  there  was  reluctance  to  issue  a  correction.    At
one  time  during  the  day  it  was  proposed   only  to  drop   the
final  sentence  of  the  passage  quoted   above,   "This  was  the
maximum  distance  at  which  the  shock  was  recorded."   But
this  would  still  have  left   the  impression  that  Los  Angeles,
250   miles  away,  was  the   farthest  point   of   record.   With
public  hearings  soon  to  be  held  by  the  Humphrey  disarma-
ment  subcommittee  on  nuclear  testing  and  its  detection,  there
was  danger  this  deceptive  release  might  be   investigated.
Finally,  late  in  the  afternoon,  the  AEC  issued  a  "note  to
editors  and  correspondents"   asking  them  to  "delete  the  last
two  sentences  of  the  second  paragraph  oh  page  6"   of   the
March  6  release  and  to  substitute  the   following   sentence:
"Seismological  stations  of  the  U.  S.  Coast  and  Geodetic   Sur-
vey  as  far   away  as  College   (near  Fairbanks)   Alaska,   about
2,320  miles  from   the  shot  mesa  recorded  the  earth  waves."
That  was  all.
Few  Got the  Significance
This   vague   bulletin   attracted   little   attention.     Tuesday's
papers  carried  no  mention of  it.   But  Wednesday,  at  my  press
time,  when  these  final  lines  were  revised,  the  news  of   the
correction  finally  hit   the  papers,   thanks  to  a  press   release
given  out  by  Senator  Humphrey  calling  attention  to  it.   We
hope  the  Senator  will  investigate  the  incident  in  his  forth-
coming  public  hearings  on  testing.   Were  it  not  for  the  pub-
licity  achieved  by  his  own  press  release,   few  people   would
know  of  the  correction.   The   AEC  document,   even   as  cor-
rected,  is  deceptive.   It  still  says  the  "earth  movement  was  so
slight  that  it  could   be  recorded  only  on  extremely   sensitive
seismological   instruments."    The  unwary  reader  might  easily
imagine  that  the  Alaska  recording  was  a  freak  of  sensitivity.
No  one  would  know  from  the  AEC  statement  even  as  cor-
rected  that  Alaska  was  only  one  of   19  stations  more  than
250  miles  away  which  detected  the  test,  nor  that  it  was  also
recorded  as  far  east  as  Arkansas,  1200  miles  away.  The   New
York   Times   dispatch   from   Nevada   the  morning  after   the
explosion  last  September  said  AEC  scientists  "predicted  that
the  explosion  would  not  be  detectable  more  than  a  few  hun-
dred  miles  away."   This  is  what  the  AEC  would   still  like
the  public  to  believe  in  its  campaign  to  sell  the  idea  that  nu-
clear  tests  can  be  held  in  secret.   The  false  press  release  with
its  reluctant and  inadequate  correction  deserves  a  fuller  airing.
4  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F. Stnne's  Weekly,  March  17, 1958
Clearing  the  Way  to  Make  Nuclear  Arms  Universal,  Nuclear War  Inescapable
Cong. Holifield  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  Secret  Hearings  to  Revise  Atomic  Law
By  Congressman  Chet  Holifield
On  January  27,  1958,  the  chairman  of  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission   delivered  to   Congress   a  legislative  draft   of   a
bill  to  amend  the  Atomic  Energy  Act  of  1954.   The  letter  of
transmittal  stated  that  the  draft  had   been   approved   by  the
Bureau  of  the  Budget,  the  legislative  clearing  house  for   the
President  and  his  Administration.  Our   Committee  has  been
holding  hearings  on  the  two  bills,  S.  3165  and  H.  R.   10348,
in  executive session.  .  . .
Among  other  things  the  legislation  provides  for,
1.  The   transfer   of   atomic   weapon   information   to   other
nations.     (Weapon   design    blueprints).
2.  The  transfer  of   'special  nuclear  material'  to  other  na-
tions  for   military  purposes,   (the   basic  bomb  material,  plu-
tonium  and  U  235).
3.  The   transfer   of   non-nuclear   weapons   components   to
other  nations  (the  electro-mechanical hardware  of  an  atomic
bomb).
4.  The   transfer   of   weapon   delivery  systems   (this   could
mean  cannons, atomic weapons,  bombing  planes,  missiles  and
submarines).    [Parentheses  are  in  the  original  text—IPS.]
One Man's  Decision
The  legislative  draft  places  responsibility  for  international
transfer  of  atomic  weapon  information,  parts  and  bomb  ma-
terials  on  the  President  of  the  United  States.
If   this  legislation   becomes  law  we  enter  a  new  phase  of
international   peril.    We   cross   the   threshold   on   a  journey
from  which  there  may  be  no  return.    The  proponents  of  this
step  claim  it  is  necessary  to  save  the  crumbling NATO.   It  is
a  most  important  step.   It  should  receive  wide  publicity  and
serious  debate  in  the  Congress  and  in  every  forum  of  public
opinion.  . . .
Should   the   power   of   distribution  of   atomic  weapons   to
other  nations  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  one  man  —   even
though  he  be  a  good  man—the  President  of  a  great  nation—
a  great  democratic  nation?   Or,  should  the  problem   of  dis-
tributing  nuclear  weapons  be  decided  through    Congressional
consideration  and  debate  under  the  treaty  process?  .  .  .
Three   nations  now  possess   atomic-hydrogen  weapons,   the
_U.  S.,  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  and^ Great  Britain.   Until  now  we  have
hoped  that  a  safe  agreement  to  prevent  a  nuclear  war  could
be  arranged  between  these  three  nations.  .  .  .  This  legisla-
tion  allows  the  U  S.  (through  presidential  decision)  to  open
the  door  to  creating  a  fourth  atomic  nation,  a  fifth,  a  sixth,
and  many  more.
This  warning  by  Congressman  Holifield   (D.  Cal.),  a
member  of  the  Joint  Committee   on  Atomic  Energy,  is
from   a  speech   which   he   delivered    March   3  at   Ohio
State   University   in   Columbus.    The  press   elsewhere
seems  to  have  ignored   it.
Does  this mean  we  have given  up  our  hopes  for  a  peaceful
agreement  among  the  present  three  nations?   Does  it  mean
that  we  have  deserted  and  abandoned  the  logic  of  limiting
the  number  of  nations  possessing  atomic-hydrogen weapons,
while  we  negotiate for  a  safe  agreement  against  nuclear war?
An  Atomic  Pandora's Box
As  a  supporter  of  the  NATO  charter  for  collective secur-
ity,  I  am  aware  of  the  pressure  now  being  exerted  to  obtain
nuclear   weapons   from   our   allies  who   do   not   have   such
weapons.     I   believe   the   upgrading   of   collective   military
strength  is  necessary  if  NATO  is  to  be  preserved.   But  there
are  many  ways  to  strengthen NATO  .  .  .  without  opening  a
Pandora's  box  of  unknown  and  unpredictable woes.
I   believe  in  the  wide  exchange  of   scientific  information
and  realize  the  secrets  of  science  cannot  be  hidden  from  the
people   of   other   nations.    But   we   do   not   distribute   hand
grenades  to  our  children  and  hope  they  will  not  be  tempted
to  experiment.  .  .  .
The  question  of  deciding  who  the  "fourth  nation"   should
be  immediately  faces  us  when  we  remove  the  present  legis-
lative  restrictions.   The   first  nation  that   comes  to  mind  is
France,   and   then    possibly   West    Germany  .  .  .  NATO,
SEATO  and  other  nations  would  be  eligible.  .  .  .
We  can  be  sure  that  Mr.  Krushchev  will  make  the  most
of  this  event. ...  In  fancy,  I  can hear  Mr.  Krushchev  now:
".  .  .  We   have  zealously  guarded  the   custody   of   our  own
defensive   atomic  weapons.    Today,   the   U.  S.  Congress  and
their  President  enacted  a  law  permitting  the  distribution   of
atomic  hydrogen  weapons  to  all  their  allies,  .  .  .  One  care-
less  and  irresponsible  nation,  one  madman,  can  now   launch
the  third  great  war,  a nuclear war, which  will  destroy  civiliza-
tion.     I  charge  the  United  States  with  blame  for  such  a  war
when  it  occurs. ..."
What   would   be  the   impact  of   such  a   speech   on   India,
Japan,   and   the   other   uncommitted  nations   of   the   world?
Would   it  enhance   the  international  prestige   of   the   United
States,  or  would  it  place  us  on  the  defensive  in  world  opin-
ion?   Would   it   increase  or   decrease  the   likelihood   of   nu-
clear  war?
Dulles   Wants   Nuclear   Arms   Available
".  .  .  the  resourcefulness  of  those  who  serve  our  nation
in  the  field  of  science  and  weapon   engineering  now  shows
that  it  is  possible  to  alter  the  character  of  nuclear  weapons.
It  seems  now  that  their  use  need  not  involve  vast  destruc-
tion  and  widespread   harm  to  humanity.    Recent  tests  point
to  the  possibility  of  possessing   nuclear  weapons  the  de-
structiveness  and  radiation   effects  of  which  can  be   confined
substantially  to  predetermined  targets.
"In  the  future   it  may  thus  be  feasible  to  place  less  re-
liance   upon  deterrence  of  vast  retaliatory   power.   It  may
All  Around   "the   Sino-Soviet    Perimeter"
be  possible  to  defend  countries  by  nuclear  power  so  mobile,
or  so  placed,  as  to  make  military  invasion  with  conventional
forces  a  hazardous  attempt.  .  .  .
"Thus,  in  contrast  to  the  1950  decade,  it  may  be  that  by
the   1960   decade  the  nations   which   are   around  the  Sino-
Soviet   perimeter   can  possess  an  effective   defense  against
full-scale  conventional   attack  and thus  confront  any  aggres-
sor   with   the  choice  between   failing   or  himself   initiating
nuclear   war.  .  .  ."
—Secretary  Dulles, Foreign  Affairs,   October,  1957.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  17, 1958
Scientist  Sees  Bleak  Future  If  We  Do  Not  Negotiate  Arms  Control  Now
Dr. Teller  Accused  of  "Willful  Distortion" in  "Blind  Hatred" of  the  USSR
By  Dr. Harrison  Brown
Excerpted   from   the   Gideon   Seymour   memorial   lecture
March  9  at  the  University   of  Minnesota.    Dr.  Brown,  pro-
fessor   of  geochemistry   at  the   California    Institute   of   Tech-
nology,  worked  in  the  wartime  Manhattan   Project.
The   most  obvious  threat  to  our   survival  today  is  nuclear
war  with  the  Soviet  Union.   For  more  than  twelve  years  we
have  been  locked  in  an  arms  race  with  the  Russians.    Both
parties   in  this  race  fully   realize  that  war   between  them   is
a  very  real  possibility.
We   are  engaging   in  an  intensive  program   aimed  at  de-
veloping  a  variety  of  nuclear  anti-plane  and  anti-missile  de-
vices.   We  recognize  that  in  the  event  of  war  far  more  nu-
clear  explosives  may  be  detonated  in  the  process  of   defending
ourselves  than  in  striking  at  the  enemy.  We  recognize  further
that  the  radioactive  products  of   these  explosions   can   result
in   far   more   deaths   than   those   resulting  from   the   bombs
which  are  aimed  at  cities.   In  part  for  this   reason  we  have
been  working  intensively  on  the  development  of  a  so-called
'"clean"   H-bomb.
Statements Which  Can't Be  Checked
There  are  many  sincere  proponents  of  the   View  that  mas-
sive  preparations   for  massive  retaliation  and  for  limited  war
represent  the  only realistic path  towards  security  at  the  present
time.   Outstanding  among   these  proponents   is  a  group   of
men,  symbolized  in  the  public  mind  by  Dr.  Edward  Teller,
and  who  exerts  enormous  influence  upon  our  policies  in  this
area.    Indeed,  the  combination  of  Dr.  Teller's  position,   his
prestige,  his  knowledge  and  the  iron  wall  of   secrecy  which
enables   him   to   make   statements   which   cannot   easily   be
checked   or   refuted   by  critics  outside   and   often   inside   the
government,  gives   this  group   a  degree   of   influence  in   the
area  of  policy  formation  which  rivals  that  of   any  group  of
persons  in  our  country  in  modern   times.
It  is  amply  clear  that  he  is  convinced  that  any   agreement
on  our  part  aimed  at  achieving  some  degree  of  arms  limita-
tion  would  be  suicidal.   It  seems  clear  to  me  that  Dr.  Teller
is  motivated  by  a  deep-rooted   hatred   of   the   Soviet   Union
which   borders  .upon   the   fanatic.    From   this   hatred   there
stems   the  belief   that   no  agreement   with   the   Soviet   Union
can  be  relied  upon.   I  believe  this  blind  fear  can  in  the  long
run  lead  to  disaster.
At  this  point  I  should   like  to  make  my  position  with  re-
spect  to  the  Soviet  Union   clear.   I  dislike  her  form  of   gov-
ernment  as  intensely  as  I  dislike  any  totalitarian   regime.    I
believe  she  would,  if  given  the  opportunity,  dominate   the
world.   Her  recent  behaviour  in  Hungary  was  despicable.
But  I  do  not  believe  that  the  Soviet  leaders  are  stupid,  nor
that   they  are   necessarily  blinded   by  preconceived   goals   to
the   extent  that   they  would   attempt   to   achieve   those  goals
by  means which  would  seriously  jeopardize  their  own  security.
We  have  seen  that  the  policy  as  prescribed   by  Dr.  Teller
is  to  continue  the  arms  race  into  the  indefinite future.   Where
might   such  a  policy  take  us' in   the   long  run   if   by   some
miracle  catastrophe  does  not  intervene  in  the  meantime?
Recently  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  participating  in  a
series  of   discussions  concerning   these  problems  which   have
k                                                                                                                                                         4
Disingenuous Argument
"Because  a  nuclear   'bomb'  can  be  made  to  have  a
yield  as  small  as  that  of  a  firecracker,  it  is  technically
correct,  but  highly  misleading,  for  a  public   official   to
state  that  we  can't  be  sure  of  detecting  all  tests.    Cer-
tain  officials  such  as  President  Eisenhower,  Prime  Min-
ister  Macmillan  and  Dr.  Edw.  Teller  have  made    gen-
eral  statements  which   to  the  public  appear  in   conflict
with   the   findings   of  this  paper   [that  nuclear  testing
can  be  policed].  .  .  .  These  officials  are  relying  on  the
technicality   of  ultra-low   yield  nuclear  'tests.'"
—Jay   Orear,  Asst.  Prof.,   Physics,  Columbia,  in  the
March   "issue  Bulletin  of   the  Atomic  Scientists.
been  held   under  the  sponsorship   of  the  National   Planning
Association.   A  group,   composed   about  50  percent   of   scien-
tists,  a  number  of  whom  possess  considerable  knowledge   of
weapons   systems,  has   been   surveying   the   general   technical
and  political  problems  of  disarmament.    The  picture  which
unfolds  is  not  a  pretty  one.
As  nuclear  weapons  are  increasingly  taken  for  granted   in
fighting  small  wars,  the   technique  of  making  them   and  of
using  them  will   become  world-wide—and  here   I  mean  all
nuclear  weapons  ranging  from  the  artillery  shell  to  the  super
bomb.   I  suspect  that  about  15  nations  will  be  in  the  business
of  manufacturing nuclear  explosives within  the  next  25  years.
Within  this  anarchic  framework  there  will  be  "little"  wars
in  which  tactical  nuclear  weapons  will  be  used.   We  are  asked
to  believe  that  human  beings  will  handle  themselves   intelli-
gently  and  cooly  in  these  wars  and  that  everyone's  ability  to
retaliate  with  massive  destruction  will   result   in   stabilization.
The   degree  of  wishful  thinking  which  is  involved   in  ths
view  is,  I  believe,  fantastic.   In   a  rapidly  changing   world,
such  a situation would  be  about  as  stable  as  a  billiard  balanced
on  a  pin.
Even  If  Russia Disappeared
I  am  convinced  that   if   the   Soviet   Union   were,   by  some
magic,   to   disappear  tomorrow  our   situation   would   not   be
greatly   eased.   I  am  convinced  that  as  industrialization  con-
tinues  its  relentless   spread,   within  the   framework  of   inter-
national  anarchy, we  are going  to  be  faced  by  new  Germanics,
new  Japans  and  new  Soviet   Unions.
Of  all  of  our  short-range  goals,  the  one  of   overwhelming
urgency,  it  seems  to  me,  is  to  secure  agreements  which  would
make   it   extremely   difficult   for   the   Soviet   Union   and   the
United  States  in  engage  in  large-scale  nuclear  war  and  which
would  severely  hinder,  if  not  completely  stop,  the  spread  of
nuclear   military   technology   to  the   rest   of   the  world.    Dr.
Teller  believes  that  any  such  agreements  would   work  to  our
disadvantage  because  we  could  not  be  certain  that  the  Soviet
Union  might  not  "bootleg"  tests.   I  challenge   this  view,  and
in  doing  so  I  do  not  stand  alone  in  the  scientific  world.
I  believe  that  Dr.  Teller  is  willfully  distorting   the   reali-
ties  of  the  situation.   I  believe  that  it  is  possible   for  us  to
secure  agreements  with  the   Soviet  Union   to  stop  tests   and
I   believe   further   that   the   agreements   could   be  of   such   a
nature  that  the  Soviet  Union  would   adhere  to  them   because
it  would  be  very  much  to  her  advantage  to  do  so.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 17,  1958
Fulbright  Substitute  Provides   Fair  Hearing   But  Keeps  Political  Test  on Right  to  Travel
Senate  Liberals  Respond  to  Pressure  Against  Hennings  Passport  Bill
Protesting  letters  in  the wake of  our March  3  issue  exposing
the  Hennings  bill  to  validate  the  State  Department's  passport
procedures  seem to  have  had  an  effect.   Several  Senators wrote
readers  explaining  that   they  had   endorsed  the  bill   on   the
strength  of  Hennings'  reputation.   Hennings  in  turn  blames
the  bill  on  poor   staff   work.   Unfortunately  his   staff   is  not
what  it  used  to  be.   A  year  ago  he  purged  the  liberals  on  it.
Benjamin  Ginzburg,  a  scholarly  and  devoted  civil libertarian,
was  dismissed as  research  director of  the  Hennings  civil  liber-
ties  subcommittee;  Langdon  West,  the   Senator's  liberal  ad-
ministrative  assistant,  was  exiled  to  a  minor  post.   The  Sena-
tor's  new  assistant  is  from  the  State  Department.
The  ACLU Opposed
Several  of  the  Senators  who  lent  their  name  to  the  bill  are
insisting  on  public  hearings.   Public  hearings  may  prove  em-
barrassing  to  Hennings.   The  American  Civil  Liberties  Union
submitted  a  vigorous  and  uncompromising  brief  by  Osmond
K.  Fraenkel  as  amicus  curiae  in  the  pending  passport  cases
and  would  oppose  the  Hennings   bill  if  hearings  were  held.
The  unhappiest  consequence  of  the  bill's  introduction  for
Hennings   was  the  attitude   taken  by  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dis-
patch,  of  which the  Senator  is  a  director.   On  Sunday, March
2,  the  "P-D"  ran  an  equivocal  editorial  about  the  bill,  headed
"Loose   Language,   Good   Bill."    But   three   days   later,   the
paper  shifted  its  position  in  an  editorial  called   "Coincidence
or  Booby-Trap?"  which  called  attention  as  we  did  to  the  re-
markable  parallelism  in  language  between  the  Hennings  bill
and  the  Walter  passport   bill   (HR  5612) and  the  way  in
which  both  embody  the  substantive  regulations  of  the   State
Department   and  uphold   its  "faceless  informer"   procedures.
Not  a  single  one  of  the  liberal  Senators  who  endorsed   the
Hennings  bill  would  have  endorsed   the  bill  if  it  came  from
Walter.   This  proves  that  a  cabbage,  unlike  the  rose,  may be
made  to  smell  sweeter  by  any  other  name.
Some  unhappy  Senate  liberals  are  turning  as  a  compromise
to a little noticed  bill  (S  2770)  introduced  in  the  closing  days
of   Congress  last  August   by  Fulbright.   The   State  Depart-
ment,  however,  would  rather  have  no  bill  than  this one, since
it  provides  for  "a   full  and  fair  hearing  before  a  board  of
Our  Special  6-Page  Reprint  on  the   Humphrey
Hat's Off  in The Soldier Cases
Our  hat  is   off  in  the  soldiers'  discharge  cases   to:
Senator  Hennings,  for  giving  less  than  honorably  dis-
charged  GFs  their  first  public  hearing  before  his  civil
liberties  subcommittee  two  years  ago  and  for  follow-
ing  through  in  pressing  the  Defense  Department  to
change  its  regulations;  to  the  Emergency  Civil  Liber-
ties  Committee  for  sponsoring  and  helping  to  finance
the  successful  appeal   to  the   Supreme  Court;  and  to
Secretary  of  the  Army  Brucker  for  at  once  obeying  the
Court's   mandate   and  giving   honorable   discharges   to
Howard  D.  Abramowitz  and  John  Henry  Harmon  III
without  putting  them   to  the  trouble  of   further pro-
ceedings  and  for  amending the  Army  discharge  regu-
lations.  The  victory  in  the  soldier cases  reinstates  the
army  rule  in  effect  before  McCarthy in  the  Peress  case
frightened  the  military  into  abandoning  the  now  re-
stored  traditional   rule  that  a  serviceman's  discharge
was  based  on  his  conduct  in  the  service.   The  Army's
attitude   contrasts   sharply   with   that   of   the  civilian
branches  which  are  still   unwilling  to  implement  the
Cole  decision  limiting  security  discharges   to  sensitive
positions.
passport  appeals."   That  legal  formula  would  bar  the  use  of
undisclosed  evidence  and   anonymous  informers.
More Muscovite Than  Liberal
On  the  other  hand  the  Fulbright  bill,  like  the  Hennings
bill,   shows  the   decay  of   a   true   liberal   philosophy   among
liberals.   It  also  provides  for  a  political  test  of  the  right  to
travel  and  echoes  the  Department's  regulation  which  bars  not
only  Communist  party  members  but  those  who  continue   "to
act  in  furtherance  of  the  interests  and  under  the   discipline
of   the  Communist  party."   If   it  is  dangerous  to  let  a  man
travel   abroad   because   (like   Paul   Robeson)   he   may   make
speeches  which  the   State  Department   regards  as  advancing
the  Communist  cause,  why  let  him  travel  and  speak  at  home,
where  he  can  cause  more  damage?   The  logic  of  the  depart-
ment's  travel  regulations  and  of  these  bills  is  not  the  logic
of   the  First  Amendment.    It   is  the   logic   of   police   states;
Moscow,  too, will  not  let  those  travel  abroad  whom  it sus-
pects  of  unorthodox  views.
Disarmament  Speech  Still  Available for  Bulk  Orders
1. F. Stone's
Please  renew  I
Name    ...........
Street    ...........
City   ................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
0*..-^*
City   ...............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Are*  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........................ ..Zone...... ......State.. ..................
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
3/17/88
..........................Zone............State........,.._.......
gift  announcement?      Yes  Q   No D
I. E Stone's  Weekly
56! 8  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weeklj.    Entered  »s   Second   Claim   Matter  at   Wanhington,   1>.  C.,  linger  the  Act  nf  Match  8,   1879.    post-dated  Mondays  bat   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  -MIS  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  WaHhlngton  IB.  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edltod   by   I.   F.   Stone.  Circulation  Mnnacer,  Bather  M.  Stone.    Sntwcrlntion;
fS   In  th   II.  ».;  M  to  Cftnadfr,   flO  olwwhete.    Air   M«'l  f«"-n:  tlS  to  Horone;  f20  to  lsrst-1.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED