I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958may12.pdf

============================================================

So  Few  Reds  Left  J.  Edgar  Hoover Stops^ Counting Them;  Was Moscow  Booby-Trapped Over the  Arctic? P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  18MAY   12,  1958WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Web  of  Official  Falsehood on  Nuclear Matters Begins  to Unravel
How  Strauss Misled  the President as Well as the Public
The   President   has   been   forced   by  Senator   Anderson   to
make  a  striking  admission  the  full  significance  of  which  has
yet  to  be  appreciated.   At  his  last  press  conference,  in  answer
to   charges   made   by  the   Senator,   Mr.   Eisenhower  admitted
that  only  40  percent  of  the  current  nuclear  testing  series  has
to   do  with  the   development   of   so-called   cleaner   weapons.
It   had   been   assumed,   ever   since  Dr.   Edward  Teller   and
Admiral  Strauss  made  their  dramatic  appearance  at  the  White
House  last  June  with  the  sensational  story  that  a  clean  bomb
was  possible   if  only  testing   were  allowed   to  continue,  that
this  was  the  principal  purpose   of  our  tests.   Over   and   over
again  we  have  been  told  by  Dr.  Teller  that  we  were  testing
in  order  to  develop  a  clean  bomb  so  we  could  protect   "the
innocent   bystander."    Now   it   turns   out,   according  to   the
President's  own   figures,  that  60  percent  of  the  current  test
series  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  problem  of  a  clean  bomb,
i.e.  of  reducing  radioactive  fallout.
The Hedging  Begins
This,   however,   is  not  the  whole  story.   The   President  as
well  as  the  public  seems  to  have  been  misinformed  by  the
AEC   Chairman    as   the    reader    can   easily   see   for    him-
self  in  the  adjoining  box.    Three  days  after  Mr.  Eisenhower
told  the  press  Admiral  Strauss  of  the  AEC  had  informed  him
"at  least  40  percent  of  the  tests  have  their  principal  purpose
to  get   cleaner   bombs,"   the   Admiral   began   to   back   down.
In  his  own  letter  of  May  3  to  the  Joint  Congressional  Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy,  Admiral  Strauss  disclosed  that  the
40  percent  figure  he  gave  the  President  was  only  arrived  at
by  deducting  from  the  total  number  of  the  current  tests  those
which  have  to  do  with  "the   effect  of  explosions  upon  mili-
tary  structures  and  materials."   It  is  only  40  percent  of   the
remainder   which  has  to  do  with  cleaner   bombs.   Just   how
many  tests  are  concerned  with  "the   effect  of  explosions   upon
military  structures  and   materials"   was  not   revealed,   so  it  is
impossible  to  tell  just  what  that  40  percent  is  40  percent   of.
It  might  easily  prove  to  be  only  20  percent  of  the  total  num-
ber  of  tests,  perhaps  more,  perhaps   less.
Why  the  Weasel Wording
Admiral  Strauss  made  another  revision  in  the  wording  he
gave  the  President.  While  the  President  said  Admiral  Strauss
told  him  "at  least  40 percent  .  .  . have  their  principal   purpose
to  get  cleaner  bombs,"  the  Admiral's letter  to  the  Joint  Com-
mittee  phrased  it  differently.   There  the  Admiral,  in  replying
to  Senator  Andersen's  charges,  said  "some  40  percent  .  .  .
are  related   directly  or  indirectly"   (italics  added)   to  the  de-
velopment  of  cleaner  weapons.   There  may  well  be,  as  Sena-
tor  Anderson  told  the  Senate  two  days  later  in  a  full  dress
Smoking  Out  the Truth  At  Last
Forty  Percent—But  of  What?
".  .  .  The  number  of  clean  bomb  tests  will  be  rela-
tively  small.  .  .  ."
—Sew.  Anderson,  Meet  the Press, April  27.
"I  was   told  by   the   Chairman  of   the   AEC  that   at
least  40  percent  of  the  tests  have  their  principal  pur-
pose  to  get  cleaner  bombs."
—Pres. Eisenhower, to the  press, April SO.
"There  will  also  be  a  number  of  detonations   to  ob-
serve  (he  effect  of  explosions  upon  military  structures
and   materials.   Excepting  this  latter  category   which,
strictly   speaking,   is   not   for   weapons   development,
some  40  percent  of   the  tests  are  related   directly   or
indirectly  to  the  development of  weapons  with  greatly
reduced   fallout—that   is   to   say,   to   so-called   clean
weapons."
—Admiral  Stra'uss, Letter  to  the  Joint  Congressional
Committee   on  Atomic  Energy,  May  3.
"On  the  clean   bomb  question,  which   the   AEC   im-
plied   was   the   main  purpose   of   our  current   tests,   I
do   not  believe  the   Commission  is   supported   by   the
facts. ...  Of  course,  the  United  States  wants  to  de-
velop  clean  bombs,   but  their  use   may   be  sometimes
limited.   Our  current  tests   do  not  have  them,  in  any
great  degree,  as  their  primary  purpose.  .  .  .  There  is
a  vast  difference  between the  phrase  [used  by  Strauss]
'directly   or  indirectly'  and   the   phrase   [used   by   the
President]   'their   principal  purpose'."
—Anderson,  speaking  in  the Senate, May  5.
reply  to  the  AEC  Chairman,  a  "vast  difference"  between   the
statement  as  passed   on  by  the  President   and   the   statement
as  revised  by  the  Admiral.
The  reason  Admiral  Strauss  had  to  word  his  reply  to  the
Joint   Committee   carefully   is  that  the  Joint   Committee   has
access  to  AEC  records  and   can  check   for   itself,  as  Senator
Anderson  suggested   be  done  in  his  Senate  speech  last  Mon-
day.     The   Joint   Committee   was  established   by  law   as   the
Congressional   watchdog  of  the  AEC.   The   net  effect  of   the
Strauss  letter  was  to  revise  downward  the  estimate   he   gave
the  President.   Obviously  considerably   less   than   40   percent
of  the  total  number  of  current  tests  have  to  do  directly  with
the  making  of  a  cleaner  bomb.
Only  Half  the  Story
This  is only  one  half  the  story  now  slowly  coming  to  light
of   official   prevarication  about  nuclear  weapons  and  their  test-
ing.     If  the  reader  will  turn  to  the  new  admissions,   contra-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone't  W«ekly,  May IS, 1958
The  State  Dept.  Would  Be  Relieved  if  Moscow  Turned  Wooden  Indian  Again
Did  the  Russians  Fall for  A  Diplomatic  Booby-Trap  in  the  Bomber   Affair?
I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  in  the  episode  of  the  bomb-
ers  and  Arctic  inspection  the  Soviets  fell  for  a  clever  trap,
a  publicity  story  by  the  Strategic  Air  Command.  There  is
no   evidence  that   these   bombers  go   anywhere   near   the
Soviet  Union.   There  is  evidence that  as  many  as  possible
are  gotten   off  the  ground  as  a  precautionary   move  when-
ever  any  "blips"  on  far   radar   screens   indicate   an  attack
by  plane  or  missile  is  possible.   The  SAC's  fear  is  to  have
its  planes  caught  on  the  ground  and  destroyed  by  surprise
attack,  as  in  the  Philippines  when  the  Japanese  struck.
Too Hasty  Improvisation
Having  improvised  a  sudden  move  on  the  basis  of  that
United  Press  story,   Moscow  did  not   handle  itself   at   all
cleverly  or  wisely.   It  had  no  information  beyond  the   UP
story  to  follow  up  with,  and  it  soon  put  itself  in  an  impossi-
ble  position.   Suppose  the  Security  Council  had  ordered  the
U.S.  to  stop  those  flights,  would  this  not  necessitate   some
system  of  inspection?  And  some  assurance  to  the  U.S.  that
there  was  no  danger  of  attack?  Was  Moscow  really  foolish
enough  to  believe  a  one-sided system  could  be  set  up?
The  Russians insisted  that they do not want  to  discuss  such
matters   except  at  the  summit.   But  they  cannot  expect  to
have  everything  their  own way.   Wasn't  the  U.S.  resolution,
as  modified  by  the  Swedish,  an  opening  for  intelligent  diplo-
macy ?  It  would  have  passed  the  question  to  the  summit  but
after   preliminary  study  by  a  committee  of  experts.   What
harm  is  there  in  having  some  discussion  beforehand  of  the
technical  problems involved?  Wouldn't  a  summit  meeting  be
more  fruitful  if  preliminary  reports  were  available?   If  the
Russians  didn't  like Arctic inspection, they  could  have  offered
an  amendment  or  counter  suggestion   of  their  own.  They
might,  for  example,  have  linked  Arctic  inspection  with  the
Rapacki  plan,  which  calls  for   inspection  of  Germany   and
Central   Europe.   Here   they   would   have  put   the   onus  of
rigidity  on  Mr. Dulles.
In  any  case,  the  polar  regions  are  likely  to  be a  key  area
militarily,  the  shortest   avenue  of  attack  between  U.S.  and
U.S.S.R. Wouldn't it  be worth discussing the  question among
all  the  countries which have territory  in  the  Arctic  regions?
The Russians have indicated they  are  willing to  discuss meas-
ures  to  prevent  surprise  attack  at  the  summit.  All  the  UN
resolution  asked  of  them  was  some preparatory  work  on  the
Arctic.  I  believe  that  old wooden  Indian  streak  that  marked
Russian  diplomacy  under  Stalin  and  Molotov  is  making  its
reappearance,  along  with  such  other  evidences  of  renewed
Stalinism  as  the  current  attack  on  the  Yugoslavs  for  refus-
ing  to  follow  every jot  and tittle  of party  line.  There  are  cir-
cles  in  State  Dept. and  Pentagon  which  would  be immensely
relieved  if  only  Moscow  settled  back  into  an  inflexible  line.
U.  S. Reds So Few  For the First  Time  in Years the  FBI  Chief  Stops  Counting  Them
Even  Lenin  Never  Kept  A  Stiffer  Upper  Lip  Than  J. Edgar  Hoover
A  feature   of  J.   Edgar   Hoover's   appearance   each  year
before  the  House  Appropriations  Committee  is  his  annual
report  on Communist party  members.  Last  year  he  gave  the
membership   as   17,360,  a  drop  of   14  percent.    This  year,
for  the  first  time  in  many  years,  Mr.  Hoover gave  no  figure
on  party  membership.   Perhaps   he   knew   it   would  be  so
small  as  to  be  ludicrous.
Instead   of  giving  a  figure,  Mr.  Hoover  made  a   remark
whose  faith  in  the  potency  of  a  die-hard  handful  could  be
matched  only in  Moscow.  "I  cannot  emphasize  too  strongly,"
he  told  the  Appropriations  Commitee,  "that  the   numerical
strength  of  the   Communist  party  means  nothing."   Even
Lenin  never  kept  a  stiffer  upper  lip.
Three  Times  as  Many  G-Men
The  ratio  of  G-men to  Communists  is  rising  sharply.  The
new  FBI  budget  calls  for  14,025  jobs.   The  number  of  Com-
munist  party  members  today  is  probably  below  5,000—and
not  a  few  of  these  are  themselves  G-men.
Mr.  Hoover  nevertheless  in  bullish.   Just  around  the  cor-
ner,  he  sees  the  Communists  creating  "the  most  devastating
fifth   column  the  world  has  ever  known."   Already   its  in-
fluence  "reaches  into  almost  every  walk  of  life."  It  would
be  interesting  to  know  what  Mr.  Hoover  includes  in  that
"almost."   The  FBI  even now has  "approximately  160 known
or   suspected   Communist  front   and   Communist  .infiltrated
organizations  under  investigation."   (Last  year  he  testified
the   House   Un-American  Activities   alone   had   listed  628
"such  Communist  front  organizations."    Are  the  other  478
going  unwatched?   Or  have  they  disappeared  in  the  last  12
months ? )
The  rousing  success  Mr.  Hoover  claims  to  have  found  on
the  Left  he  blames  on  the  courts.   "Crimes  and  subversion
have   become   critical   challenges,"   he  told   the   committee,
"due  to  the   mounting  success  of  criminal   and   subversive
elements  in  employing  loopholes,  technicalities  and   delays
in  the  law  to  defeat  the  interests  of  justice."
In  Mr.  Hoover's  vocabulary,  the   Bill  of  Rights  and  the
due  process  clause  seem  to  figure,  if  at  all,  only  a»  "loop-
holes"  and  those  who are  concerned  with  them  seem  always
to  be  put  down  as  "pseudo-liberals."    He  was  bitter  about
"certain   organizations"   which  "hypocritically   bar   Commu-
nists  from  their  membership, but  seek  to  discredit   all  per-
sons  who  abhor  Communists  and  communism.    They  claim
to  be  anti-Communist but  they  launch  attacks  against  Con-
gressional  legislation   designed  to  curb  Communism."
It  is  instructive  to  compare  this  with  Mr.  Hoover's  calm
testimony   on   another   menace—that   of   racism.    Here   he
said   nothing  which  could   offend   any   white   supremacist.
"The   Negro  situation,"  he  said  was  "being  exploited"  by
the  Communists.  They  are  trying  "to  infiltrate  Negro  mass
organizations  . . . not to aid the Negroes  but ... to take
advantage  of  all  controversial  issues  on  the  racial   question."
Eastland  wouldn't  have  said  it  differently.
Never  A  Word Against  Racism
Racism   today  is  the   real   menace  to   internal   security.
Why  does  Mr.  Hoover  never  warn  against  the  peddlers  of
prejudice,  or  the  divisive  effects   of  those  who  preach   race
hatred?  Mr. Hoover  told  the  committee  he wanted  to  stress
the  fact  that  "our  investigative  policies  in  civil  rights  mat-
ters  are  governed  entirely  by  orders  issued  by  the  Depart-
ment"  and  are  conducted  "in  a  thorough,  factual  and  im-
partial  manner."   He was  saying  as  plainly  as  he  could  that
the  civil  rights  work  was  something  imposed  on  the   FBI.
One  civil  rights  matter  in  which  Mr.  Hoover  could  exer-
cise  great  influence  is  that  of  police  brutality  against  Ne-
groes.   This  seems  to  make  up  the  bulk  of  civil  rights  com-
plaints.   He  said  the   FBI  handled  1,289  civil   rights   cases
during  the  fiscal  year   1957  and  that  this  included  "1,062
cases  involving   1,921  law  enforcement  officers."    Of   these
1,062   cases,  he   said,   "1,003   had   been  closed   and   59   re-
mained  pending."   Only  one  officer  was  convicted  and  only
12  were   under   indictment.    Remarkably   few   complaints
against  police  officers   seemed  to  stand  up  under  FBI   in-
vestigation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, May  IS, 1958
Smoking  Out  the  Truth  at  Last:  More  Evidence  of  Official  Prevarication
We  Are  Interested  in  Developing  Dirtier  Bombs  Than  Ever
"They    [the    military]   are   not   only   supporting    them
[dirtier  bombs]  but  they  have  pulled  bombs  out  of  stock-
pile  and  inserted   something  which  makes  it  dirtier."
—Senator Anderson, Meet  the Press, April 27.
"Now,    no  military   officer  that  I  know  of  has  ever  even
suggested  that  we  have  dirtier  bombs,  certainly  there  has
been  no  official  suggestion  of  that  kind."
—Pres. Eiaenhower, replying  at  press  conference,  April SO.
"Sometime  in  the  past,  we  did  some  studies—strictly  pa-
perwork—on   this   business   of   increasing   the   amount   of
fissionable material  and  making  them  dirtier.   It's   possible
that  somebody is  still  looking  into  this.   But  we  are  neither
developing  nor  stockpiling  these   weapons."
—Defense   Dept.  spokesman,  Washington  Post,  April  SO.
"The  facts   are  that  atomic  bombs  are  only  taken   from
stockpile  for  purposes  of  routine  inspection  or  for   modifica-
tion   or  improvement.   No  material   is  'inserted'  in  bombs
for  the  purpose of  increasing  the  amount  of  fission  products
or  to  add  to  the  total   fallout."
—Admiral  Strauss, replying   to  Anderson,  May  S.
MB.   WILLIAM   H.   LAWRENCE  (New   York   Times).   Were
bombs   made  dirtier   in   the   process   of   re-examination    or
whatever  it  is  you  do  to  a  bomb?
ADMIRAL  STRAUSS.  Well,  I  don't  know  what  you  mean  by
making  them  dirtier.   If  you mean  whether  the  total  fallout
was  increased,  the  total  world-wide   fallout   was  increased
by  something that  was  done to  the  bombs,  the  answer  is  no.
—Strauss  Interview,  Face  the Nation,  May  4.
"Let   me  ask  the  Chairman  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission  to  state  whether  or  not  the  local  fallout  would  be
increased.    I  am  familiar  with  the  testimony  to  which  he
refers.    It  was  given  by  a  most  eminent  scientist.   It  ap-
pears  on page  54 of  the  minutes  [of  the  Joint  Congressional
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy]   of  January   21,  which   are
labelled  'Top  Secret'  all over.  .  . .
"If  the  Chairman  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  can
use  that  statement  to  say  that  the  total  world-wide  fallout
was  not  increased  by  something  done  to  the  bomb, and  say
then  the  answer  is  'No,'  he  should  also  introduce  the  rest
of  Dr.  York's   statement   that  related  to  the  subject  as  to
whether  it  might  become  dirtier  locally.  . . .
Dr.  Libby,  a  member  of  the  Atomic  Energy   Commission
.  . .  made  a  statement  at  Amherst  College  April  30.   ...
Dr.  Libby  said:  'I  think  there  is  absolutely  no  doubt  that
[local]  fallout   from   surface-planted   nuclear  weapons  .  .  .
is  one of  the  two great  threats  of  nuclear  war. ...  It  is
estimated   an  attack  on  this  country  could  well  cause   mil-
lions  of  deaths  in  this  way  unless  we  have  adequate  defense
plans for local  fallout,  which at present  we do not have.' . . .
"Apparently   Dr.  Libby  does  not  regard  local  fallout   to
be  beneficial  to  the  people  on whom it  is  falling.  .  .  .1  also
suggest  the   Chairman  of  the   Atomic  Energy   Commission
knows  it  just  as  well  as  I  do.  The  clever  use  of  his  words
to  the  press,  and  his  adding  of  a  phrase  and  putting  in  the
words  'world-wide  fallout'   show  he  not  only  knew  it,   but
retained  a  very  good  recollection  of   it."
—Anderson  replying  in  the  U. S.  Senate,  May  5.
MR.  [Nat  S.]   FINNEY   (Buffalo    Evening  News).   Admiral
Strauss,  could  the  crux  of  this  be  in  certain  sections  of  the
new  Effects   of  Nuclear  Weapons  handbook  in  which  it   is
stated  that  for  some  time  consideration  has  been  given  to
the  possibility  of  using  radioactive  material   deliberately   as
• a  weapon  in  what  is  called  radiological  warfare. ...  To
me  this  adds  up  almost  to  a  declared  intention  on  the  part
of   the   Pentagon   and  the   AEC,  which  I   understand    pre-
pared  this  handbook  together,  to—if  the  situation  is  appro-
priate—conduct  radiological   warfare.
ADMIRAL    STRAUSS.   It   is   certainly   not   foreclosed,   Mr.
Finney.   But  there  is  a  big  difference   between  let  us  say
weapons  that  are  in  stockpile  for  such  a  purpose—and  I
am  not  saying  that  they  are—and  the  charge  that  weapons
have  been  withdrawn  from  stockpile  and  something  inserted
in  order  to  have  that  effect  caused.
MR.  FINNEY.  You  are  also,  sir,  not  saying  that  they  are
not   stockpiled.
ADMIRAL  STRAUSS. I  am not at  all.  . .
MR.  [George]   HERMAN  (CBS  News).  Is  it  possible,   feasi-
ble,  practical   and  simple,  for   instance,  to  take  bombs  out
of   the   stockpile   at   some  future   time  if  necessary   and   to
render  them  dirtier  by  addition  or  insertion   of  some  new
material ?
ADMIRAL  STRAUSS.  These  things  are   possible.
—Admiral  Strauss  interviewed,  Face the  Nation, May U.
"I  believe  that  there  are  ways  that  the  Congress,   if  it
desires,  can  check  the  accuracy  of  statements  I  have  made
today. ...  I  believe  it  would be  possible  without   involving
the   national   security   too  deeply  for   the   Armed   Services
Committees  of  the  Congress  to  ask  the  military  to  let  them
look  at  the  stockpiles  records.  .  .  .1  think  they  will   reveal
that   weapons  have   been  drawn   from   the   stockpile,   then
modified   or   'improved,'   if   the   Chairman   of   the   Atomic
Energy   Commission  prefers  that  word;  and  that,  if  these
improvements  were  to  become   effective,  there  might  be  a
change  in  the   amount  of  fallout—local  fallout,  not   world-
wide   fallout."
—Anderson  replying  in  the  U. S.  Senate,  May  5.
What  the  Official   Pentagon-AEC   Handbook  Discloses  About Dirtier  Bomb Plans
"For  some  time  consideration  has  been  given  to  the  pos-
sibility   of  using   radioactive   material   deliberately   as   an
offensive   weapon  in  what  is  called  'radiological  warfare.'
The  basic  idea  is  that  radioactive  contamination  of  areas,
factories,   or  equipment  would  make  their  use   impossible
or   very   hazardous   without  any   accompanying   material
destruction.   To  be  effective,  a  radiological   warfare   agent
should  emit  gamma  radiations. . . .
"Even   if   a   radioisotype   with   suitable   properties   and
which  could  be  readily   manufactured  were  selected  as  a
radiological   warfare   agent,   the   problems   of   production,
handling   and   delivery   of   the   weapon   emitting   intense
gamma  radiations  would not  easily  be  solved.   In   addition,
stockpiling  the  radioactive  material  would  present  a  dif-
ficulty.  Other  weapons  can be prepared  in advance.  .  . .
They  can  be  kept  for  a  long  time  without  suffering  deteri-
oration.  This  is  not  true  for  radiological  warfare  agents,
for  natural  decay  would  result  in  a  continuous  loss  of  ac-
tive  material. . . .
"The  situation  has  undergone a  change  with  the  develop-
ment   of   bombs  having  high  fission   energy   yields.   The
explosion  of  such  bombs at  low  altitudes  can  cause  radio-
active  contamination  over  large  areas  that  are  beyond  the
range  of physical  damage.  .  .  .  Instead  of preparing and
stockpiling  the  contaminating  agent   in  advance,  with  its
attendant   difficulties,   the  radioactive  substances   are   pro-
duced  by  fission  at  the  time  of  the  explosion.   Radiological
warfare  has  thus  become  an  automatic   extension   of   the
offensive  use  of  nuclear  weapons  of  high  yield."
—The  Effects     of  Nuclear  Weapons,  prepared   by  the   De-
fense   Dept.,  published   by  the  AEC,   July   IS,   1957,
pages
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 12,1958
Anderson  Charges  Strauss  With  "McCarthyism"  in  Using  Red  Smear  Innuendoes
Administration Accused of Shifting  from  "Atoms for Peace" to Atoms for  War
(Continued  Jrom  Page   One)
dictions,  evasions  and   statements  assembled   on  page  three,
he  will  see  that  the  government  is  actively  engaged   in  the
problem  of  developing  dirtier  weapons,  in  using  radioactive
fallout   as  a  deliberate  instrument   of   so-called   radiological
warfare.   There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Russians  are  doing
the  same.   Radioactive poison  is  the  third  dimension  of  nu-
clear  war,  the  other  two  being  blast  and  fire.
The Official  Handbook Contradicts  Ike
Mr.   Eisenhower's  denial  at  his   last   press  conference  —
"no  military  officer  that  I  know  of  has  ever  even   suggested
that  we  have  dirtier  bombs"—is  contradicted   (as  the  reader
will  see) by  the   official   handbook  of   the   Defense   Depart-
ment  and  the  AEC,  "The Effects  of  Nuclear  Weapons,"  re-
leased  last  July  12.   When  the  assembled  record  is  reviewed,
it  will  be  seen  that  Senator  Anderson  was  wrong,   if  at all,
only  in  charging  that  bombs  were  taken  out  of  stockpile  to
have  something   "inserted"   in   them   to  make  them   dirtier.
It   appears,   from   Admiral   Strauss's   rejoinder,  that   bombs
are  taken  out  of  stockpile  but  only  to  be  "modified"  or  im-
proved.   One  effect  of  the  improvements   is  to  give  us  means,
as  the  official  handbook  says,  to  spread  "radioactive  contami-
nation  over  large  areas  that  are  beyond  the  range  of  physical
damage."     This   widespread   rain   of   radioactive   poison   is
called   "local  fallout"   though   it   may  cover  many   hundreds
or  thousands  of  square  miles,  as  distinct  from  the   "world-
wide  fallout"  which  descends  only  gradually  over  the  years
from  the  stratosphere.  Whole  countries,  perhaps  whole  con-
tinents,  may  be  rendered  uninhabitable  by  this  means   if   a
new  world  war  comes.
Against  this  background  it  was not  surprising  to  learn  from
Senator  Andersen's   speech   last  Monday  that   the   Adminis-
tration  has  been   dragging   its  feet  on   its  highly   advertised
"atoms  for  peace"  program.   Legislation  needed  for   coopera-
tion  with  EURATOM,  the  joint  West  European  project  for
atomic  power  development,  has  been  so  long  delayed  by  the
AEC  that   action  may  not  be  possible   at  this   session.    The
Budget  Bureau,  according  to  Senator  Anderson,  "has  cut  the
heart  out  of"   the  research  and  development   program   advo-
Watch  Next  Week's  Issue  for  Fresh  Angles  on  Dr.  Hans
Prize  Remark of the  Atomic Age
"I  feel  very  sympathetic  to  pacifism  myself."
—Admiral  Strauss, Face  the  Nation,  May  4.
cated    by   the   Gore-Holifield    bill    for    peacetime    reactors.
Emphasis   has   shifted    to   the   pending   amendments  which
would  authorize  the  sale  or  gift  of  military reactors  and non-
nuclear   components   of   nuclear  weapons   to   other   nations,
a  do-it-yourself-kit   from   which  they  could  make  themselves
nuclear   weapons.     Anderson   said   the   Administration   had
shifted   from   atoms-for-peace.    He   said   he   did   not   expect
legislation    cooperating    with   EURATOM    "because  we   are
so  busy  with  atoms  for  war,  considering  whether   the   effect
of  what we  do  is to  supply  atomic warheads to  Germany.  .  ."
The   Senator  said  that  while  he   favored  full   exchange   of
atomic  information  with  Britain,  he  would  fight  any  moves
toward  creating  new  nuclear  powers  via  the  pending  atomic
"give  away"  legislation.
An Old Non-Nuclear Weapon
With  rising  Congressional  opposition  to  the  nuclear   "give-
away"  bill  and  a  growing  public  clamor  for  cessation  of  tests,
Admiral  Strauss  seems  to  be  shifting  toward  a  classic non-
nuclear   weapon  of   last   resort,   the   red   herring.    The   man
who  showed in  the  Oppenheimer  case how  deftly  he  could  ex-
ploit  this  tactic,  has  begun  to  hint  in  recent   interviews  that
there  is  "something   organized"   and  "not open"  about   the
campaign   to   end   nuclear   testing.    "Nobody,   I   presume,"
Anderson   told   the   Senate,   "actually   was   called   a  tool  of
Russia,   but   there   was   a   pretty   strong   implication    if   one
wanted  to  look'  at  it."  Anderson  said  Strauss  "seeks   to  be-
come  the  modern  apostle  of  McCarthyism."   We  believe  the
time   is  past,  public  anxiety  too   deep,   Strauss  himself   too
vulnerable  to  offer   any  hope  along   those   lines.    As  for   op-
erating  "in  the  open,"  said  the  Washington   Post  in  an edi-
torial  last  Tuesday  on  "Strauss'  Straw  Man,"  "that  is  a  pretty
peculiar   observation,   coming   from   the   man   who   presides
over  what  is  perhaps  the  most  rigidly  secret  operation  in  the
country."
Bethe's  Testimony  and  Secrecy  About Current  Testing
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
S/I2/S8
(To)   Name
Street    .......
City      ..........................................Zone............State...~...............
Shall  we send  gift  announcement?      Yes d   No D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraiko  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D. C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  th   U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED