I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958nov24.pdf

============================================================

Dr.  Libby's  New Anti-Fallout  Gadget,  P.  2
State  Dept.  Opens  McCarthy  Style  Drive  for  New  Passport  Control Law,  See  Page  4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  46
NOVEMBER  24,  1958
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
IB  CENTS
A  Growing  Pessimism  About  the  Disarmament  Talks
I  must  confess  to  a  growing  pessimism  about  the  various
disarmament  talks  now  going  on.   I  have  begun  to  feel  that
they  serve  only  to  delude people  into thinking that  something
is  being  done  when  in  fact  the  arms  race  takes  on  new  mo-
mentum.   Here  are  some  reasons  for  this  dark  view:
The  Problem  Grows  Obsolete  As  They  Palaver
1.  The   Surprise  Attack   Talks:   The  main  reliance  of  both
sides  for  a  surprise  attack  will  soon  be  the  Intercontinental
Ballistic  Missile,  which  requires  only  30  minutes  to  reach  its
target.   Even  if  we  had  inspectors  at  each  other's  bases  and
politely  allowed  them  to  telephone  before  firing  an  ICBM,
the  warning   time  wouldn't   make  much  difference.   As  for
aerial  inspection, the  careful  study of  it  in  Seymour Melman's
indispensable    symposium,   "Inspection    for    Disarmament"
(Columbia  Univ.  Press)   shows  that  the  ICBM  will  make  it
obsolete.    Unlike   the   bombing  plane   which   requires   large
easily  observed  airfields,  the  ICBM  needs  only  small  under-
ground  bases  as  difficult  to  identify  from  the  air  as  "discern-
ing  manhole  covers  from   50,000  feet."    Once  ICBM's  have
been  mass  produced  and  installed,  prevention  of  surprise  at-
tack  will  become  hopeless.   Yet  neither  side  is  ready  to  make
sufficient   concession to  win  agreement  on  controls  before  that
fatal  stage  is  reached.
A  Recipe  for  Perpetual  Recrimination
2.  The  Soviet  Union  and  Inspection:  In  the  Geneva  talks
by  the   experts  last  summer,  the   Soviet  spokesmen  aroused
misgivings  by two  proposals.   One  was  that  the  30-man  teams
which  would   be  attached  to  the   nuclear  testing   inspection
posts  be  made  up  of  nationals  from  the  country  which  was
being   inspected,  with   "perhaps"   one   or   two   international
representatives.   The  other  was  that  a  control  agency  be  made
up  of  equal  representatives from  East  and  West.   Such  a  50-50
control  mechanism,  with  no  neutral  to  break  a  tie,   would
create  a  built-in  deadlock.  Trouble  would  arise  when  a  detec-
tion  post  registered  a  "rumble"  and  wanted  to  send  a  team
for   an  on-the-spot  look  to  determine  whether  an   earthquake
or  an underground test  had  taken  place.   The  Soviet   approach
could  prevent  inspection  which  both  sides  would  trust.   A
control  system  of  this  kind  would  breed  perpetual  recrimina-
tion,  and  this  explains  why  the  Western  representatives   at
the  new  Geneva  talks  want  the  controls  spelled  out   before
signing  a  treaty  on  test  cessation.   The   Russians  want   dis-
armament  but  apparently  not  enough  to  accept   effective   in-
spection.
3.  The  Gore  Proposal:  Gore  (D.  Tenn.),  the  Senate's  ob-
server  at  the  Geneva  test  talks,  is  back  with  a proposal  which
implies  (prematurely)  that  the  talks  have  already  failed.   He
proposes  a  3-year  unilateral  moratorium  by  the  U.  S.  on  big
tests   but   continued   underground   testing   of   small   nuclear
weapons.   This  proposal  originates  with  former  AEC  Com-
missioner  Thomas   E.  Murray,  now  consultant  to  the  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.   His  views  are  attractive  to
liberal  members  of  the  Committee.  They  are  strong  for  pub-
lic  development  of  atomic  power,  but   cheap   atomic  power
depends  on  finding  a  market  for  the  plutonium  byproduct.
Its  only  present  use  is  for  weapons.   If  the  government  will
buy  large  quantities  of  plutonium for  small  nuclear  weapons,
then  there  is  an  economic  basis  for  building  dual  purpose  re-
actors  which  can  produce  public  power—and  plutonium—at
reasonable  prices.   This  linkage  of  power   with  weapons  is
characteristic  of  the  liberal  Democrats,  who  fall  back  on  the
arms  race whenever confronted  with  a  serious  economic  prob-
lem.
Holy  (Limited  Nuclear)  War
Mr.  Murray is  an  able  engineer  who  has  long  believed  that
we  already  had  too  many  large  bombs  and  that  their  testing
created a health  hazard.  He  is also  an  amateur  Catholic  vision-
ary,   preaching   (as  in  his  speech  here  last  Saturday  night  to
the  alumni  of  Catholic  University)  that  some  kinds  of  war
are  holy.   He  wants  "Catholic  thinkers"  to  take  "the  lead  in
the  elaboration  of  the  civilized  tradition  of  warfare"   which
he  equates  with  limited  nuclear  war.  His  proposal  would  cut
off   atmospheric  pollution  but  speed  up  the  arms  race.    Dr.
Hans  Bethe,  who  is on  the  President's  Science  Advisory  Com-
mittee,  called  this  "very  dangerous"  when  he  was  before  the
Humphrey  disarmament committee  last  April  but  censorship
deleted  his  reasons.
As  for  the  "civilized"  character of  limited  nuclear  war,  we
refer  readers to  Hanson  W.  Baldwin's conclusions  after  watch-
ing  a  trial  performance in  the  so-called  Exercise  Sage  Brush.
"The  biggest  lesson,"  Mr.  Baldwin  wrote  (New   York   Times,
Dec.  5,  1955),  "is that  there  probably can be no  such  thing  as
a  limited  or  purely  tactical  nuclear  war."   He  came  back  with
an  "apocalyptic  vision"  of  what  small  nuclear  weapons  would
have  done  in  the  12  State  area  in  those  maneuvers.
Big  Clubs  Were  A  Deterrent, Too
4.  Soon  Be  Too  Late  to  Trade:  Though  our  bases  aboard
will  soon  be  obsolete,  we  refuse  to  trade  them   (as  Moscow
suggests)   for  controls  which  might  still   stifle   ICBM   devel-
opment.   Though  reconnaissance  by  satellite  will  soon   open
all  countries  to  observation  from  the  air,  the  Russians  refuse
to  trade  aerial  inspection  (as  Washington  suggests)  for  arms
control.   Rigidity  mark  both  sides.   Like  two  red-eyed  cave-
men  with  big  clubs,  each  is  deterred  for  the  time  being  from
fear  of  the  smashing  blow the  other  could  deliver.   But  neither
has  sense  enough  to  relinquish  hate  for  safety.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November S4,1968
Delicacy  in Journalism Note
The  New  York  Times  managed  three  days  in  succes-
sion   to  run  a  news  story,   a  background  personality
sketch   and  an  editorial   about   William   H.  Meyer,   the
first  Democrat  to  be  elected  to  Congress  from  Vermont
in  several  generations  without  mentioning  that  he  was
active  in  the  American   Civil  Liberties  Union  and  cam-
paigned  for  an  end  of  nuclear  tests,  for  banning'  the
H-bomb  and  for  recognition  of  Red  China.
Gen.   Trudeau  Complains  About  the  Public  and  Dr.  Libby  Offers  A  New  Anti-Fallout  Device
How  to  Make  the  Man-in-The-Cellar  Less  Nervous  About  World  War TTT
The  most  wistful  note  of  the  week  was  struck  by  Lt.  Gen.
Arthur  Trudeau,  chief  of  research  for  the  Army,  in  a  speech
at  St.  Louis.   The   Pentagon  decided  discreetly  not  to  make
text  available  but  according  to  the  Associated  Press  he  de-
plored   our  lag  in  chemical  warfare  and  blamed  this  on  the
public.   "The  greatest  fly  in  the  ointment,"  he  said,  choosing
a  rather  unfortunate metaphor,  "is  the  antipathy of  the Amer-
.ican  people  regarding  chemical  weapons."   It  must  indeed  be
difficult   for   a  conscientious  scientist-General  to   understand
why  people   should   object  more  strongly  to  being   poisoned
or  fried   by  chemical  means  than  to  being  vaporized   by  an
H-bomb  or   even  pierced   by  a  bullet.   These  irrational  lay
predilections  create  problems  for  the  military  expert.    They
are   not,   however,   insuperable  and   the   Chemical   Warfare
Corps   may  find  helpful  hints  in  the  tactics  of  the   Atomic
Energy  Commission.  The  AEC, confronted  with  similar  fears
about   strontium-90  and   other   forms  of   radioactive  fallout,
launched  a  reassuring  study  some  advertising  genius   named
Operation  Sunshine, thus  equating  the  new  poisons  in  the  air
with  that  stuff  you  go  to  Miami  for  in  the  winter-time.   By
methods  no  more  far-fetched,  beneficent   associations   might
be  linked  with  chemical warfare.   Chemicals,  after  all,  are  the
base  of  all  medicines,  and  medicines  are  the  base  of  health.
If  it  is  possible  to  offer  the  idea  that  fallout  from  bomb  tests
is  no  more  dangerous  than  an  extra  ounce  of  fat,  perhaps  we
might  sell  the  idea  that  chemical  warfare  really  was  no  dif-
ferent  from  an  overdose  of  aspirin,  and  much  more  likely  to
cure  what  ails  you.
What  to Do When  the  Bombs Fall
The  AEC's  ingenuity  in  dealing  with  these  childish   fears
on  the  part  of  the  public  was  demonstrated  by  Dr.  Willard
F.  Libby, its  scientist member,  on  CBS "Face  the  Nation"  last
Sunday,  Nov.   16.   That  very  morning   in  the   Washington
Post  its  able  science  reporter,  Edward  Gamarekian,   disclosed
that  radioactive fallout  reached  a  new  all-time  high  in  many
parts  of  the  United  States  during  July—in  a  few  pkces,  for  a
short  period  of  time,  as  in  Los  Angeles,  exceeding  the  maxi-
mum  permissible  limits.   When  Dr.   Libby  was  asked   about
this,  he  said  he  thought  it  a  good  idea  to  have  people  aroused
about  fallout  because  then  they  could  "plan  to  protect  them-
selves  in  case  of  war."   With  the  air  of  a  man   unwrapping
a  surprise,  Dr.  Libby said  he  had  brought  along  "a  principal
instrument  protecting   against  fallout."    TV  viewers  all  over
the  country  must  have  leaned   forward  in  their  chairs  with
expectation.   "This,"  Dr.   Libby  declared,   taking  the   instru-
ment  out  of  his  pocket,   "is  an  ordinary  transistorized  radio.
Now,  with  this,"  he  explained,  "you  can  keep  in  touch  with
the  central  authorities  and  find  out  where  the  fallout  is  com-
ing."   The  AEC,  always forging  ahead,  was  now trying to  get
manufacturers   to   build   in   a  radiation  meter   "so   that   you
would  also  be  able  to  see  how  much  fallout  you  had."    Dr.
Libby  said  this  "plus  fixing  up  your  cellar"  could   saive   "ten
million  lives."    We  felt  safer,  just  listening  to  him.
Afterwards  we  began  to  wonder.   Our  cellar,  even  if  fixed
up,  would  only  be  of  use  if  far  enough  from  the  scene  of  a
main  attack  not  to  be  affected  by  nuclear  blast  and  fire.   Only
cellars  a  distance  of  several  hundred  miles  from  main   cities,
air  bases  and  other  prime  targets  would  be  in  this  fortunate
category.   We  wondered,  too,  about  the  "central  authorities"
on  whose  broadcasts  we  would   have  to  depend.    Could   we
be  sure  that  they  would  survive  unscathed?   And  continue  to
operate  a  communications  network  which  would  bring  them
data  on  fallout  patterns  and  radioactive  levels?    Dr.   Libby
seemed  to  assume  that  the  business  of  government  would  go
on  pretty much  as  usual,  though  dependent  on  facilities  which
might  need  a  bit  of  repair  work  after  a  thermonuclear  attack.
We  wondered,  too,  just  what  we  would  do  even  if  we  knew
"where  the  fallout  is  coming"  and  how  much  fallout  we  al-
ready  had.   If  we  decided  we  had  better   stay  down   in   the
•  cellar  a  few  days or  perhaps  even  weeks,  how  and  what  would
we  eat?   Of  course  if  the  corner  grocer  was  still  in   business,
and  his  stock  was  still  edible,  maybe  we  could  reach,  him  by
short  wave  and  arrange  for  a  delivery.   In  the  meantime  that
transistorized  radio  would  be  a  great  morale  builder.   While
cowering  in  the  cellar,  wondering  what  had  happened  to  the
President,  we could  listen  in  on  the  baseball  scores.  Dr.  Libby
has  cheered  us  up  immensely.
Four  Witch Hunt  Cases, State  and
Four  contempt  cases  were  being  argued  in  the  Supreme
Court   as  we  went  to  press  this  week.   Lloyd  Barenblatt's
First  Amendment  appeal,   supported  by  the  American  Civil
Liberties   Union,   and  a  last   minute  brief   amicus  by  the
American  Association  of  University  Professors,  challenges
the    House    Un-American    Activities    Committee.    Abram
Flaxer's  case  grew  out  of  his  refusal  to  give  the  Senate
Internal  Security   Committee   the  names  and  addresses  of
the   35,000  members  of   the   United  Public  Workers  union
of  which  he  was  then  President.
The  other  two  appeals  involve  State  agencies.   David  H.
Scull,  a  Quaker  printer  in  Arlington,  Va,,  refused  to  answer
questions  put to  him in a  State legislative  inquiry  designed,
Federal,  Argued  in  Supreme Court
in  the  words  of  its   chairman,  to  "bust  the  NAACP  wide
open."   Willard   Uphaus   refused   to   hand   over  the  guest
records  of  his   World  Fellowship  camp  at  Conway,  N.   EL,
and  its  correspondence  with  lecturers  to  that  State's  witch
hunting  Attorney  General,  Louis  C.  Wyman,  who  lost  last
year  in  the  Sweezy  case.   When  asked  why  he  wanted  the
correspondence,   Wyman   replied   the   letters   might   have
shown  that  Uphaus  suggested  that  speakers  advocate  the
overthrow  of  the  government.   The  newest  member  of   the
Court,  Mr.  Justice  Potter  Stewart,  thereupon  asked,   "But
isn't  it  absolutely  incredible?   That  isn't  the  way  you  plot
revolution."   Poor  Mr.  Elsenhower  must  have  accidentally
picked  a  liberal  for  the  Supreme  Court  again.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  24,1958
High Priced Slums  for Nonwhites
"The   visible  disparity   between  white  and   minority
housing  conditions  is   confirmed   by  Census  statistics.
In  1950  more  than  60  percent  of  all  urban  nonwhites
and  a  similar  proportion  of  urban  Spanish-name  house-
holds  in  the  Southwest  lived  in  substandard    dwellings
—units  either  dilapidated  or  lacking  sanitary  facilities.
The  proportion  of  urban  white  households  in  substand-
ard  housing  was  less  than  one-fifth  . . .
—Commission  on Race  and  Housing.
A  Three  Year  Study  Reveals  That  Federal  Housing  Practices  Foster  Jim  Crow
Segregation  Growing  Worse,  Not  Better,  in  The  Field  of Housing
While  racial  prejudice  in  our  country  has  been  declining,
and   integration  has  been  making  progress   on  other   fronts,
"segregation  barriers"  in  housing  were  in  most  cities  "tighter
in   1950   than  ten  years  earlier."   The  evidence   indicates,  ac-
cording  to  the  report  just  made  public  of  a  three  year  study
by  a  Commission  on  Race  and  Housing   (Where   Shall   We
Live?    Univ.   of    Calif.    Press,   Berkeley   and   Los    Angeles,
$1.50),  that  we are  confronted  with  "an  increasing  separation
of  racial  groups  as  non-whites  accumulate  in  the  central  city
areas  abandoned  by whites  and  the  latter  continually  move  to
new  suburban  subdivisions  from  which  minorities are  barred."
The  most  sensational  finding  is  that  Jim  Ctowism  is  on  the
march,  North  and  South,  insofar  as  housing  is  concerned,  and
where  housing  is  segregated  so  are  the   schools.
Where Southern Racists Look for  Allies
Another  unpleasant  discovery  is that  while  "in  many  South-
ern  cities, New  Orleans  for  example,  whites and  Negroes  have
historically  lived  interspersed  throughout  a  considerable  part
of  the  city,"  in  the  North   "neighborhoods   occupied  by  sec-
ond  generation  ethnic   groups  have  manifested   some  of   the
bitterest  resistance  to  Negro  entry.   Many  of  the  new  subur-
ban  residents,"  the  Commission  found,  "are  just  arriving  so-
cially  on  the  fringes  of  the  middle  class"  and  their  anxieties
about  their  social status lead  them  to  exclude  non-whites.  Such
group   animosities  in   the  North   and   the   ghetto-ization   of
Northern   cities  represent   exactly  the  kind   of   developments
on  which  diehard  racists  in  the  South  depend  for  the  spread
of  hatreds  which  would  give  them  new  allies.
Nullifying  Earlier Integration  Rulings
The   most  important   of  the   paradoxical   situations   uncov-
ered  by this  report,  which  the  Fund  for  the  Republic financed,
concerns  Federal  policy.   While  the  Federal  government  has
been  drawn  into  the  enforcement  of  the  1954  school  decision,
its  housing  agencies  have  undercut   the  Court's   earlier   deci-
sions  against  segregated  housing  and  racial  covenants.    The
Commission   found   that   "race  restrictive   housing   covenants
were  originated  by  private  real  estate  interests,  but  when  the
Federal  Housing  Administration  put  its approval  on  them  and
advocated   their   use,   they  acquired  a  status   and  a   sanction
which  they  had  not  before."    Public  housing  has  spread   seg-
regation  into  Southern  cities  which  had  not  known  it  formerly
in   the  field  of   housing.    Government   subsidies   for   private
builders  have  indirectly frozen  racial  exclusory  practices  which
the    Supreme    Court    outlawed    four    decades    ago.     Dis-
crimination  has  been  the  price  of  Southern  support  in  Con-
gress  for  public  housing;  officials  who  tried  to  fight  Jim  Crow
practices  were  purged.   The  Federal  government  has  steadily
refused  to  'proscribe discrimination  in  the  marketing  of  houses
built  with  government  assistance."   The  reaction  of  Albert  M.
Cole,  administrator of  the  Federal  Housing  and  Home  Finance
Agency  was  indicative.   His  response  to  the  criticism  in  the
report  was  to  declare  (New   York   Times,  Nov.   14)  that  he
believed  the  Federal  government  had  no  responsibility  to  end
racial  discrimination  in  housing.   The  double  standard  he  ap-
plies  was  implicit  in  his  statement   that  where  local  laws  en-
force  segregation,  his  Federal   agency   obeys  them.   On   the
other  hand,  where  local  laws  forbid  discrimination  his  agency
does  not  "knowingly  support  housing  that  violate"  these  laws.
The  truth  is that  FHHFA  knowingly  advances  segregation  in
the  South  and  manages  "unknowingly"  to  support  discrimina-
tion  in  the  North.
Real Estate and Lending Men on the  Commission
This  report  is  made  the  more  impressively  by  its  sources.
Two   distinguished   real   estate  men,   Peter   Grimm   of   New
York  and  Philip  M.  Klutznick  of  Park  Forest,  Illinois,  served
on  the  Commission.   Financing  practices  are  criticized  in  it,
though  the  Chairman,  Earl  B.  Schwulst,  and  two   members,
B.  Stewart  Rauch,  Jr.,  and  Robert  R.  Taylor,  help  to  run  re-
spectively  three  of  the  great  savings  banks  which  invest  in  the
housing  field,  the  Bowery  Savings  Bank  of  New   York,   the
Philadelphia  Saving Fund  Society and  the  Illinois  Federal Sav-
ings  and  Loan  of  Chicago.   A  Southern  white  business  man,
Stanley  Marcus,  of   the   famous  Neiman-Marcus   department
store  interests  of  Dallas,   served  on  the  Commission,   as  did
the  publisher,  Henry  R.  Luce  and  the  distinguished   Negro
educator,  Charles  S.  Johnson  of  Fisk.   Professor  Gordon   W.
Allport  of  Harvard,  who  has  written  so  ably  in  the  field  of
race  prejudice,  was also  on  the  Commission.   These  men  and
their  associates  deserve  the  highest   praise.
But  this  is  a  field  in  which  much  will  depend  on  middle
class  reaction in  the  North.   The  kind  of  intellectuals  who  are
so  swift   to  condemn   segregation   in   the   South   must   prove
their  sincerity where  it  hurts  by taking  the  leadership  to  com-
bat  segregation  in  the  North.   Blighted  areas  mean   blighted
lives,  and  a  new  wave  of  Fascism  could  easily  breed  in   the
spread  of  racial  conflicts  to  the  North.   Now  is  the  time,  in
the  neighborhoods,  to  act.   This  report,  ought  to  be  used  by
local  discussion  groups,  particularly  to  combat  the  fallacy  that
integration   in  housing   necessarily  means  a  fall   in   property
values.
Task for the  Grass Roots
The  report  deserves  the  fullest  public  support  in  its  recom-
mendation  to  the  President  that  he  establish  a  committee  on
the  elimination  of  discrimination  in  housing.   But   thoughtful
citizens  will  not  wait  for  a  glamorous  White  House  confer-
ence.   This  is a worthy  grass  roots  task,  the  final  challenge  to
our  creative  national  myth  of  the  melting  pot,   the  last  step
in  expanding  to  "nonwhites,"  Negro,  Mexican   and  Puerto
Ricans,  that  equality  of  treatment  and  of  opportunity   which
in  the  past   half   century  has  become   a  reality   for   so  many
white  ethnic  groups  once  despised  and  now  accepted.
1   8  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, November £4,1958
The  Tricky   Way  Mr.  Dulles  Made  Sure  Our  Reporters  Wouldn't  Get  Into  Red  China
State Dept. Uses McCarthyite Methods in Opening New Anti-Travel Campaign
Those   concerned  with  the  right  to  travel  had  better  get
busy.   The   State  Department  has  signalled   its  intention   to
seek  new  restrictive legislation  at  the  coming  session  of  Con-
gress.   At  the  last  session,  it  pushed  a  bill  through  the  House
but  failed  in  the  Senate.   A  speech  by  Roderic  L.  O'Connor,
administrator  of  the  Bureau  of  Security  and  Consular   Affairs
to  the  Veterans  of  Foreign   Wars  here  in  Washington   No-
vember  8,  indicates  that  the  Department  is  preparing  to  try
again,  and  that  it  will  use  McCarthyite  methods  in  its  cam-
paign.
Back  to  Government  by Slander
The  speech  reasserts  the  familiar  claim  to  control  travel  as
an  instrument  of  foreign  policy.    It  speaks  slightingly  of  the
right  to  travel  as  something  "newly  discovered"   by  Commu-
nists  and,  by implication,  the  Supreme  Court.   Like  McCarthy,
Mr.  O'Connor  smears  by name persons  convicted  of  no  crime,
though  he  admits  a shoddy lack  of  evidence  for  his  aspersions.
He  says  that  as a  result  of  the  Kent  and  Briehl 'cases,  the  De-
partment  has  received   596  passport  applications   "from   per-
sons  who  have  records  of  activity  in  support  of  the  interna-
tional  Communist  movement"   and  in  an  impassioned   finale
calls  these  applicants  "soldiers  of the enemy  . . . just  as clear-
ly  the  enemy  as were  the  troops  abroad  who  shot  at  you  and
me  in  World  War  II."    Yet  he  admits,   "Legally,   I  cannot
show  that  they  are  all  members  of  the  Communist  party.   I
cannot  prove  in  a  court  of  law  that  all,  or  even  a  large  por-
tion  of  them, are  espionage  agents  or  even  trained  subversives.
However,  as  a  group  they  share  one  thing  in  common.   Most
of  them  are  disciplined  and  obedient  to  the  policies  and  di-
rectives  of  international  Communism."   We  italicize  the  word
"most"  and  wonder  about  the  neither  disciplined  nor  obedient
remainder.  What  makes them  suspect ?  Membership  in  Group
Health?*
The  habit  of  treating  people  as  traitorous  without  firm  evi-
dence  is  characteristic  of   those   regimes  against  which   Mr.
* Among  the  suspected  new  applicants  whom  Mr.  O'Connor
mentions   by   name   is   Earl   Browder.   Apparently   the   De-
partment  still  hasn't  heard   of  his  break   with  Communism.
Dulles  claims  to  be  crusading.   We  suggest  that  since  it  may
be  a  long  time  before  Mr.  Dulles  can  reform  Krushchev,  he
get  into  practice  by  reforming  O'Connor.
Lesson in  Journalism
As  a  newspaperman  we  were  puzzled  by  Mr.  O'Connor's
reference  to  Anna  Louise  Strong.   He  protested  that  upon  re-
ceiving  a  passport  earlier  this  year  Miss  Strong   "promptly
visited  her  friends  in  the  Soviet  Union  and,  despite  the  pass-
port  restriction  against  travel  to  Communist  China,  she  went
from  there  to  Peking  where  she  is  still  visiting  and   talking."
Would  the  Department  have  preferred  Miss  Strong  to  sit  in
her  hotel  room quietly conspiring?   How  else  can  a writer  get
material  except  by  "visiting  and  talking"?   We  suggest  that
the  Associated Press Managing  Editors'  Association, which  has
just  voted  to  try  and  get  reporters  into  Communist  China,  ask
the  State  Department  what  other  means  the  Department  sug-
gests  for  newsgathering.
Why the Red Chinese Visas Never  Came
If   the   AP  Managing  Editors  really  mean  business,  they
ought  to  go  back  and  re-read  the  State  Department  announce-
ment  of  August  22,  1957,  agreeing  to  allow  24  newsgathering
organizations  to  send  one  representative  each  to  Communist
China.    This  represented  a  departmental   surrender  to  wide-
spread   protest   from   American  editors   but   it   contained   an
affront   calculated  to  make  it  unlikely  that  the  Chinese  Com-
munists  would  grant  our  newspapermen  visas.   "It   is  to  be
understood,"  the Department  said,  "that  the United  States  will
not  accord  reciprocal  visas  to  Chinese   bearing  passports   is-
sued  by  the  Chinese  Communist  regime."   This  explains  why
our   reporters  cooled   their   heels   in  vain  at  Hongkong   last
year  waiting  for  visas  which  never  arrived.   The  AP   Man-
aging  Editors,  if  they  want  Chinese  visas  for  our   reporters,
will  have  to  focus  attention  on  this  refusal  to  accord  similar
privileges  to  theirs.   What  have  we  to  lose  by  letting   their
reporters  see our  country?  Would  there  be  any  better  way  to
refute   the  distortions   of   Peking's   anti-American   campaign?
I  believe Mr.  Dulles  included  that  slap-in-the-face  deliberately
as  a  way  to  maintain  the  bamboo  curtain.
Widen  Our  Audience  and  Enlighten  Your  Friends  by  Giving  Them  The   Weekly   for   Christmas
L  F.  Stone's Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     .......................................................................—...........
Street    ............................................................................._......
City      ........................................Zone............State..............._
Enter  gift  sub for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  jr.)  additional:
n/24/aa
(To)   Name
Street     ........
City      ........................................Zone............Stst«..........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  D    No
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Monday*:  but  pn*.
listed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An  Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$6  In  the  U.  8.;  W  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Hall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED