I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958dec15.pdf

============================================================

Mr.  Duties  Goes  Confucian,  P.  3
Sevan's  Speech  Supporting  the  Rapacki  Plan  as  A  German  Solution,  See  Page  2____
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  49
DECEMBER  15,   1958
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Democrats  Abdicate  on  the  Issue  of War  or  Peace
"Never,"   says   the   policy   statement  newly   issued   by   the
Democratic  Advisory  Council,  "have  crises  broken  around  us
so  fast  and   so  violently  and   caught  our  government  so  un-
prepared  as  in  the  Middle  1-ast  during  July,  in  Quemoy  dur-
ing  September,  over  Berlin   in   November."
But   in  none  of  these  areas  does  the  Council   offer   alterna-
tive   policies;   a   close  reading  of   the   statement   reveals  that
the  Democrats  are  fully  as  unprepared.    The   panacea  of   the
opposition  turns  out  to  be  the  practice  of  the Administration
--a  heavily  armed  rigidity.    The  Democratic  policy  statement
proposes,  as  if  it  were  a  brand  new  idea,  "a  level  of  deterrent
military  power,  now  and   in  the  future,   such  as  to  leave  no
doubts   in   the   minds   of   the   Russians   and   the   Communist
Chinese  that  they  must  not  start  a  war  or  allow  one  to  start."
Or,  as  Mr.  Truman  put  it  less  elegantly  next  day  in  a  speech
to  the  National  Press  Club,  "There  is  only  one  way  to  deal
with   those   fellows—have   more  guns   than  they   do   and   be
ready  to  shoot  them  if  they  start  a  war."    This   is  to  aban-
don   diplomacy  for   arms  race,  negotiations  for   threat,   flexi-
bility  for   frozen,   sitting-duck,  postures.
Just  Like Win.  S.  (Two-Gun  Bill)  Hart
Mr.   Truman   grows   more   intrepid  with   the   years.     He
plunges   into   the   complexities  of   foreign   policy   with   the
audacity  of  a  Wild  West  movie  hero.    Our  most  striking cul-
tural  lag  seems  to  be  at  the  very  top  of  our  society.    In  the
atomic  age,  the  United  States  has  a  President  who   dotes  on
Western  stories  and  an  ex-President,  leading  the   opposition,
who  draws  his   inspiration   from  the   same  classics.    Y'gotta
be   quick   on   the   draw   find   shoo!   from   the   hip;   the   other
fellow   is  a  plain  low  down  ornery   cuss  belter  dead   anyhow.
This  is  the  spirit  in, which  William  S.  Hart—Two  Gun   Bill
—ruled  the  badlands   in  the  old  silent  film  days  and  this  is
the  spirit  in  which  Mr.  Truman   seems  to  dominate  the  Ad-
visory   Council,   apparently   to   the   frustration    of   its   more
thoughtful  members,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  Finletter  speech
quoted  in  the  box  on  this  page.
How  do  the  Democrats   feel  about  nuclear  testing?   What
do  they  think  about  recognition  of  China?   Do  they  see  any
need  for  a  new  approach  to  German  reunification?   Are  they
for   the   nuclear   training   of   the   new  West  German   army?
Their   policy  statement   makes  no   reference  to   any  of   these
problems.   It  straddles  the  armament  issue,  at  one  point  call-
ing   for   new   mobile  divisions   (as   advocated   by  those   who
believe  in  limited  nuclear  war),   declaring  that  defense  needs
must   not   be   subordinated   to   budgetary   considerations.    At
another   point   it  calls  for   "total   disarmament  down   to   the
levels  needed   for   local   policing"   but   only  as  the  end  of   a
"reliable  stage  by  stage  plan."   This  resembles  the  cumber-
some  package   proposal  to  which  the  Administration   clings.
A  Protest  From  the  Inside
'There  has  been  a  curious debate  from  time  to  time
by  the  politicians,  which  is—is  this  question  of  foreign
l.o'.icv   :'ii   issue   in   which   the   people   are   interested?
Shouldn't  we  stick  to  the  bread  and  butter  issues  that
are  Koing  to  win  votes?    Aren't  the  people  really  basi-
cally  disinterested  in  all  these  complex  questions  of  de-
fense,  the  ICBM,  the  Far  East,  Southeast   Asia,  Berlin
and  all  the  rest?    Some  little  fringe,  the  politicians  tell
us   sortie  few  of  the  intellectuals   may  be  interested  in
these  things,  but  not  the  great   mass  of  voters ...  I
think  it  is  about  time  .  .  .  that  we  stop  this  nonsense.
"In  the   first   place,  il   is  immoral.   How   a  party  can
seriously  fail  to  put  the  question  of  war  and  peace   at
the  very  top  of  the  matters  in  which  it  is  interested,  I
cannot  understand.   If  there  were  not  a  single  vote  in
it.   it  would  be  shocking.  .  .  .  This  idea  that  people  are
not  interested   in  it   [foreign   policy]   is  complete   non-
Kcp.^e ...  an  intolerably  condescending  attitude.    Pre-
cisely  why  is  it  that  these  wise  politicians  are  so  con-
vinced  that  the  American  people  haven't  brains  enough
or  heart  enough  to  be  interested  .  .  .  ?
"We  are  carrying  on  our  foreign  policy  .  .  .  pretty
much   the   same   way   we  would  have  done   before   the
davs  of  the  atom  bomb—with  an  attitude:  sure,  we  are
going  to  do  our  best  to  protect  our  interests  without  a
war,    but   basically   we   do   not   believe   there   is   much
chance  of  that ...  in  the  meantime .  .  .  play  a  game  of
chess  with  the  other  fellow,  sort  of  blocking  him  hither
and  yon  .  .  .  and  generally  hope  for  the  best.  .  .  .
"I  don't  see  any  real  deep  concern  in  the  Republican
Administration  with  the  menace  of  war,  and  as  a  result
mighty   little   effort   to   do   anything  about   it.     But   I
must  say  that  I  don't   see   anything  very   much  better
on  the  Democratic  side."
—Thomas  K.  Fluli tin-,  fo,-nnr   Ah-  Force  Secretary,
member  AdininistnitU'i'  Committee, Democratic.  Ad-
I'iaoi a  Coiinc'l,  atldreRxhig   the   Women's  Suburban
Democratic  Club   in   Washington,   Dec.    ,V,   the    day
after    the   Council   tunned  its  policy  statement.
t    9
The  silence  on  nuclear  testing  is  striking,  when  one  recalls
Adlai  Stevenson's   initiative  in  the   1956   campaign.    One  ex-
pected  the  Democrats  to  boast  that  Mr.  Eisenhower  was  only
doing  at  Geneva   what   they  long  ago  advocated.   Does  the
silence  reflect  Mr.  Truman's  opposition?   Mr.  Truman  in  his
press  club  speech   again  criticized  Mr.   Eisenhower   for   "sur-
rendering"  in  Korea.   Does  he  in  the  same  spirit  oppose  the
Geneva  talks?   Or   is  the   silence  the  familiar  State  Depart-
ment  attitude,  common   to  both  the  Dulles  and   Acheson   re-
gimes,   that   considers  foreign   policy   an   esoteric   matter   too
complex  for  the  common  man's  understanding,   too  sacred   to
be  profaned  by  debate   in  public?    Is  Mr.   Truman's  inane
give-em-hell   demagogy  about the  G.  O.  P.  being  the  "bloated-
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  15,1958
Three  D's  for  Germany  and  Central  Europe:  Disengagement,  Denuclearization,  Demilitarization
Bevan  Backs  Rapacki  Plan  in  the  Commons   Debate  on  Berlin
The  Berlin  crisis  was  the  focns  of  the  foreign   policy  de-
bate  by  the  British  House  of  Commons  Dec.  4.   We   reprint
here  the  speech  of  Aneurin  Bevan  for   the  Labor  Party,  as
reported   in  the  next  morning's   Times   of  London.    We  be-
lieve  it  deserves  close  study   by  those  who  would  like  to  see
the  Democratic  party  in  this  country  develop  a coherent  and
peaceful    opposition   view  in  foreign    policy.—IFS.
'  The  Russian  proposal  to  turn  Berlin  into  a  free  city  was
impracticable,  and  also  unacceptable.  The  Opposition  did  not
believe that  it  was  a  serious  proposal,  but  they  did not  believe
that  the  present  situation   \vas  acceptable  either,  because  it
\vas  always  going  to  be  a  source  of  trouble  in  Europe.  .  .  .
"The  Opposition said  that  a  solution  must  be found  for  the
Berlin  problem, but  a  solution  for  the  Berlin  problem  was  a
solution  for  the  German  problem, and  a  solution  for  the  Ger-
•man  problem  was  a  solution  for  the  European  problem.
"Mr.  Krushchev  was  quite right  in  his  Note  when  he  said
that  the  increasing  rearming  of  west  Germany  was  a  source
of  alarm   to  Poland  and  Russia.    It  alarmed  him,  too.    Dr.
Adenauer  said  to  his  own  party  on  Tuesday  that  he  was  not
ready  for  a  peace  treaty,  and  not  ready  to  discuss  the  future
of   Germany  with  the   Russians  because   they  'were  not   yet
ready  to  discuss  the  problems  of  Germany's  eastern   frontiers.
Nothing  could  be  more  provocative  than  that.
Waiting   for  the  Strength  to  Blackmail?
"What  was  Dr.  Adenauer  waiting  for ?  He  had  said  before
that  he did not  intend that Germany's  eastern  frontiers  should
be  settled  other  than  by  peaceful  negotiations.  Was  Dr.  Aden-
auer  waiting  until west  Germany's  armed  forces  were  strong-
er  so  that  western  Germany  could  take  a  more  independent
line?
"Members   were  being   asked   to  face  the  realities  of   the
European  situation.   For  too long  they  had  buried  their  heads
in  the  sand.   Years  ago  the  Opposition  had  been  saying  that
the  re-arming  of  western  Germany  would  not  be  a  source of
strength  to  the  west   but  a  source  of  alarm   to  Poland  and
eastern  Germany.  That  was  not  only  the  Opposition's  view,  it
was  the  view  of  a  large  number  of  Germans.
"It  would  be  a  mighty  contribution  to  the  cause  of  peace  if
there  was  a  withdrawal  of  the  great  Powers  from  each  other
in  central  Europe.
Reiterating the  Same Stale Formula
"Today  the  Foreign   Secretary   had  reiterated  the   western
proposal  that  no  move  could  be  made  towards  a   European
security  system  which  did  not  lirst  begin  by  a  reunited  Ger-
many under free elections.
"It  was  unrealistic  to  expect  the  Russians  to  agree  to  a  re-
united   and  rearmed  Germany   joining   the  western  alliance.
This  had  become axiomatic.  If  they  were  to  have  the  reuni-
fication of  Germany which would  assimilate  the  Berlin  trouble,
it  must  be  assumed  that  a  reunited  Germany  should  not  join
the  NATO alliance.
"Did   Conservative  HP's  believe  in  their  hearts  that  a  re-
armed   Germany   would  really   be  a   decisive   contribution   to
the   maintenance  of  peace?   There   were   few   members  who
would  say  'Yes'  to  that  privately.   Having  rearmed   Germany
we  would  have  insoluble  problems  on  our  hands.   If  Germany
insisted  that  the  Oder-Neisse  line  should  be  reconsidered  and
Polish  fears  were  roused,  the  Russians  would  have  to  decide
either  to  let  down  one  of  their  protegees  and  accept  German
blackmail,  or  resist  German  blackmail  and  face   conflict.
"That  was  what  the  Russians  meant  when  they  said  they
were  afraid  of  Germany.  They  feared   a  situation   might  be
reached when  they  could be  put  in  the  dilemma  of  either  hav-
ing  to  lose  face  and  dismantle  and  demoralize  the   Warsaw
pact  or face  a  resumption  of  hostilities.  To avoid  such  a  situa-
tion  arising  was  the  essence  of diplomacy.
The  Path  to National Greatness
"Mr.  HKALEY  (Leeds,  East.  Lab.)  The  Government
were   much   preoccupied  with   the   pursuit   of   national
greatness.    National  greatness  would  not  be  achieved
by   multiplying   its   power   to   destroy.    It    could   be
achieved  at  one  stroke  in  breaking  the  present   dead-
lock  and  leading  humanity  to  peace."
—Debate   on  Berlin,  House  of  Commons,  Dec.  It.
"Fortunately  Poland  had  a  profound  interest  in  preventing
such  a  situation  from  developing,  because  it  was  Poland  that
might  be carved up  in  an  effort  to  prevent  resumption  of  war.
Po'and  was  anxious  that  that  situation  should  not  arise.
''Polish  fears  put  the  most  effective  levers  in  British  hands
at  the  moment,  but  they  would  not  be  there  long  because  the
situation  was  getting  more  and  more   difficult.
"The   Pobs   said,  'For   Heaven's   sake   let   the   occupying
Powers  take  their  armies  from   central  Europe.'  The  Poles
were   sufficiently  statesmanlike  to  realize  that  their   problem
could  not  bs  solved  without solving  the  German  problem,  and
so  they  put  forward  this  [Rapacki]  plan.
"If   the  Germans  could  accept  a  solution  of  that  kind,  and
they  would  accept  it  if  it  was  put  forward  authoritatively  by
their  allies,  would  our  position  be  worsened ?  .  .  .
' The  Foreign  Secretary  had  asked  the  Opposition  whether
they  considered  that  such  an  eventuality  would  still  leave  the
great  Power  blocks,  in  relatively  the  same  relations   of  mili-
tary   strength.   The   Opposition  said   'Yes.'   Mr.   Lloyd   also
asked  if  the  Opposition  thought  we  could  afford   the  loss  of
U.S.  support  in  Europe.  The  answer  was  'No'  as  things  were
at  present.  Tha  Opposition  believed  that  until  these  various
stages  had  been crossed  it was  necessary that  we gave  no  ex-
cuse  for  any  incidents  and,  therefore,  the  Opposition  thought
the  American  forces  should  still  remain  in  Europe.
A  Glimmer of  Hope  for  Hungary
"But  why  should  American  forces  have  to  leave  Europe  if
there  was  an  area  of  disengagement  in  central  Europe  con-
sisting   of   eastern   Germany,  western   Germany,   Czechoslo-
vakia,  and   the   Opposition   would  hope,  Hungary?    If   they
could  have  this  European  security   system   in  the  centre  of
Europe,  at   first   Hungary  might   not  be  allowed  to  join   or
might  not  join,  but  it  would  be  there,  and  would help  to  solve
that  problem  too.
"He   [Bevan]   discussed   with  representative   Germans  last
December  the  problem  of  recognizing  the  east  German  gov-
ernment.   In  the  early  stages  that  would  not  be  necessary.
All  that  would  be  needed  in  the  early  stages  would be  for  the
four  Powers to  decide  the  framework  and  basic  principles  for
the  future  of  Germany.  After  they  were  decided  there  would
have  to  be  representatives   from  eastern  Germany  because  all
kinds  of  problems  wou'd  have  to  be  solved.    They  could  then
be  discussed without  loss  of  face  to  either  side.
"The   representative    Germans  he   spoke   to   saw   nothing
wrong  in  that.  We  had  tied  ourselves  to  a  credo  about   Ger-
many   which   had   become  more   and   more   unrealistic   and
dangerous.
'The  House  was  discussing  more  than  the  future  of  Ger-
many;  rather  the  future  of  the  human  race.  The   immediate
problem  of  the  recasting  of  European  frontiers  and  the  future
of   Germany  was  seen  against  a  background  which  was  in-
creasingly  alarming  every  thoughtful  person  in  the   world.
"Was   it  not  time  we  got  off  the  escalator  and  started  to
walk?  The  escalator   was  carrying  us  inevitably  to  destruc-
tion.   Every  one  was  beginning  to  develop  a  kind  of  air  of
inevitability.  The  time  had  come,  and  long  past,  when  Great
Britain  should  rise  to its  feet  and give the  world  the  lead  that
the  world  was  now  asking  for.   (Opposition  cheers)."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  15,1958
Mr.  Dulles  Finds  Reasons  for  Non-Recognition  Straight  Out  of   Confucius
On  the  Alarming  Decline  of  Ancestor  Worship  in  the  New   China
Working  up  toward  the  climax  of  his  speech  in  San  Fran-
cisco  on  why  we  ought  never—yes,  never—to  recognize Com-
munist  China,  Mr.  Dulles touched on the  danger  it  represented
to  traditional  Chinese  culture.   "The  venerated  graves  of  an-
cestors,"   said  the   Secretary   of  State,  with  an  almost   Con-
fucian   indignation,  "are   everywhere  being  desecrated."    We
are  sorry  he  did  not  continue  in  this  vein.  It  is  not  only  an-
cestor  worship which  is  declining.  Marriages  are  being  con-
tracted  in  China  without  casting  the  horoscopes  of  bride  and
groom,  and  houses  are  being built without  testing  the  site  for
malevolent  spirits.   Such  defiance  of  Heaven  must  sooner  or
later  bring  the  regime's   downfall.
Mr.   Dulles   spoke   of   the   horrors    being   visited    on   the
Chinese.    "Individuality  and   personality   are   brutally   sup-
pressed,"  Mr.  Dulles  said.   In  the  good  old  days,  the  poorest
coolie  or  rickshaw  hoy,  after   his   day's  work   in   Shanghai,
cou'.d   shop   around   according   to   individual   taste   (as   his
counterparts  still  do  in  Cairo  and  Calcutta)  before  deciding
which  dooi-way  or  gutter  he  would  sleep  in  that  night.   Per-
sonality  flowered.   "Children,"  Mr.  Dulles  went  on  with  his
description  of  the  new  commune  system,  "are  placed  in whole-
sale  nurseries,  so that  the  women cas  also  be part  of the  slave
labor."   In  the  good  old  days,  there  were  no  "wholesale"—or
even  private,  retail—nurseries;  children  were  not  separated
from  their  mothers;  both worked.
Where  the  Good  Old Days  Still Exist
The  good  old  days  still  exist  in  Hong  Kong.   A  few  days
after  Mr.  Dulles  spoke,  Peggy  Durdin  provided  a  description
in  the  New   York   Times  Magazine   (Dec.  7)  of  conditions  in
that  city.  "In  some  families,"  Miss  Durdin wrote  of  the  more
fortunate,  "the  father  has  a  permanent  job, perhaps  at  piece-
work  ten  hours  a  day  seven  days  a  week  in  a  Chinese factory;
his wife  embroiders  at  home  while  looking after  three  under-
nourished  children."
Even  into  this  paradise,  the  serpent  of  social  reform  has
been   creeping.    Miss  Durdin  wrote   of  a  new  regulation   to
limit  the  hours  of  working  women  and  children—but  not  men
—to ten  hours  a  day  and  six  days  a  week.  She  quoted  a  lead-
ing   Hong  Kong  paper,   the  South   China   Morning   Post,  as
warning  that  the  city  must  "make  gradual,  not  revolutionary
progress  in  this  type  of  social  reform."   A  few  more  years  of
godless  propaganda  and  the  male  workers  of  Hong  Kong  will
be demanding Sunday  off, too.
This  change   in  hours  for   women  and  children  is  due  to
foreign   influence.   John   G.  Morris  in  the   Washington   Post
(Nov.   5)   reported   from    Hong   Kong  that   the   regulation
against" work  for  women  and  children  more  than   6  days  a
week  and  10 hours  a  day  was  imposed  by  the  British  colonial
authorities  because  the  home  government  complained of com-
petition  in  cheap  textiles.  (Here  we  see  how  the  proletariat
benefits   from   colonialism.)    The  blow  was  softened   for   the
Hong  Kong  capitalist,  according  to  Mr.  Norris,  by  attaching
to  the  new regulation  "no guarantee  that  overall  wages would
Separate  But  Equal Voting?
One  way  to  compromise  the  voting  issue  might  be  to
promise   that   if   the   South   allowed   Negroes   to   vote,
Congress   in   return   would   legalize   segregated   ballot
boxes.
not  be reduced." Thus  the  pious  millowner  will  still  be  able  to
maintain  the  graves  of  his  ancestors   in  the  style  to  which
they  have  become  accustomed.
Troubles  Nice  People  Don't  Talk  About
"Pew  Hong  Kong  residents,"  Miss  Durdin  wrote,  "face  the
ugly  possibility that  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people,  without
' the  elementary   right  to  work,  in  daily  view  of  luxury   and
plenty,   repress   resentments   that   might    one   day   tragi-
cally  explode  into  violence."  When  it  comes  we  may  expect
Mr.  Dulles  to  attribute  the  outbreak   to  indirect  aggression,
subversive  propaganda  and  the  lack  of  sound  religious  train-
ing.   In  Hong  Kong's  better  circles,  Miss  Durdin  wrote,  "it  is
just  not  chic"  to  talk  of  the  surrounding   misery.   This,  too,
is  reminescent  of  the  good  old  days  everywhere   in  Asia.
Hong  Kong  teems,  of  course,  with  refugees  from  the  Com-
munist  mainland  and  their  flight—like  that  of  others  coming
across   Soviet  borders—testifies  to  much  that  is  wrong   with
the  new regimes.  But  we had  better  not  lean  back  with  smug
satisfaction.   The  misery  of the  China  mainland  is  the  misery
of  a  people  struggling  hard  with  bare  hands  to  make  a  leap
forward  out  of  poverty;  it  holds  a  promise  for  the  future  not
to  be  found  in  the  slums  of  Hong  Kong,  i.e.  in  the  good  old
days.  We are  being  blinded  by  hateful  propaganda  to  the  im-
mense  strides  forward   of  the  new  China.
No.  3  in  Steel  Production
We pass on one item  out  of many.  The  Baltimore  Sun   (Dec.
9)  carried  a  dispatch  from  its  London  bureau  citing  a  British
trade  letter.  It  reported  that  this  current  "year  of the  great
leap"  (as  the  Chinese  Communists call  it)  may  enable   China
in  1959  to  surpass  Britain,  West  Germany  and  France  and  to
become  the  world's  third  largest  producer   of  iron  and  steel
after   the  USA  and  the  USSR.  The  British  Council  for   the
Promotion  of  International   Trade  says  this  marks  "a  scale of
growth  for  which  no  previous  parallel  exists  in  any  country"
and that  the  Peking  planners  have  repeatedly  underestimated
the  rise  in  steel  output.
A   giant   is   awakening,   dragging   itself   up   by   its   boot-
straps  out  of  poverty.    It  is  not  wise  to  shut  our  eyes  to  this
progress.   It  is  not  charitable  for  a  people  as  rich  and  well-
favored  as  our  own to  survey  the  scene -with the  self-righteous
distortions  of  Mr.  Dulles.  The  day  may  come  when  the  new
China,  too,  will  have  ample  means  to  look  after  the  tombs of
its  ancestors.
Edgar  Snow  on  Chiang  Kai-shek:  "A  Scavenger  Among  the  Relics  of  the  Past"
"Under  Chiang  Kai-shek's  government  some  attempt  was
made  to  establish  rule  by  constitution  and  law,  some  roads
were  built,  modern  banks were  established, some  flood  con-
trol   work   progressed,   scientific   study  was   somewhat   en-
couraged,  educational  facilities improved,  and  women began
to   claim   legal   equality  with   men.     Modernization   along
such  lines   was  certainly  more  rapid  than  under  previous
regimes;  had  there  been  no Japanese  invasion  Chiang might
have  succeeded   in  unifying  the   country  under  right-wing
dictatorship.   But  the  whole  pace  of  change  was  too  slow  to
cope  with the  deep crisis  inside  Chinese  society.  Increasingly
Chiang  resorted  to  despotism  to  hold  back  the  tidal demand
for   revolutionary  measures.
"It  was,  however,  unfair  to  call  Chiang a  despot  and  let  it
go  at  that.  ,  .  .  He  was  not  a  great  tyrant,  only  a  petty  one
...  he never  understood that  his  worst  enemies  were  in  his
own   camp.   Chiang  was   not  resolute,  only   obstinate;   not
wise,  only  obsolete;  not  original,  only  a  scavenger   among
the  relics  of   the  past;   and  not  ruthless,   merely  vain—as
none  knew  better  than  the  greedy  parasites  who  surrounded
and  finally  consumed  him."
—Edgar  Snow's  new  book: Journey  to the  Beginning.
1   9   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  15,1958
The  Key  European  Issue  Is  Still  the  Nuclear  Rearmament  of  Germany
(Continued   from   Page    One)
bondholder   party"   (as  in  the  Press  Club  speech)   considered
good   enough   for   the   ignorant   rabble,   while   its  betters  in
private  decide  the  issues  of  war  and   peace?
It  is  time  to  look  back  over  the  events   of   the   least  two
decades  and  see  how  many  historic  decisions  have  been   taken
without   public   consultation   and   debate,   though   these   may
foreclose   our   fate.    The   first   two   may  be   excused   on   the
ground   that   they   were   taken   in   war-time;   these   were   the
decision  to  develop  the  atom  bomb  and  the  decision  to  drop
it  on  Hiroshima.    But  the  others   were  made   in  peace  time.
There  was  the   decision   to  go   ahead   and   try   to   make   the
H-bomb   without   an   effort   to   negotiate    a   stopping   point
with   the   Russians;  this   decision,   which   Oppenheimer   op-
posed  with  tragic  consequences  for  himself,  might  never  have
been  known  at  the  time  if  former  Senator  Johnson   of   Colo-
rado  had   not   blurted   out   news  of   the   H-bomb   in   a  radio
interview.  Then  came  the  decision to  make  nuclear  arms  "con-
ventional, "  i.e.   to  make  any   future   war   nuclear,   and  now
we  are  getting  ready  to  make  Germany  a  nucleat  power,  again
without   debate.
Humphrey  Plays  It  Safe
So  powerful   is   the   hold   of   decisions  made   by   a  small
inner  group   that   even   Senator   Humphrey  at  his  press   con-
ference  on  his  return  from  Moscow   said  German   policy  was
not   something   for  any  "ordinary  Senator"   to  discuss!     He
defended   the  nuclear  rearmament  of  Germany  by  saying  that
we  were  keeping  custody  of  the  nuclear  arms  to  be  sent  the
Reich  and  that  the  German   army  was  merely   being   trained
in  their  use.*   The  Senator,  with  his  eye  on  the  Presidency,
is  obviously  intent  on  keeping  in  with  the  inner  circle,  show-
ing  himself  loyal  to  its  cliches  and  dependably  devoted  to  its
stereotypes,   a  "safe  man,"   despite   the  fact  that   liberals  and
Mrs.   Roosevelt   like  him.
Everywhere   else   in   the   world   there   is   debate   on   Ger-
many,   including  the   Reich  itself.    Our   papers,   ballyhooing
the  West  Berlin  elections  of  last  Sunday  as  an   overwhelming
defeat   for   the   Communists,  slid   over   the   more   important
fact   that   they  showed   a   larger   majority   than   last   time   for
* The  Senator  deplored  the  interpretation  given  his  news  conference
in  Geneva  Nov.   22. which  Implied  that  the  path  to  a  settlement  with
Moscow  lay  in  abandoning:  nuclear  rearmament  for  West  Germany;
he  claimed  he  was  misunderstood.
VACATION  NOTICE
The  Weekly  is  published  48  times  a  year.
Ordinarily  it  does  not  go  to  press  the  last  two
Thursdays  in  August  or  December.   (Actually
this  year  49  issues  were  published.   Because  of
what  seemed  to  be  an  imminent  summit  meet-
ing,  we took  no  vacation during August  and  this
issue  is  Vol.   VI,  No.  49.)    The  Weekly  will  not
appear the  next two weeks.  Our next issue,   Vol.
VII,   No.  1,  will  go  to  press  Dec.    31,   and  be
dated   Jan.   5.    We  wish  our  readers  a  festive
holiday  and  a  happy  New  Year.
the   Social  Democrats,   who   want   to  negotiate   a  neutralized
Germany,   over   Adenauer's   Christian  Democrats,    who   find
even  Mr.  Dulles  too  flexible  for  their  taste.   In  Britain   (see
page  two)   the  opposition   has  a  clear  alternative  policy;  in
Canada,  Lester  Pearson  advocates  disengagement.    Only  here
there   is  no   alternative  offered   by   the   opposition   and   even
Humphrey  comes  back  from   Moscow  with  a  stultifying  for-
mula:  we  need  do  nothing  but  stand  firm  on  Berlin.
Far  More  Dangerous   Than   Korea
Berlin,   Humphrey   says,   is   only   a   "probing"   operation.
But  the  "probe"  tests  our  brains  as  well  as  our   resolution.
Berlin   is  only  the   most   dramatic  of   a  number   of    exposed
Western  salients that  give  Moscow  and  Peking  the  initiative;
they  can  turn  it  on  or  shut   it  off  as  they  please  because  our
position   is  so  exposed.   Berlin  can  only  be  saved  from  sub-
mersion  by  solving  the  problem   of  German   reunification;  in
the   long   run   the  position  of   West  Berlin  is  otherwise   un-
tenable.   But  the   Hast  will  no  more  agree  to  a  reunified   re-
armed  Germany  in  NATO  than  we  would  to  a  reunified  re-
armed  Germany   in  the  Warsaw   pact.    Yet  so  long  as   Ger-
many  is  split,  it  is  a  more  dangerous  European  Korea,  more
dangerous  because  of   the   exposed   and   encircled  position  of
West   Berlin.   A  majority  of  the  city's  voters  are  against   the
Free  City   proposal;  they  don't   trust  the  East  to  honor   that
status  and  we  don't  blame  them.  . But  a  majority  of  the  city's
voters  are  also  for  trying  to  negotiate  a  way  out  of   the  im-
passe   by   negotiating   a   neutral   Germany.     Our    press   ap-
plauds  them   for   the  first  and   ignores   them   on  the   second.
Where  do  the  Democrats  stand  on  this?   Why  should   they
and  Humphrey  be  allowed  to  duck  the  question?
Drift   is  not  statesmanship.  West  Berlin  will  not  be  saved
by  rigidity.   We   suggest   that  the  real  question  which  ought
to   be  thrown  open   to   debate   is  this:   Irrespective   of   what
the  Russians think  (why  must  we  always  react  to  them,   in-
stead   of  thinking  on  our  own?),   is  it  to  America's  advan-
tage,  will  it  make  Western   Europe  more   secure,   if  we   pro-
ceed  to  make  West   Germany  a  nuclear  military  power?   On
the  basis  of  bitter  experience,  twice  repeated   in  our   lifetime,
is  it  safe  to  trust  them  with  such  weapons?    Can  we  be  sure
that  they  will  not  use  them  to  blackmail  a  new  partition  of
Poland   and   make  a  new   deal   with   Moscow?   Wouldn't  a
neutral  Germany  without  arms  be  a  safer  bet  for  both  sides?
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED