I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958aug18.pdf

============================================================

The  Arthur Miller   Victory,  P.  4
Fulbright  On  How  the  Red  Menace  Has  Blinded  II.  S.  Foreign   Policy,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  32
AUGUST   18,   1958
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Gambling  In  Ignorance  With  Lives  Yet  Unborn
The   problems  which  confront   mankind   in  nuclear  testing
and  nuclear  war  are  moral  and  political,  not  scientific.   There
is  no  way  to  avoid  these  moral  and   political  responsibilities
by  referring the  problems  to  the  scientists, as  if  we  could  thus
get  a  mechanical  and  exact  reply.   The   report  of  the  United
Nations  Scientific  Committee  on  the  Effects  of  Atomic  Radia-
tion  contains  no  surprises.   It  finds  that  nuclear  testing  "in-
volves  new  and  largely  unknown  hazards  to  present  and  fu-
ture  populations"  and  that  cessation  of  testing  would   benefit
human  health.   The  decision  as  to  whether  this  risk  is  justi-
fiable   remains  a  political  decision  "outside   the   scope"    (as
the  majority   conclusions  say)  of  the  committee's authority.
To   understand   this   report  and   its  inconclusive   character,
one  must  see  it  in  the  perspective  of  what  science  does  not
know.   Three  statements  may  be  made  with  certainty  in  this
whole  field,  but  all  three  are  negative.   The  first  is  that  in
the  half  century  or  so  with  which  man  has  become   familiar
with  radiation,  first  through  the  discovery of  the  X-ray  and
more  recently   with   nuclear  fission  and   fusion,   he  has   con-
stantly   underestimated  its  dangers.    "By   1922,"   as  this  re-
port  says,  "about   100  radiologists  had  died  from  its   effects."
Since   1928   there  has  been  an  International  Commission  on
Radiological   Protection  which  fixes  safe  standards  of  maxi-
mum  permissible  exposure  for   persons  working  with  radio-
active  materials.   It  is  striking  that  in  the  past  generation  the
supposedly  safe  standards  have  been   steadily  reduced   from
2500  units  ("rems")  a  year  to  5  units.   The  more  we  learn
the  greater  the  danger  seems  to  be.  Year  by year  the   "safety"
level  has  been   lowered.
The  Data  Is  Triply   Inadequate
The   second  statement  which  can  be  made  with  certainty
in  this  field  is  that   the  basis  of  our   estimates  as  to   danger
are   inadequate.    They   are   inadequate   in   three   ways.    They
are   inadequate  statistically;   the   number   of   cases  studied   is
far  too  small,  the  samplings  too  spotty,  to  enable  us  to  draw
conclusions  from  them  which  can  reliably  be  applied   to  the
whole   world   population.    The   scientific  data   is  also   inade-
quate  in  that  so  much  of  it  deals  not  with  humans  but  with
other  forms  of  life,  some  as  different  from  us  as  unicellular
animals.   Even  in  the  case  of  experiments  on  so  closely  re-
lated  a mammal  as the  mouse,  "man  and  mouse  are sufficiently
different,"   as  this   UN   report   warns,   to   make   conclusions
drawn   from   mice   "particularly   uncertain"   when  applied   to
man.
The   data  available  on   radiation   danger   is  inadequate   in
another  respect.    What  we  need  to  learn  is the  danger  to  man
from  low  levels  of  radiation  over  extended  periods  of  time—
his   30  years  of   reproductive  capacity  in  order   to  assess   the
genetic  dangers,  his  70  year  life  span  to  determine  the  so-
9  *
malic  danger   from   cancers  and   other   possible  radiation-in-
duced   disorders.    But  most   of   our   knowledge   is  based   on
experiments   with   high   levels  of   radiation,   large   doses  ap-
plied   to  other  species  of   life   in   the   laboratory   or   to   men
through   accidents.   "At    present,"   as   the   UN    Committee
points  out,  "opinions  as  to  the  possible  effects  of  low  radia-
tion   levels  must  be   based  only  on   extrapolations   from  ex-
perience  with  high   doses  and  dose  rates."   Yet—as  the  re-
port  recognizes—inferences  drawn  from  experience with  short
high  doses  may  prove  a  poor  guide  to  experience  with  pro-
longed   low  doses.   Man,  the   report   warns,   "may   prove   to
be  unusually  vulnerable  to  ...      continuous   exposure   at  low
levels,  on  account   of  his  known  sensitivity  to  radiation,   his
long  life,  and  the  long  interval  between  conception  and   the
end   of   the   period   of   reproduction."    These   uncertainties
emphasize   the   responsibilities   of   our   generation.   We   are
gambling  with  the  lives  of  the  unborn.
Fall-Out  Not   At   All  Uniform
There   is  a  third  statement  which  can  now  be  made   with
certainty   in  this   field.   Fallout   from   weapons   testing   is  so
non-uniform   in  its  distribution  as  to  make  nonsense  of  esti-
mates  as  to  danger  based  on  so-called  world-wide  averages—
as   in   the   UN    report   itself.    Though    the   report   is   stuffily
academic  and  points  none  of  this  up,  a  careful  and   studious
reading  of  the  full  text  and  the  annexes  will  show  how  com-
pletely  our  Atomic  Energy  Commission  spokesmen   like   Dr.
W.  F.  Libby  misled  us  in  talking  as  if  fallout  were  uniform.
If  fallout  were  uniform,  then  the  danger  would  be uniformly
distributed  around  the  earth  and   averages   would   be  mean-
ingful  and  trustworthy.   But  if  fallout  is  not  uniform,  then
the  averages  (like  the  average  of  your  income  and  John  D.
Rockefeller,  Jr.'s)   are  meaningless.   Whole  States,   countries
or   regions   may  have  an   incidence  of   fallout   so   far   above
the  world-wide average  as  to  be  dangerous.  Nowhere  is  this
report  so  disappointing  as  in  its  failure  to  discuss  this  prob-
lem  of  world-wide averages,  and  the  related  problems  of  what
levels   of  radiation  can  be  considered   safe  when   applied   to
the  world's  population  rather  than  merely  to  persons   work-
ing  with  radioactivity.    (The   report  limits  its  discussion  of
this  last  question  to  a  cryptic  footnote  in  small  type  on  page
42).
So-called  "local"  fallout  may  affect  areas  "several  thousand
kilometres   from   the   test-sites,"   and   in   these   areas   shorter-
lived   isotopes  like  radioactive  iodine   (which   affects   the  thy-
roid)  may be  dangerous.    Tropospheric  fallout   (in  the  lower
atmosphere)    affects   the   northern   latitudes   more   than    the
southern.   But  it  is  in  dealing   with   the  stratosphere,   where
long-lived  radioactive poisons  like  strontium  90  and  caesium
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
2    J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  18,1958
(Continued  from   Page   One)
137  are  stored,  that  one  finds  the  greatest  uncertainties  and
non-uniformities.   "The  world-wide  fall-out  rate  and  deposits
of  Sr90,"  says  Annex  D  (p.  100),   "is  uneven  and  there  are
variations  with   latitude   which   show  maxima  is  the   region
between  30  degrees  and  50  degrees  North   and  South,  with
a  minimum  near  equator.  .  .  .  The  computation  of  a  world-
wide  average  of  fallout  rate  and  deposit  is  rendered   difficult
by  the  existence  of  large  areas  not  covered  by  surveys.     It
is  clear,  however,  that  the  southern  hemisphere  has  accumu-
lated  deposits  that  are  lower  than  the  average,  while  areas  in
the  northern  hemisphere   (Japan,   the  United   Kingdom,  the
United  States)*  have  deposits  of  about  three  times  the  world
average."
Non-Uniform  in  Time  As  Well  As   Space
Added  to  the  non-uniformity  of  distribution  in  space  there
seems  also  to  be  a  non-uniformity  in  time.   The  forecasts  on
probable   fall-out   levels   is   based   on   a   computation   which
assumes  that   about   12  percent   of  the   radioactive   poison  in
the   stratosphere   comes   down   each  year.    But  the   scientific
annex   on   "environmental    contamination"    (a    euphemism
adopted  to  avoid  the  term  nuclear  fallout)   warns  at  page  110
that  "the   concept  of  a  constant   fractional  removal  per  year
of  the  stratospheric content  is  inconsistent  with  meteorological
principle.    However,  nothing   better   can  be  offered   at  pres-
ent."    On   top   of   this,   the   elaborate   equations   utilized   to
forecast   future  fallout   are  hamstrung   because   data   on  "»
... the  injection  rate  of  Sr90  into  the  stratosphere"  by bomb
testing  were  "not   available  to  the  Committee."   This  means
—though  the  scientists  were  too  discreet  to  say  it  plainly—
that   the  three  testing   powers   did  not   make  available   data
on   how   much   they   have   tested   in   megatonnage.      (Only
debris   from   megaton   explosions   reaches   the   stratosphere).
On  top  of  this  it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  mechanisms
for   estimating  the  content  of  the  stratospheric  reservoir  and
our  information  on  "the  chain  of  events  that  occur  between
injection   of   the   radioactive  material   and   its   appearance   as
fallout  on  the  ground"   are  only  adequate  enough  for   short-
term   estimates   of   danger   and   these   as   the   report   admits
(p.   13)   are   "insufficient   for   the   evaluation   of   biological
hazards  from   stratospheric   fall-out."
Rice-Eaters   and  Milk-Drinkers
The  averages  and  the  forecasts  are  equally  shaky,  but  the
actual  observations do  represent  firm  data  and  here  the  non-
uniformities   are  striking.   Countries   deriving  most  of   their
dietary   calcium  from   rice  (like  Japan)   seem  to   get   about
five  times  as  much  strontium  90   in  their  diet  as   countries
which  derive most of  their  calcium from  milk  (like  the  U.  S.)-
Diet,  soil,  weather  all  create  variations.   There   seem  to  be
variations  so wide  within  countries  as  to  make  national  aver-
ages  as  deceptive  as  world-wide  averages.    Thus  a  chart  on
page   106  showing   average   concentrations   of   strontium   90
in  milk  in  selected  areas  shows  22  strontium  units  for   the
last  half   of   1957   in  Mandan,  North   Dakota   (we  hear  un-
officially   that  it  has  more  recently  gone  up  to  35  units)  as
compared  with  3.9  in  Perry,  N.  Y.,  and  5 units  in  New  York
City.   National   averages,   like  world-wide,   may  seem   to   be
* Parenthesis  in  original.
well  below  a  level  of  safety  but  whole  states  may  neverthe-
less  have  fall-out  so  high  as  to  be  in  the  danger  zone.   The
National   Committee   for   A   Sane  Nuclear   Policy  has   justi-
fiably  criticized  the  UN.  report  for  paying  so  little  attention
to   such   local   phenomena.    The   National   Committee   cited
"the   March  rains  in   Berkeley,  California,  in   which  radio-
activity  rose  as  high  as  208  times  that  set  for  'safe'  drinking
and  situations  in  which  radioactivity  rose  to   1,000  or  2,000
times  the  standard  for  vegetables  grown  in  fall-out  areas  in
California."    Public  attention  needs  to   be   focussed   on   the
disarming  fallacies  and  fallacious  reassurance  in  the   use  of
averages.
Each  Year  the  Poison   Rises
It  is  also  important  to  focus  attention  on  the  fad:  that  all
the  figures  show  a  steady  rise  in  the  accumulation  of  radio-
active  poisons,  in  the  soil,  in  milk,  and  in  human  bone.   The
data  in  the  UN  report  are  already  a  year  old,  and  it  is  to  be
hoped  that  the  new  session  of  the  General  Assembly will  ex-
tend  the  life  of  the  Committee  so  that  this  data  can  be  kept
up  to  date.
There    is   much   for    the    UN    Committee    to    do.      It
should  urge  the  establishment  of  an  international  study  bu-
reau  to  encourage  and  finance  investigation   into  the  many
unanswered   genetic,   biological,   radiological,   physical,   and
meteorological   questions   on   which   the   report   touches.    It
should  do  a  separate  report  on  the  whole  problem   of  aver-
ages  to  lay  the  basis  for  establishing  safe  standards  of  expos-
ure   for   world-wide  populations   to   all   radiation,  from   all
sources.  And  we  think  Dr.  Ralph  Lapp  made  a  most:  fruitful
suggestion  when  he  said  "the  real  problem  remains  untouched
—the  problem  of  local  fall-out  following  nuclear  war.   I  be-
lieve  the  important  task  awaiting  the  UN   Committee  today
is   a   prospectus   of   the   biological   consequences   of   nuclear
war."   Perhaps  India  or  Japan  in  the  General  Assembly  will
initiate  action  or  widen  the  tasks  of  the  UN   Committee  for
this  purpose.
An  Extraordinary   Unanimity
Realistically  considered,  the  UN  Committee  has  performed
its  task  with  extraordinary  unanimity.   In  a  sharply  divided
world,  it  managed  to  achieve  unanimity on  all  but  one  para-
graph,  that  dealing  with  the  cessation  of  tests.   Even  here  the
differences  between  the  rejected  Soviet  and  Indian  resolutions
and  the  text  as  adopted  by  the  majority  were  chiefly  in  em-
phasis.   While  the  text  proposed   by  the  U.  S.  S.  R.   (with
Czech  and  Egyptian  support)   said  "there   should  be  an  im-
mediate   cessation   of   test   explosions   of   nuclear   weapons"
and  the  Indian  substitute  (which  France,  Japan  and  the  U.  S.
supported)   ended  by  calling   "nuclear   tests"  at  present   the
"main   source"   of  the   radioactive   danger,  the   majority   did
suggest  "the   cessation  of  contamination  of  the  environment
by  explosions  of  nuclear  weapons"  would   "act  to  the  benefit
of  human  health."   What  registers  on  the  mind  of  mankind
is  that  all  the  experts  from  both  sides  and  the  neutral  coun-
tries  agree  that   testing  is  dangerous  to  mankind,  including
many  generations  yet  to   be  born.    This  can  be  one   more
powerful   instrument   toward   an   agreement   to   end   testing
forever  if  only  enough  Americans  are  stirred  to  act.   For  it
is  here  in  Washington  that   the  decision  will  be  made  and
that  the  opposition  is  entrenched.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  18,1958
Fulbright  Asks  How  Long  We  Can  Go  On  Ignoring  600 Million  Chinese
We  present  here  the  key  portions  of  the  speech  made  in
the  Senate  August  6  by  Fulbright  of  Arkansas,  No.  2  man
on  the  Democratic  side   of   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations
Committee,  the  sharpest  Senate  criticism  yet  of  Adminis-
tration  foreign  policy  in  the  current  crisis,   and  the  first
open  challenge   in  a  long   time  to  the  non-recognition   of
Communist   China.—IFS.
"The   truth  is,  Mr.   President,  that   our   foreign   policy  is
inadequate,  outmoded  and  misdirected. ...  An  aphorism  I
heard  the  other  day  has  some  pertinence  in  this  connection.
A  man  may  fail  many  times,  this  saying  goes,  but  he  is  not
really  a  failure  until  he  starts  blaming  others.   I  suggest  this
is  true  of  nations,  too,  Mr.  President,  and  it  is  painfully  de-
scriptive  of  the  U.  S.  Government  at  this  point  in  history.
Everything  that  goes  wrong  is  laid  at  the  door  of   Commu-
nism.    I  suggest  that  some  of  the  blame  belongs   closer   to
home.  . . .
"We  can denounce  the  Soviet  Union  for  seeking a  foothold
in  the  Middle  East,  or  we  can  examine  our  own  failure  to
develop  policies  which  win  the  acceptance  of  the  peoples  of
that  region.   We   can  decry  the   Soviet  Union's   great   influ-
ence  in  China, or  we  can  look  to  ourselves  for  cutting  off  all
our  contacts  with  the  Chinese  people  by emulating  the  habits
of  the  ostrich.  .  .  .  We  can  berate  the  Soviet  Union  for  pos-
ing  before  the  world  as  the  defender  of  the  ordinary  man's
interest  in  peace,  or  we  can  look  to  ourselves  for  our  failure
to  give  intelligent  leadership  to  mankind's  hope  for   peace.
Forgetting  Our  Own  Past
"A  principal  factor  involved  in  this  process  is  that  in  the
fear  of  the  deviltry  of  Communism,  we  have  cast   ourselves
indiscriminately   in   the   role   of   the   defender  of   the   status
quo.  .  .  . Here  we are a  Nation  that  for  decades  prided  itself
on  its  revolutionary  tradition,   on  its  willingness   to   experi-
ment.  .  .  .  But today this  dynamic Nation  is  shrinking  in  the
eyes  of  the  world  from   the  spectre  of  revolution ...  an
obstacle  to  change  at  the  very  time  when  the  world  is  in  a
ferment  of  cataclysmic  change.
"I   do  not  ascribe  this  particular  weakness  to  the  present
administration.   I  suspect  that  the  roots  of  this  fearful  cling-
ing  to  the  status  quo  go  back  at  least  to  the  collapse  of  Na-
tionalist  China.  There  is  a  popular   concept  in  this  country,
Mr.  President,  that  the  chief  trouble  with  our  policies  with
respect   to  China  was  that  we  failed   to  give  sufficient  mili-
tary  and  other  aid  in   sufficient   time;  in   effect,   that  we  did
not   become  sufficiently   involved  with   the   Nationalist    gov-
ernment  to  sustain  it.   I  am  afraid  that  the  opposite  may  be
the  case,  that  in  order  to  maintain  the  status  quo  in  China
we  gave  too  much  and  became  too  deeply  involved   with  a
The  Real  Red  Menace
"The  Soviet  Union  has  indeed  been  our  greatest  men-
ace—not  so  much  because  of  what  it  has  done  but  be-
cause  of  the  excuses  it  has  provided  us  for  our  own
failures.    I  am  told  that  even  now  leaders  of  the  ad-
ministration  go  to  bed  with  tracts   from  the  Marxist
litany  in  order  to  better  understand  their   adversaries.
Now,  Mr. President,  I  am  not  averse  to  these  studious
pursuits.   I  suggest,   however,  that   they   ought   not  to
be  followed  to  the  point  of  obsession.   They  ought  not
to  be  used,  like  a  hot  pad,  as  a  comforting  device  to
provide  surcease   from  the  more  chilly  business  of  ex-
amining  our policies  with a  view  to  removing  the  weak-
nesses   and   inadequacies    which   the   Communists   are
only  too  happy  to   exploit."
—Fulbright  (D. Ark.), U. S. Senate, Aug.  6.
government   which  had   failed   to  meet   the   demands  of   its
people  for  change.  .  .  .
"Look   through   the   sorry   record   of   the   past   ten   years.
What  does  it  show?   It  shows  aid  extended  indiscriminately
to  governments  which  serve  the  needs  of  their  peoples   and
alike  to  those  which  do  not.   It  shows  aid  eagerly  and  lav-
ishly   given   to  governments  which   profess   their   anti-Com-
munism  even  though  their  peoples  with  valid  reason  might
have   been   disenchanted   with   those   governments.    At   the
same  time  it  shows  aid,  reluctantly  given,  if  at  all,  to  gov-
ernments  which  refuse  to  parrot   anti-Communist   lines   but
which,  nevertheless,  have  deep  roots  in their  own peoples]  . . .
Where  Are  We  Going  in  Asia?
"I   do  not  know,   Mr.   President,   where   we  are   heading
under  the  present  leadership  of  this  country  which,  when  it
is  not  weak  and  desultory,  tends  to  be  impetuous  and  arbi-
trary.   I  doubt  that  the  leadership   itself   knows.  .  .  . For ex-
ample,  what  really  is  our  policy  in  the  Middle   East?    Can
we  live  with  Arab  unity,  or  can  we  not?   In  this   connection,
we  should   determine  to  our  own  satisfaction  the  real   rela-
tionship   between   Pan-Arabism   and   Communism.    The   as-
sumption  made  by  the  Administration  that  Nasser  is  merely
a  tool  of  the Kremlin  should  be tested  as to its validity.  .  . .
"Where  are  we  going   in  the  Far  East?   That  great   area
is  temporarily  quiescent  but  by  no  means  peaceful.   What  is
our  policy?   We  cannot  forever  ignore   600  million   people
on  the  mainland  of  China,  but  what  are  we  doing  to  make
it  possible  to  deal  with  them  on  the  best  terms  possible?   If
anybody  in  the  Administration  is  giving  serious,   imaginative,
uninhibited   thought   on  a  full-time  basis  to  these  and  many
other  similar  questions  which  I  could  cite,  I  have  so  far  been
unable  to  discover   it."
The  Sharpest  Criticism Yet  of  Our Military Aid  Program As  It  Boomeranged in Iraq
"We  have  on  a  grandiose  scale  provided  peoples  of   the
underdeveloped   nations   with   the   weapons   of   destructive
warfare,  and  have  been  miserly  in  providing  them  weapons
to  wage  war  on  their  own  poverty, economic  ills  and  inter-
nal  weaknesses.   Military  aid  has  been  on  the  most  lavish
scale.   Look  at  what  has  now  happened  in  Iraq.   The  Iraqi
army,  which  was  the  recipient  of  our  arms,  has  thrown  out
the   government   which  we  regarded   as   the  most   friendly
and  the  most  reliable  of  the  Arab  States.  .  .  .
"How   many   similar   plots   are   being   hatched   in   other
armies  which  we  are  aiding?   There  are  billions  of  dollars
worth,  of  arms  and  military  supplies  loose  in  the  world  as
a  result   of  this  aid.   Before   this  equipment  rusts,   before
these  supplies  are  exhausted,  I  am  afraid  that  we  are  in'
for  many  other  unpleasant  shocks.  .  .  .  Now is  this  sudden
unexpected   use  of  military  aid  in  Iraq  the  first  time  that
has  happened.    How  much  of  the  equipment  furnished   to
the   Nationalist    government   of   China   was    subsequently
used  by  the  Communists  to  kill  Americans  in  Korea?"
—Fulbright  (D. Ark.), U. S. Senate, Aug.  6.
1  3  \
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  18,1958
The  Key  to  U.S.  Policy  at the  UN   General  Assembly  on  the  Mid-East
The  key to  Anglo-American  policy  in  the  Middle  East  as  it
will   slowly   come  unwrapped   at   the   special   session   of   the
UN  General  Assembly  may  be  found  I  believe  in  that  extra-
ordinary  tactless  and   obtuse  remark  by  Robert  Murphy   that
we  can  live  with  Arab  nationalism   and   even   Nasserism   if
they  are  "properly  managed  and  contained."    This  posture  of
superiority   and   assumption   of  a  right   to  control   the   Arab
countries  will  stir  the  derision   and  suspicion   of  their   ruling
elites  and  intellectuals  who  do  not  relish   being   placed   in  a
kind  of  American  nursery  "until  they  grow  up."  But  this  is
what  our  policy  makers  envisage:   an  Anglo-American "pro-
tectorate"   with   dollars   for   development    as   the   reward   of
good  behavior.
The  United  Nations  is  designed   to  be  a  partial  instrument
of  this  policy,  a  cover  for  what  the  Arabs  will  see  as  a  new
variant  of   imperialism,  as  the   League  of  Nations   was  with
its  mandatory system.  UN  police  forces  would  take  over  from
the  British  in  Jordan  and  might  also  be  used  in  the   Persian
Gulf   oil  sheikhdoms.  The  trouble  with  this  policy  is  that  it
runs  counter  to  realities.    Jordan   is  a  wholly  artificial  crea-
tion,  the  most  artificial  of  all  the  Arab  States  carved  out  of
the  Turkish  empire;  neither  British  nor  UN   troops  can  save
it,  nor  the  Persian  Gulf   sheikhdoms  either  from  the  natural
Arab  tide  toward  unity  and   independence.
This   decision  "to   live  with"   Arab  nationalism  (but on
Western   terms)   is  also  based  on  a  belief  that  we  can  thereby
avoid  the  necessity  of  negotiating  with  the  Soviet  Union   and
thus  recognizing  that  it  has  natural  interests   in  the   Middle
East,  too. Mr.  Dulles  is  determined  never  to  negotiate  with
the  Russians  about  anything  if  he  can  avoid  it,  and   prefers
dealing  with  Nasser   as  the  lesser   evil.   The   trouble   is  that
in  the  absence  of  some  agreement  between  the  great  Powers,
Arab  nationalism will  play  one  side  against  the  other.    The
Middle  East  cannot  be  treated   by  Washington  as  if  it  were
only  a  more  distant  Latin  America.   It  is  only  by  negotiating
a  new  pattern  among   the  great  Powers'and  with  the   small,
Arab  and  non-Arab,  Israeli  and   Turkish,   that   stability  can
he  created.  This  is  not  easy  but  it  cannot  be  avoided  by  pre-
tending  that  while  Russian  interests  are  ignored,  Nasser  can
he  "managed"   and  the  Jordanian  Humpty-Dumpty  held  to-
Steve  Nelson  Bill   Opposed
The  New  York  Times   (Aug.  8)  and  the   Washington
Post  (Aug.  7)  deserve  praise  for  editorials   against   anti
Supreme  Court  legislation   still   pending  in  the   closing
days   of   Congress,   and  specifically   for   opposing   the
Bridges  bill  to  reverse   the  Steve  Nelson  decision   and
restore  42  State   sedition  laws  to  full  effect.   The  New
York  Times  called  the   Bridges  bill   (which   Javits  of
New  York,  oddly  enough,   is  supporting)     "unnecessary
and  in   the   long   run   unwise"   while   the   Washington
Post   said   it   would   make  confusion   and  some  injus-
tice  inevitable.
gather  with  Scotch  tape  borrowed   from   Mr.   Hammarskjold.
The  Arthur   Miller  Victory
The  U.  S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia
hates  to  swallow  the  bitter  pill  of  the  Watkins  decision  and
looked  around  for  some  other  way to  reverse  the  Arthur  Mil-
ler   contempt    conviction    without    recognizing   the    Supreme
Court  ruling  and  yet  without  risking  a  reversal  from   above.
The   whole  bench  of  nine  judges   sat  on   the  Miller  appeal
(lest  a  3-man  panel  turn  out  to  be  dominated  by  its  minor-
ity  liberals,  Edgerton  and  Bazelon)   and  found  a  unanimous
face-saving  ground  for  reversal in  a  "technicality."   But  when
this  has  been  said  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  the  "techni-
cality"  was  not  without   substance.
When   Mr.  Miller  was  asked  to  name  others  at  a  Marxist
writers'   meeting,   he   asked   Chairman   Walter   "to    postpone
this  question  until  the  testimony  is  completed"  and  Walter
replied,  "Of  course,  you  can  do  that.  .  .  ."   The  Committee
never  returned  to  the  question  and  never  warned  the  witness
he  might  be  held  in  contempt  for  refusing  to  answer.   Those
of  us  who  were  present  at  the  Miller  hearing  thought   (from
Walter's   friendly  words  to  him  as  it  closed)   that  the  Com-
mittee   was   accepting   the   playwright's   unwillingness   as   a
matter  of  conscience  to  name  anyone  else.   Indeed   I  myself
suspect  that  Walter  was  ready  to  do  so  but  was  overruled   or
persuaded  later  inside  the  Committee  to  cite  Mr.  Miller  for
contempt.   The   reversal,  however   limited   in   fact,   is  psycho-
logically  another   blow  at  the   Committee.
Watch   Next   Week's   Issue   For  A  Full  Report  on  the  UN  General   Assembly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
I'lease  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State...................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
8/18/58
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street     .............................................................................._......
City       ........................................Zone............State...................
Shall  we  aend  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Av..,  N.  W.
Washington  13,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   P.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under   the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  oub-
llshed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  18  D   C
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription-
16  in  the    TJ.  S.;  16  In  Canada;  »10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  »15  to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED