I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jul21.pdf

============================================================

Full  Digest  Administration's  New  Passport  Bill,  P.  3;  Humphrey's   Liberal  Substitute,  P.  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  28
JULY  21,   1958101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Gun-Boat  Diplomacy  in  the  H-Bomb  Age
Those  who   believed  that   no   major   power   would   risk   a
world  war  in  the  H-bomb  age  now  have  their  answer.   It  is
also  the  answer  to  those  who  thought  that  the  only  possible
danger  might  be  from  a  half-mad  dictator  ruling  a  terrorized
society.    Eisenhower,  Nixon  and  Dulles  ordered  the  Marines
into  action  in  Lebanon  without  consulting  Congress,  our  al-
lies  in  NATO  or  the  UN.   All  three  were  confronted  with  a
fait  accompli,  as  if  this  were  the  world  of   1900,   the  Lebanon
a  banana  republic on  our  doorstep,  and  the  most  lethal  weapon
still  the  machine  gun.    This  could  conceivably  be  the  start  of
the  final  planetary  struggle.   How  casually   it  may  have  been
set  in  motion.
A   free   society  is  supposed  to  have  some  control  over  its
destiny,  but  even  those  in  Congress  and  the  press  who  feel  un-
easy  are  impelled  to  take  the  attitude  that,  since  the  die  has
been  cast,  they  have  no  recourse but  to  support  the  President.
As  before  every  war,  it   is  considered  patriotic  to  let   one's
country slide into catastrophe; the  air  is full  of  the  old familiar
—and  fatal—cliches:  we  mustn't  appease,  we  must  call  their
bluff,   our  prestige  is  at  stake.  .  .  .
Rayburn  Cuts  Off  Discussion
Only  18 months  ago  when  President  Eisenhower asked Con-
gress  to  approve  the  so-called  Eisenhower Doctrine,  he  prom-
ised  that  if  armed  intervention   became  necessary  he   would
first  consult  Congress.   But  only  one  member,  Representative
Reuss,  a  maverick  Democrat   from  Wisconsin,  had  the  nerve
to  stand  up  (see  box in  next  column)  and  recall  that  promise.
His  criticism  was cut  short  by  Speaker  Rayburn with  a  rebuke,
"In  times  like  these  we  had  better  allow  matters  to  develop
rather  than  make remarks  about  them."*  These  "matters"  may
be  thermonuclear.
Let  us  assume  that  the  Russians will  not  intervene,  either
directly  or  by volunteers,  though  this  is  not  at  all  certain, con-
sidering  the  unsteadiness  recently  apparent  in  Kremlin  policy.
Stalin  could  back  down  over  Iran  in  1946  without  risk  of  los-
ing  his  own  job,  but  can  Krushchev  take  a  comparable  defeat
without  fear  of  being  overwhelmed   by  rivals?   Russia  aside
* The  Speaker  edited  his  rebuke  out  of  the  Congressional
Record  but  it  was  reported  by  the  Associated  Press  and  the
New  York  Times.   His  interjection,  according  to  the  latter
(July  16),  "effectively  cut  off  any  further  House  discussion."
Next  day,   when  Celler  of  New  York  rose  to  ask  unanimous
consent  for  a  one-minute  speech,  Rayburn  wanted  first  to
know  if  it  were  on  foreign  policy  and  refused  consent  when
told  that  it  was—until  Celler  explained  that  he  wanted  to
support  the  sending  of  troops  to  Lebanon,  when  he  was  al-
lowed  to  proceed.  The  Speaker  made  it  clear  that  no  further
discussion  of  foreign  policy  would  be  allowed.  This,  in  a   rep-
resentative  assembly!
8*                                                     I
Eisenhower's  Promise   18  Months   Ago
"Because  of  the  great  issues  at  stake,  the  adminis-
tration  should  not  have  intervened   in  the  Middle  East
without  consulting  Congress  and allowing  debate.  .  .  .
President   Eisenhower  in   1957   [Middle  East  Message,
Jan.  5]  told  Congress,  'If  ...     a  situation  arose  which
called  for  military  application  of  the  policy  [the   Eisen-
hower  Doctrine]  which  I  ask  the  Congress  to  join  me  in
proclaiming,  I  would  of  course  maintain  hour-by-hour
contact  with  the  Congress.    And  if  the  Congress  were
not  in  session ...  I  would,  of  course,  at  once  call  the
Congress   into   special   session.'    If   the   President   is
obliged  to  consult  Congress  in  the  event  of  a  violation
of  the  Eisenhower   Doctrine,  how  much   more  is  he  re-
quired  to  consult  Congress  in  the  event  of  an  interven-
tion  not  required  by  the  Eisenhower  Doctrine."
—Reuss  (D.  Wis.)  House  of  Representatives,  July  IS.
for   the   moment,  what   if   we  persist   in   our   intervention?
Where  can  it  lead  us  but  into  a  military  morass,  an  Algeria of
our  own  many  times  magnified  in  which  oil  wells  and  pipe-
lines  will  be  at  the  mercy of  guerrillas? The  fact  that  we  were
taken  by surprise in  Iraq  is not  to  be read  merely  as the  failure
of  CIA  spies  to  learn  about  a  conspiracy.   It  is  to  be  read  as
reflecting  our  political  failure correctly to  assess  the  realities of
an  allied  Arab  country  in  which  we  had  a  large  military  mis-
sion.   The  Iraqi  Army we  had  given  $45,000,000  in  military
supplies  turned  against  us.  Obviously  it  had  been  solidly  and
secretly  against  us  for  some  time,  since  this  uprising  of  which
we  had  no  inkling  was not  an  overnight  improvisation.   If  we
did  so  badly  in  Iraq,  what  makes  us  think  we  can  police  the
whole  Arab  world?
In  the  atmosphere  of  demonology  created  by  the  State  De-
partment,  it has  become dangerous  to  suggest  that  maybe  there
may  be  social  revolutions  in  the  Middle  East,  as  in  Iraq   (all
parties  had  been  outlawed   and  a  free  press  long  banned   in
that  oil  company Utopia), or  a great  big  Saturday  night  family
brawl  as  in  the  Lebanon,   without   its  necessarily   being   the
handiwork  of  Big  Devil  in  Moscow  or  Little  Devil  in  Cairo.
We  are  being  blinded  by  our  own  propaganda.   The  right  of
the  Arabs to  a  place  of  respect  in  the  world  is  something  we
must  recognize,  and  the  sooner  we  recognize  it,   incidentally,
the  better  for  Israel.  The  landing  of  the  Marines  in  Beirut  is
calculated   to  unite  the  whole   Arab  world   against   us.  The
clumsy  baldness  with   which   we  did   it  have   cost   us  much
among  smaller  friendly  powers  in  the  UN.   Even  if  it  doesn't
lead  to World  War  III,  this  will  prove  one  of  the  worst  mis-
takes  ever  made  in  American  military  and  diplomatic  history.
It  is the  duty  of  all  to  speak  up  now  when  there  is  still  time.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  SI, 1958
Summary  Dismissal  on  Vague  Security   Charges   and  Illegal  Detention  for  Crime
The  House  of  Representatives  Shows  How  Little  It  Cares  for  Basic Rights
Twice within  recent  weeks the  House of Representatives  has
demonstrated  a  mob-like readiness  to  override  the  most  fun-
damental  rights.  One was  the  passage  by  voice  vote  on  June
30 of  the  so-called Mallory  bill.  The  other  on July  10 was  the
approval,  295 to  46, of  a  bill  to  declare  all  Federal  govern-
ment  jobs  "sensitive"  and  subject  as  such  to  summary  re-
moval proceedings  on grounds of "disloyalty" or  "subversion."
Both  bills  are  intended  to  reverse  Supreme  Court  decisions,
and  both  reflect  hatred  for  its  recent  liberal  trend  especially
where  this  has  protected  the  rights  of  Negroes.   HE  11477,
which  now  goes  to  the  Senate,  is  the  result  of  the  Supreme
Court's  unanimous decision  in the  Mallory case,  reversing  the
conviction  of  a  feeble-minded Negro  youth  for  rape.  S   1411,
which  goes  to  conference committee, is  meant  to  override  the
Court's  6-3  decision  in  the  Cole  case,  which  held  that  only
Federal   employes  in  sensitive   positions  could  be  dismissed
without  some  form  of  hearing.
Amply Girdled Already
No  free  government  in  the  world  is  protected  by  so  many
political  chastity  belts  as  those  which  surround  the  govern-
ment  of  the  United  States.  The  Hatch  Act  of  1939  bars  the
employment  in  the  government  of  Communists vs  other  revo-
lutionaries.   The  Internal   Security   Act  of   1950  forbids   the
employment  of  persons  belonging  to  organizations   adjudged
to be Communist  action  groups, "fronts"  or  even  "infiltrated"
by  Communists. The  Civil  Service  Law  permits  discharge  of
Federal  employes Vhere  there  is  "reasonable  doubt  as  to  the
loyalty  of  the  person  involved."  These  laws  have  only  one
drawback  in the  eyes of our  professional  hunters of  un-Amer-
icanism—they  require  some  form  of  trial  and  proof.
In  addition  there  is  Public  Law  733,  passed  shortly   after
the  Korean  War  began.  This  was the  law involved  in the  Cole
case.  Under  it,  despite  that  decision, the  government  can still
discharge  without trial  or stated  reason  any person  suspected
of  being a  security  risk  or  disloyal  in  11 major  departments
of  government, including State,  Defense and  Justice.  S   1411,
as passed by the  House, would extend this to  all Federal  jobs.
Nature  "Friendship"  Subversive
The  facts  in  the  Cole  case  illustrate  how loosely this could
be  applied.   Cole  was  employed  by  Health,  Education   and
Welfare,  which  is  not  one  of  the   11  departments   named  in
Public  Law 733 as  sensitive  but  which was  later  blanketed  in
by  Presidential  decree.  Cole  was  a  food  and  drug  inspector,
hardly  a  position  which gave  him  access  to  military  or  diplo-
matic  secrets.   He was  not  charged  with  being  a  Communist
but  with  "close  association  with  individuals  reliably   reported
to  be  Communists"  and  with  "a  continued  and   sympathetic
association  with  the  Nature  Friends  of  America",  the  latter
an  organization  placed  (of  course  without  specific  charges  or
hearing)  on the  Attorney  General's  list.  The  Supreme  Court
held  that  Cole's  employment  was  not  "sensitive"  enough  to
justify  summary discharge,  but  still  left  open  the  possibility
of   firing   him   as  disloyal  under  Civil  Service  "suitability"
regulations.
Though  a  letter  from  an  Acting  Assistant   Attorney  Gen-
eral  asked  that  legislation  be  withheld  until  the  Department
of  Justice  could  complete its  own  study  of  the  Cole  decision
and  the  Wright  Commission Security  Report,  the Democratic
party  leadership  in  the  House  with  full  Republican support
rammed  the  bill  through.   Congressmen  Holifield   (D.  Cal.),
Porter   (D.  Ore.),  Yates   (D.  111.),  Holtzman  (D.  N.Y.),  Dol-
linger  (D.  N.Y.), Wier  (D.  Minn.),  Mrs.  Church  D.  111.)  and
Multer  (D.  N.Y.)  deserve  applause  for  trying  their  best  to
block  the  bill  from  the  floor.
Fortunately   the   House  version  of  S   1411   is  so   different
from  the  original  Senate  bill  that  chances  are  good it  will be
blocked  in  the  upper  Chamber. The  Mallory bill, too, is  likely
to  die in the  Senate,  though  swift  submission from  Eastland's
Judiciary  Committee and  passage  in  the  hectic  closing  days
of  the  session  is  not  impossible.
The Very Heart of  the  Police  State
The  Mallory  bill  is  of  dubious constitutionality.    It  strikes
at   one  of  the  most  fundamental  bulwarks  against   & police
state,  that  provision  of  the  Constitution  which  forbids  the
police  to  pick  up  and arrest  anyone they  please  and  hold him
until  they  have  extracted  a  confession. The  Fourth  amend-
ment  provides  that  no  one  may  be  arrested   except   "upon
probable  cause."
In  1943,  in  the  McNabb  case,  the  Supreme  Court  held that
a  confession  obtained by the  police from  a  person  unlawfully
held  could  not  be  used  against  him  at  his  trial.  The  Federal
Rules  of  Criminal  Procedure,  as  subsequently  adopted,  pro-
vided  that  an  arrested  person  shall be arraigned  "without  un-
necessary  delay"  so that  he  may  be  apprised  of  the   charges
against  him  and  of  his  rights.   Mallory  was  held  and  ques-
tioned  for  eight  hours  and  not  arraigned   until  after  a  con-
fession  had  been  obtained.  The  Court,  speaking  through  Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter,  outlawed  the  confession  and  remanded
for  a  new trial.  The  prosecutor,  perhaps  in  pique,  then   dis-
missed  the  case  instead  of  retrying  it.
The  Mallory  decision  touched  a   sensitive   spot   with   the
Southerners  and  the  police;  neither  are  accustomed  to  re-
garding   Negro   suspects   as   covered   by   the   Constitution.
Keating  of  New  York  and  Walter  of  Pennsylvania  joined  in
putting  through  the  Mallory bill.  It  says  no confession  shall
be held inadmissible "solely  because of  delay" in  arraignment.
The  American  Bar  Association's   Special  Committee  on  the
Bill  of  Rights  opposed  the  bill  on  the  ground  that  it  would
"take  away  the  only  existing  strong  incentive"  for  the  police
to  obey  the  Constitutional  safeguards   against  illegal   deten-
tion.   We hope  it  dies  in  the  Senate.
The  Constitution  Was  Not  Written  for  the  Convenience  of  the  Police
"The  proponents  of  this  legislation state  that  the Mallory
rule  hampers  effective  law  enforcement.   They  urge  that  it
is  often  difficult   to  show  'probable  cause'  unless  and  until
they   have  secured  a  confesion.    The   difficulty   with  this
argument  is  that  the  Fourth  amendment  to  the  Constitu-
tion  prohibits-any  arrest  except  upon  probable cause.    If
there  is  no  probable  cause  at  the  time  of  the  arrest,  the
accused  should  not  be  arrested  to  begin  with.    If,  on  the
other  hand,  the  arrest  is  lawful  under  the  Fourth  amend-
ment,  there  is   already  probable  cause  and  no  confession
therefore  is  necessary  in  order  to  hold  an  accused.  .  .  .
"Rule  5  (a),  requiring  arraignment without  unnecessary
delay,  is  a  good rule.   Nearly  all  of  the  States  have similar
enactments.   It  is  aimed  at  preserving  constitutional  rights
and,  in  particular,  procedural due  process  of  law.    It  pro-
vides  for  the  treatment  of  accused people on  an  equal basis.
It   offers   protection  to   the   impoverished,   uneducated,   or
youthful  suspect.    The  hardened  or  'well  heeled'  criminal
does  not  need a  committing  magistrate to  advise him."
—House   Judiciary   Com.,  Minority   Report   Against   the
Mallory    Bill   by   Getter,  Rodino,   Holtzman   and
Libonati.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, July  21,  1958
New   Eisenhower-Dulles  Passport   Measure  Worse   Than  Present  Regulations
Complete  Digest  of  Administration's  "Faceless  Informer"  Travel  Control  Bill
S.  4110  (identical with  HR  13318  in  the  House),  the  Ad-
ministration's  passport  bill, forbids the  issuance  of  passports
(except  abroad for  immediate return  to  the  U.S.)  to  persons
under  indictment for  felony  or  passport  infractions;  to  per-
sons  convicted within five years  of passport  violations;  to  per-
sons  "ns  to  whom  it  is  determined upon  substantial   grounds"
that  they  intend to  travel  into  a  country  or  area  into  which
the  Secretary  of  State  has  forbidden  travel;  or  to  [Sec.  103
(6)]—
"Persons  as  to  whom  it   is  determined  upon  substantial
grounds that their  activities  or  presence abroad  or  their  pos-
session  of  a  passport  would  (i)  be  in  violation  of  any  law  of
the  United  States  or  any  State  or  Territory,  or  any  order
issued  by  any  court  in  the  United  States;  (ii)  seriously  im-
pair the  conduct of the  foreign relations  of the  United States;
or  (iii)  be  inimical  to  the  security  of  the  United  States."
Who  Is  "Communistic"?
In  determining  whether  a  person  comes  within  the  cate-
gories  described  in   (ii)   and   (iii)   above,  the   Secretary   of
State   "shall   consider   as   material,   among   other   matters,
whether  the  applicant   is  a  person  who,  whether   or  not  a
member  or  former  member  of,  or  affiliated   with,  the  Com-
munist  Party,  knowingly  engages  or  has  engaged,  within  ten
years  prior  to  filing  the  passport  application,  in  activities  in
furtherance   of  the   international   Communist  movement."
Burden of  Proof
"If  the  evidence ... is  such  as to  warrant  the  conclusion"
that  the  passport  applicant  is  such  a  person,  he  "shall  have
the  burden  of  proving  that  he  is  not  within  one  of  the  cate-
gories  described"  above.
Oath  Requirement
".  .  .  Each  applicant  for  a  passport   shall  be  required  to
state  in  the  passport  application  whether  he  is,  or  has  been
within ten  years  prior  to  verifying  the  application, a  member
of  the  Communist Party  or  a  supporter  of  the  international
Communist  movement,  and  to  state  the  circumstances  of  any
such  membership  or  to  state  his  activities  in  support  of  the
international  Communist  movement."
Denial or Revocation of  Passports
The  applicant   must  be  informed  of  his  denial  within  90
days.  "A  denial  shall  set  forth  the  reasons  therefor,  as  speci-
fically  as  is  consistent  with  considerations  of  national  secu-
rity  and foreign  relations. A passport may  be revoked  when-
ever  the holder  thereof  is not entitled to a passport under  the
terms  of  this  Act.   Upon  the  revocation   of  a  passport,  the
holder  therefor  shall  be  informed  in  writing  of  the  reasons
therefor,  as  specifically    as  is  consistent  with  considerations
of   national  security  and  foreign  relations."  (Italics  added.)
Passports  No Longer Private Property
"A  passport  issued  under  this  Act  shall  at  all  times  re-
main  the  property  of the  United  States.  It  shall  be unlawful
for  any holder  of a  passport  to refuse  to surrender  it.  . .  ."
Passport  Appeals Procedure
A  Passport  Hearing  Board  would  be  set  up  consisting  of
three members  designated  by the  Secretary  of State.  When  a
passport  has  been  denied,  revoked  or  restricted   (except  for
travel  to  areas  barred  by the  Secretary  of  State),  an  appeal
may  be  made  to  the  Board  within  30 days.  The  Secretary of
State  would  have  authority  to  make  such  rules  as  would  ac-
cord  the  individual  appealing  "the   following  rights:
"(1)  To appear  in  person  and to be represented by  counsel.
"(2)  To  testify   in  his  own  behalf,  present  witnesses  and
offer   other   evidence.
1  1
"(3)  To cross-examine  witnesses  appearing  against  him at
any  hearing  at  which  he  or his  counsel  is  present  and  to  ex-
amine  all  other  evidence  which  is  made  a  part  of  the  open
record.
"(4)  To  examine  a  copy of  the  transcript  of  the  proceed-
ings  or  to  be furnished  a  copy  upon  request.
Secret  Evidence Allowed
" (b)  In  order  to  protect  information,  sources  of  informa-
tion  and  investigative  methods,  disclosure  of  which  would
have  a  substantially  adverse  effect  upon the  national  security
or  the  conduct  of  foreign  relations,  the  Board  may  at  any
time  consider  oral  or  documentary   evidence  without  making
such  evidence  part  of  the  open  record. The  Board  shall  fur-
nish  a  resume  of  any  such  evidence, and  shall  certify  that  it
is a fair  resume.  The Board  shall  take  into  consideration  the
individual's  inability  to  challenge  information   of  which  he
has not  been  advised in full  or  in  detail  or  to attack  the  cred-
ibility  of  information  which  has  not  been  disclosed  to   him."
(Notice  that  there is  no provision  here for  telling the  pass-
port  applicant  just  what  he  is  charged with  having done.  Not
only  is  the  burden  of  proof  on  the  applicant,  but  he  would
not  need  to  be  told  just  what  he  had  to  disprove.   The  bill
provides  for  some  statement of  charges  only  in  those  cases
where  a  passport  has  been revoked.)
Secretary May Make Own Findings
The  Board  shall  make written  findings  to  the  Secretary of
State,  but  the  applicant   will  be  given  a  copy  only  of  such
recommendations  "as  are  based  upon  the  open record."  With-
in  20 days  he  may file objections to  these  with  the  Secretary.
The  Secretary   in  making  the  final  decision  "may  also  con-
sider  additional   information,  available  to  him  as  Secretary
of   State,  which  cannot  be  made  known  to  the   individual,
either  by  resume  or  otherwise."
Courts Bound By His Findings
The  U.S.  District  Court  for  the  District  of  Columbia  may
entertain  appeals  from  the  Secretary's  action  "to  determine
whether  there  has  been  compliance  with  the  provisions  of
this  Act  and  of  any  regulations  issued  thereunder.   In  any
such  proceedings   the  court  shall  have  power  to  determine
whether  any  findings  which  are  stated  to  be  based  upon  the
open  record  are  supported  by  substantial  evidence  contained
in  that  record,  but  as  to  the  findings  stated  to  be  based  on
the  closed  record  the  court  shall  accept  the  resumS  of  certi-
fication   by  the  Secretary   or  the  Board  as  supporting  such
findings."
Area and Country  Control
Passport  holders  -would  be forbidden  to  travel in  any  coun-
try  or  area  the  Secretary  had  publicly'determined  to  be  a
place  where  "the   United  States   Government  is  unable  to
provide  [them]  adequate  protection  . .  . due to  the  lack of
diplomatic  relations  or  due to  disturbances within  such  coun-
tries  or  areas,  or  that  travel  of  United  States  nationals  to
or  in   such  countries  or  areas  would   seriously   impair   the
foreign  relations  of  the  United   States."
Penalties
Any  person  who  travelled  in  a  forbidden  area  or  refused
to  surrender  his  passport  would  be  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor
punishable by not more  than  one year  in jail or by a fine not
exceeding  $1,000  or both.
(No  mention  is  made  in  the  bill  of  punishment  for   mis-
statements  in  passport  applications.  These  would  be  subject
to  punishment  under  the  perjury   or  false   claims  statutes,
which  provide penalties  of five years  in jail  and  $5,000 fine.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  July  21,  1958
Philosophically  the  Eisenhower-Dulles  Passport  Bill   Is  Pure  "Kremlinism"
Seven  Liberal  Democratic  Senators  Introduce  A  Travel  Magna  Charta
On  the  eve  of  the  passport  bill  hearings  before  the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee,  seven  liberal  Democratic  Sena-
tors  led  by  Humphrey  finally  raised  a  banner  to  which  be-
lievers  in  fundamental  liberties  can  rally.   Instead   merely  of
fighting  a  weak  defensive  action  against  57  varieties  of  travel
restriction,  all  pickled  in  authoritarian  brine,  they  took  the  of-
fensive  by  introducing a  bill  to  guarantee  the  right  to  travel.
There  could  be  no  sharper  contrast  than  that  between  the
Eisenhower-Dulles   "faceless  informer"  travel  control  bill   (the
reader  will  find  a  complete   digest  of  its  provisions  on  page
three)   and  the  Humphrey   measure.   'First  of  all   Humphrey
and   his   colleagues   (Anderson,   Chavez,   Hennings,    Morse,
Neuberger  and  Symington)  would  repeal  that  provision  of  the
Walter-McCarran   Immigration   and   Naturalization    Act   of
1952  which  for  the  first  time  in  American  history  made  it  a
crime  for  an  American  citizen  to  leave  or  enter   his  country
in  peace-time without a passport.
Passports  Denied  Only   For  Crime
Secondly  the  bill  would  put  Congress  on  record  as  declar-
ing  that  "freedom  of  movement"  is  a  basic  American  liberty
and  "that  no tests of  beliefs  or  associations  shall  be applied  to
issuance  of  passports."   Except  in  time  of  war  (but  not  in  time
of  "emergency")  the  Secretary of  State  may  refuse  a  passport
only  to  persons   "under  indictment,   information   or  sentence
for   the  commission  of  a  felony."
Thirdly   the  bill  would   limit   special  treatment   of   certain
areas  to  (1)   places  in  which  U.S.  forces  are  involved  in  hos-
tilities  and  to  which  travel  may temporarily  be barred  and   (2)
areas  where  the  President  determines  that  because  of  lack  of
diplomatic  relations  or  "threatened   or  existing  hostilities  or
disturbances"   the   U.S.   cannot   give   its   citizens   protection.
Travel  to  such  areas will  not  be  forbidden  but  will  be  at  the
traveller's  risk.
Secret  Informers  Barred
Finally  the  bill  provides  that  all  actions  taken  by  the  State
Department   on   passports,    whether   in   handling   individual
cases,  or  in  establishing  rules,  shall  be  subject  to  the  Admin-
istrative  Procedures  Act  with   its  guarantees   of  due   process.
Watch  Next   Week's   Issue   for   Full
1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Street    ...........
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street    ...........
City     .............
Shall  we  send
..........................Zone............State...................
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
7/21/BB
..........................Zone............State.
gift  announcement?     Yes  DNo  D
What   Danger?
"In  President  Eisenhower's  message  to  Congress  on
passport  legislation  on  July  7,  1958,   he  emphasized  the
'urgency'  of  the  situation  and  said  that  each  day  that
passes  'exposes  us  to  great  danger,'  but  nowhere  did  he
say  what  this  danger  was.    In  Secretary  Dulles'  letter
to  Congress  transmitting  the  Administration's  proposed
legislation  on  July  8,  1958,   he  talked  about  the  'bitter
struggle  against   the  International   Communist    Move-
ment,'  but  nowhere  did he  show  the  denial  of  passports
has   aided   or   would   aid   our   country   in   that   bitter
struggle.   Loose  phrases  that  the  granting  of  passports
may  be  'inimical  to  the  security  of  the  United  States'
or  'impair  the  conduct  of  our  foreign  relations'  are  no
substitute   for   proof.    The   Administration   is   asking
Congress  to  assume  that  there  is  a  security  aspect  to
passports  without  a  single  fact  or  a  single   word  of
proof."
—Joseph  L.  RavJi,  Jr.,  testifying   for  the  ADA   July
16   against   the  Administration  passport   bill.
"This   means,"   among   other   things,   as  Senator   Humphrey
told  the  Senate  on  July  15,  "that  unidentified   informants  or
secret  dossiers  cannot  be  used."
The  eyes  of  informed  persons  abroad  are  on   Washington
in  this  travel  control  fight.  So conservative  a  newspaper  as  the
London  Observer  (July   13)   found  its  credulity  stretched  by
the  near-hysterical tone of  the  President's  message  to  Congress
for  passport  legislation.  It  thought  that  if  the   Administration
bill  passed  "the  West  will  be  on  weak  ground  in  criticizing
the  Soviet  government  for  refusing  to  allow  Russian citizens
to  travel  freely  outside  the  Soviet  Union."     Philosophically
the  assumptions  of  the   Eisenhower-Dulles   bill  are  identical
with  the  Kremlin's   in  the  belief   that  the  right   to  travel  is
something   the   State  may  manipulate   as   an   instrument  of
policy,  that  oppositionists  should   not  be  allowed   to   travel,
that  secret  informers  are  a  necessary  arm  of  government   and
that  the  burden  of  proof  is on  the  suspected  citizen. We  hope
every  reader  will  make  his  voice  heard  for  Humphrey's  bill
and  against  the  Eisenhower-Dulles   measure.
Coverage   on   the  Passport   Hearings
LE Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  AVI.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published    and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
$5  In  the  U.  S.;  $8  In  Canada;  SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  *20  to  Israel,  A«l»  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED