I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958feb03.pdf

============================================================

A  New  "Disengagement"  Proposal,  P. 2
The  Russians  as  Well  as  the  British  May  Be  Ahead  of  Us  on  Nuclear  Fusion,  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  5
FEBRUARY  3,  1958*»       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Has  Dulles  Been  Overruled  by  "Us"  on  Summit  Talks?
The  Greeks  had  a  mythical  creature,  the  centaur,  half  man,
half   horse.   We   seem  to  be  governed   in  Washington   by  a
similar   composite,   half   President,   half   press  agent.    It   has
often  been  impossible for  those  who  cover  the  White   House
to   determine   just  where  Mr.   Eisenhower   ended   and   Mr.
Hagerty  began.  That  widely  reported  remark of  Mr.  Hagerty
to  the  reporter  in  Chicago  who  thought  the  President  had  a
nose-bleed,  "Oh,  you  thought  it  was  us,"  was  revealing.   Mr.
'Eisenhower  and  his  press  representative have  become  an   "us"
—except  perhaps  for   Sherman  Adams  there  is  probably  no
one  closer  to  the  President.
Against  this  background,  Mr.   Hagerty's  slip  in  his  CBS
interview  last  Sunday  has  injected   a  new  note  of  hope   into
the  prospects  of  a  summit  meeting.  The  Eisenhower  letter  to
Bulganin  pictured  a  summit meeting  like  a  gathering  of  con-
stitutional  monarchs  to  fix  their  royal  seals   on   agreements
arrived  at  by their Ministers.  "It  would  be  essential that  prior
to  such  a  meeting,"  the  letter  said,  "these   complex  matters
should  be  worked  on  in  advance  through   diplomatic  chan-
nels  and  by  our  Foreign  Ministers  so  that  the   issues  can  be
presented  in  form  suitable  for  our  decisions.  .  .  ."
Not  How It's  Understood  by  "Us"
The  drafting  of  the  letter  was  in  the  hands  of  the  State
Department.   The  procedure  indicated  would  leave  the  deci-
sions  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Dulles  and  the  rubber  stamp  in
those  of  Mr.  Eisenhower.  But  apparently  this  is  not  how  it
is  understood  by  "us."     For  when  Mr.   Hagerty   was   asked
about  the  preconditions for  a  summit  meeting,  he  replied  "we
would  merely  like  to  know  what  we  would   like  to  discuss."
His  attempt  later   to  explain   away  the   discrepancy  made   it
sharper.   He  said  the  President  was  ready to  meet  with  Krush-
chev  and   Allied   leaders   "if   they  do  one  thing  and   fairly
simple;  if  we  have  starts  of  diplomatic  negotiations  and  then
have a  foreign  ministers' meeting  to  do  one  very  simple  thing,
to  agree  on  what  we  can  discuss."  This  would  leave  only  the
agenda  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Dulles.
A  recent  press  conference  revealed  that  the  President  was
not  familiar  with  the  final  draft  of  the  letter   he  signed  to
Bulganin.   Apparently  Mr.  Hagerty  didn't  take  time  to  read
it  too  closely,  either.   The  difference  between  the  two  views
is  considerable  because  it  is  the  widely  accepted   view  here
and   abroad   that   if  the   reins  are  left   in  the  hands   of   Mr.
Dulles,  there  will  be  no  agreements,  but  that  if  they  are  in
the  hands  of  Mr.  Eisenhower,  some  start  toward  a  relaxation
of  tension  is  possible.
The  widespread   notion  that  it  would  be  foolish  to  hold  a
summit  meeting  unless  sure  of   success   in  advance   encloses
several  fallacies.   How  can  one  ever  be  sure  in  a  real  bar-
2 *                                                                                                                   13
gaining  session  that  there  will  be  agreement?   It  is  only  at  a
conference  summoned  to  accept  the  unconditional   surrender
of  a  defeated  foe—as  at  Versailles—that  one  may  be  "sure
of  an  agreement"  in advance.  What  Mr.  Dulles  really  wants  is
assurance  in  advance  that  the  Russians  will  accept  his  terms.
A  Get-Together  Need  Not  Be  Formal
Nor   need  an  inconclusive  summit  meeting  be  a   disaster.
Few  are  foolish  enough  to  think  the  complex  issues  between
the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  can  be  settled  so  quickly.   It  is
possible  to  limit  a  session  to  the  easier  issues.   It  is  possible
to  announce in  advance  that  the  purpose  is  for  the  leaders  of
the  great  nations—Eisenhower,  Krushchev,  Nehru,   and  Mac-
mi llan—to  get   to  know   each   other   better,   as  a   token   of
good  will,  an  informal  exploration  of  possibilities  for  nego-
tiation,  a  symbol of  relaxed  tension.   It  is only  those  who  fear
any  relaxation  of  tension  who  fight  against  such  a  meeting.
If  there  is  to  be  a  meeting,  they  prefer  one  so  loaded  with
difficult  questions as  to  make  failure  inescapable.   They  would
then  have  demonstrated  "good  faith"  and  could   step  up  the
arms  race.
Ready  for  Controls in That Atom Free Zone
In   his  speech   at  Minsk,   Mr.   Krushchev   noted   that   the
French  reply  to  the  Bulganin  note,  unlike  the  U.  S.,  made  a
summit  meeting  contingent  on  a  foreign  ministers'   meeting
"to   define   the   program   of   a   possible   summit    conference,
making  the  reservation  that  the  foreign  ministers  would  not
be  competent  to  discuss  the  question  in  substance."    If  ques-
tions  of  substance  are  left  to  Mr.  Dulles,   there  will  be  no
agreement.   This  is  a  view  as  widely  held   in  allied   nations
as  among  those  on  the  other  side.   The  Minsk  speech  has  not
been   printed   here,   though   radio   transcripts   are   available.
These   show  it  more  hopeful   than   the   press   reports   would
indicate.   An  important  point  is  that  Mr.  Krushchev   in  dis-
cussing  the   Rapacki   proposal   for   an   atom   free   zone   said
the  Soviet  Union   "is  ready  to  examine  this  proposal  and  to
accept  the  establishment  of  the  necessary  controls."
"It  goes  without  saying,"  Mr.  Krushchev  said  of  the  Eisen-
hower  outer   space  proposal,  "that  we  cannot   deny  the  im-
portance  of  the  question   of  control  over  the  use  of   cosmic
space.   But  this  question   must  be  examined   as  part  of   the
general   disarmament   problem,  including  the   question   of  a
ban  on  atom  and  hydrogen  arms."   He  asked  a  halt  on  testing
and  the  elimination  of  bases  threatening  the  U.  S.  S.  R.   Can
one  honestly  deny  that  if  the  roles  were  reversed,  we  would
say  the  same?   Would  there  not  be  value  in  a  face-to-face
meeting   at  which   the  heads  of   the   great   powers  and   the
great  neutrals  could  discuss  such  questions  informally?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  3,1958
Is  This  The  Kind of  "Disengagement"  the  Administration  Is  Planning  to  Offer?
Little Noticed "Maverick" Speech on Foreign Policy May Be Clue to Ike's Plans
A   group   of   Democratic  mavericks  in   the   House   led   by
Henry  Reuss  of   Wisconsin  last  Monday  staged  a  small  scale
uprising   against  bi-partisan  rigidity   in   foreign   policy.     We
provide   two   glimpses   of   the   debate  and   the   heart  of   Con-
gressman  Reuss's  little   noticed  speech  because  this   was  the
first   voice  in   Congress  for   any  kind   of   disengagement,   be-
cause  it  is  well  to  notice  how  weakly  inconsistent  this  "rebel-
lion"  is,  and  because  he  believes  that  the  Elsenhower  admin-
istration,  too,  has a  similar  kind  of  "disengagement"   in  mind.
The  Russians  may  regard  the  idea  of  "swopping"   a  free  East
Europe  for   a  reunited   Germany  in  NATO    subject   only   to
some  arms  restrictions  as a  gold  brick,  but  here  it  is:
"At  the  NATO  conference  last  December,  the  Administra-
tion  offered   our  European  allies  a  much  expanded   shopping
list  of  American  secrets,  missiles  and   even  nuclear  weapons
.  .  .  Adequate  ground  strength  is  necessary  in  order  to  con-
stitute  a  real  deterrent  to  Russian  aggression.
"Necessary   though   it  may  be  to  share  our  atomic  secrets
and   weapons  with  our   allies,  without  adequate   precautions
such   a  move  will  have   two   fateful   consequences.    Still   an-
other   step   away  from   conventional   weapons   increases   the
chances  that  any  war  at  all  in  Europe  will  be  a  nuclear  war.
The  yawning chasm  that  divides Europe  will  therefore  become
deeper.   The  goal, of  relaxing  the  tensions  between  East  and
West  will  be  pushed   even   further   out  of  reach.    Secondly,
placing  the  atomic  weapon  in  the  hands  of  more  countries
increases   the   number   of   those   who   can   eventually  trigger
the  atomic war  we  seek  to  avoid.
Arm  and Negotiate
"Because  the  proposal  to  share  atomic  secrets  and  weapons
marks  a  great  divide,  it  must  be  considered  not  in  isolation
but  in  the  context  of  the  whole  of  our  foreign  and  military
policy.   As  we  rush  onward  with  the  arms  race,  we  must  try
equally  to  relax  the  tensions  in  Europe  which  make  the  arms
race  necessary.  .  . .
"I   believe  that  such  an  alternative  possibility  lies  in   the
disengagement  of  Soviet  and  NATO  troops  which  now  con-
front   each  other   from   opposite   sides  of   the   Iron  Curtain
through  the  heart  of  Europe. ...  If  accepted  by the Russians,
an   offer   to  withdraw  troops  and  create  a  demilitarized  zone
between   the   Rhine  and   Russia  would   greatly   increase   the
Prediction
"I  say   that  ten  years   from  now,  if  we  continue   at
our  present   rate   of   spending   for   arms,   we  can   look
back,  see   what  we  have  spent  in  the  last  ten  years,
yet  we  will  have  less  defense,  security,  and  more  threat
of  war  than  we  have   now."
—Mr.  Blatnih  (D. Minn.),  in  the  House,  Jan.  27.
chances  of  peace  by  widening  the  area  where  a  mistake  could
be  made  without  the  catastrophe  of  an  all-out  nuclear   war.
.  .  . making  some  such  disengagement  proposal,  even  though
the  Russians  reject  it,  is,  I  believe,  necessary  if  the  NATO
aliance  is  to  go  forward  toward  rearmament  with   any  kind
of  unity.  . . .
"Such  a  disengagement  differs,  for  example,  from  the  stim-
ulating  proposals  recently   made  by  Mr.  George  F.  Kennan.
He  talks  of  the  withdrawal  of  British  and  U.  S.  armed  forces
from  the  continent of  Europe,  and  the  separation  of  Germany
from  NATO,  in  consideration of  a  Russian  troop  withdrawal.
"I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  our  forces  are  needed  on
the  continent,   particularly   in  France  and  the  low  countries,
to  thicken  the  western  European  defense  on  the  ground,  and
as  a  pledge  of  our  solidarity  with  our  NATO  allies.    I  also
believe  there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  a  reunited  Germany,
with  a  self-imposed  limitation  on  its  armed  forces,  remaining
a  member  of NATO.  . . .
"In   his  letter  this  month  to  Premier  Bulganin,  President
Eisenhower   has   apparently  overruled  Mr.   Dulles   and   has
offered  in  essence the  above proposal.   After  stressing  the  need
for   reunification  of  Germany  by  free  elections,  and   for  self-
government  for  the  countries  of  Eastern Europe,  the  President
said:
" 'The  United   States  is  prepared,   along   with   others,   to
negotiate   specific   arrangements   regarding   force   levels   and
deployments    and    broad    treaty   undertakings,   not    merely
against  aggression  but  assuring  positive  reaction  should  ag-
gression  occur  in  Europe.'  .  . .
'If   these  words  mean  anything,  and  I  hope  that  they  do,
they  mean  that  the  United  States  will  urge  its  NATO  allies,
including  West  Germany,  to  prepare  with  us  a  Western   posi-
tion   regarding  the   demilitarization  of   Middle   Europe  as  a
means  to  reunify  Germany  and  to  bring  freedom  to  the  en-
slaved  nations."
How  Baghdad  Pact  Aid  Unleashes  An  Arms  Race  in  the  Impoverished  Middle  East
Mr.  McGOVERN  (D.,  S.  Dak.).  Has  it  not  been  true  that
in  some  cases  the  military  assistance  we  have  sent  to  the
northern  tier  of  states,  to  members  of  the  Baghdad  Pact,
has   actually   caused   some   other   potential   friends   in   the
world  to  take  funds  away  from  economic  and  technical  de-
velopment  and  allocate   them  to  military  weapons ...  in
order   to  counter   some   of   the  military  -aid  given   to   their
neighbors?
Mr.  ROOSEVELT  (D.,  Cal.).   I  thank  the  gentleman  and
agree   with  him.   I  can  cite  one  specific  instance,  that   of
Israel   where   she  feels  because  of   military   aid  given   to
her  neighbors  .  .  .  that  she  has  to  use  an  unwarranted
proportion    of    her   resources   to   build    up   her   military
strength. ...
Mr.   McGOVERN.   Chester   Bowles,   former   Ambassador
to  India,  has  reported   that   American   military  aid  sent  to
Pakistan   in   1956  prompted   the   Government   of   India   to
withdraw   $100  million   from   its   second   5-year   plan   and
allocate   it   to   military   orders   with   the   French   and   the
British. ...
Mr.  ROOSEVELT.   I  come  back  to  what  I  said  earlier,
imposition  of  a  real  arms  embargo  in  the  Middle  East  would
enable  those   countries   that   have   so   much   to  do  for   the
basic   welfare   of   their   people,   to   spend   their   time,   their
money   and  their  efforts   working  for   the  improvement  of
the  people  in  the  area.   Rather  too  often  unfortunately  this
military  buildup,  in  effect,  only  serves  to  keep  a  particular
ruling  party  in  power  and  to  suppress  the  great  majority
of  the   people.
—House  of  Representatives,   Jan.  27.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  3, 1958
British  Ahead  of  Us,  Russians  May Be,  in  Search  for  This  Cheap  Ultimate   Fuel
Thermonuclear  Fission  Could  Be  America's  Answer  to  Sputnik's  Challenge
There  is no  such  thing  as  an  ultimate weapon;  there's  none
that  won't  be  obsolete  soon  after   it  comes  off  the  assembly
line.    But   controlled   thermonuclear   fusion   holds   out   the
promise  of  being  an  ultimate  fuel.   The  process  belatedly  un-
veiled  here  and  in  London  in  synchronized  Anglo-American
press  conferences last  week-end  could  be  America's answer  to
Sputnik—as  sensational  as  space  travel  and  more  important
to  mankind  if  the  British  or  Russians  don't  beat  us  to  it.
The   possibilities  were   indicated  in   an   article   on   Fusion
Power  in  Scientific   American  for  December.   The  deuterium
which   could   be   "fused"   in   one   gallon   of   water   has   the
energy  equivalent  of   350  gallons   of   gasoline.    The   oceans
contain  enough  of  this  fuel  to  take  care  of  mankind's  needs
for  billions  of  years  (whereas  uranium may  be  exhausted  in
a  century).  The  cost  of  extracting  deuterium  from  water  is
low  enough  to  make  it  less  than  one  percent  as  expensive  as
coal.   Best  of  all:   fusion  produces   none  of   the   radioactive
wastes  disposal  of  which  represents  one  of  the  main   health
headaches  and  cost  obstacles  to  the  use  of  atomic  fission  for
power.   (Where  fission  "splits"  atoms,  fusion  "fuses"  them).
Still  A Long Way  Off
Power  through  fusion  is still  a  long  way off.  The  problems
to  be  solved   involve  temperatures  so  high  and   densities  so
infinitesimally   slight  as  to   be  fantastic  enough   for   science
fiction—and   to   lure   some   of   the   brightest   young   minds
around  us  into  physics.    A   "crash  program"   for  thermonu-
clear  fusion   which  succeeded  would   restore  American  pres-
tige  in  a  peaceful  field  and  put  all  mankind  in  our  debt.
But  there  was  little  sign  here  that  Admiral  Strauss  of  the
Atomic  Energy Commission  possessed  either  the  magnanimity
or  the  imagination  to  sell  the  U.  S.  such  a  project.   Though
the  Admiral  boasted  that  this  year  we  would  be   spending
about  30 times the  amount spent  in  1953,  he  did  not  give  the
figures.   That   year  we  spent   $800,000.   This  year  we  will
spend  $23,000,000.    This  is  chicken  feed  beside  the  seven  to
eight  billions  we  are  preparing  to  spend  on  that  new  "ulti-
mate  weapon,"   the  anti-missile missile.
Where  "Private  Enterprise"  Hurts
Thermonuclear  fusion  is  a  field  in  which  we  may  well  fall
behind  other  countries  (not  just  the  Soviet  Union)   which  do
not  share  our  shibboleths  about  "private  enterprise."    In  this
field  "private  enterprise"  is  a  euphemism  for  huge   monopo-
listic  concerns  in  electric  power  and  oil.   They  are  none  too
enthusiastic  about  atomic  fission;  even  less  in  a  hurry  about
atomic  fusion.  Admiral Strauss  has  been  their  faithful  watch-
dog  on  the  AEC.
Add   the   Admiral's  fixation  about   secrecy,  and  the   stage
was  set  for  leisurely  progress   toward  the  controlled   thermo-
nuclear  fusion  goal.   Hardly  two  years  have  passed  since  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission  began  to  allow   access  to  infor-
mation  about  thermonuclear  fusion   even   "to   U.   S.  citizens
holding  permits  for   access  to  restricted  data."    (See   P.   54,
Vol.  1,  of  the  report  made  Jan.  31,  1956,   by  the  Panel  on
the  Impact  of  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Atomic  Energy).
Then  a  Russian  scientist  named   Kurchatov  turned   up  in
It  Took  Pressure  from  Britain
"Despite   repeated   denials  by   officials   of   the   U.   S.
Atomic   Energy   Commission,   it   is   pretty   clear   that
scientific  papers  would  not  have  been  released  at  this
time   [on  controlled  thermonuclear  fusion]  but  for  the
pressure   applied    by   United   Kingdom   scientific   and
political   sources."
—Nuclear  Fusion:  It   Works—in   the  Lab,   Business
Week,  Jan.  25,  1058.
England  with  Krushchev  and  Bulganin  in  April,   1956,   and
disclosed  how  many  of  our  carefully  guarded   secrets  in  this
field were  already known  to  (and  surpassed  by)  the  Russians.
The  Kurchatov  address  at  Harwell,  Britain's  main  atomic  in-
stallation,  indicated  that  the  Russians  were  ahead  in  the  race
and  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  temperatures  of  one  million
degrees   in   thermonuclear   experiments   (though   not   yet   in
achieving  fusion).   Later  that  year  the  U.  S.  and  the   United
Kingdom  finally  signed   an  agreement   they  had   long   been
negotiating  to  exchange  data  in  this  field.
Five  Weeks Before  Sputnik
Strauss  used   the   agreement   to  prevent   the   British   from
making   a  unilateral  announcement   after   their   scientists   at
Harwell  last  August  30  produced  what  they  believe  to  be  the
first  controlled  thermonuclear  reaction.   That  was  five  weeks
before  Sputnik  and  could  have  been  a  feather  in  the  West's
cap.   The   story  was  leaked   September   9  in   the   highly  re-
spected  Financial  Times  of  London.   But  the   effect   was  not
the  same  as  an  official  announcement  and  led  only  to  ill  feel-
ing  between  the  U.  S. and  Britain  where  it  is  felt  that  Strauss
fumbled   what  could  have  been  a  first  rate  piece   of   public
relations   because  it   would   have   precipitated    Congressional
criticism  here  of  the  AEC's  lag  behind  the  British.
Where  We  Lag
A   careful  reading   of   the   official   documents   shows    (1)
that  the  U.  S.  did  not  duplicate  the  British  experiment  until
December  and  (2)   that  we  still  lag  behind  them  in  the  time
of   the  observed  reaction.   They   produced   a  reaction   lasting
thousands  of  a  second;   ours   (like   those   reported   by   Kur-
chatov)  were  only  to  be  measured  in  millionths  of  a  second.
This,   rather  than  the  temperature  achieved   (we  reached  six
million  degrees  where  the  British  only  reached  five),  may  be
the  key  to  the  relative  success  of  the   experiments.
Next  Monday   February   10  a  subcommittee  of   the  Joint
Congressional  Atomic  Energy  Commission  will  open  hearings
on  basic  research.   These  will  re-air  old  charges  that  the  sec-
recy  which  has  surrounded  this  non-military project  held  back
American  development  and  current  fears  here  that  the  Rus-
sians  may  be  ahead.   Kurchatov  spoke  of  experiments   which
had   taken   place   as  early  as   1952.    ("Soviet  May  Lead  "in
Fusion   Power"   said  a  New   York   Times   Jan.   26  headline
over  a  story  by  Harry  Schwartz).    It  would   be  foolish   to
assume  that  the  Russians have  been  marking  time.   The  tem-
perature  they achieved  five  years  ago  was  much  less  than  ours,
but  the  time  of  the  reaction  was  about  the  same.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  S, 1958
Miscellany;   New  Reason  for  Secrecy  and  A  Reported  Krushchcv  Apology  for   Anti-Semitism
Better  Education:  Maybe  It  Ought  to  Start  at the  Cabinet  Level
According  to  a  story  by  Warren  Unna  in  the   Washington
Post   (Jan.   23),   when  CIA  Director   Allen  W.  Dulles  com-
plained   at  a  recent  National   Security  Council   meeting   that
policy  makers  weren't   reading   his  intelligence  reports,   the
President   retorted   that  CIA  reports  were  too  hard  to  read.
He  is supposed  to  have  said  that  if  Mr.  Dulles  would   brighten
the  reports  with  maps  and  red  arrows,  make  them  briefer  and
furnish  headline  summaries,  the  President   would   "order  the
Administration's   top  25  or   30  policy  makers  to  read   them
daily."   Maybe,  in  discussing  education,  we  have  been  putting
too   much   stress   on   science   and   mathematics   in   the   high
schools.   Maybe  we  had  better  start  further  down  and  higher
up—with  remedial   reading   courses  for   Cabinet   members.
The   best  comment  we  have   seen  on  the  President's   lop-
sided  and  inadequate  education  program,   was  made  by  Con-
gressman  Frank  Thompson,  Jr.  (D.,  N.  J.).   "We  have  today
seen,"  he  told  the  House,   "a  message  go  to  the  Congress  on
education—100  percent  for  science,  mathematics,  but  nothing
for   the  humanities.   We   could   achieve   technological   super-
iority  which  is  greater  than  anyone  ever  imagined,  and  still,
if   we  do  not   have   people  educated   to   understand   human
beings,  it  would  be  an  empty  victory.   Suppose,  for   instance,
some  Soviet  biologist  comes  forward  next  month  with  a  dis-
covery  in  biology  as startling  as was  the  Sputnik  breakthrough.
Would  we  then  have  a  message  asking  us  to  educate  40,000
biologists  in  the  next  few  years?"
Another   Reason   for   Secrecy:  When   Congressman   Reuss
in  the  foreign  policy  speech  we  cited  on  page  two  complained
that  there  was  too  much  secrecy  about   foreign  military  aid,
Congressman  Vorys  (R.,  Ohio)   rose  to  defend  the  Adminis-
tration  by  saying  one  of   the   reasons  for   the   secrecy  is  the
jealousy  between  our  allies,  "If   County  A  knows  that  Coun-
try  B  is  getting  more  jets  than  Country   A,  we  are  in  a  hot
diplomatic  situation.  .  .  ."
Apology     for    Anti-Semitism:    Wm.   Zukerman's    Jewish
Newsletter  (Jan.  27)   reports  that  the  respected  London   Jew-
ish   Chronicle   (Jan.   10)   published   a  story  that   Krushchev
singled  out  Roman  Zambrowski,  the  only  remaining  Jew  on
the   Polish   Politbureau,  at  a  Moscow   meeting   and   publicly
apologized  "for  my behavior  two  years ago  in  Warsaw"  when
Send  Your  Congressman A   Gift
One The Press  Missed
None   of  the  newspapers   seem  to  have   noticed   that
the  retiring   Soviet   Ambassador,   Zarubin,  also  paid  a
farewell   call   (which   extended   into   quite   a   lengthy
chat)   with   Harold   Stassen,   the   President's   disarma-
ment   adviser   and   Washington's   otherwise    forgotten
man.   The  visit  was  regarded  as  a  mark  of  Soviet   con-
fidence  in  Stassen's  sincerity  as  an  arms  negotiator.
he  opposed  Zambrowski's  election  to  the  Politbureau  by  say-
ing   there   were   "too   many   Abramovitch.es"   in   the    Polish
government.
Propaganda   War  Item:  An  Athens  dispatch  in  The  Times
of  London   (Jan.  21)  throws  new  light  on  that   recent  press
and   radio   rumor  about   Russian  missile   bases   in   Bulgaria
and   Albania.    The   Times   man   reported   that   Moscow   had
threatened   economic  sanctions  against  Greece   if   it   accepted
NATO  missile  and  atom  bases.   "To  counteract  the  effects  of
the   Soviet   warnings   on   the   Greek   parliament   and   public
opinion,"   the  dispatch  from  Athens  continued,  "Greek  mili-
tary  sources  were  reported  in  the  Greek  press  today  to  have
revealed  that  the  Soviet  Union  has  been  building  five  bases
for   guided   missiles  and   nuclear  weapons   in   Bulgaria   and
two  in  Albania."
//   They   Would   Only   Keep   Their   Freedom   Theoretical:
"Some   Americans,"  the  Wall   Street   Journal   reported    (Jan.
28)    from   Venezuela,   "fear   the   taste  of   political   freedom
now  being  savored  for  the  first  time  in  many  years  may  be
translated  into  tougher  union  demands." ...  In   Venezuela,
as  in  Hungary,  the  first  victims  of  the  uprising,   when  work-
ers  and  students  rose  against  the  dictatorship,  were  the  secret
police.   Apparently,  a  police  state  is  a  police  state,  whether
run   by  a  Communist    bureaucracy   or  a  monopoly  capitalist
tool  like  Jimenez:  the  same  terror,  the  same  abuses,  the  same
resentments,  and  the  same  lynchings  of  the  hated  plainclothes-
men  when  the  prisons  are  opened. ...  So  far  the  Vene-
zuelan  revolution,  in  the  shadow  of  the  U.  S.,  is  faring  better
than  did  Hungary,   in  the  shadow  of  the  USSR.  .  .  .  But
we're  waiting to  see  whether  a  Red  menace  will  suddenly  be
discovered  there  by our  oil  companies.  .  .  .
Subscription  to  The   Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .............................................................................—.......
Street  .................,......................._............................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift   sub  for  $4  (1  yr.)  or  $2  (6  mos.)   additional:
a/3/58
(To)    Name
Street     .......
City     ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement T      Tes  D    No  D
IE  Stones  Weekly
5618  KUbraskt   Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as  Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington   D.  C.,  under  tue  Act  of  Marcb  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub
llghed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Angnst  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W.,  Washington  15. D.  C.
An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.   F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
16  In  the  U.  8.;  «8  In  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  US  to  Europe;  S20  to  Israel.  Aala  tnd  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED