I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958sep15.pdf

============================================================

De  Gaulle's  Constitution, P.  4
Debunking   Those   Headlines   About   Dulles's  Hints   of  Specific  Peace  Plans,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  36SEPTEMBER  15,  1958
'»'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
What   Washington,   Moscow  and   Peking   Have   In   Fraternal  Common
Why  Mankind's  Fate  May Hang  on  A  Few Distant  Isles
At  this  tense  moment,  we'd  like  to  point  out  some  com-
mon   features   of   the   international   landscape.   No   one   has
asked   the   American   people  whether  they  want  to   die   for
Quemoy  and  Matsu.   But  neither  has  anyone  asked  the  Chi-
nese  people.   Or  the  Russian  people.
Not   a  single  correspondent  in  Taiwan,  on  the  verge  of
events  which  could  blow  all  Formosa  off  the  map,  has  had
the  temerity  to  button-hole  a  passerby in  the  streets  of  Taipeh
and  ask  him,  "Do  you want  to  risk  your  life  and  family  on
this  quarrel  over  the  offshore   islands?"   We   feel  sure  that
no  one  has  asked  the  Formosans  that  question  because  the
answer  would  never  get  by  Chiang  Kai-shek's  censors   (or
Peking's  either).    As  for  the  folk  who  live  by  fishing  and
farming  on  the  rocky  islets  of  the  Quemoy  and  Matsu chains,
can  anyone  doubt  that  they  would  prefer  neither  to  be  de-
fended  nor  liberated  but  just  left  alone?
Dulles  Not  The  Only  Brinksman
We   yield  to  no  one  in  dislike  of  Mr.  Dulles.   But  he  is
not  the  only  one  practicing  brinksmanship  over  the  distant
Formosa  straits.  We  believe  the  U.  S.  has  no  business  being
in  Quemoy,  in  Matsu  or  in  Formosa.   But  are  these  islands
worth   the  risk  of  a  world  war  to  anyone,  American,  Rus-
sian  or  Chinese?   We   do  not  believe  that  in  all  the  years
since  Japan  annexed  Formosa  in   1895  a  single  Chinese  has
lost  a  night's  sleeping  worrying  about  it..
All  that  men  have  built  up  may  be  thrown  suddenly  into
the  furnace  of  war,  here  the  rich  accumulations  of   capital-
ism,   there  the  recent  triumphs  of  socialism,  and  literally  no-
body  quite knows what  may  set  the  conflict  off.  Neither  side
is  sure whether the  other  is  just  bluffing.   Neither  side  knows
exactly  where  the  other  will  decide  that  this  is  It.   The  few
men   who  sit  at  the   controls   in  Washington,   Moscow   and
Peking  are  as  much  in  the  dark  as  the  rest  of  us.   None  is
certain  that  their  hand  may  not  be  forced  by  some  misunder-
standing,   some   failure   of   command   or   some   impulse   of
fanaticism   over  the   distant   Formosan   straits.
Still  That  Matter  of  Prestige
Everybody   is  afraid  to   back   down.    Their   fear   of  their
own  thermonuclear  weapons  does  not  seem  as  great  as  their
fear  of  losing  face,  or  prestige,  and  seeming  to  be  a  paper
tiger.   The  same  motives  govern  small  boys  in  a  schoolyard
quarrel.   Both  sides  claim  to-be  the  standard   bearers  of  a
Higher  Ethic,  but  both  share  a  common  belief.   This  is  the
right  to  kill.   One  side  thinks  it  can  usher  in  the  millenium
by  killing  enough  Communists;  the  other  side  thinks  it  can
1  0  *                                                                                                                 ,14
If  You  Get  Scalped,  It's   Your  Own  Fault
"Washington,  Sept.  7  (UPI)—Leo  Hoegh, director of
the   Office   of   Defense   and  Civilian   Mobilization  said
today   that   every   American   should   build  a   shelter
against  radioactive  fallout  just  as  the  pioneers  built
defenses  against  the  Indians.
"It  was  not  the  job  of   the  Federal   government  to
build  a  shelter  for  everybody,  he  declared,  but  rather
to  provide the  planning  and  direction.
" 'The  people  must  recognize  they  have  a  respon-
sibility,'  he  added."
—New  York  Times, Sept.  8.
This  seems  to  us  an  eminently fair  division  of  labor
between  government and citizen.  They provide the  war.
We  provide  the  fall-out  shelters.
usher  in  the  millenium by killing enough  capitalists.   The  few
decision  makers  on  either  side 'think  they  have  a  right   to
throw  into  jail  any  poor  sucker  who  protests  that  a  chance
to  go  on  and  pay  off  the  second  mortgage  on  his  home  is
millenium  enough  for  him.   On  both  sides,  as with  the  eating
of  strawberries comes  the  revolution,  you've  got  to  push  over
the  brink  on  signal  and  make for  the  millenium.    In  the  free
countries,   as  in   the   dictatorships,   the   decisions   are   being
made  by  a  few.   You   can  elect  your  dog-catcher,   but   you
can't  vote  on  the  question  of  life  or  death.
Other  Nations  Not  Consulted
One  more  common  feature  deserves  to  be  noted.   War  be-
tween  the  giants  over  the  Formosa  straits  is  no  private  bar-
room  brawl.  The  mere  prospect  pushes  up  the  price  of  bread
for  millions  everywhere.   Should  war  come,  other  nations  will
be  drawn  in.   The  radioactive  clouds  will  shed  their  silent
death  on  participant  and  neutral  alike.   But  neither   side  is
telephoning   India  or   Indonesia   or   France   or   Germany   or
Argentina  or  Poland  to  ask their  permission  before  taking  the
plunge.
The  evil  is  not  any  of  the  isms  you  will  hear  beaten  out
on  the  tom-toms,  not  capitalism,  or  communism,  or  their  re-
spective  brands  of  imperialism,  but  a world  of  national  States
recognizing  no  law higher  than  their  own  will,  as  determined
by  a  few  men,  out  of  wisdom  or  whim.
It  is  on  this  world  anarchy,  and  on  the  murderous  moral
arrogance  of  the  leadership  on  both  sides,  not  just  on  Que-
moy  and  Matsu,  that  attention   must  be  focussed  when  this
crisis  passes.   Otherwise   there  will  always  be  some  offshore
island  which  may  determine  the  fate  of  mankind.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F: Stone's  Weekly,  September  15,1958
The   Background   Which   Devalues   Those   Headlines  About  "Hints"  and  "Plans"
Is  Mr.  Dulles  Ready  and  Willing  for  Peaceful  Negotiations?
As  reflected  in  the   headlines,   the   big  news  which  came
out  of  Secretary Dulles's  press  conference  on  September  9  was
a  supposed  hint  that  he  had  some kind  of  specific  peace  plan
in  mind  for  negotiation  with  the  Chinese  Communists.   The
Washington   Star  hit   the   streets   within   an   hour   with   an
8-column  page  one  line,  "US  Hints   Concessions  for  Peace"
while  the  Washington  Post  next  morning  said  "Dulles  Hints
Concessions  on  Formosa"  and  the  New  York  Times,  "Dulles
Hints  U.  S.  Has  Specific  Plan  for  China  Parley."   This  would
be  good  news  if  true.   I  don't  believe  it  is.
If  Mr.  Dulles  had  any  specific  plan  for  peaceful   negotia-
tion  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  he—who  ordinarily runs  the
State  Department  out  of  a  do-it-yourself-kit—would  leave  so
important  a  matter  to  a  minor  Ambassador  in  Warsaw.   The
prospect   of   specific   negotiations   for   peace   would    sweeten
our  relations  with  our  allies.   Mr.  Dulles  would  have  let  drop
more  than  a  hint.   At  the  very  least  he  would  have  arranged
for  a  planted  question  at  press  conference  on  which  to  drop
a  hint.   This  was  not  the  case  last  Tuesday.   I  know  because
I  asked  the  questions  which  started  this,  and  I  believe  the
supposed  "hints"  were  merely  an  improvisation  to  deal  with
an  embarrassing  line  of  inquiry.
There  Must  Be  Alternatives  to  Force
The  line  of  inquiry  is,  or  should  be,  obvious.   How  can  we
ask  the   Chinese  to  renounce  force  for   the   achievement  of
their  claims  on  the  offshore  islands  and  Formosa,   if  we  do
not  at  the  same  time  offer  them  a  peaceful  way  to   negotiate
these   matters?    "Mr.    Secretary,   one  urgent  question,"   the
writer  asked.   "If  the  Red  Chinese  renounce  the  use  of  force,
are  you  prepared   to   negotiate   the   future   of   the    offshore
islands,  that  is Quemoy  and  Matsu?"  His  answer  was,  "Well,
the  United  States  is  not  in  a  position  to  negotiate  the  future
of   property  which  it  does  not  own  and   which   belongs   to
another  and   friendly   government.    All   I  can  say  is  that  if
there  was  an  effective,  dependable  renunciation  of  force,  that
it  would  be  certainly  a  very  constructive  new  element  in  the
situation  which  might  have  future   consequences."
When   the  writer  asked  what   then   could   be   negotiated,
Mr.  Dulles  replied  that  there  was  "quite  a  lot  to  negotiate"
but  he  didn't  think  it  desirable  to  show  his  hand.    Another
reporter   then   said,  "You   imply  that  we  have  a  number  of
papers   in  our  bag  which  you  don't  want  to  disclose  in  ad-
vance."    Were  they  matters  of   substance?   The   reply   gave
no  hint  of  anything new.   "The  matters  I  am  talking  about,"
Mr.  Dulles  said,  "are  matters  which  relate  to  the  use  of  force
or  the  disuse  of  force  in  the  Taiwan   strait  area."   But  he
thought  this  might   be  dealt  with   "in   a  more   specific  way
rather  than  in  abstract   generalities."
Not   Much  Of  A   Hint
A  third  reporter   then  asked  whether,   if  the   Communists
renounced  force,  we  would  recommend  to  the  Chinese   Na-
tionalists  that  they  evacuate  Quemoy  and  Matsu?   Mr.  Dulles
replied  that  he  did  not  want  to  go  any  further  than  to  say
that   "if   there  were  a  meaningful  renunciation   of   force  in
the  Taiwan   strait  area,  that  would   alter   the  situation  in  a
great  many  respects  and  probably  have  consequences.   But  I
don't   want   to   attempt   to   say  precisely   what   these   conse-
quences  would  be  because  they   involve  the   rights   and   in-
terests  of  an  ally."   Only  here,  on  the  fourth  question  in  this
series,  was  there  any  kind  of  hint.   It  wasn't  much.
A  test  of  Mr.   Dulles's   sincerity  may  be  provided   by  his
conduct  at  Newport,  after  seeing  the  President  on   September
4.   The  official  statement  as  authorized  by  the  President  ended
with  a  clear  hint  and  invitation  to  the  Communists  for  re-
newed   negotiations.   Paragraph   8  said   the   renunciation   of
force  by  Peking  "would  not  require  it  to  abandon  its  claims,
ill-founded  though  we  may  deem  them  to  be."   This  helped
open  the  door  to  Chou's  offer  on  September  6  to  resume  the
ambassadorial  talks.
How  Dulles  Distorted  Ike's  Views
But  when  Mr.  Dulles  left  the  President  and  met  with  the
press  at  Newport,  he  chose  on  an  off-the-record   basis  to  em-
phasize  and   indeed  to  exaggerate   the   extent   to  which   the
President  had  made  up  his  mind  to  fight  for   Quernoy  and
Matsu.   Mr.  Eisenhower's  statement  looked  toward  peace;  Mr.
Dulles—he  admitted  with  a  painful   grimance  at  press  con-
ference  that  it  was  he—chose  the  mantle  of  "a  high   official"
to  turn  the  stress  the  other  way,  toward  war.   He  took  the
"ifs"  and  "buts"  out  of  the  words  authorized  by  the  Presi-
dent  and  did  not  draw  attention  to  the  peace   feelers.
Mr.   Dulles's   conduct  at  Newport   was  the   conduct   of  a
man  who,  unlike  his  chief,  wants  a  showdown  and  was  using
the  sneaky  cloak  of  an  off-the-record  briefing  to  distort  what
his  chief  had  actually  authorized.   Apparently  the  Joint  Chiefs
of   Staff   are  with  Dulles  in  this.   Their   action  in  recklessly
and   arrogantly  authorizing  a  convey  to   Quemoy  when   the
Reds  had  stopped  their  shelling  in  expectation   of  talks  was
a  provocation  which  should  not  be  overlooked.   This   is  not
the   conduct  of   men  anxious  for   negotiation.
Former  Secretary  of  State  Acheson  Speaks  Out Against  the  Drift  to  War
Former  Secretary  of  State  Dean  Acheson  performed  a
courageous   public   service   with   his   admirably   trenchant
statement  of  September  6. criticizing  our  drift  to  war  with
China.    Not  the  least  of  his  contributions  was  in  naming
Mr.   Dulles   as   the   "high   official"   who,   at   Newport,    (as
Joseph  Alsop  wrote   approvingly   on  September  8)   "closed
the  loopholes  and  annulled  the  escape  clauses''  in  the  state-
ment  authorized  by  the  President.   The  stultifying   rules
which  bind  the  press  would  have  inhibited  reporters  from
asking  Mr.  Dulles  publicly  whether  (as  they  already  knew
but   could  not   print)   he   was   that   "high   official"   if   Mr.
Acheson  had  not  said  so  flatly  in  his  statement.
Mr.  Acheson  is  the  first  and  only  Democrat  of  first  rate
stature  except  for  Senator  Morse  to  speak  out  boldly  on
the  Far  East  crisis,  and nothing  the  Senator  has  said  equals
the  bitingly   succinct  way  our  former   Secretary   of   State
took  that  policy  apart.   In  this,  for  the  first  time  in  years,
Mr.  Acheson  took  a  position  directly  opposite  that   off  Mr.
Truman,   who  is  as  belligerently  ready  as  Mr.  Dulles  for
a  showdown.   Peace  groups  should  study  the  Acheson  text
in  the  New  York  Times  of  Sept.  7  and  use  it  as  ammuni-
tion  for  a  saner  foreign  policy.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  15,1958
The   Louisville   Story   Told  With   the   Depth   and   Compassion  of  A  First  Rate   Novel
To Understand the Integration Crisis Read Anne Braden's "The  Wall Between"
Anne  Braden  grew  up  in  the  South  on  the  right  side  of
the   tracks.   She  came,  as  they  say  in  the   South,  of  a  good
family.    Very  early  she  began  to  feel  there  was  something
wrong  in  the  relations  between  the   races.   Her   family  was
always  kind  to  the  Negro  family  who  worked  for  them.  "But
something  happened  to  me."  Mrs.  Braden writes  in  her  book,
The  Wall   Between  (Monthly   Review  Press,  66  Barrow  St.,
New   York   14,  $5),  "each  time  I  looked  at  the  Negro  girl
who  always  inherited  my  clothes.   .  .  .  She  would  sit  in  a
straight  chair  in  our  kitchen  waiting  for  her  mother.  .  .  .
She  would  sit  there  looking   uncomfortable,   my  old  faded
dress  binding  her  at  the  waist  and  throat.   And  some  way  I
knew  that  this  was  not  what  Jesus  meant  when  he  said  to
clothe  the  naked."
From  Priesthood   to  Police   Reporter
Anne  became  a  newspaperwoman  and   married  a   fellow
reporter,  Carl,  who  came  most  decidedly  from  the  other  side
of  the  tracks.  His  family  was  Catholic,  the  father  an  agnostic
and  socialist  who  lost  his  job  in  the  1922  railway shopmen's
strike.   The   family  had  known  poverty  ever  since.   Carl,  at
the  age  of  13,  went  into  a  pro-seminary  to  prepare  for  the
priesthood  but  at  16  decided  it  was  not  for  him.   He  became
a newspaperman in  Louisville,  Kentucky.  "A  police  reporter,"
he  once  told  his  wife,  "has  to  become  one  of  three  things—
a  drunk,  a  cynic,  or  a  reformer."   Carl  chose  the  third  course,
and   it  led   him  in   1954   to  agree  when   a  Negro  veteran,
Andrew  Wade,  asked  the  Bradens  to  buy  a  house  for  him  in
a   new  white   neighborhood   in   Louisville,   Kentucky.    The
house  was  dynamited,  and   the   State  authorities,  instead  of
prosecuting   the   dynamiters,  indicted   the   Bradens  and  five
other  residents of  Louisville  for  sedition.   Braden,  first  to  be
tried,  was  sent  to  jail  for   15  years,  and  saved  only  by  the
miracle  of  the  Supreme  Court's  Steve  Nelson  decision.
Anne  Braden  has  told  the  whole  story  in  her  book,   The
Wall  Between,  and  told  it  with  the  depth  and  objectivity  of
a  first  rate  novel.    All  that  is  happening   elsewhere   in   the
integration  crisis  is  lit  up  for  us  by  this  story  of  what  that
attack  on  housing  segregation  did  in  and  to  liberal  Louisville.
Mrs.  Braden writes with  compassion  for  the  prisons  in  which
men  seal  themselves  up.   She  sees  the  "paralyzed  liberals"  of
Louisville,   like   its   cross-burners,   as   "trapped    men."    She
even  tried,  in  one  of  the  most  memorable  episodes   of   the
book,  to  understand  her   fellow  Southerner,   the  prosecutor,
Scott  Hamilton,  who  was  trying  his  best  to  send  her  and  her
The  Fear  That   Puts  Men in  Mobs
" 'But  why  did  it  have  to  be  my  house?   Why  did  it
have  to  be me?'  Rone  [the  real  estate  man  from  whom
the  Bradens  bought  a  house  in  a  white   neighborhood
for  the  Negro,  Andrew Wade]  asked  almost   plaintively.
'Everybody  out  here  is  blaming  me  for  it.'
"Everybody  out here  is  blaming me. ...  I saw now
that  Rone  had  had  to  oppose  the  Wades'  occupancy  of
the  house,  he  had  had  to  organize  the  crowd  to   come
to   our  house,   in   order   to  prove   to   his   friends   and
neighbors  that  he  was  not  a  part  of  this   terrifying'
thing  that  had  impinged  upon  all  their  lives,  not  re-
sponsible  for  it.   And  each  man  who  joined  the  motor-
cade  to  our  house  that   night  had  undoubtedly   had  to
come  along  in  order  to  prove,  each  man  to  his  neigh-
bor,  that  he  was  opposed  to  this  new  thing,   that   he
was  a  part  of  the old safe  world. .  .  .
"How  much  so  called  prejudice  is  maintained  from
generation  to  generation  because  every  man must  prove
to  his  neighbor  that  he  thinks  as  he  thinks  his  neighbor
thinks?"                —Anne  Braden:  The  Wall  Between.
husband  to  prison  on  trumped  up   charges  he  himself   had
come to  believe.  "If  circumstances,"  she asked  herself,  "some-
where  in  the  past  of  both  our  lives  had  been  different,  would
I   perhaps  have  been  on   his  side  of   this  battle   or   he   on
mine?"   This  was  the  same  young  woman  who  could  firmly
refuse  to  answer  questions  about  the  books  she  read  and  the
organizations   to   which   she   belonged.    "I   think   we   have
enough  McCarthys  in  this  country,"  she  said  defiantly  when
taken  before  a  Judge,  "without  the  Grand  Jury  turning  into
one."
The  Bradens  walked  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of
the  witch  hunt.   An  FBI  informer  perjured  herself   to  call
Braden  a  Communist;  he  denied  it  under  oath.   The  House
Un-American  Committee  sent  down  agents  to  frighten   An-
drew  Wade,  the  Negro  they  had  risked  so much  to  help,  and
got  him   to  say  things   one  only   says   about   a  man   and   a
woman  one  does  not   trust.   The   transcript   of  what  Wade
said  in  a  moment  of  weakness  gave  Anne  Braden  the  most
terrible  moment  of  the  whole  experience,  one  in  which  she
felt  "that  the  things  we had  been  working  for—a  world  with-
out  segregation,  a  world  of  understanding and  brotherhood—
had  turned  to  dust  in  my  hand."   But  the  moment   passed.
Both  Wade  and  the  Bradens  recovered  from  it.   Her   book
is  a  worthy  record  of  a  great  experience,  the  warming  story
of  a  heroic  couple's  abiding  faith.
"White  Humanity Has  Not  Earned the  Trust of  the Black Man"
,    "The   Negro   people   in   the   South   today,   most   of   them,
feel  that  they  are  standing   alone  at  this  hour  in  history.
I  feel  that  they  are  wrong.   I  do  not  think  that  they  are
standing  alone.   I  feel—I  know—that  the  South  has  many
white  people  who  will  go  with  them  to  the  task  of  break-
ing   down  the  wall,  wherever  that   course   leads.   But   the
crucial  thing,   the  horrifying  thing,   is  that   most   Negroes
do  not  know  it.   They  at  best  are  not  sure  of  it.
"It  is  a  situation   we  inflicted  upon  ourselves   when  we
bnijt  the  wall—or  when  our  ancestors   built  it;  and  never
has  it  proved so  true  that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited
upon  the  third  and  fourth  generations.   We  put  a   whole
race  of  people  away  from  us  and  behind  a  wall;  no  white
man  should  be  shocked  if  these  people  do  not  now  accept
at  face  value  his  statements  about  his  desire  ultimately  to
crumble  the  wall;  he  should  not  be  outraged  if  the  Negro
people  do  not  accept  his   counsel   of  an  approach   of  mod-
eration  and  gradualism  as  the  wisest  way.  White  humanity
has  not  earned  the  trust  of  the  black  man.
"I  think  that   trust  can  be  established  across  the   wall.
Not  to  believe  this  is  to  deny  every  possibility  of  brother-
hood  among  men.   But  it  is  white  men  who  built  the  wall,
and  it  is  they  who  must  take  the  initiative  if  the  trust  is
to  be  established."      —Anne  Braden:  The  Wall  Between.
,1   4  ''
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  15,1958
The  President   of   the   Republic  Will   Become   An   Uncrowned  King
France's  New  Constitution  As  Anachronistic  As  De  Gaulle
Article  89  of  the  new  Constitution  on  which  France  will
vote   September   28   says  "the Republican  form   of   govern-
ment  is  not  subject  to  revision."   There  will  be  little  republi-
canism  left  to  revise  if  de  Gaulle's   Constitution   is   adopted.
This  Constitution   is  as  anachronistic  as  de  Gaulle;   it  be-
longs  to  the   days  of   constitutional   monarchy,  when   kings
and  kaisers  were  much  more  than   figureheads.   Except   for
the  fact  that  the  President  must  be  reelected  every  seven  years
(there  is  no  bar  on  the  number  of  terms  he  may serve),  and
cannot  pass  the  office  on  to  his  heirs,  the  head  of  the  Republic
will  be  an  uncrowned  king,  combining  considerable  judicial
and   legislative   power   with   his   executive   functions.    Two
centuries  after  Montesquieu  found  the  secret  of   non-despotic
government  in  separation  of  powers,  France  will  be  reuniting
them  again  in  one  man's  hands.
Laws  by   Decree
The  President  of  the  Republic  will  preside  over  the  high-
est  council  of  the  judiciary.   He  will  name  the  President  and
three  of  the  nine  members  of  a  new  Constitutional    Council
empowered   (like  our  Supreme  Court)   to  determine  which
laws  are   constitutional.    The   President   of   the   Republic   as
head  of  the  government  may  also  promulgate   a  wide  range
of  laws  by  decree.
The  President,  may  under  Article  16  establish  a  temporary
dictatorship  when  he  feels  that  "the institutions  of  the  Re-
public,  the  independence  of  the  nation,  the  integrity  of  its
territory  or  the  execution  of  its  international  commitments  are
threatened."    He   need   consult   only   with   his   Premier   and
his  Constitutional  Council  before  taking  such  a   step.
Temporary   But  Indefinite   Dictatorship
There  is no  restriction on  the  length  of  time  he  may  govern
as  dictator  except  the  vague  provision  that  such   emergency
measures  "must  be  inspired  by  the  desire  to  assure  the   con-
stitutional  public  powers,  in  the  shortest   time,  the  means  of
accomplishing  their  mission."   Cincinnatus need  not  go  back
to  his  plow  until  he  is  good  and  ready.
Only   the  National   Assembly,   which   has  limited   powers
of   legislation,  will  be  the  product  of   direct  elections.    The
President   will   be  chosen  indirectly  by  an   electoral   college
much  like  ours  was  intended  to  be  but  never  became.    The
French  Senate,  like  ours  originally,  will  be  elected  by  indirect
suffrage.    Though   Article  2  uses   Lincoln's   words   what   de
Gaulle's   experts  have  fashioned   is  government   of   and   for,
rather  than  by,  the  people.   It  embodies  as  little   democracy
as  possible.
No  Bill  of   Rights
This  is the  kind  of  Constitution  which  would  have  pleased
Alexander  Hamilton,  who  thought  the  people  "a  great  beast"
and  believed  in  rule  by  the  select  few.    It  contains  no  Bill
of   Rights,   though  the   Preamble   says  "The French   people
solemnly  proclaims  its  attachment  to  the  rights  of  man  .  .  .
as  defined   by  the   Declaration   of   1789."   The    Constitution
itself   spells  out  no  rights  other  than  to  assure  by  Article  2
"equality  before  the  law  of   all  citizens  without   distinction
of  origin,  race,  or  religion"  and  by  Article  66  that  "No   one
may  be  arbitrarily   detained."
The  circumstances  in  which  this  Constitution   was  drafted
explain  its  nature.   In  France  the  home  of  the  great   Revo-
lution,   the   careless,   indifferent   and   apathetic   heirs   of   the
Jacobins  allowed  the  basic  charter  of  their  government  to  be
written   by  a  few   obscure  experts   and   handed   them   on   a
take-it-or-Ieave-it  basis.   A  people  which   shows  so  little  in-
terest  in  governing   itself  has  been  handed   a  new   Constitu-
tion  in  which  it  will  have  as  little  power  of   self-government
as  it  seems  to  want.   And  it  will  vote  "yes"   or  "no" under
the  threat  that  the  alternative  will  be  military   dictatorship.
The  Constitution,  like  de  Gaulle  himself,   reflects  the   power
of  the  professional  soldiers;  France,  in  this  respect,   has  de-
generated  to  the  politics  of  Latin  American  or  Arab  republics.
But  France  is  not  the  only  advanced  Western  country  today
in  which  an  apathetic  citizenry  shrugs  off  its   responsibilities,
hoping   mystically  that  some  elderly  veteran   of  the  last  war
can  get  them  safely  through  the  treacherous  eddies  of  a  world
in  convulsive  change.
This  Issue  Went  to  Press  Before   the  Little  Rock   Case  Was  Argued—Next   Week  for  A  Full  Report
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    ......................................................................................
Street    ......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 jr.)  additional:
9/13/88
(To)   Name
Street     ........
City    ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W., Washington  IS,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
W  In  the  U.  8.;  *8  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED