I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958sep22.pdf

============================================================

A  Report from  the South
First  Hand  Notes  on  the  Human  Flora  and  Fauna  of  Racially   Tense  Arkansas
L F. Stone's   Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  37
SEPTEMBER   22,   1958
•>
lot
       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  GENTS
Journal  of  A  Flying  Trip  to  Little   Rock
We  took  the  first  plane  out  of  Washington  for  Little  Rock
after  hearing Chief  Justice  Warren   read  a  tense  and  crowded
court  room  the  order  that  integration  proceed.   The  plane's
first  stop  was  at  Nashville,   and  passengers  came  aboard   car-
rying  its  evening  newspaper,  the  Banner.    A  black   headline
across  page  one  indicated that  we  had  reached  the  South.   It
said,   with  White  Citizens   Council   objectivity,   "Mix    Now,
Little  Rock  Told."   On  the  editorial  page,  under  the  caption
"Hducation   Be  Hanged!"   there   was   a   cartoon   which   pic-
tured  the  Chief  Justice  as  a  burly  man  leaning  arrogantly  on
a  huge  gavel.   Behind  him  was  a  blackboard  on  which  he
had  triumphantly  crossed   out  the  word   "deliberate"   in   the
phrase,  "all  deliberate speed," and  written  in the  word  "break-
neck-."   A  page  one  Associated   Press  bulletin   claimed  that  a
"jubilant"   Mrs.  Daisy  Bates,   local   leader   of   the   NAACP,
had  "hinted"  that  she  expected  "more  mixing"  soon,  though
I  v.'iis  later  to  learn  that  Mrs.  Bates  in  Little  Rock  was  harder
to  reach  than  the  Secretary of  State  on  Duck  Island  and  twice
as  cautious  and  that  any  such  "hint"  must  have  been  deduced
by  the  AP  man  from  the  way  she  said,  "no  comment."   A
staff   correspondent   in  Little  Rock  quoted   the   Rev.  Wesley
Pruden,  the  segregationist  leader,  as  saying  "The   South  will
not  accept  this  outrage,  which  a  Communist   dominated   gov-
ernment  is  trying  to  lay  on  us."    This  was  my  introduction
to  a  regional  journalism which  prints  such  statements  matter-
of-factly.
A  Whiff  of  the  Old  Regime
We  sat  forward  on  one  of  four  seats.   Two  of  them,  facing
each   other,  were  occupied   by   a   gray-haired   elderly   white
woman  and  a  middle-aged  colored  woman  who  seemed  to  be
travelling  together.   Though  the  former,  from  her  accent,  did
not   appear   to  be  Southern,  she  turned  out  to  be  a  gentle-
woman   returning  from   a   summer   in   Massachusetts    to   her
plantation  home  below  Memphis  with  her  Negro  maid.  When
the  maid,  a  sturdy  woman,  went  to  the  rest  room,  the  white
lady  told  us  her  maid  had  been  with  her  for  25  years  and
that  she  had  given  the  maid  a  $2500  gift  on  the  25th  anni-
versary  of  her  coming  to  work  for  her.   This  was  to   illus-
trate  her  point   that  there  were  good  relations   in  the  South
between  the  races.   "There  is  real  love  between  us,"  the  white
woman  said  of  the  Negroes  who  grew  up  on  her  pkntation.
She   blamed   the   trouble  in  the   South  on   "white   riff-raff."
She  said  her  great  grandfather   had  tried   to  free  his  slaves
before  "the  war"  but  they  pleaded  with  him  that  they  would
not  know  how  to  make  their  way  in  the  world.   (Later  that
evening  in  Little  Rock  I  was  to  meet   another   woman   who
told  me that  her  great  grandfather   had  tried  to  free  his  slaves
but  that  they  begged  him  not  to.   I  began  almost  to  believe
that  in  the  slave-holding  South   no  one  was  a  slave-holder
by  choice  but  only  out  of  devotion  to  the  welfare  of  their
That  Settles  That
"Art.    I,  Sec.  1.   Communism,  being  an  ideology  with
its  purpose  to  destroy  the  freedom  and  liberty  of  all
people  throughout  the  world,  its  major  weapon  being
the  fomentation  of  strife  and  disharmony calculated  to
turn  class  against  class  and  race  against  race,  thereby
upsetting  the  time  honored  social  patterns  which  have
been  attained  in  this  country,  not  by  prejudice  but  by
a   background  of  rich  experience,   all   of   which  inter-
feres  with  the  exercise  of  rights  reserved  to  the  state;
therefore,  Communism  is  hereby  declared to  be  against
the  public  policy  of  the  State  of   Arkansas."
—States Rights  (Johnson)  Amendment  to  the  Arkansas
State  Const,  to  be  voted  on  next   November,
black  wards).    Our   gentlewoman   friend  told   us   how   the
"cream  of  the  crop"  on  her  plantation   in  her  father's   time
and  her  husband's  had  been  sent  to  college,  and  of  the  emi-
nent  positions  they  later  reached   in  the  Negro   community.
Though   a  Democrat,   she  had   never  once  voted   for   Roose-
velt   of   whom   she   obviously   disapproved.    She   voted    for
Eisenhowcr   twice,  but   no   longer   felt   the   same  way   about
him.     She  spoke  with  gentle  cynicism  of  the  machine  poli-
ticians  and  Senators  she  had  known  in  Tennessee,  as  a  well
bred   lady   discussing,  rather  vulgar   retainers.    She   and   the
maid   got   off   the   plane   in   Memphis,   leaving   behind    an
authentic  whiff  of  the  old  regime.
Like Any "Main  St."   Town
Below  us,  in  the  deepening  dusk  on  leaving  Memphis,  was
the   dirty  gray   serpentine   Mississippi.    At   Little   Rock,   in
its  modern   new  airport,   flash-light   bulbs  popped   as  Virgil
Blossom,  the  school  superintendent,   got  off  the  plane  ahead
ol  us  looking  heavy  and  tired,  and  said  a  few  non-committal
words  for  the  TV  reporters.    Little  Rock,  its  main  street  lit
up  with  green  and  red  neon  lights,  its  J.  C.  Penney  Store  and
its   big   5-and-10,   seemed   like  any  small   mid-western   city,
except   for  the  'colored"  sign  in  the  rear  as  one  passed  the
bus  station.   The  one  pleasantly  different  touch  were  the  old-
fashioned  gas  lamps  on  the  streets,  like  those  in  Philadelphia
a  generation   ago.   On  the  way  to  the  Sam  Peck   hotel,  we
caught   a  glimpse   of   the   haberdashery   run   by   the   Syrian,
Karam,  so  prominent  behind  the  mob  scenes  last  year.    The
bell-boy  had  that  look  of  simulated  imbecility  Negroes  often
wear  like  a  protective   cloak  in  the  South.   The  elevator  was
run  by a  cute  Negro  girl  with  a  pert  bottom,  the  kind  plan-
tation  owners  must  have  pinched.
A  British  newspaperman   and  myself  were  invited  out  that
night  to  a  party  in  a  country  home  cluttered  with  heirlooms
and  good  modern  prints.    Courtesy  and  political discretion
forbid  too  close  a  description   but  after  a  night  with  a  group
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  22,1958
An  Evening  With  the  Tortured  Liberal  Intellectuals  of the  South
(Continued  from  Page   One)
of   tortured   Southern   liberals  one   acquired   a  new  view  of
Tennessee  Williams;  he  began  to  seem  a  camera-like  realist.
As  with  Negro  intellectuals,  all  their  talk  came  back  obses-
sively   and   painfully   to   the   race   problem.    These   off-beat
members  of  old  families  know  their  own  political  impotence
and   feel   like  aliens  despite   their  family   trees.   Their   self-
deprecatory  jokes  are  bitter;  their  talk  often  builds  up  to  a
kind  of  anguish.    At  moments  they  make  one  think  of   the
19th  century  Russian  intelligentsia  appalled   at  the  abyss  be-
tween  them  and  the  people.   Many  of  the  women  at  least  take
their  Christianity with  deep  seriousness  and  are  torn  by  guilt.
They  are  appalled  by  the  race  hatred  which  spills  over  from
apparently  civilized  people  they  have  known  all  their   lives.
They   are  despairing   over   those   who  know   better   but   say,
"let   it  take  its  course,"  the  "it"   being  the  mob.   They   feel
themselves  a  natural  elite  gone  to  seed,  caught   between   the
rabble   (that's  how  most   upper   class   Southerners   think   of
common   white  people)   and  the  rabble-rousers   like   Faubus
whom  they  despise.   Yet  as  the  bourbon  flows  more   freely
their  whole  environment  draws  them  into  compulsive  imita-
tion;  they  begin  to  say  "niggers"  and  "coons"  with  the  ob-
scene  pleasure  of  an  adolescent  using  dirty  words.   One  goes
to  bed   afterward,   half   seas  over   oneself,   feeling   that   the
Negro  doesn't  just  live  in  the  South,  he  haunts  it.
Suspected of Being A Yankee
A  liberal  Little  Rock  newspaperman  came  to  breakfast  at
the  hotel  next  morning  to  give  us  a  fill-in  on  the  local  situa-
tion.   His  most  revealing  remark,  it  seemed  to  me,  came  when
I   asked   him  what   Negroes   were  thinking.    "I   just  don't
know,"  he  said.   The  Little  Rock  story  is  covered  almost  en-
tirely  from  the  white  side.    In  an   effort   to  get  the  Negro
side,  I  went  to a white  lawyer, Edward  Dunaway,  a  Columbia
graduate,  who  is  head  of  the  Urban  League,  which  may  seem
stuffily   respectable  in  the  North   but  is  regarded   as   down-
right  radical in  the  South.  "People  ask me if  I  am a Yankee,"
Dunaway  said  with  some  bitterness.   "One   side  of  my  family
came  here  from  Virginia  in   1820  and  the  other  from   Ken-
tucky  in  1830."   One  of  his  grandfathers  was  Governor   of
Arkansas   and   Senator  Joe  Robinson  was  a  cousin.    Duna-
way's  father,   also  a  lawyer,  ran  unsuccessfully  for   Congress
on  an  anti-Ku  Klux  Klan  platform  in  the  20's  and  defended
Negroes   condemned   to   death   after   the   Elaine,   Ark.,   race
riots  of   1919.    These  began  when  a  deputy  sheriff  put  in  an
appearance  at  the  meeting  of  a  union  being  formed  by Negro
sharecroppers.   Several white men  and  more  than  100 Negroes
were  killed;   87  Negroes  were  sentenced   to  jail  and   12  to
the  electric  chair.   The  latter  were  saved  by  a  Supreme  Court
decision   reversing  their  convictions.   "I   remember  as  a  boy
visiting  the  condemned  with  my  father  in  the   penitentiary,"
Dunaway   related.    "They   had   been   put   to   work   building
and  painting  their  own   coffins.    They   showed   us  the   black
boxes  and  then  sang  hymns."    It  left  a  deep   impression.
Dunaway  made  a  date  for  us  to  talk   later  in  the  after-
noon  with  a  Negro  doctor,  and  took  us  off  for  lunch  to  the
Little  Rock  Club,  a  mausoleum   like  building   which   might
have  been  taken  for  a  large  undertaking  establishment.    Part
of   the   membership   were  in   sports   shirts  without   ties,   the
"If  I  could  rest  anywhere  it  would  be  in  Arkansaw,
where  the  men  are  of  the  real  half-horse,    half-alligator
breed  such  as   grow   nowhere  else  on  the   face   of   the
universal   earth."
—Davy  Crockett,  at  a  banquet  given  him  by  the
citizens  of  Little  Rock  in  18S4.
shirt  tails  worn  over  the  pants,  teen-age  style.  We  sat:  around
with  a  group  having  drinks,  in  a  kind  of  neutral  zone,  the
talk  coming  around  only  slowly  to  The  Question.    A  visiting
Texas  reporter  said  Dallas,  when  ordered  to  integrate,  would
make  Little  Rock  "look  like  a  picnic."    Another  man  said,
"Well  our  whole  problem  might  be  summed   up  by  saying
that  Orval  Faubus  just  didn't  want  to  go  back  to  Huntsville,
and   if   you've   ever   seen   Huntsville   it   is   hard   to   blame
him."    It  was  interesting  to  see  the  different   ways  in  which
members  spoke  to  the  Negro  waiters.    Some   addressed   the
waiters   with   unostentatious   politeness.    There   were   others
who  ordered  drinks  with  the  cold   look  and  lordly  manner
that  seemed  to   reflect   an   idealized  image  of   themselves  as
members  of  a  superior  race,  disposing  of  vast  acres  and   ac-
customed  to  handling  Nigra  servitors.    As  one  watched  these
men,  one  thought  "so  this  is  the  wine  that  goes  to  the  white
man's  head  in  the  South."
An  Eloquent  Silence
We  took  a  cab  after  lunch  to  Little  Rock's  Harlem  along
Ninth  Street,  a  district  of  dingy  bars,  dilapidated  stores  and
hand-me-down  houses.   My  companion  was  a  British  reporter
and  we  hoped  the  combination  of  his  accent  and  mine  would
make  it  easier  to  get  people  to  talk  with  us.   But  we  drew  a
complete  blank.   A  blind  woman  beggar  said  in  a  cultivated
voice  that  she  did  not  know  what  she  could  say  that  might
not  hurt  her   hereafter   since  she  was  on   public   assistance.
"I  will  say this,"  she  said,  picking  her  words  slowly,  "every-
one  likes  a  good  thing,"  meaning  presumably  better  schools.
Her  son,  also  blind,  also  in  a  cultivated   voice,  said  he  was
studying  music.  Further  down  the  street  we got  a  less  friendly
reception:  "White  man  takes  what  you  say and  uses  it  against
you."    On  a  side  street,  alongside  a  long  unpainted  barn-like
building  which   turned   out  to  be  the  upper   class  dorm  of
Philander   Smith  College,  a  Negro  Methodist   school,   there
were  a  number  of  Negro  boys  playing  ball.   They   wouldn't
talk  either.   We  went  inside  the  college,  which  seemed  more
like  a  run-down  old  high  school,  and  were  told  politely  but
firmly  by  the  young  woman  who  handles  publicity  that   the
college   was  keeping   strictly   "out   of   it"   and   that   nobody
would  comment.   "No,   the  students  even  among   themselves
do  not  discuss  the  question."     One  got  the  feeling  of  extra-
ordinary  restraint  and   discipline,   as  of   a  community  which
felt   itself   besieged.    No   one  even  used  the  word   "school"
or  "segregation"  or  "integration."   We  also  had  the  feeling
of   a  new  educated  generation,   not  at  all  the   "darkies"  of
white  stereotypes.   The   silence  as  it  piled   up   seemed   more
eloquent  than  anything  which  might  have  been  said.
We  did  a  little  better  with  a  white  pawnbroker  who  said
he  had  been  there  20  years:  He  understood  the  silence  which
had   greeted   us.   "People  don't   say  anything,"   he   told   us.
"They're   polite  and  friendly  but  never  discuss  it."    But  Ne-
groes   had   been   buying  guns   and   knives   and   laying   them
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  22, 1958
A  Visit  With  A  Young  Negro  Doctor  in  Apprehensive  Little  Rock
away.   "You  get  arrested  if  you  carry  them  on  the  street,"
he  explained,  "but  if  you  wrap  them  up  in  paper  and  carry
them   home  for   self-protection  it's  legal."   The   only  other
white  man  we  had  seen  in  our  walk  around  the   neighbor-
hood  came  in  and  turned  out  to  be  the  manager  of  the  local
Negro  movie.   "Business  usually  falls  off  just  before   school
opens,"   he  told  us.   "But  I've  never  seen  anything as  bad  as
this  year.   Ever  since  the  court  in  St.  Louis  overruled  Judge
Lemley   people   have  stopped   coming  out  on  the   streets   at
night.   They   keep  their  children   home."    The   pawnbroker
said  his  business was  bad,  too.   There  was  a  lot  of  unemploy-
ment  in  the  Negro  section.   "People  don't  have  anything  left
to  pawn."    But  the  Negroes   weren't  the  only  one  not  talk-
ing.   He  owned  six  duplexes  inhabited  by  whites  and   when
he  went  around  to  collect  the  rent  he  found  the  same  un-
willingness  to  discuss  schools  or  integration.   "People  on  both
sides  just  ain't  talkin'."   The   pawnbroker   summed   up   his
own  philosophy,   "you  gotta  keep  the  nigger  in  his  place  or
he'll  run  all  over  you."   He  had  a  permit  and  carried  a  gun.
Even   the  Negro   cops,   as  we  had   noticed,   went   on   their
patrols  in  pairs.
Wars and Rumors of  Wars
We  went  into  a  white  bar  near  the  Negro  section  for  a
beer  on  our  way  back downtown.  The  place  was  crowded  and
we   sat   down   at   a   table   with   two   ducktail  haircut   char-
acters,  one  handsome and  friendly, the  other  with  flatfish  face
and  slow  of  speech  but  anxious to  talk.   He  asked  my British
friend  whether  rock-and-roll had  reached  England  and  when
assured  that  it  had,  confessed  to  us  one  of  the  painful  ex-
periences  of  his  life.    Elvis  Presley  had  once  been  in  Little
Rock  before he  became  famous  and  our  new  friend  had  never
gone  to  hear  him!   He  told  us  this  was  the  worst   skidrow
bar  in  town  and  recommended  a  better  place  uptown.    He
said  he  used  to  be  a  Methodist  but  was  now  a  member  of
the  Christian  Church.   He   told  us  that  about   20  years  ago
a  Negro  had  assaulted  a  white  girl  and  "they"   had  set  him
afire  and  dragged  his  burning  body  down  Ninth   Street  and
"they  haven't  forgotten."   When  we  asked  who  he  meant  by
"they,"   he   said   "the   white  folks"   and   repeated   the   story
again,  in  the  same  melancholy  tone.   Then  he  told  it  a  third
time,  as  if  it  were  a  portent  of  things  to  come.   What  did
he  think  of   school   integration,   we  ventured  to   ask.     "It's
coming,"  he  said,  shaking  his  head.   "It'll  be  here  in  about
10 years,  and  then  as  the  Bible  says,  'there  will  be  wars,  and
rumors  of  wars'  and  war  between  the  nations  and  the  races."
He  did  not  speak   with  hatred  but  with  a  kind  of   dispas-
sionate  fatalism.   He  shook  hands  as  we  left,  but  his  friend
looked  on  coldly,  as  if  he  weren't  going   to  be  taken  in  by
any furriners.
A Better Negro Neighborhood
The  Negro  neighborhood   to  which  we  went  for  our  ap-
pointment  with   the   doctor   was  quite   different   from  Little
Rock's  Harlem.   He  lived  in  a  modest  but  well-painted  frame
house,  set  on  a  wide  lawn.   The  homes  and  yards  all  looked
well   cared   for.     A  Negro   neighbor   was  cutting   his   grass
nearby,   and   there  was  a   scamper   of   feet   and   a   burst   of
giggles  within  when  we  rang  the  bell.    Two  sets  of   pigtails
with  hair-ribbons  ran  into  the  rear  of  the  house  when   the
doctor's  wife,  a  tall,  handsome  dark  woman,  opened  the  door.
She  asked  us  to  sit  down  in  the  parlor  and  said  her  husband
would  be  home  in  a  few  minutes.   There  was  a  piano  and  a
high-fi  set  in  the  living  room.   She  said  her  oldest  boy  who
had   just  graduated  from  junior  high   was  one  of   the   new
applicants  for  Central  High.    "My  husband  and   I  tried   to
dissuade  him.   We   told  him  it  would  mean  giving   up  his
saxophone."    Apparently  the   school   band  at  Central   High
is  not  integrated.    "But  he  insisted."    The  boy  himself   came
in  before  going  out  to  serve  his  paper  route.   He  was  a  slim,
shy,  gangling  youth.   Why   did  he  want  to  go  to   Central
High.   "The   science  facilities  there  are  better  and  I  want  to
be  a  doctor.   I'd   get  a  better  education  and  I'd   be   paving
the way for  others."   (It  is a strange world  and  time in  which
the  future  of  a  race  depends  on  the  pioneering  courage   and
steadiness  of  its  children).
Racists  Go to Negro  Doctors
The  doctor,  when  he  arrived,  turned  out  to  be  a  pleasant
young  man,  conforming  neither  to  Negro  or  Southern  stereo-
types.   We  asked  what  was  the  feeling  in  the  Negro  com-
munity.    "I   can  only   speak   for  myself,"   he  replied.    "We
feel  apprehensive  but  hopeful.   We  hope  everybody  will  come
to  their  senses."   He  smiled  when  we  told  him  of  the  silence
which  had  greeted  us  in  Little  Rock's  Harlem.   "That's  not
exactly  new,"   he  said,   "Even   at  the   best  there  was   never
much  communication  between  us."   We  asked  whether  any of
his  patients  were  white.   He  said  about  20  percent.   He  said
there  were  Negro  dentists  in  the  plantation   country   whose
practice  was  85  percent  white.   Were  any  of  his  white  pa-
tients  segregationists?   He  supposed  most  of  them  were,  but
that  didn't  make  any  difference  when  it  came  to  choosing  a
doctor.   There  were  six  Negro  doctors  and  about   100  white
in  Little  Rock  and  both  sides  had  a  racially  mixed   practice.
The  Medical  Society  had  been  integrated  for  five  or  six  years
and  there  had  been  Negro  students  in  the  Little  Rock  medi-
cal  school  since  1948.    "The   doctors  meet  together   but   not
the  wives,"  his  wife  interjected.  Both  said  it  was  impossible
to  find  any  consistency  in  racial  patterns.   "In  a  store  down-
town,"  the  wife  said.  "I  will  be standing  near  a white woman
and   she  will  talk  to  me  pleasantly  and   long.    But  a   few
minutes  later  when  I  see  here  again  outside  at  the  bus  stop
where  she is with  white  friends,  she will  look  straight  through
me."   She said  there  were no  facilities  in  the  stores  for  Negro
shoppers,  no  rest  rooms,  no  place  to  get  a  bite  to  eat.
The Guilty and the Christian
Were  there  interracial  groups  in  Little  Rock?  There  was
the  Arkansas Council on  Human  Relations, a  Thursday  morn-
ing  mixed  prayer  group,  a  Fellowship  of  Reconciliation  chap-
ter,  a  Bahia group,  all  small.   All  met  at  a Negro  community
center  or  in  a Negro  church.   The  previous  Thursday,  the  day
the  Supreme  Court  heard  final  argument  on  the  school   case,
there  was  an  18-hour  mixed  prayer  vigil  in  a  Negro  Meth-
odist  Church,  beginning  at  6  a.  m.  and  ending  at  midnight.
(Later  another  reporter  told  me  that  a  camera  man   outside
the  prayer  meeting  asked  a  white  minister  going  in,   "Are
you  a nigger  lover?"   The  minister  replied,  "I  love  God.  God
(Continued   on   Page    4)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   112,1958
An  Old  Negro  Farm  Lady  Only  Person  Who  Asked  About  War  in  China
(Continued   from   Page  3)
loves  niggers.    I  guess  that  makes  me  a  nigger   lover,  too."
"Will  you  repeat  that  for  the  camera,"  said  the  camera  man).
"Why   do  white  people  here   come   to  inter-racial  groups?"
I  asked  the  doctor.   "Some  have  a  guilt  complex  I  suppose,"
he   answered.    "They   feel   they  and   their   forebears    haven't
treated  Negroes  right.   Others  just  have  deeply  Christian   feel-
ings  and  want  some  way  to  express  them."
Where  Yankees  Bombed  A  Hospital
On  Sunday, with  two  British  correspondents,  I  drove  down
to  the  delta  country.   Arkansas  is  half  southern,  half   western.
The  mountainous  country  north  and  west  of  Little  Rock  has
few  Negroes;  the  people  and  the  mentality  of  the  area  is  more
like  Oklahoma  and  mountain   Missouri.    South   and   east  of
Little  Rock  is  black  country,  "delta"  in  the  sense  that  it  gets
an  overflow from  the  Mississippi and  from  its  tributary White
and   Arkansas  rivers.   The   land   and   the   mentality   here   is
southern,   much   like   that   of   neighboring   Mississippi   and
Louisiana.   We  decided  to  visit  Helena,  the  State's  only "sea-
port,"  a  river  town  of  which  Mark  Twain  wrote  in  his    Life
on  the  Mississippi.    The  Negro  boy  who  brought  the  rented
car  to  the  hotel  for  the  trip  and  drove  me  back  to  the  car
rental   office   was  friendly   and  said  he  came  from   that   area.
He  followed  us  into the  office  to  show  us  the  best  way  to  get
there  and   the  manager  found  him  there  marking  the  map
with  me.   "Mandy  Lee,"  he  said,  "You're  getting  out  of  your
place  when  you  come  into  this  office."    I  explained  it  was  all
my  fault  and  Mandy  Lee  stood   aside,  with  a  properly  con-
trite    expression.   "Now,  my   friend,"   said   the    manager.
"You're  going  down  to  nigger  country.   This  is  where  they
raise  rice  and  cotton  and  niggers."   He  showed  me  the  points
of  interest  I  would  pass.    "Right  here,"  he  said,  "A   Yankee
gunboat  came  up  the  river  and  shelled   a  Confederate hos-
pital."    I  thanked  him   and   left   thinking  of   the   wondrous
way   in  which  all  enemies  in  all  wars  always  manage   with
unerring  aim  to  hit  hospitals.
"Work  Like  Oxes"
Helena  is  about   150  miles  southeast  of  Little  Rock.    The
Secession  from  U.S.—and  the  UN?
"Art  I,  Sec. 7.   It  shall  be  the  duty   of  the  [States
Kights]  Commission ...  to  perform  any  and all  acts
a:id  things  deemed  necessary   and  proper  to  protect   the
sovereignty   of   the   State   of   Arkansas  and  her  sister
states  from  encroachment   thereon   by  the   Government
of  the  United  States,  or  by  any  .  .  .  federation  of  na-
tions  .  .  .  and  to  resist  the  usurpation   of  the  rights
and   the  powers   reserved   to  this  State  or  her  sister
states  by  such  governments,  branches,  departments   or
agencies."
—States Rights  (Johnson)   Amendment  to  the  Arkansas
State  Const,  to  be  voted   on  next    November.
country  is  flat  and  not  too  interesting.   We  passed  two  Negro
baptismals  on  the  way;  the  women  in  bright  Sunday  clothes;
many  cars  parked  nearby,  and  some  brother  in  a  white  gown
being  dipped  in  the  water.   We  thought  it  would  be  rude  to
stop  and  watch,  that  a  white  man's  presence  would   be dis-
turbing  and  resented.   But  we  did  after  several  attempts  and
suspicious  greetings  manage to  talk  with  one  old  Negro  farm
couple  on  their  ramshackle porch  with  chickens running  about
in  the  yard.   The  old  man  said  he  had  farmed  there  for   68
years  and  the  white folks  thereabouts  had  always  treated  him
right  "and with  respect."    He  had  no  complaint,  the   price
of  cotton  was  good  but  the  price  of  victuals  went  up  with  it.
''We  work  like  oxes,"  said  the  fierce  looking  old   lady,  his
wife.    Shrewd  eyes   looked   out   of   her   worn   black   African
face.   Their  children were  gone  to  St.  Louis  and  Chicago,  all
except  one  daughter  who  sat  there  shyly  reading  in  a  hymn
book.   Good  manners  and  journalism struggled   but  the  latter
won  when  we  asked  whether we  might  see  the  inside  of  their
house.   "It's just  a  poor  man's  house,"  the  old  man  objected
with  dignity.   "There's   a  sick  person  in  there."   We   apolo-
gized.  The  old  lady said, "Are  things  going  to  get  better  for
black  fol'rs?"  and  later, "I  hope  we're  not  going  to  have  a war
over  there  in  China."    It  turned   out  that  she  was  the   only
person,  black  or  white,  who  asked  us  about  the  Far  Eastern
crisis  in  our  three  days  in  Arkansas.
(To  Be  Concluded  Next   Week)
Portraits   of   Gov.  Faubns   and   Federal   Judge   Miller   in   Our   Next   Week's    Installment
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      ......................................................................._...........
Street    ............................................................................._.....
City       ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
9/22/58
(To)   Name
Street    ........
City      ........................................Zone............State................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
5618  Nebrasko  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.    Post-dated  Monday!  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Augutit  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  IS,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the    IT.  S.  l  $6  In  Canada:  tlO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED