I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jun09.pdf

============================================================

A  Nuclear Document the Press  Ignored
Full  Text:  Cong.  Porter's   Open  Letter  Putting  21   Sharp  Questions  on  Testing   to  the  AEC,  Page   2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  22
JUNE  9,  1958
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why   de  Gaulle  Is  Likely  to  Fail
As  these  lines  are  being  written,  de  Gaulle  is  on  his  way
to   Algiers.   All   who   love   France  must   hope   that   he   will
succeed  in  mastering  the  rebels  and  in  imposing  upon   them
at  last  a  reasonable  solution  of   the  Algerian  question.    But
the  more  closely  one  begins  to  study  the  situation,  the   less
hopeful  it  appears  to  be.   Here  are  some  of  the  reasons  why
de  Gaulle,  unhappily, may  fail:
Too  Late  for  Integration
1.  "Integration"   is   no   longer   a   feasible   solution.    Too
many  lies,  too  many  tortures,  too  many  disappointments  now
lie   between  the   Algerian   Moslem   and   the   French.    Two
decades   ago   in   the   first   promise  of   Leon  Slum's   Popular
Front   government,   it   was   still   possible   to   win   Algerian
moderates  like  Ferhat  Abbas to  the  prospect  of  becoming  full
Frenchmen.   But  the  same  Algerian  colonists  now  in   revolt
wrecked  the  Blum-Violette  plan  to  start  by  giving  civil  rights
to  30,000  Moslem  Algerians.  When  de  Gaulle's  Free  French
government   imposed   these   very   limited   reforms   six   years
later,  it  was  too  late.   The   Algerians  had  been   driven  into
nationalism.   De  Gaulle's  famous  liberal  "Brazzaville   Decla-
ration"   was   already   out-of-date   in   its  integrationism   when
he  issued  it  in  1944.    As  our  brave  friend,  Claude  Bourdet's
France-Observaleur   shows   in   its   issue   of   May   29,   Syria,
Lebanon,  Morocco  and  Tunisia—and  the  Algerian  nationalists
—already  wanted  independence  rather  than  integration.    The
Algerians  have  good   reason  to  suspect  that   integration  is  a
"pie-in-the-sky"  fraud.
Racialism  Spreads  in  France
2.  Only  independence  can  end  the  war  in  Algeria,  but  the
colons  did  not  conspire  to  bring  de  Gaulle   back  in  order—
as  they  see  it—to  liquidate  themselves  in  an  Arab  sea.   Their
resistance  will   be   helped   not   only   by   the   indifference   or
hostility  that  white  populations   generally   show  to  the  strug-
gle  of  colored  men  for  equality   but  to  something   new  and
more  dangerous.  That  is  the  growth  in  France,  even—if   not
especially—among  its  white  working  class,  of  racial   prejudice
against  the  Algerian  immigrant  worker.   In  Algeria  itself,  as
in  our  South,  the  lower  class  whites  are  more  bitter  and  in-
temperate  racially  than  the  upper  class.   In  France,  the  same
racialism  has  infected  the  white  worker.  With  this  has  come
an  upsurge  of  nationalism,  the  feeling  that  the  loss  of   Al-
geria  will  be  the  end  of  France  as  a  great  power.   The   para-
noid   mentality  on  which   Fascism   breeds   is  evident  in   the
distortion  that  sees  the  U.  S.  as  somehow  conspiring  to  take
North  Africa  away  from  France.   The  apathy  of  the  majority
and   the  Fascist-nationalist   sickness  among  a  minority   make
the  imposition  of  a  peaceful  solution  in  Algeria  most   difficult.
A  Bright  Shiny  New—Political  Corpse
"Above  all,  the  insurgents  had  a  policy  for  ending
the  Algerian  war—a  policy  so  radical  that  no  French
government   had  ever  dared  put  it  into  effect.    White
Moslems  and  Frenchmen  alike  cheered  him  on,  burly
Jacques  Soustelle, who  escaped  a  police  guard  in  Paris
to   fly   to   Algiers,  called  for   complete  integration  of
1,000,000    French   and    8,700,000    Moslem    Algerians.
Cried  Soustelle: 'Let  each  one  of  us  be  French  like  all
the  rest,  with  the  same  rights  and  duties'."
—Time  Magazine,  June  2,  11)58.
"Strange  things  were  meantime  [in  January  1956]
happening   in  Algiers  itself.   Governor-General  Sous-
telle  .  .  .  whose  appointment   had  not  been  renewed
.  .  .  left  Algiers  in  the  midst  of  a  tremendous   [Euro-
pean]  demonstration. .  .  .  On  the  face  of  it,  his  'inte-
gration'  plan  of   Janaury   11   had  not   greatly    pleased
the  Europeans,  but  they  knew  that  it  was  little  more
than  so   much  window-dressing and  that  the  heart  of
de  Gaulle's  former  right  hand  man  was  in  the  right
place."
—Aleyauder   ll'nf/i.    Lost   Statesman,  the  Strange
Story   of  Mendes-France    (1958).
"Political  integration would  have  to  come  by  stages,
together   with  an  intensive   education   of   the  Moslem
masses.  .  .  .  There  would  have  to  be intensive  economic
integration,  which  would  cost   France  a  great   deal  of
money.  .  .  .  The  Moslems,  if  they  wanted  integration,
would  have to  work  harder. .  .  ."
—As  explained   by  M.  Leon  Delbccque,  leader  of   the
"colon"   revolt,   to   the   Times    of   London   cor-
respondent  in  Algiers  (Times, May 31).
"One   cannot  build  the  future  by  exhuming  corpses.
Integration  is  dead.   The  prefabrication  of  "spontane-
ous*  demonstrations   in  the  Forum  of  Algiers  will  not
succeed  in  resuscitating  it.  ...     For the  sake  of  peace,
the   FLN   [the   Algerian   National   Liberation   Front]
hopes   that   France   may   have   a   government   strong
enough  to  tell  the  truth  to  the  French  people,  to  put
an  end  to  the  myth  of  integration,   to  recognize   the
independence  of  Algeria  .  .  .  and  to  enter   into  new
mutually   profitable  economic,   cultural   and   technical
relations  with  the  25 millions  of  North  Africans.  .  .  ."
—Ferhat   Abbas,  famous   Algerian  moderate,   inter-
viewed  in  his  Swiss  exile  home  by  Claude  Bour-
let's   independent    weekly,    France-Observateur,
May  29, 1958.
Corruption  in  French   Socialism
3.  A  section   of   the   French   socialist   party   has   been   cor-
rupted   by  this  spreading  malaise,   and   the  two  leading  So-
cialists   in  de  Gaulle's  Cabinet  have  a  history  which   must
make  Algerian  Moslems  fear  that  they  could  easily  shift  from
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  9,  1958
It  Took  Almost  A  Year  to  Squeeze  Out  A  Meagre  and  Chilly  Little  Report  on  HR  8269
News  Blackout  Hides  AEC  Rejection   of  Bill  to  Suspend  Nuclear  Testing
There  was  an  extraordinary   blackout  of  news  in  one  sec-
tor  of  the  nuclear  testing  controversy  last  week.  This  is  the
story  in   sequence.   After   Congressman   Charles   O.  Porter
(D.,  Ore.)  last  June  introduced  a  bill,  HE  8269,  to  suspend
nuclear  testing  while  other  countries   refrain   from  the  ex-
plosion  of  nuclear  devices, it  was  quickly buried  in  the  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.   It  took  eight  months  before
Porter  could  even  get  the  Committee  to  ask  the  AEC  for
a  report  on  the  bill  and  three  months  more  before  he  could
get  the  AEC to react.
When  the   AEC  under  date  of  May  23  finally  sent   the
Joint  Committee  a  meagre  and  chilly  little  missive  turning
thumbs  down  on  the  bill,  the  fact  that  it  had  been  rejected
was  announced  neither  by  the  AEC  nor  the  Joint  Commit-
tee.    When  Porter  himself   released  the  news  to  the  wire
services  on  May  26,  none  carried  it.   The  news  was  again
ignored  when  Porter  took  it  to  the  floor  of  the  House  May
28  and  said,  "Perhaps  events  will  make  this  legislation  un-
necessary  but   this   is   all   the   more   reason   why  hearings
should  be  held,  the  facts  brought  out  and  the  issues   fully
explored."
The  kind  of  factual  and  policy questions  which  need  to  be
examined  are  indicated  in  a  letter  Porter  released   May  28
asking   the   AEC  21  questions   which   reflect   knowledge   he
gained  during his  recent  visit  to  the  Pacific  proving  grounds.
We  reprint  the  full  text  here,  and  urge  our  readers  to  press
for  public  hearings  on  HR  8269.   The  fact  that  experts   are
soon  to  meet  on testing  does  not  make  cessation   a  foregone
conclusion.   The  AEC  letter  on  the  Porter  bill  opposed  sepa-
ration  of testing  from  the  rest  of  the  disarmament  package.
Text  of Porter  Letter  Asking  AEC  for  Open  Answers  to  21 Questions
Here  are  a  number  of  questions  which  I  should  like  the
Commission  to  answer  in  an  unclassified letter:
1.  Why  are  the  press  and  other  informational  media  barred
from   Eniwetok  for  the  whole  Hardtack   series  with   the
exception  of  one shot?    The  top  scientists  and  military  men
there  assure  me  that  there  is  nothing  secret  there   outside
of  the  boxes  containing  the  devices  themselves.   There  are
ample  facilities   to  accommodate  ten  to  thirty  media  repre-
sentatives.  And  people  everywhere   want   to  know  and   are
entitled  to  know  more   about   the   purposes   and  conduct  of
these  tests.
2.  What  is  the  point  of  the  Pinion  operation?   It  seems  to
me  a  waste  of  time  and  money  to  show  the  32  persons
from   all  over  the  world   something  that  has  been   demon-
strated  before  and  is  not  news,  namely,  that  there  is  no
immediate   local   fall-out   from   an  airburst   of   a   device  in
our  possession.   Most  people  remember  the  picture  in  LIFE
sometime  ago  showing  the  three  Air  Force  officers  standing
directly  under  an  air  burst  and  doing  so  in  perfect   safety.
3.  Chairman  Strauss  has  on  several  occasions  defended   the
• the  present  series  of  tests  by  asserting  our  need  for   a
relatively   "clean"  anti-missile   missile  so  radioactive   debris
won't  fall  back  on  us  as  we  seek  to  defend  ourselves.   Is  it
not  true  and  rather  well  known  that  a  high  altitude  burst,
even  of  a  dirty  device,  has  no  local  fall-out?
4.   If  the  Hardtack  series,  is,  as  there  is  reason   to  believe,
relatively  "clean,"
  T
vhy  cannot  you  announce the  approxi-
mate  total  additions  from  these  shots  to  the  stratospheric
reservoir?    If  it  is  less  than   10  megatons,  why  not   publi-
cize  this  fact  and  show  up  the  last  Soviet  test  series?
Can't  the  AEC  Be  More  Explicit?
5.  Can't  you  be  more  explicit  about  the  particular  purposes
of  the  Hardtack  series  and  the  priorities  among  the  pur-
poses ?  Cleanliness  and  peaceful applications  are  given  equal
weight  with  smallness  in  previous  statements,  yet  it  seems
clear  this  is  not  the  case.
6.  Why  not  separate  peaceful   applications   of  nuclear   de-
vices  from  the   purely  military  shots?    Invite   the  UN
to  participate,  hold  them  all  underground,  and  make  public
everything  but  the  devices  in  the  black  boxes  themselves.
7.  Why  not   announce  more   details   about   the   tests  now
being  conducted  and  announce  every  shot?   At  present
the  one  sentence   announcement  is  meaningless   except  that
it  stirs  the  public  to  wonder  what  actually  is  happening  and
how  many   other   shots  have   been  completed   without    dis-
closure.
8.  Why  can't  the  AEC  issue  more  information  about    clean"
bombs?   It  is  not  exactly  a  secret  that  superbombs  de-
rive  their   energy   from  the  fission  of   U-238  and  yet   the
AEC  has  not  admitted  this  over  a  four  year  period.
9.  Why  should  not  we  quit  testing,  on  a  multilateral  basis,
since   presumably   we   are   ahead   of   the   Soviet   Union,
having  a  four  year  lead  in  testing  and  having  tested  more
than  twice  as  many  bombs  as  they  have?
10.  Does  testing   for   better   military   weapons   ever   end?
Are  we  not  seeking  perfection  endlessly?   It  is  public
knowledge  that  the  Armed  Forces  have  atomic  artillery  of
various  calibre,  depth   charges,   air   to  air,   ground  to   air,
and  air  to  ground  nuclear  warheads  for  missiles.    Will  the
need  for  more  "sophisticated"  weapons  ever  be  satisfied?
11.  Do  we   not   have   enough   nuclear   warheads   and   the
means  of  delivering  them  right  now  to  deter  any  in-
tentional  attack?
12.   Since  the  inception  of  the  H-bomb,  what  "safe  rate  of
annual  testing"  meaning  megatons  of  fission  debris  per
year  has  the  AEC used  in  its  test  program?   How was  this
safe  level  agreed   upon  within  the  AEC  and  when  was  the
first   "safe   level"   solicited   by   the   Commission   from    its
technical  advisors?
13.  When  did  the  AEC  receive  a  military  specification  for
a  clean  bomb?
14.  Have   the   natives   of   Rongelap   and  other   Marshallese
sought  compensation  for  radiation  injuries  received  as  a
result   of  U.  S.  bomb  tests?    Has   any   compensation   been
granted ?
15.  Is  it  possible  to  test  a  nuclear  weapon  in  space  with  a
high  degree  of  safety?   What  about  the  flash?
Danger  from  Anti-Missile Missiles?
16.  If  missiles  are  armed  with  nuclear  warheads  for  intro-
cepting  ICBM's  would a  nuclear  explosion  result  if  these
missiles  aborted  in  take-off  or  if  they  plunged to  earth?
17.  AEC  spokesmen  have  repeatedly  asserted  that  the  U.  S.
is  far   ahead  of  the   Soviets  in  nuclear  weapons.   Upon
what  type  of  evidence  is  this  assertion   based?
Estimates  of  Soviet  capability—including  the  date  of  their
first  A-bomb  and  first  H-bomb  have  been  badly  in  error.
18.  Since  the  AEC • is   charged   by   law   with    responsibility
for  carrying  out  weapon development,  including  testing,
would   it   not   be  desirable   for   some   other   agency   of   the
government   to   appraise   the   radiation   hazards   from   test
programs ?
19.  In   view   of   Soviet   technical   achievements,    including
Sputnik   III,   would   it   not  be  wise  to   reappraise   our
policy  of  secrecy  in  scientific  development?   Is  it  not   pos-
sible  that  we  are  hurting  ourselves  with  too  much  secrecy?
20.   Would  the  AEC  agree  to  Senator  Anderson's   proposal
that  we  halt  "the  testing  of  nuclear   weapons  of  more
than  one  megaton  intensity"?
21.  The  assertion  has  been  made  that  if  we  agreed  to  cease
testing  qualified  scientists  could  not  be  retained   at  the
Los  Alamos  Laboratory.    Has  any  poll  been  taken  of  these
scientists  which  substantiates  this  contention?   Would  not
these  scientists  stay  on the  job  if  granted  freedom  to  pursue
unclassified   and  publishable  scientific  work?
May  26,  1958                                     CHARLES  O. PORTER
(NOTE:  I  was  told  at  the  AEC this  morning  that  there
will  be  34  news  men  and   15  UN  observers   at   the   Pinion
operation  and  that  the  shot  will  not  be  an  air  burst  but  on
the  surface,  still  with  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  cleanli-
ness.  Since  all  the  other  tests  in  this  series  are  kept  shroud-
ed in  secrecy  and  since this  is not  a unique or  very  significant
accomplishment,  I  doubt  that  the  United  States  will  regain
very  much ground  in  world  opinion as  a  result  of  this  opera-
tion.   This   statement   should   be   considered   when   reading
paragraph  2, above.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  9,1958
Congressional  Rightists   Dislike   Supreme   Court   Barrier   to  Third  Degree  Methods
A  Bill  to  Revise  the  Constitution  for  the  Convenience  of the  Cops
That  basic  and  continuous undercurrent  of   Congressional
hostility  to  fundamental  liberties  is  not  limited  to  areas  in
which  the  rights  of  radicals  are  at  stake.   The  majority  re-
port  of  the  House  Judiciary  Committee  (No.  1815)   recom-
mending  passage   of  HR   11477,  the   so-called  Mallory  case
bill,  demonstrates  again  that  this  un-American attitude  ex-
tends  to  the  broader  area  of  protection  for  ordinary  citizens
against  the  police.  The  "copper"  mind  and  the  police  state
mentality  are  evident  in  this  bill  to  reverse  the  effect  of  the
Supreme  Court  decision  last  June  24  in  the  case  of  Andrew
Mallory,  a  19-year-old   Negro  of  subnormal   mentality.
The  Court  unanimously  set   aside  his  conviction  of   rape
and  remanded  for   a  new  trial  on  the  ground  that  a  con-
fession  was  elicited  from  him  by  unlawful  means.   He  was
held  almost  eight   hours  without  being  arraigned    although
rule  5  (a)   of  the  Federal  Rules  of  Criminal  Procedure  pro-
vide  that  an  arrested  person  be  taken  before  a  committing
magistrate   "without   unnecessary   delay."   This  is  a  barrier
against  third   degree  methods,  and  prolonged   imprisonment
during  investigation.
Our  hat  is  off  to  Congressman  Emanuel  Celler,  chairman
of  House  Judiciary,  a  tireless  tribune  where  basic  liberties
are  concerned, and to  the  three  others—Peter  W. Rodino,  Jr.,
Lester   Holtzman   and  Roland  V.  Libonati—who  joined  him
in   an  eloquent  minority  report.   Write   your   Congressman
to  oppose  HR  11477,  a  bill  to  restrict  constitutional  rights
for   the  convenience  of  the   police.   This  is   another   in   the
crop  of  new  measures   to   reverse   various   liberal   Supreme
Court decisions.
The  ugliest  aspect  of  the  Mallory  case  controversy   is  the
mob-and-nightstick  premise,   easily   discernible   beneath   the
smooth   phrases    of   the    Southern   constitutionalists,   that
Negroes  should  be  outside  the  law  anyway.   It   should  not
escape  notice  that  Congressman  Keating,  who  would  like  to
, be  Governor  of  New  York,  now  the  ranking   Republican  on
House  Judiciary,  voted  for  the  Mallory  bill.
Whittaker Writes Majority  Opinion of Mercy Toward Anti-Franco Fighter
It  was  encouraging  to  see  Mr.  Justice  Whittaker  writing
the  opinion for  a  liberal  majority  in  the  Bonetti  deportation
case.    The  question  on  which  the   Court   split   6-3   (Clark,
Frankfurter    and   Harlan    dissenting)    was   a   narrow   and
difficult  one.  The  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950  provides  for
the  deportation  of  any  alien  who  becomes  a  member  of  the
Communist  party  at  any  time  after  his  entry.   Frank  Bo-
netti  entered  in   1923  at  the  age  of  15,  was  a  member  of
the  Communist  party  from   1932 to  1936,  when  he  quit  never
to  rejoin.   In   1937  he  lost  his  rights  of  residence  in  this
country  by  leaving  to  fight  against  the  Franco  rebellion  in
Spain.   He  came  back  to  this  country  in   1938  and  was   re-
admitted  after  a  hearing  at  which  he  freely  admitted  past
membership  in  the  Communist  party.   The  question   which
split  the  Court  was  whether  the  term  "entry"  in  the   1950
statute  was  to  be  read  as  meaning  the   original   entry  in
1923   or  the  entry  of  1938.   The  majority  invoked  an  earlier
case  which  ruled  that  where   an  Act   of  Congress   is   am-
biguous,  it  should be  read  on  the  side  of  lenity.   The  major-
ity  might  have  added  that  in  any  other  branch  of  the  law  a
right  established  in   1938  could  not  have  been  upset  by  a
law  passed  12 years  later.   Unfortunately  the  ex  post  facto
clause  of  the  Constitution  does  not  protect  aliens  in  depor-
tation  proceedings,  the  fiction  being  that  these  are   "purely
administrative"   though  they   may  banish   a  man  from   his
home  for  life.
Habeas  Whitewash,  or  Trial  by  Hired  Press  Agent  and  Morris  Ernst
Imagine  a  murder  case  in  which  the  leading  suspect,  while
refusing  to  cooperate  with  the  police,  hires  a  press  agent
who  in  turn   hires   two  lawyers  to   make   an   "independent
investigation"  for  a  substantial   retainer  ($50,000  plus  $50,-
000  for  expenses).   When  the  lawyers  turn  in  a  report  ab-
solving  the  suspect  of  guilt,  the  New  York  Times  comments
editorially  that  "no  one  would  question  the  probity"  of  the
two  lawyers.  This  is  exactly  what  happened in  the  Galindez
murder  case  where  the   Dominican  dictator,   Trujillo,   hired
a  public  relations  counsellor,  Sydney  S.  Baron,  for   $60,000
plus  expenses  to  handle  an  investigation   of  Trujillo.   Baron
hired  Morris  L.  Ernst   and  William  H.  Munson  to   do  the
legal  work.   Whatever  their  probity,  the  situation   certainly
does  not   do  credit   to  their  sense   of  propriety.    Indeed  if
Trujillo   were  an  American  citizen  and  not   a  foreign   dic-
tator  beyond  our  jurisdiction,  this  whole  affair   might   be
investigated   by   some  bar   association   as   of    questionable
ethics.   Self-trial  by  press  agentry  is  something  new  in  jur-
isprudence.   The  final  report  by  Mr.  Ernst  reads  like  a  de-
fense  counsel's  one-sided  summation  to  a  jury.   Congressman
Charles  O.  Porter   (D.  Ore.)  who  put  the   spotlight   on  the
disappearance  of  the  anti-Fascist   exile  Galindez  (just  when
the  later  was  finishing  a  book  on  Trujillo's   bloody  reign)
told  a  press  conference here  the  Ernst  report  was  "a  hodge-
podge   of   suppositions"   and   promised   a   definitive    reply
shortly.    The  New   York   Post,   in  a   devastating    editorial
analysis  (June  2),  correctly  observed  that  to  a  casual  reader
unfamiliar  with  the  Galindez  murder  or  the  Trujillo  dictator-
ship,  "Ernst's  study  suggests   that  Trujillo  is  the  innocent
victim  of  a  drama  engineered  by  Galindez  and  promoted  by
the   U.  S.  press."   We  believe  this   peculiar   investigation
ought  itself  to  be  investigated   by  a  committee  of  Congress,
perhaps  the  forthcoming  Morse  inquiry  into  our   relations
with  Latin  America.
Senator  Douglas  Lets  Slip  the Truth  About  That  Subversive, Cyrus  Eaton
When  Senator  Douglas  of  Illinois  rose  on  the  Senate  floor
to  deplore  the  subpoena  issued  by  the  House  Un-American
Activities  Committee  for  Cyrus  Eaton   after   the   Cleveland
capitalist   dared  criticize  the  FBI,  only  one  Senator—Hum-
phrey  of  Minnesota—came  to  Douglas's  support.   Even  these
two  intrepid  Senators  disassociated  themselves  from  Baton's
criticism   of   the   FBI,   perhaps   the   No.  1  sacred   cow  of
American  society.   Douglas  also  went  out  of his  way  to  make
it  clear  that  he  disagreed   with  Eaton  on  Communist  China.
Humphrey  fell  back   on  Voltaire.    No  one,  of  course,  men-
tioned   the   close   liaison   which   has   long   existed   between
Hoover  and  the  witch  hunt  committees  of  Congress,  or  his
admiration  for  the  late  Joe  McCarthy.    It   is  many  years
since  anyone in  Congress has  dared  criticize  Hoover.  While
half   a   dozen   great   newspapers,  including  the   New   York
.Herald-Tribune,  have  come  to  Baton's  defense,  Congress  is
cowed.  There  was  a  rich  vein  of  unconscious comedy  in  the
way  the  one-time  Left   Socialist,  Douglas  defended   Baton's
ideological  respectability.    "There  is  no  question,"  the   Sena-
tor  from  Illinois  said,  "but  that  Mr.  Eaton  believes  strongly
in  the   capitalistic   system  under  which  he  has   prospered.
... He believes, however, in a  purified  capitalism.  .  .  ."  At
that   point,   listening   from   the   gallery,   we   could   almost
hear  the FBI  say  "Aha!"
9   .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  9, 1958
Mollet  and  Lejeune  in  de   Gaulle's
{Continued  from  Page  One)
de  Gaulle  to  a  more  rightist  regime  if  de  Gaulle  falls  or  is
driven   back   into   retirement.   The   one-time  Left   Socialist,
Guy   Mollet,   who   launched   his   Republican   Front   govern-
ment  in  January,  1956,   by  declaring  peace  in  North   Africa
his  first  aim,  "What  we  must  do  before  anything  else  is  to
stop  lying ...  we must  stop  all  this  blind  and  insane  repres-
sion,"  was  soon  won  over  by  the  Algiers  mob.  Max  Lejeune,
Mollet's   Secretary  of   State  for   War   Operations   in  Algeria,
now  de  Gaulle's  Secretary  of  State  for   the  Sahara,  shielded
the   brutal   repressions  of   Lacoste   and   Massu.    It   was  Le-
jeune  who  took  direct  responsibility for  that  "practical  joke"
in  October   1956  when  a  plane  load  of  Algerian  rebel  nego-
tiators  on  their  way  to  a  peace  conference  with  Borguiba  and
the  Sultan  of   Morocco   in  Tunis  was  seized   in  violation  of
international   law.    The   purpose   of   the   Tunis   conference,
arranged  with  Mollet's   approval,  was  to  work  out   a   nego-
tiated  North   African   peace.   This  is  what  the  colons  feared
and  wanted  at  any  price  to  break  up.   They  succeeded  at  the
price of  offending  both  the  Sultan and  Borguiba, and  strength-
ening   the   extremists;   Ben   Bella   and   his   three   fellow   Al-
gerian  negotiators  are   still   unlawfully   imprisoned  in   Paris.
Mollet  and  Lejeune  are  symbols in  Algeria of  French  duplicity
and   repression,  all  the   more  enraging  since  it  comes   from
Socialists.
A  Darker  Possibility
4.  While   a   reading  of   de   Gaulle's   memoirs   rebuts   the
caricature  of  him  built  up  by  hostile  American  and  British
official   attitudes—he  is  a  soldier  of  extraordinary   gifts   and
magnanimity—he  does  have  serious  limitations.   He  is  at  his
best  in  symbolizing  and  leading  on  simple,  almost  negative,
lines—as   in   the   resistance.    More   complex   problems,   like
that  of   currency   reform   in  the  first  de  Gaulle   government,
seem  to  be  beyond  his  capacity.  He  has  a  tendency  to  retire
in   a   huff   where   craft,   flexibility   and   compromise—the   po-
litical  qualities—are  required.   Assuming   that  his  intentions
in   Algeria  are  really  enlightened,   he  will   find   himself   up
against  the  most  complex  problem   of   his  career,   forced   to
combat  the  very  forces  which  brought  him  to  power.   There
is   the   darker   possibility,   however,   that   he   may  have   been
Cabinet   Symbols   of  French  Duplicity
"Onward,  Christian   Soldiers ..."
"General   Massu   [chief   of   the   paratroopers  in   Al-
giers]  was   known  to  have  been  profoundly  disturbed
by  the  third  degree  methods  that  necessity  obliged  him
to  use  to  wipe  out  the  cells  and  so  to  save  hundreds
of  other  innocent  lives  from  terrorism  and  restore  the
city   to  calm.   On  several   occasions   he  consulted   the
Roman   Catholic  authorities  here   [in   Algiers]   In   an
agony   of   spirit,  but  finally  decided  that   it   was   his
duty  as  a  Christian  and  a  soldier  to  go  on  with  the
work."
—From   the  self-serving   story   fed   to  the   Times  of
London  (Time's,  June  2;  New  York   Times,  June
4)  by  a  participant  in  the  Algiers   uprising.
"How   are  the  tortures  justified?   It  is  sometimes said
that  it  is  right  to  torture  a  man  if  his  confession  can
save  a  hundred  lives.   This  is  nice  hypocrisy  [Blenri]
Alleg  [editor  of  Alger  Kepublicain,  the  last  opposition-
ist   paper   in  Algeria]   was   no   more   a  terrorist  than
Audin."
—Jean-Paul   Sartre's   introduction   to   Allcg's    "The
Question,"   the   missing   editor's   account   of   his
torture  by  Masxti's  paratroopers.
"The   concentration  camps  today  are  full  of  the  Mos-
lem   intellectual   elite  and   of   those   Eurafricans   who
have  committed  the  crime  of  maintaining  contact  with
friends   belonging   to   the  other   [Moslem]  community
.  .  .  Some  arrested  Moslems  are  'suicided';  on  others,
in  order  to  obtain  information,  water  and  electric  tor-
ture   is   used.   .   .   .  Our  young  people  witness   these
atrocities;  they  are  presented  to  them  as  inevitable;
we  thus  risk   the  corruption  of  a  generation,  in  mak-
ing  it  lose  that  sense  of  historic   moral  values   which
constitute   France."
—Andre  Philip,  Le  Socialisme  Trahi  (Socialism   Be-
trayed),  a  leading  Socialist,  one  time  de  Gaulle's
Minister   of   the  Interior,  protesting   "Guy   Mol-
letism"  in  the  French  Socialist   party.
more  deeply  involved  in  the  Algiers  plot  than  his   unofficial
spokesmen  and  off-the-record   smoothies  will  admit.    In  that
case  there  will  be  no  end  of  trouble,  renewed  war  in  North
Africa   and  civil  convulsions  in   France,   and   the  U.  S.  and
the  U.  S.  S.  R.  may  be  drawn  in.
Why   Not   A   Subscription   to   The    Weekly    As   A   Gift    for   Graduation?
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      ...............,..................................,.....,..................—.......
Street      ....................................  .................................................
City     .......................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  eub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
6/9/S8
(To)   Name   ......................................................_..............-......
Street     ........................................_............................................
City     ........................  ................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Avc., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.  F.
.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  ATP.,  N.  W..  Washington  15, D  c
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
K>   In  th  U.  S.:  t6  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Atr  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  £!0  to  Israel.   Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED