I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958oct20.pdf

============================================================

Gen.  Ridgway  on  The Folly  of  War   With  Red  China, P.  4
Pentagon  Spy  Scare  to  Block  Nuclear  Test  Agreement,  P.  2;  On Again.  Off Again  Crisis  at  Quemoy,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  41
OCTOBER  20,   1958°
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
Why  The  Pentagon  Is  So Anxious  to  Reach  the  Moon
The  Pentagon  press  office   was  busy  giving  out  background
releases  on  the  lunar  probe  all  day  Saturday  and  a  panel  of
experts  held  a  news  conference Sunday  afternoon  at  the  Na-
tional  Academy  of  Sciences.  But  none  touched  on  the  moti-
vations which  lead  our  military  to  spend  millions on  the  prob-
lem  of  reaching  the  moon,  and  not  just  the  moon  alone.   For
with  the  lunar  releases  was  one  announcing  that  the  Navy
would  soon  send  a  manned  balloon  80,000  feet  up  to  take  a
close  look  at  Mars  in  order  to  determine  its  water  vapor  con-
tent.   Perhaps  if  there  is  enough  water  on  Mars  to  float  a
boat,  the  Navy  will  claim  jurisdiction.   The  services are  stak-
ing  out  the  planets;  the  Air  Force  has  its  eye on  Venus.
Two  Secret  Lunar  Briefings
We'd   like  to  call  attention  to  two  briefings  behind  closed
doors  on  Capitol  Hill  earlier  this  year  which  have  gone  un-
noticed.  They  show  that  the  military  men  behind  these  space
projects  approach  the  new  scientific  wonders  with  the  minds
of  comic strip  characters,  ready  like  Buck  Rogers  to  carry  out
among  the  far  stars  only  the  same  small  boy  savageries  and
cold  war hates.  One  briefing  was by Lt.  Gen.  Donald  L.  Putt,
Deputy  Chief  of  Staff   (Research  and  Development)   U.  S.  Air
Force  before  the  House  Committee  on  Armed  Services   Feb.
25.   The  other  was  by  Richard  E.  Horner,  Assistant Secretary
of  the  Air  Force  for  Research  and  Development  before  the
House  Appropriations   Committee  on  March   11.   An  unclas-
sified  version  of  what  Gen.  Putt  said  may  be  found  at  pages
4911-23  of  the  Armed  Services hearings.   Horner's  testimony
was printed  in  the  hearings  on  the  Air  Force  Budget  for fiscal
1959.    We   recommend  them  to   anybody  running  short  of
nightmares.
The  General  disclosed  that  the  Air  Force's  ultimate  objec-
tive  was to  establish  a  missile  base  on  the  moon,  and  outlined
its  usefulness.   Gen.  Putt  said  that  since  there  was  no  atmo-
sphere  and  little  gravity  on  the  moon,  less  energy  would  be
required  "to  shoot  a  warhead  from  the  moon  to  the  earth"
than  from  the  earth  to  the  moon.  "Warheads,"  he  explained,
"could  be  catapulted  from  shafts  sunk  deep  into  the  moon's
surface."    Gen.   Putt   declared  the   moon   "might  provide   a
retaliation   base  of   considerable  advantage   over   earth-bound
nations,"  using  the  term  with  condescension,  as  if  we  were
on  the  moon  already.
New  Dimensions   for  Mutual   Deterrence
Gen.  Putt  said  that  if  we  had  missile  bases  on  the  moon
"an  enemy  would  have  to  launch   an  overwhelming  nuclear
attack  against  those  bases  one  to  two  days  prior  to  attacking
the  continental   United   States."   Otherwise   the  moon   bases,
observing  an  attack  on  the  U.  S.,  could  retaliate  by  destroy-
ing  the  attacker.   Even  if  the  enemy destroyed  us  by  surprise
attack,  our   moon  bases  would  destroy  him.    On   the   other
hand,  if  the  enemy attacked our  moon  bases first to  make  such
retaliation  impossible,  the  attack would  be observed from  earth
and  give  us  warning.  Thus  the  strategy  of  mutual  deterrence
would  be  given  a  new  lunar   dimension.
Lest  anyone  think  Gen.  Putt  had   merely  stopped   off  to
testify  on  his  way  to  a  long  quiet  stay  at  a  good  rest  home,
this  can  be  checked  against  the  Horner  testimony.   The  As-
sistant   Secretary  of   the   Air  Force  said  one  advantage  of   a
missile  base on  the  moon  is that  the  flight  of  the  missile  could
be  observed  "all  the  way from  the  moon's  surface  to  the  tar-
get,  which  is something which  cannot be  done  from  one  point
on  the  earth  to  another  far  distant  point  on  the  earth."   Mr.
Horner  thought  that  moon  bases  might  some  day  break   a
stalemate  of  terror  between  the  U.  S. and  the  U.  S. S. R.  when
"we  have developed  such  a  capability to  obliterate  Russia  and
presumably   they   have   developed   [such]    a   similar   capa-
bility  to  obliterate us"  that  neither  side dares  fire.  If  we  could
then  establish  a  missile  base  on  the  moon,  we  would  again
gain   the   initiative.   When   our  high  brass  sees  visions  and
dreams  dreams,  this  is  what  they  see.   When   their   heavens
open,  missiles wham.
Next  on  Mars  or  Venus
And  what  if  the  Russians  acquire  moon  bases,  too?   And
a  stalemate of  terror  develops  on  the  moon  as  well  as  on  the
earth?   For  the  answer to  these  questions, we  must  turn  back
to  Gen.  Putt's  secret  briefing.   "We   should  not  regard  con-
trol  of  the  moon,"  he  said,  "as  the  ultimate  means  of  insur-
ing  peace  among  earth  nations."   (Note  how  all  these  mur-
derous  monstrosities  are  represented  as  means  of   "insuring
peace.")   This  would  be  only  "a  first  step  toward  stations  on
planets  far  more  distant,  from  which  control  over  the  moon
might  then  be  exercised."   A  missile base  on,  let  us  say,  Mars
could  break  a  stalemate  on  the  moon.    Even  if  the   Russians
destroyed  both  the  U.  S.  and  its  moon  base  in  one  swift  sur-
prise  attack,  our  base  on  Mars  could  then  destroy  both  their
moon  base and  their  country.  The  advantage  would  hold  pre-
sumably  until  they  had  established  a  similar  missile  base  on
Mars  or  some  other  planet,  only  to  be  checked  again  by  the
next  move,  which  would  perhaps  set  up  artillery  outside   the
solar  system altogether.   Thus,  as the  Pentagon  maps  it,  peace
by  mutual  terror  would  spread  outward  toward  the  far   stars.
This  seems  to  us  a  good  time  to  recall  the  Latin  word   for
moon,  which  is  of  course  luna,  and  to  suggest  that  before
service  rivalry  explodes   all   over   the   skies,   we   establish   a
fourth  branch  of  the  defense  establishment   for  space  warfare
and  call  it  the  Department   of  Lunacy.
1   6  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  October W, 1958
A  Mystery at  Geneva  and  Why  the  Russians  Want  A  Permanent Ban  or  None
Pentagon  Opens  Campaign  Against  Nuclear  Test  Cessation  With  Spy  Scare
That  spy-scare  story  by  Hanson  W.  Baldwin  in  the   New
York  Times  Oct.   10  is  only  the  opening  gun  of  a  Pentagon
campaign   to  prevent  an  agreement  on  cessation  of   nuclear
tests.   The  Defense  Department  was  so  sure  that  the  Geneva
talks  would  come  to  nothing  that  it  didn't  even  have  an  ob-
server  present.   The  agreement  by  the  experts  has  galvanized
it  into  action.  The  story  was intended  to  spread  the  idea  that
the  Russians  must  have  gotten  their  data  on  secret  U.  S.  tests
in  the  Pacific  last  summer  from   espionage   since  the  Penta-
gon  is sure  that  detection  methods  are  not  foolproof.   But  the
only  evidence  given  Baldwin  in  a  very  thin  briefing  was  a
speech  by  Lieut.  Gen.  Trudeau,  the  Army's  chief  of  research
and  development,  before  the  American  Society  for   Industrial
Security  here  on  September  16.  Trudeau's  McCarthyite  thesis
was that  "the  advanced  state of  Soviet  technology  today is  due
more  to  Soviet  success  in  espionage  and  subversion  than  it  is
to  their  scientific  apparatus."    Even  the  Scripps-Howard   local
paper,  the  Washington  Daily  News,  slapped  him  down  next
day  with  an  editorial  headed  "Let's  Stop  Kidding  Ourselves."
Two Tests That Never Happened?
An  examination  of  the  transcript  of  the  Geneva  talks  does
however  turn  up  an  oddity.  On  July  28  the  Russians  handed
the  U.  S.  delegates  a  list  of  32  U.  S.  tests  in  the  Pacific  test
series  this  year,  giving   dates  and  exact  time  to  the  minute.
"If  there  are  any  errors,"  the  Russians  said,  "you  will,  per-
haps,  be kind  enough  to point  them  out  to  us."   The  list  was
intended  to  be  a  demonstration  of  how  accurately  tests  could
be  detected   even  without  listening  posts.   On  August  4,  the
U.  S.  delegation  in  reply  cited  "as  examples  of  possible  er-
rors"  the  fact  that  as  to  two  of  these  explosions,  on  April  29
and  July  14,  "we  on  the  Western  side  have  no  knowledge  of
any  nuclear  tests  carried  out  anywhere  at  these  times."   The
U.  S.  delegates   asked  to  see  the  original  data.   The   Soviet
delegates  declined  to  submit  them,  but  said  that  the  methods
used  for  detection  were  no  different  from  those  discussed  at
the  conference.   The   Soviet   delegates   pointed   out  that   the
U.  S. had  announced  only  14  tests;  they  had  detected  32;  we
claimed  that  we  had  no  knowledge  of  2.   This  left  16  tests
more  than  we  had  announced.   Whether  the  Russians  mis-
took  two  explosions  for  nuclear  or  whether  two   explosions
were kept  secret  even  from  our  delegates  or  whether  two  were
Addled  Adlai
Adlai  Stevenson  says  that  New  York  State's  election
is  being  regarded  as  a  referendum  on  foreign  policy.
At   the   same   time  he  expresses   "a  high   regard   for
Nelson,"  whom  he  calls  "a  very  worthy  candidate  for
the  Republican party."
This  is   the   kind  of  flabby  superficiality   that   has
alienated  those  who  (like  myself)  once  admired Adlai.
Question  No.  1:  How  can  an  election  be  regarded  as  a
referendum   on   foreign   policy,   when   the   two   major
party  candidates  have  only  made  vague  references  to
it?   Question  No.  2:  As  seen  from  Washington,  "Nel-
son's"  position,  which  Adlai  so  admires,  is  to  the  right
of  Elsenhower's.
The  Rockefeller  report, prepared  by  a  board of  which
Nelson  was  chairman  and  Dr.  Henry  A.  Kissingeir  re-
search  director, is  for  limited nuclear  war  in  such  situ-
ations  as  Quemoy-Matsu  and  Indo-China  (both  avoided
by  Ike)  and  against  cessation  of  nuclear  testing.   Kis-
singer's  article in  the  current  Foreign  Affairs  is  being
used  by  the  Pentagon   to   undercut  the  Geneva  talks
on  testing  which  Ike  approved.
duds  but  somehow  detectable  .  .  .  these  are  all  possibilities.
The  President's  position  on  testing  is  weak.   He   allowed
the  technical talks  to  go  forward  despite  Pentagon  arid  AEC
opposition,  but  to  appease  them  permitted what  seems to  have
been  the  longest  and  heaviest  test  series  ever  held:   30  last
summer  and   10  in  the  current  series  plus  the  British  tests.
This   infuriated   the  Russians.    According  to  figures  in   the
Baldwin  story,  the   U.  S.  has  detonated  about   140  nuclear
explosions,   the  Soviet  Union  about  60  and. Britain,  21.   The
Russian  position  at  the  UN  is  that  they  will  cease  tests  onl]
if  the  West  agrees  to  end  them  permanently; otherwise,  we
can  start  up  again  after  one  year  and  they  will  "never  catch
up."   The  Russians  have  their  own  "Pentagon"  and   "AEC"
mentalities  to  contend  with,  and   (not   strangely)   there  are
Russians  as  distrustful  of  our  promises  as  we  are  of  theirs.
The  same  type  of  military mind  exists  on  both  sides,  and
they  help  each  other  against  those  in  Washington   and   Mos-
cow  who  would  like  to  see  an  agreement.    Since  it  is  easier
to  play  on  fear  and  hate  than  on  hope  and  trust,  the  odds are'
increasingly  against  cessation  of  nuclear  testing   unless  neu-
trals  led  by  India  can  bring  moral  pressure  through  the   UN
on  both  sides.
Even  Washington's  Most  Conservative  Paper  Sneers  at  Democratic  China  Policy
"For   the   most  part,  the   [Democratic   Advisory  Council
foreign   policy]   statement   does   not   set   forth   any   policy
worthy  of  its  name.   The  council  .  .  .  says  the  immediate
problem   of   Quernoy   and  Matsu  can   and  should  be   dealt
with  promptly.  The  statement  does  not  get  around  to  say-
ing  exactly  how.  .  .  .  What  it  does  say  is  that  the  whole
issue  should  be  dumped  in  the  lap  of  the  United  Nations.
.  .  .  This  is  much  easier  said  than  done.  .  .  .
"How  might  Communist  China,  despite  its   'no  meddling'
pronouncement,  be  brought  into  line?   It  is  in  this  respect
that   the  Democratic  statement  looks  at   reality  and  then
looks  quickly  away.   'This  crisis,'  the  statement  says,   're-
flects  a  much  broader  problem,  the  problem  of  our  longer
term  relations  with  Communist China  .  .  .'
"This  language,  if  it  means  anything,  is  a  guarded  hint
that  an  ultimate solution of  the  Formosa  problem must  rest
on  admission  of  Communist  China  to  the  UN  and  possibly
on  diplomatic recognition  by  the  U.  S.   Of  course,  this  is  a
hint,  and  only  a  hint.  .  .  .  Still,  the  men  who  signed  the
Advisory  Council's  pronouncement  must  know  that  the  UN
cannot  possibly  settle  the  Formosa  problem,  or  the  problem
of   Quemoy  and  Matsu,   as   long   as   Communist  China   is
excluded   from  UN  membership.
"It  probably  would  not  have  been   politically    expedient
for  the  council  to  say  such  a  thing  at  this  time.   With  it}
left  unsaid,  however, the  'foreign  policy  statement'  does  not
really  set  forth  any  policy  at  all."
—Editorial,  Washington  Evening Star, Oct. 14-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October SO,  1958
Dulles  Feels  Triumphant   as  Red  China  Backs  Down;  No  Negotiation  in  Sight
Does  Peking  Have  A  Surprise  Up  Its  Sleeve, or  Is It  Just   Face-Saving?
How  explain  the  on-again,  off-again  flareup  over  Quemoy?
Could  it  be  that  Peking  has  something  up  its  sleeve?   Might
there  be  a  deal  brewing to  take  over  the  island  from  within?
Is  this  why  the  garrison  is  urged   to  take  advantage  of   the
new  cease-fire  "to  strengthen  their  entrenchment"?   Or  is  all
this  just  a  face-saver  for  a  retreat?   Did  misgivings  at  home
pull  Peking  back  from  brinksmanship,  too?
Dulles  feels  triumphant,  and  at  press  conference  last  week
indicated  that  he  no  longer  saw  any  need  to  give  the  appear-
ance  of   flexibility.   The   press  corps,   which  had  pictured  a
"new  Dulles"  after  his  last  conference  on  September  30,  was
taken  aback.  Eisenhower  next  day emphasized  that  we  had  no
intention  of  "coercing"  Chiang  into  thinning  out  his  troops,
much  less  in  abandoning  the  offshore  islands.   The  Secretary
of  State  said  he  thought  the  offshore  islands  were  covered  by
that  provision of  our  mutual  defense  treaty with  Chiang  which
' forbids  aggressive  action  from  his  territory  without  mutual
agreement.   On  the  basis  of  the  treaty,  the  U.  S.  could  assure
Peking  and   the  world  that  we  would  veto  any  such  action
from  the  offshore  islands.   But when  Dulles  was  asked  wheth-
er  we  would  give  such  assurances,  he  replied  "I  think  techni-
cally  that  we  could"  but  "whether  we  could  make  an  arrange-
ment  that would  be binding on  us  in  the  future,  I  don't  know,
I  would  somewhat  doubt  that."   The  reluctance  to  assure  Pe-
king  no  force  would  be  used  against  the  mainland  from  the
offshore   islands   contrasts  with   his   declaration   two   weeks
earlier  that  any  renunciation  of  force  would  be  mutual.
As  the  Secretary  Said  Last  Tuesday—
"We  Are  Dealing  With  Very  Shifty  People"
"Mr.   Secretary,   inasmuch   as   you  say   you   do  not
think  it  was  sound  for  the  Nationalist  Chinese  to  have
built  up  their  forces   on  Quemoy  and  Matsu,  I   would
like  to  ask  you  if  you  now  think  it  would  be  sound  to
work   out   some   arrangement   for   the   withdrawal   of
those  forces  from  those  two  islands?
".  .  .  If   there   were  a  cease-fire   in  the  area   which
seemed  to  be  reasonably  dependable,  I  think  it  would
be  foolish  to  keep  these  large  forces  on  these  islands."
—Dulles  at  press  conference,  Sept.  30.
"Mr.  Secretary,  have  you  urged  or  do  you  intend   to
urge  Chiang  Kai-shek  to  reduce  the  military  strength
of   forces  on  Quemoy?
"We  have  no  plans  whatsoever  for  urging  him  to  do
that.  .  .  ."
—Dulles  at  press  conference,  Oct. 14.
Chiang Always  Profits from  Retreat
The  policy  seems  to  be  not  to  give  way  under  threat  of
force  and  not  to  negotiate  when  the  pistol   is  packed  away.
These  crisis  seem  to  benefit  no  one  but  Chiang.    For  agree-
ing  to  a  cease-fire  in  the  Fall  of  1954,  Chiang  got  a  Mutual
Defense  Pact.   For  evacuating  the  Tachens  in  January,  1955,
he  got  the  Formosa  resolution.   Now,  according  to  an  article
in  the  Ta  Hua  Evening  News  in  Taipeh   (on  the  UPI  news
ticker  Oct.  14 but  not  in  the  next  day's  papers  I  saw)   Chiang
is  willing  to  reduce  his  forces  on  Quemoy  and  Matsu  if   the
^U.  S.  publicly  pledges  itself   to  defend  those  islands.   "Such
an   arrangement,"   said   the   UPI's   dispatch   from   Taipeh,
"would  represent  one  of  the  most  significant  diplomatic   ad-
vances  in  the  Formosa  strait  since  the   1955   signing  of   the
Sino-American  Mutual  Defense  Treaty."    Indeed,   it   would.
Chiang   seems   to   parlay   every   setback   into   increased    aid
and   support  from   the  U.  S.   We  have  to  pay  for  his  very
retreat.   If  the  Reds  ever  drive  him  off  Formosa,  we'll  prob-
ably  have  to  give  him  Puerto  Rico.
It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  Chiang  has  two  cards  to
play.    It   is  assumed  that   he   can  always  commit   suicide  by
attacking  the  mainland  and  setting  off  a  world  war.   He  has
another  way  of  bringing  pressure  on  us.   He  has  been   offered
—publicly—by  Peking  a  high  post  in  the  government  if  he
will   defect.    He   probably  could  get   autonomy  on   Formosa
for  his  lifetime.   If  he  ever  makes  a  deal  with  Peking,   we'd
lose  our  base on  Formosa.   Krishna  Menon  says—but  no  one
listens  to  him—that  talks   have  been  going  on  between   the
two  Chinese  sides  for  two  years.   When  a  reporter   said  he
could  not  conceive  of  negotiations  between  Chiang   and   the
Reds,  Menon  answered  "that's  because  you're  not  Chinese."
Bret  Harte  ought  to  be  required  reading  in  the  State  Depart-
ment.    "For  ways that  are  dark,"  as he  wrote,  there's  nothing
like  "the  heathen  Chinee."
Why  Call  Congress  Back  Into  Session,
A  favorite standby  with Democratic  and liberal   politicians
called  on  to  say  something  about  the  Far  East  crisis  is  to
demand  that  Congress  be  called  into  session.   Judging   by
past  experience,   the  Administration  might  easily  stampede
a  special  session   into  voting  new  war  powers.
It  is  useful  to  recall   what  happened   in  January,   1955,
when,  by  passing  the  Formosa   resolution,   Congress  for  the
first  time  in  U.  S.  history   gave  a  President  a  blank   check
for  war.   In  both  Houses   this  revolutionary  proposal   was
voted  out  of  Committee without  public  hearings;  there  seem
to  have  been   executive   sessions  but  only   Administration
spokesmen  were  heard.
In  the  Senate,  many  liberals  now  critical  of  Far   Eastern
policy  were  conspicuous  by  their  absence  from  the  ranks  of
the   opposition.     Only   Lehman,  Morse   and   Langer   voted
against  the  resolution.   In  the  House,  where  the   Democratic
leadership  allowed  only  two  hours  of  debate,  the  vote  was
409-3,  with  22  not  voting.   Only  Harden  (D.,   N.  C.),  Siler
When  It  Only  Acts  As  Rubber  Stamp?
(R.,  Ky.)  and  Sheehan  (R.,  III.)  voted  "no,"  the  last  named
apparently  because  he  wanted  a  declaration  of  war  against
Russia   instead!
The  other   day  ten   liberal  Democratic   members   of   the
House  sent  the  President  a  telegram   asking  for  a  special
session  on  the  Quemoy-Matsu  problem.  The  ten  were  Boyle
111.),  Blatnik  (Minn.),  Chelf  (Key.),  Green  (Ore.),  Holifield
(Cal.),  McCarthy   (Minn.),  Reuss  (Wis.),  Roosevelt   (Cal.),
Thompson  (N.  J.)  and  Vanik   (Ohio).
We   have   no   desire   to   embarrass    these     Congressmen,
some   of   whom  are   our   friends.    But   checking   back,   we
found  that  only  Holifield  expressed  misgivings  during   the
debate  on  the  Formosa   resolution  and  all  ten  voted  for  it.
In  the  Senate,   among  the  liberal  Democrats   who  voted
to  give  the  Administration  a  blank  check  for  war,  despite
its   calculated  ambiguity  about   the  offshore  islands,   were
Fulbright,   Green,  Hennings,   Humphrey,  Kefauver,   Mans-
field,  McNamara,  Murray,  Neuberger  and   O'Mahoney.
i a
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 20,1958
The  Then  Chief  of  Staff's  Account  of  the  1954  Crisis  Throws  Light  on  This  One
Gen.  Ridgway  Tells Why  He Opposed War With Red China  Over  Quemoy
In  1954, General  Ridgway  as  U.  S.  Army  Chief  of   Staff,
opposed  the  Dulles-Nixon-Radford  group  which  wanted  us
to  intervene,  first  in  Indo-China  and  then  over  Quemoy and
Matsu.  His  view  of  the  offshore  islands question throws  so
vivid  a  light  on  the  present  crisis that  we  reprint  it  here
from   "Soldier:   The  Memoirs  of   Matthew   B.  Ridgway"
which  Harper's  published  in  1956.
"Not   long  after  the  abortive  idea  of  intervention   in  Indo-
China   had   been   laid   to  rest,   there   came  the  flare-up  over
Quemoy  and  Matsu.   Again  there  was  strong  feeling  in  high
places  that  here  we  should  take  a  stand.   And  again  I  found
myself  in  disagreement  with  the  interventionists.
"I  had  studied  the  maps  with  care.   Quemoy  and   Matsu
were  two  small  islands,  occupied  by  our  friends  the  Nation-
alist  Chinese.   They  lay within  artillery range  of  the  Red  Chi-
nese  on  the  mainland.   They  constituted,  to  my  way  of  think-
ing,  no  more  than  listening  posts  on  an  outpost  line  of  ob-
servation.   They  had   little   value  as  offensive   bases.   Matsu
would  be useless  in  this  respect,  and  Quemoy  not  much  better,
for  there  is  no  major  military  objective on  the  mainland  that
lies  within  three  hundred  miles.   If  we  were  to  go  into  Red
China  with  ground  forces,  we  certainly  would  not  use  Que-
moy.   Neither  do  the  Reds  have  to  have  Quemoy  for  an  in-
vasion  of  Formosa.   It  lies  along  the  best  and  shortest  route,
but  there  are  many  other  jumping-off   places.
Not  Sure  Reds  Preparing  for   Invasion
"I  had  also  studied  the  intelligence  reports.   I  had  as  much
information,   I  suppose,   as  did  anybody  else  about  Red  ac-
tivities  on  the  mainland  opposite  Matsu  and  Quemoy.   To  my
mind,  what  the  Chinese  were  doing  there  did  not  justify  a
conclusion  that  they  were  planning   an   attack  on   Formosa.
Their  activities  could  just  as  well  be  defensive as  offensive  in
nature.   They  were  building  airfields,   and  rail  lines,  which
could  rush  troops  to  the  seacoast  in  the  event  of  an  invasion
from   Formosa.   But  there  was  no  indication  they  were  con-
centrating   ground   troops   there,   or   organizing   an   invasion
force  of  their  own.
".  .  .  the  Quemoy-Matsu  issue  faded  into  what  seems  for
the  moment  to  be  mutually satisfactory  stalemate.   It  will,  no
doubt,  flare  up  again  and  again.   There   is  no  doubt   in  my
mind  that  we  would  go  to  war  to  defend  Formosa  or   the
Pescadores,  and  we  should,  for   the   loss  of  either   of   these
would  make a  serious breach  in  our  outermost  line  of  defense
in  the  Pacific,  and  cause our  good  friends abroad  to  doubt  our
resolution.  But  the  juridicial, historical and  geographical  back-
ground  of  Quemoy  and  Matsu  is  radically  different.    To   go
to  war  for  Quemoy  or  Matsu,  to  me  would  seem  an  unwar-
ranted  and  tragic  course  to  take.
"I  do  not  for  a  moment  wish  to  impugn  the  intellectual
honesty  of  any  others  who  did  not  share  this  view.   They  sin-
cerely  felt,  I  think,  that  it  were  better  to  face  the  issue  then
and  there,  to  make  it  clear  to  the  Reds that  any  encroachment
on  Chinese Nationalist territory, however  slight,  would  mean
war.
Not  in  Our  Interest  to  Destroy  China
"To  me  that  concept,is  completely  repugnant.   I  make  no
pretense  to  clairvoyance.  But  such  an  action  would  be  almost
impossible  to limit.   It  would  bring  us  into  direct  conflict with
the  Red  Chinese.   It  would   spread  to  full  and  all-out  war,
employing  all  the  terrible weapons at  our  command.   And  we
could,  by  such  an  all-out  effort,  conquer  China.
"But   I  challenge  the   thesis  that   destroying  the   military
might   of   Red  China  would   be   in  our   long-range   interest.
We   could  create  there,  by  military   means,   a   great   power
vacuum.   Then  we  would  have  to  go  in  there  with  thousands
of  men  to  fill  that  vacuum—which  would  bring  us  face   to
face  with  Russia  along  a  7,000-mile  frontier.   If   we  failed
to  go  in,  then  Russia  herself  would  fill  it,  and  the  threat  to
our  own  security  would  not  have  abated  one  iota.
"To  my  way  of  thinking  the  desire  to  intervene  in  Indo-
China,  the  willingness  to  use  force  in  dealing  with   Quemoy
and  Matsu  reflects   a  thinking  which  trends  dangerously   to-
ward  acceptance  of  the  doctrine  of  'preventive  war.'
"To  me nothing could more  tragically demonstrate our  com-
plete  and  utter  moral  bankruptcy  than  for  us  deliberately   to
initiate  a  'preventive  war.'   Once  we  take  that  absolutely  fatal
step  our  civilization  would   be  doomed."
CORRECTION:  IPS  (and  Harvey   O'Connor)  Talk  on  Foreign  Policy
Commander  Hotel,  16  Garden  St.,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Oct.  23,  NOT  Nov.  23,  8:30  p.m.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name
Street
City      ........................................Zone............State..............._
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
10/2O/B8
(To)  Name
Street     ........
City      ........................................Zone............State...............~
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  ID.  C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays   but  pub-
lished   every  Thursday   except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.:  $6  in  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED