I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jun23.pdf

============================================================

What  Nagy's  Execution  Means,  P.  2
The  Lebanon Is  A  Perilous  Place  for  Dulles  to  Practice   "Brinkmanship."    See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  24
JUNE  23,  1958
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The   Right   to  Travel  Is  Not   Yet  Secure
The   best  information   available  on  the  Hill  the  morning
after  the  Supreme Court's  historic  right-to-travel  decision  in-
dicates  that  Congress  is  unlikely  to  enact  a  new  passport  law
this  session.   It  is  even  less  likely  that  a  bill  framed  on  such
short  order  could  pass  judicial   muster  under  the   standards
foreshadowed   by  the   majority's   ruling  in  the  Kent,   Briehl
and   Dayton  cases.   For   while  Mr.   Justice  Douglas,  strictly
speaking,  rested  the  decision  on  an  interpretation of  a   1926
passport  law  and  thus  invited  Congress  to  change  it,  he  also
warned   that   "important  constitutional   questions"   would   be
raised   if  Congress  were  to  give  the   Secretary  authority   "to
withhold   passports   to   citizens   because   of   their   beliefs   or
associations."    This   should   be   enough   to   provoke   second
thoughts  about  the  Walter  bill  (HR  9991)   in  the  House  and
the   Hcnnings  bill   (S3344)   in   the   Senate,   both   of   which
would  enact  into  law  word-for-word  the  present   departmental
passport  regulations.  We  are  happy  to  note that  Senator  Hen-
nings  has  now  abandoned  that  bill  and  unlike  Walter  sup-
ports    the    Court   decision.    The    non-Communist   affidavit
required  by  the  Department  for  the  right  to  travel  is  dead,
for   the  time  being  at  any  rate.   Radicals,  liberals  and   non-
conformists  can  travel  again  without undergoing  McCarthyite
style  inquisition.
Long  Fight  Ahead
It  would be  most unwise, however, to  assume that  the  right
to  travel  is  now  safe.    The   State  Department  will  not  take
defeat  so  easily.   Mr.  Justice  Douglas's   invocation  of  Magna
Charta   should   not   blind   us   to   the   question  mark   in   the
opinion,  "Freedom  to  travel  is,  indeed,"   he  wrote,  "an  im-
portant  aspect  of  the  citizen's  'liberty.'   We   need  not  decide
the   extent   to  which  it   can  be  curtailed.   We   are  first  con-
cerned  with  the  extent,  if  any,  to  which  Congress  has  author-
ized   its  curtailment."   The   italics  are  added  here,   in  warn-
ing.   They   emphasize  that   the   right   to  travel   can  be  cur-
tailed.    The   extent   will   ultimately   depend   on  the   general
political  atmosphere,  the   level   of   concern   in   Congress   for
traditional   liberties  and   a   slim   majority   in   the   Supreme
Court.   This   decision,  the  first  affirmation   in  our  history  of
the  right  to  travel  abroad,  was  only   5-to-4.   The   Supreme
Court   never  had  reason  to  pass  on  the  question   before  be-
cause  the  right  had  never  been  challenged  until  recent  years.
Political  restrictions  on  the  right  to  travel  in  peacetime  ap-
pear  fitfully  in  the  anarchist  scare  toward  the  end  of  the  last
century  and  in  the  Red  hunt  after  World  War  I  but  did  not
become  a  major  matter  until  the  cold  war  State  Departments
of   Acheson  and  Dulles.   This  first  Supreme  Court   decision
on  the  question  opens  the  way  to  a  prolonged   dialogue  be-
tween   Court  and   Congress   as  to  what   restrictions  may  be
1  *                                                                                       9
imposed  and  how.    But  we  predict  that  if  peace   lasts   they
will  never  be  as  sweeping  in  character  or  as  arbitrarily  ap-
plied  as  in  the  last  few  years.  That  much  is  over.
Sweeping  Powers   Claimed
Until  Congress   passes  a  new  passport   law,  the  State  De-
partment  cannot  under  the  Supreme  Court's  ruling  lawfully
deny  a  passport  except  on  the  ground   that  the  applicant   is
not   a   citizen   or   is  engaged   in   some   illegal   activity.    The
Court  holds  that  these  were  the  only  firm  grounds  of   refusal
envisaged  by  the   1926  act  leaving  the   issuance  of  passports
to  the  discretion  of  the  Secretary of  State.   The  law  did   not,
the   Court   holds,   "give   him   unbridled  discretion   to  grant
or  withhold   a  passport   from   a  citizen   for   any   substantive
reason  he  may  choose."    This  may  seem  sweeping   to  those
under  the  impression  that  the  Department   is  concerned  only
with  the   travel  of   persons  whose  views  and   associations   it
regards  as  subversive.   Actually  the  Department's   claims  are
much  wider.   We   invite  attention  to  the   State  Department
letter  and  documents  put  into  the   Congressional  Record  by
Senator  Fulbright  on  Friday June  13  just  before  the  Supreme
Court  ruling.   These   show  that  the  Department   regards   the
right  to  travel  as  something  it  can  restrict  at  will  in   pursuing
its   foreign   policy  objectives.   "The   Secretary  of   State   must
have  discretion,"  an  Assistant  Secretary of  State  wrote  Chair-
man  Green  of  Senate Foreign  Relations,  "to  determine  wheth-
er  the  presence  of  a  particular  individual  in  a  foreign  coun-
try  would  affect  foreign  relations  and  also  whether  travel  of
American   citizens  generally  to   a  particular  foreign   country
would   have   a   similar   effect,"     It   was   on   such    sweeping
grounds  that  the  Department  barred  a  respected  Judge,   Wil-
liam   Clark,  from   travel   in  Germany  where  he  had   proven
too  independent as  an  occupation  jurist  and  that  it  refused  to
let  American  newspapermen  visit  China.
The  Evil  Is  In  The  Permit   Requirement
The  right  to  travel  will  not  be  secure  until  we  have  gotten
rid  of  special  war-time  and  emergency  regulations  requiring
a  passport  and  get  back  to  pre-war  conditions  when  no  pass-
port  was  legally  needed  for  travel.    So  long  as  this  permit
must  be  obtained,  the  right  to  travel  will  be  as  precarious
as  was  freedom  of  the  press  in  England  in  the  days  when  a
license   was  required   before   the   publication   of   a   book   or
newspaper.   The   reasoning  of  Acheson  and  Dulles  is  much
the   same   as   that   against   which   Milton   inveighed    in   the
Areopagi/ica.    Our  cold  war  Secretaries  of  State  have  sought
in   advance,   like   Cromwell's   censors,   to   forestall   the   sub-
versive  and  seditious.    We  need  unlicensed  travel  as  we  have
unlicensed   printing.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  23,1958
The  "Hards"  Here  Must  Share  Blame  for  Reappearance of  the  "Hards" There
Nagy  Execution  May  Signal  General Return  to  Stalinist  Poticy
From  the  standpoint  of  justice,  the  Nagy   affair  is  sicken-
ing.   The  official  Hungarian  communique  does  not  say  where
the  trial  was  held  or  when;  it  was  so  secret  the  news  seems
to   have   come   as   a   complete   surprise   in   Budapest.    Even
Stalin  in  the  30's  staged  public  trials  at  which  foreign   cor-
respondents   were  present.    The   brutal   faithlessness  of   the
Russians  in  this  whole  affair  will  never  be  forgotten  in  East-
ern  Europe:  they  seized  General   Maleter  when  he  came  on
their  invitation  to  negotiate  peace;  they  seized  Nagy   when
he  left  the  Yugoslav  Embassy  in  Budapest  on  their  promise
to  give  him  a  safe-conduct.   The  communique   on  the  trial,
on  its  face,  betrays the  familiar  secret  police  practice of  adding
two  and  two  to  make  thirteen.   Nagy  and  Maleter   "denied
their  guilt  but  were  unmasked"—it  is  easy  to  imagine   the
horror  and  the  lonely  courage  behind  that  phrase.
Who  Will  Be  The  Next  Beria?
From  the   standpoint   of   Russia's   relations  with  its   other
satellites,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  a  new  wave  of  purges  is  to
be  avoided.   To  speak  of  "the   black  flag  of  'national  com-
munism',''  as  does  the  Nagy   communique,   is  to  signal   the
end  of  hope  for  Poland.   If  the  Russians  are  going  back  to
rule  by  naked  repression  and  terror,  then  they  will  in  their
paranoid   way  seek   out   every  jot  and  title  of   deviation   as
a  counter  revolutionary  danger.   The  Polish  press  and  radio
covered   the   Hungarian   revolt   at  first  hand   and   honestly;
Polish   sympathy  was   with   the   Hungarian    revolutionists;
Polish  opinion  understood  that  the  roots  of  the  uprising  were
not  in  Western   imperialism  but  in  the  hatred  of  the  work-
ers  and  the  Communist  rank  and  file  for  a  regime  of  secret
police  at  whose  apex  was  a  new  ruling  class  of  Communist
bureaucrats,   with   special   privileges,   special   stores,   luxury
amid  poverty.   The  Russians  as  rulers  under  the  Czars  and
now  under  the   Commissars  have  never   known  the   art  of
holding  the  reins  lightly.   We  are  in  for  a  repetition  of  the
anti-Titoist   wave  which  began   in   1948,   and  will  no  doubt
some  day hear  a  new  regime  say "Excuse  it,  please."
From   the  standpoint   of   internal   policy,   the   Nagy   affair
must   signal  the  end   of   hopes   for   internal   reforms   in   the
Soviet  Union  itself  to  prevent  a  repetition  of  the  evils  which
occurred  under  Stalinism.  The  reform  of  the  criminal  code
promised   five   years  ago  has   never   been   announced.    The
Soviet  press  long  ago  stopped   talking   even  of   "the   cult  of
personality."   If  a  "hard"  policy  is  pursued  in  the   satellites,
a  "hard"  policy  will  be  pursued  at  home.   Krushchev  will  be
hard  put  to  survive  the  dismantling  of  so  much  with  which
his  regime  was  associated—the  reconciliation  with  Tito,  the
modus  vivendi  with   Gomulka,   the   efforts   at   peaceful  co-
existence.
This  brings  us  to  the  gravest  aspect   of  all,   the   interna-
tional.   On  June  16,  Krushchev  made  public  a  summary  of
his   letter  of  June  11  to  Eisenhower,  seeking  to  blame   the
Western  powers  for  the  breakdown  of  hopes  for  a  summit
conference.   The  next  day  Moscow  announced  the  execution
of   Nagy   and  Maleter.   These  are  not  isolated   events,   but
related.    They   mark   complementary  steps   on   a   shift   back
toward  Stalinist  rigidity  and  the  armed  camp  attitude  toward
the  rest  of  the  world.   It  is  as  if  Moscow,  disappointed   in
Variety  on IPS
"Three  ink-stained  vets   of   the  fourth  estate—Her-
bert   Brucker  of   the   Hartford  Courant  and   chairman
of    the   Freedom   of   Information   Committee   of    the
American  Society  of  Newspaper  Editors;  William  Mil-
ler,   chief   editorial   writer  of   the   New   York   Herald-
Tribune,   and  I.   F.   Stone,   former   Washington   corre-
spondent   and   now   editor   of   a   weekly   newsletter—
kicked  around  the  pressing   subject,   'All  the  News'  on
'The   Open   Mind'   program   over   WRCA-TV   Sunday
(June   1)   with   Richard   D.   Heffner   in   the   role   of
moderator.
"Stone,   who  pulls  no  journalistic   punches   and. is  a
badgering   banderillero  of   the   American   press,   pro-
vided  most  of  the  fireworks  during  the  rapidly  moving
30-minute  powwow.   Miller  and  Brucker  are  no  jour-
nalistic   slouches,   but  in  this   instance   it   was  Stone's
pyrotechnics  that  put  the  torrid  tabasco  sauce  into  the
professional  shop  talk  at  thirty."    —Variety,  June  4.
its  efforts  to  reach  a  settlement  with  the  West,  had  decided
to  dig  in  for  a  long  period  of  tension,  determined  to  survive
by  the  ugly  methods  of  the  Stalinist  past.   All  governments,
whatever  their  ideology,  contain  men  who  believe  in  concilia-
tion  and  "tough  guys."   It  is  easy  to  imagine what  the  "tough
guys"  have  been  saying  in  Moscow  for  many  months.   They
seem  to  have  won.
Rigidity  Preferred
Another  axiom  of  government  is  that  in  international rela-
tions  the  "tough   guys"  strengthen  each  other's  hands.   Just
as  the  conciliators  find  in  each  other  proof  that  conciliation
is  possible,  so  the   "tough   guys"   find   in   each  other   proof
that  the  other  side  is  not  to  be  trusted.   So  it  is  in  this  situa-
tion.   The  State  Department  has  always  preferred   a  "tough
guy"  Russia—it  is  so  much  easier  to  strike  fierce  rigid  atti-
tudes  than  to  venture  onto  the  difficult   task  of  shaping  flex-
ible  policies  which  inevitably  bring  criticism  from   the   die-
hards  at  home.    In  this  sense  the  Department   always  pre-
ferred  Stalinism,  and  has  been  helping  it  to  revive.
The  documents  hastily  released  here  by  the  State   Depart-
ment  on  June  16  when  it  heard  of  the  release  in  Moscow  of
the  statement  summarizing  Krushchev's   letter   to  Stalin  de-
serve careful  reading.  They  show  that  what  we have  been  pur-
suing  in  Moscow  is  not  informal  exploration  of  possibilities.
Instead  the  Ambassadors  of  the  three  Western   powers  seem
to  have  been  jointly  presenting  formal  statements,  and  these
embody   the   same  old   package   proposals   on   disarmament
and  the  same  effort  to  get  a  Russian surrender  reunifing  Ger-
many  on  Western  terms.
Now   the   State  Department  implies   "Summit  Talk   Out-
line  Dim"   but  Mr.  Dulles  has  been  doing  his  best  to  dim
it.   His  testimony  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee
on  June  6,  his  press  conference  on  June  10,  his  TV  inter-
view  with  Congressman  Keating   on  June   15  and  his  press
conference   of  June   17  were  all  marked   by  statements  dis-
paraging  the  possibilities  of  a  summit  meeting  he  has  never
wanted.   If  the  world  drift   is  now  back  to  prolonged    ten-
sion,  credit  for  this  victory  of  the  "hards"  in  Moscow  must
be  shared  with  their  opposite  number  here  in   Washington.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  23,1958
A   Complex   Family   Brawl   No   Place   for   Atomic  War  or  Nuclear  Diplomacy
Getting  Uncomfortably  Close  to  A  New  Brink  in  the  Lebanon
A   dangerous   situation   is  developing   over   the   Lebanon.
Its  origins  lie  in  an  oversimplified  picture  of  what   is  hap-
pening  there.   If  the  rebellion   against  the  Chamoun  govern-
ment   were   merely   a   Nasser   plot,   and   the   problem   were
simply  to  stop  the  flow  of  men  and  arms  to  the  rebels  from
across  the  border  in  Syria,  enough  troops  to  seal  the  border
might   solve  it.   But  the   troubles  which   began   in  mid-May
with  a  general  strike  to  protest  the  assassination  of  an  oppo-
sitionist  pro-Nasser  editor  are  much  more  complex  than  that.
Every  group  in  the  Lebanon,  its  Moslems,   its  Maronites,   its
Catholics  and   its  Druses   seems  to   be  split   between   a   pro
and  anti-Chamoun  faction.  President  Chamoun  himself  seems
to  have  been  exploiting  American  support  to  extend  his  term
despite   a  constitutional  provision  limiting  him   to  one   six-
year  period  in  office.   The  U.  S. has  rarely  gotten  itself  mixed
up  in  a  more  complicated  family  quarrel.
A  Long  Open  Border
The   Syrian   border  is  not   the  key  to   the   situation,   and
even  if  it  were  a  handful  of  UN   observers  would   be  totally
inadequate  to  its  200  mile  length,  most  of  it  open  and  half
of   it  in  rebel  hands.    If   more  observers   are  to  be  sent   in,
they  should  be  from  neutral  countries.    Mr.  Dulles's  hint  at
press  conference  (June  17)  that  we  would  be  ready  to  supply
more   troops   for   such   a  purpose   seems   poor   judgment.    It
was  even  more  alarming  to  hear  Mr.  Dulles  say  cryptically
that   there  were  "other  possible   contingencies"  under   which
the  U.   S.  might   intervene  alone.   This  family  row   in   the
tiny   Lebanon   is  not   one   which   can  be   ended   with   atom
bombs.   This  is  a  job  for   riot   police  and   could   tie  U.  S.
troops  down  for  months  while  hatred   boiled   up   against  us
all  through  the  Arab  world.
Yet  Mr.  Dulles  has  been  prancing   up  to  this  new  brink
for  several  weeks.   The  official  line  was  indicated  by  a  speech
which   Senator  Javits,   a  loyal   Eisenhower   Republican,   made
in  New  York—most  inauspiciously—at  an  Israel   10th   anni-
versary  dinner  May  19.   He  said  the  Lebanese  government
Disengagement   Proposed
"The   (London)  Observer  refers   to  the  situation   in
the  Lebanon.   It  thinks  the  United  Nations   observers
there  may  help to  keep  a  brake  on  outside  intervention
which  could  only  make  the  situation  worse.   If  Leba-
nese  independence is  to  be preserved,  it  is  far  more im-
portant   to   restore   Christian-Moslem  communal  har-
mony  than  to  score  points in  the  cold war between Rus-
sia  and  the  West.   That  harmony  has  recently  rested
on  a  tacit  understanding that  the  Moslem  half  of  the
population  would  not  seek  a  complete union  with  Syria
provided   that   the   Christian   half   did   not   rely   too
openly   on  an  outside  protecting   power  which  might
be  in   conflict   with  Syria  and  other  Arab  nationalist
interests.   It  was  the  involvement  of  the  Arab  world
in   the   great   power  struggle   that   upset   this   under-
standing.   The  Observer  goes  on:  '.  .  .  Lebanon  has
often  been  called  the  Switzerland  of  the  Middle  East.
There  is  a  good  case  for  making  this  comparison  more
real   by  adopting  an  absolute  neutrality  which  could
be  guaranteed by  the  great  powers.  This  would  satisfy
Lebanon's  need  far  better  than  association  with  either
the  Eisenhower  Doctrine  or  Nasser's  positive  neutral-
ism.   The  great  powers  might  also  find  Lebanon  the
easiest   place  to   experiment  with  a   policy   of   disen-
gagement'."
—British Press  Digest, June  16.
could  appeal  for  aid  either  to  the  United  Nations  or  under
the   Eisenhower   doctrine.    "In   both   cases,"   Senator   Javits
said,  "we  are  committed-to  give  our  support."
Mr.  Dulles  was  asked  by  the  press  on  June  17th   whether
in  the  Lebanese,  as  in  the  Suez  crisis,  there  might  be  a  tacit
agreement  that  neither  the  U.  S.  nor  the  U.  S.  S.  R.   would
contribute  troops  to  a  UN  force  in  the  area.   He  dodged  the
question.    In  the  Suez  crisis,  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.
were  both  on  the  same  side.  That  is  not  true  in  the  Lebanese
affair.   This  makes  it  all  the  more  important  to  seal  off  the
Lebanese  civil  war  from  great  Power   intervention   and  rival-
ry.  The  Lebanon  is a most  perilous  "brink."
After  All  the  Talk  of  A  More Flexible
Ever  since  Stassen  resigned  in  February,  the  press  office
of   the  State  Department  (and  Nixon  at  a  private   dinner
with  British  correspondents)  have  fed  out  inspired  stories
that  Mr.  Dulles  had  grown  more   flexible   and  had   indeed
taken  over  Stassen's  idea  of  negotiating   a  test  suspension
separately   from   the   rest   of   the   disarmament    package.
What   follows  is  commentary  on  those   reports   for   those
gullible  enough  to  have  been  taken  in:
"It  (the  Soviet  government)  tries  to cover  its  tracks  .  .  .
by   advocating  the   general   cessation   of   nuclear   weapons
tests—which   of   course   involves   no   armament   reduction
whatsoever."
—Dulles,  to  Senate  Foreign   Relations  Com.,  June   6.
".  .  .  any  agreement  to  suspend  testing,  if  made,  would
not  be  an  isolated  agreement  but  be  a  part  of  other   ar-
rangements.  .  .  .  We believe  that  suspension  of  testing,  in
isolation,  is  a  very  inadequate  measure.  .  .  ."
—Dulles, press  conference,  June  10.
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  to  go  back  for  a  moment  to  the  tech-
nical   talks  which  are   to   be  held  in   Geneva,   the   Soviet
Union  obviously  assumes  that  any  agreement  on  inspection
Attitude  by  Dulles  on  Nuclear Testing
methods  would  lay  us  under  obligation  to  agree  to  suspen-
sion  of  tests,  quite  apart  from  other  elements  in  the  dis-
armament  package,  whereas  last  week  I  believe  you  said
that  an  agreement  on  test  suspension   would  be  made  con-
ditional  upon  further  tests.   Well,  that  seems  to  be  a  basic
difference   here.
A.  It  could be a  basic  difference.  .  .  .
—Dulles, press  conference,  June  17.
"As  for  the  nuclear  problem,  the  heart  of  the  matter   is
not   the  mere   [sic]    testing,   but  the  weapons   themselves.
...  If  there  is  agreement  to  put  an end to  the  production
of  fissionable  materials  for  new  nuclear  weapons,  the  way
lies  open  to  an  immediate  solution  of  the  problem  of  nu-
clear  testing.  .  .  .  Testing  could  be  stopped  indefinitely  if
the  necessary   inspection  system   is  installed   and  the  pro-
duction  of  fissionable  materials  for  weapons  is  also  effec-'
tively   ended.   Both   would  be  carried  out   under   effective
measure   of   international   control."
—Western   Agenda   Proposals   for   A   Possible   Summit
Conference,    aide-memoire   given   Foreign     Minister
Gromyko  May  S8,  and  made  public  in    Washington
June  16,
9   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  25, 1958
Admiral  Strauss  Picks  Himself  A  Perfect  Understudy  at the  AEC
No  hearing has  yet  been  scheduled  by  the  Joint   Committee
on  Atomic  Energy  to  consider   the  nomination   of  John   A.
McCone  of  Los  Angeles  to  succeed  Admiral  Lewis  L.  Strauss
on  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.  The  little  that  is  known
about  Mr.  McCone   suggests   that  the  only  effect   of  the   shift
will  be  to  disarm  critics  of  the  AEC.  *
The  Wall   Street  Journal  June  6  said  Mr.  McCone's  ideas
"very  much  parallel  those  of  Mr.  Strauss,"  except  that  on  the
question  of  atomic  power  "one personal   friend   of  Mr.  Mc-
Cone"  declared  he  would  be  "to  the  right  of  Lewis   Strauss."
Since  the  Admiral  himself   is  far  from   an  orthodox  Marxist-
Leninist,   this  should   reassure   the   friends   of   private   enter-
prise.   The  Journal  added   that  he  had  the  support  of  Nixon
and  was  "a  major  money  raiser"  for  Knowland.
A  Freudian  Slip-Up?
The  New   York   Times  Sunday,  June  15,  ran  a  background
interview  with  the  nominee  by  its  Los  Angeles   correspondent
Gladwin  Hill.   The  story  contained  a  fascinating  garble,  un-
corrected  through  all  editions.  It  said  mystifyingly: ".  .  . these
are  presumptions   that  can  be  reasonably  projected   about  his
expected  role  in  the  commission:  end  atomic  tests  or  to  share
with   foreign  countries  nuclear   information."
When  we  telephoned   the  Times,  we  were   informed   that
the  first  line  of  the  paragraph  following  the  colon  had  fallen
out.   This  missing line  said  "He  would  be  in  no  hurry  either
to  .  .  ."  i.e. in  no  hurry either  to  end  atomic  tests  or  to  share
with  foreign  countries  nuclear  information.   Here  again   Mr.
McCone  and  his  predecessor  seem  so  closely  attuned  that  we
are  afraid  some  person  given  to  low   comedy  may  yet   refer
to  the  nominee  as  Louie's  Irish  Rose.
The   New   Yurt-   Times   interview  said  "Mr. McCone  got
his   first   major   experience   in  collaboration   between   Govern-
ment  and  private  industry  in  World  War   II  as  head  of  the
California  Shipbuilding Corporation."    To  this  we  can  add  a
note  of  our  own.   In  Facts  on  File  for  1946, p.  309, there
is  a  summary  of  testimony  by  Ralph  E.  Casey  of  the  General
On     tin-   other   hand,    Mr.   McCone's   appointment    may
streiifflluM     the   AEC's   liaison   with   the   White  House.    Mr.
McCone  is   a  member  of   five   golf   clubs  in  California,   New
York   and  Washington.   Here  bis  club  is  the  Burning   Tree,
where   th-.-  President plays  regularly.
Underdog-of-The-Week   Dept.
The  vast  and  disproportionate space  given  the  Adams
affair   by  the  press  reflects  much  less  an  interest  in
j;ond   government   than   the   pleasure   people   take   in
seeing  a  man  made  to  suffer  and  humiliated,  especially
a  man  who had  irritatingly  seemed  to  be  superior.  How
the  mob  loves  to  discover  that  a  man  in  high   position
is  just  a  heel,  too, like   themselves.
Accounting  Office  to  the  House  Merchant  Marine  Committee
on  September  23  of  that  year  in  which  he  said  that  19  firms
operating  Government-built  shipyards  during   the  war   made
$356,000,000  on  capital   investments  of  $22,000,000.
Only   100  Percent   Profit
One  of  these  lucky  firms  was  California  Shipbuilding  Cor-
poration.   Mr.  McCone  as  president  of  the  Company,  accused
Mr.  Cascy  of  "half-truths."   Mr.  Casey  testified  the  California
company  made  a  profit  of  $44,000,000  on  an  investment  of
$600,000.   Mr.  McCone  claimed  it  made  only  $8,782,868  on
an  investment  of  $7,300,000,  or  more  than  100  per  cent.
The  collaboration  may be as  close  this  time,  since  the  nomi-
nee  has  many  business  interests,  some  of  them  doing  business
with   the  AEC,   among   them   the   Bechtel-McCone   Corp.,   a
Los   Angeles   engineering   firm   which   has   been   engaged   in
the  construction  of   atomic  power   reactors.
Mr.   McCone's   past   service  in   government   is  indicative.
He   was  a  member  of   the  Truman   Air   Policy  Commission
which  in  1948  advocated  a  stepped-up,  indefinitely   prolonged
arms  race.  The  report  became  the  bible  of  the  aviation   lobby.
His  view recommended him  to  Secretary of  Defense  Forrestal,
under  whom  he  served  as  deputy.   Forrestal  was  perpetually
alarmist.   Mr.  McCone  served  in  1950-51  as  Under  Secretary
of  the  Air  Force.
Admiral   Strauss,  afraid   of   a   Senate  fight  over  confirma-
tion,  in  which  his  part  in  the  Dixon-Yates   scandal  would   be
fully  aired,  has  picked  an  understudy  who  can  be  relied  upon
to  hold  the  fort  for  free  enterprise  and  the  arms  race.   The
Admiral  will  still  be  able  to  keep  a  look-out  on  the  AEC
from  his  new  White  House  post  as  Presidential  assistant  on
the  atoms-for-peace  program.    This  does   not  require  Senate
confirmation.   Admiral  Strauss  has  always  been   smooth.
7V;  • Sri  «lf>  Was  About  to  Take   Up  The  Atomic  Give-Away  Bill  as  We  Went  to Press—Full  Report  Next   Week
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State...................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
6/23/38
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State...................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
/  F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
1.  F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$6  In  tb  C.  S.;  W  In  Canada;  (10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED