I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958mar24.pdf

============================================================

Can  the AEC  Be  Trusted?
Uncovering  Another  Misleading Official  Report  on  That  Underground Test  in  Nevada
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  12
MARCH  24,  1958-
10
'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
How  the  AEC  Got  Itself  Whitewashed
Before  we  set  up  a  system  to  monitor  the   Russians,  we
had   better  devise  one  to  monitor  the  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission.   The   swift   way  in  which  the   AEC  got   itself   ab-
solved   by   the   Joint   Congressional   Committee   on   Atomic
Energy  last  week  shows  that  Admiral  Strauss  and   his   col-
leagues  could  probably  evade  detection  even  by  Congressional
inspection  posts  spread  at  250  foot  intervals  straight  across
the  red  carpeting  of  the  AEC.   The  Joint  Committee,  in  the
process  of  hastily  clearing  the  AEC,  even  stumbled  across  a
second  misleading  official   report  on  the  now  notorious  Ne-
vada   underground    test   without   realizing   its   significance.
Here  is  a  new  chapter  in   The   Case  of   the   False   Press  Re-
lease  which  the  AEC  now  admits  (as  the  reader  will   see)
was  uncovered  by  "a   news  correspondent,"   meaning  yours
truly.
This  new  episode  begins  late  the  evening  of   Wednesday,
March   12,   when   Congressman   Chet   Holifield,   a   ranking
member  of   the  Joint   Committee,   issued  a  statement.    This
revealed  for  the  first  time  that  at  an  executive  session  of  the
Joint  Committee  on  January  21  "a  responsible  scientist  con-
nected  with  the  Nevada  atom  bomb  tests"  had  declared  "in
the  presence  of  high   officials   of  the  AEC"  that  the   under-
ground  explosion  had  been  detected  as  far   away  as  Alaska.
Since  high  AEC  officials   were  thus  informed  of  it  in  Janu-
ary,    Mr.   Holifield   wanted   Chairman   Durham   to   ask   the
AEC  how  it  could  possibly  have  issued  a  press  release  two
months   later   saying  that   the   blast  had   not   been   recorded
more  than  250  miles  away.
Rump Session  and Packed Jury
Two   days  later,  Friday,  March   14,  Holifield,  Mel   Price
•of  Illinois  and  Senator  Clinton  Anderson  flew  to  New  Mex-
ico  for   the   funeral   of   Congressman   Dempsey.   This   took
the  three  most  militant  members  of  the  Joint  Committee  out
of  Washington.   That  same  day  Chairman  Durham  suddenly
called  a  public  hearing  of  the  Joint  Committee  for  the  next
morning,   Saturday,  to   investigate   the   false   AEC  press  re-
lease of  March  6.  The  timing  and  the  short  notice  were  well
calculated  to  bring  out  as  few  members  as  possible.   Of   the
18  members  of  the  Joint  Committee,   only  four  turned   up,
and  those  were  among  the  least  independent.   The  only  Sena-
tor  at  this  rump  session  was  Hickenlooper  of  Iowa,  long  the
AECs  most  faithful   echo   in  the   Senate.    Two   Republican
Congressmen,  Van  Zandt  and  Jenkins,  appeared.   The  only
Democrat   was  the   easy-going   Durham,   of  North   Carolina.
The  AEC  couldn't   have  hoped  for  a  better   packed  jury.
The  hearing   lasted   less   than   an  hour,   and   ended   with
headlines  about  the  AEC  being   absolved.    Actually,   in   the
course  of  offering   new  explanations,   the  AEC  had   involved
A Bulletin of Warning
Under   the   guise  of   sharing   scientific  information,
the   Administration  is   set   to  push  through  Congress
before  the  Easter  recess  a  bill  to  amend  the  Atomic
Energy   Act  which   would  authorize  the  President   as
he   saw   fit   to   give   out   "make-it-yourself-kits"   for
atomic  weapons  to  allied  countries.   He  could  give  out
fissionable  materials,  atomic  casings,   electro-mechani-
cal  firing  devices,  atomic  cannon  and  the  information
required  to  assemble  them  as  nuclear  weapons.   This
bill  would  implement  the  policy  unveiled  by  Secretary
Dulles  last  fall  to  place  small  nuclear  tactical  weapons
in  the  hands  of  all  the  countries  around  the  Sino-So-
viet  perimeter.  This  would  include  Syngman  Rhee and
Chiang  Kai-shek  and is  a  better clue  to Administration
thinking  than  inspired  stories  out  of  State  Dept.  on
how  moderate Mr. Dulles  is  becoming on  disarmament.
Thanks   to   a  battle  within   the   Joint   Committee  on
Atomic  Energy,  a  plan  to  report  this  legislation   out
without   public  hearings  was  defeated.   But  hearings
have  been  set  for  2  p.  m.  next  Wednesday  and  unless
interested  organizations  are  alerted  the  bills   (S  3165
and  HR 10348)  will  be railroaded through.  Senator Pas-
tore  is  chairman  of  the  subcommittee  in  charge.
4  1
itself   in  new  contradictions  and   had   revealed   another  mis-
leading  report  on  the  Nevada  test,  a  scientific  report  by  the
University  of   California's  Livermore  Laboratory  which   had
been  in  charge  of  the  explosion.   The  AEC  stressed   the  fact
that   this   report   was  unclassified.    Copies  of   it  were  made
available  to  the  Joint   Committee   Chairman   on  the   eve  of
the  hearing   and   placed   on  sale  at  the   Office   of  Technical
Services  in  the  Department  of  Commerce.   This  correspondent
—morbidly  curious   as  ever—went   and   bought   a   copy   for
himself  last  Monday  morning  for  a  dolkr.   There,  on  page
25,  was  a  reference  to  the  Nevada  explosion.   It  said    "The
U.   S.  Coast  and   Geodetic   Survey  also  studied   Rainer    [the
code  name  for  the  underground   shot]  records  from   perma-
nently  located  Wood-Anderson   seismographs.   .  .  .  Records
were  available  from   seven  of  these  stations   located   110  to
350  miles  from  the   test   detonation."    Where  the   original
press  release  stated   falsely  that  250  miles  was  the  limit  of
detection,  this  upped  it  by  100  miles  and  implied—as  falsely
—that  350  miles  was  the   limit.
II
Of   course  the  Livermore  Laboratory  report  does  not  say
that  these  seven  stations  were  the  only  ones  which   recorded
the  underground   shot,  nor  that   350  miles  was  the  limit  at
which  it  was  detected.   But  that  is  certainly  the   impression
it  created.   Even  Chairman  Durham  of  the  Joint   Committee
noticed  this  at  Saturday's  hearing  and  asked,  "Why   did  they
not  have  the  results  of  Alaska  here?   They  speak  of  110  to
{Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March £4,  10SS
Was  the  Information  on  Seismic  Detection  Originally  Classified?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
350  miles?   Why   did   they  not   have  that?    They   had   all
those  other  reports   from  the  other  stations. ...  I  believe
we  were  told  in  January  by  Dr.   [Herbert]  York   [who  was
in  charge  of   the  underground   shot   for   Livermore]   that   it
was  picked  up  in  Alaska.   That  was  January  21  of  this  year.
So  I   do  not   see  why  these   people   in   making  the    official
report  did  not  have  the  same   information."
Chairman  Durham  wanted  to  know  whether  Dr.  W.   F.
Libby,  acting  chairman  of   the   AEC,  had   "anything   to  say
on  this  point."    What  Dr.  Libby  had  to  say—and  get  away
with—was   a   model   of   rambling   evasion,   which   finished
quite  off  the  point.
Not Interested in Seismic  Effects?
His  reply  gave  the  impression  that  the  scientists  who  ran
the  Nevada  test  were  primarily responsible  for  "effects  within
the  test  area"   but  that  scientists  elsewhere  and  indeed    "the
world  over"  were  responsible  for  studying  the  seismic  effects.
When   Chairman  Durham  brought  this  matter  up  again  the
AEC  representatives again  tried  to  create  the  impression  that
the  AEC  itself  was  not  interested  in  the  seismic  effects.
Chairman  DURHAM:  After  the  test  shot  when  the  AEC
and  the  test  officials   advised  that  the  Alaska  station   over
2,000  miles  away  had  detected  the  shot,  when  was  that  re-
ceived  by  the  Commission?
Dr.  LIBBY: I  believe  our  first  information  was  on  March
4, but I  must  check  with  the general  manager.
Mr.  [K.  E.]  FIELDS  [general  manager,  AEC]:  I  believe
it  was  the  fourth  of  March.
A.  D.  Starbird,  director  of  the  AEC's  division  of  military
application,   broke  in.
Gen.   STARBIRD:  The  first  time  I  heard   it,  sir,  was  in
testimony  before   the  Joint  Committee  given   in   executive
session.   The  date,  as  I  remember,  was  about  January  21.
Chairman  DURHAM:  What  action  did  you  take,  General,
after  the  statement  by  Dr.  York,  being  the  first  time  you
were  aware  of  this  greater  distance?   Did  you  contact  any-
one?
Gen.   STARBIRD:  I  did  not,  sir  ...     We  were  interested
in  focussing  on  damage  that  might  occur  from  the  shock
...  I  did  not  take  this  to  be  of  any  great  significance  to
what  I  was  trying  to   achieve.
But  Dr.  Libby's  statement  that  the  men  in  charge  of  the
underground  test  were  interested  only  in  effects   "within   the
test  area"  and  General   Starbird's  that  they  were   concerned
only  with   "damage   that  might  occur  from  the  shock"  are
belied   by  the   Livermore  Laboratory  report.    For   there,   on
pages  9  and  10,  one  may  find  set  forth  "the   technical  ob-
jectives  of  the  test"  and  among  these  was,   "6.  To   measure
and  evaluate seismic signals  and  effects  at  distances   extending
from  the  point  of  detonation   out  to  all  distances  where  the
signals   could   be   detected."    Neither   Dr.   Libby  nor   Gen.
Starbird  was  candid  with  the  Joint   Committee.
Ill
At  that   same  Saturday  morning's   hearing   the   AEC  pre^
sented  a  new  explanation  of  how  on  March  6  it  happened   to
issue  a  false  background   report   on  the   underground   shot.
The  new  AEC  statement  said  this  press  release  was  originally
Questions
If  the  AEC  was  as  uninterested in  seismic  effects  as
its  officials  now  claim,  why  were  the  reporters   present
at  the  Sept.  19 test  told in  the  briefing  on  the  spot  that
AEC  scientists  predicted  it  could  not  be  detected more
than  a  few  hundred  miles  away  and—triumphantly—
that  the  first  results  bore  out  that   prediction?     (See
New  York  Times,  Sept.  20,  1957.)
Could  it  be  that  the  AEC  made  no  effort   to  check
for  itself  the  disappointing reports  which came  in  next
morning  from  Toronto,  Rome  and  Japan  saying  that
seismologists   in  those  countries  claimed  to  have  re-
corded  the  underground  shot?
Did  these  first  predictions  not  reflect  the  hope  that
the  underground  test  would  prove  that  testing  could
be  carried  on  in  secrecy  and  that  therefore  an  agree-
ment  to  suspend  tests  was   hopeless?
drafted  by  the  Public Information  Officer  in  the  Albuquerque
explosion  site.   "That  background  statement  for   newsmen,"
the  AEC  said  in  its  new  explanation  to  the  Joint   Committee,
"was   transmitted  by  him   to   the   San  Francisco   Operations
Office   to   be   checked   by   the   Livermore   Laboratory    which
conducted   the   underground  shot.    It   was  also  transmitted
to  Washington   for  review."
The  statement  said  that  "After  consultation  in  Livermore,
the  San  Francisco  Operations   Office   Public  Information  Of-
ficer  telephoned   to   Albuquerque  recommending  to     <i  mem-
ber  of  the  Information  Staff   there  the  deletion  of  two  sen-
tences  which  read,  "The  earth  waves  were  recorded  at  seismo-
logical  stations  at  Los  Aageles,  about   250   miles,   air   line,
from   the   shot   mesa.   This   was  the   maximum  distance   at
which  the  shock  was  recorded.'   Shortly  thereafter  the  mem-
ber  of   the  Information  Staff   concerned  at  Albuquerque   be-
came  ill  and  did  not  return  to  work  until   after   the   state-
ment  had  been  prepared   in  final  form.   Others   in  the   Al-
buquerque   office,   in  his  absence,   made  the  final  draft   and
arranged  publication.   Issuance  was  also  made  by  the  Wash-
ington  office  of  the  AEC.  Neither  of  the  issuing  parties  had
knowledge  of  the  deletion  suggested   by  Livermore  and   the
San  Francisco  Operations  Office."
The  new  statement  also  says  that  on  the  day  of  the  tour
by  press  men  of  the  underground   shot  "a  representative  of
the  Livermore  Laboratory  was  present.   A  question   arose  as
to  whether  the  release  was  factual.   It  concerned  the  exact-
ness  of  the  250  miles.   Orally  the  Livermore  representative
explained  that  some  signals  had   been  received   as  far  away
as  the  Denver   region  some  600  miles   from   the   site.   This
information   was  considered  on  site  not   to   be  of   sufficient
significance  to  be  transmitted   to  Washington."
It  is a  pity  no  one  on  the  Joint  Committee  was  wide  awake
enough  Saturday  morning  to  ask  about  that  one.   Here  was
a  press  tour  of  the  underground   shot.   The   newspapermen
were  given  the  March  6  release  saying  that  there  were  no
seismic  signals   beyond  250  miles.   A  representative  of   the
scientific  laboratory  in  charge  said  it  had  been  recorded  600
miles  away  and  yet  no  one  "on  site"  thought  that  important
enough  to  inform   Washington   and   suggest   a   correction!
Let  us  add   up   some  facts   for   ourselves.   The   testimony
shows  that  as  early  as  January  21  the  head  of  the  Livermore
Laboratory  told  the  Joint  Committee  in  executive  session   in
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'a  Weekly,  March  Sk,  1958
Drs.  Teller  and  Grigg  Were  the  Main  Architects  of  the  Underground  Shot
General   Starbird's   presence   that   seismic   signals   had   been
registered  in  Berkeley,  in  Alaska  and  in  other   places.    The
new   explanatory  statement  shows  that   Denver   was  one  of
those  other   places  known  to  have  received  the  seismic  sig-
nals.   Why  then  does  the  unclassified   report   prepared   by  the
Livermore  Laboratory  and   now   released   by   the   AEC    fail
to  mention  Alaska  or  Denver?   Why   does  it  only  speak  of
certain  stations  from   110  to   350  miles   distant,  giving   the
impression  that  this  was  the  farthest   away  the  signals  were
received ?
Why  Merely A  Deletion?
Now  let  us  go  back  and  ask  a  related  question.   The  new
AEC  explanatory  statement  says  that  when  the  original   draft
of  the  release containing  the  false  250-mile  claim was  checked
with   Livermore,   the   laboratory  suggested    the   deletion   of
that  reference.   Why  did  it  merely  suggest  a  deletion?   Why
didn't  it  suggest  that  the  release  be  revised  to  say that  seismic
signals  were  received  as  far  north  as  Alaska?   If  the   AEC
was  so  unconcerned  with  distant  signals,  why  this  curious  re-
luctance  all  up  and  down  the  line  to  admit  the  Alaska  re-
cording?   Why   was  this   crucial   fact   to   be   withheld?    Is
it,  perhaps,  that  the  information  was  originally  classified  in
order  to  keep  the  public  from  becoming  aware  .of  how  easily
underground  tests  could  be   detected?
rv
The  new  AEC  statement  of  explanation   verifies  the  story
told   in   last  week's   issue  that   it  was  a  phone   call  by  this
correspondent  to  the  AEC  the  morning  of  Friday,  March  7,
which   forced  out  the  news  of  the  Alaska  recording.     "Fol-
lowing  the  tour  and  briefing,"   the  AEC  statement   says,  "a
news  correspondent   on  7  March  called  the  AEC  Division  of
Information   Services  in  Washington   asking  whether   the  in-
formation  as  to  distance  at  which  the  shot  was  detected  was
correct.   That  Division   checked  and  found   that   information
received   in  the  AEC  March   4  indicated   that  a  signal   had
been  detected   on  the  seismograph   of  a  station   in  Alaska."
This  March  4  date  is  peculiar  and  deserves  inquiry.   The
statement   says  the   press   release   was  reviewed   in  Washing-
ton   "by   the   AEC   Divisions   of   Information    Services   and
Military  Application.   Neither   caught  the  error  in  the   state-
ments.    It   was  approved   by  the  general  manager   for   issu-
ance  on   2  March   and   circulated   to  the   Commissioners   for
their  information  on  4  March."   But  it  was  on  the  4th  of
March  that  General  Starbird  received  a  communication  from
Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  giving   the  names  of   31  stations
which  recorded   the  underground   test  in  Nevada.   How  did
he  happen   to  get  it  that  particular   day?   And  why  was  no
attention  paid  to  it?
General   Starbird's  division   is   in   charge   of   testing   new
atomic  weapons  and  of  testing  means  to  detect  them.   If  an
agreement   is  reached   on   inspection,   his   tests   will   be  sus-
pended.   Could  he  have  been  as  unconscious  as  he  claims  of
the  implications  of  the  seismic  records?
I   also  find  it   impossible   to   believe   that   the  men  who
originally  advanced  the  idea  for  the  underground   test  were
unaware  of   these  broader   implications   for   national   policy.
The  two  men  were  Dr.  Edward  Teller  and  Dr.   David   T.
Griggs.   The   unclassified  Livermore  report   says  it  was  they
who  first  proposed   the  underground   test,  and  the  March  6
release  says  they  devised   the  particular   method   used   in   it.
Dr.   Griggs   is  less  well   known   than   Dr.   Teller   but   is  of
similar  mind.    His   mentality   is  displayed   in   his  testimony
against  Dr.  Oppenheimer   as  recorded   in  the  AEC  transcript
of   the  latter's  hearing.    According  to  Dr.  Griggs,  Dr.  Op-
penheimer   called   him   "a  paranoid."    Dr.   Griggs  was  cer-
tainly,  like  Dr.  Teller,  wrought  up  to  a  pitch  where  he  began
to  suspect   anyone  who  thought   along  lines  other   than   the
continued  fabrication  of  new  and  more  efficient   weapons   of
destruction.
Senator  Kefauver  summed  the  matter  up  very  well   when
he  told  the  Senate  on  March  13:
"What   has   aroused   suspicion   about   this   matter   is   the
minds  of  many  people,  is  that  the   Chairman  of   the   AEC,
Admiral  Lewis  Strauss,  and  his  principal  scientific  collabora-
tor,  Dr.  Edward  Teller,  are  vigorously  opposed   to  any  ban
on  testing  atomic  and  hydrogen  weapons.   In  part  their  op-
position,   at  least  publicly,  has  been  based  on  their   opinion
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Dr. Libby Admits We're Ahead of  the Russians But  Still Wants Testing  To Go On
Senator  Pastore.    If   we  were  ahead  in  our  arsenal  of
bombs,  nuclear  and thermonuclear, as  against  the  Russians,
if  you  stalemated  it  now,  wouldn't  we  be  in  a  better  posi-
tion  than  they  would?
Dr.  Libby.   Our  armament is  stronger  and  more  varied
and  it  is  more  developed  than  theirs,  by  a  large  factor.
Senator  Pastore.   Therefore,  if  you  could  stop  this  thing
cold  as  of  now,  wouldn't  we  be  in  a  better  position  than
the  Russians?   I  mean  let's  assume  that  you  could.
Dr.  Libby.  Our  armament  would  be  better.   One  of   the
questions  is  whether  they  would  abide by  it.
Senator  Pastore.   I  am  not  getting  into  that  at  all.   W«
are  discussing  the  point  here  whether  it   would  be  advis-
able  to  stop.   Our  question is,  Can  you  stop?
Dr.  Libby.   I  think  there  may  be  an  intermediate point.
.  .  .  you  know  w«  have  developed bombs  with  intrinsically
less  radio-activity, the  so-called  clean  bombs  .  .  .  and one
of  our  purposes  in  continuing tests  is  to  develop  this  fur-
ther,  especially  to  extend  it  to  smaller  yields.   It  is  there-
fore  conceivable that  one  could think  about  a  type  of  test
limitation  rather  than  a  test  ban.  .  .  .
"We  have  reasons  for  developing  this  small  bomb arma-
ment  in  our normal  military  police  operations,  and  we  have
a  long  way  to  go  in  cleaning  up  this  part  of  our  arma-
ment.   So  this  is  a  pretty  commanding reason  for  further
testing.
"But   fundamentally   it   is  this  point.    That   we   cannot
make  the  improvements  in  our  military  machinery  which
has  come  to  depend  in  large  part  for  explosive  power  on
atomic   and  nuclear  weapons,  we  cannot  make  these   im-
provements  without   testing.
"And  so  if  you  stop  testing,  you  are  stuck  with  and  you
have  the  present  arsenel  and  that  is  just  about   it."
—Dr.  W.  F.  Libby,  acting  chairman,  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  executive  session, Humphrey  disarmament  subcom-
mittee.,  March,  6,  transcript  released  for  publication,  March  13.
4    J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'8  Weekly, March H,  1958
Radioactive  Fallout  Was  Another  'Inadvertent  Omission" by  the  AEC
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
that  tests  could  be  undetected.
"The   question  arises  as  to  whether   it  was  a   coincidence
that  the  misinformation  given  out  by  the  AEC  in  this  case
strongly  bolstered   the  opinions  of  Admiral  Strauss  and   Dr.
Teller.   If  we  are, in  fact,   dealing  with  a  mistake   through
inadvertence,  it  is  a  very  peculiar  kind   of  inadvertence  in-
deed."
V
A  psychoanalyst  might   say  that  the   AEC  was   "inadver-
tent  omission"  prone.   "This  250  mile  statement,"  Dr.  Libby
told  Chairman  Durham,  "was  a  complete  inadvertence.  There
was  never  any  basis  for  it."  I  should  now  like  to  call  atten-
tion  to  another  of  Dr.  Libby's famous   "inadvertences."
As  readers  of  Dr.  Ralph  E.  Lapp's  brilliant   and   moving
"The   Voyage   of   the   Lucky  Dragon"   know,   it   was   only
through   the  mysterious  accident  to  the  Japanese  fishermen
on  that  unlucky  ship  in  March,  1954, that  the  world  first
became  aware  of  the  terrible  new  danger   let  loose  in   the
world  by  the  first  H-bomb   explosion.    That   incident hap-
pened  in  March,  1954, but  it  was  not  until  February,  1955,
almost  a  full  year  later,  that  the  danger  was   acknowledged
by  the AEC.
Strauss Blamed It on The Coral
Until  that  time  the  AEC  rested  on  the  misleading   state-
ment  issued  by  Admiral  Strauss   (March   31,  1954) which
attributed  the  "skin   lesions"   suffered   by  the  Japanese  fisher-
men  "to  the  chemical   activity  in  the  converted   material   in
the  coral  rather  than  to  radioactivity."   Even  when  the fol-
lowing   February  the   AEC  finally  admitted   the   radioactive
danger,  its  press  release  was  so  framed  as  to  give  the  im-
pression  that  the  radioactivity  dissipated  after   36  hours.
As  the  Holifield  subcommittee  on  civil  defense  of   House
Government  Operations  expressed   it  in  a  report  on  July  27,
1956,  "The information  released  on  that  date  by  the  AEC
might  easily  convey  to  the  lay  reader  a  misleading  impres-
sion  of  the  extent  and  duration  of  the   radioactivity   hazard.
While  explaining  that  fallout  is  due  to  surface  nuclear  ex-
plosions  which  draw  up  large  amounts  of  materials  into  the
Send  A  Gift   Sub  to  A  Friend  to  Start   With
On  Earlier  "Inadvertencies"
"The  subcommittee  sees  no  excuse  for inadvertencies
or  casual  treatment  of  atomic  energy  when  life  and
death  matters such  as  this  are  involved.  The  AEC dis-
plays  a  kind  of  easy  optimism about  nuclear  explosion
effects.   The  AEC  spokesmen  dwell  upon  the  effects  of
'nominal'  bombs rather than  on those  of  the  high  yield
megaton  weapons.  Data  presented  to  the subcommittee
on  the  intensity  of  local  radiation  hazards  are  diluted
by  resort  to  global  averages  and  other  minimizing  as-
sumptions.    The   genetic   effects  of   radioactivity  are
passed by with  the  comment that 'there is  a  wide  range
of  admissible  opinion  on  this  subject.'   Important  in-
formation  on  atomic  energy  often  is  released  in  drib-
lets,   through  speeches   of   AEC   Commissioners,  and
couched   in   highly   technical   and  hypothetical   terms
rather  than  in  concise,  plain-spoken  facts."
—Civil  Defense   for  National  Survival,  House Rpt.
2946,  Holifield   subcommittee,  July  27, 1956.
bomb  cloud,   the  first  paragraph   of   the  statement  also  ob-
serves   that   the   'main   radioactivity'   is   dissipated   within   a
few  hours  and  concludes  with  a  sentence  that  air   explosions
do  not  produce   any  serious   radiological   hazard.   The  AEC
release   referred   to   radioactivity  within  the   first   36  hours.
The  persistent   or  lingering  radioactivity  received   practically
no   attention."
Dr.  Libby  had  been  questioned  about  this  press  release  by
Congressman  Holifield  when  he  appeared  before  the  latter's
subcommittee  on  January   31,  1956, at   the  very  beginning
of   its  hearings.   This  colloquy,   which  now   deserves   to  be
recalled,  took  place:
Mr.   HOLIFIELD.   Was  there  any  reason  why  the  Febru-
ary  15,  1955, release  mentioned   the  radioactivity   only   for
the  first  36  hour  period?   Was  there  any  reason  why  this
should  have  been  confined  to  the  36-hour  period?
Dr.   LIBBY.   No.
Mr.   HOLIFIELD.   Do  you  feel  that  this  type  of  a  release
would  have  a  tendency  to  confuse  the  layman  in  that  he
might  think   that  the   36  hours  was  the  duration   of  that
radioactivity ?
Dr.   LIBBY.   I  am  afraid  this  was  an  inadvertent  omission.
These  Sensational  Nuclear  Testing   Issues
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or enter)
Street    .............................
City   .................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street   .............................
City
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
......Zone............State..._...............
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
3/24/H
......Zone............St«t«..._......_.._...
Shall  we send  gift  announcement?     Tea  D   No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D. C
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone'8   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IS,  D.  C.
An   independent  weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.   F.  Stone;  Circulation-Manager,  Either  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
fS  in  th  U.  8.;  *6  ID  Canada;  HO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  flD  to  Europe;  *20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED