I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958sep01.pdf

============================================================

How  the Right  Lost  in   Congress,  P.  3
Warning:  The  Jokers  in  That  White  House  Announcement  Suspending  Nuclear  Tests,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  34
SEPTEMBER  1,  1958
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Ike  Leaves  the  Supreme  Court  in  The  Lurch
Wednesday    Evening
I  fear  the  President at  press  conference today did  our  coun-
try  a  grave  harm.  Southern  resistance will  be  invigorated  by
his   failure  unequivocally to  deny  the  report  that  he  wishes
the  Supreme  Court  had  never  handed  down  the  school  deci-
sion   and   by  his  admission  that   Newsweek    may  have   been
correct  in  saying  that  he  told   friends   he  thinks  integration
should  proceed  more  slowly.   (If  it  proceeds  any  more  slowly
they'll  soon  be  (^-integrating  in  Clinton,  Tenn.,   as  well  as
in  Little  Rock).   The  headline,  "Ike  Hints  He  Thinks  School
Integration   Is   Moving   Too   Fast,"   will   reverberate  like   a
rebel   yell  through   the   South.    After   years  of   refusing   to
express  an  opinion  on  the  subject,  Mr.   Eisenhower  let  slip
a  remark which  shows  he  is  at  best  lukewarm  on  integration,
and   regards  it   as  another   of   those   bothers  which   are   the
bane  of  the  Presidency.   On  the  eve  of  the  Supreme  Court's
special  session  on  Little  Rock,  Mr.   Eisenhower  had  disasso-
ciated  himself  from  the  Court  and  helped  further  to  weaken
and   isolate  it  in  the   most  fateful   hour   it  has  known  since
Dred  Scott  sued  for  freedom.
A  Crafty  Bumbler
Mr.  Eisenhower  was  asked  seven  questions  about  integra-
tion  at  today's  press  conference  and  managed,  in  his  wooly-
minded  but  self-protective way,  to  undermine the  Court  and
the  cause  of  integration  in  every  answer.   He  made  it  clear
that  the  Attorney  General  was  filing  a  brief   amicus  in   the
Little  Rock  appeal   only  because  the   Court's   invitation  was
a   command,  and   because  he   was  an   officer   of   the   Court.
"I  don't  think  that  I  would  instruct  them  to  argue  one way
or  another,"  Mr.  Eisenhower  said.   "As  lawyers,  as  an   officer
of   the  court,  they  have  to   voice  their  honest    convictions."
Would  the  brief  be  applicable  to  other   situations?   "Well,
I  think  that  you  are  making  some  unwarranted  assumptions,"
Mr.  Eisenhower  replied.   "The   Justice  Department  has  been
ordered  to  file  a  brief  on  one  particular  decision  by  the  Ap-
pellate  Court,  and  I  don't  think  it  has  anything  to  do  with
the  rest  of  the  problem."   It  was  almost  as  if  Mr.   Eisenhower
were  telling  the  South,  "I,   too,  am  a  victim  of  the  Court's
coercion."   Over  and  over  again  he  emphasized  that  the  brief
amicus  was  none  of  his  doing,  although   "I   would   assume
that  any  decision  would   certainly—I  mean  any  brief   would
try  to  reflect  the  views  of  all  of  us,  so  far  as  I  know,   have
held   from   the  beginning."   No   one  ventured   to  ask  what
those  views  were.
The  power  of  headlines  to  distort  is  visible  tonight  in  one
newspaper   which   screams   across   page  one,   "President  Hits
School   Closings  As  'Terrible'."   I  am  afraid   this  will  be
1   3   ',
typical.   It  hardly  gives  the  true  flavor  of  what  Mr.  Eisen-
hower  actually  said.   When  asked  about  state  laws  to   close
schools  rather  than  integrate,  the  President  first  "didn't  un-
derstand"  the  question  and  then  said  "This,  of  course,  would
be  a  very  terrible  outcome."    But,  he   suggested,    hopefully
passing  the  buck  to  the  courts  again,  that  this  would   cause
a  lot  of  litigation.  (What  would  people  do,  sue  their  legis-
latures?)   Then  he  was  sure  "there  would  be  great   pressure
to   open  the   schools"   but   was  carefully   to  add,   lest   it   be
thought  that  he  meant  to  open  them  on  an  integrated   basis,
"under  whatever  circumstances the  inhabitants believed  would
be  best."   This  is tailor-made for  Faubus.
Federal  Funds  to  Aid   Integration
A  Washington   reporter   pointed   out  that   across  the   river
in  Arlington,  Virginia,   integrated  schools  would  be  deprived
of  State funds  as  a  penalty for  obeying  the  law.   The  reporter
wanted  to  know  whether  in  such  cases  Federal  funds   might
be  made  available.   Mr.   Eisenhower,  after   a  lot  of   palaver
about  not  shooting  from   the  hip,  indicated  he  didn't   think
this  would  be  fair  and  equal  treatment.    (One   thought  it  a
pity,  listening  to  him,  that  there  were  no  tape-recordings  of
Eisenhower   at   staff   conferences  in   his   army   days.   Did   he
ever  risk  a  clear  opinion?)
Even  Rogers  Has  More  Courage
When  Mr.  Eisenhower  was  asked  whether  the  brief  amicus
in  the  Supreme  Court  would  express  his  personal   views,   he
said   his  own  had   been   expressed   "succinctly"    in   the   pre-
pared   statement  he   gave   out   at   his   preceding    conference.
Succinct  is a strange  adjective  for  a  statement  eight  paragraphs
long  in  which  one  cannot  find  either  the  word  "school"  or
the  word  "Negro"  much  less any opinion  on  integration.   Any
craggy  question  finds  this  man  as  sure-footed  as  a  mountain
goat.   Even  his  Attorney  General,  William   P.  Rogers,  Sena-
tor  Eastland's friend,  in  his  speech  today  before  the  American
Bar  Association in  Los  Angeles,  made  it  clear  that  integration
was  not  just  "the   law"   because  this  perverse  Supreme  Court
happened  to  read  Gunnar  Myrdal  but  because   "For   a  nation
which   stands   for   full   equality  under   law—which   solemnly
believes   that   all  men  are  equal   before  the   law,   regardless
of  race,  religion,  or  place  of  national  origin—the  result   un-
doubtedly  is  permanent  .  .  .  the  law  of  the  land  for  today,
tomorrow  and  I  am  convinced  for  the  future—for  all  regions
and  for  all  people."   Is  Mr.  Eisenhower  incapable  of   speak-
ing  up  in  some  such  fashion?   It   is  tragic  that  just  when
another   irrepressible  crisis  looms  ahead  there  should  be  such
a  nobody  in  the  White  House.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  1, 1958
Without   An   Alert   Public  Opinion,  Any   New  Agreement   Can  Easily  Be  Prevented
The  Jokers  Hidden  in  the  Nuclear  Test  Cessation  Announcement
The   announcement  on  the  cessation  of  nuclear  testing  is
tricky.  It  must be evaluated (1)  in  the  light  of Administration
press   agent   policies  and   (2)    the   President's   habits  as  an
executive.   The   press  agentry  consists  in  leaking  any  major
move  in  as glamorous  a form  as  possible  to  get  the maximum
headline  effect,   leaving  the  small  print  for  later.   Thus   the
impression  created  during  the  past  week  is  simply  that   the
U.  S.  and  the  United  Kingdom,  on  the  heels  of  agreement
by  their   technical  experts   at   Geneva,   had   agreed   to   cease
testing.
Keeping  Everybody  Happy
Now   for  the  second   factor—the  President's  habits  as  an
executive.   Mr.   Eisenhower  always  seeks  for   some   common
denominator  of   policy  which  will   be  acceptable  to  all   the
diverse  views  and  interests  of  his  official   family.
The  Pentagon  is  concerned  with  making  atomic  war   "con-
ventional,"    i.e.,   in   developing   a   whole   family  of   nuclear
weapons  and  of  making  them  as  "clean"  as  possible  in  order
not  to  harm  our  own  troops.   The  AEC,  caught  up  in  the
sheer  technological   momentum  and   zest  of   development,   is
also  for   continued  testing.   If   the  Pentagon   and  the  AEC
have   their  way,  testing  will  go  on   forever.   This  was  im-
plied  in  that  statement the  AEC  had  ready  for  release  August
11  with  the  UN  Radiation  Commission  report.    "Man   must
learn   to  live  with  new  risks,"   the   AEC  said   complacently,
"even  as  he  accepts  new  benefits."   (The  benefit,  i.e.,  of  ever
more  effective  means  of  blowing  himself  to  smithereens).
But  the  Administration also  has  to  take  into  account  public
opinion.   This  is  the  State  Department's  bailiwick.   It  cannot
afford   to  appear  to  be  shutting  the  door   brusquely  on   the
possibility  of  a  test  cessation  agreement.   At  the  same  time,  it
does  not  want  an  agreement  which  will  relax  tension  at  least
until  the  Russians  give  in  and  permit  reunification  of   Ger-
many  on  Western  terms.   The   Sta*e  Department   needs  some
way  to  disarm  public  opinion  at  minimum  price,  and  to  bog
the  question  down  (as  disarmament has  been)  in  interminable
complex  negotiations.
There   are   also   senior   military   officers   like   Gen.    Omar
Bradley,  who  see  that  the  electronic  arms  race  cannot  go  on
forever.   There  are  moneyed  men  who  fear  it  must   under-
mine fiscal  solvency.  The  President  seems  to  side  with   them.
This  accounts  for  the  friendly,  optimistic   reactions  of  the
President  at  his  press  conference  of  August  20  when  asked
for   comment  on   the   agreement   reached   by  the   experts   at
Geneva  that  a  test  cessation  agreement   could  be  policed   ef-
Stone  to  Talk  on  Nuclear   Testing
A  Student  Council  for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy  will  be
organized    by    representatives    from    various    college
campuses  at   a  meeting  in  New  York  City  next  Mon-
day,  September   8.   Students   interested   can  reach   the
Council  at   202  E.  44th  St.,   New  York  17,  N.  Y.
The  Council  will  hold  a  public  meeting   at   8  p.  m.
that  evening  in  the  Judson  Memorial  Church,  55 Wash-
ington   Square.    I.   F.   Stone   will   be   the   main   adult
speaker  and  will  give  a  first-hand  report  on  the  pros-
pects   for  a  testing  agreement   and  its  importance   to
peace.
It   is  most   encouraging   that   young   people   on   the
campuses  are  again  a-stir  on  the  great  issues  of  our
time.   Readers  are  urged  to  give  the  students  a  warm
send-off   by  attending  this  meeting   and  joining  in  the
discussion.   Please  come.
fectively.   I  suspect  the  real  reason  for  Mr.  Dulles's  sudden
flight  back  to  Washington  that  afternoon  was  alarm  over  the
tone  and  content  of  what  Mr.  Eisenhower  had  to  say,  par-
ticularly  his  dismissal  of  the  idea  that  lack  of  an  agreement
with  Red  China  might  be  a  stumbling  block  and  his  Stassen-
line  statement  that  the  Geneva  agreement  "gives  grounds  to
hope  you  can  go  another  step,  and  every  step  that  you  go
means  you  can  go  another  step."   This  implied  abandonment
of   the   disarmament  "package"   favored  by  Mr.   Dulles  be-
cause  it  is  virtually inextricable.
A  Slick  New   Package
The   result  of   intra-Administration  compromise  is  a  slick
new  package.   Testing  will  be  suspended  but  not  until  Octo-
ber  31,  giving  the  AEC  two  months  more  of  testing.    The
suspension  will  only  be  for  one  year;  it  would  take  a  year
or  two  anyway  to  prepare  new  tests.   The   suspension  will
be  renewable  but  only  on  a  year-to-year  basis,  dependent  on
how   we   think   the   inspection   system   is  working   and   on
whether   "satisfactory   prograss   is   being   made   in   reaching
agreement  on  and  implementing  major  and  substantial  arms
control  measures  such  as  the  United  States  has  long  sought."
This  ties  a  test  agreement  back  into  the  bigger  disarmament
package   of   August   1957   which   also   provided   for   a   one-
year  conditional  and  temporary  cessation  of   testing.
We  have  moved,  but  not  far.   Without  an  aroused   public
opinion,  it  will  be  easy  for  those  forces  in  the  Administra-
tion  which  want  continued  testing  to  block  or  sabotage  any
agreement.
Pentagon  and  AEC Experts  Fear  For
"The  consensus among  atomic  experts  here  [in  Washing-
ton]  is  that  President  Eisenhower's  proposed  one-year  test
suspension  would  have  no  effect  whatever  on  U.  S.  nuclear
might.   An   indefinite   suspension   would.   But   a   one-year
moratorium  would  not  halt  tests  in  progress  or  scheduled
this  year.    It   would   not   slow  the   stockpiling   of   nuclear
arms.   It  would  not  alter  the  generally   accepted  fact  that
the  U.  S.  atomic  arsenal   is  larger  and  more  varied  than
Russia's. ...  A  one-year  suspension  wouldn't  even  slow
the  Nation's  normal  rate  of  atomic weapons testing  to  any
great   extent.   It  takes  about   t<vo  years  to  prepare  a  big
Their  "Ideal"  and  "Refined"   Weapons
test  like  that  held  this  Spring  and  Summer  at  Eniwetok.
"An  indefinite  suspension,   however,  would  hamper   Amer-
ica's  efforts.  . . . Experts  of the  AEC,  Defense   Department
and  Congress  . . .  agree  that  this  country  right  now could
equip    intermediate    range   and   intercontinental   ballistic
missiles   with   nuclear    warheads.   THE    NEARLY    CON-
CLUDED    PACIFIC    TESTS    MAKE    THIS    CERTAIN.
"These  warheads,   however,   would  be  far   from  ideal   for
their  purpose,   and  without   any   additional   tests  it   would
be  impossible  to refine  them.  .  .  ."
—UPI  Story,  Washington  Post,  Aug.  24.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  1,  1958
The   Legal   Profession,   A   Few   Brave   Senators   and  Lyndon  Johnson  Deserve  Credit
Not  A  Single  Anti-Supreme  Court  or  Repressive  Bill  Passed
Not   a  single  bill  aimed  to  overrule  the   Supreme   Court
and  not  a  single  piece  of  new  witch  hunt  legislation  passed
the  last  session  of  Congress.   Last  minute  efforts  in  the  clos-
ing  hours  to  put  through  (1)  a  passport  bill,  (2)   a modified
version  of  the  Mallory  bill,  (3)   the  Smith  bill  which  grew
out  of  the  Steve  Nelson   sedition  case  and   (4)    the  Walter
bill  to  overrule  the   Cole   decision  all   failed  on   the   Senate
side.    The  Jenner-Butler  bill  died  earlier,  as  did  the  bill  to
narrow  the  right  of  appeal  to  the  Federal  courts  on   habeas
corpus  (important  to  Negroes  convicted  in  Southern  courts).
Nixon  Upholds  the  Liberals
The  last  and  narrowest scrape  of  the  session  came  with  the
Mallor>  bill.   House-Senate  conferees  (with  Chairman   Celler
of  House  Judiciary and  Senator  Carroll,  D.  Col.,  dissenting)
had   worked  out   a   compromise.    The   House   conferees  ac-
cepted   the  Senate  insistence  that  any  delay  in  arraigning  a
defendant   be   "reasonable"    while   the   Senate   conferees  ac-
cepted  a  House  amendment  saying,  "Provided   that  such  de-
lay  is  to  be  considered  an  element  in  determining  the  volun-
tary  or  involuntary nature  of  such  statements  or   confessions"
made  before  arraignment.   The   effect   might   have   been   to
allow  police  to  hold  a  suspect  as  long  as  they  like  providing
that  any  confession  was  not  challenged.   If  so,  it  would  have
been  of  dubious constitutionality.  When  the  bill  in  this  form
came  over  to  the  Senate,  Senator  Carroll   raised  a  point  of
order,  claiming  that  the  House  amendment  represented   "new
matter"  and  was  therefore ineligible  under  the  rule  requiring
any   conference  compromise  to   be  within   the   limits   set  by
the  vote  in  either  House.   Vice  President  Nixon  upheld  Car-
roll,  and  Lyndon  Johnson  at  once  moved   for   adjournment.
It  was  4:11  a.  m.  Sunday morning.
Another   bill   which   died   after    successfully  hurdling   a
House-Senate  conference  was  the  Walter  security  bill.    On
the  Senate  side  this  had  started  with  S  1411,   a  measure  by
Olin  Johnston  of  South  Carolina  permitting  agency  heads  to
go   on  paying  the   salary   of   employes  summarily  suspended
while  awaiting  final  disposition  of  their  case.   In  the  House,
Walter  added  amendments  which  transformed  the   measure,
turning  it  into a  bill  to  overrule  the  Cole  decision  and  extend
summary   security-loyalty   dismissals   to   all   agencies   of    the
government  even  the   non-sensitive.   In   conference   commit-
tee,   a   compromise   was   reached   limiting  the   effect   of   the
bill  until  next  June  30.   Senator  Johnston  ;    chairman  of
Post   Office   and   Civil   Service  deserves   credit   for   resisting
strong  pressure  for  passage  of  the  bill;  the  conference  report
Notice  to  Readers
The  Weekly  is  published  48  weeks  a  year,  numbered
consecutively.     Ordinarily   it  does  not  go  to  press  the
last   two   Thursdays   of   August   and   December.   This
year  we  worked   through  the  August  vacation  because
of  the  special  UN  meeting  and  the  late  closing  of   Con-
gress.  We  hope  to  take  one  or  two  weeks  of  this  vaca-
tion  later  this  Fall  as  a  means  of  enabling  us  to  cover
a  major  assignment  out  of  Washington  or  abroad.  IPS.
was  filed  but  the  measure  was  never  called   up  for  a  vote.
This  will  be  goods  news  for  scores  of  government   employes
being  reinstated   in  non-sensitive  agencies   from   which   they
were  purged  on  tenuous  loyalty  charges  years  ago.
Just  before  adjournment,  the  House  passed  the  Selden  bill
to  legalize  State  Department   travel   restrictions  but  when   it
reached  the  Senate,  the  measure  was  referred   for   burial  to
Foreign   Relations.    The   Smith   "States   Rights"   bill   which
grew  out  of  the  Nelson  sedition   case  and  would   have   dis-
rupted  State-Federal  relations  in  many  fields  was  recommitted
41-40   on  Thursday,   August   21.   Johnson   and   Yarborough
of  Texas  and  Kefauver  (but  not  Gore)  of  Tennessee   broke
the  otherwise  solid  ranks  of  the  South  to  vote   against   the
bill.   Fulbright   (see  box  below)   did  not  join  them.
The   succession  of  defeats  led  Eastland  to  complain   in  a
Senate  speech  "there  is  no  effective  anti-subversive  legislation
[left]   in  this  country  today  at  either   the   State  or   Federal
level."    The   coalition  of   racists  and   Red  hunters   were   de-
feated  but  it  was  a  close  squeak.   The  civil  liberties   organi-
zations  worked  hard  but  the  public was  indifferent.
All  through  the  voluminous  hearings  and  debates  on  these
measures  it  was  evident  that  the   legal  profession  is  a  kind
of   secular  priesthood.    Its  special  knowledge   and   traditions
proved  powerful  forces  in  the  maintenance of  "due   process"
of   law  and  basic  liberties  against   the  repressive  and   lynch-
mind  tide.   Chairman  Hennings  of  the  Senate   subcommittee
on  constitutional rights  deserves  our  gratitude  for  much  hard
work  and  solid  accomplishment.   He  was  ably  seconded   by
Javits  of  New  York  in  the  successful  fight  against  the  Butler-
Jenner  bill.   Morse  blocked  passport  legislation  and  with  Car-
roll  of  Colorado  helped  at  many  other  crucial  moments   on
the   floor.   But  a  large  part  of  the  credit  must  in  all  justice
go  to  Lyndon  Johnson.   The  Senate  majority   leader   proved
his  "moderation"   in  courageously  taking  a  stand  against  his
fellow  Southerners.   Otherwise  little  of  this  legislation   could
have  been  blocked.
Fulbright:  Speaks  With  the  Angels,  But  Votes  With  Eastland
"What   show  of  reflection   and  choice  was  there  in  much
of  the  decade  of  the  1950's  when  the  word  egghead  became
a   term  of  abuse;  when  education  was  neglected;  when  in-
tellectual  excellence  became  a  cause  for  suspicion;  when  the
man  in  public  life,  or  the  writer,  or  the  teacher,  who  dared
articulate  an  original  thought  risked  being  accused  of   sub-
version.  .  .  .
"It  was  because  there  was  so  little  reflection   and  choice
in  this  period  that  what  we  got  in  government  was  a   gov-
ernment   which   entrusted  the  highest  interests  of  state  to
the  play  of  accident  and  force.   For  whenever  we  brought
ourselves  to  do  anything  at  all  about  a  crisis  that  exploded
before  our astonished  eyes,  we  almost  automatically  reached
for  bigger  bombs  and  bigger  bombers.  .  .  .
"We have  lately  heard  a  great  deal  about  the  nuclear  gap
between  the  United   States  and  the  Soviet  Union.   I   sug-
gest  that   an  equally  serious  gap  is  that  which  exists  be-
tween   the   profession   and  the   practice   of   the   tenets   of
freedom   in  this  country.  .  .  .  We  have  bridged  this  gap
with   an  unspoken   demand   for   rigid  conformity,   with   an
excess  of  self-righteous  moralizing."
—Fulbright  (Ark.),  U. S. Senate, Aug.   SI.
1  3  j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   1, 1958
Unexpected   Arab   Agreement   Provides   A   Breathing   Spell   for   Constructive    Mid-East   Solutions
The  UN   General  Assembly  Did  Succeed  in  Patching  Up  the  Peace
The  special  session  of  the  UN   General  Assembly  on  the
Middle  East  solved  none  of   the  region's  complex  problems
but  it  did  resolve  a  crisis  and  provide  a  breathing  spell.   The
main  contenders  lost.   The   U.  S.  and   the  U.   K.   failed   to
indict  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  for  indirect  aggression.   The  U.  S.  S.  R.
failed   to  get   a  resolution   for   the   immediate  withdrawal  of
Anglo-American   troops.     Botli   sides   gained   a   face-saving
context  in  which  to  work  out  a  compromise solution.
Mr.  Hainmarskjold   is  the  world's  foremost  skater  on  thin
ice  but  could  have  done  nothing  without  the  consent  of   the
Arabs   themselves.   The   miracle  of   an  Arab  agreement,  on
moderate  terms,   in  the   framework   of  an  Arab  League  sud-
denly   raised   from   the   dead,  gave  him   his  chance.    But   the
"practical  arrangements"  the  Secretary  General  was  requested
to  make  in  Jordan and  Lebanon  by  the  unanimously approved
Ar.ib  resolution  require  private agreement  among  the  powers.
These  alone  can  "make  possible"   (in  the  resolution's  words)
"the   early  withdrawal of   foreign  troops."
Delicate   Operation
Hussein  is  doomed.    Some  way  must  be  found  to  arrange
his  safe  abdication  and  a  more  popular  regime.   This  could
erupt  into  war  without  quiet  talks  with  Moscow,   Cairo  and
Jerusalem  as  well  as  Washington  and  London.   Let  us  hope
such  talks  had  already  begun  before  the  Assembly  ended.
Fresh  ideas  are  badly  needed.   Jordan  was  never  a  nation.
Its  Palestinians  and   its  Bedouins  live  in  worlds   far   apart,
many  of  the  latter  still  contemporary  with  Father  Abraham.
The   ideal  solution  would  be  to  join  Jordan  with  Syria  and
Egypt  in  the  United  Arab  Republic  in  return  for  recognition
of   Israel  and   resettlement  of  the  Arab  refugees.   To  fit  the
U.  A.  R.  into  a  looser  Arab  Federation, to  link  Israel   with
it  some  day  in  a  broader  Semitic  League,  would  be  to  provide
the  framework   for  peaceful  development.
Israel's  one  hope  of  survival  lies  in  this  direction,  not  in
reliance  on  the  fickle  friendship  of  great  Powers  for   whom
it  must  always  be  a  second   best  card  to  be  abandoned   any
time  the  Arabs  come  to  terms.   It  is  poisonous  for  Israel  to
be  the  darling  of  French  colonialism,  and  to  let  Britain  and
Was   the  Tsar,  Too, A   Victim
Of   "Indirect   Aggression"?
Life   Magazine   recently  ran  an  overcolored  and  un-
derdone   rewrite   of   the   Russian   Revolution   by   Alan
Moorehead.   lie  was  assigned  to  dramatize  researches
financed  by  the  magazine  into  captured  German  For-
eign    Office   archives.    The   researcher   was   a   rightist
jirofY'ssijV  at  Georgetown  University.   The  purpose   was
!o  find  new   evidence   to  prove   a  once   popular   theory
(supported  by  the  forged  "Sisson  Papers")  that   Lenin
and  Trotsky   were   German  agents   who  had  somehow
.subverted   the  loyalty   of   the   Russian  people  to   their
T:i;ir.   In  other  words,  the  revolution  was  the  result  of
"indirect   aggression."    The   Life   series   has   just   ap-
peared   in  book  form  and  is  being  treated  as  if  it  were
a  respectable  work  of  scholarship.    (An  exception   was
Harrison   Salisbury's   review   in   the   August   24   New
York   Times),     ft   is   interesting    to   see   past   history
being  rewritten  in  these  worm-eaten   terms  at  a  time
when   the   State   Department    is   again   trying   in   the
Middle  East  and  elsewhere   to  treat  popular   revolution
as   the   product   of   some   insidious   necromancy   to   be
combatted  by  better  border  control.
the  U.  S.  use  Israel  as  a  bogeyman  in  Cairo,  threatening   to
unleash  Ben  Gurion  if  Nasser  does  not  behave.
New   Holy    Alliance?
We  hope  thoughtful  Americans will  note  the  hostility  the
uncommitted  nations and  Latin  America  showed  at  the  special
session  to  the  Dulles  doctrine of  a  right  to  intervene  against
"indirect  aggression"  and  his  hope  of  creating  a  UN   police
force  for  this  purpose.   Sir  Claude  Corea  of   Ceylon   warned
that  by  this  means  "unpopular  governments   in  other   places
might  seek   the  assistance  of   friendly   countries  to  intervene
with  armed  force  .  .  .  against  the  wish  of  a  majority of  their
people."    This   is  the  kind  of  intervention  by  the   Holy   Al-
liance  on  behalf  of   "legitimate"   governments   against  which
the  Monroe  Doctrine  was  erected.   Now  Mr.  Dulles  proposes
that  we  play  Metternich's  role  and  use  the  United  Nations
as  our  tool.
Start   the   New   Season   by   Sending   the   Weekly   As   A    Gift    to   Your   College   Library
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,   56J8  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    .......................................................................................
Street   .......................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State..................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
9/I/5B
(To)    Name
Street      ........
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  O
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ay..,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every   Thursday   except  the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December   at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
K   in  the  U.  S.;  $8  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED