I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958aug25.pdf

============================================================

Behind  That  Silly   "Surrender" Debate,  P.  3
We  Risk  War  to  Defend  the  Oil  Companies  But  They  Go On  Evading  Taxes.   See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  33
AUGUST  25,  1958     -s^g^
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
IB  CENTS
If   Only  Orval  Faubus  Could  Complain  to  the   UN
United  Nations,  N.  Y,,  Wed.   A.   M.
Amid   the   prolix   soliloquys   which   seem   to   constitute  a
General   Assembly   debate,   the   Little   Rock   decision  by   the
Eighth  Circuit  in  St.  Louis  came  like  lightning  in  a  darken-
ing  sky.  While  the  Court   spoke   bras el).  \vc  have  reached
that  unhappy  stage  in  which  we  tan   no  longer  assume  that
court  orders  will  be  obeyed.   It  will  be  harder  this  year  than
last  to  control  a  mob  led  by  a  Governor  overwhelmingly  re-
elected  for  defying  the  law.   The   honor  of  our  country will
depend  on  whether  a  lew  colored  children  can  be  persuaded
to  venture  out  again  this  year into  the storm.
Here  at  the  UN   we  know   how  susceptible  the  backward
peoples   of   underdeveloped   areas   are   to   violent   demagogy.
(Perhaps   a  Mississippi  River  development  plan?)    One  can
imagine  what  the  leaders  of   the   South  would  be  saying  in
the  General  Assembly  if  theirs  were  an  independent  nation.
Just  as  Mr.  Dulles  sees  the  hand  of  Moscow  at  work  through
Cairo   in  Jordan  and   the  Lebanon,  so  Senator  Eastland   and
Governor   Faubus  see  the  hand  of   Moscow  at  work  through
Washington   below   the   poorly  patrolled  f.lason-Dixon   line.
Everyone   knows   how   happy,   contented    and   carefree   our
Nigras  were  until  those  outside  agitators  began   working  on
them.    It  is,  plainly,  indirect  aggression.   Maybe  Mr.   Ham-
marskjold  should  go  South  and  observe  those  NAACP  agents
slipping  across  the  border.
Ike Had The Summit  to  Himself
The   President's  appearance  at  the  opening  of  this
; pedal
session   must   be  regarded   as  a   success.    He   seems   to   have
been  thoroughly  rehearsed  and  read  his  speech  well, stumbling
only  over  a  few  words.   The  speech  itself  will  not  enrich  the
anthologies   but   was  at   least   competent   copy.    The   content
was  not  pure  Dulles  but  a  compromise  which  combined   the
Secretary's  high   spiritual   views   (the   passage,   for   example,
which   admonished   the   pauperishly   poor   Arabs   that    "ma-
terial   progress    should   not   be   an   overriding   objective   in
itself")  with  a  watered  down  compote  of  all  the  constructive
plans  of  the  past  decade  for  the  Middle  East,  carefully  gen-
eralized,   skirting   all    controversial    issues    (the    Suez   was
omitted  from   the  list  of  postwar  crises)   and  managing  not
to  mention   Israel.   While  independent   voices  from   Ottawa
to  New   Delhi   have   been   calling   for   neutralization   and   an
arms  embargo   by  the  great   powers,  Mr.  Eisenhower  thought
that   "perhaps  the   nations   involved    in   the   1948    hostilities
may  .  .  .  wish  to  call  for  a  United  Nations  study  of  the flow
of   heavy   armaments   to  those  nations."    We   can   just   hear
Ben  Gurion  and  Nasser  seizing  on  such  a  study  to   complain
that   they  aren't  getting  enough  arms.   But  Mr.    Eisenhower
had  the  summit  all  to  himself   there  on  the  lofty  podium  in
the  high  modernistic Assembly  chamber  with  no  need  to  fear
that  Mr.  Krujhchev  might  pop  up  with  one  of  those  infernal
peasant  proverbs.   He  spoke  without  interruption  and  at  the
end,  as  the  World-Talegram   reported,  there   was  "almost  30
seconds   of   applause."
That  Fulsome  Occidental Flattery
Though  this   v.-as  supposed   to  be  a  fire-alaim  session,   the
Assembly  opened   in  the  testive  atmosphere  of  an  important
first   night,  with  the  added  excitement  that  here  everyone—
including   the   V1P   newspapermen—feel   themselves   partici-
pants   as  well   as  audience.   For   a  multi-national  gathering,
the  delegates   (except  for  one  bearded  Sikh)  all  looked  ter-
ribly  alike  in   sack  suits.    Sartorially,   at   least,   it's   becoming
one  world.   Junior  diplomats  skirted  about   the  floor  firmly
holding  onto  their  brief  cases  with  the  air  of   men   bent  on
top  drawer missions in  accordance  with  top  secret  instructions,
perhaps  to  gel  their  Foreign   Minister  two  on  the  aisle.   But
after   the   opening   day,  attendance   fell   off   as   the   speeches
droned  on.   The  chief  feature  of  this  session  seems  to  be  the
fulsome   Occidental  flattery  with  which  everybody  from   Ike
on   showered   Arab   nationalism.    Franco's  delegate  went   so
far   as  to  make  it  sound  as  if  Spain  were  practically  an   Aral)
country,   too,   from  which  Ferdinand   anil   Isabella   were   for
tunately  expelled   by  the  noble   Moors.    One   expected   Abba
Eban  to  ascend   the  podium  in  a  khajiyeh    with  an  oration
on   the  glories   of   Saladin  when   all   good   Zionists   wrote   in
Arabic.    Everybody  was   as   flattering   as  a   Beirut   rug   sale,
man  who  has  found  him  a  well-heeled  prospect  who  doesn t
know   from   burlap    But  there  was  no  sign   that  the   Arabs
were  buying anything.
From Militarism to Mysticism
The   best,   the   most  humane  speech   was  that   of   Ireland's
Mr.   Aiken  who   sketched   out  an  international   plan   for   the
resettlement   of   the   Arab  refugees   as   basis   for   Arab-Israeli
peace  and   Mid-Eastern  stability.   But   few   heard   him.    The-
chief  activity behind  scenes  as  we  write  is  the  effort  to  phrase
a  resolution   so  vague  that  it  can  gain  a  two-thirds  vote   for
some  kind   of  face-saving  UN    intervention   in  Jordan   to     £<_•(
the  U.  S.  and  the  United  Kingdom  off  the  hook.   Even   the
Soviet   Union   is  now   ready   for   UN   observation   if   only   it
will  observe  the  withdrawal  of  Anglo-American  troops.   But
the   Latin   Americans   don't   want   observation   to   shade   off
into   intervention,   a  bad   word   below   the  Rio  Grande,   and
so  the   negotiators   are  speaking   mystically  of   arranging   for
a   UN   "Presence"   in   Jordan   which   Hussein—who   doesn't
believe   in   transubstantiation—has   already   said   he   will   re-
ject.   But  the  delegates  are  anxious  to  hurry  off  and   rest   up
for   the  next  Mid-East   crisis  which  could  be  soon.
.1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, August  25,  19S8
Most  of  Press  Blacks  Out  Senate  Debate  on  the  Tax  Loopholes  Of  The  Oil  Barons
We're  Ready  for  War  to  Defend  Them  While  They  Dodge  Their  Taxes
In  the  midst  of  a  war  crisis  over  oil,  the  Senate  spent  a
major   part   of  one  day's  session  debating  the  extraordinary
tax  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  oil  companies,  especially   those
operating  in  the  Middle  East,  but  we  didn't  see  a  line  about
it  next  day  in  the  New   York   Times.   No  less  than  50  pages
of   the   Congressional   Record  for   August   11  were  filled  by
the  debate,  but  it  wasn't  news  fit  to  print.
This   was  the   second   occasion   in   many  years   on   which
progressive   Senators   have   succeeded   in   forcing   a   roll   call
vote  on  a  proposal  to  reduce  the  oil  industry's  notorious  271/2
percent  depletion   allowance.   The  first  vote  was  in  1951  on
a  measure  by  Humphrey   (D.  Minn.)   to  reduce  the  allow-
ance  to   15  percent.    This   was  defeated   71  to  9.   But   this
time  a  tax  amendment  by  Williams   (D.  Del.)  for  a  reduc-
tion  to  15  percent  mustered  26  votes  while  a  graduated  cut
proposed   by  Proxmire  (D.  Vis.)   won  31  votes  against  58.
Only  14 Votes More
Thus  we  have  reached  a  point  where  a  shift  of   14  votes
would   begin   to  close  the  enormous  loopholes   which   make
the  oil  industry  America's  foremost  avenue  of   tax   evasion.
A  memorandum  put  into  the  Congressional  Record  by  Doug-
las  (D.   ///.)   at  page   15,551  estimates  that  these   loopholes
add  up  to  a  $13  billion  dollar  annual  subsidy  for  the  indus-
try.    The  271/2 percent  depletion  allowance  is  the  best  known
but  not  the  worst.   Among  the  others  is a  tax  loophole  which
allows  the  oil  industry  (unlike  most  others)   to  convert  net
income  into  capital  gains  by  fictitious  sales  from   individual
owners   to   their   own   corporations   and   a   provision   which
allows  the  oil  industry  to  write  of!  intangible    development
costs  against  net   income.
"Drilling  for  oil,"  says  this  memorandum   by  Dr.
Paul  Haber,  "is like  playing  dice  with  the  Treasury.
'Heads  I  win,  tails  you  lose',  with  the  Treasury  al-
ways  on  the  losing  end.    As  a  matter  of  fact,  high
tax  rates are a  boon  to  the  crude  oil industry  rather
than a burden, because the higher the rate of tax  the
lower the net cost  (the  after-tax  cost)  of  the drilling
operation.   This  explains  why  the  American  Petro-
leum  Institute,  does  not  support  the  National  Asso-
ciation  of  Manufacturers   in  its  fight  to  reduce  the
top  tax  bracket  from  90  percent   to  40  percent."
Everybody's Turning  "Oil Man"
One   result  of  this  happy  situation   is  that  many  wealthy
men  use  investments  in  oil  as  a  means  of  evading  taxes  on
their  other  business  ventures.   Since  development   costs  may
be  used  as  an   offset   against   income  from   all   sources,  this
enables   them   to   reduce   or   eliminate  their   taxable   income
while  building  up  their  capital  assets.
The  depletion   allowance  was  originally  what  its  name  im-
plies—an   allowance,  analogous  to  depreciation,   intended  to
protect   the   investor   against-  actual  depletion.    Originally   it
was  5 percent  and  the  allowance was  nullified after  full  costs
of   the  operation  had   been  recovered  by  the, taxpayer.   But
in   1926,   Andrew  Mellon's   heyday  at  the   Treasury,   it  was
raised  to  271/2  percent  and  made  perpetual,   i.e.  the  oil  in-
vestor  keeps  on  getting  a  27i/
2
  percent  depletion   allowance
as  a  percentage  of  gross  income  long  after  he  has  recovered
his  original  capital investment.
As  a  result  of  these  tax  gimmicks,  average  corporate  in-
come  taxes  for  oil  run  about  24  percent  of  net  as  compared
with  a  general  corporate  tax  rate  of  52  percent.   The   bigger
the.  oil  company, the  lower  its  net  rate tends  to  be.
Aramco the Biggest  Offender
The  worst  offender   is  the  very  company  the  U.  S.  is  pre-
pared   to  plunge  into  war  to  defend:  Aramco,  the  Arabian
American   Oil   Company.   Carroll   (D.    Col.)    recalled   that
Senate  anti-trust  hearings  last  year  showed  that  Aramco  had
thought  up  a  new  multi-million dollar  gimmick.   It  arranged
to   disguise  a  higher  royalty  for   Ibn  Saud  as  a  wholly  de-
ductible  foreign  tax.  The  U.  S. Treasury thus  pays the royalty.
(Readers  may  remember  our   exclusive  sensational   issue  on
this  last  year).   Carroll  showed  that  in   1955  when  Aramco
earned  $724  million  dollars  it  managed  to  end  the  year  with
a  $14  million  tax  credit.
Morse  (D.  Ore.) suggested that  the  U.S.  by  treaty
with  Saudi  Arabia   "should   specify"   the  taxes  its
King can impose  to prevent  "the  kind of  subterfuges
in  which Aramco and the  Kings  of  Arabia  are engag-
ing  with  the  result  that   American  taxpayers  are
being  cheated  out  of  millions  of  dollars  of  taxes  by
Aramco."  Aramco's depletion  allowance  in  1955  was
$192  millions.
Proxmire   proposed   to   allow   the   271/2  percent   depletion
only  to  oil  operators  with  a  gross  income of  less  than  $1,000,-
000,  cutting  it  to  21  percent  for  those  under  $5,000,000  and
to  15  percent for  those  over that  amount.  Williams  demanded
a  flat  reduction  to  15  percent,   protesting   (in   the   Senatorial
understatement   of   the  year),   "anyone  with   an   income   of
$1,000,000   per  year  can  afford   to  pay  taxes."
Could Finance  the  Education  Bill
Since  most  of   the   depletion   allowance  goes  to  big  com-
panies,  the  difference  in  revenue  would  be  small.   The   Treas-
ury  would  net  an  additional  $325  millions  under  the   Wil-
liams  amendment,  $310  millions  under  the  Proxmire  amend-
ment.  Proxmire compared  this with  the  $244,300,000   needed
for  the  National  Defense  Education Act  on  which  the  Senate
was  soon  to  vote.
Nine   Republicans  voted   for   the   Proxmire   amendment—
Aiken  (Vt.),  Case  (N. /.),  Javits  (N.  Y.),   Langer  (N.  D.),
Potter    (Mich.),    Purtell    (Conn.),    Smith    (Me.),     Thye
(Minn.),   and   Wiley   (Wis.)—and   Payne   (Me.)    was  re-
corded  for  it.
The  22  Democrats  who  voted  for  the  Proxmire  amendment
were  Carroll  (Col.),  Church  (Ida.),   Clark  (Penna.),  Doug-
las  (///.),  Ervin   (N.   C.),   Gore  (Tenn.),  Green   (R.  I.),
Humphrey   (Minn.),    Jackson   (Wash.~),   Jordan   (N.   C.),
Kennedy   (Mass.),    Lausche   (Ohio),   Magnuson   (Wash.),
Mansfield    (Mont.),    McNamara   (Mich.),    Morse    (Ore.),
Neuberger   (Ore.),   O'Mahoney   (Wyo.),   Pastore   (R.  I.),
Proxmire  (Wis.),  Symington  (Mo.),   and  Williams   (Del.).
In  addition Hennings  (Mo.)   and  Kefauver  (Tenn.)  recorded
the  fact  that  they  would  have  voted  for  it  if  present.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  25,1958
Limited  Wars  Require  Limited   Aims—"Unconditional  Surrender"   Means  Nuclear   Suicide
Serious  Questions  Behind  That  Silly  Senate  Debate  Over  Surrender
As  often  happens,  late  in  a  hot,  weary  and  prolonged  ses-
sion,  Congress  has  been  in  a  morbid  mood.   The  day  before
the  Senate  unexpectedly burst  into  a  debate  on  the  question
of   surrender,  a  Jesuit  Father,   the   Rev.  Herbert   J.  Clancy,
professor  of  American  history,  Le  Moyne  College,  Syracuse,
N.  Y.,  opened  that  day's  session  of  the  House  of  Representa-
tives   with   a   far    from    cheerful   prayer.     "Dear   Heavenly
Father,"  he  asked.   "May  this  House  by  its  words  and   deeds
make  clear  to  our  enemies that  America will  never  be  intimi-
dated. ...  In  our  Judaic-Christian concept,  dignity and  free-
dom   take   precedence   over   mere   biological  survival."     Ap-
parently  suicide  is  not  a  sin  when  committed   wholesale.
Like  Father  Clancy,  our  Senators,  though  mostly  large  and
comfortable  men,  not  given  to  missing  any  meals,  are  dead-
set  against what  he  termed  "mere  biological   survival."    They
stood   up  and   were  counted   88  to  2  on  an  amendment  by
Russell   of   Georgia   forbidding    payment   for   any   surrender
studies  or  for  the  salary  of  any  official  who  even  proposes  to
enter  into  contracts  "for  the  making  of  studies  or  plans  for
the  surrender  by  the  Government   of  the  United   States  .  .  .
to  any  foreign  power  under  any  circumstances."
A  Menace Closer  Than  The  Kremlin
In    offering    the   amendment,   the    senior   Senator   from
Georgia  was gloomy—it  was one  of  those hyper-humid  Wash-
ington   August   days—about   another   menace  with   which  he
feels  himself  already  at  war.   "Some  may  contend,"  he  said,
"that  this  amendment  is  illegal   and  will   be  stricken   down
by  the  courts.   In  the  light  of  the  decisions  of  the  majority
of   the  Supreme  Court  limiting  and  hampering   and  striking
down  laws  passed  by  Congress  to  ferret  out  and  punish  those
who   advocate   the   overthrow   of   our   Government   by   force
and  violence,  it  is  entirely   likely  that  a  majority  of  the  court
may  void  this  provision  of  law.   It  is  possible  even,"  he  added
darkly,  "that  Members  of  the  Senate  who  so  vigorously  de-
fend   and   espouse   decisions   such  as  the  Nelson   case  would
likewise  applaud   such  a   decision   if   it  should   be  made  by
the  Supreme  Court."   One  half  expected   to  hear  that   some
official  had  been  suggesting  a  non-segregated  surrender.
The   squall   which   blew   up   in  the   Senate   on  Thursday,
August  14,  had  its  origin  in  an  article  published  in  the 5V.
Louis  Post-Dispatch  on  August   5  and  put  into  the  Congres-
sional  Record  on  August  8.   When  Capehart  of  Indiana  and
Dirksen   of   Illinois,   both   Republicans,   urged   that   Senator
Russell  may  have  misread  the  article,  he  was  able  to  offer  a
conclusive  rebuttal.   "Mr.  President,"  he  declared  indignantly,
"I  have  not  read  the  article.   I  did  not  know  it  was  in  exist-
ence.   I  stated  at  the  outset  of  my  remarks  that  this  amend-
ment  grew  out  of  a  statement  I  heard  on  the  radio  that  these
studies  were  in  progress. ...  I  am  not  prepared  to  debate  a
statement   by  a  gentleman   whom   I   have   never   met    [and]
that  I  have  not  yet had  the  privilege  of   reading."
All Equally  Objective
The  course  of  the  debate  indicated   that  the  whole  Senate
was  operating  on  that  same  high  level  of  impassioned  objec-
tivity.  Few seemed  to  have  noticed  the  newspaper  article  which
started   the   trouble.   Nobody   seemed   to  have   read   the  so-
called   "surrender  studies"  to  which  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dis-
patch  referred.   But  everyone  (even  Senators  Cooper  of  Ken-
tucky   and   Neuberger   of   Oregon,   the   two   intrepid    "nay"
votes  against  the  Russell  amendment)  was  against  them.   No
one  disagreed  when  Thye  of  Minnesota   said   the  American
people  were  "willing  to   fight   and   yes,  to   die,   if   need   be,
rather  than  to  surrender  to  what  seems  to  be  communistic
philosophy  and  ideology,  which  are  atheistic  in  every  sense."
There  was  no  disagreement  when  Russell  came  up   with   a
clincher.    "Mr.   President,"   he  declared,   "the   Founding  Fa-
thers  who  wrote  the  Constitution  did  not  include  in  it  any
provision   about   surrender."    Thus   surrender   was   demon-
strably  contrary  to  constitutional law  as  well  as  to  theology.
Who'll  Surrender,   and  How?
In  the  excitement, the  actual  issues  escaped  attention.    The
headlines  on  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch  article  distorted  the
content  of  the  article, as  the  article  itself  distorted  the  studies
it  purported  to  discuss.  The  headlines  implied  that  the  Pen-
tagon   was  studying  "When  the  U.  S.  Should   Surrender   in
an  All-Out  Nuclear  Attack." The  writer  had  put  together  bits
from   three  "studies."   One  was  a  Johns  Hopkins  University
study  for  the  Army  which  estimated  that  an  all-out  nuclear
attack'on  this  country  would  kill  from  15  million  to  90  mil-
lion  people.   Then   "the  director  of  another  scientific   agency
tolil  the  Post-Dispatch  that  their  studies  cast  doubt   on   the
ability  of  the  U.  S.  to  survive  and  to  continue  to  fight  after
an  attack in  which 40  million were killed."   Both  these  sources
were  discussing  survival,  not  surrender.   Indeed   how  does  a
nation  subjected  to  all-out  nuclear  attack  surrender?   By  tele-
phone  or  telegraph, when  there are  no  communications ?  Who
gives  the  order?   Who  transmits it?   How  is  it  made  known?
Masses  of  wounded,  hysterical,  hungry  people  will  be  dying
of  fallout  on  both  sides.   War  on  this  scale  is  no  Napoleonic
pageant  in  which  one  general  at  the  end  hands  over  his  sword
to  another.
Why  the U. S. Air  Force Was  Interested
This  is  the  reality  with  which  the  third  study  cited  by  the
St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch  attempts  to  deal.   It  is  a  book  called
Strategic  Surrender  by  a  writer  named   Paul  Kecskemeti.    It
is  a  Rand Corporation  research  study  for  the  Air  Force.  What
it  really  tries  to  do  is  to  answer  some  questions  which  have
been  made  familiar   by  current  talk  of  limited  war.    If   un-
limited  war  means mutual  suicide,  if  we  are  to  try  and   keep
wars  limited, then  they  can  no  longer  be  fought  for  unlimited
aims.   To  fight  for  unconditional  surrender  means  to  fight  an
all-out  war  but  this  "involves  the  risk  of  self-extermination."
It   is,  as   that   author   suggests   "not    strategy   but   lunacy."
Limited   wars  require  limited  surrenders,  limited   objectives,
compromise solutions.  Kecskemeti  concludes  that  to  make  this
possible,  "We  shall  have  to  revise  some  of  our  deeply   rooted
traditional  attitudes,  such  as  our  rejection  of  compromise  and
our  faith  in  extreme  ideal  solutions."
But  this  means  co-existence  even  after  a  war.   If  we  must
co-exist  anyway,  why  not  try  and  negotiate   differences  with-
out  war?   Surely  these  questions  were  worth  less   hysterical
discussion  than  an  overwrought  Senate  gave  them?
.1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Auguat  25,  1958
Congress  More  Tender  With  Corruptionists  Than  With  Rights   Crusaders
Pennsylvania's  First  Negro  Congressman  Votes  "No"  on  Braden  Contempt
Robert  C.  Nix  (D.  Pa.),  elected  to  Congress  June  4  from
the  4th  Congressional  District,  Philadelphia,   the  first  Negro
Congressman  from  Pennsylvania,  had  the  honor  of  being  the
one  "No"    vote  in  the  365-1  roll  call  approving  the  contempt
(itatiori  of  Carl  Braden,  the  white  Louisville,  Ky.,  newspaper-
man  who  got   into  trouble   for  helping   a  Negro  family  buy
a  house  in  a  white  neighborhood.    Of  the  three  other  Negro
members  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  Diggs  of   Michigan
answered  "present"  while  Dawson  of  Illinois  and  Powell  of
New  York  were  recorded  as  "not  voting."   O'Hara  of  Illinois
changed  his  vote  from  "yea"  to  "present"  but  no  other  white
liberal  even  went  that  far.   The   contempt  citation   of   Frank
Wilkinson,  like  Braden's  a  result  of  the  recent  Atlanta  hear-
ings  by  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee,   was
approved  without  a  roll-call  and  in  rubber-stamp  silence.   But
there  were   eight   "nays"  and   four   "presents"   and   consider-
able  debate   a  few  minutes  earlier  when   the   Bernard  Gold-
line  contempt  citation  was  approved   by  the  House  which   is
more  tender  with  corruptionists  than  crusaders  for  civil  liber-
ties  and  Negro  rights.   Incidentally, Goldfine  may  win  in  the
courts  because  he  did  swear  that  the  cash  withdrawals  he  re-
tused  to  explain  did   not  go  to  any  government  officials.    If
the   Harris  subcommittee disbelieves  him,  a  perjury   prosecu-
tion  not  a  contempt  proceeding  was  the  proper   remedy.
New  Check on Contempt Abuses
One  useful  byproduct  of  the  debate  over  the  Goldfine  con-
tempt  citation  was  the  introduction by  Curtis  (R.  Aio.)—one
<>f  the  eight  who  voted  "no"—of  a  bill  providing  that  in  the
future   all   proposed   contempt   citations   be   referred   to   the
House   Judiciary  Committee   for   study,  recommendation    and
report  before  being  acted  on  by  the  House.   Curtis  said   the
f-i'lure  of  the  Hous  thoroughly  to  consider  contempt  citations
had  led  to  such  judicial  reprimands  as  those  in  the  Watkins
and  Miller  cases.   Curtis  complained   that  at  present  it  is  pos-
sible  for  any  committee to  present  a  contempt  citation  "under
a  rule  limiting  debate  where  only  one  point  of  view  is   pre-
.sented,  and  to  secure  House   action  on  such  a  serious   matter
without   a   full   inquiry   into  all  of   the   facts."    Curtis   asked,
Healthy  Sign  on the  Left
The  United Independent-Socialist party  ticket  in  New
York   deserves  praise   for   making   a  clean  break  with
the  Communist  party  and  rejecting  the  latter's  proposal
that   all   candidates   except   Corliss   Lament   for    U.S.
Senate   withdraw   as   the   price  of   CP  support.    Such
Mipport   would  in  any  case  be  a  ruinous  incubus.   The
Worker,   the  party's  weekly   organ,   has  sunk  into  the
most  deadly  slavishness  to  Muscovite  line,  as  was  evi-
dent  again   (Aug.   17)   in  its  criticism  of   John  T.  Mc-
MauuN,  the   U.I.S.  candidate  for  Governor,  because  the
National  Guardian  of  which  he  is  editor  criticized  the
execution  of   Nagy  and  because—worst   of  sins—he   is
"cooperating   with   Trot/kyites."
"Is  the  citing  committee  an  appropriate  judge  of   its  alleged
abuse  and  disregard  of  the  rights  of  the  individual  witness?
I  submit  that  it  is  not."    It  is  too  late  in  the  session  for  action
on   this   reform,   but   it  would  be  useful   if  liberals  in  both
houses  next  year  pressed  for  such  action.  The  natural  super-
visor   in  the   Senate  would   be   its  subcommittee  on   constitu-
tional  rights.
Nightmare  by Kennedy
Anyone   inclined   to  take  seriously  the  praise   solemnly   ac-
corded   by  many  of   my  more  widely   read   colleagues  to   the
foreign   policy  speech   by  Kennedy   of   Massachusetts   in   the
Senate  August   14  should  read   it  for  themselves   in  the   Con-
gressional  Record.    It  is  a  piece  of  wicked  hysterical  drivel,
echoing  Lt.  Gen.  James  M.  Gavin's  alarmist  build-up  in   Life
Magazine  (Aug.    1 1 )   for   higher   armament   spending.    Ken-
nedy  said  "Hysteria  will  not  help"  and  then  went  on  to   pic-
ture   the   Russians   as   ready   soon    (if   certain   jjs   occur)    to
"destroy     8*>  percent  of   our   industry,  43   of   our   50   largest
cities   [Kennedy  doesn't   say  which  7  would   escape  or    how]
and  most  of  the  world's  population"   and  thus  able  "to  seize
world   power   overnight."    Just   what   they   would    do   with
such  a  world   radioactive  cemetery  or  how  the  Russians  could
themselves   survive   in   it   was   not   explained   by    Kennedy's
nightmarish  ghost-writers.
We  Are  Publishing  These  Last  Two  Weeks  of  August  Because  of  the  Special   VIS  General  Assembly  on  Mid-East
IF. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ...........
City     ............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street    ..........
City     ............
Shall  we  sent
Weekly,   56J8  Nebraska
Washington
(or  enter)   my  avb  for  the
Zone           St
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr
gift   announcement?     Yes
Ave.,  N.  W.
15,  D.  C.
enclosed  $5:*
)  additional:
8/45/58
D    No D
5618  Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.   C.
Post  Office
F    Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washincton,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Monday*  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5<il8 Nebraska Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington  15, D.  C.
Ai.   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
K   lu  the   V.  S.;  SB Hi  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED