I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958sep08.pdf

============================================================

At   the Supreme   Court,  P.  2
The   Booby-Traps   and  Gimmicks   Which   Endanger   A  Nuclear  Test   Suspension   Pact,  Page  Three
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  35
SEPTEMBER   8,  1958
<oi       WASHINGTON, D.   C.
15  CENTS
Why   the  Chinese  7th  Fleet   Is  In   Long  Island   Sound
China's  first  line  of  defense  is  on  Long  Island.    We   are
honor  bound   to  support  on  that  island  the  only  legitimate
American   government,  that   of   Herbert   Hoover,   who   was
forced  from  the  mainland  by  Democratic  subversion   in    1932.
Staten   Island  admittedly   is  in   a   different   category.    Our
Congress,  in  authorizing  war  at  any  time  in  defense  of  Long
Island,  wisely  left  it  to  the  discretion  of  the  President  to  de-
termine  at  the  time  of  any  attack  whether  it  was  also  in  our
interest  to  defend  Staten  Island  and  Martha's Vineyard.
Still  Long  for  His  Return
Since  that  declaration  by  Congress   both   offshore   islands
have  become  more  important  to  the  defense  of  Long  Island
and   to   Mr.   Hoover's   hope   of   reconquering  the   mainland
where  his  picture  is  said  to  be  displayed  openly  at  the  Bank-
er's   Club,  the Union League and  other  popular  rallying  places.
Mr.  Hoover's  Republicans have  deployed  about  a  third  of
their  strength  on  Staten  Island  and  Martha's  Vineyard.  From
the  former  they  have  cut  off almost  all  shipping  into  the  Port
of  New  York  while  the  forces  on  Martha's  Vineyard  harass
the  Port  of   Boston.
An  Unfriendly  Response
The  unfriendly  nature of  the  Democratic  regime  has  been
demonstrated   by  its   response   to   these   developments.    The
Voice  of  America  has  been  threatening  Long  Island.   Staten
Island  has  been  bombarded  from  the  mainland.
Wars  have often  occurred  in  the  past  because  great  Powers
failed   to  make  clear  the  point   at  which  they  would   fight.
We  have  put  the  regime  in  Washington  on  notice  that  any
attack  on  Long  Island  would  be  an  attack  on  China.
At  the  same.time  we  have  no  intention  of  making  Wash-
ington's  military  planning  easier  by  letting   it  know  in  ad-
vance  what  we  will  do  if  the  Americans  try  to  seize  the off-
shore  islands.   We  are  also  going  to  keep  them  guessing  as
to  whether  American  aggression   against   Staten   Island   will
bring  massive   atomic   retaliation  against  New  York.    Some
nervousness  in  other  countries  is  we  suppose  natural  but  the
free  world  may  rest  assured  that  all  these  questions  will  be
answered  in  good  time  by  our  great  leader,  who  is  keeping
in  close  touch  with  the  situation  from  the  Peking  golf  links.
Can  170,000,000  People  Be  "Ignored"?
In  the  process of  determining  its  policy  toward  the  United*
States,  China  has  taken  into  account  the  various   statements
and  arguments  advanced  by  proponents  of  extending  diplo-
matic  recognition  to  Washington.   One  of  the  most  commonly
advanced   reasons   for   recognition    is  that   reality   must   be
•  Any   resemblance  between   what  follows  anrt   the   wording  of   the
U.    S.   policy    statement   on   non-recognition    of    Communist    China
(August  0)  Is  not  purely  coincidental.
1  0
Statesmen  at   Work
"Our   first   line  of  defense  is  on  Formosa."
—Harry  S.  Truman.
"As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  they  can  keep  on  guess-
ing."
—James  C.  Hagerty.
"I  think  that  there  can  be  no  atomic—that  there  are,
it   is—I  shouldn't  say,  'I  think.'   It  is  not  possible  to
use  these  weapons  except  with  the  specific  authority
of  the  President.
"Q.  I  thought,  perhaps,  isn't  there  an  exception  in
the  case  of  an  immediate  threat  to  the  command?
"A. ...  if  it  is  possible,  I  will  take  a  look  again,
because  there  is  one  exception,  but  I  don't  believe  it
mentions  atomic  weapons:  that  if   the  United  States
itself  or  any  of  its  armed  forces  are  under  attack, that
they  can  use  measures  necessary  for  their  defense,  but
I  would  have to  make  certain.   My memory  is  not quite
that  good  this morning."
—Elsenhower  Press  Conference,  August  27.
1  4
"recognized"   and  170,000,000  people  cannot  be  "ignored."
While  superficially   appealing,   both   statements    themselves
overlook  the  realities  of  the  situation.   Chinese  policy  is,  of
course,  based  on  full  appreciation  of  the  fact  that  the  Ameri-
can  Democratic  regime  is currently  in  control  of  the  mainland.
Our  attitude  toward  the  people   of  the  United   States  re-
mains  what  it  historically  has  been,  one  of  sympathetic   un-
derstanding;  our  Confucian  missionaries  long  labored   among
them  and  are  ready  to  return  any  time  they  overturn   their
present  Godless  and  materialistic  regime.   It  is  an  earnest  of
our  enduring  friendship  that  Long  Island  sits  on  the  Security
Council  of  the  United  Nations,  wielding a  veto  as  one  of  the
five  great  powers  of  the  earth.
Our  Intelligence  Agents  Tell  Us...
Moreover,  the  People's Republic of  China  is  convinced  that
the  American  Democratic  regime  does  not  represent  the  true
will  of  the  American  people  but  the  fruits  of  a  conspiracy  by
Franklin   D.   Roosevelt  and   his   successors;   our   intelligence
agents,  who  watch  events  in  the  interior  closely,  tell  us  that
guerrilla  forces  of  the  NAACP  led  by a  Negro  named  Faubus
have  already  seized  control   of   Arkansas.
Thus  our  policy  of  withholding   recognition   is  in  actuality
in  the  ultimate  interests  of  the  American  people.   China  holds
the  view  that  Democracy's  rule  in  the  United  States  is  not
permanent  and  that  it  one  day  will  pass.
By withholding  recognition  from  Washington,  and  keeping
our  Embassy  in  Mr.  Hoover's  splendid   capital   in  Rockville
Center,  we  hope  to  hasten  that  passing.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  8, 1958
Why   Didn't   Attorney   General   Rogers   (Unlike  Brownell)   Sign  That   School  Brief?
More  Eloquence  on  Little  Rock  Outside  the  Court  Than  Within
Nothing   said  within  the  crowded  Supreme  Court  chamber
during  the  Little  Rock  appeal  was as moving  as the  line  which
waited  outside.   Within,  except  for  certain  deeper   reverbera-
tions  in  the   Solicitor  General's   argument,  the   tone   of   the
pleadings   was  conversational,  almost   casual;   the    transcript
(so   enterprisingly   published   next   day  by  the   New    York
Times)  had  an  almost bumbling formlessness.   The  eloquence
was  in  the  quiet  line  outside.   It  began  to  form  at  3:30  a.  m.
when  a  local  Negro  lawyer,  with  a  name  of  tragic  memory,
Matthew  Till,  began  the  long  wait  in  the  dark  at  the  top  of
the  broad  white  marble  stairs.   He  was  joined  a  half   hour
later  by  a  local  Negro  preacher,  the  Rev.  Samuel  W.  Clark.
The  third  in  line,  the first white  man,  appeared  at  5:30 a.  m.
He  was  Leo  Roos,  a  lawyer  from  New  Orleans,  who  told  me
later   he  was  for   integration.   The   fourth   to  arrive  was  a
Negro  timid  about  giving  his  name.   The  fifth  and  sixth  in
line  were  from  Arkansas,  white,  two  young  men,  students  at
the   State  University  in  Fayetteville,  from   the   northwestern
hill  country  of  the  State,  and  both  for  integration.   By 7  a.  m.
there  were  50  people  waiting.   By  11  a.  m.,  when  the  doors
of   the  courtroom  were  finally  opened   to  admit  a  scant  50,
there   were  almost  600   in   line,   somewhat  more  than   half
Negro.   Though  the  police  kept  telling  them  it  was  hopeless
to  wait,  at  least  20Q  were  still  standing  there  at  2  p.  m.  They
stayed   on   as  if   their  mere  presence  might,   as  lawyers  say,
pray  the  Court.   It  was  a  grave  assemblage,  and  one  felt  shy
in  looking  it  over,  knowing  what  was  in  the  heart  of  every
Negro  there,  and  most  of   the  whites.   It  was  as  if  we  all
waited   for   the  final  promulgation   of   a  new  Emancipation,
this  time  for  children  and  from  a  no  less  cruel  bondage,   that
they  might  no  longer   be  made  to  feel  ashamed,  from  that
very  first  day  on  the  way  to  school,  separate  from  others  and
unequal,  irrevocably  less  than  other  men.
Afraid  of  Being  Identified?
In  an  editorial  the  morning  after  the  argument,  the   New
York  Times  noted  that  President  Eisenhower  "has  been  criti-
cized  for  what  seemed  to  be  a  justification  of  delay."   But  it
found  comfortingly,  after  what  must  have  been  a  prolonged
search,  that  he  "has,  however,  identified  himself"  with   the
brief  filed  by  the  Department  of  Justice.   The  identification
would  seem  to  be  less  than  letter  perfect   since  Mr.   Eisen-
hower  Wednesday  suggested  that  the  Court  should  go  slower
while  the   brief   filed   next  morning  by  the   Department   of
Justice  urged  it  to  go  faster;  if  the  Court  had  followed   the
recommendation   of  the  Department  it  would   have   decided
the  case  on  the  merits  at  once  without  further  argument.    It
seems  that  one  cannot  even  be  sure  that  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral,  much  less  the  President,  is  identified  with  the  Depart-
ment's  brief.  Ordinarily, in  important  appeals  to  the  Supreme
Court,   the   Attorney   General's  name  appears   on   the   brief
along  with  the  other  lawyers in  the  Department  who  worked
on  it.   In  this  case  the  brief  was  signed  by  J.  Lee  Rarikin  as
Solicitor  General,  by Oscar  H.  Davis,  Philip  Elman  and  Ralph
S.  Spritzer  as  assistants  to  the  Attorney  General,  and  by  Sey-
mour  Farber.   The  name  of  William  P.  Rogers  as  Attorney
General  was  missing.   Curious,  we  phoned   the  Justice   De-
partment  to  ask  whether  Herbert  Brownell  as  Attorney   Gen-
eral  had  signed  the  two  briefs  filed  by  the  Department  on
argument  and  reargument  of  the  original   school  four  years
ago.   Those  earlier  briefs,  reluctantly  exhumed  from  the files,
showed  they  were  signed  by  Attorney  General  Brownell  as
well   as  by  the   Solicitor  General   and   his   aides.   Did   Mr.
Rogers  think  it  impolitic  to  identify  himself  too  closely  with
his  own  Department's   brief?
How  Not  to  Deal  With  Bank  Robberies
Mr.  Thurgood  Marshall  complained   to  the  Supreme  Court
that  you don't  deal  with  bank  robberies  by  closing  down  the
banks.   The  most  striking  sections  of  the  government's  brief
were  those  which  showed  how  few,  how   easily   identifiable
and  how  readily  jailed  were  the  "robbers"  of  the  public  peace
inside  and  outside  the  Central  High  School  in  Little  Rock.
The  Solicitor  General  argued  that  while  it  might  be  true  that
there  was  "deep-seated   popular   opposition"   to   integration
in  Little  Rock,  the  active  instigators  of  trouble  were  a  hand-
ful   of  individuals  and  organizations.    They   were  named  by
the  School  Board  in  response  to  interrogatories  in  the  District
Court  and  could  be  dealt  with  by  injunction   and   contempt
proceedings  as  were  similar  elements  earlier  when  integration
was  successfully   enforced  in  Hoxie,   Arkansas.   In  the  same
way,  the  government's   brief  points  out,  evidence  in  the  lower
court  shows  it  was  a  small  group  of  no  more  than  25  stu-
dents  who  caused  the  trouble  within  the  school.   Only  two
of   these  trouble-makers   were  expelled.   "There  is  not   the
slightest   suggestion,"  the  brief   said,  "that  the  colored   chil-
dren  did  anything  to  incite  violence  or  disorderly   conduct."
The  proper  remedy  within  and  without  the  school  "was  one
directed  at  the  obstructionists,  not  in  their  favor."   What  the
government's  brief  did  not  say  was  that  the  Federal  govern-
ment  might  have  moved  in  boldly  and   tamed   the  mob  by
punishing   the   ringleaders   for   interfering   with   the   orders
of  a  Federal  court.   To  say  that  would  have  been  to  indict
Mr.  Rogers  and  Mr.  Eisenhower.   That  would  be  too  much
to  ask  even  of  the  bravest  Solicitor  General.
Fulbright's  Plea  for  Delay
We  read  with  close  attention  the  brief  filed  in  the  Supreme
Court  by  Senator  Fulbright,  who  has  the  unhappy   role  of
being   an  Oxford-educated   intellectual  representing  a.  South-
ern  State.   We  wondered  what  he  would  say  in  asking  the
Court  to  grant  Little  Rock  more  delay.   His  brief  was  literate
and  scholarly,  almost  eloquent  in  its  counsel  of  despair.   He
warned  against  the  "congenital  optimism"  with  which  Ameri-
cans  generally  confront  social  problems.   He  emphasized  the
irrationality    and    "certain    pathological     aspects"     in    the
Southern  situation,   pictured   both  races  as  prisoners   (though
he   did   not   say,  of   course,   that   only  one   is  imprisoned   in
inferior  status)  and  quoted  the  philosopher  Morris  Cohen  on
the  foolishness  of  Cato who  "would  adhere  to  the  law  though
the  Republic  be  thereby   destroyed."   He  thought  the  prob-
lem  of  integration   "more   likely   to  yield  to  the   slow   con-
version  of  the  human  heart."   The  underdog,  in  short,  must
go  on  being  patient  until  his  masters  have  miraculously  been
converted;   the  oppressed   must  walk   softly   because  the  op-
pressor,  if  disturbed,  becomes  violent  and  irrational.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  8,1958
The   Booby   Traps   and   Gimmicks  Which   Endanger  A  Test  Suspension   Agreement
Ike's  Little  Noticed  Admission  We   Still  Adhere  to  the  Arms  "Package"
The  astute  James  Reston  of  the  New   York   Times   asked
Mr.   Elsenhower  at  press  conference  August   28  whether   in
the  light  of  the  agreement  by  the  scientists at  Geneva  on  test-
ing  we  had  revised  our  disarmament policy  "or  are  we  still
standing  on  the  last  policy  placed  before  the  Russians  about
a  year  ago?"
Too   little   attention   has  been   paid   to  this   question   and
answer.   Mr.  Eisenhower  replied  that  "the   principle  of   the
policy  has  not  been  abandoned  at  all."    We  were  prepared
to  stop  tests  for  a  year  "but  we did  couple  that  with  .  .  .  the
policy  .  .  . that we  believe  in,  that  the  cessation  of  tests  must
be  related  to  the  cessation  of  production  of  this  material  for
weapons  purposes,  and  even  further   on  to  that   eventually."
This  confirms  our  story  last  week,  already  on  the  press  be-
fore   that  conference,  which  warned  that  U.   S.  policy  was
still  adhering  to  the   complex  package  proposal   of   August,
1957,  and  that  we  were  still  unwilling  to   separate  testing
from  other  issues  as  Stassen  so  long  urged.
The  Gimmicks  in  Small  Type
This  was  indeed  clear  from  the  text  of  Mr.  Eisenhower's
statement  of  August  22  on  suspending  tests.   The   offer   was
for   a  year-to-year   suspension  conditional  on   (1)    our  con-
tinued  satisfaction  with  the  working  of  the  inspection  system
and   (2)   that  "satisfactory  progress  is  being  made  in  reach-
ing  agreement  on  and  implementing   major   and   substantial
arms  control  measures  such  as  the   United   States  has  long
sought."    The  linkage  with  the  broader   disarmament   pack-
age  was  made  unmistakable  when  Mr.  Eisenhower. went  on
to  say that  any  agreement  en  testing  would  be  significant  only
"if  it  leads  to  other  and  more  substantial  agreements   relating
to  limitation  and  reduction  of  fissionable  material  for   weap-
ons  and  to  other  essential  phases  of  disarmament."   This  was
the  small  type  not  visible  in  the  headlines.
Testing  Alone  Not   Significant?
This  deserves  a  close  reading.    It  means  first  of  all   that
U.  S.  policy  still  regards  a  cessation  of  testing  as  of  no  sig-
nificance  in  itself  but  only  as  a  first  step  toward  other  agree-
ments.   This  runs  counter  to  the  accepted  scientific view  that
testing  in  itself   adds  to  the  health   and   genetic  hazards  of
mankind.   It  runs  counter  to  the  widely  accepted  observation
that  a  cessation  of  testing  would  have  value  in  lessening  ten-
sion  and   in  stopping  the  development   of   new  horrors   for
human  slaughter.   It  runs  counter,  finally,  to  the  view  held
by  many  in  the  Senate  and  elsewhere  that  since  the  U.  S,  is
ahead   in  the  number  of   tests  and   in   nuclear   weapons   de-
velopment,   it  stands  to  gain   an   advantage   by  cessation   of
tests  now.   A   thorough   and   continued   national   debate   on
these  issues  is  important  if  agreement  is  to  be  reached.
.     If   progress  is  to  be  made,   it  is  also  important   to   bring
pressure  to  bear  for  a  breaking  up  of  the  disarmament   "pack-
age."    Not  that  the  other  objectives  of  the  package  are  not
worthwhile  aims,  especially  the  cessation  of  nuclear   produc-
tion   for   weapons   purposes.    But   if   each   step  depends   on
every  other,  we  open  the  way  tp  a  circular  wrangle  made  to
order  for  those  who  do  not  want  any  kind  of   disarmament
agreement   at  all.   With  this   danger  in  mind  it  is   essential
for  those  interested  to  go  back  and  study  the  Western  pack-
Remember?  The  Nuclear  Giye-Away  Bill
Was  to  Win  British   Acceptance
Of  Test   Cessation?
"It  is  in  the  general   interest   to  stop  all  testing  im-
mediately.    Yet   the   British    Government   refuses   to
recognize  its  special  responsibility  in  nuclear  disarma-
ment.  Indeed,  the  suggested  date  for  negotiations   [Oct.
31]  was  specifically  chosen  to  allow  ourselves  to  carry
out  our  new  series  of  tests  in  the  Pacific."
—The  London Observer, August  24.
age  proposal  as  published  August  29,  1957.   To  study  it  is
to  see  how  closely  the   new  proposal   by  the   President   re-
sembles  the  old  one.    Last  year's  proposal   called   for   a  12-
month  cessation  of  testing  from   the  date  of   a  general  dis-
armament  convention, provided  agreement  had  been  reached
on  inspection.   At  the  end  of   12  months,  there  was  to  be
another   12-month   suspension   if   each   of   the   parties   was
satisfied  with  preparations  for  the  more  difficult   task  of  set-
ting  up  an  inspection  system  to  police  cessation  of  nuclear
production  for  weapons  purposes.   If  no  such  inspection  sys-
tem  had  been  established  2  years  after  the  disarmament  con-
vention   had   gone  into   effect,   everybody   would   be   free   to
begin  testing  again.
Testing  Possible  Indefinitely
The   framers  of  the  package  were  so  anxious  to  continue
testing  that  the  August,  1957,  plan  even  envisages  continued
agreement   on   other   aspects   of   disarmament   while   testing
continues  indefinitely.    Section  V  E  of  the  formal   proposals
provides   for   continued  testing   (if   cessation   of   production
cannot  be  policed)  subject  only  to  the  requirement  that  each
testing  nation  announce  in  advance  the  dates  for  each  testing
series  and  the  amount  of  energy  to  be  released,  "provide   for
limited  observation  .  .  .  and  limit  the  amount  of  radioactive
material  to  be  released  into  the  atmosphere."   Thus  from  the
Russian  point  of  view  they  might  be  opening   their   country
to   international   inspection,   and   therefore    to    intelligence
preparations  for  bombing  in  a  future  war,  only  to  have  these
escape  clauses  used  to  resume  testing  two  years  later.
Full  of  Booby   Traps
One  more point  needs  to  be noticed.   Mr.  Eisenhower  spoke
in  his  formal  proposal   of   August   22  this  year   (as   quoted
above)  of  linking  nuclear  disarmament  and  cessation  of  test-
ing  "to  other  essential  phases  of  disarmament."   All  this  was
spelled   out   in  detail  by  the   package  proposal   of   last   year.
But  in  that  package,  progress  on  non-nuclear  disarmament  is
made  dependent  on  "progress  toward  the  solution  of  political
issues"   (I,  D,  2).   These  political  issues  are  nowhere  speci-
fied.   This  could  be  utilized  to  make  reunification   of   Ger-
many on  Western  terms or  a  Formosa  settlement  on  our  terms
a  pre-condition  for  disarmament.
In  short,  this  package  has  been  ingeniously  equipped   with
so  many  booby-traps  and   escape   hatches   that   its  abandon-
ment  would  seem  to  be  a  necessary  first  condition  for   prog-
ress.   The   package   seems  to  have   been   constructed   by  Mr.
Duties  with  no  tool  other  than  a  legal  corkscrew.
;i  4  ,i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  8,1958
New   York   State's   Election   Campaign   Opens  A  New  Page  in  U.  S.   History
For  the  First  Time  A  Rich  Boy,   Too,   Can  Hope  to  Be  President
The  earlier  leaders  of  our  country  were  gentlemen   born,
members  of  the  landed  gentry  in  the  South  or  of  the  wealthy
merchant  and  professional  classes  of  the  North.   It  was  not
until  Jackson's  election  in   1828  that  the  country  first  picked
a  President  who  had  come  up  from  poverty.   With  his  elec-
tion  and  the  abolition  of  property-owning  restrictions  on  the
right   to   vote,   American  politics   became   democratic.    The
Whigs,  spokesmen  for  the  rich  and  well-born,  got  back  into
power  in  1836  by  nominating the  first  Presidential  candidate
who  could  boast  of  having  been  born  in  a  log  cabin   while
their  campaign  orators  attacked  Jackson's  heir,  Van  Buren,
as  an  Eastern  aristocrat who  put  cologne  on  his whiskers.
From  "TR"  to  Truman
For  more  than  a  century  thereafter  it  has  not  only  been  an
axiom  of  our  politics  that  any  poor  boy  might  become  Presi-
dent  but  that  no  rich  boy  could.   In  the  world's  most  suc-
cessful  capitalist  system,  no  capitalist  was  ever  elected  Presi-
dent.   The  masters  of  the  great  American  fortunes  not  only
had  to  keep  out  of  sight  politically,  but  were  the   whipping
boys   of   every   campaign.    From   Teddy   Roosevelt   through
Woodrow    Wilson    to    Truman's    whistle-stop    campaigns,
"malefactors   of  great  wealth"   and   "big   business"   were  fa-
vored   targets.
The  current  campaign   in  New   York   State  opens   a  new
page  in  our  politics.   The  heads  of  both  major  party  tickets
are  multi-millionaire  capitalists  while  the   surviving  vermi-
form  appendix  of  the  Left,  a  new  "United   Socialist"  ticket,
must  be  content  with  a  mere  millionaire.   The  names  which
head  all  three  tickets  were  dirty  words  in  American  politics
a  generation  ago.    Rockefeller  and  Harriman   were   leading
"robber  barons"  while  Lamont  was  Thomas  W.  Lament,  the
right  hand  man  of  the  No.   1  ogre,  J.  P.  Morgan   himself,
there  in  his  lair  at  Broad  and  Wall.    John   D.'s   grandson,
Nelson,  and  Edward  H.  Harriman's  son,  Averill,  in  running
for   the  Governorship  of  New  York  are  also  running   hope-
fully  for  the  Presidency  of  the  United  States.   That  a  Rocke-
feller  and  a  Harriman  could  hope  to  be  President  would  have
been  incredible  a  half   century  ago,  as  would  their  politics.
A  Great  Liberal  Judge  Steps  Down
On  October  20,  his  70th  birthday,  Henry   W.  Edger-
ton  will  step  down  as  Chief  Judge  of  the  U.  S.  Court
of  Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia  in  accordance
with  a  new  law  requiring   all  chief  judges  to  give  up
administrative  duties  at  the  age  of  70.
Fortunately    Judge    Edgerton    will   remain   on   the
bench.    He   was   appointed    to   the   Circuit    Court   by
Franklin   D.   Roosevelt   in   1937.    FDR   never   made   a
wiser  judicial  choice.   Judge  Edgerton  has   been  one
of  the  great  liberal  judges  of  our  time,  steadfast  even
during   the   worst   days  of   the   cold   war   and   of   Mc-
Carthyism.
Judge    Edgerton's    eloquent    dissenting    opinion    in
liarsky   v.   U.   S.   was   long   an   isolated   landmark   of
judicial  protest   on  First  Amendment   grounds  against
the   House    Un-American   Activities    Committee.    The
Supreme   Court's   Watkins  decision,   though   much  less
clear,   has   since   made   it   law.    Publication   of    Judge
Edfrerton's  main  opinions   in  book   form  is  long   over-
due;  they  belong  to  the  literature  of  the  free  society.
We  respectfully   salute   the  Judge's  birthday   and   hope
lie  will  remain  many  years  more  on  the   bench.
For  while  they,  unlike  Thomas  Lamont's  son,  Corliss,  have
never   been  called   upon   to  deny  membership  in   the   Com-
munist  party,  both Rockefeller and  Harriman  pride  themselves
on  being  within  their  respective  parties  left  of  center.
The  change  is  not  just  a  miracle  of  press  agentry,  though
Madison    Avenue  has   tried   hard   to   metamorphose   them
nauseatingly  into  "Rock"   and   "Ave."    If  no  hot  breath  of
protest  any  longer pursues their names, it  is largely because  the
New  Deal  not  only  succeeded  in  creating  a  newly   satisfying
security  for  the  poorer  classes  but  in  demonstrating that  the
kings  of  capital,  too,  had  to  become  constitutional  monarchs
if  they  were not  to  lose  their  thrones.  It  is  because the  under-
privileged  no  longer  feel—or  are—so  underprivileged  that  a
Rockefeller  can  be  an  object  of  curiosity  rather  than  hate.   In
this  respect,  though  we  dislike  both  major  party  tickets,  we
welcome  the  change.   Whatever   helps  men  to  live  together
with  less hatred  is all  to  the  good.
Norman  Thomas  and  IFS  to  Speak  at  Nuclear  Rally,  Judson  Church, 55  Wash.  Square, NYC,  8  P.  M.,  Sept.  8
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
af«
o
pf
City     ................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........Zone............State...................
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
9/6/B8
City     ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  Q   No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  18TO.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15, D. C.
An  independent   weeWy  published   and  edited   by   I,   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
$6  in  the  U.  S.;  16  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED