I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jan20.pdf

============================================================

How  Washington   and  Moscow  Together  Helped  Kill  Off  The  Daily  Worker,  See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  3
JANUARY  20,  1958."><       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Where Will We Put God When We Control Outer  Space?
While  the  ordinary  American  has  been  thinking  about  the
relatively   simple   problem   of   containing   the   Russians,   our
intrepid   political  leaders,  ranging   far   ahead,   set  more  am-
bitious   goals   as  Congress   opened.    The   Republicans,   under
Eisenhower,  promised  at  last  to  subdue  the  Pentagon,  though
the  President  was  discreetly  vague  in  his  State  of  the  Union
message  on  just  how  he  proposed  to  do  it.   The   Democrats,
under  Lyndon  Johnson,   issuing  a  State  of  the  Cosmos  mess-
age,  proposed  that  America  conquer  and  control  outer  space.
Not  all  the  details  of  this  Bold  New  Program  have  yet  been
filled  in  of  course.   One  that  has  bothered  us  at  night  since
Lyndon  Johnson  spoke  is—Where  do  we put  God?  What  do
we  do  when  the  SAC  has  reached  the  Pearly  Gates?   Do  we
set  up  a  reservation,  as  we  did  for  the  Cherokees  and   the
Sioux  on  our  sweep  westward?   Or  will  He  become—as  Gos-
pel   says  the  Son  began—a  Displaced   Person?   When   every
nook  of  the  Heavens  is  patrolled  by  our  astronauts,  their  very
latest   thermonuclear   boom-boom   cocked   and   ready,  so   that
no  unidentified  flying  object  dare  lurk  anywhere,  where  then
will  the  Heavenly  Father  dwell  and  the  Heavenly  Choir  sing?
A  Chance That May Not  Come Again
While  Johnson  wants  a  race  for  the  control  of  outer  space,
the  President  in  his  letter  to  Premier  Bulganin  called  for  an
agreement  that  outer  space  should   be  used  only  for  peaceful
purposes.   This  could  be  the  beginning  of  a  sharp   difference
in  policy  between  the  two  parties.   The  Intercontinental  Bal-
listic  Missile  uses  outer  space,  and  the  Russians  are  ahead  in
the  ICBM  field  but  they  cannot  have  a  monopoly  long.   The
President's  proposal  offers  a  chance  to  prevent  what  will  oth-
erwise  become  the  most  terrible  and  the  most  costly  arms  race
in  man's  history.   Beyond  the  missile  lies  the  manned   rocket
and  beyond  that  the  armed  space  station.   Technology   seems
to   have   robbed   our   generation   of   sanity.   When   a   sober,
pedestrian  gentleman  from  Texas  like  Lyndon  Johnson  begins
to  talk  of  the   need  to  be  "the   masters  of   infinity,"  as  he
did  in  his  address  to  the  Democratic  caucus,  we  are  listening
to  the  poetry  of  paranoia.    Consider  that  no  nation  has  ever
succeeded  in  dominating  the  open  seas,  yet  Johnson  seriously
proposes  that  we try  to  control  outer  space.   It  should  give  the
Russians  a  foretaste  of  what  to  expect  if  they  do  not  set  out
to  make  the  most  of  the  President's  offer  to  prevent  an  outer
space  arms  race.   This  is  the  most  statesmanlike  portion  of
the  President's   letter.
A Victory  for Stassen
The   letter   itself   must  be   seen   as  a  defeat  for   Secretary
Dulles.   It  exposes  as  hollow   the  line  the  State  Department
has  been  putting  out  that  Stassen  is through  and  that  the  Bul-
ganin  letters   would   be  given   a  brush-off.    On  January   10,
just  two  days  before  the  Eisenhower  letter  to  Bulganin  was
made  public,  Secretary  Dulles  said  to  a  reporter,   "You   ask
whether,  if  they  [i.e.  the  arms  talks]  are  resumed,  our  pro-
posals  would   be  substantially   different   from  what   they   are
now.    I  would  say  the  answer  to  that  question  is  probably
'no'."   The   "probably"   indicates  that   Mr.   Dulles  was  not
quite  certain  and  the  text  of  the  letter   shows  that   he  was
wrong,  just  as  he  was  wrong  in  his  answer  to  another   and
related  question  at  the  same  conference.  When  he  was  asked
whether  we  had  any  plans  to  "take  the  initiative"  in  arms
negotiations,  the  Secretary replied  "I  believe  that  the  program
which  we  presented  in  London  represented  very  much  of  an
initiative."
Where Dulles  Was  Wrong
But  the  letter,  after  a  long  and  stale  rehash  of  the  German
and  East  European  questions  obviously  from  the  pen  of  Mr.
Dulles  himself,  did  take  the  initiative on  controlling  an  outer
space  arms  race.   It  made  a  new  offer   in  the  field  of   nuclear
disarmament,   offering   to  match  any  Russian  withdrawal   of
fissionable  material  from  weapon  stockpiles  with  a  quantita-
tively  larger  contribution  from  our  own   (presumably   much
larger)  stockpile.   It  also  proposed  the  establishment  of  tech-
nical  groups  to  study  the  problem  of  inspection  and   control
which  "could,  if  you  wish,  be  undertaken  without   commit-
ment  as  to  ultimate  acceptance,  or  as  to  the   interdependence,
of   the  propositions  involved."    This  is  a  concession   to   the
Russian  desire  to  separate  the  question  of  a  cessation  of  test-
ing  from  the  more  complex  problem  of  an  end  to  the  manu-
facture  of   nuclear  arms.   The   Eisenhower  letter   also   opens
the  door  a  little  on  an  ultimate  agreement  to  end  testing  al-
together,   though   couched   in  terms  too  vague  to   determine
whether  it  really  differs  from  the  London  proposals.   But  in
one   respect   the   letter   does   differ   strikingly   from   the   final
proposal  put  forward  by  the  Western  powers  at  London.    It
no  longer  insists  on  certain  unnamed  political  solutions,  ob-
viously  German  unification   and  perhaps  also  a  new  formula
on  Formosa,  as  the  conditions  for  an  end  to  the  arms  race.
The   President's   letter   was  an   unexpected   victory  for   those
who  want  to  see  talks  and  a  relaxation  of   tension.
A Conservative Budget
Considering  the  realities  of  American  politics  at  this  mo-
ment   and   the   scare  campaigns   in   the   Gaither   and   Rocke-
feller  reports,  the  Eisenhower  budget  must  be  regarded   as  a
rear  guard   action  on  behalf   of  fiscal  and  military   conserva-
tism.   In  these   forces   at  the  moment  lie  our  only  hope  of
peace.   Unfortunately  the  bulk  of  the  labor  movement  is  for
a  step-up  in  the  arms  race  and  many  liberals  are  so  blinded
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,. January   20,1958
Rockefeller  Crowd  Behind  Acheson's  Attack  on  Kennan's  Plea  for  Neutral  Reich
Ike  Fighting  A  Rearguard  Action  for  Military  and  Fiscal  Conservatism
(Continued  from  Page   One)
by  distaste  for   Eisenhower  and   his  entourage  that   they   are
prepared  to  join  hands  with  the  aviation  and  electronics   lob-
by,  and  with  the  Standard  Oil-Chase  National   Bank  crowd,
in  panicky  demands  for  higher   military  expenditures   and   a
"tougher"  diplomatic   policy.    In  this  perspective,   the  Eisen-
hower  budget  holds  arms  increases  to  a  moderate  level,  makes
only  minor  cuts  in  social  services  and  still  fights  against  put-
ting  the  country  on  a  full  war  economy.   The  coming  weeks
will   see  a   full-scale   revolt  from   the   Pentagon   against   this
budget,  with  strong   support  from  the  Democrats   and   those
sections  of  big  business  and  high  finance  which  want  no  re-
laxation  of  tension.
Behind  Acheson's Attack on Kennan
The  Rockefeller's Chase  National  Bank  showed  its  hand  in
Dean  Acheson's  sharp  statement  disavowing  Democratic  sup-
port   for  George  Kennan's  proposals   to  neutralize  Germany
in   return   for   its  unification   on   the   basis  of   free   elections.
This   statement  was  arranged   by  the   American   Council   on
Germany,  Inc.,  of  which  George  N.   Shuster  is  president  and
Mrs.  John  J.  McCloy,  vice-chairman.  Mr.  McCloy,  formerly
American  High  Commissioner  for  Germany,  is  now  head  of
Chase  National   which  has  always  had  extensive  interests  in
Germany,  collaborating  with  the  Hitler  regime financially be-
fore  the  war.   The  American  Council  is  a  right  wing  sound-
ing  board  for  the  views  favored   by  Chase  National.    It  fol-
lowed   up   the   Acheson   statement   by   soliciting  Democratic
Senators   and   asking   them   to   issue   statements    supporting
Acheson.   In  this  it  failed.   There  was  a  good  deal  of  resent-
ment   among   liberal  Democrats   because   Acheson   purported
to  speak  on  behalf  of  the  party  though   they  were  not  con-
sulted   in  advance.    But  while   Senator   Humphrey  gave   the
New   York   Post  (Jan.   13)   a  statement  praising  Kennan   for
performing   a  useful   public  service  in  opening   a  public  de-
bate  about  the  future  of  Germany,  neither  he  nor  any  other
liberal  Democrat  would  venture  to  endorse   Kennan's   views.
Divided Germany Preferred
The  Rockefeller  Standard  Oil-Chase  National   interests  pre-
fer   a  divided  Germany  for  some  time  to  come.    A   reunited
Germany   would   almost   certainly  have   a   Social   Democratic
majority,-  and  this  would   spell  the  end  of  the  program   they
Corliss  Lament's  Passport   Suit
According    to   a   press    release    by   the    American
Friends  Service  Commitee  on  Dec.  9,  ten  Friends  and
one  Congregationalist objected  on  religious  grounds  to
the  new  State  Department  passport   form  requiring   a
non-Communist   oath  of   applicants.   At   least   five   re-
fused  to  sign  the  oath  but  all  were  nevertheless   grant-
ed  passports.   This   seemed   to  establish   in   passports
something  analogous  to  the  conscientious  objector  prin-
ciple  applied in  the  draft  laws.
Corliss   Lament's  suit,  which  lost   in  District   Court
here  last  week  but  will  be  appealed,  instances  this  as
evidence   of   discriminatory    regulations  and  seeks  ju-
dicial   recognition  for   secular   conscientious     objection.
Lamont  refused  to  take  the  oath  on  the  ground  that  it
infringed  the  freedom  of  political  thought   guaranteed
by   the   Constitution.   Are   such   fundamental  political
scruples  less  worthy  of  respect   than  religious  ones  in
a  secular  society  constantly  preening  itself  on  its  devo-
tion   to   freedom?    This   is   a   question   the   suit   may
answer.
are  so  successfully  implementing   for   the   revival   of  the   old
German  cartel  system  with  which  Standard  Oil  worked   before
the   war.    Those   American    interests   which    regard    West
Germany   as  their   base   and   junior  partner   for   Eurasia   are
richly  content  with  the  status  quo.    Even  now  reunification  is
possible.   The  Poles  are  fearful  of  the  Soviet  offer  to  back  a
"confederation"   of  East  and  West  Germany.   They  fear  pros-
perous  West  Germany  would  in  a  few  years  time  easily  domi-
nate  and   absorb  East   Germany,  where  the   regime   is   hated
and  has no  firm  popular  base.   But  a  reunited  Germany  would
be  Socialist  and  Protestant  rather  than  Conservative  and  Cath-
olic  as  is  West  Germany.   Dulles  and   Sullivan  &  Cromwell
were  the  employes  of  these  interests  before  the  war  and  serve
them   now.    But  Acheson's   hostility  to   negotiations    ("It    is
my  conviction,"   he  writes  in  his  new  book,  Power   and  Di-
plomacy,  "that  the  only  agreements   which  are  possible  now
would   be  disadvantageous   to  us.")   makes  him  the  ally  and
harness   partner   of  John   Foster  Dulles  whom   he  otherwise
despises.    Acheson   and   the   Democrats   represent   the   other
string  to  the  Rockefeller   bow.   Will  the  Democrats  be  per-
suaded  to  maintain stale  cold  war  attitudes  as and  if  Ike  moves
to  negotiate?
Linus  Pauling  Petition  Signed  by  36  Nobel  Prize  Winners;  44  Countries  Represented
Text  of  the  Appeal  by 9,235 Scientists  For An End  to Nuclear Tests
"Each  nuclear  bomb  spreads   an  added  burden  of   radio-
active  elements  over  every  part  of  the  world.   Each  added
amount  of  radiation causes  damage  to  the  health  of  human
beings  all  over  the  world  and  causes  damage  to  the  pool
of  human  gene  plasms  such  as  to  lead  to  an  increase  in  the
number  of  seriously  defective  children  that  will  be  born  in
future  generations.
"So long  as  these  weapons  are  in  the  hands  of  only  three
powers  an  agreement  for  their  control  is  feasible.   If  test-
ing  continues,  and  the  possession   of  these  weapons  spreads
to   additional  governments,  the   danger   of   outbreak   of   a
cataclysmic  nuclear  war  through  the  reckless  action  of  some
irresponsible  national  leader  will  be  greatly   increased.
"An  international  agreement   to  stop  the  testing  of  nu-
clear  bombs  now could  serve  as  a  first  step  toward  a  more
general  disarmament  and  the  ultimate  effective  abolition  of
nuclear  weapons,  averting  the  possibility  of  a  nuclear  war
that  would  be  a  catastrophe  to  all  humanity.
"We  have  in  common  with  our  fellow  men  a  deep   con-
cern  for  the  welfare  of  all  human beings.   As  scientists  we
have  knowledge  of  the  dangers   involved   and  therefore  a
special   responsibility  to  make  those  dangers   known.   We
deem  it  imperative  that  immediate action  be  taken  to effect
an  international agreement  to  stop  the  testing   of  all  nu-
clear  weapons."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/'. f:  Stone's  Weekly,  January   20, 1958
Circuit  Court  Holds  "Jencks  Rule"  Applies  to  Administrative  Proceedings,  Too
A  New  Check  on  the  FBI's  Stable  of  Secret  Political  Informers
For  six  years  the  Government  has  been  trying  to  make  the
Communist   party   register   as  subversive  with   the   Subversive
Activities  Control   Board  under  the  Internal  Security  Act  of
1950.    One   of  these  days  the  Supreme  Court   will   probably
throw   the  Act  out  altogether  as  unconstitutional  under   the
First  amendment.   In  the  meantime,  the  latest  decision  in  this
protracted  litigation  has  produced   a  useful  by-product.
The  U.  S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of   Columbia
has  sent  the  case  back  to  the  SACB  with  a  decision   which
for  the  first  time  holds  that  the  "Jencks  rule"  applies  to  ad-
ministrative   proceedings.    This  will   give   defendants   before
the  SACB  and  in  deportation   and  denaturalization   cases  new
protection  against  false  witness  by  the  kind  of  fanatics,  psy-
chopaths  and  perjurers  any  government   accumulates  when  it
sets  out  to  subject  free  political  association  to  secret  surveil-
lance,  as  ours  has  been   doing.
Not  Enough Untainted Evidence
The  "Jencks  rule"  takes  its  name  from  Clinton  E.  Jencks,
an  International  Mine,  Mill   &  Smelter  Workers  Union   of-
ficial,   whose  conviction  for   falsely   swearing  a  non-Commu-
nist  oath  was  reversed  last  year  by  the  Supreme  Court.    The
Court  held  that  the  defense  had  a  right  to  examine  for  itself
the  prior  reports  to  the  FBI  of  any  witness  produced  by  the
government,   and   to  use   those   reports   for   purposes   of   im-
peachment.   It  was  in  the  Jencks   case  that  Harvey   Matusow
recanted.   The  Justice  Department   could  have  retried  the  case
but  instead  had  it  dismissed  last  December   31  on  the  ground
that  "on  the  available  evidence,  the  government   cannot  suc-
cessfully  retry  this  defendant"   i.e.  it  did   not  have   sufficient
untainted  evidence  for  a  conviction.
Neither  the  Supreme  Court  decision,  however,  nor  the  bill
Congress  passed   last  year  attempting   slightly   to  narrow   that
ruling,  answered   the  question   of  whether   it  also  applied   in
administrative  proceedings.   The  Subversive  Activities  Control
Board   itself,   in  the  current   case  against  the  American   Com-
mittee   for   the   Protection   of   the   Foreign   Born,   has   ruled
that  the  Jencks  rule  cannot  be  used  before  the  Board.
A John Adams Era Judge
The   Court  of   Appeals   has  now   ruled   in  the   Communist
Party  case  that  the  right  to  see  the  original  reports  of  any
witness  produced   by  the  government   "is  one  of   the  funda-
mentals  of   fair   play  required   in  an  administrative  proceed-
ing."   The  ruling  is given  added  weight  in  that  it  comes  from
Judge  E.  Barrett  Prettyman,  the  author  of  some  of  the   most
reactionary  decisions  of  the  cold  war  period,  a  judge  of  high
integrity  as  a  judicial  craftsman  but  with  a  point  of  view  so
anachronistic  he  often   sounds  like   a  John   Adams  era   Fed-
eralist.
The  ruling  is  bad  news  for  the  FBI's  stable  of  political  in-
formers.   Under  the  impact  of  an  unfavorable  Supreme  Court
decision  in  this  same  Communist   party  case,  the   SACB  has
already  expunged   the  testimony  of  three  government  inform-
ers  as  tainted  by  perjury.    The  case  now  goes  back  for  a  sec-
ond  round  in  which  the  Board  will  have  to  re-examine   the
testimony  of  a  fourth,  Mrs.  Mary  Stalcup  Markward  and  may
also   have  to   reopen   the   testimony  of   a   fifth   witness.
Should  the  government   appeal  this  defeat  to  the   Supreme
Court,  the  defense  by  cross  petition  would  probably  challenge
the  failure  of   the   Appeals   court  to  deal  as  drastically  with
two  other  witnesses,  Louis  Budenz,  and  a  man  named   Scar-
letto,  who  was  an  FBI  undercover  agent   in  the  party.
Provocateur  As Well As Informer
The  latter  testified  before  the  SACB  that  he  was  instructed
to  enlist  in  the  Army  by  the  Communists  so  he  could   com-
mit   sabotage   in   Korea.    This   damaging   testimony   was  ac-
cepted  at  face  value  by  the  Board  until  it  turned   out  that  in
the  California  Smith  Act  cases  Scarletto  had  given  a  different
version  of  this  affair.    At  that  time  he   testified   that   during
a  Communist  party  meeting  he  got  up  and  suggested  that  he
join   the   army   so  he   could   commit   sabotage  in   Korea.    In
other   words,   he   was   trying   to   cause   trouble   as   an   agent
provocateur.   The  Board  thereupon  declared  that  it  could   no
longer   "credit"   the  original   incident  but  rejected  a   defense
motion   to   expunge   Scarletto's   testimony   altogether   on   the
ground   that  he  was  obviously   untrustworthy.
People  of  this  kind  are  going  to  find  themselves  in  trouble
under  this  new  ruling;   some   day  the  government   may  even
be  forced  to  prosecute  one  of  its  own  informers  for  perjury.
As  "Variety" Would  Say, Movie Industry  Goes Mum on  Red  Menace in  Supreme  Court
The  most  striking  aspect  of  the  argument  in  the  Holly-
wood  23  case  before  the  Supreme  Court  last  week  was  the
total  absence  of  the  Red  menace  from  the  movie  industry's
defense.    A  few  years  ago  the  industry  would  have  waved
the  flag  and  claimed to  be  fulfilling  a  public duty  in  barring
from  employment  persons  deemed  to  be  subversive  because
they  had  invoked the  Fifth  amendment.  Now  the  industry
fell  back  on  two  finely  split  legalistic  hairs,  asserting  that
even  if   the  23  blacklisted  actors,   writers  and  stage-hands
were  treated  unjustly  (1)   they  had  failed  to  raise  the  con-
stitutional  issues   in  time  and  (2)   the  State  courts  in  dis-
missing   the  suits  on  demurrer  had  acted  on  "independent
State  grounds"  not  subject  to  review  in  the  Federal   courts.
Inferences  drawn from  judicial  reaction  during  oral  argu-
ment   are   unreliable.   But  it   looked  as   if   Warren,  Black,
Douglas  and  Brennan  were  friendly  and  that  Harlan  might
possibly  join  them.   Frankfurter  was  irascible  and  seemed
to  think  the  suits  should  have  been  brought  in  the  Federal
courts  under  the  anti-trust  or  civil  rights  statutes.   Robert
W.  Kenny   and  Ben  Margolis,  counsel  for   the  blacklisted,
argued  that  movie  executives  and  House  Un-American  Ac-
tivities   Committee   members   conspired    to   deprive   their
clients  of  the  right  to  pursue  their  callings.   The  California
courts  dismissed   the  suits  without  trial.    Should   the  Su-
preme  Court  order  trial  on  the  merits,  the  movie  companies
might  settle  out  of  court  and  drop  the  blacklist,  an  obso-
lete  production headache.
The  formal  pleadings  were  not  without humor. The black-
listed   artists   relied  on  State  right-to-work   decisions   and
notoriously  reactionary  pre-New  Deal  Supreme  Court  labor
injunction  rulings  while  House  Committee  members  com-
plained  that  they  were  the  victims  of  "guilt  by  association."
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  20, 1958
We  Dishonor  Jefferson   While  They  Move  Back  Toward  Thought  Control
Washington  and  Moscow  Share  the  Blame for  The  Daily   Worker's   End
We  regret  the  passage  of  the  Daily  Worker.    It  leaves  the
United   States  the  only  one  of   the  great   world   democracies
without  a  Communist  daily.   The   ultimate   cause  of   its dis-
appearance   is  a  witch   hunt  which   frightened    away  readers
as  it  frightened  people  out  of  the  party.   Basically,  the  land
of   Jefferson   slipped  behind  Britain,  France  and   Italy.    Our
government  took  steps  to  make  it  dangerous  to  read  a  Com-
munist   paper.   Aliens   found   themselves   deported;    foreign
born  citizens,  denaturalized;  citizens,  blacklisted,  on  the  basis
of  allegations  which  often  included  the  reading  of  the  Daily
Worker.    In  this  respect  all  of  us  who  believe  in  free  tradi-
tions  must  blush  for  its  passing.   Freedom  of  the  press  proved
less  real  here  than  in  Western   Europe.
A  Hint  Would  Have  Been Enough
The  more  immediate  cause  of  the  Worker's   passing   is  to
be  found  in  Moscow.   It  would  have  taken  no  more  than  the
barest  hint  from  the  Kremlin  to  make  it  clear  to  the   Foster
Old   Guard   that   Moscow   welcomed   the   appearance   in   the
Communist  world  of  a  paper  which  was  independent.    Instead
Moscow  signalled   by  attack  in  its  own  press  that  it  did   not
like  the  independent  line  which  the  Worker  under  John  Gates
had  been  pursuing  since  the  Twentieth   Congress.   The  Gates
faction  believes  that  the  Old  Guard  thereupon  shut  down  the
Worker   as  its  own   way  of  purging   the   paper   and   that  in
the  not  too  far  distant  future  the  Daily  will  be  revived,  but
under  subservient   editorship.
In  so  acting  the  Krushchev  regime  in  our  opinion   missed
a  chance  to  make  a  contribution  to  peace.    A  Daily   Worker
independent  enough   to  criticize  Moscow   itself,  as  the  Daily
did  in  the  Hungarian   uprising,  would   have  been  proof   that
the  Communists   are  not  just  stooges   of   Moscow,   that   they
can  think   and  speak  for  themselves.   It  would  have  been  a
sign  that  de-Stalinization  was  continuing  and  thus  an  aid  in
the   fight   for   peaceful  co-existence. • For  it  must  be  admitted
that  the  existence  of   Communist   parties  which   act  as  mere
appendages    of   Moscow   makes   the    fight    for    peaceful     co-
existence  more     difficult.
The  truth  is  that  the  resignation  of  Gates  and  the   closing
From  the   Gates   Valedictory
"The  best  thing  to  do  about  the  Communist   Party  is
to  let  it  alone.   No  one  could  do a better  job  of  destroy-
ing  the  Communist  party  than  the  Communist  party  it-
self.   It  is   the  most  successful   self-liquidating   enter-
prise  in  our  country.    The  American  Communist  Party
is  dead  for  all  practical  purposes,  although  it  can con-
tinue  to  live  on,  the  way  a  mummy   does.  .  .  .
"I  predict  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  the  FBI  will  state
that  my  resignation  and  the  end  of  The  Daily  Worker
only  confirms  the  fact  that  the  Communist   party  is  be-
coming  stronger   than   ever.   It's  time  the    anti-Com-
munist  racket  in  this  country   is  ended  and  we  expand
the  democratic  freedoms  and  liberties  for   which  this
country  is  justly  noted."
—John  Gates, resigning  as  editor  of  the  Daily   Work-
er  and  from  the  Communist  party,  Jan. 10,  from,
a  statement  not  carried  in  the  Worker's  final  is-
sue  under  new  editorship,  Jan. 13.
of   the   Daily   are  of   the   same  pattern   to  be  observed   else-
where,  in  China,  in  Poland  and  in  Russia  itself.   Krushchev,
having  weathered  the   anti-Stalinist   storm  and   curtailed   the
worst  abuses  of  the  secret  police  system,  is  now  drawing  the
reins  on  intellectuals,  writers,  artists and  newspapermen.   Mao
and  Gomulka  are  following  suit.   As  for  Tito,  he  has  never
shown  the  slightest  understanding  of  what  a  free  press  means.
Not  All Sectarian Folly
And  now  in  justice  to  the  Daily  Worker,   it  must  also  be
added  that  in  its  34  years  of  existence—amid  much  that  was
foolish,  sectarian  and  cheaply  slanderous  (like  George  Mor-
ris's  final  piece  coupling  Howard   Fast  with  Howard   Rush-
more)—it  served  many  good   purposes   and  good  causes.    It
published  much  that  did  not  see the  light  elsewhere.  It  fought
for   the  Negro  and  the  underprivileged;   it  played  an  honor-
able  role  in  the  30's,  when  it  contributed  to  the  mass  organi-
zation  of   labor  and   the   reforms  of   the  New   Deal   period.
Its  underpaid  and   overworked  staff   carried  on  under  heart-
breaking  difficulties.    In  their  paper's   passing,  they  deserve  a
newspaperman's  salute  for  their  devotion.
Please  Look  at  Date  Under  Your  Address  and  Renew  Now  If  Overdue,  Adding  «  Gift   Sub  to  Help   Us  Grow
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please   renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name       ...............................
Street       ...............................
City    ....................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $4  (1  yr.) or  $2  (6  mos.)  additional:
1/20/.T8
(To)    Name  .............
Street     .....................
City    ......................._............Zone............Statc...«.............
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement T     Tes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's   Weekly
5618  Ncbratki  Av*..  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  tlie  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursday!  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington  15,  D. C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Alia  t.nd  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED