I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958dec08.pdf

============================================================

How  British Labor  Feels  About  Germany, P.  3
When  Wall  St.  Corporation  Lawyers  Uphold  the  Right  of  Radicals  to  Travel,  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  48DECEMBER  8,   1958
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
An  Open  Soviet   Society  Would  Be  An  Aid  to  Peace
For  once  we  agree  with  a  position  taken  by  our  own  gov-
ernment  at  the  United  Nations.    We   refer  to  the  challenge
by  George  Harrison,  of  the  Brotherhood  of   Railway  Clerks,
in  the   Assembly's  Special  Political  Committee  last  Tuesday.
Mr.   Harrison,  an   AFL-CIO   vice   president,   spoke  during
debate  on  an  Argentine  revision  of  a  Czech  resolution  call-
ing   for   friendly   cooperation   among  nations  in  culture  and
communications.   Mr.  Harrison  said  the  Soviet  Union  could
make  a  great  stride  forward  in  this  respect  if  it  (1)  stopped
radio  jamming,  (2)   permitted  foreign  newspapers and  maga-
zines  to   be  sold   freely   in   Soviet  cities,   (3)    freed   foreign
correspondents  from  censorship  and   (4)   allowed  all  United
Nations  publications to  be  sold  publicly  in  the  Soviet  Union.
No   one  who  has  not  experienced  the  intellectually  suffocat-
ing  atmosphere  of  Moscow,  and  seen  the  deadly conformist
dullness  of  its  press,  as  I  did  two  years  ago,  can  really under-
stand  the   full   meaning  of   these  proposals.     If   Poland  can
allow  the  New   York   Times  and  the  London  Times  and  the
New  Statesman  and  Nation  and  Le  Monde  to  be  freely  pur-
chased  on  the  streets   and   freely   read   in  the   coffee   houses,
why  is  the  far  stronger  Soviet  Union  afraid  to  let  its  people
see  foreign  papers?   Why,  40  years  after   the  revolution,  is
it  still  afraid  to  trust  its  own  people  to  read  and  think  for
themselves ?
Just  Like  the  American   Legion
The  basic  attitudes  of  men  and  governments  are  not  to  be
judged  by  their  ideologies  but  by  their  behavior.   In  the  Pas-
ternak   affair,   the  head  of   the  Young   Communists  who  at-
tacked  a  great  writer  elegantly  as  a  "pig,"  spoke  the  same
language   as   our   American   Legionnaires,    who   are   always
telling  American radical  writers  to  go  back  where  they  didn't
come  from,   as  that   YCL-er   told   Pasternak.     At   the   UN,
Mr.  Sobolev,  the  Soviet  delegate,  answered  Mr.  Harrison  in
the  same  terms  invoked  by our  FBI,  by  our  House Un-Ameri-
can  Activities  Committee  and  by  the  Senate  Internal  Security
Committee.    Mr.   Sobolev   said   the   Soviet   Union   had   atom
bombs  to  deter  aggression   and  radio  jamming  to  block  sub-
versive  ideas.   There  is  here  the  same  idea  that  societies  are
menaced   by  "subversive"   ideas,  that   the   government   must
guard   its   people   from   them,   that   the   men  wielding   such
ideas  (we  call  them  "Communists"  and  they  call  them  "count-
er-revolutionaries")  are  so  superhumanly  dangerous  that  they
must  be  put  away.  Mr.  Sobolev  spoke  the  language  of  Ameri-
can  rightists,  the  language  which  says people  cannot  be  trust-
ed   to   think  for   themselves;   that   they  must   be   treated   as
children;  that  government  must  be  their  nursemaid;  that  the
danger_to  government  lies  not  in  its  own  failure to  give  peo-
ple  justice  and  satisfaction,  but  in  its  failure  in  time  to  root
out  secret  conspiracy  .against  it.
1   9  3
A  Break   With  Both   Marx  and  Madison
This  attitude flies in  the  face  of  both  the  Marxist and  lib-
eral  traditions,  both  of  which  have  their  roots  in  the  same
rationalistic  and  materialistic  philosophy  which  teaches  that
revolutions  are  not  made  by  conspiracies  but   (in   the  words
of   our   Declaration  of   Independence)   by   "a   long  train  of
abuses  and  usurpations."   Common  to  both  systems  in  their
origins  is  a  belief  that  man's  hope  rests  in  man's  reason,  and
his  ability  to  change  the  world  for  the  better.   To  affirm  that
people  cannot  be  trusted  to  think  for  themselves  but  must
see  the  world  only  as  some  higher  body  known  as  a  Central
Committee  decrees  because  that  Committee in  turn  personifies
something  known  as  The  Party, which  is  by  definition  always
and  mysteriously  right,  is to  sink  into  a new  mysticism, a  new
form  of  superstition.  This  is  made  to  order  for  bureaucrats,
who  take  refuge  always  in  the  rigidity  of  the  rule-book.    It
is  this  rigidity  which  explains  the  violence of  the  Hungarian
uprising,  and  Moscow's  slow  movement back  toward Stalinism
in  fear  that  if  it  eases  up  there  may  be  similar  explosions  in
East  Germany  and  in  Poland.     Such  explosions  could   ignite
a  new  world  war.   We  believe  that  in  the  long  run   greater
freedom  will  prove  a  better  risk  than  greater  repression.   The
struggle  for  a  more  open  Soviet  society  is  a  struggle  for  con-
ditions   in   which   peaceful    transition  to  a  less  rigid-minded
socialism   may   be  possible  in   Eastern  Europe  without   new
convulsions.   Slowly  to  graft  First  Amendment  freedoms  onto
the  Soviet  system  would  really  be  to  check  the  evils  of .what
Krushchev  once  called  "the  cult  of  personality."
Sack  Those  Silly  Censors
Freer  communication  is  important,  not  only  to  enable  peo-
ple  to  understand  each  other  better,  but  to  provide  on  the
Soviet  side  those   safety  valves  and   correctives  which   freer
dissemination   of   ideas  allows.    We   heard   from   Krushchev
what  terrible  mistakes  Stalin  made,  mistakes  which   cost  the
lives  of  many  devoted   and   idealistic  men,  whom  the   Soviet
witch  hunters   destroyed.    What  of   his  mistakes   in   foreign
policy?   Was  he  always  right?   What  of  his  successors  who
failed  so  terribly to  get  rid  of  Rakosi  in  Hungary  when  there
was  still  time  to  prevent  an  outburst  which  set  back  the  cause
of  peace  and  co-existence?   Now  is  the  time  to  prevent  new
Hungaries.   How  much  good  the  Soviet  Union  could  do  itself
if  it  began  slowly  to  lift  the  curtain  on  freer  information.    A
good  start  would  be  to  let  foreign  papers  be  sold   freely   in
its  cities,  and  to  abolish  a  censorship  of  foreign   correspond-
ence  which  is  so  heavy-handed  and  erratic  that  it  only  makes
enemies  of  those who  have  to  work  under  its wooden   controls.
These   two   moves—signalizing   a   new   thaw   in   Moscow—
could  be  a  mighty  contribution  to  peace,  and  to  human  hopes
of  co-existence.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 8,1958
State  Dept.  Won't  Let  Waldo Frank  Lecture  on  Walt  Whitman  in  Peking
When  Wall  St. Corporation  Lawyers  Defend  the  Right  of Radicals to  Travel
A  committee  of   eight,   chosen   by  the   Association   of   the
Bar  of  the  City  of  New  York,  mainly  from  the  most  blue-
blooded   of  Wall  Street's   corporation   law   firms*,   has  just
recommended  unanimously  that  passports  ought  not  to  be  de-
nied  anyone, even  members of  the  Communist party,  for  their
political  opinions.
The   Bar   Association   committee,   in   its   newly   published
"Freedom  to  Travel"  (financed  by  the  Fund  for  the  Republic
and  published  by  Dodd,  Mead),  also  did  itself  proud  in  re-
sisting  the  notion  that  the  fair  trial  should  be  subordinated
to  the  convenience  of  the  secret  police.   Only  one  of  the  eight
—Mr.  MacVeagh—was  prepared   to  relinquish  the  right   to
cross-examine  accusing  witnesses  in  passport  hearings  when-
ever  the  government  certified  that  this  was  necessary  to  pro-
tect  informers.
Hostile  to  Faceless  Informers
Four  members  of  the  bar  committee,  Messrs.  Coudert,  Del-
ano,  Fales  and  Swope,   would   under  no'  circumstances   allow
a  man's  right  to  travel  to  be  taken  away  without  a  chance  to
confront   his  accuser.   Mr.   Fisher   and  Mr.  Workum  would
allow  an  exception  only  in  the  case of  passport  applicants  who
had  been  given  access  to  highly  classified   information.   Mr.
Fleischmann  would  allow  a  temporary  withholding  of  pass-
port  for  six  months  where  the  Secretary  of  State  personally
certified  that  security would  be  jeopardized  by  a  hearing.
The   Committee's   stand  on   these  basic   questions  of   sub-
stance  and  procedure  eloquently   testifies   to  the   special   role
that  legal  tradition and  the  legal  profession  at  their  best  may
play  in  preserving  basic  safeguards  against  hysteria, prejudice
and   fear.   The   spectacle  of   a  group   of  corporation  lawyers
defending  the  right  of  radicals  to  travel  and  challenging   the
pet  informer  shibboleth  of  the  FBI  runs  directly  counter  to
Marxist  and  democratic  stereotypes!   It  would  be  impossible
to get  eight  labor  leaders  of  equal  stature to  take  as courageous
a  stand,  and  it  will  be  difficult  to  keep  Congress  from  stam-
peding  in  the  other  direction when  passport  legislation  comes
before  it  at  the  next  session,  though  the  former  represent  the
"working  class"  and  the  latter  "the  people."
Acquiesce  in  Area  Control
Though   applauding  the  report's  virtues,  we  fear  that  the
pressure  of  cold  war  distortions   have  had  their  effect  on  the
Bar   Committee  in  two  respects.    One   is  its  acquiescence  in
the  idea  that  the  Department  should  have  the  right  to  shut
off   whole  countries  from   travel.    The   unspoken   premise   is
that  a  fundamental  liberty  may  be  treated  as  an  instrument
of   policy,  as  a  means  of  pressure  on   a  foreign  government
or  to  satisfy  the  preconceptions  of  whatever  crowd  happens
to  be  dominant in  the  State  Department.**
*The  eight:  Fifield  Workum, chairman,  a  partner  in  Thach-
er  & Bartlett;  Ewen  C. MacVeagh,  of  Davis,  Polk,  Wardwell,
Sunderland  &  Kiendl;  Alexis   C.  Coudert,   of   Coudert  Bros.;
Halliburton  Fales  2d  of  White  and  Case;  William  A.   Delano
of  Winthrop,  Stimson,  Putnam  and  Roberts;  Manly  Fleisch-
mann  of   Fleischmann,  Jaeckle,  Stokes  &  Hitchcock;  Gerard
Swope,  Jr.,  trade  regulation  counsel  for  General  Electric; and
Adrian   S.   Fisher,   vice-president   and  counsel   of   the   Wash-
ington  Post.   Only  Mr.  Fisher  has  liberal  associations.
When  Is  Travel  Pro-Communist?
"One  of  the  standards   [applied  by  the  State  Depart-
ment]   requires   rejection   of    [passport]   applications
from   persons   who  are  going   abroad  to  engage   in  ac-
tivities   which  will  advance  the   Communist  movement.
The  difficulty  with  this  standard  is  its  vagueness.   What
will  advance  the  Communist  movement  is  a  question  on
which  there  may  well  be  differences  of  opinion;  and  al-
though  this  standard  requires   that  advancement  of  the
movement  be  the  purpose  of  the  travel,  the  standard  re-
mains  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  apply.   Indeed,  it  is
a  rare  administrator   who  would  on  his  own  initiative
resolve   any   doubt  in  favor   of  the   applicant.    The   in-
evitable  tendency  is  to  deal  with  rumor  as  fact,   .asso-
ciation   as   membership,   and   advocacy   as   incitement.
This  discretionary  power,  in  short,  is  foreign   to  Ameri-
can  standards  of  fairness   and  justice."
—New  York  Bar  Report  on  "Freedom,  to  Travel."
The  idiocies and  contradictions  this  area  control  breeds may
be  seen  in  the  suit  which  has just  been  filed  here by the  Emer-
gency  Civil  Liberties Committee  on  behalf  of  the distinguished
writer,  Waldo  Frank.   Mr.  Frank  has  been  invited  to  lecture
on-Walt Whitman  at  Peking  University.  One  might  have ex-
pected  Communist  China  to  refuse  him  a  visa,  since  Whitman
is  the  great  poet  of  the  free  democratic  faith.   Instead   it  is
the  State  Department  which  has  refused  to   let  Mr.   Frank
use  his  passport  for  that   purpose.
"A  State  Department  with  a  vital  policy"  Mr.  Frank   pro-
tests  would  be  urging  people  like  himself  to  go  and   speak
in   China.    Our   country  stands   to   benefit   by  letting   young
Chinese  read  our  greatest  poet  and  hear  one  of  our  most  en-
lightened  contemporary  intellectuals.   Mr.  Dulles  only  forti-
fies  China's   most   hardened   Stalinists   by   maintaining   this
wooden  curtain  of  his  own.
Fair  Trial,  or  Crystal  Ball?
The  second  point  on  which  we  differ  from  the   Committee
is  that   it  would   allow   some   passport   restrictions   "upon   a
substantial  showing  of  the  likelihood  of  action  abroad  which
would  be  hostile  to  the  national  security."
We  believe  this  to  be  open  to  several  objections.   One  is
practical:  these  loopholes   —   though   strictly  defined   by  the
Committee—are  broad   enough   to  allow'the  Department   to
continue  some  of  its  worst  practices.   A  second  is  legal:  the
Committee,   in   drawing  an   analogy  with   injunctions,  is  in
error;  injunctions  forbid  certain  illegal  acts,  they  do  not  de-
prive  people  of  the  right  to  engage  in  lawful  conduct  such
as  travel  on  the  suspicion  of  abuse.
The  third  is  philosophical:  Law  and   fair   trial   lose  their
meaning  when  we  set  out  to  punish  men  not  for  what  they
have  done  but  for  what  they  might  do.   To  deny  a  man  the
right  to  travel  because  he  might  abuse  it  is  the  same  as  put-
ting  him  under  "preventive  arrest"  in  a  concentration  camp.
One  forbids  travel  abroad,  the  other  at  home,  on  suspicion.
**The  report  notices,  for  example,  that  in  all  the  years  we
did  not  recognize  Franco,  no  effort  was  made  to  deny  U.  S.
passports   for  travel   to  Spain,  and  that   when   Mussolini   at-
tacked  Ethiopia,  the  Department  shut  off  travel  not  to  Italy,
the  aggressor,  but  to  Ethiopia,  its  victim!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 8,1958
A  Document  Not  Available  Elsewhere  in  U.S.  Press:  British's  Labor's  New  Foreign  Policy   Manifesto
Disengagement  in  Germany,  Neutral  Middle  East,  Red  China  in  the   UN
"In   the  Far  East,  the  Labour  Government   will   vote  and
urge  other  countries  to  vote  for   the  admission  of   the   Com-
munist  Government   of   China  to  the   United   Nations.
"This  is  the  essential  first  step  towards  any  settlement  in
the  Far  East.   It  is  absurd  that  the  Tory  Government,   which
recognizes  the  Chinese  Peoples   Republic,  should  continue   to
connive  at  the  denial  of  representation  in  the  United  Nations
to  a  country  of  nearly  600  million  people.
"Labour  believes  that  the  offshore  islands  of  Quemoy  and
Matsu,  which  have  twice  in  three  years  brought  America  and
China  to  the  brink  of  war,  should   be  evacuated  by  Chiang
Kai-shek's  Nationalist   forces  and  handed   back  to  the   Gov-
ernment  of  China.
"We   shall   also  urge   that  Formosa  be  placed   under   UN
administration  until  the  people  of  the  island  can  themselves
decide  their  own  future  without  intimidation.
Since  the  Democratic  Party  here  has  failed  to  provide
any  coherent  opposition  in  foreign  policy,  we  thought  read-
ers  would  like  to  see   the   foreign   policy   sections   of   the
new  election  manifesto  which  the  British  Labor  Party  has
just   published  called,   "The   Future   Labour   Offers    You,"
particularly  in  connection  with  the  Berlin  crisis.   We  sug-
gest  this  might  be  the  basis  for  discussion  in  any  political
or  peace   group   to   which  you  may  belong.   The   relevant
portions  follow:
"Because  of   the   Cold   War,   both   sides  rely  on  amassing
nuclear  deterrents  which,  if  they  are  ever  used,  will  utterly
destroy civilization.
"Because  of  these  nuclear  deterrents,  mutual  fear  and  sus-.
picion  grow  and  political  settlement  becomes  even  more  dif-
ficult  to  achieve.
"It  is  essential  that  one  Great  Power  should  break  through
this  deadly  circle.   We   believe  that  Britain,  rid  of  the   Tory
Government,  can  do  so.  And  Labour  has  worked  out  its  plan
for   this  peace  initiative.   Our  plan   covers  both  political  set-
tlements  and disarmament.
"The   three  gravest  danger   areas  in  the  world  today  are
Central  Europe,  the  Middle  East,  and  the  Far  East.
No  Nuclear  Arms  for  Germany
"In  Europe,  Labour  will  press  its  plan  for  disengagement.
"Labour  will  propose  the  establishment  of  a  neutral  zone
consisting  of  East and  West  Germany,  Poland,  Czechoslovakia,
and  Hungary.   Inside  this  zone,  armaments would  be  reduced,
nuclear  weapons  banned,  foreign  forces—Russian  and  NATO
—withdrawn.   The  freedom  and  security  of  the  area  would
be  guaranteed  by  all  the  Powers  concerned.
"Disengagement    would   not   only  lessen   tension   but   also
help  the  free  and  peaceful  unification  of  Germany.
"In   the  Middle   East,  Labour  proposes  Great  Power  nego-
tiations  to  neutralize  the  area  and  take  it  out  of   Cold   War
politics.
"This  is  Labour's  four-point  policy:
"1.  Support  the  United  Nations  in  guaranteeing  the  fron-
tiers  of  all  Middle  East  states,  including  Israel.
"2.  Establish   diplomatic   relations   with  the   United   Arab
Republic.
"3.  Set  up  an  Economic  Council  for  the  Middle  East  to
fight  poverty  and  ensure  fairer  distribution  of  oil  profits.
"4.  Support  a  fresh  attempt  at  an  Arab-Israeli  settlement.
This  must  include  Arab  recognition  of  Israel  and  a  solution
of  the  Arab  refugee  problem.
Ending  the  Arms  Race
"Our   aim  is  not  only  to  rid  the  world   of  H-bombs  and
other  weapons  of  mass  destruction,  but  to  cut  all  armed  forces
and  armaments  to  the  points  where  aggression   would  be  im-
possible.   Not   until  that  has  been  achieved  can  we   concen-
trate  on  our  true  socialist  task—banishing  poverty  from   the
face  of  the  earth  and  sharing  the  peaceful  blessings  of   scien-
tific   progress.
"The   Labour  Government's  first  contribution   to   disarma-
ment  will  be  a  decision  to  suspend   British  nuclear   tests  at
once,  whatever  others  Powers  may decide.   We  have  also  pro-
posed  that  all  patrol  flights  with  nuclear  weapons   should  be
stopped   immediately ...  If  our  advice  has  been  accepted,
the   Russians—who  were   the  first  to   suspend   tests—would
have  had  no  excuse  for   resuming  them.
"Ending   nuclear   tests  —   and  with   them   the  danger  of
poisoning  mankind  by  radiation—will  be  only  a  beginning.
Labour  will   propose  a  disarmament   conference    to  draw   up
a  treaty  which  will
—reduce,  arms,  manpower  and  military  expenditure.
—destroy  all  stocks  of  nuclear  weapons  and  means  of  de-
livering  them,  including  missile  bases  and   bombers.
—abolish  all  chemical   and  biological   weapons.
—provide   safeguards  against   surprise  attacks.
"To   be   effective,   the   Disarmament   Treaty   will   require,
above  all,  international  inspection  and  control.   These  we  be-
lieve  should  be  enforced  through  the  United  Nations,"
Federation  of   American  Scientists  Advocates  Permanent  Cessation  of  Tests
The   Council   of   the   Federation   of   American   Scientists,
after  a  meeting  in  New  York  on  Nov.  23,  issued  a  state-
ment  few  newspapers  covered  advocating  permanent  cessa-
tion  of  testing  subject  only  to  the  condition  that  the  detec-
tion  system  be  put  into  operation  within  an  agreed   period.
"Certainly   any  cessation   period,"   said   the   Council  state-
ment  "must  be  longer   than  the  period  required  merely   to
require  another  series  of  test  explosions."    The  U.  S.  offer
at  Geneva  is  for  a  one-year  suspension  renewable   annually.
The  Council  statement  noted  that  "considerable  weight   is
being  given  to  the  military  importance  of  continued   weap-
ons  development."   It  said,  however,   that   security   was  no
longer  available  through   military  means.    The  Council  de-
clared   that   present    nuclear   stockpiles   were   now   large
enough  to  destroy   the  human  race,   that   there   was  never
likely  to  be  an  effective  defense,   and  that  even  those   sur-
viving  an  initial  attack   "could  not  live  on  the  surface  of
the  earth  until  one to  three  years  had passed,  because  of  the
lethal  effects  of  the  long-lasting  radiation."
The  Federation's  executive   committee  is:  Chairman,  Au-
gustus  H.  Fox,   Prof,  of  Mathematics,  Union  College;  Vice
Chairman,  Walter   Selove,   Prof,  of  Physics,  Univ.  of  Pa.;
Secretary,   Harry  Palevsky,   Physicist,   Brookhaven;   Treas-
urer,  Leonard  Herzenberg,  Biochemist,   Nat.  Inst.  of  Health;
Paul   M.  Doty,   Prof,   of   Chemistry,   Harvard;   and  Frank
Ham,  Physicist,  G.  E.  Research  Lab.
l   9   ;;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 8, 1958
Japan  and  Byrnes;  Nixon  Goes  Profound   in  London;  Moscow  Undersells  Esso  on  Benzene
The  French  Elections: Another  Step  Toward  Fascism  and  Civil  Conflict
The  key  to  the  French  elections  and  the  French  future  lies
in  the  fact  that  despite  de  Gaulle's  orders  the  Army  in  Al-
geria  herded  the  Moslems  to  the  polls  and  elected  a  group  of
Uncle  Toms.   With  these  Moslems  it  will  be  impossible,  as
de  Gaulle hoped,  to  negotiate  a  settlement  because  their  own
people  do  not  trust  or  respect  them.   They  will  only  go  to
swell   the   rigged   majority   in   the   new   Assembly  which   is
against   any  negotiated   settlement  in   Algeria.    De   Gaulle's
failure  to  make  his  orders  obeyed  in  North   Africa  even  be-
fore  the  elections  foreshadows  his  failure  on  a  larger   scale
now  that  these  same  elements  have  emerged  in  control  of  the
Assembly.
How  the  Elections  Were  Rigged
The  elections  have  produced  a  crop  of  faceless right-wing
yes-men,  elected  by  shrewd  manipulation of  the  new  electoral
laws.   These  new  laws  made  it  possible  vastly  to  exaggerate
the   right-ward  swing  of   French  opinion.    If   the  Assembly
seats  had  been  distributed  by  proportional  representation  on
the  basis  of  the  first  vote  the  right-wing  Independents  would
have  led  with  93  votes,  the  Communists  would  have  come
second  with  88,  Jacques  Soustelle's  de  Gaullist  Union  of  the
New  Republic  would  have  been  third  with  82  votes  and  the
Socialists  fourth  with  72.   Instead,  by  uniting  on  one  candi-
date  and  in  almost  all  cases  dumping  overboard  the  pro-de
Gaulle  Socialists,  the  rightists  were  able  to  emerge  after   the
second  balloting  with  188  votes  for  the  UNR,  132  votes  for
the  Independents,   40  votes  for   the   Socialists  and   10  votes
for  the  Communists.   The  "landslide"   was  more  a  matter  of
electoral  rigging  than  of  votes.
A   coalition   of   military  men,   Algerian   "white   suprema-
cists,"   old   style   reactionaries   and   new   crop   Fascists   has
emerged   to  power   in  the  French   Assembly  on  de  Gaulle's
coat-tails.   He,  who  hoped   to  unite  France,  may  end  by  di-
viding   it  more   deeply   than   ever.   The   elections,   far   from
destroying  Communism  in  France, may prove  to  have  strength-
ened   it   by  destroying  and   discrediting   non-Communist   left
elements  particularly  the  Socialists  and  leaving  the  Commu-
nists  as  the  only  organized  core  of  a  new  Resistance.   In  Al-
Crusading  Journalist  to  the  Senate
A  miracle  of  present  day  politics  was  the  election  to
the  U.  S.  Senate  from  Alaska  of  Ernest   Gruening,  who
made   his   reputation   as   a  crusading   journalist   on   the
team   Oswald  Garrison  Villard  gathered   about   himself
on  The  Nation   in  the   20's.    Senator-elect   Gruening  in-
vaded  Maine  in  the  30's,   establishing   its  first  success-
ful  New  Deal  daily  and  then  after  a  period  as  editor  of
the   New   York  Post  became  Governor   of   Alaska.    His
election   brings  a  fighting  liberal   of  the  George   Norris
variety  to  the  U.  S.  Senate.
geria,  too,  the  extremists on  both  sides  have  been  strength-
ened.   France  has  now  become  a  new  major  point  of  world
instability.
Once  Over Lightly
We   are  relieved  that  the  committee  here  from   Japan  to
study  changes  in  its  Constitution  did   not  get  to  see  former
Secretary  of  State Byrnes as  planned.   We'd  hate  to  have  the
Japanese  go  home  and  legalize  separate  but  equal  schools  for
Caucasians.  .  .  .  "In  replying  to  reporters'  questions,"  Drew
Middleton  cabled  the New  York  Times  (Nov.  29)  ecstatically
about  Nixon's  press  conference  in  London,  "Mr.  Nixon  gave
an  impression  of  sincerity,  frankness  and  at  times  profundity.
The   Cyprus  issue,  he  said,  can  'only  be  settled'   by  a  con-
ference   between  Britain,  Greece  and  Turkey  at  which  they
could  sit down  and  work  out  the  problem.   But  the  settlement,
he   declared,  should   not   lead   to.  'chaos'."    This   is  so  pro-
found   that  we  suggest   Nixon   run   in  I960  on  the   slogan,
"Make   Our  Next   President   Even   Profounder."   .    .   .  We
were  stirred  by  the  statement   Mr.   Bruce  Boehm,   president
of   a  Standard  Oil   subsidiary,  issued  when   he  heard   Dow
Chemical  had   bought   Soviet  benzene  several  cents  a   gallon
cheaper  than  Esso  sells  it.    "This  is  a  little  bit  new,"   Mr.
Boehm  said  softly,  "to  have  Iron  Curtain  materials  imported
into  this  country,  and  I  should  think  it  would   be  a  matter
with  which  the  American  government  might  be  concerned."
The  only  problem   is  whether  to  bomb  the  Soviet  Union  of
Dow  Chemical.
IPS  Speaks:  Dec.   12  on  Drift   to  Nuclear   War,   Unitarian  Church,  9601    Cedar   Lane,  Bethesda,  8:30    p.   m;
Dec.  15,  ECLC  Bill  of  Rights  Day  Rally,  Grand  Ball  Room,  Hotel  New  Yorker,  8:30    p.   m.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
12/8/M
(To)    Name
Street   .........
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes   D    No. CD
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED