I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958nov17.pdf

============================================================

The  Auto Industry  and  the  Search for  Peace
Facts  the  Newspapers  Dare  Not  Print  From  the  New  Kefauver Monopoly Report  on  General  Motors
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  45
NOVEMBER  17,  1968
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.16  CENTS
In Detroit  Adam Smith  Has Been Revised by Lewis  Carroll
When  Senator  Kefauver  a  few  years  ago  proceeded  to  ex-
pose  some  of  the  hoodlums  who  prey  on  the  fringes  of  our
society,  TV  and  the  press  made  him  the  hero  of  a  latter  day
saga.   When  he  turned  his  attention  to  major  rackets,  to  the
uneconomic  practices  that   affect   not  beer  and   slot  machines
but  steel  and  automobiles,  a blanket  of  silence  descended  upon
the  inquiry.   The  American  economy  pivots  on  the  automo-
bile;   its  prospective  sales  are  the  best  index  of  business  ac-
tivity;  the  price  of  cars,  their  financing,  the  level  of  trade-in
values,  are  prime  topics  in  every  American home.   Yet  when
Kefauver  as chairman  of  the  Senate Judiciary subcommittee on
monopoly  a  few  days  ago  released  a  300-page  report  on  its
investigation  of  the  automotive  industry,*  the  first  of  its  kind
in  20  years,  it  briefly  hit  the  front  pages  of  the  better  news-
papers   and   was   quickly  buried.    Coverage   was   superficial;
comment  almost  non-existent.  No  TV  cameras  were  trained
on  the  intrepid  Senator  from  Tennessee  as  he  explained  how
the  American consumer was  being  bilked  by the  longest, flash-
iest  and  silliest  cars  in  our  history.
A Portrait of  Our Odd Folkways
The  auto  report,   largely  the  work  of  the   subcommittee's
chief   economist,  Dr.   John  Blair,  is  more  than   an   economic
analysis.   It  is  a  portrait  of  our  society.   It  will  be  a  joy  to
the  anthropologist  with  a  sense  of  humor;  no  primitive  tribe
exhibits  odder  folkways.  The  intricately  planned   irrationality
and   calculated  wastefulness  of   our  leading  industry  is  here
laid  bare  for  the  social  psychiatrist.   In  it  are  the  keys  to  our
future,  our  hopes  for  orderly  social  evolution  in  America  and
for   peace.   The   main  producers  are  now  terribly  dependent
on   the   arms   race;   General   Motors    remains   a   top   arms
contractor,  though  demand  has  shifted  from  tanks  and  planes
to  rockets  and  missiles.   The  possibility  of  maintaining   pros-
perity  without  a  rising  level  of  armament  and  world   tension
depends  on  the  rational  reorganization  of  this  and  other   in-
dustries.   The  task  might   seem  insuperable  were  it  not  that
one  of  our  biggest  unions,  the  Auto  Workers,  has  a  stake  in
the  struggle,  an  interest  in  regularizing  employment.   Its  presi-
dent,  Walter  Reuther,  perhaps  the  last  major  labor  figure  who
retains  a  social  vision,  did  much  to  spark  this  inquiry.
The  scanty newspaper  coverage contrasts with  the  juicy find-
ings.   Were  candid   discussion   of   automotive   mysteries   not
tabu,  the  report  would   have  an  audience  of  Reader's   Digest
dimensions.   There  is,  first  of   all,   the   success   story.    Since
1921,   General  Motors—the  world's  largest  corporation—has
*  It   may  be  purchased  for   $1  from   the  Superintendent  of
Documents,    Washington,    D.   C.,   as   Administered   Prices:
Automobiles,  A  Report  Pursuant  to  S.  Res.  231,  85th  Con-
gress,  2d Session.
Labor's  Stake  in  Curbing  the   Monopoly
"Our   appearance here,  Mr. Chairman,  is  the  culmina-
tion  of  2'/2  years  of  continuous  efforts  on  the  part  of
our  organization  to  get  the  U.  S.  Congress  to  take  a
good  look  at  the  wage-price-profit  equation  in  the auto-
motive  industry  and  especially  on  the  part  of  the  Big
Three  .  .  .  We  believe  that  the  impact  of  their admin-
istered  prices, the  fact  that  they  can  in  the  exercise  of
their  monopoly  position  set  aside  the  laws  of  supply
and   demand   and  rig   their   prices  .  .   .   short-change
American  consumers, farmers and workers .  .  .  We be-
lieve  that  investigation into  the  destructive  impact  of
administered  prices  in  America's  basic  industries, auto,
steel,   petroleum   and  other  critical  industries  relates
very  directly  to  the  source  of  the  developing  imbalance
in  the  American  economy .  .  .
"They   said   to  me  as  the   spokesman  of   our  union,
'Why   in  the  hell  don't  you  quit  trying  to  act  like  a
labor  statesman?    Why  don't  you  just   come  in   here
and  say,  Give  us  ours  and  the  public  be  damned.'  Why
are  you  worried  about  higher  prices?   That  is  not  your
business.'  And  I  said,  'It  is  everybody's business.  What
happens  to  the  price  structure  of  America  is  the  key
to  our  economic  future  .  .  .  We  do  not  want  higher
wages  out  of   higher  prices.   We  want  higher  wages
out  of  the  fruits  of  our  advancing technology'."
—Walter  Reuther,  president  the  Auto  Workers   Union,
to  the  Kefauver   monopoly  committee,  Jan.  %8, 1958.
never  failed  to  stay  in  the  black,  even  in  1932  when  volume
dropped   from   2,000,000  to   500,000   cars.    In  the   past   ten
years,   1948-57,  GM   made  an   average  annual   return,    after
taxes,  on  its  stockholders'   investment  of   25  percent  a  year.
The  American  Institute  of  Management   pointed   out  that  at
the   1955  rate  of  profit,  GM's   net,  after  interest  and  income
taxes,  was  '.'sufficient  to  recoup  the  company's  entire  net  plant
investment   in   two   years."    In   any   ordinary   business,   this
would  seem  sheer  witchcraft.
Race-Track  Profit  Rates
This  profit  record   reflects  GM's   dominance  of  the  indus-
try.   From  20  percent  of  new  car  registrations  in  1925,   GM's
share  rose  to  50  percent  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.   Ex-
cept   for  aluminum,   automobiles  are  now  our  most   concen-
trated  industry.   In  1915  there  were  75  auto  firms.  Now  the
Big  Three—GM,  Ford   and  Chrysler—account   for   a  shade
better  than  90  percent  of  all  sales.   The  remaining  9.6  per-
cent  is  divided  by  two  surviving  small  domestic  firms,  Ameri-
can  Motors   and  Studebaker-Packard,  with  a  large  variety  of
foreign  imports.   GM  uses  its  position  to  fix  prices  at  a  level
of  output  low  enough  to  ensure  20  percent  after  taxes  on  net
worth  in  poor  years,  and  a  bonanza  in  good.   This  means  a
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  17,1958
GM  Runs  the Automobile Industry  for duPont  Like A  Private  Soviet  .  .  .
steady  increase  in  the  rate  of   profit  to  compensate  for   the
steady  increase  in  taxes,  which  GM  passes  on.   "The   rates  of
return  in  1929  and  in  1950  after  taxes,"  the  report   explains,
"were  comparable—36.2  and  37.5  percent  respectively."   But
in   1929,  with  low  taxes,  a  before-tax  earnings  rate  of   38.5
percent  was  enough  to  provide  36.2  percent  after  taxes.    "In
1950,  on  the  other  hand,"  the  report  notes,  "the  company had
to  make  a  profit  equal  to  77.4  percent  of  its  average  stock-
holders'  investment  in  order  to  earn  37.5  percent  after  taxes."
Raising Prices  to Compete!
Such  rates  of   return   are  supposed,   by  classical  economic
theory,  to  be  associated  with  the  most  speculative  of   enter-
prises.   The   automobile  industry   in  no  way  resembles  the
idealized  image  of  capitalism,  in  which  profit  rises  with  risk
and  price  falls  with  competition.  The  reality  disclosed  by  this
report  is  Adam  Smith  as  revised  by  Lewis  Carroll.   An  inci-
dent  in  the  Fall  of  1956  will  illustrate.   On  September  29  of
that  year,  Ford  announced  its  prices  on  1957  models.    They
showed  an  average  increase of  only  2.9  percent  which  a  Ford
spokesman  said  was  "no  more  than  our  actual  costs  for  ma-
terials  and  labor  have  gone  up."   Two  weeks  later,  on  Octo-
ber  13,  GM  announced  its  prices  on  Chevrolet,   which  com-
petes  with  the  Ford.    GM's  prices  embodied  an  average  rise
of   6.1  percent.   Thereupon   a  week   later,   Ford   revised   its
prices  upward  to  the  Chevrolet   level.   This,  as  Mr.  Reuther
told  the  Kefauver  committee,  was  "the  first  time  in  the  his-
tory  of  a  free  enterprise  where  a  company  raised  the  price  of
their   products  in  order   to  be  competitive."    When   Senator
Kefauver   questioned   a   Ford   vice-president,   Theodore   O.
Yntema,   about   this,   a  positively   fey   colloquy   occurred,   of
which  this  is a  sample:
Senator  Kefauver:  If  you  had  kept  your  prices  lower,
might  not  Chevrolet have  come  down  to  meet  yours?
Mr.  Yntema: Conceivably  it  would  have  happened.
Senator  Kefauver: If  you  had  kept  yours  lower,  would
you  not have gotten  more sales,  more  business?
Mr.  Yntema:  Probably some  more.
A  candid  answer  would  have  invited  anti-trust   prosecution.
A  handful  of  men  at  the  top  of  GM  determine  prices  and  the
As  Changeable as  Women's  Hats
Mr.   [George]   Romney   [president  of   American  Mo-
tors,   one  of   the  last  surviving  independents].   They
[the   Big   Three]   introduced   wraparound  windshields
that  do  not  significantly  improve  vision and  made them
a  hallmark  of  modern  design.   A  small  company could
not  have  made  the  wraparound  windshield a  successful
thing  because  when  you  get  right  down  to  the  guts  of
it,  it  has  no  basic  advantages over  the  straight  wind-
shield,  and  yet  through  advertising and  promotion  you
can  make  an  item  of  that  type  become  absolutely  the
hallmark   of   a  modern  car,  if   you  have  got  a   large
enough  percentage of  the  total  market  to  do  it  .  ,  .
The   automobile   business   really   has   some   aspects
about  it  that  make  it  similar  to  three  businesses.  One
is  the  millinery  business  where  fashion  is  such  a  big
part  of  it,  and  the  other is  the  perishable product busi-
ness  because  you have got  to  move the  cars  pretty  fast
or  they  lose  their  value  .  .  .
Now,  Senator, in  this millinery  aspect,  in  the  fashion
aspect,  a  company  doing  40  to  50  percent  of  the  busi-
ness  can  make  an  aspect of  car  appearance a  necessary
earmark  of  product  acceptance  by  the  public  just  as  a
hat  manufacturer—a  woman's  hat  manufacturer—who
sold  50  percent  of  the  hats  would  have  a  much  easier
time  of  making all  other  hat  manufacturers  put  cher-
ries  on  their hats  if  the  cherries  were  decided  by  it  to
be  the  fashion  note  of  the  year."
—Kefauver   Auto  Monopoly   Report.
others  follow  the  leader—or  else.   GM's  notion  of  free  enter-
prise  is  strikingly  like  Krushchev's;  it  consists   of  decentral-
izing  administration  under  central  planning  and  control.   As
Alfred  P.  Sloan  explained  it  in  1923  after  these  basic  policies
had  been  put  into  effect,   "Decentralization   was  analogous  to
free    enterprise.    Centralization    to    regimentation.    All,    of
course,  within  the  area  of  General  Motors.   We  decided  for
free  enterprise."   Within  this  area,  Ford  and  Chrysler  are  al-
lowed  the  same kind  of  freedom  as  GM's  own  Buick  or  Olds-
mobile,  but  not  much  more.
In  that  same  1923  statement  of  policy,  Mr.  Sloan  said  that
not   to   decentralize -operations   "would   mean   an   autocracy,
which  is  just  as  dangerous  in  a  great  industrial  organization
The  Horsepower  Race  and  A  Good  Joke  on  the  Car-Buying Public
"Second  only  to  the  annual  model  change  in  importance
in  the field of  style  has  been  the  horsepower  race  .  .  . the
lowest  priced 1958 models actually exceed  in  horsepower  the
Cadillacs,  Lincolns and Chryslers  of  1950 ...
"To contain  such  large  power plants,  the  cars  themselves
are  larger  in  size  and  heavier,  as  are  the  essential  auto-
motive  parts.  The  added cost  of  increased  size  is  not,  how-
ever,  limited to  the  original  purchase  price.   Nearly  all  such
cars  require premium  fuel  or  they  will  knock considerably.
In  addition,  overall  mileage  seldom  exceeds  12  or  13  miles
per  gallon.
"Larger tires  are required.  On top  of  this,  repair bills  for
even  minor  breakdowns tend to  run high,  not  only  for  parts
replacement  but  for  the  skilled  labor  necessary   for  such
complex  mechanisms  . . .  The horsepower  race  is  one of  the
major  factors  responsible  for  the  present  high  price  struc-
ture  in  the  automobile industry and the  low sales  record  for
1958.
"Of  course,   it  is  not  clear  that  the  automobile  buyers
were  able  to  determine  how  much  of  what  they  regarded
as  increased  power  and  acceleration  was  in  fact  traceable
to   greater  horsepower.   Chrysler,   for   example,   was   dis-
turbed  by  what  it  felt  to  be  a  common  belief   that  other
cars  had  a  faster   pickup   than  the   Chrysler   line,   which
Chrysler  engineers  said  was  simply  untrue.
"Given  the  problem,  a  market  research  expert   reasoned
that  the  public  could  not  know  how  good  an  automobile's  ac-
celeration  was;  few  people  can  judge  the  speed  at  which
they  are  travelling,  let  alone  the  rate  of  increase  in  speed.
Interviewers  were  sent  out  to  ask  car  owners  whether they
thought  their car  had fast  acceleration  or  not,  and  when  the
results were in, the  tension  of  the  spring  under the  accelera-
tor  pedal in  each make  of  automobile was  measured.   It  was
found   that   (quoting, from   Martin  Mayer's  book  Madison
Avenue,  U.  S. A.),  '. . . wherever the  accelerator  spring: was
tight  .  .  .  people  thought  the  car  had  slow   acceleration;
wherever  the  spring  was  loose,  people  thought  the  chariot
was   blessed   with   get-up-and-go.    Chrysler   loosened   the
springs   under  the  pedals'."
—Kefauver   Auto  Monopoly   Report.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  17,1958
The  Horsepower  Race  and  Style  Razzle-Dazzle  Waste  Capital  Goods
as  it  is  in  a  government."    Despite  this  unctuous   disclaimer,
Detroit  dances to  GM's  tune.   The  lesser  companies  must  dis-
port  themselves  within  price  and  sales  policies  fashioned   to
suit  GM's  convenience;  they  do  not  do  as  well  but  the  bigger
ones  do  not  too badly. Ford's  average  annual  return  after  taxes
on  stockholder  investment from  1954  through   1957   exceeded
16 percent,  less  than  GM's  25  percent,  but  half  again  as  much
as  the  average  rate  of  return  for  all  U.  S. manufacturing   cor-
porations  in  the  same period,  which  was  only  11 percent.   The
prices  set  by  GM  insulate  it  from  the  fierce  winds  of  the  free
market,  giving  GM  all  the  benefits  of  a  planned  economy  in
an  otherwise  competitive  capitalist  world.    Automotive   De-
troit  sometimes  appears   to  be  a  private  Soviet  governed   by
General  Motors,  which  in  turn  is  responsive to  its  major  own-
er,  the  du  Pont  family.  This  occupies  a  position  in  our  so-
ciety  much  like  that  of  the  great  Zaibatsu  family  monopolies
now  reviving  in  Japan.
Not That  Nutty
The   general   policy  imposed   by  this  lordly  group   on  our
major  consumer  durable  is  best  summed  up  in  a  lovely  word
coined  by  Mr.  Harlow   H.  Curtice,  president   of  GM  to  de-
scribe  the  bewildering  chrome-plated,  space  ship  finned,  raz-
2le  dazzle  of  new  almost  annual  models.   The  word  Mr.  Cur-
tice  used  in  his  appearance   before  the  Kefauver   committee
was  "fancification."   In  defending  perpetual  style  changes,  the
GM  president  said  "I  would  say that  the  application  of  fanci-
fication to  our  automobiles  is  the  result  of  the  demand  on  the
part  of  the  public."   The  phrase  is  vivid  but  the  proposition
is  dubious.
Where  the  elder  Ford  tried  to  develop  a  solid  car  within
average  means  and  great  foreign  producers  like  Rolls   Royce
developed   a  finely   tooled   staple   product   which   does   not
change   basically  year  in  or  out,  Detroit's  mad  drive   under
How  Sharply  Profits  Per  Car  Have  Risen
"Over  the  4  years   [1954-57],  General  Motors'  unit
profits  were  on  the  average  $358  before  taxes,  with  an
average  annual volume  of  3.6  million  vehicles.   In  1957
the  unit  profits  were  $312,  with  a  volume  of  3.2  mil-
lion.  It  is  interesting  to  compare these  figures  with the
data   reported  by   the   Federal   Trade  Commission  in
1939.    The  years  1935-37  were  highly  successful   years
for  General  Motors in  terms  of  the  rate  of  return  on
stockholders'   investment.   Yet  the  realized  profit   per
car  and  truck  sold  in  those  years  averaged  only  $45,
according   to   the   Federal   Trade   Commission.   While
there  is  no certainty  that  the  average  shown  is  exactly
comparable  to   the  1954-57  data  reported  by  General
Motors,  it  is  hard  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  prices
and  unit  profits  have risen  much  more rapidly than  unit
costs  in  the  past  two  decades."
—Kefauver   Auto  Monopoly   Report.
GM   direction   is   to   make   cars   flashier.   Expert    testimony
showed  that  car  quality  was  going  down;  confidential   surveys
of  dealers  afraid  to  speak  publicly  showed  their  belief   (as  one
expressed   it)   that  "John  Q.  Public  is  no  longer  standing  in
line  to  purchase  an  overpowered   beast  with  a  maze  of  elec-
tronic  gadgets  at  a  price  his  father  paid  for  a  home."   Not
the  public  but  GM  advertising  has  developed   the  taste  for
gadgetry.    In  the   drive   to   sell   bigger   and   therefore   more
profitable  cars,  requiring   higher   test  gasoline   (in  which   the
du  Fonts  have  an  interest),  Detroit  has  developed  a  new  race
of  advertising  yogis,   dervishes   and  gurus,  mobilized   not   to
sell  transportation   but  to  minister  to  hidden   sickness  in  our
souls  curable  by  the  purchase  of  gaudier  fantasies.    "Depth
techniques"  are  being  used  in  selling  cars.   Ad  copy  grows  as
mystical  as  the  Upanishads.   The  appeal  to  snobbery  and  ir-
rationality,   to  compensatory   dreams  in  two  tone   paint,   has
How  GM As  Our  No.  1 Arms  Contractor
"Another  source  of  General  Motors  strength  has  been  its
receipt  of  defense  contracts, both for  production and  for  re-
search  and  development.  During  World  War  II  and  during
most  of  the subsequent  period it  has  maintained  its  position
as  the  Nation's  No.  1  recipient  of  prime  contract   awards.
"It  is  accepted  public  policy  that  corporations   engaged
in  defense work  should enjoy no  more than moderate profits
.  .  .  The  difficulty  is  that  there  is  little  real  check  upon  the
effective  operation of  this  public  policy  .  .  .  [except]  the
occasional   check   upon  a  particular  contract   subjected   to
scrutiny  by  the  legislative branch.
"Two  such  instances  have  involved General  Motors Corp.
In  the  summer  of  1957,  the  Special  Investigation  Subcom-
mittee  of  the  House  Armed  Services  Committee conducted
hearings  on  an  airplane  contract  negotiated  with  Buick-
Oldsmobile-Pontiac  Assembly  division  of  GM.  This  contract
with  the  Air  Force  in  1952 involved the  manufacture of  599
airplanes,  plus  related  spare  parts.    It  was  a   negotiated
fixed-price  contract  with a price-redetermination  clause  . . .
"The   rate  of   profit  agreed  upon  was  8  percent  of  cost.
.  .  .  The  contract  price  established  in  redetermination  was
$208,998,000;  yet  the  investigation  disclosed  that  the  com-
pany's  actual  costs   were   $176,075,500.  Thus,   instead   of
earning   $15,481,300   as   was   originally   contemplated,   the
company's  experienced  profit  amounted  to  $32,940,500.  This
meant  that  it  enjoyed  a  profit  of  18.7  percent  .  .  .
Takes  Uncle  Sam  for  A  (Cost  Plus)  Ride
"The  General Accounting  Office  also  made a  report  to  the
Congress  on  a  series  of   [8]   contracts   negotiated  by  the
Department  of  the  Navy  with  the  Cleveland  diesel  engine
division  of  General  Motors  .  .  .  amounting  to  $118,700,000
.  .  .  substantially  completed  by September  1, 1956  .  .  .
"Failure   [by  the  Navy  adequately  to  check  estimates],
according  to  the  General  Accounting  Office,  resulted   in  an
overcharge  by  General  Motors  of  $1,692,000  .  .  .  Another
weakness  in  these  eight  contracts,  according  to  the  GAO,
was  that  General  Motors  charged  the  same  rate  of   profit
on  major  components  that  were  subcontracted  out  as  was
charged  for  items  manufactured in  its  own  plants.
"On  generators,  for  example,  the  single   contribution  of
General  Motors  was  receipt  at  their  plant  and  mounting
them  on  a  frame  with  the  diesel  engine  attached.  This  op-
eration  required  the  boring  of  holes,  and  bolting  the  gen-
erator  and  engine  as  a  unit.   For  this  service  the  company
made  a  charge  of  $644,000 for  general  and  administrative
expenses,   and  a  profit   of  $2,239,000.
"The  General  Accounting  Office  stated  that  it   had  been
informed  by  Department of  the  Navy  that  General  Motors
historical  rate  of  profit  has  been  11.11  percent  on  cost.   It
quoted   the  Navy  as   follows:   'For  several   years   General
Motors  has   applied  this   rate  of   profit,   and  all   attempts
to  reduce  this  rate  have  been  of  no  avail.'  .  .  ."
—Kefauver   Auto  Monopoly   Report.
1   8  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  17,1958
The  Key  to  Disarmament  May  Lie  in  Detroit  Rather  Than  Geneva
reached  the  point  where  the  semanticist  S.  I.  Hayakawa  wrote
in  Advertising  Age  earlier  this year that  the  car  designers  seem
to  be  operating  on  the  assumption  that  "the  majority  of  the
population   is  mentally  ill."    He  reminded  the  motivation  re-
searchers  that  only  the  psychotic  "act  out  their  irrationalities"
while  as  for  the  rest   "the  more  expensive  an  object   is,  the
more  its  purchase  compels  the  recognition  of  reality."    The
decline  in  car  sales  seems to  show  the  country is not  that  nutty,
though  Advertising   Age  in  a  preface  to  the  article  suggested
dryly,  "It   is  doubtful,  hower,  that  Professor  Hayakawa  and
the  numerous  others  who  have  suddenly  discovered how  sane
the  American  consumer  is,  can  prove  their  thesis  by  the  past
history  of  the  automobile   market."
A Shocking Waste of  Capital   Goods
The  horsepower  race  and  the  style  changes  are  enormously
expensive;  the  figures  in  this  report  on  the  cost  of  new  tools
and  dies  are  shocking  in  a  world  hungry  for  capital   goods.
The  Kefauver  report,  summing  up  conservative figures   from
industry  sources,  says  the  Big  Three   "are   together   spending
well  over  $1  billion  a  year  to  convince buyers that  last  year's
car   models   are  obsolete."   These  costs  do   not   include   the
mounting  bill  for   advertising.   In  the  past  four  years   "the
advertising  cost  of  the  Ford  more  than  doubled;  of  Chevrolet
nearly  tripled;  of  Plymouth  more  than  tripled."  The  situation
has  reached  the  stage  where  the  volume  of  advertising  is  so
huge  that  it  may  actually  be  reducing  the  potential  volume  of
sales.   The  report  figures  that  advertising  costs  now  build  in
an  extra  $100  per  average  car  and  given  the  market's  sensi-
tivity  to  price,  "a  $100  increase  on  a  $2,000  car  would  tend
to  reduce  annual  sales  by  several  hundred  thousand  cars."
The  Kefauver  committee  finds  that  if  styling,  advertising
and  tooling  costs  were  reduced  to  pre-1955  levels,  substantial
price  reductions could  be  made  with  no  sacrifice  of  passenger
car  profits  but  with  an  increase  in  output.   The  report  shows
that  with  every  10  percent  increase in  price,  sales  tend  to  fall
by  12  to  15  percent.   It  reveals that  labor  costs  have  been  the
excuse,  not  the  real  occasion,  for  the  steady  inflation  of  auto-
mobile  prices.   Hourly  rated  labor  costs  only  take  from  $300
to  $400  of  a  car  with  a  factory  sale  value  of  $2,213.   We  are
What's  Good  for  General  Motors  .  .  .
Senator   Kefauver.    Mr.  Curtis,   do  you   regard   the
growth  of  your  company   from  about  one-third  in   1929
or   1930  to  over  one-half   and  the  decline  by  the  inde-
pendents  from   one-fourth   to  less  than  5  percent  as  a
healthy   trend   in   the   economy   and  in  the   automobile
industry?
Mr.  [Harlow]  Curtice   [president  of  GM].    I  regard
that  as  a  healthy  situation  as  far  as  General   Motors  is
concerned;   yes.
Senator   Kefauver.   Not  as  far  as  General   Motors   is
concerned,  Mr. Curtice.   I  am  talking  about  the  country
and  the  industry   generally.
Mr.  Curtice.   I  think  it  is  a  healthy  situation  for  the
country  and  the  industry  in  general.
—Kefauver   Auto  Monopoly   Report.
confronted  with  a drive to  sell  the  public  less  quality  at  more
cost.   Between   1950  and   1957   advertising  expenditures   for
space  and  time only  (not  counting radio  and  TV  talent)   rose
from  61  millions of  dollars  to  195  millions,  more  than  three-
fold.   In  1957,  GM  was  first,  Ford  third  and  Chrysler fourth
among  the  100  leading  advertisers  in  measured   mediums,   in-
cluding  press,  radio and  TV.   A  major  portion  of  the  tripe  on
TV  is  financed  by  the  auto companies.  These  vast  advertising
expenditures  give  them  a  hold  on  the  mediums  of  communi-
cation  which seriously inhibits free  discussion  of  the  economic
problems  they  are  creating.
Like  Unregulated  Public  Utilities
The  problem  of  how  to  deal  with  them  (the  anti-trust  laws
are  quite  inadequate  even  if  we had  a  Justice  Department  with
the  courage  to  tackle  GM)   is  to  be  studied  by  Senator  Ke-
fauver  in  new  hearings  beginning  early  next  year.   We   hope
by  devoting  this  issue  to  the  auto  report  to  help  attract   more
attention  to  the  coming  inquiry.   When  major  industries  op-
erate  like  public  utilities,  fixing  their  own  prices  but  without
regulation,  we  have  given  up  whole  sectors  of  the  free  market
to  private  control.   Until  this  problem  is  met,  it  will  be  im-
possible  to  create  a  rational  economy,  working   at  full   em-
ployment  without orders  for  new  instruments  of  mass  murder.
In  Detroit  rather  than  Geneva  lies  the  key  to  disarmament.
Help    Us  Reach  Auto  Workers  and  More  Auto  Buyers—Bulk  Orders  for  This  Issue  Fitted  at  3  Cents  A  Copy
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      ............................................,..........................._............
Street         .............................................................................._......
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
II/I7/SB
(To)   Name
Street     .......
City      ........................................Zone............State..............._
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  D    No  D
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  IS,  D. C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class   Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat    pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W., Washington  16,  D.  C.
An   Independent   w-fcklv   niidllabed   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
So  In  the   U.  S.:  $8  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED