I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958may19.pdf

============================================================

Titoism  and  Peace, P.  3
There's  Little  About  Soviet   Nuclear  Testing  We  Don't   Already   Know   From   Afar,   Page   2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  19
MAY   19,  1958
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Allied  Countries  May  Soon  Be  Able  to  Welcome  U.   S.  Vice  Presidents   With  Real  Bang
How  They'll  Greet  A  Richard   Nixon  in   1970
Ten   years  from   now   it  looks  as  if  protesting  crowds  will
be  able  to  greet  an  American  vice-president  with   a  shower
of   small   atomic  weapons,  about   the   size   of   a   softball   or
grapefruit.   We,  in  turn,  will  be  able  to  drop  nuclear  armed
Marines  on  the  offending   spot  within  the  hour  and  wipe  it
out  in  strictly  limited  war.   This  should  add  to  the  fraternal
love  among  nations.
Small  atomic  weapons  are  expensive  for   small  countries,
but  we  are  planning  to  remedy  that.   Of  the  places  in  which
anti-American  riots  have  occurred—France,  Venezuela,  Peru
and   Lebanon—all   are   allied   or   so-to-speak   friendly   coun-
tries.    All   will   be   eligible,   should   pending  'legislation   be
adopted,  to  obtain  from  us  military  reactors  with  which  they
can  produce  the   stuff   for  bombs.   They  will  also  be  able  to
get  non-nuclear parts  of  nuclear  weapons  on  which  they  can
practice  until  they  achieve  that  "substantial  capability"  which
will  in  turn  qualify   them  for  restricted  data  showing   them
how  to  make  atomic  weapons.   They  will  then  be  ready,  in
greeting  a  Richard  Nixon,  really  to  punctuate  their  displeas-
ure  over  a  rise  in  our  tariff   on  Peruvian  zinc  or  a  reduction
in  our  import  quota  for  Venezuelan  oil.
How  Color Lines  May  Be Obliterated
Hopeful   Thought-of-the-Week
The  President  seems  to  have  angered  Negro  leaders
at   their   meeting  here   with   his   plea   for   patience.
Typical   of   the   protests   this   aroused   was   Thurgood
Marshall's   remark,  "I'm   the  world's  original  gradual-
ist.    I   just   think   90-odd  years   is   gradual   enough."
Negro  anger,  though understandable,  may  be  too hasty.
Mr.  Elsenhower,  as  the  commander-in-chief,  has  access
to   much  information  which  cannot   be   made    public.
He  may have  a  reason  for  counselling  patience.  It  may
be  that  secret  studies  have  shown  that  the  next   war
will  end  discrimination  based  on  color.   There  is  reason
to   believe   all   survivors   will  be   the   same   shade  of
radioactive   green.
When  that  happy  time  comes,  revolting  French   paratroopers
in   Algiers  will  also  be  able—with   a  few   "softballs"   well-
placed  on  the  native  quarters—to  wipe  out  that  Arab  major-
ity  they  fear.   This   will  further  endear  white  supremacy   to
Africa  and  Asia.  It  may not  be  a  more  stable  planet  by   1970,
but  it  looks  as  if  there  will  be  fewer  dull  days.
Nothing   Upsets   the   State   Department   So  Much  As   Concessions   from  The  Kremlin
The  Very  Latest  Treachery  of  Nikita  Krushchev
At  the  risk  of  not  being  invited  to  Secretary  Dulles'  next
private  dinner,  we're  going  to  tell  the  plain  truth  about  the
State  Department's  reaction  to Krushchev's  latest.   Mr.  Dulles'
astringent   remark   at   National   Airport   to  correspondents—
"We   don't   get  optimistic  quickly  about   these   matters"—is
only  half  the  story.   It  is  not  just  that  the  Department   (after
insisting  for  24  hours  that  there  was  "nothing  new"   in  the
Krushchev  note)   is  more  cautious  than  the  White  House.
The   Department   regards   the   new  Russian   offer   as  a   most
unsanitary   maneuver,   or   dirty   trick.    Mr.   Dulles  had   con-
vinced  the  leading  writers  on  the  easily  convinced  New   York
Times   that  he  was  the  flexible  one;   he  had  persuaded   the
NATO  Council  in  Copenhagen  to  put  the  wraps  on  summit
talk;  he  had  come  back  triumphant   to  resume   (in   speeches
in  New  Hampshire,   West  Berlin  and  Minneapolis)   his  old
brink-of-Armageddon  script,  with  himself   as  the  fifth  horse-
man  of  the  Apocalypse.   The  NATO  Council  had  "expressed
the  hope"  in  its  final  communique  that  the  Russians  by  agree-
ing  "in  spite  of  repeated   Soviet  refusal,  to  inaugurate  expert
technical  discussions ...  on  measures  necessary,  for  example
... to detect  nuclear  explosions might go  far  towards  demon-
strating  the  possibility  of  agreement   on  disarmament."    But
no  one  at  Copenhagen   dreamt  that   Krushchev,   as  if   from
ambush,  would  leap  up  treacherously  and  agree.   It  just  shows
how  dangerous  it  is  to  say  anything  to  the  Russians.
Technical   discussions  are  necessary.   They  can  also  be  an
easy  means  of  delay;  there's  never  a  hair  so  fine,  it  can't  be
split.    If   some  people   here   had   their   way,   technical   talks
would  be  dragged  out  until  we  had  two  atom  bombs  in  every
garage.    There  are  also  people  here   who  believe   that   Mr.
Dulles,  bowing  to  possible  White  House  readiness   to  nego-
tiate  a  cessation  of  tests  separately,  might  try  to  block   agree-
ment  by  raising  the  ante  on  inspection   to  the  point   where
the  Russians  balk.   Stassen  spoke  of  a  dozen  listening  posts
across  the  U.  S.  S. R.  There  are  now  suggestions   for  as many
as a  hundred.   If  Mr.  Dulles  had  his  way he'd  probably  insist
on  a  radar   tower   behind   every   hen-house   in  the   Ukraine.
Without  public   pressure   and   some   time  limit  on   technical
talks,  they  can  go  on  forever.   We  will  try  to  show  on  the
next  page  that  there  is  little  we  do  not  already  know  about
Russian   testing,   and  that  not   much   technical   discussion   is
required  //  both  tides  want  an  agreement.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  19, 1958
Detection  Difficulties   Highly   Exaggerated;    White   House  and  AEC  Secretive
Evidence Indicates  We  Can Monitor  Most  Soviet  Tests  From  Afar
At  least  three  different   technical  studies  are  already  avail-
able  to  the  Administration  (though   not  yet  to  the  American
public)   on  detection  of  tests.
Stassen  had  a  task  force  which  studied  the  problem,  but
the   report  has  been  withheld   on   the  ground   that   it  was
made  for  the  private  use  of  the  President.   A  second  report
has  been  prepared  by  Dr.  Hans  Bethe,  but  this  is  also  being
kept  under  wraps.   Dr.   Bethe  is  for   a  separate  agreement
on  testing,  and   believes  it  can  effectively   be  inspected.
The  fact'that  Dr.  Bethe  is  chairman  of  the  Ad  Hoc  Com-
mittee  on  Nuclear  Test  Cessation  (set  up  by  the  President's
Science  Advisory  Committee—the  so-called  Killian   commit-
tee)   was  even  censored  out  of  the  transcript  of  Dr.   Bethe's
appearance  before  the  Humphrey  subcommittee.  But  censor-
ship  was violated  by the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  the  morn-
ing   after   this   highly   censored   testimony  was   released   on
May  7.   The  fact  that  the  Bethe  group  report  has  been  com-
pleted  was  disclosed   by  Secretary  Dulles   several  weeks  ago
but   this  has  not   been  acknowledged  by  the  White   House,
which  fears  pressure  for  publication.
Stockpiles   Monitored,  Too
A  third  continuous  highly  secret  study  has  been underway
for  more  than  a  decade  by  an  Air  Force  group  (AFOAT-1)
of  which  there  are  glimpses  in  the  Oppenheimer   hearings.
Dr.   Ellis  Johnson,  its  first  technical  director,  told   a   House
civil  defense  subcommittee  hearing  May  5  it  was  established
"to  monitor the  atomic  tests  and  the  atomic stockpile."   This
presumably   is   the   source   of   the   secret   information   often
hinted  at  which  gives  us  estimates  of  Soviet   stockpiles.
The   Bethe   testimony,  though   highly   censored,   indicates
that  special  techniques  developed  by  our  government  makes
it  possible  for   us  to  monitor  Soviet  testing  with  assurance
from  outside the  U.  S.  S.  R.   Doubt  may  arise  only  with  un-
usually  small  tests  underground   (Admiral   Strauss   and   Dr.
Teller  refuse  to  say  in  public  session  just  how  small   these
would  have to  be)  and  possibly with  tests  in  the  stratosphere.
Both  stratospheric and  underground  tests  are  of  limited  mili-
tary  value;  both  could  be  monitored  by  a  chain  of  stations
in   the   U.   S.   S.   R.    Underwater   tests,   according   to    Dr.
Bethe,  are  among  those  most  easily  detected.
The   whole  problem   of   detecting   underground  tests   has
Clean  Bomb  for   Anti-Missiles?
The  AEC  has  fostered  the  idea  that  the  main  reason
for   continued  testing   is   the  need  to  develop  a   clean
bomb  as   warhead  for   use   in  an  anti-missile   missile,
lest  it  spray  our  own  territory  with  radioactivity.   But
the  real  facts  were  indicated when  Congressman   Porter
fresh  from  Eniwetok  told  the  House  May  7,  "An  Air
Force  Major  General  told  me  there  was  no  need  for  a
clean  anti-missile  missile  because  no  immediate  fallout
resulted  from  an  air  burst  of  our  stockpile   weapons."
This  was  the  point  of  that  test  in  Nevada  last  year
when  Air  Force  officers  were  shown  standing  unscathed
directly  beneath  the  point  where  an  air  to  air  missile
had  been  exploded.  This  was  an  air  burst  shot  so  high
up   that   no  fallout   was   created   under   it.    When   an
atomic  weapon  is  detonated  so  high  up  that  the  fire-
ball  does  not  touch  the  earth,  it  does  not  suck  up  debris
and  coat  this  with  radioactive  particles,  thus   creating
the   "fallout."
To  render  an  incoming  ICBM  harmless  it  would  have
to  be  hit  by  the  anti-missile  10 miles  or  more  up  before
it  could  reenter  the  earth's  atmosphere   above  the  tar-
get   area.   That  high  up  there   is  little  dust   or  other
particles  to  be  rendered  radioactive   by  the  explosion.
been  exaggerated  in  the  public  mind  by  AEC  secretiveness.
This  has  yet  to  be  fully   breached.   Even  the  little  informa-
tion  so far  extracted has  dealt  only  with  detection  by  standard
seismographs  made  to  detect  earthquakes.   Just  what  can  be
done   by   equipment   specially   designed   to   detect   nuclear
explosions  has  been  kept   classified.
Example:   standard   earthquake   detection   equipment   op-
erates  on  a  frequency of  one  to  ten  cycles  per  second.   Three
Ann  Arbor  scientists  disclosed  at  the  American  Geophysical
Union  meeting  here  that   by  using   frequencies   up   to   100
cycles  they  got   an   unusually  sharp  record   of   the   Nevada
underground   tests  1700   miles  away  last  September.    When
this  correspondent  asked  them  whether  this  was  reported  to
the  AEC,  they  said  their  records  were  furnished  the   AEC
last  Fall.   These  results  were  also  kept  secret  by  the  AEC.
We   also  do  not  know  whether  the  AEC  or  the  Air  Force
have  tried  special  equipment  for   underground   detection.
It   may  be   significant   that   neither   Admiral   Strauss   nor
Dr.  Teller  have ever  said flatly that  tests  can  be held  in  secret.
Humphrey  Statement   Prodding  Ike
"The   United  States   should  immediately  act   on  the  ap-
parent  willingness  of  the  Soviet  Union  to  set   up  a  joint
study   of  the  inspection  system  necessary  to  suspend  nu-
clear  weapons  tests.     The  President  must  also  make   the
decision   to  break  up  our  disarmament  package   and   offer
to  negotiate  separately  on  the  suspension  of  nuclear   weap-
ons  tests.
".  .  .  it  is  unfortunate  that  the  first  reaction   to  it   (the
new  Soviet  offer)  does  not  come  from  the  President  or  the
Secretary  of  State,  but  from  the  Presidential   press  secre-
tary,  James  Hagerty.    It  is  also  unfortunate  that  Mr.  Hag-
erty's   statement  is  so  hedged.   Mr.  Hagerty   stated:  'It  is
to  be  noted  that  the  Soviet  Union's  acceptance  of  this  posi-
tion  relates  only  to  discussion  of  the  single  issue  of  nuclear
test   suspension   and  not  to  the  more  important   elements
of    disarmament   which   the   General   Assembly   has    en-
on  Tests  Ignored  by  Most  Papers
dorsed.'   Since  the  President  had  received  Mr.  Krushchev's
letter  two  days  before  the  Soviet  Union  made  it  public,  I
fail  to  understand  why  the  U.  S.  reaction  to  it  could  not
be  forthright,  positive  and  a  clear  indication  that   here   is
an   occasion   where  the  Kremlin  is   appearing   to  agree  to
one  of  our proposals.  .  .  .
"I  suggest  that  the  President  appoint  a  group  of  promi-
nent   authorities   on  the   question,   scientists   such   as   Dr.
Hans  Bethe. ... In addition  to U. S.  and Soviet  technicians,
it   might   be   desirable   to   include   technicians   from   other
countries.  .  .  .  This  group  should  meet   under  the  auspices
of   the   United   Nations  with   a  member   of   the   Secretary
General's   staff   acting  as  chairman  or  rapporteur ...  to
pave  the  way  for  a  multilateral   agreement   on  the  suspen-
sion  of  tests.  .  .  ."'
—Sen. Hubert  H.  Humphrey,  May  13.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  19, 1958
Can  Peaceful  Co-Existence  in  the  H-Bomb  Age  Be  Combined  with  Class  War  Tactics?
Why  the  Renewed  Moscow-Tito  Battle  Is  Crucial  for  World  Peace
Questions  of  fundamental  importance  to  the  struggle  for
world  peace  are  involved  in  the  new  attack  by  Moscow  on
Tito.
1.  Can   the   Communist  movement  pursue   its  traditional
revolutionary  policy  in  the  H-bomb  era  when  war  may  bring
the  end  of  the  human  race?
2.  Doesn't   the   policy   of   peaceful   co-existence   entail   a
search   for   peaceful  roads   to  socialism,  lest   an   upsurge  of
violence  within  a  key  country  endanger   good   relations  be-
tween  the  Communist  and  non-Communist  worlds?
"Capitalists"  Are Human Too
3.  From  this  point  of  view  the  policy  of  "different  roads
to  socialism"  espoused  by  the  Yugoslav  Communists  is  a  pol-
icy   of   peace  whereas  .the   contrasting   policy   expressed   by
Peking—"without  proletarian  revolution  and  proletarian  dic-
tatorship   there  can  be  no   socialism"—is  a   policy   of   class
war   which  must  lead   to   increased  world   tension.    Capital-
ists  arc  not  going  to  co-exist  peacefully  with  people   prepar-
ing  to  cut  their  throats.
4.  Pravda's   milder  attack  on  Tito  seems  to  be  making  a
distinction   between   political   and   economic   co-existence.    It
said  "Two   economic  systems  exist  and  will  continue  to  exist
for  a  long  time  to  come.   The  goal  now  is  to  establish  peace-
ful   economic  co-existence  between   them,   to   normalize   the
economic  relations  between  the  world   of   socialism   and   the
world  of  capitalism."   But  the  economic  relations  are  abnor-
mal   because  the   political   relations   are   bad.    Peaceful   eco-
nomic   co-existence  is   impossible  without   peaceful.  political
co-existence.    The   restrictions  on   Soviet   trade   are   political
restrictions  and  their  dissolution  can  come  only  by   lessening
political   tension.   Trade   is  a  political   weapon,   as  may  be
seen   in   Soviet-Yugoslav  relations;   every   time   they   worsen,
the  U.  S.  S.  R.  threatens  economic  reprisals.
The  Yugoslav   Emphasis   Is  The  More  Hopeful
5.  A  special  target   of   attack  is  the   Yugoslav   view   that
the  world  today  displays  not  "two   radically  different   world
politico-economic   systems"   (as   Peking   phrases   it)    but   a
movement   everywhere  toward   the   welfare   state   and   state
control  of  the  economy.   Tito  sees  this  as  "the  most  tangible
proof  that  mankind  is  irrepressibly  and  by  the  most   diverse
roads  deeply  entering  into  the  epoch   of  socialism."
6.  Granted  that  there  are  some  elements  of  truth  in  both
views,  the  former  emphasizes  rigid  differences  and   assumes
inevitable   hostilities   while   the   latter   focusses   attention   on
those   developments   which   encourage   peaceful   change   and
peaceful   co-existence.
7.  Peaceful  co-existence  must  have  a  crucial  influence with-
in  the  communist  countries  as  well  as  within  the  non-Com-
munist.    The   spy-haunted  Russia  of   Stalin's   time   reflected
a  society  which  felt   itself   besieged.   The   evils  of  that  pe-
riod  can  only  be  prevented  from  recurring  in  full  force  in  a
world  atmosphere  which  would  make  the  Communist   regimes
less  fearful  of  inner  debate  and  free  discussion.
8.  This  brings  a  cry  of  alarm  from  the  Chinese.    Only  a
year  or  so  ago  they  were  talking  of  the  value  of  letting  dif-
ferent  flowers  contend.   Now   only  one  variety  is  to  be  al-
lowed   to  bloom.   They   accuse  the   Yugoslavs   of   proposing
to  turn  the  Communist  party  "from  a  militant   revolutionary
organization  into  some  kind  of  a  debating   society."
Why Djilas  Is In Jail
10.  How   can  "cult  of  personality,"   bureaucratic  rigidity,
domination  of  the  party  by  its  secretariat  be  avoided  if  there
is  no  right  of  debate  within  the  party?   If  there  are  "different
roads  to  socialism"  in  the  sense  that  different  countries  may
proceed  differently,  then  may  there  not  be  "different   roads
to  socialism"  within  countries?   This  is  the  next  step  which
Peking  fears  and  Tito  himself   will  not  face.   This  is  why
Djilas  is  in  jail.   Tito  is  prepared   to  champion   freedom   to
the  extent  that  it  gives  him  freedom  from  Moscow  but  not
to  the  extent  of  ending  the  "cult  of  personality"   in   Yugo-
slavia  itself.
11.  This   capacity  of   rulers   to   keep   their   doctrines   and
their   practice   in   separate  compartments   is   almost   whimsi-
cally  illustrated   in  Pravda's   rebuke  to  Tito.   The   very   edi-
torial  which  insists  on  Yugoslavia   toeing   the   exact  line  of
"Marxism-Leninism"   as   laid   down   by   Moscow   also   says,
"The   Socialist  countries  built  their  mutual  relations  on  prin-
ciples  of  full  equality  .  .  .  and  non-interference   in  one  an-
other's  internal  affairs."    Apparently  every  Communist   coun-
try  is  free,  i.e.  free  to  follow  Moscow's   line.   Does  this  re-
turn   to  humorless  rigidity  help  the   cause  of  world   peace?
How  does  Pravda  think  this  will  read  when  translated   into
Polish  and  Hungarian?   The  mentality   disclosed   in  this  dis-
pute  does  not  make  negotiation    easier.
The Comrades Were "Basically  Correct"
"We  consider  as  basically  correct  the  criticism  made  in
June,  1948,  by  the  Information Bureau  of  Communist  par-
ties  in  its  resolution 'Concerning  the  Situation  in  the  Com-
munist  Party  of  Yugoslavia'  in  regard  to  the  mistake  of
the  Yugoslav Communist party  in  departing from  the  prin-
ciples  of Marxism-Leninism."
—Peking  People's  Daily  (New  York  Times, May  11).
"What  happened  to  most  of  those  who  signed  the  first
Com inform   resolution,   which   the   Chinese   comrades   are
now  rehabilitating  so  lightly?
"Out  of   17  signatories  of   the  resolution   from   Socialist
countries,  12  of  them  have  finished  ingloriously  or  tragi-
cally.   Trajko  Kostov  was  sentenced  to  death.   Vulko  Cher-
venkov  was  removed  from  the  post  of  Prime  Minister  and
But  Are  Nevertheless  Basically Dead
sharply   criticized.    Ana   Pauker   was   expelled   from   the
party.   Vasili   Kuka   was   sentenced   to  life   imprisonment.
Matyas  Rakosi  led  Hungary  to  the  brink  of  ruin  and  now
lives  as  an  emigre  away  from  his  country.   Mihaly   Farkas
is   in   prison  for   crimes   against   his   fellow   Communists.
Erno  Gero  is  also  living  as  an  emigre.   Jakub  Herman  has
been  stigmatized  in  Poland  for  a  breach  of  the  law,..for
arresting    and    persecuting    honest    Communists.    Georgi .
Maksimilianovich   Malenkov  has   been   condemned   by   the
party  for  belonging  to   the  well-known  anti-party-   group.
Gustav   Bares   has   been   removed   from   party   functions.
Rudolf   Slansky  was   hanged.   Bedzih   Geminder  was   also
hanged."
—Kommunist  {Yugoslavia),  New  York  Times  same  date.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 19,1958
Now  Military  Science  and  Divine  Providence  Work  Hand  in  Hand  Against  Atheism
Massive  Retaliation   May  Soon  Be  Made  Post  Mortem
Mr.  Dulles,  fresh  from  his  NATO  Council  triumph,  ended
his  speech   in  Berlin  May  8  on  a  high,  if  slightly  suicidal,
note.   He  said  "men  of  faith  are  not  prepared  to  succumb  to
a  rule  that  is  atheistic  and  militaristic  merely  in  the  hope  of
thus   insuring  continued   existence."    He   will   be   happy   to
know   that   military   science  is  coming  to   the   aid   of   faith.
Men  prepared  to  die  rather  than  give  in  to  atheism  may  be
comforted   by  the   news  that  they  can  now   practice  massive
retaliation  while  dying,  and   soon  indeed  posthumously.
The  day  after  Mr.  Dulles  spoke,  the  House  Appropriations
Committee  released  its  hearings  on  the  1959 Army  budget.
In  them  Major  General   R.  J.  Wood,  the  Army's  Chief  of
Research  and  Development,   disclosed  the  results  of  an  Army
medical  research  project  last  summer  in  Nevada  on  the  medi-
cal   effect   of   nuclear   weapons.    "Obviously,"   he   explained,
"we   couldn't   use  humans  for   this   test,   so  we   used   pigs,
which  the   doctors  say  so  far   as  their  physical  reactions   are
concerned  are  closest  to  those  of  human  bodies."    The   pigs
were  protected  from  fire  and  blast  so  the  Army  could  study
the  effect   of  fallout  upon  them.   "Afterwards,"   the   General
related,  "we  treated  them  just  like  humans.  .  .  .  We   gave
them  surgery.   We  took  blood  counts.   We  took   specimens."
With Their  Last  Breath
The  pigs  repaid  this  consideration  in  unexpected   fashion.
Not  only the  medical  observers  but  the  combat  officers  learned
something   from   the   experiment.   What   the   latter   learned,
according  to  General  Wood,  is  that  "if  the  enemy  has  some
protection   such   as  those   pigs  had, the   radiological    effects
while  ultimately  lethal  or  fatal,  do  not  take  place  until  from
two   days  to  two  weeks  after   the  exposure.   The   point  is,"
the  General  emphasized,  "that   the  enemy  with  some   protec-
tion  would  still  man  his  weapons  against  you  if  you  made
an  immediate  attack  even  though  ,he  might   be  dead   a   few
days   later."    Thus,   though   dying,   the   pigs,   or   rather   the
humans,  may  pass  away  euphorically,  knowing  that  they  can
pull  the  triggers  to  devastate  the  other  side  before  the  end
comes.   This  shows  the  progress  continued  testing  makes pos-
sible.
Military  science  is  already  looking  ahead  to  the  next  step,
Who  Said   Mr.  Dulles  Was  Mellowing?
"The  essential  is   that,   for   this  long  run, the  free
world  should stay  strong  and  united.   It  must  be  will-
ing  to  make  the  sacrifices  needed to  prevent  the  Soviet
rulers  from  gaining  external  victories.  .  .  .  We  shall
need   a  sustained,  sacrificial   effort.    We  may   have   to
do  some  of  the  things  that  we  do  in  war—but  without
the  killing  and  being killed."
—Dulles,  Univ.  of  Neiv  Hampshire,  May  2.
".  .  .  The  political,  economic and psychological strug-
gle  known  as  the  'cold  war'  is  almost  certain  to  con-
tinue   until   there  is   a   fundamental   change   in   long-
range  Soviet   purposes.   It  seems  highly   unlikely  that
any  foreseeable efforts  at  negotiation can  eliminate  this
struggle.   Once  we  fully  comprehend  the  necessity   of
being  prepared  to  live  calmly  in  a  state  of  tension  and
danger  for  many  years  to  come,  we  will  be  in  a  much
better  position  to   do  the   things  that   are  needed  to
carry  forward  our  search  for  lasting  peace  and  secur-
ity—including  the  conduct  of  meaningful negotiations
with  the  Soviet  Union."
—Foy  D. Kohler, Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of State
for  European   Affairs,    at  the  National   Academy
of   Economics  and  Political  Science,  May   6.
which   may   be   found   discussed   in   the   National    Planning
Association's  new  report   on  what  will  happen   if   we  reach
1970  without  arms  control.    "If   peace   is  pursued   through
mutual   deterrents,"  it  forecasts,  "it   follows   that   the  major
weapons  of  nuclear  response  should   be  made  strong   enough
and   sure  enough   to  operate  dependably  after  a  surprise  at-
tack.    Since  a  surprise  attack   in  the   nuclear   age  may  well
wipe  out   a  major  part  of   the  personnel   of   any  defending
force   in  a  matter  of  minutes,  the  'pushbutton  for   the   dead
man's  hand'  sort  of  device  is  likely  to  receive  careful  atten-
tion.   Such  a  device  could  be  set  off  by  blast,  heat,  explosion
or  radiation  levels."   This  indicates  that  massive  retaliation
may  soon   be. put   on  a  post  mortem  basis  by  the  continued
progress   of   military  science.    Even   if   atheistic  communists
wipe  us  all  out  at  one  fell   swoop  we  can  do  the  same  to
them   though   we  will  be  already  dead.    The   thought   rein-
forces  our  faith  in  Providence  which  had  been  slipping  lately.
Free   Copies   of   Our   1957  Index   Still   Available—Send    Stamped    Self-Addressed      Envelope
1.  F.
Please
Name
C!tr0*»t
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........................................ ..Zone............State....................
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
5/19/SB
....................................... ..Zone............State....................
we  *end  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No Q
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.   C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pnb-
Hshed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska     J-  re.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15  D   C
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription'     '    '
$5  In  th   U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED