I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958may26.pdf

============================================================

Ike's  Nose  Cone  Was  Phoney,  P.  4
Cyrus  Eaton  vs. J.  Edgar  Hoover,  Page  2;  The  Weakness  of  the  Sacher  Decision,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  20MAY  26,   1958
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
France An  Episode in A World  Struggle  Over  Integration
Those   of  us  who  love  France  and  watch  its  agony   from
afar  cannot avoid  the  observation that  its  "regime  of  parties"
is  as bankrupt  as  de  Gaulle  says  it  is.   The  one  cement  which
holds  together  the  diverse  elements  in  the  Assembly behind
Pflimlin  is  the  realization  that  their  personal  careers  as  poli-
ticians  are  at   stake.   Inertia  still   rales.   The   only   concrete
move  by  the  government  is  to  appropriate  more  money  to
step  up  the  war  in  Algeria,  i.e.  to  continue  the  very  policies
which  have  brought  France  to  this  pass.   The  bankruptcy  is
as   evident  on   the   Left   as   elsewhere;   there   the   decay  of
socialist   idealism   is   symbolized   by   the   slippery   figure   of
Guy  Mollet  while  the  degeneration   of  the  Communist  party
is  evident  in  its  pampered  Cadillac-borne god,  Thorez.
De Gaulle As Fairy Godmother
The   French   people  seem   to   be  taking   it  all   calmly;  as
realists,  they  seem  to  believe  it  best  to  pretend.   The   fantasy
evident  in  the  peculiar  relations  between  the  government  in
Paris  and  the  rebels  in  Algiers,  both  pretending  nothing  has
happened,  shows French  logic  powerfully  at  work  to  produce
what  everybody  hopes  may  be  a  healing  fantasy.   Everybody
figures  that  if  worst  comes  to  worst  France's  fairy   godmother,
in  this  case  de  Gaulle,  will  set  everything  aright,  which  he
might,  since  the  right  would  acquiesce  in  a  sensible  solution
for  Algeria  if  he  imposed  it.   And  de  Gaulle—as  the  Mos-
lems  know—is  not  a  racist, not  a  Fascist,  just a  mystic  patriot.
In  perspective  the  French  crisis  may  be  illuminated  if  seen
as  one  episode  in   the   broader  world   crisis   of   integration
which  afflicts  our  own  South, South  Africa,  and  North  Africa,
all  the  lands  in  which   dominant  whites  have  exploited  sub-
merged  colored- peoples.    For  months  the  Algerian   struggle
has   corrupted   French   liberty;   its   best   papers   have   been
seized  by  the  police;  its  noblest  spirits  have  protested  in  vain.
France  demonstrates that  where whites  insist  on  denying  their
rights   to  the   colored   peoples   the   effect   is  to   destroy   their
own   liberties.   This,   in   brief,   is  the   constitutional   history
of  our  South,  the  only  part  of  the  United  States  which   turned
its  back  openly   over  a  century  ago  on   Jeffersonianism,   the
only  section  which  has  been  governed  for  a  hundred  years  or
more  by  a  one-party   regime.    Here  as  in  North  Africa,  a
handful   of   exploiting   whites   fanatically   determined    exert
enormous   pressure   because  the  other   whites   are   either   in-
different  or  carried  along  by  race  hatred.   The  colon  of  Al-
geria   and   the   planter   of   Georgia   play   similar   roles   in   a
similar  drama,  a  drama which will  develop  new  intensity  here
when  colored  children,  thanks  to  the  latest  Supreme  Court
ruling,  knock  next  Fall  on  Virginia's   school  doors  and  that
State  must   either   knuckle  under   or  implement   massive   re-
sistance.   There  will  then  be  a  bigger  Little  Rock  on  Wash-
6  *
Duties  and  Venezuela
"Caracas,  Venezuela,   May  17—There  is  resentment
here  over  the  praise  accorded  to   Perez   Jimenez   by
Secretary   of   States   Dulles,   and   over   a   decoration
given  him  by  President  Elsenhower  in  November,   1955,
when  thousands  were  in  concentration  camps  or  exile.
The  people  here  cannot   forget  that   Dulles   on  April
23,  1955,  said  the  government  of  Perez  Jimenez  'is  a
model  for  the  Americas'."
—Jules  Dubois,  Chicago  Tribune,  May  18,  "Inside
Story   of   Why   Nixon   Was   Insulted."
"Secretary   Dulles  told  a  closed  session  of  a  Senate
committee:   'The   disorders   would   never   have    taken
place  against  Nixon  in  Caracas  under  Jimenez.  He  had
a  first  class  police department'."
—Bob  Considine, N.  Y.  Journal-American,  May  20.
"The   miscalculation  in  the  case  of  the  visit  to  Ca-
racas  was  primarily  a  miscalculation   as  to  the   ade-
quacy  and   efficiency   of  the  police   force.    It   virtually
melted  away  at  the sight  of trouble.  .  . .  The police
force   that   had   been   maintained  under   Estrada   had
been  virtually liquidated."
—Secretary   Dulles,  press  conference,  May   20.
"The   political   moment   was   inopportune    for    the
[Nixon]   visit   because   the   United   States  had   given
visas  to  enter  that  country  to  ex-dictator  Perez  Jime-
nez  and  to  Pedro  Estrada,  who  were  two  murderers."
—The  Rev.  Jesus  Chappelin,  of  the  Venezuelan Catho-
lic  daily,  La  Religion  (Chi.  Trib.,  May  18).
"Estrada,   who  as   chief   of   the   abolished   security
police,  earned  the  title  of   the  'Beria   of  Venezuela,'
is  accused  of  having  ordered  the  torture  and  deaths
of  thousands  of  political  prisoners."
—Dubois  from.  Caracas, Chicago  Tribune,  same  day.
Q.  On  the  subject  of  Latin  America,  it  has  been  re-
ported  that  Vice President  Nixon  feels  strongly  one of
the  chief  shortcomings  of  our  policy  in  Latin  America
is  apparently   our   friendly   support   of  dictator   gov-
ernments.  . . . Do  you agree  with  that?  . . .
A.  We  try   to   conduct   our  relations  with  all   the
governments  of  the  world  on  the  basis  of  dealing  with
the  government  which  is  in  fact  in  power  unless  we
have  reasons,  as  we have  in  Communist   China,  for  not
recognizing  it.   [Laughter]. ... I  would  like  to  point
out   there   is  no  clear-cut  distinction.   You  can  talk
about  dictators  and non-dictators but  it  isn't  quite  easy
to  classify  on  that  basis."
—Secretary  Dulles,  press  conference,  May  SO.
Especially   when  they   have   such   efficient   police.
ington's  very  doorstep   just  across  the  Potomac.
In   France,   as  elsewhere,   the   price  of   white   supremacy
turns  out  to  be  the  liberty  of  whites  and  blacks.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  26, 1958
A  House  Committee  Subpoena Is  Not  An  Invitation  to  Open  Debate
The  FBI and Its  Allies Out  to Intimidate An  Outspoken  Cleveland  Capitalist
In  his  radio  reply  May  19  to  Cyrus  Baton's  criticism   of
the   FBI,   Richard  Arens,   staff   director   of   the   House   Un-
American  Activities  Committee  said  that  one  of  our   checks
on  secret  police   abuses  is  that   "FBI   operations   are  subject
to  the  scrutiny  of  the  free  press   of  this  nation,   the   news-
papers,  and  the  radio  and  television   media."
This   is  true.   It  is  also  true  that  the  FBI  and  its  allies,
particularly  the  House  Committee,  do  their  best  to  discour-
age   such  scrutiny.   An   example   was   Arens'   announcement
over   the  radio  that   Chairman  Walter   had   "signed   a  sub-
poena  for  Mr.   Baton's  appearance  before  the  committee."
Invitation to  Answer  Declined
The  Eaton  affair   illustrates  the  unwillingness  of  the   FBI
and   its   allies   to   meet   criticism   in   fair   discussion.     The
Cleveland   industrialist  was   interviewed   by   Mike   Wallace
over  a  nationwide  ABC  hookup   May  4,  under  the   sponsor-
ship  of  the   Fund   for   the   Republic.    Robert   M.   Hutchins,
president   of   the   Fund,   invited  J.   Edgar   Hoover   to   reply
over  the  same  facilities.   Hoover   replied   rather   stuffily   that
he  would  not  "dignify"  the  charges  of  "one   Cyrus  Eaton."
The   President,   the   Secretary   of   State   and   the   Attorney
General  all  hold  press  conferences;  J.  Edgar  Hoover   never.
He   gives  interviews  to   favored   persons   but   never    exposes
himself  to  critical 'questioning.
Instead   of   meeting  the   issue  squarely  the   FBI   chief   ar-
ranged   for   himself   to   be  interviewed   by  his   friend,   Rep.
Kenneth  B.  Keating   (R.,  N.  Y.)   on  the  latter's  TV   show,
"Let's  Look  at  Congress."    Chairman  Walter  of  the  House
Committee  demanded  "equal  time"  of  ABC  to  make  a  reply
to  Eaton.   The  result  was  the  speech  by  Arens,  and  the  an-
nouncement  that  Eaton  would  be  subpoenaed.    A   subpoena
to  appear  before  the  House  Committee  is  hardly  an  invita-
tion  to  free  and  open  debate.   It  serves  notice  that  public
criticism  of  the  FBI  is  a  hazardous   occupation.
Honest  debate  would  have  been  wholesome.   In  some  re-
spects  Eaton  overstated  his  case.   The   FBI  is  not   a  Hitler
Gestapo  and  the  snoopery  that  goes  on  in  our  own  country
is  still  a  long  way  from  the  perpetual  surveillance  to  which
the   Russian   people   are   subjected   by   their   own    political
police.   But  we  could  easily  slip  into  such  bad  habits  if   the
FBI  became  sacrosanct.
The  Impiety  of  Cyrus  Eaton
"Mr.   Eaton   criticized   the   informant   system.    The
informant   system   is   vital   to   the   operation  of   any
security  or  intelligence  program.   In  our  work  on  the
Committee   on   Un-American  Activities   we   are   con-
stantly   using   information   which  has   been  procured
from  the  inside  of  the  Communist  conspiracy  by  care-
fully  selected  people  engaged  by  the  FBI."
—Richard  Arens, over ABC,  May  19.
The  mentality  of  political  snoopers  is  the  same  the  world
over.   All  criticism  to  them  and   of   them   is  suspect    This
was  evident  in  Hoover's   sneering   reference  in  the   Keating
interview  to  "the   carpings  of  the  professional  'do-gooders,'
the  pseudo-liberals  and  the  out-and-out  Communists."    This
associates   idealism  ("do-gooders")   and   liberals  with   "sub-
version."
A Wide Mandate to  Police  Thought
Though  the  FBI  is  supposed  to  police  crime,  not   political
thought,  Hoover   seems  to  feel  he  has  a  broad  mandate  in
the  latter  field.    He  made  it  clear  he  was  watching  not  only
Communists  but   ex-Communists  whom   he   regards  as   "not
dedicated   to  the   American  way  of  life"   and   others   whom
he  sees  as  being  "in  the  twilight   zone  who  can  be  utilized
by  the  Communists."   This  could  cover  a  wide  spectrum  of
political activity.
In   the  Keating   interview,   Hoover   said  he  had   only  90
wiretaps  in  operation  and  all  were  in  internal  security  cases.
It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how  many  other   types  of
surveillance  such  as  "bugging"   are  in   use  and   how  many
of   these  taps   and   "bugs"   are  being   utilized   to   check   on
possible  violations  of  the  law  and  how  many  in  listening  in
on  citizens  whose  political  views  Hoover  distrusts.
It  is clear  from  the  Hoover  interview  and  the  Arens  speech
that   Eaton  has  earned   the   animosity  of   our   snoopers   not
merely   because  he  dared   criticize  the   FBI   but   because  he
has  been  working  for   peace.   In  their  eyes,  this  is  sinister,
part  of  "a  softening  up  process ...  a  growing  climate of
opinion  that  we  can  appease,  negotiate,   co-exist,"   as  Arens
expressed  it.   For  the  snoopers,  talk  of  peace  as  well  as  civil
liberty  is  subversive.
Some  of  the  Opinions  Which  Have  Made  An  Enlightened  Business  Man  Suspect
Wallace:  Mr.  Eaton,  you've made  considerable  news  with
your  meetings  up  at   Pugwash.   You  have  financed  these
conferences  among  scientists   of  the  free  world  and  from
Communist   countries  like  Rnssia   and   Red   China.   What
do  you  think  you  accomplish  .  .  .  ?
Eaton:  We've  demonstrated that   men  of   different  lan-
guages  and  different  philosophies can  get  together  and  dis-
cuss  crucial   questions,  come  to  a  common  understanding
and  part  great   friends.  .  .  .  These  scientists  left,  I  mean
to  go  back  home  and  tell  their  governments  of  the  great
hazards  we  face  unless   we  bring  common  sense  to  bear
on  our  international  problems.
Wallace:  Why  do  you  hold  these   meetings   up  in  Pug-
wash,  in  Nova  Scotia,  rather  than  here  in  the  U.  S.7
Eaton:  It  would  be  impossible, probably,  to  hold  them  in
the  United  States,  because  of  the  [visa]  restrictions.   The
Chinaman  would  not  be  permitted  to  come  in,  and  if   the
Russians,  got  in,  it  would  be  with  great  difficulty.
Wallace: What kind  of   restrictions?
T>.ton:  They  would  put  many  obstacles  in  the  way  and
it   would   subject   the   people   coming  here   to   very   great
humiliations  that  I  don't  think  any  self-respecting   scientist
would  submit  to. .  .  .
Wallace:  In  classified   areas,   do  you  believe  that  these
sere* rungs,  fingerprints  and  so  forth,  are  superfluous?
Eaton: I  think  so—they  keep  alive  the  spirit  of  suspicion
which  is  one of  the  things  that  plagues  us  ...     the  FBI  is
just  one  of  the  scores  of  agencies  in  the  U.  S.  that  are
engaged   in   investigation,  in   snooping,   in   informing,  in
creeping  up  on  people.   It  has  gone  to  an  extent  here  that
I  think  it  very alarming.
—Cyrus  Eaton on  the  Mike  Wallace show, May  4-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  26,  1958
Supreme  Court  Majority  Still  Vague  in  Curbing  Congressional  Witch  Hunt
The  Sacher  Decision  Fails  to  Clarify  the  Meaning  of  Watkins
Almost  a  year   ago,   last  June   17,  the   Supreme   Court   in
the  Watkins  case  for  the  first  time  reversed  a  conviction  for
contempt   of   the   House   Un-American  Activities   Committee.
That   ruling   seemed   to   promise   a   sharp   judicial  check   on
Congressional   inquiry   into   political   ideas   and   associations;
it  seemed  to  say  that  the  Bill  of  Rights  forbade  a   Congress-
ional   witch-hunt.   But   it  was  not   at   all   clear.   There  was
hope   that   the   ruling   would   be  clarified   in   other    pending
contempt  cases.
The  Harry  Sacher  conviction,  now  reversed  by  the   Court,
was  the  first  of  these  to  be  decided.   The  verdict,  freeing  a
brave  lawyer,  is  gratifying.   But  it  leaves  the  Watkins   ruling
as  obscure  as  before.   The   Sacher  case  was  important  as  the
first  test   of   the   Senate  Internal   Security  subcommittee,   the
other  acm  oi  the  witch  hunt.   Unfortunately  the  Court's   rul-
ing   offers   1'ttle  guidance   for   the  future.    It   shows  that  six
members   of   the   present   Court   (Clark   and   Whittaker   dis-
sented;  Burton   took   no  part)   remain  determined   to  put   a
curb   on   the   excesses   of   Congressional   investigation.    But
they   obviously  cannot   agree   among   themselves   as   to   just
what  the  nature  of  that  curb  shall  be.   The  result  is  another
ruling  on  grounds  so  vague   that   it  may  easily  be  bypassed
by  a  future  court  with  rightist   sympathies.
Three  Clear  Rulings Possible
Thers  were  at  least  three  clear  ways  in  which  the   Sacher
conviction   could   have   been   reversed.    To   understand   these
one  rm?st  sketch  in  the  background.   The  FBI  informer,  Har-
vey  Matusow,  had   just   recanted.    On   the   basis  of   that   re-
cantation,  the  "second   string"   Communists   convicted   under
the  Smith  Act  in  New  York  had  asked  a  new  trial.   Their
petition  was  pending  and  Sacher  was  their   lawyer.   He  was
subpoenaed   by  the   Senate   committee   in   a   burst   of   angry
publicity   designed   to  picture   the   Matusow   recantation   as  a
Communist   conspiracy.    Sacher   denied   under   oath   that   he
had   taken   any  part   in  bringing   about   the   recantation   but
refused   on  First  Amendment  groups  to  answer  three   ques-
tions  bearing  on  membership   in  the  Communist   party  or  a
lawyers  section  of   it.
The  Court  could  have  ruled  that  a  Congressional   commit-
tee  had  no  right  to  intrude  on  a  matter   before  the   courts.
The   effect,   if  not  the   purpose,   of   the   investigation   was  to
create  an  atmosphere  of   intimidation  which   made  fair  con-
Clearer  First  Amendment  Line
The  clearest  judicial  line  in  the  Harry   Sacher  case
seems  to  have  been  that  of  Circuit  Judge  Washington,
who   dissented   when   the   Court   of   Appeals   here   5-4
upheld  the  conviction.   "I  think  one  of  the  main  thrusts
of  Watkins  was  this:",  Judge  Washington  wrote,  "that
the  courts  should  not  sanction  the  criminal  conviction
of   a   person   who  refuses   to   answer  questions    which
touch  upon  First  Amendment  rights  and  which  appear
designed   to   produce   'public   self-condemnation'   .   .   .
unless  there  is  shown  clear  legislative  authority,  with-
in  the  framework   of  the  constitutional  responsibilities
of  the  Congress."  That  view,  however,  was  not  adopted
by  the  Supreme  Court.
sideration  of  the  petition  for  a  new  trial  difficult.   The   Court
could   have  ruled  that  if   it  was  believed  that  the   Matusow
recantation  was  the  product  of  a  Communist  conspiracy  that
was  a  matter  for  a  grand  jury.   The  Court  could  have  ruled
that  under  the  Bill  of  Rights  a  Congressional  committee  had
no  right  to  ask  a  man  about  his  political  views  and    affilia-
tions,   that   such   interrogation   of   persons   with   unpopular
views  inhibit  the  exercise  of  free  speech.   Any  one  of  these
three  rulings  would  have  provided  a  clean  line  for  the  future.
Good  Law  But  Poor  Logic
Instead   the  majority   of   the   Court   fell   back   on  a  ruling
that  the  questions   asked  Sacher  about  Communist   affiliations
were  not  clearly  pertinent  to  the  matter  under  investigation.
But  in  this  respect  the  Clark  dissent  makes  more  sense  than
the  queasy  reasoning  of  the  majority.    If  the  committee   had
a  right   to  investigate  a  supposed   Communist   conspiracy  to
bring  about   the   Matusow   recantation,  how   can  it   logically
be  said  that  the  Committee  had  no  right  to  ask  Sacher  about
his  Communist   affiliations?
The  country  had  a  right  to  expect  a  clearer  line  from  the
Court.   The   effect  of  such  vagueness   is  only  to  make  it  more
vulnerable  to  attack   from   Congress.    A  clear   Constitutional
line,  establishing  the  First  amendment  firmly  as  a  restriction
on  Congressional   investigation,  would   really   curb  the  witch
hunt  and  would  give  the  Court  itself  firm  grounds  on  which
to  stand.   A  ruling  based  on  "pertinence"  is,  in  this   context,
much  too  subjective  and  vague.    We  hope  the   next   appeal
coming  up,  that   of  Lloyd  Barenblatt,   will  be  less   evasive.
Fresh  Light  on  the  Dirty  Business  of
The  shady  business  of   using  informers  in  law   enforce-
ment  has  usually  been  discussed  in  terms  of  political   sur-
veillance.   The  Court  has  just  decided  two  narcotics  cases
which   show   the  dangers  which  arise  when  informers   are
used  even  in  ordinary  crimes.
One  narcotics  conviction  was  upheld  unanimously  where
the  petitioner  failed  to  show   that   the  informer   "tried  to
persuade  him  to  enter  the  narcotics  traffic."   But  the  Court
unanimously  reversed  the  other  conviction  as  entrapment,
though  splitting   5-4  on  its   reasoning.   The  decision   was
noteworthy  in  that  Black  was  with  Warren  and  the    "ma-
jority"  while  Douglas  went  with  Frankfurter,  Harlan  and
Brennan  in   the   "minority"  opinion.
In  the  conviction  reversed,   the  informer   met   the   peti-
tioner  at  a  doctor's  office  where  he  was  being  treated  for
Using  Informers  in  Law  Enforcement
addiction.   The  informer,   playing  on  his   sympathies,   not
only   entrapped  the   petitioner  into  helping  him  buy    nar-
cotics  but  induced  the  petitioner  to  resume  the  habit.   The
Chief   Justice   said   "Thus   the   government   plays   on   the
weaknesses   of   an   innocent   party   and  beguiles   him   into
committing  crimes."
The   difference   between   "majority"  and  "minority"   was
whether   entrapment   was   to   be  outlawed   on   the   ground
that   Congress  never  "intended"  such  methods  to  be  used
or  whether  irrespective  of  such  supposed  intent  "It  is   the
province   of   the   court   and  of   the   court   alone   to   protect
itself   and  the   government   from   such  prostitution  of   the
criminal   law."     The   latter   was   the   minority   view.    The
words  were  those  of  a  separate  opinion  by  Roberts  in  the
leading  case,  Sorrells  v.  U.  S.  287  U.  S.   435.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 26,  1958
Anderson  Exposes  Plutonium   Subsidy;  Eastland  "Recommends"  Civil  Rights  Director
That  Missile  Cone  Ike  Showed  on  TV   Last  November  Was  Phoney
In  the  Weekly   of  last  November   18,  after  the   President's
TV  address  on  security,  we  reported  that  the  only  thing  new
in  that  speech  was  not  true:   "We  have  not  solved   the  so-
called  re-entry  problem,   despite  that  odd  cone  put  on  view
in  the  White  House   study."    It  now  is  admitted   that  that
was  only  a   "scale  model"  as  compared   with  the   full-scale
nose  cone  retrieved  from  the  Army  Jupiter  intermediate  mis-
sile  launched  May  18.   As  the  New  York  Times  put  it  in  an
editorial  May  19,  "President   Eisenhower  called   attention   to
the  importance  of  this   [re-entry]  problem   in  his   television
and  radio  broadcast  late  last  year.   It  now  turns  out,  how-
ever,  that  the  nose  cone  displayed  to  the  nation   then  was
only  a  scale  model ..."   The  fact  is  the  President  in  his
broadcast   said   flatly   that   the   re-entry   problem   had    been
solved  when  it  had  not.  .  .  .
Subsidizing Atoms for War
The  most  important  revelation  in  Senator  Clinton  P.  An-
derson's   (D.  New  Mex.)   speech  to  the  National  Press  Club
(May   15)   went  unreported  in  most   papers.   He   disclosed
that   in  executive  session   testimony  on  S  3474,   the  bill  to
spread  nuclear  weapons  components  and  know-how  to  other
nations,  the  AEC  said  it  was  planning   to  pay  $30  a  gram
for   plutonium   produced   in   atomic   reactors   at   home   and
abroad.   The  original  bill,  as  drafted  by  the  Administration,
would   have   allowed   the   AEC  to   make   15-year   plutonium
contracts  with   plants   abroad.    This  would   have   subsidized
U.  S. firms to  set  up  nuclear  reactors  in  allied  countries  (like
South  Korea   and   Formosa)   which  could   not   otherwise   af-
ford   them.   The   15-year   contract  clause  has   been   knocked
out  in  the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy
but  presumably the  price  still  stands  at  the  $30  figure.
Anderson  charged  that  the  $30  price  would  have  a  double
effect.    Abroad  it  would  encourage  the  establishment  of  nu-
clear   reactors   "which   would   emphasize   plutonium    produc-
tion"  for  weapons  "rather  than  electric  power,"  thus  under-
mining  "the  whole  atoms-for-peace-program."    At  home  the
$30   price  would   "bail   out"    (in   Anderson's   phrase)    the
Detroit   Edison  plant   now   under   construction   at   Lagoona
—      .     ^'•  i  •         AI            _,:j    T»  _T_   /^__   __J   Cl.—I-:/*'*.
ADA  and the  Nuclear  Arms  Give-Away
The  ADA  in  its  national   convention  here  voted  for
immediate   cessation   of   nuclear   testing   with   a   UN
system  of  inspection,  step-by-step  moves  toward  elimi-
nation  of  all  nuclear  weapons,  mutual   withdrawal    from
Germany  and  East  Europe,  a  summit  meeting  under
UN  auspices  and  negotiations  "looking  toward"  recog-
nition   of   Red  China.    But  the  convention  voted  down
a   disarmament    subcommittee's   resolution   to   oppose
"any  proposal   which  would  permit   the  transfer  of  nu-
clear  and  thermonuclear   weapons   or  the  direct  means
of  their  manufacture  to  other  nations."
nuclear   power   plant   proposal   at   Eureka,   California,   also
assumes  that  the  government   will   buy  plutonium  at  $30  a
gram.
Until  recently  the  price  paid   for  plutonium  by  the  AEC
was  a  secret.   The  United  Automobile  Workers,   in  its  long
fight   against   the   Lagoona   Beach   plant   on   safety   grounds,
ingeniously   smoked   out   the   fact    [credit   UAW's   nuclear
expert   Leo  Goodman   and   lUE's   counsel   Ben   Sigal]   that
Detroit  Edison  expected  to  be  paid  $45.87  a  gram  for  plu-
tonium.    The   British   estimate   that   plutonium   costs   about
$11  a  gram  to  produce  and  puts  its  fuel  value  at  about  $9.
A  $30  price  would  thus  represent   a  substantial  subsidy.
Highly  Recommended
In  the  Senate  debate  (May  14)  on  confirmation of   Gordon
Mac  Lean  Tiffany  of  New  Hampshire  to  be  staff  director  of
the   Commission  on   Civil  Rights,  he   was  accused  by  East-
land   (1)   of  having  fought  in  the  State  Legislature  against
a  bill  to  "overrule"  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  the  Paul
Sweezy  case,  (2)   of  having  been  counsel  in  1956  for  Gordon
Kahn  when  the  latter  was  subpoenaed  under  the  State  anti-
subversion   statute,   (3)    of   having   as   law   partner   Joseph
Kovner,   formerly  of   the   CIO   legal    staff   in   Washington,
who   in   1937   (according   to  Eastland)   defended   the   Com-
munist  Gus  Hall  against  a  charge  of  dynamiting,  and    (4)
of   being   favorably  regarded   by   the   Southern    Conference
Educational  Fund.
Beach,  Michigan?   Anderson   said   Pacific  Gas  and   Electric's
Watch  for   IPS   on  Open   Mind   TV  Program  in  New  York   and  Boston  June  1
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City     .......................................— Zone............State..._...............
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
8/28/88
(To)    Name   ...............................................••••.••-.••••••••••••••—•
Street    .................................................................................
City    ........................_...........Zone............State...«.....™.-...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IF.Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I    P    Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
'   listed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$B  In  th  U   S  •  *6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  »1S  to  Europe;  ?20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED