I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958mar31.pdf

============================================================

Will  There  Be A  Summit  Meeting? P. 5
Exclusive  Full  Text:  How  the  AEC  Hid  the  Truth  About  Radioactive  Peril,  Especially  to  Children,  Pp.  2-4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  13
MARCH  31,  1958">'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Better  Creeping  Socialism  Than  Stumbling  Capitalism
For   one  who,   like  the  writer,  was  an   active newspaper-
man  and  editorial  writer  in  the  Great  Depression  of  the  30's,
the  striking  aspect  of   the   panicky  discussion  precipitated  in
the  capital  by  the  current  recession  is  the  stale  lack  of  new
ideas.   The   conservatives  in  both  parties,  like  the  conserva-
tives  a  generation  ago,  believe  that  a  sound  recovery  is  only
possible  if  deflation   runs  its  course  and  squeezes  prices  and
wages  down  to  the  point  where  new  capital  investment  be-
comes  profitable  again.   Though   no   one  dares  express  this
frankly,   this  is  the  reason  for   the  opposition   to  a  tax  cut.
The   rich  Texans  who  play  so  dominant  a  role  in  the  lead-
ership  of  both  parties  believe  "a  little  healthy  deflation"  is
long  overdue,  and  fear  to  encourage  a  new  upsurge  of  buy-
ing  before  there  has  been  a  downward  readjustment of  pro-
duction  costs.   So  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  Anderson,  Lyn-
don  Johnson  and  Speaker  Rayburn  are  linked  in  a  biparti-
san  coalition  to  choke  off  tax  cut  pressure  in  Congress.    The
ultimate   philosophy  of   this  group,   as   of   Herbert   Hoover
in   the   30's,  is  that  of   the   big  capitalists,  who   can  weather
and  even  benefit  by  a  depression—so  long  as  it  does  not  go
too  far—and   who   see  the   basic  standard  of   governmental
action   as  the   maintenance  of   profitability   in   the  -economy.
The   way  to  restore  profitability   is  to  squeeze  costs,  particu-
larly  v/ages.   For  this  purpose  a  margin  of  unemployment  is
"healthy."
Bigger  Than AH FDR's WPAs
On  the  other  hand,  the  labor  movement,  the  majority  of
farmers,  and  the  smaller  business  men,  for  whom  the  Demo-
cratic   party  traditionally  speaks,   have   no   better   remedy   to
offer   than  renewed   inflation,   particularly  through   a   stepped
up  arms  race.   No  one  stands  back  and  takes  a  good  look  at
our  economy  and  tries  to  evaluate  the  striking  fact  that   a
recession  of  unpredictable  dimensions  has  begun  even  though
for   ten  years  our   economy  has   been   leaning  on   the   infla-
tionary  crutch  of  an  arms  budget   running  about   40  billion
dollars  a  year.   This  has  been  a  WPA  of  enormous   propor-
tions,  far  larger  than  the  spending  FDR  dared  to  do  in  the
30's.    If  we  can  have  a  recession  despite  so  huge  a  pump-
priming  operation,  if  even  this  is  not  able  to  maintain   full
employment,  then  obviously  we  need  measures  more  thought-
ful   and  more  thorough-going   than  a  tax  cut  of  3  to  6  bil-
lion,   and   some   miscellaneous   public   works,    road-building
arid  the  like.   If   even  wasting   (from   an  economic   point  of
view,  it  is  waste),   40  billions  a  year  on  arms  cannot   keep
this  economy  on  an  even  keel,  then  these  piddling   measures
cannot  be  expected  to  cure  it.
The   truth  is  that  we  will   never  know   how   to  run   our
economy  properly  until  we  at  least  have  the  courage  to  look
at  it  as  it  is.   We   Americans  pride   ourselves   on  our  prag-
matism,  but  in  the  field  of  social  theory  we  are  frozen  into
It  Took  Bravery  for  A  Bishop  to  Say  This
"We  talk  of  free  enterprise, and  rightly,  and  I  think
with  proper  pride.   But  the  world  has  eyes  to  see  and
ears  to  hear,  and  knows  full  well  that  we  are   facing
serious  issues.   Personally,  I  do  not  wish  the  collective
ownership  or  the  democratic management  of  the  prin-
cipal  means  of   production,  distribution,  and  exchange
that   was  advocated  by  the  Socialist  of   a   generation
ago,   but  I  must  face  the  fact  that  there  is  something
radically  wrong  with  so-called  'free  enterprise.'
"I  am  fearful  of  stumbling capitalism  as  well  as  of
creeping  socialism.  The  truth  is  there  are  services  to
the  nation  that  can  be  rendered more  effectively  by  the
people  acting  together.   For   instance, • social   security,
the  St.  Lawrence  waterway,  the  Tennessee  Valley  Au-
thority,  our national parks.   We  reveal ourselves  to  the
world  as  reactionaries when  we  continue  to  label  such
measures   as   subversive  or   creeping  socialism.   Our
task   is   to   turn   to   the   great   problems   of   our   free
economy  and  find  solutions  to  issues  facing  the  rail-
roads   and  the  mines.   A  few   more  eggheads   in   the
automobile   industry   to  supplant   the   blockheads   who
have  designed  our  recent  cars   would  be  in   our   na-
tional  interest.
"Who   are  the  madmen  who  build  cars  so  long  they
cannot  be  parked ...  so  low  that  an  average  human
being  has  to  crawl  in  the  doors  and  so  powerful  that
no  man  dare  use  the  horsepower  available?"
—Bishop   G.  Bromley   Oxnam,  Methodist   National
Convocation on  Urban Life,  Feb. 20.
immobility  by  stereotypes  which   bear  only  a  distant   resem-
blance  to  reality.   "Free  enterprise"  is  a  national  deity  none
dare  question.   But  the  American   economic   system  is  not  a
system  of  free  enterprise.   It  is  a  mixture  of  corporate  enter-
prise,  which  FDR  once  called  "private  collectivism,"  and  of
public  ownership  and  control,  with  some  genuine  private  en-
terprise  of   the   classic  free   market   type  still  straggling  on
the   edges.    The  great  corporations   keep  prices  rigid;  it  is
the  smaller   business  men  who  must  stand   the   gaff   of  price
adjustments.    The   basic  materials   of   industry   are  all  more
or   less  controlled   by  private   combines.    Some  way  to   sub-
ject  their   prices  to  public  control,  some   measures   of   over-
all  planning  to  maintain  output,  a  willingness   to  embark  on
measures   of   public   ownership   and  'development   in   those
areas  where  corporate  enterprise  is  impotent,   as  in  the  de-
velopment   of  the  great   river  valleys,  is  necessary   if  we  are
to  have   a  healthy  and   growing   economy,   especially   if   we
manage  to  moderate  the  arms  race  and  end  the  drift   toward
war.     Then,   in  peaceful  competition   with   the   Soviet   bloc,
the  future  will  depend  on  whether  we  can  handle  our  econ-
omy  free   from   shibboleths   as  a  mixed   economy,   part   free,
part   corporate,   part   public.   If   this  means   creeping   social-
ism,   that   is   far   better   than   stumbling   capitalism,    to   use
Bishop  Oxnam's  vivid  phrase.     (See  box  above).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  31,  1!>5S
Report  Accuses  AEC  of  Failing  to  Be  Candid  About  Radioactive Danger
We  publish  here  the  full  text  of  a  report  by  the  Na-
tional  Committee  for   A  Sane   Nuclear  Policy   on   the
way   in   which   the   Atomic   Energy   Commission    has
.   failed  to  be  candid  with  the  public  on  radioactive  fall-
out,  particularly  with regard  to its  dangers  for  growing
children  and  the  role  milk  plays  in  the  absorption  by
humans  of  the  new  man-made  poison,  Strontium   90.
The  National  Committee for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy,
whose recent  full  page  advertisements  have been  signed
by  such  notables  as   Mrs.  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  and
Walter  Reuther,  includes  among  its  executive  members
Dr.  Hugh  Wolfe,  of  the  Federation   of  American  Scien-
tists;  Dr.  Charles  C.  Price,  Univ.  of  Penna.,  and  Nor-
man  Cousins,  editor  of  the  Saturday  Review.   Trevor
Thomas  is  executive  secretary.   Its  address  is  202  E.
44th  St.,   New  York  17.
The  Atomic Energy  Commission  is required by  law  to  safe-
guard  the  public  from  radiation  that  might  be disseminated
by  activities  which  employ nuclear  energy   (from  bomb tests
and  reactors).   Assessment  of  this  hazard is  a  scient fie mat-
ter.  The  task—properly  viewed  as  a  scientific  problem—may
be divided into  two  parts,  (a)   The intensity  and  characteris-
tics  of  radiation  to  which  humans are  exposed must  be  deter-
mined  by  suitable physical measurements.  This is  a  straight-
forward  matter  and  involves  clearly  understood theory  and
widely  accepted types  of  practice,  (b)  The  expected biological
effect  of  the  radiation  must  be  assessed.  This  matter  is  beset
with  difficulties,  both  with  regard  to  experimental  data,  and
with  respect  to  interpretation   and  conclusions.  One  cannot
expect  the  biological  evaluation  to  be  as  precise,  or  as  free
from  legitimate  differences  in  interpretation,  as  the  physical
radiation  data.
In  this  situation  it  is reasonable  to expect that  any  evalua-
tion  of  the  biological  hazard  from   fallout  radiation  will  be
based  on  the  following:
1.  A  statement  of  the  best  available  physical data  regard-
ing  the  occurrence  of  fallout  radiation.  This  should include
the  range  of values  in various places  and  at  various times.
2.  A  statement   of  the  scientifically  valid  estimates  of  the
expected  biological hazard  from   the  above  radiation.    Since
this  estimate  is  subject  to  a  wide range  of uncertainties,  such
a  statement   must  include  the  range   of  extreme   interpreta-
tions that are  supported  by what  data  are  available.   In  prac-
tice  such  a  statement   would  represent   the  several  views of
various  scientists  competent  to  judge  the  data—which  -will of
course  range  from  optomistic  to  pessimistic  with  regard   to
anticipated  hazard.
3. As facts  are  accumulated, and  matters  become more  cer-
tain  the  foregoing  statements  should  be  progressively  modi-
fied in  whatever  direction  is  dictated  by  the  evidence.
In  what  follows  it  will  be  shown  that  in  a  number  of  im-
portant  instances,  the  AEC  has  not  followed  this  procedure.
It  will  be  shown  that  the  AEC  has  instead  tended  to  foster
the   most   optimistic  interpretation    (i.e.,   which   most  mini-
mizes  the  expected  hazard  from  fallout  radiation)   and  that
the  AEC  has  altered  this  position  only  under  the  pressure of
outside  scrutiny  and  attack.  This  evidence  tends  to  show that
the   AEC's   evaluation   of  the   fallout  hazard   has   not   been
based  on  the  standards  of  objectivity   and  candor  that   are
customary  in  scientific  matters.
1.  The, general  hazard  from  Sr   90 in  faUout.
It  is  now  known that  one  of  the  major  biological  effects  of
fallout  radiation   results  from  the  accumulation of  Sr  90  in
the. bones  of  growing  children,  and  that  this  isotope  is  ab-
sorbed  from  milk,.which  is  the  major  food  source  of  the  min-
erals  required  during  bone  formation.  These  facts  are  now
publicly   acknowledged  by   the   AEC.  This   discussion   deals
with  the  questions:  (1)  When  were  these  facts  made  public
by  the  AEC?  (2)  Was  this  publication  on AEC  initiative,  or
forced  by external  events?
The  foregoing  facts  are  described  in  the  21st   Semiannual
Report of the  AEC  (dated  Jan.  1957). This  report  also  states
that  ''The  dissemination  of  strontium  00  from  nuclear  deto-
nations  and  of  subsequent  uptake  by humans have been under
study  by  the  Commission  since  1948."   (p.  213)   This  state-
ment   is  followed  by  a  footnote:   ''Certain  aspects  of  radio-
strontium  research  were  reported  earlier:  pp.  115-122,  Thir-
teenth  Semiannual  Report   (July-Dec. 1953);  pp.  53-54,  Six-
teenth   Semiannual   Report   (Jan.-June   1954) ;  Appendix  7,
Eighteenth  Semiannual  Report   (Jan.-June  1955);  pp.  69-72,
Nineteenth   Semiannual   Report   (July-Dec.  1955)  ;  pp.   105-
10(1,  Twentieth  Semiannual  Report   (Jan.-June   1956)."
Evidently  then  we  can  determine the  answers  to  the  above
questions   by  examining  the   foregoing  chronology  of   AEC
statements  about  Sr  90. This  chronology  follows.
a)   Jan.   1953—(Thirteenth   Semiannual   Report,   pp.   115-
122)  : This section  is entitled "Long-Term  Effects  of  Fallout."
It  describes  the  dissemination  of Sr  90 from  nuclear  tests,  its
occurrence  in  soil,  food  plants  and  animals.  Two  references
to  the  possibility  of  absorption   of  Sr   90  by  humans  occur.
One  of  these   (p.  122)  is  as  follows:
Uptake  by  Animals.  Cattle  and  other  animals  may  eat
plants  which  contain radioactive  materials  from  fall-out.
Studies  have  been  made  of  the  possibility  of  hazard  to
humans  as  a  result  of  eating  meat  from  such  animals.
These  studies indicate that the bone-seeking  radioisotopes
are   of  greatest   potential   concern  and   that   the   chief
among  these  is  radiostrontium.
Cattle  absorb  25  to  30  percent  of  the  ingested  stron-
tium,  with  about  25  percent  reaching  the  bone.   A  few
days  after   entrance   of  radiostrontium   into  the   body,
about  90 percent  of  the  remaining  amount  will  be  in  the
bones.   The  only  potential  hazard  to  human  beings  would
be-  the  ingestion  of  bone  splinters   which  might  be  inter-
mingled  with  muscle  tissue  during   butchering  and  cut-
ting   of  the  meat.   An   insignificant   amount  would   enter
tlie human  body  in this  fashion.
Note  that  there  is  no  mention  of  Sr  90 absorption  via  milk
—which  is,  of  course,  the  major  food  source  of  Sr  90.
The  second reference  is  the  possible absorption  of  Sr  90 by
eating plant  food  containing this  isotope.  The  pertinent  state-
ment  (p.  120) follows:
Plants  have  been  grown  in  soil  containing  a  concentra-
tion  of fission products  equivalent to that produced  by the
maximum  fall-out  observed  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of
the  point  of  detonation.
One  to  two  hundred  pounds  of  these  plants,  grown  in
the  very   high   concentration   of  fission  products  which
might  be found  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  detona-
tions  on  the  proving  ground,  could  be  eaten  by  an  indi-
vidual  without  acquiring  the  maximum  permissible  body
burden  of  radioactive   strontium.    The  maximum  radio-
active  content   of  plants  grown  at  a  distance  of  a  few
miles  from  the  point  of  detonation  would  be  considerably
lower.
This  statement  fails  to  point  out  that  the  Sr  90  absorbed
by  humans  in  food  accumulates  in  the  bone.    Thus  hundreds
of  pounds  of  plant  food  will  be  ingested  by  an  individual  in,
say,  15-20 years  of  growth,  during  which  time  Sr  90 present
in  food  will  accumulate  in  the  individual's  bones.
b)  July   1954—(Sixteenth  Semiannual  Report,  pp.  53-54) :
These  pages  comprise  a  brief  section  entitled  "Fallout  in  the
United  States."  This  section  reads  as  follows:
Following   nuclear   detonations,   radioactive    debris   is
distributed  by  normal  air  currents  over  large  areas  and
with   sufficiently   sensitive  instruments  may  be  found  to
encircle  the  globe.   Small  amounts  were  deposited  widely
over  the  United  States  during  the  Pacific  tests  and  in
some  areas  resulted   in  transitory  rises  of  the   normal
background radiation  levels.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. h\ Stone's  Weekly,  March  .11,   1fl.
r
,K
(Continued  frnm  preceding   paye)
How  the  Menace  of Strontium  90  in  Milk  Was  Glossed  Over
Transportation   of   the   radioactive  materials   to   the
United  States  took  only  several  days.  Thus  some  of  the
shorter  half-life  radioisotopes,  such  as  iodine  131  (8-day
half-life),  were  still  present  in  the fall-out. Although the
amounts  of  radioactivity  deposited  were  biologically  in-
significant,  it  was  possible, by special  techniques, to  dem-
onstrate   radioiodine   in  the   thyroid  glands  and   in   the
urine  of  grazing  animals.   Extremely   minute  quantities
of   iodine  131  were  also  detectable  in  the  urine  of  some
humans for  a  short time.
The  radioactive  isotopes  to  be  found  normally  in  the
body  are  potassium  40,  carbon  14 and  radium  226.   The
radiopotassium  and  radiocarbon are  distributed through-
out  the  tissues  while  the  radium is almost entirely  located
in  the  skeleton.   In  addition  to  this  internal   irradiation,
man  is  subjected  to  cosmic  rays  from  without and  to  the
gamma  rays from  radium in  the  soil.  To this  natural  ex-
posure,  the  radiation  from  bomb  products  is  added.   The
point  of  interest  in  terms  of  health  lies  not  in  the  mere
presence  of  radioisotopes,  but  in  the  amounts  and  more
specifically   in  the  quantity  of  radiation  doses  delivered
by  these  radioisotopes.  The  levels  of  activity  from   fall-
out,  outside  the   area   surrounding  the  Pacific   Proving
Ground,  have  been  far  less than  any  required  to produce
detectable   injury   either   from   the  radioisotopes  within
the  body or  from  external  radiation,  or  from  a  combina-
tion  of  the  two.
Note  that  there  is  no  mention  of  Si'    !>0  whatever  and  that
the  statement  closes with the assurance that  no health  hazard
from  fallout  exists.
c.  July   1955—(Eighteenth  Semiannual  Report,  Appendix
7)  :  Th's  section  entitled  "Radiostrontium  Fall-out"  reads  as
follows:
34.  One  of  the  most  biologically  important  radioactive
substances  found  in fall-out  is strontium  90  It  has  a long
lifetime—nearly   30  years  on  the   average.    Radiostron-
tium  has  a  chemical similarity  to  calcium and,  therefore,
when  taken  into  the  body  it  has  a  tendency  to  collect  in
the   bones.   Radiostrontium  can  enter  the   body  in  two
ways—by   inhaling   or   by   swallowing.   Normally,   the
amount   inhaled   would   be   small   compared   with    the
amount  one  might  swallow.   Fall-out  material  deposited
directly  on edible parts of plants may  be eaten  along with
the  plants, but  washing  the  plants  before  they  are  eaten
would  remove  most  of  this  radioactive  material.    How-
ever,  rainfall  carrying  the  radiostrontium  down  to  earth
may  deposit  it  in  the  soil  where  it  can  be  taken  up,  in
part,  by plants  and  incorporated  into plant  tissues,  later
to  be eaten  by  humans  or  by  grazing  animals  which,  in
turn,  provide  food  for  humans.
35.  Since  the  start  of  nuclear  tests,  careful   measure-
ments  have  been  made  of  the  distribution  of   radiostron-
tium  over  the earth's  surface,  in  the  soils,  in  plants  and
animal  tissues,  in  the  oceans,  in  rain,  in  the   atmosphere
and  in  all  forms  in  which  it  might  be  expected  to  occur.
The  results  of  this  study  are  reassimng.  The  amount of
radiostrontium  now  present  in  the  soil  as  a  result  of  all
nuclear  explosions  to  date   would  have  to  be  increased
inany  thousand  times  before  any  effect  on humans  would
be  noticeable.
Note that  this  section  does not  mention the  most  dangerous
source  of  Sr  90—milk,  and  again  concludes  with  wholly  un-
supported  statements  of  reassurance.   There  is  no  mention of
the  special  problem  of  growing  children,  or  of  the  wide  indi-
vidual  variation  in  Sr  90 uptake.
d.  Jan.  1956—(Nineteenth  Semiannual Report,  pp.  69-72) :
This  section,  entitled  "Concentration  of  Strontium  90  in  Hu-
man  Bones,"  reads  as  follows:
Assays  of  fragments   of  human  bones  available  from
routine  surgical  operations  indicates the  degree  to  which
strontium  90 has  entered  the  skeletons of  persons of vari-
our  ages.  The  highest  concentrations have  been  observed
in   children,  amounting   to  about  one-micro-mircrocurie
(one-trillionth  curie)  of  strontium  90  per  gram  of  skele-
tal   calcium.   Assays  of  vegetation,  animal  tissues   and
milk  indicate  the  principal  paths  by  which  strontium  90
enters  the  body  and, with  other  data,  provide a  basis  for
estimating  the  dependence of  such  entry  upon  pertinent
factors.
It  is  believed  that  skeletal  concentrations  of  strontium
90  required  to  produce  observable  skeletal  injury  to  hu-
man  beings  are  several  thousand  times  those  which  have
been  observed  in  the  United  States.   Concentrations   re-
quired  to  produce  serious  injury  may  range  from  ten
thousand  to  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  times  those
which  have  been  observed.  These  degrees  of   uncertainty
exist  because there  is  no  specific  experience  involving in-
jury  to  human  beings  by radioactive  strontium.  The esti-
mates  are  based  on long study  of the  effects  of  radium  in
the  human  skeleton, coupled with  experimental  studies of
the  comparative  effects   of  radium  and  strontium  90  in
animals.
Concentrations  of  radiostrontium  in  the  bones  of  graz-
ing  animals,  as  a  result  of  weapons  tests  to  date,  are
found  to  be  several  times  higher  than  in  human  beings,
although  still  far   below  amounts  which  are   hazardous.
This  difference  arises  largely  from  the  fact  that  grazing
animals  obtain  their  needed  calcium  (and  other  food  re-
quirement), by  consuming large quantities  of  vegetation.
The  radioactivity  in  the  bones  of  these  animals  depends
on  the  quantity  of  radioactive  debris that  has  settled on
the  plants from  the  air.   Humans,  on the  other  hand, ob-
tain  more  than  half  their  calcium  from  milk  which  has
been  screened  somewhat  by  the  animal  body  to  remove
much  of  the  strontium.
This  report  and  to  some extent  the  earlier  one  (July  1955)
mark  an  abrupt  change  in  the  character  of  the  AEC  state-
ments.    For  the  first  time  it  is  admitted  that  Sr  90  is  ab-
sorbed  through  milk,  accumulates  in  human  bones  and  that
the  highest  concentration   occurs  in  children.
e)   July    1956—(Twentieth   Semiannual  Report,   pp.   104-
106) :  This   section  bears  the  title  "Radioactive   Strontium
Fall-out."  Attached   to  the  title  is  a   significant    footnote:
'""Commissioner  Thomas  E. Murray  does not  subscribe  to this
section  of  the  report."  (p.  195)   This  section  describes  Com-
missioner   Libby's  views  on  the  Sr  90  hazard.   It   contains
statements relative  to  the  occurrence  of  Sr  90 in  milk, and  its
accumulation  in  bones.  It  also  contains  the  following  state-
ment,  (p.  105)  :  "Dr.   Libby's  conclusion,  based  on  a  special
Commission  study  designated  'Operation  Sunshine'  was  that
the  long-term  effects  of  fall-out  from  high-yield  weapons  was
not  as  great  as  generally  supposed."    This  statement  is  as-
tonishing  when  viewed against  the fact  that  all previous  AEC
statements  had  denied  that  any  significant  effects   occurred.
The  statement  is  a  recitation  of  Dr.  Libby's  arguments  and
concludes:   "Thus  it   appears  that  at   the  present   level  of
weapons  testing,  the  present  and  potential   contribution   of
Sr  90 to  the  world  ecology is not a significant  factor."  (p.  106)
f)   Jan.  1957—(Twenty-first   Semiannual   Report,  pp.   211-
215):  This  report  contains  a  brief  description  of  the  AEC's
current  position  and  activities  relative  to  the  Sr  90  problem.
As  stated  previously  this  statement  does  note  the  occurrence
of  Sr  90  in  milk  and  its  accumulation  in  bone.
From  the  above chronology it  is  evident  that:
1.  The  AEC  has  been  studying   the   Sr   90  problem   since
1948.  Unclassified data  published by Libby  shows that  the  Sr
90  of  soil,  foods  (including milk)   and  bones  were  measured
at least  as early  as  1952.
5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  31, 1958
(Concluded  from  preceding   page)
How  Adlai  Stevenson  Pressured  the  AEC Into  Admitting  the  New  Peril
2.  Up  to   1955  the  AEC  reports  make  no  mention  of  the
specific  facts  that  render  Sr'90  fallout  dangerous.   Its  occur-
rence   in  milk   and   vegetables,   its   accumulation  in  human
bones,  its  intensified  accumulation  in  the  bones  of  children.
3.  After   1955  the  AEC  reports  admit  these  facts,  but  take
an  optimistic view of their significant.
It  is  clear  that  the  AEC  knew  before   1955  that  Sr  90 oc-
curs  in  milk  and  accumulates in  childrens'  bones, but  was  un-
willing   to  admit   these  facts   publicly  until  after   that   date.
The  significance  of  the  date  is  fairly   apparent:   In  Dec.
1954  the   Council  of  the   American  Association  for   the   Ad-
vancement of  Science, meeting  in  Berkeley, California,  passed
a  resolution  which  established  a  AAAS  committee  to  make
the  first  investigation of the  radioactivity  hazard  independent
of  the  AEC. Within  a  few  months  it  was  announced that  the
National  Academy  of  Sciences   had  established   independent
committees  to  study  the  question,  (the   Eighteenth   Semian-
nual  Repoi-t  for  Jan.-June  1955 notes on p. 92 that: "The Com-
mission  will  cooperate  in  a  broad  study on radiation  effects  re-
cently  undertaken  by  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  by
providing  information  and  consultation  services.")   Thus  by
the  middle  of  1954  the  AEC was  aware that  for  the  first  time
an  independent  scientific  agency  was  about  to  study  the  fall-
out  problem and  would  necessarily  become aware  of  the  as  yet
undisclosed  aspects  of  the  Sr  90 hazard.   One may  infer  that
the  change  in  AEC  policy  regarding   public  notice  of  these
facts  might  have  been  related   to  this  impending  event.
The  most  casual  reading  of  the  sections of the  AEC  reports
that  deal  with  the  hazard from  fallout impresses  the  scientist
with  the  fact  that  the  reports do not follow  the  practice—cus-
tomary  in  science—of  objective  presentation   of  all  available
facts.   Instead,  the  reports  consistently  emphasize  those  facts
that   suggest   Optimistic   conclusions.   Facts   which   suggest
that  fallout  may  be  dangerous  to  some  individuals  are   pre-
sented  far  less  frequently  and  (as  noted  above)  after  a  con-
siderable  delay  in  time.   The  facts  that  are  most  suggestive
of  a  hazard  do  not  appear  in  AEC  reports  until  after   the
date  of  the  first  independent study  of  the  fallout  question.
2.  Maximum   permissible  concentrations:
The  maximum  permissible  concentration  (MFC)  is a  value
which  indicates  what  dosage  of  radioactive  material  may  be
tolerated  without  expectation  of  apparent  biological   damage.
MFC  values  have  been  established  by  an  International  Com-
mission  on  Radiological  Protection  which  is  composed  of  sci-
entific  specialists   in  this  field.  Since  1925,  this  Commission
has  had the  matter  under  continued  study.  It  has  issued  rec-
ommended  MFC  values,  of  two  types.   One  type  (MFC,  occu-
pational)  is applied  to  industrial  and  other  workers  who  are
exposed  to  radiation  under  supervised  voluntary   conditions.
A  second value  (MFC,  population)  is  recommended for  large
groups  of  the  general  population  who are  exposed  indiscrimi-
nately  and  without supervision.  The ICRP  recommends  popu-
lation  MFC  values  which  are  10 times  lower  than  the  occupa-
tional  MFC  recommendations.  This  reflects  the  opinion  that
unsupervised  populations  composed  of  individuals  in  a  wide
range  of  states  of  health  ought  to  be  exposed   to  less  radia-
tion  than  medically-supervised  individuals.   All fallout  situa-
tions  involve  the  general  population.  Therefore,  the  hazards
of  fallout  radiation  ought to  be judged against the population
MFC—a  standard  which is  ten  times  more  rigorous  than  the
occupational  MFC.
When  the  AEC  began  to  issue  numerical  statements  about
radiation  from  fall  out  it  consistently  used  the  less  rigorous
standard of  the  occupational  MFC.  Thus all  public statements
and  scientific  papers  by  Commission   Libby—-the  AEC's  chief
spokesman  in  these  matter—use  the  occupational  MFC  up  to
and  including a paper  published  in  Dec.  1956*  ("Current Re-
search   Findings   on  Radioactive  Fallout,"  Proc.  Nat.   Acad.
Sci.,  42,  945,  Dec.  1956).    However  on  April  11,  1957  in  an
1
 Submitted  on  Oct.  17,   1956.
address   at  the  U.  of  New  Hampshire,  Commissioner  Libby
for  the  first  time  made  any  mention  of  even  the  existence  of
the  more  rigorous  population  MFC.  He  states:  "However,  it
has  been  recommended by high  scientific  authorities  that  the
tolerable amounts  of radioactive  strontium  for  the  population
in  general  should be only l/10th  of those  acceptable for  work-
ers  who  of  course  expose  themselves  voluntarily."   (See  page
1518,  Joint   Committee  Hearings,  Part  2.)   Since  then   AEC
statements   have  used  the  more  rigorous  standard.
Thus  between  October  1956  and  April   1957   Commissioner
Libby—and  the  AEC generally—changed  the  tolerance  stand-
ards  employed to  gauge  the  fallout  hazard  by  ten-fold  and  in
the  direction   which   enhanced   the   biological  significance    of
fallout.
What  is the  significance of this  date?
In  Oct.  195fi  the  AEC  position  on fallout  came  under  sharp
attack  from  Adlai  Stevenson,  and  from  many  scientists.  One
of  the  major  points  made  by  the  AEC  opponents  was  that—
contrary  to  the  then  current  practice  of  the  AEC—the  more
rigorous  standard  of the  population MFC  should be employed.
This  point  was  ridiculed  or  ignored  by  the  AEC  during  the
1956  presidential campaign.  But  by  April  1957  the  point  was
conceded  and  we  find  Commissioner  Libby  for  the  first  time
acknowledging  the  validity of  the  more  vigorous  standard.
3.  The  genetic  effects    of  fallout.
One  can  establish   an  interesting   chronological  change  in
the  public  statements  of  the  AEC  regarding  possible  genetic
effects  of fallout  radiation:
a.  January   1953  (Thirteenth  Semiannual  Report  of  the
AEC, p. 78) :
"Fallout   radioactivity   is  far   below  the   level  which
could  cause  a  detectable  increase  in  mutations,  or  inheri-
table  variations."
b.  October  1957  (Report  of the  AEC  Advisory  Commit-
tee on  Biology and  Medicine) :
"The  ultimate  world-wide increase  of  defective  children
(from  fallout  of  tests  already  completed)  is  2500-13,000
per  year."
In  the  period  during  which  this  sharp  change  in  attitude
took  place   (1953-1957)   numerous  geneticists  came  forward
with  direct  criticism  of  the  original  AEC  position   (see,  for
example,  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  report  in  June
1956,  and  the  Joint  Committee  hearings  in June  1957).  Thus
the  AEC  was  only  willing  to  admit  the  genetic  hazard  from
fallout  after   this  danger  had  been  insistently  discussed  by
other groups.
4. Acceptable  radiation  levels for  workers.
The  National  Commitee  on  Radiological  Protection  recom-
mended  on  December  10,  1956  that  the  exposure  allowed  in-
dustrial  workers  be  lowered  from  0.3  rem/week  to  0.1   rem/
week.   This  recommendation  was  accepted  by the  AEC as  its
official  exposure  maximum  a  year  later,  December  10,  1957.
5.  Massive   local  fallout   from   H-bomb   explosions.
It  is  now known  that  the  explosion  of.the  Bikini  H-bomb
in  1954  caused  the  deposition  of  severe  local  fallout  over  an
area  of  about  7000 square  miles.    It  was  this  cloud  of  radio-
active  dust  that  was  encountered  by  the  Japanese fishermen
aboard  the  Lucky  Dragon,  and  which  also  inadvertently  ex-
posed  a  number  of  Marshall  Islanders  to  a  significant  dose of
radioactivity.    The  fact  that  such   intense   fallout   radioac-
tivity  would  be  spread  over  thousands  of  square  miles  by  a
single  H-bomb  explosion  is  of  basic  importance   to  civil  de-
ense  planning.    These  facts  were'made  public  by  the  AEC
in  Feb.  1955.    In  the  intervening, time  the  facts  were  deduced
by  Japanese  scientists  and  by  American   scientists  (notably
Dr.  Ralph  Lapp)  from  the public reports about  the fishermen
and  island  inhabitants.    Despite  pressure from  these  sources,
and  from  civilian  defense  authorities,  the  AEC  delayed  11%
months  before  making a  public  announcement  of the  facts.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  31, 1958
A  Meeting   Looks  Certain,  But  With  Little  Chance  of  Any  Success
Some  Keys  to  the  Tortuous  Negotiations  on  the  Way  to  the  Summit
Certain   observations   may  help   to   clarify   the   course   of
Russo-American   maneuverings  on  the  way  to  the   summit:
1.  There  will  almost  certainly  be  a  summit  meeting.    The
NATO  powers   cannot  reconcile  their  peoples   to   acceptance
of  U.  S.  missile  bases  until  they  have  gone  through   the  mo-
tions  of  trying  to  negotiate   a  settlement  with  the   Russians.
The   Administration  (particularly  Nixon)   thinks   a  summit
meeting  early  next  Fall  would  help  the  GOP  sell  itself  as  the
peace  party  at  the  next  elections.
The  Basic  Difference  Between  the  Two Sides
2.  There  is  little  prospect  that  a  summit  meeting  will  ac-
complish  very  much,  if  anything.   The  CIA's  intelligence  is
that  the  Russians  really  fear  accidental  outbreak  of  a  nuclear
war,  want  to  prevent  the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  particu-
larly  to  satellites  they  do  not. trust,  and  find  the  arms   race
a  burden.   Mr.   Dulles   thinks  the  Russians  will  pay  a  sub-
stantial   price   for   relaxation   of   tension   if   only   pressure  is
stepped   up  and  maintained.  He   sees  negotiation  as  a  means
to   change  the   status  quo   in   Germany   and   Eastern   Europe
while  the  Russians  are  only  willing  io  negotiate  on  the  basis
of   the  status  quo.   This  is  the  basic  difference  between  them.
3.  There   is  a  considerable  though   subterranean   body   of
opinion  in  the  Capital  which  believes  the  burden  of  the  arms
race  on  the  Russians is  being  overestimated,  that  stepping   up
the  arms  race  is  dangerous  to  ourselves  as  well  as  them,  and
that  the  best  way  of  changing  the  status  quo  in  Europe—and
the  only  safe  way—is  to  let  mutual  withdrawal,  disengage-
ment  and  relaxed  tension  "melt  the  ice"  and  change  the  status
quo  slowly.   They  see  this  as  the  only  hope  for  Hungary  and
Poland,  and  they  believe  that  confederation  of  East  and  West
Germany  would   subvert  the  former,   since  the  East   German
regime  is  unpopular  and  West  Germany  prosperous.
4.  The   dominant  opinion   of  what  might   be  termed   the
Adenauer-Dulles  axis,  however,   is  set  not   only  on   the   re-
armament  of  Germany  but  on  its  nuclear   rearmament.    Mr.
Dulles  believes  a  resurected   Reich,  armed  with  the   H-bomb,
would  be  our  only  reliable  bulwark  against  Bolshevism.   This
is  really  the  old  Goebbels  line  in  a  new  context.
5.  The   Administration  is  driving  ahead   with   changes   to
the  Atomic  Energy  Act  which  will  enable  it  to  give  NATO
and  other  allied  powers  the  means  and  the  knowledge   needed
to  make  the  new  weapons.    The  new  legislation,  on  which
Voice  in The Wilderness
"The   claim   has   been   made   by   the   Administration
sponsors  of  this  legislation  that  it  is  desirable  to  have
administrative  flexibility  to  distribute  atomic-hydrogen
weapons,  weapons   parts,  or  weapons  information  to  a
certain   ally   or  allies.    Of   course,   it   is   simpler   and
quicker  for  the  Executive  to  act  than  for  the  Congress
to  use the  deliberative   process.  . . .  This  is  but to  argue
that  a  monarch  or  a  dictator  is  better  equipped  to  make
quicker,  quieter  and  more   efficient  moves  than  can  be
made  under  the democratic  process. ...  If  this  legisla-
tion  becomes  law  we  enter  a  new  phase  of  international
peril."
—Con.  Chet   Hnlifield,    testifying    March   27  against
pending  n.nriidments   to  the  Atomic  Energy   Act
authorizing  the  Prcsidint  to  give  atnmic  weapons
facilities   to  any   or  all  of  42  allied  nations.
public  hearings were  beginning  as  we  went  to  press,  will  be
rushed  through  Congress  as  rapidly as  possible.
6.  It   is  we  believe   impossible  to   exaggerate   the   terrible
chain  reaction  passage  of  this  legislation  will  set  in   motion.
We  cannot give  France nuclear armament and  deny  it  to  Ger-
many.   If  West  Germany gets  nuclear arms  so  will  East  Ger-
many.   Italy  will  not  wish  to  be  a  second   class  power,   and
Yugoslavia  must  have  nuclear arms  if  Italy  has  them.
Syngman Rhee Already In Line
In   Asia,  Syngman  Rhee   is  already   pressing   for   nuclear
arms.   Turkey  is  an  obvious candidate for  them.   Chiang  Kai-
shek  will  want  them.   If  Tvirkey  has  them,  it  will  be  hard  to
deny  them  to  Pakistan.    If   Pakistan  has  them,  India  must,
too.   Moscow  will  have  to  make  Communist  China  a  nuclear
power.    The  fuses  will  be  set  all  over  the  world.
7.  Unfortunately  a   numbed   American  public   opinion   is
almost  completely unaware of  these  possibilites.  The  cold  war
press  has  printed  little  about  them.   So  far  only  one  member
of  Congress,  Chet  Holifield,  is  fighting  this  legislation.    The
recession   overnight   has   become   the   dominant   concern   of
American  public  opinion.   Overshadowing  all  else  is  the  fact
that  recession  has  made  both  business  and  labor  eager  for  a
step-up  in  the  arms  race  as  the  quick  and  easy  way  to  prime
the  pump  of  recovery.   This  is  the  factor  likely  to  prove  de-
cisive  unless  public  opinion  can  be  awakened  to  the   danger.
Scientist  Foe   of   Teller   Warns   Anew  Against  Spread  of  Nuclear  Arms
"As  each  new  nation  achieves  the  ability  of  manufactur-
ing  and  using  nuclear  weapons,  we  will  pass  through  suc-
cessive  'points-of-no-return'  where  the  problems  of  control
will  be  increased  enormously.  .  .  .
"If   New   York,   for   example,  were  destroyed  today,   we
could  be  quite  sure  that  it  was  either  an  accident  or  the
result  of  Soviet  action  and  we  would  act  accordingly.   But
if  New  York  were  destroyed  15  years  from  now,  it  might
be   literally   impossible   to   determine   the   identity   of   the
aggressor.
"It  is  very  much  in  the  interest  both  of  the  United  States
and  the  Soviet  Union   to  slow  down  the  rate  of  spread  of
nuclear-military  technology  in  the  world  as   much  as    pos-
sible.   I  believe  that  one  of  the  more  effective  approaches
to  this,  and  by  far  the  least  difficult  to  carry  out  in  prac-
tice,  would  be  to  secure  a  world-wide   moratorium  upon  the
testing  of  nuclear  devices.  .  .  .
"Such  an  agreement  would  buy  us  time.   It  would  greatly
lessen   the   problem    of   atmospheric   contamination.    And
above  all,   it   would   be  an  agreement  which,  if   successful,
could  be  the  beginning  of  a  sequence  of  agreements  which
would  lessen  the  dangers  of  nuclear  holocaust.
"If  such  a  network   [of  inspection  posts]  were  formed,
the  individual  stations  could  be  used  later  for  the  construc-
tion  of  missile  monitoring  devices  .  .  .  fully  as  urgent  a
problem ...  for the  reason  that  it  is  with  missiles  that  the
bombs will  be delivered."
—Prof.   Harrison  Brown,  California    Institute   of
Technology,   before    the   Humphrey   Disarma-
ment  Subcommittee,  March  25.
5   S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  /•'. Stone's  Wffkly,     March  .11.
Lack  of  Internal Democracy  Breeds  Corruption  and  Fosters  Strong-Arm  Tactics
The   Labor   Movement  (Like  the  Soviet  Union)  Needs  A  Bill  of  Rights
The  trade  union  movement  exhibits  in  a  milder  form   the
same  evil  apparent   to  objective  observers   of  the  Soviet   bloc
—the  development   of  a  bureaucratic  crust  with  a   privileged
position.    The   fact   that   the   leadership   may  arise  from   the
working   class   is  as  irrelevant  as  the   fact   that   so  did  many
American  millionaires—this  did  not  keep  them  from  exploit-
ing  the  people  from  whom  they  sprang.
Protection  from Their Protectors
These   bureaucracies   in   trade   unionism   and    in   socialist
society   naturally  tend   to   be   undemocratic;   their   privileges
would   be  endangered   by  free   election   and   free   discussion.
One  of  the  basic  problems  in  the  creation  of  a  healthy  trade
unionism,  as  of  a  healthy  socialism,  is  how  to  transplant   the
traditions,    the    checks-and balances,    and    the    fundamental
guaranties  of  political democracy into  the  economic  sphere  for
the  protection  of   the  workers  from   their  own   "protectors."
This  is  the  fundamental  issue  behind  the  controversy  over
(lie   McClellan    report.    Though   the   headlines   have   created
some   distortion,  the   report   itself   is   justified.    For   George
Meany,  who   managed   to  co-exist  for   so  many  years  in   the
labor   movement  with   so  many  unsavory  characters,   to  cry
"smear"   is  most  unworthy.  No   labor  spokesman  has  a  right
to  criticize  this  report  without  offering  constructive  proposals
for   undeniable  evils.   These  evils—the  appearance  in   some
unions  of  Becks  and  Ho/fas  who  made  a  private  business  of
being  labor  leaders  and  used  strong  arm  men  to  stay  in  power
—spring  from  a  source  which  afflicts  too  many  of  our  unions.
The  lack  of  internal  democraq'  enables  the  ruling  clique  to
perpetuate   itself  in  power,  and  power   there  too  corrupts.
We   urge   progressive   elements  in  the   labor   movement   to
drop  stale  preconceptions,   to  recognize  realities  and   to sup-
port   legislation  to   enforce  internal   democracy   and  financial
accounting  within  labor   unions.    We   believe   the   American
Civil   Liberties   Union*   provides   an   excellent   starting   point
with  the  labor  union  "bill  of  rights"  it  has  just  made  public,
especially   its  provision   which   would   forbid   any   union   to
Confession
"The  problems  of  lack  of  democratic procedures  and
corruption  among  a  small  minority of  unions  have  been
matters  of  concern  to  many  in  the  labor  movement   for
many  years.   The  fact  that  there  were  instances  of  cor-
rupt  or  unethical  activities  was  not  a  secret  that   re-
mained  hidden  until  exposed  by  this  [McClellan]  com-
mittee.    Responsible  labor  leaders   knew  of   such   in-
stances,  and  they  detested  them  more  than  any  Senate
committee  crusading on  the  path  of  righteousness.   Al-
though   they   knew   about  it,  eliminating the  evil   was
another  matter.   In  some  instances,  they  did  not  have
the  power;  in  others,  there  possibly   was  a  reluctance
to  face  up  to  the  challenge.  .  .  .
"I   do   not   intend   to  minimize  the   contribution  the
committee's  hearings  have  made  toward  making pos-
sible  organized  labor's  record  of   achievement  in   deal-
ing   with   corrupt   undemocratic   influences.   It   can   be
fairly   said  that  to   a  considerable  extent   this   record
would   have   been   impossible  to   achieve   without   the
committee's  hearings  and,  in  particular,  its   power  of
subpoena.  .  .  ."
—Sen.  Pat  McNaniara  dissenting  from   the  McClellan
report  nn  union  cnt'rnption.
* Our   apologies   to  the   ACLU   and  the  Workers   Defense
League  for  our  failure  in  a  recent  issue  to  credit  them  with
the  crucial  part  they  played  in  the  soldiers'  discharge  cases.
Help   the   Fight   for   Peace  by   Getting
"refuse   membership,  segregate   or   expel   any  person   on   the
grounds  of  race,  religion,  color,  sex,  national  origin,  opinion
or  lack  of   United   States  citizenship";  its  detailed   insistence
on   fair   trial  within  the   unions,   and   the   guarantees   which
would  give  dissenting  minorities  access  to  the  rank  and  file.
The Time to Act  Is Now
The   ACLU   says,   "A    free   society  needs   the   practice  of
civil   liberties,  not   only   by   the   government,   but   by   all   its
other  great  institutions."  With  this  we  are  in  heartiest   agree-
ment.     The   porcine   elements,   the   grafters,   the    pork-chop-
pers,  which  infest  the  labor  movement  are  quite  capable  some
day  of  joining  hands  with  a  U.   S.  Peron   or  a  McCarthy  in
a   labor-orientated   Fascist   dictatorship.    The   time   to  uproot
the  evil  is  now,  and  the  McClellan   committee—whatever  its
motives—has   done   a   service   in   focussing   public   attention
upon  it.
More  People   to   Read   the    Weekly
1.  F.  Stone's
('lease  renew
Street     ..........
City    ..............
Dnter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street    ..........
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
3/31/58
..................... ......Zone.... ....... .State.. ..................
gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.    V     SUone'B   Weekl
Stone'8   Weekly.     Entere.1   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,   1S7M.     Host-dated  Mondays  but   pub
lishrd  every   Thursday  except  the  lust  two  Thursdays  of  August  aud  December  at  5(118 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  18. I>  o
An    Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Btnne:  circulation   Malinger.  Esther  H.   Stone.    Subscription
K   lu   th   V.  S..    JB   In  Canada;   *!(>  eluewhern      Air   Mull  rates:  $1B  to  Europe:  $20  to   Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED