I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958aug04.pdf

============================================================

The  N.Y.  Bar  and  Leftist   Travel  P.  4
The  Secretary  of   Defense   Initially   Admits  Ike   and  Strauss  Wrong  on  Dirty  Bombs,   Page   2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  80
AUGUST  4,  1058101       WASHINGTON,  1).  C.
15  CENTS
Answering   A   Reader's   Challenge  for   Constructive   Proposals
What  Would  You  Do  If  You  Were  In  Ike's  Shoes?
If  I  were  in  Ike's  shoes,  I  would  prepare  to  recognize  real-
ity  but   I  would  ask  a  price  for   it.    I  would  not   leave   the
United  States  in  the   undignified   position  of   being  dragged
reluctantly  to  the  summit  and  left  with  no  recourse  but  a  re-
treat.    I  would   take  the   initiative   on   lines   big  enough   to
catch  the  world's  imagination.
I  would  propose  to  neutralize  the  Middle  East, including
Turkey,  Iran  and  Pakistan,  but  only  in  return  for  the  neu-
tralization   of   Eastern   Europe.    I   would   offer   to   take   all
American   troops   and   bases   out   of   the   Middle   East  if   the
Russians  took  their  troops  and  bases  out  of  Eastern  Europe.
I  would  propose  that  both  areas  then  be  opened  to  United
Nations  inspection.   I  would  say,  "we  challenge you  to  turn
the  breeding  places  of  war  into  a  cordon  sanitaire  of  peace."
When  Nasser  Spoke  for  All  Mankind
I  would  offer  to  give  up  our  methods  of  "indirect  aggres:
sion"   in   Eastern   Europe—Cl A   cloak-and-dagger  activities,
the  various  disguised  "private"  facilities  like  Radio  Free  Eu-
rope  and  the  undercover  emigre  organizations.   I  would  ask
in  return  that  the  Soviet  Union  give  up   similar   radio  and
undercover  activities.   This  again  should  be  made  subject  to
UN   surveillance  through  a  special  organism  designed  to  en-
force  the  end  of  the  cold  war.   "We   are   sick  of   the   cold
war,"  Nasser  said  in  a  speech  at  Cairo  the  other  day.   In  that
Nasser  spoke  for  most  of  the  world.   I  would  have America
take  the  initiative in  ending  it.
I  would  propose   that  existing  boundaries  in  the  Middle
East  and   Eastern  Europe  be  recognized  and   guaranteed  by
both   sides  through   the  UN.    Much   injustice   is  inextricably
involved  in  these  boundaries  but  all  this  is  minor  compared
to  the   danger   of   a  thermonuclear  war.   This  would   mean
recognition  of  Israel  by  the  Arab-States  but  I  would   propose
to  sweeten   it  for  Nasser   and   the  Arabs  by  recognizing  an-
other  inescapable  reality—the  artificiality  of  Jordan,  and  pro-
posing   that  Jordan   be  allowed   to  join  Syria  and   Egypt   in
the  United   Arab  Republic.     I   would   insist   on  a   regional
neutrality  pact  by  which  the  UAR  in  return  would   guarantee
the  existing  boundaries  of  Lebanon  and  Israel.   With  this  I
would   propose   an  international   agency  for   the   resettlement
of  the  Arab  refugees  as  part  of  a  regional  development  plan
under  UN   auspices.
Their  Own  Roads   to   Socialism
I  would   propose  that   the   countries  of   the   Middle   East
and  East  Europe,  in  return  for  their  liberation  from  cold  war
and  contending  Great  Power   imperialisms,  promise  never  to
take  part  in  combinations against  either  side  or  to  give  bases
to  cither  side.    I  would  suggest   to  the   Russians  that   they
would  be  belter  off  in  such  a  context  to  let  East  Europe  pur-
sue  its  own  road  to  socialism than  to  impose  by  rigid  armed
fist   and   terror  a   seeming  stability  which   hid   deep   resent-
ments   bound  some  day  to   explode.    I   would   assert   as  an
American  principle  non-interference in  the   affairs   of  smaller
countries  by either  side,  and  begin  to  show  that  I  meant  it  in
Latin  America.
The  Problem   of   The  Divided
There   remains  the  terrible  question  of  the  divided   coun-
tries,  East  and  West,  the  unresolved  little  civil  wars  which
could  easily  erupt   into  mankind's  own  final  civil   holocaust.
I  would  propose  the  neutralization of  Germany,  Vietnam  and
Korea  in  return  for  free  elections  under  UN  auspices  to  pick
new  regimes  for  all  three.   I  would  challenge  the  Soviets  to
relinquish  Communist  dictatorship  in  their  portions   of   these
divided  lands,  to  allow  genuine  free  choice,  and  to  accept  the
results  in  return  for  guaranteed  neutrality.  I  would   offer   in
return  recognition  of  China  and  relinquishment  of   Formosa.
And  I  would  ask  India  and  Pakistan, similarly,  to  unite  and
free  Kashmir  and  to  give  it  autonomy,  linked  both  to  India
and  Pakistan,  as  a  symbol  and  harbinger  of  that  better  day
when  all  India  may  be  united  again.
In   this  vast  band  of   in-between   nations,   there   is   much
economic  distress,  largely  due  to  the  huge  amount  of  national
resources  which  poorer   countries  must   divert   to   armament.
I  would  propose  a  general  step-by-step  arms  reduction  in  the
neutralized   zone   to   the   level   of   internal  police   forces.    I
would  say,  invoking  hallowed   phrases  and   symbols  all   the
world's   people   understand,   "Let   us   beat   the   swords   into
plough-shares."    In  the  framework  of  a  world   in  which   the
poisons  of  so  much  inter-human hate  would  no  longer  fester,
world   agreement   to  end  nuclear  testing,  and  then   to  police
nuclear  production  and  then  to  outlaw  nuclear  war—or  any
other  kind—would  at  last  be  feasible.
Why  Not  Annual  Summit   Meetings?
Finally  I  would   invite  Krushchev  to   come   and   visit   our
country  and  see  for   himself   how  unlike  his   preconceptions
it  is,  and  offer  in  return  to  visit  Russia.   And   I  would   pro-
pose   that   summit   meetings   no   longer   be   the   febrile   last
resort  of  impending  catastrophe  but  an  annual  institution,  a
get-together   without   agenda,  without  publicity  and  with   no
specific  purpose  other  than  to  get  to  know  each  other  better.
Here  it  seems  to  me  is  a  Grand  Design  worthy  of  America.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  4,1958
Despite   Delay   and   Double-Talk,   Senator    Anderson's  Charges   Are  Confirmed
Defense   Secretary  Admits  Ike  and  Strauss  Wrong  in  Dirty  Bomb  Denials
When  the  Secretary  of  Defense  admits  that  the  President
was  misled  and  misleading on  the  subject  of  "dirty"   bombs
that  should  be  news.    But  Secretary  McElroy's  letter  of  July
28  was  so  sloppily  covered  by  the  press that  few  readers  must
have  realized  what  it  was  all  about.
This  is  the  background.   On  Meet  the  Press  April  27,  Sen-
ator  Anderson  (D.,   New  Mex.),  charged  that  despite  talk
of  clean  bombs  our  military  were  not  only  stockpiling  dirty
bombs   but   inserting  something  which   makes  them   dirtier.
This  was  denied  by  the  President  and  by Strauss.
Anderson  Suggests  Russell   Inquire
In  a  Senate  speech  on  May  5,  Senator  Anderson  suggested
that  the  Armed  Services  Committee  "ask  the  military."   On
May   13  Senator  Russell,  chairman  of   Armed  Services,  sent
the  Secretary  of  Defense  a  letter  designed  to   establish   the
truth.   The  letter  from  McElroy  is  the  result.
As  the  reader  can  see  from   the  two  boxes  on  this   page,
the  McElroy  letter   shows  Anderson  was  right.    The  Penta-
gon  did  its  best  to  delay  and  disguise  this  damaging  admis-
sion.   Secretary  McElroy  tried  to  fob  off  Senator  Russell  with
an  oral  explanation.   Russell—who  has  had  long   experience
with  military  bureaucrats—insisted  that  the  Secretary  put  it
in  writing.
This  seems  to  have  taken  a  long  time.   McElroy's   letter
was  dated  July  11  and  not  released  until  July  28,  more  than
two  months  after  the  original  letter  of  inquiry.  The   Penta-
gon  did  not  rely  only  on  time  lag.   The  letter  is  a  model  of
bureaucratic  double-talk.   In  the  effort  to  befuddle  the  issue,
it  went  far  afield  and  adopted  some  novel  nomenclature.   But
in'the  course  of  this  it  officially   admitted  we  were  tackling
the  problems  involved  in  making not  just  one,  but  two  kinds,
of  dirtier  bombs.
The  letter  begins  by  dividing  bombs  into  three  classes.   It
calls  the  100  percent  dirty  bomb,  the  pure  fission  bomb,  the
"normal  weapon."    It  calls  any  bomb  in  which  radioactivity
has  been  minimized  a  "clean   weapon."   Then   it  discloses  a
third  category,  the  "salted  weapon,"  one  to  which  (as  in  the
cobalt  bomb)   other  materials  have  been  added   to   increase
How  Strauss  Lied
"They   [the   military]  are  not  only  stockpiling  them
[dirty  bombs]  but  they  have  pulled bombs  out  of  stock-
pile  and  inserted   something  which  makes  it   dirtier."
—Senator Anderson, Meet  the Press, April  27.
"The   facts   are  that  atomic  bombs   are   only  taken
from   stockpile   for   purposes   of   routine   inspection   or
for   modification   or  improvement.   No  material  is   'in-
serted'   in   bombs   for   the   purpose   of   increasing   the
amount   of   fission   products   or   to   add   to   the   total
fallout."
—Admiral  Strauss, replying   to Anderson, May  3.
"Q.  Are   there   bombs   which  have   been  withdrawn
from   stockpile   for   certain   modifications   which    are
dirtier  because  of  the  modifications?
"A.  If    you   refer   to   local   fallout   the   answer   is
'Yes.'  .  .  ."
—July   11  Letter  of   Secretary    of   Defense   McElroy
answering  questions   -put   to  him   on  May   13  by
Senator  Russell.
radioactivity  beyond  that  of  the  100%  fission  bomb.  McElroy
admits  these  are  "dirty"  bombs.
In  addition—it  takes  the  letter  a  long  time  to  get  to  the
point  —   "normal"   bombs  are  taken  out   of   stockpile   and
equipped  with  new   fuzes   in  a  way  which  sharply  increases
local  fall-out.   This  confirms  Anderson's  charge.
One  word  more  of  explanation  is  required.   McElroy  in-
sists  with  self-righteous indignation,  that  no  "salted"  weapons
are  under  development  and  that  stockpiling  them  is  not   "con-
templated  at  this  time."   Possibly  one  reason  for  this  is  that
no  one  has  yet  discovered  how  to  produce  what  the  military
want.   This  is  a  bomb  with  a  minimum of  blast  and  fire  and
a  maximum of  radioactivity.  This  would  destroy  living  things
in  any  area  and  keep  human  beings  temporarily  out  of  it  but
would  leave  intact  industrial  or  military  facilities  we  would
ourselves  like  to  use.
This  is the  "humane"  type  of  radioactive warfare advocated
by  Dr.  Ernest O.  Lawrence in  the  winter  of  '49-50.   We   leave
you  with  it  for  your next  nightmare.
McElroy—Dirtier  Bombs Have
"Now,  no  military  officer   that  I  know  of  has  ever  even
suggested  that  we  have  dirtier  bombs,  certainly   there  has
been  no  official  suggestion  of  that  kind."
—Pres.  Eisenhower  replying   at  press  conference   April
30  to  Senator  Anderson's   charges  of  April  27.
"With  reference  to  the  question  arising  from  the  Presi-
dent's  conference   of  April  30,  1958,  I  should  like  to  make
it  clear  that  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  no  military  of-
ficer  holding  any  position  of  responsibility  for  the  formula-
tion  of  military  policy  has  suggested   that  we  have  bombs
designed   to   increase   the   amount   of   radioactivity.    How-
ever,  the  possibility  and  technical  feasibility  of  adding  cer-
tain   materials   ("salting")   to   increase    short-lived   radio-
activity  have  been  under  study  for  several   years  for  two
reasons:
"(1)   We  should  like  to  know  whether  an  enemy   might
design  and  use  such  weapons  against   us;
"(2)   We  should  like  to  determine  whether  it  is   techni-
cally  feasible  to  design   atomic  weapons  in  such  a  way  as
Been  Under  Study  for  3  Years
to   create   short-lived   local   radioactivity    without,   at   the
same  time,  causing  a  high  degree  of  destruction  from  blast
and  thermal  effects.
"We  visualize  certain  situations   under  which  it  might  be
highly  desirable  to  deny  the  enemy  the  use  of  certain  fa-
cilities  and/or  areas  for  a  limited  period  without  causing
wholesale  destruction. ...
"In  the  last  paragraph  of  your  letter  you  refer  to  a  let-
ter  from   the  Secretary   of  Defense   dated  March  26,  1955.
Inasmuch  as  our  records   do  not  contain   a  letter  of   that
date,  on  this  subject,  I  assume   that  you  refer  to  a  letter
of  March 5,  1955,  which  requested  the  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission  to  explore  'methods  of  both  increasing   and  decreas-
ing  the  radioactive  yield  of  thermonuclear  weapons'."
—Letter  July   11  by  Secretary   of   Defense   McElroy    re-
plying    to   a   letter   of   May   13   by   Senator   Russell
seeking  the  facts   in  the  controversy   precipitated    by
Senator   Anderson's    charges    on   Meet    the   Press,
April  2,7.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  4,1958
White   Dissenters   Subpoenaed   for   Atlanta   Sessions  to  Intimidate  Integrationists
150 Southern  Negro  Leaders  Protest  Un-American  Committee  Hearings
Wherever  white  men  struggle  to  deny  colored   men  equal
rights,  whether  in  South   Africa,   Algeria  or  our  own   South,
a  common  pattern  appears.   The  fight  to  prevent  other   races
from   enjoying   equality  of   rights   ends  by  undermining   the
civil  liberties of  the  dominant whites  themselves.   Police  states
shape  up,  Fascist  ideologies  and  movements  spread.   Denial
of  justice  to  the  black  undermines  freedom  for  the  white.
No  Place  for  Jefferson
The  invasion  of  the  South  by  the  witch  hunt  committees,
first Eastland's  Senate  Internal Security subcommittee and  now
the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  is  in  this  pat-
tern:  a  means  of  terrorizing  white  moderates  and  liberals,  re-
calling  the  two  decades  before  the  Civil  War  when  all  anti-
slavery  views  in  the  South  were  suppressed   and  an  overt  anti-
Jeffersonianism   created  a   philosophy  congenial  to   a   society
dominated   by  a  slave-holding  minority.    The   South,   where
family,  class and  money  have long  been  the  basis of  oligarchic
rule,  is  in  this  sense  "un-American,"  a  Whig  and  racist  sur-
vival  in  an  America  otherwise  steadily  more  egalitarian.   But
this  is  not  the  kind  of  un-Americanism  the  Committee   was
scheduled  to  investigate July  29,  30  and   31  in  its  first  South-
ern  hearings,  at  Atlanta,  Ga.
The   new  hearings,   like  Eastland's  earlier   incursions,  are
intended   to   frighten   into   conformity   those   few   Southern
whites who  believe  in  integration  and  the  larger  minority  who
are  ready  to  obey  the  law.   So  far  as  could  be  learned  on  the
eve of  the  hearings  (on  which  we  hope  to  report  fully  in  our
next  issue),  no  Negroes  have  been  subpoenaed,  only  whites,
among  them  Anne  and  Carl  Braden  (her  book,  The  Wall  Be-
tween,  has  just  been  published  by  Monthly  Review  Press,   66
Barrow  St.,  NYC,  $5,  an  account  of  the  fight  for  racial  equal-
ity  that  made  them  the  central  figures  in  Kentucky's   famous
sedition  trial.)    They  have  also  subpoenaed   Perry   Cartwright
Five  Negro  Editors  In  Protest
Among  the  signers   of   the  Southern  Negro  protest
against    House    Un-American   Activities   Committee
hearings  in  the  South  were  the  distinguished  sociolo-
gist,  Dr.  K.  Franklin  Frazier,  Attorney  Louis  L. Red-
ding  of  Delaware, the  Rev.  F.  L.  Shuttlesworth  of  Ala-
bama,  and  five  Negro  editors:  L.  C.  Bates  of  the  Little
Rock,   Ark.,  State  Press;  C.  A.  Scott   of   the  Atlanta,
Ga.,  Daily   World;  C.  C.  Dejoie,  Jr.,  of   the  Louisiana
Weekly;  Carter   Wesley   of   the   Texas   Informer;  and
Eddie   L.  Madison,  Jr.,  of   the  Oklahoma   Eagle.
and   Gene  Feldman,  editors  of  the  Southern  Newsletter,  and
Frank  Wilkinson,  of  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Commit-
tee,  who  was  served   with   a  subpoena   when   he  arrived  in
Atlanta  last  week  as  an  observer.
A  striking  aspect  of  the  new  hearings  is  the  release  of  a
protest  by  150  leading  Southern  Negroes  to  the   House  of
Representatives.   This  was  coordinated   by  the  Southern   Con-
ference   Educational   Fund,   822   Perdido   St.,   New   Orleans,
La.,  the  last  militant  inter-racial group  still  operating   in  the
South.   We   reprint  the  full   text  of  this   protest   below,   not
only  because  it  has  been  ignored  by  the  press  but  also  because
it  represents  a  new  and  heartening  development.    This  is  the
first  time  in  years  a  leading  group  of  Negroes  has  recognized
the  close  connection  between  their  fight  for  civil  rights  and
the  fight  of  dissenting  white  elements  against  the  witch  hunt.
In  the  South  the  dissenting  white  is more  isolated  and  help-
less  than  the  Negro;  he  has  no  community  to  sustain  him;
he  is walled  in  between  the  contempt  of  white  racists  and  the
often   equally   racist  distrust  of   the  Negro  whose   rights   he
would  champion.    In  this  context,   it  was  an  act  of   courage
and  human  solidarity for  these  Southern  Negro  leaders  to  risk
the  Committee's  ire  by  a  public  protest.
The  Kind  of  Un-American  Activities  in  the  South  the  Committee  Won't Investigate
"We  are  informed  that  the  Committee  on Un-American
Activities  of  the  House  of  Representatives  is  planning  to
hold  hearings  in  Atlanta,  Georgia,  at  an  early  date.
"As  Negroes  residing  in  Southern  States  and  the  District
of  Columbia,  all  deeply  involved  in  the  struggle  to  secure
full  and  equal  rights  for  our  people,  we  are  very  much  con-
cerned  by  this  development.
"We  are  acutely  aware  of  the  fact  that  there  is  at   the
present  time  a  shocking  amount of  un-American activity  in
our  Southern  states.   To  cite  only  a  few   examples,   there
are  the  bombings of  the  homes,  schools,  and  houses  of  wor-
ship  of  not  only  Negroes   but  also  of  our  Jewish  citizens;
the  terror  against  Negroes   in  Dawson,  Ga.;  the  continued
refusal  of  boards  of  registrars  in  many  Southern  communi-
ties  to  allow  Negroes  to  register   and  vote;  and  the  activi-
ties  of  White  Citizens  Councils  encouraging  open  defiance
of  the  U.  S.  Supreme Court.
"However,  there  is  nothing  in  the  record  of  the   House
Committee  on  Un-American  Activities  to  indicate  that,  if
it   comes   South,  it   will  investigate   these   things.    On  the
contrary,  all  of  its  activities  in  recent  years  suggest  that
it   is   much  more  interested   in  harassing   and  labelling   as
'subversive'  any  citizen  who  is  inclined  to  be  liberal  or  an
independent  thinker.
"For  this  reason,  we  are  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  this
committee  coming  South to  follow the  lead of  Senator  East-
land,  as  well  as  several  state  investigating  committees,  in
trying  to  attach  the  'subversive'  label  to  any  liberal  white
southerner  who  dares  to  raise  his  voice  in  support  of  our
democratic  ideals.
"It  was  recently  pointed  out  by  four  Negro  leaders  who
met  with  President  Eisenhower  that  one  of  our  great  needs
in   the   South  is   to  build  lines  of   communication  between
Negro  and  white  Southerners.   Many  people  in  the   South
are  seeking  to  do  this.   But  if   white  people  who  support
integration  are  labelled  'subversive'  by  congressional   com-
mittees,  terror  is  spread  among  white  citizens  and  it  be-
comes  increasingly  difficult   to  find  white  people  who   are
willing  to  support our  efforts  for  full  citizenship.   Souther-
ners,  white  and  Negro,  who  strive  today  for  full  democracy
must   work   at  best  against   tremendous  odds.    They  need
the  support  of   every  agency  of   our  Federal   government.
It  is  unthinkable  that  they  should  instead   be  harassed  by
committees  of  the  U.  S.  Congress.
"We  therefore  urge  you  to  use  your  influence  to  see  that
the  House  Committee  on  Un-American Activities stays  out
of   the  South—unless  it  can  be  persuaded  to  come  to  our
region  to  help  defend  us  against  those  subversives  who  op-
pose  our  Supreme Court,  our  Federal  policy  of  civil  rights
and  our  American  ideals  of  equality  and  brotherhood."
2       :<
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August i, 1958
Snail's   Pace   of   Senate   Hearings   Killing  Off   Administration   Hopes
Conservative  Bar Report  Opposes  Passport  Denials  on  Political  Grounds
The  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  hearings  on  the
Administration's   passport   bill   creep   along   at   a   reassuring
snail's  pace,  and  there  will  almost  certainly  be  no  legislation
passed  at  this  session.   Until  the  hearing  last  Monday,  those
heard   from  have  been  the  expected  sources:  liberal  organi-
zations  like  the  ACLU,  the  ADA,  the  American  Jewish   Con-
gress,   the  National   Lawyer's  Guild  and   the   Federation   of
American  Scientists, and  lawyers like  Harry Rand,  who  fought
the  case  of  the  physicist  Dayton  to  the  Supreme  Court.
Last  Monday,  however,  the  Senate  committee  heard   from
a  fresh  quarter—the   Special  Committee  set  up  over   a  year
ago  by  the  Association  of  the  Bar  of  the  City  of  New   York
to  study  the  passport  problem.   The  eight  are  all  staid  prac-
titioners,  with   not   a  crusader  among   them,   headed   by  an
attorney  with  the  almost  Dickensian  name of  Fifield  Workum.
To  Appear   in  Book   Form
Mr.  Workum's  statement  to  the  Senate committee  embodied
the  gist  of  a  book  this  special  committee  is  soon  to   publish,
aii'l  we  believe  it  will  make  the  enactment  of  the   Adminis-
tration  bill  next  session  more  difficult.   The  Special  Bar  Com-
mittee  comes  up  in  favor  of  as  little  restriction  as  possible.
The   Bar   Association  report   shows   the   capacity  of   legal
tradition  to  overcome  political preconception.   The  eight  men
who  worked  on  the  report  are  all,  so  far  as  we  know,   con-
servatively  politically.   But  they  arc  also  conservative  lawyers
and   as  such  unable  to  stomach  restriction  of  liberty  on   the
basis  of   opinion.
The   statement  by  Mr.  Workum   opposed   denial  of   pass-
ports  "solely  on  the  basis of  membership in  any  organization,
even   the  Communist  Party."     They   would  limit  denials  on
security  grounds  "to  citizens  as  to  whom  the  Secretary  finds
reasonable   grounds   to   believe   that   their   activities   abroad
would   endanger   the  national  security   of   the   United    States
by   (1)    transmitting  without  proper   authority,  security  in-
formation   of   the   United   States;   (2)    inciting   hostilities   or
conflicts  which  might  involve  the  United  States;  (3)   inciting
attacks  by  force  upon  the  United  States  or  attempts  to  over-
Should  Leftists  Be  Free  to  Travel?
"Travel   restrictions   which   have   been   imposed   be-
cause   of   suspected   leftist  beliefs   and  associations   do
not,   in  the  judgment  of  the  Committee,  serve  the  over-
all  objectives  of  United States  policy.   If  United  States
expressions   of  belief  in  principles  of   freedom   are   to
be  given  credence  amonp  the  nations  of  the  world,  the
deed  must  suit  the  word."
—Statement   to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations   Com-
mittee,  .Inly   28,  on  behalf   of   the   Special    Com-
mittee  on Passport  Procedures,  N.  Y.  Bar  Assn.
throw  its  government  by  force  and   violence."
The   Bar   Association   committee  believes   that   denial   of
passports   should   not   rest   on   "the   generalized   taint  which
properly   attaches  to   the   Communist  Party   as  an   organiza-
tion"  but  on  "a  clear  showing  of  real  danger  to  the  nation
which  would  follow  from  the  travel  abroad  of  the  particu-
lar  applicant."  It  sees  in  the  kind  of  political  standards  ap-
plied  by the  State  Department  an  "inevitable  tendency  .  .  .
to  deal  with  rumor  as   fact,   association  as  membership   and
advocacy  as  incitement."
Split  on  Hearing   Procedure
On  the  question  of  hearing  procedure,  the  bar  committee
split,   though   only  one  member   would   permit   the   latitude
the   State   Department   asks   in   withholding   "sensitive"   in-
j formation   from   the  applicant.   Two   others  would   make   an
exception  from  normal  due  process  but  only  where  the  appli-
cant   is  a  person  who   has  had   access  to  "highly  classified"
information.   Another would  in  some  cases  allow  a temporary
withholding  of  passports  for  not  more  than  six  months.
Four   members  of   the   committee   believe,   however,   that
under  any  circumstances counsel  for  the  applicant   should   be
permitted  to  examine all  documentary evidence,  and  to  cross-
examine  all  witnesses, including  confidential  informants.    We
look  forward  to  the  Committee's  full  report  in  book  form  as
a  bulwark  against  the  erosion  of  traditional  notions   of  fair
trial  under  the  impact  of  the  cold   war.
We'll  Be  Glad  to  Supply   A  Few  Extra  Copies  Free  for   Friends  You  Meet  on   Vacation
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name       ..................................................................................—••
Street     .......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
8/4/58
(To)    Name
Street     .......
City      ........................................Zone............State...................
Shall   we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
IF.Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebro.ka  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under   the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, I).  P.
An   Independent   weekly   published    and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$f>  iu   the    TJ.  S.;  $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED