I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jan06.pdf

============================================================

Four  Pages  Summing  Up  NATO
That  West  European  Revolt  at  the  Paris  Conference  May  Easily  Be  Overestimated
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  1
JANUARY  6,   1958
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How   John   Foster   Mitty   Triumphed  at  Versailles
The    advance   billings   contained    a   curious    comparison.
The  word  passed  out  at  those  private  briefings  to  which  only
Grade  A  homogenized  Washington  correspondents  are  invited
was  that  the  NATO  conference  would  be  the  greatest  since
Versailles.   Subconsciously  someone  seemed  to  think  that  the
war  had  already  been  fought  to  a  successful  conclusion.    In
Walter   Mitty-like   moments  of   euphoria,   the   State   Depart-
ment  may  have  pictured  the  conference  as  another   Versailles
at  which  it would  dictate unconditional surrender  to  an  enemy
laid  low  so  swiftly  by  long  distance pushbutton  that  there  was
no  need  to  disturb  Detroit's  plans  to  put  higher  tail  fins  on
next  year's  models.    (How   Mr.   Dulles   must  dream   of   that
moment  when,  atheistical  materialism having  bit  the  dust,  he
can   lead   an  abject  Krushchev   to   the   baptismal   font   while
Mme.  Furtseva  hies  her  to  a  newly  reopened  nunnery!)  Such
are  the  pleasant  visions  which  forty  winks after  lunch  brings
°lder  statesmen.
As  it  turned  out,  we  had  difficulty   in  imposing  terms  even
m  our  allies.   In  a  sense  the  Russians  turned  up  at  this  new
Versailles  but  only  to  take  their  seats  almost  as  full  members
of  NATO.   Mr.  Dulles  must  have  felt  surrounded  at  the  con-
ference  table  by  that  indefatigable  letter-writer,  Marshal  Bul-
ganin,  who  might  now  be  described   as  the   inventor  of   the
intercontinental   missive.   The   success   of   this   new   form  of
bombardment  may  be  measured  by  the  fact  that  for  the  first
time  it  severed  Mr.  Dulles  from  his  diplomatic  Siamese  twin,
Dr.   Adenauer.   The  Paris  meeting  might  be  summed  up  by
saying  that  the  Secretary of  State  came  to  conquer,  and  stayed
to  correspond—or  at  least  promise  to.
Not  Even  A  Moral  Commitment
There  was  an  exchange   of   promises.    Our  NATO  allies
promised  in  principle  to  take  our  missiles  while  we  promised
in  principle   to  reopen   negotiations  with  the  Russians.   Both
promises   closely   examined   confirm  Mr.   Dulles's    astringent
remarks  at  his  last   press  conference  before   Paris  about   the
value  of  agreements   in  principle.   The  vague  nature  of   the
missiles  agreement   was  revealed   by  the  evasiveness   of   Gen.
Laurie  Norstad's  interview  on  Meet   the  Press  in  Paris  after
the  conference  adjourned.   When  Marquis  Childs  asked   the
NATO  commander  what  he  could  do  if  an  allied  country  re-
fused  to  take  missile  bases,  Gen.  Norstad  replied  that  it  was
not   necessary   for   every  NATO   member   to   have   missiles.
When   William   H.   Lawrence   followed   this   up   by   asking
whether  the  NATO  agreement   represented   a  moral  commit-
ment  to  take  missiles,  Gen.   Norstad   answered,   "I'm    afraid
that  question  isn't  susceptible  to  a  yes or  no  answer."
1 *
Let  Freedom Ring—But  Not  Too Loudly
"It  is   for   us,  together,   to  determine  whether   men
shall   continue  to   live   in  freedom   and  in  dignity   or
whether  they  are  to  become  mere  vassals  of   an   alt-
powerful  state. ...  As  we  begin  our NATO's  delibera-
tions,  I  shall  be  thinking  of  France's   greatest  words—
liberty,  equality  and  brotherhood."
—Ike's  speech  on arriving  in  Paris, Dec.  H
"Moreover  the  {French)  Civil  Service  Act  prohibits
that  any  reference  be  made  in  the  employe's  file  of  his
political   association   or   of   his   philosophical   and   re-
ligious  beliefs."
—Same  day,  Washington,  warning  in  Library   of  Con-
gress  survey   on  the  lack  of  American-style  loyalty  and
security   regulations  in  NATO   countries.
Unfortunately  both  sides  managed   to  exchange   checks  cal-
culated   to  bounce.   The  nature  of  the  agreement   to   reopen
negotiations  with  the   Russians  is  equally   obscure,  as  is   the
question   of  whether   West  European   statesmen   were   serious
about  peace  in  exacting  that  promise  or  merely  going  through
the  motions  to  satisfy   a  public  opinion  less  numb  than  our
own.   The  so-called  European  revolt  against   American  domi-
nation  of  NATO  may  easily  be  exaggerated.    Paul  Johnson
reported  from  Paris  in  the  London  New  Statesmen  of  Decem-
ber  28  that  Macmillan   "held  a  confidential  briefing  of   top
U.  S.  journalists.   America  was  not  to  worry,  he  told  them,
because   Britain   had   endorsed    the   demand   for   East-West
talks;  he  only  did  it  to  satisfy  public  opinion  at  home.  .  .  ."
Dr.   Adenauer's  conversion  to   negotiation   may  be  similarly
suspect.    As  the   conference   closed,   a   dispatch   from   Bonn
(New    York   Times,   Dec.   21)   said   both   Herr   Ollenhauer,
leader  of-the  Social  Democrats,  and  the  leadership  of  the  Free
Democrats  were  suspicious  that  the  West  "would  make  only  a
perfunctory   effort  at  a  political  solution  to  the  East-West  ten-
sion  and  then  push  on  with  the  armaments  race."
II
Peace  Lost  With  Norway's  Resolution
Neither  the  widespread  West  European  hostility  to  missile
bases  nor  the  inane  quality  of  that  TV  report  by  Eisenhower
and  Dulles  on  the  Paris  conference  should   blind  one  to  the
shrewd   plans   and   powerful    influences  moving   toward   an
intensified  arms  race.   The  game  was  lost  at  Paris  when   the
NATO  Council  rejected  the  Norwegian   resolution  to  defer  a
decision  on  rri'issiles  "until  all  efforts   to  come  to  terms  with
the  Soviet  Union  had  been  exhausted."   Pineau's   formula  to
"establish  the  principle of  stationing  missiles  and  warheads  in
(Continued    on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, January  6,1958
Dulles  Launches A  New  Marshall  Plan  Tied  This  Time  to  Armament
(Continued  from   Page   One)
the   countries   desiring   them  while   expressing   a  continuing
willingness   to  explore   settlement   of   political   and   disarma-
ment  problems  with  the  Soviet  Union"  was made  to  order  for
the  State  Department  and  the  Pentagon.
Consultation—With Our Own Men
This flabby formula  might  still  be  the  framework  for   effec-
tive  pressure  if  earlier  proposals   from  Canada  and  Western
Europe   for   closer   NATO   political   consultation   had   been
adopted.   But  Mr.  Dulles  is  as  unwilling   to  negotiate   with
our  allies  as  with  the  Russians.   A  year  ago  the  so   called
report   of   the  three   wise  men  of  NATO—Italy's  Martino,
Norway's  Lange  and  Canada's  Pearson—proposed  machinery
for  joint  consultation,  for  "the  discussion  of  problems   collec-
tively,  in  the  early  stages  of  policy  formation,  and  before  na-
tional  positions  become  fixed."  Such  consultation  might  pro-
vide  a  brake  on  the  arms  race  and  a  prod  toward  negotiation.
Instead  of  establishing  such  machinery,  however,  the  NATO
Council  could  agree  only  that  "Our  permanent   representatives
will   be  kept   informed   of  all  governmental   policies   which
materially   affect   the   alliance   and   its  members."    This  is  a
promise  to  consult,  if  at  all,   only  with  our  own  representa-
tives  on  NATO.  To  keep  them  informed  is  hardly  the  same
as  to  discuss  problems   collectively   in  advance  of  taking  up
fixed  positions  of  policy.
What The Poles  Fear
Mr.  Dulles's  conception  of  "interdependence"  has  always
been  that  of  a  one-way  street,  and  he  has  hit  on  an  ingenious
program   for   tying   Western   Europe   economically   and   po-
litically  to  the  arms  race.  Not  enough  attention  has  been  paid
to  die  full  implications  of  the  program  he  advanced  the  first
day  of  the  Council  meeting  for  a  coordinated  West  European
arms  production  industry  to  be  supported   by   "procurement
for  our  own  forces  as  well  as  for  our  military  assistance  pro-
grams."    This  is  the  germ  of  a  new  Marshall  plan,  but  a
Marshall  plan   tied  to  armament  rather  than   reconstruction.
Europe  would  be  given  a  chance  to  earn  dollars  by  turning
out  munitions  for   the  American  market.   This  would   have
several  consequences.   It  would  make  larger  sections  of  Euro-
pean  industry dependent  on  a  continued  arms  race,  and  there-
fore  a  political  factor   against  negotiation   and  relaxation  of
tension.   By  stepping  up  the  arms  race  through  wider  West
European  participation,  we  would  force  similar  diversions  of
industrial  capacity in  the  Soviet  bloc  from  consumer  goods  to
Moral  Lesson  from  His  Madrid
Visit  Mr.  Dulles  Won't Welcome
"A  decade  ago   many  Americans   would  have   voted
with  enthusiasm  for  the  extermination  of  the  Japanese
and  the  Germans.  Today,  faced  with  what  we  think  of
as  new necessities,  we  count  them  as  allies.
"Why   should  anyone  assume   that   the  case  will  be
totally  different with  the  Russians.   As  this  year  draws
to  its  close,  the  dominant  mood  in  America  is  that  an
unbridgeable   gulf   divides   Moscow   and    Washington.
There  is  a  tendency  to  think that  our differences, really
minor  differences  as  compared  to  those  which  split  us
off   from  Japan  and  Hitler's   Germany,  can   never   be
reconciled.
"Nothing  in  history,  or  even  in  recent  experience,*
supports  this  estimate  of  the  situation.   It  is  an  esti-
mate   which   derives   from   propaganda,    impulsiveness
and  immature  thinking.   If  any  American  Secretary  of
State,  in  1957, can  go  to  Madrid  to  chat  with  Franco  as
a  friend  and ally,  it  is  childish  to  suppose  that  there  is
something  in  the  stars,  or  in  Communist  dogma,  which  .
eternally  rules  out  a  similar  visit  to  Moscow."
—Editorial,  Washington  Star  (Ind.  Cons.), Dec. 26
arms  production, a  move  the  Poles  especially  fear.   The  belief
here  is  that  by  stepping  up  the  pace  and  reducing consumer
goods  supply  in  the  Soviet  bloc,  we  can  increase  tension  and
repression  within the  Soviet Union  and  its  satellites.   It  is  also
calculated  that  if  West  European  countries  begin  to  produce
missiles,  it  will  increase the  demand for  the  nuclear warheads
with  which  to  arm  them.   This   is  a  program  for  creating
abroad  the  kind  of  vested  interests  in  tension  which already
exist  at  home.
The  motivations  and   the  strategy  of   this  course  may  be
read  between the  lines  of  the  "leak"  to  the  Washington  Post
(Dec.   20)   of  the  so-called  Gaither  report.    Its  conclusion,
according  to  the  Post's  account,  was  that  the  recommended
additional  expenditures on  arms  and  shelters  "would  come  at
a  fortuitous moment in  the American economy .  .  . with bene-
fit  both  to  the  economy  and  to  the  national  defense."    The
committee  which  worked   on   the   Gaither   report,  the   Post
account  says,  "started  on  the  premise  of  a  recession,  not  of
further  inflation."  A  heightened  arms  race  is  advocated  as  a
means  of  stopping  the  slump  in  business and  the  stock market.
A  Form  of  Economic Warfare
At  the  same  time  the  Gaither  report  envisages  stepped  up
arms  output  as  a  means  of  economic  warfare  against  the  So-
viets.   The  Washington  Post  said  the  Gaither  committee was
Dare  We  Recognize  Good  Sense  When  It  Comes  From Moscow?
"It  is  exactly  the  present  course  of  the  United  States and
some  of  its  NATO  partners  that  undermines  their  author-
ity  and  prestige,  and  the  further  it  goes,  the  stronger  the
effect  will  be. ...
"We  are  convinced  that  the  replacing   of   the   policy   of
'from  positions  of  strength,'  the  policy  of  keeping  the  world
'on  the  brink  of  war'  by  a  different  policy  aimed  at  ending
the   arms  race,   at  lessening   international   tension  and  at
developing  cooperation  among  states,  primarily  in  the  field
of  trade,  would,  on  the  contrary,  greatly  enhance  the  au-
thority  and  prestige   of  the   United  States,  as  well   as  of
other  states  which follow  in  the  wake  of  American  policy."
—Gromyko  speech, Supreme  Soviet,  Moscow, Dec. 21.
"We  declare   that   however  acute   the   ideological    differ-
ences  between  the  two  systems  the  Socialist  and  the  capi-
talist—we  must  solve  questions  in  dispute  among  states not
by  war,  but  by  peaceful  negotiation.   We  suggest  that com-
petition  in  inventing  new  weapons  be  replaced  by  peaceful
competition.   The  history  of  a  social  system  will  be  decided
not  by  rockets,  not  by  atomic  and  hydrogen  bombs,  but  by
the   fact   of   which   system   ensures   greater   material   and
spiritual  benefits  to  man."          —Krushchev,  same  session.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   6,1958
The  Real  Meaning  of  the  Gaither  Report  Is  in  Terms  of  Economic  War
"unfavorably"   impressed  with   the  long  term  rate  of   Soviet
industrial  growth  which  it  estimates  to  be  about  twice  our
own.   "This  growth,  admittedly  based  on  a  less  'mature'  in-
dustrial  economy  and  apparently  beginning  to  slow   down,"
the  Washington   Post  said,   "permits  the  Kremlin  to  devote
about  25  percent  of  its  production  to  the  military  compared
to  only  about  8.7  percent  of   American  production  so  com-
mitted.   The  Soviet  gross  product  is  only  one  one-third   that
of   America.    In   another   ten   years  it   is  estimated   to   reach
about  one-half  the  American  figure,  because  of  a  faster  rate
of  growth."   The  Gaither  report  calculates,  according  to  the
Post,  that  if  the  U.  S.  added  about   10  percent  to  its  defense
commitment  in  terms of  gross  product,  the  Soviets  would  have
to  raise  theirs  by  one-third and  do  so  in  a  nation  already  on
the  meagerest  ration  of  consumer  goods."
So  we  emerge  from  the  NATO  Paris  conference  with  no
real  change  of  position.   We  still  regard  the  arms  race  as  a
means  of  maintaining prosperity  at  home  and  poverty  in  the
Soviet  bloc.   We  believe  that  if  the  heat  is  only  kept  on  long
enough  the  Russians  will  be  so  eager  for  disarmament  that
they  may  even  surrender  on  Germany.   In  this  perspective,   it
is  strange  to  have  the  President  questioning  Russian  sincerity
about  disarmament  since  the  foundation  of  this  whole  policy
is  a  belief  that  Moscow  wants  and  needs  arms  reduction  so
desperately  it  will  some  day  pay  a  huge  price  for  it.
This  is,  it  goes  without  question,  a  most  dangerous   game
but  there  is  no  sign  of  real  opposition   to  it.   The   Democrats
are  on  the  whole  more  devoted  to  the  arms  race  even   than
the  Republicans.   No  Democrat   says  what  Kennan  or   Lester
Pearson  or  Hugh   Gaitskell   has  been   saying;  none   of   them
questions  the  arms  race,  as General  Bradley  did.
Some  Lieut.  May Pull  the  Trigger
"The  instability  of  the  armaments  situation  can  only
grow   worse   if   present   technological' trends   continue
and  no  political  controls   are  devised.    As  large  num-
bers  of  fast-flying  missiles  come  into  the  possession of
both  sides,  ready  for   use,  critical  command  will  tend
to  devolve  to  lower  and  lower  echelons.   To  some  ex-
tent  this  is  already  occurring.   If  we  are  going  to  be
able  to  retaliate  effectively  it  will  become  less  and  less
practicable  to  assemble   the  Congress  or  even  for  the
President   to  be  consulted  when  missiles  with  the  ulti-
mate  destructive   power  are  seen  flying  toward  us.   Ef-
fective  retaliation  must  be instant  indeed.  Who at  that
moment  will  hold  the  fate  of  the  world  in  his  hands?
In  the  face  of  such  degeneration   of  command,  agree-
ment   on  effective   forms   for   the   control  of  absolute
weapons  is  the  alternative  to  ultimate   destruction."
—Lloyd   V.  Berkner,  member,  President's    Scientific
Advisory   Committee,  "Earth  Satellites  and  For-
eign   Policy,"   Foreign    Affairs     Quarterly,    Jan.
1958.
No  Way  Really  to  Investigate
A  sampling  of  opinion  expressed   by  the  more  intelligent
Democrats  in  Congress  is  cause  for  despair.   Green  of   Rhode
Island  returns  from  Europe  to  say  that  its  prosperity   shows
it  can  easily  afford  a  larger  arms  budget.   Mansfield  of  Mon-
tana,  the  party whip  in  the  Senate,  supported  the  Eisenhower-
Dulles   missile  bases  policy   in  an  extraordinarily   vapid   TV
interview  on  Face  the  Nation   December   15.    The  "radicals"
of  the  House,  a  group  of  12  Democrats  which  includes  Reuss
of  Wisconsin   and  Jimmy  Roosevelt,  issued  a  statement   criti-
cizing  Dulles's  no-negotiation   article   in   Life    but   declaring
themselves   "pleased  with  the  decision   of  the  NATO   coun-
tries  to  work  out  ways  for  sharing  missiles  and  nuclear   weap-
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
Nye  Bevan,  in  the  Commons),Debate  on  NATO,  Deplores  the  Official   "Liturgy  of  Hate"
"The  Communists  used  to  delude  themselves  into  believ-
ing  that  they  would  benefit  from  war.   They  believed   that
the   extension   of   the   frontiers   of   the   Communist  world
would  arise  from  war,  and  that  the  last  two  world  wars
had  justified  that  belief.
"When  I  discussed  this  with  Mr. Krushchev, I  pointed  out
that  they  could  not  rest  any  hopes  of  this  sort  on  a  third
world  war, because that  would wipe  out  the  capitalist  world
and  the  Communist world  (Opposition  cheers).    There  ex-
ists between us  and the  Communist world,  whatever-we  may
say   against   their  policies,  structure,  principles  and  prac-
tice,  at  least  one common  bond,  and that  is  to  avoid  a  third
world  war  breaking out  (Opposition  cheers).
"There  has  been  no  implementation of  that  recognition,
and,  if  it  is  a  fact,  instead  of  issuing  homilies  against  each
other  as  Mr. Foster  Dulles did immediately after  the  NATO
conference,  in  which  he  adopts  an  almost  religious  attitude
—(Opposition  cheers)—and  that  is  what  I  find  so  detest-
able  about those  speeches,  they  are  always  so  attitudinizing
and   moralizing—(Opposition   cheers)—we   have   an  atmo-
sphere  charged  with  irrationalities  in  which  we  cannot  dis-
cuss  the  realities  of  the  situation  at  all.   (Renewed  Oppo-
sition  cheers).
"Mr.  Dulles  had  said,  'This  materialistic  atheistic  despo-
tism  aimed  at  dominating  the  world  is  a  formidable  chal-
lenge.'   (Ministerial cheers).   Have  we  armed  ourselves   to
fight atheism?    (Loud  Opposition cheers)  .  .  .  The whole of
that  language  is  ...      the  language   of  a  religious   war.
(Opposition  cheers).
"I am not  here for  one  moment trying  to  justify  the Com-
munist  point  of  view.   (Ministerial  cries  of  'oh'  and  Oppo-
sition  cheers).   I  am  trying  to  point  out  that  what  we  must
strive  to  avoid  is  getting  the  world  polarized  by  two  ir-
rational  attitudes.  .  .  .  This  was  one  of  the  things  which
depressed  me  in  Washington,  and  it  emerges  in  the  docu-
ment  [on the NATO meeting] ...  I did not find inspiration
so  much  as  obsession. ...
"We believe  there  are  people  all  over  the  world,  and  par-
ticularly  in  the  United  States,  who would  prefer  that  Great
Britain  would  take  a  stronger   and  more  independent   line
in   foreign   affairs.   I  believe  .  .  .  that   American    official
opinion  lags  for  behind  the  readiness  of  the  American   peo-
ple  themselves.   We believe  the  Government  could  put  more
heart  into  the  whole  world  by  taking  a  more   independent
lead.
"We  are  profoundly  distressed   that  representative    after
representative  of  the  Government gets  up  and  repeats   over
and  over  again  this  liturgy  of  hate,  injects  into  the   inter-
national  situation  no  element  of  buoyancy  or  optimism  at
all,  and has  no  advice  to  give  the  nation  except  pile  up  one
more  tier  of  ridiculous  armaments  on  the  useless  pile  al-
ready  created.   (Prolonged  Opposition  cheers)."
—NATO  Debate,  House  of  Commons, Dec. 20
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   6, 1S58
The  Democrats  Attack  Dulles  — But  Faithfully  Follow  His  Lead
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
ons  with  our  European  allies"  and  pledging  themselves   "to
support   any  changes   in   law   necessary  to   accomplish   this."
The  very  Democrats  who  make  Dulles  their  whipping  boy  do
not  have  the  imagination,  insight  or  courage  to  do  other  than
follow  dutifully  in  the  path  of  his  policies.   No  one  questions
the  wisdom  of  an  arms  race,  no  one  speaks  of  the  need   to
provide  an  economic  substitute  for  arms  orders,  no  one  speaks
the  language  of  peace.
To  End  Nuclear  Testing
The   conservative   Washington    Star   has   been    advocating
negotiation   and   co-existence   but   without   finding   an   echo
among   the  Democrats.    The   Washington   Post  in  a   striking
editorial  Dec.   13  suggested   that  the  U.  S.  accept   Bulganin's
proposal  for  a  cessation  of  nuclear  testing  and  propose  on  its
own  a ban, with  inspection,  against  ICBM's  and  IRBM's.   No
Democrat   takes  it  up.    No   one  with  any  knowledge   of  Po-
land  can  doubt  the  desperate  sincerity  of  Rapacki's  proposal
to  make  Central  Europe  an  area  clear   of   nuclear   weapons,
but  no  one  here  even  discusses  it.   The  truth  is that   Washing-
ton,  whether  Republican   or  Democratic,  just  is  not   interested
in  disarmament  and  does  not  want  relaxation  of   tension.
A  striking  example  of  Democratic  bankruptcy  on   foreign
policy  was  provided  by  Pennsylvania  Senator  Joseph  dark's
reaction  to  the  Gaither  report  leak  in- the  Washington  Post. On
domestic  policy,  Clark   is  a  veritable   second   George  Norris.
On  foreign  policy,  he  faithfully  regurgitates   the   nonsensical
cud  of  those  two  bloodthirsty  idiots,  Symington  and   Jackson.
Clark  took  the  Gaither  report  hook,  line  and  sinker,  its  "hor-
rifying   facts"   and   the   "desperate  need"   it  supposedly   dis-
closes.   But  on  a  domestic  matter  Senator  Clark  would   never
think  of  accepting  without   question   the  one-sided  views  of
an  Administration committee,  briefed  in  private  by  the  very
agencies   they   were   supposed    objectively   to   study.    Policy
ought  to  be  formed  in  the  open,  on  the  basis  of  public  hear-
ings,  in  which  all  points  of  view  are  explored,  not  determined
by  a  small  elite  in  secret  sessions  on  the  basis  of  secret  evi-
dence.   What  was  the  evidence  here ?  The  self  evaluations  of
the  military  and  of  Central   Intelligence.    The   Gaither   com-
mittee   under    these    circumstances    necessarily   became    the
sounding  board  of   military  desire  for   larger   appropriations.
Words  to  Engrave  in  An  Atom  Bomb  Shelter
"A  great  gulf  has  been  opened  between  man's  ma-
terial  advance  and  his  social  and  moral  progress,  a  gulf
in  which  he  may  one  day  be  lost  if  it  is  not  closed  or
narrowed.  .  .  .  The  stark  and  inescapable  fact  is  that
today  we  cannot  defend  our  society  by  war  since  total
war  is  total  destruction,  and  if  war  is  used  as  an  in-
strument  of  policy,  eventually  we  will  have  total  war.
...  If  we  could  internationally display on  this  (peace)
front  some  of  the  imagination  and  initiative, determi-
nation  and  sacrifice,  that  we  show  in  respect  of  defense
planning  and  development, the  outlook  would  be  more
hopeful  than  it  is.   The  grim  fact,  however,  is  that  we
prepare  for  war  like  precocious  giants  and  for  peace
like  retarded pygmies."
—Lester   Pearson,  Canada's   former   Foreign   Secre-
tary,  accepting   the  Nobel  peace  prize,  Dec.  11
Many  Thanks  for  the  Record  Response  to  Our  Holiday   Gift      Offe
It  was  not  a  Royal Commission,  studying the  arms  race afresh,
but  another  small  group  of  hand-picked  worthies   given   the
full   treatment   at   Pentagon   and   Cl A.    Yet   there   is  not   a
single  voice  in  the  Senate  or  the  country  to  question  this way
of  coming  to  conclusions  on  life-and-death   issues.
If  Ike,  Too,  Answers Bertrand Russell
It  will  take  a  bigger   revolt  than  Western   Europe  has  yet
staged  to  change  this  drift   and  make  a  dent  on  the   leaden
bi-partisanship  of  American  foreign  policy.   We  are  wedded
to  the  arms  race,  no  matter  to  what  abyss  it  may  lead.   Wash-
ington  may not  want  war,  but  it  certainly  doesn't  want  peace.
It  is  thus  no  mere  error  of  tactics  or  consequence   of   better
propaganda   which  has  given   the   peace  banner  to   Moscow.
When   Krushchev   even  writes  a  letter   to  the  London   New
Statesman   (Dec.   21)   respectfully  answering  Bertrand   Rus-
sell's  open  letter  to  Eisenhower  and  Krushchev  in  the  same
publication   (Nov.   23),   he  establishes  something   of  a  new
mark   in  urgent   unconventional   effort.    We   can   only  hope
that  if  Jim  Hagerty  hears  of  this  and  decides  that  Ike,   too,
ought   to   answer   Lord   Russell   (aren't   we   supposed   to   be
respectful   in  this  post-sputnik   era   to   intellectuals?),   some-
body  will  head   him   off  before  he   gets   one   of   those   State
Department  drafts  explaining  that  we  cannot  negotiate  with
Moscow    because   the   Communists   don't    believe   in    God.
Neither—someone  had  better  tell  Hagerty—does  Russell.
You  Can Still  Use  It During  January
The  Anniversary  Dinner
More  than  half  the  reservations  have  already
been  sold  for  the  Fifth  anniversary  dinner  being
given   the  Weekly  by  New  York  Readers  at  7
p.  m.  on  January   17  at  the  Port  Arthur   Restau-
rant, 7-9  Mott Street,  New York  City.    This  will
be  a  ten  course Chinese  banquet  and  there  will
be  informal  speeches  by  IPS  and  others  and  a
free-for-all  discussion.     Send  your   reservations
with   check   to  the  Weekly  at   once   since   the
places  available  are  strictly  limited.
I. E  Stones  Weekly
5618  Nefarasfe   Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington.  D.  C.  underAct   of   March  S.   1879.
.                                                                                                                                  .       .          .                                                                     .             .     !'•  st-oatert   Momlavb   lure   pnt>
Untied  every  Thursday  except  tbe  last  tiro  Tharedays  of  Angnit  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..   Washington  16. P.  r.
An   Independent   weekly   published  and  edited  hy   1.  F.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription •
f.  in   th<-  n.   R •  |«  in  Canada:  *10  elsewhere      Air  Mall  rafes:   S1R  f»   TCnrope:  *2c  t«  Israel    Asia   i.nd  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED