I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958feb17.pdf

============================================================

Special  6-Page  Issue
Full  Text  Humphrey  Proposals  on  Cessation  of  Nuclear  Testing  and Inspection,  Pages  2, 3 & 4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  7
FEBRUARY  17,  1958
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
If  Only   They   Didn't  Believe  in  Force  and  Violence
In  the  London  New  Statesman  on  February  8,  Mr.  Dulles
replied  on   behalf   of   Mr.   Elsenhower   to  the   peace   appeal
Bertrand   Russell   had   addressed   to   the   President   and   to
Krushchev.   Mr.  Dulles  said  in  effect  that  it  was  difficult   to
negotiate  with  the  Communists or  to  live  in  peace  with  them
because  they  believe  in  force  and  violence.   By  coincidence,
that  same  day,  our  French  allies  used  American  bombers  to
raid   a  Tunisian  village,  striking  a  schoolhouse  and   killing
many  civilians,  including  women  and   children.   But  when
Mr.  Dulles   met  the  press  three  days  later,  he  managed  to
parry  all  questions  about  this  use  of  force  and  violence.   Not
by  a  single   word  did   he  condemn  the   French,  or  express
sympathy  for  their victims.
Christian  Conscience Suddenly Blacked Out
This  may  seem  remarkably  self-restrained  for   one  whose
Christian  conscience  is  normally  kept   in  a  prominent  posi-
tion.   But  Mr.  Dulles  was  operating,  of  course,  in  a  delicate
area  of  foreign  policy.   To  condemn  the  French  might  be  to
weaken  NATO,  and  to  weaken NATO  would  be  to  diminish
the  force  and  violence  we  can  muster  in  case  of  need  against
the  Communist  world.   To  treat  the  aggressor  and  the  vic-
tim  with  impartial  equanimity  is  to  tip  the   scales  in   favor
of   the  former.   But,  then,  in  a  showdown,   the  French   are
more  important  than  the  Arabs;  the  French  are  still  a  major
military   power.    Mr.   Dulles   met   the   Tunisian   crisis  with
the   same  deftness  he   showed   a   few   years  ago  when   our
allies,  the  Turks,  staged  a  pogrom  against  the  Greeks  living
among  them.   He  issued  a  statement  which  managed  some-
how  to  put  the  attackers  and  the  victims  on  the  same  high
juridical  plane.     Militarily,   the  Turks  are   more   important
than  the  Greeks.   The  scales  of  our  policies  are  adjusted   to
the  weight  of   armies,   i.e.  the  ability   to   impose   force  and
violence.
If  it  were  not  for  a  slip  at  press  conference,  it  might  have
been  thought  that,  living  in  a  sinful  world,  Mr.  Dulles  was
merely  acquiescing  in  its  bad  international  habits.   But  when
Mr.  Dulles  was  asked  to  "define  a  little  more  specifically  for
us"  what  were  the  U.  S.  objectives  "in  the  Tunisian  crisis,"
he  launched   instead   into  an  exposition   of   American   policy
in  the  Indonesian  crisis.   This  showed  him  as  ready  to  gloss
over  force  and  violence  in  internal   affairs.    Rebel   forces  in
Indonesia  are  threatening  to  overthrow   the  established   gov-
ernment.   Mr.  Dulles  indicated  that  we  favor  the  rebels  be-
cause  we  regard   the   government   as  Communist   orientated.
Mr.  Dulles   expressed  sympathy  for  the  rebel  forces   because,
as  he  said,  they  are  Moslem   and  don't  like  "that  type  of
government,"  which  maintains  itself  everywhere  "by   coercive
methods."   This  sympathy  for  the  Moslems  of  Indonesia  may
read  strangely  to  the  Moslems  of  Algeria who  also  feel  them-
selves   the   victims   of   a  government  maintaining  itself   "by
coercive  methods."    But,  then,  the  French  is  not  "that  type
of  government"  but  the  type  we  favor.    If   Mr.  Dulles  were
not  himself  involved,  he  would  be  apt  to  say all  this  showed
a  deplorable  tendency to  act  on  the  morally  repugnant  prin-
ciple   that   the   end   justifies   the   means.   Adherence   to   this
principle  is  often  cited  by  Mr.  Dulles  as  another  reason  we
cannot  live  at  peace  with  Them.
C'est  la Guerre et  la Politique
It  would  be  nice  if  this  little  comedy,  for  which  the  inno-
cent  pay  in  blood  and  tears,  could  be  ended  by  finding  us
a   new   Secretary   of   State.    But   Mr.   Dulles,   though   more
unctuous  and   harder  to   take  than   most,   represents   a  uni-
versal  tendency.   Soviet  sympathizers  were  as  ready  to  excuse
the  use  of  tanks  and  planes  against  the  people  of   Hungary
on  the  ground  of  power  politics;  they  said  the  Soviet  Union
could   not   afford   to   let   the  West   take   over   Hungary   and
move  its  bases  closer  to  Russian  soil.   It  was  too  bad  that
women  and  children  were hurt  but,  as  Gaillard  said  in  Paris
of  the  Tunisian  massacre,  c'est  la  guerre.
These  unfortunate habits  are  not  confined  to  the  big  and
imperialist  Powers.   Gandhi's  heirs  in  India  are  as  ready  to
kill  innocent   bystanders  in  war  over  Kashmir.   The   peace-
loving  neutralist  Arabs  are  only  waiting  for  a  chance  to  loot
in  the  ruins  of  Israel,  and  little  Israel—as  it  showed  in  the
Suez  affair—was  ready  to  risk  engulfing  the  whole  world  in
war  in  order  to  carry  out  what  it  considered  a  preventive  at-
tack  on  Egypt.   Our  Judaic  conscience  is  dulled   in  this  Tu-
nisian   affair  by  dependence  on  France  for  arms  and  by  the
guilty   memory  of   what   happened   not   so  long  ago  to   the
Arabs  of  Kibya.  The  truth  is that  belief  in  force  and  violence
seems  to  be  the  one  creed  all  mankind  holds   in   common,
fraternally  linking  even  a  Dulles  and  a  Krushchev.    Anthro-
pologists   do  indeed  tell  us  that  not  all  tribes   are   warlike,
but  the  other  kind  are  hard  to  locate,  except  in   reservations.
The Right to Kill
Everywhere  men  assume   that   they   have   a  right  to   kill
other  men  in  defense  of  what  they  consider  to  be  their  vital
interests.    Since  one   man's   vital   interest   is   often    another
man's  hurt,  the  carnage  is  difficult  to  equate  with  any  moral-
ity.   This  universal  complacency   about   killing,   rather   than
communism,  capitalism,  colonialism  or  what  have  you,  is  the
heart  of  the  peace  problem.   Ultimate  weapons  in  the  hands
of  a  species  so badly  conditioned  make  it  urgent.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  17,  19S8
Text  of  the  Humphrey  Proposal  to  Cease  Nuclear  Testing
The  Humphrey  speech  on  disarmament  and  foreign  pol-
icy  with  the  remarks  interjected  by  other  Senators  covers
25  pages  of  the  Congressional  Record  for  February  4  and
there  was  no  way  for   us  to  reprint  them  all.    But  we
thought  our  readers  would  like  to  see  in  full  text  the  most
important  part   of  the   speech,  the   discussion  of   nuclear
testing  and  inspection,  so  we  reprint  it  here  along  with
boxes  which  give  selections  from  remarks  by  other  Sena-
tors.  Rather  skimpy  press  coverage  gave  no  conception of
the  talk  that  day  on  the  Senate  floor.  It  showed  a  con-
siderable  number  of  Senators  full  aware  of  the  grave  is-
sues   with   which  the  thermonuclear arms  race   confronts
mankind,  and  may  thus  encourage  the  isolated  handful  in
the  peace movement, who have  felt  like  voices in  the  wild-
erness.   We  believe  the  Humphrey speech  and  that   day's
debate   deserve   wide   consideration  and   if   there  is   suf-
ficient  demand   from   readers   and   organizations  we  will
provide  a  6  page  special  reprint  made up  of  the  first  two
pages  of  last  week's  issue  on  the  Humphrey  speech  and
these  three  pages  at  5  cents  a  copy  in  small  orders  and
3  cents  for  orders  of  1,000  or  more  (plus  postage.)—IPS.
Mr.  HUMPHREY—As  to  nuclear  weapons  tests,  I  believe
that  public  opinion  in  the  United  States  and  throughout  the
world  would  support  the  suspension  of  these  tests  provided
an  adequate  inspection and  detection system  can  be  installed
in  all  testing  countries  and  close  to  all  possible  test  sites.
It  has  never  been  clear  to  me,  all  of  the  explanations and
arguments   of  the  administration  notwithstanding,  why  the
United  States  insists  a  test  suspension  with  inspection   safe-
guards  should  not  be  proposed  as  a  separate   measure.
President  Eisenhower,  in  his  cablegram  to  Prime  Minister
Nehru,  gave  the   impression  that  weapons  tests  were  not
important  as  a factor  in halting the  arms  race.  He  said:
"I  do  not  believe  that  we  can  accept  a  proposal  to   stop
nuclear  experiments  as  an  isolated  step,  unaccompanied by
any  assurances  that  other  measures—which  would  go  to  the
heart  of  the  problem—would  follow."
Supposed  to Be A First Step
In  the  first  place,  the  term  "heart  of  the  problem"  is  a
new  way  of  stating  the  objectives  of  our  disarmament   pol-
icy.   I  thought  it  was  to  be  a  first  step—a  start   toward
world  disarmament—that  we  were  pursuing.   I  would  like
to   know  whether   the  President's   cablegram   represents   a
departure  in  the  description  of  our   proposals.
I  agree  with  the  President  that  a  cut-off  in  the  production
of  fissionable  material  for  weapons  purposes  constitutes  the
heart  of  the  nuclear  weapons  problem.   But  the  testing  of
weapons  is  not  insignificant.   A  suspension  of  tests  would
retard,  and  I  hope  prevent,   the   spread   of  the   production
of   these   lethal   weapons  to   other   countries.    According   to
Admiral  Strauss  in  a  letter  to  the   Disarmament   Subcom-
mittee  last  June  "there  is  no  substitute  for  tests  to  deter-
mine  the  reliability   of  a  weapon,  conventional  or  atomic."
What  this  means  to  me  is  that   a  test  ban  would  freeze
nuclear  weapons  development  where  it  is  now  in  the  United
States,  the  USSR,  Great  Britain   and  possibly  France.   Ac-
At  Least An Equal Effort  for  Peace
Mr.  JOHNSON of Texas  . . . what the Senator  from
Minnesota  likewise  has  disclosed  is  that  our  plans  for
peace   must   progress   jointly   and  be  as  firm  as   our
plans   for   defense.    In   other   words   this   must  be   a
joint  effort.   We  must  not  spend  all  of  our  billions  of
dollars  and  make all  of  our  plans  to  fight  a  war  which
may   never   be  fought.    But   in  preparing   our   nation
and  in  purchasing  the  implements,  the   missiles,   the
planes,  and  the  submarines  which   may  be   necessary
to  prevent  a  war  we  should  also  have  some  positive,
affirmative   plan  for   peace,  to   go  alongside  our   pre-
paredness   efforts.
—During  the  Humphrey  speech,  U.S. Senate,  Feb.  4-
cording  to  the  former  Secretary  of  Defense, this  would  not
preclude  testing  of  missiles.  If  it  did, a  new  problem  would
be  presented.
Freezing  nuclear  weapons  development  at   present   levels
should  involve  no  threat  to. our  security,  since  we  have  been
assured  that  we  are  ahead  of  the  USSR  in  this  aspect  of
weapons  technology.
Assuming,  therefore,  we  are  .equal  or  ahead  of  the  USSR
on   nuclear  weapons  development  then   I   think   we   should
press  for  an  agreement  on  an  inspection  system  to  verify
the  suspension  of  these  tests.   I  repeat,  to  gain   admission
to   the   USSR  for   inspection  by   an   international   agency,
would  be  a  political  and  technological  breakthrough   second
to  none.
For  some  peculiar  reason  this  does  not  seem  to  sink  in.
For   an  international   agency  to   gain   access   to  the   Soviet
Union  for  purposes  of  inspection  of  the  cessation  of  nuclear
weapon   testing   would   be   a   spectacular   political   develop-
ment,  and  one we  ought  to  search  for  relentlessly.
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.  Mr.  President,  will  the  Senator  yield?
Mr.  HUMPHREY.  I  yield.
Mr.   FULBRIGHT.   I   refer   to  the   Senator's   speech   at
page   27  of  his  text  where  he  refers   to   nuclear   weapons
development,   and  states  that   we   are   well   ahead   of   the
USSR  in  this  aspect   of  weapons  technology.
That  statement  raises  a  question  in  my  mind.   It  is  this:
Are  we  going  to  take  the  position  that  we  are  willing   to
agree  to  freeze  or  to  control  only  in  those  cases  where  we
are  ahead?
Mr.  HUMPHREY.  No,  I  was  merely  trying  to  point  out
that  if  the  argument  was  being  advanced  that  we  ought  not
to  agree  to  a  weapons test  ban  because  it  might   jeopardize
our  security,  that  this  is  not  an  argument  at  all.   We  have
security  so  far   as  numbers  of  nuclear  weapons  can  give  it
to  us.
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.   I  wanted  the  Senator  to  clarify  that
point,  because  I  do not  believe  the  impression  should  be  left
that  the  only  times  we might  enter  into  an  agreement  would
be   when   we  were   well   ahead,   which   would   mean   auto-
matically  that  the  Russians  would  not  agree  because  they
were  behind  us.
If  Atomic  War  Comes,  There  May  Not  Ever  Be  A  Second  or  A  Third  Day
Mr.  ANDERSON.  If  the  Senator   from   Minnesota  were
a  member  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  and
if   he  had  a  chance  to  see  the  fantastic  character   of  the
weapons  we  contemplate  for  the  future,  and  if  he  had  an
opportunity  to  measure  their  destructive  power  and   also
the  limited  space  required  to  smuggle  them  into  an  area
and  to  destroy  a  great  civilization,  then  I  am  sure  he,  too,
would   be  praying  that   we  may   have  the   sense  to   use
them  wisely  or,  as  his  very  fine  address  suggests,  to  con-
trol  their  use  and eventually to  bring  about  a  disarmament
in  the  case  of  these  weapons,  which  promise  nothing   but
destruction  to  both  sides. ...  It  was my  good  fortune  to
listen  to  a  great  scientist  discussing  what  a  great  nuclear
war  would  be  like.   He  was  shocked  that  some  people  were
talking about  what would  happen  the  second  or  third  month.
He  said,  'I  am not sure  there  will be a  second  or  third  day'."
—During  the Humphrey  speech,  U.S. Senate, Feb. 4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, February  17,  1958
Criticizes  U.S.  Unwillingness  to  Explore  Soviet  Inspection   Offer
Mr.  HUMPHREY.  Yes.   I  tried   to  make  that   position
clear  in  my previous  remarks.  I  wish  to  make  that  position
clear  again.   I  reiterate  that  we  must  be  willing  to  nego-
tiate  on  these  weapons  items  even  in  some  instances  where
we  may  not  have  conclusive  or  decisive advantages,  because
we  would  be  negotiating  over  the  total  picture.
Mr.  PULBRIGHT.  I  should  like  to  take  this  opportunity
to  congratulate  the  Senator  from  Minnesota  for  his  prepa-
ration  of  the  information  which  he  is  now  giving  to   the
Senate  and  the  country,  and  for  his  statesmanlike   and  ex-
tremely   thorough   statement   of  the   subject.   The   Senator
from  Minnesota,  as  chairman  of  the  Subcommittee  on  Dis-
armament,  is  certainly  the  best  qualified  man  in  the  Senate
to  speak  on  the   subject.
Mr.  HUMPHREY.   I  thank  the   Senator.
Mr.  SYMINGTON.   I  have  followed  the  Senator's  discus-
sion  carefully.   I  say  to  him  most  respectfully  that  he  has
just  reached  a  point  which  arouses  a  little  apprehension  in
my  mind,  although  not  from  the  standpoint  of  the  matter
the  distinguished  Senator  from   Arkansas  has  brought   out.
Apprehension  About  Tests
Is  it  not  true  that  some  of  the  apprehension  incident  to
the  question   of  banning  nuclear  tests  has  had  to  do  with
our   possibly  not  being  able,  under  any   known  inspection
procedure,  to  find  out  whether  the  Soviet  Union  was  living
up  to its  agreement?
Mr.  HUMPHREY.  I  would  say  to  the  Senator  from  Mis-
souri—as  I  am  sure  he  knows  already  from  our  many  hours
of   listening  to  testimony  on  this  subject  matter   and   our
studying  it—that  it  is  not  true  that  we  can have   automatic
knowledge  of   an   A-bomb  test  merely   from   its   explosion.
That   is  not  true   any  longer,  although   it  may  have  been
true  at  one time.
The  fact   is  that   some  of  the   smaller  weapons   can  be
tested   and   not   detected   without   an   elaborate   system   of
inspection.   It  is  true  that  there  are  ways  of  testing  such
weapons  under  water  and  down  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,
so  to  speak,  which  would  make  the  detection  of  their  firing
rather  difficult.
However,  I  do  not  believe  it  is  true  that  if  we  are   per-
mitted  an  inspection  system  in  the  country  where  the  test
takes  place,  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  determine  that
the  test  had  taken  place.   What  I  am  trying  to  say  is  not
that  we  should  agree  to  the  suspension  of  tests,  per  se,  but
that  we   should   have   immediately   challenged   the   Soviet
Union  when  they  said  they  were  willing  to  agree  to  a  sus-
pension  of tests  and to  inspections.
We  should have  at  that  moment said  to  the  Soviet  Union:
"All  right,  what  kind  of  inspection   do  you  mean?   Let  us
pursue  this  subject.   Let  us  find  out  what  you  mean.  How
far  do  you  intend  to  go?"   If  this  is  going  to  be  a  Korea-
type  inspection,  we  want  none  of  it.   That  Korea  type  in-
The Russians Have Legitimate Fears of Us, Too
Mr.  JAVITS.   I  believe  that  the  Senator  from Min-
nesota  has  touched  upon  several  points  of  the  utmost
importance.  .  .  .  First,  he  is  pointing  out  to  the  Amer-
can  people  that  the  Russians,  in  entertaining  the  fears
which  they  entertain,  are  only  acting  naturally.  If  we
were  in  their  place,  we  would  consider  such  fears  le-
gitimate,  just  as  we  consider  our  concern legitimate,
from   our   standpoint.    Therefore   it   is   superficial   to
write  off  the  Russians  as  fanatics,   or  as  people  who
are  needlessly  concerned  over  what  foreigners  might
do  to  them.  Their  fears  are  the  understandable,  natu-
ral  fears  of  any  great  power,  and  must  be  separated
from   the   philosophy   which   we  should  try   to  under-
stand,  and  which  we  are  doing  our  utmost  to  cope with.
—During  the  Humphrey  speech,  U.S. Senate, Feb. 4.
spection  was  a  politically  conceived  business  that  does  little
or  no  honor  to  the  concept  effective  disarmament.
But  last  summer  we  ought  to  have  pursued  this  subject.
For  the  first  time,  we  had  a   chance  to  pursue  what   the
Soviets  mean  by  inspection.
The  junior  Senator  from   Minnesota  believes  that  if  we
could  have  been  able  to  obtain  an  inspection  system  which
provided  for   international   inspectors   and  international  in-
spection  parties,  it  would  have been  very  important  in  terms
of   weapons  and   in  terms   of  disarmament,  and   terrifically
important  in  terms  of  the  political  impact.  That  would  have
been  the  first  time  that  this  great  monolithic  society  of  the
Soviet  Union,  under  police  control,  would  have  been opened
to  the   point  where  others   could   see  what   was  going  on.
That  is  my  view.  I  know  the  Senator  and  I  have  discussed
this  question   at   some  length,  and  we  may  have   a  little
difference  of  opinion.
Mr.  SYMINGTON.   I  am  not  so  sure.   I  am  not  at  all
sure  that   I   disagree   in  any  way  with   the   distinguished
Senator   from   Minnesota.   As  I  understand  what   my  col-
league  has  just   said,  the  premise  of  all  this  discussion  is
an  inspection  system  which  it  was   decided  would  work.
Mr.  HUMPHREY.   Exactly.
Mr.  SYMINGTON.   Prior  to  any  agreement  on  our  part
to  enter  into  any  bilateral   agreement  to  suspend  tests.
Mr.  HUMPHREY.  Of  course,  I  thoroughly  agree,  and  I
am  delighted  that  the   Senator   from   Missouri  has   again
brought  this  out  for  our  comment.  What  I  am  stressing  is
the  fact  that  we have  permitted  the  Soviet  Union  to  appear
throughout  the  world  as  if  they  were  the  great   ban-the-
bomb-tests  people;   the   stop-the-tests   advocate;   the   stop-
the-radioactive-fallout   crusaders.
We  have  appeared  before  the   world   as   if   we   favored
radioactive  fallout;  as  if  we  positively  enjoyed bomb  testing.
Millions  Who  Want  to  Learn  How
Mr.   MONRONEY.   Perhaps   we   could  win   the   missile
race  and  perhaps  we  could  overtake  Russia  in  both   the
IRBM  and  the  ICBM  fields;  yet  we  could  still  lose  such  a
war,  because I  have  the  feeling  that  the  one  billion  people
who  live  in  southeast  Asia,  Indonesia,  Japan,  Iraq,  Iran,
the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  are  far  more  interested
in  finding  out  how  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  can  live,
instead  of  how  many  hundreds  of  millions of  people can  be
cremated  in  the  first  10 hours  of  an  intercontinental  nuclear
war.
So  I  believe  that  the  other  side  of  the  shjeld  of  atomic
power  and  nuclear  energy  is  going  to  be  what  my  friends,
the  former  chairman  and  the  former  vice  chairman  of  the
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  the  Senator  from  New
to  Live,  Not  How  to  Be  Cremated
Mexico   [Mr.  Anderson]   and  the  Senator  from  Tennessee
[Mr.  Gore] and others have tried  to  make  it  be.  What  they
have  attempted  to  do  has  been  to  beat  the   atom  into  a
plough-share.  Their  imaginative  approach  has  been toward
using  the  byproducts  of  atomic  energy  to  cure  diseases,  to
permit  the  raising  of  better  crops,  to  improve  transporta-
tion,  and  above  all  to  make  pure  water  for  irrigation  pur-
poses  out  of  sea  water—all  that  to  be  done  by  the  use  of
atomic  reactors.  This  approach,  if  we  but  devote our minds
and  our  money—money  measured  almost  in  terms  of  pen-
nies,  as  compared  to  the  thousand  dollar bills  we  are  spend-
ing   for   instruments   of   death—will   win   the   hearts  and
minds  of  peoples  around the  world.
—During  the Humphrey  speech, U.S. Senate,  Feb. 4.
2     '1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  17, 1958
Suggests  Joint  Teams  of  Russian  and  U.S.  Scientists    on  Arms  Problem
That,  of  course,  is  not   the   view  of  the   American  people.
It  is  not  the  spirit  of  our country.
Why   have  we  got   ourselves  into  this   position?    Every
time  the  Soviet  Union  makes  a  proposal—and  this  is  ironic;
it  is  something  like  the  case   of  Pavlov's   dog,  except  that
I'avlov  was  a  Russian—we  automatically  say   "No."
We  said,  "No,"  when  the   Soviet  Union  had  been  urging
for  years  that  the  bomb  tests  be  stopped.   But  one  day  in
London  the   chief  negotiator  of  the  Soviet  Union  said,  "We
would  like  to  discuss  stopping  the  tests,  with   inspection,
to  see  whether  or  not  the  agreement  is  kept  up  or  main-
tained."    We  said,   "No."    We  did  not   even   explore   what
they  meant  by  "inspection."   For  the  first  time  we  had  that
chance.   We  insisted  after   they   had   agreed   to   inspection,
that  they  go  one  stop   further.
Two Separate Inspection Problems
I  say  we  can  separate  this  package.   We  can  have  a  sus-
pension  of  tests  with  inspection,  if  we  can  get  that  agree-
ment,  and  then   have   inspection   over   the   stopping  of   the
production   of   fissionable  materials   for   weapons   purposes.
In  other  words,  we  can  break  up  the  whole  fissionable  ma-
terial  problem  into  separate  packages  with  inspection.
Mr.  SYMINGTON.  With  respect  to  the  position  in which
we   have   now  been   placed   before   the   world   by   the   able
diplomatic  representations of  the  Soviet  Union,  as  presented
by  the  Senator  in  this  last  part  of  the  colloquy  I  have  had
the   privilege  of  entering  into  with  him,  T  am   in  complete
agreement  with  the  Senator.   I  am  also  in  agreement  with
him   that   we  should  go   through   with   any   suspension   of
testing   or   production,   provided  we   are   certain  that   any
agreed-upon  inspection  system   is  sound  to  the  point  where
there  can  be  no  cheating.
Mr.  HUMPHREY.   I  certainly   accept  that  statement   as
the  position  I  hold.
This   proposal,   according  to   the   administration,   is   con-
sidered  to  be  the  most  important   of  all  the  points  in  the
package.   We  should  remove  it  from  the  package   and   offer
to  negotiate  on  it  separately.
The  Soviet  Union  has  never  flatly  rejected  this  proposal,
although   the    Soviets   have   never    appeared     enthusiastic
about  it.   I  want  the  RECORD  to  be  clear,  however,  that
they  have  never  said  No  to  this  proposal.
Negotiations  for   a   cutoff   would  center   on  the   inspection
system   needed   to   verify  the   production   ban.    The   Soviet
Union  undoubtedly  is  fearful   of  such  an  inspection  system.
Our  negotiators  must  press  harder  to  persuade  Mr.  Krush-
rhev   and   his   subordinates  that   an   inspection   system   to
verify   a   cutoff   of   production    of   fissionable  material   for
weapons  purposes  is  not   only  essential   but  urgent  if   the
world  ever  expects  to  put  a  ceiling  on  the  amount  of  avail-
able  nuclear ammunition.
Devising   an   adequate   and   acceptable   inspection   system
must   be  determined   by  the   experts   and  the   negotiators.
Another  Menace  Few Talk  About
Mr.  MANSFIELD.   I  know  there  has  been  a  great
deal  of  emphasis  on  nuclear  and  thermonuclear weap-
ons  and  devices.  I  think  we  ought  to  remember  also,
in  addition  to  that,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  bacterio-
logical  warfare,  which  can  be  just  as  devastating,  just
as  killing,  just  as  successful  in  eradicating  from   the
face  of  the  earth  not  only  human  life  as  we  know  it,
but  produce and  the  fruits  of  the  soil  as  well.
—During  the Humphrey  speech,  U.S. Senate, Feb. ^.
The  administration   apparently  thinks  it   would  not  be  too
difficult.    Admiral  Strauss  has   indicated   in  regard   to   in-
spection  for  a  cutoff  that  while  an  adequate  system  of  con-
trol  and  inspection  cannot  be  simple,  nevertheless   it  should
be  feasible  to  install  such  a  system.   The  French   weapons
control  expert,  Jules  Moch,  has  asserted  that  assuming  all
nuclear  facilities  are  declared  or  are  known, "on  the  whole,
less  staff  is  required  in  a  large  country  to  control  the  cut-
off   of  manufacture  for   military   purposes   than   to   verify
that   there   are   no   secret   explosions."    Mr.   Moch   further
asserts  that  as  of  this  time  there  are  less  than  100 nuclear
facilities  in  the  world  that  would  need  to  be  inspected.
With  respect  to  the  requirements  for  both  the  inspection
system   for   a  cutoff   of  production  and  for   a  suspension   of
nuclear  weapons  tests,  I  propose  that  the  executive  branch
appoint   two  teains  of  prominent   and  highly  qualified  nu-
clear  scientists  and  weapons experts.   One  should  be  charged
with   making  a   complete  and   thorough   study   of   the   re-
quirements  of  inspection for  a  test  ban;  the  other  group  for
inspection   for   a   cutoff   of   production.   These   two   groups
should  offer  to  meet  with  comparable  scientists  and  nuclear
experts  from  the  Soviet  Union  in  order  to  devise   inspection
systems   acceptable  to  both   countries.    If   the   U.  S.  S.  R.
refuses  both  of  these  proposals  then  we  should  try   such  a
proposal  on  the  nongovernmental  level.   The  United  States
National  Academy  of  Sciences  could  appoint  two  teams  of
weapons  experts.    These   teams   might   then  negotiate   with
the  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  to  determine  whether  they
could  agree  on  the  necessary  requirements  of  an  inspection
system  to  verify  a  test  ban  on  the  production  of  fissionable
material  for  weapons  purposes.
It   is  important   for   our   Government  to  know  what  we
mean  by  "inspection,"   if  we  are  to  continue  to  talk   about
it.   It  means  that  our  Government  must  proceed  to  develop
inspection   proposals,  to  have  them  in  being,  and  to  know
what  to  do  in  case  an   agreement   is  reached.   I   am  sure
there  has   been  much  talk   about   disarmament   and  agree-
ments,  but  there  has  been  little  follow-through   in  terms  of
the  meticulous  detail   which  will  be  required   for   an   effec-
tive  inspection  and  control  system.
Morse Suggests Neutral Nations Be Asked to
Mr.  MORSE.  Does  the  Senator  think  we  ought  to  pur-
sue  the  possibility  of  reaching  some  kind  of  agreement  be-
tween  the  Western  powers  and  the  Communist  powers  by
having  an  entirely independent  third  party  group—perhaps
someone  from  Norway, someone from  Sweden,  and  someone
from   India,  simply  to  name  three  possibilities—and  I  am
not  limiting  them  to  these  possibilities—which  would  give
consideration   to   the   exchanges   which   have   taken   place
between  the  Western  powers  and  the  Communist  powers?
That   group  then  could  make  recommendations   of  proced-
ures   which   they  thought   might  break   the  logjam  which
apparently   has  developed   between  Russia  and  the  United
States   and  Great   Britain.    Does   the   Senator   think   that
Mediate  Russo-American  Arms Controversy
proposal  has  merit?
Mr.  HUMPHREY.  I do.  ...
Mr. MORSE. ... It  seems  to me that  much  of the  Dulles
approach,  and  certainly   all  of  the  Krushchev  approach,  is
based   upon   a   static   conception   of   national   sovereignty.
I  urge  my  friend  from   Minnesota  to  ponder  the   problem
of  national  sovereignty  from  this  angle:  That  any  issue
which  in  fact,  threatens   the  peace  of  the  world  no  longer
is  an  issue  that   any  nation  has  a  right  to  reserve   unto
itself  for  judgment.  .  .  .  We are  entering  an  era  in the
history  of  mankind when  we  shall  have  to  modify  the  con-
ception  of  national  sovereignty  if  nations  are  to  survive.
—During  the  Humphrey  speech,  U.S. Senate, Feb.  4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  17, 1958
Bigger  Issues  Behind  Those  FCC Expense  Accounts;  We Ought  to  Negotiate  In  Korea  If  Possible
Too  Much  Apathy  on  Civil  Rights Though  It  May Shape  America's Future
A  joint  council  of  liberal  white  and  Negro   organizations
to  initiate  a  broad  program of  public  education  on  civil  rights
is  badly  needed.  There  is  too  much  indifference  among  whites
and  too  much  apathy  among  Negroes.    The  issue  behind  the
new  civil  rights  bill  introduced  by  Senator  Douglas   and   a
bi-partisan  group  in  the  Senate  is  not  whether  rights   legisla-
tion  shall  be  strengthened.   The  real  issue  lies  in  the  deter-
mination  of  the  South  to  nullify  the  law,  and  to  dig  in  for
a  counter-offensive  which  takes  on  Fascist  overtones.   South-
ern   racists  are  confident   they  can  not  only  hold   the   South
but  eventually make  the  North  see  it  their  way.   The   extent
of  Southern  nullification,  the  multitude  of  new  laws  to  rob
Negroes   of   protection,   the   philosophy   of   the  supremacists
and  its  threat,  all  need  to  be  driven  home.   So  far,  even  in
liberal   circles,   the   civil  rights   fight   has   been   primarily  a
Negro  battle.   Too  many  "relaxed"  with   last  year's  victory.
This  is  already  being  undermined  by  Administration  indiffer-
ence  and   Congressional  hostility  to   the   Civil  Rights  Com-
mission,  which  still  has  no  staff   director  or  permanent   staff.
MORE  THAN  EXPENSE  ACCOUNTS  are  involved  in
the  Bernard  Schwartz  case.   That  brave  innocent  got   caught
in   the  middle  of  Washington's   dirtiest  deal—the   Republi-
cans  promised  to  put  full  steam  behind  the  natural  gas  bill
if   the  Democrats   would  go  easy  in  investigating    regulatory
agencies  which  have  grown  extraordinarily slack  if  not  down-
right  corrupt  under  a  "business  man's  Administration."   The
uproar  may  block  a  natural  gas  bill  again  this  year.   It  is  a
pity   there  can't  be  a   real   investigation  of   FCC,   especially
the  heart  of  the  TV  problem.   Unused  almost  limitless  UHF
channels  could  open  TV  for  everybody's use  and  break   the
monopoly  held   by  NBC,   CBS,  and   ABC  with  their   inane
commercials  and  overwhelming  commercialism. Unfortunately
most  big  newspapers now  have  radio  and  TV  outlets  of  their
own,  are  affiliated   with  the  networks,  seek  FCC  favors  and
want   no   such   investigation.  .  .  .  KOREA:    remembering
how    much   Korea   cost   in   American   lives   and    treasure,
there  ought   to  be  public  pressure   for   exploration   of   joint
Chinese  Communist and  North  Korean  offers  of  reunification
with   free   elections   if  troops   are  withdrawn.   That   divided
peninsula  is  an.open  wound  which  may  flare  up  at  any  time.
.  .  .  WHO  CARES  BUT  THE  DEAD:  Few  papers   even
bothered  to  run  the  AP  dispatch   from  Frankfurt  Feb.  6  on
the   release  of   Hans-Bodo   Gorgasz,   sentenced   to   death   11
years  ago  for  murdering  more  than   10,000  persons  in  Nazi
gas  ovens.  .  .  .
Maybe  It's   Unanimous
that"If  the  Russians  can  discredit  Mr.  Dulles  .
would  be  another  cold  war  victory."
—Sen. Bridges  defending    him,   U.S.  Senate, Feb.  6.
"It  is  a  fact  that  he  [Dulles]   is  unpopular  among
our  allies.  Why?   The United  States  is  a  leader.  It  is
up  to  the  Secretary   of  State  to  point  out  the  hard
right  way.  It  is  not  easy.  It  is  not  the  way they  want
to  follow.   They  are  tired  of  carrying  thi*  burden."
—Sen. Morton,  U.S. Senate, same  day.
"There  may  be  some  who will  disagree  with  me;  but
I  have  had  occasion—especially  in  the  last  few  months
—to  visit  a  great  many  foreign  countries.   The  loud-
est  chorus  of  allegations   that   John  Foster  Dulles  is
disliked  by  the  nations  abroad  comes from  Washington,
D.  C."
—Sen. Hickenlooper,  a few  minutes later.
OUR   JOURNALISTIC   HAT   is  off  to  Ed  Lahey  of   the
Chicago  Daily  News   for  ingenuity  in  discovering  and  cour-
age  in  exposing  Sherman  Adams  as  the  "go-ahead-and-print-
it-but-don't-say-I-told-you"  source  of  that  New   York   Times
and   Herald  Tribune   story  Feb.   2  that   Ike  wanted   Stassen
to  resign.   Editors  campaigning  for  freedom  of  information
could  begin  reform  at  home  by refusing  to print  off the  record
stab-in-the-back   stories,   make   officials   assume   responsibility
for   what  they  want  to   say,  and   give   readers   a   means  of
evaluating  those  veiled  "authoritative  sources"   on  which  dis-
patches  are  so  often  based.  .  .  .  APOLOGIES   to   Senators
Neuberger   and  Proxmire  for  an  unintentional   slight   in  last
week's  story  on  the  Humphrey  speech.   Both  made   speeches
supporting  Humphrey  but  were  unable  to  get  the  floor  until
next  day,  too  late  for  last   week's   issue.   .  .  .  FALSE  IN-
FORMATION  was  given  the  press  by  Democratic  National
Committee  Chairman  Paul  Butler  after   the  Democratic   Ad-
visory   Committee  meeting   when   he   said   "no   changes   of
substance"   were  made  in  Dean   Acheson's  original  draft  of
its  foreign  policy  statement,  Adlai  Stevenson,  Governor   Har-
riman  and  Paul  Ziffren  among  other  tore  into  and  revised  it
as  too  inflexible  and  lacking   in  any  emphasis   on  the   need
to  search  for  peace.  .  .  .  MORE  THAN  200  letters  and  tele-
grams,   almost  all   favorable   poured   into  Humphrey's    office
within   three   days  of  his  peace   speech.   .  .  .   PERSONAL
NOTE:   Esquire   for   March   debunks   Washington's   news-
letters  but  gives  ours  a  friendly  boost  as  "the  heady  champion
of  many  American  liberals  .  .  . now in its sixth  year."
Bridges  Defends  Nuclear  Testing  As  A  Virtual  Health  Measure!
"The  plain  fact  is  that  continued  testing  of  nuclear  weap-
ons  is  to  the   general   benefit  of  mankind,  not   ita  barm.
Our   Eniwetok  tests  of  1956  demonstrated   that  the  radio-
active  peril  could  be virtually  eliminated  .  .  .  this  year's
tests   will  greatly   advance   the   development  of   an  anti-
missile  nuclear  weapon.   What  a  happy  day  for  mankind
if   we   found   the   means   for   neutralizing   the    holocaust
incident  to hydrogen  attack. . . . Yet the Soviet  Union  has
been  able  to  influence  large  sections  of  our  population  to-
ward  the  belief  that  testing  in  itself  is  immoral."
—Sen. Bridges  defending   Dulles,  U.S.  Senate, Feb.  8.
"The  FAS  Council  urges  international  agreement  to  pro-
hibit  further  testing  of  nuclear  weapons ... it  would  pre-
vent  the  entry  into  the  arms   race  of  still  more  nations
... it  would  allay  the  fears  aroused  by the  potential  haz-
ards  of  radioactive   fallout.   The  extent  of  these  hazards
has  been,  at  least  by  implication,   unduly  exaggerated  by
some  and  unduly minimized  by  others.  Still,  that  there  are
some  lethal  effects  is  denied   by  no  one.   Those  who  con-
tinue  testing  must  therefore  be  prepared   to  publish   good
and  sufficient  cause  or  desist  in  the  name  of  humanity."
—Council, Federation  of  American  Scientists, Feb. 8.
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, February  17,  1958
1957  Annual Un-American  Activities  Report  Gold  Mine  for  Psychiatric  Study
House  Committee  Sees  U.S. Communist  Party  Now  Mobilizing  Millions
The  annual  report   of  the  House   Un-American  Activities
Committee  for  1957  begins  with  Sputnik.  It  sees  in  the  Soviet
satellite   "fresh   evidence"   that   Soviet   technological   progress
was  "made  possible  to a  large  degree  .  .  . by'Soviet  conspira-
tors  and  their  theft  of  some  of  our  most  vital  military  and
scientific   secrets."   The   Committee   might   have   added   that
in  the  case  of  Sputnik,  judging  by  delay  in  putting   up  one
of  our  own, the  Russians  seem  to  have  stolen   the   original
as  well  as  the  carbon  copy.
Wm.  Z.  Foster   will  find  the  report   comforting.    It  says
that  notwithstanding   "eruptions"   in  the  party,  the  resigna-
tion  of  key  officials   and   the   closing  of   the   Daily   Worker,
"the   Communist   operation   today  presents   a   menace   more
serious  than  ever  before."    The  Committee,  its  faith  in  the
Party  strong,  is  sure  that  "As  the  formal  party  structure  re-
cedes  from  view,  it  is  being  replaced  by  a  widespread  under-
ground   apparatus,   duplicating   beneath   the   surface  all   the
mechanism  of  Communist  party  activities.  .  .  ."
Never  So  Successful  Before
The  report  was  split  up  into  seven  sections,  and   released
on  seven  consecutive  days  for  maximum  publicity.   The  sec-
ond  part  began  with  a  bang,   "A   nationwide   campaign   of
political   subversion,  directed   by  the   Communist   Party   and
aided  by  numerous  affiliate  organizations,  has  spread  through-
out  the  United  States  during  the  past  year  as  part  of  what
may  emerge  as  the  most  successful  technique  thus  far  devised
by  the  Soviet  apparatus  in  the  United  States.   The   Kremlin
has  succeeded  in  enlisting,  at  a  conservative  estimate,  more
than  a  million  Americans  into  this  campaign."    We're  glad
the  Committee  was conservative.
The  Committee  claims  to  have  identified   "more  than  200
organizations  charged  with  carrying  on  the  Communist pro-
gram"   but   perhaps   for   security  reasons  names  only   three,
the  American  Committee  for  Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born,
the   Emergency  Civil   Liberties   Committee   and   the   latter's
"main   adjunct"  the   California  Citizens  Committee   to Pre-
serve  American  Freedom.    The   main  objective  of   this  vast
network   is  abolition   of   the   House   Un-American   Activities
Committee.
Only  16 Years To Go
"A  prediction  that  the  international Communist con-
spiracy   will  achieve  its  goal  of   world  domination  in
about  16  years,  if  its  present  rate  of  expansion  con-
tinues  unabated,  was  made  by  Dr.  Frederick  Charles
Schwarz,  executive  director  of  the  Christian  Anti-Com-
munist  Crusade. .  .  .  Dr. Schwarz,  an  Australian physi-
cian,  surgeon  and  psychiatrist,  has  spent  many  years
in   study  and  research  into  the   basic   philosophy  of
communism.  .  .  .  'Negotiation  with  the  Soviet  Union,'
Dr.  Schwarz  warned,  'is  impossible.  To  think  we  can
do  it  is  to  indicate a  failure  to  understand communism
so  completely   that   it  approaches  mental  illness."
—Un-American  Activities Com. Report  for 1957.
Though   these   organizations  have   trouble   meeting  their
rent  money,  the  Committee  says  they  have  "raised   millions
of  dollars"  and  "they  have  been  able  to  create  a  climate  of
opinion  in  which  attacks  upon  our  immigration  and  security
systems  are  made  to  appear  an  enlightened  course  of   action."
Devilishly,   these   organizations   pretend   to   "champion    the
traditional  concepts  of  decency  and  fair  play."
Repeal  of  the  Walter-McCarran  immigration  act  is  another
objective  of   the   conspiracy.   An   expert   witness,   Archibald
Roosevelt,  is  quoted  as  explaining  that  the  purpose   of  this
campaign  is  to  protect  "the Red  strategists  .  .  . filtered in
through  our  weak  immigration barriers throughout  the  years/'
Mr.   Roosevelt   said  "the Soviet   leaders   have   moved   entire
divisions  of  their  political  army  into  our  country  unnoticed
by   all  'except   a   few   security  minded   citizens.   These   Red
forces   are  a  political  army  which  is  civilian  in   appearance
and  walk  down  the  streets  of  America  indistinguishable   from
the  rest  of  the  population."    A  walk  down  the  street  with
Mr.  Roosevelt  must  be  a  spine-tingling  experience.
Another  expert  witness,  Bishop  Fulton  J.  Sheen,  is  quoted
as  finding  the  success  of  Communism  in  (1)   the  fact  that
it  "comes  into  a  world  that  is  sick with  relativism,  and   offers
an  absolute"   and  (2)   because  "some  people—not  all, God
forbid   —   have  an   exaggerated   interest   in   social   justice."
Apparently   people   who  believe  in   social   justice  should   be
witched.
IPS  Speaks  at  First  Amendment  Rally  in  Carnegie  Recital  Hall,   N.  Y.,  Friday,  Feb. 28
1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street    .............................
City   ....................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street    ........... .................
City
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
......Zone............State..._...............
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
2/17/58
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  tbe  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December at  6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.,  Washington  IB,  D. C.
An   Independent  weekly  published  and   edited   by  L   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IB  In-  th  C.  B.;  te  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air   11*11 rates:  flB  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED