I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958aug11.pdf

============================================================

The  Witch  Hunt  in  the South, P.  2
la  Peking  Planning  A  Far  East  Crisis  to  Force  A  Far  East  Summit?     See  Page  4
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  31
AUGUST  11,  1958
101      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
Notes  on  the  Craggy  Path  to  A  Possible  Summit
The  hopeful  news  of  the  week  was  supplied  by  the  U.  S.
Department   of   Agriculture.    While   mankind   skips   lightly
from  brink  to  brink,  wondering  how  long  its  luck  will  hold
out,  the  Department's  experts  have  discovered  a  form  of  ani-
mal   life  which  could  survive  the  radioactive  after-effects   of
World   War   HI.   This   candidate  most   likely  to   succeed   to
the   role  of   creation's  crowning  glory   is  a  worm-like plant
parasite  known  as  the  golden  nematode.   Tests  disclosed  that
whije  650  roentgens  of  radioactivity  will  kill  a  man,  it  takes
640,000  roentgens  to  kill  some  nematodes.    Evolution, work-
ing  with  the  golden  nematode,  may  yet  give  earth  its  golden
age   if   only   this  tough   species   as   it  climbs  higher   can   be
rendered   resistant  also  to  religion  and   ideology,   impervious
to   passion  about   private  enterprise   and   pure  unrevisionist
Marxism-Leninism,  free  from  that  lofty   itch  to  burn,  bomb
and   destroy  the  heretic,  and   incapable  of  dressing  up  mass
butchery  as a  Crusade.   We  offer  both  sides  a  slogan  they  can
use  for  their  next—make  the  world  safe  for  nematodes.
In  Perfect  Sincerity
Krushchev  and  Mao,  after  meeting  in  Peking,  issued  a joint
communique  which   in   one   respect   was   impeccably  correct.
The  communique  said  they  met  "in  an  atmosphere  of  perfect
sincerity"  and  achieved  "full  agreement."  We  have  been  hop-
ing  for  years  to  pick  up  a  communique  and  read,  "Though
regarding   each  other   as  blackguards,  we  thought   it  in  our
mutual  interest  to  dissemble  and  did  succeed  in   negotiating
some   limited  agreement.   .  .  ."   The  communique  was  ir-
reproachably   conventional   in   another   respect.     It   marched
from  the  affirmation  of  the  highest  principles  to  a declaration
unblushingly  inconsistent  with  them.    Krushchev  and  Mao re-
affirmed   "the   right  of  every  people  to  choose  their  own  so-
cial  and  political  systems,"  the  solemn  duty  of  "countries  with
different   social  systems"   to   "practice   peaceful   co-existence,"
and  their  determination  "to  wage  an  uncompromising  strug-
gle   against   revisionism"   as   "clearly   manifested"   in   Yugo-
slavia.   Communism  is  not  the  first  sect  more  disposed  to  co-
exist  with  the  infidel  than  the  heretic.   Krushchev  and  Mao
see  Tito  as  a  menace  to  what  their  communique  terms   the
"sacred    unity,"    "the    purity   of   Marxism-Leninism,"    from
which  no  smaller  Soviet  State  dare  deviate.   At  the  same  time
they  affirm   that   "the   national  liberation   movement  is  an  ir-
resistible  trend"  and  the  "age   of  colonialism"   gone   forever.
These  phrases  may  prove  difficult  to  translate  smoothly  into
such  refractory   languages   as  Hungarian  and   Polish.    Indeed
the  writers  of  Budapest  and  Warsaw   might  find  it  easier  to
express'  themselves  nowadays  if  they  switched  to  Arabic.
The  smaller  nations  of  the  world  are  fortunate  to  live  at
9
a  time when  the  two  great  Powers  are  so  concerned   with  the
rights  of  (each  other's)  smaller  nations  as  are  the  U.  S.  and
the  U.  S.  S.  R.   But  some  small  nations  seem  to  be  smarter
than  other  small  nations.  In  the  United  Nations,  the  dispute
over  Iraq  has  often  recalled  the  dispute  over   Hungary   two
years  ago,  except  that  the  roles  of  Washington  and   Moscow
have   been   reversed.   One   wonders   what   might   have   hap-
pened   if   the   Hungarian   regime   under  Nagy   had   been   as
smooth  in  handling  the  Russians  as  the  Iraqi  regime  has  been
in  handling  the  United  States.   Where  the  Hungarian   regime
tried  to  get  out  of  the  Warsaw   Pact,   the  Iraqi   acted   as  if
they  were  only  waiting  for  an  invitation  to  stay  in  the  Bagh-
dad  Pact.   To  listen  to  the  Iraqi  leaders,  they  have  no  inten-
tion   of   nationalizing oil,  interfering  with   foreign   business
men,  joining  the  Soviet  bloc,  or  making  anything  more  than
friendly   gestures  to  Nasser.    Hashim   Jawad,   their  delegate
to  the  UN,   almost  made  noises  like  a  Zionist   when   inter-
viewed  in  New  York  on  the  problem  of  Palestine;  he's  liable
to  turn  up  any  day at  a  Hadassah  meeting.   If  poor  Nagy  had
been  as  clever,  the  Russians  might  never  have  marched   in.
It  goes  to  show  that  small  nations  have  an  unalienable  right
to  exercise  sovereign  independence   in   either   zone  of   influ-
ence  providing  they're  so  discreet  about  it  Big  Brother   can't
quite  figure  what  they're  doing.
Where  Both  Sides  Agree
The  two  great  Powers  have  been  making  faces  at  each  other
so  long  that  they  have  begun  to  look  alike.   In  nothing  is  the
resemblance  so  strong  as  their  belief   in  the   reality  of   "in-
direct  aggression,"   the  issue  on  which  Mr.  Dulles  hopes  to
impale  Krushchev  at  any  summit  meeting.   The    resemblance
is   sometimes  overlooked   because   the   two   sides   never   talk
about  "indirect  aggression"  at  the  same  time.   It  is  therefore
useful  to  recall  that  when  the  Hungarian  revolt  broke  loose,
Krushchev  also  blamed   it  principally  on  indirect  aggression
in  that  case  by  imperialist  agents   (notably   his  favorite  bete
noire,  Allen  Dulles,  to  whom  he  once  attributed   authorship
of  Krushchev's  famous  secret  speech  on  Stalin).   All  through
history  rulers and  ruling  classes  have  tended  to  absolve  them-
selves   of   responsibility  by  blaming   revolutions   on   malign
subversive  forces  which  take  the   form   at  various   times   of
witches,  Jews,  Jesuits,   Freemasons,   Communists,   Trotzkyites
and  more  recently   "revisionists."
In  this  respect,  as  the  objective   observer  may  easily   see,
Dulles  on  the  causation  in  Iraq  is  very  much  like   Krushchev
on  the  causation in  Hungary.   Nevertheless   we  doubt  whether
this  affinity,   if  and  when  they  meet  on  the  summit,  will  be
the  beginning  of  a  beautiful  friendship.
1   2   :,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August 11,1958
First   Foray   Below   Mason-Dixon   Only   Shows   How  Few  Communists  in  South
House Un-Americans  Fizzle in  Three  Days  of  Hearings  at  Atlanta,  Georgia
Chairman  Walter  presided   at  the  opening   of  the  House
Committee  on  Un-American  Activities   hearings   in   Atlanta
July  29-   He  was  welcomed  by  Governor  Griffin  who  said  in
a  short  speech,  "those  of  us  who  believe  in  the  principles  of
freedom   support   you  vigorously."    In   other   quarters,   how-
ever,  the  Committee  was  greeted  with  reserve.   The  Atlanta
World,   one  of  the  country's  leading  Negro  papers,  put  on
page  one  the  manifesto  against  the  Committee  signed  by  200
Negro  leaders  (we  printed  the  text  last  week).    The  Atlanta
Constitution,   the   day  the   hearings   opened,   welcomed   the
Committee  but   suggested   (in   almost   the   same  terms   used
by  the  Negro  manifesto)  that  it  "would  do  well  to  broaden
its  investigations  to  include  the  Ku  Klux  Klan-type  subver-
sives  who   have   been   bombing   private   homes   and   Jewish
and  Negro  places  of  worship."
"Virgin  Territory"
The  star  witness  at  the  Atlanta  hearings  was  the   ex-FBI
informer  Armando  Penha,  who  testified  that  the  Communist
Party  regarded   the   South  as  "virgin  territory."    A   psycho-
analyst  might  regard  the  adjective  as  significant;  a  feature  of
Penha's  similar  testimony  on  the' Boston  area  was  the  story  of
how  he  had  recruited   one  member  for   the  Communists  by
making  love  to  her,  and  of  how  quickly  this  fickle  creature
dropped  the  party  when  he  dropped  her.   One  witness  Penha
identified  as  a  Communist  at  Atlanta,  a  young  man  named
William  Matthews,  denied  he  was  or  ever  had  been,   denied
he  knew  Penha  and  even  answered  "No"   indignantly   when
Richard  Arens,  the  committee  counsel,  after  whispered   con-
sultations  with  Penha,   asked  him,   "Have  you  ever  been  a
non-member  Communist?"'
Penha's   testimony  and   Arens'   interrogation   were  full  of
references  to  "colonizers"—apparently  the  Communist  party,
which  hasn't  enough  members  left  to  colonize  outer  Flatbush
is  busy  "colonizing"   the  South,  just  like  Captain  John  Smith
when  he  met  Pocohantas.   One  witness,  Mrs.  Mitchell  Saba,
of   Roanoke,  Va.,  who  lost  her  job  as  a  doctor's   secretary
because  of  the  subpoena,  was  one  of  those  questioned   about
colonizing.    "Mr.   Arens,"   she  said,  in  an  unmistakable  ac-
cent,   "my  family   is  one  of  the  oldest   in  Virginia.   We've
been  colonizing  the  South  for  a  long  time."
On  the  whole  the  witnesses  seemed  to  give  the  Committee
a  hard  time.   At  one  point,  when  Congressman  Jackson  said
the  Southern  Conference  Educational  Fund  had  been  "listed"
as  a  Communist front,  Carl  Braden,  who  was  in  the  witness
chair,  challenged  him  to  prove  it.   Arens  cut  in  to  say  that
the  SCEF  was  not  so  "listed"  but  that  it  was  the   successor
Direct  Challenge
"As  a  matter  of  personal  conscience  and  responsi-
bility,  I   challenge  the   fundamental   legality   of   the
House  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities.  It  :is my
belief  that  Congress  had  no authority  to  establish  such
a  Committee  nor  instruct  it  with  such  a  mandate.  The
Committee    stands   in   direct   violation   of   the   First
Amendment  to  the  Constitution.
"The  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  has  reaffirmed   the  high
principle  that  the  broad  powers  which  Congress  must
properly  have  to investigate cannot  extend  into  an  area
in   which   it   cannot  legislate.   The   Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee,  however,  attempts  to  investigate  in
precisely  those areas  of  free  speech,  religion,  the  press
and  peaceful   association  wherein  it  cannot  legislate.
"Therefore,  I am answering no questions  of this  Com-
mittee."—Frank    Wilkinson,   Atlanta,   July   SO.
to  the  Southern  Conference  on  Human  Welfare  which  \rens
said  was listed  as a  Communist  front.    "Then  the  record will
show,"  Braden  said,  "that  we  are  not  a  Communist  front."
Several  hundred  spectators,   almost  all  white  and   hostile,
packed  the  Circuit  Court  chamber  in  the  old  Postoffice  build-
ing  for   the  three  days  of  hearings,  first  ever  held   by   the
Committee  in  the  South.   Willis  of  Louisiana  took  over  the
chair  after  the  first  day  when  Walter  left.   Tuck  of  Virginia
and   Jackson  of   California,  the   one  Northerner,   were   the
others  on  the  three  man  subcommittee  for  the  hearings.
Frank  Wilkinson,  national  director  of  a  campaign  to  abol-
ish  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  a  former  public
housing   official   in  Los  Angeles,   refused  to  give  the   Com-
mittee  anything  more  than  his  name.   He  was  subpoenaed  on
arrival  in  Atlanta  as  an  observer  for   the   Emergency  Civil
Liberties   Committee.    If   cited   for   contempt,   his  will   be  a
clear-cut  test  of  the  Committee.   Two  years  ago  he  refused
to  answer  questions  on  First   Amendment  grounds   but  was
never   cited.
The  House  Committee  tried  to  dramatize the  hearings  with
two  surprise witnesses, a  postal  inspector  who  brought  in  two
bags  of  mail  he  said  he  had  intercepted  addressed  to  people
in  Georgia  from  behind  the  Iron  Curtain.   The  other   .-/as  a
Hungarian   freedom   fighter   now   living   in   Georgia    who
praised  the  State highly.  He  described  the  horrors  of  10 years
in   Russian   prisons   but   disappointed   Congressman   Jackson
when  the  latter  asked  whether  he  thought   "we  should  now
sit  down  and  talk  with  such  people  at  a  summit  conference."
The   Hungarian  said  he  couldn't   see  any  harm  in   talking.
The  House  hearings  seemed  chiefly  to  demonstrate  how  few
Communists—or  any  other  radicals—are  left  in  the  South.
Georgia  Officials  Give  House  Committee  (Slightly Surprised)  Welcome
"The   [House]   committee   [on  Un-American  Activities]
would  not  divulge the  names  of  the  persons  who have  been
subpoenaed  [for  the  Atlanta  hearings].   But  a  spokesman
. . . said  there is no question  about there  being  Communists
in  Georgia."—Atlanta  Constitution,  from   Wash.  July   11.
" 'I'm   delighted   they're   going  to   hold   hearings  here,'
said  [State]  Attorney  General  Eugene  Cook.   'My  depart-
ment   and   the   Georgia   Bureau  of   Investigation    will  co-
operate  with  them  in  every   way."
"Mayor  Hartsfield   [of  Atlanta]  said,  'I'm  always   happy
to  have  our  Congressmen   come  here.'   He  said  he  didn't
know  anything  about  Communist  activities  here.
" 'I  think  there's  very  little  Communist  activity  in  this
section,'  he  added.
"Attorney  General  Cook   said  he  believes  Georgia  prob-
ably  has  less  Communists  than  any  other  State.   His   office
has  been  looking  into  the  conspiracy  since  the  passage  of
the  state  subversive  act  in   1954.
"Cook  said  that  while  there  probably  aren't  many   com-
munists  in  Georgia,  he  believes  the  hearing  will  have  a
beneficial  effect  by  letting  them  know  they  are  under  ob-
servation."—Same  Paper,  Same  Day  Local  Story.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly, August 11,1958
20   Years  Hence   Will   Negroes   Reject  the   Assimilation  We  Now  Deny Them?
The  Lesson  Faubus  Era  America  May  Still  Learn  from  Algeria
To  look  at  our  South  after  studying  the  Algerian   situation
is  to  see  how  lucky  we  still  are.    In  Algeria,   the  "colored
man"  is  fighting  against  integration.   Here  he  is  demanding
it.   In  Algeria,  the  Europeans  are  trying  desperately  to  stave
off  minority  status  in  an  independent  Arab  country  by   offer-
ing  too  late  an  integration  which  would  have  been  welcomed
20  years  ago.   Twenty  years  ago  the  Arabs  of  Algeria  were
prepared  for  assimilation  into  French  society  on  the  basis  of
ever  widening  equality of  status.   Today  they  no  longer  want
to  be  Frenchmen.   We  are  fortunate  that  our  Negroes   still
want  to  be  Americans like  the  rest  of  us.
They  Compare  Lebanon  With  Little  Rock
The   situation  may  be  different   20  years  hence.    Twenty
years   of   disappointment   in   the    face   of   Southern   white
instransigeance  and  Northern  white  indifference  can  create  a
bitterness  which  might  never  be  bridged.   The  Negro  sees  us
ready  to  send  troops  halfway  round  the  world  to  uphold  law
and  order in  Lebanon,  but  he  wonders  what  we  will  do  when
court  orders  are  violated  as  schools  open  next  month  again
in  Little Rock and  across  the  Potomac in  Virginia.
The  overwhelming  reelection  of  a  Faubus  is  in  Negro  eyes
evidence  that  he  is  really  up  against  a  race  issue,  that  white
men  are  overwhelmingly  united  in  the  South  against  his  as-
pirations  for  equality  and  that  white  men  in  the  North  are
basically  indifferent.
In  the  years  ahead,  as  Black  Africa  develops,  there   will
also  develop  in  conflict  with  the  whites  of  South  Africa,  of
our  South,  and  of  North   Africa,  a  fierce  Negro   nationalism,
a  racism  in  reaction  against  ours,  that  may  win  our  Negroes
away  from  the  ideal  of  assimilation.
Our  Psychotic   South
" 'The  greatest  advocate  of  the  mixing  of  the  races
in  America  today  is  the  Communist,'  Judge  T.  Grady
Head  has  told  the  Atlanta  Lions Club.
"Judge  Head  declared  that  Communist  philosophy in
this  country  holds  that  if  the  races  are  mixed, America
will  be  weakened  and  fall  to  Russian  supremacy."
—Atlanta  Journal,  July   &7.
There  was  warning foretaste of  this  in  the  Marcus  Garvey
Day  celebration  held  in  Harlem  August  2  by  a  group  calling
itself   the   United   African   Nationalist   movement,   which   is
anti-Israel,  pro-Nasser—and   (most  significantly  of  all)   anti-
NAACP,  i.  e.  against those  Negroes  fighting  for  equality  and
assimilation  as  Americans.   Nationalism  in  Harlem  and  the
memory  of  Garvey  (a   Negro  nationalist,  who   launched   a
Back-to-Africa   movement)   were   strong   enough   to   bring
Adam  Clayton  Powell,  Councilman  Earl  Brown  and  Manhat-
tan  Borough  President  Jack  to  the   meeting  as  speakers   in
honor  of  Garvey.
Liberian  history,  and  native  exploitation  by  American  Ne-
groes,  are  sour  recommendation for  Back-to-Africa  solutions.
The  American  Negro  has  little  real  bond  with  the  African
Negro;  the  former  is  racially  mixed  with  the  whites,   often
more  white  than  Negro,  culturally  and  spiritually  an  Ameri-
can  like  the  rest  of  us.   But  rejection  on  the  basis  of  color,
mistreatment  at  the  hands  of  whites,  have  already  created  a
sense  of  community between  them  which  will  grow  as  Africa
develops   and   may  some  day  have  serious  consequences   for
national  unity.
Pentagon  Still  Fostering  Delusion  Sure  Defense  Possible  by  Anti-Missile
In  the  wake  of  the  Johnston  Island  nuclear  test  which  so
alarmed  Hawaii,  the  Pentagon   is  again  building  up  the  de-
lusion   that  we  can  have   "a   completed   system  of   defense
againsi.  intercontinental  ballistic   missiles"    (Associated   Press
from   Washington,   dated  Aug.  3)   in  about  three  years  for
the  expenditure  of  about  $6,000,000,000.   This  seems  to  be
part  of  a  publicity  campaign   good  for  the  missile   business
but  not  for  clear   thinking.
A  less  optimistic  view  may  be  found  in  the  technical  jour-
nals.   Electronic  News  of  June  9  ran  a  story  headed  "AMM
[anti-missile  missile]  Project   Held  Mainly   A  Sedative."   It
quoted  Dr.  Walter  R.  Dornberger,  head  of  Hitler's  wartime
missile  work,  now  with  Bell  Aircraft,  as  telling  a  press  con-
ference   at  the  First  Missile   Industry  Conference  in  Wash-
ington   June  8,  that   the  U.   S.  anti-missile   project   "serves
chiefly  to  "calm  the  people  down'."   He  estimated  a  kill  level
'of  only  10  percent.
A  sober  discussion  of  the  possibilities  may  also  be  found
in  the  January,  1958,   issue  of  Missile  Design  &  Develop-
ment,  "Anti-ICBM—Myth  or  Method?   Formidable   Techni-
cal  Problems  Confront  Defense   System."     The  writer   said,
"The  picture ...  is not very  encouraging."  While  an  enemy
ICBM  'could  be  detected  by  radars  in  our  "Maginot  Line"
netwr  ;  across   Canada,   "these   outposts,"   the   article   sug-
gested,  "could  be   destroyed   by  enemy  Intermediate    Range
1  2
In  God  (and  H-Bombs)   Is  Their  Trust
"Like  Strauss,  he   [John  McCone,  new  chairman  of
the  AEC]  is  a  religious man.  In  a  milieu largely  ruled
by  scientific  skepticism,  Strauss,  a  Jew,  did  not  hide
his  faith  in  God and  the  moral  law.  Asked  if  he  felt
weak-kneed  about  his  new  job,  McCone,  a  devout  Cath-
olic,  said  simply,  'When  I  do,  I  go  to  my  knees'."
—Fortune  Magazine,  August, 1958.
Ballistic  Missiles   immediately   before   the   launching   of   the
ICBM's.     We   would   then   be  in  the   position   of   knowing
that  something  catastrophic  is  happening  without  being  able
to  learn  precisely  what  trajectories  are  in  use  until  it  became
too  late  for  counter-measures."   The  writer  also  indicated  that
one  of  the  basic  difficulties  about  counter-measure  is  that  the
ICBM  could  embody  its  own  anti  anti-missile  devices:   "The
nose  cone  could  fling  off  decoys  to  give  radar  echoes  or  heat
radiation.   This  simple  tactic  would  greatly  increase  the  anti-
ICBM  problems."
The  writer  in  Missiles Design  & Development  himself   said
at  the  very  beginning  of  his  survey  that  of  the  "three  Ds"
available  for  defense  against  the   ICBM,   "diplomacy,   deter-
rents  and  destruction.   The  first  is  the  most  desirable,  certain
defense,  provided  it  can  lead  to  peaceful  co-existence,  with
international    disarmament."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  11,1958
No  Sign   of   Constructive   Mid-East   Policy   Here   Despite    Hagerty-Jackson   Ballyhoo
Is  Peking  Planning  A  Far East  Crisis  to  Force  A  Far East  Summit?
Wtd.  A.   M.
The  latest  as  we go  to  press  is  that  Mr.  Lodge  at  the  UN
Security  Council  meeting  will  press  for  priority  at  any  Gen-
eral  Assembly  session  for  the  U.  S.  resolution   charging   the
United  Arab Republic  with  "indirect  aggression"  in  Lebanon.
This  seems  like  crawling  out  on  a  very thin  limb.   By  now  it
seems  to  be apparent  to  everyone  but  Eisenhower  and  Dulles
that  the  main  cause  of  the  trouble  in  Lebanon  was  Chamoun,
and  that  the  sooner  he  can  be  persuaded  to  hand  over   office
to  General  Shehab  the  sooner  peace  can  be  restored.    It  is
generally  agreed  here  now that  the  Iraq  revolt  took  the  Krem-
lin  and  Nasser  as  well  as  our  CIA  by  surprise,  and  that  Jor-
dan's  king  will  fall  as  soon  as  British  troops  leave.   To  argue
an  exploded  theory  is  not  only  to  make  ourselves   ludicrous
but  to  commit  us  to  a  dangerous  course  of  action.  That  is  to
find  some  excuse  to  keep  our  troops   longer   in  Lebanon   to
support  Britain's  in  Jordan  until  "indirect  aggression"  ends.
Peking   May  Fear  Isolation
The  U.  S.  has  given  a  dangerous   pledge  to  Britain   if  it
has  as  reported  promised  London  not  to  withdraw  our  troops
until   Britain's  can  leave  Jordan.   This   could   mean  a  new
flareup  of  trouble  in  Lebanon  and  a  new  Middle  East  crisis,
when  we  suppose  there  will  be  renewed  demands  for  a  real
summit  talk.   Not  much  was  lost  by  the  Russian  rejection  of
a  talk within the  full  Security Council  bound  by  Council  rules
but  the  rejection  by  Krushchev  seems  to  be  linked  with  that
harder  line  which  has  been  making  its  appearance  in  Com-
munist  policy  during  the  past  year  whenever  Peking   makes
its  influence  felt.   The  Chinese  may  fear  isolation.   A  settle-
ment  with  Russia  in  Europe  without  a  settlement  with  China
in  Asia would  weaken  Peking.   How  long  is  the  Far  East  to
be  left  unstable  by  our  China  policy?   We  did  not  recognize
Russia  from  1917  to  1933  but  the  China  situation  is  different
because  we  keep  alive  an  alternative  regime  on  Chinese  ter-
ritory  in  Formosa.   The  Chinese  may  feel  that  only  by  pro-
voking  a  crisis  in  the  Far  East,  i.e. by  some  such  move  as
Another   Smith   Act  Victory
We  welcome,  as  another  firm  nail  in  the  coffin  of  a
law  contrary  to  American   tradition,  the  unanimous  de-
cision  by  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  New  York  reversing
the  convictions   of  the  six  "second  echelon"  Communist
leaders  and  the  2-to-l  vote  dismissing  the   indictments.
The  ruling  was  based,  like  the  California  case,  on  the
absence  of  some  proof   of   incitement.
an  attack  on  the  Nationalist  held  offshore  islands,  can  they
create  enough   international  anxiety  to  force  the   U.   S.  into
negotiating  with  them.   This  would  be  brinkmanship  on  their
side,  too.  Our   unwillingness  even  to  consider  negotiation
except  when  there  is  a  crisis  may  lead  Moscow  and  Peking  to
think  the  way  to  get  a  real  summit  talk  is  to  precipitate  a
bigger  crisis.   The  General   Assembly  promises  to  be  nothing
but  a  brawl.
That  spate  of  stories  in  the   Sunday  papers  of  August  3,
hinting  mysteriously at  "surprises"  and  constructive solutions
to  be  unveiled   by  the  U.  S.  at  a  summit  meeting   on   the
Mid-East   stemmed   chiefly   from   an   off-the-record,    not-for-
attribution,  backgrounder by Jim  Hagerty  at  the  White  House
the  afternoon  before  plus  a  private  audience  by  Dulles   for
James  Reston  of  the  New   York  Times.   The  purpose  was  to
overcome  the  bad   effects  of  the  sterile  positions  obvious  in
Secretary   Dulles'   press  conference   the   preceding  Thursday
which  got  a  sour  reception  from  correspondents.  The  Sunday
stories  were  the  kind  of  operation  in  which  C.  D.  Jackson,
back  at  the  White   House  from  Time  Magazine,  specializes.
The  stories  were hot  air  press  agentry.   There  is  no  real  sign
here  of  any  surprises  or  constructive solutions  for  the  Middle
East.   Much  thinking  goes  on  in  the  lower  echelons  of  State
Department  but  little of  it  gets  to  the  top, just  as  CIA  seems
to  write  a  lot  of  intelligent   reports  but  Ike  doesn't  like  to
read.   He  grew  up  in  the  era  when  movies  and  dime  novels
ended   with  the   triumphant   arrival  of   the   Marines.   This
seems  to  have  molded  his  idea  of  what  to  do  in  a  crisis.
Press  Time  Flash:  Senate  Foreign  Relation*  Latt   Night   Shelved  Past port  Legislation   Till   Next     If ear
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  IS,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    .......................................................................................
Street    ......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
8/11/68
(To)   Name
Street    ........
City      ........................................Zone............State.................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  N«bro«ko  Av«.,  N.  W.
Waihintjton  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone'B  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  oub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  S618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15  D  C
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription'
tfi  in  the  U.  S.;  $0  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED