I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958feb10.pdf

============================================================

More  Money  for   Witch  Hunt,  P.  3
Gen.  Bradley  Denies  Pacifism,  but  Warns  Again  Against   Electronic  Arms  Race,  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,   NO.  GFEBRUARY  10,  1958
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Senator   Humphrey  Provides  A  New   Voice  for  Peace
Senator  Hubert  H.   Humphrey  performed   a  great   public
service  in  the  Senate last  week.   He  sketched  out  for  the  first
time  what  could  be  an  alternative  opposition  foreign  policy
for   the  Democrats.   Where  others  have  merely  criticized  the
rigidity  of  Mr.  Dulles  or  spoken  in  generalities  of  the  need
to  search  for  peace,  Senator  Humphrey  outlined  the  essential
elements  of   a   flexible   foreign   policy,  covering disarmament
and   every   major   area   of   the   world   from   China   to  Latin
America.   His   speech  was  in  striking  contrast  to  the  barren
and   evasive  statement  issued   by   the   Democratic  Advisory
Council  a  few   days  earlier,  a  statement  which  reflected   the
stalemate   within   the   Council   between   former   Secretary   of
State  Dean  Acheson,  who  does  not   differ   in  essentials   from
Mr.  Dulles,  and  those  members  of  the  Council  like  Senator
Humphrey,   Governor   Williams   of   Michigan   and   former
Senator  Lehman  who  want  the  Democrats to  strike out  on  an
independent   line  of   their  own.   The   Humphrey   speech   at
last  gave  full  expression  to  those  elements  and  new  hope  to
those  who  have  long  looked  for  a  major  spokesman  in  the
cause  of  peace.
Lyndon Johnson Backs Him
The   biggest   news  in   the   speech   itself   was   its  advocacy
of   a   separate   agreement   to   suspend   nuclear   testing.    The
biggest   news   in   its  presentation  was   the   friendly   send-off
given  the  speech  by  Majority  Leader  Lyndon  Johnson,   who
said  Humphrey  had  "never  rendered  a  greater  service."   This
gave  the  speech  the  impact  of  something  more  than  a  personal
effort,  though  much  less  of  course  than  the  expression  of  ac-
cepted   party  policy.    During   the   course   of   the   afternoon
during  which  Humphrey   spoke,  Clark  of  Pennsylvania  said
he  wished  there  was  some  way  to  convince  the  whole  world
"that   the  one  thing   the   American  people,   from   the   most
humble  citizen  to  the  President  of  the  United   States,   desire
more  than  anything  else  in  the  world  is  peace."   It  is  a  good
thing  the  Humphrey  address  was  not  televised   all  over  the
world  or  it  would   have  made  millions   feel  there  is  hardly
any  subject  in  which  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  is  less
interested.
Here  was  the  chairman  of  the  Senate's   disarmament  sub-
committee  in  a  major  speech  which   contained   serious   criti-
cism  of  the  President   and  Secretary  of  State  and  proposed  a
new   approach   to   the   bogged    down   arms   talks.    Yet   the
Republicans,   from  the  Vice  President  down,   chose   to  treat
it  as  a  social   error,   administering  the   cold   snub   of   empty
benches.    Except  for  Javits  of  New  York,  who  courageously
broke  party  lines  to  come  in  and  praise  Humphrey's   effort,
the  Republicans  stayed  away  all  through   the  four  hours  in
which   Humphrey   held   the   floor.   All   that   time   only  one
Republican  was  present,  at  one  time  Curtis,  at  another   Cot-
Krushchev  on Atom Test Inspection
"I  asked  him   [Krushchev]  at  this  point  whether  he
agreed  with  Western  statesmen  who  said  that  nuclear
bombs  could  now  be  exploded  without  the  risk  of  de-
tection  from  afar  and  that  therefore  controls would  be
necessary  if  it  could  be  agreed  to  suspend  bomb  tests
for  a  while.
" 'I  believe,"  he  said,  'that  it  is  impossible to  let  off
bombs  without  their  being  detected.   An  explosion  can
always  be  detected.    I  don't  mean  only  through  earth
tremors;  a  country   might  say   that   a   shock   of   that
kind  was  natural  in  cause.   But,  as  the  earth revolves,
all  countries  can  take  samples  of  the  air  over  them.
When  we  exploded  our  first  hydrogen  bomb  the Ameri-
cans  knew   it  was  a  hydrogen  bomb  and  not  another
atomic  explosion.   Talk  of  a  clean  bomb  is  pure  char-
latanry.'
''But  Russia  was  still  ready  to  have  control  posts  in
her  territory;  that  should  take  the  ground from  under
the  feet  of  those  who  said  that  Russia  wanted  to  let
off  bombs  in  secret."
—-Interview  with  Krushchev, London  Times, Feb.  1.
ton,   then  Javits,  to  hold  down  the  minority  leader's  seat.   It
was  most  disappointing that  Flanders  of  Vermont  and  Cooper
of   Kentucky,  though   interested  in  disarmament,  lacked   the
spirit  to  join  Javits  in  welcoming  the  Humphrey  discussion.
More Soliloquy Than  Debate
There  were  times  during  the  afternoon   when   Humphrey
seemed   to  be  engaged   in  a  full   dress  soliloquy  on   foreign
policy,  when  there was no  one  else  in  the  chamber  but himself
and   that  lone  Republican.   There  were  never  more   than   a
dozen   Democrats  on   the  floor  and   rarely  that   many.   But
during  the  afternoon seventeen  showed  up  to  give  Humphrey
a  breathing   spell   and   some  moral  support.   The   names  of
those  to  whom  he  thus  "yielded"  in  the  old  fashioned  ballet
of  Senatorial procedure  deserve  to  be  recorded.    They   were,
in  addition  to  Johnson,  Church  (Idaho),  Monroney  (Okla.),
Anderson   (N.   M.),   Mansfield  (Mont.),   Clark   (Pa.),  El-
lender  (La.),  Symington  (Mo.),  Kefauver  (Tenn.),  Douglas
(111.),   Jackson   (Wash.),   Carroll   (Col.),   Morse   (Ore.),
Sparkman  (Ala.),  Fulbright   (Ark.)   and  Long  (La.).   The
conservative  troglodytes  of  the  party  in  the  South  like  Russell
and   Byrd   conspicuously  stayed   away.    Among   the    liberal
Democrats  who  failed  to  give  Humphrey  a  hand  were  Neu-
berger   (Ore.),   Green   (R.  I.),   McNamara   (Midi.),   Hen-
nings   (Mo.),   Hill   (Ala.),   Kennedy   (Mass.),   Magnuson
(Wash.),  Murray  (Mont.),  O'Mahoney   (Wyo.),  Proxmire
(Wis.)  and  Pastore  (R.  I.).   They  ought  to  hear  from  home.
We  suggest  that  peace  groups  all  over  the  country   obtain
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  10, 1958
Humphrey  Wants  to  End  The  Little
(Continued  from  Page  One)
the  February  4  Congressional   Record,  study  the   Humphrey
speech,  ask  their  Senators  and  Congressmen  how  they  stand
on  its  proposals   and   call  public  meetings   to  discuss   them.
The   junior   Senator   from   Minnesota   has   given   the    peace
movement  a  chance  to  emerge  from  its  isolated  corner   into
the  major  field  of  party  politics.   Senator  Humphrey   (see  box
below)    satirized   the   incomprehensibly   complex   way   the
Administration  has  tangled  a  supposed   "first  step"  disarma-
ment  program   into  nine  interlocked  proposals   of  an  almost
Utopian   perfectionism.    His   first   proposal   is   to   break   the
package  down  so  it  can  be  understood  and  negotiated.    His
second  is  to  negotiate  an  end  to  nuclear  testing  with  inspec-
tion.    His   third  in   effect   is  for   a  joint  study  by  American
and   Soviet   scientists   of   the   two   different   though   related
problems  of  inspection  (1)  how  to  police an  end  of  weapons
tests  and   (2)   how  to  cut  off  manufacture  of  fissionable  ma-
terials  for   weapons  purposes  altogether.    In  this   connection
there  ought   to  be  organized  public  pressure  for  the   release
of   the   task  force  reports   on   inspection  and   control   which
Stassen  initiated  and  which  Humphrey  says  Dulles  first  prom-
ised   and   then   denied   his   subcommittee.     Since   inspection
is  the  main  stumbling  block  on  both  sides,  it  would  be  use-
ful   to  have  a  good  look  at  just  how  extensive  it  would  need
to  be.   The   unwillingness  to  release  the  reports   will   make
some  people   suspect  that  the   difficulties   are  not  as  great  as
they   are   supposed   to   be,   otherwise   the   State   Department
would  be  anxious  to  release  them.
Arms  Control in Other Areas
Senator  Humphrey   again  praised  George   Kennan's  initia-
tive  in  opening  fresh  discussion of  the  German  problem.   (The
absence  of  any  reference  to  Germany  in  the  Democratic  Ad-
visory  statement  indicates  that  Mr.   Acheson  was  unable   to
persuade  his  colleagues  to  join  him  in  criticism  of  Kennan).
Without   endorsing   Kennan's   specific   proposals,    Humphrey
suggested   ways   in  which  negotiation   might   be  made   more
flexible  and   some   form   of   mutual   withdrawal    negotiated.
Arms  Races  in  Mid-East  and  Korea
Two Basic  Delusions of  U.S.  Policy
"There  is  reason  to  believe  that  those   who  conduct
and  design  foreign  policy  make  two  false  assumptions
regarding  the  Soviet   Union.
"The  first  is   that   the   United  States   has   such   po-
litical,   military  and  economic  superiority   that   it   can
force  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  to  accept  our  terms  in  any  series
of  negotiations.
"The  other  assumption  is  that  the  internal   domestic
difficulties   of  the  Soviet  regime  are  so  great   that  all
we  need  to  do  is  continue  to  apply  pressure   and  the
collapse  of  the  system   will  follow.   Both  of  these   as-
sumptions   have   been   stated   or  implied   many   times.
Recent  events  have  shattered  the  validity  of  these  as-
sumptions."
—Humphrey   on  Disarmament,  U.S.  Senate, Feb.  4-
In  the  Middle  East,  Humphrey  saw  the  Eisenhower  Doctrine
reduced  to  a  "shambles"  and  advocated  an  international  arms
embargo  on  shipments  to  that  highly  inflammable  area.    He
proposed  a  UN   Special  Commission  on  Arms  Traffic  to  take
responsibility  and  to  make  the  area  a  pilot  project  in   both
ground  and  aerial  inspection.   He  also  suggested  U.  S.  initia-
tive  in  the  UN   for  the  establishment  of  a  Middle  East  De-
velopment  Authority which  might  create  conditions  in  which
the   key  problems   of   Arab  refugees  and   Arab-Israeli   peace
might  at  last  be  solved.
Where  Mr.  Dulles's  universal  panacea  is  to  initiate  regional
arms  races,  Senator  Humphrey  proposes  instead  to  negotiate
their  end.    He  wants  arms  limits  negotiated   in  the   danger
areas  of  the  Far  East,  particularly  Korea  and  he  touched  on
the  folly  of  discussing world  arms  limitations  without  bring-
ing  in  Communist China.  He  applied  the  same  general  views
to  an  area  outside  the  cold  war,  Latin  America,   suggesting
that  there,   too,   it  would   be  desirable  if  our   aid   programs
could   be   "geared   primarily  to   developing   Latin  American
economies  and  raising  living  standards."   This  speech   offered
fresh   approach   and   can  open   a  fruitful   national   debate  if
there  is  a  response  from  the  country.
Who  Ever  Heard  of  A  "First
"Our  present  disarmament  proposals  consist  of  the   fol-
lowing   points:   (1)   prevention  of   surprise   attack   through
aerial   and   ground   inspection,   (2)    suspension    of    nuclear
weapons  tests,  (3)   prohibition  of  fissionable  material   pro-
duction  for  weapons  purposes,  (4)  a  beginning  on  the  trans-
fer  of  fissionable  material  from  weapons   to  peaceful   pur-
poses,   (5)  modest  reduction  of  armed  forces,   (6)  the  trans-
fer  of  selected   armaments  to  international   depots,  (7)   the
prohibition   of   the   transfer   of   nuclear   weapons   to   other
countries,   (8)   the  establishment   of  a  committee   to  study
ways  to  insure  that  objects  sent  into  outer  space   will  be
used   exclusively   for  peaceful  and  scientific   purposes,   and
(9)   the  grant   of  authority  to  an  international   agency   to
study  the  control  of  the  export   and  importation   of   arma-
ments.
"The   United  States  refers   to  these  nine  points  as   con-
stituting   a  first-step   disarmament   treaty.    I   submit   that
these  points  amount  to  much  more  than  a  first  step.   What
would  be  left  for  a  second,  third  or  fourth  step  agreement
would  be  rather   insignificant  compared   to  the  disarming
that  would  have  been  undertaken  in  this  so-called  first  step.
To  call  these  nine   steps   a  'start'  on  world    disarmament
is  inaccurate and unrealistic.
Step"  Containing  Nine  Points?
"No  nation,  least  of  all  the  suspicious,  tightly   controlled
Soviet  Union  would  agree  to  such  sweeping   provisions   all
at  one  time.   The  most  important  points  in  the  U.  S.  dis-
armament   proposals   require   the  installation   of   elaborate
inspection  systems.    Do  we  really   expect   the  Soviet   Union
to  open  up  its  country  to  the  extent   of  foreign  inspectors
in  all  atomic  energy   plants,  all  test  sites,  all  major   com-
munication  centers,  all  ports,  all  airfields,  all  depots  to  men-
tion  only  the  most  important  inspection  points  in  our  pro-
posals?    And  would  we  be  ready  to  reciprocate   if  the  So-
viet  Union  were  to  surprise  us  by  accepting  the   proposal?
"What  seems   necessary  at  this  point  if  we  are  ever   to
reach   a  real   and  genuine   first   step   agreement   with   the
Soviet  Union  is  to  be  willing  to  break  up  the   disarmament
package.    We  should  be  prepared   to  negotiate  on  each  of
these   nine  points   separately. ...  I  must  emphasize   here
that  it  is  Utopian  to  expect   to  reach  comprehensive   agree-
ments  with  the  Soviet   Union  on  any  matter.   To  think  we
can  obtain  them  on  the  most  sensitive  aspects  of  their  and
our  national  security   is  deceiving   the  American   people   as
well  as  the  entire  world."
—Humphrey  on Disarmament,  U.S. Senate, Feb.  4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February   10, 1958
In  the  Senate,  Hennings   Given  $115,000  to  Protect   Constitutional   Liberties
House  Un-American  Gets  Another  $305,000,  With  Only  One  Dissenter
Those  who  picture  the  Supreme  Court's  shift  to  liberalism
under  Warren   as  a  mechanical  reaction  to  a  change  in  public
temper,  discounting the  influence  of  the  Chief  Justice  and  an
influential  few  like  him  with  courage  and  vision,  should  study
the  "debate"  in  the  House  of  Representatives  on  January  30
when  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee  was  given   an-
other  $305,000.   If  the  shift  on  the  Court  was  a  mere  reflec-
tion  of  a  shift   in  public  opinion,  the  House  would   show  a
change,  too.   But  it  didn't.
Despite  the Watkins  decision, and  the  presence  in  the  House
of  a  considerable  number  of  thoughtful  liberals  and  able  con-
stitutional  lawyers,  the   new  appropriation   and   the  old   en-
abling  resolution  were  approved  without  discussion  in  a  voice
vote  with  a  thin  scattering  of  unidentifiable  "nays."
One Brave  Man
Only  one member,  Roy W. Wier  (D.  Minn.)  stood  up  and
asked  that  he  be  recorded  against  the  Committee.   Our  hat  is
off  to  him.  Albert P.  Morano  (R,  Conn.)  then  made  a  feeble
little  speech  in  favor  of  the  Committee  and  the  new  appro-
priation  was  railroaded  through.   Thereupon  Committee  mem-
bers,  apparently  afraid  to  speak  up  on  the  floor,  proceeded  to
unload  the  kind  of  poisonous  slander  and  reckless  inaccuracy
typical  of  the  Committee  in  speeches  added  as  "extensions  of
remarks."
Here  are  a  few  samples.   That  clown,  Gordon  H.  Scherer
(R.  Ohio)   spoke  of  "the  hard  core  of  the  Communist  con-
spiracy"  as  "the  ADA,  the  Communist-dominated  Emergency
Civil  Liberties  Committee  and   the   Washington   Post."     Pat
Kearney  (D.  N.  Y.)  linked  the  ECLC  with  a  Committee  wit-
ness   named  Hugh  Hardyman   who   was  accused   of   making
germ  warfare  charges   in  speeches  behind   the  Iron   Curtain.
Kearney  said  Hardyman  was  a  member  of  the  ECLC.   He  is
not.   Clyde  Doyle  (D.   Cal.)   tried  to  explain  away  the  anti-
Memo for  Soviet  Readers
We  regard   the   attack   on  Howard   Fast  in  Litera-
turnaya  Gazeta  as  exactly   the  kind  of  literary   hooli-
ganism  which  disgraced   the  Stalin  epoch;  critics   were
never  answered  but  only  defamed.    This  kind  of  inter-
national  boorishness  is  in  poor  accord   with  the   cam-
paign  for  peaceful  co-existence   and  the  charge  of  Zion-
ism  against  Fast  is  a  cover-up  for  the  Soviet  regime's
consistent  failure  (which  he  protested)  to  make   public
amends   for  the  savage  liquidation  of   Yiddish   writers
and  literature  in  the  Soviet  Union  during  Stalin's  final
years.   News  of  this  was  allowed to  leak  out  through  an
obscure  Polish  Jewish  Communist   paper  but  has  never
been  given  corrective  publicity  in  the  USSR   itself.
House  Committee  resolution  passed  by  the  State  Convention
of  the  California  Democratic  Council  in  Fresno   last   month.
He   did   not,   of   course,  put   the   actual  text   of   the   Council
Resolution  in  the  record.
Powell's   Position
The  only  other  extension  of  remarks  was  by  Clayton  Powell
(D.  N.  Y.)   who  thought  the  Committee  had  done  "a  laud-
able  job  in  quarantining  Communists"   but   criticized   it   for
not  going  after  the  Klan.
The  day  before,  in  the  Senate,  Hennings   of  Missouri  was
given   another  $115,000   for   the   Constitutional   Rights  sub-
committee  of  Senate  Judiciary, with  the  approval  of  its  chair-
man,   Eastland.    The   only   subject   Hennings    indicated   his
rather  moribund  subcommittee was  preparing  to  work  on  was
legislation  having  to  do  with  freedom  of  information  in  the
executive  branch.   The  only  work  he  boasted  of  was  sending
an  observer  to  the  Girard  trial.   From  all  indications  the  Hen-
nings  subcommittee  is  set  on  a  course  which  will  not  annoy
Eastland.
New  Protection  for  Non-Conformists  Foreshadowed  in  Sacher  Case  Dissent
For  no  court  in  the  country  was  the  Watkins  decision  a
more  bitter  pill  than  the  Court  of  Appeals   for  the  District
of   Columbia.   Ever  since  the  cases  of  the  Hollywood  Ten
and  of  the  Joint  Anti-Fascist   Refugee   Committee,  its   rul-
ings  had  given  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee  and  the  Senate   Internal  Security  Subcommittee  a   free
hand.   In  the  absence  of  review  by  the  Supreme   Court  for
almost   a  decade,  the  rulings   of   Judge   Prettyman   on  the
Court  of  Appeals  were  the  law  until  overruled  by  Watkins.
In  the  new  5-4  Sacher  decision,  as  in  the  Barenblatt   deci-
sion,  that  same  court  is  trying  hard  to  rationalize  the  Wat-
kins  decision  out  of  existence.   We  believe  it  will   fail.
Harry   Sacher,   as  counsel   for  the   second   echelon    Smith
Act  cases  in  New  York,  was  one  of  the  victims  of  the  at-
tempt  by  the  Senate  Internal  Security  subcommittee  to  pun-
ish  those  involved  in  the  recantation  of  Harvey   Matusow
and to  create  an intimidating  atmosphere  around  the  efforts
to  obtain  new  trials   on  the  basis  of  that  recantation.   He
answered  freely   all  questions   bearing   on  a  supposed   con-
spiracy   to   bring   about   the   recantation    but   declined   on
grounds  of  conscience   (not  the  Fifth)  to  answer  questions
about  his  own  political  associations.
The  general  authorization  of  the  Senate  committee  in  the
field  of  "internal  security"  is  as  vague  and broad  as  that  of
the   House   committee   over   "un-American   activities"  and
wide  enough  for  any  kind  of  inquisition.
What  happens   when  such  an  inquiry   enters  the  field  of
First   Amendment   rights?    Judge   Fahy   for   the   minority
quoted  two  Supreme  Court  decisions.    One  was  the  Rumely
case  where  the  Court  held  that  where  a  First   Amendment
question   is   involved,  the  courts   must   "construe   narrowly
the  resolution   describing   the  committee's   authority."   The
other   was   the  Watkins  decision   which   said   "when   First
Amendment  rights  are  threatened,   the  delegation  of   power
to  the  committee  must  be  clearly   revealed  in  its  charter."
New  principles  were  also  foreshadowed   by  the  Fahy   dis-
sent  when  it  said  (1)  that  in  the  area  of  First  Amendment
rights,  courts  should  be  slow  to  compel  testimony  by  a  wit-
ness  against  himself  even  if  he  does  not  wish  to  invoke  the
Fifth  and  (2)   "Individual  values  sought  to  be  protected   by
the  Bill  of  Rights  should  cause  the  courts  not  to  coerce  un-
necessarily   by   the   penalty   of   the   criminal   law   answers
which  might  publicly  convict  the  witness  of    unfaithfulness
to  a  standard  of  good  citizenship   held  by  all  but  a  few  of
his  fellow  citizens."  This  recalls  the  earlier  law  in  England
which  held  .that   the  privilege  might   be  invoked   not  only
against   self-incriminaton  but  also  against  testimony    which
might   tend  to  defame  or  degrade.   This  strikes  directly  at
the  use  of  Congressional  committees  as  a  kind  of  public
pillory  to  expose  holders  of  non-conformist  views.
2     'l
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  10, 1958
Calls  Negotiations  to  End  Threat  of  War  Urgent  in  Interview  With  Chicago  Tribune
Gen.   Bradley  Denies  Pacifism  But  Warns  Against  Electronic Arms  Race
(Chicago Tribune  Press Service)
"Wash.  Jan.  30—Omar  N.   Bradley  said  recently  a   space
age  H-bomb  war  would  not  be  over  in  a  few  hours  but  might
drag  on  for  many  years  without  a  decision.
"Bradley,  one  of  the  nation's  military  elder   statesmen   of
five-star  rank,   said   that  so  long   as  the   U.   S.  keeps   up   its
strength  'approximately  equal  to  that  of  Russia'  we  could  not
be  defeated  quickly.   He  said  Russia  would   hesitate  to  start
such  a  war, knowing  it  would  mean  a  long,  drawn  out dis-
aster.
"The   old  soldier,   known  as  the  'GI's  general,'   talked   in
gentle   tones   of  his  hopes   for  world   peace  and  his  faith  in
human   reason  that  will  some  day  solve  the  world's   number
one  problem  of  nations  living  together  without  a  nuclear  war.
Claims  Misunderstanding
" 'I  have  been   accused  recently  of  being   a   pacifist—ever
since  my  speech  last  November,'  he  said.   'I  guess  I  was  mis-
understood,  but  I  was trying  to  make  the  point  that  the  world
leaders  must  start  right  away  to  work  out  a  peaceful  accommo-
dation  of  the  conflicting  forces  that  could  lead  to  war.'
"In  that talk,  in  which he  sought  funds  for  a  private  school,
Bradley  warned  that  the  space  weapons   and  other   ingenious
devices  being  developed   by  science  at  a  rapid  rate  are  pyra-
miding  and  could  lead  to  disaster.
" 'Missiles  will  bring  anti-missiles,  and  anti-missiles  will
bring  anti-anti-missiles,'  he  said  in  his  speech.   'But  inevitably
this  whole  electronic  house  of  cards  will  reach  a  point   where
it  can  be  constructed  no  higher.
-  " 'At  that  point  we  shall  have  come  to  the  peak  of   this
whole   incredible  dilemma  into  which  the  world   is   shoving
itself.   And  when  that  time  comes  there  will  be  little  we  can
do  other  than  to  settle  down  uneasily,  smother  our  fears,  and
attempt  to  live  in  a  thickening  shadow  of  death.'
"Bradley   said  he  was  not  proposing  —  in  his   November
speech—one-sided  disarmament  or  supine  submission  to Rus-
sia's   rocket   threats.    He   said   such   appeasement   would   ulti-
mately  lead  to  war, as  it  did  in  World  War  II,  when  an  op-
Standing Firm  Under Pressure
Ever  since  his  sensational   speech  here  in   Washing-
ton  at  St.  Alban's  School  last  Nov. 5 calling  for  "peace-
ful   accommodation"  instead   of  a  missile   race,  which
we  reprinted  in  our  issue  of  Nov. 18,  Gen. Omar  N.
Bradley,  has  been  under  pressure  to  backtrack   on sen-
timents  so contrary  to  the  dominant  views  of  the  State
and  Defense  Departments.   In  an  interview  with  the
Chicago  Tribune  which  that  paper  published  on  Friday,
Jan.  31, Gen. Bradley  said  he  had  been  accused  of  being
a   pacifist   (perhaps  the  hardest  accusation   for  an  old
soldier  to bear)  but  nevertheless  repeated  his  warnings.
We  reprint  the  full  text  of  the  Chicago  Tribune   inter-
view  as  No.  1 news  for  all  who believe  in  peace.   It  is
worth   noting   that   the   President    recently    appointed
Gen.  Bra''ley  one  of  a  3-man  group  to  study  reorgani-
zation  of  the  armed  forces,  an  index  of  his  esteem.  Re-
prints  of  the  Bradley   speech   are  still  available  at  a
penny-and-half  each  postpaid  in  orders  of  100 or  more.
ponent  thinks  he  can  win  a  quick  and  easy  victory.
"He   said  this  country's  first  task  for  survival  and  peace  is
to  maintain  its  strength  so  that  an  opposing  nation  would  not
be  tempted  to  start  World   War  III.  He  declined  to  discuss
or  appraise  this  country's current and  future  military  strength
in  relation  to  that  of  Russia.
" 'So  long  as  we  stay  strong,  Russia  won't  attack,'  he  said.
When the Smaller  Powers Get Nuclear  Arms
"He  warned  that  in  this  uncertain  period  of  the  missile  race
a  crazed  Hitler,  a  miscalculation  of  American  strength  or  de-
termination,  an  accidental  explosion  or  a  meteorite  could  trig-
ger  off  an  H-bomb  war.  With  this  'horrible'  peril   hanging
over  the  world,  Bradley  said,  'we  can waste  no  time  in  getting
started  on  negotiations  to  end  the  threat  of war.
"He  said  that  a  'small  nation  sitting  on  the  sidelines   could
start  something  and  we  could  be  at  each  other's  throats  before
we  knew  what  happened.'   In  a  few  years,  he  cautioned,  even
small  nations  might  have  nuclear  weapons  and  rockets  in  the
control  of  'irresponsible'  leaders."
IPS  Speaks  Sun.  Feb.  16  Community  Church  Boston  on  "Co-Existence  In  The   Missile   Age''
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name     .............................................................................—.......
Street    .........................................................................................
City      ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
2/io/se
(To)   Name
Street    .......
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
I. E Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED