I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958sep29.pdf

============================================================

More from  the South
The   Racial   Myths   With   Which   The   White   Upper   Classes   Console   Themselves,   Pages   3-4.
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  38
SEPTEMBER  29,  1958
°'°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Canute  Wins  Again   on  the  East   River
United   Nations,  N.   Y.
There  are  moments  when  one  is  tempted   to  believe  that
the  molders  of  American  foreign  policy  think  they  can  solve
the  problem  of  living  with  Russia  and  China  as  they  might
solve  the  problem  of  what  to  do  with  an  upstart  who   had
somehow   gotten   into   an   exclusive   club.     They   seem   to
think  that  if  the  Revolution  of  our  time  can  be  treated  with
sufficient  hauteur,  as  a  low  and  vulgar  fellow  with  whom  no
gentleman  would  associate, the  intruder  will  slink  away.  This
seemed  to  be  the  design  behind  Mr.  Lodge's  demeanor  when
he  rose  on  a  point  of  order  during  the  bitter  United  Nations
debate  on   Communist  China  to   rebuke   Mr.   Gromyko   for
suggesting  that   only  pressure  from   the   United   States   was
maintaining   a   majority   for   the   pretense   that   Chiang   Kai-
shek   still  represents  China.   Like  the   icy  condescension   of
the  State  Department  white  paper  of  August  9  on  why  we
do  not  recognize  Peking,  and  Mr.  Eisenhower's  refusal   (in
between   the   cup   races  and   a  golf   match)   to   receive   Mr.
Krushchev's  latest,  Mr.  Lodge's  point  of  order  was  intended
to  make  our  adversaries  feel  like  plebeian  bounders  ignorant
of  how  to  behave  among  their  betters.
No  Rapier-Like  Repartee
Unfortunately  these  tactics  required  talents  Mr.  Lodge  does
not  possess.  They  called  for  the  retort  discourteous,  polished
to  such  a  razor-like edge  that  the  poor  victim  doesn't  realize
until   later  that   his   throat   has   been   cut.    All   Mr.    Lodge
achieved   was  an  indignant   burble.    The   first   Henry   Cabot
Lodge  was  a  scholar  in  politics;  his  grandson  is  a  Babbitt  in
diplomacy.    He   has   neither   wit   nor   style.    Mr.   Gromyko
doesn't   sparkle  either,  so  the   exchange   between   them   was
no  rapier-like  repartee.   "We  are  certainly  aware,"  Mr.  Gro-
myko  had  said  in  his  pedestrian  way,  "that  the  majority  of
countries  espousing  the  United  States  Government's   position
in  the  question  of  China's  representation  in  the  United   Na-
tions  are  doing  this  only  for  the  reason  that  they  are  under
United  States pressure."   Mr.  Lodge  rushed  to  the  rostrum  to
protest,   "Is  not  that  a  polite,   charming   thing   to  say  about
the  members  of  this  body  who  happen  to  stand  with  us  out
of  their  convictions?   Is  that  not  a  delicate,  gentlemanly  way
for  one  Member  of  a  body  to  talk  to  his  colleagues?"   Any
moment  one  expected   him  to  announce   that  he  was  filing  a
formal  complaint  against  Mr.  Gromyko  with  the  house   com-
mittee.   Mr.   Lodge   only  succeeded   in  making   himself   look
silly   because  everyone  knew  that  what   Mr.   Gromyko   said
was  true.    Our   closest   allies,   Britain  and   Canada,   made   it
clear   to  the   Assembly  later   that   same  afternoon   that   they
were  voting  without  conviction.   Sir  Pierson  Dixon  and  Mr.
Smith  by their  short  perfunctory  statements  in  support  of  the
U.  S.  (less  than  300  words  apiece)  demonstrated   a  striking
lark  of  enthusiasm  for  our  China  policy  particularly  since  the
The  Humane  First   Lady  of   Formosa
"Q.  Mme.  Chiang,  if  ...     nuclear  weapons  are  used,
what  reaction  would  there be  among  Asians  to  the  use
of  nuclear  weapons  on Asians?
"A.  I  have  an  interesting  example.  I  know  of  a  per-
son,  one  of  the  refugees  who  came  from  the  mainland,
and  he  told  me,  he  said  the  people  of  mainland  China
were  saying,  Why  doesn't  the  government  of  the  Re-
public  of  China  use  nuclear weapons  on  the mainland?
"Q.  But  Asians  have been  quite  resentful  of  the  fact
that   nuclear   weapons   have   been   used   only   against
Asians,  haven't  they?
"A.  Well,  I  have  not  heard  that.   I  think  it's  not  a
question  of  Asians  or  not;  I  think  it's   a  question  of
necessity.   I  think  war  is  a  terrible  thing,  but  if  war
has  to  be  war,  then  the  point  is  to  get  through  with
it   as  quickly  as   possible."
—Mme.  Chiang  Kai-sheh, Meet  the  Press, Sept.  &1.
\  5
UN   after  dutifully  voting  not  to  recognize  China  will   soon
be  asked  to  mediate  the  Formosa  dispute.
Mr.   Lodge   did  not  leap  to  a  point   of  order   when   Mr.
Krishna  Menon  for  India,  speaking  just  before  the  vote  was
taken,   accused  Mr.   Lodge   of   presenting   a  false  picture  of
what   was   really  happening   on   Quemoy.    Mr.   Lodge   said
300,000   rounds  of   shells   had   been   fired   on   Quemoy   and
1,000  civilians  killed.    Mr.   Menon   declared   there   was   no
evidence  "except  in  propagandist^ minds"  that  war  was  being
waged   at  such  a  tempo.   Mr.   Menon   said  that   even   Time
Magazine,  close  as  it  was  to  the  China  Lobby,  had  discounted
Chinese  Nationalist  reports  about  the  shelling  and  in  its  Sep-
tember  15  issue  said  that  "Civilian  dead  since  August  23  was
now  approaching  40,"  a  long  way from  the  1,000  figure  used
by  Mr.  Lodge.   Mr.  Menon  said  that  the  shelling  of   August
23 was a response to  a  big buildup  in  Nationalist  forces  from
30,000  to  80,000  after  the  Geneva  talks  broke  down   earlier
in  the  year  and  to  increased  Nationalist  activity  against   the
mainland   early  in  August.   He   said  Peking   took   action   in
self-protection   and   implied   that   the   American   public   was
not  getting  the  whole  truth.   Mr.  Menon's  thesis  was  borne
out  by two  items  in  that  day's  (Sept.  23)  papers.   The   Wash-
ington   Post  published  a  Chicago  Daily  News  dispatch   from
Formosa  that  Nationalist   censorship   had   become  so  restric-
tive  that  U.  S.  correspondents   were  not  allowed  even  to  talk
with  the  Americans  who  had  risked  their  lives  to  take   sup-
plies  into  Quemoy.   The  New   York   Post  published  a  memo
sent  to  editors  by the  Associated  Press  saying  that  correspond-
ents  in  Formosa  were  "trying  to  report  one  war  while  fight-
ing   another.    The   second   is  the  battle  to  get   information
about  the   first."   The  AP  memo   said   "the   clampdown  has
led  to  some  doubts  about  the  Nationalist  claims  of   successful
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  29,  1958
(Continued   from   Page One)
convoys  and  air  drops:  Prior  to  the  clampdown,  four con-
secutive  supply  missions  failed;  since,  all  missions  have  been
announced  as  successful."   It  is  a  pity  so  few  papers men-
tioned  Mr.  Menon's  challenge  to  the  trustworthiness  of  Mr.
Lodge's   information,  just  as  so  few   of   them   coveted   the
Asian   and   neutral   European   protest   of   which   we    offer
samples  in  the  boxes  on  this  page.
We're  Becoming  Chiang's  Satellite
Mr.  Malik  as  President  of  the  Assembly  had  just  finished
appealing  to  the  delegates  to  keep  their  arguments  "as  mode-
rate,  as  measured,  as  unprovocative ...  as  possible,  because
the  atmosphere  is  sufficiently  charged"  when  Mr.  Tsiang   for
Nationalist   China  rose  to  speak  with  inflammatory   rhetoric.
The   spokesmen   for   a  regime  whose  leading   figures   salted
away   millions  in   banks  abroad  before   fleeing—and   whose
humane  First   Lady   advocates  the   nuclear  bombing  of   her
own  people—spoke  of  "moral  values."   The  voice  of  Chiang's
police  state  spoke   of   "surveillance,   repression,   torture   and
terror."   Listening  to  him, one  thought  how  -ironical  it  was
that  while  the  U.  S.  public  was  obsessed  with   fear  of  "in-
filtration"  and  subversive conspiracy,  it  was  this  regime  which
had  infiltrated Washington   and  subverted  government.   How
much  of  McCarthyism  was  due  to  the   conspiracy  and   the
money   of   the   Chiang   crowd!    All   who   opposed   it,   from
John  Stuart  Service,  Owen  Lattimore  and  John  Carter Vin-
cent  up  to  George  Marshall  himself,  had  been  smeared  and
driven   out   of   public   life.    Chiang's   lobbyists   created   the
atmosphere  in  which  politicians  have  become  fearful  of dis-
cussing  China  policy  too  openly.    And  now, when  we  may
be  plunged   into  war  on  their  behalf,  our  press  is  gagged  by
them.   Keyes  Beech  of  the  Chicago  Daily  News  quoted   one
U.  S. adviser  as  excusing  press  restrictions  by  saying  "We  are
guests  in  this  country  and  must  respect  the  wishes  of  the  Na-
tionalist   Government."    We   have   become   their   satellite.
Thanks  to  the  fact  that  most  of  the  world  needs  American
loans,  Chiang  through  his  influence  over  a  cowed  Washington
is  still  able  to  muster  a  majority  in  the  United  Nations.   But
the  majority  grows  slimmer  and  more  restive  year  by  year.
On  one  vote,  to  reject  India's  motion  to  put  the  question  of
Asian  Neutral  Voices  at  the  UN
"SIR  CLAUDE  COREA  (Ceylon).   Would  it  not  be
wise,  after  eight  years,  to  reconsider  the  General  As-
sembly's  condemnation  of  the  Chinese  People's   Repub-
lic  for  its  actions in  Korea?   Was  that  government to
be   shut   out   for   all   eternity   because   of   'one  lapse'?
Christians   should  remember   that   forgiveness   was   a
divine  virtue.   'We  should  not  keep  anger  and  hate  in
our  bosoms  for  all  time,'  he  said.
"U  THANT  (Burma)  said  .  .  .  the  United  Nations
had   'branded   the   People's    Republic  of   China   as   a
wicked  outlaw,'  and  on  the  other  hand,  was  now  com-
plaining  that  that  government  was  'acting  as  an out-
law'  .  .  .  Excluding  Peking  from  the  United  Nations
damaged   not  Peking   but  the  United   Nations.   .   .   .
U  Thant  said  China  had  'a  constant  fear  of  overt  ag-
gression   from   outside.'   That   fear   was   the   greatest
single  factor  in  rallying  the  people  of  mainland China
to   'the  call  of   Peking.'   Therefore,  it   seemed  to  him
that   a   get-tough-with-Peking  policy   was   the   worst
possible  one, psychologically.
"PRINCE  NORODOM  SIHANOUK,  Prime  Minister
of  Cambodia  said  the  American  Press  had  reported on
U.  S.  efforts  to  persuade  Chiang  Kai-shek  to  stop  us-
ing  the  offshore  islands  as  bases  for  harassing  the  Chi-
nese  mainland.   It  was   difficult   therefore   to  speak  of
aggression  by  Peking."
—UN  General Assembly  Debate, Sept.  23.
Chinese  representation   on  the  agenda,  the  pro-Chiang  forces
were  for  the  first  time  a  minority of  the  Assembly.  The  roll
call  of  the  81  member  nations  snowed  40  votes  to  reject,  28
opposed   and  13  abstentions.   On  the  next  vote,  not:  to con-
sider  the   Chinese  question  at  all  at  this  session,   Ethiopia,
Mexico  and  New   Zealand   switched  from   abstention  to   in
favor   (while  Malaya  switched  from  in  favor  to   abstention)
and  the  outcome  was  42  for, 28  against  with  11  abstentions.
On  the  final  vote,  Malaya and  Peru  switched  from  abstention
to  in  favor,  giving  a  total  of  44  in  favor,  28  against  and  9
abstentions.   The   important  point  is  that  as  compared  with
last  year  the  U.  S.  has  lost  five  votes:  Austria,  Iceland,   Iraq,
Libya  and  Greece.    Canute  cannot  hope  to  win  many  more
victories   on   the   East  River,  unless   Chiang   can   precipitate
war  in  the  meantime'.   There  lies  the  danger.
Some  Great  Neutral Powers Plead  for
"Can   we   have  effective  disarmament  without   the par-
ticipation   and  cooperation   of   the   600   million  people   of
China?    Can  we  achieve  a  ban  on  nuclear   weapons  tests
under  effective  international  control  without  the  participa-
tion  of  the  People's  Republic of  China?  .  .  .  Moreover, can
we  discuss  safeguards   against   the  possibility   of  surprise
attack  while  ignoring  China?"
—Mr.  Sastroamidjojo     (Indonesia).
"The  issue  is,  in  our  opinion,  whether  this  Assembly  is
to  feel  free  to  debate  openly  and  comprehensively  any  im-
portant  question  affecting  international  relations.
"There   can  be  no  doubt  that   the   question   of   whether
Communist  China should  or  should  not  be  represented  here
is  one  of  major  importance  .  .  .  the  situation  in  the  Far
East ... is  an immediate  threat  to  local  peace  and to  world
peace.   Indeed,  I  wonder  whether  refusal   to  discuss  it   in
previous  years  may  not  have  contributed  to  the   present
dangerous  situation  in  the  Far  East.
"Those  of  us  who  represent  functioning  democracies  and
who  wish  to  see  this  Assembly  as  a  model  and  example  of
democratic   procedure   may  perhaps   ask  ourselves  how  a
UN  Discussion of  the  China Problem
question  of  the  same  relative  importance  would  be  handled
in  our  own  parliaments.   Could  a  government   properly  re-
fuse  to  allot  Government time  for  such  a   debate?"
—Mr.  Aiken   (Ireland).
"As  long  as  the  United  Nations  treats  the  Taiwan  Gov-
ernment  as  the  legitimate  Government of  all  of  China,  the
United  Nations  has  no  relation  whatsoever  with  the  main-
land  of  China and its  approximately  600 million  inhabitants.
The  Swedish  delegation  considers  that  the  General  Assem-
bly  should  at  least  be  given  an  opportunity  to  discuss  the
serious    practical   disadvantages    which   follow   from   this
anomaly."                                        —Mrs.  Rossel    (Sweden).
"The  countries   which  recognize   the  People's   Republic  of
China  have  a  population  of  1,040  millions.    If  one  adds  to
that  figure  the  population of  the  People's  Republic  of  China
itself,   which  today  is  639  million,  one  arrives  at  a  ligure
of  1,679  million  people,  of  a  total  world  population  of  2,737
million.  .  .  .  We  are  really  ignoring  the  views  of  a  large
majority  of  the  populations  of  the  world."
—Mr.  Krishna  Menon   (India).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  29,1958
Second  Installment   of  Our Report  on  A  Flying  Trip  to  Little  Rock  and Arkansas
The  Upper  Class  White  South  in  A  Mississippi  River  Town
(The  Second  in  A  Series  from   Arkansas)
During  our  first  two  days  in  Little  Rock,  our  new  friends,
Negro  and  white,  all  expressed  a  joking  alarm  that  seemed
to  mask  a  real  anxiety  when  we  suggested   we'd  like  to  go
down  into  the  delta  country  on  Sunday.   It  was  as  if  urban
Little  Rock  looked  on  the  plantation  region  in  the  river  bot-
tom  lands  to  the  southeast  as  a  dark  continent  in  which any-
thing might  happen.   Some  offered  to  ship  our  remains  home;
others  hoped  we  would  come  back  with  our  limbs  intact.
We  set  out  early  on  a  bright  Sunday  morning  feeling  just
a  little  apprehensive ourselves.   Our  goal  150  miles  southeast
was  Helena,  the  State's  one  port  on  the  Mississippi,  a  town
Mark   Twain   mentioned  in   his   "Life   on   the    Mississippi."
Little  Rock  friends  assured  us  we  would  see  a  real  old   "Con-
federate"   town   there.    The   trip,   across  flat  rich  lands   the
first French  explorers  named  the  Grand  Prairie,  was  unevent-
ful,  and  we  encountered  nothing  more  alarming  than  a  burly
attendant  on  the  ancient  ferry  across  the  White  River  at  St.
Charles.    Our  efforts  to  draw  him  out  on  the  more  pressing
constitutional  issues  of  the  day  evoked  only  unfriendly mono-
syllables,   and   we  made  a   quick   getaway.    The    guidebook
indicated  that  it  was  a  bad  spot  for  Yankees.   There  on  June
7,   1862,  a  Federal  ironclad  came  up  the  White  River,  run-
ning  a  gauntlet  of  rebel  shore  batteries  unscathed  until  some-
one  on  board  unwisely  opened   a  porthole.    Captain   Joseph
Fry,   the   Confederate   commander,   an   ordnance   expert   out
of  West  Point,  "plumped  a  cannon  ball  through   the  open-
ing,  smashing  a  steam  pipe  and  killing  nearly  150  soldiers
packed  in  the  ironclad."
Not  Very   Picturesque
Helena,  to  our  disappointment,  turned  out  to  be  no  more
picturesque  than  Little  Rock.   We   drove  through   the   com-
monplace   main   street—"Cherry   Street"—of   a   small   river
town,  asleep  in  the  Sabbath  sun,  with  no  sign  of  antebellum
grandeur.   We  went  through  the  "gate"  in  the  high   levee,
across  the  Missouri   Pacific  tracks  and   down   to  the  muddy
waters  of  the  broad  and  unlovely  stream  where  cars  waited
for  the  ferry  to  the  Mississippi  side.   Willows   grew  thick  on
a  long  mudbank  island  near  the  Arkansas  side.   Except   for
the   ferry   pier   there  was  nothing   to   suggest   the   "seaport"
Helena  likes  to  call  itself.   We  turned  back  disenchanted   to
"Nick's,"  a  Greek   restaurant  at  the  foot  of   Cherry   Street,
and  while  waiting  for   lunch   telephoned   the   editor   of   the
local  daily.   He  wasn't  in  but  I  reached  his  father,  its  pub-
lisher,  and  told  him  I  had  two  visiting  British  reporters  with
me  and  we  wondered  whether  we  could  talk  to  him  or  his
son  while  we  were  in  town.    Within   a  few  minutes   both
Repealing  the   5th   Amendment
"Art.  I,  Sec.  9.   Should  any  witness   [subpoenaed  by
the   States   Rights   Commission]   refuse   to   testify   to
any  fact,  or  refuse  to  produce  any  book,  document  or
paper   touching   which   he   is   to   be   examined,   on   the
ground   that   he   will   thereby   incriminate   himself,   or
that  it  will  tend  to  discredit  or  render  infamous,   the
Commission  shall  consider  such  refusal   as  part  of  the
evidence  and  shall  inform  the  public  of  the  refusal  of
such  witness   to  so  testify,  and  the  facts  and  circum-
stances   under  which  such  refusal   shall  be  made."
—States  Rights  (Johnson)   Amendment   to  Arkansas
State  Const,  to  be  voted   on  next   November.
father  and  son  turned  up  at  Nick's   to  make  us   welcome.
They  were  most  hospitable.    Both  were  widely   travelled;
a  map  across  one  wall  of  the  dining  room  in  their  comfort-
able  home  on  the  outskirts  of  town  had  red  buttons   pinned
on  it  to  show  the  places  they  had  visited.   There  were  red
buttons  all  over  Europe  and  all  around  the  periphery  of  Asia,
including  Taipeh  and  Bangkok.   The  father  recalled  that  he
had  been  a  guest  in  London  at  a  dinner  given  by  the  pub-
lisher  of  the  paper  one  of  my  friends   represented,   and   in-
sisted  that  we  be  his  guests  at  dinner.   We  were  taken  for  a
ride  on  a  small  cabin  cruiser  on  the  Mississippi,   and   then
the  younger  man  in  his  convertible  showed  us  the  town,  in-
cluding   its  own  antebellum   mansion,  and   the   old   Confed-
erate  cemetery  high  up  on  a  bluff  where  a  few  Yankees  who
fell   in  the  Battle  of  Helena   are  also  buried.   We   saw  the
local  synagogue  ("Jews  began  to  come  here  with  their  slaves
from   Kentucky  before  the  war,"   our  friend  told  us).    The
town  also  has  a  large  colony  of   Lebanese.    Helena   used   to
be  three-fourths  Negro  and   is  now  60  per   cent   black.    In
the   back   streets  we   saw  row  after   row   of   unpainted   row
shacks,  much  like  those  of  a  mining  town,  where  Negroes
lived.   "They  wouldn't   live  in  better  houses  if  you  gave   it
to  them,"   our  friend   assured  us.   Helena   is  in  that  part  of
Arkansas   which   is  as  much   "deep   South"   as   neighboring
Mississippi  and  Louisiana.   Like  them  it  has  no  school  inte-
gration  problem   because  no  Negro  dares  file  suit.   But  our
friend   said,  almost  boastingly,  that  Negroes  had   forced   the
town  by  litigation  to  provide  a  modern  Negro  high  school.
Just  Dyin'  To  Come  Home
At  the  Helena   country  club  where  other   members  of   the
family   gathered   for   drinks  and   dinner  with   us  everybody
said  "nigger"  as  a  matter  of   course.    "Our   better   class  of
niggers   have  left,"   one  lady  told   us.   There  was  a  steady
stream  of  migration  northward.   But  to  believe  the  anecdotes
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
To  Restore  the  Lily  White  Democratic Party  Primary  and  Bar  Negroes   from   Politics
"Art.   IV,  Sec.  7.   No  person   shall  vote  at  any   primary
election,   or  in  any  convention,  or  other   political   assembly
held  for  the  purpose  of  nominating   any  candidate  for  pub-
lic  office,  unless  he  is  at  the  same  time  a  registered  voter
AND  A  CERTIFIED   MEMBER  [emphasis  added]  of  the
political  party  holding   such   election,   convention   or  assem-
bly,  and  has  such  other  and  additional  qualifications    [ra-
cial?]  as  may  be  prescribed   by  the  party  of  which   candi-
dates  for  public  office  are  to  be  nominated.    All  ballots  in
any  election  or  primary  election  must  designate  the  race—
either   Caucasian   or   Negro—of   all   candidates    appearing
thereon.    No   provision   of   this   amendment   shall   be   con-
strued  as  ...     binding  any  political  party  in  this  State  to
any  national  political  party  bearing  the  same  name."
—States  Bights   (Johnson)   Amendment   to  Arkansas  State  Const,  to  be  voted  on  next   November.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  29,1958
The  White  Racial  Folk  Tales  About  the  Negro  Migration Northward
{Continued  from   Page   Three)
one   would   think  the   long   distance  wires  from   St.  Louis,
Chicago  and  New  York  were  clogged  with  calls  collect   from
homesick   migrants   to   their   white   "folks"   asking   them   to
please  send  fare  to  come  home.   So-and-so  had  gotten  such
a  call  only  recently  and  simply  refused  to  take  it;  the  tone
implied  that  the  gates  of  paradise  had  been  shut  forever  on
the  faithless  one.  We   were  told   a  story  about   the   hungry
Southern  Negro  who  went   for  help  from   door   to  door   in
Chicago  in  vain  until  at  one  door  he  heard  a  voice  yell, "You
black  bastard  get  around  to  the  back"   and  sighed   with  re-
lief,   "ah's  found   friends  at  last."    Such   are  the   folk   tales
with  which  the  white  South  comforts  itself.
Some  of  Their  Best  Friends
There  was  hardly  anyone  who  did  not  assure  us  at   some
point  in  the  conversation  that  some  of  their  best  friends  were
niggers.   The  publisher  told  us  he  was  sending  a  nigger  boy
through  medical  school   in   Chicago;   the   boy  recently   asked
$100   for  books  and  he  had  sent  it  to  the  student.   When  a
British  reporter  suggested  that  the  Negro  must  be  a  brilliant
boy,  he  seemed  to  have  hit  a  jarring note.   "He'll  get  along,"
his  benefactor  said  grudingly.   He  told  us  a  story  of  a  local
Negro  who  had  gone  to  Little  Rock  and  phoned   him  from
there   (much  to  the  surprise  of  his  Negro  friends)   to  ask
for   SiO,  which  was  sent  and  duly  repaid.   This  was  related
as  another  instance  of  the  generous  way  in  which  Negroes
were  treated.   One   woman   said  she  couldn't   have  a   better
neighbor  than  the  Negro  woman  who  lived  across  the  back-
yard   from   her  home.   "There  isn't  anything  I  wouldn't   do
for  her  or  she wouldn't  do  for  me,"  she  said.   "But of  course
I  wouldn't  think  of   asking  her   into  my  parlor.    It   would
only  embarrass  both  of us."
One   man   told   us  that  Negroes  were  a  problem   because
they  just  couldn't  control  themselves  sexually,  and  related  a
story  of  a  Negro  paternity  case  in  which  four  Negroes  each
offered   to  pay  a  share  toward  the  support  of  an  illegitimate
child  since  all  four  felt  they  had  been  partly  responsible   for
its  birth.    "Sure   our  niggers  vote,"  said  another   man   glee-
fully.    "We   paid  their  poll  taxes  and  lined  'em  up  to  vote
We'll  be  glad  to  mail  free  copies  of  this  week's  issue
and   last   week's   first   installment   on   Little   Rock   to
any   friends   if   you   will   send   us   long   stamped   self-
addressed   envelopes.
for   the   liquor   interests  in   a   recent   local   option   election."
A  younger woman,  a  nurse,  said  she  had  been  working  among
the  Negroes   "by  choice"  for  the  local  health  service.   Why?
"They're   so  grateful."    Like  all   these   people,   she   seemed
quite   sure   she   knew   what   Negroes    were   really   thinking.
"They've   been   a   little  belligerent   lately,   since   this   school
trouble  started,"  she  said.   "But they  change  when   they  see
you're  friendly."  She  seemed  a  warm-hearted  and  most  cap-
able  person.   But  she  was  sure  that  "all the  trouble"   in  the
South  had  been  caused  by  a  few  white  persons  in  the   North
who  "put the NAACP  up  to it."
"Give  Us   More  Time"
Both  the  gfay-haired  father  of  the  family  and  his  wife,  a
kindly  and  motherly  woman,  felt   that   integration   "has  got
to  come"  but  pleaded  "only  you've got  to  give  us  more  time."
When   I  asked  the  father  whether  most  of  the  people  in  his
generation  and  class  felt  that  way,  he  said  they did. But  his
wife  was  non-committal,  said  she  was  "out of  things"  and
didn't  know.   It  was  disappointing  to  read  in  that  same  day's
paper  two  short  editorials the  elderly  man  had  written.   One
blamed   the  latest   Supreme   Court   school  decision   on  Chief
Justice  Warren's   wish  to  fulfill  "the desires  of  his  old  po-
litical  buddy,  Harry  Bridges,  who  wants  to  and  does  stir  up
all  the  trouble  he  can  in  the  United  States  in  the  interests  of
his  beloved  Communist  Russia."   The  other  said,  "Mrs. Elea-
nor  Roosevelt  has  gone  to  Moscow.   Moscow  is  a  good   place
for  Old  Big  Mouth  and  we  hope  she  stays  there."   The por-
trait   of   these  people   would   be   incomplete   without   noting
that  they  shared  the  upper   class  Southerner's   contempt   for
his  own  poorer  white  brethren.   "Why  some  of  them  are  so
low,"   one  lady  told  us  at  dinner,  "that   niggers   won't   asso-
ciate  with  them."    All  of   our  new  friends  in  Helena   were
strong  supporters  of  Governor  Faubus.
(More  Next    Week)
If    You've   Lagged   in   Renewing,   Why   Not   Make  Amends  by  Adding  A  Gift   Sub  to  Your  Renewal?
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ...........
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Qff>Atf>f
City    .............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
[or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
..........................Zone............State................_
for  $2 (6  moo.)  or  $4  (1 yr.)  additional:
S/2B/S8
..........................Zone............State..............._
gift   announcement?     Tea  D    No  O
I  F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  IS,  D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I    F    Stom-'s   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  3,  1ST!).    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  J5,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.:  W  in  Canada;  flO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  nod  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED