I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958feb24.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive
Nobel  Prize  Winner Linus  Pauling  Answers  Teller's  Plea  in  Life  for  Nuclear  Testing,  Pages  2-3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO. 8
FEBRUARY  24,   1958
«"      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Blessed  Are the Peacemakers, But Not  in Washington,  D.C.
The  circumstances surrounding  the  latest  Eisenhower  letter
to  Bulganin  interest  us  as  much  as  the  content.   Mr.  Eisen-
hower  was  down  in  Thomasville,   Ga.,  at  the  time,  fretting
in  weather  too  cold  for  golf  or  quail  shooting,  with  nothing
to  do  but  play  bridge.   Usually,  when  the  President  is  away
on  one  of  his  vacations, Jim  Hagerty  gives  out  as  much  of-
ficial  news  as  possible  from   the  vacation  point,  perhaps   to
demonstrate   that   Mr.   Eisenhower  is   really  hard   at   work.
Hagerty  had  hoped  to  release  the  text  of  the  letter  to  Bul-
ganin  from  Thomasville  but  a  White  House  courier  bringing
the  text  was grounded  by  the  storm  and  the  letter  had  to  be
given  out  in  Washington.   Apparently  there  was  no  copy  of
the  final  draft  in  Thomasville  or  even  an  earlier  version which
could   be  revised  by  telephone.    The   incident  suggests  that
Mr.  Eisenhower was  not  kept  in  such  close  touch  with  the
drafting  of  the  letter  he  signed  as  to  interrupt  many  bridge
games.   It  speaks  for  the  efficiency  of  this  Administration that
so  important  a  Presidential  letter  can  be  composed  without
disturbing  the  Chief  Executive.
No Dismissals  for  Warmongering
We  wonder  whether  Mr.  Eisenhower  was  as  remote  from
the  drafting  of  the  letter  released  two  days earlier  which  sped
the  departing  Stassen  from  the  government.   That  letter  and
its'circumstances  cast  an  ironic  shadow  over  the  one  to  Bul-
ganin.   Mr.  Eisenhower  indignantly  rejected  Bulganin's   sug-
gestion   that   there   are   "imperialist   ruling   circles"   in   this
country  "supposedly   eager  to  plunge  the  world  into  war  in
order  to  make  financial  gains."   Nobody  in  Washington   or
"Wall  Street"  is  crazy  enough  to  want  world  war.    Current
research  is  bent  on  finding  some  way  to  limit  war,   i.e.   to
wage  it  at  a  distance  from  which  generals  can  return  to  col-
lect  their  decorations  while  investors  clip  their  coupons   with
a  minimum of  radioactive  fallout.   But  while  it  is  difficult  to
find anyone  who wants  a  new world  war,  it  is  also  impossible
—with  Stassen  gone—to  find  any  important  figure  here  really
intent  on  peace.   Any  number  of  Generals   and  Admirals  in
this  city  have  been  guilty  of  incendiary  statements,   boasting
of  how  many  cities  in  Russia  we  can  level  in  just  how  many
minutes  flat  but  none  of  them  has  ever  opened   the  morn-
ing  mail  to  find  in  it  a  letter  informing  him  of  how  deeply
the  White  House  regrets  his  resignation.   Nor  has  Sherman
Adams  ever  held  a  private  dinner  for  select  newsmen  to  leak
the    information   that    Admiral    so-and-so's    warmongering
grates  on  the   Administration's   nerves  and   he  will   be  dis-
missed, if  he  does  not  take  the  hint  and  retire.
It  is  instructive  to  compare   the  letter  bidding   Stassen  a
carefully  worded  farewell  with  the  letter  three  years  ago  in
Ike  Would Also  Be Amazed
If  He Read the  N.  Y.  Times
"I am really amazed  now  to  be told by  Soviet  leaders,
who  have  never  even  been near this  country,  that  there
are   in   the   United  States  those  who  in   your  words,
'utter  the  dangerous call  for  preventive war.  .  .  .'"
—The  President's  letter  to Bulganin,  Feb. 15.
"Thus  the  Soviet's  slight  advantage  in  the  develop-
ment   of  long-range  missiles   does  decrease   her   risks
and  increase  ours.   It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  old
talk   of   preventive  war  —   made  sweeter  by  another
name,   'preventive   retaliation'—(to   attack   the  Soviet
first)  has  been  heard  again,  though  in  muted  tones,  in
Washington,  since  the  launching  of  the  Soviet  satel-
lites."
—Hanson   W.   Baldwin,  New   York   Times,  Feb.  4,
third  in  a  series  on  the  U. S.  military  situation.
which  the  President  appointed  him—as  the  press  was  then
encouraged  to  call  it—his  "Secretary  of  Peace."    That   letter
was   released  March   19,   1955,   with   fanfare.    Mr.   Stassen
was  to  occupy  a  newly  created   Cabinet  level  post,   that  of
Special   Assistant  to   the   President   on   Disarmament.    The
President  wrote  that   he  had  been   persuaded   to   create   the
post  by  "the  unprecedented  destructive  power  of  new  weap-
ons  and  the  international tensions  which  powerful  armaments
aggravate."
There  was  no  echo  of  these  forgotten  phrases  in  the  letter
three  years  later  extinguishing  this  position.   In  his  letter  of
resignation,  Stassen  spoke  of  his  disarmament  hopes  and  re-
ferred  to  "the  tasks  of  peace."   But  it  was  only  on  "the   more
personal   side"   that   Mr.   Eisenhower   expressed    appreciation
for  Stassen's  "readiness  to  express  to  me  frankly  your  views
on  the  many  subjects  that  have  been  of  common   interest  to
us  both."   Neither   disarmament  nor  peace  were   mentioned,
and  the historian with  no other  data  than  the  President's  reply
will  be  hard  put  to  determine  whether   Stassen   was  on  the
Civil   Aeronautics   Board   or   the   Battle   Monuments   Com-
mission.   In  a  capital  where  corruptionists  mobilize  defend-
ers  in  battalions,  Mr.  Stassen  existed  three  years  as  if  in  a
jungle.   The  State  Department's   journalistic   flunkies  pursued
him  with  venom.   On  every  side  there  was  a  herd-like  hate
for  the  one  man  trying  to  do  something  about  the  arms  race.
Mr.  Stassen  was  constantly  humiliated   and  slowly  demoted.
Perhaps  nothing  hurt  him  so  much  as  a  reputation   for   being
able  to  get  along  with  the  Russians,  a  misfortune  in  a  capital
where  the  dirtiest word  is co-existence.   His  career  is commen-
tary  on  Mr.  Eisenhower's  protestations  of  our  purely  peaceful
intent.
3  I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  24,1958
An Exclusive: Nobel Prize Winner Linus Pauling Answers  Edward Teller's ...
By  Dr. Linus Pauling
The  article  on  "The  Compelling  Need  for  Nuclear  Tests"
by  Drs.  Edward  Teller  and  Albert  Latter   in  Life,   Feb.  10
contains  serious  false  statements  and  misleading  statements,
unworthy  of  a  scientist  with  the  great  cleverness   and  long
experience  of  Dr.  Teller,  who  can  hardly  have  been  unaware
of  their  nature.
For   example,  the   second  sentence   of  the   article  reads
"The  petition  [to  the  UN  from  9235  scientists  of  44  nations,
including  36  Nobel  Laureates  and  many  others  of  the  most
distinguished   scientists  in  the  world]   said  that  the  tests
were  endangering  both  the  present  population  of  the  world
and  generations  yet  unborn  and  declared  that  an   agreement
to  stop  the  testing  is  now feasible."    In  the  next  paragraph
the  authors  say  about  this  statement  and  a  statement  about
clean  bombs  (which is  not  in  the  petition)  that  "These  state-
ments  are  not  true.   The  statements  are  at  best  half-truths
and  they  are  misleading  and  dangerous."
An Unethical  Distortion
But  in  fact  the  petition   did  not  say  that  the  tests  are
endangering   the   present   population   and   generations   yet
unborn.   The  statement   by  Drs.  Teller   and  Latter  is  abso-
lutely  false.   It  is  of  course  a  clever  technique,  though  un-
ethical,  to  attribute  to  your  opponent  an  untrue  statement
that   he  has  not  made  and  then  to  devastate  this   untrue
statement.   I  am  shocked that  two  scientists,  Drs.  Teller  and
Latter,  should  in  this  way  have  demeaned  themselves  to  the
level  of  the  unscrupulous  politician.
Life    did   not   publish   247  words  of   the   scientists'   peti-
tion  to  the  UN—this  short  text  could  not  be  fitted  into  the
5000-word  article.   [The  text  was  published  in  this   Weekly,
Jan.  20—IFS].  The  million  of  readers  of  Life   were not made
aware  that  the  statement   in  the  article  that   "the   petition
said  that  the  tests  were  endangering  both  the  present  popu-
lation  of  the  world  and  generations  yet  unborn"  is  an  untrue
statement.   In  fact,  the  petition  says  "Each  nuclear  bomb
test  spreads  an  added  burden  of  radioactive  elements   over
every  part  of  the  world.   Each  added  amount  of  radiation
causes  damage  to  the  health  of  human  beings  all  over  the
world  and  causes  damage  to  the  pool  of  human  germ  plasm
such  as  to  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  seriously
defective  children that  will  be  born  in  future  generations."
The  tests  themselves  do  damage  to  the  health  of  human
beings  and  the  pool  of  human  germ   plasm,  as  Drs.  Teller
and  Latter  know.  The tests  cause  an  increase  in  the  amount
of  human  suffering;  but  at  the  present  rate  of  testing  they
do  not  endanger  the  world.   It  is  a  great  nuclear  war  that
would  endanger  the  world,  and  would  be  a  catastrophe  to
all humanity.
Must Be Read With Caution
The  tone  of  the  article  by  Drs.  Teller  and  Latter  is  set
by  their  second  sentence.   Every  sentence  in  it  must  be  read
carefully  and  interpreted  with  caution.   For  example,  in  the
subheading  of  the  article  it  is  stated  that  "Fallout  risk  is
overrated,"   and  a  reader   of  the  article  may  be  given   the
impression  that  fallout  risk  has  really   been  overrated.   He
would  have  this  impression  because  Drs.  Teller   and  Latter
give  only  comparative  figures—they  talk  for  example  about
the   small  percentage   increase   in  the  number   of  births  of
defective   children,   but   do  not   give   any   estimate   of   the
actual  number  of  defective  children  that  may  be   expected
to  result  from  the  bomb tests.
Let  me  discuss  the  estimates  that  have  been  made  of  the
genetic  damage from  the  nuclear  tests.   At  the  present  time
75  million children  are  born  in  the  world  each  year.   About
2  percent  of  them,  1,500,000  per  year,  are  seriously  defec-
tive  because  of  bad  heredity.  The  bad  genes  that  they  have
inherited   from   their  parents  cause   these   children   to   have
serious  mental   deficiency,   or  a   serious   hereditary  disease
such  as  cystic  fibrosis  of  the  pancreas   or  muscular  dystro-
—Frank  X.  Boyle  (co-creator  of  Barnaby).
"Take  Us  to  Your  President!"
phy  or  hemophilia,  or  serious  malformation,  such  as  achon-
droplasia   (dwarfism)   or  missing   limbs  or  organs.
All   geneticists   agree  that  high-energy   radiation,  includ-
ing  that  from  fallout  radioactivity,   causes  bad  genes.   The
estimate   has  been  made  that  so  long  as  testing   continues
at  the  present  rate  the  gonads  of  a  human  being  will  re-
ceive  an  exposure  of  about  0.1  roentgen  from  fallout  radio-
activity  during  a  period  of  30  years   (the  average   age  of
parents  when  a  child  is  born  is  thirty).   This  estimate  was
published  in   1956  in  the   report   of  the   National  Academy
of   Sciences—National  Research  Council  Committee  on  Bio-
logical  Effects   of  Atomic  Radiation.   Dr.  W.  F.  Libby,  the
physical  chemist  who  is  one  of  the   commissioners   of   the
U.  S.  Atomic  Energy   Commission,  agrees;   he   has   given
0.03  to  0.15  roentgen  as  his  limits  of  the  value.
During  the  first  30  years  of  life  the  gonads  of  a  young
man  or  woman  receive  about  3  roentgen   of  exposure  from
natural   sources  —  cosmic  rays  and  natural  radioactivity.
This  exposure  is  unavoidable.   It   is  the   cause  in  part  of
the  mutations  that  produce  the   bad  genes   in  the   pool  of
human  germ  plasm.
If  mutations  were  produced  only  by  radiation,  the  fallout
radiation   would  cause   about   a   3-percent    increase   in   the
mutation  rate.  If,  however,  as  most  geneticists  believe,  only
a  fraction  of  the  natural  mutations  are  due  to  radiation,
the  fallout  radiation  will  produce  a  correspondingly   smaller
increase.   The  geneticists  of  the  NAS-NRC  committee  esti-
mated  variously  that  the   amount   of  exposure  that  would
double  the  mutation  rate  is  somewhere  between  3  roentgen
and   180  roentgen.   If   180  roentgen   were  right,  the   fallout
effect  would  amount  to  only  0.05  percent  increase   in  muta-
tion  rate.  Drs.  Teller  and Latter  give  the  value  0.1 percent,
very  close  to  the  minimum  estimate.   I  myself   estimate  1
percent,  10  times  as  much.   The  true  value  might  be  some-
what  larger  than  my  estimate,   or  perhaps  smaller.
If  testing  were  to  be  continued  indefinitely  and  the  num-
ber  of  mutant  genes  being  produced  were  accordingly  to  be
increased  by  1  percent,  a  steady  state  would  ultimately  be
set  up  in  which  the  number  of  defective  children  born  would
also  be  increased   by  1  percent;   that  is,   15,000   additional
seriously   defective  children  would  be  born  each  year.   The
birth  of  a  seriously  defective  child  is  calamity  for  the   par-
ents  and for  the  child  himself.   The birth  of  15,000  additional
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, February  24,1958
... Recent  Life Magazine Article on "The  Compelling  Need  for  Nuclear  Tests"
defective  children  per  year  would  not  endanger  the  human
race;   but  it  is  our  moral  duty  to  strive   to  prevent   even
such  a  minor  increase  in  the  amount  of  human  suffering.
Let  us  assume that  testing  of nuclear weapons is continued
at  the  present  rate  for  another  24 years,  and  then  stopped.
This  would  give  a  total  period  of  30 years  of  intensive  test-
ing.   The  number  of  seriously  defective  children  that  would
be   caxised  to  be  born  as  a  result   of  the  fallout  mutations
when  then  be  30  x  15,000  or  450,000,  according to  my  esti-
mate.   Estimates   of  others,   such   as   Professor   James   F.
Crow,  are  similar.
The  present  rate   of  testing  amounts  to  about   10  mega-
tons  of  fission  per  year.   This  is  the  amount  of  fission  that
is  involved  in  the  explosion  of  a  large  superbomb,  such  as
that   exploded  by  the  United  States   on  1  March  1954.  We
may   say,  then,  that  the  testing  of  a  single  large  super-
bomb  is  done  at   the   sacrifice   of  somewhere  around  15,000
children.
The Damage  to the Living
Geneticists  agree  rather  well  in  their  estimates  of  genetic
damage,  but  there  is  less  agreement  as  to  the  magnitude of
the  somatic  damage, damage to  the  health  of  human  beings
now  living, as  a  result  of  fallout  radioactivity.   There  is  no
doubt  that  fallout  radioactivity,  like  other  atomic  radiation,
produces   leukemia,   bone   cancer,  and   other   diseases,   and
causes  a  significant  shortening   in  life,  when  the   exposure
is  large.   The  question  at  issue  is  whether  a  small  amount
of   radiation,  100  times  smaller,  has   a   100  times   smaller
chance  of  producing  leukemia  and  other  diseases,  or  whether
it  is  harmless.   The  evidence  on  this  point  is  far   from  con-
vincing.    Some   scientists   say   that   they   feel   that    small
amounts   of  radiation  do  not   do  any   harm   at   all.   Other
scientists,  of  whom  I  am  one, think  that  it  is  highly  prob-
able  that  a  small  amount  of  radiation  has  a  correspondingly
small,  but  not  zero,  chance  of  causing  leukemia  and  other
diseases.  The  reason  for  this  belief  is  that  it  is  known that
some  of  these  diseases  involve  changes  in  the chromosomes,
which  also  are  involved  in  genetic  mutations,  and  it  seems
accordingly  probable  that  the   little  bullets  of   high-energy
radiation  have  a  somatic  effect  similar  to  the  genetic  effect.
In  any  case, many  scientists  have  pointed  out  that  so  long
as  the  question  is  undecided  we  would  be  wise  to   assume
that  somatic  damage  is  done.
Radiation  causes  a  decrease  in  life  expectancy  in  human
beings  that  has  been  estimated  in  various  ways  to  be  about
10  days  per  roentgen.   The  average  fallout  exposure  of  0.1
roentgen  in  30 years  would  correspond to  about  0.2  roentgen
in  a  lifetime,  and  hence  to  an  average   decrease  in  life  ex-
pectancy  of  2  days.   Drs.  Teller  and  Latter  say  that   the
reduction   in   life   expectancy   from   world-wide  fallout    at
present  levels  totals  less  than  2  days.   (They  also  say  that
if  tests  continue  at  the  present  rate,  radiation   levels  might
increase  as  much  as  five-fold,  which  suggests  that  the  de-
crease  in  life  expectancy  might  ultimately  become  greater.)
The Decrease  in Life  Expectancy
A  decrease  of  2  days  in  life  expectancy  might  be  con-
sidered  negligible.   Drs.  Teller  and  Latter  point  out  that  a
wrist  watch  with  radioactive   dial,  gives  radiation   exposure
comparable  to  that  of fallout, that  a  life-long  habit  of  smok-
ing  one pack  of  cigarettes  per  day  cuts  down  life  expectancy
by  7 years,  and  that  there  are  other  factors  associated  with
life  in  the  modern  world  that  decrease  life   expectancy.   I
might  say  that  very  few  people  in  the  world  wear  wrist
watches  with  radioactive  dials,  and  there  probably  will  be
fewer   in  the  future,  and  also  it  is  only  for   the  cigarette
smoker  that  life  expectancy  is  cut  down  by  the  smoking of
cigarettes,  and  that   a  cigarette   smoker  is  a  man  who  is
willing  to  take  the  chance  of  dying  of  lung  cancer—I  myself
do  not  smoke.  But  I,  like  everybody  else  in  the  world now,
am   being   subjected   to   damage   by   fallout   radioactivity,
3  *
damage  that  may  cause  me  to  die  from  leukemia  next  year.
A  decrease  of  2  days  in  life  expectancy  might  not  be  con-
sidered  a  serious  matter  if  it  meant that  every  person  would
die  2  days  earlier  than  otherwise.   But  let  us  consider  what
death  by  leukemia or  bone  cancer  or  other  disease  means.
One  of  the  people of  a  group  of  2500  may  happen  to  have
the  bad  luck  of  having  one of  his  molecules damaged  by  fall-
out  radiation  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  him  to  die  of  leu-
kemia  or  other  disease,  and  the   other   2499  might   not  be
harmed  at  all  by  the  fallout  radiation.   The  first  man  may
die   BOOO  days  before  he  would  have  died  if  the  bomb  tests
had  not  been  made;  his  life  expectancy  will  have  been  short-
ened  by  10,000  days,  or  14  years,  and  the   other   2499  not
shortened  at   all.   This  amounts  to  an  average  decrease  in
• life  expectancy  of  2  days  per  person.   There  are   2500  mil-
lion  people  in  the  world,  and  accordingly  we  may  conclude
that,  if  testing  is  continued, it  may  cause  1  million  people
now  living  in  the  world  to  die  10  or  15  or  20  years  earlier
than  they  would  have  if  the  bomb  tests  had  not  been  carried
out.    We  may  say  that  we  would  be  sacrificing  1  million
people  of  the  present  generation  to  the  bomb tests,  if  they
were  to  be  continued for  another  24 years,  about  200,000  to
the  tests  already  made.
Let  us  convert this  figure  to  an  annual  basis.   If  we  take
60  years  as  the  mean  life  expectancy  of  people  in  the  world
(this  corresponds  to  our  taking  0.2  roentgen   as  the  mean
exposure),  we  find  that  the  number  of  people  who  will  die
10 or  15 or  20 years  earlier  because of  damage  done  by bomb
tests  is  about  15,000 per  year.    The  present  rate  of  testing,
10  megatons  of  fission  per  year,  corresponds to  the   testing
of  a  single  large  superbomb each  year.   We  may  accordingly
say  that  the  testing  of  a  single  large  superbomb  involves
the  estimated  sacrifice  of  about  15,000  children, who  will  be
caused   to  be  born  with   serious  defects,  and  about  15,000
other  human  beings,  who  suffer   somatic  damage  from  the
fallout radioactivity.
If  These Were Bullets
It  has  been  pointed out  from  time  to  time  that  if  the  bul-
lets  of  radioactivity were  not  so  tiny  that  their  effects  could
not  be  noticed,  and  if  the  nature  of  the  damage  were  not
such  that  no  individual defective  child  or  individual  sufferer
from  leukemia or  bone  cancer  can  be  pointed  out  as  having
suffered   from   damage  by  fallout  radioactivity  rather   than
background  radiation  or  some  other  cause,  but  instead  were
large  bullets,  which  caused the  immediate  and  unmistakable
death  of  15,000  or  even  1000  human  beings  when  a  bomb
test  is  carried  out,  public  opinion  would  be  aroused  in  so
vigorous  a  way  that  the  bomb tests  would  soon  be  stopped.
Can  it  be  that  we  are  so  lacking  in  imagination  and  in  the
ability  of  abstract  thought  as  to  continue  to  carry  out  the
tests  of great bombs?
Dr.  Teller  argues  in  support  of  continuing  nuclear  tests
because  he  believes  in  war,  in  nuclear  war.   He  is  working
for  a  future  in  which world  problems  are  settled  by  nuclear
wars,  fought  in  such  a  way  (he  hopes)  that  the  terrible
weapons  kill  great  numbers  of  young  men  in  the   armies,
and  only  a  few  civilians  (only  a  few  million).
I  believe  that  war  is  immoral,  and  must  be  eliminated.
I  believe  that  there  will  never  be  a  great  nuclear  war.   I
believe   that   the   present   stockpiles   of   nuclear    weapons,
powerful  enough  to  destroy  the  world,  really  are  deterrents,
as  our great national leaders  say.   But if  they  are  deterrents
—if   they  prevent  war—then  they   do  not   solve  the  world
problems.    These  problems  must  be  solved  in  another  way
—by  long-continued negotiation,  arbitration,   development  of
an  effective  system  of international  law,  and  at  first  by  inter-
national  agreements  that  are  acceptable  to  all  nations  and
that  benefit  all  nations  and  all  people.  My  9234  fellow  scien-
tists  and  I   (with   Drs.   Teller   and  Latter   objecting)   pro-
pose  that  we  begin  the  new  era  of  peace  and   international
law  by  making  an  agreement  to  stop  bomb  tests.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  84, 1958
Some  Pointers  Which  Show  Washington's  Indifference  or Hostility  to  Exploratory  Talks
The  Home-Made  Gremlins  Which  Haunt  Our  Ambassador   in  Moscow
The  President's  latest  letter  to  Bulganin  says  quite  correctly
that  "exchanges  of  views  effected  through  our  Ambassadors"
are  preferable  to  polemics  in  preparing  for  a  summit  meeting.
But  it  is  disturbing  to  notice  that  Ambassador  Thompson,  re-
turning  to   Moscow   after   two   weeks  of   consultations   here,
"brought  no. instructions to  sound  out Kremlin  thinking"  (dis-
patch   from   Moscow,   N.   Y.   Times,  Feb. 14).  Three  days
earlier  Mr.  Dulles  at  press  conference  also  said  in  answer  to
a  question  about  the  Ambassador,  "He  has  no  present  instruc-
tions,  no."  One  get  the  impression  that  Washington  is  in  no
hurry  about  exploratory  talks.
Glorified  Messenger  Boys
The  absence  of  instructions must  be  evaluated  in  the  frame-
work  of  the  realities  within  which  the  Ambassador  must  op-
erate.  A  sketch  of  him  in  the  New  York  Times  Sunday maga-
zine  of  January  26  hinted  at  his  difficulties.   It  said  that  as  an
old  hand  at dealing  with  the Russians, Mr.  Thompson   believed
the  way  to  get  results  was  "through   informal  unpublicized
talks."  But  in  recent  years, the  article  said,  Ambassadors  "have
tended  to  become  expensive  messenger  services  for  the  Secre-
tary  of  State"   and  that  "more   and  more  decisions  on  even
comparatively  minor  matters are  taken  in  Washington  and  re-
layed  to  the  field."»This  is  the  same kind  of  rigid  overcentrali-
zation   of   which  Western   diplomats   justifiably   complain  in
dealing  with  the  Soviet  Foreign  Service.
At  times  Washington   seems  deliberately to  make  our  Am-
bassador's  task  more  difficult.   Much  is  said  of  the  need  for
talks  without  publicity.  But  when  the  Ambassador on  the  eve
of  his return  had  a  talk  January 23 with  Foreign  Minister  Gro-
myko,  it  was  disclosed  the  very  next  day  at  a  press   conference
ir;  Washington  and  pictured  as  discouraging.   "When  a  re-
porter  noted,'-'  said  the  New  York   Times  account  (Jan.  25),
"that  it was most unusual for  the  State Department to  disclose
the  content of  such diplomatic discussions,"  the  spokesman  ex-
plained  this was  done  in  deference to  the  wide  interest in  the
prospects  for  a  summit meeting.   The  Department  is  rarely  so
deferential  to  public curiosity.
This  unusual  press  conference  seems  to  have  disturbed  our
Embassy  in  Moscow,  too.  The  day after  the  conference a  cable
What  A  Little  Error Could  Do
"American   commanders   throughout   the   world   are
empowered   to   reply   when   their   units   are   menaced.
One  may  presume  the  same  is   true   for   Soviet com-
manders.   In  this  era  of  cold  war,  is  it  not  possible  for
human  error  to  creep  in  .  .  .  ? We know  already  of  two
tense   moments   when   we   thought   Soviet   aerial   ar-
madas  were  on  the  offensive—one   toward  the   United
States,  once   over  Turkey.   Both   were   false   alarms."
—C. L. Sulzberger,  New  York  Times,  Feb. 15
"A  sizeable  number  of  SAC's  bombers  are  always  on
the  alert  .  .  .  and  in  15  minutes  scores  of  B-47's  and
B-52's  can be  ...     on  their  way  toward  Russia.   Such
emergency   take-offs   actually   have   been   made   when
radar   screens    indicated   (falsely)   large    numbers   of
unidentified  planes  approaching  our bases. ...
"Our  reaction  time   [when   missiles   come  into   serv-
ice]   will  then  be  still  further  reduced,  and  the   defense
will  be  confronted with  a  terrible  question.   Are  those
blips  on  the  radar screen  moving  toward our  shores  the
real  thing?   Is  the  enemy  attacking—or  are  the  blips
as  they  have  been  so  often  in  the  past,  merely   elec-
tronic  'ghosts',  mysterious   phenomena  that  clutter  up
the  radar  screen  with  false  alarms?  .  .  .  Recall—once
the  missile   is  launched—is   impossible.   .  .  .
"Col.  Harvey  W.  Shelton  put  the  problem  in  sharp
perspective  in  an  article  in  last  summer's  issue  of  the
Air  University  Quarterly  Review:  .  .  .  'Imagine  a  two-
way    intercontinental    exchange    of    ballistic    missile
forces  that  was  triggered  off  by  one  radar  which  could
not   tell   the   difference   between   a   meteorite   and   an
ICBM."
—Hanson  W.  Baldwin, New  York  Times, Feb. 4.
from  Moscow  (see  p.  2 New  York  Times  Jan.  26)  said  Gro-
myko's  response  had  been  "neither  discouraging  nor  encour-
aging,"  reported that  Ambassador Thompson  thought  the  best
way  to  make  progress  was  by talks  "outside  the  glare  of  pub-
licity  and  propaganda"  but  added  significantly,  "Some  persons
in  Washington   apparently  have  not   been  convinced   of   the
advantage  of  that  approach."    Or  are  not  particularly  inter-
ested  in  its success.
IFS  Speaks  on  the  Barenblatl-Gojack   1st  Am.  Cases  This  Fri. Night  Feb. 28  in  Carnegie  Recital  Hall,  NYC
1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name    .............................
Street    .............................
City    ...................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
......Zone............State...~...............
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
2/24/SB
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  G    No  D
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  IS,  D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F'.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  I).  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15.  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Btuue ;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  St
K   In  til   U.   S. ;  $6  In  Canada ;  110  elsewhere.
.                                    .
.  Stone.    Subscription :
Air   11*11  rates :  115  to  Bnrope ;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED