I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jun02.pdf

============================================================

New  Blow at  the  Witch-Hunt,  P.  4
On  Foreign  Policy:  Isn't  It  About  Time  the  Democrats  Got  Rid of  Dean  Acheson?    See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  21
JUNE  2,  1958
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
There's  A  Fighting  Chance  Now  to  End  Nuclear   Tests
I(  would  be  very  unwise  to  assume  from   the  Eisenhower-
Krushchev   exchange   on   technical   talks   that   a   cessation   of
testing   is  "in   the   bag."    The   enemies   of   an   agreement   in
London   and   Washington   are   powerfully   entrenched.    The
President's   letter—touched   in   the   ugly,   "your  side,"   "our
side"   style  in  which  our  military  negotiators  at   Panmunjom
avoided  mentioning Communist  China  by  name—specifically
reserves   "our   respective   positions  on   the  timing  and   inter
dependence   of   various   aspects  of   disarmament."    But   the
icepack   in   which   humanity's   hopes   have   been   tightly  im-
prisoned  is  cracking  and   now  is  the  time  for  all  good   men
—in  every  forum  they  can   reach—  to  press  hard  for   an  end
of  testing.
Strauss Influence  Slipping
The   hopeful  point  at  the  moment  is  the  composition  of
the  team  we  will  send  to  Geneva.   Unlike  our  solidly  pro-
AEC  delegation  on  the  United  Nations  Scientiiic  Committee
on   Effects   of   Atomic  Radiation,  this  new   three  man   team
reflects   Admiral  Strauss's  waning  influence.    Dr.   Ernest   O.
Lawrence,  Dr.  Teller's  faithful  comrade-in-arms, and  a  right-
ist  in  his  political  preconceptions,  is  securely  in  the  Strauss
camp.   But  Robert  F.  Bacher,  the  second  member  of  the  new
team,  is  not.    As  a  member  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commis-
sion  from   I94f>   to   1949,  he  opposed   the  decision  to  make
the  H-bomb.    He  is  as  distinguished  a  physicist  as  Dr.  Law-
rence  but  quite  different  in  his  approach.  The  third   member,
Dr.  James  Brown  Fisk,  a  former  director  of  research  at   the
AEC  in   1947-48,  is  less  well  known   but   regarded  as  con-
servative  and  objective  by  those  who  worked  with  him.   Dr.
Bacher  and   Dr    Fisk   are   both   members  of   the    President's
Science   Advisory  Committee,  which  has  already  decided  by
majority   vote   (so   it   is  privately  reported   here)   that   a   test
cessation  with  inspection  would   be  to  this  country's  interest.
Where  Dr.   Fisk   stood   on  this   is  not  known,   but   there   is
reason   to  suspect   that  this  three   man   team   was  picked   —
typical   Eisenhower   fashion—to   keep   everybody   happy   and
that  Dr.  Fisk  is  the  "neutral"  whose  vote  may  be  decisive.
The  danger  is  that  technical  talks  on  the  problem  of  de-
tection   may   distract   attention   from   the   real   issues.     Mr.
Elsenhower's   letter   to   Premier   Krushchev   said   tartly   that
he   hoped   the   Soviet  team  would   also   be  chosen   "on   the
basis  of  special  competence,  so  as  to  assure  that  we  get  scien-
tific  not  political  conclusions."   This  is  snide,  silly  and   mis-
leading.   The  truth  is  that  the  issues  are  political,  not  scien-
tific,   as  the   UN   Scientific   Committee   on   Effects   of   Atomic
Radiation—now   preparing   its  final  report   for   July   1—has
discovered.   In  approaching   the  problem   of   radiation's   dan-
gers,  as  in  that  of  inspection's   efficacy,  the  real  question   is  a
choice  of  risks  and   this  choice  is  determined  by  moral   and
Wonderful...  But  Unfortunate
Miss  O'Connor:  Admiral,   President   Eisenhower   has
proposed   within   the   next   three   weeks   Western   and
Soviet  experts  begin   talks  on  inspection  of   a  nuclear
test  ban.   How  do  you  feel  about  this  proposal?
Admiral  Strauss:  1  think  it  is  very  wonderful.  .  .  .
1  am  not  opposed  to  the  cessation  of  testing.  .  .  .  On
the  other  hand,  the  cessation  of  testing,  alone,  is  not  a
very   constructive   step  to   eliminating   the   danger   of
atomic  war. .  .  .
-Miss  O'Connor:  I  would  like  to  know  what  would  be
the   consequences   lor   our   defense   posture  should   we
suspend  testing  this  year.  .  .  .
Admiral  Strauss:  I  think  under  these  circumstances
we  would  freeze  our  development  of  defensive  weapons
at   about   their   present   point,   which   is   in   the   very,
very  early  stages.
Miss   O'Connor:   You   think   this   would  have  tragic
consequences?
Admiral  Strauss:   1  hate   to   use   the   word  "tragic."
1  think  from  a  military  point  of  view,  from  a   defense
point  of  view,  it  would  be  unfortunate.  .  .  .
—Ruth  Hagy's   College  Netvs  Conference,    ABC-TV,
May  24.
political  preconceptions.   According  to  an  exclusive  story  out
of  the  United  Nations  by  Milt   Frc-udenheim  of  the   Chicago
Daily   News,   the   UN   Committee  has   discovered   that   nu-
clear   test   radiation   is  harmful   to  world   health   and   future
generations  but  cannot  agree  on  its  final  conclusions   because
these   involve   political   considerations  which   some   members
feel    is   beyond   its   province.  The    truth   is   that   no    one
knows   just   how   and   to  what  degree  radiation   is   harmful.
Those  who  believe  in  the  arms  race and  deterrence  think  the
risk   justifiable;   those   who   see  war   as   the   inevitable   result
of  an  arms  race  think   we  run  the   risk   for   no  good   reason.
Press  for  Hearings  on  The  Porter  Bill
This   is  a   question   the   average   man   is  as  equipped   to
answer  as  the  scientist.  Have  we  a  right  to  poison  the  lives
of  some  now  living  and  many  more  to  be  born  in  the  future,
all   for   the   sake  of   carrying  on   an  endless  arms   race  that
makes   all  humanity  vulnerable  to   accident   and   miscalcula-
tion?   Now  is  the  time  Io  bring  the  whole  country  into  the
debate  and  the  best  vehicle  is to  press  the  Joint  Congressional
Committee   on   Atomic   Energy   to   hold   public   hearings   at
once  on  Congressman  Charles  O.  Porter's  (D.,  Ore.)   bill  to
end  nuclear  testing.   The  AEC,  after  bottling  up  the  bill  for
months,   has   just   sent   an   unfavorable  report   on   it   to   the
Joint   Congressional   Committee   on   Atomic   Energy.     The
number  is  HR  8269.    Press  your  Senators  and   Congressmen
to  bring  it  out  for  public  hearings.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  2, 1958
Four  Years  Ago  Jenner  and  Butler  Were  Trying  to  Safeguard  Judicial  Independence
How  Liberals  and  Reactionaries  Have  Switched  Sides  on  the  Supreme  Court
The  dark  unmentionable  in  the  current  Senate  debate  over
the  Supreme  Court  is  that  in  four  years  the  reactionaries   and
the  liberals  have  completely  reversed   positions.    The   consti-
tutional  amendment  introduced  on  behalf   of  the  liberals  by
Javits  on  May  1 to  protect  the  Court  from  a  hostile   Congress
may   be   found   word-for-word   in   a   broader    constitutional
amendment  sponsored  by Butler  and  supported  by Jenner  four
years   ago.    Now   Butler  and   Jenner   have   fathered   bills   to
restrict  the  power  of  the  Court  and  the  liberals  are  backing
an  amendment  to  make  such  legislation  unconstitutional.   But
four   years  ago,  on  May  11,   1954,   when   this   same   amend-
ment  (embodied  in  a  Butler  bill,  SJ  Res.  44)   was  passed  by
the  Senate  58  to  19,  the  reactionaries,  including  Jenner   and
McCarthy   were   for   it,   while   the   liberals—including   Hen-
nings,  Humphrey  and  Morse—voted  solidly  against  it.
This   is  no   mere  historical  quirk—a   believe-it-or-not   for
the   legal  annalist.   On   the   contrary  it   illustrates   a  funda-
mental  fact  about  Supreme  Court  controversy.   Such   switches
are  familiar.   Ever  since  the  Republic was  founded,  the  party
or  faction  against  which  the  Court  ruled  has  tended  to  fight
judicial  supremacy,  i.e.  the  Court's  power  to  declare   acts  of
Congress   unconstitutional.   The   Court's    beneficiaries   have
been  its  defenders.   But  one  year's  defenders  often  turn  out
to  be  next  year's  critics.   Few  love  any  umpire  long.    In  the
1930's  it  was  the  New  Dealers   (including  people  like  my-
self)   who  attacked   the  Court   because  it  had   been   vetoing
new   social  and   economic  reforms   as  unconstitutional.     Jen-
ner's  position  now  was  our  position   then.
They  Feared  A  New  Court  Packing  Plan
This  past  history  explains  that   Butler  bill  of   four   years
ago.   When  the  Republicans  in   1953,   for  the  first  time   in
20  years,  took  over  the  Presidency  and  control   of   Congress,
they  remembered  that  experience  of  the   30's  and  wanted   to
make  it  impossible  for   a  future  New   Deal  to   "pack"   the
Court  (as  FDR  almost  did)   or  to  restrict  its  jurisdiction.   So
early  in  1953  Butler  (R.,  Md.)   introduced  a  bill  for  a  con-,,
stitutional   amendment  to   protect   the   Court   from   a   future
FDR.   This  bill  provided  (1)   that  the  Court  should   always
have  nine  members,  (2)    that   all  Justices   (this  was  to  get
rid  of  New  Dealers  like  Black  and  Frankfurter)   must   retire
at  75,  (3)   that  no Justice  (this  was meant  to  stymie Douglas)
might  resign  to  run  for  President  or  Vice  President  and   (4)
amended  Section  2,  Article  III,   of  the  Constitution   to  take
away   from    Congress   its   power   to   regulate   the   appellate
jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme   Court.
If  that  proposed   amendment  had  not  been  buried  in  the
House,  if  it  had  passed  and  been  ratified,  this  year's  Jenner
bill  would  have  been  wholly,  and  the  current  Butler  substi-
tute  for   it  partially,  unconstitutional.   The   Jenner  bill  was
framed   to  "reverse"   recent  liberal   Supreme   Court  decisions
by  withdrawing  from   it  jurisdiction  to  hear   appeals  in  five
classes  of  cases:  contempt  of  Congress  as  in   Watkins,  State
sedition   prosecutions   like   Steve  Nelson's,   Federal   employe
loyalty-security   cases   like  Cole,  State  school  witch  hunts   as
in  Slochower,  and  admission  to  the  bar  cases  like  those  of
Konigsberg  and   Schware.   The   Jenner   bill   aroused  the  al-
most  unanimous  oppostion  of  the  bar  as  too  raw  an  invasion
of   judicial   prerogatives   so  Butler   put   in   a   substitute,   the
pending  S  2646,   to  do  the  same  things  more  subtly.   The
liberals  of   the   Senate,  in  their  fight  to   block   such   legisla-
tion,   are   now   sponsoring  a   constitutional  amendment   (SJ
Res  169  by Javits, Clark,  Hennings,  Langer,  Neuberger,  Prox-
mire,   Humphrey   and   Morse)    to   take   from   Congress   its
power   to   regulate  the   appellate   jurisdiction   of   the   Court.
Thus  both  sides  in  four  years  have  reversed  positions.
The  Court  They  Defended  Was  Vinson's
Four  years  ago  when  the  Senate Judiciary Committee  under
Jenner  favorably  reported  this  amendment  to  the  Senate,  the
Court  stood  high  in  the  affections  of  the  right.   The  day  the
Butler  bill  passed  the  Senate,   Warren   had   been   Chief   Jus-
tice  less  than  three  months;  no  one  dreamed  how  liberal  the
court  would  become  under  his  leadership.    The  school  segre-
gation  decision  had  not  yet  been  handed  down   (it   came  six
days   after   the   Butler   bill   passed).    The   Supreme   Court,
Butler  and  Jenner  knew  was  the  Vinson  Court,  on  which  a
Truman   majority   had   operated   as  the   faithful  arm   of   the
cold  war  and  its  attendant  witch  hunt,  validating  the  Smith
Act  and  refusing  to  interfere  with   Congressional   investiga-
tions  as  run  by  Walter  and  McCarthy.   The  Butler  bill  was
allowed  to  die  in  the  House  and  never  revived  in  the  Senate
when  it  became  obvious  that  the  Court  was  liberal  again.
We'll  have  more  to  say  about  the   Court  fight  as  it  un-
folds.    This,   our   opening   chapter,   is  not   meant   to   breed
cynicism  but  is  told  in  the  interests  of  honesty,  and   perhaps
also  to  humble.   It  may  even  have  a  moral.   The  longer  per-
spective   may   teach   both   sides   that   they   have   a   common
interest   in  maintaining  the   Court   as   an   independent    and
respected   expounder   of  fundamental  principles.'  The   august
mechanism  which  protests  a  capitalist  one  year  may  protect
a  communist  the  next.
The   Somersault   by   Senate   Judiciary   and  Butler  from   1954  to  1958
"The   Founding  Fathers  were  especially  concerned  about
the  independence  of  the  judiciary.  .  .  .  Under  this  resolu-
tion,  the  opinions  of   the  Supreme  Court  could  not  be  in-
fluenced  by  packing,  or  decimation,  of  its  membership.   Nor
could   its   appellate   jurisdiction   in  constitutional  cases  be
removed.  .  .  .  The  Supreme   Court   has  rightly  assumed  a
position  of  pre-eminence  in our constitutional  system.  . .  ."
—Butler  (R.   Md.)   favorably   reporting  from   the  Senate
Judiciary   Committee   (Rpt.    No.  1091,   83d  Cong.  2d  Seas.),
SJ  Res.  44,  to  safeguard    the  independence   of  the  Supreme
Court,  March  24,  1954.
"This   [section  2  Article  III  of  the  Constitution,  giving
Congress   power   to  regulate   the   appellate   jurisdiction   of
the  Supreme  Court]  is  one  of  the  check  and  balance   pro-
visions  of  the  Constitution ...  a  protection  againslt  at-
tempted   usurpation   by   the   Court   of   legislative   preroga-
tives,  or  improper  invasion  of   the  rights  reserved  to  the
States  .  .  . which  the  Congress  is  in  duty  bound  to  protect."
—Butler  (R.   Md.)   favorably   reporting  from   the  Senate
Judiciary   Committee   (Rpt.    No.  1586,  85th  Cong.  Sd  Seas.)
S.   2646,  "Limitation   of   Supreme   Court  Jurisdiction   and
Strengthening   of  Anti-Subversive  Laws,  May   15,   1958.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  2,1958
Urgent  Memo  to  the  Advisory  Council  of  the  National  Committee
Isn't  It  About  Time  the  Democrats  Got  Rid  of  Dean  Acheson?
We   like  Dean   Acheson  personally  and   acknowledge   his
gifts  but  believe he  has  become  an  incubus  on  the   Democratic
party.   It  cannot  hope  to  strike  out  constructively  in  the  field
of   foreign  policy,  and  to   offer   voters  an  alternative  to   the
Republicans,  until  it  finds  some  tactful  way  to   remove   the
former   Secretary  of  State  from  the  chairmanship  of   its  Ad-
visory  Committee  on  Foreign   Policy.   He   is  a  road-block   to
progress—affable,   urbane,   cultivated   but   really   as   wooden
Indian  in  his  rigidity  as  his  old  opposite  number,   Molotov.
Those  who  think  this  verdict harsh  should  write the  Demo-
cratic  National  Committee  (1028  Connecticut  Avenue,  Wash-
ington,  D.  C.)   and  obtain  for  themselves  the  first  in  a  series
of  pamphlets  the  Advisory  Council  has  just  published   (lOc)
on  "Foreign   and  Military  Policy  for  Peace  and  Security."    It
was  written  by  Mr.  Acheson  and  then  revised  by  him  after  a
rather  stormy  meeting  behind  closed   doors  of  the  Advisory
Council.   The  revisions  haven't  helped   much.
That  Familiar  Condescension
In  the  first  place   this  pamphlet  is  written  down,   in   the
condescending   "Auntie  Knows   Best"   manner   to  which   Mr.
Acheson  became  habituated  at  the  Sttae  Department.   There
is  an   insufferable   smugness  about   it  that  is  redolent   of   the
Department.   In  the  second  place,  though  billed   as  a  recom-
mendation  for  policy,  and  though   criticizing  the   Republicans
for   failing  to  think   and   to  educate  on  foreign   affairs,   this
pamphlet   is  extraordinarily empty.    It   offers   nothing   but   a
return  to  the  cold  war  and  prolonged   world   tension.
Other   men  on   the   Advisory  Council   of   the    Democratic
party,   Senator   Humphrey,  former   Senator   Lehman,   Senator
Mansfield,  and  Estes  Kefauver  have  shown  in  recent  months
a  real  capacity  to  do  fresh   thinking  and   offer   fresh   leader-
ship.   There  are  any number  of  capable  people  on  the  foreign
policy   advisory   committee   who   must   find   Mr.   Acheson's
approach  unpalatable.   Why  must  Mr.  Acheson,  just  because
he  was  Secretary  of  State,  be  allowed  to  hold   down  the  lid
on  new  ideas?   The  impact  of  the  Kennan  lectures  last  winter
showed   what   some  independent  thinking   could   do  for   the
party;   Mr.   Acheson's   reply   to   those   lectures   reflected   an
undercurrent  of  personal  jealousy  on  his  part  that  a  former
"underling"    should   attract   so  much   attention.    He   regards
foreign  policy  as  his  private  preserve.
One  looks  in  vain  in  this  pamphlet,   as  one  looks  in  vain
to  Mr.  Acheson,  for  answers  on  the  urgent  problems  of  pol-
icy.   He  is  blank  on  testing,  on  disarmament,  on  disengage-
ment,   on   the   frozen  situations  in   Germany   and   Formosa.
The  Geneva  summit  meeting  was  "ill-timed."   The  only  thing
approaching   a   recommendation   is  for   a   sharp   step   up   in
arms  spending.
In  addition  the  pamphlet  lacks  the  courage   to  be   honest
on  two  crucial  topics.   One  is  neutralism.   The  discussion   on
page  9  of  what  the  "free  world"  means  shuts  its  eyes  to  the
real  problem   of  dealing  with  peoples   and   nations  who   do
not  want  to  come  under  Communist  domination  but  do  not
want  to  become  American satellites,  either.   One  would   never
guess   from   the   oversimplified   discussion   by   Mr.    Acheson
that  there  are  forces  in  Britain  and  France  resentful   of   our
dictation  and  non-Communists   like  Nehru   who  see  the  only
,  hope   of   world   peace  in  preventing  the   polarization   of   the
planet  between  Washington   and  Moscow.
What  They're  Afraid  to  See
The   second  point,   even  more  serious,   is  the   analysis  of
why  Russia  has  made  such  giant  strides  in  industrial  devel-
opment.    Mr.   Acheson  gives  three  reasons:   (1)   restriction
of   consumption,   (2)   modern  equipment  and  (3)   first   class
technical  brains.   This  overlooks  the  essential  point.   Without
State   ownership   of   industry   and   economic   planning,   this
progress  would  have  been  impossible.   The  Republicans  can-
not,  the  Democrats  dare  not,  recognize  this.    It  clashes   too
openly  with  national  shibboleths  about   "free   enterprise."
Yet  in  arguing  for  higher  arms  expenditures  on  page  15,
Mr.  Acheson  makes  a  curious  and  cryptic  remark  in   passing,
though  he  puts  it  in  demagogic  form.   He  says  "The    world
of  big  business  has  no  faith  in  the  power  of  democratic  in-
stitutions  to  inspire  and   direct  the  growth   of   national  pro-
ductivity,  as  they  have  done  again  and  again  in  our   history."
Forced   draft   industrial   expansion   in   accordance   with   an
economic   plan  was  the   feature  of  • the   War   Industry    Board
in  World  War  I  under  Baruch,  and  of  the  expansion  initiated
by  Truman   in  the  wake  of  the  Korean  war.   American  so-
ciety,  too,  can  plan  for  expansion  and  must  learn  to  do  so.
The  problem  is whether  we  can  do  it  for  peaceful  purposes
and   not  just  in  war  or  arms  races,  where  it  is  accompanied
by  a  highly  profitable inflation.   "It   is  the  duty  of  all  Demo-
crats,"  says  the  Acheson  pamphlet,  "to  think  long  and  hard."
This  is what  they  had  better  think  hardest  and  longest   about
if  the  U.  S.  is  not  to  be  outdistanced ultimately  by  the  USSR.
Either  mutual   suicide  through   war,  or  we   must   learn   eco-
nomic  planning,  too,  for  our  own  benefit  and  the   world's.
Civil   Liberties   Blind   Spots  in  George  Meany's   Vision
From  a  civil  liberties  point  of  view,  there  were  two   con-
trasting  points  in  George  Meany's  testimony  on  pending
labor   reform   legislation   May   22  which   did   not   get   the
attention   they   deserved.   The  first  was  his  opposition  to  a
law  which   would   guarantee  regular  secret  elections  in  all
trade   unions.   The  other  was  his   odd  way  of  coming  out
for   repeal   of   the   non-Communist    oath   provisions  of   the
Taft-Hartley    Act.
Mr.  Meany  said  the  non-Communist   oath  no  longer  served
any  useful   purpose  "if  it  ever  did."   He  said  those  unions
in  which  there  was  still  Communist   influence  were  the  ones
which   were   "most  meticulous   about   filing   non-Communist
affidavits"   and   that   this   was   recognized  by   Congress   in
1954  when  it  gave  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board
power    to   blacklist   "Communist    infiltrated"    unions.    Mr.
Meany   said   current   SACB  proceedings   against   suspected
unions  made   the  oath  unnecessary.
So  here  we  have  the  head  of  the  AFL-CIO  opposed  to  a
simple  law  to  guarantee  free  union  elections  but  endorsing
by  implication  a  much  more  complex   measure  which  allows
the  government  to  interfere  in  internal  union  affairs  and  to
determine   which  unions  shall  be  blacklisted  as  "Communist
infiltrated,"  not  dominated,  notice,  but  merely  "infiltrated."
The   potential   danger   to   the   labor   movement   should   be
obvious.    In  a  new   McCarthy   period   the   SACB  could  be
used  with  wide  and  deadly   effect.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's   Weekly,  June  2,19SS
Supreme   Court  6-3  Reverses   Lower  Courts   in  Michigan  Cause  Celebre
Restoring  the  Saner  Spirit  of  15  Years  Ago   in    Denaturalization
The   Supreme   Court's   6-3   decision   in   the   Nowak    and
Maisenberg  cases  sets  up  strict  rules  of  proof  in  denaturaliza-
tion.    It   holds   in   effect   that   proof   of   membership   in   the
Communist  Party  at  the  time  of  naturalization  is  not  enough.
There  must  be  proof  that  the  alien  had  personally  advocated
overthrow  of  the  government  by  force  and  violence  or  had
personal   knowledge   that  this  was  one  of   the   aims   of   the
part)'.   And  the  proof,  must  be  "clear,  unequivocal  and  con-
vincing"—words   quoted   by  Mr.   Justice   Harlan   from   the
similar  Schneiderman  decision   15  years  ago.        ,
In   denaturalization,  as  in   Smith   Act   and   other   sedition
prosecutions,  a  majority  of  this  court  is  not  prepared   to  con-
demn  people  out  of  hand  merely  because  membership  in  the
Communist   party  is  proven.   There   must  be  proof   that   the
accused  personally  was  culpable.   This   was  the  spirit  of   the
decision  by  Mr.   Justice  Murphy  in   1943   reversing   the   de-
naturalization    of    the    Communist  William   Schneiderman.
To   have   much   the   same   ruling   in  these  new   cases   is  an
earnest  of  this  Court's  determination  to  stem  the  witch  hunt.
Borrowing   from  Czars  and  Coi;imissars
Denaturalization  is  a  first  step  to  deportation.    It  is  ban-
ishment  as  a  political  punishment.   It  represents  the  ugly  en-
crustation  on   a   free   society  of  habits  associated  in   the   past
only  with  tyrannical  regimes.    It   is  a  violation  of   the   Bill
of  Rights,  since  it  inhibits  foreign  born  citizens  from   freely
using  their  freedoms  of  political  activity.   But  this  violation
is  masked   by  basing   the   denaturalization  on   alleged   fraud
in  obtaining  citizenship.  It   is  difficult   here  to  draw  a  First
Amendment   line.    The   next   best  thing   is  strict  procedural
protection,   astringent  insistence  on   unequivocal  evidence.
The   facts  of  these  cases  illustrate  the  justice  of   resolving
doubts  in  favor  of  the  accused.   Stanislaw  Nowak   came  here
at  the   age  of   10,  became  a  citizen  in   1938,   was  five  times
elected   to   the   State   Senate  of   Michigan,   where   he   served
with   distinction  from   1938   to   1947.    The  denaturalization
proceedings   begun   in   1952  were  based   on   evidence   which
had   failed   to   stand  up   after   a  grand   jury   proceeding   ten
years  earlier.   Aside  from  the  allegation  of  Communist  party
Other  Victims   Who  May  Be  Helped
Among  the  persons   likely  to  be  helped  by  the  Su-
preme   Court's  decision   in  the  Nowak   and   Maisenberg
cases  are  32  politicals  on  whose  behalf   Frank   Donner
filed  a  brief  amicus  in  the  Nowak  case.    These  32  are
all   persons   against   whom  the  government   has  begun
denaturalization  proceedings.
The   32  are   Isidore   Begun,   Daniel   Boano,   Louis   J.
Bra verm an,  Arthur  Bartl,  Joseph  Chandler,  Charles  A.
Collins,    Richard    Lawrence   Davis,    Anna    Devunich,
Freeda   Diamond,  David   Diamond,  Sarah   Finkel,   Leo
Fisher,  Max  Hattung,  Victor  J.  Jerome,  James   Lustig,
Salvatore  Lauranti,  James  J.  Matles,  Celia  Feller   Mil-
ler,   Anthony   Minerich,   Steve   Nelson,   Paul   Novick,
Gunnar   Paulson,   Clara   Paulson,   Sol   Almazov   Pearl,
Constantine   Radzie,   Alex  Roth  Rakosi,  Al   Richmond,
Isaac   E.   Ronch,   Allan   Ross,   James   E.   Toback   and
Louis  Weinstock.
membership  in  the  30's,  there  is  nothing  against  his  record,
which  is  more  than  can  be  said   tor   the  same  of   the   queer
characters  among  the  witnesses  against  him.
Against  the  Record  of  A  Lifetime
Mrs.  Maisenberg came  here  in  1912  at  the  age  of  11.   She
was   naturalized   in   1938.     "Petitioner   has   no   criminal  rec-
ord."    Her   case  like  former   State  Senator  Nowak's   empha-
sizes  the  humanity  of  words  Mr.  Justice  Harlan   quoted   from
Mr.  Justice Murphy.   The  latter  said  the  requirement  of  un-
equivocal  evidence  was  an  especial  obligation  on  the  govern-
ment  "wnen   the  attack  is  made  long   after   the   time   when
the  certificate  of  citizenship  was  granted  and  the  citizen  has
meanwhile  met  his  obligations  and  has  committed   no  act  of
lawlessness."
That   this   requirement  of   strict   proof    makes    successful
denaturalization   in   most   pending   radical   cases   unlikely   is
itself   evidence   of   how  tenuous  have   been  the   excuses   for
the   deportations   and   denaturalization   "delirium"   in   our
time  (to  borrow  from  the  title  of  that  brave  book  Louis  F.
Post  wrote  about  the  similar  wave  in  the  early  twenties).
Clark,  Burton  and  Whittaker  dissented.
Don't   Forget   to   Renew   Before    You    Go   Off   for   Summer   Vacation   Please
I.  F. Stone's
Please  renew  (
Gfrctat
City    ................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street    ...........
City   ...............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,   5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
............. ............Zone............State........... .........
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
9/2/ie
...................... ....Zone.. .......... State.. ..................
gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  Q
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Kntereil   us   Second   Class   Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every   Thursday  excepl   the-  last  two  Thursdays  oi  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15. D.  C.
An   Independent   weeklv   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther    M.  Stone.    Subscription:
?5   In   tb   U.  S.;   $1!  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  (SO to   Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED