I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jan13.pdf

============================================================

Standard  Oil  Statesmanship
The  Rockefeller  Report;  Hell  Bent  for  Limited  Nuclear War and A  Bigger  Arms  Race,  Pages  2 & 3
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  2
JANUARY   13,  1958
<
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The Ultimate Weapon Illusion and the Ultimate Weapon
We   Americans  are  not  a  warlike  people.   We   are  accus-
tomed  to  think  in  terms  of  gadgets   and  money.   When   we
have  a  problem  we  think  of  solving   it  with   "the   best  that
money  will buy,"  i.e. the  best  mechanical contrivance  designed
to  solve  that  problem.  We  think  of  war  in  the  same  way,  and
it  is  natural,  therefore,  that  we  should   look  for  a  contrivance
so  good  that  it  would  be  the  "ultimate  weapon,"  finally  solv-
ing  the  problem  of  war.
This  ultimate  weapon  notion  first  made  its  appearance  on
the  eve  of  World   War  II  in  the  idea  of  victory  by  airpower.
After  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  we  thought  of  the  atom  bomb
as  the  "ultimate  weapon,"  so  destructive  that  its  terror  would
police   the   world.    The   next   candidate  was   the   hydrogen
bomb   and   soon   after   it  the  intercontinental  ballistic  missile
with  an  H-bomb  warhead.   Now  the  word  being  spread  out-
ward  from  State  Department   and  Atomic  Energy  Commission
—but  curiously  enough  to  a  much  more  limited  degree  from
the  Pentagon,   which  is  closer  to  war  and  less  simple-minded
about  it—is  that  the  new  ultimate  weapon  would  be  an  anti-
missile  missile,  which  could   stop  and  destroy  the   ICBM  in
mid-course.   We  are  being   told   that  we  dare  not   negotiate
disarmament  and  cease  nuclear  testing  until  we  have  it,  this
final  and  ultimate  It,  which  will  make  us  secure.
The Rabbit's  Foot in Mechanical Guise
This  idea  of   the  anti-missile  missile   also  appears  in   the
Rockefeller  Brothers  Fund  report  which  we  discuss  on  pages
two  and   three.    With   it  goes   the   companion   idea  that   if
someone  else  gets  the  ultimate  weapon  before  we  do,  we  will
be  in  mortal  peril.   They  will  press  the  button  and  we  will
be  destroyed.   This  is  basically  a  civilian  view  of  war,  since
war   is  a  bloody   non-mechanical   not-so-easy   business   which
ends  with  foot  soldiers  slogging  it  out  in  the  mud,  and  it  is
also  a  superstitious  view,  akin  to  a  belief   in  talismans   like
the  rabbit's  foot.   Between  the  two  companion  appeals  to  fear
and   superstition—"we'd   better   not   negotiate   until   we  buy
that  magic  new  weapon  and  we'd   better  watch  out  or  They
will  get  it  first"—disarmament  may  be  stymied.
It  is  important  to  attack  the  ultimate  weapon   delusion  on
two   planes,   the   general   and  the   specific.   On   the   general
plane,  it  is  clear  that   the  trouble  with   ultimate   weapons   is
that  they  don't  stay  ultimate  very  long.   What  one  side  dis-
covers  first,  the  other  side  soon  has,  too,  and  then  both  seek
to  end  the  stalemate  with  some  new  wonder  or  anti-wonder.
There  is  always  a  new  ultimate  weapon  just  around  the  cor-
ner,  and  eventually  they  all  turn  out  not  to  be  ultimate  after
all.   Postponing   arms  negotiations   until  we  get  the  ultimate
weapon  means  postponing  them  until  the  millenium,  which  is
indeed  the  preferred  date  of  the  State  Department,   the  AEC
and  most  of  the  Pentagon.
On  the  specific  plane  of  this  particular new  ultimate  weap-
on,  the  anti-missile  missile,  there  is  already  reason  to  suspect
—some  three  years  and  eight  billion  dollars  before  we  even
get  it—that  it  is  a  good  deal  less  than  ultimate.   The  anti-
missile  missile  depends  on  the  current  weakness  of  the   bal-
listic  missile.   A  ballistic missile,  one?  catapulted  into  the  air,
follows  a  fixed  course  or  trajectory.   The  entire  curve  can  be
plotted,  once  part  of  it  is  charted.   Theoretically—because  of
this  weakness—it  should  be  possible  by  building  enormously
complex  radar,  mechanical  computer  and  electronic  firing  de-
vices  to  plot  the  track  of  an  ICBM  within  a  few  minutes  of
its  launching and  then  fire  off  an  anti-missile  missile  to  cross
that  path  and  destroy  the  ICBM   in  the  skies  before   it  can
reach   its  target.   Since  it  would  only  take  an  ICBM  a  half
hour  between  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.,  the  mechanism
would  have  to  be  faster  than  anything  man   ever   conceived.
It  would   take  not   just   money  but   the   diversion   of   much
limited  scientific  energy  and  brainpower  to  perform  this  tre-
mendously  difficult   technological  feat.
Why  They're  So Anxious To Man The Rocket
But—and  this  is  the  crucial  But—what  if  the  course  of  a
ballistic  missile  could   somehow   be   changed   in  mid-flight?
Then  all  these  calculations would  misfire.   What  if  the  ICBM
could  start  off  aimed  apparently   at  one  spot   and   then   veer
off   unexpectedly  to  hit  another?   We   don't  want  to  burden
the  reader  with  technical  details  but  this  is  now  a  possibility.
(See   London   Sunday   Times,   Dec.    15;   article   on   Manned
Rocket  Aircraft  in  the  November  issue  of  Missiles  and  Rock-
ets  and  Scripps-Howard   writer  Jim  Lucas's  interview  in  the
Washington   Daily  News  January  2  with  Major  General   John
W.   Sessums,  Jr.,  vice  commander  of   the  Air   Research  and
Development   Command  who  warned  that  the  U.  S.  "could
make   a   serious   mistake"   if   it   invests   heavily   in   the  anti-
missile  missile  as  an  "ultimate"  defense  against  the  ICBM).
By  adding  fins  for   "boost-glide"   control  or  by  manning   the
rocket,  its  trajectory  could  be  changed   in  mid-course  and   the
anti-missile  missile  evaded.    Here,   indeed,   lies  the  military
significance  of  the  current  race  to  put  a  man  on  the  rocket.
We  do  not  bring  all  this  up  to  argue  for  one  form  of  de-
fense  or  another.   That  is  for  the  military  experts.   We  only
bring  it  up  to  show  that  long  before  we  can  build  this   (as
yet  non-existent)  new  Ultimate  Weapon,  we  can  already  see
its   Ultimacy   challenged   and   made   obsolete.   To   argue   for
postponement  of  arms  talks  until  we  have  this  new  Wonder-
Monster  is  only  another  way  of  arguing  for  a  perpetual  elec-
tronic   arms   race  with  all   its  crushing   cost   and   inevitable
catastrophe.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  13,  1958
Timed  for  Opening  of  Congress  and  to  Stymie  Drive  for New  Talks
The Rockefeller Report  Casts Doubts  on Any Kind of World Disarmament...
The  bleakest  portion  of  the  Rockefeller  Brothers  Fund  re-
port  on  the  arms  problem  is  also  the  portion  to  which  least
attention  has  been  paid.   This  is  its  discussion  of  disarmament.
Perhaps  this  is  because  the  disarmament  section  was  glossed
over  rapidly  in  the  prepared   summary,  and  most  newspaper-
men  probably  depended   on  the  summary.   It  was  the  text  of
this  summary  rather  than  of  the  full  report  itself  which  the
New   York   Times  reprinted.   The  striking  omission  from  the
summary  was  the  opposition   to  any  ban  on  nuclear   testing.
The   report   breaks  the  subject  of  disarmament  down   into
four  parts  and  devotes  itself  to  arguing  that  little  progress  is
possible  on  any  of  them.   The  four,  as  it  outlines  them,  are
the  reduction  of  forces,  the  control  of  arms,  the   prevention
of  surprise  attack  and  the  end  of  nuclear  testing.   Not   only
the  stress  but  the  content  is  negative.   Here,  from  the  report
itself,  is  the  essence  of  the  discussion.
Reduction  and  control  of  arms:   "difficult   to  negotiate  be-
cause  it  seeks  to  compare  unlike  quantities.    What  for   ex-
ample  is the  relationship  between  the  U.  S. Strategic  Air Com-
mand  and  the  ability of  Soviet  ground  forces  to  overrun  near-
by  countries? ...  If  the  United  States  disbanded  its  Strategic
Air  Command,  it  would  take  a  decade  at  least  to  reconstitute.
The  Soviet  Union  can  demobilize  parts  of  its  vast  army  and
still  retain  the  ability  to  reassemble  it.  .  .  ."   As  for   nuclear
arms,  "so  much  fissionable  material  has  been  produced   and
it  is  so  easily hidden  that  no  control  scheme  could  completely
guarantee  against  a  violation."
How  Police  the   Laboratories?
.And   if  that  isn't  pessimism  enough,  here  is  the   coup   de
grace:  "A   reduction  of  armaments  is  not  meaningful   unless
it   contains  safeguards   against   violations   of   the   agreement.
But  effective  control  has  been  complicated  by  the  increasingly
rapid  advance  of  technology.    Scientific  research  and   develop-
ment  can  decide  the  armament  race.   Hence  no  reduction  in
standing  armies,  however  scrupulously  carried  out,  can pro-
tect  a  nation  against  a  technological   development  which  dras-
tically  changes  the  strategic  balance.   The   fact  that  so  much
of   the  armaments  race  occurs  in  laboratories   makes  control
and  inspection  more  and  more  complex.   It  is  difficult  to  find
something  when  one  does  not  know  what  one  is looking for."
What   about   preventing   surprise   attack?  The   report   is
equally  dubious  about  that.    "In  the  age  of  the  Inter-Conti-
nental  Ballistic  Missile,  which  is  close  upon  us,"  the  report
says,  "the maximum  warning  time  afforded  by  even  a  perfect
inspection  system will  be half  an  hour,  the  period  of  time  the
missile  will  be  in  transit.   Under  su.h  circumstances,   even  a
fool  proof  inspection  system  will  tell  largely  what  is  already
known:  that  the- opponent  possesses  the  capability  to   launch
a  devastating attack  on  very short  notice  and  with  a  minimum
of  warning."                               .
"Said  To Be" Hazardous
Nuclear  Testing:  On  this,  the  report  echoes  all  the  familiar
arguments  of  the  Atomic Energy  Commission.   "Nuclear  tests
are  said,  to  be,"  the  report  admits,  "a  hazard  to  the  health  of
all  people  and  of  generations  yet  unborn;  and  they  are  repre-
sented  as  leading  to  ever  more  horrible  weapons"   but  "there
is  much  evidence  to  indicate that  past  tests  have  had  a  much
smaller  effect  on  public health than  any  other  biological  effects
to  which  mankind  is  constantly exposed."   (Italics  added).
Then  there  reappears the  idea  put  forward  last  Fall  by  Mr.
Dulles  at   the  UN   General   Assembly,  that   to   ban  nuclear
tests  would  be  positively  injurious  to  the  cause  of  making war
more  humane.
A Bomb That  Discriminates
"As   long   as  the   production   of   fissionable  material con-
tinues,"  the  Rockefeller  report  argues,  "an  end  of   weapons
testing  would  probably  ensure that  any future  war  would  take
the  most  extreme  form.   It  would   have  to  be  fought   with
weapons  in  their  present  state  of  development  and  past  tests
on  both  sides have concentrated  on  the  most  powerful  devices.
Conversely,  s nee  the  most  destructive weapons  have  already
been  tested,  further  tests will  enable  us  to  use  nuclear  arms  in
a  more  discriminating manner  .  .  .  may  enable  us  to  reduce
radioactive  fallout  to  the  point  where  we  will  become increas-
ingly  able  to  confine any war  which  may be forced  upon  us  to
our  opponent's  war  machine.   And  it  may  make  possible  the
development  of  nuclear  anti-aircraft  or  anti-missile  weapons."
Any  hope?   We  must always "stand  ready,"  the  report  says,
"to  negotiate  on  the  issues  that  divide  the  world   including
disarmament.   But  until  the  Soviet  Union  has  shown  a  greater
willingness  to  settle  these  disputes  on, terms  other  than   her
own  .  .  ."  we  must  keep  our  nuclear  powder  dry.  On   the
other  hand  even  if  the  Soviet  Union  was  prepared   to  settle
those  issues  on  our  terms,  the   best  the   report  can  offer   —
again  echoing  the  State  Department   —  is  "There  are  many
problems  such  as  German  unification or  Soviet  subversive  ac-
tivities  in  the  Middle  East  which,  if  resolved,  would   greatly
ease   tensions  and   thus  almost   automatically   bring   about   a
reduction  of  arms."     (Italics  added).
Seduction and Slavery
All  this  is  garnished  with  a  phase  which  recalls  the  melo-
drama  of  the  1890's  and  the  rhetoric  of  every war.  We  must
not,  the  report  warns,  "be  seduced  by  Soviet  slogans  which  in
the  past  have  used  these  negotiations   as  a  means  to  disarm
their  intended  victims.  The  nature  of  disarmament  must  be
understood   if  peace  and  not  slavery  is  to  result  from   efforts
to  attain  it.  ..."
The  only  glimmer; of  hope  in  the  report  is  on  finding  some
means  to  keep  war  limited,  but  even  here  the  way  is  blocked
by  the  Soviet  Union,  which  apparently  wants  to  maintain  the
view  that  war  is  necessarily  dangerous!    "It  seems  doubtful,"
is  how  the  report  puts  it,  "that  ground  rules  for  the  conduct
of   limited  war   could   be   established   by  mutual   agreement,
since  in  order   to  undermine   the  will   to   resist,   the   Soviet
Union   has   every   interest   in   painting   the   consequences   of
resistance  in  the  direst  terms."
The  report's  one  proposal  is that  we  make  a  unilateral  dec-
laration  to  give  "an  indication  of  some  of  the  steps  we pro-
pose  to  follow  to  achieve  the  goal  of  reducing  non-combatant
casualties,  such  as  a  decision  to  use  weapons  without  sub-
stantial  fall-out  effects"  in  the  hope  that  this  would  "give  an
opponent  a  strong  incentive to  follow  suit,"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  13, 1958
Wants  Limited  War  Machine  to  Make  Intervention   Safe  in  the  Nuclear   Age
. . . And  Asks  Heavier  Arms  Expenditures to  Protect  Investments  Abroad
All   this  pessimism  about   disarmament  and   this  yearning
for   limited  nuclear  war  will  be  familiar   to   readers  of   Dr.
Henry  A.  Kissinger's   book,   Nuclear  Weapons  and  Foreign
Policy.   It  is  not  at  all  surprising  to  find  that  Dr.  Kissinger
was  in  charge  of  preparing  this  new  report  as  director  of  the
Rockefeller   Brothers   Fund   project  nor  that   the   Rockefeller
panel  which  worked   on  it  interlocks  with  the  panel  at   the
Council   on   Foreign   Relations   from   whose   discussions   the
Kissinger  argument  for  limited  nuclear  war  developed.   Six
men—Frmk   Altschul,  Gordon   Dean,   Roswell  L.  Gilpatric,
General   James   McCormack,   the   late   Frank   C.   Nash   and
Carroll  L.  Wilson—served  on  both   panels.
Allen   W.   Dulles,   director   of   the   Central    Intelligence
Agency,  has  long   been   a  leading  figure  in  the   Council   on
Foreign  Relations,  which  set  up  the  earlier  limited  war  study
group.    The  new  panel,  according  to  the  New   York    Times
(Jan.  6)   "took  testimony from  officials  in  the  State  and  De-
fense   Departments   and   the   Central   Intelligence    Agency."
The  nature  of  the  direction, of  these  briefings  ("testimony"),
of  the  auspices  and  of  the  personnel  channelled  the  conclu-
sions   into  a   replica   of   well  known  State  Department   and
Atomic  Energy  Commission  views.
Only  Cold  War Minds  Represented
No   one  who  speaks  as  Stassen,  Kennan  or  Bradley   does
was  on  the  panel.   The   only  scientist  on  it  w,    >  Dr.   Edward
Teller;  the  only  newspaperman,  Henry  W.   Lu're.   Both   have
long  seen  eye to  eye with  the  Dulles  brothers,  and  the  Dulles
brothers  with  the  Rockefeller  brothers.   David  Rockefeller  is
a   vice  president  of   the   Council   on   Foreign   Relations   and
served  on  the  earlier  "limited  nuclear  war"   panel   it  set  up.
The  most  damaging  aspect  of  the  report  to  the  Rockefeller
interests  themselves   is  its  stress  on  the   need   to  deal   with
what  it  calls  "non-overt"  aggressions.    These  are  defined  by
the  report   (p.   33)   as  "transformations  which  are  made  to
appear,  insofar  as  possible,   as  not  aggression   at  all.   These
'concealed  wars'   may  appear   as  internal   revolution   or   civil
war. ..."   In  short  this  is  a  plea  for  military  means  to  deal
with  internal  changes  threatening  American  business   interests
abroad.
"Massive  Retaliation"  Now  Feared
There  seems  to  be  a  close  relationship   between  a  desire  to
provide  a  means   for   American   military   intervention   against
social  revolution  and  the  desire  to  find  a  means  for  waging
limited  nuclear  war,  i.e.  war  which  can  be  waged   safely   at
a   distance  without   precipitating   a   third   world   war   which
would  be mutual  suicide.   "Massive  retaliation"  is now  feared.
From  this  same  pattern   derives  the  report's   recommenda-
tions  for  radical  change  in  the  military  setup.   It  wants  three
combined   commands,  one  for   continental   defense,   one   for
all-out  war,  and  one  for  limited  war—in  effect,  three  military
establishments  in  place  of  one.   The  reform  is  logical,  since
the   conventional   divisions  of   war-making  have   disappeared
and  entirely  different   equipment  and  training  is  needed   for
these  three  dissimilar  tasks.
Freedom—As in Venezuela
Limited  nuclear  war,  for  example,  requires  large  numbers
of  transports  and  parachute  troops  which  could  be   dropped
into  an  Iran,  or  a  Venezuela—wherever   American  interests
such  as  Standard  Oil  are  endangered  by what  this  report  calls
"non-overt  aggression,"    i.e.   social   upheaval.    An   enormous
increase  in  expenditure  and  an  enormous   increase   in   world
tension  are  entailed  by  such  military  planning  and   national
policy,  and  both  are  for  the  benefit  of  the  Rockefeller   inter-
ests.   The  recent  revolt  in  Venezuela,  where  Standard  Oil  has
long  supported  one  of  Latin  America's  most  brutal   dictators,
provides   a  revealing   backdrop   for   this   Rockefeller   report's
plea  that  we  spare  no  expense  "in  the  defense  of   freedom."
Standard PR  Techniques
To  bring  about  this  change  in  policy  the  Rockefeller  Broth-
ers  have,   in  accordance  with  techniques  well   understood   in
the  public  relations   business,  brought  together   an   assortment
of   "leading   citizens,"  college  presidents  and  other   worthies;
given  them  a  one-sided  briefing  in  the  dangers  of  disarma-
ment  and  the  need  for  greater  arms,  and  brought  forth  for
Monday  morning  release  the  week  Congress  met  a  report  de-
signed   to   precipitate  scare   headlines,   prod   larger   military
appropriations  and  block  disarmament talks.
It  is  a  pity  that  when  we  are  fighting  to  scrap  old  stereo-
types  in  the  struggle  for  that  sense  of  common  humanity  on
which  world  survival  depends,  that  the  Rockefeller  Brothers
have  come  up  with  something  which  so  closely  resembles   the
caricature   of   monopoly   capitalists  sacrificing   world   welfare
to  private interest.
For  Stassen — All  the  Rancor  That's  Fit  to  Print
For  the  Enemies  of  Disarmament — Madison  Avenue Hoopla
"Well,  the  floodgates  of  gab  are  already  opened.    Harold
E.  Stassen,  the  beleaguered   Presidential  specialist  on  dis-
armament,  means  to  talk  to  the  National   Security   Council
this  week.   Mr. Stassen  wants  the  President  to  take  a  more
ope-  -handed  attitude  toward  negotiating  with  Moscow  than
Mr.  Dulles  can  tolerate.    Washington's  wise-money   is  on
Mr.  Dulles;  the  betting  is  that  Mr. Stassen  will  be  out  of
work  before  Congress  is  warmed   up."
—New   York   Times,  Washington  Notes,  Jan.  6.  p.  24
".  .  .  the  Rockefeller  Brothers  Fund  report ...  is  one of
the  most   thorough   and  solemn  analyses  of  the  West's  se-
curity  problems ...  by  some  of  the  best  and  most  experi-
enced  minds  .  .  .  they  have  no  policies  to  defend  or  politi-
cal  motives   to  protect  .  .  .  well-informed  private  citizens
.  .  .  acting  the  way  responsible  citizens  of  a  democracy  are
expected   to  act  .  .  .  not  waiting  for  Government  to   lead
but  .  .  .  analyzing  and  recommending  on  their   own."
—James  Reston, "The  Rockefeller  report,"  same  day,  p. 21
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Janitary  13, 1958
Liberal  Trend  Continues  in  Supreme  Court;  What   Readers  Can  Do  About  the  Blacklist
A  New  Attorney  General  Makes  His  Debut  Without  Mentioning  Reds
How  times  have  changed!   .  .  .  When  the  new  Attorney
General,  William   P.  Rogers,  appeared  here  at  his  first  Na-
tional   Press  Club  luncheon,   he   stressed   conventional  issues
—the  fight  against  organized  crime,  congestion  in  the  courts
—said  nothing  about  the  fight  against  Communism,   though
J.  Edgar  Hoover  was sitting  beside  him  on  the  platform.  .  .  .
Only  one  question  touched  remotely  on  what  a  few  years  ago
would  have  been  treated  as  the  No.   1  issue.   In  reply  to  a
question  about  the  Labor  Department  program   for  revising
Taft-Hartley,  General  Rogers  said  he  would  of  course  support
it,  including  repeal  of  the  non-Communist  oath.  .  .  .  Only  a
few   days  earlier,  in   his  annual   report,   FBI   Chief    Hoover
(with  an optimism equalled,  if  at  all, only  by Wm.  Z.  Foster)
said  the  Communist party had  "emerged  from  hiding with  re-
newed   confidence  and   determination"  thanks  to   its  having
been  "heartened  by  a  growing  public  complacency  toward  do-
mestic  threats  to  America's  internal  security.  .  .  ."
Including Whittaker and Clark
Another  bitter  pill  for  the  Red-hunting  Old  Guard  was  the
Supreme  Court's  decision  in  the  Heikkinen  case,  which  frees
an  elderly  Finnish  American editor  in  Wisconsin  from  a  five
year  prison  sentence.  .  .  .  He  was  ordered  deported   in   1952
because  he  was  a  member  of  the  Communist  party  from   1923
to  1930  and  then  convicted  in  1953  of  violating  the  new  self-
deportation  provisions  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  of   1950.
.  .  .  The   evidence  indicates  Immigration  Service  trickery  in
this  McCarthy  period  prosecution.  .  .  .  Heikkinen  did  noth-
ing  about his  deportation because  he  had  been  informed  orally
and  by  letter  that  the  Immigration  service  was  arranging  it.
.  .  .  The  Court  held  unanimously that  there  was  not  enough
evidence  of  "willful"  failure  to  have  warranted  submission  of
the  case  to  the  jury  at  the  original  trial.  .  .  . The  decision was
unanimous;  it  was  written  by  the  new  Mr.  Justice  Whittaker,
perhaps   the   most   conservative  member   of   the   Court,   and
joined  in  by Tom  Clark on  whom  the  Immigration Service  and
the  FBI  rely  for  sympathy. .  .  . No  fundamental constitutional
issue  was  touched  upon  but  the  decision  was  a  psychological
blow   for   the   government  and   is  another  indication  of   the
clearing  atmosphere. ...  A  similar  blow  may be  in  store  for
Questions  Some  Senator  Ought  to Ask
Stewart   Alsop's  column   of   January   5  accuses   the
National   Security   Council  and  the  President  of   ignor-
ing   Central   Intelligence    Agency    information.    Alsop
paints  Allen  W.  Dulles  as  a  man  who  had  been  getting
" 'hard'  intelligence   on  Soviet  missile  progress  as  long
ago  as   1952,"  only   to  have   his   CIA   reports   ignored.
Alsop  does  not  mention  the  fact  that  three  weeks  be-
fore  the  first  Sputnik,  on  September   19,  Allen   Duties
told  the  Advertising  Council  in  San  Francisco  the  So-
viets   were  "beginning   to  encounter   difficulties   in   cop-
ing  with  the  complex  industrial  and  technological   prob-
lems  of   today."    Was  Allen  Dulles  ignoring   his  own
CIA  reports,   too?
the  State  Department's   high  handed  passport  procedures;  the
Court  has  agreed  to  hear  the  appeal  of  the  physicist,  Dr.  Wel-
don  Bruce  Dayton,  blacklisted  at  home  and  refused  (on  secret
evidence)   a  chance  to  do  work  in  India.  .  .  .
What  Readers Can Do
The   appropriation   for   the   Hennings   subcommittee   (of
Senate  Judiciary)  on  constitutional  rights  runs  out  on  Janu-
ary   31  and   the   subcommittee  will  then   become   moribund,
although  provided   for   by  the   Reorganization   Act   of    1946.
.  .  .  Why  not  write  Senator  Hennings  and  the  Senators  of
your   respective  States   suggesting   that   the   subcommittee  be
given  a  new  appropriation  and  a  new  lease  on  life  to  study
the  impact  of  unfair  loyalty-security  procedures  on  the  short-
age  of  scientists  and  teachers.  .  .  .  The  Democratic   Digest
for  January,  in  an  article  on  Nixon  and  Pals  vs.  The  Scien-
tists,  picks  up  the  story  we  told  in  recent  issues  of  what  hap-
pened  to  Dr.  Edward  U.  Condon   and  the  scientists  at  Fort
Monmouth;  copies  of  those  issues  and  of  the  issue  in  which
we  told  case  stories   of   blacklisted   science  teachers   in   New
York   City  are  available  for   use  with   letters  to  the   Senate.
.   .  .  Now   that  the  Democrats   are  making  an   issue  of   the
Oppenheimer  and  Condon   cases,  why  not  complete  the   job
and  launch  a  really  thorough  Senate  investigation  of  the  lives
wrecked  and  talents  lost  through  witch  hunt  practices which
hang  on,  despite  a  lighter  atmosphere.  .  .  .
That  Holiday   Gift   Sub   Offer    Remains  Good  Through  January—Why   Not  Send  the  Weekly  to  Your  Minister?
Fifth  Anniversary  Dinner
The  Weekly  first  appeared  on  January   17,
1953.    On  Friday,  January  17,  New  York  Read-
ers  are  giving  the  Weekly  a  5th  birthday  dinner
at  the  Port  Arthur  Restaurant,  7-9  Mott  Street,
New  York  City.    This  will  not  be  one  of  those
mass   produced  hotel   dyspepsia   producing    din-
ners   but   a   10-course   Chinese   banquet.     The
price  is  $3.     Send  check  with  advance   reserva-
tions  to  the  Weekly.     There  will  be  informal
speeches  by   IPS  and   others   and  a  free-for-all
discussion.    It  should  be  a  memorable  and  de-
lightful   evening.
I.F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Ntbraskt  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  0.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I        !•'    Stone's   \VcekH-.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.   C.,  under  tlie  Act   of   March  3.   1879.    I'nst-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every 'Thursday  except   the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Anrust  and  December  at  5018  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W..   Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   iu<li'|i"iiil«iit   weekly   published  and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:
*r.  in   tin-   IT.  M  :  *fi   In  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  S15  to  Bnrow:  J20  to  Israel.  Asia  ui  d   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED