I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jan27.pdf

============================================================

Coupling  NAACP   with KKK,  P. 3
The  Myth  That  The  Soviets  Promised  German  Reunification  at  Geneva,  See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  4
JANUARY  27,  19B8
«<"       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Has the  House  Un-American  Committee  Been  Abolished?
A  week  after   the  Watkins  decision  last  June,  the   U.  S.
Supreme  Court  vacated  the   conviction  of   Lloyd  Barenblatt
for  contempt  of  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee.   The  conviction  was  remanded   to  the  Court  of  Appeals
for   the  District  of   Columbia  Circuit  for   reconsideration  in
the  light  of  the  Watkins  ruling.   The  Court  of  Appeals,  after
an  unusually long  delay, has  now  reaffirmed  the  conviction  but
on  the  basis  of  a  narrowly  split  vote,  5-4.   Since  this  is  the
first  Court  of  Appeals  decision  interpreting  the  meaning  of
the  Watkins  case,  it has stirred a seismic tremble  left  of  center.
Can  it  be  that  the  House  Committee  on  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  is  still  free  to  operate  after  the  Watkins  decision,  and
specifically  to  carry  on  that  witch  hunt  in  the  field  of  educa-
tion  which Barenblatt,  a  former instructor at  Vassar,  defied  on
First  Amendment grounds?
This  breaks down  into several questions.  The  first  is wheth-
er  the  House  Committee's  enabling  resolution,  even  if   still
valid,  confers upon  it  any  authority  to  investigate  the  field  of
education.   The  four  dissenting  judges,  reading  the  Watkins
ruling  in  the  light  of  the  companion  decision  the  Supreme
Court  handed  down  the  same  day  last  June  in  the  Sweezy
case,  assert  that  the  House   Committee  has  no  power  to  in-
vestigate  education.   Both  the  Chief  Justice,  for   the   Court,
and  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  concurring  for  himself  and  Mr.
Justice  Harlan,  stressed  (as  the  latter  opinion  said)   "the  de-
pendence  of  a  free  society  on  free  universities.   This  means
the  exclusion  of  governmental  intervention  in  the   intellectual
life  of  a  university."  This  would  certainly  seem  to  shut  the
door  on  any  governmental  witch  hunt  in  the  schools  even  if
the   enabling  resolution   of   the   House   Committee   did   spe-
cifically   include  education,  which  it  doesn't.
The  Broader  Question
The  second  and  broader  question  raised  by  the  new  Baren-
blatt  decision  about  the  meaning  of  the  Watkins   ruling  is
whether  Congress—in  the  light  of  what  the  Supreme  Court
said  last  June—can  carry  on  any  kind  of  a  witch  hunt.   Two
dissenters  on  the  Court  of   Appeals,   Chief   Judge   Edgerton
and  Judge  Bazelon,  contend  that  the  House   Committee  has
lost   its  sting   altogether.    The   two  other   dissenters,   Judges
Fahy  and  Washington,   say  that  the  lack  of  authority  in  the
field  of  education  is  so  clear  that  "it   is  unnecessary  here  to
go  into  the  question  whether  Watkins  holds  the  Committee  to
be  without  authority  to  compel   testimony  on  any   subject."
The  majority  on  the  Court  of  Appeals  says  otherwise.   It
holds  that  despite  Watkins,  the  House  Committee  can  go  on
punishing  witnesses  for  contempt  so  long  as  they  are   "made
fully  aware  of  the  subject  under  inquiry"  and  are  "in  a  posi-
tion  to  judge  the  pertinency  of  the  questions  relating  to  that
2
Yes,  Virginia, There's Still A Red
(Red  Men, That  Is)  Menace
The  Weekly  has  decided  to  establish   an  annual  Ba-
kunin  award,  commemorating  one  of  the  livelier tradi-
tions   of   the   enlightened  Nineteenth  century,  and   to
confer  it  this  year  for  distinguished  public  service  on
the  Indians  of  Robeson  County,  North  Carolina,  who
broke  up  a  Klan  segregation  rally  with  buckshot  and
sent  the  Klan leader  complaining  to  the  police  that  he
wanted  the  same  protection—as  he  phrased  it—"given
Negroes  at  Little  Rock."  We  regret  only  that  the  In-
dians,  obviously  corrupted  by  white  civilization,  took
nightshirts  but  no  scalps.
subject."    But   this,   in   our   opinion,   misreads  the   Supreme
Court  ruling.
The  majority  on  the  Supreme  Court,  the  concurring  opinion
of   Frankfurter  and  Harlan,  and   the   dissent  of  Mr..Justice
Tom   Clark,   all  agree  that  the  Watkins   conviction   was  re-
versed  on  two  grounds,  not  one.    One  ground  was  that   the
Comrnittee  had   failed   to  make  clear  to  Watkins   just  what
was  pertinent  to  any legislative  purpose  in  inquiring  about  the
membership  of   people   he  had   known   years  before   in   the
Communist  party.  The  other  reason  was  that  where  a  legisla-
tive  inquiry  threatens  to  impinge  on  First  amendment   free-
doms,   it  must  be  scrutinized  with   the   utmost   care  by   the
Courts.   But  in  the  case  of  the  House  Committee,  its  charter
was  so  "excessively  broad,"   its  standard—"un-American"—
so  vague, that  the  Courts  could  not  possibly  determine  wheth-
er  it  was  proper  under  the  First  Amendment.   "It   is  impos-
sible  in  such  a  situation,"   the  Chief   Justice  said,  "to   ascer-
tain  whether  any  legislative  purpose   justifies  the   disclosures
sought."    The  resolution  falls  not  only  because  the   witness
cannot  judge  pertinency and  constitutionality  within  its  nebu-
lous  confines  but  because  the  Courts  cannot  either!
A Yes and  No Answer
Will  it  then  turn  out  that  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in
Watkins  has  put  the  House  Committee  out  of  business?  The
answer  is  both  Yes  and  No.   This  is  where  confusion  arises.
The  Court  cannot  void  the  action  of  Congress  in  establishing
a  Committee.  That  is the  business of  Congress.   All  the  Court
can  do  is  to  refuse  to  allow  witnesses  who   defy  that   Com-
mittee  to  be  punished  for  contempt.   Trial  is  a  judicial  func-
tion  and  this  is  the  Court's  business.   The  House   Committee
can  go  on  operating  so  long  as  it  confines  itself   (as  it  has  in
recent  weeks)  to  hearing  assorted  experts  and  screwballs  who
appear  voluntarily.  But  it  can no  longer  subpoena  and  punish
an  unwilling  witness.   In  that  sense  it  is  out  of  business.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  27,1958
The Witch Hunters Can Only Stay In Business by "Abolishing" The Committee
(Continued  from  Page One)
A Trap for  the Unwary
Here  lies  a  trap  for  those  fighting  to   abolish   the  Com-
mittee.   There  are  shrewd  lawyers  like  its  chairman,  Con-
gressman  Walter,  who are  beginning  privately  to take up  the
abolition  talk  in  order  to  establish   a  new  committee  which
can  exert  compulsory  process  because  it   will  have   a  new
name  and  a  new  charter  and  it  may  take  some  time  before
the  Courts  catch  up.  Before the  Watkins  ruling,  there  might
have  seemed  some  lesser  evil  logic  in  "abolishing"  the  House
Committee  in  favor  of  a  new group,  say  a  new  subcommittee
of   House  Judiciary,  or  a  new  joint  committee.   But  today
that  represents  the  one  way  the  witch  hunters  can  stay  in
business  a  little  longer  and find a  respectable  mask.   Walter
is  already  saying  in  private  that  he  himself  voted  against
establishing  the  original  committee  two  decades  ago  and  is
in  favor  of  its  abolition.   But  he  wants  a  new  subcommittee
in  House  Judiciary  which  he  can  dominate.
The  coming  Barenblatt   decision  will  further   undercut   the
House  Committee's  authority   and  prestige,   as  the   ultimate
disposal   of  the   companion  Harry   Sacher   and  Abe  Flaxer
contempts  of  the   Senate   Internal  Security   Committee  will
irreparably   damage  that  other  Senatorial   arm  of  the  witch
hunt.   The  fight  for  abolition  of  the  witch  hunt  must  not  be
diverted   by   booby-trap   compromise  proposals,    especially
from   weak-kneed  liberal   members   of   Congress   who   are
afraid  of  a  real  fight  with  Walter.   The  campaign  for  aboli-
tion  must  set  its  goal  that  of  public  education  in  the  fact
that  under  the  First  Amendment  Congress  has  no  right  to
abridge  freedoms  of  speech,  press  and  assembly  by  setting
up  pillories  for  those  with  non-conformist  views.
Full  Text  Chicago  Area Appeal for Abolition of the Un-American Committee
Because  it  has  been  given  scant  attention  in  the  press  and
is  available  nowhere  else;  because  it  is  a  model  that  merits
imitation  (Why do  New  York,  Philadelphia  and  Los  Angeles
lag  behind  Chicago?),  and  because  of  its  distinguished  sign-
ers, we  give  here  the  text  of the  petition  sent  by  61  Chicago
residents   to  the   16  Chicago  area   Congressmen  asking   the
abolition  of  the  House  Un-American  Activities    Committee:
"The  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  the  Watkins  case  makes
imperative   a   prompt   re-examination   of  the   practices  and
purposes  of  the  Committee on  Un-American  Activities  of  the
House  of  Representatives.    It  is  particularly  important  that
this  re-examinatidn  be  made  by  members  of  the   House  of
Representatives  who,  as  the  Court  pointed  out,   collectively
have  the  primary  responsibility   for   the   control   and   guid-
ance  of  House  committees.
"The   Court   now   fully   recognizes   the   serious   threat   to
precious   individual  freedoms   which   the   activities    of   the
House  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities  may  entail.  In
the  words  of  Chief  Justice   Warren:
A Pillory for  Non-Conformists
' " 'Abuses  of  the  investigative   process  may  imperceptibly
lead  to  abridgment  of  protected  freedoms.   The  mere  sum-
moning  of  a  witness  and  compelling  him  to  testify,  against
his  will,  about  his  beliefs,  expressions   or, associations   is  a
measure   of   governmental   interference.    And   when   those
forced  revelations  concern  matters  that  are  unorthodox, un-
popular,  or  even  hateful  to  the  general  public,  the   reaction
in  the  life  of  the  witness  may be  disastrous  .  .  .  Nor  does
the  witness  alone  suffer   .  .  .  Those  who  are  identified  by
witnesses  and  thereby  placed  in  the  same  glare  of  publicity
are   equally  subject   to   public  stigma,   scorn   and   obloquy.
Beyond   that,  there   is  the   more   subtle  and   immeasurable
effect  upon  those  who  tend  to  adhere  to  the  most  orthodox
and  uncontroversial views  and  associations  in  order  to  avoid
a  similar  fate  at  some  future  time.  .  .  .'
"The  Court  underscores  that  Congressional  investigations
must  relate   directly  to  a  genuine  legislative   function  and
explicitly  states  that  it  is  not  the  function   of  Congress  to
try  individuals,  to  enforce  the  laws,  'to  expose for  the  sake
of  exposure'.   Such  investigations   can  lead  to  'ruthless  ex-
posure   of   private   lives   in   order   to   gather  data  that   is
neither  desired by  Congress  nor  useful  to  it.'
"In  finding  that  the   House  of  Representatives   failed   to
give  appropriate   guidance  to  the  Committee  on  Un-Ameri-
can  Activities, the  Court  says 'it  would be difficult  to  imagine
a  less  explicit  authorizing  resolution  .  .  .  Who can  define
the  meaning of "un-American"  . . .  Combining the language
of  the   resolution  with  the  construction   it  has  been  given,
it  is  evident  that  the  preliminary   control  of  the   Committee
exercised  by  the  House  of  Representatives   is  slight  or  non-
existent.   No  one  could  reasonably  deduce  from  the  charter
the  kind  of  investigation  that  the  Committee  was  directed
to  make.  . . .'
"The  decision  of  the  Court  has  crystallized  the   consider-
able  criticism  which  many  segments   of  the  American  com-
munity  have  voiced  against  this  Committee's  indiscriminate
investigations.
"We,  therefore,  now  call  upon  members  of  the   House  of
Representatives   to   recognize  that   its   Committee   on  Un-
American   Activities  operates   under  an  indefensibly  broad
charter;  that  it   too  often   has   served  no  valid  legislative
purpose;  that  its  activities   imperil  American  values;   that
the  result  of  its  methods  lessens  the  dignity  and  high   office
of  our  elected   representatives.
"We  urge  that  the  standing  committee  on  Un-American
Activities  of  the  House  of  Representatives  be   abolished."
The  Signers
Dr.  John   A.  Lapp,   director,   Roosevelt   University,   Na-
tional  Committee, American  Civil  Liberties   Union;  John  B.
Thompson,  Dean,  Rockefeller  Chapel,  Univ.  of  Chicago;  A.
C.  McGiffert,  Jr.,   President,   Chicago  Theological   Seminary;
David  Riesman,  Univ.  of  Chicago;  and  Nobel  Prize  Winner
Harold  C.  Urey.
Professors   Walter   Johnson,  Harry   Kalven,  Jr.,    Jerome
Kerwin,  Morton  Grodzins, Malcolm Sharp,  Kermit  Eby,  May-
nard  Kreuger,  and  C.  Herman  Pritchett,  Univ.  of  Chicago;
Professors   Curtis   Macdougall,  Ray   A.   Billington,   Walter
B.  Rideout, Rockwell C.  Smith,  John  E.  Coons, Stephen  Love,
Ernest  J.  Wrage,  Carl  de  Schweinitz, Jr.,  Jacob  Scher,  Rob-
ert   H.  Strotz,   Jules  A.  Marcus,  Myer  Dwass,  Walter   B.
Scott,   Lawrence  Towner,  Wm.   M.  Trumbull,   and   Robert
Eisner,   of   Northwestern   Univ.;   Professors   Frank   Unter-
myer  and  George  Watson  of  Roosevelt  Univ.;  Prof.  Chalmer
E.  Faw   of  Bethany  Seminary.
Wm.  C.  Davidon, Chairman, Atomic  Scientists   of  Chicago;
Miss  Jessie  F.  Binford,  Hull  House;  Rabbi  George  G.  Fox,
South  Shore  Temple;  Rev.  James  Royston,  Gospel  Temple;
Wallace   Heistad,   head   of   Olivet   Institute;   George   Miles
Gibson,  McCormick  Theological  Seminary;  Rabbi  Eric  Fried-
land,  Beth  Am  Peoples   Synagogue;  Rabbi  Jacob  J.   Wein-
stein,  KAM Temple;  Rev.  David  H.  Cole,  First  Universalist
Church;  Rev.  Alva  Tompkins,  Olivet  Presbyterian.
Lawyers  Earl  Dickerson,  Francis  Heisler,  Eugene  Cotton,
Richard  Watt,  Samuel  Holland,  Hans  Lehmann,  Wm.  Rod-
riguez,  Al  M.  Curtis,  Leonard  L.  Leon  and  Elmer  R.  Segal.
Trade  Unionists:  Sidney  Lens,  Building  Service  Employes;
Henry   B.  Anderson,  Joint   Board   Retail,   Wholesale;   Wil-
loughby  Abner,  UAW;  Charles   Hayes,  Packinghouse;   Tom
Slater,   Carpenters.
Lafayette  Marsh,  Friends  Service  Committee;  Russell  Bab-
cock,  Citizens  Schools  Committee;   Rabbi   S.  Burr  Yampol,
Sovereign   Kosher  Nursing  Home;  Mrs.  Wanda  Babcock.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  27,1958
Alabama  Draws  A  Cute  But  Spurious  Analogy  Between  NAACP  and  Klan
It  has  been  said  that   hard   cases  make  bad  law.   There
never  was  a  harder  case  than  the  NAACP's  suit  against  the
State  of  Alabama.  Practically  the  situation  is  quite  simple:
the  courts  of  Alabama  are  playing  their  part  in  the  general
conspiracy  by  white  Southerners  to  nullify  by  every  means
at   their   command  the   Supreme  Court's   school   integration
ruling.   But  as  part  of  their  contribution  to  organized  sec-
tional  white  supremacist  lawlessness,   the   Alabama   courts
have  tied  the  case  up  in  almost  inextricable  legalistic  knots,
ranging  from  the  type  of  appeal  required  by  Alabama  pro-
cedure  in contempt cases  to  Alabama's right  to  "unmask"  the
NAACP  "just  like  the  Klan."
This  drawing  of  a  parallel  between  the  NAACP  and  the
Klan  is  as  spurious  as  it  is  cute,  and  we  are  sorry  to  see
that  the  brief  amicus  filed  by  14  sympathetic  organizations
(including  the  ACLU  and  the  American  Jewish   Congress)
dignified  it  by  arguing  in  vacua  a  right  to  anonymity  in
politics.  The  NAACP case  can  clearly  be  distinguished   from
the  old  Klan  cases  without  arguing  a  general  principle  of
dubious   value.   Whether   an   organization   has   a   right   to
operate  in  secrecy  is  a  question  to  be  determined  by   cir-
cumstances  and  not  by   abstractions.
The Cases Alabama Relies Upon
This  becomes clear  if  one  examines  the  two  leading  cases
relied  upon  by  Alabama  in  its  claim  to  the  membership  lists
of  the  NAACP.  One  is  the  Zimmerman  case  decided  by  the
U.  S.  Supreme Court  in  1928.  The  Klan  claimed that  it  was
discriminated  against  by  the   State  of  New  York   because
labor unions, the  Masons, the  Knights  of  Columbus and  other
organizations  were  allowed  to   operate   on  the  basis  of   a
secret   oath  of  membership  but   not  the  Klan.   A   Supreme
Court  majority  which  included  Holmes  and   Brandeis   (278
U.  S.  63)  ruled that  the  State  of  New  York  had  a  right  to
put  the  Klan  in  a  special  class  because  legislative  inquiry
had  shown  that  it  was using  secrecy  as  "a  cloak  for  acts  and
conduct  inimical  to  personal  rights  and  public   welfare."
The  other  case  relied  upon  by  Alabama  is  a  decision  of
its  own  State  Supreme  Court  in  1949  (265  Ala.  355).   This
upheld  the   conviction  for   contempt  of  a  Klan   official   who
had  refused to  turn  over  his  membership  list.   But this  order
was  issued  by  a  judge  in  the  course  of  a  grand  jury  investi-
gation  into  "acts  of  terrorism,  flogging,  etc."   committed  by
Klansmen  in  that  particular  county  of  Alabama.
Victories of  the  Week
It   is  a  pleasure  to  record   another   dismissal  of  a
Smith  Act  prosecution.  The  Court  of. Appeals  for  the
Ninth  Circuit has  freed  seven  Hawaii  and  four  Seattle
defendants   originally  convicted  in   1953.    The   Circuit
Court  Judge,  Richard  M.  Chambers,  complained  (over
the  protest  of  his  two  concurring  colleagues)  that  the
Supreme  Court  had  made  "a  virtual  shambles"  of  the
Smith  Act.   The  Act,  though  still  theoretically   uncon-
stitutional,  has  been  rendered   practically   unworkable
by  Mr. Justice  Harlan's  decision  in  the  California  cases.
It  is  also  a  pleasure  to  note  that  Senator  Eastland,
on  the  eve  of  argument  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  here
in  Washington last  week,  threw  in  the  sponge  and  ac-
cepted  defeat  in  William  H.  Hinton's   suit   to   recover
books  and  papers  seized  from  him  by  the  Senate   In-
ternal   Security   Committee  when   he   returned    from
China  almost  five  years   ago.
There  has  been  no  legislative  finding  in  Alabama that  the
NAACP uses privacy  of  membership for  violation  of  the  law,
nor  has  the  NAACP  been  summoned  in  a  grand  jury  in-
quiry  into  any  outbreak  of  lawlessness.   On  the  contrary  the
demand  for  its  membership  list  is  an  incident  in  a  general
campaign  by  Alabama  to  frighten  its  Negro  citizens  away
from  trying  to  enjoy  or  enforce  rights  the  Supreme   Court
says  they  have.   The  NAACP  is  trying  to  uphold  the  law,
not  to undermine it,  and its  right  to  privacy  is best  bottomed
on  the  terroristic  circumstances  existing  in  Alabama  rather
than  on  any  general  "right  to  anonymity."    It  all  depends
on  what  the  anonymity  is  used  for.   It   would  be  folly  to
argue  that  an  organization  like  the  Klan, engaging  in  masked
terrorism,  has  a  right  to  anonymity.
The  NAACP  has  been  operating  in  Alabama  since    1918.
Now  it  has  suddenly  been  fined  $100,000  and  ousted  from
the  State  on  the  ground  that  it  had  failed  to  register  as  a
foreign  corporation.  The  same  racist  judge  who imposed  the
penalty  also  issued  an  injunction  forbidding  it  to  register!
But  the  state  law  governing  foreign   corporations   does  not
require  them  when  they  register  to  make  public  their  stock-
holders  or  members.   The  whole  affair  is  a  judicial   frameup
and  it  is a pity  to  have to  argue  its  rationalizations  seriously.
Will Passport  Cases See A Surprise Like That in the Soldier Loyalty  Argument?
In  a  well-informed  source  unconnected  with  the   pending
passport  appeals  but  in  close  contact  with  the   Department
of  Justice,  the  Weekly  is  informed  that  the   Solicitor  Ge/i-
eral's   office   is  as   dubious  about  the   legality   of  the   State
Department's   policy  on  passports   as   it   is   about   Defense
Department  policy  of  giving  less  than  honorable  discharges
to  soldiers  suspected  of  subversive  connections  in  civilian  life.
The  dramatic  high-point  in  the  argument   before  the  Su-
preme  Court  last  week  of  two  soldier   appeals   came  when
the  Justice  Department  attorney  assigned  to  argue  the  case
admitted  the  Department  did  not  believe  Secretary  of  the
Army  Brucker  had  any  lawful  authority  to  base  less-than-
honorable   discharges   on  pre-induction   activities.   But   the
government  attorney  contended  the  courts  had  no  authority
to  correct  this  wrong.
Shall the Army Censor Politics?
This  view  is  unlikely  to  be  upheld  by  the  Supreme   Court
since  it  would  in  effect  give  the  Army  wide  powers  of  super-
vision   over   civilian   political   life.    Every   able-bodied   man
liable  to  military  or  reserve  duty  would  be  on notice  that  he
risked  less  than  honorable  discharge  if  he  engaged  in  activi-
ties  the  Army  regarded  as   subversive.
The  vagaries  to  be  expected   from   allowing   such  Army
censorship   over   political   activities   are   illustrated   by   the
facts  in  the  two  appeals.   David  Shapiro,  arguing  the  John
Henry  Harmon  III  appeal  on  behalf  of  the  Workers  Defense
League,  pointed  out  that  one  of  the  allegations  on  which  his
client  was  denied  an  honorable  discharge   was  the   fact  of
pre-induction   employment  at   Camp  Lakeland.     Apparently
Camp  Lakeland  was  regarded   as  "subversive"  because  it  is
interracial.
Victor  Rabinowitz,  arguing   the   Howard  Abramowitz   ap-
peal  for  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties   Committee,  pointed
out  that  his  client  had  originally  been  given  an   honorable
discharge  after  two  years  service  in  the  Army.   Later,  in  a
review  precipitated   by  fear   of  the  then   current   McCarthy
investigation,  the  Army  gave  him  an  undesirable   discharge
from   the   enlisted  reserve  on  the   ground   of   pre-induction
"subversive"   connections.   The  regulations  now  before   the
Supreme  Court  represent   leftovers   from  the  McCarthy  pe-
riod.   Until  the  famous  Peress  case,  the  Army  always  based
the  type  of  discharge   given  a  man  on  his  conduct  in  the
Army.
The  admissions  by  the  Department   of  Justice  may   have
sealed  the  fate   of  these  McCarthy  era  regulations  in   the
Supreme  Court.   Will  there  be  similar  admissions  in  March
when  the  Court  passes  on the  State  Department's  right  (1)
to  demand  a  non-Communist  oath  for  a  passport  and  (2)  to
deny  passports  on  secret  evidence?
1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  27,1958
Negotiations  Are  Difficult   Enough  Without  Inventing New  Falsehoods
The  Myth  That  the  Russians  Broke  A  Promise  to  Reunite   Germany
A  new  myth  is  in  the  making.   It  is  that  the  Soviet  Union
at  the  Geneva  conference   promised   German  reunification  on
the  basis  of  free  elections.   This  myth  has  been  launched  in
recent  weeks  by  Secretary  of  State  Duties  and  embodied  in
scripts   he  prepared   for   the   President.    It  is  used  to   argue
the  futility  of  negotiations.
The  historian,  Frederick  L.  Schuman,  challenged   this  new
myth  in  a  letter  which  the  New   York   Times   published  last
Tuesday,  Jan.  21.    "If   self-righteousness   is  to   be   deemed,
Dulles-wise,  a  proper  basis  for  foreign  policy,"  Mr.  Schuman
wrote,  "the more  obvious  mendacities  should  be   avoided."
The  New   York   Times  appended  to  the  letter  a  disingenu-
ously  worded  editor's  note  which  skillfully  evaded  the  point
and  was  designed  to  give  the  unwary  reader  the   impression
that  Mr.  Dulles  is  telling  the  truth.
They  Ought  to  Look  in  Their  Own Files
It  is  instructive  to  compare  this  editor's  note  with  what
the  Times   had  to  say  the  day  after   the  Geneva   conference
ended.   In  an  editorial,  it  said   (July  24,  1955)  that  on  all
the   main   issues,   including  Germany,  the   result   "leaves  us
about   where  we  were   before."    From   Geneva,   Mr.   James
Reston   reported,   "There  is  no  evidence   that  Germany  will
be  united  .  .  .  The  Soviet  Union  is  obviously  not  going  to
allow  the  unification  of  Germany  within  the  context   of  the
North  Atlantic  Alliance."
The  headline  over  the  Times'  story  from  Bonn  that  day
was,  "Bonn  Sees  Geneva  As  Setback   for  German  Reunifica-
tion."   Nowhere   in  the  New   York   Times,  or  indeed   in  any
other  paper,  were  the  ambiguous  words  of  the  final  Geneva
communique  regarded  as  a  Russian  promise.
The  real  story  of  that  final  communique  was  disclosed   to
Elie  Abel  of  the  New  York  Times  staff  by  a  "diplomatic  in-
formant"   during   the   Foreign   Ministers   Conference    which
followed.    The   story  may  be  found   in   a   Geneva    dispatch
which  the  paper  printed  on  October   31, 1955.
Mr.  Abel  said  that  when  the  heads  of  State  in  the  final
hours  of  the  summit   conference   were  unable  to  agree  and
found   themselves   "confronted   with  the   prospect   of   return-
The  5th  Birthday  Dinner
The  5th  Birthday  Dinner was  a  rousing  success;  320
diners   were  accommodated; as  many  more  had  their
checks  returned  or  were  turned  away.   To  them,  our
deepest   regrets.    The  dinner  had  features   which  we
modestly   believe  unprecedented.   There   were   no  set
speeches  and  there  was  no  appeal  for  funds.   Dr.  Ed-
ward  U.  Condon, Owen  Lattimore,  Albert  Deutsch,  Earl
Browder,  Olive  Van  Home,  Maxwell  S.  Stewart, Leo-
nard   Boudin   and   Clark   Foreman   were   among   the
guests   who  spoke  informally, while  IPS  was  his  own
master  of  ceremonies  and  thanks  all  who  participated
for  a  memorable  evening.
ing   to  their  capitals  empty-handed"   they  hit   upon   a  face-
saving  compromise.   The  West  insisted  German  reunification
must  be  the  first  business  of  the  Foreign  Ministers;  Moscow
insisted  it  must  be  European  security.
They   "decided   to  compromise   their   differences  by  an  in-
genious  device,"  Mr.  Abel  reported.   "Lumping  the  two  dis-
puted  questions  into  one, they  deliberately  gave  the  directive
an   ambiguous  twist."
The   Foreign   Ministers  were  directed   to   take   account  of
"the   close   link   between   the   reunification  of   Germany   and
the  problems  of  European  security"  while  the  heads  of   State
agreed  that  "the  reunification  of  Germany  by  means  of   free
elections  shall  be  carried  out  in  conformity  with  the  national
interests  of  the  German  people  and  .  .  .  European   security."
For  the  Russians  "the  interests  of  European  security"  was
shorthand   for  their  demand  that  Germany  be  demilitarized
and   neutralized,  while  Mr.  Dulles  at  the  Foreign   Ministers
conference  would  offer  the  Russians  a  security  pact  but  only
if  and  when  a  reunited  armed  Germany  joined  NATO.    On
this  the  talks  broke  down.
It  is  only  now, two  years  later,  when  the  facts  have  been
forgotten,  that  Mr.  Dulles  dares  claim  that  Moscow  at  Geneva
made   a  promise  simply  to   allow   German   reunification  on
the  basis  of  free  elections  without   other  conditions.    Never-
theless  the  truth  may  never   catch  up  with  this  new  lie  that
the  Russians "broke  their  promise"   on  Germany  at   Geneva.
Why  Not  Send  The  Weekly   Today  As  A  Gift   to  Your   Local  School  or   Library
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City    .........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $4  (1  yr.) or  $2  (6  moa.)  additional:
1/27/58
(To)   Name
Street      .......
City     ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Ntbraiki  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.  F.   Stone'e  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C.,  under  tue  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    I'ost-dated  Mondays  hut  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Aufrost  and  December  at  B618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W.,  Washington  15. D.  C.
An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited   by   I.  F.   Btone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$6  In  the  U.  S.:  *fl   In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Kail  rates:  tin  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  tnd  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED