I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958oct13.pdf

============================================================

New Light on  That  Cease Fire, P.  2
State  Dept.  Comedy:  Must  One Be  A  Communist Now  to  Get  A  Passport?   See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  40
OCTOBER  13,   1958«°«      WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15  CENTS
Why   Can't  We  Be  Just  As  "Diabolical"  As  Peking?
When  Mme.  Chiang  Kai-shek  suggested  nuclear   bombard-
ment  of  mainland  China  on  Meet   the   Press  a  few  Sundays
ago,   no  one  called  her   diabolical.   But  when   the   Chinese
Communists  put   into   effect   a   7-day   cease-fire   on   Quemoy,
"diabolical"  was  the  term  applied  to  it  by her  husband's  gov-
ernment  on  Taipeh.    Diabolical  is  a  favorite  word  here  in
Washington,   too,  though  no  one  ever  applies  it  to  Generals
who  give  out  interviews  explaining  how  in  umteen  minutes
they  can  destroy  50  cities  in  a  certain  country.   If  threats  of
mass  destruction  are  by  these  definitions  human,  and   cease-
fires  devilish,  one  can  only  conclude  that  Satan   has   fallen
behind  Man.   Indeed  how  can  old-fashioned  hell  fire  com-
pare with  the  agony beneath  the  mushroom  cloud ?
We  Could  Deprive  Them  of   Moral  Excuse
Our   propaganda  experts  at  State  Department   explain,  of
course,  that  the  Communist  Chinese  by  ordering  a  cease-fire
and  Krushchev  by  saying  that  he  will  not  come  to  Peking's
aid  unless  the  U.  S.  attacks  China  are  making  it  appear  that
the  danger  in  the  Far  East  is  U.  S.  aggression.   This,  they say,
is  diabolical.  But  if  this  is  diabolical,  why  can't  we  be  dia-
bolical,  too?   A  public  statement  that  we  would  no  longer
allow  the  offshore  islands  to  be  used  for  harassment  of   the
mainland  or  the  blockade  of  its  ports  would  be  "diabolical"
in  the  same  sense  by putting  the  Chinese  Communists   wholly
in  the  wrong  if  they  resumed  their   attacks.   If   we  wanted
to  be  extra  special devilish we  could  invoke  our  Middle  East-
ern   precedents  and   invite  the  UN   to  establish   observation
posts  on  Quemoy  and  Matsu  and  so  make  it  impossible   for
Peking  even  to  claim  they  were  being  used  for  offensive  pur-
poses.    Or   would   that   be  too  diabolical   for   bluff,   honest,
straightforward' Chiang  Kai-shek ?
Is  It  Always Disastrous  to  Back Down?
We  have  been  told  over  and  over  again  that  our   prestige
and   Chiang's   would   be  damaged   if   we  gave   way  on   the
offshore   islands.    In   an   interview   which   the   New    York
Herald-Tribune  printed  Sunday,  Oct.  5,  Admiral  Arleigh  A.
Burke,  Chief   of  Naval   Operations,   said   Chiang   can't   give
up  the  islands  and  we  can't  ask  him  to  "without   giving  up
one  of  the  most  important  things  in  the  world  to  him  and  to
us—prestige,   standing   up   under   fire   for   principles,   little
things,  intangible  things.   If  we  retreat  under  fire  and  retreat
under  pressure,  where  does  that  leave  us  in  the  eyes  of  the
rest  of  the  world—and  our  own  eyes? ...  It  leaves  you re-
treating  under  force  and  that  is  not  good  for  your  own  soul."
(We  don't  want  to  argue  theology  with  the  Most  Rev.  Ad-
miral  but we thought  that  in  the  ethic  the  Pentagon  is  defend-
ing  it  is  supposed  to  be  good  to  turn  one's  cheek?)
Now  what  the  Admiral  said  is  the  kind  of  mystical   ro-
11*'                                                                                       16
mantic  military  nonsense  which  has  bred  wars  for   thousands
of  years.   Is  it  always  disastrous  to  back  down?   The   Chinese
Communists  have  backed  down  under  pressure.    They   have
called  off  their  bombardment  of  Quemoy.   It  is  as  yet  only
for  seven  days and  it  is qualified  by the  condition  that  we  stop
convoying  supplies   and  these  conditions  are  face-savers  but
Mr.  Dulles's  partisans  are  already  saying  that  the   backdown
proves  his  brinkmanship  paid  off.  Why  then  do  we  fear  that
Peking  has  gained   instead  of  lost  by  the  move?   If   it  is  a
sound  principle  never  to  back  down  under  force,  if  a  back-
down  on  the  offshore  islands  would  undermine  our  position
in  Asia,  why  isn't  a  backdown  on  the  offshore  islands  under-
mining   theirs?   Could  it  be  that  the  rest  of  mankind   will
think  better  of  Peking  if  it  has  the  good   sense  not  to  blow
Quemoy  to  bits  in  stubborn  insistence  on  prestige?
The  Real  Principles  at  Stake
Quemoy  is  not  worth  a  war  to  either   side.    Both  Peking
and  Washington  have  been  engaged  in  brinkmanship.    The
one  which  acknowledges  it  first  will  gain  the  most  in  world
support.   The  real  principle  at  stake  here  is  the  readiness  to
negotiate  in  a  world  which  can  no  longer  risk  war.   The  real
intangible  is  the  respect  which  can  be  won  by  the  nation  that
no  longer   takes  the  Admiral  Burke  view,  the  ethic  of   the
duelist  applied  to  the  relations  of  nations.
Is  Power  Measurable  Only  in  Magatons?
We  wish  we  had  room  to  reprint  the  whole  interview  with
Admiral  Burke,  it  is  so  beautiful  a  self-portrait  of  the  mili-
tary  mind  in  action.  We  recommend  a  close  reading  of  it  to
thoughtful   students   of   the   human   tragedy.    We   want   to
touch  on  one  point  in  it  which  seems  to  have  been   over-
looked.    In  calling  attention  to  the   dangers   of   negotiation
over  Quemoy,  the  Admiral  said  "this  leads  up  to  a  more  im-
portant   thing,"   the   coming   negotiations    at   Geneva    over
nuclear   tests  and  prevention   of  surprise  attack.    The   Chief
of  Naval  Operations—a  top  post  in  terms  of  military   influ-
ence  on  governmental  policy—said  he  was  afraid   "when  we
go  into  these  conferences  we  are  going  to  have  public  pres-
sure  to  give.   You don't  build  up our future  by giving.  .  .  .
We
:
will  end  up  by  having  less  power,  less  capability."    The
Admiral   seems  to  favor  negotiation  only  if  the   other  side
does  all  the  giving.   For  him  power  and  capability  are  meas-
ured   in   military  force,   in   nuclear   weapons   and,  megatons.
This  is  the  military  mentality,  to  be  found  in  Moscow  and
Peking  as  well  as  in  Washington,   which  unless  leashed   will
get  mankind  into  trouble  sooner  or  later  as  it  stumbles  from
crisis  to  crisis,  like  a  winded  man  across  a  treacherous   bog,
pursued  by the  phantoms  of  his  own  nature.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'g  Weekly,  October 13,19S8
The  Only  Hope  Now   Is  For  India  to  Lead A  Nuclear  Revolt  in  the  UN
The  news  at  press  time  of  Gromyko's  press  conference  in
New  York  indicates  that  in  Moscow,  as  in  Washington,  there
is  a  faction  hostile  to  a  discontinuance  of  the  nuclear   arms
race  and  strong  enough  to  block  action,  though  willing  to  let
the  issue  be  used  for  propaganda  purposes.   Just  as  the  forces
in  Washington  in  favor  of  an  agreement   had   managed   to
push  and  haul  our  own  government   to  the  point  of  a  con-
ference  in  Geneva  on  Oct.  31,  the  Russians  now  set  up  a  new
obstacle  in  the  form  of  their  demand  for  an  "equal"  number
of  tests.   This  could  lead  to  interminable  arguments  on  wheth-
er  a  small  test  equals  a  large,  to  charges  of  broken  faith  on
sizes  of  tests,  and  to  a  "leap-frogging"  of  new  tests  in  which
each  side  insisted  on  holding  just  a  few  more  after  the  other
had  declared  itself  ready  for  talks.   Our  prolonged   and  heavy
test  series  (on  which  even  the  bare  numbers  have  been  kept
secret)   showed  hostility  to  an  agreement,  as  does  the  Dulles
unwillingness  to  attend  a  Foreign  Ministers  Conference.   But
a   conference   will   be  more   fruitful   with   Wadsworth  than
Dulles  anyway, and  an  end  must  come  some. time.   There will
never  be  "parity";  both  sides  have  enough   nuclear   weapons
now  to kill  each  other  several  times  over.   The  only hope  now
is  for  India  to  lead  a  revolt  against  both  sides  in  the   UN
and  to  pass  its  resolution  for  an  immediate  cessation  of  all
testing  now.  To  put  Moscow  on  the  spot  will  be  to  strength-
en  the  peace  forces  there;  to  let  the  issue  slide  will  be  to
help  the  Neanderthal  military  minds  there  as  well  as  here.
Some  Light  Upon  the  Mystery   of  the  New  Cease-Fire  on  Quemoy
1.  This  is  the  second  unilateral  cease-fire  by Peking.   Shell-
ing  of  Quemoy  stopped  when  Chou  En-lai  on  Sept.  6  declared
his  readiness  to  negotiate   the  issue.   But  in  the  New   York
Times   of   Sept.   9,  Greg  MacGregor   reported   from  Taipeh
that  a  Chinese  Nationalist  transport   vessel  carrying   ammuni-
tion  had  been  blown  up  "under  the  eyes  of  the  crew  aboard
U.  S.  convoy  ships"  and  said  that  "apparently"  the  use  of
"U.  S. naval  vessels  for  convoy  escort"  had  caused  a  resump-
tion  of  the  firing.
2.  Despite  this  past  experience,   Washington  seemed   still
to  be  having  trouble  making  up  its  mind   whether   to   cease
convoying   supply   ships   during   a   cease-fire,  as  Peking  de-
manded.   The  first  reaction  at  State  Department  was  to  ig-
nore  the  new  cease-fire  statement  from  Peking.   This  counsel
was  rejected  but  the  Herter  statement  issued  at  1  p.  m.  on
Monday,  Oct.  6,  and  cleared  with  the  White  House  but  not
Dulles  on  Duck  Island,  left  the  matter  of  convoys  ambiguous.
It  said  that  if  the  cease  fire  proved  permanent,  there  would
be no  need  for  convoys.  Dulles  made  no  reference  to  convoys
in   his  statement   on  returning   to  Washington   Oct.   7,   but
(press  time P.  S.)  convoys were  ended  next  day.
3.  Just  what  Dulles  meant  by  his  "new"   attitude  at  press
conference  the  week  before  is  still  nuclear.   The  tone  of  the
President's  letter  to  Senator  Green  and  the  fact  that  the  Ad-
miral  Burke interview  (see  page  1)  was  cleared  at  State  and
White  House  as  well  as  Pentagon  for  direct  quotation  does
not   indicate  a  softer  policy  in  the  East.   Neither   does   the
unofficial  account  here  of  the  last  bargaining  session  in  War-
In  Plain   Words
"Secretary  Dulles,  trying  to  placate  the  Chinese  Na-
tionalists,  who  took  exception  to  his  statements  at  a
press  conference  that  maybe  the  U.  S.  would  suggest
the  Chinese  ought  to  reduce  their  forces  on  Quemoy,
has  sent  word  to  Generalissimo Chiang that  there  was
a  misunderstanding  on  his part.
"Mr.  Dulles  said  there  was  a  misconception  on  the
part  of  the  Chinese  Nationalists  about  an  'exaggerated
idea  of  a  shift  of  position'  on  the  part  of  the  U.  S.
"The  Secretary  of  State  said  the  misconception  oc-
curred because the  Formosan  press  misinterpreted what
he  had  to  say   and  that  the  Nationalist   Government
made   things  worse  by  misinterpreting  the   misinter-
pretation.
"Mr.  Dulles  then left  for  a  long  week-end  before  we
had   time  to   say   we   thought   he   said   what   Chiang
thought  he  said  and  we  don't  read  Formosan  papers."
—Wall  Street  Journal, Oct. S.
"But  both  Chinese  and  U.  S.  officials  privately  ex-
pressed  the  belief  Dulles  was  trying  to  quiet  opposi-
tion   to   his   offshore   island   policy   lest   it   become   a
major  issue  in  the  U.  S.  congressional   elections."
—Associated  Press  from  Taipeh,  Oct. 2.
saw.   Beam,  when   asked  by  the   Chinese   Communists   what
the  Dulles  press  conference  meant,  said  he  was  not   author-
ized  to  interpret  it  and  stood  on  the  position  that  there  must
be  a  cease-fire  first  and  then  the  U.  S.  would  negotiate.   The
Peking   one  week   cease  fire  statement   was  given   to   Beam
Saturday  night  in  Warsaw,  a  day  in  advance  of  its  release.
Has  the  Bombardment  of  Quemoy  (As  Menon  Charged)  Been  Exaggerated?
"The  Chinese  Communists,  after  having brutally  and  in-
cessantly  bombarded  Quemoy  for  over  six  weeks  .  .  ."
—Dulles,  back from Duck Island,  Oct. 7.
"A  visitor  to  semi-blockaded Quemoy   island   .  .  .  ex-
pecting  to find  much  spectacular  destruction, is  more  likely
than  not  to  be  disappointed.    Damage  by  shells  from  152
mm.  and  112  mm.  guns—both  Russian  calibres—has  been
comparatively  slight  and  the   number  of  casualties   lower
than  the figures sometimes  given  .  .  .
"Few  shells  have  fallen  so  far  on  Quemoy  City,  the  is-
land's  'capital'  .  .  .  Now,  unless  the  shelling   appears  dan-
gerously  near,  life  goes  on  much  as  usual'in  the  streets
and  alleys  .  .  .  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  food  short-
age,  and  all  the  necessary  ingredients  for  Chinese  cooking
are  on sale  in the  shops ...
".  .  .  the  morale of  the  47,000 civilians  and  the  military
population  of  an  estimated  60,000  combat  troops  seems  ex-
cellent.    This  ia  due largely  to  the  character  of  the  present
shelling  and  to  a  widespread conviction  that  a  Communist
assault  on Nationalist-held offshore  islands  would  meet with
little  success.
"It  must  be  emphasized  that  the   shelling   has  been  a
harassing   and  not   a   destructive   bombardment,  striking
sporadically  throughout the  island  and especially at  landing
beaches  when  the  Communist  radar  detects  some  activity
there.   Observations  posts  near  the  mainland  and  the  loud-
speakers  for  broadcasting  propaganda  to  the   Communists
have  not  been  hit.   None  of  the  essential  services—among
them  the  island's  broadcasting  station  and  electric  power
plant—have  been  put  out  of  action.  .  .  ."
—"Quemoy  Under  Fire," The  Times (London), Oct. 4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  IS, 1958
Do  You  Have  to  Be  A  Communist  to  Be  Sure  of  Getting  A  Passport?
In  the  Worthy  Case,  Dulles  Argues  for  Restricting  Freedom  of  the  Press
I  telephoned  the  legal  division  of  the   State  Department
the  morning  after  Federal  Judge  Edward  M.  Curran  upheld
the  Secretary  of  State for  refusing  to  give  newspaperman  Wil-
liam  Worthy,  Jr.,  a  passport  as  a  result  of  his  visit  to  Com-
munist  China in  the  winter of  1956-57.    I  asked  an  officer  of
the  Legal  division,  "How  do  you  reconcile  the  Department's
action  in  the  Worthy  case with  the  Supreme  Court's  decision
last  June  in  the  Kent  and  Briehl  cases?"   "Oh,"   he  replied,
as  if  that  were  an  easy  one,  "all  the  Court  ruled  in  Kent  and
Briehl  was  that  you couldn't  refuse  a  man  a  passport  because
he's  a  Communist.  That  doesn't  apply  to  Worthy.   He's  not
a   Communist."
This  could  be  very  funny.   We  might  suggest  that  travel
agencies—along  with  a  photographer  and  a  notary  public—
have  handy  a  recruiting  officer   for   the   Communist  party.
Anybody  having  trouble  getting  a  passport  could  for  a  nomi-
nal  fee  take  out  a  Communist  party  membership  and  thus
make  sure  of  getting  a  passport.    Under  the   Department's
interpretation   of  Kent   and  Briehl,  the  would  be  travellers
must  at  least  be  fellow  travellers  to  benefit  from  the  Supreme
Court's  ruling.   They  must be  able  to  show,  as Rockwell Kent
and  Dr.  Walter  Briehl  could,  that  though  not  actual  mem-
bers  of  the  party  they  at  least  belong  to  a  respectable  num-
ber  of  organizations  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.
Setting An Example in Evasion
It's  not  at  all  funny.   At  a  time  when  the  Federal  govern-
ment  is  trying  to  get  the  South  to  obey  Supreme  Court  deci-
sions,  the  State  Department   is  giving   the   Faubuses  an  ex-
ample  in  evasion.   The  Court  did  not  rule  that  you  could  not
refuse  a  man  a  passport   because  he  was  a  Communist.    It
ruled  that  under  the  only  operative  Federal  law  on  passports,
that of  1926,  you could only refuse a passport  on two  grounds.
One  was  lack  of  citizenship.   The  other  was  that  the  appli-
cant  was  engaged  in  unlawful  conduct.
The  Department  could  try  to  convict  Worthy  of  a  criminal
offense  for  using  his  passport  in  Communist  China.   It  didn't
try  (1)  because it  is very doubtful that  the  passport  restriction
would  be  enforceable  in  a  criminal  prosecution  and   (2)   it
might  have  to  take  similar  action  against  the  two  men  who
went  into  Communist  China  at  the  same  time  for  Look  maga-
zine.   Those  men  were  not  punished;  they  have  been  given
new  passports.  The  Department  is trying  to  make an  example
of  Worthy,  perhaps  figuring  that  as a  young  man  with  noth-
ing  behind  him  but  the  Afro-American,  a  Negro  newspaper,
the  Department  can  get  away  with  it.
Perhaps  it  can.   The   indifference   manifested  by  most  of
the  press  is  disturbing.   We  suggest  that  editors  take  a  close
look  at  Section V  of  the  Memorandum  of  Points  and  Authori-
ties  filed  on  the  State  Department's  behalf  with  Judge  Cur-
ran.   These  reflect  a  very  restrictive  view  of  what  constitutes
freedom  of  the  press.   The  Department  would  like  if  it  could
to  establish  these  views  in  the  Worthy  case  and  then  apply
them  more  broadly.   We  hope  on  appeal  that   professional
newspapermens'   associations  will   help   the   American   Civil
Liberties  Union, which  is  fighting  the  Worthy  case,  by  filing
briefs  amicus  curiae.
A Danger  to Freedom of the Press
This  is  the  gist  of  the  Department's  argument  in  its  own
words.   "The  constitutional  right  of  freedom  of  the  press  re-
fers  primarily,"   we  italicize  the  adverb,  "to  freedom  to  pub-
lish."    Here   it   cites   Tucker's  Blackstone,   a   dubious   legal
antique  since  this  embodied  the  Federalist  interpretation  of
the  First  amendment,  which  would  have  whittled  down  free-
dom  of  the  press  to  its  precarious status  in  the  older  English
common  law.   "There  have  always,"  the  memorandum on  be-
half  of  the  State  Department  continues,  "been  limitations  on
the  right  to  gather  news."   The  thin  edge  of  the  wedge here
is  the  argument  that  the  Department  has  the  right,  under  its
foreign  policy  powers,  to  restrict  the  gathering  of  news.
The  Supreme  Court  in  Kent   and  Briehl  touched  on  the
relation  between freedom  of  travel  and  freedom of  the  press.
It  quoted  Zechariah  Chafee  as  writing,  "Foreign  correspond-
ents  .  .  .  need first hand  information ...  An  American who
has  crossed  the  sea  is  not  obliged  to  form  his  opinions  about
our  foreign  policy  merely  from  what  he  is  told  by   officials
of  our  government ...  In  many  different  ways  direct  con-
tact  with  other  countries  contributes  to  sounder  decisions  at
home."
The People's Right  to  Enow
The  right  of  a newspaperman to  travel  wherever  he  pleases
is  part  of  the  people's   right  to  be  informed.   This  is  why
freedom  of  the  press  was  written  into  the  First  Amendment
on  the  insistence of  men  like  Jefferson.   The  crisis  over  China
policy  vividly  brings  home  to  us  again  the  living  validity  of
their  views.
But  in  the  memorandum filed with  the  Court  the  State  De-
partment  argues  from  other  premises.   "The   requirements  of
national  security and  interest,"  it  says,  "coupled  with  the  deli-
cate  characteristics  of  our  foreign  relations  with   Communist
China  .  .  .  outweigh  the  rights  which  the  Plaintiff   asserts
under  the  First  Amendment."   These  are  not  the  premises  of
free  society.  They  assert  the  right  of  the  Department  to  make
decisions  of  life  and  death  but  to  keep  press  and  people  from
being  fully  informed  about  them.
Full  Text  of  Federal  Judge  Curran's
"The   conduct  and  exercise  of   foreign   relations   of   the
United  States  resides  in  the  Executive   Branch  of  the  Gov-
ernr.ient.    Within  the   reasonable   and   proper   exercise   of
foreign  relations,   the  President  of  the  United  States  may
properly  restrict  the  travel  of  certain  citizens   to  certain
designated   geographical   are'as   of   the   world  when  neces-
sitated  by  foreign  policy  considerations.
"Now,  a  passport   renewal  may  validly  be  denied  to  a
person  who, after  a hearing,  the  Secretary  of  State  has  con-
Decision in the  Worthy Passport  Case
eluded   would   engage   in   activities   in   foreign    countries
prejudicial  to  the  orderly  conduct  of  foreign  relations  be--
cause  the  Secretary   has  reason  to  believe  on  the  basis  of
his  past  conduct  and evidence  of  his  future  conduct  that  he
would,  if  his  passport  was  renewed,  violate  the  restricting
endorsements  contained  therein.
"Under  the  circumstances  of  this  case,  the  refusal  of  the
Secretary  of  State  to  issue  a  passport  to  the  plaintiff   does
not  violate  his. rights  under  the  First   Amendment."
i   6  a
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October IS, 195S
Memo  to  the  Editors  of  the  Wall  St.  Journal  and  the  New  York  Post:
Why   Not  Ask  "Rock"  and  "Ave"  What  They  Think  About  Quemoy?
The  Governorship  of  New  York  is  a  stepping  stone  to  the
Presidency.   Both  Harriman  and  Rockefeller  have  their  eyes
on  the  White  House.   The  biggest  issue  before  the  American
people  at  the  moment  is  on   China  policy,   specifically  and
urgently  the  question  of  Quemoy.   Yet  neither  candidate  has
said  a  word  about  the  question,  nor  has  it  been  put  to  them.
The  Wail  Street  Journal  and  the  New  York  Post,  on  their
editorial   pages,  have   been   campaigning   consistently   for   a
saner  policy  in  the  Far  East.   The  former  went  so  far  (see
Oct.  3  issue)  as to  question  the  man-in-the-street  on  Formosa
about  Quemoy  (and found  him  as  indifferent  as  the  average
American).   The  latter  has  constantly  complained   of  Demo-
cratic  party  silence  on  the  issue.   Why  don't   they  put   the
Quemoy  question  to  the  gubernatorial   candidates?
There  are  special   reasons   for   questioning   Harriman   and
Rockefeller.    Harriman   is   thoroughly   conversant   with   the
problem.  He  was Truman's  emissary to MacArthur  in  August,
1950,  when  the  problem  of  the  offshore  islands  and  Formosa
figured  in  the  strategy  of  the  Korean  war.  Harriman's  memo-
randum  to  Truman   on  that  mission   (as  printed   in   volume
two  of  Truman's  memoirs)   is  relevant now.
MacArthur  Cynical  About   Chiang
MacArthur  spoke  to  Harriman  then  "about  the  problem  of
the  island  of  Quemoy,  dose  to  the  mainland.   The  General-
issimo  claims  to  have  70,000  men  there  which  is  important
from  the  standpoint  of  eventually  landing  on  the  mainland,
but  has no  value to  the  U.  S."   (Our italics).
Harriman   said  he  pointed   out  to  MacArthur  "the  basic
conflict  of  interest  between  the  U.  S.  and  the   Generalissimo's
position  as  to  the  future  of  Formosa,  namely,  the   preventing
of  Formosa's  falling  into  hostile  hinds."   Harriman  thought
the  best  way  to  take  care  of  American  interest   in   Formosa
"would   be  through  the  medium  of  the  UN  to  establish  an
independent   government."
Chiang,  on  the  other  hand,  Harriman  observed  "had only
the  burning  ambition  to  use  Formosa  as  a  stepping  stone  for
his  re-entry to  the  mainland."   MacArthur  took  a  cynical view
of  this,  according  to  Harriman.   MacArthur  "recognized  that
this  ambition could  not  be  fulfilled,  and  yet  thought  it  might
be  a  good  idea  to  let  him  land  and  get  rid  of  him  that  way."
What  Harriman  stressed  to  MacArthur  then  is crucial  again
now.    "I  explained  in  great  detail,"   Harriman  reported   to
Truman,  "why  Chiang  was  a  liability,  and  the  great  danger
of  a  split  in  the  unity of  the  United  Nations  on  the  Chinese-
Communist-Formosa   policies;   the   attitude   of   the   British,
Nehru,  and   such  countries  as  Norway,  who, although   stal-
wart  in  their  determination  to  resist  Russian  aggression,   did
not  want to  stir  up  trouble  elsewhere.   I  pointed  out  .  .  .  the
complications  that  might  result  from  any  mis-steps  in  dealing
with  China  and  Formosa."
The  Morality  of  Nuclear  Weapons
There   are  equally  compelling   reasons  for   trying  to   get
Rockefeller  to  break  his  silence.   For  he  is  chairman  of   the
Rockefeller  Brothers  Fund  panel  which  earlier  this  year pub-
lished  a  report  on  International Security:  The  Military  Aspect
which  advocated  limited  nuclear  war  for  just  such  situations
as  now  confront  us  on  the  Formosa  straits.   The  basic  thesis
of  that  report  was  that  the  American  people  should  be pre-
pared  psychologcally  and .politically  for  military  showdowns
not  merely  in  cases  of   "overt   aggression   but  also  by  trans-
formations  which  are  made  to  appear,   insofar  as   possible,
as  not  aggression  at  all. .  .  .  Greece  has  furnished  one ex-
ample;  Vietnam  another;  the  Middle  East  still  another.  .  .  .
We  must  also  realize  that  non-overt  aggressions  present  is-
sues  which  are  deliberately and  intrinsically  unclear."
Rockefeller's  panel   urged   that  we  fight  if   necessary  and
with  nuclear weapons  rather  than  give  in  at  such  points  even
though  the  issues  may  be  unclear.   The  prize  sentence  of  the
Rockefeller   report   (which  should  go  into   some   anthology
of  inhumanity)  is  its  defense  of  nuclear  weapons.    "Moral-
ity  does  not  depend,"  the  Rockefeller  report   says  (p.  26),
"on  the  type  of  explosive,   but  upon  the  use  to  which  the
explosive   is  put."  Is  this  the  way  Rockefeller   feels   about
Quemoy?   Does  he  think  it  possible  to  wage  a  limited  nu-
clear war with  China?  Would  be  use nuclear  weapons  against
the  artillery  battering  Quemoy?,
IPS    Speaks    on   Formosa  Nov.  23,   8:30   p.  m.,   Commander   Hotel,   16   Garden  St.,  Cambridge,   Mass.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ....
Street   ....
City     ........................................Zone............State.............. —
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  moB.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
IO/I3/M
(To)  Name
Street     ........
City     ........................................Zone............State................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington, D. C.
Post Office
I.  V.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act of  March  S, 1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December at  B618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington   IB,  D. C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and  edited   by  I.  F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. stone.   Subscription:
IB  In  the  D. S.;  (6  In  Canada;   HO  elsewhere.   Air  Mall  rates:  (IS  to  Europe;  *20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED