I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958nov10.pdf

============================================================

Ralph  Lapp   Vindicates Pauling  on  Carbon-14, P.  3
Dr.  Otto  Nathan  on  the  1958  Depression,  Pps.  2-3;  Danger  Signals  in  the  Election  Results,  P.  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  44NOVEMBER  10,  1958'<>'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.16  CENTS
The  New  Menace  Hidden  in  the  'Clean'  H   Bomb
Behind  the  closed  doors  of  Lancaster  House  in  London,  on
the  afternoon  of  Friday,  July  5,  1957,  Jules  Moch  of  France
delivered  a  warning  of  which  few  are  aware.   The  occasion
was  the   131st  meeting  of  the   5-power  subcommittee  of   the
UN   Disarmament  Commission.   It   was  only   made  public
months  later,  and  then  only  in  the  sense  that  the  mountain-
ous   transcript   of   these   interminable  year-long  talks   was
dumped  on  the  press  table  at  the  UN  headquarters  in  New
York.   Few  of  us  had  time  to  read  it,  and  I  myself  only  dug
out  the  record  when  my  curiosity  was  aroused  by  a  reference
to  it  in  Philip Noel-Baker's  new  book,  "The  Arms  Race."
A  New  Point  of  No  Return
What  Moch  had  to  say  that  day  in  London  provides  the
best  answer  to  those  like  the  AEC's  new  chairman,  John  A.
McCone,  who  argue  that  a  cessation  of  testing   is  not  dis-
armament  and  to  those  like  Dr.   Edward  Teller  who  plead
that  an  end  of  testing   will   prevent   us  from  developing  a
"clean"   bomb.   What   they  mean  by  a  "clean"  bomb  is  a
bomb which is a pure thermonuclear device,  depending wholly
on  fusion  rather  than   fission.   "Under   present  world  condi-
tions,"  M.  Moch  warned,  "such  a  discovery  might  well  rule
out  all  possibility of  controlling  the  cut-off  of  the  production
of  fissionable  materials for  military purposes,  because the  new
explosive  materials  and   detonators  might   be  producible   by
comparatively  routine  methods  employing   substantially   fewer
resources  than  are  required  for  the  production  of  fissionable
materials.   We  should  then  have  passed  the  'point  of  no  re-
turn'  .  .  .  Control  over  future  production,  which  at  present  is
still  feasible,  would  in  its  turn  become  impossible,   and  the
world  would  have  moved  farther  along  the  road  to  catastro-
phe."   These  words  deserve  wider  attention.
So  long   as  bombs  depend   on  fissionable  materials,   Mr.
Noel-Baker   explains,   their   production    requires    "extensive
plants,  which  cannot  be  concealed."    On  the  other  hand  the
making   of   jusionable   material   for   H-bombs   "is   done   by
electrolysis,  and  the  necessary  installations  can  be   relatively
small."   Once  an  H-bomb  can be  detonated  "clean,"  i.e.  with-
out  using  fissionable  materials,  "the  raw  materials"  for  mak-
ing  them  "are  so abundant  that  no  control  of  them  would  be
possible  at  all.    In   fact,"   Mr.  Noel-Baker   writes,  " 'clean'
bombs  are  now  the  next  great  danger  in  the  arms  race,  and
the  strongest  of  all  reasons  for  stopping  tests."
Hoover  Proposed   Abolition  of  The  Bomber
Once  this  new  stage   of   technology   is  reached   even   the
smaller  and  poorer  nations  could  afford  to  threaten  each  other
and  the  world  in  thermonuclear  megatons.   The  clocks  that
tick  away  as  the   testing  parley  begins   in  Geneva   and   the
1  2 *                                                                                                      17
United  Nations  sets  itself  up  as  an  81-member  disarmament
commission  are  clocks  which  mark  the  ever  shrinking   min-
utes  that  separate  us  from  this  terrible  new  milestone.    We
have  been  passing  them  rapidly.  It  is  something  of  a  shock
to  be  reminded  by  Mr.  Noel-Baker  that  as  recently  as   1932,
a  personage  as  important  as  President  Herbert   Hoover   was
proposing  the  total  abolition  of  the  bombing  plane   to   the
League of  Nations disarmament conference of  that  year.   How
much  agony  Europe.might  have  been  spared   if   some  such
measure  had  then  been  adopted!
Controls  May  Soon  Be   Impossible
For  us  the  points  of  no  return  click  off  ever  faster.    The
discovery  of  the  atom  bomb was one;  its  use  on  fellow  human
beings  at  Hiroshima  another.   Then  there  was  the  Russian
discovery  of  the  secret.   There  was  the  moment  when  Robert
Oppenheimer  sealed  his  own  doom  by  daring  to  suggest   that
we ought to negotiate with  the  Russians  before  playing  Frank-
enstein  to  the  next  monster,  the  H-bomb.   They  got  it  before
we  did.  Then  there  came the  new  terror,  the  Intercontinental
Ballistic Missile, which can carry death  in  30  minutes  between
the  Eastern  and  Western  hemispheres,  another  Russian  first.
We  can  still  talk,  and  hope  to  in  November   at  Geneva,  of
some  way  to  prevent  surprise  attacks  by  ICBM.   But   when
and  if  the  'clean'  bomb  comes,  as  it  will  if  testing  goes  on,
controls  will  be  impossible.   A  dark  night  of  fear  may  settle
on  mankind, dividing it  into  ugly  garrison  state   dictatorships,
ever  tense  for  enemies within  and  without.   The  men  on  our
side  obsessed  with  fear  of   Communism  may  by  this   route
bring  the  worst  kind  of  Stalinism  everywhere.
Trickery  on  Both  Sides
This  is  the  danger  we must  try  to  bring  home  to  people  if
pressure   is  to  be  aroused   for   success   in  the   new  parleys.
Trickery  menaces  them  from  both  sides;  ours  insists  in  wrap-
ping  test  cessation  in  a package  with  endless  qualifications  and
loopholes.    On  the  other  side,  the  Russians  are  trying  to  re-
nege  on  their  agreement   to   set  up   controls;   they   want   a
promise  to  end  tests  without  inspection.   On  our  side,  the  un-
willingness  to  end  tests  has  deep  roots  in  the  fear  that  with-
out  the  arms  race,  American  capitalism  will  bog  down   into
depression.   On   the  other   side,   there   is  a  psychosis   about
secrecy  inconceivable  except  to  those  who  have  actually  been
in  Russia,  where  even  telephone   books  are  not  freely  acces-
sible.   Our  leadership  has  no  faith  that  our  system  can  work
without   the  perpetual   inflationary  fevers  of   the   arms   race.
Their  leadership  has  no  faith  that  their  system  can  work  un-
less  kept  closed  as  a  hothouse  against  fresh  winds  and  fresh
ideas.   Hence  the  deadlock  already  visible.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'8 Weekly,  November 10,1958
A  Distinguished  Economist  Looks  at the  Lessons  of the  1958  Depression  . .
The  business  cycle  has  been  an  especial  concern  of  the
distinguished  economist,  Dr.  Otto  Nathan,  first  under  the
Weimar  Republic  in  Germany,  then  as  special   economic
adviser  here  in  1930-31  to  President  Hoover's  Emergency
Committee  of  Employment,  and  later as  a  lecturer on  eco-   •
nontics  at  Princeton,  Columbia,  Vassar,  Howard  and  New
York  University.  He  was  chief  economic analyst  for   the
Treasury  in  1944-45.   This  background  gives  particular  in-
terest  to  his  views  on our  current economic situation,  writ-
ten  by  request  for  the  Weekly.
BY  DR.  OTTO  NATHAN
The  apologists  of  American  capitalism   rejoice  in  the  con-
tention  that  the  recent  depression  had  come to  an  end earlier
than   many   expected   and  that   capitalism   had   once   more
demonstrated  its  inherent  recuperative  powers.  A  look  at  the
many  tables  and  charts  which  the  statistical  mills  are  cease-
lessly   grinding   out  does  indeed  indicate  that,  taking   the
economy  as  a  whole and  forgetting   about  conditions  in  indi-
vidual  industries  and businesses,  the  contraction  halted  some-
time  early  last  Spring  and that  expansionist  forces  have  since
operated.   In  the  six  months  that  elapsed,  steel   production
rose  by  over  30%  (still  about  1/3  below  its  previous  peak),
orders,  production  and  sales  of  machinery   and  durable  con-
sumer  goods  have  been  increasing  considerably,  personal  in-
comes  and  consumption  reached  new  highs,  industrial  profits
have  been rising, the  stock  market  has  been extremely  active
at  fast  increasing  prices,  and  total  national  income  regained
about  half  of  its  loss  during  the  depression.  On the  surface,
these  changes  seem  impressive.   What  remains  conveniently
hidden, are  the  many unevenesses as well as the  many  serious
uncertainties  and  defects  in  the  economy, most  important  of
which  is  the  almost  unchanged  large  number  of  around  7
million unemployed (including the  millions of only partly em-
ployed  workers).  It  is,  therefore,  a  euphemism  to  say  that
the  depression  is  "over."
To  both  apologists  and  critics  of  capitalism  the  depression
should  provide  food  for  thought.   The  apologists  should  real-
ize  that  capitalism,  in  essence,  has  not  changed;  the  critics,
that  many changes  in  capitalist  institutions  have  taken  place
which  make  dogmatic  reasoning  and  over-simplification more
misleading  than  ever.
A  Myth  Exploded
The  1958  depression  has  made  it  clear  that  capitalism   is
as  unstable,  insecure,  and  unpredictable  as  ever.   The  myth,
so  ingeniously  and  laboriously built  up,  of  a  depression-proof
American  economy has  been  exploded.  For  years  the  apolp-
gists  have  claimed  that  the   government  and  the   business
world  had  at  last  accomplished  the  miracle  of  never-ceasing
"balanced  growth."  That  was  meant  to  imply  the  possibility
of  continuous  expansion  of  productive  capacity  without   the
disequilibria   and  imbalances  that   have   characterized   eco-
nomic  development  ever  since  capitalism  came  of  age.   The
critics,  on  the  other  hand,  have  held  that  the  massive  gov-
ernment  expenditure  for  military, purposes  provided  a  tem-
porary  cushion against  depressions.  Now, it  has  been demon-
strated  that  both  views  are  mistaken.   Capitalist  instability
is  still  a stark  reality:  the  built-in  stabilizers,  such  as  social
insurance   and  the   automatically   depression-responsive    in-
come-tax-collection-system,  or  continued  heavy  public  spend-
ing  for  armaments  are  incapable  of  preventing  imbalances
and  wide  fluctuations;  capitalism  is  not  able  to  enjoy  expan-
sion  with  relative  stability  without  a  broad  measure  of  cen-
tralized,  over-all  planning.
It  must  have  come as a  shock and a  lesson to  the  apologists
that,  despite  all  the  wonders  which  the  American  economy
had  allegedly   accomplished   since  the  end  of  the  war,   pre-
cipitate  declines  could still  occur.  Within  a  few  months,  pro-
duction  in  the  steel  industry  shrank  by  almost  50%  and  un-
employment  rose  from  2 to  5 million men  totally  out  of  work
and  millions only employed part-time.   The  depression  affect-
ed  almost  all  parts  of  the  economy.  It  made  it  obvious,  al-
though  daily  experiences  at  all  times—depressions  or  booms
—should  have  taught  the  lesson  long  since,  that  "security"
cannot   exist  for   anybody  under   capitalism.    All   decisions
about  purchases,  sales,  inventories,  investments,  prices,  etc.,
have  to  be  made  without  real  knowledge  of  what  the  future
may  be.  False  investments,  overcapacity,  disequilibria,  pain-
ful  losses,  failures,  unemployment   and  personal  misery  are
Award  for  Insipidity
In  a  short  pause  for  station  identification, we  would
like  to  make  our  annual  award  for  sheer  insipidity  to
CBS,  Walter  Cronkite,  and  Prudential  Insurance Com-
pany  (the  sponsor)  of  "Twentieth Century's" two  part
Sunday  night  show  called  "The  Red  Sell."   The   low
point   of   this   supposed  expose  of   Communist   propa-
ganda  was  a  bit  by  Daniel  Schorr,  who  knows  better,
suggesting   that   Sputnik   was   a   "gimmick" designed
deliberately  it  seems  to  undermine  faith  in  capitalism.
One  inane  East  German propaganda  film  about  U.  S.
soldiers  misbehaving  in  a  night club  was  used over and
over  again,  though  we  have  made  films  as  silly  and dis-
torted  on our side.  This  "Twentieth  Century"  show  was
just  about  as  wooden  as  the  most  wooden  of  Commu-
nist  efforts,   and  would  immensely  improve  morale  in
Moscow  if  shown there  since  it  would  demonstrate  that
tasteless  propaganda  is  not  a  Soviet  monopoly.  Pru-
dential  Insurance Company  must  be  run  by  executives
of  little  taste  and less  intelligence if  they  buy  tripe  of
this  kind  with  their  policy-holders'  money.
hence unavoidable.  The depression  even  accentuated  the  feel-
ing  of  insecurity  because  of  the  inevitable  diversity  of  pre-
dictions  about  its  course,  its  potential  depth  and  its  possible
duration.   Whom  should  businessmen  believe?   What  should
they  accept  as  the  basis  of  their  decisions?
It  is  chiefly  to  offset  or  circumvent  this  basic  insecurity,
as  it  affects  groups  or  individuals,  that  capitalism  has  been
changing  for  many years,  and  particularly  since  the  1929 de-
pression.   Whether  it  is  the  concentration  of  economic  power,
which  makes  planning  within  industries  and  better   protec-
tion  of  profits  possible,  whether  it  is  trade-unionism  which
tends  to  improve working  and  living  conditions of  workers  in
various  ways,  whether  it  is  bank  deposit  insurance,   social
security,  price  and  production  policies  in  agriculture  or  some
other  scheme^—they  all were directed  at  minimizing the  hard-
ships  of  capitalist  instability   in  segments  of   the  economy,
and  they  all  have  done  so  with  more  or  less  success.    But
have  those  measures   also   minimized   over-all  instability?
A  depression  in  capitalism  is  always  an  indication  of  mal-
adjustments  and  disproportionalities  that  inevitably  accumu-
late   during  a  boom.   Sooner  or  later,  at   an  unpredictable
moment, they  cause  a  contraction in  the  economy  which feeds
on  itself   through   self-cumulative  processes.   Is   it   possible
that, because of the  many changes  in  capitalism,  those which
were  mentioned  and  many  others,  such  maladjustments  may
develop  more  slowly  or  may  not  attain  their  former  magni-
tude  and  that  depressions  may  thus  be  less  severe?   Is  it
possible  that  those   self-cumulative   processes  will  be   offset
to  some  extent  by  a  slower  decline  of  consumer  purchasing
power—thanks  to  unemployment and  old-age  insurance,  long-
term   collective  labor  contracts   which  prevent   or  postpone
steep   declines  in  wage-rates,   the  maintenance  of  farm   in-
come  and  the  better  regulated   dividend  policy  of   corpora-
tions?   Further,  is  it  possible  that  the  course  of  depressions
has  been  altered   by  the   absence  of  the   customary  initial
breakdown  in  the  money  and  credit  markets  and  by  the  lack
of  bank failures  due to  deposit  insurance ?   Is  it  possible  that
governments,   whatever   their   political   constellation,    will
henceforth  be compelled to take  certain  anti-depression  meas-
ures,  as  the  Eisenhower  administration   did,  however  inad^-
quately,  during this  depression, and that  the  resulting deficit-
financed  spending  may  minimize  those  self-cumulative  pro-
cesses ?
Over-All  Instability  Reduced
The  answer  to  all  these  Questions  is  affirmative:  no  serious
and  honest  student  can  deny  that  the  institutional  changes
in  capitalism,  resulting  both from  self-evolutionary  processes
in  the  system  and  from  measures  adopted  to  correct  its  most
intolerable  features  may  cut  the  edges  of  over-all  instability
and  hence  preclude  a  repetition  of  the  1857  or  1929  debacle.
But  the  inherent  instability  of  capitalism,   affecting  millions
even  in  times  of  prosperity,  and  the  unpredictability   of   its
developments  have  remained  with  us.   The  present  situation
offers  a  good  example.   One  leading  business  magazine  as-
serts  that,  the  first  phase  of  the  upturn  having  come  to  an
end,  the  second  phase  of  expansion  is  just  beginning  "which
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November 10, 1958
Little  Decline  in  Joblessness  Though  Business  Activity   Has  Revived
will  open the  vista  of  an  unprecedented boom."   On the  other
hand,  gloom is  being  expressed  in  many  quarters  due  to  the
unevenness  of  the  recovery,  due  to  the  concern felt  for  par-
ticular  industries,   such  as   automobiles,  and  chiefly   due  to
the  very  unusual  situation  in  the  money and  credit  markets.
Sharply  higher  interest  rates  and  tightening   of  the   credit
supply,  as  they  have  lately  occurred,  are  quite   uncustomary
so  early  after  the  end  of  a  depression.   Fears  are  being  ex-
pressed  that  this  monetary  condition may  stifle  the  recovery
movement  in  its  infancy, may  discourage  or  prevent  the  re-
sumption   of  investment  in  plant   and  equipment,  so  indis-
pensable  to  economic  expansion, and  may throttle commercial
and  particularly   residential   construction  which  has   so   far
been  an  important  factor  in  the  recovery.
Forecasting  Hazardous
The causes  responsible for  the monetary developments once
more  illustrate  the  irreparable  instability   and  vicissitudes  of
present-day  capitalism.  Those  courses  are:  the   government's
need  for  relatively  large borrowings  which  are  the  inevitable
consequence  of  anti-depression  measures  and  which,  through
pushing up interest  rates, may  defeat  their  very  purpose;  in-
voluntary   liquidation   of   wild  speculations   in   government
securities,  and,  finally,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board's  urge  to
protect   the   economy  from   the   alleged  danger   of  inflation.
Capitalists  will  always  discover  new  ways  of  making  money:
a  case  in  point  were  last  spring's  huge  speculations   in—of
all  things!—government  securities,  facilitated  by  ridiculously
easy  credit  opportunities.  When some of the  speculators  were
forced  to  sell,  prices  tumbled.   How  stable   is  a  system  in
which  loans  made  to  the  government—the  "safest"  of  any
security!—lose  more  than   10%  of  their  value  within  a  few
months  and  interest  rates  on  Treasury  Bills  increase  from
0.6 to  almost  3% from  June  to  September?    A system,  more-
over,  in  which  the   Treasury's   legitimate   desire   for   easy
money  and  low interest  rates  is  undermined by  the  Central
Bank's   apparent   obsession  to  fight  "inflation"   through   re-
stricting  the  credit  supply  and  through  favoring  higher  in-
Copies  are  still  available  at  the  bulk  rate  of  three
cents  per  hundred or  more  of  the  full  text  of  the  final
statement  issued  by  the  third  Pugwash  nuclear  con-
ference   held  in  Austria  recently.   This   text   has  ap-
peared  nowhere  else  in  the  United  States   except  the
Oct.  31 issue  of  Science,  organ  of  the  American  Asso-
ciation  for  the  Advancement of  Science.
terest  rates.   Let  it  be  said  that  no  "inflationary"   situation
exists  today  in  the  United  States;  further,  if  it  did  exist,
the  tools  with which to  fight  it  would  be  quite  different  from
those  applied  in  the  last  few  years.
The  cloud  of tighter  and  more  expensive  money which  has
lately  been developing over the  economy  is  the  excuse for  the
reservations    which  some  diagnosticians   and   analysts   feel
about  economic  conditions in  the  near  future.   Nobody should
blame  them  for  their  caution;  the  innate  inconsistencies,  dis-
harmonies   and  complexities   of  capitalism  and  our  lack  of
real  knowledge  make  any  short-term   forecast   a  hazardous
project  at  any  time.
There   is  one  part   of  the   economy,  however,  where   the
clouds  are  really   dark:  the  labor  market.    Despite  the  in-
crease  in  production, unemployment has  hardly  receded.  The
increase  in  the   productivity  of  labor   and   in  the   hours  of
work, both  customary  at  this  stage  in the  business  cycle, and
the  steady  influx  of  additional  employable  workers,  due  to
the  increasing  population,  have  offset  the  potential   absorp-
tion  of  men  by  the  improvement  of  production.   Even  if   the
recovery  should  make  headway  in  the  near  future,  the  out-
look  for  labor  remains  far   from  favorable.    Once  more  the
American   people,   and  particularly   the   American    working
class,  may  have  the  painful   opportunity  to  learn  that  un-
employment  is  the  almost  chronic  malady  of  capitalism  and
that,  in  capitalism,  even  "prosperity" is  only a facade  behind
which  a  so-called  boom  exists  side  by  side  with  instability,
idleness  and  misery.
Linus Pauling's  Warnings  About  Carbon  14 Vindicated  By  New  AEC  Study
In  an  address  in  Washington   last  April   28,  Dr.  Linus      natal  deaths."
Pauling  for  the  first  time  called  public  attention  to  a  new
menace  in  radioactive  fallout  from  bomb  tests,  that  of  Car-
bon  H.   (See  full  account in  Dr.  Pauling's  trenchant  book,
No  More  War).   He  was met  with a  barrage from  the  AEC
which  made  him   appear   to  be  a  sensationalist,  unreliable
unscientific.    Now  it  appears   that  the  AEC's  own  Division
of   Biology  and  Medicine   has  discovered   that  Dr.  Pauling
was  right.   Though  this  is  news,  it  got  into  no  press  re-
leases  and  was  given  to  no  reporters.   It  remained  for  Dr.
Ralph  E.  Lapp,  whose  books  have  done  so much  to educate
the  public on nuclear matters,  to  call  attention  to  Dr.  Paul-
ing's   vindication  in  a  letter  which  the  New   York   Times
published  on  Nov.  2.   We  reprint  it  here  for  readers  who
may  have  missed  it.   This  is  another  example  of  the  way
the  AEC's  Dr.  Libby  and  some  of  his  close  associates  mis-
lead   the  public,  and  of  how  poorly   the  papers  cover news
which  runs  counter  to  the   official    AEC   pro-testing   line.
—IFS.
To  the  Editor  of  the  New  York  Times:
The  New York Times  reported  on  April  29 that  Dr.  Linus
Pauling  had  called  attention  to  the  radioactive  menace  of
bomb-produced   radiocarbon   14.   Subsequently,   Drs.   Kulp,
Kroecker  and  Schulert,  in  a  letter  published  in  The  Times
on  May  2,  took  issue  with  Dr.  Pauling,  criticizing  him  for
erroneous  statements  and  admonishing  "exaggerated   state-
ments  by  respected  scientists  only  add  to  the  public's  con-
fusion  and  do not  contribute  to  the  solution  of  the  problem."
Dr.  W.  F.  Libby,  scientist-member  of  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission,  stated  on  May  3  "Therefore,   the  extra  radia-
tion  dose  from  this product  of  nuclear  tests  is  equivalent  to
an  increase  in  altitude  of  a  few  inches."
In  a  letter  printed  on  May 16 Dr.  Pauling  challenged  the
views  of  Drs. Kulp and  Libby, stating  that  the  radiocarbon
from  thirty  megatons  of  fission  energy  release  "will  ulti-
mately  be  responsible  for  the  birth  of  230,000 seriously  de-
fective  children  and  also  for   420,000  embryonic  and  neo-
The  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine of  the  Atomic  En-
ergy   Commission  has  just   issued   Document  WASH-1008,
"The  Biological  Hazard  to  Man  of  Carbon  14 from  Nuclear
Weapons."    Since  this  writer  has  in  the  past  been  critical
of  the  A. E.  C.,  I  am happy to  compliment that  agency  upon
a  very objective and  fair  evaluation of  the  carbon  14 hazard.
The  study  reviews  the  variety  of  estimates  made  for  the
carbon  14  problem,  examines  the  different   assumptions  of
various  scientists,   including  those  of  Dr.  O.  I.  Leipunsky,
and  concludes  that  bomb carbon  14 produce  to  date   (prior
to  latest  Soviet  tests)  may  ultimately  involve  100,000  cases
of   gross  physical  or  mental  defect,  380,000  cases  of  still-
births  and  childhood  deaths  and  900,000 cases  of  embryonic
and  neonatal  deaths.
'    The A. E.  C. report  comments on  these  figures  by  stress-
ing  that  "genetic damage estimates  are  subject  to  large  un-
certainties  and  should  be  used  in  this  light."
Even  though  some  of   Dr.'  Pauling's   assumptions   differ
from  those  of  the  A.  E.  C. report,  it  is  significant  that  his
estimates   for  thirty  megations  of  bombs  are  roughly  half
those  for  the  bombs  tested   up  to  this  summer.   Reliable
reports  put  this  megatonnage  at  sixty  megations,   so  that
Dr.  Pauling's   estimates  agree  quite  closely  with  the  most
recent  A.  E.  C.  estimates.
Absolute  numbers such  as  those  cited  for.carbon  14  gene-
tic  damage  are  impressive,   especially  when  they  apply  to
the  266  future   generations   covered  by  the  persistence  of
carbon  14's  long life  (average  life  of  8,000 years).  The  ex-
pectable   annual  rate  of  carbon  14  casualties  is  of  course
very  low  and  is  not  detectable.   Thus  one's  evaluation  of
the  hazard  depends  upon  one's  point  of  view—this  fact  ae- *
counts  for  the  disagreement  of  some  experts.
When  the  experts  disagree  the  people  may  be  confused.
However,  disagreements  in  science   are   often   essential  to
progress  and   understanding.
RALPH  E.  LAPP.
Arlington,  Va.,  Oct.  27,  1958
1   7  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, November 10,1958
Many  New  Progressives  Among  the  Democrats  But  Faster  Arms  Race  in  Prospect
Election  Returns  Good  News  for  the  Negro  But  Not  For  Peace
There  is  much  to  cheer  in  the  election  results.   The  retire-
ment  of  Knowland,  Bricker,  Potter,  Malone  and  Revercomb
from  the  Senate  is  good  news  even  if  their  successors  are  as
yet  unknown quantities.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  note  that  Eugene
McCarthy,   who  made  a  strong  progressive   record   in   the
House,  has  been  elected  to  the  Senate  from  Minnesota;  that
another  young liberal,  Frank  McGee,  an  assistant  professor  of
history  at  the  University of  Wyoming,  defeated  the  incumbent
Republican   Barrett   for   the  Senate  from   that   State;   that   a
Democrat,  Moss,  defeated  both  the  conservative Watkins  and
the  ultra-reactionary J.  Bracken  Lee  in  a  three-cornered  race
for  the  Senate in Utah; that Proxmire was returned  to  the  Sen-
ate  by  Wisconsin,  Langer  by  North   Dakota,  Gore  by  Ten-
nessee  and  Yarborough  by  Texas;  that  Chester   Bowles  will
be  in  the   House   from   Connecticut;  and   that  William    H.
Meyer,  the  first  Democrat ever  to  be  elected  from  Vermont  to
the  House  has  been  active  (according  to  the  news  ticker)   in
the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union.   We   deeply  regret   the
defeat  of  Leader  by  Hugh  Scott  in  Pennsylvania;  the  former
was  a fine Governor and  would  have made a  most  progressive
Senator.
The  Negro's  Opportunity
The  huge  Democratic  landslide  brings  with  it  to  Congress
many  fresh   progressive  faces.    Even  the   incomplete  returns
showed  majorities  so  large  that  the  Southern  Democrats  will
have  great   difficulty   in  controlling   the   party  in   Congress.
Leadership  is  likely  to  pass  from  moderate  Southerners  like
Johnson  in the  Senate and  Rayburn  in  the  House  to  the  North-
ern  liberals.  This  will  further  weaken  the  moderates  in  the
South   and   tend   further   to   polarize   the   conflict   over   the
Negro's  rights.   With  a  bitter  fight  looming  ahead  in  I960,
in  which  the  Northern  Negro  vote  will  be  crucial,  prospects
were  never better  for  real  gains  on  civil  rights  legislation  and
in  the  fight  against  the  filibuster.
It  is  unfortunate that  the  country  will  be  closer  to  a  sec-
tional  North-South  division  than  ever  before  since  the  Civil
War,  but  only  a  firm  showdown  with  the  white  supremacists
might  possibly prevent a steady deterioration  on  the  race  front.
Press  Time  Flash
Incomplete  returns  indicate  that  the  Corliss  Lament
Independent  Socialist  ticket  we  supported  did very  badly.
The  New  York  city vote was  Lamont  for  Senator, 37,992;
McManus  for  Governor,  23,538;  and  Mulzac  for  Control-
ler,  27,006.  Total  City  and  State  vote  for   McManus  in
1954  was   96,000  and  for   Lamont  in  1952  on  the   ALP
ticket  for  Senator, 104,700; his city total  that year, 94,000.
This  election  holds  a high  potential  of  victory  for  the  Negro,
and  for  labor  it  demonstrates that  unionism  cannot  be  beaten
via   right-to-work  laws   (soundly   trounced   in  all   industrial
States).   Where  Nelson  Rockefeller  holds  an  edge  for  I960
is  that  he  represents  a  big  capitalist  willing  to  serve  Negro
aspiration,  to  advance  the  welfare  State  and   to  work  with
union  labor—but  asking  in  return  a  more  intense  arms  race
and  a  more  belligerent  foreign  policy;  in  this  too  he  has  a
secure  potential  alliance with  George  Meany.
The   Rockefeller  strategy,  as  worked  out  by  such  shrewd
advisers  as Anna Rosenberg,  is  really the  Democratic  formula.
The  conservatives,  after  this  election,  have  no  hope  of  win-
ning through  either  party, and  part  of  them  will  be  won  over
to  extremist lunatic  fringe  movements of  the  right.   Unfortu-
nately  this  is  also  a  setback  for  the  fiscal  and  military  con-
servatives,  who  wanted  some  curb  on  the  arms  race  and  ad-
venturism.   The  huge  Democratic  majorities  mean  more  arms
spending,  more  inflation,  more  cold  war;  it  is  significant that
Harriman  in  his  campaign  attacked  Nelson   Rockefeller   for
having   taken  part   in   the   summit  meetings   at   Geneva,   as
though  that  were  some  kind  of  crime,  though   Rockefeller's
chief   contribution  was  as  vehicle  for   the   aerial   inspection
gimmick,  a  smart  publicity  device  to  put  the  Russians  on  the
defensive  but  not  a  real  way  to  advance  the  cause  of   peace.
On  the  peace  front  this  election  offers  no  promise.   I  suspect
that  if  the  Republicans had  spent  more  on  arms  and  created
more  employment,  there  would  have  been  no  such  deep  tide
against   them.   The   Democrats,   among   them   the   strongest
mouthpieces  of   the   aviation  and   missiles   lobbies,   will  not
make  the  same  mistake.
IPS  Speaks  Nov.  13,  8  p.m.   Jewish  Community  Center,  1160   Dickinson,  Springfield,    Mass.,  on  Foreign  Policy
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City      ........................................Zone............State.......-......._
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
11/IO/BB
(To)  Name
Street     .......
City      ...,....................................Zone............State...........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I    F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  tbe  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  16,  D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   V.  8tone;  Circulation  Manager,  Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$6  In  the  U.  S.;  W  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $16 to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED