I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958apr14.pdf

============================================================

Contrasting  Baruch's  Views on  the  Recession  With  The  National  Planning  Association's,  Page 4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  15
APRIL   14,  1958
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
More  Urgent  Than  Fallout  and  Nuclear   Testing
For   those  who  fear   a  nuclear  holocaust  the  most   urgent
task  at  this  moment  is  the  defeat  of  S  3165,  the  Eisenhower
Administration  bill  to  make  nuclear  armament  and  the  nu-
clear  arms  race  world-wide.   It  is  in  this  explosive  measure,
which  has  been  kept  well  hidden  from  public  view,  that  the
real  purposes  of  the  Administration may  be  read.   The   rest
—Eisenhower's  feeble  new  note  to  Krushchev,  Dulles's  new
ramblings   about   inspection,  the   as   yet   unrevealed   Killian
technical   report—is  flim-flam,  designed   to  distract  attention
from  the  realities,  a  series  of  delaying actions  while  the  Ad-
ministration   proceeds  to   carry   out   its  plans.    "We   do   not
believe,"  Mr.  Dulles  said  self-righteously  on  April  8,  in  ex-
plaining  why  we  will  not  sell  arms  to  the  Indonesian   gov-
ernment,  "that  the  promiscuous  spread  of  large  amounts  of
major  armaments around  the  world  is  a  sound  or  a  healthy
practice."   Since  this  is  exactly  what  S  3165   is  designed   to
do   in   nuclear  armament,  it   was  hard   not   to   suspect   the
Secretary  of  having  a  sly  sense  of  humor.
A  Way  to  Subsidize Military  Reactors Abroad
Two  amendments have  been  made  to  S3165  in  committee,
and  one  section  has  been  stricken  out  to  make  it  more  pal-
atable.    These   further   illuminate  the   far-reaching  purposes
of  the  bill.   The  section  stricken  would  have  authorized   the
AEC  to  make  contracts  for  not  more  than   15  years  and  not
more   than   $200,000,000    without   competitive   bidding   or
Congressional  appropriation  to   "acquire  any  special  nuclear
material,  or  any  interests  therein   outside  the  U.   S."   This
would  have  made  possible  sweeping  subsidies  to   encourage
the  establishment  abroad  of  U.  S.  plants  producing  nuclear
materials  for  military  use.   International  General   Electric  has
just  signed  a  contract  to  establish  a  nuclear  reactor  on  For-
mosa  (see  the  financial  page  of  the  New   York   Herald-Trib-
nne,  March  30)  for  Chiang  Kai-shek.   Even  with  this  section
out,  the  AEC  can still  help  our  poorer  allies  to  obtain  fission-
able  materials  for  weapons  by  agreeing  to  buy  on  an  annual
basis  part   of   the   output   produced  by   U.  S.  plants   in  such
places  as  Formosa.   This  could  be  enough  to  guarantee  such
operations  against   loss  while  providing  nuclear   raw  mater-
ials  for  allied  countries  without  heavy  expense  to  them.
The   amendments   deserve   as   close   attention.   The    bill
would   allow  the   President   without  consulting   Congress   to
give  away,  or  authorize  the  sale  abroad  by  U.  S.  companies,
of   "non-nuclear   parts   of   atomic  weapons,"   "utilization   fa-
cilities  for  military  applications"   and   "source,  byproduct,  or
special  nuclear material  for  research  on,  development  of,  pro-
duction  of,  or  use  in  atomic  weapons ..."  and  to  exchange
with  allied  foreign  nations  restricted  data  for  "atomic  weapon
design,   development   or  fabrication  capability."    To   appease
an   alarmed  Joint   Committee   on   Atomic  Energy,   the   AEC
5                                        '                                                                                                                            6
From  Crematoria  to  H-Bombs
In  A  Few  Easy   Lessons
"After  this  debate in  the  Bundestag, it  can  no  longer
be a  point of  contention  whether or  not  the  Bundeswehr
will  be  equipped  with  atomic  weapons.   The   decision
has  been made."
—Frankfurter    Allgemeine  Zeitung,  quoted  with   ap-
proval  in  the March  25 Press  Bulletin  distributed
by  the  German  Embassy  in    Washington.
"The    public  debate  on  nuclear  armament  has  over-
shadowed  .  .  .  the  first  anniversary  of  the  new  Ger-
man  conscript  army   .  .  .  Events   have  been  marked
...  by  an  order  that  decorations  and  medals  can  in
future  be  worn  .  .  .  they  will  provide  a  link  with  the
past  which  .  .  .  has  been  sadly  lacking.  Men  will now
be   able   to   look   back   with   pride   to   the   time   they
marched  into  Poland, France,  the  Low  Countries,  East-
ern  Europe,  Russia  and  Africa."
—Dispatch  from  Bonn, London  Times, April  2.
agreed   to  amend  the  bill  so  that  neither  restricted  data   for
producing  weapons  nor  nuclear  materials  for  use  in  making
such  weapons  could   be  transferred  "unless   the   cooperating
nation  has  made  substantial  progress   in  the  development  of
atomic   weapons."    Just   what   "substantial   progress"   is   in-
tended  to  mean  was evaded  by the  AEC  witnesses at  the  hear-
ings,  and  a  suggestion  by  Holifield  that  "operational   atomic
weapons  capability"  be  substituted  was  rejected.
But   whether   "substantial"   is   defined   strictly   or   loosely,
the  effect  would  be  to  stimulate  an  atomic  arms  race  among
the  47  countries  which  qualify  for   nuclear  materials   under
this  measure  because  they  have  mutual   defense   agreements
with  the  U.  S.   Any  nation  which  lagged  behind  in  the  de-
velopment  of  nuclear  weapons  capability  would  run  the  risk
that  one  of   its  rival  neighbors   might   achieve  "substantial"
capability  before  it  did  and  thus  gain  the  advantage  of  U.  S.
nuclear  aid.   This  would   serve  to  shift   the  emphasis   from
development   for  peaceful  uses  to  military  uses,  and   encour-
age  U.   S.  firms  to   sell   military  reactors  abroad.     Reuters'
from   Seoul   reported    (Washington   Post,   March   26)    that
South  Korea,   which   has  been  demanding  atomic  arms,  was
building  an  atomic  research  center.    In  Europe,  the  Germans
have  just  signed  a  little  noticed  weapons   research  agreement
with  the  French   (see  London  Times  from   Bonn,  April   1),
who  already  have  achieved  "substantial   capability."    All  the
desperadoes  of  the  world  will  soon  qualify  for  atomic  weap-
ons  under  this  measure.
The  Pastore  subcommittee  of  the  Joint  Congressional  Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy  was  to  meet  on  April  15  to  decide
whether  to  reopen  public  hearings  or  to  go  ahead  with  this
bill.   Those  who  wish  to  be  heard  and  have  not  yet  wired
Pastore  should  do  so  now.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  14,1958
Capitol  Ticker  Tape:  The  Pauling  Suit,  Ike  to  Krushchev,  Indonesia
THE   SUIT    AGAINST   FALL-OUT:   Thanks   to   the   eminent
character  of  those  who  brought  the  new  suit  against  the  AEC
to  enjoin  testing—Linus  Pauling,  Bertrand  Russell,  Toyohiko
Kagawa,  Norman  Thomas  and  Martin  Niemoeller,  to  mention
only  the  best  known—the  action  has  served  to  make  the  front
pages   and   publicize   the   fall-out   danger.    Unfortunately   as
a  legal  action  it  cannot  be  taken  seriously,  and  there   seems
no  chance  that  it  will  ever  reach  trial  on  the  merits  when  the
AEC  would  be  forced  to  debate  the  question  in  open   court.
The   precedents   in  this  country  are  solidly  against   suits  of
this kind.  In  England, where there  is parliamentary supremacy
and  much  greater  discretion  for  administrative  agencies  than
here,  it  will  be  hard  to  find  a  barrister  intrepid  enough   even
to  venture  into  court  with  it.   As  for  the  Soviet  Union,  its
courts  have  no   power   whatsoever   to   intervene   in   political
questions,   and   have   little   independence.    Joined   with   the
notables  are  three   Japanese   fishermen.   These  are  the   only
plaintiffs  who  have  legal  standing  in  our  courts.   They  might
claim   damages;   they  could   hardly  get  an   injunction.   This
is  a  political,  not  a  judicial question,  to  be  fought  out  in  the
forum  of  public  opinion  not  the  courts.   The  suit,  as  a  stunt,
is  justifiable  however   as  a  means  of   dramatizing  the   issue.
THE   PRESIDENT'S   LETTER   To    KRUSHCHEV,   read   in   the
light  of  Mr.  Dulles's  explanations  the  same  day  at  press  con-
ference,  mark  no  change   whatsoever  in  the  Administration
position  of  insisting  on  its  intricate  package  deal.   As  Sena-
tor  Green,  chairman  of  the   Senate  Foreign   Relations   Com-
mittee,  commented  dryly,  it  "does  not  advance  matters  much."
Even  Senator  Smith  of  N.  J.,  on  the  other  side  of  the  fence,
had  to  admit  that  the  Eisenhower  letter   "does  not  propose
startlingly  new  measures."    The   strategy  is  to  bog   negotia-
tions  down  in  the  mechanics  of  inspection,  and  to  make  the
question  of  inspection  as  complicated  as  possible  in  the  hope
that  the  Russians  will  balk.   The  Administration's  main  ob-
jective,  unswervingly pursued,  is  an  atomic  armed  Germany.
Who   keeps  this  is  mind  will  find  it  easier  to  find  his  way
through  the  intricate  flim-flam  by  which  Mr.  Dulles  is  seek-
ing  to  make  himself  look  more  flexible  than  he  is.
How   BIG Is  AN  ATOMIC  "LITTLE   FELLOW"?   AEC  Com-
missioner  Libby  spoke  of  last  September's  underground   shot
at  Nevada  as  a  "little   fellow,"   almost  endearingly  diminu-
tive.   That  blast  destroying  Ripple  Rock  in  British  Columbia
Religion  and  The  H-Bomb
Mr.  Justice  Brennan  wanted  to  know,  "What  if   the
church  advocated  the  non-use  of  the  H-bomb?"  He  put
the   question   during   argument   last   week   before   the
Supreme   Court  on  the  appeal   from   a  California   law
which   takes   tax   exemption   from   churches   which  do
not  sign  an  oath  swearing   that  they  do  not  advocate
overthrow  of   the  government    "nor  advocate  the   sup-
port  of  a  foreign  government  against  the  United  States
in  event  of  hostilities."  The  attorney  for  Los  Angeles
county,  flushing,  said  opposition   to  use  of  the  H-bomb
would  not  be  regarded  as  a  violation  of  this  oath.   The
test  case  was  brought  by  the  redoubtable  Rev.  Stephen
Fritchman's   First   Unitarian   Church   and   the   Valley
Unitarian-Universalist   Church,   both   of   Los  Angeles,
supported   by   the   American    Civil   Liberties     Union.
ACLU  Attorney   A.  L.  Wirin  argued   the  case  for  the
churchmen.    The   questions    from   the   bench   seemed
sharply  critical  of  the  law.   It  was  attacked  as  a  viola-
tion  of  the  First  Amendment,  a  threat   to  separation
of   Church  and  State   and  a  precedent   for  test  oaths
which  could  enable  the  State  to  determine   what   doc-
trines  a  Church  could  teach.
on  April  5 was described  as  "the  biggest  non-atomic  explosion
ever   deliberately   set   off."    But   it   was   only   1.3   kilotons
equivalent,  as  compared  with  the   1.7  kilotons  of  that  "little
fellow"   in  Nevada.    Coast  and  Geodetic  admits  the  British
Columbia  blast  was  recorded  as  far  away  as  Eureka,  Nevada,
750  miles  to  the  south,   but  many  stations  had   not:  yet  re-
ported.   Carnegie  Institution  at  first  claimed  to  have  "heard"
the  blast  here  in  Washington   but  told  this  correspondent  it
was  "rechecking"  because  the  matter  had  become  "a  political
question."
INDONESIA—INCHING    CLOSER   To     INTERVENTION:    The
strategy  of  the  Administration  seems  to  be  to  force  the  In-
donesian  government  to  buy  arms  from  the  East  against  its
rebels  and  then  accuse  it  of  being  a  Soviet  puppet.    Public
opinion  would  thus  be  prepared   for  the  next  step—granting
belligerent  status  to  the  rebels.   For  seven  months  there  has
been   a  Western   embargo  against   the   sale  of   arms  to   the
Indonesian  government.   The  State  Department   is  playing  it
carefully  but  his  indicated  its  preferences  for  the  rebels.   The
danger  of   international  complications   in  the   Indonesian  af-
fair  is very  real;  this  could  become  another  Korea.
Our  Leading  Scientific  Organ  Is  Not  As  Cocksure About  Testing  As  Ike
"It  goes  without  saying   that  these  experiments,  so  far
as  the  United  States  is  concerned,   are  so  conducted   that
they   cannot   appreciably   affect   human  health."
—Eisenhower  reply   to  Krushchev   on  testing,  April   8.
"As  testing  of  nuclear  weapons  continues   .  .  .  the  need
to   answer   questions   about   the   effects   of   radiation  upon
health  and  longevity   will  become   more   urgent.   Up   until
now,   the  primary  responsibility   for  the  control   and  meas-
urement  of  atomic  radiation  has  been  in  the  hands  of  the
Atomic   Energy    Commission   .  .   .   [its]     double    function
entails  a  potential  conflict  of  interest,  a  conflict  between  the
need   for  testing  and  the   need   for   keeping   the   exposure
to  a  minimum.   Accordingly   it  is  noteworthy   that  the  Pub-
lic  Health  Service  is  taking  steps  to  play  a  larger  part  in
the  field  of  radiation  .  .  .  the  move  will  provide  an  inde-
pendent   source   of   information   about   the  levels  of   radia-
tion,  and  this  information  will  be  appraised  primarily  from
the  standpoint  of  public  health  rather  than  from  the  stand-
point  of  weapon  development.
"The  increased  interest  of  the  Public  Health  Service   can-
not  be  expected  to  provide  quick  answers  to  the  disputed—
and  highly   important—question  of   whether   there  is  or  is
not  a  threshold  of  low  doses  of  radiation,  BUT  THE  SERV-
ICE  CAN  BE  EXPECTED  TO  INCLINE  TO  THE  VIEW
THAT  EVEN  LOW  DOSES   MAY  BE  HARMFUL."  (Em-
phasis  added).
—Editorial  in  Science, organ  of  the  American   Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science, April  4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  U, 1958
The  Iron  Curtains  Dulles  Rings  Down  on  the  Press  and  the  Senate
Two  events  since  provide  an  illuminating  footnote  to  Mr.
Dulles's  dithyramb at  press  conference April  1,  "We   operate
...  in  terms of  a  free  press  .  .  . We  operate  in  terms  of  an
opposition  political  party  .  .  .  We  operate  in  terms  of  an
American  public opinion  .  .  .  and  I  thank  God  that  we  do."
The  first  is the  filing  of  a  suit  by  the  American Civil  Liberties
Union  on  behalf  of  William   Worthy,   Jr.,  of  the  Baltimore
Afro-American,   denied   a  passport   on  the   ground   that   his
recent  visit  to  China  and  Hungary  was  "contrary  to  known
and   existing  U.   S.  foreign  policy  and   otherwise  prejudicial
to  the  interests  of  the  United  States."    Freedom  of  the  press
is  subordinate,  in  Mr.  Dulles's   view,  to  his  conceptions  of
foreign   policy;  the  American  people   are  not  entitled   to  di-
rect  reporting  on  events  in  countries  of  which  the  Secretary
of  State  disapproves.    Mr.  Worthy's  career  as  a  foreign  cor-
respondent  is  ended  by  ukase;  if  Mr.  Dulles  wins  this  suit,
Mr.  Worthy   can  no  longer   travel  abroad.    Other   reporters
are  thus  warned  not  to  defy  the  State  Dept.
The  other  incident  which  indicates  how  peculiar  are  Mr.
Dulles's  views  of  what  constitutes  a  free'political  system  oc-
curred   at  a  recent  executive   session  of   the   Senate   Foreign
Relations  Committee.   Senator  Morse  brought   it  to  light  in
some  little  noticed  remarks on  the  Senate  floor  April  3.   The
Senator  said  that  he  questioned  Mr.   Dulles   in  an  effort   to
find  out  just  what  were  the   differences   between   the  Secre-
tary  and  Governor  Stassen  on  disarmament.  This  surely  was
information  to  which  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee
was  entitled  in  a  free  system.  Mr.  Dulles  refused  to  explain,
citing  "executive  privilege."   Senator  Morse  called  this   "the
administration's  fifth  amendment  plea"  and  said  the  Secre-
tary  fell  back  on  the  plea   of  privilege  because  he  did   not
dare  let  the  truth  be known.
Hennings  Warns  Against  Slick  Butler  Substitute  for  the  Jenner  Bill
Senator  Hennings  and  his  staff   deserve  commendation  for
the  thorough  legal   memorandum  they  released   on  April  7
calling  attention  to  the  dangers  in  the  amendments  Senator
Butler  is  offering  inside  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee  as  a
means  of  sugar-coating  the  Jenner  bill  (S  2646)   to  limit  the
Supreme   Court's   jurisdiction.   The   Jenner   bill,   thanks   to
strong  protest  from  the  American  Bar  Association,  the  Attor-
ney  General  and  papers  as  far  right  as  the  Chicago  Tribune,
is  dead.   Butler's  amendments  would   seek  to  achieve  much
the  same  results  in  a  more  skillful  form.
Like  Senator  Jenner,   Butler   wants  to  reverse  five  recent
liberal  Supreme  Court   rulings.   These  held:  that  only   gov-
ernment  employes  in  sensitive  posts  could  be  dismissed  with-
out  hearing  of  any  kind  (Cole  v.  Young),  that  sedition  was
not  punishable under  State  as  well  as  Federal  law  (the  Steve
Nelson  case),  that  Congressional  investigations  in  areas  pro-
tected  by  the  First  amendment  were  severely  limited   (Wat-
kins),  that  there  must  be  some  evidence  of  incitment  to  war-
rant  punishment  for  free   speech  under  the  Smith  Act   (the
California  cases),  and  that  admission  to  the  bar  cannot  be
denied  on  grounds  which  are  unconstitutional   (the   Scbware
and  Koenigsberg  cases).
Jenner's  bill. would   withdraw   jurisdiction   from   the  Su-
preme  Court  to  hear  appeals  in  these  five  areas  of  litigation.
This   threatens   legal   chaos   since   "the   law"   might   then   be
different   in  the   different   Circuits.    Butler   would   withdraw
jurisdiction  only  in  bar  admission  cases.   In  the  others,   his
amendments  seek  directly  to  overrule  the  Court  by  changing
the  law.
The  Hennings  memorandum  shows  that  the  Butler  amend-
ments  would  create  havoc  in  a wide  area  of  State-Federal  rela-
tions,  place  the  burden  of  proof   on  the  defendants  in  con-
tempt  of  Congress  cases,  and  violate  basic safeguards  in  these
other  areas.   One  amendment   for   example  would   open   the
way  to  destruction  of  the  whole  civil  service  system by author-
izing  the  discharge  of  any  Federal  employe,  in  "sensitive  or
non-sensitive"  position,  without  a  hearing.
It  is  significant that  one  of  the  main  targets  of  the  Butler
amendments  is  Supreme  Court  Justice  Harlan,  a  conservative
jurist,  formerly  a  Wall  Street  corporation  lawyer,  picked  by
Eisenhower  and  Brownell.    There   is  a  specific   reference  to
words  used  by  Harlan  in  the  California  Smith  Act  cases  and
Hennings  says  such  references  "can  only  breed  disrespect  for
the  judicial  branch  of  the  government."    One  Butler  amend-
ment  disparagingly  quotes  Harlan's  words  that  the   require-
ment   of   incitement  to   justify   restriction   of   free   speech   is
"subtle  and  difficult  to  grasp."
In  Harlan's   defense,  Hennings   points  out  that   Congress-
man  McCormack,  one  of  the  leading  proponents  of  the  Smith
Act  when  it  was before  Congress  "repeatedly  stated  .  .  .  that
the  only  type  of  advocacy  which  would  be  punishable   under
the  Act  was  the  type  which  incites  to  action."
Four  Witch  Hunt  Victims  Helped  by   New   Supreme   Court   Actions
Four  victims  of  the  witch  hunt  were  helped  by  decisions
of  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  last  Monday.  It  reversed  de-
naturalization  orders  against  James  J.  Matles,  director  of
organization  for  the  U.  E.  [United  Electrical  Workers]  and
against  David  and  Freeda  Diamond of  Los  Angeles,  all  ac-
cused  of  Communist affiliations.   The  Court  also  granted  a
hearing  to  Dr.  Willard  Uphaus,  convicted  of  contempt  for
resisting  political  inquisition  at  the  hands  of  New  Hamp-
shire's   Attorney   General,  Louis   C.  Wyman.   Like   Paul
Sweezy,   whose  New   Hampshire  contempt  conviction  was
reversed  in  an  historic  ruling  last  year,  Dr.  Uphaus  swore
he  was  not  a  Communist  but  resisted  Wyman's  orders,  in
his  case  to  produce  the  guest  list  of  the  New  Hampshire
World  Fellowship Centre.
The  Matles  and Diamond denaturalizations  were  reversed
along  with  those  of  Frank  Costello  and  Gaetano  Lucchese,
all  on  the  same  grounds—that  the  government  had  failed
to  file  an  affidavit  of  good  cause  at  the  beginning  of  these
denaturalization  proceedings.   Matles  had  refund  to  take
the  stand  in  his  case  and  been  held  in  contempt  but  this
5th  Amendment  question  was  not  reached  fcjr  the  Court.
Neither  did it  reach  serious  wiretap  question*  in  Costello's..
The   affidavit   requirement  was  written  Into  the  law  in
1906  at  the  suggestion  of  Attorney  General  Bonaparte  to
protect  naturalized  citizens   from  irresponsible  charges  in
denaturalization  proceedings.   It  is  a  procedural  safeguard,
like  "probable  cause"  for  an  arrest.   The  reversals  are  not
a  bar however to  new  proceedings.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  14,1958
Contrasting  Baruch's  Views  on  th»  Recession  With  tke  National  Planning  Association's
The  Real  Question — Who   Shall   Manage   Our  No   Longer  Free  Economy?
The  sophisticated  will  savor  the  fine  flavor  of  anachronism
in  Mr.  Bernard  Baruch's  testimony,  which  opened   the  Senate
Finance  Committee's  hearings  into  the  recession.   Mr.  Baruch
opposed  a  tax  cut  and  he  opposed   pump  priming.   His  was
the  investment   banking   view.   "From  whom   are  you  going
to  get  the  money,"   he  asked.   "Who's  going  to  buy   these
[government]  bonds  if  you  continue  to  reduce  the  credit  of
the  government?"
Mr.  Baruch  sees  the  main  enemy  as  inflation,  but  the  weak-
ness  of  his  whole  approach  was  indicated  when  he   suggested
that  price  reductions   would   provide  "the  best   stimulant   to
our  economy."   This  is  undoubtedly  true.   Unfortunately  the
free   market  he  pictures  in  his  mind  no  longer   exists.    The
striking  feature  of   this  recession   is  that   prices  of   the  basic
materials  and   of  major   consumer   durables  like  automobiles
have  been  rigidly  maintained.
Classical  Economic  Theory  Obsolete
A  managed  economy  has  in  large  part  replaced  the  old  free
economy.    The   problem  really  is  —  who  shall  manage   the
economy,  and  for   whose  benefit  shall  it  be  managed?   The
big  steel  and  auto  companies   "manage"  their   markets, pre-
ferring  to  let  sales  and  output  slide  rather  than  to  cut  prices.
Under  such  circumstances the  "normal"  recovery mechanisms
envisaged  by  classical  economic  theory  no  longer   work.
The  present  situation  allows  big  business  to  sit  tight,  and
let  those  who  must  operate  in  what  remains  of  a  free  market
bear   the  burden  of   "adjustment"—the   small  business  man,
the  small   farmer  and, of  course,  the  worker.   They  pay  in
the  shape  of  lost  income  and  dissipated  savings.
The  Recession  May "Cost"  $40  Billions  This  Year
From  the  national  point  of  view,  the  cost  is  heavy.   The
National  Planning  Association  indicated  that  cost  in  a  state-
ment  on  the  recession  which  got  the  brushoff   in  most  of   the
press,   "This   inactivity  of   men   and   machines   is   depriving
the   nation   of   the  opportunity  for   greater   progress   in eco-
nomic  growth  and  higher  living  standards.  .  .  .  There are,
for   exariple,  the  loss  of   steel   output   to  half   of  total   steel
capacity,   the   drop   in   overall   industrial  production   of   over
You  Can  Still  Get  A  Free  Copy  of  Our  1957  Index
11  percent  over  the  past  year. ...  If  production  should  re-
main  at  the  level  of  the  first  quarter  of  1958, a  year  from
now  it  would  run  at  $40  billion  below  the  potential  national
output."
Positive   steps   to  manage   the   economy   for   full   employ-
ment  would   make  possible  the  constructive  use  of   the   $40
billion  in  lost  output  threatened  this  year.   The  NPA,  which
represents   thoughtful   businessmen   as  well  as  labor  and   farm
organizations  and  approaches  economic  problems   in  a  prag-
matic and  non-doctrinaire way,  indicates areas  in  which  money
'might   usefully   be  spent   for   pump-priming.   These   are   all
areas  in  which  a  backlog  of  need   piled   up  during  the war,
the  post-war  rearmament  and   inflation.
Heavy Needs In  Education
One  area  is  school  construction;  the  NPA   figures   it  would
take  $6  billion  merely  to  meet  the  shortage  of  128,000  class-
rooms  expected  next  Fall,  without  counting  the  need   for  re-
placing  hazardous old  buildings  and  for  meeting  needs  at  the
college  level.   Another  area  is  in  water  resources;  water  short-
ages  are  growing  in  many  areas  and  the  Commerce  Depart-
ment  estimates  that  $10  billion   should   be  spent   for   water
works,  purification  plants  and  sewage  systems.   A  third  area
is   in   our   fast   growing   but   deteriorating  urban   areas;   the
NPA   figures   from  $7.5 to   10  billion   annually   is   needed
for   urban  redevelopment.   The   NPA   estimates   that   a   $10
billion   increase  in  such   public  spending  would   stimulate  a
$15  to  20  billion  increase  in  private  consumption  and   busi-
ness expenditure.
The  NPA  would  also  attack  the  recession  on  the  tax  front,
first  by  a  tax  cut  in  the  lower  brackets;  secondly,  by  repeal-
ing  excise   taxes  on  autos  and  similar   products  which   were
first  imposed   during   the   war   to   reduce   consumption;   and
thirdly,   by  revising  a  tax   structure  marked   by  "highly  fic-
titious  top  bracket  rates  in  the  income  tax  plus  the  tendency
of  gradually  widening  loopholes"  which  benefits  many spe-
cial   interests,  as  depletion   allowances  do  the  oil  barons.    It
is  easy  enough   to  see  why  the  same  papers   which   put   Mr.
Baruch  in  the  headlines  buried  the  NPA   proposals.
by   Sending  A  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope
I.  F.
Please
Street
City
Enter
frr\  \
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
•  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.............................. ...........Zone............State....................
gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
4/14/SS
..........................................Zone............State....................
we  send  gift  announcement?       Yes  Q    No  D
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebrosko  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  I).  (:., under  thp  Act  of  March  8,  1870.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  «yery  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Anguet  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  16, D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.   Stone.    Subscription:
II  In  tb   TJ.  8.;  10  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.     Air  Mall  rates:  J15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED