I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958oct06.pdf

============================================================

When  Federal  Courts Faced  Northern  Mobs,  P.  2
How  Liberals  Unwittingly  Follow  an  Old Dulles  Line  on  Formosa,  P.  3;  De  Gaulle's  Blank  Checks,  P.  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  39
OCTOBER  6,  1968'°'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Did  Ike  and  Dulles  Deceive  Congress   on  Quemoy?
Secretary  Dulles  admitted  last  Tuesday  that   (as   charged
by  Senator  Morse  in  The  Nation)   we  had  no  commitment
to  defend   Quemoy  under  our  security  treaty  with   Chiang's
"Republic   of   China."    The   Secretary  said  the  Administra-
tion  was  acting  under  the  Joint  Resolution  of  January,  1955,
which   did   authorize  the   President   to   defend   the   offshore
islands  if  he  thought  this  necessary  to  the  defense  of   For-
mosa  and  the  Pescadores.
But  is  this  the  whole  story?   According  to  last  year's  au-
thorized  biography  of  John  Foster  Dulles  by  John  Robinson
Bea{  secret  assurances on  Quemoy were  given  Chiang  in  con-
nection   with   both   the   treaty  and   the   Formosa   resolution.
We   invite  the  attention   of  Morse   and  the   Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee  to  two  passages.   The  first  is  at  pages
220-1.    It   says  that   during  Congressional   debate  over   the
Formosa   Resolution,   "It  was  not  known   .  .  .  that   Free
China's  President  Chiang  Kai-shek  received  a  personal  letter
from  Mr.  Eisenhower  satisfying  him  that  the  United  States
would  help  defend  Quemoy  and  Matsu,  for  that  fact  has  not
appeared  in  print  until  now."   Congress  at  the  time  was  told
over  and  over  again  that  we  would  not  go  to  war  for  the
offshore   islands  unless  an  attack  on  them  was  adjudged  to
be  the  prelude  to  an  attack  on  Formosa.
The  Senate  Would  Not  Have  Ratified
The  second  passage  which  calls  for  urgent  attention  is  at
pages  226-7  and  deals  with  the  framing  of  our  security treaty
with  Chiang.   This  treaty  was  drafted  before  Congress  was
stampeded   into  passing  the   Formosa   resolution  but   ratified
by  the   Senate  a  few  weeks  later.    "The   treaty,"   the   Beal
biography  reveals,   "mentioned   certain  Chinese  territories  by
name  and  at  one  point  in  the  Dulles-Yeh  talks  [George  Yeh
was  then  Chiang's  Foreign   Minister,   a  post  from  which  he
hastily  stepped  down  during  the  current  crisis  to  be  in  Wash-
ington  as  Ambassador—IFS]  Dulles  agreed  to  include  Que-
moy  and  Matsu  by  name.   President  Eisenhower   struck   the
two  place  names  out  when  he  saw  the  minutes  of  the  talks.
He  felt  that  the  United  States  needed  a  certain  flexibility  in
its  defensive plans.   At  the  same time  he  sent  Chiang  his  per-
sonal  assurances."   The  truth  is  that  the  treaty  would  never
have  been  ratified  by  the   Senate  with   Quemoy  and   Matsu
in  it.   Only  a  few  weeks  earlier  the  Senate  had  been  told  that
we  were  not  committed  to  defend  the  offshore  islands.   What
were  the  assurances  Eisenhower  privately  gave   Chiang?
The  Senate  and  the  country  have  a  right  to  know  what
those   assurances   were   in   order   to   understand   the   current
negotiations   in   Warsaw.    If  'Chiang   was  assured   that   we
would  protect  him  in  possession  of  the  offshore  islands   the
area  of  give-and-take  is  sharply  circumscribed.   In   particular
the  door  is  shut  on  the  idea  of  exchanging   the  offshore   is-
11-                                                                                           1
lands,  a  thorn  in  Peking's   side,  for  a  renunciation   of   force
on  Formosa  itself.   According  to  the  Dulles  biography    (p.
227)   this was suggested  by Anthony Eden  at  the  first  SEATO
Council  meeting  in  Bangkok  as  early  as  February,   1955,   but
rejected   by  Dulles  as  smacking  of   "the   same  kind   of   ap-
peasement  employed  at  Munich."    A  similar  proposal   seems
to  have  been  made  by  Peking   at  the   start  of   the   present
talks  but  been  angrily  withdrawn  when  we  (1)   refused   to
link  our  demand  for  a  cease-fire  with  any-specific   concession
and  (2)   hinted  only  that  if  the  cease-fire  went  into   effect
we  would  do  our  best  to  persuade  Chiang  to  "thin  out"  his
troops  on  the  offshore  islands.
Wishful  Thinking  in  Action
It  is  this  feeble  proposal  which  was  reflected  in  Mr.  Dul-
les's  remarks  last  Tuesday,  remarks  which  led  many  wishful
thinkers  in  the  press  corps  to  decide  that  they  now  had  a
"new  Dulles."    Dulles  in  my  opinion  is  merely  bending  be-
fore  the  storm  of  current  popular  disapproval.   He  is  playing
for  time.   Peking  may not  think  much  of  the  "thinning  out"
proposal.   For  one  thing,   since  Chiang  put   his  troops  on
Quemoy  once before  (according  to  Mr.  Dulles)  against  U.  S.
wishes,  he  could  do  so  again.   For  another,   even   "thinned
out"  such  troops  can  carry  out  unfriendly  intelligence,  sabo-
tage  and  blockade  activities.   On  top  of  this,  it  would   seem
from  the  People's   Daily  editorial  of  September   28   broadcast
by   the   Peking  home   service  that   we  are   asking   China   to
reduce  its  own  forces  along  the  coast  in  return  for   such  a
"thinning  out."   The  fact  is  that  the  American  people  would
also  benefit  by the  complete  evacuation  of  the  offshore  islands.
So  long  as  Chiang  has  them,  he  will  use  them  for   trouble-
making  purposes  at  our  expense.
Neither   A  New  Nixon  Nor  A  New  Dulles
In  return  for  this  "thinning  out,"  the  wily  Dulles  is  trying
to  exact  from  our  NATO  allies  a  new  guarantee  of   Formosa;
this  would  lock  them  as  well  as  ourselves  to  our  anachronistic
China  policy.   Those  who  imagine  they  see  a  new  Dulles  in
his  last  press  conference  will  live  to  be  as  disappointed   as
were  the  devotees  of  a  new  Nixon  when  he  cried  "sabotage"
McCarthy  style  because  the  New  York  Times  was  able  to  re-
port  that  the  State  Department's  mail  was  80  percent   against
the   Quemoy-Matsu  policy.   The  new  Nixon  in   1958   is  as
ready  for  war  over  the  offshore  islands  as  was  the  old  Nixon
in   1954  over  Indochina,  and  for  the  same  reasons  of  pres-
tige.   This,  as  Senator  Green  pointed   out  in  a  sharp   speech
at  Providence,  goes  beyond  the  war  powers  Congress  gave  the
President  in  the  Formosa  resolution.   It  did  not  say he  could
fight  for  Quemoy  to  save  Chiang's  face  or  our  own.   In  the
H-bomb  age,  we ought  to  have  a  more  adult  reason  for  press-
ing  the  fatal  button.
5  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 6,1958
A  Precedent  Cited  for  the   Little  Rock   Decision  Recalls  A  Once  Notorious  Ruling
The  Days  When  Northern  Mobs  Rioted  Against   Federal  Court  Orders
In  striking  down  all  efforts  by  State  courts  and  legislatures
to  evade  the  school   decision,  the  closest   precedent   cited  by
Chief  Justice  Warren  and  his  colleagues  last  Monday  was  a
case  now  forgotten  but  once  as  notorious  in  the  North  as  the
Dred  Scott  decision.    This  was Ableman  v.  Booth  (21  How.
506),   written   by  the   South's   one-time  hero,   Chief   Justice
Taney,  when  Northern  State  courts  and  legislatures  were try-
ing  to  evade  the  Federal  Fugitive  Slave  Law of   1850.
When  Taney  in   1859   handed   down  the  unanimous  deci-
sion  now  invoked  against  Arkansas,  the  Court  was  concerned
with  mob  action  supported  by State  courts  against  the  Federal
judiciary.   But  the  mobs  were  Northern   mobs  in   Wisconsin
acting  on  behalf  of  the  Negro.   Ableman   v.  Booth  is  cited
as  authority  for   the  final  supremacy  of   the  Federal   courts.
This  is  based  on  Article   VI  which  makes  the   Constitution
binding  on  the  States  "any  Thing  in  the  Constitution  or  Laws
of  any  State  to  the  Contrary  notwithstanding"    and   requires
every  State  official  to  take  an  oath  to  support  it.   The  Warren
Court  quotes  the  Taney  Court  as  saying  that  the  purpose  was
"to  guard  against  resistance  to  or  evasion  of  its  authority  on
the  part  of  a  State."
A  Tongue-in-Cheek  Citation?
No  one  could  guess  from  the  cryptic reference  in  the  Little
Rock  opinion  that  the  circumstances  of  the  Ableman  case were
so  neat  a  parallel.   But  to  readers  who  recognized  it  the  cita-.
tion  seemed  almost  a  tongue-in-cheek   reminder  to  the  South
of  the  days when  it  looked  to  the  Federal  courts  for  support.
Congress  had   passed  the  Fugitive   Slave  Act  in   1850   on
Henry  Clay's  suggestion   to  sugar-coat  for  the  South  the  ad-
mission  of  California  as  a  free  state.   The  law  aroused   bitter
Irostility  in  the  North  where  State  courts  and  State   legisla-
tures  tried  their  best  to  circumvent  it.
The  Act  seemed  to  destroy  the  Bill  of  Rights  in  its  eager-
ness  to  aid  the  slave-owner.   The  testimony  of  the  claimant
was  prima  facie  evidence  against  the  man  he  claimed.    The
fugitive  was  denied  trial  by  jury.   He  was  forbidden  to  tes-
tify   in  his  own  behalf.    He   could   not   summon   witnesses.
The  Federal  Commissioners  appointed  to  enforce  the  Act were
offered  a  reward  for  ruling  in  favor  of  the  slave-owner;  their
fee  was  $10  if  they  ruled  against  the  Negro  but  only  $5  if
they  ruled  in  his  favor.   If  rescue  by  abolitionists  was  feared,
a  posse  could  be  sworn  in  "and   every  freeman  of  the  North
.  .  .  made  a  slave-catcher"   (McMaster).
A  Fighting  Editor  Raises  A Mob
Opposition   to  the  Act  reached  a  climax  in  Wisconsin   in
1854  when  a  Negro  named  Joshua  Glover  was  claimed  by  a
Missouri  slaver.   Sherman  M.  Booth,  editor  of  an anti-slavery
paper  in  Milwaukee,  the  Wisconsin  Free  Democrat,  addressed
a  protest  meeting  of  5,000  persons  in  that  city.
The  crowd  broke  into  the  jail,  seized  Glover,   "placed  him
in  a  wagon  and  ran  him  down  Clinton  St.,  the  Negro'lifting
his  manacled  hands  and  shouting   'Glory!  Hallelujah!'    The
Negro  was  taken  care  of  by  an  'underground  railroad'  agency
and  finally,"   according   to  an   1895   monograph   by  Vroman
Mason   on  The  Fugitive  Slave  Law  in   Wisconsin,   "put   on
board   a   schooner   clearing   for   Canada,   which   country   he
When  Yankees  Were  The  Rebs
"Antislavery,  which  had long  ago  denounced  the Con-
stitution  of  the  United  States  as  'a  covenant with death
and  an  agreement with  hell,'  had  now  become openly
rebellious  against  Federal  authority  .  .  .  had assumed
a  judicial  form  because of  positive violation  of  law  and
the   case   was  brought   to   the   Supreme  Court   of   the
United  States.   And  one  year  after  Mr.  Seward,  in  the
Senate,  had  poured  out  his  abuse  upon  Chief  Justice
Taney,  that   patriotic  magistrate  delivered  one  of   his
most  important  and  to  himself   (as  he  told  me)  one  of
the   most  satisfactory   opinions   against   this  incipient
treason.   The  case  arose  under  the  fugitive  slave law.
It  was  the  State  of  Wisconsin,  both  by  its  Courts and
legislature,  that  openly  defied  the  judicial  authority  of
the  United  States."
—Memoir  of  Roger  B.  Taney,  by  Samuel   Tyler   (an
authorized  biography  written  from  the  Southern
•view  point  by  a  friend   of  the   Chief    Justice).
reached  in  safety."
•Booth's  trial  for  aiding  a  fugitive  slave was  a  national sen-
sation.   He  told  the  Federal  Court  that  rather  than  see habeas
corpus  and  trial  by  jury  "stricken  down  by  the  Fugitive  Slave
Law,  I  would  prefer  to  see  every Federal  officer  in  Wisconsin
hanged  to  a  gallows  higher  than  Haman's."
The   Wisconsin   legislature,   in   terms   which   recalled   the
Kentucky  resolution  of  the  1790's  against the  Alien  and  Sedi-
tion  laws,  called  for  "positive  defiance"  of  Federal  court  or-
ders.   On  Booth's  conviction,  the  Wisconsin  Supreme  Court
set  him  free  on  habeas  corpus,  ruling  that  the  fugitive   slave
lav/  was  unconstitutional because  it  failed  to  provide  trial  by
jury.   Taney  reversed  it  in  Ableman  v.  Booth.   After  six years
of  litigation,  Booth  was  given  one  month  in  jail,  rescued  by
a  mob,  rearrested  and  then  pardoned  by  President  Buchanan
just  before  Lincoln's  inauguration.
The  Tide  Is  Against  the  South
The  South  is  not  accustomed  to  having  the  Supreme  Court
against  it.   On  three  great  occasions,  the  Court  has  ruled  for
the   slave-holding   and   white   supremacist  South.    One   was
when  the  Dred  Scott  decision  upset  all  efforts  to   compromise
the  slavery  issue  by  ruling  that  Congress  had  no  right  to  ex-
clude  slaves  from   any  territory.   The   second  was  Ableman,
when  the  Court  upheld  a  fugitive  slave  law  stacked  against
the  fugitive.   The  third  was  in  the  decisions  after  the  Civil
War  which  took  the  heart  out  of  the  14th  amendment's  in-
tended  protection  of  the  freed  Negro's  civil  rights.
It  is only in  recent  years, beginning  with  the  1944  decision
striking  down  lily  white  Democratic  primaries,  that  the  Su-
preme  Court  has  begun  to  rule  against  the  South  and  sought
(as  Chief  Justice Warren  said  so  movingly at  the  close  of  the
Little  Rock  opinion)   to  "make  a  living  truth"  of  "our  con-
stitutional  ideal  of  equal  justice  under   law."
The   difference   between   those   Northern   mobs   a  century
ago  and  the  Southern  mobs  today  is  that  the  glacial   pressure
of  a  universal  human  aspiration  for  equal  dignity  is  against
the   South.   The   Civil  War   reversed  Taney  on  slavery,   but
there  is  no  way  to  reverse  Warren  on   integration.    White
supremacy  is  as  doomed  as  human   bondage.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 6,1958
Some   Recent   But   Forgotten   History   and  A   Disclosure   in  the  Vandenberg  Papers
How  U. S. Liberals  Unwittingly  Follow  An  Old  Duties  Line  on  Formosa
Until  the  outbreak of  the  Korean  war  eight  years  ago  our
government  did  not  question  the  fact  that  Formosa  was  Chi-
nese   territory.   When   FDR,   C.'.'irchill   and   Chiang   met   in
Cairo  during  World  War  II,  they  issued  a  declaration   (Dec.
1,  1943)   which  promised  "that  all  territories  Japan  had  stolen
from  the  Chinese,  such  as  Manchuria,  Formosa and  the  Pes-
cadores  shall  be  returned  to  the  Replblic  of  China."   When
Truman,  Attlee  and  Chiang  set  forth   the  terms  of  Japan's
surrender  at  Potsdam   (July  26,  1945),  Point  7  was,   "The
terms  of  the  Cairo  Declaration  shall  be  carried  out. ..."
Enter  Duties  With  A  Formula
But  in  1949,  when  it  became apparent  that  Chiang  would
soon  be  driven  off  the  mainland,  John  Foster  Dulles  tried
privately  to  sell  Secretary of  State  Acheson  and  Senator  Van-
denberg  a  legal  argument  by which  we  might  get  around  the
Cairo  and   Potsdam  Declarations.   This  came  to  light  with
the   publication  in   1952  of   The   Private  Papers   of  Senator
Vandenberg.   Dulles  suggested  in  a  lovely  bit  of  hair-splitting
that  the  Cairo  Declaration  "was  not  itself  an  operating  docu-
ment  but  a  statement  of  future  purpose"!   He  said  it  had
been  superseded   by  the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations,  that
the  Charter  made  the  welfare  of  the  people  of  Formosa  "a
relevant  consideration"  and  that  the  UN  "might  not  find  that
the  welfare  of  the  inhabitants  would  be  promoted  by  sub-
jecting   them   to   Chinese   Civil   War   and   possible   Chinese
Communist rule."  (See  Pps.  536-8  of  the Vandenberg  papers).
But  MacArthur  Had  Already  Ceded  Formosa
Senator  Vandenberg  was   "somewhat   jolted"   by  the  dis-
covery  that  there  was  nothing  in  the   official   records  of   the
Cairo  and  Potsdam  meetings  to  support  Dulles's  contention
that  in  any  case  Formosa's  status  could  not  be  legally  deter-
mined   until   there   was  a  formal  peace   treaty  with   Japan.
Vandenberg  wrote  in  his  dairy  that   "the  situation  is  some-
what  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  Japan's  formal sur-
STATEMENT  REQUIRED  BY  THE   ACT  OF  AUGUST  24   1912    AS
AMENDED  BY  THE   ACTS   OF  MARCH  3,   1933,   AND  JULY  2   l»4(i
(Title  39, United  States  Code,  Section   23:!)  SHOWINt;  THE  OWNER-
SHIP,  MANAGEMENT,  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  1. F.  Stone's  Week-
ly  published  48  times  a  year  at  Washington,  D.  C.  for   1U58.    1.  The
names  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing  editor,   and
business  managers  are:   Publisher,  Editor,   and  Managing   Editor,  I.
F.  Stone,  5618   Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington,   D.  C.;  Business
Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone,   5818  Nebraska   Avenue,  N.  W.  Washington,
D.  C.    2.  The  owner  Is:   (If   owned   by  a  corporation,   its   name   and
address  must  be  stated  and  also  immediately   thereunder  the  names
and  addresses  of  stockholders  owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more
of  total  amount  of  stock.    If  not  owned   by  a  corporation,  the  names
and  addresses  of  the  Individual  owners  must  be  given.   If  owned   by
a  partnership  or  other  unincorporated  firm,  its  name  and  address,  as
well  as  that  of  each  individual  member,  must  be  given.)    I.  F.  Stone,
5618  Nebraska  Avenue,   N.  W.,  Washington,   D.  C.   Esther   M.  Stone,
5618   Nebraska  Avenue,   N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    Celia  M.  Gilbert,
Cambridge,  Mass.    Jeremy  J.  Stone,  Menlo  Park,  Calif.    Christopher
D.  Stone,  Cambridge,   Mass.   3.  The  known   bondholders,  mortgagees,
and  other  security  holders  owning  or  holding   1  percent  or  more  of
total   amount   of   bonds,   mortgages,   or   other   securities   are:    none.
4.  Paragraphs  2  and  3  include,  In  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  se-
curity  holder  appears  upon  the  boots  of  the  company   as  trustee  or
in  any  other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or   corporation
for   whom   such   trustee   Is  acting;  also   the   statements  in   the   two
paragraphs  show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and  belief  as  to  the   cir-
cumstances   and   conditions   under   which   stockholders   and   security
holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company   as  trus-
tees,   hold   stock  and   securities  in   a   capacity   other   than  that  of  a
bona  fide  owner.    5.  The  average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of
this  publication  sold  or  distributed,  through  the  malls  or  otherwise,
to  paid  subscribers  during  the  12  months  preceding  the  date   shown
above  war:  (This  information   is  required   from   daily,   weekly,   semi-
weekly,'and  triweekly  newspapers  only.)     10,303.    Signed,  I.  F.  Stone.
Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before   me  this  27th  day  of  September    1958.
Alvin  Bernstein.  Notary  Public.  Washington,  D.  C.    (My  commission
expires  7-31-1962.)
Far  Eastern   Non  Sequitur
"He   (Finletter)    drew   a   sharp   distinction   between
Quemoy  and  the  Matsus  on  the  one  hand  and  Taiwan
and  the  Pescadores  on  the  other.   'There  has  never  been
any  question,'  he  said,  'about  the  fact  that  Quemoy  and
the  Matsus  were  part  of  mainland  China.'  Taiwan  and
the   Pescadores,   however,   were   part   of   the  Japanese
Empire  from   1895  to  the  end  of  World  War   II."
—New  York  Times, Sept. 29.
render   included   a  cession  of   Formosa   to   the   Chinese  Re-
public  and  that  the  first  of   General  MacArthur's  executive
orders  . .  . confirmed  this  cession."   (Pps.  539-40).
While  Vandenberg  hoped  there  was  some  way  to  keep  the
island   from   Communist  control,  he  thought   "whatever   our
policy  now  is  to  be  we  must  make  sure  above  everything  else
that  it  does  not  alienate"  the  remaining non-Communist  coun-
tries  of  Asia.   "In   my  opinion,"  he  wrote,  "any  militaristic
action   on   our   part   in   respect   to   Formosa   could   seriously
jeopardize our successful  contacts with  India,  Indonesia.  .  .  ."
Truman  Met  the   Pressure   Head  On
After  Chiang fled to  Formosa  in  December,  1949,  pressure
was  applied  publicly  for  American military  intervention.   On
January  2,  1950,  Senator  Knowland  made public  a  letter  from
former  President Hoover  urging  U.  S.  naval  action  and  Mac-
Arthur  put  heat  on  the  Administration by  leaking  in  Tokyo
a  circular  sent  out  by  the  State  Department   saying  that  For-
mosa's  fall  was  to  be  expected.   Truman  met  this  pressure  in
characteristic  fashion,  head   on.    He   issued  a  statement   on
January  5  saying  that under  the  Open  Door  policy  the  U.  S.
had  always  upheld  the  territorial  integrity of  China,  that  the
Cairo  and  Potsdam  declarations  had   recognized  Formosa  as
Chinese,  and  that  "in  keeping  with  these  declarations,   For-
mosa  was  surrendered  to  Generalissimo  Chiang  Kai-shek  and
for   the  past  four  years  the  United  States  and  other   Allied
Powers  have  accepted  Chinese  authority  over  the  island."
That  same  day  at  press  conference  Acheson  "rejected   any
notion  that  the  United   States  should   wriggle   into   Formosa
by   a  trick  argument  about  the   absence  of   a  formal   treaty
ending  Japanese  sovereignty."    (Me  George  Bundy:  The  Pat-
tern  of  Responsibility, The  Record of  Dean  Acheson,  p.  186).
Acheson  said  the  U.  S. would  not  compromise  the  "integrity"
of  its  China  policy  by  a  lawyer's  "quibble."
The  Korean war, which  benefitted  Chiang  in  so many ways,
led  to  the  reversal of  this  position.   It  put  the  7th  fleet  in  the
Formosa  straits  and  threw  an  American  protectorate  over  the
island.   Those   liberals  who   oppose   war  over   Quemoy   and
Matsu  as  Chinese  territory  but  agree  that   "of   course"  For-
mosa  is  different  and  should  be  handed  over  to  the  United
Nations   are  following  unwittingly  in  the  wake  of  the   old
Dulles  line.   They  may  find  themselves  morally  committed   to
war  over  Formosa.   Legally,  Formosa  is  part  of  China.   Only
the  interposition  of   U.  S.  military  force   in   1950  has  pre-
vented  its  union  with  the  mainland.   If  we  are  intent  on  the
maintenance   of   principles   in   international   relations   rather
than  on  the  use  of  force,  we  ought  to  be  prepared   to  sub-
ject  our  conduct  as  well  as  Peking's  to  that  test.
1   5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, October  6,1958
A   Sour  Observation  on  Playhouse  90's   "The  Plot   to  Kill  Stalin"
What  Happens When  de  Gaulle  Tries  to  Cash  All  Those  Blank  Checks?
The  weakness  of  the  governments  under  the  Fourth  Re-
public  is  that  almost  all   of  them  were  unstable  coalitions,
temporarily  uniting   diverse  and   contradictory  views.    In   a
sense  the  Fifth  Republic  is  the  same  kind  of  unsteady  coali-
tion,   the   difference   being   that   the   diverse   and    contra-
dictory views are now embodied  in a man  instead  of  a  Cabinet.
No  democratic  politician  or  Fascist  demagogue  in  our  life-
time  has  dared  to  be  as  non-committal  as  de  Gaulle  was  in
his  campaign.   His  assets  were  his  record  as  the  Resistance
leader   and  his   style,   always  an   appealing   point   with   the
French.    By  saying  as  little  as  possible,   he   let   every  man
believe  he  heard  the  echo  of  his  own  thoughts  in  de  Gaulle's
delphic  utterances.   No  national  leader  has  ever  been  handed
so  many  blank  checks.   But  what  happens  when  he   begins
to  cash  them?
When  The  Magic  Fails
The  French  of  the  homeland  voted  for  de  Gaulle   because
they  were  offered  no  clear  alternative  to  the  Fourth  Republic
none  defended;  the  best  that   Mendes-France  could   suggest
was  a  constituent  assembly.  The  French  did  not  vote  for  de
Gaulle  because  they  agreed  with  his  program;  nobody  knows
what  it  is,  but  because they  hoped  that  his  election  by  some
magic would  solve their problems  with  no  great  effort  on  their
own  part.   Disappointment  could  be  as  overwhelming  as  the
vote.
The  fate  of  the  Fifth  Republic,  like  that  of  the  Fourth,  will
be  settled  in  Algeria  where  Frenchman  and  Arab  voted  for
an   integration   in   which  neither   side  believes.    The   Arabs
voted  "oui"  because  they  were  herded  to  the  polls  by  the
Army;  the  French  in  Algeria  voted  "oui" because  they  hope
that  de  Gaulle  will  wipe  out  the  rebellion  by  force.   When
he  tries  to  negotiate,  he  will  disappoint  both  sides.
Until  Algeria  Is  Free
Should  de  Gaulle  really  satisfy  the  Algerian   Nationalists,
he  may be  met  with  rebellion  by the  colons, and  the  right  in
France.   Should  he  step  up  the  war  in  Algeria,  he  may  have
to  clamp  down  dictatorial  controls  against  dissatisfaction   at
Uncivil  Defense  Dept.
"Two   weeks   ago   at   a   Democratic  party   regional
meeting  in  Salt  Lake  City,  the  talk  turned  to  civil  de-
fense.   Senator  Anderson  (N.   Mex.)   was  presiding.
" 'Suppose,'  asked  a  citizen,  'that  the  Russians  come
over  and  drop  atomic  bombs  on  the   United   States?
Where  do I  go?'
" 'That  depends,'  said  Sen.  Anderson,  'on  what  kind
of  life  you  led'."
—Washington  Post, Sept.  29.
home.   France  accepted  de  Gaulle  last  May  in  fear  of  civil
war.   France  will  never  be  free  of  this  fear  until  it  has  freed
Algeria.
A  French  government  with  the  courage  to  use  the  word
"independence"    in   dealing   with   the   Algerian   nationalists
could  not  only  settle  for  something  less  but  unite  all  Arab
North  Africa  with  France  in  a  new  kind  of  free   federation,
for   both  sides  in  the  struggle  need  each  other.   Perhaps,  at
this  moment, before  the  effect  of  Sunday's  vote  wears off,  de
Gaulle  might  dare  such  imaginative  and  magnanimous tac-
tics.   But  will  he?
*      *     *
Bufferin,  Aspirin  and  Stalin
We   got  a  little  mixed  up  watching  "The   Plot   to   Kill
Stalin"  on  Playhouse 90,  and  at  one moment thought  we heard
the  announcer   say  that  Bufferin  was  twice  as  fast  as; Stalin.
After   Beria  had   observed  philosophically  that   death   comes
to   all   men,   another   commercial  contributed   the   consoling
thought  that  "All States  Insurance  Company  may  help  you."
Kleenex,  too, figured  somewhere  in  the  sponsorship   of   this
tasteful  drama.  We  wonder  why  some  resourceful  advertising
man  didn't  sell  a  share  of  the  show  to  a  vodka manufacturer,
perhaps  with  an  imaginary  testimonial  (when  so  much  else
is  imagined,  why  not  go  further?)   from  Krushchev  saying,
"I  got  the  nerve to  kill  Stalin  by drinking  X————'s  vodka."
We  don't  like Krushchev but  neither  do we  like  to  see a man
accused  of  murder on a national  network.  We  think  the  show
was  bad  taste  and  bad  medicine  in  a  world  struggling   to
maintain  some  semblance  of  sanity  and  peace.
Thanks  for   the   Gift   Subs  Coming  In  With   Tardy   Renewals
I. F. Stone'sWeekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street   ...........
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street    ...........
City     .............
Shall  we  send
..................
for  $2  (6
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
....... .Zone.. ......... .State.. ............. ~
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
io/e/08
........Zone............State................_
gift  announcement?    Yes D    No  D
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Off ice
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington   16,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
*5  In  the  U.  S.;  $8  In  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED