I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jul28.pdf

============================================================

Passport  Bill  Blocked? P.  3
Behind   the   Scenes   at   Baghdad:  Was   it   Chamoun  Who  Sealed  Nuri's  Fate?  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  29JULY  28,   1958
ioi       WASHINGTON,  I).  0.15  CENTS
Krushchev  Breaks   Out   of  Containment
We  landed  the  Marines  in  Lebanon,  and  (as  this  is  being
written   early   on   the   morning  of   July   24)    it   looks   as   if
Nikita   Krushchev   in  turn   is  about   to   land   in   New   York.
This  would  seem  to  be  an  authentic  case  of  Divine  Retribu-
tion,  but   has  badly  shaken   the   faith   of  Washington's   fore-
most   Presbyterian.   The   news   that   Krushchev  was   coming
burst  on   this  capital  yesterday  in  a  way  which  showed   that
the  Russians simply  cannot  be  trusted.   All  day  and  into  the
late   afternoon   editions,  banner   headlines   based   on   a   sour
editorial   in  Izvestia   blared  comfortingly  that  Krushchev  was
about  to  spurn  Ike's  queasy  invitation  to  a  conference  at  the
UN.    At  3:20  p.  m.  the  UPI  ticker  even  carried  a  statement
from   the   usually  silent   Soviet   embassy,   saying   that   "well
qualified   Russian  sources"   in  Washington  had  predicted   that
tlie  Kremlin  would   reject  the  Western   offer   "as  a   complete
evasion."   At  3:21  p.  m.,  one  minute  later,  there  was  a flash
from  Moscow  that  the  Soviet  Foreign  Office  would  soon  issue
an  important  announcement.   At  4:04  p.  m.  the  ticker  spelled
out  that  Krushchev  had  accepted.    Had   a  sputnik   fallen   on
the  White   House   putting  green,   it  could   not   have   created
more  panic.
From  Crisis  to  Comedy
This   has   been   a   swift   period   of   anti-climax,   collapsing
suddenly  into  low  comedy.    Last  Monday   a  week,  after   the
Iraq   revolt,  the   President   met  Congressional   leaders   at   the
White  House  with  the  exalted  calm  of  a  man  who  was  ready
for   Armageddon.   But  our  Marines  had  hardly  embarked  in
Beirut  on   what   seemed   to   be  a  major  departure   of  policy
well   past   the   point   of   no   return   than   the   Administration
began   nervously  semaphoring   that   it  wanted   out.    Suddenly
we   became  a  fervent   member   of   the   UN   again   and   after
several  days  it  appeared  that  we  would  accept  observer  teams
in  Lebanon   armed  only  with  paper   and  pencil  if  Mr.  Ham-
marskjold  would  get  us  off  the  hook,  and  allow  us  gracefully
to  get  the  Marines   away  from   all  those  soda  pop  vendors
on   the   Beirut   beaches.    While   Mr.   Lodge,   desperate   for
repartee,   accused  Mr.  Sobelov  and  the  Soviet  Union  of  vio-
lating  the  Sherman  Anti-Trust  Act,  the  hectic  week-end  at  the
UN   was  marked  by  wistful  efforts  to  water  down  the  Japa-
nese   resolution   to  the  point   where   Moscow   might  vote  for
it  and  allow  an  enlarged  UN   observer  team  to  save  face  for
the  withdrawing   Marines.    And  now  the  summit    conference
Mr.  Dulles  and  Mr.  Eisenhower   have  tried  so  hard  to  avoid
for  two  years  seems  suddenly  upon  them;  the  ebullient  Krush-
chev  might  drop  in  at  any  moment.    How  the  White  House
wishes  there   were   still   some   last-minute   way  to  stop   him,
perhaps  by  refusing   him   a  visa  for   having  been  a  member
of   the  Ukrainian   YC1.  in   1921,  or   by  getting   the  bacterio-
logical  warfare  corps  to  infect  the  White  House  with  mumps.
Across  the  dismal confusion   at   Hagerty's  office   last  night  was
scrawled   all   too    plainly,   even    before   the    visitor   arrived,
Krushchev  go  home.
Revenge  for  Suez?
Perfidious  Albion  had  led  Mr.  Eisenhower and  Mr.   Dulles
into  a  trap,  revenging  itself   for  the  Suez  affair.    The   British
had  assured  them  that  they  could  safely  suggest   a  UN   meet-
ing   in  reply   to  Krushchev's  new  call  for   a  summit  confer-
ence.   Hadn't  the  Russians  over  and  over  again   complained
of  a  "mechanical majority"  against  them  at  the  UN?    Would
Krushchev  ever  consent  to  sit  down  with  Chiang  Kai-shek ?
Even  so  the  draft  of  our  reply,  as  communicated  last  Sunday
night  to  favored  correspondents,  was  pure  cold  war   diatribe-
suggesting   only  that   "it   lies   open  to  any  of  us  to  enlarge
the   scope   of   the   Security  Council  considerations."     It   was
Macmillan   who   widened   this   microscopic  loophole   to   the
point   where   the   bulky   Krushchcv  came  climbing   through.
First,  under  pressure  from   London,   the  U.  S.  added   the  two
fatal  sentences  about  Heads  of  Government  being  allowed  to
attend  Council  meetings  and  our  being  ready  "If  such  a  meet-
ing  were  generally desired"  to  "join  in  following  that orderly
procedure."    Then    Macmillan    translated    these    nebulous
phrases  into  his  own   message   to  Krushchev,   "I   would   cei-
tainly  be  ready  to  go  to  New  York  for  such  a  meeting  .  .  .
and  I  take  it  ...     that  you  would."   And  Krushchcv,  before
you  could  say  Jack  Dmitrievich  Robinson,  did.
"Everybody  Loves  A  Fat Man"
Now  the  nightmare  that  haunts  Washington   is  what  hap-
pens  when  Ike  finishes  his  prepared   text  and  has  to  think  up
a   swiftie   under   the   TV   cameras  for   one   of   those   moujik
anecdotes   Krushchev  always  seems  to  have  up  his  sleeve.   If
there   must   be  a   face-to-face  encounter,  Washington  would
rather   have  it  in   some   far-off   place   like,   say,  Khabarovsk,
where  the  networks  can't  operate.   Of  course,  in  a  diplomatic
sense,   as  de  Gaulle  objected,   nothing  can   possibly    happen
at  a  summit  conference  amid  the  crowds  on  the   East  River.
But  in  another,  public  relations  sense,  much  will  if  the  meet-
ing  comes  off.  For  the  Russians have  us  over  a  barrel  in  the
Middle  East,  and  in  Krushchev  they  have  a  star  performer,   a
shrewd   comic,   a  natural  born   vaudevillian,  eager  to  appear
at  last  on  Broadway,  where  he  will  be  the  biggest   hit  of  its
kind   since  Fatty   Arbuckle  played  the   Palace.    Mr.  Dulles's
cold    war    will    never    be    the    same    again    once    Nikita
hits  town.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  28,  1058
National   Planning  Association   Report   Reveals   Our  "Counter-Force" Strategy
Test  Cessation   Advocated   to  End  Nuclear  "Sky's  The  Limit"  Poker  Game
If  the  world  gets  safely  past  the  current  crisis,  an  agree-
ment  to  end  nuclear  testing  will  be  urgent.   In  another  dec-
ade,  if  half   a   dozen  other  nations  have  nuclear   weapons,
peace  will  be  even  more  precarious.   Imagine   a   world  in
which  Greece  and  Turkey  could  use  nuclear  weapons  over
Cyprus,  or  one  in  which  Nasser  and  Ben  Gurion  could  ex-
change  nuclear  blows  in  an  atomic  Sarajevo.   The  shape  of
things   to  come  is  clearly  foreshadowed   by  the   news  that
France,  Switzerland and  Sweden are  all  pressing  forward  to
nuclear  arms.   It  will  soon  be  too  late  if  the  thermonuclear
powers  do not  follow  up  the  talks  at  Geneva with  an  agree-
ment  to  end  testing,  yet  these  talks  though  welcome  are  in
part  a  sham.   The  real   issues   are   political,  not   technical,
and  the  U.  S.  military  is  opposed to  cessation  of  testing.
Some  of  the  reasons  for  this  opposition  are  sketched  out
in  the  thoughtful  report  just  released  by  a  special  commit-
tee   of   the   National   Planning  Association   which  includes
such  men  as  Col. Richard  S.  Leghorn,  Prof,  flarrison  Brown,
David  Riesman  and  Norman Cousins.  Nuclear  study  groups
should   obtain  copies   (1606  New  Hampshire   Ave.,   N.   W.,
Wash.  9,  D.  C.).   It  appears  from  this  that  U.  S.  military
policy  is  based  not  just  on  the  deterrent   retaliatory  power
to  wipe  out  Russia's  key  industrial  centers  but  on  a  "counter
force"  strategy  which requires  us  to  build enough  planes  and
missiles  to  destroy  Russia's  striking  forces  "and  then  some."
Naturally   this   sets  in   motion ^a   nuclear   poker   game,   in
which  each  side  must  outbid the  other,  with the  sky  the  limit.
The  NPA  report  says,  "The  counter-force  strategy  is now
the  doctrinal  source  of  the  arms  race,  demanding  big  bombs
to  make  up  for  bombing  errors  and  to  kill  with  certainty
small  and  elusive  targets.   It  also  demands  smaller  packag-
ing  to  permit  more  accurate  and  swift  delivery  systems.   It
requires  virtually  indefinite  testing."   The  report  concludes
from   Russian  willingness  to  end  tests  that  the   USSR  "is
trying  to  build  an  intercontinental retaliatory   sufficiency  and
not  a  counter-force  nuclear  superiority,"   otherwise  it  would
be  "hard   to  understand  how  she  could  possibly  consent  to
be  frozen  in  a  position  of  inferiority  in  bomb  know-how,  or
how   she   could   so  readily  give   up  testing  of   smaller   and
Victory  Against Blacklisting
For  the  first  time  since  Attorney  General  Francis
Biddle  began  compiling  it  in  the  early  40's,  a  group
of  organizations  has  succeeded  in  getting  the  govern-
ment  to  drop  them  from   the  so-called  Attorney  Gen-
eral's  list.   Suit  was  brought  by  the   Workers  Party,
its  successor,  the  Independent  Socialist  League, and  its
affiliate,  the  Socialist  Youth  League.  The  Workers  De-
fense   League   took   up  the  case  in   1948.   Formal  de-
listing  hearings  began  three  years  ago  before  a  Jus-
tice  Department  hearing   officer,   who  ruled  that  they
should  continue  to  be  blacklisted.  Their  attorney,  Jo-
seph  L.  Kauh,  Jr.,  then  appealed  to  Attorney  General
Kegors.   The  latter,  according  to  a  letter   written  Mr.
Uau!i  by  J.  Walter  Yeagley,  Acting  Assistant   Attor-
ney  General  for  Internal  Security,  was  "not  satisfied
with  the  evidence  adduced  at  the  hearings  meets  the
strict  standards of  proof  which  should  guide the  deter-
mination  of  proceedings  of  this  character."   He  felt   it
was  "impracticable,"  however,  to  reopen  the  hearings
because  some- witnesses  had  died.   The   organizations,
therefore,  are  to  be  dropped  from  the  list.  The  victory
v/on  by  this  Marxist  splinter group  led  by  Max  Schact-
man  should  encourage others to fight the  list.
smaller  packages."
The   NPA  therefore  recommends  breaking   up  the   U.  S.
arms  package,  a  separate   agreement   to  end  testing  under
an  international  monitoring  system,  and  cessation  of  U.  S.
tests  after  the  current  series  for  two  years  while  such   a
system  can  be  established.    Since  the   only  detection  prob-
lem  is  with  very  small  tests  underground,  the  NPA  advo-
cates   agreement  for   international   control  "of   only   those
explosions   which   the   inspection  grid   can  reliably   detect."
It  bases  its  plea  for  cessation  of  testing  primarily  on  secur-
ity  rather  than  health  considerations  and  believes  that  the
U.  S.  has  more  to  gain  than  lose  by  ending  tests.
Fifth  Amendment  Ruling:  "Hiss  Act"  Declared  Unconstitutional
An   important   Fifth   amendment  decision  has   just  been
handed  down  in  the  U.  S.  Court  of  Claims.   It  has  held  un-
constitutional  the   so-called  "Hiss   Act"   by  which   Congress
directed  non-payment  of  retirement  pensions  to  any  former
government  employe  who  invoked  the  Fifth   amendment  in
any  inquiry  into  his  service  with  the  government.   The  law
was  supposedly  aimed  at  Alger  Hiss,  though  he  never  took
the  Fifth.    The  test  suit  before  the   Court   of  Claims   was
brought   by   a   former   Internal   Revenue   Service   employe
who  pleaded  the   Fifth   in  a  grand   jury   inquiry   and  was
later  indicted but  found'not  guilty.   He  sued  for  his  annuity.
The  Court  split  on  the  question  of  whether  this  constituted
a  gratuity  or  a  contractual  obligation,  the  majority  taking
the   former  view.   All  but   one  judge   substantially   agreed
that   the   Act  was  unconstitutional   "because   Congress   has
linked  the  innocent  with  the  guilty   in  exacting   a  form  of
punishment"  for  invoking  a  basic  right.   The  one  dissenter
cited  the  recent  Beilan  and  Lerner  decisions  by  the  Supreme
Court  which  held that  a  public  employe  might  be  discharged
for  using  the  privilege  against  self-incrimination.   He  argued
that  these  rulings  indicated  that  public  employes  might  be
deprived  of  pensions  as  well  as  their  jobs.
Soustelle's  Appointment  to  de  Gaulle  Cabinet  Bad  News  for  France
•  Both  Claude  Bourdet   in  France-Observateur  for  July  10
and   Jean-Jacques    Servan-Schreiber    in   L'Express    of   the
same  date  report  that  Jacques   Soustelle's   appointment   as
Minister   of  Information  in  de  Gaulle's  Cabinet  violated   a
pledge  given  center  and  left  politicians.   Both  weeklies  de-
clare  de  Gaulle  promised  that   M.  Soustelle  would  be  kept
out  of  the' government.
M.  Soustelle,  a  gifted  writer  and  ethnologist,  was  like  M.
Malraux  a  man  of  the  Left  in  the  30's,  rallied  to  de  Gaulle
during  the   resistance,  emerged   from   the   war   an   authori-
tarian  de  Gaullist,  was  won  over  by  the   colons  after   his
appointment  as  Governor of  Algeria  by  Mendes-France,  and
became  a  leading  figure  in  the  recent  Algerian  conspiracy.
His  account  of  his  Governorship,  Aimee  et  Souffrante     Al-
gerie,  shows  his  bitter   animosity   toward   the" press   over
which  his  new  post  gives  him  wide power.
Though   de  Gaulle  began   by   abolishing   the   censorship,
the   Soustelle  appointment  and  certain   high-handed   actions
by  the   military  bode  ill  for   the  press.   An  issue   each  of
L'Express   and  France-Observateur  were  subjected  to  seizure
and  censorship by  the  Army,  and  an  issue  of  Le  Monde   was
barred   from   Algiers.   Significantly   the   Army  seems   very
sensitive  to  interviews  with  rebel  leaders  which  suggest  that
peaceful   negotiation  is  still  possible.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  28,  1958
Robert   Murphy   Discovers  Magna  Charta  (in  A  Sunday  Supplement)  But  Misreads  It
Stau  Dept.  Covertly  Reimposes  Passport   Screening  Despite  Court  Ruling
There  were  three  noteworthy  developments in  the  field  of
passport  legislation during  the  past  week.  The  first  was  sud-
den   postponement  of  hearings  on  the   pending   Administra-
tion   bill  July   17  as   a  result   of  action  by   Senator   Morse,
who  invoked  Senate  rules  to  prevent  the  Foreign   Relations
Committee   from   holding  hearings   while   the   Senate   is  in
session;  the  effect  was sharply  to  lessen the  chances that  any
legislation   will  be  passed  this  session.   The  second  was   re-
imposition   by   the   State   Department  of   loyalty   screening
on  passport  applicants  who  do  not  sign  the  non-Communist
affidavit;   this  action,  in  defiance   of  the   Supreme  Court  de-
cision,  seems  to  have  been  imposed  by  orders  from  above  on
the  passport   division,  which  had  been  clearing  all   applica-
cations  without discrimination  in  compliance  with  the  Court's
ruling  in  Kent   and  Briehl.   We  suggest  that  any  persons
who   run   into  difficulties   because  of  this   illegal   screening
procedure  write  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,
with  copies  of  their  letter  for  Senator  Morse,  who  (as  can
be  seen  from  the  box  below)  is  on  the  warpath.   The  third
development  was  the  news that  the  American  Civil  Liberties
Union   has   reversed   its   earlier   position   (criticized  at   the
time  in  the  Weekly)   that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  be
allowed  to  deny  a  passport  where he  had  substantial  evidence
that  the  applicant was  going  abroad  to  engage  in  "real  sub-
versive   activity."    When  the   hearings   resume,   the   ACLU
will   support   the   principles  embodied   in   the   bill    (S4137)
sponsored   by   Senators   Humphrey,  Morse   and   five   other
Senators,  fully  establishing  the  right  to  travel  in  peacetime.
Slight   Difference
The  one  day  hearing July  16 heard  Deputy  Under   Secre-
tary  of  State  Robert  D.  Murphy  and  a  covey  of  aides  from
the  State  Department.   Mr.  Murphy  said  his  attention   had
been  drawn  by  a  Sunday  story  in  the  Washington  Post  to
the  fact  that  the  right  to  travel   was  embodied  in  Magna
Charta.   "Now  in  thinking  over  this  provision  of  the  Magna
Charta,"   he  told  the   Senate   Foreign  Relations  Committee,
"I  find  nothing  in  the  legislation  which  the  Administration
has  proposed  on  this  subject   in  contradiction   to  the  prin-
ciples  stated   in  the   Magna   Charta."   The   only  difference,
as  sharp   questioning  by  Senators   Morse,  Humphrey,  Ful-
bright  and  Sparkman  soon  brought  out,  is that  while  Magna
Charta   made  travel   a  right  even  the  King  could  not   sus-
pend,  the   Administration  bill   S4110   makes   it   a   privilege
dependent  on  the  Secretary  of  State.   Write  your  Senators
to  back  S4137  and  oppose  S4110,  lest  the  Administration's
McCarthy  era  legislation  slip  through  somehow in  the  clos-
ing  days  of  the  session.   The  fact  that  Javits  of  New  York,
who  plays  close  to  the  White  House,  has  come  out  against
A  Correction  from  Sen. Humphrey
Dear Mr. Stone :
I  have  read  with  interest  the  remarks  that   appeared
in  the  June  30 issue  of  your  Weekly  regarding  the  bill
for   furnishing  atomic  information   and   materials    to
other  nations.
Your  Weekly  has  such  a  fine reputation  for  accuracy
that   1  know   you   would   not  want  any   of  your  com-
ments  to  leave your  readers  with  a  misleading  impres-
sion.   Your  reference  to  me  in  the  newsletter   might
leave  such  an  impression.
I  was  not  in  the  Senate  when  the  bill  (S  3912)  was
brought  up  and  passed  because  I  had  been  given  firm
assurance   that   the   Senate   would   not   consider   this
measure  until  the  following  day.   I  had  every  inten-
tion  of  participating in  the  debate  on  the  bill.  Further-
more,  1 had prepared  a  rather  lengthy  statement  which
I  planned  to  deliver  when  the  bill  was  before  the  Sen-
ate  and  which  I  did  make  on  June  25,  two  days  later.
If  you  will  read  that  statement  you  will  note  I  had
two  serious  reservations  about  the  bill  which  Senator
Andei son's  amendments and  the  Senate  debate  helped
to  remove.
You  have  every  right  to  disagree  with  my  position
on  this  legislation,  but  I  believe  as  an  able  journalist
you  have  a  responsibility  to  report   my  position  accu-
rately  to  your  readers.
HUBERT  H. HUMPHREY
Aa  we  noted  at   the  time,  Majority  Leader   Johnson
had  assured   the  Senate  that  there   would  be  no  roll-
call  on  S3912  Monday,  June  23.   No  one  dreamt  that
this  could  mean  he  might  try  to  push  the  bill  through
without  a  roll-call.   Senator  Humphrey's  letter  now in-
dicates  that  he  was  specifically told  there  would be  no
vote.  We learn  that  a  serious  illness  in  his  family  kept
him  out  of  town  on  the  23rd.   Unfortunately we did  not
know  this  at  the  time  our  issue  of  the  30th  was  writ-
ten;  his  speech   of   the   25th   came   too  late   for   that
issue,    and    indeed   escaped    our    attention.     Senator
Humphrey's  able  address  of  the  25th  shows  how  fully
aware  he  was  of  the  crucial  issues  in  this  bill  and  of
the  need  for  safeguarding  amendments.   We  regret  an
unintentional   injustice   to   a   most   conscientious   and
progressive  Senator.—IFS.
the  Administration  bill,  though  favoring  some travel  control,
reflects  the  strength   of  the  pressure  building  up.
How  Morse  Delayed  the  Passport  Hearings  and  May  Have  Blocked  The  Bill
Mr.  MORSE.  There  is  pending  before  the  Senate   For-
eign  Relations  Committee  the  administration  passport  bill.
The  chief  architects,  so  far   as  I  can  ascertain,  are  Mr.
Dulles  and  Mr.  Murphy.   I   would  describe  their  architec-
tural  work  as  an  illegal,  unconstitutional  house  of  legisla-
tive  ill-fame,  because  it  is  such  a  serious  attack  upon  the
basic  liberties  of  the   American  people  and  it   is,  in  my
judgment,  so  in  violation of  the  elemental  principles  of  due
process  of  law.  Under  this  bill  the  courts  would  not  have
available  to  them  the  unrecorded,  secret  evidence  the  Sec-
retary   of  State   would   use  in  denying  a   passport.   How
could  such  a  shocking  proposal  be  made  to  the  Congress
of  the  United  States  by  a  President  of  the  United  States?
I  consider  this  such  a  challenge  to  American  civil  rights
and  the  constitutional  guaranties   of  a  free  people  that  I
propose   to  be  in   attendance   at   the   committee   hearings
when   this  bill   is  under  consideration.    Therefore,   I  now
notify   the  Senate  that  I  file  a  standing  objection  to  any
hearing  being  conducted by  the  Senate  Foreign   Relations
Committee  on  passport   legislation   while  the  Senate   is  in
session. . . .
THE  PRESIDING  OFFICER.   The  Chair  inquires  of  the
Senator  from  Oregon  whether  his  objection applies  only  to
passport   hearings.
Mr.  MORSE.   Only  to  the  passport  hearings,   because  I
intend  to  follow  those hearings  minute by  minute  and  hour
by  hour,  and  I  have  a  great  many  questions  to  ask  the  ad-
ministration  witnesses  in  regard  to  their  bill.
Never,  during  my  13 years  of  service  in  the  Senate,  have
I  been  so  deeply  moved  by  what  I  consider   to  be  an  in-
excusable  attack  on  constitutional  guaranties   as  are  to  be
found  in  the  administration's  proposed  passport  bill.
—U. S. Senate, July  16.
1   1  J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  28,  1958
A   Question   Senate  Foreign   Relations  Might   Put   to  CIA  In  Its  Coming   Inquiry
Did  the  Iraqi  Army  Revolt  Against  Intervention  in  Lebanon?
There  is  reason   to   suspect   that   the   Iraqi   revolt,  though
long  in  preparation,   was  triggered   by  the  Army's  belief   that
it  might  be  ordered  to  intervene in  the  Lebanon  on  behalf  of
President  Chamoun.   This  aspect  of  the  uprising   was  hastily
brushed  under  the  rug  by  those  who  brief  the  press  in  Wash-
ington  but  may be found  in  leading  British  and  French  papers.
The  day  before  the  Iraqi  revolt  the  Manchester   Guardian
correspondent   in  Beirut  reported   that  the  chances  of  a  com-
promise  settlement  were  brighter   under  pressure  from   Leba-
nese  business  interests  sick  of  the  fighting.  But  he  added  that
Chamoun's  supporters  "continue  to  fight  a  delaying  action  on
the  international front"  and  looked   for  "a  rescue  operation"
from   the   meeting  scheduled   to   open   in   Istanbul   next   day
(July  14)   by  the  heads  of  state  of  the  Moslem   members  of
the  Baghdad  Pact.
"Messages  from  Istanbul  and  Baghdad  stating  that  Turkey
and  Iraq  in  particular  were  ready  to  provide  military  help  to
protect   'Lebanese  independence',"   the   Manchester   Guardian
correspondent   continued   (under   dateline   of   July   13  in   the
issue   of   the   14th),   "have   been   given   prominence   in   the
Loyalist  press  in  Beirut,  and   a  spokesman   for   the   Lebanese
government   echoed   this  yesterday  when   he   said   that   such
help  had  been  offered."
Nuri  Knew  There  Might  Be  Trouble
The  London  Sunday  Times  of  July   13  also  carried  a dis-
patch  from  its  knowledgeable   correspondent  H.  A.  R.  Philby
saying   that   the   Lebanese   government,   disappointed    in   the
West,  was looking  to  Turkey  and  Iraq  for  help.   The  London
Times  two  days  later  in  its  "leader"  on  the   coup   d'etat   in
Baghdad  said  it  could  be  "that  rumours  of  possible   interven-
tion  by the  Iraq  Army in  Lebanon  brought  matters  to  a head."
This  aspect  of   the  revolt  was  also   touched   upon   by   the
Middle  Eastern  expert  of  Le  Monde   in  Paris.     Edouard  Sa-
blier,  just  back  from  the  Lebanon,  wrote  a  lengthy   background
report  in  the  issue  of  July  17.   In  it  he  said  that  for  several
years  ultra-nationalist  propaganda  had  affected  the  Army,  that
there  were  reports   of  massive  purges   and   executions   within
its  ranks,   and   that   the   Prime  Minister,  Nuri   es   Said,   was
worried  about  its  mounting  hostility.
Then  M.  Sablier  added,  "When  the  Baghdad   pact  powers
considered  the  sending  of  troops  into  Lebanon  to  check   the
insurrection,  the  old  statesman  (Nuri)   did  not  hide  the   fact
that  he  could  no  longer  depend  on  absolute  loyalty  from   his
Army."   The  Army  struck  at  5  a.  m.  on  July   14,  the  day  the
King  was  to  meet  in  Istanbul  with  the  other  Baghdad   Pact
powers  and  to  take  up  the  Lebanese  question.   Nuri  himself,
as  he  showed  in  a  press conference  two  weeks  earlier  in Lon-
don  (see the   London  Times   of  June  27)    was  in   favor   of
intervention   and   of   Iraqi   participation.
As  Seen  Through   Nationalist   Eyes
Such  intervention, from  a  nationalist  point  of  view,  meant
acting  in  concert  with  the  two  ancient  enemies  of   Iraq,   the
Turks  and  the  British,  both  former  occupying  powers,  to  in-
vade   another   Arab   country   against    fellow    Arab   natioa-
alists.
The  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee voted  on  July  22
to  question  officials  of  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  as  to
why  the  Iraqi  revolt  caught  this  country  so  by  surprise.   We
had  a  U.  S.  military  mission   in  the  country  to  supervise   the
use  of  the  $45,000,000  in  military  equipment  we  gave   Iraq.
We  were  thus  in  good  position  to  know  what  was  going  on
in  the  Iraqi  armed  forces.   How  could   we  have  remained  so
ignorant  of  the  danger?   If   CIA   can  be  that  unaware  in  a
friendly   country,  where   we   have   a   military   mission,   how
dependable   is  its  intelligence elsewhere?
An  ironic  footnote  to  the  whole  affair   is  provided  by  the
well-informed    Middle   Eastern   expert,    Jon   Kimche,    who
pointed  out  in  the  London  Express  of  July  15  that  the "dos-
siers  of  the   Baghdad   Pact  anti-subversion committee,  which
were  in  the  headquarters  building  in  Baghdad,  are  now  open
for   inspection  by  curious  and   interested  parties."   The  U.  S.
was  a  member  of  the  anti  subversion committee.   In  the  light
of   the  record,  perhaps  the   rebels  had  better  not   take   those
intelligence  files  too  seriously.
Why   Not   Give   Your   Pastor   or   Rabbi   A  Subscription    to   the    Weekly?
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
I'lease  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    .......................................................................................
Street    ......................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State...................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
7/28/SB
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City       ........................................Zone............State................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   St
lisl
Mne's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Claas  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
shod  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August   and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
•      independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
£.">  in  the   U.  S.;   $(S  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates: $15 to  Europe; $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED