I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jul14.pdf

============================================================

Special   Issue  on  Adm.  Strauss'  Successor
New   A EC  Chairman   Defends   Teller   But   Attacks   10   Caltech   Opponents   of   Atom  Testing,   P.   3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOI,.  VI,   NO.  27
JULY  14,  1958ioi       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
John   A.   McCone   Devises   A   New   Gimmick   to   Get  Around  Conflict-of-interest  Law
A  "Dear  Sherm"  Letter  the  Press  Ignored
The  scene  was  the  old  Supreme  Court  chamber,   loveliest
room  in  the  Capitol,  still  furnished  as  if  it  expected  lady  visi-
tors  in  crinolines.   A  small  gray-haired  man  who  seemed  to
have  the   faculty   of   talking  without  opening   his  mouth   or
even  moving  his  lips  sat  before  the  microphone  at  the  wit-
ness   fable.    High   up   on   the   mahogany  bench  before  him,
under  the  gilt  eagle  and  the  ancient  clock,  were  members  of
the  Joint  Committee  on   Atomic  Energy.   The   man   at   the
microphone  was  John   A.  McCone,  Admiral  Strauss'   succes-
sor  as  chairman  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.
Though   Mr.   McCone  may  be  one  of   the   most   powerful
officials   of  the  government  during  the  next  five  years,  with
crucial   influence  on  questions  of  war  and   peace,   the   public
benches  were  almost  empty  and  there  was  only  a  handful  of
reporters  present.   There  was  a  more  dazzling  side-show  else-
where.   This  was  Goldfine  Day,  the  first  appearance  on  the
stand  of  that  exuberant  Litvak  who  claimed  merely  to  be  a
Jewish   Santa  Claus.    He   was   being   exposed   instead   as   a
tax-deductible    Mephistopheles,    corrupting    innocent    New
England  gentiles by  lying  in  wait  for  them  with  second  hand
Oriental  rugs.   How  could  the  austere abstractions of   nuclear
policy  compete with  such  racy  and  covertly racist melodrama?
Though  Ethics  Now  Page  One  News
Yet  the  McCone  hearing  need  not  have  been   so  quickly
disposed  of  by  the  Joint  Committee,  nor  so  obscurely  reported
in  the  next  day's  papers.   Ethics-in-office  is  currently  page  one
news,  and  this  had  an  ethical  angle.    It  even  had  a  "Dear
Sherm"   letter  in  which  the  new  Chairman  of  the  AEC  put
an  ethical  problem  to  the  Administration's  highest   authority
in  the  field.  The  letter  made  public  for  the  first  time  a  new
and   ingenious   device   for   getting   around   conflict-of-interest
law.    Despite  the  sensitivity  to  these  moral  questions  created
by   Goldfine's   weakness   for   largesse,   the   Committee   itself
passed  over  all  this  rapidly,  like  a  traveller  anxious  after  one
peep  to  get  away  from  a  precipice.   The  "Dear  Sherm"  letter
went  unmentioned  in  the  press.
The  Joint  Committee  is  supposed   to  be  the  Congressional
watchdog  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.    The  Senate  is
required  to  confirm  appointments  to  the  AEC.   The   function
of  the  hearing  on  the  nominee  is  to  give  the  Senate  and  the
public  enough   information   on  his  past  record   and  views  to
make  possible   an  informed   judgment.    Yet  the  Joint   Com-
mittee  was  offhand   and   cursory   in   its  examination   of   Mr.
McCone.   No  real  effort  was  made  to  elicit  his  views  on  nu-
clear   policy,  and   no  adequate   consideration    was  given   his
peculiar  position  on  conflict-of-interest,  though  Mr.  McCone
will  be  involved  in  matters  somewhat  more  momentous  than
"Not    Practical"  to  Be  Wholly  Ethical
June  2,  1958
Governor  Sherman  Adams
The  White  House,  Washington,  D.  C.
Dear  Sherm:
Inclosed  are  three  copies  of  a  brief  summary  of  my
current  holdings  and  the  activities  of  closely-held  com-
panies  in  which  I  have  an  interest.   All  of  this  infor-
mation  was  given  to  Mr.  Wilkie  orally  on  Thursday.
He  requested  a  memorandum, and  you  may  pass  this
on
   p
to  him  if  you  desire.
For  reasons   which  I  discussed   with  you,  it   is  not
practical  for  me  to  divest  myself  of  the  ownership  of
my   holdings.   Therefore  the  question  of   any   possible
conflict  of  interest must  be  carefully weighed.  I  can  be
relieved   completely  of   active   management   responsi-
bilities   and  resign   as   an   officer   and   director   of   all
companies  and,  if   desired,   can  place   my  stock   in   a
voting  trust  so  that  I  will  be  removed  from   control.
However,  I  will  continue  to  benefit   from  any  success
these   interests   may  enjoy.
While  companies in  which  I  have  interests  are  not
engaged  in  Atomic  Energy  Commission  contracts,  you
will  note  they  are,  and  I  personally  am,  engaged   in
contracts  or  joint  endeavors  with  important AEC  con-
tractors.   This  could  be  construed  as  reason  for  preju-
dice  or  bias on  my  part when dealing with  the  relation-
ship  between  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  the
parties  with  whom  my  companies  have  business   ar-
rangements.    I   am  thinking  of   such   important   AEC
contractors    as    Union    Carbide,    Kaiser    Engineers,
Bechtel   Company,   Dow   Chemical,  Utah  Construction
Company,   and  possibly  others.
I  sincerely  hope  that  such  an  objection  will  not  be
raised,  but  I  feel  the  possibilities  should  be  carefully
considered  by  you  and  others  before  formal  action  is
taken  on  the  proposed appointment.
Sincerely,  and  with  warm  regards,
John  A.  McCone
1    0       i
the   mislabelling   of   cloth,  or   even   the   discovery   that   Mr.
Elsenhower's  right  hand  man  is not  pure  wool  and  a  full  yard
wide.
More  Important  Mis-Labels
The  AEC  has  been  mislabelling  dirty  bombs  as  clean,  mis-
informing  the  public  on  the  feasibility of  inspecting  tests,  and
using  millions  in  public  funds  to  subsidize  supposed  examples
of  private  enterprise   in  atomic  power.   As  compared   to  the
treatment   given   the   minor   peccadilloes   of   a  minor   textile
manufacturer,   the  attention-paid  Mr.   McCone  by  the  Joint
Committee,   the  Senate  and  the  press  is  shockingly  dispropor-
(Cont'mued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  July  14, 1958
New   AEC   Head   Will   Still   Profit   Though   Temporarily  Divorced  from  Management
McCone's  Private  Companies  Do  A  Big  Business  With  AEC  Contractors
(Continued  from  Page  One)
tionate  to  the  power  he  will  wield  and  the  vast  public  funds
of  which  he  will  dispose.   Let  us  begin  here  with  the   more
obvious  conflict-of-interest   angle.
The   Atomic  Energy   Act   provides  that   "No   member  of
the   Commission  shall   engage  in  any  business,  vocation   or
employment  other  than  that  of  serving  as  a  member  of  the
Commission."   The  purpose  of  this, provision  was  not   only
to  ensure  that  the  AEC  would  not  become  a  part-time  occu-
pation  for  its  members  but  also  to  insulate  them  from  con-
flicts   of  interest.   Yet  Mr.  McCone's  "Dear   Sherm"  letter
reveals  that  the  new  nominee  instead  of  selling  two  wholly
owned  private  companies  is  putting  them  into  trusteeship
with  a  California  bank  during  his  terms  of  office  on the  Com-
mission.    This   will   divorce   him  from   the   management   of
these  companies,  but  their   profits   will  still   accrue   to  his
account.   The  companies  are  the  Joshua  Hendy  Iron   Works
and  Panama   Pacific  Tankers.
A  Disingenuous  Reply
Presumably  these  holdings  involve  no  conflict  of  interest.
This  was  implied  by  what  seemed  to  be  a  clear  answer  to  a
clear  question  put  to  Mr.  McCone  early   in  the  hearing  by
Senator   Anderson,  who  acted  as  chairman:
Sen.  Anderson.   I  believe  you  said  these  companies  do
not  do  business  with  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and
never  have?
Mr.  McCone.   That  is  correct,  sir.
But  later  in  tKe  hearings  it  turned  out  that  this  answer
was  not  the  whole  story.  It  appeared  that  these   companies
work  closely  with   some  of  the   AEC's  biggest  contractors,
and  that  "Therefore"—as  Mr.  McCone  himself   wrote  Sher-
man  Adams  a  month  earlier  (see  page  one box)—"the  ques-
tion   of  any   possible   conflict  of  interest  must  be   carefully
weighed."   For  reasons  which  Mr.  McCone  said  he  had  al-
ready   discussed   with   Governor   Adams  "it  is  not  practical
for  me  to  divest  myself  of  the  ownership  of  my  holdings."
He  hoped  that  by  placing   the   stock   "in  a  voting  trust"
that  the  requirements  of  the  law  would  be  met,   although
"I  will  continue  to  benefit  from  any  success  these  interests
may  enjoy."   Yet  this  arrangement  was  not  questioned  by
the  Joint  Committee  nor  the  Senate  in  confirming  the  new
Chairman   of  the  AEC.
The  AEC's  Conflict  of  Interest  Rule
To  get  the  full  flavor  of this  extraordinary  affair  one  must
return  to  the   record:
Senator   Anderson.   The  AEC  has   a   policy   of   ethical
standards  for  its  employees and  officials.   May I  read from
it?   "Conflict  of  Interest.  Employees, including  consultants
and  designees  shall  avoid  situations  which  require,  or  ap-
pear  to  require,  a  balancing  of  private  interests  or obliga-
tions  against  official  duties."   Would  there  be  anything  in
that  that  would  in  any  way  embarrass  you  in  your conduct
in  this  office  because of  your  former  associations?
Mr.  McCone.   None whatsoever.
Senator   Anderson.    Do  you   think   any   extensive  busi-
ness  relationships  between  your  wholly  owned  firm  and
industrial  concerns  in  the  atomic  field  might  appear   to
require   a   balancing  of   private   interests   against   official
duties?
Mr.  McCone.   No.
Senator   Anderson.   I   say   frankly  I   do  not   think   so,
either,  but  I  do  recognize  that  it  is   going   to  be  a  hard
course  to  steer  when  you  are  dealing  directly  with  Union
Carbide  as  Chairman  of   the  Atomic  Energy  Commission
and  Union  Carbide  is  a  prize  customer  of  your  privately
owned  firm.
He  Searched  His   Soul
Mr.  McCone.   I  have  done  a  great  deal  of  soul-searching
on  that  question,  as  you  know.   This  was  the  reason  why
I  hesitated  in  accepting  this  nomination  because,  while  I
was  confident  as  to  my  conduct,  I  did  not  want  to  be  in  a
position  where  someone  would  even  suspect  I  was  acting
under  prejudice  and  bias.
The  result   of  the  soul-searching   was  the  trusteeship  de-
vice.   At  this  point   Mr.  McCone   put   his  letter  to   "Dear
Sherm"  in  the  record  and  went  on  to  say  that  it  had  been
"reviewed  by  the   Attorney   General's   office,"   implying   the
Attorney   General's   approval.    No  one  asked   whether    the
Attorney  General  did  in  fact   approve  it  and  the  whole  af-
fair   was  then   given   this   apologetic   brush-off   by   Senator
Anderson.
Senator   Anderson.    I  do  want  to   say   to   you   that   I
know  it  is  sometimes  hard  to  understand  the  reasons  for
questions  of  this  nature but  on  the  other  hand  I  feel  that
if  these  questions  are  asked  in  advance  it  is  much better,
with  the  hope  that  nobody at  a  subsequent  date  will  come
up   and  say,  'Well,   this  firm  does   business   with   Union
Carbide.'
We  know  your  firm  does  business  with  the  Union Car-
bide  and  I  am  perfectly  satisfied   to  let  that  relationship
continue.   I  hope  that  the  day  never  comes  that  a  man,
in  order  to  hold  a  position  of  public  responsibility,  has  to
be  someone  who  has  never  acquired  a  dollar's  worth  of
property   in   his   life.    Are   there   any   questions   on   this
matter?
There  were  no  questions.
Not  His  First   Appearance
The  Senate  and the  public had  a  right  to  a  more  searching
(Continued  on Page  Four)
This  Is  The Feeble  Way  Mr. McCone  Was
Sen.  Anderson.  Have  you  made  any  commitments  with
reference  to  several  policy  matters  that  I  am  going  to  ask
you  about?   If  you  feel  you  cannot  answer,  all   well  and
good.   As  to  weapons  testing,  for  example?
Mr.  McCone.   No.
Sen.  Anderson.   I  ask  that  because  just  in  the  last  day
or  two  there  was  a  statement  that  a.man  connected  with
the  Atomic  Energy   Commission  still   did  not  feel   it   was
safe  militarily  to  engage  in  the  suspension  of  tests.  On
the  same  day  there  was  a  story  in  the  newspaper,  in  the
same  paper, on  the  same  page,  saying  that  our  people  were
arriving  at  Geneva,  ready  to  start  discussions.
I  think  if   there  is  a  strong   feeling  on  your  part  that
there  must  never  be  any  halt  in  the  tests,  that   ought   to
Questioned  About Nuclear Test Suspension
be   known,   because   it   will   be   in   sharp   conflict   with,   I
imagine,  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  John  Foster
Dulles,  who apparently is  trying  very  sincerely  to  arrive  at
a  suspension  of  tests  with  proper  safeguards  that  Senator
Know-land  mentioned.
You   have   no   opinion   that   cannot   be   shaken   on   that
question  if  the  safeguards  were  satisfied?
Mr.  McCone.   No,  I  have  no  opinion.   As  I  expressed  in
that  letter  to  Dr.  Lauritsen  that  I  read,   (see   next   page)
the  closing  paragraph,  I  am  a  great  supporter  of  a  pro-
gram  under adequate  and  proper safeguards.   In  answer  to
your  specific  question,  I  have  made  no  commitment, I  have
no  irrevocable conviction  on  this  question.
—Joint  Committee  on Atomic Energy,  July  %.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  H,  1958
From   McCone's   Letter  Protesting   the   Anti   Nuclear  Test  Stand  of  10  Caltech Scientists
Admiral   Strauss'  Successor   Provides  A  Self-Portrait   of  His  Own   Views
"This   morning   I   read   with   amazement   your   statement.
It  seemed to  me  the  arguments  you  use  concerning  renounc-
ing  the  H-bomb tests  are  without  validity.  .  .  .  You mention
Foreign   Minister   Shepilov's   statements   of  July   17,   sug-
gesting  abandonment  of  bomb  tests;  but  what   you  fail   to
mention   is  that  on  almost  the  day  Mr.  Shepilov  made  the
atate:nent  the  Russians  were  conducting  nuclear  tests  in  the
interior   of   Siberia.
"You,  Dr.  Lauritsen,  and  your  associates  know  the   lead
time  required  to  conduct  a  test.    You  know  that  almost  a
year  must  transpire   from  the  time  the  test  is  decided  upon
until   it   is  made.   This  year   is  consumed  in   planning,   as-
sembling  material  and  construction  and, finally, in  the  trans-
portation   of  the   device  to  be  tested.   Now,  if  we  make   a
unilateral   decision  of  a  type  you  and  your  associates  advo-
cate  and  then  Mr.  Shepilov  does  as  he  did  last  July—turns
around   and  sets  off  a   few  hydrogen   bombs  in  their  own
testing  ground—where  do  we  stand?   The  answer  is  simple.
We  have  lost  a  year;  we are  behind  in  the  race.  .  .  .
No  Harm  in  Fail-Out
"Your  statement  is  obviously   designed  to  create  fear   in
the  minds  of  the  uninformed that  radioactive   fall-out   from
H-bomb  tests  endangers   life.    However,  as  you  know,  the
National  Academy  of  Sciences  has  issued  a  report  this  year
completely  discounting  such  danger.    Also  you  know  from
your  close  contact  with  the  tests  that  one  of  the  important
objects  of  them  is  to  develop  techniques  for  reducing  fall-out.
"Your  proposition   that  postponement   of  tests  will  delay
the  time  when  other  nations  might  possess  practical  H-bomb
experience  seems  to  have  no  foundation.    In  fact,  it  is  an
argument  that  has  for  several  years  been  a  prominent  part
of   Soviet  propaganda. ...
"As  far  as  our  prestige  in  Western  Europe  is   concerned,
I  have  spent   much   more  time   in  Europe   during  the  past
two  years  than  you  have  and  have  been  in  touch  with   the
civilian   or  military   officials   of  practically  all  Western   Eu-
rope  governments  and  I  can  tell  you  that  our   conduct  of
tests,  H-bomb or  other  nuclear  devices,  is  not  at  issue  with
our  prestige  in  Western  Europe.
"You  infer  that  our  government   shields  our  people   from
the  realities  of  the  dangers  which  confront  us.  This  impres-
sion  is  false.   President  Eisenhower   has  repeatedly   warned
us  of these  dangers.  .  . .
Suppose  We  Had  Listened  to  Robert  Oppenheimer?
"A  unilateral  decision  of  the  type  you  recommend  might
be  fatal   to  our  country.    It   might   easily  lose  for   us   the
The  Scientists   Who  Angered  McCone
Here  is  the  gist  of  the  letter  sent  by  John  A.  Mc-
Cone,   new  chairman  of   the   Atomic  Energy   Commis-
sion,   on  October   15,  1956,  to   Dr.  Thomas  Lauritsen,
professor   of   physics  at   California   Institute   of   Tech-
nology.    Mr,   McCone   is   a  trustee   of   Caltech.   Prof.
Lauritsen  and  nine  other  Caltech  scientists  including
Dr.  Carl  D.  Anderson,  Nobel  laureate  in  physics  for
1934,  that  day  published a  statement  supporting  Adlai
Stevenson's  proposal  for  a  ban  on  H-bomb  testing.
The   10  scientists   disagreed  with  Elsenhower's   ex-
pressed   regret   that   the   nuclear  issue   had   been   in-
jected   into   the   campaign.    "On  the   contrary,"   th'ey
said,   "we  find  it   regrettable   that   discussion   of   our
military  strength,  of  our  vulnerability and  of  our  for-
eign  policy   in  relation  to  the  H-bomb  have  thus   far
represented  such  a  small  proportion  of  current  political
discussion."
That  statement  also  took  issue  with  the  argument
that  Stevenson's  suggestion   would  be  dangerously  uni-
lateral  and  permit  the  Soviet  Union  to  get   ahead  in
nuclear  technology.   The  other  signers  were  Harrison
Brown,  Robert  F.  Christy, James  W.  M.  Dumode, Rob-
ert  V.  Langmuir, Charles  P.  McKinney, Matthew Sands,
John  M.  Teem  and  Robert  L. Walker.
precious   technical   advantage   we  now  hold.   Think   of   the
desperate   circumstance   we  would  find  ourselves   in   today
had  we  followed  the  advice  of  one  scientist,  Dr.  Robert  Op-
penheimer,  a  few  years  ago  and  abandoned  the  development
of   the   H-bomb.   Democrats   and  Republicans  alike  at  that
time  saw  the  folly  of  such  thinking.    I  am  sure  the  more
thoughtful   members  of  both  parties  will   see  the   extreme
hazards  to  our  national   security   in  the  course  you   recom-
mend  and   advocate.
We  Can't  Disarm  Yet
"I  stand  steadfastly  behind  a  policy  of  disarmament  when
we  reach  agreement  with  other  nations for  a  safe  and  proper
procedure  of  inspection  so  that  we  Americans  will  be  sure
that,  as  we  take  our  guard   down  through  agreement  with
Russia,   we  will  not   be  exposing  ourselves  to  their  unre-
stricted  power  against  which  we  will  have  no  defense.   This
President   Eisenhower   has   advocated   time   and  again.    It
continues  to  be  his  policy  and  you,  unfortunately,  have  com-
pletely  distorted  his  position   in  your  press  release."
McCone  Defends  Teller's Right to  Speak  But  Not  His  Opponents
Sen.  Anderson.  Here  were  ten  scientists  who  individually
decided  it  was  safe  for  this  country  to  stop  testing  as  long
as  other  countries  stopped  testing.   Mr.  McCone  took  them
pretty  strongly  to  task  and  there  were  suggestions  which
I  understand  he  did  not  make,  that  they  all  be  fired.  .  .  .
Now,  if  Mr.  McCone  becomes  chairman of  the   Commission,
and  it  has  been  established  that  he  would,  do  you  think  a
scientist  would  dare  express   himself  on  the  subject  if  he
worked  for  AEC  while  you  were  chairman?
Mr.  McCone.  There  was  no  scientist  fired  from  Caltech
on  advice  or  recommendation  from  me,  sir.  .  .  .
Sen.   Anderson.   Now,  Dr.  Teller  has  made  some  state-
ments  about  the  ability  to  detect  tests.   He  is  a  scientist.
He  was  connected  with  the'University  of  California.  .  .  .
Do  you  see  anything  wrong  in  that?
Mr.  McCone.   Not  at  all.
Sen.  Anderson.   Then  he  went  on  to  television   and  ex-
pressed  himself  very  freely  on  the  subject.   Is  there  any-
thing  wrong with  that?
Mr.  McCone.   Nothing  at  all.
Sen.  Anderson.  What  is  the  difference  between  what  Dr.
Harrison  Brown  did  and  what  Dr.  Teller  did?
Mr.  McCone.   Well,  Dr.  Teller  was  speaking  as  an  indi-
vidual  and  as  an  authority  in  a  particular  area.   I  felt,  as
I  have  said  before,  that  Dr.  Harrison  Brown  recruited  ten.
men,  I assume  he  did, ten  of  them  together,  and  using  their
position  in  the  Institute  [of   nuclear  research   at  Caltech]
injected   themselves  into   what   appeared   to   me   to   be   a
political  argument.   That   was  my  objection   to  their  pro-
cedure.
—July  g  before   the  Joint  Committee  on Atomic  Energy.
1    1    ;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, July  U, 1958
Senate  Confirmation  of  AEC  Members  Not  Supposed  to  be  Rubber  Stamp
{Continued  from  Page  Two)
examination  because  this  is  not:  Mr.  McCone's  first  appear-
ance  in  dealing  with  the  government.   There  was  a  cryptic
reference  to  the  past  when  Senator   Anderson   said  early  in
the  hearings,  "a  good  deal  of  the  mail  that  I  got  after  your
name  came  up  had  to  do  with  your  partnership   in  the  firm
of   Bechtel-McCone."    The   Senator   never   explained   what
kind  of   mail   it  was,  whether  any  charges   had   been   made,
nor  what  investigation  disclosed.   The   only  other   reference
in  the  record  to  this  company  occurs  in  Mr.  McCone's   own
letter  to  Governor  Adams,  where  it  appears  that  the  Bechtel
Company  (Mr.  McCone  has  given  up  his  partnership  in  it)
is  one  of  those  concerns  which  will  be  dealing  both  with  the
AEC  and  the  private  companies  of  its  new  chairman,
His  Old  Firm  Makes  Reactors
The  Bechtel-McCone  company  has  been  engaged  in  making
atomic  reactors  for  the  AEC,  and  its  importance  is  indicated
by  the  announcement  June  30  that  W.  Kenneth  Davis,  direc-
tor  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Reactor  Development,  was  re-
signing  to  become  vice-president  of  Bechtel.   Mr.  McCone  as
chairman  of the  AEC will  be dealing  with a company  he help-
ed  to  form  in  1937  as  the  Bechtel-McCone-Parsons  Corpora-
tion  to  engage  in  construction  and  engineering  work.   During
the  war  it  built  a  huge  center  at  Birmingham,  Alabama,  for
the  modification  of  B-24's  and  B-29's.   It  also  had  a  manage-
ment  contract  to   run  the  war-time  California  Shipbuilding
Company  of  which  Mr.  McCone  was  president
According  to  testimony from  the  General  Accounting  Office
before  a  1946  investigation  by  the  House  Merchant   Marine
Committee  into  wartime  shipyard   profits,   this    shipbuilding
company  was  formed  in  January  1941  with  $100,000  ifl  capi-
tal,  half  of  it  put  up  by  Henry  J.  Kaiser  companies.   A  year
later  it  declared a  $1,000,000  dividend.  The  GAO  claims  the
company  made $44,000,000 in  profit.  Mr.  McCone  claimed  in
rebuttal  that  after  all  taxes  and  non-reimbursable  costs,   the
earnings  were  less  than  $9,000,000,  or  an  average  of   about
$2,000,000  a  year,  itself   not  a  bad  return  on  that   original
$100,000  invested  in  the  risk-free  business  of  running  a  war-
time  government  owned   shipyard.  The   same    Congressional
committee,  reporting  a  few  months  later  on  the  disposal  of
government   owned   yards,   complained   that   Mr.    McCone's
company  was  paid  $2,500,000   by  the  Maritime    Commission
to  take over  a  yard  costing  $25,000,000  and  surplus   material
costing  $14,000,000.  The  whole  operation   showed  a  genius
for  making  a  fast  and  fancy  buck.
A  Small-Time  Operator
In   the   light  of   their   long   running   fight   with   Admiral
Strauss,  it  is  difficult   to  understand  the  complaisant  attitude
toward  Mr.  McCone  by men  like  Senator  Anderson  and  Con-
gressmen  Holifield  and  Price.   The  angry  letter  he  sent  the
Caltech   scientists   on   nuclear   testing    (see   page   3),    when
coupled  with  his  defense  of  Dr.  Teller,  shows  how  completely
he  shares  Admiral  Strauss'  preconceptions.    He  is  unlikely  to
be  any friendlier to  public  power.   His  continued  private  busi-
ness  connections  carry  the  seeds  of  potential   scandal,  and  es-
tablish  a  dangerous  precedent  in  the  conflict-of-interest  field.
He  seems  to  have  no  visible  qualifications  for  so  important  a
position.   He  is  a  small-timer  as  a  business  man,  an  operator
on  the  fringes of  bigger  enterprises.  This  is the  man  chosen  to
boss that huge  sector  of  American scientific  talent  which  is em-
ployed  directly or  indirectly by  the  AEC.
Privately  some  of  the  Joint  Committee  members rationalize
by  saying  that  the  President  has  a  right  to  pick  the  members
of  his  official  family.  So he  has.   But  Mr.  McCone  will  be  in
office  three  years  after   Mr.   Eisenhower  leaves.   The   law,   in
providing  for  Senate  confirmation of  AEC  appointments,  cer-
tainly  did  not  intend  this  to  be  a  mere  routine  rubber  stamp
operation.   Especially because  so many  people  feel  that  the  re-
tirement  of  Strauss  is  some  sort  of  victory, it  was  important to
hold  a  hearing  which  would  give  the  public  a  fuller  look  at
the  man  he  chose  to  be  his  successor.
A  Carbon  Copy  of  Strauss
From  the  Eisenhower  Administration point  of  view,   Mr.
McCone fills the  bill perfectly.  He  entered  government  earlier
as  a  protege   of  Secretary  Forrestal  and  has  much  the   same
arms  race  views.   He  was  satisfactory  to  the  Air  Force  lobby
as  Under  Secretary  of   the   Air   Force  in   1951.    He   served
agreeably  on  the  Wriston  committee  which  made  an  innocu-
ous  inquiry  into  the  foreign  service  for  Secretary  Dulles  in
1954-5.   He  was  a  financial  banker  of  Knowland  in  the  re-
cent   California  primaries  and   has   often   played   golf   with
Ike.    He  was  the  latter's   representative  at  Pius  XIFs   80th
birthday  in   1956.    In  background  and  outlook   he  promises
to  be  a  carbon  copy  of  Strauss.
When  a  telegram  was  read  by  Senator  Anderson  from  the
Los  Angeles  chapter  of   the   Federation   of   American  Scien-
tists,  asking  the  nominee's   views  on  academic  freedom,   in-
formation   policy   and   government   development   of   atomic
power,   the   Republicans  on   the   committee   acted   as   if   a
group  of  servants  had  suddenly  turned  impertinent.   Senator
Anderson  was  half-hearted  about  putting  the  questions  and
the  other  Democrats  sat  in  stultified   silence.    Mr.   McCone
was  allowed  to  get  away  with  a  few  vague  generalities.    It
was  only  through  the  submission-for  the  record  of  the  "Dear
Sherrn"   letter   and   the   letter   to   Dr.   Lauritsen   (see   page
three)   that  a  fuller  portrait  of  the  new  AEC  Chairmau  was
inadvertently  presented.   Thanks  to  non-coverage  by the  press,
very  few  people  will  know   about   this   anyway.   This   is  a
strange  way  to  pass  on  an  appointment   to  one  of  the   most
important  positions  in  our  government.
IF.Stone's   Weekly
5618   Nebratko  Av«.,  N,  W.
Waihinston  15, D. C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   ae   Second   Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Poat-dated  Mondays  but  pub
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  laet  two  Thursdays  oi  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.,  Washington  IS,  D.  c.
An   Independent   -weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   **.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Eether  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
$5  In  the  U.  S.;  *8  in  Canaan;  $10  elsewhere.    Alt  Mall  rates;  *15  to  Europe;  ?20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED