I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jul07.pdf

============================================================

Historic  Text  Douglas-Black  Dissent, P.  2
Full  Report  in   Warning  on  the   Pending   Bills   to   Restrict  Right  to  Travel,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.   2H
JULY   7,   1958
101      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Supreme  Court  Falters  in  the  Little  Rock  Crisis
The  big  disappointment  of  the  Supreme  Court's  final  day of
term  was  its  rejection  of  the  appeal  for  quick  action  on  Little
Rock.   The  crucial  weakness  of  its  per  curiam  order  was  the
failure  to  indicate  that  the  Eighth  circuit  ought  to  hear  and
decide  the  appeal  on  the  merits  before  the  next  school  year.
In  saying that  it  did  not  doubt  that  the  Eighth  Circuit  would
act  "upon   the   application   jor  a  slay   or  the  appeal"   before
September,  the  Court  left  open  the  possibility  that  the  lower
bench  might  issue  a  stay  this  summer  but  leave  final  decision
until  later   in  the  year.   It  will  be  immensely   more   difficult
to  keep  order  in  the  Little  Rock  Central   High   School   if   it
opens  with  the  appeal   still  pending.   The   Lemley  order   re-
warded  the  mob  by  directing  all  deliberate  speed   backward
on   integration;  it  opened   a  new  technique   for   nullification.
We   have  little  doubt  that  the  Eighth  Circuit—which  is  non
Confederate   in   its   personnel—will   ultimately   reverse   but
much   harm   will   be   done   unless   it   reverses   before   school
opens.    The   failure  of   the   Attorney   General   to   intervene
amicus  curiae  weakened   the   appeal   to  the   Supreme   Court.
We   believe  he  will  not  intervene  in  the  lower   court  unless
there  is  public  pressure;  he  made  some  kind  of  deal—overt
or   implicit—with   the   Southern   Senators   on   the   Judiciary
Committee  for  confirmation.   We  still  hope  that  a  group  of
eminent   lawyers  will,  as  we  urged   last  week,   petition   the
President   to   direct   the   Attorney   General   to   intervene   and
press  for  final  decision   this  summer.
A  Victory  for  the  Right  of  Association
Disappointment  over  the  Little  Rock  opinion  was  leavened
by  the  unanimous  decision  in  which  Mr.   Justice  Harlan  re-
versed  the  contempt   citation   and  the  $100,000  fine  imposed
on  the  NAACP  for  refusing  to  reveal  to  Alabama's  Attorney
General  the  names  and  addresses  of  its  members.   The  deci-
sion  distinguished  the  NAACP  case  from  the  older  cases  cited
as  precedent   by  Alabama  in  which  the  Ku  Klux  Klan  was
forced  to  unmask  its  membership.    The  NAACP  is  an  asso-
ciation  of  citizens  formed   to  advance  their  lawful   rights   by
lawful  means  whereas  the  Klan  decisions,  as  the  Court  noted,
were   "based   on  the  particular  character  of  the  Klan's  activi-
ties,  involving  acts  of  intimidation  and  violence."  The  Court
linked  the  right  of  lawful  association  with  a  right  to  privacy
(see  box  on  this  page)  in  a  way  which  seems  to   foreshadow
two  other  liberal  victories.    One  would  be  in  the  Flaxer  case,
where   a  union  leader   was  held  in  contempt  for   refusing   to
give  a  Congressional   committee   the   names   of  his   members.
The  other  may  come  in  the  test  of  the  Internal  Security   Act.
The   reasoning   of  the  NAACP  decision   would   seem  also  to
outlaw   the   idea   of   a   Subversive    Activities   Control   Board
empowered    to   blacklist   organizations   it   considers    commu-
nistic  and  to  force   them  and  their  publications   to  wear  the
Death-Knell  of   the   SACB,  Too?
"This  Court  has  recognized  the  vital  relationship  be-
tween  freedom  to  associate  and  privacy  in  one's  asso-
ciations.   When  referring  to  the  varied  forms  of   gov-
ernmental  action  which  might  interfere  with   freedom
of  assembly, it  said  in  American Communications Assn.
v.  Douds:  'A  requirement that  adherents  of  particular
religious   faiths  or  political  parties   wear  identifying
arm-bands,  for  example,  is  obviously  of  this  nature.'
Compelled   disclosure   of   membership   in   an   organiza-
tion  engaged  in  advocacy of  particular beliefs  is  of  the
same  order.   Inviolability  of  privacy  in  group   associa-
tion  may   in  many  circumstances  be  indispensable   to
preservation   of   freedom   of   association,   particularly
where  a  group espouses  dissident  beliefs."
—Mi:   Justice   Harlan,   in   NAACP   v.   Alabama.
1  0
yellow  badge  of  a  registration  order.   The   ultimate   decision
will  depend   on  how  the  individual  Justices   feel   about   the
Communist   Party,   but   we   doubt    that   a   majority   can   be
mustered  to  hold  that  an  administrative  board  can  force   dis-
closure  of  mmebership  purely  on  the  basis  of  evidence   show-
ing   that   certain   organizations   express   opinions    paralleling
the  party  line.   This  is  the  heart  of  the  Internal   Security  Act.
More  Concerned With  Procedure  Than  Principle
The  California  loyalty oath  tax  cases  which  came  down  the
same  day  are  not  quite  the  liberal  victory  they  appear  to  be
on  the  surface.   This  present  Supreme  Court   is  more  apt  to
intervene  against  thought   control   devices  where  they  offend
conservative  notions   of   due  process   than   when   they   violate
fundamental   liberal   principles.    The   Chief   Justice  took   no
part   since  he   was   in   some   way   inolved   while   in   office   in
California   and   the   decisions   were   7   to   1,  with   only   Mr.
Justice  Clark  dissenting.   The  Court  denied  the  right  of  Cali-
fornia  to  demand  a  non-communist   oath  of  churchmen   and
veterans  as  condition  for  the  enjoyment  of  certain  tax  privi-
leges.      (Dr.    Stephen    Fritchman's   First   Unitarian   of   Los
Angeles—a  little  Gibraltar  of  resistance  to  the  witch  hunt—
was  the  best  known  of  the  appellants).   Black  and  Douglas
concurring  would   have  outlawed   the  California   constitutional
provision  denying  tax  exemption  to  persons  or  organizations
which  advocate  revolutionary  doctrine.   But  the  majority  opin-
ion  by  Mr.   Justice  Brennan   was  more  circumscribed.    Black
and   Douglas  would   bar   such   provisions   altogether   as   con-
stituting   "a   tax   on   belief   and   expression."    The   majority
merely  held  that  California   could   not  require  a  loyalty  oath
under  this  provision  and  thereby  put  the  burden  of  proof  on
the  tax  applicant.   The   majority  did   not  pass  on  the   con-
stitutionality  of  the  provision  at  this  time,  and  left  the  way
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  7,  1958
Douglas   and  Black   Protest   the   5th   Amendment  Discharges   of   A   Teacher  and   A   Subway  Conductor
Full  Text  of  A  Dissent  We   Believe  Will  Become  A  Libertarian   Classic
Mr.   Justice   Douglas,  with  Mr.  Justice   Black,   dissenting:
"The  holding  of  the  Court  that  the  teacher  in  the  Beilan
case  and  the  subway  conductor  in  the  Lerner  case  could  be
discharged   from   their   respective   jobs  because   they   stood
silent  when  asked  about  their  Communist  affiliations  cannot,
with  due  deference, be  squared  with  our  constitutional  prin-
ciples.
"Among  the  liberties   of  the  citizens  that  are  guaranteed
by  the  Fourteenth   Amendment  are  those  contained   in  the
First    Amendment.    [Five    cases    cited.]     These    include
the  right  to  believe  what  one  chooses,  the  right  to   differ
from  his  neighbor,  the  right  to  pick  and  choose  the  political
philosophy  that  he  likes  best,  the  right  to  associate  with
whomever  he  chooses,  the  right  to  join  the  groups  he  pre-
fers,  the  privilege  of  selecting   his  own  path  to  salvation.
The  Court  put  the  matter  succinctly  in  Board  of  Education
v.  Barnette,  319  US  624,  641-2:
America  Has  No  Orthodoxies
We   can  have   intellectual   individualism   and   the   rich
cultural  diversities  that  we  owe  to  exceptional  minds   only
at  the  price  of  occasional  eccentricity   and  abnormal  atti-
tudes.   When   they   are  so  harmless   to  others  or  to   the
State  as  those  we  deal  with  here,  the  price  is  not  too
great.  But  freedom  to  differ    is  not  limited  to  things  that
do  not  matter  much.   That   would  be  a  mere  shadow  of
freedom.    The  test   of  its  substance  is  the  right  to      differ
as  to  things   that   touch  the  heart  of   the  existing   order.
If   there  is  any  fixed  star  in  our  constitutional  constel-
lation,  it  is  that  no  official,    high  or  petty,  can  prescribe
what  shall  be  orthodox  in  politics,  nationalism,   religion,
or  other  matters  of  opinion  or  force  citizens  to  confess   by
word  or  act  their  faith   therein.
"We  deal  here  only  with  a  matter  of  belief.   We  have  no
evidence  in  either   case  that  the  employee  in  question   ever
committed   a   crime,  ever   moved   in  treasonable   opposition
against  this  country.   The  only  mark   against   them—if   it
can  be  called  such—is  a  refusal   to  answer  questions  con-
cerning  Communist Party  membership.  This  is  said  to  give
rise  to  doubts  concerning  the  competence  of  the  teacher  in
the  Beilan  case  and  doubts  as  to  the  trustworthiness   and
reliability  of  the  subway conductor  in  the  Lerner  case.
Parting  Radically  With  Tradition
"Our    legal  system  is  premised  on  the  theory  that  every
person  is  innocent until  proven  guilty.   In  this  country  we
have,  however,  been  moving  away  from  that  concept.   We
have  been  generating   the  belief  that  anyone  who  remains
silent  when  interrogated  about  his  unpopular  beliefs  or  asso-
ciations  is  guilty.  I  would  allow  no  inference  of  wrongdoing
to  flow  from   the  invocation  of  any  constitutional   right.   I
would  not  let  that  principle  bow  to  popular  passions.    For
all  we  know  we  are  dealing  here  with  citizens  wholly  inno-
cent   of   any   wrongful   action.   That  must   indeed   be   our
premise.   When  we  make  the  contrary  assumption,  we  part
radically  with  our  tradition.
"If   it  be  said  that  we  deal  not  with  guilt  or  innocence
but  with  frankness,  the  answer  is  the  same.   There  are  areas
where  the  governmnt  may  not  probe.   Private  citizens,   pri-
vate   clubs,  private   groups  may  make  such  deductions  and
reach  such  conclusions as  they  choose  from  the  failure  of  a
citizen  to  disclose  his  beliefs,  his  philosophy,  his  associates.
But  government  has' no  business  penalizing  a  citizen  merely
for  his  beliefs  or  associations.   It  is  government  action  that
we  have  here.   It  is  government  action  that  the   Fourteenth
and  First  Amendments  protect  against.    We  emphasized  in
NAACP  v.  Alabama,  decided this  day,  that  freedom  to  asso-
ciate  is  one of  those  liberties  protected  against  governmental
action   and  that  freedom  from   'compelled  disclosure   of   af-
filiation  with  groups  engaged  in  advocacy'  is  vital  to  that
constitutional   right.    We  have   protested   in   the    NAACP
case  against  governmental  probing  into  political  activities
and  associations  of  one  dissident  group  of  people.  We  should
do  the  same  here.
"If  we break  with  tradition  and  let  the  government  penal-
ize  these  citizens for  their  beliefs  and  associations,  the  most
we  can  assume  from   their  failure  to  answer   is  that   they
were  Communists.  Yet,  as  we  said  in  Wieman  v.      Updegraff,
344  U.  S.  183,  190, membership in  the  Communist Party  'may
be  innocent.'   The  member may  have  thought  that  the  Com-
munist  movement  would  develop  in  the  parliamentary  tradi-
tion  here,  or  he  may  not  have  been  aware  of  any  unlawful
aim,   or  knowing  it,  may  have  embraced  only  the   socialist
philosophy  of  the  group,  not  any  political  tactics  of  violence
and  terror.   Many  join  associations,  societies  and  fraternities
with  less  than  full  endorsement  of  all  their   aims.
"We  compound  error  in  these  decisions.   We  not  only  im-
pute   wrongdoing   to  those   who  invoke  their  constitutional
rights.  We go further  and impute  the  worst  possible  motives
to  them.
"As  Judge  Fuld  said  in  dissent  in  the  Lerner  case,  'It  is
a  delusion  to  think  that  the  nation's  security  is  advanced  by
the  sacrifice  of  the  individual's basic  liberties.   The  fears  and
doubts  of  the  moment  may   loom  large,  but   we  lose  more
than  we gain  if  we counter  with  a resort  to  alien  procedures
or   with   a   denial   of   essential   constitutional   guarantees.'
How  to  Judge  a  Teacher's  Fitness
"Our  initial  error   (see  Dennis  v.  U. S.  341 US  494)  was
our   disregard   of  the   basic  principle  that  government   can
concern  itself  only  with  the  actions  of  men,  not  with  their
opinions  or  beliefs.  As  Thomas  Jefferson  said  in   1779:
.  .  .  the  opinions of  men  are not  the  object  of  civil  gov-
ernment,  nor under  its  jurisdiction  .  . . it  is  time  enough
for   the  rightful   purposes   of  civil  government   for   its   of-
ficers   to  interfere   when  principles   break  out  into   overt
acts  against  peace  and  order.'
"The  fitness  of  a  subway  conductor  for   his  job  depends
oft  his  health,  his  promptness,  his  record  for  reliability,  not
on  his  politics  or  philosophy of  life.  The  fitness  of  a  teacher
for   her  job  turns   on  her  devotion  to  that  priesthood,  her
education,  and  her  performance  in  the  library,  in  the  labora-
tory,  and  the  classroom,  not  on hsr  political  beliefs.  Anyone
who  plots  against  the  government  and  moves  in  treasonable
opposition  to  it  that  can  be  punished.   Government  rightly
can  concern  itself  with  the  actions  of  people.   But  it's   time
we  called  a  halt  to  government  penalizing  people  for  their
beliefs.   To  repeat,  individuals and  private  groups  can  make
any  judgments  they  want.   But  the  realm  of  belief—as  op-
posed  to  action—is  one  which  the  First  Amendment  places
beyond  the  long  arm  of  government.
Searching  for  Total  Security
"A teacher  who is  organizing  a  Communist cell  in a  school-
house  or  a  subway  conductor  who  is  preparing   the   subway
system  for  sabotage  would  plainly  be  unfit  for  his  job.   But
we  have  no  such  evidence  in  the  records  before  us.   As  my
Brother   BRENNAN  points  out,  to  jump  to  those  conclusions
on  these  records  is  to  short-cut   procedural  due   process.
"In  sum, we  have  here  only  a  bare  refusal  to  testify;  and
the  Court  holds  that  sufficient  to  show  these  employees  are
unfit  to  hold  their  public posts.  That  makes  qualification  for
public   employment  turn   solely   on   a  matter   of   belief—a
notion  very  much  at  war  with  the  Bill  of  Rights.
"When  we  make  the  belief  of  the  citizen  the  basis  of  gov-
ernmental   action,   we   move  toward   the   concept   of   total
security.    Yet  total  security  is  possible  only in  a  totalitarian
regime—the  kind  of  system  we  profess  to   combat."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  7,  1958
Public   Hearings   on   Right-to-Travel   Open   in   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   July   9
Warning:   A  Restrictive   Passport  Bill  Could  Easily   Pass  At  This  Session
The  Administration  as  this  is  written  was  preparing  a  bill
to restrict the  right  to  travel.  The  introduction of  such  a meas-
ure  at  this  time  increases  the  possibility  that  restrictive  legis-
lation  may  be  passed  before this  session  of  Congress adjourns.
The  Supreme Court's  decision  in  the  Kent,  Briehl and  Dayton
cases  has  put  several  new  travel  bills  into  the  Congressional
hopper.    Five  separate  committees  now  have  passport   bills,
only  one  of  them  a  liberal  measure,  H.   Con.  Res.   153,   by
Celler.   It  would  guarantee newsmen  the  right  to  travel.
Two   days  of  public  hearings  will  be  held   by  the   Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee  July  9  and  10.   They  will  deal
mainly  with  S  2770  by  Fulbright,  the  mildest  of  the  restric-
tive  measures  so  far  introduced.   It  would  guarantee  "a  full
and  fair  hearing,"  presumably barring  faceless  informers.
Only  Hennings   Praised   the  Court
The  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  hearings  are  also
supposed  to  consider  S  3344  by Hennings  which  was  exposed
by  the   Weekly   on  its  introduction  last  February  as  largely
identical  with  HR  12989  by  Chairman  Walter  of  the  House
Un-American   Activities  Committee.    Senator  Hennings,   the
only  member of  Congress  to  praise  the  Supreme  Court's  right-
to-travel  decision  ("sound   American  policy  and  good  law")
has  since  let  it  be  known  that  he  has  abandoned  his  old  bill
as  a  mistake.   A  liberal  substitute  has  been   promised.
An  official  analysis  put  into  the  Congressional  Record  June
13  by  Fulbright  shows  (as  do  the  boxes  on  this  page)   that
the   State   Department   is  opposed   to   any  restriction   on   its
passport  powers,  and  to  any  requirement  which  would  out-
law  the  use  of  secret  evidence  in  passport   proceedings.
The  most  sweeping  passport  bill  now  before  Congress  is
S  4030,   introduced  by  Eastland   (text   in  the   Congressional
Record  of  June  18).    It  is  in  Eastland's  own  Judiciary  Com-
mittee,  from  which  he  can  report  it  out  without  hearings.   A
similar  situation  exists  in  the  House.   There  Walter  has  two
restrictive  measures,  HR   12989,   in   House   Judiciary,  where
it  might  be  bottled  up,  but  the  other  HR  9937  in  the  Un-
American  Activities  Committee  from  which  he  could   report
it  out.   The  latter  is  an  omnibus  security  bill  with  a  sweep-
ingly  restrictive  right  to  travel  section.
In  addition House  Foreign   Affairs  Committee  has  two  bills
introduced  in  the  wake  of  the  Supreme  Court  decision  which
would   authorize  unlimited   discretion   by  the   State   Depart-
ment.   One  is  HR  13005  by  Collier,  (R.  111.),  and  the  other,
HR   12983,   by  Hillings   (R.  Cal.).
Correcting   Mr.  DuIIes's  Memory
"I  would  like  [on  the  passport  decision]  to  take  this
occasion  to  emphasize  that  the  Departmental  Regula-
tions  in  question  were  not  regulations  that  were  intro-
duced  by  this  Administration.  They  were   regulations
which   this   Administration  inherited.    They  had   been
introduced  and  put  in  force  under  President  Truman
and   Secretary   Acheson,    and   we   merely    continued
them."     —Secretary  Dulles,  press  conference,  June   If.
The  regulations   restricting  travel  by  suspected  sub-
versives  were  promulgated  by  Acheson.   But  the  most
sweeping  restriction  was  added  by  Dulles   himself   in
an  order  signed  January  10,  1956.   This  addition,  Sec-
tion   51.136   of  the   regulations,   permitted   the    Secre-
tary  of  State  to  refuse  a  passport   to  anyone—"sub-
versive"  or  not—"when  it  appears  to  the    satisfaction
of  the  Secretary   of  State  that  the  person's  activities
abroad   would:   (1)   violate   the   laws   of   the   United
States;   (2)   be  prejudicial   to  the   orderly   conduct  of
foreign   relations;   or   (3)   otherwise   be  prejudicial   to
the  interests  of  the  United  States."
Two  things  need  to  be  stressed.   One  is  Congressional  ani-
mosity  to  the  Supreme  Court  which  will  guarantee   a  favor-
able  response   for   any  restrictive   bill   which   comes   on   the
floor.   The  other  is that  the  Supreme  Court  decision  was  only
5-to-4,  that  its  basis  was  statutory  not  constitutional,  that  it
invited  Congress  to  art,  and  that  one  member  of  the  majority,
Frankfurter,  indicated  by  his  reasoning  in  Perez  v.  BroivneH
on  March  31  that  he  might  be  inclined  to  uphold   some  po-
litical  restriction  on  the  right  to  travel.
Now  Is  the  Time  to  Fight
Since  public  rights  in  this,  as  in  some  many  areas,   depend
on  private  litigation,  passage  of  a  restrictive  bill  would  entail
a  new  round  of  financial  and  other   sacrifice  for  people  in-
trepid  enough  to  fight  the  new  regulations.    We  are  all  in-
debted  to  people  like  Paul  Robeson,  Corliss  Lamont,  Rockwell
Kent,  Dr.  Walter  Briehl,  and  Weldon   Bruce  Dayton  for  the
fight  they   put   up,   to   attorneys   like   Leonard   Boudin   and
Harry  Rand,  and  to  organizations  like  the   American  Civil
Liberties  Union  and  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Committee.
Must  the  agony  be  repeated?   The  time  to  fight  is  now  by
letting  your  representatives  hear   from  you  on  the   right   to
travel.    Passage   could   still   be   blocked   at   this   session   if
enough  people  acted.
The Extent  of  the  Discretion  the  State  Dept. Would Like to Write Into Law
Senator  FULBRIGHT.  Do  you  consider  that  the   Secre-
tary  of  State  has  complete  discretion  as  to  whether  any
American  citizen may  leave  the  United  States.
Mr.  [Robert  D.]  MURPHY,  [Under  Secretary  of  State].
Yes,  sir;  I  think  he  does  under  our  law  and  regulations.
Senator  FULBRIGHT.   Then  he  has  complete  discretion
to  prescribe what countries may  be  visited  by  an  American
traveler?
Mr.  MURPHY.   Yes,  sir.  .  .  .
Senator   FULBRIGHT.    Does   the   Secretary   have   com-
plete  discretion  in  prescribing  activities  which  may  be  en-
gaged  in  abroad by  an  American  citizen,  as  a  condition  to
the  issuance  of  his  passport?
Mr.  MURPHY.  Yes,  sir.  .  . .
Senator  FULBRIGHT.   If  he  thought  the  manners  of  the
man  were so  egregious  that  they  would cast  reflection  upon
us,  he  could  refuse  the  passport?
Mr.  MURPHY.  To  cast  reflections  upon  us?
Senator  FULBRIGHT.   To  cast  reflections  upon  us,  that
he  would  be a  poor  representative  of  our country.  .  .  .
Mr.  MURPHY.   I  think  in  the  honest  exercise  of  his  dis-
cretion,  he  would  have  the  authority.
—Testimony   to  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  "Dept.  of  State  Passport  Policies," April  2,  1957.
ID/
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  7, 195S
Privilege  Against  Self-Incrimination  Weakened  by  New   Decision
(Continued   from   Page   One)
open  for  further  proceedings.   If  California  can  muster  proof
that   the  appellants   advocated   revolutionary  doctrine,   it  will
get  another   day  in   court.    At  that   time  California  is   more
apt  to  lose  again  on  the  absence  of   real   proof   of   advocacy
than  on  the  basic  issue  itself.
Splitting  Some  Fine  Hairs
The   Lerner   and   Beilan   cases   indicated   the   difficulty   of
obtaining  a  majority  against  the  witch  hunt  where   sufficient
lack  of  due  process  could  not  be  shown.   Here  the  liberals,
Warren,  Brennan,   Black  and   Douglas   found   themselves   in
a  minority  of  four.   Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  filed  a   separate
opinion  concurring  with  the  majority  on  the  ground  that  if
New  York  State  wanted  to  fire  a  subway  conductor  and  Penn-
sylvania  a  school   teacher  for  refusing  to  answer  whether  or
not   they   were   Communists,   "the  Fourteenth    Amendment
does  not  check  foolishness  or  unwisdom  in  such  administra-
tion."   He  insisted, extending  his  familiar  doctrine of  judicial
abnegation,   that   the  14th Amendment   could   hot   be   made
"an   instrument  of  general   censorship  by  this  Court   of   state
action."    The   majority   opinions,   by  Burton   in   Beilan   and
Harlan  in  Lerner,   were  less  candid  and   rest  on  a  split  hair
so  fine  that  it   defies   brief  exegesis.     Herman   A.  Beilan,  a
Philadelphia   school   teacher   of   22   years  standing,   a   gentle
person   of  good   reputation,  was  a  victim  of  the  House  Un-
American   Activities   Committee.    For    13   months   after   his
refusal   to   tell   the   Superintendent  of   Schools   at   a   private
hearing  whether  or  not  he  had  been  a  Communist,  Mr.  Beilan
was  retained  as  a  school   teacher   and   twice  rated   highly   by
his  superiors.   But  five  days  after   his  appearance   at  a  tele-
vised  House  Committee  hearing,  Mr.  Beilan  was  discharged
for    "incompetency."    The   minority   insisted   that   the    real
grounds  for  discharge  was  the  invocation of  the  Fifth  before
the  Committee   and  called  for  reversal  on  the  precedent  of
Slochower.   The  majority  would   not  look  behind  the  subter-
fuge.    Mr.   Justice  Burton's   decision   will   chiefly   be   remem-
bered  for  his  plaintive  remark,  "We  find  no  requirement  in
the   Federal   Constitution   that   a  teacher's   classroom    conduct
be  the  sole  basis  for  determining  his   fitness."   In  the   case
Taxation  for  Thought   Control
"The  State  by  the  device  of  the  loyalty   oath   places
the  burden of  proving  loyalty  on  the  citizen.   That  pro-
cedural  device  goes  against   the  grain  of  our  constitu-
tional  system,  for  every  man  is  presumed  innocent  un-
til  guilt  is  established.   .  .  .
"If  the  aim  of  the  law  is  not  to  apprehend  criminals
but  to  penalize  advocacy,  it  likewise must  fall.   In  Mur-
dock  v.  Pennsylvania,  we  stated,  'Plainly  a  community
may  not  suppress,   or  the  state  tax, the  dissemination
of  ideas  because   they  are  unpopular,  annoying   or  dis-
tasteful.'    If   the   government  may   not   impose   a   tax
upon   the   expression   of   ideas   in  order   to  discourage
them,  it  may  not  achieve  the  same  end  by  reducing  the
individual  who  expresses  his  views  to  second  class  citi-
zenship  by withholding  tax  benefits  granted  others.  .  .  .
"There  is  no  real  freedom  of  thought   if  ideas  must
be  suppressed.   There  can  be  no  freedom   of  the  mind
unless  ideas  can  be  littered.   I  know  of  no  power   that
enables  any  government  under  our  Constitution   to  be-
come   the   monitor  of   thought,   as   this   statute   would
have  it  become."
—Douglas   (and   Black)   concurring  in  the     California
veterans  loyalty   oath  tax   cases.
of   the   subway  conductor,  Max   Lerner,   Mr.   Justice  Harlan
insisted  that  he  was  merely  being  discharged  for  lack  of  can-
dor.    The   twin  cases  were  made  memorable   by  a   Douglas-
Black  dissent  which  we  believe  will  live  as  a  classic expres-
sion  of   libertarian   principles.   We   print  it   in   full   text   on
page  two.
A   group   of   decisions  in  criminal  law  handed   down   the
same  day  showed   the  present  Court's  high  devotion   to  due
process.   But   in  the   case  of   Knapp   v.  Schweitzer,   a   6-to-3
decision   by  Mr.   Justice  Frankfurter,   considerably   narrowed
the  privilege against  self-incrimination.   The  New  York  Court
of  Appeals  had  held  that  a  racketeer  could  be  compelled   to
testify  on  grant  of  immunity  before  a  New  York  grand  jury
because  the   same  testimony  could  not, as  a  matter   of law,
be   used   against   him   in   a   subsequent   Federal    prosecution.
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  held,  however,  that  compulsory  testi-
mony  may  be  enforced  by  the  States  even  though  the  witness
is  not  safeguarded  against  Federal  prosecution.
Note  to  Laggards:   Please  Help   Us  By  Renewing  Before   Vacation  and  by  Adding  A  Gift   Sub
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .......................................................................................
Street     ....................'..........................................................-.......
City      ........................................Zone............State..................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
7/7/58
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    .......................................................................................
City       ........................................Zone............State...................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  O
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   P.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thnrsday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15  D  C
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription-
K   In  th  TJ. S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  M«ll  rates:  115  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED