I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958nov03.pdf

============================================================

Reflections  on Boris Pasternak,  P.  4
Full  Text:  New  Warning  by  East-West  Scientists  Who Met at  Third  Pugwash  Nuclear  Parley, Pages 2 & 3
L F.  Stone'sWeekly
VOL.   VI,  NO. 43
NOVEMBER  3,  1958
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  This Geneva  Meeting  May Be Mankind's Last Chance
The  ancient  Sanhedrin which  met  in  the  Temple  at  Jeru-
salem   as  the  highest  Rabbinic  Court  was  made  up   of   71
learned  men.   Exactly  the  same number  signed  the  manifesto
with  which the  third Pugwash  conference  of  nuclear scientists
ended  their  meeting in  September at  Kitzbuhel,  outside Vien-
na.   This  was  a  Sanhedrin  of  mankind's most  learned  and  of
some  who  are  among  its  most  wise.   Bertrand  Russell  was
there  from  England, Bhabha  from  India,  Ogawa  from  Japan,
Oliphant  from  Australia,  Leopold  Infeld  from  Poland,  Top-
chiey  from  the  Soviet Union  and  men  like  Linus  Pauling  and
H.   J.  Muller  from   our  own  country.   Nobel   prize-winners
were  a  commonplace  among  them.    They  transcended  the
current  glowering  divisions  of  the  earth.   The  Western   bloc,
six  Soviet  States and  the  neutrals,  including Yugoslavia,  were
represented.   Yet  the  gravely  considered  warning which  they
issued  at  the  end  of  their  meeting  has  nowhere  been  made
available  to  the  general  public.   The  newspapers,  as  full  of
chatter  as  a  monkey  cage,  found  no  space  for  their  conclu-
sions;  the  meeting itself — made  possible  by  the  initiative and
bounty  of  Cyrus Eaton — was  barely noticed;  indeed  it  was  not
quite  respectable,  since its  sponsor,  though  a multi-millionaire
capitalist,  had  rendered  himself  controversial  by  questioning
an  exalted  figure,  the  head  of  our  secret  police,  Mr.  J.  Edgar
Hoover.   It  is  a  commentary on  our  times  that  a  little  paper
like  our  own  can  have  the  honor  of  printing  the  text  of  the
Pugwash  declaration.  We  make  it  available  here  as  our  con-
tribution  to  the  success  of  the  new  parley  opening  (we  hope)
at  Geneva  the  day  after  we  go  to  press. .
Big  Brother  Won't Like
The   Pugwash  declaration  contains  bad  news.   The   arms
race,  as  it  picks up  speed,  passes  one  point  of  no  return  after
another.   The  scientists  warn  that  "a  completely  reliable  sys-
tem  of   controls   for   far-reaching  nuclear   disarmament"   has
become  "extremely  difficult,  perhaps  impossible."   They  warn
that  even  though  negotiation  eliminated  all  nuclear  weapons,
the  knowledge  of  how  to  make  them  remains  "for  all  time,
a  potential  threat  to  mankind."   Should  war  come,  any major
industrial power could  produce  them within  a year.  The  scien-
tists  regard  the  Pentagon  dream  of  limited  wars  as a  delusion.
They  see  no  alternative  to  peace.   They  see  no  substitute  for
the  restoration   of  trust  among  men.   They  ask  us  to  stop
glorifying  war  and  violence.   They  protest  that  science,  har-
nessed  everywhere  to  the  arms  race,  has  been  diverted   "from
its  true  purpose."   They  call  for  an  end  of  secrecy,  and  they
affirm  that  science  "can  best  serve  mankind  if  it  is  free  from
interference  by  any  dogma  imposed  from  the  outside,  and  if
it  exercises  its  right  to  question  all  postulates,   including  its
own.  " This — to which  16  Soviet  bloc  scientists  appended  their
\   2
Pot  and Kettle  Dept.
SECRETARY  DULLES.  I  have  a  statement  to  read
.  .  .  Soviet  insincerity  has  now  been  clearly  exposed
.  . . Despite its  professed concern for  the  effect  of  test-
ing  upon  human health, the  Soviet government has  been
testing  at  an intensive rate .  .  .  This  demonstrates the
hollowness  of  these  past  Soviet  expressions  of  concern.
.  .  . The U.  S.  delegation is  now on its  way  to  Geneva.
The  Soviet  attitude  dims  the  chances  of  success  .  .  .
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  what  happens  if   word  is  received
that  the  Soviets have  exploded  an  atomic  device  after
Oct.   31st?   What  effect  will  that  hare  on  U.  S.  policy
or  U.  S.  action?
A.  Well,  we  would  ourselves  plan  to  resume  testing.
But  the  negotiations,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned, would
go on ...
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  to  clarify   one  remark   you  made
earlier,  you  said  that  we  would  continue  to  plan  tests
if  the  Russians  did  not  suspend  their  tests  on  October
31st   or  thereafter,  I  think.   Does  that  mean  that  if
they  don't  have  tests  after  October  31st  that  we  will
not  then  plan  for  any  future  tests?
A.  We  will  not  plan  for  future  tests  during  the  pe-
riod  that  we  proposed,  the  one-year period.
—Press  Conference,   October  28.
names—is  not  Marxism-Leninism;  neither   is  it  the   milder
plastic-packaged  conformism of  Madison  Avenue;  in  our  Or-
wellian world,  these are words which Big Brother  will  not  like
on  either  side.   But  unless  we  can  get  people  to  heed  these
words  soon,  it  will  be  too  late.   Thermonuclear   war,  reduc-
ing  the  remnants  of  mankind  to  a  cancerous  savagery,  may
come  in  our  lifetime.   Geneva  may  well  be  our  last  chance.
As  before  World  War  I  and  World  War  II,  prolonged
talks  on  disarmament  are  accompanied  by  a  rising  tempo  of
arms   accumulation.    This   year's   relatively   successful   nego-
tiation  toward  a  test  ban  has  been  accompanied  by the  highest
level  of  testing  yet  reached;  the  Russians,  by  resuming,  place
supposed  military over  moral advantages  just as we  do, though
both  sides  in  this  crazy  contest  already have more  than  enough
monsters  in  stock  to  destroy  the  other.  The  General  Staffs  on
both  sides,  now  as  before  the  other  wars,  work  in  covert  and
contrapuntal  harmony  to  drown  out  the  voices  which   plead
the  hard  case  of  reason  against  the  easy  incitements  of  fear
and  hate.   Every  human  being  who  cares  must  now  do  what
he  can  to  bring  pressure  on  his  own  government.   We  must
pressure  ours  at  least  as a  starter  to  offer  more  at  Geneva  than
a  one-year  ban  on  testing.   This  is  no  more  than  the  quick
breather  required  to  try  out  new  horrors,   from  bombs  with
dirtier  fallout  to  devices  so  cute  they  can  almost  make  the
popgun  nuclear,  too.
7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  3,1968
Full  Text  of  Statement  Issued  By  Famous  Thinkers  of  East  and  West  .  . .
1.  Necessity  to  End  Wars
We  met  in  Kitzbuhel  and  in  Vienna  at  a  time  when  it  has
become   evident  that   the   development  of   nuclear   weapons
makes  it  possible  for  man  to  destroy  civilization  and,  indeed
himself;  the  means  of  destruction  are  being  made  ever  more
efficient.    The  scientists  attending  our  meetings  have  long
been  concerned  with  this  development,  and  they  are  unani-
mous  in  the  opinion that  a  full-scale  nuclear  war  would  be  a
world-wide  catastrophe  of  unprecedented  magnitude.
In  our  opinion  defense  against  nuclear  attack  is  very  dif-
ficult.    .Unfounded   faith   in   defensive   measures   may   even
contribute  to  an  outbreak  of  war.
Although  the nations  may  agree  to eliminate  nuclear  weap-
ons  and  other  weapons of  mass  destruction  from  the  arsenals
of  the  world,  the  knowledge  of  how  to  produce  such  weapons
can  never  be destroyed.   They  remain  for  all  time  a  potential
threat  for  mankind.  In  any  future  major  war,  each  belliger-
ent  state  will  feel  not  only  free  but  compelled  to  undertake
immediate  production  of  nuclear  weapons;  for  no state,  when
at  war,  can  be  sure  that  such  steps  are  not  being  taken  by
the  enemy.  We believe  that,  in  such  a  situation,  a  major  in-
dustrial   power  would  require   less  than  one  year  to   begin
accumulating  atomic  weapons.   From  then  on,  the  only  re-
straint  against their  employment  in war  would be agreements
not  to  use  them,  which  were  concluded  in  times  of  peace.
The  decisive  power  of  nuclear  weapons,  however,  would make
the  temptation  to  use  them  almost  irresistible,  particularly
to  leaders  who are  facing  defeat.   It  appears  therefore  that
atomic   weapons  are   likely  to  be  employed  in   any   future
major  war  with  all  their  terrible  consequences.
It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  localized wars,  with  limited
objectives,  might  still  be  fought   without  catastrophic  con-
sequences.    History  shows,  however,  that  the  risk  of  local
conflicts  growing  Into  major  wars  is  too  great  to  be  accept-
able  in  the  age  of  weapons  of  mass  destruction.    Mankind
must  therefore   set  itself   the  task  of  eliminating   all  wars,
including  local  wars.
2.  Requirements for  Ending  the  Arms  Race
The   armaments   race   is   the   result   of   distrust   between
states;  it  also  contributes   to  this  distrust.    Any  step  that
mitigates  the  arms  race,  and  leads  to  even  small   reductions
in  armaments  and  armed  forces,  on  an  equitable  basis   and
subject  to  necessary  control,  is  therefore  desirable.   We  wel-
come  all  steps  in  this  direction  and,  in  particular,  the  recent
agreement   in  Geneva  between  representatives    of  East  and
West  about  the  feasibility  of  detecting  test-explosions.    As
scientists,   we  take  particular  pleasure  in  the  fact  that  this
unanimous  agreement,   the  first  after   a  long  series   of  un-
successful  international  disarmament  negotiations,  was  made
possible  by  mutual  understanding  and  a  common   objective
approach by  scientists  from  different  countries.  We note  with
satisfaction  that  the  governments  of  the   USA,  USSR,  and
UK  have  approved  the  statements   and  the   conclusion  con-
tained   in  the   report   of  the   technical   experts.    This  is   a
significant  success;  we most earnestly hope that this  approval
will  soon  be  followed  by  an  international  agreement  leading
to  the  cessation  of  all  nuclear  weapon tests  and  an   effective
system  of control. This  would be a  first  step toward  the  relax-
ation  of  international  tension  and  the  end  of  the  arms  race.
It  is  generally agreed  that  any  agreement  on disarmament,
and  in  particular nuclear  disarmament,  requires  measures  of
control  to  protect  every  part  from  possible  evasion.  Through
their   technical  competence,  scientists   are   well  aware  that
effective  control  will  in  some  cases  by  relatively   easy,  while
it  is  very  difficult  in  others.   For  example,  the  conference of
experts  in  Geneva  has  agreed  that   the   cessation   of  bomb
tests  could  be  monitored by  a  suitable  network  of  detecting
stations.  On the  other  hand,  it  will be  a  technical  problem of
great  difficulty  to  account  fully  for  existing  stocks  of  nuclear
weapons and  other  means  of  mass  destruction.   An  agreement
to  cease  production  of  nuclear  weapons  presents  a  problem
of  intermediate  technical  difficulty  between  these two  extreme
examples.
We  recognize  that  the  accumulation  of  large  stocks  of  nu-
clear  weapons has  made  a  completely  reliable  system  of  con-
trols  for  far-reaching   nuclear   disarmament   extremely   dif-
ficult,  perhaps   impossible.   For  this  disarmament  to  become
possible,  nations may have  to  depend,  in  addition  to  a  practi-
cal  degree of technical  verification,  on a  combination  of  politi-
cal  agreements,  of  successful  international  security  arrange-
ments,  and  of  experience  of  successful  cooperation  in  various
areas.  Together,  these  can  create  the  climax  of  mutual  trust,
which  does not now exist, and an assurance that nations recog-
nize  the  mutual  political   advantages  of  avoiding  suspicion.
Recognizing  the   difficulties   of  the  technological  situation,
scientists  feel  an  obligation  to  impress  on  their  peoples  and
on  their  governments  the  need  for  policies  which  will  encour-
age  international  trust  and  reduce mutual  apprehension.   Mu-
tual  apprehensions  cannot  be  reduced  by  assertions  of  good
will; their  reduction  will  require  political  adjustment  and the
establishment   of  active   cooperation.
3.  What  War  Would Mean
Our   conclusions   about   the   possible  consequences  of   war
have  been  supported  by  reports  and  papers  submitted  to  our
Conference.   These  documents  indicate  that  if,  in  a  future
war,  a  substantial  proportion  of  the  nuclear  weapons  already
manufactured   were   delivered   against   urban   targets,   most
centres   of  civilization  in  the  belligerent   countries  would  be
totally  destroyed,  and  most  of  their  populations  killed.   This
would  be true  whether  the  bombs  used  derived  most  of  their
power   from   fusion  reactions   (so-called  "clean"  bombs)  or
principally  from  fission  reactions  (so-called  "dirty"  bombs).
In  addition  to  destroying   major  centres  of  population  and
industry,  such  bombs  would  also  wreck  the  economy  of  the
country  attacked,  through  the  destruction   of  vital  means  of
distribution   and  communication.
Major   states  have  already   accumulated  large   stocks  of
"dirty"  nuclear  weapons;  it  appears  that   they  are  continu-
ing  to  do  so.   From  a  strictly  military   point  of  view,  dirty
bombs  have  advantages  in  some  situations;  this  makes  likely
their  use  in  a  major  war.
The  local  fall-out  resulting   from  extensive  use  of  "dirty"
bombs  would  cause  the  death  of  a  large  part  of  the  popula-
tion  in  the  country  attacked.    Following  their  explosion  in
large  numbers  (each  explosion  equivalent  to  that  of  millions
of  tons  of  ordinary  chemical  explosive),  radioactive  fall-out
would  be  distributed,  not  only  over  the  territory  to  which
they  were  delivered  but,  in  varying  intensity,  over  the  rest
of  the  earth's, surf ace.    Many millions  of  deaths  would  thus
be  produced,  not  only  in  belligerent  but  also  in  non-belliger-
ent  countries,  by  the  acute  effects  of  radiation.
There  would  be,  further,   substantial   long-term   radiation
damage,  to  human  and  other   organisms   everywhere,  from
somatic  effects  such as  leukemia, bone cancer,  and  shortening
of  the  life  span;  and  from  genetic  damage  affecting  the  he-
reditary  traits  transmitted  to  the  progeny.
Knowledge  of  human  genetics  is  not  yet  sufficient  to  allow
precise  predictions  of  consequences  likely  to  arise  from  the
considerable  increase  in  the  rate  of  mutation  which  would
ensue  from  unrestricted  nuclear  war.    However,   geneticists
believe  that  they  may  well  be  serious  for  the  future  of  a
surviving  world  population.
It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  in  a  future  war,  the  use of
nuclear  weapons  might  be  restricted  to  objectives   such   as
military  bases,  troop  concentrations,  airfields, and  other  com-
munication  ^entres;   and  that  attacks  on  large  centres  of
population  could  thus  be  avoided.
Even  tactical  weapons  now  have  a  large  radius  of  action;
cities  and  towns  are  commonly  closely  associated   with  cen-
tres of supply and  transportation.   We, therefore,  believe  that
even  a  "restricted"  war  would  lead,  despite  attempted  limi-
tation  of  targets,  to  widespread  devastation  of  the  territory
in  which  it  took  place,  and  to  the  destruction  of  much  of  its
population.  Further,  an  agreement  not  to  use  cities  for  mili-
tary  purposes, entered  into in  order  to justify  their immunity
from   attack,  is  unlikely  to  be  maintained  to  the  end  of  a
war,  particularly  by  the  losing  side.   The  latter  would  also
be strongly  tempted to  use nuclear  bombs against  the popula-
tion  centres  of  the  enemy,  in  the  hope  of  breaking  his  will  to
continue  the  war.
4.  Hazards  of  Bomb  Tests
At  our  first  conference  it  had  been  agreed  that  while  the
biological  hazards of bomb tests  may  be  small  compared  with
similar   hazards  to   which   mankind   is   exposed  from   other
sources,  hazards from tests exist  and  should  receive  close  and
continued  study.    Since  then,  an  extensive  investigation  by
the   United  Nations   Scientific   Committee   on  the   Effects  of
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November S, 1958
.  At  Third  Pugwash  Nuclear  Conference,  Kitzbuhel,  Austria,  Sept.  14-21
Atomic  Radiation  has  been  carried  out  and  its  authoritative
conclusions  published.  In  this  case,  too, scientists from  many
different  countries  have  been  able  to  arrive  at  a  unanimous
agreement.   Their   conclusions  confirm  that  the  bomb  tests
produce  a  definite  hazard  and  that  they  will  claim  a  signifi-
cant  number of  victims  in  present  and  following  generations.
Though  the  magnitude  of  the  genetic  damage  appears  to  be
relatively   small  compared  with  that   produced  by   natural
causes,  the  incidence  of  leukemia  and  bone  cancer  due  to  the
radioactivity  from  test  explosions may, in the  estimate  of  the
UN  committee, add  significantly to  the  natural  incidence of
these  diseases.    This  conclusion  depends  on  the   assumption
(not  shared  by  all  authorities  in  the  field)  that  these   effects
can  be  produced  even  by  the  smallest   amount  of   radiation.
This  uncertainty  calls  for  extensive  study  and,  in  the  mean-
time,  for  a  prudent  acceptance  of  the  most  pessimistic   as-
sumption.   It  lends  emphasis  to  the  generally  agreed  con-
clusion  that  all  unnecessary  exposure  of  mankind  to  radia-
tion  is  undesirable and  should  be  avoided.
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  biological  damage  from  a
war,  in  which  many  nuclear  bombs  would  be  used,  would  be
incomparably  larger  than  that  from  tests;  the  main immedi-
ate problem before  mankind  is  thus  the  establishment  of  con-
ditions  that  would  eliminate  war.
5.  Science  and  International Cooperation
We  believe that,  as  scientists,  we  have  an  important   con-
tribution  to  make  toward  establishing  trust  and cooperation
among  nations.   Science is, by  long tradition,  an  international
undertaking.   Scientists   with   different   national   allegiances
easily  find  a  common  basis  of  understanding;  they  use  the
same concepts and the  same methods; they  work toward com-
mon  intellectual  goals,  despite  differences   in  philosophical,
economic,  or  political views.  The rapidly  growing importance
of  science in  the  affairs  of  mankind  increases  the  importance
of  the  community of  understanding.
The  ability  of  scientists  all  over  the  world  to  understand
one  another,  and to  work together,  is  an  excellent  instrument
for  bridging  the  gap  between  nations  and  for  uniting  them
around  common  aims.   We  believe that  working  together   in
every  field  where  international  cooperation  proves  possible
makes  an  important  contribution toward  establishing  an  ap-
preciation  of  the  community of  nations.  It  can  contribute  to
the  development  of the  climate  of mutual  trust, which  is  nec-
essary  for  the  resolution  of  political  conflicts  between  na-
tions,  and  which is  an  essential  background  to  effective  dis-
armament.    We  hope  scientists   everywhere   will  recognize
their  responsibility, to  mankind and  to  their  own nations,  to
contribute  thought, time,  and  energy  to  the  furthering  of  in-
ternational  cooperation.                        ,
Several  international  scientific  undertakings   have  already
had  considerable  success.   We  mention  only  the  century-old,
world-wide  cooperation  in  weather  science,  the  two  Interna-
tional  Polar  Years which preceded  (by  seventy-five and  twen-
ty-five   years   respectively)   the   present   International   Geo-
physical  Year,  and  the   Atoms-for-Peace   Conferences.   We
earnestly   hope  that   efforts   will  be  made  to  initiate  similar
collaboration  in  other  fields  of  study.   Certainly   they  will
have  the  enthusiastic  support  of  scientists  all  over  the  world.
We call  for  an  increase in  the  unrestricted flow of  scientific
Information  among nations,  and  for  a  wide  exchange  of  sci-
entists.   We  believe  that  nations  which  build  their  national
security  on  secrecy   of  scientific  developments  sacrifice   the
interests  of  peace,  and  of  the  progress  of  science,  for   tem-
porary  advantages.   It   is  our  belief  that   science  can  best
serve  mankind  if  it  is  free  from  interference  by  any  dogma
imposed  from  the  outside,  and if  it  exercises  its  right  to  ques-
tion  all  postulates,  including  its  own.
•    In  our  time, pure  and  applied  science  have  become increas-
ingly  interdependent.   The  achievements  of  fundamental,  ex-
perimental  and theoretical  science  are  more  and more  rapidly
transformed  into  new  technological   developments.   This  ac-
celerated  trend  is  manifest,  alike  in  the  creation  of  weapons
of   increased   destructiveness,   and   in   the   development  of
means  for  the  increased  wealth  and  well-being  of  mankind.
We believe that  the  tradition  of-mutual  understanding  and of
international   cooperation,  which  have  long  existed  in  funda-
mental  science, can  and  should  be  extended  to  many  fields  of
technology.   The  International   Atomic  Energy  Agency,  for
example,  aims  not  merely   at   cooperation   for   establishing
facts  about  atomic energy,  but  also  at  helping  the  nations of
the  world  to  develop  a  new  source  of  energy  as  a  basis  for
the  improvement of  their  material  welfare.   We  believe  that
international  cooperation in this  and other  fields,  such  as  eco-
nomic  development  and  the  promotion  of  health,  should  be
greatly   strengthened.
The  extremely low level  of  living in  the  industrially  under-
developed  countries  of  the  world is  and  will  remain  a  source
of  international  tension.   We  see  an  urgent  need  to  forward
studies  and  programs  for   the   effective   industralization   of
these  countries.   This  would  not  only  improve  the  level  of
living  of  the  majority  of  the   population  of  the   world;   it
would  also  help  reduce  the  sources  of  conflict  between  the
highly industrialized  powers.  Such  studies  would offer  fruitful
scope  for  cooperative  efforts  between  scientists  of  all  nations.
The  great  increase  in  the  ease  and  speed  of  communica-
tions,  and  our  increasing understanding  of  how  the  forces of
nature  influence  the  living  conditions  of  nations  in  different
parts  of  the  world,  show  us,  in  a  way  not  previously  pos-
sible,  the  extent  to  which  the  prosperity   of  individual  na-
tions  is  connected with,  and  dependent  upon,  that  of  man-
kind  as  a  whole;  and  how  rapidly  it  could  be  increased  by
common  international  effort.   We  believe  that  through   such
common  effort,  the  coexistence between  nations  of   different
social  and  economic  structure  can  become not  merely  peace-
ful  and  competitive,  but  to  an  increasing  degree  cooperative,
and  therefore  more  stable.
As  scientists,  we  are  deeply  aware  of  the  great  change  in
the  condition  of  mankind  which  has  been  brought  about  by
'   the   modern  development and  application  of  science.  Given
peace,  mankind  stands  at  the  beginning  of  a  great  scientific
age.   Science  can  provide  mankind  with  an   ever-increasing
understanding  of  the  forces  of nature,  and  the  means  of  har-
nessing  them.   This  will  bring  about  a  great  increase  in  the
well-being, health,  and  prosperity  of  all  men.
6.  The  Responsibility  of  Scientists
We believe it  to  be  a  responsibility of  scientists  in  all coun-
tries  to  contribute to  the  education of  the  peoples  by  spread-
ing  among  them  a  wide  understanding  of  the  dangers  and
potentialities  offered  by  the  unprecedented growth  of  science.
We appeal to  our  colleagues everywhere to  contribute to  this
effort,  both  through  enlightenment  of  adult  populations,  and
through  education  of  the  coming  generations.  In  particular,
education  should stress  improvement of  all  forms  of  human
relations  and  should  eliminate  any  glorification  of  war  and
violence.
Scientists   are,   because   of  their   special   knowledge,  well
equipped  for  early  awareness  of  the  dangers  and  the  prom-
ise  arising  from   scientific  discoveries.    Hence,  they  have  a
special  competence  and  a  special  responsibility  in  relation  to
the  most  pressing  problems of  our  times.
In  the  present  conditions  of  distrust  between  nations,  and
of  the  race  for  military  supremacy which arises  from  it,  all
branches  of  science—physics,  chemistry,  biology,  psychology
—  have  become  increasingly   involved  in  military   develop-
ments.   In  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  many  countries,   science
has   become  associated   with  the   development  of   weapons.
Scientists  are  either  admired  for  their   contribution   to  na-
tional  security,  or  damned  for  having  brought  mankind  into
jeopardy  by  their  invention  of  weapons  of  mass   destruction.
The  increasing  material  support  which  science  now enjoys  in
many  countries  is  mainly  due  to  its  importance,  direct   or
indirect,   to  the  military  strength   of  the  nation  and  to  its
degree  of  success  in  the  arms  race.  This  diverts  science  from
its  true  purpose,  which is  to  increase  human knowledge,  and
to  promote  man's  mastery  over  the  forces  of  nature  for  the
benefit  of  all.
We  deplore the  conditions  which  lead  to  this  situation,  and
appeal  to  all  peoples  and their  governments  to  establish  con-
ditions  of lasting  and  stable  peace.
U.S.  Signers:  Prof.  Harrison  Brown,  Dean  David
Cavers,  Prof. Charles  Coryell, Prof. William  Davidon,
Prof.  Bernard  Feld,  Prof.  Bentley  Glass,  Prof.  Mor-
ton  Grodzins,  Dr.  David  Hill,  Dr.  Martin  Kaplan,
•   Prof. H. J.  Muller, Prof. Jay  Orear, Dr. Harry Palev-
sky, Prof. Linus Pauling, Prof. Eugene Rabinowitch,
Prof. Frederick  Seitz, Prof. Walter  Selove,  Prof. Leo
Szilard,  Dr.  Alvin  Weinberg, Prof. Victor  Weisskopf,
Prof.  Eugene  Wigner.
1   7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November 3,1958
We  Applaud Russia's  Critics  and  They  Honor  Ours,  But  Both  Ostracize  Their  Dr.  Zhivagos
The  Test  of Our  Society's  Freedom  Is  How  We  Treat  Our  Own  Pastetnaks
our  intellectuals  in  Hollywood  and  elsewhere  on  their  psycho-
analyst's  couch  may say the  very words  Pasternak  puts  into  the
mouth  of  Dr.  Zhivago.
Words  Which  Apply  to  Us  As  Well  As  Russia
"The   great  majority  of  us,"  he  protests,  "are required  to
live  a  life  of  constant,  systematic  duplicity.   Your  health   is
bound  to  be  affected   if,  day  after  day,  you  say  the   opposite
of  what  you  feel,  if  you  grovel  before  what  you  dislike  and
rejoice  at  what  brings  you  nothing  but  misfortune.   Our  nerv-
ous  system  isn't  just  a  fiction, it's  a  part  of  our  physical  body,
and  our  soul  exists  in  space  and  is  inside  us,  like  the  teeth
in  our  mouth.   It  can't  be  forever  violated  with  impunity."
In   another  passage  Dr.   Zhivago  tells  his  beloved, "The
main  misfortune,  the  root  of  all  evil  to  come,  was  the   loss
of   confidence   in  the  value  of  one's   own  opinion.     People
imagined  it  was  out  of  date  to  follow  their  own  moral  sense,
that  they  must  all  sing  in  chorus,  and  live  by  other  people's
notions,  notions  that  were  being  crammed  down  everybody's
throat."   This  applies  equally  to  present-day  America.
If  The Kremlin Were Wise
Unlike  Ehrenbourg's pedestrian  The  Thaw  and  Dudinstev's
wooden  Not  by  Bread  Alone,  the  other  protest  novels  of  the
post-Stalin  period,  Doctor  Zhivago  is  a  work  of  art.  Giving
it  the  Nobel  prize  was  a  political  act  in  the  best  sense  of  the
word,  for  it  put  world  pressure  behind  the  struggle  of  Rus-
sia's  writers  for  greater  freedom.   If  the  masters  of  the  Krem-
lin   were  wise  they  would   have  let   Pasternak   go  to   Stock-
holm   and   they   would   publish   his   book   in   Russian;   such
magnanimity  and  the  book's  complete   negativism  about   the
revolution  would  have  been  a  telling  answer  to  its  thesis  and
their  critics.   Bigness,  obviously,  is  beyond  them.
Whatever  their  folly,  let  us  examine  the  mote  in  our  own
eye  and  remember that  an  American Pasternak  who  accepted  a
Soviet  prize  would  be  hauled  up  before  the  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee and  blacklisted  in  Hollywood  and  on  Madi-
son  Avenue.   And  few,  very  few,  of  those who  are  now  prais-
ing  Pasternak  would   then   say  one  word   in  defense  of   the
right  to  a  free   conscience.
I  read  Boris  Pasternak's  Doctor  Zhivago  with  joy  and  ad-
miration.   In  its  sensitive  pages  one  is  back  in  the  wonderful
world  of  the  Nineteenth  Century  Russian  novelists.   He  is  a
fine  writer,  and  a  brave  man;  there  are  passages  which,  read
against   the  background   of  Soviet  realities,  are  of  a  sublime
courage.
But  I  find  myself  more  and  more  annoyed  by  the  chorus
of  Pasternak's  admirers  in  this  country.   I  do  not  remember
that  Life   Magazine,  which  glorifies  Pasternak,   ever   showed
itself   any   different   from   the   Pravda-Kommunist   crowd   in
dealing  with  our  own  Pasternaks.   I  do  not  recall  that    Life
defended  Howard  Fast  for  receiving  the  Stalin  award  or  de-
plored  the  venomous  political  hostility  which  drove  Charlie
Chaplin  and  more  recently  Paul  Robeson  into  exile.
The Humiliation of  Arthur Miller
Only  a  few  years  ago  Arthur  Miller,  an  American  writer
much  less  critical  of  our  society  than  Pasternak  is  of  his  was
summoned  before  the  House  Un-American  Activities Commit-
tee,   submitted  to  humiliating   interrogation,   and   threatened
covertly  with  perjury  charges  unless  he  recanted  past  political
views.
Even  today  the  one  movie  house  in  Washington   which  has
revived  the  old  Chaplin   classics  runs  an  apologetic  note  in
its  advertising.
It  is  easier  for  a  critic  of  capitalism  and  the  cold  war   to
live  in  this  country than  for  a  critic of  communism  to  live  in
Russia.   But  an  unofficial  blacklist  still  bars  some  of  our  best
artists  and  actors  and  directors  in  Hollywood  and  from  radio-
TV  work.
The  closest  analogue  to Pasternak  is Howard  Fast,  and  until
he  broke  with  the  Communists  he  was  forced  to  publish  his
own  books.   All  of  us  who  are  more  or  less  heretical  in  our
society  are  forced  to  live  on  its  margin,  grateful  that  we  are
able  to  speak  (at  the  cost  of  abnormal  exertions)   to  a  small
audience.
Pasternak  has  universal  meaning,  for  he  embodies  the  fight
the  artist  and  the  seeker  after   truth  must  wage   everywhere
against  official  dogma  and  conformist  pressures.   Not  a  few  of
Extra  Copies   This  issue  Available  On  Bulk  Order  of  100  or  More  at  3  Cents  Each
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street   ..............................
City     ................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  ......................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5 :*
........Zone............State................_
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
11/3/58
City     ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  IS,  D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D-  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
SB  In  tbe   TJ.  8.:  (6  In  Canada:  SIO  elsewhere.    Air  1U11  rates:  *15  to  Bnrope:  *20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED