I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958oct27.pdf

============================================================

Nuclear  Arms for  Franco and  Other Small Fry?  P.  2
More  Light  and Official  Admissions  on the  Strange  Story  of  the  Chinese  Offshore  Islands,  See  Page  8
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI,  NO.  42
OCTOBER  27,  1958
'»'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Some  Observations   on  the   Synagogue  Bombings
1.  Since  January   1,  1957,  there  have  been  83  bombings,
achieved  or  attempted,  against  schools,  churches,  homes  of
Negro  leaders  and  synagogues.  But  since  most  of  the  bomb-
ings  affected   Negroes,   scant  attention  has  been  paid   them.
Not  until  the  recent  synagogue  outrages  (eight  this  year)  did
the  President  order  the  FBI  to  act.   "After  all,"   as  they  say
down  South,  "a  Jew  is  a  white  man."   The  tardy  reaction,
the  absence  of   initiative  by  the  Justice  Department,   reflects
the  extent  to  which  the  Negro  is  regarded  as  a  second  class
citizen,  and  attacks  upon  him  taken  for  granted.
That  "Confederate Underground"
2.  These  bombings  seem  to  have  a  twofold  origin.   One  is
psychotic   imitation.   The   other   is   a   "Confederate   under-
ground."    This  may  not  number  more  than  a  few  hundred
men,  the wilder  fringe  of  the  Citizens'  Councils  and  the  Klan.
But  experience elsewhere has  shown how  dangerous  a  handful
of  terrorists may become when  their  activities are  more  or  less
approved  in  the  region  in  which  they  operate;  we  do  not
want  an  Algeria on  our  doorstep.
3.  To  say  that  the  Federal  government   has  no   authority
to  act is the  subterfuge  of  the  reluctant.  There  is a  law  which
forbids  the  shipment  of  explosives  across  State  lines.   There
are  the  Civil  Rights  statutes;  under   them,  as  the   Supreme
Court  said  in  Collins  v.  Hardyman   seven  years  ago,   even  a
conspiracy  of  private  persons  is  liable  to  prosecution   where
"of   such  magnitude  and   effect   as  to  work  a  deprivation  of
equal  protection  of  the  laws."  There  is a  law  against  seditious
conspiracy  framed  to  deal  with  incipient  rebellion   (and  not
like  the  Smith  Act  merely  with  ideas).   The  mere  announce-
ment  of  large-scale  FBI  investigation  would  itself  be  a  deter-
rent.   Even  if  the  FBI  does  not  find a  basis  for  Federal  action,
it  can—as  in  kidnapping  cases—turn  over  evidence  to  State
authorities   for   prosecution.    The   trouble   is  that   until   the
synagogue   bombings,   the  White   House   has  not   been   suf-
ficiently  interested.
Any  FBI  Men in  the  Klan?
4.  The  head  of  the  FBI  has  been  almost  apologetic  in  dis-
cussing  its meagre  civil  rights  activities with  Congress.  Though
J.  Edgar  Hoover  is  constantly  making  statements  on  the  dan-
gers  of  Communism,  he  rarely  if  ever  touches  on  the  dangers
of  racism.   He  is  scathing  about  "do-gooders"  and  "pseudo-
liberals"  and  in  his  appearance  earlier   this  year  before  the
House  Appropriations  Committee  on  the  1959  budget  waxed
emotional  about  the  way  in  which  the  courts  allow   "vicious
hoodlums"   to  escape  "merely  because  of  procedural  errors,"
a  theme  which  fell  pleasantly  on  Southern  ears.   But  he  shows
no  such  heat  about  the  bombings.   One  difficulty   in   solving
them  is  that  the  authorities  seem  to  know  so  little  about  the
hate   organizations  which  are  their  breeding  ground.     Mr.
Hoover  has  a  network  of  informers; he  told  the  House  Com-
mittee he  had  "approximately  150  known,  or  suspected,  Com-
munist-front   and   Communist  infiltrated   organizations  under
investigation,"   including   organizations   which   "hypocritically
bar  Communists from  their  membership, but  seek  to  discredit
all  persons  who  abhor  Communism  .  .  ."   It  is  time  to ask
him  how  many  racist  groups  the  FBI  has  under   surveillance.
Southern  Cops  Themselves  Racist
5.  Among  the  worst  racists  in  the   South   are  the   police
officials  themselves.   Gunnar  Myrdal  in  his  monumental  study
of   the  Negro  problem,   "An   American  Dilemma,"    reported
that  in  many  Southern  towns  "almost  anyone  outside  of  the
penitentiary  who  weighs  enough"   can  become  a   policeman.
He  also  reported,   "More  than  half   of  all  Negroes  killed  by
whites,   in   both   the  North  and   the   South,   were  killed   by
police."   Such killings  are  often  a  legalized  form  of  lynching.
The  extent  of  this  problem  was  indicated  by  the  figures  Mr.
Hoover  gave  the  House  Committee  on  civil  rights  cases  han-
dled  the  year  before  by  the  FBI.   Of  a  total  of  1,289,  there
were  1,062  which  involved  "1,921  law  enforcement  officers."
Of  these  police  cases,  1,003  had  been  "dosed."   There  had
been  only   12  indictments  and   one  conviction.    The   police
seemed  to  fare  better  than  their  victims.
Their  Common  Obsession
6.  A   familiar  feature   of   Fascist   movements   everywhere
are  the  secret  chords  of  sympathy they  strike  with  the  police.
So  it  is  with  racism  in  the  South.   Stan  Opotowsky  in  a  fas-
cinating   dispatch   from   Atlanta  in  the   New   York   Post  of
October   21  quotes  an  unnamed  Southern  Mayor   as  saying,
"Much  as  I  hate  to  admit  it,  you  must  realize  that  many  of
our  policemen  get  a  vicarious  delight   from  these   bombings
...  A  generation  ago  many  of  them  were  members  of  the
Ku  Klux  Klan.   Today  many are  members of  the  White  Citi-
zens  Councils."    Birmingham's  police   commissioner—Eugene
(Bull)   Connor—is   a  leading   anti-Semite.    A    Jacksonville,
Fla.,   policewoman,   has   been   wowing   the   White   Citizens
Councils  with  a  lecture  on  how,  after  the  schools  were  inte-
grated   in  Washington,   Jewish  women  began   having  Negro
babies.   A  Jacksonville  detective,  looking  for  bomb  clues,  told
Opotowsky   he  suspected  the  NAACP  and  the   Communists.
Similarly  the  FBI  chief  told  the  House  Committee  how  Com-
munists  were  infiltrating  Negro  organizations   "to   take  ad-
vantage   of   all  controversial   issues  on  the   racial  question."
The  notion  that  the  Negro's  desire  for  full  acceptance  as  a
fellow  human  being  is  a  plot,  whether  by  Communists  or
Jews  or  Catholics,   is  an  obsession  the  police   have  in  com-
mon  with  the  racists.
.1   6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 27,1858
It  Will  Soon  Be  Too  Late  to  Stop  the  Spread  of  Nuclear  Arms  to  Irresponsible  Powers
Ireland's  Foreign  Minister  Pleads  at  the  UN   for  Action   Now
Jack  Raymond's  exclusive  story  in  the  New  York  Times
Oct.  20  that  the  Pentagon  is  favorably  considering  Franco's
request  to  transform  his  army  into  "a  pentomic-type  force,
i.e.  for  atomic  war"  lends  urgency   to  the  speech   made  by
Ireland's  Foreign   Minister,  Frank  Aiken,  in  the  UN  Gen-
eral  Assembly  October  17  calling  for  action  to  prevent  the
spread  of  nuclear  weapons  to  other  nations.    We   reprint
here  the  heart  of  his  speech,  which  was  given  scant  notice,
and  the  text  of  his  two  resolutions.  We  urge  letters  to  the
U.S.  delegation  at  the  UN  in  support  of  the  Irish  initiative.
"As  this  Assembly, and  the  Great  Powers  represented  in  it,
are  unable  speedily  to  abolish  nuclear  weapons  completely,
they  ought  at  least  to  take steps  aimed  at  preventing  the  threat
from   becoming   even  greater.    It  is  a  great  tragedy  that  the
Baruch  proposals were not  accepted  and  implemented  12 years
ago.   If  we  do  not  soon  succeed  in  limiting  the  number  of
states  making  or  possessing  nuclear  weapons  the  problem  of
saving  the  world   from   nuclear  destruction  may  well   have
passed  beyond the  power  of  man  to  solve  long  before  another
12  years  have  passed.
"The   danger  of  nuclear  weapons  seems  likely  to  increase
in  geometric  progression.   Those  who  now  possess  nuclear
weapons  are  a  few  great  and  highly  developed  states,   with
great  urban  populations,  with  much  to  lose  and  little  to  gain
in  a  nuclear  war.   As  in  the  case  of  every  other  military  in-
vention,  however,  the  harnessing  of  nuclear  energy  for  mili-
tary  purposes  is  bound  to  become  simpler  and  cheaper  with
the passing of  time.  Sooner or later this  weapon  will  pass  into
the  hands  of  states  with  much  less  to  lose.   Furthermore,  as
it  comes  into  their  hands,  it  may  give  them  a  temporary  but
enormous   advantage   over   their   adversaries,   an   advantage
which they will  be sorely tempted  to  exploit.
Suppose  Syngman  Rhee  Got  the  Atom  Bomb?
"We  can  all  think  of  several  regions  of  the  world  where
fierce  antagonisms  exist,  held  in  suspense  only  by  a  kind  of
truce or  deadlock.  That  truce,  that  deadlock,  could  be  broken
all  too  easily,  if  one  side  or  the  other  possessed  nuclear  weap-
ons.    Furthermore,    nothing     except     international     meas-
ures  to  prevent  the  dissemination  of  such  weapons  can  pre-
vent  them  from  coming,  ultimately,  not  merely  to  small  and
poor  states  but  also  to  revolutionary organizations.   And  since
local  wars  and  revolutions  almost  always  involve  some  degree
of   Great  Power  patronage  and   rivalry,  the   use  of   nuclear
weapons  by  a  small  state  or  revolutionary  group  could   lead,
only  too  easily,  to  the  outbreak  of  general  war.   One  obsolete,
Hiroshima-type  bomb,  used  by  a  small  and  desperate  country
to  settle  a  local  quarrel,   could  be  the  detonator  for  world-
wide   thermonuclear   war,   involving   the   destruction   of   our
The Irish  Amendment
Introduced   in   the   UN   General   Assembly    Oct.   17
would  add  to  the  Western  resolution  (for  a   discontinu-
ance  of  nuclear  tests  while  the  coming  Geneva  talks  are
in  progress)  the   following:
"Recognizing   further  that  the  wider  dissemination  of
nuclear    weapons    could   jeopardize   progress    towards
these  aims,
"Urges that  the  parties  involved  in  these  negotiations
shall   not   supply   other   States   with   nuclear    weapons
while  these  negotiations   are  taking   place  and   during
the  period  of  any  suspension  of  tests  that  may   result
therefrom;
'"Urges  further  all  States  which  are  not  now  produc-
ing  nuclear  weapons  to  refrain  from  undertaking   their
manufacture  while  these  negotiations  are  taking  place
and  during  the  period  of  any  suspension  of  tests  that
may  result   therefrom."
whole  civilization.
"There  remains  the  argument,  seldom  actually  stated,  that
for   a  country  to  abjure  these  weapons  while  others   possess
them  involves  a  sacrifice  of  prestige.   We   think  that   argu-
ment  is based on  a  false  idea  of  how  prestige—the good  opin-
ion  of  mankind—is  likely  to  be  won  today.  True  prestige,  it
seems  to  us,  will  now  be  won,  not  by  those  who  may  press
their  way  into  the  nuclear  club,  but  by  those  countries  which
possess  the  skill  and  resources  necessary  to  produce  nuclear
weapons  but  which,  by  deliberate  choice,  and  in  the  interests
of  peace,  refrain  from  producing  them.
"The   second  objection  concerns  the  supposed  impairment
of  alliances.  No  nuclear power  has  in  fact  yet found  it  neces-
sary  for  the  effective  working of  an  alliance  to place  its  nuclear
weapons in  the control  of  a non-nuclear ally.  The  reasons  why
they  have not  done  so are plain.  Military pacts  cannot  in  their
nature  be  absolute  and  permanent.
"But   the  objection  which  I  am  now  considering   against
these  proposals  does, imply  that,  in  certain  circumstances,  and
to  secure some military advantage,  nuclear  powers  would  con-
sider  handing  these  weapons  over  to  non-nuclear  allies.   That
very  possibility seems to  us a  danger  against  which  we  should
provide  by  international  agreement  now.   Let  us  grant  that  it
may  at  some time appear  militarily advantageous  to  give  these
weapons   outright   to   allied   forces,   rather   than   keep   them
stored  in  the  control  of  military  units  belonging  to  the  nu-
clear  power  itself.   Is  not  the   sacrifice  of  that   hypothetical
military  advantage  well  worthwhile  if  it  can  secure the  actual
and  enormous  collective  advantage  of  checking the  dissemina-
tion  of  nuclear  weapons?"
Text of  the  Resolution  by Ireland  to Prevent  New  Atomic  Powers  from  Emerging
"The  General  Assembly,  1.  Recognizing  that  the  aim  of
the  United  Nations  in  the  field  of  disarmament   is  an  effec-
tive  general  agreement  on  the  prohibition   of  atomic,  hydro-
gen  and  other  weapons  of  mass  destruction  which  will  pro-
vide  for  the  cessation  of  the  production  of  such  weapons,
the  destruction  of  existing  stocks  and  the  progressive  limi-
tation  of  conventional   armaments,
"2.  Recognizing  further   that  the  danger  now  exists  that
an  increase   in   the   number   of   States  possessing   nuclear
weapons   may  occur,  aggravating  international   tension  and
the  difficulty  of  maintaining  world  peace  and  thus  rendering
more   difficult   the   attainment   of   the   general    disarmament
agreement  envisaged  in  paragraph  1,
"3. Decides  to  establish  an  ad hoc  Committee  to  study  the
dangers  inherent   in  the   further   dissemination    of   nuclear
weapons,  and  recommend  to  the  14th  session  of  the   General
Assembly   [next  year]   appropriate   measures  for  averting
these  dangers."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 27,1958
Evidence  Which Contradicts  Dulles's  Denial  of  Blockade Activities  "In  Recent  Months"
Some  New  Light  on  the  Strange  Story  of  the  Chinese  Offshore  Islands
Krishna  Menon  at  the  UN  has  said  that  the   Communist
shelling  of  Quemoy  which  began  on  Aug.  23  was  a  reaction
to  provocative  action  from  the  offshore  islands.   On  the  other
hand,  Secretary Dulles  on  Oct.  15  in  effect  denied  this.    "Ac-
tually,"  he  said  at  press  conference  that  day,  "little,  if  any-
thing,  has  been  done  from  these  islands  in  recent  months  to
make  them  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  peace.   They  have  not  been
used  to  blockade  the  ports  of  Amoy  or  Foochow.   They  have
not  been  staging  commando  raids  or  trying  to  infiltrate  agents
from  them.   I  think  the  situation  in  that  respect  can  be  clari-
fied,  but  there  is  not  a  great  deal  to  be  done."
This  answer  provided  a  glimpse  of  the  kind  of   aggressive
activity  which  has  made  Nationalist   possession   of   the  off-
shore  islands  "a  thorn  in  the  side  of  peace."   Blockade,  com-
mando  raids,  infiltration of  agents  .  .  .  these  were  specified
by  the  Secretary,  and  he  hinted  that  something  might  be  done
to  "clarify"   this  situation,  whatever  that  may  mean.   His  as-
sertion  that  there  had  been  no  blockade  activities   "in   recent
months"   seemed  to  be  supported   by  a  statement  which   the
Chinese  Nationalist   Defense  Ministry  issued  the    following
day  in  Taipeh.   It  said  a  9-year  old  blockade  of  the  port  of
Amoy,  opposite  Quemoy,  had  been  lifted  in  mid-July  because
the  Nationalists  knew  the  Communists   "would  complain  bit-
terly  . . . and we did  not want to get world  opinion   confused."
A Nine-Year Blockade
Here  again  we  were  given  a  glimpse  of  why  enemy  pos-
session  of   the   offshore   islands  is  a  problem   for   the   main-
land.   Here  the  Nationalist  Defense  Ministry  was   admitting
that  Quemoy  had  been  used  for  9  years to  blockade  the  port
of  Amoy,  which  is  as  close  to  Quemoy  as  New  York's  port
is  to  Staten   Island.   But  the   very  next   day  the   Associated
Press  carried  a  dispatch  from  Taipeh  (Wash.  Eve.  Star,  Oct.
17)  which  quoted  a  Nationalist  Defense  Ministry   spokesman
as  denying  that   the   lifting   of   the   blockade   had   been   an-
nounced,   though   it  was  admitted  that  the  present  cease-fire
"enabled  Communist  craft  to  sail  in  and  out  of  Amoy  harbor,
which  the  Quemoys  previously   blockaded."
It  would  be  good  to  know  what  the  real  situation   is,  and
whether   cessation  of   the   blockade  was  to   be   discussed   by
Dulles  and  Chiang  on  the  former's  visit  to  Taipeh.   There  is
reason  to  doubt  the  Secretary  of  State's  statement  that  there
had  been  no  blockade  activities  "in   recent  months."   A  dis-
patch   from   Taipeh   by  Tillman   Durdin   in  the  New    York
Times  of  August  10,  gave  a vivid  picture  of  the  blockade  and
of   other  aggressive   actions  by  the  Nationalists   against   the
mainland.   That  dispatch  tends  to  support  Krishna  Menon.
How Our Fleet and Air  Force Helps
The   Durdin  dispatch   said  that  while   Communist   planes
"have   rarely  ventured"   toward   Formosa,   Nationalist   planes
had  been  flying  reconnaissance  over  the  adjoining   mainland
"for  years"  and  regularly  "photographing  airfields  and  scruti-
nizing   other   military   objectives."    Transports,   covered   by
fighters,  had  been  dropping  leaflets.   In  the  straits,   according
to  Durdin,  "The   Nationalist  Air  Force  and  Navy,  backed  by
ships  and  planes  of  the  U.  S. Seventh  Fleet  and  Taiwan-based
U.  S.  Air  Force  jets,  have  kept  effective  supremacy."
Even  Our Independent  Minds
On  Oct.  16  a  group of  independents  ran  an  ad  in  the
New  York  Times calling  for  a  new  foreign  policy.  The
signers  included  persons  like  Mrs.  Roosevelt,   Clarence
Pickett,  Norman  Thomas,  James  P.  Warburg, Walter
Millis,  Erich  Fromm,  Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  B.  Hester,  Jay
Orear  and  Freda  Kirchwey  whom  we  respect.   Yet  it  is
striking  to  notice  that  they  were  unable  to  agree  on  a
single  constructive proposal, especially  in  regard  to  the
Far  Eastern  crisis.   Here  they  went  no  further  than  to
say   that  "We  find  ourselves  trapped  in  tight  corners
where  we  desperately  assume rigid  positions  that  make
negotiation  virtually  impossible."
The  biggest  trap  of  all  is  our unwillingness to  recog-
nize  Ked   China  or  to  allow  it  to  be  admitted  to   the
UN.   To  try  and  stablize  the  Far  East  without  recog-
nizing  China  would  be  like  trying  to   stablize   North
America  without  recognizing  the  USA.   Many  of  those
who  signed  agree with this  but  could  not  muster  a  suf-
ficient  majority.  It  is  a  danger  signal  and striking  evi-
dence  of  our  unrealistic rigidity  as  a  nation  that  even
independents  do  not  dare  say  in  this  country  what con-
servatives  say   in  Britain,  Canada  and  other   Western
nations.
A  sample  of  this  conrast  may  be  found  in  the  recent
conference  of  the  British Conservative Party.  We  quote
from  the  London  Times  account  of  Oct.  11,  "'But  it
would  be just  as  well  if  we  said  with  frankness  that  it
is  not  only  the  hysterical  voices  on  the  Left  who  are
profoundly  disturbed about  the  position  the  Americans
have  got  themselves  into  in  the  Far  East,'  Mr.  Van
Straubenzee   said   amid   cheers.    To  pretend   that   the
small,  discredited  rump  of  China,  based  on  an  island
which  was  not  essentially  part  of  the  mainland, was  the
duly  representative  government  of   China  was   not   to
recognize  realities.   The  Communists were  the  effective
government  of  the  mainland, and  it  would be  unwise  to
leave  them  'in  outer  space.'"   The  speaker  was  a  key
figure  at  this  annual  parley.  He  moved  the  conference
resolution  on  foreign  policy,  which   was  unanimously
adopted.   Thus  Tories  cheer  in  England  what  liberals
cannot  bring  themselves  to  utter  here.
"As  a  result,"  Durdin  reported,  "Communist   shipping  be-
tween  north  and  south  China  has  been  hampered.   Aside  from
small  Communist  vessels  that  sneak  in  and  out,  the  ports  of
Foochow  and  Amoy, are  served  only  by  other  foreign  ships."
Durdin Called the  Shots Correctly
This  New   York  Times  dispatch  cabled  on  August  9  from
Formosa  would  seem  to  deny  the  truth  of  the  Nationalist  an-
nouncement  of  Oct.  16  that  the  blockade  had  been  lifted  in
"mid-July"  and  the  Secretary's  statement  of  Oct.  15  that  there
had  been  no  blockade  activities  "in  recent  months."
"In   the  last  two  years,"  the  Durdin   dispatch    concluded,
"Peiping   has   been   pushing   the   economic   development    of
Fukien   [the   province  opposite   Formosa]   and   extending   its
rail  networks.   This  must  be  making  Nationalist   interdictions
increasingly  irksome  and  may be bringing  nearer  the  day  when
the  Communists  feel  they  must  free  their  coastline  by  assert-
ing  air  control  and,  possibly,  by  eliminating   the   Nationalist
grip  on  Quemoy  and  Matsu  as  well."
Thirteen  days later,  Aug.  23,  the  shelling of  Quemoy  began.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone't  Weekly,  October £7,1958
Idiot's  Tale  Campaign;  Ike  "Goes  Nixon"   and  Truman  Regrets  End  of  Korean  War
Why  We  Would  Vote  for  the  Lament  Ticket  If  We  Lived  in  New  York
If  we  were  a  resident  of  New  York,  we  would  vote  for
Corliss  Lament  and   the  United-Independent   Socialist   Party
ticket.  We  have serious differences  with  Mr.  Lamont  and  with
this  new  party.   But  we  see  no  other  way  to  vote  for  peace,
the  overriding  issue.
Ever  since  the  1948 campaign,  both  parties  have  made  it
hard  for  dissenters  on  the  peace  issue.  The  Truman  Admin-
istration   tried  to  break  up   the  Wallace  movement   with   a
whispering  campaign  that  spoke  of  indictments  awaiting  the
leaders  of  the  Progressive  Party.
Big  Brother Won't  Know
McCarthy,  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee,  and  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  joined   in.    They
made  it  dangerous  to  sign  a  peace  petition  or  go  to  a  radical
or  liberal movement.  The  FBI,  which  shares  the  screwy  pre-
conceptions  of  the  witch  hunters*,  even  had  snoopers  watch-
ing  organizations  as  palely  pink  as World  Federalists.
But  we  still  have  a  secret  ballot,  and  there  will  be  no  Big
Brothers  looking  over  the   shoulders  of  New   York   readers
who  vote  the  Lamont  ticket.   They  can  exercise their  freedom
unscathed  in  the  ballot  box.
We  have  watched  this  year's  campaign  with  rising  gorge.
As  we write  Ike  has  gone  Nixon  on  us,  claiming  at  Los  An-
geles  that  the  Democrats  are  dominated  by  "political   radi-
cals"   (would  they  were!).   Truman  at  press  conference  here
last  week-end indicated that  he  still  seems  to  think  it  was  un-
forgivable  of  the  Republicans to  call  off  the  Korean  war!   A
Gallup   poll   in  the  New   York  Herald-Tribune  of  Oct. 19
showed  that  60  percent  of  the  Republicans  and   54  percent
of  the  Democrats  reported  "little  or  no  interest"  in  this  elec-
tion.   We  regard  this  as  heartening evidence  of  popular   in-
telligence.
Nowhere  is  the  scene  more  disgusting  than  in  New  York.
Henry   Abrams,   chairman  of   the   Lamont   ticket    campaign
Why  Third  Parties
"Opening   the  ballot   to   more   than   two  alternatives
encourages  citizen  participation  in  the  political  process.
The  right  to  political  dissent  becomes  nominal   and  can
become   dangerous  without   the  steamvalve    mechanism
of  placing  minority  candidates   before  the  voters.   Frus-
trating  legal  restrictions  can  only  contribute  to  disillu-
sionment   without   democratic   ideals."
—"Do   Third   Parties  Have   A   Chance?"    The   legal
restrictions  on  them,  by  Ralph  Nader  and   Theo-
dore  Jacobs,  Harvard  Law  Record,  Oct.  9,  1958.
*In  this  connection   we  heartily   recommend   the  special  64-
page  issue  of  The  Nation  for  Oct.  18 which  is  wholly  devoted
to  Fred  J.  Cook's  masterly  survey  of  the  FBI,  the  best  job  of
its  kind  since  Max  Lowenthal's  monumental   work  in  1950.
committee,  was  right  when  he  said  the  major  party  candidates
in  New  York  "by  common  consent  think  that  the  only  issues
in  this  campaign  are  ethnic  eating   and  how  best  to  shake
hands."
Nelson   Rockefeller  has  been  financing  a  campaign  to  sell
the  idea  of  limited  nuclear  war  and  to  fight  cessation  of  nu-
clear  testing  through  his  Rockefeller  Brothers  Fund  and  its
research  man,  Henry  A.  Kissinger.   The   Rockefeller  report
last winter  talked  of  the  need  to  prepare  the  American  people
psychologically  for  nuclear  war  but  Rockefeller  has  kept dis-
creetly  mum  about  these  views  in  the  campaign.   And  Harri-
man  hasn't  attacked  Rockefeller  on  them,  though  this  would
be  political  dynamite.  Obviously  "Ave"  agrees  with  "Rock."
As  for  the  rest  of  the  ticket,  Keating  is  "liberal"  only  on
civil  rights where he  has  to  be,  and  otherwise  on  civil  liberty
sees  eye  to  eye  with  his  close  friend  J.  Edgar  Hoover.    To
have  the  liberal  Javits  campaigning  for  the  ultra  conservative
Keating  for  Senator  is  as  comic  as  to  have  Finletter  dutifully
on  the  hustings  for  Carmine  de  Sapio's  handpicked  Hogan.
The  Tammany  Boss  De  Sapio  failed  in  his  effort  to  keep
the  Lamont  ticket  off  the  ballot.   The  U.-I.  S.  people  did  a
back-breaking  job  in  refuting  192  pages  of  phoney  challenges
to  their  election  petition.   Their   victory  gives  New  York  a
chance  to  cast  a  meaningful  protest  ballot  for  peace,  and  in
the  vote  for  Lamont  to  salute  a  man  who  did  so  much  in  the
worst  days  of  McCarthyism  to  keep  alive  the  fight  for   civil
liberty.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  A  Friend  If  You  Send   V»  A  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Long   Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Qtvoot
City     ................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  ......................
CUroot
City     ...............................
5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........Zone............State......™.... —
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
10/27/SB
...... ..Zone... .........State................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washinston  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I    F    Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  18T9.   Post-dated  Mondayn  but  pub-
lished  every   Thursday   except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Bather   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
Io  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED