I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958apr07.pdf

============================================================

The  Supreme  Court and  Statelessness,  P.  3
There's Now A Fighting  Chance to  Defeat  the  Bill to  Create  New  Nuclear  Powers,  See  P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  14
APRIL  7,  1958
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Is  "Nyet"  All  That  Washington  Can  Say?
There  was  a  wide  variety  of  replies  the  American  govern-
ment  could  have  made  to  the   Soviet  announcement  on  nu-
clear  testing.    The  government  could  have  complained  that
Moscow  had   been  tricky  in  speeding   up   a  test  series  of   its
own  and  then  making  its  announcement  just  on  the  eve  of
the  new  American  tests.   Washington   could   have  explained
why   it  considered  the  new  tests  too  important  to  be  aban-
doned  but  promised  to  cease  testing  after  this  new  scries  if
the  Soviets kept  their  word.
Any  number  of  qualifications  were  po^ible.   Our   govern-
ment  could  have  said  that  it  would  use  the  new  testing  pe-
riod  to  negotiate  a  system  of  inspection  to  enforce  a  ban  on
testing,  and  to  give  up  testing  when  a  satisfactory agreement
had   been   reached.   We   could   have   offered   to  give  up   big
tests,  but  not  small.   We  could  have  suggested  an  agreement
to  limit the  number  and  volume  of  future  tests  on  both  sides,
regulating  the  amount  of  radioactivity  to  be  released.
No Use  Keeping Clean Bombs A  Secret
If  Washington   thinks  the  development   of  so-called  clean
bombs  so  important,  it  could  have  offered   to  put  testing  for
clean   bombs   under   international   supervision,   with   the   re-
sults  to  be  shared  by  the  three  thermonuclear  powers.   After
all,  if  the  purpose  is  to  make  nuclear  war  more  humane,  as
Mr.  Dulles   insists  it  is,  we  should  want  to  share  the  devel-
opment  secrets;   otherwise   an  enemy  would   have   no   choice
but  to  use  dirty  bombs.
Similarly,    if   we    consider    testing    essential    for   certain
peaceful  purposes,  as underground  for  mining,  we  could  have
offered   to  carry  these  on,   too,   under   international  auspices
if  the  Soviets  did  likewise.   Any  one  of  these,  or  any  other
constructive  compromise  suggestions,  would  have  given  Wash-
ington  a  reasonable  reply  with  which  to  face  Moscow   in  the
forum  of  public  opinion.    This  time  it  is  the  U.  S.  which
stands  before  the  world  with  nothing  to  say but  "nyet."    The
rigidity  is  on  our  side.
Stevenson Made The Same Proviso
The  State  Department  grasped  at  the  fact  that  the  Russian
announcement   left   the   door   open   to   resumption   of   testing
if   other   nations  did  not  follow   suit,   saying  this  meant   the
offer  could  be  "altered  at  will."   Gromyko's  proviso  was  no
different   from   Adlai   Stevenson's   just  two   years  ago,   when
the  Democratic   candidate   suggested   we  do  what   Moscow  is
doing  now.    "Of   course,"  Stevenson   added,   in  that  famous
speech  of  April  21,  1956,   "I  would  call  upon  other  nations
to  follow   our  lead,  and  if  they  don't  and  persist  in  further
tests,  we  will  know  about  it  and  can  reconsider   our  policy."
Perhaps Just  As  Museum  Pieces?
Q.  Mr.  Secretary  .  .  .  are  we  to  understand  you  to
mean  that  when  we  have  achieved  a  smaller,  cleaner,
tactical   bomb  we  will   then  be  prepared  to   elimirate
from   our  atomic  arsenal  the  megaton  bombs  and  the
kiloton bombs?
A.  Well,   this   operation   that   I   refer   to  involves  a
considerable   making   over   of   existing   weapons  into
smaller  or  cleaner  weapons.  .  .  .  You  don't  throw  them
away;  the  material  is  too valuable.
Q.  But  will  we  not  retain any  of  the  megaton bombs
and  kiloton  bombs  in  the  arsenal?
A.  I  just   don't  know  what  the  program  is  in   that
respect. ...  I  assume  we  might  retain  some.
—Dulles  press  conference,  April  1.
The   State  Department   also   charged   that   Moscow's  uni-
lateral  cessation  of  testing  could  be  "evaded   in  secrecy."   This
hardly  conforms  to  that   standard   of   candid  discussion  im-
plied   by   Mr.   Dulles's   emotional   references   to   the   checks
exercised  by  a  free  press  ancl  an  opposition  party.   A  battle
is  being  waged  as  we  go  to  press  between  the  AEC  and  the
Pentagon  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Humphrey  disarmament
subcommittee  on  the  other  over  the  government's  efforts   to
keep   secret  recent  executive  session  testimony  on   the   range
and   efficiency   of  our  test  detection  devices.
We Know All About the Soviet Tests
Marquis  Childs   reflected   that   executive  session  testimony
when  he  wrote  in  the   Washington   Post  April   2,  ".         >   .  we
know  every  detail  of  the   recent  series  of  nuclear  tests  con-
ducted   by  the  Russians.   We   know  exactly  where  the  tests
were  conducted.   We   know  the   yield   of   radioactive  fallout
they  sent  into  the  atmosphere.   We  know  the  chemical  make-
up  of  the  weapons  tested  and  the  exact  number."   The  rea-
son   all   this   is  being  kept   secret   is  not,   however,   "simply
inertia,"  as Mr.  Childs believes.  The  government  could hardly
reveal  how  much   it  knows  of   Russian  tests  without   at   the
same   time   undermining   the   whole   hint-and-run   campaign
designed   to   make   the   public  believe  inspection   may  easily
be  evaded.    If   we  can  learn   this   much  without   inspection
posts  on  Soviet  soil,  how  can  it  be  argued  that  tests  could  be
kept   secret   if   there   were   international   inspection   stations
across  the  USSR?   Gromyko  repeated  the  control  post   offer.
Mr.  Dulles  said  at  press  conference  that  both  we  and  the
Soviet  Union  now  have  "enough  large  thermonuclear  weapons
to  destroy  the  other  and   perhaps  a  large  part  of  humanity.
The  Soviet  Union  is  willing  apparently  to  let  it  go  at  that."
(Continued   on  Page  4)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone't  Weekly,  April  7, 1958
Senator  Russell  Joins  the  Opposition;  Top  Secret  Strauss  Letter  Turns Up
Now  A  Real  Chance  to  Defeat  the  Nuclear  Arms  Give-Away  Bill
There  is  now  a  real  fighting  chance  to  block  passage  of
S  3165,  the  Nuclear  Arms  Give-Away bill.   The  new  Russian
move  on  testing  makes  this  measure  too  scandalous  from   a
propaganda  point  of  view.   Unexpected  powerful  opposition
has  made  itself  felt  in  conservative  quarters;   on  March  30,
Senator  Russell  of  Georgia,  chairman  of  the   Senate  Armed
Services   Committee  and   a  member   of  the   Joint   Congres-
sional  Committee on  Atomic  Energy,  gave  the  United  Press
a   statement   opposing  the  bill  on  much  the   same   grounds
as   those   advanced  earlier   by   Congressman   Chet   Holifield
when  he  first  opened  what   seemed  to  be  a  hopeless  fight
against  the  measure.   Senator  Russell  said  that  "spreading
nuclear  weapons  around  the  world"  would  make  arms  con-
trol  more  difficult   and  increase  the  danger   of  their  use  in
local   conflicts   "which  are   in  no  way  related   to   our  inter-
national   security."
Another  lucky  break:  someone obtained  and  gave  Senator
Clinton  Anderson of  New  Mexico excerpts  from  a  top  secret
letter  AEC  Chairman   Lewis   L.   Strauss   had  written   last
Dec.  12  to  Deputy  Secretary   of  Defense  Quarles   objecting
to  the  bill.   Production  of  these  excerpts  surprised   and  dis-
comfited   Strauss  when  he   appeared   to   testify   before   the
Pastore  subcommittee  on  March  27.   Strauss  had  just  fin-
The  Same Mistake We Made  Before
". . .  Suppose  we decide  to  arm  France  with  nuclear
weapons ... or the Germans—is  it  always  certain  that
these    governments   will   be   friendly    to   the   United
States?    We  helped  arm  Japan  in  many  ways  before
Pearl   Harbor,  and  we  saw   an  awful   lot   of   material
come  back  to  kill  American  boys."
—Prof.   Charles  Price,  U.  of  Penna.,  testifying    for
the  Friends   Committee   on  National   Legislation,
against  Nuclear  Arms  Give-Away  Bill,  Mar.  28.
ished  testifying  in  favor  of  the  bill  and  denying  that  other
nations,   given  non-nuclear  components  of  nuclear   weapons
under  the  bill,  could  then  proceed  to  fabricate   the   nuclear
portions  as  charged  by  Holifield  and  Anderson.
Strauss  declined  to  let  the  excerpts  go  into  the  record  on
the  ground  that  they  were  from   "a  very   classified  letter."
But  the   excerpts   were   published  in  the   Washington    Post
March  29.   In  them  Strauss  said  other  nations  could  dupli-
cate  nuclear  weapons if  given  the  non-nuclear  parts  and  fis-
sionable   materials,   as   the   bill   proposes.    He   also    argued
that   once  these  nuclear   "make   it   yourself   kit"   materials
were   given  one  of  our  NATO  allies  there  would  be  pres-
sure  from  others  "to  be  treated  similarly."   This  letter,  like
the  testimony  in  the  box  below,  contradicted  State  and  War
Department  assertions  to  th  Pastore  subcommittee  that  the
bill  was  not  "intended"   to  create  new  nuclear   powers.
At  present  transfer   of  nuclear  weapons,  their  components
or  the  secret  of  making  them  is  forbidden.   The  Adminis-
tration   could  do  so  only  by  embodying  its  proposals  in  a
Where  Acheson  Agrees With  Kennan
"It   would,  I  believe,  be  wiser  to  leave  the   nuclear
power  in  American  and  British  hands  and  not  hasten
the  dissemination  of  nuclear  weapons.   We  have  prob-
lems  enough  without  advancing the  time—which  seems
to  me  inevitable—when   these  weapons  will  be   much
more   widely  available  than  they  are  today. ...  It
would,  I  believe,  be  a  disastrous  mistake  to   increase
nuclear  power  in  Europe  as  part  of  our  present  policy
of  increasing  our  military  reliance  on  nuclear  weapons.
To  do  this  would  perpetuate  the  danger  and  horror  of
living  under  the  sword  of   Damocles."
—Dean  Acheson:  Power  and  Diplomacy  (1958),  p. 101
treaty   (requiring   two-thirds   Senate   approval)   or   a   con-
current  resolution  (requiring  a  majority  vote  of  both  Houses
of   Congress).    The   pending   legislation    would   enable   the
Administration,   without   consulting   Congress,   to   give   the
makings  and  secrets   of  nuclear  weapons  to  any  of  the   47
nations  which now  have  nrutual  defense  pacts  with  the  U.  S.
Senator  Anderson  protested   at  the  Pastore  subcommittee
hearings  that  under  this  legislation   the  Senate,  which  must
confirm   small  town  postmasters   and   tariff   changes  on  bi-
cycles  and  clothespins,  was  being  asked  to  give  the  Admin-
istration  a  blank  check  to  create  new  nuclear  powci's.
When  the  public  hearings  beg-an  on  March  26,  the  outlook
for   opponents  of   the   bill   looked  hopeless.    The   hearings
were  called  so  swiftly  and  the  previous  executive  hearings
had  been  held  so  secretly  that  few  were   aware   of  the   is-
sues.    Congressman  Holifield,  a  member  of  the  Joint  Com-
mittee,   took  the   unusual  step   of  appearing   as   a  witness
against   the  bill,  repeating   the   analysis   he  made  public  in
his  little  noticed  speech  at   Columbus,  Ohio,  last  March   3
which  first  brought  the  dangers  in  this  legislation   to  public
attention.     (See  the  heart  of  this  speech  as  printed  in  the
March  17 issue  of  the   Weekly).
Six  eloquent  witnesses   turned   up:   Prof.   Charles   Price
of  the   Univ.  of  Penna.  for  the   Friends   Committee   on  Na-
tional  Legislation;   Mrs.  Ralph  Pomerance,  for  the   Women's
International   League   for   Peace   and   Freedom;    Christoph
Hohenemser,  Swarthmore  Students  for  Disarmament;   Brig.
Gen.  Hugh  Hester  (USA  Ret.);  Rabbi  Isadore  Hoffman   of
the   Jewish   Peace   Fellowship   and  James   L.  Morrison,   re-
cently  resigned   member   of  the   AEC's  general  counsel  of-
fice.  Morrison  warned  that  certain  sections  of  the  bill  would
give  the  military   greater  power  than  ever  to  prevent   de-
classification   of   scientific  information.
When  the  hearings   ended  on  March  28,  Senator  Pastore
agreed  to  ask  Secretary  Dulles  to  be  heard  on  the  bill  and
to  reopen  the  public  hearings  if  enough  people  and  organi-
zations  asked  to  be heard  by  April  15.   Individuals  and  or-
ganizations  wishing  to  be  heard  should  wire  Senator  Pastore
at  once.
State Dept. Official  Admits Nuclear  Give-Away Would Probably Create 4th Atomic Power
Sen.  PASTORE.   A  short   while  ago  Mr.  Stassen   came
before  the  Senate  Committee on  Disarmament,  of  which  I
am   a   member,  and   said   that   the   reason   why  we   were
anxious  to  negotiate  a  disarmament  agreement  at  London
was  because  the  possessors  of  nuclear  weapons  were  anxi-
ous that  no fourth nation come by this  knowledge and  stock-
piles  of  nuclear  weapons.   Am  I  correct  in  that?
Mr.  [C.  Burke]  ELBRICK  [Asst.  Sec.  of  State  for   For-
eign  Affairs].   I  think  that  is  correct.
Sen.   PASTORE.    Do  these   recommendations   basically
change  that  policy  of  the  United  States,  in  your  opinion?
Mr.  ELBRICK.  No.  Mr.  Chairman,  our  policy  is  still  to
reach  a  disarmament  agreement   which  would  be  mutually
satisfactory   to  both  sides  as  soon  as  we  can.   This  is  our
policy.  We  would like  to  do  this.   But  in  the  face  of  a  re-
jection  of  the  Western  proposals   on  disarmament,   we  have
no  alternative,   we  feel,  but  to  prepare  the  West,  to  build
up  the  West,  to  the  point  where  it  can  meet  a  threat  from
the  East.  Whether  this  involves  necessarily  the  encourage-
ment  of  a  fourth  country  to  enter  this field, I  am  not  sure.
It  probably  does.
—Hearing  on  the  Nuclear  Arms  Give-Away  Bill, Mar.  27
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  7,1958
Supreme  Court  Splits  Wide  Open  on  5th  Amendment, Contempt and Expatriation
The  Terrible  Power  to  Declare  Dissenters  Men  Without  A  Country
A  bitter  issue  split  the   Supreme   Court  in  the   expatria-
tion  cases  last  Monday.  It  is  whether  Congress  may  regu-
late  fundamental rights  so  long  as  the  regulations  are   "rea-
sonable."   This  view,  held  by  Frankfurter   and  opposed  by
Black   and   Douglas,  would  negate   the   First  amendment,
which  says  Congress  shall  make  "no  law"  abrogating   free-
dom  of  speech, press  or  assembly  and  the  Fourteenth  amend-
ment,  which  makes   "all   persons   born   or   naturalized"  in
this  country  citizens  of  the  United  States  and  of  the  State
in  which  they   live.   This   fundamental   grant   was  intended
to  safeguard  the  newly  freed   Negro.   It   is  as  absolute  as
anything  in  the  Constitution,  but  Frankfurter   would  make
it,   too,  subject   to   "reasonable"    regulation,   allowing  Con-
gress  to  denaturalize   even  native  born  Americans  for   cer-
tain   actions   or   crimes,   and   make   them   "stateless"—men
without  a  country.
A Police State  Custom
Hitler  made  the  Jews   and  his  political  opponents  state-
less.   Statelessness  is  also  a  penalty  imposed  by  Soviet  law
on  oppositionists.   A  law  passed  by  Congress  in   1954   [we
devoted  the   special  issue  of  this   Weekly,   Feb.   1,  1954  to
exposing  its  dangers]  would  authorize   the   government  to
deprive   of   nationality    even   native   born   Americans   con-
victed  of  conspiring  to  violate  the   Smith   Act.   It   was  an
Eisenhower  administration  measure,  sponsored  by  Ferguson
of  Michigan  and  Mrs.  Smith  of  Maine.   This  present   court
would  hardly  uphold  it.   But  what  of  the  future?    Is  state-
lessness  some  day  to  become  a  means  of  punishing political
dissent  in  this  country,  too?   This  is  why  Douglas   angrily
said  from  the  bench  last  Monday  that  these  cases  involved
"perhaps  the  most   important   constitutional  pronouncement
of  this  century."
Three  separate  cases  were  decided, but  only  two  of  them
reached  the  constitutional  issue.   In  these  Brennan,  by  shift-
ing,  decided the  outcome.  In  the  Trop  case,  he  joined  Black,
Douglas,  Warren  and  Whittaker  to  hold  that  Congress  could
not  make  expatriation  a  punishment  for  desertion   in  war-
time.   In  the   Perez   case,   however,  Brennan  joined  Frank-
furter,  Burton,  Harlan,  and  Clark  to  rule  that  an  American
citizen  could  be  expatriated  for  voting  in  a  foreign  election.
[In  the  Nishikawa  case,  the  Court  7-2 reversed  the  expatria-
tion  of  an  American  born  Japanese  drafted  into  the  Japa-
nese  army  during  the  last  war  but  did so on the  ground  that
the  burden  of  disproving  duress  rested  on  the  government].
The  gravity  of  the  Perez  decision  is  that  it  is  rested  by
Frankfurter    on   the   government's    foreign   policy   powers.
Weakening the  5th Amendment
The  Stefana   Brown  case  decided  last  Monday  again
showed   how  the  present   Court  is  divided  between  a
strong  liberal  minority  of  Black, Warren  and  Douglas;
a  conservative  bloc  led  by  Frankfurter,  with  Brennan
(and   sometimes  Whittaker)  swinging  between  them.
The  effect   of  the  Frankfurter  5-4  decision  upholding a
six  months  contempt   sentence  on  Mrs.   Brown  is   to
weaken   Fifth   amendment   safeguards   in   deportation
and  denaturalization  actions,  extending  to  these  "civil"
proceedings  a  stricter  rule  hitherto  applied in criminal
cases;  a  defendant  who  takes  the  witness  stand  volun-
tarily  waives any  right  to  plead  the Fifth  during  cross-
examination  thereafter.   A  native  of  Poland,  resident
in  this  country  since  the  age  of  two,  Mrs.  Brown is  an-
other  of  those  naturalized  citizens  hounded  for   past
membership   in   the   Communist   party.    She   lost   her
citizenship   and  now  must  serve  6  months  in  jail   as
well.   Brennan  joined  the  dissenters   in  her  case.
One  passage  casts   its  shadow  across   the  coming  right  to
travel  cases.   In  it  he  says,  "Experience  amply  attests  that,
in  this  day  of  extensive  international  travel,  rapid  commu-
nication   and  widespread  use   of  propaganda,   the    activities
of  the  citizens  of  one  nation  when  in  another   country  can
easily  cause  serious  embarrassments   to  the   government  of
their  own  country  as  well  as  to  their  fellow   citizens."   On
this   basis   he  upholds  the   government's   right   to   declare
stateless  a  citizen  who  embarrasses  the  government  by  vot-
ing  in  a  foreign  election.   What  of  those  who  "embarrass"
their  government  by  speeches  or  writings  on  foreign  policy?
Douglas,  with  Black,  protested  "if  the  power  to   regulate
foreign   affairs  can  be  used  to  deprive  a  person  of  his   citi-
zenship  because  he  voted  abroad,  why  may  it  not  be  used
to  deprive  him  of  his  citizenship because  his  views  on  for-
eign  policy  are  unorthodox  or  because  he  disputed  the  posi-
tion  of  the  Secretary   of  State ...  or  the   action   of  the
Chief  Executive  in the field of foreign  affairs.  .  .  .  No doubt
George  F.  Kennan  'embarrassed'  our  foreign  relations  when
he  recently  spoke  over  the  British   radio.   Does  the   Consti-
tution  permit  Congress  to  cancel  his  citizenship?   Could  an
American  who  violated  his  passport  restrictions  and  visited
Red  China  be  deprived  of  his  citizenship?    To  many  people
i:,iy  of  these  acts  would  seem  much  more  heinous  than  the
fairly  innocent  act  of  voting  abroad."
The  Real  Truth  About  the  Issue  of  Jury  Trial  in  Contempt   Cases
If  the  Supreme  Court  had  reversed   instead   of  upholding
the   convictions  of  Gilbert   Green  and  Henry  Winston,  who
went  underground  rather  than  serve  their  sentences   under
the  Smith  Act,  Southern  Senators  like  Eastland   would  have
accused  it  of  being  soft   on  Communists  again.   The   effect
of   such  a  decision   would  have  been  to  restrict  the   power
of  Federal  judges  to  punish  for  contempt  without  jury  trial.
This  is  what  the   South   argued  for  in  its  fight  last  year
against  the   civil  rights  bill.   But  the   victory   of   principle
would  have  been  too  unpalatable  for   Southern   rightists  if
it   came   in  the   shape   of  a   decision   helping   two   fugitive
Communist  leaders.
On  the  other  hand,  liberals  who  were  strongly  opposed
to  the  South  on  the  civil  rights  bill  also  dislike  the   Smith
Act  and  feel—as  I  do—that  Green  and  Winston  were   vic-
tims  of  political  persecution.  They  will  therefore  be  strongly
attracted  to  the  minority   dissent   in  which  Black,   Warren
and   Douglas  argued   for  reversal  of  the  extra  three   year
sentence   imposed  on  the   two   fugitives   for   disobeying   a
court  order  to  surrender.   One's  position  will  be  determined
by  one's  sympathies.    This  is  what  Holmes  meant  when  he
said  that  inarticulate  premises  rather  than   general   propo-
sitions  really   determined  judicial  decision.
The  truth  is  that  the  jury  system  is  only  as  dependable
as  the  community  from   which  the  jury  is  picked.   Radical
defendants   in   the   recent   years   of   the   witch   hunt   have
usually  preferred  trial  without  a  jury.   Though  white  juries
in  the   South  do  on  occasion  punish  white  men  for   offenses
against  Negroes,  white  juries  could  hardly  be  depended  on
in   this   atmosphere   to   enforce   civil  rights   legislation   by
convicting  segregationists   who  defy  court  orders.   Thus  how
one  feels  on  the  issue  of  summary  punishment  for   contempt
vs. trial  by jury  will  depend  very  much  on the  circumstances
and  the  end  one  is  seeking  at  that  moment  to  achieve.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April   7,1958
U.S. Weakness Is Not  in Propaganda  But in Its Hostility to Any  Arms  Control
{Continued   from   Page  1)
This  is  a  grave  distortion.   The  Russian  position  is  not   "to
let  it  go  at  that."   This  is  what  Gromyko  said:  "We   realize
that  the  ending  of  tests  would  not  fully   remove  the   danger
of  atomic  war.  .  .  .  We  consider  it  to  be  our  principal  aim
to  reach   agreement   with  other   powers  on  the   unconditional
banning  of  atomic  and  hydrogen  weapons   of  all  kinds,  end-
ing  production   thereof   and   completely   destroying   stockpiles
of  thece  weapons  with  proper   control."   (Emphasis  added).
Another Unpleasant Surprise  In The Offing?
The   Secretary  of   State  has   a  right  to  ask  what   Moscow
considers  "proper  control,"  to  dispute  its  conception  of   that
and   to   suggest   his   own.    He   has   an   obligation   to   world
opinion   to   explain   whether  he   is  willing  to   negotiate   the
matter  separately  from  testing,  once  a  testing  ban  is  achieved.
He  has  no  right  to  pass  over  it,  and  he  is  very  foolish  to  do
so.   He  may  be  laying  himself  open   to  unpleasant  surprise.
After   all,   in  the   same  pre-election   speech   last   month   in
which   Krushchev   hinted   at   unilateral   cessation   of   testing,
he  also  said  the  time  might  be  coming  when  the  major  pow-
ers   "failing   to   achieve  agreement   among   themselves,   will
be  forced   unilatcrally   to  discontinue  manufacture   of   atomic
and   hydrogen  weapons."    If  Krushchev  in  a  new   announce-
ment   says  the  Soviet  Union  has  stopped   manufacturing  nu-
clear  weapons,  Gromyko's  reference  to  "proper  control"  will
become  of  crucial  importance.   What  will  we  do?   Will  the
President   inanely  dismiss  this,  too,   as  a   "gimmick" ?   Does
he  really  think  we  can  go  on  testing  until  next  August  as
world  clamor  for  cessation rises?
Not Just A  Question of  Propaganda
It  is  in  my  opinion  nonsense  to  write  of  this  whole   affair
as  a  propaganda  tragedy  for   the  United   States.    I  have  no
way   to  read  Moscow's  mind  but   I  think   I  can  read  Wash-
ington  s.   The   American  government   is  opposed   to  disarma-
ment.    It   is  committed  to   nuclear   arms.    It   aims   to   make
nuclear  weapons  "conventional."    The   interminable   disarma-
ment   talks   have   been   engaged    in   only   as   a   smoke-screen,
So  We  Do Intend  to  Spread Nuclear  Know-How
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  there  is  considerable  doubt  on  the
Hill  about  the  Administration's  proposal  to  share  nu-
clear   military   information  with   allied   governments.
The  chief   point  of   opposition   appears   to  be   a   fear
that   this   will   encourage   the   development   of   fourth
country  nuclear  powers.  Can  you  give  any   assurance
that  it  is  not  this  government's  intention  to  do  any-
thing  that  would  help  fourth nuclear powers  beginning
with  France?
A.  The  program  which   we  have,   which  permits  of
sharing  some  of  our  nuclear knowledge  with  our  allies,
is  not  designed  to,  nor  would it  be  used  primarily   [sic]
to,  expand  the  number  of  countries  which  have nuclear
weapons.   However,  the  idea  that  we  can  stop  expan-
sion  by  keeping  our information secret  is  illusory.  .  .  .
It  is  no  great  trick.   It  takes  some  money,  but  almost
anybody  who  has  enough  money  and  some  reasonably
educated  scientists  can  make  at  least   a  crude  atomic
or  nuclear  weapon,  and  the  crude  ones  are  the  worst.
...  I  believe  myself  that  a  program  which  enables  the
United  States  with  discrimination to  share  its  knowl-
edge  is  more  apt  to  keep  the  development of   nuclear
weapons  under  control.  .  .  .
—Dulles press  conference,  April  1.
just  as  we  will   go  to  the   summit   only  to  "prove"  to  our
Western   allies  that   no  agreement   with   the  Russians  is   pos-
sible  and  that  they  must   therefore   accept  missile  bases   and
nuclear  arms.   This  is  the  truth  and  this  is  why  Washington
looks  bad.   The  fault  lies  in  policy,  not  in  propaganda.
Washington  talks  of   Russian   insincerity,  but   its  real  fear
is   that   Moscow    may   really   be   sincere.    Washington    does
not  want  to  negotiate   because  it  fears  that   arms   agreement
is  possible.    The   real  attitude  of  the  Eisenhower  Administra-
tion   stands  revealed   in  the  pending   legislation   to   authorize
American  companies  to  sell  military  reactors,  fissionable  ma-
terials,   and   non-nuclear  components   of   nuclear   weapons   to
other   nations,   and   to   let   the   Defense    Department    share
hitherto  restricted  data  on  how  to  assemble  these  into   atomic
weapons.   We  aim  to  make  nuclear  armament  universal,   and
that  means  above  all  to  put  it  in  the  hands  of  the   Germans.
Many   Thanks  to  the  Many  Readers   Who  Have  Been  Distributing  Extra  Copies  of  Our  Recent  Nuclear  Issues
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please   renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .........................................................,..................._.......
Street      ........................................................................................
City     .......................................Zone............State..._...............
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
4/7/BS
(To)   Name   ................................................................................
Street     .........................................._............................................
City     .........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?       Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I    F.    Ktonfc'H   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub'
iMheil   I'vpry  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
\n   liuiep-ndent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$'.   :-j   HI   i  .  s.;   $H   In  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Burope;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED