I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958jun16.pdf

============================================================

Special   4-Page  Issue
Little  Use  in  A  Testing  Agreement  If  the  New  Atomic  "Give-Away"  Measure  Passes
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  23
JUNE  16,  1958
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Block  This  Bill  to  Stop  A  Nuclear  Arms  Race
Until  now  it  has  been  the  public  policy   of   the   United
States,   as  embodied  in   the   McMahon   Atomic  Energy  Act
of  1946,  not  to  help  other  nations  develop  the  means  of  pro-
ducing atomic weapons.  The  "atomic  give-away" amendments
now   reported  to  the   Congress  by  the  Joint   Committee  on
Atomic  Energy   (S   3912  and  HR   12716;  Sen.  Rpt.    1654;
Hse.   Rpt.   1849)    would  make   a  breach  with   this   policy.
Without  waiting  for  the  outcome  of  the  new  nuclear  testing
negotiations,  on which  rests  the  world's  hope,  the  new  Atomic
Energy   Act   revisions  would   begin   to  spread   nuclear  arms
technology  around  the  world.   Yet  no  minority  report  was
filed.   The  way  is  clear  for  passage  with  no  more  than  cur-
sory  debate  unless  enough  people  can  be  awakened  to   the
danger.
New  Spokesman Needed
Those  who  led  the  fight  within  the  Joint  Committee,  Con-
gressman  Chet  Holifield  of  California  and  Senator  Anderson
of  New  Mexico,  both  Democrats,  have  agreed  to  support  the
measure  in  return  for  certain  safeguards.    In  the  narrow  per-
spective  of  Capitol  Hill  and  existing  political  realities,   these
may   seem  a  substantial  victory,  especially  since  the   Demo-
crats  are  pretty  well  committed  to  the  wider  use  of   small
nuclear  weapons  and  to  the  delusive  idea  of  limited  nuclear
war.    But  from  a  wider  vantage  point,  the  revisions  seem  a
minor  price  the  Elsenhower  Administration  is  paying  to  get
the   first   Congressional   acceptance   of   the   basic   principle.
The  basic principle  is  that  we  must  help  our  two  score  allies
around  the  world  to  prepare  to  fight  a  nuclear  war.   This
principle   ought   not   to   be  accepted   and   embodied   in   law
without  full  discussion  of  what  it  implies  and  a  full  debate
in  Congress.
Unfortunately   the   fact   that   both   Senator   Anderson   and
Representative  Holifield  joined  in  the  unanimous  committee
report  will  make  other  liberal   members  hesitate.    Both   are
deservedly  respected.   Both  are  experts.   Both  have  been  mili-
tant   in   challenging   the   Atomic  Energy   Commission.    But
both  are  committed  to  support  the  legislation   in  return  for
changes  to  which  the  Administration  agreed   and  both  may
be  led  by  pride  in  their  accomplishment  and  the  momentum
of  debate  into  taking  a  more  favorable  attitude  toward   the
legislation  than  they  otherwise  would.   We  hope  there  may
be  enough   public   pressure  to  encourage   other   members  to
look   at  these  bills   with  a  fresh   eye,  and   to  speak   up  on
them  with  a  fresh  voice.
Two  safeguards   were   written   into   the   legislation.   One
is  that   any  executive   agreement   to   give   other   nations   re-
stricted  data  on  how  to  make  nuclear  weapons  must  be  sub-
mitted  to  Congress  and  referred  to  the  Joint  Committee  for
a  period  of  60  days.   Congress  can  veto  any  such  agreement
U. S. Policy  Only  A Year  Ago
"The    spectre  of   nuclear  war  is  at  present  held  at
arms   length  by   the   equilibrium   that   has  developed
between  the  atomic  forces  of  East  and  West.   If   the
possession   of   nuclear   weapons   spreads   much  beyond
the  U.  S.,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.,
this  equilibrium  will  be  upset.  If  a  fourth  country,  and
a  fifth,  and perhaps half  a  dozen  others,  should obtain
such  weapons,  the  control  problem   would  become  in-
finitely  more  complicated."
—Francis  O. Wilcox, Assistant  Secretary  of State  for
International     Organization     Affairs,      Boston,
Mass.,  May  18, 1957, quoted  by  Charles C.  Price
in  testifying    March  28  of  this  year  against  the
Atomic  Give-Away Bill  on  behalf   of  the  Friends
Committee  on  National  Legislation.
by  passing  a  concurrent  resolution  within  that  period.   Such
a  resolution  is  not  subject  to  Presidential  veto.   Thus  a  ma-
jority  of  both  Houses  may  veto  the  agreement  but  only  if
they  act  within  60  days.   This  is  a  very  short  time  to  digest
the  complex  details  of  an  international  agreement.   A  con-
current  resolution  may  easily   be  delayed  by  the   leadership
or  key  committee  chairmen  beyond  the  60-day  deadline.   It
will  be  much  easier  for   the  Administration to  put   over  an
agreement   within  this  60  day  provision   than   it  would   be
under  the  Act  as  it  stands  today.   Under  the   present   law,
an  agreement  to  give  restricted  weapons  data  would  require
a  separate  bill,  subject  to  committee  hearings,  and  full  legis-
lative  consideration.    The   Administration  did   not   get   the
blank   check  it  asked—it  wanted  to  give  the   President  un-
limited   discretion  in  making  such  nuclear  give-away  agree-
ments—but  it  certainly  wins  a  much  easier  procedure  than
the  existing   one.
What Does "Substantial Progress" Mean?
The   second   safeguard  won   by  Anderson  and   Holifield
was  the  addition  to  the  bill  of  a  phrase  providing  that  re-
stricted  data  on  how  to  make  nuclear  weapons  and   special
nuclear  material  for  that  purpose  cannot  be  transferred  to
any  other   nation  unless   "that   nation  has  made  substantial
progress  in  the  development  of   atomic  weapons."    This  is
the  exact  language  of  the  assurances  given  by Admiral Strauss
in  transmitting  this  proposed   legislation  last  January  27  to
the  Joint  Committee.   The  Joint  Committee  took  the  assur-
ances  out  of  his  letter  of  transmittal,  where  they had  no  legal
force,  and  put  them  into  the  bill  itself.   But  what  does  "sub-
stantial  progress"   mean?
The  Joint  Committee  report  (p.  12)  says  that  by the  term,
substantial   progress,   "it   is   intended   that   the   cooperating
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'g  Weekly,  June 18,19S8
"Substantial  Progress"  Vague Enough  to Give  the  Government  A  Free  Hand
(Continued   -from   Page  One)
nation  must  have  achieved  considerably  more  than  a  mere
theoretical  knowledge  of  atomic  weapons  design,  or  the  test-
ing  of  a  limited  number  of  atomic  weapons.   It  is  intended
that  the  cooperating  nation  must  have  achieved  a  capability
on  its  own  of  fabricating  a  variety  of  atomic  weapons,  and
constructed  and   operated   the   necessary   facilities,   including
weapons   research   and   development    laboratories,    weapon-
manufacturing  facilities,  a  weapon-testing  station,  and  trained
personnel  to  operate  each  of  these   facilities."
The Committee Is Deluding Itself
But  none  of  this  language  is  in  the  bill  itself,   and  it  is
only  the  language  of  the  law  which  will  be  binding.   The
Administration   would   not   go   beyond   the   vague   phrase,
"substantial  progress."   When   Holifield   asked  General  Star-
bird,  the  director  of  the  AECs  division  of  military  applica-
tions,  whether  the   AEC  would   accept   "operational   atomic
weapons  capability"  instead  of   "substantial   progress,"  Gen-
eral  Starbird  said  it  would  not.   When   pressed  he  gave  his
own  definition   of  what   "substantial   progress"  meant.    The
General  said,  "If   it  is  obvious  that  that  nation  is  about  to
enter  [italics  added]  that  field  [i.e.  of  nuclear  weapons  pro-
duction],  and  as  we  brought  out  if  it  intends  to  proceed  in
that  field  to  a  po\nt  where  there  would  be  a  substantial  con-
tribution  to  our  mutual  defense and  security,  only  under  those
conditions  could  it  be  done"  i.e.  furnishing  them  with  know-
how  and  nuclear  material.   To   read   "substantial   progress"
as  progress  to  the  point  where  a  country  is  "about  to  enter"
the  field  of  nuclear  production  is  so  different  from  the   "in-
tent"  spelled   out  in  the  committee   report   as  to  make  the
latter  ludicrous  in  its  eager  self-delusion.   Yet  what   counts
is  not  what the  Joint  Committee  "intends"  but  what  the  AEC
and  the  Defense  Department  intend.
The  point  which  perhaps  most  needs  to  be  stressed  is that
the   "substantial   progress"   clause   does   not   apply  to   other
types  of  transfers.   There  does  not  have  to  be  a  finding  of
"substantial   progress"    to   transfer    "non-nuclear    parts   of
atomic  weapons,"   "utilization  facilities  for  military   applica-
tions"  of   nuclear   energy,   or   "source,  byproduct  or  special
nuclear  material  for  research  on,  development  of,  production
of,  or  use  in  utilization  facilities  for  military   applications."
These  provisions  of   Section  91c  plus  certain  provisions  of
Secton   144,   particularly  the   transmission   of   restricted   date
on  "refining,  purification  and  treatment  of  source  material,"
constitute  what  Anderson  and  Holifield  earlier  characterized
Must  We  Make  Them  All Nuclear  Powers?
"There   is   today   understandable   resistance   on   the
part  of  other  free  world  countries  to  an  international
agreement  which  would  have  the  effect,  if  not  the  pur-
pose,  of  perpetuating  for  all  time  their  present  nuclear
weapons    inferiority,    without    the   mitigation   which
would  be  made  possible  by  these  amendments."
—Secretary   Dulles,  testifying     for   the  atomic  give-
away  bill,  April  17.
as  a  "make  it  yourself  kit"   for   nuclear  warfare.    Without
"substantial   progress"   any  one  of   our   40   odd   allies  may
obtain   restricted   data   on   how   to   make   the   basic   "bomb
stuff"  of  uranium  and  plutonium  and  the  "non-nuclear   parts
of  atomic  weapons."    With   this  they  can  make   "substantial
progress"  more  quickly  and  qualify  for  restricted   data.
Indeed  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  with  the  non-
nuclear  parts  and  the  fissionable  raw  material,  other   nations
can  make  nuclear  weapons  on  their  own  without  too  much
difficulty.    At  the  public  hearings,  when  this  question  was
put  to  AEC  Commissioner  Harold   Vance,  he  said   "In  my
opinion  it  would  be  very   difficult   for  a  nation  without   an
atomic  weapons  capability  to  make  a  reliable  [italics  added]
nuclear  weapon  from  a  non-nuclear  component  without  in-
formation  concerning  the  design  of  the  nuclear   component."
The Secret Admissions of  Strauss
This  admits  that  an  "unreliable"  nuclear  weapon  could  be
made  without  too  much  difficulty  under  these  circumstances
and  it  abo  admits  that  it  would  be possible  to  make a  reliable
nuclear   weapon   with  fissionable  material   and   non-nuclear
components.    But   Strauss   himself   went   much   beyond  this
in   the   private   letter   he   wrote   Deputy   Defense   Secretary
Quarles  last  December  12  opposing  this  proposed   legislation.
That  letter  fell  into  the  hands  of  Senator   Anderson.   The
text  from  which  we  quote  was  published  in  the  Washington
Post  March  29  the  day  after   Senator   Anderson  confronted
Strauss  with  it  at  the  public  hearings.
"When   the  weapons  concerned  —  weapons  less   nuclear
components  —  are  transferred  to  another   power,"   Strauss
wrote  Quarles,   "that   power  could  duplicate  these   weapons
even  though  it  had  no  prior  nuclear  weapons  capability  of
its  own.   More  importantly,  having  secured  from  its  own  or
other  sources  a  limited  amount  of  nuclear  material,  it  could
design  and  construct  without  too  great  scientific   difficulty   a
usable  nuclear  component.   It   is  entirely  possible   therefore
Kennan  Warns  This  Would  Freeze
"There  is  a  further  danger,  and  a  very  imminent  one
as  things  now stand;  and this  is  that  atomic  weapons  stra-
tegic  or  tactical  or  both  may  be  placed  in  the  arsenals  of
our  continental  allies.
"I  cannot  overemphasize  the  fatefulness  of  such  a  step.
I  do not  see  how it  could  fail  to  produce  a  serious  increase
in  the  existing  military  tension  in  Europe.   It   would   be
bound  to  raise  a  grave  problem  for  the  Russians  in  respect
of  their  own  military  dispositions  and  their  relations  with
other  Warsaw  Pact  countries.   Moscow  is  not  going  to  be
inclined  to  entrust  its  satellites  with  full  control  over  such
weapons.
Russia   in  Central   and  East  Europe
"If,   therefore,  the  Western  continental  countries  are  to
be  armed  with  them,  any  Russian  withdrawal   from  Central
and  Eastern  Europe  may  become  unthinkable  for  once  and
for  all,  for  reasons  of  sheer  military   prudence,  regardless
of  what  the  major  Western  powers might  be  prepared  to  do.
"In  addition,  it  is  perfectly  obvious  that  the  larger  the
number  of  hands  into  which  the  control  over  atomic  weap-
ons  is  placed,  the  smaller  will  be  the  possibility  for  their
eventual   exclusion  from  national  arsenals  by  international
agreement."
—George  F.  Kennan,  Harper's   Magazine,  Feb.   19S8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, June  16,19S8
A  Simple  Resolution  Enough  to  Permit  Nuclear  Exchanges  With  Britain
to  visualize  that  such  nation  could  achieve  a  nuclear  capa-
bility  under   its  own   complete   control   when  it   would   not
otherwise  possess  such   capability."
The Text  Leaked,  Anyway
Strauss  would  not  permit  the  non-secret  portions  of   this
letter  to  be  declassified  so  they  do  not  appear  in  the  hear-
ings.    But   someone   gave   the   non-secret   portions   to   the
Washington   Post  and  we  hope   some  Senator  or   Congress-
man  will  read  the  text  into  the  Congressional  Record  during
the  debate.   For  here  we  have
x
Admiral  Strauss  himself  ob-
jecting  that  another  nation  could  make  its  own  nuclear  weap-
ons  with  information  and  non-nuclear  components  available
under  provisions  of  the  pending  legislation   which  are  not
subject  to  the  "substantial   progress"   clause.
Against   this   background   one  reads  with   anxiety  another
of  the  wishful  statements  of  "intent"  in  the  Joint  Committee
report.   In  discussing  the  clause  which  allows  the  President
to  transfer  "non-nuclear  parts  of-atomic  weapons,"   the  Joint
Committee   adds   "It   is   understood   that   non-nuclear   parts
of  thermonuclear  weapons  are  not  to  be  transferred  in  the
foreseeable   future,   but   only   non-nuclear   parts   of   fission
weapons."    It  is  appalling  to  realize  from  this  that  non-nu-
clear   components   of   H-bombs   may  also  be  transferred   by
the   President   without   a  finding  of   "substantial   progress."
The   Committee   "understands"   that   H-bomb   parts   are  not
to   be  transferred  within   "the   foreseeable   future"   but   no
safeguard  is  written   into  the  Act  to  keep  H-bomb  parts  at
least  out  of  the  hands  of  our  many  allies,  some  of  them—
like  Chiang  Kai-shek  and  Syngman  Rhee—highly  unreliable.
Sixty Days Too Little
Of  course,  there  will  have  to  be  specific  agreements  under
this  bill  and  the  agreements  will  have  to  come  before  the
Joint  Committee.   The  issues  can  be  argued  then.   But  will
they   be?    It   is  six  months   since  this   legislation   was   sub-
mitted  to  Congress.   Yet  few  members  and  an  even  smaller
proportion   of   the   general   public   are  aware  of   the   issues.
How  arouse  them  in  60  days?  What  happens  if  an  agree-
ment   is  dropped   into   the   hopper   within   two   months  of
adjournment  when  there  is  the  usual  logjam   of  legislation
and  members  are  eager  to  flee  the  heat  of  Washington   for
home?  Will  it  not  seem  that  the  general  principle  has  been
established   of   sharing   nuclear   know-how  with  our   allies?
Will  it  not  seem  futile  to  debate  specific  applications?   The
more  countries  which  enter  the  nuclear  club,  the  harder  it
will  be  to  keep  others  out.   In  the  context  of  this  bill,  nego-
tiations  to  end  testing  would  no  longer  be  a  first  step  toward
a  broader agreement to  outlaw  nuclear  war  altogether.   Under
this  bill—without  testing—other  nations  can  become  nuclear
•powers.  The  horse  is  being  stolen  before  our  very  eyes  while
What  A  "Mistake" Might Do
"Government   agencies   have  estimated  that   during
the  first  few  days  of  any  World  War  III,  more  than
half  the  population  of  the  United  States  may  expect
to  be  killed  or maimed..  .  .  The more people  that  have
access  to atomic secrets,  the less  the control. .  . .  This
amendment   will  increase  the  possibility   of  mistakes.
.  .  .  We  saw  one  human  error  when  an  atomic  bomb
dropped  on  Florence,  South Carolina recently.   We  saw
another  when a  B-47 accidentally  dropped live  cannon
shells  on  three  homes  in  Sheboygan,  Wisconsin.  .  .  .
Think  of  the  risks  that  will  be  multiplied when,  if  the
amendment  should  pass,  other  nations   are  given  nu-
clear  materials  and  weapon  production  information."
—Mrs.  Josephine   Pomerance,  testifying    against   the
Nuclear  Give Away  Bill  on  behalf   of  the  Women's
International  League  for  Peace  and  Freedom,
laborious  talks  on  how  to  lock  the  barn  door  are  just  begin-
ning.
Easier Way to Exchange With Britain
The   Administration  has  spread   the   impression   that   this
legislation  is  required  to  provide  for  an  exchange  with  Great
Britain,  which  is  already  a  thermonuclear  power  and  to  im-
prove  the  defensive  capacity  of  NATO,  not  to  encourage  the
emergence  of  a  nuclear  "fourth  power."   But  an   exchange
with  Britain  may  be  authorized   by  a  simple   Congressional
resolution   without   opening   the   Pandora's   box  of   a   wider
nuclear  arms  race.   The  nuclear  defenses  of  NATO  may  be
strengthened  under  the   1954   Atomic  Energy  Act   revisions
which  permitted  the  President  to  transfer  restricted   data   to
our  allies  for  "(l)  the  development  of  defense  plans,   (2)
the  training  of  personnel  in  the  employment  of  and  defense
against  atomic  weapons  and  (3)   the  evaluation  of  the  capa-
bilities   of  potential   enemies  in   the   employment   of   atomic
weapons."   But  that  is  subject  to  the  provision  that  "no  such
cooperation  shall  involve  communication  of  Restricted   Data
relating   to   the   design   or   fabrication  of   atomic  weapons."
This  restriction  would  be  deleted  by the  pending  bill.  With-
out  this  restriction  we  will  be  doing   exactly  what  the  Ad-
ministration  has  claimed  it  did  not  "intend"  to  do,  and  that
is   encourage   the   emergence   of   "fourth,"   "fifth,"   "sixth"
and  ultimately  many  more  nuclear  powers  among  our  allies.
A  Defeatist View
An  answer  by  AEC  Commissioner  Harold   Vance   reveals
the  truth.   The  basic  assumption  behind  this  bill  is  that   dis-
armament  talks  have  finally  failed  and  there  is  no   alterna-
tive  but  to  proceed  with  the  nuclear  armament  of  our  allies.
The  colloquy that  tells  all  was this:
SENATOR   PASTORE.   What   effect   will  these   recommen-
(Cont'mued   on  Page  Four)
Help  Defeat  This  Bill  by  Circulating  Extra  Copies  of  This  Issue
If   you  send  stamped   self-addressed   envelopes,   we   will
mail  copies free.  Reprints in  bulk available  at  5  cents  each
postpaid  up  to  100 copies.  Orders  in  lots  of  100  at  3  cents
or  in  lots  of  1,000  at  2  cents  each.   Much  can  be  accom-
plished  even  now  if  every  reader  does  something.
Everyone  can  help  defeat   this  bill,  or  at  least  force  a
public  debate  in  Congress,  by  mailing  extra  copies  of  this
issue  to  his  or  her  editor,  pastor,  Congressman  or  Senator,
and   by   providing   for    the   widest   possible   distribution
through  interested  organizations.
9  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone't  Weekly, June  16,18S8
How  The  Smaller  Powers  Would  Be  Forced   Into  The  Nuclear  Arms  Race
This  Bill  Would  Fatally  Undermine  the  "Atoms  for  Peace" Program
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
dations   [i.e.   these  proposed   amendments  of   the   Atomic
Energy  Act]  have  upon  our  disarmament  negotiations?
COMMISSIONER   VANCE.   No   agreement   has   been   pos-
sible  with   the   Soviet   Union  regarding  the   disarmament
negotiations   and   therefore    [emphasis   added]   the   U.   S.
must  take  the  necessary  steps  among  which  are  the  amend-
ments  to  this  act.   The  amendments  we  now  have  under
discussion  will  serve  to  maintain  the  strength  of  our  allies.
This  is  an  honest  answer.   It  admits  that  the  initiation  of
nuclear  armament  for   our  allies   is  predicated  on  the  view
that  there  is  no  alternative  to  a  wider  arms  race.   No  other
Administration  spokemen  was  honest  enough  to  admit  this.
But  disarmament  is  not  yet  hopeless.   New   agreements   are
possible,  first  on  testing.   Should  we  not  wait  before  author-
izing  the  steps  envisaged  in  this  bill?
For  Once, An Honest  Answer
Rep.  Holifield.  The  President,  in  his atoms  for  peace
speech,   said   The   United  States   knows  that   if   the
fearful   trend  of  atomic  military  build-up  can  be  re-
versed,  this  greatest  of  destructive  forces  can  be  de-
veloped  into  a  great  boon  for  the  benefit  of  all  man-
kind.'   My question  is,  in  passing  this  legislation,  are
we  reversing   the   atomic  military   build-up T
Mr.   [C.  Burke]   Elbrick   [Ass't  Secretary  of  State
for  European  Affairs].   I  would  say  No,  Mr.  Holifield.
—Hearings  on  the  Atomic  Give-Away  Bill.
A Premium for the  Warlike
This  bill  runs  squarely  athwart  the  purposes  of  our  inter-
national   "atoms   for   peace"   organization.    Here   we   have
joined  with  the  U.  S.  S.  IL  in  a  world  agency  to  encourage
development  of  atomic  energy  for  peacetime  uses  in  a  world
largely  poverty-stricken.  We  have  set  up  the  first  working
system  of  world  inspection  to  prevent  the  diversion  of  fis-
sionable  materials  from  atom  power  plants  to  military  uses.
Yet  now,  before  this  world  plan   gets  a  chance  to  benefit
mankind,  Congress  is  asked  to  authorize  a  contradictory  pro-
gram.   The  pending  amendments to  the  Atomic  Energy  Act
would   offer   advantages  to  countries  which   divert   their   re-
search  to-warlike  purposes:  the  sooner  they  can  show   "sub-
stantial  progress"  toward   weapons   manufacture,   the  sooner
they   can  qualify   for   nuclear  weapons  restricted   data   from
the  U.  S.
Few  nations will  be  able  to  afford  the  risk  of   concentrat-
ing  on  peaceful   uses  only.   In  the  divided  nations—Korea,
Vietnam,   Germany  —   each  side  will   be   pressing   its   Big
Brother,  the  U.  S. or  the  U.  S.  S. R.,  for  nuclear  arms  against
its  other  half.   Each  of  the  smaller   nations   must  begin   to
worry  lest  its  main  rival  achieve  nuclear  arms  capability  be-
fore  it  does:  India  and  Pakistan  must  enter  the  race  in  fear
of   each  other;  so  with  Israel  and  Egypt.   Everywhere  there
is  rivalry,  it  will   assume  a  nuclear   arms  form,   immensely
increasing  the  danger  that  accident  or  Lilliputian  feud  will
drag   the   whole   planet   into   the  final  thermonuclear   catas-
trophe.
How  to  Block  Passage
The  only  hope  of  blocking  this  bill  is  for  someone  to  offer
a  simple  resolution  authorizing  an  exchange  of  nuclear   in-
formation  with  Great  Britain  as  a  stopgap  measure  until  we
see  how  the  new  testing   negotiations   turn   out.    We   urge
readers  to  write  their  representatives,  and  particularly  to  urge
Senators   Morse,   Humphrey   and   Russell   to   stand   up   and
fight  along   these   lines   against   this  bill.    Secretary  Dulles
sees  it  as  a  form  of  pressure  against  the  U.  S.  S.  R.   But  it
is  a  two-edged   sword.   Once  the  nuclear   information   and
non-nuclear  components   are  passed  out,  we .give  our   allies
weapons  that  can  be  used  against  us,  too,  either  as  blackmail
or  in  a  switch  of  sides.  Both  great  powers  have  a  common
interest  in  preventing  the  spread  of  these  terrible  new  mili-
tary  tools  to  the  smaller  nations.
If   This  Is  The  First  Time  You  Have  Seen  the  Weekly,  V»e the  Blank  Below  to Subscribe
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ..........
City     ............
Enter  gift  sub
Street    ..........
City     ............
Shall  we  senc
Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
...........................Zone............State...................
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
e/io/86
...........................Zone............State................._
gift  announcement?   Yes  D   No  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  tbe  Act  of  March  8,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  ezcept  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and   edited  by  I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
$5  In  th   U.  S.;   *6  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  115  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Aala  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED