I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1958
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1958apr21.pdf

============================================================

Why  Dulles Really  Fears  the Summit, P. 2
Ike  Embarrassed:  The  Truth  About  Those  "Clean"  Bombs  Slowly  Begins to  Leak Out, Sec Page  2
/. F. Stone's Weekly
VOL.   VI,   NO.    1(5
APRIL  21,  1058       <*iS3$3"'
0
'       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Police  State  Implications  of  the  Passport  Cases
The   right  to  travel  abroad  was  argued  before   tlte  U.  S.
Supreme  Court  for  the   first  time  last  week.   Three   passport
applicants  were  heard:  the  famous  artist  Rockwell  Kent,  the
psychiatrist  Dr.  Walter  Briehl  and  a  physicist,  Weldon  Bruce
Dayton.   Kent  and  Dr.   Briehl  were  denied  passports  by  the
State  Department  after   they   refused   to  sign  a  non-Commu-
nist  affidavit.   Dayton  was  denied  a  passport  even  though  he
did   sign  such  an   affidavit.
The  cases  involve  two  questions.   One  is whether  the  State
Department  can  refuse  passports on  political  grounds  because
it   is  suspicious   of   a  man's  associations  and   opinions.    The
other,  which  turns  up  strongly  in  the  Dayton  case,  is whether
the  denial  of   a  passport  can  be  based  on   faceless   informer
evidence   which   is  not   disclosed  to  the  applicant.  Thus   the
right  to  fair  trial  as  well  as  the  right  to  travel  is  at  stake.
Not Just a Matter of Tourism
The   right  to  travel  is  more  than  a  question   of  tourism.
Dayton  has  been  trying  to  go  abroad  in  order  to  take  a  job
in   cosmic  ray   physics   at   the   Tata   Institute  in   India.    The
denial   of   the   passport  is  not   only   costing   him   his   job   in
India  but  the  web  of  suspicion  woven  around  him  has  made
it  impossible  for   him   to  find  work  as  a  physicist  at  home.
Dr.  Briehl  was  refused   a  passport  to  attend  a psychoanalytic
conference   in  Geneva.    This   affects   his  professional   reputa-
tion.   Much  of  Kent's  best  work  as  a  writer  and   artist  has
been  based  on   travel  to  out-of-the-way  places;   for   the   last
seven  years  he  has  been  refused  permission  to  travel  abroad.
Similarly  William  Worthy's  pending  passport  suit  and  Anna
Louise   Strong's,  newly  filed  action   involve  their  careers  as
foreign   correspondents.   Thus  the  State  Department's  power
may  affect   the  right  to  practice  one's  profession.
The   passport  power  also  casts  a  shadow   across  the  First
Amendment.   The   allegations  against  Kent   and  Dr.  Briehl
involve  no  charge  of  any  crime  but  are  based  upon  their  asso-
ciations   and   opinions.    In   explaining   why   a   passport   was
refused  Kent,  the  Department  alleged  that  his  "prolific  writ-
ings"    showed   his   "sympathetic   support    for   the   Soviet."
Among  the  more  concrete  allegations  was  the  signing  of  a
petition  urging  a  ban  on  the  atomic  bomb.   Dr.   Briehl  was
alleged  among  other  things  to  have  been  a  member  of  the
St.   Louis  Bookshop   Association,   written   articles   (in     1936
and   1941)   for  "Social   Work   Today"  and  been  "a   contact"
—whatever  that  means—of   the  Los  Angeles   Committee   for
the   Protection  of   the  Foreign   Born.    Such  allegations   serve
notice  .on  other  Americans  that  if  they  exercise  their  rights  in
ways  of  which  the  government   does  not  approve,  it  may  cost
them  their  right  to  travel.   In  this  way  the  State   Department
5 *
The Essential  Issues
"The  Secretary   [of  State]  proposes  to  continue  re-
stricting   the   personal   liberty   of   a   citizen   because
statements  by  informants whom  the  Secretary  does  not
identify  have  led  him  to  think  that  if  the  citizen  goes
abroad  he  will  do  something,  the  nature  of  which   the
Secretary  does not  suggest,  which  the  Secretary  thinks,
for  reasons  known  only  to  him,  he  conceives  to  be  the
'national  interest.'  . .  . May the government  deprive  a
citizen   of   his   constitutional   right   to  bo  abroad    (1.)
without  a  jury  trial,  (2)  without a  definite  standard  of
guilt,   (3)   without   sworn  testimony,   and   (4)   without
an  opportunity to  confront  his  accusers  or  know  their
identity?    May  it  deprive  him  of  this  liberty  because
of   the   way   he   has   exercised   his  First  Amendment
rights  of  free  speech,  press  and  assembly?"
—Chief    Judge    Edg(  rton,   dissenting    in   Briehl    v.
Oidles, Court  of  Appeals   (D.  of   C.)
6  5
restricts  at  home  the  fundamental   freedoms  about  which   it
is  so  eloquent  abroad.
II
The  excuse  for  these  restrictions on  the  right  to  travel  is
that  the  right  has  been  abused.   The  government   charges   in
the  Kent  and  Briehl  brief  that  American passports  have  been
utilized  by  some  Communists  in  past  years  to  carry  on  espion-
age  and  revolutionary  activities  abroad.   But  this  problem  is
in  no  way  different   from  that  arising  in  other   areas  of   the
criminal   law.   Passports  have  also   been   utilized   for   smug-
gling,  for  the  import  of  narcotics,  and  for  many  other   forms
of   illegality.   Those   who   misuse  them   should   be   punished
when  their  crime  is  proven,  and   the  government    itself—in
recalling  the  Browder  and  Warszower  passport  convictions—
serves  to  remind  us  that  Communists have  been  sent  to  prison
for  passport  frauds.   But  to  refuse  people  the  right  to  travel
because  they  might  commit  a  crime  is  to  make  a  fundamental
break  with  free  traditions.
When   a   crime   has   been   committed   or   attempted,   it   is
susceptible  of   proof.   Tangible   evidence   may  be   presented
in  a  court  of  law.   But  how  do  you  prove  that  a  man   might
commit  a  crime?   This  is  the  specialty  of  police  states,  Fascist
or   Communist,   which   practice  "preventive  detention."    No
doubt  the  government  could  cut  down  on  any  number  of  seri-
ous  crimes  if  it  could   ignore  constitutional   guarantees,  raid
people's  homes  at  night  without  a  warrant  and  lock  up  large
numbers  of  persons  whose  associations  they   suspect.
Constitutions  and   bills  of  right   are  always  an   inconveni-
ence  to  the  police.   They  originate  however   in  bitter   experi-
ence.    Arrests  on   suspicion,   "class   justice,"   secret    evidence
and   star  chamber  proceedings  are  a  story  as  old  as  Nero's
{Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'8  Weekly,  April  21, 1958
What  Dulles  Is  Really  Afraid  of  In  A  Summit  Conference
The  real  question,  which  foreign  diplomats  put  in  private,
is  why  the  U.  S.  does  not  go  through  the  motions  of  a  sum-
mit  conference.   There  is  little  prospect   of   agreement,   and
there  are  always  ways  of  preventing  an  agreement   even  if
the  Russians  should  give  in—as  they  have  many  times—on
questions  of  substance.    Once  the  summit  conference   faib,
heads  of  the  NATO  States  could  tell  their  people,  "See,  we
have  tried  but  failed.  Now  there  is  no  other  course  left  open
but  accepting  missile  bases  and  nuclear  arms."
The  answer,  as  it  is  given  in  private,  is  that  Mr.  Dulles
fears  the  Russians  will  not  let  the  conference  come  to  any
Ike  and  Dulles  Now  Admit
The  longer  that  public  clamor  here  and  abroad  continues,
the  clearer  it  becomes  that  the  real  issue  is  not  testing  or  in-
spection  but  simply  that  our  vast  military  machine  is  deter-
mined  to  go  on  ad  infinitnm  developing  all  the  possibilities
of  nuclear warfare.
In  this  respect  Senator  Humphrey  has  performed  a  major
public  service  of  which  few  will  be  aware.   He  has  smoked
out  the  Administration.  The  Stassen  "task  force"  studies  on
the  possibility  of  inspecting  a  cessation  of  tests  and  a  cessa-
tion   of   nuclear   production  have   been   kept   secret   but   the
Humphrey  subcommittee  is  getting  much  the  same  informa-
tion  by  subpoenaelng  officials   who  worked  on  these  studies.
Hence  the  changed  tone  of  the  President  and  of  the  Sec-
retary  of  State.   Both  now  grudgingly  admit  that  inspection
is  possible,  and  have  shifted  their  grounds.   Now  the  excuse
for   continued  tests   (as   in  the   Dulles   press  conference  of
April  8  and  Ike's  of  April  9)   is  that  we  cannot  stop  them
until—as  the  President  said—the  scientists  tell  him   "whether
they  had  largely  or  almost  completely  found  out  things  they
such  clear  ending,  that  they  will  open  the  doors  to  further
negotiation,   that  committees   to  study  knotty  problems  may
be  set  up,  and  that  the  net  effect  will  be  (1)   to  keep  hope
of  agreement  alive  and  therefore  (2)   to  block  the  nuclear
armament  of  West  Europe,  particularly Germany,  while  nego-
tiations  with  Moscow  go  on.
Such  a  denouement  could   be  avoided,   of   course,   if   the
British  were  prepared  to  be  as  brusque  as  Mr.  Dulles.   But
they  are  not.   For  Britain,  unlike  the  U.  S.,  is  too  poor  for
a  guns-and-butter  economy;  it  fears  the  arms  race  will  wreck
its  postwar  recovery;  and  it  fears  a  resurgent  Germany.
That  Inspection  Is  Possible
wanted  to  know."
That  point  is  still  a  long  way  off.  Mr.  Dulles  was  asked
the  day  before  whether  it  was  hoped   that  we  might  learn
enough  from  our  forthcoming  series of  tests  so  that  we  could
without   risk   suspend   further   tests   when   they   were   over.
Mr.  Dulles  replied  "there  is  a  likelihood  that  there  will  be
a  need  for  some  further  testing  in  some  of  the  areas  which
probably  will  not  be  fully  explored."
This  is  flim-flam.  Is  there  ever  a  point  in  any  technology
where  new  problems  will  not  beckon  further  study,  experi-
ment  and  improvement?   AEC  Commissioner  Libby was  more
candid  when  he  told  the  Humphrey  subcommittee  in  execu-
tive  session  March  6  he  was  against  an  end  of  testing  even
if   we  could   get  a  foolproof   agreement   with  the. Russians
because  "if  you  stop  testing,  you  are  stuck  with  .  .  .  the
present  arsenal  and  that  is  just  about  it."   As  General  Twin-
ing,  chairman  of   the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   told   the   U.   S.
News  & World  Report  (April  18),  "Only  by continuous  test-
ing  can  the  versatility  of  our  atomic  weapons  be   increased."
The  Full  Truth  About  the  Clean  Bomb  Is  Also  Coming  Out
The  Humphrey  subcommittee  is  also  smoking  out  the  full
truth  about  the  so-called  clean  bomb.   When  the   President
on  April  9  was  asked  about  the  proposal   by  Senator   Case
of  New  Jersey to  test  "only  clean  defensive nuclear  weapons"
in  the  future,  he  replied  that  "in  all  honesty"  we  "call  them
clean  weapons"  but  there  is  still  "a  percentage  of  what  you
would  call  a  dirty  residual  .  .  .  so  I  don't  think  you  could
just  start off by saying, 'y°
u can test  on
ty  clean  weapons'."
The  meaning  of  this  obscure  reply  becomes  clearer  if  one
looks  at  the  executive  session  testimony  given  the  Humphrey
subcommittee  on  March  12  by  Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  D.   Star-
bird,   the   AEC's  director   of   military  application,   and   re-
leased  here  April  14  in  a  highly  censored  form.
That  testimony shows  that  if  the  President  had  been  really
frank  he  would  have  said  we  could  not  limit  testing  to  clean
weapons  because we  don't  have  any.  The  General  said  flatly,
"We  have  no  clean  tactical  weapons."    Apparently  we  have
succeeded  only  in  "cleaning  up"  the  big  ones.   He  also  ad-
mitted  that  while  he  talked  of  clean  weapons,  "I  should  em-
phasize  that  as  of  now  we  see  no  way  of  making  a  weapon
completely  clean."   This  throws  new  light  on  Teller's  claim
that  if  only  testing  were  continued  a  few  years  longer   we
could  have  clean  nuclear  weapons.
The  General  went  on  to  say  "Yet  it  appears  entirely  pos-
sible  to  reduce  the  area  of  fatal  radioactivity  to  approximate
the  area  of  fatal  blast  and  burn.   In  other  words,  to  pull  it
down  so  the  radioactivity  has  the  same  basic  area  of  fatal
hazard   as  you  would   have   from   that   size  of   weapon   for
burn  or  blast.   [Deleted]."
Even  without  knowing  what  further  admissions  were  de-
leted  by  the  censor,  it  is  obvious  that  despite  all  the  recent
talk  about  a  clean  bomb  (which  deceived  even  a  Republican
Senator  like  Case  who  is  close  to  the  President),   we  must
be  a  long  way  from  it  if  the  best  Gen.  Starbird  can  say  is
that  "//  appears  entirely  possible"  to  limit  the  area  of  "fatal"
fallout  to  the  area  of  burn  and  blast.
Would   there  still  be  some  less-than-fatal   fallout   outside
this  area?  The  censored  transcript  gives  no  clue.   But  even
limiting   "fatal'   fallout   "to   approximate   the   area   of   fatal
blast  and  burn"  would  still  leave  it  covering  quite  an  area.
For  if  one  looks  at  page  504  of  the  AEC's  "The   Effects  of
Nuclear  Weapons"  one  will  see  just  how  large  the  area  of
blast  and  burn  may  be.   "Even  bombs  of  20-kiloton  energy
yield,"  such  as  were  exploded   over  Japan,  this  basic  report
says,  "can  cause  devastation  over  an  area  of  several  square
miles.   With   weapons  in  the  megaton   range,   the  damaged
area  may cover  a hundred  or  more  square miles."   So even  the
"clean"  bomb  would  still  have  a  lot  of  dirty  radioactivity.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  21,  1958
HST  Critical  of  Ike  on  All  Else  but  Opposition  to  Ending  the  Arms  Race
Is  Truman's  "Healthy" Jobless  Margin  (1950)  Now  the  GOFs  Real  Goal?
"A    HEALTHY  THING  TO  HAVE   SOME    UNEMPLOYMENT"
—the  Truman  remark  to  Arthur  Krock  of  February,  1950,
during  the  pre-Korean  war  recession,  accurately  reflects  what
many   well-informed   correspondents  here  believe   (but   dare
not  write)  is  the  real  Republican  big  business  attitude  to  the
current  slump.   The  only  logical  framework  for  Administra-
tion  inaction  is  a  belief  that  now  is  the  time  to  shake  down
the  labor  movement,  drain  its  swollen  treasuries  and  stop  the
upward   trend  of   wages.   The   Treasury  and   the  Texas   oli-
garchs  in  both  parties  believe  "a   readjustment"  is  overdue.
Economic  stimulants  by  tax  cuts  and  pump  priming   might
mean  a  return  to  full   employment.   Without  that   "healthy
margin"  of   joblessness,  labor  has  the  upper  hand  in  wage
bargaining.   It  should   be  kept   in  mind  that  while   smaller
businesses  thrive  only  on  the  upward  swings  of  the  business
cycle,   the   top   brackets  can   benefit   by  deflation,   absorbing
hard-hit   smaller   competitors   and   buying  up   properties   at
distress   prices.
ON  ONE  SUBJECT  TRUMAN  BACKS IKE, as  Acheson  backs
Dulles   and   that   is  opposition   to   a   summit   meeting   and
relaxation   of   world   tension.    His   first   instinct   is  still,  as
shown   by   his   testimony  before   House   Banking   and   Cur-
rency,  to  reach  for  bigger  arms  orders  as  the  main  prop  of
an  inflationary  economy.   His  largest  spending  recommenda-
tion  was  for  a  $3  billion  increase  in  arms  expenditure   over
Ike's   budget   in  the  fiscal  year   beginning   July   1  and   an
additional  rise  of   500  millions  a  year  every  year  thereafter
until   1964.    Perpetual   inflation   through   perpetual   tension
and  an  endless  arms  race  is  still  the  easy  way  to  have  full
employment   without   the   need   for   hard   thinking   or   hard
battling  with  prime  economic  problems.
THE   REPUBLICANS,  THE   RICH   MAN'S   PARTY,   is  for   de-
flation;   the   Democrats,   the  poor  man's   party,  is  for   infla-
tion.   This  rough  generalization   adequately  sums  up  the  con-
trasting  real  attitudes.   Planning  is  anathema  to  both;   "free
enterprise"   is  a  sacred  bi-partisan  shibboleth.   The  need   for
Invitation to Washington Readers
Readers  in  the  Washington  area  are  invited to  hear
I.  F.  Stone  speak  on  "Peace  in  the  Missile  Age:  The
Final  Challenge to  Social  Science"  at  the  closing  ses-
sion  of  the  Annual'Spring  Conference  at  Howard  Uni-
versity,  Friday^  April  25  at  8  p.  m.  in  the  Auditorium
(Engineering    and   Architecture),    2400   block    Sixth
Street,  N.  W.    No  admission  charge.
Readers  are ialso  invited  to  hear  a  "Report  from  the
South"  Sunday  afternoon,  April  27,  2:30  to  5  p.  m.,
in   the   Asbury;  Methodist  Church,  llth  and  K  Sta,
N.   W.    Aubrey  Williams   and   speakers   from   seven
Southern  States  will  report   on  the  Negro's  fight  for
voting  rights.    The  Southern  Conference   Educational
Fund  is  the  sponsor.  No  admission  charge.
more  fundamental  measures  is  indicated  by  the  situation  in
our   basic  industrial  material  —   steel.    Steel   production   in
March  was  41  percent  below  last  year  but  Tom   Campbell,
editor  of  the  authoritative  Iron  Age,  predicts  an  increase  in
steel  prices  of  $5  to  $7  a  ton  on  July  1—to  "recover"   an
expected  two  to  four  cents  an  hour  cost-of-living  adjustment
in   steel   wages.
LOWER  STEEL  PRICES could  help  recovery  in  a  wide  range
of   industry  from  housing  to   consumer  durables,   including
autos.   But  how  stop  a  slump  when  steel  prices  rise  while
business  activity  declines?   Steel  plants  shut  down,  prepar-
ing  to  "sit  it  out"  until  order  backlogs  rise.   The  steel  com-
bine  prefers  to  exact  a  higher  toll  on  a  dwindling  volume
of   activity  rather   than   encourage   recovery   by   responding
to  supply-and-demand  with  lower  prices.  Not  the  free market
but  steel  company  fiat  determines  steel  prices.   Steel  governs
the  market,  instead  of   the  market  governing   steel.    But  if
prices  so  important  to  recovery  are  to  be  fixed  by  a  form  of
"government,"  shouldn't   it  be  the  U.  S.  rather  than  U.  S.
Steel?   The  Democrats  are  as  frightened   of   such   questions
as  the  Republicans.
On  and  Off the  Ticker  Tape  from  the  Capitol  and  Round  the  World
PLUS   CA  CHANGE:   Krushchev   in   an   interview  with   the
Paris  Figaro   (April  9)   on  the  Jewish  question   in  Russia—
it  seems  to  have  one  again—criticized  the  Jews  as  "too  indi-
vidualistic."   To  anti-Semites  in  the  capitalist  world  Jews  have
always  been  "too  communistic."   Krushchev's  vulgar   generali-
zations,  in  a  country  where  Jews  played  a  major  part  in  both
the  reformist  and  revolutionary  wings  of  the  Marxist  move-
ment,  are  an  appalling  testimonial  to  the  failure  of  the  Bol-
shevik  revolution   in  40  years  to  wipe  out  racial   prejudices
even  in the  thinking  of  its top  leadership.  .  . .
SCHOLARSHIP?    In  the  uproar   over  "SPX,"  the   crackpot
attack  on  the  Supreme  Court,  the  important  point   overlooked
is  the  light   this  incident  throws  on  the  mentality  of   Jules
G.   Sourwine,  chief   counsel  of   the   Senate  Internal   Security
subcommittee.   He  described  it  as  a  "work  of  some  scholar-
ship"  and   is  responsible   for  printing   the   attack   separately
so  it  could   be  circulated   as  a  Senate   document   instead   of
buried   in  the  voluminous   testimony   on  the  Jenner   bill  to
reduce  the  Court's  jurisdiction.   Sourwine  was  eased  out  of
his  job  two  years  ago  after  he  began  to  investigate  the  New
York  Times  for  Communist  influence, but  has  since  returned.
LOWER    COURT    REVOLT?    The   Supreme   Court's    agree-
ment  last  Monday  to  hear  Lloyd  Barenblatt's  appeal  from  a
conviction   for   contempt   of   the   House   Un-American   Ac-
tivities  Committee  should  help  to  clarify  the  meaning  of  the
Wat kins   decision.    A   conservative  majority   led   by   Judge
Prettyman  on  the  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of  Co-
lumbia  to  which  the  Barenblatt  case  was  remanded  last  year
for   reconsideration   in  the  light  of  Watkins  has   consistently
treated  that  ruling  as  if  it  placed  no  real  limits  on  Congres-
sional  investigations.
TROUBLE  IN  SPAIN  is  predicted  by  a  Madrid   dispatch   in
the  London  Sunday'1'imfs,   April  13,  which  says  never  since
the  last  days  of  pre-war  dictator  Primo  de  Rivera   "has  criti-
cism   of   a   Spanish   government   been   more   widespread   or
more  bitter."
6  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  al, 1958
A  Clean-Cut  Travel  Decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  Is  Unlikely
(Continued   from   Page   One)
Rome  and  as  recent  as  Stalin's  Russia.   Either  one  risks  let-
ting  some  crimes  go  unpunished  or  one  risks  an  atmosphere
of  terror  in  which  no  one  is  safe.   This   is  particularly  true
in  the  field  of  political  offenses.    How  does  one  tell  where
criticism   becomes  subversion?   How   does  one  distinguish  a
"real"  liberal  from  a  disguised  Communist?   And  if  the  latter
is  to  be  denied  a  passport,  why  not  a  telephone,  or  a  license
to  drive  an  automobile?   To   cut  loose   from   the   moorings
which   guarantee   freedom  of   discussion   and   limit   punish-
ment  to  crimes  proven  in  a  court  of  law  is  to  move  into  a
dark  morass  in  which  no  one  is  safe.
Ill
It  is  not  likely  that  a  majority   of  the  Court  can  be  mus-
tered  for  some  such  reaffirmation   of  fundamental  principles.
The  Court,  particularly  the  Chief  Justice,  seemed  wrought  up
over  the  use  of   secret  evidence  in  the  Dayton   case,  as  elo-
quently  pleaded  by  his  counsel,  Harry  Rand.   But  there  was
no  visible  revulsion  against   the  imposition   of   political   con-
ditions  on  the  right  to  travel  in  Kent   and   Briehl,  as  ably
argued  by  their  counsel,  Leonard  Boudin.   The  cold  war  has
put   too   many   constitutional  safeguards  in   deep   freeze.    A
good  guess  is  that  the  Court  will  dodge  basic  issues  and  seek
only  to  put  limits  on  the  State  Department's   passport  prac-
tices.  This  would  be in  keeping  with the  pattern  of  the  whole
post-McCarthy   period,   in  which   some   security  abuses   have
been  curtailed  but  police  state  practices  in  a  milder  form  have
been   allowed   to   become   institutionalized.
An  Easy  Dodge  Available
The  Court  can,  for  example,  dodge  the  constitutional   issue
of   a  right  .to  travel  by  deciding  that  there   is  no   adequate
statutory   basis  for   the   State   Department's    passport    regula-
tions.   But  this  will  invite  passage  of   a  restrictive   law  by
Congress   and  only  postpone   the  issue.   The   law  as  it  now
stands   in   the   Internal   Security  Act   of   1950 denies   pass-
ports  to  anyone who  is  a  member  of  any  organization  finally
determined   by  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  to  be
Communist.
The  State  Department   regulations  go  far  beyond  this  law.
Travel  for  Any  Purpose
"Under  the  regulations,  the  purpose  of  the  citizen's
travel  is  made  irrelevant.   Thus,  here,  the  Department
did  not  challenge   the  petitioners'   stated   purposes  for
traveling—in  the  one  case  to  attend  a  medical  conven-
tion,  and  in  the  other  to  paint  pictures.   In  each  case,
the   Department   ruled   that   the   petitioner's  past   po-
litical  associations  constituted   a  bar  to  his  travel  with-
out  regard  to  the  purposes."
—Brief   for   Rockwell  Kent   and  Dr.   Walter   Briehl.
They  deny  passports  not  only  to  members  of  the  Communist
party  but  to  those  whose  resignation   the  Department   does
not  regard  as  bona  fide.  They  also  deny  passports  to  persons
who  may  never  have  been  Communists  but  whom  the   De-
partment  suspects  of  going  abroad  to  "advance  the  Commu-
nist   movement."    The   Department   claims   these  regulations
are  in  the  spirit  of  the   1950   Act.   And,  indeed,  if  Commu-
nists  are  so  dangerous  that  they  must  be  denied  the   right
to  travel,  what  of   those  who  resign   merely  to  evade   legal
sanctions,   or   who   are   not   members   but   may   be    doing
the   party's  biding?    Once   the   notion   is   established   that
Communists  are  somehow  outside  the   law,  it   is  difficult   to
keep  the  exception  from   growing.
The  Court  was  shocked  by  the  secret  evidence  issue.   But
if   Communists   are   so   dangerous   that   their   constitutional
rights  of  travel  may  be  suspended,  why  not  their  constitu-
tional  right  to  a  fair  trial?   Once  police  state  premises  are
accepted,  it  becomes  more  difficult   to   combat  the   argument
that  evidence  should  be  kept  secret  lest  it  destroy  the   gov-
ernment's  precious  network  of  informers  and   techniques  of
surveillance.   The   burden  of  proof   is  quietly  shifted   to   the
accused,  and  there  is  an  unspoken  assumption  that  it  is  too
bad  if  some  innocent  people  are  hurt  but.  .  .  .
All  this  flows  from  what  may  properly  be  called  a  witch
hunt,  i.e.  the  superstitious  attribution  to  a  hounded  minority
of  occult  powers  for  harm  far  beyond  its  apparent  size.   In
the  Soviet  bloc,  the  "witches"   are   "counter-revolutionaries."
Here  they  are  Communists.  It  is  this  demonology  which  has
undermined    freedom    in   America.    Until    it   is   dissipated
neither  the  right  to  travel  nor  any  other   basic  liberty  will
be  secure.
Extra  Copies  of  This  Issue  Available  in  Quantity  for  Distribution  at  Five  Cents  Each
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name    .............................
Street   .....;.......................
City    ....................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
......Zone.... ...... ..State.. ..................
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
4/21/58
City   ........................_..........2one............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?       Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  bnt  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Ang-nst  and  December  at  B818 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.,  Washington  15, D. C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by  I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
l»  In  th  U.  g.;  W  ID  Canada:  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  flS  to  Bnrope;  «20  to  Israel,  Asia  ana  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED