I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jan24.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  Security
Extra:  A  Chief  Inquisitor  Begins to  Have  His  Doubts  About  the Witch-Hunt,  See Page 3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER 50
JANUARY  24,  1955
WASHINGTON, D. C.16 CENTS
Justice  and  "Security"  Cannot  Be  Reconciled
In  the  growing  uproar  over  the  loyalty-security   program,
its  critics  still  cling  to  a  comfortable  fallacy.    They   assume
that  it  is  possible  to  reconcile  "security"  with  justice.    They
speak  as if,  by  some  reform  of  the  rules,  or  better  adherence
to  them,  maximum security  for  the  government  and  fair  trial
for  the  individual  can  even-handedly  be  assured.    Thus  Mr.
Walter   Lippmann,  in   criticizing   the   President's  clumsiness
in   the   Ladejinsky  case,  asserts  the   citizen's   right   in   such
matters  "to  have  the  charge  tried  by  due  process"   without
stopping  to  consider  whether  due  process  is  possible  in  such
proceedings.    How  do you  try  the  "charge" that  a man  once
worked  for  Amtorg  or  has  two  sisters  in  Russia?
If  we stop  to  compare  what  happens in  the  trial  of  a crime
with  what  happens  in  the  trial  of   a  loyalty-security   case,
we  will  begin  to  see that  a  more  fundamental  attack  on  the
problem  is  necessary  if  the  miasma  of  suspicion  is  to  be  dis-
sipated.    Here  are  some  of  the   differences:
1.  The  matter  of  proof.   A  trial  deals  with  something
that  happened.    A  loyalty-security  hearing  deals  with  some-
thing  that  might  happen.   When  a  crime  has  been  committed
or  attempted,  objective   proof  is  possible:  a  body,  a  cracked
safe,  a  forged  check,  witnesses,  may  all  be  put  in   evidence.
But  when a man  is up  on  loyalty  or  security  charges, noth-
ing  has  happened.    The  tribunal  is  not  dealing  with  an  act
but   with  future  possibilities.    It   is  engaged  in  an  exercise
in  clairvoyance.    It  must  determine  whether  a  man"  might
commit  a  crime  some  time  in  the  future,  whether  he  might
steal  or  sell  secrets.    There  are  no  ways to  prove  what  a  man
might   do.    The  essence  of  the  loyalty-security   procedure  is
not  the  trial  of  a fact  but  a guess as to  future  conduct.
2.  How  any  doubt  is  resolved:  In the trial of a crime,
even  for  the  most  heinous,  such  as  murder  or  treason,  any
reasonable  doubt   is  resolved  in  favor   of   the   accused.    As
Blackstone  phrased   the  rule,  already  venerable  in  his   time,
"The   law  holds  that   it   is  better  that   ten   guilty   persons
escape  than  that  one  innocent  suffer."    Law  enforcement   is
thereby  made  more  difficult.    But  justice  to  the  individual,
not  the  security  of  society,  is  the  primary  concern.
All  this  is  reversed  in  loyalty-security   cases.    To   bar  a
man  from  a job  and  label  him  disloyal because in  your  opinion
he  might  do  something  bad  in  the  future  is  by  its  nature  a
decision  which  resolves  the  doubt  in  favor  of  the  State  and
against   the   individual.    "Security"  means  to   take   as  few
chances  as  possible,  even  at  the  expense  of  injustice  to  some
people  who  never  have  committed   a  crime  and  never   will.
This  is  vividly  illustrated  by  Fifth   amendment   cases.    A
man   summoned  before  a  magistrate  and   asked  whether   he
had  ever  committed  larceny  who  thereupon  pleaded  the  Fifth
amendment  could  not  be  thrown  in  jail  or  even  prosecuted.
2  0
But  a  worker  in  the  government  or  at  General  Electric  or
Bethlehem  Steel  who  invokes  the  Fifth  amendment  loses  his
job.    No  evidence  that  he  ever  committed   a  crime  or  was
ever  a  radical—the  two  are  equated  by  now  in  the   public
mind-—is   required.     The   invocation   of   his   constitutional
right  is  enough  to  ruin  his  reputation  and  his right  to  work.
Those who  defend  these standards fall  back  on  a  totalitarian
logic.    David  Lawrence  protested  recently   against  what  he
terms  a  "Left-wing   drive"  to  "surround   governmental  em-
ployes   with   complex   procedural   safeguards   which   would
supersede  the  right  of  the  American  government  to  protect
its  own  safety."    Mr.  Lawrence  forgets  that  much  of   the
Constitution  and  the  common  law  is  devoted  to  surrounding
people  of  al!  kinds,  including  the  disreputable,  with  complex
procedural  safeguards  which supersede the  right  of  government
to  protect  itself.   In  such  restrictions  lies  the  essence  of   free
government.
3.  Avoidance:   The  difference  in  the  two  procedures  be-
comes  clearer  if  you  ask yourself  how  you  avoid  getting  into
trouble.    To  avoid  arrest  and  trial  for  a  crime,  one  has  to
obey  the  law.  But  what  does one avoid to  keep out  of  loyalty-
security  trouble?    One  has  to  avoid  political  activity.     Since
you  never  know what organization may  some day  be regarded
as  suspect,  better  join   none.    Since  almost   any   cause   may
some  day  be  regarded  as  subversive,  better  keep  away  from
all.     Since  there  are  now  informers  everywhere,  including
the  campus,  say  as  little  as  possible,  avoid  the  discussion  of
dangerous  subjects.    Be careful  what  books  you  have in  your
library  and  what  publications  you  read.    These  may  be  held
against  you.   Safety    Iks  in  the  abnegation of  one's  rights.
4.  Standards:  Here,  too,  the  difference  becomes  sharp.
There  is little  doubt  as to  what  is murder,  larceny, or  espion-
age.     These  are  defined  in  the  law  books.
But   what   is   "subversion"  or  "Un-Americanism?"     The
latter  is  an  epithet,   the  former   is  a  wholly   relative   term.
Much  that  we  take  for  granted  today  seemed un-American
and   subversive  a  century   ago—income   taxes  for   example.
Much  that  existed  then  would  seem  "un-American"  today—
for   example,  the  earlier  restriction   which  limited  the  right
to  vote  to  those  citizens  who  owned  property.     What  one
man  sees  as subversion  another  man  sees  as progress.
5.  The  mode  of  defense:   In  a  criminal  trial,  the  ac-
cused  is  furnished  with  a  bill  of  particulars.    It  informs  him
that  the  government  will  allege  that  a  safe  was  cracked  at
such  and  such  an  address in  such  and  such  a  city  at  such  and
such  a time.   The  accused  may  then  prove  he  was  elsewhere.
But  anything  remotely  approaching  a  bill  of   particulars
is rare in  loyalty-security  cases.   The  accused is  usually  asked
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  24, 19SS
As the  Danger  of  War  Recedes, the Hobgoblins and H'ants Grow Fainter...
The  direction   of  events   is  enormously  encouraging.   The
President's  affirmative   attitude   at   press   conference  toward
a  cease-fire  in  Formosa*  and  UN  Secretary  Hammarskjold's
assurance  on  his  visit  here  that* he  would win  the  release  of
the  American  flyers  if  restraint  were  exercised  indicate  that
elements   of  agreement   already   exist.    The  Administration
seems  prepared  for  its  part  to  let  the  Tachen  and  other   off-
shore  islands  go.  The  opening  of negotiations  for  a  cease-fire
before    ratification   of  the   mutual   security  agreement   with
Chiang   provides  important   leverage   both   at   Taipeh   and
Peking.
Peace  in  the  straits would be the  end  of  Chiang;  nostalgia,
disaffection    and    obsolescence   would   gradually    overcome
Chiang's  forces  from  within.   Peace  would  also  snuff  out  the
most  obnoxious  lobby  ever  to  hold  the  American   government
in  thrall.  The Eisenhower  Administration  clearly  feels  strong
enough  to risk  a  showdown with  the  China .Lobby, Knowland
and  the  Republican  extremists.   The  larger  dimensions  of  its
thinking  are  visible  in  Defense  Secretary  Wilson's  plea  for
increased  trade  with  the  Soviet  bloc—as  a  means  of  creating
good-will.   Peace  is really  breaking  out.
Humanity  being  the  same everywhere (how often  in history
it  has  been  dreadfully  radical  and  daring  to  suggest  that
maybe  They   are  really  just  like  Us!),  there  are  evidences
on  both  sides  that  the  thaw  is  freeing  men's  minds.  First  in
literature   and   then   in   science,   Soviet   intellectuals   during
recent  days  have  begun  to  sound  off against  dogmatism  and
xenophobia  and  their  own  brand  of  witch-hunting.   The  evi-
dence  of  new  and  similar  trends  on  our  side  have  been  ac-
cumulating  at  a  rate  which  suggests  we  are  slowly picking
up  momentum in  the  move  back  toward  less  repressive  atti-
tudes.  With  relaxation  of  world tension, the  hobgoblins  may
evaporate.
Certainly  a  week  in  which  Mrs.  Annie  Lee  Moss was  rein-
stated  in  her  job,  Martin  Dies  refused  a  place  on  the  House
Un-American    Activities   Committee,   the    new   indictment
against   Owen  Lattimore  dismissed  and  McCarthy twice  or-
dered  to  take  his  seat  and  shut  up  is  a  week which  must  give
heart  to  all  who hope  for  an  abatement  of  the  witch hunt.   In
the  hope  of helping the  tide along we are  devoting  this  week's
number  to  a  fundamental  discussion  of  the  issues  on  pages
one  and  four,  and  call  attention  to  some  useful  ammunition
on  pages  two  and  three:   the  attack  on  Brownell  under  the
aegis   of  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce,  the   wholly  unex-
pected  speech  by  former  Senator  Cain,  the  UAW-CIO  reso-
lution  in  the  Lupa  case  and  a  Canadian  psychiatrist's   re-
* For   the   background  and  origins   of   the   idea  see   the   Weekly   for   last
September  27,  "flallying:  Pjint:  A  Cease-Fire  for  Formosa."
flections  on  the  unreliability  of  intelligence  agents.
Secretary  Wilson's  action  in restoring  Mrs. Annie Lee Moss
to  her  job was a  blow  not  only at  McCarthy but  at  J.  Edgar
Hoover,  for  it  rejects  as  unreliable  the  evidence  of  a  profes-
sional  FBI  undercover   agent,  Mrs.  Markward.   The   House
Democratic  leadership,  by  refusing  Martin   Dies  a  place  on
the   House  Un-American  Activities   Committee,   showed   its
own resistance  to the  witch  hunt.  The moderate   conservative,
Walter,  who wanted  to  abolish  the  committee  altogether,  will
have  a  free  hand  as  chairman  to  run  the  committee  his  way.
Judge   Youngdahl's   forceful   decision   dismissing   the  new
indictment  against   Owen  Lattimore  is  sui  generis—the  ex-
pression  of  unusual  courage  and  integrity  on  the  bench.   But
it  must  help  to  clear  away  the  fog by bringing  justice  nearer
for  a  scholar  who has  become a  symbol  and  by  the  reasoning
of  the  decision  itself.   For  in  denying  that  charges  of  adher-
ence  to  Communist  party  line  are   specific  enough  to  be  the
basis  of  prosecution  for  perjury,  the  decision  strikes  at  the
basic  tendency  of  recent  years  to  set  up  an  anti-Communist
standard   of  American  orthodoxy  and  to  punish  those  who
deviate  from  it.  Lattimore's  agony is not yet  over, but  a  long
stride  forward  to  his  ultimate  victory  has  been  taken.
Among  the  politicians,  there  is  beginning  almost  a  band-
wagon  rush  to  exploit   growing   popular   revulsion   against
snoopery.   Kuchel,  no  less,  of  California,  who  voted  against
censuring  McCarthy last  session,  rose  in  the  Senate  January
14  to  warn  that  Congressional  investigations   must  not  be
allowed  to "degenerate  into  witch  hunts  or inquisitions  .  . .
into  forums  for character  assassins  . .  ."  Shortly   afterward
when  his  one-time  idol, McCarthy, was  twice  ordered  to  take
his seat, Kuchel commended the  chair  for  its  ruling.   Poor  Joe
was  only  saying  that  the  Senate's  unanimous  vote  for  the
Daniel  resolution  against  Communism  as   sin   could  not  be
taken  at  face value, which is true.  Joe  is  in  a  bad  way when
a  Kuchel  can  turn  on him.
Not  one but  several  investigations  of  the  witch  hunt  itself
may  be  in  the  cards.   Humphrey  of  Minnesota, who  played
such   a  cowardly  role  last  August,   has   dashed   in  with   a
clumsy  proposal.   He  would  set   up   a   12-man  Commission
to  investigate  the   loyalty-security   program   but   allow   the
Republicans  to  pick  eight  of  the  twelve  (four  by  the  White
House,  four  by  Nixon).   This  explains  why  after   a  week  of
canvassing  he  could  get   only  Stennis   of  Mississippi  to  co-
sponsor  his  resolution.    The  Senate   Democrats  are   staking
their  cards  on "Cotton  Ed"  Johnston  who has  opened  his own
investigation  as  chairman  of  the  Civil  Service  Committee by
rubbing  McCarthy's  nose  in  his  old charges  about  the  State
Department.   The  time  has  come  for  a  successful  fight-back.
Criticism of  Brownell From An  Unexpected Source
We  don't  know  whether  it's   a  trend  or  just  an  accident
but  Nation's  Business, organ  of  the  U.S.  Chamber of Com-
merce,  carries  an  article  sharply  critical  of  Brownell.
The  January,   1955,  issue,  a  "Midterm  Report"   by  the
President's  Cabinet, contains articles  by  each member of  the
Cabinet,  followed  by  an  independent  appraisal  of  that  Cab-
inet  member's record.
The  appraisal  which follows  Brownell's is  by Jefferson  B.
Fordham,   dean   of   the   University   of   Pennsylvania   Law
School.   The  article,  "Security   Quest  Threatens   Freedom,"
is  useful  ammunition for  civil libertarians.
Dr.  Fordham  writes,  "Faith  in reason  and  the free  inter-
play  of  ideas  is being shaken by  an  approach  to  the  problem
of  national  security,  which is  at  once  negative  and  authori-
tarian."   He  says  "the  Department  of  Justice  has  not  been
spared    the   psychological   virus   of   negativism   and   con-
formity."
Dr.  Fordham  criticized  the  Attorney  General  for   asking
authority to tap  wires in  security  cases,  including  "sedition,
although  it  is  concerned with  political  thought  and  expres-
sion  and  presents great  hazards  to freedom  of the  mind  and
free  speech."
Dr.  Fordham  blames  the  loyalty  program  for  permitting
"discharge  for  opinions  expressed  under  outdated  conditions
and  now  deemed  indications of  bad  judgment"  and  for   "the
individual  insecurity  which  is  created   by  the  jeopardy  of
multiple  investigations."
The  parting  shot:  Dr.  Fordham  finds  it  "understandable
that  an  Attorney  General with  a  reputation  as  an  able  poli-
tical  strategist  would  have  difficulty  keeping  himself  aloof
from  partisan  politics"  but  thinks  Brownell  "should  not  use
his  office  for  partisan  purposes."
"Mr.  Brownell  made  a  great  mistake  in  this  respect  by
his  use of FBI  material relating  to Harry  Dexter  White  for
patently partisan  purposes.  One does not  need  dilate  on  the
truly  horrendous  implications  of  political  exploitation  of  an
agency  such  as  the  FBI.   The  White  episode  should  serve
as  a  wholesome warning."
This  Is  Vol. II,  No. 50,  The  Last  Issue  of  Our Second  Circulation  Year
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  24,1955
... And A Chief Inquisitor Begins to Have His Doubts About The Witch Hunt
If  Cardinal  Spellman had  suddenly  questioned  Papal  Infalli-
bility*,  or  Krushchev  wondered  aloud  whether  Lenin  might
not  have  been  all  wrong,  it  would have  been  no stranger than
the  speech  made  at   Spokane,  Washington,   January   15,  by
former   Senator  Harry  P.   Cain,  "Can   Freedom   Live   With
Internal  Security?"   Though  Cain  is  a  member  of  the   Sub-
versive  Activities  Control  Board, principal  arm  of our  secular
Inquisition   and  was  talking  to  Republicans,  the  answer   he
suggested  was  that  maybe  freedom  was  not  compatible  with
"internal  security."
Though  the press outside of the two Washingtons, the  State
and  the  District,  paid little  attention to the  speech,  its  source
gave  it  unusual  weight.   In  the  Senate  from   1946  to   1952
when  he  was  defeated  for  reelection,  Cain  was  most  closely
allied  with   McCarthy,  McCarran  and   Dirksen.   He   distin-
guished   himself    chiefly   by   demanding   the   deportation   of
Charlie  Chaplin  in  1949 and  paying  a  cordial visit  to  Franco.
Cain  remains  a  man  of  the  right,  but  a  man  who  has  been
doing  some  thinking.   In  this  speech  he  takes  a  look  at  the
various   laws   and   agencies   which  now  deal   with   internal
security  and  asks,  "With  the  exception  of  wire-tapping  au-
thority,  would  you  establish   much  more  were  you  an  auto-
cratic  ruler  in  our  land?"   Cain  says  the  average  Russian
citizen  "lives  in  dread  of  the  absolute  surveillance  and   the
unrelenting  control  of  his  conduct"  but  warns  that  our  own
internal  security  system  could "snuff  out the  lights  of learning
while  making  cowards  and  mental  robots  of  free  men  and
women."
Cain  took  a  dour view of  the  security  system  as  applied to
Federal   employes.    He  observed   of  security   officers,   "Any
misfits  or  second-raters  among  them  are  more  dangerous  to
our  future  than  the  subversives  they  endeavor  to  catch."  He
said  "the  nation's  need  is  for  security  personnel who can  tell
the  difference  between  disloyalty  and  non-conformity,  between
treason  and  heresy."  He  declared,  "There  is  every reason  to
encourage  the  iconoclast  as  well  as  the  conformist  to  serve
the  Republic."
But  what  government  official  will  dare  hire  non-conformists
when  some  McCarthy  may  breathe   down  his  neck?   Cain  is
prepared  to  see this,  too.   Why,  he  asked  ironically,  take  an
applicant  who "has  been a  member  of organizations  alleged  to
be  subversive"  though  "these  organizations   may  not  be  sub-
versive   or  perhaps   they  weren't  before   they   went   out  of
business  years  ago?"  Cain  added  wryly,  "No  one is  likely  to
encounter   any   future   trouble  by   shelving   a   troublesome
looking  application."
Blackmail  by Government
"To what extent  is  the  FBI  recruiting informers among
persons immediately threatened with economic and social
ruin  by  being  charged  as  security  risks,  on  the  implied
or actual promise  of  immunity  and protection?  Does  the
system  positively  encourage  malicious  and  false  reports
by  extending  an  unwarranted  and  universal  guarantee
of  privacy [by  denying  accused  persons  the  right  to  con-
front  their  accusers]?"
—Resolution  by  the  UAW-CIO   executive  board   January
11, protesting  the  security  suspension of  John  Lupa,  a
machinist  of  the  Chrysler  Arsenal  in  Detroit.
*  As,  indeed.  His  Eminence   may  if  the  Pope  doesn't  stop  talking  about
co-existence.
Cain's  solution  in  security  cases  is  to  change  the  rule  and
provide for  no dismissals  "unless it  is affirmatively found  that
his   [the   employe's]   retention   of  employment  is  reasonably
inconsistent  with  the  National  interest."  This  would  put  the
burden  of  proof  on  the  government—but  require  a  lot  more
backbone  from  department   heads.   (The  speech  may  be  read
in  the  Congressional  Record  of  January   18.)
Cain's  anxieties  are  welcome,  his  warnings  salutary,  but
his  proposals  are  inadequate.   He  thinks  "a  whole  clique of
spies"  could  hardly  do as  much  damage  as  "our  failure  as  a
government  to  have  confidence  in  our  own  people."   But  the
Board   on  which   he  sits,  as   established   by  the   McCarran
Internal   Security   Act,   reflects  little  such   confidence.   The
Board's  job  is  to  play  ideological  nursemaid  and  flatfoot  to
the   American   people  by  registering  radicals  and  labelling
their  writings—as  if  administering  a  Pure  Politics  and  Ideas
Act.   Cain  is  not  yet  ready  to  see that  freedom  is  indivisible
and  inseparable  from  risk.
Yet  out  of  context  or  in,  there  is  much  in  the  speech  that
would  once have  been enough to  get  a  Left  intellectual   hauled
before  the  House Un-American Activities  Committee.  Report-
ers  casting about for  some explanation  recalled  that  Cain  was
originally  a  Democrat, that  he protested  the  treatment  of  the
Japanese  on the  Coast during  the war,  that  he defended  Anna
Rosenberg  and  that  the  political  pendulum in  his  home  State
of   Washington   has   been   swinging   steadily  Left.    Its   own
McCarthy,  Canwell, was  defeated  for   Congressman-at-Large
by  Don  Magnuson  again  last  Fall.   In  1954  Canwell  lost  by
10,000 votes  out  of more than  1,000,000 cast; last  Fall  he lost
by   121,000.
Whatever  the causation  (and who can read  a man's  mind?),
Cain  deserved  a  salute  from  left-of-centre.    It  took   courage
for  a  man  in his  position, with  his  political  ties, to  make  that
speech.  It  seemed  another  indication  of  a  changing  tide.
The Most Unreliable of  All  Are The Security Police Themselves
One  of  England's  most  distinguished  reviews,  The  Twen-
tieth Century,  published an  article  on "Science  and  Secrecy"
last  October  by  Humphrey  Osmond,  who  occupies  a  rather
advantageous  post  for  the  observation  of  the  U.S.  security
mania,  since  he  is  not  only  a  Canadian  but  superintendent
of  the  Saskatchewan  Mental  Hospital.  One passage deserves
wider  circulation,  since  it  illustrates  the  ancient  problem—
quis  custodes  custodiet?  or  who  will  watch  the  watchman?
Dr.  Osmond  points  out that  "the  excitement and  uncertainty
of  espionage  attracts  peculiar  and  unreliable people:
"Admiral  Canaris, head  of  German Naval  Intelligence,  is
said  to  have  worked  for  the  British, though the  evidence is
not   completely  satisfactory.    Beria,  according  to  his  col-
leagues,  was  for  many  years  an  agent  of  capitalism  while
heading  his  country's   secret   police;   however  dubious  we
may  be  about  these  accusations,  it  is  certain   that  Petrov,
one of his men, gave  away  many  important  secrets  . . .
"Recently Dr.  John,  head  of the  West  German  Intelligence
Services, fled to the  Eastern  Zone.  One of the  most  interest-
ing  accounts  we  have  is  that  of   Colonel  Redl,  for   years
before  1914  Chief  of  the  Austrian  Intelligence  Services.   He
was well-known as  a  spy-hunter, but  himself  a  Russian  spy.
"Besides,  it  is  not  only  deliberate  treachery  from  secret
service  men that  we  must  guard  against,  but  also  zealous
stupidity.   It  has  been  shown  in  an  analysis  of  the  Oppen-
heimer  enquiry  that,  in  an  effort  to  justify  the  committee's
action  in  suspending  Dr.  Oppenheimer, much  highly  secret
information  was  published.  The  energetic  Admiral  Strauss
and  the  U.S.  intelligence  services  presented  their  Russian
counterparts   with  information that  would  have  cost  many
millions  of  dollars  to  obtain  by  normal  means.
"It  may  be  felt  that  these  are  special  instances,  but  it
seems  that  . . . treachery  is an  occupational  disease  in spy
services  much more  than  among scientists."
If  You  Haven't   Yet  Renewed,  Your  Sub  Has  Probably  Expired—Please  Renew  Now
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  24, 1955
No  Freedom  Without  Risk, No  Stability  Without  Trust
< (Continued  from  Page  One)
to  rebut  vague  charges  of  Communist  sympathy  or  associa-
tion.   The  task  of  the  defense is  to  prove  a  negative.
Even  where  particulars   are  furnished,  the  outcome  is  not
necessarily   conclusive.     A  man  may  indeed  "clear"  himself
by  proving  that  he  never   engaged  in   liberal   or   left-wing
activity  of  any  kind.   But  what  if  he  did  belong  to  a  radical
organization?     Does  that  mean  that  he  is  a  security  risk?
The  only   espionage  case  turned  up  in  the  whole  security
program  is  one  which  would   never  be  suspected  by  normal
"loyalty"  standards.   Joseph  Petersen  had  no  Left-wing   con-
nections.     A   Catholic,   graduated   from   a  Catholic    school,
he  never  belonged  to  any  organization  on  the  Attorney Gen-
eral's  or  any  similar  "list."    Whatever  this  code  expert  did
was  for   a  friendly   power,   Holland,  and  for  no   ideological
reasons.    He  could  slip  easily  through  the  sieve of  customary
loyalty  standards.
On  the  other  hand  a  Ladejinsky,  for  all  his  demonstrated
value  as  an  agricultural  expert,   could  never  hope  to  qualify
under  them  for   government   employment  if  he  were  a  new
applicant.    A  man  who  had  once  worked  for'Amtorg,  with
two  sisters  in  Russia,  whose  name  had  been  on  the  mailing
list  of  several  "front"  organizations  during   the  war   would
never  be  freshly  hired  today.    The  liberals  would  never  dare
defend  him.  The  Ladejinsky  case  shows  the   advantage  of
judging  a man  by what  he  does  when employed,  by  the  record
he  makes rather  than  by  a  system  based  on  paranoid  surmise.
6.  Witnesses:    The  difficulty  is made the  greater  by  the
mode of  presenting  evidence.    In  a criminal  trial,  the accusing
witness  must  be  produced  in  court  and  subjected  to   cross-
examination.    The  right  to  confront   one's  accuser  is  funda-
mental.    The  government  may  use  informers,  as  in narcotic
or  smuggling  cases,  but  it  cannot  come into court  and  ask for
conviction  on  undisclosed  evidence  by  undisclosed  persons  on
the  ground   that  to  reveal  them  would  endanger  its  sources
of  information.    The  conviction  can  be  obtained  only  on  the
basis   of   whatever   evidence   and   witnesses  the   government
produces  in  open  court.
But  in  loyalty-security  cases  nothing  is  more  familiar  than
the   submission   of   allegations   from   undisclosed    informers.
The  accused  has  no  chance  to  confront   the  accuser.     Such
confrontations    in   criminal    cases   often    disclose   mistaken
identity.    Cross  examination  may  uncover  perjury.    All  these
safeguards   are  absent  in  loyalty-security   cases  because  here
again  the  security  of  the  state,  its  secrets  and  informers,  is
ranked  ahead  of  justice  to  the  individual.
The  anxiety  over  security   reflects  its  widening  impact  on
our  society.    As  more  people  are  drawn  into  its  orbit,  more
become  aware  of  its  injustices.    The  government   is  having
trouble;   the  loyalty   program,  designed  originally   to   purge
the  government  of  liberals  and  radicals,  has  ended  by  making
people  of  all  kinds  afraid   to  take  government  jobs.    Some-
thing  has  to  be  done,  and  the  politicians  scent  popularity  in
the  issue.  But  they,  like all  of  us,  take  the  line  of  least  resist-
ance,  and  talk  only  of  correcting  the  "abuses"  of  the  security
program.
Few  will  dare  to  say it  now,  but  the  time  is  coming  when
the  truth  will  be  recognized,  a  truth  which  the  Framers  of
our  Constitution  wove  into  the  fabric  of  American  govern-
ment.    They  saw  that  there  could  not  be  freedom   without
risk, that  no  stable  society  could  be built  except  on  a founda-
tion  of  trust,   and  that  when  trust  was  violated—and  only
then—could  a  man  be  punished.    They  did  not  think  it  was
the  province  of  government  to  police men's  minds,  nor  that  it
had   a  right   to   punish   them   unless   they   committed   some
wrongful  act.  They  would  have  been  horrified  at  our  grow-
ing  system  of  thought  police,  of  guessing  game  "law" about
prospective  crime,  and  indeed  most   of   all  by  our  obsession
with  "security."
An  administrative    official   has  a  right  and  duty  to   judge
the  reliability  of   a  man  he  hires.    But  what  is  proper   and
necessary   in   private   administrative  judgment   is   improper
when   erected   into   a   system  of   universal   surveillance  and
public  defamation  of  character  that  chokes  off  free  political
discussion  in  ever  wider  areas  and  brands  men  as  "disloyal"
or  "security   risks"  on  the   basis  of  pseudo-judicial  guessing
as  to  whether  they  might  possibly  some  day  commit  a  crime.
The   loyalty-security   program   cannot  be  reformed.     Given
peace, it  will eventually be  abolished.
This  Special  Issue  Is  Available  for  Quantity  Orders—Help  Give  ft  The Widest  Circulation  Possible
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name——————————————————————————————
Street-
City
.  Zone
Enter  this  gift  sub for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
<^To)   Name_________________________
Street—————————:—————————————————
City.. Zone
1/24/55
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St,   S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED