I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955apr18.pdf

============================================================

Revealing  Just  What  Our Government  Means  By  The  "Defense"  of  Formosa, Page 2
LF.  Stone's  Weekly
VOL. Ill,   NUMBER 13
APRIL  18,  1955                              WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
The War Party  Is  On The  Defensive,  But  There  Is  Still  No  Peace  Party
Stevenson's  Speech: Helpful  Here, Silly  in  Bandung
From  the  vantage  point  of  Washington,  Adlai  Stevenson's
speech  made  a  contribution  to  peace.   It  is  true,  as the  Wash-
ington  Post  said, that  "he  ought  to  have  made it  two  months
ago,"   before  the  Democrats  gave  Eisenhower  a  blank  check
for  preventive  war  in  the  Formosa  straits.   But  the  situation
here  is  so  bad  that  Stevenson's   belated  effort   to  put   the  off-
shore  islands  in  a  more  sober  perspective  must  be  welcomed.
It  helps to  put  the war party  on the  defensive.  It  supports  the
logic  of  the  Morse-Lehman  resolution   for   the  evacuation  of
Quemoy  and Matsu.  It  paves  the  way  for  disengagement.
Two  observations  may indicate  the  political  realities  against
which   the   Stevenson  speech  must   be  judged.   Though   the
Morse-Lehman  resolution  is  a  concurrent  one,  no  one  has  yet
volunteered to introduce the bill in the House.  The  Democratic
leadership  there  dealt  so  harshly  with   those  Democrats   who
objected   to  the  Formosan  war   powers  resolution  in  January
that  none  of  them  has  had  the  nerve  to  come  forward  now.
In   the  Senate,  Stevenson's  old  running   mate,  Sparkman  of
Alabama,  only  a  few  days  before  his  speech,  gave  the   Asso-
ciated  Press  an  interview   (April  8)   agreeing  that  Eisenhower
should  make  a  preventive  strike  against  the  Chinese mainland
if  the  military  buildup  there  continues  "beyond  a  stage  where
their  power  is apparent  and  the  threat  real."
A  Different  Kind  of  Blank  Check
When  Sparkman  still  talks  preventive  war,  and  no  one  can
be  found   to  introduce   the  Morse-Lehman   resolution  in   the
House,  we  are  still  a  long  way  from  having  a  peace  party  in
this  country.   The  Democrats  would  rather  make  an  issue  of
Army  cuts  than  of  Quemoy  and  Matsu.    If   there  is  to  be
further  "appeasement"  in  the  Far  East,  they  would  rather  let
Eisenhower  do  it  and  then  criticize  him  for  it  afterward.   In
this  sense  the  Stevenson  speech  did  give  the  President   greater
freedom  of  action.   Where  Congress   gave  Ike  a  blank  check
for  war,  Stevenson  has  signed  a  draft  offering  bipartisan  sup-
port  for  the  abandonment  of  Quemoy  and  Matsu.   At   home,
this  is  how  the  Stevenson  speech  must  be  measured.
But  from  the  standpoint  of  the  conference  now  opening  at
Bandung  in  Indonesia,  the  speech  will   seem  pathetic,  almost
ludicrous.   Bandung  is  an  historic  turning  point.  The  colored
and  colonial  powers  are meeting  there  with  a  sense  of  common
destiny,  grievances  and  purpose.   Color  is  more  important   at
Bandung  than  capitalism  or  communism,   and  two  non-white
powers  emerge  at  that  conference  as  great  Powers.   India  and
China  will  within  a  generation  be  the  equals  of  the  two  great
white  powers,  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.,  neither   present  at
Bandung.   In  the  eyes of  Bandung,  the  Stevenson  speech,  with
its  fatuous  nonsense  about  our  "moral"  right  to  be  in   For-
mosa,  will  merely  demonstrate  how  far  the  U.S.  has  drifted
into  an  unreal world.   There  is not  a power  at  Bandung  which
does  not  naturally  see Formosa  as China's,  and  our  threats  and
pretensions  as  the  last  gasp  of  Western   colonialism   in  Asia.
This  is  the  truth  to  which we  must  soon  be rudely  awakened.
It  should  be  disturbing  to  every  thoughtful   American  that
our  country  has become  so blinded  by hatred,  self-righteousness
and  atomic  bluster  that  political  necessities  prevent   even  so
enlightened   a  man  as  Stevenson  from  speaking—not   indeed  as
frankly  as any  Asian—but  even  as frankly  as any  West  Euro-
pean  would  of  Formosa.   We  are  definitely  in  someone   else's
territory,  interfering  in  another  nation's  internal  affairs,   sup-
porting  a civil war  that  would  long  ago have  been  extinguished
because  our  military  men  want  Formosa,  and  are  prepared   to
hold  it,  even  at  the  risk  of  World  War   III.
Where  Dulles  and  Adlai  Differ
Dulles  is prepared   to  exchange  the   offshore   islands  for   a
Chinese  pledge  to  relinquish  Formosa,  or   for   a  promise   by
Britain  and  France  to  join  in  any  military  action  required  to
hold  the  island.   But  Britain  and  France  are  not  prepared  to
give  any  such  pledge unless we in  turn  are prepared  for  inter-
national   negotiations    which   must   eventually  liquidate  the
Chiang  Kai-shek regime.   It  is here  that  Dulles  and  Stevenson
differ.    The  recent   testimony  by  the  Assistant  Secretary  of
State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  which  we  reprint   on  the  next
page,  reveals  that  we have no  intention  of  giving  up  Formosa,
even  if  Chiang  collapses  and  we  have  to  use  our  own   troops
for   naked  annexation.   When  Stevenson  spoke  of  "some  final
settlement  ...     by  independence,   neutralization,   trusteeship,
plebiscite,  or  whatever  is  wisest"  he  was not  talking  the  lan-
guage  of  Dulles.   To  Dulles  that  way  lies  the  "craven   sur-
render"  to  which  he  referred   in  the  pyromaniac  address  he
made  last  Monday  to  the  congenial  audience  of  the   Jesuits.
Thus   for   America   Stevenson   offers   leadership   out    of   a
morass of our  own making.  His speech, and Walter  Lippmann's
column  last  Tuesday,  add  powerfully  to  the  peace  forces.   But
it  would  be easy to exaggerate their  strength.  Despair,  coward-
ice and apathy are to be met  on every hand in  Congress.   Morse,
to  all  intents  and  purposes,  stands  as  alone  today  as  when  he
was  a  one-man  party.   Several  dozen  Senators  are  prepared  to
do something  if  only  there were  more  signs  of  support.   Really
and  truly,  it  all  depends  on  you  who  read  this.   Letters  and
telegrams  in  support  of  the  Morse-Lehman  resolution,  even  if
but  from  a  minority  (the  war  party  are  a  smaller  minority),
would  change  the  atmosphere  here  overnight.   You  can  help.
Every  letter,  every  voice, will  strengthen  the  peace  tendencies
against  the  war  party.   The  fight  is  far  from  won,  but   cer-
tainly not  foredoomed  to defeat.  Wire Senator  George demand-
ing  public  hearings  on  the  Morse-Lehman  resolution.
5  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's. Weekly,  April  18, 1S55
Round  This Shaky Globe
His   Holiness   must  be  a  great  disappointment   to  David
Lawrence  and  Bishop  Sheen,  not  to  mention  Cardinal   Spell-
man.    Lawrence  has  written   several  columns  recently   stig-
matizing   as  a   Communist  plot   the   warnings   of  scientists
against  the   dangers   of  radiation.     But  the   Pope's   Easter
message  carried   the  same  warning   against  "an   increased
radioactivity   in  the  face  of  a  yet  unknown margin   of  bio-
logical  security."    Bishop  Sheen's   Good  Friday  message  was
similarly  undercut  by  the  Supreme  Pontiff's  Easter  allocu-
tion.    The  Bishop's  column  on  Good  Friday  was  devoted  to
proving   co-existence  impossible;  the   Pope   two   days  later
blessed   those  who  would  "arrange  treaties  which  will  en-
sure  peace,  start  a  progressive  disarmament  and  thus  spare
humanity  the  destruction  of  a  new  war."     Unlike  Cardinal
Spellman,  the  Pope  does  not  believe  the  road  to  peace   lies
through  a  third  world  war.
The  uproar  over  the  Corsi  affair  is  awakening  the  Italian-
American  community to  the  evils  of  the  security  system  and
leaves John  Foster  Dulles  seriously  shaken  for  the  first  time
in  the  post  of  Secretary   of  State.    What  is  hurting   Dulles
and   Congressman  Walter  worst,   though  little  of  this   has
appeared  in  the  press,  is that  the  latter  was  quoted by Mary
McGrory  in  an  interview  published  by  the  Washington  Star
March  26 as  calling  Italians  "dagoes."   Walter  insisted   this
was  incorrect  but  the  Star  claimed  that  its  reporter  was
accurate.     In   the   Congressional   Record  of  April  4  Walter
published  a  long  letter  to  Congressman  Peter  W. Rodino,  Jr.,
complaining  of  the  Star  story  and  declaring  his  friendship
for  the  Italian   people.    In  the  letter  Walter   again  accused
Corsi   of  belonging  to   Communist  front  organizations   and
quoted  a  passage  from  Corsi's.testimony against  the  national
origins  quota  system   of  the  immigration  laws.    Corsi  said
this   system  was  "based   on  the   same  type   of  pathological
mentality  that  brought  the  German  people  to   destruction."
Walter  said  this  proved  Corsi's  unfitness  to  advise the  Secre-
tary  of  State  on  immigration  matters.    This  may  yet  cost
the  Republicans New  York  State  and  Dulles  his  job.  Stassen
would  be  an  improvement in  that  post,  giving  Eisenhower  a
Secretary  of  State  who  took  his  cues  from   the   President
instead  of  Ike's  party  rival,  Knowland.
Last  Tuesday's  Chicago  Tribune  (April  12)  carried  a  long
Washington  dispatch,  "Leftists  Find  Ex-Sen.  Cain  Is  Their
Darling"   which   speculates   that   the   maverick   Subversive
Activities  Control  Board  member  is  planning  to  run  for  the
Senate  again  in   1956  from  his  home  State  of   Washington
where  "there  are  tens  of thousands  of  defense  workers  .  .  .
and  a  feature   of  Cain's  present   campaign  is  his   insistence
What  Admiral  Carney   Said
From    the   notes   of   Peter   Edson,    Scripps-Howard
Washington  columnist,  one  of  the   20  Washington  cor-
respondents   at  that  private   "off  the  record"  war-over-
Matsu-by-April  15 you-can-use-it-but-don't-quote-me din-
ner  given  by  Admiral  Carney, Chief  of Naval  Operations,
as  printed  April  8 in  the  Washington  Daily  News:
"If  attack  is  launched  [on  Matsu],  it  will  be  difficult
to restrain  Chiang . . . Chiang  will  want  to attack  Com-
munist   air   fields.   Chinese   Communists  can  retaliate
[against  Formosa].   That's  a  key  factor  for  the   U.  S.
This  would  involve  Formosa  itself   .  .  .
"If   decision   is   made  for   the   U.  S.  to   participate,
should  not be a local,  tactical  battle  . . . We must wreck
his  war  potential.   This  involves all-out  war.   We know
targets  to  destroy  their  potential   now.   We'd  have  to
mobilize.    It   would  take  a  U.  S.  buildup  in  area  and
at  home . . .
"We have  no  reason  to  think  our  allies  will  help us  in
the   Far   East.    We  must   not   kid  around.    If  we  use
atomic  weapons  there   will   be   propaganda  by  Nehru.
But  success  is  important  in  the  Orient.   Are  we  to  be
influenced  by  our  allies  or  by  success?"
that  security   precautions   in  defense  plants   are  outmoded,
cumbersome  and inefficient  .  .  .  Politicians  noted  that  Cain's
attacks   on  this  phase  of  the  federal  security   system   have
vote-getting  possibilities."    This  is  the  first  time  since  1947
that  vote-getting  possibilities  were  scented  on the  liberal-left
side  of  the  fence.   The  Tribune   said   Cain's  recent  speeches
have  aroused  wrath  in the  Justice  Department  but  that  there
had  been  "no   official   word  of  criticism"   against  him.    The
secret   may  lie  in  the  report,  which  the   Weekly   gets  from
reliable   quarters,  that   Cain  boldly   offered   his   resignation
at   the  White  House  before  he  made  his  first  speech   this
year  criticizing  the  security  program  and  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral's  list.    It  was  not  accepted.
The  FBI  Before  the  House  Appropriations  Committee:  As
the  number  of  Communists  go  down,  the   cost  of  watching
them  goes  up..  The  FBI   spent   almost   $83,000,000  in  fiscal
1954,  expects  to  spend  almost  $91,000,000  in fiscal 1956  .  .  .
It  now has 107,344,805 "non-criminal" fingerprints on file . . .
J.  Edgar  Hoover  testified  that  no  membership  cards   have
been   issued   by  the   Communist  Party   since   1948,  a   good
point  for  lawyers  to  remember  when  clients  are  accused  of
being  "card-carrying"  ...     As  of  the  first  of  the  year,  the
FBI   claims  there  were  22,663  Communist  party  members
Revealing  Just  What  Our  Government  Means  by  The  "Defense"  of   Formosa
Mr.  [Frederic   R.]  COUDERT  [R.,   N.Y.]   What  would  be
the  [State]  Department's   position  if  over  the  next  2, 3, 4  or
5  years  the  Chiang  government  should  fall  and  be  replaced
[on  Formosa]  by a  government  deriving  its  inspiration   from
the  Peiping  regime?
Mr.  [Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern.  Affairs]
ROBERTSON.   We  would  consider  that  to  be  a  hostile  gov-
ernment.   I  think  one  of  the  problems  with  which  we  are
faced  now  is,  entirely  outside  of  other  considerations,  main-
taining  the morale  of the  Chinese  who are on Formosa  . . .
if  something  should  happen  to  the  morale  of  that  army  and
the  people  there,  and  to  their  will  to  fight  the  Communists,
we  might  well  be  forced—let  me  put   it  this  way,  if  that
army  should  fold, and  if  Formosa  is  necessary  to  our  secur-
ity, and our military  advisers say it  is, it  would tremendously
expand  and  complicate  the  problem  of  how we  could  hold  it.
Would  we  be  willing  to  put  American  troops  in  there  to
hold  it  against  Communist  assault?
I   cannot   answer   that   question.    I  say  the   question  of
—Hearings  on  the  195S State  Department   budget,
maintaining  the  morale  of  the   Government  on  Formosa   is
we think  to  our  selfish  interest,  leaving  outside  the  Republic
of  China  altogether.
Mr.  COUDERT.   As  far  as  you  have  gone,  Mr.  Robertson,
in  your  observations  to  this  point,  there  doesn't  seem  to  be
much  hope  of  establishing  really  peaceful   relations   in   the
Far   East   unless   the   Peiping   government   is   prepared   to
acquiesce  in the  permanent loss  of Formosa.   Is that  correct?
Mr.  ROBERTSON.   I  think  as  long  as  Formosa  is  con-
sidered   necessary   to  the  security   of  the   United  States,  I
assume  it  will be  the  policy of  this  government  to  defend  it.
Mr.  COUDERT.   One  last  question  on  the  subject.   Apart
from   the  Japanese  dominion  since  the   end  of  the   war  of
1895,   Formosa   has   substantially    been   Chinese   throughout
the  period  of  recorded  history,  has  it  not?
Mr.  ROBERTSON.   You  mean  up  until  1895?
Mr.  COUDERT.   Yes.
Mr.  ROBERTSON.    Yes,  so  far  as  I  know.
House  Appropriations  Committee,  pages  130-31, just  released.
last  Week's  Anti-War  Issue  Was Advertised  in the  Sunday  New  York  Times, April  10, Page 6,  Section 4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  18, 1955
in the U. S. . . . The FBI must  have an underground  turnstile
to  get that  exact  a  count  .  .  .  Hoover  said  only  one agent
was  needed  "for   proper   coverage   of  a  Nazi"   but  ten   arc
required  for  every   Communist  .  .  .  Watch  out  for  young
married  couples who  appear  to be "mild  liberals" . . . Hoover
testified   that   the    Communists   recruit    "young    married
couples"  who  are  then  "sent  into  different   areas  to  enter
industry  and assume  the  role  of  mild  liberals  .  .  .  They  in-
filtrate the  labor  organizations   . . . they  are  available  to be
active  agents  in  time  of  national  emergency."    Why   "mild
liberals"?    Why   not   "mild   reactionaries"?    The   result  of
this  bogeyman  nonsense  is  to  make  "mild  liberals"  as  well
as  radicals  suspect,  and  to  lay  the  groundwork for  hysteria
in  the event  of war.  . . .
Rarely  has  the  Supreme  Court  been  so  clearly  invited  to
reverse  itself  as  in  the  3-man  appeals  bench  decision uphold-
ing  the  new  immunity  statute  in  the  test  case  of  William
Ludwig  Ullmann.   All  three  judges  voiced  misgivings,   but
declared  themselves  bound  by  precedents   only  the   Supreme
Court   could  change.    The  main  opinion,  by  Judge   Jerome
Frank,  was  a  single  paragraph,  followed  by  a  footnote  ten
times  as   long,  a  tail   obviously  intended  to  wag  the   dog.
The footnote  was  a  lengthy  quotation from  the  defense  brief
arguing  that  the  "immunity"   offered  by  the  statute  was of
little  value  since  those  who  were   forced   to  admit  radical
views   or   associations   faced   a   wide  variety   of  non-penal
sanctions.
Judge  Frank  said  he  was  not  prepared  to  assert  that  this
argument  "lacks  all  merit.    But  our  possible  views  on  the
subject,"   he  added,  "have   no  significance.   For   an   inferior
court   like   ours   may   not   modify   a   Supreme   Court   doc-
trine.  .  .  ."   The English  courts  in  the  Nineteenth  century
held  that  the  privilege  was  against  self-degradation   as  well
as  self-incrimination.   But  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  1890's
decided  by  one  vote  (the  5-4  decision  of  Brown  v.   Walker,
161 U.S.   591)   that  the  privilege  relates  solely  to  testimony
which  might  lead  to  defendant's  prosecution  for  a  crime.
District  Judge   Clarence  G.  Galston,  sitting  on  the  three
man  bench,  said  "If  this  matter  were  one  of  first  impression
I  could  easily  reach  the  conclusion that  the  immunity  statute
in  question  is  in  effect   a  circuitous  attempt  to  circumvent
the  Constitution  by  a  short-cut  legislative  statute  amending
the  Fifth  Amendment."    Chief  Judge  Charles  B.  Clark,  con-
curring,  cited  three  recent  books  on  the  Fifth   amendment,
by  Dean  Erwin  N.  Griswold  of  Harvard  Law  School, Telford
Taylor  and  Alan  Barth   on  the   need  for   a  more   realistic
interpretation   of  the   privilege.
"I  concur,  but  regretfully,"  Judge   Clark  wrote.  "For   the
steady  and  now  precipitate  erosion  of  the  Fifth   amendment
seems  to  me  to  have  gone  far   beyond  anything  within  the
conception  of  those  justices  of  the   Supreme  Court  who  by
the  narrowest  of  margins  first  gave  support  to  the  trend  in
the  1890's.    And  serious  commentators  have  found  this  new
statute  peculiarly  disturbing  in  policy  and  in  law.   Griswold,
The  Fifth   Amendment    Today   80-81  (1955);  Taylor,  Grand
Inquest   217-221, 296-300  (1955);  Barth,  Government  by  In-
vestigation,  130-134   (1955).  .  .  .  Realistically   viewed  there
is  much  in  the  defendant's  contention that  at  the  end  of  the
road   is  a  charge   of  perjury   supported   by  the   oath   of  a
renegade   or   paid   informer.     Convictions  so   obtained  and
punishment  thus  decreed  cannot  satisfy   either  the  needs  or
the  ideology  of  a  democratic  country  committed  to   respect
and toleration  for  dissident  minorities."
Three years after  the  McCarran  committee  began its  smear
campaign  against  the  United  Nations,  a  belated  victory  has
been  won  on  behalf  of  its  employes  and  the  world  organiza-
tion  itself  in  the  acquittal  of  Mary Jane  Keeney of  contempt
by  Federal Judge  Henry  A. Schweinhaut  here  in  Washington.
Mrs.  Keeney was  asked  by  the  McCarran  committee whether
anyone  in  the  State  Department  had  helped  her  obtain  em-
ployment  in  the  UN.    She  refused  to  answer  on  the  ground
that  prior  instructions  by  UN  officials,   its   staff   regulations
and   its   Charter   debarred   her   from   answering.    She  was
found  guilty  by  a  jury  after  Judge  Alexander  Holtzoff  ruled
as  a  matter  of  law that  she  was  "not  entitled  to  assert  any
privilege  under  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  UN."    But
the  Court  of  Appeals   (Danaher,  Edgerton  and  Prettyman)
reversed   and  sent  the  case  back  for  a  new  trial.    A  jury
was  waived  and  this  time,  in  the   light  of  the   principles
expressed   by  the   higher   court,   Judge   Schweinhaut   found
her  not  guilty.    But  the  victory  came  too  late  to  save  the
staff   of  the  UN  from  a  purge  in  which  Mrs.  Keeney,  too,
lost  her  job.   It  is  also  too  late  to  reconstruct  the  UN back-
bone  broken   when  Trygve  Lie  knuckled   under  to  the   Sen-
atorial  witch  hunters.
Our  hat  is  off this  week  to  Anita  Willcox, who  declined  to
be   intimidated   when   the   New   York   Herald-Tribune    "ex-
posed"   her   last   Monday  for   furnishing    $10,000   bail   for
Harvey  Matusow.   "I  believe,"  Mrs.  Willcox  told  that  paper,
"that  however  much  he  may  deserve  jail  for  the  wrongs  he
has  done,  he  should  not  be  jailed  for  trying  to  right  those
wrongs."    Nor  should  people  be  smeared  for  helping  others
to  enjoy  their   constitutional  right  to  bail  until  cleared   or
convicted.
You  Just  Can't  Expect Those Informers To Be Impeccable
".  .  .  if  you  are  just  going  to  have  to  get  somebody of
absolutely  impeccable and  unassailable  character,  it  is  going
to  have  a  terrific  impact  on  our   prosecutions."
—Assistant  Attorney   General  William  F.  Tompkins,  head
of  the  Interned  Security  Division, explaining  the  Matusow
•  case to  the  House Appropriations  Committee.  1956  budget
hearings,  p. 309.
"The   day  he   [Matusow]   announced   he   had   lied,   I   in-
structed   Assistant   Attorney  General   W.  F.  Tompkins  to
make   a   thorough  investigation.   They   served   a   subpoena
on  Matusow."
—Attorney  General Brownell, to  the  same  committee, p. 13,
Mr.  ROONEY.   When  you  talk   of   using  Matusow   last
June,   did  you  have   occasion   to   go  into  his    neurological
record  while  with  the  armed  services?
Mr.  TOMPKINS.  I  don't  think  we  had  a  record   of  that
at  the  time,  Mr.  Chairman.    Since  that  time  I  have seen—
Mr.  ROONEY.   Since  what  time?
Mr.  TOMPKINS.  Since  this  Matusow  controversy  started,
I   might   say.    A  copy  of  a  letter   reportedly   sent  to   the
former   U.  S.  Attorney   in   New  York,  Myles   Lane,   which
pointed  out that  psychoneurosis  to  Mr. Lane  ...    I  received
a  copy  of  it  from  the   FBI.
Mr.  ROONEY.   When?
Mr.  TOMPKINS.    Under   date  of  February   23,  1955.    I
then  asked  Mr.  Lumbard  about  it  yesterday  [February  28,
1955]   and  he  told  me  that  the  U.  S.  Attorney's   office   had
received  the letter  in January  1952 . . .
Mr. ROONEY.   Are  we to  understand  that  all  during  this
time  the  matter  of  the  question  of  his  mental  equilibrium
has  never  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Attorney
General's  office  . . .
Mr.  TOMPKINS.  As far  as  we know,  sir,  that  is  true  . .".
The  diagnosis  ...     is  psychoneurosis  of  a  mild  but  acute
form  .  .  .  his brother  had been  killed  in  action  as  a  crew
member  of a  B-17 ...   I  am going  to  be very frank  with  you,
with that  information, I would have  used the witness ...  that
medical  description  wouldn't  have  any  impact  as  far  as  I am
concerned,  from  reading it, on his credibility  . . .
—Same  hearing, pages 294-S.
Place  A  Bulk  Order  for  Last  Week's  Issue—50,000   Already   Sold—and   Help   The  Morse-Lehman   Resolution
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  .18,  1955
Big  Business  Sets  Out  to  Gut  The  Anti-Trust  Laws
By  A Business  Observer
The  Federal  Antitrust   laws—those   frail  barriers  against
the  growth   of  monopoly  and  the  smothering   of  free  enter-
prise—have  been  dealt  a  new  blow.   It   comes  in  the  form
of  a  report  to  the  Attorney  General  from  the  committee  of
60 experts  he  appointed  19 months  ago  to  study  the  laws  and
is  so  well  disguised  it  has  been  hailed  in  some  places  as  a
pat  on the  head.     ("Reaffirms  the  basic  tenets" ....   "an
important  milestone.")
Most  of  the  daily  press  gave  little  heed  to  the  dissents.
For   some  committee   members,   headed   by  Prof.   Louis  B.
Schwartz  of  the  U.  of Pa., said  it  would be  harder  and  more
expensive   than  ever   to  fight   monopolies  if  the    majority's
recommendations   are  adopted.    The  report's  proposal  for  a
law  to  stop  unions  from  exercising  "commercial   restraints"
brought  a  protest from  Prof.  Walter  Adams,  Michigan  State.
The   vagueness   of   the   proposal,   he   said,  "might   be con-
strued—erroneously    perhaps—as     prohibiting    some    union
activities  generally   regarded  as  normal  and  necessary."   He
joined   Dr.   Schwartz   in   saying   the   recommendations   will
weaken  the  laws.
This  is  distressing   news.    The  three  key  laws—The  Sher-
man  Act  of  1890,  the  Clayton   and  Federal  Trade  Commis-
sion  Acts  of  1914—have  had  no  more  than  a  mild  braking
action  on the  growth  of big  business.   The  laws that  followed
were attempts  to  patch  loopholes  in  the  basic  statutes  or,  as
in  the  case  of  the  fair  trade  laws,  to  exempt   questionable
business   practices.
A  Wave  of  Mergers
Despite    the   laws   the   number   of   companies   producing
America's  goods  continues  to  shrink.    Rep.  Emanuel  Celler,
in   one  of  the   few   Congressional   criticisms   of  the   report,
pointed  out  that  since  1950  over  3,000  mergers   took  place—
more  than  at  any  other   time  in  our  history,  and  that  gov-
ernment   agencies   have   instituted   "a   grand   total   of  five
prosecutions   to  stem  this  wave  of  corporate  mergers."
Dr.  Schwartz's   main  objection   to  the  report  is  the   fond
glance  it  casts  in the  direction  of a  "rule  of reason" approach
to  antitrust  enforcement.    Yet  that  is  the  approach FTC,
under  the  chairmanship of  Edward  F.  Howrey,  has  adopted
more  and  more  openly   since  1953.  It   is  the  approach,  of
course,  sanctioned  by  the  courts  in  early  interpretations  of
the   Sherman   Act,  when  they   ruled  it   outlawed   only "un-
reasonable"  restraints   of  trade.    A  big  reason   for  passing
the  Clayton  Act  was  to  get  around  the  "rule  of  reason,"  to
prohibit  certain   business  practices   outright   and  make  them
"per   se"  violations.    The  history   of  antitrust  enforcement
supports  Dr.  Schwartz's  argument  that  the  "rule  of  reason"
introduces uncertainties  into antitrust enforcement and makes
it  more   difficult.
Yet  Howrey  has  chosen  to  ignore  the  hard-won   experience
of   his  agency's  staff.     In  doing  so  he  lines  up  abreast  of
one  of  the  co-chairmen  of  the  Antitrust   Committee,  Prof.  S.
Chesterfield    Oppenheim   of   the    University    of    Michigan.
Oppenheim  is  widely  regarded   as  the  draftsman   of  Republi-
can  antitrust  policy.    It  is  apropos,  therefore,  to  note  that
Howrey  delivered  his  first  major  policy  speech  at  Michigan
and   has   one  of   Oppenheim's  former     student-collaborators
as   his   legal   advisor.     Howrey,   however,   does   not   quote
Oppenheim  in  support  of  his  innovations.  He  quotes Woodrow
Wilson,  the  man  who launched  FTC  in  1914  as  a  bold  experi-
ment  in  bringing   order  and  strength  into  the.  enforcement
of  the  antitrust laws.   Severely  limited from  the  start,  under-
budgeted, understaffed, it  has  dwindled  in  power  and  influence
ever  since.    It  would  be  the  final  irony  if  it  expired  as  an
antitrust  agency  under  the  leadership  of  a  man  who  uses
its  founder's  own  words  to  justify  his  acts.    Now that  the
antitrust  report  is  out  (Howrey,  incidentally, was  a  member
of  the  Committee)  it  is  being  hailed  within  the  Commission
as  further   vindication  of  the   chairman's   more   reasonable
attitude   toward   antitrust   enforcement.    That   underscores
the  real  importance  of the  report—as  a  touchstone  for  assay-
ing  the  changing  attitude  toward  antitrust   legislation.
Milestone  or  Millstone?
But  this  aspect  of  the  study  has  been  largely  ignored  by
the  daily  papers.    They  have  given  the  biggest  play  to  the
Committee's  recommendation that fair  trade laws  be repealed.
As  a  concession to  the  public  that  is  not  unimportant.    But
it  seems  rather  insignificant  measured  against  recommenda-
tions  that  can  help intensify  business  control  of  this  country.
The  report  will  not  escape  Congressional  scrutiny.    Celler,
as   head   of  the   House   Judiciary   Committee,   is   ready   to
investigate   it.    So  is  Sen. Sparkman,  head   of  the   Senate
Small  Business  Committee.   And so is Wright  Patman,  whose
House  Small  Business  Committee has  already  begun  hearings.
Perhaps,  as the  Washington  Post  says, the  antitrust report
is  a  milestone, but  like many  milestones  in  Washington  these
days,  it  seems  to  mark  how small  a  distance  the   Eisenhower
Administration  has  advanced  from  the  views  fashionable  at
the  start  of  this  century.
Special  Bulk  Rates  tor  Last  Week's  Issue: 5c A Copy  for  500;  3c for  1,000;  2e for  5,000 or  more
J. F. Stone's Weekly, 301
Please  renew  (or  enter) my
Namp
E.  Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Street
CityZnnp          fitat.**
Enter  this gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
(Ta)    Namo
Strppt
Citv
*  $1 extra for  Canada.
Zonp           Rtpto
4/18/65
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
You  Con Strike A Blow  for  Peace By Getting  Behind the  Morse-Lehman  Resolution  to  Evacuate   Quemoy-Matsu
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED