I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955oct17.pdf

============================================================

Dulles  Ignores  The  Nathan-Schachtman   "Right  to  Travel"  Rulings,  See Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,  No. 38
OCTOBER  17,  1955
'»«      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Election  Forecast   1956:  Cold  and  Cloudy
The  steady  decline  in  the  stock  market—for  three  weeks  it
has  been  tolling  the  end  of  an  era—makes  all  attempt  to  fore-
cast  next  year's  election  foolish.  The  bull  market  is over. It  had
to  end  sometime,  and  the  President's  heart  attack  has  started
a  rush  to  cash  in  the  chips  without  waiting  for  an  election
year  tax cut  to make liquidation more profitable.  The  economic
situation  abroad   is  unsteady,  inflation   is  again  a  danger  in
Western  Europe  and  the  raw  material producing countries are
nervous  over  the  weakness  in  the  basic world  commodities.  At
home  maintenance of  business volume has  become increasingly
and  dangerously  dependent   on   inflation   of  consumer  credit.
The  business  world  is  moved  more  by hunch than  statistic, the
rabbit's  foot  superstitions  of  the  primitive lie  just  below  its
slick  surface.   Uneasiness  will  take  on  momentum  in  the  com-
ing  months.    We  are  in  for  a  change.
Economic  instability  and  political  instability  feed  on  each
other.   A  slump  will strengthen  both  right  and  left  against  the
center.  In  the  Republican  party, with  Eisenhower fading  from
the picture,  the rightists will pick up strength,  and find support
for  a  "twenty  years  of  treason"  election  campaign.  The  con-
servative  business  core  of  the  Administration will  fight  for  a
candidate  and  a  campaign  in  the  Eisenhower  image.   For  the
inner  big  business  crowd,  the  ideal  of  a  "safe  and  sane" candi-
date  would  be  Secretary of  the  Treasury  Humphrey, running a
"peace  and   prosperity"  campaign  with  Eisenhower  backing.
From  the  standpoint  of  world  peace,  four  more  years  of  such
an  administration  might  be  good,  for  it  could  negotiate  a  new
world settlement  more easily than  the  Democrats.
A  Macbethian  Frenzy
But  everything  is  terrifyingly   dependent   on   Eisenhower's
health.   Should  an  unexpected   turn  for  the  worse   force  his
resignation  or  should  he  die,  Nixon  as  his  successor  would  be
in  a  position  almost  to  ensure  the  nomination  for  himself. The
Nixons,  on  the  very brink  of  the  Presidency,  must  feel  an  al-
most  Macbethian  frenzy.  The  California organization is  against
him  for  having  obtained  the  Vice  Presidency  by  selling  out
Warren;  the  McCarthyites  regard  him  as  a  traitor;  the  China
Lobby  sees  him  as untrustworthy;  the  White House  crowd  dis-
likes  him  intensely;  the  politicoes   feel  sure  he  could  not  win
the  election;  and  the  big  business  men  regard  him  as a kind of
political  errand boy.  But  fate might  y et make Nixon  President,
and the Republican  candidate.
The  economic  and  political  forces  undermining conservatism
in  the  Republican  party  also  undermine  it  in  the  Democratic
party.   This  means  a  weakening  of  Stevenson.   Stevenson  has
many  assets—his   head  start,  the  fact  that  the  last  campaign
made  him  better  known  than  any other  Democratic  candidate,
and  perhaps  mass  instinct  in  a  troubled  time  for  a  man  with
promise of  genuine  bigness.  But  Stevenson  is closer  in  outlook
.1
and  temperament  to  the  Eisenhower crowd  than  to  the  combi-
nation  of  city  machine  politicians,  labor  leaders,  and  million-
aires-in-overalls   (like  Harriman  and  "Soapy"  Williams)  who
run  the  Democratic  party.  It  is not  difficult  to  understand  why
Truman  is  drifting  away  from  him  in  the  general  direction of
Harriman.   Truman's  demagogy  about  big  business  (which  he
turns  on  like  a  spigot  at  election  time  though  he  did  little
enough  to  make good  on  such talk while  in  office)  is quite dif-
ferent  from  the  gentlemanly views  Stevenson  unveiled  in  the
October   issue  of  Fortune.   Adlai  is  no  "give  'em  hell"  cam-
paigner.   That  kind  of  tub  thumping  is  not  his  style.
Comforts  of  Cold  War
Much  more  serious  is  the  divergence  between  Truman  and
Stevenson  on  foreign  policy.   Truman  and  Harriman  are  still
cold  warriors,  hostile  to  the  "Geneva  spirit,"  opposed  to   "re-
laxation,"  still  devoted  to  the  arms  race,  and  wedded  to  the
conception  of   "negotiation   from   strength."   A  campaign   in
which   the   Republicans  were   accused   of   appeasement   holds
many attractions for  the  Democrats.  It would  please  the Roman
Catholic  blocs  in  the  city  machines and  in  the  labor  movement,
as  George  Meany's  speech  last  week  to  the  American  Legion
again  illustrated.   It  would  undercut  any  Republican  campaign
to  accuse the  Democrats  of  being  soft  on  Communism.  And  it
would  provide  the  easy  stimulant of  bigger  arms  contracts  to
create employment in a slump.  (It's  a shrewd hunch  that  keeps
aircraft  stocks up while the  rest of  the market goes down).  The
"Left"  that  would  be  strengthened  by  hard  times  is  not  the
evaporated  left  of  the  Wallaceites  but  the  "left"  of  organized
labor  which  would  again  comfortably  combine  cold  war  and
the  welfare  state.
Where  Stevenson   and  George  have  skilfully    back-stopped
Eisenhower  on  the  road  to  peace,  developing  a  vested  interest
in   "Geneva,"  Truman   cannot  help  but  resent   the   applause
given  Eisenhower  for  making  peace  in  Korea  and  for  begin-
ning  to  liquidate the  cold  war.  Here  Truman  is close  to Harri-
man.   A  combination  of  Stalin  regime  rudeness,  broken Yalta
promises  of  free  elections  in  Eastern  Europe,  and  the  raw  hu-
man  stink  of  a great  revolution  in  process  of  achievement per-
manently  antagonized  this  heir  to  a  multi-millioned  fortune
when  he  was  in  Moscow.   The  crudeness  of  his  robber  baron
forbears  might  have  found  the  crudeness  of  the   Bolsheviks
congenial,   but  it  was  too  much  for  their  gentlemanly   heir.
This  synthetic  New  Dealer  from  New  York,  where  Cardinal
Spellman  is a power,  would  turn  back  the  clock  to  cold  war  if
elected.  Yet his Governorship  of  the biggest state in the union,
and  the  important  fact  that  he  is  in  a  position  to  be  his  own
"fat  cat,"  must  give  him  an  almost  irresistible  fascination  for
the  professional  politicians  of  the  poorer  party.    If  Harriman
is  their  candidate,  finance is no  problem.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 17,19SS
State  Department  Intends  to  Ignore  the  Nathan  and  Schachtman  "Right   to  Travel"  Rulings
Dulles Insists  on Iron  Curtain  at  Home While Fighting It  Abroad
Secretary  of  State  Dulles wants  to  lift  the  iron  curtain  in
Russia  and  maintain  it  in  America.    His  own  affidavit  and
the  State  Department   pleadings-in  the  Carl  Foreman   case
before  the  Court  of  Appeals  here  last  week  deserve   wider
attention  than  the  press  has  given  them.    The  Secretary
successfully  opposed  Foreman's  effort  to  get  a  ten  day  tem-
porary  passport  with  which  to  visit  Paris  on  film  business.
Refusal  of  the  passport  meant  the  loss  of  a  $75,000  cinema
contract  for  Foreman,  producer  of  "High  Noon,"  a  refugee
from  the  Hollywood blacklist  how living in England,  where his
U.S.  passport  was lifted  by the  U.S.  Embassy  two years  ago.
The  Secretary's  affidavit  shows that  he  intends  to  make  no
revision   in   present    passport    hearing    procedures,    under
which  derogatory  information  is  kept  secret  from  the  appli-
cant.    The  State   Department   trickily   dismisses   the   Otto
Nathan  case  requirement  of  a  "quasi  judicial  hearing"  (see
full  account  in  the  Weekly  of  last  June  13)  as  no  precedent,
since  technically  it  was  only a  court  ruling  on an  application
for  a stay,  and "does not  represent  any ruling  on the  merits."
In  that  case  the  Department  shrewdly  evaded  a  ruling  on
the merits by hastily  issuing  a  passport.  It  now contends that
the  Nathan  case  does  not  require  a  reform  of  its  passport
hearing  procedure.
Schachtman  Rule   Sidestepped
The  Schachtman  decision is  sidestepped  with  equal  agility,
and  the  outcome  supports  our  own  astringent  view  of  that
over-advertised  decision  (see  "The  Right  to  Travel  Is  As Yet
Only  A  Right  to  Litigate"  in  The  Weekly   of  July  4).    The
State  Department  argued,  "The  Schachtman  case  holds  that
a  citizen's  right  to  travel  abroad  is  'subject  to  the  rights of
Can  Informing   Be  Required?
".  .  .  the  use  by  the  defendant   [State  Department]
of  the  plaintiff's   refusal   to  furnish   names  of  persons
known  to  him  to  be  Communist   Party  members  at  the
time  he  was-a  member  as  a  basis  for  denying  passport
.facilities  was  unwarranted   in  the  passport  regulations,
was  an  arbitrary  abuse  of  discretion  and  was  in  excess
of  defendant's  powers."
—Carl  Foreman's plea for  a  temporary  restraining
order  against  John  Foster  Dulles.
others  and  to  reasonable  regulation  under law.'  The Schacht-
man  case  held  merely  that  it  was  arbitrary   for  the   Secre-
tary  of  State  to  deny  a  passport  on the  sole  ground  that  the
applicant  was the  head of an  organization listed  as  subversive
by  the  Attorney  General,  when in fact  that  organization  was
not  subversive,  had  been  denied  an  opportunity  to  prove  its
innocent   character,   and   the   Department   of   State   itself
considered    the    organization    hostile    to    the   Communist
International."
The  unwary  reader  would  never  guess  from  this  Jesuitical
summary  that  the  State  Department  has  held  Schachtman's
organization   subversive  and   refused   him   a   full   passport
hearing   even  though  an  anti  Communist  leaflet   signed   by
Schachtman  had  been  dropped  over  Shanghai  in  1949  after
its  capture  by  the  Reds.    (See text  in  our  July  4  issue,  the
only  place  where  this  was  reported.)
The  State  Department  pleadings  also  indicate  future  pass-
port  intentions  in  asserting  that  it  is  not  a  violation  of  due
process  to  deny  a  man  a  passport  on  undisclosed evidence
as  was  done  in  Foreman's  case.    Use  of  secret  informants
in  merchant   marine   screenings,   conscientious   objector   and
employe  loyalty  cases  are  cited  as  precedent.
The  Proof  of  "Sincerity"
Passport  applicants  will not  only continue to  be the  victim
of   informants  if   the   State   Department  has   its   way   but
must  themselves become  informants  to  qualify  for   passports.
Foreman   left   the   Communist  Party  in  1949,  swore  under
oath  in  1950  that  he  was  no  longer  a  member,  but  took  the
Rule  Of  Law  Under  Dulles
"The   record  of   the  proceedings  before   the  Depart-
ment  of  State  shows  that,  despite  the  requests  of  the
plaintiff,  he  was  denied  the  opportunity  (1)  of  knowing
and  rebutting   the  evidence  against  him,   (2)  of  seeing
and  excepting  to  the  recommendation  of  the  hearing
officer   or  the   Board  of   Passport   Appeals,   or   (3)   of
examining  and  excepting  to  a  statement  giving   with
particularity  the  reasons  for  the  final  denial  of  passport
facilities,  whether of  a permanent or temporary  nature."
—Affidavit    for  Carl  Foreman  in  his  passport  suit
against  John  Foster  Dulles.
Fifth   amendment   when  asked  by  the   House    Un-American
Activities   Committee  to  name  other  persons.    The   Depart-
ment  has  made  itself  the  inquisitorial   committee's  "secular
arm."  In January  Dulles rejected  Foreman's  application for  a
new  passport   and  more  recently  his  request   for  a   10-day
temporary  passport  to  Paris  on the  ground that  he  "was  not
satisfied"  that   Foreman's   connection  with   the  Communist
party  "had  been  terminated  under  such  circumstances  as  to
warrant  the  belief"  that  he  was  no  longer  under  its  influ-
ence.    These  lofty  but  standard  phrases  are  those  used  by
the  Department  where an  admitted  ex-Communist refuses  to
"prove  his  sincerity"  by  naming  others.
The   Dulles   affidavit,   in   trying   to   establish    Foreman's
political  heresy,  uses the  typical  informer effluvia  of  a  loyalty
hearing.    It  cites  Foreman's  conduct in  the  Screen   Writers
Guild  in  1950-51,  the  fact  that  he  subscribed  to  the  Daily
People's  World  in June  1951,  that  he  helped  a  political  pris-
oners  fund  in  the  same year,  that  he was  on the  mailing list
of  the  Hollywood Arts,  Sciences  and  Professions  Council  in
1951-52,  and  that  his  name  "appeared  in  the  records"   (just
how  is  not  specified)   of  the  Los  Angeles  Committee for   the
Protection   of  the  Foreign  Born.    Significantly  the   affidavit
cites   no  heretical   associations   since   1952   and   alleges   no
improper   conduct  while  abroad  since  that   time.     Neither
does  it   contest   Foreman's. claim  that  he  is  no  longer   a
member  of  the  Communist Party.
Only  A  "Natural  Right"?
Legally   the   Foreman   case  sets  no  precedent   since   the
District  Judge,  Pine,  decided only that  he  could  not  issue  a
temporary  restraining   order  but  could  act  only  after  a  full
hearing  on  the  merits.    The  Court  of  Appeals   (Prettyman,
Fahy   and   Danaher)   rejected   Foreman's    appeal   without
written  opinion.   But  the  pleadings do show Dulle's intention
to  maintain  present  procedures  though  some  of  his  subordi-
nates  feel  that  the  U.S.  cannot  press  at  the  UN  and Geneva
for   a  lifting  of  the   Soviet  iron  curtain  while  maintaining
rigid  political bars  on the  right  to travel  at  home.  Foreman's
lawyers,  Sidney  E.  Cohn  and  Eugene Gressman, plan  further
proceedings.
State  Department  aids  attending  the  argument  before  the
Court  of  Appeals  took  notes  with  great   satisfaction  when
Judge  Fahy,  who  wrote  the  Schachtman  decision,  said-  the
right  to travel  was a  "natural"  rather  than a  "constitutional"
right.  This metaphysical  gibberish  splits  (if  we may  mix  the
metaphor)  a potent legal hair,  since there  are many "natural"
rights  which  are  not  guaranteed  by the  Constitution  and  are
subject   to  regulation,   curtailment   and   even  denial.
The  strategy   of  the  Department  in  giving  passports   to
Otto  Nathan,  Clark  Foreman,  and  others  earlier  this  year
while pursuing  the  Paul  Robeson  case  is now clear.   It  wants
as   test   case   the   application   of   a   man   so  close  to _the
Communist  Party  line that  it  may use the Communist-phobia
to   establish   its   right   to   refuse   passports   for    political
reasons.     Though   nervous   liberals   will   shy   away    from
defending   Robeson's  right  to  travel,  this  is  the  case  that
may  finally  determine  theirs.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, October 17,1955
A  Quick  Look  Around:  Sokolsky  Defends  Himself  Against  Brooklyn  Tablet
Sen. Humphrey & the Word "Peace"; Why We  Liked Peron;Coal  vs. Atom
GRATUITOUS  SLAP:  "It  is  an  amazing  document  start-
ing  with  the  gratuitous   claim  that  'there  is  peace'  .  . ."—
Senator  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  (D.  Minn.) complaining about
an  Agriculture  Department  publicity  release,  "Pacts  Impor-
tant  to Farmers."   Why do liberal  Democrats  like Humphrey
bristle   at  the  word   "peace"?  .  .  .  DOLLAR  SIGN  VS.
CROSS:  The  Argentine  situation   was  one  of  the  few  occa-
sions  in  recent   years  when  the  State  Department  and  the
Vatican  did  not  see  eye  to  eye.    This  was  reflected  in  the
celerity  with   which  the  latter  recognized  the  new  Lonardi
government  while the  former  waited,  as  if  hoping that  Peron
might   yet   work  a   miracle.     The  State   Department  was
ready  to  forgive  Peron  his  outburst  of  anti-clericalism  be-
cause  he  was  showing  a  new  piety  toward  foreign  invest-
ments.   His  overthrow  disrupted  not  only the  pending  Stand-
ard  Oil contract  but  negotiations  (1)  to pay  for  expropriated
American  and  Foreign   Power  properties  and   (2)   to  allow
U.S.   investors   to   begin   to   draw   their   profits    (hitherto
blocked)   out   of  Argentina.    While  investors   were   to   be
allowed  withdrawal  of  $4.2  millions  in  profits,  the  U.S.  was
prepared  to  make  $60 million  available  through  the  Export-
Import  Bank for a new semi-public  steel  mill. . . . SIGN OF
CHANGING  TIMES:  George  Sokolsky  in  the  Hearst  New
York  Journal-American  October  8  forced  to  defend  himself
against  a  letter  in  the  Brooklyn  Tablet  criticizing  him  for
defending  Landy  (as  did  the  Hearst  newspapers).
COAL  VS.  ATOM:  The  Atomic  Energy   Commission  will
have  trouble  at  the  next  session  of  Congress  with  the  coal
industry.     Congressman  James   E.  Van  Zandt   (R.  Pa.)   is
marshalling  both  coal  labor  and  capital  in  his  campaign  to
force  the  AEC  to  make  cost  figures  public  on  the  uranium
supplied  private  atomic  industry.    Coal  suspects  a  hidden
subsidy,  and  Van  Zandt  wants  coal,  oil  and  gas  protected
from  unfair  competition.    In  the  course  of  the  conflict  be-
tween  the  older  and  newer  forms  of  energy,  the  public  may
also  learn  to  what  extent  the  atomic  industry   will  have  a
stake  in  a  continued  atomic  arms  race  so that  it  can  have
an  assured  and  profitable  market  for  fissionable  materials
produced  in the course of generating  power . . .  COOPS VS.
MONOPOLY:  Elk  River,  Montana,  has  the  second  highest
rural  electric  power  costs  in  the  country  because  coal  for
existing   generating   plants  has  to  be  brought  in  by  truck.
Six   Minnesota  cooperatives  have  been  dickering  with   the
AEC  to  build  a  22,000  kilowatt,  $6  million  reactor   at   Elk
Same  Name  As  The  Fellow  Who  Wanted
To  Bomb  Across  The  Yalu
"He  thinks  that  another  war  would  be  double  suicide
and  that  there  is-enough  sense  on  both  sides   of  the
Iron  Curtain  to  avoid  it.    The  Soviets  and  the  democ-
racies  will  adopt  the  best  characteristics   of  each  other,
and  in  the  process  of  many  years,  there  will  not  be  a
strict  demarcation   between  their  ideals;  therefore  no
causes  for  war  between  them."
—General   of   the   Army   Douglas  MacArthur,  OB
reported    by   Mayor   Achille   Laura   of   Naples,
after    a  talk  with  MacArthur   at   the    Waldorf
Astoria,  Oct.  7.
River.   National  Rural  Electric  Cooperative  Association  last
week  accused the AEC of giving the project  a run-around  ..  .
SIMILAR   CHARGES  OF   PARTIALITY   to   private   big
power  interests  came  at  the  same  time  from   Congressman
Irwin  D.  Davidson  (D.-Lib.,  N.  Y.)  in  connection  with   the
sale  of  leftover  atomic  power  at  West  Milton,  N.  Y.,  to  the
Niagara   Mohawk  power  group  with  nonprofit  utilities   left
out  in the  cold,  despite the  preference  provision  of the  Atomic
Energy  Act.  ...    It  looks  as  if  atomic  power  is  on its way
to  becoming a major  political  issue. . . .
SHADOW  OF  A  POSTAL  CENSORSHIP:  The  scandal
magazine  Confidential   won only  half  a  victory  last  week  in
its  fight  against  postal  censorship.   Judge  Luther  W. Young-
dahl  made  the  Postoffice   Department  withdraw   instructions
holding  up  the  mailing  of  the  next  issue  until  it  could deter-
mine  whether  it  contained  obscene matter.  But  the  magazine
had  to  agree  to  let  postal  authorities  inspect  the  next  issue
in  advance  of  mailing.   This  would  give  the  Postoffice   time
for  a court  order  if it  thought  the issue  obscene. . . .  LATTI-
MORE  TEACHING AGAIN: We have better  news to  report
in  the  wake  of  a  more  famous  Youngdahl   decision.    Owen
Lattimore  is teaching  again  at  Johns  Hopkins.   He has  been
reinstated   with  tenure  as  a  lecturer,  and  is  giving  a  course
this   semester   on  Chinese  history   based  on  studies   for   a
forthcoming  book on "China  in  History."   Though  the  Walter
Hines  Page  School  of  International  Relations,  of  which   Lat-
timore  was  director,  was  disbanded  during  the  long  attack
upon   him,  his  return   to  classes   writes  a   pleasant  finis
to  a great  case.
Ah,  Heraclitus,   How  Melancholy and  Monotonous Are  The  Claims  of  Empire!
"Nothing  in  The  World  Is  Permanent" — Except  British  Control  of  Cyprus
To  the  latest  issue  of  Keesing's  Contemporary  Archives
to  arrive  from  London  we  are  indebted for  the  full  text  of
the  two  questions  addressed  by  the  Turkish  Foreign  Min-
ister   to   the   British   Foreign   Secretary   and   the  latter's
answers  the   day  after   the   terrible   anti   Greek  riots   in
Istanbul  and  Izmir.    The  answers  would  make  Gilbert  &
Sullivan   envious,  though  the   circumstances   may   make
them  seem  less  than  funny  to  the  Greeks:
"(1)    Does  the  British  Government intend  to  maintain  in
the  present  and  in  the  future  the  right  of  sovereignty  on
the  island  of  Cyprus,  devolved  upon  Great  Britain  by  the
Treaty  of  Lausanne?
"To  this  Mr.  Macmillan  replied  as  follows:
" The  British  position  ...    is  really  a  simple  one.  We
are  a  very  empirical  people.   We try  to  deal  with facts  as
we  see  them.   There  is  nothing  permanent  in  the  world,
and  especially  in  the  nuclear  world; and  in  the  long history
of   mankind—no  one  knows  it  better  than  the   races  and
countries  bordering  on  the  Mediterranean—there are  many
changes  and  permutations which  take  place.    But  we  face
facts  as  they  are.    We accepted  Cyprus  as  a  trust,  in   1878,
to  meet  certain   strategic   and  political  conditions  of   the
world.   These  strategic  and  political  conditions have  repro-
duced  themselves  with  melancholy  and  monotonous itera-
tion,  and  indeed  are  present  today  in  a  far  greater   degree
than  ever.   Therefore,  while  we cannot look  into  the  future
at   a   very  great   distance,   we  cannot   foresee  conditions
enabling  us  to  abandon in  one direction or  another  the  trust
we  undertook  and which  we must  still  carry  out.  . .  .
"(2)   If  the  British  Government  is  determined  to  main-
tain  sovereignty  on  the  island,  does  it,  for  the  present  or
for   the  future,  accept  any  principle  of  self-determination
which  might   ultimately   lead   to  the  independence   of   the
island  or  to  its  accession  to  another  country  [i.e.   reunion
with  Greece  IPS]?
"To  this  Mr.  Macmillan  replied:  'I  think  I  have  already
answered  that  question.   We  do  not  accept  the  principle of
self-determination  as  one of  universal application. We think
that  exceptions must  be  made in  view  of  geographical,  tra-
ditional,  historical,   strategical, .and  other  considerations.'"
3  .52
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 17,1955
Foreign  Affairs  Roundup;  Why  Should  Moscow  Become "A  Merchant  of  Death"?
The  Ike-Bulgania  Exchange:  Progress  En Route  to  Geneva
After   two  generations   of  struggle  by  the   Left  in   every
capitalist  country  for   abolition  of  the  war-breeding   muni-
tions  business  is  the  stronghold   of  world  socialism  still  so
weak  that  it  couldn't  afford  to  announce, "The Soviet  Union
stands  ready  to  trade  with  any  and  every  country  but  not
in  the  tools  of  war."   Is  the  sale  of  munitions  to  dictators,
and  to  countries   which  need  peace  but  drift   toward  war,
any  more honorable and  decent  a trade  just  because  Skoda  is
now  owned  by  the  Czechoslovak  Republic?   We  believe  the
Soviet   Union  wants  peace.    Why,  then,  should  it  play  with
fire in  the highly  inflammable  Middle  East?  .  . .
Years  ago  an  Italian   anarchist,  Armando  Borghi,   author
of  "Mussolini  Red  and  Black,"  then  an  anti-Fascist   exile  in
our  country,  told  me  a  story  of  his  visit  to  Moscow  during
the   first   meeting   of   the   Third   International   under   the
Bolshevik  regime.    Borghi  said  he  ran  into  Karl  Radek  with
More  Contempt  Cases
Lawrence  Arguimbau,  a  former  teacher  at  MIT, was
tried  without  a  jury  here  last  week  for  refusing  on
moral  grounds  to  give  the  House  Un-American   Activ-
ities  Committee the  names  of  others  who  were  in  the
Communist  party  with  him  until  he  left  it  five  years
ago.    His  counsel,  Osmond  K.  Fraenkel,  attacked  the
authority   of   the   Committee   on   First   Amendment
grounds.    It   will  be  several   weeks  before  there  is  a
decision.   Barrows Dunham, a former  teacher at Temple
University,  well  known   for   his  books  on  philosophy,
goes  on  trial  for  contempt  of  the  same  committee  this
week  in  another  test  of  the   Fifth   Amendment.    And
Goldie   Watson,   the   Philadelphia   schoolteacher,   who
pleaded  the  First  before  the  House  committee, will  be
tried  next  week.   All  three  contempts occurred in 1953.
A  Senator  Trying  to  Be  Optimistic
"The  predominant  factor  in  the  current  situation  in
south  Vietnam is  the  survival of  the  Diem  government.
Not  only  has  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  remained  in  power;  he
has  greatly  strengthened  his  position  as  the  head  of
the  free  Vietnamese  government. . . . There  is a  need,
however, to avoid undue  optimism. . . . Diem's authority
is  still  weak  outside  Saigon-Cholon  and  other   cities.
—Senator  Mansfield's   report  on  Vietnam,  Oct.  10.
"The  authority  of  the  southern  Vietnam government
does  not  extend effectively  over  the  whole  of  its  terri-
tory.    Large  tracts  of  the  countryside of  Cochinchina
are  in  the  hands of  the  three  rebel  sects,  the  Caodaists,
the  Binh. Xuyen,  and  the  Hoa  Hoa, all  hostile  to  the
government  of Mr. Ngo Dinh  Diem. . .  . The mass of
the  people in  the  south  favor  the  Communist regime  in
the  north,  but   for   reasons   of  nationalistic  sentiment
rather  than  because  of  any  doctrinaire  attachment  to
Communism.  .  .  .  The kind of argument  one hears  is
that  the  choice  lies  between an  efficient  dictatorship  in
the  north  and  an  inefficient  dictatorship  in  the  south.
.  .  . All shades  of Vietnamese  nationalist  opinion are
now   agreed   that   the   only   hope  of   saving  southern
Vietnam  from  Communism  lies in removing . . .  Diem."
—The   Economist   (London)   October  8.
a  volume  of  "The Prince"  under  his  arm, and  Radek dis-
coursed   brilliantly   on    Macchiavelli.     Borghi   commented
sadly  in  telling  me  the  story  in  his  broken  English,  "Mac-
chiavelli  all  right  for  Caesar.    No  good  for  Brutus."    Can
those  who  seek  to  serve  humanity  use  the  same  methods  as
those  who  seek  only power  for  themselves?   Must  not  Brutus
be  corrupted  if  he  acts  like  Caesar?  .  .  .
More  progress  than  meets  the  naked  eye  seems  to  be  in
the  making  on  the  way  to  Geneva.    The  British,   playing
something  of  a  broker's  role,  are  trying  to  subordinate  talk
of  the  grandiose  Eisenhower  aerial   inspection  plan   to  less
glamorous   but   more  practical   methods  of   easing   tension.
Bulganin's  letter  to  Eisenhower  was  noteworthy  chiefly  be-
cause  it  no  longer  linked  the  Soviet  arms  proposal  (as  Mos-
cow  did  last  May)  with  withdrawal  of  U.S. bases.    Eisen-
hower's  reply  opens the  door  tentatively  to  the  Soviet "key
points"  inspection  proposals.    The  Pentagon  is  still  opposed
to  arms  reduction  of  any  kind,  but  the  pressure  is  on  for
a  change  in this  respect  too. . . .
Before   the   American  Legion  in   Miami  last   week  John
Foster   Dulles  for   the   first   time  tentatively  acknowledged
that   change  was  working  like  a   yeast   within  the   Soviet
Union  and  that   a   peaceful   internal   transformation   away
from  dictatorship  and  in  the  relations  between  Moscow  and
its  satellites  was  possible.    We  award  him  an  A  for   effort
and   suggest   that  his  brother   Allen  W.  of  CIA, who  still
clings   to  the  old  line,  drop  a   parachutist   into  the   State
Department  and freshen  up his intelligence  sources.  . . .
And  if  it's  any  comfort   to  Molotov,  the   Dunn  survey  of
Greenwich,  Conn., reported  last  week that  the  United States,
with  the  help  of  the  Republican  and  Democratic  parties  has
now   entered  "the  fourth   and   final  movement  into   social-
ism."  .  .  .  Like  Molotov,  we thought  only  the  foundations
had  been  laid.  . . .
Why  Not  Send  A  Gift   Subscription to  Some  (Reviving)  Liberal  Friend?
I. F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)  Name ....
Street
City
* $1 extra  for
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol.  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Zone
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
Zone
Canada.
State
yr.)  additional:
State
10/17/53
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D  C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED