I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955feb14.pdf

============================================================

The  Hidden  History  of  the Fcrmosa  Crisis
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NUMBER 4
FEBRUARY  14,  1955
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Inner  Politics  of A  False  Alarm
What  Threat  to  Formosa?
An  extraordinary  admission  was  made  by  Senator  George
in  a little  noticed radio interview  over MBS last Monday  night.
The  Senator was  asked  whether  he  thought  Communist  China
was  bluffing.    He  replied  that  he  did  not   think  China  was
bluffing  "in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term." "But," he added,
"in  point  of  timing  it  may  be  several  years  off  before  they
would  actually begin an  operation looking  to  the,  as they  say,
liberation  of  the  Formosan people."
The  time  and  the  source  made  this  startling.   It  was  just
two  weeks  after  the  President  in  an  emergency  message  had
asked  authority  not  only  to  defend  Formosa  but  to  strike  in
advance   of   hostilities—and  even   with   nuclear  weapons—
against  any  buildup  on  the  mainland which  seemed  to  fore-
shadow  an  attack  upon  it.   The  request  for  this  approval  in
advance  was  rushed  through  Congress with  the  urgency  of  a
declaration  of  war.  The  country  and  the  world  were whipped
into a state of  near hysteria by a move which seemed  justifiable,
if  at  all,  only  on  secret  information  that  Peiping  was  on  the
verge  of  unleashing an  attack.   This  was indeed  the impression
created  by  the  secret  briefings  which  were  given  the   Con-
gressional  committees  concerned  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  and  the  Secretary  of  State.   Members of  these
committees  hinted  on  the floor of  both  House  and  Senate that
revelations  were  made  which  explained  the  need  for   swift
warning  to  Peiping.   Only  so,  we  were  told,  could  we  avoid
World  War  HI.
Yet  here  two  weeks later  was Senator  George,  the  chairman
of   the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,   who  had  heard
all  the  secret briefings, the  most  respected  and  the  most  power-
ful   member  of  Congress  on  matters   of  foreign  policy,   the
confidant  of  Admiral Radford  and  Secretary  Dulles,  the  Sen-
ator  who  did  more  than  any  other   single  man  to  put   the
Formosan    resolution  through   an  unconvinced   and  worried
Senate  over  the  misgivings  of  some  of  his  closest  colleagues,
and  he  was  saying  "in  point  of  timing  it,"   i.e.  an  attack  on
Formosa,  "may  be  several years  off!"
An  Advance  at  Snail's  Pace
Were  it  not  for  the  deafening  barrage  of  war  scare  head-
lines  since  the  President's   Formosan  message,  this  admission
by  Senator  George  would  have  been  less surprising.   A  minute
and  patient  examination  of  the  dispatches  would have  thrown
doubt  on  the  urgent  alarms.   Walter   Simmons,  the  Chicago
Tribunes    correspondent   on   Formosa,   had   spelled   out   the
snail's  pace of  the  Chinese  Communist  island-hopping  advance
in  its  issue of  February  2.  Simmons pointed  out  that  the  steep
mountainous   beaches  of   Fukien   province  opposite   Formosa
made  it  "militarily  useless,"  that  any  attack   on  the  island
(or  from  the  island on  the  mainland)  must  utilize  the  Shang-
hai  region  400  miles  to  the  north.   The  rocky  Tachens  cover
the  approaches to  this  area.
Simmons  reported  that  the  Communists  had  opened  their
campaign  against  the  Tachens  last  May  by  taking   the  Kao
Taos  isles,  20  miles  to  the  north.   A  month  later  they  took
Toumen  island,  five  miles  closer.   At  this  point  they  stopped
to  build  up  air  support   for  their  next  step,   the  assault  on
Yikiang  island,  eight   miles  from  upper   Tachen.    This  was
captured  on  January  18, and  put  the  Communists  in  position
for  their  next  move;  which  was. an  attack  on  Upper  Tachen
island.  A  drive  against  Formosa  itself,  200  miles  to  the  south,
was   "probably,"   Simmons   cabled,   "many   months   in   the
future."
This  explains a  remark  few  newspapers reported  which  was
made  by  Secretary Dulles  the  day  Yikiang  fell.  That  was  the
day  the  Secretary,  after  talking  with  the  White  House,  dis-
missed  the  loss  of  the  island  as  "without  any  particular   im-
portance."   Mr.  Dulles  told  his  press  conference  Yikiang  was
"part  of  a  group  of  islands  most  of  which  actually  passed
from  Nationalist  to  Communist  hands  last  May."   He  added,
"The   loss  didn't  attract  any particular  attention  at  that  time.
Since then," the  Secretary  continued,  "public  opinion  has been
focussed  more  on  these  little  off-shore  islands  than  was  the
case  last  May."   This  was  the  day  before  the  President  at  his
own  press conference wrote  off  the  Tachens  altogether.
No  Sign  of  Impending  Attack
This  was  the  attitude  taken  by  the  Administration  before
it  decided  to  ring  the  alarm  bells  and  send  its  war  message
to  Congress.  But  even after  the  message there  were  indications
from  informed  sources which  deflated  the  notion  of  a  military
emergency.  John  G.  Norris, who  covers  the  Pentagon  for  the
Washington  Post, reported  on  January  26,  two  days  after  the
President's  message, "military men don't  look for  an  immediate
assault  on  the  Tachens."   He  added,  "most  military   men  at
the  Pentagon  believe the  Reds  will  move  a step  at  a  time,  and
that  they  are  nowhere  near  ready  for  an  assault  on  Quemoy,
much  less  Formosa  itself."   The  New  York   Times  next  day
published  a dispatch  from Greg MacGregor on Formosa saying,
"Ships  and  aircraft  patrolling  Formosa  strait   reported   today
they  had not  detected  a Communist  vessel build-up  indicating
any immediate invasion  of  any  Nationalist-held  island."
Land  cannot  be taken  by  air.  Even  with  the  latest  military
technology,  we  had  to  use  the  lowly  LST  to  land  troops  in
Normandy.   MacGregor  said  "a  vast  concentration   of  junks
and  sampans"  easily  spotted  by  reconnaissance  "must  neces-
sarily  precede  any  attempt  by  the  Reds  to  take  islands  held
by  any  sizeable  number   of  Nationalist  troops."   As  for   an
1   V
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly, February  U, 19S5
invasion  of  Formosa  and  the  Pescadores,  MacGregor  reported
this  would  require  "a  fleet  of  more  than  5,000,  and  possibly
close  to  10,000  of these  small  craft  . . . but even  with  this
huge  armada  the  Reds  would have  only  the  slimmest  chance
to  land  an  appreciable  percentage   of  troops,  naval  men  be-
lieve."  The Washington  Evening  Star, summing up  the  mili-
tary  picture  on  January   30,  said  "most  American  military
men think  nothing short  of a  modern invasion fleet  could give
Red  China  even  a  fighting  chance  to  put  a  formidable  force
on  Formosa's  beaches."
Even  General  Chennault,  who  advocates  war  with  China
and  who told  reporters  on  Formosa  February  1 "now  is  the
time for  decision,"  did not  think  Formosa  in  danger.  He  told
Homer Bigart  (New York Herald  Tribune, Feb.  2)  he  thought
Quemoy  and  Matsu  would  be the  next  Communist targets,  to
be followed  by a shift  southward  to  Indo-China.  "He  thought
Formosa  would be  safe  for  the  present,"  Bigart  cabled.   He
quoted  General  Chennault  as  saying,  "I  don't  see  how  they
can take  it.  Formosa  can be captured  only by a massive opera-
tion,  not  by  infiltration."    Even  Chennault's  war-time   aide
and  hero  worshipper,  Joseph  Alsop,  in  a  dispatch  from   For-
mosa  published  February  7  went  no further   than  these  rich
and  hollow  phrases—"the  slow  but  inexorable  movement of
all   [Chinese   Communist]  forces   southward   also  points   to
an  eventual  attack  on  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus  and   beyond
much  doubt  on the  main  island  of  Formosa."  The  italics  are
added  to  show  that  Alsop  himself,  the  Cassandra  of  colum-
nists, was unable  to find an  attack  imminent.
II
The  Fliers  Are  Forgotten
The  President's  sudden and  alarming  war  powers  message
seems  all  the  stranger  when  viewed  against  the  background
of  what  a  few  weeks  before  was  supposed  to  be  the  main
concern  of  the  American government  and  people—the  release
of  the.  fliers  imprisoned  as  spies  by  Communist  China.   It
was  on  their  behalf  that  UN  Secretary  General  Dag  Ham-
marskjold   had  gone  to  Peiping,  and  when  he  returned   on
January  13 he made it  clear  that  he did not  consider his  mis-
sion  completed.  The Ninth  General  Assembly,  at  the  request
of  the  U.S.,  had instructed  the  Secretary  General to "make, by
the  means  most  appropriate  in  his judgment, continuing  and
unremitting  efforts"  to  obtain  the  release  of  the  fliers.  He
told  the  press  on his return  that  he  would determine his  next
step  after  conferring  with  the  heads  of the  various  UN  dele-
gations.   "We  hope  to  be  able  to  continue  our  contact,"  Mr.
Hammarskjold  said  of  his  visit  with  Chou  En-lai.   "The  door
that  has  been  opened  can  be  kept  open,  given  restraint  on
both  sides."
This  feeling  seems  to  have  been  shared  in  Peiping.   The
Times  of  Indie,,  which had  its  own  correspondent  in  Peiping
for  the  Chou-Hammarskjold  talks,  carried  a  revealing   dis-
patch from  the  Communist  capital  in  its  issue  of January  17.
The  dispatch  reported  that  Peiping  was  pleased  with  Ham-
marskjold's  visit, that  the  release  of the  American  fliers  was
expected  when  the  atmosphere  improves,  and  that  "The  note
of  restraint  in  President  Eisenhower's  statement   in  Wash-
ington  has  not  escaped notice  here."
"Contacts  between  the  UN  Secretary  General  and  Peiping
are  expected  to  be  resumed  later,"  the  dispatch  continued,
"during the  ensuing week when  Mr. Hammarskjold  will  have
completed  his  round  of  consultations with  the  chief   delegates
of  the  various  UN  member countries, which he  is  expected  to
conclude in the  next  two  days."
The  first  fruit  of  these  better  relations  came  on  Friday,
January  21, when  simultaneously  in  Peiping  and  at  United
Chiang  Predicted  War  in  1955
"Taipeh,  Jan.  1  (AP)— Chiang  Kai-shek  Friday de-
clared  the  Red  attacks  on  Nationalist   offshore   islands
were  'the  overture  to  the  battle  of  Taiwan   (Formosa)
strait.'
'"A   full-scale   war  may  break   out  at   any   time,'
Chiang  declared  in  a  New  Year's  statement   to  the
people.
"Chiang  spoke after  conferences with Admiral Arthur
W.  Radford,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff,
who  is  here  for  a  series  of meetings,  presumably  on  the
defense  of  Formosa."
—Associated   Press  dispatch,  read   to  the  Senate
by  Morse,  Jan.  S8, Con. Bee.,  808.
Lecture  Note:  IFS  speaks  next  Friday  night  in  Regina, Saskatche-
wan;  Sunday  night,  the  20th,  in  Winnipeg;  and  Monday  the  21st in
Gary,  Indiana,  at  445   Adams  St.   Watch  for   announcement of  a
special  get-together  with  New  York  readers  on  March  4.
Nations headquarters  in New York it  was announced that  the
Chinese  Communist  government   was  inviting   the  families
of  the  imprisoned  fliers  to  visit  the  men  in  China.  "United
Nations  sources,"  the Christian Science Monitor  correspondent
at  the  UN  wrote  that  day,  "said  Mr.  Chou  made  the   offer
in  response  to  Mr. Hammarskj old's  expressions  of  concern  for
the  well-being  of  the  imprisoned  men"  and  "One  experienced
diplomat  in  close  touch  with  the  Hammarskjold mission  said
he  could  not  conceive  of  Mr.  Chou's  making  the  move  if  he
expected  to  keep  the  men in jail  indefinitely."
Next  day  in  its  weekly  "Washington  Letter,"  the  Monitor
said  Peiping  was  expected   to  free  the  fliers  soon  "without
direct  bargaining,  in  the  course  of  a  few weeks."  The price,
according  to  this  report, was  simply "that  the  United  States
do  nothing  to  push  matters  or  make  new  demands,  through
the United Nations or otherwise.   Oriental  'face'  requires  that
Communist  China  seem  to  act  voluntarily.    If   Washington
were  to  allow  certain  detained  Chinese students  to  return  to
Communist  China," the  report continued, "that  would be wel-
comed,  but  it  is  not  demanded by  Peiping."
The  State  Department's   reaction   must  have   come  as  a
surprise  to  Hammarskjold.  Instead  of  hailing  this  as  a  vic-
tory  in  the  campaign  for  the  release of the fliers, the  Depart-
ment warned the  families that  in  response  to this  "ostensibly
humanitarian  offer"  they  would be going  into  an  area  where
"the  normal  protections  of  an  American  passport  cannot  be
offered."   The  invitation   was  made  to  seem  sinister  by  the
press  officers  of  both  the  Department  and  the  Air  Force.   Mr.
Hammarskjold  at  once issued  a  statement  saying  he  had  "no
doubt  about  [their]  safety"  and at  UN headquarters  "it  was
understood  that  if  the  United  States  would  not  issue  pass-
ports  valid  for  travel  on the  China mainland,  the  UN  itself
would   offer   the   families   official   diplomatic   laisaez-passers,
thus  throwing  the  UN's  mantle  of  protection   over   them."
(Christian  Science Monitor, Jan.  22).
The  State  Department  seemed afraid  that  good-will  would
be  created  toward  Communist China  by  the  visit,  especially
if  the  families were  allowed to bring  the men back with  them.
The  campaign  for  the  release, of  the  fliers  was  shut  off  and
the  President's  war  powers  message  gave  the  Department  a
reason  to refuse passports for  such a visit.
The  manner  and  timing  of  this  refusal  were  significant.
On  January  27, John  Kiba,  an  Akron,  Ohio, foreman,  visited
the  United   Nations  headquarters.   He  wanted  to  take  ad-
vantage  of  the  invitation  to  see  his  brother,  one  of  the  im-
prisoned  fliers.  He  spoke with  Andrew W.  Cordier, executive
assistant  to  Hammarskjold,  and  with  Henry  Cabot  Lodge,
Jr.,  the  U.S.  representative  to  the  UN.  Afterwards  he  held
a  press  conference.  According to  the  New  York  Times  next
day  (Jan.  28),  Cordier  "was  reported  to  have told  one of  the
prisoners'  relatives  that  'a  definite  link'  might  exist between
the  visits  of  the  families  and  possible  Communist  action  to
free  the  men.  quickly."   Mr.  Lodge,  according  to  the  New
York  Times, "promised  he  would  do all  he  could  to  help  once
the  State  Department  had  given  clearance."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  It,  1955
3
Washington Slams The Door
Apparently  neither  UN  headquarters  nor  our  UN  repre-
sentative  had  been kept  informed  of what  was  going  on.  For
that  very night the State Department  in Washington  released
the text of a letter by Mr. Dulles to relatives of the imprisoned
men.   The Department said the text was being  released  "when
it  had  reason  to  believe"  the  families  had  already  received
their  copies.  Mr. Dulles said that because of the  "increasingly
belligerent attitude  of China" passports  for  such a visit would
be  denied.  Apparently  Mr.  Kiba  had  not  received  his  copy,
and  Mr. Lodge  had not  been  consulted,  though  the  letter said
this  action was being taken  "only  after  careful  deliberation."
And  when  Henry  Suydam,  the  Department's  press  officer,  an
able  and  very  knowledgable gentleman,  was  asked  that  night
whether  Secretary  General Hammarskjold had  been informed
or  consulted, he replied  "Not  that I  am aware  of."
Few newspapers reported, none so far  as  I  know commented
on,  the  discourteous if  not  studied  indifference  of  this  reply.
The  Secretary  General  had  gone  to  Peiping  on behalf  of  the
fliers.  He had persuaded the  Chinese to permit their  relatives
to  visit  them.   Such  a  visit  opened  the  possibility  that  the
fliers  might  be  allowed  to  go  home  with  them.   His  reward
was  to  have  the  door  slammed  shut  by  Washington  without
consulting  or  informing  him  although  he  was  still  working
on  the  delicate task  of freeing  the  fliers.  This  was  a  strange
way  to  treat  an  international   official   engaged  in  a  mission
of  mercy  on  one's behalf.
The  invitation  was  a  good-will  offering.   It   implied  that
the  men  could  hardly  be  guilty  of  any  very  heinous  crime.
One  does not invite  relatives to come visit  dangerous  spies  and
criminals.  If  Peiping  chose to  make it,  the  stage  was  set  for
a  dramatic gesture.   To let  the  men go home  with  their  rela-
tives,  after  being  treated   well  in  Communist  China,  would
have  broken  the  ice  of  the  American press  and  won  Peiping
that  good-will  it  so badly  needs  in  this  country  for  ultimate
admission  to  the  UN.   Is  that  what  the  State  Department
feared?   The  release  of  the  letter  came  too  late  that  night
for   official   UN  reaction  but  the  New  York   Times   reported
there  would  be  disappointment because  "one  prevailing  view
here"  i.e.  at  UN  headquarters,  "has  been  that  acceptance of
the  offer  might  go  far  to  speed  the  men's  release."  Did  Mr.
Dulles have tongue in cheek when he wrote  in  his letter to  the
relatives  of  the  fliers,  "In  the  best  interest  of  peace,  we  do
not think it  prudent to  afford  the  Chinese Communists further
opportunities  to  provoke  our  nation  and  strain  its   patience
further?"
Ill
The Key to the Mystery
Since  there  was  no  immediate threat  to  Formosa  and  the
Pescadores,  and  the  UN's  escorts  for  the  release  of the  fliers
were  still  going  on  with  some  promise  of  success,  why  did
the  Administration suddenly  change its tune and rush  a  war-
like  message  to  Congress?   Up  to  and  including  his  press
conference   of  Wednesday,  January  19,  the   President    (like
Mr.  Hammarskjold)  had  counselled  restraint  and   patience.
Two days later,  on Friday, January  21, Congressional  leaders
were  summoned  to  the  White  House  to  be briefed  by  Admiral
Radford  and  Secretary  Dulles  on  a  quite  different  course  of
action.   The  threat  of  preventive  war  marked  a  sharp  turn
of  policy, and was  calculated to upset  the  delicate  negotiations
behind  the  scenes.
In   this   respect,  it   bore  a   striking   resemblance  to  the
Radford-Dulles  plan  last  Spring.  The Admiral  and the  Secre-
tary  of   State   saw   Sir   Anthony  Eden  on  the   eve  of   the
Geneva  conference.   Their  plan  was  for  U.S.  air  and  naval
units  to  strike  at  the  besiegers  of  Dienbienphu.   They  said
the  President  was prepared  to go to  Congress  on the following
Monday,  April  26—the very  day  the  Geneva  conference  was
to  open—and  in  a  special  message  ask  authority  for  military
intervention.     (See  the   story   as   spelled   out  by   Chalmers
Roberts  of  the  Washington  Post  in  The  Reporter  last   Sep-
tember  14.)   Had  the  British  and  French  agreed,  the  Geneva
conference—a   conference  Mr.  Dulles   opposed—would  have
been  doomed.  There  would have  been  no  peaceful  settlement
in  Indo-China.  There  would  have  been  another   Korea,   per-
haps another  Chinese intervention,  possibly a wider  war.
The  Threat  of  Peace
The  threat  then  was  the  threat  of  a  peaceful  settlement
which  would  enhance the  prestige of  Communist  China.  I  be-
lieve  the  key to the  mystery  of the  current crisis is the  same.
The threat was not the threat  of a military attack.  The only
threats  were  verbal—and political.   The danger  was that  the
behind   scenes  negotiations   might   succeed   (1)   in   bringing
about  a  de facto  cease-fire in the  Formosa  straits  and  (2)  in
obtaining  the  release  of  the  American   fliers.   The  ensuing
relaxation  of  tension  would  not  accord  with  the  aims  of  the
Secretary  of  State  and  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff.   The  Secretary  of  State  has  never  really  given  up  his
belief  in  "liberation"  nor  in  "massive  retaliation,"  whatever
the  President's  views  on  co-existence.   He  was  allied   with
Radford  again  last  September  in  advocating  the  bombing of
the  Chinese mainland  in  defense  of Quemoy.
Why  did the  President  suddenly change his  mind this  time
and go along with the  Radford-Dulles plan?  One can only  sur-
mise.  No doubt domestic politics played their  part—the  desire
to placate  the Knowland wing of the  Republican party, and  to
prevent  an  open  break.  But  this  factor  of  domestic  politics
by  itself  is not  enough to explain  so crucial  a  shift.  It  repre-
sented  only  one  of  the  pressures  brought  to  bear  upon  the
Presidency.   The  decisive  factor,   I  believe,  was  simply  the
long-time  ambition  of  the  American  armed  services  to  keep
Formosa  as  a  military  base.  On the  eve of the  Korean   war,
when the military  assumed Chiang could not last much  longer,
they were casting  about  for  some way to take  over  the  island
Attlee and Bevan  Agree  in  Regarding  Formosa  as  Chinese
"MR.   ATTLEE.   It  is,  of  course,  clear  that  in  this  matter
of  Formosa  and  the  islands  there  is  an  intervention  in  a
civil  war.   (Opposition   cheers).   It  is  clearly  an  action  by
the  United  States  and  not  the  United  Nations.    (Renewed
opposition  cheers).   But  in  view of  the  need  for  preventing
hostilities  and  trying  to  get  some peaceful  arrangement,  is
it  not  clear  that  the right  thing  would  be that  China should
occupy  her  proper  position  in  the  United  Nations?    (Loud
opposition  cheers).
"Sra  A.  EDEN.  I  must  say I  am surprised  that  Mr. Attlee
should  couple  Formosa  with  the  offshore   islands—(Opposi-
tion  cries  of  'Why?')—because   he  must  surely  be   aware
the  islands have always  been treated  as separate  areas  . . .
Formosa  in this  century has never been a part of China . . .
"MR.   ATTLEE.   The  Foreign  Secretary  has  left  out  some
history.  It  is quite true that Formosa  was seized  from  China
by  an  act  of  aggression  of Japan:  it  is equally true  that  at
the  end of  the  war  Formosa  was  declared  to  be  an  integral
part  of  China,  and  no  one  stated  that  more  clearly  than
Chiang  Kai-shek.   The  fact  that  he  has  been  put  out  in
favor  of another  Government does not alter that  fact  . . .
"MR.   ANEURIN  SEVAN  (Ebbw  Vale,  Lab.).   The  Foreign
Secretary   stated  that  the  position  of  Formosa   was  much
different  from  that  of  the  offshore  islands.   This  has  been
described  in  the  United  States  as  a  sort  of  jurisdictional
line.  We have  not been  able  to understand  that  situation  at
all  because  it  has  always  been  understood  that   Formosa,
equally with  the  offshore  islands, belongs to the  mainland of
China.   Does  he  now  suggest  that  the  situation  has  been
altered  by virtue  of the  fact  that  Formosa  was  stolen  from
China  in  1896?  Is  it  now an  interpretation  of  international
law that if  you steal property  from  a  thief  you can hold  it?"
—House  of  Commons, January  27.
1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  14,  1955
via  a  UN  trusteeship  or  some similar  device.  They  are  again
prepared   to  write  off  Chiang.   The  logic  of  events  and   the
status  quo  persuade  acquiescence  in  "two   Chinas."    Where
the  belligerent  military  and the  more  cautious  agree  is in  the
desire to keep Formosa.  Successful  cease-fire  negotiations  and
better relations with Peiping threatened  our hold on Formosa.
The  Minima and  Maxima of  Cease-Fire
Negotiations   have  been  underway  since  last   September.
Though the  details are  still  withheld,  several  things are  clear.
The  first  is that  no cease-fire  could be  expected  until  Peiping
had  recovered  the  offshore  islands   from  which  Chiang,  the
American military  and  CIA have been carrying on  intelligence
and  sabotage  activities  against  the  mainland.   With  the off-
shore islands in its hands,  the situation would become tolerable
for   Peiping.
The second point  which became clear was that Feiping  could
not be expected ever publicly and formally  to give up its  claim
to   Formosa.    This  is  a  question  on  which   the   Chinese—
•whether  they  follow  Mao,  Chiang  or  anyone  else—are  united.
But  that  does  not  mean  that  Peiping  might  not  acquiesce  in
foreign  occupation for  some time,  so long  as  the  island  were
not  a  base for  counter-revolutionary  activity  against  it.
Was  there  a  possibility  of  such  an  unspoken  agreement?
Last  week I  quoted  indications  of just  such  a  solution  in two
off-the-record  statements  made  to  Thomas  J.  Hamilton,  the
chief  correspondent  of  the  New  York   Times  at  the  United
Nations  after   the  Chou-Hammarskjold   conversations    (Jan.
13  and  City  Edition  of  Jan.   14).   The  same  impression  was
given  to  William  R. Frye, the  Christian  Science Monitor  cor-
respondent  at  the  UN.   In  that  paper  on  January  19, Mr.
Frye  reported,  "Communist  China,  for  its  part,  did  not  tell
Mr.  Hammarskjold  directly whether  it  would consider  a com-
promise  settlement   which  would  leave  Formosa   outside   its
jurisdiction.   Mr.  Chou  is  understood  to  have  said  he would
not  abandon  his  'claim'  to  Formosa,.  leaving  the  inference
that under some conditions he might abandon his  active  efforts
to  seize   it."
But  such  a  solution  is  possible  only  if  no  explicit  renunci-
ation  of  Formosa  is required.   As the  London Times  said  in  a
leading editorial  on January 25, the  day after  the  President's
war  powers message,  it  may be  possible for  "two  Chinas"  to
exist  in fact  "but  if  any  degree  of formal  settlement  is  sought
between  them each must  deny the  right  of the  other  to exist."
Because  of  the  delicacy of  the  situation, the  Times  therefore
thought  it  would  be  "more  profitable  to  pursue  the  private
diplomatic  channels that  have  been  opened  as  a  result  of  Mr.
Hammarskjold's  visit  to  Peking."  The  Times  thought  it  pos-
sible  to  achieve  a  cease-fire  but  said  "it  would  be  folly  to
suppose  that  Peking  would  ever  publicly  and  explicitly   rec-
oncile  itself  to  such  a  prospect."
Those Submarines Again
"With the  U.S. 7th Fleet  Off Formosa,  Feb.  5 (UP)—
American naval  officers  revealed  today that  'unidentified
objects'   presumed  to  be  submarines  apparently   have
been  shadowing  the  U.S.  7th  Fleet in  Formosan  waters.
Their  best  guess   was  that  the  undersea   craft   were
Russian."
—Most  of  the  U.S. Press, Feb. 5 and  6.
From  a  survey  of the  military  situation  in  the  For-
mosan  area   by  Mark   S.  Watson,  most   respected   of
Pentagon  reporters,  in  the  Baltimore  Sun,  Feb.  8:  "It
is  understood  that  no  non-American  submarines  have
been  detected  in that vicinity  for  weeks."
Peiping  seeks  to  keep  the  situation  fluid,  Washington  to
freeze  it.   Our  Western  allies  see  in  the  abondonment of  the
offshore   islands  the  creation  of  a  military  situation  which
would  make a  tacit  cease-fire easy  to  achieve.  What  Radford
and  Dulles sold  Eisenhower  was  quite  a  different  proposition
—that  we  "swap"  Quemoy  and  Matsu  for  explicit abandon-
ment by Peiping of claim to  Formosa.  It  is here that  we come
to  the  real  difference  between  Washington  and London.
Similarly   the   treaty   with   Chiang   stimulated   Peiping's
belligerence  in  recent  months.  As  Mr.  Dulles told  the  Senate
Foreign   Relations   committee  last   Monday,   "when   it   was
known  that  the   United   States   intended   to   negotiate   this
Treaty  of  Mutual  Defense  with  the  Republic  of  China,  the
Chinese  Communists stepped  up  their  anti-American  activi-
ties.   They  announced  their   condemnation  to imprisonment
of  United  States  fliers."  Indeed,  Mr.  Dulles  said,  "that  an-
nouncement coincided to the very day with  the initialing  of  the
Security  Treaty  by  the  Foreign  Minister  of  the  Republic of
China  and  myself."
The  treaty  with   Chiang,  from  Peiping's   point  of  view,
threatened   permanently  to  freeze  the  situation  in  the   Far
East,  to  commit  the  U.S.  to  the  support  of  Chiang,  and  by
Article  VII  to  give the  U.S. military  bases on the  island.  The
purpose of the  State Department and the  Pentagon  in  rushing
the  mutual  security  pact  with  Chiang to  completion last  Fall
was  to  establish  some  semblance  of  legal  right  to  bases  in
P'ormosa  before this  could  be  lost  in  a  new  Geneva-style  con-
ference.  As Mr. Dulles told  the  Senate  committee last  Friday
in  asking  quick  action  on  the  treaty,  its  ratification  "would
provide firm reassurance  .  .  . that  Taiwan   (Formosa)  and
the  Pescadores  are  not  a  subject, for  barter  as  part  of  some
Far   Eastern   'deal'  with  the  Chinese  Communists."   This  is
slick  work.   No  wonder  the  New  York  Times  reported   (Jan.
31)  that  Knowland  is  now  on  the  best  of  terms  with   the
State  Department  and  has  been  calling  Mr.  Dulles  "boss."
Next  Week:  The Need  for  Alarm  to  Stampede  the  Senate
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Strrrt
Ctty
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  snb  for  the  enclosed  $5:
7«n.                             St.*.
Enter  this  gift  snb for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(Tit)  Nnnn
1
rtt,                                            z™,,         a***.
2/14/65
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St,   S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  at
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED