I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955feb07.pdf

============================================================

Special  Double  Issue
Inside:  Bertrand  Russell's  New  Plea  for  Peace;  Hutchins'  National  Press  Club  Speech
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL. Ill,  NUMBERS 2 and 3         FEBRUARY  7,1955
„        WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
The  Hidden  History  of  the  Formosa  Crisis
There   is   an   Eisenhower   anecdote,   probably   apocryphal
though  told  me  as true  by  a  person  with  some  access  to  high-
level  political  circles,  which  may  help  to  throw  light  on  the
bewildering  twists  and  turns  of  Administration policy  during
the  past  few  weeks.  The  story  concerns  an  intra-Administra-
tion  controversy   over  policy  which  was  so  badly  deadlocked
that  it  was  decided  to  refer  it  to  the  General  himself.  Each
side  prepared  the  executive  order  it  wanted  the  President  to
sign,  and  the  two  contrary  orders  were  handed  him  for  de-
cision.  Mr.  Eisenhower was on  his way  for  a few  hours' relaxa-
tion  at  a local  golf  course  but  agreeably took  them  along  with
him  to  read  on  the  way.   The  story  goes  that  the  President,
after   carefully  reading   the   proposed   executive   orders,   was
delighted  with  them—and  signed  both!
The   anecdote   undoubtedly   is  unfair   to   Mr.   Eisenhower,
whose  press  conferences  reflect   a  great  deal  of  homework  in
a  bewildering   assortment   of  unfamiliar  and   complex  issues.
But   in  the  context   of  Far  Eastern   policy  it   has  a  kind  of
symbolic  truth.   For  the  President  in  the  past  few  weeks has
in  effect  sought  at  one  and  the  same  time  to  implement  two
contradictory   policies.    The   first   was  to   begin  to  stabilize
relations  with  Peiping  and  get  the  country   off  the  hook  on
which  Chiang  Kai-shek  and  the  China   Lobby  have  so  long
impaled  it.   The  other  was to  appease the  advocates of  a  tough
and  unyielding  policy  toward  the  New  China.   In  the  process,
it  now  appears, he has failed utterly  to  dislodge  Senator  Know-
land  from  the  offshore  islands.  America's  China  policy  is back
in  the  old stalemate.
"Massive  Retaliation"  Against   Hammarskjold
In  the  excitement  it  seems  to  have  escaped public  attention
that   the  principal   casualty  of   the   renewed   deadlock  is  the
Hammarskjold   mission  to  Peiping.   The  war  party  may  still
be  too  weak  to  drag  the  U.S.  into war,  but  has proven  strong
enough  again  to  torpedo  new  possibilities for  peace.  This  may
prove  to  be  the  real  meaning  of  recent  events:  a  glance back
will  show  how  dangerously  close  we  must  have  seemed  last
month   (from  the  China   Lobby's   point  of  view)   to   better
relations  with  Communist  China.
When  Hammarskjold  arrived  in  Peiping  on  January   J,  it
was  felt  at  the  United  Nations  in  New  York  that  the  public
trials  of  the  American  aviators  meant  that   the  Communists
wanted  to  bargain and  that  they  would  hardly have agreed  to
the  visit  unless  they  were  prepared  ultimately   to   free   their
prisoners.   To  make  a  friend  of  the  Secretary  General,  to  ac-
cord  him  a  success,  to  soften  U.S.  public  opinion  were obvious
steps  toward  their  main  objective—admission   to  the  UN.   In
neutral  Sweden,  Hammarskjold's  home  and  the  avenue  for  the
preliminary  negotiations,  this  was  well  understood.    A  diplo-
matic  official  in  Stockholm   (see  dispatch,  N.  Y.   Times,  Jan.
9)   said  the  trip  had  been  so carefully  prepared  diplomatically
"that  the  chance of  failure was virtually  eliminated  before  he
[Hammarskjold]   proposed  to  see Mr.  Chou."
Saving  "Face"  for  China
Whether   by  design  or  not,  both  Washington   and  Moscow
had  behaved in  such  a  way  as  to  pave  the  way  for  the  release
of   the  airmen  without   loss  of  "face."   Eisenhower  had  been
most  pacific  and  rejected  the   idea  of   a  blockade,  requesting
UN   mediation  instead.   Moscow  had  set  Peiping  an  example
by  releasing  two   long-time  American  prisoners  of   its   own,
and  soon  after  a  third.   If  Big  Brother  could  so  meekly  hand
over  three  American  prisoners,  there  was  no  loss  of   prestige
within  the  Soviet  family  or  without  if  Peiping  followed  suit.
India,  too,  made  a  plea  for  the  release of  the  American  fliers.
The  Peiping  radio  kept  calling  for   the  liberation  of   For-
mosa,  but   there  were  indications  on  Hammarskjold's   return
that  the  Chinese Communists  were  not  unaware of  the  reali-
ties  of   American  politics.    The   New   York    Times   reported
January  13  from  United  Nations  headquarters,  "according   to
reliable  sources,  Mr.  Chou  did  not  demand  the  withdrawal  of
the  U.S.  naval  cordon  that  has  protected   Formosa  since  the
start  of  the  Korean  war"  but   "seems  to  have  given  the  im-
pression  that   Communist   China   would  be  satisfied   with   an
assurance  by  the  U.S.  that  there  would  be  no  attack  on  the
mainland  from  Formosa."
This  was  confirmed  when  Hammarskjold  first  spoke  to  the
press  on  his  return  to  New  York  January  13.  A  story  by  the
New  York   Times  chief  UN  correspondent,  Thomas  J.   Ham-
ilton,   reported   next  morning:   "Mr.   Chou,   it  was  disclosed,
asked   for   the   withdrawal  of   all  foreign  troops  from   both
North  and  South  Korea,  but  indicated  that  he  would  be  satis-  .
fied with  an  assurance from  the  United  States  that  it  would
not  permit  an  invasion  attempt   from   Formosa."   This   was
printed  on  page  J,  column  3  of  the  City  Edition,  Jan.  14.   It
was  omitted  in  the  Late  City  Edition  when  the  lead  was  re-
written  to  make room  for  a statement  by Henry  Cabot  Lodge,
Jr.,    saying—after   a   conference   with   Hammarskjold—that
Lodge  felt  confident  the  American aviators would  be  released.
Brandishing  the  Atom Bomb
For  the  record,  Mr.  Hammarskjold  spoke  very   carefully.
"The   door  that  has been  opened," he  told  the  press that  night,
"can   be  kept  open,  given  restraint  on  all  sides."   Mr.  Lodge
echoed  this  with  a  call  for  "patience."  But  the  foreign   cor-
respondents  here   in  Washington   were  appalled  in   the   next
24  hours  by  two  events  which  hardly  fit  into  the  pattern  of
(Continued   on  page   two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F,  Stone's   Weekly,  February   7, 1955
patience,  though  little  noticed  by  the  American  press.   The
first  was  a  most  inflammatory speech  made  before  the  Greater
Philadelphia  Chamber  of  Commerce  on  the  night  of  January
13  by  Walter  S.  Robertson,  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for
Far   Eastern  Affairs,  which  was  abusive,  unrealistic  and  in-
temperate  in  its  treatment  of  China.
The  other  was  the  fact  that  Secretary  of  State  Dulles,  de-
spite  last-minute  efforts  at  the  State  Department  to  dissuade
him,  flew  to  Omaha  next  day  for  a  "briefing"  at  Strategic
Air  Command headquarters   by  Gen.  Curtis  Le  May.    Lodge,
who  was  supposed  to  see  Dulles  ip  Washington  to  report  on
what  Hammarskjold  had  to  say,  was  instructed   to  meet  the
Secretary  in  Omaha  instead.  The  SAC, of course,  is  our  long-
range  arm  for  delivery  of  the  H-bomb;  it  seemed  as  if  we
were  "tuning  up  for"  massive  retaliation.
There  were  inquiries  from  the  UN  and  from  abroad.   Next
day the White House told the press Mr. Eisenhower  had  talked
with  Mr.  Dulles  by  phone  in  Omaha  and  issued  a  statement
Morse's  Fear  of  Radford
"MR.    MORSE.   It  simply must  be said—even  though  it  is  a
very  blunt  statement—that   some  of  us,  and  I  am  one  of
them,  believe  that for  the  past two or  three  years  Admiral
Radford   has   been   leaning   and   inclining  very    strongly
toward  the  preventive  war  theory-   Some  of  us  feel,  after
we hear  himj. that  he entertains  the  thought that  war  with
Red  China  is  inevitable—and,  for  that  matter,  that  war
with  Red Russia is inevitable, too;  and we fear  that  he may
hold  the  opinion that  if  such  a  war  is  to  be fought,  now is
the  time  to  fight  it—if  not  sooner.   That  is  why  we  have
this  additional  reason   for   fearing   the   language   of   the
joint  resolution."
—U.  S.  Senate,  Jan.  27, Congr.  Rec.  742.
calling  for  "calm."   Later  in  the  day  at  Omaha,  Lodge—but
not  Dulles—issued   a  statement   saying  that  the  meeting  with
the  SAC  command had  "nothing  to  do with  a  show  of  power
diplomacy  and  is  not  primarily  concerned with  the  captured
fliers." But  this  incident  seemed  the  first  foreboding sign  that
despite  the  President  the  advocates  of  a  "tough"  policy  still
threatened  the  results  of  Hammarskjold's  mission.
Why  Wasn't   Hammarskjold   Told?
There  was  a  second  disturbing   incident  which  has  yet  to
bo  explainer!.  This has  to  do with  the  exchange  of  letters be-
Lvr   •!! Secretary  of  State  Dulles and  the  Nationalist Foreign
Minister  George  C.  Yeh  on  the  mutual  defense  treaty  with
Chiang.  The  treaty  was  made  public  December  1.  The  letter
wa.i  dated  December  10 but  not  made  public until  January 13.
There  are  several  curious things  about  the  timing.   The letter
Why Let The People Know?
"MR.   MORSE.   I  was  surprised  and  a  little  shocked  last
night,  Mr.  President,  to  hear'  a  prominent  journalist   tell
me  that  he thought  the  major  objection to  my  approach  to
this  problem was  that the  people  of  the  country  should not
be  the  ones  to judge  the  course  of  action  which  is  taken  in
such  a  matter  as  this.  I  could not believe  my  ears.
"He went  on  to  argue  that,  of  course,  the  people  did  not
want  to  go  to  war,  but  it  may  be  necessary  to  go  to  war.
I   hope  we   have   not   reached   the   point,   Mr.   President,
where  the  people, and  the  sons  of  the  people  who  will  be
doing  so  much  of  the  dying  in  a  war,  if  it  should  come,
cannot   determine   the   peace   and   war   policies   of   their
government.
"I  am  perfectly  satisfied  that  if  the  people  of this  nation
had  1  week  in  which  to  consider  the  implications  and  in-
evitable  consequences  of  this  resolution   it  would  be  over-
whelmingly rejected  by them  in its present  form.
"There  are  various  reasons  for  wanting  an  early  dispo-
sition  of  this  resolution  which  is  before  the  Senate,  but  I
am  not  blind  to  the  fact  that  one  of  these  reasons  on  the
part  of  Administration  leaders  is  that  they  would  like  to
get  the  matter  settled  before  the  people  learn   too  much
about   it."
—17.   .S. Senate,  Jan.  27,  Congr.  Rec.,  p. 7&0.
was  not  made  public  until  it  began  to  look  as  though  there
might  be  trouble  getting  the  Democrats  to  ratify  the  treaty.
A  private  memorandum by  Benjamin  V.  Cohen  questioning
the  terms  had  begun  to  circulate  among the  Democrats  a  few
days  earlier  and  had  leaked  to  the  press.  The  Dulles-Yeh  let-
ters  disarmed  criticism  because  it  filled  a  loophole  left  open
by  the  treaty.  The  exchange  of  letters  gave  the  U.S.  a  veto
over  any  attack  on  the  mainland  by  Chiang,   albeit   a  veto
which  had  to  be  evaluated  in  the  light  of  Chiang's  stubborn
and  successful  fight  to  keep  any  such  clause  out  of the  treaty
itself,  and  in  the  light  of  the  exception  for  measures  taken
"in   self-defense."
Hammarskjold   on  January  16  sent  a  message   on  this  to
Peiping  and  "reliable  sources"  at  the  UN  disclosed  that  the
Secretary   General  believed  the  chances  for  the  release  of  the
U.S.   airmen   would  be   improved  "when   Communist  China
learned  the  exact  meaning  of the  treaty."  Hammarskjold  had
not  left  for  Peiping  until  December  30,  which  was  20  days
after  the  date  of  the  Dulles-Yeh  letters  "but  did  not  find  out
about  it  [the  exchange]  until after  his return  from  Peiping."
(N.  Y.  Times,  Jan.   17).   It   seems  very  odd that  this  infor-
mation  was  not  given   Hammarskjold  by  the  State  Depart-
ment  in  advance  of  his  trip,  since  it   might   help  to  allay
Chinese  suspicion of the  mutual  aid treaty.
Charges  Against  Chiang  Not  Even  Knowland  Rose  to  Deny
"MR.    LONG.   For  myself,  I  fully  believe  that  Chiang  Kai-
shek  and  his  friends  have  no  more  certain  purpose  than  to
have  the  United  States  fully  involved  in  all-out  war  with
Red  China,  even  if  this  should  mean  war  with  Russia.
—Jan.  26, Congr.  Rec.  632.
"MR.    MORSE.   I  happen  to  share  the  point  of  view,  which
lias   been  expressed  by  other   Senators   also,  that  the   Na-
tionalist  Chinese  believe their  only  hope  of  survival  in  the
lorijr   run  is  to  get  the  United  States  involved  in  an  all-out
war  on the mainland of China."     —Jan. 26, Congr.  Rec.  6S8.
"MR.    KEFAUVER.  We  shall   place  our  future  ...     in  the
hands  of  a  man  who  passionately  wants  to  get  back  on  the
mainland  of  China, and  who apparently  would give anything
in  the  world  to  get  us  involved  in  a  war  with  Communist
China,  so  he  could  get  back  on  the  mainland  of  China,  by
using  our  troops  and  our  military  power."
—Jan.  26,  Congr.  Rec.  658.
"MR.    BYRD.   If   the  pending  treaty   is  ratified,  we  would
enter  into  close  partnership,  on  equal  terms,  with  Chiang
Kai-shek  ...     It  was  Chiang  Kai-shek  to  whom   America
sent  hundreds  of  millions of  dollars' worth  of  war  materials
when  the  civil war  began  in  China.  Later,  our  valuable  war
materials were found  not  only  in the  black  markets of  China
but  also  in  the  hands  of  the  Communists.
"We  are  becoming a  partner  with  the  leaders  of  Chinese
who  have  been  driven  from  their  country.   Our  purpose   is
to  protect  the  perimeter  of  our  defense.   Above  all,  we  do
not  want  land  warfare  on  the  mainland  of  China.   But  the
primary  desire  of  Chiang  Kai-shek  is  war  on  the  mainland
to  recapture  his  power  in  Asia.
"For   his  purposes,   Chiang   Kai-shek   knows  better  than
anyone  else  that  he  can  never  set  foot  on China  again  with-
out  American  planes,  troops  and  ships.
"As  a  Senator,  it  is  my  considered   opinion  that  Chiang
Kai-shek  is  motivated by self-interest; that  when  the  critical
time  comes he  may  place  his  ambitions  above  the  welfare  of
his American  partner."
—U. S. Senate, Jan.  28, Congr. Rec.  838.
Build  A  Bigger  Weekly  This  Year  By  Getting  Your  Renewal  In  Early
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  7, 1955
Knowland  Raises  the  Alarm
It  looked  that  week-end  as  if  this  Dulles-Yeh  gloss  on  the
pact  with  Chiang might further  smooth  the  way toward  suc-
cess  for  Hammarskjold's  mission.   The  day  after  the   Secre-
tary   General   announced  that   he  was   informing   Peiping,
Knowland  made  a   speech  in  Chicago  declaring  that  Ham-
marskjold  had failed and warning of "a  Far  Eastern  Munich."
Knowland's  anxiety   seemed  justified   when  Yikiangshan,   a
tiny  island  20 miles  north  of  the  Tachens  fell  to  the  Chinese
Reds  and  Dulles—after  talking   with   Eisenhower—told  his
A Warning That May Prove Prophetic
"ME.    MORSE.   ...    if  we go into  such  a  war,  we are  not
going  to  end it  in  a  day  or in a  year,  or in ten  years.  That
is  because  all  the  modern  weapons,  all  the  atomic bombs
and  hydrogen  bombs  will  not  subjugate  the  mainland  of
China.  We can  pockmark it with  all  the  weapons  of atomic
destruction,  and  even  though  each  pockmark  on the  topog-
raphy  of  China  may  extend  20 miles  across,  we  could  not
subjugate  China  by  atomic  action.   Mr.  President,  in  the
last  analysis  we  could  not  subjugate  China  by  any  means
except  manpower;  and  that  would  mean  American  man-
power,, with  foot  soldiers—American foot  soldiers.  .  . .
"Should   a   conflict   come  it  will  go  on  long  after   the
bombing  is  over.   We  then  would  be  confronted  with  the
job  of  occupying  the  vast  land  mass  of  China,  which  no
nation  to  date  has  ever  subjugated,  and  which  I  am  not
sure  even  our  trigger-happy  military  advisers  of  our  own
Nation  believe  even  we  could  conquer.  Years  of  guerrilla
warfare  would  go  along  with  our  occupation of  China."
—17.   S.  Senate,  Jan.  26, Congr. Rec.,  p. 637.
The "Sophisticated"  View
"MRS.    SMITH  of  Maine  .  .  .  But is  it  [the   resolution]
actually   what   it   seems  to  be  to  the   American  public?
Certainly  that  does  not  seem  to  be the  case  with  many of
the  sophisticates  in  international  relations,  for  there  is  a
widespread  interpretation   and  prediction  in  Washington,
in  London,  and  in  other  capitals  of  the  world  that   the
resolution  is  a  beginning  of  a  partial  withdrawal  of  the
United  States from  this area  of  Chinese conflict;  that  it  is
the  first  step toward  a  goal  of  two-pronged  neutralization:
First, to  insure the  security  of  Formosa  and ultimately  to
make  it  a  UN  trusteeship  under  Chiang  Kai-shek;  second,
to  give  notice  to  the  Chinese Reds that  the  United  States
not  only  will  not help  Chiang in  any  attempt  to  invade the
mainland  and  regain  control  of  China  from  the  Reds,  but
that  the  United States will go further  and  prevent Chiang
from  making such  an  attempt.
This  interpretation  and  prediction, which  is  being made
freely   in  Washington,  London  and  other  capitals  of   the
world,  further  forecasts  an  ultimate  and  accelerated  ad-
mission  of  Red China  to  the  United  Nations  arid  the  recog-
nition  of  Red  China by  the  United  States.  Who  are  right
in  their  interpretation—the   American   public   or  the  so-
phisticates  in  international  relations?"
—V.  S.  Senate,  Jan.  26, Congr. Rec., p. 662.
press  conference that  day  the  island  was  of  no  importance.
The  next  day  was  worse  for  Knowland. The  President   after
breakfasting  with  the  Senator  from  California  told  his own
press  conference   we  were  not  concerned   with  the   Tachen
islands  and  were  committed  only  to  the  defense  of  Formosa
and  the  Pescadores.   Mr.  Eisenhower  suggested  that  the  UN
negotiate  a  cease-fire.
Efforts  for  a  cease-fire  had  been  made  behind  the  scenes
last  September  after  the  Communist  attack  on  Quemoy  and
failed.  Apparently  a  first  condition for  such  a  cease-fire  from
Peiping's  point  of  view was  the  abandonment of  the  offshore
islands  from  which  guerrillas   and  intelligence  agents  made
constant   forays   onto  the   mainland,  and   from   which   the
Nationalist  navy  harrassed  ships  moving into  Chinese ports.
It  looked  on January  19 as  if  Mr.  Eisenhower  was  prepared
to  let  the  offshore   islands  go,  thus  creating  a  situation   in
which  a  de  facto  cease  fire  might  be  achieved.
The  Chinese Foreign  Minister Yeh called immediately  after
the  press  conference  on  Secretary  Dulles  and  stormed  out
angrily,  saying  he  was  returning  to  Formosa  "where  I  be-
long."  On Taipeh  a  responsible source  was  quoted  as  saying,
"The  Communists  are  going  to  take  our  islands  one by  one,
and  the  U.S.  7th  Fleet  is  not going  to  do a  damn  thing  about
it,"  adding  "and  there  is  not  much  we can  do without Ameri-
can  naval  and  air  support."    United  Press,  N.   Y.   Times,
Jan.   20).
That  day was the  high-water  mark of the  Eisenhower China
peace  policy.   We  must  leave  until  next  week  the  story  of
how  and  why  it  was  transformed  first  into  a  war  policy  and
then  degenerated  again  into  the  old familiar  stalemate.
A  Vivid  Glimpse  of  Preparations   for  Preventive  War
"MR.    CASE  of  South  Dakota.   Because  I  do  not  expect  to
vote  for  the  [Langer]  amendment  [limiting  the   President
to  defense  of  Formosa],  I  wish  to  make  a  few  brief  state-
ments  about  it,  and  to  make  clear  that  if  the  amendment
should be rejected, as  I think  it  will be, that rejection  should
not be construed  by indirection  to  say that the  intent  of  the
pending resolution  is to  give  the  President  a  directive  to use
forces  on the mainland of China.  It  does  not do that  . . .
"Mr.  President,  I  wish  to  give  point  to  this  situation  by
reading  a  part  of  Ned  Calmer's  broadcast  as  reported  on
the  CBS  World  News  Roundup  this  morning.   It  was  Bob
Schackne's  report  from  Tokyo.  I  was  startled  by  it  when
I  heard  it  on the radio  this morning.  I  had my staff  call  the
CBS  office  in  New York to  get  a  transcript  of  the  broadcast,
and  I  have in my hand  what  they furnished  me.  I  read now
from   Bob  Schackne's  report  from   Tokyo  at  8  o'clock  this
morning:
"  'The  Air  Force  has rushed  war  planes to  Korea  to  meet
the  crisis  in the  Formosa  Straits.  Fifty  planes,  half  sabre-
jets  and  half  propeller-driven bombers, were  sent  to  Korea
at  the same time they  were ordered to Formosa.  A glance  at
the  map  explains  why.
" 'South  Korea  is closer  than  any other territory  in Allied
hands  to  Shanghai,  only  365  miles.   It  is  in  the   Shanghai
—U.  S. Senate,  Jan.
area   that   the   Communists  have  concentrated  twelve   to
fourteen   hundred  planes,  including  some   250  MIGs,  and
possibly  some hundreds of IL-28 twin jet  bombers.  These  are
the  planes  that  threaten   the  United  States  8th  Fleet  and
Formosa.
"  'In  standard  Air  Force  tactics, the  best  way to  counter
this threat  is to  strike  directly  and  destroy  the  Red airbase.
The  best  weapon to  use  is  a  tactical  atomic  bomb.   The  Air
Force  has  the  plane  to  do the  job—the  F-84  Thunder   Jet,
which  can fly great  distances  and  refuel  in  midair.
"  'Whether  this will be done is a  decision  President  Eisen-
hower  has  not  yet  made.  What  the  Air  Force  is  doing  in
positioning  itself  in  case  the  order  is  issued.'
"Mr.  President,  I  do not believe that  the  President  of  the
United  States  is  going  to  decide  on  any  move  such  as  this
commentator  suggests.   If  I did, I would  support the ponding
amendment,  because I  do not  believe in  starting  war  under
the  guise  of preventive  war . . .
"Mr.  President,  when  a  broadcast  from  Tokyo  tells  of  a
buildup  in  Korea  of  our  planes,  and  a  concentration of  Red
planes  in  Shanghai, and  says  that  the  best  way  to counter
this  threat  is  to  strike  directly  and  destroy  the  Red  airbase
and  that  the  best  weapon to  use  is  a  tactical  atom  bomb,  I
do not  wonder  that  fears  are  being  generated."
28, Congr. Rec. 795-6.
And  Help  Us  Reach  A  Wider  Audience  By  Sending  A Gift  Sub
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stonef*   Weekly,  February  7, 19SS
How  Long Will Attorney  General  Brownell Go Oh Using  False  Witness?
One  of The  Government's  Most  Notorious  Informers "Comes Clean"
Washington—As  we  go  to  press  on Thursday  morning,  one
of   the   government's   most  notorious  informers,  Harvey  M.
Matusow,  was  about  to  appear  at  a  press  conference in New
York  to  unveil  his  new  book,  "False  Witness."   The  revela-
tions  are  expected to  upset  a  whole  series  of  prosecutions  in
which  Matusow  was  a  star  witness,  notably  the   Lattimore
case.
In   the   meantime,  affidavits   by  Matusow  were  filed  last
week  in  the  Federal  courts  in  Texas  and  New  York,  asking
"Fine,  Intelligent  Witness"
"Mr.  Harvey  M.  Matusow,
"1491  Macombs  Road,
"Bronx  52, New   York.
"Dear   Harvey:
"As  I  told  you  before   you  left   El  Paso, I  am  sincerely
grateful   to  you  for  your  fine  cooperation  in  the  case of
U.S.  v. Clinton  E.  Jencks.
"As  you  know,  your  testimony  was  absolutely  essen-
tial  to  a  successful  prosecution  and  you  presented  it  in
a  fine,  intelligent   manner.
"If   you  are  ever  in  my  part  of  the  country,  be  sure
and  look  •trie   up.
"Sincerely   yours,
"(S)    Charles  F.  Herring
"United  States  Attorney
"Western  District   of  Texas."
Lied  About Copper Strikes and  Korea
"At  this   time,  and  with  further   reference   only  to
Clinton  E.  Jencks  and  the  International  Union  of  Mine,
Mill  and  Smelter  Workers,  I  would  like  to  add  that  I
testified  falsely,  or  did  not  tell  the  entire  truth, when
I  appeared  in  Salt  Lake  City  on October  8,  1952,  before
Senators  McCarran  and  Watkins  during  hearings  con-
ducted  by  the  Senate  Judiciary   Subcommittee   on  In-
ternal  Security  concerning  Mine, Mill.   Specifically, and
without  now referring  to  other  matters  I  then   testified
about,  I  also  told  the   same   untruth   about  the   con-
versation   with  Jencks  relating  to  a  plot  to  interfere
with  the  Korean  war  by  calling  copper  strikes  which  I
later  told  when  I  testified  at  the  trial  of  Jencks."
—Affidavit  of  Matusow  in  U.S.' v.  Jencks.
new  trials  in  two  cases  in  which  he  admits  he  lied.   One  is
the  Taft-Hartley  oath  prosecution  of  Clinton  E.  Jencks,  an
official   of  the   International  Union  of  Mine,  Mill  &  Smelter
Workers.   The  other   is  the   conviction   of  Elizabeth  Gurley
Flynn  and  a  group  of  so-called  "second  echelon" Communist
leaders  under the  Smith  Act.   On this  page  we  give samples
from  both  affidavits  which  indicate their  flavor.
The  affidavit  in  the  Flynn case accuses Roy  Cohn  of suborn-
ing  perjury,  a  grave  charge  inviting a  legal  contest  in  which
either  Matusow or  Cohn  might  go to  jail.    Cohn  was  also  one
of   the  five  prosecutors   whose  name  is  signed  to  the   first
indictment  of  Owen  Lattimore.    Matusow  says  in  his  book
that  he  lied  when  he  testified that  "Owen  Lattimore's books
were  used  as.the   official  Communist Party  guide  on  Asia."
Anyone  who  has  followed  the  prosecution  and  inquisition
of  radicals,  and  knows something  of  life  on  the  hounded Left,
is  aware  of  the  pressures  exerted  by  the  government  on  the
ex-Communist.   There  is  no  market  for  the  drab  dull  truth.
Prosecutors  and  inquisitors  want  "hot  stuff" which will  make
headlines  and  wow  juries.
Unscrupulous  prosecutors  and  Congressional  investigators
have  ample  leverage  with  which to  create  liars.   People  who
admit  they  have  been  Communists  are  open  to  prosecution,
deportation  and/or  denaturalization  on political  grounds. Add
the  fact,  as  shown  by  testimony  in  several  trials,  that  some
of  these  professional  witnesses  are  men  with  pasts  marred
by   crimes  more   tangible   than   the   harboring   of   Marxist
thoughts,  and  you  can  see  how  easy  it  is  for  the  "coaching"
process.
Matusow's  Own Story  of  How  He Was  "Coached"  in  Perjury  by  Roy  Cohn
"In  all  other  respects,  my testimony concerning this  con-
versation   with  Defendant   Trachtenberg   is   false.     At  no
time in  the  course of  the  conversation did Defendant  Tracht-
enberg  make the  statements  that  I  attributed  to  him in  the
foregoing  quoted portions of  the  testimony.   At  no time did
Defendant  Trachtenberg  refer  to the  book in  relation to  the
concept  of  revolution or  overthrow  of  the  Government.   At
no  time  during  the   many  occasions  that   I  met  with  and
talked   with   Defendant  Trachtenberg  did  he  indicate  that
he  advocated  the  overthrow  of  the  United  States  Govern-
ment,  by  force  or  violence or  any  other  means.
"The  question of  my  testimony concerning  the  book  'The
Law   of  the   Soviet  State'  by  Andrei  Vishinsky, was  first
raised  by  Roy Cohn,  Assistant  United States  Attorney,  who
worked  with  me  in  preparing  my  testimony.   The  conver-
sation  in  which  the  subject  was  first  discussed  with  Cohn
took  place  in  a  car  driven  by  a  special  agent  of  the   FBI.
U. S. Attorneys David  Marks, Roy Cohn  and  J.  C. McCarthy,
a  special  agent  of  the  FBI,  and  two  other  individuals were
seated   in  the  car  at   the  time.    Mr.  Cohn  mentioned  the
book  by  Vishinsky.    Cohn  said  that  because  of  a  section  of
the  book  it  would  be  important  to  connect  the  book  with
the  defendants.   He  said  that  the  U.  S.  Attorney  had  at-
tempted  to  introduce this  book  in  the  Dennis case,  but  was
unable  to  lay  the  necessary  foundation.   He  then  asked  me
if  I  had  ever  discussed  the  book with  any  of  the  defendants.
—Affidavit   of  Harvey  M.  Matusow,  in
I  told  him that  I  had  discussed  it  with  Trachtenberg.    Cohn
asked  me  for  the  substance  of  that  conversation,  and  I  in-
formed  him that  Trachtenberg  had  inquired  about  the  sales
of   the   book  in   a  conversation  in  which  he  made  similar
inquiry  concerning  the  sales  of  other  books  carried  in  the
bookshop.
"A  subsequent  conversation  concerning  the  book  occurred
in  Roy Cohn's  office.    He  showed  me the  book  entitled.   The
Law  of  the  Soviet  State,'  and  asked  me  whether  this  was
the  book  which  Trachtenberg  had  discussed  with  me.    He
then  asked  me  for  further  details  concerning this  conversa-
tion  with  Trachtenberg.  and  I  informed  him that Trachten-
berg  had  discussed  the  price  of  the  book.   Cohn stated  that
this  would  not  be  sufficient  to  lay  the  necessary  foundation
for  its  introduction  in  evidence.   Cohn  pointed  to  a  passage
in  the  book  and  told  me  that  that  passage  was  important
in  proving  the  Government's  case.   He  then  asked  me  if  I
had  discussed  anything with  Trachtenberg  which  would  tie
him  with  this  passage,  and  I  said  'No',  I  had  not.    Never-
theless,  thereafter,   in  several   sessions  with  Cohn,  we  de-
veloped  the  answer  which  I  gave  in  my  testimony,  tying
Trachtenberg  to  that  passage.   WE  BOTH  KNEW  THAT
TRACHTENBERG   HAD  NEVER  MADE  THE    STATE-
MENTS WHICH I  ATTRIBUTED TO HIM IN  MY TESTI-
MONY."
I7.S.  v.  Elizabeth   Gurley  Flynn   et  al.
For  Only  8  Cents A Week, $4  A  Year,  You Can Send The Weekly  To A Friend
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  February   7, 19SS
An  Appeal   Recently  Made  by  the   Great   British  Philosopher  Over  BBC
Man's  Peril  from  The  Hydrogen  Bomb
By  Bertrand  Russell
EDITOR'S   NOTE:   The  Formosa  crisis  has  given  such
urgency  to  this  recent  appeal  by  Bertrand  Russell  over
BBC  that  we  are  reprinting   the  full  transcript   as  pub-
lished  in  the  British  Broadcasting  Corporation's  organ,
THE  LISTENER.  It  is a pity  that  no American  commercial
broadcasting  company  has  had  the  enterprise  or courage
to  rebroadcast   this  moving   warning   from    England's
foremost    living   philosopher,   the   octogenarian,   Lord
Russell.
I   am  speaking  on  this  occasion  not  as  a  Briton,  not  as  a
European,  not  as  a  member  of  a  western  democracy, but  as
a  human  being,  a  member  of  the  species  Man,  whose  con-
tinued  existence  is  in  doubt.   The  world  is  full  of  conflicts:
Jews   and  Arabs;  Indians  and  Pakistanis;  white  men  and
Negroes   in  Africa;  and,  overshadowing  all  minor  conflicts,
the titanic  struggle  between  communism and anti-communism.
Almost  everybody  who  is  politically  conscious  has  strong
feelings  about  one or  more  of  these  issues;  but  I  want  you, if
you can,  to set  aside  such feelings  f ov the  moment and  consider
yourself  only  as  a  member  of  a  biological  species  which  has
had  a  remarkable history  and  whose disappearance  none of  us
can  desire.   I  shall  try  to  say  no  single  word  which  should
appeal  to  one group  rather  than  to  another.   All,  equally,  are
in  peril,  and, if the  peril is understood, there  is  hope that  they
may  collectively avert  it.  We have  to learn  to  think  in  a new
way.   We have  to  learn  to  ask  ourselves  not  what  steps  can
be taken  to give military  victory  to whatever  group we prefer,
for  there  no  longer  are  such  steps.   The  question we have  to
ask ourselves is:  What steps can be taken to prevent a military
contest  of  which  the  issue  must  be  disastrous  to  all  sides?
The  general   public,  and  even  many  men   in  positions  of
authority  have  not  realised  what  would  be  involved in  a  war
with hydrogen  bombs.  The general  public still thinks  in  terms
of  the  obliteration  of  cities.   It  is  understood  that  the  new
bombs  are  more  powerful  than  the  old  and  that,  while  one
atomic  bomb  could  obliterate  Hiroshima, one  hydrogen bomb
could  obliterate  the  largest  cities  such  as  London, New York,
and  Moscow.  No  doubt  in  a  hydrogen-bomb  war  great  cities
would  be  obliterated.   But  this  is  one  of  the  minor  disasters
that  would  have  to  be  faced.   If  everybody  in  London,  New
York, and  Moscow  were  exterminated,  the  world might,  in  the
course  of  a  few  centuries,  recover  from  the  blow.  But  we now
know,  especially  since  the  Bikini  test,  that  hydrogen bombs
can  gradually   spread   destruction    over   a  much  wider  area
than  had  been  supposed.  It  is  stated  on  very  good  authority
that  a  bomb can  now  be  manufactured  which  will  be  25,000
times  as powerful as that which destroyed Hiroshima.  Such  a
bomb,  if   exploded  near  the   ground  or  under  water,  sends
radio-active  particles  into  the  upper  air.   They  sink  gradually
and  reach  the  surface  of  the  earth  in  the  form  of  a  deadly
dust  or  rain.   It  was  this  dust  which  infected  the  Japanese
fishermen  and  their  catch  of  fish  although  they  were  outside
what  experts  believed  to  be  the  danger  zone.   No  one  knows
how  widely  such  lethal  radio-active  particles  might  be  dif-
fused,  but  the  best  authorities  are  unanimous in  saying  that
a  war  with  hydrogen  bombs  is  quite  likely  to  put  an  end  to
the  human  race.  It  is  feared  that  if  many  hydrogen  bombs
are   used  there  will  be  universal   death—sudden  only  for   a
fortunate  minority,  but  for  the  majority  a  slow  torture  of
disease  and  disintegration.
War  Itself  Must  Be  Abolished
I  will  give  a  few  instances  out  of  many.  Sir  John   Slessor,
who  can  speak  with unrivalled  authority  from  his  experiences
of  air  warfare,  has  said:  'A  world  war  in  this  day  and  age
would  be general  suicide';  and  has  gone  on to state:  'It   never
has  and  never  will make any  sense  trying to  abolish  any  par-
ticular  weapon  of war.   What  we  have  got  to  abolish  is  war.'
Professor  Adrian,  who  is  the  leading  English  authority  on
nerve  physiology,  recently   emphasised  the  same  point  in  his
address  as  President   of  the  British  Association.   He  said:
'We  must  face  the  possibility  that  repeated  atomic  explosions
will  lead  to  a  degree  of  general  radio-activity  which  no  one
can  tolerate  or escape';  and he added: 'Unless  we are  ready  to
give up  some of our  old loyalties, we may be forced into a  fight
which  might  end  the  human  race.'   Air   Chief   Marshal   Sir
Philip  Joubert  says:  'With  the  advent  of  the  hydrogen  bomb,
it  would appear  that  the  human  race  has  arrived  at  a  point
where  it  must  abandon  war   as  a  continuation  of  policy  or
accept  the  possibility  of  total  destruction.'   I  could  prolong
such  quotations  indefinitely.
Many  warnings   have  been   uttered   by   eminent   men  of
science  and  by authorities  in military  strategy.  None of  them
will  say that  the  worst  results are  certain.  What  they  do say
is  that  these  results  are  possible  and  no one can be  sure that
thty  will  not be realised.  I  have  not  found that  the  views of
experts  on  this  question  depend  in  any   degree   upon  their
politics  or  prejudices.   They  depend  only, .so  far   as  my  re-
searches  have  revealed,  upon  the  extent   of  the   particular
expert's   knowledge.  I  have  found  that  the  men  who  know
most  are  most  gloomy.
Stark, Inescapable Problem
Here,  then,  is the  problem which I  present  to you, stark  and
dreadful  and  inescapable:  Shall  we  put  an  end  to  the  human
race;  or  shall  mankind  renounce  war?   People  will  not  face
this  alternative  because it  is  so  difficult  to  abolish  war.   The
abolition  of  war   will  demand  distasteful  limitations  of   na-
tional  sovereignty.   But  what  perhaps  impedes understanding
of  the  situation  more  than  anything   else  is  that  the  term
'mankind'  feels  vague  and  abstract.   People  scarcely  realise
in  imagination  that  the  danger   is  to  themselves  and  their
children  and  their  -grandchildren, and  not  only  to  a  dimly
apprehended  humanity.  And  so  they  hope that  perhaps  war
may  be  allowed  to  continue  provided   modern  weapons  are
prohibited.   I am afraid  this hope is illusory.   Whatever  agree-
ments  not  to  use hydrogen bombs had  bten  reached in  time of
peace,  they  would  no  longer  be  considered binding in  time of
war,  and  both  sides would set  to  work  to manufacture hydro-
gen  bombs  as  soon  as  war   1 roke  out,  for   if  One side manu-
factured   the  bombs  and  the   other   did  not,  the   side  that
manufactured  them  would inevitably be victorious.
On  both  sides  of  the  Iron  Curtain  there  are   political  ob-
stacles  to emphasis on the  destructive character  of future  war.
If  either  side  were  to  announce that  it  would  on  no  account
resort  to  war,  it  would be diplomatically at  the  mercy  of  the
other  side.   Each  side, for  the  sake  of  self-preservation,  must
continue  to  say  that  there  are  provocations  that  it  will  not
endure.   Each  side may long for  an accommodation, but  neither
side  dare  express  this  longing  convincingly.  The  position  is
analogous  to  that  of  duellists  in  former  times.   No  doubt  it
frequently  happened that  each  of  the  duellists  feared   death
and  desired an  accommodation, but  neither  could  say  so, since,
if  he  did,  he  would  be  thought  a  coward.   The  only  hope  in
such cases  was intervention  by friends of both parties  suggest-
ing  an  accommodation to  which both  could  agree  at  the  same
moment.   This  is  an  exact  analogy  to  the  present  position  of
the  protagonists   on  either  side  of  the  Iron  Curtain.   If   an
agreement  making  war  improbable  is  to  be  reached,  it  will
have to be by  the friendly offices  of neutrals,  who can  speak of
the  disastrousness  of war  without being  accused  of  advocating
a  policy  of 'appeasement.'  The neutrals have every  right,  even
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  7, 19SS
from  the  narrowest  consideration  of  self-interest,  to  do what-
ever  lies  in  their  power  to  prevent  the  outbreak  of  a  world
war,  for,  if  such  a  war  does  break  out,  it  is  highly  probable
that  all  the  inhabitants  of  neutral  countries,  along  with  the
rest  of mankind, will  perish.  If  I  were  in  control of  a  neutral
government, I  should certainly  consider  it  my paramount duty
to see to it that  my country would continue to have inhabitants,
and  the  only way  by  which I  could make this  probable would
be   to   promote  some  kind   of   accommodation  between   the
powers  on  opposite  sides  of  the  Iron  Curtain;
I,  personally, am of course  not neutral  in my feeling and  I
should  not  wish  to  see  the  danger   of  war   averted   by  an
abject  submission of the west.  But,  as a human being, I  have
to  remember that,  if  the  issues  between east  and  west  are  to
be  decided  in  any  manner  that  can  give  any  possible  satis-
faction   to  anybody,  whether   communist   or   anti-communist,
whether  Asian  or  European  or  American,  whether  white  or
black,  then  these  issues  must  not be  decided  by war.   I should
wish  this  to  be  understood  on both  sides  of  the  Iron   Curtain.
It  is  emphatically  not  enough  to  have  it  understood  on  one
side  only.  I  think  the  neutrals,  since  they  are  not  caught  in
our  tragic  dilemma, can,  if they  will, bring  about this  realisa-
tion  on  both  sides.   I  should  like  to  see  one  or  more  neutral
powers  appoint  a  commission  of  experts,  who  should  all  be
neutrals,  to  draw  up  a  report  on the  destructive  effects  to be
expected  in  a  war  with  hydrogen  bombs, not  only  among  the
belligerents  but  also  among neutrals.  I  should  wish  this  re-
port  presented  to  the  governments  of  all  the  Great  Powers
with  an  invitation to express their  agreement  or  disagreement
with  its  findings.  I  think  it  possible  that  in this  way all  the
Great  Powers  could be  led  to  agree  that  a  world  war  can  no
longer  serve  the  purposes  of  any  of  them  since  it  is  likely  to
exterminate  friend  and  foe  equally and  neutrals  likewise.
As  geological time is reckoned, Man  has  so far  existed only
for  a  very  short  period—1,000,000  years  at  the  most.   What
he  has  achieved,  especially  during  the  last   6,000  years,  is
something  utterly  new in  the  history  of the  Cosmos, so far   at
least  as we are  acquainted with it.  For  countless ages the sun
rose  and  set,  the  moon  waxed and  waned,  the  stars  shone in
the  night,  but  it  was  only with  the  coming of  Man that  these
things  were  understood.   In  the  great  world  of  astronomy
and  in  the  little world of  the  atom,  Man  has  unveiled  secrets
which  might  have  been  thought  undiscoverable.  In  art  and
literature  and  religion, some men  have  shown a  sublimity of
feeling  which makes the  species worth  preserving.   Is  all this
to  end  in  trivial  horror  because  so  few  are  able  to  think  of
Man  rather  than  of  this  or  that  group  of men?  Is  our  race
so destitute of  wisdom, so incapable  of impartial  love, so blind
even  to  the  simplest  dictates  of  self-preservation,  that  the
last  proof  of  its  silly cleverness  is  to  be  the  extermination  of
all  life  on  our  planet?—for  it  will  be  not  only  men  who  will
perish,  but  also  the  animals  and  plants,  whom  no  one  can
accuse  of  communism  or anti-communism.
I  cannot  believe  that  this  is  to  be the  end.  I  would  have
men  forget  their  quarrels  for  a  moment  and  reflect  that,  if
they  will  allow  themselves  to  survive,  there  is  every  reason
to  expect  the  triumphs of  the  future  to  exceed  immeasurably
the  triumphs of  the  past.  There  lies before  us,  if  we  choose,
continual   progress   in   happiness,  knowledge,  and  wisdom.
Shall  we,  instead,  choose  death,  because  we  cannot  forget
our  quarrels?   I  appeal, as  a  human  being to  human beings;
remember  your humanity, and  forget  the  rest.  If  you  can  do
so, the way lies open to a new Paradise;  if you cannot, nothing
lies before you but  universal  death.—Home Service.
A  Witty  Attack  on  the  Reece  Committee—and  a  Sad  Confession
How  Foundations  (Like The  Rest  of Us)  Are  Intimidated
By  Robert  M. Hutchins
EDITOR'S  NOTE—Because  of   its   militancy,   its   intel-
lectnal  gayety   and  its  realism,  we  are  reprinting   the
major   portion  of   the  speech  made  January   26    before
the  National  Press  Club  in  Washington  by  Robert  M.
Hutchins,  president  of  the  Fund  for  the  Republic.   We
believe  it  deserves  the  widest  possible  circulation.
The  conduct of  the  majority,  if  it  was  the  majority,  of  the
Reece  Committee  was  so  scandalous  that  it  outraged   almost
all  the  press  and  apparently  even  one  of  its  own  members.
At  any  rate,  Angier  L.  Goodwin  of  Massachusetts   wrote  a
new  kind  of  concurring opinion, one  that  disagreed  with  all
the  conclusions of  the  opinion  with  which  it   purported   to
concur.  In  the  conduct  of  the  hearings  Mr.  Reece added  some
new  wrinkles to  the  distortions  that  we  have  become  accus-
tomed  to  in congressional investigations.
The  foundations were  elaborately  attacked  by the  staff  and
by-some  witnesses  of  dubious standing.   Then,  pleading  that
Mr.  Hays  of  Ohio  would  not  let  him  conduct  the  hearings  as
they   should   be  conducted,  Mr.   Reece  adjourned  them   and
informed  the  foundations  that  they  could file written  state-
ments.  Perhaps  the  most  depressing  fact  about  the  report of
the  so-called  majority  of  the  Reece  Committee  is  that  Mr.
Reece  takes  credit  for  relieving  the  foundations  of  what  he
calls  the  "embarrassment"   of  cross-examination.   You  might
as  well  execute an  innocent man  without  the   embarrassment
of  a  hearing—but if  you  did  nobody  would  claim that  you  had
conformed  to the  principles of  Anglo-American jurisprudence.
Like  Those  Who Live  "In Furnished  Souls"
The  most  entertaining  of  the  new  wrinkles  was  that  the
majority  took a  philosophical position.  The  Cambridge  ladies,
e.  e.  cummings said,  lived  in  furnished  souls;  so  Mr.  Reece
and  Mr.  Wolcott  came  bustling  out  in  second-hand  suits  of
anti-empiricism,  supplied them  by  the  sages  of  the  staff.   Mr.
Reece  and  Mr.  Wolcott were much against  empiricism, which
they  associated  with  moral  relativism,  irreli'gion,  the  cultural
lag  and  ultimately with  subversion.
The  Congressmen  could  not  be bothered  with  history.  They
overlooked  the  fact  that  some  of  the  most  empirical  empiri-
cists  in  history,  like  Hume  and  Montaigne,  were  thorough-
going  tories.   The  Congressmen  could  not  be  bothered  with
consistency:  for  example,  they  went  after  the  teachers'  col-
leges  for  sponsoring empiricism  and  then  after  the  Fund  for
the  Advancement of  Education  for  not  sponsoring  the  teach-
ers'   colleges.
If  a  committee  may  charge  a  foundation with  empiricism,
why  not  charge  a  college  with  it,  and  if  with  empiricism why
not  with  Presbyterianism  or  Catholicism  or  any  other  phil-
osophy,  religion,  or  dogma that  the  committee  does  not  care
for?   The grant  of  tax  exemption  may  carry  with  it  certain
obligations,  and  those  who accept  it  may  by implication  agree
that  they  must  perform  certain   services.   But  it  has  never
been  supposed that  by taking  tax  exemption a  college,  univer-
sity,  church,  or  foundation,  otherwise  within  the  law,  was
liable  to condemnation because of  the  philosophy  that  it  held.
If  there  is such  liability,  the  way  is  open  to the  most  flagrant
violation  of  religious  freedom  and  of  freedom  of  speech  and
teaching.
The  lesson  the  majority,  if  it  is  a  majority,  of  the  Reece
Committee  wants  to  teach  the  foundation is  stated  in  words
of  crystalline  clarity:  "They  should  be  very  chary  of  pro-
moting  ideas,  concepts  and  opinion-forming material   which
run  counter  to  what  the  public  currently   wishes,  approves
and  likes."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  7, 1955
The  One Way  to  Be  Safe
Here   the   Committee   throws   overboard   the  principle  ac-
cepted   by  the   Cox  Committee  that  the  justification  of  the
foundations  is that  they  supply risk  or venture  capital  in  the
field  of  philanthropy.   That  is  what  they  are  for,  to  take
chances, the  Cox Committee said.  The  Eeece  Committee would
confine  them  to  what  a  public  relations  man,  presumably  by
a   series  of  careful  polls,  found   that  the   public   currently
wished,  approved,  and  liked.   The  way  to  be safe  would be  to
attract  no  attention,  arouse  no  discussion,  create  no  contro-
versy.
Even this would not  be enough.  All the things  of which  the
Committee  now  complains were  currently  wished,  approved,
and  liked  at  the  time  the  foundations did them.   To  meet  the
test  laid   down  by  the   Committee,  therefore,   a  foundation
would have to be able to foresee  what  would  become  unpopular
by  the  time  of  an   investigation.
But  even  this  is  not  enough.   The  issue  is  not  what  the
public  will  wish,  approve,  and  like.  There  is  no  evidence, for
example, that  the  American public dislikes empiricism.  Quite
the  contrary.   The  public  does  not  dislike  empiricism:  the
Reece  Committee  does,  or  rather  two  members  of  it  do,  or
perhaps  just  the  staff  of the  Reece  Committee  does.   Running
a   foundation  on  these   terms   becomes  an   extra-hazardous
occupation  fraught  with  dangers  that  test  pilots  and  sub-
marine  explorers   and  others  who  are  up  against   nothing
worse  than  the  laws  of Nature  do not  encounter.
The  Reece  Committee achieves  some of  its  gaudiest   effects
by  the  simple process  of  giving  old words new  definitions  and
then  pinning  the  old  words  on  the  foundations.   This  is  the
way  that  empiricism  becomes  subversive.    Subversion  now
means,  the  Committee  says,  a  promotion  of  tendencies that
may  lead  to  results  that  the  Committee will  not  like.  Hence
support of the  New Deal could be subversion.  Social engineer-
ing,  planning,  world  government,  the United  Nations,  William
James,  John  Dewey, the American Friends  Service Committee,
Dr.  Kinsey  and  reform  are  all  subversive  in  the  bright  new
lexicon  of the  Reece Committee.  And  of course  all  these  things
are  socialistic,  if  not  communistic, too.
So  a  Papal  Encyclical  Was  Termed  Red, Too
At  times  one  feels  when  reading  the  report  that  old  scur-
rilous  words will  be  redefined  and  applied  to  any  expression
of  decent human  feeling.  So it  was that a  staff  member found
himself  identifying the  Papal  Encyclicals  as communistic.
But the  Reece report  is  said  to be a  majority  report, and  it
will  be referred  to in the future  as a  majority  report.  Its  ap-
pendix  will  be  quoted  as  an  authoritative   collection  of  dan-
gerous  names.   The  only resaon  for  the  appendix  is  to  enable
some committee in the  future  to  say  of somebody that he  was
listed by the  Reece  Committee.  This fact  will  then  be  greete_d
with  hushed  and  incredulous  awe  by  those   to  whom  it   is
communicated.
All  you  have  to  do to  qualify  for  the  appendix is  to  favor
world  government  or  get  mentioned  by  the  Daily   Worker.
The  principal  charge  against  one  distinguished   professor  is
that  he  is  quoted,  apparently  with  approval,  in  a  dissenting
opinion  in  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals.   A  low  of  some  sort
is  reached  with  the  mention in  the  appendix  of  the  name of
George  F.  Kennan.  He  is  accused of  the  following—and this
is  the  total  record:  a  book  of  his  was  reviewed  (we  are  not
told  whether  favorably  or  unfavorably)  in  the  Daily  People's
World  and  the  New  World  Review;  on May  9,  1950,  the  New
York  Times reported that he spoke on Communist China  (what
he  said  does not appear);  and on May 28,1950, the  New  York
Times  reported  that  he  "attacked  witchhunting  of  commu-
nists."  On the  basis  of  such  information  Mr.  Kennan  will  in
the  future  be  referred  to  as  "cited  by the  Reece  Committee."
The  appendix  of  the  Reece  Committee's  so-called  majority
report  is  an  endless  carnival  of  good  clean  fun—it  is  almost
200  pages  long;  but  I  must  pass  on.  I  cannot  regard  the
Reece  Committee  as  having  more  than  symbolic  or  sympto-
matic  importance.   Its  wild  and  squalid  presentation   affords  a
picture  of  the  state  of  our  culture  that  is  most   depressing.
Its  aims  and methods are  another  example  of the  exploitation
of  public concern about communism and  subversion  to  further
political  ambition  and  to  work  off political  grudges.
A  Fraud  From  the  Very  First
We may as  well  state  it  plainly:  the  Reece investigation  in
its  inception  and  execution  was  a fraud.   Nobody  in  his right
mind  could  suppose  that  the  great  accumulations  of  wealth
left  by our  richest  men were  being intentionally  used by their
trustees  to  overthrow  the  institutions  of this  country.   Hence
the  Reece  Committee had  to  take  another  tack:  the  trustees
were  said  to be so busy that they  had to leave  the  foundations
to   officers  who  were  often  quite  disreputable.    Though  this
relieved  the  men  of  wealth   and  standing   of  the  charge  of
being  knaves,  it  did  so  only  at  the  expense  of  charging  them
with  being  fools.   Only  fools  could be  so  careless  as  to  allow
enormous sums entrusted  to them  for  charitable  purpose to be
stolen  away  and  lavished  on  the  subversion  of  their  country.
Congress   may  properly   investigate  the   foundations   and
seek  to  arrive  at  general  legislative  policy  concerning  them.
But  the most important  question  to ask  about  any  given  foun-
dation  is whether  it  is  one.  Is  it  actually  using  its  money for
religious,  charitable,  educational,  or  scientific purposes?   The
First  Amendment  suggests  that  tax  exemption should  not be
denied  or  revoked  because  the  particular   views  of  religion,
education,  or  science  held  or  promoted  by  the  foundation   are
unpopular.
On  the other  hand, nothing in the  Constitution  requires  that
tax  exemption must be accorded an organization, which  though
in  outward  form  a  foundation, is  actually  a  tax  dodge, or  a
public  relations  device, or  a  scheme  to  promote  the  personal
interests  of  the   donor.   The  test  is  public  versus  private
purposes.   The  Government  may  properly   inquire   into  this
question, since the exemption is granted  with  a  promise of  per-
formance.   The  appropriate  forum  for  the  determination  of
the  question of  performance  would  seem  to  be  a  court.
Most  Foundations  Already   "House-Broken"
As  Dr.  Johnson  used  to  say,  we  must  clear  our  minds of
cant.   When  we  do, we  see  that  in  general  the  foundations
have  for  many  years  been  following  the  prescription   laid
down  for  them  by  the  majority  of  the  Reeee  Committee.   This
prescription  is  to  try  to  avoid  doing  what  is  or  may become
unpopular.   The  failure  of  the  foundations  to  be  universally
popular  at  all  times  is  seldom caused  by  a  spirit  of  reckless
abandon  or eager pioneering on their  part.  It  is caused  rather
by  the  difficulties  of  predicting  what  will  be  popular  or  un-
popular.
Who  could have  imagined  that helping prospective teachers
in  Arkansas  to  get  an  education  would  have  ever  been  re-
garded   by  anybody  as   exhibiting   dangerous   tendencies  of
mind?   But  when  a  foundation  did this,  it  was  criticized  by
teachers,  businessmen, and newspapers  in that  State and  was
of  course  complained of by  the  Reece Committee.  What  would
the  foundation have  done in  Arkansas  if  it  had  been  possible
to  foresee  the  reactions  that  in  fact  occurred?   I  do not  say
that  the  grant  would  not  have  been  made,  but  I  would  not
bet  on  it;  for  the  foundations  have  in  varying  degrees  sup-
pressed  their  ambition  to  provide  risk  capital  in  favor  of  a
desire  to  have  what  are  called  good  public  relations,  that  is,
to  avoid   unpopularity.
We  know that  the  Attorney  General's  list  is  an  ex  parte
finding  of  guilt  with  no  probative  standing  in  law.   But  how
many  foundations  would  give  money  to  an  organization  or
even  to  an  individual  in  an   organization   on  the  Attorney
General's  list,  no matter  how meritorious  the  project?   Would
we  support  organizations  that  allowed  groups  listed  by  the
Attorney   General  to  meet  in  halls  owned  by  them?   If   not,
for  an  irrelevant  reason,  one that  has  nothing  to  do with  the
quality  of  the  proposal,  but  that  has  a  great  deal  to  do with
our popularity, we have made our peace with  Reece.
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  7, 1855
The  Fear-and-Smear  Is  Effective
We  know  that  the  most  dreadful   aspect  of  the  current
situation   is   the   atmosphere   of   suspicion   and   of   guilt-by-
association  in which we live.  We ought  to say that until  a man
or  an  organization  has  been condemned  by due  process  of  law
he or  it  must  be presumed  innocent,  and therefore  individuals
and  organizations  are  not to  be  automatically  denied  support
solely  on the  ground that they  are  associated  with  unpopular
people.   Yet  how many  foundations  would  give  money  for  a
good  purpose  to  be well  carried  out  by  an  organization  which,
though  not  on the  Attorney   General's  list,  was  vaguely  re-
ported  to  be  dominated  by  Communists?
We  have  come  a  long  way  since  Lord  Macaulay,  who  said,
"To  punish  a  man  because  we  infer  from  some  doctrine  he
holds or from  the  conduct of others  who hold the  same  doctrine
with  him that  he will commit a  crime  is  persecution  and  is  in
any  case  foolish  and  wicked."
Congressman  Reece  was  scoffed  at.   It  was  agreed  that  his
investigation  was  a  farce.   I  think  he had  good  reason  to be
satisfied  with  himself.  I  think  he won.  Without firing a  single
serious   shot,  without   saying   a  single  intelligent  word,  he
accomplished  his  purpose,  which  was  to  harrass  the  founda-
tions  and  to  subdue  such stirrings  of  courage,  or  even  of  im-
agination,  as  could be  found  in  them.   As  I  have  said,  there
were  not  many  there  when  he  came  on the  scene.   Congress-
man  Cox  had  been  there  before  him.   And  even  before  Con-
gressman   Cox,  the  foundations  were  coming  to  limit  their
venturesome  risk  capital   supplying  to  the  natural   sciences,
medicine, technology, and long-term  research.  These fields are
of   great   public  benefit.   They  are   also   not   controversial.
If  there  ever  was  a  foundation that  was  willing  to  be  con-
troversial,   that  was  willing  to  take  risks  and  to   venture
capital  in  areas  about which people have strong prejudices,  it
learned  its  lesson  by the  time  Cox and  Eeece  got  through.
The  Contradictions  of  Our Time
The  pressures  of  our  time  produce strange contradictions,
as  in the case  of the  man who said that there  were two things
he  hated,  intolerance  and  Jews.   Even  those  who  understand
what  they  are  talking  about  are  sometimes  afflicted  with  a
disease  that  often  attacks  intelligent   people,  a  disease  that
gives them such satisfaction  in what they  say they  are blinded
to the fact that  it  makes no  difference.
The  Houston  Post  did  a  wonderful job  on  the  situation  in
the  schools of  that  city,  but  the  deputy  superintendent,  who
was  fired,  has  not  been  reinstated.    We  all  smiled  at   the
decision  of  the  commandments not  to  permit  West  Point  and
Annapolis  to  debate  the  entry  of  Communist .China  into  the
UN  and  applauded  Mr.  Eisenhower's  sensible   observations.
We  went  away  feeling  very  good,  forgetting  that  West  Point
and  Annapolis are  not  to be permitted  to  debate  the  entry of
Communist  China  into  the  UN.   The  Illinois  Department  of
the  American Legion  has  repented,  I  hear,  of its  brutality  to
the  Girl  Scouts;  but  the  Girl  Scouts  revised  their  Manual as
the  Legion  demanded.  We were  pleased  to  notice that  Bishop
Oxnam  was  "cleared"  by  the  House  Un-American   Activities
Committee; but he is not allowed to speak  at  the  Philharmonic
Auditorium  in Los Angeles.  We assert that the  Fifth  Amend-
ment is  one of the brightest stars in  the crown  of our  liberties
and  proclaim  the  inalienable  freedom  of  every  man  not  to
testify   against   himself,  conveniently   overlooking   the   fact
that  almost  everybody  who  has  declined  to  do  so  is  now  un-
employed.   We  say  that   a   security   system   that   deprives
us  of  the  services  of  some  of  our  ablest  people  is   scarcely
helping us to be secure;  we regard this  as  a  pungent  remark.
But  Davies  and  Oppenheimer  are  not  working  for  the  Gov-
ernment;  Ladejinsky  is  not  working  for  the  Department  of
Agriculture.   And  what  about  Edward  U.  Condon, retiring
President  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement
of  Science, who  has  been  repeatedly  cleared,  but  who, at  the
prospect  of  his  tenth  or  eleventh  investigation, pronounced
himself  investigated   out  of  public  service?
The  Losers  Are the  Victors
The  temper  of  the  times  appears  to  be  such  that  the  real
victories  go to  those  who are  nominally  defeated.   The rather
messy  anti-communist  legislation   adopted  at  the  close  of  the
last  session  of  Congress  and  the  pious  resolution  passed  by
the  Senate  at  the  opening of this one must  be regarded  as  real
victories  for  a  Senator  who  was  formally  condemned  by  his
colleagues  two months  ago.  So must the  requirement imposed
on  every  public  speaker  these  days  that  he must disavow  any
connection   with   communism  and   attack   the   vicious con-
spirators  in  the  Kremlin.
The  newer  orthodoxy  is  an  odd thing.  For  example,  it  re-
quires  us  to  be  against  McCarthy,  but  not  too  soon  or  too
much,  not  in  such  a  way  as  to  arouse  too much animosity  in
too many  of those  who might  have  a  different  opinion.  If,  for
example,  we  say  that  rumor  and  gossip  are  an  inadequate
basis  on which to condemn a man or a  group, we are  told that
of  course  we  are  right,  but  that  in  this  case  the  rumor  and
gossip  are  so  widely  believed  that  people  would  think  bad
thoughts  of  us  if  we  insisted  on  proof.   So  it  comes  to  this:
we  must  ourselves  adopt  an  un-American  attitude because  if
we  don't  we  may  be  regarded  as  un-American  by  those  who
have  an  admittedly  un-American  attitude.   We  are  all  dedi-
cated to the great  American  tradition, but  the battlecry of the
Republic  is, what  will  people  say?
Help  Distribute  This  Issue  More  Widely  by  Getting  Your  Organizations  to  Order  Bulk  Reprints
I. F. Stone's Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter) my
Name
ftt™«t.
f.ity
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 m
(Tn)    N»n,»
St-rw*
fHty
E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
sub for the  enclosed  $5 :
Zone          State
are  (money enclosed) :
Zone          State
2/7/66
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
SOI  E.  Capitol  St,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mall
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED