I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955dec12.pdf

============================================================

Clifford  Durr  Writes  on  the  Death  of  Paul  Crouch,  See  Page  Three
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    Ill,   NO. 47
DECEMBER  12,  1955
«"      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  (Test)   Case  of  the   Unwanted    Subscription
Why  the  Weekly  Rejected That $5 from  Senator  Eastland
On  Friday,  December  1  the  Weekly  received  a  letter   from
the  Senate  Internal  Security  Subcommittee,  signed  by  its  rec-
ords  manager,  asking  for  a  one-year  subscription.   Enclosed
was a $5  voucher  processed  for  signature  by the  chairman, Sen-
ator  Eastland, and the  chief  counsel, J.  G. Sourwine.  On Mon-
day,  December  5,  the  Weekly  had  summonses  issued  for  Sena-
tor  Eastland and  his  eight  colleagues  of  the  subcommittee;  for
Mr.  Sourwine  and  for  Benjamin  Mandei,  its  research  director.
The  summonses were issued  in a test  case  filed  in U.  S.  District
Court  here  in  Washington  that  morning  by  I.  F.  Stone  acting
as  his  own  counsel.
The  day before  the  Weekly  wrote  Senator  Eastland rejecting
the  subscription on  the  ground  that  it  would  constitute an  un-
lawful  expenditure  of  public  funds  under  the  First  Amend-
ment.    The   Senator  was  put   on   notice   that   the   letter   and
voucher  would  be submitted  to  the  district  court  in  a  civil  suit
asking   (1)   an  injunction  forbidding  the  use  of  the  subcom-
mittee's   funds   in  purchasing  and  compiling  newspapers  for
purposes  of  surveillance under  the  "internal  security"  program,
(2)   for  a  declaratory  judgment ruling  that  surveillance of  the
press  by  the  subcommittee  was  unauthorized  and  unconstitu-
tional,  and  (3)   for  an  order  requiring  the  subcommittee  to
produce  in  court  its  unlawfully   gathered   dossiers  on  news-
papers   and   newspapermen   for   such   disposal   as  the   judge
deemed  proper.    This  was  the  substance  of  the  suit  filed  on
Monday.
Not  Just  Man-Bites- (Large)  -Dog
This  was  not  intended  merely  as  a  man-bites-(exceptionally
large)  dog  story.    The  hearings  begun  by  the  subcommittee
last  Monday  in' New  York  on  the  "infiltration"   (such  is  the
vocabulary  of  paranoid  melodrama)   of  the  press  are  sufficient
indication  of   the   subcommittee's   belief   that   it  can  act  as  a
thought   police   over   newspapers   and   newspapermen.     It   is
hardly  a  secret  around  Washington  that  the  subcommittee  has
been  building  dossiers  on  the  press.   The  arrival  of  the  letter
and  the  $5  voucher  seemed  admirably to  pin-point  this morbid
interest,  and  to  furnish  an  occasion  for  asking  the  courts  to
take  judicial cognizance  of  the  subcommittee's  activities  in  the
newspaper  field  and  to  rule on  its  propriety.
The  Weekly  is  anxious  to  reach  as many people  as  possible
and  would  be  happy  to  have  Senator  Eastland,  his   colleagues
and  their  employes  as  subscribers  in  their  personal  capacity.
We  are  only challenging  their  right  to use the  funds  of  the  In-
ternal   Security  subcommittee  and   its  employes  to  buy  news-
papers  and  other  publications  for  analysis  and  compilation  in
watching  the  press  for  ideas  they  may  consider  possibly  dan-
gerous  to  internal  security.   Such  activity  is  not  authorized  by
'It's   Bunk,"  The Senator  Declares
"Sen.   James  O.  Eastland   (D.  Miss.),   chairman   of
the  subcommittee  was  reached  in  Mississippi  for  com-
ment  on the  suit  [by  Stone's  Weekly].    'It's   bunk,'  the
Senator  declared."
—Washington  Post  and  Times-Herald,  Dee. 6.
the  resolution  establishing  the  subcommittee,  nor  by the  Reor-
ganization  Act  of  1946  setting  forth  the  powers  of  the  parent
Senate  Judiciary  Committee,  and  it  is  in  violation  of  the  First
Amendment.
Even  Under  the   Cloak  of  Conformity
It  seems  to  us  a  very  grave  matter  for  the  future  of   the
newspaper  profession  and  of  this  country  to  begin  to  take  for
granted   that  a  Congressional   committee  may  keep  the  press
under  surveillance  on  one  excuse  or  another,  whether  to  hunt
suspected   Communists  or  other  radicals.    Fundamental   liber-
ties  would  soon   be  swallowed  up  in  the  quicksands  of  the
witch  hunt.   At  each  step  we  would  find  ourselves   sinking
further  away  from  the  traditional  standards  of  a  free  society.
One  way to  detect  subversives  is by what-they write;  what  they
write  must therefore  be subject to governmental  scrutiny. Since
they will  presumably seek  to  confuse  the  sharp  eye of  the  secret
inquisitor,  he  must  be  on  the  lookout  not just  for  the  overtly
revolutionary  but  for  whatever  seems  covertly  to  move  in  that
direction.   He  must  peep  under  the  cloak  of  conformity  itself.
The  Senate  subcommittee,  in  the  name of  protecting  "inter-
nal  security,"  is  reviving  in  thin  new  guise  the  old  common
law  of  seditious  libel  which  the  United  States  rejected  at  the
very  inception  of  the  Republic  and  England  long  ago  aban-
doned.   This  old  law  and  its  evil  consequences  were  authori-
tatively   described  in  a  passage   from   Cooley's  Constitutional
Limitations  which  Chief  Justice  Hughes  cited  with  approval  in
the  famous  case  of  Near  v.  Minnesota  (283  U.S.  697)   when
the  Supreme  Court  invalidated  injunctions  even  against  con-
sistently  "malicious,  scandalous  and  defamatory"  gutter  publi-
cations,  lest  this  restrict  freedom  of  the  press.
A  Law  Against  Dangerous  Thoughts
"At  the  common  law,"   Cooley  wrote  (Constitutional  Limi-
tations, Vol.  II, p.  898),   "it was indictable to publish anything
against  the  constitution  of  the  country  or  the  established  sys-
tem  of  government.   The  basis  of  such  a  prosecution  was  the
tendency   [italics  added]  of  publications   of  this  character   to
excite  disaffection  with  the  government,  and thus  induce  a  rev-
.   (Continued  on  Page  Four)
I  3
9  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, December 12,1955
"It   Is  No  Crime  to  Champion  Economic  Planning"   Hearing  Examiner  Rules
Edward  Lamb Wins  First  Round  in  His  Long  Battle  at  the FCC
The  long nightmarish  ordeal  of  Edward  Oliver  Lamb,  pub-
lisher  of  the  Erie,  Pa.,  Dispatch  achieved  a  brief  respite  and
an  intermediate  victory  in  the  decision handed  down by  Hear-
ing  Examiner  Herbert  Sharfman  at  the  Federal  Communica-
tions  Commission last  week.  But  this,  in  the  PCC's  terminol-
ogy,  is  only  an  "initial" ruling,  subject  to  reversal  or  modifi-
cation   by  the   Commission  itself.   For   Lamb  the   toughest
hurdle  is  still  ahead.
The  Sharfman   decision—140 pages  single  spaced—has  the
effect  of doing justice to  Lamb  while saving face  for  the  Com-
mission.   The  hearing  examiner  recommended  the  renewal  of
Lamb's  license  for  TV station  WICU in  Erie,  Pa.,  and  found
"no  proof  that  Lamb  personally  engaged  in  any  subversive
activity."  This conclusion  was reached at  the  end of the  most
fantastic  if  not  the  longest  hearings  ever  held by  any  admin-
istrative  agency.
From   September   15  of  last  year   until   May  24  of  this,
Sharfman  heard  32  witnesses   (their  testimony   covers  7,000
pages).   Among them were  several  platoons  of ex-Communists
and  informers  marshalled  by the  FCC's  Broadcast  Bureau  in
its  zealous  effort  to  wrest  that  TV  license  from  Lamb.
Two  Informers  Recanted
Two  of  these  ex-Communist witnesses,  Mrs.  Marie  Natvig
and  Lowell Watson,  recanted  their  testimony.  The former  de-
clared  "only  an  idiot  would  have  put  any  credence  in  what  I
said"  and  accused  a  former   FCC  lawyer  of  "coercing"  her
testimony.  She wa* prosecuted  for  perjury  in making this ac-
cusation  and  her  conviction  is  now on appeal.  Watson  made a
similar  charge,  declaring  that his  testimony  was  the result of
"coaching,  conditioning  and  misleading   conversations."
Most  famous  of  these  witnesses  was  Louis  Budenz.  Lamb,
careful  to  depend  on  "recollection"  in  much  of  his  testimony
rather  than  on direct  statements,  gave  Budenz the  lie  direct.
Lamb called testimony  by Budenz  about  a  meeting  with Lamb
and  Yetta  Land,  a  leading   Ohio  Communist,  a  "conscious,
outrageous  falsehood."
Lamb  himself  now eminently respectable  mustered  as  char-
acter  witnesses  such  Democratic  notables  as  Senator  Kefau-
ver   and   Mayor   David   Lawrence   of  Pittsburgh;  the   chief
counsel in  his defense was former  Attorney  General McGrath.
No  Wrongdoing Alleged
The  record  in  the  Lamb case  is  voluminous  but  the  keys_ to
it  are  simple.  The  first  is  on  page  9  of  Sharfman's  decision
where he says "no question has  been raised  by the  Commission
as  to  the  programming  of  Lamb's  stations"  and  that  it  can
therefore  be  assumed  that  the  FCC  "has  been  entirely  satis-
fied in  this respect."  The effort  to  take  Lamb's  license  away
from  him  is  not  based  on  any  allegation  that  he  has  abused
his  privileges  as  a  broadcaster,   or  failed  to  operate  "in  the
public  interest."
The  second  key  to  the  maze lies  in  Sharfman's  handling  of
Lamb's  charge  that  the  whole  proceeding  was  illegal  in  that
the  FCC  was  exceeding  its  authority  "by  inquiring into  past
alleged   communist  beliefs,   associations   and   affiliations   of
Edward  Lamb  . . . especially in  view of the fact  that  even if
Mr.  Lamb  has  held  the  alleged  beliefs  and  maintained  the
alleged  affiliations  and  associations,  he  would  not  have  been
guilty  of  any  wrong-doing."
The  hearing  examiner  saves  face  for  the  FCC  by  ruling
that  the  case  "involves  no inquiry  into  Lamb's  past  associa-
tions  and  conduct, as  such, but  is  concerned  solely  with  alleg-
ed  misrepresentation."   No  figleaf  was  ever  more transparent.
Poor  Fellow  Wrote  A  Book
Lamb as  a  lawyer  in  the  thirties  was  active  in  the  defense
of  labor  and  of  radicals  in  civil  liberties  cases.   He  also  had
the misfortune  to write a  book 21 years  ago  on "The  Planned
Unfit  to  Print?
The  newspapers  of  New  York  City  seem  to  believe
that  if  they  print  no news  about the  Eastland  commit-
tee  investigation  of  newspapermen  which  opened there
last  Monday  maybe the  committee will  get  discouraged
and   go  away.   The  Herald-Tribune   on  Tuesday   and
Wednesday  ignored  the  hearings   altogether,  the  New
York  Times buried  the news in a few paragraphs  inside.
The  New  York  Post  alone  protested   in  an  editorial
"The  Untold  Story"  last  Wednesday:  "The  real  issues
are  whether  this  inquiry  was even  remotely  warranted,
and  whether  newspapers  can  afford  to regard  the  news
as  incidental  trivia."
The  inside  story  we  printed  last  week  on  the  Times
and  the  witch  hunt  was  on  sale  in  New  York  Friday
December  2  but  did  not  appear  in  the  daily  press until
the  Post  printed  the  same  details five days later. It  dis-
closed  that  the  New  York  Newspaper  Guild  had  inter-
vened  in  the  new  firing  at   the   Times  of  an  employe
who  said  he  would  take  the  Fifth  rather  than  inform
on others. What little news  leaked out  of the  three  days
of  Eastland  committee executive  sessions  in  New  York
confirmed  the  report that  the  Newspaper  Guild  and  the
New   York   Times  were  prime targets.
Economy  in  Soviet  Russia."   Some  of  the  organizations  with
which  he  worked  as  defense  counsel have  since  been  put  on
the  Attorney  General's  list.  The  book  praised  economic  plan-
ning.   He  was  accused  of  "misrepresentation"  by   denying
that  these  past  activities  and  writings  were  "subversive."
The  Broadcast  Bureau  in raking  up this past  seems to have
been  carried  by  passion  far  beyond the  limits  of  discriminat-
ing  judgment.   It  put  into  evidence  (FCC  Exhibit  98a)  the
old  1931  report  of  the  Ham  Fish  committee,  predecessor  in
Congress   of  the   Un-American  Activities   Committee.   This
notoriously  frenetic  bit  of  rubbish  actually  "found"  that  the
American  Civil  Liberties  Union "attempts  not  only to  protect
crime  but  to  encourage  attacks upon our  institutions in  every
form."
Sharfman's   conclusions  about  Lamb's  past  ideas  and  asso-
ciations  took  considerable  courage  in  the  current  atmosphere.
He  ruled  that  Lamb's  "professed  sympathy  with  the  under-
dog,"   his   "espousal   of  'liberal'  causes"   and   his   "possible
naivete"   could   not   "be  transformed   into   something   more
sinister."
Washington's  Dirtiest  Words
Sharfman's  findings  on  the  book  Lamb  published  in  1934
are  startling and refreshing  in a  Washington  where  "planned
economy"  have  been  dirty  words since  the  right  destroyed  the
National  Resources  Planning  Board  in  the  late  30's.
"It  is  no  crime  to  champion  planning,"  Sharfman  calmly
concludes,  "and  to  the  Hearing  Examiner  it  is  a  matter  of
complete indifference,  so far  as this  case  is concerned, whether
Lamb  stood  for  an  assumption  of  title  to  the  means  of  pro-
duction.  There  would have  been  nothing  un-American  or  un-
constitutional  in  doing so, provided it  was  not  proposed  that
such  a  transfer   of  ownership  be  achieved  by  other  than  con-
stitutional  means.   Fabian  socialism,  however   impracticable
it  may  be  considered  by  doctrinaire   Communists,  and  how-
ever  it  may  run  counter  to  our  prevailing   notions  of  free
enterprise,   is  possible  within  the  framework  of  our  present
constitution,  by  amendment,  if  necessary."
Twenty years hence this may sound trite  and obvious.  It  is
sober  truth  that  to  say  them   here  today  is  to  risk   one's
career.   We raise  our  hat  to  a  brave  and  enlightened   man.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, December 12,1955
Our  Guess  on What  the  Supreme Court Will  Do  In The  Immunity  Case
The  Democratic  National  Committee  should  have  been  in
court  last  week  as  amieus  euriae  when  Leonard  Boudin  ably
argued  the Ullmann immunity appeal  before the  U.S.  Supreme
Court. . . . The revived prosecution of William  L. Ullmann was
neatly  timed  to  revive  the  "twenty  years  of treason" cry  and
the  Harry  D. White charges  against  the  Democratic  party  in
time for  use in the presidential  campaign.... If  the immunity
law  is upheld, Ullmann  will have a  choice of  going  to jail  for
contempt  or  again  telling  under  oath  the  same  story  he  told
the  FBI  in  1947  (and  at  least two grand juries and  the House
Un-American  Activities  Committee afterward).  . . . Then he
denied  all  her  charges,  the  charges  on  which  Attorney  Gen-
eral Brownell and J.  Edgar  Hoover  relied in their  posthumous
attack on Harry White and through  White on Harry  Truman.
...    On the  heels  of  the  new denials,  Ullmann could be tried
for  perjury  just  about  the  time the campaign  was getting hot
—and dirty. . ..
It  is not often  that the  Supreme Court  has  a  case  so  super-
charged with  politics.  . . . The Chief  Justice  will  undercut the
Republican  campaign if  Ullmann goes free.  . . . Truman's At-
torney  General,  Tom  Clark,  will  be  passing  indirectly  on  a
smear  charge  against  the President  who appointed  him.  . . .
In  addition the Court  confronts  a  difficult  legal  question.  . . .
If  it  declares  all  compulsory testimony  unconstitutional  under
the   Fifth   amendment,  it   will  invalidate   a  whole  series  of
measures  since  the  1890's permitting  compulsory testimony  in
economic  regulatory   hearings   before   the   ICC  and   similar
agencies.  ...     To distinguish  these  from  First  Amendment
cases,  as  Mr. Justice  Frankfurter   emphasized by  sharp  ques-
tioning during  oral  argument,  would  be  impossible. What,  he
asked,  would you  do in  the  case  of  sabotage,  which  is  neither
economic  nor political? . . . The Court could,  of course, evade
these  difficulties  by declaring this particular  statute unconsti-
Just   "Prophylactic"
"Where  the  effect  of  political  heresy  is  as  serious  as
it  is today, the dissenter  is subject  to penalties and  for-
feitures  which  are  more  drastic  than  criminal  prosecu-
tion.  . ..   Only  the most.menial and low-paying work is
now  available  to  many  persons  who have  been  branded
as  subversive  by  congressional  committees,  administra-
tive  agencies  or  the  daily  press.  ...     If  the  privilege
[against  self-incrimination]  is  to  have  any  meaning  in
the  current  context,  these  sanctions  must  be  regarded
as reason  for invoking the privilege.  In an analogous  pe-
riod  of  religious oppression, the  18th  Century,  the  Eng-
lish  equity courts  allowed  witnesses  to  be  silent  where
admissions  of  papacy  would  result  in  property  loss."
—Defense   Brief   in  the  Ullmann Immunity   Appeal,
pps.  16-19.
'The   possible  "disabilities'  petitioner  lists  .  .  .  are
prophylactic  measures designed to  remove dangerous or
unsuitable  persons  from  areas  in  which  they  can  do
harm,  but  they  are  not  punitive  or  criminal sanctions."
—The  Government's Reply  in its  main  brief,  p. 25.
tutional  on the  technical  grpund that  it  violates  separation  of
powers  by  permitting  the  judge  to  share  in  the  non-judicial
function  of determining  when immunity can be granted.  . . .
Our  guess  is that  this  is  what  a  majority  will  do. ...     This
would  defend the  Fifth  amendment and  free  Ullmann,  with-
out  saying  that  Congress  could  under  no  circumstances  ever
pass  a  compulsory  testimony  law.  ...   It  took  McCarran and
the  Korean  war  four  years  to  get  this immunity law through
Congress and many years may pass before there is another
A  Letter  Neither  New  York  Times  Nor  Washington  Post  Would  Publish
A  Noted  Victim  of  Paul  Crouch  Writes  The  Informer's  Obituary
ment's  own  immunity.  When he  had  finished  speaking,  they
printed  and  bound his  words  and  sent them  in  official  reports
throughout  the  land  to  serve  as  permanent  storage  bins of
suit  proof  libel, from  which  the  sick-minded, the unscrupulous
and  all  who have a  grudge  were  invited  to  help  themselves.
How  should  we  judge  the  Crouches?   In  less  excited  and
healthier  times,  they  would  be of  no  importance,  except  in  so
far  as the  lives of even the  sick  and  broken in  body  and  mind
continue to matter. They would certainly  have no power. How
can  people be made to  see and  understand  that  the  Crouches,
as  destructive   as  they  are,  are  not  the  source  of  evil,  but
its  mere conduit?
In  his  testimony  before  the  Courts,  Congressional  Commit-
tees,  and  Loyalty  Boards,  Crouch did just  what he  was  hired
to  do and,  whatever  may  be  said  about him,  he  gave  his  em-
ployers full  value  of what  they  wanted  of him.  He  died lone-
ly  and  despised by those  who used him.   Those who hired  him
remain  respectable  and  powerful.   They  used  him  and  when
he  was  no  longer  useful   they  threw  him  aside.   There   are
plenty  of others to take his place.  His very  death  was a final
act  of  service  to  his  hirers,  for  by  it  he became purged  of  his
evil  doing and  they,  of  their  responsibility  for  using  him, for
of  the  dead  we  should  speak  only  good.  Our  Attorney  Gen-
eral   will  now  be  spared  the   embarrassment   of   answering
questions  about  the  progress  of  his  long  delayed  "study" of
Crouch's  conflicting  testimony  or  about  what  is  being  done
to right  the  wrongs  done  his  victims.
Isn't  it  high  time that  we recognize  that  the  responsibility
for  bearing  false  witness  does  not  lie  solely  in  the  mouths
that  utter  the  false  words?
History  teaches,  over  and  over  again,  the  grim  lesson  that
the informer  system  will  corrupt  and  destroy  any nation that
uses  it.  It  is beginning  to  corrupt  and destroy  our  own coun-
try  and it  is time that  it  be  ended.
By  Clifford  J.  Durr
As one of  the  many targets  of  Paul  Crouch, I  would  like  to
make  a  few  observations,  prompted  by the  story  of  his  death.
If  headlines are  the  test,  Crouch's death  was  less newsworthy
than  his  destructive  assaults on the  reputations  of  others.    In
a  matter  of  a  few  months, he  had  passed  from  the  glare of
the  spotlight  into  comparative  obscurity.
During  his  lifetime  he  knew  fame  and  glory  and  the  ex-
citement  of  intrigue.   For  nearly  a  decade he made his  living
in  what  has  formerly  been  regarded  as  one of  the  most  con-
temptible  of  all  trades, that  of  informer.   Again  and  again,
not  only  the  inconsistencies  but  the  sheer  fabrications  in  his
testimony  were  exposed, but  to  little  purpose.  Public  officials
continued  to  vouch  for  his  reliability  and  the  nobility  of  his
character.    The  following  from   the  United  States   Senator,
James  O. Eastland,  are  just  a  few  of  many  illustrations  that
could  be given:
"You  should be honored to  know  that  man."
"The  Attorney  General  has  vouched for  your  veracity."
"Let  me  say  right  here  that  the  Chair  thinks  he  knows
what  he is talking  about, that  the  FBI  has  gotten  some very
valuable  information  from   this  man  and  has   confidence  in
what he says."
Crouch's  most  lurid  confessions of  past  perfidy,  deceit  and
treachery  became,  it  seemed, a  guarantee  of  his  current  ve-
racity  and  patriotism.   The  power  of  men  in  high  places  con-
tinued  to  flow  through  him,  to  destroy   the  reputations  of
countless  American  citizens  and  to  deprive  many  of their  lib-
erty.   Because  he  served  their  purpose,  they  sheltered   and
guarded  him  and  paid  him  in  the  taxpayer's  money  and  in
fame.   They  sanctified   his  words  with  their  benediction  of
their  own exalted  positions and, lest  the truth  of  his  words be
challenged,  they  wrapped  him  in  the  mantle  of  the  Govern-
1   9  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December IS, 18S5
•Internal  Security"  Was  Also  The  Excuse  for  the  Old Law of  Seditious  Libel
A  Worse   Menace  to   Freedom  of   the  Press  Than  Huey  Long's  Tax
(Continued   -from   Page  One)
olutionaiy  spirit.  ...      If  any  such  principle  of   suppression
should  ever  be  recognized  in  the  common  law  of  America,  it
might  reasonably  be anticipated  that  in  times  of  high  party ex-
citement  it  would  lead  to  prosecutions  by the  party  in  power,
to  bolster  up  wrongs  and  sustain  abuses  and  oppressions   by
crushing  adverse  criticism  and  discussions."
George  III  Used  The  Same   Logic
It  was in the  name of  protecting  "internal security"  that  edi-
tors   were  prosecuted   by  the   Crown   in  Eighteenth   Century
England  and  America. The  law  of  seditious  libel  was  intended
to  facilitate  a hunt  for  subversives  and  subversive writing  like
that  now  being  carried on  by  Senator Eastland  as the  successor
of  the  kte  Senator  McCarran  at  the  helm  of  the  Senate  Inter-
nal  Security  subcommittee.    The  First  Amendment,  in  forbid-
ding  Congress  to  abridge  freedom  of  the  press,  was  intended
to  protect  against  any  attempt  to  revive  such  restrictive  doc-
trines  in  this  country.
Chief  Justice  Hughes  quoted  Madison,   "the  Father  of  the
Constitution,"  on this  very  point  in  that  same  decision  in Near
v.  Minnesota.   "This  security  of  the  freedom  of  the  press,"
Madison  wrote in the  Virginia  resolution  against  the  Alien  and
Sedition  laws,  "requires  that  it  should  be exempt  not only from
previous  restraint  by  the  executive,  as  in  Great   Britain,  but
from  legislative  restraint  also."   It  need  hardly  be  argued  at
this  late date  in  the  witch  hunt  that a  Congressional  investiga-
tion,  calling  up  newspapermen  for  interrogation  on  their  po-
litical  views  and  associations,  acts  as  a  very  effective   restraint.
The  Supreme  Court  has  held  on  several recent  occasions,  nota-
bly  in  the  Emspak  and  earlier  in  the  Rumely  case,  that  the
power  of  Congress   to  investigate  is  limited  under  the   First
Amendment.
Worse  Than  Huey  Long's  Tax
The  Court  has  already  held  that  indirect  as  well  as  direct
limitations  on  freedom  of  the  press are  unlawful.  When  Huey
Long  ruled  Louisiana  he  imposed  a  two percent  gross  receipts
tax  on  advertising revenue.  This  was  not  on  its  face  excessive
Subscription  Rejected
"Dear  Senator Eastland:
"I  am  in  receipt  of  a  letter  from  Dorothy  C.  Baker,
the  Records Clerk  of  your  Internal  Security  Subcommit-
tee,   asking  that  the  Weekly  be  sent  regularly  to  the
Subcommittee  and  attaching  a   $5  voucher  for  a  one-
year  subscription  prepared  for  signature  by  you  and
Mr.  Sourwine.
"I  am  compelled to  reject  this  subscription because  it
would  involve an  unconstitutional expenditure of  public
funds  under  Article  I  and  the  First  Amendment  to  the
Constitution."
Sincerely  yours
L  F.  STONE
but  the  Supreme  Court  threw  it  out  on  the  ground  that  such  a
tax  could  be  used  by Long  to  punish  and  extinguish  a  critical
press.   On  that  occasion  Mr.  Justice  Sutherland  wrote  a  land-
mark  decision  in  the  law  of  freedom  of  the  press  (Grosjean   v.
American  Press,  297  U.S.  233).   In  this,  again  quoting  from
Cooley,  the  Supreme Court  said that  in  the framing of  the  First
Amendment  "The   evils  to  be  prevented  were  not  the  censor-
ship  of  the  press  merely,  but  any  action  of  the  government  by
means of  which  it  might  prevent  such  free  and  general  discus-
sion  of public matters.   ..."
The  terror  instilled  by  the  Eastland  committee,  the  wake of
blasted  careers  it  leaves  behind,  are  far  more  effective  restric-
tions  than  a  two  percent  gross  advertising  receipts  tax  would
be.  We  believe  some means must  be found  to  bring  the news-
paper  investigation  to  a  halt  under  the  First  Amendment, and
think  it  a  pity  that  no  big  and  influential  publisher  has  the
nerve  to  take  the  offensive  and  challenge  the  subcommittee's
powers  in  a  some  such  way  as  we  have  chosen.   Whether  our
action  is won  or  lost,  some  action  like  it  will  some  day be  vic-
torious.  In  the meantime we invite other  newspapers  and  news-
papermen  to  support  our  petition  to  the  end  that  the  Senate
subcommittee  may  at  least  be  subject  to  questioning  in  open
court  on  its  activities  and  purposes   in  regards  to  the  press.
This  is  the  spirit  in  which  we  have  filed  suit.
Send  a Gift  Subscription  Today  to  Your  Local  Editor  or  Friendly  Newspaperman
L  F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name
Street
City
*  extra  for   Canada.
301  E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Zone          State
mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
Zone          State
12/12/55
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED