I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955oct03.pdf

============================================================

Wffl  The Newspaper  Guild  Undercut  the  First  and  Fifth  Amendments?   See Page 4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   No. 36
OCTOBER  3,  1955
«"      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 GENTS
The  President's  Illness  A  Blow  to   Peace
The  President's  illness  is a world  calamity.   Dwight  Eisen-
hower  occupied  a  most  peculiar   role  in  American  politics.
Through  him,  exploiting  his fame  as a soldier  and his  personal
charm,  the  Eastern  seaboard  moneyed  interests  who  direct  die
Republican  party  achieved  a  number  of  purposes.   They  at-
tracted  enough  of  the  independent  vote  to  win  the  1952  elec-
tions  from  the  Democrats,  who  have  since  1932  been  the  ma-
jority party.  They put  into effect  a program which  accepted  die
main  accomplishments  of  New  Deal and  Fair  Deal  but  sought
to  establish  a  climate  favorable  to  big  business,  notably  in  die
control  of  basic resources  and of fiscal policy.  Above all,  in  the
search  for a sound  dollar,  a balanced  budget  and  tax  reduction,
they  moved  to  end  die  Korean  conflict,  to  liquidate  the  cold
war,  to  recognize the  world  atomic stalemate,  and  to cut  down
swollen   military   expenditures.    Only   through   the   foremost
American  General  of  our  generation  could  they  put  some curb
on  the  Pentagon,  and  only  through  a  General  speaking  for  a
conservative  party  could  they  begin  to  negotiate with  Moscow
and  Peking  without  being  accused—in  the  overheated  atmos-
phere  of  an  America  driven  slightly  wacky  since   1947—of
"appeasement,"  or  treachery.
A  Soldier's  Gifts
To  this  pattern  of  political  manipulation,  Mr.  Eisenhower
contributed  little,  but that  little  was decisive.   He  came to  die
White  House  uninformed,  politically  naive,  and  almost  child-
ishly  trusting  in  the  men  of  wealth  who  groomed  him  for  the
Presidency.   But  he  also  brought  with  him  certain  intangible
but crucial assets.  A life-time soldier, he was no militarist.  The
leader  of  a  victorious  coalition  in  the  greatest  war  of  history,
he was genuinely  a man of  peace.  His own high  rank and long
military  experience  made  it  impossible  for  die  Pentagon  brass
to  overawe  him;  he  handled  them  as  no  big  business  man  or
corporation  lawyer  could.   He  had  a  very  modest  view  of  his
own  capacities  but  his  own  swift  rise  in  the  Army and  success
in  die  war  had  given  him  a  justifiable  confidence  in  his  one
great gift—a gift  of  getting along with  people, of  solving and
smoothing  over  organizational  problems.   Hence  his  faith  that
he could  sit  down  and  talk  with  die  Russian  leaders  and  begin
to  move  toward  agreement.   Though  this  faith   reflected  an
oversimplified  view of  power  politics,  it  supplied  a vital  miss-
ing  ingredient,  a  readiness  to  confer,  a  willingness  to  assume
there  were  human  beings  with  human  problems  on  die  other
side,  too.  For  the  first  time  since  FDR  died  we had  a  leader-
ship  which  was not  afraid  to  negotiate.  People at  home  and
abroad  sensed  this  basic  good  .will  and  hopefulness  in  Dwight
Eisenhower,  and  trusted  him  for  it;  this  is  why  the  heart  at-
tack  brought  such world-wide  instinctive  dismay.
We  share  this  feeling  and  join  in  the  universal  wish  for  the
President's  speedy  recovery.  But  no one  sees  die  possibility of
a
  *                                                                       3
a  miracle  great  enough  to  enable  Mr.  Eisenhower  to  bear  the
burdens  of  a  presidential   campaign  and  another  term.   And
this  is serious.  We  are  proud  of  the  fact  that  as  early  as  June
13,  1953,  in an editorial  "Challenging the  Left:  'Back  Dee  For
Peace,'  "  we were the first voice left  of  center  to  recognize  the
President's  historic role.  Now,  as two years ago,  the  balance of
forces  for  peace is still a precarious one.   It  was through  Eisen-
hower that the big business men in the  Cabinet  like Humphrey
and Wilson have been  able to put  some brake on the arms race.
Sherman  Adams  and  Stassen  and  Humphrey  will  have  much
less  of  a  check  on  Dulles  and  Radford  with  Eisenhower out  of
the  picture  in  the  next  few  months.  The  problem  of  untan-
gling  our  relations with  the  Soviet  bloc  has hardly  begun;  the
difficult  knots  remain  to  be  untied.   Four  more  years  of  Eisen-
hower,  with  a  Democratic  Congress,  in  which  Senator  George
could  have  gone  on  playing  his  wise  and  healing  role,-  were
badly  needed.   Now,  there  is  no  substitute  in  sight,  except  in
the unlikely event that  Chief  Justice Warren  could  be  prevailed
upon  to  take  the  Republican  nomination.
Painful    Awakenings
At  this  juncture,  the  Democratic  party,  and  particularly  its
liberals and  laborites,  cannot  be relied  upon.  The  two  historic
events  of  the  past  two years—the defeat  of  McCarthy  in   1954
and   the  deflation   of   the   China   Lobby  in   1955—were   the
achievement  of  bipartisan  coalitions  under  conservative  leader-
ship.   Only a continuance of  such  leadership  can make possible
the  adjustments  American society must make if  peace  is firmly
to  be  established  and  world  atomic  suicide  avoided.   We  are
going to have to recognize Communist China  and we are going
to  have to  recognize  that  the only  alternative  to  a  dangerously
divided  Germany—with both  sides arming  for  what  could  flare
up  into a greater  Korea—is to permit  its neutralization   outside
NATO in  return for  unification and free  elections.  These con-
cessions  to reality will  be painful  because our people have  been
fed  on  pipe-dreams  and  paranoid   nightmares.   The  liberals,
their  spirits  rubbed  raw  by  accusations  of  communism,  are
much  less  ready  to  recognize  these  realities  than  are  the  con-
servatives  and  the  big  business  men.   Those forces which may
not  want  war  but  certainly  make  peace more  difficult  to  obtain
—the dominant  portions of  the  Roman Catholic hierarchy  and
the  A.  F.  of  L.—are  much  more  powerful  in  the  Democratic
than  in  the  Republican  party.   The  aviation  lobby,  which  fat-
tens  on  war  alarums,  depends  on  leading  Democrats.     They
and  their  labor  allies  like  the  arms  race  as a  means  of  main-
taining  employment.   Consequently  they find it  comfortable  to
believe  that  if  only  we  arm  heavily  enough  die  Kremlin  will
surrender.    Even  Stevenson   has   been   sour   about   Geneva.
Despite  Senator  George,  the  Democrats  are  still  a  cold  war
party   and   the   prospect   of   their   return   to   power   at   this
time  is  appalling.
A. 2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 3,19SS
The  American  Negro  Needs  A  Gandhi In  The  Fight  Against  Racial  Degradation                 ••
The  South  Is  Sick — That^Is The  Meaning  of  The  Till  Murder
Next  to  the  President's  collapse,  the  worst  news   of  the
week  was  from  Mississippi.   The Jury  at  Sumner  brought  in
two  verdicts,  not  one.    The  immediate   and  visible   decision
was  that  J.  W.  Milam  and  Roy  Bryant  were  not  guilty  of
killing   a   14-year-old   colored   boy.    The   other,   unspoken,
unintended,  unconscious  but  indelible  was  a  verdict  of  guilty
against  all  the  rest  of  us  and  our  country.
There  are  scenes  at  the  murder  trial  which  imprint  them-
selves  unforgettably:    The  Negro  reporters,  as  they  walked
into  court  one  day  after   lunch,  being  haled  by  the  Sheriff
with  "Hello,  Niggers."   Mrs.  Bradley,  the  mother  of  the  vic-
tim,  testifying  that  she  told  her  son  before  he  left  for   the
South,  "to  be very  careful  how he  spoke  and  to  say  'yes,  sir*
and  'no,  ma'am'  and  not  to hesitate to  humble yourself  if  you
had  to  get  down on your knees." Moses Wright—we  salute  his
courage—testifying   that  when  J.  W.  Milam  came  to  get  his
14-year-old   nephew  Emmett  Till,  he  asked   "You  from  Chi-
cago?"  and  when  the  boy answered   "yes"   Milam  said  "Don't
you  say  yes to me or  I'll  knock  hell  out  of you."  Mrs.  Bryant's
sexy  whopper  (which  Judge  Swango  to  his  credit  kept  from
the  jury)  that  this  14-year-old  boy with  a  speech  defect  had
grabbed  her  round  the  waist,  solicited  her  with  an  unprint-
able  expression   and  boasted   "I've   been  with   white  women
before."    J.  A.  Shaw,  Jr.,  the  foreman  of  the  jury,  asked  by
the  press  what  the jury  thought  of  Mrs.  Bradley's  testimony
replying,  "if  she  tried  a  little, harder,  she  might   have  got
out  a  tear."
No  Sympathy  for  A Mother
Emmett   Till's  broken  body,  with   the  bullet  hole  in   the
right  temple  and  the  gaping  hole  in  the  back  of  the  head,
as  if  broken  in  by  a  rock,  testified  to  a  maniacal   murder.
Those  who  killed  him  were  sick  men,  sick  with  race  hatred.
The murder  and  the  trial  could  only  have happened  in  a  sick
countryside.   Where else  would a mother  be treated  with  such
elementary  lack  of  respect  or  compassion?   Where  else would
the  defense  dare  put  forward  the  idea  that  the  murder  was
somehow  "framed"  by the  NAACP?   Where  else  would  news-
papers  somehow make  it  appear  that  those  at  fault  were  not
the  men who killed  the  boy but  those  who tried  to  bring  the
killers  to  justice?    There  is  a  sickness  in  the  South.    Unless
cured,  there   may  some  day  spring   from   it  crimes  as  evil
and  immense  as  the  crematoria   of   Hitlerism.
If   Milam  and   Bryant   did  not   kill   Till,   then   who  did?
Nobody  in  the  South  asks  the  question,  at   least   publicly.
Who was the third  man with  them?   Where are  the  two  miss-
ing  witnesses?    Nobody  cares.   Mississippi went  through  the
motions,  and  the  motions  were  enough  to  muffle   the  weak
conscience   of   the   northern   white  press.    The  judge   was
honorable;  the  special prosecutor  tried  hard;  who can  quarrel
with  a  jury  verdict?   But  the  jury  was all  white,  in  an  area
The   Color  Blind  FBI
"It's  getting  to  be  a  strange  thing  that  the  FBI  can
never  seem  to  work  out  who  is  responsible  for killings
of  Negroes  in  the  South.   We must find out  why  South-
ern investigators  of  the  FBI  can't seem  to solve  a crime
where  a  Negro  is involved."
—Dr.  T.  R.  M.  Howard,  Mississippi  Negro  leader,
reporting  on  the  Lee, Smith  and  Till  murders  at
an  NAACP  meeting  in  Baltimore,  Sept.  25.
two-thirds  Negro.  And of what  use  was  an  upright  judge  and
a  special  prosecutor  when the case  was rushed  to trial without
adequate  preparation   or  investigation?    This  was  only  the
final  scene  of  a  lynching, hastily  covered  with  a  thin  veil  of
respectability  by  a  shrewd  Governor.    The  same  Governor,
Hugh  White,  as  chairman  of  the  Legal  Education  Advisory
Committee,  has  just  put  forward  a  6-point  program  to fight
desegregation   which  calls  for  abolition  of  compulsory public
schooling  and  legislation  to  "prohibit  interference  with  state
law   under   cover   of  federal   authority."     Hugh   White   is
himself  the  leader  of  Mississippi's  racists and  nullificationists.
Before  the  war  and  the  witch  hunt,  where there  were  still
organizations  like  the  Southern  Conference for  Human  Wel-
fare,  there  would  have  been public meetings  of  protest  under
mixed  auspices.   It  shames  our  country  and  it  shames  white
Americans  that  the  only  meetings,   in   Harlem,   Baltimore,
Chicago   and   Detroit,   have   been   Negro   meetings.     Those
whites  in  the  South  and  in  the  North  who  would  normally
have  been  moved  to  act  have  been  hounded  out  of  public life
and  into  inactivity.    To  the  outside  world  it  must  look  as  if
the  conscience  of  white  America  has  been  silenced,  and  the
appearance  is  not  too  deceiving.   Basically  all  of  us  whites,
North    and    South,   acquiesce   in   white    supremacy,   and
benefit  from  the  pool  of  cheap  labor  created  by  it.
Will  the  Negro  take  this  latest  outrage?    Unless  Negroes
rouse  themselves  to  make  their  indignation felt  in  some  dra-
matic  way, nothing will be done in  Mississippi or  in  Congress.
A.  Philip  Randolph last  Sunday  suggested  a  march  on Wash-
ington  like  that  which  dramatized  the  FEPC  fight   before
Pearl  Harbor.    Were  thousands  of  Negroes  to  converge  on
the  Department  of  Justice   and  demand  action  against  the
murderers   of  Till,  and   of  the  other   Negroes  whose  recent
murders  have  gone  unpunished in  the  South,  such  a  demon-
stration  would  have  an  impact.    The  American  Negro  needs
a  Gandhi  to  lead  him,  and  we  need  the  American  Negro  to
lead  us.    If  he  does  not  provide  leadership  against  the  sick-
ness  in  the  South,  the  time  will  come  when  we  will  all  pay  a
terrible  price  for   allowing  a  psychopathic  racist   brutality
to  flourish  unchecked.
How  Mississippi  Whites  Terrorize  Negroes  Who  Dare  Ask  De-Segregation
"I  submit  to  the  committee  as  a  part  of  this  statement a
photostatic  copy  of  a  full-page  advertisement in  the  Yazoo
City,   Miss.,   Herald   of   Aug.   25,   inserted   by   the   White
Citizens   Council   of   the   city,  containing  the   names  and
addresses   of   every  person  who  signed  a  petition  to   the
school  board  asking  desegregation.
"Of  the  54  citizens who  signed,  it  is  estimated that  as  of
today  all  but  six  have  asked  that  their  names  be removed.
Many  of  the  48 were  fired  from  their  jobs; others were sub-
jected  to  threats  of  a  nature  which  caused  them  to  recant.
One  man, a  plumbing  contractor,  not  only  lost  a  contract,
but  was  refused materials from  a  plumbing  house,  and  was
told  by  his   grocer  that  a  loaf   of   bread   would  cost   him
one  dollar!  . . .
"Last  May 7 the  Rev. G. W. Lee, the  first  Negro registered
—Roy  Wilkins,  exec,  secretary  of  the  NAACP,    before    the
voter  in  Humphreys County,  Miss.,  was  killed  by  a  shogut
blast  as  he  drove  his  car  down  a  street  in  that  town.  ..The
sheriff   cynically  suggested  that   the  shotgun  pellets  in  his
jaw  and  neck  could  have  been  lead  filings  in  his  teeth.    On
August  13, Lamar Smith, another  registered  voter, was shot
down  in  broad  daylight  on  the  courthouse lawn  in   Brook-
haven,  Miss.,  the  home  town  of  a  judge who has  gone about
the country urging impeachment  of  the  U.S.  Supreme Court.
"In  Mississippi  the  guarantees  of  the  Constitution mean
what  the  local  sheriff   or  newspaper,  or  leading  town  busi-
nessman,  or  plantation  owner  wants  them  to  mean.   Their
interpretations   of  the  Bill  of  Rights  are  enforced  with  the
pistol,  the  shotgun,  the  blackjack  and  lately,  through  the
state-wide  Citizens  Councils,  with  economic  sanctions  that
deprive  citizens of  employment, credit and  homes.
Senate   subcommittee   on  constitutional   rights,  Sept.   17.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'g Weekly, October S, 1955
Some  Myths  and  Realities  in  the  Field  of  Foreign   Policy
The  Old  Sales  Rivalry  in  the  Middle   Eastern  Arms  Baaaar
Mid-East  Mixup:  The  sale  of  arms by  a  great  power  to  a
small  is  a  form  of  control.    The  buyer  is  dependent  on  the
seller  for  replacements,  parts  and  ammunition.   Britain  has
been  waging  an undercover  struggle to keep Egypt  within  the
Imperial  sphere  of  influence  by  preventing  other  powers  from
selling  her  arms.   Several  months  ago  London  dissuaded  the
French  from  selling  Egypt  artillery.   Last  week  London was
upset  by a  calculated  leak  from  the  State  Department  to  the
Associated  Press, planned to prepare the  public mind for  U. S.
arms  sales  to  Egypt  on the  excuse  that  the  latter  was  about
to  buy arms  from  Moscow.   Britain  saw this  as  a  U.  S. take-
over  of Egypt;  Israel  as  indication that  the  recent  Dulles  pro-
posal  for  a  Mid-Eastern  peace,  development  and  resettlement
program  was a. fraud,  since it  appeared  that  the  State  Depart-
ment  had  been  negotiating   to  sell  arms  to  Egypt   without
making  such  arms conditional on a  peace  agreement.   London
stopped  any  arms   deal  with  a  protest  to  Washington   and
next  day  Egypt  announced  that  it  was  accepting  a  Czech
offer   to   barter   arms   for   cotton   and   rice.     Moscow   had
assured   Israel   a   week   before  that   no   sale   of   arms   to
Egypt  was  contemplated,  and  in  the   absence  of   confirma-
tion  from  Prague  there  was  some  disposition  to  believe that
the  Egyptians  were  still  bluffing.    Whatever  the  truth,  this
complex  bazaar  intrigue   shows  there   will  never   be  peace
in   the   Middle  East   until   the   area   is  removed—millenial
hope!—from  great  power  rivalry.
New  Myths  in  the  Making:  After  World  War  II,   Soviet
progress  in  armament  and  aviation  design  was  attributed  to
captured   Germans.    Later    Soviet   success   in   making   an
atomic  bomb  was  attributed   to  successful  "stealing"  of  the
secret.   New  myths  may  be  seen  in  the  making  in  the  wake
of  the  Burgess-Maclean affair.  U. S.  News  and  World  Report,
which published the  Petrov  story  in  its  issue  of September 23,
attributes  to  the  missing  British  diplomats  (1)   a  supposed
improvement  in   the   quality  of  Moscow's  foreign  language
paper,  New   Times,   (2)   the  "brilliant  new  shift   in   Soviet
diplomacy  and  (3)  Chinese  intervention   in  the  Korean  war.
"People   close  to   General  MacArthur,"   according  to   U.  S.
News,  are  sure that the  Chinese only intervened because these
British  diplomats "tipped  them  off" that  we would  not  attack
across  the  Yalu.   These myths pander  to the  comfortable and
flattering  view that  the  Soviet  regimes  are  hopelessly inferior
affairs,    whose   successes    can   only   be   due   to   defecting
foreigners  or  espionage.
Traffic   Cops  in  Peking
"Policemen  in  Communist countries  are  notoriously
brutal,  callons,  sinister,   and  overbearing.    There   are
doubtless many  such in  Peking. They do not  allow those
to  direct  the  traffic.    Only  once  or  twice  was  I  ever  in
a  car  that  was  involved  in  a  difference  of  opinion  with
the police—passing a tramcar on the wrong side or some
violation  of  the  traffic  rules  so  flagrant  that  it  could not
be  overlooked.   The  policeman would  then  approach  the
car,  and  the  dialogue would  follow  roughly this  course:
" 'It  seemed to me that  you were impetuous, Comrade.'
" 'It  is  possible,  Comrade.'
" 'Perhaps  I  should not have mentioned this?"
"'No,  by  all  means,  Comrade;  you  have  your  duty
to  do.'
" 'It  causes  no  offense  if  I  suggest  you were  driving
in  a  disgracefully careless way?'
" 'In  the  circumstances,  no, Comrade.   I  freely   offer
you  the  right  to  say  this.'
"'Very   well!  I  have  said  it.    I  shall  return  to  my
post?'
" 'Certainly,  Comrade.  Let us both return  to work.' "
—Inside  Red  China, by  James  Cameron, The  Atlantic
Monthly,  Sept.  1955.
Change  on  Germany?
The  return  to  Washington  last  week  of  Gen.  Alfred
Gruenther,  NATO commander  in  Europe,  is  linked  with
serious  discussions   here  of  alternative  policies  on  Ger-
many.  A  deal  to  reunite  the  Reich outside  NATO is  not
as  unthinkable  as  the  State  Department  pretends.   In
this connection  it  is worth  recalling  the  report  on  West-
ern  Europe published August  14 last  by the  Washington
Post's  editorial  page  editor,  Robert  H.  Estabrook,  on
his  return  from  a five-week tour.   Estabrook  quoted  an
unnamed  American  general  in  Europe  as  telling  him,
"NATO  is  a  means,  not  an  end  in  itself.    We  must
always  be  looking  ahead  and  thinking  of  what  we  are
trying   to  accomplish.    Of  course,  we  must   think  of
alternatives  (to  German  membership  in  NATO).    The
main point  is to be sure that we get something  in return
by  way  of  self-enforcing  guarantees."   Only  Gruenther
himself  would  have  talked  with  such  assurance  on  so
delicate  a  matter.
Morality  and  Military  Bases: It  is  interesting to  match  the
State  Department's   conduct  in  the  Cyprus  affair  against  the
moralistic   sterotypes   of  its  foreign   policy.    It   is  for   free
elections  everywhere,   except  in  Cyprus  where  80  percent  of
the  people  are  Greeks  and  would  vote  for  reunion  with  the
mother  country.   It  does not believe that  the  end justifies  the
means,  but  is  against  free  elections  in  Cyprus  because  we
and  the  British  want  to  keep  the  island  as  a  military  and
naval  base.    It  constantly  emphasizes  devotion  to  the  Chris-
tian  religion,  but  looks  the  other  way  when  Turkish  mobs
sack  ancient  churches  which had  survived  centuries  of bloody
struggle.    (The Turks  had  been encouraged  by the  British  to
intervene  in  the  Cyprus  dispute  so that  Britain  could  appear
to  be compelled to  stay  in  possession  as  mediator  between  the
majority  Greeks and the  minority  Turks.)    The State  Depart-
ment  believes in  freedom  of  the  press  and  advertises  Turkey
as  a  "bastion  of  democracy" but  is silent  when  Turkish news-
papers  are  suppressed  by the  government  for  publishing  the
Secretary  of  State's  plea  for  peace  between  Greece and  Tur-
key.   Usually  the  Secretary  of  State's  messages  are  heavily
larded  with  references  to  morality,  but  his   Greek-Turkish
statement   was  carefully  drafted  not  to  offend  the  Turks;   it
did  not  distinguish  between  the  aggressor  and  the  victim;  it
said  not  one word  of  sympathy  for  the  Greeks  who  lost  lives
and  property.    Clearly,  when  moral  principles  are  weighed
against  military   bases,  military,  bases  outweigh  them.
The  Magic of  Disarmament: Unlike  the  A.  F.  of  L.  News
Reporter,  which  seems  to think  arms  reduction  a  menace, the
latest  issue  of  the  Railway  Clerk,  organ  of  a  powerful  Rail-
way  Brotherhood,  publishes  an  article  on  the  social  benefits
of  disarmament.   It  says  the  $2,000,000  cost  of a  B-47 bomber
would  be  enough  to  build  a  200-bed  hospital  and  that  the
$200,000,000  required  for  an  aircraft  carrier  of the  Forrestal
class  would  be  enough  to  build  a  hundred  new  high  schools.
The  article  estimates  that  if  U.  S.  arms  spending  were  cut
back  to the  level of the  years  just  after  World  War  II,  about
10  billion  annually,  25  billion  a  year  would  be  saved.    One
year's  saving,  it  estimates,  would be enough for:  100,000 new
school  classrooms,  5 billion; four  new buildings for  every  col-
lege  in  the  U.  S.,  6 billion;  a  10 percent  increase  in  hospital
facilities,  4  billion;  and   10,000  miles  of  new  modern  high
speed  highways,  10 billion.   "This  is  the  elementary  magic of
disarmament,"  the  article  says.   "Disarmament  is  the  magic
word  that  stirs hope everywhere.  In this country  and  in many
others  people are  carrying  a  crushing  burden  of  armament."
The  article estimates  that  the  current  35 billion dollar  budget
is  equal  to  $1,075  a  year  for  every  family  of  five.  George  M.
Harrison,  president  of  the  Railway  Clerks,  is  an  important
member  of  the  AFL  executive  council.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'* Weekly,  October 8,19SS
The Barnet  and  Gordon Cases: A Challenge  to  the  Newspaper  Guild
What  Right  Has  Congress  to  Police  and  Investigate  the  Press?
Melvin  L.  Barnet,  a  copy reader  for  the  New  York  Times,
and  David  A.  Gordon,  a  reporter  for  the  New  York   Daily
News,  were  discharged  after  they  told  the  Senate  Internal
Security  Committee last  summer that they  were not  presently
Communists  but  took  the  Fifth   amendment  as  to  the  late
1930s.   The  Newspaper  Guild  grievance  committees  at  both
papers   have   voted   against   fighting   these   cases   through
arbitration.
The  grievance  committees  do not  have  final  authority.    A
membership  meeting  at  the  Times  will  vote  on  the  question
this  week;  a  similar  meeting  will  already  have  voted  at  the
News  by the  time  this  reaches  the  stands.    The  unit  recom-
mendations  will  go  to  the  Guild's  executive  board  and  later
to  the  representative  assembly  for  final  action.
I  hope that  the  Guild  will  not  lag  behind  the  rest  of  the
country  at  a  time  when the  tide  of hysteria  is  ebbing.   Only
a  few  days  ago  360 distinguished  Americans,  including  Sen-
ator Pat  McNamara of Michigan, petitioned  the  U.S. Supreme
Court  to  invalidate  the  McCarran  Act  and  the  registration
order   issued   by  the   Subversive  Activities   Control   Board
against  the  Communist  Party.
On  the  anniversary  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,  83 equally  prom-
inent  Americans  issued   an  "Open  Letter  to  the   American
People"  demanding an  end  to  infringements  of  civil  liberties.
Among them were Jacob  Potof sky  of the  Amalgamated Cloth-
ing  Workers  and  A.  Philip   Randolph  of  the   Sleeping   Car
Porters.
Are  They  Authorized  Agencies?
Among  the  evils  at  which these  83 aimed  their  fire  is  one
which  is  directly  relevant  to  the  Barnet  and  Gordon  cases.
They  attacked  "the  arrogation  of  powers  as  prosecutors  and
punitive  bodies  by  some  Congressional   committees."
At  both  the  Times and  the  News, a  majority  of  the  griev-
ances  committees took  the  view that  Guildsmen have a duty—
as  the  former  put  it—to  "cooperate  with  authorized  Govern-
ment   agencies   investigating   communism."     But   are   the
inquisitorial   committees  of  Congress  "authorized   agencies"
for   this   purpose?    The  question  has  yet  to  be  answered
by  the  Supreme  Court.
I  would  like to  call  the  attention  of  Guildsmen  to a  case in
point.    A  few  days   ago  the  United  Automobile  Workers
(through  its  Washington  counsel,  Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr., -of
Americans  for  Democratic  Action),  filed  an  appeal  in  the
Court  of  Appeals in  the  Watkins  case.   John  T.  Watkins,  an
organizer  for  the  UAW  since  1953,  admitted  to  the  House
Committee  on  Un-American  Activities  that  he  had  worked
closely  with  the  Communists from  1942  to  1947.    But  be  de-
clined  as matter of morality  and  conscience to name others  he
knew  in  the  Communist party. He was  convicted of  contempt.
What the  UAW has to say in that brief  of the  Watkins  case
applies  equally  to  the  Barnet  and  Gordon  cases.    "When  a
committee  of  Congress,"  the  brief  says,  "determines  that  a
general  standard  of  conduct  (past  membership  in  the  Com-
munist  Party)   is  reprehensible  and  seeks  to  enforce  this
standard  by  building  a  list  of  persons  who engaged  in  that
conduct  and  then  by  publicity  inflicting  upon  such  persons
public  scorn  and  retribution,  the  Committee is  arrogating  to
itself,  in  this  process  of  exposure,  legislative,  executive  and
judicial  functions  in  derogation   of  our  historic   separation
of   powers."
What  If  They  Had  Pleaded  The  First?
Neither  Barnet  nor  Gordon was accused by Jlis paper  of  per-
mitting  political  views, past  or  present,  to  interfere  with  the
conduct  of his job.  Both were merely trying  to protect  others
from  the  infamy attendant  on exposure  as  past  Communists.
To permit men to be discharged for  invoking their constitu-
tional  rights  is  to  establish  a  most  serious  precedent  for  the
future.   It   is  to  say  that  newspapermen  must  become  in-
formers  to  keep their  jobs.   Since  the  Guild  membership and
leadership  (including  some  of  its  most  violent  anti  Commu-
nists)   is  full   of  men  who  had  their  attacks  of   ideological
measles  in the past, this  may some day become a  weapon with
destructive  impact  on the  Guild itself,  and  on freedom  of  the
press.   For   what   if   Barnet   and   Gordon  had  pleaded   the
First instead of the  Fifth!
"I  seem  to  recall,"  Mr.  Gordon  wrote  to  the  News  griev-
ance  committee, "that  a  dozen  or  so years ago a  Washington
correspondent  of the  Daily  News was accused by the President
of  the  United  States  of aiding  the  Nazis  in  his  columns.  Yet
neither  the  Daily  News  nor  the  grievance  committee  rushed
to  discharge  him or to say that this  accusation  destroyed  his
usefulness  as  a  newspaperman  on  the  News.   Nor  did  any
Senatorial  committee  call  this-man  to  testify  at  a  hearing."
The  House Committee on  Un-American Activities  was  then
in  existence.    The country  was  at  war  against  Nazism. - Yet
had John O'Donnell been subpoenaed for  questioning about  his
political  views and  associations,  it  would have been recognized
clearly  as  an  invasion  of freedom  of the  press,  an  attempt  to
browbeat a newspaperman  for  his views.  Can't Guildsmen see
that  the  same  principle  still  applies?   The First Amendment
give  Congress  no power to  police the  press,  nor  to  investigate
the  political  purity  of  newspapermen.
We  Would  Appreciate  Lists  of  Friends  for  Free Sample  Copies
L F. Stoned  Weekly
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street       «... .
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)  Name .
Street    .  .
City
* $1 extra  for
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.Zone
for  $2 (6  mos.) or  $4  (1
Zone
Canada.
....  State
yr.)  additional:
State
10/3/55
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St..  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED