I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jan17.pdf

============================================================

Why  Dulles Should  Have Fired  Himself  Instead  of  John  Carter  Vincent, Page Two
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 49JANUARY  17,  1955
WASHINGTON, D. C.
15 CENTS
How  Ike  Earned  His  Afternoon  Off
In   England   the   equivalent   of   our   State   of   the   Union
message is couched in  the  form  of  an Address from  the Throne.
Everyone  knows  that  this  is  a  fiction,  and  no  one  wastes time
trying  to  infer  from  it  the  Weltanschaung   of  the  reigning
monarch.    But  much  nonsense  is  generated  here  when   the
President,  instead  of   being  a  governing  personality,   is  like
Eisenhower,  a  figure-head.  In  England,  the  Address from  the
Throne  is  fashioned  by  the  Prime  Minister,  representing  the
majority  party.  Here,  however,  the  President  being both  chief
of  state  and  head  of  the  government,  there  is  no  Prime  Min-
ister.   When  the  President  does  not  govern  there  is no  way  to
figure  out  who,  if  anybody,  was  responsible  for  the  State  of
the  Union   message  and  the  policy   decisions  reflected   in   it.
Who  is  "Eisenhower,"  that  is  the  Eisenhower  in  whose  name
all  this  is  spoken?  No  one  really  knows.
The  press,  being  almost  entirely  Republican,  the  President
has  an  overwhelming  claque.   The  respectable  pundits  never
permit  themselves  to  see that  this  (Washington's   best-known
and  best-kept  secret)  is a king  as naked of  ideas as a new-born,
babe.    Nobody   must   be  more   surprised  than   the   likeably
unpretentious   and  modest  Eisenhower  himself  to   read   next
morning  in,  let  us  say, Walter  Lippmann,  just  how  profound
he  was  the  day  before.   The  reality  peeped  out  in  that  Asso-
ciated  Press  dispatch  which  reported  that  after  delivering  the
message,  Eisenhower  was  given  the  afternoon  off  to  play  golf,
like a small boy allowed to  go  and play  after  doing  his required
stint  at  Sunday  School.   "His   doctor   and  the  whole  White
House   staff   told  him  to  get  out  on  the  golf  course,"  Presi-
dential  Press  Secretary  James  C.  Hagerty   related,  "and   get
some  relaxation."   For  a  man  who  hates  to  read  as  much  as
Eisenhower  does,  reading  these  7800  words  (aloud yet)   must
have  been  work  enough  for  one  day.
Bureaucratic  Shreds  and  Patches
The  message appears to  be a rather  ill-organized  patchwork
of   bits   and   pieces  from  various  departments,  nauseatingly
larded  with  the  wholly  artificial religious  sentiments  now  con-
sidered  de  rigeur  in  all  American  State  papers  and  designed
firmly  to  anchor  God  on  our  side in  the  cold  war.  The  open-
ing  section   sounded  as  if  it   came  straight  from   the   State
Department;  its  self-righteous  rhetoric  is  the  kind  to  which
we  have  been  accustomed  since   1947   and   it   is  amazingly
devoid  of  anything  new.   The  next   section  must  have  been
drafted  in  concert  by  two  opposing  wings  at  the  Pentagon,
with  the Treasury  as referee.  It  does at  one point  warn against
"undue  reliance on one weapon"  (to  keep the  Army  and  Navy
happy)  but  it  pretty  clearly  reflects  a  decision  to  depend  on
nuclear weapons and  airpower.  The  Treasury,  therefore, wants
to  save on  the  Army  and  conventional  weapons.  Here  Eisen-
hower  is put  up  to  speaking  in  persona  proprit,  assuring  Con-
gress  (where  the  Army  lobbyists  are  stirring  up  a  rumpus)
that  this  "reduction  of  forces  in  certain  categories"  was made
at  his  "personal  direction  after  long  and  thoughtful  study."
This  is  supposed  to  scare  off  Congressmen.
Never  Had  It  So Good
Justice  Department   is  next  in  the  patchwork   and    "con-
tinuance  of  our  aggressive  attack  on  subversion  at  home"  is
promised.   There  follows  a  pep  talk  on  business—we  never
had  it  so  good,  at  least  that's  what  Commerce   Department
seems  to   have  said.   Agriculture   was  allowed   to   insist   on
"flexible"   prices;  Labor  was  permitted   to  suggest  a  90-cent
minimum  wage.   Health  and  Welfare  promises  a  new  health
plan  but  without  "socialized  medicine."  Taf t-Hartley  is to be
revised   so  that   employers,   too,   must   sign    non-Communist
affidavits  and  public  power  is  to  be  watered  down  further  via
"partnership"  with  private   enterprise.   There  are  the   usual
words  about  small  business.   Something  is  promised  on   edu-
cation,  and  a  plea  is  again  made  for  some  lowering  of   tariffs.
This  is  "New   Dealish"  only  in  the   sense  that  it   does  not
propose  to  turn  back  the  clock,  except  stealthily  on  hydro-
electric  power.   The  idea  that  this  will  force  the  Democrats
Left  is equally  nonsensical.
As  "New  Dealish" as  Dewey
"Eisenhower"  is  as  much  and  no  more  to  the  Left   than
were  Landon,  Willkie  and  Dewey.   In  a  two-party   system,
under  normal  conditions,  both   parties  play  as  close  to   the
center  as possible.  This  leaves both  the  Republican Right  and
the  Democratic  Left  dissatisfied  but  since  they  have  nowhere
else  to  go  they  exercise  no  leverage.   At  the  moment,  while
the  Republicans are thus  "Left,"  the  Democrats  are "Right."
In  fact  some  of  them  are  shopping  around  for  a  more  con-
servative  candidate  than   Stevenson.   There   is  even  talk  of
Lausche,  a  Taft   Democrat   (!)   and  a  Catholic   who  might
garner  in  disaffected  Republicans  and  McCarthyites.
The  Democrats  will  make  capital  in  the  West  on  power;
keep  mum  on  civil  rights  for  Negroes;  do  nothing  for  labor;
jump  on  Reds  as  hard  as  Republicans  to  prove  their  purity;
exploit   the  discontent  over  the  security  program  and  at  the
same  time  kick  up  a  fuss  about  cuts  in  the  defense  budget  to
show  that  the  Republicans  are  the  ones  who  are  really  "soft"
about  Communism.   The  country,  generally  as  contented   as
the  Borden  cow,  will  take  all  this  without  a  moo  as  long  as
business holds up.  There may  be a change in  the  spring,  how-
ever,  when  the  auto  industry  finds  it  just  cannot  sell  all  those
new  cars it  is making.
1   9  J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly, January  17,  1955
The Papers  Ignore the  Story—the  State  Dept. Withholds the  Tell-Tale  Document
Dulles's  Far  Eastern Mission  of  Appeasement in  1938  Comes to  Light
Washington—The latest  volume of  documents to  be  released
here   by  the  State  Department  on  U.S.   Foreign   Relations
discloses  that  John  Poster  Dulles  went  to  China  in  1938  on
an  "appeasement  mission"  which  paralleled  Axis  efforts   to
make  Chiang Kai-shek  submit  to Japan.
The  volume  (1938,  Vol. Ill,  the  Far  East)  was  generally
covered  by  the  press,  but  this  revelation  was  ignored  though
it  provides  an  ironic  sidelight  on  the  story  the  newspapers
did  feature.   Attention  was  focussed  by  the  headlines  on  a
memorandum  of July  23,  1938,  in  which John  Carter Vincent
warned  that  unless  we  helped  Chiang  Kai-shek  resist  we
would  ourselves  be  menaced  by Japanese  militarism.
Vincent's   analysis   in  that  memo  proved  prophetic.   The
irony  lies  in Vincent's  dismissal by  Dulles on the  ground that
Vincent's  "reporting  of the facts  .  . . and policy  advice" did
not   meet  Foreign   Service   standards.    The  new  revelation
shows  that  Dulles himself  in his "reporting  of the facts  .  . .
and  policy  advice"  on  China  was  strikingly  wrong.   By  this
standard,  it  is  Dulles  rather  than  Vincent who  should  have
resigned.
This is the background of the  new documents.  In  July,  1937,
with  the  "Marco  Polo  bridge  incident" Japan  invaded  North
China,  demanding  that   Chiang's   government  suppress   all
anti
T
Japanese  activity  and  "cooperate  against Communism."
By  the  end  of  the  year,  after   massacres  at   Tientsin  and
Nanking  which  shocked world  opinion,  Japan  had  control  of
the  China coast  down  to  and  including  Shanghai.
Japan  Wanted  a  "Breather"
Civilian  unrest  in Japan  led its  military to seek a  breathing
space via "mediation"  in which to digest the  conquest of North
China  and  turn  the  rest  of China into a  protectorate.   "Tokyo
sought   through   Nazi  good   offices,"   Frederick   L.  Schuman
relates in his book International  Politics, "to negotiate  a peace
with  Chiang Kai-shek  on  the  basis  of  Chinese repudiation of
'Communism'  and  of  the  Soviet  non-aggression  pact,  recogni-
tion  of  [the  Japanese  puppet  regime in]  Manchukuo, payment
of   the   costs   of   the   war,   and   appointment   of   Japanese
'advisers'."
Berlin  was  also  anxious  to  bring  the  hostilities   in  China
to  an  end  because,  as  our  Ambassador,  Nelson  T.  Johnson,
cabled  Secretary  of State Hull  on February  28, 1938,  "A  Ger-
many  involved  with  Soviet  Russia  can  hope for  little   assist-
ance  from  a  Japan  preoccupied  with  China"  (p.  107  of  the
new volume).
The  year   1938,  with  which  the  newly  released  documents
deal, opened with  two campaigns by Japan  against China, one
military,   the   other   diplomatic.   The  former  culminated  in
the  capture  of  Hankow  and  Chiang's  last  outlets  along  the
China  coast.   The  latter   sought   through   Berlin   and  later
London  to  force  Chiang  to  accept  "mediation."
The  U.S.,  which  still  declined  to  recognize   the  Japanese
puppet  regime  in  Manchuria, was  opposed  to  any   settlement
which meant the  dismemberment of China.  In  one of the  newly
published  documents,  Norman  H.  Davis  informed  the  State
Department   that   he  had   been  approached   in   London  by
Yoshida  [Japan's  recent  Prime  Minister,  then  Ambassador  to
Britain]  with  a  request  that  the  U.S.  "mediate."
The  compromise  suggested  by  Yoshida  included  not  only
recognition  of Manchukuo but  of a  new puppet  buffer  state in
North   China.   Davis  told  Yoshida  he  himself  thought   "the
issue  between  China  and  Japan  was  so fundamental  that  it
was  not  susceptible  of  a  compromise"  (p.  208).
Duties  Turns  Up  in  Hankow
Dulles  seems  to  have  felt  differently.   At  pages  119-121 of
the new volume there is disclosed for the first time a communi-
cation  from  Ambassador  Johnson  in  Hankow  reporting  on  a
conversation he had  on March  5,  1938,  "with  Mr. John  Foster
Dulles,  well  known  writer   and   lawyer,   on  the   subject  of
mediation."  Johnson  indicated that  Dulles  had  come to  China
to  see Chiang Kai-shek in the  interest  of  a compromise  settle-
ment with  Japan.
Nelson sent the  Department a  memorandum on this conver-
sation  with  Dulles but  the  memorandum was  not  printed  in
the  new volume.  I  spent  several  weeks  attempting  to  get  a
look at  this memo.  First I was told it  was "in the  warehouse,"
later  that  it  had been obtained  and that  I  could  read  it.  But
the  State  Department  press  office  first  sent  the  document  to
Dulles's  office  for  "clearance."  Permission  to  read  the  memo
was  then  refused.   Since  these  documents  are  supposed  to  be
available to  scholars, perhaps  some historian  will  try  his  luck
at  obtaining it.
The  Japanese,  as  the  new documents show, were trying  to
get  Britain  to  force  the  Chinese  to  compromise  with  them.
The  British  were reluctant  to  do anything without  American
approval.  They were at  the time negotiating the pact  in which
they  tried to  buy  off Mussolini by  recognizing his  conquest of
Ethiopia.   Against  this  background  it  is  interesting  to  note
that  Johnson  reported:
Envisioned  a  Squeeze  on  China
"The  attention  of  the  Department  is  invited  to  the  view
expressed  by Mr.  Dulles that,  since the  British  government is
on  its  way  to  a  settlement  of  its  differences  with  the  Italian
government  over Mediterranean problems, it  would  soon  be in
a  position  to  exert  a  firmer  influence  in  the  Far  East  and
might  even  compel  the  Chinese to  accept  some  kind  of  settle-
ment  at-the  hands of  the  Japanese."    (Italics  added.)
The  New  York  Times  of  March 7,  1938,  carried  a dispatch
from  Hankow saying  that  Dulles  "denied  that  his  visit  was
connected  with  an  American loan  to  China, or  had  any  politi-
cal  significance.   He said," the  cable  reported,  "that  his  pres-
ence  in  Hankow had  no specific  purpose other  than  to  investi-
gate  the  Chinese  situation  in  the  interest  of  his  law  firm  and
its  clients  . .  ."  Who these  clients were was not disclosed.
The  next  day's  paper  carried  a  one-paragraph  cable  from
Hankow, "Chiang Receives J.  F.  Dulles," which says  "Nothing:
of   special   significance   is   said   to   have   been    discussed."
Apparently the  attempt to "mediate" had failed.
Some  day  a  Congressional   investigation  may  throw  more
light  on  this  tantalizing  episode.   Dulles's  general  attitude
toward  Axis  expansion before  the  war  is  notorious.   In  his
famous  pre-war  debate  with  Willkie he  denied  that  the  U.S.
had  anything  to  fear  from  the  Axis.  As  early  as  1932 when
American  public  opinion  was  aroused  against  the   Japanese
invasion  of  Manchuria, Dulles threw  cold water  on the  idea of
sanctions  against  Japan   (see  his  contribution  and  Frederick
J.  Libby's  in  a  symposium  on  the  subject  published  in  the
July,  1932,  issue  of  the  Annals  of  the  American  Academy  of
Political  and  Social Science.)
Again,  in  his  forgotten  article on  The  Road  to  Peace  in  the
Atlantic  Monthly  for  October  1935,  Dulles discussed the  Man-
churian  situation  from  a "realistic" point of view and  thought
the  changes  required  by realities  in the  Far  East  "could  not
be  held  in  suspense  until  that  hypothetical  date  when  China
was  prepared  freely  to  acquiesce  therein  so that  the  change
could  no longer  be treated  as 'aggression'."  Putting  "aggres-
sion"  in  quotation marks  was  indicative.
STONE TO SPEAK IN NEW YORK
I.  F.  Stone  will  report  on  the  new  Congress  and  the
outlook  for  the  year  at  Yorkville Temple,  157  E.  86th
Street,  New  York  City,  under the  auspices  of  the  York-
ville   Compass  Forum  next  Friday night,  January  21,  at
8:30 p.m.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  17,  1955
Some Improvement  in  the  Senate, But  Not  Much  in  the  House
Though  formal   committee   assignments  had  not  yet  been
voted  in  the  House  as  we went  to  press  (and  the  interesting
question  of  whether  Dies  would  be  re-assigned  to  House  Un-
American  was  still  undecided),  few  surprises  were  expected.
The  only  genuine liberal  who will  get  a  committee chairman-
ship  is  Celler,  slated  by seniority  to  head  Judiciary.  Walter
of   Pennsylvania   should  be  an  improvement  over  Velde   at
the  head  of  House  Un-American but  it  would  be  unwise  to
expect  an  abatement  of  the  witch  hunt.  With  Smith  (of  the
Smith  Act)  back  in  the  key  post  of  Rules  Committee  chair-
man,  the  conservative and  middle-of-the-road  Southern  Demo-
crats firmly control  the House.
In  the  Senate,  however, nine of  the  15 standing  committee
chairmanships   last   week   went  to   liberal   Democrats.   The
brightest   spots  are  the  replacement  of  Jenner  by  Green  at
Rules  and  of  Alexander  Smith  by  Lister  Hill  at  Labor  and
Public Welfare.  Murray of Montana gets Interior  and Insular
Affairs;   Kilgore,  Judiciary;  Fulbright,  Banking   and   Cur-
rency;  Hayden,  Appropriations;  Magnuson,  Interstate   and
Foreign  Commerce; Chavez,  Public  Works;  and  Neely,  Dis-
trict  of  Columbia.  All these  are  decided improvements.
Six  committee chairmanships, including some  of  the  most
important,  go to  conservative  Southern  Democrats.   But  here,
too, there are  welcome changes.  McClellan succeeds McCarthy
at   Government  Operations.   Olin  D.  "Cotton   Ed"  Johnston
takes  over  at  Post  Office  and  Civil  Service.   Ellender  succeeds
Aiken  at  Agriculture and  Forestry.   As  a  cotton  Senator,  he
favors  high  support  prices.
The three key chairmanships of  Foreign  Relations, Finance
and   Armed  Services  go  to  the  real  leaders  of  the  party,
George,  Byrd and  Russell, respectively.   At  the  moment,  when
questions  of foreign  policy are  uppermost, these key  posts  are
safer  in these  conservative  hands.  Last year, when Knowland
drew  support  from   Democratic  liberals,  the   Southern  con-
servatives, especially  Senator  George,  strengthened  the  Presi-
dent's  hand  against  Radford  and  the  interventionists.    The
thoughtful  and  well-informed  George  is  a  relief  at  Foreign
Relations  after   the  incredibly ignorant   Wiley.   George  gave
the  London  Sunday  Times  of  January   9  an  exclusive  inter-
view  calling  for  reduced  restrictions  on  (as  he  phrased   it)
both  West-West  and  East-West  trade.
ATOM  POWER  FOR  FARM  CO-OPS?    Expect  renewed
battle  over  atomic  power  at  this  session  of  Congress.   While
AEC  Chairman  Strauss  prepares  to  subsidize private  owner-
ship  of  atom  power  plants, the  National  Farmers  Union  will
fight for  legislation  enabling RE A  (Rural  Electrification  Ad-
ministration)   co-ops  to  get  in  on  atomic  power  as  soon  as
possible.  Leland  Olds, former  chairman  of the  Federal  Power
Commission,  now  with  the  Public  Affairs   Institute,  figures
that  a  publicly  owned  atom  power  plant  could  generate  elec-
tricity  at  4.2 to  4.4 mills  per  kilowatt  hour,  or  less  than  half
the  cost  of  generating  electricity  from  coal  at  Boston.   Olds
estimates  wholesale  delivery  could be made to  REA  co-ops  at
8.1  cents  per  KWH,  or  less  than  average  costs  in  24  states
(where  wholesale prices  now range from  15.1  mills  in  Maine
to  8.5 mills  in  Illinois).   This  is  one  of  the  issues  on  which  a
Democratic-controlled   Congress will make a difference.
NEW  ARGUMENT FOR  EAST-WEST   TRADE:  At   the
moment  the  biggest  talking  point  of  these  fighting  for  lower
tariffs  and  the  reciprocal  trade  program  is  the  need to  "save
Does  He  Suspect  The  White   House?
On  January  5,  J.  Edgar  Hoover  released  his  annual
report  on  crime.   Sandwiched  in  amid  the   figures   on
bank  robberies  and  automobile  thefts   was  this,  "The
need  for  eternal  vigilance  against  subversion  by  follow-
ers  of  the  Communist  party  becomes  more  necessary
with  the world-wide rise  of  'neutralism'  and the  intensi-
fied  Soviet  propaganda  program  of  'peaceful  co-exist-
ence.'   The  Communist  action  program  of   the   United
States is  being  geared  to cause a lowering  of  our guard
which,  if  successful,   could  have  far-reaching  and  dis-
astrous  consequences."  It  would  be easy  to  dismiss  this
with  a  joke about tapping  White House wires  since our
foremost  advocate of  co-existence seems  to  reside there.
But  what  business  is  it  of  the  secret  police  to  mix  into
foreign  policy?  By  what  right  does  Hoover take  it  on
himself  to  smear the world-wide movement for  a relaxa-
tion  of  international tension  as  a Communist plot?   Can
discussion  really  be  free  when  carried   on  under   the
shadow  of  FBI  disapproval?
Japan  for  the free  world,"  i.e.  to  compensate  in the  American
market  for  lost  markets  in  Communist China.   American  in-
terests  opposed to  this  program  are  in consequence beginning
to  look  with  favor  on  the  easing  of  East-West  trade  as  one
way to keep out Japanese competition.   Cotton  textile interests
north and south are  pressing  this argument.   A brief  on behalf
of   the   New  England  governors  opposing  lower   tariffs   on
Japanese  textiles  says   (Con.  Rec.  1/11/55,  p.  A93)  "Japan
will  have  to  turn  more  to  Asia  and  even  the  Iron  Curtain
countries  for  trade.  With  improved East-West  relations  this
will  be  possible."
WHEN  IS  AN  ANTI-DEMOCRATIC   MENACE  NOT  A
MENACE?  When the  Guatemalan government  was  supposed
to  be  buying  arms  from  abroad,  the  State  Department  un-
leashed  a  world-wide  campaign   to  prevent  shipments  from
reaching   Guatemala.    But   when   the   right-wing   dictator
Somoza  of  Nicaragua  bought  twenty-five  P-51 Mustang  fight-
ers  in  Sweden for  use  in  the  attack  now being  made  against
Costa   Rica,   the   one  truly   democratic   regime   in   Central
America,  the  State  Department's   spokesman  said  there  was
nothing in the plane deal "to lead the United  States to have an
interest in the situation."
JIM  CROW  PROGRESS  AT  NATIONAL PRESS  CLUB:
Fourteen   years  ago  I  took  America's   first   Negro  Federal
judge,  William  H.  Hastie,  to  lunch  at  the  National   Press
Club and  resigned  when he was refused  service.  Last Monday
the  club's  board  of  directors  voted  tentatively  to  admit   its
first  Negro  member,  Louis  K.  Lautier,  of  the  Atlanta,  Daily
World  and the National  Negro Press Association.  A last-ditch
fight  against  the  Lautier  nomination  will  be  staged  at  the
Club's  general  membership meeting this Friday.  The  by-laws
at  present  allow  ten  members  to  blackball  a  new candidate if
they  assign  "reasonable  cause."   Since  anti-Negro  prejudice
might  not  be  held  "reasonable  cause,"  the  racists  seek   to
amend  the  by-laws  and  remove this  qualification.  Ten  mem-
bers  would  then  be  able  to  block  Lautier  and  keep  the  Club
lily-white.
MOST  SUBSCRIPTIONS  EXPIRE  WITH  NEXT  WEEK'S  ISSUE
Next week's  issue will be Vol  II,  No. 50, the final issue of
our  second  circulation  year.   Unless  you  have  already  re-
newed,  your  subscription  probably  expires  with  that  issue,
since  most  of   our  subscribers  date  from  the   first   of   the
circulation  year.  You can tell  by  noting  the  expiration date
under  your name and address.  If  you haven't  renewed yet,  I
would  appreciate it  if  you did it  now, using  the  blank  on the
reverse  side.  Why not give a  gift  subscription  at  the  same
time—it  only  costs  eight  cents  a  week, $4  a  year,  to widen
our  audience  in  this  way  and  help  us  reach  a  friend.   An
index  for  Volume II  is  in  preparation  and will  be  published
soon  as  a  supplement,  like  last  year's.  The index  has  made
the   Weekly    more   useful   for   reference   and   boosted   sub-
scriptions   by   libraries.   Some   of   our  largest   university
libraries  now  subscribe   and  have  complete  sets.   Why  not
give  a  gift  sub  to  your  local  or  college  library?   There  is
much  in the  Weekly,  small  as  it  is,  which is  not to  be  found
elsewhere.                                                        —I.  F.  STONE
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Janiutry  17,  195S
How  the  Government's  Informers  "Ride  Circuit"  in  Smith  Act  Cases
The  Supreme  Court  Again  Denies  the  Review  It  Promised
The   moral   cowardice  which  pervades  our   whole   society
was evident  in  the  Supreme Court's  refusal  last  week  to  grant
a  hearing  in   the  appeal  of  Elizabeth  Gurley  Flynn  and  12
other   so-called  "second  echelon"  Communist   leaders  against
their   conviction   for   "conspiracy   to   advocate"  under   the
Smith  Act.
So  far   the  Supreme  Court   has  consented   to  review  only
one  case  and  only  one  issue  arising  under   the   Smith Act.
This  was whether  the  government  could  validly enact  a peace-
time  sedition  statute.   The  Court,  in  the  first  Foley  Square
case,  decided  that  the  Smith  Act  was  constitutional  but  de-
clined  at  that  time  to  pass  on  the  other  issues  raised.
The   Court   clearly   promised   to   do  so,  in   future   cases.
"Where  there  is doubt,"  Chief  Justice  Vinson  said  (341  U.S.
at  516)   "as  to  the  intent  of  the  defendants,   the  nature  of
their  activities,  or  their  power  to  bring  about  this  evil,  this
Court  will  review  the  convictions  with  the  scrupulous  care
demanded  by  our  Constitution."
Last  year,  however,  the  Court  refused   to  hear  the  appeal
of   the   Baltimore  Smith   Act   defendants.   This   year   it   has
turned   down   the   appeal  of   Miss  Flynn   and  her   associates.
The  deterioration  in  the  atmosphere is evident  in  the  fact  that
while  both  Douglas  and  Black  noted  their  disagreement  last
year,  this year  only  Black dissented.
More  than  a hundred  persons  have  been  indicted  under  the
Smith  Act  since  the  Dennis  case  was  decided  by  the  Supreme
Court.   Appeals  are  pending  from  mass  convictions  in  Phila-
delphia,  St.  Louis  and  Hawaii.   Others   are  awaiting  trial  in
Denver,  New  Haven,  Cleveland  and  Puerto  Rico.   In  a  peti-
tion   asking  the  Court   to  hear  the  Flynn   case,  a  group  of
lawyers  representing  various  of   these  defendants  eloquently
described  the  way  these  cases  are being tried:
Circuit-Riding   Informers
"The   prosecution  presents  its  case  through   a  series  of  in-
formers  who  proceed  from  trial  to  trial  presenting  the  same
testimony.   These  informers are supplemented by  local  inform-
ers.   The  'national'  informers  are  usually  cast  in  the  role  of
'experts.'   They  expound  in  case  after   case  their  version  of
the  meaning of Marxist-Leninist  theory  . . .
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Strw>t.
City
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Znn»            Rfat*
Enter  this gift  sub for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(To)  Nnme                                                     ....   .
Street
City
7nn«         State
1/17/55
"The  systematic  use  of  these  witnesses, subject  as  they  are
in  political  cases to  extraordinary pressures to  distort,  steadily
to  expand  the  scope  of  their  recall  to  meet  prosecutive  needs,
and  to  misrepresent,  has  reached  proportions  which  seriously
compromise  the administration  of justice  . . .
"Moreover  many  of  the  informers  have no  personal  famili-
arity  with  the  defendants  in  these   cases  and  are  unable  to
testify  as  to  their  teaching  and  advocacy ...  In  the  same
way  scant  heed  is paid  in  the  trial  of  these  cases  to  the  proof
necessary  to  establish  each  defendant's  connection   with   the
conspiracy."
These  cases,  in  short,  are  breaking  down  traditional   safe-
guards  of  proof  and  procedure  which  have hitherto  restricted
the  prosecution  of  political  ideas.  The  courts  no  longer  insist
on  proof  of  specific  individual  intent,  nor  judicial  determina-
tion  of  whether  a  "clear  and  present"  danger  exists  in   suffi-
cient  degree  to  warrant  suspension  of  the  First   Amendment.
Congress  in  effect  is  held  to  have  outlawed  the   Communist
party.   To  be  a  Communist  is  to  qualify  for  jail  whether  or
not  there  was intent  or  power  to  overthrow  the  government.
And  Now  Membership
There  was  therefore  a  nice  historic  logic  in  the  fact  that
the  day  the  Court   again  refused  to  review  the  Smith   Act
"conspiracy"  cases, Claude  Lightfoot  went  on  trial  in  Chicago
in  the  first  of  a  new  series  of  Smith  Act  prosecutions.    These
are  based  solely on  membership  and  rest  on  the  reading  of  the
Act  as  a  pure  and  simple  outlawry  statute.
The   liberals  who   look   the   other   way   rather   than   risk
defending  the  rights  of  Communists  will  have  a  bitter  awak-
ening,  like that  which  they  have experienced under  the  loyalty
and  security  procedures.   For  the  day  is  coming  when   non-
Communists,  too,  can  and  will  be prosecuted  under  the  Smith
Act.   Future  Ladejinskys  will  go  to  jail.  The  prosecution   of •
men   for   their   opinion   alone—whether   disguised   as "con-
spiracy  to  advocate" or  facilitated  by  group convictions under
the  "membership"  clause—is  a  cancer  which  must  be  excised
or  it   will  destroy   the   living  tissue  of   a  free  society.    The
liberals,  on  or  off  the  bench,  know  this  very  well  but   are
afraid  to  act  upon  it.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol St,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mall
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED