I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jun27.pdf

============================================================

Special  Report  from  San  Francisco
Inside:  A  Close-Up  of  Moscow's  New  Team;  H.  H.  Wilson on Lippmann's "Anti-Public" Views
IF.   Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    Ill,   NO. 24
JUNE  27,  1955
'<><       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Molotov   Wins  the  First  Round   For  Peace
San  Francisco
The  Curtain  raiser  for  the  San Francisco  Conference was an
unfortunate  bit  of  pantomine.   Delegates  flying  in  from  abroad
found  that  Eisenhower  was running the  American Government
from  a secret  bomb  shelter  while  Molotov  was taking the  after-
noon  off  to  visit  an  art  gallery.   No  doubt  the  contrast  was
sheer  coincidence,  any  implications  unintended.   But  whoever
planned  Operation  Alert to  start  just five days  before the  tenth
anniversary  meeting of  the UN  was not  very  wide  awake.  In-
coming  foreign  ministers  picked  up  their  first  American  news-
papers  with their  breakfasts to  read  that  millions of Americans
were assumed  to be  killed  and  some  59 cities assumed to  be  in
ruins  as the  result  of  an assumed  H-bomb  attack,  while  one of
the  principal architects  of  all  this  assumed  carnage was touring
the Metropolitan  Museum in New  York  and  being as ingratiat-
ingly  bewildered  as any average  Joe  by abstractionist  painting.
The  dumb show  implied  that  while the  Russians were  relaxing
we Americans were still driving  ourselves  wacky, and therefore
to  be  humored  rather  than  trusted  by  a  world  in  search  of
peace. The  timing  was deadly.  If  the Democrats  were in power,
J.  Edgar  Hoover  would  be sure  that  somebody  in  Washington
was  getting  paid  off  for  it  with  the  Order   of  Lenin,  two
Armenian  rugs  and  a  free  pass  to  the  Moscow  subway.
In  the  preliminaries,  Molotov  got  the  publicity breaks  here
at home as well  as abroad.   To  the  assembled  press waiting  for
his  arrival  in  San  Francisco,  all  of Madison  Avenue's  hucksters
seemed  to  have  gone  over  to  the  enemy.    That  picture  of
Molotov  in  a  ten  gallon hat  en route was the  biggest  stroke of
genius  in  press  agentry  since  the  late  Ivy  Lee  discovered  that
the  elder  John  D.  could  atone  for  his  millions  by giving  away
dimes.    The  hat  on  Molotov  recalled  similar  pictures  of  Cal
Coolidge  on  campaign;   both   looked   like  a  58th  variety  of
pickle  in  this  kind  of  headgear;  the  picture  suddenly  made
Molotov  seem just  another  Republican  politician  ready to  pose
in  anything for  a  vote.  It's  going to  be hard  to  keep  the  cold
war  going  if  Molotov starts  acting  like a  brother  Elk.
Movie  Star   Treatment
Here  in  San  Francisco  Molotov   has  been  accorded  movie
star treatment.   Under  gray skies,  in  the grimy old  railroad sta-
tion  at  Oakland  last  Saturday,  reporters,  photographers,  plain-
clothesmen  and  cops swarmed  over  the  platform  and  the tracks
waiting  for  his  train  to  come  in.   The  limousine  driving  him
off  was  blocked  by  reporters  until  he  let  down  a  window  and
through  an  interpreter  made a statement of  greeting.   At  Mon-
day  night's  reception  for  delegates  in  the  Mark  Hopkins  on
Nob  Hill  and  at  Tuesday  night's  glittering  affair  at  the  Palace
of  the  Legion  of  Honor,  Molotov's  brief  appearances stole  the
show.
Hostile propaganda  has boomeranged.   The Russians have so
long  been  depicted  as  monsters that  everybody  is  quite  dazed
to  discover  that  they are human.  Telescopic  lenses  and  cameras
watch  every  move made  by Molotov  and  his  entourage  in  the
baronial  home  they  rented  in  plush   suburban  Hillsborough.
When  Molotov finished speaking Wednesday,  the Opera  House
rapidly emptied.   Suddenly, for  a press  and  public which craves
spectacle,  the  old  Bolshevik  has  become  a  character.    Of  the
Big  Four  ministers,  nobody  ever heard  of  Pinay, MacMillan  as
yet  is a name only to  the  book  trade, and  Dulles hasn't  the  pop-
ular  touch.   Perhaps  for  want of  something  more  exciting,  this
little gray  methodical  man, who outwardly  seems  more  like one
of  Gogol's  devoted  government  clerks  than  a  veteran  revolu-
tionary  and  shrewd  statesman, has caught—and  is  exploiting—
popular   fancy.    Moscow  ought  to  send  him  on  tour.    When
the papers  start calling  him "Mollie" the  cold  war will  be over.
To  Press  Agentry  Alone
But  Molotov's  success here is  not the  result  of  press  agentry
alone.  The  General  Assembly heard  President  Eisenhower  on
Monday,  the  new  British  Foreign   Secretary  on  Tuesday,   and
Molotov  on  Wednesday.  Only  the  Russian  offered  more  than
vague  generalities  to  the  hunger  for  peace  which  makes  itself
felt  even in this gathering  of  diplomats,  politicians  and  bureau-
crats.   Mr.  Eisenhower's  speech  was painfully  uninspired.   He
drew  applause  only  twice,  once  when  he  said  "we  shall  reject
no  method,  however  novel,  that  holds  out  any  hope  however
faint,  for  a  just  and  lasting  peace."   The  other  was  for  that
famous  quotation from  Lincoln about  "the  dogmas  of the  quiet
past."    Lincoln's  words  shone  like  diamonds  amid  the  synthe-
tic  and  labored  phrases  ghosted  for  Eisenhower.   As  for  Mac-
Millan,  the  new  British   Foreign  Secretary  has  a  genius   for
banality.
The  Opera  House  was jammed Wednesday  morning  to  hear
Molotov.  The  scene  was  striking.   On  the  stage,  the  flags  of
the  United  Nations  were banked against  the  black  curtain  with
the  gold  UN  emblem.   Dwarfed  against  that  huge  backdrop
Van  Kleffens,  Hammarskjold  and  Cordier  sat  in  yellow  back
chairs  overlooking  the  rostrum  below  them.    The  first  floor
with   its  red  plush   seats   was  given   over   to  the  delegates.
Little blue flags marked  off the  sections  and  gave  the  names of
the  nations  represented   in  each.   About   10:30   A.M.,   when
Romulo of  the Philippines  had finished speaking, Van  Kleffens
gave  the  floor  to  Molotov.   A  little  stocky gray-haired  man  in
a gray  suit got up from the  second  row to the right of  the  audi-
torium  and  slowly  moved  to  the  rostrum.   His  voice  came
across  translation  headphones   in  clipped   "English  English."
His  own  voice  in  Russian  was  pleasant,  liquid,  often  forceful
but  not  harsh.   The   lack  of  demagogy,   the  sober   tone  and
earnest  manner  were  impressive,   especially   after   the   rather
blowsy  oratory  which  is  Romulo's  stock  in  trade.
Where  Eisenhower  was  interrupted  by  applause  only  twice,
(Continued  on  page  4)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  27, 1955
A  Brilliant  Young  Princeton  Political  Scientist  Challenges   "The  Public  Philosophy"
Lippmann's  Strange  Prescription  for  the  Evils  of  Our  Time
Editor's   Note—The   author   of  this  review  is  Associate
Professor   of  Political Science  at  Princeton,  author  of  "Con-
gress,  Corruption  and  Compromise" (1951)  and  (with  Har-
vey  Glickman)  of  "Problems  of  Internal  Security  in  Great
Britain"  (1954).    We  asked  him  to  write  on  Walter  Lipp-
mann's  new  book,  "The  Public  Philosophy,"  because  the  re-
spect  rightfully   accorded  its  author  as  a  journalist   gives
influence   beyond  their  intrinsic  merit  to  the   anti-democra-
tic  views  Mr.  Lippmann   propagates.
By  H.  H.  Wilson
Mr.  Walter  Lippmann, long  one of  the  responsible   analysts
of  American  politics,  writes  as  a  "liberal  democrat"  who has
"no wish  to disenfranchise  my fellow  citizens."   It  is  his hope
that  "both  liberty  and  democracy can be preserved  before  the
one  destroys  the  other."   Despite  this  declaration  The  Public
Philosophy  is,  in  large  measure,  a  restatement  of  his  convic-
tion  that  democracy  is  government  by  the  incompetent.    He
set  forth  much  of  this  case  in  Public  Opinion  (1922),  The
Phantom   Public   (1925),   and   "Why   Should  the   Majority
Rule?"  in  Harpers   (March  1926).    He  is  convinced that  the
Western  democracies  are  "sick  with  some kind  of  incapacity
to  cope  with  reality,  to  govern  their  affairs,  to  defend  their
vital  interests  and,  it  might  be, to  insure  their  survival  as
free  and  democratic  states."
According  to  Lippmann's  unique view  of  history,  there  oc-
curred  in  1917  "an  unrecognized revolution  within  the  democ-
racies."    Because  the  war  had  become so  costly  in  lives  and
material that it  no Jonger  made  sense  to continue, the  govern-
ments  were  forced  to  turn  to  the  people.    "They  had  to  ask
still  greater  exertions  and  sacrifices.   They  obtained  them  by
'democratizing'  the  conduct and  the  aims  of the  war:  by pur-
suing  total  victory  and  by  promising  total  peace."    On  the
surface  this  revolution  appeared  to  be  a  surrender  of  power
by  the  executive  to  the  representative   assemblies.    "In  fact,
the  powers  which  were  ceded  . . . passed  through  the  assem-
blies,  which  could  not  exercise  them,  to  the  mass  of  voters
who,  though  unable  to  exercise  them,  passed  them  on  to  the
party  bosses,  the  agents  of  pressure   groups,  and  the  mag-
nates   of  the   new  media  of   mass   communications."    This
process  results  in  "a  functional  derangement  of  the  relation-
ship  between  the  mass  of  the  people  and  the   government."
And  "this  breakdown in  the  constitutional  order  is  the  cause
of    the    precipitate    and    catastrophic    decline   of    Western
society."
Theirs   Not  To  Reason  Why
It  is Lippmann's  recurring  thesis  that  "the  prevailing pub-
lic  opinion  has  been  destructively  wrong  at  the  critical  junc-
tures"  in  world  history.    Up  until  1914  this  made  little  dif-
ference  because  legislatures  were  rarely  consulted  on  issues
of  war   and  peace.    "Even  their  right  to  be  informed   was
severely  limited, and the principle of the system was . . . that
war   and  peace  were  the  business  of  the  executive  depart-
ment."    As  a  result,  then,  of  the  "unrecognized  revolution"
of  1917,  the  "people  of  the  liberal  democracies"  are  responsi-
ble  for  the  expansion  of  fascist  power  in  the  1930s  and  for
the  inability  of  their  governments  to  mobilize  for  defense  or
to achieve peace.
Quite  apart  from  consideration of  its  validity the  diagnosis
is  presented  plainly  enough.   In  contrast  the  Lippmann  pre-
scription  is  difficult  to  follow,  extremely confused,  tinged with
mysticism,  and  strongly  colored  with  elitist   overtones.    In
preparation   for  correcting  the  "morbid  derangement"  which
has  weakened the  power of the  executive, he has  some  routine
things  to  say  about  the  difference  between  the  executive and
the  representative  function.   Contending that it  is the execu-
tive  power which must  ask  and  propose, while the  representa-
tive  assembly  consents,  petitions,  approves  and  criticizes,  he
insists  that  the  two  powers  must  remain  distinct.    "While
"Democratic  politicians  rarely   feel   they   can   afford
the  luxury  of  telling the  whole  truth  to  the  people.   And
since  not  telling  it,  though  prudent,  is   uncomfortable,
they  find  it  easier  if  they  themselves  do  not  have  to
hear  too  often  much  of  the  sour  truth.    The  men  under
them  who  report  and collect the  news come  to  realize in
their  turn  that  it  is  safer  to  be  wrong  before  it  has
become  fashionable  to  be  right."   —Walter   Lippmann
the  electors  choose  the  ruler,  they  do not  own any  shares  in
him  and they  have no right  to  command him. ...    Their  duty
is  to fill the  office  and  not  to  direct  the  officeholder.'.'  However,
it  is  the  executive  which  represents  the  public  interests,  i.e.
"what  men would  choose  if  they  saw  clearly,  thought  ration-
ally,  acted  disinterestedly   and  benevolently."   The  important
thing  is  that  the  executive  power  should  be  protected   from
mass opinion.
If  Only The Bastille  Hadn't  Fallen
In  common  with  many  declared  conservatives,  Lippmann
finds that the  ascendancy  of the  Jacobin  philosophy, "the  doc-
trine  of  democratic   revolution,"  deriving  from  the   French
Revolution,  is  the  root  of  all  evil.    Because  of  it  "the  democ-
racies  are   ceasing  to  receive  the  traditions  of  civility   in
which  the  good  society,  the  liberal  democratic  way  of  life  at
its  best,  originated  and  developed."    They  have  rejected,  or
forgotten,   or  ignored  the  public  philosophy,  the  belief  that
rational  men can agree  upon common principles  which  possess
a universal validity.
Short   of  writing   another   book   it   is   difficult   to   analyze
Lippmann's  peculiar  interpretation  of  contemporary  history
because  it   is  a  strange   melange  of  shrewd  insights,  lofty
idealism,  and  patent  nonsense.    Perhaps   no  other   observer
would  accept  his  definition  of  the  "unrecognized   revolution"
as  one in  which  power  passed  from  the  executive to  the  legis-
latures   and  to  the  people.    Throughout  .the  West  there  is
virtually  total  agreement  on the  contrary  development:  that
everywhere  there  has   been  a  vast  increment   of  executive
power.    To  hold  the   people  responsible  for   the   disastrous
appeasement  of  Hitler  and  Mussolini is  to  strain  credulity.
Are  we  to  forget  that  many  of  the  most  powerful  and  re-
spectable  leaders  in  all  Western  countries  greeted  the  rise of
fascism  as  "the  wave  of the  future"  and  the  bulwark  against
the  Soviet  Union?   One may  question  popular  understanding
of  crucial  issues,  but  this incurs  an  obligation  to  examine  the
role  of  the  mass  media  in  capitalist  society.    Operated   as
commercial  enterprises,  the  media  have  peddled  amusements,
distractions,  and  banalities  but  only rarely  and  exceptionally
have  they   served   as   instruments   of   enlightenment.    How
often  do  public  leaders,  political  parties,  or  the  press   offer
alternative  policies  from  which voters  may  choose?   Even so,
in  many instances  and  without  democratic  leadership  popular
reaction  to  crises  was  more  nearly  right  than  the  response
of  the  elites  Lippmann  seems  to  favor.    There  was  popular
support   for   applying   sanctions   to   Mussolini   in   Ethiopia;
there  was a  willingness to  supply weapons to  Loyalist  Spain;
and  throughout  the  months prior  to  Pearl  Harbor  Americans
were  prepared   to  do  more  than  their  leaders   were  asking.
One can't  help but  feel  that  Lippmann is writing  an  apologia
for  the  ruling  elite  with  which  he  prefers  to  associate.    In
any  case  the  significant  thing  is  that  he  does  not  believe in
the   possibility   of   an   enlightened   and   informed   citizenry.
That  democracy faces  a  crises  of  unresolved problems deriv-
ing  from  technology,  organization,  and  the  mass  society  few
will  deny.   That  Mr.  Lippmann's   diagnosis  and  prescription
will  lead  to  adequate  therapy  seems  unlikely.   One  may  as-
sert  a faith  in minority  rule,  but  it  requires  a  tortured  inter-
pretation  of  history  to  proclaim  its  wisdom.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  27,  1955
A  Special Correspondent Finds  The  Intelligentsia  Are  Speaking  More  Freely
The  London  Times Reports  on  Russia's  New  Leaders  and  Policies
After   the   long  years   when   Stalin   hestrode   the   Russian
world,  the  new  leaders  seem  at  first  to  be  small  and  rather
shadowy  figures,  even  to  many  Russians.   I  was  continually
being  struck  by  finding,  as  we walked along,  how many  Rus-
sians  could  not  recognize more than  three or four of the dozen
men  whose  portraits  hang  in  the  streets  on  fete  days.   And
the  upheavals that have taken  place  in the  team  since Stalin's
death—producing  Beria's  execution  and  Malenkov's  resigna-
tion—are  bound  to  make  people  ask  whether   the  team   is
really  in  final  shape  even  now.
Khrushchev,  now  emergent   as   the  head   of  the   team   in
Stalin's  old key position as  First  Secretary  of  the Communist
Party,   remains   a   puzzling  figure.  He  certainly   has   any
amount of vigor  and  courage.   He is  not afraid  of committing
himself  to  a  line,  even  one that  seems  made  up  on  the  spur
of  the  moment.   Lately  he  has  been  taking  to  Stalin's  ques-
tion-and-answer   style   of   speaking,  adopting   the   language
with  the  mantle,  but  he  is  much  more  impetuous than  Stalin
ever  was,  much  more  the  extrovert,  and  his  speech  in  Bel-
grade  showed how clumsy he  can  be  on  occasion.   It  is  hard
to  think  of  him  as  Stalin's  sole  successor.    He  is  rather  the
leader  of  a  band—even  if  he  sometimes  gets  ahead  of   the
band.
The   Marshals
Marshal  Bulganin  (he  usually  drops  the  Marshal  now)  is
generally  regarded  as  being  more  easy-going  than  Khrush-
chev,  but  he  is  extraordinarily  busy  as  Prime  Minister  and
has  a  good record as  administrator  behind him. Marshal  Zhu-
kov  (he  keeps  the  Marshal)  brings  the  army  voice  into  the
team, and  it  is bound to influence  policy.   It  is wrong to think
of  the  army  as  a  distinct  political  force,  but  a  change  from
former  days  is  in  the  way  that  Marshal  Zhukov  may  speak
publicly,  "as  a  soldier,"  on  political  or  diplomatic  matters.
Of  the  other  leaders  Mr.  Molotov  (showing his  age  more  and
more)   and  Mr.  Kaganovich   remain   steady,  cautious   influ-
ences,   usually  in   the   background.    Mr.  Malenkov,  though
present  on all  big  occasions, is  subdued and  his  face  sags  un-
healthily.   Of  the  younger  men,  the   Moscow  grape-vine   re-
ported  that  Mr.  Shepilov,  editor  of  Pravda,  was  coming  for-
ward  to  strengthen   the  party  theoreticians  even  before  he
went  with  the  delegation  to  Belgrade.
What  does  the  new  team  mean  in  terms   of  policy?  One
plausible  theory  is  that  it  is  the  men  of  the  party's   "left
wing"  who are  now dominant.  That  is  to  say,  Malenkov  was
"to  the  right,"  proclaiming  a  swift  raising  of  living  stand-
ards  after   the  Stalinist   rigors  and  offering  inducements  to
the  peasants.    The  new  men,  as  we know, have  slowed  down
the  rate of  increase for  consumer  goods  in  favor  of  heavy  in-
dustry.   To  offset  inflationary  trends  and  to  put  a  brake  on
spending power, they  have this  year  broken  the  almost  tradi-
tional  spring-time  custom  of  reducing  prices,  and  they  have
doubled  the  total  of  the  State  loan  which  each  year  is  met
mainly  out  of  wages  and  prices.   Most  clearly  of  all,  instead
of   offering   special  monetary   inducements  to  the   peasants,
they  are  setting  out  to tighten  up  organization  on very many
of  the  farms  in  the  belief  that  efficiency   and  vigilance will
produce  more  results.     With   it   all,   they   emphasize,  more
strongly than  before  the  role that  the  Communist party mem-
bers  must  play  as  the  organizers,  leaders,  and  inspirers  of
national  life.   The  talk  of  "revolutionary  fervour"  is  heard.
Shifts  of  Emphasis
The line seems fairly  clear.   It  stands for  greater  efficiency,
closer  organization  of industry  and agriculture,  and  a  stricter
control  of  the  purse-strings,   in  the  sense  that—though  de-
fense  expenditure has  risen—net  investment  in  the  national
economy  has  been  slightly reduced in  this  year's  budget.  Most
of  the  changes  are,  in  fact,  shifts  of  emphasis  rather  than
During  the  week  of  June  6  the  Times of  London pub-
lished  an  unusually  objective series,  "Russia Revisited,"
by  a  special  correspondent.  We  recommend  the  series
to  our  readers and  here  reprint  most  of  the  final  article
on  "The  New  Leaders  and  Their  Policies,"  which  ap-
peared  on  June  11.
reversals of previous  policy; they  are  important  but  they  are
marginal.
That is hardly  surprising.  The leaders  have to work  within
a  given  context  which—in  spite  of  the  easier   atmosphere—
remains  basically  unaltered  since  Stalin's  day.   There  is  more
discussion,  and  it  is  a  sign  of the  times  that  articles  in  jour-
nals  for  the  intelligentsia  are  raising  questions  not  touched
since  Stalin's  hold  tightened  on  the  country.    They  are  ask-
ing what  kind of matters  may  be counted "controversial"  and
therefore  fit  for  public discussion.   But, of  course,  open  politi-
cal  groups  remain  as  unthinkable  as  workers'  strikes.
Even  more  strongly  the  limits  of  the  Government's policy
are  set  by  the  social  pyramid  which  is  one  of  Stalin's  main
legacies.   Gone are  the  exciting and fearful  days  when a  sin-
gle  decree,  or  a  single  program,  could  rock  and  mould  a  so-
ciety  that  was  only  taking  shape.   Gone,  too,  are  the  days
when  Communist Party  members took  only  a  small  standard
wage  home or  when it  was  hard  to tell  a  factory  director,  by
his  clothes  and  bearing,  from  a  workman.  The  society  of  to-
day  has  its  gradations  from  poor  to  rich,  its  obvious  ranks
and  its  many  privileges  (as  well  as  responsibilities)  for  the
higher  ranks.
Soviet  Foreign  Policy
It  takes  much  patience  and  many  talks  in  Moscow  before
any  insight  can  be gained into  Soviet foreign  policy  that  can-
not  be gained  outside  Russia.    But,  behind  all  the  talk  about
the  unshakable  unity  of  the   Socialist   camp  that   stretches
from  the  Elbe to Indo-China  (a  unity  and  a force that  cannot
be  belittled)   one  notices  a  touch  of  reserve,  something  less
than  the  usual  brimming enthusiasm,  in  references  to China.
It  should not be exaggerated, but  Russians were pensive when
talking  about  the  potential  strength  of  China's  six  hundred
million  people,  even  if  they  are   six  hundred  million   allies.
And  there  were  no  furious  denials  if  anyone  suggested  that
China's   young  revolutionary   regime   could  itself   make   an
over-confident  and  dangerous  step  in the  Formosa  Straits. On
the  contrary, enough  was  usually  said  to  show that  Russia  is
as  anxious  as  other  countries—whether  India  or  Britain—to
remove  the  danger  of an  explosion  in the  Straits at  this time.
Probably  because the  Far  Eastern  dangers  are  now counted
less,  Russians  were  more anxious to  talk  about  the  future of
Germany  and  the  prospects  of  four-Power  talks.    The  chief
impression  I  gained  from  a  number  of private  informal  talks
was  that   Russian   policy  about   Germany   was   still  being
thought   out.    All  dwelt  on  the  need  to  establish  a   unified,
neutral   Germany   ("prevented   solely  by  western   ill-will"),
but  some were  readier  than  others  to  discuss  the  possibility
of  a  working  arrangement  for  security  if,  in  spite  of  efforts
on  each  side,  German unity  were  not  found  possible.   Where
one  or  two rejected  anything  less than  unity,  saying  that  the
only  alternative  was  an  arms  race,  the  others  did  not  reject
lesser  solutions—for   example,  the  idea  of  an  agreement  for
limiting  arms  in  the  two  parts  of  Germany.
If  one  seeks  for  the  real  differences  between  the  Khrush-
chev-Bulganin  Government and  the  Malenkov Government,  it
is  not  to  be  found  in  switches  of  policy.   It  is  rather  that,
both  at  home and  abroad,  the  new leaders  set  out  to  be  more
energetic,  more  positive,  sometimes  more  startling—as  when
they  invited  the  Austrian  leaders or Dr.  Adenauer  to Moscow.
i  a  ..
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  21,1955
Dulles  Must  Answer  Molotov   Or  Lose  By  Default
(Continued  from  page   I)
Molotov  was interrupted  by applause  five  times.   The  first  was
when  he  called   for   the  outlawing   of  atomic  weapons;   the
second,  when  he said  that  China  ought  to be a party  to any dis-
cussion  of  disarmament; the  third,  when  he  spoke  of  the  good
feeling  of  the  Soviet  people  toward  the  American  people;  the
fourth,  when  he  said  it  depended  largely  on  these  two  peoples
to  consolidate  peace  and  security  for  many  years to  come;  and
fifth,  when  he  said  this  was  all  the  Soviet  people  desired  and
that he was confident  that this was also the  desire  of  the  people
of  America.
The  tone was conciliatory, and  though  there  was little  in  the
speech  which  Molotov  had  not  said  before  there  was  much
which  the Western  powers have yet to answer.  The  speech  was
in  large  part  a  repetition  of  the  Soviet  disarmament  proposals
of  May  10  but  these have been  dismissed  in  Washington  with
scant  attention.   Earlier  Soviet  proposals  for  outlawing  atomic
weapons  were met with  the  rejoinder  that  this  would  leave  the
Soviet  bloc  with  superior  armies.   In  the  May  10 proposals,  as
Molotov  pointed  out,  the  Soviet  Union  gave  in  to  this  argu-
ment  and  "without  any  modifications"  accepted  the   Western
proposals  on  conventional armies  and  weapons.   The  U.S.A.,
the  U.S.S.R.  and  China  would  each  be  restricted  to  armies of
less  than  1,500,000  men.   In  addition  the  Soviet  Union  also
went  further  than  ever  before  in  specific  proposals  for  inspec-
tion  and  control  to guard  against  surprise attack  and  to  enforce
atomic  disarmament.  These  proposals  would  lift  the  iron cur-
tain.   They  represent  major  concessions  yet  they  have  called
forth  no  response.
British  and  Belgians  Impressed
The  San Francisco meeting gave  Molotov  a  world  forum  in
which  to  make people  aware of  the  Soviet  concessions^ and  in
which  to  force  the  Western  powers to  take  notice of  them.   In
this  sense,  the  Molotov  speech  has  transformed  the  nature of
the  conference.   In  effect  bargaining has  begun.   Dulles  in  his
speech  Friday  must make some reply to Molotov's  concrete'pro-
posals,  or  lose a  round  by default  in  the  battle  for  public opin-
ion.  Dulles  sought after  the  Molotov  speech  to  brush  it off but
British  reactions  and  those of  Belgian  Foreign  Minister Spaak
showed  how  deeply  impressed Allied  Western  opinion  was by
Molotov's  tone.  Real  concessions  have  been  made  by  Moscow
to  the  West  on  disarmament and  as  Molotov  said  "it  is  up  to
the  USA  and  the  other  Western   powers  to  make  the  next
move."
So far  there have only been petty publicity dodges.  The  U.S.
delegation  seems  to  have  feared that  Molotov  might  suggest  a
ban  on  nuclear  tests  in  his  speech.    The  night  before  Lodge
therefore  issued  a  statement  which  created  headlines  about  a
new  American  "Atom  Plan,"  but  this  when  examined turned
out  only to  be a statement which calls  for  the  collection of  data
on  the  effect  of  nuclear  tests.   Lodge  put  forward  the  dubious
proposition  that  "the  best  scientific  information"  says  "prop-
erly  safeguarded  nuclear testing,  in  contrast with  nuclear war-
fare,  is not  a threat  to human health."   (Obviously  some  prog-
ress  has  been  made, since Mr.  Lodge  does  not  insist  that  nu-
clear warfare itself  is healthful.)
A  Brawl  That  Didn't  Come  Off
The  other  "reply" to  Molotov  was the  Cuban speech.   If  the
purpose  of  this  typical  cold  war  speech  about  Soviet   "slavery"
was  to  embroil  Molotov  in  an  undignified  quarrel,  it  not  only
failed  but  boomeranged.  The  result  of  Dr.  Portuondo's  speech
and  Romulo's  intervention  was  to  anger  Van  Kleffens,  and  to
make a bad  impression on  other  friendly  delegates.   The  hearty
handshake  with  which  Lodge  greeted   the   Cuban   after   his
speech  and  the  pat  on  the  back  given  him  by  Dulles  showed
their  approval.  They  had  gotten  a  stooge  to  do what  they did
not  dare do  themselves.   They  may have  hoped  that  Portuondo
and  Romulo  between   them  might  turn  the  meeting  into  an
anti-Soviet  brawl.
As  this  is  being  written  Wednesday   night,   Molotov   has
clearly  won  the  first  round.   Whether  he  wins  the  second  and
last  round  of  this  Conference  depends  on  the  reply  made by
Dulles  Friday.  The  resounding  defeat  in  the  Senate of  the Mc-
Carthy  "liberationist"  resolution  shows how united  both  parties
are  in  support  of  genuine negotiation; the  war party  is reduced
to  pigmy  proportions.   The  Eisenhower  Administration  could
now  lead  from" strength  and  take the  initiative in  the  search  for
a  settlement  instead of  merely  reacting  to  Soviet  proposals iri a
half-hearted   way  and  negativistic  way  unworthy  of   a  great
power.
Watch  Next   Week's  Issue  For  Another  Report  Direct  From  San  Francisco
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name
Street
City                                              .Zone           State
Kilter gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)  Name                                                        ,
Street                      :..:.
City                                                Zone           State
* $1 extra  for  Canada.                                                    6/27/55
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED