I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jul04.pdf

============================================================

Schachtman—Good  Enough  for  U.  S.  Propaganda  Abroad But  Not  For A Passport,  Page Two
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    Ill,   NO. 25JULY  4,  1956
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Eisenhower  Hopeful.  Dulles  Sour,  On The  Way  to  That  Meeting  at  The  Summit
Ike's  Secretary  of  State —  or  McCarthy's?
In  Washington  last  week,  as  in  San  Francisco the  week  be-
fore,  there was a striking divergence in  tone between the Presi-
dent  and  his  Secretary of  State.    The  President  was  hopeful,
his  Secretary of  State astringent, about the  outlook  for  Geneva.
Mr.  Eisenhower said  the  chances of  solid  progress  were  better
than  he thought  they were two months ago;  Mr. Dulles left  the
impression  that  the  chances  had  been  rendered  less  promising
by  a  Russian  "loss  of  interest"  in  German  reunification.  The
President  said  flatly  that  he  was  sure  the  plane  incident  over
the  Bering strait  was a  local  matter, and  not  a  deliberate  act of
policy;  he  even  mentioned  that  the weather was bad  and there-
fore  visibility  poor  at  the  time  of  the  shooting.   His  Secretary
of  State  issued  a  press  release  saying,  "So  far,  however,  we
doubt  that  that  [shooting]  represents  a  considered   policy  on
the  part  of  the  Soviet  Union."   The  word  italicized  illustrates
Mr.  Dulles's  genius  for  poisonous  ambiguity.
Nowhere  was the  divergence more evident  than  in  the  Presi-
dent's response to a question about  the plan  for a Congressional
resolution   expressing   the  hope  that  the  Communist   satellite
states  can  achieve freedom.   This,  always one  of  Mr.  Dulles's
fervent  themes,  elicited  a  lukewarm  response  from  Mr.  Eisen-
hower.   The  President  would  not  commit  himself; he  had  said
again  and  again  that  there  could  be no  real  peace  until  all  na-
tions  had  the  right  of  self-determination,  but  we  were  not
going  to war to  free  them.  This will  be a  cold  douche  for  Mr.
Dulles's  East  European  politicians-in-exile.
Why  Go  to Geneva?
Were  it  not  for  the  President's  hopeful  words  next  day any-
one  would  assume  from  the  Secretary  of  State's  press  confer-
ence  last  Tuesday  that  there  was  no  point  in  going  to  Geneva
unless  to  demonstrate  that  there  is no  hope  of  peace.    The  list
of  subjects  on  which  Mr.  Dulles  sees  no  chance  of  agreement
is  long  enough  to  cover  any  feasible  agenda  except   exchange
of  weather  reports.   On  Korea,  he  saw no  hope  of  reaching an
agreement  on  unification.  Ditto  for  Indo-China;  he   stressed
the  fact  that  neither  the  U.  S. nor  South  Vietnam were a  party
to  the  Geneva  agreement  of  last  year promising  elections  for  a
unified  Indo-Chinese  regime  in  1956.   The  only  place he  wants
unification  is  Germany;  unless  the  Russians  were  prepared  to
surrender  and  accept  American  terms  for  a  unified  Reich,  they
would  be  demonstrating   "insincerity."
Molotov   seemed   to  feel  that  the  Russians  had   sufficiently
proven  their  "sincerity"  in  Austria  and  Yugoslavia;  by  accept-
ing  Western  terms  on  conventional  arms and  by offering  to  lift
the  Iron  Curtain  to  continuous  international  inspection.     "Mr.
Secretary,"  Mr.  Dulles was  asked,  "Molotov  said  that  the  next
step  on  disarmament  was  up  to  us  now.    Is  it  your  present
thought  that  the  Allies will  take  some  step  on  disarmament at
Geneva.  .  .  . ?"  Mr.  Dulles  replied  (the  rules  require  that  his
words  be given  in  indirect discourse)  that there  will be  no spe-
cifics  discussed at Geneva.  If  no  "specifics"  are  to  be discussed,
what  will the  heads  of  State  do  on  that  summit ?  The  purpose,
Mr.  Dulles  said  in  reply  to  another  question, was  (we  use  his
words as closely as the  rule allows)  merely to set  up  procedures
for  arriving at  results  which  we  both  find  acceptable  in  prin-
ciple!   The  exclamation  point  is ours.
Busy   Closing   Doors
The  President  was applauded  at  San  Francisco for  declaring
that  we  would  try  any  method,  however  novel,  that  holds  out
any  hope  for  peace.   His  Secretary  of  State  seems  to  be  busy
shutting  off  as  many  avenues  as  possible  to  a  solution.    One
proposal  has  been  to  sweeten  German  rearmament with  a  non-
aggression  pact  between Eastern  and Western  blocs; Mr.  Dulles
rejected  that  idea.  Indeed  any agreement whatsoever seemed  to
be ruled  out  by his  remark on  the  danger  of  dealing with those
whom  you  don't  trust.   He  wants  a  rearmed  and  a  reunited
Germany allied with NATO, and he reluctantly recognizes  that
this  is linked  with  the  problem  of  disarmament, but  he  sees  no
possibility   of   arriving  at   an   agreement   on  disarmament  at
Geneva  because  (again  the  indirect discourse)  it  is an extremely
complicated  subject  and  there are  infinite  varieties of  formulae
which  might  be  applied.    There  are  many  permutations  and
combinations which would all have to be explored.  . . . Though
the  latest  NATO war  games  underscore the  total  deadliness of
atomic  war,  this  is  not  a  man  in  a  hurry  for  peace.
One  Gospel  Theme  Dulles  Avoids
The  day  before  the  San  Francisco  conference  Mr.  Dulles
spoke  at  the  "Festival  of  Faith"  in  his  favorite religious strain,
but  one Gospel  injunction  which never appears  in  his unctuous
homilies   is   "Blessed'  are   the'  peacemakers."     He   belittled
Krishna  Menon  at  press  conference.   His  great  triumph  at  the
UN  gathering  was  to  block  a  "Declaration  of  San  Francisco"
in  which  East  and  West  would  have  made  a  new  pledge  of
peace;   the  setting  would  have  further   relaxed  tension.    His
own   speech  privately  appalled  our  Canadian  and  West  Euro-
pean  friends;  this  was  the  same  cracked  cold  war  record   the
State Department  has  been  playing since  1947.  The  Senate had
defeated  the  McCarthy  resolution  two days earlier, but  Dulles's
was a  speech  tailored  to  its belligerent  specifications.  The  Pres-
ident,  if  he  is to  succeed  in  his  search  for  peace,  must  get him-
self  a  new  Secretary of  State.  This  one  is McCarthy's.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  4,1955
There's  Many A  Legal  Slip Between the  Schachtman  Ruling and  A  Passport
The  Right  to  Travel  Is As Yet  Only  A Right  to  Litigate
Last  Monday Walter  Winchell breathlessly  reported,  "Paul
Robeson,  who now can  get  a  passport   (due  to  a  High  Court
decision)   will   be   refused   entry   into   Britain   and   maybe
France."  Walter  never  took  a  longer  leap  to  a  less  solid con-
clusion.   The  decision  of  the  U.  S.  Court  of  Appeals  in  the
Max  Schachtman  passport  case  did  indeed  hold  for  the  first
time,  "The   right  to  travel  ...    is  a  natural  right."   But  a
careful   reading  will  show  that  for  most  radicals  and  many
liberals  there  may  be many  a  slip  between  this  judicial  gen-
erality  and  the  actual  obtaining  of  a  passport.
True,  the  State  Department   is  taking  a  beating  in  the
courts.   The  Schachtman  case  and  the  new  District   Court
decision  last  week  in  the  Clark  Foreman  case,  on the  heels of
Otto  Nathan's,  have  just  about  ended  the  simple  absolutism
long  wielded  over  the  right  to  travel  by  the  Czarina   Ruth
Shipley  and  her  successor  the  Czarina  Frances   Knight.
One-Sided  Inquisitions
The  Foreman   decision, unless  appealed,  means  the  end  of
the  practice  whereby  the  Board  of  Passport  Appeals  stages
one-sided  inquisitions  in  the  guise  of  hearings.     The  appli-
cant  is  confronted  only  by bare  allegations  and  must  prove  a
negative,  with  no  bill  of  particulars  to  help  him  and  no  wit-
nesses   to   crosc-examine.   Judge   Matthews,  relying   on   the
Nathan  case,  ordered  a  "quasi-judicial  . . . evidentiary  hear-
ing"  for  Foreman.   The  Department  avoided  a  precedent   a
few  weeks  earlier  by  hastily giving  Otto  Nathan  a  passport.
In  the  Foreman  case  it  must  either  change.its   hearing   pro-
cedure  or  take  an  appeal.    Secretary  Dulles  at  press  confer-
ence last  week indicated that  hearing  procedures  would  be  re-
vised.  This  is a  David-and-Goliath  victory  over  the  State De-
partment  by the  Emergency Civil  Liberties  Committee and  its
general    counsel,   Leonard   Boudin,   who   represented    both
Nathan  and  Foreman.
The  day  is  ending when  the  Department  can  deny  a  pass-
port  without  a  hearing.   But  the  day  is  still  a  long  way off
when  the  right  to  travel  will- again  be  secure.   The  headlines
did  not   do  justice   to  the   Appeals   Court   decision  in   the
Schachtman  case.  "The  right  to travel," the Court  said, ". . .
is  a  natural  right"  but  it  added,  "subject   to  the  rights  of
others and  to reasonable  regulation  under  law."  The Czarinas
are  deposed,  but  the  courts  take  their  place.   The  next  ques-
tion  is  what  constitutes  "reasonable  regulation"  and  this  will
depend  on the  judges, and  the  climate of opinion. The right  to
travel  will  be at  best for  some time  merely  a  right  to  litigate.
That  Subversive  List  Not  Enough
All  the  majority  opinion  by  Judge  Fahy  really  decided  in
the  Schachtman  case  was  that  a  man  might  hot  lawfully  be
denied  a  passport   solely  because   the  organization    (in  this
case  the  Independent  Socialist  League)  of  which  he  is  chair-
man  has  been  listed  as  subversive  by  the  Attorney   General.
There  must  be  an  independent   determination   by  the  State
Department.   What  Schachtman  gets  is  not  a  passport  but  a
new  hearing.   When  the  State  Department  then  decides  "in-
dependently"  that  his  group  is  "subversive,"  he must  go back
to  court  again  and  attack  this  finding  as  "arbitrary."   The
result  will  depend  on  the  judges.   In  any  case  it  will  be  a
long  time  before  Max  Schachtman  gets  abroad  again.
Schachtman  was  able  to  prove   (1)  that  his  organization
was  bitterly  anti-Communist  (and  indeed  as  the  box  below
shows  had  been  used  for  anti-Communist  propaganda  abroad
by  the  U. S. government),  (2)  that  it  was  also  anti-Trotzky-
ist,  (3)  that  it  had  no international  affiliations  and  (4)  that
it  did  not  advocate overthrow of the  government  by force  and
violence.  The  State  Department  agreed  finally that  the  Inde-
pendent  Socialist  League  was  not  Communist but  still  held  it
to  be "subversive"  on the  basis  of the  Attorney  General's  list.
What  Is   "Subversive"?
If  one  can  be  anti-Communist  and  non-revolutionary   and
yet  too  "subversive"  to  be  allowed  to  travel  abroad,  a  lot  of
assorted   radicals  and  liberals  are  in  for  trouble.    Yet  the
Court  of  Appeals  implies  that  denial  of  a  passport  may  be
valid  if  the  Department  can  prove  the  Independent  Socialist
League  "subversive."
Similar  shadows  are  cast  by  the  Foreman  case.   He  is  ac-
cused not  only of having been a  Communist (which he denied)
but  of  belonging  to  various  liberal  and  radical   organizations
which   the   State    Department   regards   as    "communistic"
though  not  actually on the  Attorney  General's  list.  The  ques-
tion  the  courts   must  ultimately   decide  is  whether,  even  if
proven  at  a  fair  hearing,  such  vague  political  standards  con-
stitute  "reasonable   regulation"  of  the  right  to  travel.   That
battle  is  still  a  long  way  off, and  the  Department  still  has
many  legal  dodges  it  can  use,  not  the  least  of  which  is  indi-
cated  by an  ominous footnote  to the  Schachtman decision, "No
suggestion  is made here  that  the  basis for  the  denial may  not
be  disclosed,  for  reasons  of  national  security  or  otherwise."
How  Shanghai  and  Canton  Were  "Bombed"  With  A  Max Schachtman Leaflet
Good  Enough  for  Propaganda,  But  Not  for  A  Passport
This  vivid  bit  of  testimony, in  the  record  submitted to  the
Court  of  Appeals in  the  Jlax  Schachtman passport  case,  de-
serves  to  be  recorded  for  the  future  historian.    It  is   from
the  typescript  of  Schachtman's  hearing  November  3,  1953,
before  Ashley  J.  Nicholas, assistant  chief  of  the  State  De-
partment's  passport  division.   The  questioner  is  Schacht-
man's  counsel, Joseph  L.  Kauh,  Jr.
"Mr.  KAUH.   I  think  you  told  me  some  time  ago  of  a
situation  in  which  the  Independent Socialist  League  officially
cooperated  with  the  State  Department  in  1949.    Could  you
mention  that  to  Mr.  Nicholas,  please?
"Mr.  SCHACHTMAN.  I wouldn't say  officially  cooperated
with  the  State  Department—I know  that  a  few  years   ago,
almost  exactly  four  years  ago,  October  17,  1949,  the  Social-
ist  party,  in  the  name  of  its  secretary,  Mr.  Harry  Fleisch-
man;  the  secretary  of  the  Social  Democratic  Federation  in
the  United  States,  August  Claessens,  and  myself,  officially
in  my  capacity   as  national  chairman  of  the   Independent
Socialist  League,  issued  a  joint  statement  entitled  "Stalin-
ism  Is  Not  Socialism."   This  was  made  up  of  a  preamble,
etc.,  which indicated what, despite  the  differences  among  the
three  of  us,  we held  in  common about  Socialism  and  that  it
was  in  no respect  related  to  Stalinism.
"We  have  excellent  reason  to  believe  that  the  State  De-
partment,  whether on  its  own initiative  or  in .any  case  with
the  knowledge and  support,  had  this  statement—of  which  I
remind  you  we  were  one  of  the   signers—translated   into
Chinese  and  dropped  in  something  like  100,000  copies  by
bomber  over  Shanghai  and  Canton, some  time  between May
10  and  May  15,  1950.    I  can't  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  the
translation—I  am  not  familiar  with  Chinese.    Here   is  a
photostatic  copy  of  the  document."
The date  given  for  the  "bombing"  was  more than  a  month
before  the  Korean  war,  and  six  months  before  Chinese  in-
tervention.    What  happens  if  such  bombers,  intruding  un-
lawfully  into  the  air  over  a  country with  which  we  are  at
peace,  are  shot  down?    The  readiness  of  the  government  to
use  an  American  radical  for  counter-revolutionary  purposes
abroad  while  refusing him the  right  to  travel  is  instructive.
It  indicates  that  while  Stalinism  may  not  be  socialism  con-
temporary  "Americanism"  as  interpreted  by  the  State  De-
partment  is  hardly  a  model  free  society,  either.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  4,1955
Humphrey  and  Stennis  Give  the  GOP  A  Chance  to  Whitewash   and  Expand  Thought   Control
Dissipating  Any Naive  Illusions  About That  Coming  Security  Inquiry
The  Republicans  and  the  rightists  joined  last  week  in  the
unanimous  voice vote  for  the  Humphrey-Stennis   joint  resolu-
tion  to investigate  the  security program  because  (1)  they  will
control  it,  (2)  the  Hoover-style  commission  to  make  the  study
will  have  no  power  to  examine  the  secret  practices   and  the
informer   system   of  the  FBI,   and   (3)   the  final  result  may
serve   only  to  fasten   thought   control   more  firmly  onto   the
fabric  of  American  life.
Of  the  12 members, four  will  be named  by  Eisenhower,  four
by  Nixon;  this  means  that  Brownell  and  J.  Edgar   Hoover
will  have  an  effective  voice  in  choosing  eight  members.    The
Democrats  will  pick  but  four  members  through  Speaker  Sam
Rayburn.   Section  8 of the  resolution  provides that  no  agency
of  the  government  may  be required  to  furnish  information  to
the   Commission  when  in  the   President's  opinion  such   dis-
closure  would  interfere  with  or  jeopardize  intelligence  or  in-
vestigative  functions.   This  follows from  what  Senator   Hum-
phrey  called  "the  unquestionable  necessity  for  protecting  the
FBI's  methods  and  devices  for   infiltrating   the   Communist
conspiracy."    The  italics  are  added;  these  "devices"  include
wire-tapping  and  mail   covers.
No  Real  Right  to  Confront
In  presenting  the  resolution  to  the  Senate,  Humphrey  ac-
cepted  the  view that  there  should  be  no right  to  confront  ac-
cusers  when  the  source  was  a  "genuine  undercover  agent"—
though  some  of  the  most  famous  of  these  have  turned  out  to
be  psychopathic  liars,  alcoholics  or  mercenaries.    Humphrey
said  it  was  necessary  to  consider   the  problem  "strictly  in
terms  of  casual  informants."    He  did  not  advocate  the  right
to  confront  but  merely  the  need  to  consider  it;  the  FBI  will
oppose  this  but  since  its  stock  in  trade  is  the  guarantee  of
secrecy  when  it  interrogates  neighbors  and  friends.
Senator  Cotton  (R. N.H.),  who helped frame  the  final  reso-
lution,  said  the  coming  inquiry  would  not  be  "digging  into
this  case  or  that  case,  or  trying  to  find  political  ammunition
in  the  treatment  of individual cases."  Cotton  said  "of  course"
the  Commission could  not  study  the  security  system  "without
knowing  something  of  the  individual cases"  but  he  was  sure
the  Commission  could  "proceed  in  such  a  manner  that  there
will  be  no  question  of  trying  to  get  into  its  record   informa-
tion  which,  in  the  interest  of  future  security,   should  not  be
divulged."    Thus  the  inquiry  itself  is  to  be  launched   under
wraps.
Built-in   Conclusions
The  resolution  contains  built-in  conclusions.   The  most  im-
portant  is  its  declaration  that  a  security  system  is  "vital"
for   all  persons  privately  or  publicly  employed  on  work   re-
Mundt  Abhors   Concentration   Camps
Discussion  of  the  Humphrey-Stennis  resolution  gave
Mundt  a  chance  to  twit  the  liberals  of  the  Senate  on
the  light-headed  maneuvers they  adopted  in  1950  to  up-
hold  Truman's  veto  of  the  Internal  Security  Act.    Led
by  Lehman they  tried  to substitute  a  bill  to  put  all  sub-
versives  in  detention  camps  on  the  outbreak  of  war  or
national  emergency.
Mundt  said  last  week that  "in  the  effort  to  secure  suf-
ficient  votes  to  override  a  presidential  veto  ...    it was
necessary  to  accept  several  amendments. .  .  .  Some of
these  were  amendments  which  I  would  have  ordinarily
opposed,  such  as the one . ..  which provides  for concen-
tration  camp  punishment  for  certain  individuals.    I  am
one  who  abhors  all  types  of  concentration   camps,  but
that  provision  is  part  of  the  law of  the  land.   It  repre-
sents part  of the increasing  need  for study. . . ."  Mundt
did  not  say  he  favored  repeal,  however.
Ever   Vigilant
The  silliest  testimony  in  the  hearings   on  the  Hum-
phrey-Stennis  resolution  seems  to  have  come  from  the
State  Department.   Senator  Humphrey  told  the  Senate
last  week  he  saw  "no  convincing  reason"  why  hearings
should  not  be  accorded  applicants  for  government  jobs
who  would  otherwise   be  barred  for  security  reasons.
Usually  hearings  are  only  accorded  those  already  em-
ployed.
"The   only   real   argument   against   such   hearings,"
Humphrey  said,  "was  offered   by  the  representative  of
the  State  Department  who  testified   that   if   applicant
procedures  were  adopted,  one  of  the  dangers  would  be
immediately  all  the  Communists would  come in  to  apply
for  a  Federal  job  just  to  find  out  whether  the  Federal
government  knew  about  them  or   not."
Humphrey  said  the  State Department  did not  seem  to
realize   that   the  Atomic  Energy   Commission  has   for
several  years  accorded  applicants  a  hearing.     Presum-
ably  "all   the  Communists"  have  already   been  free  to
apply  for  jobs  with  the  AEC  to  find  out  whether  the
government  "knew  about  them."
quiring  access  to  national  defense  secrets  or  affording    "sig-
nificant  opportunity for  injury  to  the  national  security."  This
could  hardly  be  broader.     The  Commission  is  instructed  to
make reports  on the  adequacy of  existing  security  laws.  Thus
the  idea  of  a  Commission, first broached last  year  as  a  device
to  sidetrack  the  Butler  bill  for  nationwide  industrial  screen-
ing,  may  become  a  means  for  recommending  such  legislation.
This,  and  not  some  overnight   conversation  to   liberalism,
explains  why  Mundt  (R.  S.  Dak.)   rose  to  say  that  he  was
"unreservedly"  a  strong  supporter  "of  this  approach  and  this
resolution."    Mundt  agreed  with  Cotton  that  any  benefit  of
the  doubt  in  security   cases  "should  be  given  to  the   govern-
ment  and  to  those  who are  peaceful,  honest,  God-fearing  and
loyal,  who  live  under  the  machinery  of  the  administration  of
that  government."   To resolve  the  benefit  of the  doubt  against
accused  persons  has  not  until  this  generation   been  an  ac-
cepted  feature  of  American  law.
Perpetual  Surveillance
The  co-sponsor  of  the  Mundt-Nixon bill  which later  became
the  McCarran  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950,  told  the  Senate
it  was  wrong  to  believe  tha'   the  security  check  was   about
over.   "It   will  never  be  entirely  completed,"  Mundt  declared.
"It  is  a  continuing  problem.   It   seems  to  me  that  we  must
always  have  machinery for  checking those  already  on the  job
because  individuals  may  change."   Mundt  said  some  persons
came  to  the  government  loyal  "but  later  switched  to  subver-
sive  attachments."   So we  are  to  have  a  system  of  perpetual
surveillance.  And  if  we are  to  detect  early  when  an  official  is
becoming  "subversive"  we must have  an  omnipresent  network
of  political  spies  and  secret  informers  to  eavesdrop  and  peep.'
Not  a  single  Democrat  other  than  the  two  sponsors,  Hum-
phrey  and  Stennis,  rose  to  say  a  word  in  favor  of the  resolu-
tion  during  discussion  of  it  in  the  Senate.   A  different  leader-
ship  in  a  different   atmosphere  would  never  have   permitted
passage  of  the  measure,  which  robs  the  Democratic  party of
what  might  have  been  a  campaign  issue  in  195G.  "Non-parti-
san"   treatment  will  prove  only  a   cover  for   a   Republican
whitewash.
The  terms  of  the  resolution  provide  that  the   Commission
must  be  evenly  divided  between  both  parties.   The  least  that
influential  liberal  Democrats  can  do is  to  see that  Sam  Ray-
burn,  in  picking  his  two  Democrats   (and  two  Republicans),
for  the  Commission appoints  a  few men with  the  insight  and
guts  to file a  strong  minority  report.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  4,1955
Now  That  Brownell Has  Dropped The  Charges  Against  Lattimore
A  Pity  McCarthy  and  Budenz Can't  Be Tried  for  Perjury
If  Owen  Lattimore  was  not  a  perjurer,  then  Joe  McCarthy
and  Louis  Budenz are;  it  is  a  pity  there  is  not  some  way  to
make  the  Senator  and  the  FBI  informant  stand  trial.    It  is
also  a  pity  there  is  no way to make  the  government  pay  dam-
ages when  it  puts  a  man to  endless  agony  and heavy  financial
cost,  then  decides  to  drop  the  charges  against  him.  The De-
partment of Justice  ought  not to  be allowed to  engage  in  gam-
bles   of  this .kind   at   other   people's   expense.   The   perjury
charge was an  obvious phoney from  the  start; the  government
did not dare indict him for  denying McCarthy's  charge  that he
was  the  top  No.  1 Soviet  spy  in  America or  Budenz's  unwill-
ing identification of Lattimore  as  a Communist under pressure
from  Robert  Morris, then counsel for the McCarran committee.
Why did  Brownell  decide to  drop the charge?   For  one thing
he  had  just  picked  a  Justice  Department   official,  Warren  E.
Burger, to fill the  vacancy on the  Court  of Appeals  here.   Had
the  government asked  for  a  rehearing  of  the  latest  4-4  deci-
sion,  Burger  would  have  had  to  disqualify himself.  Though
not  in  the  Criminal  Division,  Burger  helped  map  legal  strat-
egy  in  the  Lattimore case.  A second factor  is that  Simon  So-
beloff,  the  Solicitor  General, who refused  to  argue  the  Peters
case  in  the  Supreme  Court,  also  had  a  low  opinion  of  the
Lattimore  prosecution.  Thirdly, chances  of  a  successful   ap-
peal  to  the  Supreme  Court  were  slim.  Finally,  the  Chief  Jus-
tice  is  a  powerful  Republican  and  his general  attitude  toward
the  witch  hunt  may  have  had  some influence.   It  is  not  hard
to  imagine  someone  saying  at   the  White  House,  "When  is
Herb  [Brownell]  going  to  stop  making  a  fool  of  himself  in
that  Lattimore  case?"
Salute  to  Youngdahl
The  moral  and  psychological effect   of  the  victory   cannot
be  overestimated.  It  will  strengthen  resistance  to  the  witch
hunt;  give  teachers  elsewhere  more  courage;  strike   another
blow  at  the  fading  repute  of  all  who  ganged  up  at  the  China
lobby's  behest on  Lattimore.  The  legal  effect  is  to  discourage
investigating  committees from  carrying  on  idealogical  inqui-
sitions.   A  man's  opinion  of  whether  he  follows  Communist
party  line  or  not  cannot  be made  the  basis  of  a  perjury  in-
dictment.   The  fight  will  not  be over  until Lattimore  has  been
reinstated  in his teaching job at  Johns  Hopkins;  its  president
says  that  is  up  to  the  trustees,  who meet  in  September.   Jus-
tice  will  not  have  been  done  until  he  is  teaching  again.   And
for  this victory  a  salute  and  thanks  is  due  the  Lutheran  con-
science  of  lirave  Judjre  Youngdahl and  the  devotion  of  Latti-
more's   lawyers:   to   Thurman   Arnold,  Senator  O'Mahoney,
Abe  Fortas,  Paul  Porter  and  their  associates.   They  had  the
honor  to  fight  and  win  one  of  the  historic  battles  for   intel-
lectual  freedom  in   America.
New  Red  Thriller
The  day  after  the  Attorney  General  announced  the  Latti-
more  case  was  being dropped  the  same  committee  that  tried
to  get  Lattimore  for  perjury,  the  Internal  Security  Commit-
tee  of the  Senate,  set  off a  new  Red sensation.  Robert  Morris,
now  a  municipal judge  in  New York, came down to  watch  his
old committee  put  Winston  Burdett  of  CBS on the  stand  as  a
friendly  witness.  Burdett  told  an  exciting  story  of having  be-
come a  Communist while on the  Brooklyn  Eagle  and  of  going
abroad  as  a  Soviet  spy  to  Finland,  Iran  and  other   countries
before  he  broke  with  the  party  in  1942.   In  the  course  of  his
interrogation   he  volunteered  the  names  of  other   newspaper-
men,  including  two  now  on  the  New   York   Times,  whom  he
claims  to  have  known as  Communists.
The  hearing  was  billed  as  a  study  of  "Communist  exploita-
tion   of  the  press."   For   several   years,   the  Internal   Secu-
rity  Committee  and  later  the  McCarthy  committee have  been
promising  a  Red  hunt  into  the  American  press.   Budenz  at
the  time  of  the  first  hearings  in  which  Lattimore   was  men-
tioned  promised  a  list  of  200 "molders  of  opinion"  who  were
you-know-what  and  Matusow was  primed at  one time  to  show
that  there  were  more  Communists on  the  New   York   Times
than  the  Daily   Worker.   Journalistic  scuttle-butt   rightly  or
wrongly  gives  William Randolph  Hearst,  Jr.,  credit for  bring-
ing  pressure  on  McCarthy to  put  a  stop  to  these  shenanigans
as  a  menace  to  the  freedom  and  good  name  of  the  press.   (A
Journal-American   man  is  among  those  named  by   Burdett.)
But  with  Eastland  in  charge  the  situation  seems  to  have  got-
ten  out  of  hand.
Since  there  is  hardly  a  newspaper   in  America  which  does
not  have  a  Communist  or  ex-Communist  somewhere  on  its
staff,  an  inquiry  of  this  kind  could  have  wide   repercussions.
The  danger  to  freedom  of  the  press  is  obvious, but  the  weak
response  of  the  American  Society  of  Newspaper  Editors  to
McCarthy's  attack  on James  Wechsler  of  the  New  York   Post
and  the  general  silence  of  the  press—Wechsler included—on
the  deportation  of  another  McCarthy  victim,  Cedric   Belfrage
of  the  National   Guardian,  shows  how  little  resistance  there
is  among  the  editors.   There  is  one  obstacle,  however,  which
may  prove  fatal;  the  public is  bored  with  Reds.   If  Burdett,
who  confessed  all  to  the  FBI  in   1951,  and  has  been  on  ice
since,  had  told  his  story  in  1947,  he  like  Whitaker   Chambers
might  have  skyrocketed  to  fame  and  fortune.   The  market  is
not  what  it  used  to  be.
Tuh<"   Ailvanl<i»f   of  Our   Special   Six  Month  Introductory   Offer    at  Only   $2  to  Send  The   Weekly   to  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  :»oi E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
Please   renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City                                                 Zone            State
Enter gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)  Name .
Street
City                                              Zone           State..
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
7/4/55
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E. Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington   3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED