I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955dec19.pdf

============================================================

The  Pretense  That  President  Eisenhower Is  "Good  As  New" Wears Thin, See  Page  Three
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   No. 48
DECEMBER  19,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
That  "Millionaire  Radical"  His  Father  Would  Once  Have  Been Prime Target  for  A Witch  Hunt
An  Open  Letter  to  William   Randolph   Hearst,  Jr.
Dear  Mr.   Hearst:
Twenty  years  ago  your  father  brought  a  suit  here  in  the
District  of  Columbia  against  a  Senate  investigating  committee.
The  head  of  that  committee  was  Senator  Hugo  Black  of  Ala-
bama,  now a member  of  the  U.S.  Supreme Court.  On  the  prec-
edent  established  by that  once  famous  case  of  Hearst  v.  Black,
the  U.S.  Attorney  last week  asked  for  the  dismissal  of  the  sim-
ilar  test  suit  I  filed  against  the  Senate  Internal  Security  sub-
committee  under  Senator Eastland.
The  background  of  your  father's  suit  was  the  violent  cam-
paign  being  waged  by the  electric  power  companies  against  the
bill  which  was to  become  the  Public Utility Holding  Company
Act,  one  of  the  corner  stones  of  the  New  Deal.   A  flood  of
fake  telegrams  had  been  unloosed  on  Congress,  and  in  July
1935  the  Senate  established  a  special  committee  under  Black
with  full  power  to  investigate  "all  lobbying  activities"  in  con-
nection  with  the  pending  legislation,  and   "efforts   to  control
the  sources  and  mediums of  communication  and  information"
with  respect  to  it.   In  the  course  of  its  investigation,  the  com-
mittee obtained  from  the  Federal  Communications Commission
copies   of   a  mass  of   telegrams,   including   private   messages
which  had  passed  between  William  Randolph  Hearst  and  his
newspaper  executives.
The  Court  Refused  to  Enjoin
Hearst's  suit  did  not  question  the  Senate's  right  to  investi-
gate  these  lobbying  activities.  But  it  did  challenge  the  author-
ity  of  the  Federal  Communications Commission  to  make  avail-
able to the  Senate  committee  private  messages  passing  between
a  publisher  and  his  subordinates.   Hearst  asked  the  court  to
enjoin  the  Black  committee  from  keeping,  using  or  disclosing
these  messages.   He  denounced  their  seizure as  an  invasion  of
privacy  and  a  threat  to  freedom  the  press.   The  Court  refused
to  issue  the  injunction,  and  was  upheld  by  the  Court  of  Ap-
peals  which  said  "the  legislative  discretion  in  discharge  of  its
constitutional  functions,  whether  rightfully    or  wrongfully    ex-
ercised,  is not  subject to  judicial interference."  (Italics  added).
The  dismissal of  my own  suit  on  the  same grounds  is  a  cer-
tainty.  I  had  hoped  by it  to  put  the  Eastland committee on  the
defensive  in  the  courts.   The  suit was  pegged  on  a  $5  voucher
from  the  Senate  Internal  Security subcommittee  subscribing  to
my  Weekly  for  a year. The  subcommittee  could  hardly  be buy-
ing  my Weekly  to  read  the  box  scores or to  follow  my  hunches
on  the  3rd  race  at  Hialeah.  The  voucher  pin-pointed  the  sub-
committee's  morbid  interest  in watching  newspapers  and  other
publications  for  ideas  it  may  consider  dangerous  to  internal
security.   I  rejected  the  subscription  as an  unconstitutional  ex-
penditure  of public funds under  the First Amendment  and  filed
suit  for  a  declaratory  judgment  that  the  Internal  Security  sub-
committee  had  no  right  to  use  its  funds  and  staff  for   surveil-
lance  of  the  press,  and  enjoining  it  from  such  activities.
The  U.S.  Attorney's motion  to  dismiss did not  argue  that  the
subcommittee's  vague  powers  over  "internal  security"  gave  it
authority  to  police  the  press  for  "dangerous  thoughts."  Except
for  one  technical  point  (failure  to  allege  that  the  amount  in
controversy  exceeded $3,000), the U.S.  Attorney  confined  him-
self  to  arguing  that  under  the  law  as  established  in  Hearst  v.
Black, a  Senate committee cannot be  enjoined  even  if  acting  il-
legally.  On  that  point  I  am  about  to  be  tagged  out  before  I
get  to  first  base.
The  Publishers  Can  Stop  It
The  reason  I  appeal  to  you is not  for  help  in   rescuscitating
my  man-bites-dog effort,  though  there never was a larger,  mad-
der  dog  bitten  by  a  smaller  candidate  for  hydrophobia.    The
reason  for  the  appeal  is  that  the  Eastland  committee,  after  its
three  days  of  executive  hearings  in  New  York  last  week,  is  on
the  verge  of  open  circus  sessions  which  will  bring  the  news-
paper  business  and  newspapermen  fully  within  the  orbit  of
the kind  of  intimidation, slander and  guilt-by-association  which
has  disrupted  government  employment and  created  the  kind  of
scandals  your  papers  protested  only  recently  in  the  Landy  case.
As  a  newspaperman  I  am  appealing  from  the  courts  to  the
publishers.   I  believe  that  a statement  now from  the  publishers
of  a  few  leading  newspapers  would  be  enough   to  stop  the
witch hunt at the very  threshold  of  newspaper  business.   And  I
believe  you are in  an  ideal  position  to  take  the  lead  in  such  an
effort,  and  to  pick  up  the  cudgels  20  years  later  where  your
father   left  off  in  the  fight  for  freedom  of  the  press  on   the
other  side  of  the  fence.
What  I respectfully  suggest  is that  the  publishers  assert  their
right   to  run  their   business   free   from   inquisition;   that  they
declare  they will  not  fire  men  who  invoke  their   constitutional
rights  against  interrogation   about  their  political  ideas  and  as-
sociations  and  that  they  will  judge  their   employes   by  their
work  alone.   I  suggest  that  they  affirm  the  right  of   newspapers
and  newspapermen  to  be  free  from  ideological   inquiry  under
the  First  Amendment.   Freedom   of  the  press  can  easily  be
abridged  by  fear  of  being  smeared  in  the  public  pillory  of  a
Congressional  investigation.   I  believe  they'would  find  a  hearty
response from  a public fed up with  the witch hunt if  they were
to challenge  as unconstitutional  any effort  by Congress  to  decide
what  are dangerous  thoughts  and  police  the  press  against  them.
Pause  a  moment  and  think  back a half  century  and  you will
see what  Congress  could  have  done to  your  father  if  the  device
of  Congressional  inquisition  had  been  developed  before  World
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
195
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 19,1955
A Few Courageous Publishers Could  Save The  Press  From A Witch Hunt
(Continued   from   Page   One)
War  I.  When  he  ran  against  Charles  Evans  Hughes  for  Gov-
ernor  of  New  York  in  1906  he  was denounced  as  a  millionare
radical  and  a  stooge  of  the  "communistic"  Arthur   Brisbane,
then his  chief  editorial writer.  The  Hearst  papers  were  then  as
sharply  left  of  center  as were PM  and  the  Daily  Compass  in  the
New  York  of  the  '40s.   The  Hearst  paper  had  campaigned  for
many  of  the  reforms  urged  by  populists  and  socialists.    They
built  their  circulation  in  those  days  by  attacks  on  wealth  and
privilege.
Advocated   "Free  Love,"  Too
Your  father's  political  opponents   made  much  of  Brisbane's
origins.  He  was a kind  of  Landy  enlarged,  blamed  not  for  his
mother  but  his  father.   His  father,  Albert  Brisbane,  was  one
of   the   first   American   Utopian  socialists,   a   follower   of   the
Frenchman  Fourier,  who'proposed  to  abolish  not  only  private
property  but  marriage.  An  "internal  security"  committee  or  an
"Un-American  Activities"  committee  in  those  days would  have
found   the  Hearst  press,   its  publisher  and  its  chief   editorial
writer  easy  targets  for  sensational  smears.   Many  of  the  wisest
social  reforms  of  this  century,  notably  the  income  tax  amend-
ment  of   1913,   might  have  been  stymied  by  such  tactics.   Re-
member  that  in  those  days the  Hearst  papers  were agitating  for
this   amendment,   though   the  first  income  tax  had   been  at-
tacked   before  the  Supreme  Court  literally  as   "communistic"
and  thrown  out  as  unconstitutional.
The  Eastland committee  today cannot  even  claim  to  be going
after  the  radical  press.   The  main  target  of  its  hearings  last
week,  as you well  know,  was  the  New  York  Times,  independ-
Time  and  Newsweek   Hushed,  Too
Though   Time   and   Newsweek   pride   themselves   on
their  press  departments,  neither  one this  week  mention-
ed  the  biggest  news  in  newspaper  business—the  East-
land  committee  hearings  last  week  in  New  York  City
where  several  dozen  newspapermen  were  questioned  be-
hind  closed  doors,  presumably  as  "security  risks."   If
Senator  Eastland  has  his  way  public  hearings  will  fol-
low.  But  so far,  no daily  except  the  New  York  Post  has
protested  these  hearings   as  an  invasion  of  freedom  of
the  press,  and  the  two  big  news  weeklies  have  now
joined  the  ostrich  brigade.
ent  conservative,  and  picked  for  smear only  because  it  has  at-
tacked  McCarthy  and  McCarthy ism.  The  press  is to  be  taught
that  it  cannot  criticize  the  witch  hunters  with  impunity,  and
whether  this  succeeds  depends  basically  not  on  the  courts  but.
on  the  press  itself.   The  great  newspapermen  of  the  past  were
not  afraid  to  fight  even  against the  background  of  a hostile  cli-
mate  of  opinion.  But  today  the  public  has  had  enough  educa-
tion  in  the  extremist  follies  of   "security"   and   "loyalty"   to
make  it  ready  to  applaud  a  fight-back  by  the  publishers.
The  Hearst  press,  though  on  the  right,  has  not  tried  to  ex-
ploit  this  affair  against  its  competitors.   It  has  on  occasion,  as
in the  Landy  case, begun to speak  up  against these same abuses.
You  yourself  are  regarded  in  the  business  as  bringing  fresh
new  blood  into  the  old  Hearst  organization,  which  had  grown
stale.   Here  is  an   issue  on  which  you  could   step   out   and
make  newspaper  history.
Sincerely  yours,
I.  F.  Stone
Why  We Feel  Compelled to  Acquiesce  in  the  Government's  Motion  to  Dismiss  Our Suit
Does Hearst  y. Black  Mean  There  Is  No Remedy  Against  Congressional   Committees?
Does the  Hearst  v. Black  ruling  mean  that  newspapermen
or  other  citizens  have  no  remedy  against  unlawful  abuse  of
power  by  Congressional   committee?   No.   The  ruling  only
means  that  the  courts  will  not  interfere  with  the  legislative
process  by injunction.   The ruling  was that  it  would  violate
separation  of  powers  were  the  courts  to  interfere   with  the
legislature.
How,  then,  is  relief  possible?   Two years  ago  the  Circuit
Court  of  Appeals  here  reversed  the  conviction  of  a  profes-
sional  gambler   (Nelson  v.  U.S.,  208 F.  2d  505)  on  evidence
which  the  Kefauver  inquiry  obtained  illegally.   The  Court
ruled  that  while  under  Hearst  v.  Black  it  could not  enjoin
a  Congressional  committee  from  unlawful  conduct,  it  could
refuse  to  recognize  the  fruits  of  such  conduct.   Where  and
when  a  committee  must  go to  the  courts  to  enforce  its  will,
there  the  courts  have  the  right  to   interfere.
The  latest  and  most  authoritative  expression  of this  view
was  made  by  Chief  Justice  Warren  in  Quinn  v.  U.S.  last
May  23 when  in  reversing  a  conviction  for  contempt  of  the
House   Un-American  Activities   Committee  he  wrote:
"But   the  power  to  investigate,  broad  as  it  may  be,  is
also  subject   to  recognized  limitations.    It   cannot  be  used
to  inquire  into  private  affairs  unrelated  to  a  valid  legisla-
tive  purpose.   Nor  does  it  extend  to  an  area  in  which  Con-
gress  is  forbidden  to  legislate.   Similarly,  the  power  to  in-
vestigate  must  not  be  confused  with  any  of  the  powers  of
law  enforcement.  . . . Still  further  limitations  on the power
to  investigate  are  found  in  the   specific   individual  guar-
antees  of the Bill  of Rights. . . ."
Within  the  broad  area  sketched  out  by  the  Nelson  and
Quinn  decisions,  newspapermen  and  others  may  hope  suc-
cessfully   to  challenge   invasions  of  freedom   of  press   and
speech  by refusing  to  answer  unlawful  inquiry and  inviting
action  for   contempt.'
The  Logic  of  the   Rule
Why  not  allow  interference  by  injunction?   The  legisla-
tive process  could be disrupted  if  it  could  be interfered  with
directly   by  judicial  orders.    Though  there  may   be   mar-
ginal  cases  in  which  interference  by injunction with  a  legis-
lative  committee  is  justified,  the  rule  of  Hearst   v.  Black
generally   seems  to  be  sound  law  and   good  public  policy.
The  consequences of  the  opposite  rule  would  be  too  danger-
ous,  creating  more  evils  than  it  would  correct.
The  New  Deal  had  enough  trouble  with  suits  to  declare
its  basic reforms  unconstitutional.   It  might  have  been hope-
lessly  hamstrung   if   powerful   interests  could  have  inter-
fered  by  injunction in  the  very  process  of  legislative  hear-
ings  and  debate.   Believing  as  we  do  that  the  law  is  not
just  a  debater's  bag  of  tricks,  containing  doctrines   to  be
cynically  utilized  or  abandoned  as  immediate  interest  dic-
tates,  we  cannot  go  into  court  and  oppose  the  government
on  a  point  with   which,  after   careful   study  of  the  cases
cited,  we  find  ourselves  in  agreement.
On  this  ground,  and  this  ground  alone,  that  injunction
under  these  circumstances   would  be  an  improper   remedy,
we  are  acquiescing in the  motion to  dismiss  our suit  against
the  Eastland  committee.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, December 19,1955
Capital  Roundup:  Is  A  New  Trend  Toward  Armed  Isolationism  Ahead?
Washington's  First  Glimpse  of  the  President  "Since"  Is  Disturbing
President   Eisenhower:  The  pretense  that  he  is  "good   as
new"  wore thin  -with his  reappearance  last  week in  Washing-
ton.   A  combination  of  kindness  and  political  expediency  has
been  holding  back  the  full  truth  about  his  condition.  Those
who  saw him here  last  Monday  at  the  reception  for  the  Uru-
guayan  President  were  disturbed.   He  looked well for  a  man
who had just come through a heart attack—but  overnight  the
years had  caught  up with  him. As an  elder  statesman  he may
play  a  useful  role  and  enjoy  well-deserved years  of  retirement
but  he  did not  look  like  a  man  who ought  to  risk  the  strains
if  a  political  campaign  and  the  Presidency.
Why  Moscow  "Surrendered"   on  Outer  Mongolia: The  sud-
den  last  minute  shift  cost  the  Russians  little.  They  will  now
have nine votes instead  of ten.  But  the  shift  has  cost  the  U.S.
the  easy  veto  it  wielded  in the  past on issues requiring a two
thirds  vote.   In  the  original  Assembly  of  51  votes,  17  were
enough for  this "veto" but in  the new Assembly of 76, the  U.S.
would  have to muster  26 votes—and the  entire  Western  Hem-
isphere  (which  does  not  always  agree  with  us)  has  only 22.
On  the  other  hand,  a  combination  of  Soviet,  Asian-African
bloc and "neutralist" states will now be big enough to  wield a
veto  of its  own.  By swallowing its  pride and  giving  up  Outer
Mongolia  temporarily  (until  a  "swop"  is  arranged  for  its  ad-
mission  with Japan)  the  Soviet  Union has  changed the  politi-
cal  complexion of  the  UN,  which  now emerges into  an  era  of
greater  independence. This  will  make  itself  felt  next  year  in
new  crises  to  be  expected  over  Indochina,  Formosa  and  the
admission  of  Peking.
Back to the Arms Race:  With  the  President's weight  absent
from  the  precarious  scales  of  policy,  the  shift  is  back  to  the
arms  race.  The  cave-man  mind  in  the  electronics  era  now
reaches  for  the intercontinental  ballistic  missile  as a  new  "ul-
timate" weapon.  If  we succeed  in making  it,  we will make the
task  of  disarmament and  control almost  hopeless and  frighten
ourselves  into  the  psychology of  the  garrison  state.  The Mis-
sile,  by  freeing  us  from   dependence  on  foreign  air   bases,
would  also  free  us  from  the  need for  taking  into  account  the
more  sober  and  often  restraining  views  of  our  allies.   Add
this  trend  to  the  new independence of  the  UN  and  a  revival
of  isolationist  tendencies  is  in  the  cards.
New  Far  East  Crisis:  Senator  George has been warning  for
some time that  there  was  danger  of  a  new  flare-up  unless  we
agreed  to  negotiations  with  Peking  at  the  only  level  which
would  mean  anything,  Dulles  and  Chou  En-lai.   But  Dulles,
closer  to  Knowland than  Eisenhower  anyway,  would  rather
risk  war  on  the  Formosa  straits  than  trouble  at  home  with
Republican  rightists  and  with  Democrats  anxious  to  accuse
the  G.O.P.  (for  a  change)  of  "softness"  toward  Communism.
The expectation  of trouble  explains  the  hurried visit  of  Secre-
tary  of  the  Army Brucker  to  Quemoy  and  the  Cook's tours  of
the  island  being arranged  by  Chiang for  U.S.  press  and  mili-
tary.
Dulles  and  Goa:  Real  explanation  for  his  folly  on  Goa  is
that  the  statement  was  issued  to  sweeten  up  Portugese   For-
eign  Minister  Cunha.  The  agreements  which  allow  the  U.S.
to  maintain  and  man  bases  in  the  Azores  begin  to  expire
Bon  Voyage   and  Bon  Cold  War
Bon  Voyage,  and  "Bon   Cold  War":   "In  advance  of
his  departure   this  afternoon   [for  Paris  and  the  NATO
meeting]  Mr. Dulles  was  reported   confident.  .  .  . The
'ast-West  deadlock   at  Geneva,  he  believes,  will  serve
new  impetus  for  the  15  allies  to  stick  together,  re-
sing what  he saw as a  growing  trend  toward   disunity
-  to  the  Geneva  conference  with  the  Russians."
—Washington   Evening  Star,  December   IS
Lattimore   Emerges  Fighting
From  'Ordeal  by   Slander
5
"It  is  ironic  that  because  of  the  fear  which  has  re-
sulted  in  so much  and  such fantastic  re-writing  of  the
recent  history  of  China,  and  our  relations  with   China,
my  Tightness   has  in  recent  years  received   much  less
consideration   than  my  alleged  wrongness.    The  most
fantastic  thing  of  all  is  that  the  one thing  on  which  I
was  really  wrong  was  either  never  mentioned at  all,  or
perverted  into  its  exact  opposite.   I  mean  my  slowness
in  realizing  that  Chiang  Kai-shek's  palace  guard  and
his  own  increasing  megalomania  had  pulled  him  down
from  the  high  place  that  he  had  once  occupied  as  the
symbol  of  China  and a  great figure of freedom  in  Asia;
that,  as  the  Chinese put  it,  he was  losing  the  mandate
of  heaven.  That  is  a  salutary   reminder  that  there  is
often  more danger  of being stabbed  in  the  back  by  hired
assassins  than  of  honorable  wounds inflicted in  battle."
—Owen  Lattimore,  speaking  on  "Fear  and  Foreign
Policy,"   before    the  annual  Bill   of  Rights   dinner
held  by  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Committee
in  New  York  December 15,  his  first  public  speech
since   the   government   abandoned   its   attempt   to
"get"  him  on  perjury  charges.
next  year.  After  Dulles  took  Portugal's  side  on  Goa,  Cunha
issued   a   statement   saying   that  his   country   was   willing
to   negotiate   extension   of   these   agreements.     We   defend
colonial  bases  in  Asia  in  order  to  keep  our  own  "colonial"
bases  in  West  Europe.
Otto John:  Most reasonable  explanation  is that he fled West
Germany  in  protest  against  the  increasing  influence  of  ex-
Nazis  and militarists, and then fled back  from  East Germany
because  he  couldn't  stand  the  suffocating  atmosphere  of  the
Soviet  satellite  regime  there.   The  chief   Communist  party
paper,  Neues  Deutschland,  provided  a  glimpse  of  what  has
been  happening   when  it   complained—just   before  the  new
John  sensation—of  a  mass  emigration  of  intellectuals   from
the  East  zone.  The place  is comfortable only for  party  hacks,
and  the  kind  of  yes-men  who  thrive  under  any  dictatorship,
right  or  left.
As Variety  Would Put  It:  Congressman  Walter's latest  laid
an  egg  as  a  road  show.   The  House  Un-American  Activities
Committee  chose  Chicago  for  the  debut  of  its  long  expected
public  testimony  by  Herbert  Fuchs  that  there  were Commu-
nists in NLRB and other  New Deal agencies is hardly  news by
now.  The real  news is that even the  Chicago  Tribune  couldn't
work  up any excitement  over  it  and  printed  the  story  on page
12.  This  is  an  important  index  of  the  current  climate.   The
Washington  press  played the  story  on page  one because  of  the
local names but  in New York, like Chicago, it  ran  into  heavily
diminishing  returns.   Hearst's  Mirror  didn't   even  run   the
story;  the  Daily  News  squeezed it  in  under  Smilin'  Jack  on
page  52;  it  was  on page  12 of the  Herald-Tribune  and  page 30
of  the  New  York  Times. The  House committee  may  be cheered
to  learn  that  it  did  get  a  good  play  in  the  Daily   Worker.
Amnesiac  Footnote:  After  that  speech  of  George  Meany's
attacking  Nehru  and  Tito  abroad,  and  the  liberals  at  home,
we find it hard to remember just what  was that hot  encounter
he  had  at  the  NAM.  Was  he  too far  right  for  them?
Hat's Off: To John  Henry  Faulk  who organized  and  carried
to  victory  in  AFTRA  a  middle-of-the-road  slate  dedicated  to
fighting the radio-TV blacklist and AWARE,  Inc.
The  Weekly  is  published 48 weeks  a year.  It  does  not  go
to  press  the  last  two  Thursdays  in  August   or  December.
We  sign  off   now  for  Christmas  vacation.
1  9  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, December 19,1955
The  Forgotten  C.0.'s  and  How Times  Have  Changed  the  Connotations of  the  Name "Ford"
Some  Thoughts  Sweet  and  Sour  for  the  Christmas  Season
The happiest  thought  we can contribute  for  the  New Year:
Henry  Ford  in  the  20's  was  threatened   with  a  boycott  for
supporting  the   dissemination   of  anti-Semitic   and   Fascist
propaganda.   His  grandson  in  the  50's  is  being  threatened
with  a  boycott  by  rightists  because  Ford  money   established
the  Fund  for  the  Republic  and  made  possible  the  wonderful
work  it  has  been  doing  in  defense  of  civil  liberties.   Thirty
years  ago the  money of  a  great  industrial  genius  was  slipped
out  the  back  door  to  support  that  hate  sheet,  the  Dearborn
Independent.    Today  a  hate  sheet  urges  people  not  to  buy
Fords  because  of  the  Fund  for  the  Republic.   So  there  is
change  for  the  better  and  if  politics  is to play  a  part  in  car-
buying,  we  can  think  of  no  finer  reason  for  trading  in  our
old  jalopy  for a  Ford.    ...
We  can  forgive  Henry  Ford  2d for  the  crumb  of  appease-
ment  he has  offered  the  American Legion and  other  extremist
groups  by  saying  in  a  private  letter  that  maybe  the  Fund
has  taken  some  actions  "dubious  in  character"  which  led  in-
evitably  to  "charges  of  poor  judgment."   In  a  free  and  demo-
cratic  country,  whoever  depends  on  a  mass  market,   whether
a  politician  or  a  business  man,  is  inexorably  pushed  toward
a  common denominator  which  leaves  him  with  little  freedom
to do or  say  anything  to which any  sizeable  minority  strongly
objects.  But need the Ford family apologize because along  with
its  munificent  gift  of  a  half  billion  dollars  to  hospitals  and
schools,  it  also  established  a  Fund  with  $15,000,000 to  defend
the   Bill   of   Rights,  which   even   American   Legion   orators
admit  is a not unimportant  national  possession?  . . .
Nothing  seems to  us  more important  in  the  preservation  of
a  humane  society  than  to break  up  as many as  possible of the
encrusted  stereotypes which breed  hatred  and  misunderstand-
ing.   In  this  I  include  not  only  the  stereotypes  of  the  other
side  but  our  own.   So  here  we  have  the  spectacle  of  one  of
America's  biggest capitalist fortunes  setting  up a  Fund which
has  helped  defend  the  rights  of  anti-capitalist  radicals—and
is  attacked  for  it  by unthinking  grass  roots  elements—while
the  great majority  of the  common  people are  largely   indiffer-
ent  to  the  fate  of  the  fundamental  traditions  on which  their
freedom  depends.  Some people so hate to have their neat little
black-and-white   maps  of  the  world  disturbed  that  they  will
consider  me  downright  mischievous  to  dwell  on  a  spectacle
•which  so little  fits  the  cliches  of  democratic  and  Leftist   ora-
tory.   But  I  cannot  imagine  a  better  subject  for  our  medi-
tations  in the Christmas   season.  . . .
And  while  we're  on  the  subject  and  since  this  is  our  last
issue  of  1955  (we  only  publish  48  weeks  a  year  and  do  not
go to press  the last two Thursdays  in  August  and December),
we'd  like to  say a  word for  the  conscientous  objectors.  A  dele-
Those  Poor  Little  Pigs  Again
When  Senator  Hickenlooper,  solidly  Republican  and
Iowa,  came  up  last  week  with  the  proposal  that   the
government  raise  pork  prices  by  buying  little  pigs  for
slaughter,   an  enterprising   Associated  Press   reporter
remembered  what  happened after  the  New  Dealers  did
this  in  1933  and  telephoned  Henry  Wallace  for  com-
ment.   Since  most  editors  spiked  the  story  we  provide
the  gist  of  it  here  for  a  chuckle.
Maybe  so  few  papers  ran  the  story  because  Wallace
was  untactful enough to  recall  that  Midwestern Repub-
licans  initiated  the  pig  buying  program  22  years  ago.
He  advised  against  it  now,  even  though the  pork  were
again  given  to  the  needy.
Wallace  said  the  program  would  be  hopelessly   mis-
represented   and  it  was  better   not  to  run  counter  to
popular  mythology.   "More  crocodile  tears   were  shed
about  those  sweet  little  pigs,"  he  told  the  AP  man,
"than  about  any  animals  in  history.   It  so happens  that
the  city  public looks  on  the  pig  as  a  merry  little  crea-
ture  who  goes tripping along  singing,  'Who's  Afraid of
the  Big  Bad  Wolf   and  living  to  a  ripe  old  age  as  a
household   pet."    We  wonder  at   that   how  many  city
folks   unconsciously  imagine  the   hen  lays   the  bacon
along  with  the  eggs.
gation  of  them  picketed  the  White  House  last  week-end  but
nobody paid  them any  mind, and  though  the  Associated  Press
sent  out  a  stick  and  a  half  on the  story  I  didn't  see it  any-
where  but  the  York,  Pa.,  Gazette  and  Daily,  still  the  shiny
candle  in  the  naughty  world  of  American  journalism.    The
Voice of America continues to  explain how We  (unlike Them)
build  our  society  on tender  concern for  individual conscience.
But  it  was  a  bit  of  a  surprise  even  to  us  to  learn  that  there
are  still  nearly  13,000  men  who have  yet  to  be  pardoned  for
refusing  to  take  up  arms  in  the  last  war  on  the  grounds  of
religious or moral  scruple.  Harry  Truman  at  Christmas  time
in   1947  pardoned  about   1500  but   nothing   has   been  done
since  to  lift  the  bars  which  consign  C.O.'s  to  second  class
citizenship  as  unpardoned  felons.   Since  1947  was  also  the
beginning  of  the  cold  war  in  which  all  good  Christians  were
called  upon  to hate  their enemy and  pay  higher  taxes to  smite
him  back  twain  with  A  and  H  bombs in  case  of  trouble,  this
may  explain  why  no  more  C.O.'s  have  been  pardoned.   We
suppose  it  didn't  seem  logical  to  encourage  conscientous  ob-
jection  by  pardoning  those  guilty  of  it  in  the  last  war  when
we were  getting ready  for  a new one.
Next  Issue of  The  Weekly   Will  Be  Jan. 9—Till  Then  We  Wish  You  A  Merry  Christmas and  A  Happy   New  Year
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name
Street
City                                           Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(to)    Name
Street
City                                        .Zone.         State
*  extra  for  Canada.                                               12/19/55
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED