I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jun06.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive;   "Mr.  China  Lobby"  Kohlberg  Complains Red  China  Trade  Embargo  Unfair,  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    HI,  NO.  21
JUNE  6,  1955
»
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Will  The  South  Fire  on  Fort  Sumter  Again?
Chief  Justice Warren,  like  Jackson  and  Lincoln before  him,
is  moving  toward  a  showdown  with  the  State  of  South  Caro-
lina.   But where Jackson and  Lincoln could call out  troops,  the
Supreme  Court  must  rely  on  the  intangible  of  respect  for  law.
The  decision  Warren  handed  down  for  a  unanimous court  in
the  segregation  cases is disappointing, but  understandable.  The
Chief  Justice  is  pressing  hard  for  de-segregation,  but  wants  to
avoid  a  frontal  collision with  the  intransigeants  of  the  South.
He  aims  to  give  the  racists  space  and  time  for  retreat  rather
than  risk driving them into a corner where they might turn  and
impair  the  Court  by demonstrating  its  impotence.  So the  Chief
Justice  carefully  avoided  putting any  deadline  in  the  new deci-
sion,  indeed  decided  even  against  a  formal  decree.
There is this  much to  be  said for  Warren  and  his  colleagues
when   measured   against  the   earlier   crises  on  the   tariff   and
slavery.    Jackson  was  much  milder  in  public  than  in  private.
While  the  Union  was upheld,  the  tariff  to  which  South  Caro-
lina  and  the  other  cotton  States  objected  was reduced.    Lincoln
and  the  Republicans  went  further.    In  their  effort  to  avoid  a
sectional  conflict,  they  put  through  Congress  in  March  1861  a
constitutional   amendment  which  would   have  forbidden   the
Federal   government   ever   to  abolish   slavery.     Jackson   and
Lincoln  were  both  "appeasers"  by  contrast  with  Warren.    In
the  face  of  threats  from  the  South  to  abolish  public  schools
altogether,  the  Supreme Court  has  reaffirmed  "the  fundamental
principle  that  racial  discrimination  in  public  education  is  un-
constitutional"   and   declared  that   "all   provisions  of   federal,
state  or  local  law  requiring  or  permitting  such  discrimination
must  yield  to  this  principle."    This  is  no  surrender.
If  "Forthwith"   Was  Disobeyed?
The  NAACP  and  the  CIO  had  urged  the  Court  to  order
compliance   "forthwith."      The   Department   of   Justice   had
counseled  a more  moderate course.   It  suggested  that  the  cases
be remanded to the lower  courts with a decree  requiring the de-
fendant  States  to  submit within  90  days "a  plan  for  ending,  as
soon  as feasible,  racial  segregation of  pupils in  public schools."
Were  no  plan  submitted  and  approved,  the  lower  courts  were
"forthwith"   to  order  "admission   of  the  plaintiffs  and  other
children  similarly situated  to  non-segregated  public  schools  at
the  beginning  of  the  next  school  term."   The  Court  apparently
was  afraid  to  go  that  far.   What  would  happen  if  a  "forth-
with"  order  was  disobeyed?    How  would   the  order  be  en-
forced  in  sections  of  the  country where  the  courts,  the  Federal
marshals,  the  press  and  the  dominant  whites  are  in  favor  of
segregation?     How  much  would  respect  for  law  count?
So  the  court  decided  that  discretion  was  the  better  part  of
adjudication.    They  did  not  even  order   the  immediate  com-
plainants  admitted  to  school,  as a kind  of  token  first  payment.
Instead  they  remanded  the  cases  to  the  district  courts  with  in-
structions  "that  the  defendants make a  prompt  and  reasonable
start  toward  full  compliance  with  our  May  17,  1954   ruling."
Once  a  start  has  been  made,  an  extension  of  time  may  be  al-
lowed  but  the  burden  will  be  upon  the  defendants  "to  estab-
lish  that  such  time  is  necessary  in  the  public  interest  and  is
consistent  with  good  faith  compliance  at  the  earliest  possible
date."   The  Court  retains  jurisdiction and  the  South  Carolina,
Virginia  and  Kansas  cases  were  heard  by  three  judge  special
statutory  courts  from  which  a  direct  appeal  to  the  Supreme
Court  is  provided.    The  Supreme  Court  avoids  a  direct  show-
down  at  the  price  of  allowing  considerable  foot-dragging.    Its
strategy  is  to  wear  down  the  opposition  slowly.   While  prog-
ress  is  made  in  the  border  States,  the  Southern  States  will  be
shamed  into  action  and  slowly  harried  by  litigation  to  defeat.
So the  Justices  no  doubt  hope.
White  Man's  Court
This  inglorious  Fabian  strategy  is hardly  on  a  level  with  the
constitutional  and  equitable  principles the  Court  invokes.   But
this  is  a  white  man's  court  in  a  white  man's  country,  striving
to  carry out  successfully the  most  difficult  kind  of  revolution—
the  destruction  of  old  habits  and  cherished hates,  on  behalf  of
a  minority, against  a majority.   The  idol  of  our  time, the  Com-
mon  Man,  is  the  despot  here.    Few  in  the  North  were  con-
cerned  about  slavery  and  few  are  concerned  about  segregation,
though   it  begins   to  burn  the  brand  of  inferiority  into   the
Negro  child  from  the  day he  enters  a  separate  school  whether
in  the  segregated  South  or  in  the  "unsegregated"  North.   Fos-
tered  racial  inferiority  pays  off  for  the  white  man  North  and
South  by holding  the  Negro  down  to  menial  jobs  and  menial
wages.    Not  social  conscience  but  the  growing and  often  deci-
sive  power   of   the  marginal  Negro  vote  is  reflected  in   the
decision.     Against   that   background,   it   is   an  achievement.
This  perspective,  coming  from  a white man, may seem  smug
to  a  black.   Why  must  his children  wait on  a  "creeping  equal-
ity?"    The  racially lopsided  "option"  system in  the  District  of
Columbia  schools shows  how  readily  de-segregation  may be  de-
feated  and  delayed  in  the  absence  of  some more  specific  direc-
tion  from  the  Supreme  Court.   The  brief  amicus  curiae  by  the
State   of   Florida   disclosed   the   ingenuity  with  which   some-
Southern  legalists  are  already planning  to  nullify  (he decision
without  appearing  to  disobey  it.   A generation of  heartache, of
costly  appeal,  interminable  litigation  and  tortuous   argument,
may  easily  be  foreshadowed  by  the  Court's  politic  vagueness.
But  it  is our  prediction  that  in  the  end  Southern intransigeants
will  speed  up  the  process  by some burst of  folly  so blatant that
it  will  mobilize  against  them  the  indifferent  white  majority.
At  the  very  moment  the  abolitionists  were  in  despair  over  the
betrayal  of  their  hopes  by  Lincoln,   it  was  the  South  which
opened  fire  on  Fort  Sumter.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  6,1955
Major  Dent  in  America's  Own  Iron  Curtain:  Einstein  Executor  Wins  Suit
State  Dept.  (First  Time  in  History)   Ordered   to  Issue   Passport
America's  own  iron  curtain  is  in  process  of  being  dented.
On  June   1,  Federal  District  Judge  Henry  A.  Schweinhaut
signed  the  first  passport  order  of  its  kind  in  American  his-
tory.     Declaring  angrily,   "The   State   Department   cannot
overrule  the  Supreme  Court,"  Judge   Schweinhaut  ordered
Secretary   of  State  John  Foster  Dulles  immediately  to  issue
Dr.  Otto  Nathan  a passport  "of  the  standard  form  and  of  the
standard  duration."   An  appeal  was  at  once  taken  to the  Cir-
cuit  Court  by  the  State  Department,  for  if  Judge  Schwein-
haut's  order  is  upheld  the  Department's  arbitrary,  dilatory
and  secretive  passport  practices  must  be  drastically  revised.
The  economist Dr. Nathan  has  been  trying  for  two years  to
get  a  passport  and  for  two months to make the  State  Depart-
ment  obey  an  earlier  order  of  Judge   Schweinhaut's  for   a
genuine  hearing  on  his  passport  appeal.    On  May  19 he filed
an  additional  affidavit  in  support  of  a  motion to  adjudge  the
Secretary  of  State  in  contempt.   This  pointed  out  that  Dr.
Nathan  was  sole executor of Einstein's  will  and  in this  capac-
ity  wanted  to  attend  the  Jubilee of  Relativity  Theory  Confer-
ence  in  Switzerland  in  July.
Einstein  Made  No  Difference
This  new factor  was  not  without  effect  on  the  Court.   The
State Department refuses passports  for  travel  in  cases  where
it  thinks  a  trip  abroad  would  not  be  in  the  public  interest.
Dr.  Nathan's  inability to  attend  the  jubilee  would  create  an
international  scandal.   Judge  Schweinhaut asked  the  Depart-
ment  of  Justice  attorney  handling  the  case  for  the  State De-
partment,  "Does  the fact  that  Nathan  has  been  named execu-
tor  of  Einstein's  estate  make any  difference  to  the  State De-
partment?"    Counsel  for   the  government  answered  lamely,
"Your  Honor  ...    I  have  not heard  anything  from  the  State
Department  that  would  make  any  difference."
The  Nathan  case,  argued  by  Leonard  Boudin  of  New  York
and  Joseph  Forer  of  Washington, promises to  become  a  mile-
stone  in  the  long  battle  to  make the  State  Department  obey
the   Bauer   decision   (10G  F.   Supp.  445).    This   test   case,
brought  by the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union, decided  three
years  ago  that  the  State  Department  could  not  deny  or  re-
voke  a  passport  without  a  real   hearing.
Dr.  Nathan's  lawyers  contend  the  hearing  offered   by  the
Department  does not  give the  applicant the  right  to know the
precise  charges  against  him, or  to confront and  cross-examine
hostile  witnesses.   Government counsel again  admitted before
Judge  Schweinhaut  last   Wednesday  that  "confidential  ma-
terial"  was  used  which  "could  not  be  disclosed  to  the  appli-
cant  or  his  counsel."   The  Judge  thereupon decided  this  did
not  constitute a  real  hearing, that  his  order  of  last  March 15
had  not  been  obeyed  and  issued  a  new  order  requiring  the
Department  to  give ,Dr.  Nathan  a  passport  immediately.
The  passport  division has  been  having  a  hard  time  of  it.
In   April   a   House  Appropriations  subcommittee  released
testimony  showing  that  Livingston  T.  Merchant,  Assistant
Secretary   of  State  for  European  Affairs,  had  testified  that
Russia  was  having  "some  success"  in  Europe  and  Asia  with
a  campaign  to  blame  the  U.  S. for  "maintenance  of  an  Iron
Curtain  between  the  East  and  West."    Mr.  Merchant  said
the  Russians  had  adopted  a  new  policy  of  permitting  more
visitors  to  enter  and  allowing more  Russians  to  leave.
Cain  Scared   Them
Early  in  May  former  Senator  Harry  P.  Cain  of  the  Sub-
versive  Activities Control Board threw a fright  into the  pass-
port  division  by  appearing  at  a  hearing  on  behalf  of  a  65-
year-old  retired  Interior  Department  employe who  had  been
denied  a  passport  to  attend  the  World  Congress  of  Pytha-
goreans  in Athens  in July.    (Pythagoras  was  considered sub-
versive  2500  years  ago.)     Like  Dr.  Nathan,  Mrs.  Gale  had
signed  a  non-Communist  affidavit  but  had  been  denied a  pass-
port  on  a  variety  of  charges,  including  one that  she  had  put
up  Scott  Nearing  at  her  home  overnight!   At  the  end  of  the
hearing,  the  passport  officer  was  so  flustered  by  Cain's  pres-
ence  that  he  decided  there   and  then  that  no  appeal  was
necessary.    The  woman received  her  passport  next  day.
Lattimore  Got  His  Passport
On  May  20, the  Department  after  weeks  of  delay  issued  a
passport  for  Owen  Lattimore and  his wife just  in time to make
it  possible  for  him  to  keep  a  speaking  date  at  Oxford,  the
first  of  a  series  scheduled  for  him  by  European  universities
and  learned  societies.   Fear  of  court  action, and  unpleasant
publicity  at  home and  abroad, seems in that  case to have  out-
weighed fear  of  the  China lobby crowd in  Congress who have
long  been  hounding  the  famous  scholar  and  writer.
Finally  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  will  within  a
few  days file a  series  of  test  suits  in  the  District  of  Columbia
against  the  passport  division;   Patrick  M. Malin,  the ACLU's
executive  director,  released   correspondence with  Scott  Mc-
Leod  turning  down  its  request  for  a  conference  on  passport
and  visa  problems.   Malin  claims that  the  Department's  reg-
ulations    actually    discriminate    against   non-Communists,
"since  apparently  only  persons  accused  of  Communism  have
a  right  to  appeal  to  the  Passport  Appeals  Board;  persons
denied  passports  for  other  reasons  have no right whatsoever
to  appeal  to  the  Board."   We hope  shortly  to  provide a  sum-
mary  of  the  ACLU correspondence and  cases.   "Thanks  to  a
rising  volume of  suits  and  protests,  Americans whose views
the  Department  dislikes  may  yet  recover  the  right  to  travel.
Diplomatic  Follies  at  Foggy  Bottom  *
How  the  State  Dept.  Reacted  to  Its  First  Passport  Order
Q.  Henry, is  the  Department  going  to  comply  with  Judge
Schweinhaut's  order  to  issue  a  passport  to  Dr.  Nathan  over
the week-end?
A.  I  can  make  no  comment  on that  subject  at  all.
Q.  Has   the   Department   been  officially   notified   of  this
matter?
A.  I  cannot comment.
Q.  Do  you  expect  to  be^able  to  comment later,  perhaps,
on  it?
A.  I  cannot  discuss it.
Q.  Henry,  has  he  been  given  a  hearing  on  his   passport
application?
A.  I  cannot  discuss it.
Q.  Will  the  Department  comply  with  this  order?
A.  I  said  I  could  make  no  comment  on  it.
Q.  Has  there  been any  precedent  where the  State  Depart-
ment  has  been  given  a  court  order  to  do something?
A.  I  can  make  no  comment  on  this  order  at  all.
Q.  Is  it  a  question  of  security  which  prevents  any  com-
ment  on  your  part?
A.  That  will  have  to  be left  at  the  moment to  the  discre-
tion  of  the   Department.
—Daily   press   briefing   with  State  Dept.      official
spokesman,  May  27.
* The area  in which the  State Department building is now
located  at  24th  and  Virginia  Avenue,  Washington,  D.  C.,
was  known  locally  as  "Foggy  Bottom."    Rarely  has   any
official  area  been  so  aptly  named  in  advance.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  6,1955
Washington  Less  Happy  in  Private  than  Public  About  Eden's  Victory
Dramatic   Offer   of  Settlement   in  Far  East  Now   Expected
Dramatic  changes  are  in  the  offing  in  the  Far  Bast.    What
Krishna  Menon  seems  to  have  sold  Peking  was  the  idea  of
"internationalizing"    the   Formosan   crisis.     The  UN  would
take  over from  the  U. S. the  task  of protecting  Formosa,  thus
saving  Washington's  face.   There  would  be  a  cease-fire  and  a
promise  not  to  attack  the  island.    But  with  the  UN  rather
than  the  U.  S.  in  control,  Peking  could  be  satisfied  that  the
island  would no  longer  be used  as  a  hostile  base  and  the  way
would  be  cleared  for  the  eventual  liquidation  of  the  Chiang
regime  by  a  plebiscite  or  some similar  device.   Peking, by co-
operating  with  the  UN, would  clear  the  way to  its  admission.
This  prospect,  much  welcomed  in  London  and  Paris,  has
created  gloom in  Washington.   Here  a  strong  sector  of mili-
tary  opinion, though  indifferent  to  Chiang's fate  and  against
war  with  China, wants  nonetheless  to  hold  on to  Formosa  as
a  U.  S.  base.    At  this  point  Chiang's  partisans  and  most  of
the   Pentagon  find  common  ground.    The  military   and  the
dominant  forces  at  State,  especially  Dulles,  are  opposed  to
any  "relaxation  of tension"—the former see it  as  a  menace to
military  budgets,  the  latter  believe the  longer  a  settlement  is
delayed,  the  harder  the  bargain  which the  Soviet  bloc  can  be
driven  to  accept.    So there  is  no  jubilation here  over  the  re-
lease  of  the  four  fliers;  poisonous stories  are  "leaked"  to  fa-
vored  reporters  about  Menon being  pro-Communist and  being
built  up  deliberately  by  Peking,  etc.    And  the  President  was
primed  to  cast doubt on the  motives of the  release  and to  sug-
gest  that  we  would  not  give  up  Quemoy  and  Matsu.    Wash-
ington  is  fighting  a  rear  guard  action  against  a  settlement.
In  this  situation  the  State  Department  regards Sir Anthony
Eden and the  British  election with  a dour eye.   Our press  out-
did  itself  in  nonsense  about  both.   The  election  itself   was  a
typical  postwar   "normalcy"  affair,  with  little  to  choose  be-
tween  the  two parties and the  electorate  indifferent  to  politics
in  its  general  contentment  with  recovery.    But  just  as  both
parties  are  (reluctantly)  committed  to  German  rearmament
so both  are  (enthusiastically)  committed to  four  power  talks.
In  this  Eden, especially  an  Eden strengthened  by  the  election,
will  be  more  difficult  for  Washington  to  handle than  a  Labor-
ite.    Eden  is  blamed  here  rather  than  Churchill for blocking
action  at  Dienbienphu last  year,  and  Dulles  came  back  from
Bangkok  disturbed   because   Eden  favors  restoring  Quemoy
and  Matsu  as part  of a  cease-fire.   Eden  is  also,  unlike  Dulles,
for  "substantive"  talks  at  the  summit  conference.   Histori-
cally,  Britain's  Tories,  though  less  vocal  about  it,  have  been
more  independent  of  the   U.  S.  than  the   Laborites,   despite
their  Bevanite  fringe.   Sir  Anthony, it  is  feared  here,  intends
some  vigorous  brokerage  for  peace  in  both  Europe  and  Asia.
While  the  European  press  went  too  far  in  inferring  from
Eisenhower's  remarks  two weeks  ago  that  he  might  favor  an
armed  neutral  Germany,  it  is  also  wrong  to  assume  that  the
U. S. is  firmly  committed  against  such  a  solution.   The Dulles
press conference  on this subject  (May 24) deserves  more care-
ful  examination.    Dulles said  he  was  authorized  by  the  Presi-
dent  to  say  that  his  remarks  were  not  to  be  interpreted  as
implying  acceptance  of  a  role  of  neutrality  for  the  Federal
German  Republic.   But  when  Dulles was  then  asked   whether
this  meant  that  "our  position  at  the  summit  meeting  will  be
one  of  opposition  to  any  neutrality  for  a  unified  Germany,"
Dulles  gave   an   evasive  answer.    Later   in  the   conference,
Dulles  said  he  did not  think  the  German  people or  the  Soviet
people  or  the  West  European  people  want  to  see  applied  to
Germany  the  concept of it  being  an independent State  with  an
unlimited  army.    So  far   as  we  know  this  is  the  first  time
Dulles  has  ever  suggested   there  were  dangers  in   rearming
Germany.    He  must   feel   hard-pressed   to  fall  back   on  so
demagogic  an  appeal.
Eisenhower's   decision  to  address  the  UN  meeting  in  San
Francisco  was  a  defeat  for  Dulles  and the  State  Department
which  would have  liked  (1)  to  keep  the  President  away  from
the  scene  of  exploratory  talks  among  the  powers,  and  (2)  to
play  down  the  United Nations.   Dulles wants  to  reduce  Eisen-
hower's  role  in any  talks to  little  more than  a  decorative  one,
and  fears  the  UN's  initiative  in  peace  talks.
Krushchev's  crass  opening  remarks  at   Belgrade  blaming
Beria  and  other  "enemies  of  the  people"  for  the  attacks  on
Tito  may  prove  to  have  been his  biggest  blunder  in  Belgrade.
The Yugoslav  Communists  are  nostalgic  for  the  fold  but  have
grown  too sophisticated  for  the  kind of  drivel  Moscow  expects
its  followers  to  swallow  without  a  grimace.
An  important  victory  for  civil  liberties   was  the   Supreme
Court's  announcement  last  week that  it  will  hear  the  appeal
against  the  order  requiring  the  Communist  party  to  register
under  the  McCarran  (Internal  Security)  Act.    The  order  is
the  trigger which will finally put  the  Act into  effect,  and  con-
front  anyone  who  cannot  prove  he  is  not  a. Communist  with
possible  loss  of  passport,  deprivation  of  jobs  in defense-con-
nected  facilities  and  prosecution  for  failure  to  register.
Counsel  for  Lattimore  filed  a  supplemental memorandum
with  the  Court  of  Appeals  last  Wednesday  citing  the  Quinn
decision   (see  text  in  our  last  week's  issue)  observation  in
which  Chief  Justice  Warren   set  out  the  limits  on  Congres-
sional   power  to  investigate..    "Stated  bluntly,"    Lattimore's
lawyers  said,  "this  is  new law"  and went  on to  argue  that  it
provided  new  grounds  for  dismissing  the  indictment  against
him  since  the  McCarran  committee  went  beyond those  limits
in  its  interrogation   of  Lattimore.
As  we go  to  press, former  Senator  Cain  is  about  to  appear
as  a  witness  against  loyalty  probe  excesses  before  the  John-
ston  committee.    Watch  next  week's  issue  for  a  full   report.
Diplomatic  Follies  at  Foggy  Bottom
How  the  State  Dept.  Reacted  to  Russia's  Acceptance  of  4-Power Parley
Q.  Are we happy that  they  [the  Russians]  have  accepted     a  substantive  matter,
this  thing  [the  Western  invitation  to  a  4-power talk]  even
under  the  terms  with  which  they  did  accept  it?
A.  Well, Mr. [Donald J.]  Gonzales  [United  Press]  said  at
the  beginning that  he wished to  deal  in  substantive  matters.
I  do  not  think  I  should  get  into  subjective  states  of  mind.
Q.  You mean you refuse  to  say  whether  we are  glad  that
they  accepted  it?
A.  Have  I  stopped  beating  my  wife!
Q.  Are  we  unhappy  about   it?
Q.  And  does  Mr. Gonzales set  the  rules  of  the  conference?
Q.  [By  Mr.  Gonzales]  If  he  does,  I  declare  happiness  is
Q.  Thank  you,  sir.
A.  I  will have  to  leave that  to  the  President  of  the  State
Department  Correspondents  Association.    Some  days—-
Q.  I   really   think   that   it   is  a   legitimate   question  of
whether  or  not  we  are  glad  they  accepted  it.
A.  I  cannot  make any  comment on a  question  of that  sort.
Q.  Won't  you go  as  far  as  Mr.  Molotov  did  and  say  that
you  take  a  positive  attitude  toward  their  acceptance?
A.  We take  a  positive  attitude  toward  their   acceptance.
—Daily  press  briefing   with State  Dept.  official    spokesman,  May  26.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  6,1955
Exclusive:  China  Lobbyist   Hoist   On  His  Own  Petard
Kohlberg  Complains  Rules  Against  Red  China  Trade  Unfair
For  some  strange  reason  not a  single  daily  newspaper  has
seen  fit  to  tell  the  story  of  Alfred  Kohlberg  and  his  30,800
dozen  embroidered  linen  handkerchiefs.
Kohlberg  has  told  the  story  himself  in  a  complaint  he  has
just filed with  the  U.  S.  District  Court  in  Washington.    And
it  is hard  to believe that  the  experienced  reporters  who cover
the  court  could  have  overlooked  something  so  richly  ironic.
For  what  it  amounts  to  is  that  Kohlberg,  a  wealthy  textile
importer  as  well  as  one  of  the  most  influential of  the  China
Lobbyists—indeed  a  man  who  insists  that  he  is  the  China
Lobby—has  been unable  to  convince the  Customs  Bureau  that
he  is  not  trying  to  import  merchandise  made  in  Red  China.
His  administrative   remedies  and  perhaps  his  patience  ex-
hausted,  Mr.  Kohlberg  has  now sued  Secretary  of  the  Treas-
ury  George  M. Humphrey  in  an  attempt  to force  a showdown
on  what  he  considers  unfair  import   rules.
Back  in  1952,  Mr.  Kohlberg  says,  he  bought  a  quantity  of
linen in  Belfast,  Ireland,  and  had  it  shipped out to the  British
Colony  of  Hong  Kong,  where  in  October  of  that  year,   his
agent,   Henry   Chang,   arranged   for   its   manufacture   into
handkerchiefs.
Linen  Handkerchiefs  Are  "Red"  Handkerchiefs
The  rest  of the  story  is  a tortuous  account  of a man  caught
in  a  web of  regulations.    And  it  was  probably  no  consolation
to  him  to  know he helped prepare  the  ground  for  those  regu-
lations.    For  in April,  1952, the  Bureau  of  Customs, with  the
Treasury  Department's approval, issued  instructions  designed
to  cut  off imports  from  Communist  China  and  North   Korea.
Custom  collectors  were  told  that  from  then  on,  "merchandise
of  a  type  which  was  historically  imported  from  China" (and
linen  handkerchiefs were  specifically  named as  such  merchan-
dise)  "would  be  presumed  to  be  of  Chinese origin"  unless  an
importer  obtained  a  special  license  from  the  Foreign  Assets
Control  by  presenting   evidence  to  rebut   the   government's
"presumption."
About  a   year  after   the  linen  first  reached   Hong  Kong,
Kohlberg  applied  for  a  license  to  import  the  finished  hand-
kerchiefs  and  claims  he  presented   the  necessary   evidence  to
obtain  one.  But  his  application  was  denied  on  the  ground
that  "importations   from   Hong  Kong  of  embroidered  linens
should  be authorized only when goods have  been  properly cer-
tified  under  Comprehensive Certificate  of  Origin   procedures."
When   Kohlberg  attempted   to  get  his   goods  certified  he
found  himself  tangled  in  another  set  of  precautionary  meas-
ures.    This  time  it  was  the  "certificate  of  origin"  procedures
referred  to  in  the  denial.    These  procedures  were   established
on Sept. 29, 1953  by agreement  between  the  Treasury  and  the
government   of   Hong   Kong.    On   October   25,  1954 Kohl-
berg  applied  for  such  a  certificate and  was  turned  down.   It
seems the procedures made no provision for  granting  a  certifi-
cate  to  anyone who began  to manufacture linen handkerchiefs
in  Hong Kong before Sept.  21,  1953.   Mr.  Kohlberg had  begun
to  manufacture  his  handkerchiefs  about  a  year  too  soon.
A  Possible  $90,000  Loss
That  is  not  the  end  of his  story.   In  Nov.  1954, fearing  the
outbreak  of a war  in the  Far  East, he managed  to  get  an  ex-
port  license  from  the  Hong  Kong  government  and  shipped
the  handkerchiefs  to  the  Foreign  Trade  Zone  of  the  Port  of
New  York.  They  are  still  in  the  warehouse  there.  Caught  in
the  net  of rules,  Kohlberg cannot  import  them  into  this coun-
try.   He  cannot  export  them  anywhere  else,  either.   And  the
delays,  he claims,  are  causing  him "irreparable  injury."   The
handkerchiefs  are  beginning  to  depreciate   in  value.   Their
style  and  design  are  being  outmoded  and  the  linen  may  be-
come  discolored.  All in all, he  says  he  stands  to  lose  $90,000.
Stoutly  he  insists  he  made  a  special  trip  to  Hong  Kong to
be  sure  the  handkerchiefs were  being manufactured  accord-
ing  to  regulations.  Resolutely  he  declares  that  at  no  time
have  China  or  North  Korea  or  "nationals"   of  either  of  those
suspect  countries  had  any  interest  in  the  handkerchiefs.
And  in  a  passage  of  his  complaint  that  probably  sounds
more  querulous than  his  attorneys  meant  it  to,  he  cries "the
standards  for  obtaining  a  Comprehensive Certificate  of Ori-
gin  from  the  Hong  Kong government  are  arbitrary  and dis-
criminatory  because  it  is  impossible for  the  plaintiff  to  com-
ply  with  the  requirement  that  the  manufacture of  said  hand-
kerchiefs must have commenced  subsequent to  Sept.  21,  1953."
Mr.  Kohlberg,  from  all  accounts,  has  approached  his  task
of  "lobbying"  for  the  Nationalist  Chinese government  with  an
ardor  that  makes it  clear  it  is  work  he finds much to  his lik-
ing.    Before  his  suit  is  finished  he  may  learn,  with  peculiar
force,  that  business  and  pleasure  do  not  mix.
For  Philadelphia  Area  Readers
The  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Committee is  holding
an  all  day  public meeting, "A  Rebirth  of  Freedom,"   at
the   Broadwood  Hotel  in  Philadelphia  Saturday,  June
11, to  be  addressed,  among  others,  by  Senator   Langer,
Ernest   Mazey  of  the  UAW-CIO, Goldie  Watson,  John
Ciardi, Wm. Gailmor, and  IFS. Philadelphia Area  read-
ers  are  invited  to  attend.
You  Can  Still   Take  Advantage   of  Our  Special   6-month  $2   Gift   Subscription      Offer
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name
Street
City                 ~
* $1 extra  for
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash. 3,
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed
Zone          State.....
B.C.
$5:*
for  $2 (6 mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
Zone         State......
Canada.
6/6/55
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S. E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED