I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955may30.pdf

============================================================

Special  Double   Issue
Text  and  Comment: Cain's  Attack  on  the  Attorney  General's  List,  Pages 2 and 8
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NOS.  19 & 20
MAY  30,  1955
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Full  Text  of  the  Historic  Emspak,  Quinn  and  Bard  Contempt  Decisions  Inside
The  Supreme  Court  Strikes  A Blow  at The Witch  Hunt
The  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  the  Emspak,  Quinn  and
Bart  cases  is another  indication that  the  tide  is turning  against
the  witch hunt  in  America.   In  reversing  these  convictions  for
contempt  of  the  House   Un-American  Activities  Committee,
Chief  Justice  Warren  and  a  majority  of  the  Court  were  not
dealing  with  any  of  those  easy,  politically  innocuous  cases  on
which  our   more  timorous  liberals  like  to  take  their  stand.
Julius   Emspak  is  General   Secretary-Treasurer,   and   Thomas
Quinn  was a field representative,  of  the United  Electrical Radio
& Machine  Workers  (UE),  one of  the unions  expelled  by  the
CIO  and  long  hounded  by  the  Committee.    Philip  Bart  was
summoned  before  the  committee  in  another  investigation  in
1950  as  general  manager  of  the  Daily  Worker.'   By  cold  war
standards,  all  three  men  were  therefore  fair  game.
Had  they invoked the Fifth  amendment, decision would  have
been  easy.   The  privilege  against  self-incrimination is  the  one
constitutional  right  the  courts  have  consistently  upheld.    The
witch hunters  are content to  have it so.   Why  go to the  trouble
of  trying to  convict  a  man  of  a crime when  you  can  make  him
seem  a  criminal  by forcing him  to  invoke the  privilege ?    Had
Emspak,  Quinn  and  Bart  in  their  different  hearings  clearly  in-
voked  the  Fifth,  they would  not  have  been  cited  for  contempt.
The  Committee  would  have  achieved  its purpose,  which  was to
smear  them  and  the  UE  in  the  public mind.
Evasive  in  Self-Protection
The  three  ended  up  in  court  because  they  evaded  clear  invo-
cation  of  the  Fifth.    They  refused  to  answer  questions,   and
they  refused  to  admit  they  were  refusing  to  answer.    Emspak
and  Quinn  insisted that  the  Committee had  no  right  to  inquire
into  their associations and  beliefs. When  they  entered  any  plea
at  all,  it  was usually  on  the  grounds  of  "the  First  amendment,
supplemented  by  the  Fifth."    The  Fifth  was  thrown  in,  as  if
on  counsel's  advice that  it  must  be  mentioned  to  stay  out  of
jail  for  contempt.  The  government  argued  before  the  Supreme
Court  that  the  defendants  had  been  deliberately  vague  about
the  Fifth  in  order  "to  obtain the  benefit  of  the  privilege  with-
out  incurring  the  popular  opprobrium  which  often  attaches  to
its  exercise."    This  is  so  clear  from  the  record  that  on  appeal
in  the  circuit  courts  even  the  liberal  judges  did  not  go  further
than  to suggest  that  the  cases  ought to  be re-tried  to  determine
whether  the defendants did  or did  not  invoke  the  Fifth.
What  makes the  Supreme Court's  decision  so striking  is  that
the  Chief  Justice  and  his  colleagues  of  the  majority  met  this
issue head-on.   "If  it  is true,  as the  government  contends,"  the
Chief   Justice   said,   "that   petitioner   feared   the   stigma   that
might  result  from  a forthright  claim  of  his  constitutional  right
not  to  testify,"  then  bare  mention  of  the  Fifth  was  enough  to
obtain  its protection.    "No  ritualistic  formula,"  the  Chief  Jus-
tice  ruled,  "is  necessary  to  invoke  the  privilege."   The  burden
was  on  the  Committee  rather  than  the  witnesses  to  ckrify  the
basis  on  which  they  were  refusing  to  answer.    If  the  commit-
tee  wasn't  sure,  it  was up  to  the  committee  to  ask  the  witness
whether  he was invoking  his privilege.
New  Liberal  Trend  Foreshadowed
These  decisions  show  that  our  new  Chief  Justice  is  deter-
mined  to  write  into  law  the  liberal  attitudes  expressed  in  his
recent  speeches  on the  Bill  of  Rights.    They  also  show  that  re-
vulsion  against  the  excesses  of  the  witch  hunt  has  grown  con-
siderably  when  it  is  possible  in  such  cases  to  weld  together  a
firm  majority  of  six  for  acquittal.    Three  Justices,  Reed,  Min-
ton  and  Harlan,  seem  to  be  all  the  right  can  count  upon  for
certain  on  this  court  and  in  this  atmosphere.    The  lineup  and
the  circumstances  may foreshadow  a  new  liberal  trend.
The  Chief  Justice  is an  experienced  judge  of  public  opinion
and  a  skilful  practitioner of  politics.    We  believe  the  cause of
reviving  liberty  is in good  hands  when  he  takes  it  over.  There
is  reason  to  hope  that  having  marshalled   a  majority  for  so
broad  an  interpretation  of  the  Fifth,  he  may be  preparing  the
ground  for  action on  the  First.   The  Court  declared  that  hav-
ing  decided  these  contempt  cases on Fifth  amendment  grounds,
it  did  not  feel  it  necessary  to  pass  upon  the  defense  contention
that  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  was  itself
unconstitutional  under  the  First   amendment.
First  Amendment  Next?
But  the  majority  hints  that  it  may be  preparing  the  ground
for  this  wider  issue.    "The   power  to  investigate,"   the  Chief
Justice  said  in  the  Quinn  decision,  "broad  as  it  may be,  is  also
subject  to  recognized  limitations.    It  cannot  be  used  to  inquire
into  private  affairs.  . . . Nor  does it extend  to an area  in which
Congress  is forbidden  to  legislate.'  Similarly  the  power  to  in-
vestigate  must  not  be  confused  with  any  of  the  powers  of  kw
enforcement.  . . . Still  further  limitations  ...   are found  in the
specific  individual  guaranties  of  the  Bill  of  Rights."
These  observations  may  spell  a  showdown   for  the   preten-
sions  of  Congressional  committees  to act as roving  public  grand
juries,  to  determine   what  is  "subversive"  or  "Un-American"
and  to  pillory  those who dare  dissent  from  these standards.   In
this  respect  the  Emspak,  Quinn  and  Bart  cases  may  prove  to
have  prepared  the  way for  fundamental  decisions  by  the  court
in  the  prosecutions  of  Corliss  Lamont  and  Harvey  O'Connor,
both  fighting  citations  for  contempt  after  invoking  the  First
amendment  alone  against  McCarthyite  inquisition.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's Weekly,  May  SO, 1955
"Of   125  Blacklisted  Organizations,  Not  More  Than  30  Are  Communist  Fronts"
Cain   of  the   SACB  Debunks   the   Attorney   General's    Subversive   List
Because   the   Attorney   General's  list  is   being   used   so
widely,  the  attack  made  upon  it  by  former  Senator  Harry
P. Cain of  the Subversive  Activities Control Board is   useful
as  defense   ammunition.    We  are  here reprinting  the  text  of
what  he had  to say  about  the  list  in  his  speech last   Monday
night   before   the  B'nai  B'rith  at  Lake  Kiamesha,  N.   Y.
Turn  to  page  eight  for  our  own  reactions.—JFS
"The  Attorney  General's  list  was  authorized  by  Executive
Order  of  the  President  in  1947.   The  Attorney  General  was
directed  to  compile  a  list  of  organizations  which  he  consid-
ered  to  be Fascist, totalitarian,  Communistic or  subversive in
their  purposes.   The  resulting  list  was  to  be  employed  by
the  Civil  Service  Commission in  checking the  loyalty  of  civil
servants   and  applications  for  the  federal   establishment.
"The  Attorney  General did not  provide nor  was  he  required
to  grant  a  hearing  to  any  organization  which  he  saw  fit  to
place  on  the  list.    It  becomes  important  to  remember  that
organizations  listed  before  1953  were  never  permitted  to  be
heard  in  their  own defense.
Still  No  Hearings
"Since  1953,  the  Attorney  General  has  offered  organizations
previously listed  an opportunity to be heard  and provided that
no  organization  would  be added to  the  list  without  an  oppor-
tunity  for  a  hearing.   The reasons  have  been  several  and  the
administrative  difficulties  have  been  apparent  but  no  organi-
zation  to  my  knowledge  has  ever   actually   had  a  hearing,
which might resulb in  de-listing  the  organization,  nor has  any
hearing  actually  been  given  to  an  organization  before it  was
listed.
"Unless  we assume that an Attorney  General, either  Repub-
lican  or  Democrat,  is  infallible,  as  no  human  being  ever  is,
we  should  not  take  for  granted  that  every  single  proscribed
organization  has  been listed  for  complete  and  sufficient  cause.
This is  said  without  prejudice  to  any  Attorney  General.  We
must  look for  a  better  way to  establish  as  being  conclusively
true  that  listed  organizations  have  been  found  factually  to
be  actually  totalitarian  or  subversive.
Now  275  On the  Blacklist
"Between  1947  and  the  last  change  of national  administra-
tions  in  1952,  192  organizations  were  listed.    Since  1952,  83
organizations  have  been  added  to  the  list  and  its  published
total is now 275.  We can reasonably expect that other  organi-
zations  are  intended  for  listing.   I  will  not  hazard  a  guess
as  to  the  eventual  number  of  organizations  which  may  be
proscribed  in  this  free  society  of  ours.    I  simply, note  that
millions  of  citizens  are   now  members  of  or  were  previously
members  in  the  listed  organizations  and  these   associations
become  an  important  factor  in  determining  whether  an  indi-
vidualis  eligible  for  employment  by  the  federal   government
and  many  other  private  employment areas.
"These  memberships, past  or  present,  are  being  exercised
by states  and  municipalities  in  scores  of different  fashions  to
ostracize  free  citizens,  to  denounce  and  condemn  them;  to
prohibit  legitimate  activities  of individuals  and to  place  other
citizens  outside  the  law.    Much  of  what  I  charge  has  been
unintended  but  my  cry  of  alarm  and  warning  is  undeniably
justified.
A  Warning,  Not  A  Finding
"The  Attorney   General  has  never  suggested  nor  does  he
believe  that   mere  membership  in  a  listed   organization   is
necessarily   evil,  bad  or  dangerous  but  many  people  in  au-
thority,  both  in  and  beyond the  federal  establishment,   do  so
believe.   In his  own public words, the  Attorney  General  states
that 'membership  is a red flag; it  is  a warning  sign and  gives
an  agency  head  something  to  go  on  so that  he  can examine
the  individual  to  find  out  more  about  the  nature  and  extent
of   his   contact  with  that   organization.'   The  logic   in  this
approach  is  that  a  member  of  a  listed  subversive  organiza-
tion  may  be anything  but subversive  in  his  own conduct.  The
Attorney  General  recommends only  that  unexplained  or  un-
satisfactorily  explained  membership in  a  listed organization
is  a  factor  to  be  considered in  security  evaluations  of  em-
ployees  and applicants  for  the  federal  service.
How  It  Works  in  Defense  Plants
"Do you know that  an  applicant  for  a  defense  industry  job
requiring  a  clearance,  and many plants are  entirely  classified,
is  denied employment if  his  application  includes any  deroga-
tory  information  or  if  any  derogatory   information  is  filed
against  him  by  someone else?    There  is  no pre-employment
examination  system  within  the  Industrial   Personnel  Security
Program.    Derogatory  information   includes  membership   in
any  of  the  organizations  listed  by  the  Attorney  General.   In
such  cases,  the  greater  loss  is that  of the  government  because
on  a  simply  unexamined charge,  the  government  may  have
lost the  services  of the finest workers.   Unless  we find a  way,
and  do  it   soon,  to  permit  an  applicant   to  face  up  to  any
allegations,   we  shall  endanger  and  weaken  our  national  se-
curity  and  we  shall  accelerate  the  spreading  of  the  poison of
distrust  and  suspicion  and  a  lack  of  faith  by  the  individual
in  his  government everywhere.   If  this  isn't  an  expression  of
common  sense,  of  what  does  common  sense  consist?
"The  Attorney  General's  list  should be understood  to  repre-
sent  nothing  more than  an  attorney's  advice to  his  client who
started out to be the  government but has  become anybody and
everybody  else  who  makes  use  of  the  list.   As  a  citizen,  I
object  to  the  advice because in  its  present form, the  advice  is
unintelligible,  misleading  and a threat to a continuing  vitality
and  strength  of your  nation's  internal  security.     ....
Misleading  Assumptions
"When  the  average  citizen  is  confronted with  the  Attorney
General's  list  of  275  subversive  organizations,  he  quite  nat-
urally  can be  expected to  assume that all  of  the  listed  organi-
zations   are   working   daily  and  nightly,   too,   against   our
common  good.
"I  tell  you that  the  Attorney  General's  list  is  vastly  mis-
leading  because  it  indicates  that  the  United  States  is  con-
fronted  by a far  larger  assault against our security  by  organ-
ized groups of Communists or fellow-travelers than is the  fact.
"Permit  me to  tell  you what I  believe the  facts  to  be which
I  can  do without violating security  in  any  manner.
More  Than  Half  No  Longer  Exist
"Of  the  275 listed  organizations,  approximately  150 of  them
have  long  since  gone  out  of  business.    I  derive  some  solid
satisfaction   from  this  knowledge  that  the  list  includes  so
many  organizations  which  today  offer   no  threat  or  danger
of  any  kind to  our Republic.
"The  Internal  Security Act  of  1950  defined by  statute what
a  Communist Front is.   A Communist Front is  dominated, di-
rected  and  controlled  by  the  Communist Party,  USA,  or  by
International  Communism.  When  a  Front  does  exist,  it  can
be  a  menace  to  the  security  of  this  country  and  we ought  to
impose  upon  every  Front  which  exists  the  onerous  sanctions
provided  by  the  law  and  require  that  front  to  register  so
that  you  citizens  know  what  it  is,  where  it  is,  how it  came
into  being  and  what  it  is  doing.
"Of  the  approximately  125  organizations   which  are   cur-
rently  operating  in  one manner  or  another,  how many  would
you  guess  can  be  established  to  be  in  fact  an  organization
which  as  a  Front  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  Communist con-
spiracy?    To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  I  can  reasonably
assume that  as  many as  twenty  but  not more than  thirty  are
in  this  category."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  SO,  1955
3
The  Historic  Contempt  Decisions  In  Full  Text
QUINN  v.  U.  S.
Petitioner  was  convicted   of  contempt   of  Congress   under
2   U.  S.  C.  § 192  in  the   District  Court   of  the   District  of
Columbia.   Section   192  provides  for   the  punishment  of  any
witness  before  a  congressional  committee  "who  .  .  .  refuses
to   answer   any   question   pertinent   to   the   question   under
inquiry.  .  .  ."   On  appeal,  the  Court  of  Appeals  for  the
District   of   Columbia  Circuit   reversed   the   conviction   and
remanded  the  case  for  a  new trial.  Claiming  that  the  Court
of    Appeals   should   have   directed   an   acquittal,   petitioner
applied   to  this  Court  for   certiorari.   We  granted  the  writ
because  of  the  fundamental  and  recurrent  character  of  the
questions  presented.
Pursuant   to  subpoena  petitioner   appeared   on  August  10,
1949,  before  a  subcommittee of  the  Committee on  Un-Ameri-
can  Activities   of  the  House  of  Representatives.    Petitioner
was  then  a  member  and  field  representative  of  the   United
Electrical,  Radio  and   Machine  Workers   of  America.    Also
subpoenaed  to appear  on that day were  Thomas J.  Fitzpatrick
and  Frank  Panzinp,  two  officers  of  the  same  union.   At  the
outset  of  the  hearings,  counsel  for  the  committee announced
that  the  purpose  of  the  investigation   was  to  inquire  into
"the  question of Communist affiliation  or association  of  certain
members"  of  the  union  and  "the   advisability   of   tightening
present   security   requirements   in  industrial   plants  working
on  certain  Government  contracts."  All  three  witnesses  were
asked  questions  concerning  alleged  membership  in  the  Com-
munist  Party.   All  three  declined  to  answer.  '
"That  Is  My  Own  Personal  Belief"
Fitzpatrick  was  the  first  to  be  called  to  testify.   He  based
his  refusal  to  answer  on  "the  First  and  Fifth   Amendments"
as  well  as  the  First  Amendment to  the  Constitution,  supple-
mented  by  the   Fifth   Amendment."   Immediately  following
Fitzpatrick's  testimony,   Panzino   was  called  to  the   stand.
In   response  to  the   identical   questions   put  to  Fitzpatrick,
Panzino  specifically  adopted  as  his  own  the  grounds  relied
upon  by  Fitzpatrick.   In  addition,  at  one  point  in  his  testi-
mony,  Panzino  stated  that  "I  think   again,  Mr.  Chairman,
under  the  fifth  amendment,  that  is  my  own personal  belief."
On  the  following day,  petitioner,  unaccompanied  by  counsel,
was  called  to  the  stand  and  was  also  asked  whether  he  had
ever  been  a  member  of  the  Communist Party.   Like  Panzino
before  him, he  declined  to  answer,  specifically  adopting  as  his
own  the  grounds  relied  upon  by  Fitzpatrick.
On  November  20,  1950,  all  three  witnesses   were  indicted
under  § 192 for  their  refusals  to  answer.    The  three   cases
were  tried  before  different  judges,   each  sitting  without   a
jury.   Fitzpatrick   and   Panzino   were   acquitted.    In   Fitz-
patrick's  case,  it  was  held  that  his  references  to  "the  First
and  Fifth  Amendments"  and  "the  First  Amendment  to  the
Constitution,    supplemented    by    the    Fifth     Amendment"
constituted  an  adequate  means of invoking the  Self-Incrimina-
tion  Clause  of the  Fifth  Amendment.   Similarly,  in  Fanzine's
case,  it  was  held that  his reference  to  "the  fifth  amendment"
was   sufficient   to  plead   the   privilege.    In  petitioner's   case,
however,  the  District  Court  held  that   a  witness   may  not
incorporate   the   position   of   another   witness   and   rejected
petitioner's  defense  based  on  the  Self-Incrimination   Clause.
Petitioner  was accordingly  convicted and  sentenced  to  a  term
of  six  months  in  jail  and  a  fine  of  $500.
In  reversing  this  conviction,  the  Court  of  Appeals,  sitting
en  bane, held that  "No formula  or  specific  term  or  expression
is  required"  in order  to plead the  privilege  and that a  witness
may  adopt  as  his  own  a  plea  made  by  a  previous  witness.
Thus  the  Court  of  Appeals  viewed  the  principal  issue  in  the
case  as  "whether  Fitzpatrick  did  or  did  not  claim  the  privi-
lege."   On  this  issue,  a  majority   of  the   Court  of   Appeals
expressed   no  view.   They   agreed   that   a  reversal    without
more  would  be  in  order  if  they  "were  of  clear  opinion  that
Fitzpatrick,  and  therefore   Quinn,  did  claim  the  privilege."
8
Another  Exclusive  Service  For
Readers  of   The    Weekly
Because   the   texts   were   not   printed  even   in   the
New   York   Times,  we  are,  as   a  public  service,  pub-
lishing   a   special   double   issue   this   week   to   make
available  the  full  text  of  Chief  Justice  Warren's deci-
sions  in  the  Quinn,  Emspak  and Bart  cases.    Since  these
widen  the  protection  afforded  witnesses  before  Congres-
sional  investigating committees  and  may  prove  to  mark
a   turning   point   in  the   temper   of   the   Court   and   the
country,  we believe they  deserve careful study and wide
circulation.   Extra  copies  are  available as  long  as  they
last  at  our  regular price of  15 cents,  or  at  5  cents  each
in  bulk  orders  of  1,000 or  more.
But  they  were   "not   of  that  clear  opinion."   The  Court  of
Appeals  therefore  ordered  a  new trial  for  determination  of
the  issue  by  the  District  Court.   The  Court  of  Appeals  also
directed  the  District  Court  on  retrial  to  determine  whether
petitioner   "was  aware  of  the  intention  of  his  inquirer  that
answers were required  despite  his objections."   In that regard,
however,  it   rejected   petitioner's  contention  that  a  witness
cannot   be  convicted  under  §  192  for  a  refusal   to   answer
unless  the  committee  overruled  his  objections  and specifically
directed  him  to   answer.
It  is from  that  decision  that  this  Court  granted  certiorari.
I.
There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  power  of  Congress,   by
itself   or  through  its  committees,  to  investigate  matters  and
conditions  relating  to  contemplated  legislation.   This   power,
deeply  rooted  in  American and  English  institutions,  is  indeed
co-extensive  with  the  power  to  legislate.  Without  the  power
to  investigate—including  of  course  the  authority  to  compel
testimony,   either   through   its   own  processes   or   through
judicial   trial—Congress    could  be  seriously   handicapped  in
its  efforts  to  exercise  its  constitutional  function  wisely  and
effectively.
But  the  power  to  investigate,  broad  as  it  may  be,  is  also
subject  to  recognized limitations.  It  cannot be  used  to  inquire
into  private  affairs  unrelated  to  a  valid  legislative purpose.
Nor  does it  extend  to  an  area  in  which  Congress is  forbidden
to  legislate.   Similarly,  the   power  to  investigate  must  not
be  confused  with   any   of   the  powers  of   law  enforcement;
those   powers  are  assigned  under   our  Constitution  to   the
Executive  and  the  Judiciary.   Still  further  limitations  on  the
power   to   investigate   are   found  in   the   specific   individual
guarantees  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,  such  as  the  Fifth  Amend-
ment's  privilege  against  self-incrimination which  is  in  issue
here.
"The  Horror  of  Star  Chamber"
The  privilege   against   self-incrimination   is  a  right   that
was   hard-earned  by  our  forefathers.   The  reasons   for   its
inclusion   in   the   Constitution—and  the   necessities   for   its
preservation—are  to  be  found  in  the  lessons  of  history.   As
early  as  1650, remembrance  of  the  horror  of  Star Chamber
proceedings   a   decade   before   had   firmly   established    the
privilege  in  the  common  law  of  England.   Transplanted   to
this  country  as  part  of  our legal  heritage,  it  soon  made  its
way  into  various state  constitutions  and  ultimately  in  1791
into  the  federal  Bill  of  Rights.  The  privilege,  this  Court  has
stated,  "was  generally  regarded  then,  as  now,  as  a  privilege
of  great  value,  a  protection  to  the  innocent, though  a  shelter
to  the  guilty,  and  a  safeguard  against  heedless,   unfounded
or  tyrannical  prosecutions."   Co-equally  with  our  other  con-
stitutional   guarantees,  the  Self-incrimination  Clause  "must
be  accorded liberal  construction  in  favor  of  the  right  it  was
intended  to  secure."  Such  liberal  construction  is  particularly
warranted  in  a  prosecution  of  a  witness   for  a  refusal   to
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May  SO, 195S
answer,  since  the  respect  normally  accorded  the  privilege  is
then  buttressed   by  the   presumption   of   innocence  accorded
a   defendant   in   a   criminal  trial.    To   apply   the   privilege
narrowly  or  begrudgingly—to  treat  it  as  an  historical  relic,
at  most  merely  to  be  tolerated—is  to  ignore  its  development
and  purpose.
In  the  instant  case  petitioner   was  convicted  for  refusing
to  answer  the  committee's  question  as  to  his  alleged  mem-
bership  in  the  Communist Party.   Clearly  an  answer  to  the
question  might  have  tended  to  incriminate  him.  As  a  conse-
quence,  petitioner  was  entitled   to  claim  the  privilege.   The
principal  issue  here  is  whether  or  not  he  did.
It  is  agreed  by  all  that  a  claim  of  the  privilege  does  not
require  any  special  combination  of  words.  Plainly  a  witness
need  not  have  the  skill  of  a  lawyer  to  invoke the  protection
of  the  Self-Incrimination  Clause.  If  an  objection to  a question
is  made  in  any  language  that  a  committee  may  reasonably
be   expected  to   understand   as   an   attempt   to   invoke  the
privilege, it  must be respected  both  by the  committee  and by
a  court  in  a  prosecution  under  §  192.
Here  petitioner,  by  adopting  the  grounds  relied  upon  by
Fitzpatrick,   based  his  refusal  to  answer  on  "the  First  and
Fifth  Amendments" and "the  First Amendment to the  Consti-
tution,   supplemented   by   the    Fifth    Amendment."     The
Government  concedes—as  we  think  it  must—that  a  witness
may  invoke  the  privilege  by  stating  "I  refuse  to  testify  on
the   ground  of  the  Fifth   Amendment."   Surely,  in  popular
parlance and even in legal literature, the  term  "Fifth  Amend-
ment"  in  the  context  of  our  time  is  commonly  regarded  as
being  synonymous with  the  privilege  against  self-incrimina-
tion.  The  Government argues,  however,  that  the   references
to  the  Fifth  Amendment  in  the  instant  case  were inadequate
to  invoke the  privilege  because  Fitzpatrick's  statements  are
more  reasonably  understood  as  invoking  rights   under  the
First   Amendment.  We  find  the   Government's   argument
untenable.   The  mere  fact  that  Fitzpatrick   and  petitioner
also  relied  on  the  First  Amendment does  not  preclude  their
reliance  on the  Fifth  Amendment as  well.  If  a  witness  urges
two constitutional objections to a committee's  line of question-
ing,  he  is  not  bound  at  his  peril  to  choose  between  them.
By  pressing   both  objections,  he  does  not   lose  a   privilege
which  would  have  been  valid  if  he  had  only  relied  on  one.
"No Ritualistic Formula .  .  .  Necessary"
The  Government, moreover,  apparently  concedes  that  peti-
tioner   intended  to   invoke  the   privilege.    In  its   brief   the
Government  points  out  "the  probability  that  petitioner's  am-
biguous  references to the Fifth  Amendment . . . were  phrased
deliberately  in  such  vague  terms  so  as  to  enable  petitioner
...     to  obtain  the  benefit  of  the  privilege  without  incurring
the  popular opprobrium which often  attaches  to  its  exercise."
But  the  fact  that  a  witness  expresses  his  intention  in  vague
terms  is  immaterial so long  as  the claim is  sufficiently  definite
to apprise the committee of  his intention.   As  everyone agrees,
no  ritualistic  formula  is   necessary  in  order  to  invoke  the
privilege.    In  the   instant   case,   Quinn's  references   to   the
Fifth   Amendment  were  clearly   sufficient   to   put  the  com-
mittee  on  notice  of  an  apparent  claim  of  the  privilege.    It
then  became incumbent on the  committee either  to  accept  the
claim  or to  ask  petitioner whether he  was  in fact  invoking  the
privilege.    Particularly  is  this  so if  it  is  true,  as  the Govern-
ment  contends,  that  petitioner  feared  the  stigma  that  might
result  from  a  forthright  claim  of  his  constitutional  right  to
refuse  to  testify.     It  is  precisely   at  such  times—when  the
privilege  is  under  attack  by  those  who  wrongly  conceive  of
it  as  merely  a shield for  the  guilty—that  governmental bodies
must  be  most  scrupulous in  protecting  its   exercise.
This  ruling  by  no  means  leaves  a  congressional  committee
defenseless  at  the  hands of  a  scheming witness  intent  on de-
ception.   When  a  witness  declines to  answer  a  question be-
cause  of  constitutional  objections  and  the  language  used  is
not  free  from   doubt,  the  way  is  always  open  for  the  com-
mittee  to  inquire into  the  nature  of  the  claim  before making
a ruling.   If the witness unequivocally and intelligently waives
any  objection  based  on  the  Self-Incrimination    Clause,  or  if
the  witness  refuses  a  committee request  to  state  whether he
relies  on  the  Self-Incrimination  Clause,  he  cannot  later  in-
voke  its  protection  in  a  prosecution  for  contempt  for  refus-
ing  to  answer  that  question.    Here  the  committee  made  no
attempt  to  have  petitioner  particularize  his  objection.  Under
these  circumstances, we must  hold that  petitioner's  references
to  the  Fifth  Amendment were  sufficient  to  invoke the  privi-
lege  and  that  the  court  below  erred  in  failing  to  direct  a
judgment  of  acquittal.
II-
There  is  yet  a  second ground  for  our decision.
Section  192,  like  the  ordinary  federal  criminal  statute,  re-
quires  a  criminal intent—in this  instance, a  deliberate, inten-
tional  refusal  to  answer.   This  element  of  the   offense,  like
any  other,  must  be  proved beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.   Peti-
tioner  contends that  such proof  was  not,  and  cannot be, made
in  this  case.
"Not  Every  Refusal  to  Answer  .  .  ."
Clearly  not  every  refusal  to  answer  a  question propounded
by  a  congressional  committee  subjects  a  witness  to  prosecu-
tion  under  § 192.   Thus  if   he  raises  an  objection  to  a  cer-
tain  question—for  example,  lack  of  pertinency  or  the  privi-
lege  against   self-incrimination—the  committee  may  sustain
the   objection   and  abandon   the   question,   even   though   the
objection  might  actually  be  without  merit.    In  such  an  in-
stance,  the witness' refusal  to answer is  not contumacious, for
there  is  lacking  the  requisite  criminal  intent.   Or  the  com-
mittee  may  disallow  the  objection  and  thus  give  the  witness
the  choice  of  answering  or  not.   Given such  a  choice,  the  wit-
ness  may  recede  from  his  position  and  answer  the  question.
And  if  he  does  not  then  answer,  it  may  fairly  be  said  that
the  foundation  has  been  laid  for  a  finding  of  criminal  intent
to  violate  § 192.    In  short,  unless  the  witness  is  clearly  ap-
prised  that  the  committee  demands his  answer  notwithstand-
ing   his   objections   there   can  be  no  conviction   under  § 192
for  refusal  to  answer  that  question.
Was  petitioner  so apprised  here?    At  no time  did the com-
mittee  specifically  overrule  his  objection  based  on  the  Fifth
Amendment;  nor  did the  committee  indicate  its  overruling of
the  objection  by  specifically  directing  petitioner  to  answer.
In  the  absence of  such committee action,  petitioner  was  never
confronted  with  a  clear-cut   choice  between  compliance and
non-compliance,  between  answering  the  question  and  risking
prosecution   for   contempt.   At   best   he  was  left   to   guess
whether  or  not  the  committee  had  accepted  his  objection.
This ambiguity in the  committee's  position is apparent  from
the  transcript  of  the  hearing.    Immediately after   petitioner
stated  that  he was  adopting  Fitzpatrick's  objection, the com-
mittee  chairman  asked  petitioner:  ". . . will you now answer
the  question whether  you are  now or  ever  have  been  a mem-
ber  of  the  Communist Party,  or  do you  decline  to   answer?"
In  response  to  this,  petitioner  stated  for  the  first  time  that
he  would  not  answer.    He  said:  "I  decline  to  discuss  with
the  committee  questions  of that  nature."   Committee  counsel
thereupon  stated  that  further  questioning  "relating  to  those
matters" was  "not  necessary"  and  proceeded upon  a  new line
of  inquiry.  There is  nothing  in this  colloquy from  which  peti-
tioner  could  have  determined  with   a  reasonable  degree  of
certainty  that  the  committee  demanded his  answer  despite
his  objection.   Rather,  the  colloquy is  wholly  consistent  with
the  hypothesis that  the  committee  had  in  fact  acquiesced in
his objection.
Our  view that  a  clear  disposition  of  the  witness'  objection
is  a  prerequisite  to  prosecution for  contempt  is  supported by
long-standing  tradition   here  and  in  other  English-speaking
nations.    In  this  country  the  tradition  has  been  uniformly
recognized  in  the  procedure  of  both  state and  federal  courts.
It  is  further  reflected  in  the  practice  of  congressional  com-
mittees  prior  to  the  enactment  of  § 192  in  1857;  a  specific
direction  to  answer  was  the  means  then  used  to  apprise  a
witness  of  the  overruling  of his  objection.  Against  this back-
ground  § 192 became law.    No  relaxation  of  the   safeguards
afforded   a  witness  was  contemplated  by  its  sponsors.    In
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/,  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  SO,  1955
explaining  the   bill   in  the   House,   Congressman   Davis  ex-
pressly  stated  that  committee   powers  were  not   increased,
that  no  added  burden  was  placed  upon  the  witness,  and that
a  "mere  substitution"  of  a  judicial  proceeding  for   punish-
ment  at  the  bar  of  Congress  was  intended.   The  reason  for
enacting  § 192 went  to  the  punishment  and  not  the   offense.
It  was recognized  that  the  power  of  Congress  to  deal  with  a
contemnor  by  its  own  processes  did  not  extend  beyond  the
life   of   any   session.     By  making   contempt   of   Congress   a
crime, a fixed term  of imprisonment  was  substituted  for  vari-
able   periods  of  congressional   custody  dependent  upon   the
fortuity  of  whether  the  contemnor  had  been  called  to  testify
near  the  beginning  or  the  end  of  a  session.    But  there  is
nothing  to  indicate  that  this  change  in  the  mode  of  punish-
ment  affected   in  any  way  the  well-established   elements  of
contempt   of  Congress.     Since  the   enactment   of  § 192,   the
practice   of  specifically  directing   a  recalcitrant  witness   to
answer   has  continued   to  prevail.    In  fact,   the  very  com-
mittee involved here,  the  House Un-American  Activities  Com-
mittee,   originally   followed  this   practice   and  recently   re-
sumed  it.
"So  Long  as  the  Witness  Is  Not  Forced  to  Guess"
Giving  a  witness  a  fair  apprisal  of  the  committee's  ruling
on  an  objection   recognizes  the  legitimate  interests  of  both
the  witness  and the  committee.  Just  as  the  witness  need not
use  any  particular   form  of  words  to  present  his  objection,
so  also  the  committee  is  not  required  to  resort  to  any fixed
verbal  formula to  indicate  its  disposition  of  the  objection.  So
long as the  witness  is not forced to  guess  the  committee's  rul-
ing,  he has  no cause  to  complain.  And adherence  to this tradi-
tional  practice   can  neither   inflict   hardship  upon  the  com-
mittee  nor  abridge  the  proper  scope  of  legislative   investi-
gation.
III.
Petitioner   also  attacks  his  conviction on  grounds  involving
novel   constitutional   issues.   He   contends  that   the   House
Resolution  authorizing  the  committee's  operations  is  invalid
under  the  First  Amendment.   In  addition,  petitioner  contends
that the  trial  court  erred  in denying a  hearing  on the  alleged
bias  of  the  indicting  grand  jury.   Our  disposition  of  the  case
makes  it  unnecessary  to  pass  on these  issues.
The  judgment  below  is  reversed  and  the  case  remanded  to
the  District   Court  with  directions  to  enter  a  judgment  of
acquittal.                                                                       Reversed.
EMSPAK  v.  U.  S.
This  is a  companion case  with  Quinn V. United States, ante,
p.  —.   Challenged  in  each  proceeding  is  a  conviction  under
2  U.  S.  C.  § 192  in  the  District  Court  for   the  District  of
Columbia.   The  two  cases  arose  out  of the  same  investigation
by  the  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities  of  the  House
of  Representatives.     Because  of  the  similarity  of  the   legal
issues  presented,  the  cases  were  consolidated  for   argument
in  this   Court.
Pursuant  to  subpoena petitioner  appeared  on  December 5,
1949,  before  a  subcommittee  of  the  Committee  on  Un-Ameri-
can  Activities.   The  subcommittee  consisted  of  a  single mem-
ber,   Rep.   Morgan   M.  Moulder.    Petitioner   was   then   the
General  Secretary-Treasurer    of  the  United  Electrical,  Radio
&  Machine  Workers  of  America  as   well  as  Editor   of   the
UE  News,  the  union's  official  publication.   The  subcommittee's
hearings  had  previously  been  announced  as  concerning  "the
question  of  Communist  affiliation   or   association   of  certain
members"  of  the  union  and  "the   advisability   of  tightening
present  security  requirements   in  industrial  plants  working
on  certain  government  contracts."
"A  Total  of  239  Questions"
Petitioner  was  asked  a  total  of  239 questions.    Most  dealt
with  the  structure   of  the  union,  the   duties  of  its   officers,
the  scope  of  its  membership  and  bargaining  commitments,
the  alleged  similarity  in  policies  of  the   UE  News   and   the
Communist   Party,  the   non-Communist    affidavit  that  peti-
tioner   had  filed  with  the  National   Labor   Relations  Board,
and  related  matters.   Petitioner  answered  all  of  these  ques-
tions.  He declined, however, to answer  68 of  the  239 questions.
These  68  questions  dealt  exclusively  with  petitioner's   asso-
ciations  and  affiliations.   He  based  his  refusal  on  "primarily
the  first  amendment,  supplemented  by  the   fifth."   Of  the  68
questions,  58 asked  in  substance that he  state whether  or  not
he   was   acquainted   with   certain   named   individuals   and
whether  or  not  those  individuals   had  ever  held  official  posi-
tions in the  union.  Two of the questions concerned  petitioner's
alleged  membership  in  the  National  Federation  for  Constitu-
tional  Liberties  and  the  Civil  Rights  Congress.    Eight  ques-
tions  concerned  petitioner's  alleged  membership  and  activity
in  the  Communist  Party.
On  November  20, I960,  petitioner  was  indicted under § 192
for  his  refusal  to  answer  the  68 questions.    Sitting  without
a  jury,  the  District  Court  held  that  petitioner's  references
to   "primarily  the   first   amendment,  supplemented   by  the
fifth"  were  insufficient  to  invoke the Fifth  Amendment's  privi-
lege  against  self-incrimination.    The  District  Court  accord-
ingly  found  petitioner  guilty  on  all  68  counts  and  sentenced
him  to  a  term  of  six  months and  a  fine  of  $500.   The  Court
of  Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia  Circuit,  three judges
dissenting,  affirmed  en  bane.   From  that  decision  this  Court
granted  certiorari.
I.
As  pointed  out  in  Quinn  v.  United  States,  ante,  no  ritu-
alistic  formula  or  talismanic  phrase  is  essential  in  order  to
invoke  the  privilege  against  self-incrimination.   All  that  is
necessary  is an  objection  stated  in language  that  a committee
may  reasonably  be  expected  to  understand  as  an  attempt  to
invoke the  privilege.   In  the  Quinn  case  we hold that  Quinn's
references  to  "the   First  and  Fifth   Amendments"  and   "the
First  Amendment to  the  Constitution,  supplemented  by  the
Fifth  Amendment" were  sufficient  to  meet  this  standard.    It
would  be  unwarranted,   we  think,  to  reach  a  different  con-
clusion  here  as  to  petitioner's  plea  based  on  "primarily  the
first  amendment,  supplemented  by  the  fifth."
"A  Stigma  May  Somehow  Result"
The  Government does  not  even  attempt  to  distinguish  be-
tween  the  two  cases  in  this  respect.   Apparently conceding
that  petitioner  as  well as  Quinn  intended  to  invoke the  privi-
lege,  the  Government  points  out  "the  probability"  that  his
references  to the Fifth  Amendment were likewise deliberately
phrased  in  muffled  terms  "to  obtain  the  benefit of  the  privi-
lege  without  incurring  the  popular opprobrium  which  often
attaches  to  its  exercise."   On this  basis  the  Government  con-
tends  that  petitioner's  plea  was  not  adequate.  The answer  to
this  contention  is  threefold.    First,  an  objection  that  is  suf-
ficiently  clear  to  reveal  a  probable  intention  to  invoke  the
privilege  cannot  be ignored  merely because  it  is  not  phrased
in  an  orthodox  manner.   Second,  if  it  is  true  that  in  these
times  a  stigma  may  somehow result  from  a  witness'  reliance
on  the  Self-incrimination  Clause,  a  committee  should  be  all
the  more  ready  to  recognize  a  veiled  claim  of  the  privilege.
Otherwise,  the  great  right  which  the  Clause  was  intended  to
secure  might  be  effectively  frustrated  by  private  pressures.
Third,  it  should  be  noted  that  a  committee is  not  obliged  to
either  accept  or  reject  an  ambiguous constitutional  claim  the
very  moment  it  is  first  presented.   The  way  is  always open
for   the  committee  to  inquire  into  the  nature  of  the  claim
before  making a  ruling.   If  the  witness  intelligently  and un-
equivocally  waives any  objection based  on the Self-incrimina-
tion  Clause, or  if  the  witness  refuses  a  committee  request  to
state  whether  he  relies  on  the  Self-incrimination Clause,  he
cannot  later  invoke  its  protection  in  a  prosecution  for  con-
tempt  for  refusing to answer that question.
The  Government  argues  that  petitioner  did  in  fact   waive
the  privilege,  at  least  as  to  one count  of  the  indictment,  and
that  the  conviction  can be  sustained  on that  count  alone.   In
response  to  a  question  concerning  his  associations,  petitioner
expressed  apprehension   that  the  committee  was  "trying  to
perhaps  frame  people  for  possible  criminal  prosecution" and
6  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  30,  1955
added  that  "I  think  I  have  the  right  to  reserve  whatever
rights  I  have.  . . ."  The following  colloquy  then  took  place:
"No . . . Right to  Pry"
"Mr.   Moulder.   Is  it   your  feeling  that  to  reveal  your
knowledge  of  them  would  subject  you  to  criminal  prosecu-
tion?
"Mr.  Emspak.   No.  I  don't  think  this  committee  has  a
right to pry  into  my associations.  That is my own position."
Petitioner's  reply,   it   is  contended,  constituted   an  effective
disclaimer  of  the  privilege.   We  find this  contention   without
merit.  As this  Court  declared  in Smith v.  United  States, 337
U.  S.  137,  150:  "Although  the  privilege  against  self-incrimi-
nation  must  be claimed, when  claimed it  is  guaranteed  by  the
Constitution.  . . . Waiver  of constitutional  rights  ...   is not
lightly   to  be  inferred.   A  witness   cannot  properly   be  held
after   claim  to  have  waived  his  privilege  .  .  .  upon   vague
and  uncertain   evidence."
The Smith case, we believe, is controlling here.  The  witness
in  that  case,  at  the  outset  of  questioning  by  an  OPA  exam-
iner,  stated  "I want  to  claim  privilege  as  to anything  I   say."
The  examiner  accepted  this  statement   as  a  plea  of  possible
self-incrimination  and  a  request  for  the  immunity afforded  to
involuntary  witnesses  by  the  Price  Control  Act  of  1942.   The
questioning   proceeded  on  that   basis.    In   response   to  one
question,  however,  the  witness   made  a  statement  that  ap-
peared  to  the  examiner  to  be  voluntary.   This  colloquy  then
ensued:
"Q:  This   is  a  voluntary   statement.   You  do  not   claim
immunity  with  respect  to  that  statement?
"A:  No."
In  a  subsequent  prosecution  of  the  witness  for  violation  of
the  Price   Control   Act,  it  was  held  that  his  "No"    answer
waived  his  immunity at  least  as  to  the  one statement.   This
Court  unanimously  reversed,   stating   (337  U.  S.,  at    151):
"Without  any  effort  to  clarify  the  "No,"  the  examiner   went
ahead  and  had  the  witness  restate  the  substance  of  the  long
answer  .  .  .  without  any further  intimation  that  the  subse-
quent  answers  were  considered by  the  examiner  to  be  volun-
tary.  We do not  think  under  these  circumstances  this equivo-
cal  "No"  is  a  waiver  of  the  previous definite  claim  of  general
privilege  against   self-incrimination."    Similarly,  in  the  in-
stant  case, we do not  think  that  petitioner's  "No"  answer  can
be  treated  as  a  waiver  of  his  previous  express  claim  under
the  Fifth  Amendment.   At  most,  as  in  the  Smith  case,  peti-
tioner's  "No"  is  equivocal.  It  may  have  merely  represented
a  justifiable  refusal  to  discuss  the  reasons  underlying  peti-
tioner's  assertion  of  the  privilege;  the  privilege  would  be  of
little  avail  if  a  witness  invoking  it  were  required  to  disclose
the  preciso  hazard  which  he  fears.   And  even  if  petitioner's
"No"  answer  were  taken  as  responsive  to  the  question,  the
answer  would  still  be  consistent  with  a  claim  of  the   privi-
lege.   The  protection of  the  Self-incrimination  Clause  is  not
limited   to  admissions  that  "would. subject   [a  witness]   to
criminal  prosecution"; for  this  Court has  repeatedly  held  that
"Whether   such  admissions  by  themselves   would  support   a
conviction  under  a  criminal  statute  is  immaterial"  and  that
the  privilege  also  extends  to  admissions  that  may  only  tend
to incriminate.  In  any event, we cannot say  that  the colloquy
between   the  committee  and  petitioner   was   sufficiently   un-
ambiguous  to  warrant  finding  a  waiver  here.    To  conclude
otherwise  would  be  to  violate  this  Court's  own   oft-repeated
admonition  that  the  courts  must  "indulge  every   reasonable
presumption   against   waiver  of  fundamental   constitutional
rights."
Throughout  this  entire  proceeding—in the  trial  in  the  Dis-
trict  Court,  on  appeal  in  the  Court  of  Appeals,  and  here  on
certiorari—the  Government has  never  denied  that  petitioner
would  be  entitled  to  the  protection of  the  privilege  if  he  did
in  fact  invoke  it.   ' And  during  argument  in  this  Court  the
Government  expressly  conceded  that  all  68  questions  were
of  an  incriminatory character.    In  addition,  neither  the  Dis-
trict  Court nor  the  Court of  Appeals saw  fit  to  introduce  the
issue  into the  case.  We  are  therefore  reluctant  to  do  so now.
But  doubts  on the  issue  by  some  members  of  the  Court  make
its  consideration  necessary.
"To sustain  the privilege," this  Court  has  recently  held,  "it
need  only  be  evident  from  the  implications  of  the   question,
in  the  setting  in  which  it  is  asked,  that  a  responsive  answer
to  the  question  or  an  explanation  of  why  it  cannot  be  an-
swered  might  be dangerous  because injurious disclosure could
result."    And  nearly   150  years  ago  Chief  Justice  Marshall
enunciated  a  similar  test:  "Many  links  frequently  compose
that  chain  of  testimony  which  is  necessary  to  convict  any
individual  of  a  crime.    It  appears   to  the  Court  to  be  the
true  sense of the rule that no witness  is compellable to  furnish
any  one of them  against  himself."    Applying  this  test  to  the
instant  case,  we  have  no  doubt that  the  eight  questions  con-
cerning   petitioner's   alleged   membership  in  the  Communist
Party fell within  the  scope of the  privilege.   The same  is  true
of  the  two  questions  concerning  petitioner's  alleged  member-
ship  in  the  National  Federation  for  Constitutional  Liberties
and  the  Civil  Rights  Congress;  both  organizations  had   pre-
viously  been  cited  by  the  committee  as  Communist-front or-
ganizations.   There remains for  consideration the  58 questions
concerning  petitioner's  associations.   This  Court  has  already
made  abundantly  clear  that  such  questions,  when  asked  in  a
setting  of  possible  incrimination,  may  fall  within  the  scope
of  the   privilege.
"What  Was  the Setting  . . .?"
What  was the  setting—as  revealed  by the  record—in  which
these  questions  were  asked?   Each  of  the  named individuals
had  previously  been  charged  with  having  Communist  affilia-
tions.   On  October   14,  1949,  less  than  two  months  prior  to
petitioner's  appearance before the  committee, eleven principal
leaders  of  the  Communist Party  in this country had'been con-
victed  under the  Smith  Act  for  conspiring to  teach  and advo-
cate  the  violent  overthrow of  the  United  States.    Petitioner
was  identified  at  their  trial  as  a  Communist and  an  associate
of  the  defendants.    It  was  reported  that  Smith  Act  indict-
ments  against  other  Communist leaders  were being  prepared.
On  November  23,  1949,  two  weeks  prior   to  petitioner's  ap-
pearance,  newspapers  carried  the  story  that  the  Department
of   Justice   "within   thirty  days"  would  take  "an   important
step"  toward  the  criminal  prosecution   of  petitioner   in  con-
nection  with  his  non-Communist affidavit  filed  with  the  Na-
tional  Labor  Relations  Board.
Under  these  circumstances, it  seems  clear  that  answers  to
the  58  questions  concerning  petitioner's   associations   "might
be  dangerous  because  injurious  disclosure  could  result."   To
reveal  knowledge  about  the  named  individuals—all of  them
having  been  previously  charged  with  Communist   affiliations
—could  well  have  furnished  "a  link  in  the  chain"  of  evidence
needed  to  prosecute  petitioner  for  a  federal  crime,  ranging
from  conspiracy  to  violate  the  Smith  Act  to  the  filing  of  a
false  non-Communist affidavit   under  the  Taft-Hartley    Act.
That  being  so,  it  is  immaterial  that  some  of  the  questions
sought  information  about  associations  that  petitioner might
have  been  able  to  explain  away  on  some  innocent  basis  un-
related  to  Communism.  If  an  answer  to a  question  may  tend
to  be  incriminatory,  a  witness  is  not  deprived  of  the   protec-
tion  of  the  privilege  merely  because  the  witness  if  subse-
quently  prosecuted  could perhaps refute any  inference of guilt
arising  from  the  answer.
II.
There  is here,  as in the  Quinn  case,  a  second ground for  our
decision.   At  no  time  did  the  committee  specifically overrule
petitioner'  objection  based  on  the  Fifth  Amendment, nor  did
the   committee  indicate  its   overruling   of  the   objection  by
specifically   directing  petitioner   to  answer.    In  the   absence
of   such  committee   action,  petitioner  was  never   confronted
with  a  clear-cut  choice  between  compliance and  non-compli-
ance,  between  answering  the  question  and  risking  prosecu-
tion  for  contempt.    For   the  reasons  set  out  in  the   Quinn
opinion,  we  believe the  committee—by failing  to  meet  these
minimal  procedural  standards,   originally  recognized  by  the
committee  and  recently  re-adopted—did  not  adequately  ap-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  30,1955
prise  petitioner  that  an  answer  was required   notwithstanding
his  objections.   And  without  such  apprisal,  there  is  lacking
the  element of deliberateness necessary for  a  conviction  under
§ 192 for  a  refusal  to  answer.
III.
Our  disposition of the  case  makes  it  unnecessary  to  pass  on
petitioner's  other  contentions as  to the  First  Amendment and
the  grand   jury.   The  judgment  below  is  reversed   and  the
case  remanded  to  the  District  Court  with  directions  to  enter
a  judgment  of  acquittal.                                               Reversed.
BART  v.  U.  S.
On  November 20,  1950,  the  petitioner   was  indicted  under
2  U.  S.  C. § 192 for  refusing  to  answer  thirty-two  questions
put   to  him  by  a  subcommittee  of  the   Committee  on  Un-
American  Activities  of  the  House  of  Representatives.    Dur-
ing the trial in the  District  Court for  the  District of  Columbia,
the  Government  abandoned  twenty-four of  these  counts.   The
District  Judge,  sitting  without  a  jury,  found  Bart  guilty  of
the  remaining  eight  charges.    On  appeal,  the  Court  of  Ap-
peals for  the  District  of Columbia reversed  the  judgment upon
three  of  the  counts  and,  one  judge  dissenting,  affirmed  as  to
the  others.    From  that  decision,  we  granted  certiorari  and
set   the  case  down  for  argument   along  with  the  two  com-
panion  cases.    Quinn  V.  United  States,  ante,  p.         ,  and
Emspak   v.  United  States,  ante,  p.        .
In  response  to  a  subpoena, petitioner  appeared  before  the
subcommittee  on  June  21,  1950.    He  was  then  general  man-
ager  both  of  Freedom  of  the  Press  Co., Inc.,  which publishes
the  Daily  Worker,  and  of  the  Daily  Worker  itself.    During
the  course  of  the  interrogation,   members  of  the  committee
and  the  committee  counsel  posed  various  questions  dealing
with  Bart's  background, his  activities,  and  alleged   associates.
Among  these  were  the  five  questions,  which,  because of  peti-
tioner's  refusal  to  answer,  led  to  the  convictions now  under
scrutiny.   The  particular  inquiries  involve  petitioner's   name
when  he  came to  this  country  as  a  child,  his  name  before  it
was changed years ago to Philip Bart pursuant  to a New York
court  order,  his  father's   name,  and  the  identity  of   officials
of  the  Ohio  section  of  the  Communist Party  in  1936.   To  the
questions  concerning  name  or  family  background,  he  raised
objections of pertinency; to the other, he unequivocally pleaded
the  privilege  against  self-incrimination.
In  finding  petitioner  guilty,  the  trial  court  rejected   these
defenses   as  without  merit.    Before  the   Court  of  Appeals,
petitioner  abandoned  his  defense  as  to  lack  of  pertinency.
The majority  thought  that  this  abandonment  in  effect   erased
petitioner's  objections  from  the  committee  record   and  that
they  were  thus faced  with  "naked  refusals  to  answer"  which
did  not  require  affirmative  rulings  from  the  committee.  We
cannot  agree.   The  objections  were  in  fact  made  before  the
committee  and  the  witness  was  entitled  to  a  clear-cut  ruling
at  that  time,  even  though  the  claims  were  later  abandoned
or found  to be invalid.  Quinn v.  United States, supra.  Without
such  a  ruling,  evidence  of  the  requisite  criminal  intent  to
violate  § 192 is  lacking.   An  abandonment  made  two  and  one-
half  years after  the  objections were raised  cannot  serve  retro-
actively  to  eliminate  the  need  for  a  ruling.   If  the  require-
ment  of  criminal  intent  is  not  satisfied  at  the. time  of  the
hearing,  it  cannot  be satisfied  nunc  pro tune  by a later  aban-
donment  of  petitioner's  objection.  Therefore,  the  issue before
us  is,  upon  the  record  as  it  stood  at  the  completion  of  the
hearing,  whether  petitioner  was  apprised  of  the   committee's
disposition  of  his   objections.
At  no time  did the  committee  directly  overrule  petitioner's
claims  of  self-incrimination   or  lack  of  pertinency.    Nor  was
petitioner   indirectly   informed  of   the   committee's    position
through  a  specific  direction  to  answer.   At  one juncture,  Con-
gressman   Case  made  the  suggestion  to  the  chairman  that
the  witness  "be  advised  of  the  possibilities  of  contempt"   for
failure   to  respond,   but  the   suggestion   was  rejected.    Tho
chairman  stated:
"No.    He  has  counsel.    Counsel  knows  that  is  the  law.
Proceed,  Mr.  Travenner."
"We  Don't  Rule  on  Objections"
A  few  moments  later,  when  committee  counsel  inquired  as
to  certain  details  of  petitioner's  marriage,  the  following   col-
loquy  took  place:
"Mr.   Unger   [Counsel  for   petitioner]:   Mr.  Chairman,
what  concern  is  it  of  anybody here
"Mr.  Walter:  We  permit  you to  appear  with  your  client
for  the  purpose  of  advising  your  client.   You  apparently
are  old enough  to  have  had  some  experience  in  court.
"Mr.  Unger:   Yes, indeed.
"Mr.  Walter:   Of  course,  you  know  there  are  many  pre-
liminary  questions  asked  witnesses,   leading  up   to  some
point.  As  they  are  propounded you will  readily  learn  what
the purpose  is.  Just advise your client and don't  argue  with
the  committee,  because  we  don't  rule  on objections."
The  questioning  proceeded  on  this  basis.
Because  of  the  consistent  failure  to  advise  the  witness  of
the  committee's  position  as  to  his  objections,  petitioner  was
left  to  speculate   about  the  risk  of  possible  prosecution  for
contempt;  he  was  not  given  a  clear  choice  between  standing
on  his  objection  and  compliance  with  a  committee  ruling.
Because  of  this  defect  in  laying  the  necessary   foundation
for  a  prosecution  under  § 192,  petitioner's  conviction cannot
stand  under  the  criteria  set  forth   more  fully   in  Quinn  v.
United  States,  supra.
Our  disposition  of  the  case  makes  it  unnecessary  to  con-
sider  petitioner's  other  contentions.   The  judgment  below  is
reversed  and  the  case  remanded  to  the  District  Court  with
directions  to  enter  a  judgment  of  acquittal.              Reversed.
Harlan  Says  Emspak  Simply  Didn't  Want  to  "Stoolpigeon"
"In  the  last  analysis  the  Court's  holding  seems  to  rest
on  the  premise  that  the  questions  put  to  Emspak  became
automatically  incriminatory once  it  was  shown that  he and
those  about whom  he  was  interrogated  were under suspicion
of  Communism.  This  is  painting   with  too  broad  a  brush.
"It  is  true  that  under  the  rule  as  it  exists  a  witness may
sometimes  have  to   walk   a   tightrope   between  waiver  of
his  privilege,  if  he  answers  a  question  later   held  to  be
incriminatory,  and   contempt,  if   he  refuses   to   answer   a
question  later  held  to  be  nonincriminatory.  And  it  may  be
that  in  some  circumstances  the   privilege  should  be  held
to extend to questions which  are  not in themselves incrimina-
tory,  but  which  seem  likely  to  lead  to  other  questions  which
are.   But  in  my  view  any  such  doctrine  should  be  regarded
as  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  and  should  be  confined
to  cases  where  special  circumstances  exist  which  make  it
unfair  to apply  the  ordinary rule,  such  as  where the  witness
is  without  counsel,  is  ignorant  or  confused,  and  the  like.
Some  of  the  decisions  of  lower  courts  seem  to  suggest  that
in  proceedings  obviously  designed  to  develop a  case  against
a  particular  witness,  the  witness  may  be  allowed  to  invoke
the  privilege  as  to  all  questions,  as  may  a  defendant  in  a
criminal  case.   See  Marcello  v.  United  States,  196  F.  2d
437  (1952);   Maffie  v.  United  States,  209 F.  2d  225  (1954).
I  think,  however, that  such a  view  is  too  sweeping,  and  also
that  where there is  room  for  the  application  of  an  exception
to  the  ordinary   rule,   it   should  be  done  openly,  and  not
under   the    guise   of   holding   nonincriminatory    questions
incriminatory.   No   circumstances  are   shown  here   which
would call  for  the  application  of any  such exception.   Emspak
was  represented  by  counsel and  was  obviously an  intelligent
and   shrewd  witness.   The  inference  most   readily   drawn
from   the  record   is  that  Emspak  did  not  want  to  "stool
pigeon"  against  his  associates.   While  such  a  motive would
not,  in  my  opinion, vitiate  an  otherwise  valid  claim  of  the
privilege,  it  certainly  furnishes  no legal  excuse  for  refusing
to  answer   nonincriminatory   questions."
—Harlan  dissenting  in Emspak  case.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May SO, 1955
The  Fallacy  in  Cain's  Campaign  Against  the  Attorney  General's  List
You  Can't  Have  Thought  Control  and  Free  Thought
Former  Senator  Harry  P.  Cain has  been  campaigning  since
last  winter  against  the  Attorney  General's  list.   His  latest
attack  upon  it  was  made  last  week  before  the  B'nai  B'rith.
We  print  on page  2  those  portions  of  the  speech  which  dealt
with  the  list.  We  believe  it  important   ammunition  for har-
assed  government  employees, teachers  and  defense   workers.
Cain's  campaign  against  the  list  is  one of  the  anomalies  of
Eisenhower  era  Washington.   Though a Truman  appointee  to
the  Subversive Activities  Control  Board, Cain is a Republican.
Though the Attorney General's  list originated  with  the Demo-
crats,  Eisenhower's  Attorney  General,  Brownell, is  an  enthu-
siastic  "lister."    Indeed  Brownell  all  but   added  the  Demo-
cratic  party  to  the  Attorney  General's  list  with  his   "twenty
years  of  treason"  speech  attacking  Harry  Truman.
So  we  have  a  witch  hunting  Attorney  General  confronted
with  a series of attacks from  a  fellow  Republican,  serving on
the  board  of  an  administrative  agency  set  up  for  witch  hunt-
ing  purposes.
Why  the  conflict ?   In  a  sense,  of course, the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  and the  SACB are  rival  "listers." The SACB is in  process
of  compiling a list  of its  own under the  terms of  the  Internal
Security  Act, which  provides  for  the  registration  of  Commu-
nists,  Communist "action" organizations,  Communist  "fronts"
and  now  of  Communist "infiltrated"   organizations.    The  ex-
cesses  and follies  of  the  Attorneys  General  in  compiling their
list  helps to  bring  into  disrepute  any such  blacklist,  including
that  which  the  SACB has  begun  to  compile.    Cain  may  feel
that  without  some  reform  and  restraint,  popular   revulsion
may  sweep  both  away.
Like  A  Benevolent   Despot
Cain  has  become a  kind  of  Haroun  Al-Raschid  of  the  secu-
rity  world.   Just  as  the  legendary  Sultan  by  personal  inter-
vention  sought  to  alleviate  the  abuses  of the  despotic   system
he  headed, so  Cain  has  been  making forays  on  behalf  of vic-
timized  "security  risks."    His  prestige  and  his   sympathy
have  built  up  a  circle  of  informal  "clients"  like  the   poor
woman  denied  a  passport  whom  he  frightened  the  State  De-
partment  into  clearing  for  travel  recently.   He  has  learned
much  from  these  experiences.
But  as  yet  Cain  is  only  trying  to  reform  the  security sys-
tem  not  to abolish it.   He would not be the  first  reformer who
ended  up  by becoming a  revolutionary, but  he  is  still  to  take
a  genuinely  liberal  position.   He  attacked  the  repressionist
Broyles  bills  now  up  again  in  Illinois,  but  he  praises  New
York's  Feinberg law  and  the  purge  of  teachers  being  carried
on  under  it.
Cain  would  like  to  identify,  label,  ostracize  and  blacklist
the  Communists,  and  their  fronts  and  fellow  travellers,  but
without  letting  the  witch  hunt  spread  beyond them.   This,  as
he  will  learn,  is  not  possible.    In  the  first  place  the  U.  S.
Chamber  of  Commerce which  fathered  the  Internal  Security  ,
Act  intended it  to  apply  beyond  the  Communists. The Mundt-
Nixon  and McCarran bills  were part  of  a  deliberate  campaign
by  the  Chamber to  drive  radicals  and  liberals  of  any  kind off
the  air, out  of  newspapers,  libraries,   teaching,  government
and  every  agency which had  to  do with  the  making of opinion
and  policy.   What  the  Chamber  wants  is  to  prevent  a  new
New  Deal,  and  to  create  an  Orwellized America in  which dis-
sent  from  "free  enterprise"   orthodoxy  is  dangerous.
Repression  Creates   Conspiracy
Another  obstacle  lies  in  the  nature  of  men.   If  you  make
some  kinds  of  thinking  hazardous,  the   cautious  will  avoid
thinking  altogether.    As  for  the  others,  the  resistant  few, if
you  do  not  let  men  speak  freely,  you  force  them  to  conspire.
And  when men conspire, how can  you tell  whether that  liberal
reformer  might  not  secretly  be  a  dangerous  revolutionary?
The  abuses  of  the  Attorney  General's  list  are  not  accidental
but  spring  front the  momentum of any attempt to  police  men's
thoughts  and political  associations.    We must  run  the  risks of
freedom  or  those  of  repression.    We  cannot  avoid  both.
Cain  said  in  his  speech,  "In  recent  years,  we  have  done  a
remarkably  shortsighted  job in  failing  ...     to  distinguish
clearly  between  dissent  and treason."  We have  done a  short-
sighted  job  because  we  have  abandoned the  only  way  to dis-
tinguish  them  which is  compatible  with  a  free  society.   That
is  the  way  chosen  by  the  Framers  of  the  Constitution.    If
Senator  Cain will  re-study  the  treason  clause,  he will  see how
they  handled  it.    They  did  so  by  limiting  treason   to  overt
acts, and making  it  impossible  to prosecute  a  man for  treason
merely  on  the  basis  of  his  political  opinions  or   associations.
For  Compass   Fans
The  Weekly  is  pleased  to  announce that  Mr.  Ted  O.
Thackrey,  formerly  editor   and  publisher   of  the  New
York  Daily  Compass, has  launched  a  newsletter  of  his
own,  appearing  twice  monthly.    The  regular  subscrip-
tion  will  be  $6 a  year  but  the  charter  rate  is  $5.   Mr.
Thackrey's  address  is  225 Lafayette  Street,  New York
12, N.Y.  We extend  our  best  wishes  to  the  new  project.
You  Can  Still  Take  Advantage   of  Our  Special   6-month   $2   Gift   Subscription       Offer
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F. Stone's Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my
Street
City
Knter gift  sub  for  $2 (6 inos.)
(To)  Name
Street
City                                   .,
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
E.  Capitol,
sub  for  the
Zone
or  $4 (1  yr
..Zone
Wash.  3,  D.  C.
!  enclosed $5:*
State
) additional:
State
5/30/55
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol St.. S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED