I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jul18.pdf

============================================================

The  New  York  Times  Opens  the  Gates  to  the  Enemies  of  A  Free  Press,  See  Page 4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 27
JULY  18,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Einstein-Russell  Warning  to  Our Planet  Evokes  Little  Echo  in  Congress
"We  Have  to  Learn  to  Think   In  A  New   Way"
In  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  there  was  little  evi-
dence  of  any  such  new  way  of  thinking.   On   Saturday   the
warning signed  by Einstein before he  died had  been made pub-
lic  in  London  by  Bertrand  Russell.  Nine  of  mankind's  great-
est  minds had  warned  that  war  might  now  mean  the  total  de-
struction  of  our  species.   "We  have  to  learn  to  think  in  a  new
way,"  was the  core of  their message.  It  went  almost  unnoticed
when  Congress  reopened  on  Monday.
No  Senator  seemed  to  think  the  Russell-Einstein  statement
worth  reprinting in the  Appendix.  Neuberger  put  in  an article
called  "Flying  Is  Folksy  on  A  Feeder";  Bennett,  the  full  text
of  an  address  in  Syracuse  on  subversives  by  Stanley  J.  Tracy,
chairman,  organizing  committee,  the  Foundation  for  American
Research;  and  Morse  reprinted  an  editorial from  the  Louisville
Courier-Journal  on  "A  Bus Strike Tests  Free  Enterprise."   But
none  of  the  thirteen  Senators who  inserted  material  in  the  Ap-
pendix  that  day thought  of  including the warning to  mankind.
Often  the  same article  or  speech  is put  into  the  Appendix  sev-
eral  times  by  various members.   In  this  case,  a  lone  Congress-
man,    the  Hon.  Daniel   J.  Flood,   a  Democrat   from   Wilkes-
Barre,  Pennsylvania,  did  include  the  historic  text  among  other
"extraneous  remarks."    We  salute  him  for  it.
Dismissed  As  "Naive"
Though  the  meeting  at  the  summit  was  heatedly  discussed
on  the floor of  both  Houses,  there was only one reference made
to  the  Russell-Einstein  statement.   This  was  by  Senator  Flan-
ders.  He  thought  the  scientists  were  "right  in  emphasizing the
horrors  of  atomic warfare"  but  "naive  in urging  agreements  to
end  atomic  warfare."   This  enlightened  Republican  from  Ver-
mont  thinks  the  bombing  of  cities  "bestial"  and  proposes  that
we  "unilaterally"  renounce  it  "except  in  reprisal."   But  he be-
lieves  "it  may be necessary for  us,  in  order  to  deal  from  a posi-
tion  of  strength,  to  retain  the  power  and  the  right  to  use tacti-
cal  bombing"   against   troop   concentrations,   communications
and  supply  depots.   This  is  the  Eisenhower-Dulles   policy  of
using  tactical  atomic  weapons  as  one  would—so  the  President
termed  it—"a  pistol."
That  atomic  weapons  may be used  with  humane  precision  to
kill  soldiers  but  not  civilians  is the  delusion  being  fostered  by
our  government  in  the  hope  of  retaining  the  use  of  its terrible
new  -military  toys.   But  only  one  Senator   rose  to  combat  it.
Mansfield  told  Flanders  he  was  "flirting  with  a  mirage."   Said
the  Montana  Democrat,  "Military  installations  are usually near
towns  and  cities.   A  weapon  large  enough  to  insure  the  de-
struction  of  such  a  military  target  will  almost  inevitably  take  a
toll  of  non-military  areas.   To  paralyze  an  enemy  it  would  be
necessary  to  hit  the  centers  of  industry,  which  are heavily  pop-
ulated.  . . . We can expect  retaliation.  . . . The  enemy may  not
have  perfected  a  tactical  atomic  or  hydrogen  weapon,  so  they
will   drop   several  large   ones.     The   next   step   would   be  a
thermonuclear  holocaust.  .  .  ."
The  New  Horror   Coming
Little  attention  was  paid   by  the  press   to  this   exchange,
though  in  the  course  of  it  Senator  Mansfield made  an  observa-
tion   on  which  all   friends   of   peace   should   focus   attention.
There  was  a  time  when  a  ban  on  further  atomic  tests  would
have  prevented  the  development  of  the  H-bomb.    The  next
horror  will   be  the   intercontinental  ballistic  missile;   in  five
years  or  so,  at  the  present  rate,  both  sides  will  have  it,  and
neither  will  be  able  to  sleep  at  nights.   If  IBM's  are  perfected
the  mutual  suspicion  and  internal  fears  will  create  a  hell  of
anxiety  on  earth.  Radar  and  fighter  planes  will  be  no  protec-
tion.   Senator  Mansfield  points out  that  an  international  agree-
ment  to  bar  further  nuclear  tests  might  prevent  the   develop-
ment  of  the  IBM,   since  these  would  carry  nuclear  warheads.
"The   scientists  could  not  be  sure  that  the  missile  would  per-
form  as  calculated"  without  an  actual  test.   Mutual  agreement
might  yet save the human Frankenstein  from  this  last  and  most
terrifying  of  its  monsters.
But  except  for  these  small  inadequate  voices  there  was  no
echo  in  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  to  the  deep  bells set
tolling  over  the planet  by Russell and  Einstein.  Were the  earth
suddenly  menaced  from  without  by  another  invading  species,
Russians  and  Americans  would  close  ranks  with  the  rest  of
mankind.   But  the  common  danger  which  arises from  common
hatred  and  the  common  possession   of  weapons  too  deadly  to
be  used  is  too  familiar  for  man's  feeble  imaginationv   In  the
House,  McCormack  spewed hate of  co-existence,  Dodd  of  Con-
necticut  was applauded  for  talking  in terms  which  would  make
war  inevitable.   In  the  Senate,  the  mainsprings of  action  were
in  the  desire  of  both  the  Republican  and  Democratic  majori-
ties  not  to  be  outmaneuvered  on  the  satellite  issue  by  the  Mc-
Carthy  extremists  in  the  play  for  the  Polish   and  other  East
European  voting  blocs.
As  the  summit  meeting  opens,  one  can  only  hope  that  East
and  West—already  frozen  into  irreconcilable  positions  on  the
German  question—will  lift  their  eyes  from  stale  and   obsolete
quarrels  to  the  full  immensity of  the  new  danger.   Something
will  be  achieved  if  not  too  much  is  attempted.   Einstein, Rus-
sell  and  the  other  scientists  expressed   succinctly  the   modest
goal:  "Any  agreement  between  East  and  West  is  to  the  good
insofar  as it  tends  to  diminish  tension."  Hate and  fear  are  the
common  enemies,  and  only  when  they  are  put  to  rout  can  we
begin  to  make  homo  sapiens  secure  again:
1  .t
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, July  18,1955
I.  G. Farben's  Old Swiss  "Front"  Thwarted   Again
Court  Dismisses  $100   Million  Suit  For  Former  German  Property
If  you will  recall that  lurid  but  not  inaccurate  image  of  I.
G.  Farben,  the  German  chemical  empire,  as  an  octopus  with
tentacles in every  country in  the  world, you will be  interested
to  know that  an  American  court  may have just  denied it  the
use  of  one  of  its   appendages.
The  U.  S.  Court  of  Appeals  here  has  upheld dismissal  of  a
suit   to   regain   control   of   General  Aniline   &  Film   Corp.
(GAF),  Farben's  major   prewar   American  property.    The
suit  was  brought  by  a  Swiss  holding  company, I.  G. Chemie,
which  indignantly  denies  the  insinuation  that  if  it  ever  re-
gained  control,  GAF  might  find  its  way  back  into  German
hands.    Chemie admits it  was founded  by Farben  in  1928  and
once controlled  GAF for  the  German  firm.  But  it  claims that
by  1940  its  Swiss  members  kicked  the  Germans  out  and  it
functioned  as a neutral  all during  World War II. As a neutral,
it  claims  it  is  entitled  to  recover  the  property.
What  the  holding  company seeks  to  regain  is  the  largest
block  of  enemy  property  in  this  country   appropriated  in
World  War   II:   more  than   $100  million  worth  of  stock  of
GAF,  a  leading  producer  of  dyestuffs   and  chemicals,   and
about  $2  million  in  cash.   The  Office  of  Alien  Property  took
the  property   over  in   1942  on  the  suspicion  that  the   Swiss
were  merely  "fronts"  for   German  interests.
The  government  replies  to  Chemie's  claim  of independence
by  saying  the  holding company only pretended  to  break  with
Farben;  that  straight  through  to  the  end of  the  war  it  con-
spired  with  a  Swiss  bank,  H.  Sturzenegger   &  Co.,  to  cloak
Farben  assets.  GAP attorneys  persuaded  the  District  Court
that  the  bank's  records  were  indispensable  to  any  proof  of
Chemie's  non-enemy status.
Chemie  was  first  ordered  to  produce  the  bank's  records  in
1949.  But  in  1950, before  OAP attorneys could fly to  Switzer-
land  to  see them,  they  were  impounded by the  Swiss  govern-
ment.
David  Schwartz,  principal  OAP attorney,  claims  the  Swiss
impounded  the  Sturzenegger  papers  to  save  Chemie from  any
embarrassment.    He  pictured  a  relationship  between Chemie
and  the  bank,  which  he  said  the  Sturzenegger  papers  would
document, that was like a  scenario  for  a  spy-film.
Sturzenegger  was  in  no  sense a  commercial  bank,  he  said.
It  was  housed  in  a  private  villa  in  a  residential   section  of
"Any  bill  which  permits  a  facility  like  General  Ani-
line  &  Film   to   get  into  the  hands  of non-American
owners  should  foresee  the  possibility  that  the  control
would  be  misused  within  six  months or  a  year."
—Col. Dallas S.  Townsend, director  of  the     Office
of  Alien  Property,  testifying   against  the  Dirk-
sen  bill  to  return  seized  Axis  properties.
Basle.    In  the  30 years  of  its  existence  it  had  had  no  more
than  50 to  100 depositors,  none that  was  not  in  someway con-
nected  with  Farben.   Chemie, Schwartz  said,  started  as  "just
a  thing  in  the  drawer  at  Sturzenegger;   what  we call  a  desk
drawer   corporation."    In   1937  Chemie  outgrew  the   drawer
and  moved to  its  own villa, around  the  corner  from  the  bank
and  separated  from  it  only  by  a  garden.   From  these  head-
quarters,  Schwartz  charged,  the  bank  and  the  holding com-
pany  did  odd jobs for  Farben  and  the  Germany  Army.   The
records  would  show,  he  predicted,  that  Chemie was  as  deeply
involved  as  Sturzenegger  in  covering  up  for  the  Nazis.
"Delay,  Time  Is  On Our  Side"
Meanwhile  the  fight  to  regain   GAF  goes  on  outside  the
courts.   Last  term  and  this  term  Sen.  Everett  Dirksen   (R.,
111.)  has  introduced bills that  Col. Dallas  S.  Townsend, Direc-
tor   of  OAP,  said  would  give  Chemie  complete  power  over
GAF  for  a  year  and  permit  it  to  sell  the  company in  that
period.   Last  year  the  bill  was  never  called  up  and  it  may
never  reach  a  vote this year,  either.  But  Chemie has  another
chance  to  get  control  of  GAP.  Both  the  President  and  Chan-
cellor  Adenauer  agreed  at  their  conference  here  last  year,
that  GAF  and  other  property  seized in  the  war  should be re-
turned.   There  are  willing hands  on the  Hill  to  introduce  the
legislation  necessary  to  carry  out  this  agreement.
There  is  a  timely  ring  to  the  advice a  Chemie director  ad-
dressed  to a  colleague in  1945 on how the  claim for  GAF's  re-
turn  should  be  prosecuted.   "Delay,"  he  wrote.   "Time  is  on
our  side.  The causes underlying the  attitude of the Americans
will  disappear  in  time.  Matters  will  assume  a  different  com-
plexion  as  time  passes,  even  with   Americans."
Economic  Storm  Warning:  The  Facts  Behind The  Steel  Price  Rise
Wholesale  prices  have  been  fairly  steady  for  four  years.
The  new  steel  price  boost  may  set  off  a  new inflationary
spiral.    Privately   some  government  economists  here   are
appalled  at  the  size  of  the  price  rise.   Iron  Age,  organ  of
the  steel  industry,  forecast  an  average  increase  of  $4.50  to
$5  a  ton.   U.  S.  Steel  instead  boosted  prices  an  average  of
almost   $7.50.
Against  the  background of  U.  S. Steel's  record  this  year,
the  increase  is  described  as  "brazen."   In  the  first  quarter
of  this year,  its  best  ever,  U. S. Steel  chalked up  $43,000,000
MORE  in  sales  while paying  $3,000,000  LESS  in  wages,  and
$20,000,000  LESS  for  supplies.   Earnings  per  share  of com-
mon  rose  50 percent  over  the  first  quarter  of last year,  from
$1.48  to  $2.49.  .
It  is  estimated  that  the  rise  in  wages  and  salaries  this
year  will cost  U. S.  Steel  $104,000,000.   At  the  rate  of  earn-
ings  before  taxes  the  first  quarter  it  will  make some $600,-
000,000  this  year.   The  wage  boost  could  easily  have  been
absorbed,  and  net  earnings   would  still  have  been   greater
than  last  year.    In  the  first  quarter  alone  the  rise  in  net
before  taxes  (out  of  which  wages  are  paid)  was  over  $60,-
000,000.   The  price  boost  is  expected  to  give  U.  S.  Steel  an
additional  $188,000,000 in  revenue.
Iron  Age  estimated  the  increased  wage  and  salary  costs
for   the  industry  at  $225,000,000.   "Actual  costs,"  said   its
issue  of   July   7,  "will   eventually  be  roughly   twice   that
amount  due  to  subsequent  increases   in  cost  of  goods  and
services."   That  would  still  only be  $450,000,000.   The  price
increase  will  give  the  industry  an  increase   of  more  than
$600,000,000.
The  rest  of  the  industry  is  doing  as  well  or  better  than
U.  S.  Steel.   The  eleven  leading  steel  companies  increased
their  earnings  55  percent  in  the  first  quarter  of  1955  over
the  first  quarter  of  1954.   Fourteen  small  steel  companies
increased  their  earnings  by  149 percent.
AH  will  of  course  follow  the  prices  posted  by  U.  S.  Steel.
For  some,  in  certain  lines,  the  new  prices  will  be  fantasti-
cally  out  of  line with costs.   Thus again,  by  a  process  which
in  no  way  resembles  the  operations  of  a  free   enterprise
market,  the  decision  of  a  handful  of  private  administrators
will  determine not  only the  cost  of  our  basic  industrial  com-
modity  but  may  upset  economic stability  here  and  abroad.
Industry  apologists  claim  the  increase  is  needed  to make
possible greater  expansion.   In saying  so they  confess  their
monopolistic pricing  methods.   A competitive industry  exist-
ing  in  a  competitive  market  cannot  raise  capital  this  way,
by  overcharging  the  consumer.   In  any  case  (1)  talk  of  ex-
pansion  is  exaggerated  as  an  excuse  for  the  price  rise  and
(2)  expansion  is  being financed at  the  U.  S.  Treasury's  ex-
pense  anyway, via  accelerated  amortization  privileges.
In  the  last  two  years,  U.  S.  Steel  has  added  $200,000,000
to  facilities  by  the  easy  method  of  writing  them  off against
its  tax  bill.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  18,19SS
Godkin  Lectures  Also  Disclose  He  Thought  New Immunity  Law  Unconstitutional
Justice  Jackson's   Posthumous  Warning   Against  the  FBI
Harvard  has  just  published  the  three  Godkin lectures  the
late  Supreme  Court  Justice  Robert  H.  Jackson  was  to  have
delivered there this year.  Few reviewers have  had  the  temer-
ity  to  mention the  big  news  story  in  this  posthumous volume
(The  Supreme  Court in  the American  System.   Harvard  Univ.
Press).  It  is  Jackson's  warning  against  the   FBI.
Jackson  approached the  subject from  an  unexpected angle:
his  doubts  about  the  wisdom of  the  old  Civil  Rights  Statutes
revived  in  our  time  to protect  Negro  rights.   "If  the  Depart-
ment  of Justice  must  prosecute  local  officials,"  Jackson  wrote,
"the  FBI  must  investigate  them,  and  no  local  agency  which
is  subject  to  federal  investigation,  inspection  and  discipline
is  a  free  agency.
"I  cannot  say,"  Jackson  continued, "that  our  country could
have  no  central   police  without  becoming totalitarian,  but  1
can  say  with  great  conviction that  it  cannot  become totali-
tarian  without  a  centralized  national  police."
How The Nazis Did  It
Recalling  his  own  experience  as  prosecutor  in  the  Nurem-
berg trials,  Jackson  went  on to  say that  Goering  "with  great
candor  related  the  steps  by  which  the  Nazi  party  obtained
complete  domination  of  Germany,  and   one  of  the   first   was
the  establishment  of  the  supremacy  of  the  national  over  the
local  police  authorities.    So  it  was  in  Russia,  and  so  it  has
been  in  every  totalitarian  state."
"All  that  is  necessary,"  Jackson  wrote,  "is  to  have  a  na-
tional  police  competent  to  investigate  all  manner  of  offenses,
and  then, in  the  parlance  of the  street, it  will  have  enough on
enough  people, even  if  it  does not  elect  to  prosecute  them,  so
that  it  will find no opposition  to  its  policies.   Even  those who
are  supposed to  supervise  it  are  likely  to  fear  it.
"I  believe,"  Jackson  concluded, "that  the  safeguard  of  our
liberty  lies  in  limiting  any  national  policing  or  investigative
organization,  first  of  all  to  a  small  number  of  strictly  federal
offenses,  and  secondly  to  non-political  ones."
Odd  Road  to  Fascism
The  Justice's meaning  is  clear  enough, though  his  approch
is  curious.   There  is  something  almost  satirical  in  the  notion
that  the  U.  S. would move toward  totalitarianism  if  the  FBI
began   to   spend   too  much  time   helping   to   prosecute   the
lynchers  and  racist  police  departments  of  the   South.
It  was  not  centralized  police  departments—both   England
and  France  have  them  without  loss  of  liberty—which  made
Hitler's  rise  possible  but  the  deliberate  spread  of  a  national
psychosis  about  Jews   and   Marxists   much  like  ours   about
Communists.   Not  the  Civil  Right  Statutes  but  the  new  sedi-
tion  laws  have  enabled  the  FBI  to  concentrate   on  political
heresy  with   all  the   attendant   power  of  intimidation   and
blackmail.
The  warning  is  nonetheless  useful,  especially  from  a  Su-
preme  Court  Justice  who had  himself  been  an  Attorney  Gen-
eral  and  seen  the  workings  of  the  FBI  at  first  hand.    The
We  Didn't  Realize The  Sokolskys
Came  Over  on  the   Mayflower
"When  the  United  States   was  short   of  population,
particularly  of  men  who  could  do  heavy  labor,  it  im-
ported  large  numbers  of  peasants  from   Poland,  Hun-
gary,   Czechoslovakia,   Italy   and   other   eastern   and
southern  European  countries.  .  .  .  Today  most  of the
work  that  those  men  did  is  done  by  machines  and  they
are  no longer  essential.  . . .
"The  trouble  with  those  who advocate  changes  In  our
immigration  laws  is  that  they  do  not  face   the   facts
squarely. . . . The  national  origins  quota  system  ...  so
works  out  that  about  70 percent  of  the  visas  available
each   year   go  to   countries  of   northern   and   western
Europe.   This  has  nothing  to  do  with  race,  religion  or
local  habitat.    It  has  to  do  with  the  assimilability  of
immigrants.    Those  who  voted  for  such  a  law  believe
that  ours  is  an  Anglo-Saxon  culture."
—George Sokolsky,  in  the Hearst  press, July  12
lectures   contain   two   other   bits   of   ammunition   for   civil
libertarians.
ITEM:  The  Attorney  General's  list.    Jackson  wrote  that
though  the  Supreme Court  in  1951  "cast  serious  doubt upon
the  legality  of the  Attorney  General's  list  it  has  never  ceased
to  be  used  in  the  press,  in  the  executive  department,  by  and
before  congressional  committees, and  even in  courts  to  preju-
dice  individuals  in  their  liberty,  position  and  good  name."
Not  Immunity Law
ITEM:  Wiretap  and  immunity  legislation.    Jackson   took
the  position  that  the   Constitution  in  limiting  the  Federal
courts  to  actual  "cases  and  controversies"  casts  serious  doubt
on the  validity  of  legislative  proposals  which would  "empower
judges to grant  or  deny wiretapping  rights to a  prosecutor  or
to  approve  a  waiver  of  prosecution  in  order  to  force  a  wit-
ness  to  give  self-incriminating   testimony."
A  bill  to  permit  wiretapping  on  order  of  a  Federal  judge
failed  to  pass  at  the  last  session.   But  the  immunity  bill  be-
came  law;  a  judge  decides  whether  "to  approve  a  waiver  of
prosecution"  under  just  such  circumstances  as  Jackson  de-
scribes.    The  point  made  by  Jackson  was  made  by  defense
counsel  in  the  Ullmann  case  in  the  lower  courts  and  the  Su-
preme  Court  has- already  agreed  to hear  this  first  test  of  the
new immunity law.
The lectures  end on a  veiled apologia.  Jackson  pleads,  as  if
in  extenuation,  that  the  preservation  of  civil liberties depends
more  on  "the  attitude  of  a  society and  of  its  organized  politi-
cal  forces,  rather  than  its  legal  machinery. . . ." This  is true
but  begs  the  question.  Judges  like ordinary  citizens must  also
do their  duty.   The  apathy  of  the  people  does  not  excuse  the
timidity   of  the  judges.   It   only  makes  their   responsibility
heavier.
How  the  State  Dept.  Strives  Manfully  for  Social  Justice  Abroad
Mr.  [Ivor  D.]  DENTON  [R.,  Pa.].   I  understand  that  the    in  these  countries.
[Mutual  Security]  program  has  not  been  so  much  help  to
the  poorer  classes  of  people  who have  been  more  subject  to
communism than anyone else, that  they are paying  the heavy
taxes  in those countries.   Can you say  anything  about  that?
Secretary  DULLES.   I  think it  is correct  that  in  many of
the  countries  that  we help,  perhaps  most  of  them,  the  taxa-
tion  system  does  not  conform   to  our  standards   of   social
justice . ..  but I do not think the international situation  per-
mits  us  to  condition  aid  which is  important  for  purposes of
our  own security  upon the  improvement of  the  tax  situation
Mr.  DENTON.   Do we do anything to  see  that  the  money
is  going  to  people  more  subject   to  communism  than   the
people  who  are  well  to  do?
Secretary DULLES:   We try.   In relation  to such matters
as  offshore  procurement, let  us  say,  we  have  been  experi-
menting   in  certain  countries  in   insisting   that    contracts
should  not  be  placed  with  companies  which  are  dominated
by  Communist  labor  unions, and  we have tried  to  encourage
the prosperity  and well-being of companies that  operate with
free  labor  rather  than  Communist-controlled  labor.
—House  Appropriations  Com., testimony  on mutual  security,  June  9
A   1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  18,  1955
Swift  Discharge  of  5th  Amendment   Pleader   Forces  Employes  to  Inform
The  New  York  Times  Opens  the  Gates  to  Its   Enemies
Arthur  Hays  Sulzberger,  publisher  of the  New  York  Times,
struck  a  blow  at  his  own paper  and  at  American journalism
by  his  ignominously  swift  letter  to  Senator   Eastland   dis-
charging  a  copy reader  who had  invoked the  Fifth  amendment
before  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee.  Melvin  Bar-
net,  a  pre-war  employe  of  the  Brooklyn  Eagle,  one  of  those
named  by  Winston  Burdett,  said  he  had  not  been  a  Commu-
nist  since  February   or  March,  1942,  but  declined  to  answer
questions  about  the  earlier  period.  In  any  ordinary  criminal
prosecution  questions  that  far  back  would have  been  barred
anyway  by the  statute of limitations.   How can  the  Times  edi-
torially   support   the  Fifth   amendment  and  discharge   those
who  invoke it?   Reactionaries  have long been gunning  for  the
Times.  Its  brand  of  independent  conservatism  is  unpalatable
to  them.   To  smear  it  and  break  it  morally  was  one  of Mc-
Carthy's  objectives.   In  discharging  Barnet,  it  gives  its  em-
ployes  a  choice  of  becoming informers  before  Eastland   (and
almost  certainly  involving others  on  its  staff)   or  losing  their
jobs.   Instead   of  standing   on  First  and  Fifth   amendment
principles,  Sulzberger  invites  the  witch  hunters  in.  The  con-
sequences  for  his  paper  and  others  may  be  serious.
The  Eastland  committee  is  trying  hard  to  reestablish  in-
forming—the  right  kind  that  is.  It  has  never  dared  accept
Clifford  Durr's challenge to pit his word against  Paul  Crouch's
but  Amos Landman, another  former  Brooklyn  Eagle employe,
was  recalled  to  be put  in  the  pillory and  threatened  with  con-
tempt  because he told  the  Providence Journal  that  he had  in-
voked  the  Fifth   to  protect   others.    Not  a   single  informer
caught   in  perjury   on  the  government's  side  has   ever  been
touched  by  the  witch  hunters  or  the  Department  of  Justice
but  Eastland  and  Brownell are  still  out to crush  and  terrorize
all  those  who took part  in  the  turnabout  of  Harvey  Matusow.
The  new  indictment  returned  against  him  in  New  York,  and
the  indictment of  two  respected  lawyers  and  Marty  Solow of
The  Nation  for  conspiracy  to  obstruct  justice,  is  a  challenge
to  the  conscience of the  country.
It  begins  to  look  as  if  there  is  a  fundamental  change  of
policy  reflected  in  the  passport   situation.   The  sudden  grant
of  passports   to  Clark  Foreman,  Martin  Kamen,  Willard  Z.
Park  and  Joseph  Clark  of the  Daily  Worker  looks like  a  com-
plete  collapse  in  our  own  Iron  Curtain  policy.   In  the  first
three  cases,  passports  were  granted   although  all  the  court
had  ordered  was  a  real  hearing.   The  Department's   action
confesses  that there  would have been no real  evidence to  sub-
mit  at  such  a  hearing.   The  Clark  passport  is  the  most  sur-
prising  of  all.  As  a  writer  for  the  Daily  Worker,  he  is  ineli-
Sidelight  on  Those  Chinese  Guerrillas
San  Francisco—A  divorced  woman  was  granted   tem-
porary  custody   of  her  5-year-old   son  from  his   father,
Roy  F.  Watts,  31, of  Taipeh,  Formosa,  in  Domestic  Re-
lations  Court  here,  on  the  plea  that  the  latter  was  too
much  of  a  daredevil.    According  to  the  San  Francisco
Chronicle    (July   8)   she  said  Watts  was   employed   by
Civil  Air  Transport,   Inc.,  at  $2,000  a  month.   "In expla-
nation  of  the  high  pay,  she  said his  duties  include  drop-
ping  Nationalist  Chinese  guerrillas  into  Red  China."
gible  for  a  passport  under  a  half  dozen  provisions  of  the  de-
partmental  regulations:  he follows  party  line,  advances  party
aims,  has  associated  over  the  years  with   Communists,   etc.,
and  he  failed  to  sign  an  affidavit  swearing  that  he  is  not  a
Communist.  If  a  Communist can get  a passport without  sign-
ing   this   humiliating   affidavit,   it   is   time   non-Communists
refused  to  sign  it,  too.
The  latest  revelations  about  First  Boston  Corporation  have
done  more  than   wreck   the   Dixon-Yates   deal.   They  have
ended  Republican hopes  of  "turning  back  the  clock"  on  TVA
and  public  power  generally.   Senators  Langer,  Kefauver  and
Hill  deserve  applause  for  uncovering the  missing  link  in  this
scandal—the  Wenzell memorandum.  This  showed that Dixon-
Yates  was  part  of  a  well  conceived  plan  to  dismantle  TVA
and  hand  over  more  and  more  of  its  power  functions  piece-
meal  to  private  industry.   Dixon-Yates  will  not  win  the  next
election  against  Eisenhower,  but  the  President's  surrender
means  that  on  power  as  on  most  other   social   policies   the
G.O.P. must  accept  a  moderate  New  Dealism  to  stay  in  office.
Despite  swift  communications and  the  press,  the  Germans
manage  to  talk  one way  in the  West  and  another  in  the  East
and  get  away  with  it.   How many Americans  noticed that  the
German  reply  to the  invitation  from  Moscow omitted  all  those
preconditions about  war  prisoners,  Oder-Neisse and the  Soviet
zone  government  about  which  Adenauer  talked  so  boldly  in
this  country?  .  .  . The British  wanted  the  meetings  "at the
summit"  to  be  held  without  having  the   Foreign    Ministers
present,  a  way  to  talk  without  Dulles  but  Eisenhower  in-
sisted  on having the Secretary of State along. ...   The Chinese
Communists have  been "behaving" themselves  on  Formosa  on
the  assumption   (sold  them  by  neutral  mediators)   that  this
was  the  way to  get  the  U. S. into  direct  negotiations.   Watch
for  a  new eruption  as  hope  of such  talks  evaporates.  .  . .
Take  Advantage   of  Our  Special  Six  Month  Introductory    Offer    at  Only  $2  to  Send  The  Weekly   to  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
CKy   .„                                        Zone           State
Enter gift  sub for  $2 (6  no*.)   or $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name                                                                        ..._....
Street                                    _
City             _                             .Zone.         State....
* $1 extra  for  Canada.                                                   7/18/55
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capital  St.,   S. E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED