I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955nov21.pdf

============================================================

Special  Double  Issue
Full  Text:  Prof.  Alexander  Meiklejohn's  Historic  Testimony  on the  First  Amendment
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NOS.  43  &  44             NOVEMBER  21,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
Showdown  Coming:  Is  Dulles  or  Eisenhower  to  Make  U.S.  Foreign  Policy?
What  Really  Happened   at  Geneva
It  may  be  that  Dulles  told  his  Western   colleagues   that  if
only  they  said  "nyet"  to  the  bitter  end,  they  would  be  reward-
ed  at  the  penultimate   hour  by  a  Russian   surrender  on  the
German   question.     If   so,  they  have  been   led   into  a  blind
alley.   Molotov  would  not  budge;  he  was  intransigeant.   This
is the  refrain  of  the  journalistic chorus which  responds  to  every
motion  of  the  State  Department  baton.    But  nobody  stops  to
consider  that  we,  too,  did  not  budge;  that  we,  too,  were  in-
transigeant.    We  insisted  that  we  would  accept  nothing  else
but  a  rearmed  and  reunited  Germany  allied  with  us  against
the  Soviet  bloc.    A  Russian  rejection  was  expected.    Would
we  agree  to  release  Western  Germany  in  order  that  it  might
join  the  Warsaw  pact?    Yet  such  is  the  imbecility  to  which
American  opinion  has  been  reduced  by  our  own  propaganda
that  Walter  Lippmann  seems  to  be  the  only  major  commen-
tator  who  sees  the  obvious.   Geneva,  on  this  basis,  had  to  fail.
From  the  standpoint  of  world  opinion, the  Russians  emerge
with  a  better  position.   We  wanted  a  rearmed  Germany  allied
with  the West; they, a  neutralized Germany.   From  the stand-
point  of   the.  Germans,   the  failure   leaves  them   no  recourse
but  direct  negotiations  with  Moscow.    From  the  standpoint  of
America,  this  may  prove   disastrous.    The   German   right   is
friendly  to  a  Russian  deal.    To  harden  the  lines,  of  the  cold
war  again  is  to  lay  the  groundwork  for  a  new  Russo-German
entente;  what  this  would  do  to  the  world  balance  of  power  is
comparable  only  to  the  Chinese  upheaval.
The  Geneva  balance  sheet  totes  up  against  us.    The   Rus-
sians  were  ready  to  accept  inspection  if  we  accepted  arms  re-
duction  and  the  outlawing  of  the  bomb;  we  were  serious  only
about  that  glamorous  Madison  Avenue  phoney—aerial  inspec-
tion.   This would  have given  us a map of  Russian  installations,
free  of  charge  as  it  were,  with  no  commitment  in  return.    As
for   Item  Three,  the  Russian  proposals  fell   far  short  of   the
Utopian,  but  could  one  expect  their  curtain  to  be  raised  over-
night?    Their   proposals   involved  a  freer   interchange;  these
were  rejected  for  the  sake  of  the  counter  revolutionary muez-
zins  of  Radio  "Free  Europe."    Rather  than  make  some  prog-
ress  toward  a  world  without  barriers,   the  State   Department
prefers  to  see  nailed  down  again  the  curtain  which  has  been
slowly  rising.    The  Russians would  be  playing  into  the  hands
of  their  worst  enemies  if  they  turned  back  into  isolation  and
the  room  without  windows  which  was  Stalin's  Russia.
The  Repercussions   in  Washington
Dulles  fought  hard  against  the  meeting  "at  the   summit"
and   has   succeeded   in   undoing   its   fruits.     His   success   in
achieving  a  failure  has  released  an  anvil  chorus  here,  not  only
in  the  right  wing  of  the  Republican  party  and  in  the military
circles  which  want  more  spending   money,  but   even   in  the
"liberal" wing  of  the  Administration.   For  example,  that   "top
level  administration  leader"  who  was quoted  by the  Associated
Press  as  saying  that  the  cold  war  and  a  cold  war  budget  are
back  again  was Nelson  Rockefeller,  exploiting  the  turn  to  put
in  a  plug  against  the  Treasury  for  more  aid  abroad.     The
rightists  and   the   military  are  talking  jubilantly  of   another
"hundred  years'  war"  in  which  they  can write their  own  ticket
at the Budget  Bureau.   The  outcome must  lead  to a  showdown,
and  the  best  news  of  the  week  was  Constantine  Brown's   col-
umn  in  the  Washington  Evening  Star  last  Wednesday   head-
lined,  "Dulles  May  Be  The   Scrapegoat.    Ouster   Would  Be
Politically  Expedient  In  Light  of  Failure  of  Geneva  Talks."
Brown,  very  much  in  the  cold  war  camp,  says  the  President's
"immediate   entourage"    (Sherman    Adams?)    is   hostile   to
Dulles.   The  contrasting  calm  on  Geneva  and  friendlier  atti-
tude taken  by Defense  Secretary Wilson  at  his  press  conference
last  week  is  most  significant.    Wilson  and  Humphrey  are  the
pro-peace  core  of  the  Administration.   Is  Dulles  to  determine
policy,  or  Eisenhower?    If  Dulles,  then  there  can  be  no  bal-
anced  budget,  no  tax  reduction  and  no  peace  appeal—in   1956.
My  own  hunch  is  that  the  outcome  will  be  the   downgrading
of Dulles; this failure  makes  it more likely  that Eisenhower  will
run  again.  I  believe  the President  deeply  desirous  of  cementing
peace,  and  that  we  will  yet  see  a  new  Geneva  without   either
Dulles  or  Molotov;  both  these  "old  Bolsheviks"  are  stale.
What  About  The  Stevenson   Candidacy?
If  only  Eisenhower  had  Stevenson's  ability—or   Stevenson
the  General's shiny stars!    A  General  Adlai  Eisenhower  in  the
White  House,  leading  a  conservative  big  business  party,  could
really  negotiate   a  settlement.  -Stevenson,  like  George,  would
like to  negotiate,  but  how  far  could  he  go with  the  Democratic
party  as  it  is,  and  the  Republican  right  ready  to  cry  "treason"
at  any give-and-take  ?  So long as the  Republicans are  in power,
they  are  forced   to  muzzle  their  own  McCarthies  and  Know-
lands  in  self-protection.     Once  out  of  power,  the  right  will
be unleashed  again.    The  ideal  solution  would  be another  four
years  of  Dee without  Dulles  or  Nixon  and  with  a   Democratic
Congress,  led  in  foreign  policy  by George—or  the  same  com-
bination  with  Warren.    But  November's  choices  may  be  far
from   ideal.
1  1
1   7  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  SI, 19SS
A  Different  Kind  of  Hearing  Opens  Where  McCarthy Long  Performed
It  is  a  pity  the  TV  cameras  could  not  have  been  focussed
last  Monday  on  Room 318 in  the  Senate  Office  Building,  the
famous   caucus  room,  with   its   high   marble   walls  and  red
drapes.   There  almost  six years  ago  McCarthy  rose  to  a  sin-
ister  prominence  by his charges  against  Owen  Lattimore  and
the  State  Department.   There  three  years  later  he  began  to
terrorize  the  nation's  intellectuals  and  public  servants  as
chairman  of  the  Senate  Government  Operations   Committee.
In  the  same  room  last  year,  while the  entire  country  watched
on the  TV screens fascinated,  he lost his battle with  the Army
and  fell  from  public favor;  too many,  observing  him  at  close
range, saw him at  last  for  what  he  was.
The  scene  in that  room  last  Monday was  a  measure  of  the
change  which  has  taken  place.   The  occasion  was  a  new  Sen-
ate  investigation,  but  this  time  into  violations  of   constitu-
tional  liberties.   At  the  committee  table,  its  chairman,  Hen-
nings  of  Missouri,  was  flanked  by  O'Mahoney of  Wyoming,
himself   a  portent.   For   O'Mahoney  had  been  re-elected  to
the   Senate   after    appearing   as   co-counsel   with   Thurman
Arnold  in  the  successful  defense  of  Owen  Lattimore  against
trumped  up  perjury   charges  growing  out  of  the  long  cam-
paign  against him by  McCarthy and  McCarran.   O'Mahoney's
election  and  the  Hennings  inquiry  demonstrated  that  it  had
become  politically  feasible  to  defend the  Bill  of  Rights.
Before   the   cameras   as   the   hearing  opened  was   one  of
McCarthy's  favorite   targets,  a  college  professor.    But  this
one,  this  time,  was  being  listened   to  with   respect.     There
sat  a  tall  thin  man,  with  a  long  scholarly  face  and  a  thin
fringe  of  hair,  speaking  in  a  cultured  New  England  accent,
of  the  First  Amendment  and  its  true  interpretation,  with  an
eloquence  and  a  vibrancy   amazing   in  a  man  of  83.    The
witness  was  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  eldest  of living  American
philosophers,  once  president   of  Amherst,   later  famous  for
his  work  at   Wisconsin,  a  follower  of  Kant,  for  whom  the
defense  of fundamental  American  liberties  was  a  categorical
imperative.    Needless to  say,  no rancorous  voice dared  break
in   to   say,   "But,   Professor,   were   you  now  or   have   you
ever  been  .  . .?"
Beside  him, waiting  to  testify  next,  was  an  old friend  and
O'Connor  Loses  First   Round
The  right  of  a  Senate  committee not  only  to  investi-
gate  the  books  in  the  government's  overseas  libraries
but  the  ideas  in  the  heads  of  their  authors  was  upheld
by  Federal  Judge  Joseph  C.  McGarraghy  last  Tuesday
in denying a  defense  motion for  the  acquittal of  Harvey
O'Connor.
The  Judge,  citing   the   Barsky  and   Hollywood   Ten
cases, held that such inquisition was a justifiable  abridg-
ment  of  the  First  Amendment.  The  defense  contention
that  O'Connor was  within  his  rights  to refuse  to answer
whether  he  was  a  member  "of  the  Communist  conspir-
acy"   because  that   was   too   dangerously  vague  was
brushed  aside.   The  Judge  said  "defendant  had  no dif-
ficulty  in  understanding what  was  meant  by 'communist
conspiracy'  at  the  time of  the  contempt, for  he  refused
to  answer  the  question."  Presumably, by  this standard
of  logic,  if   he  had  answered  the  question,  that  would
have  proved  that  he  did  not  understand  it!
The  Judge's  ruling  on  the  First  Amendment  sets  the
stage  for  a  higher  court  test,  and seems  to  obviate the
possibility  (though  this  is  not  absolutely certain)  of  an
acquittal  on  some  technicality.
friendly  antagonist, the  famous Zechariah  Chafee of Harvard.
Where   Chafee,  himself   one  of  the   most  famous  American
civil  libertarians,  accepts  the  "clear  and  present  danger"  re-
striction  on  free  speech,  Meiklejohn  is  a    "fundamentalist,"
arguing  (as  may be  seen  on the  next  page)  that  a  man may
say  what  he  likes  so long  as  it  is  not  an  incitement  to  crime.
Chafee's  statement,  from  which we print  some  excerpts,  had
little  that  is  not  familiar   to  readers  of  his   classic   work,
"Free  Speech  in  The  United  States"  and  stopped   (like  the
book)  at  Pearl  Harbor.    A man  of  such  wit  and  insight  owes
it  to  himself  and  the  rest  of us  to  bring  himself  and  his  book
up  to  date;  there  is  work  to  be  done worthy  of  the  Harvard
professor   who  defended  the  rights  of  Wobblies  and   Social-
ists  a  generation  ago,  when that  took  nerve.
Bi-Partisan  Whitewash   Being  Prepared  for  Security  Program
Months  ago  we  pointed  out  that  Senator  Humphrey's  bill
for  a  12-man  bipartisan  commission to  investigate  the  secur-
ity  program  was  made to  order  for  a  whitewash  by  Brownell
and  J.  Edgar   Hoover.  The  appointments  confirm  the  warn-
ing.    As  the  ADA  and  the  Washington  Post  were  quick  to
point  out,  not  a  single  person—"no  Learned  Hand,  no  John
Lord   O'Brian,  no   Erwin   Griswold"—associated    with   the
defense  of  civil  liberties  was  appointed  to  the  Commission.
The  four  men  picked  by  "the   White  House,"  i.e.  by  the
Attorney   General,  include  two  Administration  figures  who
will  be  investigating   the  security   program   they   themselves
administer    and   a   former   Democratic   Attorney    General,
McGranery,  "who  shares  responsibility"   as  the   Washington
Poet  said  "for   some  of  the   worst   excesses  of  the   security
program."     The   four   men   picked  by   Nixon  include   two
Senators,   both  right   wingers,  Stennis   of   Mississippi   and
Cotton  of  New  Hampshire.
That  the  eight  men  to  be  picked  by  the   Administration
would  be of  this  kind  was  to  be expected.   It  is  disappointing
to  find that  the  four  men  named  by  the  Democrats,  through
the  Speaker  of  the  House,  Rayburn  of  Texas,  are  no  better.
Suppressed  Dispatch*
"London,  Eng.,  Nov.  7  (AP)—American money indi-
rectly  provided  the  down  payment  for  Communist arms
Egypt  is  buying  from  Czechoslovakia, the  London Daily
Mail  reported  today  in  a  dispatch from  Saudi Arabia.
"The  Daily  Mail  said  that  Egypt  was  short  of  cash
when  time came to  make  the first payment  to Czechoslo-
vakia.   It   was  then,  the  newspaper  said,  that  Egypt
turned  to  Saudi  Arabia  for  a  loan.   Saudi  Arabia,  in
turn,  borrowed  the  sum  of  $3,000,000  from  the Arabian-
American  Oil Co. (Aramco) and sent  it  to  Premier Nas-
ser  of  Egypt.
"The  report  pointed  out  that  Aramco might not  have
known  the  purpose  of  the  loan  but  added  'you  cannot
get  away  from  the  fact  that  American  money  helped
buy  Communist  arms.'"
* So far  as  we  know, this  Associated  Press  dispatch
was  not  published  in  any  American  paper,  though  it
went  over  the  AP  wires.
A  memorial  meeting  for   Eugene  Debs  will  be  held
Monday  night,   November  28  at   the  Fraternal   Club-
house,  110 W.  48th  Street,  New  York  City,   sponsored
by  the  National   Guardian,  the  Monthly   Review,   the
American   Socialist  and  this  Weekly.   James   Aronson
will  be  chairman;  the  speakers:  W.  E.  B. du  Bois, Leo
Huberman,  Bert  Cochran,  Clifford  McAvoy, and   IPS.
Rayburn  picked  Chairman  Walter  of  the  House  Un-American
Activities   Committee   and  three  nonentities.     Wan,  indeed,
seems  the  hope  expressed  by  the  Washington  Post  that  these
men  will  be "relentless"  in  examining  FBI  files  and  security
records.  They  seem  hand-picked to  make sure that they would
"relent."   The  one hopeful  observation  is  that  this  Commis-
sion  represents  a  rear  guard  action;  the  witch  hunt  is  on
the   defensive.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  SI, 1955
Prof.   Alexander   MeikleJohn's   Historic   Defense    of   the   First  Amendment
"Loyalty  Does  Not   Imply  Conformity  of  Opinion"
Mr.  Chairman  and  Members  of  the   Committee:
I  deeply  appreciate  your  courtesy  in  asking  me  to  join
with  you  in  an  attempt  to  define  the  meaning  of  the  words,
"Congress  shall  make  no law .  .  .  abridging  the  freedom
of  speech  or  of  the  press  or  the  right  of  the  people  peaceably
to  assemble  and  to  petition  the  government  for  a  redress of
grievances."    Whatever   those   words   may  mean,   they   go
directly  to  the  heart  of  our  American  Plan  of  Government.
If  we  can  understand  them  we  can  know  what,  as  a  self-
governing  nation,  we  are  trying  to  be  and  to  do.   Insofar  as
we  do not  understand  them, we  are  in  grave  danger  of  block-
ing  our  own  purposes,  of  denying  our  own  beliefs.
It  may  clarify  my  own part  in  our  conference if  I  tell you
at   once  my  opinion  concerning  this  much-debated   subject.
The  First  Amendment  seems  to  me to  be  a  very  uncompro-
mising  statement.   It  admits  of  no  exceptions.   It  tells  us
that  the  Congress  and  by  implication,  all  other  agencies  of
the  Government are  denied  any  authority  whatever  to  limit
the  Political  Freedom  of the  citizens  of  the  United  States.   It
declares  that  with  respect  to  political  belief,  political   discus-
sion,  political   advocacy,  political  planning,  our  citizens   are
sovereign, and the  Congress  is  their  subordinate  agent.   That
agent   is   authorized,   under  strong  safeguards   against  the
abuse  of  its  power,  to  limit  the  freedom  of  men  as  they  go
about  the  management  of  their  private,  their  non-political
affairs.    But  the  same  men,  as  they  endeavor   to  meet  the
public  resposibilities   of  citizenship  in  a  free  society,   are  in
a  vital  sense,  which  is  not  easy  to  define,  beyond  the  reach
of  legislative  control.   Our common task,  as  we talk  together
today,  is to  determine  what that  sense  is.
Mr.  Chairman,  in  view  of your  courtesy  to  me, I  hope you
will  not  find  me  discourteous  when  I  suggest  that  the  Con-
gress  is  a  subordinate  branch   of  the   Government   of   the
United  States.   In  saying  this  I  am  simply  repeating  in  less
passionate  words  what  was  said  by  the  writers  of  the   Fed-
eralist  papers  when,  a  century  and  three-quarters   ago,  they
explained   the   meaning   of  the   proposed  Constitution   to  a
body  politic  which  seemed  very  reluctant  to  adopt  it.    Over
and  over  again  the  writers  of  those  papers  declared  that  the
Constitutional  Convention  had  given  to  the  People  adequate
protection  against  a  much-feared  tyranny  of the   Legislature.
In  one  of  the  most  brilliant   statements   ever  written  about
the  Constitution, the  Federalist  says:
"It  is  one thing  to  be subject  to  the  laws, and  another  to
be  dependent   on  the  legislative  body.    The  first  comports
with,  the  last  violates,  the  fundamental   principles  of  good
government,  and, whatever  may  be the  forms  of  the Consti-
tution,  unites  all  power  in  the  same  hands."   (No.  71).
They  Feared   Congress
It  is  chiefly  the  legislature,   the  Federalist  insists,  which
threatens  to  usurp  the  governing  powers  of  the  People.   In
words  which unfortunately have  some  relevance  today,  it  de-
clares  that  "it  is  against  the  enterprising   ambition  of  this
department  that  the  people  ought  to  indulge  their  jealousy
and  exhaust  all  their  precautions."    And,  further,  the  hesi-
tant  people  were  assured  that  the  Convention, having  recog-
nized  this  danger,  had  devised  adequate  protections  against
it.    The  Representatives,   it  was  provided,  would  be  elected
by  vote  of  the  People.    Elections  would  be  for  terms  brief
enough  to  ensure  active  and  continuous  popular  control.   The
legislature  would  have  no  law-making  authority  other  than
those  limited  powers  specifically  delegated  to  it.    A  general
legislative  power  to  act  for  the  security  and  welfare   of  the
nation  was  denied  on  the  ground  that  it  would  destroy   the
basic  postulate   of  popular   Self-Government   on  which   the
Constitution  rests.
As  the  Federalist  thus  describes,  with  insight  and  accu-
racy,   the   Constitutional   defenses   of   the   Freedom   of   the
People  against  legislative  invasion,   it   is  not   speaking   of
1  7
The  Weekly  is  proud  to  make  available  here  in  full
text   the  classic  defense   of  the  First  Amendment  with
which  the  venerable 83-year-old  Prof.  Alexander  Meikle-
john, dean of  American  philosophers, and  most  uncom-
promising  of  American  libertarians,  opened  the  historic
hearings  begun  last  Monday   by  the  Hennings  subcom-
mittee  of  the  Senate  on  constitutional  liberties.
that  freedom   as  an  "Individual   Right"  which  is   bestowed
upon  the  citizens  by  action  of  the  Legislature.    Nor  is  the
principle  of  the  Freedom  of  Speech  derived  from  a  Law  of
Nature   or  of  Reason  in  the  abstract.    As  it  stands  in  the
Constitution,  it  is  an  expression  of  the  basic  American polit-
ical  agreement   that,  in  the  last  resort,  the  People  of  the
United  States  shall  govern  themselves.   To find its  meaning,
therefore,  we  must  dig  down  to  the  very  foundations  of  the
Self-Governing  process.   And what  we shall there find is  the
fact  that  when  men  govern  themselves,  it  is  they—and  no
one  else—who must  pass judgment  upon public policies.   And
that  means  that,  in  our  popular   discussions,   unwise   ideas
must  have  a  hearing  as  well  as  wise  ones,  dangerous   ideas
as  well  as  safe,  unAmerican  as  well  as  American.    Just  so
far  as,  at  any  point,  the  citizens  who are  to  decide issues  are
denied  acquaintance  with  information  or  opinion or  doubt  or
disbelief   or  criticism  which  is  relevant  to  those  issues,  just
so far  the  result  must  be ill-considered,  ill-balanced   planning
for  the  general  good.   It  is  that  mutilation  of  the  thinking
process  of  the  community  against  which  the  First  Amend-
ment  is  directed.    That  provision  neither   the   Legislature,
nor  the  Executive, nor  the  Judiciary,  nor  all  of  them  acting
together,  has  authority  to  nullify.    We  Americans  have,  to-
gether,  decided  to  be  politically  Free.
Mr.  Chairman,  I  have  now  stated  for  your  consideration
the  thesis  that  the  First  Amendment  is  not  "open  to  excep-
tions" that  our  American "freedom  of  Speech"  is  not,  on  any
grounds whatever,  subject to  abridgement  by  the  Representa-
tives of the  People.   May I next  try  to  answer  two  arguments
which  are  commonly brought  against  that  thesis  in the  courts
and  in  the  wider  circle  of  popular  discussion?
Can  Speech  Threaten   Freedom?
The  first  objection rests  upon the  supposition  that  freedom
of  speech  may  on occasion threaten  the  security  of  the  nation.
And   when  these   two  legitimate   national   interests   are   in
conflict,   the   government,  it  is  said,  must  strike  a  balance
between  them.    And that  means  that  the  First Amendment
must  at  times  yield  ground.    The  freedom   of  speech  must
be  abridged  in  order  that  the  national  order  and  safety  may
be  secured.
In  the  courts  of  the  United  States,  many  diverse opinions
have  asserted  that  "balancing"  doctrine.    One  of  these  often
quoted,  reads  as  follows:
"To  preserve  its  independence, and  give  security  against
foreign   aggression  and  encroachment, is  the  highest  duty
of   every  nation,  and  to  attain  these  ends  nearly  all  other
considerations  are  to  be  subordinated.   It   matters   not  in
what  form   such  aggression  comes. .  .  .  The  government,
possessing  the  powers which  are  to  be exercised for  protec-
tion  and  security  is  clothed  with authority  to determine  the
occasion  on  which  the  powers  shall  be  brought  forth."
That  opinion tells  us  that  the  "Government"  of  the  United
States  has  unlimited  authority  to  provide  for  the  security  of
the  nation,  as  it  may  seem  necessary  and  wise.    It  tells us,
therefore   that,  constitutionally,  the  Government  which  has
created  the  defenses  of  Political  Freedom  may  break  down
those  defenses.   We, the  People,  who have  enacted  the  First
Amendment, may  by  agreed  upon  procedure  modify  or  annul
that  amendment.   And, since we are,  as  a government,  a  sov-
ereign  nation,  I  do  not  see  how  any  of  these  assertions  can
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   November  SI, 1955
be  doubted  or  denied.    We Americans,  as  a  body-politic,  may
destroy  or  limit  our  freedom  whenever  we  choose.   But  what
bearing  has  that  statement  upon  the  authority  of   Congress
to  interfere  with  the  provisions  of  the  First  Amendment?
Congress  is  not  the   Government.    It   is  only  one  of  four
branches  to  each  of  which  The  People  have  denied   specific
and  limited  powers  as  well  as  delegated   such  powers.    And
in  the  case  before  us,  the  words,  "Congress  shall  make  no
law  .  .  .  abridging  the freedom  of  speech,"  gives  plain  evi-
dence  that,  so  far  as  Congress  is  concerned,  the  power   to
limit  our  Political  Freedom  has  been  explicitly  denied.
"Balancing"   Security   and Freedom
There  is,  I  am sure  a  radical  error  in  the  theory  that  the
task  of  "balancing"   the  conflicting  claims   of  security   and
freedom  has  been  delegated  to  Congress.   It  is  the  failure  to
recognize  that  the  balancing  in  question  was  carefully  done
when,  one  hundred  and  seventy  years  ago,  the   Constitution
was  adopted  and  quickly  amended.   The  men  who  wrote  the
text  of  that  Constitution  knew,  quite  as  well  as  we  do, that
the  program  of  Political  Freedom  is  a  dangerous  one.   They
couid  foresee  that,  as  the  nation  traveled  the  ways  of  Self-
Government,  the  Freedom  of  Speech  would  often  be  used  ir-
responsibly  and  unwisely,  especially  in  times  of  War or  near-
war,  arid  that  such  talking  might  have  serious  consequences
for  the  national   safety.
They  knew, too,  that  a  large  section  of  the  voting  popula-
tion  was  hostile  to  the  forms  of  government  which  were  then
being  adopted.  And, further,  they  had  every  reason  to  expect
that,  in  a  changing  world,  new  dissatisfactions   would  arise
and  might  in  times  of  stress  break  out  into  open  and   pas-
sionate  disaffection.    All  these  considerations,  I  am  saying,
were  as  clearly  and  as  disturbingly  present  to  their  minds
as  they  are  to  our  minds  today.    And, because  of  them,  the
First  Amendment might  have  been  written,  not  as  it  is,  but
as  the  Courts  of  the  United  States  have  re-written  it  in  the
war-maddened  years  since  1919.   The  Amendment might  have
said,  "Except   in  times  and  situations   involving  Clear   and
Present  Danger to  the  national  security,  Congress  shall  make
no  law  abridging  the  Freedom  of  Speech."    Or  it  might  have
read,  'Voly  when,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Legislature,   the
interests  of  order  and  security  render  such  action  advisable
shall  Congress  abridge  the   Freedom   of  Speech."    But   the
writers   of  the   Amendment  did  not   adopt   either   of   these
phrasings  or  anything  like  them.    Perhaps   a  minor  reason
for  their  decision was the  practical  certainty  that  the  Consti-
tution,  if  presented  in  that  form,  would  have  failed  of  adop-
tion.    But  more  important  than  such  questionable  historical
speculation  are  two  reasons  which  are  as  valid  today  as  they
were  when  the  Amendment was  decreed.
First,  our  doctrine  of  Political  Freedom  is  not  a  visionary
abstraction.   It  is  a  belief  which  is  based  in  long  and  bitter
experience  which  is  thought  out  by  shrewd  intelligence.    It
is  the   sober  conviction  that,  in  a  society  pledged  to   self-
Government, it  is never  true  that, in the long run, the  security
of  the  nation  is  endangered  by  the   freedom   of  the   people.
Whatever may be the  immediate gains  and  losses,  the  dangers
to  our  safety  arising  from  political  suppression  are   always
greater  than  the  dangers  to that  safety  arising  from  political
freedom.    Suppression  is  always  foolish.    Freedom  is  always
wise.   That  is  the  faith,  the  experimental  faith,  by  which we
Americans  have  undertaken  to  live.    If  we,  the  citizens  of
today,  cannot  shake  ourselves  free  from  the  hysteria  which
blinds  us  to  that  faith,  there  is  little  hope  for  peace  and
security,  either  at  home  or  abroad.
Inquisition  Outlawed
Second,  the  re-writing  of  the  First  Amendment which  au-
thorizes  the  Legislature  to  balance  security  against  freedom
denies,  not  merely  some  minor  phase  of  the  amendment,  but
its  essential  purpose and meaning.   Whenever, in our  Western
civilization,   "inquisitors"  have  sought  to  justify  their  acts
<of  suppression,  they  have  given  plausibility  to  their  claims
<ealy by  appealing to the  necessity of guarding  the  public  safe-
%y>  1% is that appeal  which the  First Amendment intended,  and
Men  Do  Not  Like  Dissent
"Human beings do not instinctively  desire  to  live  in a
community  where freedom  of  speech prevails.  Instead,
they  long for  a  unified  society.   Even sophisticated men
feel  a  strong exhiliration when they march  in  a proces-
sion  which  keeps perfect step  with  everybody  singing  in
unison.  Distaste  is  a common initial reaction to anybody
who  is very different  from  the  general run.  It  is  natural
for  us  to  feel  hostility  toward  anybody  who  expresses
unfamiliar opinions or views which we intensely dislike."
—Zechariah  Chaffee.   Jr.,  before   the  Hennings   Inquiry
intends,   to  outlaw.     Speaking   to  the  Legislature,   it   says,
"When  times  of  danger  come  upon  the  nation,  you  will  be
strongly  tempted,  and  urged  by  popular  pressures,  to  resort
to  practices  of  suppression  such  as  those  allowed by  societies
unlike  our  own  in  which men  do  not  govern  themselves.  You
are  hereby  forbidden to  do so.   This  nation  of  ours  intends  to
be  free.     'Congress   shall  make  no  law .  .  .  abridging  the
freedom   of  speech.'"
The  second objection which must  be met  by  one who asserts
the  unconditional  Freedom  of  Speech  rests  upon  the  well-
known   fact  that  there   are   countless  human   situations   in
which,  under  the  Constitution, this  or  that  kind  of  speaking
may  be  limited  or  forbidden  by  legislative   action.    Some  of
these   cases   have  been  listed   by  the   courts   in  vague  and
varying  ways.    Thus  libels,  blasphemies,  attacks  upon public
morals  or  private  reputation  have  been  held  punishable.   So,
too,  we  are   told   that   "counselling   a   murder"   may  be  a
criminal  act,  or  "falsely  shouting  fire  in  a  theatre,  and  caus-
ing  a  panic."    "Offensive"  or  "provocative"  speech  has  been
denied  legislative  immunity.   "Contempt  of  court,"  shown  by
the  use  of  speech  or  by  refusal  to  speak,  may  give  basis  for
prosecution.   Utterances  which  cause  a riot  or  which  "incite"
to  it  may  be  subject  to  the  same  legal  condemnation.   And
this  listing   of  legitimate   legislative   abridgments  of  speech
could  be  continued  indefinitely.   Their  number  is  legion.
In  view  of  these  undoubted  facts,  the  objection  which  we
must  now  try   to  meet  can  be  simply  stated.     In  all  these
cases,   it   says,   inasmuch   as   speaking   is   abridged,   "excep-
tions"  are  made  to  the  First  Amendment.   The Amendment
is  thus  shown  to  be,  in  general,  "open  to  exceptions."  .  And
from  this  it  follows  that  there  is  no  reason  why  a  Legisla-
ture  which  has  authority  to  guard  the  public  safety  should
be   debarred   from   making  an   "exception"   when  faced   by
the  threat  of  national  danger.
The  Fallacy   About   "Exceptions"
Now the  validity  of that  argument  rests  upon  the  assumed
major  premise  that  whenever, in  any  way,  limits  are  set  to
the   speaking  of  an  individual,  an  "exception"   is  made  to
the  First  Amendment.   But  that  premise  is  clearly   false.
It  could  be  justified  only  if  it  were  shown  that  the  amend-
ment  intends  to  forbid  every  form  of  governmental  control
over  the  act  of  speaking.    Is  that  its  intention?    Nothing
could  be  further   from  the  truth.    May  I  draw  an  example
from  our  own present  activities  in  this  room?    You  and  I
are  here  talking  about   Freedom  within  limits  defined  by  the
Senate.    I  am  allowed  to  speak  only  because  you  have  in-
vited  me to  do so.   And just  now everyone  else  is  denied  that
privilege.    But  further,   you  have   assigned  me  a  topic  to
which  my  remarks   must  be  relevant.    Your  schedule,  too,
acting  with  generosity,  fixes  a  time   within   which  my  re-
marks  must  be made.   In  a word, my speaking,  though   "free"
in  the  First  Amendment  sense,  is  abridged  in  many  ways.
But  your  speaking,  too,  is  controlled  by  rules  of  procedure.
You  may,  of  course,  differ  in  opinion, from  what  I  am  saying.
To  that  freedom  there  are  no  limits.    But,  unless  the  chair-
man  intervenes,  you  are  not  allowed  to  express  that   differ-
ence  by  open  speech  until  I  have  finished  my  reading.    In  a
word,  both  you  and  I  are  under  control  as  to  what  we  may
say  and  when  and  how  we  may  say  it.    Shall  we  say,  then,
that  this  Conference,  which  studies   the   principle  of  Free
Speech,   is   itself   making   "exceptions"   to   that   principle?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  gl, 1955
I  do  not  think  so.    Speech,  as  a  form  of  human  action,  is
subject  to  regulation  in exactly  the  same  sense  as is  walking,
or  lighting  a  fire,  or  shooting  a  gun.    To interpret  the  First
Amendment  as  forbidding  such  regulation   is  to  so  miscon-
ceive  its  meaning  as  to  reduce  it  to  nonsense.
The  principle  here   at   issue  was   effectively,   though   not
clearly, stated  by  Mr. Justice  Holmes when, in  the  Frohwerk
case,  he  said:
"The     First   Amendment,   while   prohibiting   legislation
against  free   speech  as  such,  cannot  have  been, and  obvi-
ously  was  not, intended  to  give  immunity   to  every  form  of
language.  . . .  We venture  to  believe  that  neither  Hamil-
ton  nor  Madison,  nor  any   other  competent  person,  ever
supposed  that  to make criminal the  counselling of  a murder
would  be an  unconstitutional interference  with free  speech."
Those   words   of  the  great  Justice,  by  denying  that  the
First   Amendment   intends  to   forbid   such   abridgments  of
speech  as  the  punishing  of  incitement  to  murder  seem  to
me  to   nullify   completely  the   supposed  evidence  that   the
amendment  is  "open  to  exceptions."   They  show conclusively
the  falsity  of  the  "exception"  theory  which has  been  used by
the  courts  to  give  basis  for  the  "danger"  theory  of  legisla-
tive authority to  abridge  our Political  Freedom.    If, then,  the
"danger"  theory  is  to  stand  it  must  stand  on  its  own  feet.
And  those  feet,  if  my  earlier  argument  is  valid,  seem  to  be
made  of  clay.
The  Positive  Meaning  of  The  First
Mr.  Chairman,  in  the  first  section  of  this  paper  I  spoke
of  the  negative  fact  that  the  First  Amendment forbids  the
Legislature   to  limit   the   Political   Freedom   of  the   People.
May  I  now,  surveying  the  same  ground  from   its   positive
side,  discuss  with  you  the  active  powers  and  responsibilities
of  free  citizens, as  these  are  described  or  taken  for   granted
in  the   general   structure   of  the   Constitution  as  a  whole?
If   I  am  not  mistaken,  we  shall  find  here  the  reason  why
the  words  of  the  great  proclamation  are  so  absolute,  so  un-
compromising,  so  resistant  of  modification  or   exception.
The  purpose  of  the   Constitution  is,  as   we  all   know,  to
define  and  allocate  powers  for  the  governing  of  the  nation.
To  that  end,  three   special  governing  agencies  are  set  up,
and  to  each  of them  are  delegated  such  specific  powers as  are
needed  for  doing  its  part  of  the  work.
Now  that  program  rests  upon  a  clear  distinction  between
the  political  body  which  delegates  powers  and  the  political
bodies,  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial,  to  which  powers
are  delegated.    It  presupposes,  on  the  one  hand,  a  supreme
governing  agency  to  which, originally,  all  authority  belongs.
It  specifies,  on the  other  hand, subordinate  agencies to which
partial  delegations  of authority  are  made.   What,  then, is  the
working  relation   between  the  supreme  agency  and  its  sub-
ordinates?    Only  as  we  answer  that  question  shall  we find
the  positive meaning of  the  First Amendment.
First of  all,  then, what  is  the  supreme governing agency of
this   nation?     In   its   opening  statement    the   Constitution
answers that  question.   "We the  People of the  United States,"
it  declares,  "do ordain  and establish  this  Constitution  .  .  ."
Those   are   revolutionary   words   which   define   the   freedom
which  is  guaranteed  by  the  First  Amendment.    They   mark
off  our  government  from  every  form  of  despotic  polity.    The
legal  powers  of  the   People   of  the   United  States  ars   not
granted   to  them  by  some  one  else—by  kings  or  barons  or
priests,  by  legislators  or  executives  or  judges.    All  political
authority,  whether  delegated  or  not,  belongs  constitutionally,
to us.   If  any  one else  has  political  authority,  we  are  lending
it  to  him.    We, the  People,  are  supreme  in  our  own right.
We  are  governed  directly  or  indirectly,  only by  ourselves.
One  Power  Not   Delegated
But  now  what  have  We,  the   People,  in  our  establishing
of  the  Constitution  done  with  the  powers  which thus  inhere
in  us?    Some  of  them  we  have  delegated.    But  there  is  one
power,  at  least, which  we have not  delegated,  which  we  have
kept  in  our  own hands,  for  our  own direct  exercise.  Article  I,
section  2, authorizes the  people, in their capacity as "electors,"
to  choose  their  Representatives.    And  that  means  that  We,
the  People,  in  a  vital   sense,  do  actively  govern  those  who,
by  other  delegated  powers, govern us.   In  the  midst  of  all  our
assigning   of  powers  to  legislative,  executive,   and   judicial
bodies,  we have jealously  kept  for  ourselves  the  most  funda-
mental  of  all  powers.   It  is the  power of voting,  of choosing—
by  joint  action, those  representatives  to  whom certain  of  our
powers  are  entrusted.   In  the  view  of  the  Constitution,  then,
We  the  People,  are  not  only  the  supreme  agency.    We  are,
also,  politically,  an  active  electorate—a  fourth,  or   perhaps
better,  a  first  branch  which, through  its  reserved  power  gov-
erns   at   the   polls.    That   is  the   essential   meaning  of  the
statement  that  we  Americans  are,  in  actual  practice,  polit-
ically,  a  free  people.   Our  First  Amendment freedom  is  not
merely  an  aspiration.    It  is  an  arrangement  made by women
and  men  who  vote  freely  and,  by  voting,  govern  the  nation.
That  is  the  responsibility,  the  opportunity,  which the  Consti-
tution  assigns  to  us,  however slackly  and  negligently  we may
at  times  have  exercised  our  power.
It  follows  from  what  has  just  been  said  that,  under  the
Constitution,  we  Americans  are  politically  free  only  insofar
as  our  voting  is  free.    But  to  get  the  full  meaning  of  that
statement  we must  examine more closely what  men are  doing
when  they  vote,  and  how  they  do  it.
The  most  obvious  feature  of  activity   at   the  polls  is  the
choosing  among  candidates  for   office.    But,  under  our  elec-
tion  procedures,  with  their  party  platforms  and  public  meet-
ings,  with  the  turmoil  and  passion  of  partisan  debate,  the
voters  are  also  considering and  deciding about  issues  of  pub-
lic  policy.   They  are  thinking.   As  we  vote  we  do more  than
elect  men  to  represent   us.    We  also  judge  the  wisdom  or
folly  of  suggested  measures.   We plan  for  the  welfare  of  the
nation.    Now it  is  these  "judging"   activities  of  the  govern-
ing  people  which  the  First  Amendment  protects by  its  guar-
antees  of  freedom from  legislative  interference.   Because,  as
self-governing  women  and  men,  We  the  People,  have  work
to  do for  the  general  welfare,  we  make  two  demands.  First,
our  judging  of  public  issues,  whether  done  separately  or  in
groups,  must  be  free  and  independent—must be  our  own.   It
What  About  "Communist  Front" Organizations?
"It may be argued,  however,  that  the  so-called  'Communist
front   organizations'  present   an  entirely   new  problem   be-
cause   they   have   objectionable   purposes   and  include   ob-
jectionable  persons  in  their  membership.  .  .  .
"The  membership  situation  is  much  the same now as  it  has
always  been.   Propagandist  organizations  are  not  likely   to
be  made  up of  men and women with conventional  ideas.  . . .
The  organizations   opposed  to  slavery   had  members  who
urged  violations of  law,  such  as  rescuing fugitive  slaves and
transporting  them  to  Canada  on  the  Underground   Railway.
Some  of  them  even  favored  or participated  in  the  attempt  of
John  Brown   to  start  a  slave-rising  in  Virginia.   Time  and
again  the  whole  labor  movement  has  been  denounced  as  law-
less because some unionists undoubtedly  engaged in violence.
—Zechariah  Chaffee,    Jr.,
"It  is  sometimes  assumed  that  the  moderate  members  of
an  organization  always  have  an  obligation  to  oust  the  ex-
tremists  or else  resign  themselves.  But  this  is  by  no means
plain.   Throughout   the  history  of  this  country,  the  propa-
gandist  organizations  which  I  have  been  describing  were  en-
gaged  in  a  hard  fight  against  determined   opponents.  Their
chances of  winning  this  fight  would clearly  have  been  weak-
ened  if  they  had also  waged  an  internal  war  with  their  own
extremists  or if  moderates  had  got  out  and stopped  support-
ing  the cherished  purpose of the organization.    ...
"...    there  is  a  tremendous  temptation  to  make  the pres-
ence  of  extremists  the  excuse  for  outlawing  an organization
when  the  real  reason  for  getting  rid of  it  is  not  the  fear  of
the  extremists  but  the  hatred  of  the  legitimate  purposes."
before   the  Hennings    Inquiry
1  2
1   7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

6
/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  SI, 1955
must be done by us  and by no one else.   And,  second,  we  must
be  equally  free  and  independent  in  expressing,  at  the  polls,
the  conclusions,  the  beliefs,  to  which our judging has brought
us.    Censorship   over  our  thinking,   duress   over  our   voting,
are  alike  forbidden  by  the  First  Amendment.   A  legislative
body,  or  any  other  body,  which,  in  any  way,  practices  such
censorship   or  duress,  stands  in  "contempt"   of  the   sovereign
people of the  United  States.
But,  further,  what  more  specifically, are  the  judging  activ-
ities  with  which  censorship  and  duress  attempt  to  interfere?
What  are  the  intellectual  processes  by  which  free  men  gov-
ern  a  nation,  which,  therefore,   must  be  protected   from  any
external  interference?    They  seem  to  be  of  three  kinds.
The  Mechanisms  of  Free  Choice
First,  as  we  try  to  "make  up  our  minds"  on  issues which
affect   the  general  welfare,   we  commonly  though   not  com-
monly  enough,  read  the  printed  records  of  the  thinking  and
believing  which  other   men  have  done  in  relation  to  those
issues.    Those   records   are  found   in  documents  and  news-
papers,  in  works  of  art   of  many  kinds.    And  all  this  vast
array  of  idea  and  fact,  of  science  and  fiction,  of  poetry  and
prose,  of  belief  and  doubt,  of  appreciation  aand  purpose,  of
information  and  argument,  the  voter  may find ready  to  help
him  in  making  up  his  mind.
Second,  we electors  do  our  thinking,  not  only  by  individual
reading  and  reflection,  but  also  in  the  active  associations  of
private  or  public  discussion.    We think  together,  as  well  as
apart.    And,  in  this  field,  by  the  group  action  of  congenial
minds,  by   the   controversies   of  opposing  minds,  we  form
parties,  adopt  platforms,  conduct  campaigns,  hold  meetings,
in  order  that  this  or that  set  of  ideas  may  prevail,  in  order
that that measure or  this may be defeated.
And  third,  when  election  day  finally  comes, the  voter,  hav-
ing  presumably  made  up  his  mind,  must  now  express  it  by
his  ballot.   Behind the  canvas  curtain,  alone  and  independent,
he  renders  his  decision.    He  acts  as  sovereign,  one  of  the
governors  of  his  country.    However  slack  may  be  our  prac-
tice  that,  in  theory,  is  our  freedom.
What,  then,  as  seen  against  this  Constitutional  background,
is  the  purpose  of  the  First  Amendment, as  it  stands  guard
over  our  freedom? That  purpose  is to  see to it  that, in  none of
these  three  activities   of  judging  shall  the  voter  be  robbed,
by  action  of  other,  subordinate  branches  of  the  government,
of  the  responsibility,  the  power, the  authority,  which  are  his
under  the  Constitution.   What  shall  be  read?    What  he  him-
self  decides to  read.   With  whom  shall  be  associate  in  polit-
ical  advocacy?    With  those  with  whom  he  chooses  to  associ-
ate.    Whom  shall  be oppose ?   Those with  whom  he disagrees.
Shall  any  branch  of  the  government  attempt  to  control  his
opinions  or  his  vote,  to  drive  him  by  duress  or   intimidation
into  believing  or  voting  this  way  or  that?     To  do  this  is
to   violate  the   Constitution  at   its   very   source.    We,  the
People  of  the  United  States,  are  self-governing.    That   is
what  our  Freedom  means.
Mr.  Chairman, this  interpretation  of  the  First  Amendment
which  I  have  tried   to  give  is,  of  necessity,  very  abstract.
May  I,  therefore,  give  some  more  specific   examples  of   its
meaning  at  this  point  or  that?
Not  The  Citizen  Alone
First,  when  we  speak  of  the  amendment  as  guarding   the
freedom  to  hear  and to  read,  the  principle applies, not  only to
the  speaking  or  writing  of  our  own  citizens,  but  also  to  the
writing  or  speaking  of  every  one whom  a  citizen,  at  his own
discretion,  may  choose to  hear  or  to  read.    And  this  means
that  unhindered  expression  must  be  open  to  non-citizens, to
resident  aliens,  to  writers  and  speakers  of  other  nations,  to
anyone,  past  or present, who has  something to  say  which may
have  significance  for  a  citizen  who is  thinking  of  the  welfare
of  this  nation.   The  Bible,  the  Koran,  Plato,   Adam  Smith,
Joseph   Stalin,  Gandhi,  may  be  published  and  read   in   the
United  States,  not  because  they  have,  or  had,  a  right  to  be
published  here,  but  because  we,  the  citizen-voters,  have  au-
What  Free  Debate  Means
"Now  suppose  that legitimate purposes  of  the organi-
zation  on  one  side  happen  to  coincide  with  the  view of
active  supporters  of  the  Soviet  Union.  If  the  govern-
ment  makes  that  fact  a  reason  for  crippling  those  or-
ganizations in  various ways, then those  on the other side
will  pretty  much have  everything  their  own  way.  Inso-
far  as  there  are  errors  in  the  arguments they present,
it  will be  very  difficult  for  those  errors  to  be  combatted
by  reason when  the  government  silences a  large number
of  potential opponents.  Thus  the  danger of  unwise  de-
cisions  on  public  issues  is  increased.    What  kind  of  a
boxing  match  would  be  it  where  the  referee  was  con-
stantly  tripping  up  one  of  the   fighters?"
—Zechariah  Chaffee.   Jr.,  before   the  Hennings   Inquiry
thority,  have  legal  power,  to  decide what  we  will  read,  what
we  will  think  about.   With  the  exercise   of  that  "reserved"
power,  all  "delegated"  powers  are,  by  the  Constitution,  for-
bidden  to  interfere.
Second,  in  the  field  of  public  discussion,  when  citizens  and
their   fellow   thinkers   "peaceably   assemble"   to  listen  to  a
speaker,  whether  he  be  American  or  foreign,  conservative  or
radical, safe  or  dangerous,  the  First  Amendment  is  not in  the
first  instance,  concerned  with  the  "right"  of  the  speaker  to
say  this  or  that.   It  is  concerned  with  the  authority  of  the
hearers to  meet  together, to  discuss,  and to hear  discussed by
speakers  of their own choice, whatever they  may  deem worthy
of  their  consideration.
Third,  the  same  freedom from  attempts at  duress  is guaran-
teed  to  every  citizen  as  he  makes  up  his  mind,  chooses  his
party,  and,  finally,  casts  his  vote.   During  that  process,  no
governing body may use force upon him, may try  to drive him
or lure  him toward  this decision  or that, or  away from  this de-
cision  or  that.  And for  that  reason,  no subordinate  agency of
the  government has  authority to  ask,  under compulsion to  an-
swer,  what  a  citizen's  political  commitments are.   The  ques-
tion,  "Are  you a  Republican?"  or  "Are  you  a  Communist?",
when  accompanied by the  threat  of harmful or  degrading  con-
sequences,  if  an  answer  is  refused,  or  if  the  answer  is  this
rather  than  that,  is  an  intolerable  invasion  of  the  "reserved
powers"  of the  governing  People.  And the  freedom  thus  pro-
tected  does not  rest upon the  Fifth  Amendment "right" of one
who  is  governed  to  avoid  self-incrimination.   It  expresses  the
constitutional  authority, the  legal  power,  of  one  who  governs
to make up his own mind without fear  or favor,  with  the  inde-
pendence  and  freedom  in  which self-government  consists.
And  fourth,  for  the  same  reason,  our  First  Amendment
freedom  forbids  that  any  citizen  be  required, under threat of
penalty, to take  an  oath, or  make  an  affirmation  as  to  beliefs
which  he holds or rejects.  Every citizen, it  is true,  may  be  re-
quired,  and  should be required,  to  pledge  loyalty,  and  to  prac-
tice  loyalty, to the  nation.  He must  agree to  support  the Con-
stitution.  But  he may  never  be required  to  believe in  the  Con-
stitution.  His  loyalty  may  never  be  tested  on  grounds  of  ad-
herence to, or  rejection  of,  any  belief.   Loyalty  does not imply
conformity  of  opinion.  Every citizen of  the  United States  has
Constitutional  authority  to  approve  or  to  condemn  any  laws
enacted  by  the  Judiciary,  any  principles  established  by  the
Constitution.   All  these  enactments  which,  as  men  who  are
governed, we must  obey, are  subject  to  our  approval  or  disap-
proval,  as  we  govern.   With  respect  to  all  of  them,  we, who
are  free  men, are  sovereign.   We are  "The  People."   We  gov-
ern the  United States.
Mr.  Chairman,  I  have  tried  to  state  and  defend  the  asser-
tion that  Constitutional  guarantee  of  Political  Freedom  is  not
"open  to  exceptions."   Judgment  upon the  theoretical  validity
of  that  position  I  now leave  in  your hands.
But,  as  between  conflicting views  of  the  First Amendment,
there  is  also  a  practical  question  of  efficiency.   May  I,  in  clos-
ing,   speaking   with  the   tentativeness   becoming  to   a  non-
lawyer,  offer  three  suggestions   as  to  the  working  basis  on
which  decisions  about  Political  Freedom  should  rest?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  81, 19SS
First,  the  experience  of  the  courts  since  1919  seems  to  me
to  show  that,  as  a  procedural  device  for  distinguishing  forms
of   speech  and  writing  and  assembly  which  the   amendment
does  protect  from  those  which it  does  not  protect,  the  "clear
and  present  danger" test has  failed  to  work.  Its  basic  practi-
cal  defect  is  that  no  one  has  been  able  to  give  it dependable,
or even  assignable  meaning.   Case  by  case,  opinion by opinion,
it  has  shifted  back  and  forth  with  a  variability  of  meaning
which  reveals  its  complete lack of  Constitutional  basis.   In  his
opinion  confirming  the  conviction of  Eugene  Dennis  and others
for  violation of  the  Smith  Act, Judge  Learned  Hand reviewed
the  long  series  of judicial attempts  to give  to the  words "Clear
and  Present" a usable  meaning.   His  conclusion  reads,  in  part,
as follows:
"The  phrase  'clear  and present  danger'  ...wo    way  to
describe   a  penumbra   of   occasions,  even  the   outskirts   of
which  are  indefinable,   but  within  which,  as  is  so  often  the
case,  the  courts  must  find  their  way  as  they  can.   In  each
case  they  must  ask  whether  the  gravity   of  the  'evil,'  dis-
counted  by  its  improbability,  justifies  such  an  invasion  of
free  speech as  is  necessary  to  avoid  the  danger."
And  to  this bewildering  interpretation  of  the  words,  "clear
and  present,"  he  adds:  "That  is  a  test  in  whose  application
the  utmost  differences of  opinion have  constantly  arisen,  even
in  the  Supreme  Court.   Obviously  it  would  be  impossible  to
draft  a  statute  which  should  attempt  to  prescribe  a  rule  for
each  occasion;  and it  follows,  as  we have  said,  either  that  the
Act  is definite  enough as it  stands, or that  it  is practically  im-
possible  to deal  with  such  conduct in  general  terms."
Those  words,  coming  from  the  penetrating  and   powerful
mind  of  Learned   Hand  show  how  intolerable   it  is  that  the
most  precious, most  fundamental,  value  in the  American  plan
of  Government  should  depend,  for  its  defense,  upon  a  phrase
which, not  only has no warrant in the  Constitution, but  has no
dependable  meaning,  either  for  a man  accused  of  crime  or  for
the  attorneys  who  prosecute  or  defend  him  or  for  the  courts
which  judge  him.  That  phrase  does not  do its  work.  We need
to  make  a  fresh  start  in  our  interpreting  of  the  words  which
protect  our Political  Freedom.
Is  "Advocacy"  Protected?
Second,  as  we  seek  for  a  better  test,  it  is,  of  course,  true
that  no  legal  device  can  transform  the  making  of  decisions
about  Freedom  into  a  merely  routine  application  of  an  ab-
stract  principle.   Self-government   is  a  complicated  business.
And  yet,  the  "no-exception"  view  which  I  have  offered   seems
to  me to  promise  a  more  stable  and  understandable  basis  for
judicial  decision than  does the  1919  doctrine  which the  courts
have  been  trying  to  follow.  For  example,  the  most   trouble-
some  issue which now confronts  our  courts,  and  our  people,  is
that  of the  speech  and  writing  and  assembling  of  persons who
find, or think  they  find,  radical  defects  in  our  form  of  govern-
ment,  and  who  devise  and  advocate  plans  by  means  of  which
another  form  might  be  substituted  for  it.   And the  practical
question  is,  "How  far,  and  in  what  respects,  is  such  revolu-
tionary  planning  and  advocacy  protected  by the  First Amend-
ment?"
It  is,  of  course,  understood  that  if  such  persons  or  groups
proceed  to forceful  or violent  action,  or even  to  overt  prepara-
tion   for   such   action,   against   the   government,   the   First
Amendment  offers  them,  in that  respect, no protection.  Its  in-
terest  is  limited  to  the  freedom  of  judgment-making,—of  in-
quiry  and  belief  and  conference  and  persuasion  and  planning
and  advocacy.  It  does not protect either overt  action  or  incite-
ment  to  such  action.  It  is  concerned  only  with  those  political
activities  by  which,  under  the  Constitution,  free  men  govern
themselves.
From  what  has  just  been  said  it  follows  that,  so  far   as
speech  and  writing  are  concerned,  the  distinction  upon  which
the  application  of the  First  Amendment rests  is that  between
"advocacy  of  action" and  "incitement  to  action."  To  advocacy
the  amendment  guarantees  freedom,  no  matter  what  may be
advocated.  To  incitement,  on the  other  hand,  the  amendment
.  guarantees nothing  whatever.
This  distinction   was  sharply   drawn  by  Justice   Brandeis
when,  in  the  Whitney  case,  he  said,—
"Every  denunciation of  existing  law  tends  in  some meas-
ure  to  increase  the  probability  that  there  will  be  violations
of   it.    Condonation of  a  breach  enhances  the   probability.
Expressions  of  approval   add  to  the  probability.    Propaga-
tion  of  the  criminal  state  of  mind  by  teaching  syndicalism
increases  it.    Advocacy  of  law-breaking  heightens  it   still
further.     But  even  advocacy  of  violation,  however  repre-
hensible  morally,  is   not   a  justification   for   denying   free
speech  where  the  advocacy  falls   short  of  incitement  and
there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that   the  advocacy  would  be
immediately   acted on."
Only  Incitement   Barred
Those  words,  I  think,  point  the  way which  decisions  about
our  Political  Freedom  can,  and  should,  follow.  An incitement,
I take it,  is an utterance  so related to  a  specific  overt  act that
it  may  be regarded  and treated  as  a  part  of the  doing  of  the
act  itself,  if  the  act  is  done.  Its  control, therefore,  falls  with-
in  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Legislature.   An  advocacy,   on  the
other hand,  even  up  to  the  limit  of  arguing  and  planning  for
the  violent  overthrow  of  the  existing  form  of  government,  is
one  of  those  opinion-forming,  judgment-making   expressions
which free  men need to utter and to  hear  as  citizens  responsi-
ble  for  the  governing  of  the  nation.  If  men  are  not  free  to
ask and to answer  the  question,  "Shall the present form  of our
government  be maintained  or  changed?"  If,  when  that  ques-
tion  is  asked,  the  two  sides  of  the  issue  are  not  equally  open
for  consideration,  for  advocacy,  and  for  adoption,  then  it  is
impossible  to  speak  of  our  Government  as  established  by  the
free  choice  of  a  Self-Governing  People.   It  is  not  enough  to
say  that  the  People  of  the  United  States  were  free  one  hun-
dred  and  seventy  years  ago.   The First  Amendment requires,
simply  and  without  equivocation, that  they  be  Free  now.
Third,  and finally, if  we say,  as this  paper  has  urged,  that,
in  many  situations,  speech  and writing and  assembly  may  be
controlled  by  legislative   action  we  must  also  say  that  such
control  may  never  be  based  on  the  ground  of   disagreement
with  opinions held  or  expressed.   No  belief  or  advocacy  may
be  denied  freedom  if,  in  the  same  situation,  opposing  beliefs
or  advocacies  are  granted  that  freedom.
If,  then,  on  any  occasion  in  the  United  States,  it  is  allow-
able  to  say  that  the  Constitution  is  a  good  document, it  is
equally  allowable,  in  that  situation,  to  say  that  the  Constitu-
tion  is  a  bad  document.  If  a  public  building  may  be  used  in
which to  say,  in time of war, that the war  is justified,  then  the
same  building may be used  in which to  say that  it  is not justi-
fied.  If  it be publicly argued  that  conscription  for  armed  serv-
ice is moral  and necessary,  it  may be likewise publicly  argued
that  it  is  immoral  and  unnecessary.   If  it  may  be  said  that
American  political  institutions  are  superior  to  those  of  Eng-
land  or  Russia  or  Germany,  it  may,  with  equal  freedom,  be
said  that those  of  England  or Russia  or Germany are  superior
to  ours.   These  conflicting  views  may  be  expressed,  must  be
expressed,  not  because  they  are  valid,  but  because  they  are
relevant.  If  they  are  responsibly  entertained  by  any  one, we,
the  voters,  need  to  hear  them.   When  a  question  of  policy  is
"before  the  house,"  free  men choose  to  meet  it,  not with  their
eyes  shut, but  with their  eyes  open.  To be afraid,  of any  idea,
is  to  be  unfit  for  self-government.   Any  such  suppression  of
ideas  about the  common good, the  First Amendment condemns
with  its  absolute  disapproval.   The  freedom  of  ideas  shall  not
be  abridged.
This  text  was  rushed  to  the  printer's   last  Monday   at
the  close  of  Prof.  Meiklejohn's  testimony   in  the   belief
that   this   eloquent   defense    of   pure    "fundamentalist"
American   doctrine  should  be  available  for   the  widest
possible  distribution.  Extra  copies  may  be purchased  in
bulk  orders  of  1,000 or more at  S cents  a  copy, and  at  10
cents  for   lesser  quantities.     Every   organization   con-
cerned  with  civil  liberty   ought  to  put  a  copy  into  the
hands  of  every  member.    Please  telegraph  your  orders.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  el,  195S
Capitol  Roundup:  Virginia  Legislators  Blame  Gunnar Myrdal
U.  S.  and  Soviet  Journalists   Find  A  Common  Bond
The  Soviet  journalists  got  a  friendly  reception  at  the  Na-
tional  Press  Club here  last  week.   The  exchange  of  questions
and  answers wasn't  very  profound,  but  it  was  well  calculated
to  provide a  feeling of  good fellowship, notably  the  prize  final
question  from  the  U.  S.  side,  "How  do you fellows pad  an  ex-
pense account?" Most of the  Soviet journalists wear their hair
long  and  wavy,  with  a  cowlick  over  their  foreheads,  like  an
earlier  generation   of  newspapermen,  who  acted  as  if   they
only  covered  stories  in  order  to  keep  themselves  alive  while
they  wrote  sonnets  after  hours.  . . .
The  report   last  week-end  of  the   Virginia   Commission  on
Public  Education  blames  the  Supreme  Court's  school  decision
on  "a  lengthy  treatise  edited  by  Gunnar  Myrdal,  a  European
sociologist  of  slight  experience  in the  United  States."  The  re-
port  unanimously  recommends  amendment  of  the  State  Con-
stitution  to  permit  the  payment  of  tuition  in  private  schools
so no pupil  need be "integrated" against his  will.  ...    At the
same time  the  members seem  to feel  they were very  brave  and
"liberal" because  they did not  (as racist "radicals"  suggested)
recommend  abolition  of  the  public  school  system  altogether.
A  pleasant  feature  of the  elections  was  the  rout  of  the  rac-
ist  forces  (described  in  the  October  31 issue  of  the   Weekly)
in  Arlington  across the  river from  here.  But  the  white liber-
als  there,  like  those  in  South  Africa,  are  not  openly for  inte-
gration ;  they  merely  want  to  defend the  public  school  system
and  somehow "adjust"  painlessly to the new court ruling. . . .
Even  some  Southern  papers  seem  to  be shocked by the  failure
to indict the admitted  kidnappers  of Emmett  Till.  . . .  Senator
Stennis  told  an  audience in  Jackson,  Miss.,  on  November 10,
Negroes  should be told  they  must  accept  segregated  schools  or
see the public school system  abolished. . . . Thought  U. S. Sen-
ators  took  an  oath  to  uphold  the  laws  and  the  Constitution?
The  greatest  enemies  of  the  Negro  have  been  his  own  apa-
thy,  his  rich  humor,  his  forgiving   nature,  his  eagerness  to
live  and be let  alone.  .  .  .  But the  Till  case  is  arousing  the
Negro as never  before, giving  the minority-supported  NAACP
a  wider  base  than  it  ever  had.  ...    Dr.  T.  R. M. Howard  of
Mississippi  spoke  before  a  packed  Vermont  Avenue  Baptist
church  here  last  Sunday  night  and  the  writer  asked  him
afterward,  "In  your  years  in  Mississippi,  has  a  white  man
ever  helped you or  secretly  expressed  sympathy?"  The  answer
was  "No."  ...   To hear  him, one of the  brave  men of our  time,
a  Moses of his people, was a deeply moving experience.  . . .
Trial  of  six  persons  indicted  for  sedition  in  Louisville  with
Carl  Braden  was  postponed until  May 14 when they  appeared
What  Most  Book  Reviewers   Missed
Acheson   Attacks   Brownell
"The  Attorney  General's attitude  is  unhappily typical
of  the authoritarian mind  at  all  times and places.  If  the
state  is  faced  with  internal  danger  of  any  sort,  the  re-
sponse   lies  in  repression   and  the  secret  police.   It   is
thought  that  dangers  rooted in ideas  can be repressed  as
burglars  are  repressed.  If  burglars  are  shown  to  enter
more  often   through  back  doors   and  side   doors   than
through  front  doors,  then  arrest  all  who enter  through
back  and  side  doors.  But,  one protests,  this  will  result
in  the  arrest  principally  of  innocent householders.   The
answer  recalls  us  sternly  to  the  path  of  duty.  Shall  we
open  the  doors  to  burglars.   Those  who  suggest  this
either  do not understand  the  problem and  the  danger,  or
they  are  burglars,  or  their  apologists  and  dupes."
—Former  Secretary   of  State  Dean  Acheson  in  his
new   book,  "A   Democrat  Looks  At   His   Party,"
satirizing   Attorney   General  Brownell's     defense
of   the  FBI   secret  informant   system.    Acheson's
discussion  of  "The  State  and  the  Individual"  de-
serves  respectful   salute:  even  now,  out  of     office,
it  took  courage  to  write.
in  court  last  Monday.  Their  cases  were  postponed to wait  the
outcome  of  the  appeal  filed  by  Braden  from  the  16-year  sen-
tence  given  him  last  December.  The  outcome will  also  be  af-
fected  by  the  Steve  Nelson  case, on which the  Supreme  Court
was  hearing  argument  as we went  to  press.  .  . .
Henry  A. Wallace's  speech  to the  Iowa Farm  Bureau  Feder-
ation  in  Des  Moines last  Tuesday,  his  first  major  public  ad-
dress  in many years, was  Wallace  at  his  best—good humored,
non-partisan  and  refreshingly  analytical  after  the  demagogy
which  marks  most  current  political  discussion  of  the   farm
problem.   He  advocated  the  "soil  bank"  idea  instead  of  rigid
supports,   i.e.  Federal  subsidy  to  take  unneeded  land  out  of
production.  . . . The Weekly  bares  its  head  at  the passing of
Bernard   De  Voto,  whose  famous  "Easy  Chair"  in   Harper's
took  on the  FBI  and  many  other  not-so-easy  liberal  issues  in
the  course  of  his  long  career.  In  his last,  in  that  magazine's
November  issue,  De  Voto  said  he  was  on  many  subversive
lists  and  commented,  "Nomination  to  them  is  the   diagnostic
test  of  decency  for  everyone  who  has  a  public  forum."
Why   Not  Start  a  Gift   Subscription   for   A  Friend   With   This  Special  Meiklejohn   Issue?
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City                                         Zone          State
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  raos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
Street
City                                           Zone            State
*  extra  for  Canada.                                                11/21/55
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED