I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955mar07.pdf

============================================================

After  5 Years  of  Study, the  Air  Force  Finds  That  Russians  Like  Socialism,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   NUMBER 7
MAKCH  7,  1955
0
         WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
In   the   Wake   of   Dulles's  Mischief-Making   Tour
Dangerous War  Crisis Ahead
The  Bangkok  meeting  was  a  curtain-raiser  for   a  new  war
crisis  in  the  Formosa  straits.   It  would  be  easy  to  poke   fun
at  the  pompous  inanities  of  Mr.  Dulles's  opening   statement.
"Freedom,"  he  said,  "cannot  thrive  in  an  environment  that  is
hostile  to  freedom."   Someone should  have  reminded him  that
in  the  whole  Western   hemisphere  south   of  the   U.S.   border
there  are  only  three  free  countries—Costa   Rica,  Mexico  and
Uruguay—and  all  of  them  conspicuously  suffer   from   a  lack
of   U.S.    friendliness.    The   Secretary   was   speaking   in   the
capital  of  the  most  ancient  absolutism in  Asia,  whose name he
discovered means "land  of  the  free."  The  only  thing  free  about
Thailand  then  is its  etymology.   This  claptrap  becomes mean-
ingful  only  if  translated  into  what  Mr.  Dulles  really  means
by  freedom,   and  that  is  freedom   for   capitalist  exploitation.
But  his  main  purpose  was not  to  declare a  new  Dulles  ver-
sion  of  the  Monroe Doctrine,  extended  now  to  Southeast Asia.
He  was  engaged  in  a  subtler  task,  and  that  was  to  draw  the
SEATO  powers into  the  defense  of  Formosa.  This  is exactly
what  they  tried  to  avoid  at  Manila.  Formosa  was  pointedly
excluded  from  the  orbit  of  SEATO.  But  at  Bangkok the  U.S.
opposed   the  establishment  of   a  SEATO  military  force.   Mr.
Dulles  instead  tried  to  sell  the  idea  that  the  Manila  pact  was
interlocked   with   our  mutual  security   pacts  with   Chiang,
Syngman  Rhee  and  Japan—and  that  Southeast  Asia  must  rely
if  attacked  on  counter-action  from  these  other  areas.   This  is
to  link  the  fate  of  Singapore with  the  fate  of  Formosa.  Thus
Mr.  Dulles  set  out  to  do what  Knowland has  been  demanding,
and  that  is to  make  the  British  underwrite  Chiang.
Why  the  Atrocity  Report Now?
Mr.  Dulles  may  yet  succeed.   The   release  in  London  last
week-end  of  the  report  on atrocities  against  British   prisoners
of  war  is regarded here  as  a  sign  that  the  British are  beginning
to  give  in  and  to  prepare  public  opinion  for  possible involve-
ment  in  war  with  China.   The   reliability  of   these  atrocity
stories  cannot  be  judged   on   the   basis  of   the   meagre  cable
summaries.   That   the  North  Koreans   (like  the  South)   were
guilty  of  savage atrocities  in  the  first  phase of  the  war  is  in-
disputable.  That  conditions  improved  when  the  Chinese  inter-
vened  was  long   ago  attested,   among  others  by  MacArthur.
It  is  the  timing  which  is significant.  A  sensational rehash  can
serve  only  to  inflame  British  public  opinion.
A  showdown  is  shaping  up  over  the  offshore  islands.   U.S.
intelligence  in  Tokyo  reports   a  Soviet   build-up   of   Chinese
air  strength  opposite  the  Formosa  straits.   A  Russian  air  mar-
shal,  Zhavoronkov,  reputed   to  be  a  bombing  expert,  is  said
to  be in  charge;  several  hundred  Russian  warplanes  have  been
delivered  within  the  past  fortnight;  these  include,   according
to  last  week's  issue  of  the  Sunday  Times  of  London  "the   first
deliveries of  Mig  17s, the  Soviet's latest  twin-jet  radar-equipped
fighter-bomber."   The  Pentagon  and  Chiang's  headquarters  in
Taipeh  are quick  enough  to  give out  information  of  this  kind,
reliable  or  not,  when  they  wish  to  alarm the  American  public.
It  is disturbing  that  little  of  these  circumstantial  reports  have
been  carried  in  the  American  press.  It  could  be that  when  the
threat  is real,  Chiang  and  the  war-hawks prefer  not  to  arouse
anxiety.
Richards,  Then, Was  an "Appeaser"
Congress  was  included  in  setting   the  stage  for  war.   The
chairman  of  the  House  Foreign  Affairs  Committee,   James  P.
Richards,  of  South  Carolina,  attacked  the  British  for  trying
to  "soften   up"  our  policy  on  Formosa,  and  the  Eisenhower
Administration  for  preparing  to  back  down  on  Quemoy  and
Matsu.   Like  Knowland   and   Dulles,   this  Richards    (see  his
admission  during  the  Formosa  debate on  January  2 J)   was  for
"appeasing" the Nazis before the war.  This pressure from  Con-
gress  is  what  the  war  hawks  need.   Constantine  Brown  in  the
Washington  Star  last  Tuesday  reported  an  attack  on  the off-
shore  islands expected  in  30  days  and  said  that  "unless  there
is an  11th  hour  switch," i.e.,  by  the White  House "all  measures
have  already  been  taken"'  for  U.S.  forces  to  protect  Quemoy
and  Matsu.
Mr.  Dulles  was  due  in  Taipeh  for  what  was  being  billed as
the  biggest  war  council  the  U.S.  military  have  ever  held  with
Chiang.    On   the   other   side  of   the   world,   Churchill    (like
R.  H.  S.  Grossman  in  last  week's  New  Statesman)   defended
the   fateful   British   decision   to   make   the   H-bomb   on   the
curious  ground  that  it  is needed  not  just  to  deter  the  Russians
but  to restrain  the  Americans!  "I  cannot  feel,"  Churchill  told
the  Commons  in  a  revealing  passage,  "that  we  should  have
much  influence  over  their  [i.e.  U.S.]   policy  or  actions,  wise or
unwise,  while  we  are  largely  dependent,  as we  are  today,  upon
their  protection."
But   Churchill's    possibly  optimistic   estimates  are  already
being  seized  on  here  to  build  up  opinion  for  preventive  war.
The  State  Department  fed  the  Associated  Press  a  long  "dope"
story  hinting   that  by   1959  Russia  may  be  able  to   practice
"diplomacy   by  ultimatxim"  and  therefore  maybe  it  would  be
better  to  precipitate  a showdown at  "the  next  step  of  U.S.  and
allied  policy  now in  prospect  .  .  .  that  of  the  Chinese  coastal
islands."  This  is  how  Radford   thinks.   When  Churchill  told
the  Commons,  rational calculation  might  be upset  by "lunatics
or  dictators,"  he  should  have  added  admirals.
2    ~
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F:  Stone's  Weekly,  March  7, 1955
If  We  Can't  Change  Russia  by  War,  Why  Not  Try  Living  With  It  in   Peace?
The  Real  Question  (Unanswered)  By That  5-Year  Air  Force  Study
The   average   American  has  been  conditioned  by  now  to
think  of  Russia  as  a    huge  "slave  state,"  in  which  helpless
millions  are  only waiting  for  the  U.S.  Marines to land before
turning  on  their  handful  of  oppressors  in  the  Kremlin.   For
our  military  and  big  business  elite—if  you  look  closely you'll
see  we  have  one—a more  sophisticated  picture  is  in  process
of preparation. Nation's  Business, organ  of the  U. S. Chamber
of  Commerce  (by  subscription  only), gave  its  readers  a  pre-
view  in  its  March,  1955,  issue,  "What  Will Russia  Do  Next?"
The curtain-lifter   does  not  answer  that  question  (we  suspect
the  Politbureau  itself  would  be grateful  if  it  did), but  it  does
puncture many pipe-dreams  about  the  Soviet  system.
The  preview  is  of  one  of  those  grandiose  surveys  financed
by the  military,  in  this  case the  Air  Force,  in that manner to
which  our  poor  scholars  are  totally   unaccustomed.   (What
wonders  might  be  achieved  if,  for  once, some  peaceful  study
in  human frailty  might  be  organized  and  bank-rolled  in  the
Medicean grandeur  of  these  studies  in preparations  for  war!)
For  five  years  a  whole  battalion  of  Russian  "experts"  have
been  working   out  of  Harvard   on  "Strategic   Psychological
Strengths   and  Vulnerabilities  of  the  Soviet  Social  System."
The unprocessed data  total  33,000 pages;  Dr.  Clyde Kluckhohn
was  the  director;  the  results  will  not  be  in  final  shape  until
this  summer.   Safe  bet:   few  will  ever   read   it,  and   those
portions  which conflict  with  our  dominant respectable  stereo-
types  about  the  U.S.S.R.  will  leave  no permanent  impression.
Double  Hedge  Against  Objectivity
The  study  is  doubly  hedged  against   an  objective,  in  the
sense  of  comprehensive and  balanced, view  of  Russia.  1, It  is
based  largely  on  interviews  in  1950-51  with  Soviet   citizens
who  had fled their  native  land, and  is  thus  subject  to exactly
the  same  kind  of  distortions  as  if  the  Russians  depended  (as
in  a  sense  they  do)  for  their  view  of  America  on  the  inter-
rogation  of  Smith  Act  victims.   2.  The  scholars  hired  by  the
Air  Force  were  certainly  cleared  for  "loyalty,"  i.e.,  for  the
possession  of  the  proper  political  preconceptions,  so that  no
scholar  who  might  look  on  the  U.S.S.R.  with  friendly   eyes
would  knowingly be employed.  Hatred  is  not  always  the  best
lens  for  good vision.
The  purpose  of  the  study,  of  course,  is  to  determine  how
to  defeat  Russia  in  a  war,  and  what  to  do with  it  if  we win.
From  this  point  of  view,  the  study  had  the  temerity   and
honesty  to  arrive   at   some  pretty   unpalatable   conclusions.
Here  are  a  few  of  the  questions  asked  by  Nation's  Business
of  the  Air  Force  official  in  charge,  and  his  answers.
Are  the  Russian  people  likely  to  revolt?   "No.    There  is
scant  evidence for  the  view that  more than  a  very  tiny  part
of  the  population  would  take  appreciable  risks  to   sabotage
the   regime  or  to  aid  Western  democracy."    Do  the  people
resent  the  Soviet leaders  or  the  Soviet  system?  "Their  hos-
tility  is  to  the  regime—the  actual   people  in  power—rather
than  toward  the  system.  Even  those  who are  violently  anti-
Soviet  favor   state   ownership  of  means  of   production,  and
other  institutional   features   which  are  associated  with  so-
cialism."   What  features   of  Soviet  leadership  receive  wide-
spread  approval?   "The   people  like  the  purposefulness,  the
activism,  and the  steady  looking to the  future."
They  Like   Socialism!
In  other  words,  to  put  it  more bluntly,  the  Soviet  citizen
dislikes  dictatorship  but   does  like  socialism.   The  Marines
will  not  find  the  U.S.S.R.  ripe  for  free  enterprise.   This  is
not  too unexpected an  observation.   More thoughtful  observers
like  George Kennan have  been trying  unsuccessfully for  some
time  to  register  this  fact  on  American  thinking.
Nor  did the  Air  Force study find the  Russians  ruled by mon-
sters.  "The  goal—and to  some extent  the  attainment—of  the
elite  is  the  rather  puritanical   'new  Soviet  man':  disciplined,
HEARST'S  VIEW
"As long  as  they,  the  Soviet  leaders,  feel  they  are  not
going  to be directly  attacked,  as  long  as  they  know  they
cannot  themselves  attack  without  the  certainty  of  swift
and  terrible  retaliation,  I  seriously  doubt  that  they  will
deliberately  precipitate  a  conflict  with  the  West."
—W. R. Hearst, Jr., reporting  on his trip  to  Moscow,
New  York  Journal  American,  Feb. 28.
working   steadily   and   consistently,   subordinating   personal
conduct  and  motivation   to  the  requirements   of  Party  dis-
cipline."   Perhaps  the  naivest  question  of all  was whether  the
Soviet  regime  could "completely disregard  the  wishes  and  the
welfare  of  the  people."   The  answer:   "No.    Since  the  indi-
vidual  is  the  most  flexible  resource  of  the  Soviet  system,  the
regime   is   necessarily   concerned   with   the   morale   of   the
population . . ."
When  and  if  the  Marines  land,  they  will  also  find  several
strikes  against   them  on  another  score:  the  Soviet   citizens'
view  of  America.  This  cannot be  attributed  purely  to  propa-
ganda,  for  "overwhelmingly  from   intellectual  emigres"   the
Air  Force  students  heard  "Americans  are  materialistic  and
lack  spiritual  values."  (Time  magazine's  theological  thumb-
sucking   apparently   failed  to   impress   them.)    The   Soviet
citizen  also  thinks  America  "aggressive  and  bent  on  world
domination."  (H-bombs  will  not  eradicate  this  impression.)
But—and  this  could  be  important  for  the  future—they  still
dissociate   the   American   government   "from   two   symbols
which  Soviet  citizens  still  value:  the  American  people  and
Franklin  D.  Roosevelt."
Non-Air  Force  Conclusions
The Air  Force findings lead  to conclusions it  does not  make,
for  these have to do with peace and not war.  The first is that,
against  this  background,  war   would  only  unite  the   Soviet
peoples  more  firmly against  us,  and  confirm  their  suspicions.
Socialism  is  there  to  stay  (except  among the  peasantry,  the
"oppressed   class"   of   the   U.S.S.R.,   which   hates   collective
farming,. according  to   those   findings).   Even   if   by  some
miracle  in  this  nuclear  age  we could  take  over  Russia  intact,
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  we  could  remold  it  in  our  own
image;  what  we cannot  do in tiny  Guatemala or  South  Korea,
we  can  hardly  accomplish  with  the  vast  bulk  of  the  Soviet
Union.  The  U.S.S.R. has  its  problems, very  difficult  ones, and
its  discontents, very  real  ones,  but  the  Russians  will  have  to
work   them   out  for   themselves.    We  cannot   use  them   as
leverage   against  the  regime.   "Expectations   are   low,"  the
study  reported  of the  people, "and  there  is  also  still  sufficient
belief   in  the  reality  of  'capitalist  aggression'  to  make  the
people  satisfied  with  small   concessions."
Hatred,    economic  warfare,   "containment,"   the   ring  of
hostile  bases—these  merely confirm  in  Soviet  minds what  they
have  been  conditioned  to  believe  of  the  outside  world,  not
just  by "propaganda" but  by bitter  history  since  the  Revolu-
tion.   But  they  would  be  surprised   by  a  change  of  tactics.
One of the main  psychological weaknesses, the  Air  Force  study
found,  is  "To  actions  by  the  United  States,  whether  of  an
economic,  military   or  psychological  warfare   nature,  which
are  unexpected  by the  Soviet  leaders,  and hence disturbing  to
their  confidence  that  their  calculations  about  us  are  sound."
A reversion  to friendly policies would  really  upset  those  calcu-
lations.   There  is  much  in  these  findings  which  could  be  used
to  create   an  adult,  pragmatic   and  charitable   view  of  the
Soviet  Union,  and  to  buttress  the  case  for  co-existence—and,
indeed, for  the  practice in  our relations  with  Russia  of just  a
little of that Christian  spirit we talk  about  ad nauseam.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  7, 1855
We  Blush  for  Rogge
Those of us who are  old friends  of 0.  John  Rogge will blush
to  see him turn  up again  as witness  for  the  State  against  the
hounded  radicals  of  our  time.   His  appearance  in  the  New
York  State  investigation  of  the  Civil  Rights  Congress  and
his  testimony about  the  Case  of  the  Trenton  Six  recall  the
ignominious  role  he  played  in  the  unsuccessful  prosecution
of  W. E. B. du Bois, the  noted Negro historian.  The Congress,
the  Joint  Anti-Fascist  Refugee  Committee and th^  American
Committee  for  the  Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born  have  all
given  much  help  in  their  time  to  poor  people  in  distress.
Whatever  our  political  differences, it  is not  honorable  to  join
in their  persecution.  Their  officers  in refusing  to  reveal  their
records  are   protecting  others   from  the  public  pillory  and
deserve  credit  for  their  courage.
"Need,  Not Greed  ..  ."
For  once we agreed  with  Senator  Byrd.  The Virginian  was
the  only  Senator  to  protest  when  the  scandal-ridden  FHA's
authority  to  insure mortgages  was  raised by another  one and
a  half  billion  dollars.   The  Senate  Banking  and  Currency
Committee  piously warned  FHA  to  "observe  adequate  safe-
guards"  against  misuse and  to  make  "need,  not  greed,"   its
standard.   But  everybody knows what  lush  pickings in jerry-
built  over-priced housing this  will  provide.  Byrd  pointed out
that  since  1933  the  Federal   government  has  underwritten
domestic  housing to  a  gross  total  of  more  than  61  billions.
He  did  not  point  out  that  his  own  charts  showed  only  70
millions  went  for  slum  clearance  and  urban  redevelopment.
•  Subsidies for  low-cost public housing were  difficult  to  obtain
even  in  New  Deal  days.   But  how  easy  to  get  billions  in
Federal  credit  for  high-cost  housing, so  long  as  gravy  drips
from  it  into private  pockets.
Sharecropper  News
Senator  Morse put  into  the  Congressional Record for  Feb-
ruary  25 the  annual  report  for  1945  of  the  National  Share-
croppers  Fund  with  two  startling  items  in  it.    Some  3,000
small  Louisiana  strawberry  growers  "whose  average   yearly
earnings  from  strawberries  were  less  than   $400"  tried  to
market their  products more profitably  through an AFL union.
They were convicted under the  Sherman Act of being a straw-
berry  trust  and  their  leader  fined  $5,000  and  given  a   sus-
pended  sentence  of  one year  in  jail.   (No  capitalist  has  ever
gone  to  jail  for  violation  of  the  anti-trust  laws.)   The  other
item,  also out  of  Louisiana, concerned  2,000  sugar  cane work-
ers   (average  yearly  family   earnings,   $700  to  $1,200)  who
formed  an  AFL  union  and  went  on  strike.   The  strike  was
broken  by  an  injunction  which  the  State's  Supreme  Court
upheld   with  this   ruling,   "The   guaranties   of   freedom   of
speech,  even  if  picketing  and  speech  are  held  to  be  identical,
cannot  be  maintained  in  the  face  of  such  irreparable  injury
to property."  The case is being  appealed to the  U.S.  Supreme
Court.
The Lehman-Celler Bill
Lehman  in  the  Senate  and  Celler  in  the  House,  with  an
impressive  list  of  co-sponsors, have again  taken  up  the  task
of  repealing  the  MeCarran-Walter  Act  and  reforming  our
immigration  and  naturalization  laws.   Their  bill,  214  pages
long,  represents  a  massive  task  of  purification.  It  would—
among  many  other  things—repeal  the  racialistic   national
origins  quota  system written  into  our  law  in  1924 under  the
influence  of  Nordic superiority  theories  like those of Hitler's;
set  up  a  board  of  Immigration  and  Visa  Appeals  to  give
immigrants  and  visitors  some  protection   against  arbitrary
and  ignorant  consular  officials;   and  liberalize  the  naturali-
zation  laws.   In  particular  it  would  repeal  that  Eisenhower
Administration   monstrosity,  ' the   Ferguson - Brownell   bill
(which  even  McCarran  and  Walter   derided  as  unconstitu-
tional).   Under this  measure,  as  passed  last  year,  we could
for  the  first  time  in  our  history  deprive native-born  radicals
of  their  citizenship  on  conviction  under  the  Smith  Act  and
make them—sinister  phrase—Stateless  persons.
Turning  the  Tables on an  Inquisitor
It  is  pleasant  to  report that  Albert  F.  Canwell,  who flour-
ished  some years  back  as  the  Martin  Dies and Joe  McCarthy
of  the  State of Washington,  is  in  serious  trouble for  contempt
of  the  State  legislature.  A joint  resolution  had  ordered  him
to turn  over  to the  FBI  the  records  of the  1947-49  State  Un-
American  Activities  Committee  of  which  he  was   chairman.
This  was  the  committee  whose  use  of  informers  like  George
Hewitt  helped ruin  several  good teachers  at  the  University of
Washington.  Canwell admitted  recently  at a  legislative  hear-
ing that  he had  destroyed  some of the  records  hot  refused  to
disclose what  happened to the rest.
Harry  Bridges'  Fifth
On  instructions  from  Washington,  U.S.  Attorney  Lynn  E.
Gillard  in  San  Francisco  has  withdrawn  his  agreement  to  a
stipulation  that  Harry  Bridges'  ideas  and beliefs  were  not  an
issue  in the forthcoming  fifth  attempt  to deport  him.  Bridges
goes  on trial  again  June  20 for  denaturalization  proceedings.
"If  the  government  can't  prove that  Bridges  is  or  ever  was
a   member  of  the  Communist  party,"  his  lawyer,  Richard
Gladstein  commented,  "and   nobody  has   ever   been  able   to
prove  that—will  it  then  proceed  to drag  in everything he has
ever  written,  and  try  him for  ideas  of which the  government
doesn't  approve?"
Culture  and  Freedom  Note
The  February  28  issue  of  the  New  Republic  carried  news
that  deserves  a  wider  audience.   David  Riesman,  author  of
"The  Lonely  Crowd,"  has  resigned  from  the  executive  com-
mittee  of  the  American  Committee for  Cultural  Freedom  be-
cause  it  spent  too  much  of  its  energies  in  "the   vindicative
pursuit  of 'liberals who haven't learned.'"  Riesman broke  the
news  in  dissasociating   himself   from   a  letter  sent  by  the
Committee's  executive secretary,  Sol  Stein,  a  kind  of  pygmy
anti-Communist  Commissar, criticizing  the  New  Republic  for
an  article  defending  Owen  Lattimore.  Stein's letter  praised
the  McCarran committee, but  whether  for  its  contribution  to
culture  or  freedom  was  not  clear.
Let's  All  Die for  Formosa
The  apocalyptic  plane  on  which  the  China  Lobby  and  a
certain   kind  of  American   Catholic  thinker   meet   may   be
studied  in  an  article  from  the  October  1954  issue  of  Notre
Dame's  Review  of  Politics put  into  the  Congressional  Record
February   25  by  Senator  Knowland.  The  writer,  using  the
pen  name Ferreus,  argues  the  case  for  preventive war.   His
"14  Fundamental  Facts  of the  Nuclear  Age"  lead  np  to  the
conclusion  that  "the   time  may  come  when  a  dispassionate
survey of the  security  problems of the free world "would  show
that  they  could  not  be  solved  "except  through  the  deliberate
resort  to  force."   This  may  be  finish  for  all  of  us  "but   it
hardly  pays,"  says  Ferreus,  clinging  to  a  safe  anonymity  in
the   meantime,  "to   survive   for   the  blessings  of   a   slave
existence."
Salute  to  a  Hero
Last   Monday,  with   Black  and   Douglas   dissenting,   the
Supreme  Court  refused  to  hear  the  appeal  of  George  Ana-
staplo,  a  World  War  II  Air  Force   officer,  who  was  denied
admission  to  the  bar  in  Illinois  because  (1)  he  refused  on
principle  to say whether  he was a  Communist and  (2)  he in-
sisted  that  people  have  a  right  to  overthrow  an  oppressive
government.  The  Court's  action  ends  his  hope of becoming  a
lawyer.   Anastaplo,  a  man  with  the  highest  scholastic  and
character   references,  is  a  philosophical  libertarian.   One of
his  teachers  said of him, "He  has  one of the  two most brilliant
minds  I  have  ever  taught.  His moral  standards  are  impreg-
nable."  His  is  the  ancient  breed  of  Patrick  Henry  and  John
Lilburne  for  which  there  is  little  place  in  the  deadly  con-
formity  of  cold  war  America.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  March  7, 1955
In  the  Wake of  Mrs.  Ruth  B.  Shipley's  Retirement  as  Travel  Czarina
Two  New  Passport Decisions Put  Cracks In  Our  Iron  Curtain
Mrs.  Ruth  B.  Shipley  took  over  control  of  the  State  De-
partment's  passport.office  in  June  1928. By  the  time  of  her
retirement  a few  days ago she had  become Washington's  most
feared  bureaucrat.    Long  before  the  McCarran  Act  in 1950
forbade   the   issuance   of   passports   to   Communists, Mrs.
Shipley  had  cast  a  baleful eye on the  left-of-center.  On more
than  one occasion  during  the  war  FDR  himself  had  to  inter-
vene to  obtain passports for  New Deal civil servants  assigned
to  work  abroad  but  unable  to  obtain  passports   because  to
Mrs.  Shipley's  eye pink  and  red  were  indistinguishable.
No  one practiced  more  deftly  than  Mrs.  Shipley  the  finest
of  the  State  Department's  arts—the  art  of  governing  nega-
tively by failing to  answer  communications, mislaying papers,
etc.   Many  simply  did  not  travel  abroad  because their  appli-
cations  were  never  acted  upon.  A  long list  of  other  assorted
Leftists   and  radicals  had  their  passports   lifted   or  denied.
Under  Mrs.  Shipley,  an  Iron  Curtain  was  erected  which made
it  almost  as  hard  for  dissenters  to  get  out  of  the  U.S.A.  as
to  get  out  of  the   U.S.S.R.
Cracks  in  the  Curtain
Within  a  few  days  of  Mrs. Shipley's  retirement,   cracks
were  opened  in  that  curtain  by twin  decisions  handed  down
here last  Monday by Federal Judge  H. A. Schweinhaut in two
passport  suits  against  the State Department. One was brought
by Professor  Otto Nathan, the  economist; the  other  by former
Judge   William  Clark.   The  two  cases,  though  widely dis-
similar,  were  decided  together  on  the  common  ground  that
neither  had  been'given  a  genuine  hearing.
The effect  is to upset the kangaroo court  passport  procedure
established  by the  Department  in  the  wake of the  Bauer  case,
when  it  was held that  a  passport  could not be denied without
"due process."  The Department thereupon set up an elaborate
regulation  designed  to  cover  "persons  supporting   the  Com-
munist  movement"  and  "persons  likely  to  violate   [security]
laws  of  the  United  States"  while  abroad.  The  procedure was
the  vague  one  of  a  loyalty  proceeding,  with  no right  to  con-
front  accusers.
"The  Law's  Delay"
In  Otto  Nathan's  case,  he  applied  for  a  passport  in  De-
cember, 1952.  "After  several  months of informal  interrogation
and  correspondence," as  Judge  Schweinhaut describes it,  "he
was  in  July,   1954,  denied  a  passport."    Prof.  Nathan  was
accused  of having  once been  a  Communist  in  Germany  during
the  20's.  This he  denied under oath.  A chance to confront his
accusers  was  not  granted.   "The  plaintiff,"  the  Judge ruled,
"did  not  have  a  hearing  which  the  law   contemplates  and
guarantees."
The  government  had  asked  for  the  dismissal  of   Nathan's
action  on the  ground, among others, that  he had  not  appealed
to  the  Board  of  Passport  Appeals  set  up  by  the  1952  regula-
tions.  Nathan  pleaded that  in  the  absence  of  a  real  hearing
there  was  no  point  in  such  an  appeal.   The  Judge   agreed.
"It  does not satisfy  me to argue," he ruled, "that the plaintiff
has  not  exhausted  his  administrative   remedies  since  I  thin,
as a matter  of practical fact  he had none."
The Price of  a  Passport
The  same principle  was  applied  by  the  Judge  to  the  Clark
case,  though  here  it  is  somewhat confusing.  Judge  Clark  did
not  claim  lack  of  a  proper  hearing.   He  produced  a  letter
from  Scott  McLeod  saying  that  he  could  have  a  passport  if
he  promised while abroad  not  to  criticize  American  policy  in
Germany.   Clark,   as  a  judge  of  the   American  occupation
courts,  had  been critical of  State Department  policy, and  had
thereupon  been  denied judicial  reappointment.
In  Clark's  case the  Department  quite baldly  and boldly had
asserted  what it  has  so often  done privately  in passport  cases
—made  it  clear  that  an  American  citizen  whose  opinions  it
disliked  must  promise to  foreswear  his  right  of  free  speech
if  he wanted to  enjoy  the  right  to  travel.  This was the  hint
dropped  to  Corliss Lamont  and this was  the  clear implication
of  the  decision  which  wrecked  Paul  Robeson's  livelihood  as
an  international   concert  star.   The  only  difference   is  that
Clark  is not  a  left-winger.
Less  Right  Than  Communists
The  Clark  decision may  have  one peripheral  benefit.   Until
now  the  Department  has  ruled  that  if  a  person  is  not sus-
pected  of being a  Communist, he does not  come under  the  new
regulations—and  therefore  no hearing  need be granted  him if
his  passport  is  denied.
Thus in a third  passport case, that of Max Schachtman, now-
awaiting  decision in the  Circuit Court of Appeals here, he was
denied  a  passport  because  the  Independent  Socialist  League
he  heads  is  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.  The  Department
argued  that  it  did  not  have  to  give  Schachtman  a  hearing
since it  did not  suspect him of being a Communist!  This is  the
kind  of  passport  wonderland   our  retiring  Alice  helped   to
create.
If  You  Have  Not  Yet  Renewed,  Please  Do  So Now  and  Send  a  Gift  Sub to  a  Friend
I. F. Stone's  Weekly,
Please renew  (or enter)
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:*
«*«-4
Tity
Zon
^   _
Enter  this gift  sub for  $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(T>)  Nam?
Tity
* $1 extra for  Canada.
Z«n«         St.«»
8/7/BS
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St,   S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED