I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955sep12.pdf

============================================================

Why  Did Duties  Suddenly  Change  His  Tune  on Israel?   See Page  2.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO.  33
SEPTEMBER   12,   1955
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The Term  "Subversive"  Has No  Place  In  A Free  Society
We  are  still  a  long  way from  seeing  the  end  of  the  security
mania.  One  of  the  obstacles to  clear thinking is that  the  critics
are  under  compulsion  to  demonstrate  their  own  "loyalty"  by
accepting  the  premises  of  the  witch  hunters.   We   offer  as  a
horrid  example  the  program   of  reform  put  forward  by  the
American  Jewish  Congress  at  the  recent  hearings  before  the
Senate  Post  Office   and  Civil  Service  Committee.    The  AJC's
were  the  most  detailed  liberal  proposals   for   remedying  the
abuses  of   the  government  security  program.    Some  of   these
proposals  are  appalling.
Here,  for  example,  is  one  of  the  reformed  standards  sug-
gested  by the  AJC  for  determining whether an  applicant  for  a
sensitive position  is or  is not  "subversive."   The  AJC  says,  "As-
sociation  with  'front'  or  other  organizations  known  to  be  in-
filtrated  with  members  of  subversive  groups   should   only  be
considered  v/hen there  is  also  information as  to  other  activities
of  the  individual which  establishes that  he  may be  a  part  of  or
sympathetic to  the  infiltrating  element  or when  he has  personal
views  which  are  sympathetic  to  or  coincide  with  subversive
lines."
Broad  Enough  for  A McCarthy
This  legalistic  gibberish  is  broad  enough  to  cover  not  only
"front"  organizations, a vague  enough  category,  but  the  vaguer
one  of  "infiltrated"  groups.   Its  logic  would  bar  not  only  Com-
munists  and  other   "subversives"   but  those  whose  "personal
views  ...   are sympathetic to or coincide with  subversive lines."
Reliability  would  be  measured  by  political  opinion.   The  door
would  be  opened  to  close  examination  of  personal  views  and
their  judgment  by  the  perniciously  nebulous   yardstick   (no-
where  denned  and  indeed  indefinable)  of  "subversion."   Such
"reformed"   standards  are  broad   enough   to  accommodate   a
future  McCarthy.   They  acquiesce  in  the  confusion  of  loyalty
with  conformity, security  with  thought  surveillance.
Another  example  is  the  AJC's  proposed  reform  of  the  evils
which  feed  on  anonymous  accusations.   These  volunteer   Solo-
mons  propose,  "disclosure  and  confrontation  should  be  denied
the  accused  employe  only  [italics  in  original]  if  it  is shown  to
the  satisfaction  of  the  Security  Commission  or  persons   dele-
gated   by  it  that   (a)   the  informer  sought   to  be  shielded  is
currently   [italics   also  in  original]   serving  as  an  undercover
member of  one  of  the  U.  S. Government  investigation  agencies
in  a strategic position  to  secure  information, or  (b)   is a  person
who  has participated  in  the  offense  and  turned  against  his  col-
leagues  but  who  has  remained underground,  and  (c)   the  dis-
closure  of  the  informer's  identity would  seriously hamper  the
government's   investigative   power,   and   (d)    the    informer's
testimony  is  the  only  practical  means  of  proving  the   govern-
ment's  charge  or  charges."
This,  again,  is  broad  enough  to  provide  a  new  and  firmer
legal  basis  for  the  evils it  proposes  to  reform.   The  informer  is
neither  a new phenomena  nor  one limited  to  the  prosecution  of
political  crimes.  The  government  cannot  convict  a  dope  ped-
dler  or  a  jewel  smuggler  on  undisclosed  informer  testimony;
it  cannot  plead  as  excuse  that  to  bring  the  informer  forward
publicly  would  destroy  his usefulness.   Nor  can the government
convict  anyone  of  political  crimes—for  treason  or  sedition  or
conspiracy  to advocate  revolutionary  doctrine—without  produc-
ing  its  informers.  Why  should  it  be  permitted  wider  latitude
in  security cases ?  Political  informers, paid  to  spy  on  their  asso-
ciates  or  betraying  their  comrades  to  win  immunity for  them-
selves,  have  never  been  very  reliable  creatures.   Why   should
they  be  allowed  the  cover  of  secrecy  in  hearings  which  ruin
people's  reputations  and  destroy  their  livelihood?
The  Purge  We  Need
Liberal  reforms  of  this kind,  if  adopted,  would  serve  only  to
institutionalize  the  witch  hunt,  and  to  establish  it  permanently
in  American life.   Once  its standards are accepted,  with  the  un-
spoken  premises which lie behind them,  it  is impossible  to  keep
the  security  program within  reasonable bounds.  If  certain  ideas
are  so  dangerous  that  those  who  hold  them  should  be  barred
from  "sensitive"  government  positions,  it  is  difficult  to  refute
the  logic  which  says  that  other  persons  should  not  be  allowed
to spread  such  ideas as teachers,  writers,  speakers  or  journalists.
If  "subversives"  are  to  be  barred  from  government,  then  why
not   from  plants  working  on  orders  from   the   government?
America  will  not  be  restored  to  health  until  the  security  pro-
gram  is  abolished  altogether.    A  free   society  cannot   operate
without  real  risks;  to  try  and  avoid  them  artificially  is  to  foster
graver  evils  and  more  serious  dangers.    The   security  mania
has  succeeded  in  brainwashing a  whole  generation  of  Ameri-
can  intellectuals.    But  this  is  a  kind  of  terror,   not   effective
counter-intelligence.
The  purge  we  need  is a  purge  of  American thinking,  which
has grown  foul  with  alien  concepts.   The  most fundamental of
these  is that  history is  made  by  conspiracies,  and  that  the  path
to  social  stability therefore  lies  in  policing  political  activity  in
order  to  stamp out  dangerous,  "subversive"  ideas.  But  what  is
regarded  as  "subversive"  in  one  generation  may prove  progres-
sive  in  the  next.   Among  the  "subversive"   ideas  in  the  Com-
munist  Manifesto,  for  example,  were  the  income  tax  and  the
eight  hour  day.  Who  but Westbrook  Pegler  today  fails  to  take
them  for  granted  as  healthy  features  of  a  stable  society?   Yet
these  reforms might  never have  been  achieved  peacefully  if  two
generations  ago  there  had  been  a  "security"  program  to  drive
out  of  government  and  opinion-forming   professions  all  who
held  such  "subversive"  views.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  12,1955
The  $64  Question  of  Middle  Eastern  Politics
Why  Did  Mr.  Dulles  Suddenly   Change   His  Tune  on  Israel?
What  Secretary  of States  Dulles meant  by his  recent  speech
on  the   Middle  East  seems  to  have  everyone  in  Washington
(and  no  doubt  also  in  Tel  Aviv and  the  Arab  capitals)   puz-
zled.  The  speech  offered  an  international  loan  with American
participation    to  resettle   Arab   refugees;   American   aid  in
water  development for  the whole area; and a security  guaran-
tee  of  Arab-Israeli   borders.    But  all  this  seems  to  hinge  on
whether  Arabs  and  Israeli  can  first  agree—a  most unlikely
event—on  where  the  borders  should be.
The  Secretary's  genius  for  ambiguity,  developed by  a  life-
time  in  the  practice  of  corporation  law,  was  never  more  bril-
liantly  evident  than  in  this  carefully  drafted  speech.   At  his
press  conference four  days  later,  he  cut  short  all  questions
about  it,  saying  he  did  not  think  it  "wise  or  proper"  to  add
"anything   of  substance"  to  what  he  had  said  in  the  speech.
Perhaps  it  can  best  be evaluated  against  certain  background
developments:
During  the  past  two  years  Israel  has  been  negotiating  in
London  and  Washington  for  an  Anglo-Israeli  or  U.  S.-Israeli
military  alliance.   Its  chief  argument  has  been  that  such  an
alliance  would  make the  Arab  States  realize  that  Israel  was
here  to stay,  and thus  clear  the  way for  peace between  it  and
the  Arab  States.   These  negotiations  have  been  fruitless.
During  recent  weeks  the  idea  of  a  U.  S.-Israeli  military
alliance  has  been  taken  up  by  Democratic  party  circles.   W.
Averell  Harriman,  Governor of  New  York  State,  said  on  his
return  from  Israel  last  month that  the  peace and  stability of
the  Middle  East  might  best  be furthered  by  a  pact  between
the  U. S. and  Israel.  Congressman Celler  expressed  the  same
view  in  a  press  conference at  Tel  Aviv  on  August  23.
This  may  become  an  issue  in  the   1956  elections.   It  was
politically   necessary   that   the   Eisenhower  Administration
have  something  constructive to  offer.   The  result  may  have
been  the  Dulles speech.
A  Change  of  Emphasis
When  this  speech  is  compared  with earlier pronouncements
from   the   Department  of  State  under  Dulles,  a  change  of
emphasis  is  apparent.   When  Mr. Dulles made his  "Report  on
the  Near  East"  (June  1,  1953)  after  a  visit  to  the  area,  the
emphasis was  on reassuring the  Arabs  that  the  U. S., Britain
and  France  by  their  tripartite   declaration  of  May  25,  1950,
were  pledged to  resist  any  attempt  by  Israel  to  expand.    "It
must  be  made  clear,"  the  Secretary  of  State  said,  "that  the
present  U.  S. Administration stands  fully  behind that  Decla-
ration.   We  cannot  afford   to  be  distrusted   by  millions  who
could  be  sturdy  friends  of  freedom."
There  was  the  same emphasis in  the  Eisenhower Adminis-
tration's   next  authoritative  exposition  of  policy.   This  was
the   speech  made  almost  a  year  later,  on  May  1,  1954,  by
Henry A. Byroade, then Assistant  Secretary  of State for  Near
Eastern,  South  Asian  and  African  Affairs,  now  U.  S.  Am-
bassador  to  Egypt.   The  choice  of  forum  was  in  keeping with
the  content.  He  spoke before  the  anti-Zionist American Coun-
cil  for  Judaism  and  called  his  address  "Pacing  Realities  in
the  Arab-Israeli  Dispute."   He  hinted  that  one  of  the  reali-
ties was  to restrict  immigration into Israel  in  order  to  placate
Arab  fears  of  what  he  called  "expansionist  Zionism."
An  even  more  bitter   pill  for   Zionist  and  Jewish  opinion
was  the  address  made here  in  Washington  last  March  6 be-
fore   the   Conference  of  Jewish   Organizations  by  John   D.
Jernegan,   Deputy  Assistant   Secretary   of  State  for   Near
Eastern,   South  Asian  and  African   Affairs.    Mr.   Jernegan
spoke  of  "Middle  East  Defense"  and  he  made  it  quite  clear
that  Israel  was  to  be  excluded  from  America's  Middle East
defense  planning  so  long  as  the  Arabs  were  hostile.
Put  More Bluntly
The  same  point  of  view was  expressed  more  bluntly  by  the
London  Times  on  Monday, August  28,  in  commenting  on  the
new   Dulles   speech.    The   Times   admitted   that  Israel  had
One  of  Freedom's  New  Allies
Q.  Did  the  German  Generals  want  war?
A.  The  German  Generals   didn't   want   war   in  1939.
Their  buildup  was  not  scheduled  to  be  completed  until
1948.   Goering  was  against the  Polish war.  Even  Hitler
didn't  want  war.  He  just  wanted  to  regain  Danzig and
eliminate  the  Polish  Corridor,  which  was  an  affront  no
German  could  accept.  Britain  could  have prevented  the
war   by  putting   a  little  pressure  on   the  Poles.    But
Britain  refused.
—How  Hitler   Could  Have  Won,  Interview   with  Field
Marshal  Kesselring,  U.S. News  & World  Report, Sept.  2
"built  up  the  strongest  Levantine fighting force  outside  Tur-
key"  and that  she had  grasped  at  every apportunity  to  nego-
tiate with  the  Arabs.   The  Times,  often  the  unofficial  voice of
the  Foreign  Office,  also  admitted that  the  Tripartite   Declara-
tion  of   1950  put   Israel   at   a   disadvantage,  by  preventing
Israel  from  forcing  a  military  showdown  while enabling  the
Arab  States  to  carry  on  an  economic  blockade  against  her.
But—
"Alliance  implies  a  high  identify of interest,"  said  the  Lon-
don  Times,  "and  Britain's  interest  in  the  Middle  East  can  be
advanced  now by  alliance with  the  Arab  States.  They  alone,
however  incompetent, unstable or  unreliable, have  the  oil, oc-
cupy  the  territory,  and  provide air  fields  in  sufficient  disper-
sion  for  the  function  they  fulfill.   The  use  of  the  Israel  Army
and  provision  of  a  British  base  in  Israel,  valuable  though
these  could  be,  would  not  compensate for  this."
There  are  few  informed  people in  the  capital  who  do  not
believe that  editorial  pretty  accurately  reflects the  real  views
of  the  State  Department as  well as  the  Foreign  Office.   It  may
help  one  to  understand  the  Dulles  speech  and  the  fact  that
officially  Britain  endorsed the  Dulles speech.  For  that  speech
does  not  offer   Israel   a  military  pact.   It   offers   a  security
guarantee  of  her  borders  if  and  when  she  has  been  able  to
reach  an  agreement  with  the  Arab  States  on  where  those
boundaries  shall  be.
This,  as  the  Times  points  out,  really  goes  no further  than
Sir  Anthony  Eden went  last  April  when he said  that  Britain
would  be  prepared  to  "back  up"  any  arrangements   between
Israel and the  Arabs  on frontiers, Jordan  water  and the  Arab
refugees.   Since  there  is  no  prospect  of  such  agreements  be-
tween  Israel  and  the. Arabs, the  Eden offer  did not  mean  very
much.  As  the  London  Economist  said  September  3,  "An  echo
rings  through  from  the  old  days  when  the  mandatory  was
ready  to  execute  any  decision  'acceptable  to  both  communi-
ties.' "    Since  the  two communities—Arab and Jewish—could
never  agree,  the  mandatory never  had  to  act.
Pie-In-The-Sky,  Too?
Is  this  all there  is  to the  Dulles offer,  too?  Is  it  only  a  pie-
in-the-sky   performance,  designed  to   sweeten   and    confuse
American  Zionist opinion, and  to  give the  Eisenhower Admin-
istration   a  talking  point  in  the  next   election  against  the
Democrats?
Perhaps.  But there is one more  factor  in the  situation, and
this  is  the  growing  flirtation  between  Egypt  and  the  Soviet
bloc.   There  has   been  much  speculation  about  Mr.   Dulles's
timing,  and  this  has  been  attributed   to  a  desire  to  speak  in
more friendly vein of  Israel  before the  1956 presidential  cam-
paign  actually got  underway.   But  the  timing  may  also  have
to  do  with  developments  elsewhere.
Just  two weeks before  Mr.  Dulles  spoke,  Egypt's  "neutral-
ist"  Premier  announced that  he  had  accepted  an  invitation  to
visit   Moscow  next  year.   The  friendlier  tone  of  the   Dulles
speech  toward  Israel  and  its  one new  proposal—an  interna-
tional  loan  to  Israel  for  resettlement   of  the  Arab  refugees—
may  also  have  been  intended  to  make  Cairo   nervous.
(Next  week: Washington,  Moscow  and  the  Arab  League.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  12,1955
Carl  Braden  Tells  What  Has  Happened  to  The  Others  in  the  Louisville   Case
That  Negro  Family,  Target  of  the  Dynamiters,  Is  Still   Homeless
By  Carl  Braden
The  plight  of  Andrew  Wade  IV  and  his  family  has  been
obscured  by  the  concern  over  what  happened  to  me  and  six
other   white  people  in  the  Kentucky  sedition   cases.
Wade  is  the  young  Negro  veteran   whom  my  wife  and  I
helped  to   obtain   a   house  in   a   so-called  white   subdivision
near  Louisville.   The  house  was  later  dynamited  by  neigh-
bors,  but  my  wife  and  I  and  others   were  accused  of  con-
spiring  to  blow it  up  to  achieve  a  political  end.
Wade's  house  faded  into  the  background  during  my  trial
and  imprisonment.    It  was  all  but  forgotten   in  the  fight  to
raise   the   $40,000   bond  that   resulted   in  my  release   from
prison  after  I  had  served  a  total  of  8  months.    I  was  freed
pending   action   on  my   15-year   sentence   by  the   Kentucky
Court  of   Appeals.
Many  have  sympathized  with  me  because  I  had  to  serve
those  8  months,  but  it  is  the  Negro  people  in  the  South  who
merit  the  most  concern.   They  have  been  in  prison  for  300
years  and  are  just  now beginning to  see a  chance  to  get  out.
Wade's  house  is  a  symbol  of  their  struggle.    It  stands  as  a
monument  to  the  inhumanity of  those  who would stop  deseg-
regation  in  the  schools  by  block  desegregation   in  housing.
No  House,  No  Money
The  house lies  half  in  ruins  because  Circuit  Court  is  hold-
ing  the  money  paid  by  the  insurance  company to  repair  the
bomb  damage.    It  is  surrounded  by tall  grass  and  plastered
with  "No  Trespassing"   signs,   erected  by  county  policemen
who  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  prevent  its  being  dynamited
in  June,   1954.
The  court  was  able  to  place  the  money  in  escrow  because
the  building  and  loan  association  had  sued  to  foreclose  on
the  mortgage.    The  insurance  company  said  it  did  not know
who  was  entitled  to  the  money because title  to  the   property
was  in  dispute.    This  despite  the  fact  that  Wade  bought  the
policy  and  paid  the  premiums.
Meantime,   Wade  is  desperate.    He  still  has  no  place  to
live.   He   and   his   wife   and   their   two  children,   4-year-old
Rosemary  and  Andrea,  a  year  old,  are  sharing  the  home of
Wade's   parents,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Andrew  Wade,  Jr.     Young
Wade  pointed  out  to  the  Louisville  Defender   recently  that  he
and  his  family  are  bunking up  like  refugees  while  the people
who  blew  up  his  house  remain  free  of  prosecution.
Wade  tried  to  buy  another   house  in  a  new  Negro  subdi-
vision,   but   lending  institutions   turned   thumbs   down.    He
had  to  seek  a  house  with  a  very  low  down  payment  because
he  still  has  $1,400 tied  up  in  the  bombed house.
Then  he bought  a  house that  was  to  be torn  down to  make
way  for  a  turnpike.    He  paid  $100  down and  put  up  a  $300
bond  to  insure  that  it  would  be  moved  by  a  certain   date.
All  kinds  of  blocks  were  thrown   up  by  the  mover  and   the
man  who  was  selling  Wade  a  lot  to  put  the  house  on.   They
suddenly  wanted   more  money  than  they   ordinarily  would.
The  deadline  for   removal  passed  and  the  house  was  torn
down.    Wade's   $400  went,  too.
Other   innocent  victims  of  this  persecution   are   our   two
children,  Jimmy,  almost  4, and  Anita,  2%.   Just  about  every
other   day  Jimmy  says  to  me  or  my  wife,  "Please  don't  go
away   in  the  night."
We  were  torn  from  the  children  last  October  1  when  we
were  indicted  on  charges  of  advocating  sedition.    The  indict-
ment was  returned  at  night  and  we were  taken  away  and  put
in  the  county jail.   I  did not  see Jim  and  Anita  until  Novem-
ber  5.   They  were  staying  with  Anne's  parents  in  Anniston,
Ala.    We arrived  to  visit  them  that  morning.    In  the   after-
noon,  the  grand  jury  at   Louisville  indicted  us   again—this
time  on  the  charge  of  conspiring   to  blow  up  Wade's   house.
Anne  and  I  had  to  leave  Anniston  that  night  in  order  to
drive  the  400  miles  to  Louisville  and  be  in  court  the  next
morning.   Jimmy, a  brave little boy, did not say much at  that
time.    But  the  experience  left  deep  scars.
The  Other   Defendants
The  plight  of  the  other  defendants  has  also  been  obscured
by  the  concentration  on  my  case.    Their  trials  have  all  been
postponed  pending  the  outcome  of  my  appeal.    All  are   free
on bond.
I.  O.  Ford,  who  spent  his  80th  birthday  in  jail,  was  en-
feebled  by  over  six  months'  imprisonment  and  is  ill  quite  a
bit.    He  was  unable  to  supply  the  $10,000  bail  set  after   his
indictment and was not freed  until  the  bond was cut  to  $3,000.
He  is  living  on  Social  Security  benefits,  such  as  they   are.
Vernon  Bown, a  former  seaman  and  truck  driver  who made
pretty  good  money,  is  working  as  a  mechanic  at  a   service
station—when  there  is  work.    Some  weeks  he  makes  all  of
$28.   He  spent  5 months  in jail  because  of  the  excessive  bail.
Miss  LaRue  Spiker,  a  social  worker,  is  trying  to  live  by
making   leather   goods,   doing  mimeographing,  and    stuffing
envelopes.    Miss  Louise  Gilbert,  considered  one  of  the   top
social  workers   in  Louisville,  is  working  with  the   Women's
International   League  for  Peace  and  Freedom  in  Philadelphia.
The  local  branch  of  the  W.I.L.,  of  which  she  was  an   officer,
dissolved  as  a  result  of the  terror  created  by  the  sedition  in-
dictments  and  my  prosecution.
Lewis  Lubka  worked  for  a  photographer  12 hours  a  day,
6  days  a  week, until  the  boss  cut  his  meager  pay  20 per  cent.
He  now plans  to  go to  work  as  a  welder's  assistant.  He  was
formerly  a  shop  steward  for  IUE-CIO  at  the  General  Elec-
tric plant here.
Hopes  for  Jobless   Compensation
Anne  and  I  are   living  on  loans  and  contributions  from
friends  and  relatives.    I  am also  hoping  to get unemployment
compensation.   I  was a  copy  reader on the  Louisville Courier-
Journal  at  $120 a  week.
The defendants figure that this  case  has  cost  them  upwards
of  $20,000  and  that  it  will  cost  at  least  another   $5,000  just
to  perfect  my  appeal.
But  they  figure  it  is  worth  it.    They  feel  that  the  world
will  be a better  place  to  live  in  because  they  stood and  fought
for   civil  rights  and  civil  liberties   in   1954  and   1955.     Each
of  them  contributed  in  one  way  or  another   to  the   Wade's
fight  to  live in  the  house  of  their  choice.   That  was  why  they
were   persecuted.
An  Item  the  New  York  Times  Did  Not  Think  News  Fit  to  Print
Senator  Finds  Soviet  Bloc  Different  From  State  Dept.  Briefing
"Vienna,  Sept.  1  (AP).—U. S.  Senator  Allen  J.  Ellender
(D.-La.),  said  here  today  that  he  favors  greater  trade  and
more exchanges  of  delegations between the  U.  S.  and Russia.
Returning  to  the  West  from  visits  to  Poland,  Russia,  Ro-
mania   and   Hungary,   Sen.  Ellender  told   a   Vienna   press
conference:
" 'My  trip  was  a  revelation to  me.    It  was  far  different
from  the  impression  I  had  gained  from  the  U.  S.  State  De-
partment.    I  saw  enough  and  talked  to  enough  people   to
gather  the  impression that  they  do not  want  war.   They  are
suspicious  of  us,  however,  and believe  we  want  war.'"
—N.  Y.  Herald-Tribune,  Sept. 2, P. 2.
"Vienna,  Sept.  1  (UP)—Senator Allen  J.  Ellender, Demo-
crat  of  Louisiana, left  today  for  Yugoslavia  where  he  will
talk  with  President  Tito  on  general  world  affairs."
—N.  Y.  Times, Sept. 2, P. 6.
A  .3  J.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  12,1955
No  Disarmament  Agreement,  But  The  Arms  Race  Is  Slowing  Down
The  Government  Decides  It  Cannot  Get  A  New  Lamont  Indictment
RETREAT ?  On September  2 the  government  served  notice
that  it  would  appeal  Federal  District  Judge  Edward  Wein-
feld's   decision  throwing  out  the  indictments   of  Corliss   La-
mont,  Albert  Shadowitz  and Abraham  linger  for  contempt  of
the  McCarthy committee.  The Judge  ruled  the  indictments  in-
valid  because  they  failed  to  show that  the  McCarthy "Perma-
nent  Subcommittee  on Investigations" had  ever  been  properly
authorized  by  resolution  of  the  Senate  or  the  full  committee.
Senator  Mundt  in  a  letter  to  Brownell  demanded  that  the
three men be indicted  again, but  a  new indictment  would still
be  invalid  unless  the  government  could find some law  or  reso-
lution  authorizing  that  McCarthy  subcommittee.   Apparently
neither  the  Senate  committee  nor  the  Department  of  Justice
were  able  to  find  such  a  resolution.   Had  they  found  one,  it
would  have  been  easy  to  obtain  a  new  indictment.   The  gov-
ernment  has  been  forced  to  appeal  instead,  though  reversal
of  the  Weinfeld  decision  is  very  unlikely.  Should  the  Wein-
feld   ruling   be   upheld   on   appeal,   it   would  invalidate   all
other  outstanding  indictments  for  contempt  of  the  McCarthy
committee,  including  Harvey  O'Connor's,  which  should  go  to
trial  here  in Washington  this  Fall.  . . .
DISARMAMENT:  There  will be no arms  agreement.   U.  S.
policy  is  set  on  atomic  weapons.   Russia's   offer  last  May  to
accept  Western  terms  for  reduction  of conventional  armies  in
return   for  a  ban  on  atom  bombs  is  therefore  being  hastily
swept  under the  rug  at  the  New York  talks.  The Eisenhower
plan  for  a  pie-in-the-sky  swap  of  all  secrets  is  a  propaganda
"out"   to  hide  this  reality.  But  general  reductions  in  armies
and  arms  budgets  are  already  underway  without  agreement.
A  slowing down  of  the  arms  race  has  begun.
JAPAN:  Dulles, pro-Axis before the  war,  still  sees  the  Far
East  as  a  Japanese   "co-prosperity  sphere"  in  which  Japan
would  become the main supplier  for  East  Asia  and  its  police-
Something  New  in  Secrecy
Washington—A  scientist  employed by  the  government
was called  in by  Army  officials last  year as  he  was  about
to  leave  for  ait  international   conference  held  out  West
and  warned,  "There's  going  to  be  a  certain  number  of
persons  at  this  conference  who  are  subversive  and  we
don't  want  you  to  associate  with  them."
The  scientist,  anxious  to  keep  out  of  trouble,  asked
who  these  subversives  were  so  that  he  could  watch  out
for  them.   "We're  not  allowed  to  tell  you,"  was  the  an-
swer  he  got.    "But   we  want  you  to  know  that  you'll  be
watched."
No  Doubt  Tortured  Into  Writing
His  Mother   Regularly
"The  mother  of  an American  who's been  in  Red  China
for  seven  years  said  today  she's  been  hearing  from  him
regularly.    Mrs.  Thomas  D.  Miner,  of  611  Ethan  Allen
Ave.,  Takoma  Park,  yesterday  heard  the  good  news  that
the   Chinese   Communist   will   give   an  exit   permit   to
Charles  Sydney  Miner,  48.    ...
"Mrs.   Miner,  a  widow,  said  letters  used  to  come  from
her   son  every   week   or  10  days.   And  he  always  tele-
phoned  on  holidays  and  her  birthday,  she  said."
—Washington Daily  News,  Sept.  7.
man  against  Communism.  This is what lies behind  that  high-
sounding  reference  in  the  Dulles-Shigemitsu statement  on es-
tablishing  conditions whereby Japan  can  "as  rapidly  as  pos-
sible  ...   be able  to  contribute  to the  preservation  of  interna-
tional  peace and  security  in  the  Western  Pacific."  This, which
has  already  provoked  protest  in  Japan,  would  require  more
than   defensive  forces.    The  Dulles  program  was  undercut
by  one  of  those  American  radicals  whom  Shigemitsu  visited
in   New  York  two   days   after.    "Russia's   attitude   toward
Japan,"  he  told  Shigemitsu,  "will  be  one  of  defense  against
her,  but  not  one  of  aggression  so  long  as  Japan  avoids  any-
thing  in  the  way  of  an  aggressive   position,"   (NY  Herald
Tribune,  Sept.  3).    This  subversive adviser,  now  living  un-
derground  at  the  Waldorf  Astoria,  was  General MacArthur.
FOOTNOTES  ON  THE  THAW:  Our  nomination for  Re-
mark  of  the  Year:  An  Associated  Press  reporter   in  Moscow
covering  the  throngs  of  foreign  tourist  moving  through  the
Kremlin  heard  an  American  youth  with  a  white  sport  shirt
and  a  big  "USA"   badge  say,  "This  place  is  crawling  with
capitalists."   (Christian  Science  Monitor,  Sept.  3).  ...    John
O'Donnell   (New    York   Daily   News,   Sept.   7),    mournfully
noting  Senator   Malone's   (R.,  Nev.)  friendly  statements   in
Moscow,  recalls  elegaically  that  McCarthy,  Malone  and  Mc-
Carran  were  the  "three  most  dedicated  anti-Communist mem-
bers  of  the  Senate"  and  asks  in  alarm  "If   Molly  has  been
softened  up  in  Moscow,  is  it  safe  to  let  any  of  our   legislators
visit  the Soviet  Union?" . . . The London  Times  Literary   Sup-
plement    (Aug.  5)   includes   a   special   Autumn  number  on
"Writing  Abroad."   The  articles  oh  the   Soviet   Union  and
Eastern  Europe  show  increasing   freedom  for  writers  since
the  death  of  Stalin  but  the  survey  of  literature  in Communist
China  shows  Peking  is  still  in  the  throes  of  the   sectarian
Communist  tendency toward  close  political  control  of  writers
and  intellectuals.  . . .
We'll   Be   Glad   to   Send   Free   Sample   Copies  of  Any  Issue  to  Your   Friends
L  F. Stone's   Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name
Street                                                                                    ...
City                                              .Zone           State
Enter gift  sub for  $2 (6  mos.)   or $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name                                                                                ~....
Street                                 —     -
City                                               Zone           State-
•  $1 extra  for  Canada.                                                     9/12/55
Room  205
301   E.  Copitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED