I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955sep05.pdf

============================================================

The  Pentagon's  Light-headed  Plan  to  Give  Syngman  Rhee  Atomic  Cannon,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 32
SEPTEMBER  5,  1955
= '<"      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Danger-Points  on  The  Path  Toward  Peace
Dr.  Adenauer's trip  to  Moscow  this  week  explains  the  sud-
den  shifting  of  gears  in  American  foreign  policy,  as  reflected
in  the  President's address to  the  American  Bar  Association and
the  two  "tough"  speeches  echoing  it  by Vice  President  Nixon.
Washington  could  not  afford  to  have  West  Germany  believe
that  the  U.  S.  was  prepared  to  acquiesce  in  a  relaxation  of  in-
ternational  tension  while Germany was  still  divided.  So  there
was  a  return  to  the  kind  of  talk  which marked  the  1952  cam-
paign.    Moscow  could  have  peace  only  be  agreeing  to  give  up
East  Germany, relinquishing its  satellite  states,  liquidating  the
international  Communist  movement,  etc.
Washington  was alarmed because only a  few  days  before  the
President  spoke  in  this  old  Truman-Acheson-Dulles  uncondi-
tional  surrender  vein  there  was  disturbing  news  from  Bonn.
The  Associated  Press  reported  on  August  22  that  Dr.  Aden-
auer  had  "quietly  put  the  brake"  on  rearmament  and  adopted
"a  wait-and-see attitude in view of  his  impending trip  to  Mos-
cow."   The  foxy  old  Chancellor,  alarmed  by  the  ability  of  the
U.  S. and  the  U.S.S.R.  to  meet  peaceably at  Geneva  over  Ger-
many's  head,  had  decided  to  see what  kind  of  a  deal  might  be
made  in  Moscow  before  going  ahead  with  rearmament.   Thus
the  revived "tough"  policy was intended to  reassure Dr.  Aden-
auer,  and  to  make  Moscow  feel  that  unless  it  agreed  to  U.  S.
terms,  especially  on  Germany,  there  would  be  no  relaxation
of  tension.
Too  Late  for  Tough   Speeches
Unfortunately  for  Dr.  Adenauer's friends  in  Washington  it
is  too  late  for  "tough"  speeches.   Moscow  as well  as  Washing-
ton  now  negotiates  "from  strength"  and  the  mutual  possession
of  the  H  bomb  has  created  a  stalemate  in  which  the  Russians
can  neither  be  pushed  nor  frightened  out  of  Eastern  Europe.
The  German  problem,  now that  Washington  no  longer  has the
power  to  force  unification  on  its  own  terms,  is  on  the  shelf.
Molotov  at  San Francisco and  more  recently  Bulganin  in  Mos-
cow  indicated  that  the  Russians were  in  no hurry and  that  the
Germans  would  have  to  wait.  Nobody,  including  most  of  the
Germans  themselves,  are  enthusiastic   about  rearming  anyway.
The  Russians  since  Stalin's  death  have  learned  that  they  can
take  control  of  their  relations  with  the  outside  world  away
from  their  enemies  by acting  with  better  manners  and  less  sus-
picion.   The  more  Russia opens  her  doors  to  travel  in  and  out,
relinquishes  her  own  ancient paranoid  fears,  and  eases  her  in-
ternal  regime the more she can make friends and  allay tensions.
The  outside world  has  shown  itself  quick  to  respond.   The  un-
expected   warmth  of   Iowa   an'd  Texas   to   the   visiting  Soviet
farmers  here  in  the  U.  S.  should  have,  and  seems  to  have,
taught  Russia  a  lesson.    If  she  insists  on  being  friendly,  no
amount  of  "tough"  speeches  can  keep  the  rest  of  the   world
9   *
from  being  friendly,  too.
The  tide toward  peace can only be  reversed  now  if  some  un-
toward,  perhaps  stage-managed,  event  like  the  East  German
rising  frightens the  Kremlin  away  from  a  more  liberal  policy,
as  the  assassination   of  Kirov  did  Stalin  in  1934.   The  Russian
state historically has been subject to  just  such mercurial change-
overs  from  repression  to  liberalism  and  back.  The  tide  could
also  be  reversed  by another Korea,  which appeared  or  could  be
made  to  appear  as  evidence  of  Russian  duplicity  and   aggres-
sion.   A  third  possibility  is  the  outbreak  of  a  war  which  did
not  involve the great  Powers  directly  but  into which they  might
be  drawn  because of  strategic considerations and  vital interests.
A  resumption of  war between  Israel  and  the  Arab States  would
be just such a situation. The  geopolitical  importance of  the  area
and  its  oil  resources  render  it  highly  inflammable.   It  is  this
which  makes  the  initiative  taken  by  Mr.  Dulles  of  such  im-
portance.
A  New  War Is  Brewing
The  Palestine  problem,   difficult   as  it  is,  might  have   been
solved  peacefully  between  Jew  and  Arab  if  the  great   Powers
had  acted  firmly  in  time,  and  if  they  had  really  wished  to  pre-
vent  the  1948  war.   But  Britain  expected  a  Jewish  rout  by  the
Arabs  and  the  UN  did  not  intervene and  impose  a  truce  until
it  became necessary to save the Arab States from  an  overwhelm-
ing  defeat.   Perhaps  it  would   have  been   better  if   the   Jews
could  have fought  the  war to a  conclusion  and  forced  a viable
peace,  with  viable  boundaries  for  Israel.   Having   imposed  a
truce,  the  Western  powers  should  have  finished  the  job  and
forced  a  peace.   Their  failure  to  do  so  has  built  up   internal
tensions  pushing  toward  resumption  of  the  war.
The  condition  of  "no  peace,  no  war"  with  its  heavy burden
of  armament  and  the  constant  incursions  on  her  borders  have
created  an  intolerable  situation  for  the  Israeli.   An  increasing
number  feel—and  that  feeling  was  reflected  by  the  sharp  rise
in  "activist"  sentiment  on  both  the  right  and  left  in  the  last
Israeli  elections—that  the  great  Powers  will  not  step  in  and
force  peace until  Israel  again  as in  1948  hands  the  Arabs  a de-
feat.   They  see  no  sign  that  Arab  leaders  will  otherwise  make
peace  and  permit settlement  of  the  refugee  problem.   The  Dul-
les  speech,  which  marks a  new  sharp  curve  in  Eisenhower  Ad-
ministration  policy,  is  a  good  start  in  that  for  the  first  time
pressure  is  applied   for  peace  and  a  generous  proposal  made
toward  making  new  homes  for  the  refugees.   It  is  a  pity  this
was  not  done  in  1949.     A  broad  program   of  reparation   and
resettlement  might already have been  launched  and  peace  made
between  Israel  and  the  Arab  States,  as  peace  was  made  in  the
1920's  between  Greece  and  Turkey  after a  large-scale  exchange
and  resettlement  of  populations.
.1  3  .1,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  5,1955
Behind  That  Uproar  in  Korea  Over  the  Armistice  Commission
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  Want  to  Give Rhee(Of  All People) Atomic Cannon
Last  Tuesday  the  New  York  Times  ran  an  almost  hysteri-
cal  editorial,  "Arms  Control  Fails  in  Korea."  The  immediate
effect   was  to  help  Syngman   Rhee's  campaign  to  force   the
Neutral  Nations  Supervisory   Commission  out  of  Korea.   Be-
hind  this  campaign,  openly  avowed,  is  Rhee's  desire  to  start
the  Korean war  up again.  Linked  with this is one of the most
light-headed   ideas  ever  espoused  by  the  American  military—
a  plan  to  give  Rhee  (of  all  people)  atomic  cannon.
The  plan  originated  with  Rhee  himself   last  March.    The
New  York   Times  reported  March  17 that  South  Korean   offi-
cials  had  appealed  to  the  U.  S.  for  atomic  cannon.  Nothing
more  was heard  of the  proposal  at  the  time.  But  in  the  past
few  weeks  at  least three  newspapermen  with  good  sources  of
military  information  have  reported  that  the  U.  S.  military
are  now  actively  pushing  this  proposal  and  want  to  get  rid
of  the  supervisory  commission and  the  truce  agreement.   The
agreement  forbids  the  entry  of  new  weapons  and  new  forces
into the  peninsula.
Rhee  Wants  The  War Resumed
What  Rhee would do with  these cannon  if  he  got  the  chance
is  quite  clear.   As  recently   as  August   9  the  chairman  of
Rhee's Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  his  Army  Chief  of  Staff  pub-
lished  an  appeal  asking  the  U.  S. "to  recognize that  the  truce
has  ended  and  to  resume  the  fighting  for  our   unification."
(NYT  8/11,   p. 3).  For  months  Washington,  fearful  of  Rhee's
intentions, has  rationed  fuel  and  ammunition  supplies  for  his
army  so strictly  th'at  South  Korea  could not  wage  war  on  its
own  for  more  than  a  few  days.  Yet  it  is  now seriously  pro-
posed  to  supply  with  atomic  cannon a  man  who is  not trusted
even  with   a  normal   supply  of   gasoline!
The  three  sources  of  the  report  that  U.  S.  military   are
anxious  to  ship  atomic  cannon  into  South  Korea  are   syndi-
cated  Washington  columnist  Robert  S. Allen  (Aug.  1);   Rich-
ard   Hughes,   Tokyo  correspondent   of   the   London   Sunday
Times   (Aug.  14),  and  Earl  H.  Voss,  staff   writer  for   the
Washington  Star  (Aug. 21).
"The  U.  S.  interest  in  abolishing  NNSC  inspectors,"  Voss
reported,  "is  closely  tied  to  its  global  military  strategy.  The
Pentagon  wants  to  withdraw  a  division or  so of  troops  which
are  still  in  Korea,  to  augment  its  strategic  reserve.   But be-
fore  it  does this it  would like to  beef  up  the  Republic of  Korea
forces  with  more  modern  equipment, like guided  missiles  and
atomic  weapons.   The  Koreans  already  have  announced that
U.  S.  Army  atomic  experts  will  soon  start  training  ROK
officers  in  atomic  warfare  tactics."
Hughes  reported  from  Tokyo  to  the  Sunday   Times  of  Lon-
don, "The  U.  S. Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  wish to  move into  South
Korea  six  atomic  cannon, recently  delivered  to  Okinawa, as  a
counter  to  the  heavy  illegal  buildup  of  Communist military
strength   in  North  Korea.   This  action  would  necessitate   a
declaration  that  the  United  Nations  regarded  the  undertak-
ing  in  the  armistice  agreement  prohibiting  the  bringing  in of
new  weapons  and  forces  as  null  and  void.   It  is  understood,
however,  that  a  number  of  the   16  nations  which  fought  in
Korea  are  strongly  opposed  to  voiding  the  agreement."
Dulles  Backs  The   Pentagon
The  State  Department  seems to have joined hands  with  the
Pentagon  to  get  rid  of the truce  agreement.   At  his  press  con-
ference  on August  16 Secretary  Dulles said that while he  was
opposed  to  "forceful  or  unilateral  measures  to  terminate  an
international  contract  of  this  sort"  he  had  been  "trying  to
work  out  something  there  for  some months"  by  conversations
with  the  other  members  of  the  16-nation  UN  command  and
with  the  Swedes  and  Swiss.   These  two,  with  the  Poles  and
Czechs,  staff  the  supervisory  commission.  Mr.  Dulles  thought
the  commission  was  "not  really  serving  any  useful  purpose"
and  "may  be  serving  an  evil  purpose."
British  Differ  Strongly
The  British  seem to  differ  strongly  with  Mr.  Dulles on this.
"Britain  takes  the  view,"  wrote  the  diplomatic  correspondent
of  the  authoritative   London  Times  on  August  13, "that  the
commission  is  doing  a  useful  job  and  should  remain  at   its
present  strength  for  the  time  being;  in this she is  believed  to
have  the  support  of  Switzerland,  if  not  of  Sweden,  the  other
non-Communist  member  of  the  commission."
The  outcry  in  South  Korea is that  the  Communist members
of  the  Commission  have  been acting  as  spies.   The  New   York
Times  editorial  last  Tuesday  echoed this  by  saying  that  they
had  been "enforcing  the  armament limitations  in  South  Korea
to the  point  of outright  espionage."   But  when  Mr. Dulles was
asked  directly  about the  espionage charge at  his press  confer-
ence of August  10, he  replied only  (we take  the  words directly
from  the  released  transcript),  It  is  not likely that  any  infor-
mation  that  is  being  gained  by  these  Communist members  is
of  vital  significance.  The  British   also  seem  to  take  an  as-
tringent  view of the  charge.   "Little  attention  is  paid  in  Lon-
don,"  the  diplomatic  correspondent  of  the  London  Times  re-
ported  August  13, "to  allegations  that  espionage  activity  by
the   Polish   and   Czechoslovik  members  of  the   commission  is
jeopardizing  South  Korean  security."
"When   China   denounces  'acts   aimed   at   sabotaging    the
armstice  agreements'  and  holds  the  United  Nations command
'responsible  for taking  effective  measures'  " the  London Times
account  declared,  "she  has  the  Foreign   Office  for  once  whole-
heartedly  with  her."
The  Swiss,  Too,  Disagree
The  State  Department  has  been  trying  to  bypass   British
objections  by  persuading  the  Swiss  and  Swedes  to  liquidate
the  supervisory   commission  by  resigning   from  it.   But  the
Swiss  at   least,   despite  many  complaints  of  Communist  ob-
struction    and   non-cooperation,   have   been   opposed.    Last
March 26 the  New  York  Times  carried  a  dispatch from  Berne
reporting  that  "the  highest  Swiss  political  officials"  were  con-
vinced  that  the  commission  was  valuable, that  its   presence
had  helped to  keep the  peace, that  both  sides  in  Korea  had  in
fact  "reduced  their  forces  substantially"   and  that  the  Com-
munists  had  become  more  cooperative.   That  this  point  was
not  entirely  wishful  thinking is  shown by  a  dispatch  the  New
York   Times  carried   May  12,  reporting  that  the   Poles   and
Czechs  had  joined the  Swiss and  Swedes in  an  unusual unani-
mous  report  rejecting  Communist charges  that  the  UN  com-
mand  had  been  bringing  combat  material  into  Korea  in  vio-
lation  of  the  truce.
A  supervisory commission of  four  which  can  be deadlocked
by two members, a  commission on which the  Communists have
two  "neutrals,"  is  obviously  a  poor  mechanism for  impartial
surveillance.  But the  British  and  Swiss  reports  indicate  that
the  situation  is  far  from  being  as  black-and-white  as  Syng-
man  Rhee  and  the  American  press  generally  report  it.    The
commission  is  some check on resumption  of  the  war,  and  use-
ful   even  if  it  does  no  more  than  prevent  an  atomic  conflict
in  Korea.
One  of  the  difficulties  in  the  situation  is  that  "U.  S.  corre-
spondents  accredited to the  United  Nations  Command are  un-
der  the  control  of  the  U.  S.  military  forces  in  Korea."   The
quotation  is  from  a  Panmunjom  dispatch  in  the  New   York
Times  July  6.   This  reported  that  Major  General  Harlan  C.
Parks,  UN  representative   on  the  Joint   Military   Armistice
Commission,  had  forbidden  UN  correspondents  to  attend  a
press  conference  called  by  General  Lee  Sung  Cho,  the  North
Korean  representative,   to  answer  charges  that  the  Commu-
nists had  been violating  the  truce.  These charges  of  an  illegal
buildup  may  be  true,  exaggerated  or  false.   But  when  the
military  so  clearly  control  the  sources  of  the  news,  they  had
best be read  warily.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  5,1955
Brownell  "Promotes  Competition" by  Giving  Standard Oil A  100% Monopoly
Anti-Trust   In  Action  —  Under  the  "Free  Enterprise"   Republicans
Washington—A  "maverick"  member  of  Attorney  General
Brownell's  own 60-man committee to  study  the anti-trust laws
criticized  Brownell before the  Senate's  anti-trust  and monop-
oly  subcommittee for  giving  Standard   Oil a  100 percent  mo-
nopoly  of  butyl  rubber  and  certifying  (as  he  is  required  by
law  to  do)  that  this  would  "tend  to  promote  competition  and
prevent  monopoly."
The  witness  was  Prof.  Walter  Adams  of  Michigan  State
College  (for  his  earlier  dissent  on  the  Brownell  commission
see the  Weekly  of last  April  18).    Prof.  Adams appeared  be-
fore  Subcommittee Chairman  Kilgore  (D., W. Va.),  sitting  as
a  one-man  committee in  what  is  planned to be the  first  syste-
matic  review of  Federal  anti-trust  laws  in  the  past  65 years.
Prof.  Adams accused the  Administration  itself  of  fostering
monopoly,  directly  by its  interpretation  of the  anti-trust  laws
and  indirectly  by  channeling  its  huge  procurement   program
largely  to  big  business.    In  the  former  category  he  took  ex-
ception  especially  to  the  butyl  deal  and  to  the  way  aviation
is  being   regulated.
Shadow  of  The  Old  I.  G.  Farben Cartel
The economist said  that  Brownell in  permitting  the  govern-
ment  to  sell  its  two  butyl  rubber  plants  to  Standard  Oil of
New  Jersey  had  given that  company a  100 percent  control  of
that   important   new  synthetic.     Kilgore   pointed  out  that
butyl  "is  the  only rubber  product  we have  that  is completely
impervious  to  atmospheric   penetration."
In  the  investigation  of  the  I.  G. Farben  cartel  by the  Tru-
man  inquiry  when  the  war  began,  it  became clear  that  while
Standard  Oil and  I.  G. were  willing to  license  patents  on  the
synthetic  buna  rubber,  butyl  was  to  be  kept  back  as  a  post-
war monopoly.
The  postwar   hurdle  was  to  obtain  ownership  of  the  two
government  owned butyl  plants.  Under  the  law,  sale  of  gov-
ernment  owned facilities is  subject to  certification  by the  At-
torney  General  that  the  sale  will  "tend  to  promote  competi-
Subversion  by  Kinship
Duke  Frederick.   You, cousin.
Within these  10 days if that thou be'st  found
So near our  public court  as  20 miles,
Thou  diest  for  it.
Rosalind.   I  do  beseech  your  Grace.
Let  me the knowledge of my fault  bear  with  me .  . .
Never  so  much  as  in  a  thought  unborn
Did  I   offend  your   Highness.
Duke  Frederick.   Thus  do all  traitors.
If  their  purgation   did  exist  in  words
They  are  as  innocent  as  grace   itself.
Let  it   suffice   thee  that  I  trust  thee  not.
Rosalind.   Yet  your  mistrust  cannot  make  me
a  traitor.   Tell  me whereon  the  likelihood  depends.
Duke   Frederick.    Thou  art   thy   daughter's   father;
There's enough.
Rosalind  . .  .  Treason  is not inherited,  my lord.
—Act  I, Scene III,  Shakespeare's  As  You Like  It.
Object   Lesson?
The  attorney   who  was  the  first  to  force  the  State
Department  to grant  passports  has  himself  been  denied
a  passport.   Intentionally  or  not,  this  may  provide  an
object  lesson  for  other  lawyers  on  the  brink  of  taking
passport   cases.   Leonard   B.  Boudin,  general   counsel
for   the   Emergency   Civil  Liberties  Committee  in   its
precedent  making  successful  suits  to  win  passports  for
Dr.  Otto  Nathan  and  Clark  Foreman,  was  forced to file
suit through  Harry  I.  Rand last  week  against the  State
Department  for  refusing  to  renew  his  passport.
Boudin  had  become a  legal  thorn  in  the  side  of  the
once  all  powerful  passport  division.   Recently  he  forced
issuance  of  a  passport  to  Mrs.  Jane  Foster  Zlotowski,
an  American  painter  living  in  Paris,  whose  passport
was  picked  up  when  she  came  home to  visit  her  ailing
mother.    Boudin  is  also  counsel  in  the  pending  Paul
Robeson  case.   Until  the  Fall  of   1954,  Boudin  had   a
limited  passport  permitting
1
 him  to travel  in four  coun-
tries.  When  it  expired,  renewal  was  denied  even  after
he  signed  an  affidavit  that  he  was  not  a  Communist.
The lawyer  claims  he  needs  his  passport  to  confer  with
clients  in  Western  Europe—mostly  on pending  passport
cases.
tion   and   prevent   monopoly."   Prof.   Adams   testified   that
Brownell  issued  such  a  certificate  for  the  sale  of  these  two
plants   to  Standard   Oil,  although   this  would  create  a  100
percent monopoly.
Ninety  percent  of  butyl  now  goes  into  inner   tubes   but
Standard  is  pioneering  new  uses.    The  butyl  story  runs  re-
markably  parallel  to  the  old  cartel  agreement,   though  I.  G.
Farben   itself   was  broken  up  into  a  number  of  companies
after   World  War  II  and  the  agreement  itself   was  declared
void   in   an  anti-trust   consent  decree.     That   parallel   may
some  day  be  spelled  out  in  a  new  investigation.
Monopoly  in  Air  Transport,  Too
Postmaster  General  Summerfield  was  the  Cabinet  target of
Prof.  Adams'  criticism  in  dealing  with  aviation.   The  witness
was  bitter  in  his  discussion  of the  Civilian  Aeronautics  Board
for  its  "death  sentence"  order  against  North  American  Air-
lines,  the  largest  non-scheduled passenger  line in  the  country.
It  was  ordered  to  discontinue regular  flights  by  September  1.
Under  the  Republicans  as  earlier  under  the  Democrats,  the
CAB  had  refused  to  give  North  American  "regular"  flight
status   and  favored  American  Airlines,   TWA  and   United.
Prof.   Adams  testified  that  North   American  was  in   effect
punished  for  pioneering  low  fare  aircoach  service  and  that
the  CAB had  not  licensed  a  single  major  new  airline  in  17
years  though   air  travel  had  increased  2500  percent  during
that time.
Prof. Adams said  Postmaster  General  Summerfield has  con-
tinued  the  practice  of  awarding  mail  contracts  to  the  major
airlines  though  the  non-skeds  have  submitted   "fantastically
low  bids"  for  carrying  the  mails.
This  cryptic   journalese  was  telegraphed  by   I.   F.  Stone
to  the  Monthly   Review  Press.    It  refers  to  the  forthcoming
book   by   Harvey  O'Connor,   entitled   The   Empire   of   Oil.
Unfortunately  we  haven't  space  to  print  here  the  "wonder-
ful  table  of  contents"  so you  could  judge  for  yourself.   But
we   can   assure   you  that   in   The   Empire   of  Oil,   Harvey
O'Connor  has,  for  the  first time,  packed between  two  covers
a'comprehensive,  thoroughly  documented, absorbingly read-
able  account  of  the  oil  industry—the  biggest  cartel  in  the
world.
'Table  Contents  Harvey  Book  Wonderful'
It  is a  long  book—almost  400  pages—and  it  will  sell  for
$5  per  copy.    Until  publication   date—but   not  after—we
are  offering  the  book  at  the  special  pre-publication   price
of  $3.50.    Combined with  a one-year sub to  the  independent
socialist   magazine,   Monthly   Review,   the   saving   is   even
greater—$6  for  both  the book and the sub  (a saving of  $2).
Send  $3.50,  your  name and address with  the line,  "I  saw
it  in  Stone's Weekly"  and  we will  send you the  book  as soon
as  it  comes  off  the  press.    Or  better  yet,  send  $6  and  get
both  the  book,  and  Monthly  Review  for  a  year.
MONTHLY  REVIEW    PRESS
66   Barrow   Street
171
New  York  14,  N.  Y.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  S, 1955
Democrats  Cling  to  The  Cold  War;  Witch  Hunters  Grow Melancholy
The  dominant  liberal  wing  of  the  Democratic  party  con-
tinues  to  be strikingly  uninterested  in the  drift  toward  peace.
Truman  at  French  Lick August  27 managed  to  give the Demo-
• crats  credit  for  any  good  that  Eisenhower  had  accomplished
but  said  no  word  about  peace  or  the  part  played  in  foreign
policy  by  Democratic  Senator   George.   The  Harriman  camp
exudes  a strong  odor of  Spellmanism in foreign  policy.  At  the
annual  convention  of  the  Catholic  War  Veterans  in  New York
August  21, with  the  Cardinal  present  as  guest  of  honor,  Har-
riman  took  over  the  old  "liberationist"  slogans  of  Dulles  in
criticizing   the  Geneva  conference;  Tammany  Leader   Sapio,
Harriman's   chief  backer  for  the  Presidency,  warned  against
the   Russian  peace  drive.   Stevenson   at   Chicago  August  10
came  out  with  what  must  be  the  pettiest  remark  of his  whole
career,  "I  for  one had  never  expected  an  American  President
to  plead  with  a third  string  Communist to  please  believe that
the  U. S. wanted peace."
The  professional   anti-Communists   are   also  worried  over
the  drift  toward  peace.   No  newspaper  mentioned  the  most
interesting  remark  made  at  the  rally  held  August  15 in New
York to  support  the Walter  investigation  of the theatre.   Wil-
liam  F.  Buckley, the  author  of  that  book  on  God  and  Yale,
told  the  McCarthyite  audience, "We may  be witnessing  one of
the  final  demonstrations  of  anti-Communist  activity  arising
from   deeply  felt   conviction.    In   the   future,   when   cordial
friendship   with   the   Communists  becomes   institutionalized,
there  may  be  investigations   looking  into  men  like   Godfrey
Schmidt  who believe that fraternization  with  the  Communists
is  an  affront   to  reason   and  morality."   Walter   in  his  own
speech went out of his way to attack  "the  meeting  at  the  sum-
mit."   Those  with  vested  interests in the  witch  hunt  see inter-
national  relaxation  as a threat to themselves.  ...   It  is good to
be  able  to  report  that  the  Walter  inquiry  failed  to  throw  the
theatre  into  a  panic;  actors  who pleaded the  Fifth  were  later
cheered  by  audiences  and  had  their  contracts  renewed.
The  tide  seems  to  be  running  strongly  against  the  witch
hunt.    The  Yarmolinsky  study  of  loyalty  case  abuses  for  the
Fund  for  the  Republic  and  the  Hutchins report  on the  recent
erosion  of civil liberties  both  got  a  good  press  in  the  past  two
Why  Ike  May  Run  Again
An  interesting  glimpse of  White  House  thinking  was
provided  in a  Society  Page  interview  with  Eisenhower's
assistant,  Sherman  Adams, published  by  the  Washing-
ton  Sunday Star, August  28.   Adams said  there  was  no
question  that  the  President   would  be  only  too  glad  to
relinquish  his  job  if  he  could.   He  "shoved  a  clipping
from  France's  Le Monde  across  the  highly  polished sur-
face  of  his  desk.   Praising  the  peaceful  impact  of  Mr.
Eisenhower's  dignity  and  honesty  on  the  Geneva  Con-
ference,  it  ended,  'In  the  coming  years  he  can  play  a
leading  role  in  reconciling  the   two  cold  war   camps.'
'Maybe  that's  the  answer  to  the  question'  [of whether
Ike  will run  again],  Adams said."
Last  Einstein  Story
Last  Einstein  story  being  told  in  and  around  Prince-
ton:   The  great   physicist   was  questioned  by  an   FBI
man  about  a  young scientist.
"Is  he  loyal?"  Einstein  was  asked  by  the  FBI  man.
"Oh  yes,"  Einstein  replied,  "As  loyal as  an  intelligent
man  can  be."
weeks—unleashing  a  counter  barrage  from  David  Lawrence,
John  O'Donnell, Human  Events  and  George Sokolsky against
Hutchins  and  the  Fund.   But  Sokolsky  himself,  with  a  sharp
nose  for  trends,  broke  ranks  and  joined  in  the  protests  over
the   Landy  case—no  doubt  because  the  Hearst  press  made
that  a  major  item  of editorial  protest  during  August.  Sokol-
sky's  latest  (Aug. 31)  as  we go to  press  is very  sad,  "So,"  he
writes,  "we  are  to  have  an  era  of  good  will,  but  when  one
hears  that  a  sort  of  voluntary  censorship  is  coming  out  of
Washington  to the  effect  that  nothing unpleasant  is to be  said
about  Russia or  the  Russians, true  or false,  is  one not  to  gain
the  impression  that  we  are  to  be  brain-washed?"
Most  tantalizing  item turned  up  by the  Eastland  committee
in  its  "on  the  spot"  investigation  of  the  late  Harry  D.  White
at  his  summer  home  in  New  Hampshire  was  a  piece  of  Rus-
sian  music, a  song  headed "Fasha,  Pasha,  Yasha."   If  the  in-
defatigable  investigators  do not let themselves get  discouraged
too  easily  they  may  yet  dig  up  his  favorite  recipe  for  kasha.
While  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  seem  to  be  recovering
somewhat from  their  own respective  versions of  witch  mania,
Communist  China  seems to  have a  bad  case  of the  disease.   A
well known Marxist  writer,  Hu  Feng,  who wrote letters to  the
Peking  People's   Daily  criticizing  the  Communist regime  for
"suffocating  the  life  of  realism" in  Chinese literature  was  ex-
pelled  from  two  leading  organizations  of  writers  and  artists
for  "subversive  activities"  and  then  was  ordered  arrested  as
a  counter-revolutionary   and  spy  for   Chiang  Kai-shek.   We
wonder  whether  anyone  will  have  the  nerve  to  point  out  that
spies  do not  usually  call attention  to themselves by publishing
letters  which criticize  the  regime  on which  they  are  supposed
to  be  spying.   The  Hu  Feng  affair  is  a  reminder  that  witch
mania  in  its  various  guise  is  a  universal  phenomena.
Thai  Special  Issue  on  Draftees   and  Subversive  Manias  Still  Available  in  Bulk  at  5  Cents  A   Copy
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name
Street                                                               .'.
City                                              .Zone           State
Enter gift  sub for  $2 (6  mos.)  or $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)  Name
Street
City                                              Zone           State
* $ 1 extra for  Canada.                                                    9/5/55
/.  F. Stone's   Weekly
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED