I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955apr11.pdf

============================================================

Special  Anti-War  Issue
Exclusive  Text:  Morse  Speech  and  Morse-Lehman  Resolution  on Quemoy-Matsu
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NUMBER 12APRIL  11,  1965
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
A Chance  To  Strike A Blow  For  Peace
For   the   first   time   in   many   months   the   people   of   this
country   have  a  way  to  make  their   voice  heard  for   peace.
This   is   to   write   their   Senators   and   Representatives   and
mobilize   their   organizations   to   demand  public   hearings  on
the  Morse-Lehman   resolution,   and  its   passage  by   Congress.
If  you  don't  want  to  see our  country  sucked  into  an  atomic
war  over  Quemoy  and  Matsu,  this  is  your   opportunity.
So  far   as  we  know   no   newspaper—not  even   the    New
York   Times—has  published  the  text  of  this  historic   resolu-
tion  or  of  the  masterly  speech made by  Senator  Wayne  Morse
of  Oregon  in  introducing  it.    We  are  printing  both  in  this
issue  and   also  the   heart   of   Senator   Estes  Kefauver's  bold
attack   two  days  earlier  on  the  war  party.    We  believe  it
urgent  that  this  material  reach  as  wide  an  audience  as  pos-
sible,  and  think  it  a  commentary  on  the  pass  to  which  we
have  come  that  it  is  left  to  a  little  publication  like  ours  to
make  available  texts  so important  for  peace.
If  by  the  time  Congress  readjourns after  the  Easter  recess,
there  is  a  real  kickback  from  the  country  in  favor  of   this
resolution,   a  brake   will   be  applied  to   the   appalling   drift
toward  war.    The  Morse-Lehman  resolution  would  limit  the
blank  check  given  the  President  by  the  Formosan  war  powers
resolution;  it  says  the  latter  shall not  be  construed  as author-
izing  military  operations  in  defense  of  Quemoy   and  Matsu;
it   asks  the  United   Nations  to  undertake  the  evacuation  of
the  islands.    The  Morse-Lehman  resolution  would  also  begin
to   untie   Chiang   Kai-shek  from   the   U.   S.  apron   strings
knotted   by  the  Mutual  Security  Pact;   the  resolution  asserts
the  right  of   the  U.  S.  to  defend  Formosa  but   adds  signifi-
cantly,  "until  such  time  as its  sovereign  status  is  determined
by  peaceful  processes."
Clearing  The  Way  for  Diplomacy
The  Morse-Lehman  resolution  would  thus  accomplish  two
purposes.    The  evacuation  of   the  offshore  islands  would   at
last  make  possible  a  tacit   cease-fire  on  the  Formosa  strait.
The   status  of   Formosa   would   be  unfrozen   and   the   way
cleared  for  negotiation  to  determine  its  future.    Where  the
Administration  has  been  trying   to  proceed  by   threatening
China  with  atomic  destruction,  the  Morse-Lehman  resolution
would  put   the  Congress  on  record  as  directing  a  return  to
the  methods  of  diplomacy  under  conditions  which   make  it
possible.    This  is  why  the  war  party  is  mobilizing  to  bury
the   resolution   in   the   Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee.
The   fight   for   the   Morse-Lehman   resolution    is   a   fight
* Members of  this  key  committee,  to  whom  you  may write,  are:  Democrats
—George   (Ga.),   Green   (R.I.),  Fnlbrikht   (Ark.),   Sparkraan  (Ala.),   Hum-
phrey    (Minn.),   Mansfield   (Mont.),   Barkley    (Ky.K   and   Morse    (Ore.);
Republicans—Wiley   (Wia.),   Smith   (N.  J.),   Hlckenlooper   (Iowa),   Langer
(N.  Dak.),  Knowiand  (Calif.),  Aiken  (Vt.)  and  Capehart   (Ind.).
against   something   worse   than   secret   diplomacy—and   that
is  secret  foreign  policy  legislation.    With  all  the  fuss   about
Yalta,  no  one  raises  a  cry  about  the  private  discussions  which
have   been   going   on   behind   the   closed   doors   of    Senator
George's  suite  at   the  Mayflower,  and  in  the  White   House.
No  one  knows  what  is  being  said,  what   commitments   are
being  made,  what  decisions  are  being  reached—though  these
may  literally  mean  a Third  World  War  which  would  destroy
civilization  as  we  now  know  it.    What   FDR  did  at  Yalta
is  history,   but   what  Dulles  tells   George  in  private   at   the
Mayflower  may  be  our  fate  and  destiny.    This  is  a  fight  to
take  the  shaping  of  foreign  policy  out  of  the  hands  of  a  few
and  return  it  to  the  Senate and  the  people.
Toward  A  One-Party  State
The   people  of   this  country   are  being  treated  as  if   they
were  mindless  idiots.    They  are  told  we  must  make  a  clear
commitment   to  Formosa   lest   the  enemy  stumble  into  war,
and  then  they  are  told  we  cannot  make  our  intentions  clear
about  Quemoy  and  Matsu because it  is important  to  keep  the
enemy  guessing!    The  Constitution   says  the  President   is  to
make   foreign   treaties  with   the   advice  and  consent  of   the
Senate,   but    the   Senate   has   degenerated   into   the   role   of
rubber  stamp  for  the  State  Department.     The  weakness of
the  Democratic  party  leadership,  and  Senator  George's  gentle
but  almost  dictatorial  control  of  the  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee  has  turned  the  Senate  into  a  complaisant  instrument,
instead  of  the partner in  policy  the  Constitution  intended it  to
be.    The  reality  of  "bipartisanship"   is  to  create  a  one-party
state  in  the  making  of  foreign  policy.
In  the  past  two  months,  four  fateful  commitments  in  the
sphere  of  foreign  policy  have  been  pushed  through   Congress
with   less  consideration  than  is  often   accorded   local  harbor
improvements.    The  Southeast  Asia  Pact  on  February   1  and
the  German  rearmament  accords  on  April  1  passed  the  Senate
as  minor  items  of  an  afternoon's  work.    The  Formosan  war
powers  resolution  and  the  Mutual  Secret   Pact  with   Chiang
were   aired   only   in   secret   hearings   at   which   Dulles   and
Radford  were  the  chief   witnesses  and  no  one  was  heard  in
opposition,  though  the  former  was  the  first  blank  check  for
preventive  war  ever  signed  by  an  American  Congress.    On
foreign  policy  the  Senate is beginning  to  act  like  the  Supreme
Soviet   in   Moscow  where  whatever   the   government    asks  is
adopted  by  acclamation.    It  is  this  withdrawal   from   demo-
cratic  control  of  the  vital  decisions  of  war  and  peace,  of  life
and  death  for  our  country,  that  Senators  Morse  and  Lehman
are  fighting  on  our  behalf.    Read  what  they   propose.     Pass
it  on.   And  do something  about  it.
/>     3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  11, 1955
An  Historic  Appeal  for  Peace  and  Sanity
Wayne  Morse's  Challenge   to  the  Eisenhower  Administration,  U.  S.  Senate,  April  1
Let  me make  clear  my  position  that  the  foreign   policy  of
the  United  States  is  not  entirely  within  the  province  of  the
President  of the  United  States, although we have  reached  the
point  where  there  seems  to  be  acceptance  of  the  notion  that
American  foreign  policy  must  be  what  the  President  of  the
United  States  decides  it  shall  be.   The  foreign  policy  must
always  be  what  the  American  people  decide  it  shall  be.   If
the  Congress  of  the  United  States  and  the  President  of  the
United  States  will  present  the  facts  to  the  American   people
about  the  Asiatic  situation,  the  foreign  policy  of  the  United
States  with  respect  to  Asia  will  not  be  the  foreign  policy
which  the  President  of  the  United  States  seems  to  be follow-
ing these  days.
In  my  opinion  the  President  of  the  United  States  has  no
right  to  leave  in  suspension  the  question  of  America's  posi-
tion  in  regard  to  Quemoy  and the  Matsus.  ...    In  my  judg-
ment,  already  great  damage  has  been  done  by  the  President
of  the  United  States  to  the  prestige  of  the  United  States  in
the  field  of  foreign  policy.    I  believe  that  the  President of
the  United States  has  already  delayed too  long  making  clear
to  the  world  what  our  position  is  to  be  in  regard  to  our
Asiatic  foreign  policy.   In  my  opinion, already  the  President
has  delayed  too  long  in  making  clear  to  the  world  that  we
are  going  to  insist  on staying  within  the framework of inter-
national   law.   We  are   outside  it   today   in  respect  to  our
Asiatic  policy.
What  is  happening  around  the  world is that  our  allies  are
asking the  question,  "How  can  the  proposed course  of  action
of  the  United  States  in  regard  to  Quemoy and  the  Matsus,
in  respect  to  which  islands  the  United  States  does  not  have
a  single  legal  right  under  international  law be defended?"
I  have  been  waiting  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  answer
a  question which  I  put  to  him in  the  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee  the  other  day.   I  asked  the  Secretary  of  State,  "What
principle  of international law  justifies the  defense  of Quemoy
and  the  Matsus  by  the  United  States?"  He  did not  name  a
Best Way to  Save  Face
"Mr.  LONG.  [D.   La.]   I  wish  to  say  to  the  Senator
from  Oregon  that  it  seems  to  me  his  logic  is  inescap-
able.  ...     I  say  that  the  best  way  for  us  to  save  face
over   Quemoy   and   Matsu   is   not   to   get   our   face   on
Quemoy  and   Matsu."
principle  of  international  law  in  justification  of  our  position
for  the  simple reason  that  he  could  not.   In  the  light  of  the
situation  in  Asia  at  the  present  time  the  defense  of Quemoy
and  the  Matsus  cannot be  reconciled with  international   law;
on  the  contrary,  in  my  opinion, if  we  defend  them  we would
violate  existing  international  law.   We  have  no  right  to  be
defending   these  coastal  islands   with  respect   to  which  we
have no territorial  rights.   That  is the  situation.   The  Amer-
ican  people  have  the  right  to  expect  their  President  to  stay
within  the  framework  of  international  law.   He  has  made  it
perfectly  clear  that  he  does  not  understand  the   principles
of  international  law,  because  if  he  did  understand  them  he
would  not  have  asked  the  Congress of  the  United  States  for
authorization  to  go  outside  the  framework  of  international
law.
Preventive  War  Power  Asked
What  did  he  ask  for?    He  asked  for  authority  to  strike
the  mainland  of  China  before  an  act  of  war  was  committed
against  the  United  States.   That  is what  the  language  of  the
resolution  means.   We cannot read  its  language  in  any  other
terms  in  the  light  of  existing  international  law.    The  Presi-
dent  sent  to  us  a  resolution  which  was  passed  by  the  Con-
gress,  in  which  the  President  asked  for  power  to  take  "such
If  It  Were  Staten  Island
"MR.  KEFAUVER.  [D.  Tenn.]  As  for  the  islands  of
Quemoy   and  Matsu,  Mr.  President,  I  wonder   how  long
we  would   sit  idly  by  if  the  Chinese  Communists  were
to  hold  Staten  Island,  which  is  about  as  far  from  New
York  City  as  Quemoy  is  from  the  coast  of  China,  Or if
the  Chinese  Communists   were  to  hold  Catalina   Island,
which  is  only  a  few  miles  off  the  coast  of   California."
other  measures  as  he  judges  to  be  required  or  appropriate
in  assuring   the  defense  of  Formosa   and  the   Pescadores."
A  reading  of  the  testimony  before  the  committee  which  was
submitted  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  by  the  Chairman  of  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  and  by  other  top  Administration  wit-
nesses,  discloses  that  there  is  no  question  about  what  they
seek  to  do.   They  seek  authority  to  exercise  the  discretion-
ary  right  to  determine  when we  shall  strike  the  mainland of
China  before  an  act  of  war  has  been  committed  against  the
United  States.    When  we  follow  that  course  of  action  we
walk  outside  the  framework  of  international  law.    That   is
where  the  United  States  stands  today,  in  the  judgment  of
the  world.
That  is why Canada, France  and  Great  Britain  are  making
it  perfectly  clear  to  us  that  they  will  not  support  us  in  the
defense  of  Quemoy and  the  Matsus.    They  have  no  intention
of  supporting  the  United  States  in  an  aggressive  course  of
action  with  respect  to  Quemoy and  the  Matsus,  over  which
territory  we have  not  a  scintilla  of  legal  right.
Of  course,  I  am  perfectly   aware  of  the  fact  that  these
days  when one makes the  fight  for  peace  which I  am making
in   these   arguments   in  the   Senate   and   elsewhere   in   the
country,  he  is  likely  to  be  called  an  appeaser,  a  follower  of
Chamberlain  or  even  a  follower  of  the  Communist  line.
History  Will  Condemn  Us
Mr.  President,  the  judgment  of  history  against  the  United
States  will  be  a  sad  one  if  America  continues  much  longer
to  follow  the  foreign  policy  of  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower.   The
time  has  come for  the  American people, in  the  interest  of  the
tens  of  thousands  of  American  boys  who  are  likely  to  die
if  we continue to  act  outside  the  framework  of  international
law,  to  make  clear  to  the  President   of  the  United   States
that  they  do  not  want  to  defend  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus,
over  which we  have  no  international   legal   rights.
I  think  the  issue  is that  simple.  I  am perfectly  willing,  in
this  historic  debate  across  the  country  in  the   weeks  and
months  ahead—God  giving  us  weeks  and  months  of  peace—
to  take  this  issue  to  the  American  people,  because  I  am
satisfied  that  an  overwhelming  majority  of  them   disapprove
of   the  President's   request   for   authorization   to  strike  the
mainland  of  China  before  an  act  of  war  has  been  committed
against  us.
The  Right  to  Know  the  Facts
I think it  is very  important  that the  American  people  make
clear  to  the  President   of  the  United  States  at  the  earliest
possible  date  the  great  groundswell  of  opposition  to  his  pro-
posal  embodied  in  the  resolution,  that  we  should  follow  an
aggressive  course  of  action  on  the  mainland  of  China  or  in
defense  of  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus,  if  he  decides that  such  a
course is necessary.  It  is about time for  the  American people
to  make some decisions  about  American foreign  policy.  They
cannot  decide  intelligently   and  accurately  unless  we  in  the'
Congress  see  to  it  that  they  have  the  facts  about  American
foreign  policy  in  Asia.
The  delightful  social  luncheon  engagements  at  the  White
House  with  leaders  of  the  Congress,  in  which  we  are  given
ft  fs  Important  To Gef  This Speech  Info  As Many  Hands  As Possible
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   11, 19553
very  little  information,  do not  result  in  the  American  people
getting the facts.  I  think  the  situation  adds  up to a  policy of
maintaining   the  status  quo.   The  American  people  are  not
given  the  facts  to  which they  are  entitled.   They  are  entitled
to  know from  the  President  of  the  United  States  the  answer
to this question, "Why  do you not  tell  us  why you will  or  will
not  defend  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus?"    The  people  of  the
United  States  are  entitled  to  an  answer  to  that  question  in
the  first  instance,  and  our  allies  are  entitled  to  it  in  the
second  instance.
Formosa,  But  Not  the  Offshore  Isles
Before  coming  to  the  resolution  which  I  intend  to  submit
I  wish  to  make  it  clear   again  that  there  is  no  one  in  the
Senate or in the  country  more determined than I am to defend
Formosa   to  the  hilt,  because  we  have  the  legal  right  and
duty  to  defend  Formosa.   When  we  are  defending   Formosa
we  are  within  the  framework  of  international   law,  not  out-
side  it,*  as  we  are  with  respect  to  Quemoy and  the  Matsus.
When  we  defend  Formosa  we are  defending  the  peace  in  the
Pacific.  When  we  defend Formosa  we  are  doing  what  we  are
clearly  obligated  to  do,  in  my  judgment,  under  the  Japanese
treaty, until  the  sovereignty  of Formosa  is  determined  by  the
judicial  processes  of  the  United  Nations.
What  the  American people need  to  have  told  to  them  very
clearly  is  that  under  the  Japanese  treaty  Formosa's   sover-
eignty  was  not  determined.  What  the  Japanese  treaty  did
was  release,  as  far  as  Japan  is  concerned, any  claim  Japan
had   over  Formosa.   However,  the   sovereignty  of   Formosa
was  never  vested  in  Chiang  Kai-shek.
That  is  why  while  I  was  opposing  the  [Mutual  Security]
treaty  [with  Chiang],  I  tried  to  write  into  it  a   reservation
which  would  make  very  clear  that  the  treaty  could  not  pos-
sibly  be  interpreted   by  anyone  as  strengthening   Chiang's
* Neither  the   Senator  nor   Genera]  MaeArthur   were   so  sure  abont  onr
right  to  hold  Formosa  four  years  ago.   During the  MaeArthur  inquiry,  this
exchange  took  place  between  them  (p.187):
Senator  MORSE.   One  other  question  on  Formosa  .  .  .  if   we  come  to  a
system   of   international   justice  through  law,  we   will   then   be  confronted
possibly  with the  Formosa  issue  before  the  World  Cdurt  ...     I  am  afraid  if
we  got  to  the  World  Court  now,  on  jnst  the  one  issue  as  to  whether  the
Cairo  agreement,  as  a  matter  of  international  law,  it  might  obligate  us  to
give  it  up.   That  might  be  pretty  difficult  for  us  to  win  as  a  legal  proposi-
tion  ...     we  are  on  there  now on  unilateral action  because  we  believe it  is
necessary  to  protect  it  from  falling  into  Red  hands  in  order  to  protect  out
security  and  interests.
General  MacARTHUR.   Right.
claim  to  any  sovereign  rights  over  Formosa.  With  regard  to
the  speech  of the  Senator from Wisconsin  [McCarthy],  I  wish
to  say  that  the  American  people  are  entitlad  to   assurance
from  the  President  that  American  boys  will  not  be  called
upon to  die  in  China in  defense  of  Chiang  on  Quemoy and  the
Matsus.
China's  Civil  War  Not  Ours
The American  people know that  Chiang's  civil war  in China
is   not   a   matter   in   which   we   should   become  embroiled.
Further,  with  regard  to  the   social   conferences  with   con-
gressional  leaders  at  the  White  House  on yesterday,  and  the
day  before  yesterday,  it  needs  to  be said that  the  vacuity of
information   that   came   out   of  these   luncheon   conferences
was  not  reassurring  to  the  American  people.   The  public  is
now  entitled  to  know  from  both  the  President  and  the  con-
gressional   leaders  what  our  policy  is  going  to  be  in  respect
to  Quemoy and  the  Matsus.
I  am  opposed  to  the  President  of  the  United  States  drag-
ging  us  into  the   China  civil  war  through   any  attempt  to
defend  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus.  Therefore,  I  submit  to  the
Senate and ask to have  referred  to the  Committee  on Foreign
Relations,  and  that  the  committee  hold  early  hearings  on  it,
a  concurrent  resolution.   I  submit  it  on behalf  of  myself  and
on  behalf   of  that  great  statesman  from  the  State  of  New
York,  and  my  beloved  friend,  the  junior  Senator  from  New
York   [Mr.  Lehman].   The  resolution  reads  as  follows:
Senate   Concurrent   Resolution  21
Whereas  it  is  the  historic  policy  of the  United  States  to
promote  peace  throughout  the  world  by  urging  the  settle-
ment  of  international  disputes  through  juridical  processes;
and
Whereas  the  United  States  has  always decried the  use of
aggression  or  threats  of  aggression  in  foreign  affairs;  and
Whereas  there  is  now  danger  of  United  States  involve-
ment  in  atomic  war  with  the  Chinese  Communists  in  de-
fense  of  the  Matsu  and  Quemoy  islands  occupied by  forces
of  the  Republic of  China; and
Whereas  the  United  States  under  international  law  has
no  territorial  rights  or  claims  to  the  Matsu  and  Quemoy
islands; and
Kefauver's  Warning Against  A War  Party  in  The Administration
"Mr.  KEFAUVER.  Mr. President,  the  Congress  has  writ-
ten  a  blank  check  for  the   President   in  dealing  with  the
Formosa  situation.   It  was  done  at  his  request   and  prin-
cipally  to  demonstrate  the  unity of the  nation.   But  the  fact
that  the   Formosa   resolution  exists   places  a   burden  and
responsibility   on  the  President   of  the  United  States  which
I  expect  he  will  one  day  regret  he  has.    There  are  forces
in  his  administration  so  powerful  and  apparently   so  eager
for  a  war  with  China  that  they  are   becoming  almost  im-
possible  to  resist.   That  the  United States  should be plunged
into  a  war  over  Quemoy  and  Matsu  ought  to  be  unthink-
able.   Yet there  are  those  in  the  present  administration  who
are  plotting  and  planning  to  bring  such  a  war  about,  what-
ever  the risks  involved. . . .
"These  plotters  tell  us  that  we  can  fight  a  limited  war
with  China  without  risk.    They  tell  us  that  we  can  fight
a  limited  war  with  precision  atomic  bombing and  get  away
with   it.    There   is  one  school  which  wants  to  blast  and
destroy  China's  industrial   capacity.    There  is  another,  and
apparently  more  official   school,  which  merely  wants  to  use
atomic  weapons  against  China's   airfields.
"In  either  case  we  are  told  that  Russia  will  not  come  to
the  aid  of  her  ally  China  because  of  fear  of  massive  retalia-
tion  herself.  ...    If  Russia  stood  idly  by while we destroyed
the  industry  of  China  or  even  her  air  force,  it  would  mean
the end of her hold on all her satellites. . . .
"It  is  said  that  Russia  does  not  now  have  the  means  of
delivering  atomic  or  hydrogen  bombs  on  this  continent,  and
that  she   would  thus  be  paralyed  by  fear   of  bombs  that
Russia  knows  we  are  now  capable  of  delivering.    I  do  not
know  that  Russia  cannot  deliver  bombs  on  this  continent,
and  I  doubt  that  anyone  else  knows  other  than  the   Rus-
sians.   But  if  Russia  cannot  deliver  bombs  on this continent,
there  are  plenty  of  places  vital  to  onr  interests  and  the
future  of humanity where she  is  perfectly  capable  of  deliver-
ing  the bombs we know she possesses.  . . .
"Mr.  President, although  the  President  may not  seem  to  be
rocking  the  boat,  the  tragic  fact  is  that  in  his  administra-
tion  American  foreign  military  policy  has  degenerated  into
rule  by fear.   The  tremendous  good  will  toward  our  Nation
and  our  people  which  was  ours  at  the  end  of  World  War  II
has  been  dissipated   into  the  mists  of  history.   Nobody  in
the  State  Department  or  the  Pentagon  ever  talks  any  more
about  good  will  or  neighborliness.    Instead, they  rattle their
atomic  bombs.   These  days  one hears  coming from  the  State
Department,  not  the  cooing  of  the  doves  of  peace,  but   the
sharp  click  when  someone  cocks  a  hydrogen  bomb.
"It  is  time  we  started  talking,  for  a  change,  about  peace.
We  should  put  in  a  deep,  dark  closet  all  of  Secretary  Dulles'
bellicosity."
—Senator   Kefawer    (D.   Tenn.),  to  an  almost   empty
Senate Chamber  Wednesday  evening March 30 (Congr.
Rec. that  date   34M-S).
Help  Widen  Its  Distribution Through  Organizations  and  Otherwise
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April   11, 1955
Whereas a  military  defense  of  said  islands by the  United
States  subjects  the  United  States  to  the  charge  of  acts of
aggression  and  involvement in  a  Chinese  civil war;  and
Whereas  the  major  allies  of  the  United  States  have  de-
clared  that  they  are  unsympathetic  to  and  would  not sup-
port  the  defense  of  the  Matsu  and  Quemoy  islands;  and
Whereas  it  is  the  right  and  policy  of  the  United  States
under  international   law  to  defend  Formosa  and  the  Pesca-
dores  against  communistic  attack  until  such  time  as  its
sovereign   status   is   determined   by   peaceful   processes:
Therefore  be it
Resolved   by  the   Senate  (the House  of   Representatives
concurring),  That  it  is  the  sense  of  the  Congress  that—
(a)  the joint  resolution  entitled  "Joint  resolution  author-
izing  the  President   to  employ  the  Armed  Forces  of  the
United  States  for  protecting  the  security  of  Formosa,  the
Pescadores,  and  related   positions  and  territories  of  that
area,"  approved   January   29,  1955 (Public  Law   4,  84th
Cong.),  shall  not  be  construed  to  authorize  the  President
to  employ  any  of  the  Armed Forces  of the  United  States in
military   operations    concerning   the   Matsu   and   Quemoy
islands;
(b)  the  existing  danger  of  war  could  be  relieved  by  the
cooperation  of  the  Republic  of  China  in  the  evacuation  of
such  islands  and  the  safe  return  of  the  forces  of  the  Re-
public  of  China   and  the   civilian  inhabitants   to   Formosa;
(c)  on the  basis of  such  cooperation  the  President  at  the
earliest  practicable  time  should  take  appropriate  action  to
lay  before  the  United  Nations  the  danger  to  the  peace of
the   world  presented  by  the  threat  of  attack   upon  such
islands,  with  the  request  that  the  United  Nations  under-
take  the  supervision  of  such  evacuation  and  the  removal
from  those islands  of  the  Republic of  China and  the  civilian
inhabitants  who  may  desire  to  seek  refuge  elsewhere;  and
(d)  the  Armed  Forces of  the  United  States  properly may
be employed  to  render  assistance  which  may  be required  to
safeguard  such  evacuation  and  removal under  such  condi-
tions  as  the  United  Nations  may determine  to  be necessary
to  avoid,  to  the  greatest  practicable  extent,  involvement in
hostilities  with  forces  of  the  Chinese Communists.
Mr.  President,  let  me  say  that  by  adopting  such  a con-
current  resolution  we  would  stay  within  the  framework  of
international  law.  Moreover, we would  return  to  the  historic
foreign   policy  of  the  United  States,  a  foreign  policy  which
has  always  made  clear  to  the  world  that  we  do not  follow a
course  of  aggression   or  a  course  of  threatened   aggression,
and  that  we  have  never  claimed to  exercise  jurisdiction  over
territories  to  which  we have no international law  rights.
In  the  interest  of  the  judgment that  will  rest  on the  heads
of  future   generations  of  American   citizens,  we  had  better
go  back  to—and  the  President  of  the  United  States  has  the
duty  to  the  American people  to  lead  us  back into—the frame-
work  of  international  law,  out  of  which  he  led  us  when  he
sent  to  Congress  in  the  first  place  the  joint  resolution that
sought  to  give  him  extraordinary  and,  in  my  opinion, uncon-
stitutional  powers.
Public  Opinion  Has  Shifted
In  the  days  that  have  passed  since  the  historic  debate  on
that   joint   resolution,  a   very   interesting   shift   has   been
taking  place  in  American  public  opinion.  Those  of  us  who
dared  to  stand  on the  floor  of  the  Senate  and  speak  in  behalf
of  the  thesis  I  am  reiterating  today,  expected  to  be  casti-
gated;  and  we  have  been  castigated.   But,  Mr.  President,  a
great  change  is  taking  place  in  American public opinion, and
we  are   beginning   to   observe  a  growing   evidence  of  it   in
American  journalism.
Mr.  President,  I  refer  to  the  New  York   Times,  which  is
certainly  not  an  anti-Eisenhower  newspaper.   It  is  a  news-
paper   which   I   say   respectfully  has, in  my  opinion,  been
trying  to  rationalize  and  alibi  the  President's   mistakes   ever
since'  it  made  the  mistake   of  supporting  President   Eisen-
hower  in  1952.
Even  the  Philippines
"Mr.   HUMPHREY  [D.   Minn.]   The   Senator    from
Oregon  is  right.  When  we  cannot  get  the  Canadians  to
support  our  policy,  then  our  policy  deserves  gome  re-
examination.    When  we  cannot  find  allies  anywhere  in
the  world  save  Dr.  Rhee  and  Chiang  Kai-shek  who  will
support  us,  then  we are  in  trouble.
"I think  it  is interesting  to  observe that  the  Secretary
of  State,  returning  from  Bangkok,  could  not  deliver  to
the  government  or  to  the  Senate  assurances  that  even
the  Philippines  would  be  with us."
What  do we  read  these  days  on  the  editorial  pages  of  the
New  York  Times  with  regard  to  the  Quemoy  and  Matsu  situ-
ation ?  I read from the  editorial,  "Burning  Daylight  in Asia,"
published  in  the  New  York  Times  of  Sunday, March  27,  1966.
The  editorial  quotes  the  statement   of  the  able  chairman  of
the  Committee  on Foreign  Relations  [Mr.  George]  about  time
passing   and  about   our  burning   daylight   in  Asia.    In   the
course  of  the  editorial  the  New  York  Times  had  this  to say:
Mr.  Reston   gives  this  interpretation   of  the  opinions  of
some  other   Senators  who  have  not  spoken  out: "We  are
drifting  into  a  war  over  Matsu  and  Quemoy.  The Admin-
istration  is  reconciling  itself   to  the  idea  that  this  issue
now  rests  not  with   Washington   but   with  Peiping."   So
we  have  as  today's  news  describes  it,  a  situation  in  which
a  certain  kind  of  logic—the  logic,  perhaps,  of  death   and
widespread  destruction—goes  from  the  defense  of Quemoy
and  Matsu  to  an  all-out  atomic  attack  on the  industrial  po-
tential of  Communist  China.  What this logic  means  in  cost
of  human  life  and  perhaps  in  a  vast  destruction   of  cities
far  outside  China, the  citizen  may  ponder.
A  Change   In  Tone
The  tone  of  that  editorial  in  the  New  York  Times  is  quite
different   from  that  of  the   editorials  the   Times   published
when  the  joint  resolution  was  before  the   Senate.
Mr.  President,  one  of  the  arguments  made  by  those  of  us
who  opposed  the  joint  resolution,  and  who  are  now,  in  the
debate   across   the   country,   opposing  the  President's   Asia
policy,  is  that  there  is  no  real  danger  that  the  Communists
can  take  Formosa.  With  more  than  a  hundred  miles  of  open
blue  water  between  Formosa   and  the   mainland,  with   the
military  power  we  have  in  the  Western  Pacific,  there  is  no
real  danger  that  the  Communists can  take  Formosa.
I  happen  to  have  more  confidence  in  our  military   might
than  apparently  have  the  preventive  war  advocates  in  this
country  who would like-to get  us  into  war  with  China.  They
seem  to  think  that  our  military  cannot  hold  Formosa   unless
we defend  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus  and in fact  strike military
installations  in  China.   It  is  the  position  of  the  experts  that
there  is  no  real  danger  that  the  Communists can  take For-
mosa,  but  there  is  a  great  danger  that  we  can  get  into  a
terrible,  bloody  war  over  Quemoy and  the  Matsus,  to  which
we  have  no  legal  right.   There  is  no  justification  for   our
joining  Chiang  in  a  civil war  on Quemoy  and  Matsus  in  order
to  protect  Formosa.   The  "face-saving"   argument  is  an  un-
sound  one.
Formosans Couldn't  Care  Less
Tucked  inside  last  Sunday's  (April  2)  New  York Daily
News  was  a  dispatch  from  its  own  correspondent,  John
O'Kearney,  on  Formosa,  headlined  "Believe  Chiang  Fate
Hinges   on   Offshore   Islands."    The   main   theme  was
"growing  resentment"  over  American  "vacillation"   but
one  paragraph  provided  this  glimpse  of  realities:
"Politically informed  Chinese sources who are unques-
tionably  anti-Red  believe,  however,  that   four-fifths   of
the  Formosan  population would  not  care  much  one way
or  another  about  Quemoy  or   Matsu."
Bundle  Orders  of  50  or More Available  at 5 Cents Each; 500 or More at  3 Cents Each
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   11, 1955
Saving  Lives  More  Important
Since  when  in  American  history  has  the  United  States of
America  heen  worrying  about  "saving  face"?    Since  when
have  we  adopted  that  Oriental  psychological trait?   I   say,
Mr.  President,  we had  better  pay  more attention  to  the  sav-
ing  of  the  lives  of  American  boys  than  to  saving  face.   We
had  better  pay  more  attention  to  the  risks  of  war  than   to
the  risks  of  peace.   If  we  permit  the  ruthless  police  dictator
of  Communist  China to  suck  us  into  a  war  on  the  mainland
of  China,  we  shall  have  to  kill  millions  of  Chinese.   I  think
that  if  that  is  done,  the  judgment of  history  will  be  that  we
are  the  aggressor  in  the  situation,  and  as  a  result  of  that
course  of  action,  we  will  lose  China  for  hundreds of  years
to  come.   Now  is  the  time,  before  it  is  too  late  and  while
there  is  still  an  opportunity, for  the  United  States  to  rededi-
cate  itself   to  the   international   law  principles  which  have
always  characterized  our  foreign  policy.
On  this  point,  Mr.  President,  one  of  the  reasons  I  am  such
a   strong   advocate  of  the  Paris  Accord  Treaty   before  the
Senate  for  ratification  today  is  that  it  is  an  example  of  free-
men  standing  together  within  the  boundaries  of  international
law  to  meet  the  threat  of  Russian  communism  in  Europe.
It  is  another  example of  freemen  joining  forces  within  the
international  legal  rights  of  each  of  the  nations  involved  as
a   protectorate    of   freemen   against   the   Russian  threat  of
communism.
Why   did   I   support   as   strongly   as   I   did  the   SEATO
treaties ?  Because those treaties  took the  form  of  the  nations
of  Southeast  Asia,  again  within  their  sovereign rights, join-
ing  forces  against  the  threat  of  communism.   Those treaties
involve  in  no  way  the  invasion  of territorial  sovereign  rights
of  other  nations.  They  in  no  way  involve  the  United  States
making  territorial  claims  over  territory  to  which  it  has  no
legal  right.
Inadequate  Information
This  is,  in  part,  the  issue  which  must  be  drawn  in   the
debate  over  Quemoy  and  Matsus  that  will,  in  my judgment
be  waged  in  the  next  few  weeks  across  this  country.  I  am
willing  to  say  on the floor today, having just  gone  across  the
country  that  I  am  deeply  convinced  that  the  great  rank  and
file  of  the  American  people,  even  on  the  basis  of  the  inade-
quate  facts  which  have  been  made  available to  them  by  the
administration,  are  not  in  favor  of  what  they  already  know
about  President  Eisenhower's foreign  policy  with  respect  to
Asia.
Mr.  President,  there  are  other  editorials  which  support  the
thesis  I  am  advancing here  today.   I  wish  to  invite  attention
to  a  second  New   York   Times  editorial  of  March  31,  1955.
I  wish  to  read  two paragraphs  from  the  editorial:
But  free  world  unity  is  jeopardized  today  by  growing
division  and  confusion  regarding  a  subsidiary  problem  of
our  Far  Eastern  policy, involving  the  question  of  whether
we  shall  or  shall  not  defend  the   Chinese  offshore  islands
of   Quemoy  and  Matsu.   There  is  no  longer  any  question
Why  They  Leaked  The  Yalta  Papers
"Another   factor  which  influenced   the   timing   of   the
publication  was  that  it  was  certain  that  German  and
French  ratification  of  the  Paris  accords  would  lead   to
more  intensive  consideration  of  another  conference  with
the   Russians.   It   was  obvious  that  the   full   story  of
Yalta   illuminates  graphically  the   dangers,   as  well  as
the  possible  values, of  such  talks;  the  need  of  adequate
prior  preparations,  and  the  importance of  a  clear  defini-
tion  of  principles  which  will  not  be  sacrificed  to  secure
agreement.    These  are  the  considerations  which  led  the
Department  to  make  the   publication."
—Letter  by  Assistant  Secretary   of  State  Thnaton  B.
Morton  replying  to  a  letter  from  Senator   Humphrey
to  Secretary   Dulles  asking  him  to  explain  why  and
how  the   Yalta   papers  were   "leaked"   at  this  time.
(Congr.  Rec.  April  1, p.  $587.)
that we shall  defend, as we are  pledged  by treaty  to  defend,
both  Formosa  and  the  Pescadores  and  that  we  shall  do  so
with  all  the  means at  our  disposal.  In  this  policy  we  have
won  increasing   support  from  all  free  nations.   But  these
free  nations,  including our  European  allies and  neighboring
Canada,  draw  a  clear  line  of  distinction  between  Formosa
and   the   Pescadores,   on  the   one  hand,   and   the    offshore
islands  on  the  other.  They  not  only  decline  to  support  onr
equivocal  stand  on the  latter  but  definitely  reject  any  idea
of  joining in  their  defense.
Elsewhere  in  this  editorial the  Times  said:
In   these  circumstances  it   is  high  time  to  review  our
policy   regarding   these   islands   and  clarify   our   position
beyond  any  doubt or  misrepresentation.
I  digress  from  the  editorial  long  enough  to  say  that  such
is  the  purpose  of  my  resolution.  Its  purpose  is  to  give  the
Congress  of the  United  States  and the  administration  another
opportunity  to  reexamine and  clarify  their  positions  regard-
ing  Asia.    Such  a  reexamination   is  sorely   needed,  because
American  policy  in  Asia,  if  it  is  not  clarified  and  if  we  move
into  a  defense  of  Quemoy  and  the  Matsus,  will  leave  us,  I
fear,  in  a  position where we will  stand  alone in  Asia,  because
the  action  itself  will  convict  us  of  aggression  in  Asia.
Elsewhere  in  this  editorial the  writer  says:
This  would  be strictly  in line with  our  treaty  obligations,
which  do  not  extend  to  the  offshore  islands.   It  would  pre-
serve  Western  unity and assure  us  the  moral support  of  the
free  world.   It  would  demonstrate  our  willingness  to  pre-
serve  peace  by  putting  a  hundred  miles  of  blue  water  be-
tween  Formosa  and  the mainland.
"Atomic  War  Over  Matsu?"
Likewise,  Mr.  President,  there  is  a  rather  interesting  edi-
torial  in  the   Washington   Post  and  Times  Herald,  a  news-
If  This  Is the  First  Time  You  Have  Seen  a  Copy  of  This  Weekly—
A  word  of  introduction  may  be  in  order.  It  is  edited  and  published  by  I.  F. Stone, formerly  Washington  editor
of  PM  and  the  Nation,  author  of  "The  Hidden  History  of  the  Korean  War,"  "Underground  to  Palestine"  and  many
other  well-known works.  Its  purpose  is  to  provide  independent  and  militant  coverage  of  the  capital  without  those
concessions  to  hate-breeding  cold  war  stereotypes  which  have  become  necessaiy  in  American journalism  generally.
It  is based on a  belief  in  the  necessity  of  peace  and  the  indivisibility  of  civil  liberties.   As  in  this  issue,  it  tries  to
present material inadequately  covered, if  at all,  by the press.   It  is now  in  its  third  successful  year  of  publication.    It  is
published  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  in August and  December  at  301 E. Capitol Street, Washington
3,  D.C.  The  domestic  subscription rate  is  $5  a  year;  $6  elsewhere  in  the  Western  Hemisphere;  $10  by  first-class
mail everywhere  else in the world.  Air  mail is $15 to Europe and $20 to Asia and Africa. You will  find  it an indispensable
source  of  information  not to  be found  elsewhere,  and  of  a  point  of  view  in  defense of  peace  and  civil  liberty  few  are
any  longer  willing to  express.
Use the  Blank  on  Page  Six  to  Subscribe   Now
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

6
/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   11, 1»5S
paper which  seems  to have blown hot  and cold on this  subject.
Its   most   recent   editorial   contribution    on  this   subject   is
headed  "Atomic  War  Over  Matsu?"   Mr.  President,  the edi-
torial  says,  in part:
Thus  is  the  deadly  prospect  of  nuclear  war  raised  over
a couple of tiny  and in themselves insignificant island groups
on  the  doorstep  of  Communist  China.
This  possibility  of  involvement  over   the  Quemoys-  and
Mateiu   has  caused   increasing   concern  among  our  allies.
The  Brjtiah  have  made  known  their  intention   not  to  join
in  a  war  over  the  coastal  islands;  and last  week  the  Cana-
dian  Foreign   Minister  said   much  the  same  thing.   These
protests  evidently   are  aimed  at  dissuading   the  adminis-
tration   from   what   other   governments   consider   a   rash
course;  our  allies  know  that  if  a  major war  should develop
from  a  clash  over  the  Matsus,  the  question  of  cause  would
become  academic  and  they  would  inevitably  be  drawn  in.
The  fact  remains  that  despite  a  large  measure  of  support
for  the  American pledge  to  defend  Formosa  and the  Pesca-
dores,  most  of  the  free  world simply  does  not  believe  that
the  Matsus  and  Quemoys  are  worth  a  war.
Evacuation  of  the  Islands  Asked
Mr.  President.   I  wish  to  say  that,  in  my  judgment,   the
immediate  course  of  action  which  should  be  followed  is  that
we  reveal  to  the  world  our  determination  to  stay  within  our
international  legal  rights  which  automatically  will  bring  to
an   end  even   the   suggestion   that  we  shall   defend  a  few
square  miles  of  rocky  land  off  the  coast  of  the  mainland  of
China  over  which  we  have  no  international   law   rights.   My
resolution  provides  that  we  shall  proceed  at  once  to  use  our
good   offices  and  juridicial  processes   in  connection  with   the
evacuation  of  Quemoy and  the  Matsus  if  Chiang  wishes  to
cooperate.   But  if  he  does  not, then  the   answer   must   be:
"You  stay  there  alone.  We will  not  endanger  American  boys
in  the  defense  of  the  Nationalist  Chinese  on  Quemoy and  the
Matsus.   We will  give  you  coverage,  if  you want  it,  with  the
cooperation   of  the   United   Nations,   to  return  to  Formosa,
because  we  have  a  legal  right  to  defend  Formosa."
Then  I  think  we must  make it  very  clear  to  the Communist
segment  of  the  world  that  we  stand   ready,   in   cooperation
with  our  Allied  friends,  to  discuss  with  their  top  leaders  the
present  danger   of  war; and  once  again   take  the  rules  of
reason  to  the  issues  of  peace  and  war,  and  demonstrate  that
it  is  the  United  States  and  our  allies  who are  seeking  peace.
"We Are  In  the  Wrong"
We  shall  not  maintain  among  the  allies  the  unity  which  is
so  essential  in  the  struggle  to  maintain  peace  if  we follow a
Inside  Red  China
Nation's  Biuinets,  the  organ  of  the  U.  S.  Chamber of
Commerce,  in  ita  April  issue  carries  a  summary  of  an
Air  Force  survey  of  Communist China.   This  is  one  of
those    mammoth    jobs    of    scholarship-for-war    being
financed  by  the  military.   This  one  was  begun  in  1951
and  had  produced  20  reports  totalling  2500  pages  when
it   was   abandoned,  only   two   thirds   completed.   Two
questions-and-answers   in   the   Chamber   of   Commerce
summary  may  indicate  why  the   Air  Force  decided  to
spend  no  more  money  on  it:
"Has     China's  new   position   of   power   and   influence
aroused  national pride?
"Yes.   The  success  of  Chinese soldiers  in  forcing  back
UN  forces  in  Korea  appears  to  have  done  more  than
any  other  single   thing  in   China  to   gain  support  for
the  Communists'  programs.  The  people  are  proud  of  a
winner.
"What  is  the  likelihood that  the  Red  regime will  col-
lapse,  or  that  the  people  will  revolt?
"No  evidence  was   found   of   any   group   with  power
enough   to   overthrow  the   regime  in   any  considerable
region."
course   of  action   in  Asia   which  our   allies   cannot   support.
If   we  look  at   the   record   in  respect   to   Quemoy  and   the
Matsus  I  think  we must  acknowledge  we  are  wrong;  because
I  think  we  are  making  threats  of  aggression  in  Asia  today
in  respect  to  these  islands  and  in  respect  to  the  possibility
of  the   President   authorizing   a  strike  against  military  in-
stallations  on  the  mainland  of  China  before  an  act   of   ag-
gression  has  been  committed  against  the  United  States.
The   time   has   come  when   the   President   of  the   United
States  has  no  moral  right  to  remain  ambiguous any  longer
with  the  American  people  about  Quemoy  and  the   Matsus.
The  American  people  are  the  ones who will do the  dying  and
they  have  the  right  to  say  to  the  President,  as  I  think  they
are  calling  out  by the  millions today,  "Mr.  President,  what  is
your  policy  in  regard  to  Quemoy and  the  Matsus?   Are  we
or  are  we not  going  to  defend  them?   What  justification can
you  give  for  our  dying  in  ^heir  defense  if  you  should  decide
to  defend  them?"
If   the  answer   of  the  President  is  that  his  policy  is   to
defend   them,  I   think   the   overwhelming   majority   of   the
American   people   will  make  it   very   clear   to  him,   in   the
exercise   of  the  American  democratic  processes,  that  he  is
not  their  leader.
A  Wider  Audience  for  the  Weekly  Is A  Wider  Audience  for  Peace  —  Send  A  Gift  Sub  Now
1. F.  Stone's Weekly, 301
Please  renew  (or  enter) my
K^mp
Str«>t
Pity
E. Capitol Wash.  3. D. C.
sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
7nn»          State
Enter  this gift  sub for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(Tnl     N.mo
Stropt
Tity
* $1 extra for  Canada.
Znno         St.to
4/J1/B5
I.  F, Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
50,000  Copies  of  This  Issue  Are  Being Printed—More  Than 40,000  Were Sold  by Press Time—Order  At  Once  for  the  Next Run
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED