I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jul11.pdf

============================================================

Twin  Mysteries  of  the  Sudden  (and  Suddenly  Squelched)  Press Inquiry.  See  Page 4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 26JULY  11,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
Hoover  Commission   and  CIA:  Can  One  Nation  "Seduce"  Another?
Foreign   Policy  a  la  Nellie  the  Cloak   Model
The  best  of  us  seem  to  approach  foreign  policy  in  terms  of
melodrama.   James  P.  Warburg,  certainly  one  of  our  more  in-
telligent  writers on  foreign  policy, warns in  a  rather hectic let-
ter  to the  Washington  Post  (July  5)  of  the  dangers which con-
front  us at  Geneva.  The  peculiar terms in which Americans of
this  generation  tend  to  see the  problems  of  international rela-
tions  are  reflected  in  one  passage.    In  this  Mr.  Warburg  says
the  Kremlin  is  attempting  to  create  neutral  buffer   zones  in
Europe  and  in  Asia  "which  it  no  doubt  hopes  will  be  suscep-
tible to  later  seduction  or  subversion."
Now  seduction and  subversion are  real  dangers  in  some situ-
ations.   Nellie   the  Cloak   Model,   if  we  recall  correctly,  was
seduced  and  in  the  literal sense  subverted,  i.e.,  overturned  or
turned  over when the  champagne dispensed  by the  villain had
done  its  wicked work.   But  can  one  nation  "seduce" another?
Can one nation chuck another  nation under the chin, ply it with
liquor,  soften  it  up  with mink  stoles ?  In  all  their  centuries of
life  side  by side,  did  Germany  ever  "seduce"  France  or  France
"seduce"  Germany?  The  British  are  pretty  devilish  fellows
but  in  generations  of  occupation  they  never  succeeded   in   "se-
ducing"  India  or  Ireland.
Silly  Metaphor
How  far   do  we  carry  such  silly  metaphor?   Nations   are
moved   by  their   interests.   They   are  not   light-headed   girls.
Turkey  was  not  "seduced"  by the  United  States;  it  needed  the
counter-balance  of  American  aid  against  Russian  demands  on
the  Straits  and  the  Armenian  provinces.   Most  nations  in  be-
tween  the  great  Powers  today  need  some  degree  of  neutrality
to  avoid  being  ground  to  pieces  in  a  struggle  between  them.
This  is what  moves  Tito  and  Nehru  and  U  Nu.   If  a  neutral
zone  were  created  in  Eastern  and  Central  Europe,  how  could
these  countries be  "seduced" ?
"Subversion"  is more  respectable  but  no  less  mysterious. Can
one  nation  "subvert"  another?   Even  Austria  had  to  be  occu-
pied  by Hitler's  armies.  Revolutions  are  not  brought  about  by
"subversion."   It  is not  "subversion"  but  hatred  of  the  French
which  keeps Indo-China in  crisis.   It  was not  "subversion"  but
generations  of  wounded  self-respect  which  made  Gandhi  the
leader  of  India's  millions against  the  British.  It  was not  "sub-
version"  but  "a  long  train  of  abuses  and  usurpations"  which
brought  about  our  own  Revolution.
"More  Direct"  Operations?
There  is  involved  here  more  than  a  manner  of  speaking.
This  is  a  way  of  thinking,  and  it  affects  foreign  policy.   We
may  see an  example of  it  in  the  Hoover  Commission  report  on
intelligence  agencies,  or  at  least  those  excerpts  thought  fit  for
the  not-to-be-trusted   public.   Let  us  begin  with  a'  sentence
which  says  a great  deal  more  than  it  was  intended  to  say about
current  attitudes.   "The   task  force  has  recognized,"  the  report
says,  "the  incompatibility  in  method  between  the  practice  of
diplomacy  and  more  direct  and  active  operations  incident   to
the  collection   of  intelligence  and  the  conduct  of  cold   war."
Diplomacy  is  diplomacy  and  war  is  war.   But  what  are  these
"more direct and active  operations  incident to  ...   the conduct
of  cold  war"?
In  war-time the  CIA's  predecessor,  the  OSS,  could  carry on
sabotage  or  assassination as part  of  the  necessity  of  war.  Surely
the  Hoover  task force was  not  recommending  any  such  lawless
tactics  in  time  of  peace?  But  what  did  it  mean  by this  refer-
ence to  "more  direct  and  active operations"  and  by its criticism
of  the  State  Department  for  interfering with  "efforts"  which
"might  have  brought  direct  and  immediate  results  .  .  .  that
would   have   justified   the  attendant  political   risks"?    These
cryptic  allusions  underscore  the  need  for  a joint  Congressional
committee  to  exercise  some  check  over  the  cloak-and-dagger
operations  of  the  CIA,  and  for  this recommendation we  should
be  grateful.
On  the  Eve  of  Geneva
It  is a  serious  matter  for  the  whole  world  that  on  the  eve of
Geneva,  of  the  first  meeting  of  heads  of  state  since  1945,  of  a
meeting  which  may give  the  world  a  chance  to  avoid  the  mu-
tual  suicide  of  an  atomic  war,  the  Hoover  commission  should
issue  a  report  complaining  that  "among  some  of  those  respon-
sible  for  implementation  of  our  foreign  policy  by  diplomacy
and  negotiation,  there  seems  to  exist  an  abhorrence  to  anything
that  might  lead  to diplomatic  .  . . complications."    Apparently
some  of  us  not  only  believe  in  the  possibility  of  carrying  on
foreign  policy  by  "seduction  or  subversion"  but  want  to  prac-
tice  them  ourselves,  despite  our  moralizings  about  those  who
believe  ends  justify  means.
Insofar  as  intelligence  is  concerned,  its  collection  is  hamp-
ered  by the  mentality which  sees  foreign  policy, revolution  and
history   as   the   product   of   pulp   fiction   conspiracy.     Harry
Schwartz,  the  Soviet  expert   of  the  New   York   Times,  made
some  interesting  disclosures  on  this  score  in  an  article  (p.  18,
July  4)  rebutting  the  Hoover  report-on  why  the  deficiencies  in
our  Soviet  intelligence.   Reactionaries  always  prefer  to  see  the
great  convulsions  of  history as  bedtime  stories;  this  is  the com-
forting  view  and  absolves  them  of  responsibility.  Mr.  Hoover,
I  am sure,  still  thinks he  lost  in  1932  because of  some  "subver-
sive"  plot;  the  apple-sellers  on  the  corners  were  never  really
visible  to  his  kind  of  eye.  Such  mentalities are  unfitted  for  in-
telligence  and  dangerous  if  allowed  to  carry on cloak-and-dag-
ger operations.
Can  there  be  peace  if  a  huge,  unsupervised and unregulated
governmental  establishment  is  allowed  to  act  out  Hollywood
scenarios?    How  much  control  can  we  have  of  the  basic  deci-
sions  of   war  and   peace  when  such  an  agency   may   create  or
manufacture    "incidents"?
3  0 3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  11,  1955
An  "On The  Scene"  Report From  the  Backwoods
Prince  Edwards  County  Prefers  Illiteracy  to    "Mongrelization'
By  Marvin  Caplan
To  an  obscure  section  of  the  hilly  tobacco  lands  of  middle
Virginia,   newspaper   reporters,  radio   commentators   and  a
CBS  television   crew  have  trooped  in  recent  weeks  to  study
the   impact   of  the   Supreme   Court's   school  decisions   on  a
Southern   community.   Prince  Edward  County,  their  destina-
tion,  was  a  defendant  in  one of  the five  school  cases.  It  was
the  first  Southern  community to  react  to  the  Court's  May 31
ruling.  Instructed  to  "make  a  prompt  and  reasonable  start"
toward  integrating  their  public schools,  Prince   Edward   offi-
cials  yielded  to  a  perverse  inspiration.   They  decided  to  abol-
ish  the  schools  altogether.
"The  situation  is  confused,"  said  J.  Barrye  Wall,  Sr.    "I
hope  you will  emphasize that."
Mr.  Wall,  who has  never  lived outside  the  county, has  been
editor  of  its   bi-weekly  paper,   the   Farmville   Herald,   since
1921.   A leader  in  the  move to close  the  schools,  he  denies  that
the white people  are  defying the  Supreme  Court.   It  would be
defiance,  he said,  to  open the  schools  this fall  on a  segregated
basis.  They  have  decided not  to  open the  schools  at  all.   They
made  the  decision  the  same  day  the  Supreme  Court  handed
down   its   ruling.   The  county   Board   of   Supervisors    voted
enough  funds  to  maintain  school property  next  year  but  not
enough  to operate  the  schools.  Seven  days later, white  parents
held   a   mass   meeting    and   formed   an   Educational    Corp.
pledged  to  raise  about  $200,000  to  pay  the  salaries  of  the
county's   white  teachers:   "Prince  Edward,   Stand  Steady!"
Mr.  Wall  has  instructed  the  community  editorially.    But  it
seems  only  to  have  decided  to  stand  still.
State papers and  some white parents say  school will be held
privately  this  fall  in  churches,  homes,  halls,  etc.   But  Mr.
Wall  says  the  leaders   have  not  even  decided  that.    "We're
More  Than  Just  Schools
"Yes   sir.   There's  more here than  just  schools.    This
country  has  been  marching down  the  road  to  Socialism
for  20  years."
—E.  Louis  Dahl, Farmville  business  man.
not  thinking  any  further   at  the  moment  than   maintaining
our   teaching   staff.     We   are   proceeding  in  this   logically,
legally,  calmly.   We  don't  know what  the  future  is,  we  have
to  meet  it  day  by  day."
But  it  doesn't  matter  that  white  leaders  sound  vague  and
contradictory.   In  Prince  Edward,  where  Negro  students  out-
number  the  white,  it  is  enough to raise  the  fearsome  prospect
of  intermarriage  and  mongrelization to  gain  widespread com-
munity  support.   Even  so, there  is  some  grumbling.   A  white
mother, for  instance,  wrote  to  the  Herald  and  after  apologiz-
ing  for  being  born  in  the  North  and  educated  in  integrated
schools,  said,  "I  would  be  far   more  willing to  send  my  chil-
dren  to  integrated  schools  in  the  South, woeful  as  that  would
be, rather  than  let  the  radical  members  of  our  white  society,
in their  wrath  and  indignation, cause our  public school  system
to  come tumbling  down  around  us.  ..."     A  few  Negroes  say
they  have  been  approached  privately  by  white  friends  who
tell  them  they  do not  object  to  letting  white  and  colored  chil-
dren  go  to  school  together.   But  there  is  no  open  opposition.
Not  the  Churches, Not the  Schools
Sometimes  the  churches  or  colleges  in  a  Southern  commu-
nity  produce  intrepid  souls  who dare  to criticize  the  local  cus-
toms.   Not  in  Prince   Edward.   Longwood  College,  a  state
school,  is  in  Farmville,  the  county  seat.  And just  outside  the
city  is  Hampton-Sidney   College,   founded   by  Presbyterians
six  months  before  the  Declaration  of  Independence.   But  ex-
cept  for  the  chaplain  at  Hampton-Sidney,  who  once  spoke  in
favor  of integration, the teachers and students at  both  schools
Those  Unsegregated  Thickets
"You  get  a  white  girl  and a  colored boy sitting beside
each  other on  a  bus  going  25  miles  to  school  and have
them  go  home  through the  thicket together  at  dusk  and
what  have  you  got?"
—Editor  Barrye   W-all.
have  been  silent.   And  though  the  regional  governing  bodies
of  the  several  Protestant  congregations   in  the  city  have  all
gone  on  record  endorsing  the  Supreme  Court's  decisions,  the
local  white  ministers  have  not  taken  any  open  stand  on  the
matter.  Perhaps  they  are  chastened  by  the  experience of  the
Rev.  J.  W.  Kennedy, who rose  at  the  mass  meeting  to  ques-
tion  the  wisdom  of  abolishing  public  schools  and  has  found
himself  unpopular  ever  since.    His  position  is  difficult.    An
elder  of  his  church  is  Robert  Crawford,  a  prosperous  Farm-
ville  laundry  operator  and  head  of  a  state  organization  that
has  sprung  into  being  as  a  result  of  the  school  decisions, the
Defenders   of   State   Sovereignty   and   Individual    Liberties.
Recently  Mr.  Crawford  told  a  state  meeting  of  his   group:
J
'The  worst  obstacle  we  face  in  the  fight  to  preserve  segre-
gated  schools  in  the  South  is  the  white  preacher."
He might  have added that  his fight was  also  to  preserve  the
South  he grew  up  in.  For  to  a  great  extent  the  opponents of
integration  are  the  opponents of  innovation.  They  have  man-
aged  to  keep  new  industry,  new  people  and  new  ideas  out  of
their  county.   It  is  remarkably  homogeneous.  But  the  price
they  pay  for  this  is  to  drive  their  youth  away,  white  as  well
as  colored.  A white  high  school student  exclaimed in  disgust:
"There's  nothing to  do in  this  town.  You either  get  a  job  at
the  A&P or  a filling station.  Everybody who graduates moves
away.   I  don't  believe there's  a  fellow  from  the  last  graduat-
ing  class  who's  still  around.   Eight  men  own this  town  and
they  don't  let  anything  come  in.  Du  Pont  wanted  to  build  a
plant  here.   They  wouldn't  allow  it.   They  said  it'd   bring  a
foreign   element   in."
Blame  the  Whites  For  Integration
It  was this  rigid  resistance  to  change  on the  part  of  white
leaders,  a  colored  doctor  says,  that  caused  the  present  dilem-
ma.  "If  white  folk  want  someone to
:
 blame integration  on,  let
them  blame the  members of the  School Board. If  they'd  talked
to  our  children  and  promised  them  a  new  school,  that  might
have  ended  it."    That  Board's  refusal  to  discuss  a new Negro
high  school  so  exasperated   the  Negro  high  school  students,
they  struck.  They walked out  of their  "drafty  shack"  and  re-
fused  to  return  until  the  NAACP  agreed  to  sue  the  School
Board.  A by-product of that  historic  suit  is  the  new $840,000
R.  R.  Moton  High,  built  under  threat  of  court  order  and  one
of  the  finest  schools  in  the  state.
If   one  considers   how  dependent  the   Negroes   of   Prince
Edward  are  upon  the  whites,  he  can  appreciate  what  a  des-
perate and courageous  thing the school strike  was.  If  a  Negro
lives  in  Farmville,  he  probably  works  at  the   Buffalo  Shook
Co.,  run  by  the  father  of  B. B.  Hanbury,  head  of  the  Educa-
tional  Corp.;  at  the  Farmville  Manufacturing  Co.,  operated
by  Maurice  Large,  former  Board  of  Education  president;   or
in  one  of  the  plants  producing  dark-fired  tobacco.   In   the
county,  he  is  usually  either  one  of  the  111 tenant   farmers,
subject  to  pressure   from  their  white  bosses;  or  one  of  the
489 farm  owners,  who  depend  on  loans  from  white  banks  to
tide them over from one tobacco  crop to another.  Their  situa-
tion  led  Dr.  Vernon  Johns,  a  colored  gentleman  farmer   and
sage,  to  remark   once:   "Docility  had  its  premiere  in  Prince
Edward   County."
Mr. Wall  claims  the  student  strike was adult  inspired.  But
the  students  insist  they  organized   and  carried  it  through
themselves  when  they  were  convinced  the  Board  had  stopped
listening  to  them.    ("We  went  there,"  one  strike  leader  ex-
(Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'*  Weekly,  fuly  11, J9&5
"Unbelievable and Incredible" Is  A Circuit  Court's Verdict  on One of Them
Should  Regular  FBI  Informers  Be  Exempt  From Confrontation?
Chicago—Those  liberals  who are  being taken  in  by the  line
that "regular" as distinct  from  "casual" FBI  informers  should
be  exempt  from  confrontation  are  urged  to  read  for  them-
selves  the  decision  handed  down  by  the  U.  S.  Court  of  Ap-
peals  in Chicago last  month unanimously setting  aside  the  de-
portation  of  Matthew Brzovich.  The  case  illustrates  the  fact
that  a  "regular"  informer  may  be  just  as  unreliable  as  a
"casual"  one,  perhaps  more  so  since  continued  employment
depends  on  his  coming  up  with  more  "information."   The  in-
former  in  the  Brzovich case  was  Matthew  Cvetic  and  this  is
what the  Court  (Judges  Duffy,  Major  and Swaim) said of  him:
"The  sole  witness  who testified  against  petitioner  was  one
Cvetic,  who joined the  Communist  Party  in  1943 as  a  salaried
agent  of  the  FBI  and  who  acted  as  a  professional witness  in
numerous  Communist trials  and  deportation  proceedings.  He
testified  that  he  met  petitioner at  a  meeting  of  the  Commu-
nist  party  held  in  Cleveland, Ohio,  in  the  latter  part  of  1948.
His  testimony  on  this  point,  however, was  in  some   respects
evasive  and  conflicting.
"The   witness  also  testified  that  petitioner   had   sold   sub-
scriptions  for  a  Croation  language  newspaper, Narodni Glas-
nik,  published in  Pittsburgh,  and  that  petitioner  had  written
articles for  it  as  a  correspondent  in  Chicago.   This  testimony
indicated  that  this  newspaper  was  controlled  by  the  Commu-
nist  party.    We  have  read  these  articles  introduced  in  evi-
dence  and we find not  a  single  word which would indicate that
petitioner  was  a  Communist.
"It  is  claimed  that  petitioner  was  a  paid  employe  of  the
newspaper  and  that  no  persons  were  so  employed  other  than
Communists.  The  evidence on this  score  raises  no more  than
an  anemic  suspicion.
"The  Board  [of  Immigration  Appeals]  in its  analysis of  the
evidence  relies  upon  the  testimony  of  Cvetic  'that  the   re-
spondent  (petitioner)  was commonly  referred  to  as  a  member
of  the  Communist Party by other  Communists who  considered
him  a responsible  and active  member in the Chicago area'  . . .
This  testimony  was  hearsay  and  has  no  more  probative  value
than the tattlings  from  a town  meeting.  . . .
"It  is pointed out that the  hearing  officer  made no finding as
to credibility of the  witness  Cvetic. This is merely a play upon
words  ...    it  is  inherent  in the findings which  he did  make
that  he  regarded  the  witness  as  unbelievable  and  incredible."
But  what  if  the  government  were  able to  assert that  its  in-
formation  came from  a  reliable  undercover informant  whose
identity  could  not  be  disclosed  without  harm  to  "security"?
What  if  it  could  plead that this was  not  a "casual"  informant
but  a  "professional"   undercover  agent  and  therefore  exempt
from  examination  in  the  full  daylight  of  a  court?
REPORT  FROM  PARMVILLE
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
plained,   "and   when  we  complained  about  our   school  some
Board  members  said  Well,  Abraham  Lincoln  went  to  school
in  a  log  cabin.   Fine,  we  said.   Let  the  white  kids  go  to  our
log  cabin  and  well  go  to  Farmville  High.")    But  if  'an  adult
didn't  lead  the  strike,  he  may  have  created  the  atmosphere
for  it.   M.  Boyd  Jones,  who was  principal  of  the  Negro  high
at  the  time,  was  such  a  capable  administrator  he  was  even
praised  editorially  in  the  Herald.   His  encouragement  of  in-
dependent  thinking  among the  students  made  the  strike  pos-
sible,  one teacher  feels.  He  has  been  replaced  by  a  principal
who  is  rumored  to  be  under  orders  to  hold  the  kids  down—
"or  you'll  be  looking."
How  Could  They  Be  So Childish?
Perhaps past  experiences  should have  prepared  the colored
community  for  the  whites'  decision  to  close  the  schools.   But
most  Negroes  were  astonished.   "We  never  thought  they'd  be
so  childish,"  a  town  man  said.   "They're   acting  like  kids."
And  a  farm  woman,  in  unconscious  inversion  of  the  sort of
thing white  people  used  to say  when  they  heard  Negro  neigh-
bors  were  suing  them  for  a  new  school, cried:  "I  was  sur-
prised.    Why,  we  love  our  white  race.   We  don't  carry  any-
thing  against  them."
Most  Negroes  were  hurt  rather  than  angry,  says  the  Rev.
L.  F.  Griffin,  pastor,  First  Baptist  Church.   "Prejudice  isn't
open  here  as  it  is  in  Mississippi  or  Georgia.   It's   a  hidden,
vicious type  of thing." Negroes  were  pained to  see white  folks
they  thought  were  friends  lining  up  with  the  opposition.
The  great  majority  of  them  still  can't  believe  the  schools
will  not  open.   "No  sir,"   one  handsome,  spirited, loquacious
woman  declared:  "Do you think  our  fine  government  and  the
Supreme  Court  are  going to turn  their  backs on us  and  let  us
go  on  without  schools?"   Not  all  colored  parents   share   her
faith.    A  Negro  mailman  has  begun  circulating  a  petition
among his  people asking the  school board  to  open  the  schools
this  fall  on a  segregated  basis.   But  most  of  the  parents  are
just waiting.  Rev. Griffin,  a ranking  leader  in the  Negro com-
munity,  refuses  even  to  conjecture  until  he  sees  what  the
NAACP  does.  A young  man,  36, large, beefy,  forceful, he  has
been  a  pastor  in  Farmville  for  five  years.   He  has  played  a
leading  role  in maintaining support  for  the  school  suit  in  the
colored  community.  This  has  led Wall to brand  him a  foreign
element,  although  he was  born  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  spent  most of
Prejudiced  Enough  Already
While  nine-year-old  Rickie  played  on  the  porch  with
four  turtles,  his  mother  tried  to  explain  how  she  felt.
A  widow  of  modest  means,  she  has  pledged  $150  this
year  to  help  pay  white  teachers' salaries.   "I've  lived  in
other   places  besides  Farmville   so   I'm  not   as  bitter
against  them  as  most.   But  I  still  don't  like  it."   The
level  of  education  would  be  lowered.   Social  interming-
ling.   Was  she  sure  Rickie   would  object   to  going  to
school  with  colored children?    "I  don't  think  he'd  like
it,"  she  said  with  a  troubled  frown.   Then she  moved  a
few  steps  away  from  him  to  the  rail  and  lowered  her
voice.   "I  don't  like  to  talk  in  front  of  him," she mur-
mured.    "I  don't  want  him  to  be  more  prejudiced  than
he  already  is."
his  boyhood  in  Farmville  and  returned,  after  completing  his
schooling   elsewhere   in   the   South,   to   accept   his   present
pastorate.
His  position  is  not  without  danger.    Shortly  after  the   stu-
dent  strike, a  cross was burnt  in front  of the  school.  The next
day  a  white  man  asked  Griffin  if  he wasn't  afraid.   "Oh,"  the
Reverend  drawled,  "They  been  burnin'  wood  ever  since  the
discovery  of  fire."  Another  time,  late  at  night,  he  received  a
phone  call.   "Reverend,"   an   unidentified   voice  said,  "We're
holding  a  necktie  party  tonight.   You  want  to  be  guest  of
honor?"  "Well,"  Griffin  replied,  "You'll  have  to  come  by  to
pick  up  the  body."   No  one  appeared.    In  addition  to  such
threats,  economic  pressure  has  been  exerted  upon  him.  "If  I
owe  a  bill  they  force  collection  on  me  before  I  get  out  the
door  good."   It  has  been  brought  to  him  that  if  he  had  been
willing  to  use  his  influence  to  get  the  school suit  dropped  the
white  leaders  would  have  made  it  worth  his  while.   He  has
also  been  forced  to  resist 'the  temptations  of   advancement,
having  recently  turned  down  a  tempting  offer  of  a  pulpit  in
Philadelphia.   As  the  father  of  four  small  children  it  may  be
guessed  that  this  was  not  an  easy  decision.  He  quotes  with
evident  feeling lines from  Gray's "Elegy" that he has  adapted
a  bit  to  his  own situation:   "Chill  Penury  has  repressed  my
noble rage, And froze  the  genial  current  of my soul." But  it  is
highly  unlikely he will  leave  Farmville  until  the  school  situa-
tion  is  settled.  He has  been there  from  the   beginning.
How  will  it  end  and  when  will  it  end?   No one  can  answer
that. "But  it's  fun  watchin'." says the  Rev.  Griffin,   cheerfully.
.1  0   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  11,  1955
Is  Somebody  Trying  to  Poison  The  Atmosphere  in  Time For  The  Geneva Parley?
Twin  Mysteries  of  the  Sudden  (and  Suddenly  Squelched)   Press   Inquiry
The  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee's  investigation  of
the  press really  began  several  weeks before Winston  Burdett's
appearance,  but  since  the  initial  sessions  dealt  with  (a)  radi-
cals  and  (b)  foreign  language  papers  nobody  paid  much  at-
tention  to them.  The hearings  were  billed as  "Communist Ex-
ploitation  of  the  Foreign   Language  Press"  and  opened  on
June  17 with  the  interrogation  of  Paul  Novick, editor  of  the
Freiheit,  the  Yiddish  daily  in  New  York.   Senator   Jenner
wanted  to  know,  among  other  things,  why  the  Freiheit  op-
poses  the  rearmament   of  Germany.
Novick  was  followed  on  the  stand  by  the  ex-Communist,
John  Lautner,  now  employed  as  a  witness  and  "expert" .by
the  Justice  Department,  and  then  by  Boris  Sklar  of  Russky
Golos,  a  Russian  language   daily.
On  June  23  the  session  resumed  with  Sol.  A.  Pearl  of  the
Freiheit.   Next  day  the  committee  produced  a  surprise  wit-
ness,  a  Countess  Stella  Andrassy.   She was  born  in  Sweden,
but  saw  the  revolution  in  Russia  where  her  father  was  sta-
tioned  as  the  Swedish  military  attache.  She  married  a  Hun-
garian  nobleman,  barely  missing  the  Hungarian  revolution,
her  husband  being  stationed  at  the  Hungarian  legation  in
Stockholm  when  Bela  Kun  took  over.
With  Kun's  overthrow  and  the  establishment   in  Budapest
of  Europe's  first  Fascist  dictatorship,  that  of  Horthy,  Count-
ess  Andrassy  went  back  to  Hungary,  recovering  the  family
estate  and  living  happily  thereafter   until  the  Russians  cap-
tured  Budapest  in  1944.  The  Countess  then  fled  to  America
where she is  now an  expert  on Communism. She testified that
the  Communist foreign  language  press  in  this  country  now
has  about  a  million  readers,  an  estimate  which will  cheer  the
Communists  no  end.
Myrdal  Suspect  Too
Since  the  Countess  is  Swedish  born  and  the  Committee  is
not  parochial  in  its  concern with  the  Red menace, its  counsel,
Richard  Arens,  asked  her  whether  Gunnar  Myrdal  is  a Com-
munist :
"Countess  Andrassy.   Well, he  is  on the  extreme  left,  what
they  call him  in  Sweden.  That  is not quite  Communist, but  it
is  the  very  left  side  socialistic.
"Sen.  Eastland.    Socialistic?
"Countess  Andrassy.    Yes.
"Mr.   Arens.    Do  you  have   any   information   concerning
Gunnar Myrdal's  wife ?
"Countess  A.   She  has  just  now  been  nominated  Sweden's
Ambassador  to  India.
"Sen.  Eastland.    Is  she  a Marxist?
"Countess  A.   Oh, yes,  very  much left,  yes.
"Mr..Arens.    Is Gunnar Myrdal a  Marxist?
"Countess  A.   Yes,  they  are  very  openly Marxist."
As  it  happens  Myrdal's  book,  "Politics  and   Economics,"
(1930)   takes  a  quite  un-Marxist  view  of  surplus  value  but
Senator   Eastland   with   true   Southern   courtliness   let   the
Countess's  remark  pass  without contradiction.   Anyway Myr-
dal's master  work on the  Negro in America is just about twice
as  subversive  as  Das  Kapital,  in  Eastland's  Mississippi.
Recessed   "Indefinitely"
Heartened  by  these  discoveries,  the  Committee  on June  29
opened  a  new  series  of  hearings   billed  as  "Communist  Ex-
ploitation  of  the  Press,"  at  which  Burdett  starred  but  which
lasted  only  two  days.   On June  30  the  Committee announced
that  the  hearings   had  been  recessed   "indefinitely,"  though
some  of  those  named  by  Burdett  had  not  yet  been  called  to
testify.   Just  why  these  hearings  were  called  off so suddenly
after  producing  such  rewarding  headlines  is  still  a  mystery.
Perhaps  the  newspaper  publishers  thought  it  best  to  squelch
this  one before  newspapers  all  over  the  country  were  "Mc-
Carthyized."  Another  angle  which  may have  played  its  part
is  that  one member of  Ike's  White  House staff  was  a member
of  the  same unit  at  the  Brooklyn  Eagle  with  Burdett,  News-
paper  Guild  unit  that  is.
A  second mystery  is just why Burdett  was produced at  this
time.   He  told  his  story  to  the  FBI  in  1951  in  the  wake  of  a
"security   check"  by  Columbia  Broadcasting   System   on   its
own  staff.  Presumably  all  those  he  named were  watched  and
wiretapped  thereafter   to • see  whether  they  were  up  to   any
deviltry.  The fact  that  no legal  action  was ever  taken  against
them  speaks  for  itself.
Whether   Burdett   told  his  story  to  a  grand  jury  is  not
known,. but   as  in  the   case  of  Elizabeth   Bentley  the   FBI
usually  passes  such witnesses  on to  Congressional witch  hunt-
ing committees when they  have panned out for  other  purposes.
Was Burdett  timed to  appear  during  the  Guild convention?
That  doesn't  seem likely, though  it  is  good  to  see that  despite
this  two-day  sensation  the  Guild  voted  down  a  proposed  con-
stitutional amendment barring  Communists from  membership.
Now  that  the  press  inquiry  has  stopped,  an   investigation
of  "Iron  Curtain  propaganda  outlets"  is  being  made  by  the
FBI,  according  to  Robert  S.  Allen's  column  of  July  5.    Is
somebody  trying  to  poison  the  atmosphere  in  time  for   the
Geneva conference?
Take  Advantage  of  Our  Special  Six  Month Introductory   Offer    at  Only  $2  to  Send  The  Weekly  to  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my
Street
£.  Capitol, Wash.  3,  D. C.
sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
City       ,.                                    ..Zone           State
Enter gift  sub for  $2 (6 mos.)
Street                                   ....
Citv        .    ._
* $1  extra  for Canada.
or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
..Zone.         State
7/11/35
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED