I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955aug01.pdf

============================================================

Why  The  House  Un-American  Committee  Is  Opening  Up  On  Broadway,  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    Ill,   NO. 29
AUGUST  1,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Brownell  as Well  as Talbott  Ought  to  be  Fired
Though  the  Weekly   possesses  no  special  pipeline  into  the
White  House,  it  is  our  belief  that  Harold  E.  Talbott  will  be
fired  by  Eisenhower  as  Secretary  for  Air.  The  revelation  that
Talbott  used  his  official  position  to  drum  up  private  business
will  be no surprise  to  our  readers.  In  our  Vol.  I,  No.  3, Janu-
ary  31,  1953,  two  and  a half  years  ago,  we  retold  a  story con-
spicuously  ignored  at  the  time  by most  of  the  press:  the  story
of  the  part  played  by Talbott  in  the  most  notorious  scandal  of
World   War   I—"the  flying  coffins"   investigated   by  Charles
Evans  Hughes.   What   Hughes   noted  about  Talbott   and  his
aviation  associates  then  applies  squarely  to  his  conduct   now:
"The  absence  of  proper  appreciation  of  the  obvious  impropri-
ety  of  transactions  by  government  officials  and  agents  of  firms
or  corporations  in  which  they  are  interested."
The  Weekly  said  of  Talbott  at  the  time of  his  appointment,
"The  man  now  picked  by  the  Republicans  as  Air  Secretary  in
preparing  for  World  War   III  was  regarded   by  them  thirty
years ago as a horrid  example  of  what  went  on under  the  Dem-
ocrats  in  World  War  I."   Talbott's  Dayton  Wright  Airplane
Company  was  severely  criticized  in  three  investigations   after
World  War  I,  but  this  time  the  Democrats  as  well  as the  Re-
publicans   seemed  anxious  to  bring  their  inquiry  to  a   close
quickly.   The  same  Senate  committee  that  spent  most  of  two
years  chasing  one  poor  Army  dentist  was  content  to  end  the
Talbott  inquiry  after  one  week.   It  was  as  if  both  parties  were
afraid  to  look  too  closely  lest  they  learn  too  much.   The  avia-
tion  program  Talbott  supervised  has  been  one  of  the  cushiest
financial  operations  in  history;  the  contracts  have  never  been
closely  examined.  Talbott  and  Mulligan  were  just  small-time
moochers  picking  up  chicken  feed  along  the  periphery.
It   has   been   amusing  to   see  those   ruthless   investigators,
Mundt  and  McCarthy,  so  anxiously  trying  to  shield   Talbott
from  "unfair"  newspaper coverage.   Less buffoonish,  more seri-
ous,  are  the   revelations  as  to   the   Attorney  General.      Mr.
Brownell  admits  that  John  A.  Johnson,  general  counsel  of  the
Department  of  the  Air  Force,  is  "technically  correct"  in  saying
that  the  Attorney General  did  not  express  disagreement  when
shown  a proposed  legal  opinion  declaring that  RCA  could  deal
with  Talbott's  private  management  company without  violating
the  "conflict  of  interest"   statute.    At  a  social  function  a  few
days  later,  however,  the  Attorney  General   did  tell  Talbott  it
would   be   "against   our   policy"—but   only   to   give   a  legal
opinion  to  a  private  concern!
Mr.  Brownell  did  not  object  to  having  the  Air  Secretary
solicit  private  business  from  a  defense  contractor.    He  knew
eight  months ago at  least what was going  on but  made no  effort
to stop  it.  The  Attorney General  is the one the President  ought
to  fire.  The  G.O.P.'s  chief  crusader for  high  standards  in  gov-
ernment  turns  out  to  be a  man  who  shut  his  eyes  all  too  easily
to  unethical  practices.
From  The  Summit to  Peking — A Higher  and Harder Climb
The  "ambassadorial   level"  meeting  with  the  Red  Chinese
opening  in  Geneva  indicates  that  the  meeting  at  the  summit
•was  not  quite  the  goldfish  bowl  it  was  supposed   to  be.   The
right   wingers   here   fear   that   without   explicit   commitments
much  else may quietly have  been  allowed  to  "arrange  itself"  at
the  Big  Four  meeting.   The  results  are  not  to  be  measured  by
the  formal  directives  and  communique  with  which  it  ended
nor  by Eisenhower's  report  when  he  returned.  What  is  taking
place  must  be  one  of  the  most  delicate  political  operations  of
all  time:  the  slow  disengagement  of  two  hostile  blocs  abroad,
and  the  deft  liberation  of  the  American  government  at  home
from  its  self-produced  and  self-imprisoning cold  war  hysteria.
In  all this,  Senator  George continues  to  play  a Toscanini's  role;
his  wand  calls  the  new  score  into  being.   Under  his  cautious
guiding  hand  a  Republican  President  and  a  Democratic  Con-
gress   are  moving  toward   peace.
The  picture  is  confusing  (1)    because  the  Administration
must  pretend  that  nothing  is happening  and  (2)   because  both
East  and  West  are  bargaining  hard  as  negotiations  begin.   The
prime   purpose   of   the   most   sensational   move   at   Geneva—
Eisenhower's  pie-in-the-sky  proposal  for  mutual  surveillance
of  U.  S. and  Soviet  skies—was  to  blanket  Bulganin's   proposal
earlier  that  same  day  for  an  end  to  all  atomic  tests.   This,
which  would  have  made  headlines,  was lost  to  sight  as Eisen-
1   1  J
hower  set off his  fire-cracker.  The  British government  does  not
want  to  end  tests  until it  has  an  H-bomb,  too;  American mili-
tary   and   budgetary   policy   is  wedded   to   nuclear   weapons;
Washington  believes  it  can make a better  deal with  Moscow  by
maintaining  the  fear  of  an  H-bomb holocaust.   So  the  govern-
ment's  smart public  relations  men  do their  best  to  divert atten-
tion  from  serious  consideration  of  atomic  disarmament.
Eisenhower  is  credited  here  with  saving the  Geneva  confer-
ence  from  a  last  minute  deadlock  by agreeing  to  link  German
reunification  with  European  security, and  the  hint  in  his  radio
report   Monday  night   about   the   need   for   "adjustments"  if
peace  is  to  be  attained  has  spread  gloom  on  the  right.   The
German  problem  has  been  pushed  into  a  secondary  role;  all
Adenauer  will  find  at  Moscow  is a  readiness  to  treat  him  on  a
plane  of  equality  with  the  East  German  puppet   regime.   If
Moscow  can  restrain  Peking  long  enough  to  get Eisenhower
off  the  China  Lobby hook,  there will  be  an  easing  of  trade  re-
strictions.    And   if   Peking   is  patient,   the   Chiang   Kai-shek
regime  will  wither  on  the  vine.   But  whether  a  fresh   revolu-
tionary  regime  is  capable  of  that  kind  of  patience  remains  to
be  seen.   The  difficulty  is that  Moscow  is  a  "satisfied"  revolu-
tionary  power  while  China  is still  too unsure of  itself  not  to  be
greatly  concerned  with  "face."    Perhaps  this  is  why  Senator
George  is  so  insistent  that  Dulles  meet  with  Chou  En-lai.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August1,1955
Why  the  House  Un-Americans  Have  Scheduled  Hearings  in  The  Entertainment   Industry
The  First  Rank-and-File Trade  Union  Revolt  Against  the  Witch  Hunt
For  the  first  time  in  the  postwar  period  there  has  been  a
rank-and-file  trade  union  revolt  against  the  witch  hunt,  and
for  the  first  time  a  trade  union  leadership  has  joined  hands
with  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  in  an  ef-
fort  to  crush  the  rebels.  The union  is  the  American  Federa-
tion  of  Television  and  Radio  Artists  (AFTRA).   When  the
House  Committee  goes  to  New  York  on  August  15 for  hear-
ings  in  the  entertainment   industry,  its  objective  will  be  to
halt  the  increasingly  successful  defiance  of  the  blacklist  not
only  in  the  theatre  but  on  the  radio  and  TV.
The  coming  battle  with  the   House  committee   will  be  a
major  engagement  in  the  fight  to  restore  freedom  in  America
for  artists  and  intellectuals  of  all  kinds.   Much  will  depend
again  on  tho  rank-and-file of  AFTRA  and  its  reaction  to  a
sudden  referendum  being  staged  by  the  union's   leadership.
The National  Board on July 21 sent  out a proposed new "rule"
of  membership  which  would  make  possible  the  expulsion  of
any  member who "fails  or  refuses  to  answer"  when  asked  by
a  Congressional  committee whether  he "is  or  ever  has  been  a
member  of  the  Communist Party."
The  union  leadership  would  have  its  members  agree  in  ad-
vance  that  any  effort  to  plead  fundamental  rights,  whether
under  the  First, Fifth  or  Sixth  amendments,  might  cost  them
Look  Who's  Defending
The  Right  to Earn  A  Living
"I  don't  know  why  he  should  be  denied a  livelihood."
—McCarthy  defending   Harold E.  Talbott.
their  livelihood.  While  the  Newspaper  Guild is  preparing   to
fight   discharge   of  newspapermen  for   pleading   the    Fifth,
AFTRA  asks its  members in  this  referendum to  give  up  their
rights  in  advance, irrespective  of the  facts,  the  circumstances
or the  legality  of any future  Congressional committee hearing.
An  Honest  Buck  on  Holy  War
Back  of  this  referendum  is  the  effort  to  strike  back  at  the
rank-and-file  for  the  overwhelming defeat of the  leadership  on
the  issue  of  AWARE,  Inc.  AWARE,  Inc.,  is  another  of  the
Liz  Billing  "Red  Network" type  of  organizations  which  sells
a  special  service  to  subscribers  "exposing"  Communist  front
linkages  and  associations.   AWARE, Inc.,  has  a   directorship
which interlocks* with that  of AFTRA  and  with  private  "con-
sultants" who sell dossiers  and advise actors on how they  may
"clear"  themselves.   This   type  of  business   represents    the
adaptation   of  free  enterprise  methods  to  ideological  inquisi-
tion,  combining  the  spiritual  gratification  of  holy  war  with
the  making  of  an  honest  buck.
The  striking  thing  about  the  AFTRA  rank-and-file  revolt
is  that  these  were  the  same  union members  who last  Decem-
* Just  as  we  go  to  press  there  comes  news  that  Vincent  Hayworth.
TV  and  rnclio  actor,  one  of  these  "interlocking  directors,"  a  member
of   the   board  of  AWAKE,  Inc.,  has   resigned  from  the  national   and
New-   York   boards  of  AFTKA  ufter   being  defeated  for   reelection  aa
first  national  vice  president  of  AFTRA  at  its   annual  convention   in
Souttli}  last  month.
Self-Appointed  Executioner  Explains
"Mr.  [Godfrey P.]  Schmidt  [associate professor of con-
stitutional  law  at  Fordham  and  President  of  AWARE,
Inc.]  said  that  no perfect  means  of  identifying  Commu-
nists  was  available.  'With  the  best  of  goodwill  we're
going to make mistakes,' he said. 'But we cannot let  fear
of  making  mistakes  freeze  us  into  a  timid  inactivity.'
He  noted  that  .  .  .  the  courts may  convict or  even elec-
trocute  the  wrong  man."
—Interview  with Jack  Gould, N.Y.  Times,  June 26
We'd  like  to  untangle  this  analogy  just  a  little   bit.
(1)  Courts are  not set up by private groups  on their own
initiative,  nor  (2)  are  they run  by people who draw  fees
on   the   side   as   "consultants"  for   naming   others   as
"criminals" nor  (3)  do they  convict  without  trial  under
strict  rules  of proof,  nor  (4)  do they  electrocute  people
on  suspicion  and  then  publish  a  posthumous  correction
when  it  turn  out  (oops!)  that  they  threw  the  switch on
the  wrong  man.   What  kind  of  constitutional   law  does
Professor  Schmidt  teach  at  Fordham—the  kind   Spain
had  during  the  Inquisition?
ber  overwhelmingly reelected  a  right-of-center   slate  of  union
officers.    An  AWARE  bulletin   on  the   defeated    opposition,
vividly  illustrating the  techniques  of  the  blacklist  which  have
kept  some  450 actors  from  one  show  or  another  in  the  past
five years,  led to  a  series  of increasingly  larger private  meet-
ings  of  protest.**   These  culminated in  a  resolution  condemn-
ing  AWARE for  using  "the  now familiar  smear  methods  of
. . . innuendo from  alleged  'public  records." "  When this  reso-
lution  was approved at  a tumultuous  AFTRA meeting  in May
by  a  vote  of  197 to  149,  the  union leadership  called  a  refer-
endum  only  to  be  defeated  again—this  time  by  982 votes  to
514,  or  almost  two  to  one.  The  Association  of  Catholic Trade
Unions  at  its  tenth  national  convention a  few days  later  also
condemned AWARE.
The  unexpected  revolt  was  set  off by  the  AWARE  bulletin
"No.   12."   This  said  the  fact  that  there  had  been  an  inde-
pendent slate in the  election with  "Red  Channel" type  linkages
showed  the  need  for   "a  full-fledged   official   investigation   of
the  entertainment  industry  in  New York."   Chairman  Walter
of  the  House Committee, surprisingly  liberal  last  year,  seems
to  be  suffering  badly from  the  heat  this  year.   He announced
such  an investigation  the  week after  the  AWARE referendum
results  were  made  public.   Some  two  dozen  subpoenas  have
been  served.  The  National  Board  of AFTRA  followed this  up
within  a few days by launching a new referendum. The  ballots
must  be  in  August  8, just  a  week  before  the  hearings   open.
Its  defeat  would be a Bronx cheer for  the  Congressional  witch
hunters  on  the  eve  of  their  arrival  in  New  York.
*• Vincent  Hartnett,  a  director  of  AWARE,  one  of  the  authors  of
Red  channels   and  a  "consultant"   not  only  planted  a  microphone  on
the  big  February  22 meeting  at  the  Blue  Ribbon  restaurant   but  could
not  resist,  "showing  off"  to  Juck  Gould  of   the  New   York   Times   by
playing   the  tape  recording  to  him  during  an  interview  on  June  20
(See  N.  Y.  Times  theatre  section  June   26).
Distinguished  Professional  Man  (Doctor  of  Blacklisting?)  Replies  to  Slur
"Mr.  [Vincent W.]  Hartnett  [one  of  the  authors of  'Red
Channels'  and  a  director  of  AWARE,  Inc.]  said he  was pro-
fessionally  engaged in  providing  advertising agencies, spon-
sors  and occasionally  a  network  with  information  regarding
a  performer's  background,  including the  artist's  Communist-
front  connections or  lack  of  it.   Mr. Hartnett  said he wished
to  deny  rumors  that  he  charged  $7.50  a  head  for  making a
report  on  an  actor.  For  a  first  report  on  an  actor, he  said,
his  fee  is  $5. ...    For an extensive  report, Mr. Hartnett  said,
his  fee  is  $20."
—Jack  Gould, New  York  Times, June  28
"Mr.  Gould  wrote  that  'a  commercial  cloud  was  cast  over
the   anti-communism   of   AWARE  by   the   confirmation   by
Vincent  Hartnett, a  director  of  the organization, that he  was
professionally  engaged in reviewing the political background
of  artists  at  the  rate  of  $5  a  head.'  This  argument has  as
much  merit  as  the  argument  that a  commercial cloud is  cast
over  the American  Medical Association because  one  of  its  di-
rectors   happens  also   to   be  engaged   in   the   practice  of
medicine."
—Hartnett's  letter  of  protest. New  York  Times, July  14
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, August 1,1955
Latest Development  in  the  "20  Years  of Treason" Taylor  Case
Four  times,  in  1947,  1952,  1953  and   1954,  William  Henry
Taylor,  one-time associate  of  the  late  Harry  D.  White  in  the
U. S. Treasury,  denied  to grand  juries  that  he had  ever given
information  to  Elizabeth  Bentley  or  engaged  in  espionage.
No  indictments ever  were  returned,  but  last  week  a  loyalty
board  found  him  guilty  of  the  Bentley  charges  and  recom-
mended  his  dismissal  from  the  International  Monetary Fund.
The  verdict  came  after  months  of  secret  one-sided  hearings
in  which  the  Board  repeatedly  evaded  requests  that  it  sub-
poena  Bentley  for  questioning by  Taylor's  counsel, ex-New
Deal  Congressman Byron  N.  Scott.   The  accused not  only  had
no  chance  to  confront his  accusers  but  was  not  even  allowed
to  examine the  transcript  of the  testimony given against  him.
The board decision seemed strikingly unfair when compared
with  Taylor's  testimony.  Sample:  the  board  declared,  "Eva-
sion  by Taylor was particularly apparent  when the  Board  at-
temped  to  determine  whether  or  not  he furnished information
to  unauthorized persons."   But  here  is  how Taylor  "evaded":
"Q.  Well,  do  you  deny  you  ever  gave   Miss  Bentley   any
papers?
"A.  I  affirmatively  deny  it.
"Q.  Or  that  you  gave  anyone  else  papers  to  transmit   to
Miss  Bentley?
"A.  I  deny  it.
"Q.  Did Harry  White  ever  give you  papers  for  delivery  to
anybody  who  was  not  fully   authorized  to  receive  them  by
virtue  of  the  business  you  knew  they  were  engaged  in?
"A.  No, sir,  Harry  White  never  gave  me any  papers  to  be
delivered   to   anybody  other   than   in   a   strictly    business
manner."
Taylor's   counsel  will  challenge  the  board  to  submit  this
testimony,  given  under  oath,  to  a  grand  jury.   If  this  fails,
he  will  appeal  to  the  courts.   The  whole  "twenty   years  of
treason"  myth  is  at  stake  in  this  historic  case.
Lighter  Note —  In  the  Good  Old  Days  of Dean  Acheson
In  the  meantime  those  "twenty  years  of  treason"  are  be-
ginning  to  appear  in  mellower light  in  other  quarters.  Con-
stantine  Brown,  the  diplomatic  correspondent  of  the  Wash-
ington  Star,  who never  said  a  good  word in  the  past  for  the
"old   Acheson  State  Department"  suddenly   complained  last
Tuesday  that  "stringent   regulations  established  by  former
Secretary  of  State  Dean  Acheson  regarding  the  issuance of
passports   to  individuals about  whom  the  State  Department
has  information of belonging to  the  Red conspiracy are  baing
bypassed."   The  place  is full  of  Republican  cells working ever
so  slyly:  they  have  not  abrogated  the  Acheson  regulations,
Brown  reports,  "lest  there  be too much  fuss  in  Congress"  but
discretionary  powers  are  being  used  to  give  passports  and
visas  to  "established  subversives."    He  concludes sourly   (al-
most  as  if  Tovarisch  Truman  were  still  in  the  White House
instead  of  safely  exiled  to  a  kolkhoz  in  Independence,  Mis-
souri)  that  "the  administration"  thinks  this  "might  serve  its
high  purposes  of  creating  an  atmosphere of  confidence  among
the  Kremlin  plotters."   We  recommend  this  as   a  model  of
objective   and   judicious  reporting  to   our  better   schools  of
journalism,   and  expect   any   day  now  to  see  Brown's  good
friend,  McCarthy, rise  in the  Senate  and  denounce those  card-
carrying  Republicans who  are  undermining the  foundations
laid  by that  great  American patriot,  Dean  Acheson.  We  are
prepared  to  help  by  testifying  that  early  in  1948  we  saw  a
man   who  looked  strangely   like   Scott   McLeod   in   a  closed
G.O.P.  meeting  held  underground  in  a  Chase  Bank  vault.
So  disguised  are  these  passport   plotters   that  their  own
beneficiaries  treat  them  with  disdain.   Thus  when  the  State
Department,  in  the  latest  of  its  reversals,   announced  that
William  Clark  could  have an  unrestricted  passport  for  travel
to  Germany, Judge  Clark  only  snarled  and  told  the  press  he
was  glad  the  State  Department  had  "finally  come  to  realize
that freedom  of movement cannot  be conditioned on, in  Jeffer-
son's  famous  phrase,  'coercion  of  opinion'  .  .  .  Americans
travelling  abroad  do  not  have  to  carry   State  Department
gags in their  mouths."  The Department earlier  had told Clark
he  could  have  a  passport  if  he promised not  to  criticize  U.  S.
policy  while  he  was  in  the   Reich,  but  that—it  would  now
seem  from  Brown's  warnings—was  only camouflage.
At  this  juncture with  our  own Iron  Curtain  in  danger,  Re-
publicans  are  not  the  only  ones  who  will  bear  watching.   A
Congressman  A. S. J.  Carnahan, a  Democrat  from  Missouri,
declared  himself  so  impressed last  week by  the  farm  delega-
tions reciprocally visiting  Iowa  and  the  Soviet Union, that  he
introduced  a  bill   (H.R.  7575)  not  only  to  admit   temporary
visitors  from  the  U.S.S.R.  "and   certain  satellite  countries"
but  to  pay  their  "cost  of transportation  and  maintenance, not
to  exceed  $2,000" each,  for  visits  of  up  to  two  months dura-
tion.  If  this  generous  bill  passes,  the  least  the  Russians can
do  in  return  is  to  invite the  DAR  to  hold  its  next convention
in   Moscow,  with  all   expenses  paid—in  rubles  of   course.
Melvin   Barnet  Continues  to  Haunt  the  New  York  Times
On July  22  the  New  York  Times  published  an  exchange  of
letters  between  its  publisher,  Arthur  Hays  Sulzberger,  and
Patrick   Murphy  Malin  and   Osmond   K.   Fraenkel    of   the
American   Civil   Liberties   Union.    Sulzberger   denied    that
Barnet  was  discharged   for  invoking  the  Fifth  Amendment
and  insisted  the  real  reason  lay  in  Barnet's  "course  of  con-
duct  culminating  in  his  refusal   to  answer   the   committee's
questions."  Just  what  this "course of  conduct" was  remained
unspecified   but   the   A.C.L.U.   officials   hastened   to   inform
Sulzberger   that   while   they   opposed   discharges   on   Fifth
Amendment   grounds   "we  gather   from  your  reply   to   us"
that  this   was   not  the  case.    We  are  sure   that   Fraenkel
would  never   be  content   to   "gather"  satisfaction   from   so
vague—and   damaging—a  reply  in  any  ordinary   litigation.
The  "course-of-conduct-culminating-in"  formula  was  sub-
jected  to more  astringent,  if  less  tactful,  treatment  by  a  let-
ter  from  Herbert  S.  Marks which  the  Washington  Post  pub-
lished  July  23.    Marks,  once  counsel  to  David  Lilienthal  in
TVA  and  later  counsel  for  Robert  Oppenheimer  in  that  fa-
mous  security  case,  criticized  the  Post  for  its  editorial  de-
fending  the  Times.    Marks  asked  the  kind  of  questions  one
would  have  expected  from   the  ACLU.    Marks   wrote:
"You  say  he  was  lacking  in  candor  in  his  relationship  with
the  newspaper  prior  to the  Senate  hearing.  .  .  .  Lack  of  can-
dor  is  at  best  a  loose  expression.  .  .  .  What  have  the  News-
paper  Guild  and  Mr.  Barnet  to  say  about  this  construction
of  the  facts?    Did Mr. Barnet  deliberately  misrepresent  mat-
ters  to  the  Times?    Did  he  fail  to  make  disclosures   to  his
employer  that  any  reasonable   newspaperman  should  be  ex-
pected  to  make?   .  .  .  Or,  innocently  failing   to  anticipate
events,   did  he  make  the  mistake  of  neglecting   to  tell   the
Times  fully  of  complications   caused  by  incidents  in  his  re-
mote  past  which  would  not  have  been  of  interest  to  his  em-
ployer  except  for  the  immediate  pressure  of  a   congressional
investigation?   ...
"The  public  should  not  be  exhorted  to  form  an  opinion  on
what  you  characterize   as  'difficult  issues  of  ethics  and  hu-
manity'  on  the  strength   of  vague  and  unsubstantiated   alle-
gations  no matter  who makes  them.  The  important  question
for  outsiders  at  this  stage  of  the  dispute  is  not  whether  the
Times  is  right  or  the  Guild is  right.   The  important  point  is
that  the  process by  which  the  controversy   is  resolved  in  the
forum  of  public  opinion  and elsewhere  should  not  be  colored
by  prejudgment  of  the  case  without  disclosure  of  the  facts."
3.  2  A
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  1,1955
When  Ivan  Meets  John  and  John  Meets  Ivan—and  Neither  Has   Horns!
The  Kind  of Mutual  Inspection  Which  Can Alone  Assure  Peace
At  the  San  Francisco  conference the  Syrian  foreign  minis-
ter  made  a  remark  which  comes  to  mind  as  one  watches'the
Soviet  farmers  in  Iowa  and  the  U.  S. farmers  in  the  Soviet
Union.  He said  that  more  important  than  the  meeting  at  the
summit  was the  meeting  at  the  base.
When  Communist visitors  from  the  Ukraine  are  welcomed
at   Kiwanis  club  luncheons  in  Des  Moines  and   capitalistic
American  farmers   are   cheered  in  Kharkov  something  has
been  done for  peace  which is  more  powerful  than  any  pact  pr
system  of  inspection.   This  is,  indeed,  tHe kind  of  inspection
the  world  needs—the  kind  in  which  John  looks  at  Ivan  and
Ivan  looks at  John and neither  sees  the  horns  propaganda  had
led  him to  expect  and  each  says,  "Gosh,  he's  a  man,  too, just
like  me."
Nothing  is  more  deadly  for  the  war  spirit  than  the  discov-
ery  that  the  enemy,  too,  is  human.  This  is  the  most   disarm-
ing  of  all  disarmaments.    So while  we  are  glad  to  hear  that
Soviet  leaders  and  American  leaders  may  visit  each  other's
countries  soon,  we  hope there  will  be  more  exchange  of  ordi-
nary  folk.   Farmers  are  kin  the  world  over,  but  so  in  as
genuine  a  sense  are  newspapermen  and  storekeepers   (private
or  collective)  and auto  mechanics and  welders  and  miners  and
street-car  conductors.   Let  us  tear  down  the  evil  screens  on
which  Russians  have  seen  Americans  as  lynchers  and  Ameri-
cans  have  seen  Russians  as  slave-masters  and  visit  with  our
brothers.
*           *     .    *
Cheerful  Box  Score  for  Progressive  Tenants
Four  different  courts  have  now  refused  on  one  ground  or
another  to  bar  "subversives" from  public  housing.  The latest
—and  most  important  decision—was  by  the  U.  S.  Court  of
Appeals  here July  21.  A three  man bench  (Edgerton,  Bazelon
and  Washington)  refused  to  permit  the. eviction  of  John  and
Doris  Rudder  for  refusing  to  sign  a  certificate  of  non-mem-
bership  in  organizations  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.
The  Court  in  its  decision  chose  to  be  very  literal  minded
about  the  Gwinn  "loyalty"  amendment  to  the  Federal  Hous-
ing  Act.   This  says  no  dwellings  constructed   under  it  "shall
be  occupied by a  person  who  is  a  member  of  an  organization
designated  as  subversive  by  the  Attorney   General."    Judge
Edgerton  pointed out  (1)  that  of  almost  200 organizations  on
the  Attorney  General's  list  only  13 are  designated  as'  "sub-
versive"   (the   others   are   "totalitarian,"   "Communist"  or
"Fascist")  and  (2)  that  the refusal  to  sign  the  certificate  did
not  prove  that  the  Rudders actually belonged to  an  organiza-
tion  held  to  be   "subversive."
Under  this  decision, low cost  housing  tenants  cannot  be  re-
quired  to  take  loyalty  "oaths"  and  cannot  be  evicted  without
proof  that  they  presently   belong  to  an  organization   desig-
nated  as  "subversive"  by  the  Attorney  General.   Only  a  few
weeks  earlier  the  Supreme  Court  of  Wisconsin went  further.
On  June  1  in  Lawson  v.  Milwaukee  Housing  Authority   (70
NW  2d  605)  it  held  the  Gwinn  amendment  unconstitutional
as  an  encroachment  on First  Amendment freedoms.  The  Su-
perior  Court  of  Los  Angeles  last  January   19  (279  Pac.  2d
215)  also  refused  to  permit  the  eviction  of  a  tenant  who de-
clined  to  sign  a  certificate  like that  in  the  Rudder  case.   The
Illinois  Supreme  Court  threw  out  a  similar   State  housing
"loyalty"  act   (122  NE  2d  522).
*            *       .    *
Contempt   Citations  In  Dispute
For  two  weeks sponsors  of the  resolutions  to  punish  Harry
Sacher,  Joseph  Starobin  and  Harvey  Matusow for  contempt
of  the  Senate  Internal   Security   Committee  had  been  unable
to get  unanimous consent and  the  bills  had  been  "passed  over"
on  objections  from  both  sides  of  the  aisle.  Just  before  we
went  to  press,  however,  the  Starobin  citation  was  called  up
suddenly  and  approved  but   Senator   Langer   blocked  action
temporarily  when Sacher's was  called  up  next.
One factor  for  the  delay  may  have  been  the  discovery that
J.  G. Sourwine,  chief  counsel  of  the  Committee, gave  it  some
poor  advice.   He  seems  to  have  thought  that  a  witness  who
had  answered  certain  questions  elsewhere  thereby  waived  his
right  to  plead  the  Fifth  amendment on them  before the  com-
mittee.   But  only  recently  in  the   Neff    case,  the  Court  of  Ap-
peals  for  the  Third  Circuit  cited  a  long  list  of  precedents  to
show that it  was overwhelmingly  decided  "that a  person who
has  waived his  privilege  of  silence  in  one trial  or  proceeding
is  not  estopped  to  assert  it  as  to  the  same  matter  in  a  sub-
sequent  trial  or  proceeding."    (206  F  2d  149).
The  interrogations  on  which the  Sacher,  Starobin  and  Ma-
tusow  contempt  resolutions  are  based  establish  something of
a  new  low in  Congressional  inquisition.  What  business  of  a
Congressional  committee  is  it  to  know who is  marketing  Ma-
tusow's  stringless  yo-yo, who loaned  Starobin  money to  make
possible  the  publication  of  his  last  book,  "Eyewitness  in  In-
dochina,"  or  whether  Sacher  attended  a  birthday  party  for
his  client,  Alexander   Bittleman,  a  Smith  Act  defendant?
At  one point  Sacher  boldly  declined to  take  refuge  in  the
Fifth  or First  amendments  but  said that  as a  matter  of  "con-
science"  he  felt  it  "incompatible  with  the  dignity  of  the  indi-
vidual  to  make  compulsory disclosure of  his  thoughts  and  his
ideas  and  his  beliefs."   Our  hat  is  off to  him for  the  courage,
dignity  and quick wit with  which he confronted his  inquisitors.
Pres.i  Time  Flash—Watch   Next  Week's  Issue  for  the  Victory  in  the  Lamont,  Shadowitz,   Vnger  Contempt   Cases
I. F. Stone's
I'lcase  renew
Street       ..: .
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)  Name ..
Street
City
* $1 extra  for
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Zone    ..     State
for  $2 (6 mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)   additional:
Zone          State
Canada.                                               8/1/55
L  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  DC.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED