I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955oct10.pdf

============================================================

H. H. Wilson  Writes on the  Burgess-Maclean  White  Paper,  See  Page  2.
L R  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   No. 37OCTOBER  10,  1965
101
      WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16  CENTS
"My  Misfortune  Is  That  I  Had  Written  Books"
Washington,  Oct. 5
Harvey  O'Connor  made  history  here  today.    He  was  the
first  witness  in  all  these  years  of  the  witch  hunt  to  take  the
stand  in  his  own  behalf  on  a  trial  for  contempt.  When  the
Assistant  U.  S. Attorney,  William  Hitz,  Jr.,  moved  in  for  the
kill and  asked  him whether  he had  ever been a member  of  the
Communist  party,  O'Connor   (see  adjoining  box)   turned  to
Federal  Judge  Joseph  C.  McGarraghy  and  offered  to  answer
the   question   if  directed   by  the  Court.    But  the  Judge,  to
everyone's  surprise, declined  to do so and  disallowed  the  ques-
tion  when  Hitz   later   tried   to  ask  it   in  a   different   form.
O'Connor,  in  the  first  trial  of  a  First  Amendment  contempt
case  since  the  Hollywood  Ten  (whom  Hitz  also  prosecuted),
thus  found  himself  the  beneficiary  of  a  judicial  ruling  which
enabled  him  to  demonstrate  readiness  to  answer  the   question
without  risking  the  hazards  of  a  perjury  prosecution.
Though   McCarthy  himself   appeared   as  a  witness  in  the
case,  it was O'Connor  who stole the  show.  The  Senator  looked
older  and   fatter,  his  wife  younger   and   svelte,  when  they
turned  up  in  the  courtroom  yesterday.   Two  years  ago  Mc-
Carthy's  appearance  as  witness  in  a  Federal  court  would  have
drawn  a  moderate  size  mob.    But  there  were  only  about  a
dozen  spectators  on  hand  when  the  trial  opened   yesterday.
Except  for  one  stout  bailiff,  who  looked  as  pleased  with  Joe
as  if  he  were  Di  Maggio,   the  audience  seemed  only  mildly
interested  when  McCarthy  was  sworn  in.
The  Infamy  Rebounded
The  Senator  shows  the  effects  of  his  fall  from  glory.    His
head  has  grown,  his  figure  thickened,  as  if  he  had  passed  his
change  of  life,  and  stood  on  the  threshold   of  old  age.    He
looks  with  his  too  eager  smile  like  a  man  who  feels  that  he
has  become disreputable,  secretly  agrees  with the  verdict  passed
upon  him,  but wishes people would  like  him  anyway.  He  who
made so many people infamous and  drove them  out  of  respect-
able  society  now  stoops  slightly,  as  if  under  the  weight  of  a
similar  fate.   On  the  witness  stand,  prompting  the  prosecutor
and  offering  information which had  not  been  asked, he  seemed
to  forget  that  he  was a  witness  in  a  courtroom,  and  no  longer
an    all    powerful   committee   chairman.    But    he    showed
undiminished  agility  in  crookedly  inserting  slander  wherever
given  the  least  opening  and  had  several  times  to  be  stopped,
benevolently  but  firmly,  by  the  Judge.   He  nevertheless man-
aged  in  his  once  familiar  style  to  call  O'Connor  "a  long  time
paid  functionary of  the  Communist  Party."   The  "paid"  was a
touch  of  the  old  genius.
McCarthy's  appearance  here  in  the  O'Connor  case  was  an
effort  by  his  testimony to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  what  hap-
pened  in  New  York.  There  Federal  Judge  Edward  Weinfeld
threw  out  the  First  Amendment  contempt indictments  of  Cor-
The  Judge  Declined  to  Press  the  $64  Question
Q.  [By  the  Prosecutor,  Wm. Hitz,  Jr.]   Mr. [Harvey]
O'Connor, you are now in a Court of  law.  You are a wit-
ness.    You  are  a  witness  in  your  own  behalf.    Your
credibility  is  at  stake.    It  is  a  proper  question  for me
to  ask  you  have  you  ever  been  a  member of  the  Com-
munist  Party.    Do  you  care  to  answer?
A. I do not think it  is a proper question for yon to  ask.
Q.  I  submit it  goes  to  his  credibility.
THE  COURT:  Do  you  want  to  be  heard  on  it?
MR.   [Leonard  B.]   BOUDIN  [of   defense  counsel]:
I  am going  to  leave  this  to  the  witness.   If  the  witness
has  anything  to  say  to  Your  Honor  on  the  subject  he
can  say  it.   I  will  not  raise  a  formal objection.   I  don't
happen  to  think  it  is  material  or  relevant,  but  I  think
the  purpose is  so  clearly  improper I  must  refrain  from
objecting.
THE  WITNESS:  Your  Honor,  I  was  asked  a  similar
question  before  a  Congressional   committee  and  as  a
matter  of  principle I  declined  to  answer.  I  consider  the
question quite as improper here  as  anywhere else. When
public   officials   presume   to  inquire  into   the   political
opinions of  the citizens,  freedom  is  dead in  this country.
And  for  that  reason  I  would  take  the  same  stand  on
principle  here  as  I  did  before  the  Congressional  com-
mittee.  However, if  the  Court feels  I  must  answer  that
question  under  duress  to  my  public  humiliation  as  a
citizen  and  voter  I  will  answer  it.
MR.  HITZ:  Your  Honor,  might  I  ask  the  witness  a
question  or  two  before  we  proceed  further  with  that
last  question?
Q.  Are  you  refusing  now  to  answer  the  question  on
the  basis  of   the  First   Amendment  or  Fifth  Amend-
ment—self-incrimination  clause?
A.  I  believe  I  just  indicated  I  was  not  refusing  to
answer  the  question.    I  was  deferring  to  the  opinion
of  the  Court.
THE  COURT:  It  'is  my  understanding you  are  not
refusing   to   answer  on  either   grounds   if   the   Court
direct  you to  answer?
THE  WITNESS:  Correct.
THE  COURT: Mr. Hitz,  what is  the  relevancy  of  the
question?
MR.   HITZ:  I  think  it  goes  to  his  credibility  as  a
witness  in  his  own behalf.
THE   COURT:  I  don't  think   so.   I  won't  force  an
answer.
liss  Lament,   Albert   Shadowitz  and  Abraham  linger   before
trial.    Judge  Weinfeld  ruled  that  the  government  had  failed
to  show  any  lawful   delegation   of  authority  to  McCarthy's
"Permanent  Investigating  Subcommittee"  by  the  parent  body,
the   Senate   Government   Operations   Committee.   McCarthy
turned  up  with a  two page  document headed  "Minutes  of  the
Committee  on  Government Operations."   This  purported  to
relate  what  happened  on  February  26,  1948,   but  had  been
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
.:  s  .1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 10,1SSS
Was It  Class  Solidarity  Which  Made  British  Intelligence Fumble?
The  Burgess-Maclean White  Paper  and  England's  Security  System
By  H.  H.  Wilson
Prof.   Wilson   of  Princeton   is   co-author   with   Harvey
Glickman  'of   The   Problem  of  Internal   Security   in   Great  •
Britain  1948-1953   (Doubleday  Short  Studies  in   Political
Science,  1954,  now published  by  Random House,  N.Y.,  95c),
a   study  based   on  four  visits  to  Great   Britain   between
1948  and   1963.
Evaluation  of  the  White  Paper  has  to  be guided  by aware-
ness  that  published  facts  may  be  deceptive  and  valid  detail
scanty in  accounts  of counter-intelligence.   In  the  words  of  the
Paper,  "Counter-espionage   . . .  depends  for its  success  upon
the  maximum  secrecy  of  its  methods.   Nor  is  it  desirable   at
any  'moment  to  let  the  other  side  know  how  much  has  been
discovered   or  guess  at  what  means  have  been .used  to   dis-
cover  it."   Certainly  no one can read the  Foreign  Office  report
without  sensing  that  only  the  smallest  fragment   of  the   ice-
berg  has  been   revealed.
It  strains  credulity   to  be  asked  to  take  at  face  value  an
explanation  that  security  officials  repeatedly  bungled,  or  were
too  devoted  to  the  niceties  of  British  law.    It  may  be  true,
but  the  British  did  not  acquire  their  renown  as  the  world's
most  subtle  and  effective  intelligence  operators by the  methods
described  in  this  case.   A  service  capable  of  penetrating  the
German  general  staff  in  World War  II  should have  been able
to   keep  track   of   Burgess   and   Maclean,  as   well  as   Mrs.
Maclean  and  her  children.   Stupidity  is  perhaps  involved  but
caution   dictates  reservation.   Assuming  that  bungling  was
Whole  Family  Tainted
"Talk  of  Milton  Eisenuhower,  Ike's  brother,  for  the
Republican  nomination  bumps  into  the  fact  that  Milton
during  the  height  of  New  Deal  days  worked  for  Henry
Wallace ..."         _[/.   S. News & World  Report, Oct. 7.
Also  Dwight  Eisenhower,  Milton's  brother, was  given
an   important   job   during   the   war   by   Franklin   D.
•Roosevelt.    There's   hardly  an   Eisenhower   who's  not
a  security  risk.
involved  the  most  plausible  explanation  is that  M. I. 5 reports
were  discounted  by  the  Foreign   Office  because  Maclean  and
Burgess came from  the  proper  families  and  schools.
'    There  are  fundamental differences  between  the  British  and
American  conceptions.  Compared  to  American  practice  the
British  operate  on  a  far  more  restricted   basis.   They  do not
assume  that  absolute  security  is  possible.    For  this  reason
they  practice   a  selective  coverage  of  truly  sensitive   areas.
They   do  not   consider  that  youthful  radicalism   creates   a
permanent  security  risk,  nor  do  they  think  men  incapable
of  changing  their  political convictions.
Thus   Geoffrey   Hoare,  author   of   The   Missing  Macleans,
writing  in the  News  Chronicle, September  24, rejects  Petrov's
claim  that  Maclean and  Burgess  became  Soviet  agents while
at  Cambridge.  "It  is  true  that  both  were  then  ardent  Com-
munists.     But   so  were  thousands  of   other   liberal-minded
young  men  who  turned  to  Communism  in  the  dark  days  of
the  mid-thirties  simply  because  they  considered  it  the  best
way  of   fighting   Fascism."
The  British  understand  that  the  maintenance  of  security
is  a  continuing  problem  so  long  as  there  are  nation-states,
since   all   countries  conduct  intelligence  operations.     In   a
democratic  society  counter-intelligence  must  be  conducted so
as  not  paralyze  freedoms  basic  to  the  political  process.   With
the   introduction  of  a  security   program   in   1948,  the   pro-
cedures   followed   were  confidential   and  secret.    There   has
been  "no  trial  by  accusation,"  no  newspaper   prejudgment,
and  no  political  capital  to  be  made by  politicians.
This  conception led  the  London  Observer  to  rebuke  other
newspapers  which  seem  willing  to  forego  legal  safeguards.
"The  fact  that  Maclean was  allowed  to  get  out  of the  country
Not  a  Form of  Entertainment
"The  public  has  every  right  to  know  that  an  inquiry
by  impartial  and  implacable  men  is  being  made.    Par-
liament  should,  we believe,  press for  such a commission.
But  its  findings  should remain secret;  and  if  its  mem-
bers  are  satisfied,  that  should  be  enough.   Otherwise
security  must  become  increasingly   breached.    To  in-
crease  parliamentary  or  ministerial watchfulness of  our
officials  and  public  understanding of  enemy  methods,  is
a  duty:  to  try  to  break  into  our  own  official  secrets   is
a  highly  irresponsible  form  of entertainment."
—The   Observer,  London,  Sept.   25,  1955,
shocks  the  Manchester  Guardian:  but  would  that  paper  ap-
prove  legislation  empowering a  secret  police to  detain  people
without  clear  evidence  of  guilt"    This  belief   in  preserving,
a  climate of freedom  does not  imply that the  British  are  soft-
headed.   The  reverse   is  true.    They  compile  dossiers   and
engage   in  surveillance  without   disrupting   the   basic   safe-
guards  for  the fundamental values  on which  the  society rests.
Hardly  two  years  ago  the  "J.  Edgar  Hoover  of  England,"
Sir  Percy  Sillitoe,  then  head  of  the  British  security   police,
expressed  this  philosophy in  a  form  which  has" unfortunately
proven  prophetic  but  is  nonethless  valid.   "The  head  of  the
Security  Service,"  he  wrote  in  the  Sunday  Times  of  London,
Nov.   22,   1953,   "is—fortunately,   in   my   opinion—not  em-
powered  to  take  the  law  into  his  own hands  and  put  people
under  arrest  because he  suspects  them  of  being  spies,  or  for
any  other  reason.   We  must  all  bear  in  mind  if  we  cry  out
against  the   people  who  have  abused  their  liberty   in  this
country,  that  had  we  deprived  them  of  that  liberty   without
legal  evidence against  them  we should have been taking  steps
which  would, inevitably, have  threatened  the  liberty  of  every
one  of  us  in  Britain.    We  should  in  fact  have  been  standing
at  the  top  of the  slipper  slope which  leads  to  the  Police  State
—in  which  the  ordinary  citizen  goes in  constant  helpless  fear
of  a  Secret  Police  against  whose  decrees  he  has  no  redress.
Surely  none  of  us  wants  that.  I  myself,  at  any  rate, would
rather  see  two  or  three  traitors  slip  through  the   net  of
the   Security   Service  than   be  a  party   to   the   taking  of
measures  which  could  result  in  such  a  regime."
The  real  question on  which  attention  in.Britain  will  focus
when  Commons  reconvenes is  not  this  philosophy of  law  and
risk  but  whether  British  Intelligence  and  the  Foreign    Office
were  culpable  in'  not  acting  sooner  against   two   diplomats
whose  bizarre  escapades,  involving  excessive  drinking,  loose
talk  and  homosexuality, had  become  notorious  in  their  own
social  circle.    Was  it   loose  security  or  the   old  school   tie
which  saved  them?
STATEMENT  REQUIRED  BY  THE   ACT  OF  AUGUST  24,  1912,  AS
AMENDED  BY   THE   ACTS  OF   MARCH  3,  1933,  AND   JULY  2,
194G  (Title  39,  United  States  Code,  Section  233), SHOWING   THE
OWNERSHIP.   MANAGEMENT   AND   CIRCULATION  OF
I.   P.   STONE'S  WEEKLY   published   Weekly   except   the   last   two
weeks  in  August  and  December  at  Washington,  D.  C.  1.   The  names
and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing  editor,  and  business
managers  are:  Publisher,  Editor,  Managing Editor,  Business  Man-
ager,  I.  F.  Stone,  5B18 Nebraska  Avenue,  Washington,  D.  C.  2.    The
owner  is:  I,  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Inc., 301 E.  Capitol  Street,  Washing-
ton,  D.  C..  I.  F.  Stone,  Esther  M,  Stone,  Celia  M.  Gilbert,  Jeremy  J.
Stone,  C.  David  Stone,  5618 Nebraska  Ave., Washington,  D.  C.  3.   The
known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning
or  holding  1 percent  or  more  of  total amount  of  bonds,  mortgages, or
other  securities are:  (If  there  are  none,  so  state.)  None.  4. Paragraphs
2  and  3 Include,  in  cases where  the  stockholder  or  security  holder  ap-
pears   upon   the   books   of  the   company   as  trustee  or   in   any  other
fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation  for  whom
such  trustee  is  acting;  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs
show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and   belief   as  to  the circumstances
and  conditions  under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders who  do
not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustees, hold  stock  and
securities  in  a  capacity  other  than  that  of  a  bona  fide  owner.   5.  The
average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of this  publication  sold  or  dis-
tributed,  through  the  mails  or  otherwise,  to  paid  subscribers during
the  12 months  preceding  the  date  shown  was  10,093.  (s)  I.  F.  Stone,
publisher.    Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before  me  this  5th  day  of  Octo-
ber,  1955.  (s)  Mary  G. Murr.  [Seal]  (My commission  expires  12/14/55.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/„ F. Stone't  Weekly,  October 10,1965
Passing  Scene:  The  AEC's  Strauss  Grows  Humble  and  Russia  Cleans  Up  Those  Labor  Camps
The  Guild  Reconsiders  on  the  5th;  Dulles  Picks  A  Literary  Man
The  Newspaper  Guild  may  go  to  bat  on  the  Fifth   amend-
ment  after   all.   The  New  York  Times  unit  voted  last  week
49  to  24  in  favor  of  taking  to  arbitration  the  discharge  by
that paper of  Melvin L. Barnet  for  invoking the  Fifth  amend-
ment.   Unfortunately  the  total  vote  fell  short  of  the  quorum
required   (one-tenth  of  the  unit's  1,385  members).  The Daily
News  unit  voted  62  to  41  against  arbitrating   the  discharge
by that paper  on the  same  grounds of  David A. Gordon.  Both
polls  were  merely  advisory  and  Thomas J.  Murphy, executive
vice  president  of  the  New  York  Guild, said  he  would  recom-
mend  arbitration.   Charles  Grutzner,  one  of  the  Times  men
who  "named  some  names"  at  the  same  Eastland  committee
hearings  last  summer  in  which  Barnet  and  Gordon  appeared,
strongly  supported  Barnet  at  the  Guild  unit  meeting.   The
New   York  Post  helped  with  a  strong  editorial  supporting
Barnet  October  2, day  before  the  unit meeting.   In  the  mean-
time,  to  its  embarrassment,  the  discharge  of  Barnet  by  the
Times  is  cited  as  a  precedent  by  the  City  of  New York  in  a
brief  filed  with  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  the  Harry  Slo-
chower  case.   The  latter,  a  Brooklyn  College  teacher,   was
discharged  by the  city  for  taking  a  position  like  Barnet's be-
fore  the  Eastland  committee.  Slochower,  too,  denied that  he
was a  Communist now but  took the  Fifth  as  to  1940 and   1941.
*      *     *
"Rebirth  of  Humility"
Chairman  Lewis  L.  Strauss  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic  Energy
Commission  may  not  be  the  most  sensitive  of  men  but   the
recent   Geneva  conference  on  the   peaceful   uses  of   atomic
energy  seems  to  have had  quite  an  impact  on him.   He told  a
joint meeting of the  Atomic Industrial  Forum  and  the  Amer-
ican   Nuclear   Society  in  Washington  that   one  of  the   by-
products  of the  Geneva gathering  was  "a  rebirth  of humility"
on  our  part.    He  praised  the  Russian  delegation  "of  whom
some  79 were  technicians  ...    as  generally  competent and, in
"Subversion"  Defined  At  Last
'Throughout  the  Delta  country   [of  Mississippi]  the
Citizens   Councils  maintain   a   vigilant   watch  against
subversion.   Down  here  subversion equals  integration.
'"Our  intention  is   to  see   that   the  new generation
grows  up  with  the  same ideas  we  have,'  said  Herman
Moore,   Indianola  banker   and   local   Citizens   Council
chief.   'All  we  want  is  to  maintain  the  status  quo.
1
"
—Homer  Bigart, from  Jackson,  Miss., Sept. US.
some  instances  . . . exceptional."   He said  at  least  one of the
Russian  papers  on peaceful  uses  of the  atom  "bore  the  date of
1943,  indicating  that  they  had  been  seriously  concerned  with
the  subject for  a longer time than  many of us realize." Strauss
warned  against  thinking  of  the  Russians "as  not  quite  equal
to  us  in  the  technological  sense."   He  also  noted  "the  belief
that  science  cannot thrive  under conditions designed solely  to
protect  the  security  of  data  already  in  hand  and  deemed  im-
portant  to  national   defense  would  seem  to  be  brought  into
question  by  the  degree  of  Soviet  progress"  since  the  Soviet
security  system  is far  more comprehensive  and  rigid  than  our
own.   More hopeful  than  this  "paradox,"  as  Strauss  termed  it,
was  his  observation  that  reestablishment   of  communication
between  atomic  scientists  at  Geneva  would  result  in  "much
cross-fertilization   of  ideas."
*      *      *
Russian   Labor  Camp  Reforms
Russian  labor  camps  have  been  the  subject   of  much  dis-
torted  and  exaggerated  propaganda,  but  with  a  substratum
of  truth  ample enough  to  show a  widespread inhumanity and
slovenly  wastage  of  human  resources.   The  September  18  is-
sue  of  the  London Observer which has  just  arrived  here  car-
ries  a  long  and  detailed   account,  "Russia   Reforms  Labor
Camps,"  of which very little has  seeped through  to  the  Amer-
ican  press.   The  story  came  from  Milan  and  reported  data
J.  Edgar  Hoover  Rebuked
"A  great   many  patriotic,  intelligent   and  respected
Americans  have  deplored   the   use   of   anonymous  in-
formers  in the  Federal security program.  This is  a con-
spicuous  fact  which  the  director  of  the  Federal Bureau
of  Investigation,  Mr.  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  ignored  in  his
speech  on  Monday.   He  indulged in  a  gross  distortion
when  he  said  that  criticism  of  what  he  prefers  to  call
'confidential  informants' is  'part  and  parcel  of  Commu-
nist  strategy,'  that  it  has  'for  the  most  part  .  .  .  been
devised  by  Communist  lawyers' and that  it  is  spread by
'pseudo   liberals'  enlisted  by   Communists   'to  convey
propaganda  designed  to  discredit  truth.'   This  kind  of
argument  by  epithet  and  invective  is  peculiarly  unbe-
coming  to  a  law  enforcement officer   and  puts  a  stain
on  Mr.  Hoover's otherwise exemplary  record  of  public
service.    It   is   time   he   learned  that  critics   are   not
necessarily  Communists. .  .  .''—Washington  Post, Oct. S.
made public at  the  Congress  for  Cultural  Freedom  held there
last month.   On the  basis of interviews  with  recently  released
Austrian  prisoners,  a  German  author  of  a  book  on the  Vor-
kuta  camps said  reforms  began  in the  spring  of  1954 as  a  re-
sult  of  large-scale  and  often  bloody strikes.   The  older  penal
system  is  being  conveniently  blamed,  like  so  much  else,  on
Beria.  The  Ministry  of Justice has  had  "commissions of  revi-
sion" at  work in the camp areas for  more than  a  year, reduc-
ing  many individual sentences.   Some 60 percent  of  Vorkuta's
500,000  prisoners  had  been released  by the  time the  Austrians
left  in June.   Working conditions have been improved. Appar-
ently  the  job  of  opening  up  and  exploiting  the  coal,  mineral
and  wood  resources  of  the  Far  North  and  Far  East  is  being
shifted  "from  forced  labor  in camps  to  'free'  labor,  consisting
partly  of  released  prisoners  in  forced  residence  and  partly  of
new  deportees,   with  an  admixture  of  genuine   volunteers."
*     *     *
It's  Not  Only  the  Bourbons
Labor  and  many  elements  on  the  Left,   too,  never  learn.
While  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union very  properly  has
gone to  the  defense of that  miserable  scandal  sheet,   Confiden-
tial,  against   postal   censorship,  the  Textile  Workers  Union
September  29 appealed  to  the  Postmaster  General  to  prevent
use  of  the  mails  by  an  anti  union  hate-sheet  in  Tennessee.
When  are  some of our  friends going  to learn  that  civil liberty
is  not  something to  be invoked  in  one's  own defense and  then
shelved  when  it  comes time  to  deal  with  one's enemies?
*     *     *
Incautious  Meditations?
As  in  the  days  of  Hawthorne  and  Stendhal,  literature  and
diplomacy   are   again   being  united.   The   newly   appointed
Deputy  Undersecretary  of  State  for  Economic  Affairs,   Her-
bert  V. Prochnow, until  now  vice president  of  the  First  Na-
tional  Bank of  Chicago, is  also—we are  charmed to  report—a
literary  man.   His  official   biography  discloses  that  he  is  "a
well-known  author."   Listed  among  his  better  known  works
are  The Public Speaker's  Treasure  Chest, The  Toast-Master's
Handbook,  1,001  Ways  to  Improve  Your  Conversation,  and
Meditations on the  Ten  Commandments and  American Finan-
cial  Institutions.  We are  trying  to find out—before  the  Sen-
ate  Internal  Security  Committee takes  up  the  trail—whether
the  "Meditations"  and  the  "Financial  Institutions"  are  two
separate  books  or  one.  If  one, then  the  title  is  "Meditations
on  the  Ten  Commandments and  American Financial  Institu-
tions."  This  has  possibilities,  but  we  doubt  whether  a  man
astute  enough to  become the  vice-president of a bank would be
so incautious  as  to juxtapose  the  Ten  Commandments and fi-
nance.  It  is  reassuring  to read  in  the  Washington  Star  that
despite  these  literary  proclivities  "friends   describe  him  as  a
middle-of-the-road    economist."
.1  5  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stow?* Weekly,  October  10,19SS
"How  About  Books  Blaming
(Continued  from  Page One)
certified only a few  days ago by a committee clerk.  It  contained
an  excei pt  which  indicated,  if  authentic,  ifa*t   die  parent  com-
mittee  had  delegated  full  power  to  its  subcommittee.
This  document  was  excluded  by  the  Judge  as  not  property
^  but the  substance  was gotten  into  the  record by
oral  testimony from McCarthy.  This exhumation  of  a commit-
tee  action  hitherto  unheard  of  was  obviously  intended  to  be
the  government's  legal  bombshell  at  die  O'Connor  trial,  but
soon  proved  a  dud.  For  under  skilful  cross-examination  by
Gerhard Van Arkd, counsel  for  O'Connor,  McCarthy admitted
that  this  particular Senate  committee  adopted  new  rules  at  die
beginning  of  each  Congress.   No  record was  produced  of  any
such  delegation  of  power  to die  subcommittee at the  beginning
of  die  83rd  Congress  in  1953, the  year  O'Connor  was sub-
poenaed  and  invoked  die  First  Amendment
Smear  by  McCarthy  Blocked
Judge   McGanaghy,   the  newest   member  of   our  Federal
bench,   a  Taft   Republican,   upheld   the   defense   when   die
government   sought  through  McCarthy  to  show  that  it  had
reasonable  grounds  to ask O'Connor  whether he was a member
of  the  Communist  "parry"  or  "conspiracy."    Both  questions
were  asked  in  1933 and  it  was  on  the  refusal  to  answer  the
second  that  contempt  was  alleged.  Defense  counsel  objected
that diis would  allow  McCarthy to put into evidence  at  second
hand  any  informer  scuttlebutt  in  his  committee  files.
When  McCarthy was on  die  stand,  "die old  Acheson  State
Department"  seemed  again  to  be  on  triaL   The  Senator  said
when  O'Connor was summoned  as a  witness  in  July of 1953,
his  subcommittee was investigating  "the  extremely vicious anti-
American propaganda"  on die shelves of  U.  S. overseas librar-
ies.   For  die  first  time,  McCarthy actually  specified  which  of
O'Connor's  books  were  on  those  shelves:  his  books  on  die
Asters,  the  Goggenheims   and  die  CIO  Oil  Workers  Union.
He  made no  *rmrAamt  about their tyniftttx,    however,  insisting
that  whether  such  books  "were  anti-American  or  not" their
purchase  for  overseas  libraries  added  to  die  prestige  of  Com-
munist  authors  and  duongh  diem  "swelled  party  coffers."
At  one  point  McCarthy and  Hirz seemed  to  be  treading  a
line designed to  avoid  any charge  of  censorship  or  ideological
Roosevelt  For  Pearl  Harbor?"
inquisition.   But  under  cross-examination by  Van  Arkel,  Mc-
Carthy  testified  he  believed  books  which  "unfairly"  portray
American  historical  figures  should  be  purged  from  overseas
library  shelves.    Van  Arkel  then  asked,  "How about  books
blaming  Roosevelt   for  Pearl  Harbor?"   McCarthy  met  that
one head on.    "I personally  think he  was responsible  for  Pearl
Harbor,"  McCarthy  reacted  angrily,  "so  I'd  hardly  exclude
those  books."
The  Realm  of  Beliefs
hi  demeanor,  appearance  and  tone,  O'Connor  presented  a
striking  contrast  to  McCarthy.  A  distinguished  looking  man,
with  graying  mustache  and  ruddy  face,  O'Connor  spoke  in
quiet  unaffected  accents,  as  if  in  man  to  man  talk  with  the
Judge.   He  said the  McCarthy committee  had shown  no  inter-
est  in  die  content  of  his  books,  that  he  had  nothing  to  do
with  their  purchase  by  overseas  libraries,  and  that  he  thought
it  the  duty of  a  citizen  to  cooperate  with  any properly  consti-
tuted  Congressional  inquiry.   But  O'Connor  said  he  felt  that
McCarthy wanted only  to  blacken his  reputation as the  Senator
had many others.    "Writers have no special  privilege,"  O'Con-
nor explained  gravely,  "but we  do have a special  responsibility
to  defend  the  First  Amendment."   He  asserted  when  cross-
examined  by  Hitz  that  he  did  not  think  any  Committee  of
Congress could validly inquire under die  First Amendment  into
political  beliefs.   He  insisted  that  when  McCarthy asked  him
whether  he  was  "a member of  the  Communist  conspiracy"  die
Senator was  using  "as an  epithet  a term too  vague"  to  be  sus-
ceptible  of  proper  answer.   "My misfortune,"  O'Connor  said,
"was  that  I  had  written  books.   If  I  hadn't  written  books,
I  wouldn't  have  been  there.  ...      I  felt  the  committee had
no  reason  to  roam in  die  realm of  beliefs."
When   O'Connor   stepped  down  from  die   stand  late  this
afternoon,  he  had  succeeded  for  a  few  hours  in  turning  his
trial  into  a  trial  of  McCarthy.  The  atmosphere  of  two  years
ago,  when  McCarthy's shadow  was still  long  and  heavy  upon
the  land,  had  been  revived.   The  Judge  hears  final  argument
tomorrow,  and  has  asked  for  trial  briefs  two  weeks  hence.
Whether  O'Connor  is  acquitted  or  convicted,  whether  he  is
ultimately  freed  or  jailed,  his  appearance  in  court  this  week
will  prove a  memorable  defense  of  fundamental  liberties.
We  Would  Appreciate Lut* of  Friend*  for  Free Sample Copiet
1. F. Stone's Weekly,
PksM  renew  Cor enter)
StrrH    ,      ......
fStr
Ml  &  Capitol,  Waafc.  3. D. C.
mj  snk  for  the  cadosed  $5:*
^
                 mtmtm
IDS-) or M (1 vr-> additional:
'
City
* $1 extra for Canada.
Z«P»         Statr
10/70/35
L  F. Stone's  Weekly
i     205
301  E. Capital  St.. S.  E.
WahfcgtM  3, D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D  C
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED