I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955may09.pdf

============================================================

Leftist  Paradox:  GM's  Wilson  Pleads  for  Peace  In  Defending   Army  Cuts,  See  Page  3
/. F,  Stone'sWeekly
VOL.  Ill,   NUMBER  1C
MAY   9,   1955
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How  Industry  May  Outflank  Opposition  to  the  Butler  Bill
And  Establish  A  Master  Blacklist   System
Warning   To  The  Labor   Movement
The  campaign  for  the  Butler  bill  has  been  reopened   here,
with  a  statement  to  the  Senate  Internal  Security  subcommittee
by  the  general  counsel  of  the  Defense Department,  Wilber  M.
Brucker,  Republican Governor  of  Michigan  in  1931-33.    The
labor  movement  is  again  united  in  opposition,   and  the   CIO,
the  AF  of  L.,  the  United  Automobile Workers,  the  I.U.E.  and
the  Rubber Workers  were all  scheduled  to  testify  against  it  as
we went to press.   The  bill  was blocked  in  the  House  last year
after  passage  in  the  Senate, and  the  chances are  that  it  will  be
blocked  again.
But  while the  labor movement has  its  eyes focussed on Capi-
tol  Hill,  a  time bomb  is ticking only a  few  blocks  away  in  the
Supreme  Court.    All  that  the  Butler  bill  would  do—and  more
—will  be accomplished  if  the  Court  either  refuses  to  review or
reviews  and  upholds  the  registration order  against  the  Com-
munist party  issued  by the  Subversive Activities Control  Board.
A  passage  in  former  Governor  Brucker's testimony  which  no
newspaper  seems  to  have  noticed shows  that  the  Defense  De-
partment  is  ready  to  bypass Congress  and  "enact"  the  equiva-
lent  of  the  Butler  bill  as  soon  as  that  registration  order   is
upheld
Here  are  the  facts,  and  we  hope  that  readers  in  the  labor
movement  will  not  shy  away  from  them  because they  seem  at
first  sight  only  to  involve  the  Communist  party.     Governor
Brucker  was  asked  by  Richard  Arens,  counsel  for  the  subcom-
mittee,  whether the  Defense Department was ready  to  put  Sec-
tion  5 of  the  Internal  Security Act into  effect.    Brucker replied
that  an  order had  been  prepared  and  was  ready for  use  as  soon
as  the  Supreme Court  had  sustained  the  pending  registration
order.   This  cryptic reference was not  developed  further  at  the
hearing,  but  the  labor  movement for  its  own  safety  had  better
examine  its  implications.
A  Crime to  Work  in  Any  "Defense   Facility"
Section  5  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  comes  into  action  as
soon  as a  Communist party registration  order  has  been  upheld
by  the  Supreme  Court.    Section  5  thereupon  makes  it  a  crime
for  a Communist  "to  engage  in any employment in any  defense
facility."    Section  5 directs  the  Secretary of  Defense  to  "desig-
nate  and  proclaim,  and  from  time  to  time  revise"  a  list  of  de-
fense  facilities.   These  are  defined   as  "any  plant,  factory  or
other  manufacturing, producing  or  service  establishment,   air-
port,  airport facility,  vessel, pier, waterfront  facility, mine,  rail-
road,   public  utility,   laboratory,   station,  or   other    establish-
ment.  . . ."   The  Secretary of Defense  need  only find that   "the
security  of  the  United  States"  requires  that  these  facilities  be
given  this  special   protection.
Like  the  Butler  bill,  this  list  would  extend  the  security  pro-
S  *
                                                                                                                  6
gram  to  all  of  American  industry.   Facilities working  on  mili-
tary  contracts  are  already protected  by security  regulations,  and
workers  cannot  be  employed  in  them  without  being  screened.
The  listing  provision  of  the  Internal  Security  Act,  like   the
Butler  bill, would  extend  security screening  and  the  blacklist  to
facilities  which  are  not  directly  employed  on  defense  work.
The  list  of  such  plants  and  the  order  putting  this  into   effect
are,  as  Governor  Brucker  disclosed,  ready  for  use  as  soon  as
the  registration  order  is  upheld.
This  listing  is  more  dangerous  than  that  required  by  the
Butler  bill.    The  provisions  of  the  Butler  bill  for  screening
workers  in  industry generally  would  not  come  into  effect  auto-
matically.    The  screening  would  not  be  imposed  unless  and
until  the  President  issued  a  special  proclamation  or  executive
order  finding  "that  the  security of  the  United  States  is  endan-
gered  by  reason  of  actual  or  threatened  war, or  invasion, or  in-
surrection,  or  subversive activity,  or  of  disturbance  or  threat-
ened  disturbance  of  the  international  relations  of  the  United
States. ..."     This  is sweeping  enough  to be  used  at  almost any
time,  but  the  President—especially  if  he  were  trying  to  nego-
tiate  peace—might  hesitate  to  alarm  the  country  by  issuing
such  an  order.    The  Butler  bill  might  pass  only  to  become a
dead  letter;  in  any  event  the  screening would  last  only  as  long
as  the  proclamation  was  in   effect.
Keystone   of  A  Thought   Control  System
But  a listing and  screening system will  go  into  effect  at  once,
and  permanently, without a Presidential order,  if  and  when  the
registration  order against  the  Communist party is upheld.   This
registration  order  is  the  keystone of  the  thought  control  struc-
ture  erected  by the  U.  S. Chamber  of  Commerce  in  the  Mundt-
Nixon-Ferguson  legislation  which finally  passed  Congress  over
Truman's  veto  as  the  McCarran  Internal  Security Act  of   1950.
It  is important  for  labor  to notice that  the  1950  Act has  been
amended  in  such a  way as to  make  its  bar  against  Communists
broad   enough  to  endanger   any  militant  trade  unionist.    The
original  Act  was  carefully written  by  shrewd  legalists.    It  dis-
tinguished   members  of  Communist  fronts  from  members  of
the  Communist  party  (a  "Communist  action  organization").
The  former  were  forbidden  to  work  in  "any  defense   facility"
without  disclosing  their  membership in  any organization  found
by  the  Subversive Activities Control  Board  to  be a  Communist
front.    The  latter,  actual  members  of  the  Communist   party,
were  barred  from  employment  in  such  facilities  altogether.
Under  the  original  Act,  a  militant  trade  unionist  who was
not  and  never  had  been  a  Communist  would  have  a  fighting
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  9,1955
Around  the  Globe:  Vietnam,  Austria,  Germany,  Japan  and   Formosa
Some  Clues  to  the  Shifting  Tides  in  U. S. Foreign  Policy
Vietnam:  American  policy  is  designed  to  create  a  govern-
ment   strong-  enough   to   block  the  holding  of  the   elections
promised  in  the  Geneva  agreement,   and  to  wipe  out  the  pri-
vate  sect  armies  which  are  suspected  of  secret  ties  with  the
Communists.   The French  believe  Ho Chi-minh would win  the
elections,  and  are  reconciled to  them.   They  still  hope,  though
with  dwindling  assurance,  that  perhaps  they   could  come  to
terms  with  Ho  Chi-minh  and  preserve  some  French  cultural
and  economic interests  in  Indo-China.    Prime  Minister  Diem,
an  honorable but  inept  man, reflects  the  pro-Catholic   orienta-
tion  of  American  foreign  policy.   Diem is  a  Catholic  but  only
one-tenth  of  the  people  of  Vietnam  is  Catholic.    Thus  he  rep-
resents  a  decided  minority.     "The  accusation   you  hear   fre-
quently   from   Vietnamian   Catholics,"  reports   the   English
Catholic writer  Graham  Greene  in  a  vivid  account  of a  recent
visit to  Vietnam  (London Sunday  Times,  May 1),  "is that  the
Church  has  been  made  a  political  tool, that  the  name  of God
is  being-  used  to  get  votes."
Austria:  The  State  Department   and  the  Pentagon  would
welcome  the  breakdown  of negotiations  for  an  Austrian  pact.
Withdrawal  of  occupation  troops  from  Austria  would  break
military  lines  of  communication  between  Germany  and  Italy.
Not  a  few powerful American  military  and  diplomatic  figures
would  like to  see  a new Anschluss  between  Western  Germany
and  Austria.   Such  a  "greater  Western  Germany"  would  have
that much more  leverage in dealing with  the  Eussians.  Above
all  they  fear  the  effect  of  the  Austrian  pact  on  Germany,  and
their  plans  to  rearm  the  Reich  and use  it  as the  main  instru-
ment  of  "liberation."
Germany:  The  Russians  by  denouncing  their  mutual  assist-
ance  pacts  with  France  and  Britain  are  now  in  position   to
deal  directly  with  the  Germans.    A  new variant  of  the  tactic
embodied  in  the  Rapallo  and  Nazi-Soviet   pacts  is   possible.
Behind  the  scenes  distrust  of the  Germans  is  growing  even  in
the  State  Department  where  the  fashionable  anthem,   accord-
ing  to  one  French  wit,  is  "Deutschland   iiber   Dulles."    The
Adenauer  government,  for  all  its  protestations  of  friendship,
has  not  yet  prepared  the  enabling  legislation  required  to  be-
gin  on  the  task  of  recruiting,  outfitting   and  training  those
long-  desired  12 divisions.    This  failure  to  take  the  necessary
steps,  without  which  the  Bonn  accords  remain  a  dead  letter,
leaves  doors  open  for  discussion  between  Bonn  and  Moscow.
What  the  Germans Fear: In  recently  released  testimony  at
a  private  hearing  before  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee  March  2G, General  Alfred  M.  Gruenther,  NATO com-
Ever   Heard  of   UHF-TV?
Extraordinarily  little  attention  was  paid  in  the  press
last  week-end  to  the  68-page  minority  report  made  by
Federal  Communications Commissioner  Frieda  B. Hen-
nock  to  the  need  for  a  Congressional  investigation  to
break  the  monopolistic grip  of  the  big  networks on  TV
stations,  programming,  advertisers  and  talent.
Miss  Hennock, the  one independent voice on  the  FCC,
pointed  out  that  the  public  lias  invested  more  than  10
billion  dollars   in  over  30,000,000  TV  sets  that  cannot
tiuie  in  UHF  (ultra  high  frequency)  channels,  though
these  represent  85  percent  of  all  television.
Although  there  are  108 UHF  stations  left  on  the  air,
few  set  owners have ever heard  of  UHF.    As  Miss Hen-
nock  wrote  Chairman  Magnuson  of  the   Senate  Com-
merce Committee the public "is still  completely unaware
of  the  fact  that  they  are  being  cheated  when  they  buy
sets  that  cannot  receive  signals  from  85  percent  of  the
TV   spectrum."
While  four   stations   are   about  as  much  as  can  be
broadcast   over   "normal"   VHF   (very   high   frequency
channels),  there  are  about  eighty  bands  available  on
ultra   high   frequency.     This   "scarcity"   makes   VHF
easier   to  control  and  the  big  networks,   according  to
Miss  Hennock,  are  trying  to  freeze  out  UHF  as  they
tried  to  freeze  out  FM  stations  on  radio.
No  regulatory  agency  of  government  is  more  closely
controlled  by- the  industry  it   is  supposed  to   regulate
than  FCC.   Miss Hennock, a Truman oppointee, has  also
led  the  fight  for   educational  TV.    Her   term   expires
June  30, and  she deserves  support  in  this battle  to  save
TV  from  complete monopoly control.
mander  in  Europe,  explained  why  12  German  divisions  were
wanted.  This  would  be  enough  to  force  an  advancing  enemy
"to  concentrate  as  he  comes  against  it"  and  "as  he  concen-
trates,  he  becomes very  vulnerable  to  atomic  weapons."   Gen-
eral  Gruenther  stressed  the  fact  that  it  was  "not  merely  12
German  divisions" but  these  "plus the  use  of  atomic  weapons"
which  figured  in  NATO  plans.    He  implied  (1)  that  12  Ger-
man  divisions  without  atomic  weapons would not  be  enough  to
tip  the  balance  of  forces  against  the  East,  and  (2)  that  Ger-
(Continued  on  Page   Three)
Eastland  Declines  to  Call  Elizabeth   Bentley  for    Cross-Examination
Byron  Scott,  counsel  to  William  Henry  Taylor,  last  asso-
ciate of the  late  Harry  D. White  still in  government employ-
ment,   has   released   an   exchange   of  letters   with   Senator
Eastland,  who succeeded  Jenner  as  head  of  the  Internal  Se-
curity  subcommittee when  the  Democrats  took  over.   East-
land  refused  to  let  Taylor's  counsel cross-examine  Elizabeth
Bentley  on  the  serious  discrepancies   (see  our  issue  of  April
25)  in  her  accusations.    A  committee  anxious  to  get  at  the
truth  would  at  least  subpoena  Miss  Bentley  and  cross-ex-
amine  her  itself,  especially  since  it  goes  on taking  her  story
at  face  value.
While  the  Democrats,  from  Mr.  Truman  down,  still  lack
the  nerve  to  pitch  in  and  fight  the  twenty  years  of  treason
myth,  the  Taylor   case  is  beginning   to  reverberate.    The
Washington  Post  in  an  editorial April  30 said  that  since  the
Internal  Security  subcommittee  echoed  the  Bentley  spy ring
charges  against  Taylor  "after  a  grand  jury  had  declined  to
indict... on the basis of her  testimony"  it  is under a  special
obligation  to  find  out  whether  the  charges  are  true.   Mc-
Carthy  was allowed  to cross-examine  his accusers  and  East-
land  himself  allowed  Clifford   Durr  to  cross-examine   Paul
Crouch  on  behalf  of  Aubrey  Williams  in  the  New  Orleans
hearings  last  year.
Scott's  letter  to Eastland  goes  all  the  way back to the  25th
chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  in  its  argument  on  the
right   to  confront   one's   accusers.    The   Roman  Governor,
Festus,  is  there  quoted  as  saying,  "It  is  not  the  custom of
the  Romans to  condemn any  man  before  that  he  who  is  ac-
cused have his  accusers  present  and  have liberty  to make his
answer  to  clear  himself  of  the  things  laid  to  his  charge."
It  may  not  have  been  the  custom  of  the  Romans  but  it  has
certainly  become  the  custom  of  us  Americans.
Instead  of  offering  to  recall  Miss  Bentley,  Eastland   offers
to  recall  Taylor  for  a  public session.   Lattimore's  ordeal  be-
fore  the  same  committee shows  what  would  likely  happen
to  Taylor  if  he  agreed:  loag  sessions  of  tortuous  examina-
tion  in  an  effort  to  trip  him  into  self-contradictions  and  lay
the  basis  for  perjury  without  calling  his  accuser.    The  Con-
gressional   witch  hunters,   the  FBI   and   Brownell  all   feel
themselves  endangered  by  Taylor's  lonely  fight  for  vindica-
tion.    That  fight  has  just  begun.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  9,1955
What  Was  Good  for  General  Motors  Proves  Good  for  the  USA
Secretary  Wilson  Pleads  for  Peace  in  Defending  Military  Cuts
The  hardest  thing  in  the  world  is  to see things  which  do not
fit  one's  preconceptions.    When  Eisenhower  picked  the  head
of   General  Motors  to  be  Secretary   of  Defense,   everyone    left
of   center  protested.    But  Secretary   Wilson  has  proved  to  be
a   force   for   peace  in   the  Cabinet.    To  give  our  readers  a
glimpse  of  his  point  of  view  we  present   below  some  excerpts
from  his  testimony,  as  released  last  week,  on  the  1956 budget
before    the  House  Appropriations    Committee.
"We  should  give  the  devil  his  due.   The  whole  world,  in-
cluding  the  Russians  and the  Chinese, ;ire  struggling  with  the
aftermath  of  a  terrible  war,  and  some  revolutions that  fol-
lowed  wars.    Wars  do  not  settle  problems; they  just  create
new  ones.    We  are   still   struggling  with  the  aftermath  of
World  War  II.    We  have  to  be  realists  as  well  as  idealists
about  it  and  look  them over  and  see  if,  one  at  a time,  we can-
not  help  cure  some of these  problems. . . .
"The  history  of  the  world  is  that  if  you  listen  to  the  mili-
iury  people  only  they  will  bankrupt the  nation  or  else  create
a  military  dictatorship.    That  is  why  our  Constitution   says
that  the civilians  should  say how big the Army  should be. . . .
"There  is no absolute security that  we can achieve.  I meant
it  very definitely  when  I  pointed  out that  twice  as  big  a force
would  not  assure  peace in  the  world.   We  will  have  to  get  at
it  through  some  other  means,  too,  to  cool  off  the  points  of
conflict  and  various kinds of  things.   Too big  a  military  force
on  our  part  might  convince  most  of  the  people  in  the  world
that  we were  going  to  start  trouble.    They  might  be  afraid
we  are going  to start  a war.  . . .
"I   do  not  think  any  of  you  will  find  me  making  foolish
statements  trying  to  inflame   the  American   people  or  con-
tribute  to  misunderstanding  in the world.  . . .
"It  gets  back  to  the  basic  thinking  that  we must  be  strong
until  time  cures  some  of  these  ideological  conflicts  and  some
of  the  aftermath  of  World War II  ...   but  I  am pointing out
that  we  are  strong  in  a  military  sense,  and  that   excessive
military  power  will  not  do  the  job,  but  it  may  simply  scare
all  the  rest  of  the  nations  and  perhaps  cause  us  to  throw  our
weight  around a  little  too much ...    I  do not think  that  any-
one  wants  to  argue  that  we  are  going  to  match  the   Soviets
man  for  man  and  fight  a  war  on the  continent  of  Asia.   I  do
not  enthuse  over  such  a  prospect.  . . .
"The  purpose  of  our  country  is  not  to  precipitate   a  third
world  war;  it  is  to  establish  peace  in  the  world  and  to  oper-
ate  from  strength  in  doing  it.   We must  have  the  courage  to
do  some  of  the  right  things,  which  takes  more  courage  than
to  just  go  around  with  a  chip  on your  shoulder.  .  . .
"I  do  not  think  the  American  people  would  support   the
idea  that  we are  the  policemen  of the  world and  that  we have
to  have  sufficient  military  strength  stationed  in  all  the  coun-
tries  of  the  world to  preserve  the  status  quo  and  underwrite
their  security.  . . ."
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
many  can  only  be  defended  with  atomic  weapons.   But  an
atomic  defense  of  Germany  may  mean  the  end  of  Germany.
The  Germans  understand  this.    So  General  Gruenther  was
rather  pessimistic.    "With  their  [Russian]   tendency to  show
that   tensions  are   evaporating,   emphasizing  the  horrors  of
atomic  warfare  and  thermonuclear  warfare   for  the  West,"
the  General  said,  "we  are  going  to  be  in  for  a  tough  session.
Already  there  is  a  slight  but  evident tendency to  relax."  The
General  made  it  pretty  clear  he  himself  does  not  really  be-
lieve  in  the   possibility   of  peaceful  co-existence.
Formosa:   Dulles  is  stalling,   hoping  to   avoid  talks  with
Communist  China.    The  State  Department's  first  reaction  of
hostility  to  talks  was  no  "accident",  no  breakdown of  liaison
but  the  carrying  out  of  well-defined  and  consistent  policy  di-
rectives.    It  is  a  bad  situation   because  the  President,  who
wants  peace,  doesn't  really  know  what  is  going  on  half   the
time.   Dulles,  who thinks  we ought  to  "forego  peace  in  order
to  enjoy  the  blessings  of  liberty,"  is  crafty,  shrewd  and  capa-
ble,  and sits  at  the  controls  of foreign  policy.   The  Secretary
of  State  is  allied  with  Knowland and  Radford;  if  the  White
House   were  capable  of  really  running   the   government,  it
would  replace  Dulles   with  Stassen,  and  create   a  team  on
which  Eisenhower  could depend.
Unkindest  Cut:  The  State  Department  is  furious  with  its
pet  Asian  protege,  Prime Minister Mohammed Ali  of  Pakistan
for  announcing  May 1  (without  consulting  Washington)  that
he  has  accepted  an  invitation  to  visit  Chou  En-lai.
VIP:  New   York   area  readers  will   be  able  to  hear   Rev.
Stephen   H.  Fritchman,   of  the  First   Unitarian   Church,  Los
Angeles,  one  of  the  brave  clergymen  of  this  period,  now  on  a
visit   to  the  East:  May  IS,  at  the  Hey wood  Broun  Room  of
the  Newspaper  Guild, 133 W.  44th Street, New  York  City,  on
"Have  the  Preachers  Sold  Out  Socialism?"  at  a  Monthly  Re-
view  fifth  birthday  party  (with  Paul  Sweezy  and  Leo  Huber-
man),  and May  18 at  Essex  House, Newark,  on  the  Un-Amer-
ican  Activities  Committee  in  Los  Angeles   (with   Professor
Broadus  Mitchell  of  Rutgers   and  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  of
Princeton).     The  latter   meeting   is  planned   by  New   Jersey
associates  of  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties   Committee  as  a
"greeting"   to  the  House  Un-American  Committee  which  will
be  "visiting"   Newark   that   iveek.
The   Reaction  Against  War  Made  Itself  Felt  at  The  White  House"
"The  reaction  throughout  the  country  against  getting  involved
in  a  war  over  Matsu  and  Quemoy,"  sharp-eyed Washington  bu-
reau  chief  James   Reston  reported  last  Wednesday  to  the  New
York  Times,  "has   been  so strong  that  the  President has  felt  he
had  to  take  it  into  account."     In  the  building  up  of  this  reac-
tion,  the  Weekly  and  its  readers  played their  part.    More  than
54,000  copies were distributed of  our  special  anti-war  issue  with
the  text  of  the  Morse-Lehman  resolution  for  the  evacuation  of
Quemoy  and  Matsu.    Through  the  Friends, the  Unitarians,  peace
groups  and  labor  organizations,  they  reached every  section of  the
country,  and  our  mail  showed  hundreds  responded by  writing  the
White   House  or  their   Senators     No  other   weekly   publication
made  these  texts  available—even  the  New  York  Times  did  not
print  them.    In  the fight  for  peace, the Weekly  proved its useful-
ness  again.
With  many  thanks,
Help  us widen  our  audience.   We'd  like  a  thousand  new  read-
ers  before  the  summer  doldrums  settle  down  on  circulation   de-
partments.    So we're offering  a  special  6-months  gift  subscrip-
tion  offer  at  only  $2.     Surely  you  have  a  friend  you'd  like  to
introduce  to  the  Weekly.    Or  send  it  to  your  local  editor  or  your
favorite  minister  or  to  the  library  of  your  home  town.    You  may
have  a  half  dozen  of  these  6-month  gift  subs  at  only  $10,  and
we'll  bill  you  if  you  like.    Only  sit  down  and  do  it  now.    Make
up that  list  of  friends and  send it  to  us today.    The  tide  is slowly
turning  toward  peace  and  freedom.    As  the  ice  cracks  and  fear
abates,  the  potential  of  progressivism in  America  will  begin  to
make  itself  felt  again.    Help  the  momentum  of  revival by  helping
us  reach more  people with  indispensable  news and  ammunition  in
the  fight  for  peace  and civil  liberties.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May 9,1955
Not  Even  "Proof" of  Prospective  Crime  Will  Be  Required  for  Blacklisting
Worse Than The  Kaf ka-ish  Procedure of the  Butler  Bill
(Continued  from  Page  One)
chance  to  avoid  being  blacklisted  under  these  provisions.    Un-
der  the  original  Act,   to  prove  membership   the  government
would  have to  prove  it  by overt  acts—payment  of  dues,  posses-
sion  of  a  membership  card,  attendance  at  meetings.    In  addi-
tion  Section  5  (c)   set  up  safeguards  by  which  an  individual
could  contest  and  hold  up  designation   as  a  member  by  the
Attorney  General.
Normal  Proof   Made  Unnecessary
But  last  August  in  passing  the  Communist  Control  Act  of
1954  Congress  repealed  Section  5  (c)   and  adopted  the  Hum-
phrey-Morse-Douglas   amendment   for   determining   member-
ship.   The  14 standards  established  by this  amendment  would
make  it  unnecessary to  prove  membership  in  the  normal  way.
They  are  so  sweeping  that  anyone  who  has  ever  in  any  way
helped  to  achieve  an  objective  which  was  also  sought  by  the
Communists—even  though  a  lawful  objective—could  be  held
to  be a member.   When  the  1950  Act  is reread  in  the  light  of
the  1954  amendment,  it  will  be  seen  that  if  the   Communist
party  registration  order  is  upheld  and  the  plant  listing  goes
into  effect,  the  foundations are  laid  for  universal  blacklisting
of  militants.
This  again  would  be worse than  the  Butler  bill.   The  Butler
bill  would   bar  from   employment  any  person   "as  to   whom
there  is reasonable  ground  to  believe  they  may engage  in  sabo-
tage  of  the  industrial  economy  and  productive  capabilities  of
the  United  States,  espionage  or  other  subversive  acts"  in  order
to  weaken resistance to  "actual  or  threatened  war,  invasion,  in-
surrection,  subversive  activity,  disturbance  or  threatened  dis-
turbance  of  international  relations."    This  weird  formula,  re-
quiring  an  administrative finding that  a  man  might  commit  a
crime,  is rendered  the  more Kafka-ish  by the  further  provision
that  at  the  "trial"  nothing  in  the  act shall  require  "any  investi-
gatory  organization  of  the  U.  S. government  to  disclose  its  in-
formants  or other information  which in  its judgment would  en-
danger  its  investigatory activity."    (The  Butler bill  thus  seeks
to  protect  the  FBI  in advance against  an  unfavorable ruling  on
secret  accusations  in  the  pending  or  some  future  Peters  case.)
The  procedure  threatened  under  the  Internal  Security  Act as
amended  is worse than  the  Butler  bill.   It  would  not  be  neces-
sary  to  show  that  a  man  might  commit  a  criminal  or  "subver-
sive"  act.    It  would  only  be necessary to  show that  he  had,  for
example,  "indicated   by  word,  action,  conduct,  writing  or  in
any  other  way  a willingness to  carry  out  in  any manner  and  to
any  degree  the  plans,  designs,  objectives,  or  purposes  of  the
[Communist]   organization."    (Sec.  5  (12)  of  the  1954  Act.)
A  trade  unionist  who  helped  in  any  labor  or  reform  campaign
which  was also supported  by the  Communists could  be  brought
within  the  orbit  of  such  sweeping  language.    It  would  not  be
necessary  to  prove  that  he  had  committed or  might  commit  an
illegal  act.
Thus  through  a  Supreme  Court  decision  upholding  the  reg-
istration  order  against  the  Communist  party  the  Defense  De-
partment  might  accomplish  not  only all  but  much  more than  it
could  achieve  through  the  Butler  bill.    The  same  awareness
that  led the  labor  movement  to  oppose  the  Butler  bill as a new
way  of  setting  up  a  master  industrial blacklist  against militant
workers  should  lead  them to  support  by briefs the petition filed
by  the  Communists  for  review  of  the  registration  order.    The
consequences  are  too  serious,  the  potential  area  of  damage  too
widespread,  to  leave  this  case  entirely  in  the  hands  of  a  hated
minority,  forced  to  argue  without  support,  in  the  context  of
general   suspicion.     The   broader   implications   ought   to   be
brought  home  to the  court  by the  appearance of  the  C.I.O.,  the
A.F.  of  L.  and  the  railroad  brotherhoods  as  amid  curiae.   For
in  the  obscure  recesses  of  this  unpopular  cause  may  be  forged
a  deadly  weapon  against  the  entire  labor  movement.
NEXT  WEEK
"They  Worked  Their  Way  Through  College
Spying  for  the   FBI."
An  Account  of   the
North  Carolina.
Junius  Scales  Trial   in
Help   Us  Reach  As  Many  Labor  People   As  Possible   With   This   Issue—Extra   Copies   Are   Available
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my
Street
E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
City                                            .Zone
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money
(To)  Name                                 -----
Street
City
* $1 extra for  Canada.
...Zone
State
enclosed) :
State
5/9/55
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED