I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955dec05.pdf

============================================================

Why  Pay  Millions to the  Rich Farmer  In Order  to  Dribble A Few Dollars to  the  Poor?   See Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   No. 46DECEMBER   6,   1955
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
As  the  Witch Hunters  Open  Up  on  Newspaper  Business
The   New   York   Times  Knuckles  Under
The  long  threatened   investigation  of  "subversives"   in  the
newspaper  business  is opening  this  week  in New  York  City.  Its
main  target  is  America's  greatest  newspaper,  the  New   York
Times,  which  earned  the  hatred  of  the  witch  hunters  by  oppos-
ing  McCarthy  and  McCarthyism.   It  is  painful  to  report  that
the  Times,  despite  all  it  has  said  on  the  subject   [see  the  ex-
cerpts  on this and  the  next page],  has surrendered  to  the  witch
hunt.   It  is  urging  employes  subpoenaed   by  Senator   Eastland
and  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  to  "cooperate" and
it  has  already  discharged  one  employe,  and  forced  the  resigna-
tion  of  another,  for  refusing  to  do so.
Some  70  subpoenas  have  been  served  on  newspaper  workers
in  New  York,  about  30 of  them  on  the  New  York  Times.  The
management  of   the  Times  has  helped   serve  the   subpoenas.
Those  singled  out  by  the  committee  have  been  summoned  one
by  one  from  work  by  the  personnel  department,  and   ushered
into  a conference  room  where  the  subpoenas  were  served  upon
them.   Rarely have fundamental  principles  been  surrendered  so
sedately.   If  we  published  pictures  Time  magazine  style,  we'd
have  to  caption   Arthur  Hays  Sulzberger   at  this  point,   "No
Zenger   He."
The  procedure  at  the  Times  has  been  first  to  help  serve  the
subpoena  and  then  to bring pressure  on the  unlucky employe  to
talk.   Soon  after  receiving  the  subpoena,  the  victim  has  been
"Informing  for  The  Sake  of  Advantage"
"A  Code  of  Conduct  for  American  servicemen  .  .  .
should  be  applicable to civilians no less than  to  soldiers.
...   It  expresses a national  duty  and obligation  that are
implicit  in  the  life  of  the  soldier  and  should  be  implicit
in  the  life  of  the  civilian.  The report  and  the  code  alike
put  stress,  also,  on the  obligation  not  to betray  or  harm
one's  fellows.   This  is  less  a  matter  of  patriotism   than
of  ethics  and  good  morals.   It  is  noteworthy that  inrthe
adverse  report  upon  the  behavior  of  some  prisoners  the
question  of  'ratting'—or  informing  for  the  sake  of  ad-
vantage—is  the  decisive  factor  in  some  cases.  That  ac-
cords  with  the  best  code  of  conduct,  civilian  as  well  as
military."
—New  York  Times  editorial,  Aug.  19, 1955.
called  in  for  an  interview  by Louis  Loeb,  counsel  for  the   New
York   Times.    Loeb  has  been  telling  these  employes  that  the
Eastland  committee  has  several  hundred  names  of   newspaper
and  radio  people  to  be  called,  and  he  has  made  it  clear  that
those  on  the  Times  who  invoke  the  Fifth  amendment will  be
fired,  with  all  the  attendant   damaging  publicity  that  entails.
One  employe  who  ranked  high  enough  to  be  of  non-News-
paper  Guild  status  resigned  under  threat  of  discharge.  A  sec-
ond  told  Loeb  in  confidence  that  he  had  been  a   Communist
some  years  before  and  would  take  the  Fifth   rather  than  be
forced   to  name  others.   It  was  suggested   that  he  resign  and
"We Shall Not Miss... The Cowardly"
"If  it  is  wrong  to refuse  to  testify  against  one's  self,
is it  also wrong to  object  to  unlawful  search  and  seizure
...    to the  abridgment  of  freedom  of  the  press  and of
speech?   To ask such  questions  is to answer  them.  . . .
It  is  time  for  us  to  reaffirm  our  faith  in  the  whole  Bill
of  Rights—the  Fifth  amendment  included—without fa-
vor  and  without fear.   We shall  be  stronger  when we do
so.   We shall  not  miss  the  weak, the  cowardly  and  the
vicious  who  will  fall  out  of  the  ranks."
—New  York   Times  editorial,  Feb.  21,  1955.
"I  have learned  to my regret  that  at  your  appearance
today  before  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Sub-commit-
tee  you  refused  to  answer  questions  put  to  you  in  con-
nection  with  your  alleged  association  with  the  Commu-
nist  Party."
—Letter  of  discharge  from  Arthur  Hays   Sulzberger,
publisher  of  the  New  York  Times  to  Melvin  Bar-
net,  July  IS,  1955.
when  he  did  not  do  so,  he  was  first  suspended  and  then  dis-
charged.  When  his  lawyer  asked  the  cause of  discharge,  he  was
told  that  if  the  employe  insisted  that  the  Newspaper  Guild  be
told  the  cause,  the  New  York  Times  would  consider  itself  re-
leased  from  its pledge  of  confidence.   Such  are  the  rewards  of
candor.
It  was  suggested  by Loeb  to  another  employe  that  if  he  did
not  want to  testify  publicly  against others,  he  should  go  to  the
FBI  and  tell  them all  he knows. Then  when  called  by the  com-
mittee  he  could  testify  about  himself  but  refuse  to  name others
on  the ground  that  he had already told  all  to the  FBI,  and  take
his  chances  on  that.   Loeb  said  he  was  making  this   suggestion
as  an  individual and  not  as  counsel  for  the  New   York   Times
but  thought  the  paper  would  probably  support  that  kind  of  a
position.   Similar  conversations have  led  some  others  to  decide
that  their  best  course  would  be to  name a  few  names,  but  con-
fine themselves  to persons  dead  or  already well known  as Com-
munists.
The  number  of  actual  Communists  present  or  past   in  the
newspaper  business,  as  elsewhere,  is  vastly  exaggerated.    It  is
no  surprise  to  find  among  the  privately  circulating  lists  of
those  subpoened at  the New  York  Times,  the  names of  persons
never known  to  engage  in  political  activity of  any kind,  except
—significantly—within  the  Newspaper  Guild  itself.  The  lists
seem  to have been  compiled  in no  small  part  from  persons  who
were active in  the  Guild,  though  all kinds of  other  odd  choices
have  been  included,  among  them  several  printers.     Perhaps
some  subversive  typographical  errors  have  been   uncovered.
Other   subpoenas—among   those  known—have  been  served
at  the  New  York  Post, Hearst's  Mirror  and  the  Daily  News  in
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
1   B  V
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone?t  Weekly,  December 5,1955
A  Cowed Press  Can Be  The  Only  Result  of  Permitting  A  Hunt  for  "Subversives"
No  Firm  Defense  Possible  Short  of  the  First   Amendment
(Continued  from  Page One)
the  daily  field  while  the  National  Guardian  is  again  a  target
among  the  weeklies.   McCarthy  two and a half  years ago  started
out  with  the  Guardian,  summoning  its  editor  Cedric  Belfrage
and  its  executive  editor,  James  Aronson.   Belfrage  has  since
been  deported  to  his native  Britain  on  the  usual  trumpery  with
hardly  a  murmur  of  protest  in  newspaper  business.  This  time
subpoenas  have  been  served  on  Aronson  and  on  John  T.  Mc-
Manus,  the  Guardian's general  manager.  The  strategy  may  be
indicated  by  the  fact  that  Aronson  was  formerly  on  the  New
York  Times  and  McManus  was  for  five  years  president  of  the
New  York  Newspaper   Guild.
In  the  New  York  newspaper  field,  honorable  salute  is  due
the  New  York  Post and  its  editor,  James  Wechsler,  who  was
also  one  of  McCarthy's  targets.   In  an  editorial  on  October  2,
"Nobody's Business But  His Own"
"Chief  Justice  Warren's  decision  ...    reaffirms  individ-
ual  rights  when it  strikes  down  the  arrogated  authority
of  an executive  agency  to penalize an individual for    ...
associations  which were within his  discretion  as a  citizen
and  thoughts  which  were  nobody's  business  but  his  own.
"The  Peters  case  does  not  merely  vindicate  one  man.
It  arose  from  an  effort,  with  which  surely  most  Ameri-
cans  must  sympathize,  to vindicate  the  dignity  of  the in-
dividual citizen  against  the  usurpations  of  governmental
agencies,   the   mendacity  of   secret   informers   and  the
passing  hysteria  of  some  sections  of  public   opinion."
—New   York   Times  editorial,  June  8,  19SS.
"The   Erosion  of  Our Own Freedom"
". .  .  the  Fifth  amendment is  an  important  and  his-
toric  element in  the  charter of  our liberties;  and if  it  is
to  protect  the  best  of  us  it  must  also  stand  ready  to  be
used  even by  the  worst. The  erosion  of  our  own freedom
begins  when  we  deprive of  its  guarantees  those  whom
we  most  hate  and  despise."
—New   York   Times  editorial,  "Not  Excluding   The
Fifth,"    May   BS, 1955.
the  Post  took  the  Times  to  task  for  dismissing  Melvin  Barnet,
a  copy-reader who  invoked  the  Fifth  before the  Eastland  com-
mittee  last  July  in  the  curtain-raiser  for  these  new  hearings.
The  Post  also  criticized  the  grievance committee of  the  Guild
at  the  Times  for  voting  against  Barnet—a  remarkable piece  of
something   worse   than   company  unionism—and  concluding
that  "every  loyal  American"  is under  obligation  to  tell  all  he
knows  to  Congressional  witch  hunters. This  ignominious  posi-
tion  was  also  supported  by a  majority  vote  of  the  Times  unit
and  is  being  cited  by  the  Times  in  its  pending  action  against
the  Guild  for  an  order  to  enjoin  arbitration  of  the  Barnet dis-
charge.   Thus  the  Times  and  its Guild unit  in their  own  respec-
tive  ways  illustrate  the  collapse  of  principle  under  panic.
The  principle  seems  to  us  clear.  The  First  Amendment for-
bids  Congress  to  abridge  the  freedom  of  the  press.  That  free-
dom may not  be abridged even indirectly, as the  Supreme  Court
held  when  it  threw  out  Huey  Long's  famous  punitive  tax  on
newspaper  advertising. The  most  effective  way to  abridge  free-
dom  of  the  press  would  be  to  do  to  newspapers what  has  al-
ready  been  done  by  the  Congressional  witch hunters  to  other
businesses  and  professions.  That  is  to  frighten  the  daylights
out  of  publishers and  newspapermen by subjecting them  to  po-
litical  inquisition, and  thus  putting  them  on  notice  that  they
may  be  smeared  and  destroyed  if  they  do  not  conform  to  the
standards  of  the  McCarthies, McCarrans  and  Eastlands. Their
purpose  is to  make it  as  dangerous as possible  to  oppose  them.
This  is why the  Times,  which has spoken  out  against the  witch
hunt in  a truly conservative and  independent spirit, was marked
long  ago  for  smear; McCarthy had  Matusow  all  primed  for  it.
Against this attack we  see only  one  firm  line of  defense, and
that  is  the  First  amendment  itself.   Congress  has  no  right  to
interrogate  newspapermen  on  their  political  ideas  or  associa-
tions.   To  put  Communists and  other  "subversives"   (whatever
that  means)  in  a  special class  is  to  lose  the  battle  at  the  very
start,  by  throwing  editorial  rooms  wide  open  for   ideological
examination  in which any deviation from  a  cowed  standpattism
becomes suspect.
But  He  Fired  Barnet,  Who Left  the  Party  Six  Years Earlier, in 1942
The  Speech  in  Which  Sulzberger  Proposed  An  Amnesty  for  Former  (Pre-1948)  Communists
"As I  see  it  you  must  have  the  courage  to  condemn a  new
form  of  lynch  law  which  has  become  too  prevalent  in  our
land—you  must  have  the courage  to  stand  up and be counted
even  when  the  crowd  is  hell-bent  on  burning  a  witch.  .  .  .
Some  of  us  have  become  alarmed  and  evidence  our  fears  in
ways destructive  to our system  of  government.  These  fright-
ened  people  are the  ones  who tear  to  shreds  the  fabric  of  our
democracy  in  the  hope  of  disclosing  a  Communist   hiding
within  its folds....  I am not prepared to  cast  guilt  and  sus-
picion  upon  my  trusted  associates  and  in  so  doing  destroy
the  atmosphere  of  confidence  which  is  necessary  to  produce
the kind  of  newspaper  that  we do.    ...
"Taking  that  date  [1948]  then,  I  would declare  the  equiv-
alent  of  a  sort  of  moratorium  or  some  sort  of  political  am-
nesty:  Anyone  who  joined  a  Communist  front  organization
thereafter  must  accept  whatever  consequences  might  befall
him  as  a  result  of  that  association.   On  the  other  hand,  he
who  joined   such  an  organization  prior  to  that  date   should
not  be  regarded  as  necessarily  and  automatically   having  a
black  mark  on  his  record,  provided  he  has  clearly  disassoci-
ated  himself  from  any such  group  before  the  date  set. .  .  .
"I am  not  talking  about  the  indisputable  right  to  question
a  man's  judgment,  but  about  the  popular  tendency  to doubt
a  man's  present  motives  because  of  his  past  associations.   I
am  concerned  with  trying  to  preserve  the  redemptive   prin-
ciple  in  our  society,  for  that  society  is  based  on  the  theory
of   redemption,  on  the   idea   of   forgiveness   even   for   past
crimes.
"Thus  we  have  a  statute  of  limitations  which .protects  a
man  from  being  brought  to  trial  for  certain  offenses  after  a
number  of  years.  The  reasoning  behind  this  is  that  over  a
period  of  time  the  perspective  changes,  accurate   testimony
is  hard and sometimes  impossible  to  gather  because  memory
fades,  and it  is  difficult  to  judge  a man in  the  atmosphere  of
one  generation  for  things  said  and  done  in  another."
—Arthur  Hays  Sulzberger,  publisher,  the  New  York  Times,
speech  accepting  honorary  degree  at  John  Carroll  Uni-
versity,  June  15, 1953  (full   text  in  his  paper  next day).
Extra  Copies  of  This  Issue   Available   on  Request  for  Distribution  to  Newspapermen
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F, Stime't  Weekly, December S, 195S
The  Numbed  Silence  That  Greeted  Krushchev's  H-Bomb Announcement
Independents   Want  Eisenhower  Again,  But  Not  With  Nixon
The  President's  recovery  is  good  news  for  all  who  want
peace  and  we hope he will  run  again, but  if  Nixon is  to  be on
the ticket with  him for  Vice President many  independents  will
regretfully   feel  that  a  vote  for  Eisenhower  is  too  hazardous.
. . . Were  Nixon to reach  the White House, with  Dulles in the
State  Department  and their friend  Knowland party  leader  in
the  Senate, the  outlook for  peace  would  be bleak  indeed. . . .
The balance  of forces  within  the  Republican party is  too  pre-
carious  to  gamble  on Nixon.  ...    He will  make  votes  for  the
Democrats....
A  Numb  Silence
All  over  India  the  Soviet  leaders  have  been  greeted  with
cheers.   But  a  British  newspaperman,  William Stvenson, who
covered  the   speech   in   Bangalore   at   which   Krushchev  an-
nounced  the  Russian  hydrogen  bomb  explosion,  reported   "a
numb  silence"  (London Sunday  Times,  Nov. 27)  at  the  news.
Krushchev  ended by raising his arms  and  crying  "India,  Rus-
sia,  Bhai,  Bhai"  (long  life)   which  on  all  previous   occasions
had  drawn  loud applause  "but  this  time  there  was  none, and
Krushchev  sat  down, blinking in evident  puzzlement."  ...    It
would  seem that  the  Indian  masses  are  as  appalled  by  Rus-
sian,  as  by  American,  H-bombs, and  this  may  explain  why  a
few  days  later  Moscow repeated  its   offer  of  last  May  10  to
discontinue  atomic  tests  if  the  West  did,  too.  ...     A  mora-
torium  on further  tests  was  first  suggested  by  Nehru.
Short  of  Telepathy
When  Mr.  Dulles was  asked  about  the  Soviet  offer  at  press
conference  last  week, he made a  characteristically   vague  and
ambiguous  answer.   He  said  that  as  yet  no  formula  for  an
agreement  had  been  found  which  was  "both  dependable and
in  the  interests  of  the  United   States."  ...     A  dependable
agreement   would   seem  to  be  easy.  We  detected  the  latest
Soviet  explosion  as  we have  its  predecessors,  and  announced
it  three  days before Krushchev did. We could hardly  do better
than  that unless we had long distance  telepathic  mind-readers
which enabled  us to know what  the  Soviet  leaders  were  going
to do before they  did it.  ...    An agreement  for  no more tests
would be self-enforcing,  since such tests cannot be kept  secret.
.  . .  But it  is  well to  remember  that  the  same  winds which
carry the news  also carry the  fresh  poisons  thus  let  loose
Is  it  in our interest to let this mutual  poisoning of the  atmos-
phere  go on? ...     Dulles  dodges  this  by saying  "I  refer  not
only to  our national  interest, but  the  interest  that  we have in
Question  of  the  Week
How many Negroes have  to be shot  in  Mississippi be-
fore  the  conscience  of  this  white  man's  country  is  suf-
ficiently moved  to  enforce  the  law?
protecting  peace  and freedom in the world."  . . .  Presumably
this refers  to deterrence-by-terror.   . . . But Mr. Dulles  seems
to forget  that  we no longer  have a  monopoly; there  is now a
stalemate.  ...    It  could  be that  "peace  and freedom"  are a
little over-protected,  perhaps  almost  endangered by our  highly
advertised  trigger-tense  ready-to-go  bombers.  . . . We believe
it  to  be  the  moral  duty  of  the  atomic  scientists  to  evaluate
the  Secretary   of  State's  answer  and  open  a  national   debate
on the question. . . .
No Army for  East Germany
The  American  press  seems  to  have  ignored  the  most  strik-
ing  aspect  of  the  reshuffle  in  the  East  German  government.
"Contrary   to  expectation,"   the  Berlin  correspondent  of  the
London  Sunday  Observer reported  (Nov. 27), "no  Ministry  of
Defense  has  been  created.  This'corresponds  to  a  recent  dying
down of military  propaganda.   It  seems now certain  that East
Germany  will  not,  for  the  time  being,  raise  its  police   forces
officially  to  the  rank  of an  army,  or  enter  an  armaments  race
with  West  Germany."  The Observer correspondent  speculates
that this may be due  (1)  to  the  slow beginnings of  West  Ger-
man  rearmament,  or  (2)  to  objections from  within  the  Soviet
bloc,  especially  Poland  but   (3)  "it  seems  chiefly  to  indicate
that  the  Soviet  Union  still  expects  some progress  of  the  dis-
armament  talks  with  the  West,  including  a  possible  agree-
ment  on  limitation  of  East  West  forces."
Footnote  It  Is  Dangerous  to  Ignore
In this connection,  we note  (in trying to read  the  West  Ger-
man  papers  lately)  that  even  the  responsible writers refer  to
East Germany as  "Mitteldeutschland."  What we call  the  East
Zone  is  for  them  only  "middle  Germany."   Eastern Germany
is  presumably  the  old territory  now  occupied  by  Poland  and
(East  Prussia)  the  Soviet  Union.  This  means  that  for  Ger-
mans the  Reich will  not really  be reunited  again  until  Poland
has  once  more  been  dismembered  and  Russia   (by  force   or
secret  deal)  gives  up  the  old eastern  territories.  Thus  peace-
ful  reunion of  West  and  "Middle"  Germany would  only be  the
prelude to a new period of tension, threat and secret maneuver.
What  Molotov  Told  Charlie  Wilson  About  His  Youth  hi  the  Czar's  Salt  Mines
Few  newspapers reported what  Defense  Secretary  Wilson
told  the  press  on  his return  from  Geneva about his  talk with
Molotov.  It  was crowded out  of our  last  week's  issue but  we
think  it  worth recording  verbatim because it  shows that  Mr.
Wilson  treated  Geneva as  an  exercise  in  understanding and
not  an  occasion  for   inflammatory   self-righteousness.    Mr.
Wilson  had just  been  asked by the  Chicago Tribune reporter
at  the  Pentagon  whether  the  cold  war  was  being   resumed
and  whether it  had  ever  stopped.  The  Secretary  said  it  had
not  stopped,  there was "tension" before  and it  still  existed—
and  then  he  went  on  to  tell  this  story:
"I had an interesting experience,"  the Secretary said,  "after
one of  the  dinners with Mr.  Molotov. We were sitting  having
coffee  after  the  dinner  and  I  was talking to  him  through an
interpreter,  Mr. Troyanovsky. As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  knew
his  father,  who  was  the  first  Russian  Ambassador  to  this
country.   He  came  to  Detroit  with  some  other  Russians  and
their  wives to  pay  me a  visit  and  I  think it  was in  '34.
"I  had  mentioned that  previously,  and  also  the  day  in  the
conference  Foster  Dulles  had  happened to  mention  that  he
had  been  present  at  Versailles  and  he  had  been  watching
these  things for  a  long,  long  time.  So there  was  discussion
about  how long  the  various  people  that  were there  had  been
in  government.  Obviously I  was  junior  to  the  whole  outfit.
"But  Mr.  Molotov  said  'Do  I  get  credit  for  the  time  I
worked in  the  salt  mines?"  He said  'You know,  the  Czar  put
me  in  the  salt  mines when  I  was  19 years  old, and  do  I  get
credit  for  working  for  the  government  over  that  period?'
"Now  I make that  point because it  was very clear  that  the
comparisons  the  Russians   are  making  are  really  basically
between  what they have achieved, what  their  present type of
society  and what they had  under the  Czars,  and  certainly  for
an  old timer  like him it  was very clear  that  that  was still  in
his mind, and they don't quite realize  the  great  difference  be-
tween  our  form  of  capitalist  society,  our  free  American  ap-
proach  to  the  whole problem, and  they  lump  that  with  the
same  thing  they  had under  the  Czars,  which is  not  so at   all.
And  I am sure  the Russian people themselves and  the  people
of  our  country have  much  more in  common  than  you  would
think  from  our  two  types  of  government."
1  8  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, December 5,195$
Why  Pay  Millions to  the  Rich  Farmer  In Order  to  Dribble  A  Few  Dollars  to  the  Poor?
A  Fruitful  New  Idea  in  Farm  Relief: "Graduate" It  Like  the  Income Tax
Since  New  Deal  days, farm  aid  programs  have  poured  out
millions  to  rich  farmers  in  order  to  dribble out a  few  dollars
to the  poor.  Last  Tuesday night  at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  Sen-
ator  W. Scott  Kerr,  Democrat, of North  Carolina,  proposed  a
fruitful  new idea.  Just  as  we graduate  the  income  tax,  in  or-
der  to  collect  more at  the  top and  less  at  the  bottom, so  Sena-
tor  Scott  would  have  us  graduate  the  price  support  program
to  give  more relief  at  the  bottom, less  at  the  top.  This  makes
much  better  sense  than  Democratic  demagogy  about  90  per-
cent  of  parity,  and  the  new  soil  bank  program  promised  by
the   Republicans.    Under  either  program,  rich  famers  who
don't  need  it  will  cash  in heavily.
The  effect  of  giving  the  same  price  supports  to  big  farmer
as  well as  small  was graphically painted by Senator  Scott. He
said that  in  1954 the  five largest  price  support  loans  on  corn
in  Iowa  averaged  $75,446  each.  This  means that  the  five  big-
gest  Iowa  corn  growers  in  effect  unloaded their  surplus  corn
on  the  government that  year  at  an  average  of  $75,000  apiece.
The  average  of  all  corn  loans  in  Iowa  during  that  year  was
only  $1,909.
Senator  Scott  provided  similar  figures  on  Kansas   wheat
growers. In  1954 the five largest price support  loans  on wheat
in  Kansas  averaged   $71,506—but the  average  of  all  wheat
loans that  same  year  averaged  only  $1,759.  The  Senator  said
loans  on  other farm  commodities showed  about  the  same  pic-
ture  and  added,  "From  these  figures,"  Senator   Scott   said,
"you  can  see  who  is  mainly  responsible  for  the  continuing
growth  of  our  surplus  farm  stocks."  The  big  farmers,  who
can  take  care  of  themselves, produce  most  of  the   surpluses
and  get  most  of  the  farm  relief.
One  Farmer  Got  A  $1,250,000  Dole
The big farmer  dominates our agriculture.  In  wheat,  farm-
ers  who planted  100 acres  or  more made up  less  than  11 per-
cent  of  the  total  number of  wheat  farmers  but  accounted  for
almost  42 percent  of wheat  production. About 8 percent  of  the
cotton   growers  accounted  for   45  percent  of  all  cotton  pro-
duced.   In   1954  one  of  these  big  farm  operators  received  a
"support  loan"  of  $1,250,000. Why  should  these  big  business
farmers  be subsidized?
Senator  Scott proposes that a farmer  marketing  up to  1,000
bushels  of wheat  receive  price  supports  at  100 percent  of  par-
ity.   On  the  next  500 bushels  the  government  would  allow 95
percent  of  parity  and  on  the  following  500 only  90 percent  of
parity.  This  would  be further  graduated  downward so that  a
A  Precious Item  Few  Papers  Carried
Will  Wonders Never  Cease?
"Norwalk,  Conn.,  Nov.  25  (United  Press)—Lt. Gen.
Leslie  R.  Groves,  who  headed  the  World  War  II Man-
hattan  Project  that  developed  the  atomic  bomb,  said to-
day  the  disclosure  that  Russia  had exploded  another  nu-
clear  device  'is  not  particularly  pleasant.'
" 'It  emphasizes  once again  that  we  can't  afford  a nu-
clear war,'  Groves  said. The retired  General  now is  vice-
president  of  the  Remington  Rand  Corp.   Groves  said  the
atomic  bomb  was  the  first  weapon  that  led  men  toward
the  idea  that  'war is  too  terrible"  to wage.
" 'We're  not  the  only  ones  who  don't  want  war,'  he
said.   'Russian  leaders  don't  want  one, either.'"
big  farmer  would  get  only  60 percent  of  parity  on  all  wheat
produced  over  4,500 bushels.
In  the  case of cotton, Senator Scott  would  allow  100 percent
of  parity  on  the  first  15 bales  and  95 percent  on  the  next  15
bales.  This  would  be graduated  downward so that  any  cotton
produced  in  excess  of  500 bales  would  get  support  only at  60
percent.
A  "General  Motorized" Agriculture
The  effect  would  be to  give the  smallest  farmers  support  at
100 percent  of  parity,  more than  they  get  now, and  to  lower
the  support for  the largest farmers  to  60 percent.  "Under  the
adjusted   price   support   system,"   Senator   Scott   said,   "the
larger  the  farmer  the  less  support  he  gets  from  his  govern-
ment."  The present  support  system, the  Senator  said,  threat-
ens to turn  this  into  a  nation  of  plantations  and  corporation
farms,  and to create  a "General  Motorized" agriculture.
The  rich  farmers  generally  have  preferred  lower  flexible
price  supports  because  they  can  produce  more  cheaply,  and
force  out  the  small  farmer.  The  smaller  farmer  has  been
forced  to  agitate for  high  supports,  though this  puts millions
in  the  pockets of  the  big farmer  and  encourages overproduc-
tion  on  the  big  farm.  "Graduated"   farm  relief   would  give
high  supports  to  the  small farmer, flexible lower  supports  to
the  big.  Neither  party  is  likely  to  warm  up  to  Scott's  idea;
even  in  the  best  days  of  the  New  Deal,  the  richer   farmers
north  and  south  had  the  most  political  influence  and  got  by
far  the  biggest  helping of government gravy.
Don'l  forget   Us  in  Your  Christmas  Shopping—We   Depend  on  Gift   Subs  for  Growth—Send  One   Today
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name
Street
City                                           Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name
Street
City                                            Zone           State
*  extra  for  Canada.                                                    12/5/55
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED