I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955may23.pdf

============================================================

How  Long  Will  Liberal  Editors  Remain Silent  About  Belf rage's  Deportation?    Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,  NUMBER 18
MAY  23,  1955
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Russian  Visit  to  Belgrade  Is  The  Key  to  Events
The  Liberation  of  Europe  Has  Begun
What  we  are  seeing  is  the  slow  liberation  of  Europe,   the
liberation  of  the  West  from  American  and  of  the  East  from
Russian  control.    The  areas  in  between  the  two  great  Powers
have  recovered;  the  Russians  are  tired  of  Stalinism  and  its
heavy  costs;  American big  business  has  decided  for  relaxation
of  tension and  tax  cuts.   The  real rulers of  Germany have  de-
cided  that  while they  still want  to  be on  our  side—who  wants
to  refuse  dollars  as  long  as they continue flowing ?—they want
to  be neutral on  our  side—like  Tito-.
It  is  in  Belgrade,  not  Vienna,  that  the  meaning  of  events
may  be read.   For  Tito  demonstrated  that  it  can be  done.    He
got  American  aid.    He  commands  a  big  Army.   He  has  an
alliance with two members of  the  Atlantic Pact.   Yet  he  voted
against  the  U.  S.  in  the  UN.     He  is  comrade-in-arms with
Nehru.    He  remains a  Communist and  a  dictator.    He  kicked
Moscow  and  the  world  Communist  movement  in  the  face.
And  his  reward  is a  State visit from  the  most  important  Soviet
delegation  to be sent abroad  since Potsdam—a  delegation  from
which  Molotov,  who  took  part  in  Stalin's  purge  of  Tito,  has
been  tactfully  excluded.
The  Reich  A  Larger  Yugoslavia?
The  Austrian state  treaty is  supposed  to  have  been  bait  for
the  Germans.    The  forthcoming  agreement  with   Yugoslavia
will  be  more  to  the  point.    The  Reich  cannot  be  a  second
Switzerland,  but  it  could  be a  larger  Yugoslavia,  able without
explicit  treaty restrictions—worthless  anyway, as past  treaty re-
strictions  on  the  Germans have proven—to  play the  role of  an
armed  neutral  in  the middle  of  Europe,  dealing  with America,
yet friendly with Russia.   This  is the  message  the Russians will
write for  the  Germans  in  the  skies  over  Belgrade.    And  it  will
prove  irresistible,  too  tempting  for  the  Germans to  reject,  too
subtle  for  the  State  Department  to  cope  with.
The  Russians have seized the  initiative for  two reasons.   One
is  that  mankind  is  hungry  for  peace.    The  other  is  that  the
Russians, unlike ourselves, have been  big enough  to  bow  grace-
fully  to the  inevitable.   They couldn't  topple  Tito,  so they will
deal  with  him.    No  Soviet  "China  lobby"  of  die-hard  Yugo-
slav  Communists ties  the Kremlin's  hands.   The  Belgrade  visit
is  impressive  because  it  reflects  a  willingness  to  face  up  to
realities.    And  in  those  realities  there  is  beginning  to  unfold
a   new  era  in  East  European  history  and   in  the  history  of
Communism.
Rolling  Themselves   Back
We  have  talked  of  a  rollback.    The  Russians  are  rolling
themselves  back.    Dulles—the  chief  American advocate  of  a
rollback—seems  singularly  unhappy  over  the  course  of  events,
and  with  good  reason.   What he  had  envisaged  was a rollback
of  Russian  power  before  a  rearmed  and  truculent  Germany,
able  to  reestablish  the  counter  revolution  in  Eastern  Europe
and  again  make  it  a  preserve  for  German  exploitation.    This
is a different  rollback.   It  reflects the  fact  that  the  Russians  are
beginning  to  learn  what centuries  of  empire taught  the  British
—to  hold  the  reins  lightly.    Until  now  we  have  seen  an  un-
pleasant   draconian  Russian   and   Russian   stooge   rule   over
Czechs,  Poles,  Hungarians,  Bulgarians  and  Rumanians—each
with  their  own  ways  and  traditions.    Even  their  Communists
found  the  Russian hand  heavy,  as  repeated  purges  of  "nation-
alist"  Communists  demonstrated.
But  now  watch  Belgrade.    If   the  Yugoslavs  may  have  a
Tito,  why  can't  the  Poles?    If   an  independent  Communist
regime,  genuinely  native  and  non-subservient,  with  its  own
variants  of  communism, is  possible  in  Yugoslavia,  why  not  in
Hungary?    Krushchev  and  Bulganin  cannot  go  a-wooing  in
Belgrade,  and  then  purge  those  who  will  not  give  them  100
percent obedience in  Warsaw.  And  from  Russia's point of  view
—isn't  this a  better  path  than Stalin's?   She can have  friendly
regimes  in  Eastern  Europe,  Communist regimes,  really  stand-
ing  on  their  own  feet.    A  series  of  Titos  would  be  a  bulwark
against  Western  penetration,  yet  the  Russians  could  honestly
claim  that  they had  withdrawn  to  their  borders.   There  could
be a  new  cordon  sanitaire  in  reverse,  as  part  of  a  new  pattern
of  co-existence.
An  Echo  from  Germany
This,  too,  is  being  read  in  the  skies  over  Belgrade  by  the
Germans.   The  Sunday  Times  of  London  (May 8)  ran a Bonn
dispatch  from  its  well-informed  German  correspondent   An-
tony Terry  saying  that  the  new German  Ambassador to Britain
was  carrying  a  proposal  whereby  the  West  would  accept  Ger-
man  neutrality  in  return  for  the  neutralization  of  the  Soviet
satellites  between  the  Reich  and  Russia.    The  Germans,   too,
according  to  this  dispatch,  are  talking  of  thus  creating  a  new
cordon  sanitaire.   What  happens  to  the  "liberationist"  slogans
of   Dulles  if  we  are  confronted   by  a  series  of  independent
Communist  regimes  in  East  Europe  like  Tito's?
Tito  in  his  speech  at  Pula  on  May  7  spoke  for  all  Europe
when  he criticized  those  who thought  one could  achieve  "peace
through  strength"  and  said  this  led  only  to  an  arms   race.
Europe  is  tired  of  the  burden  this  entails  and  the  tension  it
creates.   The  Russians are dealing with  Europe  over our  heads.
That  is  why  Dulles  was  so  glum  in  that  TV  cast  from   the
White  House.    We  must  join  in  making  peace,  or  have  it
made  without  us.
7  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May US, 19SS
The  Prospect  of  Peace  Begins to  Give  Wall  Street  The  Jitters
Why  the  Stock  Market  Sags  in  New  York, Rises  in  London
The  New  York  stock  market  opened  last  week  by  hitting
the  lowest  level  in  five  weeks.   Arms  issues,  especially  avia-
tion,  and  steel  were  hardest  hit.    The  New  York  Journal  of
Commerce  last  Tuesday  in  a  front  page  editorial   began  to
discuss  the  "major  repercussions"  to  be  expected  from   "fur-
ther  abatement  of  the  cold  war."    It  noted  that  "initial  cuts
in  defense  spending"  by  the  Eisenhower  Administration  had
"contributed  to the  business recession  of  1953-54."    The  finan-
cial  organ  speculated  that  "much  sharper  reduction  in  taxes
might  become  feasible  as  an  offset  to further  armament  cuts
if  the  Austrian  treaty  "is  followed by the  settlement  of  other
outstanding   disputes  with  the  Russians."
One  cause  for  worry  is  the  international   balance  of  pay-
ments.   The "dollar  gap"  between what the  U. S. sells  abroad
and  what  it  buys  has  been  chronic since  the  early  years of
World  War  I.    Other  countries  have  been  able  to  buy  more
from  us  than  we  buy  from  them—but only  because  we  found
ways  to  lend  or  give  them  dollars  with  which  to  do the  buy-
ing;    Last  year's  gap  of  almost  5  billions  was  filled  by  4.7
billions  in  military  aid  and  other  grants.   What  happens  if
tension  is  reduced?   Since  1915  U. S. loans or.grants  to  carry
on  war,  then to clear  up the  damage, and  then  to  prepare  for
a  new war  have financed U. S.  exports.    How will  exports  be
maintained if  the  world  is stabilized?  The big  upcoming ques-
tion:  can  we learn  to  spend  and  invest  for  peace  on as  large
a  scale  as  we have for  war?
Even  Steel  Rose  in  Britain
While the  New York stock market  opened weak, the London
market  opened  strong.    "Russia's  agreement  to  a  four  power
meeting,"  a  London  financial  cable  to  the  New  York  Times
reported  last  Tuesday, "cheered  the  stock market  here  today."
British   government  bonds,   Dominion  and   colonial   loans,
moved  upward.    So  did  German  and  Japanese  bonds,  along
with   Czech  and  Hungarian  issues.    Steel,  engineering  and
store shares  rose.
This   contrast   between  the  New  York  and  London  stock
markets  is  striking.    Every  time  hopes  of  a  settlement  ap-
pear,  the  New  York  market  sags,  the  London  market  rises.
Perhaps  one reason  is  that  we are  rich  enough  to  face  with
equanimity  the  prospect  of  priming the  pump of  business  by
Victory  for  Civil  Liberties
The  best  news  on  the  home front  since  we last  went
to  press  was  the  passage  of  S.  Res.  94  by  the  Senate.
It   was  approved  by  a  voice  vote,  with  no  opposition
other  than  a  rather  querulous inquiry  from  the  econ-
omy-minded   Ellender   of   Louisiana.     The   resolution
authorizes  a  Senate  Judiciary  subcommittee to  spend
$50,000  between now and  next  January  31 on  an  inves-
tigation   of  civil  liberties.    This  will  be  the  first  time
since   the   pre-war   LaFollette  committee  that   either
house of  Congress  has  acted  to  defend   basic rights.  The
subcommittee  will  be  made  up  of  Hennings   (D.  Mo.),
Langer   (Rep.  N.D.)  and  O'Mahoney (D.  Wyo,).
It  looks as  if  the  Hennings  subcommittee  may  be  the
only inquiry of  its  kind at  this  session.  Much  was hoped
for  from  the  investigation  promised  by  Senator  John-
ston   (D.  S.  C.)   into  the   security   program   and   the
"numbers game" played by the  Eisenhower Administra-
tion  with  figures  on  risk   discharges.    The  Senate  on
February  21 passed  S.  Res.  20 and  appropriated  $125,-
000  for  "a  full  and  complete  study."    A  Senate  Post-
office  and  Civil  Service subcommittee of  Johnston,  Neely
(D.  W.  Va.)   and  Carlson  (R.  Kans.)   was  set  up  and
retained   former   Senator   Gillette  as   special   counsel.
But  justifiably  or  not  the  impression  has   spread  on
Capitol  Hill  that  this  inquiry  may  peter  out.    Testi-
mony  on  the   Commerce  Department   budget  just   re-
leased  by  the  House  Appropriations  Committee  shows
how  badly civil  servants  and others  subject to  clearance
need  a  champion.   The  hearings  disclosed  that  of  85
"security  separations"   at  Commerce in  1954  only  two
were  cases  in  which  the  employe  was  told  the  charges
against  him.
a  perpetual  cycle of war,  castastrophe,  reconstruction,  a new
arms  race  and  then  war  again.    The  European   capitalist
powers impoverished by two world wars  cannot  afford  to  pur-
chase  "prosperity"  at  the  price  of  a  third.
Foreshadowing  the  Russian  Proposals
The  new  Russian  proposals  for   solving  the  problem  of
atomic  inspection  and  control resemble those  suggested  over
a  year  ago  by James  R.  Newman,  counsel to  the  McMahon
committee  in the  framing  of  our  Atomic  Energy  Act.   In  a
letter  to  the   Washington  Post  published  January   9,  1954,
(the   salient  portions  were  reprinted  at  the  time  in  Vol.  II,
No.  1 of  this  Weekly)   Newman  wrote:
"It  is  commonly  supposed  that  the  operation  of  an   effec-
tive  inspection  system  entails   almost  insurmountable   diffi-
culties.    It  is  assumed, for  example,  that  a  very  large  in-
spectorate   would  be  needed  for   each  country  that   would
seriously  hamper  the  conduct  of  internal  affairs—govern-
ment  and  private.    These  assumptions  are   unjustified.
"The  several  inspectorates  need  not  be  large.    A  small
group  of  inspectors  at  key  points  can  keep  major   produc-
tion  activities  under  surveillance.   It  is  not  important  to
know  everything;  it  is  important  only  to  know  important
things.    It  is  important  to  know if  a  country  is mobilizing.
"If  an  international  agreement  fixes  levels  of  armaments
production  . . . these  levels  will be reflected in certain  criti-
cal  indices:  steel  and  aluminum production, the  use  of  elec-
tric  power,  shipbuilding,  mining  of  strategic  metals,   the
manufacture  of  machine tools,  airframes,   jet  and   internal
combustion  engines,   electronics   equipment.
"Any   significant  departure   from   agreed-upon   levels  of
production  can be detected.   It  is unnecessary to keep  every
for   Atomic  Inspection  and  Control
mine  and  factory  under  observation.    The  economy  of  a
large  industrial  nation  is  so integrated,  its  parts  are  so in-
terdependent, that  a  sharp  increase  in rate  of output  at  one
point is visible  at  every  point.   The inspectors  need  not  con-
cern  themselves over leaks; their  task  is to watch for floods.
War  mobilization is  a  flood.  The notion of hidden prepara-
tion  for  a  major  war  is  absurd.
"There  are  three  essentials  to  keep  in  mind.   First,  both
conventional  and  atomic  weapons  are  needed  to  wage  war.
Second,  small-scale  illegal  production of  weapons in  either
category  is pointless  as  a  preparatory  measure;  simply not
worth  the  risk  of  detection.    Third,  illegal  manufacture  of
fissionables is  no more  difficult  to  detect  than  illegal  manu-
facture   of  any  other   item  requiring   a   large   industrial
effort."
The  Washington  Post  in  an  editorial   (May  13)  noted  the
resemblance  of  the  new  Russian  proposals  to  those  in  the
Newman  letter  and  said  the  Soviet  plan  "seems  to acknowl-
edge that what  is important  in this stage of the nuclear  race
is an effective  alarm  system  ...   a nation  intending  to launch
a war  would have to assemble  weapons and  planes  and  man-
power  on a large  scale.   Inspection  of  bases,  ports and  high-
way  and railway  junctions  might  provide  a  key, not  to con-
trol, but  to  advance  warning  of hostile  intentions.    Russia's
proposal  seems  to  go a  considerable  distance  in  recognizing
the  need  for  this kind  of  inspection."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  S3,1955
That  Past  Connection  With  The  Ku  Klux  Klan  May  Prove  Politically  Fatal
The  Fight  Against Wood's Nomination  to  the  SACB
The  fight  to  prevent  the  confirmation  of  John  S.  Wood  to
the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  would ordinarily  be
hopeless,  since  he  has  the  backing  of  both  Senators  from  his
home state of  Georgia,  the  powerful George  and  Russell.  Con-
gressional  courtesy  works  in  favor  of  a  former  Congressman
like  Wood, a  lame  duck  in  need  of  a  job.   As long time  chair-
man  of  the  House  Un-American  Activities   Committee,  he  is
—from  the  standpoint   of  the  Justice  Department,  the   FBI
and  the  right  generally—admirably   suited   for  the   Board.
The  Board  has  from  the  beginning  been  a  dumping  ground
for  lame  ducks and  witch  hunters.   The  only liberal   appoint-
ment,  that  of  former   Congressman   Charles   La  Follette  of
Indiana,  failed  of  confirmation;  the   maverick   Cain  would
never  have  been  confirmed   if  there  had  been  the  slightest
suspicion  that  he  would develop  qualms  and  courage,  a  sense
of  perspective  and  a  capacity  for  independence.   It  would be
naive to  suppose that  Wood's  witch  hunt  past  was  anything
but  a  recommendation.
There  is  but  one  possible  way  to  block  the   nomination.
This  lies  in  the  opposition  of  the  National  Association  for  the
Advancement  of  Colored  Peoples.    The  NAACP  did  not  ap-
pear  at  the  hearing  on Wood's nomination,  a  one-man Judici-
ary  subcommittee  affair  before  Senator  Watkins.    The  only
two  witnesses  were  Royal W. France for  the  Emergency  Civil
Liberties  Committee  and  William  L.  Patterson  for  the  Civil
Rights  Congress.    Both  relied  heavily  on  unverified  charges
from  Georgia that  Wood was  a  member  of  the  Ku Klux Klan,
and  these  drew  from  Wood  an  admission  that  in  the  20's  he
paid  an  initiation  fee  and  went  to  a  meeting.    Wood  claims
that  he withdrew when  he learned  the  Klan  was committed  to
violence!    This  is  enough  for  the  NAACP;  obviously Wood
is  no  Hugo Black.   There  may  be hesitation  in  the  Senate  at
the  prospect  of  offending  the  Negro  voter.    This  is  the  slim
chance,  and   even  this  will  be  of  little  avail  without  some
public  pressure.
Klan  Charges  Unproven
There  is  no proof  that  Wood  is  a  Klansman  or  that  he did
not  tell  the  truth,  and  no  good  will  be  done  by  intemperate
overstatement  on this  score.  But  there  is  a powerful  avenue of
attack  open for  some  Senator  with  the  nerve  to  use  it.   And
that  lies  in  the  way  Brownell  has  handled  the  Klan  charge.
The Attorney  General  received  a  letter  last  March  7  (from  a
fellow  Republican  at  that)  saying  that  he  ought  to  know—
"I  have  been  reliably  informed  that  ex-Congressman  Wood
was  not  only a  member of  the  Klan, but  was  one of  the  lead-
ers  of  that  organization  in  his  community."   The  letter  was
signed  by  John  Wesley  Dobbs,  vice  chairman  of  the  Republi-
can  State  Central  Committee  of  Georgia.    Mr.  Dobbs is  a  re-
spected  Negro  business  man.    His  letter  was  supported  by
the  NAACP, which  wrote  Brownell to  ask that  these  charges
be  investigated   before  Wood  was  confirmed.    The  NAACP
letter  was  acknowledged by  Deputy  Attorney   General  Wil-
liam  P.  Rogers,  but  no  report  was  made  to  the   Judiciary
committee  and  there  is  no  indication  that  Brownell  did  any-
thing about  this.
Considering  the  lengths  to  which  the  government  goes  in
prying far  back  into the  private  lives  of file clerks  and postal
carriers,  this  yawning  disinterest  in  Wood's  background  is
instructive,  if  not  surprising.   This  is  not  a  matter  of  "loy-
alty"—the   SACB  job  requires   Senate  confirmation  and  in
such  cases the  Justice  Department  is  supposed fully  to  inves-
tigate  the  appointee's  character  and  background.    The  Klan
is  on the  Attorney  General's  subversive list,  and  it  is  easy  to
imagine  how  differently   he  would  have  reacted  if  someone
charged  that  Wood  was  a  Communist,  or  even  that  he  had
once bought  insurance  from  the  International  Workers  Order.
The  Justice  Department  and  the  Judiciary  committee  would
not be satisfied to take Wood's explanation  at  face value—nor
would  Wood  himself  if  the  roles  were  reversed   and  he  as
chairman  of the  House  committee were presiding over  a  hear-
ing  at  which  someone else  was  accused  of having  belonged to
a  subversive  organization.    This  is  worth  rubbing  home,  and
since  it  might  pay  off politically  in  Negro  votes  some  North-
ern  Democratic  Senator  might  get  up  the  nerve  to  air  it  on
the  Senate floor.
SACB  Aimed  Only  at   Leftists
As a matter  of public education, another  point is worth  air-
ing  in  this  fight.   Some people are  using  the  argument  that
Wood  might  have  to  pass  on  the  Klan  itself  as  a  subversive
organization.   There is no danger  of this.   The Internal  Secu-
rity  Act  was  too  well  drafted  by  the  Chamber  of Commerce
master  minds  who  sold  it  to  Mundt,  Ferguson,  Nixon,  Mc-
Carran  and  finally  Congress.    The  sanctions  of the  act—reg-
istration,  refusal  of  passports,  denial  of  government  and  de-
fense  employment—apply  only  to  persons  adjudged Commu-
nist  members  or  fronters.    None of  these  sanctions  apply  to
Fascists or racists.   In this sense  the  SACB is quite  different
from  the Attorney  General's  list which includes rightist as well
as  leftist  organizations.   Section  4  (a)  of  the  Internal  Secu-
rity  Act  is  the  only  part  which  might  affect  rightists;  this
makes  it  a  crime  to  do  anything  which  might  contribute  to
the establishment of a totalitarian dictatorship in this  country
—but  only  if  the  totalitarianism is  under  foreign  control.  The
Klan  as  a  native  home-grown  affair  would  not  be  subject  to
prosecution  under this  provision.
It  is important  to make the public realize  that  the  Internal
Security  Act  is  not  aimed  at  "subversives"  generally  in  the
sense  that  it  might  also  proscribe  native  Fascists  or racists.
The  Act  was  aimed  only at  the  Left—and  now thanks  to  the
Morse-Humphrey-Douglas  amendment  of  last  August   it   is
loose  and  vague  enough  easily  to  encompass  the  mildest  lib-
erals,  from  One Worlders  to  ADA-ers.   Whether  Wood  was
a  Klansman, whether  he  is  celling  the  truth,  whether  he did
indeed  as  he  claims  take  some steps  against  the  Klan  while
heading  the  House  committee,  all  these  matters  deserve  full
investigation  and  not  just  the  brush-off  Brownell  gave  them.
But  the  truth  is  that  a  lame-duck  witch  hunter   like  Wood,
fresh  from  the  kangaroo  court   of  the  House  committee,   is
ideally  suited  to  the  SACB.   This  authoritarian  style  court
for  labelling  dangerous  thoughts,  and  setting  up  an  Ameri-
can  political  index  expurgatorius  is  completely  at  variance
with  the  ideals  of  a  free  society  and  the  campaign  against
Wood  ought  to  nurture  no  illusions  about  the  SACB  itself.
Your  Chance  to  Give  The  Weekly  to  A  Friend  for  Only  $2
Until  now  we  hove  not  been  able  to  handle  shorter  than  one  year  subscriptions.   But  we  are  currently able  to  offer  a special
6-month  gift  and  trial  subscription  for  only  $2—and   allow  you  to  send a  half  dozen  such  gift  subs  for  the  special  price  of  only
$10.    Here's your  chance  to  introduce  the  Weekly  to  a  friend,  or to place it  in  the  hands of  your  favorite pastor, editor or  librarian.
And  in  case  you're  one  of  the  laggard  few  who  haven't  yet  renewed  you  can  do  that  at  the  same  time.    Remember  every  reader
adds  to  the  awakening army  of  Americans  prepared  again  to  think  and  act  in  the  struggle  for  peace  and  against  the  witch  hunt.
Send  those gift  subs  today.
With  many  thanks,                            fX      ^T.
,  'I,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May 23,1955
A  Case  of  Atrophied  Conscience:  No  One Protests An  Editor's  Deportation
How  Long  Will  Our Liberal  Editors Remain  Silent  About   Belfrage?
Who  would  have dreamt  that  it  would  be  possible  to  order
an  editor  deported   because  of  his  political   views  without  a
single  protest  from  America's few  liberal  weeklies and  dailies ?
It  is two years since  Cedric Belfrage  of  the  National  Guard -
tan  was  arrested  for  deportation  the  day  after  he  was  inter-
rogated  by McCarthy.    In  all  that  time  not  a  word  of  protest
has  come  from  any  other  liberal  weekly  or  daily,  indeed  most
of  them  have  yet  to  mention  the  arrest.   Last  Thursday (May
12)  the  deportation  order  was upheld  by the  Board  of  Immi-
gration  Appeals,  again  with  scant  notice.    How  atrophied  has
the  conscience  of  American  liberal  journalism  become?
When  A  Hunger  Strike  Is  Not  News
Last  December,  in  the  wake of  the protests from  Pearl  Buck
over  the  disgraceful  treatment  of  aliens  ordered  deported,   the
Immigration  and Naturalization Service  (see New  York  Times
last  December  10)  rescinded  the  order  which  had  been  send-
ing  such  aliens  to  jail  ever  since  Ellis  Island  was  closed.     It
was  announced that  in  the future deportees  would  be  held  un-
der   custody  in  hotels   until  new  special  quarters   had   been
established.
But  when Belfrage  was taken  to  jail  last  week-end and  went
on a  hunger strike in protest against the  conditions imposed  on
him,  the  only  paper  which  carried  the  news  was  the   Hearst
Journal-American.    Why  were  the  other  papers  so queasy?
We  have no  doubt  that  if  an  editor were  picked  up  for  de-
portation,  and  it  turned  out  that  he  was  a  McKinley Republi-
can,  that  far  from  being  an  alien  his  family  had  scraped  its
shins  on  Plymouth  Rock, and  that  (ha, ha!)  he  had  just fin-
ished  running  a  series  of  editorials calling  for  preventive war,
a  hundred  bold editors would have sprung to  his defense—and
one  of  them  would  have  been  awarded the  Pulitzer prize.
Unfortunately  Belfrage's  is  not  one  of  those  cases  of  mis-
taken  identity,  one  of  those  rednctio  ad  absurdums, which  can
be championed without danger to  respectability.   The  National
Guardian  is the  organ  of  the  Progressive Party.    Belfrage  is a
Left-wing  editor.    Why   not  look  the  other  way, and  write
another strong editorial about that  fellow in the  Air  Force  who
was  branded  disloyal  because his  second  cousin by marriage  on
his  mother's  side  once  owned  a  book  on  Socialism  by  Karl
Kautsky—although  sworn  witnesses  of  the  highest  repute  at-
tested  (1)   that  the  book  had  only  been  used  as  a  door-stop,
(2)    that  the  cousin  was  illiterate   anyway,  and   (3)—the
clincher—that Kautsky in his old  age criticized  the  Bolsheviks ?
Ah,  for  those  libertarian  causes  which can  be  fought  shoulder
to  shoulder  with  Sidney Hook!
A  Victim   of   McCarthy
We  challenge  editors  to  take  a  look  at  the  Belfrage  case.
Do  they  believe  a  person  accused  of  Communism  in  a  depor-
tation  action  has  a  right  to  demand  that  the  charges  against
him  be proven?    Do  they  believe,  after  reading  the  Board  of
Immigration   Appeals  decision  for   themselves,  that   the   case
against  Belfrage  was  proven ?
We  believe  that  the  case against  Belfrage is  so  tenuous that
if  he  gets  his  full  day  in  court,  the  deportation  order  will  be
reversed.    The   Board  found  that  he  was  a  Communist  "at
least  from  October  1937  to  the  end  of  1938,"  but  not  in 1945.
The  main evidence  was a  party card  issued  in  that  period  to  a
"George  Oakden"   who  is  linked  by  two  woozy-minded  wit-
nesses  and  a  dubious  chain  of  circumstantial evidence  with
Belfrage.
Only  Dead  Radicals   Defended?
The  truth,  when  it  comes out,  will  show  that  the  Immigra-
tion  and  Naturalization Service  investigated  all  this  when Bel-
frage  re-entered  the  country  in  1945,  and  that  it  would  never
have  been, hashed  up  in  a  deportation  proceeding  if  McCarthy
had  not  insisted  on  Belfrage's  arrest  the  day after  he  appeared
before  the  McCarthy committee.
But what  if  Belfrage were a Communist ?   Do  we  believe  in
a  free  press?   Is  it  in  accordance  with  the  First  Amendment
to  allow  an  editor's  deportation  for  his  political  views?    Or
are  these principles  we  affirm  only  in  the  case  of  radical  aliens
and  editors  safely  dead  and  buried  like  that  foreigner  Paine
and  that  trouble-maker  Zenger?
Why  Not  Send  A  Gift  Subscription  to  Your  Local   Editor?
LF.  Stone's  Weekly
I.  P. Stone's Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my
Name
Street
E.  Capitol  Wash.  3,  D. C.
sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
City                                           .Zone
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money
(To)  Name
Street
City
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
...Zone
State
enclosed) :
State
3/J3/5.-.
Room  205
301   E. Capital  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED