I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955may02.pdf

============================================================

Debunking   Brownell's  Latest  on Informers,  P.  2;  Scientist  Challenges  Passport  Czarina,  P.  3
I. R  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   NUMBER  15MAY  2,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  Dulles  Was  Forced  to  Make A  Complete  About-Face   on  Negotiations
Peace  Is  Breaking  Out
Far  more  important  than  any  evacuation  of  Quemoy  and
Matsu  is the  eviction  of  Knowland  and  the  China  Lobby  from
the driver's seat of  American foreign policy.  This  is what  hap-
pened  here last  week.   With  the  Secretary of  State's  press  con-
ference  on  Tuesday,  there  has  been  a  complete  about  face  in
American  foreign  policy.   We  may not  have  been  heading  for
war  but  we  were certainly facing  in  that  direction.   We  move
now  toward  global  negotiations.    In  making  the  shift,  Eisen-
hower  called  Knowland's  bluff.  When  Knowland  finally  broke
his  silence  by summoning the  press  to  his  office  in  the  Capitol
Wednesday  afternoon,  the  reporters  expected  a  fighting  state-
ment,  looked   for  a  dramatic  resignation  as  minority  leader.
There  under  the  inevitable picture  of  Lincoln  sat  the  leading
spokesman of  the pro-war faction,  pink,  ruddy, prosperous  and
overweight,  with  the  booming  affability  of  a  small  town  real-
tor.    What  came  out  was  a  toothless  rehash  of  the  familiar
statements   about   Yalta   and   appeasement.     Knowland   had
crumpled.
Knowland  Faces  McCarthy's  Fate
What  has happened  here on  foreign policy this  year is much
like what happened  last year  on  McCarthy.   A  coalition  led by
conservatives  and  supported  by  both  wings  of  the  Democratic
party  made it  possible  for  the  Eisenhower  Administration, in-
deed  forced  it,  to  take  on  McCarthy,  and  to  deflate  his  wild
man  minority.   A  similar  coalition  has  gone  into  action  and
achieved  a  similar  deflation  of  the  pro-war  extremists.    The
Stevenson  speech,  and  Senator  George's  initiative, gave  Eisen-
hower assurance of  Democratic  support  if  he  turned  on Know-
land  and  moved  toward  negotiations.     Knowknd,  like  Mc-
Carthy,  had  also  become  a  personal  rival,  a  contender  for  the
next  presidential  nomination, one  of  the  few  dissident  voices
in  the  Republican chorus  begging  Ike  to  run again.  This  is the
kind  of  politics  an  Army  man  like  Eisenhower  understands.
He  has  cut  the  big  humorless  Californian  down  to  size.
A  Frankenstein  With  Three  Monsters!
The  State Department  had  built up three men.  It  had  staked
its all in Europe on Adenauer.  It  had  built  up  Mohammed  Ali
of  Pakistan  as  the  counter-weight  to  that  neutralist  Nehru.    It
had  made George  its "Vandenberg"  in  the  Senate.    Last week-
end  all  three  allies  put  the  squeeze  upon  it.    Adenauer  must
have  four  power  negotiations;  the  impact  on  Germany  of  the
Austrian  treaty cannot easily be overestimated;  the  Germans  are
eager  for  a try at  unification  along  the  same lines.   Mohammed
Ali  had  been  won by Chou  En-lai, and  the  Pakistani  announced
that  Chou  had  made  a  "quite  reasonable"  offer  to  settle  the
Formosa  question  peacefully.    This  was  not  Nehru,  this  was
Ali speaking—it  just could  not be rejected  out of  hand.  Finally
here  at  home,  the  gentle  and  shrewd  old  Georgian  Saturday
night,  failed  utterly to  take his cue from  the Department  in his
speech  to  the  newspaper  editors.   Where  the  Department  had
icily  set  out  pre-conditions  for  talks  with  Chou,  George  spoke
up  for  talks  without  conditions  and  even  referred—horrors!—
no  less  than  three  times  to  our  Russian   "friends."
The  Big  Money  Is  for  Co-Existence
Back  of  George  speaks  the  really  big  and  sober  money men
of  this  country, not  the  Texas  newly rich but  the  Rockefellers,
heavy  industry  (except  for  aviation)  and  most  of  Wall  Street.
With  him  stand  the  two  big  business  men  of  the  Cabinet,
Humphrey  and  Wilson,  and  the  conservative  military  element
at  the  Pentagon   (see  the  Ridgway testimony  on  page  four  for
a  glimpse  of  their  thinking).    Eisenhower,  basically  a  peace
man  and  a  military conservative,  seems  to  have  been  carrying
on his own  "meeting on  the  Elbe"  secretly with  Zhukov.    The
President  and  this  crowd,  with  an  ear to the  grass  roots  and  an
eye to a stable dollar, would  love to face  next year's elections  on
a  peace  program  with  a  juicy  tax  cut,  and  the  only  way to  cut
taxes  is to cut world  tension.   Not  being liberals  or  Democrats,
they can move toward  co-existence without  fear  of  being  called
pro-Communist.   The  first  problem  was to  disengage  from  the
China  Lobby.    Rising  popular  resistance  to  war,  reflected  in
both  parties,  has  made  this  possible.
On  the  Road  from  Duck   Island
Dulles  had  to change  his  tune  or  give  up  his  job.   The  De-
partment's  press  officers,  adept  at  poisoning  the  wells  of  public
opinion,  had  been  casting  suspicion  on  the  Austrian  treaty  and
throwing  cold  water  on  the  prospects  of  negotiation.     Dulles
got  back  and  after  seeing  Eisenhower  completely  changed  his
stance.    He  welcomed  the  Austrian  treaty.    He  accepted  the
idea  of  talks  with  Chou  and  of  an  agreement  for  a  cease-fire
despite  Chiang's  opposition.    Dulles  even  said  that  he  felt  that
Red  China  unlike  the  East  European  satellites  had  a  consider-
able  measure  of  independence.    Saul  on  the  road  from  Duck
Island  seemed  to  have  become  Paul.   Only  in  his  answer  to  a
question  about  whether  the  Hammarskjold  mission  had  helped
to  make  peace  talks  possible  did  he  show  his true  colors.   Un-
graciously  Dulles  said  he  saw  "no  discernible  relationship."
But  Hammarskjold  brought  back  from  Peking  the  same  offer
of  talks  in  which  the  Chinese  Communists,  without  giving  up
their  claim  to  Formosa,  would  nevertheless  accept  a  cease-fire.
The  American  fliers  would  have  been  free  by  now  if  Dulles
hadn't  slammed  the  door  hard  on  Hammarskjold  last  January.
6   .<
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  2,1955
The  False  Accuser  of  Bunche  and  Mrs.  Karpuk  Remains  A   "Consultant"
Debunking That  Supposed Reform  by  Brownell of  the  Informer  System
On  Friday, April  15 the  Scripps-Howard  Washington   Daily
News  ran  two banner  lines  across  page  one,  "Justice  Depart-
ment  Drops  Its  Stable of 87 Ex-Red  Per  Diem Witnesses."  In-
side,  the  headline  said  "Justice  Drops  Its  Ex-Commie  Help-
ers."     The  result  was  a  flurry  of  congratulatory  editorials
and  a  general  impression   that  the  Justice  Department   had
at  last  reformed  its  informer  system.
That  same   afternoon  the  Attorney   General  held  a  press
conference.    The transcript  will  show that  the  only  reform,  if
any,  is  that  in  the  future  these  informers  will  be  paid  per
diem  instead  of  on  salary.
The  Attorney   General  was  either  ill-informed  or  careless
even  in  the  statement  that  there  were  no  more  salaried  in-
formers.  This  appeared  from  an  incident  in Greenboro,  North
Carolina, during the  trial  of  a  local  Communist leader,  Junius
Scales,  under  the  membership  clause  of  the  Smith  Act.   The
ex-Communiat  informer,  John  Lautner,  on  the  witness  stand
April  12 and  13 swore  that  he  was  a  salaried  "consultant" of
the  Justice  Department   at  $125  a  week.
Defense   Counsel  David  Rein  of  Washington  saw  the  Daily
Netos  story.    When  court  reopened  on  Monday,  April  18,  he
called  the  Judge's  attention  in  a  side-bar  conference  to  the
contradiction   between  the  Lautner   testimony  and  the  report
from  Washington.    The  U.S.  Attorney   in  charge   thereupon
telephoned   Washington.    After   doing   so,  he  informed   the
Judge  that  the  records   of  the  Justice  Department   showed
that  Lautner  was  employed  at  $125  a  week.   This  is  in  flat
contradiction  to  the  Attorney   General.
Case  of  the  Baltimore   Grandmother
That  the  Attorney  General  is  in  no  mood to  reform  the  in-
former  system  was  revealed   when  he  was  questioned  about
the  Karpuk  case,by  Peter  J.  Kumpa  of  the  Baltimore   Sun.
Mary  Karpuk  is  the  61-year-old   Baltimore  grandmother  who
had  been  ordered  deported  after  two  professional   informers,
Leonard  Patterson  and  Earl  Reno,  identified  her  as  a  Com-
munist.
On  April   14, the  day  before  the  Attorney  General's  press
conference,  the  Board  of  Immigration   Appeals  reversed  the
deportation  order.    The  Board  analyzed  the  informer  testi-
mony  and  found  it  unworthy  of belief.   In  addition  the  Board
criticized  the  way  in  which  Department  of  Justice  investiga-
tors  had  led  these  two  informers  to  identify  Mrs.  Karpuk  as
a  Communist.
They  were  asked  whether   they   had   ever  known  a   Mrs.
Karpuk  in  the  Communist party.   When  they  said  they  had,
the  investigators  showed them  several  pictures  of the  accused
woman  taken  at  different  times.   Patterson   identified  one and
Reno  another.   The.pictures.of  Mrs. Karpuk  were  not  shown
with  photographs  of  other  people  to  test  whether  Patterson
and  Reno  "were  qualified," as  the  Board  said,  "to  positively
identify  the  respondent,"    This  is  obviously  poor  police  tac-
tics  if  an  honest  identification  is  desired.
The  Baltimore   Sun  reporter  asked  whether  the  Attorney
General  in  view  of  these  findings  would  use  Patterson  and
Reno "again in a future  case?" Brownell  replied, "If  they had
They   Sure  Were
"This  internal evidence of  perjury  and  my  belief  that
Matusow  had  no  scruples against  it  compel  me  to  find
that  all  of  his  testimony which  attributed  to  the Com-
munist  party  or  to  any  of  the  defendants an  intent that
the  Government  be  overthrown   by  force  and  violence
was  false.  .  .  .
"Defendants  originally  made  the  accusation that  Ma-
tusow's  perjury  was  suborned  by  the  Government   at-
torneys,  but  that  charge  is  not  being  pressed.    It  has
proved  to  be  without  foundation.    The  specific  charges
against  [Koy]  Cohn. were  conclusively  disproved.    The
other  charges  made  against  Government  attorneys are
categorically  denied  by  them.   I  cannot  accept  the  word
of  a  proved  perjurer  against theirs and  the  circumstan-
tial  evidence is  all  in  their favor.    I find that  all  of  Ma-
tusow's   fabrications  were   his  .own  suggestions.     By
hindsight   we  can  see  that  the  Government   attorneys
were  credulous.  .  . ."
—Federal   Judge   Dimock,  ordering   a  new  trial   for
Alexander     Traehtenberg     and    George    Blake
Charney   under   the  Smith   Act.
facts  which  were  important  to  the  case  and  after  we checked
their  testimony  in  ordinary  course  and  found  it  to  be  reliable,
we  would,  yes."
Doesn't  Want  to  Be  "Impertinent"
Kumpa  then  asked  whether  he  thought  the  method  used  in
the  Karpuk  case  was  "the  proper  way  to  identify  an  individ-
ual."    The  Attorney   General   replied   only,  "That's  not  the
usual  way."    When pressed  for  comment on  the  Board's  find-
ings  about  these  two  informers,  he  said  it  would  be  "imperti-
nent  for  me  to  comment."
"General,"  Anthony  Lewis  of  the  Washington  Daily   News
then  asked,  "perhaps what  the  gentleman  is getting  at  is  this
—sometimes you  have  a  case  in  which  one or  two  persons  ac-
cuse  a  man  of  something  and  eventually the  defendant  or  the
person  accused  is  cleared.    Now,  another  one  that  comes  to
mind  involves  the  same  accusers  or  two  people on that  list of
consultants—anyway  Ralph  Bunche.    Now, when  eventually
the  person  is  cleared,  the  public  feels  well  shouldn't  some-
thing  be done about  persons  whose accusation  was  apparently
incorrect.    What  should  be  done  to   prevent—"
The Attorney  General broke  in  to  say evasively,  "Well,  that
keeps  us  pretty  busy  because  there  are  tens  of  thousands  of
indictments  every  year  where  there  is  no  conviction."
At  that  point  the  press  gave up.
In  the  Bunche  case,  the  accusers  were  Leonard  Patterson
. and   Manning  Johnson.     A   UN   loyalty  board,  in   clearing
Bunche,  referred   their  testimony  to  the  Justice  Department
for  possible  perjury   action.    No  action  was  ever  taken  and
both  men  are  still  "per   diem  consultants."
P.S.  Though  the reporters  asked  sharp  questions,  very little
of  this got  into their papers.
Professional  Ethics  As  Practiced
It  is  a  violation of  the  Canon of  Ethics  for  a  lawyer  to
discuss  in  the  newspapers  a  case  pending  in  the  courts.
The  U.S.  Supreme Court  recently heard  the  Justice Depart-
ment's  argument  in  the  Peters  case  and  is  now preparing
its  opinion.    In  the  April  29  issue  of  U.S.  News  & World
Report,  the  Attorney  General  reargued the  case  in  public.
U.S.  News  features on its  cover  "Shall Doors  Be Opened
to  Spies  and Subversives?—Asks Attorney General Brow-
nell  in an exclusive  interview."   The interview is concerned
with  the  need  for  secret  informants  and  for  denying  ac-
at  the  Department  of  Justice
cused  persons  in  loyalty  cases  the  right  to  confront  their
accusers,  a  rehash  of  his  brief  in  the  Peters  case.
This  is  the  second  such  unprofessional incident  in con-
nection  with  this  case.    In  March,  Warren  E.  Burger,  As-
sistant  Attorney  General  in charge of  the  Criminal  division,
called  in  a  dozen  newspapermen  for  a  private  "briefing"  on
the Peters  case. Without revealing their source,  they there-
upon  wrote  "dope"  stories   (as   in  the  Washington  Star,
March  28)  intended to  build  up  public  support  for  the  gov-
ernment's  point of  view  in  the  Peters  case.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 2, 1955
Mrs.   Shipley  For  the  First  Time  Is  Ordered  to  Answer  Questions
An  American  Scientist  Challenges  the  Passport  Czarina
If  you  can  imagine  someone bold  enough  to  ask  riddles  of
the  Sphinx,  you  have  some  idea  of  the  effrontery  involved  in
asking  Ruth  B. Shipley  to explain  why she  has  denied a  pass-
port  to   Dr.  Martin  D.  Kamen.    Mrs.  Shipley,  Chief  of  the
State  Department's   Passport   Division  for  27  years,   usually
answers  to  no  one.    But  she  and  Secretary   of  States  Dulles
have  been  sued  by  Dr.  Kamen, an  internationally-known  bio-
chemist,  who claims  they  violated  his  constitutional  rights  in
refusing  to  let  him  leave  the  U. S.   And she has  been  ordered
to  give  a  deposition  before  she  departs  for  a  European  vaca-
tion  on  May  6.
But  Mrs.  Shipley  will  be spared  the  hurly-burly  that  some-
times occurs when  depositions  of  lesser  personages  are  taken.
The  court  ruled  that  all  questions  must  first  be  submitted  to
her  in  writing.    Then  she  will  answer  them.    One  must  not
expect  too much.   She  will not  answer  anything  that  touches
on  classified  information.    But  she  is  sure  to  give  some  in-
sights   into  the  internal   workings  of  her  section.    And  Dr.
Kamen,  who  has  been  put  off repeatedly  since  1947  with  the
U.  S.  Iron  Curtain  at  Bandung
Louis  Lautier,  covering the  Asian-African  conference
for  the  newspaper,  Afro-American,  reported  from  Ban-
dung  in  its  issue  of  April  23 that  the  delegates  greeted
with  applause lengthy  messages  from  Dr.  W.  E.  B. Du
Bois  and  Paul  Robeson.    Both  said  they  were  unable  to
obtain  passports  to attend  the  conference.    Dr.  Du  Bois
founded   the  Pan-African  Congress   in  Paris  30  years
ago.     The   world's   best   known  Negro   historian   and
America's  most  famous  Negro  artist  thus  advertised  to
the  meeting  of  the  colored  powers  that  the  U.S.A.  now
has  an  iron  curtain  of  its  own, and  denies  the  right  to
travel  to  persons   of  whose  ideas   the  American  State
Department   disapproves.
stock  statement  that  "his  travel  abroad  would  be contrary  to
the  best interests of the  United  States" may at  last  get  into a
court  record  some  of  the  thinking  that  lies  behind  the  State
Department's  refusal  to  let  him  leave  America.
Dinner  In  A  Goldfish   Bowl
Kamen  is well-aware  of  the  incidents  in  his  past  that  made
him  an  object  of  suspicion  for  a  time.    Most  publicized was  a
dinner  he  had  in  1944 with  two  Russian  vice-consuls  while  he
was  in  San  Francisco  working  in  the  Manhattan  Atom Bomb
Project.     This   historic   meal   occurred   in   Bernstein's   Fish
Grotto  and  the  spies  outnumbered  the  guests.    The  security
agent   who  regularly   tailed   Kamen  was  there.    And   FBI
agents,  in an  adjoining booth, recorded  the  table  conversation.
Because  of  that  dinner,  Kamen was  accused  of  an  indiscre-
tion,  forced  to  resign  from  the  Project,  and  has  been  haunted
since  by charges  that  he  passed  secrets  to  the  Russians.   But
he  claims  he  met  one  of  the  consuls  casually  at  a  cocktail
party  and only tried  to help him get  radioactive  treatment  for
a   consular   official   dying  of   leukemia.    When  the   Russian
asked  him  to  dinner,  Kamen,  who  denies  any  Communist  af-
First  Test  of  New  Travel  Queen
First  test  of  Mrs.  Shipley's  successor,  Miss  Francis
Knight,  will be the  application  made by  Owen  Lattimore
for  a  passport.    The  famous  Far   Eastern  expert   and
scholar,  whose  perjury  case  is  still  in  the  courts,  has
been  invited  to lecture  abroad  by a  half  dozen  European
universities  and  learned  societies.    He  is  scheduled   to
lecture  at  Oxford  late  this  month and  before  the  Rome
Congress  of  the  Historical  Sciences  in  September.    His
application  was  filed  March  12  and  the  State  Depart-
ment  told  the  Baltimore  Sun last  week it  was still  being
considered.    Said  a  spokesman  for  the  passport   division,
"It  is  kind  of  a  complicated  matter."
filiation  or  sympathy,  says  he  went  out  of  curiosity  and  did
not  divulge  any  atomic  secrets.
By now there  is  more than  his  own denials  to  refute  the  old
charges.   In  1948  he  testified before  the  House  Un-American
Activities Committee.   And the  Committee,  which  is  not  noted
for  charity, called  him  a  "frank"  witness  and  said  it  was  "in-
clined  to  believe that  Kamen committed a  serious  act  of  indis-
cretion  rather  than  an  act  of  espionage."    In  1951,  when  the
Chicago  Tribune  exhumed the  old rumors  and  described  him
as  a  spy  and  traitor,  he  sued  for  libel  and  has  just  collected
$13,500  damages.
Kamen  might  reasonably  be  said  to  have  cleared  his  name.
But  he  has  not  impressed  Mrs.  Shipley.    In  a  letter  she  sent
him  in  1953,  she  repeated  the  old charges  as  grounds  for  the
latest  refusal.   Yet  neither  she  nor  the  government,   during
Kamen's  appeal  from  her  ruling,  has  ever  presented  any  fresh
evidence  to  support  these  worn   accusations.
The  A.E.C. Cleared Him
Then  why  is  Kamen  kept  here?    It  might  be  argued  that
since  the  government  once  thought  him  "indiscreet"  it  fears
to  let  him  go  abroad.    But  no  such  fear  exists.   According  to
his  attorney,  Nathan  David,  both  the  A.E.C.  and  the  Army
have  told  the  Passport   Division  they  do not  object  to  Kamen
leaving  the  country.    This  suggests  then,  that  Kamen, who
has  been  forced  to  forego  a  lectureship  in  Israel,  a  visiting
professorship  in Australia,  and  numerous  conferences vital  to
his work, may be a  prisoner  here  because  Shipley wants  it  so.
Support  for  this  suspicion is  found  in  an  interview  reported
in  the  Yale  Law  Journal  for  Feb.,   1952.    There  Mrs.   Shipley
admitted  the A.E.C. did not object  to Kamen's  leaving but  said
that  had  nothing  to  do with  it.   She cited  his  testimony  before
the  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  an  appearance  that
has  generally  been  considered  a  triumph  and  a  vindication  for
Kamen  and  said,  "Well,  I  think  that  sums  up  the  situation."
If  this  is  all  that  keeps  Kamen  here  one  might   expect  a
change  since  Mrs.  Shipley,  now  70,  retired  April   30.    But
there  will  be  none.   She  hand-picked  her  successor,  Frances
G.  Knight.    The  appointment  is  not  subject   to  Senate  con-
firmation  and  Dulles  has  approved  it  despite  a  warning  from
Rep.  Celler, for  one, that  Mrs.  Knight  was  a  reputed  member
of   Sen.  Joe  McCarthy's  "loyal   American   underground."
Westbrook  Pegler  Confirms  The  Weekly's  View  of  Mrs.  Shipley's  Successor
"The  appointment  of  Miss  Frances  Knight  to  Mrs. Ruth
Shipley's  old  job  of  chief  of  the  passport   division  of   the
State Department is a heartening  victory. . . . This  division
is invested  with  arbitrary  legal  authority to  reject  applica-
tions, for  passports  for  Communists and  persons  who have
truck  with  them.
"Frances broke in with Hugh Johnson  in  the  crazy  Fasc-
ist  experiment  called  NRA but  she  seems  to  have  been  a
pro-American  undercover  agent  in  the  bureaucracy.    She
bored  into  the  bureaucracy  in  the  heyday  of  the  Acheson-
Hiss  cabal  and  actually  was  the  source  of  most  of  the  in-
formation   which  Joe  McCarthy  relied   on  in  his  original
speech  on traitors  and  perverts  in  State."
—Westbrook  Pegler,  New  York  Journal-American,   April  14, in  a  column  attacking  the  Washington  Post,  the  New  York
Post  and  Stone's   Weekly  (March  14 issue)  for  criticizing   the  Knight    appointment.
6  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, May 8,1955
Some  Good  News  and  Bad  on  the  Civil  Liberties   Front
Senator  Hennings  Asks $50,000  to  Protect  the  Bill  of  Rights
Biggest   news  of  the  week  from  a  civil  liberties  point  at
view was  the  introduction  last  Monday of  8.  Res.  94 by  Sena-
tor  Hennings  (D., Mo.).   This  would for  the  first  time  imple-
ment  Section  134  of  the  Legislative  Reorganization   Act  of
1946, which called for  the  establishment  of  a  Senate  Judiciary
subcommittee  on  civil liberties.   The  full  Judiciary  committee
has  approved the  resolution,  and  the  appointment  of  the  sub-
committee.    Hennings  will  be  chairman,  with   Langer   and
O'Mahoney  (fresh  from  arguing  the  historic  Lattimore  case)
as  the  other  members.    The  resolution  would  give  the  sub-
committee  $50,000  in  funds.    Hennings  said  this  would  be
used  for  "a  general  examination  of the  Bill  of  Eights" in  the
light  of  present  day  conditions.   The  resolution  goes  to  the
Rules  committee, which fortunately  is  now cnaired  by  liberal
Senator  Green  of  Rhode  Island.    The  appropriation  is  to  be
compared  with  the  $260,000  given  the  Eastland-chaired  Sen-
ate  Internal  Security   subcommittee   and  the   $225,000  given
the   House   Un-American   Activities   Committee  this   year.
When  a  half  million dollars  is  thus  made available  for  witch-
hunting,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  ask  one tenth  that  sum to
defend  civil  liberties.   The  new  sub-committee  will  be  a  most
useful  forum  under  the  liberal  Hennings,  and  it  is  very  im-
portant  to  organize  pressure  for  passage  by  the  Senate,  to
which  at  press  time  the  resolution  had  just  been  favorably
reported.
The discouraging new& was that the  Supreme Court,  instead
of   passing   on  the  right  to  confront  one's  accusers   in  the
Peters  case,  is  getting  ready  to  exercise  its  right  not  to  con-
front  constitutional  issues until  it  has  to.   This  outcome was
indicated   during   argument   of  the   case  when  Mr.  Justice
Frankfurter  said  from  the  bench that  the  Court  reaches  con-
stitutional   issues  "last—not   first."   At  the  court's   request
supplemental  briefs  were  filed  last  Tuesday  on  what  may
prove  to  be  the  technical  point  on  which the  case  will  be  de-
cided.    This  is  whether   the   Civil   Service  Loyalty  Review
Board had a right to  reopen the  case of Dr. John  P. Peters  for
"post  audit"  after  he  had  been  cleared  by  the  Public  Health
Service.   The  review board is  supposed to  hear  appeals  from
employes  who  have  been  held  disloyal.    Can  it  reopen  cases
on  its  own where they have been held loyal?   This is the  tech-
nical  mouse  likely  to  issue  from  the  mountainous  labors  by
Thurman  Arnold and his  associates  on this  really momentous
test  case.   Whether  a man's reputation  and  livelihood  can be
destroyed  on the  basis  of  anonymous accusations  may  be  left
still  undecided.
A  victory  was  won  when  a  Nevada  jury   acquited  Hank
The  Delusion  of  Easy  Victory
"I  regard as  potentially  dangerous  the  concept  which
is  very  definitely  held by a certain segment  of  our popu-
lation  and by  certain  people  in  uniform  in  our  Military
Establishment  that  the  next war is  going  to  be a matter
of  days  or  at  most  weeks.    I  do  not  say  that  will  not
happen.   It is  conceivable because it  depends on  whether
or  not  you  break  the  will  to  resist  of  your  opponent.
"Personally  I have  the  gravest  of  doubts  that  you  will
break  the  will  to resist  of  a  people  like  the  Slav  and the
oriental  by  destruction rained  on their  metropolitan   cen-
ters  and fixed industrial  installations  from  the  sky.   We
have   had  one  example  in  recent  years,  and  that  was
Germany,   where   her  cities   were  reduced   to  piles  of
rubble.    We  did  not  get  a  capitulation.
"We are dealing with a much  tougher  people.   We are
dealing  with  people  with  a  much  lower  standard  of  liv-
ing,  to  whom  those  things  are of  much  less  significance.
We  are  dealing  with  a  vast  geographical  area  of  some
6,000  miles  from  the  Oder-Neisse  line  on the  west  to  the
Sea of Japan.    ...
"Unfortunate   as  it  may  be,  I  think  the  part  of   pru-
dence  and  wisdom  dictates  that  the  United  States  be
prepared  to  win  a  long  war  if  we  get  involved  in   it."
—Gen.  Matthew  B.  Ridgway,  Chief   of  Staff,     U.  S.
Army,  before  the  House  Appropriations Commit-
tee,  pps.  105-7.
Greenspun,  the  doughty  publisher  of  the  Las  Vegas  Sun,  of
the  trumped  up  charge  that  he  incited  the  assassination  of
Joe  McCarthy.   Hank,  who  once  went  to  jail  for   helping
smuggle arms  to  the  Haganah  in  Palestine, is  one of  the  few
people  who ever  threw  a  physical scare  into  Low Blow Joe  in
his  heyday, and  the  only  publisher  in  Nevada who ever  chal-
lenged and defeated the late  Senator  McCarran and his  gang.
Why  doesn't  Nevada send  Hank to  the  Senate—he's  really  in
the  "High  Noon"  pattern?
Aliens  are  given  greater  protection  in  deportation  cases by
Justice  Black's  6-3  decision  last  Monday  in  Shaughnessy  v.
Pedreiro.    This  in  effect   (though  not  technically)   reverses
Heikkila  v.  Barber  (345 U.S.  229).   The Court  holds that  an
alien  may  defend  himself  against  deportation  by  injunction
proceedings  and  is  not  limited  to  habeas   corpus.    Justice
Clark,  who wrote  the  earlier  opinion to  the  contrary,  joined
the majority  this time.   Minton, Reed and Burton  dissented.
The  Tide  /*  Turning  Toward  Peace—Help   It  On  By  Getting  Your  Friends to  Read  The   Weekly
I.  F. Stone's Weekly, 301
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my
Street
City
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 m
(To)  Name
Street
City
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
E.  Capitol,
sub  for  th«
Zone
ore  (money
...Zone
Wash.  3,  D.  C.
5  enclosed  $5:*
State
enclosed) :
State
5/2/55
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301   E. Copital  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED