I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jun20.pdf

============================================================

Revealing  the  Hospital  Record  of  Another  Famous  FBI  Informer,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   NO. 23
JUNE  20,  1955WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Items   It's  Not  Polite  to  Mention  at  San  Francisco
(And   Not   Safe    to   Forget}
1.  Ten  years  ago  Mr.  Dulles  went  to  San  Francisco  not  as
a  friend  but  as an  enemy  of  a United  Nations.    The  Roosevelt
Administration  felt  that  peace  would  not  be secure  if  the  Ger-
mans  were  again   able  to  play   East  and  West  against   each
other;  it sought  peace  through  Big  Power  unity  in  a  new  world
organization.    Mr.  Dulles  was Dewey's  foreign  policy adviser,
and  in  the  1944  campaign  Dewey  attacked  these  plans  as  "cy-
nical  power  politics,"  an  "immoral  military  alliance."   Cordell
Hull  included  Dulles  in  the  U.  S. delegation  to  San  Francisco
as  Dewey's  representative  to  buy  off  Republican  opposition.
2.  Mr.'Dulles  never  was  an  advocate  of  collective  security.
He   opposed   sanctions  against   Japanese   aggression   in   1932.
When  Hitler  tore  up  the  disarmament provisions  of  the  Ver-
sailles  pact  in  1935,   Mr.  Dulles  wrote  as  his  apologist.     In
1938   (as  publication  of  the  latest  U.  S.  foreign  policy  dpcu-
ments,  1938,  Vol.  Ill,  the Far East, recently revealed)  he went
to  China  in  an  effort  to  win  Chiang  Kai-shek  to  a  negotiated
peace  with Japan.    In  1939  in his  famous debate with Willkie,
Mr.  Dulles  defended  Axis expansionism.    After  the  European
war  began,  he  opposed  aid  to  Britain.   But  in  1943  when  the
tide  of   war  turned   against  Hitler,  Mr.   Dulles   advocated  a
"Christian  peace"  and  then  through  Dewey  an Anglo-Ameri-
can  alliance  to   police   the  post-war  world.     This    proposal,
which  echoed  what  was  then  the  Goebbels   line,  was  the  first
signal  of  the  cold  war  to  come.
Washington-Berlin   Axis
3.  If  Germany  today,  as ten  years ago,  is again  the  center of
attention   at  San  Francisco,   that   is  in  no  small  degree   Mr.
Dulles's  triumph.     Ten  years  of  cold  war  have  enabled   the
German  phoenix  to  rise  again  with  unparalleled  speed   from
the  ashes  of  its  greatest  defeat.    What  FDR  foresaw has  come
to  pass.    The  nation  which  seemed  in  1945  decisively  crushed
for  generations  to  come  turns  up  in  1955  holding  the  balance
of  power.    Moscow  woos  it  at  the  expense  of  her  own  German
puppets,   and   Dr.   Adenauer   is  received   in   Washington   as
America's  favorite  ally.    For  the  UN  there  has  been  substi-
tuted  NATO  and  NATO  itself  only  sugar-coats  for  Western
Europe  a  new  Washington-Berlin   axis.    Western  Germany  is
today  again  a  great  industrial,  and  will  be  tomorrow  a  great
military  power.   And  as its  power  grows,  its tune  will  change.
4.  The  Reich  always  finds  itself  a  "good  European"  front
during  the  period  when  it  is still  recovering  from  defeat.    Dr.
Adenauer  is  the  counterpart  of  that  other  "good   European,"
Dr.   Stresemann,   Germany's   foreign   minister   from   1923   to
1929,   winner   of   the  Nobel' peace   prize,   co-architect   with
Briand  of  Locarno.   Not  until  his  unpublished  private  papers
were  finally  made  available  to  scholars  in  1953  did  it  become
known   that  while  publicly  pursuing  the  task  of   international
7
                                                                            as
conciliation,  Dr.  Stresemann  too  played  the  fox  and  privately
connived   in   illegal   rearmament.     (See   the   study  of   those
papers  in  Hans  W.  Gaztke's  book,  Stresemann  and  the Rearm-
ament  of  Germany,  Johns  Hopkins Press,  1954.)
5.  "The   danger  of  German  militarism  has  disappeared.     It
no  longer  exists."   The  words  might  have  been  Stresemann's.
They  were. Adenauer's  last  week at  that  elephantine  press jam-
boree  he  held  in  Washington.    "The  danger  of  German  mili-
tarism  ...    no  longer-exists."   His own  people,  his own party
colleagues,  do not  believe him.  Not  only  the  Social  Democrats
but  his  own  Christian  Democrats  blocked  his  effort  to  rush  re-
armament  legislation  through  the  Bundesrat.    It  was Dr.  Stra-
ter,   the   Christian  Democratic   Minister   from   North   Rhine-
Westphalia,  who  attacked  the  proposed  law for  recruiting mili-
tary  "volunteers"  as  "blitz"  legislation.    It  is  the  CDU  which
demands  that  the  high-handed  old  Chancellor  let  Parliament
have  a  look  at  what  kind  of  basic  long  term  military  law  he
contemplates   before  asking  it  to  approve   this  "emergency"
measure.    Working  and  middle  class  elements  are  apprehen-
sive  in  Germany  today  as  they  were  in  the  20's.
Lesson  of  the  Schluter  Affair
6.  Now  as then  it is clear  that  a remilitarized  Germany  must
be  a  reactionary  Germany.    The  recent  Schluter  affair  is  indi-
cative.   To  get  a  two-thirds  majority  in  the  Bundesrat  for  the
legislation  he  needs  to  recreate  a  German  army, Dr.   Adenauer
had  to  assure  himself  the  votes of  Lower  Saxony by a deal  with
the  rightist   Free   Democrats.     They   demanded   the   post  of
Minister  of  Education  for  Herr  Schluter,  a  reactionary  adven-
turer, a half  Jew who made  his  peace  with  the Nazis,  a leading
publisher  of  neo-Nazi  authors  since  the  war.   The  Rector  and
Senate  of  the  University of  Gottingen  have  resigned  in  protest
and  mobilized  widespread  support.    It  is this  other  and  better
Germany  which  again  feels  itself  menaced.    This  is  the  reality
behind  the  bland  visage  of  Dr.   Adenauer.
7.  When  the  Foreign  Ministers sit  down  to dinner this  week
in  San Francisco, and  when  the  Big Four  meet  "at  the  summit"
next  month  in  Geneva,  they  meet  in  a  new  context.    Germany
today  is  the  equal  of  Britain and  more  important  than  France.
The  "Big  Four"  has  become  a   fiction.   The  big  powers  are
now  the  U.S.A.,  the  U.S.S.R.,  Communist  China,  Great  Britain
and  Germany.    Germany's  leverage,  her  power  as  an  arbiter,
depends  on  maintaining  tension  and  preventing  agreement  be-
tween  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.   If  Moscow  and  Washington
ever  agreed,  Moscow  would  no  longer  have  to  woo  Bonn  and
Washington  would  not  be  disposed  to  pick  up  that  fat  check
which  is coming  for  German  rearmament.  Mr.  Dulles  and  Dr.
Adenauer  are  not  disposed  to  give  up  the  cold  war  while  it
still  pays off.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.Slone's  Weekly, June  20,1955
Judge  Hastie  Says  Acquittal  Should  Have  Been  Directed  for  Pittsburgh  Five
First  Circuit  Court  Dissent  in  A  Smith  Act  Conviction
In  Philadelphia  last  Monday the  Court  of  Appeals  upheld
the  Smith  Act  convictions  of  the  Pittsburgh   Five—Stephen
Mesarosh    (Nelson),  William   AlBertson,  Benjamin   L.   Ca-
reathers,  James   H.  Dolsen  and  Irving  Weissman.  This  was
the  fifth  occasion  on  which  a  Circuit  Court  has  upheld  the
conviction  of  Communists  under  the  Smith  Act.    The  Phila-
delphia  decision, however, was  the  first  in  which there  was  a
dissent  on the  Appeals  Court,  and  the  first  dissent  anywhere
to  discuss  the   sufficiency  of  the  evidence.   When  Black  and
Douglas  dissented  in  the  Dennis  case,  the  only  issue  before
the   Supreme  Court  was  the  constitutionality   of  the   Smith
Act.   The Pittsburgh  cases  were  heard  by the  Third   Circuit's
full  bench  of  seven,  and  the  decision  was  5-2.    The  dissent
was  written  by  William H.  Hastie,  a  Truman  appointee  and
the  first  Negro  ever  to  sit  on  the  Federal  bench.   Judge  Al-
bert  Branson  Maris  joined in  the  dissent.
The  Hastie  dissent  is  important  because  it  shows  how con-
victions  under  the  Smith  Act  may  be reversed  if  the  Supreme
Court  keeps  its  promise  in  the  Dennis case  to  review  the  evi-
dence  in  future  prosecutions.    So  far   in  the  only  two  cases
to  reach  the  Supreme  Court  (Flynn  and  Frankfeld),   & hear-
ing  has  been  denied.
Since  the  evidence  in  all  the  Communist  Smith  Act  con-
spiracy   cases   has   been   substantially   the   same—inference
from  the  circulation  of  Marxist   classics  and  the   1945  party
revolt  against  "Browderism"—Judge  Hastie's analysis  applies
equally  to  all  of  them.
Even  the  Prosecutor  Wasn't  Sure
The  dissent  begins  with  a  striking  example  of  prejudice  at
the  trial.    Judge  Hastie  notes  that  "the  prosecutor  candidly
stated  in  open  court  that  'at  this  particular  time,  we  do not
contend  that  there  is  any  question  of  the  personal  guilt  of
any  of  the  defendants  involved here,  except  with  the  possible
exception  of  Mr.  Nelson.  .  .  .'"    Judge  Hastie  comments on
this,  "It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  persons  trying  to  be  fair,
as  the  jurors  here  undoubtedly  were,  would  have  been willing
to  send  anyone  but  a  Communist  to  jail  after  hearing  such
an  admission  by  the  government  that  the  personal  guilt  of
the  accused was  not   established."
Judge  Hastie  says  there  should have  been  a  directed  ver-
dict  of  acquittal.    He  reaches  this  conclusion on  two  princi-
pal  grounds.    One was  the  failure  to  show  that  the  defend-
ants  during  the  period  of  the  alleged  conspiracy  committed
any  overt  acts  other  than  attendance  at  ordinary Communist
party   meetings.    Judge   Hastie's  reasoning  on  this  may  be
found  in  the  box  below.    The  other-was the  failure  to  prove
that   the  defendants  actually   were   conspiring  to   advocate
overthrow  of  the  government  "as  speedily  as  circumstances
permit,"  as  required  by  the  Supreme  Court's  ruling  in  the
Dennis  case.
Judge  Hastie  says  that  in  the  absence  of  such  proof  the
government  was merely punishing "talk."   He points  out that
the  government itself,  in submitting in  evidence speeches  and
statements  made  at  the   1945  convention  of  the  Communist
party  admitted  that  these  "do  not  on their  face  sanction  the
violent  overthrow  of  the  government  much  less  call  for   its
achievement  as  soon  as  possible."
The  dissent quotes  at  length from  a  speech at  that  conven-
tion  by  William  Z.  Foster  which  the  government  put  in  evi-
dence.    In  that  speech  Foster  attacked  those  "Leftists"   in
the  party  who said  "we are  going to, or  should  .  .  . drop the
slogan  of  national  unity  .  .  .  bring forward  the  question of
socialism  as  an  immediate issue, and  generally adopt  a  class-
against-class  policy.  .  .  .  Leftist  policies  of  this   character,"
Foster   declared,  "would  be  no  less  disastrous   to   us   than
Browder's  right  revisionism."
The  Old  Aesopian Argument
Judge  Hastie  says  the government contended "all  this  had  a
sinister   meaning,  not  obvious  on  its  face."   The ex-Commu-
nist,  Lautner,  was  called as  a  witness  to  testify  to  this  effect
but  "Lautner," the  dissent  declares,  "did  not  point  to  a  single
thing  indicating  that  the  1945  program  contemplated  .  .  .
teaching  that  the  time  had  come  for  the  overthrow  of  the
government  as  soon  as  possible."
The  dissent  asserts,  "The  line  which  courts  try   to  draw
distinguishes  punishable  incitation  to  insurrectionary  action
from  permissible teaching  that  at   some  time  in  the  future
violence is  inevitable  and  the  'proletariat'  must  be  ready  for
it.    Lautner's  testimony  does  not  even  make  clear   whether
there  is  anything  in  the  1945 program  which in  his  view  im-
plies  one rather  than  the  other."
The majority,  quoting  Judge Harlan's Circuit  Court opinion
in  the  Flynn  cuse, is  content  to  slide  over  the  question  of  in-
tent  and  like him  to  deduce  the  right  to  punish  radical  talk
from  the  world  "setting"  of  the  time  "when  the  Korean  con-
flict was  raging  and  our  relations  with  the  Communist  world
hud  moved  from   cold  to  hot  war."    But  the  Hastie   dissent
echoes  classic  Jeffersonian  doctrine.
"It  is  not  a  sufficient  basis  for  prosecription,"  Judge  Hastie
writes,  "that  the  Communists  are  committed to  ultimate  vio-
lent  revolutionary  action.   If  their  present  tactic  is  a  waiting
game,  characterized  by  the  teaching  of  revolutionary  theory
while  incitation  to  action  is left  for  the  indefinite  future,  the
First  amendment  prevents  the  government  from  proscribing
their  teaching.
"Our  lawful  recourse  during  such  a  period,"  Judge  Hastie
continued,  "lies  in  the  field  of  education  and  demonstration
which  will  increase  devotion  to  our  democratic   institutions
and  thus  frustrate   Communist  preachments.    There  is  some
risk  in  this  course.    But  the  adoption  of  the  First  Amend-
ment  has  committed us  to  it."
When  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  Asked  for  Proof  That  He  Was  Subversive
"The  failure  of  the  prosecution  to  show  how  any  of  this
conduct  [attendance  at  party  meetings]  was  in  furtherance
of  the  conspiracy  charged  is  very  revealing.  .  .  .  The  jury
must  not be  left  to  speculate  in  the  absence of  proof  whether
an  act,  innocent  on  its  face,  is  in  furtherance  of  a conspir-
acy.  . . . The disposition  to relax requirements  of  strict  proof
in   trials   of   suspected   subversives  appears   whenever   the
existing  order  is  subjected to  stress  and  strain.
"It  is  reported  that  in  1603, when  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  was
tried   by   the   king's  judges   for   treason,  his   demand   for
stricter  proof  was  silenced  by  the  court  with  the  withering
rejoinder:  'I  marvel,   Sir  Walter,  that   you  being   of  such
staunch  experience and  wit,  should  stand  on  this  point;  for
so  many  horse-stealers  may  escape if  they  may  not  be  con?
demned  without  witnesses.'   Rex  v.  Raleigh  2  State Trials
(Howell  ed.)  1.    In  due  course  the  accused  was  convicted
and  executed.
"It  may   well  be  that  a  number  of   Communists,  among
them  schemers  for  our  undoing  and  destruction,  will  go  un-
punished if  in  their cases  we insist upon clear  and convincing
proof  in  open  court  of  every  element  of  the  alleged crime.
There  is  no gainsaying  that  'horse-stealers [and worse] may
escape.'   But  that  is  not  too  great  a  price  to  pay  for  assur-
ance  that  our  way  of  administering  the  criminal  law  mini-
mizes   for   everyone   the   risk  of   undeserved  conviction  of
crime."
—Circuit  Judge   William  H.  Hastie  dissenting  in  the  Pittsburgh  Smith  Act  cases,  V.  S.  v.  Mesarosh  et  al.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  20,  195S
Matthew  Cvctic's  Hospital   Record   Found  By  Steve  Nelson  Defense
Famous  FBI  Informer  Turns  Out  to  Be  Poor  Tortured   Alcoholic
The  hospital  record  of  Matthew  Cvetic, the  informer, hero
of  the  movie,  "I  Was  A  Communist for  the  FBI,"  was  made
public  last  week  in  Pittsburgh.    It  was  generally  ignored  by
the  press,  despite  the  glimpse it  affords  into  the  kind  of men
the  government  coiitinues to  use.    The  deposition was  taken
by  the  defense in  the  government's  suit  to  denaturalize  Steve
Nelson.    The   record   shows  Cvetic  was   hospitalized  three
times  for  alcoholism   and  attendant   psychic  disorders   from
February  17 to  May  21 of  this  year.
A  few  days  earlier   in  Chicago  the  Court  of  Appeals  re-
versed  the  deportation  order  against  Matthew Brzovich  which
was  based  on  Cvetic's  testimony  that   he  had  once  seen  the
alien  at  a. Communist  meeting. The  Court did  not  find  Cvetic's
testimony  credible.   In  Pennsylvania,  Cvetic has  appeared  as
a  witness  in  some  300  cases.
Among  Cvetic's  more recent  appearances nationally was  as
a  witness  against  the  Bradens  in  Louisville  and  as  a  Repub-
lican  campaign  speaker  last  Fall  in  Montana and  Washing-
ton.   Excerpts  from  the  deposition  follow.    Hymen  Schlesin-
gcr,   Nelson's  counsel;   First   Assistant   U.   S.  Attorney  D.
Malcolm   Anderson,  Jr.,   and   Frank   R.   Bolte,  counsel  for
Cvetic  and  the  hospital,  were  among  those  present:
Mi'.  Schlesingcr:   Will  you  please  state  your  name?
Miss   Mackenzie:   Natalie   Mackenzie.
Mr.  Schlcsinger:   Where  do  you  live?
Miss   Mackenzie:   318  Collins  Avenue,  Pittsburgh,   Pa.
Mi:  Schlcsinger:   What  is  your  occupation? .
Miss   Mackenzie:   Record  room  clerk  in   the   St.   Francis
Hospital.
Mr.  Schlesinger:   In  your  capacity  as  clerk  in  the  record
room,  do  you  have  custody  of  the  records  of  one  Matthew
Cvetic?
Miss  Mackenzie:  I  have.
Mr.  Schlcsinger:   Did  you  bring  those  records   with  you
today?
Miss  Mackenzie:  I  did.
Mr.  Schlesinger:   Will  you  permit  counsel  for  the  govern-
ment  and  for  the  defendant  to  examine  such  records?
Mr.  Bolte:  For  the  record,  on  behalf  of  the  hospital  and
the  witness,   we  object  to  the  delivery  of  these  records  to
the  defendant  or  to  anybody  at  this  time  on the  ground that
these  records  are   confidential  and  that  the  consent  of  the
patient  has  not  been  obtained.
Mr.  Anderson:   Let  the  record  show that  I  have  not  made
any  request  to  look  at  these  documents.
Mr.   Schlesinger:    According   to   the   record   of   Matthew
Cvetic   in   the   St.   Francis   Hospital,   he   was   admitted   on
February   17,  1955  and  discharged  on  March  5,  1955  with  a
diagnosis   of  Depressive  Reaction  (Anxiety),  alcohol  addic-
tion, treatment  electro  shock treatments.    He returned  March
19,  1955  and   was  discharged   March  26,   1955.     Diagnosis:
Alcohol   addiction.     Result:    Improved.     Prognosis:   Good.
Returned:  May  21,  1955.   Discharged:  May  28,  1955.   Alcohol
addiction—Improved—Prognosis   Good.
Mr.  Schlesinger:   Under  date  of  February   17,  1955  on  a
sheet  marked  "History   Sheet"  appears  the  following  notes:
"Present   Illness:   Informant,   son   Richard.     Patient   used
liquor  heavily  for  a  period  of  five  years  but  quit   altogether
2
1
/*>  years  ago  and  has  been with  the  A .A.   Patient  has  been
doctoring  for  a  nervous  condition.   He  started  drinking  this
past  Sunday  and  Monday, February   13  and  14.   He  started
to  drink  again  this  morning.   Patient  got  in  touch  with  his
son  and  asked  him  to  come  to  his  hotel.    He  has  been  very
despondent  and  unsettled  since  this  time;  he  paced  back  and
forth  in  the  hotel  room.    He  ate  and  slept  very  little  since
Wednesday.    Since  he  was  so  despondent,  his  son  called  the
hotel  doctor  who  gave  him  some  medicine and recommended
hospitalization.   Patient  was always  rather  a  depressive  per-
son;  his  son never  could understand  him.   He  never  discussed
his  problems with  him  and  he  is  at  a  loss  to  know  what  his
trouble  is  at  present  other  than  being. lonely.   He  lives  in  a
hotel  room  alone  and has  been  writing  a  book. .  . ."
Mr.  Schlesinger:  Miss Mackenzie, the  notations  I  have  read
into  the  record  are  contained  in  this  hospital  record  which  I
show  you.    Is  the  record   which  I  have  now  given  back  to
you  a  true  and  correct  record  of  Matthew  Cvetic  in  the  St.
Francis  Hospital?
Miss  Mackenzie:  It  is.
But  for  the  death  of  Chief  Judge  Harold  M.  Stephens,  the
new  Lattimore  indictment  would  almost  certainly  have  been
upheld  5-4,  since  Stephens  was  the  only  dissenter   when  the
Court  of  Appeals  threw  out  the   earlier   indictment  8-to-l.
This  means  Brownell  may  win  the  case  on  reargument  if  he
picks  a  rightist judge  to  succeed  Stephens  and  then  asks  for
a   rehearing.
Plot  Widens: The Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  after
combing  the   900  volumes  of  diary  kept  by  Henry  Morgen-
thau, Jr.,  as  Secretary  of the Treasury  (what  a job that  must
have  been;  Henry  M.  is  no  Sam  Pepys)   has  succeeded  in
linking  another  high  New  Dealer  to  the  Harry  White  affair.
This  one  called  White  "a  mighty  suitable  man"  for  the  job
and  "a  very  high  class  fellow."    The  encomiums were  by  a
well  known  Leftist  from  Tennessee,  Cordell Hull.
A   new  version  of  the   "Counter-Attack"   business   is   the
"public  library  on  subversives"  to  be  established  here  by  the
Foundation   for   American  Research,   Inc.     This   has   been
launched  by  two former  assistants  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  and
two  former  FBI   agents.    They  will  solicit  funds  from   the
public  to  set  up  a  "free  library"  which  will  have   available
witch hunt material  and  listings  (black and  red)  of  all  kinds.
Stanley  J.  Tracy,  a  former  assistant  to  Hoover,  said  the  li-
brary   would  contain   no  secret   information  and   (like  most
FBI  loyalty reports)  make no attempt  to  determine accuracy.
A  survey  by  U.  S.  News  &  World  Report  (June  17)  of  the
Federal  judges  who  will  preside  over  de-segregation   (when
and  if)  in  the  South  shows  all, of  course, white and  only one
born  above  the  Mason-Dixon  line.
Still  Small  Voice:  In  a  study  of  peace  called  "Speak  Truth
to  Power"  just  published the  American  Friends  Service  Com-
mittee  says,  "No  reputable  historian  has  ventured  the  idea
that  either  the  first  or  the  second  World  War  was  spawned
by  Communism.   Nor  are  the  Russians   responsible  for   the
concept  of  blitzkrieg,   obliteration   bombing  or   first   use  of
atomic  weapons.    These  have  all  been  loosed  upon  the  world
by  the  very  nations  which  now profess  outrage  at  the  cynical
Soviet  concept  of  the  role  of  violence."
Gen.  Hasso  von  Manteuffel,  one  of  the  Nazi German's  most
famous  generals  during  World  War  II,  was  a  guest  of  the
U.  S. government from  April  20 to  May  12 of  this year, visit-
ing   the   Capitol,   West   Point   and  military   installations  as
"Mr.  von  Manteuffel"  without  a  line  or  picture  getting  into
the  press.   No doubt  the  government  is  still  a  little  nervous
about  freedom's  new  allies.
The Senate  Internal  Security hearing  at  which John  Mullen,
national  political   action  director   of  the   CIO  Steelworkers,
was  smeared  as  a  Red was noteworthy  for  two  reasons.    Sen-
ator  Daniel  of  Texas,  who  presided,  permitted  counsel   for
Mullen  to  pass  him  questions  to  ask  the  accusing   witness,
Mary  Mazzei,  an  FBI  informant.    A  serious  discrepancy   ap-
peared  in  her  testimony.    Mrs.  Mazzei  testified  that  she  had
been  at  a  closed  party  meeting  with  Mullen.   But  at  an  exec- •
utive  session   before  the  committee  last  year,   she  had  an-
swered  "no"  when asked  by  Senator  Welker  whether  she  had
ever  attended  a  closed  party  meeting.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  20,1955
The  New  Justice  Harlan's  First  Free  Speech  Opinion
Several   years  ago  a  group  in  Westchester   and  Yonkers,
New  York,  formed  a   Committee  for   Peace.     They  held  a
meeting in. the  YWCA  at  Yonkers in  November,  1951.    It  was
addressed  by  Stephen  G.  Gary,  a  well-known  Quaker.    The
YWCA, in  allowing the  meeting on its  premises,  resisted  pro-
test  from  rightist  sources.    The  meeting  was  held  without
disturbance,  but  the  Yonkers  Board  of  Education  denied  the
Committee  for  Peace  a  permit  for  another  meeting  on school
property.    No  reason  was  given  but  when  the  Committee
went  to  court  the  Board  of  Education  cited  the  protests   as
showing  that  the  meeting  would  have  been   "controversial."
This  is  the  background  of  the  decision  in  Ellis  v.  Dixon
which  the   Supreme  Court  decided  on  the  final  day  of  this
year's term  of  Court.   The  decision  is  of interest  for  two  rea-
sons.   In  Yonkers,  as  in  many  other  communities,  the  schools
are  customarily  available  for  forums  and  public  meetings;
the  Court was  asked  to  decide whether  discrimination  against
such  "controversial"  subjects   as  peace  abridged  freedom  of
speech  and  assembly.    The  decision was  the  first  to  be  writ-
ten  by the  new Justice,  John  Marshall  Harlan,  in  a  case  in-
volving  the  Bill  of  Rights.
The  law  is  that  boards  of  education  may  deny  use  of  the
schools  for  public  meetings.   But  where  public  meetings   are
customarily  allowed in  the  schools,  may  the  Boards  discrimi-
nate  against  certain  groups?    This  question  has  never  been
passed  upon  by  the  Supreme  Court.
Like  Federalist  Judges
The   New  York   City   Board   of   Education   filed   a   brief
amicus  curiae supporting  the  Yonkers Board.  The  New York
City  Board  argued  that  the  "rights  guaranteed  by  the  First
and  Fourteenth  amendments  are  subordinate  to  the  greater
rights  of  the  general  public  and  to  the  right  of  the  govern-
ment  to  maintain   arid  protect  itself."    This  is  the  law  as  it
was expounded by Federalist judges  in the  Alien and  Sedition
Act  period.    It  implies  that  people  have  a  right  to  speak
freely  as  long  as  no  one  disagrees  strongly  with  what  they
propose  to  say  ("controversial")  and  as  long  as  the  govern-
ment  does  not  regard  their  views as  dangerous  to  its  safety
("subversive").
The  U.  S. Supreme Court  has  never  passed  on the  question
of  discrimination  in  the   use   of  school  buildings  for  public
meetings.  But  the  Supreme  Court  of  California  has.     Cali-
fornia  law  says that  school auditoriums  may be used  for  pub-
lic  discussion  but  not  by  groups  or  persons  advocating  over-
throw  of  the  government  by  force.    In  San  Diego  a  permit
was  asked  to  hold  a  meeting on  "The  Bill  of  Rights  in  Post-
war  America."   The permit  was  granted  by  the  school  board
on  condition  that  the  applicants  take  an  oath  they  were  not
affiliated   with  any  group  advocating  overthrow.     They,  re-
fused  to  take  the  oath  and  the  California  Supreme  Court  in
1946  (28  Cal.  2d  536)  upheld  them  on  the  ground  that  the
oath  requirement  constituted  prior  censorship.
Behind  the  Technicalities
The  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  split  5-4  on  the  Yonkers  case.
Chief Justice Warren,  with  Justices Black, Douglas  and  Clark
noted   that   denial   of   the   permit   might   be   regarded   as
discrimination  contrary  to  the  equal  protection  clause  of  the
Fourteenth   amendment.   Justice   Harlan  dismissed  the  ap-
peal  on  technical  grounds  too  involved to  be  explained here,
and  too tenuous to  bore the  reader  with.   His rather  labored
words  and  specious  argument  must  be  relegated  to  a  foot-
note.*    They  imply  that  schools  might  lawfully  be  closed  to
peace meetings altogether.   This is to  reach,  by a more  round-
about  rationalization, the  same  result  as  the  New York  State
Supreme  Court  which  held  substantially  that  it  could  not  in-
terfere  because  the  meeting  would have  been  "controversial."
Unlike  His   Grandfather
Only the  naive will  take at  face value the  technical  reasons
Justice   Harlan   invokes.    The   doctrines   for   which   judges
reach   in  making  their  decisions,  like  the  colors  a  painter
mixes on his palette, are  a  reflection  of their  own inner  selves.
These  doctrines  are  not  the  counters  of  an  exact  science,  but
the  materials  of  adjudication,  which  is  an  art.     As  Justice
Holmes  once  said,  "General  propositions   do  not  decide  con-
crete  cases.   The  decision will depend on a  judgment  or  intui-
tion  more  subtle than  any  articulate major  premise."    (Loch-
ner  V. N.Y.).  The Yonkers  case  indicates  that  the  new  Judge
Harlan,  unlike  his  grandfather   and  namesake,  is  disposed
rather  to  restrict  than  to  champion civil  liberties.   This  was
also  evident the  week before  when in  the  Emspak,  Quinn  and
Bart  contempt  cases  he  was  the  only judge  who  went  out of
his  way  to  record  his  view  that  he  did  not  think   Congres-
sional  inquisition violated  the  First  amendment, a  point  on
which  the  Court  did  not  pass.
* "Petitioner  concedes  that  a  State  may  withhold  its  school  facilities
altogether   from  use  by  nonscholastlc   groups.    It  is   implicit   in  this
concession  that  petitioner  also  recognizes  that  a  State  may  make   rea-
sonable   classifications   in  determining  the  extent  to  which  its  schools
shall  be available  for  nonscliolastic' uses  .  .  . yet  petitioner  has  failed
to  allege  in  his  pleading  .  .  .  that   other  organizations   of  a   similar
character  to  the  Committee  for  Peace  have  been  allowed  use  of  Yonk-
ers  schools."   This  adroitly  begs  the  real  question.   Would  it  be  a
reasonable   classification  under  the  'Constitution  to  classify  as  ineligi-
ble  for  permits  those  meetings  which  proposed  to  deal  with  controver-
sial  subjects  like  peace?   Stated  this  way,  the  answer  is  obviously  no.
Why   Not  Send   That  Friend  A  Special   6-month   $2   Gift     Subscription?
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter gift  sub
(To)  Name
Street
City
* $1 extra  for
Weekly,  301  E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Zone
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
.......Zone....
Canada.
,  State
yr.)  additional:
State
6/20/55
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED