I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955apr04.pdf

============================================================

Text  and  Expose—The  New House Witch Hunt  Rules
Inside:   Roy  Cohn,  Matusow   and  the  "Second  Echelon"  Communists
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,  NUMBER 11
APRIL 4,  1965
»        WASHINGTON, D. C.
16  CENTS
What Admiral Carney Did  for Peace
I  rise  to  the  defense of  Admiral  Carney.   In  my  opinion he
may  deserve  the  Nobel  peace  prize.   He  has  done  more  than
any  single  American  to  advance the  cause of  peace  since Vice
President  Nixon  a  year  ago in  a  similar off-the-record talk  let
the   cat   out   of   the   bag  on   Indo-China.    Nixon's   call   for
sending  U.S.  ground  troops  to  the  Far  East  aroused  so  sharp
a  reaction  as  to  keep  us  out  of  war  in  the  Dienbienphu  crisis
and  transform  Nixon  himself—in  time  for  the  election—into
a passable imitation  of  a Picasso dove.
No  voice  for  peace  could  have been  half  so effective  as  the
glimpse   Admiral   Carney's   off-the-record   talk   with   a  few
favored  reporters  gave  this  country  and  the  world  of  what
the  Eisenhower  Administration  is  really  thinking   and  where
America  is  really  drifting.   Admiral  Carney's  purpose  was  to
create  an  atmosphere of  urgency  in  advance of  the   President's
scheduled  meetings  of  the  following  Wednesday  and  Thursday
with  Congressional   leaders,  like  the   atmosphere  which  was
built  up  to  push  the  special  Formosan  war  powers  resolution
through  Congress  last  January.
But  like Dulles  in  leaking  the  Yalta  papers,  Carney defeated
his  own  purpose.   The  President  in  quiet  talks  with  Congres-
sional  leaders  might  have  won  their  agreement  to  a  definite
commitment  to  the  defense of  Quemoy  and  Matsu.   This  has
been  a major  aim  of  the  pro-war  crowd  in  Pentagon  and  State
Department;  the  islands were specifically  named in  the original
draft   of  the  Formosan  resolution;   the  wavering  Eisenhower
would  feel  less  queasy  about  such  a  commitment  if  he  could
win  Democratic  support  to it  in  advance.  It  was felt  that his
purpose in arranging these Congressional  conferences was not—
as  the  headlines implied—to  discuss  the  possibilities  of  a  Four
Power  meeting  but   to  feel  out  the  temper  of  Congress  on
Quemoy  and  Matsu.
Too  Shocking  in  Black  and  White
It  was Admiral Carney  who upset  the  apple cart.  His  brief-
ing  spelled  out  too  clearly  in  advance  the  trap  into  which
Congress  was being  led  and  the  consequences.  Put  into  black
and  white,  these  were  too  bloodthirsty.   The  inspired   stories
said  the  Congressional  leaders  might   already  be  confronted
with  "a  made  decision,"  that  the  President  was  being  urged
by  his  military   advisers  "to   destroy  Red  China's   industrial
potential  and  thus  end  its  expansionist  tendencies,"  and  that
this  program of  intervention   "would  require  mobilization  and
a  reversal  of  the  retrenchments  ordered  in  the  ground  forces
under  the  'new  look'  policy."   The  quotations  are  from  the
New  York  Times story  of March  26 and  these details are worth
dwelling  upon  because  they  are  being  carefully  swept  under
the  rug  while  public  attention  is  focussed  on  whether  or  not
an attack on  the  offshore  islands is expected by April  15.   Here
the  Administration hand has been  quicker  than  the  public  eye.
Neither  the questions and  answers authorized  by  Presidential
Secretary  James  C.  Hagerty  on  Tuesday  nor  the  President  on
Wednesday  denied  that  these  were  the  inevitable  and  logical
consequences  of  a  decision  to  defend  Quemoy  and  Matsu.   If
war  begins over  the  islands, the  first  target  will  be the  Chinese
Communist   air  bases;  the  second,  their  industrial  capacity;
the  third,  their  will  to  resist.   Only  an  idiot  would  imagine
that  the  bombing  of  the  bases  would  be  enough  to  end  the
war,   or  the  smashing of  industrial  centers  either.   These  are
not  yet  too  important;  the  country  is  still  basically  peasant;
its  Communist  armies  grew up  on  dispersed  guerrilla  warfare;
atomic  bombing  would  set  off  such  hate  of  us  among   the
common  people of  China  that  they  would  have ample  support.
Ground  troops  would  be needed in  large numbers,  and  so when
Admiral  Carney  spoke of  "mobilization" after  the  bombing  of
industrial  facilities he was talking  sound military  sense, though
much  too  frankly  and  with  a  cold-blooded   readiness  for   the
slaughter  of   millions  which  should  help  awaken   America's
numbed  conscience.
Admiral  Carney must  have been astounded by  the  repercus-
sions.   Secretary of  State  Dulles  is  as ready as he  to  go  to  war
over  Quemoy  and  Matsu  and   the  main  purpose  of   Dulles'
official  visit  to  Canada two  weeks  ago was to  find  out  how  the
Canadian  government  would  react  if  we attacked  the  Chinese
mainland  in  defense  of  the  offshore  islands.  The  Ottawa   cor-
respondent  of   the   Washington  Evening   Star  on  March  19
quoted  one member of  the  Canadian parliament  who  sat  in  on
a  Dulles  briefing for  MP's  as saying he  was  "horrified"   at  the
Secretary  of  State's  "calm  acceptance of  the  possibility  of  a
world  war  over  islands that  are utterly  inconsequential."    This
was the same mood in  which Dulles on his return  to New  York
told  the  United  Negro  College  Fund  on  March  20  we  may
again be forced  to  "forego  peace in  order  to  assure the  blessings
of  liberty."   Admiral  Carney  was  not  wrong  when  he  told
those  reporters  Secretary Dulles  had  been supporting  the  "new
outlook."
Awakening  the  Democrats
This  was  the  second  time  in  two  weeks  that  a  "leak"  had
succeeded   only   in   leaving  the   perpetrator   sopping   wet   in
public.   The  Dulles  leak of  the  Yalta  papers had  so angered  the
Democrats  that  Senator  George initiated  talk  of  a Four  Power
conference  both  Dulles  and  Eisenhower  are  anxious  to  avoid.
The   Carney   leak  led  even  the   Texas   Milquetoast,   Lyndon
Johnson,   to  show  a  little  independence  and  suggest  on   the
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  4, 1955
The  Case for  a  New Trial  Does  Not  Depend  on  the  Recantation  Alone
Matusow, Roy  Cohn  and  the  Trial  of  the  "Second  Echelon" Communists
One  of  the  marks  of  a  lying  informer  is  that  he  tends  to
"remember"  more  and  more  as  time  passes.  Of the  infamous
Titus  Dates,  whose  wild  tale  of  a  vast  Jesuit  conspiracy  de-
stroyed  the  lives  of  many  innocent  men  in  Seventeenth  Cen-
tury  England,   Wigmore  says  in  his  monumental  work  on
Evidence:
"One   of  the   chief   weaknesses   in   the   testimony   of   the
notorious  perjurer   Oates  was that  at  his original  information
to  [the  King's]  Council he failed  to state facts  which he  after-
wards testified  to on the trial of his various  victims;  each time
bringing out new facts  before  unmentioned."
The  passage  is  cited   in  the   memorandum  submitted  by
Harry  Sacher  to  Federal  Judge  Dimock in  New York,  asking
a  new trial for  Elizabeth  Gurley  Flynn  and the  other  "second
echelon"   Communists  convicted  under  the   Smith  Act.   The
motion  was  filed  as  a  result  of  the  recantation  by   Harry
Matusow.   But  the  motion  does not  depend  on the  recantation
alone.
In  the  course  of  the  hearing,  the  defense  demanded  and
obtained  the  introduction  into  evidence of  Matusow's   original
reports to the  FBI  and the  "witness  sheets" used  by the  gov-
ernment  prosecutors  originally  in  preparing  for  the  trial  of
Miss  Flynn  and  her  associates.  Sacher  used  these  and  cross-
examination   of  the  Government's   prosecutors   to  show  that
some  of  the  most  damaging  testimony  given  by  Matusow  at
the original trial did not appear in his original reports to the
FBI  or  even in his earlier preparatory talks with  the  govern-
ment's  prosecutors.  Matusow,  like  Titus  Oates,  added  to  the
story  as  he went  along.
Cohn  Helped  Him Remember
"As  is  conclusively  demonstrated  by  the  documents  which
emanated   from  the  government  itself,"  the  defense  memo-
randum  says,  "Matusow  made  no mention  whatever  of  more
than  half  of the  items  to  which  he  testified  at  the  trial,  and
made  no  mention  of  the  most  damaging  portion  of  seven  of
these  items  in  any  of  his  reports  to  the  FBI  or  to  Assistant
U.S.  Attorney  Blinder  who had  him  in  preparation  prior  to
the time when Mr. Roy M. Cohn took him over  for preparation,
i.e.  sometime  after  May  16,  1952."
The  most  striking bit  of  testimony  thus  added by  Matusow
had   to   do  with   Vishinsky's   book,  The  Law   of   the   Soviet
State.  This  book begins  by declaring  that "the  violent  seizure
of  power  by the proletariat  ...    is the most  important  thesis
of  the  Marxist-Leninist   doctrine."   According  ,to  Matusow's
affidavit  in  recantation   (see textual  excerpts  reprinted  in  our
issue of last February  7),  Roy Cohn  told  him that  the  govern-
ment  tried  to  get  this  book  into  evidence  in  the  first  Smith
Act  trial  but  was  unable  to  lay  the  necessary   foundation.
Cohn wanted  to connect it  with  the  defendants  in  the  "second
echelon"  case.   To  link  them  with  Vishinsky,  who  was  then
the chief  Soviet delegate to the  United  Nations,  and  Vishinsky
himself   with  incitation  to  revolution,  had  obvious  headline
possibilities.   This  would  be  "hot  stuff."
When  Matusow's reports  to the FBI  and his earlier  sessions
with the  government prosecutors  were  produced, this  is  what
appeared:   There  was  no  mention  of  the  book  in   Matusow's
reports to the  FBI.   When Matusow first mentioned  it  to  gov-
ernment  prosecutors,  he  said  only  that  the  manager  of  the
Jefferson   School  Bookshop had  told  him  to  push  the  sale  of
the  book.
It  was  not  until  a  few  days  before  the  trial  opened  that
Matusow  suddenly linked it  with  one of the  defendants,  Alex-
ander  Trachtenberg,  head of International  Publishers.  Trach-
tenberg's  firm  did  not  publish  the  book.  The  Vishinsky  book
was published by Macmillan as part of the  Russian translation
project  of  the  American  Council  of  Learned  Societies.   Matu-
sow said  Trachtenberg  told  him  to  push  the  sale  of  the  book.
The  story  grew  straight  through  the  trial.   On  July  21,
1952, Matusow testified that Trachtenberg  told him to push the
sale  of  the  book  because  "the  party  should  be  familiar  with
this new concept of Socialist  law."   The government thereupon
offered  in  evidence the  first  two  pages  of  the  book,  containing
Vishinsky's  summary  of  Marxist-Leninist  revolutionary  doc-
trine.
Overnight   Recollections
The defense objected.  Court  recessed for  the  night,  promis-
ing  to hear  argument  the  next  morning.  The objections were
sustained  and  admission  of  these  pages  barred.   Immediately
thereafter  Matusow was asked whether  Trachtenberg  had  said
"anything  else"  about  the  book,  Matusow then  testified  that
Trachtenberg  told  him  the  book  was  important  because  it
showed  how socialism  could be  established  and   "diametrically
opposed  classes  could be  eliminated."
It  was  on  the  basis  of  this  newly  "remembered"   remark
which Matusow now says was a lie that the government  argued
to the jury that  Trachtenberg  had  displayed not only "intent"
to  overthrow  the  government  but  knowledge that  "violent
seizure  of authority"  was  an  object  of the  alleged  "conspiracy
to  advocate."
Matusow was  a  key witness  for  the  prosecution  because he
was  the  only one who testified that  any  of  the  defendants had
in  any  way  advocated force  and  violence_during the  period of
the  alleged  conspiracy  from  1945 to  1951.   Since  a conspiracy
was  alleged,  this  readiness  to  advocate  violent  means  was
allowed in evidence against all the  defendants.  Here  are  sam-
ples  of  Matusow's  testimony  against  three  of  the  defendants.
How  the  Stories  Grew
William  Blake Charney: Originally Matusow reported to  the
FBI  only that  Charney  suggested  he help  set up a  Communist
party  newspaper  in  Puerto  Rico and arrange for  the  sending
of  a  Puerto  Rican  delegate  to  the  World  Youth  Festival  in
Budapest.   The  story  subsequently  grew  to  the  point  where
. Matusow testified that Charney talked  to him about  destroying
U.S. military  bases  in Puerto  Rico and crippling the  Caribbean
defenses  of the  U.S.
Henry  Winston:  In  October,  1951,  Matusow reported  to  the
FBI  that  Henry  Winston made  a  speech  in  Philadelphia   dis-
cussing  the  need  for  Communist party  members  to  "go  out
into  basic  industry  as  was  done in  the  30*8"  and  that  on  the
way  home  to  New  York  Winston   discussed  with   him   the
"party's  role  in  the  Progressive  Party."
But  when  Cohn  the  following  June  began  to  prepare  Matu-
sow  for  testimony,  the   story   significantly  expanded.   Now
Matusow was  ready  to  swear  that  Winston  said  Communists
had  to  go  into  basic  industries  "so  that  in  the  event  of  war
with  the  Soviet  Union  we  would have  people  on  our  side  to
cut  off production for  the  capitalists."
Pettis  Perry:  Matusow  testified  at  the  trial  that  Pettis
Perry, another  of the  "second  echelon" Communists,  said that
only  by  overthrowing  capitalism  and  establishing,  a  dictator-
ship  of the  proletariat  could  a  Negro  nation  be established  in
the  Black  Belt.  The defense memorandum points  out that  this
version  of  what  Perry  said  appears  in  none  of  the  prior  re-
ports  or  documents until  it  turns  up  in  Roy. Cohn's  "witness
sheet" on June  10,  1952.
The  defense argues that  Matusow's  recantation  is  corrobo-
rated  by  the  government's   own documents,  that  without  his
testimony  there would have  been  no  evidence  of any  advocacy
of  violent  means  during  the  period  of  the  alleged  conspiracy,
and  that  the  circumstances—the  Korean  war  was  then  on—
and  the  nature  of his  testimony  made  it  highly  inflammatory
and  prejudicial.
When  argument  began  on the  motion for  a  new .trial,  Judge
Dimock  said  he would  be guided in his  decision  by  the  opinion
in the  Larrison  case  (24 F 2d 82).  The requirement  for  a new
trial  when  a  government  witness   has  recanted   was  there
stated as whether without  the false testimony  "the  jury  might
have  reached  a  different  conclusion."   (Italics  in   original.)
This  is what  Judge  Dimock  will  soon decide.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  U,  1953
Smith  of  the  "Smith  Act"  Uses  the  Steamroller  to  Put  Over  a  Fake  Reform
The  New  Doyle  Resolution  Leaves  Witch  Hunt  Abuses  Untouched
This  is  the  third  year  the  House  of  Representatives   has
been  debating  reform of  Congressional investigating  commit-
tee abuses.  Extensives hearings were held last year. This year
the  Democratic leadership  decided  to  throw  public  opinion  a
sop.   Hearings  were  held  before  the  Rules  committee  under
Howard  W.  Smith  of  Virginia  and  a  resolution  reported  by
Clyde  Doyle, California  Democratic member of  the  House Un-
American  Activities  Committee.  Three  years  of  labor  could
not  have brought  forth  a  less  impressive  mouse.
The way the resolution was handled was typical.   The hear-
ings  were  not  printed.   No  report  was  made  to  the  House.
Smith,  as chairman of the  Rules committee, brought  it  up  for
a  vote on the  afternoon  of March 23 on a "take it  or leave  it"
basis.  Debate was  sharply limited, amendment from  the floor
barred.   Two  Republicans, Hugh  Scott  of  Pennsylvania  and
Keating  of  New  York,  were bitterly  critical  of  the  bill.   The
Northern  liberal  Democrats  sat  silent.  It  passed,  steamroller
style, without a record  vote.
The  ordinary  newspaper  reader  is  led  to  believe  that  the
House  has  "reformed"  its  procedure.   This  resolution  makes
little  or  no change  in  present  practices.  It  leaves  untouched
the  evil  which allows a  Congressional  investigating  committee
to act as a public grand jury which can destroy  reputations in
the  course  of  "investigating"  a  new kind  of  crime  too  vague
to be definable-^the holding of "un-American"  or "subversive"
ideas  dangerous to "internal  security."
As  ammunition in  the  fight  for  more  fundamental  reform
later, we print  below  Congressman  Scott's sharp  analysis of
the  new rules,  an  examination  of the  fallacy  that  "executive
sessions"  necessarily  protect  accused  persons  and  the  text of
the  Doyle  resolution.
A  Liberal  Republican  from  Philadelphia  Assails  It  As A  Fraud
"MR.  SCOTT  (Hugh  D.  Scott, Jr.,  R.,  Pa.).   This  resolution
is a triumph of innocuous  inconsequence . . . The Doyle  reso-
lution is totally  inadequate to curb the abuses of congressional
investigating  committees.  Far   from  being  the  conscience of
the  House  it  is  a  sop  designed  to  head  off  effective   legis-
lation . ..
"The  pitifully  inadequate  Doyle  resolution  is  powerless  to
prevent  any  of  the  following  abuses,  all  of  which  have  been
the subject of widespread criticism:
"First.  It  would  allow a committee to  circulate  'derogatory
information'  from  its  confidential  files  without  notice  to  the
individuals  concerned and  without  giving him an  opportunity
to explain or deny the  defamatory material.
"Second.  It  would allow a committee to make public defama-
tory  testimony  given at  an  executive  session without  notice of
hearing  to the  person defamed.
"Third.  It  would  allow a committee to issue  a public report
defaming  individuals or groups  without  notice or hearing  . . .
"Sixth.  It  would not  allow a  person  under  investigation  to
cross-examine a  witness  accusing  him. at  a  public  hearing.
"Seventh.  It  would  not  entitle  a  witness  even  to  24 hours'
advance notice of a hearing  at  which his  career  or  reputation
would be at stake . . .
"Tenth.  Finally,  and most  important, it  would not prevent
the  committee from  sitting as  a legislative  court, trying  guilt
or  innocence of  individuals, or  inquiring  into  matters wholly
unrelated  to  any  function  or  activity  of  the  United  States
Government.
"The  Doyle resolution will only create false  hopes and  divert
attention  from  the  pressing  problem of  committee reform.   It
should  be  decisively  rejected   by  the   House  of  Representa-
tives.
Is  It  Always  A  Safeguard  to  Be Heard  in  Executive  Session?
The  new rules  provide  that  "if  the  committee  determines"
that  testimony  will  defame  anyone, it  shall  receive  such  evi-
dence  in  executive  session.
Congressman  Scott,  in  the  resolution  (HR  447, 83rd  Con-
gress)  he introduced  last  year,  provided  instead  "No  witness
shall  be  compelled  to  give  oral  testimony  before  an executive
session   if,  prior  to  testifying,   he  demands  to  be  heard  in
public."   In  a  Virginia  Law  Review article  put  into  the  Con-
gressional  Record during the  debate  (see  column  3,  p.  3030,
Cong. Rec., March 23), the  Congressman  explained:
".  .  .  the  executive  session  is  potentially  a  device  of op-
pression.   It  can  be  used  purely  as  a  dress  rehearsal  for  an
ensuing   public   spectacle.    In   secret,   the   witness   may  be
pounded  to  pieces  by  lengthy   and  intensive   grilling—with.
every reply  given under  oath  and recorded against him—until
whatever  charge  the  committee is trying  to  develop has been
woven  into  the  record  in  its  worst  possible  light.   Then  the
curtain  is  raised  and  the  witness  is  put  through  the  same
process again,  bound  now, at  the  risk  of perjuring  himself,  to
stick by his earlier  replies, but under the  terrible  disadvantage
of  having  only  the  most  damning  and  accusatory  lines  of  his
earlier  testimony brought  out  again.   Or  the  committee  may,
at  its  election, merely  release  the  secret  transcript."
Congressman   Keating   (R.,  N.Y.),  who  called   the   Doyle
resolution  little  more than  "a  faint  first  gesture in  the  direc-
tion  of  fair  play,"  made  the  same  point  about  executive   ses-
sions, citing  "a  danger that the secret hearing  may be used  as
a truly terrible reincarnation  of the star chamber."
Text  of  the  New  Rules  Governing  House  Investigating    Committees
"Each  committee  may  fix  the  number  of   its   members   to   constitute  a
quorum   for  taking   testimony   and  receiving  evidence,  which   shall  be  not
less  than  two.
"The  chairman  at  an  investigative  hearing  shall  announce  in  an  opening
statement  the  subject of  the  investigation.
"A  copy  of  the  committee  rules,  if  any,  and  paragraph  2f  of  rule  XI  of
the  House  of  Representatives  shall  be  made  available  to  the   witness.
"Witnesses  at  investigative  hearings  may  be  accompanied  by   their  own
counsel   for   the  purpose  of   advising  them  concerning   their   constitutional
rights.
"The  chairman may  punish  breaches  of  order  and  decorum,  and  of   pro-
fessional  ethics  on  the  part  of  counsel,  by  censure  and  exclusion   from  the
hearings; and the committee  may  cite  the  offender  to the House  for  contempt.
"If   the  committee  determines  that  evidence  or  testimony   at  an  investi-
gative  hearing  may   tend  to   defame,  degrade,   or  incriminate  any   person,
it  shall—
"(1)   receive  such  evidence  or  testimony  in  executive  session;
"(2)   afford  such  person  an opportunity  voluntarily  to  appear as a witness;
and
"(3)   receive  and dispose  of  requests  for  such  person  to  subpena  additional
witnesses.
"Except   as  provided   [above]  the  chairman  shall   receive   and  the   com-
mittee  shall  dispose  of  requests  to  subpena  additional   witnesses.
"No  evidence  or  testimony   taken  in  executive  session  may  be  released  or
used  in  public  sessions  without  the  consent  of  the  committee.
M
In  the  discretion  of  the  committee,  witnesses  may  submit  brief  and  per-
tinent  sworn  statements  in  writing  for  inclusion   in  the  record.   The   com-
mittee  is  the  sole  judge of  the  pertinency  of  testimony  and evidence   adduced
at  its  hearing.
"Upon  payment  of   the  cost  thereof,  a  witness  may  obtain  a  transcript
copy  of  his  testimony   given  at  a  public  session  or,  if  given  at  an  executive
session,  when  authorized  by  the  committee."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  4,1955
In  the  Mail  Bags  of  Congress  Peace  May  Yet  Be  Saved
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Senate  floor  that  maybe  Knowland  was  a  warmonger.   More
manfully,  by Wednesday,  though  still clinging  to  Eisenhower's
coat-tails,  Kefauver  declared  "there  are  forces  in  his  adminis-
tration  so  powerful  and  apparently  so  eager  for  a  war  with
China  that they are becoming impossible to resist."  The Carney
leak  on top  of  the  Dulles leak  had  for  the  first  time in  months
pushed  the  Democratic  party  into  the  semblance—still  weak
and  wavering—of   being  a  peace  party.   If  only  a  few  more
brasshats  will  talk  their  heads  off  and  their  hearts  out,  maybe
we  can  get  somewhere.
The Democrats Were Had
It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  third  party  in  Congress  to  rise  and
point out  what has also been left  naked in  the wake of  Carney's
off-the-record   talk—the  fact  that  the  Democrats  were  prize
suckers  and  willing  dupes  last  January  when  they  gave  Eisen-
hower  the  blank  check  war  powers  to  defend  these  offshore
islands—the  check  they  are now  protesting  when Carney  indi-
cates  the  Administration   is preparing  to  cash  it.   Carney  said
in  that  famous  briefing  that  Formosa  "could  not  be taken  by
the  Reds  for  a  couple  of  years  if  the  islands  were  lost"  and
Hagerty  said  a  few  days  later  "there's  no  evidence  of  a  suffi-
cient  buildup  at  this  time"  even  for  an  attack  on  Matsu.  So
why  was it  necessary last  January  to  rush  through  the  special
war  powers  resolution?   If  attack  on  Formosa  is  still  several
years  off,  even  in  Carney's  opinion,  what  need  was  there   to
throw  a  monkey  wrench  in  the  Chou-Hammarskjold  negoti-
ations   with   an   alarmist   resolution   threatening    preventive
atomic  war  against  China  just  when the  ice was being broken?
The  answer is that  East  and  West  the  Eisenhower  Adminis-
tration,  like  Truman's  before  it,  does  not  want  to  negotiate.
Period.  The  situation  is dangerous because while  the  men  here
•who want  war know what  they want and are determined  to get
it,  the  men who want  peace don't want  it  enough  to  face  the
cry  of  "appeasement"  which  will  follow any successful negoti-
ation.   The  advocates  of  war  with  China  think  the  longer  it  is
postponed  the  harder it  will  be  to  win.   They  think  the  time
to  smash  China  is  now  before  its  industrialization  transforms
it  into  one of  the  great  powers  and  demonstrates to  Asia  that
a  colonial  people  can  create  its  own  capital  out  of  its  own
labor  and  sufferings  without  courting  the  finicky,  undepend-
able  and haughty  foreign  investor.   When  the  war-hawks hear
French  Premier  Faure  talk  of  admitting  Communist  China  to
the  UN,  they  fear  that  if  war  does not  come  soon,  the  stabili-
zation of  the  Far East on a basis of  co-existence will become  un-
avoidable.  This is what gives that  shrill urgency  to their  voices.
Not  Much  of  a  Peace  Party
As  against  the  mad  if   realistic   savagery  of   the   pro-war
party  (mad  because  our  homes,  too,  will  be  destroyed  in  the
holocaust),  the  peace  party  hardly  deserve  the  name.    They
believe  that  if  they  can  ignore  the  revolution  long  enough  it
will  curl  up  and  die,  the  wan  victim  of  a  prolonged  snub.
They  don't want  war, but  they don't really want  peace,  either,
not  peace in the full  meaning of the term.  They oppose  negoti-
ation  because  negotiation   involves  some  recognition   of  China
and  some stabilization.   At  the  least  it  would  entail  the  lifting
of  our  trade  embargo  against  China  and  the  relinquishment
of  the  offshore  islands  and  the  sabotage-espionage operations
which  both  U.S.  and  Chinese  Nationalist  personnel  admittedly
have  been  carrying  on  for  them.   The  new  regime  would  be
free  for  the giant task of reconstructing China.  This—and  not
aggression—is what  they  fear.
What  hampers  the  Democrats  in  this  situation  is that  they
don't  really  favor  negotiation,  either,  and  even  their  braver
spirits  must  echo  the  prevalent  demonology  which  makes clear
thinking  impossible in  American  politics.  Now  is  the  time  to
prod  them  hard;  a  sufficient  backlash from  the  country  in  the
mail  bags  of  Congress  may  yet  save  the  peace  of  the  world.
Without  that  pressure,  Dulles  will find a  way to frustrate  the
European demand  for  a Four  Power  conference;  he dreams of a
German  army  in  being  with  which  to  dictate  a "rollback"  to
the  Russians.  Without  that  pressure,  we will continue  to  drift
toward  war  with  China.   Each  day  that  passes  makes  "disen-
gagement"  more  difficult.   Now  is  the  time  to  act  before  we
make  the greatest  mistake in our national  history,  one that  can
bleed  our  country  white,  squander  its  wealth  and  destroy  its .
blessings.   The  good  men  in  this  capital  are weaklings,  the  bad
are  strong  and  quite  mad.
For Only  Eight  Cents a  Week  You Can Send  a  Gift  Sub to  a  Friend and  Widen  the  Audience for Peace
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Street-
Enter  this  gift  sub for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name                                                                :
City
• $1 extra for  Canada.
4/4/66
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,   S.E.
Washington   3,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED