I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jan31.pdf

============================================================

Debunking A  New  Phoney:  "No Need  to  Bomb  Cities to  Win  War"—See  Page 3.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   NUMBER 1JANUARY  31,  1955
WASHINGTON, D. C.
15 CENTS
"Just  A Ripple"  That  Might  Engulf  The World
When  first  heard  it  was comforting,   there  in  Room  313-A
of   the  Old  House   Office  Building,  the  hearing  room  of   the
House  Armed  Services  Committee,  with  its  high  arched  ceil-
ings   and   ante-bellum  chandeliers,  its   massed  flags  and   red
draperies.   The   Secretary  of   Defense  looked  so  wholesomely
chubby  and venerably white-haired that  it  sounded reassuring.
The  first  question  put  to  him  by  the  long-winded chairman,
Vinson  of   Georgia,  was  how   the  Administration  reconciled
the  risks  it  was  taking  in  the  Formosa  straits  with  the  new
budget's  reductions in  the  armed  forces.  It  was then  that  Mr.
Wilson,  with  his  gift  for   gaffe,   said  the  Formosan  crisis  was
"just  a  little  ripple."  It  gave one  a  shiver afterward  to  think
how  this  remark  will  look  in  the  history   books  should  this
little  ripple turn  out  to  be a  tidal  wave.
Rationally  considered,  in  the  often  deceptive. search  for  a
logical  pattern  in  events,  the  Formosan  crisis  cannot  be taken
at  face  value.  Surely this must  be an international pantomime,
with  both  sides making  fierce  faces  at  each  other,  in  the  ex-
pectation  that   alarmed  third   parties  will  separate  them  and
impose  a  compromise  settlement.    Certainly   Formosa   is  not
worth  a world  war  to  either  side, when war  is likely  to unleash
a nuclear holocaust.  The  budget is a big business man's  budget,
a  sound-dollar  budget,  worked  out  months  ago,  and  behind
Mr.  Wilson's   cheery  remark  about  the  "ripple"  is  no  doubt
the  usual  assurance  from   the  military   that   this   is  a  little
fuss  which  can  be  settled  if  necessary  with  a  few  swift  air
force  sorties  and  no  need, positively,  for  any  ground  troops—
just   like   Korea  was  originally  supposed  to   be.    "Anyway,
they'll  never  call  our  bluff"—one  can  almost  hear  the  words,
though  top   secret  and  highly  classified—"the   Russians  will
never  let  "em."
A  Strange  Kind  of  Monster
One  of  the  most  touching  traits  of  the  Russophobes  in  this
capital  is  their   childlike  faith  that  while  the  Kremlin  is  in-
habited  by  monsters,  they  are  monsters  who  can  be depended
on  to  do  nothing  rash,  and  that  with  one  telephone  call  to
Peiping  they  can make the  Chinese  behave,  too.   This  situation
contains  too  many  imponderables  for  trust  in  such   magically
monolithic  restraint.   Stalin  himself  was  unable  to  hold  back
Mao,    and  there  is  no  one  in  the  Kremlin  now  with   Stalin's
prestige.  That  "paper  tiger"  talk  and  their  military  victories
in Korea may have  gone to  the  heads of  some Chinese  Commu-
nists.   The  new  men in  Moscow  are  not  as sure of  their  power
as was Stalin;  with  the  prospect  of  German  rearmament,  there
are  signs  of  a shift  back  to  hard  policies;  Molotov  may  not  be
bluffing.    If  war  is  to  come,  some  Russians  might   prefer   to
see our  war  machine bog  down  in  China,  no  small  bog.
The   issue  is  a  poor   one.    We   are  drugged   by   our   own
propaganda.   Nobody  but  us  is  going  to  equate  Chiang  Kai-
shek  with  the  cause  of  the  "free  world."  Our  bitter  enemies,
the   Chinese  on   the   mainland,   and   our   uneasy   allies,   the
Chinese  on  Formosa,  agree  on  one  thing,  and  that  is  China's
title  to  Formosa;  Chiang  is as ready  as Mao to  fight  "trustee-
ship."  But  this  is not  a situation  to  be met  by  legalistic  argu-
ment.   The  threat   of  overwhelming  force  might   settle   the
question  and  establish  some  temporary   stability   if   we   really
drew  a  firm  and  clear line.  The  danger  lies in  that  very  vague-
ness  for  which  Truman   and  Acheson  were  criticized   by  the
Republicans  in  the  case  of  Korea.   It  is  too  much  to  ask  any
Chinese  regime  to  give  up  offshore  islands  like  Quemoy  and
Matsu  from  which  its  mainland  cities  and  shipping  may  be
shelled.   It  is  very  hazardous,  with  trigger-happy  aviators  on
both  sides,  not  to  make  clear  just  where  we  say  "so  far  and
no  further."    To  leave  this  vague  is  to  invite  incidents   from
which  no  graceful retreat  may  be  possible.
"MacArthurism"  Is  Back  in  Favor
Too  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  vagueness of  the
Formosa  resolution  and  the  authoritative  interpretation   given
it  during  the  debate—if  that  word  can  be  applied  to  it—in
the  House  last  Tuesday.   Among  the  few  questions  asked  was
one  by  Mr.  Yates of  Illinois.  He  wanted  to  know  whether  the
phrase   about   "such   other   measures"   would   authorize   the
President  "to  invade  the  mainland  of  China."  The  Chairman
of   the   Foreign   Affairs   Committee   replied   that   it    would
authorize  the  President   "to   take  physical   possession  of   the
islands  in  friendly  hands"—we  may  find  ourselves  then   gar-
risoning   Quemoy   and  Matsu?   Mr.  Richards  also  said   that
while  it  would  not  authorize  the  President  "to  take  possession
of  the  ground  on  the  mainland"  it  would  authorize  him   "to
attack  the  mainland  if  he  deemed  it  necessary  in  support  of
the   defenses  of  Formosa."    Mr.   Vorys   of   Ohio,  a   ranking
Republican  member  of  that   committee,   made  the   meaning
clearer  when  he  explained  a  few  minutes  earlier  why  no  line
had  been  drawn  in  the  resolution.  "It  would  certainly  be  dis-
astrous,"  Mr.  Vorys  said,  "if  we,  by  law,  created  a  privileged
sanctuary  on  the  mainland   of  China,  as  we  did  beyond  the
Yalu,  if  the  Reds  decided  to  defy  our  resolution  to  defend  the
Pescadores  and  Formosa."   So  this  is  an  open  door  a  la  Mac-
Arthur  to  unlimited  war on  the mainland.
In  the  light  of  these  all  too  obvious  perspectives,   and  all
the  talk of  recent  months  on  the  sheer impossibility  of  nuclear
war,  it  was  appalling  to  see how  the  House  of   Representatives
rose  to  its  responsibilities.   All  the  slogans  about  freedom  and
slavery  invariably  to  be  encountered  on  both  sides  in   every
war,  filled  the  fatuous  air.   The  House  was  as  ready  to  go  to
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  81,19SS
Weak-Kneed  Liberals  and  the  Plague  of  the  Secret  Informer
The  ACLU  and the  CIO  Suggest A  Compromise  With  the  FBI
The issue  of the secret  informer  is again before the Supreme
Court.   Can  people  be  branded  disloyal  without  a  chance  to
cross-examine  their  accusers?    Three  years  ago the  Supreme
Court  split  4-4  on  the  question  in  the  Dorothy  Bailey  case
(341  US  918).   Such  tie  votes  leave  the  lower  court  decision
standing.   In  that  case,  the  Circuit  Court  in  a  2-to-l  decision
by  Judge  Prettyman   (182  F.  2d  46)  had  upheld  the  use  of
secret  informers.
Now the  Supreme Court has  agreed  to hear  argument  on the
same  point  in  the  appeal  of  Dr.  John  P.  Peters,  senior  pro-
fessor  of medicine at  Yale, a  Public  Health  Service  consultant
dropped  as  a  security  risk.   The  circumstances  are   exactly
the  same as  in  Dorothy Bailey's  case:  all  the  evidence on  the
record  was  in  his  favor;  the  only  adverse  information  was
undisclosed  and  unsworn;  even  the  hearing  board  was  not
allowed  to  question  the  secret  informers  and  evaluate  their
testimony  for  itself;  the  accusations remained faceless.
The  Right  to  Reputation
Dr.   Peters   is   represented   by   former   Judge   Thurman
Arnold's law  firm,  with  two  members  of the  Yale  Law School
faculty,  Fowler  Harper  and  Vern  Countryman  on  the  brief.
They argue  that the government may discharge for  any reason
it  pleases  so  long  as  there  is  no  "adverse  finding"  against
the  employe, but  that  it  may  not  term  a  man  disloyal  or  a
security  risk  without  a  real  hearing  "with  full  opportunity
to 'test, explain and  refute'."
But   three  organizations — the   American   Civil   Liberties
Union,  the  CIO and  the  Engineers  and Scientists—have filed
briefs  amicus  curio*  in  the  Peters  case,  and  they foreshadow
a  different  line of argument.  The first explicitly and the latter
in  footnotes  suggest  a  compromise which  might  appeal  to  a
timid  court.  They  suggest  a  distinction between  the  informa-
tion  supplied  by  professional  undercover  informants  of  th«
FBI   and  "casual  buiybodies."   The  former  might   still  be
protected  by  secrecy.
Casual  Informers  and  Professionals
Such  a   distinction   is  made  to  order  for   th»  FBI.   Tha
ACLU's  position is given added importance  because the  name
of  Morris L. Ernst  is on iti  brief.  It  says  (p. 26) that in non-
sensitive  and  non-policy making  positions  "there  is  neither
necessity  nor  justification   for  withholding  one  iota  of  confi-
dential  information, or  for  refusing  the  employe  the  right  to
cross-examine  each  and  every  adverse  witness."
The  brief  goes  on  to  argue,  however, that  "In   'sensitive'
jobs,  which   inTolve  either   access   to  classified  material   or
other  information  important to  national  defense  and  foreign
relations,  or  in  'policy-making' positions  in  these  areas,  the
professional  or  'under-cover'  informant  should  be  separated
'from  neighbors,  maiden  aunts  and  casual  busy-bodies who
hare  no  legitimate  reason  for   »ecrecy'."
A  similar  idea  appears  on  page  5  of  the  CIO  brief,  which
also  bears  the  name  of  Joseph  L.  Rauh,  a  leading  figure  in
Americans  for  Democratic  Action,  and  Washington  counsel
for  the  United  Automobile Workers.   "If  only  a  few  persons
in  highly  sensitive   positions  were  being  subjected  to   the
ravages   of  secret   informants,"  the  brief   says,   "one  might
conclude  that  the  balance  of  national  interest  lay  with  the
President's  judgment that  the  security  of the  nation required
the  protection  of  these  secret  informants."   A  footnote  adds,
"Of  course,  even  here,  the  distinction  might  well  be  drawn
between  different  categories  of  secret  informants.   An  under-
cover  agent  of  the   FBI,   for   example,  might  be  protected
under   many  circumstances  when  the   landlord,  the   school
associate  or  village  gossip  ought  not  be  protected."
A  suggestion  along  the  same  line  is  made in  a  footnote on
page  9 of the  brief  for  the  Engineers  and Scientists.   "In  our
collective  professional experience,"  the  footnote declares,  "we
have  yet  to  see  a  loyalty  or  security  case  in  which  an  FBI
agent  working  internally  in  the  Communist party  was  indi-
cated  as  the  informer  rather  than  a  neighbor,  working  asso-
ciate,  college  classmate  or  the  like.   Like  any  other  citizen,
such a casual informer should  not be protected  because he does
not  want  to  testify.   Rather,  should  his  statements  be  disre-
garded  as  unreliable  for  that  reason."
What  The  Moss  Case  Showed
The  fallacious character  of  any  such  distinction  is pointed
up  by  the  Annie  Lee  Moss  case.   There  the  accuser  was  no
"casual   informant"  but  "an  FBI  agent  working  internally
in  the  Communist  party,"  a  Mrs.  Markward.   When  Mrs.
Markward  was  produced  publicly  as  a  witness  against  Mrs.
Moss  in  the  McCarthy hearings,  it  turned  out  (1)  that  she
could  not  identify  Mrs.  Moss,  (2)  that  there  were  at   least
three  Annie  Lee  Mosses  in  Washington  and   (8)  that  Mrs.
Markward  had   confused   Rob  Hall,  the   Washington   corre-
spondent  of  the  Daily  Worker,  a  white  Southerner,  with  a
Negro  of  the  same  name.   Had  Mrs.  Markward  remained  a
secret  informant, immune from  cross-examination,  Mrs. Moss
would  never  have  been   cleared.
Obviously,  being  a  professional  undercover  agent  for  the
FBI,  does not  necessarily  make one any  more reliable.  On the
contrary  there  are  instances  in  which  the  professional  in-
former,  to  keep  his  job  with  the  FBI,  tend*  to   "remember"
more  and  more  as  the  years  go on.
Many examples  could be cited  of cases  in  which  professional
informers  of  the  FBI  were  found  to  have  given  information
which  failed  to  stand  up  in  open  hearing.   A  striking  recent
case  was  that  of  Ralph  Bunche.  Both  witnesses  against  him
were  professionals.   The  extent  to  which  the  FBI  and  th«
Immigration   Service   depend   on   perjuriom    informers   in
radical  cases  has  become  notorious.  There  is  no more  reason
to  protect  a  Crouch or  Matusow than  the  "casual" informer.
The  fundamental  right  to  confront  one's  accuser,  and  force
him  to  undergo cross-examination,  was  established  in  revul-
sion  against  just  such secret  police practice*.
The  Independent  Left Has A Month// Magazine Too . .
And  like  /.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   it  has  made  a  reputation   for  fearless,
thoughtful  •nalysis  of  the  molt  lignificant   trends  in  domestic  and  foreign
affairs.
Monthly  Ktriew  it  edited  by  leo  Hubermdn  and  Paul  M.  Sweezy.  Since
its  founding   in   1949,   it   hat   increated   iti   circulation   tenfold.    In  thii
period  of  hysteria,  what  better   proof  can  be  offered  of  the  worth  of  a
left  magazine?
In   his  article,   "Why   Socialismf"  which  appeared  in  the  first   issue  of
MONTHLY   REVIEW                                          66  Barrow  Street
MR,   Professor  Albert   Einstein  wrote:  "Clarity  about   the  eiras  end   prob-
lems  of  socialism is of  greatest  significance  in  our  age  of  transition  .  .  ;
I   consider  the  founding   of  this   magazine   to  be  an   important   public
service."
This  is  your  invitation   to  subscribe  to  MR.    If   yov   do  *e    immediately
you  will  get  Free,  as  a  gift,  a  copy  of  the  book,  "Out   of  Your   Pocket,"
the  story  of  cartels,  by  Darel  McConlcey.  Send  $3,  your  name  end  address
with  the  line,  "I  saw  it  in  Stone's  Weekly,"   and  we  will  send  yeu  a sub
for  one year,  plus  the  cartel  book.
New  York  14,  N.  Y.
This Is Volume Iff, No.  1, The Beginning Of Our Third Year
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  31,1955
Some  Beguiling  New  Nonsense  Made  to  Order for  the  China Lobby
How  Atomic  War  Can Be Made  Short  and  Sweet  and  Practically  Painless
The  Strategic  Air  Command  is  the  sacred  cow of  the   U.S.
Air  Force, but  some younger officers  are  beginning to question
dependence  on  "massive  retaliation."   They  would  like  some
way  to  retain  the  use  of  atomic  weapons  and  yet  seize,  or
seem  to  seize,  the  initiative for  peace.   They  are  afraid  of  the
paralyzing  effect  that  fear  of  all-out  nuclear  war  may  have
on  national  policy.
They  are  anxious  lest  it  create  stalemate  and  peaceful  co-
existence.  One of them, Colonel Richard S. Leghorn, on  active
duty  until  1953  in  the   Office  of  Development Planning  in  the
Air  Force,  now an  executive of Eastman  Kodak, has  set  forth
new proposals  in  an article published  by  U.S. News  and  World
Report  in its  issue of January  28.  A similar article by another
Air  Force   Colonel  now  in  private  industry  is  scheduled  to
appear  in  the  February  issue  of  Air  Force,  organ  of  the  Air
Force  Association.
Leghorn's  thesis,  "No  Need  to  Bomb  Cities  to  Win  War"
is  spread  all  over  the  U.S.  News  cover  in  bold  black  and  red.
This  beguiling new  theme song  fits  the  needs of  Chiang  Kai-
shek  and  the  interventionists  in  dealing  with  an  American
public  opinion  numbed  by  an  awareness  of  how  vulnerable
our  own cities  are.   The  Leghorn  thesis  bypasses  the  notion
of  an  atomic  stalemate  with  the  seductive  prospect  of  small,
limited  wars  in  which nobody  much  would  get  hurt.  "Massive
retaliation" would  no longer threaten  enemy cities or our own.
Big bombers and aircraft  carriers are  termed  outmoded. Total
war  theories  are  dismissed  as  "100   percent  foolish"  in  the
nuclear  age.   "But  war  is expected  to  last  only a  few  weeks."
Like  Painless  Dentistry
Atomic  w«r,  like  dentistry,  is  to  become practically  pain-
less.   "For   civil  defense  within  the  U.S.  the  plan,"  says  the
editor  of  U.S. News,  "calls for  shutting  down  all  major  cities
when  war  begins,  moving  populations  out  and  small  care-
taker  forces  in,  for  the  few  weeks  of war's  'decisive  phase'."
Just  as  Paris  empties  in  August  for  the  vacation  season, so
would  our  cities empty for  these brief  interludes of war, while
the   people  scatter   (on  vacation, pay?)   to  the   woods  and
mountains  for  a  rest.
The  new  painless  warfare   can  be  adapted  to  large  wars
or  small.   "Tactical  use  of  nuclear  weapons  against  solely
military  targets  is  the  basis  of  his  plan.   Enemy   industry
would  not  be  threatened.    Neither  would  enemy  population
centers,  unless  U.S.  cities  were  hit  first."  In  this  way,  with
little  disturbance  beyond  a  possible short  trip  to  the country,
"the   author  insists,  both  Korea  and  Indo-China  could  have
been   won  by   the   West   and   Formosa"—happy   thought!—
"could  be  h«ld  now."
Small  Boy  Minds at  Work
German  militarists  and  Fascists  over  the  past  few  genera-
tions mad* their  country  seem a land  led by Wagnerian  pyro-
maniacs.    Articles  like  Leghorn's   may  make  America  seem
a  land  led  by  Boy  Scouts,  clean-cut,  naive,  sincere,  and  well-
meaning,  but  terribly  dangeroui  because  politically  ignorant,
appallingly  self-righteous  and  waving  weapons  which  could
destroy  the  world.
Leghorn'^  blueprint  for  world  order  would  fit  nicely  into
"The  Rover  Boys in the  Nuclear  Age"  or  "Tom  Swift  and  the
H-Bomb."   To begin  with, we  do not  give  up  nuclear  weapons
—what  small  boy  would  voluntarily  relinquish such wonder-
ful   fire-crackers?   In  the  second  place,  he  naturally  assumes
that,  using  these  magic  weapons,  we  will  police  the  world.
Leghorn   would   have   the   President   issue   a   proclamation
abandoning  massive  retaliation   for  "Nuclear    Punishment."
This  would  have  four  points:  if  an  aggressor   attacks  with
surface  forces  using  conventional  weapons,  we  will  destroy
his  units  in  the  battle  zone  and  the  immediate  rear  areas
with  tactical  nuclear  weapons;  if  he  uses  aircraft  as  well,
we will  wage  "hot  pursuit" with  nuclear  weapons and  destroy
his  air  bases;  if  he  uses  nuclear  weapons, we will  utilize  "our
nuclear  plenty  to  destroy  instantly  and  utterly"  the  nuclear
stockpiles and the  entire delivery capability of the  aggressor;
should  he  make  nuclear  attack  on  U.S.  cities  or  those  of  our
allies  we  will  then  destroy   his.   Leghorn  explains  that  the
purpose  of  this  system  is  to  "make  the  punishment  fit  the
crime,"  an  unconscious echo of Gilbert & Sullivan  in  his  script.
And  If  The  Enemy  Does  The  Same?
What  if  the other  side uses tactical nuclear  weapons against
our  battle  zone?  What  if  the  Chinese  answered  "hot  pursuit"
by  nuclear  attack  on  our  bases  in  Japan  or  Okinawa?  What
if  the  enemy tried  to  destroy  our  nuclear  stockpiles  and  the
air  bases  of  our  Strategic  Air  Command?   Leghorn  assumes
that  we could use nuclear  tactical  retaliation  without  nuclear
tactical  counter-attack.    Such  assumptions,  neatly  tying  up
the  plot  for  a  happy ending, are  better  suited  to  movie melo-
drama  than  to  serious  military  strategy.
Colonel   Leghorn  lives  in   a  comfortably  simple   universe.
What  does  he  do  about  "internal  subversion"?    Special  elite
troops  are  to be dropped by parachute  "and  police the  country
temporarily  pending  prompt  UN-supervised  elections."   And
if  the  elections go  against  us,  as  we  are  afraid  the  elections
in  Indo-China will?   The  thought  never  seems  to  enter   the
Colonel's  head.
Nor  does  it  ever  occur  to  him that  nuclear  weapons might
be  ineffective  against  dispersed  guerrilla  troops  in  a  country
like  Indo-China or  Malaya, that  we  would  be using  a  sledge-
hammer  for  a  fly-swatter.
The biggest  fallacy lies  at  the  heart  of  Leghorn's  proposal.
He  sees  a  U.S.  "unilateral"  declaration  not  to  bomb  cities
as  a  means  of  gaining  the  propaganda  initiative  yet  keeping
nuclear  weapons for  "tactical"  use.
But  can  cities  be spared  from  atomic  destruction  so long  as
atomic weapons are  used?  Leghorn himself is  forced  to hedge
his  answer.   He starts  by  saying  that  it  would  be  wisest  to
strike  first  at  nuclear  stockpiles  and  nuclear  air  bases,  not
at  cities,  since  the  former  represent   the  real  danger.   But
what  if  these  are  situated  in  or  near  cities?   In  that  case,
Leghorn would  use "precision bombing" and thus  "limit major
destruction  to  about  one-half  mile  of  the  target   circumfer-
ence."  There can be a lot of innocent bystanders  in  a  half-mile
circle  of  city.
When  Is  A City Not  A City?
Leghorn  extricates himself  from the  dilemma by re-defining
what  he  means  by  a  city.   "For   purposes  of  the  proposed
policy,"  he  finally  writes,  "we  should  define   a  city  as   any
population  concentration  not  within  the  destruction  radius
of  the  size  weapon  required  to  destroy  a  military  nuclear
installation."   He  adds  reassuringly,   "There   are   no   other
military  targets  in  cities which  we  need  to  bomb."
This  is  not  the  only  hedge.   The  "Punishment   for   Peace"
policy  also  envisages  saturation  bombing within  a  200 mile
zone  along  any  invading frontier  so  as  utterly'to  blast  the
communications  and  supply  of  an  aggressor.    And  what  if
there  are  border  cities  in  this  zone?   These urban  areas,  too,
would  be  an  exception  to  the  pledge.   The  two  exceptions
to  his  no-bombing pledge, in  the  thickly populated and highly
urbanized  countries   of  Western  Europe  and  Eastern   Asia,
would  be  enough to  incinerate  millions of  human beings,  and
poison  the  atmosphere  for  millions more.
Yet  Colonel Leghorn's  thinking, puerile as  it may  be, repre-
sents  the  more  thoughtful  younger elements of  the  Air  Force.
The  High  Command  is  content  with  SAC and  massive  retali-
ation,   though   as   Colonel   Leghorn   says   "in   nuclear   war.
names  on casualty lists will be replaced  by •etimates  in  mega-
deaths."   Everything  seems  to  be  "moga"  nowadays  except
our  brains.
If  You  Have  Not  Yet  Renewed,  Please  Do  So  Now
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone?*  Weekly,  January  31, 1955
The  House  Voted  for  War  on  The  Basis  of Facts Kept  From  It
(Continued  from  Page  One)
war  with   the  H-bomb  as  cave-men  were  a  few  milleniums
ago  with  a  club.   The   same  mindless  enthusiasm,  the  same
fake   gravity,   the   same  cowardice  on   the  part   of   the   few
thoughtful,  which  can  be  matched  on  the  eve  of  every war,
were  here  in  evidence.   Mr.  Colmer  of  Mississippi said  that  we
had  no  quarrel  with  the  people of  China,  but  we  are  nonethe-
less  prepared  to  destroy  them  with  the  latest  technical  devices.
Mr.  Winstead  from  that  same  State,  a  well-known  citadel of
Jiberty,   said  "Christianity,   Magna   Charta   and   the   Bill  of
Rights  are  seriously  threatened."    Mr.  Zablocki  of  Wisconsin
averred  that  "We  cannot  cower  and  hesitate."  Mr.  Rivers  of
South   Carolina  said  he  was  voting   to  let   the  President  use
nuclear  weapons  "and  I  hope he will start  at  Peking  and  work
right  down."   Mr.  Rivers  waxed  lyrical.   "We  can  roam  the
skies  of  China  and Russia at  will," he gloated.    ".  .  . And old
Curtis  Le  May   [head  of   the  Strategic  Air  Command],   just
untie  his hands  and  he  will  level  them."  Thus  we  prepared  to
enforce  the  finer  civilized  and  Christian  virtues.
Rubber  Stamp  Democracy
Mrs.  Church  of  Illinois  thought  it  "refreshing  and  whole-
some" that  the  President had  asked for  authorization "in  truly
democratic  process."   A  few  minutes later  she was  telling  the
House   that   she  had  voted   for   the   resolution  in  committee
only  after  five  hours  of  executive  session  testimony  by  Dulles
and  Radford.   "The main  tragedy  being,"  she  added,  "that
we cannot  tell  you  all of  the  facts  in  the  case, ever."  A  House
which  votes  a blank  check  for  war  409-3  on  the  basis of  facts
which  cannot  be  disclosed  to  its  own  members  "ever"   was
engaged   in  something   less  than   pure  "democratic   process."
(And  is  it  safe  to  let  Dulles  and  Radford  dish  out  "facts"
without  fear  of  rebuttal?)
Mr.  Holifield  of   California   alone  had  the  nerve  to  make
some  really  critical  observations,  though  he  did  not  dare  vote
against  the  resolution.  Mr.  Holifield  pointed  out  that  just  two
years  ago,  on  February  2,  1953,  Eisenhower  sent  the  Congress
a  message  in  which  he  declared  that  under  the  Democrats  the
Seventh  Fleet  had  been  used  "as  a  defensive  arm  of  Commu-
nist  China."   Mr.  Holifield  forbore  to  add  that  forces which
must   be  rescued   by  our  fleet  from   the  Tachens,   obviously
never  were  the  menace to  the  mainland they  boasted  of  being.
The  Generalissimo who  was  going  to  liberate  China   cannot
even  hold  the  offshore  islands  alone.   Mr.  Holifield  did cou-
rageously  point  out  what  disastrous  advice  from  Radford  and
Dulles  was  rejected  by  Congresional  leaders after  Dienbienphu
last  year,  and  asked "Are  you  giving  the  same two  advisers a
blank  check  today?""  Can  it  be that  with  the  election  safely
over  neither  party  is  as interested  in  peace?
Is  It  Wrong  to  Stop,  Look  and  Listen?
Never  were  graver  issues rushed  through  Congress  with  less
thought.    Mr.  Smith  of  Virginia  (the  Mr.  Smith  of  the  Smith
Act)   opened  by  saying  that  the  Formosan  resolution   repre-
sented  "one of  the  most  far-reaching  steps  in 'foreign  policy
that   will  be  taken  by  Congress."   Yet   as  Chairman  of   the
Rules  committee  he introduced  it  under  a rule strictly  limiting
debate  to   two  hours,  and  forbidding   any  amendment.    He
hoped   there  would  be  no  dissenting  voice  from   his  fellow
Democrats  and  that   they  would   show  "where   the   national
interest   and  security   of   our   country  is  concerned,   we  are
Americans."   Apparently  it  is true  devotion  to  one's  country
to  rubber-stamp  war  resolutions  without  giving  thought   to
the  consequences.   Can  we  be  sure  the  Chinese  are   bluffing?
Can   we   be  certain   this   war   can   be  waged  without   using
ground  troops?  Do  we want  to  risk  a  long  war  on  the  main-
land  in  which  the  best  of  our  youth  might  be  bled  in  endless
fighting?   Should  we  use nuclear  weapons?  Would  they  auto-
matically  open  the  door  to  victory?   And  how  will  all  Asia
and  Africa  react  if  once  again  colored  peoples  are  chosen  for
our  experiments in  wholesale  incineration  in  nuclear  warfare?
Is  it  unpatriotic,   is  it  being  untrue  to  this  great  and  blessed
country   of  ours  to  suggest  that  we  stop  and  consider  such
questions  before  taking  the  plunge?
As  we  go  to  press,  early  on  the  morning  of  January   27,
there  are signs that  the  Senate,  unlike  the easily  steam-rollered
House,  will  hear  some  real  debate.   At  least  Langer  and  Morse
voted  against  the  war  resolution  in  joint  committee;  six other
Senators  joined  them  in  voting  for  amendments by  Kefauver
and  Humphrey  designed  to  limit  our  military   commitments.
Long questioned the haste and Flanders termed  this  "preventive
war."    Now  is  the  time  for  all  good  men  to  speak  up.
for  Only  8  Cents A  Week,  $4  A  Year,  You Can Send  The Weekly   To A Friend.    Why  Not  Do  So  Now?
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:
City.
Enter  this  gift  sab  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
1/31/65
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
SOI  E.  Capitol  St..  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mall
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED