I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955mar14.pdf

============================================================

Extra:  Mrs. Shipley Picks McCarthyite to Succeed Her as Travel  Czarina.  Page  4.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   NUMBER 8
MARCH  14,  1955
„        WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
Hatred,  Not  Hydrogen,  Is  The  Fatal  Explosive
<    In  all  the  widening  international  debate  on  the  H-bomb,  a
central  issue  seems  to  be  avoided.   It   is  not   hydrogen,   but
hatred,  which  threatens  the  future  of  mankind.   We  cannot
go  on  building  up  hateful  attitudes  without   making  a  fatal
explosion  unavoidable.  Sir Winston  Churchill's  finest  rhetoric
cannot  mask the  specious character  of  the  hope  he expressed  to
the  House  of  Commons—that   by  a  "sublime  irony"  it  may
develop  that  "safety  will  be  the  sturdy  child  of  terror  and
survival  the   twin   brother   of   annihilation."    This  is  only  a
newer  restatement  of  an  old  fallacy—that  to  preserve  peace,
prepare  for  war.   The  accumulation  of  armament,  the  steady
stepping  up  of  tension,  the  increase in  fear  have  often  made
war  inescapable over  some  slight  incident  which  might  have
been  passed over  safely,  in  other  circumstances, particularly if
the  great  Powers  were  not  so well  prepared.*
Nuclear fission and fusion have changed nothing  whatsoever
in  the  nature  of  man.   When  tension  builds  up  to  a  certain
point,  the  long-expected  war  comes  almost  as  a  physical  and
organic  relief.   Civilizations  have  destroyed  themselves  before;
the  risk  of  death  and  annihilation  is  a  commonplace  to   the
soldier;  that   larger  annihilation,  perhaps  of   all  mankind,  is
only  an  abstraction   to  the  individual.   The  same  men  who
would  go  bravely  into  death  in  battle  cringe  like  the  worst
cowards before  the  more  onerous duty  of  serving  their  country
by  speaking unpopular  truths.
If   we  go  on  developing  in  the  United   States  the  mental
climate of  the  cold war, building up  a picture of  the  Soviet  bloc
as  a  monstrous  society,  permitting   military  men  and  priests
(in  the  immemorial fashion of  their  kind)  to  create  the  notion
that  the  alternative  to  war  is  "slavery,"  that  .Ms   conflict
(like virtually every  other  war  mankind  has known)  is a  holy
crusade,  then  war  will  become inescapable.
It   is  a  fallacy   to   believe  that  there  can  be  peaceful  co-
existence  in  a world  split  between heavily  armed  Powers  glow-
ering with jealousy, suspicion and hatred  across the  line between
them.   Peace  is only  possible  with  charity,  and  charity  in  this
context  means a  readiness  to  understand  how  these  new  revo-
lutionary  societies developed,  to  see the  good  as well  as the  evil
in  them, in  short  to  take  a pragmatic,  adult,  humane and  com-
passionate view of  our fellow travellers on  this tiny and perhaps
already fated planet—and  above all to  recognize  the  quite  fan-
tastically  swollen  mote  in  our  own  eye when  we talk  glibly  of
ourselves  as the  "free  world."
Our  scientists,  months  later,  have  begun  to  echo  Nehru's
plan  for  a  standstill  agreement  on  further  atomic  tests.   The
more  tests  the  more  we  frighten   ourselves  and  others  toward
war;  the  more  "total"  the  weapons  become,  the  more  insinu-
ating  the  whisper  that  maybe  we  had  better  drop  one  first
before  the  enemy does.  But  basically we  need  most  a  standstill
agreement  on  the propagation of  hatred.
The  Russians were hooted  down  when  they  proposed  a  ban
on war propaganda at  the UN  some years ago;  admittedly  such
a  ban  could  not  be  reconciled  with  a  free  press.   But  to  say
that  is to  stop  at half-truths.   The fact is that our  government
gives  the  line  to  public opinion,  and  that  the  same people  who
recoiled  from  banning  war  propaganda have  been  doing  their
best  to  ban  peace  propaganda.  The  witch  hunt  has made talk
of   peace  dangerous  and  shrivelled  up   the   peace   movement.
Yet  what  is  said  here  for  a  comparative  handful  ought  to  be
a  major  topic  of  debate  on  press  and  radio.   Our  own  hatred,
skilfully  and  perpetually  fostered  in  all we  read  and  hear,  may
yet  be our  destruction;  this is the  fatal  explosive.
A  Frightened  Giant Who  Ties  Himself  Up  in  Knots
We  have worked ourselves up  into  such  a state of  awe about
our  own terror weapons that  we are hampering our own  efforts
to  protect  ourselves;   security   regulations   designed  to  keep
secrets  from  the  enemy  encumber our  own  defense  plans.   The
whole  American  atomic  security  craze  is  passing  the  point  of
diminishing returns.   An example the press ignored  was  brought
to  light   by  Senator  Symington  of  Missouri  last  Tuesday  'in
interrogating   William   F.  Tompkins,   the  Assistant   Attorney
General  in  charge  of  the  Department  of  Justice's  Internal  Se-
curity  division,  about  the  Administration's   security   program.
Symington  said  Civil  Defense  Administrator  Val   Peterson,
testifying  four  days  earlier  before  a  Senate  Armed  Services
subcommittee,  said  security   regulations   "made   it   extremely
•  It  is  disturbing  to  find  in  the  Fact  Sheet  lent  out  by  the   Democratic
National-   Committee   last   week   that   the   Eisenhower    defense    cuts   are
opposed   on   the   ground   that   "Army   cut-backs   thwarted    Administration
desire  for  troop  intervention   to  save  Indo-China."
difficult   for  us  to  work  in  the  area  of  preparation  to   take
effective  steps  to  meet  the  threat  of  fall-out."   Peterson  de-
clared  "we  simply  could  not  reveal  that  data  to  the  Bureau of
Public  Roads.  It  is classified  . . . and even  in my own organi-
zation ...   we could not discuss the fall-out  problem  or fall-out
data  even  with  the  people  in  our  own  organizaion  who  were
cleared  to  accept  secrets  (sic)   because  they  did  not  have  Q
clearance."
In  other  words,  employes  already  cleared  for  security in  civil
defense  were  unable  to  take  part  in  planning  against  fall-out
because they  did not  have Q  clearance.   (Washington will  soon
have  as many  types  of  clearance  as H.  J.  Heinz  has  pickles.)
With  all  the  talk  about  fall-out   and  security,  no  newspaper
seems   to   have   reported   either   the   Peterson   testimony   or
Symington's  reference  to  it.   Yet  here  we have  a  real  security
problem  arising  from  an  excess of  "security."
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  14, 1955
ROUND  OUR  GIDDY  CAPITAL
Far  East  Crisis:  A  month  ago  State  Department   officials
were  talking in  private  briefings  of  "swopping"  Quemoy and
Matsu  for  a  cease-fire  in  the  Formosa  straits,  but  last  week
in  his  appearance behind  the  closed  doors  of  the  Senate  For-
eign  Relations Committee Dulles took a  stiffer  position, denied
that  any  such bargain  would be  considered.   Peking  seems to
have  upped  its  terms,  too,  and there  are  indications  that  not
only  the  coastal  islands  but  a  UN  seat  are  its  price  for  a
cease-fire  ...   The prevalent  opinion in the press  corps  is that
the  Eisenhower  Administration  would  like  some graceful  way
to  get  off the  hook  at  Quemoy and  Matsu,  but  nobody is  sure
just  what  dominant  policy  is.   The  same  lines  of  divergence
are  visible, with  Defense  Secretary  Wilson  and  Secretary of
the Treasury Humphrey  for disengagement  while Dulles  plays
to the  Knowland-Radford team  ...   A sharp  crisis  is in  sight
over the Finnish oil tanker, the Aruba, with  State  Department
hinting  last  Wednesday  that   despite   angry   "dares"  from
Peking the vessel would be stopped   ...
Keeping  Ourselves  Confused:  So  great  is  the   confusion
created  by  the  deliberate   obscurity  in  foreign   affairs  that
press  men are  about  equally  divided between  the  theory  that
Eden's speech and  Dulles's  reflect a  sharp  difference  in Anglo-
American  policy,  and  those  who  believe  them  the  product of
private  agreement,  with  Dulles  "firm"  while  Eden  negotiates
...   The latter point  to the passage in the Dulles speech  where
he expresses the hope that the present military  activities  of the
Chinese   Communists   are  not  "the   first   stage  of  an  attack
against  Formosa"—if  not, this  seems  to  imply, we would  not
defend  the  coastal  islands.  "We  know that  friendly  nations,
on  their  own responsibility,"   Dulles  went  on, "are  seeking  to
find  substance for these hopes . . ."
BrowneH  on the  Defensive:  The  opening of hearings  on  the
government  security  program  before  the  Humphrey subcom-
mittee   showed   the   effect   of  informer   turnabouts   and   the
Ladejinsky   case.   Assistant   Attorney   General   William   F.
Tompkins  of  the  Internal  Security  Division  turned  up  with
a  63-page  statement  but  didn't  get  very  far  with  it  before he
was  put  on the  defensive  and  subjected  to  sharp  questioning
by  Senators  Humphrey,  Symington  and  Norris  Cotton   (R.,
N.H.).  Last  August  Humphrey  was  ready  to  throw  the  Bill
of  Rights  overboard  to  prove  himself  no  Red.   Now  he  was
rebutting  the  Justice  Department's  attempt  to  picture  the
attack on informers  as a Red plot.  Symington, too, has  shifted
with  the  political wind.
How  Do  Yon  Tell?   The  questioning  was  naive  and   ill-
informed.   The  Senators  seemed  to  think  that  determining
whether  a  man  was  a  "subversive"   was  on  a  par  with  de-
termining  whether  he had blue  eyes  or was  over  six  feet  tall;
they  spoke  as  if  objective standards  were  possible  and  as  if,
by  applying  these  standards,   differences  of  opinion  between
Conscience  Becomes Suspect
Next  Thursday,  March  17,  the  New.York  Board  of
Education  votes  on  whether  teachers  must  become  in-
formers   to   keep   their   jobs.     Said   one  McCarthyite
witness   in  favor   of  such  a  requirement,   Thomas   F.
Flynn,   for   the   Kings   County   (Brooklyn)   American
Legion,   "I   have   heard   a   lot   this   afternoon   about
individual  conscience.    It   seems  to  be  the  new  Com-
munist  line."
Clark  Foreman,  who  appeared  against   the  proposed
new  rule  on  behalf  of  the   Emergency  Civil  Liberties
Committee,  testified  in  rejoinder,  "You  have  a  spokes-
man  for  the  American  Legion  say  that  the  right  of
the  individual  conscience  seems  to  be  the  new  Com-
munist  line  . . .  Martin  Luther  is not regarded  by the
majority  of  Americans  as  either  a  heretic  or  a  sub-
versive."
(By  strict  definition,  of  course,  Luther  was  both.)
Departments  (as  in  the  Ladejinsky  case)  could  be prevented.
But  we have  reached  the  stage  where  there  are  few  liberals,
much  less  radicals  or  actual  Communists, left  in  the  govern-
ment.   The  danger,  Tompkins  said,  is  from  those  "who  have
been  successful  in  keeping  their  Communist  connections  a
secret from their friends  and associates."  Such persons would
give  only  faint  and  distant  indication  of  any  liberal  views.
The  inference  is  that  everybody  must  now  be  watched  and
spied  upon, and that  one can  never  tell  where  a  "subversive"
may  be  lurking.   When  the  public  begins  to  wake  up  to  the
fact  that  this  means  everybody  is  suspect  and  no  one  to  be
trusted,  we shall  really  see some political  fireworks.
FBI  Still  a  Sacred  Cow: Senatorial  questions  also  showed
that  the  FBI,   whose  political  illiteracy  and  sloppy  methods
are  responsible  for  informer   abuses,  is  still  a  sacred  cow.
Brownell   is   criticized   for   his   meaningless  new   "reforms"
which  make  no  change  whatsoever   in  existing  security  pro-
cedures,  and  for  his  brief  in  the  Peters  case.   But  both,  in
their  defense  of  the  informer  as  the  cornerstone  of  thought
control,  only  reflect  the  FBI's  long  and  intense  campaign  to
encourage  gossip,  snooping and spying as  a means of  political
thought  control  . . . Solicitor  General Sobeloff's  failure  to  sign
the  Peters  brief  will be no surprise  to  readers  of the  Weekly;
we  reported  last  year  that  he  differed  sharply  with  Brownell
on  the Lattimore  case  and Rover's  attack  on Youngdahl  . . .
The Natvig Case: This is an  effort  by indictment to  frighten
reformers  who recant.  Justice  never  bothered  to  investigate
whether  she lied  about  Ted  Lamb,  and  already  had  a  "recan-
tation  of  her  recantation" when the  indictment  was  obtained.
A  Documentary  Not to Be Found  Elsewhere in the  U.S.  Press  . . .
The  Text  of  the  Exchange Which  May  Split  the  Labor  Party
MR.  ANEDX.IN    SEVAN    (Ebbw  Vale,  Lab)  .  .  .  The  assumptions  on
which  the  [defense]    programme was  based  were  as inaccurate  as the  assump-
tions  underlying  the  Prime  Minister's   speech  yesterday.   In   I950-5J   they
said  we  bad  three  yean.    It   had  turned  out  to  be  more.    Yesterday   the
Prime  Minister   said  we  had  three  or  four   years,  but   it  might  be  wrong.
They   wen   merely  wild  guesses.    The   difficulty     of   the  Prime  Minister   in
making  a  speech  in  the  Home  arose  out  of  his  virtues,  out  of  his extraor-
dinary   capacity   for   presentation.    The   mediocrity   of   his  thinking   was
concealed  by  the  majesty   of  his  language.    (Opposition  laughter.)
The   Prime  Minister   yesterday   spent   the  time  of   the  House  telling  the
nation  and  the  world  that  the  hydrogen  bomb and  the  atom  bomb  between
them   bad  produced   circumstances  in  which   negotiation   might   be  more
fruitful.     What  they  wanted  to  know  was when  the  negotiations  did start?
(Loud   opposition  cheers.)  . . .
Jf   it  be  true  and  I  think  it  is,  what  the  Prime  Minister   said   yesterday,
will   he  tell  the   House  why   he   Joes   not   insist   upon   meetings  with  the
Russian  leaden?    It   may  be  that  they  are  not   sincere  in  what  they  say,
but   there  is  only  one  way  of   finding   out,  and  that  is  to  meet  them.    It
may  be  that  the  Prime  Minister  would  like  to  do  it  but  that  the   United
States  won't  permit  him.    That  is  a  sombre  thing  to  say, it  is  a  wicked
thing   to  believe,  but   we   have  now   reached   a  situation  in   Great   Britain
where  we  can,  in   a  jew   short  years,  run   the   risk   of   the  extinction  of
British  civilization  and  we  cannot  reach  the  potential  enemy  in  time   to
arrive  at  an  accommodation  because  we  are  now  at  the  mercy  of  the  U.  S.
SIR   WINSTON   CHURCHILL   fVoodford,    C.)    It  is  absolutely  wrong
to  suggest  that  the  course  which  we  have followed   has  been  at  the  dicta-
tion  of  the  United  States,   It  is  quite  true  that  I  would  have  liked  to  have
seen  a  top-level   conference   of   the   three  Powers.   1  would  have  liked   to
have  seen  it  shortly  after   Mr.  Malenkov  took  power,  to  see, as  I  said:  'Is
there  a new  look?'    7 wanted  to  do  that  and  my  colleagues  agreed  ...     I
prepared   to  go  over  and  see the  President  and  hoped   to  arrange  with  him
to  invite  a  three-Power   conference.     However  I  was  struck   down   by   a
very   sudden   illness  which  paralyzed   me  completely   physically.    1  had   to
put  it   off,    and  it  was  not  found  possible  to  persuade  President  Eisenhower
to  join  in  that  process.    [£mphasis  addedj     ...
MR.  BEVAN   said  the  House  was  grateful   for  the  Prime  Minister's  inter-
vention—(cheers)—but   his  statement  was  complete   confirmation   of  what
he  (Mr.  Sevan)  had  said.    The  Prime  Minister  bad  wanted  to  visit  Presi-
dent  Eisenhower  in  the  hope  of  converting  him  to  the  project,  but   failed
to  do so . . .                                                            (Continued  on Page 3)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  U,  1955
The  hope here  is  of  an  easy  conviction, but  Mrs.  Natvig  is  so
unstable  that  further   surprises  are  not  to  be excluded;  these
would  add to public  disgust  with  informers  . . .
Anna   Louise  Strong   Cleared:  It   is  a  pleasure  to   record
Moscow's  action  in  clearing  the  name  of Anna  Louise  Strong.
As one who defended  Miss Strong  at  the  time  she was  expelled
from   Moscow  and  several   times   protested   the  high-handed
way  she was branded  a  spy without  hearing  or  even  statement
of  concrete  charges,  we  take  our  hat  off to  the  Russians  for
this  act  of  justice.   Given  peace,  we  believe  the  witch  hunt
will  abate  on both  sides.
Testing  the  New  Immunity Law
The  immunity  statute  passed  at  the  last  session   of  Con-
gress has  two parts,  one dealing  with  witnesses  before  grand
juries  and  courts,  the  other  with  witnesses  before   Congres-
sional  committees.    It  is  the  constitutionality  of  the  former
which  will  be  argued   before  the   U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  in
New  York next  Wednesday  (March 16)  in  the  case  of William
Ludwig  Ullman.    This  former   Air   Force   major   and   U.S.
Treasury   official   had   refused  to  talk   even  on   offer   of   im-
munity  when  called  before  a  Grand  Jury.    His  appearance
marked  the  latest  of  Attorney  General  Brownell's   attempts
to  exhume and make political capital  of the  Elizabeth  Bentley
charges  that  the  late  Harry  Dexter  White  was  the  center  of
a   Soviet   spy  ring  in  Washington   during   World  War   II.
Brownell  had  hoped, with  the  use  of  the  new  immunity  law,
to  have  some  sensations  ruinous  to  the  Democrats  ready  in
time  for  election,  but  his  plans  miscarried.
Last  Tuesday,  in  New  York,  Federal  Judge  Tom  Murphy,
the   prosecutor   of  Hiss,  imposed  a  six  months  sentence  on
Ullman  for  contempt  with  the  right  to  purge.   This  means
that  if  Ullman  loses  his  appeal,  he  can  still  avoid  the  jail
sentence  by  talking.    A  three  man  appeals  bench  presided
over  by  Judge  Medina that  same  afternoon  reversed  Judge
Murphy's  refusal  to  grant  bail  pending  appeal,  and  Ullman
went  free  on  $5,000.   Should Ullman  lose, this  will  not  decide
the  more  difficult  question  of  whether  witnesses  before  Con-
gressional  committees  may  be  forced  to  talk   on  promise  of
immunity.    Ullman  himself   may  prefer  to  go  to  jail  if  he
loses—or  he  may  decide to  tell  the  truth,  and  again  deny  the
Bentley charges  as  he  did originally.    That  would expose him
to an  ordeal  by perjury,  with  his word  against  Miss Bentley's.
Censorship  by  Incinerator
The   postoffice   seems   to   be   operating   a   political   index
expurgatorius   in  dealing  with  foreign  mail,  and  given   the
least  encouragement  might  extend  the  practice  to  domestic.
The  latest  issue  of  the  British  pacifist  weekly,  Peace  News,
to  reach  this country  by air  (the  issue  dated  Feb.  25) reports
Convenient  Dummy
The  Atomic  Energy  Commission is  appointing  repre-
sentatives  to  an  electric  utility  advisory  conference  on
proposed  AEC  licensing  regulations.    Admiral  Lewis  L.
Strauss,  the  chairman,   promised  that  in   determining
"the   composition  of  the  electric  utility  conference,  the
selection  of participants was made with  a view to assur-
ing  reasonable  diversification  as  to  geographic  location
and   size  of  organization,   and   representation    of  both
privately  and  publicly  owned utilities."
But  the  National  Rural  Electric  Cooperative  Associa-
tion,  which  represents  936  rural  electric   coops  in  42
states and Alaska,  and is  anxious  to assure a fair  share
of  atomic  power  for  its  members,  protests  that  Strauss
named  only  one  coop  representative   to  his  conference.
"This   cooperative,"  it   declares   in  a  public  letter  to
Strauss,"  is  a  non-operating   paper   organization   and
does  not  have  a  paid  manager  or  any  employees.  How
can   such   an   organization   possibly   be  representative
of    the   needs   and   problems    of   the   rural   electric
systems?"
A  less  high-minded  publication  than  ours  would  say
this  is  certainly  a  straws  in  the  wind  of  atomic  power.
that  British  pacifist  and  other  non-Communist  radical  books
and  pamphlets  are  being  seized  along  with  Soviet  books  and
periodicals  from  the  international   mails  and  burned  at  the
Boston  postoffice.    Among  others  so  treated  were  books  and
pamphlets   issued   by  the   Movement  for   Colonial   Freedom
and  the  Union of  Democratic  Control.
Peace  News   cites  two  articles  in  the  Boston  Post  of  last
January  13 and  14 as  its  authority.    The  newspaper   reported
that  only  a  few  research  centers  are  being  allowed  freely  to
receive  such  "Red"  literature,  that  certain  well  known  pub-
lications  are  automatically  destroyed  and  others  analyzed  on
the  spot  for  consignment  to  the  incinerator  if  the  inspectors
regard  them  as  containing  dangerous   thoughts.
In  the  same category  is  the  news  that  the  Postoffice  is now
doing  all it  can to prevent the  delivery of Izvestia  and  Pravda
to   persons   "not   authorized   to   receive   them."    George   F.
Kennan,  once  our  Ambassador  to  Moscow, protested  this  in
a  letter  to  the  New   York   Times   March  6,  asking  whether
there  were  people  in  the  government  with  so  little  faith  in
"our   own  political  philosophy"  and  with  so  high  an  evalua-
tion  of our adversaries "that we must  shield  our people  physi-
cally   from   every  confrontation  with   Communist  thought?"
Indeed it  is but  a short and easy  step from  labelling  danger-
ous  thoughts,  as  under  the  McCarran  Internal  Security  Act,
to  burning  the  books  in  which  they  might   be  found.
Sevan's  Historic  Challenge  on  the  H-Bomb  to  Attlee  and  Churchill
A  "Deterrent"  That  Would  Mean  Britain's  Own  Extinction
{Continued  from  Page  2)
They   were  now  given  to  understand  that  when  reference   was  made   to
hydrogen  nuclear  weapons  as  deterrents,.it   was  meant  that  they  would  be
used   at  once  in   the   beginning  of   any   sort  of  hostilities.
Did  the  leaders  of  the  [Labor  tarty\   Opposition   mean  in  their  amend-
ment  what  the  Government  meant  in  the  White   Paper?     Did  they  mean
that  nuclear weapons  would  be  used  with  the  support   of  the  British Labour
movement  against  any  sort  of   aggression?     He  wanted  an  answer,  because
if    the   Leader   of   the   Opposition  said   that   was   his  interpretation   of    the
amendment   he   (Mr.   Bevan)  would  not   vote  for   it.     It   would   be  plain
insanity   to  say  that  wherever  aggression  occurred  in  Europe,  no  matter  of
what   sort,  it  would  be  answered   by   the  use  of   nuclear  weapons,  which,
the  Prime  Minister  had  said,  would  involve  the  destruction  of   the  British
nation.
The  question  was  not  a  complicated  one  that   required  long  elucidation.
The   Commander-in-Chief   of   the   allied   forces   had   said   that  whether   the
enemy  used  it  or  not,  if  attacked  we  would  use  at  once  the  weapon  that,
used  against  us,  would  result  in  extinction,     lid  the  Prime  Minister  think
that  if   the   people   of   the   country   understood  that  he  would  be  in      office
a  week?
3   *                                                                                       3 ;
All  that  the  Prime Minister  had  said  was  that  he  was  postpdning  discus-
sion  with  the   Soviet  Union  to   get  a  German  army   that   everyone   knew
would   be  of   no  use.    (Opposition .cheers.)    All   the   generals  were  saying
that   armies  would  be  of   no  use.    It   was  true  to  say  that   if   such  a  war
broke   out   the   armies  would   be  farther   away   at   the   end   than   at   the
beginning   because  they  would  have  to  march  away   from   the  radioactive
areas  they   created.    If   one  wanted  to   be   safe   one  should  join  the   army.
(Laughter.)
The  Prime Minister  said  yesterday  that  he  would  meet  the  Soviet  leaders,
talk   tough   and  then  have  supper.     The   last   supper.      (Some    Opposition
laughter.)    If  he  met  them  and  they  would  not  give  in,  what  would  he  do,
pout  and  say  he  would  commit   suicide?    That  was  where  the  nation  had
got;  one  had  to  agree  with  one's  enemy  or  commit  suicide.  International
difficulties    had  to  be  negotiated  or  mankind  died.    It  was  the  point  of   no
return.   Millions  of  money  were  being  spent   on   foolishness.
The   issue  was  simple..      "Was  Britain  to  talk  peace  or  to   talk  war?     He
begged   the  Government  to  match  up  to   the  magnitude  of   the  problem.
Let  the  Prime  Minister  do  deeds  that  matched  his  great  words,  not  attempt
to  delude  the  country  by   the  majesty   of  his  language  but   inspire   it   with
the  dedication  of  his behaviour.   —House of  Commons, March 2,1955
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  14, 1955
The  Travel  Czarina  Mrs.  Shipley  Grooms  a  Successor  in  Her  Own Image
Washington  Post  Says  McCarthyite  Picked  for  Passport  Control  Job
Once upon a  time  in the  days  of the  New Deal  and  the  Blue
(NRA)     Eagle,  the  picturesque   Gen.  Hugh  Johnson  had  a
picturesque  secretary  named  Prances   Knight.   In   1939,  in
disappointment   over  a   promotion,  Miss  Knight   "defected"
and  left  the  New  Deal  to  work  for  the  G.O.P.  Congressional
Campaign  Committee.   Since  April,   1953,  Miss  Knight   has
been  Scott  McLeod's assistant  at  State.  According to  a  spe-
cial  story  in  the  Washington  Post  (March  2),  she is  favored
by  Mrs. Euth  B. Shipley to succeed her  as  chief  of the passport
division  when  Mrs.  Shipley  retires  at  the  end  of  the  month.
The career  of  Miss Knight  (in  private  life  Mrs.  Wayne W.
Parrish)   as  sketched by  Post  Reporter  Warren  Unna should
clear  away  any  lingering  suspicion  of  a  New  Deal  taint.  A
native  of  Rhode  Island,  daughter   of  an  English  father   and
Czech  mother,  Miss Knight  worked  during  the  war  for  Voice
of  America and  figured  in  a conflict within  the  Czech division.
According  to the  Washington  Post,  "Miss  Knight  was  very
interested  in the  Slovakian separatist movement founded by a
priest,  Father  Joseph  Tiso,  who headed  Hitler's  puppet  gov-
ernment."
Worked  With  Robert  B.  Lee
The  Poet  reported  that  Martin  Merson,  chief  aide  to  Dr.
Robert   L.  Johnson  during  the  latter's  short  term  as U.S.
information  chief, "said  he  once  heard  McLeod tell  Johnson:
Frances  Knight  helped  expose  Voice of  America  personnel  to
Senators  McCarthy and  Bridges."  The Post  said  Miss  Knight
has  also  been  serving  as  liaison  between  McLeod's  office   and
Congressmen  seeking  the  appointment  of  proteges  to  jobs  in
State.
Her  procedure,   according  to  the  Post,  is  first  to  get  the
security  file  of  the  person  occupying  the  desired  job  and  if
anything  suspicious turns  up  "the  employe may be summoned
and  told it  will be to  his  own good to  resign."  If  the  security
file is  barren,  "Civil  Service  regulations  are  scanned  to  see
how  the  job  might  be  abolished  and  reconstituted"   under  a
different  name.   According  to  the  Post's  informants  within
the  State Department, Miss Knight  "was  known for  her  con-
scientiousness  in  retrieving  inter-office  memoranda  and  pass-
ing  them  on  to  Congressman  Taber,"  for  whom  she  worked
after  she left  the  New Deal.  This  was  done, the  Post  related,
"through  Robert  E.  Lee,  former  Taber   committee  chief  in-
vestigator,  former  FBI  man  and  now a  Federal  Communica-
tions  Commissioner."
It  was  the  Taber  committee  which  did  the  first  postwar
attack   on  State,  and  it  was  Lee  who  made  the  Taber  com-
mittee's  list  of  suspected   Reds  available   to  McCarthy   after
Astringent   Footnote   on  Life   Magazine's   New
Series  Glorifying  Religion
"In the  vast  panic  which  followed  on  the  French  Revo-
lution,  the  multitude  of  mediocre  minds  in  the  [British]
middle  and  upper  classes,  formerly  deistic  or  indifferent,
took  fright   at   unbelief   as  something  now  visibly con-
nected  with  democracy  and  regicide;  new  money   endow-
ments  were  rapidly  bestowed  on  the  Church;  and  ortho-
doxy   became  fashionable  on  political  grounds  just   as
skepticism  had  become  fashionable  at  the  [English  17th
Century]  Restoration.  Class  interest  and political  preju-
dice  wrought  much  in  both  cases;  only  in opposite  direc-
tions.   Democracy   was  no  longer  Bibliolatrous  [as  with
the  revolutionary  Puritans  of  the  17th  Century],  there-
fore  aristocracy  was  fain  to  become  so,  or  at  least  to
grow   respectful   to   the   Church   as   a   means   of   social
control."
-J.   M. Robertson: A  History  of  Freethouffht,   Vol.  II, 795
his  West  Virginia  speech.
Said  Mrs.  Shipley to  the  Washington  Post:  "Miss  Knight's
a  very  highly  estimable  lady  and  most  intelligent  and  very
fine . . . Yes, my successor has been chosen—by me!  Don't you
think  that  after  27 years  I  should know what's  needed."
Who  Says  the  Press  Is  Not  Discreet?
It  has  been  a  long  time  since  the  Washington  Post,  some-
times  regarded  as  a  semi-official  mouthpiece of  State,  has  so
taken  out  on the  warpath  against  any  official  of that  Depart-
ment.  But the  story  has  yet to be picked up generally,  and the
press  has  shown a  vast  disinterest  in  who Mrs.  Shipley's  suc-
cessor  is  likely  to  be.  The  Washington  Post  said  it  could not
reach  Miss  Knight  for  comment  and  the  State  Department
press  office  a  week  later  not "only  had  no  statement   to  make
but  volunteered  that very few if  any  newspapermen   had  even
asked  about the  Post  story.   This  shows how discreet  the  pro-
fession,  on  occasion,  can  be.*
Senate  approval  of  the  appointment  is  not  required. But.
considering  the  passport  division's  long  record  of  arbitrary
rule, is there  no one in  Congress willing to  ask for  an  investi-
gation  before  Mrs.  Shipley can  pick  her  successor?  This  is  a
good  time and  a  good  issue on which to write  your  Senator  or
Congressman  if  you  don't  want  another  reactionary   travel
czarina  in that  job.
•  If  there's  anything  newspapermen  like  to  do, it's travel.
Still  Offering  Stone's  Truman  Era ($3) Free  With  Every  Two  Subs,  and  One  Can  Be a  Renewal
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. c.
Please renew  (or  enter)  my sub for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name-
Street-
City —
.  Zone
Enter  this gift  sub for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name
Street-
City
* $1 extra for  Canada.
.Zone
8/14/56
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED