I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955nov28.pdf

============================================================

Inside  Story;  Why  Brownell  la  Attacking  Harry  Cain  for  "Bias,"  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 45NOVEMBER   28.1955
101
      WASHINGTON D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Real  Question  Raised  by  Murray's  Proposal  for  An  H-Bomb  Demonstration:
Is  National  Suicide  A  Sensible   Form   of  Defense?
The  real  reason  Washington   rejects  Atomic Energy  Commis-
sioner  Thomas  E. Murray's proposal  for  a world  H-bomb  dem-
onstration  is not  for  fear  of  what  it might  do  to Them  but  for
fear  of  what  it  might  do  to  Us.  The  basic  decisions  of  atomic
warfare  have  been  made  from  the  beginning  without  consult-
ing  public opinion.  At  first  from  necessity  and  later  from  con-
siderations  of  military security and  finally from  fear  and  habit,
atomic  decisions have  been  and  are  being  made  in  secret,  with-
out  popular   consultation.
Democratic  processes  have  been  one  of  the  first  victims  of
nuclear fission. The  decision  to try and  make the  bomb  and  the
decision  to  drop  it  on  Japan  were,  of  course,  made  privately.
So was the  decision  to  go  ahead  and  make  the  H-bomb;  had  it
not  been  for  a  slip  by former  Senator  Ed  Johnson  of  Colorado
the  public  would  never  have  known  of  it.  Finally  the  decision
to  use  "tactical"   atomic  weapons,  and  to  refashion  the  armed
services  for  atomic  warfare,  has  also  been  made  by  the  inner
circles  of  the  government  without  debate  in  Congress  or  else-
where.  The  current  Sagebrush  military maneuvers  in  Louisiana
show  how  far  that  transformation  has  gone.  (See  the  very  per-
ceptive  dispatch  from  Fort  Polk  by  Mark  S. Watson,  ablest  of
the  Pentagon  military correspondents,  in last Sunday's Nov.  20
Baltimore   Sun).
The  atomic  thunderbolt  is  no  longer  a  final  weapon  to  be
held  in  reserve  for  use only under  the  gravest  circumstances on
Presidential  decision,  but the weapon  around  which all our mil-
itary  planning  and  training  now  revolve.  Though  atomic war-
fare  mean  national  suicide  and  humanity's  final  holocaust,   the
decision  to  engage  in  it has  been  made.  We  have  been  consult-
ed  as  little  about  it  as  if  we  lived  under  a  dictatorship.
Our  New  National  Religion
Only  once  has  there  been  a  great  national  debate  on  atomic
policy  and  that  came  when  the  aroused  atomic  scientists  de-
scended  on Washington  like a flock of  Paul  Reveres to  raise the
alarums  against  military  control  of  atomic  energy.  That  great
debate,  right  after  the  war,  was  made  possible   because   (1)
Congress  had  to  be  consulted  if  an  atomic  energy  act  were  to
be  passed,   and   (2)    the  atomic  scientists  had  not  yet  been
frightened  away  from  political  activity  by  the  loyalty-security
mania.  In  this  case political  activity meant  an  attempt  to  fulfill
the  highest  moral  responsibilities  in  the  society  to  which  they
had  made  so fatal  a  gift.  But  that  was before  the  onset  of  the
cold  war,  and  since that  time  the  government  has  succeeded by
one  means or  another  in shutting  off real  debate.
Every  attempt  by the  Russians from  the  Stockholm  peace  pe-
tition   to  the  latest  Molotov  proposals   for  a  world    pledge
against  atomic  warfare  has  been  hooted   down.  Discussion  of
foreign  policy  has  been  made  to  seem  somehow  unpatriotic;
talk  of  peace  suspect. Mr.  Acheson's  call  for  "total  diplomacy"
in  January,  1950,   merely  put  this  into  a  vivid  and   sinister
phrase;  it  sought  at  home  the  same  kind  of  "disciplined"  atti-
tude toward  foreign  policy on  which  dictatorships  pride  them-
selves.  Oppenheimer's   ordeal,  of  which  the  atomic   scientists
knew  long  before  the  public,  provided  the  scientific  elite  with
a  chilling  object  lesson.  The  decisions  were  to  be  made by our
"betters"—though    these   self   appointed   "betters"    included
some  of  those  Generals  with  prognathous  jaws  and  Neander-
thal  minds  who  adorn  the  covers  of  our  news  weeklies   and
wield  the  power  of  world  life  and  death  through   our  ever-
ready  Strategic  Air  Command.  The  reality  has  been  the  subor-
dination  of  the  best  scientific  minds  to  military control  through
the  rich  carrot  of  military  research  grants  and  the  heavy  stick
of  possible  loyalty proceedings.  In  a  period  when  no  General
ever  makes  a  speech  anymore without  giving  God  a  plug,  and
self-righteous  moralizings  ooze  from  every  political  pore,  real
morality  has  been  completely  abandoned  in  our  imbecile  fasci-
nation  with  these  new  destructive toys. The  atom  is  our  totem;
the  Bomb  our  Moloch;  faith  in  overwhelming  force  is  being
made  into our  real national  religion.
Public  Debate  Feared
The  Pentagon  and  State  Department  have  feared  public  de-
bate  lest it interfere with the  task of  recasting  our  armed  forces,
our  moral  standards and  our minds. There is evidence  that  this
remolding  process  is  far  from  complete  and  irreversible.   The
latest  Gallup  poll  which  shows  that  peace  far  outranks  every
other  problem  in  the  public mind  (42  percent  answered  peace
—the  farm  problem which was next,  drew  only  8 percent).  To
hold  an  H-bomb  demonstration  in  the  Pacific,  as  Mr.  Murray
proposes,  with  the  world  press  and  all  other  governments  rep-
resented,  would  be not  merely to frighten Them  but  to  awaken
Us  out  of  our  lethargy.
Thanks  to  Mr.  Murray,  we  are  now  authoritatively  warned
that the atmospheric and  soil  contamination from  large  thermo-
nuclear  explosions  is  a  far  graver  menace  than  had   hitherto
been  supposed;  apparently there  is a limit to the  safe amount  of
thermonuclear  explosions  even  without  war.  A  new  substance,
radioactive  strontium,  not  hitherto  present  in  the  air  or  earth,
has  been  created  and  released. Its contamination  continues long
after  the  blasts.  As  it  passes  from  the  soil  into  food  and  the
human  body,  it  can  create  bone  tumors  and  fatal  effects.  Com-
missioner  Murray  says  that  estimates  of  how  much  radioactive
strontium  can safely  be absorbed  "have  changed  almost wildly"
in  the past  year. A year  ago it was said  that  we had  little to  fear
because the amount  would  have  to  increase by 1,000,000  times;
now  the  estimate  has  been  reduced  to  10,000  times.  Mr.  Mur-
ray  thinks this figure will  be lowered.  His  four  fellow  Commis-
sioners  in rejecting his proposal  for  an H-bomb  demonstration,
.,  g .                         (Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  28,1955
Brownell  Opens  Up  on  The  Witch  Hunter  Who  Turned  Against  The  Witch  Hunt
The  Real  Story  Behind  The  Attack  on  Harry  Cain  for  "Bias'
For  transparency  it  would  be  hard  to  match   the  attack
which  the  Department  of  Justice  has  just  launched  against
former  Senator Harry  Cain for  "bias." A certain kind of bias
has  been  the  prime  requisite  for  appointment   to  the   Subver-
sive Activities  Control  Board.  When  Truman  tried  to put  one
lone  liberal  on  it,  Charles  M. La  Follette,  the  FBI  and  the
Congressional   witch  hunters  ganged   up  and  prevented   his
confirmation.   The  Board  has  been  the  exclusive  preserve  of
rightists,  and  Cain's main  qualification  for  membership  when
Eisenhower  named  him  to  it  in  1953  was  his  outspoken  ad-
herence  to  McCarthyite   doctrine.
In the past two years, thanks to personal  contact with  secu-
rity  cases  and  an  awakened  conscience,  Cain  has  become  the
maverick  of  the  SACB,  the  gadfly  of  the  Administration  on
loyalty  probe  abuses  and  a  crusader  against  the  Attorney
General's list  and  anonymous  informants.  Nevertheless,  when
the  Attorney  General  last  winter  petitioned  the  SACB  to  de-
clare  the  Washington  Pension  Union  a  Communist front  and
Cain  was  assigned  to  the  case,  defense  counsel filed the  same
kind  of  general  motion  to  disqualify  against  Cain  that  the
first  accused  Communist  fronts  had  made  in   1953.  The  De-
partment  of Justice  defended  Cain's  impartiality at  the  argu-
ment  on this  motion, which  was  denied  last  March.
Echo  of  the  Wallgren  Fight
At  that time  no specific  allegations  of bias  against the  Pen-
sion  Union were  made.   But  when  the  hearings  opened  Octo-
ber  3  in  Seattle,  J.  G. Sykes,  counsel  for  the  Pension  Union,
asked   an   off  the  record  sidebar   conference  with   Cain   and
Posey  Kime,  the  government  attorney.   Sykes  said  his  client
had  discovered  that  in  opposing  the  nomination  of  former
Senator  Mon  C. Wallgren  in  1949  to  be chairman  of  the   Na-
tional  Security  Resources  Board,  Cain  had  called  the  Wash-
ington  Pension  Union  "a  notorious  Communist front."  At  the
conclusion  of  the  conference, however, Sykes  declared  himself
satisfied  that  Cain  could  give  the  Union  a  fair  hearing.
The  government  agreed  and  presented  its  case,  which  was
completed  on  October  19.  It  was  not  until  November 9,  after
the  defense  had  begun to  put  in  its  evidence, that  William  F.
Tompkins,  Brownell's  Assistant  Attorney  General for  internal
security,   opened  his  attack   on  Cain  for  "bias"  against  the
Washington  Pension  Union  as  evidenced  by  his  statement  in
1949.   By that time  it  was  the  general  consensus of  opinion  in
the  Seattle  press  (1)  that  Cain  had  been  presiding  over  the
hearings  with  admirable  fairness*  and  (2)  that  the  case was
going  badly  for  the  government.   Mishaps  had  occurred  dur-
ing  the  parade  of  informers;  one  of  them  had  sued  a  Seattle
paper  for  calling him  a  Communist, an  accusation  he  denied
under  oath;  now he turned  up  as  an  admitted  ex-Communist
to  testify  against  the  Pension  Union.
Evidence  on  the  Crucial  Point
More  serious  was  Cain's  ruling,  over  the  government's  ob-
jections,  allowing the  Washington  Pension  Union  to introduce
a  mass  of  its  statements  and  literature  as  evidence  of  its  ac-
tivities. This  was admitted in pursuance of  Section  13 (f)  3 of
the  Internal  Security  Act  which  says  that  the  Board  in  de-
ciding  whether  an  organization   is  a  Communist  front   shall
take  into  consideration   "the   extent  to  which  its  funds,  re-
sources  or  personnel  are  used  to  further  or  promote  the  ob-
jectives  of  any   Communist  action  organization,   Communist
foreign  government  or  the  world  Communist movement."  The
literature turned  out to deal  largely with the fight for  higher
pensions, and little else.
It  was at  this point  that the  Department  decided to  ask for
Cain's  disqualification.  Its  campaign,  though  well larded  with
assertions  of  a  high  ethical  duty  to  the  accused,  opened  with
a  serious  misstatement.   In  a  letter  to  Chairman  Herbert of
the  SACB,  Tompkins  claimed  that  in  the  sidebar  conference
of  October  8  Sykes,  after   expressing  his  own  confidence  in
Cain,  had  added that  a  motion  to  disqualify  "might  be  made
at  a  later  date  if  the  organization   [i.e.  the  Washington   Pen-
sion  Union]  should insist."
Invitation  Rejected
When  the  Tompkins  letter  was read,  Cain  asked  those who
participated  in  the  October  8  conference  to state  their  recol-
lection  on the  point.  He  said  he  himself  remembered  no  such
statement.   Kime, the  government  attprney,  was  significantly
silent  and  failed  to  support  Tompkins.   Sykes  denied  he  had
said  any  such  thing.  He  declared  that  if  the  Tompkins  letter
was  an  invitation  to file a  motion to  disqualify  "we reject  the
invitation."   "We  have  never  made  a  motion  to   disqualify
Board  Member  Cain,"  Sykes  said,  "and  we  will  not  make  a
motion  to  disqualify  Board  Member  Cain."
On  November  22  the  Department  of  Justice  filed  a  formal
petition  in  Seattle and  Washington asking  Cain's  disqualifica-
tion,  and  the  hearings  were  thereupon   suspended  for  two
weeks.  But  this  time  Tompkins  and  Brownell  added  another
charge—of  "bias"  on  the  other  side.   It  asked  the  Board  to
"take  judicial notice"  of  an  article  by  Cain  in  the  November
issue  of  Coronet,  of  the  friendly  way  Cain  characterized   the
Pension  Union  in  it,  and  of  his  story  about  championing  a
former  WPU  member named  Smiley.  [See  box on next  page.]
The  petition  says  Smiley  "is  believed to  be  the  pseudonym of
Vernon  Todd Biley."  Riley was  one of those  named  as  a  Com-
munist  by the  government's  star  witness,  Mrs.  Barbara  Har-
tle,  who has  become  an  informer  since  her  conviction  under
the  Smith  Act  as  a  leading  State  of  Washington  Communist.
The  implication  is  that  Cain  is  "biased"  for  the  Union  and
against   the   government's   principal   informer   because   he
championed  one  of  her  victims.
Tactics  of  Desperation
In  any  ordinary  law-suit,  a  motion  to  disqualify  under  the
circumstances  in  this  case  would  be thrown  out  as  highly  ir-
regular.   Only  a  fear  of  losing  the  case  and  hatred  of  Cain
can  explain  the  desperate  foolhardiness  of  the   Department.
The  Washington   Pension   Union  was  once  a  political  power.
It  had  30,000  members  and  it  gave  Washington  the  highest
pensions  in  the  country.  Its  ex-members  are  threatened  with
blacklisting  for  many types  of  employment because  the  Union
is  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.   Were  Cain  to  rule   the
Union  was not  a  Communist front,  this  would  lift  the  shadow
of  the  security-loyalty  program  from   them.
In  addition  there  are  thousands  of  defense  and   maritime
workers  in  Washington State who have an  interest  in fighting
the  security hysteria.   Cain is already  a hero to many of  them.
The  witch  hunter  who turned  against  the  witch  hunt  would
make  a  powerful  candidate next  Fall  for  the  Senate  against
Magnuson,  the  liberal  who  fathered  the  illiberal  legislation
for  screening  maritime  workers.   Cain's  term  on  the  SACB
expires  in  August  and  he  will never  be  reappointed  if  Brow-
nell  has  his  way.  The  effect  of  this  new attack,  ho\vever, may
serve  to  put  Cain  back  in  the  Senate,  where  he  would  be  all
the  more  effective  as  our  No. 1  Republican  critic  of  security
abuses.
•  The  Seattle  Times:  "Cain's  fair  and  judicious  conduct  of  the   Pen-
sion  Union  hearings  has  made  an  excellent  Impression  in   Seattle—one
that  lends   weight   to   his   views   on   questions   of   Federal   security
procedure."
Why   Overburden  Santa's  Reindeers?
Lighten  their  load—and  yours.    Solve  your  Xmas  problem
by  sending  that  friend  a  gift  subscription  to  the  Weekly.
Just  use the  coupon on page  four  and  write  across  it,  "Please
send  Christmas  gift  card  with    it."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  28,1955
A  Quick  Glance  at  the  Main Fronts:  Stevenson  Starts Off  With  Bromides
And  When  Will  Harriman  Stop  Pretending  He's  A  Robespierre?
Political  Front:  Stevenson's  opener  was  a  bore.    The  last
thing  one  expected  from  Adlai  were  after   dinner   bromides.
And  we  wish  Harriman   would  stop  acting  as  if  he  were  a
Robespierre.  Just because  he's  a multimillionaire is no reason
why  he  should  be  so fiercely anti  "moderate."   The  one thing
evident  from  the  Chicago  speeches  is that  the  Democrats  are
not  disposed  to  challenge  the  Republicans either  on  German
or  Chinese  policy,  and  have  nothing  more  to  offer  than  in-
tensification  of  the  cold  war.
•    Aftermath  of  Geneva: The  first  Geneva meeting  was  a  de-
feat  for  the  Germans:   it  relaxed   tension  while  leaving  the
Reich  defeated.   The  second  Geneva  meeting,  thanks  to  Mr.
Dulles,  was  a  German  victory:  the  Russians  must  now  deal
directly  with  the  Germans  in  order  to  achieve  any  relaxation
of  international  tension  and disarmament.  . . . The weakness
of  Dulles'   (and  their)  position  is  that  it   (1)   overestimates
Russian  internal  strains  and  (2)  underestimates  the  benefits
the  Russians  draw from  a split  Reich, particularly  in  supplies
and  machine  tools from  East  Germany.   Meantime many  West
Germans  are  displeased  because the  U.S.  did not  offer  to  swap
free   elections  and  a  neutral   Reich  for  reunification.  .  .  .
Perhaps  we were  afraid  the Russians  might  accept.  . . .
Civil  Liberties  Front:  The  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Com-
mittee  won  a  victory  of  historic  importance  for  all   draftees
when  Federal  Judge  Edelstein   ruled  in  New  York  that  the
Army  could  not  give  less  than  honorable  discharges  because
of  pre-induction activities  deemed disloyal  or  subversive.   But
the  Army's  revision   of  the  discharge   rules  under  pressure
from  the  Hennings   committee  is  still  equivocal.  .  .  . The
ECLC's  own  counsel,  Leonard   Boudin,  won  half   a  victory
when Judge Youngdahl ruled that the  State Department  could
not refuse  him a passport without  a hearing at  which  adverse
evidence had  to  be disclosed.  But  at  the  same  time  the  Judge
held  that  State  Department  might  make  "reasonable   regula-
tions" restricting the  "right" to travel.  A right which can be
restricted  so easily  is not  much of a  right.  . . . The  Supreme
Court  has  rarely  heard  more  inflammatory   nonsense   than
from  the  State  Attorneys   General  in  the   Nelson  case;  one
would  think  from  their   presentation   that   without   sedition
laws  the  states  could  not  punish  disorderly  conduct,  riotous
assembly,  destruction  of property  and arson.  .  .  .  Questions
from  the  bench  during  argument  of  the  Communist  registra-
tion  case  against the  SACB seemed to indicate that  Chief  Jus-
Jolly  Fellow,  Comrade  Krushchev
And   (Just   Like  Beria)   Quite
A  Civil  Libertarian
"Mr.  Pearson  retorted   that  every  Communist  party
organization  in the  West  was a  Soviet  base.  That  was a
domestic  problem  for  individual  countries,   Mr.  Krush-
chev  replied,  adding,  'Why  not  liquidate  them,  or  put
the  members  in  concentration  camps?'"
—Account  from   Ottawa   of  Canadian  Foreign   Min-
ister  Lester  Pearson's  recent  visit  with   Krush-
chev,  New  York  Times,  November  20.
tice  Warren  was  concerned about  the  "buckshot"  character of
registration, affecting  legal  as  well  as  illegal  activities,  while
Mr. Justice  Frankfurter   indicated  concern  about  the  innocent
and  idealistic  drawn  into  Communist  association.  .  . .
Middle  East  Front:  Israeli  Foreign  Minister  Moshe  Shar-
rett, who grows  more  skilful  with  the  years,  had  to  deal  with
an  unusually  hostile   and  unsympathetic   (sometimes  almost
anti-Jewish)  barrage  of questions  at  the  National  Press  Club
last  Monday. .  .  .  The State  Department  is  throwing  all its
weight  behind the  Eden  plan  to  make peace  at  the  expense  of
Israel.   Cairo  welcomes  the  Eden  proposals   because  a  trun-
cated  Israel  could more  easily  be  attacked  on the  next  round.
Dulles'  remark  about territory  with  only  "sentimental"  value
seems  to  have  echoed  Nasser's  proposals  last  year  to  make
peace  if  given a  large slice of the  Negev. But  the  oil,  minerals
and  challenge  of the  Negev have  more than  sentimental  value
for  Israel.  . .  . Both  sides  are now playing  up to  the  Arabs,
and there has been a  disturbing  increase in  anti-Zionist agita-
tion  in  the  satellite  States.  .  .  .  One of  the  side-rivalries  in
the  Middle  East  is  reflected  in  the  "little  war"  being  waged
over  the  oil rich  Buraimi  desert  between  (American  backed)
Saudi  Arabia  and  a  (British  backed)  independent  Sheikh  for
the  right  to  exploit  that  disputed  area.  That  "suppressed"
story  to  which we called  attention  last  week was  bigger  than
the  AP  reported:  the  London  Mail  of  November 7 and  8  not
only reported  that  Aramco funds financed the  Czech-Egyptian
arms  deal  but  also  said,  "American  money  goes  even  further
afield.  The  Saudis,  who  live  by  bribery,  virtually  control  the
Syrian  Parliament and half  the Parliament  of Lebanon."  . . .
If  A  Scientist  Works on  Cancer, What  Difference  Docs  His  Politics  Make?
This,  Too,  Is  Cited  As Evidence  of  "Bias"  By  The  Justice  Department
"Our  exaggerated  fear  of  Communist infiltration had  be-
come  a  plague.  It  led brother  to  spy  on brother,  as  in  Nazi
Germany  and  Soviet  Russia.   It  broke  the  lives  of  many de-
cent  people,  who,  in  a  number  of  cases,  were  convicted  by
malicious  rumor,  plain  dirty  lies  and  the  words  of  profes-
sional  informers.  ...    It  blacklisted  actors  and artists.  It
drove  teachers  from  their  classrooms,  defense  workers  from
the  shops. .. .
". . . It  was the visit  of  Mrs.  Smiley that  got me started.
She came to my office  and begged me to listen. . . . She told
me her  husband, a  government scientist  at  work doing cancer
research,  had  been  suspended  from   his  job.   Unknown  ac-
cusers  had charged that  Smiley had been a Communist Party
organizer  in the state  of Washington  in the 1930's. . . .
"I  asked,  'What  in the  blazes  difference  does it  make  if  he
had  been  a  Communist or  a  Hottentot,  if  he is  combatting a
disease  that  strikes  all men?'  I had to answer  that  question
myself.  With  my background,  it  was  a  pretty  tough  one  for
me  to  face.  I  had to admit  it  did not  make  the  slightest  dif-
ference  what  Smiley's  politics  had  been,  unless  it  had  been
clearly  established   that  he  had  been  working  against   the
U. S. . . .
"Smiley  and his  wife  married  in  college.  The time  was  the
depression  with its breadlines  and bank failures.  Mrs.  Smiley
joined  an  outfit  called  the  Washington  Pension  Union  be-
cause it  worked  for  free  milk  and  pensions.  Occasional  meet-
ings  were  held  at  Smiley's  home. . . .  Some  years  after  the
Smileys  were out  of  the  Pension  Union, it  was  placed  on  the
Attorney  General's  list  of  subversive  organizations.   Then,
years  later,  nameless  voices  accused  Smiley  of being  a Com-
munist  organizer.
"Smiley  asked  me,  'How can  I  prove  I  was  not  a Commu-
nist?    I  don't  even  know  who  made  the  charge,  or  under
what  circumstances he  considered  me  a  Communist.'
"I  read  through  the  hearings  on Smiley,  and I  appeared  at
one session. ...   The security  board  was more  concerned  with
what  anonymous accusers  said  that  Smiley  had  been  in  the
long  ago  than  with his  ten  years  of  faithful  Federal  service.
"I  knew  then  that  I  could  not  remain  silent  and  live  with
myself."
—Former  Senator  Harry  Cain,  "I  Could  Not  Remain  Silent,"   (As   Told  to  Tris   Coffin)    in  Coronet  for   November.
1  8  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  28,1955
Operation  Sagebrush  Shows  An  Aggressor  Can  Jam  Our  Radar  Defenses
The  Ultimate  Delusion
{Continued  -from   Page  One)
significantly  fail  to  deny  these  figures.  Their  official  statement
merely  says that  until  further study has  been  made "it  is  impos-
sible  to  be definite  about  the  genetic  effects."  To  say that  it  is
impossible  as yet to  be  definite  is quite  different  from  the  state-
ments  of  a  year  ago  that  fear  of  radioactive  fallout  was  exag-
gerated.  Why  should  these  matters  be  cloaked  in  secrecy,  the
decisions  on  them  made  without  popular  discussion ?
The  Fallacies  of  Atomic  War
The  lack  of  real  debate  has  allowed  a  thick  deposit  of  dubi-
ous  ideological   fall-out  to  contaminate  the  public  mind.  A
whole  series  of  doubtful  propositions  have  been  rubbed  in  by
official  statement  and  their  echoes  in  a  well-coordinated  press.
There  is first of  all  the  notion  that  but  for  the  bomb  the  Rus-
sians  would  have  overrun  Western  Europe  after  the  war.  This
is highly  doubtful  in  view  of  the  terrible wounds they  still  had
to  heal  from  the  last  war;  the  enormous  headaches  occupation
of  Western  Europe  would  have  added  to  their  problems,  the
civil  war  it  would  have  provoked  and  the  world  war  it  would
have  unleashed.
America  has  twice  been  plunged  into  world  war unprepared,
and  twice  won  despite  that  initial handicap.  The  Russians are
not  fools;  they do  not  underestimate  the  huge  industrial  capa-
city  and  human  resources  of  the  American  people.  It  is,  I  be-
lieve,  the  most  dreadful  nonsense  to  say that  they  would  have
overrun  Western  Europe  if  we  had  not  had  the  bomb.  The
same  is  true,  in  my  opinion,  of  the  equally  prevalent  notion
that  there would  be world  war today but for  fear of  our  bombs.
The  Russians and  the Chinese  have enough  to  do at  home;  and
even without the  bomb, war with  America would  ruin them  for
a  generation.  Then  there  is the  newer  notion  that  we must  not
give  up  nuclear  warfare  because  only  The  Bomb  counterbal-
ances  the  "hordes"  at  the  disposal  of  Russia  and  China.  But
this  completely  overlooks  the   fact   that  these  "hordes"  now
have  the  A-bomb  and  the  H-bomb,  too.  So we  no  longer  have
an  advantage. Would  it  not  be  better  for  both  sides  to  see if
some  means  cannot  be  found  to  ban  nuclear  warfare  for  hu-
manity's  good?
of  the  Atomic  Age
In  the  past,  certain  terrible  weapons  have  been  held  in  re-
verse  by  both  sides, and  neither  have  used  it;  poison  gas  is  an
example.  It  is one thing  to have the  bomb in  reserve. It  is quite
another  to  equip  whole  armies  with  atomic  weapons  so  that
they  are  no  longer  able  to  fight  any other kind  of  war. That  is
what we are doing. We  are thus deciding  in advance that  a new
war  shall  be  a  war  without  mercy  and  limit.  The  notion  that
atomic  war  can  be  limited;  that  atomic  weapons  can  be  used,
as  Eisenhower  once  said,  like  "pistols,"  fosters  the  most  dan-
gerous  misconceptions.  Once  such  a  war  begins,  neither  side
dares  hold  back  its  worst and  biggest  bombs,  though  this may
mean total mutual destruction.
Nightmarish  Consolation
Atomic war means national suicide. The  ultimate delusion of
the  atomic  era  is  the  notion  that  national  suicide  is  a  feasible
means  of  defense; how  apparently sensible and  sane men  could
drift  into  such  beliefs  will  astound  future  historians,  if  there
are  any.  All  this  has  been  underscored  by  the  Sagebrush  ma-
neuvers.  They  have  shown  how  easily  radar  defenses  can  be
jammed  by  an  attacking air  fleet;  we  can  wreck  Russia's cities
but  Russia can  wreck  ours.  And  the  whole  human  race may  be
ruined  by  the  after  effects.  Is  it  not  irrational, then,  to  decide
for  atomic warfare when atomic warfare means mutual suicide?
Should  such  a  decision  be  made  without  the  fullest   national
and  world  debate ? How  much  security is there  in  plans  for  de-
fense  which  could  do  no  more  than  assure  our  dying  people
that  the  enemy was  dying,  too?  The  Strategic  Air  Command
can  destroy the  enemy, but  it  cannot defend  us.
To  set off on  the path of atomic warfare  is to  set off on  a path
from  which  there  is  no  return, toward  a  goal  where  there  can
be  no  victory,  into a hell  where none  could  survive. Until  now
the  worst  wars  have  been,  to  some  extent,  limited—if  not  by
human  intention and  hatred, then  at  least  by human capacity to
destroy. But this war, the war we have been trying out  in  Oper-
ation  Sagebrush,  the  atomic  war  must  become  unlimited  war,
against  Us  as well  as Them.  On  those  whom  the  bombs  spare
the  radioactive  dusts  will  fall,  gently  and  impartially  as  the
rain.
We  Believe  This  Deserves  Wide  Circulation—Order  in Bulk  or Let  Us Send  Copies  to  Your   Friends
I.  P.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name
Street
City                                         Zone          State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
Street
City                                         Zone          State
*  extra  for  Canada.                                                n/28/55
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED