I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955sep19.pdf

============================================================

Adenauer  Knuckles Under at  Moscow; A  Dulles  Defeat,  See  Page  2.
/. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 34
SEPTEMBER  19,  1955
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
Is  Eisenhower  A  Communist  Front?
John  J.  Abt  aad  Joseph  Forer,  counsel  fot  the   Communist
Party,  filed  a  270-page  brief  with  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court
last  Tuesday.    The  Court  has agreed  to hear  the  party's  appeal
this  Fall  against  the  order  requiring  it  to  register  with  the
Subversive   Activities   Control   Board.    The   Court  will   pass
upon  the  constitutionality  of  the  McCarran  Act,  the   Internal
Security  Act  of   1950,  which  Congress  passed  over  President
Truman's  veto.    If  a  majority  finds  the  Act   unconstitutional
and  throws  out  the  registration  order,  it  will  add  a  mighty
push  to  the  tide  now  carrying  this  country  back  toward  its
traditional  freedoms.    We  believe  the  Court  will  do so.
The   Communist   Party  has  beea  shopping   around   for   a
lawyer  of   national  reputation  to  argue  the  case  before   the
Court,  but  as  yet  has  been  unsuccessful.   There  is  no  sign  of
a  new  Wendell  Willkie.    Though  the  implications   of   this
appeal  are  well  understood  among  lawyers,  even  the  best  of
them  seem  to  have  some  special  reason  why  they  should  not
argue  it.    Voltaire  and  Lord  Erskine,  Jefferson  and   Andrew
Hamilton,  are  invoked  in  every law  school  commencement,  but
few  are  found  to  imitate them.   It  is not what  happens  to  the
American  Communist  parry  which  makes  this  case  crucial;  it
is what  the  outcome will  do  to  the  atmosphere  of  this  country.
The Nursemaid  Theory  of  Society
This  legislation  is  based  on  premises  completely  foreign  to
those  which  lie  at  the  foundations  of  free  government.     The
McCarran  Act  is  based  on  the  analogy   of  a  Pure  Food  and
Drug  Act for  ideas.   It  assumes  that  ordinary people  and  free
debate  are  not  to be trusted.    It  has  its  roots  in the  Nursemaid
Theory  of  Society,  which  Communists  in  power  also  practice.
This holds  that  an  all-wise government  must decide what  ideas
are  "good"  and  what  ideas are  "bad,"  lest  otherwise  the  poor
not-to-be-trusted   people  be  ideologically  poisoned,  misled  or
"subverted."
The  Act  set  up  a  Subversive  Activities  Control   Board   to
compile  the  equivalent  to  an  Index  Expurgatorius  for  Amer-
ican  political  life,  like  that  which  the  Vatican  has  so  long
wielded   over  world   literature.     Organizations  found   to   be
"subversive,"  whether  Communist, Communist fronts  or  Com-
munist  "infiltrated" are  forced  to  register,  subjected  to  severe
legal  disabilities;  required  to  label  themselves,  their  publica-
tions  and  their  broadcasts  as  "communistic."    The  idea  is  that
ordinary   people  will  thus  know   what   they   may  join   and
listen  to.
Guilt  by  Parallelism
This  Act  is  intended  to  drive  Communists  underground.   It
would  deprive  them  of  the  right  to  travel  and  to  work  in
defense  plants.    It  would  turn  them  into  second  class  citizens.
All  this  has been  happening  anyway.  But  the  Act,  if  the  regis-
tration  order—its  cornerstone—goes  into  effect,  will  legalize
and  widen  the  process.    Any  Communist  who  fails  to  register
will-be  subject  to  five  years  in  jail,  a  fine  of  $10,000  or  both.
But  how  determine who  is  a  Communist if  they  have  torn  up
their  membership  cards  and  gone  underground?
The  basic  answer  of  this  Act  is  that  Communist  fronts  and
Communist   members   can  be  detected   by  parallelism.    This
theory  of  parallelism  was  further  developed  in  the  new  stand-
ards  for  determining   membership  which  Congress   added  to
the   Act   by   the   Humphrey-Morse-Douglas   amendments  of
August,  1954.    The  basic yardstick is  the  "extent  to  which"
an  organization  or  a  man  advances  ideas  which  are  also  ad-
vanced   by  Communists.    This   is  a  most   dangerous   rubber
yardstick,  as  the   late  John  W.   Davis  objected   in  opposing
this  law  when  it  was  still  the  Mundt-Nixon   bill.
Can  The  Board  Read  Men's  Minds?
A  vivid  example  of  how  dangerous  this  yardstick  can  be
was  furnished  just  a  few  days before  the  new  brief  was  filed.
The  National  Council  of  American-Soviet Friendship  was  be-
fore  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  on  a   proposed
order  to  register   as  a  Communist  front.    Its  campaign   for
peace  and  co-existence  was  held  to  be .part  of  the  proof   that
it  was  Communist  dominated.    The  Board  has  already  ruled
that  it   does  not  matter  whether  an  organization's  aims  are
good  or  bad,  to  America's  interest  as  well  as  Russia's.    "Par-
allelism"  condemns  it.    Now   in   1945   General  Eisenhower
cabled  a  rally  held  by  this  same  Council,  "American-Soviet
friendship  is  one  of  the  cornerstones  on  which  the  edifice  of
peace  should  be  built."    In   1955,  at  Geneva,  this  is  exactly
the  premise  on  which  Eisenhower operated.    In  this  the  Ad-
ministration  parallels  declared  Soviet  aims  for  peace  and  co-
existence.     Is  Eisenhower   then  a  Communist   front?
Such   slanderous  parallels  were   McCarthy's   stock-in-trade.
To   draw  them  is  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board's
business.    It  is  expected  to  read  men's  minds.   The  law  gives
it  the  impossible  task  of  deciding who  holds  or  advances ideas
on  his  own,  and  who  holds  or  advances  the  same  ideas  be-
cause he  is a Communist, a front  or  an  "infiltrated" dupe.   The
existence  of  such  power  makes  it  hazardous  to  advocate any-
thing  the  Communists  also  advocate,  however  innocuous.    It
poisons  the  atmosphere  of   free  discussion.    It   cripples   the
fight  for  world   peace.    Its  dangers  are  high-lighted  for   the
Court  by the  National  Council for  American-Soviet Friendship
case.    Humbler  citizens are  in  danger  of  being  proscribed  for
advocating   under   less   respectable   auspices  what  a  five-star
General  as  President  is converting into  national  policy.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.IStone's  Weekly,  September 19,1955
DerAlte  Fucbs,  Like Der Schone Adolf,  Ends  Up  Retreating  from  Moscow
During  the  past  year  no  Western  statesman  has  taken  so
sour  a  view  as  Adenauer  of  the  Soviet  Union.   He  has  dis-
paraged  negotiation,  diagnosed  the  Russian  peace  drive  as  a
reflection  of  serious  internal   weakness,  implied that  if  only
Washington would  wait  the  Soviet  Union  would  collapse  from
within.
When  Adenauer  himself  accepted  an  invitation  to  Moscow,
he talked  big of preconditions.  His own march to  Moscow  was
to  be a  triumph  of  dealing  from  strength.  The quotations  in
the  adjoining  column  from  Newsweek are  typical  of  the kind
of   boastful   pap   fed   the   American  press  from   Bonn   and
through  the  State  Department  from  Washington.
Though  the  American  press  is doing its  best  to  hide it,  the
Moscow visit  ended in  the  biggest  pratt-fall  of  postwar  diplo-
macy.  Adenauer,  too,  like  Hitler  before him, has  ended  up  in
an  ignominious  retreat  from  Moscow.  The  official  documents
show  the  Russians  got  exactly  what  they  wanted,  resumption
of  diplomatic  relations,  with  no  conditions  and  no  promises.
Adenauer's  claim  that  he  got  a  promise  from  Moscow  on
German  prisoners  is not  borne  out  by the  official communique
or  by the  letters  exchanged  between  the  Soviet  Premier  and
the  German  Chancellor.   On the  contrary  the  Russians  have
set  up  a  counter-claim  to  Soviet  citizens  still  on  German  soil
and  held  to their  contention  that  they  will  only  negotiate  the
prisoner  question  with  their  East  as  well  as  our  own  West
Germans.
What  The  Germans  Prefer  to  Forget
There  is little reason  to doubt that many of these  prisoners
are,  indeed, war  criminals.  "We cannot  forget  the  millions of
people,"   Bulganin  told  Adenauer,  "shot,  gassed  or  burned
alive  in German concentration  camps.... Over five and a half
million  completely innocent  people were killed at  the  camps of
Maidanek  and  Oswiecim."   These  were  German  crimes,  and
it  was  good  to  have  the  Germans reminded of  them.
If  Adenauer  expected  to  be  offered  a  separate  deal  if  he
would withdraw from NATO, he must have been disappointed.
Kruschchev  spoke  quite  plainly  on  the  subject,  saying  "we
would  be  stupid  to  help  all  Germany to  join  NATO,  thereby
strengthening  the forces  mustered  against  us."  But he  added:
"It  is  too late  now  to  raise  the  question  of  annulling  the
Paris  agreements,  they  exist. ...   To raise the question  of the
German  Federal  Republic's  withdrawal  from  NATO  is  also
unreal  and would sound like an  ultimatum  from  our  side.  We
How  Bold and  Brave  He  Blew!
"Adenauer  ruled  out  in  advance  any  resumption  of
Soviet-German  diplomatic  ties  except  on  Bonn's  own
conditions:   Prior   'frank'   understandings   on   German
unity  (i.e.  free,  internationally  supervised  all-German
elections),  and  the  release  of  some  9,000  German  war
prisoners  (out  of  an  original  75,000)  believed  still  in
Russian  hands.  He  set  a  five-day  limit  on  the  talks and
served notice he would not even consider diplomatic rela-
tions  if  the  Russians 'refuse  to  make  any  concessions.'"
—Newsweek,  Sept. 12.
do  not  pose this  question.  That  is  why, proceeding  from  the
real  conditions which  have  developed today,  the  Soviet  gov-
ernment  has  proposed  to  establish   diplomatic relations  with
-the German Federal  Republic and  to create  conditions for  the
favorable  development of  trade  between us. ...    If  it  is not
advantageous  for  you to develop trade with  us, then you  don't
have  to  do it.   We can  do without   it."
Not  A  Seduction Scene
These  are  quotations  from  the  official  texts,  little  of which
appeared  in American press  coverage.   They indicate that  the
Russians  set  out  simply  to  establish  relations  and  to  trade
with  Bonn  as  part  of  their  policy  of  seeking  relaxation  of
tension.  They were not out  to woo or  tempt the  West  Germans.
This is not the seduction  plot Bonn pictured;  like many young
ladies  in  similar  positions,  the  West  Germans were  suffering
from  illusions  and  over-valued  their  own  charms.
The upshqt was  Adenauer's  deflation,  and  his  agreement  to
just what the  Russians wanted. With this  collapsed the Aden-
auer-Acheson-Dulles vision of a  new Der  Tag  on which a  Ger-
many rearmed  (at  American expense)  would  lay  down terms
for   Moscow's  withdrawal   from   East   Germany  and   East
Europe.
Bitterest  pill  for  the  Germans is that  events  are  reducing
them  to secondary importance.   Their  reunification is a  burn-
ing  question only  for  themselves.   Everybody else  in  Europe
knows  reunification  will  not  solve  the  German  problem  but
merely  set  the  stage  for  new  demands.  The  Saar,  the  Oder-
Neisse  lands.  East  Prussia  will  follow,  and  then  a  desire  to
repeat  what  the  Kaiser  dreamed  and  Der  Fuehrer  screamed.
A  generation  in  cold  storage  would  do  them good.
Clues  to  The  News:
COMMUNIST  CHINA: By a  compromise which recalls  in
reverse  the  old days of  colonialism, the  release  of the  remain-
ing  American  civilians  held  in  Communist  China  has   been
negotiated.   India  will  act  as  "protecting  power"  for  Chinese
students  in  the  United  States.   Those  who  want  to  go  home
but  lack  funds  or  feel  themselves  "obstructed" from   depart-
ing may apply for  aid to the  Indian  Embassy. India may also,
on  request  of  Peking,  investigate.
The day after  this news from  Geneva, Senator  George in  an
interview  with  the  United Press  (which  few  papers  carried)
again  called for  a  meeting  between  Dulles and  Chou  En-Iai.
The  release  of  Americans  held  in  China  was  a  triumph  for
George,  who coaxed, prodded and  led  the  Eisenhower Admin-
istration  into these  talks,  as he did into the conference "at  the
summit."  Last  July  24  George  warned that  an  "actual flare-
up"  over  the  Formosa  straits was "almost  certain" unless  the
U.  S. agreed  to  a  meeting with  China  at  the  Foreign  Minis-
ters  level.   He  implied  that  Peking  would  resort  to  force  if
it  saw  no  way  out  by  negotiation.
The  State  Department  is  chilly  toward  George these  days.
Dulles  is  as  unwilling to talk  with  Chou  as  he  was  to  have
Eisenhower  talk  with the  Russians.  But  the  tide  is the  other
way.   Already  the  sometimes  (in  such matters)   quasi-official
Washington  Post  (Sept.  7) saw "the  day seemingly . . . ap-
proaching  when  the  Administration, if  it  will  not  welcome
Chinese  Communist  membership  in  the  UN,  at  least  will  not
interpose  a  veto."
Clues  to  The  News:
ARGENTINA:   Gen.  Lucero,  Minister   of  the   Army,  no
doubt  unintentionally,  established  himself  as  the  Wit  of  the
Week.  He  rejected  the  proposal  of  Peron's  Confederation of
Labor to mobilize its  6,000,000 members as a  civil militia.  His
reason:  "it  would  be  unconstitutional."    (Many  people  will
be  surprised  to  hear  that  Argentina  has  one.)
The incident  threw  a  flash  of  light  into  the  murky  Argen-
tine  situation,  revealing  where  the  ultimate  power  now lies.
Peron's  laborites  asked  permission,  not  of  Peron,  but  of  his
ostensible  subordinate,  the  Minister  of  the  Army.   Lucero,
who  saved  Peron  from  an  abortive  naval  revolt  last  June,
still seems to be the  boss.
A labor militia would  give Peron  armed support of  his own,
render  him  independent of  the  Army.  It  would  also  have  a
revolutionary  potential, and  Peron  is  capable of  moving  left-
ward  if  necessary  to  retain  power.  He  is  a  character  out of
Plutarch,  a  social  demagogue  in  the  pre-Augustan  Roman
tradition,  raising  up  the  proletariat  against  the  oligarchy.
What  may yet  save Peron  is that  the  Army chiefs can veto
but  seem unable to rule.   Peron's  strength  is that  his various
opponents have no ready  substitute  for  him, fear  the  mob be-
hind  him.  Argentina  has  rarely  known  democracy or  freedom
except as a thin  crust.   While his  enemies  hesitate,  Peron  has
time to maneuver.  He is settling his  conflict  with the Catholic
Church   (six  leading  anti-clericals  have  been  dropped  from
office  since June),  and  offering  unprecedented  privileges   to
Standard  OiL
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  19,  18SS
Behind   the   Scenes   of   Middle   Eastern   Policy
Why  Israel  Fears A Danger  to  The  Negev  in  the  New  Dulles  Proposal
The  State  Department has  been  playing  a  game  of  almost
"Oriental"   subtlety  in  the  Middle  East.    Its  aim  has  been
to  bring  Egypt  to  terms.    Egypt  is  the  natural  leader  of
the  Arab  world  by  civilization  and  religious  pre-eminence.
But  fresh  from  its  struggle  to  get  rid  of  the  last  vestiges  of
British  occupation,  Egypt  regards   U.  S.  talk   of  a  Soviet
menace  with  suspicion  as  new  excuse  for   putting  foreign
bases  on  her  soil.    She  is  therefore  "neutralist"  and  gave  a
neutralist   cast  to  the  Egyptian-dominated  Arab  League.
So  the  U.  S.  set  out  to  break  up  the  Arab  League,  to
join   the   "northern   tier"   of  Arab   States   with  non-Arab
Turkey. and  Pakistan.    The  first  open  signal  of  what  was
going  on  came  last  December  when  Turkey  rejected  Egypt's
proposal for  a regional alliance linked with the  Arab League.
Iraq   then  joined  the  Turkish-Pakistan   alliance  backed  by
the  U.  S.  and  Britain.
This  scheme  was  sold  all  around with  a bewildering series
of   sometimes  contradictory  arguments.    The  Turks  were
told  this  would  be  a  first  step  to  the  resumption  of  their
old  hegemony  over  the  Arabs.    The  Arabs  were  told  this
would  bring  Turkey  into  alliance  with  them  against  Israel.
The  Israeli  were  told that  this  would  help them  by breaking
up  the  Arab  League.   Iraq  was  told  this  would  reduce  the
importance  of  its  main  Arab  rival,  Egypt.    The  Egyptians
were  told  that  unless  they   came  to  terms   and   joined  a
Western  military  alliance, they  would  be left  out  in  the  cold.
Somewhere  in  such  an  alliance,  room  must  be  made   for
Israel.  Had  the  Arabs  crushed  the  Jews  in   1948,  as  some
British   and  American  diplomats  hoped,  the  problem  would
have  been  settled.    But  since  they  did  not,  and  Israel  is
not  only  a  fact  but  a  military  power in  the  area  with  strong
political   support   inside   the   U.  S.,  its   elimination  is  no
longer  possible.
The  first  sign  that  there  might  be  some kind  of  bargain-
ing  going  on between Cairo  and  Washington in  this  respect
came   last   March   when   Egypt   said   she   might   join   the
Western  alliance  if  given  the  Negev.   Subsequently Egypt
began  a  flirtation  with  Moscow  which  alarmed Washington;
Neguib  next  year  is  to  visit  the  Russian  capital.
Against   this   background  the   recent   Dulles   speech  on
Israel  is  seen  to  face  two  ways.   On the  one hand  it  warns
Egypt  that  if  she  goes too  far  toward  the  Soviets,  the  U. S.
may  make  Israel  and  the  Northern States  her  military  base
in  the  Middle  East, further  weakening Egypt.
On  the  other  hand, the  speech hints  at  benefits  for  Egypt
if  Cairo  goes  along.    What  has  the  Israeli   alarmed  in  the
speech   is  not  merely  its   reference   to   boundary  changes,
which  might  be  minor  corrections, but  the  passage  in  which
Dulles  said  "the  difficulty  is  increased  by  the  fact  that  even
territory    which   is   barren   has    acquired   a    sentimental
significance."  .
More Than Sentimental
The  only  barren  territory  involved  on  the  Israeli  side  is
the  Negev.  This  passage  may  encourage  Egypt  to  believe
that  there  might  be  serious  bargaining  on  its  proposal  of
last  March. But Sharrett  in Jerusalem has made it  clear  that
Israel  will not  give up  the  Negev. If  the  Dulles proposal  for
aid  in  resettlement  of  Arab  refugees  and  the  achievement of
peace  is  dependent  on  this  kind  of  territorial  sacrifice   to
Egypt,  the  proposal  is  only  a  brilliantly devised trap.
The   alarming   passage   is   typical   Dulles.    Its   smooth
wording  would  down-grade the  Negev  by  speaking  of  it  as
an   area   having  only   "sentimental"   significance.    But   for
Israel  the  Negev  is  a  matter  of  national  life  or  death,  not
of  sentiment.    If  this  huge  barren  area  can  be developed,
and  the  development  has  begun,  then  the  new  State  can
breathe  and  expand  without  coming  into  conflict   with   its
neighbors.    Without  the  Negev,  Israel  is  only  a  collection
of  precarious corridors between the  mountains and  the  seas.
When  the  Israeli  Ambassador,  Abba  Eban,  praised   the
Dulles  proposal  in  a  speech  to   the  Israel   Bond  drive  in
Washington   on  September   11,  he  asked  "Is   there   not   a
serious  danger  that  this  proposal  as  it  stands  contains  a
built-in  deadlock  with  somber potentialities  of  disillusion?"
That  question  becomes  clearer  against  this  background.
Profit  Figures  Most  Newspapers  Suppressed:  The  Bonanza  That  Is   Aircraft
The biggest  financial  success  story  of  the  week  was  given
amazingly   little  attention  by  the  press.    An  industry   in
which   a   company   can   earn   every   year   for   three    years
almost  as  much  or  more  as  its  net  investment   is  quite  a
business.     But   when   the   Preparedness    Subcommittee   of
the  Senate  Armed Services  Committee last Tuesday  released
a  report  on  the  profits  of   the  aircraft  manufacturing  in-
dustry,  few  papers  reported  the  stupendous  profit   margins
it  disclosed.
We   give   a   sampling   of   them   here.    The   report   was
tentative  and  circumspect,   reflecting  the  cautious   subcom-
mittee  chairman,  Lyndon Johnson,  no crusader.    The  figures
were  all  based  on  those  furnished  by  the  companies   them-
selves  to  the  SEC.    They  show  the  stake, this  industry  has
in  the  maintenance  of  international  tension.
The  report  is  based  on  the  figures  as  reported  by  the
aircraft   companies   themselves   to  the   SEC.     For  the  in-
dustry  as  a  whole  it  shows  the  percentage  of  profits  to  net
worth  during  the  past  three  years  as  follows:
Before  Taxes    After  Taxes
1952                                         46.6                   17.3
1953                                         60.1                   21.0
1954                                         60.1                   29.4
The  company  with  the  most  profitable  record,  Glenn  L.
Martin,  paid  no  taxes  in  1952  or  1953  and  very  little  in
1954.    Its  earnings   were  1,029.8  percent   on  net   worth  in
1952  and  136.6  in   1954.    In  1955,  it   earned  76.6  percent
on  net  worth  before  taxes  and  72.9  percent  on  net  worth
after  taxes.    [These  figures  looked  so  startling  in  the  cold
print  of  the  report  that  we  rechecked  them  with  the   sub-
committee  by phone  to  make sure  they  were  not a misprint.]
Consolidated  Vultee   (now  General  Dynamics),   maker  of
the   B-36,   was   another   big   profit   maker.     Here   are   its
profit  ratios  to  net  worth  during  the  three  years:
Before  Taxes    After  Taxes
1952                                         45.4                   25.0
1953                                         38.7                   21.4
1954                                       139.0                   65.9
Here  are  the  figures  for  another  maker  of  big  bombers,
Boeing:
Before  Taxes    After  Taxes
1952                86.1       24.4
1953                87.1       30.1
1954                93.3       45.0
The  tables  show  how  completely   this  industry   depends
on  war  and  war  scares.   The industry  as  a  whole  went  into
the  red  as  soon  as  the  war  ended,  picked  up  with  the  cold
war,  hit  another  peak  with  the  Korean  war  and  has  zoomed
to  war-time  profit  levels  since.
"Now  once  again  as  a  result  of  increased   international
tensions,"  the  Senate   report  says,   "and  particularly   as  a
result   of   the   recent   exhibit   of   modern  types   of   aircraft
known  to  have  been  produced  in  quantity  by  the   U.S.S.R.,
increased  emphasis  is  being  placed  on  aircraft   production.
.  .  .  But,"  the  report  adds  mildly,  "surely,  in  this  renewed
effort   no   one   should   be   allowed   to   make   excessive   or
unjustified  profits."
.1  4  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  13,  1955
Once  The  Son  of  An  Erring  Mother  Gets  Cleared  He  Can't  Be  Too  Careful
Homecoming  of  the  Loyal  Coast  Guardsman  —  A  Playlet  in  One  Act
Mother:  Oh,  George,  it's been  so  long.
George:  Doesn't   seem  unusually  long  to  me,  Mother.
Mother:   Son,  do   you  know  it's  been   exactly  five  years,
three  months  and  nine  days  since  you  were  last  home?
George:   But   you   remember   the   wording   of   my  loyalty
clearance  decision,  Mother?    That's  not  too  long  a  time  for  a
boy  whose  "relationship  to  his  mother  has  not  been  close."
You  wouldn't  want  me  to  risk  my  clearance,  would  you?
Mother  {wiping  her  eyes):  Of  course, not, dear.    But how
silly  of  me,  going  on  like  this,  when  you've  brought  a  nice
friend  home  with you.  Won't  you introduce him?
George:  Well,  he's not  exactly  a  friend,  Mother.    But  he
was  kind  enough  to  come  home  with  me.    Just  to  see  that
everything  was—well,  you know  ...     I  thought  it'd be  best
to  have a  witness  just  in  case.    So I  asked  our  local  FBI  man
if  he  wouldn't  come  along.    This  is  Agent  Donald   Thomas,
Mother.
Mother:  Well,  I'm  happy  to know you, Mr. Thomas. Won't
you  join  iis at  dinner?   Just  let  me  straighten  things  up  here
a  minute.    You know  I  didn't  expect  you,  George,  and  every-
thing's  in  such  disarray.
George:   Mother,   what's   that   you're   pushing   under   the
sofa  pillows?
Mother:  Why, nothing,  dear.
George:  Let  me  see  it.    Give  that  to  me,  this  instant.
Mother:  Oh,  dear,  it's just  some  magazine  a  neighbor   left.
George:  Mother,  it's "the Nation,  and  you know  it.  And you
promised  me  you  were  going  to  lay  off  all  that  sort  of    thing.
Mother:   I  swear  I  haven't   touched  anything  more  radical
than  the  Ladies  Home   Journal   since—since  that  awful  time
they  denied  you  your  commission.    This—this   just  was  left
here  by  that   neighbor.
George:  Well,  you  shouldn't  associate  with  such   neighbors.
.Mother   (humbly,   still   tidying  up   frantically):   I   know,
George.    I  promise.     Anyway,  The  Nation   isn't  so   radical.
I  bet  even  Mr.  Thomas  sometimes  reads  it.
Mr.  Thomas  (politely):  I've often  read  The  Nation,  Mrs.
Martin—as  part  of  my  official  duties,  of   course.
A  Boy's  Best   Friend
Had  Better  Be  His  Dog
"It  has  been  found  that  Gaston's  relationship  to  his
mother  has  not been, close,  especially  during  his  scholas-
tic  and  more  mature  years.     In  fact,   the    mother-son
relationship  was  less  close  than  in  the  ordinary   case
and  no  improper  influence  exists."
—V.   S.   Coast  Guard  statement   announcing
that  "in  accordance  with  the  basic  American
principles   of   fair   play   and   justice"   it   is
awarding  a  reserve  Ensign's   commission  to
Norton  Pierre  Jerome  Gaston  even  though
Ms   mother   had   once   been  active   in   the
American   Russian  Institute,  the    California
Labor  School, and   the  Independent  Progres-  •
sive  Party   of   California.
George:  Mother,  what  are  these  under  the  table?   Are  you
selling  benefit  tickets  again ?
Mother:  It's really all  right, son.  It's just a  benefit  for  that
Republican  Women's  Auxiliary.
George:  But  you promised, Mother.   That's  political.    And
you  know  one  thing  leads  to  another.    You  promised  to  keep
away  from  benefits.    First  thing  you know you'll  be  back  help-
ing  the  foreign   born  or  something.     Oh,  you  make. me  so
nervous,  Mother.    And  I  worked  so hard  for  my commission.
Mother:  Now, now.  Just  sit  down  and  dinner  will  soon
be  ready.
George:  Mother,  I'm  sorry  but  I  don't  think  we  can  stay
to  dinner  after  all.
Mother:  Oh, son.
George:  Well,  I  just  remembered  I  have  another  appoint-
ment  that's awfully  urgent.    But I'll be  seeing  you again  soon.
Mother:   Oh,   George.     Don't  make  it  so  long  this  time.
I  promise  .  .  . you know  what.
George:  Sure,  Mother.
Mother   (calling   after   them  as  they  go  down  the   stairs):
And  George  please  be  careful.    I  get  so  worried  when  I  read
about  those  Russian  submarines  that  seem  to  come  up  along
the  coast  every  spring.
George  (firmly)  :  That  will  do,  Mother.     That's  classified.
We'll   Be   Glad  to   Send   Free   Sample   Copies  of  Any  Issue  to  Your   Friends
I. F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)  Name  ....
Street
City
* $1 extra  for
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  thi
Zone
for  $2 .(6 mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr
Zone
Canada.
Wash.  3,  D.  C.
:  enclosed  $5:*
State....
) additional:
State..
9/19/55
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED