I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955sep26.pdf

============================================================

Do  POW's  Need  Torture  Training  or  Political  Education?    See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,  NO. 35SEPTEMBER  26,  1955
'°«      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  Peron  Happened  and  Can  Happen  Again
In  the  editorials  celebrating  the  fall  of  Peron,  two  major
items  in  his  rise  to  power  are  passed  over  in  a  discreet  silence.
One  is  how  much  he  owed  to  the  cold  war.  The  other  is  how
much  he  owed  to  the  Catholic  Church.   Indeed  the  cold  war
may  be  said  to  have  begun  with  the  Argentine question.   The
first  of  Yalta's  broken  promises  was  not  Stalin's  promise  of
free  elections  in  Eastern  Europe  but  our  promise  that  Argen-
tina,  the  Axis  base  in  the  Western  hemisphere  in  World   War
•  II,  would  not  be admitted  to  the  United  Nations.
Peron   as   vice  president   and   minister   of   war   and   labor
was  already the  real  power  in  Argentina when,  in  the  interest
of  welding  the  Western  hemisphere  into  a  solid  anti-Soviet
bloc,   we  broke  that  promise  and   sponsored   Argentina   for
membership.    Molotov  finally  gave  in,  but  at  a  price:   "You
can  have  Argentina  if   we  get   Poland."     The  unity  of   the
victors   was  breached,   and   power   politics   took   over.     The
Lublin   regime   was   thereby   established  ,in   Poland   and   a
regime  Cordell  Hull  had  stigmatized  as  Fascist  was  admitted
to   respectability   in   the   Americas.     When   Peron   ran   for
President  the  year after  and  consolidated  his  power  (with  the
help  of  some  $13,000,000  contributed  by  Nazis),   Acheson
and  Spruille  Braden  tried  to  defeat  him  with  a  "Blue  Book"
exposing  his  pro-Axis  record   and  backing,  but  it  was  then
too  late.
Truman  Era  Mythology
We   didn't   try  again.    The   mythological  rhetoric  of   the
cold   war   propagated   the   view  that  Peron's   Argentina  was
part  of   the   "free   world."     We   hope   Mr.  Truman   in  his
memoirs  will  find  space  to  recall  that  two  months  after  Peron
suppressed   La  Prensa   he  hailed  a  Latin  American   Foreign
Ministers  Conference  (with  the  Argentine  present)  as  "proof
of  the  vitality  of  free  men  and  their  institutions."     A  Bra-
zilian  newspaper,  Correio  a da  Manha  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  noted
sadly  that  there  wasn't  enough  vitality  present  to  discuss  the
suppression  of  Argentino's  leading  newspaper.    "Freedom  was
sacrificed,"  it  wrote,   "to  the  diplomatic  convenience  of  hav-
ing  General  Peron's  representative  sign  the  conference  decla-
rations.  .  .  .  Unanimity  .  .  .  was not  really  achieved.   La
Prensa is a reality. Peron's  solidarity is at  best  an  equivocation."
Another  incident  is worth  recalling,  lest  it  be  imagined  from
the  events  of  the  last  few  months  that  Peron  and  the  Catholic
Church  were  always at  loggerheads.    In  Argentina,  as in  Ger-
many  and  Italy,  the  Church  was  ready  to  sacrifice  liberty  and
Catholic anti-Fascists to  its own  purposes.    In  Peron's   1945-46
campaign  for  the  Presidency,  thoughtful  Argentines  realized
this  might  be  their  last  chance  for  a  long  time.    An  extraor-
dinary  event  occurred.    The  Radical,  Socialist  and  Communist
parties  joined  forces,  with  the  unofficial  support  of  the  Con-
servative  party,  in  a  Democratic  Union  which  put  an  opposi-
tion  ticket  into  the   field.   Peron  was  supported   by  all   the
rightist,   pro-Axis,  nationalist  and   anti-Semitic  hate   groups;
by  a  captive  labor  movement  and  a  renegade  split-off   from
the  anti-Clerical   Radical  party.    It  was  with  this  motley   col-
lection  that  the  Church  took  its  stand  for  Peron.    On  the  eve
of  the  election  a  pastoral  letter  was  issued  urging   Catholics
to  vote  against candidates who  advocated  separation  of  Church
and   State,  secular  education  or   legal   divorce.    This  meant
vote  for  Peron.
Argentina's  Father  Coughlin
In  Argentina,  as  in  Italy,  there  were  brave  churchmen  who
fought   Fascism.    But  the  majority  of   the  hierarchy,  led  by
the  Primate,  supported   "the   revolution  of   1943"   in  which
Peron  played  a  leading  role.    Argentina's  "Father  Coughlin,"
Padre  Filippo,  told  his  people  during  the   1945-46   election
campaign,  "you  must  shut  your  mouths  because  Jesus  Christ
himself  was  a  great  dictator."    The  Church's  reward  was  the
reintroduction   of   compulsory   religious    instruction   in    the
schools,  where  secular  education  had  been  the  rule  since   1884.
The  new  press  law  forbade,  among  other  things,   publication
of  matter which might  undermine Christian morals.    "We  are
pleased,"   Pius   XII   said  in  a   message   to   Peron,   "by'this
recognition   of   the   rights   of   the   Church   in   the   field   of
Christian  education."    We  may  be  sure  that  clerical  influence
played   its  part  in  the  behind   scenes  maneuvers  which   had
made a place  for  this  "new"  Argentina  in  the  United  Nations.
This  is  not  ancient history.    The  same  forces  which  helped
Peron  into  power  are  still  at  work,  and  are  an  obstacle  to
the  creation  of  a  free  Argentina.   The  Church  fell  out  with
Peron   only  because  in  the  end  he  turned   anti-clerical;   the
logic  of  totalitarianism  pushed  Peron  as  it  once  pushed  Mus-
solini  into  conflict  with  the  Church.    We  may  be  sure  that
the  Argentine hierarchy  is shopping  around  for  a  safe  General
who  will  carry on  in  the  spirit  of  1943.    We  may be  sure  that
the  State Department  is also  looking  for  a  cooperative  military
man.     U.  S. firms have  some $400,000,000  invested  in  Argen-
tina;  Standard  Oil  of  California  has  an  exploitation   contract
with  Peron,  as yet unratified,  which  was  so  juicy  that  we  were
willing  even  to  overlook  church  burnings  for  the  sake  of  it.
In   the   context  of   Argentina  these   forces   may  fashion  a
new  "strong"  regime.    The  context  is  one  in  which  free  tra-
ditions  never  took  deep  and  wide  root.   The  democracy  over-
thrown  by  successive Generals  from  1930  on  was  in  too  many
respects  an  oligarchy  to  win  mass  support.    The  underprivi-
leged  working  classes  were  too  easily  open  to  the  bribery  of
compulsory wage  increases and  a  dictator's  social  welfare bene-
fits.   To  overlook  these  fundamental  factors  in  the  Argentine
picture  is  to  fail  to  see  why  Peron  lasted  as  long  as  he  did,
and   why  a  new  Peronismo  could  so  easily  be  established.
J 4.3,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly, September ft,  1S5S
First  Hearing  Shows  Danger  to  Civil  Liberties  From  Majority Pressure Groups
Will the Hennings Committee Hit The Real Evils,  or  Spread  Itself  Thin?
On  the  second  floor  of  the  Capitol  there  is  a  relic  of  the
early  Republic which  stirs  the  imagination  of  the  visitor,  a
small  semi-circle  of  a  room  with  gray  marble  pillars  at  the
back  and  an  arched  sky-light.   This  was  the  original   Senate
chamber,  in  which  Webster  spoke and  Clay.  Here  the  Senate
met  until   1860,  and   afterwards,   until   1935,   the  Supreme
Court.   Behind  the  long  mahogany  bench, under  the  picture
of   Lincoln  reading   the   Emancipation   Proclamation   to  his
Cabinet,  Taney  once  presided.   This,  too,  was  the  secluded
Olympus  on  which  Holmes and  Brandeis   sat.
This  chamber, no longer  in  daily  use,  was  opened  up  on the
168th  anniversary  of  the  Constitution.   The  new  Senate  sub-
committee  on constitutional  rights held a  special  hearing  in  it
which  was  intended,  with  ceremonial  flourish,  to  launch  its
long  awaited  investigation.    Eleven  "citizens,"   representing
as  many  organizations,  were invited  to  sit  on the  high bench
and  "petition  for  redress of  grievances"  while the subcommit-
tee  listened  from  the  old counsel  table  below.
The  Pageant  Was  Not  So  Sedate
The  subcommittee  plans  to  begin  with  the  Bill  of  Bights,
and  then  go  one  by  one  through  the  various  other  "rights"
guaranteed  by  the  Constitution.   The  opening  affair  was  a
projection  of  what  some of  the  subcommittee would  like  the
coming  investigation   to  be—a  kind  of  sedate   pageant,   in
which  representatives   of  various  respectable  mass  organiza-
tions  would, as  the  chairman,  Senator  Hennings  of  Missouri
said,  "focus  renewed  national  attention  upon  the  basic  pre-
cepts  of  our  democracy."
The  result  at  the  opening  session  was  what  one would ex-
pect  if  representatives  of  the  Southern  Baptists,  the  Vatican,
the  Shiite  Muslims,  the  Grand  Rabbi  of  Jerusalem,  and  the
Orthodox Patriarch were convened to focus  renewed  attention
on  the  basic  precepts  of  the  Bible.  Everybody  was  full  of
reverence  for  the  Constitution,  but  everybody interpreted   it
his  own  way  for  his  own  purposes.   Everybody  was  polite,
but  enough  was  said  to  show  how  easily  this  could become
the  curtain  raiser  for  a  tumultuous  national  brawl.
Panel  Split  6-5
Of  the  eleven "citizen"  witnesses,  six  showed no  concern  at
all  about  civil  liberties.  Three  of  the  six,  the  spokesmen for
the  American  Bar  Association,  the  American  Legion and  the
Knights  of  Columbus  emphasized  the  need  for  more  "vigil-
ance,"  i.e.  repression.   The  Legion  and  the   K.  of  C. would
turn  the  subcommittee into  another  "un-American  activities"
committee.
Two  other  "citizens," the  president  of  the  U.  S. Chamber
of   Commerce  and  the  legislative  director  for  the  American
Farm  Bureau  Federation,  devoted themselves  in  almost  iden-
tical  language  to  the  dangers  of  "compulsory unionism"  and
centralized  government.  They  are  still  fighting  for  the  open
shop  and  against  the  welfare state.   The  "workingman  citi-
zen,"  Secretary-Treasurer  William F.  Schnitzler  of  the  A.  F.
of  L., also had  not  one word to  say  about any  danger  to  free-
dom  of  opinion.  He  emphasized only  Taft-Hartley  and  simi-
lar  threats  to  trade unionism.
Much  of  the  current  threat  to  civil  liberties  stems  directly
from  attitudes  fostered  by  these  major  pressure  groups.   If
the  subcommittee really  tries  to  defend  civil  liberties,  it  will
find itself  in  hot  water  with  them.
The other five were the  voices of those who look  to this sub-
committee  for  aid.   They  did  not  have the  same sure  tone of
command.   The  head  of  the  National  Education   Association
timorously  reflected  the  agonies  of  the  teaching   profession
but  accepted  the  fatal  premise  that  Communists  of  course
should  not  be  allowed  to  teach.   Mrs.  John  G.  Lee  of   the
League  of  Women  Voters  named  no  names  (the  American
Legion  and  the  K.  of  C. were  only  a  few  seats  away)   but
complained  that  one  of  the  main  threats  to  free   discussion
came  from  certain  private   associations.
J.  Russell  Wiggins  of  the  Washington Post  discussed  free-
dom  of  the  press  with  competence  and  vigor.   He  made  the
only  reference  at  the  session  to  the  fact  that  invasion  of  the
rights  of  Communists may  also  affect  everyone's  basic  liber-
ties;  he protested  recent  legislation  requiring  Communists  to
register  their  printing  equipment; he  said  "this  comes closer
to  press  licensing  than  any  measure  enacted  since  the  adop-
tion  of  the   Constitution."
The  Boldest   Liberal
The  boldest  liberal  witness  was  Dr.  Eugene  Carson  Blake
of    Philadelphia,    president    of   the    National    Council  of
Churches  of  Christ.   He  hit  the  House  Un-American Activi-
ties  Committee by  name.  He  struck  out  at  the  whole idea of
letting  Congress  decide  what  is  "American."    He  protested
the  Attorney  General's  list  and  the  denial  of passports.
But  none of  these four  spoke with  that  immediate sense of
injury  which one felt  in  Roy Wilkins of the  National Associa-
tion  for   the  Advancement  of  Colored  People.   He  told   the
story   of  the   way   in  which  Negroes  have  been  boycotted,
ruined  and murdered in  Mississippi  in the past few months in
an  effort  to keep them from  exercising  their right  to  vote  and
their  right  to  unsegregated  schooling.  That  no  white  liberal
had  a  word  to  say  of  the  Negro's  struggle  was  mutely  elo-
quent  of  how segregated  the  lives  of  the  two  races  still   are.
Senator   Hennings  spoke  in  his  opening  remarks   of  the
rights  won  by  "Anglo-Saxon"  struggle  against   "tyrannical
rulers."  This first hearing  should show the subcommittee that
a  lot  has  happened  since  Magna  Charta  was  won.  Then  the
struggle  was  simple.  The enemy was  a  despot.   The  Barons,
in  putting  the  squeeze  on  King  John,  were  also  helping  to
make  every  Englishman's  life  and  property  more  secure.
The  Common Man  His  Own  Despot
The  struggle  for  liberty  and  law  within  the  framework of
a  democratic  society  like  ours  is  more  complicated  and  less
comfortable.  John  Citizen is  himself king, and  he is  now both
the  oppressed  and  the  oppressor.  -Men of  one  color  oppress
those  of  another.   The  many  try  to  gag  the  non-conformist
few.   The  rich  take  advantage  of  the  poor.
Those  who  fight  for  constitutional  rights  are  compelled to
take  sides whether  they wish to or not.   The issues  can rarely
be  settled  on  an  abstract  basis,  once  one gets  beyond  simple
rights like jury trial or near-absolute  fundamentals like  free-
dom  of opinion. Beyond this is  a vast  area  in which one man's
"right"  violates  some  other  man's.    The  right  of  a  man  to
be  free  collided  in  the  Civil  War  with  another  man's  right
to  the  property  he  had  acquired.    The  worker's  right  to
organize  for  self-protection  collided in  the  New  Peal  period
with  the  employer's  right  to  hire  and  fire  as  he  pleased.
In  widening its  target  to  the  whole field of  Constitutional
rights,  the   subcommittee  is  wading  in  where   generations
of  jurists  found  difficulty  in  treading.   It  thus  threatens  to
dissipate   its   energies,   and  to  entangle   itself   in  scores  of
controversies,  some  ancient  and  long  settled,  which  there  is
no  point  in  reopening.
An  example  is  its  decision  to  begin  its  regular  hearings
October   3  with   freedom   of  religion,  a  liberty   in  no  real
danger.   This  is  not  only  a  waste  of time  but,  as  the  Baptist
Joint  Committee on  Public  Affairs  points  out  in  its  Septem-
ber  bulletin,  may  open  up  thorny  religious  issues  best  left
alone.   There  are  two urgent  areas—the  rights  of  the  Negro
and  the  right  to  think,  speak  and  associate  freely,  without
danger  of  thereby  losing  one's  job,  reputation   or  right  to
travel.   The  subcommittee  must  decide  whether  to  wade  in
and  wage  battle  where  it  counts,  or  evade  the  real  issues
by  spreading  itself  thin.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly, September SB, 1955
Some  Important   POW  Problems  the  Pentagon   Shoves  Under  the  Rug
It's   Easier  to   Concentrate   on  the   Melodrama   of  "Torture  Training'
When  Congress   convenes  perhaps   it  may  be  possible   to
have  an  intelligent  inquiry  into  all  this  talk  of  "brain-wash-
ing"  and  into  the "torture  training" the  armed  services  have
begun  to  administer.  I  would like to call attention  to an  Asso-
ciated  Press  dispatch  from  San  Francisco   which  I  saw  no-
where else but  in the  Baltimore Sun  of  September  16.   It  was
an  interview  with  three  American  turncoats  who  changed
their  minds,  came out  of  China in July  and  are  now awaiting
court  martial.    All three,  according  to  the  AP,  "ridiculed  as
'childish'  the  U.  S. Air  Force's  Nevada  school  against  brain-
washing."
All  three  stressed the fact  that  the  big problem for  POW's
under  interrogation   was  not  torture  but  lack  of   education.
"When  I  was captured,"  Otho G. Bell said,  "I  expected to  get
shot,  instead  they  shook my hand.  . . . The big thing is educa-
tion.  A man with  an education can stand  up to the  Chinese or
anybody  else.   But  you  got  to  know  what  they're   talking
about."   Lewis W. Griggs  said, "And  all  those  Chinese torture
stories aren't true either. A lot  of guys  came  back from  POW
camps  and  told  some  pretty  terrible  tales—just  to  cover  up
what  they  had  done  themselves.  The  first  real   step  is  to
teach  democracy."   William  A.  Cowart  said,  "A  man  had  to
know  what  communism   is."
Most  Not  "Brain-Washed"
Now this is borne out by the  recent  report  of the   Secretary
of  Defense's  Advisory  Committee on  Prisoners  of  War.   The
Committee found that in  some cases American  prisoners  were
subjected   to   mental   and   physical  torture.    "Most   of   the
prisoners,  however,"  it  said,  "were  not  subjected  to  brain-
washing,  but  were  given  a  high-powered  indoctrination  for
propaganda  purposes."   And here  the  trouble  was  the  politi-
cal  ignorance  of  the  average  American.
"When  plunged into  a  Communist indoctrination  mill,"  the
Advisory  Committee report  said, "the  average American POW
was  under  a  serious  handicap.  ...    He had to  tell  what  he
knew  about  American  politics  and  American  history.   And
many  times  the   Chinese  or  Korean  instructors  knew more
about  these  subjects  than  he did.  ..  . Many  [of the American
POWS]  had never  before  heard  of  Karl  Marx.  .  .  .  They
couldn't   answer   arguments   in  favor   of   Communism   with
arguments  in  favor  of  Americanism, because  they  knew very
little  about  their  America."
It  is  more  dramatic  and  hate-breeding  to  stress  "torture"
than  to  face  up  to  ignorance,  though  ignorance  was  the  big-
ger  problem. "Brain-washing"  is  more than  nine-tenths  myth.
At  page  63 of the  printed  report  is  a  glimpse from  one of  its
many  appendices  of  how  the  Russians  converted  many  Ger-
man  soldiers  including  Gen. von Paulus  during  the  last  war.
Communist   Evangelism
"The  reindoctrination  of a  Nazi-indoctrinated  German,"  the
report   says,   "demanded  a  high-powered  approach  akin  to
evangelism.  It  was nothing more than  a  high-gear  recruiting
campaign.  It  did not  involve  'menticidal'  pressuring  or  any-
thing   akin   to   so-called   'brain-washing.'     Boiled   down,   it
amounted  to  advertising."  (Italics  added.)
The  report  goes  on  to  say  that  while  the  Russians  were
working in this  way  on German prisoners,  "the  Chinese Reds,
waging  civil war,  adopted similar  tactics.   Nationalist  prison-
ers  were herded into  'political  camps' and harangued  with the
Red  Chinese version  of  Marxian  doctrine."  (At  page  51 in  the
same appendix one may  see that both sides did the  same thing
in  our  Civil  War:   "Some  3,170  Union  captives  exchanged
blue  for  gray.   About  5,450  Confederates  went  over  to  the
Federal   side.   One  famous  company  of  'reconstructed   Rebs"
was  sent  West  to  man  a  frontier  post  and  relieve  a  Union
garrison  needed  on  the  front.")
One  reason  the  armed  services  prefer   the  melodrama  of
"torture  schooling"  to  the  problem  of  political  education  is
that  the  latter  might  get  them  into  trouble  with  professional
patriots  and  witch  hunters.   In  the  same  appendix,  hidden
away  in  a  portion  of  the  report  few  people  will  ever  see,  the
Advisory  Committee said  one reason  for  the  lack  of  political
education lay  in "alarmists" about  Communism.  "The  fear  of
Marxist  literature,  for  example,"  the  report  says,"  caused
the  banning  of  Das  Kapital  from  a  number  of  school  and
public  libraries."   The  committee  thought  it  was  important
to  teach  Communism and  to  teach  Americanism,  "the  Bill of
Rights.  Or call  it  Democracy."
Imagine  the  Army  Teaching   Marx!
But  imagine the  uproar  if  the  Army were to  get  soldiers  to
read  Marx  in  preparation  for  Communist  captivity.    There
are  wide  circles  in  this  country,  for  that  matter,  which  re-
gard talk about  the  Bill  of Rights as equally  suspect—"That's
commie  talk.   Only   commies  talk  about  the   Constitution."
Obviously  it's   easier  to  concentrate  on  torture.
There  is  another  aspect  of  the  prisoner   of  war  problem
which  is  also  being  shoved under  the  military  rug  because  it
is  unpleasant  and  uncomplimentary.    Much  of  the   suffering
in  POW  camps  was  caused  by  lack  of  discipline  and  lack  of
proper  leadership  by  the  officers.    This  proved  an  important
problem.  After  all very few  Americans signed  germ  war  con-
fessions,  or  joined  the  enemy  side  during  the  war.   Of  4,428
American  fighting  men returned  from  enemy prison  camps in
Korea,  there  were  only  565  whose  conduct  was  even  quest-
ioned   and   of  these   373  were  cleared  or  had   the   charges
dropped  after  investigation.   Not  all  the  rest  are  guilty  of
misconduct.  The  report  expects  only  about  50  to  be  brought
to trial.  That is a  good record.
But  the  survival  record  is  terrible.   The  report  says  2,730
Americans  died  in  Korean  prison  camps—38 percent  of  the
total.  Brutality  early  in  the  war  by the  North  Koreans, and
primitive  Oriental  conditions were  partly  to  blame.   But  the
report  makes  it  clear  that  in  some  cases  a  high  rate  of  death
was  due  to  lack  of  discipline and  officer  leadership.   A  vivid
picture  of  this  is  given  at  page  12 of  the   report:
Discipline  and  the  Death  Rate
"By  design  and  because  some  officers  refused  to  assume
leadership  responsibility,  organization  in  some  of  the  POW
camps   deteriorated   to   a   every-man-for-himself    situation.
Some  of  the  camps  became  indescribably   filthy.   The  men
scuffled   for  their  food.    Hoarders  grabbed   all  the   tobacco.
Morale  decayed to the  vanishing point.  Each  man  mistrusted
the  next.   Bullies  persecuted  the  weak  and  sick.   Filth  bred
disease  and  contagion swept the  camp.   So men  died for  lack
of  leadership  and  discipline."
There  is  considerable  evidence  that  among  the  British  and
the  Turkish  POW's  a  much  higher  survival  rate  was  due to
the  better  discipline and  the  leadership  shown by the  officers.
Too many officers  treated  the  last war  as  a  chance to do some
"yankee  trading"  and  enrich  themselves.  A  few  brought  the
same  attitude  to  POW camps,  and  sought  "deals"  by  which
they  could  better  their  own lot at  the  expense of  others.  This,
like  the  problem  of  political  education,  is  neither   easy  nor
glamorous.
I  want  to touch finally on another  equally prickly  problem.
"Many  of  the  accused,"  the  report  says,  "informed  on  their
prison-mates  with  dire  consequences for  the  victims."   How
are  you going to  cut  down  on "ratting" when a  whole genera-
tion  in  this  country  is  being brought  up  to  believe  that  in-
forming  is  an  obligation?   A  generation  that  sees   teachers
punished  and  discharged  for  refusing  to  inform  cannot  help
but  gather that  the "smart  guy"  tells and saves  his own skin.
.1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, September 26,1955
Capitol  Follies:  Ike's  Favorite  Movie  Maker  Sues for His Passport  . . .
. And Jim  Patton  Finds  G.O.P. Farm  Policy  Too  Pro-Soviet
Don't tell Senator  Eastland  but Carl Foreman, who filed suit
here  last  week for  a  passport,  wrote  President   Eisenhower's
favorite  movie,  "High  Noon".  .  .  .  Fortunately  for  both of
them  the  Daily  Worker  called  the  film "Fascistic."    (This  is
another  issue  on which  the  Weekly   agrees  with  Ike.)  .  .  .
Foreman's  suit  will  test  whether  the  State  Department  can
deny  a  passport  to  a  man who is  no longer  a  Communist but
declines  to "prove  his sincerity"  by naming  others.  . . .
Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, former Atomic Energy  Commission con-
sultant  seems  to  have  odd  ideas  on  what  makes  people  feel
secure.   He  says  our  stockpile  of  atomic  weapons  is  now  so
huge  as  to  be  the  equivalent  of  "several   tons  of  TNT   for
every  inhabitant  of our  planet."  Dr.  Lapp  thinks  the  Presi-
dent  should publish the  size of the  stockpile as  a  "potent  force
for  peace." Just how this  constitutes a force for  peace was not
made clear.   The knowledge that one country has enough explo-
sives  on  hand  to  blow every  man, woman and  child  on  earth
to  bits  might  conceivably make  some other  peoples  nervous.
One  passage  in  the  Lapp  speech  should  make Americans
nervous,  too.   He  predicted  a  sharp   slump  in  the  uranium
market in the next decade.  He might  have  added that industry
is  depending  on  the   sale  of  explosive  fissionable  materials
from  power producing reactors to make their operation  profit-
able.  .  . .  Will  there  some day be a uranium-and-plutonium
lobby  whooping it  up  like  the  aviation  lobby  for  an  inten-
sified  arms  race?
In  this connection, notice  the  rash  of  stories on how swiftly
we  are  being  overtaken  by the  Soviet  air fleet. .  . .  Prelim-
inary budgets  are  now being worked out  in  Washington,  and
the Air Force is leaking scare stories to fight off economy. . . .
Before  World War  I,  the  British  and  German Navy  Leagues
used  to   engage   in   similar   tactics,   each  exaggerating   the
strength  and  size  of  the  other's  navy  in  order  to  push  up
appropriations  in their  respective  parliaments.  . . .
One  of  these  scare  stories   is  in  the   September  issue  of
Fortune,  by  Charles  J.  V.  Murphy,  through  whom  the  Air
Force  also  fed  out  its  first  attack  on  Robert  Oppenheimer.
. . . This  article  reveals  just how large  "an cc-haunted  area of
extrapolation,  inductive surmise  and  plain  guesswork"  there
is  in  trying  to  arrive  at  estimates  of just  what  the  Russians
do  have. . . .
"It  is  possible,  for  example,!' Mr. Murphy writes,  "by  shift-
ing a few technical assumptions  to credit  the  Soviet Flashlight
fighter  with  a  speed  in  excess of  Mach  2—i.e. twice the  speed
of   sound—whereas  the   conservative  rating   of   Flashlight
would put  its  speed at  about  700 mph.  Similarly, a  15 percent
error  in  the  assumed fuel  consumption of  the  Bison's  engines
could  add  or  subtract  1,000  miles  from  its  range."
Mr. Murphy's bete  noir, like  that  of  the  Alsop brothers,  is
Secretary  of Defense Wilson.  "He  is  fond  of  remarking,"  Mr.
Murphy writes,  "that 'the  Russians aren't all forty feet tall.' "
. . . Nothing seems so subversive to lobbyists for higher  arms
appropriations than  to  doubt  that  the  enemy  is  superhuman.
While  American  capitalists  wickedly try  to  slow  down  the
world  arms  race,  the  American labor  movement stands  firm.
The  September  16 issue of  the  A. F.  of  L.  News  Reporter  at-
tacks  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  Humprey  for  trying to  bal-
ance  the  budget  by  cutting  military  appropriations  and  says
the  workers  of this  country "don't  want to  save  a  few  dollars
in  their  tax  bill  at  the  expense of the  nation's  safety."
The  real  story  behind  that  suit  to  force the  government  to
keep  its  promise  of  credit  aid  to  the  Harvey  Machine Com-
pany's  aluminum  project  in  Oregon  is that  Alcoa used its  in-
fluence in  the  Eisenhower Administration  against  another  in-
dependent  competitor.  .  .  .  The Democrats  hit  political pay
dirt  in  the  newly  blocked  2.4 billion  dollar  deal  between  the
Air  Force  and  A. T.  & T.  But  considering A. T.  & T.'s  power,
and  the  close links between the  Air  Force  and  leading  Demo-
cratic  politicians,  this  story  is  likely  to fizzle out.  . .  . The
party  showed  little guts in the  Dixon-Yates affair;  a  handful
of  Democrats carried  the  ball  with little help from  the  Senate
leadership.  . . .
The  National Farmers  Union  is jubilant  because  the  G.O.P.
is being forced to  fall  back  on its  "Conservation  Acreage  Re-
serve"  plan  to  cope  with  the  problem  of  growing  crop  sur-
pluses  and  falling  farm  prices.  This  goes  back  to  a  proposal
first  made  by  Henry  Wallace  in  1937  when  he  warned  that
rigid  farm  supports  would  periodically  run  into  surplus  trou-
ble and  suggested  that  land  be leased from  farmers  to take  it
out  of  production,  or  into  soil-building   non-surplus   crops.
At  the  same  time President  James  Patton  of  the  NFU  has
grown  quite  violent  on  the  subject  of  the   Administration's
sudden reversal  in favor  of trade with the  Soviet bloc—"a con-
fession  of  the  failure  of  the  Eisenhower  sliding  scale  policy
...   an attempt  to get the farm  depression  . . . removed  from
the  1956  Presidential  campaign ...   another  Will o' the  Wisj>.
...    I  do not regard  our  abundant  supplies  of farm  products
as a  curse that ought  to be dumped  into the  first  rat-hole that
opens  up. . .  ."  After  all  these  years  of  being  Red-baited  is
Jim  Patton  trying  to  prove  he's  more  anti-Soviet  than  the
Republicans?
Help   Us  Reach New  Readers  By  Sending A  Gift  Sub  to  A  Friend
L  F^ Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  3W E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name  ........................»................................................•.••.•........;.
Street   .......................................................       .............................
i
City  .-                                      .Zone..........  State....—...™™
Enter gift sub for  $2 (6 mos.) or $4 (1 yr.) additional:
(To)  Name ........................
Street                                   ™
City
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
.Zone.      ..  State........
0/26/55
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED