I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955feb28.pdf

============================================================

A  Flying  Visit  to  North  America's  Only  Socialist  State,  Saskatchewan,  Page Two
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   NUMBER 6FEBRUARY   28,  1955
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Harvey's  Little  Hatchet  on  BrownelTs  Cherry  Tree
The  Senate of  the  United  States never  found  a stranger way
to  celebrate Washington's birthday.  The  main feature  was  the
all-day  grilling of  the  self-confessed  perjurer  Harvey Matusow
by  the  Senate Internal  Security  Subcommittee.   This  was  the
second  of  two  days  spent  in  angry  interrogation,  apparently
on  the  theory  that  the  greatest  menace  to  the internal security
of  this  country  was  anything  which  might  shake its  faith  in
ex-Communist  informers.   The  day  on  which  as  children  we
were  given  red  cherries  and  toy  hatchets  to  commemorate
the Father of  Our  Country, who  could  not  tell a lie even  when
he  chopped down papa's favorite cherry  tree,  was the  occasion
for   a  different   kind  of  object  lesson.   In   the   person  of   the
dapper  Harvey,  the  nation's  regiment  of  informers were  to  be
taught  that   they  might   lie  unscathed  in  the   government's
witness  stand,  but  woe  betide  them  if  they  ever  got  religion
and  came clean.
Not  that  Harvey  suffered  too  grievously.   On  the  contrary
the   consensus  of  opinion   among  the   reporters  who   covered
the  show  was  that  Harvey  was  in  control  of  the  proceedings.
His  swift  rejoinders  and  tart  tongue  were  too  much  for  the
Senators,  and   there   were  moments  when  he  seemed  a  good
deal  more  honest  than  his  interrogators.   When  Jenner—who
has   been   suffering    for   months   from   ideological   delirium
tremens—suggested  that  Matusow  ought  to  see a psychiatrist,
Harvey  answered  dryly,  "A  lot  of  people should."   When  the
committee's  counsel, J.  G.  Sourwine, wanted  to  know  whether
Matusow  had  gone  to  a  certain  party  in  New  York  on  "oral
or  written"  invitation,  Harvey  shut  him  up  with,   "Usually
you   don't   have  written   invitations    to   Greenwich   Village
garrets."
When  McClellan  asked  Matusow whether  he would  not  like
to  go  to  jail  and  expiate  his  crimes,  Harvey   replied  that  he
would  be glad to  go to  jail if  the  government's  other  informers
went  with  him.   "In  other  words,"  McClellan  twisted  it,  "if
the  government  now  will  undertake  to  prosecute  and  to  con-
vict  all  of  those  who  have,  presumably,  served  their  country
by  testifying  to this  conspiracy  of the Communist  Party  . . .
If  the  government  is  now  ready  to  prosecute  all  of  those  who
rendered   this  service  for  their  country,   then  you  would  be
willing,  maybe,  to  consider  a plea of  guilty."  Matusow  pricked
that   overblown   bubble  with,   "Sir,   I  don't   think   Mr.  Paul
Crouch  has  rendered  any  constructive   service  to   this   gov-
ernment   by  lying  under  oath,  as  he  has  done,  nor  has  Mr.
Manning  Johnson."
An  Inside  Glimpse of  "Counter-Attack"
Except  for  Hennings  of  Missouri,   not   a  Senator   on  that
notorious  subcommittee   seemed  at  all  interested   in   eliciting
as  much  information  as  they  could  on  just  how,  where  and
when  Matusow had  lied.   At  one point  Matusow  began  to  tell
of  his  work  as  assistant  to  the  editor  of  "Counter-Attack,"
which   he  described  mildly   as  "a   blacklisting   publication."
As  an  example he  said  that  in  1952  "Counter-Attack"  had
"compiled   a  list   of   people,  'Stars   for   Stevenson,"  for   Adlai
Stevenson,  and  these  Hollywood   stars  are  now  listed  in   the
file   of   'Counter-Attack'   as  left-wingers   and    controversial,
unsuitable  people."   The  chairman,  that  second-hand  Southern
McCarthy,  Eastland,  broke  in  with   "Just  a  minute.    Those
Hollywood  stars were not  candidates for  Congress."  McClellan
was  as uninterested  when  Matusow  tried  to  tell how McCarthy
originally  planned  his  attack  on  the  Army  for   1952,  with
material on John  J.  McCloy and General  Donovan.
The   one  aim  of   the  subcommittee  was  to   discredit   and
intimidate Matusow, even  if  at  the  expense of  picturing  them-
selves  as  gullible  idiots.   Eastland,  who  never  had  the   nerve
last  year  to  accept   Clifford   Durr's  challenge  to  pit  Durr's
word  against Paul  Crouch's  in  perjury  proceedings,  announced
in  advance  that  Matusow  was  a  Communist  "plant."   If  so,
then  Eastland, Jenner,  McCarthy,  McCarran  and  the  Justice
Department   were  guilty  of  permitting  a  Communist  under-
cover  agent  to  smear  people  with  impunity.   It  follows  that
if  this  is true  of  Matusow, it  may  be true  of  Budenz,  Crouch,
and  others  of  that  brigade.   Either  way  you  look  at  it,   the
Congressional   witch-hunters   and   the    Justice    Department
emerge—those   great   investigators—with   their   pants   down.
Either   they  were  suckers  or  something  close  to  suborners  of
perjury.
Just  A Brand  New Term
Matusow  has  the  Justice  Department   running   around   in
circles,   its   dizziness  intensified   by   the   confessions   of    two
informers  in  the Ted  Lamb  c.ise before the  FCC.   The  Tuesday
before  Matusow's  appearance  here,  William  F.  Tompkins,   the
Assistant  Attorney  General  in  charge  of  hunting   subversives,
warned  the  Glen  Ridge,  N.  J.,  Battalion  Forum  that  all  this
was  a  new  Communist  plot.   "They,"  Tompkins   complained
of   the  Communists,  "have   coined  the   term   'informer'   as  a
term  of  opprobrium in  characterizing all  government  witnesses
in such  cases."   This  will  be news to Funk  & Wagnalls.
The next  day Attorney  General Herbert  Brownell who,  with
good  reason  (the  press  dislike  the  oily  dissembler  so)   rarely
calls  a  press  conference,  summoned  one  to  explain that  he  was
asking  a  grand  jury  to  look into  the  Matusow  and  FCC  cases.
A  reporter   took   advantage  of   the  occasion   to  ask   whether
Brownell   planned   ever   to   do   anything   about   the   United
Nations  request  more  than  a year  ago that  the Justice Depart-
ment  look  into  the  false  testimony  of  Manning  Johnson   and
Leonard  Patterson   against  Ralph  Bunche.   Brownell   claimed
he  had  never  heard  of  this.   It  is  only  when  perjurers  recant
that  grand  juries  are  summoned.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stontfi   Weekly,  February  X8,  19S5
A  Successful  Experiment  of  Which  the  U.S.  Press  Has  Said  Remarkably  Little
A  Flying  Visit  to  North  America's  Only  Socialist  State
A heavy snow was falling across  the  Canadian  border  and  a
sub-zero  wind  blowing  when  the  plane  took  off  before  dawn
in  Winnipeg.   But  when  we woke up  several  hours  later  over
Saskatchewan   the  sky  was  clear  and  the  sunlight   dazzling.
Below  us  and  all  around  as  far  as  the  eye  could  see was  an
endless,  flat,  utterly  bald,  treeless  land  under  snow,  the  icy
prairie  of  the  north.  The  stewardess  brought  around  a  type-
written  report that the weather  on the ground where we would
soon  be landing  was  11 degrees  below zero.
In  the  sharp  clear  air  it  looked  as  if  we  were  flying  only
a  few  feet  above the  ground  until  one noticed, here  and  there,
in  the  far  corners  of  the  huge  snowy farm  country  checker-
board, tiny  toy  red  barns  and  an  occasional little  scooter  bug
of  a  car  on  the  black  straight  threads  of  road  and  realized
that we were  still  several  thousand  feet  up.
Moving westward  and  downward, we suddenly saw  the  city
of  Regina,  capital  of  Saskatchewan,   emerge  upon  the  plain,
a   sprawling   city  topped  with  oil  refinery  stacks  belching
flame, several  "skyscrapers,"  some shining  church  spires  and
the  dome  of  the  provincial capital.   In  the  airport  were men
wearing  the  broad-brimmed Stetsons   of  the  West,  and   the
high  fur  hats  of  the  North.   There  was  an  Eskimo couple
passing  through,  the  woman  surprisingly  petite  and  as  chic
as  if  just  returning  from  a  shopping  tour  in  Paris.  Outside
the  weatherbeaten  wooden  shack  of the "Airport  Inn"  carried
ads  for   Seven  Up  and  the  usual  airline  limousines  waited.
The  sights  driving  into  town  might  have  been  those  of  the
U.S.  prairie  country anywhere  north  from  Fort  Worth  to  the
Dakotas.   The  broad  main  streets;  the  shabby  frontier  look;
the  Esso,  Safeway  and  F.  W. Woolworth signs;  the first-class
hotel—this  was  still  the  Midwest of  Sinclair  Lewis,  though  it
had  spilled across  the  Canadian  border.
Ancient  Ceremonial
Looking  down  from   the  press  gallery  of  the  marble  and
carved   oak  legislative  hall   in  the   Provincial   Capital   that
afternoon,  one  might  have  imagined that  these  legislators  in
their  business  men's  sack-suits,  with  their  flat  Midwestern
accents,  were  the  kinfolk  of  Babbitt  meeting  in  any  State
Capitol  west of  the  Mississippi.  But  the  session  opened in  the
ceremonial  that  Burke  and  Gladstone  knew.   The   Sergeant-
at-arms   in  traditional  black  robes  came  first,  bearing   the
heavy  golden  mace, followed  by the  Speaker  in  three-cornered
hat,  white  tie  and  black  robe.   Edward  VII,  Queen  Victoria
and  George  V  looked  down  in  effigy  upon  the  scene,  and  the
bills  waiting  debate began  in  antique  dignity,  "Her   Majesty,
by  and  with  the  consent  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  of  Sas-
katchewan  enacts  as follows  . . ."
But  this  was  only the  more  picturesque  of  the  surprises  in
that  chamber.   For  there  sat  a  very  unevenly  divided  assem-
blage,  arranged  in  the  manner  of  the  British  House  of  Com-
mons,  the  government's  supporters  on one side,  the  opposition
facing  them  on  the  benches  opposite.   On  these  were   only
eleven  men—ten  Liberals  and  one    Progressive-Conservative.
But  on  the  government  benches  sat  41  men  and  one  woman,
elected  by  the  Cooperative  Commonwealth Federation,  Can-
ada's "third party," a  Socialist,  Cooperative and Labor  party,
which   has   won  three   successive  elections   in   the   Province
since  1944.
The  ancient  ceremonial and  the  Rotarian  look  of  the  legis-
lators   could  not  have  been  more  deceptive.    This  bare  and
lonely land, one of the  prairie  provinces of  Canada  (its Indian
name  from  the  Saskatchewan  river),  a  province  not  much
smaller than  Texas  with  a  population less than  that  of Cleve-
land,   Ohio,  or   Washington,  D.   C.   (252,000   square  miles;
831,000  people)  is  the  only  Socialist   State  or  Province  in
all  North  America.  In  this  Province  which extends  400 miles
westward  along the  border  of  our  Dakotas  and  Montana,  and
almost  800 miles north  to  the  sub-arctic  wilderness, is  a  gov-
ernment which has  developed the most elaborate  social  services
and  the  most advanced  labor legislation  on the  Continent, and
gone further  than  any  other  in  the  direction of publicly owned
enterprises.
The   Canadian   Commonwealth  Federation   was   born   in
Regina  in  1933,  offspring  of  that  same  Farmer-Labor move-
ment  which developed  after  World  War  I  in  the  drought  and
depression  haunted  prairie  wheatlands  on  both  sides  of  the
border.   Indeed, three  of  the  Ministers  in  the   Saskatchewan
government,  the  Ministers of Agriculture  (Hon. I.  C. Nollet),
of  Municipal  Affairs   (Hon.  L.  F.  Mclntosh),  and  of  Publica-
tions  (Hon. J.  W. Burton), are  native-born  Americans, immi-
grants respectively from Montana, North  Dakota  and Kansas.
Saskatchewan  politically indicates  what  our  prairie  country
might  have  become  if  New  Deal  reforms  and  big   business
control  of .the  American mind  and  the  means  of  reaching  it
had  not  shrivelled our  native  radical  and  socialist  movements.
Space-Time  Travel
For  me  the  visit  to  Regina  was  like  one  of  those  science
fiction stories  where the hero is suddenly transported  through
time.  To leave witch  hunt  Washington  at  1 p.m.  on a  Thurs-
day,  a  capital  in  which  I  sometimes feel  like  a  pariah  and  a
leftover,  and  arrive  early  next  day  in  a  capital  where  the
Premier  graciously  had  me to lunch with three  of his  Cabinet
Ministers   and   where   the   governing   party   sponsored   my
appearance  at  a  public  lecture,  was  an  experience.   So  was
talking   to   an   audience  indistinguishable   from   small-town
(Continued  on Page  Three)
Two  Significant  Excerpts  From  His  Annual  Messages  to  the  Provincial   Parliament
Premier  Douglas  of  Saskatchewan   on  Peace  in  Asia  and  Civil  Liberty
". .  .  it  is  of  very  little  use  to  speak  of  political   democracy
to   the   millions  of   people  of   Asia   who  hare  never   known
anything   about   political   democracy.    What  they  can  under-
stand   is  food,  clothing,  medical   supplies  and  technological
equipment  that  will  enable  them  to  raise  their  standard  of
living.  We speak  of  political  democracy  as  though  it  is  some-
thing  they  once  enjoyed  or  that  they  even  understood.   Lord
Boyd-Orr,  the   British   nutritionist,  said,   as  a  result  of  his
survey,  that  two-thirds  of  the  people  of  Asia  have  never  in
their lives  known  what  it is to go to bed on a full  stomach    ...
What  is  happening  in  Asia  today  is  that  a  great  revolution  is
taking  place.   Hundreds  of  millions  of  people  who  have  been
subjugated   and  exploited  by  the  white  man  for  centuries  are
now  throwing  off  the  yoke.   We  can  do  one  of  two  things.  We
can try to  understand  their problems; we can try  to help  them
out  of their economic and social difficulties; or we  can  blunder
into a war with  them  that  will  devastate  the whole  world  ..  .
Before  we  condemn  China  we  ought  to  sit  down  with  China
and  give  her  a  place  among  the  nations  of  the  world."
"My  hope,  my  plea  for  Saskatchewan  is  that  we  shall  keep
hysteria  out  of  this  province.   I  hope  that  this  province  will
be  an  island  of  tolerance  and  good-will  in  a  sea  of  turbulent
hysteria  and  suspicion.   I  hope  that  in  this  province  there
will  be  a  haven  of  neighborliness  in  which  we  will  give  to  all
men,  and  to  all  classes,  and  to  all  creeds,  and  to  all  colors,
the  same  rights  and  the  same  civil  liberties  that  we  ask  for
ourselves.   I  want  to  say that  as  long  as this  government  sits
here,   (here   will   be   no   infringement    of   civil   liberties   in
Saskatchewan  and  there  will  be  no  witch-hunting   and  there
will  be  no   red-baiting."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  28,  1955
Memo  to  Prof.  Einstein:  Master  Plumbers  Now  Face  The  Same  Trouble
The  Case  of the  Second-Hand  Piano  Dealer  Is Not  At  All Funny
In  the  District  of  Columbia, as  in  many  American  munici-
palities,  a  wide range  of  occupations  and  professions  require
police  licenses  based  on  findings  of  good  character.   Here  in
the   District    (we  hate  to  disillusion  dear   Prof.   Einstein)
master  plumbers  are  on the  list.  "So are  physicians  and  bar-
bers, druggists and bus drivers, fortune tellers, masseurs  and
second  hand dealers.   Some two  dozen  callings  are  included.
This  is  what  makes  our  local  Case  of  the   Second  Hand
Piano  Dealer  a  serious  matter  for  business  and  professional
men  all  over  the  country.   The  case  raised  an   international
laugh  when William Shonick, a loyalty  purged  music teacher,
was  refused renewal of his  license  to  sell  second hand  pianos.
Should  his appeal he lost,  the  precedent  will be no joke, but  a
lever  to deprive many others of their businesses  and  livelihood.
The  ex-teacher,  William  Shonick,  has  just  won  the  first
round  of his appeal from  adverse action by the  police.  Charles
W.  Hart,  a  local  lawyer,  as  hearing  officer  for  the  Board of
Appeals  &  Review  of  the   D.  of  C.  Dept.  of  Licenses,   has
written  a  preliminary  proposed  decision  for  the  Board  re-
versing the  police authorities.  This  is in  some ways a  remark-
ably  enlightened  document, but  there  is  no  assurance  that
the  Board  will  accept  it.   A  long  Federal   court  fight  is  a
distinct  possibility.
Slapping  Down the  Attorney  General
One  of  the  most  enlightened  and  courageous  parts  of  the
Hart  decision  is  its  treatment  of  the  police  allegations  that
Shonick  attended  a  meeting  of  the  United  Negro  and  Allied
Veterans  addressed  by  Paul  Robeson  and  a  meeting  of  the
Washington  Committee to  Defend  the  Bill  of  Rights  to  raise
funds  for  the  defense  of  Smith  Act  victims.   The  police  cited
the  fact  that  the  Attorney  General  (later)   put  both   these
organizations  on his  blacklist.
Hart  ruled,  "The  Attorney  General's  findings  are  based on
ex  parte  investigations  and  do  not  rise  above  the  status of
accusations."  A police investigator  had  testified  that  Shonick
had   "figured   consistently"  in  certain  groups,   described   as
"those  groups which  have  some particular  racial  or  religious
appeal  to  certain  groups"—just  that  vaguely.  "A  witness's
conclusions  from,  or  generalized  summary  of,  data  in  secret
files,"  Hart  ruled,  "cannot  be  received  as  substantive   evi-
dence."
But  Shonick's  counsel, Forer  & Rein,  is  filing  exceptions  to
that  portion  of the  Hart  decision  which  says  a  license  hear-
ing  examiner  may  infer  from  a  refusal   to  answer  that  an
applicant  is  a  Communist.  Shonick  had  twice  refused,  once
invoking  the  5th  Amendment before  the  House Un-American
Activities  Committee,  the  second  time  on  advice  of  counsel
in the original  license interrogation.  On that occasion  Shonick
did  not invoke the  5th but  claimed the question  was irrelevant.
What Kind of  Character?
Though  upholding  the  right  to  infer  that  Shonick  was  a
Communist, Hart  upheld his contention  that  the  question  was
irrelevant. "That  good  character  reasonably  required  of  an
applicant   for  a  second  hand  dealer's  license,"  Hart   ruled,
"is  such  as  will  dispose  him to comply with  the  statutes  and
police  regulations  relating  to  second  hand  dealers  and  not
to  be a  receiver  of  stolen  goods."
Hart  held that  while as  a  Communist  Shonick  could not be
held  entirely  of  good  character,  he  was   "sufficiently   good"
to  be  a  second  hand  piano  dealer.   To  hold  otherwise,  Hart
wrote,  would be  to  decide  that  Communists  could  be  refused
the  right  to  engage  in  any  of  the  businesses  or  professions
on  the  licensing  list.  This,  he  said,  would  be  "clearly beyond
the  scope of any  delegated  authority  under the  police  power."
Saskatchewan,  Where  the  CCF  Has  Been  in  Power  for  11 Years
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
America  in  appearance,  but  for  which  socialism  was  not  an
indiscreet  and  dangerous term  but  an honorable  and  inspiring
word.  I felt  at home.
I  ran  into  fellow  Americans who feel  the  same  way.  Two
centuries  ago  Americans  fled  across  the  Canadian  border  in
flight  from   the  revolution.   A  new  generation   seems  to  be
trickling  across  it  in flight from  the witch hunt.  There  are  a
ceuple  dozen  American  technicians  and   doctors  who  have
settled  down  to  work  for  the  government  in   Saskatchewan
after  service in the  American government  and in UN  agencies
became  unbearable.   They  find  the  same  kind  of  atmosphere
in  the  Province that they  once enjoyed  in  New Deal  and  Fair
Deal  Washington.    Among  the  good  people  I  met  after   the
public meeting—including a  delegation of Weekly readers who
came  by  bus  from  Moose  Jaw  forty  miles  away—there  was
that  same  combination  of  evangelical   Christianity  and  so-
cialist  thinking  which  was  characteristic  of  American  radi-
calism  a  generation   ago.
A  Canadian FDR
The  Premier,  T.  C. "Tommy"  Douglas, just  turned  50, is  a
younger  Norman Thomas,  a  Thomas  who  came  to  power,  a
Thomas  unsoured  by  the  experience  of  seeing  much  of   his
program  stolen  by  a  major  party  while  he  himself  was  left
in  a  corner to wage  bitter  Lilliputian  quarrels  with  the Com-
munists.  As  a  poor  Scottish  immigrant  boy, Douglas earned
his  living  as  a  printer,  decided to  enter  the  Baptist  ministry,
became a champion debater  and boxer  at  college, was ordained
in   1930  but  shifted  to  politics  with  his  election  as  a  CCF
member  to  the  Canadian  House  of  Commons  in   1935.    His
leadership  carried  the  party  to  power  in  Saskatchewan  in
1944.  When M. J.  Coldwell, the  national  leader  of  the  party,
a  man very  much  like the gentle and moderate  Attlee, retires,
the  more  militant  "Westerner"  Douglas  may  take  his  place.
The  Premier  of  Saskatchewan  may  yet  be the  Prime  Ministei
of  Canada.
At  the  newsstand  in  the  hotel  where  I  had  lunch  with  the
Premier,   there   was   displayed  the   local   daily   paper   with
screaming page  one headlines,  "Totalitarian  State  Alleged"—
by  a  Liberal  member  of  Parliament  denouncing regulation  of
fishing and  trapping  activity  in  the  north.  The  conversation
was  less  melodramatic.   The  Provincial  Treasurer,  the  Hon.
Clarence  Melvin  Fines,  spoke  of  the  prejudice   encountered
by  a  Socialist   government  in  marketing   its  bonds  and  the
limitations  on attempting  a  Socialist  program  in  a  Province
without  the  support  of  the  Federal  government's    sovereign
fiscal powers.  The  Minister  of  Education,  the  Hon.  Woodrow
Stanley  Lloyd, himself a school teacher  by profession, sketched
the   problems  of  education  in  a  province  where   population
density  is less than  four  per  square  mile and so many children
live  on distant  and  isolated  farms.
The  Minister  of  Agriculture,   Hon.  I.  C.  Nollet,  a  veteran
of  the  American army  in  World War  I,  touched on his  earlier
experience   in  the   Farmer-Labor   movement.   The   Premier
himself  covered  a wide range of  international  and  local  prob-
lems—from  the  making  of  peace  with  the  new  China  in  the
Far  East  through  the  question  of  "McCarthyism"  to  the  ex-
perience   of  his  government   in  running   such   experimental
businesses  as  a  shoe  factory,  a  brick  kiln  and  a  woolen  mill.
There  was  a  sober  idealism  impressively   combined  with  a
grasp of exact  detail  and a remarkable  knowledge of American
and  world affairs.   In  Douglas, the  same rare  combination of
the  intellectual  and  the  practical  politician,  Canada  may  yet
find  an  FDR  of  its  own.  I  hope to  write  again  soon  of   Sas-
katchewan  and  the  CCF.
2   /
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  S8, 195S
Poor  Mark Hanna;  Lesson  for  Poland;  Tito's  Oblique  Rebuke;  Pravda  and India
When  the  Standpat Farm Bureau Federation  Urges East-West Trade
East-West Trade: State and Agriculture  are  at  loggerheads
over  East-West  trade.  The  Secretary  of  Agriculture,  though
a  thorough  reactionary,  has  been  looking hungrily  for  some
time  at   the  possibilities   of  selling  farm   surpluses  to   the
Soviet bloc.  The strength  of the  desire  for  farm business  with
the   Soviets  was  indicated  when  Charles  B.  Shuman,  newly
elected  president  of  the  Standpat  Farm  Bureau   Federation,
made his  first  press conference here  the  occasion  for demand-
ing  an  end  of  economic  warfare  bars  against   sales  to  the
U.S.S.R.  Shuman objected to  the  State Department's  thumbs
down  on butter  exports  to  Moscow.
In  the  advance  text   of  the  reply  to  Robert  M.  Hutchins
made  by  Representative   Carroll  Reece  of  Tennessee  at   the
National  Press Club last Wednesday, it was not too surprising
to  see  Laski  referred  to  as  "Prof.  Howard  3.  Laski,  the  top
philosopher  of  the  British  Socialist  Party."  But  when Reece
warmed  up  on  the  menace of  Fabian  socialism,  it  was  sad  to
see  the  declaration  that  tax-exempt  funds  should ,not  be used
"to  propagandize  for  the  theories  of  either   Karl   Marx  or
Mark  Hannah."   What  hope  is  left  for  free  enterprise  when
an  old  fashioned  Republican  like  Reece,  who  spells   Marx's
name  correctly,   stumbles   over   the   spelling   of  McKinley's
mentor,  the  business  man-politician  who  once  symbolized  all
that  was  "safe  and  sound"  in  the  G.O.P.?   Could  it  be  that
Reece, too, is an unwitting victim of progressive  education?
For  the  eyes  of  our  few  readers  in  the  Soviet  States,  and
for  radicals  in  the  West  silly  enough  to  dismiss  our  funda-
mental  liberties as "bourgeois," we want to dwell for a moment
on  the  barbarous  story  told  by  Hermann  Field  in  London on
his  five  years'   imprisonment  without  trial   in   Poland   on
charges  the  government  admits  "mistaken."   Were  it  not  for
the  defection of  the  former  Polish  police chief, Josef  Swiatlo,
Field  might  still  be  rotting  in  his  cellar  prison,  his  where-
abouts   unknown.   The   Polish  government   sought   to  make
amends  by  paying  him  $50,000  and  the  cost  of  his  convales-
cence  in  Switzerland.  It  owes  it  to  itself  and  the  good name
of'  socialism to  do something more  and  that  is  calmly  to  ex-
amine  this  case  and  act  upon  what  it  demonstrates.   Were
there  habeas  corpus  in  Poland,  the  right  to  a  statement  of
charges,  the  right  to  counsel,  the  right  to  bail,  the  right  to
trial,  this  "mistake"  might  have  been  corrected  five  years
ago  and  Poland  saved  the  shame  of  it.   How  many  obscure
citizens  in  the   Soviet  States  have  suffered  just  such  false
imprisonment,   privation   and   worse   because   of  just   such
•'mistakes"  by  the  secret   police?   When  will  they  institute
basic  reforms  instead  of  intermittent  shake-ups?
Add  Subversive Documents
"A  few days ago ...    a  group  of state employes—not
in Missouri—charged with responsibility  for  determining
what  announcements could  be  posted  on  the   employees'
bulletin  board  refused  to permit  the  Bill  of Rights  to be
posted  on the  ground  that  it  was  a  controversial  docu-
ment  . . .  Only  after  the Governor  in writing  vouched
for  its  non-controversial  character  was the  Bill  of  Rights
permitted  to  occupy a  place  along with routine  items of
interest  to the state employes.  And this happened in  the
U.S.A.  on  the   15th  day  of  December,  1954,  the   163rd
anniversary  of our Bill of Rights  ...   It  is straws  in the
.wind  like  this  which  cause  some  thoughtful   people  to
ask   the   question  -whether  ratification   of   the   Bill  of
Rights could be obtained today  if we were faced  squarely
with  the  issue."
—Chief   Justice  Warren,  at- St.  Louis,  Feb. 19
Good  Sense  from  Tito: "It  is wrong,  and this  in  my opinion
has  become  too  much  the  rule  in  the  foreign   policies  of  too
many  countries today,"  Marshal  Tito said  in  a  speech  Feb.  12
on  his  return  to  Belgrade, "to  view the  peaceful  moves of  one
country  as  a  sign  of her  weakness and  then  sharpen   relations
even  more;  and, when  there  is  some  reaction  as  the  result of
this  policy, to  say:  'You  see,  we were  right  when we said one
cannot  do anything with  them.'   Every  voice making towards
a  relaxation  of  tension  should  be  accepted  and  tested   and
'only  maneuvers'  should  not  be  seen  in  everything  that  has
been  put  forward."    ..
Some  Odd  Aspects  of  the  Andrha  Elections  in  India:  the
Christians   generally   support   the   Communists  because  in
Andrha  they  are  untouchables and  landless,  with  the  natural
resentment of the caste-less  against the  Congress Party. Many
wealthy  landlords  support  the  Communists because  the  Con-
gress Party in Andrha is backed by a  sub-caste  with  which the
landlords  have  an  ancient  feud.   Despite  Nehru's   good  rela-
tions  with  Peking  and  Moscow,  the  national  executive  of  the
Congress  party   decided   to  campaign  by  linking  the   local
Communists with the  Russian and  Chinese regimes,  and accus-
ing  the  latter  of  crimes  against  humanity.   The   Russians
turned the other cheek. To the dismay of the  local Communists,
Pravda  ran  an  article  praising  the  achievements of  the  Con-
gress  Party  in  the  Central  government   of  India,  especially
in  economic  development.  And the  Pravda  article  was  at  once
telegraphed   from   New  Delhi  to  Andrha,  where  Moscow's
praises  were  quoted by  the  anti-Communist   candidates!
N.Y.C. Readers  Are Invited to  the  "Coffee  Klafsch" with IFS This Fri. Night at the  Newspaper Guild, 133 W. 44th
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5 :*
Name_
Street-
City—
. Zone
Enter  this  gift  sub for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
(To)  Name                                      '.
Street-
City
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
. Zone
2/28/65
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED