I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955may16.pdf

============================================================

They  Worked Their  Way  Through  College  Spying  for  the  FBI,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NUMBER 17
MAY  16,  1956
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB   CENTS
A  Dramatic  New  Disarmament  Plan  and  the  Projected   Four  Power  Talks
Russia  Offers  to  Lift  Its  Iron  Curtain  for  Peace
"Missions  to  Moscow"  have  become  a  familiar  pre-election
phenomena.    Mr.  Truman  in  1948  wooed  peace votes  by drop-
ping  a  hint  that  if  elected  he  would  send  Vinson  to  Moscow;
nothing  more was heard  of  the  idea  once the  election  was over.
Churchill  won  the  British  elections  two  years  later  with  a  dra-
matic  proposal  for  a  meeting  with  Truman  and  Stalin  to  stop
the  atomic  arms  race;  that,  too,  was  shelved  after   the  votes
were   counted.     Anthony   Eden   is  depending   on   the   same
promise of  a meeting  "at  the  summit"  to help  him win  in May,
and  the  U.S.  has  reluctantly  agreed.   A  bargain  seems  to  have
been  struck.    Britain  reversed  herself  at  Paris  on  Indo-China
and  forced  France  to  support  our  protege  Diem,  and  there  is
reason  to  suspect  that  when  British  elections  are  safely  over  it
will  be  seen  that  Eden  has  also  promised  to  back  the  U.S.  in
defense  of   Formosa.
To  this  astringent  view  must  be  added  a  sober  look  at  the
men  who  would  meet  at  or  near  that  summit.    The  one  com-
manding figure who might  have brought  peace  is in  retirement.
Eden  is  a  light-weight  compared  to  Churchill;  it  is  not  at  all
clear  who,  if  anybody,  is at the  top  in  Moscow.    And  the  Pres-
ident  unfortunately  is  not  equipped  for  the  job  of  leadership;
he  is  a  front  man,  a  symbol,  an  optical  illusion.    His  vapid
little   speech   Tuesday  night   to  the  Republican   women  is  a
measure  of  the  man;  you don't  prepare  for  serious  negotiation
by  insulting  in  advance  those  with  whom  you  want  to  talk.
The  compromise  by  which  the  meeting  at  the  summit  will  be
more  or  less  perfunctory  while  the  Foreign   Ministers  do  the
real  work  is,  of  course,  a  dodge.    But  Mr.  Eisenhower  really
isn't fit to  do  more  than  shake  hands  all  around.
Worse  Below  the  Summit
Below  the  summit,  the  new  British  Foreign  Secretary,  Mac-
millan,  is  commonplace,  and  Dulles  is  hostile  from  the  start
to  negotiations.     The  Washington   Post  Wednesday  reported
"word  from  Paris  that  Dulles  wants  to  raise  at  the  Big  Four
meeting  the  issue  of  the  denial  of  freedom  in  the  Soviet  satel-
lites."     (Mr.  Dulles  turns  strongly  civil  libertarian  once  he
gets  past  the  Pripet  marshes.)     Ludwell  Denny,  who  has  be-
come  almost  an  unofficial   spokesman,  cables  that  Mr.   Dulles
has  launched  a  new  offensive  to  utilize  the  talks  to  stir  disaf-
fection  behind  Soviet  lines  and  "to  head  off false  hopes  .  .  .
that  peace  is  just  around  the  corner."
Yet,  despite  Mr.  Dulles,  peace  may be  just  around  the  cor-
ner.   Last November,  in  their  joint  notes  to  Moscow,  the  U.S.,
France  and  Britain,  called  for  agreement  on  an  Austrian  treaty
and  on  free  elections  for  a  reunited  Germany as  the  pre-requi-
sites  for  fruitful   Four  Power  talks.    Since  then  Moscow  has
indicated  that  it  would  accept  the  Eden  plan  for  free  elections
in  Germany and  an  Austrian  treaty  is about  to  be  signed.    In
addition  the  new  Soviet  disarmament  proposals   spell  out  in
explicit  terms  a  plan  to  meet  Western  demands  for   reduction
in  conventional  arms  and  armies  before  nuclear   disarmament,
and  for  an  effective  system of  control  and  inspection  to  enforce
the  latter.   The  new Soviet disarmament  proposals mark  a  new
stage  in  the  Russian  drive  for  peace.    Moscow  has  in   effect
accepted  Western  terms  on  Austria, German  elections  and  dis-
armament.    The   task  of  preventing  and  sabotaging  a   Four
Power  settlement  has  been  made  very   difficult.
No  More  Atomic  Tests
Of  all  the  dramatic  events  in  the  movement  toward  peace,
none  is  more  important  than  the  publication  of  these   Soviet
disarmament  proposals.    They  will  have  an  enormous  appeal
everywhere  in  the  world.    They  would  reduce  the  armies  of
the  Big  Three—the  U.S.,  Russia  and  China—to  from  1,000,-
000  to  1,500,000 men  each  and  those of  Britain  and  France  to
650,000  men  apiece.    They  would  call  off  all  further  tests  of
atomic  weapons.     They   would  follow  reduction   of   conven-
tional  armies  and  arms  with  the  complete  prohibition  of  the
hydrogen  and  atom  bombs  "and  other  weapons  of  mass  de-
struction."    They  would  lift  that  Iron  Curtain  to  make   effec-
tive  control  and  inspection   possible.
These  provisions  deserve  to  be  spelled  out  since  few  papers
in  this  country  have  carried  them.    The   General   Assembly
would  establish  an  international  control  agency.   This  would
first  "set  up  on  the territories of  all  the  respective  states  along
reciprocal  lines  control  posts  in  big  ports,  railway  junctions,
motor   roads  and  airdromes"   with  the  object   "of   preventing
sudden  attack  by one  state  upon  another."    The  task  of  these
posts  "shall  be  to watch  that  there  shall  be  no  dangerous  con-
centrations  of  ground  forces  or  of  air  and  naval  forces."     The
control  agency  would  have access to  all  governmental  decisions
and  papers  pertaining  to  military  budgets  as a means  of  check-
ing  on  the  observance  of  armament  reductions.     Finally  the
control agency, in order  to prevent  the clandestine accumulation
of  nuclear  and  other  materials,  and  other  violations  of  the  arms
agreement,  would  have  the  right   to  station   permanently  in
every  country  a  staff  of  international  inspectors  "who,  within
the  bounds  of  the  control  functions  they  exercise,  would  have
unhindered  access  at  any time  to  all  objects  of  control."
Our  Turn  to  Prove  Sincerity
For  months,   if  not  years,  the  State  Department  has   been
asking  Moscow  to  prove  its "sincerity"  in  the  search  for  peace.
But  the  Department   instead  of  being  jubilant  is  struck  dumb
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 16,1955
Organized  Labor Agrees  with  the  Lawyers  Guild  on the  "Guilt  by  Anticipation" Bill
A  United  Front  Against  the  Butler  Measure  for  Industrial  Blacklisting
It  is  not  often  these  days  that  the  organized  labor  move-
ment  finds  itself  in  agreement   with  the  National  Lawyers'
Guild.   Last  Tuesday  Osmond  K.  Praenkel  of  the  Guild  and
Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.,   as  counsel  for  the  United  Automobile
Workers  (and  head  of  Americans  for  Democratic  Action)  ap-
peared  before  the  Senate  Internal  Security  subcommittee  in
opposition  to  the  Butler  bill.    The  preceding  Friday  the  sub-
committee  had  heard   from  the  CIO  (through  its  assistant
general  counsel  Tom Harris), from James B. Carey,  president
of   the   I.U.E.-CIO,   and  from  the   A.F.   of  L.    This  unusual,
united  front  measures  the  extent  of  the  danger  labor  senses
in  S  681,  the  so-called  "Defense  Facilities  Protection  Act,"  a
bill  for  universal  security   screening   in  American   industry.
Fraenkel   termed  it  a  "guilt  by  anticipation"  bill,  since  it
would  authorize  government  officials  to  determine  which  em-
ployes  "may  engage  in  espionage,  sabotage  or  other   subver-
sive  acts,"  and  deny  them  employment  in  so-called  "defense
facilities."    The  Senate   report   on  the  bill  last  August  ad-
mitted  it  was  aimed  to  cover  "privately  owned"  plants   "en-
gaged  in  what  is  regarded  as  normal  civilian  production."
Carey  in  his  testimony   said   2,000,000  employes  in  more
than  18,000  plants  with  defense  contracts  are  covered  by  in-
dustrial  security  screening;   complained  that  "vigorous   anti-
Communist  union  leaders  had  been  denied  clearance  as  secu-
rity  risks" under  these  existing  procedures; and  asserted  that
"the  net  effect  of  the  [Butler]  bill  would  be  to  place  in  the
hands  of  some  government  officials  the  power  to  condemn to
ostracism   and   starvation,   or   dependence  on  public   relief,
workers  in  vast  sections  of  the  American economy."
Perhaps  the  hardest  hitting  of  the  statements  made  on be-
half  of  labor  was  that  by  Rauh.   "The  UWA,"  he  said  as  its
general  counsel, "is  vitally  concerned with  this  proposed bill.
Thousands upon thousands of  our  members  are  presently  cov-
ered  by  the  Defense  Department's  program  for  screening  em-
ployes  in  defense  plants.  .  .  .  They  have  seen  that  program
operate;  they  have  seen  employes tried  on  vague  charges  at
hearings based  on meaningless  criteria  and have  seen  Hearing
Boards  decide cases  on the  testimony  of  unknown  informers."
The bill  by  its  terms is  aimed  at  workers who  "might"  com-
mit   espionage,  sabotage   or  "other  subversive  acts."    Rauh
criticized  this  last  phrase  as  "so vague  as  to  be  meaningless,"
and  said  possible espionage  was  already  covered by  existing
security  procedures covering every kind  of secret  work.  Rauh
said   the   bill  was  basically  an   anti-sabotage   measure,  and
pointed  out  that  there  was  no  recorded  case  of  sabotage  dur-
ing  World  War  II  "or  what  is  more  significant,  during  the
Korean  war."    Rauh  said  anyone  caught   in  an  attempt  at
sabotage  was  already  subject  to  30 years  in  jail,  no  small  de-
terrent.    He  said  the  new  bill  would  set  up  "a  nationwide
screening  of  all  workers"  and  added  "the   moment  we  start
watching  everybody, the  more  certain  we  are  to  uncover  the
non-conformists  and the  less  certain  we are  to  safeguard  our-
selves  against  real  traitors."
Rauh  declared  the  bill  if  passed  would  be  administered by
"the   same  Department  of  Justice  which,  in  using  such   wit-
nesses  as  Harvey  Matusow and  Paul  Crouch, vouched for  the
credibility  of  known  liars"  and  "in  utilizing the  files  of  the
FBI  to impugn the  loyalty of President Truman, demonstrated
the  potential  danger  to  our  democracy in  the  political  use  of
secret  files  collected  for  security  purposes."
The  CIO  in  its  statement   suggested   a  compromise  "new
practice"  whereby  the  "identify  of  FBI  undercover  agents"
could  be  kept  secret  while  the  testimony   of  associates  arid
fellow  employes would  be  used  in  security  cases  only  if  they
appeared  openly  to  testify.    This  would  protect  a  new  crop
of  Matusows  and  Crouches  from  confrontation.
Most  disappointing  was  the  way  in  which labor  spokesmen
took  for granted  that  a nationwide screening  system  would be
set  up  under  the  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950  when  and  if
the   Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  registration   order
against the  Communist  party  is upheld  by the  Supreme Court.
Tom  Harris  for  the  CIO, Carey,  and  Walter  J.  Mason for  the
A.F.  of. L. used  this  as  an  argument  against  enactment  of  the
Butler  bill.   Carey  said  "hard  core"  Communists could  be ex-
cluded  from   defense  facilities  without  the  Butler  bill  when
the  registration  order  went  into  effect.    None  of  these  three
faced  up  to  the  fact  that  under  the  Internal  Security  Act  as
amended   last   August   by   Senators   Humphrey,  Morse  and
Douglas  the  impact  of  the  blacklisting  would  go  far  beyond
"hard  core"  Communists.
Henry  Cabot Lodge  Blurts Out  The
The  European  press  covering  the  recent  UNESCO  loyalty
hearings  in  Geneva has  been quoting with amusement a state-
ment  by  Henry Cabot Lodge  on  the  real  reason  for  the  U.  S.
loyalty purge  in  UN  agencies.   The  statement  was  unearthed
by  defense  counsel  Leonard   Boudin   from   testimony  which
Lodge  gave—as  U.  S.  representative  to  the  UN—before  the
House  Foreign  Affairs  Committee on February  2 of  last  year.
Since  this has  yet  to  appear  (so far  as  we know)  in  the  U. S.
press,  we give  it  here.   The  testimony  also  throws  some vivid
light  on the  U. S. attitude  toward  the  UN during  the  Korean
war.
"It  was  obvious,"  Mr.  Lodge  told  the   House  committee,
"that  U. S. national  security  was not  affected  by the  character
of  these  U. S. employes.   In  the  first  place, the  UN is not  only
not  a  government;  it  has  none of  the  powers  of  government.
Everything that  it  does is  purely recommendatory, except  for
the  Security  Council, and in that  body there  is  the  veto which
protects  us  completely.    This  is  one  difference  between  the
UN  and  the  U.  S.  government.
"Secondly,  in  the  UN  there  is  no  secret  or  classified  infor-
mation.      THE     ONLY    INFORMATION   WHICH    THE
UNITED  NATIONS EVER  RECEIVED ABOUT  THE  WAR
IN  KOREA,  FOR  EXAMPLE, WAS  MIMEOGRAPHED MA-
TERIAL  WHICH  I  TRANSMITTED AFTER  THE  PENTA-
GON   HAD  RELEASED   IT   TO  THE   PRESS.    There   is,
therefore,  nothing  to  spy  on  in  the  UN.    No  U.  S.  citizen
Truth About the  UN "Loyalty" Purge
working  there  has  ever  been  indicted for  spying.   Perhaps  it
is  because  there  is  nothing  to  spy  on  that   the  Soviet   has
never filled their  quota  of employees. .  . .
"The  prime consideration, as  regards  employment of  U.  S.
citizens  by  the  UN,  therefore, is  one  of  justice  and  of  a  sense
of  the  general  fitness  of things.    It  boils  down  to the  fact that
it  is  clearly wrong  for  any  U.  S.  Communist to  be employed
at  the  UN  when  there  are  so  many  good  Americans  from
which  to  choose."
The Administrative Tribunal  at  Geneva, in  ordering  the  re-
instatement  or  payment of damages  to three  employes  [David
Leff,  Peter   Duberg  and  Annette  Wilcox],  held  that  the  in-
tegrity  required of  international  civil  servants  was  not  to  be
identified  with  "loyalty"  to  their  governments,  and  that  they
were  guaranteed  "entire  freedom  of conscience ...    in  respect
of   both   their   philosophical   convictions  and   their   political
opinions."
In  the  background  is  one  of  those  few  questions  on  which
the  U.  S. and  the  U.S.S.R.  have  agreed  at  the  UN.   Both ob-
jected  when  the  General  Assembly  established   a  system  of
administrative  tribunals  with  power  to hear  appeals  from  dis-
missed  personnel.   The  Czech  government  several  times  tried
to  obtain  the  discharge  of  U^N  employes of  Czech  nationality
who  were  no  longer  regarded  as  "loyal"  to  the  Communist
regime.    On  those   occasions  the   U.  S.  threw   its  influence
against  dismissal  on  loyalty  charges.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  16,1955
They  Worked Their  Way  Through  College  Spying  for  the  FBI
A  New  Type  Informer  in  the  South's  First  Smith  Act  Case
Three  paid   informers,    members   of  the   Justice   Depart-
ment's  Smith  Act  troupe, have  just  completed  a  performance
in  the  first  prosecution  of  a  Southern  Communist.   They  gave
the  testimony  that  led  to  the   conviction  of  Junius   Irving
Scales  under  the  membership  clause  of  the  Act.
Scales,  leader   of  the  Communist  Party  in  the   Carolinas,
admitted  his  membership.    What  he  denied  was  the  rest  of
the  government's  charge:  that the party  advocated the violent
overthrow  of  the  government, that  he  knew  its  purpose  and
intended  to  help  carry  it   out.
The  three  informers made  the  charge  stick.
First  to  take  the  stand  in  the  Federal   District   Court  in
Greensboro,  N.  C.,  was  John  Lautner,  a  former  Communist
now  a  Justice  Department  consultant  at  $125  a  week.   Laut-
ner  presented  testimony  he  has  perfected before  many  courts
and  government  boards.    He  described  the  ultimate  aim  of
the  Party  in  the  U.  S.:  to  "bring   about  the  destruction  by
force  and violence" of imperialistic capitalism.  He  spent  a  day
identifying  as  Communist literature numerous books and pam-
phlets  that  probably  included  some  things  Scales  had  read.
Then  for  local  color,  the  government  called  Ralph  Clontz,
Charlotte,  N.  C. attorney,  who began  to  spy  on  Scales for  the
FBI  while  still  attending  Duke  University,  and  Charles  Ben-
son  Childs,  a  young  University  of  North  Carolina  physics
student  who had  also  joined  the  Party  for  the  FBI.    This led
Scales'  attorney  David Rein  to  remark  in  his  final  address  to
the  jury  that  "apparently  now it's  the  fashion  to  work  your
way  through   school  by  working  for  the   FBI."
Red  Troops  in  the  Carolinas
According  to  Clontz,  who  was  "not   interested   in  money"
but  nevertheless   reached  a  point  where  the   FBI   paid  him
$400  a  month,  Scales  talked  of  little  else  but  force  and  vio-
lence  whenever  they  met.    "Force  is  the  only  answer,"  he
claims  Scales  told  him.   "Ideas  alone  can  never  accomplish
anything."
To  an  all-white,  largely  middle-class Southern  jury,  he  re-
counted  Scales'  plan to unite the  "Negro nation"  and the  work-
ing  class  into  a  revolutionary  force  that  would  be  aided,  if
necessary,  by  troops  from  Russia.   As  added  catnip,  he  told
of  Scales'  prediction  that  Clontz's daughter  would  marry  in  a
Socialist  or  Communist United  States,  a  statement  that  prob-
ably  chilled  twelve  Southern  marrows  with  its  hint  of  mis-
cegenation.    He  pictured   Scales  plotting   the   overthrow  of
the  U.  S. from  his  home  in  Carboro,  and  at  the  same  time  he
estimated   there  were  only  20  Communists  in  all   of   North
Carolina.
Taught   to  Kill—With A  Pencil
The  other  student  informer,  Childs,  took  the  stand   as  a
"surprise" witness  since he had paid up  his Party  dues  only a
few  days  before.   He  told, for  instance,  of  a  secret  school  for
Communists  on  a  North  Carolina farm,  where  someone, not
Scales,  had  shown him how to  kill  a  man  with  a  plain wooden
"Overthrow"  as   Fantasy
In  an  editorial on  the  Scales  case,  in  which  it  attacks
the   government's   use  of  paid  informers,  the  Raleigh,
N.  C.,  News   and  Observer  says   [April   15]  it   regards
as  "almost  comic  the  contention  that  he  (Scales)  could
have  conspired  in  anything  but  fantasy   to  overthrow
the  government  of  the  United  States."    It  then  goes  on
to  say  later  in  the  piece:  "National  security  is  a  very
important   thing.     Even  so  insignificant  a   danger   as
Junius  Scales  may  deserve  attention  in  that  connection.
Some  real  questions  of  national  security,  however,  rise
when  justice  may  be  shaped  on  the  basis  of  the  testi-
mony  of  the  expelled  Communist  who  is  now  the  regu-
larly  hired  paid  informer."
Can  Ideas  Be  Tried?
"I  am  innocent  of  the  charge   in  this  case.    Insofar
as  the  issues  are  Marxism-Leninism  and  my  beliefs,  I
do  not  feel  they  can  be  tried  in  a  courtroom.
"No jury  is  competent  to  convict  a  man  for  ideas,  no
matter  how  long  a  study   they   make.    The  jury  had
small   opportunity  with   the  rags   and  tatters   of   un-
familiar  books  introduced   and  misrepresented  by   the
government.
"For  all  the  world  it  has  been  like  a  medieval   trial
for  heresy."
—Junius  Scales'  final  statement  at   the  time  of
sentencing.
pencil.    He  then  demonstrated  this  useful  skill  to  the  court.
He  also  said  that  while  he  was  working  for  Western  Electric
once,  he  told  Scales  of  certain  anti-Red   pamphlets  the  com-
pany  was  distributing   to  its  employees  and  was  advised   to
keep  a  list  of  the  authors  so they  could  be  lined  up  and  shot
"after  the  revolution."   (Under cross-examination  he  admitted
he  never  made  such  a  list  and  that  Scales  never   mentioned
the  matter  again.)
Scales'  mother  appeared  in his  behalf.    She told  how Scales,
grand  nephew of  a  governor  and  son of  a  wealthy  Greensboro
attorney,  had  left  that  life  and  joined  the  Party  to  help  his
fellow  man.   He told  her  he  wouldn't  belong  to  the  party  if  it
advocated  the  use  of violence.   And she  quoted  him  as  saying,
"To my mind it  would be just  plain  silly  for  a  little  minority
group  to  try  to  overthrow  the  government."  and  also:   "the
only  way is to  educate  the  people  ...   if they wanted  it  (Com-
munism)  all  right,  and  if  not,  all  right."    (But  "What would
you  expect  a  mother  to  say?"  the  U.  S.  District   Attroney
asked   the  jury.)     Finally   two  professors   who  had  taught
Scales  at  the  U.  of  N.  C. and  a  minister  who  also  knew  him,
characterized  him  as  "Sincere,  honest  but   misguided."
Scales  was  sentenced   to  six  years.    Since  his  indictment
last  November,  he  had  been  free  under  a  $35,000  bond  his
mother  posted.   Judge  Albert  V.  Bryan,  who  presided  at  the
trial,  revoked  it  and  he  is  in  jail.   A  judge  of  the  appellate
court  also  refused  to  reinstate  the  bond and  Rein  is  presently
appealing  to  Chief  Justice   Warren.
Scales  is  the  second  person  to  be  convicted  under  a  provi-
sion  of the  Smith  Act  making  it  a  crime  to  be  a  member  of  a
party  which  advocates  overthrow  of  the  government  by  force
and  violence.   Earlier  this  year  Claude  Lightfoot  of  Chicago
was   also  convicted  of  "membership"   and   sentenced  to  five
years  in  jail  and  a  $5,000 fino.
The  McCarran Act  May  Help  the   Communists
Until  the  Lightfoot  conviction, all  Smith  Act   prosecutions
had  been  for  "conspiracy  to  advocate."    If  these  new  convic-
tions  are  upheld,  the  government  could  prosecute   every  one
of  the  23,000-odd Communists in this country for  membership.
The  main  hurdle  on  appeal   is  Section   4f  of  the  Internal
Security  (McCarran) Act  of  1950.   This  says that  no one  may
be  held  guilty  of  a  crime  merely  because  he  is  an  official   or
member  of  the   Communist  party.    The  intent   of  the   late
Senator  McCarran  in  adding  this  provision was not,  of  course,
to  help  Communists.   Section  4f  was  put  into  the  1950  Act  to
safeguard  its  requirement  that  all  Communists  register.
Section  4f  was  intended  to  safeguard  the  registration  pro-
vision  from  attack  under  the  Fifth  amendment.    Communists
cannot  be forced to  register  if  registration  would  incriminate
them.    But  one of  the  byproducts  may  be  to  make  it  impossi-
ble  for  the  government  to  prosecute  anyone  for  membership
alone.    If  Lightfoot  and  Scales  finally  go  free,  it  will  be  be-
cause   Senator   McCarran  was  so  clever   a  lawyer  he   ended
by  out-foxing   himself.
7 i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 16,1955
NATO  Chief  General  Gruenther  Was  Alarmed  at  the  First  Sign  of  a  Soviet   Surrender
Will We  Be The  Ones  to  Balk  Now  That Our Terms Are Accepted?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
when  Russia  goes  so far  as  to  offer  to  open  her  airdromes  and
factories  to  foreign   inspection.    There  could  not  be  a  more
striking about  face  on  the part of  the  Russians.   Now  it  is  our
turn  to prove  our sincerity.   The  price  of  the  deal  is the  reuni-
fication  and  neutralization  of  Germany,  the  evacuation  of  for-
eign  armies  from  the  Reich,  and  the  abandonment  of  our  for-
ward  bombing   bases  in  Europe,  Africa  and  Asia.    Russia  is
offering  in  effect  to  retreat  to  her  borders  if  we retreat  to  ours,
to  establish  a  neutral  cordon  sanitaire between  us  and  to  open
her  own  territory  to  inspection  as  assurance  against  hostile  or
aggressive  intentions  on  her  part.    Here  is  a  basis  on  which
there  could  be  negotiated  a  secure  planet  for  all  mankind.
The  Slide  Toward  An  Atomic  Precipice
In  a  speech  to  the  American  Irish  Historical  Society  on May
7,  Atomic  Energy  Commissioner  Thomas  E.  Murray  warned,
"Today  we  stand  on  the  edge  of  the  abyss  of  atomic  annihila-
tion.    Daily  the  threat  of  world  destruction  grows  measure by
measure.  ...    In  this  slide  toward  the  precipice  whence can we
be  saved?"   Never  before  has  there  been  so  real  an  opportu-
nity  to stop  the  slide toward  that  precipice.    A  year  ago  it  was
the  U.S.  which  proposed  continuous  and  permanent  teams  of
international  inspectors.    A  year  ago  it  was  the  Soviet  Union
which  still declined to  "talk  turkey"  on  inspection  and  insisted
that  it  would  not  agree  to  reduce  its armies  until  we  had  first
agreed   to  atomic  disarmament.    Today  the  U.S.S.R.  has  ac-
cepted  American  terms  and  spelled  them  out  in  great  detail.
Will we be  the  ones  to balk?
Precisely  because the  Soviet Union  is accepting  our  terms,  it
is  in  a position to  wage a diplomatic  offensive  deadly  to  Amer-
ican  prestige  if  we  do  not  seize  this  opportunity   sincerely  to
negotiate  atomic  peace.    The   Soviet   about   face   began   last
October when  Vishinsky  at the UN  General  Assembly  accepted
the  Anglo-French   atomic  proposals of  June,  1954,  as the  basis
for  negotiations.   The  result  was  a  resolution  calling  for  the
resumption  of  disarmament discussions  and  this  resolution  was
the  first  of  its  kind  since  1946  to  be  sponsored  jointly  by  the
Soviet  Union  and  the  Western   Powers.    Vishinsky  agreed  to
Western  demands  that  any  disarmament  start  with   conven-
tional  armies.  This  Russian  reversal  created  dismay in  Western
military  circles,  and  was  attacked  by  General  Gruenther,   the
head  of  the  NATO  armies,  in  a  speech  the  very  day  after
Vishinsky's.
Our  military leaders  are  fascinated  by  atomic  war  and  have
based  all  their  plans  upon  it.    These  men will  do  their  best  to
prevent  agreement,   but  that  becomes  more  difficult  when   the
Soviets  accept  our  terms.    The  Russians  are  in  a  position  to
force  us  sincerely to  negotiate or stand  exposed  before all man-
kind.    They  are  also  in  a  position  to  negotiate  independently
whether  we wish  to  or not.  The  Austrian treaty,  and  the  de-
nunciation  of  the  Soviet  pacts  with  Britain  and  France,   clear
the  way  for  direct  negotiations  between  the  Russians  and  the
Germans.    The  latter  understand  very  well  what  atomic  war
would  mean  to  Germany, while our  Western  allies understand
very  well  how  dangerous  to  them  would  be  a  separate  agree-
ment  between   the  Germans  and  the  Russians.   We  will   be
forced  to  move toward  peace  whether  we  want  to  or  not.
They,  Too,  Negotiate  from  Strength
We  have  talked  about  negotiating  from  strength,  but  now
both  sides  can  negotiate  from  strength—the  equal  possession
of  the  new  terrible  weapons  of  human  self-destruction.  Pro-
posals  the  Russians  could  not  accept  before,  they  can  accept
now  when  they  too  have the  H  and  A  bomb.   What  they  fear
is  what  we  ought  also  to  fear:  a  war  neither  side  could win,
and  the  rearming  of  the  one  nation  which  might  try  again  for
world  dominion with  the  new  weapons.
It  is  the  duty  of  every  thoughtful  human  being  to  bring
these  Russian  proposals  to  the attention of  their  fellow  citizens,
to  show  how  far  they go  in  embodying  American demands  the
Russians  had  formerly  rejected,  and  to  support  those  forces  in
our  government  which  want  (as  Secretary of  Defense  Wilson
said  at  press  conference  last  week)  a  "cooling  off"  period  in
which  the  momentum  toward war  may be  reversed  and  an  end
of  the arms race negotiated.   There  may not  be another  chance.
IFS  Speaks   Sunday,  May  15  at  11:15  a.m. Before   The  Ethical  Society,  1822 Mass. Ave.,  Washington,  D.  C.
I.F.  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my
Street
City                       ......  ...
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 mi
(To)  Name
Street
City
* $1 extra for  Canada.
E.  Capitol,
sub  for  th<
..Zone.
»re  (money
Wash.  3,  D.  C.
;  enclosed $5:*
State.
enclosed) :
State.
5/18/55
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S. E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED