I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955oct24.pdf

============================================================

On the  Scene  Report  from  The  Perfect  Circle Strike in New Castle,  Indiana
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   HI,   No.  39OCTOBER  24,   1955
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
Will  Labor  Let  the  Clock  Turn  Back  to  Pre-Wagner  Act  Tactics?
Strike-Breaking  By  Martial  Law
New   Castle,  Indiana
New  Castle,  in  central  Indiana,  near the  Ohio  border,  is on
a  branch  line  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  between   Chicago
and  Cincinnati.  Three  trains  a  day going  each  way make  the
stop.   When  I  dropped  off late  Saturday afternoon  and  walked
through  the  high  grass  to  the  narrow  station  platform,  the
only visible signs of martial law were two National Guardsmen,
one  with  adolescent  acne.   Their  steel  helmets  and  their  jeep
were  marked  in  white,  "Military  Police,"  and  they  had  the
sheepish  look which Americans, an  ineradicably civilian people,
seem  to  acquire  in  uniform.    When  I  asked  one  of  them  if
New  Castle  had  a hotel,  he  seemed  as much of  a stranger as  I.
The  lone  taxi  driver  was lugubrious.   The  taverns had  been
closed  down  by  a  military  order  prohibiting  all  sale  of  alco-
holic  beverages.   In  addition,  as  a  result  of  some  trouble  with
teen  agers  the  night  before,  a  curfew  had  just  been  issued,
ordering  residents  under  18  off  the  streets  at  10:30  p.m.  and
all  others  before  midnight.   New  Castle,  ordinarily  a  lively
place  on  Saturday, was  in  for  a  dull  night.   The  neon  lights
were  going  on  but  there  were  few  people  on  the  streets  as we
drove  up  to  the  local  hotel,  the  Plaza,  a  comfortable  faded
establishment  of  Grover  Cleveland  era  vintage.   The  elderly
gentleman  who served  as room  clerk,  switchboard operator  and
bellboy  was  still  exhilirated   by  the  after   effects  of  the  strike
shootings  at  the  Perfect  Circle  Foundry  the  week  before.  This
—by  actual  count—had  brought  42  reporters  and  camera men
to  a  town founded  in  1822  but  hitherto  overlooked  by history.
Like  Occupied  Territory
Outside,  the  scene  might  have  been  that  in  any  one  of  a
thousand   small.  Midwestern  towns.    The  county  courthouse,
with  its  monstrously  gloomy  tower  and  the  standard  soldier
monument  on  the  lawn,  was an  architect's  nightmare.  Most  of
the  stores  were  closed  and  there  was little  traffic.    A  National
Guardsman  smoking  a  pipe  went  by with  a  girl,  and  an  occa-
sional  jeep  passed  on  patrol.   The  last  time  I  covered  a  town
under  martial law was Jerusalem  in  1947,  and  I  headed  down
Main  Street  toward  the  city  hall  for  a curfew  pass.  There was
a  jeep  out  front,  and  a  20-year-old  six-foot  Guardsman   from
Indianapolis   on  duty  outside.   The  police   sergeant   referred
me  to  the  "Provost  Marshal"  on  the  second  floor.
There  the  military  had  taken  over,  with  maps,  pins  and
charts.   The  maps  showed  the  martial  law  area  of  Henry  and
Wayne  counties;  the  pins,  the  road  blocks;  the  charts,  the  pub-
lic  meetings  and  demonstrations  for  which  permits  had  been
issued.   The  Cub  Scouts  were 'meeting  Tuesday  at  1400  hours
in  the  Holland  House,  the  Audubon  Society  on  Thursday  at
2030  hours  and  the  Baptist  Church  had  obtained  permission
for  a  hay  ride  on  Saturday  night,  with  20  couples   expected.
The  youthful  blond  Major  Wilson  in  charge  never  seemed  to
have  heard  of  curfew  passes  for  the  press  but  was  otherwise
in  his  element.   It  turned  out  that  he  had  been  an  American
Occupation  officer  in  Linz,  Austria, after  the  war  and  this  was
just  another  assignment  in  handling  occupied  territory.    "You
have  to  work  through  the  existing  authorities,"   he  expkined
about  the  police  operating  as usual  downstairs.  In  the  civilian
years  between  Occupied  Linz  and  Occupied  New  Castle,  the
Major  had  settled  down as a hardware  salesman.
Four  blocks  away  on  North  Main  Street  at  the  headquar-
ters  of  the  United  Automobile  Workers  there  was  less  affabil-
ity.   The  union  hall  is  a  new  solid  brick  one  story-and-base-
ment  building  set  high  above  the  street  with  small  windows
like  a  fortress.   On  the  doors  at  the  top  of  a  flight  of  stairs
were  two  notices,  the  new  curfew  order,  signed  by  Howard  S.
Wilcox,  Colonel,  Indiana National  Guard,  and  a  union  notice
declaring  that  for  the  duration  of  the  emergency  all   persons
entering  the  building  must  identify  themselves.   Just  inside  the
door  in  the  darkened  hall  were  four  union  men  sitting   on
guard.   They  were  willing  to  identify   themselves  as  strikers
from  the  Perfect  Circle  plant  but  beyond  that  sat  in  glum  and
awkward   silence,  unwilling  to  answer   questions.    "All   the
stories about us have been one-sided,"  one of  them  complained.
Only  Carl  Batsfield,  president  of  the  local,  could  give out  any
information.   Where  was  he?   Out  of  town.   When   was  he
expected  back?  Maybe tonight,  maybe  tomorrow.
Plant  Approaches  Guarded
A  Christian  Science  Monitor  reporter  came  along  but  had
no  better  luck  in  trying to  break  the  ice.  We  decided  to  drive
off  in his  car  to  the  scene of  the  shootings  which  brought  mar-
tial  law.  We  drove  up  25th  street  to  Plum  and  were  turning
down  toward  the  Perfect  Grcle  Foundry  plant  when  we  were
stopped  by  two  guardsmen  on  the  corner.   One  had  an  M-l
gun  slung  over his shoulder, the other  a walkie-talkie.   No  one,
we  were  told, was allowed  to  approach  the  plant  without  spe-
cial  permission.  A  sergeant  drove up  in  a  jeep,  inspected   the
glove  compartment  and  trunk  of  the  car,  looked  at  our  creden-
tials  and finally let  us go through.   Outside  the  darkened  plant
a handful of guardsmen  sentries  with  wool  scarves  pulled  over
their  helmets in the cold  night  air walked  up and  down  in  their
badly  fitting  uniforms,  looking  like  Bill  Mauldin   characters.
A  few  houses  down  the  street  the  wife  of  one  of  the  strik-
ers  gave us her  version  of  the  shooting  and  showed  us a  bullet
hole  in  the  wall  of  one  room,  just  above  the  children's  beds.
The  one story clapboard  four  room house  was bare and  poverty
stricken.  She and  her  husband  had  four  children  at  home  with
them  and  were originally,  like many of  the  workers  here,  from
Kentucky.   She insisted  in  her  broad  Southern  accent  that  the
1  1
3  5 .9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  October 64,19SS
Atavistic  Incident  or  A  New  Pattern  for  Labor  Relations?
shooting had  begun  from  within  the  struck  plant  but  admitted
"when  they  started.shootin'  our  men  decided  to  go  home  and
get  their  shootin'  arns,   too."
II
This  industrial  town  of  18,000 is the  scene  of  an  odd  strike.
The  intransigeance  of  the  employers  and  the  militancy of  the
workers  are  like  something  out of  the  pages  of  the pre-Wagner
Act  past.  So is the  use  of  the  labor  injunction, the  police,  the
National  Guard  and  then  martial  law  in  a  classic  attempt  at
strike-breaking.  In  this  sense,  the  Perfect  Circle  strike'is  more
than  a  freak,  an  atavistic  incident  in  labor  relations.   If   the
strike  is  broken,  Perfect  Circle  may  become  a  foretaste  of  the
future  instead  of  an  unexpected  page  from  the  past.   If   for
the  first  time  in  many  years  employers  again  succeed  in  break-
ing  a  strike  by martial  law,  they may be  encouraged—especial-
ly  if  business  slackens off—to  try  the  same  formula  elsewhere.
This  is  why  New  Castle  deserves  national  attention,  and  the
Perfect  Grcle strikers the support  of  the entire labor  movement.
Small  Town   Barons
The  story really  begins  some  15 miles east  of here  in  Hagers-
town,  not  much  more  than  an  overgrown  village,  with   some
1800  population.  This,  too,  is under  martial  law. Whether  one
drives in from  New  Castle to the  west or from  Richmond some
15 miles  east,  the  traveller  stopping  while National  Guardsmen
search   his  car  for   arms  and   liquor,   catches  a   glimpse   of
baronial   mansions  unexpected   in  a  small  midwestern  town.
These  are  the  homes  of  the  Teetors,  who  dominate  Hagers-
town  and  own  Perfect  Circle,  its  only  industry.   An  earlier
generation   of   Teetors   had   a   bicycle  shop   in   Hagerstown,
switched  to  making  the  old  fashioned  hand  operated  railroad
flatcars,  and  then,  with  the  rise  of  the  automobile,  to  piston
rings,  their  present  specialty.    They  produce  a  fourth  of  the
rings  used  in  the  automobile  industry.   There  were  four  or
five Teetor  brothers,  and  their  children  run  the  company.  .
From  the  road  block  on  the  west  side  of  the  town,  set  high
on  a  wide  lawn  curving  upward  is  the  mansion  of   Ralph
Teetor,  blind  since five, who  began  as chief  engineer  with  the
company  in  1919  and  has been  its  president  since  1946.   He  is
a  Republican,  a  32d  degree  Mason  and  a  trustee  of  Earlham,
the  famous  Quaker  college   in  nearby  Richmond.   From  the
road  block  at  the  other  end  of  town  one  can  catch  a  glimpse
through   the  trees  of  three  other  Teetor  mansions,  those  of
Harry,  Donald  and  Lothair.
Shot  Out  of   Office
Cousin  Ralph  is  the  engineering  genius,  Lothair  the  head
of  the  family  company.  Lothair was born  in  Hagerstown.   He
served  in  the  Navy  in  the  first  World  War,  began  as  a  clerk
with  the  family  concern  in  1920,'became  president  in   1938
and  chairman  of  the  board  in  1946.   He  was  elected   president
of  the  Indiana State Chamber  of  Commerce in  1940,  a director
of  the  National  Association of  Manufacturers (1942-49),  and
served  two  terms  in  the  State  Legislature  (1945-47  and  1949-
51).    He  lists  himself  as  a  Republican,  a  Christian  Scientist
and  a Mason.   In  October,  1953,  he  became Assistant Secretary
of  Commerce  in  Washington,  distinguishing  himself  there  as
in  Indianapolis  by  his  craggy  rightist  anti-union  views.   The
day  after  the  shooting  in  New  Castle,  Secretary of  Commerce
Reverse  Play  on  the  Usual   Charge
"One  of  the  principal difficulties  in  the  relations  be-
tween  the  Perfect  Circle  Company  and its  employees  is
the  acceptance  by  the  management  of  the  company of
the  theory  of  the class  struggle.   UAW-CIO  representa-
tives  who  have  participated  in  negotiations  with  this
management   can  testify   that   their  dedication  to  the
theory  of  class  warfare  is  just  as  strong  as  that  of  the
Communist   Party—and   the   incident  today   at   New
Castle  is  an  evidence  of  that  fact."
—From  telegram of  protest sent  by  Walter  Reuther
of  the  UAW  after   the  Perfect   Circle shootings
to  Secretary   of  Labor  Mitchell  and  Governor
Craig  of  Indiana.
Weeks  denied  that  Teetor  was being  "dropped,"  but  admitted
he  was  resigning.   Weeks said  this was in  pursuance  of  a  deci-
sion  made  in April. The shots made  Teetor a political liability.
The  original  Teetor  plant  in  Hagerstown,  with  about  650
production   workers,   machines  the   piston   rings   cast  at   the
New   Castle   foundry,  which   employs   about   250   production
workers.    In   Richmond  the   company  has  two  new   plants,
a  foundry  employing  about  70  workers  and  a machining  plant
employing  about  250.  All  are on  strike.  Their  labor  relations
from  the  beginning  have  been  a  story  of  bitter  struggle.   The
Teetors  have  tried  to  break  the  UAW-CIO  not  only  by  "inde-
pendent"  unionism  but  by  playing  A.  F.  of  L.  against   CIO
without  success.   There have  been  several  strikes  and  de-certi-
fication  elections.   To  the  handful  of  workers  and  their fam-
ilies  having  breakfast  in  the  sunny  union  hall  at  Hagerstown
Sunday  morning,  the  current  strike  is  only  a  new  chapter  in
a  long  effort  to  break  their  union.   The  military  jeeps  parked
in  front  of  the  fire  house  just  behind  the  union  hall  are  only
other  evidence  of  Teetor  political  power.   Martial  law  covers
all  of  Henry  County,  Hagerstown  in  adjoining  Wayne  Coun-
ty,  and  a  two  mile  radius  around  the  Teetor  plants  in  the
larger  city  of  Richmond,  where  the  scene  around  the  Teetor
plants  is  bright  with  khaki.    This  is  how  "labor  relations"
were  conducted  a  generation   ago.
Anti  Union  Mayor
Hagerstown  is at  the  mercy  of  the  Teetors.   Richmond  with
its  small  plants  has never  been  too strong  a  union  town.   New
Castle  is the  labor  citadel  in  this  struggle  and  one  of  the  issues
is  the  insistence  of  the  UAW  that  the  Teetors  negotiate  a
company-wide  contract.   The  UAW  wants  a  union  shop  while
the  Teetors  have  long  been  pressing  at  Indianapolis  for  a
"right  to work"  law.  The  UAW  also  wants to  close  the  40  to
60  cents  an  hour  wage  differential  between  Perfect  Circle  and
the  other plants  in New  Castle.   "A  sweeper  at  Chrysler,"  one
New  Castle  worker  said,  "gets  as  much  as  a  skilled  machine
operator   at  Perfect  Circle."
Chrysler,  with  its  4,000  employes   (all  but  50 of  them  non-
union  before the present union shop was won),  is New  Castle's
biggest   industry.    This  town   of   18,000   has   almost   6,000
unionized  workers,  half  of  whom  live  inside  the  city  of  New
Castle.    They  can  be  but  are  not  always  a  political   power.
Under  the  Democratic Mayor  labor  failed  to  support  for  re-
election   four   years   ago,   the   police   did   not   interfere   with
picketing  when  Perfect  Circle  was  shut  down  in  1949  nor  in
1950  when  Chrysler  was  shut  down  for   104  days  and  only
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'* Weekly,  October 14,195$
Why  and  How  Those  Shootings  Occurred   on  October  5
maintenance   workers  were  allowed   through   the  picket   line.
It  is  the  present  Mayor,  Paul  McCormack,  an  insurance  man
by  profession,  the  Republican  incumbent,  whom  labor  blames
for  the  attempt  to  break  the  Perfect  Circle  strike  by  violence,
and  McCormack  comes  up  for  reelection  November  7.
HI
Indiana   is  a  Republican  State  but  many  of   its   industrial
towns   have  Democratic   pro-labor   Mayors.    In  .recent   years,
during  strikes  at  Terre  Haute  and  Connersville,  when  "scabs"
were  brought  in,  the  Mayors  had  them  shipped  out  of  town
under  police escort.  The  Perfect  Circle  strike has been  marked
by  planned  strike-breaking   almost  from  the  beginning.   It  be-
gan  on July  25 and  for  several  weeks  the pknt  at  New  Castle
was shut  down.  Then  strike-breakers  were  recruited  and  about
three  weeks  later,  when  they  tried  to  get  through  the  picket
line with  police  help,  there was trouble.  This gave  the company
its  opportunity  to  obtain  an  injunction on  the  ground  that  the
picketing   was  not   peaceful.    It  may  be  significant  that   the
Teetors had to go outside Henry  County.to  get that  injunction.
Circuit  Judge  W.   Ratliff   of   this  county  showed  his   mettle
when   he   refused   to   hold   court  at   all  under,  martial   law.
The  injunction  limited  the  number  of  pickets  to  five,  but  as
the  strike  dragged  on  the  number of  pickets  began  to  increase
and   .ill   feeling   grew   as  the   police   took   strikebreakers  in
and  out  of  the  plant.
On  September  27 there  was a line  of  about  100 men around
the plant when  several  panel trucks  and  a  miDc truck  drove  up.
Out  came  the  entire  police  force  of  New  Castle,  and  not  only
broke  up  the  picket  line  but  for  good  measure beat  up  workers
watching  from  their   lawns  on  Plum  street.     In   reserve  at
Baker  Park,  in  case  the  situation  got  beyond  the  local  police,
was  a  contingent   of   state   police.     They   did   not   have   to
be  called.    Fifty  strikers  were  arrested  that  day  by  the  local
police,  and  the  next  week  35 strikers,  including  Carl Batsfield,
president  of  the  Perfect  Circle  local,  received  form  notices  ad-
vising  them  of  their  discharge  for  improper  conduct  on  com-
pany  premises.   This  set  off  the  demonstration  of  October   5.
Met  With  Gunfire
On   the  morning  of   October   5  several  thousand  demon-
strators  from  o.ther  plants  and  surrounding  communities  con-
verged  on  the  plant.   Police  posted  at  the  entrances  of  Plum
and  Walnut   streets  did  not  risk  an  attempt  to  stop   them.
That  day there  were  no  state  police  in  reserve.    They  poured
down  the  two  streets  singing  "solidarity  forever"  and  as they
approached  the  plant  they  were  met with  gunfire  from  within
it.    At  least   four  demonstrators  were  hit   and   the  strikers
were  enraged  when  word  spread  shortly  after  that  Bob  Ford,
a  Chrysler  worker,  had  died  of  his  wounds.  This  false  report
was  even  carried  in  a  news  broadcast  and  soon  swelled   the
size  of  the  demonstration.   A  majority   of  the  workers  here
are  from  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  accustomed   to  firearms.
They  went  home—as  the  lady  said—for  their  "shootin" arns"
and  many  did  not  live  more  than  a  few  doors  away.
The  rest  has  been  well  covered.    It  took  an  appeal   from
the  State  Police  and  then  from   the  Lieutenant  Governor  to
win  a. two  hour  truce  from  the  workers  in  which  to  disarm
and  evacuate  the  strike-breakers  and  shut  down the pknt.  An
attempt  was made  to mediate but  the  company  held  out  against
.1  6  .1
An  Anti-Union   Crusade
"The   people  who  have  made  the  operation  of   the
foundry  possible  have,  of  course,  helped  the  company
take care  of  their customer commitments and helped in-
sure  jobs  for  the  future, but in  addition  to  that they  are
making a personal contribution to the crusade which will
undoubtedly  eventually  result  in  the  passage   of  laws
establishing   the  right  of  an  individual to  work  where
he  pleases  without paying  tribute  to  anyone."
—Letter    of    encouragement   for    strike-breakers
posted  October  12  on  the  bulletin  board  of  the
strike-bound   Perfect    Circle  foundry   in   New
Castle,  Ind.,  from   William  B.   Prosser,  vice
president  and  general manager of  the  company.
a  union  shop  "as  a  matter  of  principle."    It  was  the  Mayor
who  went  over  the  Lieutenant  Governor's   head  to   Governor
George  N.  Craig  and  on  October  10 martial  kw  was  imposed.
Under  cover of National  Guard  guns  the  plants  were  reopened
with  strikebreakers.
The  scene  here in New  Castle was peaceful  on  Sunday  morn-
ing.  Plum  street with  its one story frame  houses on  wide-spaced
green  lawns,  was bright with  flowers.  At  the  end  of  the  street
across  from   the  plant  were  the  five  folding  chairs  under  a
clump of  trees with  an old  iron  stove in  the  center, waiting  for
the  five  permitted  pickets  to  return  on  Monday  morning.   On
the left was a high  yellow water tower with  "Perfect  Circle"  on
it  in  black  letters  and  over  toward  the  right  behind  the  wire
fence  were  three  big  ugly  Sherman  tanks  and  two half   tracks.
The  young  Lieutenant  in  charge  was polite  but  would  answer
no  questions.   "How  many  of  your  men  are  union  members?"
I  asked  him.  He  blushed,  "I  can't  answer  that  one,  either."
Not  Like  The  Old  Days
The  Teetor  family  would  turn  back  the  clock.  The  Interna-
tional  UAW  representative who met me at  the union  hall  after
church  on Sunday with his  new tweed coat,  neatly clipped  mus-
tache  and  tan  kid   gloves   might   have  stepped   off   Madison
Avenue,  but  he  has  seniority  as  a  machine  operator   in  the
Chrysler  plant  here  which  goes  back  to   1936  when  Teetors
were  the  rule  and  not  the  exception.   "I  don't  think  our  mem-
bers  are  going   to  install  bloody  piston  rings,"  William  F.
Caldwell,  the  UAW   representative,  summed  it  up  for  me.
Ford,  General Motors,  Chrysler and  International  Harvester  all
use  Perfect  Circle  rings,  and  all  are  UAW   strongholds.
Twenty   years  ago  the  Teetors  might   have   starved   their
workers  out.    Today  a  family  with  five  children  are  allowed
$30  a  week  by  the  union  for  groceries  and  their  utility  bills
are  paid  for them. Archie H. Hill, the union's  Negro  sergeant-
at-arms,   recalled  that   in   1934   when  he  first  joined  up   at
Chrysler  he was drawing only $32  in pay every two  weeks.  The
violent'effort  at  union-busting  has  suddenly  recalled  the  old
days  vividly  to  trade  unionists  grown  sedate  and   respectable;
there  is  an  upsurge  of  the  old  militancy  here.    Times  have
changed,  and  labor  will  fight  to  keep  them   changed.
On  a bronze plaque  in  the  building,  signed  by the  executive
board, Hill's name among them,  is a memorial  commemorating
the  104-day  Chrysler  strike  in  1950.    "With  our  hands,"  it
says,  "we  build  automobiles.    With  our  hearts  we  build  a
better   tomorrow."     This   is  the   tomorrow   at  stake   in   the
strike  at  Perfect  Circle.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Weekly, October H,  I9SS
The  Supreme  Court  Agrees to  Hear  Its  First  Smith  Act  Appeal  Since Dennis
Barrows Dunham Acquitted—A Challenge  to  Philadelphia's  Conscience
The  acquittal  of  Professor   Barrows  Dunham  in  Federal
court  here last week was a defeat for  the  House Un-American
Activities   Committee  and  the  Department  of  Justice.    The
Fifth  amendment was never more sweepingly invoked than  by
Professor   Dunham.   When  called  before  the  committee  two
years  ago,  he  refused  to  do  more  than  give  his  name,  and
the  place  and  time  of his  birth.  When he  declined  to  answer
.questions  as  to  his  educational  background  and  occupation,
he  was  held  in  contempt.    The  government  argued  that  the
answers  to  these  questions  were  known  and  could  not  have
been  incriminating.   But  Judge  Joseph  C. MeGarraghy ruled
that  the  nature  of  the  investigation  and  its  setting  justified
Professor  Dunham.
In  deciding  that  Professor  Dunham had  properly  invoked
the   privilege,  Judge   MeGarraghy   in   effect   overruled   the
trustees  of  Temple  University  in  Philadelphia.    When  they
dismissed  Professor  Dunham, they  did so on the  ground  that
he  had  "misused"  the  privilege.   It   would  have  been  more
seemly  to  wait  until  that  question  had  been  decided  by  the
courts.   But  what  happens  now that  the  trustees: have  been
declared  in  error?
This  is  a  challenge  to  the  academic  profession  and  to  the
people  of  the  Philadelphia  area.   A  full  professor,   head  of
his department, a philosopher  of  distinction,  author  of several
well-known  works,   was   dismissed   from   his   post,  despite
tenure, on legal  grounds  which have failed  to  be sustained' in
court.   Since  the  trustees  misread  the  law,  just.'ce  calls  for
Professor   Dunham's  reinstatement.   We  urge  the  formation
of  a  committee  in  Philadelphia  for  this  specific  purpose;  a
mass meeting  to  bring  pressure  on the  trustees.  Would  some
energetic  readers  in   Philadelphia   start   the   ball   rolling?
The   Weekly    is   ready   to   sponsor   the   meeting   if   local
organizations  are  too  timorous.
In  that  almost   empty  courtroom  last   Wednesday  (who
cares  about  another   Professor   on  trial?),  with  Committee
Counsel  Frank  S. Tavenner, Jr.,  on the  witness  stand,'  it  was
an  experience  to hear  him read  into  the  record  the  testimony
of  Professors   who  "cooperated"  and  again  to  live  through
the  anguished  moments our  latter  day  inquisitors  imposed on
scholars  and teachers, bartering  safety  for  self-respect.    Pro-
fessor  Dunham was  one  of  that  handful  who  came  through
the  ordeal  with  honor  in  a  period  when few  American intel-
lectuals  showed much  in  the  way  of  guts.
*       *          *
As the  Supreme Court opened last  week there  were  further
indications  of  a  changing climate of judicial opinion.  Though
the  Court  in  recent  years  has  frowned  on  "friends   of  the
German  Heroes  Return
"Bonn,  Oct. 17—Prof.  Karl  Glauberg,  head  of  the  so-
called  experimental  medical  center  in   the  Auschwitz
extermination camp,  returned last Thursday  from Soviet
captivity  in  a  convoy  of  598 war  prisoners.  .  * .
"Dr.   Glauberg   told  reporters  for   the   Suddeutsche
Zeitung  .  .  .  that  Himmler  had  assigned  400  Jewish
women prisoners to him for experiments in  sterilization.
.  . . Dr. Glauberg  spoke of hs experiments  with  a  sense
of  scientific  achievement and appeared to be inordinately
proud  of  his  work.  .  . .
"Foreign   reporters  who  saw   the   first   arrivals  at
Camp  Friedland  said privately  on  their  return  to  Bonn
they  had the  impression  that the  first  convoy included a
substantial number of  men who had been in special units
detailed  for  extermination  work  among  civilians  and
prisoners  of  war."
—N.  Y.  Times, Oct. 8, Late  City  Edition  only.
Odd that reporters  should take  to  reporting  "private-
ly."  Why the  protective  curtain  around these "heroes"?
court" briefs,  it  agreed  to  receive  that  offered  by 360 citizens
in   the   pending   case   which   may   decide   the   fate   of   the
McCarran  Act.
The  Court  also  agreed,  for  the  first  time  since  the  original
Dennis  case,  to  hear  a  Smith  Act  appeal.   The  14 convicted
California   Communists  are  to  have  a  hearing  denied  the
"second  string"  New York  and  Baltimore   defendants.
Freedom  of  the  Press  Angle
The  California  cases  have  one  unusual  feature.    Augustin
Donovan,  a  leading  member  of  the  State  Bar   and  of   the
Knights  of  Columbus, will  argue  as  attorney, without  com-
pensation  for  two of  the  defendants,  Al  Richmond and  Philip
M.  Connelly.  Both  are  editors  of  the  Daily  People's   World.
When John  Gates,  editor  of  the  Daily  Worker, was  convicted
in  the  first  Smith  Act  case,  it  could  be  argued  that  he  was
convicted  not  as  a  Communist  editor  but  as  a  member of
the  party's  Central   Committee.
But  the   activities   of  Richmond  and   Connelly  for   years
have  been those of  newspapermen.  Sixty-eight  issues  of  their
paper  were  put  in  evidence.   Donovan  in  his  petition  for  a
hearing  said  "not  a  single  word"  advocating  overthrow  was
turned  up  by  the  government.   His  argument  will  be that  if
unlawful  activities  may  be  inferred  from  writings  in  them-
selves  legitimate,   then  freedom  of  the  press  is  endangered.
Let  Vs  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  of   This  Issue  to  A  Labor  Union  Friend
L  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City                                            ..Zone           State.
Enter gift sub for  $2 (6  mos.) or $4 (1 yr.) additional:
(To)  Name            _
Street
City                                               Zone           State
* SI extra for  Canada.                                                 10/24/55
/.  F. Stone'8  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St..  S.  E.
Washington  3,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED