I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jul25.pdf

============================================================

The  Moral  Collapse  of  the  New  York Times  and  the  Washington  Post,  See  Page  Two
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 28
JULY  25,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Moscow's   Real   Price  for  A  Reunited   Germany
Written  at Press Time,  Early  Thursday, July  21.
Whatever   the  final  outcome  at  Geneva,  the  Germans  have
already  lost  the  meeting  at  the  summit.   The  fate  of  Europe  is
being  decided  without  them;  the  victors  of  the  last  war  have
met  in  that  concord  which  it  has  been  a  major  objective  of
German  foreign  policy  since  1945  to  prevent.   The  East-West
tension  which  has  made  possible  Germany's  phenomenal  re-
covery  as an  American  protege  has  been  lessened.
Adenauer's constant theme has been  that the Western  powers
must  not  relax  their  pressure  on  Russia  unless  she  first  agrees
to permit the  Reich  to be reunited and  rearmed  as a member of
NATO.  This  point of  view seemed to  have  won  a preliminary
victory  when  the  Russians accepted  an  agenda  that  put  reunifi-
cation   first.   The   Russians  would   have   reversed   the   order.
Their  approach  to  Geneva  was  to  get  a  relaxation   of  tension
first.  In  effect,  despite the  agenda,  they won  their  point.   Ger-
many  has  already  been  bypassed,  and  if  there  should   be  an
agreement  on  the  Reich  it  will  only  be  as the  result  of  conces-
sions  on  trade,  arms  and  security which  loosen  the  cold  war
noose  around  the  Soviet  bloc.
Adenauer  is concerned with the  recovery  of  the  Oder-Neisse
lands  and  what was  East Prussia.  He  sees that  only  a rearmed
Germany,  leading  a  NATO  coalition,  in  belligerent   posture,
could  force  the  Russians to  partition Poland  again  and  give  up
East  Prussia.   If  the  world  settles  down  to  peace  and  co-exist-
ence  before the  Eastern lands  are recovered,  they may never  be
recovered.   This  is  why  Adenauer  feared  the  meeting  at  the
summit,  whispered  that  if  we  made  peace  in  Europe  it  would
only  free  Soviet  resources  for  use  against  us  in  the  Far  East.
The   recovery  of   the   lost  territories   requires   tension,   bluff,
threat  and  the  risk  of  world  war  by  the  West  on  Germany's
behalf.   Geneva  has  already  shown  that  this  is  a  risk  Britain
and  France  do  not  intend  to  take.
The  First  Battle  Lost
The  battle  for  the  maintenance of  tension  was  lost  when  the
Big  Four,  having  failed  to  agree  on  the  reunification of  Ger-
many,  passed  on  to  the  other  subjects  of  the  agenda.   But  if
Adenauer—and  his  faithful   Achates,  John  Foster—had  their
way,   that  would  have  ended  the  discussion.   To  discuss  the
lifting  of  the  trade  embargo  and  the  lightening  of  the  arms
race burden  on  the  Soviet  bloc when  there  has  been  no  agree-
ment  on  Germany  is  from  Bonn's  point  of  view  to  give  up  its
bargaining  power.
Worse  than  that  was  to  discuss  security  in  the  terms  that
Eden  and  Faure  discussed  it.  The  State  Department's  obvious
anger  over  the  Eden and  Faure  speeches  is understandable.  For
what  both  were  trying  to  do  was  to  maintain   in  appearance
their  united  front  with Washington  for  a rearmed Germany  in
NATO while hedging  NATO  about with so many promises of
mutual  border  guarantees  and  demilitarized  zones  as to make  it
8  *                                                      ' '
more  a  means  of  restricting  Germany  than  threatening  Russia.
The  Russians  are  cool  to  the  elaborate  compromises  offered
by Eden  (echoing proposals first made  by the  Belgian  Van  Zee-
land  in  1953)   because  they  want  a  bigger  price  for  East  Ger-
many  than  an  Eastern  Locarno.   The  pre-war  Western   Locarno
did  not  keep  Hitler  from  marching  into  the  demilitarized zone
of  the  Rhineland  and  tearing up  an  earlier  system of arms limi-
tation  imposed  on  Germany;  the  inspectorial  machinery set  up
at   Versailles   for   enforcement   of   armament   limitation   was
flouted  and  gulled   by  "good"  Germans   long  before  Hitler.
The  earlier  Locarno  lasted  only  until  the  Germans  felt  strong
enough  to  ignore  it.   This  is  ancient  history  neither  in  Paris
nor  in  Moscow.
An Unwanted  Broker
There  is another  reason  for  a  Russian  coolness  which seems
to  have  angered  Eden.   If  they  are  going  to  buy  a  system  of
mutual  guarantees  and  demilitarized   zones  they  don't  want  to
buy  it  through  a middle man.  They  want  to  buy it  direct  from
Eisenhower  because  only Eisenhower can  pay an  adequate price
for  it.   And unless  I am very much mistaken what the Russians
would  prefer  is not  a  direct  deal  with  the  Germans—they  have
dealt  with  the  Germans  before,  and  recall  some  bitter  experi-
ence—but  a  direct deal  with  Washington  for  trade  and  credits
on a large  scale.
We  are  back to where we were  ten  years  ago when  the  Rus-
sians  would  have  been  glad  to  settle  for  a  lend-lease  program
extended  into  the  postwar  period.  There would  have  been  no
need  for  them  to  seal  off  the  East  and  to  cart  off  second-hand
German  equipment  in  gloomy  isolation  if  they  could  have  ob-
tained  U.  S. trade  credits  for  recovery and  reconstruction.   The
Russians  today  need  East-West   trade  on  a  scale  only  credit
can  make  possible.  If  Washington  opened  the  door  to  that,  if
some new  type of  Marshall  Plan  linked  with  disarmament and
open  to  East  as well  as West  were made  available,  Eisenhower
could  have  Germany on  a  platter.
The  Russians dare  not  avow  this  until  the  atmosphere  im-
proves,  but to  improve  the  atmosphere  they  must  not  let  Eisen-
hower   return   empty-handed.   The   biggest    development   at
Geneva  is the way he  has  slowly extricated  himself  from  proto-
col  and  positional  papers.   He  is  no  longer  Dulles's  prisoner.
The  "alarm"  system he  advocates against  a  nuclear  Pearl  Har-
bor  is  close  to  the  May  10  proposals  of  the  Russians;  his  re-
turn  to  Europe  has  refreshed  his  own vivid knowledge  of  why
the  Germans  are  still  feared.  There  is  reason  to  suspect  that
his  own  thinking  is  closer  to  Eden's  than  to  Dulles's.   Agree-
ment  is  possible.   The  beginnings  of  it  are  essential  and  must
be  laid firmly enough  to  resist  the  termites  who will  begin  to
eat  away  at  it  as  soon  as  the  meeting  at  the  summit  is  over.
And   to  resist  the  shocks  coming  from  the  Far East,  where  a
renewed  crisis  is in  the  making.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  25-, 1955
Even  the  Newspaper  Guild  Compromises  The  Fundamental  Principles  of  A  Free  Press
The  Moral  Collapse  of  the  New  York   Times  and  the   Washington   Post
Suppose  Congress  were  to  pass  a  law  forbidding  Commu-
nists  to  work  on newspapers.  Suppose  it  were  to provide  for
an  enforcing  agency  to  make  sure that  no  secret  Communists
evaded  the  law.   Suppose  no man  could  work  on  a  newspaper
without  first  appearing  before  this  agency  for  a  hearing and
obtaining from  it  a  certificate  of clearance,  attesting his  free-
dom from  ideological  taint.  Is  there  anyone  who doubts  that
such  a  law  would  be unconstitutional?   Yet  is  not  the  Senate
Internal  Security   Committee  under  Senator   Eastland  begin-
ning  to  act  as  if  there  were  such  a  law,  and  as  if  Congress
had  authorized  it  to  screen  newspapermen?
Is  it  necessary  at  this late  date to  spell  out the  meaning of
such  a  screening   process  for   freedom   of  the  press  in  this
country?   There  are  no radicals  and  few liberals  still  writing
on  American  newspapers.    To  the  paranoid  mentalities  that
run  the  Congressional  witch  hunting  committees, hidden  Left-
ists  can  however  be  discerned.   To  them  any  deviation  from
fanatic  anti-Communism,  any  tendency  to  defend  civil  liber-
ties,  any  disposition  to  question  the  stereotypes   of  the  cold
war  are  suspect.
The  Real  Target
The  witch hunters are  not  afraid  of the  Daily  Worker.   The
peripheral  anti  cold war  press  is  too  small  to  be a  menace  to
them.   What  they   are  afraid  of,  what  bulks  large  in  their
haunted  minds, are  those  newspapers  and  newspapermen who
still  reach  a  large  audience,  .who outwardly  at  least  conform
to  current  cold  war  stereotypes  but  who every  now and  then
put  in  a  plea  for  peace  or  a  protest  against  the  excesses  of
"McCarthyism."   These  are  the  voices  they  would like  to  "ex-
pose"  and  silence.   These  respectables  are  what  David  Law-
rence  means  when  he  speaks  of  "Left-wing   commentators."
Yet as  the  Eastland  committee  continues to put  more  news-
papermen  into  the  pillory, it  evokes only  a  numbed silence on
the  part  of  editors.   Those  few  who  have  spoken  out  have
done  so in  timid  and  confused  quavers.   We reprint  two  sam-
ples  on  this  page  today,, one  from  the  Washington  Post  and
the  other from the  New  York  Post.  The latter  thinks  the New
York  Times  and  the  New  York  Daily  News  "erred"  but  does
not  challenge  the  committee's  right  to  engage  in  ideological
inquisition.
Yet  no other  newspaper  has  gone  as  far  as  the  meek  little
protest from  the  New  York  Post.  The  Washington  Post came
to  the  defense  of  the  New  York   Times  in  an  editorial    (see
excerpts    below)   which   merely   serves   to   demonstrate   the
moral  collapse  of  both.   The  Washington  Post  praised   Har-
vard  when  the  university  on  demand  of  a  Senate  committee
refused  to  discharge  Dr.  Wendell  C. Furry.   Dr.  Furry  had
admitted  that  he had  been a  Communist but  declined  to  name
others.   Melvin  L. Barnet  took virtually  the  same  position;  he
"In  the  absence  of  any  fuller  explanations, it  would
appear  that  Barnet  and  Gordon  each  was  fired  for  in-
voking   a   Constitutional  safeguard   which   cloaks   all
Americans.  The Post  has  no violent  enthusiasm  for peo-
ple  who  take  the  Fifth  .  .  .  but  we're  not  happy  about
what  the  Times  and  the  News  have  done.   Unless  the
two  papers had more  compelling  reasons  for  the  firings
than  appear  on  the  surface, we  think  they  have erred."
—New  York  Post  editorial,  July  17.
said  he  had  not  been  a  Communist since  early   1942,  but  in-
voked  the  Fifth  to  avoid  asking  questions  about  himself  and
his  associates  in  the  earlier  period.
The  Washington  Post  says  the  Barnet  case  is  different  be-
cause,  among  other  things,  "The  Times  made  its  decision  to
discharge   Barnet  without   demand  or   pressure   from   Con-
gress."   The  truth  is  that  Arthur   Hays  Sulzberger  jumped
through  the  hoops so quickly  that  the  committee did  not  have
time  to  demand Barnet's  discharge.   Barnet  was on the  stand
at  a  morning  session;  when  he  stepped   down  he  was  told
there  was  a  message  for  him  at  the  Times  bureau  here  in
Washington;   the   message   was  a  letter  of  discharge   from
Sulzberger.   A  copy  was  rushed   by  messenger   to   Senator
Eastland  before  the  committee  met  again  for  the  afternoon
and  the  Senator  read  the  Times  letter  into  the  record  as  a
triumph  for  the  committee—another    scalp  on  its  belt.
The  Guild  to  Fight
We salute  the  Newspaper  Guild  for  its  decision to  fight  the
Barnet  and  Gordon  cases  as  improper  discharges   under  its
contracts  with  the   Times  and  Daily  News.    Both  contracts •
provide  for  arbitration,  and  much  will  depend  on  finding  an
arbitrator  with  the  courage  to  rule  against  powerful  news-
papers  in  the  current  climate.   The  Guild's  decision  is  in  line
with  the  membership's  rejection  at  its  recent  convention of  a
proposal  to  bar  Communists  from   membership.
Unfortunately  the  Guild  has  compromised its  own position
by  also  deciding in  advance  that  it  will  not  contest  the  dis-
charge  of  any  newspaperman  shown  to  be a  Communist or  to
have  been  one within  six  months  of  his  appearance  before  a
competent  tribunal.   Once  accept  the  principle  that   Commu-
nist  newspapermen  have  no right  to  work,  and  the  doors  are
opened  to  the   witch  hunt;    The   ex-Communists  now  anti-
Communist  who bulk  so large  today  in  the  Newspaper  Guild
cannot   limit   themselves   to   the   defense   of  ex-Communists
only.   Congress  has  no right  to  regulate  the  politics  of  news-
papermen,  and  publishers  have  no right  to  discharge  men  for
their  private  political  views.   Only  on this  basis  can  freedom
of  newspapers  and  newspapermen  be  effectively  defended.
Washington  Post  Advises  Newsmen  to  Submit  and  "Inform"
". .  .  We  think  the  Newspaper Guild  makes a  serious mis-
take  in contesting the  issue  [of  Melvin  L. Barnet's discharge
by  the  New  York  Times].
"At the  same time,  humane  people  cannot  be callous or  in-
different  to  the  dilemma of  many  who  appear  before  these
committees.    No  wonder  they  shrink   from  disclosing  mis-
takes  made  many  years  ago.  .  .  .
"For  the  repentant  ex-Communist,  we  think   the   proper
path  is  plain,  although  hard.   He  should  be  prepared  to con-
fess.  ...    He  should  protect  his  country  by  giving  what  in-
formation  on  party  activity  he  has  to  the  FBI  including
names  of  former  associates.   If  disclosure  at  a  committee
hearing  will  impose  upon  old  friends  hardships utterly  un-
endurable,  he  should appeal  to  the  Senate  committee's sense
of  justice  and fair  play.  .  .  .
"At  the  same  time,  we  must  say  that  we  do  not  under-
stand  what  all  this has  to do with  the  internal  security of  the
United  States.   Are  we  endangered by'the  long-ago,  half-
hearted,  transient Communist  affiliations  of  a  handful  out  of
the  thousands  employed on New  York  newspapers?  ...     In
fact, if  the Committee is  now systematically  ...    to  make the
press  the  particular  object  of  investigation  we  think  Ameri-
can  principles  will  be  endangered by  the  Committee.
"Such   an   endeavor   will   have  all   the   appearance   of   a
studied  effort  to  browbeat  and  intimidate.  ...     It  will  not
work with the Times.  It will not work  with many  other great
newspapers.   Nevertheless ...    it  might  .  .  .  serve  to  dimin-
ish  the fearless  reporting and courageous expression ...    of
which  we  already have too little.  ..."
—Washington  Post  editorial, July  17.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  25,  IVSS
The  Attorney  General  Is  Hoist  By His  Own (Passport  Case)  Petard
The  First  Hearings  in  The  History  of  The  Subversive  List
Ever  since  1947  the  Independent  Socialist  League,  a  dissi-
dent  sub-splinter  of  the  dissident  Trotzkyist  movement,  has
been trying to get  a hearing  from  the  Attorney  General  in  an
effort  to  get  off his  subversive  list.   Today  (July  25)  it  gets
its  wish.   For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the   postwar
witch  hunt  the  Attorney  General  will  begin  presenting  evi-
dence  at  a  public  hearing  in  Washington to  support  a  listing.
The  precedent-making hearing  does not  reflect  a  change of
heart  on  the  Attorney  General's  part.  The  Supreme  Court
ruled  to no avail  more than  four  years  ago that  the  Attorney
General  could  not  list  an  organization  as  subversive  without
some  kind  of  hearing.   The  proceeding which begins  today  is
the  byproduct  of  a  passport  case.   But  what  originated  as  a
tactical  maneuver  on  the  Attorney  General's  part  may  end
by  undermining  his  subversive  list  altogether.
Max  Schachtman,  the  head  of  the  Independent  Socialist
League,  had  been  denied  a  passport  on  the  ground  that  the
I.S.L.  was  "listed."  One of  the  points  made  by  his  counsel in
oral  argument  before  the  Court of  Appeals  here  recently  was
that  the  I.S.L.  was never  given  a  hearing.    Fearing that de-
cision might turn  on this point, the Justice  Department  there-
upon  offered  the  I.S.L.  a  hearing.
The  Court  ruled  that  the  blacklisting  of  the  League  by  the
Attorney   General  was  not  proper   ground  in  any  case  for
denying  Schachtman  a  passport.   But  in  the  meantime  the
government  was  stuck  with  its  own maneuver,  and  had  to  go
on with the  hearing.   Edward  Morrissey, a  Civil Service Com-
mission  examiner  also  employed by  the  Subversive  Activities
Control   Board   (he  has  been  hearing  the   case  against  the
American  Committee for  the  Protection  of the  Foreign  Born),
was  retained  as  special  hearings   officer.
Self-Informing  Required
Until  now  organizations  which  asked  for  a  hearing  have
been  served  instead  with voluminous "interrogatories"  requir-
ing  them  to  disclose their  workings in  minute  detail,  down to
the  names  of  all .members and   contributors.
Such  questions  are  answered under pain  of the  perjury-like
penalties  imposed by the  False  Claims Act, and  really  require
listed  organizations to  save  the  FBI  time  and  expense by  act-
ing  as  their  own self-informers.  The  interrogatories  are  ac-
companied  by  a  warning  that  the  Attorney  General  reserves
the  right  to  deny a  hearing  if  all  questions  are  not  answered.
This  hurdle  has  proved  too  forbidding.   No  organization,
including  the  I.S.L.,  has  yet  answered  all  these  questions  as
the  price  of admission to  a  hearing.  The  I.S.L.  is  getting  one
anyway.   This  may  create  a  precedent.
The  first  preliminary  session  before  Morrissey  last  Mon-
day  foreshadowed  some  other  precedents.   I.S.L.  was   listed
both  as  "Communist,"  and  as  "subversive."  The  "subversive"
charge  was  dropped, perhaps  because  the  government  feared
it  would  be unable  in  a  legal  showdown to  define  this  vague
term  precisely  enough.
The  first  day's  sparring  indicated the  difficulties  which face
And  It   Would  Have  Shown
An  Even  More  "Decent  Respect"
To  Have  Disqualified   Himself
"The   [National   Lawyers]   Guild   says   the   District
Court  erred  in  its  ruling  upon  the  allegation   of  pre-
judgment.  It  was  shown by  affidavit  that, on August 27,
1953 . . . the Attorney  General  delivered  an address be-
fore  the  American  Bar  Association  in  Boston  in  which
he  [said]  . . . 'It is because  the evidence shows  that the
National   Lawyers  Guild  is  at   present   a  Communist
dominated  and  controlled  organization  fully  committed
to  the  Communist party  line  that  I  have  today  served
notice  to  it  to  show  cause  why  it  should  not  be  desig-
nated  on  the  Attorney  General's  list  of  subversive  or-
ganizations.'  . . .
"While  one  might  question  the  propriety  of  the  vig-
orous  statements  made  publicly  by  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  in  the  case  at  bar,  at  the  same  time  it  should  be
recognized  that  he  may  well  have  felt  that   'a  decent
Respect  to  the  Opinions  of  Mankind'  required  him  to
disclose  personally  .  . .  the reasons  for proposing  the
designation  of  a  national  bar  association."
—Circuit  Judge  Prettyman   rejecting   National
Lawyers  Guild  appeal  for  an  order  to  en-
join  the  Attorney   General  on  the  ground
of   prejudice.
the  Attorney  General  once  he  embarks  on  a  hearing  which
the  courts  will  scrutinize.   Counsel  for  the  I.S.L.  wanted  to
know  just  what  the  government  meant' by "Communist"  since
the   League,  though  Marxist,   is  anti-Communist  and  anti-
Soviet.   The  government  declined  to  answer,  perhaps  because
it  found  the  tangled  dialectic  of  Left  wing  splinter   politics
too  bewildering.
But  how is  the  I.S.L.  to  answer  the  charge  of  being  "Com-
munist"   if  the   government   does  not  explain  just  what   it
means?   The  League  calls  itself   Marxist—but   Dos  Kapital
like  the  Gospel  has  proliferated  many  bitterly  warring  sects.
The  I.S.L.  believes  in  socialism  and  would  achieve  it   peace-
fully  where democratic means  are  available.   If  this  be  "Com-
munism"  then  Norman  Thomas  is  a  "Communist,"  too.   In
this  context  "Communist"  becomes  almost  as  va'gue  as  "sub-
versive."
We  predict that  before this  case  is finished the  Justice De-
partment  will  be thoroughly  sick  of  its  self-arrogated   task of
acting  as  a  heresy-hunter.   Even  an  authoritarian   institution
like  the  Roman Catholic  Church, with  a  system  of  dogma  and
exact  standards  of  orthodoxy,  has  not  found  it  at   easy  in
practice  to  determine  what  is  really  heresy.   How do it  in  a
society   whose  constitutional   and   philosophical   foundations
reject  dogma and  sanctify  dissent?
The  Kind  of  Interrogatories  Customarily  Served  Up  By  The  Attorney  General
"The  [National Lawyers] Guild  also attacks  the  interroga-
tories  submitted to  it.   Some further  revision  of  these  ques-
tions   is   probably  in   order.    For   example,  some   of   the
amended  questions  appear  to  be  extremely  difficult,   if  not
impossible,  of  answer.  The  Guild  says  it  had  at  times some
thirty   chapters.   ...      A  few  of  the  interrogatories    are:
No.  60, 'To your  knowledge has . . .  any .  .  .  chapter of
the  NLG ever  permitted  the  use  of  its  mailing  list  to  any
other  organization?'   No.  64,  'Has  the  NLG  or  any  of  the
.  .  .  chapters  thereof,  passed  an  anti-Communist  or  anti-
Soviet  Union resolution  since  1946?'  No. 49, ' ...   have you
reason  to believe  that  any of the . . . past  members of any
. . . chapter  of the  NLG . . . ever  has  been  [a] ...   member
of  the CP [Communist Party] . . .?'  'If  so, identify  each of
them. . . .'  No. 50, ' ...   have you reason to believe  that . . .
any  . . . chapter ..  . ever furnished information to the Daily
Worker  ...   on any occasion  when such  information was not
likewise  furnished  to  other  newspapers  or  news  service?"'
—Circuit  Court  Judge   Prettyman   rejecting  the  National  Lawyers   Guild  plea  that   the  Attorney   General's
prejudice,  the  nature  of  the  proceedings  and  the  unconstitutionality   of  the  "subversive   list"   entitled
it  to an  injunction  forbidding  him  to  add  the  Guild  to  the  list.  [Elisions  in  the  original.]
1  1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. f..Stone's  Weekly, July  25,1955
Once  Quickly  Round  An  Overheated  Capital
In  a  forthcoming report  on  the  Matusow  case,  the  Senate
Internal   Security   Committee  will  advocate  non-Communist
oaths  for  lawyers  and  disbarment  for  those  who  plead  the
Fifth.  . . .  The Committee's  view of Matusow recalls  the In-
quisition's  attitude  toward  recanting  witnesses.   The  Encylo-
paedia  Britannica  in  its  article on the  Inquisition  refers  to  a
famous  legalist of the time  and says, "Zanghino  Ugolini states
that a witness  who should retract his hostile  evidence shall  be
punished  for  false  witness,  but  that  his  evidence  should  be
retained,  and  have  its  full  effect  on the  sentenced."
Seen  crossing  a  street  alone near  the  Capitol:  Senator  Mc-
Carthy,  looking ten  years  older  and  ten  pounds heavier,  with
the  shamefaced ingratiating smile of a  man  who feels himself
disreputable.  . . . A year  ago Congressman  Walter  was talk-
ing  a  very  liberal  line,  telling  reporters  on the  record  and off
that  he  wanted  to  abolish  the  House  "Un-American  Activities
Committee.   Now  as  chairman  of  that  committee  he  is  pre-
paring  to  extend  the  witch  hunt  into  the  theatre  and  punish
those  who led  the  successful  fight  in  AFTEA   (the  American
Federation     of    Television    and    Radio   Artists)    against
AWARE,  Inc.,  which  specializes  in  Red-listing   and  "clear-
ing"  actors  of  all  kinds.
For  The  Scrapbook:  A  long  dispatch  from  Saigon  on  the
first  anniversary   of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem's  regime  (N.Y.   Times,
July  7)  ended with  the  admission, "Peasants make up 80 to 90
percent  of the  population  and  it  often  appears  that  the Diem
government  has few real  roots  among  them."  .  .  .  Here  in
Washington  the  surprise  of. the  week  was  the  State  Depart-
ment's  announcement that  Paul  Robeson,  barred  for  several
years  from  Canada,  would  be  allowed  to  give  a  concert  in
Vancouver  and  promising  "careful  and  prompt  consideration"
for  his passport  application.  .  .  .  Perhaps  criticism   abroad
may  explain:  the Manchester Guardian July  19 ran  two  head-
lines  side  by side.  One said, "Destroy  All  Curtains,  President
Eisenhower's  Appeal"  and  the  other,  "Paul  Robeson  Again
Seeks  Passport."
Straws  in  the  Wind: Nation's  Business,  organ  of  the  U.  S.
Chamber  of  Commerce, for  July  starts  off  with  an   editorial
by  Felix  Morley  comparing  the  current  Geneva conference  to
the  Congress  of  Vienna  in   1813  and  saying  that  the  latter
succeeded  because  its  philosophy  was  "to  let  bygones  be  by-
gones."   Morley  declares  the  success  or  failure  of  the  Geneva
meeting "will  in  effect  decide the  scale  and  nature  of  national
defense,  therefore  the  level  of  corporate  and  individual taxa-
tion. . . ."  Peace—it's  wonderful: especially  if it  means  lower
taxes.  . . . And Holiday  for  July  has an  article  on travel  in
Russia   beginning   (subversively),   "Cold  war   and   ideology
aside,  Russia  is a  land  peopled  by human  beings.  . . ."
Which  Army  Press  Release  Do  You  Read?
"1.  No  man  being  prosecuted  was  'brainwashed'—in
fact  no  American  military  prisoner  was  'brainwashed'
during  the  entire  Korean  War.
"2.  No American PW has  been or  will be tried  by  the
Army  who was  physically tortured.    But torture,  in  the
classic  sense,  was  not  used  at  all  as  a  means of  obtain-
ing  converts.   ...
"4.  The  men  who did  not  collaborate  with  the enemy
generally  fared  as  well  or  better  in  enemy hands  than
the  men  who  did."
—A.  E.  Hotchner,  writing  in  This  Week  maga-
zine,  July  17, 1955, from  "an  Army   Intelli-
gence  Conference  room in  the Pentagon with
the  team  of  Intelligence  Officers    whose  job
it  has  been to study  and evaluate the  conduct
of   hundreds  of  men   who   were  prisoners  of
war  in  Korea."   An   editor's  note  explains
"in   this  'article  we  print   the  major  argu-
ments  in  the  Army's  case"  for  punishing  re-
turned  POW's  who collaborated.
A  most  enlightened  decision  was  handed  down  here  for  a
unanimous  3-man  Court  of  Appeals  panel  (Bazelon,  Danaher
and  Bastian)   "In  re:  Adoption of  a  Minor."  Judge  Bazelon
reversed  the  District  Court's  denial  of  a  petition  for  adoption
of  a  natural  child  filed  by  its  white  mother  and  her  Negro
husband.   The  petition  had  been  denied  on  two  grounds   (1)
the  couple's  refusal  to  sing  tenants'  loyalty   oath  that  they
did  not  belong to  any  organization  on the  Attorney   General's
list  and  (2)  that  the  boy "might  lose  the  social  status  of  a
white  man"  because  his  adopted  father   would  be  a   Negro.
Judge  Bazelon  held  the  refusal  to  sign  the  oath  was  no  "ad-
verse  reflection"  on  the  couple  and  that  denial  of  the  adop-
tion  could  not  "rest  on a  distinction  between  the  'social   sta-
tus"  of  whites  and  Negroes.
Hat's  Off to  the  Emergency-Civil Liberties  Committee for
raising  the  bulk  of  the  $40,000 bail  for  Carl  Braden,  highest
bail  ever  asked  in  the  history  of  Kentucky.  An  appeal  from
his  conviction for  sedition  will  be heard  in  the  highest  State
court  in  the  Fall.   Braden  is  now  free.
Recommended  Theatre:  Paul  Muni  has  never  done  a  more
magnificent  job  of acting  than  as  "Henry  Drummond"  (Clar-
ence  Darrow)  in  Inherit  The  Wind,  a  play  about  the  Scopes
evolution  trial,  now  at  the  National  Theatre  in  New  York
City,  with  deep  and  moving relevance  for  the  similar  efforts
at  thought  control  in  our  own day.  Don't  miss  it.
Why  Not  Sell  a  Few  6-Month  Introductory   Subs  While  on  Vacation  at  Only  $2  Each?
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift sub
(To)  Name  ....
Street
City
* $1 extra  for
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  aub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.Zone
for  $2 (6 mos.)  or  $4  (1
„                   .....Zone....,
Canada.
State.
yr.)  additional:
State..
7/25/55
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S. E.
Waihington  3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED