I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955mar28.pdf

============================================================

The  FBI  and  the Daily  Worker, P. 4
While  a  Leading  Witch  Hunter  (Cain  of  the  SACB)   Moves  Left,  the  ADA  Moves  Right,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   NUMBER 10
MARCH  28,   1955
„        WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16  CENTS
How  Senator  George  Cancelled  Out the  Yalta  Revelations
The  Swindle  at  the  State  Department
If  you  think  of  the  public  mind  as  a  huge  blackboard   on
which only large and  simple words are visible,  this is what  hap-
pened here in the  past week.  The  leak of  the  Yalta  papers wrote
"Negotiations  Bad"  across  that   blackboard.   Senator  George
three  days later  on  Meet  the  Press  unexpectedly  ran  an  eraser
through   those  words  and  made  negotiations  seem  respectable
again.
Yalta,  justifiably  or  not,   is  associated  in  the  public  mind
with  Alger  Hiss,  espionage,  the  sell-out  of  Poland,  the  loss  of
China,   Muscovite  duplicity.    The   State  Department,  which
devotes  a  major  share of  its  energies  to  the  molding  of  public
opinion,  knew  exactly  what  it  was doing  when  it  leaked  those
papers  to  the  New  York   Times.*   The  British,  the  French  and
the  Germans  had  all been  promised  that  when  rearmament  of
the  Reich  was  ratified  we  would  agree  to  negotiate  with  the
Russians.    In   addition   there  is  evidence  of   much   parleying
behind   the  scenes  among  London,   Moscow,  New   Delhi  and
Peking  with  a  view  toward  a  conference  for  a  general  settle-
ment  in  the  Far  East.   To  release  the  documents  at  such  a
time  was again  to  blacken  the  idea  of  any  negotiations what-
soever.
It  was hopeless to  try  and undo  that  effect  by  analyzing  the
documents  once  they  had  been  released.  Fascinating  and  vivid
as they  are, they will be read  by few  people.  That  they  contain
nothing  new  is  beside  the  point.  Their  release  touched  off  all
the   conditioned    reflexes    associated   with   the   dirty    word,
"Yalta."  The  one  effective  rejoinder  was  to  associate  the  idea
of  negotiations  with  something  established  in  the  public  mind
as  unassailably   sound  and  impeccably  conservative.   This  is
what  the  senior  Senator  from  Georgia  did  when  on  Meet   the
Press  last  Sunday  he  suddenly  came  out  for  a  meeting  of   the
Big Four  heads of  state  as soon  as possible.
The  chairman of  the  Senate Foreign  Relations  Committee  is
probably  the  most  respected  man  in  Congress,  ultra  conserva-
tive  in  fiscal  affairs,  a  traditionalist  on  constitutional   questions
as  he  has  shown  on  crucial  occasions  in  defense  of  the  Bill  of
Rights,    an   old-fashioned    Southern   internationalist    of    the
Wilson  era variety, and with it  all a man of  precise  mind  and a
certain  personal purity  of  character.  If  Senator  George  thinks
it  wise  and  necessary  to  negotiate   as  soon   as  possible  with
Moscow,  lesser  and  more  vulnerable  men  may  advocate  nego-
tiation  without  being  smeared. This is the  change in  atmosphere
*  I  have  yet  to  find  a  reporter  in  the  capital  who  does  not  believe  that
Dulles's  press  relations  assistant, Carl  McCardle,  gave  them  to  the  Times  on
the   Secretary's   instructions.    When   the   State   Department's  spokesman,
Henry  Suydam,  was  asked  last  Monday   about   the  report  that  McCardle
had   leaked  the   report   "with   the   Secretary's  concurrence,"   he   made   no
denial.   "I  have  no  comment  on  that,"  was his only  answer.
which  George  brought   about,  and  no  one  but  George  could
have  accomplished   it.
A  Strictly  Ersatz  Confusion
The  confusion  in  the  wake  of  the  George  statement  is  of  a
planned  variety.   Once  George  had  spoken  up  for  a  top-level
meeting,  the  State  Department  could  not   afford   to   disagree
with   him  openly   and  let  Western   Europe   see  that   we  are
reluctant  to enter  the  negotiations we promised  after  the  Bonn
accords  had  been  ratified.   Nor   could  Dulles  afford   an   open
rift  with  the  chairman  of  the  Foreign  Relations  Committee  in
a  Democratic  Senate,  the  man without  whose  help  the  Admin-
istration  might  never  have won  approval  for  Public  Resolution
No.  4,  with  its  blank  check  for  war  in  the  Formosa  straits.
So  the  Department   set  out   to  create  the  impression  that   it
agreed  with  George,  and  succeeded  in  generating  the  kind  of
headlines  it  wanted.   But  any  West  European  diplomat  who
studies  the  transcripts   of  the  State  Department's   daily  press
conferences  last  week  will  see that  Dulles  does  not  agree  with
George  at  all  and  is  as  opposed  as  ever  to  a  new   conference,
unless  indeed  Moscow  signs  on  the  dotted  line  in  advance—in
which event, as George commented, we'd  have not  a conference
but  "a jubilation  meeting."
Each  day last  week  the State Department  spokesman  insisted
that  George's  views  were  in  harmony  with  Dulles.   But  the
answers  to  questions,  and  the  refusals  to  answer,  showed  how
wide apart  their  views  are.  The Department  made  clear  that  it
is  still  thinking  in  terms  of  a  meeting  of  the  Four   Foreign
Ministers  not  of  heads  of  state,  that  it  is  against  even  such  a
meeting  unless  the  Russians  have  shown  themselves  ready  in
advance to  agree with  us on Germany  and Austria,  and  that  it
does  not  share  George's  view  of  the  urgency  of  conferring  if
war  is  to  be  averted.   A  study  of  these  transcripts  and  of  the
President's  own  replies  on  Wednesday   shows  that   Knowland
was right  when  he said after  calling at  the  White  House Tues-
day  that  Senator  George's  view  was not  that  of  the  U.S.   Gov-
ernment.  Dulles will  do all he  can  to  avoid  negotiations.
Dulles's  own  view  was made  clear when  he  told  the  United
Negro  College Fund  in  New  York  Sunday  night  that  we may
again be forced  to "forego  peace  in order  to  assure the  blessings
of  liberty."   These  lush  phrases  reveal  his  real  thinking.   The
Secretary  of  State  is  a  Cato  bent  on  war;  Eisenhower  for  the
time  being  is with  him  and  Radford.   The  advantage of  what
has  happened  is  that  in  angry  reaction  against   the  double
dealing  of  Dulles  a  stifling  bipartisanship  has  been  shelved   for
a  Democratic  initiative  looking  toward  negotiations.    If  there
were  only  a  mass  peace  movement  today,  how  much  could  be
accomplished  behind  George's  leadership!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  SS, 1955
You  Can't  Make  Outlaws  of  Communists  Without  Establishing  Thought  Surveillance
While Harry  Cain  Moves  Left,  the  ADA  Moves  Right
One  of  the  heroes  of  the  fight  against  the  witch  mania
was  a   16th   century   German  jurist   named  Dietrich   Flade.
His  experience  as  chief  judge  in  witch  trials  gradually  led
him  to  doubt  the  validity  of  what  was  paraded  before  him
as   evidence  and  confession.    When  he  began  to  voice  his
misgivings,   he  was   himself   tortured   until   he,   too,   "con-
fessed"   to  being  part  of  the   Satanic   conspiracy  and  was
burnt  at  the  stake.   We  hope  his  story  will  not  furnish  too
many  parallels  with  that  of  former  Senator   Harry  P.  Cain
of  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.   Last  week,  for
the  second  time  this  year,  Mr.  Cain  made  a  speech  severely
criticizing   many   aspects   of   our   own  witch   hunt.     Were
Pat   McCarran   alive,   Mr.  Cain  would  almost  certainly   be
roasted   on  the   Senate  floor.
Mr.  Cain's  conversion  to  liberalism  is  as  yet  limited.   He
is  in  the  same  stage  as  a  Madame who, as  religion  begins  to
creep up on her,  wonders whether  the  girls  (without seriously
interfering  with  business)  couldn't  be just  a  little more, well,
virginal.    Mr.  Cain  sees  the  injustices  and  fallacies   of  the
witch  hunt;  there  is  a  warmth  about  what  he  has  to  say
which  carries  conviction; we  applaud  him  for  it.    But  what
he  would  like  is  somehow  to  clean  up  the  witch  hunt  and
yet  keep  it  at  the  same  time.   He  is  casting   about   (as  can
be  seen  from  the  excerpts  below)  for  some  way  to  limit  its
impact  to  real  Communists and  real  fellow  travellers.    These
are  the  only  people  he  would  proscribe.   But  how  determine
who  is  really  a  Communist  and  really   one  of  their   fellow
travellers  without  setting  up  an  idealogical  thought  police
(like the  SACB) ?
Mr.  Cain  may  be  respected   as  a  man  painfully  learning
from  experience.    But  while he  moves lift,  liberal organiza-
tions  like  the  Americans  for  Democratic  Action  move  right,
not   so  much  out   of  conviction  but   in  an   attempt   at   self
protection  by  truckling.    At  its  convention here  last  week-
end,  the  ADA  adopted  a  resolution  calling  the  Communist
party  a  conspiracy  for  espionage  and  sabotage.    This  is  too
serious  a  charge to be made  irresponsibly.
If  the  Communist  party  is  a  conspiracy  for  espionage  and
And  On Top  of  All  That  Is  That  D       d  Old
Constitution
"On  top  of  all  that  there's  a  'left  wing'  drive  on  to
surround   Government   employes  with   complex   pro-
cedural  devices  which  would  supersede  the  rights  of
the  American  government  to  protect   its  own  safety."
—David  Lawrence,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, Jan.  IS
sabotage,  it  can be prosecuted  on those  grounds in  the  courts.
These   are   crimes,   and  have  nothing  to   do  with  political
ideas.    The  government  has  a  network  of  secret  agents  and
informers  inside the  Communist party  and its  affiliated  organ-
izations.    If  it  had  evidence  on which  to  base  a  prosecution,
it  would have  done  so  a  long  time  ago.    The  very  fact  that
the  government  has  had  to  use  the  Smith  Act  against   the
Communists,  and  to  charge  them  with  "conspiracy  to  advo-
cate,"  is  a  confession  that  it  has  no  evidence  of conspiracy
to  commit  espionage  or  sabotage.    Then  what  right  has  the
ADA  to  make  the  accusation?    Are  people  to  be  accused
wholesale  without  proof?   Is  the  ADA  in  this  any  different
from   the   cowardly  "casual   informer"  who  makes   charges
he  cannot  substantiate  to  demonstrate  his  own "loyalty"?
This  fuzzy  minded formulation about the  Communists being
outside  the  pale  of  constitutional  liberties  because they  are  a
"conspiracy"   is   a   passport   to   respectability   these   days.
Frightened  intellectuals   cling  to  it.   But  it  is  a  menace  to
everybody's liberty.   It  is made to order for  the witch hunters.
If  the  Communists are  conspirators,  they  will  hide  in  osten-
sibly  non or  anti  Communist organizations  to  carry  out  their
purposes.    If  we  are   dealing  with  a  conspiracy,  then   the
secret  police  have  a  right  to  spy  on  every  organization.   If
the  Communists are  to be outlawed, as  the  conspiracy concept
must  and  is  outlawing  them,  then  how  are  we  to  determine
without  thought  surveillance  who  is  really  Communist?   By
calling  the  Communists  conspirators,  the  liberal   intellectuals
merely  succeed  in  bringing  themselves  under   suspicion.
A  Leading  Witch  Hunter  Again  Expresses  Doubts  About  the  Witch  Hunt
"Those  who  use  'Fifth   Amendment'  as  an  adjective of
disapprobation   modifying  the  noun  'Communist'  are   as
guilty  of   disrespect   for   the   Constitution  as   any  Com-
munist  could  he. .  .  .  We should  be  less  concerned  with
the  few  who hide behind the  privilege  without justification
and  much  more  concerned  by  those  who  trifle  with  and
prostitute  its  significance.  .  . .
"The  government  employes undercover  agents,  paid  in-
formers,   and  casual   informers   for   whom  it   wishes   to
guarantee   anonymity.  . .  .  Investigators  ask us what we
know  or  desire  to  say  about  our  friends,  co-workers,  asso-
ciates   and  acquaintances.    Should  we  not  be  willing   to
say  under  oath  and  at   a  hearing   what  we  have  freely
said,  be that  derogatory  or  praiseworthy,  within  the  four
walls  of  our  home  or  office?    If  we  are  unwilling,  should
we not  be required  to  support  our judgment  or  retract  it?
"The   accused  employee  is  constantly  impressed   by  the
sad  consequence  to  result  if  he  does  not  tell  the  truth.
I  think  it  sadder  that  he  can  be  torn  to  shreds  by  the
tongue  of  a  person  he  never  sees.    Perjury   ought  to  be
as  applicable  to the accuser  as to the accused.  . . .
"Is   it  not  logical   to  understand   that  one  may   have
joined  the  Workers  Alliance  because  unemployed, or  taken
out  a  card  at  the  Washington  Bookshop during  the  early
1940's  in  order  to  buy  books  or  records  at  a  discount,  or
joined  one  of  the  friendship   with  Russia   groups   during
the  World  War  II   alliance,   without  in  these  cases   ever
knowing  that  the   organization   was   subversive   or  con-
trolled  by  the  Communists?   Has  our  society  become  so
lacking  in  vitality,  vision  and  strength that  we must  pore
over  the  ashes  of  a  dead  period  in  the  past  which  will  not
be fully  analyzed  by historians  for  another  50 years ?  . . .
"All  I  do  professionally   is  to  work  on  those  portions  of
the   [Attorney  General's]  list  which  cover  alleged  Com-
munist  organizations.   My  experience  has  taught  me,  or
I  have  grown  to believe,  that memberships  in these  groups
are  often  absolutely  meaningless  unless  they  are  related
to  when,  where  and  why.
"The  Attorney  General  is  presently  seeking  to  list  the
National  Lawyers   Guild  as  the  legal  mouthpiece  of  Com-
munism  in  our  country,  but  had  I  been  an  enterprising
law  school  undergraduate   or  Negro  lawyer   in  the  late
1930's,  I  would  probably   have  joined  it.    The  American
Bar  Association  of  that  period  did  not  admit  Negroes   to
membership.  . . .
"The   Attorney   General's  list  ought,  in  my   judgment,
to  be  liquidated   through  procedures   which   our  country
supports.    The  merits  of  the  charges  against  any  listed
organization    should   be   adjudicated.     Sanctions    should
apply   only  to  those  who  remain   as   members   after   an
organization  has  been  found  to be guilty  as  alleged  by  the
Attorney  General."
—Former  Senator  Harry  P.  Cain, of  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board,   before    the  National   Civtt   Liberties
Clearing  House in  Washington,  March  18 (the  text  is  on pages S585-91, of  Congress. Rec., same  date)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  S8,  19SS
The  Old  Case  of  the  Recalcitrant  Railway  Auditor   Is   Challenged
The  Fight  to  Save  the 5th  Amendment  from  The  New  Immunity  Law
In  the  1890's  an  auditor  for  the  Alleghany Valley Railway
Company  pleaded  the  Fifth  amendment when  asked  whether
his  employer  had  violated  the  Interstate  Commerce  Act  by
giving  rebates  to  the  Union  Coal  Company.  The  Interstate
Commerce  Act  provided that  a  witness  could  be  compelled  to
testify  if  granted  immunity  from  prosecution.   The  auditor
challenged   the  constitutionality   of  that  provision   but   the
Supreme  Court  in  1895  rejected  his  plea  5 to  4  in  Brown  v.
Walker   (161  U.S.  591).   This  is  the  precedent  which  must  be
reversed  or  by-passed  if  the  new Immunity Act  is  to  be over-
turned  in  the  courts,  and  the  Fifth   amendment  saved   for
political  heretics.
The  issues  have  just  been  argued  before  a  3-man  appeals
bench  in  New  York  in  the  case of  William  Ludwig  Ullmann,
one of those named  by Elizabeth Bentley as part of  an  alleged
Soviet  espionage  ring  in  the  Treasury  during  the  last  war.
Ullmann was taken  before  a grand  jury  last Fall, just before
election,  and   ordered  to  talk   on  proffer   of  immunity.   He
declined  and  was  sentenced to  six  months for  contempt.  His
appeal  was  heard  by  two  U.S.  Circuit  Court  judges,  both
liberals,  Jerome  Frank  and  Charles  E.  Clark.   Sitting  with
them   was  District   Judge   Clarence  G.  Galston.   Ullmann
pleaded  in  an  affidavit   (see  excerpts  below)  that  he  was  the
victim  of  political  persecution;  that  he  had  several  times
denied  the  espionage  charges  under  oath;  and that  the  grand
jury  proceeding was  a  "fishing expedition"  to  "get"   him  for
perjury  or  to  expose  him  as  a  radical  if   he  could  not  be
frightened   into  informing  on  the  promise  of  immunity  for
himself.
The government argued that the Supreme Court had already
decided  in  Brown  v.  Walker  that  immunity  legislation  was
constitutional.   Defense  counsel,  Nathan  Witt  and  Leonard
B.  Boudin,  set  out  to  "distinguish"  (as  the  lawyers  say)  the
older  case  from  this  one.  The heart of their  argument  is that
"running  through  the  majority  opinion"  in  the  old  Brown
case  "is  open  skepticism as  to  how the  auditor  could  himself
have been  involved in any  crime  and how his  admissions  could
lead  to  any  personal  odium  and  disgrace."   Rebates  were  a
common  practice;  the  auditor was not personally  responsible;
he  would  not  have  been  hurt  by  the   revelation   of  illegal
rebates.   The  majority   said  they  could  not  see  where  the
auditor  would  suffer  any  "legal  detriment"  from  being com-
pelled  to  testify.
Ullmann's   defense  counsel  in  a  brilliant  brief   contrast
what  happens  to  a  radical  today  who is  compelled  to  testify
about his  political  views and associations.   Even if the  witness
is  granted  full  immunity from  Federal  or  State prosecution,
it  cannot be said  that  the  radical  will  not  suffer  "legal  detri-
ment"  of  other  kinds.
Sen.  George on the  Immunity Law
". . .  underlying  our whole  concept  of  jurisprudence
is  the  personal  right  of a  witness,  not  only to refuse  to
testify   or  to  answer  a  question  which  would  tend  to
incriminate  him, but  it  is  also the right  of the  witness
to refuse to testify  when his testimony  would necessarily
bring  into  public  contempt  and  disrepute  the  members
of  his  immediate  family.   It  is  a  much  broader  right
than  the  mere right  of the  defendant  himself  to  escape
punishment  for  a  criminal   offense."
—Sen. George, opposing  passage of  the  McCarran  bill  to
compel  testimony  on grant  of  immunity,  99 Con. Ree.
474S  (1954).
These  are  summarized by  the  defense.  "Subversives"   are
barred  from   employment  in  the  government  or  in   defense
facilities.   Under the  Internal  Security  Act it  is  unlawful  for
them  to  apply for  or  use passports.  In  the  event  of  an  emer-
gency,  they  may be interned  in detention  camps.  Employment
as  a  longshoreman,  in  the  merchant  marine,  or  as  a  radio
operator  is  subject  to  political  screening.   Dishonorable  dis-
charge  from  the  Army is  provided  for  subversives.   Teachers
and  many  other  types  of  profession  or  occupation  are  now
subject  to loyalty  oaths  and political interrogation.   "Only  the
most menial and low-paying occupations," the  defense  argued,
"are  now available  to  many  persons  who have  been  branded
as  subversive  . . ."
In  addition  to  such  governmental  sanctions—none covered
by  the  proffer  of  immunity—there  are  all  kinds  of  private
sanctions:  expulsion  from  labor  unions,  loss  of  private  em-
ployment,   discrimination    in   housing   and   schooling,   and
public  opprobrium.
"These  sanctions,"  the  defense  argued,  "are  not  generally
regarded  in the  United States as  reason  for  invoking the con-
stitutional  privilege.   However,  it  is  significant   that  in  an
analogous  period  of  religious  oppression,  the   18th   century,
the  English  equity courts allowed  witnesses  to be silent where
admissions  of  papacy  would result  in  property  loss, or  where
ecclesiastical  censure  would  follow, or  where  a  parliamentary
seat  was  at  stake.  Where  the  effect  of  political  heresy  is  as
serious  as  it  is  today  the  dissenter  is  subject  to  penalties  and
forfeitures  which,  if  anything,  are  more  drastic  than  even
criminal prosecution."
So  the  defense  concludes  that  the  purpose  of  the   Fifth
amendment  "cannot  be  achieved  unless  it  is  interpreted   and
applied  in  the  light  of  the  dangers  today  confronting  the
witness in a  political  case."
Ullmann's  Own Story  of  His  First  "Harry  White Spy  Ring"  Interrogation  by  the  FBI
"Not  Foreign  Riff-Raff  That  Came Over on a  Boat  a  Few  Years  Ago"
"On  April  15,  1947,  about  a  month  after  I  had  left  the
Treasury,  two agents  of the  Federal Bureau of Investigation
came to my home at  about  5:30  p.m. . . . Although I  said  I
preferred  to  talk  to  them  at  my home, they  prevailed  upon
me to go to FBI headquarters  . . .
"I  am prepared  at  any  time to  testify  in  detail  about  the
character   of  the  questioning  and  the  insults   and  threats
which  went  with  it,  but  I  merely  summarize  here  so as  not
to  burden this  affidavit  unduly.  I  was  asked  the  questions
about  espionage  which  were  based  on what  I  later  learned,
in  1948 as I have said, were Miss Bentley's  charges.  When I
answered  such questions in  the  negative,  the  agents  accused
me of lying,  as they  did also from  time to time when I  denied
that  I  knew this  or that  friend  or  acquaintance  or  Govern-
ment  associate  of mine was a 'red'  . . .
—Affidavit     of  William  Ludwig  Ullmann,  U.S.
"The  agents left  no doubt that  they were firmly convinced
of  my guilt.  As I  have  said, they  kept  accusing me of lying.
They  told  me  at  one  point  that  I  was  'lucky'  that  the
questioning was  not  taking  place  in  a  'red'  country where,
because of the  denials I  was  making, my arm  would already
have  been  broken.   They  knew   about  my  'good  staunch'
American  parents  in  Missouri  and  that  I  would  'hate'  to
see  anything  happen  to them.  . . .
"The   agents  reminded  me  that  I  was  'good  American
stock—not  foreign   riff-raff   that  came  over  on  a  crummy
boat a few years  ago';  I was not a 'smelly  foreigner.'   They
told  me  that  they  would  protect   me  if  the   Silvermasters
were  threatening  my life,  and that  if  I  'cooperated,'  I  could
earn   (in  fact  they  could  almost  'guarantee'  it)  large  sums
from  writings,  movies,  lecture  tours,   etc."
District  Court,  Southern  District  N.  Y.,  Nov.  17, 1954
4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  SS, 1955
They  Would  Repeal  the  First  Amendment to  Get  the  Daily  Worker
A  Bill  to Prove  (Positively)  That  Sens. Johnston  and  Smith  Are  Not  Reds
The  Postmaster  General  in  a  letter  to  Johnston  of  South
Carolina,  chairman  of  the  Senate  Post  Office  Committee,  com-
plains  that  the  Post  Office  is subsidizing  the  Daily  Worker  to
the  tune of  $40,000 a year,  this  being  the  estimated   difference
between  the  second-class  mail  rates  it  pays  (along  with  other
publications)   and  the  cost  of  carrying  such  mail.  The  Senator
and  Mrs. Smith,   the   Republican   lady  Senator   from   Maine,
thereupon  introduced  a  bill  (S.  1508)  last  Tuesday  to  bar  the
Daily  Worker  from  the  mails' altogether.
If  this is meant  as economy,  it  doesn't make sense.  At  present
we are spending  roughly  $80,000,000 a year on  the  FBI and  no
one knows  just  how many  millions  more  on  the  other  political
gumshoe  agencies of  the  government.   Were  the  Daily  Worker
put   out  of   business,  the  government   would  have  to   spend
several  times  as much  to  do  the  same  job.   It  is obvious  from
the  kind  of  evidence dredged  up  in  countless  hearings  that  the
FBI  and  the  other  snoopers  get  most  of  their  information  by-
reading  the  Daily   Worker,   the  Communists  if   conspirators
being  the  only  ones  who oblige the  police by  publishing a daily
bulletin  on  their  activities.  That  $40,000 is less  than  one  half
of  one-tenth  of  one percent of  the  FBI budget and  perhaps one
of  the  few  intelligence  expenditures of  the  government  which
pays off.
It  is not  only  the  FBI which  would  be hurt  by  putting  the
Daily  Worker  out  of  business.  On  this frail  foundation, barely
kept  in existence by constant  appeals for  help and an  underpaid
staff,  has  been built a major new  American industry—our  pri-
vate  experts  and  consultants  on  Communism.   What   would
Counter-Attack  do  for  copy?  Where  would  the  Jenner-East-
land  committee find its source  material?  How  would  Philbrick
know  what  was going  on  in  the  Red  Underground  if  he  could
not  read  about  it  in  the  Daily  Worker?
When   the  profits  of  these  private  agencies  are  taken  into
account,   $40,000  is  chicken   feed.   The  Daily  Worker   could
probably  blackmail  the  lot  of  them  into  paying the  $40,000—
and  its  constant  deficit—by  threatening to  leave them  all high
and  dry by  going  out of  business    ...
This  bill  is  another  example  of  the  tendency  of  our  "lib-
erals," such  as they  are,  to  cancel out  any  good  they  do in  the
fight  against  the  witch  hunt  by  hastily  sponsoring   repressive
measures  of  their  own  lest  they  themselves  be  suspected.    To
prove  that  they  are  not  soft  on  Communism,  they  are  ready
to demonstrate that  they are soft  in the head.   Mrs.  Smith  tried
to  atone  for  her  anti-McCarthyism  last  year  by  sponsoring  the
Eisenhower-Brownell  measure  for  making  stateless  persons  of
native-born  American  radicals.
Fascists  Are Exempt
Perhaps  Senator  Johnston  is trying to  atone  for his  activities
in  protesting  injustices   to  civil  servants   under   the  loyalty-
security  program.   The  method  he  has  chosen  is to  tear  a  pro-
pitiatory  hole in  the  Bill  of Rights.  The  First  Amendment  says
Congress  may  make  no  law  abridging  freedom  of  the  press.
This  bill  would  not  only  deny  2d  class  mail  privileges   but
forbid   the  mails  altogether   to  "written  or  printed   matter,
designed  to  promote,  or  the  circulation  of  which  may  reason-
ably  be  expected  to  promote"  the  establishment   "eventually
...     in  any  one or  all  of-the  countries  of  the  world"  of  a
"Communist   totalitarian   dictatorship."   This   carefully  ex-
cludes Fascist material and  is broad enough  to  cover  a friendly
attitude  toward  Communist  China.
This  bill  would  do  more  than  establish  postal  censorship.
It  would make it  unlawful  for  any  private  person  to  transmit
such  literature  "in  interstate  or  foreign  commerce."  The  dis-
tributor  would  have  to  read  all  the  periodicals  or  books  he
distributed  to  see whether  he  "has  reason  to  believe"  that  the
material  "might   reasonably  be  expected   to   promote   world
communism."   The  penalty  would  be .a  fine  of  no  more  than
$10,000  a  year  or  five  years in  jail  or  both.   This  is enough  to
scare  the  average  distributor,  already  timorous,  into  handling
nothing  to  the  left  of  the  Ladies  Home  Journal.
The  chances that  this monstrosity will pass the  Congress  are
slim,  but   it   is  the  kind  of   measure  which  sometimes  slips
through   (like  the  Eisenhower-Brownell denaturalization law)
in  the  closing  days of  a session.  In  the  meantime  it  is worth a
million  dollars  to  anti-American  propagandists abroad anxious
to  show the  world just how wacky  we are getting  to be.
Help  Us Reach  a  Larger  Audience  by  Sending  a  Gift  Sub to  Your   friends
I. F. Stone's  Weekly,
Please renew  (or enter)
Name
Bt'o^t
rjty
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
. Zoie      .    .  Ptatp
Enter  this  gift  sub for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(To)  TJnmf
Pt
r
«1«t
City
'  $1  extra for  Canada.
.     ,  ZOIM>        .. pint*
8/28/65
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St, S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED