I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955nov14.pdf

============================================================

Matusow's  Recantation  in The  Courts;  A Strange  Moral  Standard,  See  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,   No. 42
NOVEMBER   14,   1955
«<>'       WASHINGTON,    D.   C.
15  CENTS
Two  Soviet  Proposals  With  Constructive  Possibilities  Ignored
How  the  News  Out  of  Geneva   Is  Being  "Managed"
While a Congressional  subcommittee  in Washington  opened
hearings   (see  page  two)   on  how  the  government  "manages"
the  press,  the  Geneva  conference  provided  vivid  illustrations
of  the  process at  work.  Two  Soviet proposals  with constructive
possibilities   were  ignored;   oversimplified  views  of  Germany
and  the  Middle  East  encouraged.     In  this  the  press  generally
was  as  much  to  blame  as  the  government;   the   newspapers
"raped  awful  easy."
Ignored:   Molotov   in  a  private  talk  with  British  Foreign
Secretary  Maonillan  suggested  a  general Middle  Eastern  con-
ference  to deal  with  the  Arab-Israeli  crisis.  This  was  reported
from  Geneva  by Chalmers  Roberts  in  the  Washington  Post  of
November  5 and  again  on  November  6.
Ignored:  After  all the talk  about  "liberating"  the  East  Euro-
pean  satellites and  the  ballyhoo  about  Dulles'  visit  on  the  sub-
ject  with  Tito,  not  the  slightest  attention  was  paid  to  the
political  implications  of  a  new  proposal  in  the  Soviet  security
plan  for  Europe.   It  takes  an  idea  first  put  forward  by  Eden
for  a  demilitarized  zone  between  East  and  West,  and  gives  it
new  dimensions.  It  suggests the creation  of  a  "zone of  limita-
tion  and  inspection  of  armaments"   which  shall   include  the
entire  territory  of  both  Eastern  and  Western  Germany  "and
those  of  all  or  some  neighboring  states."   Eastern   Germany's
neighbors  are  Poland  and  Czechoslovakia.   This  suggests  Rus-
sia  is  ready  to  neutralize  them  if  we  agree  to  neutralize  Ger-
many.  We  ignore the proposal at our peril.  For  this  is one of
the  ideas  the  West  German  government  has also broached  pri-
vately  (see  Bonn  dispatch,  London  Sunday  Times  last  May  8)
and  might  some  day negotiate with  Moscow  behind  our  backs.
If  The Position  Were  Reversed
The  American  press  has  been  the  willing  instrument  of  the
State Department  in  selling  the  most  ludicrously oversimplified
view  of  Germany  to  the  American public.  We  need  only  stop
and  ask  ourselves  one  question  to  see  how  absurd  our  own
position  is.  Would  we  agree  to  the  reunification  of Germany
if  Russia's condition were that the  Reich be allowed  to join  the
Warsaw  pact  against us?   It  is nonsense to say that all  we insist
on  is  a  free  choice  for  Germany.  The  new  Western  security
proposals  give  the  game  away.  Their  guarantees  go  into  effect
only  if a  reunited  Germany joins NATO.
We   have  come  to  think  of  world   problems  so  largely  in
military  terms  and  we  are  so  fascinated  by  those  12 German
divisions  that  we  are  in  no  mood  to  discuss any  proposal  if  it
does  not  put  German  soldiers  into  NATO  ranks.  From  this
fixation  stemmed  two  of  the  moves  made  to  falsify  the  news
out  of  Geneva  last  week.   One  was  Dulles'   "off  the  record"
plea  to  the  press  to  interpret  the  situation  as  optimistically  as
possible;  the main  reason  for  this is that if  the Germans become
convinced  that  the  deadlock  is hopeless,  a  popular  demand  for
direct  negotiations  with  Moscow  will  be  hard  to  resist.   The
other  falsification  was the  agreed  Western  "line"  to  the  press
that  the  new  Russian  proposals  on  Germans  meant  its  "com-
munization."
The  Soviet  proposals  are  open  to  question  on  many  points,
notably  their  failure to  allow  for  free  elections.   But  the  main
idea,  of  a  joint  East-West  German  council  to  deal  with  com-
mon  German  problems,  is logical  in  the  absence  of  a  general
settlement  and  not  too different  in  some respects  from  the  ideas
of  the  Social  Democrats.   The  Germans  will  notice  that   the
East  Germans  no  longer  demand  parity  of  representation,   and
will be  inclined  to laugh  at our  notion that  the  rich and power-
ful  West  German  Republic with  its  50,000,000  people,  can  be
"communized"  by the  East German  regime  with  its  18,000,000,
a  majority  of  whom  do  not  like  their  Communist  rulers.   To
draw an analogy between  this  proposed  Council  and  the  Lublin
government  in  postwar  Poland  is nonsense.  Poland  was  occu-
pied  by  the  Red  Army.
The  Realities  in  The  East
This  same  unwillingness  to  deal  with  reality  also  makes  it-
self  felt  in  the  Middle  Eastern  crisis.   How  many Americans
realize  that  this  was  brought  about  as  much  by  our  effort   to
play  Iraq  off  against  its  rival  Egypt as  it  was  by Arab hostility
to  Israel?   How  many  Americans  realize  that  the  Soviet arms
deal  with  Egypt  followed  our  action  in  linking  Iran  with  the
"northern tier" pact?  How many American newspapers stop  to
consider  that our  reaction  would  be violent, too,  if  the Russians
drew  Mexko  into  an  analogous  anti-American alliance  cover-
ing  the  Caribbean?
Eisenhower  has  issued  an  appeal  from  Denver  to  the  Rus-
sians  for  peace  in  the  Middle  East.   But  can  he  appeal   for
peace  and turn  down a conference?  Can we ask Russia to keep
out  of  Egypt  and  still  insist  on  drawing  Iran  completely  into
our own orbit?  Peace is not  a one-sided proposition.   The  U.S.
can  create  it  in  the  Middle  East by a  firm  commitment to  pre-
vent  any  aggressive  move  to  change  Israeli-Arab boundaries;
it  can  further  peace  by  offering  to  put  into  effect  the  Dulles
proposals  of  last  August  for  resettlement  and  repatriation  of
Arab  refugees  on  the  basis  of  present  boundaries;  and  it  can
negotiate  a  general  stabilization  in  the  area.    The  alternative
is  participation  in  an  arms  race  which  would  impoverish  the
Middle  East,  Israeli  and  Arab,  and  tear  it  apart  in  a  sullen
duel  between the  two  great  powers.
.1 .7 i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  14,19SS
Subcommittee  Opens  Inquiry  With  A  Field  Day  for   Newspapermen
An  Astringent  Minority  Opinion  on  What  Ails  Our   Press
The  main  obstacle  to  the  creation  of  a  well-informed   pub-
lic is its  own indifference.  In  every  country  with  a  free  press,
thoughtful  papers which conscientiously  try  to  cover  the  news
lag  behind  the  circulation  of  those  which peddle  sex and  sen-
sationalism.  This  is  as  true  in  Paris  and  London  as  in New
York;  and  if  Moscow  ever  permits  a  free   privately   owned
press,  Izvestia   and  Pravda   will  fall  far   behind  any  paper
which  prints  the  latest  on that  commissar's  love-nest.
The  second  obstacle  is that  most  papers  are  owned  by men
who  are  not  newspapermen   themselves;  publishing  is  a  busi-
ness,  not  a  Jeffersonian   passion,  and  the  main  object  is  as
much  advertising  revenue  as  possible.    Thus  it  happens that
between  the  attitude of  the  publishers  and that  of  the  public,
most  papers  in  this  country  print  little  news.  And this, ex-
cept  for  local  coverage,  is  mostly   canned,   syndicated,  and
quick-frozen.
Why  Write  for  the  Spike?
The third  obstacle  is that  this has  always  been  and  is now
more  than  ever  a  conformist  country;  Main  Street  and  Bab-
bitt—and  de  Tocqueville  long  before  Sinclair  Lewis—held  a
faithful  mirror  to  our true  nature.   It  doesn't  take  much de-
viation  from  Rotary  Club  norms  in  the  average  American
community  to  get  oneself   set  down  as  queer,  radical,  and
unreliable.
Against this  background, it  is  easy to  see why the average
Washington   correspondent   is  content  to  write   what   he  is
spoon  fed  by the  government's  press  officers.   Especially  since
the  press  is  largely  Republican  and  this  is  a  Republican  ad-
ministration,  there  is  little  market  for  "exposing"  the  gov-
ernment.   Why  dig  up  a  story  which  the  desk  back  home  will
spike?
"Managing"  the  News
It  was  this  astringent  view  of  our  profession  and  its  cir-
cumstances   which  I   found   lacking   in  the   newspapermen's
testimony  which  opened the  investigation  launched  here  by  a
special   House  subcommittee   on  government    "information."
The  most  perceptive  of  the  witnesses,  and  one of our  very best
reporters,  James  Reston   of  the  New   York   Times,  put   his
finger  op  the  vital  point  when  he  said  that  worse  than  sup-
pression  was  the  "managing"  of  the  news  by  government  de-
partments.    But the  news is "managed" because the reporters
and  their  editors  let  themselves  be  managed.
The  State  Department   is  an  outstanding   offender.    Very
often,  for  example, newspaper  readers  get  not  so  much  what
actually  happened  at  the  UN  as  the  "slant"  given  out  in  the
corridors  afterward  to  the  reporters  by  a  State  Department
attache.
The  private  dinner,  the  special  briefing, are  all  devices  for
"managing"  the   news,  as  are   the  special  organizations  of
privileged  citizens  gathered  in  by State  and  Defense  Depart-
The  CIA and  the  Press:
What   to  Do  About  Official   Lying?
"...      The news  of  the  CIA  [Central  Intelligence
Agency]  and its  operatives  all over  the  world often  con-
front  us  with  the  most  embarrassment  in  that  any  re-
porter  can be confronted with the dilemma as to  whether
he  is  going  to  tell  the  truth,  or  whether  he is  going  to
mislead  the  American  people  by  putting out  something
put  out  by  the  government  which  he  knows not  to  be
truth.  That  whole  area  of  the  CIA,  Mr.  Chairman,  I
think  is  a  growing  problem  for  the  press,  and  I  would
think  it  would merit  some attention  by your  committee."
—James  Reston  of  the  N.  Y.  Times,  before   the House
Government  Information  Subcommittee   (official    tran-
script).
ments  for  those   sessions   at  which  highly  confidential   (and
one-sided)  information  is  ladled  out  to  a  flattered  "elite."
As  a  reporter  who  began  by  covering  small  towns,  where
one  really  has  to  dig for  the  news,  I  can  testify  that  Wash-
ington  is  in  many  ways  one of  the  easiest  cities  in  the  world
to  cover.   The  problem  is  the  abundance of  riches.  It  is true
that  the   government,   like   every   other   government  in   the
world,  does its  best  to  distort  the  news in its  favor—but  that
only  makes  the  job  more  interesting.
Correspondents   Themselves  Conformist
Most   of   my  colleagues  agree  with   the   government   and
write  the  accepted  thing  because  that  is  what  they  believe;
they  are  indeed—with honorable  exceptions—as  suspicious  of
the  non-conformist  as  any  group  in  Kiwanis.
Though  the  first  day's  witnesses  included the  best  and  bold-
est  of the  regular  press, no one mentioned the  recent  deporta-
tions  of  radical  foreign  language  editors  and  of  Cedric  Bel-
frage  of  the  Guardian.  No one mentioned the  Communist edi-
tors  and  reporters   prosecuted—for    their   ideas—under   the
Smith  Act.   No  one  mentioned  the  way  McCarthy  "investi-
gated"  James  Wechsler.   Surely  thoughtful  men,  as  aroused
as  these  were  over  the  future  of  a  free  press,  might  have
given  a  moment's  consideration  to the  possible  danger  in such
precedents.  Did they  feel  it  would  be indiscreet  to  go beyond
respectable   limits?   That   such  fundamental  principles   are
best  left  for  orations  on  Zenger  and  Lovejoy,  both  conveni-
ently dead?
Yet having  expressed  these  minority  views I  hasten  to  add
that  the  testimony,  the  results  of  the  committee's   question-
naire  and  Allen Raymond's competent  and  comprehensive  sur-
vey  for  the  American  Civil Liberties  Union are  a healthy  pro-
test  against  a  growing  secretiveness.   The  need to  keep  some
few  matters private  has proliferated  into 57 varieties  of "clas-
sified"  data.   We will  report  on  the  investigation   as  it   pro-
gresses.
Washington  Editor  Protests  The  Orwellian  Curtain  Descending  on  The  News
"We  find  an  example  of  this  [withholding of information]
in  the  directive of  March  29, 1955 instructing information  of-
ficers  to  put  out  only  information that  would  'constitute  a
constructive  contribution  to  the  primary  mission  of  the  De-
partment of Defense.'  What does 'constructive'  mean?  From
the  standpoint  of  an  official  in  government we fear  it  might
mean only information that  would  not embarrass  officials....
"Another  example of  this  is  the  directive of September 16,
1955  advising  defense  contractors  to  release  no information
that  might  be  'of  possible  value  to  a  potential  enemy.'  This
is  an  effort  to  withhold  not  only  public,  but  also  private  in-
formation,   from   the  people,  under  a  standard   that   is  so
vague  as  to  be  no standard  whatever.  All  information is of
'possible  value to  a potential enemy'—the amount of  rainfall,
the  state  of  the  crops,  the  condition of  the  highways, the  lo-
cation  of harbor  channels—and  a  million  other  facts  of  daily
life.  They  are  all of some use to an enemy.  They are  ...   of
even  greater  use  to  our  own citizens  who could not  carry  on
their  normal work without this information. This  is  a  stand-
ard  of  secrecy  to  which  no  democratic  people  ought  to  con-
sent. . . .
"We   hope  the   time   will   never  come  when  the   situa-
tion  in  the  world is  so  desperate  that  the  only  way  we  can
prevent  the  Communists  from  destroying  our  free  institu-
tions  will  be  to  destroy  them  first  ourselves.    Certainly  we
do  not  believe  that  in  the  present  hour  we ought  to  tamely
submit  to a  course  of  action that,  in  a military metaphor, we
might call  a  'scorched  freedom'  policy."
R.  Wiggins,  executive  editor,  the  Washington  Post,  before   the  House Government Information  Subcommittee,  Nov.  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  November 14,19S5
Smiles  Real  or  False  in  Geneva, But  The  Cold  Shoulder Here
How  Washington  "Celebrated"  the  October  Revolution
Whether  the  smiles  in  Geneva are  real  or  synthetic,  there
is  no doubt that  the  cold  shoulder  is still  dominant—and  gen-
uine—in  Washington.  Practically  the  whole  ruling  group  in
the  Soviet  Union  turned  up  at  the  Fourth  of  July  reception
in  the  U.S.  Embassy at  Moscow  last summer, but  not  a  single
Cabinet  officer  appeared  at  the  Soviet  Embassy's  annual  re-
ception  last  week  on  the  anniversary  of  the  October  revolu-
tion,  nor  at  the  party  the  previous week for  the  Soviet  pian-
ist,  Gilels.  Justice  Douglas filed a  dissenting  social  opinion;
he was the  one membsr of the  Supreme Court  and the  highest
ranking  American.to attend  both parties.  Deputy Under  Sec-
retary  Robert Murphy  represented  the  State  Department;  he
was one of the last to arrive,  perhaps  in the  hope  (disappoint-
ed)  that the  camera  men would have  left.
The social sensation was the  appearance  of the  former  Mrs.
Joe  Davies;  the  most  interesting   portent  left  of  center,  the
fact  that  Michael  Straight  of  The  New  Republic  turned  up.
The  American  cold  shoulder  did  not   affect  the  rest  of  the
diplomatic  corps,  which  was  represented  to  a  man, including
Israel  and  Egypt.  Attendance was  so much heavier  than  last
year  that the  usually  lavish  buffet  finally  ran  short.  In  some
ways  this  annual  party  is  unfortunate;  everybody  seems  so
frightfully  hungry  that  Soviet  economic  observers  may  well
be led to conclude that American capitalism  is breaking  down.
Softening  The  Blow
The  Russians  may  easily take  the  social  snub too  seriously.
They  must  consider that  thanks  to the  loyalty-security  mania
many  Washington  personalities  are  nervous  about  being  seen
at  the  Soviet Embassy  (just  as  Russians  are,  I am sure,  about
becoming  too  chummy  with  the  U.S.  Embassy  in Moscow).
There  is  balm  also to be found  in  the  President's  greetings  to
Voroshilov,  dictated  in  his  sick  room at  Denver,  and  in  Press
Secretary  Hagerty's  announcement that  to his knowledge this
was the  first  time  a President had sent greetings on the  Octo-
ber  Revolution.  They may also take comfort in the  statements
made to  the  press by  Defense  Secretary  Wilson at  the  Wash-
ington  airport  on  his  return   from   Geneva  at  the  very  time
their  big  party  was  being  held  here.    Wilson  described  the
Russian  leaders  in  friendly  terms,  favored  another  meeting
"at  the  Summit"  if  necessary,  hinted that  some progress  may
be made on Germany "that will not  be clear  to  everyone"  and
said  (so few papers  ran  this  that  we give it  in full),  "There
is  something  bigger  than  the  Geneva  spirit,  because people in
all  countries  hope  that  their  leaders  will  be smart  enough to
insure that  there  will  be no  war."    When  a  key  official  and
big  business  man  like  Wilson speaks  in  these  terms,  the  Rus-
sians  and  the rest  of the  world  may feel  sure that  the  desire
for  peace  strikes  important  answering  chords in  Washington.
Century  of Socialism?
Several   newspapers,   including   the   New   York   Herald-
Tribune  and  the  Daily  News,  were upset  because Kaganovich
in  his  speech at  the  anniversary  celebration  in  Moscow, while
Stressing  peace  and  co-existence,  boasted  that  this  was  the
century  of  "socialism  and  communism."  This  will  only startle
those  who  refuse  to  see.   As  compared  with  50  years  ago,
every  government in  the  world today is  "socialistic."  The ero-
sion  of  absolute property  rights, 'the  growth  of  governmental
power  over  the  economy  and  the  popularity  of  the  welfare
state  are. visible everywhere.  War  would  only  make  the  state
as  all-powerful in  the  "capitalist"  countries  as  it  already  is
in  the  communist.  The  trend  toward  socialism of  one type  or
another  is  universal  and  irresistible.    Given  peace,  we  may
hope  to  cope with the  unexpected and  unpleasant  features  of
this  drift:   the  draconian  nature  of  thought  control  in  the
Communist  countries,  the  difficulty  everywhere of  preserving
individual  liberty  as  state  control  of  the  economy  grows,  the
bureaucratic  rigidity  which  develops in  both  the  centralized
states  and  the  big corporations.  Obviously  private  enterprise
could still play  a useful  role  within  the  confines  of state  plan-
Add  Faceless  Informers
In  a  local  Washington  radio  (WRC)  broadcast  No-
vember  7, Earl  Godwin said  he  had just  had  an  inter-
view  with  J.  Edgar   Hoover  and  that  the  FBI  would
ask  to be relieved  of its  responsibility  in  loyalty-security
cases  if  the  courts  or  Congress  finally  determined  that
its  informants  could not  be kept  confidential.
Latest  newspaper  to  join  the  campaign  against  the
faceless  informer  is  (three  guesses)   the  Chicago  Trib-
une.  Suit  was filed in  Federal  district  court  in  Chicago
this  month  on  behalf  of  Douglas  Stephens,  a   former
army  sergeant   given  a  dishonorable  discharge   by  an
Army  security field board  for  misconduct  as  a  POW.
The  field  board's  verdict  is  attacked  as  the  fruit  of
an  "unconstitutional  star  chamber"  proceeding  on  the
ground  that  Army  security   officials   were   allowed   to
keep  confidential the  identity  of  their   informers.
Counsel  was  obtained  for  Stephens  and  the  suit filed
as  the  result  of  an  expose  in  the  Chicago  Tribune  Sun-
day  magazine  of  October  9,  asking  "Is  this  American
justice?"   The Tribune's protege, according  to  its  story,
"sometimes   read   the   Red  newspaper,   but   only   for
sports."   This  seems  breath-takingly   broad-minded   for
Col.  MeCormick's old  paper.
ning,  and  some  way  must  be found  effectively  to  affirm   abso-
lute  freedom of  opinion  against  the  state,  whatever  its  form.
These  are  the  problems of  the  socialist  future,  but  that  it  is
the future may be seen  even  in this  country, the  stronghold  of
private  capitalism.    The  Gallup poll, for  example, just  asked
which  party  would  do  the  best  job  of  keeping  the  country
prosperous.   It  found,  even  after  three  years  of  Republican
prosperity,  that  a  slight  majority  (39%  Democrats,  37% Re-
publicans)  of  the  voters  still  believes the  New  Dealish Demo-
crats  are  a  better  bet  for  prosperity  than  the  "free   enter-
prise"  Republicans.  Even  in  America, where  private  capital-
ism  can  claim  credit  for  energizing  a  century  and  a  half  of
tremendous  development  and  striking  improvement  in  mass
living  standards,   a  majority  of  the  voters  is  still  nervous
about  possible  crises  and  doesn't  trust  the  free  market  and
the  profit  system  to  cope  with  them.
Wallace  Reappears:  The  nonsense being  talked  by  both  po-
litical  parties about  rigid farm  supports  will  be hit  by  Henry
Wallace  tomorrow   (Nov.  15)  in  a  speech  before  the   Iowa
Farm  Bureau  Federation  in  Des  Moines, his  first  public  ad-
dress  in  years.  .  .  .  Puzzler:  The brief filed by the  govern-
ment  in  the  Harvey  O'Connor case  now awaiting  decision  in
Federal  district  court  here  does  not  even  mention  the  First
Amendment,  but  confines  itself   to  jurisdictional,  procedural
and  technical  issues.  . . . Gruenther for President?   Fantastic
as  it  may  sound,  some rightist  circles  here  are  plugging  Gen.
Alfred  M. Gruenther,  NATO  chief,  as  a  dark  horse  Repub-
lican  candidate  for   '56,  saying  he  is  no  more  obscure  than
was  Willkie six  months before his  nomination.   One obstacle
is that  Gruenther  is a  Catholic.  Adelbert  Weinstein,  military
correspondent   of   the   influential   Frankfurter     Allgemeine
Zeitung,  wrote  in  an  interview  with  Gruenther  last  summer
that  the  latter  reminded him  of  a  Jesuit  priest  with  whom
Weinstein  had  been  in  a  POW  camp.  Weinstein  said  he  was
therefore  not  surprised  to  hear  from  Gruenther  that  he  had
thought  of  becoming  a  priest  before  deciding  on  West  Point.
.  .  .  Justice  Douglas  is  understandably   miffed   because  the
State  Department  this  year  as  in  past  years  is  completely'
uninterested  in  hearing  what  he  observed  abroad,  this  past
summer,  in the  Soviet  Union. . .  Sign  of the Times:  Both  the
New  York Herald-Tribune and Hearst's Mirror urged  a   "yes"
vote  for   an  additional  low  cost  public  housing  State  bond
issue   in  last   week's   New  York   election,   something   they
would  never  have  done  20 years  ago.  . . .
.1  3.  .3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly, November 14, 1-S55
Crowded  Court Week:  Matusow, Scales,  Toth  and  Some Hopeful  Items
Can  The  Law Accept  the  Doctrine That The  End Justifies  The  Means?
Matusow—Some  odd  moral  standards   are   implied  by  the
Fifth   Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  in  upholding  the  conviction
of  Clinton  E. Jencks  for  false  statement  in  a non-Communist
affidavit  despite  the  recantation  of  Harvey  Matusow.   "The
government;"  the  court  said,  "is  frequently  compelled to  look
to  the   criminal  element   including  accomplices  for  its   wit-
nesses.  The  enforcement  of  the  criminal  laws  would  be  ren-
dered  impotent  if  convictions  should  be  set  aside  merely  be-
cause one of  such  witnesses  essays  to  repudiate  his  testimony
when  it  seems  profitable  to  do  so."   But  what  the  Court  is
really  saying  is  that  an  informer's  word  is  reliable  when  he
is  paid  by  the  government  but  becomes  unreliable  when  he
recants  and  publishes  a  book  indirectly  financed  by  a  trade
union  benefiting  from  the  recantation.   Why is  the  testimony
held  tainted  by  one  kind  of  payment  but  not  by  the  other?
The  Court  also  makes a  revealing  comment on a  vital  contra-
diction  in  testimony.   Matusow,  recanting,  testified,  "I  told
the  FBI  agent  I  didn't  want  to  testify  in  the Jencks  trial.  I
didn't  feel  my testimony  was  honest."  The  FBI  agent  denied
that  Matusow  said  this.   The  Court  accepted  the  denial  but
added  a  footnote  saying,  "Moreover, other  testimony  given by
Matusow  gave  substance   to  the  assumption  that,  what  he
meant  when  he  stated  to  the-agent  that  he  did  not  feel   that
his  testimony  was  honest, was that  it  was  not honest  for  him
to  associate  intimately  with  appellant  and  then  testify  as  to
what  transpired  between  the  two."   The  italics  are  added  to
show  that  the  Court,  after  accepting  the  FBI  agent's denial,
turns around  and  accepts  Matusow's version  but interprets  it
differently.   Even  if  the  Court's  interpretation   is  correct,  is
it  honest  to  associate  intimately with a  man  and  then  exploit
this  to  give  testimony  for  pay  against  him?    Does  it  not
Violate  the  innermost  essence  of  law  to  accept  the  premise
that  the  end justifies  the  means?
Scales—The  first  Circuit  Court opin'on upholding a convic-
tion  under  the  membership clause  of the  Smith  Act was hand-
ed  down  November  7  in  Baltimore  by  a  unanimous  Fourth
Circuit  bench speaking  through  Chief Judge  Parker.  The de-
fendant  was Junius Irving  Scales,  chairman  of the  Communist
party  in  North  and  South  Carolina,  an  area  in  which  revo-
lution  is  somewhat  less  than  imminent.   The  opinion  recalls
those  of  the  criminal  syndicalism cases  in  the  early  twenties.
The  "clear  and  present  danger"  rule  is  discarded.   Member-
ship  is  equated  with  conspiracy,  and  given  the  same  sinister
overtones.   The  most  interesting  part  of  the  opinion  is  its
handling  of  Section  4  (f)  of  the  Subversive Activities Control
Act  of   1950  which  says  "Neither  the  holding  of   office   nor
membership  in  any  Communist organization  shall   constitute
per  se a  violation ...    of this  section  or of any  other  criminal
statute."   The  Court  met  this  by  splitting  a  fine  Talmudic
hair.  "In  other  words,"  Judge  Parker  ruled,  "mere  member-
ship  in  the  party  is  not  a  crime.   Membership  with knowl-
edge  of  the  criminal  purpose  of  the  organization  remains  a
crime."  The  purpose  of  Section  4  (f),  of  course,  was  to  get
around  the  plea  that  to  force a  Communist to register under
. the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Act  was  to  require  him  to
incriminate  himself.   But  if  Section  4  (f)   is  no  more  than
Judge  Parker  says  it  is,  how can  registration   be  reconciled
with  the  Fifth  amendment?  At  the  very  least  it  provides  a
vital  link  (membership)  in  the  chain  of  incriminatory  proof.
This is  the  question on which  the  Supreme  Court hears  argu-
ment  this  week  in  the  Communist Party  appeal  against  the
order  requiring it  to  register.
Toth—The  law, too, has  its  relativity.  As seen  from  Korea,
a  U.S.  airman  killed  "one  of  us  gooks"  and  got .off   scotfree
on  a  technicality.   As  seen  from  the  U.S.A.,  Justice   Black's
decision freeing Robert W. Toth  puts  some  curb on a  military
power  which  has  been growing  at  an alarming rate, and  pro-
vides indication that on some issues  at  least  Harlan  and  Clark
may  vote  on  the  liberal  side.   As  a  result  of  the  Court's  6-3
decision  that  a  soldier  once  d'scharged  may  not  be  tried  by
court  martial,  three  returned  "turncoat"  POW's from  Korea
were  set  free  next  day  by  a  Federal  judge in  San   Francisco.
This,  too, is  welcome.  For  months a  truce  was  held  up  while
we protested  that  Chinese Communist  soldiers would  be  faced
with  political  reprisals  on  their  return  home.  Since  then  a
series  of  savage  Army  trials,  like that  in  which  Major  Alley
has  just  been  sentenced to  10 years  at  hard  labor,  raises  the
suspicion  that  in  many  cases  we  are  doing  the  same  thing.
Hopeful—The  Supreme  Court's  refusal  to  hear  an  appeal
from  the  Wisconsin  Supreme Court dec'sion  holding that  ten-
ants of a  Federal  housing project  may not  be required  to  sign
a  loyalty  oath.  .  .  .  The Court's  unanimous orders  striking
down  segregation  in  public  recreational  facilities.  .  .  . The
courageous  decis'on of  Virginia's  highest  state  court  striking
down  plans  to  get  around  the  anti-segregation  rule  by public
financing  of   private   segregated   schools.  ...     The  District
Court  decision here  throwing  out  the  contempt  indictment of
Bernhard  Deutch,  a  physics, student   who  refused   to  name
others  before  the  House Un-American  Activities  Committee.
.  .  .  And the suspension  by  Judge   Morris  of  sentence  for
contempt  against  Lawrence  Baker  Arguimbau  who  likewise
declined  on  moral  grounds  to  "name  names"  for   McCarthy.
A Subscription to  the  Weekly  Makes  An  Ideal  Christmas  Gift  for  That  Thoughtful   Friend—Use  Coupon  Below
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name
Street
City                                        Zone          State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
Street
City                                           Zone           State
*  extra  for  Canada.                                              11/14/53
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED