I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jun13.pdf

============================================================

The  Nathan  Passport  Victory  and The  Right  to  Travel,  Page  2
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 22
JUNE   13,  1955
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The   Sinister   Face  Behind   The   Faceless   Informer
The  way  the  Supreme  Court  decided  the  Peters  case  is  bit-
terly  disappointing,  though  not  unexpected.   The  course  of  the
oral  argument  had  indicated  this  outcome.    In  evading   the
issue  of  whether  reputation  and  livelihood  may  be  destroyed
in  loyalty  proceedings  by  anonymous  accusation,  five  members
of   the  Court   invoked  the  rule  that  constitutional   questions
should  not  be  decided  until  necessary.    But  this  rule  was  de-
veloped  as  a  precept  of  judicial self-restraint  not  as  a  device
for  judicial comfort.    It  was not  intended  to  be*  an  excuse  for
evading  ticklish  questions.
The  invocation  of  the  rule  sounds  impressive,  but  it  begs
the  question.   What  is meant  by saying that  the  Court  will  not
decide  constitutional  issues  in  advance  of  the  need  to  do  so?
Does  it  mean  that  constitutional  questions  should   not  be  de-
cided  prematurely?   Or  does  it  mean,  as  in  this  case,  that  the
court  is  justified  in  evading  constitutional  questions   if  it  can
find  any  technicality  on  which  the  case  may  be  disposed   of?
A  Legalistic  Straw
In  this  respect,  it  would  be  hard  to  match  the  Peters deci-
sion.    The  Court  grasped  at  a  point  neither  side  had  raised,
and  on  which  both  sides  agreed.     Both  sides  agreed  that  the
Loyalty Review  Board  had  power  to  reverse  favorable  decisions
by  the  lower  boards  as  part  of  its  "post-audits."     Both   sides
agreed  that  this  power  was  exercised  in  pursuance  of  instruc-
tions  from  the  President  to  "coordinate   the  employe   loyalty
policies  of  the  several  departments.  .  .  ."    For  Chief  Justice
Warren  and  the  majority  suddenly  to  decide  that  this  accepted
administrative  practice  was  unauthorized  by  the  President  was
to  take  refuge  in  a  distant  legal   fiction.   The  Court  was  thus
able  to  declare  the  Board's  unfavorable  decision  against   Dr.
Peters null  and  void—and  in  this  sense,  but  this  sense  only,  to
"clear"  him.
This  detour  around  the  point  on  which  both  Dr.  Peters and
the  government  had  asked  the  court  to  rule  is  not  made  more
engaging  by the  analogy  Chief  Justice  Warren  drew.    In  hold-
ing  that  the  Board's  power  to  review was limited  to  those  cases
in  which  there  had  been  an  unfavorable verdict,  the  Chief  Jus-
tice said  this  accords  "with  the  deeply  rooted  principle of crim-
inal  law  that  a  verdict  of  guilty  is  appealable  while  a  verdict
of  acquittal  is  not."    This  is  indeed  to  strain  at  the  gnat.    If
the  Court  is going  to  bring  up  the  principles  of  criminal  law,
what  of  the  more  deeply  rooted  principle  that  no  man  shall  be
convicted  without  a  chance  to  cross-examine  his  accusers?
The  Need  for  Decision
If  ever  a constitutional question  was  ripe  for  decision,  it  was
in  this  case.    The  loyalty-security program  is  in  its  ninth  year.
Its  use of  secret  informers has  become  a  national scandal.   The
*  For  a comprehensive exposition  of  the  rule and  its  purpose see Jus-
tice  Brandeis's  concurring  opinion  in Aihwander  v. TV A,  297 U.S.  341.
program   itself   has  mushroomed;   it  now  covers   millions   of
workers  in  private  as well  as public  employment.    The  Attor-
ney  General  for  two  years has  been  seeking  by  the  Butler  bill
to  extend the  loyalty-security  program  beyond  "defense"  work-
ers  virtually  to  the  whole  of  American  industry.    There  will
soon  be  few  Americans  left  whose  reputation  and  livelihood
are  not  at  the  mercy  of  anonymous  accusations.
What  began  as  a  limited and  temporary emergency  measure
threatens  to  become  permanently  a part  of  American  life.   The
right  to confront an  accuser  remains in  the  criminal law  one  of
the  essentials  of  fair  trial.    Even  in  that  ultra-sensitive  defense
occupation,  that  of  an  officer  in  the  Armed  Forces,  where  dis-
loyalty would  be  most  dangerous  and  secret  surveillance  would
seem  most  justified,  an  officer  may  not  be  dismissed  without  a
court  martial,  and  the  Manual  for  Courts  Martial  forbids  the
use  of  testimony  which  is  not   "sworn   and   subject  to  cross-
examination,  the  scrutiny of  the  court  and  confrontation   of  the
accused."     Yet  the  Supreme  Court  still  declines  to  rule  that
similar   safeguards   must   be   accorded   millions   of   ordinary
workers  in  far  less sensitive  positions.    Only  Black  and  Doug-
las  were  prepared   to  take  a  fundamental   stand;  the   latter's
concurring  opinion  memorably  expresses  the  better  conscience
of  our  time.
Perhaps  we  should  be  grateful  for  small  mercies.   The   last
occasion  this  issue  was  passed  upon,  in  the  Bailey  case,  Judge
Prettyman  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  here  five  years  ago  held
that  the  security of  the  state  justified  what  he  himself  termed
"these harsh  rules,  which  run  counter  to  every  known  precept
of   fairness  to  the  private  individual."    The   Supreme   Court
split  4-to-4  on  the  issue,  and  so Prettyman's  ruling  that anony-
mous  accusers might  be  used  in  loyalty  cases  was  left  standing.
The  Earlier Ruling
Perhaps  we  should  be  grateful  that  the  Supreme  Court  this
time  did  not,  as  the  government   urged,  actually  uphold   the
practice.    But  we  had  reason  to  expect  better.    The  Court  has
displayed  a  creeping  libertarianism.    Two  years  after   Bailey
it   held   unanimously  in  the   Oklahoma   loyalty   oath   case—
through  Mr.  Justice  Tom  Clark,  no  less—that "constitutional
protection  does  extend  to  the  public  servant  whose  exclusion
[from  employment]  pursuant  to  statute is  patently  arbitrary or
discriminatory."  This was in flat contradiction  to Judge Pretty-
man's  holding  that  due  process  does  not  apply  to  loyalty pro-
ceedings.    Yet  now,  in  a  case  as  clear  as Bailey's,  where  again
all  the  evidence  on  the  record  favored  the  accused  and  the
fatal  derogatory  charge  was  anonymous,  the  Court  has  been
unable  to  muster  five  judges  to  do  more  than  clear  Dr.  Peters
personally.    The  Supreme  Court  was unable  to  face  up  to  the
faceless   informer.
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  IS,
The  Meaning  of  the  State  Department's  Surrender  in  the  Otto  Nathan  Passport  Case
A  Victorious   First  Step  in  the  Fight  for  the  Right  to  Vote
The  State  Department   is  fighting  a  rearguard  action  to
protect  the  arbitrary  powers  it  exercises   over  the  right  to
travel.    On  Thursday,  June  2,  it  filed  an  affidavit   with   the
Court  of  Appeals  declaring  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the
public interest  to  let  Dr.  Otto  Nathan  travel  abroad.   On Mon-
day,  June  6, it  announced that  Dr.  Nathan  was being  granted
a  passport.
If  it  is  contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  the  United  States
to  let  Dr. Nathan  travel  abroad,  then  the  Acting  Secretary of
State,  Herbert   Hoover,  Jr.,   Was guilty  of  violating   national
interest  in  granting  the  passport.   On the  other  hand,  if  it  is
not  true  that  his  trip  would be  contrary  to  national  interest,
then  Ashley  J.  Nicholas,  who signed  the  affidavit  as  assistant
director  of  the  Passport  Office,  committed  perjury.
Were  Nicholas  a  private  citizen,  making  the  statement  in
conversation  or  writing,  he  would be  subject  to  suit  for  slan-
der or libel.   It  is a pity that  Dr. Nathan  cannot  sue the  State
Department  for  defamation  of  character.   Nicholas  after  ac-
cusing  Dr.  Nathan  of various  political  associations  went  on to
say   (1)  that  other   information  had  been  considered  which
could  not  be  disclosed  and  (2)  that  one  of  the   considerations
in  the  Department's   decision  was  that  some  Americans  had
travelled   abroad   to   carry   on  espionage   and   revolutionary
propaganda  activities on behalf  of  the  Soviet  Union.   Such  in-
sinuations  would clearly  be  actionable  if  Nicholas  were  not  a
public  official.
Power  to  Destroy   Reputations
The  affair  illustrates  the  fact  that  in  exercising  arbitrary
powers  over  the  right  to  travel  the  State  Department  is  also
in  a  position  seriously  to  hurt  reputation  and  livelihood.  The
news  that  one  has  been  denied  a  passport  carries  the  same
stigma as  a finding of disloyalty, and may interfere  with  one's
job  or  profession,  as  it  strikingly  did  in  the   case   of  Paul
Robeson  whose  business  as  an  international  concert  star  was
destroyed.
Yet  in  the  memorandum filed by  the  Department  Monday
with  the   Court  of  Appeals  there  was  no  suggestion   of  an
apology to  Dr. Nathan.   It  merely said that  the  Acting  Secre-
tary  having  referred  the  case  to  the  Board  of  Passport  Ap-
peals  "and  having  received  the  report  and  recommendation
of  the  Board,  advises  the  Court  that  the  application  of  Otto
Nathan  for  a  passport  has  been  approved."
How  is  it  that  the  Department  filed  an  affidavit   declaring
Dr.  Nathan's  travel  abroad  contrary  to  public  interest  with-
out  waiting  for  a  final  determination?    Or  was  this  all  a
sham  to  avoid  a  showdown with  the  Court  of Appeals?
Just  as  we went  to  press  last  week, the  Department   asked
the  Court  of  Appeals  to  stay  an  order  by   Federal   Judge
Henry  A.  Schweinhaut  ordering  the   Secretary   of  State  on
pain  of  contempt  to  issue  Dr.  Nathan  a  passport.    This  was
the  first  order  of  its  kind  in  American  history.
State's Misfortune
It  was  the  Department's  misfortune  to  encounter  on  the
Court of Appeals a three  man  panel made up  of the  new Chief
Judge, Henry W. Edgerton,  David  Bazelon  and  George  Wash-
ington.    The  first  two  are  the  most  liberal   and  the  last  (a
lineal  descendant)  one  of  the  most  conscientious  judges  on
the  appellate bench.
These  three,  foreseeing  the  possibility  of  a  historic  test on
appeal,  issued  an  order  shrewdly  framed  to  put  the   Depart-
ment  squarely  on  the  procedural   spot.    The  Appeals  Court
Thursday, June  2, said  the  Department  could have  a  stay  pro-
viding it  gave  Dr. Nathan  "a  quasi  judicial hearing" on or be-
fore  Tuesday,  June  7, to  be  concluded within  three  days,  the
hearing    officer   to   make   his   recommendation  in   five   days
thereafter,  and the  Department  to  make  its  decision  not  later
than  ten  days  after  that.    The  time-table  was  designed  to
make   impossible  the   Department's   favorite   tactic—delay.
The  Appeals  Court  was  as  precise  in  indicating  just  what
kind  of  a  hearing  was  required  to  fulfil  its  order—something
Judge  Schweinhaut  had  not  specified.  It  said  Dr.  Nathan  had
never  been  accorded  "an  evidentiary  hearing   or  confronted
with  the  evidence, if  any,  which  led  to  the  denial  of  a  pass-
port."
This  order,  taken  in  connection  with  Judge   Schweinhaut's
opinion  of  last  February  28,  makes  legal  history.   Schwein-
haut  held  that  the  kind  of  hearings   held  by  the  Board  of
Passport  Appeals is not the  kind  "which the  law  contemplates
and  guarantees."   It  is  indeed  only  an  extended  interrogation
of  the  applicant  under  oath,  and  as  the  pending  test  suit  of
Dr.   Clark   Foreman   shows,   no   evidence  or   witnesses   are
offered.
Spelling   Out  "Due  Process"
The  Court  of Appeals, upholding  Schweinhaut, proceeded to
spell  out  just  what  kind  of  hearing  would  fulfil  the  require-
ments  of  due  process.    To  meet  those  requirements  the  De-
partment  would  have  to  produce witnesses  and  offer  evidence.
It  could not  rely  on undisclosed information  or  anonymous  in-
formants.   Thus  while  the  Bauer  case  three   years  ago  held
passports  could  not  be  denied  without  hearings,  the  Nathan
case  indicates  what  kind  of  hearing  is  necessary.
The  Court  of  Appeals  order  offered  the  Department  three
alternatives.   It  could refuse  to  obey and face  a  contempt  ac-
tion.   The  chance of  enforcing an  order against  the   Secretary
of  State  by  contempt  or  mandamus  are  slim;  the  opportuni-
ties  for  delay  are  many.    The  sequel  to  the  famous  Bauer
case  shows  how  easily  such  an  order  may  be  circumvented.
A  statutory  court  (106  F.  Supp.  445) held  the   Department
was  wrong  in  revoking  Miss  Anne  Bauer's  passport  without
a  hearing.    The  Department  did  not  appeal  but  Secretary of
State  Acheson   delayed   compliance;   there  was  talk  of  con-
tempt;  nothing happened; Miss  Bauer, her  funds and  patience
exhausted,  gave  up  the  fight,  married  a  Frenchman  and  took
out  French  citizenship.
Undoubtedly  Dulles could  have  adopted  the  same  tactics  as
Acheson.   But  a  wholly  non-legal  consideration made  this  in-
advisable.   The  Department  might  win  such  a  running  battle
but  the  fact  that  Dr.  Nathan  had  become Einstein's   executor
gave  this  long delayed  passport  case  (the  original   application
was  made  two  and  a  half  years  ago)   international   promi-
nence.  The  publicity  would have  focussed too  much  attention
on  the  arbitrary   way  the  passport  division  operates.
Unhappy   Alternatives
So  this  left  two  alternatives.    One was  to  hold  the  hearing
ordered,  but  this  would  have  set  a  precedent  for  the  future.
It  might  also  have  thrown  on  the  record  and  opened  to  the
scrutiny  of  the  courts  the  sloppy  character  of  what  the  De-
partment  regards  as  "evidence"  in  passport  matters.   The
other  alternative  was to  issue the  passport  without a  hearing,
thus   avoiding   adjudications  which   might   ultimately   have
forced  the  Department  to  revise  its  hearings  procedure.  This
was the  course chosen.
The  Emergency  Civil Liberties  Union  and its  general  coun-
sel,  Leonard  Boudin, by  bringing  this  suit  on  behalf  of  Dr.
Nathan,  have  demonstrated  that  the  Department  can  be  de-
feated.    The  Courts  have  been  led  to  take  judicial  notice  of
the  meaningless  facade  which  is  the  Board  of  Passport  Ap-
peals,  a  Board which has  no fixed membership, makes  no find-
ings,  issues  no decisions, and  produces  no witnesses.    A pass-
port  has  been  won,  and  this  victory  is  the  precedent.    Now
is  the  time for  all  good men  similarly  situated  to  bring  simi-
lar  suits  against  the  Department.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  IS,   1955
Replacement   of   Dulles   By  Stassen  May  Be  In  The  Cards
Final  Chance  to  Avoid  Repetition  of An  Old  Folly
The  invitation  to  Bonn  is  a  final  warning  to  the  West  that
unless  the  German  problem  is settled  at  the  Four  Power  meet-
ings  soon  to  be  initiated  another   Russo-German  entente  is  in
the  making.    The  American  public  is  so  drugged   with   cold
war  propaganda  by  the  State  Department  that  it  has  forgotten
1917  and   1941  and  all  they  cost,  but  it  would  be  criminal  if
France  and  England  permit  the  Germans  to  slip  out  of  control
again  via  a  repetition  of  Rapallo  and  the  Nazi-Soviet  pact.
The  Russians  are  playing  for  the  withdrawal  of  American
troops  and  bases  from  Western  Europe.   They  are  prepared   to
pay  with  a  withdrawal  from  their  own  satellites  and  with  a
reunified   Germany,  i.e.  the   liquidation   of  the   East   German
regime.    Should   this   new  Grand   Design  for   a   normalized
Europe   be   negotiated   between   East  and   West,  particularly
within  the  framework of  an  arms  limitation  program,  some  re-
strictions  on  German militarization might  be maintained.  Some
check  at  least  would  be  provided   by  common   agreement  be-
tween  East  and  West.    But  if  the  deal  is  made  between  Bonn
and  Moscow,  no  real  check  on  German  power  is  possible.
The  Russians are  reported  ready to  allow  the  Reich  500,000
men  under  arms  as  part  of  a  bargain  to  stay  out  of  NATO.
But  past  history  shows  how  little  German  promises  are  worth.
Once  the  Germans  have  their  army,  rightist  and  military  ele-
ments will  control  the  Reich again;  it  will have  freedom  of  ac-
tion;  it  can resume  the  swing  between  East  and  West,  bidding
one  side  against  the  other.    The  Russians can maintain a  Ger-
man  entente  only  by  feeding  more  to  the  monster,  and  its  ap-
petite  will  grow  with  the  eating.    A  new  partition  of  Poland
would  be  a  mere  entree  to  the  meal.
Whether  looked  at  from  Moscow  or  Paris  only  a  restoration
of  East-West  understanding,  i.e. to  speak  plainly,  encirclement
of  Germany,  can  offer  a  minimum  of  safety  once  Germany  is
rearmed  again. Why  rearm her? Why  hand  over  her  youth, her
workers,  her  sober  middle  class  elements,  all  the  new stirrings
since  the  war  of  doubt  and  misgivings  about  militarism,  and
let  the  drill  sergeants  take  over  again  for  that  Third  Try  at
world  dominion  which  were  part  of  her  General  Staff's  plans ?
Stale  Minuet
The  Russians  and  the  Americans have  mobilized  and  moved
outward  only  in  fear  of  each  other's  expansion;  basically  both
are  isolationist  peoples,   satisfied   powers,  possessors  of  conti-
nental   domains,  men  who  march  to  war  only  out  of  neces-
sity.    But  there  is a  dynamic  element  in  Germany  which  loves
war,  a  pattern  of  obedience which  serves  its  purpose,  a  hunger
for   expansion  that  waits  to  be  slaked,  a  contempt  for   other
peoples  whether   Slav,   Frenchman   or   American   that  is  but
thinly  hid  even  now,  and  a  Wagnerian  sucidal  mentality  that
may  bring  about  the  downfall  of  mankind  once  the  Germans
have  the  new  nuclear  weapons.    Their  militarists  may  easily
make  the world  one vast  crematorium.     Experience  since   1870,
thrice  repeated,  underscores  the  folly  of  returning  to  the  stale
minuet  of  balance  of  power  politics on  the  European continent.
Is  it  too  late  for  some  counsel  of  caution  to  make  itself  felt?
If  we were  soberly  consulting  past  lesson  and  present  inter-
est  we  would  be  trying  to  persuade  Moscow  that  it  was  non-
sense  to  conceive of  a  "neutral"  zone  in  Europe built  around  a
neutral  Germany  because  Germany  will  never  play  a  neutral
role  once  rearmed.    The  context  of  a Europe  from  which  Rus-
sian  and  American  power  has withdrawn  is a  context  prepared
for   German   penetration,   expansion,   hegemony   and   conflict.
American  military  power   moved  into  Western  Europe  little
more  than  a  decade  ago  for  the  same  reason  that  Russian  mili-
tary  power  moved  into  Eastern  Europe:  each  to  protect   itself
against  German  expansion.    The  Atlantic  Pact  reflects  the  fact
that  the  U.  S.  like  Britain  before  it  cannot  permit   a  hostile
power  to  come   down  to  the   Atlantic   seaboard   of  Western
Europe.    This  is what  drew  us  into  two  world  wars,  and  both
were  against  German  militarism.    Must  both  sides  repeat   the
same  errors ?    Is  the  terrible teaching  of  the  Nazi-Soviet  pact
so  soon  forgotten  ?  The  Russians  were as  unsuccessful  in  turn-
ing  the  Germans westward  as Chamberlain  was  in  the  attempt
to  turn  them  eastward.    A  divided  Germany  is  preferable  to
a  reunited  Germany if  that  reunited  Germany is to  be  rearmed.
Ike  Has  Not  Entirely  Forgotten
As  the  meeting  at  the  summit  approaches,  where  in  Wash-
ington  are  there  such  perspectives ?  Nowhere  visibly,  but  un-
spoken  and  below  the surface wherever  there  has been  thought-
ful  study  of  the  German  question  in  preparation  for  the  talks.
Mr.  Eisenhower  has  not  entirely  forgotten   why  he  marched
into  Europe  all  so  recently;  his  recent  press  conferences  have
encouragingly  indicated awareness of  the  need  for  and  a  readi-
ness  to  pursue   an  East-West   understanding  within   which  a
German   settlement  may  be  achieved.     "At  the  summit"   the
English,  the  French  and  the  Russians may find an  echo  of  their
own  misgivings  in  the  President,  an  avenue  for  solution.   This
is why  Dulles  fears  such  a  meeting,  seeks  so hard  to  make  it  a
mere   formal,   sharply   limited,   purely   ceremonial    gathering,
with  no  real  function  other  than  to  set  the  stage  and  arrange
the chairs.
Mr. Eisenhower's remarks  last week  about the three-day  limit
and  his  willingness  to  talk  any  reasonable  time were  indicative
of  the  growing   divergence   between  White  House  and   State
Department.     Perhaps  it  would  be  more  accurate  to  say  be-
tween  the  White  House  and  Mr.  Dulles  because  the  latter
alone   seems  to   be  wedded   indissolubly  to   that   blind   anti-
Sovietism  on  which  Goebbels   (remember?)   played  so  fatally.
The  hopeful  strand  in  events  here  in  Washington  is that  this
divergence   in  views  is  leading  the  Secretary  of   State  visibly
into  the  camp  of  the  President's  rivals  in  his  own  party.   The
political  necessities  which  forced  Eisenhower  reluctantly  into
a   clash   with   McCarthy   in   1954   and   Kriowland   in   1955
may  push  him  into  conflict  with  Dulles  by  1956.     The  State
Department's   slap  at  Nixon   for  his  Chicago  speech  so  soon
after  the President  made it evident that  he  did  not  want  Know-
land  as  a  running  mate  in  1956  was  not  lost  on  the  White
House.    It  delighted  Knowland,  who  sees  Nixon  as  his  rival;
it  served  notice on  those around  the  President  that  Dulles was
undercutting  his  chief  in  domestic  policy.   The  Secretary  of
State  cannot  surreptitiously  play  to  the  Knowland  wing  with-
out  political  danger.    If  he  were  to  be  replaced   with   Stassen
not  only  would  the  President  have  a  lieutenant  on  whom  he
could  rely  at  home  but  we  would   have  a  Secretary  of   State
ready  to  negotiate  co-existence  and  disarmament  in  an  atmos-
phere  of  East-West   understanding.
9   -<
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  IS, 1955
The   Court's  Evasion  Was  The   FBI's  Victory
(Continued  from  Page   One)
The  Supreme   Court  has  failed  us.    Let  no  one  think  the
issue  has  simply  been  postponed.    Five  years  passed  after  the
Bailey  case  before  that  of  Dr.  Peters  was  heard.    More  years
will  pass  and  this  cancer  on  our  law  will  eat  itself  in   deeper
before  there  is another.   It  is  not  easy  to  find  the  thousands of
dollars  which  such  appeals  cost;  even  counsel  as  redoubtable
as  Arnold,  Fortas  & Porter*  who  fought  both  the  Bailey  and
the  Peters cases  may be disheartened.    The  replacement  of  the
old  "loyalty"  by  the  new  "security   risk"  standard  will  serve
further  to  confuse  the  issue.
The  issue  of  the  anonymous  informant  which  the  Supreme
Court  evaded  is not  one simple  issue, but  unfolds  into  several.
Attention  has  been  focussed  on  a  man's  right  to  confront  his
accusers,  but  there  is a  second  related  issue.    This  is  whether
the  FBI  is  to  be  accorded  such  power  that  it  can  withhold  its
sources  not  only  from  the  accused  but  from  his  judges.    This
was  a  point  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  raised  during  oral  argu-
ment.    "The  very  judges  of  the  government,"  the  Justice  said,
"are  not  allowed  to  know  who the  witnesses  are  ...     on the
basis  of  whose  testimony they  are  to  make  a   finding."   It  is  a
pity  he  confined  himself  to  this  informal  protest.
An  Invitation  to  Gossip
A  careful  reading  of  the  record  in  the  Peters  case   shows
three  different   reasons  for  withholding  information.    One  is
that  FBI  men  are  instructed  to  guarantee  anonymity to  casual
informants;  this  makes people more  willing to  talk,  but  does  it
make  them  more  reliable?   "A  large  area  of  vital  government
information   depends,"  the  government   argued   in   its  main
brief  (p.  105),   "on  .  .  .  casual  informers  who must  be guar-
anteed  anonymity."    To  guarantee  anonymity is  to  encourage
malice  and  invite  gossip.    A  person  who  knews  that  he  will
never  have  to  be  responsible  for  anything  he  says  is  not  the
most  dependable  source  of  information.   The  rigorous  stand-
ards  of  criminal trial force  all  such  loose  material  through  the
strictest  of  sieves,  but  in  loyalty proceedings  loose  talk  loosely
collected  is shielded  from  scrutiny  by  the  plea  that  to  disclose
*  A  salute is  also  due  Fowler  Harper  and Vern  Countryman  of  Yale
Law  School  as  co-counsel  for  Dr.   Peters.
the  sources  would  be  harmful  to  "security."
The  second  reason given for  withholding information is that
it  would  uncover  the  FBI's  professional  informers.    Even  in
liberal  circles,  these  are  regarded  as  somehow  sacrosanct  and
briefs  amicus  curiae  in  this  case  suggested  that  maybe  "an  un-
dercover  agent  of  the FBI  .  .  . might  be protected  under  many
circumstances when  the  landlord, the  school  associate or village
gossip  ought  not.  . . ."  (See  footnote  page five of  CIO brief.)
But  surely enough  has  come out  by now  to  show  that  these  un-
dercover  agents  include  a  most  unseemly  sampling  of  perjur-
ers,  psychopathic  liars,  stumble-bums and  plain  moochers  who
will  say anything  for  a  buck.
The  Technics  of   Snooping
Finally  a  close  reading  of  the  Peters case will  show  that  the
government  is  protecting  not  only  the  FBI's  informers but  its
other  methods of  surveillance.   As  the  government  also  said  in
its  brief   (p.   105),   "In  addition  to  information  from   confi-
dential  informants,  a  large  percentage  of  the  material  included
in  the  reports under  the  loyalty and  security program  is derived
from   the   use   of   extremely   delicate   and   confidential  tech-
niques."    What  are  these  mysterious  "extremely  delicate  and
confidential  techniques?"
At  page  23  of  the  reply  brief  for  Dr.  Peters  there  is  quoted
a  passage  from  Elinor Bontecou's  The  Federal   Loyalty-Security
Program   (1953),   perhaps   the   most   authoritative  scholarly
work  on  the  subject  and  one  the  government  also  cites  in  its
briefs.    Miss  Bontecou  says  that  in  reporting  loyalty informa-
tion  the  FBI  conceals  not  only  the  source  of  the  information
but  the  method  by which  it  has  been  obtained  "whether  from
an  undercover  agent,  a  stool  pigeon,  a  check  to  determine  the
source  of  incoming  mail,  a  telephone  tap  or  by  other  means."
(Italics  added.)     So mail  covers  and  telephone  taps,  both  of
questionable  legality, are  among  those  "extremely  delicate  and
confidential  techniques"  which  the  FBI  fights  against  disclos-
ing.    To  hide  the  use  of  such  methods   from  the   executive
branch  of  the  government  and  from  the  judiciary is  to  draw  a
cloak  over  what  may be  large  scale  official   lawlessness  and  in-
vasions  of  privacy.   The  face  behind  the  faceless  informer  is
the  sinister  face  of  a  secret  political  police.   The  evasion  of  the
issue  in  the  Peters  case  was  a  major  victory  for  the  FBI.
Why   Not  Send  That  Friend  A  Special   6-month  $2   Gift    Subscription?
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Zone          State
or  $4 (1 yr.)   additional:
Zone          State
6/13/55
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED