I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955nov07.pdf

============================================================

Extort
First  Full  Report  on  Historic  Security  Decision  Unreported  in  Most  of  The  Press
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,  No. 41
NOVEMBER  7,  1966
">«      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Ninth  Circuit  Tackles  Issue  Supreme  Court  Dodged  in  Peters  Case
Loyalty-Security    Regulations   Declared   Unconstitutional
When  Hearings  Are  Based  on Anonymous Accusation
The   Faceless  Informer  Struck  Down   At  Last
When the  Supreme  Court  dodged  the  issue of  secret inform-
ers  in  the  Peters  case last  June,  the  Department  of  Justice  was
as  jubilant as defense lawyers were  gloomy.  This was  the  sec-
ond time in five years the  issue had  been before the  Court  with-
out  eliciting  an  opinion  on  it,  and  it  looked  as  if  another  five
years  might   pass  before  someone   else  was  found   intrepid
enough  to  challenge  the  practice  of  anonymous  accusation  in
loyalty-security  proceedings.   But  now the  Ninth  Circuit  Court
of  Appeals  in  San  Francisco  has  created  something  of  a  crisis
within  the  Department.   That  court  (in  Parker  v.  Lester)  has
just  met  the  issue  squarely,  holding  unconstitutional  loyalty-
security  regulations which permit  the  use  of  faceless informers.
The  decision granted  seven seamen  and  three  longshoremen
an injunction  in which the  Coast  Guard was forbidden to black-
list them.  The  case involved  regulations  issued  under  the  Mag-
nuson  Act  of  1950  which  authorized  the  Coast  Guard  to  bar
"security  risks"  from  maritime  and   waterfront   employment.
But  the  principles  laid  down  by the  decision  (see  the  passages
quoted  in  boxes  on  this  page  and  page  four)   equally   affect
hearing  procedures  now  used  by  the  government  not  only  in
Federal  employment and  in  defense plants  but  also  in  passport
applications  and  in  conscientous  objector  cases.  The  Court  held
in  effect  that  it  was a violation  of  due  process  to  deprive  a man
of  his  livelihood,  reputation  or  other  rights  on  the  basis of  evi-
dence  not  fully  disclosed  to  him.   The  Department  of  Justice
has  90  days  in  which  to  take  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court,
and  it  is believed  here that  it will  have  to  risk  final  test  or  see
its  entire  security program  undercut.   Additional  pressure may
be  exercised  if  counsel  for  the  victorious  West  Coast  workers,
Gladstein,  Andersen,  Leonard  and  Sibbett  found  some  way  to
file suit—as  they threaten  to  do—for  recovery  (from  the  gov-
ernment  or  private  shipping  companies)  of  back  pay  lost  dur-
ing  the  five  years  these  security  cases  have  been  in   litigation.
Changing  Climate  of  Opinion
A  changing  climate  of  opinion  is  strikingly  evident  in  the
new  decision.  Two  years ago the  same court  (in  U.S. v.  Gray,
207  F.2d 237)  did uphold  the  dismissal of  indictments  against
three  seamen  for  taking  jobs  without  security  clearance.    It
ruled  that  the  seamen  had  not  been  "adequately  informed"  of
the  charges  against  them.   But  the  Court  did  not  then  require
full  disclosure.  At  that time the  Court  frowned  on  "revelation
of  the  names  of  the  informants"   as  likely  "to   dry  up  the
sources  of  information."   Now  it  has  reversed  a  District  Court
for  adopting  the  same rule  it promulgated  in  1953.  The  lower
court  held  that  the  complainants  had  a  right  to  an  adequate
summary  of  the  charges  against  them  except  where  the resume
.1  6  :i
Is  Secret  Talebearing   Necessary?
"Is  this  system  of  secret  informers,  whisperers   and
talebearers   of  such  vital  importance to  the  public  wel-
fare  that  it  must  be preserved  at  the  cost  of denying  to
the  citizen  even a  modicum of  the  protection  tradition-
ally  associated   with  due  process?  . . .
"In  the  procuring  of  evidence  for  the  prosecution  of
criminal  cases,  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  has
shown  no  signs  of  collapsing  because  proof   of  guilt
must  be  furnished  by  witnesses  who  must  appear   for
confrontation  and  cross-examination.  . . .
"It  may  be  assumed  that  this  determination   [forbid-
ding  the  use of derogatory information  from  undisclosed
sources]  will remove from  the  investigative  agencies,  to
some  degree,  a  certain  kind  of  information  and  that,  in
the  future, some persons  will be deterred  from  carrying
some  of  these  tales  to  the  investigating  authorities.   It
is  unbelievable that  the  result  will prevent  able  officials
from  procuring  proof  any  more  than  those  officials   are
now  helpless  to  procure proof  for  criminal  prosecutions.
"But  surely it is better  that  these  agencies  suffer  some
handicap  than  that  the  citizens   of  a  freedom  loving
country  shall  be denied that  which has  always been  con-
sidered  their  birthright.   Indeed, it  may  well  be  that  in
the  long  run  nothing  but  beneficial  results  will  come
from  a  lessening  of  such  talebearing.  It  is  a  matter of
public  record  that  the  somewhat  comparable   security
risk  program directed  at  government employes has been
used  to  victimize perfectly innocent  men."
—U  S.  Court  of  Appeals  in  Parker  v. Lester.
might  disclose  the  identity  of  the  informant.   Now  the Circuit
Court  2-to-l  rules  against  any  such  exception  because  this  "as
a  practical matter  gives the  Coast  Guard  carte  blanche to with-
hold  substantially any  information the  officials  may  choose  to
keep  from  the  seamen."
As  recently  as  September  of  last year,  the  same Judge  Pope
who  wrote  this  new  decision  held  in  a  conscientous objector
case  (White  V. VS.,   215  F.2d  782)  that  it  was  "a  matter  of
common  knowledge"  that  the  FBI  would  be handicapped  if  it
could  not  protect  its  sources  of information.  Now  Judge  Pope
not  only  scoffs  at  this  argument  (see  box  on  this  page)   but
says  it might  be a good  idea if  some of  this kind  of  talebearing
was  discouraged.  Judge  Healy, who participated  in  these  earlier
decisions,  merely  noted  in  a  one  paragraph   dissent  that  the
question  had  been  dodged  by the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Peters
case  and  that  any  reversal  should  be  left  to  that  tribunal.
There  are  other  ways  in  which  this  decision  would  put  a
spoke  in  the  callous  wheels  of  the  security program.    It  criti-
cizes  the  practice,  common  to  most  agencies,  of  discharging  a
man  first  and  then  giving  him  some  sort  of  hearing.  The  ac-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Store's  Weekly,  November   7,1955
Few  Agree  On  What  Automation  Is,  but  None  Oppose  It
Labor  Fears  Short-Term   Unemployment;    Business,  A  Labor   Shortage
By  John  B.  Stone
A Congressional  subcommittee wound up  15 half  day sessions
in  the  old  Supreme  Court  chamber  of  the  Capitol  last  week
after  about  25 expert  witnesses  had  talked  about  automation
for  a  total  of  some  30  hours.   There  was  no  agreement  on
what  automation  is  or  what  it  would  do to  the  U.  S. economy
and  labor  force.
Though  automation  is  supposed  to  have  a  revolutionary  ef-
fect  on technology,  the  hearings  were  sparsely  attended.  The
subcommittee  chairman,  Congressman  Wright  Patman   (D.
Tex.)  was  the  only  member of the  subcommittee  in regular  at-
tendance.  He  told  a  handful  of  bored  newsmen  he  found  only
one  point  of  agreement—everybody   was  for  automation.  But
where  industry  was  enthusiastic,  labor  was  apprehensive.
Industry  spokesmen  like Ralph  J.  Cordiner  of General  Elec-
tric,  D.  J.  Davis  of  Ford,  and  Don  G.  Mitchell  of  Sylvania
Electric  Products  insisted  that  automation   is  not  something
new,  but  merely  a  continuation of mechanization.  They  agreed
that  while  it  would displace  workers  on the  production  line,  it
would  create  new  jobs  elsewhere,  especially  in  service  indus-
tries.
They  pictured  labor  "liberated"  from  the  machine,  and  an
American  utopia  of unlimited production.  They  suggested that
Congress  offer  big  business  special  tax  inducements  to  enable
it  to  invest  in more  mechanical  brains..  They  even  went  so  far
as  to  predict  so  great  a  demand  for  U.  S.  goods  in  the  near
future  that  there  would  be  a  shortage  of  workers  unless  in-
dustry  grew  more  automatic.   They  said  there  was  already  a
tremendous  shortage  of  engineers  and  technicians.
Why  Labor  Is  Uneasy
CIO  President   Walter  P.  Reuther  and  President  James  B.
Carey  of IUE  defined  automation  as  a  "second  industrial  revo-
lution"  because  it  substitutes  control  of  machines  by  other
machines  for  control  of  machines  by  men.
They  supplied  figures  showing  that  while production-—and
profits—rise  sharply  in  automated  operations,  the  number  of
pfoduction  workers  drops  dangerously.  They  doubted the  abil-
ity  of industry  to  absorb, forever,  in non  production  lines  and
new  industries,  the  workers  laid  off when  machines  take  over
direction  of  production.
All  the  labor  spokesmen  agreed  the  concept  of  full  employ-
ment  must  be  retained  to  create  purchasing  power  for  con-
sumption  of  the  greater new production. A 30 to  35 hour week
with  no cut  in take-home  pay,  longer  vacations,  earlisr  retire-
ment   of  workers,   were   some  of  the   suggested   long  range
cures.    To  meet   any   immediate  automation  unemployment,
they  suggested   a  big  housing,   educational,   hospital,   public
roads  and  public  works  program.
President   Joseph   A.  Beirne,  of  the   CIO  Communications
Workers,  told  the  subcommittee the  number  of  telephones  in
the   U.S.  increased   533%  from   1920  to   1954   (8.1  million  to
43.3  million)  and  the  number  of  average  daily  calls   increased
Too  Little  Respect  for  Teachers
The  famous  scientist,  Vannevar  Bush,  was  asked  by
Chairman  Patman  during  the  automation hearings why
the  USSR  is  going  to  graduate 45,000  engineers  and 1,-
600,000  technicians next  year while  the  U.S.  will gradu-
ate  only  27,000  engineers  and  50,000  technicians.
"The  first  thing  we  need  to  do,"  Bush  replied,  "is  to
raise  the  pay  of  primary  and  secondary  teachers.   But
more  than  that," he  added after  a  moment's pause,  "we
have  lost   something  since   the  days  of   the  little  red
schoolhouse.   We  must  create  respect  for  our  teachers,
restore  their dignity.
"I  don't  want  to  see  us  adopt  the  Russian   system,"
Bush  said,  "but  there  they  do  have  a  deep  respect   for
men  of  culture."
If   Only  God  Were  Automated
During  the  automation  hearings, James  B.  Carey  of
the  IUE, was  subjected to  sharp questioning by  Senator
Ralph  Flanders  (R. Vt.),  himself  a famous  machine  tool
manufacturer.    The   latter   was   trying  to   prove  that
mechanization  of  any  kind  always creates  new jobs.
Carey  drew  a  laugh  and  took   the  pious Vermonter
aback  with  this  anecdote.  "There  was  a  meeting of  the
great  minds  of  industry  at  Schenectady—I  won't  name
the  company—about  the  first  of   the  year,"  Carey  re-
lated.   "It  was  decided that only  the  surface of  automa-
tion  had been scratched.  One of  the speakers at  the con-
ference  said  that if  God had only had  some  of  the  auto-
mation  talent   there   present,   the  time  of  the   Creation
could  have  been  cut  to  five  days."
Schenectady  is  the  home of  General Electric.
382%  while  the  number  of  all  telephone  employes  went  up
only  152%.    He  did  not  think  continued expansion  would  cre-
ate  many  new jobs  in  his  industry.   He  warned  200,000 would
lose  their  jobs  in  the  Bell  System  in  the  next  10 years  unless
present  policies  are  changed.
As  exchanges   were  changed  to  dial  operation  in  Michigan
from  November, 1949, through  December, 1954, employment of
operators dropped from  1,414  to  273. More than  half  the  wom-
en  (761)  were  laid  off, 48 transferred   to  other  jobs  with  the
same  local company, 309 transferred  to other  companies, and 8
pensioned.  He  accused   A.T.&T.  of  withholding  such   figures.
President  W.  P.  Kennedy,  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Railroad
Trainmen,  complained that  workers  whose whole life  has  been
railroading   are  simply  laid  off  wherever   automated   freight
yards  are  installed.
But  Chief  Engineer  S.  R. Hursh, of  the  Pennsylvania  Rail-
road,  devoted  almost  his  entire  time  to  a  glowing  description
of  the  new  $34 million Conway Yard  near  Pittsburgh,  biggest
in the world, where radar, mechanical "brains," and other  gad-
gets  will  do  the  work  of  hundreds  of  men  with  only  a  few
operators.   His  only  reference   to  the   problem   of  displaced
workers  came  when  he  said,  "If  what  is  done  leads  to  more
efficiency  and  more  economy ...     it  makes  more  secure  the
employment  of  all  employes."
Hursh's  testimony  brought  a  charge  by  Patman  that  the
railroads  are  "not   recognizing  their  responsibilities."  Presi-
dent  William T.  Farley,  of  the  Association  of  American  Rail-
roads,  promised Patman  the  problem of laid  off workers would
be  considered  at  the  group's  meeting  in  Chicago  this  month.
Where  Automation  Is  Coming
Some  trends  were  revealed  by  the  hearings.   Automation
will  develop fast  in  some  industries  like  electrical   equipment
and  electronics.    It   will  grow   stronger  in  those   industries
where  it  already  is  strong:  petroleum,  chemicals,  steel  and
autos.  But no automated  assembly  line  is in sight  in  the  auto
industry.   The  new  technique  will  be  reserved  for  component
parts.
In  most  industries,  development will  be  slowed  by three  im-
portant  factors:   (1)  the  huge  cost  of  automated   equipment,
(2)  the  rapid  development  of  new  mechanical  marvels  which
often  make  "wonder"  machines  obsolete  before  the  long  proc-
ess  of installation  is completed  and,  (3)  automation  equipment
for  mass  industry,  so far,  can  produce  only identical   products,
and  can't  be  changed  to  make  various  models.
But  even  with  fast  progress  in  only  a  few industries  auto-
mation  may  cause  economic dislocation.  Edwin  G. Nourse,  first
chairman  of the  President's  Council of  Economic Advisers  un-
der  Truman,  warned,  "Unless  the  responsible  executives  seek
to  integrate  their  operation   to  the  prosperity  of  the  whole
economy  .  .  .  our  economic  process  will  distintegrate  into
wasteful   struggles  for  individual  or  group  short-run  advan-
tage."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  7,1955
Talk  in  and  Around  the  Capitol:  Mobilizing  Religion  Again
Welcoming  A  Revolutionary;  Acheson  Finds  Peace   Unmentionable
The flags were  out  on  Pennsylvania  avenue all  last  week to
hail  a  visitor  who  had  successfully  practiced  the  overthrow
of  a  duly  elected  government  by  force  and  violence  and   shot
his way into the  United  Nations.  But  though  he was  paraded
triumphantly  past the Justice  Department,  no Smith Act  war-
rant  was  served  upon him  nor  was  recognition  denied him  at
the  State  Department.   We  refer,  of  course,  to  our  honored
visitor,  Castillo  Armas  of  Guatemala.    The  festivities  with
which  he  was  greeted  may  serve  to  underscore  the  fact  that
our  government  stands  foursquare  for  free  elections,  except
in  countries  where  we  don't  like  the  governments the  people
happened  to  vote  for,  in  which  case  second hand  planes  and
leftover  bombs may  be  obtained here  on  discreet  application.
Bipartisan  Pot  and Kettle
If   Dean  Acheson's  articles  on  foreign  policy  in   Harper's
for  November was  intended to  be one of  the  big  opening guns
for  the   1956  campaign,  it  certainly  misfired.    Mr.  Acheson
has  his  admirable  qualities,  but  his  article,  like  his  appear-
ances  as  Secretary  of  State  before  Congressional committees,
exuded  an  unfortunate  air  of  smug  superiority.   The  article
is  noteworthy  chiefly  for  what  it  does not  say.   He  justifiably
attacks  his  successor,  Mr. Dulles, for  the  doctrine  of  "massive
retaliation" but that  is ancient  history.  This  doctrine, like Mr.
Dulle's  "liberationism"    (which   Mr.  Acheson  does  not   criti-
cize), was  abandoned by the  Eisenhower Administration.  Mr.
Acheson  gives  it  no  credit  for  this,  nor  for  making  peace in
Korea,  nor  for  keeping out  of  war  in  Indochina. Though anxi-
ous  to  claim  all  that  is  good  in  foreign  policy  for  the  Demo-
crats, he makes no mention of the  role played by Adlai Steven-
son and  Senator  George in  helping to  steer  Eisenhower out of
war  over  the  Formosa  straits  last  winter   and  toward   the
meeting  at  the  summit last  spring.   Mr.  Acheson seems emo-
tionally  wedded to  the  cold  war,  the  arms  race  and  "negotia-
tion  from  strength"  and  these  stair
1
  policies  are   no recom-
mendation  for  1056.  In  patting  himself  heartily on  the  back,
Mr. Acheson omits from  the  fulsome  catalogue of his  own  past
achievements  any  mention  of  how he initiated  German rearm-
ament, perhaps  because this  was  launched  "without   consulta-
tion  or  warning"  to our  allies,  and  this high-handed  and  uni-
lateral  way  of  carrying  on foreign  policy  is  one  of  the  points
on  which the  Acheson  kettle calls the  Dulles pot  ever  so black.
The  Tovarisch  Two
Mr. Dulles at  Geneva has  magnanimously  lifted  the  current
restrictions   which  make  U.S.  passports  not  good  for  use  in
Soviet  countries.  This  is  advertised  as  a  big  step  forward  to
freedom  of  travel,  and  the  Soviets  are  urged  to   reciprocate.
But  what  is  the  use  of  lifting  the  restrictions  on  the  use  of
passports  while maintaining the restrictions on getting  a  pass-
port?  The  U.S. is  at  present  the  only  Western  country  which
refuses  passports  to  its  citizens and  visas to  would  be visitors
on  political grounds.  This  affects  not  only  the  Soviet bloc  but
our  own  allies.   Not  a  little  resentment  has  been  caused  in
England, for  example, by the humiliating loyalty-security type
questions  asked  of  Britishers  who want  to  visit  this country.
Uh,  Would  You  Mind  Repeating
That  Again,  Professor?
"To  the   'intellectual'   as   a  rootless   Bohemian,   an
alienated  man, a  Jacobin,  a  presumptuous  innovator, a
person  who  makes  excessive claims  for  defecated   [sic]
rationality  without  allowing  any  place  for  veneration or
tradition  or  moral  worth,  I  am  profoundly  opposed.  But
to  the  real  works  of  the  mind,  elevated power  of  intel-
lect,   the   scholar,  the   philosopher,   the   bookman,   the
clerisy  [sic],  the  union  of  right  reason  with humility
and  duty,  I  am  humbly  dedicated.   It  is  because I  do  not
want  the  thinking  American  to  sink  into  the condition
of  an  ideologue  that  I  venture  to  criticize  the  drift  of
the  American intellectual."
—Dr.  Russell  Kirk,  author   of  "The   Conservative
Mind,"  addressing  the  Second National  Conference   on
Spiritual    Foundations   in   Washington   last   week,  a
gathering  which  also  heard  (among  other  holy   men,
divines    and   gurus)    from    Vice    President    Nixon,
Admiral   Radford,    and   Atomic   Energy   Commission
Chairman  Lewis  L.  Strauss.
In  the  past ten  years we have  imitated  the  Russian  system of
making  travel  a  privilege  only  to  be  accorded  those  whose
views  are   satisfactory   to  the  regime.    The  Russians   since
Stalin  died have been liberalizing  their  attitude,  but  ours—as
shown  by Dulle's latest  actions in passport  cases—are  as rigid
as  ever.  This is  an  issue  on which Britain  and  France,  which
still  honor  the  traditional   freedoms,   ought  to  gang   up   at
Geneva  on the  two  totalitarians—Molotov  and  Dulles.
Hitler  Found  Him  Slippery,  Too
From   Saragossa,   Spain,   David   Darrah   in   the  Chicago
Tribune  (Nov. 1)  describes the  new  $10,000,000 600-mile pipe-
line  the   U.S.   Navy  is  building  from   the   Atlantic   to   the
Pyrenees  to  fuel  U.S.  air  bases  in  Spain.    Darrah  says  this
will  free  the   U.S.  from  dependence on  Moroccan  bases   and
adds,  "The  Spanish  bases  are  closer  for  sending  planes  across
Europe.  They  would be invaluable  should  any  situation  arise
such  as  a  disagreement  with  some  other  members of  NATO
over  the  expediency of  atomic warfare."   In  other  words,  if
Britain  or  France  in fear  of atomic destruction vetoes  the  use
of  bases  on their  soil for  an  atomic attack  on  the  Soviets,  the
veto  can  be  circumvented  by  using  Spanish  bases.    Western
Europe  could  thus  be  plunged  into  atomic  war  against   its
wishes.  . . . But what  makes us certain  that  Franco  would be
any  more willing  to  permit  u ,e of  bases  in  Spain?   The  same
dispatch  says  we  are  delivering  him  $350,000,000  worth  of
military  equipment,  but  Franco  is  Europe's  oldest  "neutral-
ist."    He  never  gave  Hitler  or  Mussolini  more  than  a  token
Blue  Legion.  They, too, supplied  him  heavily with  arms,  but
Spain  kept  out  of  World War  II  as  it  kept  out  of  World  War
I.  Franco's  record  suggests  that  he  would  be as  unwilling to
risk  Soviet retaliation  in  a  new war  as  he  was  to  risk  Anglo-
American  bombing in  the  last  one.
Portrait  of  An  Eminent  Divine  Repairing  Our  Spiritual  Foundations
"Clem  D.  Johnston,  Chairman  of   the   Board  of   the  U.S.
Chamber   of    Commerce,   denounced   yesterday  the    trend
toward  smaller  profits.
" 'It  is  striking  at  the  rest  of  our  whole  economic system
by   depriving   it   of   motivating   force,"   he   told   the   Second
National  Conference  on  Spiritual  Foundations here.
"He  blamed  the  trend  on  a  popular  reaction  'against  the
whole  ethic  of  acquisitive  man.'  Not  only  labor  leaders,  New
Dealers  and Fair  Dealers are running  down  'material  better-
ment,' he said, but also some preachers  in the  Bible  Belt. .  .  .
"In his  address on  'The Spiritual Responsibility of  Amer-
ican  Business  and  Industry,'  at  the  final  conference  session
.1  6
at   the   Sheraton-Carlton   Hotel,   Johnston   also   criticized
orthodoxy  both  in  business and  religion.
"The  Christian  religion  as  taught  by  Jesus and  the  Amer-
ican  competitive  business system  are  'the  two  most  revolu-
tionary  forces  in  the  world  today,'  he  declared.  Too  many
Christians  respect   Jesus,  he   said,   but   balk   at  practicing
Christian  love.  .  .  ."
—Washington  Post  and  Times-Herald,  Oct.  27.
To sum  up, if  we understand the  Mahatma  correctly,  what
we  need  is  to  encourage  the  practice  of  Christian  love  by
allowing  a  higher  rate  of  profit.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone't  Weekly,  November  7,1955
Decision Also  Sideswipes  Use of  Attorney  General's List  As    Unfair
(Continued  from  Page  One)
cused,  the  Court objects,  "is given  no opportunity  to  participate
in the  process of  examining  the  facts which may have  a  beating
upon  this  initial  determination."   The  decision  also  dismisses
the  familiar  government  plea,  so often  heard  in  passport  cases,
that  the  complainants  had  not  exhausted   their  administrative
remedies.   The  Court  held  that  this  did  not  apply  where  the
proceedings are not governed  by the  Administrative  Procedures
Act.    It  also  says  of  the  appeals  machinery  set  up  by the  Coast
Guard,  "It  is apparent  that  the  so-called  appeal  before  the ap-
peals  board  is no  remedy  in  fact  or  in  law."   For one  thing  the
decisions  of  the  appeals boards  are only  advisory,  like  those of
the  passport  appeals  board  at  the  State  Department.
Finally the Court takes  a sideswipe  at  the Attorney  General's
list.   The  Court  says  that  "the  screening  of  persons  who  are
Geneva  In  A  Nutshell
On  the  Middle  Eastern  Crisis:  Russia  is  still  willing
to  risk  war  in  the  area  in  order  to  have  a  voice  in  its
destiny.   The  U.  S.  is  also  willing  to  risk  war  there
rather  than  grant  this  by asking  Russia  to  participate
in  a  4-power  guarantee  of Arab-Israeli  peace.   But  it  is
now  too  late  to  exclude  Russia  from  the  Middle East.
The  only  question   is  whether   the  area  is  to  be  torn
apart  by  Big  Power   rivalry  or  stabilized  by  a  Big
Power  agreement.
On  Germany:  The  Powers  are  further   from  agree-
ment  than  ever.  They  would do well  to  heed  the  warn-
ing  given  by the  anti-Nazi  hero, Pastor  Martin  Niemol-
ler,  at  a  Labour  Party  Peace  Meeting in  Margate,  Lon-
don,  which  was  not  covered  by  the  American  press.
According  to  the  Oct.  14 issue  of  the  London Peace
News,  Niemoller  predicted  that  there  would  soon  be 20
or  24 German divisions, half  armed  by the  Americans  in
the  West, half  by the  Russians  in the  East. He said  that
once  armed  the  armies  would  unite;  that  neither  East
nor  West  would  interfere  for  fear  of  starting  World
War  III;  that  the  German  people  would  then  say  they
had  been  saved  again  by military  power  "and  in  a mo-
ment  of  time  Germany  could  go  back  to  1932:  one  na-
tion,  one  Fuhrer,  one  empire.   Then  all  hope  of  a  new
and  better  Germany  is  gone.   That,"  said  Pastor  Nie-
moller,  "is  the  vision  that  I  see."
Every  Worker's  Rights  Endangered
". .  . The rights  of  the individual here  considered  are
also  fundamental  in  the  sense  that  if  they  are limited,
qualified  or non-existent  in  the case  of  merchant seamen,
they  can  be  modified  or  limited  or  held  non-existent  as
applied  to other  persons  ...    it  is  plain  that  many per-
sons  other  than seamen  would be  just  as  susceptible  to
security  doubts.  ...    If  these  men, engaged  in  ordinary
tasks  of  earning  a  livelihood,  may  be  denied  the  usual
measure  of  due  process,  then  multitudes of  others  may
be  dealt  with  in  like  manner.
"Furthermore,  in  considering  the  public  interest  in
the  preservation  of  a  system  under  which  unidentified
informers  are encouraged to  make  unchallengable  state-
ments  about  their  neighbors,  it  is  not  amiss  to  bear  in
mind  whether  or  not  we  must  look  forward  to  a  day
when  substantially  everyone  will  have  to  contemplate
the  possibility  that  his  neighbors  are  being  encouraged
to  make reports to  the  FBI  about what  he says,  what he
reads  and  what  meetings  he attends.
"...   The time has not come  when  we have to abandon
a system of  liberty for  one modelled on that of  the Com-
munists.   Such  a  system  was  not  that  ordained by  the
framers  of  our  Constitution.   It  is  the  latter  we  are
sworn  to  uphold."
—U  S.  Court  of  Appeals  in  Parker  v.  Lester.
security  risks is permissible  as a matter of  substantive  due  proc-
ess,"  i.e.,  the  screening  itself  is  not  a violation  of  fundamental
rights  so long  as the  procedure  used  is  fair.   But  in  a  footnote
the  Court  says  it  does  not  think  this  reasoning  applies  to  that
portion   of   the   Coast  Guard   regulation   which  provides   for
denial  of  clearance  if  the  applicant   "is  or  recently has  been  a
member  of,   or   affiliated   with,   or   sympathetically   associated
with"  any  organization  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.   The
Court  says that  since  the  regulations  do  not  require  "proof  of
membership  with  knowledge  of  the  character  of  the  organiza-
tion"  and  since  applicants  "may  have  joined  unaware  of  the
organization's  activities  and  programs"  it  may be  unlawful  to
bar  a  man  "for  mere  membership."    It  looks  as  if  the  Depart-
ment  of  Justice,  which  prefers  to  evade  these  issues,  will  be
forced  to  ask  the  Supreme  Court  to  pass  upon  them,  particu-
larly  on  that  of  the  faceless  informer,  the  ugliest  legal  land-
mark  of  this  period.
If    You  Have  Been  Reading  A  Friend's  Copy,   Why  Not  Help   Us  By  Subscribing  Today  for     Yourself?
I. F. Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name
Street                       „
City
*  extra  for  Canada.
301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Zone          State
mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
Zone.....      State
11/7/55
LF.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington   3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED