I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955oct31.pdf

============================================================

Charlie  Chaplin's  "Suppressed"  Message  of  Protest  Against  Passport  Abuses,  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   No. 40OCTOBER  81,  1955
«>«       WASHINGTON.  D.   C.IB  CENTS
Moscow's   (Too)   Brilliant   Opening  Play  at   Geneva
As  Realpolhik,  Soviet  moves  in  the  Middle  East  are  bril-
liant.  On  the  chessboard  of  world  politics,  Moscow  has  coun-
tered  the  formation  of  the  northern  tier  alliance  against  her  by
moving  toward  an  understanding  of  her  own  with  the  south-
ern   tier  of  Arab  States.   The  flank  of   the  Turkish-Iranian-
Iraqi-Pakistani  line  has  been  turned  almost  as  soon  as  it  was
formed.    When  Washington  split  the  Arab  league,  building  a
new  Mideastern bloc  based  on  Iraq,  Moscow  replied  by  build-
ing  one  of  her  own,  based  on  Egypt.  The  world's  most  an-
cient  and  enduring  rivalry,  that  between  the  empires  of  the
Nile  and  of  the  Euphrates-Tigris,  was  thus  skilfully  utilized
by  the  world's  newest rivalry.   The  Bagdad  pact  was  intended
to  seal  off  the  last  gap  in  the  line  of  hostile  bases  around  the
Soviet  Union,  but  the  understanding  with  Cairo  has  for  the
first  time  in  years  enabled  the  Russians  to  emerge  into  the
Mediterranean,  and   exercise  a  direct  influence  on  the  Arab
world  and  North  Africa.    And  this  at  a  time  when  the  decay
of  French  power  and  the  rebirth  of  Israel  have  created  such
turmoil  that  the  Russians  through  Cairo—the  headquarters  of
the  North  African  Nationalists  and  the  dominant  Arab  influ-
ence  on  Syria  and  Saudi Arabia—may make  our  bomber  bases
untenable  and our  Arab oil  sources  precarious.
Making  Trouble  Is  Not  Making  Peace
A  few  swift  moves  have  completely  transformed  the  scene
as  the  new  Geneva  parley opens.    A few  months  ago  Bulganin
and  Krushchev  went  to  Geneva   as  petitioners  for  a  world
delen'e  and  peace,  happy  to  find  President  Eisenhower  of  like
mind.    Now   Russia  through   Molotov  squarely  occupies  the
center  of  the  stage,  ready to  receive the  petitions  of  the  West-
ern  powers and  of  Israel.   The  measure of  Molotov's  bargain-
ing  power  is his. potential  for  making  trouble.   In  the  Middle
East  an  Arab-Israeli  arms  race  may easily  lead  to  war,  and  not
a  war  easily  contained.   But  this  new  bargaining  power  was
acquired  at a  price,  and  Moscow  had  better  consider  that  price
carefully.   It  cannot  make  itself  the  world  spokesman  for  dis-
armament,  and  at  the  same time cynically foment  an  arms  race
in  the  Middle  East.  It  cannot  win  world  sympathy by  arguing
the  case  for  co-existence  in  the  H-bomb  era,  and  at  the  same
time  stoke  the  fires  of  war  in  a  most  inflammable  area.
The  world  is  sick  of  Realpolitik;  the  Germans  coined  the
term  and  mastered  the  practice  only  to  find  that  while  it  can
start world  wars, it cannot  win  them.   The  new  Russian  moves
are  too  clever.  The  problem,  if  they want  arms  reduction  and
peace,  is  to  allay  American  anxieties,  to  help  the  world  cool
off,  to  create  an  atmosphere  in  which  American  forward  bases
may  be withdrawn and  the  new  realities  like  Communist  China
recognised.   This  cannot  be  achieved  by  suddenly  threatening
the   entire   American   strategic   picture   from   Casablanca    to
Karachi   just   when   Eisenhower   had   routed   the    American
«  1 *                                                                '
rightists  and  begun  to  sell  the  American  public  on  peace  and
co-existence.
The  Trend  Toward   Neutrality
It  is  a  pity  that  at  this  juncture  American  leadership  has
neither  the  subtlety  nor  the  flexibility  to  counter  the  Russian
moves  in the way the  world  as a whole  needs  to  see them  coun-
tered.    Everyone  by  now  is  impressed  with  the  victories  of
Soviet diplomacy in the  past  few  months,  but  how many people
in this country are prepared  to recognize much  less advocate  the
course  which  made  them  possible?   Moscow  has  strengthened
its  position  since  Stalin  died  by  swallowing  a  whole  series  of
bitter  pills.  The  idea  of  a  neutral  "Third  Force"  between  the
contending  big  powers  was  scorned  by  the  Communists  as  a
liberal  fraud  and  delusion.   Tito  was a  traitor.   Adenauer  was
a  scoundrelly puppet  of  the  West.   The  Russians  emerged  out
of  isolation  by recognizing  realities—the  strength  of  the  desire
for  neutrality  and  peace,  the  survival  of  Tito,  the  reality  of
Adenauer.  They  are now even  wooing  Franco.   The  U.S.  could
win  a  similar victory by  recognizing  Peking  and  freeing  Com-
munist   China   from   dependence  on   Moscow.    Basically   the
strength  of  the  Russian position  is  its  willingness  to recognize
the  desire  of  "the  powers  in-between"  for  neutrality.    Dulles
was never more wrong  than  when  he told  the American Legion
on  October   10,  "neutrality  today  is  an  obsolete   conception."
. On  the  contrary, the  danger  of  atomic war  has  made neutrality
necessary  for  the  smaller  powers,  their  economic  revival  has
made  it  possible,  and  the  new  upsurge  of  nationalism  and
anti-colonialism  has  made it  popular.    To  go  with  this  tide is
to  gain  power  to  mold  events  and  the  U.S.  could  gain  the  ini-
tiative  by  offering  to  neutralize  Germany  if  Moscow  neutral-
izes  Eastern  Europe.
The  key  to  peace  everywhere  lies  in  this  neutralization  of
the  areas  in-between,  beginning  with  the  Middle   East  and
Germany.   The  American  effort  to  use  these  areas  as  forward
bases  is  bankrupt,  primarily  because  under  present   conditions
war  would  certainly and  completely  destroy  them.   Neutraliza-
tion   and   joint  guarantees   against   aggression   under   United
Nations   auspices  represent  the  way  out.    Nothing  could  be
worse  for  both  Israel  and  the  Arab  countries  than  to  become
pawns  in  a  great  Power  game.   Nothing  could  be  worse  for
Europe  than  to  see  the  Germans  rearmed  East  and  West  for
the same kind of play. The swift  revival  of  the old Nazi  leader-
ship  in  the  Saar,  the  encouragement  given  the  worst  German
tendencies  by the  freeing  of  such  murderers  as the  SS General
responsible   for   the   Malmedy   massacre,   are   warnings   both
Washington  and  Moscow  had  better  heed  while  there  is  time.
What  happened  at  Saarlouis  may happen  next  in  Breslau  and
Koenigsberg.    New  directions  were  never  more  badly  needed
than  at  this  moment  in  Geneva.
6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October SI, 1955
Eastland  and  McCarthy  Lend  A  Hand  in  A  Local   School   Board   Election
Virginia  Racists  Fight  Desegregation   in  The  Shadow  of  The  Capitol
By  Marvin  Caplan
Arlington,  Va.
Only   six   miles   from   the   U.   S.   Supreme   Court,   racist
Southern   diehards   are   demonstrating    the   kind   of  tactics
they  are  ready  to  use  to  preserve  segregation.
The  occasion  is  an  off-year   election  in  Arlington   County,
Va.,  just  across  the  Potomac  River  from  Washington.   On
Nov.   8,  Arlingtonians    will   vote   for   three  representatives
to  the  state  House  of  Delegates,  two  County  Board  and  three
School  Board  members.    It  should  have  been  a  very  ordinary
campaign.     But  any   School  Board  race  in  which  Senators
Eastland   and   McCarthy   lend   a   helping   hand   cannot   be
considered   ordinary.
"It    is   annoying,   perplexing,    baffling—and    odd,"   says
Kathryn   Stone,   Democratic  incumbent  for   the  House,  com-
menting   on  the   local  situation.     For   one  thing,  she  says,
none  of  the  real  issues  have  been  discussed.    Public  meetings
tend   to   bog   down   into   discussions  of   integration   versus
segregation  in  the  public  schools.
A  White  Collar  Klan
The  integration  issue  was  injected  into  the  campaign  by
the  local  chapter  of  the  Defenders  of  State  Sovereignty   and
Individual  Liberties.    That  is  Virginia's  version  of  the  white
Citizen  Councils  that  have  sprung  up  throughout  the  South
in  reaction  to  the  Supreme  Court  school  decision.    Like  the
others,   it   is  a   kind  of  white  collar   Klan,  drawing   much
support   from  prominent,  well-to-do   Virginians.
In  Arlington,   the  Defenders  are  not  running  any   candi-
dates  of  their  own.    But  in  the  County  and   School  Board
races  they  back  the  cand'dates  of  the  non-partisan  Arlington
Independent   Movement,  or  AIM.    Opposing  the   AIM  nom-
inees  are  candidates  chosen  at   large  public  conventions  of
delegates  from  county  civic  groups.    These  conventions  are
necessarily  non-partisan  since,  under  the  Hatch  act,  Federal
employees  who  live  in  Arlington  may  only campaign  actively
for  non-partisan   candidates.
"We're  the   conservatives,  they're   the  left-wingers,"   an
AIM  worker   said   in  explanation  of  the   difference  between
the  two  slates.    Convention  candidates find the  labels  mean-
ingless.   It  may  be more  accurate  to  say that  the Convention
group  attracts  public-spirited  couples from  the  young  busi-
ness  executive,  professional, government worker  set  that  has
moved into the  county; while  AIM attracts  ultra-conservative
businessmen,  Byrd  Democrat's  and  native  Southerners.   Only
one  AIM  candidate,  Willis  Kern,  running  for   School  Board,
is  an  admiUed   Defender.
Only  5  Percent  Colored
Considering  the  large  cosmopolitan  element  in  the  county
and  the  fact  that  only  about  5  percent  of  its  school  children
are  colored,  Convention candidates say  integration  was  never
much  of  an  issue until  the  Defenders raised  the  racial  issue.
They  run  daily  "Defendergrams"  in  the  local  county  paper,
quoting  choice  racist  tidb'ts.    They  attacked  Mrs.  Stone  in
two  ads  because  her   children  have  attended  an  interracial
private   school.     They   recently   held   a   meeting   at   which
Charles   C.  Tansill,   Prof,  of  American  Diplomatic   History
at  Georgetown University,  delivered a  tirade  against  FEPC,
Eleanor   Roosevelt,   and   the   NAACP   and   called   Negroes
"syphilitic    morons."
The  Defenders  and  local  groups  that  side  with  them  also
receive  assistance  from  outside  the  state.   A  speech  by  Sen-
ator  Eastland  attacking  the  Supreme   Court   decision   went
out  under  his frank.    On another  occasion, a  local  group  was
able   to   obtain   confidential  material   from   Sen.   McCarthy
purporting  to  show that  an  educator  whom the  School  Board
brought  in  to  address  the  teachers  belonged  to  a  Communist
front   organization.
A  Touch  of   Anti-Semitism
It  is not  surprising,  either,  to find a touch  of  anti-Semitism
in  the  campaign.   One of  the  candidates  for  the  County Board
is  Jewish   and   he  has   received  several   crank   letters   and
has   had   his   religion   called  to   the   attention   of  voters   by
an  AIM  candidate.
A   Defendergram. attacking  the   Fatherhood   of   God  and
the   Brotherhood   of   Man    [see   box   below]   has   provoked
hostile  criticism.  This  has  led  Kern  to  sue  each  of  the  five
Convention  candidates  for  $150,000 because they  sent  a  letter
to  voters  pointing  out  that  he  had  admitted  "without  embar-
rassment  that  his  group   (the  Defenders)  placed  this   attack
against   religion   in   our   local  newspapers."     Perhaps   the
most   significant  evidence  of  retreat   from   the   Defenders'
position  was  the  public  announcement by  the  AIM  chairman
disavowing  any  connection  with  the  Defenders.
"Phonics"  and  Racism
A  visit  to  AIM  headquarters  in  the  old  Sombrero  restau-
rant  in   Clarendon,   however,   suggests  that  if  there  is  no
formal  connect on there  may  still  be  an  ideological one.    The
three  AIM  ladies,  at   work  on  a  mailing  said  at  first  that
segregation  was not  a  big  issue  in  the  campaign.   One  talked
learnedly  of  "phonics"  and  it  developed that  Rudolph  Flesch,
author  of  "Why  Johnnie  Can't  Read,"  is  a  hero  of  opponents
of  "new-fangled  teaching  methods" introduced into  Arlington
by   the  present   School   Board.
But then:  one deplored the  fact  that  Negroes  have no pride
of   race.     And   why   couldn't   they   learn   from   the   Jews?
"You've  had  pride  of  race  inculcated  in  you  since  you  were
as  high  as that  typewriter  table," she told  the  reporter.   And
another  spoke  scathingly  of  the  "Jews  and  white  trash"  in
the  NAACP  and  the  presence  of  these  elements  in  the  Con-
vention  group.    These  sentiments  sound  like  Defendergrams.
The  specific  threat  is  to  Arlington's  school system.  During
the  past  8  years  the  schools  have  been  improved  to  where
they  are   nationally   recognized  for   their   excellence.    That
achievement  was  the  work  of  County and  School Boards  con-
.trolled   by   people   now   active   in   the    Convention  group.
Recently  AIM  gained  control  of  the  County  Board  and   has
expressed   its   hostility  to  the   School  Board  by  cutting  its
budget  and  criticizing  educational  methods.   If  it  wins  next
month,  which  at  the  moment  seems  unlikely, it  will  control
the  schools  for  the  next  four  years.    That  might  mean  not
only   the   deterioration    of   the   schools   but   end   any   pos-
sibility  of integrating  them.
The  Convention  group  says- integration   is  no  issue  now
because  no  Board  can  bring  it  about  or  stop   it  until   the
state  acts.    Yet  given  the  opportunity,  a  Convention  board
might  be sympathetic  toward  integration.    The election's out-
come may  show how  effective  Defender methods are,  in  border
areas where  the  Solid  South  has  begun to  show a  few  cracks.
Fatherhood  of  God  and  Brotherhood  of  Man  "Just  Softsoap'
"It's   the  Fatherhood  of  God and  Brotherhood  of  Man  soft-
soap  that  gets  a  lot  of  folks.   It  sounds  so  good  when  it
goes  sloshing  into  one's  ears.   It  sounds as  sweet  and  clean
as  Ivory  . . . but  if  one will  hang: on to  his  sanity  and  take
a  little  time  to  analyze  it,  he'll  find  it  isn't  anywhere  hear
99.44%  pure.    As  a  matter   of  fact,   it's   the   other   way
'round.   —Then,  My  Old  Kentucky  Home,  Good  Night!"  .
—One  of  a  series  of  daily  "Defendergrams"  inserted  in
the  local  Daily  Sun  by  the  Arlington,  Va.  chapter   of  the
Defenders  of  State  Sovereignty  and  Individual  Libert
:
es  in
an   attempt   to   influence  -voters   in   the   current   race   for
County  Board,  School  Board  and  House  of   Delegates.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 31,1955
On  the  Civil  Liberties  Front:  Medina Reversed  in  Communist  Case
Fifth  Amendment  Discharge  of  Schoolteacher  Overruled  by  Phila. Court
A  Philadelphia  schoolteacher  discharged  after  pleading  the
Fifth  amendment  before  the  House  Un-American   Activities
Committee  won  a  victory  in  the   Pennsylvania   courts   last
week. A three man  hench in the  Court  of  Common Pleas  (Bok,
Flood  and  Levinthal)  unanimously reversed  the  dismissal  of
Herman  A.  Beilan,  a  high  school  teacher   of  English.    The
decision  held  that  Beilan's  refusal  to  answer  a  question  as
to  whether  he  was  a  member  of  the   Communist  Political
Association  eight  years  ago  "was   obviously  not  relevant  to
the  issue  of his  present  competency as  a  teacher."  The  Phila-
delphia  Board  of  Education   (with  its   respected   President,
Walter  Biddle  Saul,  dissenting)  had  held  that  invocation  of
the  Fifth  constituted  incompetence and  therefore  was  grounds
for   dismissal  under  the  state's  Tenure  Act.
The  full  text  of  the  decision may  be  found  in  the  October
21  issue  of   The   Legal   Intelligencer   in   Philadelphia.    The
Court  noted  that  the  State  Legislature  since  1953  had  twice
refused   to   enact   bills  by  Senator   Pechan   (author   of   the
Loyalty   Act  of   1951)   which  would  have  provided  for   the
removal  of  public  servants  who  refuse  to  testify  on  consti-
tutional   grounds.    The  Court  held  that  if  Beilan  was  sus-
pected  of  disloyalty,  the  Board  of  Education  had  to  follow
the  procedure  outlined  in  the  Loyalty  Act,  but  this   would
require  hearing  and  proof  that  Beilan  was  presently  a  "sub-
versive"  person  as  defined  in  it.
The  Slochower   Case
A  similar  but  more fundamental  question  is  raised  by  the
Slochower  case  argued  before  the  Supreme  Court  last  week.
Dr.  Harry   Slochower,  a  professor  of  German  at  Brooklyn
College, winner of  a  Bollingen Award  and  a  Guggenhe'm  Fel-
lowship, was  dismissed after  he denied present  membership in
the  Communist Party but took the  Fifth  as to membership be-
fore  1941.    A  New  York  City  Charter  provision adopted  two
decades ago in the  Seabury investigation  of Tammany  corrup-
tionists  was the  basis  of the  teacher's  dismissal.   The  Charter
says   a   city   official   or   employe  who  invokes  his   privilege
against  self-incrimination  when  asked  a  question  about  city
affairs  by  any  legislative  committee empowered to  investigate
them   shall   be  dismissed.   One  of  the   questions  before   the
Court  is  whether  such  dismissal  violates  basic  constitutional
rights.   The  Court  may  dodge  this  difficult  question  and  de-
cide  the  case  instead  on easier  grounds.  Was  there  a  reason-
able  relationship  between  Dr.  Slochower's  employment  as  a
teacher  and  a  question as  to  whether  he had  been  a  Commu-
nist  more than  a  decade earlier?   Ephraim  London, his  coun-
sel,  also  made  much  of  the  fact  that  the  chairman   of  the
Briefs  Amicus  Rejected
The  Supreme  Court  last  week  refused  to  accept  two
briefs  amicus offered  in  support  of the  California  Smith
Act   appellants.      One  was   signed   by   24   California
Methodist   ministers   headed   by  the   Rev.   Howard   R.
Carey  of  Altadena,  and  the  other  was  by  a  group  of 19
headed  by  the  Nobel  pribe  winner,  Linus  Pauling.
Senate  committee  insisted  at  the  original  hearing that it  had
nothing  to  do with  Dr.  Slochower's  "official  conduct."
Supervisory  Parole
An  anti-Communist  decision  by  Circuit  Judge  Medina  of
Foley  Square  fame  was  reversed  by the  Supreme  Court  last
week.  The reversal  means that  a  group  of fourteen  aliens  or-
dered  deported  for  Communist  Party  membership  have  won
the  first  round  in  their  fight  against  the  supervisory   parole
provisions  of  the  McCarran-Walter  Act.   Three  "second  eche-
lon"  leaders  convicted  under  the  Smith  Act—Betty   Gannett,
Alexander  Bittleman  and  Claudia Jones—are  among the  four-
teen.   The  McCarran-Walter   Act  provides  that  aliens  who
cannot  be deported  because  they  are  stateless or  their  native
lands  will  not  receive  them  must  thereafter   live  under   severe
restrictions.    They  must  report   to  the  immigration   services
regularly,  submit  to  medical  and  psychiatric  examination  if
necessary,  "give  information  under  oath"  as  to  their  political
associations  and  activities,  and  conform  to  travel  and  other
regulat.ons   prescribed  by  the  Attorney  General,  under  pen-
alty  of  $1,000  fine  or  a  year  in  jail.
The  14  aliens  went  into  court  for   a  judgment   declaring
such  supervisory  orders  unconstitutional  and  an  order   for-
bidding   their   enforcement.    But  a   three  judge  statutory
court   (Medina,  McGohey  and  Weinfeld)  dismissed the  action
on  the  ground that  it  presented  no "case  or  controversy"  and
the  orders  could  not  be  contested  until  one  of  the  aliens  had
been   arrested   for   refusing   to   obey   them.    The   Supreme
Court  reversed   and  ordered  a  trial  on  the  merits.
Loyalty  Quiz  Dropped
After   protests  from  the  American  Jewish   Congress,   the
CIO  Insurance   Workers  Union  and  other  groups,  the  New
York  State  Insurance  Department  last  week dropped  its  plan
to  subject  license  applicants to  loyalty  tests.   It  had  planned
to  ask  whether  they  had  ever  belonged  to  any   one  of  130
blacklisted   organizations.    The  department's  precipitate  re-
treat  represents  the  first  victory  of  the  kind  in  the  current
fight against  the  witch  hunt.
U.  S.  Press  Ignores  Acquittal
When  Olga  and  Vladimir  Petrov  defected  to  the  West  in
August,  1954,  they  named  Mme.  Rose-Marie  Oilier,  a  vice
consul  clerk  in the  French  Embassy  at  Canberra,  Australia,
as   one  of  their   informants.    Mme.  Oilier   was  sent  home
under  heavy  guard.
The   U.S.   press,   which   widely   reported   the   charges
against  her,  accepting  them  as  true,  almost  entirely  ignored
her  acquittal  by a  military  court  in  Paris last  week.  A four
paragraph  United  Press  dispatch  in  the  New  York   Times
of  October 21 was  the  only reference  we saw  in the  American
press,  and  this  did  not  tell  why  she  was   acquitted.
The  London papers  of  October  21  and  Le  Monde  of  Octo-
ber  22  carried   fuller  reports,  however.   Headlines  in   the
latter  hailed   Mme.  Oilier  as  the   victim   of  a   "too   hasty
witch  hunt"  (chasse  a  sorcieres).     Mme.  Oilier  was  orig-
inally   charged   with  betraying  state  secrets  but  this  was
reduced  to  "negligence"  last  winter   after   the   Australian
inquiry  "proved,"  Le  Monde   said,  "that  Petrov   had   been
boasting  and  that  his  own  chiefs  had  reproached   him  for
of  Woman  Accused  by  Petrovs
having  obtained  nothing  from  the  French  woman diplomat."
At  the  trial  Mme.  Oilier  admitted   having  visited   with
Petrov  outside  her  home and  office  but  said  she  did  so  when
he  told  her  he  was  afraid  of  being  denounced  by  his  col-
leagues  for  consorting  with  Western   diplomats.
On  one occasion, when  she asked  where  Mme. Petrov  was,
he  said  she  was  busy  decoding  messages  and   complained
that  the  Russian  code  "is  a  very  complicated  one and  has  to
be burned  every  night."  Then  he  asked  Mme. Oilier,  "What
is  your  code  like?"   Mme.  Oilier  testified  that  she   replied
that  she had  no  idea  because  her  job  was looking  after  the
archives.   She  said  she  was  surprised  by  the  remark  but
colud  not  be  sure  it  was  asked  with  evil  intent.   She  said
this  was  the  only  time  the  code  was  mentioned.
When  asked  by  the  court  why  she  had  not  reported  this
to  her  Ambassador   (the  "negligence" charge  was  in  failure
to  report),  Mme. Oilier  said  he was  not  very  accessible  and
would  only  have  laughed   and  said,  "Oilier  is  discovering
Russian  spies."
J   6 S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 31,  1955
Politics  at  Home  and  Abroad:  Diem  Imitates  Frank  Hague
Harriman's  Real  Goal  to  be  Stevenson's  Secretary  of  State?
Political  Scuttlebutt:  Reported  here  in fairly  well  informed
circles    (which   doesn't   make   it   necessarily   reliable)   that
Harriman's  real  game  is  to  gather  enough  delegates to  exact
the  two jobs  of  Secretary  of. State  (himself)  and  Postmaster
General  (De Sapio)   from   Stevenson.  .  .  .  Senator   Russell's
assumption  that  Chief  Justice  Warren  will  be  the  candidate
if  Eisenhower  doesn't  run  again  dovetails  with  other  reports
that  the  Chief  Justice  will  change  his  mind  and  accept  the
nomination  if  there  is  any  danger  that  Nixon  might   other-
wise  get the nomination.  . . .
Democracy, Jersey  City Variety: Judging  by the referendum
results,  Premier  Diem  of  Vietnam  must  have  studied  democ-
racy   under  Frank  Hague.    Even  Jersey  City   never  dared
turn  in  a  better-than-98-percent   majority.   U.S. press  agen-
cies  never  did  a  better  job  of  covering  up  the  realities  of  an
election  but  Philip  Potter  of the  Baltimore  Sun  writing  from
Saigon   (Oct. 24)   provided  some  glimpses  of  just  how con-
trolled  and   one-sided  the   voting  was.   "Diem  has   ruled,"
Potter  cabled,  "as  a  one-man  government  whose  censors  sit
in  every  newspaper   office  and  stifle  the  voice of  criticism.   He
and  his  followers  have   formed  youth  organizations   which
help  enforce  his  will."   Now  Diem will  block  the  Indochinese
elections  pledged  for  next  July  at  the  Geneva  parley.    His
ground   is  that  free   elections  cannot  be  guaranteed   in  the
North!  .  .  .  Reuters   throws  entirely   different   light  on the
Diem  election.    It   reported   (Oct. 24)  that  about  half   the
eligible  voters had  abstained;  that  in  several  towns  the  num-
ber  of  votes  counted  exceeded  the  number  of  electors  by  30
percent;  and  that  in  Saigon  "by  11 a.m. many  presiding   offi-
cials  found  themselves  almost  alone  [in  the  polling  places]
with   security    officers   and  no  voters."    Perhaps   they  just
went  on counting  to  while  away  the time.  .  .  .
Note  for  Farmers: While  hog  prices  are  lower  than  at  any
time  since  1946, a  New  York  Journal  of  Commerce  market
survey  from  Chicago  (Oct.  25)  reports  "Packer  Profit Mar-
gins  Improve"  and  the  meat  packers  expect  1955  net  to  show
a  sharp  rise  over  1954.  . . .
"Protection"?     That   delegation   of   32  from   Chicago,   in-
cluding  7  Negro  ministers,  who  came  here  last  week  to  ask
Federal action  in the  Till murder  were  shadowed by the police
everywhere they  went.   Chicago police tried  to intimidate and
dissuade  them  from   making  the  trip.   Here,  on  arrival   at
Washington's  Dunbar hotel, they  found  the  place  surrounded
by  police.    Six  police  motorcycles  and  three  full  pol'ce  cars
followed   them   Monday  morning  to  Vice  President   Nixon's
office,  to  Attorney  General  Brownell's  office   and   on  a  sight
Chaplin  No  Longer  News
This  letter  by  Charles  Chaplin, protesting  the  refusal
of  passports  on  political  grounds,  was  released  in  New
York  last  week by  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties Com-
mittee  in  connection with  Rockwell Kent's  suit  to  obtain
a  passport  without  signing  a  non-Communist  affidavit.
The  letter   was  turned   down  for   publication  by  the
New   York   Times,  the  AP  and  the   UP  but  sent   out
by   Reuters,   the  British  world   news   service.    It   has
not  been  printed  in  any  American  newspaper,  so  effec-
tive   is  the   self-imposed  blanket   of  conformity.    The
text   follows:
"The  natural  right  of  every  free  man  to  travel   is
being   violated   more   and   more   by  the  unscrupulous
withholding  of  passports.  The  situation  is  most  alarm-
ing.   For  every  American  today,  whether  he  knows  it
or  not, is  a  prisoner  on probation,  with  a  chain  around
his  leg  to  be  drawn  in  by  a  jailer  at  any  time  he may
disagree   with  the  political   policy  makers  who  are  in
temporary  power.  And  who knows that  what  we  agree
about  today,  we  may  disagree  about   tomorrow.
"Such   international  artists   as   Paul   Robeson  and
Rockwell  Kent,  whose  art  is  a  credit  to  America  and
whose art  has  enriched understanding  between  America
and  Europe,  are  chained  by this  vicious and  dangerous
policy.   To  deny  the  right  to  travel  to  Americans  held
in  such  general  respect  abroad  is  stupid  and  inhuman.
It   destroys   American  prestige  and  creates  doubt  and
suspicion   in  the   countries   whose  friendship   America
most  needs.
"This  is  not  a  plea  for  American  artists  in  chains,
but  for  every  American  over  whose fundamental  free-
dom  this  menacing  shadow  is  creeping.   The  violation
of  the  right  to  travel  affects  every  aspect  of  American
democracy  and  freedom.   That  is  why  nothing  can  be
of  greater  importance  than  this  effort  by  the   Emer-
gency  Civil  Liberties    Committee."
seeing trip  in between.   They  got  a  cold shoulder  everywhere.
Neither  Nixon nor  his  Administrative  Assistant  was  on hand
to  see  them,  though  an  appointment  had  been  made  in  ad-
vance,  and  they  were  forced  to  leave  a  statement  with  the
receptionist.     Brownell  was  also  "out"  at  Justice.  .  .  .
IFS  to speak:  With Carl Braden  at Meridian Hill  Baptist
Church,  1725 Kalorama  Road, NW., Washington,  D.  C., at
8:30   p.m. Friday   November   4.
Why   Not  Send   A   Gift    Subscription    to  Your    Favorite    Radio   Commentator?
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol.  Wash.  3.  D. C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name  .
Street
City                                                 Zone            State
Enter gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1 yr.)  additional:
(To)  Name
Street
City
*  $1  extra  for  Canada
Zone         ;.  State..
10/31/5a
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Copitol  St., S.  E.
Woihington  3,  D. C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED