I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955aug15.pdf

============================================================

Special   Issue  for     Draftees
What  Every  Young  Man Should Find  Out  About  His  Mother
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 31
AUGUST   15,   1955
«<>«       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
A  Startling*  Report  Most  of  the  Nation's  Press  Ignored Shows the  Landy Case Far from Exceptional
How  The  Army  Controls  The  Minds  of  Our  Youth
The  day  Eugene William  Landy  was  refused  a  commission
in  the Naval  Reserve because his mother had  once been  a  Com-
munist  a  two  volume study  of  military  security  cases  was  pre-
sented   to  the   Secretary   of   the   Army  by  Norman   Thomas.
While  the  Landy  case  made  headlines,  too  little attention was
paid  the  report.  This shows the  Landy  case was no nightmarish
accident,  but  the  result  of  a  system  of  screening  in  which  it  is
not  at  all  uncommon for  the  political sins of  the  parents  to  be
visited  on  their children  when they enter  the Army.
The  special report  on  "The  Draftee  and  Internal  Security"
taken  in  protest  to  the  Pentagon  showed  how- often   in   the
Army  a  boy's  worst enemy turns  out  to  be  his  mother.     One
hundred  and  ten  cases  were examined  and  49  are  set  forth  in
detail.   In  no  less  than  11  of  these,  soldiers  found  themselves
branded  disloyal  because of  their  mothers.  A  sample  is  the  al-
legation  served on  Case No.  49,  "You  were closely  associated,"
he was informed,  "with  your  mother,             , a reported  Com-
munist  Party  member,  and  continue  to  correspond  •with   her."
Soldier  boys  should  check  on  Mama before writing  home.
Even  A  Dead  Mother-in-Law
Mothers  are  not  the  only  menace.   "The  Draftee  and  Inter-
nal  Security" shows that  before wooing  a girl  it would  be  well
to have her  family  tree examined  by the  FBI.   A mother-in-law,
though  long  dead,  may prove  as  troublesome  as  a  mother.   In
one  soldier's  case  G2  reported   that  he  had  a  mother-in-law
"who  was  reported  to  have  been  'lying  low  as  a  Communist
for   a  long  time'  and  was  supposed  to  become  active  in  the
peace  movement again."    G2  did  not  add  that  the  only  peace
movement  in  which  she  could  possibly  become  active  again
was   the   Second   Coming,   since   the   lady   in   question   was
dead.  Nor  did  the G2  summary, the  report  notes,  "include  the
easily verifiable  information that  the  alleged  mother-in-law died
in  1940,  when  the  inductee was  ten years old  and  ten  years  be-
fore  he  met  the  girl  he  married!"
The  cases  show  that  fathers,  grandparents,  brothers  and  sis-
ters,  in-laws, boyhood  associates,  chance  remarks at  school  and
books  read  at  college  may  all  come  back  to  haunt  one  in  the
Army.   Books,  indeed,  are  a  special  Army  bugaboo.   Rowland
Watts,  author  of  the  report,  summarizes it  by saying,  "A  care-
ful  study of the Army Military Personnel  Security program . . .
makes  it  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the  ideal  draftee
is  an  only  child  of  spontaneous  generation  who,  despite  a  her-
mit childhood,  has miraculously acquired the ability to  read  and
write  English  but  has  never  made  use  of  these  skills."    The
habit  of  reading can  be  as  hazardous  as  the  accident  of  birth.
This  issue  of  the  Weekly   is  entirely  devoted   to  the  Watts
report, which  is otherwise  available  only  in  a  very  limited   edi-
2  3.
iion  of  two  bulky  typewritten  volumes  reproduced  by  photo-
offset.   It  shows  the  mindless machinery beginning  to  grind  a
nation's  youth  into  conformity.   It  reveals  that  all  the  evils  so
familiar   in  the  loyalty  screening  of  government   employes—
anonymous  charges,  star  chamber procedures,  politically  illiter-
ate  allegations,   suspicion  of  the  slightest  liberal  tendency—
have spread  to the  armed  services.  The  source and  sponsorship
of  the  report  give  it  additional weight.    Its  author,  Rowland
Watts,  a  member of  the  Baltimore bar,  is national  secretary of
the  Workers  Defense   League,  which  represents  the  various
Socialist,  non-Communist and  anti-Communist sections  of  the
Left.   A grant  from  the  Fund  for  the  Republic made the  study
possible.  Kenneth M.  Birkhead, national director of  the Amer-
ican  Veterans  Committee,  joined Norman  Thomas  in  present-
ing the  report at the Pentagon.    It  deserves  the widest  possible
publicity  and  lays  the  basis  for  fundamental  reform.   It  also—-
as  its  author  notes—offers  the  labor  movement  a  preview  of
the  kind  of  mentalities  and  screening   procedures  to   which
workers  would  be  subjected  if  the  Department   of   Defense
should  succeed  in  getting  the  Butler  bill  for  screening  labor
through  the  next  session  of  Congress.    What  happens  to  the
worker's  son  today may happen  to  the  worker  tomorrow.
A  New  Way  to  Blacklist
Indeed,  as Watts points  out,  if  the  Butler  bill  does  not  pass,
then  "an  almost as effective,  albeit  somewhat  slower,  resolution
of  the  problem  from  the  Army's  standpoint  is  to  screen   the
future  labor  force of  the  country as  it  passes  through  its  hands
and  render  it  impossible for  those  it  remotely  suspects  ever  to
enter  an  industrial plant."   What  the  armed  forces  are  doing
is to give a less than  honorable  discharge  with a notation  show-
ing  that  doubt  about  loyalty exists.   Such  a  discharge  is  a  bar
to  many  kinds  of  employment.
In  addition,  since draftees  move  into  the  reserve  for  a  num-
ber  of  years, they  are  liable  during  that  period  to  an  undesir-
able  discharge  if  their  political  utterances  and  associations  or
those  of  their  relatives  and  wives  do  not  conform   to  Army
standards.   "It  is inconceivable,"  Watts  writes,  "that  the  Con-
gress  intended   to  delegate  to  the  Army  political  and  social
control  over  every  young  man  subject  to  the  Selective   Service
Law  from  the  dawn  of  his  mature  understanding  until  he  ap-
proaches  thirty.    Yet  this  is  the  effect  of  the  Army's  applica-
tion  of  what  it  considers  to  be  the  law.    Through  the  threat
of  an  'Undesirable'  discharge,  it  says,  'Conform,   not  only  on
active  service  but  for  the  full  term  of  your  developing  ma-
turity.' "   The  stronghold  of  freedom  is doing  its  best  to mo-
bilize  an  army  of  the  cowed.    The  pages  which  follow   show
how  and  why  this  is  happening.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  Augutt  IS, 1055
Although  the  Army  Defeated   McCarthy  in  the  Peress   Case . . .
Politically  McCarthy  is  dead,  but  his  soul  goes  inarching
on.  The  Peress  case,  which  led  McCarthy  into  a  frontal  at-
tack  on the  Army,  still  casts  its  shadow  across  the  nation's
youth.   Loyalty  regulations  adopted  by the  Pentagon  in pan-
icky  reaction  to  McCarthy's charges  about  the  Brooklyn den-
tist  are  branding  hundreds of  youngsters  on the  very  thres-
hold  of  their  careers.  This  is  how  the  evil   developed.
Though military  service  is  not government  employment,  the
armed  forces  in  1950 began  to  apply  the  Truman  loyalty  or-
der  to  draftees.
1
  But  those  who  were  regarded  as  politically
suspect  or  unreliable  were  barred  from  service  or  gotten  rid
of  with  an  honorable  discharge,  as  happened  in  the  case  of
Somebody  Should  Warn  Ike
"He  [the inductee]  was  asked,  'Did  you believe  at  one
time  that  the  government  of  the  U.  S.  and the Commu-
nist  government  of  Russia  could  co-exist  in  a  peaceful
manner?'   He  answered,  'Yes.'  He  was  then  asked,  'Do
you  entertain  that  thought  at  the  present  time?'   He
answered,   'No  sir,  my  attitude  is  realistic   about   the
matter.'"      —Case No. 11, P. £2, Vol. II,  Watts  Report
Dr.  Peress.   Under  those   circumstances   at  least  no  stigma
was  left  on  a  man's  record.
Until  the  Army  was  frightened  by  McCarthy,  its  tradi-
tional  policy  was  to  give  an   honorable   discharge  to  any
man  "whose  conduct  has  been  faithful  and  honest  during  his
time  in the  service  .  .  .  notwithstanding  what  his. conduct
may  have  been  prior  to  entering."  The  words  are  from  the
testimony of  Secretary  of the  Army  Robert T.  Stevens  before
the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee   on  March  18, 1954,
during  the  famous  "McCarthy  investigation."
But,  Stevens  went  on  to  explain,  he  had  recently  changed
this.  Where  a  man  was  discharged  from  the  service  because
Making  Soldiers  or   Informers?
"In  one  instance,  at  least,  a  federal  investigative  of-
ficer  threatened  the  man  (before  induction)  with  dif-
ficulties  in  his  military career  if  he  did  not  become  an
informant  on  his  alleged   associations."
—Page  1», Vol  I,  the Watts  Report
found  to  be  subversive  "his separation  within  the  limits  of
the  law  should  be  under  other  than  honorable    conditions,
regardless  of   the  actual  character  of  the  service  rendered."
In  addition,  Stevens  testified,  "when  the  evidence  fails  to
show that  he  is  disloyal  or  subversive,  but  does  establish  that
he  is  otherwise  a  security  risk,  and  should  be  eliminated,  he
But  Valley  Forge  Wasn't  A  POW Camp
And  Washington  Got  Along  Without
Loyalty   Questionnaires
"On cross-examination  in  discussing  prisoners  of  war
in  Korea  the  following  colloquy  took  place:
"WITNESS:  'We  talked  about  it  a  little  bit  wonder-
ing  why  some  of  the  guys  wanted  to  stay  over  there
since  this  is  such  a  nice  peace  loving  country.   We  felt
that  Red propaganda had a lot  to do with it.  They were
depressed,   lonely,  hungry,  beaten,  subject  to  any  kind
of  punishment.  Of  course  you  don't  have  a  clear  mind
to  think  with.'
"PRESIDENT  [of  Army  Loyalty  Board]:  'At  Valley
Forge that  didn't  bother  them  very  much did it?' •
—Page  98, Vol. I,  Watts  Report
is  separated  under  honorable  conditions,  usually  with  a gen-
eral  discharge."   Stevens  did  not  add  that  the  general dis-
charge bears a  code  notation  which  shows  that the separation
was  for  security  reasons.   Such  a  general  discharge   carries
a  stigma  and is  as  much a  bar to  many kinds of  employment
as  an  out-and-out   dishonorable   discharge.
Watts points out in his report, "According to  all  other  gov-
ernmental  policy  either  a  person  is  adjudged  a  security  risk
or  he isn't-  If  he  is,  or  is  adjudged  to  be, he  is  fired.  If  he
isn't,  he  continues   in  employment  and  eventually  draws  a
pension.   Only  the  Army  sets  up  a  third  security  category,
that  of  an  'almost  subversive"  and  gives  him  a  'General dis-
charge.'"
According  to  the  regulations  adopted   in  February, 1954,
all  draftees  "prior  to  induction"  are  supposed  to  fill  out  a
loyalty  certificate^  DD  Form  98.  [This  was  exposed  shortly
afterward   in  an  article  "Kafka   Might   Have  Written  The
Army's Loyalty  Form" in  the  Weekly  of  March  8,  1954.]  The
form  requires  full  disclosure  of  all  associations  with  any  or-
ganization  on the  Attorney  General's list.
The  regulations  provide  that  "known  Communists  will  not
be  inducted into the  Army  Establishment" where  there  is  ad-
mission  of  membership  or  "credible  derogatory  information."
But Watts found that in not  one of the  cases he examined  was
the  draftee   given  an  opportunity  to  execute  DD 98 prior  to
induction.  "The  tendency  has  been,"  Watts reported, "to rush
the  man through with  the  statement, 'if  you aren't a Commie,
sign  it.""  In  April,  1954,  the  Army  added  to  the  category of
"security risk" anyone  who pleaded  the  Fifth  amendment   (or
its  military  equivalent,  Article  31, Uniform  Code of  Military
Justice)  in  refusing  to  answer  any  question.
The  ostensible  purpose  was to  apply  to  the  Army  the  same
If  G2's  Charges  Were  True,  One Inductee  Was A  Communist  at  The  Age  of  Eight
The  Kind  of  Allegations   Which  Figure  in  Army  Loyalty  Proceedings
"The  allegations  of  'derogatory information'  filed  against
inductees  have  run  the  full  gamut  from  the  expected 'mem-
bership in  the  Communist Party' to  remote degree  of  family
relationship.   Any  association  with one  of  the  organizations
listed  by  the  Attorney General, however casual,  will  consti-
tute  an allegation.   The organizations are  by  no  means con-
fined  to  the  Attorney  General's  list,  however.  There  have
been  included  organizations  which  have  been  cited  by  the
House  Committee on  Un-American  Activities,  the  California
Committee  on  Un-American  Activities, the  Ohio Committee
on   Un-American  Activities,  etc., organizations  which  are
anonymously  'reported' to  have been dominated by members
of  listed  organizations; and  organizations  which,  as  far  as
the  allegation  indicates,  have  been  cited  or  reported by  no
one  at all.
"—  Because  of  the  youth of  all  of  these  men, most  of  the
allegations  concern  activities  of  their  mid  or  late  teens,  a
high  degree  of  them  allegedly  occurring  before  they  were
old  enough  to  drive a  car  or  publicly  drink  a  beer  in  most
states.    In  one  instance,  the  alleged  membership, if   true,
must  have  occurred  when  the  inductee  was  eight.  .  .  .
"Other  allegations  are  so  ambiguous  or  vague  as  to  be
impossible  of  definition,  let  alone  rebuttal.   Where  the  in-
formation  in  the  confidential  file  has  become  available  for
inspection  in  summary  form, it  has  sometimes  revealed  that
it  does  not support  the allegation  for  which  it  is  supposed to
be  the  basis.    Most  curious  of  all, however,  are  those  alle-
gations  which  are factually false  on their face.  ...    It  would
be interesting  to  hear the  government's justification for  sub-
mitting  to  a  Field  Board  as  evidence  'improbable informa-
tion  from  an  unreliable  source.'"
—Pages  27-28 and 46, Vol. I,  The  Watts  Report
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August IS, 1955
. . It  Knuckled  Under  to  McCarthyism  in  Its  Treatment   of  Draftees
standard  established  by  Eisenhower  for  the  government.   As
the  Army  counterpart  of  the  Eisenhower   loyalty  order  (SR
600-220-1)  states, its  purpose  is "the  rejection  of persons who
would  otherwise be inducted  or  involuntarily  ordered  into  the
Army  when  retention  in  or  acceptance  into  the  Army  is  not
clearly  consistent  with  the  interests  of  national  security."
.  Despite  this  clear  regulation,  the  Army  goes  on  inducting
"security  risks."    Admiral   Radford   explained   why  in  his
own  testimony-during  the  McCarthy  inquiry.
"An  easy  solution  to  the  problem,"  the  Admiral  told  the
Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,  "would  be  to  issue  orders
to  drop  anyone  about  whom there  was  the  slightest  suspicion
of  disloyalty  and  declare as  a  suspect  anyone who refused  for
any  reason,  including  the  Fifth   amendment,   to  execute  the
loyalty  certificate."
This  is,  indeed,  what  the  regulation  requires.   But  the
Admiral  said  the  services  were  afraid  that  if  they  did that
young  men  might  avoid  military  duty  by  pleading  the   Fifth
amendment    "Therefore,"  the  Admiral  said,  "we  reluctantly
accept  as  a  solution,  for  lack  of  a  better  one,  the  taking  of
this  type  of  young  man  into  the  service  with  certain  safe-
guards. . . . He is to remain  in the lowest  enlisted  grade  dur-
Working  In  Israeli  Kibbutz  Suspect
"Allegations:   June,  1954
«b.  In                   you  worked on  a  Communist  Collec-
tive  Farm in Israel....
"Answer: July, 1954....
"b.  I did work  on said farm, but  not with prior knowl-
edge  of  it  being  Communist,  and  without  any  aid  or
sympathy toward their  political  philosophy.  .  . .
"First  Hearing:  August,  1954  . . .
"On  cross  examination  he  stated   that   he  went   to
Israel  to  visit  friends  after  one semester  at  Manchester
College,  England;  that  because of  financial  necessity  he
secured a job on the collective  farm and discovered  after
about  one  week  that  it  was  communist   operated.   He
notified   the   American  Consul   of   this  but   continued
working there for  about three weeks.   He stated  further
that  the  language  barrier  screened  him  from  any  real
contact  with  the   personnel."
—Case No. 11, Pps. 87-39, Vol. II,  Watts  Report
No  Subversive  Snorer  He   ...
"The  man being  investigated  is  usually  assigned  to  a
'Holding'  company  where  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  a
fair  proportion  of  his  fellows  are  either  Counter-intel-
ligence  or  Battery-Intelligence men.  One amusing man-
ifestation  of  this  was  in  the  case  where the  man's com-
pany  commander in  Basic  training  testified  as  a  char-
acter  witness  at  the  hearing  a  year  later.
"When  asked,  on  cross-examination,  how  he remem-
bered  so  well  this  particular  man  of  all  the  hundreds
that  passed  through  his  command, he  said  he  had been
ordered  to  observe  him;  so  he  had  assigned  his  squad
leader  and  the  men  who  'slept  to  the  right  and  left  of
him'  to  report  everything he  said  and  did.    (He  found
'no disloyalty.*)"
—Page 24, Vol. I,  Watts  Report
ing his tour of duty;  he is not to be promoted . ..  and he is not
to  have  access  to  any  classified  information.   He is  to  remain
in this status  unless  he has  a  change  of heart  and  voluntarily
clears  himself."
But  as  the  reader can see from the  glimpses  in this  issue of
the  Watts report, it  is not at  all  clear  how a  man can "clear"
himself  of  charges  and  association  as  vague  as  those  which
figure  in  many  of  these  cases.  How clear  yourself  .of  having
read a radical magazine,  or  been a member  of the  Young  Peo-
ple's Socialist  League,  or having  a  mother  or  some other rela-
tive  who  was  or  is  a  radical?   Short  of  enlisting  as  an  in-
former,  "telling"  on  one's  own kin  and  resuming  old  associa-
tions  for  purposes  of  counter-espionage   how  can  one  demon-
strate  a  "change  of  heart"?
The  induction  of  so-called  "security  risks"  despite  Army
regulations  and  their  submission  to  humiliating  conditions  of
service  and  damaging  conditions  of  discharge were  calculated
to  appease   McCarthy.   "Coincident   with  the  Senate  Armed
Services   Committee's   hearings  in  Washington,"  Watts  re-
ports,  "the  regulations  were  tightened   not  only  in  terms of
the  type  of discharge  but  by curtailing'the opportunity  of  the
inductee  adequately  to  reply  to  the  allegations."
Until  April,  1954,  inductees  were  given  thirty  days  to  an-
swer  charges  in  writing—little   enough  especially   for  men
overseas.   But  in  April  this  was  shortened   to  seven  days.
"With  seven  days  to  answer,"  Watts  reports,  "few  could do
more  than pit  their  own written  word  against  the  unrevealed
'information'  in the  Confidential file."
In  Korea,  "one  man  found  that  he  could  not  even  see  the
applicable  regulations.   He  was  told  that  if  any  one  of  the
allegations  was  true,  it  didn't  make  any  difference  whether
he  answered  or  not."   Yet  in  his  case  the  charges  were  not
only  vague  but  inaccurate.    One  was  that  "you  distributed
Monthly   Review,  a  magazine  published  by  the   Independent
Socialist  League."  The  Monthly  Review  is  not  the  organ of
the  ISL  or  of  any  other  political  group  and  neither  the  At-
Army  G-2 Thinks  Nation  and  New  Republic  Confuse  Liberals
The  Case  of  A  Catholic  Who  Objected  to  "The  Moral  Implications  of  Strategic   Bombing"
'The  individual  is  presently 24 years  old.  He is  a member
of  the  Catholic church and attended                (Catholic) Col-
lege  in                           His  father, a  lawyer, was  formerly a
member  of  the  Board of  Governors  of                    (Catholic)
College  and  is  well  known  in  the  community as  a  defender
and  counsel  for  allegedly  Communist-front organizations.
While  in  college,  the  individual  participated in  ROTC  but
was  discharged from  the  Reserve Corps on the  basis  that  he
was  not  proper  officer  material.  The reason  given being that
he  did  poor  paper  work  and  that  he  objected  to  the  moral
implications of  strategic bombing.
"Inducted: August, 1953.
"Loyalty  Certificate  DD  98:  About  12 or  13 days  after  in-
duction.   Claimed  the  Federal  Constitutional Privilege,  but
stated  that  his  loyalty  to  the  Pope  as  a  Catholic  might be
considered  to be loyalty to a  foreign  power. . . .
"62  Summary  contains such information  as:
" 'Subject's  political  beliefs  were  such  many people  would
accuse  him  of  being  'pink'  but  that  he  should  be  classified
as.  an  idealist  who  believes  in  speaking  out  for  what  he
thought  is  right; he did not  think  the  Rosenbergs  had a fair
trial;  his  father  is   a  member  of   the   National  Lawyers
Guild
" 'Subject  possessed  a  copy of  the  Reporter dated 20 Sep-
tember  1953, and  also  had  copies  of  the  New  Republic and
one  of  the  Nation.   Files  indicate  that  the  Nation  and  the
New  Republic both have long  records as liberal  publications;
that  they  cannot  be  described  as  Communist, but  they  are
so  infiltrated  with  the  Communist Party  policy  that  they
serve  the  interests  of  Communists  and  confuse  liberals  on
many issues.'"
—Cose No. 31, Pps. 101-2, Vol. II,  Watts  Report
1  2  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  15,1955
Call  This  to  The  Attention  of  Your  Senators  and  Congressman
torney  General nor  any  other  official  body has  ever  so listed  it.
The  Watts  report  says  the  present  system  acts:
"1. To burden the  Army  with  men it  claims  it  doesn't want
and  to  force  it  to  create  a  vast  and  expensive  system  of de-
What  One  Court  Said
"An  honorable  discharge   is   an  extremely  valuable
property right  as  well  as a personal right  and to deprive
a  person  of  an  honorable  discharge  is  to  deprive him  of
property  rights,  as  well  as  civil   rights   and  personal
honor.   To  destroy  such  a  certificate  of  title  ...     in an
arbitrary  way  in  a  unilateral proceeding,  is  contrary  to
our  ideas  of  democracy.
—17.  S. v. Keating,  121 Fed. Supp.  W7
tection, investigation,  hearing  and  determination  in  a field to
which  it  is  ill-fitted  and ill  at  ease.
"2.  To  make  it  assume  the  role  of  jailor  of  those  who  are
charged  with  no  crime.
"3.  To permit  it  to  assess  punishment of  life-time  duration
(through  the  discharge)   upon  those  who  have  committed  no
offense  against  the  Army."
The  Watts  report  proposes  that  the  whole  Military   Per-
sonnel  Security  Program  be scrapped, and  a  new one  adopted
on  new premises.   Under  these  the Army would  be  responsible
for  men  only  during  their  terms  of  active  service,  grant  dis-
charges  solely  on  the  basis  of  service  rendered,  and  grant
men  in  security  cases  "the  same  full  hearing  rights  that  are
guaranteed  him  by  the  Uniform  Code of  Military  Justice  in
defending  himself   against  any  other  charge."
"Within   the  limits  of  established   standards   of   eligibility
and  procedure,"  the  Watts  report  concludes,  "the  Army  must
be  the  sole judge  of  whom  it  will  permit  to  serve  in  its  ranks
"The   Army  Seems  Afraid   of  Books"
"A  final  alarming tendency  is  detected  in  the  [Army
Loyalty]  Board's  questions.   The Army seems  afraid of
books  and  reading.   Repeatedly  witnesses   are   asked:
'Does   he  read?',   'Does   he  do  much  reading?'  'What
books  does  he  read?'  Music  and  art  also  arouse   sus-
picious  concern,  until  we  reach  this  stage:
"Q.  'What   do  you   mean  by   an  intellectual?   Does
that  mean  you  question  our  present  way  of  living  and
our  present Government?   Is  that what  yon mean by  an
intellectual?   In  other  words,  you  don't  accept  for  face
value.   Is  that  what  you mean?
"A.  'An intellectual is  a  person  who questions every-
thing,  even  his  fact   of  living,  the  fact  that  he  even
exists.   He  is  more  on  a  philosophical level  than  politi-
cal level.'
"Q.  'Does  it  mean  that  you  consider our  form  of Gov-
ernment  open  to  question, and you're not  too firm about
defending   our   form   of  government?'
"A.  'No,  it  doesn't  mean  that.    I'm  very  firm  about
defending  our  form   of   government.   It   doesn't  mean
that  at  all.'
"Q. 'You're loyal to  our form of government?'
"A.  'Yes,  sir.'
"Q. 'You are intellectual up to that  degree?'
"A. 'Well, looking  back on my  adolescent   experiences,
I  can  laugh  with  you.'"
—Pages  58-9, Vol. I,  Watts  Report
Jews  and  Negroes
"The   individual had  two  interviews with Army  Secu-
rity  officers.   At  the  first  interview  two  civilians  were
present   and  were  believed   to  be  S-2   agents.    In  the
course  of  the  interview,    one  of  them  asked  him,  'did
you  know  that  there  were  many  Jews  at  the University
of                          (the  school  the  individual  attended)?'
Another  question  was  asked  to  this effect:  'why did you,
a  white  person,  belong to  the  National Association  for
the  Advancement  of  Colored  People?'"
—Case No.  8, p. 25, Vol. II,  Watts  Report
and  that judgment  will  be based  solely  on its  military  needs;
therefore,  the  Army  will  not  accept  into  service  anyone who
is  not  in  a  position  to  be permitted  to  serve  fully  in  accord-
ance  with  his  capabilities."
Norman   Thomas,  the   Workers   Defense   League   and  the
American  Veterans  Committee  have  performed  a  public  serv-
ice of the  first  magnitude in presenting this report to the  Sec-
retary  of the  Army.  Now that  Congress  is disbanded,  readers
should  call  it  to the attention  of their  Congressmen  and  Sena-
tors and  urge them  to  put  pressure on the  Army.  The report
discloses  a  system   of  nationwide   surveillance   and  thought
control  in  the  armed  forces  that  shames  our freedom-loving
pretensions.   When  boys can  be  blacklisted  for  life  because of
their mothers,  something is seriously  wrong with  our  America.
The  Weekly  is published. 48  times  a  year.   It   does  not  go to
press  the  lost two Thursdays  in  August  or December. The  next  is-
sue will be Sept.  5.  We  wish  our readers a  pleasant vacation, too.
This  Issue  May  Be  Ordered In  Bulk  At  5  Cents  A  Copy  Plus  Postage
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City                                            Zone           State
Enter gift  sub for  $2 (6  mos.) or $4  (1 yr.)  additional:
(To)  Name                                             „
Street                                               „
City                                            Zone.          State
* $1 extra  for  Canada.                                              8/15/63
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  0.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED