I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955feb21.pdf

============================================================

One  Law for  the  Crooked  Oil  Man,  Another  for  the  Hollywood  Writer,  See  Page 4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  Ill,  NUMBER  5FEBRUARY   21,  1955
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Bigger  News  in  Some  Ways  Than  the  Malenkov-Bulganin   Shift
A  Startling  New  Moscow  Bid  on  Germany?
The  Weekly   is  forced  abjectly  to  confess  that  it  hasn't  a
single  secret   pipeline  into  the  Kremlin,  and  not  the  slightest
reliable  idea  as  to  what  the  shift  from  Malenkov  to  Bulganin
means.    We   are  amused,  however,   by   the   unexpected   and
politically  posthumous  canonization of  Malenkov by  Secretary
Dulles in  his Foreign  Policy  Association address last Wednesday
night.   Only  a  few  weeks  ago,  in  a  year-end  statement  called
"Balancing   the   Books  for   1954,"  the   Secretary  said  of   the
Soviet  Union  "Hostile  forces  remain  strong   and  implacable.
They  are  operating  with  even  greater  guile  than   heretofore."
This  was  in  accord  with   the  State  Department's   line  since
Stalin's  death  which  was  (1)   that  nothing  had  changed  in
Moscow  but   (2)   that   if   there  appeared  to  be  a  relaxation
this  was  only  apparent  and  represented  a  "New   Look"  which
made  the  Kremlin  more  diabolically dangerous than  ever.
But   now   Mr.  Dulles   sees  in   the   "despotic   disarray"   and
"elemental  personal struggle  for  power"  in  Moscow  "the   out-
lines  of   a  basic  policy  difference."   On   one  side  were  those
"who  are  primarily  concerned  with  the  welfare,  security  and
greatness  of  the  Soviet Union  and  its  people"  and  on  the  other
those  who  "would  have  the  Soviet  Union  and  its  power serve
primarily  as a tool of International Communism."   Temporarily
the  moderates,  the  good  Communists   (what  a  heresy  is  here
implied!)  have  lost  while  the  conspirators  (Bulganin is thus  a
kind  of  neo-Troskyite)    have  won.    Mr.  Dulles  thinks  that
some  day  "Russians  of  stature  will  patriotically  put  first  their
national  security  and  the  welfare  of  their  people."    Then—
happy  day—negotiation will be possible!  We  hope  the Kremlin
will  not  take  this  too  seriously.   They  might   embarrass  Mr.
Dulles by  promoting  Malenkov  again.
Like  The  Only  Good  Injun
It  might  be  said  that  Mr.  Dulles's  notion  is  that   the  only
good  Russian  is  a  demoted  one.   His  day  dream  implies  that  a
"tough"  regime  in  Moscow  must  be  one  which  is  concerned
with  advancing  Communism   elsewhere.   He   would   have  us
assume  that   a  Soviet  regime  interested  only  in  the  U.S.S.R.
and  its  people  would  not  object  to  being  ringed  by  American
atomic  bomber  bases.  The  fact  is,  of  course,  that  from   the
very  beginning  of  the  Revolution  its  extremism,  harshness  and
suspicion  had  as much  to  do  with  the  unrelenting  hostility  of
the   outside   world   as  with   its   own   Russian  and  Bolshevik
heritage.   Fear  of  a  rearmed  Germany  and  a  justified  suspicion
of  people  like  Mr.  Dulles  are  driving  the  Soviet  regime  back
toward  a  tougher  policy.   This  is  a  great  relief   to  the   State
Department,   which  prefers  an  intransigent  Moscow.   Perma-
nent  hostility  is so much  easier,  and  politically  more  comfort-
able,  than  negotiation  and  peaceful  co-existence.
The  problem  of  arranging  the  succession  in  the  new  type of
"monarchy"  which  the  Communist  dictatorships   represent  is
not   an  easy  one.   "Democratic  centralism"  in   practice   has
become  rigid  control  from  the  top  in  the  Communist   parties;
"collective  leadership"  is  more  difficult  to  maintain  than  one-
man  rule;  in  practice  proletarian  dictatorship  tends  to  breed  a
kind  of  Marxist  Frank  Hague  or  political   boss.   All   things
considered,  after  so  many  years  of  Stalin,  his  successors  are
doing  much  better  than  their  enemies  expected.   It  would  be
very  serious and  create  world  instability  if  they  proved  unable
to  cope  with  the  problem  of  a  permanent  succession.    New
surprises  are not  to  be  excluded.
An  Historic  Resolution
In  the  meantime, it  would  be better  if  public  opinion  in  this
country   gave  up   those   deliciously   morbid   reflections  with
which  ever since  1917  it  has foreseen, just  around  the  corner,
the  collapse of  the  Revolution.   It  is more  important  to  focus
on  the  really  dramatic  but  widely  ignored  prospect  of  a  new
and  revolutionary  offer   from  Moscow  to  settle  the  German
problem.   In  Warsaw  on  February  6  a  Communist   controlled
"International  Conference  on  European  Peace  and  the German
Problem"  with  delegates  from  all  the  Soviet  countries  passed
a  resolution  which  is  bigger  news  in  some  ways  than  the  shift
from  Malenkov  to  Bulganin.  This  promises  the  withdrawal of
the  Soviet  army from  Poland  along  with  all  occupation troops
from  Germany;  free  democratic  elections  in  Germany  as  pro-
posed by Sir Anthony  Eden at  the  Berlin conference on January
29 of  last  year;  and  an Austrian  peace treaty.   This is Moscow's
highest   bid  yet   for   a  "return   to   Potsdam"—a    neutralized
Germany   outside  any  military   coalition,   with   its  territories
"guaranteed   by  other  European  nations  and  by   the   United
States."
If  this  is  soon  embodied  in  a  formal   offer  from  Moscow,  it
may  upset  the  Adenauer  regime  in  Germany.   The  American
press  has completely  underplayed  the  resistance  to  rearmament
in  the  Reich  and  the  fears  aroused  by  Molotov's  threats  that
acceptance  of  the  London  and  Paris  agreements  will  shut  the
door  permanently  on  the  hope  of  a  reunified  Germany.    The
Soviet   offer  would  mean  a  voluntary   "rollback."   The  with-
drawal  of  the  Red  army  from  Germany,  Poland  and  Austria
would  mark  the end of  the  abnormal  situation left  by  the  war.
The  Eden  plan  would  provide  really  free  elections in  the  Reich.
For  millions  in  England  and  France,  a  Soviet  offer  on  the  lines
of   the  Warsaw   resolution  would   also  lay  the   spectre  of   a
rearmed  Reich.  Moscow  obviously is prepared  either  to  make a
grand  settlement  on Germany  or to  play it  rough.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  SI, 1955
The  Hidden  History   of  the  Formosan  Crisis  III
How Ike and Dulles Blocked An Independent Democratic Formosan  Policy...
Washington—A   confession  was  made  to   the   Senate  by
Kefauver  the  day  it  ratified  the  mutual  security  pact  with
Chiang  Kai-shek.     This  confession  will  make  it   easier   to
understand   just  what   happened  in  the  three  hectic  weeks
between  the  Monday, January  24,  when  Eisenhower   upset
the  Hammarskjold  negotiations  with  Peiping  by  asking  Con-
gress  for  authority  if  necessary  to  make  preventive  war  on
the  Chinese mainland and last  Monday when the  UN  Security
Council  suspended  its   efforts   to  achieve  a  cease-fire  in  the
Formosa  straits.
Kefauver,  one  of  the   six  Senators  to  oppose  the  treaty
with   Chiang,   said  he  had  voted  for  the   earlier   Formosan
war   authority   asked   by   the   President    "reluctantly    and
against   my   better   judgment"   and   because   he   had  been
given  to  understand  that  it  would  be  followed  by  quite  a
different   resolution.   This  was  S.  J.   Res.  65,  sponsored   by
Kefauver,  Humphrey,  Sparkman,  Morse, Mansfield, Fulbright,
Lehman,   Magnuson,  Neuberger   and   Hill.    This   resolution
said  the   U.S.  would  "welcome  intervention   by  the   United
Nations" to  bring  about  a  cease-fire  and  "a  definitive settle-
ment  of  the  future  status  of  Formosa  and  the  Pescadores."
According  to  Kefauver,  something  like  a  promise  had  been
Quite  A  Boil
"Mr.  Wiley.   In  substance,  the  executive  branch  has
said  that  we  can  either  defend  the  United  States  in
the  Straits  of Formosa,  now, or we may  have  to  defend
it  later  in  San  Francisco  Bay.   That  is  what  the  ques-
tion  boils  down  to and .  .  . that  is why I  am in favor
of  this  treaty  [with  Chiang  Kai-shek].
—U.S.  Senate,  Feb.  9, Con. Rec. 1173
given  and  broken.    The  Tennessean  told  the  Senate  he  had
voted  for  the  joint  resolution  asked  by the  President  because
"prior  to  the  vote"  on it  "I  was  given  to  understand—and  I
think  most   other   Senators   so  understood"—that   this  other
United  Nations resolution  "would be considered and  agreed  to
by  the  Senate"  the  following  week.   (The  italics  are  added.)
Instead  the  resolution  was  buried  in  the  Senate  Foreign  Re-
lations  Committee.
Freezing  the  Situation  in  Advance
The  basic  reason  for  not  calling  up  that  resolution  for  a
vote  is  that  it  would  have  been  more  difficult  afterwards   to
persuade  the  Senate  to  ratify  the  mutual  security  pact  with
Chiang.    For  as  Kefauver  said,  the  pact  "by  inferentially
agreeing" that  Chiang had title  to  Formosa  "might  make  it
impossible  for  the  United  Nations  to  work  out  any  solution
of  this  problem."    The  Senate  could  hardly  have  voted  one
week  to  ask  the  UN  to  bring  about  "a  definitive   settlement
of  the future status  of Formosa"  and  then,  before waiting  for
such  a  settlement  to  be  attempted,  ratify  a  mutual   security
pact  promising to  keep  Chiang in  possession  of  Formosa  and
As  Seen  From  The  Other   Side
"It   is  the  armed  forces  of  the  United  States which
have  for   many  years   systematically  violated  the   air
space   and  territorial  waters   of   China,  and  not   the
armed  forces   of   China  which  have  violated   the   air
space  and  territorial   waters   of  the  United  States;  it
is   the   U.S.  fleet  which  has   virtually   blockaded  the
Chinese  coast,   and  it  is  not  the   Chinese  fleet  which
has  made  its   appearance   off  San  Francisco   or  New
York."
—Sobolev,  the   Soviet  member  of   the   UN   Security
Council,  in  the  Formosa, debate, Jan.  31
One  Good  Reason  For  A  Small  Army
"Of  course,  if  Mr.  Vinson, Mr.  Gavin,  and  the  other
fire  eaters  of  the   [House  Armed  Services]  committee,
wish  to  fight  another   war   on  the   Asiatic  continent,
there   will  be  need  for   a   huge  army.    It   should  be
added,  however, that  the  best  of  all  reasons  for  follow-
ing  Mr.  Eisenhower's  suggestion   is  that  the  smaller
the  army,  the  less  our  fire  eaters  will  be  tempted  to
send  our  men  to  war  on  the  Asiatic  mainland  where
a  war  will  surely  cost  us  more  than  we  can  hope  to
gain  from   it."
—Editorial   in   Col.  McCormick's   Chicago   Tribune,
Feb.  3  (and  for  once we  agree with  him).
the  Pescadores.   It  would have been too  obvious that  we were
freezing  the  situation   in  advance.
Indeed this  is  exactly  what  we have done.   During the  past
six  months  the  aim  of  the  Dulles-Radford-Knowland  team—
for  in this  they  are  a  team—has been to  freeze  the  status  of
Formosa  and  prevent  an  international   solution  of  the  prob-
lem.   This  is  the  main  thread  for  those  who would find their
way  through   the   labyrinth   of  Far   Eastern   developments.
By  following  it   we  may   see  the   function  played   by   the
President's  war   powers   message   of  January   24  in   stam-
peding   a   Democratic   Senate   into   accepting   the   mutual
security  pact  with  Chiang.
The  mutual  defense  treaty  with   Chiang  was   signed  on
December  2.    A  memorandum  on  the   proposed  treaty  was
prepared  for  Democratic  members  of the  Senate  by Benjamin
V.   Cohen,  who  was   counsellor   of   the   State   Department
under  Secretaries  Byrnes  and  Marshall.    This  began  to  cir-
culate  widely here at  the  end of  December.   (The full  text of
the  memo and a later  note  added to it  may be found  at  pages
1183-5  of  the   Congressional   Record  for   February  9.)    The
Cohen  memorandum  argued   that   "the   treaty  as   presented
would  be  more  of  an  obstacle  than  a  help  in  working  for  a
peaceful  settlement"  and  that  "before  attempting   to  agree
on  any  mutual  defense  treaty  for  this  disturbed  area"  the
U.S.  seek  through  the  UN for  a  cease-fire  "so that  it  will be
clear  that  we  are   seeking  peace  and  not  trying  to   shield
Formosa  and  the  Pescadores   while  attacks  on  the  mainland
are  in  course  of preparation  there."
No  Real  Curb on  Chiang
This last was a  reference  to  the fact,  as  pointed  out by the
memo,  that  there  was  nothing   in  the  treaty  nor  in  Mr.
Dulles's  explanations  of  it  which would prevent  Chiang  from
attempting   by  force  to  extend   his  power  to  the  mainland
and  thereby  perhaps  dragging  the  U.S.  into  war  with  China.
When  the  Secretary  of  State was  asked  about  this  very  point
at  press  conference,  he  could say  only  "we  expect  that  there
will  be  worked  out  practical  arrangements  so  that   neither
will take action  in this area which would jeopardize the  other
and  that  we could generally  act  in  an  agreed  pattern  of con-
duct.  .  .  . We would not  expect,  nor  would the  Chinese Na-
tionalists  expect  to act rashly. . . . We  anticipate  . . . a great
deal  of consultation  and  agreement."   This  ambiguous phras-
ing   "in  no  way  suggests,"  the   Cohen  memorandum  said,
"that  an  attack  on the  mainland  by the  Chinese  Nationalists
from  Formosa" would be a  violation  of the  treaty.
In  the  wake  of  the  memorandum, as  Senator  Lehman  said
during  debate  February   9  on  the  pact,  "there  appeared   to
develop  a  considerable  resistance,   both  in  public  circles  and
in  the  Senate,  to  fundamental  aspects  of  the  treaty.  Then,
suddenly,  President  Eisenhower  sent  the   Congress   a  mes-
sage"  asking  special  war  powers  in  the  Formosan   straits.
The  Senator  did  not  develop  the  inference   suggested  by
the  sequence  of  events.   But  the  war  alarms  stirred  by  the
We  Will  Be Glad to  Send Free Sample Copies of the  Three  Formosa  Pieces
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February   SI,  1SSS
. . . The  Flim-Flam  in  Those  "Understandings"   Chiang  Needn't   Understand
Poor  Track  Material  By  Now
"Mr.  MORSE.   On  the  basis  of  such  military  facts
as  I  have  ever  heard  discussed, I  am  not  enthusiastic
about  the  argument  as  to  what  these  great  allies  of
ours,  the  Nationalist  Chinese  will  do  if  we  become in-
volved  in war.    I  think  the  chief  thing  they  will do will
be  to  run.    However,  they  will  not  be  able  to  run  as
fast   as  they  ran   off  the  mainland  of  China,  because
they  are  older."
—U.S.  Senate,  Feb.  9,  Con.  Rec. 1179
message  created  an  atmosphere  in  which  calm consideration
of   the  treaty  became  politically  impossible.    Logically,  as
Lehman  said,  "passage  of  the   [special  war  powers]  resolu-
tion   certainly   eliminated  the   necessity   of   a   treaty   with
Chiang."    The  resolution  gave  the  President   more  power  to
defend  Formosa  than  he  would  have  under  the  treaty.   But
emotionally  it  became  difficult  to  question  the  treaty  so soon
after   approving   the   war   powers  resolution.    So  a  treaty
which  may  some  day  involve  our  country  in  World  War  III
was  reported   by  the   Senate   Foreign   Relations  Committee
after  hearing  but  one  witness,  the  Secretary   of  State,  and
ratified  by  the  Senate  with  but  one day  of  debate.
The  Pact  Is  More Dangerous
Yet  the  pact,  though  less  dramatic,   is  more   dangerous
than  the war  powers  resolution.  The resolution  is a  unilateral
declaration  we  can  rescind  at  any  time;  indeed  by  its  terms
the  special  war  powers  of  the  President  to  defend   Formosa
expire  "when  the  President  shall  determine  that  the  peace
and  security  of the  area  is  reasonably  assured  ...    by action
of  the  United  Nations  or  otherwise.  .  .  ."   But  by ratifying
the  pact,  the   Senate   (as  Lehman  said)  was  "binding  our
country  not  only for  the  present,  to  meet  the  present  situa-
tion, but  binding us  with the  bonds  of constitutional  strength
far  into  the  indefinite  future,  to  meet  situations  which  we
cannot  possibly  foresee  today."  The  pact  serves  the  purpose
of  those  who  do not  want  to  see  a  peaceful  settlement  nego-
tiated.    I*  sharply  reduces  the  area  of  possible  bargaining.
It  ties  Chiang  securely  to  our  national   apron-strings.
This  is  well  understood  in  the   Senate,  but  few  had   the
courage  to  say  so  openly.   As  Morse  said  of  his  colleagues,
during  the  one-day debate  "I  think  they  ought  to be  agreeing
with  me  on the  floor  of  the  Senate,  as  well  as  in  the  cloak-
room."    The   Oregonian   showed   himself   by  far   the   ablest
and  the  bravest  member of the  U.S.  Senate  in the  fight  on  the
war  powers  resolution  and  again  on  the  treaty.    All  who
believe  in  peace  are  deeply  in  his  debt.
Ostensibly  Morse  spoke  only  for  a  handful.   Only  Langer
and  Lehman  voted  with  him  against  the  war  powers  resolu-
tion.    Only three  others,  Chavez,  Gore  and  Kefauver, joined
them  in  the  final  vote  against  the  pact.    But  the  votes  were
no  index  in  this  case   to  the  real  feelings   of  the   Senate.
Morse's  stature  rose  among  his  colleagues  as  well  as  in  the
country.    There  were  many  signs  that  but  for  the  skilfully
rung  war  alarums  the  treaty  with  Chiang  would  have  had
hard  going.
Byrd  Splits With  George
The  most  striking  was  the  way  Byrd  and  Russell  reacted.
These  two  with  George  make  up  a  triumvirate   of   Southern
conservatives  which  works  closely  together.    They  hold  the
chairmanships   of   three  key   committees:   Finance    (Byrd),
Foreign  Relations   (George)  and  Armed  Services  (Russell).
They  almost  never  disagree  and  when  they  do  they  usually
keep  the  disagreement   to  themselves.    While  George's   in-
fluence swung  the day for  the  resolution  and  the  pact, Russell
was  silent  and  Byrd,  though  dissuaded  from  speaking,  did file
a  scorching  statement  opposing  the  direction  of  Far  Eastern
policy,  calling  the  President's  resolution  "a  predated  declara-
tion  of  war"  and  bitterly  criticizing  Chiang.    Byrd  was  one
of  the  13 Senators  who  voted  for  the  Morse-Lehman amend-
ment  to  cut  the  offshore  islands  and  preventive  war  power
from  the  grant  of  authority  to  the  President.   He  was  also
one  of  the  ten  who  voted  for  the  Morse  amendment  which
would  have  removed  from  the  pact  with  Chiang  those  pre-
visions  which  make  it  possible  "by  mutual  agreement"  to
extend   American  protection  to  areas   other   than   Formosa
and  the   Pescadores.
The  failure  of  the   influential   Southern  conservatives   to
speak   up   in   support   of   George   during   the   debate    was
significant.     One  of  them,  Stennis   of  Mississippi,  told   the
Senate,  "I  am not voting for the  joint  resolution  as  a military
alliance  in  any  way  with  Nationalist   China,  nor  as  a  police
action  against  the  spread  of  Asiatic  communism."
The  temper  of the  Senate  was  also  indicated  by  the  failure
of  any  Senator  to  defend  Chiang  against  the  serious  charges
made  against  him  on  the  floor,  and  the  complete   disappear-
ance  from  the  debate  of the  delusion that  he  might  some  day
"liberate"  the  mainland.   It  was  a  sour  and uncomfortable
Senate  which  gave  the  President  the  emergency  powers  he
asked  and  then  ratified  the  mutual  security  pact  Dulles  had
Morse  Sums  Up
Mr.  MORSE.   I  have  opposed  the  [Formosa]  treaty
because  I  believe  it  increases  the  danger   of  war.    I
have  opposed  the  treaty  because  I  believe  it   compli-
cates   the   final   determination   of   juridical  rights   to
Formosa.    I  have  opposed  the  treaty  because  I  think
it  indirectly  places  in  the  Nationalist  Chinese  a  sanc-
tion  upon  the  sovereign  rights  over  Formosa.    I  have
opposed  the  treaty  because  I  do  not  think  we  should
enter   into  a   so-called  treaty  with  a   government   in
Formosa  which is  a  government  of military  occupation,
which  we, in  effect,  have helped  to  impose upon  millions
of  native  Formosans,  without  their  having  any  right
to  self-government  in  connection with  such  imposition."
—U.S.  Senate,  Feb.  9,  Con.  Rec. 1185
negotiated.    But  the  result,  as  Adlai   Stevenson  is  said  to
have  protested   privately   to   Senator   George  here,   was   to
torpedo  an  independent  Democratic  party   Formosan  policy
based  on  cooperation  with  the  United   Nations.
All  that  remains  of  what  might  have  been  a  Democratic
position  on  Formosa   are  the  three  "understandings"  which
the  Senate Foreign  Relations  Committee wrote into the  report
accompanying  the  mutual  security  pact  to  the  Senate.  Never
was  a  majority   party   gulled   so  cheaply.    The  committee
"understands"  that  we  are  not  obligated  to  support   Chiang
in  an  attack  on  the  mainland,  that  the  area  to  be  protected
cannot  be extended  beyond Formosa  and  the  Pescadores  with-
out  the  Senate's  approval  and  that  the  terms  of  the  treaty
shall   not   be  construed   as   affecting   the   legal   status   or
sovereignty  of Formosa.  These "understandings" have  neither
legal  validity nor political reality.   To make a treaty with  the
"Republic  of  China"  is  to  recognize  its  sovereignty,  Chiang
as  the  other  party  to  the  treaty  is  in  no way  bound by  what
our  Senate  "understands."
For  New  York   Readers
New   York   friends   of   the   Weekly    invite   New   York   subscribers
to   a   coffee  "klatsch"   Friday   evening   March  4   at   the   New   York
Newspaper  Guild   clubhouse,   133  W.  44th  Street,  for   an  informal
get-together   with   IPS.     No   admission,   no   speeches,   no  collection,
just  a   chance   to  say  hello.
To Your  Friends  If  You Just Send  Us Their  Names  and Addresses
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  &1,  1955
More  Odds  Than  Ends:  Crooked Oil  Man  and  Hollywood  Intellectual
Money   Counts   Where  Ideas  Don't:  All  through  our  law,
like a  bright  and revealing  thread,  there  runs  a  double  stand-
ard  of  treatment,  one for  money and men  of  money,  the  other
for  ideas  and  men  of  ideas.   The  sharp  contrast  may  again
be found  in Ring  Lardner Jr.'s suit against Twentieth Century
Fox  Film  which the  Supreme  Court last  week  refused  to  hear
.  .  .  When  Harry  Sinclair  refused  to  answer  questions  in  the
Teapot Dome oil  scandals and was held in contempt,  the  courts
held  that  contempt   does  not  involve  moral  turpitude.   This
was  settled  law  until  the  Lardner case.   Lardner,  one  of  the
Hollywood  Ten,  was  awarded  $25,000  in  back  pay  by  a  jury
in  a  suit  for  breach  of  contract  by  Twentieth  Century which
fired him  after  his  appearance before the  House  Un-American
Activities  Committee.   The  jury  held  that  Lardner's  refusal
on  First  Amendment  grounds  to  answer  questions  as  to  his
political  views  was  not  "moral  turpitude"  and  therefore  not
cause for  discharge  under the typical "public disrepute"  clause
of his movie contract... But the  U.S.  Circuit  Court of Appeals
reversed  the  verdict  on  the  ground  that  as  a  matter  of  law
the  refusal  to  answer  was  moral  turpitude, despite  the  Sin-
clair  case.    One  law  for   a  crooked  oil  man  protecting   his
swag,  another  for  an  intellectual  invoking the  First  Amend-
ment  to  protect  his  freedom  of  opinion.
Dickie  Boy's  Theologico-Politicus:   When  Nixon  in   Guate-
mala  paid  tribute  to  the  Catholic Church as  one of "the major
bulwarks  against  Communism", he  stepped  right  into  a com-
plicated  political  situation,  foot-in-mbuth.  The  Church  may
ov may not be a bulwark  against  communism but  has  certainly
been  a  bulwark  against  progress   in  Guatemala.   When  the
Liberals  came  to  power  there  in  the  1870's  they  had  to  exile
the  Archbishop and  disestablish  the  Church, which was  a bul-
wark of feudalism.  Even the  current  President,  Carlos  Castillo
Armas,  though   a  product  of  counter-revolution  and  United
Fruit  Company  intervention,  finds  the  Church  too  backward
for  his  taste,  and  has  resisted  pressure  to  re-establish   the
Catholic  Church  as  the   official  State  religion,  complained of
Church  interference  in  the  elections  for  the  constituent   as-
sembly  and  is  on none too friendly terms  with  the  Archbishop
Nixon  praised.   When  Dickie  Boy  asked  His  Grace  whether
there  was  still   Communism  in  Guatemala,  the  Archbishop
replied,  "There  is  always  communism among  certain  classes."
The  poor  and  the  idealistic  will  always  bear  watching,  as  will
those  who take the Gospel too seriously  . . .
Mendes-France   and   Indo   China:   Last   week's   issue   of
L'Express,    which  is   Mendes - France's   closest    journalistic
supporter,  claims  that  Washington, allied with  his  enemies in
the  Assembly, went  into  action  on  the  eve  of  his  fall  to  block
his  plan   for   stabilizing   Indo-China  by  an  agreement   with
Ho  Chi-minh.   For  France  an  agreement  with  Ho  would  be
a  chance  to  maintain  business  and  cultural  contacts  with  all
of  Indo-China, North  and  South.   U.S.  policy  prefers  a  new
"38th  Parallel"    ...
Socio-Political  Note:  Prince  Hubertus  zu  Loewenstein  was
guest  of honor here Tuesday at a party  given by Freda  Utley...
Footnote on Dementia  Americana for  the  Future  Historian:
"Without  their  knowledge,"   Walter  Winchell  reported  Feb.
13, "the  entire  cast  of  the  new  play,  'The Desperate   Hours',
was  thoroughly  screened  for  any  trace  of  subversive   affilia-
tions.   Because  Robert  Montgomery  [the director]  is  So Close
to  the President."  . . .  Probably   afraid  Bulganin  might  steal
some  of his golf  secrets . . .
South-East Asia Citadel of  Freedom  (and The Dope  Traffic):
A  delayed  dispatch  from  its  special  correspondent  in   Singa-
pore  published  by  the  New  York  Daily  News  February  13,
quotes  a  British   customs   official   as  saying  that   "Thailand,
where  opium  dens  are  wide  open,  has  become  the  center  of
most  Southeast   Asian  opium  peddled  by  international  rack-
eteers."  . . . And after  those  news  stories  about  China  flood-
ing  the  world  with  opium, "The British   spokesman  said  Red
China's  contribution  to  the  international  drug  racket  appears
to be the smallest  of all."   ...
Add  Famous  American  Last  Words:  "The  Bill  of  Rights
and  the  Constitution  are  controversial,  and not  to be posted on
the   bulletin   board"—order   issued   by  Rear   Admiral   (ret.)
Orville  E.  Gregor   after  finding   these   obviously   subversive
documents   posted   on  the   bulletin  board   of   the   California
Division  of Architecture  in Los Angeles  . . . Quiver of the  Lip
Dept.:  "We're  not  a  splinter  group,"  Utah's  Gov. T.  Bracken
Lee  at  that  Lincoln  Birthday  meeting  in  Chicago,  and  Joe
McCarthy's  "I'm a  Republican  first  and last, root  and center;
I campaigned for President  Eisenhower . . ."
About  That  Immunity  Test:  The  new  immunity  law  has
two parts, one dealing with  Grand Juries,  the  other  with  Con-
gressional   committees.   The  procedures  are   quite   different.
The  former  is   involved   in   the   decision  by  Federal   Judge
Weinfeld  in  New  York  upholding  its  constitutionality  in  the
William   Ludwig  Ullman  case.   This  is  another   attempt   by
Brownell  to  smear  the  New  Deal  via  the  Elizabeth  Bentley
charges,  which  Ullman  has  several  times  denied  under  oath.
For  the  best  survey  of  the  background  of  this  whole  affair,
which  we hope  soon to  discuss  at  greater  length,  readers  are
referred   to  Dan  Gillmor's  new  book,  "Fear,  The   Accuser"
(Abelard-Schuman,  New  York).   This  is  the  best   study  be-
tween  book  covers of the  Bentley  testimony  and  the  Harry  D.
White  affair.
You  Can Help  Me  by  Renewing Now  and  Sending  a  Gift  Subscription  to  a  Friend
I. F.  Stone's Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter) my
Nftnt**
Street
City
E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
7onp            Stuff
Enter  this  gift  sub for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(To)  Name
Strwf
fHty
Kmt*         State
2/21/66
I,  F,  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
.101  E.  Capitol St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second   Class  Mall
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Potf   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED