I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955apr25.pdf

============================================================

Exposing  Eliz. Bentley's  Contradictions
The  Real  Informer  Issue:  Protecting  Secrets  or  Political  Character  Assassination?
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    Ill,   NUMBER 14
APRIL  25,  1965
<•""       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Chance to  Destroy  the  20 Years  of Treason  Myth
Former  President   Harry  S.  Truman,
Independence,   Missouri.
Dear  Mr.  President:
Since  you  seem  from  that  last  haymaker of  a  speech  to  be
the  only  Young  Democrat  left,  the  one  leader  in  the  party
who's   a   fighter,   and   because  it   involves  your  honor   and
Franklin  D.  Roosevelt's,  we  want  to  ask  your  intervention  in
the  case  of  William  Henry  Taylor.    Taylor  is  an  official  of
the   International   Monetary   Fund,   assistant   director   of   its
Middle  and  Far  Eastern  division.   He  is  the  last  associate  of
the  late  Harry  D.  White  named  by  Elizabeth  Bentley  still  to
hold  a  government  position.    His  fight  to  hold  his  job  and
clear  his  name  is  also  a  fight  to  clear  yours  and  the  Demo-
cratic  party's.    The  public  hearing  and  the  chance  to  cross-
examine  his  accusers which  Taylor  has  long  sought  could  be
a  turning  point  in  American politics,  the  end  of  the  20  years
of   treason   smear   applied   to  New   Deal   and   Fair  Deal  by
Brownell  and  J.  Edgar  Hoover.
There  is  another  reason  which  may  persuade  you  to  take
a  hand.    When  you  signed  the  1947  loyalty  order  you  were
prevailed  upon  to  make  an  exception  to  the  right  to  confront
one's  accusers.    You  were  prevailed  upon  to  provide  a  loop-
hole  where  confrontation  might endanger  "security."    History
will  say that  you  were  the  President  who  permitted  the  first
break  in  the  dam  of  traditional  safeguards against anonymous
accusation.    No  one  who  knows  you  and  your  record  in  the
Senate  as well  as  the  White  House  can  doubt  that  you  meant
this  to  be  no  more  than  a  strictly  limited  exception  for  use
in  grave  circumstances.   Certainly  you  never  dreamt  it  would
some  day widen  to  the  point where  an  Attorney  General  and
the  Director   of  the  F.B.I.  would   use  it  to  practice  politics
by  character  assassination  on  a  grand   scale—as  they  did   in
the  20  years  of  treason  testimony  they  gave  the  Jenner  com-
mittee  18  months  ago.
Did  Moscow  Invent  Judas?
The   informer   issue  reverberated   in  the  capital  last   week
and  is  building  up  into  a  major  political  question.    Before
the  Supreme  Court,  Thurman  Arnold  and  Paul  Porter  mag-
nificently  argued  the  constitutionality  and  ethics  of  anonymous
accusation  in  the  Peters  case.    Two  blocks  away  the   Senate
Internal  Security  Committee  under  that  Dixieland   McCarthy,
Eastland  of  Mississippi,  sought  to  pillory  and  frighten  every-
one in any way connected  with the  recantation  of  the  informer,
Matusow.    The  Justice  Department  is frantic  and  cries  "Com-
munist  plot."    To  believe  its  spokesman  would  be  to  believe
that  normal  Americans  always  honored  informers  until  Com-
munists  came  along  and  poisoned   their  minds  against  them;
if  Brownell   had  his  way,  we'd   begin  to  believe  that   Judas
Iscariot   is  a   character   invented   by   Pravda,   and    somehow
slipped  into  Gospel  when  the  preachers  weren't  looking.
The  William  Henry  Taylor  case  strips  the  whole  informer
controversy  naked.    The  only  issue  of  security  in  his  case  is
the   security   of   Attorney   General    Brownell   and   Director
Hoover.    The   informer   Taylor   has   been   trying   to   cross-
examine  all   these  years  is  an   informer  whose  identity   the
F.B.I,  allowed  the  House  Un-American  Activities  to  disclose
publicly  seven  years  ago  in   1948.     They   permitted   her   to
appear  in  public  when  two  years  of  investigation  and  grand
jury  proceedings  failed  to  produce  a  single  indictment  against
any  person  she  accused.    This  was  not,  as  Brownell  has  im-
plied,  because  wiretap  evidence  was  inadmissible  (she  herself
has  several  times  testified  that  she avoided  ever  using  the  tele-
phone)  but  because  her  story  just  did  not  hang  together  and
was  so  strangely  uncorroborated.    She  did  not  have  a  single
scrap  of  documentary  evidence  to  show  after  all  those  years
of   commuting  between  New  York  and  Washington  with  a
knitting  bag  full  of  secrets.    Even  that  Order  of  the  Red  Star
she  claimed  was  conferred  upon  her  was  missing—the   "Al"
who  came  all  the  way from  Moscow  to  present  it  took  it  back
after  letting  her  have  no  more  than  a  peek.
They  Won't  Let  Taylor  Testify
Taylor  told  his  story  to  the  F.B.I,  and  the  1947  grand  jury
in  the  original  investigation  of  the  Bentley charges.    Though
no   indictment   resulted,   he   has   been   hounded   ever   since.
Luckily,  he   is  an   official   of   an   international  rather  than   a
purely  U.  S.  agency,  or  he  would  have  lost  his  job  long  ago,
fired out  of  sheer  political  cowardice.   His  trouble  is a  strange
one.   Like the  others  accused  by Miss  Bentley in  the  so-called
White  ring,  he  also  denied  her  charges  under  oath  at  first.
Unlike  many  of  the  others,  however,  Taylor  has  continued  to
do so.   His  failure  to take the  Fifth  has been  his trouble.    He
has  never  been  given  a  chance  to  testify  in  public  by  any  of
the  witch  hunt  committees  and  has  been  rushed  off  the  stand
in  executive session  when  it  became  apparent  that  he  was  not
afraid.
When  Brownell  in  November   1953  put  into  the  record  of
the  Jenner  committee  the  special  F.B.I,  reports  sent  you,  Mr.
Truman,  in  the  White  House  in  1945  and  1946  about  the  so-
called  White  ring,  there  was a  great  to-do  in  the  reports  and
in  the  Brownell-Hoover   testimony  about  how  carefully  and
completely   the   whole   Bentley  story  had   been   checked.
If  this  is  true,  then  the  F.B.I,  ought   to  hire  a  few  old-
fashioned   police   reporters.     Taylor   and   his  counsel,  Byron
Scott,  a  former  New  Deal  Congressman   from  Long   Beach,
California,  presented  a  107 page  statement  to the  International
Organizations  Employes  Loyalty Board  here  last  month  which
shows a whole  series of  contradictions and  discrepancies among
the  various  stories  told  by Miss  Bentley,  the  old  F.B.I,  reports,
and  the  Jenner  committee  statements  of  Brownell  and  Hoover.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,1955
The  Last of the Harry White "Ring" Still in Government Employment.
Browder  and  the  Silvermaster'Group: In  1948  Miss  Bentley
told  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  that  the
Silvermaster  espionage   group   was  organized  in  July,    1941,
when   Jacob   Golos   "told   me   he   had   received   from   Earl
Browder  the  name  of  a  man  working  for  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment,  who  was  interested  in  helping  in  getting  information
to  Russia  and who could organize  a  group  of other  employees
to  help  in  this  work."   Later  the  same  day  she  said,   "Mr.
Silvermaster  came  to New York to see Mr. Golos at  the  behest
of  Earl  Browder.  .  .  ."   But  Browder  entered  Atlanta  peni-
tentiary  for  passport  fraud  in  March,  1941,  four  months  be-
fore  Miss  Bentley  says  this  key  incident  occurred,  and  was
not  released  until  May,  1942!
The  Spies  Who Paid  Dues:  On  her  first  public  appearance
before  the  Ferguson  subcommittee  of the  Senate in  1948,  Miss
Bentley testified that she collected dues from  the  Silvermaster
group  and  turned  them  over  to  Golos  who  took  them  "down
to  party  headquarters,  and  brought   me  back   receipts  for
each."   After  Golos  died,  "the  money I  took  down to  Mr. Earl
Browder,  and  got  receipts  from  him."    From  July,  1941,  to
May,  1942,  Browder  could not  have  been the  recipient  of  dues,
since  he  was  in  Atlanta  penitentiary.    "Whatever  else   the
head  of  the  then  head  of  the  American  Communist  party  was
capable  of  doing,"  Taylor  testified,  "he  certainly  would  not
sit  down  with  Miss  Bentley  and  write  out  receipts  for   each
member's  payments,"  and   added,   "Why   receipts?     Wasn't
this  supposed  to  be  an  espionage  ring,  operating  in  the  dark
and  with  the  least  possible   evidence  lying  about?"
Browder   Contradicts   Bentley   Under  Oath:  Browder   was
questioned  about  Miss  Bentley under  oath by the  Tydings  com-
mittee  in   1950.    He  admitted   knowing  Miss   Bentley   as  a
stenographer-secretary,  but  never  as  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist  party.    He  denied  that  he  had  ever  assigned  or  re-
quested  anyone  to  commit  espionage  or  attempted  in  any  way
to  obtain  restricted  information   for  the  Soviet   government
"or any people . . . believed to be agents of the  Soviet  govern-
ment."    He  was  not  indicted  for   perjury.
Golos  and  the  Perlo   Group:  When  the  House   Un-Amer-
ican  Activities   committee  in  1948  asked  her   about  the   dis-
position  of  the  party  dues  she  claims  to  have  collected  from
the  members  of  the  Perlo  group,  her  reply   was,  "I   turned
them  over  to  Mr.  Golos  during  his  lifetime."    She  testified
repeatedly,   however,  that  she  took  the  Perlo  group  over  in
March  1944.    Golos  died  on  November  23,  1943,  which  was
four  to five months,  according  to  her  own statements,  before
she  met  Victor  Perlo  or  any  members  of  his  group  for   the
first   time.     This   contradicts   Attorney   General   Brownell's
statement   to  the  Jenner   committee,  "The  information  gath-
ered  from  the  Perlo  group  was  channelled through  Jacob  M.
Golos  and onto  the  Soviet  diplomatic  establishment.  . . ."
Major  Duncan Lee:  Miss  Bentley  said  he  was  a  Communist
New  Kind  of  Communist?
"On   December  1,  1952,   Mr.  Taylor  testified  before
the  Internal   Security   Subcommittee in  executive   ses-
sion  in  New  York  City.    The  testimony,  including  the
denial of  the  Bentley charges,  was quite brief.    As  soon
as  sub-committee counsel  saw  that  Mr. Taylor  intended
to  answer  all  questions and  was  not  going  to  plead  the
Fifth   Amendment,  he  was  immediately  excused   from
testifying.    He has  never  been  called  since.  ...    Is the
Internal   Security  subcommittee  seeking  to  develop  a
new  brand  of  Communists—persons   who  are   stigma-
tized  as  Communists not  because  they  refuse  to  testify
and  invoke the  Fifth  Amendment, but  because  they  re-
fuse  to  invoke the  Fifth  amendment, and  are  therefore
barred   from    testifying?"
—Memorandum  submitted  to Senator  James  O. East-
land,   Chairman,   Senate   Internal   Security   sub-
commmittee,  by  Byron  N.  Scott,  counsel for  Wil-
liam  H.  Taylor.
party  member  "our  most  valuable  source  in the  OSS ...    he
paid  his  dues  to  me."    (Senate,   1951,  p.  413.)    Lee  denied
her  charges  and  said  he  knew  her  as  "Helen  Grant,"  a  busi-
ness  woman from  New York.   Taylor  pointed  out  that  in  the
FBI  letter  of  November 8,  1945,  Miss  Bentley  named  Lee  as
a  member  of  the  Silvermaster   group;  in  the  FBI  memo of
November  27,  1945,  she  shifted  him  to  the  Perlo  group;  and
in  the  1948  House  committee  testimony  she  identified  him  as
a  sub-agent  to  Mary  Price  and  thereafter  as  one  of  her  un-
attached   agents.
The  Doolittle  Raid  on  Tokyo:  Miss  Bentley  testified  to  a
Senate   committee   in   1949  that   through   William   Ludwig
Ullman, whom she described as  then  a Major in  the  Air  Corps
at  the  Pentagon,   she  obtained  advance  information  on  the
Doolittle  raid  on  Tokyo.   But  this  raid  occurred  on  April  18,
1942,  Ullman was  still  in  the  Treasury  at  that  time  and  was
not  drafted  until  October,  1942.
The  Order  of  the  Red  Star:  The  gist  of  the  order  of  the
Red  Star  story  is  simple.    In  recognition  of  her   "extremely
valuable  services  to  the  Soviet  Union,"  Al  [whom  she  later
identified   as   Anatol  Gromov,  first  secretary   of  the   Soviet
Embassy]  had  been  sent  to  the  U.  S.  "especially"  to  see  and
tell  Miss Bentley that, by  order  of  the  Supreme  Presidium  of
the   U.S.S.R.,   a  "great  honor,"  which  "few   people  receive"
because  it  is  "reserved   for  all  our  best  fighters,"   had  been
conferred  upon  her.    The  ceremony  of  presentation  was  un-
ostentatious—Al  took  a  magazine  clipping,  in  color, from  his
pocket  and  showed  it  to  her.    A  couple  of  months  later,  Al
showed  up with  the  Red  Star  award  itself  in  a  box,  let  Miss
Bentley  look  at  it  and  also  showed  her  a  "little  book"  with
THE  JUSTICE  DEPARTMENT  ONCE  WARNED  J.  PARNELL THOMAS  AGAINST BENTLEY
"What  did  the  Department  of  Justice  think  in  1948 when
it  learned  that  Miss  Bentley  would  be  called  upon  to  repeat
her  story  in  public?    Mr.  Robert  E.  Stripling,  chief  inves-
tigator   of   the   House   Un-American  Activities   Committee
from   1938  to  1948,  has  left  us  a  record  of  this  event:
"As  soon  as  it  was  made  known  that   the  Committee
had  subpoenaed her . . . Vincent T. Quinn, then  Assistant
Attorney  General  in charge  of the Criminal  Division  . . .
came  to  my   office   to  counsel  caution.    He  was   accom-
panied  by George Morris  Fay,  U. S. Attorney for  the  Dis-
trict   of  Columbia.    I   sensed   readily   enough  that   their
visit  had  something  to  do  with  Miss  Bentley,  so  I  rang
up  Chairman J. Parnell  Thomas . . . and asked  the officials
to  speak  to  him,  not  me.
"They  urged  Thomas to question Miss  Bentley in  execu-
tive  session   and  warned  him  that  while  the  Justice  De-
partment  had  never  been  able  definitely  to  disprove  any
of  her   allegations   there  was  available  no  material   evi-
dence,  and  a   great   dearth   of  corroborating  witnesses.
(The  Red  Plot  Against  America,  1949,  pp.  91-2.)
"But   the  committee  proceeded  with  public  sessions,  and
Stripling  continues:
"There  were,  indeed, some  members  who  felt  that  we
should have accepted the  advice of  the  Justice  Department
and  confined  Miss Bentley's  testimony to  a  closed  hearing.
Corroboration  most  certainly  would  be  difficult  to  obtain.
(Same,  p.  94.)
"And  he  adds:  'Miss  Bentley's  story  plainly  was  too  hard
to  believe,  I  agreed.'"    (Same,  p.  96.)
—Taylor  statement  to Loyalty  Board, March  28, 1955
Extra   Copies   of   This   Issue   Available  in  Bundle  Orders  at   Five  Cents  Each
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,1955
. . Points  Out  Some  Contradictions in the Elizabeth  Bentley  Testimony
"Flawlessly  Truthful"
"In  opening  the  hearings  on  Harvey  Matusow, you,
as  chairman  .  .  .  voiced  unmeasured confidence  in the
truth  of  Miss  Bentley's  testimony.    'The   Subcommittee,'
you  declared,  'put  her  through  the  crucible  in  our  in-
quiry  into  "Interlocking  Subversion  in  Government De-
partments."     We   found   hundreds  upon   hundreds  of
documents  which  showed  that  her   description  of   the
methods  of  the  conspiracy has  been  flawlessly  truthful.'
...   At  no time in the public subcommittee hearings  has
Miss  Bentley  been  cross-examined by  any  of  the  per-
sons  against  whom  she  made  accusations.    The  refer-
ence  to  a  subcommittee  'crucible'  suggests   a   greater
familiarity   with  the  arts  of  chemical  concoction  than
with  the  historic   Anglo-Saxon  process  of  arriving   at
the  judicial truth."
—Scott memo to Senator  Eastland  on  behalf   of  Taylor.
her  name inside, the  honor certified,  and  the  date.   The medal
entitled  Miss  Bentley  to  many  privileges—the  only  one  she
cites  is  the  freedom  to  ride  street  cars  free.    Al  informed
her  that  when  she  came to  Moscow  she  would  be  "wined  and
dined  and  treated   like  a  princess."    Unfortunately, Al  took
the  medal  away  with  him.  .  .  .  She  doesn't  even  have  the
magazine  clipping, in  color.   In  1948  Miss  Bentley  said   the
presentation  was  made  in  New  York  while  walking  toward
Riverside  drive  (House,  1948,  pp.  811-12).   In  1951  she  told
a  Senate committee the  "presentation" was  made  in  Naylor's
restaurant  in  Washington   (Sen.,  1951,   p.  254).
The  $2,000  From  "Al":  Miss  Bentley claims  that  "Al"  gave
her  $2,000  on  October  17,  1945,  at  the  corner  of  Fourth   and
Tenth  streets  in  Greenwich Village,  New York, that  she  was
then  "acting  under  instructions  and  in  full  cooperation with
the  FBI"  and that  she had  "every  reason  to  believe"  the  FBI
watched  the  transaction  take  place.   Taylor  told  the  hearing
board,  "If  this  payment  of  $2,000  was  made by  Gromov and
observed  by  the  FBI,  it  is  curious that  there  was  no mention
of  it,  as  far  as  is  known, in  the  first  three  FBI  reports  deal-
ing  with  Miss  Bentley's  activities—two  in  November  1945
and  the  third  in  February  1946.   If  the  transaction  had  been
scrutinized  and  verified,  would  it  not  have  been  highlighted
as  corroborative  evidence  in  these  reports?"
The  Dramatic  Picture  That  Wasn't   There:  In  her  book,
"Out  of  Bondage,"  Miss  Bentley  says  she  first  learned  that
her  lover, Golos,  was  a  spy  and that  his  superior's  name was
Ovakimian  in  May  1941,  when  Golos  pointed  out  a  picture  to
her  in  the  New   York   Times  of  a  Russian  engineer  named
Ovakimian  just  taken  into  custody  by the  FBI  on charges of
espionage.    "That's   the   man   I've   been  in   contact   with,'"
Golos  said  "somberly,"  as  Miss Bentley tells the  story.   "Now
I'm  afraid  we're  in  the  soup."    This  is  how Miss  Bentley de-
scribes  the  scene  in  her  book:
"I  still  couldn't  quite  get  my  bearings.
" 'But  you  aren't  mixed  up  in  Russian  espionage,'  I  said
dazedly, and then,  seeing  the  look  on his  face,  'You mean, you
are?'
" 'I  thought  you knew,'  he  said  in  some  surprise.    'I'm  a
member  of the GPU. . . . That  man whose picture  you see in
the  paper  is  my  superior   officer.'"   (p.   135.)
Taylor  pointed  out that this was  at  variance  with  previous
testimony.    On  July  30,  1948,  she  told  the   Ferguson  sub-
committee  of  the  Senate  and  on July  31,  1948,  the  House  Un-
American   Activities  Committee  that  she  had  no  "personal
knowledge"  of  what  Golos  did  with  the  information  she  gave
him, and that  she never  knew his Russian  superiors  except  by
their  nicknames  and  that  Golos  was  very  "close  mouthed."
Taylor's   attorney,   Byron   Scott   searched   the   New   York
Times  index  for   1941  and  the  files  themselves  for   May  of
that  year  but  was  unable  to  find  any  trace  of  a  picture of
Ovakimian.    Neither  could  that  newspaper's   chief  librarian.
Who  was  Ovakimian?:  Brownell  declassified  and  put  into
the  record  before  the  Jenner  committee  in  1953  a  letter  sent
out  by  the   FBI   on  February   1,  1946,  saying   among  other
things  that   Golos  delivered   material   originating  with  the
Silvermaster  ring  in  the  Treasury  to  another   Soviet  agent
named  Gaik  Ovakimian.   "Ovakimian,"  Taylor  told  the  hear-
ing  board,  "had  been  arrested  on  May  5,  1941  and  again  on
June  6,  1941,  by  agents  of  the  FBI  and  charged  with  viola-
tion  of  the  Foreign  Agents  Registration   Act.    He  had  actu-
ally registered  shortly  before this but the  contention was that
he  should  have  registered  earlier.   He  was  freed  on $25,000
bail  and  presumably was  under  constant  surveillance.    Jacob
Golos  had  been  indicted   and  convicted  in  March,   1940,   for
failure  to  register  as  an  agent  of  the   Soviet   government.
Would  Mr.  Golos, once  convicted  and  forced  to  register  as  a
foreign   agent,  be  likely  to  pass  on  secret  information  to  a
Russian  national  who  was  in  process  of  being  tried  under
criminal  proceedings?  .  .  .  The Silvermaster   group  did not
begin  to  function until  late  July  1941.   A  Congressional  com-
mittee  states:  "Ovakimian  never  came to  trial  in this  matter.
...   He departed  from  San Francisco,  Calif.,  aboard  the  Soviet
vessel  Kim  on July  23,  1941"  (House Rep.  No.  1229,  1951,  p.
17).    If  Ovakimian  sailed  from   San  Francisco  on  July  23,
1941,"  Taylor  pointed  out,  "he  could  not  have  been  in  New
York  in  late  July,   1941,   to  receive   Silvermaster    material
from   Golos."
D-Day:  Miss  Bentley  testified  that  she  obtained  the  date
of   D-day   "long   before   D-day   happened"   from   Ullmann
"through   his  connections  with  General  Hilldring's   office   in
the Air  Corps."    But Hilldring had  no connection with the  Air
Corps,  he  was  in  Civil  Affairs  Division.    Eisenhower   himself
only   knew  the   date   less   than   24  hours   in   advance—the
weather  having  made  advance planning  difficult   ("Crusade  in
Europe,"  p.  250)  and  the  Russians  were  kept  fully   notified
since  it  was  an  allied   operation.
A QUESTION J. EDGAR HOOVER HAS NEVER BEEN REQUIRED TO ANSWER
According   to  the   Bentley  story,   she  operated  between
two  poles—Golos in  New  York  and  Silvermaster  in  Wash-
ington  from  July  1941  to  November  1943.    Yet  both  were
under  constant  surveillance by  the  FBI.    Golos's  offices   at
World  Tourists,  Inc.,  in  New  York,  were  searched  in  Octo-
ber,  1939,  and  in  April,  1940,  he  pleaded  guilty  to  an  in-
dictment   for   failing  to  register   as  a  So vie.   agent.    Yet
according  to  Bentley's  story  a  year  later  he  organized  the
Silvermaster   ring   in   Washington.
Silvermaster  was  an  economist who  worked for  the  gov-
ernment  from  August  1935  to  November  1946.   From  June
30,  1941,  to  February  12,  1946,  the  FBI  carried  out  numer-
ous  investigations  of  Silvermaster   and  according  to  testi-
mony before  the  Jenner  committee in  1953  compiled no  less
than  24 reports  on  him.   As  early  as  1942  an   intelligence
report  called  him  a  Communist  "and  very  probably  a  secret
agent  of  the  OGPU"  but  the  Civil  Service  Commission  two
years  later  after  a  lengthy review  of  these  reports  decided
"the   record  as  submitted   does  not  contain  sufficient   infor-
mation  to warrant  charges.  . . ."
"Under   these  circumstances,"  Taylor   asked   the  loyalty
board  last  month in  his  own  case,  "how  could  Miss  Bentley
have  escaped  observation,  suspicion   and  detention?   Where
was  the FBI . . .?"
Help  Clear   Up  the   Informer  Miasma   By  Circulating   This   Issue   to   Your   Friends
.6.;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,1955
An  Open  Letter  to  Former  President  Truman
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Not  the  least  of  the  contradictions is  Miss  Bentley's testimony
that  she  received  secret  material  during  the  war  from  Taylor
and  her  deposition  in  a  recent  civil  suit  that  she  never  saw
him  until  May  17  of  last  year!
We  are  devoting  our  two  inside pages  this  week  to  glimpses
of  this  careful  study  of  the  Bentley  contradictions.    Taylor's
counsel  has  asked  the  board  to  summon  as  witnesses  not  only
Miss  Bentley  but  Brownell  and  Hoover.    In  eight  years  of
harassment,   Taylor   has  never   had   his  day  in   court.     The
loyalty  board  has  had  his   case  under  advisement  for   more
than  a year and  a  half—obviously too  honest  to  give  in  to  the
political  pressure   brought  to  bear  upon   it  (a   story  Taylor's
statement  also  spells  out)   and  yet  too  frightened  to  make  a
decision.     It   will  never   dare   summon   Bentley,   much   less
Brownell  and  Hoover,  unless  powerful  countervailing  political
pressure  is  brought  to  bear.
You,  Mr.  Truman,  could  give  this  case  national  attention.
The  contradictions put  on  the  record  by Taylor  and  his  counsel
call  for  full   explanation  by  Bentley,  Brownell  and   Hoover.
Their  unwillingness  to  be questioned.(though  the  two  officials
were  ready  enough  to  appear  as  witnesses  against  the  Demo-
cratic  party  before  the  Jenner  committee  in  1953)   would  in
itself   be  a  confession  of   complicity  in  a  vast  campaign  of
political  character   assassination  based  on  a  witness  who   (as
you  will  see  inside)  was  so  distrusted  by  the  Justice  Depart-
ment  that  in  1948  they  warned  the  House  Un-American Ac-
tivities  Committee  against  using  her  as a  witness.
Your  great  fighting  voice  could  force  open  hearings  in  this
case,  or  confession-by-avoidance.   Justice  to'a  man  is  at  stake,
but  more  than  that—justice  to  the  honor  of  the  great  social
reform  movement  associated  with  your  name  and  FDR's.
Sincerely  yours,
I.  F.  Stone
Prof.  Einstein  would  not  have  liked  a  stuffy   tribute.    My
wife  and  I  loved  him.    He  was  a  charter  subscriber  to  the
Weekly,  and  often  strained  its primitive bookkeeping  facilities
by  renewing  when  no 'renewal  was  due.    We  and  our  three
children  had  the  great  pleasure  on  several  occasions of  having
tea  with  Prof.  Einstein at  his  home.    It  was  like going  to  tea
with  God,  not  the  terrible old  God  of  the  Bible  but  the  little
child's  father-in-heaven, very kind,  very  wise  and  yet  himself
very  much  a  child,  too.    We  feel  that  we  have  lost  a  friend.
If  our  dim  understanding of  his  work  has  any  validity, we
thought  of  it  as  a  lifelong  search  for  a  new  and  greater  unity
in  physical phenomena,  and  the  reestablishment  of  the  possi-
bility  of   law  in   the  universe;     A  world   made  up   only  of
statistical  probabilities  offended   his  profoundest  instincts;  he
was  like  Bach  or  Beethoven,  striving  for  new  harmonies,  but
with  the  tools  of  mathematics and  physics.    There  were  times
when  one  felt  his  infinite  zest  in  the  search  that  was  his  life,
though  he  sadly  called  himself  a  has-been  last  time  we  saw
him,  which was  last  August.
The  man  who  sought  a  new harmony in  the  heavens  and  in
the  atom  also  sought  for  order  and  justice  in  the  relations  of
|Ir0f. Albert  iEtatntt
men.    As  the  greatest  intellectual  in  the  world  of  our  time,
he  fought  Fascism  everywhere  and  feared  the  signs  of  it  in
our  own  country.   This  was  the  spirit  in  which  he  advised
American  intellectuals   to  defy   the  Congressional   Inquisition
and   refuse  to  submit  themselves  to  ideological   interrogation.
In  that  position  he  was  interpreting  the  First  Amendment  as
Jefferson  would  have  done.
Prof.  Einstein—if  I  read  him  rightly—-felt  like  a  failure
rather  than  a  success:  he  died  without  quite  achieving  that
unified  theory he  sought.    But  his  was a beautiful and  satisfy-
ing  life,  and  nothing  would  have  pleased  him  more  than  how
many—and   such  diverse—people  remember  him  with   affec-
tion,  especially  the  children  of  the  neighborhood   in  Princeton
who  recall  the  cookies  he  gave  them.
In  that Olympus  where he  goes to  dwell  with  his  few  peers,
this  is  something  all  his  own.    Newton  and  Copernicus  and
the  misty  Pythagoras,  too,  could  sweep  the  heavens  with  their
grasp—but   none   of   them   were   remembered   by   so  many
humble  friends,  for  so  many  simple  human  kindnesses.    In
this   realm,   far   beyond  politics  and   physics,  Prof.   Einstein
reigns  alone  in  warm  human   memory.
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name
Street
City                ,
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  3
(To)  Name       :
Street
City
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
301  E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,
my  sub  for  the  enclosed
Zone
4  more  (money
Zone
State.
enclosed]
State
D.  C.
$5:*
:
4/25/55
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301   E.  Capital  St.,  S. E.
Washington  3,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED