I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955mar21.pdf

============================================================

Behind  the  Scenes  of  the  Security  Hearings
Inside:  The Drift to War; the  UN  and the  Israeli  Raids; Matusow and  Perjury.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NUMBER 9MARCH  21,  1956
»        WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  GENTS
Is  Sen.  Humphrey Unwittingly Running Interference  for  Brownell?
Warning  Against  A Booby-Trap  For  Liberals
The  witch  hunt  in  government  began in  1939 with passage
of  Section  9  A  of  the  Hatch  Act.   This  forbade  the  employ-
ment  by  the  Federal government  of  anyone who  was a member
of  an  organization  which  advocates overthrow  of  the  govern-
me^nt  by  force  and  violence.   The  Civil  Service  Commission
three  years  later  promulgated  a  resolution  making reasonable
doubt  as  to  "loyalty"  grounds  for  discharge or  denial  of  em-
ployment.   Long  before  the  Truman  executive  order  of   1947
establishing  the  so-called  loyalty  program,  it  was  already ob-
vious  that  the  FBI,  utilizing  agents  often  politically  illiterate
and  generally  reactionary,   was  encouraging  anonymous  and
irresponsible  accusation  and  equating  liberal  views  with  dis-
loyalty.    Indeed  the  writer  exposed  this  in  a  series  of  articles
for  the  newspaper PM during  World  War  II,  which  was  docu-
mented  from  actual  transcripts  of  loyalty  interrogations.
Despite  intermittent  protest  and  exposure during  the  inter-
vening  years,  it  is only  in  the  past  week  that  a  committee  of
Congress  has ever  held  hearings  to  give  critics  of  the  loyalty-
security  setup  a  chance  to  air  their  views  and  observations.
All  kinds  of  committees  from  the  days  of  Dies  to  those  of
McCarthy  have  created  sensations  and  made  political  careers
by  hearing  the  wildest  kind  of   charges  against  government
employes.  But  not  until  the  Humphrey  hearings of  last week
has any  committee  sat  down  to  hear  the  other  side of  the  story,
the damage done to  individuals, to  the  government  service and
to  the  atmosphere  of  a  free  society  by  these  loyalty-security
proceedings.    This   striking   fact   reflects  the   awakening  of
public  opinion  in  the  past  year  to  the  injustices and  evils these
proceedings   have   created.    The   Ladejinsky   and   Chasanow
cases,  the  repeated defeats  of  the  government  in  the  Lattimore
case,  the  perjuries  disclosed  in  the   testimony   of  professional
witnesses,  the  Matusow  recantation,  have  all  played  their  part
in  this.
The  FBI  Is  Worried
Last  week's  hearings  were  not  part  of  a  full  dress  investi-
gation.   They  were  merely  preliminary  hearings  on  whether  to
investigate.    Specifically   they   were  hearings  on  whether   to
report  favorably  to  the  Senate,  S.  J.  Res.  21,  which  would
establish  a  Commission  on  Government  Security  to  make such
an  inquiry.   Even  before  these  few  days  of  hearings,  the  FBI
and  the  right  were  already  alarmed.  "Grave  fears  arise here in
the  Capital,"  said  the  McCarthyite  newsletter  Human  Events,
March  12, "that  a formidable monkey wrench  may  be  thrown
into   the  machinery,  created  within  the  last  five  years,  for
ousting   Communists  and  fellow  travellers  from  the   govern-
ment."   The  Chicago  Tribune   broke  the  release  date  on  the
testimony  of  Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.,   of  Americans  for   Demo-
cratic  Action,  which  was not  given  until  Tuesday,  and  spread
it  on  the  front  page  last  Monday,  "Left  Wingers  Ready  to
Open  Attack  on  FBI.   ADA  to  Assail  Security  System."
It  would  be pleasant  to  report  that  these  almost  hysterical
anxieties  are  justified.   But  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go.
S. J.  Res.  21  is itself  open  to  criticism.  'It   prejudges many of
the  basic  issues by its  own  declaration of  policy which  declares
it  "vital"  to  maintain  loyalty-security  procedures  and  to  pro-
tect   private   as  well   as  public   installations   not   only   from
espionage  and  sabotage  but   also from  "disloyalty"  and   "sub-
versive  activities"—neither,   of  course,  defined.   The  emphasis
of  the  declaration  of  policy  is  entirely  on  "security"  and  its
three  sub-divisions  nowhere  explicitly   call  for  study  of   in-
justices  to  the  individual  or  of  the  need  for  reforms  in  pro-
cedure.   Though  one of  its  main concerns  should  be a study  of
how  the  FBI  works  in  loyalty   cases,  the  Commission's   own
employes  under  the  terms  of  the  Humphrey  resolution  would
have to be investigated by the FBI "as  to  character,  associations
and  loyalty."  Thus  the  FBI would  have  a  chance  to  pass  first
on  those  who were later  to  pass upon  the  FBI.
A  Halter  on  the Commission
Such  a Commission of  inquiry  can hardly do  its  job without
a  chance  to  see loyalty  files  and  to  study  the  whole  informer
system.  But  Section  8 of  S.J.  Res. 21 says, "Nothing  contained
in  this joint  resolution shall be construed  to  require any agency
of  the  United  States to  release any  information  possessed by  it
when,  in  the  opinion of  the  President, the  premature  disclosure
of   such  information   would  jeopardize  or   interfere  with   a
pending   or   prospective   criminal   prosecution,   or  with   the
carrying  out  of  the  intelligence responsibilities  of  such agency."
(Italics  added).   This  is  broad  enough  to  shield  the  informers
and  informer   methods  of   the  Department   of  Justice   from
scrutiny.  In  theory  it  would  depend  on  the  President  whether
such  information  would  be made available to  the  Commission.
In  practice,   the   President   would   necessarily  depend  on  his
Attorney   General,  and  Eisenhower  at   press  conference  last
Wednesday  showed  himself  as  ready  as  Brownell  to   defend
secret  informers.
There  are  also  serious political  objections  to  the   resolution,
and this may explain why  its  sponsor,  Humphrey  of  Minnesota,
tried  hard  but  was  unable  to  get  any  other  Democratic   col-
league  but   Stennis  of  Mississippi  to  co-sponsor  it  with   him.
The  Eisenhower  Administration  and  a  Republican   Attorney
General  are  responsible  for  the  present  security  program  and
(Continued  on  next  page)
3   V
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  SI, 1955
Bulletin  from  the  White  House-State  Dept.-Pentagon   Front
Our  Course  Is Being  Set for  the  Most  Terrible Kind  of  War
WASHINGTON—Nobody   in   the   press  corps,   and   perhaps
nobody  in  the  government,  knows  what  will  be  done  if  Quemoy
and   Matsu   are   attacked.   Dulles   and   Eisenhower,   at   their
respective  press  conferences  last  week,  only  added  to  the  con-
fusion.    The   former   seemed   to   be   adding   another    "hedge"
against  war when  he  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  it  would  be be-
yond  the  President's  authority   to  make  war  if  an  attack   on
Quemoy  and Matsu  were  not  part  of  an  attack  on  Formosa  and
the   Pescadores,  but  just   how  the   government   proposes   to
determine   whether  an  assault  on  the  offshore  islands  is  part
of  a planned offensive  against  Formosa  is  still  terribly  unclear.
The  truth  is  that  there  is  no  way  of  knowing.   The  President
and  his  advisers  will  decide.   Unfortunately   among  these  ad-
visers  the  men  of  peace  like  Secretaries  Wilson  and Humphrey
seem  to  be  losing  influence  to  Dulles,  Radford  and  Knowland.
When  Radford told  the  industrialist   Committee  of  One Hun-
dred in  Miami  Monday night  that  war, big  or little, "could  come
almost  any  place,  any  time"  and  "could  be  initiated  secretly
by  a  small  handful  of  men"  he  was  referring  to  Moscow  and
Peking  but  he  was  also  describing   Washington.
Several  things  are  clear  in  this  perilously   murky  situation.
One  is  that  the  Pentagon  has  convinced  itself  the   Russians
will  stay  out  if  we  slip  into  war with  China,  a  most  hazardous
assumption  since  the  momentum  of  events  must  tend  to  draw
Russia  in.  Another  is  that  we  do not  intend  to  fight  a  limited
war  with  China, but  as  Dulles  said  last  week,  if  war  comes  we
could  hardly  be  expected  any  longer   to  "restrain"   Syngman
Rhee  and  Chiang.   The  third  is  that  we  are  now  irrevocably
being   committed   to  a  terrible   decision—the   use   of   atomic
weapons  from  the  very  start  of  any  conflict.   Eisenhower  and
Dulles  echoed  the  new  propaganda  line  that  atomic   weapons
can  be  used   in  a  "humane"  way  tactically   without    striking
"unrelated"  civilian  targets.   This  will  prove  to  be  the  most
ghastly  delusion  if  war  comes—once  the  tactical   weapons  are
used,  some  "related"  civilian  targets  will  be  hit,  there  will  be
retaliation,  and then  everything  will  be  thrown  in.  Nothing  is
stranger  than  the   silence—not   a  voice   raised   for   peace—in
which  the  American  State  drifts  into  a  position   where  it  will
be  more  and  more  difficult  not  to  fight  if  Quemoy  and  Matsn
are  attacked,  though  the  consequences  may  be  World  War  HI.
(Continued  from  Page  One)
especially  for  the  attempt  to  use  it  and  secret  FBI  files  for
partisan  purposes in  the  "twenty  years  of treason" campaign
launched   by   Brownell.   The   Democrats   now  control  Con-
gress.   They are  in  a  position to  investigate  these  abuses and
to make political capitol of  them.  What, then,  is  the political
sense of  S.J.  Res. 21 which would set  up  a  12-man Commission
of  whom  four  would  be  picked  by  Eisenhower  and  four  by
Nixon—and  thus  eight  with the  advice  of  Brownell?
Humphrey  Jumped  the  Gun
It  is  significant  that  while  Humphrey, Morse  and Lehman
are   all  vice-chairmen  of  Americans  for  Democratic Action,
neither  Morse  nor  Lehman co-sponsored the  Humphrey reso-
lution.   What  makes  the  Humphrey resolution  seem  all  the
more  fuzzy-minded  is  that  the  Democrats have  already  used
their  new control  of  the  Senate to  launch an  investigation  of
the  security program.  Ten  days before  Humphrey submitted
S.J.  Res. 21, Senator  Johnston  as chairman of  the  Committee
on  Post  Office  and  Civil  Service had  already introduced S. Res.
20  for  "a  full  and  complete study  and  investigation"   of  the
security program.  This was quickly cleared by  Senator Green
as  chairman  of  the  Rules  committee.  On  February   21  the
Senate,  without  objection,  approved  the  investigation  and  a
$125,000  appropriation to finance it.  Former  Senator  Gillette
was  named special counsel  and  last  Tuesday a  three-man  sub-
committee made up of Johnston, Neely and  Carlson was named
to  preside over  the  investigation.   Humphrey jumped the  gun
on  his  own  party  colleagues.
The  Democrats, of  course, control both the  special  subcom-
mittee  and  the  full  committee.  The  attitude  with  which  they
are approaching this  investigation  is quite different  from  that
reflected  in  the  Humphrey resolution's  declaration  of  policy.
In  a  letter  to  Senator  Green  asking  the  $125,000  appropri-
ation,  Senator  Johnston  (Sen. Rep. 28)  set  forth  the  outlines
of  his  proposed  inquiry.  He  said that  in  addition to  2,000,000
Federal  employes  "another  3,500,000 military  personnel  and
some  4  million  civilians  are  indirectly  affected  by  the  Gov-
ernment  security  system."   He  said  that  in  addition  to  the
FBI  there  were  now  5,000  special  investigators  employed on
the  security  program.   He  said  his  committee  had  received
many  complaints,  that  the  country  had  a  right  to  know
whether  the  program  "is  effective,  economically  administered
and  whether  or  not  serious  injustices  have  occurred."
When  the  resolution  came  up  for  passage  in  the   Senate,
there  was  an  illuminating. colloquy  between  Johnston   and
Senator   Langer:
Mr.  LANGER.   Is  it  not  the  belief  of  the  committee,
from  a  preliminary  investigation,  that  when  an  employee
loses  his  job  he  is  at  least  entitled  to  know   what  the
charges  are,  and is  entitled to face  his  accusers and listen
to  the  testimony  against him?
Mr.  JOHNSTON  of  South  Carolina.   We  think  that  is
entirely  correct,  and we  believe  our committee  is  the  one
to see that  the employee is  given that  right.
With  so  powerful  a  Southerner  as  "Cotton  Ed"  Johnston
in  charge  and  on the  warpath,  the  investigation  launched  by
his  committee promises  an  independent  study  of the  security
program.   The  passage   of  the  Humphrey  resolution  would
only  set  up  a  Commission the  Republicans might  control  and
which  could  divert  public   opinion   and  perhaps  whitewash
what  the  Administration  has   been   doing.   The  Democrats
would be well  advised to  vote it  down.  It  is well 'to remember
that  Humphrey has  a  most  equivocal  record  in  the  security
field.  He  presided  over  a  special  investigation  of  security  in
industry  in March and July,  1952, which first gave a platform
for  a  proposal  to  subject  unions to  the  Subversive  Activities
Control  board.   Last  August  he  voted  against  the  Butler  bill,
which  embodied  this  proposal,  and  sponsored  instead  a  bill
to  outlaw the  Communists. Then, when  Daniel  of  Texas  pro-
posed  the  Butler  bill  as  an  amendment to  Humphrey's  meas-
ure,  Humphrey  "gladly"  accepted  it.   The  result   was  that
monstrosity,  the  Anti  Communist  Control  Act  of  1955.   This
combined  the  Brownell-Butler  proposals  for   subjecting   all
"Communist  infiltrated"  organizations  to  the  SA<3B  with  the
Humphrey-Morse  Douglas standards  for  determining  who  is
a  Communist and therefore subject to outlawry.  These  stand-
ards  are  so fantastically  vague  and  sweeping  that   (as  the
ADA-ish  New  York  Post  pointed  out  at  the  time  in  disgust)
Humphrey  himself  could be proscribed  as  a  Communist under
them.
An  Unreliable   Champion
This  is  not  raked  up  as  ancient  history  but  to  show  that
Humphrey  is  not  a  reliable  champion  of  civil  liberties.  He  is
not  very  astute and he is very  much the opportunist.  I  do not
doubt  that  he  is  sincerely  disturbed  about  the  security  pro-
gram  (and  sees  that  political  capital  can  now be made of  it)
but in this case  he may prove to be running interference,  how-
ever  unwittingly,  for  Brownell.  S.J.  Res.  21 is  a  booby-trap.
Next  week  I  want  to  take  up  the  testimony   before  the
Humphrey   subcommittee.   Useful  and  informative  as  this
testimony  was,  it  contained much which  dangerously  accepts
the basic preconceptions of the  witch hunt  and cravenly  echoes
its  poisonous  vocabulary.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'g  Weekly,  March  SI, 1955
The UN Security  Council Dodges Its  Responsibilities  in the  Middle East
Behind  Israel's  Retaliation  Raid  on  Egyptian-Held  Gaza
By  Richard   Yaffe
Formerly  of  PM  and  the  Compass,  Yaffe  is  UN
correspondent  for  Al Hamishmar, Israeli  daily of  the
Left  Socialist  Zionist  party,  Hashomer  Hatzair.
United  Nations,  N.  Y.—If  it  was  the  intent  of  those  in
Israel   responsible  for  the  Gaza  retaliation  raid   (38  Egyp-
tians,  8  Israelis  dead)  to  dramatize  Israel's  day  and  night
border  warfare  and  her  insecurity  and  isolation in  a  sea  of
Arab hostility, the  lesson was  lost  on those it  was  intended  to
impress.  When  these lines are  read, the  Security  Council will
have met  and condemned Israel for  the  foray,  and  adjourned.
It  will  have  neglected  to  do its  duty  under  the  UN  Charter:
Act  as  peacemaker to  avoid  or  halt  war.
A  poll  of  delegations  showed  no  one  willing  to  raise  the
whole  question  of   Israel-Arab   relations   as   Dr.   Francisco
Urritia  of  Colombia,  which is  no  longer  in  the  Council,  did
last  Fall  during  the  debate  on  Egypt's  anti-Israel  blockade
of  the  Suez  Canal.  He  suggested—and no  one  took  him  up
on  it—that it  was the  duty of the  Council to tackle the  disease
and not just an occasional spasm considered  important enough
for  the  Council  to consider of the  hundreds reported  yearly  to
the various Arab-Israel  armistice  commissions.
For  example,  in  only  two  weeks  prior  to  the  Gaza  raid,
there  were  fifteen  incidents  resulting  in  death  to  one Israeli
and  injury  to  another.   Among  the  incidents:  Two  tractor
drivers,  five  settlements,  six  Israel   patrols   and  two  police
vehicles  fired  upon  from  across  and  within  Israel's  borders.
Syrians  were  involved in  at  least  six  cases,  Jordanians  also
in  six  and  Egyptians  in  at  least  two  in  which  it  was  estab-
lished  that  the  marauders  had  fled  into  the   Egyptian-held
Gaza  strip.    Commentators for  the  American press  generally
attributed  the  Gaza raid  to two factors:  Revenge for  Egypt's
hanging  of  two  Jews  for   alleged  pro-Israel  activities,  and
David  Ben  Gurion's  return   to  the  Cabinet  as  Minister  of
Defense.   The  Cairo  trials  and  sentences  aroused  all  Israel,
and  were decried as  political and  unfair  by  such observers  as
Richard  Crossman and  Roger Baldwin.
The  Real  Reasons
But  while  these  factors  cannot  be  removed from  the  total
picture  of  the  Gaza  affair,  they  are  merely  part  of  it,  and
perhaps  the  smallest  part.  Else,  the  press  of Israel,  cutting
through  party  lines,  and  even  those  of  the  Left  who  see  no
way to peace through retaliation,  would not have rallied to  the
defense.   As for  the  Israel  Government, it  neither  denied  the
raid   nor  apologized  for  it    It   merely  explained  its  back-
ground,  detailed  the  deteriorating  relations  with  Egypt,  and
promised  more  of  the  same  if  Egyptian  troops  did  not  stop
attacking   Israel  and  then  fleeing  to  the  sanctuary   of  the
Gaza  Strip,  as  they  had  done just  prior  to  the  Gaza  affair
when they went eighteen miles to  Rehovot and there murdered
an  Israel  civilian  from  ambush.
The  remnants  of  Israel's  terrorist  gangs   from  Mandate
days,  the  small  anti-Arab  elements  and  the  few  revanchist
extremists   in  the  State  certainly   were  pleased  by  the  Gaza
raid.    The   border   settlements,   uneasy   and   divided,   could
understand  it  because  their  members  are  high  on the  list of
casualties,   their   homes  are   set   afire,  their   livestock   and
irrigation  pipes  stolen  by  infiltrators.   They  saw  the  results
of  the  cold war  in mounting intransigence  of  the  Arab  states
and  Israel's  growing  isolation.
'Blueprint  for  Peace'
It  is  recalled that  before Kibya,  the  large-scale  Israel  raid
in Jordan  in which about fifty Arabs  were killed, and the Gaza
affair,  there  was another  and  opposite attempt  at pacification
of  the  Arab  states:  "The  Blueprint  for  Peace  in  the  Middle
East"  delivered  two  years  ago  by  Israel  Ambassador  Abba
Eban  to  the  United  Nations.  In  it  the  new state  offered  co-
operation  to its  neighbors in all fields: Health,  culture,  educa-
tion,   economy,  technology,  science.    It   offered   to   lend   or
exchange  doctors,  nurses,  teachers,  technicians,  scientists.   It
proposed land reclamation and irrigation  schemes to be shared
in by all, to raise the standard  for  all.  It  offered  a path  across
the Negev for Jordan to reach the sea, and a free port area in
Haifa  for  use  of  all  Israel's  neighbors.
Neither  the  carrot  nor  the  club has  worked.  Neither  could
work  so long as  feudal military  regimes  were being  wooed  by
the  United States  to  become part  of the  vast  iron  ring being
forged  to  contain  the  USSR.
Failure  of Israel's regime to see the  inevitable consequences
of  Mr. Dulles' "new  look"  at  the  Middle  East  can  only be laid
to a  sort  of wishful thinking that  America would  always take
care  of  Israel  regardless  of its  own real  or  imagined interests
in  the  area.   This  has  led  to  an  externally-imposed  sort  of
neutralism  that  is far  from the  kind  being  practiced  by India
and  others.  Theirs is based on the right to express  sovereignty
over  their  own  affairs;   to  make  pacts  with  whomever  they
wish;  to  be friendly with  all  peace-loving  states.
What  Israel  is drifting—or  being forced  into—is  something
entirely  different.  It  is isolation, immobility.  Israel  is finding
itself  in the untenable position of being rejected  by the  side  its
leaders  have  chosen, of  having  the  hostility  of  the  side  it  has
ignored,  and  of  being snubbed  by the  independents  in  whose
area  it  more properly  belongs.
Even  as  U.S.  arms  arrive  in  Iraq  as  down-payment  for
joining  the  Turkish-Pakistan   Alliance,  and  Egyptian   troops
mass   on  her  borders,  Israel  is  told  by  John  D.  Jernegan,
Deputy  Assistant   Secretary   of  State  for   the   Near   East
(March  6)  that the  U.S.  "cannot  see evidences" of  prospective
hostility  on the  part  of  her  neighbors  but  that,  in  fact,  the
Arabs  themselves fear  Israel  because  of  her  superior  army;
and  that  Israel  cannot  become  part  of  a  Middle  Eastern  de-
fense  organization because the  Arabs  won't  have  her.
Empty  Promises
The  State Department's  private  assurances  to Israel repre-
sentatives  that  its  moves in  the  Middle  East  will  break  the
Arab  League  and  thus  redound to  the  benefit  of  Israel  are
empty  of real meaning.  While it  is true that the  demise of  the
League  is  being  heralded,  the  reports  of  its  death  are  exag-
gerated.   There   never  was  any  organic   unity   within   the
League, and therefore  there was none to break.  Its  collective
security  pact  is  an  unimplemented scrap  of  paper.   Its  only
reason  for  existence  is  hatred  for  Israel  and  to  provide  a
facade  for  non-existent  Arab  unity  to  show to  the  world  for
blackmail  purposes.
Regardless  of  what  happens;  regardless  of  whether  or  not
the  Turkish-Pakistan   Alliance will find other  adherents  (and
it will), the Arab League will remain, whether  it  is called that
or  not,  as  a  convenient tool  for  Arab  hostility  toward  Israel.
On  this the  Arab  states  are  together,  if  on nothing else.  It  ia
therefore  plain  that  if  the  League  is  stripped  of  everything
but  its  anti-Israelism,  its  anti-Israelism  will become stronger.
It  is also therefore  plain  that  America's  vaunted "rift"  in the
Arab  League  has  done  the  opposite  of  rebound  to  Israel's
favor.   One example of  this  is  Turkey's  growing  hostility  to-
ward  Israel  after   close  friendship  and  excellent  trade  rela-
tions,  and  its  promise to  Iraq that  it  will  join  the  Arab  bloc
against Israel in the UN.
It  is perhaps  too much to  expect  the Arab  states and  Israel
to  find  co-existence  in  the  context  of the  present  world.  The
eyes  of  the  people in  that  part  of  the  globe,  who  also  desire
peace,  look  to capitals  other  than  Jerusalem,  Cairo,  Baghdad
and  Damascus  for that larger  settlement  which must  precede
theirs.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  SI,  1955
Why  Brownell  Wants  to  Change  the  Perjury  Law;  the Rumely  Case and  "False  Witness"
The Frantic Drive To  Hush  Up  The Truth  About  Informers
If  there  is  still  justice  in  this  country,  an  appeal  should
end   in  the   reversal   of   U.S.   District   Court   Judge   R.   E.
Thomason  on  two  counts,  one  for  refusing  a  new  trial  to
Clinton  Jencks,  the  other   for  holding  Harvey  Matusow  in
criminal  contempt.  As  may  be  seen  by  the  text  we published
February   7,  the   U.S.  Attorney   who  prosecuted  Jencks   ad-
mitted  in  a  letter  of  thanks  to  Matusow  that  his  testimony
was  "absolutely  essential" to the  conviction.  Jeneks,  an  officer
of  the  International  Mine,  Mill  &  Smelter  Union,  was  con-
victed  of  lying  when  he  signed  a  Taft-Hartley   oath  denying
that  he was  a  Communist on April  28, I960.  Not  one  witness
testified  that  he know Jencks  to be a  Communist at  that  time
or  subsequently,  but  Matusow  swore  (falsely,  he  now  says)
that  he heard  Jencks  make  statements  after  that  date  which
in   Matusow's   opinion   could   only  have   been   made   by   a
Communist!
This  was  thin  enough  at  the  time.   Matusow's  recantation
of  testimony  so crucial  called  for  a  new trial.   The  truth  is
that the  prosecution over which Judge Thomason presided had
a   most  gamey   flavor.   At  least  one  government  witness—
"excused"  after  his  testimony  had  been  proven false—should
have  been  prosecuted for  perjury.  The trial  was  also  marked
by  the  appearance  of  one of the  most  repulsive  informers  yet
produced  by  the  government—a  Methodist  pastor  who  ad-
mitted  he was  paid  by the  FBI  to spy on his  friends.
Judge  Thomason's action  against  Matusow must  be  seen  in
the  context  of frantic  efforts  by the  government  to  protect  its
system  of  informers  from  full  public examination.  An  honor-
able Department  of Justice, determined to clear its skirts of all
suspicion  of  impropriety, would have  joined  in  the  request  for
a  new  trial.   To  hold  Matusow  in  contempt  is  in   effect   to
punish  him for  recanting  without  having  to  take  the  trouble
of  proving  a  charge  of  perjury.  The  three-year  sentence, im-
posed  on a judge's  fiat  without jury  trial, is a brutal  warning
to  other  informers.
*       *      *
A  Bill  to  Make Truth  Unsafe
Those who want  to  see the  miasma  of informing cleared  up
had better awaken public opinion to the meaning of the change
asked  by  Brownell  in  the  perjury  law.   This  would  make  it
unsafe  for  informers to  get  an  attack  of conscience.
At  present  the  government  cannot  send  a  recanting  in-
former  to  jail  without  proving  which  of  his  statements,  the
original  testimony or  the  recantation,  was  false.   To try  and
prove  the  recantation  false  is  not  easy,  and  a  jury  may  feel
that  the  man  is  being persecuted for  "coming  clean."
Once  a  man  has  admitted  that  his  original  testimony  was
false,  his  own admission is the  strongest  kind of  corroborative
evidence.  It  is easier to prove that the man lied—as he  admits
—originally.   But  in  doing  so the  government  admits  that  it
used  false  evidence and  lays  the  basis  for  a  new  trial  and
acquittal  of  those  against  whom  the  informer  testified.   It  is
this  prospect,  and  not  the  difficulties  of  proof,  which  give  the
government pause when it tries to figure  out what  to do about
a  man  like  Matusow.
Brownell  would  amend  the  perjury  law  so that  the  mere
fact  of  contradictory  statements  would be  enough  for  convic-
tion—without  proving  which was  false.   Such  a  change would
serve  notice on informers that they  could  easily be sent  to jail
if  they  dared  recant—and  that  the  government  could  convict
them  without  disturbing  the  convictions  obtained  with  their
past  testimony.   This  is  a  bill  to  make  it  unhealthy  for  any
false  informer ever to  tell  the  truth.
An  Evil  Precedent
Matusow's   book,  "False  Witness,"   finally   published  last
week  is  being  made  a  success  by  its  enemies.  Whatever  its
shortcomings,  the  book  and  its  publishers,  Angus  Cameron
and  Albert  E.  Kahn, have  performed  a  first-rate  public  serv-
ice.    They  are  doing  for  the  informing  business  what   "The
Jungle"  did  for   meat-packing.
Cameron  and  Kahn  were  treated  in  reprisal  to  savage  and
illiterate  cross-examination  here  by  the  Senate  Internal  Se-
curity  subcommittee.  Their  treatment  raises serious questions
for  publishing in  America.  Has  a  Senate  committee the  right
to  subpoena  the  publishers of  a  book  it  does  not  like,  subject
them  to  exhaustive  and  often  irrelevant  inquiry,  demand  the
names  of their  backers  and  the  details  of their  business?  The
Supreme  Court's  decision  year  before  last  in the  Rumely case
suggests   that   Cameron  and  Kahn  might   have   refused   to
answer  on  the  grounds  that  such  questions  were  beyond  the
lawful  authority  of  any  Congressional  committee  under   the
First Amendment.
Edward  A.  Rumely, of  the  rightist  Committee  for  Consti-
tutional  Government, was  held  in  contempt  for  refusing  to
tell   a  House  lobby  investigating   committee   who  were   the
buyers  and  distributors   of  a  book  by  John  T.  Flynn.    The
Supreme  Court  unanimously reversed,  indicating  that  such
inquiry  was  beyond  the  lawful  investigative   power  of  Con-
gress.  We believe the  same  reasoning  applies  to  the  Matusow
book,  and  that  the  dragooning  of  Cameron  and  Kahn  is  a
sinister  precedent  for  book publishing in  America.
LET   US  SEND  A   FREE  SAMPLE  COPY   OF   THIS  ISSUE   TO   YOUR  FRIENDS
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please renew  (or enter)
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Stri"*
ruy7nn»         Stat.
Enter  this gift  sub for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(To)  Name
Strcpt
nty
* $1 extra  for  Canada.
70T1A              <U*t»
8/21/55
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St,   S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED