I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955aug08.pdf

============================================================

The  Courts  "Relax,"  Too;  The  Lamont,  Bridges  and  Sheiner  Victories,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   Ill,   NO. 30
AUGUST  8,  1955
•>">'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Note  to  the  Rest  of  the  Universe
Within  two  years you may see a flaming  ball  rocket up  from
the  earth's  surface  and  swing  into  position  in  an  orbit around
it.    Do  not  regard   the  spectacle  with  complacency.    These
satellites  will  grow  larger  and  more  numerous;  men  will  go
up  with  them.   Voyages  to  the  moon  will  follow.    After  that
the  distant  realm  of  planet  and  star  will  lie  open  to  Man.
Beware  in  time.   This  is a breed which has  changed  little  in
thousands of  years.  The  cave-dweller who  wielded a stone  club
and  the  man  who  will  soon  wield  an  interstellar  missile  are
terribly  alike.  Earth's  creatures  feed  upon  each  other,  but  this
is  the  only  one  which  kills  on  a  large  scale,  for  pleasure,  ad-
venture  and   even—so  perverse  is  the  species—for  supposed
reasons  of  morality.
Should  you  drop  a  secret  mission  of  inquiry  in  alarm,  you
will  find that  the  sacred  books  on  which  the  young of  the vari-
ous  tribes  have been  brought  up  for  thousands  of  years glorify
bloodshed.  Whether  one  looks  in  Homer,  or  the  Sagas,  or  the
Bible,  or  the  Koran,  the  hero  is  a warrior.  Someone  is always
killing  someone else for  what  is called  the  greater  glory  of  God.
This  is  not  a  creature to  be trusted  with  the  free  run  of  the
universe.   At  the  moment  the  human  race  seems  to  be  tempo-
rarily  sobered  by  the  possession  of  weapons  which  could  de-
stroy  all  life  on  earth  except  perhaps  the  mosses  and  the  fungi.
But  the  planetary  rocket  may  revive  recrimination.   The  cur-
rently  rival  tribes,  the  Russians  and  the  Americans,  fear  the
other  may  use  the  new  device  against  it.   They  may  soon  be
transferring  to  outer  space  the  hates  that  in  every  generation
have  brought  suffering  to  the  earth.    It  might  be  wise  to  stop
them   now,  on   the   very  threshold   of   the   open   and   as  yet
unpolluted   skies.
The  Congress  in  Which
O
The  first  session  of  the  84th  Congress  just  ended  will  go
down  in  history as the  session  in  which  the  Great  Thaw  began.
It  opened  with  the  false  alarms  that  pushed  through  a  resolu-
tion  giving  the President power  to wage  preventive  nuclear  war
against  China,  and  ended  with  new  and  higher  level  negotia-
tions  between Washington  and  Peking.    The  relaxation  abroad
was  accompanied  by  a  relaxation  at  home.
For  the  first  time  in  many years,  Congress  was  again  expos-
ing  big  business  men,  its  usual  peacetime  target,  instead  of
Reds.   Its  star  investigations were those  of  Talbott  and  Dixon-
Yates  while  the  House Un-American Activities Committee and
the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  had   difficulty   getting
into the  headlines.  McCarthy's old  committee under  McClellan
shifted  from  Peress  to  Talbott,  brought  down a member of  the
Cabinet,  really  looked   into  "Government   Operations."
The  shift  was  one  measure  of  the  advantage  in  a  Congress
controlled  by Democrats  in  however  poor  a stage  of  leadership.
No   new  repressive  legislation   passed;  Brownell  did  not  get
wiretapping,  a  new  perjury  law  or  the  bill  to  set  up  security
screening  throughout  industry.  There  were  two  sets  of  major
the  Great  Thaw  Began
Senate  hearings,  for  a  change,  on  the  abuses  of  the  security
program.
Progress  was  made  almost  in  spite  of  the  labor  movement.
The  only  issue  on  which  it  put  up  a  real  fight  was  the  mini-
mum  wage  where  it  won  $1  instead  of  the  75  cents  asked  by
the  President.   It  did  not  otherwise  bestir  itself  even  to  repeal
section  I4b  of  Taft-Hartley on  which  State  right-to-work  laws
depend.    Aid  to  education  did  not  rouse  the  labor  movement.
And  unlike the Big Money, labor  exerted  no pressure  for  peace.
Except  for  the  earlier  Morse-Lehman  resolution  on  Quemoy
and  Matsu,  it  was  conservative  rather  than  liberal  leadership
which  distinguished  itself.   The  hero  of  the  session,  the  man
who  deserves  world  gratitude,  is  Senator  George—he   steered,
coaxed,  cajoled  and  pushed  an  unwilling  Secretary  of  State  to
the   conference  table.    The   President's   own   Senate   leader,
Knowland, had  to  be bypassed in  the  process.   It  was Ike and  a
Democratic  Congress  which  began  to  unfreeze  the  cold  war,
which  put  McCarthy on the  shelf  and  reduced the  China  Lobby
to  a minor  nuisance.  Whether  Ike  can be  reelected  without  re-
storing  a  Republican  majority  in  Congress  is  the   question.
Dulles   Still  Wants  Unconditional   Surrender  on  Formosa
At  press  conference  last  week  the  Secretary of  State  made  it
clear  that  give-and-take  is not  in  his  estimates.   Left  out  of  the
officially   released  transcript  were  a  series  of  questions  and  an-
swers in which Dulles  made it very clear  that while he was  glad
to  have  the  Chinese  renounce  force,  he  did  not  envisage  any
possibility  of  their  achieving  their  aims  on  Formosa  or  the   off-
shore  islands  by  negotiation.   It  is  this  unwillingness   to  com-
promise  which  keeps  the  Indians  alarmed;  State   Department
is  not  willing  even  to  allow  a  neutral  third  party  to  interview
Chinese  students  in  this  country  and  thus  assure  Peking  none
are  being  held  against  their  will.  There  is  no  sign  of  a  quid
pro  quo  for  the  release  of  the  fliers,  and  later  of  the  civilians.
Also  left  out  of  the  official  transcript  was  a  remark  which
deserves to  be in  the  anthologies  of  unconscious  humor,  Dulles
was  asked  whether  he  felt  encouraged  by  the  apparent  readi-
ness  of  the  Communist  bloc  to  forego  force.   His   answer—as
closely as the no direct  quote  rule permits—was  that he thought
that  in  the  case  of  Communist   regimes  where  the  rulers  are
not  guided  by  moral  considerations  and  where  expediency  is
very  much  the  rule  that  the  policies  depend  upon,  in   effect,
what  they  can  get  away  with.   How  different  from  our  own
government  of  haloed  saints  and  parsons!
,1  2  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  8, 1955
Lamont  Beats  McCarthy,  Bridges  Wins Again,  Sheiner's  Disbarment  Reversed
Three  Noteworthy  Victories  for   Civil  Liberties  In  One  Week
Three  crucial  civil  liberties  cases  were  won  last  week.   A
Federal  judge  in  New  York  dismissed  the  indictment  of  Cor-
liss  Lamont,  Abraham  Unger  and  Albert  Shadowitz  for  con-
tempt  of  the  McCarthy  committee;  they  had  refused  to  an-
swer  questions  on  First  amendment  grounds.   Another   Fed-
eral  judge, in  San  Francisco,  threw  out the  government's  suit
to  revoke the  citizenship  of Harry  Bridges;  this was the  gov-
ernment's  fifth  attempt  in  12 years  to  "get"   the   waterfront
labor  leader.  And the  Florida  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case of
Leo  Sheiner,  ruled  4-to-l that  a  lawyer  could not be  disbarred
merely  because  he  took  the  Fifth  amendment  before  a  Con-
gressional  committee;  this  was  the  first  test  case  of  its  kind.
*            *           *
Any  Technicality  in  A Storm
The   Lamont-Unger-Shadowitz    decision — all   three   cases
were  decided  together—illustrates   the  importance  of  provid-
ing  a  judge  with  any  and  every  technicality  with  which he
may  evade the  issue, yet  decide for  one's  client.  All three men
had  pleaded  the  First  amendment  when  queried  about  their
political  views  by  McCarthy,  sitting  as  chairman  of  the   Per-
manent  Subcommittee  on  Investigations   of  the  Senate  Com-
mittee  on  Government   Operations.   Lament's  lawyer,  Philip
Wittenberg, discovered that there  was no public law or  Senate
resolution    establishing    the    "Permanent      Subcommittee"
through  which  McCarthy  had  been  acting.  The  Judge  there-
upon  threw  out  the  indictment,   declaring  that  the  statutes
and  resolutions  cited  in  it  contain  no  reference  to  a  perma-
nent  subcommittee  "let  alone any  delegation  of  power  to   it."
By  declaring  that  the  permanent  subcommittee  had  never
been  lawfully  constituted,  Judge  Weinfeld  cast  doubt  on  all
outstanding  indictments  for  contempt  of  the  McCarthy  com-
mittee,  including  that  of  Harvey  O'Connor, who  also pleaded
the  First  amendment.*   But  the  Judge  also  thereby  evaded
two  other  questions.   One  is  whether  the  Senate  Committee
on  Government  Operations,  the  old  Audit  and  Expenditures
Committee,  had any  right  to inquire into political  ideas at  all.
Public  Law  601,  the   so-called   Reorganization   Act  of   1946,
only  authorized  the  Committee on  Government Operations  to
investigate  all  matters  having  to  do  with  "economy  and   effi-
ciency"   and   "intergovernmental    relationships."    The   other
question, the  fundamental question, the  one on which  Lamont,
Unger  and  Shadowitz made their  challenge, was  whether  any
committee  of  Congress  could  lawfully  engage   in  idealogical
inquisition.    Such  inquisition,  as  recent   years  have  shown,
definitely  "abridge"  freedom  of  speech,  press  and  assembly,
as  guaranteed   by  the  First   Amendment.
Tip  to  those  smeared  by  McCarthy: If  McCarthy's  conduct
as  chairman  of that  subcommittee  was unlawful,  then  it  was
not  covered  by  Congressional  immunity.  McCarthy  could  be
sued   for   libel,  defamation   or   causing  breach   of   contract.
Here's  one way  for  his  victims  to  get  back  at  him.
*            *           *
When  Is  Perjury  Not  Perjurious?
The  answer  seems to  be when  it  is  mustered by  the  govern-
ment.   The  Bridges  case  was  heard  without  a  jury  and  the
most  interesting  portions  of  Judge  Louis  E.  Goodman's deci-
sion  are  its  findings  of  fact,  and  the  appendices  in  which  the
Judge  analyzed  the  key  incidents  on  which  the  government
relied  to  prove  that  Bridges  had  been  a  Communist.   These
make  a  successful  appeal  by  the  government  unlikely.
One witness,  Saunders, testified  that  he had  collected  party
dues  from  Bridges.   He  testified  that  shortly  after   returning
from   the  party's  national   convention   in   1936,   he  went  to
Bridges'   office  in  the  Balboa  building,  "and  said  to  Bridges
that  the  [party]  unit  was  very  sore  about  him  and  that  he
should  pay   some  dues.   In   response   Bridges   slapped  three
silver  dollars  on  his  desk."
* The  text  was  inserted  in  the  Congressional  Record  for  Aug. 2.
Power  of  Inquiry  Limited
"While  the  Congress  is  possessed  of  broad  powers  to
conduct   investigations  necessary   for   the   performance
of  its  constitutional  functions  .  .  .  there  are  outer limits
to  the  power.  .  .  .  From  Kilbourn  v.  Thompson  down  to
Quinn  v.  IT. S.,  the  Supreme  Court  has  steadfastly  held
that  the congressional  power  to investigate is  not  bound-
less.  The restrictions upon this power  have been sharply
delineated  by  Mr. Chief  Justice  Warren:  'But the  power
to  investigate,   broad  as  it  may  be,  is  also  subject  to
recognized   limitations.    It   cannot   be   used   to   inquire
into  private  affairs  unrelated to  a  valid  legislative  pur-
pose.    Nor  does  it  extend  to  an  area  in  which Congress
is  forbidden  to legislate'   (Quinn  v, U.  S.).  .  . .  Accord-
ingly,  'a witness rightfully  may  refuse  to  answer  where
the  bounds  of  power  are  exceeded  .  .  .'  (U.  S.  v.  Sin-
clair,  McGrain  v.  Daugherty)-"
—Judge  Edward  Weinfeld   in  U. S.  11. Lamont
The Judge  commented, "It  is peculiar, to say the least, that
Saunders  would  have  collected dues in  such  a  manner  from  a
man,  whom,  the  government  argues,  Saunders  believed  had
just  been  elected  to  the~National  Committee of  the  Commu-
nist party."
The  most  important  government witness,  Schomaker, testi-
fied  that  in  1938  Bridges  addressed  a  meeting  of  some  35  to
50  Communists  and  non-Communists at   which  he   asserted
that  he  was  a  Communist  and  urged  the  non-members  pres-
ent to  join.
"In  the  fall  of  1938  when  this  meeting  is  said  to  have oc-
curred,"   the  Judge   commented,  "Bridges'   deportation   was
already  being sought by the  United  States on the  ground that
he  was  a  member  of  the  Communist Party,  and  a  warrant
against  him  was  outstanding.   Under  these  circumstances,  it
is  against  all  reason  to  believe that  even  a  person  so brash
and  outspoken  as  Bridges  has   demonstrated  himself  to  be
would  have  made  the  statements  attributed  to  him   before
such  a  group  of  people."
The  Judge  on  the  key  government   witnesses:  "There  are
grave  improbabilities in  Schomaker's  story.  .  .  .  Saunders'
testimony  is inherently flimsy. .  . .  Hook's  testimony  is un-
substantial.  . . . The testimony  of witnesses  Jones,  Mann and
Melin,  former  Communists,  who  gave  evidence  on  behalf  of
respondent  was  also  replete  with  inconsistencies,  hates  and
malice. . . ."
Plain  and  fancy  lying  has  been  a  feature  of  the   Bridges
cases  since  the  beginning.  At  the  previous  trial,  No. 4,  Paul
Crouch, Lawrence  Seton  Ross  and  Manning Johnson  all  swore
that  Bridges  was at  a  Communist meeting  in  New York.  The
defense  submitted  documented  records  proving  that  Bridges
was  in  California at  the  time.
We  suggest  that  Bridges  now take  the  offensive  and  have
his  lawyers  prepare  and  publish  a  careful  study  of  the  kind
of  testimony  used  by  the  government  in  the  five  attempts  to
get  him.  Added  up  and  collated it  would  provide  so striking
a  collection  of  perjuries   as  to  shame  the  government   from
trying  again.
*            *           *
Legal  Goliath  Takes  the  Count
The Sheiner  decision is noteworthy,  among other  things, .for
being  the  first  direct  legal  contest  between  the  stuffy  Ameri-
can   Bar   Association  and   the   hounded  National   Lawyers'
Guild.   Both  argued   before  the  Florida  Supreme  Court  aa
"friends  of  the  court"  but  on  opposite  sides:  the  ABA  that
lawyers  who take  the  Fifth  should  be disbarred,  the  Guild  in
defense  of  Leo  Sheiner,  the  Miami  lawyer  who  pleaded   the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  8, 1955
Langer  Helps  Harry  Sacher  Challenge  the  Authority  of  the  Eastland  Committee
And  Some  New  Battles  Looming  Up  On The  Witch  Hunt  Horizon
Fifth  amendment when the  Senate  Internal  Security  Commit-
tee  asked  him whether  he was  a  Communist.  That  a  Southern
court,   under   these   circumstances,  with   national    attention
focussed  on  it,  should  rule  in  favor  of  Sheiner  and  the  Guild
seems  almost miraculous.
Another  noteworthy  aspect  of  the  Florida  decision  is  its
astringent   attitude  toward  Congressional  investigation.   The
majority  opinion  (written  by  Justice  Glenn  Terrell  and  con-
curred  in  by  Chief  Justice  E.  Harris  Drew  and  Justice  H.  L.
Sebring)   criticized  the   lower  court  for   disbarring   Sheiner
when  its  action  was  "supported  by nothing  more than  the evi-
dence  taken  by  a  Congressional committee."  In  reversing  the
lower  court,  the  State  Supreme  Court  said  that  if  such  mat-
ters  were  grounds  for  disbarment,  "then  one's  privilege  to
practice   law   may   be  made   to   depend  on  a   very  tenuous
thread."   The  majority  added,  in  criticism  of  the  way   the
Senate  Internal  Security   committee  acted,  "To  deprive  one
of  the  privilege  of  practicing  law  should  never  be  done  by
'faceless   informers'."
A fourth  member of  the  Florida  bench, Dade  Circuit  Judge
Robert  L.  Floyd, wrote  a  concurring opinion in  which  he  took
issue  directly  with  the  American  Bar   Association's  conten-
tion  that  a  lawyer's  rights  are  different  from  those  of  an  in-
dividual.  "Whatever  rights  lawyers  enjoy  as  individuals they
also  enjoy  as  attorneys,"  he  wrote.   Of  the  ABA's  argument
that  lawyers  could be disbarred  for  using  their  constitutional
rights  under the  Fifth  amendment, Judge  Floyd  declared,  "It
would  be just  as  right  to  contend that  a  sheriff  could demand
entrance  to  a  lawyer's  house  without  a  search  warrant."
Unfortunately  this  does not  end the  Sheiner  case.    The  dis-
barment order  was reversed but  the case was remanded  to the
Dade  county  courts.   If  they  can  establish  by  proof  Sheiner's
unfitness  to  practice,  he  may  still  be  disbarred.   And  proof
that  he  is  a  Communist may  constitute  proof  of  unfitness.
*            *            *
Still  Rubber-Stamping  Contempt  Citations
The  U.  S.  Senate  is  less  courageous  than  the  Florida  Su-
preme  Court.  In  a new  case  last  week  involving  the  rights of
lawyers,  it  again  acted  as  a rubber  stamp  when  confronted by
a  contempt  citation.   After  more  than  ten  days  of  delay  and
behind  the  scenes  misgivings,  the  Eastland   committee  cita-
tion  of  Harry   Sacher  was  agreed  on  a  routine  vote  without
dissent  though  Langer  read  the  Senate  brief  by  Sacher   (see
Con.  Rec. July  28, p.  10,198)  and  defended his  refusal  to  an-
swer  the  questions  on which the  contempt charges  were  based.
Sacher  said  that  when  the  subpoena  was  served  upon  him,
he was told  the  Eastland  committee wished to interrogate him
in   its   investigation    of   the   Matusow   recantation.     Sacher
pointed   out  that  he  answered   all  questions  about   Matusow.
The  questions  Sacher  refused  to  answer  was  (1)  whether  he
is  a  member  of  the  Communist party,  (2)  whether  he  ever
Second  Immunity  Test
New  York—Although   the  Supreme  Court  has  prom-
ised  to  rule  in  the  Fall  on  the  validity  of  the  new  immu-
nity  law  and the  three  Appeals  Court  judges who  passed
on  it  expressed  varying  degrees  of  doubt  as  to  its   con-
stitutionality,    the   government   has   launched   a  second
test  here  against  Edward  J. Fitzgerald,  another of  those
named   by   Elizabeth   Bentley.
Fitzgerald   released   a   letter    to   Attorney   General
Brownell  asking  why  immunity  was  being  pressed  upon
him,  and  why  he  wasn't  being  prosecuted  if  the  Bentley
espionage  charges  were  true.   (Since  they  deal  with  the
war   period   they   are  covered   by  no  statute  of   limita-
tions.)   Fitzgerald  also  asked  Brownell,  "Why  have  you
kept   from  the  Grand   Jury   the  detailed  evidence   com-
piled  by  William  Henry  Taylor  demonstrating  the   fal-
sity  of  the  Bentley  story?"
When  Taylor  began  to  tell  a  Washington  grand  jury
in  October,   1954,  what  he  had  learned   (see   full  resume
of  the  Taylor   affidavit  carried  in  the  Weekly,  April  25)
the hearing was  adjourned  and the  grand jury  disbanded.
had  been and  (3)  whether  he was  or  ever  had  been  a  member
of  a  lawyers  section  of  the  party.
J.   C.   Soul-wine,   the   committee's   counsel,  justified  these
questions by explaining that  "among  the  measures  under  con-
sideration  by  this  committee  is  proposed  legislation   ...     to
prohibit  members  of  the  Communist party  from  practicing  in
the  Federal   courts."
Sacher   pleaded   neither   the  Fifth  nor  the  P'irst  but  said
that  as  a  matter  of  conscience  he  declined to  submit  to  poli-
tical   interrogation.    In   the  brief   read   the   Senate,    Sacher
pointed  out  that  nothing  in  the  resolution  establishing   the
Internal   Security  Committee  gives   it   power  to   investigate
"the  fitness  of Communists to  practice  in  the  Federal  courts."
Langer   supported  Sacher's   position  and  told  the  Senate,   "I
have  no patience  at  all with  the  judge in Texas  who  disbarred
a  lawyer because the  lawyer  chose to  defend  a  Communist, or
refused  to  tell  the  judge  whether  he  was  a  Communist  him-
self"—a  reference  to  the  Matusow proceedings  in  Texas.
Eastland  in  reply  claimed the  broadest  possible jurisdiction
for  his  committee over  anything  connected  with communism
or "subversion,"  said  Sacher  "was  the  most  contemptuous  wit-
ness  I have  ever  seen"  and told  the  Senate,  "I  do not  think  we
should  take  the  word  of  a  notorious  Communist."
The  shadow  of  some  fundamental  issues   falls  across  the
Sacher  case.   He  is  counsel for  clients  awaiting  retrial  in  the
Federal  courts  as  a  result  of  Matusow's  confession.   If  law-
yers  can  be  hauled  before  congressional  committees  and  in-
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
First  Senate  Civil  Liberties  Inquiry   Since  La  Follette  Committee  Begins  October  3
For  the  first  time  since  the  pre-war  hearings  of  the  La
Follette  committee,  a  Senate investigation  into infractions of
basic  rights  will  begin  on  October  3 with  public  hearings  be-
fore  the  newly   established  subcommittee  on  constitutional
liberties.   This  subcommittee  of  the  Senate  Judiciary   Com-
mittee  was  authorized almost  ten  years ago  by  the  Reorgani-
zation  Act  of   1940.
The  subcommittee's  chairman  is  Hennings  of  Missouri  and
the  other  two  members  are  Langer   (N.   Dak.)   and  O'Ma-
honey  (Wyo.).   Lon  Hocker,  Jr.,  former  president  of  the  St.
Louis  Bar  Association,  will  be  in  charge  as  Chief  Hearings
Counsel  of  the  committee.
The  first  week  will  be  devoted  to  freedom  of  religion  and
separation  of  church  and state.  On October  17  two  weeks  of
hearings  will  be  given  over  to  freedom   of  speech  and  press
and  beginning   November   14,  four   weeks  on  the  right  of
assembly.
The plan  is  systematically  to  cover  all  the  rights  specified
in  the  Constitution.   The  public  is  invited  to  bring  to  the
subcommittee's   attention   any   current   violations   of   these
rights  "bearing  in  mind,"   however,  Senator  Hennings  ad-
vised,  "that  neither  the  time  nor  the  public  interest  can  per-
mit  it  to  use  the  hearings  to  vindicate  individual  positions
or  to  right  personal  wrongs  not  giving  rise  to  constitutional
questions  of  general  application."
Establishment  of  this  subcommittee  was  first  promised by
Senator  Langer  last  year in  a speech  to  the Emergency  Civil
Liberties  Committee  in  New  York.
.1   2   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  8,1955
House  Un-American Activities  Committee Opens  Investigation  of  Rosenberg Committees
Brownell  Picks Strike-Bound  Copper Industry  to  Test Anti-Union Law
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
terrogated  about  their  political   views  and  about  their  rela-
tions with witnesses  while cases  are  pending, orderly trial in a
calm  atmosphere  can  be  made  impossible.  This  is  indeed  the
purpose  of  the  Eastland  committee—and  the  Department  of
Justice—in  harassing  everyone  remotely  connected  with  the
recantation   of  Matusow.  What  happens  in  such  a  context  to
separation   of  powers,  the  right  to  counsel  and  fair  trial?
*           *           *
First  "Infiltration"  Test
Last  August  Congress  passed  a  new  anti-Communist  con-
trol  law  depriving  "Communist  infiltrated"  unions  of  collec-
tive  bargaining  privileges  under  the  Wagner  Act.  Last week
Attorney  General  Brownell invoked this law for  the  first  time
and  initiated  action  against  the  Mine, Mill  & Smelter  Workers
Union   (Ind.).   All  factions  of  labor  last  year  fought  these
provisions  as  a  potential  strike-breaking   weapon  and  noted
that  the  Department  of Justice  opened  up  on Mine, Mill in  the
midst  of  a  nationwide  copper  strike  (see  box  in  column  2).
Through  "such  actions  as  this"  Assistant  Attorney  General
William  F.  Tompkins  explained,  "we  intend  to  assist  loyal
Americans  of  Communist infiltrated  unions  ...     to  oust  the
Communist  leadership."
The  basic  assumption  of  the  act  is  that  members  of  labor
and  other  organizations  cannot  be  trusted  to  use  their  own
judgment   and   voting   power  to   pick   the   leadership   they
want,  but  that   the   government   must   step   in  as  a   legal
nursemaid  and  protect  them  from  leaders  they  chose  but  it
considers  "communistic."   The  allegations  in  the  formal  peti-
tion  against  Mine, Mill  shows how easily  this  could  be used  to
defame  and  break  up  organizations  advocating   policies  the
government  dislikes.  It  is no surprise  to find among the  alle-
gations  that  Mine, Mill  opposed  this  new  law!
*           *           *
New  Rosenberg-Sobell   Persecution
Last  July  18 the  National  Committee to  Secure  Justice  for
Morton  Sobell  filed  a  request   with  the  new  Hennings  sub-
committee  (see  box bottom  of  page  three)  to  investigate   the
conduct  of  the  U.  S.  Attorney  General's  Office  in  the  Rosen-
berg-Sobell   case.   That  same  day  subpoenas  were  served  by
the  House Un-American Activities  Committee  on  members of
various  Rosenberg  and  Sobell  committees.
Since  then   two  books  throwing  much  new  light   on  the
Rosenberg   case  have  appeared,  "The   Atom  Spy  Hoax"  by
William  A. Reuben  (Action  Books,  N. Y.)  and  "The  Judgment
of  Julius  and  Ethel  Rosenberg"  by  John  Wexley  (Cameron &
And  It  Did
"A  continued  shutdown  this  week  of  a  major  part  of
the  nation's  nonferrous  industry  over  a  wage  dispute
may  win  the  leftwing   Mine,  Mill  &  Smelter  Workers
(Ind.)  substantial  raises  from  some  of  its  biggest  em-
ployers  but  it  might  also  make  MMSW  the  first  target
of  a  legal crackdown  on  unions  suspected  of  Communist
control."
—Business  Week, July  30
Kahn, N. Y.).  Though  both try  to prove too much and  mingle
fact,  half-fact  and  surmise,  they  also  present  new  material
which  strengthens  the  claim  of  Sobell to  a  new trial.
It  is  a  pity  this  country  is  not  mature  enough for  a  Royal
Commission  style  inquiry to  re-examine  the  whole Rosenberg
affair.    The   vindictive  effort   of   the   House  committee   to
frighten,  smear  and punish those  who took part  in  the  Rosen-
berg  defense is  no  substitute.  Chairman  Walter,  who once  in
a better  moment said  something in favor  of clemency, will find
that  these  hearings  will  only  create  sympathy  for  the  wit-
nesses  and  a  new interest  in  Sobell's  cause.
*            *           *
Challenging  the  Security  Mania
In   1950  Congress  authorized  the  Executive  summarily  to
discharge  on  security  grounds  any  employe of  certain   speci-
fied departments  and  such  other  agencies  "as  the   President
may,  from  time  to  time,  deem necessary  in  the  best  interests
of  national  security."   The  Court  of  Appeals  here  last  week
split  on  the  meaning  of  this  law  in  Cole  v.  Young  and  the
Supreme  Court  may  therefore  hear  an  appeal.
Cole  was  a  food  and  drug  inspector  discharged  without  a
hearing  on  the  ground  of  association   "with  individuals reli-
ably  reported  to  be  Communists."  Judge  Prettyman  for  the
majority  upheld the  discharge.   But  Judge  Edgerton,  dissent-
ing,  objected that  it  could  not  "reasonably  be  deemed  neces-
sary  in  the  best  interests  of  national  security  that  employes
in  all  agencies, including not  only  the  Food and  Drug Admin-
istration  but  the  Fish  and  Wildlife  Service  be subject  to  sum-
mary  unappealable  dismissal."
*           *           *
The   Weekly  regrets   the  death  of  Earl   G.  Harrison,  of
Philadelphia,  and  honors  his  memory  for  the  sympathy   he
showed  in  his  report  to  President  Truman  on  the  plight  of
Jewish  D.P.'s  after   the  war,  and  for  the  consistency  with
which  he  spoke  up  for   civil   liberty.
Why  Not  Give  That  New  Vacation  Acquaintance A  6-Month  (Only  $2)  Introductory Subscription?
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter gift  sub
(To)  Name  ....
Street
City
• $1 extra for
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash. 3,
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed
Zone          State
D.  C.
$5:»
for  $2 (6 mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
Zone          State
Canada.
8/8/58
/.  F. Stone's   Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED