I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1955
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1955jan10.pdf

============================================================

Special  Double  Issue
Can  U.  S.  Capitalism   Prosper  in  Peaceful  Co-Existence?   See  Weir's   Answer,  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBERS 47-48            JANUARY  10,  1955WASHINGTON, D. C.
15 CENTS
A  Fateful  Decision  Nobody  Talks About
Of  the  events  of  the  holiday  fortnight,  none  was more  im-
portant   and   none   received   less   attention   than   the  2-to-l
decision  by  the  U.  S. Circuit  Court  of  Appeals in  Washington
upholding  the  McCarran  Internal  Security  Act  and  the  regis-
tration  order  issued  under  it  against  the  Communist   Party.
This  system  of  registration  orders,  if  allowed  to  stand  by  the
Supreme  Court,   promises  to   become  our   equivalent  of   the
yellow  Star  of  David  the  Nazis  pinned  upon  the  Jews.   Not
indeed  that  ours  are  racist  symbols,  or  need  to  be  worn  upon
the  lapel.  But  under  this  system every radical, liberal or  other
non-conformist  will  speak  at  the  risk  of  being  called  on  to
explain  why  he  is  not  registered  as  a  Communist  on  penalty
of  five  years  in  jail.   The  agonies  of  the  loyalty  probe,  again
being  exposed in  all  their  painful  folly  by  the  Ladejinsky case,
will be extended  outside the  government  service.  The  effect,  as
President  Truman  warned  in  his  unsuccessful  effort   to  block
this  legislation  by  veto,  will  be to  make it  prudent  "to  avoid
saying  anything   that   might   be  construed  as  not  deviating
sufficiently   from   the  current  Communist  propaganda  line."
Fear  is  already evident  in  the  current  attitude  of  the  news-
papers  which  four  years  ago  applauded Mr.  Truman  for  that
veto   message.   Only  one  of   them,   the   Louisville  Courier-
Journal,  (Dec.  27)  protested  the  Circuit  Court  decision  vali-
dating the Act  they had all opposed.  Three leading  newspapers,
the  New  York  Times,  the  Washington  Post  and  the  St.  Louis
Post  Dispatch  reversed  themselves  and  welcomed  the   ruling.
The  rest  were  silent.   The  role  of  those  suddenly  struck  dumb
is  a  depressing  one.   The  Wall  Street  Journal,  the  Christian
Science  Monitor,  the  New  York  Post, the  Chicago  Sun-Times,
the  Madison, Wis.,  Capital-Times,  the  Milwaukee Journal, the
Des  Moines,  Iowa,  Register,  the  Chicago  Daily  News,  though
fresh  from  campaigning  against  McCarthyism  and  exercised
over  the  Ladejinsky  case,  had  said not  one word  editorially  up
to  the  time we went  to  press.  Even  the York,  Pa., Gazette and
Daily,  the  bright  candle  in  the  naughty  world  of  American
journalism,  the  one  daily  which  supported  Wallace  in   1948,
failed  to  comment.  The  liberal  columnists, Max Lerner,  Mar-
quis Childs,  Tom  Stokes, Doris Fleeson, Murray Kempton,  kept
their  eyes discreetly  averted.
Forgetfulness  or  Fear?
The  silence  is  the  more  shocking  because  all  these  papers
and  writers   spoke  out   in  alarm  last  August  when  Senators
Humphrey,  Morse  and  Douglas,   to  prove  that   they   them-
selves  were  irreproachably   homogenized,  fathered  an  amend-
ment  to  the  McCarran  Act  setting  up  standards  to  determine
who  is'a  Communist.   These  are  so broad  that  the  three  Sen-
ators   could  easily  be  proscribed   under  them.   They  are  the
standards  which   would  now  determine   who  must   register.
These  editors  and  writers  have not  so soon  forgotten.    They
falter  because  this  first  registration  order  is  against  the  Com-
munist  party,  and  one  just  does  not  defend  Communists  any
more.   The  liberal newspapers gravitate toward  mistaken  iden-
tity  cases,  and  look  for  reductio  ad  absurdums.  A  Ladejinsky
case  is  easy  grist  for  the  editorial  mill.   A  government  official
who  has  been  praised  by  MacArthur,  cleared  by  Scott  McLeod
and  smeared  by  anti-Semites  may  be  defended  against  charges
of  Communism  without  too  much danger.
It   would  be  a  happy  event   for   timorous  editors  if   the
Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  would  rally  all  the  better
elements  of  the  country  against it  by  issuing its  first  registra-
tion  order  against—let  us  say—the  board  of  directors  of   the
Chase  National   Bank.   Unfortunately   that   is  not   how  the
foundations  of  freedom  are  first  rendered  shaky.  The  principle
that  the  government  has  a  right  to  make  you  account   for
your  political  views is more  easily established by  starting  with
some  untouchable extremist  fringe  the  respectables  shudder  to
defend.    In  this  case,  until   the  Communist   party   has  been
ordered  to  register,  it  is  impossible  to  proceed  against  indi-
viduals  for  non-registration  as  Communists.   The   registration
order  against the  Communist  party  is the keystone of  the  whole
McCarran   Act  structure.   Once  that  order  has  been  upheld,
the  damage is  done.  Then  will  come  the  turn  of  the  Ladejin-
skys.  Not  all will  be condemned.   Some will  be acquitted.   But
even  those  who  win  their  clearance  will  have  been  put  to  so
much  pain,  trouble  and  bad  publicity  as  to  put  all  others  on
notice  that  the  only  safety  lies  in  conformity.   An  Orwellized
America  will  have  arrived.
Just  a  Circuit  Court  Decision?
Some will  say that  this  is merely  the  decision  of  the  Circuit
Court  of  Appeals.   There  could  be  no  more  foolish  way   to
salve   conscience.    The   Circuit  Court   is  the  only   court  of
appeals in which  a man  has a right  to  be heard in  Federal  cases.
Whether  he  gets  a  hearing  in  the  Supreme  Court  depends  in
almost  all  cases on  privilege,  not  right.  It  seems  unthinkable,
but  it  is not  certain  that  the  Supreme  Court  will  consent   to
review  this  decision,  much  less  that  it  will  consent  to  review
all  the  vital  issues  involved  in  it.   It  takes  the  vote  of  four
Justices  in  chambers  to  win  a  hearing,  and  if  the  country  so
takes  this  order  for  granted,  if  there  is  so  little  protest,  the
Court  too  will  be  affected.   It  is  often   dominated*  by  what
it  thinks  politic.   In  this  atmosphere,  the  Court  might  also
decide  it  would  be  better  to  put  the  issue  on  the  shelf   for
settlement  later,  and  leave  the  Circuit  Court  decision  stand.
(Continued  on  Page  Eight)
1  3
1   9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10,1955
Nobody  Seems  to  Realize  the  Die  Is  Cast  for  Atomic  War
In  a  front  page  article,  "The  Fatal  Decisions  Have  Already
Seen  Made,"   (Nov.  1)  we  were  the  first  publication  in  this
country  to call  attention  to  the  implications  of a  little  noticed
speech  by  Marshal  Montgomery  in  London  on  planning   for
World  War  III.   Montgomery  indicated  that  NATO planning
was  based  on  the  use  of  atomic  weapons  for  defense  whether
the  enemy  attack  was  atomic  or  not.   Despite  protest  in  the
House  of  Commons, this  was  endorsed  at  last  month's   meet-
ing  of the  NATO  Council  in  Paris.
The phrasing  was  deliberately  obscure  and few  publications
in  this  country  had  any  interest  in  deciphering the  meaning
clearly  for  the  American  public.  The NATO decision  fell  into
two  parts.   The  first  was  that  the  military  were  authorized
to  plan  for  an  atomic war.   The  second was that  the  Govern-
ments  would retain  the  responsibility  for  putting  these  plans
into  effect.   The  latter  is  eye-wash  meant  to  hide  two  things
from  our  own people and  from  our  allies.
It  Will  Be Too  Late
It  is  eye-wash,  first  of  all,  because  if  operational  plans  are
made  and  military  forces  recast  to  use  the  various  kinds of
atomic weapons now available,  there will be little real  margin
of  decision  left.   It  will  be  difficult   in  practice  to  make  an
atomic  army  fight  a  conventional war;  the  war  might  be  lost
in  the  confusion  of  the  change-over;  there  would be  no  time.
It  is  eye-wash,  in  the  second  place,  because  it  is  intended
to  convey  the  idea  to  Western  Europe  that  the  question  of
atomic  war  will  be  in  the  hands  of  the  governments  making
up  the  NATO Council.  Actually  each government  will  be free
to  make  up  its  own  mind.  In  practice  that  means  the   U.S.
will  decide.  All our  eggs  are  in  the  basket  of our  highly publi-
cized  Strategic  Air  Command, which  is  not  subject  to NATO
and  which is  geared  to  massive  atomic reprisal.  The  SAC by
bombing   Russia   would   open   Western   Europe   to   atomic
counter-attack.
This  is  what  Western  Europe  wants  to  avoid.  The  reason
why  is  set forth  by the  famous military  expert,  B. H. Liddell
Hart,  in  a  long letter  published last  Monday  (Jan.  3)  in  the
London  Times.  Hart  says that as  few as five and certainly  as
many  as  ten  thermonuclear  devices  could  wipe  out  all  Eng-
land's  main centers  of  population  and that  "still  fewer would
paralyze  the  vital  centers  of  France,  Belgium  and  Holland."
He  says  these  can  now  be  delivered,  without  possibility  of
interception  by  rockets  from  Russian  bases  in  Germany.
"The  value  of  armies,"  Hart  wrote,  "lies  in  providing  a
non-suicidal   defense   against   attack.    To   arm   them   with
atomic  weapons  is  to  destroy  the  case  for  maintaining  them.
In  that  form  they  would  increase  the  risks  of  spreading  a
local  conflict  into  a  universal  conflagration  without diminish-
ing  the  fatal  prospect."
Montgomery  and  others  have  sold  the  idea  that  the  West
must  use atomic weapons to  provide time  to mobilize reserves.
The  London  Observer  correspondent  at  the  NATO Council
meeting  in  Paris  reported   (Dec. 19)  "psychiatrists  who  have
been  consulted  on  the  human  effects  of  the  types  of  destruc-
tion  and  chaos which the military  would  expect have  said that
after  four  days  of  this  experience  [atomic  war]  the  forma-
tion  of  new units would probably  be impossible."
If  war  comes, it  will  be atomic.   Whichever  side  feels  it  is
in  danger   of  losing,  will  loose  the   nightmare   on  mankind
whatever  happens  at  the  beginning  of  the   conflict.
The  only  way  out  is  to  fight  against  war  altogether,   and
to begin to cut  down tension  by ending further  nuclear weapon
experiments.   In  this  connection  earlier   warnings  are   rein-
forced  from  an  unexpected quarter.
Even,the  Hearst  Press  Alarmed
The  day  after  Christmas  the  New  York   Journal-American
ran  a  long dispatch  on its  editorial  page  from  its  chief  Euro-
pean   correspondent,  Kingsbury   Smith,   "A-H   Bomb  Tests
Threaten   Mankind."    Smith  quoted  a   high-ranking  NATO
officer   in  close  touch  with  nuclear  developments  as   saying
"he  fully  shared.the  view  that  a  serious  danger   could  con-
front  mankind 20 years  hence if  the  experimental  explosions
were  not curtailed  and  strictly  limited."
The  Democrats in  Congress  are getting  ready  to investigate
the  cuts  in  the  Army  projected  by  the  Elsenhower Adminis-
tration.   Their  motives are  mixed.  Smarting  from  charges  of
"treason,"  they  are  always  on  the  lookout  for  a  chance  to
appear   more   patriotic   than   the   Republicans.   They   have
always  favored  higher  military  expenditures.   They  would
perform  a  public  service  if  instead  of  merely  playing  Army
politics,  they  threw  this  whole  subject  wide open.  The  public
knows  entirely  too little  of the  real  facts.
Morning-After  Blues  on  German-Jap  Rearmament
IN  WASHINGTON: Though little  evident  in  public  state-
ments,  behind  the  scenes  there  is  considerable  cooling  off of
fervor  in  Washington  about  German  and  Japanese  rearma-
ment  .  .  .  Some   officials   are  even  talking  privately   of  the
former  as  a  "frank   gamble"  .  .  .  One reason  for  lessened
fervor  is that  both  German and Japanese  interests  are  trying
to  drive  a  hard  bargain  .  .  .  Neither  wants  to  divert   energy
from  civilian  output and exports  to military  production  .  . .
American  grants  and loans are  being  asked  to finance expan-
sion  of  German  and  Japanese  industry  to  the  point  where
rearmament  can be piled  on top  of "business  as  usual."  .  . .
Their  mood  is much  like that  of our business men in  1940  . . .
IN  BONN: Not  Reported  in the American Press:  The semi-
official  Allensbach  Institute  at  Bonn  on New Year's  Day  pub-
lished  the  results  of  a  West  German public opinion  poll which
showed:  less  than  half  the  Germans  favor  rearmament  and
nearly  40 percent  are  violently opposed to  it.   What  Germans
are  most concerned  with  now are  unification  and  the  recovery
of  the  Saar,  Silesia  and  East  Prussia  but  an  overwhelming
majority  is  against  going  to  war  for  this  purpose.   Perhaps
one  reason  is  that  most  Germans  polled  expressed  the  view
that  in a new war  the  Western  Powers  would withdraw,  leav-
ing  Germany to  be  destroyed  by  atom  bombs.   Two-thirds  of
all Germans believe the  Saar  should be returned  to  the  Reich.
IN   PARIS:   For  the   Scrap-Book:  Harold   Callender,  the
New   York   Times   correspondent   in  Paris,  reported  of   the
debate  on  German  rearmament:  "Nobody  spoke  in  favor  of
German  rearmament.   Everybody  regretted  it  .  .  ."   (NYT,
2/1/55,  Review  of  the  News,  P.  3)  and  on  the  vote,  "the  98
Communist  and  fellow-travelling  deputies,  for  once,  did  not
distort  the  result.   Their  opposition  to  German   rearmament,
while  it  jibed with  Moscow's policies,  also  jibed  not  only with
the  views  of  the  approximately  one-fifth  of  the  French  voters
who had  elected them but  with  the  views of something not  far
from  five-fifths  of  the   French  voters  as  a  whole."   (NYT,
2/1/55,  P.  5.)   The  atmosphere  in  Paris  must  be pretty  over-
whelming  to  make  the  rather  conventional  Mr.   Callender
write  in  such  strong terms.
IN  TOKYO:  Not  Reported  in  the  American  Press.   One
reason  for   concern  about  Japanese   rearmament  is  the   re-
appearance  of  the  "patriotic  assassins"  who  terrorized   pre-
war    moderates.    Four    of   those   who   murdered    pre-war
Premiers  have  been  released  from  prison  and  delivered  in-
flammatory speeches recently  at  public meetings.  One was  the
man  who assassinated  Prime Minister  Hamaguchi in  1930 and
the  other  the  assassin  of  Finance  Minister   Inoye  in   1932.
Richard  Hughes,  Tokyo  correspondent  of  the  Sunday   Times
of    London,  reported   December   19  that  similar   threats  of
assassination  led to  Yoshida's  recent  resignation  and that  his
successor,  Hatoyama,  "has  ventured  no  denunciation  of  pre-
war  terrorist  methods which,  if  not  stamped  out,  may  recur
to  plague  him  in  his turn."
Watch  Next   Week's  Issue  for   A  Full  Report   on  the   Opening   of  the   New  Congress   and  the   Elsenhower   Program
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  10, 1955
Weir  Shows  Normal  Peacetime  Growth  Will  Require  Enormous Industrial Expansion
A Big Business  Man  Renews  His  Plea  for  Co-Existence
By Ernest T. Weir
Never  in  all  history  has  humanity had  so great  an  oppor-
tunity  to  exercise  a  choice  as  to  what  its  future  shall  be.
And  never  before  has  it  been  confronted  with  a  choice  be-
tween  such  drastic  extremes.    Scientific  knowledge  and  the
ability  to  apply  that  knowledge in  practical  ways  have  been
increasing  at  an  ever-faster  rate—particularly  over  the  past
half  century.   It  is  difficult  for  the  mind  to  grasp  the  enor-
mous  development that  has  taken  place before  our  eyes.  And
the  prospect  for  future  development  defies  the  imagination.
A  Livable World  or  Suicide
The  critical  question  is  will  humanity  use  this  expanding
knowledge,  and the  ability  to  apply  it,  as a  tool  or a  weapon?
Will  these  things  result  in  a  better,  more  livable world,  or  in
the  suicide  of  civilization?  I  am  convinced that  the  answer
to  this  question  is  being formulated  by  those  of  us  who  live
today—and that no individual can escape  a  personal   responsi-
bility  for  his contribution to that  answer.
As  some of  you  may  know, I  have been  deeply interested  in
this  question  for  some years.   I  have  devoted  a  great  deal of
time  and  study  to  it—as  part  of which  I  have  made a  trip  to
Europe  each  year  since  the  end  of  the  war.   I  have  written
and  spoken about it  extensively.   Frankly,  during part  of this
time  I  have  been  discouraged.   At  times,  the  movement  of
world  affairs  seemed to be in the  wrong  direction—on  the  way
to  world  disaster.  I  am happy that  I  can say  tonight  that  I
believe  a  change has  taken  place.  In  my opinion, the  outlook
is  now more  hopeful  and  promising  than  it  has  been.   And
the reasons for  this  view stem from  the  economic and  political
situations  that  I  think  are  developing in the  world today.
Now,  in  referring  to  the  economic  situation,  I  am  speaking
about the long term  rather than  the short term.  I  do not mean
to imply that the  short  term is unimportant.   As businessmen,
the  short  term  is  something  that  you  and  I  must  always  be
concerned  about.   In  fact,  it  is  a  universal   concern—as  is
demonstrated, for  instance  by the  amount  of newspaper  space
devoted  to  various  aspects  of  it  during  the  past  year.   It  is
rather  generally  agreed  that  1954  has  been  a  year  of  reces-
sion.  Actually,  by peacetime  standards, it  has  been one of  the
better years.  In  its transition  from  conditions created  by the
Korean   War,   it   probably  represents  the   most   remarkable
adjustment  to a peace economy that our country  has ever  seen.
Nevertheless,   production   has   been   down   from   previous
levels  and  there  is  some  unemployment.   And  even  if  unem-
ployment  should  be  as  low  as  1%,  it  is  little  consolation  to
the  fellow  who  is  out  of  a  job  to  know  that  99  others  are
working.  It  is also  not particularly  consoling  to  the  business-
man  whose  industry  is  down at  the  moment for  some  reason
to  know that  other  parts  of the  economy are  thriving.  In  the
steel  industry we did  not  particularly  relish  operations  below
60%.  Nevertheless,  ups  and  downs have  been  constant  in  the
affairs  of  men  since the  dawn  of  history  and  no  perfect  insu-
lation  against  their  effects  has  yet  been  devised.   At  present
we  are  again  on  the  upgrade  and  I  believe  that  in  1955  we
can  look forward  to  a  year  somewhat  better  than  1954.
The  Real  Worry
In  terms  of  its  effect  on the  world  problem,  however,  it  is
the  long-term  economic  situation  that  is  important.   In  this
connection,  let  me  say  that  our  real  worry  will  not  be  tem-
porary  periods  of  recession   and  unemployment—although  of
course  everything   possible  must  be  done  to  minimize  their
effects.   The real  worry  will be to find the  ways  and  means  to
provide  for   constantly   growing   needs  and   demands  of   the
world's  peoples.
Let  me illustrate by reference  to my own industry.  Present
steelmaking   capacity   is  about  125  million   tons  per   year.
United  States population  is about  160 million.   It  is estimated
Editor's Note
Because  of  its  humanity  and its  hopefulness,  because
of  the  light  it  throws  on  the  better  currents  molding
Eisenhower  Administration  policy,  an'd because  we  be-
lieve  it  deserves as  wide an audience as  possible  for  the
New  Year,  we  are  reprinting  here  the  speech,  "Which
Future:  War or  Peace?"  made  a  few  weeks  ago  before
the  Cleveland, Ohio,  Engineering  Society  by  Ernest  T.
Weir,  chairman  of  National  Steel  Corporation, a  fre-
quent  visitor  to  the  White  House  and  a  close   business
associate   of   Secretary   of   the   Treasury   George   M.
Humphrey.  In  July,  1953, the   Weekly   was  the  first  na-
tional  publication  to  reprint  one  of  the  pamphlets Mr.
Weir  had  begun  to  issue  in  his  one-man  campaign for
peaceful  co-existence.   This  speech  is  his  latest  report
after  his  most recent trip abroad. We are  mailing each of
our subscribers an extra copy so  that  they may pass  it  on
to friends.
by  the  year  2000—only  45 years  away—United  States  popu-
lation  will  be 300 million.  To provide  for  the  same  per  capita
consumption  of  steel  as  in  1953,  the  steel  industry,   by  the
year   2000,  will  need  at   the  least—an  additional  85  million
tons  of  steelmaking  capacity.   This  means  that  between  now
and  then—on  this  basis—the  steel  industry  will  have  to  add
an  average  of  almost  two  million  tons  of  ingot  capacity  per
year.  This  would be the  equivalent  to creating—from  iron  ore
and  coal  mines  right  on through  all  the  finishing  processes—
an  entirely  new  steel  company  every  four  years  bigger  than
National  Steel,  the country's  fifth  largest.
Steel  Consumption Will Increase
This  is  on the  basis  of  a  stationary  per  capita consumption
of  steel.  It  has never remained stationary.  There  is no  reason
to  think  it  ever  will.   In  1900  consumption  was  300 pounds
per  person  per  year.   In  1920  it  was  less  than  900 pounds.
In  1940  about  1000  pounds.   In  1950  less  than  1300  pounds.
In   1953  about  1400  pounds.   This  gives  you  an  idea  of  the
progression.   No  one knows  what  increase  will  take  place  in
per  capita  consumption.  If  I  knew,  it  probably  would  scare
me.  But  it  is  plain  that  the  real  job the  steel  industry   faces
over  the  next  45 years  is  adding  the  equivalent  of  a  bigger
steel company than  National  Steel on an  average  of  something
less  than  every four  years.
To  put  it  another  way, the  expansion  that  will be  required
of  the  steel  industry  over  the  next  45  years  will  be  the  ap-
proximate  equal  of  building  from  the  ground  up  all  of   the
present  facilities  of  the  industry's  six  largest   companies—
United  States  Steel,  Bethlehem,  Republic,  Jones  & Laughlin,
National  Steel   and  Youngstown  Sheet   and  Tube.   Bear  in
mind  that  these  are companies  which  together  operate a  great
many   plants  at   different   locations.   As   engineers   you   can
readily  appreciate  what  such  expansion  will  mean  in  capital
expenditure  and  employment  on  construction  and  subsequent
employment  in  production.
World  Living  Standards  Rising
Steel  is  basic.   What  applies  to  steel  will  apply  to  other
lines  of  production.  The  entire  economy  faces  the  need  for  a
very  great  expansion  just  to  maintain  present  standards of
living.   Naturally,  these  standards  will  not  stand  still.   They
will  continue  to  improve  and  possibly  at  an  even  faster  rate
than  in  the  past.  In  the  United  States  this  progress  is  the
norm.   It  is  expected.   But  that  has  not  been  true  in  other
parts  of  the  world.   Peoples  of  other  countries  have  wanted
more,  have  wanted  to  live  better—but,  as  a  rule,  have  con-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10,195S
The Victor  in A New  War  Would  Preside  Over A  Heap  of Cinders . . .
sidered  improving  standards  as  beyond  practical  reach  and
have been more or  less  resigned  to their  fate.
Now  there  is  a  definite  change  in  attitude  and  it  holds
utmost significance for  the  long-term  economic situation  of  the
world  as a  whole.  I  recently  returned  from  a visit to  Europe.
While  I  was in  Paris, there was an  automobile  show.  It  was
held  in  a  very  large  exhibition  hall  near   the  Place  de  la
Concorde.  There was  an  admission  charge,  yet that  hall  was
crowded—jammed  with  people  from  morning  to  night.   The
show  lasted  10 days  and  more  than  one  million persons  paid
the  price  of  admission to  see those  automobiles.   I  went  twice
but  turned  away  each  time  when  I  saw  the  crowds  at  the
doors.  A friend advised me to wait for  a  special  day when  the
admission   charge  was  doubled.   He  thought  this  would  cut
down  the  attendance.   I  took  his  advice  but  found  that  the
crowd  was every bit  as large.
They  Want  to  Own  Automobiles
The  important  thing is that it  was not  mere  curiosity  that
brought  out  that  throng  of  people.  They  came  because  they
want  to  own automobiles  and  now think  they  see better  pros-
pects  of  doing  so.  And that  is  something  new  in  Europe.   In
the  same  vein, there  is  another  new  development.   You  know
that  in  Europe  there  has  never  been  extensive   installment
buying as  in the  United  States.  Now the  Renault  Company is
making an approach  to it in France.  Here  is the way it  works.
A  Frenchman  goes  to  a  Renault  show room, picks out his  car,
and  signs  papers  in  which  he  agrees  to  pay  one-third  of  the
sales  price  over  a  period  of  nine  months.   At  the  end  of that
period  he  is  allowed to  take  delivery  of  the  car  and  then  has
27 months  in  which to  pay  off the  balance.
These  things,  and  others,  indicate  that  the  mass  domestic
market   is  really  beginning  to  develop  in  Western    Europe.
It  is  coming  in  response  to  an  active  and  insistent  public
demand  for  better  living.   We  know from  our  American  ex-
perience  what  this  will  mean.   It  will  have  profound  effects
on the  European  economy and,  in my opinion, the  results  will
be  good  for   Europe—and  the  world.   There   are   no  really
remote  areas  anywhere.   People  everywhere  today  know that
there  are  better  ways  of  life  than  the  ones  they  have.   They
want  to  improve  themselves  and  are   determined  to  do  it.
Rather  than  something  to  be  feared,  this  determination  can
be  a  tremendous  constructive  force  .  .  . leading  to economic
activity,  trade  and  general  prosperity  on the  world  level  far
beyond  anything  known in the past.
There  is  a  distinct  improvement between  Western  Europe
as it  is  today and as it  was on my  last visit a year  ago.  Now
there  is  a  hustle  and bustle  everywhere.  There  is  practically
no  unemployment  in  France.  There is  also considerable build-
ing.  There are  many  other  signs  of  stepped  up  activity.  In
England,  the  difference  is  even  more impressive.  I  made my
first  trip  to  London  48  years  ago  and have  been  there  many
times  since.  I  can  say  truly  that  never  has  that  great  city
looked better than it  does today.  There is a scarcity of labor in
England.   The  steel  industry  is  operating  100% and  falling
steadily  behind on deliveries.  This  year  300,000  housing  units
are  being  built  and on a comparative basis  that equals present
construction  in  the  United  States.   New  production records
also  are  being  established  in  autos,  textiles,  feed,  .clothing
and  other lines.
Evidence  of  a  New Prosperity
There  is every outward  evidence of a  new prosperity  and  it
is not  confined  to England  and France but  is general in  West-
ern  Europe.  And it  is  all  the  more  remarkable  because this
has  occurred  while  there  was  a  down  trend  in  the  United
States.  Many  people  believed  that  any  recession  here  would
cause  a  full-blown  depression  overseas.   You  know  the  old
saying  that  when the  United  States  gets  a  cold,  Europe  gets
pneumonia.  It has not happened  . . . quite the reverse.
Along  with  this  economic activity  there  is  something  else
of  probably  greater  importance.   That  is  the  change  in  the
spirit  and attitude of the  people.  On earlier  visits  Europeans
were  plainly  a  beaten  people.   They  were  still  dazed  and  de-
vitalized  by their  war  experiences.   They  did not  know where
to begin  the  attack  on their immediate  problems  • • . and  as  to
the  future,  they  seemed  to  despair  of  ever  being  able  to  find
a  sound footing again.  Now it  is apparent to any visitor—and
many  recent  visitors  have  commented on this—that  Western
Europe  has  turned  a  corner.   There  is  hope  and  confidence.
You  are  impressed  by  a  general   feeling  among  the  people
that  they  are  on the  way  up.   There  is  a  sense  of  direction,
a  belief that at last firm  foundations  are  being built  for  sound
home  economies  and  that  the  nations  of  Europe  are  moving
again to their former  positions of importance in world  affairs.
Changes  in  Western   Europe
Now  does  this  imply that  Western  Europe  has  come to  the
place  where  it  can stand  on its  own feet  . . . that  it  will be
less  dependent on the United  States for financial aid . . . and
also that it  will be more independent  in  world political  action?
I  believe that  all of these  things  are  definitely  true.  In my
opinion,  the  time  is  now  at  hand  when  we  can  and  should
substantially  reduce  our   aid  to  the   countries   of  Western
Europe  and  look  toward  its  complete  elimination.    And  this
will  be  good  for  both  Europe  and  the  United  States.
On  the  political  side,  Western  Europe  now asserts  and  will
continue to assert the right to a much  stronger  voice in inter-
national affairs.   Since  the  war,  the relationship of the  United
States  to  Europe  has  been,  in  the  main,  that  of  leader   to
follower.   Europe  will  now  insist  not  only  on  a  more  equal
status  but  also  on  recognition  of  the  right  to  a   European
viewpoint  that  may  differ  from  the  United  States  viewpoint.
And, in my opinion, this  also will be good both for  Europe  and
the  United  States.  In fact,  it  is the  development  of this  situ-
ation  that  caused  me to  say  at  the  outset that  the  world  out-
look  is  now so much more hopeful and  promising.
Two  Real  Centers  of  Power
Since  the  war,  the  two  real  centers  of  power  in  the  world
have  been  the  United  States  and  Russia.   And  these  two
centers  have  conducted   themselves   as   armed  camps,  each
viewing the  other  with suspicion  and hostility.  I hold  no brief
for  Russia.   But  I  believe  we  must  admit  that  nntil  recently
the  policy of  the  United States—and the  great  bulk  of opinion
expressed   by  certain  military  men,  by  certain  members  of
Congress,  and  in  a  number  of  news  organs—created  the  im-
pression  of  a  nation  convinced that  world problems could  not
be  solved  short  of  forcible means.
There has been little belief  in Europe that either  the  United
States  or  Russia  wanted  war.   But  for  a  time  there  was  a
definite  and  widespread  fear  that  the  attitudes  of  these  two
countries  could  easily  precipitate a war.   Europe  not  only dis-
believes  that  war  between the  Communist  and  free  worlds  is
an  inevitable  necessity  .  .  .  Europe  definitely   believes  that
the  way  can  be found  for  the  two  worlds  to  occupy the  same
planet  in  peace.
In contrast with the United  States, you hear very little talk
about war  in  Europe.  In  fact,  if  you want  to  discuss  the  sub-
ject  you have  to  bring  it  up  yourself.   In  Europe,  they  are
convinced  that  the  danger  of  war  has  become  more  remote.
It  is  obvious  also  that  they  are  determined   to  have   peace.
Their  whole emphasis  is  on  rebuilding,  on  economic  develop-
ment,  on  better  conditions  of  life  and  on  a  state  of  world
affairs  which will  make  all  these things possible.
Western  Europe—A  Third  Force
Western  Europe  is  now  developing—we  can  even  say  has
now  developed—as  a  third  force  in  the  world  with  these  ob-
jectives  as its  basic policy.  While it  was in a  weakened condi-
tion, it  could do little about that policy.  With  its  newly-gained
greater  strength,  confidence and  firmness  of  purpose,  it  can
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10,1955
... Fresh Approach Needed: A Hostile Co-Existence Would Only Lead to War
.  . . and I  predict  it  will.  In  fact,  I  believe  it  is  because of
the  new atmosphere  in  Europe that we have  seen the  peaceful
solution   of  some  very  thorny  problems.   Examples  are   the
Trieste,  the  Suez  Canal,  and  the  Iranian  oil  disputes—any
one  of which  could  have  sparked  very  serious  trouble.
It  is because  of this  new atmosphere  that  the  London Con-
ference  succeeded after  hope for  the  unity  of Western  Europe
seemed  entirely  gone with  rejection  by France  of  the  Defense
Community  proposal.  It  is  notable  that,  although  the  United
States  was  a  participant,  the  London  Agreement  was  domi-
nantly  of  and  by  Europeans.  The  diplomatic  leadership  came
from  England  and  the  real  foundation  of  the  agreement  is
French   confidence  that,  under  this  Plan,  German   military
strength  will  be controlled  .  . .  plus,  of  course,  French  self-
confidence  arising from the  fact  that, under  the  leadership  of
Hendes-France,  there  appears  to  be  a  firm  government  in
France  for  the first  time  since the  war.
It  is  notable  also  that  despite  Russia's  open  opposition  to
the  London  Agreement,  the  countries  of  Europe  are  calmly
proceeding  with  preparations  for  its  ratification.  To me this
is  a  most  effective   refutation   of  the  statement  frequently
made  in  the  United  States  that  the  sum  and  substance  of
European  policy  is  appeasement  of  Russia.
Make no mistake about it.  There is  nothing  of  appeasement
in  Europe's  position.  The people there  are every bit  as firmly
dedicated  to  the  principles  of  individual  freedom  .  .  . and
every  bit  as  strongly determined to  preserve  the  free  way  of
life ...  as  the  loudest  and  most  frantic  champions  of  the
"get  tough"  policy in  the  United  States.  It  is  just  that  they
think  there is  a  better  way  to  do it  than  to  blew  Russia and
China off the map ... and ourselves in the process.
The  People  Demand  Peace
The  objective  of  the  countries  of. Western  Europe—every
country—is  peace,  not war.  It  is the  objective  because that is
what  the great  mass  of people in  every  country  demand . . .
and,  in  my  opinion, are  determined  to  have.   Europe  believes
peace  is  possible  and  it  is  convinced that  the  people  of Com-
munist  countries  are  just  as  strongly  opposed to  war  as  the
people  in  the  Western  World.  And  because of that,  Western
Europe  believes  that  a  way  can  be  worked  out  to  live  with
Russia  and  China  on  a  basis  of  peace.   Now there,  of  course,
is  where  the  rub  comes  in.   This  is  where  Europe  differs  so
sharply  from  those  who  argue  for  a  "tough"  policy  in  the
United  States.  But  this  is  what  Europe  believes  and  this  is
the line that Europe is going to follow.
I  place this  emphasis  on Western  European  policy  for  two
reasons.  First, in and of itself,  it  is something that the  United
States  must take  into  account.  Second, it  raises  the  question
of  whether  a  similar  policy is  not  also  the  right  one for  the
United  States.  For  my part,  I  definitely believe  it  is.  Let  us
take a  look at  some of the  reasons  for  this  belief.
No  Nation  Dares  to  Have War
The first reason  . . . the reason  of fundamental  importance
is that today no nation  dares  to have a war.   President  Elsen-
hower  indicated  what  the  consequences  would  be  in  his  pro-
posal  for  peaceful  development of  atomic  power  and  on other
occasions.   People   who  have   inside   knowledge  of  the   new
weapons  have  spoken  plainly   about  their  terrible  potential
for  destruction.
An  example  is  Thomas  E.  Murray,  member  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission, who  by  virtue  of  his  position  is  thor-
oughly  familiar  with  all the facts.  He recently  said this:
"I  consider it  ...   the sober  truth to say that  atomic  energy
has  resulted   in  the  greatest  change  in  man's  relations  with
nature  since the fateful  day in the Garden  of Eden  . . .  Man
has  within  his  grasp  an  unlimited  force,  the  very  source  of
all  energy  in nature,  atomic  e,nergy . . . The difficulty  is that
this  force is a potential  equally  for death  as for life . . .  The
misuse  of  atomic energy  means death on a  scale  that  staggers
the  imagination."
Now  this  is  known  fully in  every  nation ... by leaders and
people.  Russia, for instance,  has  gone  to quite  some length  to
educate  its   people  to  the  meaning  of  the  H-Bomb  and  has
emphasized  that  no  nation  can  escape destruction.   And  that,
of  course, is  a fact that  is  generally accepted.  After  a nuclear
war,  the  so-called  victor  would  find  himself  presiding  over  a
world  that  had been  reduced  to  a  heap  of  cinders.
Nevertheless,  so long  as  the  world's  most  powerful  nations
deal  with  each  other  on  a  continuing  basis  of  distrust  and
hostility,  there  is  always  the  danger  that  there  will  be  an
incident  or  a  small  war  that  will  grow  into  the  Big  War.
I firmly  believe that  if  the  Big War  comes,  at  some point  one
side  or the  other  will  drop the  Bomb.  Then  the  fat  will  be in
the fire.
Live  Together  or  Die  Together
As  Bertrand   Russell  put  it  recently,  the  only  real  choice
that the  people of the world  have today  is that  choice:  To live
together  or  to  die together.  The fact  is  that  war  has moved
to  such  extreme  levels  of  destructive  power  that  it  has  lost
whatever  excuse it  ever had  as  an instrument  of international
policy.   Every  nation  knows  this.   I  believe  it  would  have  a
most  salutory  effect  if  the  principal  nations  acknowledged  it.
After   the  terms  of  the  London  Agreement   are  put   into
effect,  as  I  am  convinced they  will  be ...    and  after   Russia
accepts  this as an accomplished fact,  as I  believe she will  . .!
I  would  like  to  see the  United  States,  England,  France  and
Russia  meet  together  and  subscribe  to  a  declaration  formally
pledging  the  renunciation  of  war  as  an  instrument  of  policy.
These  are  the  nations  which  have  the  technical  knowledge,
means  and  skill  to  produce and  use  atomic  weapons.   Each  of
them  knows that  against  these  weapons  there  is  no  defense
. . . that the result of their use will be near-annihilation,  near
total  destruction,  for  all  involved.   They  know not  only that
what  we now call  conventional war  is outmoded, but  that  war,
itself,  is  now  removed  beyond  the  bounds  of  sanity.   They
know that  they  have only one recourse  and that  is—whatever
their  differences,  they  must  settle  them  by  the  methods  of
peace.  This being true, why should they  not openly admit  it—
and  openly renounce  war.   I  believe that  such  a   declaration
by  these  four  nations  now  in  control  of  atomic  energy  would
have  constructive  results  that  would  be  tremendous  in  scope
throughout the  world.
"Can't  Trust  Russia"  Argument
In  our  country,  when  you talk  about  any  agreement  with
Russia—or  about  any  attempt  to  establish  a  living  relation-
ship  between  the  Communist World and the  Free  World—you
get  the  familiar  objection:  "How  can  we  place  confidence  in
Russia's  word  on  anything?"
Remember  what  our  ultimate  choice  is—to  live  together  or
to  die  together.  Those who follow  the  "You  can't trust  Russia"
line  are  casting  their  vote  for  dying  together.   Their  argu-
ments  all  boil  down  to  continuance of  hostility  and  suspicion
... of  the  warlike  posture  that  surely  will  lead  eventually  to
actual war.
Now,  we must  realize  that  to  a  large degree  the  basis  for
this  position is the thought  that Communism can be eliminated
from  the  world.  The fact  is that war—the rejection  of  peace-
ful  coexistence  as  the  only other  alternative—would  not  elim-
inate   Communism.   Communism is  an  idea.   In  all  history,
ideas  have  never  been  changed  or  driven  from  the  minds  of
men  by  force.   Force  has  simply  served  to  strengthen  and
spread  ideas.
Maintain  Adequate  Military  Defenses
The  other  position  . . . the one  I  advocate ... is  simply
this:   Let   us  keep  in  mind   the   difficulty   of   dealing   with
Russia;  let  us  not  forget  our  past  experiences,  let  us  main-
tain  thoroughly  adequate  military  defenses  . . .  tut,  at the
1  3 *
1   9  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10, 1955
Weir  Says  America  Need  Not  Fear  Peaceful  Competition
same  time,  let  us  make  it  plain  to  Russia  and the  world  that
our  objective  is  peace  .  .  .  that  we want  to  conduct  inter-
national  dealings  and  relationships  by  the  methods  of  peace.
There  must  be  no  war.   We  know  it  can  solve  no  problem.
Consequently,  the  objective must  be  peace.
Russia's  attitude  lately  has  been  more  conciliatory.   She
has  been  talking  a  great  deal  about  "peaceful    coexistence"
not  only for  world  consumption but  also  for  the  benefit  of  the
Russian  people.   Now,  there  is  no  doubt  that  "peaceful  co-
existence"  means  something  that  is  different  to  Russia  than
it  is  to  us  and  other  Western  nations.
While  in  England  I  had  a  long  talk  on  this  subject   with
Christopher   Mayhew,  who  is  a  member  of  Parliament  and
formerly  was  Under  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs.
Under  the  English  system,  as  you know, a  man must  be thor-
oughly  qualified  by  previous training  and  experience  to  hold
such  a  position  in  government.   Mayhew  is  recognized  as  a
particularly  keen  student  of  world  affairs.   He  had   recently
returned  from  a  trip  to  Russia  in  which  one of  his  principal
purposes  was  to  get  some  understanding   of  just  what  the
Russians  mean  by  "coexistence."  He had  talked  with  a  great
many people from  the rank  and file and also  such Russian  lead-
ers  as  Malenkov,  Molotov and  Gromyko.
He came to  these  conclusions.  The  Russians  are  devoted  to
the  ideas  of  Communism.   They  believe  that  Capitalism  is
bound  to  fail,  that  inevitably it  will  be  replaced by  Commu-
nism  throughout the  world,  and  that  it  should  be.  In  view  of
this,  they  believe  they  have  the  right  and  the  obligation  to
help  speed  the  day  by  giving  encouragement  and  support  to
Communism  everywhere.  They  see  nothing  wrong  with  this
and  are  surprised that  we  do.  They  think  it  is  entirely com-
patible  with  ' peaceful  coexistence."   Nevertheless,  and this  is
highly  important,  Mayhew  is  convinced  that  they  have come
to  the  definite  conclusion  that  forcible  means  up  to  and  in-
cluding  war   are   an  instrument  of   no  value  in  promoting
Communism.  And, in this context,  they  are completely sincere
in  their talk  about  'peaceful  coexistence."
It  Might  Become  Permanent
Mayhew  pointed  out  that  the  Western  nations  should  wel-
come this new Russian approach  because  if  it  is  put  into  effect
and  continues for  a  time  it  stands  a  good  chance  of becoming
permanent.
In  other  words,  it  is his  idea—and  it  is  the  idea  in  Europe
generally—that  we  should  seize  the  opportunity  to   convert
the  present  basis  of  cold  war  with  its  ever-present  danger  of
hot  war—a  Hydrogen  Bomb  war—to  the  basis  of  peaceful
competition  between  different   ideologies  and  systems  of  gov-
ernment.  And  it  is  also  the  idea  that  as  part  of this  compe-
tition, we should promote to the  greatest  extent  possible  inter-
relations  between  the  Communist World  and  the  Free  World
—including  trade  relations   as   one  of  the   most  important
elements.
Two  Forces  of  Enormous  Power
In  my mind, at  least, there  is  not the  slightest  doubt  as  to
the  outcome of  such  a  competition.   I  am  so thoroughly  con-
vinced  of the  Tightness of  our  basic principles  and  ideals that
I  believe they  will prevail—not  in  a few years  or few  decades,
perhaps,  but  certainly   over  the  long  pull.   With  a  basis   of
competition  from  which  the  threat  of  war  is  removed,  two
forces  of enormous power work  on the  side of enduring  peace.
They   are  the  passage  of  time  and  the  operation  of  the  uni-
versal  human  longing for  peace, security  and  better  conditions
of   life.   Certainly, these  forces  can  work  to  better  effect  under
a  condition  approaching  normal  international  relations  than
under  the  present  condition in  which the  Communist  World—
with  one-third  of  the  world's  people—is  hermetically   sealed
against  the  influence  of  Western  thought  and  ideals  and  its
way  of  life.
Develop   a   more   open   situation;   let   peace   continue   for
awhile  and  it  will  be  most   difficult  for   the  leaders   of  any
nation  to  take  their  people  into  a  war.   Mayhew was  deeply
impressed  with  the  fact  that  in  Russia  the  openly  expressed
fear  of  war  and  the  yearning  for  peace  among  people  of  all
kinds  were   even  more  pronounced  than  in  the   West.    The
same  thing  impressed  another  acquaintance  of  mine,  William
R.  Matthews,  publisher  of  the  Arizona  Daily  Star,  who  last
year  visited  countries  behind  the  Iron  Curtain  for  the  third
time.   He  said  that  "peace" was  the  word that  he heard  most
often   wherever   he  went.   He  believed  that   the   people  of
Poland,  Czechoslovakia  and  Russia,  itself,  could  be  induced
to  fight  only in  the  event  of  actual  invasion.
Frequently,  we  hear  it  said  that  the  people  in Communist
countries  have  no  influence;  that  they  do  as  they  are  told.
Yet  we know  that keeping the  people sold on governments and
their  policies  is  a  major job of  Communist leaders  and one  at
which  they  work  around  the clock.  These  leaders never forget
that  they  came  to   power  as  the  result  of  revolution.   They
know  that  if  they  go  against  widespread  and  deeply-held  de-
sires  of  the  people,  they  can  also  be  thrown  out  of  power  by
revolution.   There  is  little  question  that  peace  is  the  No.  1
desire  of  people  in  Communist  countries  as  it  is  in  the  rest
of  the  world. And that  is  the  best  basis  for the  reasonable hope
that  a  divided  world  can  live  together—coexist,  if  you  will—
without war.
World's  Most  Important  Subject
Gentlemen,   I  fully  realize  that  this  subject  of  war  and
peace  is  not  the  most  cheerful  one.  But  it  is  by  far  the  most
important  one  before  the  world  today.   In  fact,  unless  it  is
resolved  in  the  right  way,  no  other   subject   can  have   any
genuine  and  permanent  importance  whatever.   It  will  do  us
no  good  to  pretend  that  this  problem  is  not  in  existence.  Or
to  lull  ourselves  with  the  belief  that  if  we sit  still  and  ignore
it,  it  will  somehow dry  up  and  blow away.  This  problem  will
not  solve  itself.   We  must  solve  it.   By  "we"  I  do  not  mean
just  the  President,  or the  State Department, or the  Congress.
I  mean  you  and  the  State  Department,  or  the  Congress.   I
mean  you and  I  and  the  other  fellow working  for  a  firm  and
clear  national  policy with  the  objective  of  world  peace.
There  can  be  no  such  national   policy  without   widespread
public recognition  of its  need  and  strong public  support.  Rec-
ognition  and  support   will  not  develop  spontaneously.    They
must  be generated  by  individuals—in  Cleveland  and  through-
out  the  country—who  have  the  vision  to  see this  problem  in
its  full  meaning  and  the  public  spirit  to  do  something  about
it.   Such  individuals  as  the  men  here  tonight.   And  there  is
not  one of  you who cannot  do something  about  it  ...     some-
thing   effective.   At  minimum,  you  can  let  your  representa-
tives  in  government  know where  you stand.  You can  initiate
the  discussion,  the  thrashing  out,  the  coming  to  conclusions
on this  subject  at  everything from  small  home groups  to large
gatherings.  In  short—in  the  broad  meaning  of the  term—you
can  take  political  action.
Do Something  About  It!
On  many   occasions   in  speaking   to  businessmen,   I  have
stressed  the  importance  of their  taking  a  personal  and  active
interest  in  politics—in  the  affairs  of  both  political  parties—
because  basically  it  is political  activity,  starting  at  the  grass
roots,  which  determines  the  conditions  under  which  we  must
live  in  locality,  state  and  nation—and  ultimately   determines
world  conditions  in  which  we  must  live—or  die.   Very  often
in  such  talks  to  businessmen,  I  feel  that  it  makes  no  im-
pression  at  all . . . that  it  is water  rolling  off a  duck's  back.
I  certainly  urge  you  strongly  that  this  matter  of  a  national
policy for world peace is vital.. . literally a matter  of life and
death  for  all  of us  ...    and  that  each  of you will  leave  this
room  tonight  with  the  firm  resolve  that  you  personally  are
going  to  do  something  about  it.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10, 1955
How  Combine Socialism with  Freedom of  Discussion?
The  Meaning  of  the  Djilas-Dedijer  Affair  in  Yugoslavia
After  Tito  broke  away  from  the  Cominform,  Belgrade  be-
came a  Mecca  for  Leftists  of various kinds looking for  a  half-
way  house  between  capitalism  and  communism.  The  Yugo-
slavs  tried  very  deliberately,  though  vaguely,  to  make  their
country  a  center  for  some kind  of  a  new  international   move-
ment,  in  which  socialism  and  democracy  might  be combined.
This  movement never  got  very  far  because foreign  observers,
however  friendly   and  however  ready  for  wishful  thinking,
soon  saw  that  there  was  little  reality  to  all  this  talk.   The
quarrel   between  Belgrade  and   Moscow  was  too  obviously  a
family  quarrel—and  this  is  how  I  described  it  in  the  New
York  Daily  Compass  after  my  own visit  there  in  the  Pall  of
1950—between  two  groups  of  Communists, responding  to  the
diverse  national  needs  of  their  own  countries.
I  felt  that  this  was  another  of  the  frequent   quarrels  be-
tween  Russians  and  Serbs,  and  would yet  end  in  their  recon-
ciliation, though  Tito  having tasted  independence would  never
sink  back into  Cominform  subservience.   But  I  saw little  evi-
dence  of  fresh  thinking on  the  problem of  how  and  when  one
begins  to  move  back  toward  freedom  from  a  Communist dic-
tatorship.    I  talked  with  Tito  and  Pijade  and  many  other
leaders.    What   impressed  me  most  was,  that   despite  their
criticism   of  the  "rigidity"'  and   the   "bureaucracy"   of   the
Russian  dictatorship,   they  would  never   get   down  to  brass
tacks  on  the  subject.   The  whole subject  was  left  vague,  and
the  vagueness  I  felt  was  significant.  To  grapple   concretely
with  the  problem of what  had  happened in  Russia  would have
required  them to make real  changes  in  Yugoslavia.  This  they
were  unwilling to  do.  The  reluctance  was  striking  when  one
came  to  discuss  such  a  subject  as  the  secret  police  and  its
power.    When   I   suggested   that   perhaps   the   adoption  of
habeas   corpus   would  be  one  way  to   put   a  curb  on  police
abuses,  I  could  never  get  a  response,  especially  in  talking
to a top Yugoslav jurist, a real  phoney  and  smoothie, the  kind
who  manages  to  get  good jobs  under  any  regime.
"First  A Human  Being"
I  did  not  speak  with  either  Dedijer  or  Djilas  at  the  time.
I  find  their  present  difficulties  with  the  regime  intensely  in-
teresting.   The  former,   in  his   interview   with   the  London
Times  (Dec. 22),  said  two things  which must  strike  home to
everyone  who  believes  both  in  socialism  and  in  democracy.
The  first  was  in  defending  his  fallen  friend,  Djilas,  and  ex-
plaining  why  he  would not  join  in  the  boycott  of  that  Titoist
"deviator."   Dedijer  said,  "In  my  view  a  Communist  should
be  first  of  all  a  human  being,  and  every  political  movement
which  puts  aside ethics  and  morals  carries  within it  the  seeds
of   its  own  destruction."   This  may  yet  be  the  epitaph  of  the
Communist   movement  as   we  have   seen   it   under   Russian
auspices.   The  second  was,  "there  can  be  no  development  of
socialism  without  struggle  of  opinions."   There  never  will  be
a  system  of  society  which  can  stay  healthy  without  allowing
free  criticism,  including  criticism  which  may  seem  to  be and
criticism   which  really  is  directed   at   its   very   foundations.
Healthy  human  societies  cannot  be grown  in  hothouses.
Amid  much  devotion in the  giant tasks  on which  the  Yugo-
slavs  were  engaged  under  Tito,  there  was  also  considerable
evidence  of  other  natural  tendencies.   The  revolutionary  who
now  took  villas  and  servants  for  granted  as  his  right,  and
began  to  live  and  act  as  a  member of  a  new upper  class,  was
often  encountered.  The lickspittle,  the  yes-man,  was  already
making  his  way  to  the  upper  circles  of  a  society  still  domi-
nated  by the  original  makers  of the  Yugoslav  revolution.  The
parrots  had  begun  to  cackle,  as  one  can  hear  them   cackling
in  the  resolutions  of  the  Yugoslav  and  Croatian  journalists'
associations  "unanimously"  denouncing  Dedijer  as  a  traitor.
Dangerous Radical
Djilas  now  believes  that  Yugoslavia   needs  a  two  party
system   if  free   discussion   is  to  be  restored.   (How   radical
some  old  ideas  suddenly seem  as  the  wheel  of  history turns!)
He  criticizes  Trotzky  and  his  followers,  "Their  mistake  was
that  they wanted  to be better  Leninists  than  Stalin."  He does
not  want  to  substitute  one  "party  apparatus"  for   another.
He  thinks  the  evil  lies  in  the  one-party   system.   He  thinks
the  name  of  communism has  been  compromised  and  become
"a  synonym for  totalitarianism  in  this  country  as  well  as  in
Russia."   He  added,  "What  is  the  use  of  an  ideal  name?   I
handed  in  my  Communist party  card  for  moral  and  political
reasons.   Why remain  in  the  party  when  I  cannot  say  any-
thing?   Why  pretend?"    These  are  words  which  will  strike
a  chord in every  Communist party in the world,  albeit  silently.
They  are  dangerous  words  because  they  are  free  words,  and
we  wait  to  see  how  the  Yugoslav  regime  will  treat  Dedijer
for  uttering  them  and  Djilas  for  supporting  him.
There  is  a  witness  Djilas  may  summon in  his  own defense,
one  of  the  great  names  of  revolutionary  socialism  and  one of
its  martyrs,  Rosa  Luxemburg.   Early  in  the  history  of  the
Russian   revolution,  not  long  before  she  was   murdered   in
Germany,  Luxemburg  wrote  in  friendly  criticism,   "Freedom
for  supporters  of the  government  only, for  the  members of one
party  only—no  matter  how  big  its  membership  may  be—is
no  freedom  at  all.   Freedom  is  always  freedom  for  the  man
who thinks  differently."
Luxemburg  was  writing  of  the  Bolsheviks,  whose  leaders
were  her  friends.   "The  suppression  of  political  life  through-
out  the  country,"  she wrote,  "must  gradually  cause the  vital-
ity   of  the   Soviets   themselves  to  decline.   Without  general
elections,   freedom   of  the   press,  freedom  of   assembly,   and
freedom  of speech, life  in every public institution  slows  down."
"No  one,"  Luxemburg went  on  (Die  Russische  Revolution,
p.  113 as  quoted  in  Paul  Frolich's  biography  of  her,  London,
1940),  "can   escape  the  workings  of  this  law.    Public   life
gradually   dies,  and  a  few  dozen  party  leaders  with   inex-
haustible  energy  and limitless  idealism  direct  and rule  .  . .
In  the  last  resort,  cliquism  develops  a  dictatorship,  but  not
the   dictatorship   of  the  proletariat:  the  dictatorship  of  a
handful    of   politicians,    i.e.,    a   dictatorship   in   the   bour-
geois  sense,  in  the  Jacobin  sense."
This  is what  the  Yugoslav  party  crisis  is  all  about.
Don't  Be Surprised  When  The  Postman  Rings  Twice  This  Week
So  many  readers  write  in  for  extra  copies  to  give friends  that  this week
as  an  experiment we  are  mailing  every  subscriber  an  extra   copy  of  the
Weekly.   We  think  you'll  want  to  pass  on Mr.  Weir's  hopeful  and  humane
report  for  the  New  Year,  and  that  you'll  want  to  have  others  read  our
discussion   of   the   Circuit   Court  decision   most   of   t'r.e   press,   daily   and
weekly,  ignored.   These  are  samples  of  the  material   '.a  be  found  in  these
pages  week  after  week  which  are  not  available   elsewiiere.   Help  us grow
by  making  yourself  a  committee  of  one  to  pass  this  issue  onto  a  friend
and  get  his  subscription.   As  a  special  inducement,  you  may  offer  a  sub
at  the  gift   rate  of  only  $4  a  year.   If   each  of  you  get  but  one  new
reader  this  way  I  could  double  the  circulation  and  reach  twice  at  many
people.   Won't  you  help  broaden  the  audience for  the  kind  of  message
which  can  help  give  us a  freer  America  and  a   more  peaceful  world  in
the  New   Year?    Pass  your  extra  copy  on  today,   and  get   your  prospect
on  the  dotted  line  of  the  blank  on  the  reverse  side.   If  you  want  extra
copies  for  the  same  purpose,  I'll   supply  them free.   And  please  get  your
own  renewal  in  at  the  same  time.
With  all  best  wishes  for  a  Happy  New  Year,
-I.   F.  STONE
1   9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10, 1955
A  Judge Who  Frankly  Disagrees  with  the First  Amendment
(Continued  from  Page  One)
It  is well  to  remember that  the  same Judge  Prettyman  who
wrote  the  decision  upholding   this  first  registration   order  is
the  same  Judge  Prettyman  who  made  the  law  of  the  land  in
two  similar  areas,  also  without   precedent.    It   was  he  who
wrote  the  2-to-l  opinion  in  Barsky  v.  U.S.  (157  F  2d  241)
in  1948  which  decided  for  the  first  time  that  a  Congressional
investigating  committee  could  inquire into political  beliefs  and
associations  even  though  the  effect   was  to  restrict   the  basic
freedoms   the  First   Amendment   was  supposed  to   safeguard
against  any  abridgement  by  Congress.   This  was  the  decision
which  sent  Dr.  Edward  K.  Barsky  and  the  members  of  the
Joint  Anti-Fascist  Refugee  Committee   to  jail,  and  it  was  on
this  precedent  that  the  Hollywood   Ten  later  followed  them.
The  Supreme  Court  declined  to  review  either  ruling,  and  left
the  law  as  stated   by  Judge  Prettyman.    It   was  also  Judge
Prettyman  who  wrote  the  2-to-l   opinion  in  the  Bailey   case
(182F2d46)inl9JO which  decided  that  national security so
takes  precedence  over  justice  to  the  individual  that  a  minor
government   employe  in  a  non-sensitive   position  may  be  dis-
missed  on  allegations never fully  disclosed  to  her,  or  her judges.
A  4-to-4  split  on  the  Supreme Court  left  that  the  law,  too.*
No  First  Amendment  Nonsense
Judge  Prettyman  is  no  queasy  legalist.   He  does  not   stoop
to  pretense.   "We  make  the  same  assumption  here,"  he  ruled
in  the  Communist  registration  case,  "that  we made in  Barsky
v.  U.S.   We  assume,  without   deciding,  that  this  statute  will
interfere  with  freedoms of  speech  and assembly . . . The prob-
lem  is  whether  the  restrictions  imposed  are  valid  in  this  situ-
ation."  Judge  Prettyman  makes no  strained  effort  to  reconcile
this  "rule  of  reason"  with  the  First  Amendment.    For  him,
"the  right of  free  expression,"  as he puts it  in  this  new  decision,
"ceases at  the point  where it  leads to harm to  the  government."
This  bold  dictum  takes  us  back  to  the  kind  of   thinking
against  which  the  Framers  of  the  Constitution   rebelled.   This
is  the  language of  a  judge who  disagrees fundamentally  with
the First Amendment.  Judge  Prettyman  belongs in the  English
common  law courts  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  when freedom
* The   same  issues  are  now  raised  by  the   Peters  case  which  we  hope  to
discuss  very  soon.
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
NalYlB
StfM*
City
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
7nn»           St»t«
Enter  this  gift  sub for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(To)  Name                                            ,.,..._         .
S«r«w.t
rity
7nn»              Sfat«>
1/10/65
of  speech  and  press was freedom  only from  prior  restraint,  and
exercised  at  the  risk  of  an  action  for  seditious  libel  if  anything
was  said  or  printed  which  some official  might  consider "harm-
ful"  to  the  government.
We  cannot  enter  at   this  time  on  a  full   analysis  of   the
Judge's lengthy  and ill-organized  opinion.  Like so many judges
who  have  provided  the  rationale  for  repression,  he  jumps  in
simple-minded   vigor  from  broad  truisms  about  the  right  of
self-preservation,  national  security,  etc.,  to  specific  cases  in  a
way   which   really  abandons   constitutional   limitations.    Of
course,  a  government  has  a  right  to. preserve  itself.   But  does
that  mean  it  may  jail  a  man  without   a  warrant,  hold  him
without  a  trial,  punish  him  for  views  it  dislikes,  make  him  a
second-class  citizen  because of  ideas  and  associations the  gov-
ernment  regards as dangerous?
The  Dissents,  Too,  Have Weakened
It   is  another  indication  of   the  change  in  the   climate  of
opinion  that  the  sweeping  assertions  of  the  Prettyman   deci-
sion  are  not   challenged  point  by  point,  as  Judge   Edgerton
challenged  them in his historic  dissenting opinions in the  Barsky
and  Bailey  cases.  Judge  Bazelon,  the  only  other  liberal  judge
with  courage  on  our  Circuit  Court  bench  here,  confined  his
dissent  in  this  case to  the  one  issue  of  the  Fifth   amendment.
But  this  is  a  slim  reed  to  lean  upon.   What  happens  if   the
government  orders  a  known  Communist  leader,  already  con-
victed  under  the  Smith  Act,  to  register  under  the  McCarran
Act  and  give  the  names  (as  that  law  requires)  of  all  officers
and  members  of  the  party?   A  person  already  "incriminated"
can  hardly  plead  the  Fifth.
The  issue for  all  who  believe in  a  free  society  is  a  clear  one.
Freedom  will  not  be  preserved   by  defending  marginal  cases
and  mistaken  identities.   If  it  were  legal  to  be  a  Communist,
non-Communists   would  be  in  no  danger  of  being  forced   to
prove  an  obnoxious  negative  proposition.   Once   Communism
is  made illegal,  every  other  non-conformist  faces  the  danger  of
being  called  upon  to  prove  that  he  is not  a  Communist.   The
root  of  the  evil  lies  in  trying  to  establish  a  system  of  partial
liberty,  of  proscribing   one  set  of  ideas.   This  generation   in
America  is going  to  have  to  learn  by  bitter  lesson  that  liberty
is  indivisible.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED