I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957dec16.pdf

============================================================

New  Hope for  Aliens, P.  4
Good  Teachers  in  Short  Supply But  New  York  Goes  on  Blacklisting Them,  See  Pages  2 and  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  48
DECEMBER  16,  1957WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
What  the  Soviet  ICBM  Did  to  NATO
A  great  deal  can  be  learned,  if  the   American,  people   take
care  to  learn  it,  from  the  fiasco  at  Cape  Canaveral.   This  was
more,   much   more,   than   the   mechanical  failure  of   a   new
gadget.   What  exploded  was  the  kind   of  military  windbag
leadership  which  this  country has  had  for  10  years.   The  same
type  of  mind  which  mishandled  press  relations,  mechanical
preparations  and  technological  management at  the  Cape  is  the
same  type  of  mind  which  has  been  running  our  militaristic
diplomacy.   It  has  built  up  an  illusion  of  such  overwhelming
supremacy  that  we   needed   only   to  push   a  button   for   the
beetle-browed  commanders  of   our   SAC   to   zoom  off   under
the   movietone  cameras   and   smash   Russia   to  thermonuclear
smithereens.  The  affair  at  the  Cape  was  a  moment  of  national
humiliation.   The   same  leadership  and  the  same  miscalcula-
tions,  tested  in war,  could  bring  disaster.  It  is time  to  sober  up.
As in 1929—The Resort to Mesmerism
There  is  little  evidence,  however,  of  sobriety.   The   same
leadership   continues.    Essentially   its   faith   is   grounded   on
ballyhoo.   As  in  the  1929  crash,  the  Republicans think  all  will
be  well  if  only  they  can  restore  "confidence"  by  some  magic
move  or  formula.   If  only  Eisenhower  can  get  to  Paris  and
smile  while  the  crowds  hurrah,  all  will  be  remedied.   There
has  been   no  real  thinking  and   no  real   preparations   at   the
upper   levels  of  government.    Even  within  the  framework  of
NATO,  the  problems  are  formidable.   If  the  coalition  is  to
hold  together,  there  must  be  some  political  coordination.  But
how  does  one  coordinate  French   fears  and  Arab  aspirations
in  Algeria?    How  does  one  reconcile  Greek  nationalist  feel-
ing,  British  strategic  needs  and  Turkish  anxiety  on  Cyprus?
The  fading  glamor  of  an  ailing  President  who  never  had  any
ability  greater   than  a  smart  salesman's  will  not  solve   these
problems.   The  approach,  like  the  leadership  itself,  is  phoney.
The  shape  of  the  real  change,   however,  has  yet  to  be  as-
sessed  either  by  the  Republicans  or  the  Democrats;  the  latter
seem  to  believe  that   thinking   can  be  avoided   by   spending,
that  a  boost   in  the  budget  will  cure  all  national  aches  and
pains.   Both  avoid,  if  indeed  they  have  fathomed,  the  crucial
change   which   the   Soviet   ICBM   has  brought   about   in   the
relations   between   Western   Europe   and   the   United    States.
This  is  fundamental.
Western  Europe  has  been  bypassed.  Until  now,  there  could
have  been  no war  between  the  U.  S. and  the  U.  S. S. R.  which
was  not  fought  through  and  over  Western  Europe.   Now  a
Soviet  attack  would  be  by  30-minute  missiles  over  the  Arctic;
the  Russians .could   afford   neither  the  time  nor  the   thermo-
nuclear  material  for  Western  Europe.   Each  side  would   have
to  strike quickly  at  the  bases  and  cities  of  the  other.  'Western
Loss of Nerve by  Kennan?
In   a   message   from   BBC,   London,   which  arrived
after  we  went  to  press  last  week,  we  were  informed
that    the   eloquent   passage    against   nuclear   testing
which  we  had   reprinted   in  our  issue   of   December  9
from  the  uncorrected  advance text  of  George  F.  Ken-
nan's  fourth  Reith  lecture  over  the  BBC  on  December
1   was   not  in  the  text  as   delivered.  An  attempt  by
cable  to  check  this  with Kennan brought  only  the  reply
that  the  text  as  delivered was  being  airmailed but  this
had  not  arrived  as  we  went  to  press  this  week.   We
hope  that  Mr.  Kennan  will  yet  say  what  he  was  pre-
paring   to   say   and  that  having  boldly   challenged  so
many  stereotypes  of  U.  S.  foreign  policy,  he  will  not
falter  at  this  one  either.
Europe would  be  drawn  in  only  if  there  were  bases  there  from
which  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  was  being  attacked.
The Roles Have Been  Reversed
Until  now  Western  Europe  wanted  American  troops  on  its
soil  in  order to  protect  itself  against a  new  American  isolation-
ism  in  the  event  of  war.   It  feared  a  European  Korea  in  Ger-
many  and  it  wanted  American  troops  in  Germany  to  ensure
American  participation in  the  defense  of  West  Germany.  The
fear  was  a  double  one—of   Soviet  aggression  and   American
non-involvement.   This  enabled  the  U.  S.  to  transform  the
Brussels  pact  into NATO  and  obtain  forward bases  in  Europe.
But  the  Soviet ICBM  is  the  response  of  Russia  to  this  adverse
situation;  it  outflanks  those  bases  and  makes  direct  attack  pos-
sible  from  Russia  on  the  U.  S.  itself.   In  this  situation,  the
roles   have   been   reversed.   U.   S.  bases   in  Western   Europe
insure  the   U.  S.  against  European  isolationism.    So  long  as
the  bases  are  there,  Western  Europe  cannot  do  a  Switzerland
and  stand  aside but  must  immediately  be  drawn  in,  for  those
bases  will  be  used  in  retaliation  for  Russian  attack  or  antici-
pation  of  it,  or  maybe  in  error.
It  is  the  change  of  the  strategic  picture  and  the  possibility
of  trigger-happy  error  which  explains  the  chilled   response  in
West  Germany,  in  France  and  in  Britain  to  the  proposal   for
the  establishment   of   thermonuclear  intermediate  range   mis-
sile  bases  on  their  soil.    Aside from  the  provocation  to  Russia,
and  the  folly  of  talking  so  much  about  bases  for  missiles  we
do  not  yet  possess,  there  is  a  growing  realization  that  techno-
logical   chance  has  made  West  European  neutralism   possible
and  that  it  may  be  wiser  for  West  Europe  to  make  its  influ-
ence  felt  in  separating  the  two  great  Powers  than   in  estab-
lishing  new  bases  which  can  only  heighten   tension   and   in-
crease   war's   danger.    This   is   the   new   idea   which    official
propaganda  hides  but  cannot  suppress.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  16,1957
One  Way  to  Meet  the  Teacher  Shortage—and  to  Teach  the  Purest  Principles  of  Civics
A  Proposal  of  Belated  Justice  to  the  Blacklisted  Teachers  of  New  York
In  view  of  the  teacher  shortage,   the  science  race  with  the
Soviet  Union  and  the  growing  national  bad  conscience  about
the  Oppenheimer  case,  the  Weekly   suggests  that  a  committee
of  public  spirited  citizens  be  formed  in  New  York  to  review
the  cases  of  the  teachers  blacklisted  for  loyalty-security reasons
in  the  schools  of  that  city,  to  make  a  full  report  to  the  public
and  to  recommend   the  reinstatement  of  all  but  those  guilty
of  some  actual  misconduct  as  teachers.
We  believe  the  time  has  come  to  crack  the   icecap  which
the  cold  war  spread   over  the  nation's  schools  and  that  New
York  City  is  the  place  to  begin.   We   believe  that  action  of
this  kind  is  called  for  not  just  on  utilitarian grounds,  because
the  shortage   of  teachers  is  acute,  but  for  profounder  reasons
of  education  in  the  fundamentals  of  a  free  society.
Review,   amends   and   reinstatement   in   America's   greatest
city  would  demonstrate  to  the  world  that  we  were  recovering
in  a  big  way  from  McCarthyism and  it  would  teach  students
by   example  that   in   preaching   freedom   of   ideas   we   again
meant  what  we  preached.    To  talk  of  political  freedom  and
then  to  blacklist  teachers  because  of  their  political  associations,
real  or  suspected,  was  to  teach  a  whole  generation  of  children
that  our  talk  of  democracy  was  hypocritical.
Above  all,  a  change  is  called  for   because  the  New   York
City  Board  of  Education,  despite  a  ruling  to  the  contrary by
the  State  Commissioner  of  Education,  is  still  fighting  to  apply
the   rule   that   a  teacher   suspected   of   communism  can  only
prove  his  loyalty  by informing on  others.   There  could  be  no
more  revolting  ethical  lesson  taught  in  the  classrooms  of  New
York.
What Is Subversive?
The   dismissal  of   teachers  for   real   or   suspected   political
association,   the   insistence  that   they  turn   informer  to   save
their  own  skins,  are  certainly  subversive  in  the  true  sense  of
the   word.    In   this  sense   the   Boards   of   Education   and   of
Higher   Education  have   been   a  subversive  influence   in   the
school  system of  New  York  for  close  to  a  decade.
But   obviously  this   is  not   what   the   Board   of   Education
meant  when  in  its  "Feinberg  Law"  report  this  year  it  said  285
teachers  had  been  severed  from  the  school  system  since   1951
as  a  result  of   its  investigations  into  "subversive    activities."
It  is time  an  independent  inquiry  was  made  into  this  queasy
wording.
How   many  were   found   guilty   of   "subversive    activity"?
What  standard  did  the  Board  apply?   How  many  were  really
discharged   for   "insubordination  and   conduct   unbecoming   a
teacher"  when  they  refused  to  answer  questions   about   their
own  political  beliefs  and  those  of  their  associates?   Is  it  true
Case No. 1
The  first  victim  of   the   school   witch  hunt   in   New
York  City.    Two  days  before  the  Christmas  holiday  in
1948  Superintendent  of  Schools  Jansen  sent  Law  Secre-
tary  Nicholas   Bucci  and   Asst.  Supt.  John   Conroy   to
question  a   1-A  teacher  in  Staten  Island,  Mrs.   Minnie
Gutride,  about  an  allegedly  subversive  meeting  she  had
attended  in  1940.   She was  told  that  she would  face  trial
for  insubordination  if  she  did  not  answer.   A   widow,
who  lived  alone  she  went  home  and  turned  on  the  gas
jets.    Her   body  was  found   next   morning   among   the
Christmas  toys  she  had  prepared  for  her  classroom.
that  the  Feinberg  law,  bad  as  it  is,  has  never  really  been  ap-
plied  but  that  the  Board  has  fallen  back  on  the  easier  route
of  discharge  for  "insubordination"?
Vindictive  Witch  Hunting  Zeal
The  New  York  City  Board  of  Education  has  not  acted  with
mere  cowardly  acquiescence  in  popular  hysteria.   On  the  con-
trary  it  has  gone  beyond  the  call  of  duty  in  vindictive zeal.
Symptomatic  is  the  case  of  the  five  teachers  (three  of  them
high   school   teachers  of   science)   suspended   in   September,
1955,  for  refusing  to  inform.   When  the  State  Commissioner
of  Education  ruled  in  July,  1956,   that  teachers  need  not  be
informers  to  prove  their  loyalty, the  Board  should  have  closed
the  case  with  that  decision.   Instead  it  appealed  to  the  State
Supreme  Court,  where  the  Commissioner  was  upheld,  and  is
now  appealing  again.   Do   the   people   of  New   York   really
approve  the  expenditure  of  tax  funds  in  these  appeals,   in  so
repugnant  a  cause?
Some  of  New   York's   best  and  most  needed   teachers  are
among  those  purged.    Of   the   350-or-so  teachers  who   have
lost  their  jobs  (there  are  forced  resignations  not  included  in
the   published   totals),    about   75   were   teachers   of   mathe-
matics  or  science and  about  75  were  teachers  in  the  so-called
"difficult"   and  minority  group   schools   (Negro  and  Puerto
Rican).   About  175  were  elementary  school  teachers,  some  of
them  known  as  experts  in  the  teaching  of  arithmetic: and  ele-
mentary  science.
A   public   investigating   committee   will   find,   we   believe,
not  one  single  instance  where   incompetent   teaching,    misuse
of  the  classroom  for  indoctrination  or  any  other  violation  of
professional  conduct  was  alleged  much  less  proven.    Instead
these  were,  almost  without  exception,   as  the  box  below   dis-
closes,  teachers  of  competence  and  integrity.
"Indeed  Teachers  of A High Order of  Ability" — So  Fire Them!
"The   respondents  adduced   the  testimony  of  a  long   suc-
cession  of  colleagues,  supervisors,  parents  and  former   pup-
ils,  demonstrating  their  superior  talents  as  teachers.  It  was
demonstrated  that  these  are  teachers  of  long  service  and
with   records   of   conspicuously   fine   accomplishment,    fre-
quently   under   adverse  circumstances.
"Your  committee  is  satisfied  that  these  are  indeed  teach-
ers  of  a  high  order  of  ability ...  (I  recommend)   that
(they)  be  removed forthwith  as  teachers  in  the  employ  of
the  Board  of  Education  of  the  City  of  New  York."
—Report  of  Col. Arthur Levitt,  as a  one man  loyalty  com-
mittee   trial  examiner,  to  the  New   York  City  Board
of  Education,  Dec.  2,  1952  and  requated  by  him,  in  a
further  report,  April  8,  1954.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  16,1957
And  Perhaps Also in Increased  Trust
"To  carry  out   the  task  ahead,  we  will  need  more
teachers  in  all  fields,  and  to  get  them  we  will  have  to
pay  them  their  due  in  both  dollars  and  prestige."
—U. S.  Commissioner of  Education  Derthick,
Richmond,  Va.,  Dec. S.
Isn't  It  Time  A  Great  City  Like  New  York  Made Amends for  These  Wasted  Lives and Talents?
Case  Studies  in  What  the  Witch  Hunt  Has Cost  in  Suffering  and  Schooling
Here  are  some  glimpses,   in  cases  provided   at  my  request
by  the  Teachers  Union  of  New   York,  which  show  the  in-
humanity  and  stupidity  of  the  witch  hunt  in  the  city  schools:
Max  Gilgoff:  a  teacher  of  French  for   18  years,  Phi  Beta
Kappa,   highest  ratings  as  teacher,   questioned   after  he  pro-
tested  the  killing  of  a  Negro  grocery  clerk  in  Brooklyn  by  a
policeman  in  1951, denied  past  or  present  membership  in  the
Communist  party,  died  of  a  heart  attack  at  39  after  a  year  of
harassment  by the  Board  of  Education,  leaving  two  small  chil-
dren  and  a  pregnant  wife.
Teacher   A:   Teacher   of  Social  Studies  for  ten  years  when
he  made  the   mistake  of   joining  Gilgoff   in  protesting   the
Fields  murder  (the Brooklyn  DA   called   the  failure  of  the
Grand  Jury  to  indict  that  policeman   "a  gross  miscarriage  of
justice,"  N.   Y.   Times,   June   22,  1951),  termed   "Qualified
and  Preferred"  by the  Citizens  Union  when  he  ran  for  public
office   in  1946 but  the   Board  of  Education  began   to   harass
him  with  the  Fields   case.   He  was  subpoenaed   by  the  Mc-
Carthy  committee  in  1953  and  finally  fired  in  1954.  Now  a
salesman.
Teacher   B:   A  High   School   teacher   for   28   and   a  half
years.    Wife  and  two  children.    Forced   to  resign.    Already
53  years  old, he  found  extreme  difficulty  in  adjusting himself
to  new  ways  of  making  a  living.   Worked  as  a  salesman,  did
some  private  school  teaching,  died  two  years  later.   Left  fam-
ily  without any  pension benefits  since  he  got  no  credit  for  his
28  and  a  half  years  as  a  teacher.
Teacher  C:  One  of  the  teachers  fired  for  asserting  the  5th
amendment  before  the  McCarran  committee,  after  29  and  a
half  years  of  teaching—six  months  short  of  the  requirement
for  a  pension.   Fired  without  severance  pay,  trial  or  hearing.
Her  husband  was  hounded  by  other  government  agencies,  in-
cluding  the   Immigration  Bureau,  and   his  death   occurred  a
few  years  later  under  circumstances which  made  his   friends
suspect  suicide.
Teacher  D:   Had  been  teaching  30  years  in  a  junior  high
school,   outstandingly  successful  in   handling   problem   boys
and  problem  classes,  forced  to  retire  from  the  school  system
at  the  age  of   55,  tried  to  retrain  as  bookkeeper,   got  a  job
at  $45  a  week.   His  wife,  with  two  children,  finally  took  a
factory   job.  He   cracked  up   and  was  committed  to  a  state
mental  institution.
Some Wasted  Science  Talents
Teacher   E:   High   school   physics  teacher   for   23  years  in
academic  and  vocational   schools.    Preferred   to  resign  in  the
spring  of  1953  rather  than  "cooperate."   Offered  to  complete
his  term  for  sake  of  the  students.   Offer   rejected.   Age  and
security  regulations   have  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  find
work  as  a  physicist  or  physics  teacher.    Has  worked   inter-
mittently  in  various  factories  as  a  semi-skilled   machinist.
Teacher   F:   Another   physics   teacher,   after   18   years  of
teaching  in  the  high  schools,  forced   out  by  the  witch  hunt,
now  an  "idea  man"  for  a  manufacturer  of  toys  and  gadgets.
Teacher   G:   A   dedicated   teacher   of   mathematics   for   20
years  in  all-Negro  junior  high  school  for  boys,  dismissed   in
1952  for  "insubordination,"  at  present  working  as  a  salesman
for  a  printing  firm.
Teacher   H:   Resigned  in  1953 under  witch  hunt   pressure
after   22  years  as  a  teacher  of   physics  and   general  science;
works  at  semi-skilled  jobs  in  the  electrical  industry.
Teacher  I:  Taught  science  27  years  in  a  junior  high  school
attended  mostly  by  Negro  and   Puerto   Rican  students,   now
sells  flavorings  and  syrups  for  soda  pop  and  bakery products.
The Three  "Won't Inform"  Cases
Of  the  five  teachers  suspended  without  pay  for  refusing  to
inform   in  September,  1955, and  still  awaiting  final  disposi-
tion  on  appeal,  three  are  science  teachers.
Harry  Adler,  taught   electronics   for   20  years  in   a   voca-
tional  high  school,  holder  of  the  first  regular  license   ever
issued   by   the   Board   of   Education  in   this   subject,   highly
praised  by  his  supervisors,  offered  a  job  by  a  suburban  school
board  if  he  would  drop  his  own  case,  refused  to  do  so  and
is  still  unemployed.   The  New  York  school  authorities  have
been  unable  to  find  a  replacement  for  him, despite   ads  in
three   technical   journals   offering   to   accept   a   high   school
graduate with minimal electronics and  no  teaching  experience.
Irving  Mauer:   Taught  science  for   ten  years,  the   last  six
in   a  Negro-Puerto   Rican  junior  high,   a  one-time   football
and  basketball  star  popular  with  his  students  in  a  most  dif-
ficult  school,  has  been  supporting  a  wife  and   two  children
by  self-employment  as  a  TV  repairman  and  technician.
Julius  Nash:  A  high   school  teacher  of   biology,  with   19
years  experience,  and  an  admittedly  excellent  record,  unem-
ployed  for  long  periods  after  his  suspension,  now  manager  of
a  retail  toy  and  juvenile  furniture  store,  a  10-hour  a  day  out
of  city  job  requiring  3  hours  travel  time  each day.
One  Happy  Exception — Dr.  Julius  Hlavaty —  The  Only  Teacher So  Far Reinstated
Of  all  those  caught  in  the  witch  hunt,  the  only  one  who
has been reinstated is  Dr. Julius Hlavaty, nationally famous
in  his  field,  chairman  of   the  mathematics  department  of
Bronx  High  School  of   Science   when  dismissed.    He   was
subpoenaed  by  McCarthy  in  March  1953 because  of  a broad-
cast  he  made in  his  native Czech  for  the  Voice  of  America
about  this  model  science  high  school.    He  was  summarily
dismissed  in  April,  1953, but  a  suit  forced  his  reinstatement
1   9   S
in  April,  1956,  after  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  the
Slochower  case.
Though  the  Bronx  school  has  suffered  by  Dr.  Hlavaty's
dismissal   [two of  my  own  boys,  who  were  in  his  classes,
can  attest  his  wonderfully inspiring  quality—IPS],  he  was
not  restored  to  his  old  post  but  assigned  to  De  Witt  Clin-
ton.    During his  three  years  out,  Dr.  Hlavaty  managed  to
get  along  as  a  private tutor.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 16,1957
The  Supreme  Court,  5-4,  Rules  Past  Membership Must  Be  "Meaningful"  for   Banishment
The  Rowoldt  Decision  Softens  Our   Savage  Deportation  Law
The   5-4  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  in   the   Rowoldt
case  will  ease  the  conscience  of  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  and
the  fate  of  a.good  many aliens.  It  is unsatisfactory as  law  and
vague  as  logic,  but  it  tempers with  mercy  the  savage  rule  that
an  alien may  be deported  for  past  membership  in  the  Commu-
nist  party,  without  proof   that  he  shared  any  unlawful pur-
poses,   and   without  evidence  of  participation   in   any  illegal
conduct.
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  is  himself  responsible  in  part  for
that  repugnant  rule.   Three  and  a  half  years  ago, in  the  case
of  Galvan  v.  Press he  wrote  the  decision  upholding  that pro-
vision  of   the   Internal   Security  Act  which  made   aliens  de-
portable   for      past   membership.    The   majority   ruled   that
neither  the  ex  post   facto  clause  nor  substantive  due  process
protected  aliens  against  deportation.   Galvan,  a  poor  Mexican
so  frightened  that  he  offered   to  rejoin  the  party  as  an  FBI
informer,  was  deported.
During the  Palmer  Red Raids
The  Galvan  decision must  have  been  a  painful  one  for  Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter.    A  generation  earlier,  during  the  Palmer
Red  raids  after  World  War  I,  he  and  his  then  Harvard  Law
School  colleague,  Zechariah  Chafee,  had  protested  the  illegal
practices  of   the  Justice  Department   and   appeared   as   amid
curiae  on  behalf  of  alien radicals before  Federal  Judge  George
W.   Anderson  in  the  famous  case  of   Colyer   v.     Skeffington.
That  judge  freed  many  of  those  arrested  on  the  ground  that
the  government  had  to  prove  more  than  nominal membership
in  radical  organizations for  deportation.
That   ruling,   by  a  peculiar  route,   has   born   fruit   in   the
Rowoldt  case.  Senator  McCarran  in  1951 put  forward amend-
ments  to  his  own  Internal  Security Act  when  it  became  clear
that  it  would  exclude  or  deport  past  members  of  Fascist   and
Nazi  organizations  and  defectees  from  the  Soviet  bloc.   The
Senator  cited  Colyer  v.  Skeffington    in  contending  that  the  past
membership  provisions  should   not  be  used   against  nominal
members.
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  discussed  this  in  the  Galvan   case
but  without  applying  it.   In  the  Rowoldt  case,  he  has  put  it
5th  Birthday  Dinner
On  Friday,  January  17,  the  fifth  anniversary  of   the
Weekly,  a  group  of  readers   in  New   York  are   giving
IFS  a  10-course  Chinese  banquet  at  the  Port   Arthur
Restaurant,   7  and  9   Mott   Streets,   New   York   City's
Chinatown.   The  dinner  is  limited  to  200  and  reserva-
tions  will  be  made  in  order  of  receipt;  they  must  be
accompanied  by  check.   The  price   is   $3,  the   time   is
7  p.  m.   Good  time   guaranteed.
to  use.  Rowoldt, an  alien in  this country since  1914, admitted
that  for  about  a  year  in  1935 he  was  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist  party  and   worked   in  a  Communist  bookshop.     Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter  held  that  this  was  not  "the kind  of  mean-
ingful   association"  required  by  the   McCarran  amendments.
What  Is A Meaningful Association?
Just  what  constitutes a  meaningful  association  is  not  clear,
nor   how   Galvan's   was   more   meaningful   than   Rowoldt's.
Within   the  framework  of  the  statute,  Mr.   Justice   Harlan's
dissent  (for himself,  and  Justices  Burton,  Clark  and   Whit-
taker)   may  make  more  sense  the  majority.    But  we  may  be
grateful  for  small  mercies,  since  there  are  quite  a  few  cases
pending  in  which  aliens  whose  past  association  was  not  very
meaningful  may  be  saved.
From  Galvan  to  Rowoldt,  the  change  is  not  in  the  facts  but
in  the  atmosphere.   The  first  past  membership  case  under  an
earlier  statute,  Harisiades  v.  Shaughnessy  was  written  by  the
late  Mr.  Justice  Jackson  in  1952 with  cold  war  passion.   Mr.
Justice  Douglas,  dissenting  then  with  Black,  said  this  decision
turned  its  back  on  "the principle  of  forgiveness  and  the doc-
trine  of  redemption."    Again,  in  Galvan,  he  protested   that  if
aliens  were  to  be  deported,  it  ought  to  be  "for what  they  are
and  do,  not  for  what  they  once  believed."
These  are  the  words  posterity  will  prize,  not  the  split  hairs
in  Rowoldt.    The  evil  is  the  doctrine  that  constitutional  guar-
antees  do  not  fully  apply  to  deportation   proceedings.    This
new  decision  nonetheless   will  help  a  few, and   moves  in  a
gentler  direction.
Happy   Holiday—The   Weekly  Is Not Published  the  Last  Two  Weeks  in  December—Next  Issue  January   6
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City     .
...............Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub for  $4  (1  yr.)  or  $2  (6  mos.)  additional:
12/16/57
(To)    Name
Street     .......
City     ..........................................Zone............State.. ................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?       Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebroskc  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D. C
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
Stonp's  Weekly     Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.   C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.  Prst-flated  Mondajs  but pub-
llahed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  AnirnBt  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent'weekly  published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:
sS  in  theU.  8.:   Mi  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia   t.nd   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED