I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957dec09.pdf

============================================================

Is Dislike of  Nixon,  Ike's  Medicine?  P.  4
Condon's  Own Story:  How  Scientists  Are  Hounded  Out  of  Private  Industry,  Too.   Pages  2  and  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  47
DECEMBER  9,  1957
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Ten  Years  After,  Mr.  X  Would  Substitute  Disengagement   for  Containment
Exclusive!  Kennan  Opposes  Nuclear  Tests  in  BBC  Talk
In  a  series  of  weekly  lectures  over  the   BBC  in  London,
George  F.  Kennan  has  been  having  a  fresh  look  at  the  doc-
trine  of  containment  he  launched  ten  years  ago.   In  these  lec-
tures,  of  which  four  had  been  delivered  at  the  time  we  write,
our  former  Ambassador to  Moscow  is  illustrating  the  poverty
of  ideas  which  mark  not  only  the  Eisenhower  administration
but  the  Democratic opposition,  the  former  still  inanely  rigid,
the  latter  feverishly  insistent  on  greater  urgency  but   in   no
visible  direction  other   than   the   same  brink  on  which   Mr.
Dulles  performs.   Unfortunately  there  are  as  yet  available  no
full  texts of  the Kennan  lectures  as delivered.  The  New   York
Times  has  reported  them  less  fully  than  the  Times  of  London.
Even  coverage  in  the  latter—judging  by  the  uncorrected  ad-
vance  texts  supplied  us  here  in  Washington   by  the   British
Broadcasting  Company—has  not  been  satisfactory.  The  most
striking  gap  in  coverage  seems  to  be  the  omission  from  the
news  accounts  of  the  eloquent  passage  reprinted  in  the  ad-
joining  box  in  which  Mr.  Kennan  pleads  for  an  end  of  nu-
clear  testing.  Whether  this  excerpt  from  the  advance text  was
omitted  at  the  last  moment  in  delivery  or  whether  it  has  just
been  ignored  we were still unable  to  learn  as we went  to  press.
If  Socialism Is What They Want...
It  is  easy  to  understand  from  these  lectures  why  Mr.  Ken-
nan  was  eased  out  of  the  State  Department  so  soon  after  Mr.
Dulles's  advent.   For  in  them  Mr.  Kennan  not  only  proposes
the  abandonment  of  containment  for  disengagement   but  de-
molishes  the  foundations  of  cold  war  policy,  particularly  the
notion  that  if  it  were  not  for  our  possession   of  the   atomic
bomb  the  Russians would  have  moved  in  on  Western  Europe
and  precipitated  a  new  world  war  long  ago.   Though  he  has
his  own  profound  disagreements  with  the  Russian  leaders  he
knows  so  well  and  has  some  very  just  observations  to  make
on  the  habits  of   self-deception   to   which   the    opportunistic
Leninist  dismissal  of   objective  truth   has  led,   he  attacks   as
unsound  the  idea  which  since  1947  has  equated  them  with  the
Hitler   crowd  and   posited   no   means,  of   dealing  with   them
except  on  the  similar   basis  of  unconditional   surrender.    He
believes  it  unfair  to  expect  them  to  agree  to  the  reunification
of  a  rearmed  Germany  in  NATO,  and  he  sees  a  neutralized
Germany  as  the  cornerstone  of  a  mutual  withdrawal  of   Soviet
and   American  armies   which   would   really   liberate   Eastern
Europe.   He  would  liberate  if-not  only  from  Russian  occupa-
tion   but   from   American   preconceptions.      "If    socialism   is
what  these  people  want  and  need,"  Mr.  Kennan  said  in  the
1   3                                                                                                                            1
Man's Duty  to  The Future
"I  have  expressly  refrained  from  speaking,   in  con-
nection  with  these  other  matters,  of  that  aspect  of  the
atomic  problem that  now  worries  many  of  my  country-
men  most of  all: namely,  the  damage that  may  be  done
to  our  human  environment  and  to  the  genetic  make-up
of  human  beings  by  the  mere  testing  of  these  fearful
weapons,  not  to  mention  their  actual  use  in  war.
"I  would  like  to  say  that  I  have  the  deepest  misgiv-
ings   and  feelings  of   conscience   about  the   continued
testing  of  these  devices.   I  believe  that  man's  duty  is
not  to  this  generation  alone,  but  also  to  those  who have
gone  before  and  to  those  who  will  come  after  us.
"Could  anything  be  more  egotistical   and  more  pre-
sumptuous  than  to  alter,  in  the  interests  of  our  own
physical   survival,   the   environment  in   which  it   was
given  us  to  live?   Surely  it  is  better  that  many  of  us
should  die  somewhat  before  our  time,  than  that   we
should  live  at  the  cost  of  prejudicing  the  conditions  of
life  for  our  children.  So  long,  therefore,  as  the  scien-
tists  disagree  about  the  effects  of  all  this  testing,  it  is
our  duty  to  be  guided  by  our  obligation  to  the  other
generations—not  just  to  our  own."
—George  F.  Kennan,  Reith  Lecture  No.  4,  BBC,
Sun.   Dec.  1  (uncorrected   advance   text).
advance  text  of  his  third  lecture,  "so  be  it;  but  let  it  by  all
means  be  their  own  choice."
Against  A Tighter NATO
In  a  striking  distortion,  the  New   York   Times   (Nov.   18)
headlined   its  report  of  Mr.  Kennan's   second  lecture,   "Ken-
nan  Holds  Talk  with  Soviet  Futile."  On  the  contrary,  though
dubious  of  sensational  summit  talks,  Mr.  Kennan  pleaded   for
an  unremitting   patient   diplomatic   effort,   issue  by  issue,  in
search  of  agreement  with  the  Russians.   For  this  reason   he
strongly   opposed   a  tighter  NATO  structure.    "The    delicate
explorations  and  discussions  which  must  precede  accommoda-
tion   in  complex   international   questions,"   said   the   advance
text of  his  second  lecture,  "cannot  be conducted  by a coalition,
operating   on   the   basis  of   sporadic,   unanimous   and   highly
formalized  decisions."    In  his  fourth  he  opposed   the  current
policy  of  giving  out  nuclear  weapons.    "A  defense  posture,"
he  said,  "built  around  a  weapon   of  suicidal  destruction  can
serve  only  to  paralyze  national   policy."   'As  for  the   notion
that   tactical  nuclear  weapons   would   be  "relatively   harmless
things,"  he  added   in  the  same  address.    "Even  the  tactical
atomic  weapons  are  destructive  to  a  degree  that  sickens  the
imagination."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December 9,1957
The  Inside  Story  of  Ten Years  of  Security-Loyalty  Mania  Persecution  .  .  .
Dr.  E. U.  Condoh  Lifts  the  Curtain  Before   the  American  Physical  Society
By  Dr.  Edward U.  Condon
From  an  address  the  press neglected  before   the  American
Physical  Society  Nov.  29  in  St.  Louis  by  the  former  director
of   the   National   Bureau  of   Standards,  now   head   of   the
department   of   physics  at  Washington   University.
Please  forgive  me  if  tonight  I  discuss  an  old  and  tiresome
subject.     I  want  to  make  some  remarks  about  the  political
abuse  of   the  personnel   security  system,  which  has  done  so
much  in  the  past  decade  to  blight  the  relations  of  loyal Ameri-
can  scientists  and  their  Government.
During  the  last  two months  there  has  come  about  a  general
public  awareness that  America is  not  automatically,  and  effort-
lessly  and  unquestionably  the  leader  of  the. world  in  science
and  technology.   This  comes  as  no  surprise  to  those  of  us  who
have  watched  and  tried  to  warn  against  the  steady  deteriora-
tion  in  the  teaching  of  science  and  mathematics  in  the  schools
for  the  past  quarter  century.
It  comes  as  no  surprise  to  those  who  have  known  dozens
of  cases  of  scientists  who  have  been  hounded  out  of  jobs  by
silly  disloyalty  charges,  and  kept  out  of  all  professional  em-
ployment   by  widespread   blacklisting   practices.    It   comes  as
no  surprise  to  those of  us who  have  known  how  good  Ameri-
can  scientists have  had  to  face  vilification  by  political  speech-
makers  in  and  out  of  Congress,  and  have  been  falsely  prose-
cuted  for  perjury, and  have  been  improperly  denied  passports,
or  have had  their  passports  seized  and  invalidated  without  due
process  by  the  State  Department,  or  who  have  had  their  tele-
phones   tapped   or   their   letters   intercepted   by   government
agents.
Ten Years of  Persecution
.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  boastful,  and  in  this  respect  I  would
gladly  change  places  with  any  of  you,  but  I  think that  I  have
probably  had  a  bigger  dose  of  this kind  of  mistreatment  than
any  of  my  fellow  members  of  the  American Physical  Society.
It  began  ten  years  ago  last  summer.
In  that  time  I  have  had  two  full   scale  loyalty  hearings  in
the  Department  of  Commerce,  a  full  field  investigation  for
the   Atomic   Energy  Commission  which   occupied   the   best
efforts  of  300  FBI  agents,  and  finally  in  1954  had  a  hearing
under  the  policies  and  procedures  set  up  by  this  administra-
tion.   In  all  of  these  I  received  full   clearance.   All   covered
essentially  the  same ground  which  was no  ground  at  all.   The
House  Committee on  Un-American Activities made  numerous
attacks  on  me  in   1947   and   1948   before   its  then  chairman
went  off  to  serve  a  term  in  Federal  penitentiary  as  a  common
crook.   Finally  this  Committee  staged  a  political  hearing  on
the  same old  stale  and  outworn  material  just  before  the  1952
elections.
During  most  of  this  period  I  kept  on  working  to  develop
the  scientific  strength  and  stature  of  the  National  Bureau  of
Standards.
Helped on H-Bomb
Edward  Teller  told  this  last  personnel  security  board  hear-
ing  in  April  1954  that  the  Bureau's  work  on  the  hydrogen
bomb  which  I  organized  advanced  our  achievement  of  that
goal   by  many  months,  probably  a  year.   If   he   is  correct  in
Dangerous  National  Habit
"It  seems  to  me  that  the  population  of  this  country
has  a  considerable   predilection  for  trusting  essentially
stupid  people  and  mistrusting   those  who  are   brilliant.
—Nobel  Prize  Winner  Harold  C.  Urey,  addressing  Sci-
ence  and  Mathematics   Teachers,  Chicago, Nov. SO.
the  implication  that  without  that  work  we  would  have   been
delayed  by  about  a  year,  then  the  lack  of  that  work  would
have  made  us  come  in  second  in  the  international  rivalry  for
the  hydrogen  bomb.
Nevertheless  all  the  old   stuff   was  rehashed  once  again  in
1952  and  again  in  1954.   I  was  badgered   all  those  years  for
having  been  interested  in  the  American Soviet  Science  Society,
an  organization  which  received  a  grant  from  the  Rockefeller
Foundation  ten  years ago  to  foster  translation  and  wider  dis-
tribution  in  this  country  of  the   Russian   scientific  literature.
Now,  a  decade  later,  we  read  of  crash  programs  to  translate
the  Russian  scientific  literature  and  spread   it  around  in  this
country.  Why,  man, you can't  do that:  that's  subversive!
In  July  1954  I  was given  complete  security clearance  by  the
Eastern  Industrial  Personnel  Security Board.   You  might  think
now  that  I  would  be  allowed  to  go  back  to  work.   Yet  in
October,   1954,  just before  the  election,  we  find Nixon  making
his  twenty-years-of-treason  speeches  and  boasting  that  he  got
the   Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  suspend  my  clearance,  as  was
done  on  October  21.
Seven  Years  of  Smear
Try  to  picture  the  situation.   I  had  been  under  steady  po-
litical  attack  for  seven  years,  and  had  won  at  every  hearing.
Hut  now I  was told  that  I  would  have to  go  over  all  the  same
material  again,  before  a  kangaroo  court  whose  members  were
to  be  hand  picked  to  do  their  job  by  Defense   Department
officials.
Many  of   my  friends   had   been  persecuted   by  the   House
Committee  on  Un-American  Activities.   Some  of   them   had
taken  refuge  abroad.   Our   good   friend  and  past   president,
Robert  Oppenheimer,  who  brilliantly  built  and  led  the  Los
Alamos  laboratory  during  the  war,  had  just  been  publicly  dis-
graced  by an  official  action  of  the  government.   The   scientific
staff  of  the  Signal  Corps  laboratories  at  Fort  Monmouth  had
suffered  a  blow  from  which  it  has  not  yet  recovered   through
the  irresponsible  attacks  of  Joseph  McCarthy—attacks  which
the  President  had  not  resisted  until  McCarthy  began  lobbing
his  shots  toward  the  White   House.
It  was  plain  that  our  scientific  leadership  in   Washington
felt  powerless  to  do  anything.   I  discussed  the  problem  at  the
National  Academy of  Sciences.   I  asked  our  good  friend  and
past  president,  I.  I.  Rabi,  whether  possibly  something could  be
done  by another  of  our  good  friends  and  past  presidents,  Lee
DuBridge.   For  Lee  was  at  that  time  chairman  of  the  same
scientific  advisory  board  to  the  President  that  Rabi  now  heads.
I  was  told   that   Lee  himself   was  having   security   clearance
troubles!
Under  those  circumstances,  I  decided  then,  and  I  still  think
correctly,  that  the  Administration was  committed  by  policy  to
persecution  of  scientists,  or,  at  the  very  least,  to  a  callous  in-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 9,1957
.  . .  And A  Plea  for  Belated  Justice  to  Other  "Exiles" Less  Glamorous  Than   Oppenheimer
How  Scientists  Have  Been  Blacklisted  Even  After  Umteen  Clearances
difference  toward  what  others  were  doing  to  attack  and  dis-
credit  them.   I  decided  that  the  situation  was  hopeless,   and
that  I  had  done  all  that  could  reasonably  be  expected  of  me
in  having  resisted  these   evil  dishonorable   forces  for  seven
long  years.
No Rest for the Innocent
In  those  seven  years  so  much  of  my  nervous  energy   had
gone  into  the  struggle  that  I  was  weary  unto  sickness,  and
was  forced  to  neglect  the  proper  courtship  of  our  beloved  pro-
fession.   So I  decided  to  withdraw  from  the  struggle,  and  my
resignation   from   an   industrial  position   for   which  security
clearance  was  needed  was  announced  early  in   December.
You  might  think  now  that  I  would  be  allowed  to  go  back
to  work.  I  came East  in  January 1955  after  giving  my retiring
presidential  address  to  the  American Association  for  the  Ad-
vancement  of  Science and  was  offered  the  post  of  chairman  of
the  Department  of  Physics in  a  leading  university.  In  March
the  Chancellor of  that  university  told  me  he  could  not  follow
through  on  the  appointment  because  a  high  government  of-
ficial  threatened  one  of  the  university  trustees  that  if  my  ap-
pointment  went  through,  that  university  would  lose  all  of  its
Federal  funds.
In  June  of  1955  I  was  asked  to  serve  on  a  committee on  a
non-classified  problem  of  military  importance—and  then  sud-
denly  asked  not  to,  just  before  the  first  meeting  of  that  com-
mittee.
Incidentally  I  was cleared  from  July  1954  to  October   1954.
During  that  period  some  navy  people  came  to  see  hie  with
an  urgent  problem  on  the  development   of  a  radome  for  a
guided  missile.   It  was highly  secret  but  I  was  cleared  for  it.
By  the  time  we  had   the  development   models   made,  my
clearance  had  been  suspended  'pending  further  consideration,'
as  Secretary Thomas  put  it.   Some  of  our  cleared  young  men
tried  to  deliver  the  radomes  but  found  these  Navy  men  in
such  a  state of  panic that  they would  not  accept  them!   A  few
weeks  later—all  this  was  just  about  three  years  ago—they
regained  their  courage  and  sheepishly  asked  to  have  the  ra-
domes.
Ike for Freedom—In the  Abstract
In  the  winter  of  1955-56,  I  thought  that  surely  the  Presi-
dent   would  not  approve  of   these  things   if  he  knew   about
them.   In  June  of   1954  I  had  been  Phi  Beta  Kappa   orator
for   Columbia's  bicentennial  year  and  spoke  in  favor  of  aca-
demic  freedom,  and  that  same  evening  had  heard  the  former
President  of  Columbia  University,  Dwight  Eisenhower,  give  a
rousing  address  on  freedom  and  democracy  at  a  big  alumni
dinner  at  the  Waldorf-Astoria.   But  none  of  our   Columbia
friends  knew  how to  get  through  to  him.
In   the   fall   of   1954   I  had   met   socially   the    President's
brother,  Milton  Eisenhower,  now  of  Johns  Hopkins   Univer-
sity,  just  after  my  clearance  had  been  suspended,  and  he  had
inquired  solicitously  about  the  effect  of  this  on  my  work.   As
everyone  knows Milton  spends  a  good  deal  of  his  time  trying
to  help,  the  President.    So  I  wrote  several  letters  to   Milton
outlining the situation  and  asking his  help.  These  letters were
never  answered  except  for  perfunctory  replies  by  secretaries.
Eyes, But  They  See Not
The  just  released  second  interim  report  of  the  Presi-
dent's  Committee  on  Scientists  and  Engineers  manages
to  discuss  the  shortage  of  teachers  and  of  scientists
and  technicians  without   once  mentioning  the  effect   of
the  witch  hunt   and  the  blacklist   in  unjustly  exiling
many   good  scientists  and  teachers  from  their  profes-
sions.    When  will  professional  organizations  take  this
indelicate  subject  up  on  their  own  and  document  the
impact  of   the  loyalty-security   mania   on  these  short-
ages?
i  B a
I  was  more  than  ever  convinced  that  persecution  of  scientists
was  being  followed  as  a  settled  policy.
In  connection  with  all  the  soul-searching  that  is  going  on
we  hear  a  good  deal  being  said  about  asking  Robert  Oppen-
heimer  back  into  government  service.   I  hope  this  is  done—
humbly  and  with  apologies.
That   will  be  a  good  start.   But  what  about   the  others?
What  about  David  Bohm  whose  passport  was  seized  in  Bra-
zil?   What  about  Robert's  brother,  Frank,  whose  brilliant  ca-
reer  as  a  cosmic  ray  physicist  was  abruptly  terminated  so  that
he  must  now  hide  away on  a  Colorado  cattle  ranch  instead  of
working  as  a  physicist?  What  about  Joe  Weinberg,  luridly
attacked  in  Congress  as  Scientist  X,  and  driven  from  univer-
sity  work?   What  about  Bernard  Peters?   What  about  B.  T.
Darling?   What  about  all  the  dozens  of  others  of  our  fellow
members  whose  careers have  been  blighted ?
Our  present  President,   Harry  Smyth,  wsa  recently  quoted
in  the   newspapers   about  the  question  of   rehabilitating  the
Government's   relation   to   Robert   Oppenheimer   as  saying:
'Naturally  I  think  he  should  be  reinstated—if   he  wants  to
come  back.  I  wouldn't  blame him  if  he  didn't  want to.'
Not the Only Way for A Physicist
I  want  to  close  these  already  too  long  remarks  with   some
thought  this  suggests  to  me.  There  is a  grave  danger  that  the
public  will  get  the  false idea  that  the  only  way a  physicist  can
really  serve  our  society  is  in  making  bigger  and  more  deadly
missiles.
I  know that  Robert  Oppenheimer  does  not  have  the  hide of
a  rhinoceros,   so  of  course  he  has  suffered   emotionally   from
what  has  been  done  to  him.   But  I  would  rather  think  he  is
better  off scientifically to  have  had  time  to  get  back  to  physics.
I  think  that  in  the  long  run  his  time  will  have  turned  out  to
have  been  better  spent  working  on  physics  these  past  three
years  than  if  he  had  spent  them  dervishing  in  and  out  of  the
revolving  doors  of  the  Pentagon.
What  I  am  trying  to  say  is  that  the  Government  ought  to
make  honorable  amends  to  him  and  others—but  that  we  must
recognize  that  if  basic  research  is to  be  done,  an  excellent   job
of  teaching  must  go  along  with  it,  and  that  our  very  best
people are  needed  for  both  these  things.  The  very  best  physi-
cists  can  make  their   most  worth-while   contribution   in  these
ways  rather  than  in  weapon  development.    I  not  only  would
not  blame  him  if  he  didn't   return  to  weapon   development,
but  if  that  were  his  decision,  I  would  know  that  he  was  not
sulking,  but  simply  putting  first  things  first  as  a  man  of  his
intelligence  should.  At  least  that's  the  way I  feel.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  December 9,1957
A  Foray  into  Psychosomatic  Politics  and  the  Inner  Love  Life  of  the  Administration
Is  Dislike  for  Nixon  the  Magic  Medicine  of  the  President's  Recoveries?
No  one  can help feeling  sorry for  the  President and  pleased
with  his  recovery.   No  poor  sick  old  man  was  ever  more  put
upon   by  those  surrounding  him  as  they  prop  him  up  after
every  attack.   He  deserves  retirement  to  the  rest  he  has  earned
at  Gettysburg  but  it  looks  as  if  he  may  never  achieve  it.
My  own  theory  is  that  a  principal  factor  in  Mr.   Eisen-
hower's   phenomenal  come-backs  is  his  determination  not  to
hand  the  office  over  to  his  Vice  President.   No  one  likes  his
heir  apparent;  one  always  suspects  that  he  is  hanging  around
hopefully,  waiting  for  the  old  man  to  shuffle     off.
The  real  relations  between  Eisenhower  and  Nixon  is  one
of  the  big  untold  stories  of  this  capital.   Those  who  would  be
willing  to  write  it,  do  not  know  the  facts.   Those  who  know
are  bound  by-confidence  and  convention  not  to  tell  it.   I  can
only  claim to  have  picked  up  echoed  bits  and  pieces  from  the
periphery.   My  own   hunch   is  that   they  dislike  each   other
intensely.
The Unwanted Bride
Nixon  from  the  beginning  felt  like  an  unwanted  bride  in
an  arranged  marriage.   Eisenhower  found  himself  hitched  to
a  partner  whose  standards  (as  in  the  incident  of  the  expense
fund  given  Nixon  by admirers)  he  found  distasteful.   Nixon
felt  on  the  verge  of  national  disgrace  and  rejection  then  and
deeply  humiliated  four  years  later  when  Ike  was  neutral  as
between  Nixon  and   Stassen.
The  differences,  as  so  often  the  case  in  such  relations,  are
instinctive  and  temperamental,  not  matters  of  principle.    The
President's  own  fuzziness  when  it  comes  to  politics  may  be
illustrated  by  a  story  told  me  by  the  correspondent  of  a  lead-
ing  British  newspaper  with  entre  to  the  best  circles  of   the
capital.
A Ticket to End All Tickets
This  British newspaperman  heard  that  at  one  of  the  private
get-togethers  at  the  White  House  to  which  leading  personali-
ties   are   invited,   Mr.   Eisenhower   in   discussing   the   next
campaign  suggested   that  an  excellent  ticket  would   be   Gen.
Gruenther  for  President  and  J.  Edgar  Hoover  for  Vice-Presi-
,   For  California  Readers
I  am  speaking  twice  in  California  during  December,
on  Friday  the  13th   at  the  First  Unitarian  Church  in
San  Francisco,  and  on  Tuesday  the   17th   at  the  Music
Box  Theatre,  7080  Hollywood  Boulevard,  Los  Angeles,
on   "The   Real   Challenge   of   Sputnik,"  admission   $1.
Time:  8  p.  m.
The  Los  Angeles  meeting  is  under  the  auspices  of
Women  for   Legislative   Action,  a  live-wire  organiza-
tion,  but  the  San  Francisco  meeting  is  an  experiment,
a  rather  hazardous  one.    It  is  under  the  Weekly's  own
auspices,   and   will   depend   on   the   pulling   power   of
these   few   announcements   and   on   those   good   souls
among  the  readers  who will  take  it  on themselves  to  do
a  Paul  Revere  on  the  telephone  among  their  friends
and  in  any  organizations  they  influence  and  help  drum
up  an  audience.
So  this  is   an  appeal   above   all   to   readers   in   the
San  Francisco  Bay  area  to  help  make  the  meeting  there
(on  Friday  the  13th yet)   a  success.—IFS.
dent.   The  correspondent,  incredulous,  began   to  check  with
men  who  had  been  present  at  that  affair  and  much  to  his  sur-
prise  found  them  ready  to  confirm  it  since  they,  too,   thought
it  an  eminently  sensible  suggestion!
Nixon's Self  Build-Up
If  the  President  were  for  Nixon  as  his  successor,  he  would
not  be  discussing  other  possibilities.   Nixon,  on  his  side,  has
been  having  key  newspaper   correspondents  in   for   chats  off
the   record.    These   are  designed   for   two  purposes   (1)    to
continue  the  task  of  remaking  Nixon's  image  into  that  of  a
responsible  rather  liberal  young  man  and  (2)   to  advance  his
campaign   to  be  acting  President  during   these  recurrent  ill-
nesses  by  spreading  the  impression  that  Nixon  alone   (unlike
the  President's  entourage)   is  really  aware  of  the  basic  issues
in  the  world  crisis.
These   off-the-record   talks  have  not  increased  the   affection
of   the  White  House   palace  guard  for  Nixon.    Is  there  an
American  Balzac  in  the  audience?   Here  is  a  story  made  to
order  for  him.
Why  Not  Send  Gift   Subscriptions  to  the  Organisations  to  Which  You  Belong?
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     ................................
Street       ................................
City     ......................................
Enter  gift  sub for  $4  (1  yr.)   or  $2  (6  mos.)   additional:
12/9/57
(To)    Name
Street      ........
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraski  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15, D.  C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of   March  3.  1879.    IVst-dated  Mondays  but  pnb-
llshed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
*5  In  the  U.  S.:  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $16  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  Lnd  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED