I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957nov11.pdf

============================================================

Neglected  Text: The First  Western  Statesman to  Call  for  Co-Existence  and Negotiation,  See  Page  4.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  43
NOVEMBER   11,  1957
'°'        WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15   CENTS
Too   Late  to   Catch   Up?
The   extent   of   the  Russian  break-through  in  space-science
and  the  dimensions  of  the  American defeat  are only  beginning
to  be  visible. When  Lyndon  Johnson  told  a  press  conference
here,  "The   Russians are  ahead  of  us  period,"  he  was  making
a  statement  whose  full  import  will  slowly  unfold  itself  in  the
months  to  come.   In  the  lower  echelons  of  the  Capitol,  where
the   real  study  is  done,   a  suspicion  is  growing  that  we  may
never  really  "catch  up"  and  will only  make  ourselves  ludicrous
when  we  finally  send  aloft  that  first  5-pound  satellite  along-
side  not  only  half-ton   Sputnik   II   but  probably  more   sensa-
tional  Russian  achievements  in  the  skies.
Needed:  A Revolution  in Education
What  the  Russians  are  doing  today  was  begun   ten  years
ago,   and   we  must  begin   now   to  plan  for   10  and   20  years
hence,   not   just   our   own   satellites,  but   new   technological
break-throughs   as  yet  undreamed   of,   if  our  national  pride  is
to  be  saved.  But  an  achievement  on  a  comparable  scale  will
require  us  to  revolutionize our  educational  system,  to  raise  the
general  level  of  everyone's  scientific  knowledge,  to  give  teach-
ing  a  lucrative  and  honored  place  in  our  society,  and  to  pro-
vide  the  funds  to  guarantee  that  no  talented  youngster  will
fall  by  the  way  side  because  he  cannot  afford  a  higher  educa-
tion.   Some  of  the  billions  now  spent  on  arms  will  have  to  be
shifted  to  the  schools;  the  choice  is  between  obsolete  bombers
and  obsolete  minds.   Unfortunately,  as  Lyndon  Johnson   also
said,   "a   conservative   approach"   will   not   do   the   job.   The
Eisenhower  Administration still  clings  to  the  premise  that  edu-
cation  is  primarily  a  local  matter,  though   a  bold   speech  by
Secretary  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare  Marion   Folsom
(see  page  two)   shows  one  fresh  mind  at  work  in  the  Cabinet.
The  blunt  truth  is  that  the  United   States  cannot  afford   at
this  moment   in  its  history  to  be  led  by  a  figurehead  retired
General,  who  has  neither  the  knowledge  nor  the  drive  for  the
Presidency,  buttressed  by  a  Secretary  of  State  whose  slippery
utterance,   reckless  spirit  and   unctuous  claims  to   partnership
with  God  have  earned  him  universal  distrust  and  distaste.  Mr.
Dulles  at  press   conference  admitted   that  we  were  unlikely
again  to have  "during  the  foreseeable  future"  the  kind  of  pre-
ponderance   of  military  power   we  had  in   1948   or   1949;   he
spoke  of  the  impossibility  of  "maintaining   the  great  gap  that
did  exist  a  decade  ago."     But  what  the  Pentagon  fears  is  that
the  balance  has  already  shifted;  its  nightmare  is  a  space  plat-
form  from  which  the  Soviets  could  police  the  earth.   But  our
diplomacy  (if   it  can  be  called  that)   is  still  based  on  a  situa-
tion   of   strength   and   an   ability  to   dictate   terms   which   no
longer  exist  if  they  ever  did.  When  the  first  news  of  Krush-
chev's  renewed  call  for  a  summit  conference  and  co-existence
began  coming   over  the  State  Department  ticker,   the   official
spokesman  evaded  comment  by  saying  that  we hadn't  seen  the
Where  We're Still  Ahead
Q.  Mr.  Secretary .  .  .  you  said  that  one  of  the  reasons
or    the    reason    for    the    recent    Soviet    technological
achievements  is  that  they  have  been  concentrating  for
10  years on  this  military  aspect  of  technology.   But  on
Friday  the  President's  Committee  of  Scientists  and  En-
gineers  briefed   the  press  on  this  issue  and  said,  'We
must   puncture  this  myth   that   the  Russians  succeeded
by  concentrating  all  energies  on  military  things.  They
have  concentrated  on  so  broad  a  variety  of  fields  that
it  reads  like  a  list  of  everything  that  man  can  do.'  .  .  .*
A.  If   I  said  they   were  concentrating  just   upon   the
military,  that  was  too  narrow  a  statement of  the  case.
They  have  been  concentrating  primarily  upon scientific
and  technological  work,  which is  largely  utilized  by  the
military,  altho  not  exclusively  so.   But  they  do  not  al-
low  many  of  their  youth,  I  think  any  of  their  youth,  to
go  to  theological  seminaries.
—St-'O'C'tUi'y  Duties, at  /)n«s  coii/cioiec,  Nov.  u.
*This  statement  never  got  into  the   U.S.  press.   Mr.
Dulles's  questioner,  Philip   Penne,  of  the   London   Ob-
server,  was  the  only  correspondent who  showed  up  at
that  science briefing,  and  the  wire  services—which  were
represented—did   not   think   it   worth   reporting!—IFS
complete  text—as  if  that  could  make a  difference.  Yet  the  new
Democratic  victories hold  out  hope  of  no  alternative;  the  latest
pronouncements  of  Mr.  Truman  and  Mr.  Achcson  show  (hey
fundamentally  share  the  Dulles  outlook,  and  are  still  wedded
to  the  delusion  that  an  intensified  arms  race  may  ag.iin  give  us
something   like  that  vanished  atomic  monopoly.   Only   Gen.
Omar  Bradley, in  a  speech  at  press  time  on  the  fatal  idiocy  of
an  electronic  arms  race,  struck  a  rational  note  in  this  capital.
Where America Could  Win  in Humanity's Esteem
The  ticker  from  Moscow  indicates  that  insofar  as  domestic
policy  is  concerned,  Stalin  is  being  upgraded  as  well  as  imi-
tated  by  Krushchev;  Zhukov's  dismissal  may  be  followed  by
another  purge  of  the  armed  forces  as  in  the  30's;  in  Poland,
where  there  had  been  hope,  the  curtains  are  slowly  being low-
ered,  and  the  Communist parties everywhere arc  being shaken
down  again  to  an obedient  core. The  promise  of  the  Twentieth
Congress  fades.  Russia  has  made  prodigious  strides  in  science,
but   after   40   years,   the   dictatorship   of    the   proletariat   is
still  a  dictatorship  over  the  proletariat;  the  people  are  still  in
tutelage;  the  press  still  feeds  them  pre-digested  decisions  sup-
ported  by one-sided  versions of  what  has  occurred  in  the  upper
ruling  circles.  This  absence  of  freedom,  this  lack  of  democracy,
is a  weakness  not  a  strength.   In  a  race  for  the  esteem  of  man-
kind,  peacefully  competing,   this  is  the  terrain  on  which  our
country  could  cover  itself  with  honor—if  we  had  the  courage
really  to  encourage  freedom  at  home,  instead  of  merely  talk-
ing  about  it.
1   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  11,19S7
Will  All  That  Pooling  Talk  End  Only  in  Lifting  the  Atomic  Restrictions  on Germany?
The  U.S.  As Well  as the  U.S.S.R. Is  Walking  Out  on  the  Arms  Talks
The   day  Soviet  Deputy   Foreign   Minister   Kuznetsov  an-
nounced  the  Soviet  Union's  withdrawal  from  the  UN's  pres-
ent  12-man  disarmament committee and  its  5-man subcommit-
tee,  the  Washington  Post's  Chalmers  Roberts  was  being  brief-
ed at  the State Department  on  the  fact  that  ( Washington  Post,
Nov.   5)   the  Eisenhower-Macmillan  "pooling"  program  was
based  on  the  "grim"  assumption  "that  no  agreements  can  be
negotiated  with  the  Kremlin,"   adding   (in  a  resounding  un-
derstatement)   that  Secretary  Dulles   "never  has  been  an  en-
thusiast  for  negotiating with  the  Soviet  Union."  This  is not  so
different  from  the  heart  of  Kuznetsov's  statement.   He  asked
the  UN  Political  and  Security  Committee  how  one  could  ex-
pect  results  from  the  5-nation  arms  subcommittee  when  four
of  them  are  members  of  NATO  and  the Eisenhower-Macmil-
lan  communique  of  October   25  pinned  NATO's  hopes  on
"the  intensification of  the  arms  race."
Men  to Watch Indeed
In  this  connection  it  is  worth  noting  that  pressure  is  being
exerted   from   Washington    (1)    to   discourage  France   from
making  its  own  atomic  weapons  and  (2)   to  revise  the   1954
agreements  under  which  Germany agreed  not  to  make  atomic,
biological,  or  chemical  weapons  and  rockets. ...  A  headline
in  the  London  Daily  Sketch  of  Nov.  2  illustrates  the  build-up
to  be  expected,   "Big  Two  Call  in  German  A-Brains".  .  .  .
The  "pool"  idea  is  already  dead,  though   it  hangs  on  in  the
after-fumes  of the headlines.  . .  .  Congressional  coldness and
Dulles's  hostility  is  turning  the  idea  toward  a  system  of  divi-
sion  of  labor  rather  than  pooling  of  brainpower.   Each  of  the
Western   allies  would  work  on  specific  projects,  sharing   the
results  by  bilateral   agreement.    We   would   keep  the  major
projects   for   ourselves,   thus  avoiding  an  outcry  in   Congress
about  security  and  the  giving  away  of  secrets.   Since  this  is
quite  different  from  true  partnership,  and  too  much  like  the
over-ballyhooed  but  long  moribund  NATO  Mutual  Weapons
Development  Program  of  three  years  ago,  it  will  provoke  sour
reactions  at next  month's  Paris  meeting.  .  . .
The  'Loopholes' Go Back  to 1776
New   step  in  the  glorification  of   our  secret   police:   Don
Whitehead's  feeble  official  portrait  of  the  FBI  is  now  to  be
filmed  with  Jimmy  Stewart  playing  the  lead  role  as  an  FBI
For Journalism Students
If  a  minister of  the  gospel  were  kidnapped and  beat-
en  in  the  Soviet  Union,  the  story   would  be  on  every
front  page  in  America.   But  it  was  hard  work  on  Nov.
5  finding  the  story  of  how  a  Rev.  T.  D.  Wesley   was
horse-whipped  by  three  car-loads  of  attackers  the  night
before  in  Selma,  Ala.   We  couldn't  find  it  in  the  New
York  Times  but  the  Washington  Post  gave  it  four  para-
graphs  on  page  19  and  the  Baltimore  Sun  three  para-
graphs  on  page  3.
Indifference   bordering   on  contempt   was   evident   in
the  way  the  Associated  Press  handled  the  story.   The
rival  United  Press  lead  said  "Three  carloads  of  white
men,  including  one  in  a  'Klan-type'  mask,  kidnapped
and  horse-whipped  a  Negro   minister,  Sheriff   Carl   A.
Griffin   reported  tonight"  and  added  that  the  minister
was  whipped when he  refused  to  "talk  about  Negro  in-
tegration   leaders   in   the   State."    But   the   Associated
Press  omitted  any  mention  of  the  motive  and began  its
story  this  way,  "A  Negro  minister  says  he  was   lashed
by  white  men  as  he  drove  home  from  his  church."   It
ended,   "Officers   said   he  was   severely   beaten   but  not
seriously  injured."  No  doubt the  boys  were  just  f unnin'.
agent.    "The   task   now,"   Dorothy   Manners  reported   from
Hollywood  in  the  Hearst  press  Nov.  4,  "is  to  find  the  actor
to  play  the  J.  Edgar  Hoover  part  when  Hoover  was about  29
t
Although  Hoover's  role  is not  dominant,  it  was  J.  Edgar  hirrir
self  who  personally negotiated  the  deal  with  Jack  Warner  for
the  screen  rights." ...  In  his  address  to  the  FBI National
Academy  Nov.   4  Hoover   said  that  in   1949   the  nation  was
"confronted  with  a  subversive  conspiracy  of  staggering   pro-
portions.  The   Communist  party  itself   numbered   well   over
50,000  members  .  .  ."   If  50,000  Communists  are  "stagger-
ing"  in  a  nation  of  170,000,000,  then  Italy  and  France,   each
with  less  than  a  quarter  our  population  but  with  several  mil-
lion  Communists  should  have  staggered   to  their  doom  long
ago.  .  .  .  Hoover's  main  theme  was  the  "lack  of  vision  and
misdirected   effort"   which  was  enabling   criminals  "and   sub-
versive  elements"  to .use  "loopholes"  in the law. ... In  some-
thing  of  a  new  high  in  overstatement,  Hoover   declared,   "A
typographical  error  in  a  warrant  or  indictment  can  paralyze
the  wheels of justice"—but  only  until  it has been  retyped.  . . .
The  real  "loopholes"  are  in  the  Bill  of  Rights—the  Fathers
seem  to  have  been  the  original  subversives.  .  .  .
Higher Salaries, More Respect for '
"It   doesn't   do  much  good,   however,   to  provide  quality
graduate    study    facilities    and   fellowships    for    potential
teachers   if  what  lies  beyond  graduate  school  is  social  and
economic  disappointment.   It  is  nothing  short  of  a  national
disgrace  that  we  are  discouraging  people  who want  to  teach
by  offering salaries  that  are  far  below  the  level  justified by
their  training  and far  below  the  levels  which  others  are will-
ing  to pay....  If  college  teachers in  these  fields  are not paid
adequately,  they  will  soon  become  as  scarce  as  competent
science  teachers  in high  schools.  . . .
"In a sense,  however,  low salaries  for  college  teachers  are
simply  a  reflection  of  a  more  fundamental  fault—the  lack
of   respect   accorded  to  teaching   by  the   public.   A   society
that  has  become  preoccupied  with action  [and  money—IPS]
has,  I  am  afraid,  tended  to  neglect   those  whose  function  is
Profs'...  Pay for College Students?
somewhat  more remote  from  the  arena  of  activity.   The  task
of  reestablishing  the  college  professor  as  a  key  figure  in our
society,   worthy  of  society's  high  regard   and  reward,  is  a
task  that  requires  more  than  raising  salaries.  .  .  .
"It  disturbs   me  greatly   that   the  best   estimates   avail-
able  indicate that  about  one-third  of  the  top  quarter  of  our
high  school  graduates  do  not  now  go  on  to  college.   This  is
a  serious  national  waste  .  .  .  the  concept  that  a   student's
tuition  fee  should  be  equal  to  the  total  cost  of  his  education
.  .  .  seems  to  assume  that  only  the  individual  derives  bene-
fits  from  his  education,  and  it  tends  to  limit  opportunities
for  higher  education  to  those  who are relatively wealthy....
"The  most  qualified  Russian  high  school  graduates—about
30  percent—are  offered  free  higher  education,  and  all  but
the  weakest,  students  are actually  paid  for  going  to college."
—Marion  B.  Folsom, Secretary   of  Health, Education  and  Welfare,   Con/,  on Se.  Educ.,  Chicago,  Nov.  2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  11,1957
Its  UN  Delegation  on  Apartheid
Strange  Kind  of  Guardian
"The  government  of  the  Union  of  South Africa  defined
the  relationship   of  the  European  to  the  non-European
community   as  being   that  of   guardian   to  ward.    What
would  be  thought   of  a  guardian   who,  in  deliberate  de-
fiance  of  the  best  medical  and  scientific  opinion,  persist-
ed  in   regarding    his   ward   as   mentally   defective   and
treating   him  as  such?"
—Cruise  O'Brien  (Ireland)   UN  Debate  on  Apartheid.
A  Debate  the  Press  Ignored:  The  U.S.   "Abstains"  Again  on South  African  Racism
State  Department  "Tones  Down"
United  Nations,  N.  Y.
In  1952  the  U.S.  voted  to  put  apartheid   on  the  agenda  of
the  United  Nations  General  Assembly but  has  always abstain-
ed  from  voting  on  any  resolution  which  specifically  criticized
South  Africa  for  racial  discrimination.  Again  this  past  week
when   the  General   Assembly,  sitting  as  the  Special  Political
Committee,  voted  59  to  5,  with  10  abstentions,  appealing  to
South  Africa  to  "revise  its  policy,"   the  U.S.  abstained.
Less   surprising   than   this   abstention   was   the   equivocal
speech  made  by  Herman  B.  Wells,  president  of  Indiana  Uni-
versity,  the  U.S.  spokesman  in  the  debate.  Except  for  the  Bal-
timore  Sun,  whose  Paul  W.  Ward   gives  the  UN  unusually
comprehensive  coverage,  the  press  seems  to  have  ignored  the
entire  debate.
Ward  reported  (Nov.  1)  that  Wells,  a  Republican, wanted
to  make  a  strong  speech  because of  Little  Rock  and  that  two
other  U.S.  delegates,  George  Meany  and  Philip  M.  Klutznick
of  B'nai  Brith,  "helped  Wells  draft  a  stronger  speech"   only
to  have  it  toned  down  by  the  State  Department.
But,  On The Other Hand ...
The   queasy   wording   of   the   speech   as   finally   delivered
avoided  any  direct  condemnation  of  apartheid.   It  said  South
Africa's  policy  is  "under  attack  here,  as  discriminatory."   On
the  other  hand,  Mr.  Wells  added,  South  Africa  claimed  that
apartheid   was  "non-discriminatory  and   not   oppressive"   but
"the  best  solution ...  for  the  difficult   problem."
Wells  then  went  on  to  say that  "without  condoning  in  any
way"  South  Africa's  policy,  "a  number  of  other  governments
openly  practice  policies  which  deprive  their  citizens  of  basic
human  rights."   Racial problems  were  "complex"  and  the  UN
might  help  by  "positive  studies"  but  had  no  power  and  al-
though  this  was  the  sixth  session  at  which  the  Assembly  had
discussed  the  question,  "we  have  regrettably  seen  no  improve-
ment."  This was as close  as he  came  to  expressing  disapproval.
This  year  only  five  nations  voted  against  the  resolution,  all
white  and  all  colonial  powers  which  govern  colored   peoples,
four   of  them   in   Africa.  The  five  were  Australia,   Belgium,
France,  Portugal,   and  Great  Britain.  The  abstainers,  besides
the  U.S.,  were  Argentina,  Canada,  Dominican  Republic,  Fin-
land,   Italy,   Netherlands,   New   Zealand,   Peru,   and   Spain.
Spain  still  has,  and  Italy  until  the  war  did  have,  African  pos-
sessions.  Thus  from  the  colored  man's point  of  view  the  white
empires   either   voted    against   the   resolution   or   abstained,
though  not  one  nation  spoke  in  defense  of  South   Africa.
The  Iranian  delegate,  in  opening  the  debate,  made  the  cru-
cial  point.  There  was  race  discrimination  almost  everywhere
but  South  Africa  "was  the  only  one  in  the  community  of  na-
tions  which  had  adopted   racial  segregation   as  a  goal."    Iraq
said  that  in  pursuit  of  this  objective  South  Africa  had  begun
"to  apply  rigorous  measures  of  repression  which  would  actu-
ally  amount  to  genocide."   Ghana  protested  that  on  apartheid
the  great  Powers  had  taken  refuge  behind  legal   technicalities
in  sharp  contrast  to  their  position  on  Hungary.
Latin  America  Called  Mulatto
Fabregat  of  Uruguay  protested  that  the  dark  peoples  of  the
Union  of  South  Africa  had  been  "sequestered"  like  people  "in
concentration  camps"  and  cited  the  "repugnant"   statement  of
its  Prime  Minister,  who  said  that  without  apartheid,  South
Africa   would   become   like   "the   mulatto   republics   of   Latin
America."   The   remark   rankled   everywhere  below   the   Rio
Grande.   Ethiopia  said  South  Africa  was  trying  to  spread  its
policy   throughout   the   African   continent   and   warned   this
might  lead  to  "desperate   actions."
India,  on  the  last  day  of  debate,  expressed  admiration  for
"the  trend  of  legislation,  enforcement  and  executive measures
adopted  by  the  United  States  under  the  leadership  of  a  great
President."   Even  this  went  unreported.   The  U.S.  press  treat-
ed  the  whole  debate  as of  no  importance.   But  in  the  question
of  apartheid  we  ignore  a  volcano,  and  put  our  moral  preten-
sions  to  shame.
What  the  President  Failed  to  Explain
President   Elsenhower's   fuzzy   grasp  of   the  integration
issue  was  again  evident  in  his  press  conference  of  Oct.  30.
He  said  the  South  had lived  "for  56  years  under  a  social  or-
der  that  was  approved   by  the  Supreme  Court,   and  specifi-
cally   with  respect  to  education,   the  theory  of  separate  but
equal  facilities.   Now  they  are  asked  to  consider  the  whole
system  unconstitutional  and,   naturally,   this  causes  difficul-
ties."  This  is  expressing  it  as  the  Southern  white  suprem-
acists  do,  and helps  to  create  the  impression  that  the  South
is  somehow  the  victim   of  the  Supreme  Court.
There  are  several  things  wrong  with  this  way  of  putting
it,  aside  from  the  puzzling  reference  to  56  years;  Plessy  v.
Ferguson,   which   first   established   the  separate  but  equal
doctrine,   was  in  1896,  or  61  years  ago.    The  Plessy  ruling
was  one  in  a  series  of  decisions  which  cut  down  the  protec-
tion  the  Fourteenth  amendment   was  intended   to  give  the
Negro  while  building   that  amendment  up  as  a  safeguard  of
1   7   3
About  the  School  Integration Ruling
corporate  rights.
When  Justice  Brown   wrote   for  the  Court  in  Plessy  that
while   the  Fourteenth  amendment    was,   of  course,  intended
to  bring  about   "absolute  equality  of  the  two  races  before
the  law"  but  "could  not  have  been  intended   to  abolish   dis-
tinctions  based  on  color",  he  set   a  high  water   mark   for
sophistry.   Harlan,  dissenting,  provided   the  perfect  answer
when  he  retorted   that  the  Constitution   was   "color  blind."
But  bad  as  Plessy  v.  Ferguson  was,  it  did  not  do  what  the
President  implied.   Neither  that  decision  nor  any  other  de-
cision  by  the  Supreme  Court   since  slavery  was   abolished
ever  authorized  white  supremacy  as  practiced  by  the  South.
The  Court  did not,  in  talking  of  separate  but  equal  facilities,
endorse  a  social  order   actually   based  on  separate  and  de-
gradingly  unequal  facilities.   It  is  this  on  which  the  country
needs  to  educated,  if  the  propaganda  of  the  South  is  to  be
combatted.   Education  must  begin  in  the  White  House.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  11, 1957
Canada's  Lester  Pearson  Attacks "Diplomatic Rigidity" and  Frozen  U.S.  Policy
The  First  Western  Statesman  to  Say the  Missile  Age  Calls  for  Co-Existence
Lester   B,   Pearson,   Canada's   former    Foreign   Secretary,   made   a
speech   al  the   University   of  Minnesota   Nor. 3  worthy  of  the   1957
Nobel  Peace  Prize  recently   awarded  him.  Except   for   an   apprecia-
tive  editorial  in  the  Washington  Post Nov.  6  and a  news  story  in  the
New   York   Times,  the  U.S.  press  largely  ignored  the  speech   because
it  went  counter  to  cold  war policy.   We  give  the  gist  of  it  here:
". .  . One of two things  will  happen.  (1)  Nuclear war  with
inter-continental   missiles   against  which  no  present   defense
would  save  us  from  total  destruction;  or  (2)  Suspension be-
tween  uneasy peace  and  global  war  in  a  state  of  tension  and
fear ... all history  shows  that  unless we do something  about
it,  the second will  ultimately lead  to the first  . . . nor does it
do  any  good ...  to  wrap  ourselves  in  a  cloak  of impeccable
rectitude  and diplomatic rigidity.  .  . .
"What  do  we  oppose  to  this  controlled  and  centralized  so-
ciety?  Too  often,  merely  the  well-born  cliches  of  the  super-
iority  of  freedom  and  democracy and  our  'way  of  life'.  .  .  .
Soviet  life,  Soviet  policy,  I  know,  is  founded   on  power  and
compulsion,  rather  than  consent.  But  are  we  sure  that  our
own  social  purpose ... is steady.  . . . The very  word freedom
has  now  lost  some  of  its  earlier  angry  meaning  of  stern  and
sturdy  resistance  to  pressures  and persecutions.  .  .  .  Surely
we  are  not  going to  escape total  state  control  in  order  to  seek
security  in  the  'big  organization'  type  of  social  and economic
conformity.  .  . .
"We  have,  then,  two  duties  in  the  West;  first,  to  protect
our  institutions  within  the  city  walls  from  deterioration   and
decay,  and  then  to  defend  the  walls  themselves.
The  Supreme Obligation of  All Men
"There  is, however, a  third  and  even  more  important  duty:
to  bring  about  a  state  of  affairs  in  the  world  where  no  one
will  wish  to  attack  us  at  all—or  we, them;  where  eventually
walls   themselves   will   be   as   much   of   an   anachronism   as
trenches,  barbed  wire  and  forts  on  the  U.S.-Canadian  border.
This is the supreme  obligation  of all men in all nations. . . .
"Our   insistence  on  the   primacy  of  this  task  of  making
peace  by  international negotiation;  our  seizure  of  every  po-
litical  opportunity  to  this  end,  does  not  mean  that  we  should
or  need  contemplate  agreements  which  would  betray  either
our  friends  or  our  principles.  Indeed  peace  on  such  terms
would  be  false  and  any  arrangements   made  would  be  worth-
less.  I  know that  there  are  those  who  look with  suspicion  on
every  move  which  is  made  that  implies  a  desire   or  even  a
willingness  to  negotiate;   who  call  it  'appeasement'—one  of
those  words  debased  by  polemics—or  softness  toward   Com-
munism.    Such  critics  forget  that   if  total   and  unremitting
hatred  of  Communism  were  the  only test  of  loyalty  to  demo-
cratic  ideals,  Hitler  would  be  the  greatest  democrat  of  all
time.  .  . .
"I  quite  realize  that  the  easiest,  and  in  some  quarters  the
most  popular  attitude  that  we  could  adopt  in  the  cold  war
would  be  a  relentless  and  immovable  stand  on  a  platform of
inveterate  and  inflexible  hostility  to  Soviet  Russia  and  deter-
mined  opposition to  every  move  she  makes  or  tries  to  make
any  place  any  time.
The  Hope of Unconditional Surrender
"The  corollary to  this  means  taking  steps  to  counter  and
defeat  every  such  move  in  the  hope that  Russia  will  eventu-
ally  accept  without conditions our  terms  for  ending the  cold
war   and  withdraw—actually  and   ideologically—behind   her
old  Czarist  boundaries.  I  see  myself  no  prospect  of  any  such
easing  of  tension, and, ultimately, of  international  peace  and
security,  if  we  base  our  policy  and  diplomacy  on  any  such
thesis.  .  . .
"I   accept  the  fact  that  no  matter   how  enlightened  and
flexible our  policy,  we  cannot   safely  allow  it  to  result  in  a
weakening  of  what  the   military   call  our   defense   posture.
If,  however,  we  allow  an  exaggerated   and  provocative pos-
ture  to  result  from,  or  be  encouraged  by,  a  rigid  'uncondi-
tional  surrender'  type  of  diplomacy,  we  make  the  establish-
ment   of  peace  through  tolerable   arrangements   even  more
difficult  than  it  is.   ...
"There   is  a  ferment  of  freedom   ever  at   work,  even  in
Russia;  for  freedom,  as  the  epic  of  Hungary  has  shown,  can-
not  be  rooted  out  of  the  human  mind  by  force  or  by  fraud.
.  .  .  Such  an  evolution, however,  will  be  held  back,  perhaps
indefinitely,  if  we  take  fixed  and  final  positions  now  in  oppo-
sion  to  every  Russian  move.  As  I  see  it,  if  and  when  Russia
has  a  legitimate  interest  in  some  area  or  some  development,
we  would  be  foolish  to  act  as  if  that  interest  can  either  be
ignored  or   attacked.
"Such  an  attitude,  of  course,  plays  right  into  the  hands  of
the  worst  elements  inside  the  Kremlin.   It  also  weakens  our
position  in  those  nations  who  have  no  love  for  Communism
but  refuse,  for  reasons  which  seem  perfectly  good  to  them,
to  take  sides  in  the  cold  war. There  are  situations  in  the
world  today  which  do  not  admit  of  any  permanent   solution
which  will  bring  about  stability,  without  Russian   participa-
tion  in,  and  at  least  acceptance  of,  that  solution.   We  might
as  well  admit  that  hard  fact.  . .  ."
Remember,  Please, Every  Reader  Get  A  Reader—and  Widen  the  Audience  for  Peace
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  ray  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     ............................................................................—.......
Street    ........................ .................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $4  (1 yr.) or  $2  (6  mos.)  additional:
11/11/57
(To)   Name
Street    .......
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  Q    No D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebroskt  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
T     w    «t,„,,.•<,   Wi-ol-lv     Filtered   as   Kcroncl  Class  Matter  at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the   Act   of  March  3.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
shed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  3018 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15, D. C.
lished  every  inursuaj ev
         bljs
,   ,
  an(]  e(lite<]  b
    j
   P
.
 stone;
  circulation  Manager   Esther  M. Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  L.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED