I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957mar18.pdf

============================================================

The  Truth  About Foreign  Aid,  P. 3
Exclusive:  Bunche's   Accusers,  on  BrownelPs  Payroll  Again,  Smear  the  NAACP  in  Louisiana,  Page 2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  11MARCH  18,  1957»
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Footnotes  on  A  Crisis  With  Nobody  Home
Mr.  Elsenhower  as we go to  press  is on  his way to  Bermuda;
Mr.  Nixon  is  in  the  Sudan, Mr.  Dulles  is  in  Southeast  Asia;
even  Mr.  Stassen  is on  his  way  somewhere,  in  his  case to  Lon-
don.  We  hope  Jim  Hagerty sticks around, to make a  noise like
a  Head  of  State when the Mid-Eastern crisis reaches the  boiling
point  again.  We  wonder  wistfully,  doesn't  Nasser  ever  take  a
vacation  or  get  a  cold  in  the  head?
Peace  Through  Weakness
Perhaps  the  strangest  aspect  of  the  developing  situation  is
that  the  U.S.  government,  which  has  proceeded  since  1947  on
the  premise  that  only  strength  can  preserve  peace,  is  now  act-
ing  on  the  premise  that  even  strong  words  are  dangerous.   At
the  daily  State  Department  briefing  Tuesday,  Lincoln  White,
the  official  spokesman, time after  time avoided  use of  the  word
"Egypt", as  if  the  syllables like those of  Jahveh were too sacred
to  be  uttered,  when  asked  just  whom  he  meant  by  that  state-
ment  about  the  U.S.  "hope  that  all  the  parties  concerned  will
continue  to  cooperate  with  the  United  Nations."   Mr.  Eisen-
hower  at  his  farewell  press  conference  next  day  was  weaker;
he  did  not  even  "hope",  but he had  communicated his views to
Mr.  Hammarskjold.  Very  daring.  The  Israeli  are  being  told
that  the  U.S.  cannot  say  more  publicly  without  appearing  to
be on  Israel's  side!  We  gave  Naguib  a  pistol;  someone  should
send  Mr.  Eisenhower an  umbrella.
The  Same  Cracked Record
The  off the  record  views fed  put  by the  State Department  to
Washington   correspondents  strikingly  recall  the  sort  of   stuff
with  which  the  British  Foreign  Office  tried  to  reassure  and  de-
fend  itself  during  the  heyday of  the  Axis. The  Foreign   Office
constantly  explained  away  Hitler's  violent  statements by saying
that  they  were  merely  propaganda  for  home  consumption.  The
Foreign   Office  also  excused  its  truckling  to  II  Duce  by  telling
correspondents  that  if Mussolini  were weakened  Italy would  go
Communist.  The  State  Department  strikes  both  themes  in  dis-
cussing  Nasser.   It  tries  very  hard  to  spread  the  view  that  the
Egyptian  is  really  more  reasonable  than  he  sounds.   Its  second
line  of  defense  is  that  there  is  no  alternative  to  Nasser,  that
the  Army  would  take  over  altogether,  that  Egypt  would   slip
into   the  Soviet   orbit,  etc.  This  is  the   same  cracked   record
London  played  in  the   30's.
"Too Soon"  for A Suez  Shipping  Policy?
The  simplest  point  of  policy  to  be  decided  is  whether  and
on what  terms  U.S.  ships  are  to use  Suez. The  U.S.  can  boycott
the  Canal  if  Nasser  does  not  negotiate  some  reasonable   pro-
posal  on  tolls.  The  two  U.S.  shipping  lines,  American  Export
and  American  President,  which  use the  Canal  are both  govern-
ment  subsidized  and  routes  are  subject  to  regulation  by  the
U.S.  Maritime  Administration. They  now  have  permission  to
use  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  route.  What  happens  when  the
Canal  reopens?   Shall  they  pay  tolls  to  the  Suez  Canal  Com-
pany  or  to  Egypt ? When  the  New  York  Journal  of  Commerce,
which  covers  shipping  news  closely,  put  the  question  to  the
State   Department   last   -week,   the   paper   drew   a   complete
blank.   "Queried  as to  whether  the  Department had  a  policy,"
the  Journal  reported  March  13,  "an  official  replied  that  it  was
'too  soon'  to  enunciate  one."   From  shipping  industry  sources,
the  paper  learned  that  the  liaison committee set  up  by the  De-
partment  last  Fall  has  not  met  since  last  November  and  no
meeting   has   been  scheduled   though   the   reopening   of   the
Canal  is  imminent. The  effect  is  to  encourage  Nasser  to  do  as
he  pleases,  since at  the  Treasury  the  Journal was  told  that  the
regulation  of  August  3  "is  still  on  the  books."  This  tells  U.S.
shipowners  they  can pay  their  tolls  to  Egypt  providing  they  do
so  "under  protest."
Another  Explanation  of  Aswan
The  State  Department  has  almost  as  many  different  reasons
for  the  withdrawal  of  the  Aswan  dam  offer  as  it  has  for  the
refusal   of   newspapermen's   passports   to   Communist  China.
Last  Tuesday  C. D.  Jackson,  of  Time,  Inc.,  formerly  special as-
sistant  to  President  Eisenhower,   created  a  minor  furore  at  the
Department  by  telling  the  Advertising and  Sales  Club  in  To-
ronto  that  the  U.S.  touched  off  the  Middle  East  crisis  to  force
a  showdown  with  Russia.   He  said  the   offer   to-finance   the
Aswan  dam  was withdrawn in  order  to  "call  Moscow's   bluff"
when  the  Soviets  shifted  from  cold  war  to  an  economic  offen-
sive,   and   that   while  perhaps   "we  told   Nasser   a   trifle   too
abruptly"  the  move  proved  the  emptiness  of  Russian promises
of  aid.   Jackson  also  said  that  at  a  luncheon  shortly  afterward
with  Dulles,  nationalization  of  the  Suez was mentioned  as  one
of  the  ways  Nasser  might  retaliate.  Philip  Deane  of  the  Lon-
don  Observer,  who   also  represents   the   Toronto   Globe  and
Mail  here,  was  asked  to  file  a  story  on  State  Department  reac-
tion.  The  reaction  was tortuous.  No  single  item  in the Jackson
speech  was  incorrect  but  he  had  put  it  together  wrongly, ac-
cording   to  State  Department   sources.  The   Department   was
glad to  have  called  Russia's  bluff  but  the  real  reason  for  with-
drawing  the  Aswan  offer—so  Deane  reported  to  his  Toronto
paper—was  that  Nasser  had  incensed  Congress  by  recognizing
Communist   China.
Prediction
Eisenhower  and  Dulles  will  do  all  in  their  power  to  prove
themselves  the  friends  of  the  oil  bearing  Arabs  up  to  and  in-
cluding  U.S.  naval  intervention  to  protect  Gaza  if  Ben  Gurion
moves  again.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 18,  1957
Still  on  BrowneH's  Payroll,  Perjury Investigation  Dropped
Bunche's  Phoney  Accusers Turn  Up  to  Smear  The  NAACP In  Louisiana
Memo  to  the  NAACP:  Why  not  take  the  offensive  against
Manning  Johnson  and  Leonard  Patterson,   two  of  the  state
witnesses  in  the  3-day  hearing  held  by  a  Louisiana  state  leg-
islative  committee  last  week-end to  smear  the  Rev.  Martin
Luther  King  and  the  NAACP?
In  August,  1954,  after  the  International  Organization  Em-
ployees   Loyalty   Board   had   cleared  Ralph   Bunche   of   the
charges  brought  against  him  by  Johnson  and  Patterson,  the
Department  of Justice  announced  that  they  had  been dropped
as  "paid  consultants."   The  loyalty  board  chairman,   Pierce
Gerety,  transmitted   the  transcript  of  their  testimony  to  the
Justice   Department   for   investigation   of   possible   perjury.
Gerety  had before  him sworn  testimony  which  gave  the  lie  to
the  charge  by  Manning  and  Patterson  that  Dr.  Bunche  had
participated   in  Communist  activity  in  1934.    The  Board  did
not  find  their  testimony  credible,  but  there  has  never  been
any  public  announcement as  to  whether  Johnson  and  Patter-
son  would  be  tried  for  perjury.
Perjury  Charges Dropped
Now  it  appears   (1)  that  the  Department  of  Justice  has
gone  on using  Patterson  as  a  paid  witness,  (2)  that  it  is  also
using Manning Johnson, and  (3)  that the  perjury inquiry  has
quietly  been  dropped.  The  principal  source  of  these  revela-
tions  is  a letter  sent  by  J.  M. Swing, Commissioner of  Immi-
gration  and  Naturalization,  to  Joseph  Porer,  a  Washington
lawyer,  in  response  to  two  letters  Forer  had  sent  the  Attor-
ney  General  oh  December  26  and  January  17  last,   asking
why  the  government  was  still  using  Patterson  as  a  paid  wit-
ness  in  deportation  proceedings.
Swing's  letter  was  dated  January   31  but  has  just  been
made  available  for  publication.  The  Forer  letters  were  writ-
ten  in  the  belief that  Manning Johnson  had  been  dropped  but
since  then  the  government  has   announced  in  Los  Angeles
that  both  Manning Johnson  and  Leonard Patterson  would be
among  the   professional  witnesses   to  be  called   in  the   de-
naturalization trial  of Peter  Chaunt  which began  on March  7.
Victim and Accusers  Put on Same Plane
The  Swing letter  revealed  for  the  first  time what  had  hap-
pened  to  the  perjury  charges  in  the  Bunche  case.   "With  re-
spect  to  your  allegations  concerning  Mr.  Patterson's  testi-
mony  before  the  International  Organization  Employees  Loy-
alty  Board  in  the  case  of  Dr.  Bunche,"   Swing  wrote  Forer,
"investigation   conducted  concluded  that  there  was  no  basis
for  perjury  prosecution  against  any  of  the  persons  who  tes-
tified  in  that  proceeding."  This  puts  Bunche,  the  cleared  vic-
tim,  on  the  same  level  with  the  professional  informers  the
loyalty  board  disbelieved.
Forer's  letter   of   December   26  to   the   Attorney   General
pointed  out  that  Patterson's  testimony  had  been  rejected  as
untrue   in   the   deportation   cases   of  Matrona   Karpuk   and
Nathan   Stricker,  that  U.  S.  District   Judge   Bryan  did  not
credit  testimony  given  by  Patterson   in  U.  S.  vs.  Horwitz,
HO  F.  Supp.   839,  and  that  U.  S.  District  Judge   Westover
in  Los  Angeles  had  commented unfavorably  on  Patterson's
testimony  (and  Maurice Malkin's)  in  dismissing   deportation
proceedings  last  August  in  the  Kusnitz  case.
Did  the  FBI  Want  to  Prosecute  Bunche?
In  his letter  to  the  Attorney General, Forer  said  that  when
he   cross-examined  Patterson   in   one   of  these    deportation
cases,  Patterson  testified that  he  was  under  instructions  not
to  reveal  what  he  testified  to  in  Dr.  Bunche's  hearing.    "He
also  testified,"  Forer  wrote  Brownell, "that  the  day  after  he
had  testified  against  Dr.  Bunche, agents  of  the  FBI  came  to
him  and  asked  if  he  would  testify  against  Dr.  Bunche  for
perjuring  himself."   These  two  bits  of  testimony,  Forer  said,
"carry   a  ring   of  palpable  falsity"   and   could   be   "readily
checked" within the  Department.
"I  might  also  mention," Forer  added,  "that  when  I  asked
Mr.  Patterson  on  cross-examination whether  he  was  'aware
that  Ralph  Bunche  is  still  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  United
Nations,'  he  replied: 'Oh  I  am  sure  he  is  there.   So was  Dex-
ter   White  in  the  Treasury,  and  Alger  Hiss  in  Yalta.'   Mr.
Patterson  thus  smeared  Dr.  Bunche  even- while  refusing  to
divulge  what  he  had  testified to  about  Dr.  Bunche."
Forer  wrote  that  "in  view of  the  developments which  have
occurred   with   regard   to   government   witnesses   Matusow,
Mazzei,  Crouch  and  Manning Johnson,  there  has  inevitably
arisen  some  public  doubt  as  to  whether  the  Department   has
been  sufficiently  careful  not  to  use  unreliable  witnesses.   It
seems  to  me this  doubt would  be  magnified  if  the  public were
aware  that  the  Department  is  still  using  Mr. Patterson  as  a
witness."
The  Second  Letter to  Brownell
When  there  was  no reply,  or  even  acknowledgement, Forer
wrote  again   on  January   17  saying   "The  natural   inference
from  this  silence  is  one  which I  am  loath  to  draw,  namely,
that  the  Department  is  unable  to  assert  that  Mr. Patterson
is  a  reliable  witness  and  yet  intends  to  go  on  calling  him  as
a  government  witness  and  to  rely  on  his  testimony."
This  finally  elicited the  response  of January  31.  In  this  let-
ter   Commissioner  Swing  disclosed  that  perjury   charges   in
the  Bunche  case  had  been  dropped.   He  did  not  discuss   the
Patterson  testimony that  the  FBI  had  asked  him whether  he
would  testify   against   Dr.  Bunche  in  a  perjury   prosecution.
The  four  deportation  cases  lost  by  the  government  despite
Patterson's  testimony  were  easily   explained   away  by   the
Commissioner.   It  was  not  that  the  Board  of   Immigration
Appeals  or  the   Courts  had   disbelieved  Patterson,  it   was
merely  that  they  found  that  the  government  had  not  proven
that  the  accused were  Communists and  therefore  deportable!
No finer hair  has  ever been  split  in  a  phonier  cause.   Judging
by  the  letter,  the  Justice  Department  intends  to  go  right  on
using  Patterson.
Indeed,  while  admitting   that  Patterson's  testimony  had
been   "insufficient"   in  four  deportation   cases,   the   Commis-
sioner  pointed  with  pride  to  a  fifth,  that  of  Milo  Jovetich,  in
which  he  said  an  order  of  deportation  "was  substantially   up-
held  upon  the  testimony  of  Leonard  Patterson  and  another
witness."
Bad  Faith  in  Public Relations
What  all  this  shows  is  (1)  that  the  Department  of  Justice
acted  in bad faith  three years  ago when  it  told  the  press that
Johnson  and  Patterson  had  been  dropped  as  "paid   consult-
ants"  in  the  wake  of  the  Bunche  case,  and  (2)  that   again
when  its  own  paid  informers  are  proven  false   the  Depart-
ment  never  brings  perjury  charges.   Only  victims  or  recant-
ing  witnesses  like  Matusow  are  ever  charged  with   perjury.
Finally,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  NAACP  and  the  fight
for  Negro  rights,  the  continued  employment  of  Dr.  Bunche's
accusers   is   serious.    Government  employment  gives   added
weight   to   their   testimony   in   Louisiana.    This   testimony,
which   pictured   Dr.   King   as   a   Communist  tool   and   the
NAACP  as  Communist infiltrated, is being  made  available  by
Louisiana   (according  to  a  March  10  Associated   Press   dis-
patch   from  Baton   Rouge)   for   use  in  the   other   Southern
States.    Several,  like  Virginia,  are  already  engaged  in  legal
actions   designed  to  prosecute,   if   not  outlaw,   the   NAACP
while  forcing  it  to  reveal  its  membership  rolls.
Thus  Brownell's  paid  informers,  on  the  government   pay-
roll,  are  being  allowed  to  undercut  in  the  South  that  strug-
gle for  Negro  rights which he claims  to  support  in the  North.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  18,  1957
Most  of  the  Money  Goes  for  Militarization,  Not  Economic  Development
Two Reports to  Elsenhower,  One  Phoney,  One  Thoughtful,  on  Foreign  Aid
Timed  to  build  a  favorable  opinion for  new mutual  security
appropriations   in  Congress,  two  reports  on  foreign  aid  were
released  by the  White House last  week.  One, from  a  commit-
tee  headed  by  Benjamin   F.  Faii'less,  retired   head  of  U.  S.
Steel,  was  what  is  known  on  Madison  Avenue  as  a   "snow
job."   It  found  that  all  was  for  the  best  in  the  best   of  all
possible  mutual  security  programs.   "Your  Citizen  Advisers"
informed  the  President  that  they  saw  no'reason  why  collec-
tive  security  expenditures  should  "exceed  the  approximately
8  billion  level  of  the  fiscal  year  1956,"  but  urged  their  coun-
trymen  to  "abandon  the  false  hope  that  collective  security
costs  are  temporary."    Apparently  the  cold  war  is  to  go on
forever.
It  would  be hard  to  match  this  Fairless  report  for  vague-
ness,  avoidance  of  hard  facts  and  at  least  occasional  serious
distortion.   A  sample,  in  its   effort   to  magnify   the   role  of
U.  S.  private  investment   abroad,  was  its  estimate  that  new
private   investment   abroad,  in   fiscal   1956   was   $3.7   billion
when  the  last  official   published  figure  (for  fiscal  1955)   was
only  $679  million!   The  new  figure  is  padded  by  including,
among  other  things,  the  reinvestment  abroad  of  foreign  cur-
rency  earned  abroad;  needless  to  say  this  is  hardly   dollar
investment:
Would  Divorce  Aid  From  Cold  War
The  other  report,  from  the  International  Development Ad-
visory  Board,  appointed  by  President   Truman  in  1950,  was
sharply  different  in  emphasis  from  the  first  but  like  it  was
utilized  chiefly  to  produce headlines favorable  to  foreign  aid.
The  Board  is  headed  by  Eric   Johnston   and  includes   such
thoughtful   businessmen  as  Gardner  Cowles  and  Harvey  S.
Firestone,  Jr.   We  recommend it  to  serious  students   of  the
subject.  Its  main  points  got  scant  attention  in  the  press  and
we  give  them  textually  in  the  boxes  on this  page.  The  John-
ston  board  (see  below)  tried  to  clarify  the  extent  to  which
"foreign  aid"  today  is  really  military,  and  to  plead  (see  top
of  column  2)  for  a  genuine  and  substantial  economic  devel-
opment  program  divorced  from  cold  and  hot  war  calculations.
It  gives  some  vivid  figures.  Total  capital  formation  in  Asia,
Africa  and  Latin  America  today  is  only  $15 billions  a  year,
or  little  more  than  the  annual  increase  ($14  billion  plus)  in
our  annual   output   of  goods  and   services   ($412  billions  in
1956).   The  Johnston  Board  argues  that  we  could  make  "a
significant  increase  in  the  capital  formation   of  underdevel-
oped  countries  with  no  reduction  at  all  in  U.  S.  income  and
with  only  a  small  reduction  in  the  amount  by  which  our  in-
The  Weakness of  the  Military  Approach
"One   role  of  the  economic development program  we
envisage  is  to help  to  shape  the  new patterns in  a  man-
ner  conducive  to  world  peace  and  compatible  with  the
existence  of  free  institutions.  .  .  .  Military  pacts and
military  aid  are   neither  designated   to  meet  nor  can
they  cope  with  the  vast  social,  political  and  economic
forces  loose  in the underdeveloped  countries.  .  .  . We
recommend   that   an   economic  development  program
should  be  considered,  established  and  budgeted  on  its
own  merits  as   an  instrument  of  foreign  policy.   The
present  intermingling of  military  and  economic assist-
ance—both   budgetwise   and   in   the   public   mind—has
created    misunderstanding   at    home   and   suspicions
abroad.   When  we  view  foreign  developments through
military  lenses,  we  tend  to  divide  the  world  into  those
who are  allies  and  those  who are  not. With such  a  view-
point,  there  is  little  room  for  understanding  of  coun-
tries  wishing  to  remain  free  of  all  military  alliances
but   needing  outside  help  to  win  their  battle   against
hunger,  disease  and poverty. . .  ."
—IDAB  Report,  see  box  at  bottom  of  this  page.
come  increases  each  year."
This  humane  and  far-sighted   report,  in  the  best  American
tradition,  is  certain  however to  fail.   The  military  will  go  on
utilizing   the   benevolent  connotations   of   "foreign   aid"   to
sugarcoat   billions  for   its   cheap   auxiliary   armies    abroad.
(Almost  half   the  entire  program   of  military  and  non-mili-
tary  aid this fiscal year  goes  to  Korea,  Formosa,  the  remains
of  French  Indo-China,  Pakistan  and  Turkey.).  While  the  lib-
erals  fight  for  foreign  aid,  the  economy  bloc in  Congress  will
compromise  with  the  Pentagon  by  reducing  economic  devel-
opment  and  technical  assistance  still  further.
The  Johnston  board,  in  its  plea  for  a  magnanimous  view,
quotes  some  wonderful  words  of  Henry  L.  Stimson.   "I  do
not   mean   to   belittle   the   Communist  challenge,"   Stimson
wrote  in  October,  1947.   "I  only mean that  the  essential  ques-
tion  is  one which  we  should  have  to  answer  if  there were  not
a  Communist  alive.   Can  we  make  freedom   and   prosperity
real   in   the   present   world ? •  If   we  can,  communism  is   no
threat.   If  not,  with  or  without  communism, our  own  civili-
zation  would ultimately  fail."   Who will  listen?
The  Truth  About  Our  Foreign  Program:  Only  10 Percent  Is  Really  Non-Military
"There   is  a  widespread  but   quite  mistaken   impression
that  the  United States  is  already  engaged  in  a  massive  eco-
nomic  development program.   This  arises,  in  our   opinion,
from  the  fact  that  many  Americans  refer  to  the  entire  Mu-
tual  Security   program  as  'foreign  aid'  and  then  use  this
term   as  synonymous  with  'economic  aid.'    The  facts   are
these:
"(a)   Congress   appropriated   3.8  billion   for   the   entire
Mutual  Security  program  in the current  year.  .  .  .  (b)  Of
the  total  Mutual  Security   appropriation,  54  percent,  or  a
little  over  $2 billion, is  'military  assistance' and  finances  the
exportation  of  military  hardware  to  countries  with  which
the  United  States  has military  agreements.  .  . .
"(c)  Of  the  total  Mutual  Security  appropriations,  nearly
1.2 billion  goes  to  supply  non-military  goods  and  services  to
these  countries  with  which  the  United  States  has   military
arrangements.   This  non-military aid  is  called  'defense  sup-
port'  and  is,  in  the  words  of  Congress,  'designed  to  sustain
and  increase  military  effort.'  'Defense  support'  funds  serve
to bolster  the  economies  of  these  countries, and  permit  them
to finance larger  military  establishments   than  their  econo-
mies  could  otherwise  support. ...  A  portion  of  these  'de-
fense  support'  funds  does  contribute to  long-term  economic
development.  Estimates  of  the  experts  vary  widely  on  this
point.   Some  put  it  as  low as  20 percent,  others  as  high  as
60  percent.  . . .
"(e)  Of  the  total  Mutual Security  appropriation,  only  10
percent  or  385  million  is  for  'economic  development'  in  all
of  the  countries  with  which  the  United  States  does  not  have
military  arrangements,  and  for  'technical  assistance'  on  a
world-wide  basis. . . .
"To  sum  up:  out  of  the  $3.8  billion  Mutual Security  Ap-
propriation   for   the  current   year,  the   following  amounts
contribute  to  economic  growth   abroad:
—$250  million  for   'economic  development.'
—$135  million  for  'technical  assistance.'
—Between  $240  and   $720  of  'defense  support."
—$17  million  U.  S.  contribution   to  international  agen-
cies  for  'technical  assistance.'
—Report  to  the  President,  by  the  International  Development
Advisory   Board,  Eric  Johnston,   Chairman,  March  8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  18, 1957
How  to  Get  Nixon  Down  South  to  See  Our  Own   Ethiopians
Mr.  Nixon's  triumphal  (non-segregated,  yet)  tour  through
Africa   should  firmly   establish  the  U.S.A.  as  the   most  pro-
Ethiopian,  pro-African  and  pro-Negro  nation  on  earth.  .  .  .
It  is  now  clear  that  the  Negroes   of  Montgomery,  Alabama,
can  have  a  visit  from  the  Vice  President,  too,  any  time  they
find  oil  in  their  backyards  or  uranium  deposits  under  their
privies. ... Or have an air base  to offer.  . . .
We  were  all  ready to  write  a  solemn  piece  on  the  evils  of
exposure  by legislative  process,  as  argued  before  the  Supreme
Court  in  the  Watkins  case when  along  came  that  Florida  leg-
islative  committee  and  violated  John  Kasper's   right   to  pri-
vacy  by  eliciting  an  admission  under  oath  that  he  had  danced
the  shango  with  Negro  girls  at  mixed  parties  in  Greenwich
Village.  . . . We haven't  so enjoyed a  legislative  investigation
since  that  midget  sat  on  J.  P.  Morgan's  knee  in  the   Pecora
inquiry.  .  .  .  The  executive  secretary  of  the  Seaboard  White
Citizens  Council  could   have  survived  the  admission  that  he
read  Lenin  and  liked  borscht,  but  Kasper  we  believe  was  fin-
ished  when  he  had  to  answer  "yes"  to  the  question,  "Did  you
ever  attend  a  dance  where, white  men  danced, with   colored
girls  and  colored  men with  white  girls?"  .  .  .  After  that,  he
can  never  waltz  amid  the  magnolias.  .  .  .
Are  Labor  Unions   Sacrosanct?
The  old  legal  crotchet  says  circumstances alter  cases.  .  .  .
No  one  who  is  honest  with  himself can  fail  to  see  that  he  is
often  led,  as  history  shows  us  contending parties  have invari-
ably  been  led,  to  take  up  fundamental philosophical  positions
under  the stress of  purely tactical  considerations. ... I  am not
arguing  for  a  cynical  "realistic"  view  of  the  law  but  only  for
a  deeper  facing up to the basic issues. . . .
Not  only  my delight  in  Kasper's  deflation  but  the  Supreme
Court  split  over  the  United   Automobile  Workers   case  pro-
voked  these  reflections. . . .
Two  generations  of  American  liberals  and  radicals,  as  Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter's  majority   opinion  recounts  it,  fought  to
prevent  the  power  of  massed  corporate  capital  from  distorting
the  electoral  process.  .  .  . But  now when  an  attempt  is  made
to  enforce  the  law  against  labor  organizations,  too,   emotional
positions  change.  .  . .
Mr.  Justice  Douglas  in  his  dissent  for  himself,  Black  and
Warren,   speaks  of  "We  The  People"   (in   large  sentimental
capitals)  but  so  sweepingly  as  to  cast  doubt  on  the  constitu-
tionality  of  banning  contributions  by  corporations  as  well  as
labor  unions.  .  .  .  The  majority  merely  held  that  the  consti-
tutional  issues  should  not  be  passed  on  until  there  had  been  a
trial, and the full  factual picture were available.  .  . .
We  are  not  at  all  sure  that  the  labor  movement  would  not
grow  healthier  and  stronger  if  it  had  to  persuade  the  mem-
bers,  not  only  voluntarily  to  make  campaign contributions  but
voluntarily  to  join. ...  A  labor  movement  built  on  compul-
sion,  mass  signing  up  of  workers  from  above  in  closed   shop
agreements,    and   mass  manipulation   politically   by  the   top
bureaucracy,  may  easily  attain  large  proportions  but  tends  to
be fat and flabby rather than  strong  and lean.  .  . .
More  Briefly
The   contempt  action  against   Ludwig   Rajchmann,   Polish
delegate   to  the  UN   Children's  Education   Fund,   represents
a  move  by  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  to  help
block  a  Polish  loan  by  creating  unsavory  headlines. ...  In
this  Eastland   is  a  help  to  the   "hard"   faction   in  Moscow,
which  would  like  nothing  better  than  to  see  a  loan  refused
and  Gomulka  weakened. . . . Add last  week's  note  on our new
"Horatio   Alger"  Supreme  Court  Judge:   Daniel  M.  Berman
in  the  Washington  Sunday  Star  (March  9)   turned  up  Judge
Charles  W.  Whittaker's  one  civil  liberties  opinion   (129   F.
Supp.  716).    Whittaker   ruled  the  trustees  of  the  University
of  Kansas  City  were  not  only  justified  but  would  have  been
"derelict"   if   they  had   not   discharged   Horace   B.  Davis   as
professor   of  economics   (despite  tenure)  for  refusing   to  an-
swer  "whether"  (the  words  are Whittaker's)  "he  is a member
of   a  found  and   declared  conspiracy  of  a  godless  group   to
overthrow  our  government.  .  .  ."   Cross-examination  of  Jules
Sourwein  by  Harry  Rand  in  the  William   A.  Price  trial   for
First   Amendment  contempt   of   the   Internal   Security   Com-
mittee  last  week  elicited  the  information  that  the  one   con-
crete  reason   the  Committee  had  for  calling  this  New   York
newspaperman  was  that  in   1941   a  "William  Price,   Swarth-
more,  Pa."  signed  a petition  defending  civil  liberties  for  Com-
munists.  Price  always  uses  the  initial  "A"  and  never  lived  in
Swarthmore.  . . .
//   You  Keep  A  File  of  Weeklies,  Write  Now  For  Any  Missing  Numbers  Before   Our  Spring   Cleanup
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street    .........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .......................................................
Street    ..................................................................
3/18/57
City   ......................—•——..........Zone..........State................~....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stones  Weekly
Room   205
301   C.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
WaihHiflton  3,  D. C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I   F    Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
'      llshetl   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August   and   December   at  301  B.  Capitol   St.,   Washington  3,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.   F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED