I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jan14.pdf

============================================================

Billion  Dollar  Oil  Steal,  Page  3
Extra:  How  The  South's  Power  in  the  Senate  Can Be  Broken  in  1959,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  2
JANUARY   14,  1957
«>'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Deterrence  by  Guessing   Game?
Room  1301  is  the  hearing  room  of  the  House  Banking and
Currency  Committee, borrowed  for  the  occasion  by  House  For-
eign  Affairs.    It  is  a  homey  chamber  with  its  lemon   colored
walls,  gilt  lighting  fixtures  and  the  two  potted  green  elephant
plants  on  its  fireplace  mantle.   It  contains  about  50  cane  bot-
tommed  chairs which filled rapidly last Monday morning, most-
ly  with  elderly ladies, the  wives or  widows  of  members,  and  a
scattering  of  college  students.  The  long  press  table  was  jam-
med   with   second   echelon   Washington   correspondents.   The
bigwigs  were  snobbishly absent,  having  been  privately briefed
by  Mr.  Dulles  the  week  before.
Mr.  Dulles  arrived flanked by Admiral Radford  and  follow-
ed  by  a  covey  of  anxious  aides  with  briefcases.    Mr.  Dulles
looked  in  amazingly  good  health  after  his grim  operation   (how
these  Republicans  thrive  on  surgery!).  Mrs.  Dulles,  a  rather
sweet  faced  woman  with  sad  eyes,  took  a  reserved  front  row
seat,  from  which  she  watched  all  day her  husband's   extraordi-
nary  form  of  convalescence. The  faces  and  expressions  at  the
crowded   committee   bench  above  Mr.  Dulles  were  those  one
might  see at  any  Akron, Ohio,  Rotary club luncheon  at  the  cli-
mactic  moment  when  the  pie  a  la  mode  has  been  served  and
it  is  time  to  hear  the  distinguished  visiting  speaker.
Geography,  Too,  Is  Now  "Classified"
Mr.  Dulles  in  his  prepared  statement,  like  the  President  in
his  message  two  days  earlier  to  that  rather  apathetic  joint ses-
sion  of  Congress,  emphasized  the  importance of  the  new  Mid-
dle  Eastern  resolution  in  putting  potential  aggressors  on  firm
and  clear  notice.  The  danger,  as  Eisenhower  expressed  it,  was
that  "ambitious  despots  may miscalculate."   So almost  the  first
question  was  whether  the  Secretary  would  tell  the   committee
just  what  countries  would  be  guaranteed.  What  was  meant  by
"Middle  East"  and  by  the  resolution's  even  vaguer  wording
which  speaks  of  authorizing  the  President  to  undertake  mili-
tary  assistance  or  action  "in  the  general  area  of  the  Middle
East?"    "I  prefer  not  to  go  into  this  merely  closely,"  Mr.
Dulles  said  mysteriously, "except  in  executive  session."
This  was  the  first  surprise  of  the  hearing.  What  happens  to
the  notion  of  a  clear,  precise  and  unmistakable  warning  if  the
exact  area  to  be  covered  by  the  guarantee  against  aggression  is
a  secret ? And  is Congress to  sign another  blank  check  for  war,
with  the  place  as  well  as  the  time  to  be  filled  in  later?   Mr.
Dulles's  reply  in  effect  was that  it was better  to keep the  enemy
guessing,   lest  he  take  a  more  specific  guarantee  as  an  invita-
tion  to  seize  territory  not  covered  by  it.   But  how  does  one
reconcile  the  miscalculation  theory  with the  keep-'em  guessing
strategy ?  Mr.  Dulles was not  pressed  on  it.  The  Formosa  reso-
lution   two  years  ago  left   Quemoy   and  Matsu  vague  in   the
blank  check  for  war. This new one  leaves  not  two small  islands
but  a huge  area  of  the  globe  in  doubt.   Advance stories includ-
ed  in  this  "general  area"  countries as  far  east  as Afghanistan,
as  far  west  as  Morocco,  and  as  far  south  as  Tanganyika.  Mos-
cow  will  have  to  guess  hard  to  keep  up  with  Mr,  Dulles.
A  Lovely  Bit  of   Logic
The   second   surprise  of  the   hearing  came   in  the   answers
which  Mr.  Dulles  furnished  to  the  question  of  whether  we  had
any  evidence  that  there  was  danger  of  armed  overt  aggression.
This  was  asked  several   times.  The  first  time  the  wily   Mr.
Dulles  replied  that  we had  fully  as  much  evidence  in  the  Mid-
dle  Eastern  area  as in  other  areas we  had  guaranteed.   No  one
asked  how  much that  was.  "I  don't  know  of  any  demonstrable
evidence  that  the  Soviet  Union  is  going  to  attack  the  United
States,"  Mr.  Dulles   said  the  next  time,  "but   we  have   bases
ready  just  in  case."  The  third  time,  in  replying  to  Mrs.  Kelly
of  Brooklyn,  the  Secretary gave  a  fuller  answer.  "We   do  not
have  any  concrete  evidence,"  Mr.  Dulles  said,  "of  a  planned
attack   on  this  area."    But—he  continued—the   Soviets   were
tempted   by  it  and   they  had   no  moral  or   legal   inhibitions
against  taking  the  area  if  they could,  so maybe they  would  try.
"The   fact  that  we  don't  have evidence of  attack,"  Mr.  Dulles
concluded   triumphantly,  "does  not  prove   that   they  are  not
going  to  attack."   No  one  challenged   this  lovely   logic.
The  third  surprise  toward  the  end  of  that  day  long  session,
with  an  early winter dusk  creeping  through  the  windows,  came
in  response   to  a  question  by  Mrs.  Church   of   Illinois.    Mr.
Dulles  said  the  Administration would  make  no  binding  com-
mitment  under  the  new  Middle  Eastern  plan  which  would  au-
tomatically  bring  this  country  to  the  defense  of  any  nation  in
that  area  attacked  by  the  Soviet  Union.  (If   the  commitment
isn't  firm,  what  happens  to  the  theory  of  deterrence  by  clear
warning?)  Mrs.  Church  commented  wistfully  that  she  thought
there  was  "something   indefinite"  about  the  resolution.    This
will  rank  high  among  the  understatements  of  this  session.
One   definite   thing   emerged   from   Mr.   Dulles's   replies.
When  Mr.   Dulles  was  asked  by  Mrs.  Kelly  whether   Israel
could   qualify  for  military  assistance  under  the  resolution,   he
replied  that  it  was  "our   general  policy  not  to  be  major  pur-
veyors of  arms to  Israel  or  the  neighboring  Arab countries  and
we don't  expect  the  resolution  to  alter  it  in  this  respect."  Sup-
pose,  Mr.  Dulles  was  asked,  that  Israel  was  attacked  by  a  na-
tion  which  had   Soviet  advisers  and   Soviet  arms,  would   she
qualify  for  aid under  the  resolution ?  Mr.  Dulles  said  the  reso-
lution  would  not  apply  unless  the  attacking  government  was
actually  controlled  by Russia. This as much as  says that  an  Arab
state  may  accept  Russian  advisers  and  arms  and  attack   Israel
without   running  afoul  of  the  new  policy.  This  is  hardly  a
formula  for  bringing  peace  and  stability  to  the  Middle  East.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  14,  1957
Labor  and  the  Negro  May Now  Bring  About  A  Revolution   in  The  Senate
The  Power  of  the  Southern  Oligarchy  Can  Be Broken  in    1959
The  anti-filibuster  fight  can  be  won  in   1959.   The  Nixon
ruling   makes   it  possible  for   a  majority   two   years  hence   to
change  the  rules.  With  Nixon  in  the  chair  to  break  a  tie,  a
change  of  seven  votes  is  now  enough  to  loosen   the  strangle-
hold  of  the  South  upon  the  Senate. This  is the  big  news  which
comes  out  of  the  first  week  of   Congress.
Left  of  center,  as  well  as  right,  there  is  reluctance  to  look
too  closely  at  what  happened  in  the  Senate  on  Friday,  January
4. The  Democrats  and  liberals  find  it  politically  uncomfortable
to  recognize  what  Nixon  did. The  Old  Guard  looks  away  be-
cause  the  events  of  that  day  foreshadow  the  end  of  that  coali-
tion  of  Southern  Democrats  and  Republican  troglodytes  which
so  long  dominated  the  Senate.   But  the  Negro  can  cheer,   for
this  was  the  curtain raiser  on  the  final  act  of  his  struggle   for
first  class citizenship.
The  Nixon  ruling  and  the  vote  in  the  Senate  reflected   the
new  power  of  the  Negro  voter  in  the  North  and  the  recogni-
tion  of  that  power  by the  Eisenhower  forces.   If  the  Negro can
be won  back permanently to  the  Republican party,  if  it  pursues
the  "me,  too"  New  Dealism  of  the  Eisenhower  period,  and  if
economic  conditions remain good,  the  G.O.P.  can  hope  to  stay
in  power  a long  time.
When  this  year's  vote  (55-38)  to  table  the  Anderson  anti-
filibuster  resolution  is  compared  with  the  vote   (70-21)    last
time  it  came  up,  four  years  ago,  an  historic  shift  in  political
What    Happened?
The  problem  of  changing  the  rules  of   the  Senate  is
now  a  majority   problem.   In  1949  the  Senate  adopted  in
Section  3  of  Rule  XXII  a  provision   that  would  forever
prevent  a  majority  from  changing  the  rules  against  the
wishes   of   even  one   determined  dissenter.   In   holding
Section  3  unconstitutional,  Nixon  has  restored  majority
rule.   It  was  by  a  simple   majority  that   the  Anderson
anti-filibuster   resolution  was  tabled.   Two  years  hence,
if   Nixon  rules  the  same  way  and  a  point   of  order   is
raised,  it  will  take  only  a  simple  majority  vote  to  up-
hold  him,  and  a  majority  can  then  change  the  rules.
power   is  disclosed.  The   South   is  rapidly  being   isolated.   A
mere  change  of  seven  votes  would  create  a  tie  and  Nixon holds
the  power  to  resolve  that  tie  against  the  South.   Perhaps  the
shift  is  most  dramatically  illustrated  by  the  names  and   States
of  the  twelve  Republican  Senators  who  voted  with  the  South
in   1953   and   changed   their   minds  to   vote   (or    announce)
against  it  in  1957.  These  were:  Payne  and  Smith  of  Maine,
Aiken  and  Flanders  of  Vermont,  Bush  and  Purtell  of   Con-
necticut,  Smith  of  New  Jersey, Beall  of  Maryland,  Cooper  of
Kentucky,  Potter  of  Michigan,  Thye  of  Minnesota  and  Wiley
of   Wisconsin.
Even  in  the  border  States,  the  power  of  the  Negro  voter  is
rising.   Four  years  ago  there  were  no  votes  against  the   South
from   Maryland,  Kentucky  and  Tennessee   (Kefauver   merely
abstained).  This  year  there  were  only  two  votes  from   these
States  for  the  South:   Gore  of  Tennessee   and  Butler  of   Mis-
souri. This  time Kefauver  voted  against  the  South.  So did  both
Senators  from  Kentucky  and  Beall  of  Maryland.
Another  way  to  visualize the  shift  is  to  look  at  the  block  of
Northern  and  border  States  from  the  Mississippi Valley  to  the
Atlantic  seaboard.    In   1953   in  only  four   of   these   States—
The  Filibuster   and   Minorities
"Wa  are  told   the  filibuster  protects  the  right  of   the
minority.   What   minority,    Mr.  President?   The   Negro
minority,   which,  in  much   of  our  Nation  is  still  denied
first  class  citizenship  .  .  .  ?   Or is  the  consideration   de-
voted  to  the  protection  of  an  entrenched  and  powerful
minority   determined   to  continue  to  deny  full  first  class
citizenship  to  all  Americans  regardless  of  color  .  .  .  ?
How  long  has  it  been  since  any  other  minority  was  pro-
tected by  the  filibuster?"
—McNamara   (D.,  Mich.)  to  tlie  Senate, Jan.   4.
Rhode  Island,  New  York,  West  Virginia  and  Missouri—did
both  Senators  vote  against  the  South.    But  this  year  in  only
three  of  these  States—New  Hampshire, Delaware  and  Indiana
—did  both  Senators  vote  for  the  South.   Except  for  white su-
premacist  Delaware,  there  is not  a  single  State in  this northern
area  where  the  Senators  are  not  vulnerable  to  pressure.
Where  to  Get  the   Vote
Where  can  the  seven   votes  to  change  the  picture   be  ob-
tained?  The  easiest vote,  of  course,  is that  of  Green  (R.I.).  He
voted  against  the  South  in   1953.   His  vote  this  year  on  the
other  side  of  the  fence  is  inexplicable.  Next  is that  of  Salton-
stall  in  Massachusetts;  his  colleague  Kennedy voted  against  the
South  both  years.  The  third  is  the  seat  which  Knowland  will
vacate  in  California;  he  was  the  only  holdout  on  the  South's
side  among  the  six Senators  from  the  Pacific  Coast  States.   Con-
sidering  California's  high  proportion  of  Mexican,  Jewish  and
Negro  voters,  whoever  succeeds  Knowland  is going  to  have  to
vote  as  Kuchel  did  against  the  filibuster.
Where  to  get  four  votes  more?   Of  the  30  Senators  whose
terms  expire  in  1959,   the  next  time  the  issue  comes  up,  three
are  from  the  South  and  thirteen  voted  against  it.  This  leaves
14, including  Knowland  who  will  not  run  again.   Of  the  other
13 at  least  seven  can be fought  on  this  issue with  some  hope of
success.   Martin  (R.)   of  Pennsylvania  is  a  last  holdout  in  the
Middle  Atlantic  States  against  the  dominant  trend  in  his  own
Republican  party.   Bricker  (R.)   of  Ohio  will  have  trouble  on
this  issue,  especially  since  Lausche  voted  the  other  way.    Rev-
ercomb   (R.)   of  West  Virginia  is  from   a  State  where   both
Senators   last  time   (Neely  and   Kilgore)    voted   against   the
South.   McCarthy   (R.)   was  left   isolated  on  this  issue  when
Wiley   reversed   his   own   position   and   announced   this  year
against  the  South.   Gore  (D.)   of  Tennessee  must  change  his
vote  in  1959  and  join  Kefauver  or  give  up  any  hope  of  the
Democratic  presidential  nomination.   Goldwater   (R.)   is  from
a  State,  Arizona, where  one  fifth  of  the  population  is of  Mexi-
can  extraction.   (Senator   Anderson's   leadership   in  the  anti-
filibuster  fight  is  no  accident:  one  third  of  the  people  of  his
State,  New  Mexico,  are  of  Mexican  origin,  and  feel  the   race
issue  as keenly  as the Negro).  Jehner  (R.)   of  Indiana  will  be
hard  put  to  explain  how  he  claims  to  be  for  civil  rights  but
keeps  on  voting  for  the  South  on  the  filibuster  issue.   It  should
be  possible  to  pick  up  four  votes  from  these  seven.
Labor,  the Negro  and  other  minority  groups  ought  to  begin
and  plan now for  that test two years  hence. A virtual revolution
may  be  accomplished  in  the  Senate.  This  would  bring  drama-
tic  changes  not  only  on  Negro  rights  but  on  all  social  issues.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jamtai-y  14,  1957
The  Billion  Dollar  Oil  Steal  In  The  Wake  of the  Middle  East  Crisis
dustry—and  one  which  cannot  be  solved  by the  European  fuel
shortage,"  the  New  York  Journal  of  Commerce  reported  Jan-
uary  8,  "is  the  surplus  stocks  of  gasoline."  .  .  . Yet  the  price
is  boosted  a  penny  a  gallon  on  the  excuse  of  the  oil  shortage
abroad. ...  As for  crude  oil,  shut-in  production  is two  and  a
half  times as great  as Western  Europe's  emergency  needs.  .  . .
Production  is  being  artificially  restricted  to  provide  an  excuse
for  the  price  rise.  .  .  .  Senator  O'Mahoney  (D.  Wyo.)  is call-
ing  for  an  inquiry  by  the  Senate  Anti-Trust  and   Monopoly
Subcommittee,  of  which  he  is  a  member. ...  He  complains
that  the  Administration handed  over  emergency  powers  to  15
major  companies  in  the  Middle  East  crisis  and  they  are  using
it  at  the  expense  of  the  consumer  and  the  independent.  .  .  .
The  story  to  which  the  press  is  paying  least  attention  is  the
oil  company gouge  in  the  wake of  the  Middle  East  crisis.  .  .  .
The   35  cent  increase  a  barrel  in  the  price  of  crude  and  the
penny  increase  a  gallon  in  the  price  of  gas  will  add  up  this
year  to  an  extra  tax  of  close  to  a  billion  dollars  on  the   U.S.
consumer.  .  .  . The  penny-a-gallon  alone  will  amount  to  more
than  a  half  billion  dollars  a year.  .  .  . This  is pure  steal.  .  . .
The  Suez  crisis  did  not  increase the  demand  for  gasoline  from
abroad  but  for  crude;  foreign  countries prefer  to  do  their  own
refining.  . .  . Instead  of  a shortage  of  gasoline,  we have  a glut.
.  .  .  The  latest  official  figure  was  that  gasoline  in  storage  is
more  than  175 million barrels,  20  million  barrels  higher  than
last  year.  .  .  .  "The   greatest  problem  facing  the  U.S.  oil  in-
Congress  Prepares  to  Tackle  That  Long  Overdue  Surgery  of  Labor  Rackets
Labor's  enemies  may  be  preparing  to  attempt  what  labor's
leaders  and  friends  have  been  too  weak  to  tackle:  a  clean  out
of  racket  elements.  .  .  .  The  big  labor  news  this  year  will  be
made on  Capitol Hill  where  behind  closed  doors  this  week  the
Senate  Permanent  Investigations  Subcommittee  of  the   Senate
Government  Operations  Committee   (the  old  McCarthy   com-
mittee)  will begin  to interrogate  Teamster  officials.  . . .  Victor
Riesel's  blinding  last  April  sparked  the  committee's  investiga-
tion, which began  in July. ... Its chairman,  Senator  McClellan
(D.  Ark.)  told  the  Senate last  week  staff  members  had  been  at
work  in  New  York,  Chicago,   Seattle,  Portland,  Los  Angeles,
Minneapolis,  Philadelphia  and  other  areas,  and  had  uncovered
instances  of  collusion  with  employers,  extortion,  violence,   di-
version  of  funds,  income  tax  frauds  and  even  a  case  where
"dishonest  Teamster  officials"  tried  to  take  over  a  city  govern-
ment  "for  the  purpose  of  controlling  vice,  including  gambling
and  prostitution."  .  .  . The  McClellan  committee   membership
is  heavily  anti-labor  and  Senator  Ives   (R.  N.Y.)    tried   last
week  with  a  rival  resolution  to  shift  any  investigation  to  the
friendly  Senate  Labor  Committee.  .  .  .  But  three  events  have
created  so  bad  an  impression  as  to  make  it  unlikely  Ives  will
succeed.  .  .  .  Frank  Brewster,  president  of  the  Western  Con-
ference  of  Teamsters  in  Seattle,  now  says  the  records  he  was
asked  to bring  here  this  week  have  been  "stolen." ... In New
York  City,  the  Teamsters  announced  that  they  were  reactivat-
ing  the  alliance  with  the  racket-ridden  ILA  (longshoremen)
which  George   Meany  blocked  last  spring.  .  .  .  And  Martin
Lacey  of  the  Teamsters  Joint  Council  in New  York  gave  up  his
long fight against  racket alliances in disgust.  . .  . The  situation
is  so bad  that  even  some  labor  leaders, traditionally opposed  to
Congressional  investigation  of  union  affairs,  are  not  as  hostile
as  they  would  normally  be to a  Senate  inquiry.  .  .  . The  rack-
eteers  in  some  areas  of  the  movement  are  getting  too  big  for
the  top  leaders  of  labor  to handle on  their  own.  .  . .
Behind  the  Barenblatt  and  Harry  Sacher  Contempt  Decisions
Three   indistinguishably  conservative  judges   (Washington,
Bastian  and  Burger)  on  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  here,  in
upholding  the  First  Amendment  contempt  conviction  of  Lloyd
Barenblatt,  serve  as  a  reminder  that  the  U.S.  Supreme   Court
has  never  yet  passed  on  the  right  of  the  House  Un-American
Activities  Committee to  engage  in  ideological  inquisition.  The
Barenblatt  decision,  in upholding  the  powers of  the  Committee
to  inquire  into  political  association  and  belief,  was  based  on
the  famous  Barsky   case  (167  F.  2d  241)   in  1948,  which  the
Supreme  Court  refused  to  review,  as  it  also  refused  to  review
the  Hollywood  Ten  cases.  This  has  left  the  law  as  stated  by
the  Circuit  Courts,  but  one  of  these  days—perhaps  in  the  Bar-
enblatt  case—  the  Supreme  Court  will  have  to  pass  on  the  is-
sue.    So  far   Judge  Edgerton's  dissent  in   Barsky   and  Judge
Charles  E. Clark's  dissent in  the  Josephson  case (165  F. 2d  82)
are  the  only direct  judicial  challenges  to  the  right  of   Congress
to  engage  in  a  secular heresy hunt.   Barenblatt,  a  young  Vassar
instructor   (discharged   immediately  on   being    subpoenaed),
was  identified   as  having  been  a  member  during  his   student
days  of  an  allegedly  Communist  discussion  group.
The  same three judges, in upholding  the  conviction  of  Harry
Sacher  for  contempt  of  the  Senate  Internal  Security  subcom-
mittee,  unfairly  stated  the  facts  of  the  case.   Sacher  was  sum-
moned  in  the  subcommittee's  investigation   of  Matusow's  re-
cantation.  The  subcommittee  purported  to  be inquiring  into  an
alleged   conspiracy  to   arrange   for   Matusow   to   recant.   The
Court  opinion  failed  to  make clear that  Sacher,  while  declining
on  First  Amendment  grounds  to  answer questions  about  mem-
bership  in  the  Communist  party,  did  deny  under  oath  that  he
had  any  knowledge  of,  or  had  participated  in,  any  such  con-
spiracy.  The  omission  blurred  the  issue,  which  was:  Having
answered  the  questions  pertinent to  the  Matusow  investigation,
was  Sacher  compelled  to  answer  general  questions  about  his
political  views and  associations ?  But  the  court  went  beyond  an
unfair  omission  to  a  direct  misstatement.  The  opinion  says  the
Senate  committee  was  investigating  "reports  linking  appellant
with  this  alleged  conspiracy."   But at  the  trial,  Jules  Sourwine,
then  counsel  for  the  committee,  testified  to  the  contrary.   Sour-
wine's  testimony  in  court,  like  Sacher's  before  the  committee,
was  that  Sacher  knew  nothing  of  the  recantation  until  he  re-
ceived  Matusow's  affidavit.  The  decision admits  that  Sacher,  as
lawyer  for  the  Communists  in  the  "second  echelon"  Smith  Act
prosecution    (Elizabeth   Gurley   Flynn   et  al)    had   "a   right
and  a  duty"  to  make  use  of  Matusow's  recantation   for   the
benefit   of  his  clients.   History  will   see  this  whole  affair   as
another  incident  in  the  political  persecution  of  a  brave  lawyer.
Unless  he  wins  on  appeal,  Sacher  goes  to  jail  for  six  months.
He  has  already  served  six months  for  contempt  of  court  in  the
first  Smith  Act  trials  and  was  only  saved  from  disbarment  by
a  favorable  Supreme  Court  decision.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Wee/fly,   January  14, 1!>57
High-Lights  and  Low: Off The  Ticker  Tape  and  In  The  Crystal  Ball
Israel's  Crisis:  It  would  be  suicidal  for  Israel  to  withdraw
from  Gaza  and   Sham-es-Sheikh  at   the  head  of  the  Gulf  of
Akaba  and  permit  Nasser  to  resume  fedayeen   raids  from  the
Strip  and his illegal  blockade of Elath.  . .  .  Nasser  promised
not  to  blockade  the   Gulf   of  Akaba  in  1950; his  promise   is
worthless.  .  .  .  Fedayeen  are  already  operating  again   from
Jordan.  .  .  .  The  wise  solution  would  be to  let  the  UN  take
over  the  Gaza  strip  pending  a  final  Arab-Israeli   settlement;
the  refugees  there  prefer  UN  to  Egyptian  rule,  though  un-
derstandably  hostile to Israel. . . . And if the  UN wants  peace
and  stability  in  the  Middle  East,  a  system  of  permanent  pa-
trols  in  the  Sinai  (until an  Israeli-Egyptian  peace)   would  go
a  long way to prevent  the raids  which provoked  Israel  to war.
... It  is time  for  Americans to  remember  what  we did  when
Villa's  troops  raided  across  the U.S.-Mexican  border. . . .
Nixon  vs. Knowland: The  stage  is  set  for  a wide-open fight
between  the  two  for  the  1960 nomination;  the  former  has  de-
cided  to  bank  his  future  on  Elsenhower  Republicanism  and
the  Negro,  the  latter  on  disaffected  right  wing  Republicans.
The   Knowland  move  this   early   puts   the   Administration's
nominal  Senate   leader   into  a  posture   of  opposition  and  in-
creases  its  dependence on  the  Democrats.   Since  the  Adminis-
tration  must  do something  on  civil  rights,  the  session  will see
the  curious  spectacle   of  Eisenhower  and  the  liberal  Demo-
crats  drawing  closer  while Johnson  and  Knowland  form  a  bi-
partisan  opposition.
The  Future  of Poland: Gomulka's absence  from  the  meeting
of  the  other  satellite  States  with  Krushchev  in  Budapest,  the
U.S.  receptiveness  on  trade  talks,  and  the  attack  by  Rude
Pravo  in  Prague  on  both  Polish  and  Yugoslav   publications
for  their  heretical  attitude  on  Hungary  add  up  to  a   further
drift  of  Poland  toward  a  qualified  independence.  .  . . Gomul-
ka's   position  is  precarious;  the  Russians  will  never  let  him
become a  Tito,  receiving  military  aid  from  the  U.S. but  cour-
age  and  political  skill  may  carve  out  considerable  leeway  for
the  Polish  state  internally  and externally. ...
Tip  to  the  Press:  Federal   Judge  Goodman's  order  in  San
Francisco  forbidding  the  State  Department   to  penalize  Los
Angeles  Attorney  A. L. Wirin "for entering or  leaving" Com-
munist  China  might  become a  precedent  for  a  similar   action
to  protect  a  reporter  threatened  with  sanctions  for  travelling
there  in  the  course  of  exercising  freedom  of the  press.  .  .  .
Wirin  is  counsel  for  John  W.  and  Sylvia  Powell  and  Julian
Schuman  of  the  now defunct  China  Monthly  Revieiv  (Shang-
hai)   indicted  for   sedition  for   printing   germ   warfare   and
other  charges  during  the  Korean  war.  .  .  .  Wirin  withdrew
his  passport  suit  here  in  the  District   on  the   heels   of  the
Memo  to  the  State  Dept.
In  view  of  an  unfortunate  trading  practice  in  Saudi
Arabia  perhaps  it  might  be  just  as  well  if  the  schedule
for  the  forthcoming  visit  of  King  Saud  omitted  a  visit
to  the  Lincoln Memorial.  If  His  Royal  Highness should
turn  the  conversation  to  the  Emancipation  Proclama-
tion,  our  visitor   could  be  taken  instead   to  see  where
Booth  shot  him.
Goodman  order. ...  He is going  into  China  to  collect  deposi-
tions  to  prove  that  such  charges   were  printed  in  good  faith
and  on the  basis  of reports  the  Powells  believed  reliable.  . . .
When  an  editor  has  to  prove  in  court  that  he  did  not "wil-
fully"  print what  the  government  believes untrue  we are  back
in  the  days  when  Eighteenth   Century  colonial  editors  could
be  haled  into  court  for  "seditious  libel."  .  .  .  "Print  but  at
your  own  risk"  was  freedom  of  the  press  as  Blackstone  un-
derstood  it,  but  the  Framers  thought  Blackstone  was  super-
seded  by the First  Amendment.  . . .
Test  of  white  supremacy:  The  Southern  Regional  Council
reports  that  21 cities  in  Arkansas,   North  Carolina,  Virginia,
Texas  and  Tennessee  have  abolished bus  segregation   without
court  action.  The real test  of  the  white  supremacists  in  Mont-
gomery,   Birmingham  and  Tallahassee   is  whether   (like  the
Negroes  in  those  cities)  they  care  deeply enough  to  walk:  no
law  says  they   have  to  ride  the  buses.   .  .  .  Hat's  Off: To
Edward  R.  Murrow  and  Fred  W.  Friendly  for  their  "See It
Now"  TV  program  January   6  on  Clinton, Tenn.,  superb  and
sensitive  reporting. . . .
Just  the  politically  purest   little  old  capital   in  the  world
(this  side  of  Moscow):  The  District  of  Columbia Commission-
ers  voted  unanimously last  week  (despite  a  recent  protest  by
the  ACLU)  that  the  Corporation  Counsel had  a  right  to  ask
applicants  for   licenses   to  sell   insurance   whether   they   had
ever  invoked  the  Fifth  amendment.  .  .  .  The ACLU  doesn't
realize  the special  hazards  here.  . . . The shrewd  City  Fathers
are  taking  no  chances  on  letting   subversive  insurance  men
handle  policies  for  certain  members of Congress.  . . . Imagine
the escape  clauses  a  pinko agent might  slip  into  life  insurance
for,  let  us  say, Chairman  Walter  of  the  House   Un-American
Activities  Committee.  .  .  . His  heirs  would  probably  find  (in
the  small  print)  that  they  could collect  the  full  sum  on which
premiums  had  been  paid  by  the  deceased  if  he  got  trampled
by  a  wild bull dropped  from  a  helicopter  in  a  collision with  a
BMT  subway  train  anywhere  in  Flatbush  on  a  legal  holiday.
Use  The  Blank  Below  to  Send  A  Gift   Sub  to  A  Friend   With  Your   Renewal
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
^trpot
City  ................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name
C* ma*
City  ................
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.........................Zone.......
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
...................... ...Zone.......
gift  announcement?
..State.......................
(1 yr.) additional:
1/14/57
..State.......................
Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.  Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  nnder  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879. Fre-dated  Mondays  but   published
every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  AuipiBt  and  December  at  301  ID.  Capitol  St.,  Washington  8,  D.  C.  An  Independent  weekly  pub-
lished  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  circulation  Manager,  Esther  II.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in   the  U.S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.   Air  Mall
rains :  $15  to  Burope;  ?~0  to  Israel,  A»i»  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED