I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957sep16.pdf

============================================================

Documentary:   Joseph   Clark's  Letter  of  Resignation  from  the  Daily  Worker,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.   35
SEPTEMBER   16,  1957
»«"        WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Like  the  Beginnings  of  A  Revolution
o          D
What  we  are  seeing  in  the  South  is  something  which  re-
sembles   a   revolution.   The   government   is   trying   to   bring
about  a  deeply  unpopular  change.   The  moderates  have  been
counselling  peaceful   resistance,  and  undermining  respect  for
the   agencies   of   government.     The   moment   has   now   come
when  leadership  passes  to  the  extremists, who  advocate  force
and  violence.   The  street  mobs  have  begun  to  take  control.
The  mobs  are  only  a  handful,  and  those  who  would  resort
to   violence   are   still  a   minority.    But   that   minority  has   so
much  power  because  its  aims  are  the  wishes  of  the  majority
—to  block  integration.  The  power  of  the  mob  may  be  meas-
ured  by  the  silence  of  the  South's  normal  leadership.   Except
for  the  Mayor  of  Little  Rock,  no  public  figure  has  spoken   up
for  obedience  to  law.   No  Senator  from  the  South,  no  Gover-
nor,  no  member  of  Congress,  no  leader  of  the  bar,  has  dared
publicly  utter  a  restraining word.  This  dead  silence  may  prove
to  be  the  inner  "eye"  of  a hurricane.
The  Moderates  Outbid
It   is  whispered   in   Washington   that   unless  something   is
done  soon  by  the  Federal  government  the  moderates  will  be
destroyed  politically.  The  Southern  Senators only  a  few  weeks
ago  looked  like  shrewd  and  skillful  statesmen.   Now  they  ap-
pear   to  be  appeasers   and   quislings.    How  can  they  compete
with  a  Governor  who  calls  out  the  National  Guard  to  pre-
vent  integration ?   The   niceties  of  Senatorial  footwork   would
look  ludicrous  if  explained  to  a  Southern  audience  which  has
just  seen  action.
The   best  the  moderates   offered   was  a  long  slow  delaying
action.   To   the  extremists  this  was  only  a  gradual   form  of
surrender.   They  have  taken  the  offensive  in  the  border  states
of   Arkansas   and   Tennessee   where   integration   had  already
begun.    They   can  claim  to  be  pushing   integration  back,  in-
stead  of  retreating   slowly  before  it.   The  extremists  have  out-
bid  the  moderates.
They  Prepared  Their  Own Downfall
The  moderates  prepared  their  own  downfall.   In  the  State
legislatures,  the  moderates  enacted   nullification.   In   Congress
all  last  spring   during  the  civil  rights   debate,   the   moderates
helped  to  intensify  in  the  South  a  pathological  state  of  mind:
suspicion  of  the  Supreme  Court,  distrust  of  all  Federal  judges,
a  feeling  that  alien  and  esoteric  forces  were  plotting  against
the  South  and  its  "way  of  life."   The  moderates,  when  a  little
integrity  and  courage   might   still  have  counted,   pandered  to
the  view  that  resistance  to  law  was  an  almost  sacred  duty  for
white  Southerners,   a  pious  obligation   they   owed   their   past.
Faubus,  the  mobs  and  the  dynamiters  are  only  acting  out  what
the  moderates  taught  them.
The   mob   itself   is  what   mobs  usually  are,  unstable   fringe
elements,  eager  for  any  occasion  to  vent  long  pent  up  hatreds,
hatred  of  their  own  ugly  selves  they  spew  outward  on  what-
ever  their  social  conditioning  makes  the  target.   The   South
has  more  than  the  normal  quota  of  such  sick  souls,  as  it  has
more  than  the  normal  quota  of  poverty,  ignorance  and   shift-
lessness  plus  a  frontier  habit  of  violence.   The  average  South-
ern  white  is  probably  more  afraid  of  the  mob  than  the  aver-
age  Southern  Negro,  since  the  former  fears  his  own  good  in-
stincts,  which  might  betray  him  into  "nigger  loving"  opposi-
tion.   The   latter  may  regard  the   mob  as  an  almost   normal
recurrence   of  white  bestiality  which  one  may  avoid   without
loss  of  self-respect.
A  Void at  the Helm
These  human   scarecrows   and   juvenile  delinquents  in  the
news  photos   and   on   the   television   screens  might   become  a
majority  overnight.   If   they  can  provoke  a  race  riot,   if  they
can   make   the   issue  seem   starkly   North   versus   South,   the
United  States  could  find  itself  in  the  gravest  crisis  since  Fort
Sumter.   Every  day's  delay  by  the  President,  whose   enormous
personal  prestige  might  be  put  to  good   use  at  this  juncture,
risks  irreversible  events.
Unfortunately  we have a President who  is nine-tenths figure-
head.   A  figurehead  must  be  manipulated.  There  seems  to  be
no  one  around  to  tell  him  what  to  do,  and  so  he  turns  up
in   the   same   picture   pages,   happily   relaxing  on   the    18lh
green.   "Mr.   Brownell  also  informed  the  President,"  the  New
York   Times  reported   almost  tongue  in  cheek,  "that  a  Nash-
ville  school  had   been  bombed.   Mr.   Hagcrty  said  the  Presi-
dent's  reaction  to  this  had   been   'the  same  as  anyone  else's
would  be—he  thought   it  was  a  terrible  thing'."   The   gaping
walls  of  the  Hattie  Cotton  school   are  not  as  terrible  as  this
gaping  vacuum  in  the Presidency.
If  Only Little  Rock Were  in  Syria
If  the  situation  were  not  so  deadly  serious,  one  would  be
tempted  to  satirize the  contrast  between  the  airlift  swiftly  un-
loading  arms  6,000  miles  away  in  Jordan   to  meet  an   exag-
gerated   crisis  in   Syria  with  the   irresolution  the  government
shows  at  home.   The  dangers  of  communism  seem  to  arouse
Washington  much  more  quickly than  those  of  racism,  though
the  latter  comes  up  in  a  form  which  is  a  fundamental chal-
lenge  to  law  itself.
This   is  a  time  to  see  ourselves  as  other  see  us.   The   ugly
hate/filled   faces  of  the  whites  in  Little  Rock  and  Nashville,
the travery  of  the Negro  children  and  their  parents,  the  Min-
ister   knocked   down   and   beaten   in   Birmingham,   the    poor
feeble-minded  Negro  emasculated  by  Klansmen   just  to  prove
their  mettle,  are  giving   the  colored   majority   on  this  planet
a  picture of  us  it  will  be  hard  to  eradicate.   Whether  here  or
in  Algiers,  the  white  race  just  doesn't   seem  as  civilized  as  it
claims  to  be.
1  3  j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  16, 1957
An  Important  Documentary  of  Our Times:  The  Daily  Worker's  Foreign  Editor  Explains
Why   He  Lost  Faith  in  His  Own   Party   and  the  Krushchev  Regime
By  Joseph  Clark
"I  was  among  those  who  greeted  the  progress  recorded  at
the  last  convention  of  the  Communist  Party. ...  It  pro-
claimed   its   independence   and   came  out   against   dogmatism
and  sectarianism.  .  .  .  This  was  a  natural  result  of  the  crisis
in   our   movement   following   the   revelations   about  the   evil
degeneration  caused  by  Stalinist communism.
"The   hope  and  promise  of  that  convention  have  not  been
fulfilled.    Sad  confirmation is  found  in  the  record  of  the  last
National   Committee  meeting  held   July  27-28.    A  summary
of  the  proceedings  has  been  published  in  Party  Affairs,   Vol.
I,  No.  1.  Readers  will  notice  that  instead  of  a  search  for  more
effective  means  to  advance  socialism  the  meeting  took  up  the
most  incredibly  irrelevant  questions.   For  example,   do2ens  of
speakers  discussed  at  great  length  what  one  of  them  quaintly
called,  'the  question  of  Joe  Clark.'   One  after  another  con-
demned   my  views.   A  grand   climax  was  reached   with   full
unanimity,  'that  the  National  Committee  register  its  disagree-
ment  with  the  line  of  the  Daily  Worker   foreign  editor.'
Stalinist  Style  Refutation
"Their  judgment  could  be  perfectly  correct.   I  am  only  too
keenly  aware  of  my  own  fallibility.   But  while  my  views  and
my   'line'   were   condemned   no   one   could   detect   what   my
views  and  'line'  were.   The  Party  Affairs  bulletin  reveals  not
a   single   reason,   no   argument,   not   one   idea   for   that   con-
demnation.   As  in  the   days  of  Stalin  something   is  declared
'right'  or  'wrong'  with  no obligation  to tell  why, what  or  how.
"Though  the  National   Committee  voted  against  removing
me  as  foreign  editor  it  explained  this  was  because  of  'its  rela-
tion  to  outside  forces  at  the  present  time,  when  we  are  still
in  this  difficult,  weak  stage.'   At  a  different  stage,  other  steps,
presumably  will  be  in  order.   The  fact  is  that  I  find  it  dif-
ficult to  write  as  I  please  in  the  Daily  Worker.    Not  that  my
writing  is  directly  censored.    But  within   the   framework  of
harassment  in  the  party  and .an  obligation  to  those  who  share
many  of  my  views,  but  are  concerned  with  'proper'  tactics  in
the  inner-party struggle,  I  simply  do  not  express  my  views  as
I  would  like  to.
Opposes  Support  of  Krushchev
".  .  .  my  view  is  that  socialism  can  be  served   only  by  a
complete  break  with  Stalinism.  The  latter  perverted  socialism
by  substituting autocracy for  democracy.  .  .  .  Are  we  helping
socialism  and  the  Soviet  people  if  we  seem  to  go  along  with
Krushchev  when  he  proclaimed  that  Malenkov   was  respon-
sible  for  the  evil  that  Stalin  wrought?   I  have  no  doubt  that
Malenkov,   as  well   as  Krushchev,   was   implicated   in   those
evils.   But  the  roots  of  the  evil  require  a  better   explanation
than   the   'character'   of   Stalin   or   Krushchev's    latest   gloss,
We  present  here  the  heart  of  Joseph  Clark's  letter  of
resignation    as   foreign   editor   of   the   Daily   Worker.
The  text,   to  the  paper's   credit,  was   published  in   its
issue  of   Sept.   9.    We  believe   it  will  be  followed  one
of   these   days  by  the  resignation   of   the   editor,  John
Gates.   Clark  feels,  as  we  have  ever  since  our  visit  to
the   Soviet    Union   in   the   spring   of    1956,   that    the
Krushchev  regime  represents  no  real  break  with   Stal-
inism.—IPS.
'Malenkov  not  only  did  not  restrain  Stalin,  he  very  skillfully
took  advantage  of  Stalin's  weaknesses  and  habits  in  the  last
year  of  his life!  .  . .
"One   cannot  have  an  independent  stance,  or  a  scrupulous
regard  for  truth,  and  support  the  'unity'  of  the  Soviet   Com-
munist   party  behind  Krushchev,  as  the   Daily   Worker    did
editorially.   Since  there  is  no  prospect  that  a  common   sense,
Marxist  view  will  prevail  in  this  regard,  party  membership
has  become  incompatible  with  a  truly  socialist  position.
"The  only  effective  posture  from  which  American  Marxists
can  work  for  American-Soviet friendship—necessary   if  man-
kind  is  to  survive in  a  time  of  hydrogen-headed  ICBM  weap-
ons—is  that  of  independence.   The   issue  was  posed   directly
at  the  last  convention  of  the  party  by  the  letter  of   Jacques
Duclos,  who,  for  a  second  time,  meddled  in  the  affairs  of  the
American  Communist  movement. ...  I  refer  particularly  to
Duclos'  declaration  that  proletarian  internationalism  'implies
solidarity  with  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Soviet  Union."
When Kadar Was Still  Honest
"History   is  replete   with  instances  where  the  opposite  is
true.   In  1939  internationalism  required  support  for  the  anti-
Hitler  war,  not  the  shameful  neutrality  of  both   the   French
and  American  Communist  parties.   And  in   1956   proletarian
internationalism    required    solidarity   with    the     Hungarian
workers  opposing   Soviet  intervention.   It  demanded   support
for  the  Hungarian  workers  who  formed  a  solid  phalanx  of
workers   councils   and   for   their   100   percent   solid   general
strike.   It  meant  solidarity  with  the  views  expressed  by  Janos
Kadar  in his Nov.  1 radio  address,  when  he was still  with  the
Hungarian  masses,  and  said:  'Our  people  have  proven  with
their  blood   their  intention  to  support  unflinchingly  the  Gov-
ernment's   (Nagy's)   efforts   for   the  complete  withdrawal  of
Soviet  forces.'  .  .  .
"There  is  no  prospect  that   party   leaders   will   rebuff   the
Duclos   statement  quoted   above,  not  in  generalities   but  with
specific  reference to  the  Duclos  letter.   All  efforts  that  I  made
to  get  a  specific  refutation  .  .  .  were  rebuffed.   Therefore  to.
remain  in  the  party  tends  to  lend  support  to  the  disastrously
un-Marxist  policy  which  has time  and  again  isolated  us."   .  . .
From the  Significant Reply  the  Daily Worker  Published  Next  Day  by  John  Gates,  Its Editor
"The  resignation  of  Clark  is  another  sign  of  the  contin-      The  resignation   of   people   from   the   Party   only   weakens
ued  decline  of  the  Communist  Party   .  .  .  the  loss  of   45     the  struggle  of  those  who  want  to  see  the  great  hope  and
percent  of  our  membership  in  the  past  year.  .  .  .  We  have      promise  of  the  national  convention  fulfilled.   In  my  opinion,
not  yet  succeeded  in  creating   the  kind  of   atmosphere   in     the  development  of  these  policies   has  been   retarded.   .  .  .
the  Communist  movement   where  new  ideas  can  freely  be     But  they  have  not  been  destroyed   or  reversed. ...  I  have
advanced  without   name-calling   invective   and  abuse.  .   .  .     not  lost  hope,  as  has  Clark.  .  .  ."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  16, 1957
Expulsion  of  the  Teamsters  Will  Not  Cure  the  Movement's   Bureaucratic   Ills
Labor Ought to Set Up  An Independent Investigating Commission on Its Own
The  expulsion  of  the  Teamsters  will  not  solve  the  prob-
lems  of  the  labor  movement,  nor  prevent  a  drive  in  the  next
Congress  for  restrictive legislation.   If  the  leaders  of  the  AFL-
CIO  were  wise,  they  would  ask  a  group  of  respected  leaders
in  law,  political  science  and   the  radical  movement—men  of
the  statute  of  Learned  Hand  and  Norman   Thomas—to  in-
vestigate  the  internal  structure of  trade  unionism  and  to  rec-
ommend  reforms.
It  evades  the  point  to  argue,  in  the  wake  of  the  McClellan
Committee  hearings,  that  most  labor  unions  are  not  corrupt
and  that  many  big  businesses are.   When  a  union  as  huge  and
powerful  as  the  Teamsters  can  be  run  by  men  like  Beck  and
Hoffa,  the  problem  is  not  a  marginal  one.   The  corruption  in
the  Teamster  leadership  has  its  roots  in  conditions  which  ex-
ist  elsewhere  in  the  labor  movement.
As Profitable  As  Slot  Machines
When  it  is  possible  for  a  labor  leader  to  sign  up  a  shop
by  a  deal  with  the  employer  over  the  heads  of  the  workers,
without  ever  really  organizing  them,  and  to  collect  dues  di-
rectly  from  their  pay  envelopes,  again  by  arrangement  with
the  employer,  we  have  the  seeds  of  a  racket.   A  union  under
such  circumstances  can  be  as  fruitful   a  source  of  income  for
a  racketeer  as  a  chain  of  slot  machines.
Add   the   ease  with   which   in   some  international  unions,
locals  can  be  transferred,  created   or  purchased;  the  absence
within  most  unions  of  internal  democracy;  the   lethargy,   in-
difference  or  despair  of  rank-and-file  elements;  and  the  pref-
erence  employers  often   show  for  corrupt  union  leaders,  and
you  have  a  situation made  to  order  for  gangsters.   What  hap-
pened   in  the  Teamsters   can  happen   elsewhere   in  the   labor
movement,  and  has.
Essentially  what  we  have  here  are  political  problems,   like
those  in  government.   Trade  unions  have  become  one  of  our
means  for  organizing,  protecting   and  governing   segments  of
society.   Unfortunately  they  have  grown   up   in  a  very  un-
democratic  way.
Like Latin  American  "Presidents"
With  all  due  respect  to  the  many  able  and  devoted  men  in
the  leadership  of  labor,  the  actual  situation  in  most  unions—
whether  honest  or  corrupt,  left  or  right—is  that  once  a  man
gets  himself   elected   President,   he  stays  in  for   life,   like  so
many  Latin  American  "Presidents."   The  cult  of   personality
is  a  chronic  disease  of  American  trade  unionism.
The  retention  of  power  begins  as  a  tribute to  ability  shown,
often  under   difficult  conditions  in  early  struggle.   But   power
is  soon   perpetuated   by  less   admirable   means.   Most   unions
are   little   one-party   States,   in   which   the   way  to   advance-
ment  is  through  faithful  adherence  to  the  ruling  party.
Too   few   unions   have   constitutional   devices   for    regular
elections,  a  really  free  ballot,  and  the  possibility   of   organiz-
ing  an  opposition   slate.    The   union   paper   is  open  only  to
the  ruling  party;  its  pages  are  always  adorned  by  pictures  of
the  Leader;  its  independence  as  journalism  is  on  a  par  with
Prat/da's.    It  is  not  surprising  that  so  few  members  turn   up
for  meetings  which  decide  nothing.    This  helps   solidify   the
ruling   party  in   power,   just  as  the   small  vote   in  Virginia
makes  life  easy  for  the  Byrd  machine.
Participation  Is The Key
The   labor  movement   generally  displays   a  thickening  bu-
reaucratic  crust  over  an  indifferent  or  apathetic  mass.   Instead
of  militant workers  of  an  older  type,  for  whom  trade  union-
ism  was  a  crusade,  an  education  in  democracy,  a  means   for
self-development   through   participation—and  that  is  the  key
word—we  have  a  labor   movement   made  up   to  a   growing
extent  of  men  who  belong  to  unions  without  conviction  and
pay  dues  only  because  they  must.  This kind  of  a  labor  move-
ment  is  not  the  kind  that  can  weather  a  crisis,  much  less  lay
the  foundations  for  a  better  social  order.
An  independent  investigating  body  of  the  kind  here  sug-
gested  could  perform  a  service  to  the  American  labor  move-
ment  by  an  analysis  of  this  internal  situation  and   a  recom-
mended  program   of  constitutional  reform  for   labor  unions,
with  a  Bill of  Rights for  the  rank  and  file.  The  mere sporadic
policing  of  "ethical  practices"  from  the  top  will  not  cure  the
evils;  we  need  means  for  encouraging  greater  participation  in
the  government  of  unions  from   below.
Legislative  Program  Needed
Is  the  AFL-CIO  leadership   capable  of  launching  its  own
Counter  Reformation ?  In  the  absence  of  such  action,  progres-
sives  ought  to  have  their  own  legislative  program.    Congress
can  by  statute  establish   a  system  of  regular  labor  union  elec-
tions,  with  public  control  of  the  ballot  and  its  count,  opposi-
tion  ticket  access  to  membership  lists  and  publications,   full
disclosure  of  all  financial  transactions  by  the  leadership,  and
a  "conflict  of  interest"  law  for  labor  leaders.   The  last  is par-
ticularly  important  to  drive  out  the  type  of  leadership  which
regards  trade  unionism  as  a  business,  to  be  run  along  with
other  business  interests.
There  is  no  doubt  that  Congress  has  the  power  under  the
commerce   clause   to   regulate    the   internal   affairs   of   trade
unions,  as  there  is  no  doubt  of  its  right  on  the  same  basis  to
investigate  labor  abuses.   An  investigation  of  labor  racketeer-
ing  under  a  specific   resolution,   like  that  of   the   McClellan
Committee,   is  not  to  be  confused  with  an   investigation  of
ideas  protected   by  the  First  amendment.   If   the   McClellan
committee  has  given   the   labor   movement  a   black   eye,   the
fault  lies  with  its  own  failure  to  clean  house  long  ago.   With-
out  that  investigation  Beck  and  Hoffa   would  still  be  riding
high.   Progressive   unionists  ought  to  use  the  McClellan   reve-
lations  to  force  into  action  those  stodgier  elements  who  have
lived  side  by  side  with  corruptionists  for  many  years,  quite
comfortably.
REMINDER:  I.  F.  Stone  to  speak  on  disarmament,  "Will  Mankind  Destroy   Itself?"  in  Chicago   (Eugene
V.   Debs  Forum),  Sept.  20,  Curtis  Hall,  410  S.  Michigan; in Detroit  (Labor  Forum),  Sept.  21,  Central YWCA,
2230  Withered  at  Montcalm;  and  in  Toronto   (Socialist  Forum),  Sept.  22,  in  United  Steel  Workers  Hall,  35
Cecil  Street,  Time:  8  p.m.                                           ,  ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  16, 1957
Soviet   Bloc  Five  Years  Ago  in  UN  Laid  Basis  for  Debate  on Hungary
That  Diilles  Retreat  011  China  May  Foreshadow  Stricter  Travel  Restrictions
It  was  Senator  Knowland,  that  pillar  of  the  China  lobby,
who  forced  Secretary   Dulles  to  reverse  himself  on  visas  for
Chinese  Communists  and  permission  for  Americans  to  visit
Bulgaria.    In  both  cases  the  Senator  wanted  action  in  order
to  make  it  possible  for  California  to  be  host  in  1960  to  the
winter   Olympic's.   Red  China,  Bulgaria   and  Albania  are  all
members  of  the   International   Olympic  Committee   (meeting
Sept.  20  in  Sofia)   and  the  rules  require  invitations  for   all
members.   But  the  State  Department  in  retreating  has  laid
the  basis  for  a  broader  attack  on  the  right  to  travel.   Until
now  restrictions  have  been  linked  to  Communist party  mem-
bership  or  cooperation  with  its  aims.   But  the  announcement
on  Bulgaria  said  passports  will  be  allowed  for  that  country
if  the  State  Department  believes  such  travel  "in  the  national
interest"  and  newsmen  who  apply  do  so  in  the  wake  of  Mr.
Dulles's  new  doctrine  of  August  27 that  they  have  "an  obli-
gation   to   be   responsive"   to   U.   S.   foreign   policy.     This
means  (1)  that  the  Department  would  no  longer  feel  obliged
to  allege  or  prove  Communist  connections  in  denying   pass-
ports  and  (2)  that  newsmen  who  get  passports  may  have
their  dispatches  scrutinized  to  see  if  they  were  "responsive"
to  U.  S.  foreign   policy.
Precedent   for   Hungary:  Just  five  years   ago   (Sept.  12,
1952)   the   Soviet   bloc  voted   with  the   majority   in  the   UN
General  Assembly  to  override  South  Africa's  protests  against
interference   with   its   "internal   affairs"   and   the   UN   con-
demned  apartheid   legislation   as  a  violation  of  fundamental
human  rights.  .  .  .  Peter  Fryer,  the  correspondent  who quit
the  London  Daily   Worker   when  it  refused  to  print  his  dis-
patches   on  the   Hungarian   revolution,  notes   in  his   News-
letter   (180  Clapham  High  St.,  London, SW  4)  that  the  only
real  white  Terrorist  the  Kadar  regime  has  been  able  to  dis-
cover  since  that  revolution  was  69-year-old  Mihaly  Kiss,  and
he  was executed  for  crimes  committed  in  1919.  . .  . The  Lon-
don  Sunday   Times   (Sept.  1)  reports  that   Soviet   plans  to
stage  a  spectacular  trial   linking  Imre  Nagy   with   Western
imperialism  before  the  UN  General  Assembly  meeting   have
broken  down.   The  kidnapped  former  Prime  Minister  had  a
dangerous   heart  attack  just   before  the  revolution  and  the
usual  methods  for  extorting  the  necessary  confession  cannot
be  applied.  . . . The quality  of the present  regime  was etched
unmistakably   in  Janos  Kadar's  speech  on  August  20,   "The
imperialists   say  our  system   is  cruel,  but   our  workers   and
peasants  say  it  is  not  cruel  enough."
Worth   Wider   Attention:  Frank   Gervasi  from   Damascus
in  the  New  York   Post   (Sept.  5)  reported  an  interview  with
Khaled  Azem,  Syria's  defense   minister,  fresh   from   a   suc-
cessful  trade  mission  to  Moscow, in  which  "for  the  first  time
since  the  end  of  the  Arab-Israeli war  in  1947  an  Arab  leader
has  spoken  publicly  of  the  possibility of  peace  with  the  Jew-
ish  state."   Azem  hinted  there  might  be  peace  in  "two,  five
or   ten   years,   given   a   long   period   of   quiet   on   the   fron-
tiers.  .  .  ."  They  Still  Like  to  Be  Led:   "The   ideal  of  our
citizens,"  Reinhold  Maier,  head  of  the  right  of  center  Free
Democrats  said   in  an  unusual  election  campaign   speech   in
Heidelberg,  "is  simply  to  turn  their  cares  over  to  a  leader
and  to  think  no  more  about  it.  That  was  the  case  with  Bis-
marck.   Then  it  was  repeated  with  Kaiser  Wilhelm  II.  .Then
came  Hindenberg,  and  we  know  what  came  after  that.   And
now  our citizens  have  their  Adenauer."  .  . .
State  Dept's  New  Policy  Planner:  Of  Gerard  C.  Smith,  the
Department's   new  Assistant   Secretary   of  State  for   Policy
Planning,  the  Washington Post  said  in  an  editorial  (Sept.  5)
that   though   once   assistant   to   former   AEC   Commissioner
Thomas  E.  Murray,  Smith  "later  seemed  to  reflect  the  es-
sentially   narrow   approach   of   Lewis   Strauss   and   Admiral
Radford.   Associates  say,  however, that  Mr.  Smith  is  broader
than  this.  .  .  ."    Upsetting  the  Middle  East:  The  Italian
Embassy   in  Washington,  asked  about  reports  that  the  U.  S.
was  trying  to  block  the  new  oil  agreement   between  Iran  and
Italy,  said  no  official  protest  had  been  made  but  that  there
had  been  some  informal  discussion  on  the  matter.  Italy's  oil
deal  with  Iran  would  give  the  latter  75 percent  of  the  profits.
U.  S.  and  British   oil  companies  fear   this  will  upset  their
50-50  deals  elsewhere  in  the  Middle  East.  . . .  Shadow  Over
TVA:  With  the  recess  appointment  of  former  Deputy  Budget
Director  Arnold  Jones,  the  board  of  TVA  will  now  be  domi-
nated  for  the  first  time  in  its  history  by  men  hostile  to  it.
In  opposition  to  public  power  of  any  kind,  the   Elsenhower
Administration    is   consistently    not   "modern"   Republican.
Senators  Hill,  Kefauver  and  Sparkman  blocked  the  Jones  ap-
pointment  and  will  fight  it  when  Congress  reconvenes.   .  .  .
Reminder:  the  Israeli   press,  commemorating  the  fifth  an-
niversary   last   month  of  the   murder   of  the   Soviet    Union's
Yiddish  writers,  noted  that  the  Russian  government   had  yet
to  make  a  public statement  admitting  the  "mistake"  and  re-
habilitating   the  dead.  .  .  .  Odd:  "Nobody  is  bothering  him
for   it,"   Walter   Winchell  reported  in  the  New   York   Mirror
(Sept.  4),   "but   Red  spy  catcher   Boris   Morros   owes   Uncle
Sam  a  whopping  tax  bill."  .  .  .  Danger   Signal:  the  latest
Federal  Reserve  Board  report  shows  consumer  credit  reached
an   all-time  peak   at   the   end  of  July  at   $42,360  billion, of
which  32.7  was  installment  debt.   Automobile  credit  also  set
a  record  high,  at   15.3  billion.
//   Your  Subscription   Ran  Out  During  the  Summer,  Please  Renew  Now
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name       ........................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City    .........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name     ..........................................................
9/lli/57
Street
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  ns   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.   D.  C..  tinder  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December  at   SH18  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington  15. D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Cirenhltion   Manager.  Kslher   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  iu  tu   U.  S.;   $(i  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $-'0  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED