I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957feb11.pdf

============================================================

Why  the CP  Ought  to Dissolve, P.  3
New   Developments   in  the  Fight  Against  the  "Undesirable  Discharge"  Menace,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  6
FEBRUARY   11,   1957
'<"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
White  Man's  Comedy,  Black  Man's  Agony
We  went  over  to  the  Old  House  Office  Building  last  Mon-
day  to watch the  opening  of  the  annual hearings on  civil rights
legislation.  They  were  held  in  Room  346,  the  hearing  room  of
the   House  Judiciary  Committee.  This   high   walled   chamber
with  its  heavy  leather  chairs  and  thick  dark  red  carpeting,  its
mahogany   book-cases  filled  with   fat   legal   works,   might   be
the  reading  room  of  a  well  established  bar  association.  Of  the
four  rows  of  chairs  set  out  for  the  hearing,  scarcely two  were
filled.  There  were  three  Negroes   in  the  audience  and   three
Negro  reporters  at  the  press  table.
Attorney  General   Brownell,  who  was  scheduled  to  be  the
first witness, arrived early,  and  looked  about him ingratiatingly.
He  came  over  to  the  press  table  to  greet  favored  reporters, pat-
ting  one  on  the  back  and  hailing  another  with,  "Haven't  seen
you  for  years."   Nobody  at  the  press  table  was ungentlemanly
enough  to  reply,  "you  haven't  had  a press  conference in  years."
The  Attorney General  is thin  and  bald,  with  a  sharp  face  and
a  much  too  plausible  expression.   A  satisfied  little  wisp  of  a
smile  plays  about  his  lips,  as of  a  man  who  feels  himself  to  be
a  smooth,  a  very  smooth,   operator.
Ready   for   Another   Dear   Departed
Chairman  Celler,  with  the  strong  bald  head  of  a  late Roman
Emperor,  the  hard  working  type,  rapped  the  hearing  to  order
from  the  high  committee  bench.   He  read  a  statement  which
turned  out  afterward  on  examination  to  be  quite  eloquent,  but
he  delivered  it  in  a  colorless,   almost  inaudible  voice,  and  in
the  accents  of  an  overworked  preacher  at  a  funeral,   sad,  re-
signed   and  all  but  completely   hopeless.    No   man   struggles
more  indefatigably  year  after   year  in  causes  foredoomed   to
failure;  Celler  fights  white  supremacy,  monopoly,   bank  hold-
ing  companies and  immigration  restrictions,  but  always in  vain;
he  is  the  Sisyphus  of  Capitol  Hill.
On   Celler's   right   sat  his  fate,  the  handsome  gray-haired
Keating  of  New  York,  the  ranking  Republican  member.   If  all
goes  this  year  as  in  the  past,  when  the  Celler  civil  rights  bill
reaches  the  House  floor  after  all  Celler's  labors,  there  will  be
a motion  to  strike all  but  the  enacting  clause,  the  weaker  Keat-
ing bill will  be  substituted,  the  new "Celler  bill"  will  pass  and
then  be  buried   in  the  Senate.  This  familiar  and   remorseless
script  is enough  to  make  any  Congressman   sound  mortuary.
The   Attorney   General,   flanked   by  his   assistant,   Warren
Olney   III,   read   his   prepared   statement   next,   in   cultivated
Eastern  seaboard  tones.   Occasionally  he  tried  to  spread  a  lit-
tle  elocutionist  schmaltz  (if   the  phrase  be  permissible   of  so
high  born  an  Episcopalian)   on  its  dry  and  stereotyped  phrases
about  "equal  justice  under  law"   and  "the   very  life-blood  of
representative   government."   Into  this   tired   and   hackneyed
text,  recited without  real feeling,  as into  this genteel  and  sedate
chamber  where  Mr.  Brownell  was  so politely questioned,  there
penetrated  no  echo  of  the  Negro's  agony  and  humiliation.
A  Lily-White Committee
Neither  in  the  questions  nor  in  the  statement  was  there  any
reference   to  the   Montgomery   bombings   or   the  Mississippi
murders,  except  perhaps  in the  Attorney  General's  one  discreet
phrase  about  "the  turbulent  events  and  unfortunate  incidents
that  occurred  in  the  interim",  i.e.,  since  the  last  time  he  went
through  the  motions  of  asking  civil  rights  legislation.  Though
there  are  three  Negroes  in  Congress  and  one  is  a  lawyer,  no
Negro  sat  as  member  or  guest   on  that  committee  bench  to
question  the  Attorney  General  with  the  deeper  feeling  of  a
shared  pain.    No  Negro  has  ever  been  assigned  to  the  Judici-
ary  Committee  which  passes  on  his  hopes  of  full  emancipa-
tion.   The  black  man's  burden  is  in  white  men's  keeping.
Mr.  Brownell  is  not  without  tender  feeling.    In  asking  for
the  right  to  use  civil  injunctive  remedies  against  violations of
civil  rights,  he  drew  a  parallel  with  the  anti-trust  laws  where
"as  in  civil rights  cases,"  he  said,  "criminal  prosecution  of vio-
lators  sometimes  is  unduly  harsh."   No  one  stopped   him  to
note  that  the  only  criminal  prosecutions  ever  brought   under
the  anti-trust laws  have  been  against  labor  leaders.   The  "male-
factors  of  great  wealth",  like  white  supremacists,  have always
been  treated  gently.   No  one  asked  him  in  what  civil   rights
prosecutions  the  law had  "sometimes"  proven  "unduly  harsh."
Why  No  Prosecutions in  Ouachita?
Beside  Mr.  Brownell  sat  Mr.  Olney,  the  assistant  attorney
general  in  charge  of  the  criminal  division.   Last  October   10,
in  a  pre-election   grandstand   play   for   the  Negro  vote,   Mr.
Olney  unexpectedly  added  to  his  testimony  before  the   Gore
committee  on  campaign  expenditures  a  vivid  picture  of  how
the  White  Citizens  Councils  had  conspired  with  registrars  in
Ouachita   Parish,   La.,  and  Pierce  County,   Ga.,   to  purge  the
rolls  of  registered  Negro  voters.    No   one  asked  Mr.  Olney
why  no  criminal  prosecution  had  been  brought.   No  one  asked
what  was the  use of  giving additional  powers  to  a  Justice  De-
partment  which  was  not  using  the  powers  it  already  had.
The  G.O.P.  is  interested   in  wooing  the  white   Southerner.
No  filibuster  can  stop  a  civil  rights  program   if  the  Republi-
cans  really  want  one.   But  the  indications  are  that  this  session
they  will  again  play  out  their  little  comedy  with  the  Southern
Democrats,   and  perhaps  get  another  investigating   committee
(without  power  of  subpoena)  and  a civil  rights  division  in  the
Department   of   Justice   (but   without   power   of   injunction).
This  is  the  kind  of  toothless  civil  rights  bill  Congress  is  likely
to  pass this  year,  if  any.   The  battle  will be won  on  the  streets
of  Montgomery  and  Tallahassee,  not  in  Washington.
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  11,1957
Underscoring   The  Need  for  the  Roosevelt   "Fair  Play  for  Inductees"  Bill
The  Kind  of  Military  Injustice  Which  Haunts  A  Whole  Generation
John  H.  Harmon  III  was  inducted into  the  Army  in  Octo-
ber,  1952. In  February, 1954,  he  was  ordered  to  answer some
"derogatory"  security information.  He  was  accused  of  various
"associations",  including  those  with  his  father  (reported  to  be
a  Communist)  and  his stepmother  (registered  with the Ameri-
can  Labor  Party).   He  declined  on  the  grounds  of  "moral  in-
dignity"  and  "filial  piety"  to  answer  questions  about  his par-
ents  but  freely  answered  about  himself.   He  also  admitted  the
"charges"  against  him:  that  he  had  registered  with  the  ALP,
that  he  had  once  worked  as  a  kitchen  helper  in  Camp  Unity
and  as  a  counsellor  in  Camp Lakeland  with  the  Detroit  Urban
League,  and  that  he had  solicited contributions for  two  Detroit
Smith  Act defendants.
At  first  the  Army recognized  that  these  were  less  than  hein-
ous  offenses.    He   was  informed  that   he  would  not  be dis-
charged  as  disloyal, but  that  he  would  be  assigned  to  non-sen-
sitive  duties and  on  completion  of  service  would  be  given  the
type  of  discharge  he  had  earned  in  the  Army.  Five  days later,
as  a  result  of  the  uproar  McCarthy stirred  over  the  Peress  case,
the  Army  was  stampeded  into  applying  the  civilian  security
program  to  military  personnel.
How  the  Army  Tried  to  Make It  "Moot"
On  June  2,  1954,  Harmon  was  given  an  "Undesirable"  dis-
charge.  He  appealed  on  the  ground  that  (except  for  the solici-
tation  in  the  Smith  Act  cases)  all  the  associations  complained
of  occurred before  induction and  that  his  ratings  in  the  Army
had  never  been  less  than  "excellent."  After  the  appeal  to  the
courts  was  filed,  the  Adjutant General  upgraded  his  discharge
from   "Undesirable"    to   "General    (under   honorable   condi-
tions)"  and  asked  that  the  case  be  dismissed  as  moot.    But
since  the  General  discharge  is  less  than  honorable,   Harmon
continued  his  appeal.  The  form  of  his  discharge  is  especially
important  since  he  is  a  student   at  Howard   University  Law
School,  and  this  may come up  against  him  when  he  applies  for
admission  to the bar.
Judge  Youngdahl  reluctantly ruled  against  him  in  District
Court  here  in  January of  last  year.   Last  week  the  U.S. Court
of   Appeals   upheld   that   decision   2-to-l.    Judge   Prettyman
(with  Judge  Danaher)  ruled  that  the  courts  could  not  inter-
fere  with  the  Army  discharge  procedure.    Judge  Bazelon dis-
sented  on  the  ground  that  the  Supreme  Court  has  not  yet  de-
The  Army  Inflicts  "A  Gratuitous  Wound"
"Appellant  is  a  youth  who  was  plucked out  of  civil-
ian  life  and  made  a  soldier,  as  are  many  others,  at  the
threshold   of  the  career  he  was  planning  for   himself.
Before  the  end  of  his  term  of  service,  he  was  restored
to  his  civilian  status,  but  hung  about  his  neck  was  the
millstone  of  'security  risk.' ...  His military  service  is
admitted  to  have  been  'excellent'  and  he  is  not claimed
to  have  done  anything  illegal  or  reprehensible  during
his  tour  of  duty.   He  does  not  challenge  the  discretion
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Army  to  judge  whether  the  na-
tional  security   is  served  by  dismissing   a  soldier.    He
complains  only  that,  in  the  exercise   of  that  discretion,
there  is  neither  necessity  nor  authority  for  inflicting
upon  him  a  gratuitous  wound  which  may  plague  him
all  the  rest  of  his  days."
—Judge  Bazelon  dissenting  in  Harmon  v.  Brucker.
cided  whether  courts  may  not  in  such  circumstances  review  a
less  than  honorable  discharge.   Before  McCarthy  frightened
the  Army  in  1954,  the  traditional  practice  was  that  "a  man
whose  conduct has  been  faithful  and  honest during the  time in
service  would  be  entitled  to  separation  under  honorable  condi-
tions"  notwithstanding  his  prior  conduct  as  a  civilian.
Public  Campaign  Needed
The  decision,  if  upheld  by the  Supreme  Court,  would  allow
the  Army to  stigmatize young  men  for  life,  not  for  something
they  did  in  service  but  for  lawful  conduct  and  associations (in-
cluding  those  of  their   parents)   before  induction.    Not  the
least  disturbing aspect  of  this  case  is  the  solemnity  with  which
the  courts  accept  a  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee
"citation"  of  the  American  Labor  Party  as  somehow  subver-
sive  though  of  course  the  committee  attaches  such  labels  un-
lawfully  and  without  the  remotest  semblance  of  a  public  hear-
ing.   Now  that  it  has  added  the  Progressive  Party  to  its  list,  a
million  other  families  may  be  affected  by  this  kind  of  ruling.
The  Harmon  decision  casts  a  shadow  over  a  whole  generation
of  young  men  eligible  for  Army  service.    It  underscores  the
need  for  a  public  campaign  to  support  the  Roosevelt  bill  de-
scribed  below.
Write  your Senator  to  put  a  companion  measure  in  the  Sen-
ate  and  your  Congressman  to  demand  public  hearings.
How  the  Roosevelt Bill  Would  Help Those  Given A Less  Than  Honorable  Discharge
A  new  bill  (HR  429) by  James  Roosevelt   (D.  Cal.) pro-
vides  that  any  member  of  the  armed   forces   given  a  less
than  honorable  discharge   may  demand  a  court  martial.  It
also  amends  the  Code  of  Military Justice  so  that  no  court
martial  may  punish  a  man  "for anything  done  or  not  done
by  such  person"  outside  the  military   service  "or  for  any
exercise  of  a  legal  or  constitutional  right",  in  or  out  of uni-
form.  The  advantage  of  a  court  martial  is  that  it  is  bound
by  due  process   and  unlike  security   procedures   accords  the
right  to  confront  and  cross-examine   accusers.   The   Roose-
velt  bill  would  also  permit  former  members  of  the   armed
services  to  obtain  an  honorable  discharge  if  they  can  prove
that  a  less  than  honorable  discharge  given  them  since  1947
was  solely  because  of  something  they  had  done  or  failed  to
do  as  civilians.
A  similar  bill  introduced  by  Roosevelt  last  session  (June
26)   was  quickly  buried  in  House  Armed  Services   Commit-
tee.  This  year  opponents  have  provided  a  second  line  of  de-
fense  in  the  shape  of  a  bill  (HR  1108)  by  Clyde  Doyle   (D.
Cal.)   a  member  of  both  Armed  Services  and   Un-American
Activities.  The  Doyle  bill  would  allow  persons  given  a  less
than  honorable  discharge  to  "clear"  themselves  by  proving
that  for  not  less  than  three  years  their  "character,   conduct,
activities  and  habits"  had  been  "good."   But  an   honorable
discharge   won  in  this  way  would  not  restore  the  pension,
hospitalization,   education,  loan   and  other  benefits  lost  by
the  original   discharge.    This  is   not  left   to  inference   but
specifically  stated  in  the  Doyle  bill.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February   11,1957
On  Howard  Fast  and  Comrade  Krushchev's  Debt  to  Comrade  Walter
Looked  at  from  Capitol  Hill,  Howard  Fast's  renunciation  of
his  ties with  the  Communist movement has  an  ironical  aspect.
Fast's   break  was  in  large  part  due  to  the  revelation   of  how
Jewish  writers  had  been  liquidated in  the  Soviet  Union  under
Stalin,  and  of  the  vulgar  anti-Semitism  which  colors  the think-
ing  of  Krushchev.
The  most  complete  coverage on  this  aspect  of  the  de-Stalini-
zation  campaign,  and  the  source  in  this  country  which   people
of  Fast's  outlook  trusted,  is  an  obscure  monthly  called  Jewish
Life,   originally founded  10 years ago  by  the  Freiheit,  the  Yid-
dish  Communist  daily,  but  more  lately  operated  on  its  own.
Last  May  Jewish  Life   printed  the  full  text  of  the  sensational
article  in   the   Volkstimme,   the   Polish   language   Communist
paper  which  first  disclosed  the  terrible  story  of  the  liquidation
of  Soviet  Jewish  writers.   Since then,  Jewish  Life,   has  become
critical  of  Soviet  policy.   In  its  most  recent  February  issue,  it
published  the  full  text  of  the  disclosures  made  by  the  Cana-
dian  Jewish  Communist  leader,  J.  B.  Salsberg,  who  attacked
Krushchev   for   anti-Semitism.  The   Salsberg  report   seems   to
have  been  the  final  blow  for  Fast.
The   irony  is  that  Jewish   Life   has  just  been  added  by  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  to  its  blacklist  of
"subversive"  publications,  though  the  only  people  it  has  ever
subverted  are  American  Jewish  intellectuals  hitherto   faithful
Not  Sure  What They  Were,  But  30  of  Them
Mr.  [Dennis  A.]  Flinn  [Director,  Office  of  Security,
State  Dept.]-   He  admitted  that  he  could  not  be  spe-
cific  as  to  the  allegations  of  the  red  propaganda,  nor
cite  specific  instances  as  to  the  spread  of  that   propa-
ganda.   He  did furnish, however,  a  list  of  30  individuals
suspected   by   him   of   being   'leftists.'   This  informant
was  also  not  quite  articulate  when  asked  to  define  the
term  'leftist.'
Mr.   [John  J.]  Rooney  [D.  N.  Y.]  Did  he  not  say  he
believed  there  were  certain  people  who  were un-Ameri-
can?
Mr.  Flinn,  Un-American;  yes.
—Page  883,  House  Approp.   Com.  Hearings  on  State
Dept.  Budget   for  1957, 84  Con.  2d.  Sess.
A  sample from  the  hearing on "Symphony  of  the   Air"
last  March   14 showing  the  kind  of  informer   and   infor-
mation  used  to  smear  this  group  of  musicians.  This  was
the  take-off  point  for  the  executive   session  held  by  the
House    Un-American    Activities   Committee   this  past
week  in  New  York  City.
followers  of  the  Communist  party  line.    If  the  House  Com-
mittee   "citation"    helps   to   destroy   Jewish   Life,    Comrade
Krushchev  will  be  much  obliged  to  Comrade  Walter.
Why  The  American  Communist  Party  Ought  to  Dissolve
The  Fast  renuciation seemed  to  be timed  as  a  political  bomb
since  it  came  on  the  eve  of  the  Communist  party  convention
which  opens  this  week  in  New  York.   It  will  add  to  the   diffi-
culties  of  the  Daily  Worker  insurgents, John  Gates,  Alan  Max
and   Joseph   Clark  who  have  been  pursuing   an   independent
Polish-style   line.     Moscow   has   been   moving   back   toward
Stalinist  rigidity  and  repressiveness,  and  its  influence  will  be
on  the  side  of  Wm.  Z.  Foster.  The  bureaucrats and  careerists
of  this  Lilliputian  world—and   no   doubt  its  numerous   FBI
agents—will  therefore  be  for  a  return  to  "hard"  and  "ortho-
dox"  Muscovite policies.
We   believe  the  greatest  contribution  the  insurgents  could
make  to  the  fight  for  freedom  and  social  reform  in  America
would  be to  bring  about  the  dissolution  of  the  American  Com-
munist  party. The  Russians  will  always  prefer  a  hard  core  of
submissive  and   obsequious  fanatics  to  honest   men   honestly
dealing  with  the  real  problems  of  their  own  country.  Their
favorite  in  the  West  is  the  ignominious  French   Communist
Party,  with that  big pompous  pampered  stuffed  shirt  Thorez  at
its  head,  and   stupefied   intellectuals  like  Joliot-Curie  in  their
entourage  of   sycophants.
There are  good,  devoted  and  heroic people  in  the American
Communist  party  but  they  will  never  be  effective  until  freed
from   the   intellectual   bondage  of   the  movement.    The   real
crime of  the  CP  is that  it  taught  a  whole  segment  of  youth  and
intellectuals  to  believe  blindly,  to  obey  without  question,   to
shut  their  eyes  to  thought  control  and   political  persecution  in
the  Soviet  Union  immeasurably worse  than  anything  we  fight
at  home,  and  to  slander  and  destroy  by  any  means  those  who
tried  to  tell  the  truth.
A Healthy Reaction Against "Risk Law" Abuses Appears in  New  York  State
Another  indication  of  a  changing  climate  which  deserves
national  attention  is  the  Interim  Report  on  Public  Employee
Security  Procedures  just  submitted  to  the  New  York  legis-
lature  by  Governor  Harriman in  Albany.  The  five  man  com-
mittee,  appointed  last  September,  is  headed  by   Whitelaw
Reid  of  the  New  York  Herald  Tribune.   It  was  established
to  study  the  Security  Risk  Law  passed  during  the  Korean
war.  This   allows  dismissal   where   public  employes   occupy
"security  positions"  in  "security   agencies."
When  enacted,   the  State   Civil  Service  Commission   an-
nounced  that  it  would  not  undertake  to  determine  just  what
these  "security"   jobs  were  until  requested.    "No  such   re-
quest",  the  interim  report  discovers,   "was   made  for   more
than  two  years."    But,   "In  195S,  after   a  subcommittee  of
the   House    Un-American   Activities    Committee   had   held
hearings  in  the  State,  a  wave  of  activity  by  the  State  Civil
Service  Commission   took  place."    Some  20  agencies  of  the
state  and  some  40  units  of  the  New  York  City   government
were  thereupon  designated   as  having  "security    positions"
in  them.
"The  immediate  connection   with  the  'security  or  defense
of  the  nation  and  the  State'  of  many  of  these  agencies  and
positions,"  the  committee   commented,   "is  not  readily   dis-
cernible.   For  example,  scientists  in  the  Paleontology    Sec-
tion  of  the  Department  of  Education  have  been  specified  as
holding  'security  positions',   on  the  ground  that  they   have
knowledge  concerning  the  location  of  caves   and  their  suit-
ability  for  defense  storage  purposes.    Even  probation  serv-
ices  of  the  New  York  City  Domestic  Relations  Court   h4s
been  designated  as  a  'security  position.' ...  To  subject  to
summary   removal   procedures   and  the   label   of   disloyalty
without   benefit   of   court   trial,   presumption    of   innocence,
and   confrontation   of   witnesses,   employees    who   are   not
more  advantageously  situated  to  commit  espionage  or  sabo-
tage  than  is  the  ordinary  citizen,   is  to  run  counter   to  our
history   of  personal  rights."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  11,1951
On  The  Intrepidity  of  Senator  Hennings  and  the  Closed  Door  Policy  of  Mr. Dulles
Why  Not  Ask  Nasser,  Too,  to  Respect  the  Opinion  of Mankind?
On   the  Akaba-Gaza  dispute,  the   important  point   is  that
neither  the  President  nor  Mr.  Dulles  last  week  said  one  word
which  might  be  interpreted  as  a  warning that  the  U.S.  would
expect  Nasser  to  obey  UN  resolutions  for  free  transit at Akaba
and  desist  from  fedayeen  raids from  the  Gaza strip  when  Israel
withdrew. The  effect  of  this one-sided  approach  is to  encourage
Nasser  to  believe that  the  U.S.  will  permit  him  to  resume dis-
crimination  not  only  against  Israel  but  perhaps  also  against
England  and  France  when  the  Suez  is  cleared.    Washington
policy  is  all-out  for  the  oil-bearing  Arab  bloc  but  when  the
President  was  asked  whether  he  thought  Ibn  Saud  would  now
present   the   Eisenhower  Doctrine   in   a   favorable  light,   his
answer  was "I  don't  know."
Progress  Report  on  A  Crusader
Getting  down  to  work  for  this  session,  Congress   seems  to
have  appropriated  about  $600,000  to  undermine  constitutional
rights  and  $100,000  to  defend  them.    The  House  voted  the
Un-American  Activities  Committee  $305,000  on  January  28
and  the  Senate  two  days  later  voted  $289,291.45   for  the  In-
ternal  Security  Committee  and  $100,000  for  the  Hennings  sub-
committee  on  constitutional  rights.    But  this  6-to-l  division,
lopsided  as  it  is,  does  not  reveal  the  whole  story.
A  year  ago  Hennings  curled  up  to  McCarthy to get  his  1956
appropriation;  Joe  withdrew  his  objections  on  being  assured
by  Hennings  that  the  latter  was  "finished"  with  investigating
security-loyalty  abuses.  This  year  Hennings  got  his  appropria-
tion  without  opposition  after  telling  the  Senate  that  the  main
business   of   his   subcommittee  now  would   be   to  study   due
process  in  administrative law  with  a  view  to  protecting   "the
rights  of  American  citizens,  including  corportions  and  other
business  entities."   Hennings  has  put  a  bill  in  on  this  subject,
working closely with  the  American  Bar  Association.   This  new
Hennings  crusade  is the  same one  which  Congressman  Walter
waged  before  the  war,  culminating  in  the  Walter-Logan  Act
to  cushion  business  interests  from  New  Deal  regulation.   An
intrepid  fellow,  Senator  Hennings.
A  Triple  Alarm,  But  Where's  The  Fire?
Mr.  SYMINGTON.   I  ask  the  distinguished   Senator
from   Montana  whether,  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,
there  is  any  present  situation  requiring  the  use  of  our
military  forces  in  the  Middle  East.
Mr.  MANSFIELD.  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  ho
information  has  been  forthcoming  before  either  of  the
two  committees  which  would  indicate  such   to  be  the
case.  .  .  .
Mr.  MORSE.  I  do  not  believe  we  should  hasten  into
action  on  any  resolution  on  the  Middle East  issue  until
the  Administration  comes   forward  at  least   with  one
competent  witness  who  can  testify   .  .  .  that  there   is
an  imminent  threat  of  an  armed  attack  on  any  Arab
country  by  the  Soviet  Union.  .  .  .
Mr.  HUMPHREY. I  would  say  at  this  point  with  the
Senator's   permission  that  I  think  we  can  examine   the
record  of  testimony  and  not  find  any  place  where  the
Secretary   [of  State]  was  willing  to  state  that  there
was  any  evidence  as  to  any  impending  military  aggres-
sion.
Mr.  MORSE.  He  specifically  testified  that  he  did  not
have  any  such  evidence.
—On  the  floor  of  the  U.S. Senate, Jan.  Z9.
From  the  Open  Door  to  the   Closed
As  we  get  it  from  Mr.  Dulles's  latest,  the  Chinese  Commu-
nists  are  so  perfidiously  anxious  to  lift   the  Bamboo  Curtain
that  they  even  offered  to  free  the  ten  American  fliers  still  in
their  jails if  we would  let  U.S.  newspapermen  visit  China.   Mr.
Dulles  termed  this  blackmail.   He  might  have  gone  further
and  characterized it  as  an  attempt  by  Peking  to  interfere  with
interference  with  freedom  of   the   press.     Secretary  of   State
John  Hay  went  down  in  history  as  the  author  of  the  Open
Door  policy  on  China;  Mr.  Dulles  seems  to  be  carving  out  a
niche  of  his  own  in  manly  defense  of  the  Closed.
And  one  way  to  clean  up  the  labor  movement,  of   course,
is  for  others  to  join Dave  Beck  in  Europe  for  relief  from  Sena-
torial  strain.  They  could  be  pensioned  off  with  a  classy  title,
perhaps  as  labor  leaders  emeritus,  in  absentia ab  subpoena.
You  Can  Send  A  $2   Gift   Sub  for   6   Months   With   Your  Renewal
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  D    No  D
Name     .
Street  .....................................................................................
City   .........................................JZone..........State....._...........
Enter  a  gift  sub  for  $2  additional:
(To)   Name
Street   .........
2/11/57
City   ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  1  ashlngton,  D.  C..  nnder  the  Act  at  March  »,  1879.   Pre-dated   Mondays  but  published
every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  801  B.  Capitol  St.,  Washington  t,  D.  C.  An  Independent  weekly  pub-
lished  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Bather  If.  Stone.    Subscription:  *8   In   the  D.S.;   tt   Io  Canada:   110  elsewhere.    Al*  Hall
ratra:  MB  to  Baropo;  *20  to  Israel,  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED