I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957apr29.pdf

============================================================

Liddell  Hart:  Can Suicide  Deter? P.  2
Exclusive:  First  Text  of  the  Declaration  by  the  German  Atomic  Scientists,  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  17APRIL  29,   1957
'°<        WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 CENTS
Shall  It  Be  Reverence  for  Life,  or  A  Final  Gamble  With Death?
The  Question  Every  Nuclear  Physicist  Must  Face
The   central  point  at  the  Nuremberg   trials  was  that   no
man,   soldier  or  civilian, could  absolve  himself  from  guilt  for
crime  on  the  plea  that  he  was  obeying  orders  of  a  superior.
The  question  now  is  whether  the  world  scientific  community
will   continue  to   work   on   the   perfection   of   methods   for
slaughter   which  may  extinguish  human   life  on  this  planet.
This  is  what  every  scientist  must  face  up  to  in  his  own  con-
science.   The  answer  he  gives  will  determine  whether  he  is  a
man,    in   the   full   sense  of   the  word,   responsible  as  a  man
should  be  for  the  fate  of  other  men,  or  a  tool.
One   section  of  the  world   scientific  community  has  given
an  answer.  The  declaration  of  the  18  German  atomic  scien-
tists  that  they  will  take  no  part  in  the  production,  testing  or
utilization  of  nuclear  weapons   is  an  event  of  magnitude   in
the  realm  of  history  and  morals.   The  scientists  of  Germany,
who  know  from  bitter  shame  what  it  means  to  have  collabo-
rated  in  mass  murder  on  orders  of  the  State,  are  the  first  to
answer  "no"   to  the  process  which  would  turn  the  earth  itself
into  a  vast  crematorium.   If  there  is  no  echoing  answer  from
America  and  Russia,  from  Britain  and  France,  the  world  war
against  Fascism  will  seem  in  the  eyes  of  German  youth  a  lie.
For  the  best  minds  of  East  and  West  will  seem  to  be  march-
ing   past  them,  too,  in   goose-step,   weakly  absolving  them-
selves  of  responsibility,  shrugging  their  shoulders,   with   the
old  feeble Germanic  excuse,  "Ich  bin  nur  ein  kleine  Mensch."
The  greatest  minds  of  our  generation  will  indeed  seem  little
men.
No Such Thing  As  "Baby"  Bombs
Dr.  Albert  Schweitzer,  from  deepest  Africa,  has  added  his
noble  voice,  appealing" as  did   Bertrand   Russell  and   Albert
Einstein  with  nine  other  scientists  two  years  ago  for  an  end
of   preparation   for   nuclear   war.   But   the   Germans,   among
them  one  German   Jew,   Max  Born,   who  returned   to   Ger-
many,  have  done  more  than  make  an  appeal.   They  have  set
an  example.   The  text  of  their  declaration,  which  no   paper
in  the  U.  S.  has  yet  printed  (a  fact  itself  significant),  is  im-
portant  in  that  it  answers  the  nonsense  being  spread  by  mili-
tary  propaganda  that  small,  tactical,  "baby"  bombs  can  some-
how  safely  be  used.   They  point  out  that  these  baby  bombs
are  the  equivalent   in  firepower  of  the  bomb  which   fell  on
Hiroshima,  no  harmless  military  toy.   The  declaration  deserves
to  be  widely  circulated,  if  only  to  combat  the  delusion  that
tactical  atomic  weapons  are  somehow  safe,  and  have   effects
which  can  be  limited  to  the  immediate  battlefield.
The  declaration  itself  is  part  of  a  chain  reaction  set  off  by
the   new   British   White   Paper.    If   Britain   must   have   the
H-bomb  and  place  primary  reliance  for  defense  upon  its  pos-
session,  then  so  must  Germany  and  if  Germany,  then  France;
5  *
Men  Into  Automatons
"The   man  who becomes a  victim  of  propaganda is  no
longer  human,  he  does  not  live  a  life  of  his  own  .  .  .
normally  we  ascribe  this  method  of  making  man  basi-
cally   inhuman   to   what   we  call  totalitarianism —   to
Nazis  and  to  Bolsheviks-   But  'cold  war'  is  the  same,
everywhere  and  uses  the  same  methods.  Man must  not
think.   He  must  do  what  he  is  ordered  to  do.  ...     The
consequences  of   "cold  war'  are   the  same  everywhere:
suspicion,  enmity,  mistrust,  hatred ...  the  'cold  war'
destroys   the  spiritual  basis  of   human  life.   There  is
nothing  good  in  your  neighbor  on  the  other  side  of  the
fence  or  borderline. ...  And  so  you  accept  it,  un-
wittingly  at  first,  then  at  last  with  full  'conviction,'  as
you  think.   But  you  don't  think,  you  only  believe  what
you   think,   because   propaganda   tells   you   what   you
think.  .  .  .  Human  beings  are  being  turned  into  auto-
matons."
—Pastor  Martin  Niemoller,  Friends  House,  London,
March  26  (Text  in  Peace News, April   5).
6   7
and   if  France,  then  Italy;  and   if   Italy,  then  Israel;  and  if
Israel,  then  Egypt.  . . . When  every power,  great  or  small, can
brandish  these  ultimate  weapons,   the   chances  of  setting  off
the  ultimate  conflagration  will  be  increased  many-fold.    The
Bonn  General Anzeiger  of  April  13  wondered  why  the  Ger-
man  scientists  should  suddenly  have  pledged  themselves   not
to  take  part  in  the  production  of  nuclear  weapons,  since  the
Paris  treaties  for  German  rearmament  forbid  their  production
in  the  Reich.   There  is  speculation  in  the  German  press  that
the  German  scientists  spoke  up  because  tacitly  the  Western
powers   have   already   agreed    that   this   restriction   will   be
waived.   Imagine  what  Hitler  would  have  done  if  he  had  this
weapon,   imagine  .what  a  new  Hitler  would  do  with  it,  and
one  can understand  why the  German  scientists  at  the  first hint
of  this  decided  to  speak.   We  honor  them  for  doing  so.
No Leadership  in Britain
The  texts  of  the  British  White  Paper  on  defense  and  of
the  debate  upon  it  in  the  House  of  Commons  now available
almost  make  one  despair.   To  read  the  White  Paper  and  then
to  see  it  described  by  as  sober  a  publication   as  the  London
Economist  as  "logical  and  realistic"  makes  one wonder  wheth-
er  mankind  is  slowly,  logically  and  realistically  growing  quite
irrational.  The  White Paper  "frankly"  recognizes  that  there is
no  defense against  a nuclear  attack  and  concludes  quite  rightly
therefore   "that  the  overriding  consideration   in  all   military
planning  must  be  to  prevent  war  rather  than  to  prepare  for
it."   But it  then  turns  around  and  proposes  to  make  England's
defense  totally dependent  on  weapons  which  (as  Liddell  Hart
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  29,  1957
Exclusive;  In  the  Full  Text,  Not  Hitherto  Published  in This Country
Germany's 18 Leading Atomic Scientists Refuse  to Work on Nuclear Weapons
Because  no  paper  in  this  country  so  far  as  we  know,
not  even  the  New  York  Times,  has  published  the  text
of   the   historic  declaration  made  by  Germany's  leading
atomic  scientists,  we   obtained   the   text   from   the  Sud
:
deutsche Zeitung  of  April  13-14.
"The   plan  for  the  atomic  arming  of  the  Bundeswehr  fill
the  undersigned  atomic  scientists  with  deep  sorrow.    Some  of
them   indicated   their   misgivings  several  months  ago  to   the
responsible   Minister.   Now   the   question   is  being   generally
debated.   The  undersigned  therefore  feel  themselves   obliged
to  call  attention  publicly  to  certain  facts  the  experts  know  but
of  which  the  public  does  not  yet  seem  sufficiently  informed:
"1.  Tactical   atomic   weapons   have   the   same   destructive
power  as  normal  atomic  bombs.   They  are  described  as  tac-
tical  in  order  to  express  the  idea  that  they  are  to  be  used  not
only  against   human   settlements   but  against  ground   troops.
Every  single  tactical  atom  bomb  or  shell  has  an  effect  similar
to  that  of  the  first  atom  bomb,  which  destroyed   Hiroshima.
Because  the  tactical  atom  bombs  are  available  today  in  great
numbers,  their  total  destructive  effect  would  be  much  greater.
These   bombs  are  called  'small'  only  in  comparison  with  the
'strategic'   bombs   developed   since,  above   all   the   hydrogen
bomb.
"2.  No  physical  limits  are  known  to  the  possibility  of  in-
creasing  the   destructive  effects   of   strategic  atomic   weapons.
Today  one  tactical  atom  bomb  can  destroy  a  small  city.    But
one  hydrogen  bomb  can  render  a  region  as  big  as  the  Ruhr
uninhabitable  for  some  time.  Through  the  diffusion  of  radio-
activity,  one  could  today  with  hydrogen  bombs  in  all  likeli-
hood  destroy  the  population  of  the  West  German  Republic.
We  know  no  possible  technique for  protecting  large  masses of
population  from  this  peril.
"We  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  draw  political  conclusions
from  these  facts.   Some  will  try  to  deny  us  the  right  to  do  so,
since  we  are   not   engaged   in   politics.    But  our  profession,
which   is  devoted   to  pure   science  and   its  development   and
through  which  we  influence  many  younger  men,  imposes  on
us  responsibility  for   the  possible  consequences.    On   this  ac-
count  these  are  political questions  on  which  we  cannot  keep
silent.
"We  recognize  that  the  Western  world  today  is  defending
freedom  against  Communism.   We  do  not  deny  that  mutual
fear   of   hydrogen   bombs  makes  a  vital  contribution   to   the
preservation  of   peace  in  the' world  and  of  freedom   in  part
What  Progress, Dr.  Adenauer?
"Apparently   the   authors   of   this   declaration     [the
atomic  scientists]  .  .  .  have  not  been  informed   of  the
progress   which   has   been   made   in  the   United  States
with  regard  to  the  protection  of  the  civil  population and
soldiers  from  these  weapons.'  .  .  .  Adenauer   regretted
that   the  Professors   had  not  spoken   with   him  before
giving   out  their   declaration."
—Suddeutsche  Zeitung  (Munich)   April  1S-H.
Mr.  [Val]  Peterson  [Federal  Civil  Defense  Adminis-
istrator].    "We  must  not  make   the  American  people
believe  that  simply  by  its  government   spending  billions
that  we  can  save  the  people  in  cities.   It  is  just  an  im-
possibility.  . . . There isn't  going  to be any security  in a
thermonuclear  war.   That  is  the  blunt  fact. ...  No one
is  prepared  for  this  kind  of   war."
—Testimony   before   the  House  Appropriations    Com-
mittee  on  the  1958   budget.
"It  must  be  frankly  recognized  that  there  is  alt pres-
ent  no  means  of  providing  adequate  protection  for  the
people  of  this  country   against  the  consequences  of  an
attack  with  nuclear  weapons."
—The  New  British  White  Paper  on   Defense.
of   it.    We   believe  however  that   reliance   for   long   on  this
way  of  securing  peace  and  freedom  is  treacherous  (unzuver-
lassig)  and  we  believe  the  peril,  in  case  it  fails,  is  deadly.
"We   feel   no  competence  to  make  concrete  proposals   for
the  political  consideration  of  the  great  powers.    We  believe,
however,  that  a  small  country  like  the  West  German  Republic
best  protects  itself  and  promotes  world  peace  if  it  expressly
and   freely  renounces  possession  of  atomic  weapons  of  every
kind.    In  any  event  none  of  the  undersigned   are  ready  to
take  any  part  in  any  way  in  the  manufacture,  testing  or  use
of  atomic  weapons.
"At   the  same  time  we  emphasize  that  it  is  extremely  im-
portant  to  advance  the  peaceful  application  of  atomic  energy
by  all  means and  we will  cooperate  in  this  task  as  heretofore."
(Signed),  Professors   Fritz   Bopp,   Max   Born,   Rudolf
Fleischmann,   Walther   Gerlach,   Otto   Hahn,
Otto  Haxel,  Werner  Heisenberg,   Hans  Kop-
fermann,  Max  von  Laue,  Heinz  Maier-Leib-
nitz,  Josef  Mattauch,  Friedrich-Adolf   Paneth,
Wolfgang     Paul,    Wolfgang    Riezler,   Fritz
Strassmann,   Wilhelm   Walcher,    Carl   Fried-
rich  von  Weizsacker  and  Karl  Wirtz.
Famous  British  Military  Expert  Calls  "Nuclear   Defense"
"The  basis  of  Europe's  defense  situation  and  problem,  can
be  summed   up  thus:
"The  present  plan  of  using  nuclear   weapons  both  'tacti-
cally'  and 'strategically' makes  sense  as  a  deterrent,  but not
as  a  defense—for  put  into  use  it  means  suicide.
"The   original  plan   of   Supreme   HQ,  Allied  Powers,  Eu-
rope,  was  to  build  up forces  strong  enough  to  check  aggres-
sion  with  normal  weapons.   That  plan  made  sense  as  a  way
of  defense  without  nuclear  suicide.
"The    revised   SHAPE   plan   of   defense,   with   tactical
atomic   weapons   to  compensate   the   reduced   scale   of   its
forces,  would  make  sense  if  such  action  is  practicable  with-
Merely  A  Form  of  Suicide
out  wider  strategic  use  of  nuclear  weapons.
"But  the  combination  of  the  two  does  not  appear  to  make
sense—and  it  rests  with  SHAPE  to  show  how  it  can.   Their
case  has  not  been  at  all  convincing  so   far.
"All  the  statements  they  have  made  in  the  past  few  years
about  their  planning  has  left  the  impression  that  they   con-
sider  it  impossible  to  draw  a  line  between  tactical  and stra-
tegical  action  with  such  weapons,  and  see  no  hope  of  stop-
ping  short  of  all-out   war.    Such  a  view   naturally  discour-
ages  the  peoples  of  Europe.  .  .  .  For  what  is  the  sense  of
pouring  out  money  on  forms  of  defense  that  merely  make
suicide  more  certain?" .  . .
—B. H. Liddell  Hart,  letter  to the London  Times, Mar.  26.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  &9, 1957
The  Marcus  Singer  Case  Is  Like  Tjiat  of  Watkins  But  With  the  5th  Amendment  Added
A  Newly  Split  Legal  Hair  to  Protect  Against  the'Ignominy  of  Informing
There  must  be  many  intellectuals  who  had  the   experience
in  the  30's  or  40's  of  belonging  to  Marxist  study  groups  un-
der  Communist  influence.   For  them  the  Marcus  Singer,  con-
tempt  case,  just  decided  here  2-to-l  by  the  Court  of   Appeals,
will  be  of  special  interest.  It  involves  a  finely  split  legal  hair
which,  if  it  wins  favor  with  a  majority  of  the  Supreme  Court,
may  save them  from  the  necessity of  going  to  jail for  contempt
if  they  do  not  wish  to  suffer   the  ignominy  of  informing  on
others.
Dr.   Singer,  a  professor  of  zoology  at  Cornell,  four  years
ago  admitted  to  the  House   Committee  on  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  that  he  belonged  to  a  Marxist  study  group  at  Harvard
in  the  early  40's  but  declined  on  grounds  of  honor,  conscience
and  the  Fifth  amendment  to  name  others.   Honor  and  con-
science   have   no   standing   in   our   courts,   but   his   attorneys
worked   out  an   ingenious  defense  for   him  under  the  Fifth
amendment.*
A  man  who  admits  to  membership  in  the  Communist  party
cannot  under  the  Rogers  case  (340  U.  S.  367)   refuse  to  name
others   on  Fifth  amendment  grounds.    The   Supreme   Court
there  held  that  once  membership was  admitted,  naming  others
did   not   increase  the  danger   of   self-incrimination.    But   Dr.
Singer's  lawyers  pleaded  that  while  he  considered   himself   a
Communist  there  was  no  evidence  that  he  had  actually  been
a  member  of  the  party.   He  testified  that  he  took  part  in  no
illegal  activities.
The  defense  pointed  out  that,  according  to  the  testimony  of
the  "cooperative"   witness,  Robert  Gorham  Davis,  the  Marxist
study  groups  to  which  Dr.   Singer  belonged   were  so  loosely
organized  that  not  only  some  of  their  members  but  even  some
of  the  instructors  "were  not  actually  party   members."
Nine He Would Not  Identify
Dr.   Singer  was  cited  for  contempt   in  refusing  to  identify
nine  persons   (including  Davis)   named  to  him  by  the  Com-
mittee  as  having  attended  his  study  group.   These  nine  were
identified  by other  witnesses  as  "hard  core"  Communists.   The
defense  pleaded  that  if  he  had  identified  these  "real"   Com-
munists  as  members  of  his  study  group,   he  might   have  put
that  study  group   in  a  quite  different  light  and  incriminated
himself  under  the  Smith  act,  which  makes  it  a  crime  to  be-
*  For  a  full  and  lucid  exposition  of  the  defense  theory  we
recommend  the  article  published  by   Mr.  Daniel  H.  Pollitt,
Singer's  chief  defense  counsel,  in  the  Notre  Dame  Lawyer
for  December,   1956.
Academic  Celerity
Four  years  ago  Horace  B.  Davis  was  dismissed  as  an
economics  professor  by  the  University   of  Kansas  City
after   invoking   the  Fifth  before  the  Jenner   committee.
The  American  Association  of  University  Professors  has
finally   published   a   report   on  the  case,  containing  no
recommendations  for  censure  but  finding  that  "A  re-
fusal  to  answer  questions  about  possible  Communist  af-
filiations  is  ill  considered  but,  standing  alone,  it  does
not  merit  dismissal."
long  to  any  "group"  which  advocates  or  teaches  overthrow  of
the  government   by  force  and  violence.
Two  Judges,  Miller  and  Prettyman,  rejected  this  plea,  rely-
ing  on  the  Rogers  case.   But  Chief  Judge  Edgerton   dissented,
citing  Hoffman  v.  U.  S.  (341  U.  S.  479)   where  the  Supreme
Court  in  a  gangster  case  held  that  the  privilege  against  self-
incrimination  protects  a  refusal  to  answer  unless  it  is "  'per-
fectly    clear,'   from   a  careful  consideration  of  all  the   circum-
stances  .  .  .  that  the  answer  .  .  .  cannot  possibly  have  such
tendency  to  incriminate"  (italics  in  original).
"Though  the  appellant,"   Judge  Edgerton  argued,   "had  at-
tributed  an  innocent  character  to  his  group,  it  did  not  follow
that  the  government  would  not  be  able,  in  a prosecution  under
the  Smith  Act,  to  convince  a  jury  that  his group  was  not  what
he  said  it  was  but  actually  advocated  overthrow  of  the  govern-
ment  by  force.   It  did  not  follow  that  the  government   would
not  be  able,  in  a  prosecution  for  perjury,  to  convince  a  jury
that  he  had  given  the  Committee  testimony which  was  false
and  which  he  knew  to  be  false."
Casuistical Drivel
The  Singer  case  is  much  like  the  Watkins  case,  except  that
Dr.  Singer  unlike  the  UAW  organizer  had  invoked  the  Fifth
as  well  as  conscience  to  defend   his  refusal  to  inform.    His
chances   in   the   Supreme   Court   therefore   seem   better   than
those  of  Watkins.    Dr.  Singer's  victory would  slightly   enlarge
the  protections  of  the  Fifth.   There  is also  a  chance,  of  course,
that  the  Supreme  Court  might  reverse  the  conviction   on  the
ground  that  no  real  purpose  was  served  by  asking  Dr.  Singer
to  identify  those  nine  others,  since  they  were  already  known
to  the  Committee  as  "hard  core"  Communists.
It   is,   of   course,   a   commentary   on   our   times   that   such
casuistical  drivel   should   be  the   last   resort   of   decent   people
like  Dr.  Singer  in  their  lonely  struggle  to  maintain  their  self-
respect  and  some  freedom  of  political   association.
AWARE  Alarmed   by  Report  that  Author
Our   readers   will   be   pleased   to   hear   that   Godfrey    P.
Schmidt  as  head  of  AWARE,   Inc.,  has  sent  an  alarmed  open
letter   to   the   House   Un-American   Activities   Committee
about   Carl   Foreman,  the  writer-producer  of   "High  Noon"
who  has  returned  from  exile  in  England  to  work  again  in
Hollywood,   on  contract   for   Columbia   Pictures.    Foreman
had  been  blacklisted  since  1951   when  he  invoked  the  Fifth
before  the  Committee.   Mr.  Schmidt  objects  that  Columbia
has  sought  to  give  the  impression  that  Foreman  was  re-
hired  because  at  a  new  hearing  before  the  Committee  he
"has'  given  names,  dates  and  places,"  and  been  "cleared."
It  is  a  pleasure  to  record—on  the  high  authority  of  Mr.
Schmidt—that  this  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the  case.
of  "High  Noon"  Did  Not  Name  Names
Mr.  Schmidt   claims  that  in  reply  to  an  inquiry  from  the
Veterans  of  Foreign  Wars,  Chairman  Walter  said  there  had
been  no "hearing" and it  was  "unfortunate"  that  a  press  re-
lease  had  created  the  impression  that   Foreman  had  been
"cleared"  as  a  "cooperative"  witness.   Mr.  Schmidt  says  it
is  clear   from   this  that  Mr.  Foreman  was  still   an  "unco-
operative"  witness.   Mr.  Schmidt  protests  that  in  not   pub-
licly  challenging  Mr. Foreman's  return  to  respectability  and
employment,  the  Committee  is  setting  "a standard  far  lower
than,  for  instance,  that  applied  to  playwright  Arthur  Miller
.  .  .  and ...  to  the  three  stage  personalities  .  .  .  singer
Pete  Seeger  and  actors  George  Tyne  and  Elliott  Sullivan"
indicted  for  refusing  to  turn  informer  for  the  Committee.
6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  29,1957
One  Calls That  "Beast  on  the  Prowl"  Communism,  The  Other  Capitalism
(Continued   from   Page One)
points  out  in  a  letter  we  reprint  on  page  two) are  of  no  good
except  for  suicide.   The  White  Paper   says  quite  rightly  that
Britain's  influence  in  the  world  "depends  first  and  foremost
on  the  health  of  her  internal  economy  and  the  success  of  her
export  trade."   But  it  then  turns  around  and  outlines  a  pro-
gram   which   concentrates   on   the   most   expensive   kind   of
weapons.   Those  who  look  at  the  gobbledygook  in  paragraph
72  of  the  White  Paper,  with  its  "neverthless  it  can  safely  be
assumed  that  the  new plan  .  .  . when  fully  implemented  .  .  .
will  further  appreciably  reduce  the  burden  on  the  economy"
will  see the  truth  peeping  out.   There  is  no  assurance  here  of
any  saving.   England   is  cutting  down  on  conventional  arms
but  only  so  she  can  "keep  up  with  the  Joneses"  of  Russia
and   America  in  the  nuclear  race  toward  a  nuclear  war   the
British  Isles  certainly  will  not  survive.
Labor's  Divided Mind
Unfortunately   in  this  juncture  the  Labor  opposition   does
not  speak  with  a  clear  and  undivided  voice.   Labor  wants  to
get  rid  of  conscription  and  yet  maintain  a  conventional army.
It  asks  a  temporary  cessation  of  nuclear  tests  but  wants  to  go
on  with  the  making  of  the  H-bomb.   The  saddest  if  clearest
voice  seems  to  be  that  of  R.  H.  S.  Crossman.   Two  years  ago
he  was  an  advocate  of  a  British  H-bomb  to  maintain  inde-
pendence  of  the  U.  S.   He  told   the  Commons   he  has  now
become  convinced  that   the   only   defense  policy  for  Britain
was  in  concert  with  France  and  Germany  "to   renounce  not
only  the  great  deterrent,  but  all  nuclear  weapons."    But  this
is  not  the  voice  of  the  Labor  Party, but  of  a  peripheral  figure.
Never  was  there  greater  need  for  a  new  lead  and  a  new
leadership.    Two   monstrous   machines,   one   headed   up   in
Washington,  the  other  in  Moscow,  are  moving  toward  a  war
neither  wants  but  no  one  seems  able  to  prevent.   That  warn-
ing  of   Dulles'   last   week   against  the   "suicidal   sovereignty"
which  would  leave  small  nations  at  the  mercy  of  That  Beast
"on  the  prowl"  might  as  easily  have  been  uttered  by  Krush-
chev.   The  only  difference  is  that  for  one  the  Beast  is  Com-
munism  and  for  the  other  the  Beast  is  capitalism.   Our Sec-
retary  of  State's  warning  to  the  neutrals   is  exactly  like   the
warning  Krushchev  has  been   giving  the   dissident   Hungar-
Send  for   Extra  Copies   of   This
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street    .............................
City     ...............................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
301  E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........Zone............State................_
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
4/20/57
City     .......... ..............................Zone............State.. .................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  Q
Unhappy  Men Debate Their Unhappy Fate
MR.  GEORGE  THOMAS  (Cardiff,   West,  Lab.) said
.  .  .  the  hydrogen  bomb  was  an  evil  thing ...  an  of-
fense  against  God and  man .  . .  spreading  its  death and
worse  over  neutral  lands  as  well  as  belligerents ...  its
malignant  curse.   There  was  enough   [radioactive]  dust
in  the  upper  atmosphere   to  ensure  that   30,000  people
would  be  born  either  sterile,  or  idiots,  or  with  cancer  of
the  bone.   What  cowardice  it  was  to  say  in  the  name  of
defense  that  Britain  was  willing  to  risk  the  well  being
of  unborn  generations.
MAJOR   BEAMISH   (Lewes,   C.)   said   that   no   one
would  deny  that  the  hydrogen  bomb  was  evil,  but  the
terrible  thing  was  that  it  was  in  the  hands  of  evil peo-
ple.   (Opposition  cries  of  dissent).   One had  only  to  re-
call  what  had  happened  recently  in  Hungary  to  know
how  evil  were  the  hands  it  was  in.   (Opposition  cries  of
"Suez!"  and  "Nagasaki!").
—Debate   on  the   White   Paper,  House  of   Commons,
April  17.
ians  and  Polish  Communists:  "You cannot  stand alone  because
That  Beast  is on  the  prowl."   One  preaches   "interdependence"
with  Moscow,  the  other  "interdependence"  with  Washington.
Each  side  is  willing  to  liberate  the  other's   satellites,  but  not
its  own.  Each  side  is  self-righteous  about  the  other's  bases,
one  in  Eastern  Europe,  the  other  in  the  Middle  East.   They
have  so  long  gazed  at  each  other  with  hate  that  they  have
begun  to  look  alike,  like  a  long  wedded  pair,  in  the  surest
wedding  of  all, that  of  hatred.
Both  sides  need  to  be  liberated   from  each  other.     Mutual
terror  can only end  in  mutual  destruction.   The  refugee  Mayor
of  Budapest  said  here  a  few  weeks  ago  in  a  speech  to  which
little  attention  was paid,  "We  don't  want  arms.   We  want  di-
plomacy."   The  path  to  liberation  is  mutual  withdrawal.   The
new  Russian  feeler  for  putting  an  end  to  the  occupation  of
Europe   by  mutual   agreement   as   suggested    in   the   past   by
Eden  and  later  by Gaitskill  could  be  the  beginning  of  a  fruit-
ful   diplomacy.   But  Washington   is  still  in  the  grip  of   the
dream  that  if  cold  war  and  trade  embargo  and  the   pressures
of  the  arms  race  are  kept  up  long  enough,  it  can  get  a  kind
of  unconditional  surrender  by  the  Russians  without  war.  This
is  the  will  of  the  wisp  which  draws  us  toward  the  final  brink.
Issue   to   Give   Out   to   Friends
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I      F    Stone's  Weekly.     Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington.   D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pnb-
lt«bri)   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August   and  December  at  301  B.  Capitol  St.,  Washington  i.   D   C.
An   Independent   weekly  published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
»f     tr>   -h°     TT  ft  : # In  Canada:  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  *1B  to  •urope;  *20  to  Israel,  All*  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED