I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957feb18.pdf

============================================================

Walter's  Witch  Mania
A  Special  Report  on  the  New  1957  Un-American  Activities  Committee  Report,  Pages  2  &  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  7
FEBRUARY  18,  1957
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Elsenhower  Bey  Had  Better  Hurry  Home
Washington,  like  the  Middle  East,  seems to  suffer  from  ab-
sentee  landlordism.   Ike  spends  as  little  time  in  the  White
House  as  Egypt's  feudal  beys  and  pashas  were  (to   their  un-
doing)  accustomed  to  spend  on  their  estates.   The  system  un-
der  which  Mr.  Eisenhower,  through  his  faithful   Mameluke,
Mr.  James  Hagerty,  runs  the  old  plantation  by  long  distance
phone  from  the  better  quail  preserves  of  Georgia  while  Mr.
Dulles   makes  foreign  policy  is  breaking  down.   Mr.   Dulles
himself   was  never  more  unpopular   in  Congress.    His  disin-
genuous  replies  on  the  question  of  newspapermen's  passports
for  China  and  his slippery  performance at  the  hearings  in  both
houses  on  the  Middle  East  resolution  have  reduced  his  reputa-
tion  to  a  new  low,  and  the  coming  Senate  debate  will  reduce
it  further.  The  20-8  vote  with  which  it  was  reported  and  its
last  minute  amendment  foreshadow  a  fight  long  enough  con-
siderably  to  deflate  its  importance.  The  resolution  at  the  mo-
ment  seems  bound  to  pass  eventually, but  its  repercussions  are
likely  to make Mr.  Dulles's  further  tenure as Secretary of  State
a  short  one.  No  one  seems  to  trust  him,  left,  right  or  center.
When  Senator  Long   (D.  La.),  always  sober  in  speech,   told
the  Senate  with  exasperation  last  Monday,  "As  one  Senator
who  in  good   faith  tried  to  cooperate  with   the   Secretary,  I
found  him  to  be  one of  the  least  candid  and  most  evasive wit-
nesses  we  have  ever  examined",  no  one  on  the  Republican
side  rose  to  contradict  him.
A  Case  for  the  Dietary  Laws
Under  the  circumstances  Nasser  has  done  Israel  a  favor  by
rejecting  in  advance the  so-called  Dulles  plan  for  opening  the
Gulf  of  Akaba  to  shipping   and  preventing  a  resumption  of
fedayeen   raids  from  Gaza.    It  is  difficult  enough   to  pin   Mr.
Dulles  down  when  he  makes  a  public  statement.   It  is  more
hazardous  to  rely  on  him  when  all  the  public  gets  is  the  filter-
ed  reflection  of  what  some  unnamed  State  Department   official
at  a  private  briefing  for  selected  Washington  correspondents
said   Mr.   Dulles   said.    When   the   best   of    them,    James
Reston,  reports  in  the  New  York  Times   (Feb.  12)  tongue-in-
cheek  surely  that   "the   State  Department  has  no  evidence  of
any  serious  interference  by  Egypt  with  Israeli  shipping  in  the
Gulf  of  Akaba"  and  adds  "precisely  how the  U.S.  Government
would  react  to  any violation  in  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  remains  to
be  determined.  .  .  ."   Israel  would  be  well  advised  to  abide  by
the  dietary laws and  beware of  buying a goyische pig  in  a  poke.
Senator  Morse  (D.  Ore.)  in  a  speech  to  the  Senate  the  day of
that  briefing  urged   Israel  "not  to  give  an  inch"  because   "its
very  survival"  is  at  stake,  and  added  "I  think  Israel  has  had
enough  experience  thus  far  with  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the
United  States  so  that  certainly  Israel  should  not  'fall'  for  any
more  of  his  double  talk."  This  harsh  judgment,  too,  went  un-
challenged.
Blanking  Out  The  Constitution
"The  Administration  .  .  .  asks  for  a  blank  grant  of
power  over our  funds  and  Armed  Forces,  to  be  used  in
a  blank  way,  for  a  blank  length  of  time,  under  blank
conditions,   with  respect  to   blank   nations,   in  a  blank
area.   We  are  asked  to  sign  this  blank  check  in  per-
petuity.  .  .  .  History will  demonstrate  that  the  periods
of   greatest  danger  to  the  rights  of   the  people,  in  a
democracy,   are   those   periods   when   adulation   for   a
popular  idol  diverts  their  attention  momentarily   from
the   implications  of   their  actions."
—Fulbright  (D. Ark.),  U.S. Senate, Feb. 11.
2    1
No  defense  of  Mr.  Dulles  came,  of  course,  from  the  man
who  is  still  known  whimsically as  the  minority  leader  of  the
Senate.  Two  years ago Senator Knowland  (R.  Cal.)  was calling
the  Secretary  of  State  "boss."   Now  he  has  been  utilizing  Mr.
Dulles'  unpopularity  to  make  himself  the  leader  of  the  most
curious  majority  coalition  the  Senate  has  seen  in  a  long  time.
Knowland  seized  on  Mr.  Dulles's  hint  a  week  earlier  to  the
Asian-African  bloc  that  the  U.S.  would  have  to  consider sanc-
tions  seriously  if  voted.   He  took  a  leaf  from  the  Secretary's
own  oleaginous  manipulation  of  morality.   It  was  a  stroke  of
political  genius  for  Knowland  to  declare  that  it  would  be  a
"double   standard"   and   "immoral"   to  apply  sanctions   to  a
small  country in partial compliance with UN  resolutions "while
side-stepping  the  question  of  sanctions  on  a  larger  aggressor"
which  had  "totally  ignored"  all  the  resolutions  "on  the  crime
against  Hungary."    On  this  formulation  Knowland  rallied  a
majority  of  the  Senate,  from  the  old-time  isolationists  and  the
anti-Soviet  bitter  enders  through   faithful   Eisenhower Repub-
licans  like  Ives  and  Flanders  to  liberals like  Morse,  Humphrey
and  Javits.  Men  who were  skittish about  opposing  a resolution
opposed  to  Communist  aggression  found  this  juxtaposition  of
Israel  and  Hungary  an  attractively  safe  vehicle  for  expressing
their   dissatisfaction.  They   could   be  anti-Ike  and   still  anti-
Communist.   If  ours  were  a  parliamentary government,  Know-
land  would  have  forced  the  resignation  of  the  Cabinet  on  the
issue.  As  it  is, he  compelled  the  Administration to  abandon  its
plans  to  be  "forced"  to  join in  imposing  sanctions.
It  is a  pity  that  as  sweeping  a  majority  cannot  be  mustered
against  the  resolution  and  in  favor  of  a  positive  policy.  But  to
ask a  Senator  to  vote  against  a resolution  warning  the  Russians
not  to  commit  aggression,   even  if  no  one  expects  it,  is  like
asking  him  to  vote  against  a  resolution  against  chastity.  Even
the hearts of  the  bravest  quail at  the thought  of  how  they could
explain  it  come  election  time.   The  opposition,  as  was  demon-
strated  by the  voting  inside  the  joint  Senate  Committees  seems.
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  18,1597
Is  the  Country  Purer  Than  Ivory  Soap,  or On The  Verge  of  Being  Taken  Over?
Chairman  Walter  (Like  Wm.  Z. Foster)  Bullish  on  Leftism  in  America
In   some   ways  the   Left   may  find  the   new   report   of   the
House   Un-American   Activities   Committee   an   encouraging
document.   It  will  be  heartening,  in  browsing  through   it,  to
learn  on  page  34, for  example,  that  "Henry  Wallace ... re-
ceived  over  ten  million  votes  .in  the   1948  national   election."
The  figure  mistakenly reported  hitherto  in  such  publications as
the World  Almanac was  1,156,103.
The  Committee  is  fond  of  multiplying things  by  ten.    We
would  not  be  surprised  to  learn  after  a  few  more  years  of  its
researches  that  Vincent  Hallinan,  the  Progressive  Party  candi-
date  in   1952,   really   received   1,326,080  votes   and   not   the
132,608  with  which  he  has  been credited.
The  Committee  does  not  limit  itself  to  mechanical multipli-
cation.   It  is  creative.   Like  the  FBI,  it  multiplies  the  number
of  Communist party members  by ten,  to  reach  a  grand  total  of
200,000   subversives.   But  it  does  not  rest  content  with  this
arithmetic.
It  would  be  dangerous  to  do  so.   Some  readers  might  take
out  their  paper  and  pencil,  and  make  this  kind  of  a computa-
Another  of  Walter's  Discoveries
"The   evidence   adduced   at   the   hearings  established
that  there  is  not,  and  never  has  been,  in  the  entertain-
ment  industry  any  practice  of  depriving   people  of  em-
ployment  because  of  'political  affiliations  or beliefs,'  but
that  a  number   of  people  who  have  been  identified   as
Communists  or  active   on  behalf   of   Communism   have
been  refused  access  to  mass  mediums   of  communica-
tions."
—p.  25, '57  Report,  Un-American  Activities  Committee.
tion.  They  might  take  the  population  of  the  U.S.  roughly  as
160,000,000.
One  percent  of  160,000,000   is  1,600,000.   Half  of  that,  or
half  of  one  percent,  is  800,000.   Half  of  that,  or  one  quarter
of  one  percent,  is  400,000.   Half  of  that,  or  one-eighth  of  one
percent,  is  200,000.
According  to  that  computation,  only  one-eighth  of  one  per-
cent  of  the  people  of  the  United  States  are  subversive  even  by
the  standards  of  Congressman  Walter  and  J.  Edgar  Hoover.
If  only  one-eighth  of  one  percent  are  subversive,  then  99  and
88/100th  percent  are  pure.  This   is  better  than   Ivory  Soap,
which  only  claims to  be  99  and  44/100th  percent  pure.   How
pure  can  a  country  get?
Chairman    Walter    approaches    the    problem     differently.
Without  Jury Trial  or  Counsel!
The   House    Committee    on   Un-American   Activities
Committee  in  its   1957  annual   report   discloses  that   at
an  executive  session  last  June  2,  it  heard  two  witness-
es,   Joseph   Schoemehl   and   the   Rev.   Obadiah   Jones,
"both  of  whom  served  as  informants   for  the  FBI   with-
in  the  Communist   party."
The  Committee  charges  (P.  45)  that  when  Schoemehl
was  called  before  a  Party   Review  Commission  in   1950
on   suspicion   of   being   an   FBI   plant,   his   trial    "was
cloaked   in  secrecy,  and  the   defendant   was  not  given
benefit  of  counsel,  nor  was  there  a  jury."
We  hope  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  will  in-
vestigate.    On  due  process  grounds  alone  Mr.  Schoe-
mehl   seems  entitled   to  reinstatement   with   back    pay.
In  his  preface  to  the  annual  report,  Chairman  Walter  admits
"Numerically,   the- membership  of  the  Communist  Party  has
declined  considerably during  the  past  few years.  .  .  ."  But,  he
continues,  "Anyone  who  thinks that  Communism in the  United
States  no  longer  constitutes  a  serious  menace  should  consider
that  at  this  moment  on  American  soil  are  the  equivalent  of  20
combat  divisions  of   enemy  troops   engaged   in   propaganda,
espionage,  subversion,  and  loyal  only  to  the  Soviet  Union."
When  startled  reporters  went  to  the  Committee's  offices  for
more  light  on  this  horrifying  revelation,  they  were  told  that
this  was  based  on  the  Pentagon's  own  official  figures  and  that
in  fact  this  army of  subversives  "far  outnumbered"  the  Ameri-
can  troops  on  home  duty.
This  led  to  an  interesting  statistical  hassle  at  the   Pentagon.
The  Pentagon  admitted  that  the  nine  divisions  on  duty  in  the
U.S.  and  its  possessions  comprised  about  158,000  troops,   but
insisted  that with  supplemental  forces  it  could  muster  350,000.
For  aficionadoes   of  the  Committee,  however,  the  admission
will  be enough.   As  Chairman  Walter  paints  the  picture,  there
are   "20   combat  divisions"  of   subversives  in  this   country  as
against  only  nine  Army  divisions.   Even  the  Pentagon   admits
that  the  total  number of  troops  it claims  in  its nine divisions  are'
42,000  less  than  the  number  in  Chairman  Walter's  divisions.
From  this  we  can only  conclude  that  any  moonless  night,  on
signal,  the  U.S.  Army might  be overpowered  and  we  might  all
wake  up  next  morning  nationalized.  Thus,  by  Chairman  Wal-
ter's  gifted  computations,  using  the  same  figures,  the  country
instead  of  being  99  and  88/100  percent  pure  is  so  menaced  by
disloyalty  that  it  is on  the  verge  of  being  taken  over,  its  armed
forces  outnumbered  by  the  enemy.
We   had   assumed   from   past
were  anxious  to  infiltrate  the  government.   But  a  revelation
in   the   1957   report   of   the   House   Un-American  Activities
Committee   leaves  us  confused.    The  report  devotes  consid-
erable  space  to  the  testimony   in  Denver  last  year  of  Bellar-
mino  Duran,   whom  it  describes  as  "one   of  the  many  patri-
otic  Americans  who  have   devoted   years  of   their  lives  as
undercover  agents  for  the  F.  B.  I."
A  subject  on  which  Mr.  Duran   gave  the  Committee  the
benefit  of  his  inside  knowledge  was  the  security  system  set
up  by  the  Communists   to  avoid   detection  and   infiltration.
One  of  the  methods  used  (p.  38)  by  the  Party  in  what  Mr.
Who's  Infiltrating  Whom?
reports   that   Communists      Duran  called  its  "obsession  with  secrecy" was  to  check  care-
fully   whether   any  of   its   members   "had   relatives  in   the
Federal  government  or  local  government  or  newspapers  or
radio."  Apparently   the  Communists  with  whom   Mr.  Duran
dealt  were  as  suspicious  of  members  with  relatives  in  the
government,  as  the  government  has  been  of  employes  with
relatives  in  the  Communist  party.   It  seems  to  be  getting
harder  all  the  time  to  plant  such  people  in  the  party.
Can  it  be  that  some  day  a  young  man  will  have  a  better
chance  to  get  a  government  job if  he can  show  that  grandpa
is  an  old-time  member  of  the  CP, in  a  position  to  slip  him  a
little  inside  stuff  now  and  then?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  18,  1597
A  Report  on  The  House  Un-American  Activities  Comittee's  1957  Report
Nothing  Like  It  Since Cotton  Mather  Exposed  Satan's  Wiles  in  Salem
"It  cost  the  Court  a  wonderful  deal  of  Trouble,   to  hear
the  Testimonies  of  the  Sufferers;  for  when  they were  going
to  give  in  their  Depositions,  they  would  for  a  long  time  be
taken  with  fitts,  that  made  them  uncapable  of  saying  any
thing.  The  Chief  Judge  asked  the  prisoner, who  he  thought
hindred  these  witnesses  from  giving  their  testimonies?  and
he  answered,  He  supposed  it  was  the  Divel.  That  Honour-
able  person  then  reply'd,  How  comes  the  Divel  so  loathe  to
have  any Testimony  born  against you? Which  cast  him  into
very  great  confusion."
—The  Tryal   of  G.B.  {the  Rev.  George  Burroughs].  At   a
Court   of   Oyer  and   Terminer,  Held   in  Salem, 1692.
All  that  we  have  discussed  on  page  two  would  be  funny  if
the  Committee  did  not  take  it  all  so seriously. Any psychiatrist
who  reads this  report  will  see that  it  is not  the  product  of cyni-
cal  minds  but  of  people  who  are  on  the  verge   of  hysteria.
Chairman  Walter   ends  his  preface  by  saying apocalyptically,
"It  is  but  a  brief  interval  that  still  remains  for  us  to  elect sur-
Verdict  First,  Trial  Later
Last  June  7  in  a  public  statement  announcing hear-
ings  of  the  Fund  for  the  Republic,  Chairman  Walter
asked  with  finely  balanced  impartiality,  "Is  this  foun-
dation ...  a  friend  or  a  foe  in  our  Nation's  death
struggle  against  the  Communist  conspiracy?"   In  his
preface  to  the  1957 report,  Walter accuses  the  Fund of
giving  "great  aid  and  comfort  to  the  Communist appa-
ratus."    The  report  itself  quotes  with  approval  testi-
mony  by  representatives  of  the  American Legion  and
the   Veterans   of   Foreign   Wars   calling   the   Fund  a
"fraud"  and  a  "tool."    But  for  those  who  wonder  like
Elmo  Roper, head  of  the  Fund, when it  will  be allowed
to  present  its  side  of  the  story,  the  report  says  "Staff
investigations  have  not   yet   been  completed,  and  the
general  public  hearings  on  the  Fund  for  the  Republic
have  not  as  yet  been  scheduled."  We  wonder  how many
more  times  the  Committee  will  find  the   Fund  guilty
before  venturing to  give  it  a  hearing.
vival—or  extinction."   The   report   itself  ends  by  saying  that
"unless  we  meet  the  total  challenge  of  Communist  unconven-
tional  war, we  shall  assuredly condemn  ourselves  to  the  Arctic
hell  of  Siberian  slave  labor  camps."  Men  who  can  write  this
way  at  a  moment  when  Russia  and  the  Communist  movement
have  never  been  so  discredited,  when  the  satellite  system is be-
ginning  to  break  up,  and  when  the  American  Communists  are
a hunted  and  divided handful,  are as sick as the  men who  made
Salem  a  synonym  for  witch  mania  three  centuries ago.
There  is  hardly  a  page  which  does  not  have  some  trace  of
neuroticism.    Here  we  find  the  Committee   quoting  with  ap-
proval   testimony  that   Gomulka   is  dedicated  to  the   complete
Sovietization  of  Poland.   There we have  Chairman  Walter say-
ing  that  Communism's   "methodology   has  become  more cun-
Why  Not  A  Subpoena  for  the  DAR?
"The  activity  of  the  Communist  Party  working with-
in  the  Mexican  community  was  to  agitate  the  aspira-
tions  of  the  Mexican  people  in  this  spontaneous   stam-
pede  to  show  the  government was  not  willing  to accept
them  [as  fully  American].  .  .  ."
—Bellarmino  Duran, an  FBI  informer,   quoted  in  the
1957  report   of  the  Un-American   Activities Com-
mittee  from  its  Denver   hearings   last  May.
"I  wouldn't  want  a  Mexican boy  to  carry  'Old  Glory,'
would  you?"
—Mrs.  Charlotte   C.  Rush,  chairman   of  the   Denver
D.A.R.'s    Committee   on  Patriotic  Education,   in
the  statement  Feb. 11  which  forced   cancellation
of   a  Lincoln's  Birthday   celebration  at  the  Colo-
rado  Industrial  School  for  Boys.
ning"  and find that  all these big words  refer  to  is nothing  more
novel  than  the  filing  of  a  brief  amicus  curiae  in  the  Supreme
Court.  There  are  plots  everywhere:  "a  mammoth  nationwide
campaign ...  to  paralyze the  security  programs",   "an  organ-
ized  effort ...  to  disrupt  and  break  down"  passport   regula-
tions.  The  Committee  has  no  trouble  in  finding  witnesses  who
have  seen  with  their  own  eyes old  ladies  flying  over  the  church
steeple  on  a  broom,  like  the  FBI  informant who  told  of  being
driven  around  in  St.  Louis by  a  strange  man  from  New   York
with  a Daily  Worker  press  card who  "operated  under  the  name
of   Whirlwind   Larson."   (Could   it   have   been   Superman?).
This informant boasted  how  with  a  few  explosives  in  the  local
light  company,  "I  could  blow  it,  blow  it  up  out  of  the  ground
and  keep  it  blown  up."   Wheel
The  Un-American  Activities  Committee  some  day  will  have
a  final  resting  place  in  the  annals  of  political  psychiatry.   But
in  the  meantime  its sloppy,  unfair, and  inaccurate  compilations
are  taken  seriously  in  the  courts  and   solemnly  consulted  by
community  groups.  To  oppose  its  recommendations  is  to  help
the  Reds,  and  to  help  the  Reds  is  to  put  oneself   beyond  the
pale.   Its  recommendations  once  they  get  through  to  the  House
floor  are  practically  unbeatable.   Here  we  have  a  whole  set  of
new  ones:  to  authorize  wiretaps  and  other  technical  means  of
surveillance  (all's  fair  against  the  wiles  of  Satan),  to  restrict
the  right  of  travel  (Walter  is a one-man  Iron  Curtain,  as  head
of  the  Immigration  subcommittee  he  works  to  keep   'em  out
and  as  head  of  the  Un-American  committee  he  works  to  keep
'em  in;  he's a  menace  to  the  travel  business),  and  to  lengthen
the  statute  of   limitations  and   increase   the  penalties   for   all
kinds  of  political  misdeeds,  especially  those  witches  and war-
locks  are  prone  to  commit.  We  will  report  more  fully  later  on
the  Committee's  bills  but  suggest  that  in  the  meantime  there  is
no  better  way  to  educate  your  neighbors   on  just  how  wacky
this  committee  is  than  by  circulating  its  own   report.
Travel  Restrictions Asked  Even  on  Americans  "Neither  Communist nor  Subversive"
"Glaring   instances   have   come  to   the   attention  of   the     travel  against   the  best   interests   of   this  country.   In   the
Committee  of  certain  foreign  travel  by  nationals   of   this     opinion  of  the  Committee,  serious   consideration  should  be
country,   neither   Communist   nor  subversive,  at   times,   in     given  to  the  extension  of  legislation  governing  the   issuance
areas,   and   under   circumstances   rendering   such   foreign     of  passports  coming  within  this   category."
—p.  56,  Un-American  Activities  Committee  Report  for  1957.
2   9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  18, 1597
Without  A  Big  Four  Arms  Embargo,  the  Arabs  Can Bid  East  Against  West
Mid-Eastern  Realities  Make  Negotiations With  Moscow  Inescapable
(Continued   from  Page One)
incapable  of  uniting  on  any  alternative  more  substantial  than
the  hair  split  at  the  last  minute by substituting  "prepared"  for
"authorized"  in  the  resolution.     Some,  like  Byrd  (D.   Va.),
object  only  to  spending  more  money.   Others,  like  Fulbright
(D.  Ark.),  see  the  dangers  in  giving  the  President   another
blank  check  for  war. The  leadership  of  both  Houses,   being
from  Texas,  are  all  for  a  program  which  would  buy  friends
for  the  oil  tycoons  at  the  Treasury's  expense.  The   Democrats
outside  Congress  are  as  divided  as  the  Democrats  within;  Mr.
Truman  is  positively  cult-of-personality  in  his  attitude  toward
the  Presidency, and  implies  that  it  possesses  a  Higher  Knowl-
edge  (the CIA?)  which  compels  us  docilely  to  acquiesce  in
whatever the White House  asks, though  there  is little  Allen W.
Dulles  tells  Eisenhower  between  holes  which  he  couldn't  get
more  accurately  by  subscribing  to  a  good  daily  paper.
If  They  Were  As  Close  to  Texas
The  most  serious  limitation  of  all  is  the  unwillingness  of
even  the  bravest  in  the  Senate  to  recognize  that  we  cannot
treat  the  Middle  East as a private preserve, that  not  only  equity
but  political  realities  must  force  an  attempt   to  negotiate   an
over-all  settlement  in  the  area  with  the  Russians.  The  Middle
East  requires  reconciliation  of  natural  interests  on  three  levels
—between  Arab  and  Israeli,  between Western  Europe  and  the
Arabs astride the  transit facilities  and  oil  it  needs,  and  between
the  U.S. and  the  U.S.S.R.   If  the  Russians  had  bomber  bases
as  close  to  the  Texas  oil  fields,  as  Dharhan  is  to  Baku, we'd
make  trouble,  too. The  principles  put  forward  in  the  new Rus-
sian  note  are  caricatured  by  Moscow's   own  recent  actions  in
Hungary,   including  the   note's   reference   to   the   natural   re-
sources  of   underdeveloped   countries  as  "the  inalienable  na-
tional  property of  the  people  of  these  countries."   (Hungary  is
still   smoldering  with   resentment   because   it   cannot   sell   its
uranium  for  hard  currency but  must  give  it  to  the  Russians  for
a  price  which  has  still  not  been  disclosed  to  its  people).   But
the  statement  of  these  principles  will  prove  attractive  none-
theless  to  the  Arabs,  and  the  Russian offer  to  join  in  an  arms
Instead  of  An  Arms  Race
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.  I  think  a  moratorium  on  all  arms
would  be  more  appropriate  than  a  program  of  arming
everybody,  if  such  a  program  could  be  successfully   ap-
plied.    Of   course,   it   would   require   some   cooperation
from  Russia,  and  I  do  not  know  whether  that  is  possi-
ble.   But  I  also  do  not  know  whether  our  administra-
tion  has  ever  tried  such  an  approach.
Mr.  MANSFIELD.   I  do  not  know  either.    If  we  act
on  the  request  as  provided  in  the  resolution  now  being
considered   by  the   two  committees,   what  will   prevent
the  Soviet   Union  from  doing  the  same   thing?
Mr.   FULBRIGHT.   I   think  we   would  supply   them
with  example  and  precedent.   In  that  sense  the  resolu-
tion  may  well  be  considered  as  a  challenge   to  them  to
do  the   same   thing.
—On  the Mid-East  Resolution,  U.S. Senate, Feb. 11
embargo  on  the  Middle  East is worth  negotiating.  The  alterna-
tive  is  to  let  the  Arabs  bid  East  against  West,  and  to  risk  the
outbreak  of  a  war  between  them  and  Israel  which  would   be
difficult  to  contain.
It  is  because  they  can  turn  to  Moscow  that  Ibn  Saud   and
Nasser  continue to outwit and  out-bargain  the  U.S.A.  The  final
communique  issued  by the  President  and  King  Saud  will  draw
a  laugh  in  the  bazaars when  the  Arabs  see  how  neatly  it  was
worded   to   sidestep   approval   of   the   Eisenhower   Doctrine.
While  Eisenhower  "explained"  his doctrine,  Saud  did  no  more
than   receive  this   "exposition"   with  "satisfaction."   Far  from
being  anxious  to  prevent  an  arms  race,  the  Administration  is
almost  abject  in  its  offer  of  the  arms  with  which  it  hopes  to
buy  the  Arab  States.   Everywhere else  in  the  world,  American
arms  can  be  obtained  only  with  strings  attached   but  to   the
Arabs  the  new  "Eisenhower  Doctrine"  would   offer  them  un-
conditionally.   It  should  particularly  be  noted   that  the  statu-
tory  arms  aid  conditions  waived  under  the  new  Mid-East  reso-
lution   include  those  which   forbid  the  recipients   to  transfer
these  arms  to  other  nations  without  permission,  and  to  use
them  for  other  than  defensive  purposes.   This  is  another rea-
son  Israel  should  be  wary.
Extra  Copies   of   This  Issue  Available  for   Mailing   to  Your   Friends
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please   renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   .........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Enter  a  gift  sub  for  $2  additional:
(To)   Name
Street   .........
2/18/57
City   ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3.  0.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  V aahlngton,  D.  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.  Pre-dated  Mondays  but  published
every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  SOI  B.  Capitol  St,   Washington  I,  D.  C.  An  Independent  weekly  pub-
lished  and  rdlt-rt  by  T  P   Rtonr;  rtrmlatlnn  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:   *B  In  the   U.S.;  14   In  Canada;   HO  elsewhere.   Air  MUl
r»t««: til to  Vurooa:  60  to '«••!.  • «<•  «nA
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED