I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957apr08.pdf

============================================================

Some Exclusive  Revelations
Underside  of  Ike's  Doctrine;  How  the   Oii  Companies  It  Protects  Mulct  the  U.  S.  Treasury
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  14
APRIL  8, 1957
101
        WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Where  the  Body  Is  Buried  in  That  Aramco  Tax-Scandal
Digging    into   the   happy    circumstances   which   enabled
Aramco  to make $280,000,000  in  1956 without paying  a penny
of  U.  S.  income  tax, I  made  a  discovery.   I  obtained  photo-
stats  of   the   official   Arabic  and   English  texts  of   the   Saudi
Arabian  income tax  decrees promulgated  by Ibn  Saud  in 1950.
These  had  been  filed  by  the  Arabian  American  Oil  Company
(Aramco)   with  the  Internal  Revenue  Bureau  here  in  Wash-
ington.   The  O'Mahoney  monopoly  subcommittee,  which first
disclosed   Aramco's  Elysian   tax   life,   ought   to   subpena   the
Internal  Revenue  Bureau's  file  for  itself.   It  will  be  surprised
to  learn  that  originally  Ibn  Saud's  decrees  contained  a pro-
vision  envisaging  the  possibility  that  Aramco  might  have  to
pay  U.  S. income  taxes  on  its  profits  from  Arabian  oil.   This
provision  (precisely  and  exotically,  Article  2  of  Royal  Decree
No.  17/2/28/7634/16  Rabia  Al  Awal  1370)  allowed  the
company  to  deduct  U.  S.  income  taxes  in  arriving  at  the  net
income  on  which  Ibn  Saud  would  get  his  final  50-50  split.
That  provision might  have  put  many  million  of  dollars  into
the  U.  S. Treasury.  Unfortunately  it  was  removed.   If  Senator
O'Mahoney  puts  his  investigators  to  work  on  it,  he  will  find
written  alongside  this  Article  2  a  notation   by  an  unknown
hand  in  ink, presumably  that  of  an  Internal  Revenue   Bureau
official.   This  says,  "removed  from  law  in  1952 see page  4  of
memo    dated    4-16-54    from    Aramco."      I    hope    Senator
O'Mahoney  will  ask  the  Internal  Revenue  Bureau  for  a  copy
of   that  1954 memo  and   demand  that  Aramco  explain  just
how  Ibn  Saud  happened  to  change  his  tax  decree  in  1952]
The  Man Who Drafted  Those   Decrees
The   effect   of  the  change   was  to  make  it  harder   for   the
U.  S.  to  collect  anything  on  the  huge  Arabian  oil  profits  it
spends  so  much  to  protect.   How  did  the  change  happen  to
be  made?   Testimony   already  taken  by  the  O'Mahoney  sub-
committee  indicates that  Aramco  has  paid  no  income  taxes  on
its  Arabian  profits  since  those  tax  decrees  of  1950.  How  did
it  manage  to  avoid  paying  income  taxes  during  the  two  years
when  the  Saudi  Arabian  law  itself  allowed  U.  S.  income  taxes
as  a  deduction?   One  way to  start  on  this  aspect  of  the  matter
might  be to  subpena  the  man  who  drafted  the  tax  decrees  for
Ibn  Saud.  He  is John  F.  Greaney,  a  lawyer  with  offices  in  the
Warner  building  in  Washington,  a  man  unknown  to  the gen-
eral  public  but  well  known  in  the  profession  as  an  expert  on
the  foreign  tax  credit  problems  of  American  corporations.    He
went  to  Saudi  Arabia  to  draft  those  laws  in 1950.
The  discovery  of  the  original   decree  and  the  handwritten
notation  shows  that  F.  A.  Davies,  chairman  of  the  board  of
Aramco,  was  less  than  frank  with  the  O'Mahoney   committee
when  he  appeared  as  a  witness  before  it  on  March  20.   Mr.
Davies  was interrogated by Donald  P.  McHugh,  chief  counsel
of   the   subcommittee,  on   the   assumption   that   the   original
Saudi  Arabian  tax  decree  took  50  percent  of  the  net   profits
without  allowing  for  payment  of   U.  S.  income  taxes.    Mr.
Davies  did  not  correct  this  false  assumption  much  less   offer
the  original  decrees  in  evidence.   He  said  Ibn  Saud  was  de-
manding  a  deal  like  that   in  Venezuela   where   the   govern-
ment's  take  of  oil  company  profits  had  been  raised  to  50 per-
cent  of  the  net.   Mr.  McHugh  asked  Mr.   Davies  why  the
company  didn't  just  raise  the  royalty  payments  to  50  percent
of  net.  "That  would  have  made  our  position  out  there  pretty
bad  competitive  wise,"  Mr.   Davies  replied,  "and  the   Saudi
Arabian  government  was  insisting  on  an  income  tax  which
would  result  in  no  additional  burden  on  the  company."  This
insistence  that  Ibn  Saud was worried  about  the  company  rather
than  his own  profits  shows  a gift  for  humor  on  the  part  of  the
Aramco  executive.
Other  Evidence  Available
There   is  other   evidence  that   originally   Aramco  was   not
sure  it  could  rid  itself  of  U.  S. income  taxes  by  its  1950 agree-
ment  to  split  its  profits  with  Ibn  Saud.   A  relevant  passage
from  page  128  of  the  famous  Federal  Trade  Commission  re-
port  on  "The International  Petroleum  Cartel"  was put  into the
record  of  the  O'Mahoney   committee  hearings   but  its  signifi-
cance  was  not  understood.   The  FTC  report  cites  the   annual
reports  for  1950 of  the  four  constituent  companies  which  own
Aramco  (Standard  of  N.  J.,  Standard  of  Calif.,  Texas  arid So-
cony Mobil)  as telling their  stockholders  that  Aramco  in 1950
"agreed  to  pay  taxes  up  to  but  not  exceeding  50  percent  of
its  net  profits,  after   income  taxes  to  the  U.  S.  were  deducted."
(My  italics).
What  Ibn  Saud  did  in  1950 was  to  issue  two  income  tax
decrees.   The  first,  of  November  4,  imposed  a  general   5 per-
cent  tax  on  individuals   and  a  20  percent  tax  on  the  income
from  invested  capital.   The   second  decree,  of  December   27,
imposed  an  additional  income  tax  on  petroleum   companies  in
the  Kingdom  amounting  to  50  percent  of  their  net  operating
income.   In  figuring  net  operating  income,  the  oil  companies,
i.e.  Aramco,  were  allowed  to  deduct  the  amounts  already  paid
under  the  general  Saudi  Arabian  income  tax  and  all  other  ex-
penses,  royalties  and  local  taxes.   They  were  also  allowed,  by
Article  2,  to  deduct  "Income  taxes,  if  any, to  the  extent  that
such   taxes  have  actually  been  paid   by  the   company  or   are
payable  by it  to any foreign  country. .  .  ."  Under  this  arrange-
ment  Aramco  would  have  paid  a  20  percent   income  tax  to
Saudi  Arabia  over  and  above  its  royalties,  and  then  paid  an
income  tax  to  the  U.  S. Treasury,  and  then  split  the  remainder
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  8, 1957
Did Herbert Hoover, Jr., Use A Tax Deal to Sweeten the Iranian Agreements...
with  Ibn  Saud.   Instead,  as  the  tax  was  finally  worked out,
nothing  was  paid  to  the  U.  S.  Treasury.
The   background  of   this  tax  scandal  is  the   different   way
U.  S.  law  treats  income  taxes  paid  abroad  from  income  taxes
paid  at  home.   If  a  U.  S.  corporation  pays  an  income  tax  in
Idaho,  it  can  deduct  the  amount  before  figuring  the  net  on
which  it  pays Federal  income taxes.   But  if  a  U.  S.  corporation
pays  an  income tax  abroad,  that  amount  becomes  an  offsetting
credit  against its  Federal  income  tax  bill,  not  just  a  deductible
item.   The   difference  is substantial.
Let  us  illustrate  with  an  oversimplified example.    Suppose
the   Federal   income  tax  is  10  percent.    A  corporation   earns
$100  in  Idaho.   It  also  pays  a  $10  State  income tax  on  this  in
Idaho.   So  it  gets  a  deduction.  The  $10  is  deducted  from  the
$100  income  and  the  corporation  pays  Federal  income  tax  on
$90.   The  Federal  tax  itself  is  thus  reduced  to  $9.   The  $10
deduction  results  in  a  $1  saving  on  the  tax  bill.
But  if  the  corporation  earns  $100 in  Saudi  Arabia  and  has
paid  a  $10  income  tax  there,  that  $10  becomes  an  offsetting
credit  against  its  Federal  income  tax  bill.   The  $10  credit  for
the  tax  in  Saudi  Arabia  would  offset  the  $10  owed  the Fed-
eral  government.   No   tax  at  all  would  be  paid  the   Federal
government.   The   difference   between  treating  this  $10  as  a
credit  or  a  deductible  item   is  the   difference   between  paying
nothing  and  paying  $9.
Why  Ibn  Saud  Grumbled
It  was  this  tax  loophole  which  Aramco  seized  upon  when
Ibn  Saud  in  the  late  40's began  to  grumble  that  he  wasn't
being  paid  enough  for  his  oil.  He  could  hardly  be  blamed
for  complaining.  The  60-year  exclusive  concession  he  granted
Aramco  in  1933  fixed  a  royalty  of  21  cents  a  barrel.   In 1949
when   the   net   profit   by   Aramco's   own   figures   was  $1.10
a  barrel,  Ibn  Saud  was  still  getting  only  21  cents  or  less  than
20  percent.   Saudi  Arabian oil  was  the  century's  biggest  bon-
anza,  and  Ibn  Saud  wanted  a  bigger  share of  the  profits.
But  if  Mr.  Davies  is  to  be  believed,  Ibn  Saud's  resentment
was  not  against  the  company  but  against  the  U.  S.  Treasury.
He   testified,   "They  wanted   more.    They   asked   as  early  as
1948,   'Isn't  there  some  way  in  which  we  can  get  a   greater
take?'  and  a  little  later  than  that  they  said,  'Isn't  there  some
way  in  which the  income tax  you  pay  to  the  United  States  can
be  diverted  to  us  in  whole  or  in  part?'."   At  another  point
Mr.  Davies  said,  "You want  to  bear  in  mind,  Mr.  McHugh,
I  think  it  was  in  the  year  1949 our  income taxes  to  the  United
States  were  greater   than  the  total  take  of  Saudi  Arabia  out
there  from   the  venture,  and  they  weren't  a  darn  bit  happy
about  it.  ...     They  felt  that  the  U.  S. was  getting  too  big  a
percentage  of  the  profits  from  the  venture."   The  prize  state-
ment  in  this  vein,  however,  came when  Mr.  Davies  said  self-
righteously,   almost   the   crusader   against   colonialism,   "It   is
very   difficult   for   many  countries  to   realize  why   the   U.   S.
should   participate  in   the   profits   from   the   development   of
their  natural  resources."    By  U.  S.,  of  course,  he  meant  only
the  U.  S.  Treasury.*
*  Contract  his  reply  when  asked  by  Senator  G'Mahoney  how  he  felt
about  nationalization  and  whether he  would  expect  the  U.S.  to  defend
Aramco  against  an  attempt  to  nationalize.   "I  would  certainly/' Mr.
Davies  replied,  "I  think  it   IK  one  thine  to  nationalize a  business  with-
in  a  country  purely  for  the  welfare  of  the  people  of  that  country,  and
Earlier  in  1950 the  Internal  Revenue  Bureau  had  for   the
first  time  ruled  that  a  50  percent  tax  on  petroleum   companies
could  be  treated  as  an  income  tax  credit.   This  was  in   the
case  of  Venezuela.   Aramco  may  have  feared  that  the   Treas-
ury   would   find   differences   between   the   situation   in   Vene-
zuela   and   that   in  Saudi  Arabia.   Venezuela   had   long   had
an  income  tax  on  mining  as  well  as  petroleum.   When   the
rate  was  raised  to  50  percent  of  net  it  was  no  different  from
the  52  percent  maximum  on  the  net  of  corporations   in  this
country.  The  Arabian situation  was  somewhat  different.  Dig-
ging  around,  I  learned  that  the  original  concession   agreement
not   only  fixed  the  price  at   21  cents   a  barrel  but, looking
shrewdly  ahead,  forbade  the  Arabian  government   to   impose
new  and  higher  taxes  on  the  oil  company.   Legally  the  com-
pany  itself  could  decide  whether  it  choose   to  pay  a   higher
royalty  or  accept  a  higher   income  tax  in  place  of  a  royalty.
Practically  it  was  in  a  powerful  position  since  if  Saudi  Arabia
nationalized  the  petroleum  industry  and   took   over  the con-
cession,  it  could  not  hope  to  refine,  ship  and  market  that  oil
against  the  wishes  of  the  Standard  Oil   Companies.
Neither  Sovereign  Act  nor Arm's  Length  Bargain
Thus  the  Treasury  might  have  decided  that  the  50  percent
income  tax  law  in  Saudi  Arabia,  unlike  that   in   Venezuela,
was  not  a  genuine  result  of  action  by  a  sovereign  power   but
a  move  decided  by  Aramco  itself,  a  subterfuge  to  make  the
Treasury  pay  the  whole  cost  of  its  increased  payments  to  Ibn
Saud.   The  term  "whole  cost"  is  used  since  if  the   increased
payments  had  been  in  the  form  of  an  increased  royalty,  this
would  have  been  a  deductible  item.   Aramco  normally  deducts
the  total  amount  of  its  royalty  from  its  income  and  pays  tax
only  on  the  remainder.   Since  the  top  rate  is  52  percent,   the
Treasury  would  in  effect  have  been  paying  48  cents  on  every
additional  dollar   paid   Ibn   Saud.    But  Aramco  wasn't   satis-
fied.  They  wanted  to  find  a way to  make  the  Treasury  pay  the
full  amount.   They  did  this  eventually  by  working  out  with
Ibn  Saud  the  scheme  for  a  50  percent  income  tax. The  total
amount  of  this  would  then   become  an  allowable   tax   credit.
In   1956, when   Ibn   Saud   and   Aramco   split   $280,000,000
between  them,  Aramco's  share  was  tax  free  because  it  could
apply  the  50  percent  Aramco  tax  as  a  dollar-for-dollar   offset.
There   is   reason   to   believe   that   the   top   officials   of   the
Treasury   under  both   Truman   and   Eisenhower  were   queasy
about  this  Arabian  tax  deal  and  that  Aramco  had  difficulties
in   getting   it   approved.    This   is   a   matter   on   which   the
O'Mahoney   committee   could   perform   a  great   public   service
by  investigating  further,   for  this   involves   much  more  than
Arabia.   Aramco  did  not  succeed  in  getting  approval   for  the
Arabian  tax  scheme  until  after  Herbert   Hoover,  Jr., made  a
similar,  tax  scheme  part  of  the  Iranian  oil  consortium   agree-
ment  in  September,   1954.  The  gossip  in  those  small  circles
informed  even  meagerly   on  such  highly  technical  and   secre-
tive  matters  is  that  Hoover  got  the  White  House  to  take  a
hand  and   force  approval   of   such  settlements.    In   effect   the
Iranian   government,   like  the   Saudi  Arabian,  was  given   an
I  think  it  Is  entirely  different  when  an  Industry  is  nationalized which
is  operating  in  that  country  through  a  sacred  concession  agreement
or  a  contract,  and  I  don't  believe  it  should  be  justified  or  condoned
by  the  U.S.  government. ...  I  would  like  to  see  .  .  .  that  we  have
some  kind  of  a  recourse  when  some  dictator  or  other  ruler  tells  yon
that  you're  through.  .  .  ."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  8,  1957
And  Get  the  White House  to  Overrule  the  U. S. Treasury's  Qualms?
increased  take  at  the  expense   of  the  U.  S.  government.    In
May,   1955, the   Aramco   deal   was   approved    by    Internal
Revenue.   Presumably  similar  arrangements   benefit   Standard
of  New  Jersey  and  Socony  Vacuum  in  their  joint participation
(a  23  percent  interest)  in  Iraqi oil. Unfortunately  they  make
no  public  reports  on  their  Near  East  Development   Company.
The  State  Department   is  treating  most  of  the  Iranian   agree-
ments  as  classified.   The  amounts   involved  in  Iran,  Iraq,  the
Persian  Gulf  sheikdoms  and  Saudi  Arabia  may  be  costing  the
U.  S.  Treasury  many  times  more  than  the  $200,000,000  at-
tached  to  the  Eisenhower  Doctrine.
What  the  public  does  not  yet  realize  in  this  Year  One  of
II
In  the  excitement  created  by  the  revelation  that  Aramco
was  making  close  to  $300,000,000   a  year  in  Arabia  without
paying  income  taxes  on  it,  certain  other  sections  of  the  March
20  testimony  were  overlooked   and   it  was  assumed  that   the
U.   S.  government   was  the   unwitting   victim   of   something
cooked  up  at  its  expense  by  Ibn  Saud  and  Aramco.   But  Mr.
Davies  in  his  testimony  disclosed  that  the  government  was  in
on  the  preliminary   discussions.  When   Mr.   McHugh   asked
him,  "Was  there  any  consideration  given  previous  to  the  pro-
mulgation  of  this  decree  concerning  the  upping  of  the  royalty
rate as against  paying  that  money  in  the  form  of  income  tax?"
Mr.  Davies   replied,   "Considerations   were  given  along  every
possible  line.    We  discussed  the  matter  among  ourselves  and
we  also  discussed   it  here  in  Washington,  and  there  was  no
alternative  which  was  arrived  at  which  would   fulfill   the  de-
sires  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  government  for  this approximately
50-50  take  which  they  knew  Venezuela  was  getting."
Apparently  Ibn  Saud  had  also  been  visited  by a  U.  S.  Treas-
ury  representative.   This  came  out  while  Mr.  Davies  was dis-
cussing  Ibn  Saud's  efforts  to  get  more  revenue  out  of  Aramco.
"In   the  meantime,"   Mr.  Davies  said,  "they  [the Arabians]
had  been  visited  by  a  representative  of  the  Treasury  Depart-
ment."   Senator  Carroll  (D.  Cnl.)  was  curious about  the  part
this  Treasury  man  played:
"Not   That  I  Know  Of"
Sen.   Carroll:  Did  he  [the Treasury   representative] pro-
mulgate   this   [Saudi   Arabian]   income   tax   law   which   was
passed?
Mr.  Davies.   No,  he  was  there  before  this  law  was  written.
Sen.   Carroll.   Did  he  participate  in  the  conferences?
Mr.  Davies.   Not  that  I  know  of.
Sen.   Carroll.   Was  he  sent  there  to  participate?
Mr.  Davies.   Not  that  I  know  of.
Senator  Carroll  wanted  to  know  whether  the  State  Depart-
ment,  too,  had  had  a  hand:
Sen.   Carroll.  Did  you confer  with  the  State  Department  on
this  income  tax  mechanism  whereby  Saudi  Arabia  would  get
funds  and  the  U.S. Treasury  would  get  nothing?
Mr.  Davis.   We  conferred  with  the  State  Department.
Sen.   Carroll.   Did  they  approve  it?
Mr.  Davies.   They  did  not  approve  it.   They  did  not  so  far
as  I  know  disapprove  it.   They  listened  and  appreciated,  ex-
pressed  an  appreciation  of  the  pressure  we  were  under.
The  Senator  wanted  to  know  with  whom  he  had  conferred.
It  was  with  George  C.  McGhee,   then   Assistant  Secretary  of
State  for  Near  Eastern  and  African  Affairs.   Mr.  McGhee,  it
the   Eisenhower   Doctrine   is  that   none   of   the   oil   company
operations  in  the  Middle  East  it  is  designed   to  protect  are
paying  income  taxes.   All  these  companies  are  leading  a  tax-
charmed  life,  and  charging  the  U.  S.  the  full  amount  of  the
increased  payments  necessary  to  keep   happy   the   sheiks  and
potentates  with  whom  they  deal.    They   are   in   effect   being
subsidized  by  the  U.  S.  Treasury.   The  private  interests  more
responsible  than  any  others  for  the  huge  and  warlike  Eisen-
hower  budget   not  only  escape  their  fair  share  of  its  burdens
but  have  managed  to  shift  some  of  their  own  to  the  back  of
the  Treasury.   This   is  the  story  which  needs  to  be  dug   out
and  brought  into the  light  of  day.
appeared  from  further  questioning,  is  now  in  the  oil  business
on  his  own.
When   the  afternoon  session  resumed  (with  George  Wads-
worth,  Jr., the  U.  S.  Ambassador  to  Saudi  Arabia  recorded  as
present),  Mr.  McHugh   wanted  to  know  more  about  what  a
U.  S. Treasury  representative—his  name  was  George  A.  Eddy
—was  doing   in  Saudi  Arabia.   Mr.   Davies   said   it  was  his
"understanding   that   he  was  out   there   to   confer   with   the
Saudi  Arabian government  with respect to their  fiscal  policies."
Mr.  McHugh:  Which  fiscal  policies?
Mr.   Davies:  Of   Saudi   Arabia.    Financing   arrangements
and  so  forth.   Stabilization  of  their  currencies.
Mr.  McHugh.   Did  that  involve  the  income  tax  decree?
Mr.  Davies.   I  wouldn't  think   so.
By  A  Happy  Coincidence  .  .  .
When  Mr.  McHugh   asked   Mr.  Davies   whether   he  knew
where  "this  Mr.  Eddy,"  was,  Mr.  Davies  answered,  "Yes, I
spoke  to  him  here  a  little  while  ago.   He  is  there  on  the  other
side  of  the  room."   Mr.  Eddy  was  called  to  the  stand.
The  first  impression  given  by  Mr.  Eddy  is  that  he  wasn't
out  there  in  connection  with  fiscal  matters  at  all, but  with
monetary   or   currency  problems.    He   said   he   was   in   Saudi
Arabia  in  1948 for  six  weeks  and  was  sent  out  by  the   Treas-
ury  "to  supply  any help  I  could  about  their  extraordinary  and
unique  monetary  problems."  This  sounded  almost  numismatic,
as  if  he  were  going  to  study  the  ancient  coins  hung  on   the
throats  of  the  lovelier  dancing  girls  in  Mecca.
Then  it  appeared  that  for  some  reason  Aramco  was  bashful
about   looking   into   these   "monetary"    problems.     This   was
when  Senator  O'Mahoney   wanted  to  know  how  the  Treasury
happened   to  send  him   out  and   he  said  he   "believed"   the
Saudi  Arabian  government   had  asked  for  advice  "and I  do
recall  that  the  Arabian  American  Oil  Company   had   recom-
mended  that  some  experts  be  sent  out  to  help  them   because
the   company  did   not   want   to   advise   the   country   on   that
monetary  policy  area."    This  seemed   unusually   fastidious.*
Sen.   O'Mahoney:  Did  you  have  anything  to  do with  respect
to  Aramco  at  the  time?
Mr.  Eddy:  Yes, sir,  Aramco  loomed  very  large  in  all  of
* It   appears  that  the   State  Department  also  participated   In  this
"monetary"   study   because  later  Mr.  Eddy  told   Senator   Wiley,   "I
don't  recall  who  In  the  Department gave  the  final  approval  of  going.
Another  man  from   State   Department  also   went.   I   do   know   that
Aramco  wrote  to  Undersecretary  Ijovett  of  the  State  Department  and
possibly  to  Mr.  Snyder  but  to   someone  in  the  Treasury  and  asked
these  departments  to  send  a  mission  to  Saudi  Arabia  to  give  advice
on  monetary  problems."
5     '1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  8, 1957
That  "One  Brief  Conversation"  in Arabia Turned Out to Be Quite A Pow  Wow
Saudi  Arabia's  problems  and  I  did  have  several  things  to  do
with  it,  touched  on  Aramco's  problems.  .  .  .
Sen.  O'Mahoney.   Did  you  have  anything  to  do  with  this
income  tax  problem?
Mr.  Eddy.  A  very  little.  There  was  one  brief   conversation
which  touched  on  this point.
So  Mr.   Eddy   wasn't   just   matching   coins   for   the   Saudi
Arabian  government.   But  he  was  very   diffident   about   this
"one   brief   conversation."    He  was  only  a  subordinate.     He
didn't   know   whether   he   was  authorized   to   speak   for   the
executive   departments   of   government.    Senator   O'Mahoney
said  he  would  absolve  the  witness:
Mr.  McHugh:  Will  you  tell  us,  then,  Mr.  Eddy  what  if  any
discussions   or   advice  was   furnished  by   you   to   the   Saudi
Arabian  government  in  connection  with  the  drafting  of   the
income  tax   law  of  Saudi  Arabia?
Mr.   Eddy.   Nothing   whatever  on  that,  sir.   So   far   as   I
know,  any  drafting of  the  law  occurred  a  year  or  two  after
I  had  been  in  the  country.  I  had  no  communications  with  the
Saudi  Arabian  government  on  any  drafting  of   any   income
tax law.
"Naturally,  They  Were Thinking  of  Aramco  .  .  ."
This  sounded   pretty  conclusive,  but   fortunately   Mr.  Mc-
Hugh  was  persistent:
Mr.  McHugh:  Did  you  discuss  with  Saudi  Arabian  officials
the  question  of  establishing  an  income  tax?
Mr.  Eddy: There  was  one  question  that  was  asked  me  by
a  subordinate official,  something  to  the  effect:  What  kind  of
arrangements  are  there  throughout  the  world  by  which  the
owners  of  oil  bearing  lands  participate  in  the  income  from
the   production  of   oil?
Mr.  McHugh:  Did  the  question arise  concerning  the  method
whereby  the  Saudi  Arabian  government  would  share  in  the
profits   of   Aramco,   the  question  of  royalties   vs.  an   income
tax?
Mr.  Eddy.   It  was  a  general  question  not  applied  to  any
company  in  any  wording  of  the  question.  But  of  course  Saudi
Arabia  has  just  one  oil  producing company  so  naturally they
were  thinking  of  Aramco.  But  the  question  asked  me  and  the
answer  I  gave  was  wholly  in  very  general  terms  without  any
company  or  any  figures  involved  at all.
Obviously  no  company  had  to  be  named  or  no figures men-
tioned.   But  Mr.  Eddy's  further  testimony  shows  he  was  well
aware  of  what  was  involved.   The   conversation   was  not  as
brief   and  inconsequential  as  he  first  made  it  appear   because
he  actually  went  to  see  the  U.  S.  Ambassador   for  advice  be-
te*  Us  Send  Introductory   Sample
I. F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ..........
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
................ ...........Zone......
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
City     ............................ ............Zone.....
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?
......State...................
(1 yr.) additional:
4/8/57
......State...................
Yes  D    No  D
fore  answering  the  question!   Let  us  listen   in  again  at  this
point:
Mr.  McHugh:  Will  you  tell  the  Committee generally  what
the  effect  of  your  advice  to  them  was  on  this  question?
Mr.   Eddy:  By   effect,   I   presume  you   mean   the  purport
rather  than  the  result.  I  don't  know  of  the  result  and  I  have
no  idea  whether anything I  said  had  anything  to  do  with  the
result.   I  had  one  conversation  with  a  man  who  himself  I  be-
lieve  was  relieved  of  his  position  or  resigned  the  next  year.
He  asked me  what  kinds  of  arrangements owners  of  oil  lands
used.
I  consulted  with  the  U.S. Ambassador  whether  I   should
answer  the  question  at  all  and  he  said  I  should,  and  then  I
went  back  to  this  official   and  said  that  I  was  by  no  means
qualified   to  give  him  expert  advice  on  that  subject.   I   was
trained  in  another  area  but  so  far  as  I  knew  there  were sev-
eral   different   arrangements.   I  cannot  recall   all  the  ones  I
named.   One was  a  direct  royalty.  One  was  I  believe  a  rental
arrangement.   One  was  a  stock  participation.  One  was  an  in-
come  tax,  and there may  have been  several  others,  I  can't  re-
call  now.
The  Confession  Eddy  Added  Later
So  that   "brief   conversation"   was  quite  a  conference   after
all,   interrupted   by  a  trip   to  the   U.   S.  Embassy   for   advice
on  whether  to  answer  the  question.   It  is  interesting  to  notice
that  in  his  testimony he  mentioned  the  income  tax  last,  almost
as  an  afterthought  "and there  may  have  been  several  others,
I  can't  recall now."
And  now  I  want  to  come  to  my  final  revelation,  which  un-
derscores  my  belief  that  the  committee  has  merely   scratched
the  surface  so far, that  Mr.  Eddy  could  tell  the  committee  a
lot  more  than  he has.
Reading  the   official   transcript  in  the  subcommittee   rooms,
I  found  a  sentence  written  in  at  the  end  of  the  answer  by
Mr.  Eddy  which  I  have  just  quoted.   The  additional,  sentence
said,  "I  did  explain  to  him  the  difference in  the  effect  on  the
company   between   a  royalty  and  an   income  tax."   This sen-
tence  was  added  by  Mr.  Eddy  himself  when  he  turned  up  at
the  subcommittee   several  days  after  the  hearing  to  read   his
own  testimony.   Why  was  he  afraid   to  let  his  testimony  stand
as  given  without  this  crucial  admission?   What  was  the  Treas-
ury-State  "monetary  mission"  to  Saudi  Arabia  doing?   Was  it
helping  the  Treasury?   Or  Aramco?   This  is  where  the  body
is  buried.
Copies   of   This   Issue "to  Your   Friends
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,   D.  C.,   under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August  and   December   at  301  E.  Capitol   St., Washington  3,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager    Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  *6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Hall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED