I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957nov25.pdf

============================================================

The  Bishops  and  Bad  Books,  P.  2
Scientists  in  Short  Supply But  the  Press  Ignores  McCarthy's  Victims at  Ft.  Monmouth,  See  Page  3.
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  45NOVEMBER  25,  1957
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Stevenson   Hitches  on  To  That  Misguided   Missile
It  is  often   difficult   for   us  to  understand  what,  if  any,  is-
sues  are  involved  when  a  Krushchev  ousts  a  Kaganovich.   It
must  often  be  as difficult  for  a  Russian  to  understand   just  how
our  two  parties  differ.    When   Adlai  Stevenson  finds  it  pos-
sible  to  work  in  friendly  harness  with  John  Foster  Dulles,  is
the  two  party  system real ?  Does  it  any  longer  give  thoughtful
Americans  a  choice  on  the  ultimate  issue  of  war  or  peace?
Twice   Mr.   Stevenson  made  Mr.   Dulles   rather  than   Mr.
Eisenhower  his  main  target   in  running  for   the  Presidency.
Today,  when  the  need   for   a  change  has  been  dramatically
demonstrated,   Mr.   Stevenson   bolsters   Mr.   Dulles's   sagging
fortunes  by  moving  in  with  him.   Mr.  Stevenson  has  hitched
himself  to  the  man  he  called  a  misguided missile.
They Have Him on The  Old School  Tie
Of  course,  in  one  sense,  Mr.  Stevenson  can  claim  that  he
has  not  given  up  his  freedom  to  criticize.  But  in  another  and
more  realistic  sense,  he  has.   One  cannot  work  with  people,
proffer  them  advice,  act  as  part  of  a  team,  and  then  criticize
the  result   publicly  and  freely.   The  old  school  tie  will  bind
Adlai  now.
To   his   liberal   friends   in   the   newspaper   fraternity,   Mr.
Stevenson   drops   engaging   hints  of   fundamental  differences
with  the  Administration.  The  fact  that  he  does  not  see eye to
eye  with  Mr.  Dulles  is  described,  in  familiar  journalese,  as
."no  secret"  which  is another  way  of  saying  that  no  one  is  any
longer   quite   sure   just  how   and   where   he   differs.    As   the
New  York  Times  put  it  (Nov.   13),   "Mr.  Stevenson  has  made
no  secret  of  the  fact  that  he  is  not  fully   in  agreement   with
some  of  the  policies  and  methods  of  the  Eisenhower  Admin-
istration."    The   italics   are  added.    Which   policies?   What
methods?   How  fully?   Must  we  become  telepathic  to  tune  in
on  Mr.  Stevenson's   leadership?
Publicly  Mr.  Stevenson  says  nothing  which  could  not  have
been   cleared   at  the   State  Department.    In  his  statement  of
November   17,  disarmament  "at  least  nuclear  disarmament"  is
still  piously  included,  but  in  subordinate  place,  as  an  after-
thought.   At  a moment  when  the  intercontinental  missile  poses
the  simple  issue  of  co-existence  or  co-annihilation,  when   the
urgent  necessity  is  to  learn  to  live  together  with  the  Russians
on  a  dwindling  planet,  when  Western   Europe  is  only  a  10-
minute  transit  point  on  the  ICBM  trajectory,  his  reaction  to
Sputnik  is  to  strengthen   NATO.   With  IRBM's  we  do  not
yet  possess ?
The   same  mirror   image   thinking   which   leads   us  to  fear
from  Them  what  we  know  they  have  to  fear  from  Us  is  also
evident  in  Mr.  Stevenson.   What  on  solemn  consideration  he
now  expects  from  them  (he  said  on  Nov.   17)  is  limited  war,
presumably  since  that  is now  the  newest  fashion  in  the  Penta-
Oh
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  have  we  really  got  an operational
IKBM   [Intermediate  Range  Ballistic  Missile],  and  if
so,  have  we  got  enough  to  be  distributing  them around
to  other countries?
A.  No,   we  haven't  got   them   at   the   moment.    We
have  them  in prospect.
—Secretary  Dulles,  press  conference,  Nov.  19.
gon.    We   seem  as  sure  our  changing  military  doctrines  will
be  universally  imitated  as  the  Paris  couturier  is  that  what  he
designs  today,  the  outside  world  will  copy  tomorrow.   These
happy  hunches  will  do  in  the  world  of  millinery.  But  aren't
they  a  little giddy  when  the  headgear  may  have  to  fit  over  an
atomic  warhead?
Our  foreign  allies  are  uneasy  about  Mr.  Dulles.    They  may
become  as  uneasy  about  Mr.   Stevenson  when   they  see  how
rapidly  and  easily  he  speaks   (in   the  Nov.   17  statement)   of
"Communist   aggression   as  in  Greece,   Korea,   Indochina  and
Malaya."   These  lump  together  in  the  familiar simple-minded
State  Department   way  very  dissimilar  situations—an  internal
revolt  in  Greece,  war  between  two  sections  of  a  divided coun-
try  in  Korea,  a  long  smoldering  nationalist  revolution  which
French  blindness  turned  Communist  in  Indochina,  a  guerrilla
insurrection  in  Malaya.  The  prevention,  the  solution,  for  each
of  these  situations  is  quite  different.    A  man  who  thinks  in
such  oversimplified  stereotypes  offers   little  promise  of   fresh
leadership  anyway.
Is Twice as  Dead,  Deader than Once?
To  look  at  the  foreign  policy  statement  of  the   Democratic
Advisory  Council  and  the  President's  recent  speeches  is  to  see
no  differences   sufficient   to  keep  Mr.   Stevenson   from  taking
up   quarters   at   the   State   Department.    Basically   both   the
Democrats   and  the  President   believe  that   since  we  and   the
Russians  can  now  shoot  each  other   dead,   the  solution   is  to
hurry  up  and  create  the  capacity  to  shoot   them   dead   twice
when  they  shoot  us  dead  once.   This  is  what  schoolyard  von
Clausewitzes  knew  as  the  massive  deterrence   of  the  Double-
Dee-Dare-You.
Bipartisanship  comes   easy  to  the  Democratic  party  leader-
ship  and  to  Mr.  Stevenson   because  they  share  the   bankrupt
cold  war  thinking  of  their  opponents.    Mr.  Stevenson's   office
across  the  hall  from  Mr.  Dulles's  symbolizes  a  fundamental
agreement.   It  is  significant  that  the  Democra'rs  and  Mr.  Stev-
enson,  like  the  President,   show  themselves   willing  to  spend
billions  more  on  arms,  but  both  are  silent  when  it  comes  to
spending  on  the  race  which  will  really  determine  the  future  if
there  is  peace,  the  race  to  raise  the  level  of  public  education.
1   7  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  25, 1957
Little  Noted  Obscenity  Decision  Now  Seized  On For  Wider  Surveillance
The  Roman  Catholic Hierarchy  Prepares  to  Police  American  Literature
A  little  noticed   Supreme  Court  decision  of  last  June,  up-
holding  the  Federal  government's  right   to  suppress   obscene
literature,  has  been  seized  upon  by  our  Roman  Catholic  Bish-
ops  to  justify  the  launching  of  a  National   Office  for   Decent
Literature  to  do  for  books  what  the  Legion  of  Decency  does
for   the   movies.
Their   joint  statement   (as  the  quotation  in  the   adjoining
box  shows)   asserts  the  right  to  impose  limits  on  freedom  of
publishing  which  go  beyond  the  area  of  obscenity.   The  phi-
losophy  is,  of  course,  that  of  their  Church,  which  believes  in
a  system  of  revealed  dogma  rather  than  freedom  of   thought.
The  Holy  Office—which  once  presided  over  the  Inquisition
—has  long  used  an  Index  of  forbidden  books  (among   them
many  of  mankind's  great  classics)   in  its  war  against  Error.
The   new  National   Office   is  potentially  a  serious  threat   to
freedom  of  expression.   The  very  name  is  disturbing.
The Misgivings  Were Well-Founded
A  wider  censorship  was  not  intended  but  it  was  invited  by
the  loose  language  Mr.  Justice  Brennan  used  last  June  in  up-
holding  the  conviction  of  a  bookseller,  Roth,  under  the  Fed-
eral  statute and  of  another,  Alberts,  under  a  similar  California
law.   Chief  Justice  Warren,   one  of  four  Justices  to   express
misgivings,   concurred   in   the   result   but   warned   that    "the
broad  language"   of  the  majority  "may  eventually  be  applied
to  the  arts  and  sciences  and  freedom  of   communication."
Mr.  Justice  Harlan  concurred  with  reluctance  in  the  Cali-
fornia   case,  and   dissented  with   vigor   in  the   Federal.    He
thought  some  State  regulation  bearable.   He  said  he  was  pre-
pared  to  let  one  State  ban  D.   H.   Lawrence  so  long  as  his
books  could  still  be  read  in  another.   But  he  thought   it   "in-
tolerable  and  violative  of   both  the  letter   and  spirit  of   the
First  Amendment"  to  set up  a  Federal  censorship  under  cover
of  an  anti-obscenity statute.
The   majority   decision  was   bad   logic   and   bad   history.
Brennan,   Frankfurter,  Burton,  Clark   and   Whittaker   argue
from   the  existence  in   1776   of  State  laws  against  libel   and
blasphemy  that  the  Framers  of  the  First  Amendment   could
not  have  meant  it  when  they  said  "Congress   shall  make  no
law"  abridging  freedom  of  speech,  press  or  assembly.    The
testimony  of  Madison  and   Jefferson   shows  that  the   Federal
government,  unlike  the  States  was  not  intended  to   exercise
any  authority  over  the  press. *
The  Judges  who  joined  in  the  decision  accepted  the   trial
judge's  ruling  in  the  Roth  case  that  the  jury  might  hold  ob-
scene  anything which  "offends  the  common  conscience  of  the
A  Holy  Office  for  the  USA?
".  .  .  Freedom  of  expression  is  not  an  absolute  free-
dom  .  .  .  liberty  has  a  moral  dimension  .  .  .  liberty  is
exercised  within bounds fixed by  ...    a  regard  for pub-
lic   order,   and  a   positive   deference   to   those   human,
moral  and  social   values   which  are  our  common  Chris-
tian   heritage.    It  is   within  this  context  that  freedom
of  expression  is  rightly  understood.
"This  recognition of  limitations has  been  given  state-
ment  in  recent  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of   the
United  States.    'We  hold  that  obscenity  is  not  within
the  area  of  constitutionally  protected  speech  or  press.'
(Roth  v.  U.  S.)."
•—The  Roman  Catholic Bishops  on "Bad"  Books.
"I  have  the   same   confidence  in   the   ability  of   our
people  to  reject   noxious  literature  as   I  have  in  their
capacity  to  sort  out the  true  from  the  false  in  theology,
economics,  politics  or  any   other  field."
—Douglas  and Black  dissenting  in Roth v.  U.S.
community."   Douglas   eloquently  dissenting  for  himself  and
Black  termed  this  "community  censorship  in  one  of  its  worst
forms."
What  Interest  More Important?
The   Brennan  decision  qualified   the   First  Amendment  in
the  very  act  of  upholding  it.   The  Justice  wrote,   "All   ideas
having  even  the  slightest   redeeming   social   importance—un-
orthodox  ideas,  controversial  ideas,  even  ideas  hateful  to  the
prevailing   climate  of   opinion—have  the   full   protection  of
the  guaranties,  unless  excludable  because  they  encroach  upon
the  limited  area  of  more  important  interests."  (Italics  added)
What  if  a  Court  holds  in  the  future  that  certain  ideas  have
no  social  importance,  or  that  they  encroach  upon  "more  im-
portant  interests"?    (What   could   be  more  important  than
freedom  of  thought?)     Similarly, the  decision  says  the  First
Amendment  protests  the  literature of  sex  except  when  treated
"in  a  manner  appealing  to  prurient  interest."   The  prurient
can  find  prurience in  the  Bible,  the  Talmud  and  the  Church
Fathers  as  well  as  in  Chaucer   and  James  Joyce.    This  is  no
civilized   standard.   The   campaign  launched   by  the   Bishops
illustrates  the  dangers,  though  there  is  all  too  little  protest.
*   A  brilliant  deflation  of   the  legal,  historical,  and  socio-
logical  fallacies  of  the  majority  decision  may  be  found  in  the
late  Judge  Jerome  Frank's  regretfully  concurring  opinion  in
the   Uoth  case   when  it   was  before  the   Second   Circuit,  237
F.2d  797,  and  in  a  State   decision  to  which  he  paid  tribute,
Judge  Curtis  Bok  in  66  Pa.  D  &  C  101.
How  Blame  Delinquency  on  "Bad"
"Who  can  deny  that  in  modern  America;,  life  there   are
many  grave  moral  problems  .  .  .  when  the  National  Coun-
cil  of  Juvenile  Court  Judges  attacks  vicious  and  evil  publi-
cations  as a major cause  of ...    juvenile  delinquency ...  ?"
—Statement  of  the  U.S.  Roman  Catholic  Bishops
"Scientific   studies   of   juvenile  delinquency    demonstrate
that  those  who  get  into  trouble,  and  are  the  greatest  con-
cern  of  the  advocates  of  censorship,  are  far  less  inclined  to
read  than  those  who do not  become  delinquent.  .  .  .  Sheldon
and  Eleanor  Glueck,  who  are  among  the  country's   leading
authorities  on  the  treatment   and  causes  of  juvenile  delin-
Books  When  Bad  Boys  Don't  Read?
quency,  have  recently  published  the  results   of  a  ten   year
study  of  its  causes  .  .  .  but  the  Gluecks  gave  no  considera-
tion  to  the  type  of   reading  material,  if   any,  read  by   the
delinquents.   This  is,  of  course,  consistent  with  their  finding
that  delinquents  read  very  little.  .  .  .  The  Kinsey   studies
show   the   minor  degree   to   which  literature   serves   as   a
potent  sexual  stimulau  .
—Lockhart  & McClure:  Literature, The  Law  of  Obscenity
and   The  Constitution.   38  Minn.  L.   Rev.   295,  387
quoted  by Douglas  (with  Black)  dissenting  in  Roth  v.
U.S.,  SSIt   U.S.-476,  June  H,  1957.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  25, 1957
Why  Is  The  Press Afraid  to  Open  Up This  Story  of  Wasted   Scientific   Capacity?
Two  Physicists  and  Three  Engineers
It  is  extraordinary  how  little  interest  the  press  has  shown
in  Judge  Alexander  Holtzoff's  decision  in  Federal  Court   here
rejecting  the  appeal  of  the  Ft.  Monmouth  Six  for  reinstate-
ment.   This  is  not  only  the  first  round  in  what  their  counsel,
Thurman  Arnold,  believes  will  be  an  historic  legal  battle  but
a  vivid  example  of  the  kind  of  flimsy  charges  and  secret  pro-
cedures  which  keep  hundreds  of  competent  technicians black-
listed.
In   the   wake  of   Sputnik   and   in  the   midst  of   an   almost
hysterical   concern   with   the   shortage  of   scientists  and   engi-
neers,  there  has  been  a  curious  journalistic  indifference  to  the
story  of  these  poor  victims  of  the  headline-hunting raid  Mc-
Carthy   made   on   the   Army   signal   corps   laboratories  at   Ft.
Monmouth,  N.  J.,  in  1953.
One Working  In A Hi-Fi  Shop
Two  physicists, three  engineers  and  a  stenographer  are  in-
volved  in  these  cases  which  will  be  appealed   to  the  Supreme
Court.   One  of  the  victims,  Hyam  Gerber  Yamins,  was  one  of
the  inventors  of  portable  radar  during  World  War   II.   An-
other,  Aaron  H.  Coleman,  was  one  of  the  chief  architects  of
the  U.  S.  anti-aircraft  radar  defense  warning  system.   Of   the
five  technicians,   none   has   been   able  to  get   employment   in
private  industry  of  the  kind  to  which  their  qualifications  en-
title  them;  one  is  in  a  Hi-Fi  shop.
The  Ft.  Monmouth   physicists  and  engineers  are  typical  of
many  hundreds   of   able   technicians  who   remain  blacklisted
and  wasted   in  menial  jobs.   They  not  only  cannot  work   in
government   but  will  not   be  hired   by  any  important  indus-
trial  or  engineering   concern.
No One Seems Interested
After   Judge  Holtzoff   ruled   that   the   Federal   government
is  under  no  obligation  to  grant  a  fair  hearing  to   discharged
employes,  friends  appealed   to  the  New   York   Times  and  the
Washington   Post   to   make   this   decision   the   starting   point
<:f   a  general   survey   into  cases  of  this  kind.   Neither  justice
to  men  who  have  suffered   (several  of  the  Ft.  Monmouth  vic-
tims  were  made  ill)   nor  concern  for  the  country's  scientific
needs  was  enough  to  spark   interest.
We  hope  this  may  stir  some  larger   publication   to  a  thor-
ough  examination  of  what   is  a  scandal  from  the   standpoint
both  of  law  and  science.   Those  who  examine  the   complaints
filed  in  the  District  Court  and  the  government's  answers  will
be  struck  first  of  all  by  the  thinness  of  the  "charges"  as  con-
trasted  with  the  testimonies  from  commanding   officers   attest-
ing  the  good  work  and  reliability  of  the  accused.
Whom  McCarthy  Cast  Into  Limbo
Science  Has  Arrived
" 'If    I  were   a   well-known   hostess,    I   know   who   I
would  try  to  get  as  my  social  lion,'  said  a  Washington
woman   the  other  day.   'I'd  inveigle  Dr.  Wernher  von
Braun  to  my  dinner  table  —  the  head  of   the  Army's
Kedstone  Missile  Project  and  sooooo—handsome.'
" 'You  know  who  I'd  ask  right  now  if  he  were  here?'
put  in  another.  'Col.  John P.  Nickerson,  the  officer  who
was   'exiled'   to   Panama   for   trying  to   promote   the
Army's  Kedstone  missile  project.    If  you  ask  me,   he's
the  Billy  Mitchell  of  today.'
"So  there  you  are,  Capital  hostesses.   If  you  want  to
get  ahead  of   the  game,  bone  up  on  your  science   and
make  out  a  new  list  loaded  with  gray  matter."
—Betty  Beale,  Washington  Post  society  columnist.
No Fifth  Amendment  Men Among  Them
In   the  prolonged  and   exhaustive,  investigations   to   which
all  have  been  subject,  none  has  been  accused  of  wrongdoing.
None  has  been  accused  even  of  having  been  a  Communist;  the
nearest  charge  to  this  is  the  allegation   that  one  of  them   once
attended  a  meeting  of  the  Young  Communist  League  in   1937.
Here  are  some   sample   allegations   against   them:   that   the
mother  of  one  was  a  registered   member  of  the  American  La-
bor  Party;  that  one  plaintiff   was  a  member   of  the  American
Veterans   Committee;    that   one  was  a  member   of   the   New
Jersey  Independent   Citizens  League;   that  one  "declared   the
Communist  party  an  ineffectual  party  that  should  be  permitted
to  operate  legally  and  not  be  suppressed";  that  another   once
expressed   favorable   views   of   the   Russian  government    and
said  "the  United  States  Government  was  too  liberal!"
They Wouldn't  Have  Been Fired  Today
The   plain  truth  is  that  these  men  were  fired  for   fear  of
McCarthy.   The   Army  got   rid  of  anyone  at  Ft.   Monmouth
with   the   slightest   personal   or   family   connection   with  any-
thing  that  smelled   even  slightly  of  radicalism  lest   McCarthy
dig  this  up  and  use  it  in  his  feud  with  the  Army.   Probably
none of  these people would  be  discharged  today  if  brought   up
on  similar  "charges"  under  current  procedures  in  the  current
atmosphere.    The  Army,  once  having  made  a  mistake,  is  un-
willing  to  admit  it.
But  why  with  McCarthy  dead,  the  witch  hunt  on  the  wane,
and  the  shortage  of  scientists  and  engineers  serious,  do  none
of   the   big   papers   of   the   country   open   these   cases  up   for
public  inspection  and  put  an  end  to  this  kind  of  injustice  and
waste  of  human  resources?
That  Statue  in  New   York  Harbor  Should  Have  Been  Investigated  Long  Ago
Lieut.  Buckley: Well,  did  this  social  group  to  which  your
parents   belong   have   that   unenviable  reputation  of   being
Communist   in  nature,  so   that   somebody  might   have   re-
ported  that  social  group  as  a  Communist  group?
Miss  Levine:  No.
Q.  Does  that  social  group  have  a  name?
A.   Yes.
Q.  What  is  it?     A.  Emma  Lazarus.
Lt.  Buckley:  Not  being  a  linguist,  I  don't  know  whether
that  has  a  translation  or  whether  it  is  the  name  of  some
individual.
Mr.   Katchen   (defense   counsel):  Lazarus  happens  to  be
the   name  of   the   woman  who   coined  the   phrase   on   our
Statue  of  Liberty.  That  is,   'Our  doors  are  open  to  all  ye
who  are   persecuted"  or  something  like  that.  .   .  .  Emma
Lazarus  is  the  poetess  who is  responsible  for  that quotation
and  it  is  a  name  frequently   used  by  many  Jewish cultural
groups.
—Before   the  First  Army  Security  Hearing  Board  in  the  Case  of  Bernice  Levine,  One  of  the  Ft.  Monmouth    "Six"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  25, 1957
Judicial  Blows  at  the  Smith   Act,  Trade   Union   Racism  and  Nazi   Collaborators
The  Eisenhower  Administration  Risks  Another  Flare-Up  in  Little  Rock
To  test  public  opinion   the  Eisenhower  Administration de-
liberately  leaked   its  plan   to  withdraw  Federal   troops   from
Little    Rock   and    replace   them    with    "selected"    National
Guardsmen  under  Army command  by Thanksgiving.   The  last
time  selected  Guardsmen  were  used  by  the  Army  inside  the
school  they  looked  the  other  way  when  Negro  children  were
attacked  and  had  to  be  withdrawn.   Even  with  the  Army  in
the  school,  two  Negro  boys  have  been  attacked  inside  Central
High  School  during  the  past  two  weeks  and  as  one  of  them
said  "what's  the  rush?"  about  removing  Federal  troops.    The
unscrupulous  Faubus,  avid  for  a  return  to  the  headlines,  indi-
cated  in  his  Hot  Springs  interview with  Relman  Morin  of  the
AP  that  he  is  sticking  to  his  thesis  that  only  "voluntary  with-
drawal"  of  the  Negro  children  can  solve  the  problem.   Hasn't
the  White  House  enough  trouble  on  its  hands  without   giving
Faubus  a  chance  to  set  Little  Rock  ablaze  again?
Judge  Hastie Vindicated
Two   years  ago,  before  the  present  trend   in  the   Supreme
Court  had  made  itself  felt,  Judge  William  H.  Hastie  on  the
Third   Circuit  Court   of   Appeals   in   Philadelphia,   dissented
(with  Judge  Maris)   in  the  Smith  Act  case  of  the  Pittsburgh
Five;  he  thought  an  acquittal should  have  been  directed.   Now
Judge  Hastie  for  a  unanimous  court  has  directed  the  acquittal
of   four   Smith   Act  defendants   (including   the   poet   Walter
Lowenfels)  in  the  case  of  the  Philadelphia Nine,  and  ordered
a  retrial  for  the  remaining  five.  The  Court  of  Appeals   held
that  under  the  interpretation  of  Mr.  Justice  Harlan  for   the
majority  in  the  California  Smith  Act  cases  (Yates)   there  had
to  be  some   proof   that   defendants  had   advocated    "concrete
action"   toward  overthrow  and  not  just  theoretical   doctrines.
We  are  making  progress.   When  is  the  Soviet  Union,  in  that
long  promised   revision  of   its  criminal  code,  going  to  take
similar  steps   to  ameliorate  its  "Smith   Act,"   the  law  against
counter-revolutionary  crime,  which  is  vaguer  even  than  ours?
The  Supreme   Court  in  a  unanimous  decision  by  Mr.   Jus-
tice  Black  last  Monday  struck  a  blow  against   a  particularly
obnoxious  form  of  racism—the  abuse  of  collective  bargaining
rights   by  such   unions  as  the   Brotherhood   of   Railway   and
IFS  to  Speak  in  Mass, and Calif.
IFS  will  be  featured  at  a  week-end  seminar  by  the
American  Friends  Service  Committee at  Woolman  Hall,
Deerfield,  Mass.,  Nov.  29  and  will  speak  for  the  Com-
mittee  Against  Nuclear  Testing  in  Charles  St. Meeting
House,  Boston,  4  p.  m.  Sunday,  Dec.  1.
IFS   will  speak  for  the  live-wire  Women  for   Legis-
lative  action  on  "The   Real  Challenge  of  the  Sputnik"
in  Los  Angeles  Dec.  17 at  a  place  to  be  announced and
has  First  Unitarian  Church,  San  Francisco, tentatively
reserved  for  Dec.  13  on  the  question  of  peace  and   the
arms   race,  if  there  is  enough  advance  response   from
readers   of  the  Weekly  in  Northern  California.
Steamship  Clerks  to  take  jobs  away  from  their  Negro  mem-
bers  and  give  them  to  whites.   The  lily  white  attitude  of  the
railway  brotherhoods  generally  has  been  a  scandal.  .  .  .  The
Court  also  cast  a  pall  on  the  hopes  of  Nazi-collaborating  I.  G.
Farben   to   recover   its  American  properties   when   Fritz   von
Opel  was  refused  a  review  of  a  lower  court  decision  rejecting
a  similar  suit  exploiting   a  Swiss  corporate  cloak  similar  to
that  used  by  I.  G.
In  Hearsl's  New   York  Minor,  Nov.  19,  Fulton  Lewis,  Jr.,
crusades  against  the  Crusade  for  Freedom,  saying  "One   top
Congressional  investigator  who  has  interviewed  literally  thou-
sands  of  Iron  Curtain  escapees"   and   asked   every  one  about
Radio  Free  Europe  informed  him  that  "less  than  one  percent
of  them  have  ever  heard   it,  or  heard  of   it."    Lewis,  whose
Soviet  sympathies have  hitherto  been  well  hidden,  claims  RFE
transmitters   are   short   wave,   "and   short   wave   receivers   in
satellite  countries  are  very   scarce."
Lee  Mortimer,   Winchell's  stand-in,   same  paper,  same  day,
reports   in  alarm  that   the  President's   new   scientific   adviser,
Dr.  Killian  of  M.  I.  T.  "signed  a  resolution  in   1951.   urging
the  withdrawal  of  U.  S.  troops   from  Korea  and   Nationalist
China  and  the  recognition  of  Red  China.    He  defended  Dirk
Struik  .  .  .  still  teaching  at  M.  I.  T."  and  furthermore    "Dr.
Rabi,  the  White  House  adviser  on  missiles,  testified  in  favor
of  Oppenheimer.   .  .'."   We  suggest  the  FBI  throw  a. cordon
around  the  White  House  right  away.
Bradley   Peace  Speech   Reprints   Available  $15  a  Thousand—More   Than  20,000  Already  Sold
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name
Street
City    ......................................... .Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $4  (1  yr.)  or  $2 (6  mos.)  additional:
11/25/57
(To)   Name
Street    .......
City    .........................................Zone............State..................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
I.F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebroskt  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.   C.
Post   Office
I.  F.  Stone's   AVppfcly.    Entnrod   as   Second  Class   Mnfrtor   at   Washington.  D.  C.   umler  the  Act  of  March  3.  187!).    I'- Rt-nntP'l  Monrlnvb  fr-ut  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5fil8  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   anil  edited   hy   I.   l-\  Stone;  Circulation    M;J nfitrer.   Ksther   M.  Stone-    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.;  $0  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $-"'  to  Israel.  Asia   *.n.d  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED