I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957aug05.pdf

============================================================

The  ABA   and  the Supreme  Court,  P.  3
TMc  South  Accords  No  Jury  Trials  in  Its  Attack  on the NAACP, See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  31
AUGUST  5,  1967
101
       WASHINGTON,  IX  C.
15  CENTS
"Latin  America"  Begins  at  the  Mason-Dixon  Line
In  that  witty  classic,  "Southern  Politics  in  State  and   Na-
tion,"  Professor  V.  O.  Key,  Jr.,  himself   a  Southerner,   says,
"the  issue  of  Negro  suffrage   is  a  question  not  of  white  su-
premacy  but  of  the  supremacy of  which  whites."   This  obser-
vation  brilliantly  illuminates the  realities  the  spokesmen  for
the  Southern oligarchy  in  the  Senate have kept  discreetly hid-
den  in  grandiloquent  appeals  to  Magna  Charta.   The  South's
restrictions  on  the  right  to  vote  originated mainly  from   1890
to  1908  in  a  determined  effort  to  smash  the  radical  agrarian
movements  then  uniting  poorer   elements,  white  and  black,
against  the  ruling  class  of  Black  Belt  planters  and  urban busi-
ness  men  which  had  dominated  the  South  since  Reconstruc-
tion.   The   oligarchy  succeeded   in  disfranchising   the  Negro,
in  befuddling  the  poor  white, and  in  reestablishing its  politi-
cal  monopoly.  The  South,  which  talks as  if  it  were  the  faith-
ful  guardian of  Anglo-Saxon  freedoms  pure  and  undefiled,  is
actually  the  only area  in  the  English tradition which  has  a  one-
party  system.   The   majority  of  its  native  pure  white  Anglo-
Saxon  stock,  like  peons,  are  too  apathetic  to  vote  at  all.   No-'
where  else  in  the  English  speaking  world  do  so  few  manage
to  go  on  ruling  so  cynically,  so  ruthlessly,  and   in  such  open
contempt  for  democratic  processes.   In  this  sense  it  might  be
said  that  "Latin  America"  begins  at  the  Mason-Dixon   line.
The Veto of  the  Moneyed Minority
If   some  modicum  of  civil  rights   is  to  survive  what  now
promises  to  be  a  long  drawn  out  fight,  it  is  essential  that  the
spotlight  be  shifted   from  legalistic  abstractions  to  these  po-
litical  realities.  Only  so  can  the  South  be  put  on  the  defen-
sive.   Political  discussion  has  reached  a  new  level  of  inanity
when  a  Northern   Senator  like  Alexander  Smith  (R.  N.  /.)
can  say on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  July  24,  "I  know  that  the
South  does  not  want  to  prevent  the  Negro  from  enjoying  full
voting  rights."    In  so  fatuous  an  atmosphere  it  is  not  surpris-
ing  that  the  Southern  leadership  has  been  extorting  a  maxi-
mum  of  concession  without   any  agreement   to  give  up   their
final  weapon  of  the  filibuster.  This  weak  strategy  reflects  the
weak  convictions  of  all  but  those who  make  up  the  hard  core
of  the  civil  rights  forces.   Though  the  defeat  of  the  school  aid
bill  again  demonstrated   the  power  of  the  Southern   oligarchy
in   coalition  with  Northern  big  business,  no  one  is  driving
home  the  lesson.   To  establish   the  civil  rights  of  the  Negro
would  be to  break  the  disproportionate   power  of  the  Southern
oligarchy  in  Congress.   This  is  what  led  the  U.  S.  Chamber
of  Commerce,  in  the  July  12  issue  of   its  confidential  news-
letter,  "Congressional  Action,"  to  warn  its  members   against
the  danger  that  civil  rights  might  split  the  business  alliance
with  the  South.   "If  that  happens,"  the  U.  S.  Chamber  asked
in  alarm,  "will  there  be  any  effective  control  of  Congress?"
That   is  to  say,  how  will  the  wealthy  minority  maintain   its
veto  if  the  power  of  the  Southern oligarchy  is broken?
Seduced at  Hell's  Canyon
Here  lies  the  key  to  awakening the  indifferent  white masses
of  the  North  to  the  fact  that  civil  rights means more  than jus-
tice  to  the  Negro  minority.   But  most  of  the  Western  liberals
have  been  deluded  by  the  Hell's  Canyon  vote  into  believing
they  might  succeed  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  the  South's
affections.    Such  Western   liberal   Democrats   as  Murray  and
Mansfield  of  Montana,  Magnuson   and  Jackson  of   Washing-
ton,   O'Mahoney   of  Wyoming  and  Church  of   Idaho  joined
the  anti-civil  rights  forces  on  July  23  to  swamp  the  Bricker
amendment,  the  last  chance  to  save  Part  III.   This  would  have
allowed  the  Attorney  General  to  protect   other   than  voting
rights  but  only when  directed  to  do  so  by  the  President.   The
civil  rights  faithful—such   Senators  as  Douglas,  Javits,  Clark,
McNamara  and  Neuberger—all  voted   for   it.   But  Morse  of
Oregon,  like  Kennedy  of  Massachusetts,  joined  the  South  in
defeating  the  Bricker  amendment,  and  only  then—when  the
defeat   of  Part  III   was  certain—did   these  two  finally  speak
their  piece in  favor  of  the  bill as  a  whole.   It  may  be  observed
parenthetically  that  of  all  the  speeches  in  favor  of  civil  rights
during  the  debate,  Kennedy's  was  the  weakest   and  briefest
quaver,  an  almost  inaudible  "me  too."    Morse  and  Kennedy
voted  for  Part  III  next  day, when  the  cloakrooms  knew  it  was
defeated.    Such  New   England   liberals  as   Green   of   Rhode
Island  and  Flanders  of  Vermont  helped  to  strike  it  down,  as
did   Chavez   of   New   Mexico,   though   civil   rights   mean  as
much  to  his  Mexican
:
American  kin  as  to  Negroes.
The Joker in That  Jury  Compromise
As  long  ago  as  June  23,  1955,  a  Southern  columnist,  John
Temple   Graves,   writing   in   the   Birmingham    Posl-Herald,
pointed  out  that  civil  rights  could  ultimately  be  nullified  by
"10,000   [Southern]   juries  saying  'not  guilty'."    Here   again
the  Southern  oligarchy  has  managed  to  get  liberals  to  front
for    it.    The   "compromise"   jury   trial   amendment    finally
worked  out  between  O'Mahoney   and  Kefauver  is  a  joker  to
which  Javits  of  New  York  supplied  the  key:  "When  a  local
official   .  .  .  has  the  choice  between  complying  and  not  com-
plying,  he  knows  that  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  drag  his  feet
until  after   election  day,  and  then  the  contempt   will   be  not
civil  contempt,  but  criminal contempt,  and  he  will  be entitled
to  a jury trial  in which his  own  friends  would  be on  the  jury."
For  three  quarters  of  a  century Southern  juries  have  made  the
older  civil  rights  statutes  a  dead  letter  by  refusing  to  indict  or
convict.    If   jury  trial  passes,  we  will  be  back  at  the   point
where  our  grandfathers  came  in.
1   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  August  5,  1957
No  Jury  Trial  Nonsense   When  the  South  Sets  Out  to Smash Negro Rights
How  Government  by  Injunction  Is  Being  Used  to  Outlaw  the  NAACP
While  Southern white  supremacists  are  fighting  in  the  Sen-
ate  against  "government  by  injunction"  and  for  trial  by  jury,
in  their  own  Southern  States  they  have  been  issuing  a  series
of  savage  injunctions  without  jury  trial  in  order  to  outlaw
the  National   Association  for   the   Advancement  of   Colored
People  and  make  it  impossible  for  Negroes  to  litigate  their
rights  in  the  courts.  Here  are  some  samples  from  the  survey
made  by  the   American  Jewish  Congress   in   its  newly  pub-
lished   report,   "Assault   Upon   Freedom   of   Association:   A
Study  of  the  Southern  Attack  Upon  the  NAACP":
In  Alabama  Judge  Walter  B.  Jones,  without  a  hearing,  is-
sued  a  temporary  injunction  on  June  1,  1956,   forbidding  the
NAACP  to  operate  in  that  State.   Attorney  General  John  Pat-
terson  then  served  an  order  on  the  NAACP  demanding  full
disclosure  of  all  membership lists  and  financial records.  When
the  NAACP  refused,  Judge  Jones—of  course,  without  a  jury
trial—found   it  guilty  of   contempt,  and   fined   it  $100,000.
The  higher  State  courts  refused  an  appeal  but  the  U.  S. Su-
preme  Court  last  May  27  agreed  to  hear  the  case.
Jailed Till the  Records Were Produced
In  Georgia,  last  November,   State  tax  officials   raided   the
Southern  Regional  and  Atlanta  offices  of  the  NAACP.   They
seized  all  records  in  the  former  but  were  resisted  by  John  H.
Calhoun,  president  of  the   local  NAACP   chapter.    A  court
order  was  obtained  from   Judge  Durwood  Pye,  and   after  a
trial  without  a  jury  Calhoun  was  found  guilty  of  both  civil
and  criminal contempt.   He  was  sentenced  to  a  year  in  jail on
the  criminal  charge  but  sentence  was  suspended   "so  long  as
he  behaves  himself."    In  the  civil  charge  he  was  imprisoned
without  bail  until  he  agreed  to  produce  his  records.   An  ef-
fort  to get  this judge to disqualify  himself  for  prejudice  failed,
though  he  admitted he  held  "strong  views  on  the  mongreliza-
tion  of  the  races."
In  Texas  last  September  21,  Judge  Otis  T.  Dunagan,  with-
out  notice to  the NAACP  and  without  a  hearing,  gave  Attor-
ney  General  Ben  Shepperd  an  order  barring  all  NAACP  ac-
tivities  -in   the   State.    Texas   Rangers   descended   upon   the
NAACP   offices   in  Dallas,   Houston  and  Corpus  Christi,  de-
manding  to  see  all  records.   Records  thus  obtained  were  used
in  a  series  of  hearings—without  a  jury—which  culminated  in
a  permanent  injunction  forbidding the  NAACP  to  engage  in
any  litigation  or  any  political  and  lobbying  activities  in  Texas
and  to  keep  all  its  records open  for   inspection.
Frankly  for  Thought Control
"Because  of  its  success   [in  governing  by  injunction]
in  its  courts,  the  State  of  Alabama  has  found  no  need
to  enact  new  laws  containing  wholesale  prohibitions  of
NAACP  activity.  .  .  .  Nevertheless,  its  legislature  has
passed   a  number  of   bills  applying  to   selected   rural
counties  where  the  Negro  population  is proportionately
high.   In  1955,  it  enacted  a  law  requiring  any  organiza-
tion  soliciting  money  in  Wilcox  County  to  pay  a  $200
license  fee,  $50  for  each  solicitor   and  $5  for  each  per-
son  it  enrolls.  .  .  .  Representative  Sam  Nettles,  who
introduced  the  bill,  made  clear  his  intention  to  impose
thought  control.   'Without  such  a  proposal,'  he  said,  'it
would  be  very  easy  for  the  NAACP  to  slip  into  Wilcox
County  and  teach  the  Negroes   undesirable  ideas'."
—Assault   Upon  Freedom  of  Association:  A  Study  of
the  Attack   on  the   NAACP.
Higher  Court Ignored
In  Louisiana,  when  the  State  Court  of  Appeals  finally  re-
versed  an  injunction  forbidding  the  NAACP  to  operate  in
that  State,  Attorney General  Jack Gremilion  refused  to  recog-
nize  the  decision  saying  he  was  "confused"  by  it.   NAACP
branches  were  forced   to  hand  over   their   membership   lists
despite  the  higher  court  ruling.
Similar  steps  have  been  taken  in  the  other  Southern  States.
Arkansas  passed  a  law  requiring  registration  of  any  organi-
zation  promoting  integration.    Florida   empowered  its  Gov-
ernor   to   declare  an   emergency  and   suspend   constitutional
guaranties  if  any  steps  were  taken  to  further  integration.
Against  "Loud and Offensive  Talk"
In   Mississippi  the   legislature   forbade  lawsuits   by   "out-
siders"  to  enforce  integration,  provided  a  $500  fine  for  per-
sons  convicted  of   "loud   and   offensive   talk,"   required   all
school   employes  to  reveal  organizational  affiliation   and   set
up  a  Commission with  a  $250,000   budget  and  the  power  to
employ  secret  investigators  and  confidential informants  in  the
fight  against  integration.
Virginia  passed  a  series  of  laws  which  would  cripple  the
NAACP  by  punishing  as  "barratry"  any  effort  by  it  to  bring
suits  to  enforce  integration.   North  and  South  Carolina,  and
even  Tennessee,  have  enacted  similar  anti-NAACP  laws.
This  is  the  way  white  supremacists  operate  at  home  while
their  spokesmen  in  Congress  talk  as  if  they  were  the  defend-
ers  of  Magna  Charta  and  constitutional  liberty.
Every  American's  Stake  in  the
"We  conclude with  de  Toqueville  who  spelled  out  so  long
ago  why  freedom  of  association   is  essential  to   democracy.
With  startling   clarity,  he  saw  that  if   the  state  bans  any
association   all  are  restrained.    In  words   that   could   have
been  written  yesterday,  he  said:
" 'When  some  kinds  of  association  are  prohibited  and oth-
ers  are  allowed, it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  the  former  from
the  later  beforehand.   In  this  state  of   doubt  men  abstain
from  them  altogether,   and  a  sort  of  public  opinion  passes
current,  that  tends  to  cause  any  association  whatsoever   to
be  regarded  as  a  bold  and  almost  an  illicit  enterprise.'
"Every   American   has   a  stake   in   the  struggle   of   the
NAACP  to  survive  and continue  its  work.  Freedom  of  asso-
NAACP's  Struggle  to  Survive
ciation,  like  the  freedoms  of  speech,   press  and   conscience
which  it  implements,  exists  primarily  for  the  benefit  of  the
people  at  large.   It  protects   the  people's  right  to  hear,  to
know,  to  be  informed,  so  that  they  may  properly  exercise
their  rights  and fulfill  their  obligations   as  citizens.
"The  racial  issue  in  the  South  has  assumed  a  new  dimen-
sion.   At  first,  only  the  constitutional   guaranty  of  equality
was  challenged.    Today,  the  fundamental  rights  of   expres-
sion  are  in  jeopardy.   The  attack  on  the  NAACP  is  a  reck-
less  effort   to  preserve  inequality  by  stifling   freedom."
—Assault   Upon   Freedom  of  Association:   The   Southern
Attack   Upon   the. NAACP,   by  American  Jewish  Congress..
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  5,1957
J.  Edgar  Hoover's  Public  Relations  Factotum  Turns  Up With  the  Lawyers  in  London
ABA Provides A Sounding Board for A  Smear Attack on the Supreme Court
The  week  the  American Bar  Association  arrived  in  England
for  its  annual convention,  the  London  Daily  Telegraph,  pub-
lished  a  special  supplement  on  the  U.  S.   In  one  of  the  ar-
ticles  Geoffrey   Gorer   deplored   the   influence   of   ex-Commu-
nists  in  American life  (see  adjoining box).   He  reflected  con-
solingly  that  there  had  always been  a  minority  in  the  United
States  which  saw  history  and  politics  as  a  conspiracy,  whether
of  "Negroes,  Jews,  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  the  British
Royal  Family  and  aristocracy,  Wall  Street   [or]   the  Freema-
sons"  and  thought   our  latest  attack  of  nerves  abating.
This  was  hardly  off  the  press  before  the  Bar  Association
itself  demonstrated  this  tendency  to  see  plots.    Its  Committee
on   Communism  brought   in   a   report   which   criticized   the
Supreme  Court   in  terms  which  implied  that  our  highest  tri-
bunal  was  a  tool  of  the  Communists,  notably  in  their  designs
on  the  sacred  files  of  the  FBI.     (Too  few  newspaper  noticed
that  J.  Edgar   Hoover's   public   relations   factotum,  Louis  B.
Nichols,  turned  up  in  London  for  the  ABA  meeting.)
An Obscure But Frenetic  Handful
The  report  was served  up  in  the  compote  style of  the  House
Un-American  Activities  Committee,  jumping  from  discussion
of  rules  of  evidence  to  innuendoes  linking  the  Court  with  a
conspiracy  to  "recognize   Red  China  .  .  .  enlarge  East-West
trade"  and  even  to  "oppose the  possibility  of  the  United  States
breaking  off  diplomatic  relations   with  Soviet  Russia!"
The  report  was  an  affront   to  the  Chief  Justice,  who  is  in
England  for  the  convention.    Abroad,  the  benign  figure  of
Earl  Warren   symbolizes  the  welcome  recovery  of   the  U.  S.
from   witch  mania.   The  ABA  hurt  its  own  reputation   and
America's  when  it  allowed   itself   to  be  used  as  a  sounding
board  for  an  attack  on  the  Warren  court  by  the  obscure  but
frenetic   handful   of   lawyers  which   runs   its   Committee   on
Communism.   It  is  a  commentary  on  the  ABA  that  it  has  no
comparably  active  committee  on  fundamental  liberties.
The  nature  of  the  committee  which  attacked  Warren  may
be  gathered  from  its  most  prominent  member,  Louis  C.  Wy-
man,  rebuked  by  the  Court  when  it  defended  academic  free-
dom  in  the  Sweezy  case.  Wyman  graduated   from  the   China
Lobby   in  Washington,   where   he   was   an   aide   to   Senator
Bridges,  and  became  Attorney  General   of  New   Hampshire.
In  those  rustic  mountain  pastures,  where  real  Communists  are
almost  as  rare  as  Hottentots,  Mr.   Wyman   launched   a  Red
The U.  S. As  Anti-Communist  Satellite
"One  of  the  greatest  of  contemporary misfortunes  is
the   power  and   influence   which   ex-Communists   have
been  allowed  to  attain  in  the  United  States. ...  It  is
disastrous  that  they  should  acquire  influence,  for  their
conspiratorial  views  of  world  affairs  dovetail  with dia-
bolical  accuracy  the  conspiratorial   views  of  the   nati-
vistic  [rightist]  minority.
"The   only  change  which   influential    ex-Communists
appear   to  make  in  their  views  is  in  the   identification
of   friend   and   foe;   that   apart,   Marxist    habits   of
thought,  suspiciousness,  contempt  of  'objective'  legality
and  so  on  have  achieved  far   greater  permeation   and
acceptance in  the  United  States than  in  any  other  coun-
try  not  under  Communist  domination."
—Geoffrey    Gorer, London  Telegraph,  July    &&.
hunt   which   managed   to   harass   one   Marxist   scholar,    Paul
Sweezy;  a  pacifist,  William  Uphaus;  and  several  lady  summer
visitors  caught  barehanded  with  copies  of  The   Nation.
No Memorial for  Magna  Charta
The  ABA  visitors  hung  a  wreath  on  a  memorial  to  Magna
Charta,   but   their   security-minded   report   should   have   been
saved  for  some  future  convention  in  Moscow,  where  it  would
have  been  a fit memorial  for  Vishinsky.   He  would  have  found
congenial  the  ABA  report's  stress  on  the  danger  of  having  the
courts   "lean   too  far   backward   in  the  maintenance   of   theo-
retical  [sic!]  individual  rights"  and  its  grandiloquent   appeal
from  constitutional  safeguards  to  "the  first  law  of  mankind
—the   right   of   self-preservation."    This   insistence   that   the
safety  of  the  state  must  take  precedence   over  justice  to   the
individual,  was  Stalinism's  standby,  as  it  has  been  the  stand-
by  of  every  despotism.
The  ABA  committee  found  tainted  fruit  to  its  liking  in  the
Privy  Council  report  on  the  Burgess-Maclean  case,  from  which
it  quoted.   We  prefer   to  recall  Prime  Minister   Macmillan's
observation  on  that  affair.    "Whilst  action  against  employes,
whether  of  the  state  or  of  anybody  else,  arising  from  suspicion
and  not  from  proof  might  be  taken  from  good  motives  and
might  avert  serious  consequences,"  he  told  the  Commons  at
the  time,  "it  seemed,  judging  from  what  happened   in  other
countries,  that  the  practice   soon   degenerated   into  the  satis-
faction  of  personal  vendettas  or  a. general  system  of  tyranny,
all  in  the  name  of  public  safety."    That  is  the  real  risk.
The  Answer  of  the  Los  Alamos  Scientists  to  the  Clean  Bomb  Ballyhoo
"We  regret   that  recent   highly   publicized  views  of  Drs.
Ernest  O. Lawrence, Edward Teller  and  Mark  M. Mills were
subject   to  interpretation  as   an  oblique  attack  on  initial
forms  of  the  U.  S.  disarmament   proposals.
"The  dominant  concern  of  U.  S.  policy  must  be  to  seek
out  and  to  take  all  equitable  steps  in  disarmament  and  in
international  relations  which  can  be  expected   to   diminish
the  risk  of  war.  When  placed in  contrast  with this  objective,
technical  improvements in  the  means  of  waging  war  are  in-
significant.   Therefore,  it  is  urgent  that  the  technical   rea-
sons   recently   publicized  for   continuing  nuclear   weapons
tests  be  put  in  proper  perspective.
"If  it  be true  that  mankind faces  a future  in  which  either
'clean'  or  'dirty'  nuclear  bombs  will  be  employed,  then,  of
course,  weapons  testing  must  continue  to  develop  so-called
'cleaner'  bombs.   But  in  a  larger  sense  the  paramount  ob-
jective  is  world peace.   The  choice  which  faces  us  is  not  so
much  between  'clean'  and  'dirty' bombs, but  rather between
a  world  in  which  war  and,  therefore,  nuclear  bombing  will
occur,  and a  world  in  which  we  shall  be free  of  the  scourge.
"A   secondary   technical   reason   offered   for   continuing
weapons   testing  is  the  hope  that   such  testing  may  con-
tribute   to   the  development  of   peacetime  uses   of   atomic
energy.   To  the  extent  that  there  is  a  basis  for  this  hope,
we  stress  that  the  appropriate  auspices  for  such  a  program
would  be  provided by  the  inspection  and  supervision  of  a
UN   Commission  rather  than  by  the  competitive  conceal-
ment  of  secret  weapons   programs."
—"Putting   Nuclear    Weapons    Testing   in   Perspective,"
Los  Alamos  Chapter,  Federation  of  American  Scientists.
1   2   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  5, 1957
The  "Free  World"  Loses  Another  Dictator;  Dulles   to  Downgrade   Stassen  in  London
The  School  Bill  Defeat:  Oligarchic  Power  and  Democratic  Myth
Defeat   of  the  School  Bill:  A  striking  example  of  how  the
realities  of  American government  differ  from  its  myths.  Both
parties  in  1952 and  again   in  1956 pledged   Federal   aid   to
education.   A  Gallup  poll  in  February  showed  76  percent  in
favor,  only  19 percent  against  it;  even  the  South,  least  friend-
ly  to  Federal  Aid,  was  70  percent  in  favor  of  help  to  schools.
Hearings  showed  enrollment  of  children  this  year was  2,500,-
000  in  excess  of  capacity,  including  many  schools   condemned
as  unsanitary  firetraps.  Yet  the  oligarchic  coalition  of  South-
ern  and  Northern  Congressmen  speaking  for  the  wealthy mi-
nority  again  killed  the  bill.   Eisenhower  cancelled  his   regular
press  conference  the  day  before  the  final  vote  rather  than  face
a  question  on  it.   Yet  a  shift  of  three  votes  could  have  saved
the  bill.   It  was  not  defeated  by  the  anti-segregation  amend-
ment.  Proponents  in  despair  had  just  accepted  as  a  substitute
the   identical  bill  Eisenhower  asked  last  year,  minus  a  racial
provision,   when   Smith   of   Virginia  [the  Smith   Act man]
forced  an  immediate vote  on  the  previous measure  before this
new  maneuver could  pick up  steam.   A  large  part  of  the  debate
was  taken up  with the  effort  to  read  Ike's  mind  in  the  absence
of  word   from   the  White  House.   "It   is  a  lot  easier  to  like
Ike,"  said  Congressman  McGovern  of  South  Dakota  bitterly,
"than  it  is to  learn what  it  is that  Ike  likes."
Guatemala:  One  need   only  read   the  dispatches   closely   to
note  the  tell-tale  absence  of  any  details  to  support  the  charge
that  Castillo  Armas  was  killed  by  a  Communist.  Assassina-
tion  is  not  a  Communist  weapon,  and  if  the  killing had  been
ordered  by  any  political  party  there  would  have  been  an  up-
rising  timed  to  follow   it.   This  was  more  likely  a  crime  of
passion.   Washington's  attitude  toward  the  death  of  this  two-
bit  dictator  may  pass  unnoticed  by  a  dulled  opinion  at  home
but  will  bring  sour  reflections   in  Latin  America.   Our   little
puppet—and   United   Fruit's   —  had   allowed   no   opposition
parties  since  he  took  over  with  U.  S.  backing  in  June, 1954.
The  "free  world"  has  an  odd  martyr  in  Castillo  Armas.
Disarmament:  The  Dulles   trip  to  London   is  another   step
in  the   long   State  Department   campaign  to   downgrade   and
then  ditch  Stassen.    Eisenhower   is  as  wavering  and  as  poorly
informed  on  disarmament as  on  most  matters  in  this  Admin-
istration;  he  is  no  match  for  Dulles.    The   Secretary  of   State
Gems  from  the  House  Debate
"Mr.  Chairman,  much  is  made  of  the  fact  that  oppo-
sition   to   Federal   aid   to   education   comes   from   the
NAM  and  the  chambers  of  commerce.   We  who  believe
that  the  Federal  government  has  no place  in  the  field  of
education  are  accused  of  being  tools  of  these  powerful
business   organizations.   This   is   ridiculous."
—Rep.  Stuyvesatit   Wainwright   (R.  N.   Y.)   July   Zlt.
"What  is  the  biggest  problem  facing  the  schools  of
America  today?   To  hear  some  of  our  colleagues  talk,
you  would  think  that  great  buildings   can  teach.  .  .  .
Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  best  teacher  the  world  ever
knew  and  I  do  not  believe  he  ever  had  a  school  building
in  which  to  teach."
—Rep.  D.  R.  Matthews   (D.  Fla.),  July   24.
"At  best   we  have  got  guesses  or  estimates   on  the
[school]  shortage.   Mr.  [Marion  B.]  Folsom  as  head  of
the   department   [of   Health,   Education   and   Welfare]
proposing   this  legislation ...  is  a  propagandist   of  a
rather  violent  sort."
—Rep.  Ralph   W.  Gwinn  (R.  N.  Y.),  July  2S
"We  should  be  alert  to  the  sinister  forces  which  are
behind  legislation  of  this  sort.  . .  .  Lurking  in  the  back-
ground,   hoping   for   this   legislation   to  pass,   are   the
forces  of   socialism."
—Rep.  John  E.  Heiitlerson  (R.  Ohio),  July   25.
"I  am  against  this  bill.  .  .  .  Ever  since   1620,  when
the  Pilgrims   landed  in  Plymouth,  we  have  taken  care
of  the  educational  system  in  our  State."
—Rep.  Donald  W.  Nicholson  (R.  Mass.),  July   25.
"Put  the  education  of  our  children  under  the  domina-
tion  of  Washington  and  you  have  taken  the  long  step
toward  fulfilling  the  prophecy  of  Nikita  Krushchev.  .  ."
Rep.  Wm.  H.  Bates  (R.  Mass.),  July   25.
wants  no  agreement  at  all  until  after  the  German  elections  in
September,  lest  this  upset  prospects  for  an  Adenauer  victory.
Dulles  wants  none  but  the  most  limited  agreement  afterward.
He  is against  relaxation of  tension,  and  for  a  continued  arms
race  but  is  forced   to  pay  some  lip  service  on  the  subject  be-
cause  Eisenhower  and  a  substantial  portion   of  the  big  busi-
ness  community are  for  arms reduction.
Wonderful    Response   Io  Pugwash  (Scientists  Warn   Mankind)   Manifesto:    Rush  Your   Orders
1.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew
City     ............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street    ..........
Cily     ............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  5618  Nebraska
Washington
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the
..................... ......Zone..... ...... .6
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 y
...........................Zone............S
gift   announcement?     Ye
Ave.,   N.   W.
15,  D.  C.
enclosed   $5:*
r.)  additional:
8/S/57
s  D    No  D
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
+'.  Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter  at   Washington.  D.   C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  DUb-
llsbed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   P.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
K   In   the   II.  S.:  W  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  SIS  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED