I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957apr01.pdf

============================================================

Dave Beck  and  the 5th Amendment,  P.  4
Eastland's  "Who  Me?" Testimony  In  A  Freedom-of-the  Press  Contempt Trial,  P.  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  13
APRIL  1,  1957
101
        WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
Naught  So  Misguided  As  Those   Missiles
What  was  so  appalling  about  the  Bermuda  conference was
not  the  meagreness  of  the  results  but  the  mendacity  of   the
final  communique.   In  putting  their  names  to  it,  Eisenhower
and  Macmillan  testified  to  a  cynical  contempt  for  the  intelli-
gence  of  their  own  people.   The  real  agreements  in  the  joint
statement  were  not  new  and  the  new  agreements  were  not
real.  The  decision  to  give  Britain  nuclear  missiles was  reached
in  the  Wilson-Sandys  talks  at  the  beginning  of  February,  and
the  decision  to  join  the  military  committee  of  the   Baghdad
Pact  was  made  several  weeks  before  Bermuda.  The  "accords"
reaffirming  support  for  the  reunification  of  the  Germans  in
the  sweet  bye-and-bye,  and  of  sympathy  for  the   Hungarians
will   only   infuriate   both;   these  phrases   mask  the   old   lazy-
minded   unwillingness  to  do  anything  for   either  people  by
negotiation  and  diplomacy.   As  for  the  Middle  East,  the  best
commentary  on  those  accords  was  the  one  word  answer  of
Secretary  Dulles  at  press   conference  last  week  when   asked
whether  any  instructions  had  yet  been  given  U.S.  vessels  on
where  and  to  whom  their   Suez   tolls   are  to  be  paid.    His
answer  was  "No".    If  no  decision  has  been  registered  on  that
elementary  a  point,  what  reason  is  there  to  believe  any  have
been  arrived  at  on  the  more  complex  issues?
A  Mindless  Momentum
The  joint  communique  was  most floozy where  the  problem
was  most  grave,  that  of   responding   to  world-wide  anxiety
about  nuclear  tests.   All   Eisenhower   and  Macmillan   offered
was  a  willingness to  register  with  the  United  Nations  advance
notice  of  their  tests  and  "permit   limited  international  obser-
vation"  if  the  Soviet  Union  would  do  the  same.  The  rest  was
only  a  joint reiteration  of  the  sham  "intention  to  conduct  nu-
clear  tests  only,  in  such  manner  as  will  keep  world   radiation
from  rising  to  more  than  a  small  fraction  of  the  levels   that
might  be  hazardous."   This,  as  the  ordinarily   pro-Eisenhower
Washington   Post  pointed   out,   "accepts   the  optimistic  view
that  the   tests  are  doing   no  harm,   although   no  one   really
knows  and  ...     is  designed  to  sanction  new  British  thermo-
nuclear  tests  as  well  as  to  dignify  the  doubletalk  about   the
American  'clean'  bomb."  The  truth  is  that  the  U.S.  seems  to
be  doing   exactly  what  AEC  Commissioner   Murray   warned
against  in  his  address  last  November  to  the  Catholic  Associa-
tion  for  International  Peace:   "we  allow  weapons   technology
to  control the weapons  program  . . . and the stockpiled  results
of  the  weapons  program  to  control  military  policies."  We  con-
tinue testing  to make  "better"  if  not  krger  bombs;  we give  no
real  thought   as  to  whether   they  can  ever  be  used   without
world  suicide;  but  since  the  stockpiles  grow  bigger  we  "econ-
omize"  by equipping  our  own  and  allied  armies  with  them  in
a  kind  of  mindless  momentum  which  could  carry  us  all  to-
ward  the  final  catastrophe.
For  the  British  people  the  communique must  be  doubly dis-
appointing.  They  had  hoped  that  Macmillan  would  win  some
of  those  concessions  on  freer  trade  with  China  which  Eisen-
hower  promised  Eden  to  study  14  months   ago.   Apparently
Macmillan  was  unable  to  persuade  Eisenhower  to  join  him
even   in   the   most   generalized   accord   looking   toward   the
lightening  of  cold  war  restrictions  on  trade  between  East  and
West.  The  other  eloquently  blank  space  in  the  communique
was  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  Britain's  desire  for  mili-
tary  retrenchment,  particularly  in   regard   to  her   occupation
forces  in  Germany.   Instead  the  statement  said  that  in  the  in-
terest  of  "mutual  economy"  certain  guided  missiles  would  be
made  available  to  Britain  by  the  U.S.   But  it  is  doubtful  that
this  will  prove  an  economy to  either;  missiles  are  expensive  to
produce  and  expensive  to  man.  This  gift  will   cost  Britain
many   millions   of   dollars   in   additional   arms   expenditure.
Other  costs  may  prove  more  serious.   Britain,  living   beyond
its  income,  needs  relaxation  of  world  tension  in  order  to  re-
duce  her  arms  burden  and  increase  her  trade.  To   establish
nuclear  missile  bases  capable  of  bombing   Moscow  will  be  to
step  up  tension. The  British  people  ask for  bread,  and  we  give
them  guided  missiles.
Down  The  Steep  Slope  to  War
Nothing   could  be  more  misguided  than  these  missiles  we
intend  to  put  into  mass production  and  then  parcel  out  among
our  allies.    They  may make  the  drift  toward  war  irreversible;
they  will  certainly  make  it  harder  to  be  certain  that   small
wars  do  not  expand  into  the  big  one,  as  the  missiles  fall  into
more  and  more  hands.    We  are  indeed  acting  as  if  war  were
inevitable.     We   are   establishing   forward   bases,    deploying
our  navies,  preparing  bases  for  our  air  fleets.  We  are  waging
economic  warfare.    We  are  digging   deeper  all  the  terrible
divisions  of  the  world—of  Germany  and  Europe;  of   Korea,
China,  Indochina  and  East  Asia;  and  by  joining  the  Baghdad
Pact,  of  the  Middle  East.    We  have  set  our  faces  against  any
negotiation  with  the  other  big  power  of  the  world;  we  have
downgraded  disarmament  to  a  minor  sideshow  no  one  takes
seriously.   Everywhere this  process  is  impoverishing mankind;
wasting  manpower  and  materials  with  which  a  start  might  be
made  on  the  world's  poverty.    With  the  arms  race  and  the
cold   war   comes  creeping   inflation;  it  makes  its   appearance
even  here   in  the  highest   peacetime  budget  of   our  history.
The   voice  of  Nehru   pleading   for   Russo-American   negotia-
tion  is  drowned  out  in  our  press;  every  effort  of  the  Russians
to  negotiate  is  howled  down.    This  is  not  responsible   con-
duct.    Eisenhower  said  last  year  that  war  is  now   "preposter-
ous."    But  if  war  is preposterous,  should  we  not  shore  up  the
precarious   foundations   of   peace   instead   of   piling   up   and
handing  out  ever  deadlier  arms?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  1,1957
Syngman  Rhee  Campaigns to  End  the  Korean  Armistice  and  Obtain  Atomic Arms
Army  Chief  of  Staff  Contradicts  Expert  Senate  Report  on  Korea
For  some  time  Syngman  Rhee  has  been  campaigning   for
abrogation  of  the  Korean  armistice  and  for  the  equipment of
the  South  Korean  forces  with  atomic  weapons.   His  Defense
Minister  is  in  Washington lobbying for  those  objectives,  and
Rhee  seems  to  have  succeeded  in  utilizing  one  of  those  speoial    ,
Senate  reports  on the  foreign  aid program'for  his  purposes.
The  report  made  by  Dr.  John   A.  Hannah,   president   of
Michigan  State  University,  a  former  Assistant  Secretary of
State,  on  Korea,  Japan,  Formosa  and  the  Philippines  recom-
mends  that  the  U.S.  ignore  the  armistice  agreement  ban  on
modernizing  South  Korea's  military  forces.  This  could  be  a
first  step  toward  resumption  of  the   war.
Dr.  Hannah  drew  a  somber  picture  of  the  military  situa-
tion  in  Korea.   He  said  the  UN  forces  had  continued  to com-
ply  with  the  terms  of  the  armistice,  which  specifies that  old
equipment  may  be  replaced  only  by  equipment  of  the   same
type.  "In  consequence,"  his  report  said,  "we  now have  there
an  assortment  of largely  obsolete World  War  II  type  military
weapons."
The  Communists, on  the  other  hand,  are  accused  of  having
"openly,  flagrantly  and  continuously violated  the  terms  of  the
armistice", building  new airfields and moving large quantities
of  jets  into  North  Korea.
Another  Syngman  Rhee Whopper?
Syngman  Rhee's  Defense Minister  told  reporters  here  that
last  December  North  Korea  trained  five  divisions  in  nuclear
warfare in maneuvers  near  the  armistice line.  Since  Dr.  Han-
nah's  report  was  released  three  months  later,  it  is  strange
that  it  makes  no 'mention  of  so  striking  a  violation  of  the
armistice  agreement.   Judging  by  Syngman  Rhee's  past  rec-
ord  for  alarmism  and  unreliability,  and  judging  also  by  the
distrust  which  Peking  and  Moscow both  have  always  shown
for   the   North   Korean  forces   (like  the   South   notoriously
trigger-happy),  I  am inclined to think  this  report  a  pure and
simple  "whopper."
Even  Dr.  Hannah's  more  moderate  view of the  situation  in
Korea  has  now  been  contradicted  by  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff.
Three  days after  the  release of the  Hannah  report,  Gen.  Max-
well  D.  Taylor,  arrived  in  South  Korea  on  a  tour  of  inspec-
tion.   Gen.  Taylor   knows  Korea  well,  since  he  was  Eighth
Army  and  UN  Commander  before  becoming  Chief  of  Staff.
What  Gen.  Taylor  had  to  say  about  the  equipment  of  the
South  Korean forces  is  in  flat  contradiction  to  Dr.  Hannah's
report.  A  dispatch   from   Seoul  in  the   New   York   Times  of
March   22  reported,  "When   asked   whether   the  Communist
military  buildup in  North  Korea  endangered  the  UN  forces
in  Korea,  General  Taylor  said,  'No,  I  think  the  United  Na-
tions  forces  are  thoroughly   equipped."
Formosa  as  Seen  From  Madison  Avenue
Unfortunately  the  interview  with  Gen.  Taylor  was  a  spe-
cial  dispatch  which  got  only  a  few  paragraphs  in  the  Late
City  Edition  of the  New  York  Times  that  day  while the  Han-
Korea  Costing Billion  A Year
The  total  amount  of  military  assistance  to   Korea
has  long been  treated  as  secret  information, but  a  foot-
note  on  page  73 of  a  Senate  foreign  aid  report  released
March  21  on  "The  Military Assistance  Program  of  the
United   States"   reveals   "the   United   States   is  now
spending—on  the  Korean  forces  and  the  Korean   econ-
omy,  and  on  our  own  and  United  Nations   forces—at
a  rate of more  than  a  billion  dollars  a  year. . .  ."
Some  other  interesting  glimpses  of  Korean  realities
can  be  pieced  together  from  this  report.  At  page    119:
"The  Republic of  Korea  has  21 divisions  which  cost   the
U.  S.  more  than  700 million  dollars  a  year  and  absorb
a  great   deal  of  Korean  manpower  of  the  age   group
most  needed  for  essential  economic  activities."
At   page   54:  "Some   Asian   leaders,  Syngman   Rhee
being  an  outstanding  example,  have  sought  to  build  or
maintain   much  larger  armed   forces   than  the  United
States  has  thought  necessary."  And  at  page  68, "Some
of  our  allies  have  demonstrated   that   they  are  not  in
perfect  accord  with,  nor  perfectly  responsive  to,  Amer-
ican  preferences  on  certain   important  questions.   The
ambition   of  President   Rhee,   of   South  Korea,   to   re-
unify  his  country  with  American  trained  and  equipped
forces  and  the  hopes  of  Generalissimo  Chiang  to  return
to  the  mainland  are  examples  of  areas  of  nonconsensus
in  which  allies  become  more  likely  to  act  on  their  own
initiative  as  their  military  power  increases."
nah  report's  recommendations were  carried  by the  wire  serv-
ices.    How many  Senators  reading  the  Hannah  report  will be
aware of  how  flatly  it  was  contradicted  by the  Army  Chief  of
Staff?
Giving atomic arms  to Syngman  Rhee would be a  recipe  for
serious  trouble.   He  has  been  anxious  for  resumption   of  the
war,  and  like  his  comrade-in-arms,  Chiang  Kai-shek,  would
be  willing  to  set  off another  world  war  if  it  suited  his  pur-
pose.   Dr.  Hannah  and  Gen.  Taylor  both  ought  to  be  ques-
tioned  by  the  special  Senate  Committee on  Foreign  Aid,  and
the former  in  particular  ought  to  be asked  whether  he  meant
atomic  arms when  he  said  the  South  Korean  forces  should be
given  "the  most  modern  equipment."
These  reports  are   supposed  to  be  expert   studies   for   the
guidance  of  the  Senate  and   the  public,  not  bits  of   special
pleading.    Dr.  Hannah's  dithyrambs   on  Chiang   Kai-shek's
forces   do  not   inspire   confidence   in   his   objectivity.   "Free
China,"  he  reported,  "is  a  better  military  and  economic  risk
than  Americans  have  been  led to  believe.  .  .  .  Our military
feel  that  the  Chinese  Nationalists  are  an  effective  military
force.  They  have  a  burning  desire  to  return  to  the  Chinese
mainland.  . . . Assistance  to this  forces  is a  good  military  in-
vestment."  Is this a serious report, or an advertising  brochure?
Korean  Economic and Political Realities Peep Through Dr. Hannah's Report
"President   Rhee  effectively  holds  the  reins  of  power  and
personally  makes  most  of  the  Government's  decisions.   At
times  this  has  been  advantageous to  the  United  States,  for
he  has  been  able   to  hold  his  government  together  on  a
strongly  anti-Communist basis.  On  the  other  hand,  his  ex-
treme  anti-Japanese   attitude  has  made  difficult   the  devel-
opment  of  more  satisfactory  Korean-Japanese   relationships.
"Since  there  is  an  acute  shortage  of  experienced  people
to  manage  its  affairs,  the  Government  is  relatively   inef-
ficient and  often  indecisive.  Government officials  are  grossly
underpaid   and  with   resulting  temptations  for   graft   and
corruption.
"The  military  program  has  an  important  relation  to  the
economic  situation  of  the  country.   Over  50  percent   of   the
national  Republic  of  Korea  budget  is  for  military  purposes.
Reduction  of  military  expenditures,   if  that   ever   becomes
feasible,  would reduce  governmental  expenditures  and  make
additional  resources,  including  mechanical  and  other  skills,
available  for developmental  purposes. . . .
"As  long  as  the  country  is  divided,  and  as  long  as  it  is
necessary  to  devote  so  large  a  share  of  its  national  income
to  military  purposes,  it  is  an  open  question  as  to  how  long
it  will  be  before  Korea  can  become  economically    self-sup-
porting."
_Korea,  Japan,  Taiwan  and the Philippines,  Survey  No. 5, U.S.  Foreign  Assistance  Programs,  by  Dr.  John  A.   Hannah.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  1,1957
Morse  and  His  Fellow  Senators  Throw  A  Two  Day  Legalistic  Fit  on  Immunity
But  They  Act  as Rubber  Stamps  for  Eastland  in  Freedom  of  the  Press  Cases
The  Constitution  exempts  members  of  Congress  from   ar-
rest,  except on criminal charges,  while their  respective  Houses
are  in  session.  The  effect  is  to  make  them  immune from  sub-
poena  as  witnesses  while  Congress  is  sitting  since  they  can-
not  be arrested  for  failure to  appear.  This  was  recalled  when
Federal  Judge  Luther  Youngdahl granted  the  defense  a  sub-
poena  for  Senator   Eastland   in  the  trial  of  Seymour  Peck.
Peck,  a  member of  the  staff  of  the  New  York  Times,  was  con-
victed  of  contempt for  refusing  on First  Amendment grounds
to  answer  questions  in  the  Senate  Internal  Security  commit-
tee  investigation  of  alleged  Communist infiltration  into  the
press.
At  first  Senator  Eastland  pleaded that  he could  not  appear
because  he  had  the  gout.  Then  he  appealed  to  the  Senate
when  Judge  Youngdahl declined on motion of  the  prosecution
to  quash  the  subpoena.  The refusal  to  quash  placed   Eastland
in  a  quandary.  The  Judge  made  it  clear  that,  of  course,  he
could  not  force  the  Senator  to  appear.   On the  other  hand,  if
the  Senator   failed  to  appear,  the  Judge   could  dismiss  the
case  on  the  ground  that  the  non-appearance of  Eastland  had
deprived  the  defense of full  opportunity to prove its  case. The
heart  of  that  case  was  that  the  Committee, in  embarking on
an  investigation  of  the  press,  was  in  violation  of  the  First
Amendment.  The defense wanted to  prove this from  the  testi-
mony  of  Eastland   as  Committee  chairman.
The   Senate   thereupon  spent  most   of  two  days   debating
whether  to  vote  a  resolution  permitting  Eastland  to  appear,
and  finally  decided  to  drop  the  resolution  altogether   and  al-
low him  to  appear—as  Senators  usually appear—voluntarily.
The  main  cause  of  the  long  and  tedious  debate  lay  in  the  os-
tentatious   and  legalistic   objections  of  Senator   Morse,  who
blocked   unanimous  consent  the   first   day,  making  a  great
show  of  constitutional  qualms.
Loquacity  Now,  But  Silence  Then
The  immunity of  Senators  from  arrest  during  a  session  is
an  important  safeguard  of government,  though  one not  really
at  stake  here  since Judge  Youngdahl  had  no intention  of  try-
ing  to  arrest  the  Senator.   But  freedom  of  the  press  is  at
least   as   important   as   senatorial   immunity.  Yet  the   same
Senators  last  year  approved  with  no  discussion   whatsoever
the  contempt  citations  requested  by  Senator  Eastland  in  the
Peck  case  and  others  arising  out  of  his  press   investigation.
Why  was  Senator   Morse  silent  then?  Where  was  all  his
legal  learning?  What  happened  then  to  his  meticulous con-
cern  for  every jot  and  tittle  of  the  Constitution?   Is  the  Sen-
ate  supposed  to  be  a  rubber  stamp  and  vote  contempt  cita-
tions  with  no  concern  for  its  own constitutional  obligations?
Or  does  Morse  save  his  erudite  histrionics  for   those  occa-
sions  when  he  can  be  on  Eastland's  side?  We  wish  some  of
our  readers  in  Oregon would  put  these  questions  up  to  Sena-
tor  Morse, and  the  silent  junior  Senator  from  Oregon,  Neu-
berger,  who  seems  to  have  forgotten  completely that  he  was
a  newspaperman  himself  once.
Does  Senator  Eastland  Really  Believe  in  Hobgoblins?
Aside  from  giving  the  Senator  a  chance  to  explain  lamely
that  he  had  no  intention  of  investigating  the  press   (see box
below),  the  chief  feature  of  Eastland's  cross-examination   by
Defense  Counsel Telford  Taylor  was  the  apparent  gullibility
of   the   Internal   Security   Committee  chairman.
In  explaining  why  the   Committee  had   subpoenaed  Miss
Matilda  Landsman,  a  linotypist  on the  New  York  Times,  the
Senator  said  "We  had  information  that  she had  downgraded
herself   in  employment,  taken   a  job  at  less  salary  in  New
York  to  be  in  a  position  to  direct  and  assist  in  taking  over
.Local  No. 6 of the  Typographical  Union ... the  biggest  local
in  the country."
The  fact  is  that  Miss  Landsman  far  from   "downgrading"
herself  increased  her  income  from  50 to  75 percent  in moving
from  a  secretarial  job to a  linotypist.   And who sold  the  Sen-
ator  the  idea  that  an  ex-secretary  could take  over  one of  the
most  conservative  unions  in  the  country?
Eastland   was  also  cross-examined  about  the  David  Fine
bookstore,  which  was  brought  out  of  obscurity   in  order  to
smear  Fine's  brother  on the  New  York  Times.   Eastland  was
asked  to  explain  the  many  questions  by the  Committee about
the  political  content  of  publications  that  bookstore  sold.  Was
this  not  an  inquiry  into  ideas?
"Well,"  the  Senator  said,  "I  remember  there  was  such  a
bookshop  in  Chapel  Hill,  North   Carolina,  I  believe  it   was,
that  we  were  able  to  get  information  on it  by  questions  ex-
actly  like  that.  We  developed  the  fact  that  the  Communist
underground,  in  case  of  war   with  Russia,  in  the  Southern
States would be located  back  of that bookshop. . . ."
Wouldn't  a  conservative  bookstore  be  a  better  blind?
Senator Eastland Testifies  There Was Nobody There But Us Chickens
Q.  Well,  I  understood  that  in  answer  to  one  of  Mr.  [Wil-
liam]  Hitz'  {Assistant  U.  S.  Attorney]  questions  you  said
that  you  did  not  try  to  find  out  whether  the  content  of  the
press  had  been  affected  by  infiltration.
A.  That  is correct. ...
Q.  Well,  I  would  like  then  to  ask  you  to  comment  on this
colloquy  between  yourself  and  Senator   Hennings  that  Mr.
Hitz  has already  referred  to. ...    where  Senator   Hennings
says,   "And  I  think,  too,  it  should  be  clear  that  the  best
evidence  of  any  subversion  or  infiltration  into  any  news-
dispensing  agency  or  opinion-forming  journal  is   certainly
the  product  itself."   And  you  say,  "That  is  correct."
A.  Well,  that  is  correct.
Q.  What?
A.  That  is  correct.   But  that  was  not  the  matter  that  we
were  investigating.  . . .
Q.  I  will ask you to look  a little  further  down. . . . right
in  the  middle  there,  the  long  statement   by  Senator  Hen-
nings.  . . .  "that  this  is not an attack  upon any one news-
paper,  upon  any  group  of  newspapers  as  such,  but  an  effort
on  the  part  of  this  Committee  to  show  such  participation
and  such  attempt  as  may  be  disclosed   on  the  part  of  the
Communist  Party   in  the   U.  S.  or   elsewhere,   indeed,   to
influence  or subvert  the American  press." . . .
A.  At  the  time  he  said  that,  now,  I  noticed  that  when  I
read  it.   At  the  time  he  said  that  I  didn't   catch  the  sig-
nificance of what he said. . . .
Q.  You  did  say  that  that  was  a  very  fine  and  very  accu-
rate  statement,  didn't  you?
A.  Yes,  sir,  but  I  said  I  didn't  catch—you  can  read  that
out  of  context. ... I  understood  what  he was  going  to  say
that  he  was  going  to  make  it  very  plain  that  we  were  not
investigating  any newspaper.  .  .  .  That  we were  not at-
tempting  in   any   way   to  infringe   upon   freedom   of   the
press. ...
Q.  Senator,  isn't  it  a  fact  that  in  the  course  of  these  very
hearings,  after  this colloquy, that  a number of  the  witnesses
were  asked  about  the  actual  slanting  and  distortion  of  the
press  by  Communists?
A.  I  don't  recall.
—Senator  Eastland,  in  the  Seymour  Peck  contempt  case.
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  1,1957
Why  the  AFL-CIO  Ought  to  Fire  Him  As  A  Vice-President
Dave  Beck  and  The  Fifth  Amendment
As  a  citizen  of  the  United   States,  Dave  Beck  has  a  right
to  invoke  the  Fifth  amendment.    On  trial,  his  invocation  of
the  Fifth  cannot  be  used  against   him  as  inference  of  guilt.
So  much  is  clear.     But  does   he  have  a  right   to  remain  a
trade  union   official  when  he  refuses  to  explain  secret  finan-
cial  transactions  with  representatives  of  employers  at  the  ex-
pense  of  union  funds?   This  is  the  question  raised  by  Beck's
disgusting    performance   before   the   McClellan    committee.
When  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  was  Governor  of  New  York
he  removed  Sheriff  Thomas  M.  Parley  of  New  York  County
after   the   Seabury  investigation   disclosed   the   vast  sums  de-
posited  by  the  Sheriff  in  excess  of  his  salary.
"As  a  matter  of  general   sound  public  policy,"   Roosevelt
ruled  as  Governor, "...  there  is a  requirement  that  where  a
public  official   is  under  inquiry  or  investigation  .  .  .  and  it
appears   that  his   scale  of   living,   or   the   total   of   his   bank
deposits  far  exceeds  the  public  salary  which  he  is  known  to
receive,  he  ...    owes  a  positive  public  duty  to  the community
to  give  a  reasonable  or  credible  explanation   of  the  sources
of  the  deposits,  or  the  source  which  entitles  him  to  maintain
a  scale  of  living  beyond  the  amount  of  his  salary."
The  Teamsters  Would  Never  Have   Known
We  believe  the  principle  applies  equally  to  leaders  of  labor
unions.    They  exercise vast  power  today  in  their  own  realms;
they  can  deprive  men  of  their  livelihood  by  expelling   them
from   union   membership;   they   can   by   legal   manipulation
and  physical intimidation prevent  internal  questioning  of  their
conduct;   they   easily  perpetuate   themselves   in   office;   huge
pension  and  welfare  funds  are  at  the  mercy of  their  sense  of
stewardship.
There  is  no  doubt  that  Congress  has  full  power  to  legis-
late  in  employer-employe  relations,  and  to  regulate  the  affairs
of   non-profit   associations  like   labor   unions.    There   is   no
doubt   that   the   McClellan   investigation  has   been   lawfully
accorded  power  to  investigate.    There  is  also  no  doubt  that
if  there  had  been  no  investigation  the  average  teamster  and
the  average worker  and  the  average  citizen  would  never  have
known  that  Beck  had   been  borrowing   interest-free  and  se-
cretly—as  he  admitted  over  the  air—from  his  union   treasury.
Nor  would  they  have  known  of  the  unethical  relationship  to
which  Shefferman   testified.
When   a  labor  leader  in  Beck's  position,  confronted  with
checks  he  signed  and   testimony  of   a  man  with  whom   he
dealt,  invokes  the  Fifth,  what  does  the  labor  movement  do?
Give  him  a  medal?
This  Is  Not  A  Witch  Hunt
It   is  stretching  the   Fifth   amendment  beyond  all   reason-
able  bounds  to  hold  that  Beck  not  only  has  a  right  to  invoke
it  against  legal  prosecution,  but  even  against  the  consequences
of   the  disclosure ethically  required  by  his  quasi-public  posi-
tion  and  the  trustee  relation   he  occupies  in  relation   to  his
union.    No  one  is  suggesting  that  he  be  sent  to  jail  for  in-
voking  the  Fifth.    But  the  AFL-CIO   Council  will   do   the
labor  movement  a  service  if  it  fires  him  as  a  Vice-President,
as  I  believe  it  will  in   the  meeting  called   just  before   this
went  to press.
It  is nonsense to  argue  that  Congress  has  no  right  of  expos-
ure.    Where  it  can  legislate,  it  can  "expose."    Three  genera-
tions  of  social  reform  in  this  country  have  been  made  pos-
sible  by  Congressional   investigations   exposing   "malefactors
of   great   wealth"   and   laying  the   basis  for   legislative   check
upon  their  power.    From  the  anti-trust  laws  to  the  Wagner
Act,  this  was  how  reform  was  brought  about.   These  porcine
racketeers  who  plunder  and  oppress  the  worker  through   the
very   instrumentalities  designed    for   his   protection   are   as
great  an  evil.    We  applaud  George  Meany  and  Walter  Reu-
ther  for  standing  up  against  them.
The  fight  against  the  witch  hunt  must  be  fought  on  more
fundamental  lines.    To  reverse  the  familiar  metaphor,   there
is  no  need  to  burn  down  the  barn  of  Congressional  investi-
gation  in  order  to  save  a  few  rats.    The  witch  hunt  is  un-
constitutional   because  there   two   Congressional   committees,
in  violation  of  the  First  amendment,  are  seeking  to  investi-
gate  ideas  and  political   associations  that  are  no  business  of
government  in  a  free  society.    The   invocation  of  the   Fifth
amendment  in  such  an  inquiry  stands  on  a  different   footing
from  the  invocation  of  the  Fifth  by  Dave  Beck  in  a  proper
Congressional   investigation   long   overdue.
Next  Week:  The  California   Bar  Condemns  The  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Qtffutt
City    .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
...........................Zone......
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
City     ........................................Zone......
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?
......State.................
(1 yr.)  additional:
4/1/57
......State..................
Yes  D    No D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington   3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat   pub-
lished   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August  and  December  at  301  E.  Capitol   St.,   Washington  8,  D.  C.
An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by   I.  F.   Btone;  Circulation  Manager   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IO  in  the  U.  8.;  «6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  (IB  to  Burope;  *20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED