I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957oct28.pdf

============================================================

Sequel  to  Pugwash:  U.S.  Press  Ignores  An  Appeal  from  Leaders of  Soviet  Science,  See Page 3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  41
OCTOBER  28,  1967
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Back   at  the  Brink,  Despite  Talk  of  Limited   War
An  important  aspect  of  the  Middle  Eastern  crisis,  perhaps
the  most  important, has  gone  unnoticed.  This  is  the  headlong
abandonment  of  what  was  supposed  to  be  our  new  strategy  of
limited  war.   Last  August  the  Pentagon  let  it  be  known  that
our  military  thinking had  shifted  over  to  the  views  advanced
by  Henry  A.  Kissinger,  a  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff  consultant,  in
his   book  on   "Nuclear   Weapons   and   Foreign   Policy."    His
study  sought  to  find,  in  the  tactics  of  limited  nuclear  war,  "a
course  somewhere  between  Armageddon  and  surrender."
These  views  were  echoed  by  Secretary Dulles  in  his  famous
article  in  the  October  Foreign  Affairs.     Mr.  Dulles  wrote  that
"the  United  States  has  not  been  content  to  rely  upon  a  peace
which  could  be  preserved  only  by  a  capacity  to  destroy  vast
segments  of  the  human  race,"  a  concept  "acceptable  only  as  a
last  alternative."   Mr.  Dulles  said  that  fortunately  "those  who
serve  our  nation  in  the  field  of  science  and  weapon  engineer-
ing"  had  developed  tactical  nuclear  weapons  which  could  be
used  "without  vast  destruction ...  to  humanity"  and  would
make  it  "feasible to  place  less  reliance upon  deterrence  of  vast
retaliatory  power."   This  was  hailed  in  the  headlines  a  few
weeks   ago   as  the   abandonment  of   the   massive  retaliation
doctrine.
Mac Arthurism  Ascendant
But  when  Mr.  Dulles  was  asked  at  press  conference  what
we  would  do  if  there  were  an  attack  on  Turkey  by  the  Soviet
Union,  all  this  was  brushed  aside  as  if  non-existent.   He  re-
plied  that  our  answer would  not  be  "a  purely defensive  opera-
tion  .  .  .  with  the  Soviet  Union  a  privileged  sanctuary."   In
other  words,  we  at  once  threatened  all-out  war.   The  phrase
"privileged   sanctuary"  was  MacArthur's  and  it  reflected   his
bitter  criticism  of  Mr.  Truman's  insistence  on  keeping   the
Korean  war  a  limited   conflict.   The   Kissinger   book  was  in
large  part  based  on  the  Korean  experience,  and  saw  in  it  a
means  of  retaining  war  as  an  instrument  of  policy without  in-
viting   the   mutual   suicide  of   all-out   nuclear   war.    It  was
thought  that  Mr.  Dulles  agreed.   But  at  the  very  first  test,  he
leaped  straight to  the  brink.
In  passing  one  may  wonder  whether  Mr.  Dulles  was  mak-
ing  such  life-and-death  threats  "off  the  cuff"  or  whether  they
reflected  considered  policy.   The  day  after  Mr.  Dulles's  press
conference,  Vice  Admiral  John  H.  Sides,  the  man  in  charge
of   the  Navy's   missile  program,   was  boasting   of   the   short
range  atomic  rockets  and  cannon  we  already  have  in  opera-
tional  use  and  telling  the  press,  (See  Mark  Watson's  story  in
the Baltimore Sun,  Oct.  19),  "These are the kinds of  weapons
which  will  be  used  in  any  limited  warfare,  the  kind  which  is
far  more  probable  than  the  all-out  war."   Does  the  Sixth fleet
11*.                                                                                    1
massed  in  the  eastern  Mediterranean  have  orders  for  the  kind
of  limited  war  envisaged  by  Admiral  Sides,  or  the  massive  re-
taliation  threatened  by  Secretary Dulles ?
War to the Last Turk?
We  suggest  that  those  who  think  limited  nuclear  war  feasi-
ble  take  a  long  hard  look  at  this  picture.   We  do  not  believe
the  confusion  can be attributed  solely  to  Mr.  Dulles's  tempera-
ment.   The  difficulties  run  deeper.   Will  any  ally  be  satisfied
with  a promise only of  limited  support ?  If  the  Russians  bomb
Istanbul  or  Ankara,  would  the  Turks   be  satisfied  with  any-
thing  less  than  a  counter-attack  by  air  on  Moscow  or  Odessa,
even   though   the   consequence   might   be   a   Soviet   reprisal
against   Washington   and  New   York?    For   the   small   ally,
limited  war  is already total  war.   Given  the  power  of  modern
weapons,  a  small  country like  Turkey  can  be  wiped  out  over-
night  by nuclear attack  from  a  great  Power.   To  reply  to  such
an  attack  by a purely defensive operation  would  become  pretty
close  to  meaningless.   What  would  there  be  left  to  defend?
Wouldn't  it  seem  that  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  had  a kind  of
gentlemen's  agreement  to  fight  out  the  war  to  the  last  Turk?
Of  massive retaliation,  Dr.  Kissinger  wrote,  "It  is a  strange
doctrine which  asserts  that vital  interests can be defended  only
by  the  most  catastrophic  strategy."   In  suggesting  limited  nu-
clear  war  as  an  alternative,  he  stressed   "the   importance  of
diplomatic  overtures  which  make  clear  that  national  survival
is  not  at  stake  and  that  a  settlement  is  possible  on  reasonable
terms."  This  kind  of  willingness  to  negotiate  is  a  necessity  if
the  war  is  to  be  kept  limited.   How  can  we  be  sure  the  Rus-
sians  will  not  bomb  New   York   unless  we  promise   not  to
bomb  Moscow?   How  can  we  be  certain  Russian  submarines
will  not  bomb  Texas  oil fields unless  we  promise  not  to  bomb
those  of  Romania?   Dr.  Kissinger  goes  so  far  as  to  envisage
mutual  inspection  in  wartime  to  keep  the  conflict   limited.
War Is  Obsolete
On  the  other  hand,  if  war  can be kept  limited  only  by nego-
tiation,  why not  negotiate  without  war?  The  unwillingness  to
negotiate  with  Russia  about  a  neighboring  area  so  important
to  her  strategically  is  the  basic  factor  in  the  Middle  Eastern
crisis.   How   negotiate   in  war  what  we  will   not   discuss   in
peace?    The   unwillingness   to   use   the   tools   of   diplomacy
creates  the  blind  alley,  and  if  the  situation  is  to  be  met  by
military  threats—as  both  sides are  now meeting  it—the  threats
would  be  ludicrous if  limited.   The  conclusion  we  draw  is  the
folly  of  believing  nuclear  war  can  be  limited,  and  that  a  wide
range  of  new  nuclear  weapons  somehow  makes the  hard  work
of  negotiation  unnecessary.
6   '(
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 28, 1957
At  the  UN:  Britain  Spreads  Defeatism  While  India's  Voice  for  Peace  is  Drowned Out
Krishna  Menon: "We  Are Really  Discussing  the Problem of Human  Survival"
United   Nations,  N.   Y.
India   spoke   for  mankind  as  the   debate  on  disarmament
continued  in  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly,  but  man-
kind  wasn't  listening.   The  Nineteenth  Century  style  growl-
ing  among  the  great  Powers  over  the  Middle  East  drowned
out  the  voice  of  reason.   Krishna  Menon,  whom  the  U.  S.
press  is  orchestrated  to  hate  and  defame,  told  the  Assembly
gravely,  "Although  this  subject is called  disarmament, I  think
that  it  is  important  and  useful  for  us  at.the  very  outset   to
reflect  on  it  a  little  and  see  what  we  really  dealing  with.   I
would  submit  that  in  discussing  this  subject  which  had  been
discussed  year  after  year—not  to  much  purpose  but  to  some
purpose  all  the  same—we  are  really discussing the  problem  of
human  survival. . .  ."   This  made no  headlines, but  should  be
etched  somewhere  in  stone.
The  UN,  Mr.  Menon  recalled,  was  founded  to  end   "the
scourge  of  war"  but  instead  of  progress  there  had  been  retro-
gression.   On  January  24,  1946,  the  Assembly called  for  the
prohibition  of  weapons  of  mass  destruction.   Mr.  Menon  cited
the  resolutions  in  the  years  since which  had  repeated  this  de-
mand.   Now  for  the  first  time  in  ten  years,  Mr.  Menon  said,
the  Assembly  had  before  it  .a  resolution  sponsored  by  great
Powers  "in  which -this  problem  of  prohibition  is  eliminated."
He  referred  to  the  Western  proposals  which  envisage  the  con-
tinued  distribution  of  atomic weapons  to  the  smaller  powers
and  the  right  to  use them  in   "self-defense."
The Sovereign  Right to Destroy Ourselves
Mr.  Menon's  sharpest  irony  wa& aimed at  the  British speech
two  days earlier.   "We  were  told  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of
the  United  Kingdom,"  he  told  the  Assembly,  "that  the  sus-
pension   or  abandonment   of   explosions   is  not  disarmament.
We  heartily agree.  No  one said  it was disarmament.  I  do not
think  that  even  disarmament  has  any  value.   Disarmament  is
not  peace;  disarmament is  only a  step  to  peace.  Disarmament
is  for  the  purpose  of  abandoning war.   This  is  the  first  time
in  the  history of  this  Assembly that  a  distinguished delegation
has   come  forward  and   stood   openly  against  suspension   of
tests.   We  are  told  that,  if  the  tests  are  not  continued,  the
bombs  will  be  worse.   What  is  more  we  are  told  about  the
sovereign  rights  of  nations.   I  am  glad  that  imperial  nations
are  now  sometimes willing to  discuss  the  sovereign  rights  of
other  people.   We  are  told  it  would  be  very  wrong  to  deny
to  other  countries  the  right  to  make  bombs.   Well,  there  are
other  things  that  they  can  do  with  their  sovereignty  rather
than  destroy  the  world."
The   Indian  representative,  in   calling   for   a   cessation   of
tests  with  inspection  machinery to  police  it,  saw  this  first  step
as  "a   reversal   of   the   engines  of   armament.    It   creates  an
atmosphere  in  the  world.   It  creates,  to  a  certain  extent,   the
machinery  of  inspection,  the  machinery of  give  and  take,  of
looking  at  each  other's   affairs   to  a  certain  degree;  and  that
would  work  in  other  ways."   He  asked  the  Assembly  to  ask
for  a  suspension  of  tests  under  a  tripartite  system  of  inspec-
tion  as  a  first  step  toward  relaxation  of  world  tension.
Where  India  pleaded  for  peace,  Britain  pleaded,  in   effect,
for  continued  testing  and  continued  arms  race.   The  West,  it
Old  Delusion  in  New  Guise
"Can   it  be  that  there  are  still   in  the   world  today
advocates  of  the  old dictum  "Si  vis  pacem  para  bellum"
[If  you  want  peace,   prepare  for  war]?   .  .  .   Prepara-
tions  for  war  have  never  led  to  peace  .  .  .  the  dictum
itself  reflected  a  state  of  international   relations  where
war  was  a  logical  instrument   of  policy. ...  If  then
the  formula  has  so  clearly  become  untenable,  can  there
be  any  real  justification  for  the  doctrine  of  retaliation
or  of  deterrence?    This  doctrine  is  actually   nothing  but
the  old  formula   under  a  new  guise.   The  theory   .  .  .
actually   seeks   to   cloak   the   armaments   race   with   a
mantle  of  legality. ...  To  be  naive  in  my  view  is  to
believe   in  a  type   of   security   which   is  based  on   the
possibility   of   all-out   destruction,    including    the   de-
struction   of  any  way  of   life."
—Popovic  (Yugoslavia)   UN  Assembly  debate  on arms.
was  evident  from   Mr.  Noble's   speech  to  the  Assembly, can
agree  with  the  East  but  only  when  the  East  adopts  in  sub-
stance the  same defeatist line that the  drift  toward  nuclear  war
is  irreversible.   The  British  delegate  accused  the  Soviet  Union
of  being  "more  than  a  little  cynical"  in  asking  a  ban  on  nu-
clear   weapons.    He   quoted  with   relish  a   speech   made  by
Marshal  Zhukov  at  a  Soviet  military  conference  last  March  16
when  the  Russian  said  atomic  weapons  "will  come  more  and
more  to  take  the  place  of  conventional  arms  and  in  the  event
of  a  major  armed  conflict  are  bound  to  be  used  as  a  funda-
mental  striking agent."   The  British spokesman  commented  to
the  General  Assembly,  "Now  this  is  perfectly  sound  military
sense  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  any  General  Staff  would  say
the   same."
Mr.  Noble  quoted  with  similar  satisfaction  from   the  So-
viet  proposals  of  last  May  10  saying we had  reached  the  point
where  the  "possibilities ...  for  organizing  the  clandestine
manufacture   of   atomic  and   hydrogen  weapons"   were   now
"beyond  the  reach  of  international  control."   With  this,   too,
the  British delegate  agreed,  saying this  was  why  the   Western
proposals   "make  no  mention  of  the  complete  prohibition  of
nuclear  weapons,  together  with  the  destruction  of  their  stock-
piles."    Mr.  Noble  said  it  was  impossible  any  longer   to  ac-
count  for  all  existing  weapons.   This  is  a  logic  which   leads
to  despair.
Postscript—Just  A  Sideshow                             Washington
As  the  world's   third   and   newest  nuclear  power,   Britain
is  deeply  opposed  to  any  cessation  of  tests  until  it  has  devel-
oped   its  own  thermonuclear  weapons  more   fully   and   built
a  greater  stockpile.  Not  until  then—when  it  may  be  too  late
—will  it  began  to  accentuate  the  positive;  it  is  a  fairly  well
known   secret   in   Washington   that   Stassen   had   substantial
White   House  support  for  a  separate  agreement  on   cessation
of  tests  but  that  strong  British  opposition   reinforced  his  op-
ponents  in  the  Pentagon  and  State  Department.   The  British
will  make every effort  to  exploit  Sputnik  for  an  Anglo-Ameri-
can  partnership  in  a  heightened  arms  race  with  more  testing.
The    Macmillan-Eisenhower    talks    are   centered    on   better
preparation   for   war,  not   peace,   and   the   UN   "debate"   in
Washington's  eyes  is  a  sideshow  for  simpletons.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 28,1957
Sequel to Pugwash: A Release from  the  Bulletin of  the  Atomic  Scientists  the  Press Ignored
Soviet  Scientists  Appeal  for  World  Conference  on  Nuclear  War   Danger
On   October   16,  the   Bulletin  of  the   Atomic  Scientists  in
Chicago  sent  out  a  press   release  for   immediate   publication
containing  two  Soviet  documents  it  had  just  received  and  an
editorial  commenting  on  them  to  be  published   in  its  forth-
coming   November    isue.    One   document   was   a   resolution
passed  by  the  Presidium  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of   the
USSR  approving  a  report  to  it  by  the  Soviet  participants  in
the  atomic  conference  held   last  summer  at  Pugwash,   Nova
Scotia,  and  calling  for   "a  broad  international  conference  of
scientists  to  discuss  the  dangers  to  mankind  of  the  attempts
to  use  atomic  energy  for  military  purposes."    The  other  was
an  appeal   by  some   156  Soviet  scientists  for   such  a  confer-
ence.   Though  it  would   seem  of  the  greatest   importance   to
keep  open  the  channels  of  communication  between  scientists
east  and  west,  this  release  seems  to  have  been  ignored  by  the
American  press  just  as  it  largely  ignored  the  historic  Pugwash
manifesto,   the  text  of   which  we  published   in  our   July   22
issue,  "The   Scientists  Warn  Mankind."   We  print  the  heart
of  the  Soviet  appeal  in  a  box  below.
In   commenting,   Dr.   Eugene   Rabinowitch,  editor   of   the
Bulletin   writes  that  the   appeal   "confronts   the   scientists  of
the  West  with  a  challenge"  and  that   "the   indifference  and
timidity  of  large  responsible  groups  of  scientists  in  the  West
may  do  as  much  to  destroy  the  opportunity  which  now  seems
to  offer  itself  as  the  designs  of  the  political  leadership  of  the
East."   He  warns  however  against  a  new  "Partisans  of  Peace"
movement,   asks  the   Soviet   scientists   for   "unaccustomed  re-
straint"  and  says  that  "scientists  owe  the  world  a  more  crea-
tive  contribution  to  the  resolution  of  the  crisis—which  their
discoveries   have  helped   to   engender—than   merely   lending
their  voices   to  a  chorus  of  slogans."   At  the  same   time  he
believes   the  scientists  of  the  West  "should  not  be  the  ones
to   refuse   their   Russian   colleagues'    offer    to   discuss    in   a
•business-like  way'  any  proposal  directed  towards  the   preven-
tion   of   an  atomic  war."    But  he   concludes   Western   scien-
tists  have  the  right  to  hope  that  the  discussions  will  be  truly
open-minded,  without  advance   commitment   to  any  slogan."
Queasy  Reassurances
The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  has  released  a  re-
port  by  its  Advisory Committee on  Biology  and  Medi-
cine  which  seeks  to  allay  public  fear  of  nuclear  testing
but  at  the  same  time  reflects considerable  misgiving.   It
admits  that  estimates  of  the  number of  individuals who
will  ultimately  be  harmed by  testing  "are  large  in  ab-
solute   terms"  and   that   how  one  evaluates   this   "de-
pends  on  the  ethical  and  emotional  makeup  of  the  in-
dividual."
The  Committee's  own  ethical  standards  seem   to  be
those  of  the  Pentagon.   It  balances  the  harm from  fall-
out  against  the  benefits  and  decides  that  "if  we  wish  to
maintain   a   first  class   military  organization   for   the
safety  of  the  country,  we  must  at  least  keep   abreast
of  new weapons  developments. .  .  .  Therefore,  in  terms
og  national  security,  necessary  tests  of  nuclear  weap-
ons  are justified."
The   Committee  feels,   however,  that   other   consid-
erations  must  also  be  taken  into  account.    "Radioactive
fallout   from   tests   spreads  all  over  the  world.   Simi-
larly,  tests  made  by  others  affect  us.   Other  countries
may   well  want  to  develop  nuclear  weapons   later.   In
time,  the  situation may  well  become  serious.   Estimates
of  ultimate  damage  to  the  world's  present   and  future
population,  expressed  in  absolute  terms,  are  large  and
impress  many  people."   It  therefore  recommends  that
future   tests   "be  held  to  a  minimum  consistent   with
scientific  and  military  requirements."
Query:  How  can  tests  be  kept  within  limits  without
agreement  with  Russia,  which  is  also  testing?    Isn't  it
deceptive   to  talk  of   "scientific  and  military  require-
ments"  when  one   is   talking  of   an  arms  race?    The
Committee  talks  as   if   there  is   no  alternative  to  an
arms  race.   This  is  the  assumption  the  AEC  is  trying
to  fix  in  the  public mind.
The   small   gathering   at   Pugwash   was  strikingly   devoid  of
sloganizing.    How   will   Western   scientists   respond   to   this
invitation   and   will   Moscow   politicoes   keep   hands   off?    A
genuine  discussion  would  advance  human  solidarity.   An  exer-
cise  in  party  line  parrotry  would  be  disastrous.
"In  Such  A Tense  Time  .  .  .  Scientists  Cannot  Remain  Aside'
"The  threat  of   atomic  war  grows,  the  armaments  race
and  the  accumulation  of  weapons  of  mass  destruction   ac-
celerate;  the  number  of  powers  capable  of  producing  atomic
weapons  increases;   the  tests  of  nuclear  weapons  increase
in  scale. ...  It  has  become  vitally  important  for  scientists
all  over  the  world  to  warn  all  men  of  the  new  dimensions
of  the  approaching  danger,  which  threatens  the  health  not
only  of  those  men  now  alive,  but  also  of  future  generations
of  men. ...
"We  recognize   that  in  their  desire   to  achieve   the  pro-
hibition  of  atomic  weapons,  scientists  of  different  countries
can  approach  this  aim  in  a  different   way,  that  their  dif-
ferences  of  opinion  in  this  field  are  based  on  differences
of  their  general  concepts  of  the  world,  and  often   directly
depend  on  the  policies  of  the  ruling  circles  of  their  coun-
tries.    This,  in  our  opinion,  shoujd  not  be  an  insurmount-
able  obstacle. ...
"We   believe   that   scientists   need   broad   international
meetings   to  discuss  in  a  businesslike  way  the  problems
—(Signed)   A.  Nesmejanov,  N.  Semenov, I.  Bardin,
':                            '                   1   6   5
which  worry  them  in  connection  with  the  dangerous   effects
of   radiation   and   the   threat   of   military   use   of   atomic
energy.    A  positive  step  in  this  direction  was  a  meeting
called  in  July  of  this  year  in  Pugwash,  Canada,  in  which
some  prominent  scientists  from  the  USA,  England,  Soviet
Union,  China,  Japan,  Australia  and  some  other   countries
were  present.  .  .  .
"We  support  the  idea  of  the  necessity  to  call  a  confer-
ence  concerning   the  problem  of  the  prohibition   of   atomic
weapons.    Let  not  only  atomic  scientists  of  all  countries,
but   also   representatives   of   other   disciplines:  biologists,
medical   scientists,   philosophers   of  all  schools,   economists
of   all  schools,   historians,  sociologists,   educators,   etc,  ex-
press  their  weighty  opinions  in  a  broad  international  meet-
ing  of  the  most  important  representatives   of  science.
"In  such  a  tense  time,  full  of  danger  of  a  general  de-
structive  war, scientists  cannot remain  aside.  Their  duty  is
to  add  their  voice  to  the  requests  for  the  cessation  of  the
atomic  tests. ..."
A.  Topchiev,  P. Kapitsa,  D. Skobeltzyn,  and  150  others.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 28,  1957
Dangerous  Uncertainty  Over Formosa;  Did  Russia  Steal  A  Secret  We  Haven't  Got?
The  Democratic  Platform:  A  Bigger  Arms  Race — But  Without  Inflation
The  Democratic  Advisory  Policy  Committee  managed   to
discuss   foreign   policy   without  once  mentioning  the   word
"peace"  or  negotiation,  much  less  co-existence;  it  was  more
cold  warrish  than  the  Republicans.  It  urged  that  budgetary
considerations  should  not  be allowed to  hold  down  arms  costs,
but  then  turned  around  and  on  economic  policy  accused  the
Republicans  of  permitting  inflation,  though  of  course  with-
out  suggesting  price  and  wage  controls.   How  do  you  have
an  arms  race  without  inflation, or  control  inflation   without
controlling  prices  and  wages?   The  question,  of  course,  -went
unanswered.   Its  weak  little  three  paragraph  quaver  on civil
rights  blamed  Eisenhower  but  not  Faubus  for  Little  Rock.
And  these  were  the  better   minds  and   elder   statesmen  of
the party! .. .
From   Taipeh,  Formosa,  in  the  New   York   Times  of Oct.
19, C. L.  Sulzberger  reported  that  in  December, 1954,  Chiang
was  induced  to  give  Washington  "a  written   guarantee   not
to  attempt  invasion  except  with  our  prior  approval,"  but
same  day  from  the  same  place  in  the  Scripps-Howard   press
(Wash.   Daily   News   for  one) Fred   Sparks   reported   that
Chiang  only  recently  "stated  he  had  never,  in  accepting  our
aid,  promised  to  limit  operations."   The  Formosa  straits  is
a  dangerous  place  for  uncertainty.  ,  . .  Sulzberger's  descrip-
tion   of  this  "free   world   outpost"   is   worth   filing   away:
"Chiang's   is   in   effect   a   one-party,   semi-socialist    regime.
Most  key  industries  such  as  aluminum, sugar  and  power  are
state-owned.    Private   investors   are   therefore   not  attract-
ed.  .  .  ."  Perhaps   we  prefer   Chiang  ideologically  because,
unlike  Mao,  he  remains  loyal  to   Confucius.
Our  favorite  quote  from  the  new  Nobel  prize-winner,  Al-
bert  Camus:  "Every  revolutionary  ends  by  becoming  either
an  oppressor  or  a  heretic"  (The  Rebel).  .  .  .  The  Supreme
Court  has   agreed   to  hear  the  suits  brought  by  the  First
Unitarian   Church  of  Los  Angeles  and  the   Peoples  Church
of   San   Fernando   Valley  to  test  the  State  of   California's
right  to  impose  a  loyalty  oath  on  churches   to  qualify   for
tax  exemption.  . .  . Nixon asked  a  Negro  newspaperman  and
an  editor  of  the  anti-Faubus  Arkansas  Gazette  to  his  dinner
for  Queen  Elizabeth.  .  .  .  New technological   break-throughs
in  political  science  in  the  free  world:  In  Guatamala  victory
for  the  right  was  assured  by  allowing  only  rightist  parties
to  compete  in  the  election  and  in  Jordan   (cable from  Beirut,
N.  y.   Times,  Oct. 19), where  ten  members  of  Parliament
have   been  arrested,  "The military   authorities   are   said   to
have  warned  members  of  Parliament  that  any  deputy  who
did  not   give  a  written  vote   of  confidence  to   the   Cabinet
Precepts  for  African Guests
"Don't  (if  an  African  guest  in  the  land  of  the  free)
get  thirsty,  hungry  or  sleepy  in  America.   If  you. do,
find  a  Negro  and  ask  him  where  you  may  be  served.
Failing  that,  try  to  locate  a  minister  or  priest.
"In  an  emergency, ask  a  policeman.  Humbly.  In  the
last  extremity, eat  and  sleep  in  your car.  Many  other-
wise  respectable  restaurants  will  stoop  to  sell  you  food
and  drink  in  disposable  containers,  for  consumption off
the  premises.   If  you  have  no car, you  might  sit  on  the
curb  or  lean  on  a  mailbox  while  eating.
"Visitors  to  primitive  peoples  must  be  prepared   to
defer  to  local  taboos,  or  risk  violence  at  the  hands  of
the  natives,  or  at  least  a  free  lecture  from   a  metro-
politan  newspaper.   This  is  a  free  country,  you  know,
and  public restaurants  cannot  be  restrained  from  turn-
ing  away  finance  ministers.   After  all, you  might  have
been  merely  an  American   citizen.
"Finally,  remember that  in  being  turned  away  from
an  inn  you  are  in  the  very best  company."
—From  a  letter  by a Mr.  James  E. Renter  in  the  Bal-
timore  Sun  Oct.  19  commenting  on  its  editorial
saying  it  was  a  pity  that  the  Finance  Minister  of
Ghana  was  not  "better  advised"  than  to  ask  for
service   at   a   Howard   Johnson's   restaurant   in
Dover, Del.
would  be arrested  as  subversive.  .  .  ."
Part  of  the  price  for  closer  scientific  cooperation  between
Britain  and  the  U.  S.  is  likely  to  be  the  extension  of  U.  S.
style  security  procedures to the  United  Kingdom.  . . . Not a
word   was   said   about  freedom   of  the  press,  by  Secretary
Dulles  when  he  addressed  the  Inter-American   Press  Asso-
ciation  here  though  the  theme  of  the  meeting  was  an  attack
on  the  press  gags  imposed by  Latin  American  dictators.  .  . .
Cuba,  the  Dominican Republic, Paraguay,   Bolivia  and  Vene-
zuela  were   singled   out  as  the   worst   offenders,   but   Vene-
zuela  is  a  U.  S.  oil  company favorite.  .  .  .  The  myth  that
the  Soviets  got  the  atom  bomb  secret  by  stealing  it  (as  if  it
were  a  kind  of  shiplifter's   item)  was  at  least  based  on  the
fact  that  we  had  the  atom   bomb   first.   But   th.e  new  myth
being  developed  in  Congressional  witch  hunt  circles  is  that
Russia   also  stole  the  secret   of  the  satellite  from   us.   Just
how  can  one steal  a  secret  a  country  does  not  yet  possess?
Copies  Still  Available  of  Our   Special   4-Page  Analysis   The  New  Dulles  Foreign  Policy
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    .............................................................................—.......
Street    ........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.)  additional:
10/28/67
(To)   Name
Street      .......
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraskc  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  i-;t  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December at  861*  Nebraska Aye.,  N.  W.,  Washington 15, D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Ml  lager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IB  in  to  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  HO elsewhere.    Air  Mall  ratei:  «B  to  Bnroue;  |20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED