I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jul01.pdf

============================================================

The  Truth  About  That  Security  Report
Its  Red  Smear  Attack  on  the  Judiciary,  P.  4;  Its  Phoney  Right  to Confront, Page 3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  26
JULY   1,  1957
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
What  Happens  When  the  FBI  Investigates  Itself
The  report  of  the  Commission on  Government  Security is  a
monument  to  the  inexplicable  folly—we  do  not  want  to  use a
harsher  word—of  Hubert  Humphrey.   In  the  middle  of  the
uproar   two   years   ago   over   the   loyalty-security  "numbers
racket,"  Senator   Humphrey   suddenly  fathered   the  resolution
which  set  up  this  Commission.  The  result  was  to  hand  the
Eisenhower  Administration  and  the  FBI  a  chance to whitewash
clearance  procedures  just  when  the  public was  demanding  in-
vestigation.  The  Democrats  could  have  made  a  political  issue
of  the  criticism  aroused  by the  "faceless  informer"  and  by  the
confusions  brought   to  light  in  such  cases  as  those  of  Lade-
jinsky.  The  Democratic  controlled  Senate could  have  set up  an
investigation  of  its  own.  Instead Humphrey  introduced  a  reso-
lution  which this  Weekly  (March  21,  1955)   termed  "a  booby
trap  for  liberals."  It  called  for  a  Commission  of  12, of  whom
four  were  to  be  appointed  by  the  White  House  and  four  by
Nixon,  thus  ensuring  Republican  control.   In  addition,  as  we
pointed  out  at  the  time,  the  terms  of  the  resolution  were  de-
signed  to  protect  the  precious  "confidential  informant"  system
of  the  FBI  from  a real  airing.
That  Alien Ideologist From  Monticello
The  Commission,   its  staff,  and  its  proceedings  were  models
of  how  not  to  investigate  secret  police  practices.   Not  a  single
liberal  or  even  a  distinguished  conservative was  among  the  12
men  named  to  the  Commission.   But  it  included  one  witch
hunter,  Chairman  Walter  of  the  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee.  The  chairman,  Loyd  Wright,  of  Los  Angeles,
a  former  president  of  the  American  Bar  Association,  may  be
judged  from  the  interview with  him  in  last  Sunday's  Washing-
ton  Star  (June  23).  When  the  interviewer  suggested  that  Mr.
Wright  seemed   to  entertain   some  fears   about   the  Supreme
Court,   he  replied,  "Very  definitely.  We  are  in  the   unhappy
situation  where  the  court  is taking  a license  to spread   ideologies
rather   than   the   cornerstone   of   Anglo-Saxon   jurisprudence,
which  is  precedence."  Mr.  Wright  seems  to  regard  the  First
amendment  as  alien  ideology.
The  staff,  it  turns  out,  was  carefully  chosen.   Mr.  Wright
told  the  House  Appropriations  Committee  last  year  (page  823
of  the  hearings  on  the  Supplemental  Appropriation  Bill)  that
the top  job, that of  Administrative Director, was filled by a Mr.
D.  Milton  Ladd  at  $15,000,  and  the  No.   2  job  by  a  Mr.
Stanley  J.  Tracy  at  the  same  salary.   He  gave  no   indication
whatsoever  as to their  background  and  qualifications.  But any-
one  who  now  gets  as  far  as  the  staff  biographies  on  page  761
of  the  Commission  report  will  discover  that  Mr.  Ladd  retired
in  1954  after  26  years  as  an  FBI  man,  his  last  post  being  that
of  assistant  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover   "in  charge  of  all  FBI  intelli-
gence  and  criminal  investigations." Mr.  Tracy,  it  appears, also
retired  from  the  FBI  in  1954,  when  he  held  the  post  of  As-
sistant  Director.   In  studying  FBI  procedures,  they  were  re-
viewing  a  record  of  which  their  own  life  work  was  a  part.   It
is  not  strange  that  while  the  report  criticizes  the  military  for
over-classification  and  (surprise!)  the State Department's pass-
port  division  for  violating  due  process,  it  finds  (see  box  on
page  four)   that  the  "competency  and  fairness"  of  the  FBI
"has  not  been seriously questioned."   The  verdict was built-in.
No Victims  Heard—Out  Loud, Anyway
The  procedure,  like the  staff,  was designed to  give  the  secret
police  a minimum of  bother. The  Commission must have heard
many  witnesses—there are occasional references  to  them  in  the
report—but  it  heard  them  all  in  private,  as  if  they  were  con-
fidential  informants.   If  any  victims  were  heard,  their  voices
could  not  penetrate beyond the  Commission's  closed  doors.   In
18  months  of  existence,  the  Commission  never  held  a  public
hearing  or  a  press  conference,  except  for  a  final  briefing  ses-
sion  just  before its report  was released  last  week. This was  sig-
nificant  chiefly  for  its  demonstration of  how  little  Mr.  Wright
knew about  his  own  report.   Every time a question  got  specific,
it  had  to  be  referred  to  the  equable  and  competent  Mr.  Ladd
or  to  the  Commission's  sharp  general  counsel,  a  Mr.  Samuel
H.  Liberman of  St.  Louis,  who  reminded  one  strongly  of  Mr.
Benjamin  Mandel,  the  research director  of  the  Senate  Internal
Security  Committee.
Mr.  Hoover  maintains  close  liaison  with  the  Congressional
witch  hunt  committees;  he  was  an  admirer  of  McCarthy  and
approves  the  exposure  of  radicals  but  his  old  assistants  took
care  that  there  should  be  no  similar  open  hearings  to  educate
the  public as to  security-loyalty abuses.  One  would  never  guess
from   the  Commission's  report   that   thousands   of  lives   have
been  cruelly  hurt  by  these  abuses,  nor  that  among  the   confi-
dential  informants so  precious  to  the  FBI  there  has  turned  up
a  most  odoriferous  assortment  of  crackpots  and  moochers  with
memories  so  double-jointed  they  might  (for  a  fee)   identify
Eastland  himself  as a  fellow Bukharinite from the  Bronx.  This
is  what  might  have  been  expected  when  a  secret  police  is  al-
lowed  to  study  its  own  navel  in  secret.
Hopeful Stocking  Filled at  Last
The   result  of   these  narcissistic  meditations  is  a  series  of
recommendations   embodying   everything   the   FBI   has   long
wanted  for  Christmas:  a  bill  to  legalize  wire-tapping,  a  law
to punish  newspapermen  who print  "official  secrets,"  an  execu-
tive  order  to  provide  stricter  surveillance  over  international
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
I D
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  1,1957
(Continued   pom   Page   One)
organizations,  a  law denying suspected  subversives the  right  to
travel  even in  normal times, extension of  security procedures  to
civil  air  transport,  statutory  authority  for  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral's  list  and  the  establishment  by  law  of  a  super-duper Cen-
tral  Security Office  which  will  freeze  the  loyalty-security mania
permanently  into  the  structure  of  American   government.
The  most  sinister, though  little noticed,  aspect  of  the  report
is  its  implication that  the  Judiciary,  too,  cannot  be  trusted  but
must  have  its  personnel  screened  for  loyalty  and  security  by
the  FBI.   This  elicited  a  protest  from  the  Commission's  lone
dissenter,   former   Attorney   General   James   P.    McGranery,
whose  views  were  misrepresented  in  the  Commission's  press
release  and  hidden  away  behind  the  index.  (We  print  part  of
them  on  page  four.)  Mr.  McGranery  also  protested  the  pro-
posal  for  a  Central  Security Agency  as tending  "to  weaken  the
foundations  of  our  freedom  by  the  building  of  an  extravagant
and  false  facade:  a  topheavy  superstructure  masquerading  as
efficient,  expedient  security."  Coming  from  Mr.  Truman's  last
and  most  reactionary Attorney General, this  is doubly  eloquent.
Rule  by  Flatfoot
Behind  the  smoke-screen  of  a  few  procedural  reforms  and
(see  next  page)  a  spurious claim to  establish  the  right  to  con-
front  accusers,  the  Commission  would  extend  and  make  per-
manent  what  began  ten  years  ago  as  an  emergency  program
limited  to  government  employes.   Suspicion  rather  than  trust
would   be  the  leitmotif   of  American  life;  avoidance  of   risk,
rather  than   freedom,  its  anxiety.   Plato's   closed   society  was
at  least  to  be  ruled   by  philosophers,  not   flatfeet.   The   Com-
mission's  report  would  move  toward  a  closed  society  ruled  by
the  ubiquitous  secret  agent  marking  down   in  his  little   black
book  whatever  he  overhears.    For  the  logic  of  this  program
cannot  be  contained.   Once  the  premises  of  surveillance  are ac-
cepted,   it  tends  to  widen.   If  messenger  clerks  and   mailmen
have  to  be  screened,  why  not  doctors,  lawyers, and  newspaper-
men?   If  the   "regularly  established  confidential   informants"
of  the  FBI  are  too  important  to  the  national  security  to  be  dis-
closed  in  loyalty  hearings,  why  should  not  their  evidence  be
taken  secretly  in  court  proceedings   too?    And   if  the  Bill  of
Rights  and  the  Constitution  provide  excuse  for  subversive  de-
cisions  by  judges  who  perversely  distrust the  secret  police,  can-
not  something  be  done  to  put  these  venerable  but   dangerous
documents  in  cold  storage?
Business  Men Annoyed
Oddly  enough  a  point  of  resistance turns  up  in  the  Ameri-
can  business  man.   The  one  point  at  which  the  report  slows
down  respectfully is  at  the  factory  gate.   "The    Commission,"
Mr.  Wright   told   the  House   Appropriations   Committee   last
year,  "has  already  received  information  indicating  that  indus-
try  is  encountering  considerable  trouble  and  expense   in  han-
dling  its  programs  of  personnel,  physical  and  document  secu-
rity. ..."  The  only  strong  protests  that  come  through  in  this
report  are  those  of  business  men  who  feel  that  industrial  and
scientific  progress  is being  tied  up  in security and  secrecy  knots;
an  example  is  the  letter  from  the  head   of  United   Aircraft
quoted  on  pages   166-7,  and  the  criticism  of  the  military  on
pages   300-1.  The  one  point  at  which  the  Commission  pro-
poses  to  shrink  rather  than  expand  the  area  of  surveillance is
in  industry.  It  recommends  (p.   176)   not  only  that  the  cate-
gory  of  "confidential"  on  government  documents  be  abolished
but  that  "industry  be  permitted  immediately  to  discontinue
clearance  of  employees  for   existing  contracts  classified   confi-
dential."    It  opposes  the  Butler  bill,  which  would   have  ex-
tended  loyalty-security  procedures  to  all  workers  in  industry,
even  though  not  engaged  on  military  contracts.   It  wants  the
Department   of   Commerce   Office   of   Strategic   Information
abolished;  OSI's  surveillance of  technical publications  has  got-
ten  into the hair of  industry.
In  response  to  business pressure,  the  report  adopts  the  logic
of   the   Supreme   Court's   Cole   decision  which   would   limit
loyalty-security  procedures  to  sensitive  positions.    But: in  deal-
ing  with  government,  the  report  would  extend  the  procedures
to  every employe  no  matter  how  unimportant.  The  contrast  in
treatment  is striking. The  fact  that  the  government  already  al-
lows  private  industry  to  clear   employes   for   access  to   confi-
dential  information  "without  requiring  a  security  investigation
of  any sort"  is regarded  by the  Commission  (p.  304)   with  ap-
proval,  and  as  indicating  that  "the   degree  of  risk  to  the  na-
tional  security  is  not  substantial."  The  report   (p.   305)   says
"the  industrial process  is such  that  the  various  phases  of  a  con-
fidential  contract  are  so  dispersed  that  it  would   be  virtually
impossible  to  assemble  this information  to  the detriment of  the
national  security."   It  objects  that  the  Butler  bill  would   "re-
quire  a  screening  of  thousands  of  individuals   [in   industry]
not  now subject to  the  security program"  and  explains  that  the
investigative   agencies   already  have   "the   hard-core   Commu-
nists  . . . well-identified" (p.  273)  and  readily  apprehendable
for  detention  under  the  Internal  Security  Act  "in  the  event  of
war  or  insurrection."   It  cites  (p.   174)   with  approval  the  in-
dustrial  and  scientific  view  that  "security  at  its  best  can  only
provide  lead  time  in  this  highly  technological    age."
Nobody Really Trusted But The  Cops
But  there  are  whole  agencies  and  departments   of  govern-
ment  which  have  much  less  to do  with  any real  military  secrets
than  many  businesses  today.   Yet  the  Commission   on  Security
not  only  proposes  to  blanket  in  every  government   worker  but
to  keep  him  under  constant  surveillance.    He  is  forever   sus-
pect.   "A  loyalty  case,"  the  report  says  at  page  74,  "can  never
be  res  adjudicata,"   the  legal  term  for  a  case  finally  settled  by
the  courts.  The  employe  must  be  subject  to  new  check  at  any
time  "even  though  he  may have  emerged  clean  and  clear  from
a  score  of  investigations  and  as  many  hearings."  The  ultimate
idiocy  is that  though  cleared  for  "suitability"   and  certified  for
"loyalty,"  he  may still  be  distrusted  for  sensitive  jobs.    As  thp
report  says  (pps.  85-6),  "There  are  certain  positions  in   Gov-
ernment  which  are  so  identified  with  the  national  security  in-
terest  that  even  though   an  incumbent   employe   may  not   be
disloyal  or  unsuitable   for   employment    generally   under   the
recommended   regulations,    nevertheless   his   background   may
be  such  that  he. is  unsuitable  for  a  particular  position."    Ap-
parently  nobody  can  really  be  trusted  except  the  secret  police,
though  they, of  course,  would  be exempt  (p.  51)  from  loyalty-
security  procedures.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  1,1957
The  "Small  Print"  Gives  The  Lie  to  the  Claim  That  Made  The  Headlines
Debunking  That  "Right  of  Confrontation"  in  The  New  Security  Report
Here  are  some  of  the  loopholes  in  that  "right  of  confronta-
tion"   recommended   by   the   report   of   the   Commission   on
Security:
1.  It  would  not  apply  to  "regularly  established  confidential
informants."   But  many  of  these  have  proven  to  be  unreliable.
Some  have  become  notorious  as  perjurers.   Several  have  been
committed  as  alcoholics  or  insane.
2.  Even  when  some  scandal  or  court  appearance  has  dis-
closed  the  name  of  one  of  these  informants, the   "derogatory
information"  furnished by him  may  be  considered  by  the  hear-
ing  examiner  without  an  opportunity  for  cross-examination   if
he  is  unavailable  "because  of  death,  incompetency,  or   other
reason."
Casual  Informants  Shielded,  Too
3. Casual  informants may  not  be  subpoenaed  for cross-exam-
ination,  either,  if  they  gave  information  to  the   FBI  on   the
promise  that  their  identity would  not  be  disclosed.
The  report  says  the  examiner  is  not  to  consider  derogatory
information  supplied  by informants immune from cross-exami-
nation.   But  this  may  prove  to  be  quite  a  feat  since  the  Secu-
rity  Commission  also  says  (p.  68),   that  nothing  in  its  recom-
mendations  on  confrontation  "should  be  construed  to  require
the  investigating  agency  to  exclude  from  its  report  any  infor-
mation  derived  from  any  source."    So  the  FBI  could  go  on
using  such  casual  information, and  yet keep  the  source  a  secret
from  those  accused.   How  is  the  examiner  to  blot  such  infor-
mation from  his mind ?
The  proposed  new  security law  seems  to  contradict  itself  on
this  point.   Section  84  says the  hearing  examiner  is not  to  con-
sider  such   information.   But  Section  86  says   (p.   714)    that
"notwithstanding"   this  provision   "the   examiner  may  receive
in  evidence  .  .  .  information  or  documentary  material  offered
in  behalf  of  the  Attorney General,  in  summary  form  or  other-
wise,  without  requiring  the  disclosure  of   classified  informa-
tion."  Presumably  if  the  Attorney  General  declared  the  source
of  the  information  classified, it  could  then  be  put  in  evidence
without   giving   the   accused   a  chance   to  confront   or   cross-
examine.
Hard  on Defense  Workers
4.  A  special  loophole  as  wide  as  a  hangar  door  appears  in
the  case of workers  in  defense facilities. Section  84  (page  713)
limits  the  right  of  confrontation   in  industrial  security  cases.
Eight kinds  of  charges  are exempt  (p.  709-10)  from  the  right
of  confrontation.
These  include  charges  as  vague  as  "any  behavior,  activities,
or  associations  which  tend  to  show  that  the  individual  is  not
reliable  or  trustworthy,"  "any  facts which  furnish  reason  to be-
lieve  that  the  individual  may  be  subjected  to  coercion,   influ-
ence  or  pressure  which  may  cause  him  to  act  contrary  to  the
best  interests of  the  national  security,"  and  "any  other  activity,
association   or  condition   which   tends   to  establish    reasonable
ground   for  belief  that  access  by  such  individual   to  classified
information  or  to  any  security  facility  will  endanger  the  com-
mon defense  and  security."
These  are  sweeping   enough  to  cover  malicious  gossip   in  a
shop  or  factory  without  giving  the  accused  a  chance  to  cross-
examine  the source.
"Justice  and  Fair  Play"
"Should   charges   of   disloyalty   reach   the   hearing
stage,  the  Commission  recommends  other  safeguards  to
the  person  involved.   The  constitutional  guarantee  that
'In  all  criminal  cases,  the  accused  shall  enjoy  the  right
...  to be confronted  by  the witnesses  against  him,' has
never   applied    to   administrative   inquiries   or   loyalty
hearings.   However,  the  consequences  of  a  person  being
declared  disloyal  are  so  grave  that  the  Commission  felt
justice  and  fair  play  require  that  he  be  permitted  to
confront   and  cross-examine  witnesses  who  have    fur-
nished  derogatory  information  against   him,   whenever
it  may  be  done  without  harm  to  the  national  security."
—Press  Release, Commission  on  Security.
In  addition,  it must  be kept  in mind  that  all  these  loopholes
and  exceptions  also  affect  the  statement  of  charges  given  the
accused.   The  charges  are  supposed  to  be  "as  specific  and  de-
tailed  as the interests of  national security permit"  (p.  699).  In
practice   this   has   meant  withholding   specific   details   which
might  identify  the  informant.  Yet  lack  of  details  as  to  time
and  place,  for  example,  may  make  it  impossible  to  disprove
an accusation.
5. The  widest  loophole  of  all  is  that  opened  up  by the  final
sentence  of  Section  84  (p.  713).  This  says  the  "right  of  con-
frontation"   shall  not  apply  to  charges  brought   "under   any
other  security  program."
This  refers  to  discharges  as  a  "security  risk"  under  the  so-
called  "suitability"  regulations  of  the  Civil  Service  Commis-
sion.  These  provide  for  no  right  of  confrontation.   Indeed  ex-
cept  in  case of  veterans they do  not  provide  for  any  real  rights
of  hearing  or  appeal,  and  the  Commission  on  Security recom-
mends  that  the  special  hearing  rights  granted  veterans  by Sec-
tion  14  of  the  Veterans  Preference  Act  of   1944  be  repealed
by  Congress.
"Suitability" Charges Preferred
Against  this  background  the  reader  may  understand  better
what  the  report  means  when  it  says  (p.  85),   "the   best  evi-
dence  available  to  the  Commission  indicates  that  since  the  be-
ginning  of  the  current security program ... the  vast  majority
of  so  called  'security  removals'  have  in  fact  been  suitability  re-
movals,  handled  under  normal  civil  service  or  related  proce-
dures.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  this  practice,  particu-
larly  under  the  Commission's  recommended   expanded  regula-
tions,  can  be continued. Where there  is a  choice  of  procedures,
the suitability procedures  should  be followed."   (Italics  added).
The  "expanded   regulations"  recommended  by the   Commis-
sion  would  allow  government  workers  to  be  fired  as  "unsuit-
able"  under  the  same  vague  clauses  quoted  above  from  the  in-
dustrial  security  program   as  exempt  from  the   right  of  con-
frontation.
Thus  if  other  loopholes were  not  enough  to  protect  a  casual
informant  from  cross-examination,  the  FBI  could   always  use
his  information  in  a  "suitability"  proceeding  where  there  is  no
right  of  confrontation.
When  all  this  is added  up,  it will  be  seen  that  the  "right of
confrontation"  recommended  with  so  much  fanfare  by  the  re-
port  amounts  to  no  more  than  a  public  relations    smokescreen.
1  0
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  1,1957
The  Beginning  of  A  Red  Smear  Attack  on  the   Judiciary?
While   the  report  of   the  Commission  on  Security  found
the  FBI  practically   perfect    (see  the  adjoining  box),  it  cast
doubt  on  the  trustworthiness  of  the  Federal judiciary.  Scant
attention  has been  paid  to  this  aspect  of  the  report  though  it
may  prove  the  opening  gun  of  a  new  attack  on  the  courts.
The  report  is  calculated  to  create  the  impression  that  recent
liberal  decisions  may  be  due  to  the  influence   of  subversive
assistants  on  Federal  judges.   The   report  recommends   that
Court  aides  be  screened  for   loyalty  and  "suitability."   This
would  make  it  difficult    for  a judge  to  hire  a. law  clerk  or sec-
retary  whose  ideas  seemed  too  liberal  to  the  FBI.   It  would
also  open  judges  to  future  McCarthy  style  smear  attack  on
the  charge  of  hiring  or  retaining  suspect  assistants. The   po-
tential  of  this  attack  for  undermining   faith  in  the  courts  is
obvious.  It  proved  too much,  however,  for  only  one  member
of  the  Commission,  James  P.  McGranery,  Truman's  last  At-
torney  General, and  by  no  means  a liberal.  Here  is  what  he
had  to  say  in  dissenting  from   this  part  of  the   Commission
report:
"This  member  wishes  to  express  a  vigorous,  dissent  from
the  Commission  recommendation   (p.   106)   that  'The  judicial
branch  of  the  Government  should  take  effective    steps  to  insure
that  its  employees  are  loyal  and  otherwise  suitable  from   the
standpoint   of  national  security';  and  he  submits  that  this  rec-
ommendation  is  irrelevant  to  the  scope  of  the  Commission  in-
quiry,  not  based  on  any  need  that  has  been  demonstrated  by
facts   ascertained   or   ascertainable,   a   gratuitous    conclusion
drawn  from  premises  that  are  purely  conjectural.
Judiciary  Supposed to Be Independent
"The   independence  of  the  Federal  judiciary has  throughout
America's  history  been  the  warranty  of  constitutional  govern-
ment   in  this  Republic.   A  Federal   judge   is  mindful   of   the
sacred  responsibility  that  is  his  whether  presiding  over  a  trial,
hearing  an  argument,  instructing  a  grand  jury  or  a  petit  jury,
sentencing  a  defendant,   or  preparing  an  opinion.  Trie  Found-
ing  Fathers  provided  for  continuation  of  judicial  service  dur-
ing  good   behavior  of  the  judge,  and,  it  is  submitted,   would
have  found  it  as  difficult  as  does  this  member  of  the  Commis-
sion—to envisage  the  possibility that  any conscientious  judge—
Practically  Perfect
"The   Commission  has  found  little  fault  with  the  in-
vestigative  standards,  methods  or  personnel  of  the  ex-
ecutive  branch.    The  competency  and  fairness  of   the
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation's  trained  force  in  in-
vestigating  and  reporting  on  Federal  personnel  loyalty
and  security  matters  has  not  been  seriously  questioned
except  by  the  perennial  critics  of  all  security  measures
and  by  the   uninformed."
—Commission  on Government Security,  Report,  P. 56.
or  as the  Commission  report  expresses  it  (p.  106):  '.  .  . Fed-
eral  judges,  busy  with  ever  crowded  court  calendars, must  rely
upon  assistants to  prepare  briefing   papers  for  them.'
"It  is  submitted  that  such  a  Federal  judge  is  not  'busy'—he
is  either  lazy  or  confused.   In  either  instance,  the  remedy  is  to
proceed  to  impeach  the  individual  judge—not  merely  to  con-
taminate  the  crutch  upon  which  he  leans.  The  Commission  re-
port  continues  to  explain,  excuse,  accuse  and  conjecture—
" 'False   or   biased   information    inadvertently    reflected    in
court  opinions  in  crucial security,  constitutional,   governmental
or  social  issues  of  national  importance  could  cause  severe   ef-
fects  to  the  Nation's   security  and  to  our  Federal loyalty-secu-
rity  system  generally.'   (p.   106).
No Evidence Any Such Judge Existed
"This  journey  into  a  fanciful   world  has  summoned  up  a
hypothetical  judge  who  is  not  only  lazy  and  confused  but  al-
most  unconscious—certainly  unaware  that  his  opinion   is  'in-
advertently'  reflecting  false  or  biased   information.
"This member  of  the  Commission  is happy  to  report  that  no
evidence  was  presented  at  Commission   conferences  tending  to
indicate  that  such  a  judge  is  now  a  member  of  the  Federal
judiciary,  by appointment  of  the  President  of  the  United  States
with  the  advice and  consent  of  the  Senate.
"Neither  was any evidence  presented  that  at  any time  in  our
history  such  a  judge  menaced  national  security  by being  'busy
with  the  ever  crowded  court  calendars'  or  by inadvertent   accept-
ance  of  'false  or  biased  information.'   This  member  regrets  the
unwarranted  intrusion  into  the  judicial  branch  of  our  govern-
ment  by the  recommendation  in  the  foregoing   report."
Let  Us  Send  A  Sample  Copy   of   This  Important   Issue   Free   to   Your   Friends
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     ......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City           ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name  ..............................................................................
7/1/57
Street
City      ........................................Zone............St*te................_
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1870.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5018  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent  weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
S5  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED