I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jan28.pdf

============================================================

What  the  Newspapers   Didn't  Say  About  the  Death  of  Toscanini,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  4JANUARY  28,  1957
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Back  to  Cold  War   and  Hot  Air
The  problems  of  the  world  are  so  complicated  that  it  is  a
pity  people's  minds  have  to  be  further  confused  by  the  kind
of  chrome-plated  generalities  and  warmed  up  helium  which
filled  the  President's  inaugural address,  as  it  did  his  State  of
the  Union  message.    The  style  had  the  sheen  of  good  adver-
tising  copy;  it  subordinated  realistic discussion  to  selling.  The
new  arms  budget,  highest  ever  in  peacetime,  was  sold  as  "the
price  of  peace."  The  world  scene  was  pictured  again  as  cold
war  melodrama: the  struggle  of  us  goodies  against  them  bad-
dies.   The   world  is  indeed  divided,  but   division  cannot   be
blamed  entirely  on  Them.  Our  friends,  Syngman Rhee,  Chiang
Kai-shek,  and  Diem  are  also  dividers; ready,  like  the  Commu-
nists  for  unity  at  any  time,  but  on  their  own  terms.  The  Presi-
dent  spoke of  "tragically"  divided Germany, but  it  is a  tragedy
that  rests  very  lightly on  Dr.  Adenauer  and  our  big  business
friends  in  the  Reich.  They  are  in  no  hurry  to  assume  the  eco-
nomic  and  political  problems  of  the  impoverished,  socialistic
and  Protestant  East  zone.  We  say  we  don't  like  a  world  di-
vided,  but  the  countries  like  India  which  feel  that  way  and
try  to  stand  aside  from   the  general  division  of  mankind  we
stigmatize  as  "neutralist,"  a  bad  word.  We  say we  don't  like
a  divided  Europe,  but  in  both  addresses  as  at  press  conference
last  week  the  President  showed  remarkably  little   interest  in
trying  by diplomacy to  achieve  the  withdrawal  of  the Russians.
But   who   expects  sensible   discussion   of   detergents   in   soap
copy?    Better  just  to  say,  "It  floats."
A  Little  Sober  Truth  Would Be  Helpful
The  trouble with continually  picturing  our side  as 99 44/100
percent  pure  is that  it  creates  a public mind  totally  unprepared
for  the  give-and-take  necessary to  heal  the  discords  of  an  im-
perfect  world.  We   are  so  used  to  hearing   about   the   "free
world"  that we-forget  that  most  of  our  allies  in  that  free  world
run  regimes  as  dictatorial  and  as  bloody  but  often  a  good  deal
less  constructive  than  those  of  the  Communist  States.   Most  of
Latin  America,  virtually  all  of  the  Middle  East,  are  governed
by  dictators  dependent  for  their  maintenance  on  armed  force,
which  we  supply  under  "mutual  aid"   (shade  of  Kropotkin!).
When  the  President  spoke  of  "the  building  of  a  peace  with
justice  in  a  world  where  moral  law  prevails"  he  was  talking
in  the  kind  of  rhetoric  which  unfits  free  men  for  tackling  real
problems.  The  corollary  of  all  those  rosy  words  is  that  until
we  reach  this pie-in-the-sky state  of  virtue we must  continue  to
arm  to  the  teeth.  We  are  all  for  justice,  but  it  can  only  be
achieved  slowly,  by charity,  and  patience.  What  is  the  just so-
lution—to  take  only  problems  divorced  from  the  Communist
issue—in  North  Ireland,  or  Algeria,  or  Cyprus,  or  Palestine,
or  Kashmir?  No  solution  to  these  old  and  tangled  feuds  is
possible  which will not  be unjust to  somebody. The  President's
oversimplified   self-righteous  rhetoric  may  drum  up  emotions
Up  and  Up
"The   new  and more  powerful  weapons which are being
delivered  to  our  Armed  Forces  in  increasing quantities
and  varieties  are  much  more costly  to  produce, operate
and  maintain  than   the   weapons  they   are  replacing.
Furthermore,  we  are  now  engaged  in  the  development
of  a  whole new  family  of  even more advanced weapons
for   all   the  services.   Large  expenditures  will   be  re-
quired  to  bring  these  weapons  into  use.   During  the
transition,  we  must continue  to  purchase enough  of  the
current  types  to  preserve our  readiness  until  the  effec-
tiveness  of  the  advanced  weapons  is  demonstrated  in
tests."             —The  President's   new  budget   message.
for  war.   It  will  never  prepare  men  to  compromise  for  peace.
Dwight   Eisenhower  is   a   man   who   shies   away   from   a
scrap,  and  gravitates  naturally to  the  path  of  least  resistance.
This  is  evident  in  dealing  with  our  most  acute  domestic prob-
lem,  that  of  race  relations.   It  was  characteristic of  him  in  the
State  of  the  Union  message  to  advocate  a  program  of  school
aid   "uncomplicated   by  provisions  dealing  with  the   complex
problems of  integration."   Mr.  Eisenhower  is all  for  Law, with
a  big  capital  L,  until  he  runs  up  against  a  law  difficult   to  en-
force.   At  press  conference  last  Wednesday  he  looked  relaxed
and  confident   until   Robert  Spivack  of   the  New   York   Post
asked  him  about  the  appeal  by Southern Negro  leaders  that  he
come  South  and  use  his  influence to  stem  the  rising  mood  of
violence.   He  was  at  a  loss  for  an  answer,  consulted  with  Jim
Hagerty  and  then  replied  lamely  that  the  request  had  been  re-
ferred  to  the  Justice  Department  for  study.   We  can  just  see
the  lights burning  there  far  into  the  night.
The  G.O.P.  Elected  A  Truman  Democrat
That  instinctive  fondness  for  the  easy  way  out  is  charting
the  course  of  the  next  four  years.  We  wish  there  was comfort
to  be found  in  the  symbolism of  the  attack  made  on  Mr.  Eisen-
hower  at  the  very  beginning of  his  second  term  by the  Council
of  State  Chambers  of  Commerce.  The  Council,  like  his  own
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  objects  to  the  huge  budget  and  its
renewed  and  New  Dealish  spending.   But  this  welfare state  to
which  Eisenhower  is  turning  comes  coupled  with  the  garrison
State;  Humphrey  represented  the  big  business  influence  which
was against  New  Dealism  but  was also  for  relaxation  of  world
tension  to  cut  arms  spending.  The  weakening  of  his  influence
is  therefore  no  unmixed  blessing.   Ahead  of  us  lies  renewed
cold  war  and  arms  race,  sugar-coated  by  social  welfare meas-
ures.   But  the  major  share  goes  to  the  Pentagon;  the  blueprint
is  to  make  all  the  world  outside  the  Soviet  zone  our  protector-
ate  and  beneficiaries.  Mr.  Eisenhower  has  emerged  as  a  Tru-
man  Democrat,   dependent  on  the  arms  race  as  the  WPA  of
our  prosperity,  and  facing  inflation  with  essential  equanimity.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  28,1957
We  Use  Milder Methods  Than  The  Fascismo  Against  Which  the  Maestro  Protested
Meditations  on  the  Death  of  Toscanini  and  the  Artist  in  America
All   the   obituaries  of   Toscanini   told  how  he  had   defied
Mussolini   and   refused   to  play  the   Fascist  hymn,   "Giovan-
nezza,"  choosing  exile  rather  than  knuckle  under.   But  of  all
the  newspaper  writers  who  applauded  the  Maestro's  bravery,
who  was  brave  enough  to  note  that  we  ourselves  do  not  en-
courage  our  artists to  be Toscaninis?  We  do  not  use  the  blud-
geon  and  castor  oil,  as  the  Black  Shirts  did,  to  enforce  con-
formity.  We  have  milder  methods  for  frightening  people.  We
put   them  in  the  pillory  before  the   Senate  Internal   Security
Committee  or  the  House  Un-American  Activities   Committee.
We  make  them  unemployable.   If  Toscanini   had  dared  criti-
cize  this  American  variant  of   Fascismo,  we  would   probably
have driven him  into  exile as we did  Chaplin,  or  kept  him  here
under  "house  arrest"  as  we  do  Paul  Robeson,  punishing  him
by  refusing  to  let  him  perform  abroad.  Our  artists  have  been
taught  that  it  is  safer  not  to  mix  in  politics.
In  this  sense,  not  to  mix  in  politics,  is not  to  mix  in  life,  to
be  but  half  a  man;  to  look  the  other  way when  other  men  are
treated   unjustly;   if   there   are   crematoria,   not   to   hear   the
screams;  to  abdicate.  How  can one  be a true artist, striving  un-
attainably  to  express  the  deeper  meanings,  as  Toscanini   did,
and  be  but  half  a  man?   Can  a  eunuch  make  love?   Toscanini
in  this  was  like  Einstein, and  it  is  something  to  remember  that
the  greatest  conductor  of  our  time,  like  the  greatest  physicist,
was  an  anti-Fascist;  both  chose  exile  rather  than   submission.
But  where  are  the  younger  men  to  follow  them?
The  Intellectual  As  Puppet
In  the  U.S.,  as  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  the  artists,  scientists  and  in-
tellectuals  are  encouraged  to  take  part  in  politics  but  only  as
the  State  orchestrates  it.  There  they  are  encouraged  to  criticize
Western  imperialism, here  to  speak  out  against  Soviet   oppres-
sion  in  Hungary.  There  the  first  question  they  ask  you  is  about
Paul  Robeson,  but  it  is considered  bad  taste  to  ask  them  about
the  Soviet Robesons,  the  dissident artists and  writers  who  end-
ed  up  in  sub-Arctic labor  camps.  Here  we  are  allowed  to  cele-
brate  the  way the  writers and  newspapermen  resisted  in  Buda-
pest,  staking  their  lives  on  the  demand   for  free   expression.
But  I  did  not  notice  any  of  our  newspapermen   demonstrating
outside  the  half  empty  courtroom  in  Washington   last   Friday
where  Robert  Shelton   of  the  New   York   Times   was   found
guilty  of  contempt  for  invoking  his  First  Amendment   rights
before   the   Senate   Internal   Security   Committee,   and   Mary
Knowles  the  librarian  was given  120  days  in  jail  for  the  same
offense.
There  is  a  numbness  in  the  national  air.  There  was  no  hos-
tile  mob  outside  the  courthouse.  There  were  no  sympathizers
massed  within  it.   Every  day  we  are  told  that  freedom  is  the
precious  possession  we  must  be  ready at  the  drop of  a  bomb  to
defend  with  our  lives  against  Them,  but  nobody  took  an  hour
off  from  work  to  come  down  to the  courtroom  and  see whether
maybe  the  First  Amendment  was  in  danger.   Our  reflexes  have
not  been  conditioned  to  associate  the  First  Amendment   with
the  Freedom  on  which  the  Pentagon  puts  a  big  capital  F;  the
Bill  of  Rights  is  not  conspicuous  in  the  briefings of  the  Strate-
gic  Air  Command.   Indeed,  as  the  sophisticated  may  whisper
to you, that  stuff  about  the  First  Amendment  is  "commie  talk."
Real  Americans  don't  talk  that  line.   It's  "commie"  here  and
New   Attack   On  The   Blacklist
"If  the  respondents,  monopolizing  all  employment  op-
portunities  in  the  motion  picture  industry,  had  agreed
among  themselves  to  hereafter  exclude  all  Negroes,  Re-
publicans   or  Jews   from   the   industry,   and  the  state
courts  had refused  all  redress  to  the  persons  affected, it
appears  clear  that  this  [the  U.S.  Supreme]   Court  would
consider  the  matter  ripe  for  adjudication. .  .  .  The  cen-
tral  issue  here  is  whether  affected  persons  following  a
like  calling  are without similar  recourse  to  the Constitu-
tion   when   the   agreement   by   the   same   monopolistic
combination  excludes   from  the  industry  all  those  who
claim  the  privilege   against   self-incrimination   guaran-
teed  by  the  federal  Constitution  before  a  federal   legis-
lative  inquiry, or  who,  when  named  as  Communists,  fail
to  voluntarily  appear  and  answer  all  questions  without
invocation  of  their  Constitutional  privileges.  .  .  ."
—Petition  to  the  Supreme  Court  (granted   last  week)
by  23  blacklisted   Hollywood   artists  and  writers
against  film  companies   and  members  of  the  Com-
mittee  on  Un-American  Activities.
"bourgeois"  there.   This   is  the  shadow   of  what  Orwell   saw
coming.
i
Conscience  Is  Contempt
Our  country  is  supposed  to  be  the  citadel  of  private  consci-
ence  against  State  power.   But  when  Mrs.   Knowles'  lawyer,
Henry  Sawyer III,  a  Philadelphia  City  Councilman,  spoke  with
passion  of  the  Christian  and  Quaker  tradition  against  inform-
ing,  of  early  Church  Council  edicts  against  those  who  turned
their  brothers  in,  of  the  Quaker  printer  William  Bradford  who
in  1689   was  the  first  man  in  the  New  World  to  invoke  the
privilege,  his  moving  words  seemed  to  find  a  wall  rather  than
an  audience  in  the  owlish  rotund  man  on  the  bench  with  the
dark-rimmed   spectacles.    It   was  only   when   Sawyer   pleaded
that  if  Mrs.  Knowles  had  submitted  to  the  authority  of   the
committee  it would  have  meant  informing  on  the  father  of  her
son  that  the  Judge   was  moved,   but  in  the  other   direction.
Judge  Rizley  broke  in  to  say that  he  had  seven  children  and
eleven  grandchildren  and  that  his  sons  and  sons-in-law  had
been  engaged  all  over  the  world  in  the  Army,  the  Air   Force
and   the  Marines  in   resisting   Commrfnism.   The   Judge   told
Sawyer,   "I   just  can't   bring   myself   to   say  to   her   that   she
should  not  serve  some  time."   Mrs.  Knowles  made  an  appeal-
ing  figure  as  she  stood  there  awaiting  sentence,  thin  and  wan
in  a trim  suit. The  Judge made  a great  show of  being troubled,
but  he  sentenced  her  to  four  months.   No  harm  would   have
come  to her,  he  said,  if  she  had  only  answered  the  committee's
questions.    "Suppose,"  he  asked,  again   referring  to  his  sons
and  sons-in-law,  "they  refused  to  obey  the  command  of  their
country?"   Does  a  civilian owe the  same  duty  to  the  State  as a
soldier ?   Is  a  citizen  to  be  commanded  in  a  free  society ?  Was
not  Mrs.  Knowles,  too,  a  soldier  in  her  way,  standing  on  a
battlefield  colder  and  lonelier  even  than  the  38th  Parallel,  in
defense  of  something  precious  in  America?
The  Judge   does  not  regard   the  Internal  Security  Commit-
tee's  powers  with  niggardly  eye.   Mrs.  Knowles  had  told  the
Committee  she  was  not  a  Communist,  that  she  had  not  been
associated  since   1947   with  any  organization   on  the  Attorney
General's  list,  that  she had  no  knowledge  to  impart  of  any un-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   28,1957
They  Demonstrate   in  Budapest  For  1st  Amendment  Rights  But  Not  in  Washington
.  .  .  Do   American  Newspapermen  Really  Care  About  Freedom  of  the  Press?
lawful  act,  and  that  she  was  after  all  not  a  government  em-
ployee  but  worked  in  a  private  library  belonging  to  a  Quaker
group. The  Judge  brushed  all this  aside,  as had  the  Committee.
Its  real  target  in  hauling  her  before  it  for  the  second  time  in
September,   1955,  was  the  Fund  for  the  Republic,  which  has
given  Plymouth  Meeting  55,000  for  its  courage  in  continuing
to  employ Mrs.  Knowles.  The  Committee,  like the  Inquisition,
regards  the  uncowed  spirit  as  an  affront.    It  would  if  it  could
wipe  out  every center  of  resistance.
Shelton's  case  was  similar.    He,   too,   was  an  innocent  by-
stander,  a  case  of  mistaken  identity  caught  in  the  cross-fire  of
the  Committee's  attempt to smear the critical Neiv  York  Times.
Shelton's  counsel,  Joseph  L.  Rauh, Jr.,  made  a  vivid  court  rec-
ord,  though  the  only  witness  called  was  Jules  Sourwine.   He
was  the  Committee's counsel  when  it  launched  its investigation
of  newspaper business a  year  ago  and  is  back  as  assistant coun-
sel,  after  an  ignominious  defeat  in  Nevada  politics  where  he
hoped  to  become  a  U.S.  Senator.
The  Man-in-the-Street  Theory
By  tart  questioning,  Rauh  showed  that  America's  greatest
newspaper  was  the  focus  of  the  Committee's  abortive inquiry
into  Communist  "infiltration   of   the   press."    Only   witnesses
whose  silence  or  testimony might   reflect  upon  the  New   York
Times  were  called  in  open  session;  no  other  newspaper  was
investigated;  Shelton  himself  was  called  by  mistake.   One  of
those  precious informers who  cannot  even  get  names  right  had
Shelton  mixed  up  with  another  [non-Communist]   newspaper-
man  of  the  same  last  name.   Prosecutor  William  Hitz,  Jr.,  de-
fended  this  light-hearted  method  of  serving  subpoenas  by  ad-
vancing  the  theory  that  the  Committee  has  power  to  pick  up
any  "man  on  the  street"  and  haul  him  up  for  interrogation  on
his  political  views,  whether  or  not  there  is  "probable   cause"
(as  the  criminal law  requires)  to  believe  that  he  has  pertinent
information.    This  was  substantially upheld  by  the  Judge.
Perhaps  the  most  alarming  aspect  of  the  Shelton  trial  was
the  Judge's  magnanimity to  the New  York  Times.    The  Judge
observed  that  the  Court  was  prepared  to  take  judicial  notice
of  the  fact  that  no  one  had  accused  that  paper  of  being  Com-
munistic. When judges  begin  to  take  judicial  notice  of  whether
papers  are  subversive  or  not,  it  is  time  for  thoughtful  editors
to  begin  to  worry.  A  free  press  was  never  supposed  to  operate,
like  a  trusteeship,  under  the  watchful  eye of  the  courts.   Or  of
Congress.  Judge  Rizley  added  that  his  generous  offer  of  a  clean
bill  of  health  to  the  New  York   Times  did  not  mean  that  Con-
gress  doesn't  have  power  to  investigate  it.   Indeed  the  resolu-
tion  establishing  the  Senate  Committee  on  Internal   Security,
like  that  establishing  the  House  Committee  on  Un-American
Activities,  is so broad  and  vague  that  it  can  investigate  anyone
whose  ideas  it  considers  dangerous.    It  is  not  Judge  Rizley's
reasoning  but  the  resolutions  on  which  attack  must  be  made.
Must  The  Zengers  Be  Dead?
A  second  New  York  Times  employe,  Seymour  Peck,  goes  on
trial  next  week,  also  for  contempt  of  the  Senate  Internal  Secu-
rity  Committee.   A  different  kind  of  judge,  Luther  Youngdahl,
presides  over  his  trial  but  the  outcome  is  unlikely  to  be  very
different.   Conviction  of  contempt  is all  but  a  foregone  conclu-
Bulletin  on  the  Right   to   Travel
Washington—In  a  surprise  move  the  Court  of   Ap-
peals  has  ordered  a  reargument  on  January  29  before
the  full  9-man  bench  of  the  passport  suits  brought  by
the  artist  Rockwell  Kent  and  the  Los  Angeles  psychia-
trist  Dr.  Walter  Briehl.   It  did so  without  waiting  for  a
decision  by  the  three judges  who  heard the  appeals  last
Fall—Edgerton,   Bazelon  and  Prettyman,  a   panel  2-1
liberal.   In  the  Gold,  Flaxer  and  Watkins  cases,   a  re-
argument  before  the  full  bench  resulted  in  a  decision
for  the  government.  Both  Kent  and  Dr.  Briehl  refused
as  a  matter  of  principle to  file  a  non-Communist affida-
vit  with  their  applications for  a  passport.   One  of   the
three judges  who heard their  case  has  asked  the govern-
ment  to  file  a  memorandum  setting  forth  the  periods
since  1918 when  it  has  been  illegal  for  an  American to
travel  abroad without  a  passport and the legal authority
for  the  restrictions.  In  another  passport  suit  on  which
argument  has  already  been  heard,  that  of   the  writer
Donald   Ogden   Stewart,  now   living   in   England,   the
Court   will   decide  whether  a  non-Communist  affidavit
covering  the  last  15  years  is  sufficient  test  of  political
purity  to  qualify  for  the  right  to  travel.
sion  in  that  and  in  the  case  of  a  third  New   York   Times  man
awaiting  trial.  The  newspaper  announced  that  Shelton's   status
as  an  employe will  remain  unchanged  until  final  disposition  of
the  case.   But  what  does  that  mean?  Will  the  three  lose  their
jobs  if  they  lose  on  appeal?  Will  the  New  York   Times  finally
treat  as  disreputable  characters  men  who  are  risking  a  great
deal  in  defense  of  the  freedom  of  our  profession ?  Do  we only
honor  Peter  Zengers  when  long  dead?   When  will  the  New
York  Times  take  the  offensive ?
What  if  a new  McCarthy  appears ? What  is to  keep  him  from
subpoenaing  a  whole  brigade  of  New   York   Times  men  and
smearing   that   paper   with   the   hue   and   cry   of   loose   Red
charges?   Newspaper   business  is  full   of   ex-liberals  and   ex-
radicals  with  past  utterances  and  associations  easily   exhumed
and  exploited  against  the  background   of  an  alleged   Commu-
nist  "conspiracy"   to  infiltrate  the  press.
The  ANG:  Scared  and  Silent
Against   this  background   it  is  painful   to  report  that  the
American   Newspaper   Guild   has  done   nothing   to  help   the
newspapermen  caught  in  the  Committee's  web,  and  that   the
New  York  Post  seems  to  be  the  only  big  paper  in  the  country
which  is  treating  this  affair  as  it  deserves.  The   Post  sent  its
brilliant   columnist,   Murray  Kempton,   to   cover   the   Shelton
trial;  it  carried  a  strong  and  serious  editorial  on  the  implica-
tions of  the verdict.  But  when  are other  editors  going  to react?
We  urge  editors  also  to  look  at  the  new  revised  "Guide  to
Subversive  Organizations  and  Publications"  just  published  by
the  House  Committee.   It  has added  to  the  blacklist  "The   Na-
tional  Guardian"  and  "Jewish  Life,"  along  with  the  vanished
Progressive  Party.   Let  them  ask  themselves   whether   we  are
going  to  allow  the  fungoid  growth  of  an  atmosphere  in  which
it  begins  to  be  taken  for  granted  that  a  Congressional  commit-
tee—or  any  other  agency  of  government—may  decide  which
publications  are  subversive  and  which  are  not.   Now,   in  this
lull,  when  reaction  ebbs  and  the  battle  would  be  easy,  is  the
time  to  wipe  out  this  excrescence  on  a  free  society.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  88,1957
The  Polish  Election  and  Ibn   Saud's  Tender  Feelings
The  results  of  the  Polish  election  were  hardly  a  compliment
to  the  Russians.   It was fear  that  they  might  do  in Poland  what
they  have  done  in  Hungary  that  led  the  majority  of  Poles  to
vote  for  the  moderate  Gomulka.  Those  elements  in  the  Polish
Communist  party  most  subservient  to  Russia  dabbled  in  anti-
Semitism  in  their  inner  party  feud  with  Gomulka,  another  in-
dication  of  the  degeneracy  among  the  orthodox  Stalinist ele-
ments.   One  of  the  dramatic  episodes  of  the  campaign   was a
broadcast  over  BBC  by  the  poet,  Czeslaw  Milosz,  urging  the
voters  to  support  Gomulka.   Milosz,  whom  I  knew  as  cultural
attache  at  the  Polish   Embassy  here  in  Washington,   defected
when  he  could  no  longer   stand  Communist  thought   control
and  is living in  self-imposed  exile  in  Paris.   He  was  a  hero  of
the  anti-Nazi  underground.   His  book,  "The Captive  Mind,"
is  a  first  rate  study  of  the  intellectuals  under  Stalinism.
On   the   eve  of   Ibn   Saud's  visit,  Dave   Sentner,   Hearst's
Washington  Bureau  chief  disclosed   (New  York  Journal-Amer-
ican, Jan.  21)  the  government  was  so  afraid  he  might  shut off
the  Armaco  pipeline during  the  Suez  crisis  that  "Administra-
About  Those  Doves
"An exuberant spokesman for  the  Air  Force  says  the
B-52   achievement   demonstrates   that   our  long   range
bomber  force  has  the   'capability  to   drop  a  hydrogen
bomb  anywhere  in  the  world.'  This  conjures  up  a  reas-
suring  picture  of  our  ability  to  blast  Russia  whenever
necessary,  but  we  doubt  that  it  is  necessarily  true.
"It  is  one  thing  to  fly  around  the  world  and  make a
simulated  bomb  drop  over  an  undefended  area.   It   is
something  else  to drop a bomb over  a target that will  be
heavily   defended   by    modern   fighters,   anti-aircraft
guided  missiles, etc.   Furthermore,  we  would  do  well  to
keep  in  mind  the  point  that  if  the  Air  Force  claim  is
literally  true,  if  this  flight  really  demonstrates   that  we
have  the  capability  to  drop  an  H-bomb  anywhere in  the
world,   the  chances  are  that   the  Russians  can  do  the
same."—Editorial, the Washington  Sunday  Star, Jan.  20
Labor  Relations  in  Saudi  Arabia
"Last  June  4,000  workers struck  at  Aramco just  be-
fore  Saud  paid  a  formal  visit,  greeted  him  shouting of
'oppression'  by  foreign  imperialists.  Saud's  police beat
several  demonstrators  to  death  with  palm   stems."
—Time  Magazine,  January    %8.
tion   press  agents   circulated   among   newspaper   bureaus   and
pleaded   for   soft-pedalling   of  any  news  about  American  oil
being earmarked for  Britain and  France."  . . . His Majesty will
be  pleased  to  hear  that  even  now  Texas  is  loyally  refusing  to
allow  increased  production  of  oil  to  help  the  West  European
infidel.  . . . Ibn  Saud  is not as tender of  Washington's   feelings.
The  agreement  among  Egypt,  Syria  and  Saudi  Arabia  to  take
over  Britain's subsidy  to  the  Arab  Legion  in  Jordan  was  not
only  a  defeat  but  an  affront.  . .  .  Ibn  Saud  didn't  even  wait  to
hear  what  Eisenhower  had to  propose.  .  .  .  There  are  reports
here  that the  State Department  hoped  for  the  dissolution  of  the
Jordanian  State,  winning  Ibn  Saud's  support  for  its  partition
by  giving him  the  land  east  of  the  Jordan.  .  .  .
Look  for  demands  on  Capitol  Hill  for  an  investigation  of
Stevenson's  statement  in  Look  (Feb.  5  "Why   I  Raised  the  H-
Bomb  Question"),  "There  was,  indeed,  reason  to  believe  that
the  National  Security  Council  itself  between  September   5  and
September   19  had  voted  'unanimously'  in  favor  of  a  similar
superbomb  proposal;  but  this  decision  had  been  set  aside  for
obviously  political  reasons.  .  .  ."  The  President's   refusal  to
confirm  or  deny this  at  press  conference  last  week  is  regarded
as  tantamount to confirmation.
Judging  by the  import  of  sharp  questioning  from  the  bench
during  argument  of  the  Ben  Gold  appeal  last  week,  the  Su-
preme  Court may order  a  new  trial for  the  Fur  Workers'   lead-
er. The  Justices  seemed  most  interested  in visits  paid  by an  FBI
agent  to  three  members of  the  jury  during  the  fourth  week  of
his  trial  on  charges  of  falsely  swearing  he  was  no  longer  a
Communist.   Government  counsel  claimed  the  visits  were  ac-
cidental,  that  the  agent  was  investigating  jury  panels   to  see
whether  certain  persons  on  them  had  been  receiving  commu-
nistic  literature.   Defense  Counsel   Harold   Cammer  pleaded
that  the  visits  were  calculated  to  intimidate  and   constituted
jury  tampering.  .  .  .  Senator  Langer  (R.  N.D.)  last  Tuesday
put  into the  Congressional  Record the  text  of  the  Circuit  Court
decision  reversing  the  contempt  convictions  of  Corliss  Lament,
Abe  Unger  and  Albert  Shadowitz,  with  a  tribute  to  Lament.
And   now  that  Krushchev  has  discovered   that   Stalin  was
such  a  fine  fellow,  we  wonder  how  soon  it  will  be  before  the
Kremlin  begins  to  explain  that  the  Krushchev  speech  of  last
February  attacking  him  was just a  State  Department  invention.
Why   Not   Let   Us   Send  A  Free  Sample   Copy  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Local  Editor
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3,  D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  .
Street
City   ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
1/28/57
Street
City   ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone'B  Weekly..   Entered  ae  Swond  Class  Matter  at  v  aslitugton,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879. Pre-dated  Mondays  but  published
every   Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Auguet  and  December  at  SOI  B.  Capitol  St.,  Washington  S,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  cnh
llnhcd  end  ed I'ed  hr  I.  F.  Stone;  circulation  Manager.  Either  M.  Stone.    Hubacrlptlon:  $5  In   the   Tl.g.;  ?6  to   Canada;  $10  elsewhere.   Air  Mall
mt««: (U  to  Burope;  £20 to lira*!,  AeU  and  .atrtaa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED