I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jun10.pdf

============================================================

Revolt  in  Washington,  P. 3
Why  We  Won't  Take  Up  Krushchev's  Challenge  on  Mutual  Withdrawal,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO. 23
JUNE  10,  1957
'»'        WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 CENTS
Did  the  Government  Use  Testimony  It  Knew  to  Be  Tainted?
The  Jencks  Decision  Reopens  the  Matusow  Case
The  Supreme  Court  decision  in  the  Jencks  case  only  tells
half  the  story.  It  deals  with  the  trial  and  conviction  of  Clin-
ton  E.  Jencks,  an  official  of  the  Mine,  Mill  & Smelter  Work-
ers  Union  in  New  Mexico,  for  falsely  swearing  out  a  Taft-
Hartley  non-Communist affidavit.   The  decision  does  not  deal
•with  the  sensation which followed  the  trial,  when  the  govern-
ment's  chief  witness  Harvey  Matusow  recanted,  nor  does  it
pass  on  the  denial  of  Jencks'  motion  for  a  new  trial  on  the
basis  of  that  recantation.  Without  this  other half  of  the  story,
the  full  significance  of  the  Jencks  decision  has  been  missed.
And  the  press has  taken  more  seriously  than  the  facts  warrant
Mr.  Justice  Clark's  almost  hysterical  protest  that  the  Court  has
opened  FBI  files  "to  the  criminal  and  thus  affirmed  a  Roman
holiday  for  rummaging  through   confidential  information  as
well  as vital national  secrets."
Not  A  Fishing Expedition
A  reader  of  the  Supreme  Court  decision  sees  the  facts  only
as  they  appeared  at  the  trial  before  Matusow's  recantation,-
though  the  Court  itself  got  the  full  story  in  the  pleadings.   A
casual  reader  of   the   decision  gets  the   impression  that   the
Jencks  defense  at  the  trial  was  engaged  in  no  more  than  a
kind  of  fishing  expedition  in  the  FBI  files  when  it  asked  the
trial  judge  to  subpoena  the  original  reports  made  to  the  FBI
about  Jencks by Matusow  and  J.  W.  Ford,  another Communist
turned  FBI  informer  for  pay.    The  defense  asked  that  it  be
allowed  to  use  the  reports  to  test  the  credibility  of  these  two
witnesses  if  the   reports  varied  from  their  testimony  at   the
trial.    The   Judge   refused,  and   because  of   this   refusal   the
Supreme  Court  ordered  a  new  trial  at  which  the  original  re-
ports  must  be made  available  to  the  defense.
The   decision  does  not  go  on  to  explain   that  the  hunch
which  led  the  defense  to  ask  for  the  reports  was dramatically
given  new  support  within  a  few  months  by  Matusow's  recan-
tation.  At  the hearing  on the  motion  for  a  new trial,  Matusow
turned  defense witness  and told  the trial Judge  (R.  E. Thoma-
son,  in  El  Paso,  Texas)  that  his  original  reports  to  the  FBI
would  show  that  he  never  at  any  time  identified  Jencks  as  a
member  of  the  Communist  party.   In  addition,  under  cross-
examination by the  government,  Matusow  said  that  after  testi-
fying  to  the  grand  jury  which  indicted  Jencks,  he  told  an  FBI
man  in  Santa  Fe he  did  not  want  to  testify  at  the  forthcoming
trial  because  "I  didn't  feel  my  testimony  was honest."   Matu-
sow  said  the  FBI  man  took  this  down  in  writing  and  showed
it  to him  for  verification.  If  this  is true, the  government  went
to  trial  knowing  that  its  case  depended  on  dubious  or  tainted
testimony.
After  hearing  Matusow's testimony on  the motion  for  a new
trial,  it  was  the  Judge's  duty to  subpoena  the  FBI  reports  and
The  Law  As  Stated  by  The  Court
"While  we must  accept  it  as  lawful  for  a department
of  the  government  to  suppress  documents,  even  when
they  will  help  determine  controversies   between  third
persons,  we cannot  agree  that  this  should  include  their
suppression   in  a  criminal   prosecution,  founded  upon
those  very dealings  to  which the  documents relate,  and
whose  criminality they  will,  or  may,  tend  to  exculpate.
So  far  as  they  directly  touch  the  criminal  dealings,  the
prosecution  necessarily  ends  any  confidential  character
the  documents may possess; it  must be conducted in  the
open  and  will  lay  bare  their  subject  matter.   The  gov-
ernment  must  choose;  either  it  must  leave  the  trans-
actions  in  the  obscurity  from  which  a  trial  will  draw
them,  or  it  must  expose  them  fully."
—Judge   Learned  Hand,  in   U.S.  v.  Andolschek,  as
quoted  by Mr. Justice  Brennan in  U.S. v.  Jencks.
the  Santa  Fe  document  and  see  for  himself  whether  Matusow
was  telling  the  truth.   If  Matusow  was  lying,  submission  of
the  original  reports  in  evidence  was  the  easiest  way  to  prove
his  recantation  false.   If  he  was  telling  the  truth,  the  next
question  for  an  unbiased  and  conscientous  court  was  to  deter-
mine  how  and  by  whom  Matusow  was  persuaded  to  go  into
court  and  give  testimony  he  knew  to  be  false.    Instead  the
Court  held  Matusow  in  contempt,  branded  him  a perjurer  and
sentenced  him  to  three  years  in  jail  for  obstructing  justice.
The  Court  of  Appeals  reversed,  holding  that  Matusow  could
not  be punished  by summary contempt  proceedings  but  had  a
right  to  a  trial  on  the  charge  of  perjury. The  government,  in-
stead  of  trying  Matusow  for  perjury,  thereupon   dropped   the
case.
His  Word  Against  Roy Cohn's
The   Justice   Department   had   better   luck  in  New   York.
There  Matusow  had  recanted  crucial  testimony  in  the  Smith
Act  prosecution  of  the  "second  echelon"   Communist  leaders
and  claimed  that  he  had  been  coached  by Roy Cohn.  The  gov-
ernment  charged  this  was perjurious,  and  cited  Matusow's  re-
cantation   in  the  Jencks  trial   as  evidence  of  his  instability.
With  Matusow's  word  pitted  against  Roy  Cohn's,  Matusow
was found  guilty  by Federal  Judge  McGohey  and  sentenced  to
five years  in  jail  for  perjury.  An  appeal  from  this  conviction
is  being  filed  with  the  Supreme  Court  this  week.
Matusow  as  well  as  Jencks  was  hurt  by  the  Judge's  failure
to  subpoena  the  FBI  reports  in  the  Jencks  trial.   It  is  most
unlikely   that  the  government  will  now  re-try  Jencks,   since
Matusow  was  the  only  witness  who  claimed  to  have  direct
evidence  that  Jencks  was  a  Communist  after  taking  the  Taft-
Hartley  oath.   But  what  about  Matusow?  Will  the  dropping
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  10,1957
Adding  up  The  Score  on  That  Krushchev  TV  Interview
The  Krushchev  interview  was  a  major  event  for  all  who
desire  a  relaxation  of  international  tension.    CBS  performed
a  public  service by it.  Krushchev's  performance was strikingly
superior  to  Chou  En-ki's  when  interviewed  some  months  ago
by  Ed Murrow.  Though  the  Chinese  Communists have shown
themselves  more  flexible  theorists  than  the  Russians,  Murrow
got  nothing  from  Chou  En-lai  but  slogans  and  propagandistic
rantings.   Krushchev  deserves   credit  for   seizing  what   Chou
En-lai  missed, the  opportunity  to  emerge  as a human  being  for
an  American  audience.   This  humanization  of  the  leaders  and
people  on  the  opposite  side  is  the  first  essential  toward  peace.
Will  the  Russians  reciprocate  by  ending  the  shamefully  men-
dacious   current   "smear   America"   campaign   in   the   Soviet
press ?
Too Many Threats
There   was  nothing   new  in  the  Krushchev   interview  but
then  there  rarely  is  in  any  interview  with  a  top  rank  leader.
But  he  said  some  things  which  need  to  be  said,  and  which  he
as a  Russian  had  a  right  to  say to  an  American  audience.   He
had  a  right  to  complain  of  the  generals  and  admirals  in  our
own  country who  make  entirely  too  many  speeches  "saying  in
how  many  hours  the  Soviet  Union   can  be  destroyed  by  the
power  of  the  United  States."   He  was  making  a  good   point
when  he  said  that  the  trade  embargo  we  impose  on  the  So-
viet  bloc  "does  little  damage  to  us.   On  the  contrary,  it  com-
pels  us  to  make  an  extra  effort  and  produce  things  at  home
which would  otherwise have been brought  from  your  country."
Next  in  importance  was  the  picture  of  Krushchev  himself
which  emerged  from  the  hour  long  interview.   It  was the  pic-
ture  of  a  shrewd  manager  in  a  socialist  society,  himself  pas-
sionately  concerned  about  his  own  major  assignment—an  in-
cr'ease  in  food  output.   He  was  agile  in  evasion  where  he  did
not  want  to  meet  the  issue,  and  he  is  obviously  a  man  of
ability.  He  can  also  be  as  tricky—and  transparent—as  a  peas-
ant  haggling  over  a  pig.  When,  for  example,  Krushchev  said
the  Soviet  armed  forces  had  already  been  reduced  by  1,800,-
000  men,  B. J.  Cutler  of  the New  York  Herald-Tribune asked
him  how  many  men  remained.  His  answer was that  he  didn't
know  the  question  would  arise  and  therefore  had  not  asked
the  Minister  of  Defense  and  didn't  know.  This  was  not very
clever.
No  Competition  in  Ideas
With  this  peasant  slyness  goes  a  conventional  Communist
mind.  He  foresees competition  in production  but  not  in  ideas;
A  Rumanian  Exile's  View
"Western  diplomacy  has  wrongly  put  the   emphasis
on  German  reunification,   ignoring   the   Central  Euro-
pean  countries.  This  tendency  has  increased  in  the  last
few  months  because  of  the  forthcoming  West  German
elections.   German  unity  cannot  be  achieved by  neglect-
ing  those  other  states.   It  can  more  easily  be  achieved
by   dealing  with   the   whole  problem  of   the   satellite
States.  . . .
"Our  conviction  is  that  both  the   West   and   Soviet
Russia  would  benefit  if  the  neutral  belt  could  be  real-
ized.   An  existing   example  is   Finland,  a   free,   anti-
Communist  but  militarily  neutral  country,  whose  neu-
trality  has  given  Scandinavia  and  Russia  a  feeling  of
security  and  whose  economy  has  been  flourishing  be-
cause  of  its  growing  trade  with  Russia."
—"To  Free  The Satellites,"  by  V.  V.  Tilyea,  Ruman-
ian  Minister  to  Britain,  1938-40,  in  the  London
Times,  May  26.
his  remarks on  jamming the  Voice  of  America show  how  nat-
urally  he  takes  to  the  sophistries  of  Soviet  censorship.
When  Daniel  Schorr  of  CBS  asked  him  about  that  recent
statement  by  Peking  which  Pravda  republished  on  the  contra-
dictions  which  arise  under  Communism  between  the   masses
and  the  leaders,  Krushchev  denied  that  there  were  any  such
contradictions  in Russia.  This  will  evoke a discreetly  silent  but
unmistakable horse laugh  among  those who read  it  in  Russia.*
Finally,   after   all   that   happened   in   Poland   and   Hungary,
Krushchev  can  say,  "We  have  no  intention  of  imposing  our
ideas  on  anybody"  and  predict  that  the  Kadar  regime  in  Hun-
gary  "will  flourish  for  ages  to  come."
But  we  see  nothing  ludicrous  in  Krushchev's  challenge  to
test  his  assertions  by  mutual  withdrawal  of  troops  from  Eu-
rope.   If  we  believe  that  most  of  the  East  European  satellite
regimes   rest  ultimately   on  Red  Army  bayonets,  would   not
mutual  withdrawal  liberate  these  regimes?
The  real  reason  for   resisting  this  proposal   is  that  U.  S.
diplomacy  is  not  concerned  with  East  European  liberation  but
with  building up  German  military power  in  alliance  with  the
West  to  the  point  .where  the  Russians  and  Poles  might   be
forced  to  accept  a  territorial  revision  which  will  again   open
Slavic  East  Europe  to  German  expansion.   The  atomic  pistols
are  being  cocked  in  the  hope  of  some  day  frightening   the
Russians  into  just  such  a  surrender.   This  is  the  key  to  the
barren  vagueness  of  disarmament  talks.
•  No  doubt  this  is  why  the  Soviet  censor  struck  this  quest ion  and
answer  out  of  the  versioii  released   in  Russia.
To Be  Read  With the  President's Press  Conference  Claim of  A "Cleaner"  Bomb
"I  have  just  read  the  press  release  issued  by  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  'for  A.  M. Release  Wednesday,  May 29,
1957'  announcing  progress  in  their  so-called   'clean  weap-
ons'  program.  .  .  .  The  release  bears  a  curious   parallel  to
the  original  'clean  bomb'  press  release  last  July  19.    ...
"Testimony  before  the  Joint  Committee  [on  Atomic  Ener-
gy]  during  the  current  fallout  hearings  and in  prior  execu-
tive  sessions  has  indicated   that   the  AEC  statement   that
'the  success  thus  far  achieved  (in  developing  cleaner  weap-
ons)   has  convinced  us  that  widespread  hazard  from  fallout
is  not  a  necessary   complement  to  the  employment  of  large
nuclear  weapons'  is  misleading.  .  . .
"It  is  true  that  fallout  is  being  reduced.   But  there  is  and
at  present  cannot  be  such  a  thing  as  an  absolutely   clean
bomb,  i.e.  no  fallout.   Moreover,  in  any  large  scale  war,  it
would  seem  inevitable  that  weapons  of  varying  degrees  of
cleanliness   will  be  used,  and  the  inevitable  result   will  be
large-scale  fallout.
"It  tends  to  give  the  impression  that  weapons  tests  from
so-called   clean  bombs  have  little  fallout.   This  is  a  subject
which  these  hearings  will  explore  further.   So  far  we  have
been  provided  with  no  evidence  to  prove  the   Commission's
assertion.    We  have  no  assurance   that  Russian  or  British
tests  are  or  will  be  free  of  substantial  radioactive  fallout.
"Senator   Anderson   [Chairman  of  the  Joint   Committee]
has  asked  me  to  add that  he  fully  endorses  this  statement."
—A  release the  press ignored  by Rep. Chet Holifield,   Chairman of  the  Subcommittee  on Radiation, May  29
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  10,1957
Glimpses  of  A  Capital  With  Revolt  Breaking  Out  Everywhere
The  most charming event  of  the  week—it  had  the flavor of
small  town  America  before  jet  planes  and  Madison  avenue
came  along—was  the  pilgrimage  of  the  President  to  Capitol
Hill,  where  he  bought  Republican  members  of  Congress  one
of  those  dyspepsia  creating  fried   chicken  box  lunches  in  an
effort  to  soften  them  up  on  the  budget.   This  was  a  Canossa,
but  Dubuque,  Iowa,  style, without  snow  or  hard  feelings.  The
President  picked  up  a  $284.11  tab  for  the  lunch,  but  nobody
mentioned  the  budget.   "We  were  just  talking  about  pleasant
things,"  Joe  Martin  explained.  We  cherish  the  scene,  and  in
it  lovingly  salute  the  Republic.
The  President had  better  start  giving  fried  chicken  lunches
all  over  town.  The  whole  place  is  in  revolt.   The  House  for
the  first  time  since  the  Korean  war  revolted  against  the  Pen-
tagon  and  snipped  two  and  a  half  billion  dollars  off the  mili-
tary  budget.   The  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic
Energy  under  Clint  Anderson  and  Chet  Holifield  was  in  the
second  week  of  public  hearings  that  had  utterly  destroyed  the
complacency  nurtured  by Admiral  Strauss of  the  Atomic Ener-
gy  Committee  about  nuclear  tests,  their  negligible   effects  and
growing  "cleanliness."   Another  powerful  cold  war  force,  the
China  Lobby,  seemed  to  have  collapsed;  even  Senator  Know-
land  was curiously muted  in  his  reaction  to  Britain's  lifting  of
the  bars  on  the  Red  China  trade;  the  President  himself   indi-
cated  that  he  was  for   easing   the  barriers,  and  what   looks
like  a  bloc  is  forming  in  Congress  to  favor  wider  trade  with
China,  prominent  in  it  those  powerful  Southern  Senators  who
want  to  divert  cheap  Japanese  cotton  textiles  away  from  the
U.  S.   These  are  striking  changes  in  the  Washington   land-
scape.   Gen.  Taylor,  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  chose  this  mo-
ment  to tell  the graduating  class  at  West  Point  how  much  the
Army  was  needed  for  "brush  fire"  wars  but  one  reason   the
House  revolted  on  the  military  budget  was  its  discovery  that
$110  million  given  the  Army to  buy planes  which  could  carry
mobile  divisions—tanks  and  all—to  "brush  fires"  anywhere
in  the  world  had   been   converted   to  the   purchase   of   two
dozen  super-plushy  DC-6's   to  carry  military  VIP's  in  Wal-
dorf  Astoria  comfort  on  their  trips  across  the  Atlantic.
An  Old  Fashioned  Trust-Busting  "Coup  d'Etat"
In  some  ways  the  strangest  revolt  of  the  week  occurred  on
the  Supreme  Court.   I  am  not  referring  to  the  Jencks  case,
which  merely reaffirmed  traditional  law.  I  am  referring  to  the
du  Pont  decision.   This  was  not  only  a  revolt,   but  a  coup
d'etat,  in  the  sense  that  a  minority  took  advantage  of  odd  cir-
cumstances  to  write  the  law.   The  case  was  decided   4-to-2.
Clark,  Harlan  and Whittaker  took  no part;  the first  because  he
had  been  Attorney  General  when  the  suit  was  begun,  the  sec-
ond  because  he  had  once  been  counsel  for  du  Pont  and  the
third   because  he  was  not  on  the  court  when  the   case  was
argued.  The  two Eisenhower  "youngsters," Warren  and  Bren-
nan  joined  the  two  New  Deal  radicals,  Black  and  Douglas,  in
a  foray  which  shows  that  the  former  share  the  economic  as
well  as  the  libertarian predispositions  of  the  latter.   Last  year,
in  the  anti-trust  suit  against  du  Pont  for  its  control  of  cello-
phane,  du  Pont  won,  with  Black,  Douglas   and  Warren   dis-
senting.   This  time,  in  a  factually  much  weaker  case,   they
made the  law.  Strangely enough  they made the  law on  a  point
the  anti-trust  division  thought  so  weak  they  devoted  only  a
few  pages  of  their  brief  to  it  and  at  one  time  considered  drop-
ping.   The  main  attack  was  on  the  du  Pont*General  Motors
combine  as  restraint  of  trade.   The  "afterthought"   argument
on  which  the  decision  was  based   claimed   that  the   original
acquisition  by  du  Pont  of  23  percent  of  General  Motors  stock
in  1918  also  violated  Section  7  of  the  Clayton  Act.  The  shift
by  the  court  from  the  Sherman  Act  to  the  Clayton  Act  may
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  former  illegalizes  combina-
tions  which  restrain  trade  while  the  latter  illegalizes  stock  ac-
quisitions  by  one  corporation  in  another  "where  the  effect  of
such  acquisition  may . . . tend  to  create  a  monopoly."   (Italics
added).   Judging  by  Mr.  Justice  Burton's  very  vigorous  and
impressively  factual  economic  analysis  in  dissent,  the  govern-
ment  failed  to  prove  that  the  combination  actually  had  re-
strained  trade.   There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  it  might—
and  the  four  Justices  of  the  majority  went  all  the  way back  to
Woodrow Wilson's  original  purpose  in  fathering  the  Clayton
Act  when  they  ruled  for  the  first  time  that  Section  7  applied
(1)  retroactively,  (2)  to vertical  combinations  and (3)  in the
absence  of  evidence  that  trade  was  actually  monopolized.  The
anti-trust  division  is  jubilant;   corporation   lawyers  are  in  a
tizzy;  this  is trust-busting as  it  was  meant  to  be  a  half  century
ago.    Unfortunately  this  weapon   against   big   business   com-
binations  has  been  put  in  the  hands  of  an  Administration  run
by  big  business.   Except,  it  seems,  in  the  choice  of  Supreme
Court  Justices.
The  most  reasonable  explanation  for  the  Court's  order  that
the  Smith  Act  "membership"  .case  (Scales  and  Lightfoot)   be
reargued  is that  the  seven  sitting  Justices  who  heard  the  argu-
ment  last  Fall  couldn't  find  a  point  of  agreement  substantial
enough  to  write  a  majority  opinion.   Brennan  and  Whittaker
will  sit  on  the  reargument,  but  since  they  are  almost  certain
to  take  opposite  sides,  this  will  not  solve  the  problem.
Arthur  Miller's Conviction  Twinges
Arthur  Miller's  conviction for  contempt  of  the  House  Un-
American  Committee  stirred  misgivings  in  newspapers  or-
dinarily  sympathetic   to  investigation   of  radical  activities.
The  Washington  Evening  Star  (June  3)  in  an  editorial,  "A
Man  and  His  Conscience,"  thinks  it  would  be  "a  harsh  con-
sequence"  to  send  a  man  like  Miller  to  jail.
The  Baltimore  Sun  (June  2),  sees  Miller  as  "a  minor  fig-
ure   in   a  considerable   company,   stretching   back   through
Thoreau  and  many  a  Christian  saint  to  Socrates,  whose  be-
lief  in  the  rightness  of  their  convictions   led  them  to  prac-
the  Conscience of Conservative  Press
tice  'civil  disobedience'."
The  appeal  will  hinge  on  the  issue  of  "pertinency."   The
defense  claimed  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  the  writers
Miller  refused  to  name  had  anything   to  do  with  passport
frauds.   Judge  McLaughlin  ruled  pertinency  could  not  "be
determined  by  .such  a  narrow  light."
The  Committee  already  had the  names  of  those  present  at
the  meeting  with  Miller.  The only  purpose  was  to  break  his
spirit  by  forcing  him  to  inform.   What  he  resisted,  to  his
honor,  was  our  own  variant  of  "brain-washing."
9  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  10,1957
Brownell  and  Hoover  Themselves  Breached  FBI  Privacy  to  Attack  Truman
Must  Matusow  Go  to  Jail  Without  His  Day  in  Court?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
of  the  Jencks  case  end  his  last  chance  of  proving  that  his  re-
cantation  was  true?  What  of  the  public's  right  to  know  the
full  truth  about  the  Jencks  prosecution?
Even   Clark*  Disturbed
The  Court  split  three  ways  in  the  Jencks  decision,  but  no
one  defended the  conduct  of  the  trial  judge.   Even  Mr.  Justice
Clark,  the  one  dissenter,  admitted  grudgingly,  "Perhaps  here
with  a  recanting  witness  the  trial  judge  should  have  examined
the  specific  documents  called   for,  as  the  defense   requested,
and  if  he  thought  justice  required  their  delivery  to  the  de-
fense,  order  such  delivery  to  be  made."   Justices  Burton  and
Harlan,  concurring  in  the  order  for  a  new  trial,  thought  the
FBI  documents  should  have  been  subpoenaed  by  the   Judge
but  not  handed  over  to  the  defense  unless  he  considered  them
relevant  to  the  issues.  The  majority,  speaking  through   Mr.
Justice  Brennan,  ruled  however  that  it  was  not  enough  to  let
the  Judge  see the  FBI  reports;  they  must  be made  avaikble  to
the  defense.  The  conduct  of  the  Judge  in  the  Jencks  case  sup-
ports  the  reasoning  of  the  majority.
Not  A  License  to  Rummage
The  majority  did  not  rule,  as  might  have  been   gathered
from  some  newspaper  headlines,  that  the  defense  could  rum-
mage  at  will  through  FBI  files.  But  it  did  hold  that  where  a
witness  has  been  produced  by the  government  the  defense  has
a  right  to  "relevant   statements  or  reports"   by  that   witness
"touching  the  subject  matter  of  the  testimony  at  the  trial."
The  Court  held  that  if  the  government  felt  that   important
secrets  were  at  stake,  it  could  decide  not  to  prosecute  rather
than  reveal  such  information  but  could  not  (in  the  words  of
an  earlier  decision)   "undertake  prosecution  and  then  invoke
its  governmental  privileges  to  deprive  the  accused  of  anything
which  might  be  material  to  his  defense."
With  the  increasing  power  of  a  secret  political  police  in  our
society,  the  notion  has  been  fostered  that  its  files  must  some-
how  be  sacrosanct. There  is  indeed  a  good  reason  for  keeping
those  files  private;  they  necessarily  contain  much  that  is  un-
Double-Jointed  G-Man—
For the  FBI  and the CP
"J.  W.  Ford  was  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party
of  New  Mexico  from  1946  to  September  1950  and!,  from
1948,  was  a  member  of  the  State  Board   and  a   party
security  officer.   He  said  that  in  1948  he  became  a  paid
undercover  agent  for  the  FBI*  and  reported  regularly
upon  Party  activities  and meetings.  .  .  .
"Ford's  duties   as  a  Party   security   officer   were  to
keep  watch  on  all  Party  members   and  to  report  'any
particular   defections   from   the  Communist   philosophy
or   any   peculiar   actions,   statements   or   associations,
which  would  endanger   the  security  of  the   Communist
party  of  the  State'."
—Mr.  Justice  Brennan,  in  Jencks  v.  U.S.
"*From  1948 through  1953,  Ford  was  paid  $7,025  for
his  services."
proven  and  untrue  (though  the  most  striking  breach  of  the
files was  by Attorney  General  Brownell  and  J.  Edgar   Hoover
themselves  in  their  1953  attack  on  the  late  Harry  D.  White
and  former  President  Truman).
But  where  a  prosecution  is  begun,  the  defense  should  have
a   right   to  know  whatever   in   the   government's   possession
might  help  clear  the  accused.  This  only  seems  novel  in  the
current  atmosphere, which  has made  a  sacred  cow of  the   FBI;
actually  it  goes  back  to  an  old  and  fundamental  rule  of  law,
that  each  side  in  any  case  has  a  right  to  relevant  information
in  the  possession  of  the  other.  That  the  new  liberal  majority
on  the  Warren   Court  has  so  splendidly   reaffirmed   this   is
another  mark  of  national  recovery  from  cold  war  hysteria.
It  would  be  a  great  pity  if  the  government  in  the  wake  of
this  decision,  however,  were  to  be  allowed  quietly  to  drop  the
Jencks  case  without  the  public  ever  coming  to  see  the  dirt
swept  under  the  rug,  the  ugly  practices  covered  over,  and  the
continued  injustice  done  to  Matusow.    In  a  period   when  so
many  of  the  government's   informers  have  been   allowed   to
commit  perjury  unscathed,  is  there  no  way  to  get  his  just  day
in  court  for  one  informer  who  tried  to  go  straight?
We'll   Be  Glad  to  Send  A  Copy   of  This  Issue  to  Any  Friend   You   Name
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    .....................................................................................
Street     ......................................................................................
City  ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  .........................................................
Street    .................................................................
0/10/57
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes n    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I    F   Stone's  Weekly.
one's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W., Washington  IB,  D. C.
An   Independent   weekly   published  and  edited   by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the   U.  S. ;  $6  in  Canada:  ¥10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rafes.-  SIS  to  Europe;  120  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED