I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957may20.pdf

============================================================

The  Discrepancies  the  Jury  Overlooked in  Convicting  Hiss,  by  Vern  Countryman,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  20
MAY  20,   1957
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
The  Mind  of  Nikita  Krushchev
Thoughtful  intellectuals on  the  Left  would  do  well  to study
carefully   the  text  of   the   interview  Krusnchev  gave   Turner
Catledge  of  the  New  York   Times  (May  11).  The  interview
shows  a  man  of  great  shrewdness,  with  a  peasant's   vividness
of  speech,  but  with  an  outlook  on  society  not  very   different
from  Stalin's.
Earlier  Marxists  saw  the  dictatorship of  the  proletariat  as  a
painful  temporary  necessity,  but this man's  world, like Stalin's,
is  a .simple  world  of  blacks  and  whites,  in  which  those  at  the
top  decide  which  is  which.    Censorship,  in  this  view,  is  as
Krushchev  told  Catledge   a  "rational  use  of  a  means  at  the
disposal  of  society  not to  waste  .  . .  ink,  paper  and  paste on
information  that  only  creates  harm."  The  permanent  censor-
ship  has  been  the  ideal  of  the  closed  society  since  Plato.
Krushchev   said   that   as   Marxism   Leninism   grew   more
"fashionable",   it  would   become  more  important  to  oppose
"pseudo-Communists"  in  order  to  "keep   the  theory  clean."
The  metaphor  with  which  he  tried  to  explain  was  revealing.
"We  can compare  it  to the  Army,"  Krushchev  said.  "When  a
company  is  marching  all  in  step  except  one  man  he   should
try  to  keep  step  or  ...     drop  somewhere  in  the  tail  until  he
learns  to  march  correctly."  That  was  also  the  way  the  cult  of
the  individual  and  all  the  terrible  abuses  connected  with  it
happened.   Men  were  taught  they  all  had  to  march  as  one;  to
keep  step.   Between   the  censored  press  and  the  regimented
people  none  dared  question  Stalin.
Just  A  CIA  Fabrication
How  could  such a  man have  downgraded  Stalin ?  It  is clear
that  Krushchev  hated  Stalin.   It  is not  dear  that  he  hates  Sta-
linism.   Indeed  it  has  been  clear  for  some  time  that  he  has
begun  to  regret that  attack  on  Stalin  and  is anxious to  rehabili-
tate  the  dictator  in  order  to  reconstruct  the  shaky  foundations
of  the  dictatorship.   He  is  getting  ready to  deny  that  he  ever
spoke  at  all.   "I  don't  know  what  you mean  by the  text  of  my
speech,"  Krushchev  said  when  Catledge  referred  to  it.   "There
was  a  text  apparently  fabricated  by  the  U.S.  intelligence  serv-
ice.   But  this  publishing  house,  headed  by  Allen  Dulles,  has
no  great standing in  our  eyes."
This  is the  Bare-Faced Super-Whopper.  Krushchev  does  not
yet   dare  deny  that  he  attacked  Stalin.   Too   many   millions
know  that  he  did.   He  does  not  say,  as  an  honest  man  might,
that  the  published  text  was  wrong  in  this  respect  or  that.   It
is  all  a  fabrication  by  the  CIA.
Stalin  was  a very great  man"; so Krushchev now  says,  though
admitting  his  faults  were  considerable.   But  when   Catledge
asked  what  these  were,  Krushchev  said  they  were  the  faults
mentioned  in  Lenin's  testament.   But  these  were  all   personal
6                                                                                                            73
faults.    Here  is the  leading figure of  the  most  important Marx-
ist   country  in   the   world,   where   dialectical   materialism   is
gospel,  and  he  attributes  all  the  failings  of  several  decades  to
one man's  personality  defects.   Is  this  Marxism?
Krushchev  did  say  it  is  "impossible   for   one  man  or  one
party  to  exercise  the  exclusive  right  to  interpret  Marxism  and
Leninism."  . He  speaks  of  a  "collective  interpretation."    But
how  does  this  arise  in  the  absence  of  free  discussion?  Where
does  this  collective  consciousness,  like  the  sobornost  of  Ortho-
dox  Russian  theology,  lie?   In  the  magic  of  some  new  com-
munion,  in  some new  priesthood ?  Is  this  not  mysticism ?  Is  it
not  nonsense,  the  nonsense  of  a  self-deifying  bureaucracy?
Not  Marx's  Marxism
Lenin,  though  wiser  and  kinder,  was  also  in  some  respects
as simple-minded.  But  this  is not  socialism  as it  was- envisaged
by  Marx  and  Engels.  They  saw  in  it  a  more  perfect   demo-
cracy,  not  rule  from  the  top  by  a  self-chosen  few.   Marx  and
Engels  would  never  recognize  a  Marxism  that  purported  to  be
a  self-contained  system  embracing  the  totality  of  truth,  from
which  correct  answers  could  be  obtained  on  any  subject  by
turning  on  the  top  spigots  in  the  hierarchy. This  rigid,  naive,
dogmatic  view  is  the  very  opposite  of  that  rich,  complex  and
dynamic  concept  of  social  change  which  Marx  and  Engels  de-
veloped  in  the  tradition  of  English  philosophical  materialism.
The  Krushchev  mentality  is  the  mentality  which—as  Tito
revealed—thought  Rakosi  an  "honest  revolutionist"   as  easily
imposed   on  Budapest   as  flim-flam  is  imposed   on   Moscow.
With  this  mentality  in command,  one  can  expect  further  erup-
tions  in  Eastern  Europe and  ultimately in  Russia  itself,  and  one
can  expect  the  further  degeneration  of  the  world  Communist
movement   as   it   dutifully   swallows   Krushchev's   new   CIA
whopper,  as  it  once  swallowed  Stalin's  assurance  that  Lenin's
Testament  was  only  a  Trotskyite  invention.
When   the   Continental   Congress   in   1774   tried   to   win
Canada  to  the  revolutionary  struggle  against  England,  it  ex-
plained  in  a  Letter  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Quebec  why  certain
rights  were  being  insisted  upon.    Of  freedom  of  the  press,  it
said  that  this  was  a  means  "whereby  oppressive   officers   are
shamed  or  intimidated  into  more honorable  and  just  modes  of
conducting   affairs."    Two  centuries   later   this  takes  on  new
meaning  in  the  struggle  against  Stalinism.    If  freedom  of  the
press had  not  been  so completely crushed  by Lenin and  Trotsky
at  the  very  beginning  of  the  Bolshevik  revolution,  Stalinism
would  never have come into being.    It  is  not  in  censorship,  or
in  dogma  handed  down from  above,  in  a  continued  goose-step,
that  Russia  and  East  Europe  can  avoid  the  evils  Krushchev
himself  exposed  last  year.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 20,1957
Our  Reviewer  Says  Judge  Goddard  Should  Have  Granted  A  Hearing  on  the  Motion  for  Retrial
The  Discrepancies  the  Jury  Overlooked  in  Convicting  Hiss
By  Vern  Countryman
Vern   Countryman,  formerly   of   Yale   Law  School,   now
practicing  in  Washington,   is  the  author  of  a  well   known
book  on the  Little  Un-American  Activities  Committee  in th'e
State  of   Washington,   and   has  revieived   the  record   of   the
Hiss  case  and  previous  books  on  it,—IPS.
Alger  Hiss,  In  The  Court  of  Public Opinion  is  Alger  Hiss's
version  of  the  case which  originated  with  the  1948  testimony
of  Whittaker  Chambers  before  the  House  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee  and  led  to  Hiss's   1950  conviction  of  per-
jury  in  denying  Chambers'  charges  of  espionage.   The   book
contains  no  significant  new  facts,   but  it  does  contain  a  re-
markably  dispassionate account of  the  facts.
The  jury,  if  it  followed  the  court's  instructions, concluded
that  it  had  no  reasonable  doubt  as  to  the  truth  of  Chambers'
espionage   story  despite  the   fact  that  Chambers  himself   had
twice  earlier  denied  under  oath  that  any  espionage   was  in-
volved  and  despite  some  startling  features  of  the  Chambers
testimony  including:
Some  Major  Discrepancies
(1)    Chambers   told   the   House   Committee  of   numerous
visits  to  four  successive  Hiss  residences  from   1934   to   1937
but  could  remember  virtually nothing  about the  houses.   After
spending  three months with  the  FBI,  which had  acquired floor
plans  of  the  houses  and  which  brought  in  former  maids of  the
Hisses  for  Chambers  to  interrogate,  he  was able  at  the  trial  to
testify  to  almost  complete  floor  plans.    Mrs.  Chambers  sup-
plied  supporting  details.
(2)   Chambers  told  the  House  Committee he  had  spent  sev-
eral  nights  at  one  of  the  Hiss  residences.  Thereafter,   Hiss's
fgrmer  maid  told  him  that  the  house  had  only  two  bedrooms,
both  occupied  by  the  Hiss  family.   At  the  trial  Chambers  dis-
claimed  any recollection  of  an  overnight  visit.
(3)   Mrs.  Chambers'  description  of  one  of  the  Hiss  resi-
dences  which  she  claimed  to  have visited  in  1937  or  1938  re-
moved  a tree and  replaced  it  with  a  concrete porch—a physical
alteration  which  did  not  actually  take  place  until   1946.
(4)   One  of  the  documents  which  Chambers  claimed  Hiss
had  given  him  for  transmission  to  Russian  agents  summarized
part  of  a  State Department  cable  reporting  on  French  neutral-
ity   in   the   Sino-Japanese   hostilities   of    1938,    but   omitted
another   part  commenting  on  Japanese  plans  for   a  military
move against  Russia.
The  Book's  Weakest  Point
Hiss  is quite  probably correct  in  his  assertion  that  the  House
Commitee  had  created  an  atmosphere  in  which  the  jury  ex-
pected  Hiss  to  disprove,  rather  than  Chambers  to  prove,   the
Chambers  story.   But  Hiss's  real  complaint  here  is  against  a
defect  inherent  in  the  jury  system,  as  compounded  by  an  irre-
sponsible  Congressional  committee.   -The  weakest  part  of  the
book  is  the  chapter  devoted  to  criticism  of  the  appellate  court
which  refused  to  reverse  the  conviction.   As  Hiss  recognizes,
the  jury's  determination  as  to  the  credibility  of  witnesses  is
not  subject  to  review  on  appeal. With  this  issue  foreclosed,  the
points  raised  on  Hiss's  appeal  were  not  such  as  clearly  to  re-
quire  reversal.
Hiss  has  a much  more  legitimate  complaint  against  the  trial
judge's  denial  of  his  motion  for  new  trial  which  presented
newly-discovered  evidence  on  three  significant  points:
(1)  Before the  House  Committee Chambers  repeatedly -fixed
the  date  of  his  break  with  the  Communist  Party  as  some  time
in  1937.    But when  he  later  produced  copies  of  State  Depart-
ment  documents  which  he  said  he  received  from  Hiss  they  all
bore  dates  between  January  5  and  April  1,  1938.   At  the  trial
Chambers  fixed  the  date  of  his  break  with  the  Party  precisely
at  April  15,  1938  and  added  that  "about  a  month"  thereafter
he  obtained  employment  with  the  Oxford   University  Press
translating  a  book  and   spent  a  further  month   in  May  and
June  doing  the  translation.   Documentary  evidence  from  the
files of  the  Oxford  Press  shows  that  it  shipped  manuscript  to
Chambers on  March  18 and  that  Chambers  returned  100  pages
of  translation  on  May  1.
(2)   Hiss's  attorneys  had  produced  at  the  trial  a  Woodstock
typewriter  as  one  which  Hiss  had  owned  until  1937  or   1938
and  which  the  attorneys had  traced  to  a  subsequent  owner.   A
Government  expert  testified  that  the  documents  which  Cham-
bers  claimed  to  have  received  from  Hiss  and  other  papers  ad-
mittedly  typed  on  the  Hiss  Woodstock   came  from  the  same
machine.   After  Hiss's  conviction  his  attorneys  retained, a  spe-
cialist  who,  working  entirely  from  typing  samples,  produced  a
duplicate  machine which experts  swore was so exact  that  an ex-
pert  witness  would  not  distinguish  between  the  products  of
the two machines.
Contradictions  Might  Have  Been   Resolved
(3)  Affidavits  of  other  experts  showed  that  the  machine lo-
cated  by the  defense and  placed  in  evidence  was  itself  a manu-
factured  duplicate.   The  distinguishing  defects  in  the  typeface
were  not  the  result  of  original  casting  or  of  wear,  but  were
the  product  of  "deliberate  alteration"  which  left  visible  tool
marks.    Moreover,  most  of  the  typefaces were  soldered  on  in
amateurish  fashion  and  with  a  different   type  of  solder   than
that  on  the  remaining  typefaces.   Efforts   to  corroborate  this
showing,  by  demonstrating  that  the  machine  in  evidence  was
manufactured  several  months  after  the  original  Hiss  machine
was  purchased  and  that  the  altered  typefaces  were  of  a  differ-
ent  vintage  than  either  machine, were  frustrated  when  Wood-
stock  officials  and  investigators  retained  by Hiss  refused  to  sign
affidavits.   In this  connection  a hearing  was requested  in  which
they  could  be  required  to  testify.
The  trial  judge  denied  both  the  hearing  and  the  motion  be-
cause   the  new  arguments   involved   "many   improbabilities."
By  this  ruling  Hiss  was  denied  his  first  and  best  opportunity
to  prove  his  claim,  made  at  the  time  of  sentencing,  that  he  is
a  victim  of   "forgery   by  typewriter."    Hiss  asserts  that  he  is
still  "certain of  eventual vindication."   If  he  is  indeed  innocent
it  is  a  matter  not  only  of  essential  justice  but  of   considerable
public  importance  that  he  have his  vindication,  since  a  convic-
tion  based  on  "forgery  by  typewriter"   could  hardly  have  been
obtained  without  the  connivance,  or  at  least  the  culpable  ac-
quiescence,  of  prosecuting  authorities.   It  is  doubtful  that  jus-
tice  or  the  public  interest  were  best  served  by the  ruling  which
deprived   him  of  the  subpoena   power  and  left  him  to  seek
vindication  "in  the  court  of  public  opinion."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 20,  1957
"Modern  Republicanism" Turns  Out  To  Be A  Blank  Check  for the  Military
That  Presidential broadcast  on the  budget  was an inane piece
of  copy,  about  on  a  level with  its  schoolboy  delivery.   Ike  has
neither  FDR's  magic nor  Truman's  earthiness;  he's  too  honest
for  the  kind  of  demagogy  needed  to  sell  the  mounting  arms
race  as  "a  fight  for  peace"   (how  Orwell  would  have  appre-
ciated  that  euphemism)  but  too  weak  to  hold  back  the  mili-
tary  juggernaut rolling along  on  its own  mindless momentum.
The  result  is that Ike,  who  began  as the  instrument of  the  big
business  men  who  wanted  to  put  a  bridle  on  the  military  and
cut  the  budget,  has  become  the  instrument  of  the  Pentagon.
The  paradox  of   the  growing  party  split  is  that  the  liberal
"modern"   Republicans  find  themselves   supporting  a   blank
check  for  the military.
The  wickedest  thing  in  the  copy  the  President  read  was  the
suggestion  that  the  Russians might unleash nuclear  war  if  they
thought  they  could  "destroy  the  free  world"  without  destroy-
ing  themselves.   Both  sides  now  know  that  nuclear  war  is im-
possible,  but  the  U.S.  is  using  the  economic  pressure  of  the
arms  race to  put  the  squeeEe  on  Moscow  for  surrender  on  out-
standing  issues,  above  all  German  reunification   on   Western
terms.  The  will  of  the  wisp  that  is  leading  the  world   ever
nearer  to  circumstances in  which  accident  might  set  off  a  final
conflict  is the  "brinksmanship"  which  Dulles  prefers  to  diplo-
macy.  The  President says  he  sees  no  immediate prospect  of  re-
laxation.   If  he wanted to  be candid, he  might  have added  that
the  military  feared  relaxation.
The  military  are pressing  now to give atomic arms to  Korea.
This  proposal   has  been  blocked  for  months  in  the  National
Security  Council.   It  is  one  thing  to  give  the  Koreans   "new
model"   arms;  it  is  another  to  give  them  atomic  arms.   The
Soviet  bloc will  follow  suit, and  then  the  two  big  powers  will
be at the  mercy of  the  most  reckless, bloodthirsty and  irrespon-
sible  of  all  their satellites. The  big  argument,  oddly  enough,  is
economic.  The  nuclear  stockpiles  are  so  huge  we  can  afford  to
spread  the  stuff.  This  is the  meaning  of  Secretary of  the  Army
Brucker's  little  noticed  speech   in  Chicago   May   7   declaring
that the  comparative cost  of  atomic arms  has  "declined  to  such
an  extent"  that  "the  economics  of  the  situation"  could  force
us to  use them  "in  preference  to  more  conventional  weapons."
The  fight  over  the  military  budget  is  the  nearest  thing  this
country  has  seen  in  many  months  to  a  fight  for   peace.   The
military  are out  to heighten  tension  in order  to maintain  politi-
cal  control  and  high  spending  at  home.   All  the  disarmament
talk  is just  a  smoke-screen for  this  basic strategy.
Two  New  Liberal  Senators  Provide  A  Contrast  in  The  McLeod  Fight
Two  new  liberal  Senators  distinguished  themselves  in  the
debate  over  the  McLeod  appointment  as  Ambassador  to  Ire-
land,  Joseph  Clark,  D.,  of  Pennsylvania,  for  his  eloquence  in
leading  the  fight  against  McLeod,  Jacob  K.  Javits,  R.,  of  New
York   for  abandoning  what  we  thought   were  his  principles.
Senator  Clark  rightly  declared  that  the  nomination  raised  a
moral  issue,  that  McLeod's  role  as  a  McCarthyite  snooper  in
the  State  Department  made  the  vote  "a  clear-cut  question  of
whether  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  is  going  to  turn  its
back  on an unsavory  chapter  in the  recent history  of  the United'
States,  or  whether  we  are  going  to  carry  forward  that  chapter
by  confirming  a  man  whose  public  activities  over  the  past  four
years  have  identified  him  with  a  philosophy   of   government
which  is  alien  to  the  highest  ideals  of  the  American  people."
Javits,  who  was  himself  a  target  of  the  witch  hunters  on  the
eve of  his  election,  supported  McLeod  on  the  lame  excuse  that
the  vote  was  a  question  of  confidence  in  the  President.
McLeod's   testimony  before  the   Senate   Foreign   Relations
Committee  was  shifty  and  disingenuous,  notably  in  discussing
his  rather  sneaky  role  in  the  fight  against  Bohlen.  The  part
McLeod   played  in  undermining  the  morale  of  the  Foreign
Service  makes  particularly  reprehensible  the  votes  cast  for  him
by  two  Senators  fresh  from  the  Foreign   Service,  Thruston  B.
Morton  and  John  Sherman  Cooper,  both  of  Kentucky.   It  was
also  disappointing that  Case  of  New  Jersey,  Flanders  of  Ver-
mont,  and  Chavez  of  New   Mexico  should   all  vote  for  this
witch  hunter   though   they  have  all  fought   the  witch  hunt.
Mike  Mansfield,  who  seems  to  have  been  corrupted   by  asso-
ciation   in  the  party  leadership   with   Lyndon   Johnson,  also
voted  for  McLeod.   Incidentally  Mansfield  seems  to  have  been
the  only  Senator  of  Irish-American  origin  *  to  vote  for  Mc-
Leod.  Kennedy, McNamara, Monroney, and O'Mahoney voted
against  him, Neely  would  have  voted  "Nay."  From  the  South,
Hill  and  Sparkman  of  Alabama,  Fulbright  of  Arkansas,   the
Arthur  Miller's  Own Crucible
Arthur  Miller's  trial  for  contempt  was  still  going  on
as  we  went  to  press.  It  was  painful  to  hear  his  lawyer,
Joseph   L.  Rauh,  Jr.,  expatiate  on  the  fact   that  Miller
had  been  a  "cooperative   and  forthright   witness"   with
"no  desire   to  show   up  the  committee."   A  man  who
wrote  a  play  against  the  witch  hunt  ought  not  to  crawl
before   it.    Rauh's   pleadings,   like   Miller's    appearance
before   the   House   Un-American   Activities   Committee,
does  not  challenge   the  right   of  Congress  to  engage  in
ideological  inquisition.   In  the  Miller  case,  as  in  Wat-
kins,  Rauh  is  only,  defending   unwillingness   to   inform
on others.   But  if  Congress  has a  right  to explore  men's
political  views  and  associations,  how  can  an   individual
witness  refuse   to  testify   about  his  own  and  other's?
Where  no  firm  line  of  principle  is  drawn,  no  firm  de-
fense  is  possible.   All  that  ugly  regurgitation  of  hear-
say   and  slander   from   the   House   Committee   files   to
which  Miller  was  subjected   derives  from  the  existence
of   a  Congressional   Inquisition.    Miller  betrayed   him-
self  when  he  was  "cooperative."    We  had  a  right  to  ex-
pect  more  from  the  author  of  "The  Crucible."
new' Senator  Yarborough   from   Texas,  and  Ervin  of  North
Carolina  voted  against   McLeod,  while  Scott  of  North   Caro-
lina  was  paired  against  him.    The  others  who  voted  against
the  confirmation, all  Democrats,  were  Carroll  (Col.),  Church
(Idaho),  Douglas   (111.),   Green   (R.I.),  Hennings   (Mo.),
Jackson   (Wash.).,   Lausche   (Ohio),   Magnuson   (Wash.),
Morse  (Ore.), Neuberger  (Ore.),  and  Pastore  (R.I.)  Kefau-
ver,  Clark  and  Symington  were  paired  against  the  nomination.
* Our  favorite  comment  turned  up  in  a  canvass'  of    1,000
residents  in  the  predominantly    Irish  district  of  the  Lower
Manhattan   Republican   Club,  "Why   stick  Ireland  with  this
guy?" The  Club's  executive  committee  was  unanimous against
McLeod  and its  canvass  showed  the  district  12-1  against  him.
Con.  Rec.  May  8,  P.  5836.
8  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May W, 1957
Why  the Government  Dropped the Ben Gold Taft-Hartley  Oath Prosecution
That  was  a  lame  excuse  the  government  gave  for   dropping
the  Ben  Gold   case  on  the  eve  of  its  scheduled  retrial.    The
U.S.  Attorney,  in  asking Federal  Judge  Curran  to  dismiss  the
indictment,  said  that  Louis Budenz would  be  unable  to  testify
at a new trial  because  of  a heart  attack  and  that  the  Justice  De-
partment  had  reason  to  believe  that  Benjamin  Gitlow  would
refuse  to  testify  again.
But  the  evidence  they  gave  is  as  replaceable  as  interchange-
able  parts  in  factory  production.    Budenz  did  not  claim  ever
to  have  seen  or  talked  with  Gold;  Gitlow   last  saw  Gold   in
June,  1929. The  kind  of  "evidence"  they  furnished  can  be
supplied  by  any  of  the  other  ex-Communists  whom  the gov-
ernment  employes  to  testify.
Indeed,  this  was  the  weakness of  the  case.  Gold  was  found
guilty  of  falsely  swearing  in  a  Taft-Hartley   affidavit  that   he
was  no  longer  a  member  of  the  Communist  party.   But  the
government  produced  no  witnesses  to  testify  that  he  still  paid
dues,  attended  meetings,  or  carried  out  party  directives  after
filing  his  affidavit.    All  it  really  had  was  surmise  by  its  paid
experts.
Aesopianism  Again
The  only  evidence,  if  it  can  be  called  that,  was  Gold's  ap-
pearance  in  May  Day  parades  in  1951  and  1952,  and  the  fact
that  he  was  several  times  mentioned  without   abuse  by  the
Daily  Worker  after  his  resignation.   From  these  scant  strands,
the  government  wove  a  tenuous  net  based  on  expert  testimony
about  Aesopian   language, etc.
Gold  for  30 years  had  been  an  avowed  member of  the  Com-
munist  party.   On  resigning,  Gold  made  it  clear  that  he  was
not   abandoning  his  beliefs.   The   Taft-Hartley   affidavit   re-
quires  a  Communist  labor  leader  to  give  up  beliefs  as  well  as
membership  but  the  government  did  not  indict  him  under  the
"belief"   provision,  probably  because  the  Supreme   Court  has
never  been  able  to  muster  a  majority  for  its  constitutionality.
Only  the  oath  as  to  membership  has  been  upheld.
Apparently  the  government  was  afraid  that  it  could  not  at
a  new  trial  get  a  conviction  on  the  membership  clause  and
make  it stick.   The  Court  of  Appeals  here  split  4-4 on  the  pre-
l/  You  Like  This  Issue,  Let   Us
Other  Encouraging  Decisions
In  addition  to  the  6-2  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court
ordering  a  new  trial  for  three  persons  convicted  of har-
boring  a  Smith  Act  fugitive  and  the  Court's  agreement
to  hear  John  M.  Harmon  Srd's  appeal  from  an  Army
security   discharge,   there   was  another  bit   of   encour-
aging  court  news  here  in  Washington  which  went  un-
noticed.
Judge  Prettyman,  perhaps  the  single  most  influential
reactionary    judge   on   the   Court   of   Appeals   in   (this
country,  filed  a  dissenting  opinion  in  suits  brought  by
two   American   Lithuanian  Associations  against   "list-
ing"  by  the  Attorney   General.
This   dissent    dealt    with    the   interrogatories   Mr.
Brownell  sends  out  to  organizations  which  ask  him  for
a  hearing  before  listing.   Judge  Prettyman's  dissent  is
the  most  acidly   devastating  analysis  of  these   interro-
gatories  to  come  from   any  judge.   He  said  the  ques-
tions   asked   were   "impossible   to   answer"   and   the
proffer  of  a  hearing  based  on  answering  them  "was  a
nullity."
vious   conviction;  the   Supreme   Court   threw   it   out   on   the
ground  that  the  FBI  had  tampered  with  the  jury.
The  Same   Old  Informers
The  only judge on  the  Court of  Appeals  to write an opinion,
Bazelon,  had  been  scathing  in  analyzing  the  character  of  the
evidence  offered  by  the  prosecution.   That  opinion  must  have
raised  the  question  of  whether   it  would   be  wise  to  use  the
same  type  of  testimony  at  a  new  trial.  The  government  appar-
ently  had  no  other,  since  it  decided  to  throw  in  the   sponge
instead.
Another   inhibiting  factor   may   have   been   the   growing
hostility  of  the  Supreme  Court  where  there  is  evidence  that
the  testimony of  the  government's  paid  "experts"  is tainted  by
perjury.   Of  the  seven  ex-Communist  witnesses  in  the  Gold
trial,  six  make  their  living  by  testifying,  lecturing,  writing  or
"consulting,"  and  one—Manning Johnson—has  been  proved  a
liar  so  often  (notably  in  the  case  of  Ralph  Bunche)   that  the
Department   of  Justice  may  have  blanched  at  the  thought  of
trotting  him  out  again  in  this  better  atmosphere.
Send   A  Sample   Copy   to   A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      ........................................................... ............................
Street     .................„.......................................•».....••••••••••••—•••••
City      .......................................    fane............8t*te.................
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  .........................................................
Street     ......„...............................:.........................
8/20/57
City      ........................................Zone............State.................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stones  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone'B  Weekly.    Entered  et   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C.,  under  tlie  Act  of  March   3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published  and  edited  by   I.   F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
t&  In  the  U.  8.;  *6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $19  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED