I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jul29.pdf

============================================================

An  Angry  Letter from  Sen. Humphrey,  P. 3
Why  Ike  Lost  That  Argument  With  Zhukov:  Is  Freedom  Just Commercial?  P. 2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  30JULY  29,  1957
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The   Senate  Debate  Through  Negro  Eyes
More  important to  the  Negro  than  the  right  to  vote  is  the
right  to  live  without  humiliation.  The  right  to  vote  in  the
one-party   South,  where  rival  Democratic  candidates  if   any
compete  in  appeals  to  racism, has  been  highly  overrated  in  the
Senate  debates  which  are  slowly  destroying hopes  of  an   effec-
tive  civil  rights  bill.   The  right  to  sit  down  undisturbed  in  a
bus  after  a  hard  day's  work,  the  right  to  justice  when  short-
changed  or  cheated,  the  right  to  have  one's  children  begin  to
grow  up  without  being  treated  as  niggers  or  even  (as  the  bet-
ter  white  folks  slur  it)   nigras,  these  are  the  rights,  these  are
the  every  day  agonies,  these  make  the  bitter bread  of  the  black
man's  affliction.   All  this  has  been  forgotten  in  the  complacent
discussions  which  paved  the  way  for  defeat  of  Part  III,  the
human  rights  section  of  the  civil  rights  bill,  and  may  end  in
emasculating  Part  IV,  its  political  rights  section,  with  a  jury
trial  amendment.
What  No White Man Really Knows
What  is missing  from  the  debate  is  easily  discernible.   The
Negro  has  his  champions  in  the  Senate  but  no  spokesman.
The   massive  researches  of  a  Douglas  of   Illinois,  the   noble
humanism  of  a  Clark  of  Pennsylvania, the  legal  labors  of  a
Javits  of  New  York,  are  no  substitute  for  a  man  who  could
speak  as  one  who  himself  knows  what  it  means  to  be  born
black.  Amid  the  sterile  legalisms  and  the  courtly  compliments
what  is  missing  are  the  realities  only  a  Negro  can  know  and
only  a Negro Senator  could  express.  From  the  gallery,  through
the  eyes  of  a  Negro,  there  must  be  a  constant  anguish  in  the
lily-white  scene.   The  Senate  appears  not  merely  as  an  exclu-
sive  club  but  as a  white  man's  club  in  which  a  younger  group
faces  up  reluctantly  to  the  task  of  enacting  regulations  pain-
ful  to  some of  its  oldest  members.   Even  through  the  speeches
of  those  most  devoted  to  the  Negro's  cause  there  runs  a  tone
of  supplication,  apology  and  tenderness.   Rarely  has  so  much
exquisite  tact  been  expended  on  the  oppressor   by  those  who
are  supposed  to  be  rescuing  the  oppressed.
Filibuster  Outlawed In  South
If   little  enough   reality  gets  through   on  the   Senate  floor,
even  less  of  it  is reported  in  the  press.   The  South  makes  short
shrift  at  home  with  all  the  ideals  it  parades  in  Washington.
The  filibuster  it  wields  as  its  final  weapon  in  the  Senate  is out-
lawed  in  its  own  State  legislatures.    A  simple  majority  on  a
motion  for  the  previous  question  is  enough  to  shut  off  all
debate  in  the  State  Senates  of  Arkansas,  Georgia,   Louisiana,
Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Texas  and  Virginia.
Alabama  and  South  Carolina  have  other  forms  of  cloture.   In
the  Southern,  as  indeed  the  Northern   States,  there  is  no  jury
trial  for  civil  contempt  and  rarely  even  in  criminal  contempt.
Fulbright  smugly  quotes  Walter  Lippmann on  "the American
idea  .  .  .  that  important minorities  must  not  be  coerced"  but
lawless  coercion  of  the  Negro  minority  is  the  essence  of  that
"way    of  life"  the  South  is  defending.   Even  while  the  South
assails  government  by  injunction  on  the  Senate  floor,  the  Na-
tional  Association for  the  Advancement of  Colored  People  is
being  outlawed  in  the  South  by  some  of  the  most  savagely  re-
pressive  injunctions  ever  issued  by  the  courts  in  this country.
The  American  Jewish  Congress,  to  its  credit,  has  published  a
sober   and  documented  study  of  this  judicial  reign  of  terror
but  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  it.   Douglas  read  it  into
the  Congressional  Record after  Russell blandly told  McNamara
he  had  "never  heard"  of  laws  against  the  NAACP.
That  so  feeble  a  spirit  as  Eisenhower  should   fumble   and
so slippery  a  politician  as  our  Attorney General  should  choose
this  moment  to  vacation is  not  surprising.   The  desertion that
hurts  is that  of  such  Senate  liberals  as  Morse  and  O'Mahoney.
Russell,  one  of  the  five  conservative Southern  Democrats  who
joined   Morse   to  vote  for   the  Hell's   Canyon  public  power
project,  denied  on  CBS Capital  Cloakroom  [transcript  in  the
July   10   Congressional   Record]   there   was   a   deal   "in   any
sense  I  know  of.   I  hope,  however,  such  a  thing  as apprecia-
tion  still  exists in  the  Senate. ...  I  hope  that  the  purpose  of
this  charge  will  not  frighten  the  true  liberals  in  the  Senate
who  will  support,   for  example,  a  jury  trial  amendment."
Is Committee Procedure Sacred?
Sure  enough   at  the  most  crucial  moment  for   the  Negro
since  Reconstruction,  Morse  grew  emotional  about  "the   end
justifies  the  means doctrine adopted  by those  who  have  put  the
[civil  rights]  bill  on  the  Senate  calendar  in  violation  of  his-
toric  committee  procedure  and  justice."   He  was  for  consign-
ing  the  bill  to  Eastland.   A  subcommittee  of  Senate  Judiciary
had  held  hearings  from  February  14  to  March  5;  it  had  pub-
lished  them  in  a  950  page  volume;  it  had  discussed  the  iden-
tical  bill  sent  over  from   the   House;   a  majority   report   had
been  filed  with  the  full   Judiciary  Committee  on  March   19
and   a  minority  report   by  Ervin   and  Johnston   on  May   10.
Hennings,  the  chairman  of  that  subcommittee, had  complained
bitterly  to  the  Senate  on  June  20  that  Eastland  was  keeping
the  bill  and  the  report  bottled  up.   But  here  weeks  later  was
Morse  asserting  that  there  had  been  no  committee  hearings  or
report.   When  Pastore  of  Rhode  Island  asked  him  why  East-
land  could  not  have  brought  in  a  report  during  the  last  few
weeks  of  civil  rights  debate,   Morse  replied   "Human  nature,
just  human  nature."    Of  all  the  bitter  scenes  in  this  Senate,
the  worst  for  the  Negro  was  to  see  a  Morse  scratching  an
Eastland's  back.
t  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.   Stone's    Weekly,    July    29,   1957
Trujilio  Buys  Himself  A  Positively  Impartial  Investigation  for  Only $160,000
Why  Eisenhower  Lost  That  War-Time  Ideological  Debate With  Zhukov
We  were  fascinated   by  Elsenhower's  account  of  his  war-
time   ideological  bull  sessions   with   Zhukov.   The  President
said  "I  was  very  hard  put  to  it  when  he  insisted  that  their
system  appealed  to  the  idealistic,  and  we  completely  to  the
materialistic."   It  is  indicative that  the  only  freedoms  Eisen-
hower  stressed,  as  he  recalls   it,  were  commercial:  "a  man
can  earn  what  he  pleases,  save  what  he  pleases,  buy  what
he  pleases."  Nowhere  did  the  President  mention  the  right  to
think   as  one  pleases.    Eisenhower  saw  freedom  in  business
men's  terms,  the  freedom  of  the  market   place.   Limited  to
those  terms,  the  system  is  wide  open  to  Zhukov's  reproach  in
the  classic  socialist-communist  tradition,  "Everything  that  is
selfish  in man you  appeal  to  him. ..."
Ideologically   Ike  was  as   ill-prepared   and   naive  as   the
average  G.  I.   His  account  of  the  conversation  is  in  striking
accord  with  the  portrait  drawn  by  a  writer  in  the  summer
issue  of  the  quarterly   Dissent,  summarizing  the  findings  of
the   research  branch  of  the   U.  S.  Army  in  its   volumes  on
The  American  Soldier  in  World  War  II:  "The  American  sol-
dier  emerges  from  this  collective  portrait  as  a  man  without
serious  commitment.   He  fought  because  he  had  to;   mean-
while  he  looked  out  for  himself   as  much  as  he  could.   The
resistance  to  ideology,  stemming  partly  from  the   American
dream   of  individual  success  which  not  even  the   depression
had  been  able  to  destroy,  was  now  reenforced  by   military
experience.    Soldiers   fighting   for   democracy   found   them-
selves  serving  under  a  tremendously  authoritarian   military
caste  which  they  justifiably  despised."
The  only  effective  answer  to  Zhukov  was  that  communism
in  practice  had  become,  not  a  brotherly  society  working  for
the  common  good,  but  an  authoritarian   hierarchical    system
run   by  a  bureaucratic   caste,  on  the  basis  of  unquestioning
obedience  by  subordinates.    But  these  are  also  the  character-
istics  of  armies.
It  is  not  surprising  that  a  professional  soldier  like   Eisen-
hower  failed  to  criticize  communism effectively  for  habits of
regimentation  he  had  been  trained  all  his  life  long  to  accept
as  virtues.  The  civilian  ideals  he  defended  were  abstractions
with   which  he  had  too  little  experience.    Even   now,  years
later,  as  President,  the  freedom  that  comes  at   once  to  the
surface   of  his  mind  when  he  is  asked  to  answer  a  question
"off   the  cuff"  at  press  conference  is  the  freedom  to   make
money.   This  is,  indeed,  the   only  Magna  Charta   capitalism
prizes;  the  rest  is  tolerated  as  oratorical   eye-wash.
Impartial  at  $50,000  Per
We  are  shocked  by  the  dubious ethics  and  bad  taste  shown
by  Morris  Ernst  in  accepting   a   $50,000  fee  from   a  public
relations  firm  representing  the  Trujillo  dictatorship  in  Santo
Domingo  to  conduct  a  supposedly  impartial  investigation  of
the  Galindez  disappearance  and  the  Murphy  murder.   A  dis-
Add   Krushchev   v.   Malenkov
"The  bloody  tangle of  the  'Leningrad  Affair,'  with  its
secret   purges  and  counter-purges,  can  hardly  be  un-
ravelled  by  anyone  without  access to  the  archives of  the
Soviet   political   police.    As  to  Malenkov's  alleged   re-
sponsibility  for  Voznessensky's  fate,  Krushchev's  latest
version  conflicts  with  an  earlier  account  he  himself  has
given  to  Eastern  European Communists.  In  that  earlier
version  he  related  that  he,  Malenkov, and  Bulganin  had
jointly  tried  to  save  Voznessensky's  life.  .  .  .  They in-
terceded  with  Stalin,  pleading  that  Voznessensky  was
innocent.  . . . One of Krushchev's  own accounts of Ma-
lenkov's  role  in  this  matter  must  be  false."
—Isaac  Deutscher,  biographer   of  Stalin,  writing   in
the  London   Times,   July   11,  on  the  new  purge.
tinguished  anti-Fascist  scholar  and  exile  was  kidnapped  on
American   soil   16   months   ago   and   has   disappeared;    the
American  pilot  who flew him  out  has  been  murdered;  a   sec-
ond  pilot  arrested  by the  Dominican  government  under  pres-
sure  from  the  State  Department  is  said  to  have  committed
suicide  in  jail  and  left  a  note  confessing  Murphy's  murder.
But  the  handwriting  of  the  purported  confession turned  out
not  to  match  that  of  the  man  supposed  to  have  written  it.
Thus  we  have  here  a  series  of  crimes,  in  part  committed
on  American  and  in  part  on  Dominican  soil.   The  Trujillo
government  protests  its  innocence  but  has  refused  to  coop-
erate  with  the  investigations  by  the   New  York   police  de-
partment   and  the  State  and  Justice   departments.     Instead
Trujillo   has   signed   a   $160,000  contract  with   a   Tammany
Hall  publicity  man,  Sydney  S.  Baron,  to  bring  about  "a  gen-
erally  better  understanding"  of  his  regime.   Baron  has  hired
Ernst  and  a  former  New  York  State  Judge  at  $50,000  each
and    $50,000    expenses    to   investigate.    The    investigating
group  will  set  up  offices  in  the  Baron  publicity  firm  "and   the
two  will  work  together  closely,  according  to  Mr.  Baron."
The  Dominican  Ambassador   announces  that  his   govern-
ment  "has   waived  all  power  of  censorship"  over  the  report
to  be  made  by  Ernst  and  Ernst  says  that  in  case  of  lack  of
cooperation  by  the  Dominican  authorities  he  will  withdraw.
But  Ernst  adds  that  if  he  withdraws  he  will  "preserve  pro-
fessional   confidence   and  refrain   from  issuing   any  report."
This  is  how  one  fulfills   a  private  relationship,  not  a  public
duty.   It  means  that  if  Ernst  ever  gets  too  close  to  where
the  bodies  are  buried  for  Trujillo's   comfort,  the  whole  thing
can  be  called  off  and  Ernst  will  keep  mum.
Any  day  now  we  expect   to  hear  that  Jimmy   Hoffa   has
hired  a  public  relations  firm  and  a  liberal   lawyer   to  in-
vestigate  him,  too.
Youngdahl's  Historic  Words  Condemning  the  Internal  Security  Committee
"The   Senate  Internal   Security  subcommittee conducted
investigations  which  were  indistinguishable from  those  the
Supreme  Court  condemned.    In  addition,  the  particular se-
ries   of   hearings  here  involved  constituted  an  even  more
serious  threat  to  freedom   of  thought  and  expression.   Por
these  hearings  consisted  of  the  questioning of  persons  em-
ployed  in  the  newspaper field, in  radio  and  television.  .  .  .
"In  Watkins,  the  Supreme Court  found  that  the authoriz-
ing  resolution  of  the  Un-American Activities  Committee  is
of    'confusing   breadth   and   that   its    boundaries   are   so
nebulous'  that  it  is  impossible for  courts  to  determine  when
the  Committee has  exceeded its  authority.  .  .  .  The  vices  to
be  found  in  the  House  Un-American Activities  Committee's
authorizing  resolution  are  equally  present   in  the   charter
of  the  Senate  Internal  Security  subcommittee  .  .  .[which]
purports  to  grant  the  authority  to  investigate   'subversive
activities.' ...
"What  is  the  height  of  orthodoxy  today  may  be  viewed
as   'un-American'  tomorrow.   Nor  is   there   any   individual
who  can  be certain that  he  is  not  considered  'subversive'  by
some  of  his  fellow  citizens.   Who  is   to  say,  for  example,
whether  one  who  is  openly  dedicated to  depriving his  neigh-
bors  of   their  14th   Amendment   rights   under  the  Federal
Constitution  is  a  subversive?    The  dangers  of  classifying
certain  forms  of  belief  or  political  activity  as  'subversive'
are  all  too  apparent from  the  recent  history  of  this  coun-
try."
—Judge   Youngdahl,   acquitting   Seymour    Peck
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   July   29, 1957
A  Letter  of  Protest  and  A  Reply:  How  An  ADA  Senator  Served as  Foil  for  the  FBI
Some  All  Too  Recent  History  Senator  Humphrey  Would  Rather   Forget
Senator  Humphrey  is  one  of  the   ablest  and  most  hard-
working  members  of  the  Senate,  a  liberal  to  whom  we  have
been  grateful  on  many  issues.   But  we  have  been  critical  of
him  on  security  matters.   The  angry  letter  from  the  Senator
which  we  published  at  the  bottom  of  this  page  seems  to  us
—with  all  due  respect—a  pretty  vague  reply  to  our  July  1
issue.   We  there  discussed  the  report  made  by  the  Commis-
sion  on  Government  Security  and   the  curious  role   Senator
Humphrey  played  in  creating  that  commission.
The  facts  are  easily  ascertainable.   In  1955  the  Ladejinsky
and  Chasanow  scandals,  the   Matusow  recantation,   and  the
perjuries  which  turned  up  in  the  testimony  of  so  many  of
the  FBI's  confidential  informants  had  aroused  the  public  to
security-loyalty    abuses.    The    Democratic   leadership    was
angered   by  the  unscrupulous  manipulation  of  statistics  by
Attorney   General   Brownell  and   other   Republicans  in   dis-
cussing  the  loyalty  of  government  employes.   Their   figures
had  become  a  "numbers   game."
The  Right  Was  Alarmed
The  Democrats  were   back   in   control   of   Congress.    The
stage  was  set  for  corrective  legislation.   Johnston  of   South
Carolina   had  just  submitted   a   resolution   for   a   full   scale
Senate    investigation.      The   Right   was   alarmed    (see   the
Weekly   of   March   21,   1955   for   details).    At  that  moment
Senator  Humphrey  put  in  S. J.  Res.  21 for  the  creation  of  a
12-man  Commission  on  Government   Security.
Since  four  men  were  to  be  picked  by  the  White  House  and
four  by  the  Republican  leadership   in   Congress,  it  was  ob-
vious  that  this  Commission  would  be  stacked  by  the   G.O.P.
8-to-4  and  could  be  used  to  whitewash  security-loyalty   abus-
es.   It   was   significant   that   neither   Morse   nor    Lehman,
Humphrey's   two  fellow  vice  chairmen  of  ADA   (Americans
for  Democratic  Action),  joined  Humphrey  in  sponsoring  this
resolution.   The  only  co-sponsor  he  could  obtain  was  Stennis
of   Mississippi.
Why  Mundt  Applauded
In  his  letter,  Senator  Humphrey  says  his  report  to  the
Senate  on this  resolution  "speaks  for  itself."   Indeed,  it  does.
It   explains   why   Senator   Mundt,  co-author   of   the  Mundt-
Nixon  bill  which  became  the  Internal  Security   Act  and  set
up  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board,  rose  to  say  that
he  was  "unreservedly"  a  strong  supporter   of  the  Humphrey
resolution.
For  in that  report  to  the  Senate,  Humphrey  indicated  that
his  resolution  contained  provisions  which  would protect  secret
Add  Confidential  Informants
On  July  16,  without  debate,  the  House  passed  a  bill
to  pay  Michael  S.  Tillimon  of  Toledo,  Ohio,  $2,000  for
damages  incident  to  his  false  imprisonment  by  the  FBI
on  a  charge  of   cashing  stolen  travellers'  checks.   He
was  arrested  Dec.  23,  1955,  but  ordered  released   two
months  later  by  Federal  Judge  Kent  in  Michigan  after
a  witness who had identified  Tillimon  as  the  check  cash-
er  admitted  he  had  made  a  mistake.
When  this  bill   (HR  6166)  reaches  the  Senate,  will
some  liberal  Senator  point  out  that  such  an  injustice
could  never  have  been  corrected  if  this  had  been  a  se-
curity  case,  if  Tillimon  had  been  a  government employe
and  if  the  witness  against  him  had  been  one  of  those
confidential   informants  the  FBI  shields  from   confron-
tation?
practices   from   full   study   by  the   Commission.   He  pointed
out  that  under  Section  8 no  agency  could  be required  to  fur-
nish  the  Commission  with  information  which  might  "jeopar-
dize  intelligence  or  investigative  functions."   This  followed,
Senator  Humphrey  explained, from  "the   unquestionable  ne-
cessity  for  protecting  the  FBI's  methods  and   devices"   for
surveillance.    These   include   wire-tapping,   "bugging,"  mail
covers  and  a  network  of  political  informers.
Only  Casual Informants
Senator   Humphrey  also  made  it   clear   that   in  his  view
there   should  be  no  right  to  confront  these  informers  when
they  were  regularly   employed  undercover  men,  though  some
of  the  most  famous  of  these  had  turned  out  to  be alcoholics,
psychopaths  or  mercenaries.   He  thought  the  Commission,  in
considering    the    problem   of   confrontation,    should   do   so
"strictly  in  terms   of  casual    informants."
As  it  turned   out,  these  built-in  safeguards   were  unneces-
sary.   Not  a   single  liberal   was  appointed   to  that   12-man
Commission.   Its   existence   served   to  sidetrack   the   critical
recommendations   made   by   the   Johnston   Committee.    The
Commission  worked  18 months  in  secret,  under  the  direction
of  two  former  assistants  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  and  its  con-
clusions  were  about  what  might  have  been  expected.   We  will
not  repeat  our  analysis  of  them  here.   Now readers  can  have
a  copy of  the  July  1 issue  on request,  and  compare  for  them-
selves  our  exposure  of  the   Commission's  phony  claims  with
Senator  Humphrey's  significantly  vague  protest.
Senator  Humphrey's  Angry  Reply  to  Charges  in  Our  Issue  of July  1
"Dear  Mr.  Stone:   I  have  read  your  publication  for  July
1.   I  refer  in particular  to  page  one concerning  the  report of
the  Commission  on Government  Security.  I  trust  the  balance
of  your  bulletin  is  more  accurate  than  its  introductory  para-
graph.
"I  am  sure  you  know  that  some  of  your  observations   are
inaccurate.  First,  the  resolution  that  I  introduced  to  estab-
lish  a  Commission  on  Government   Security   did  not  prevent
a  Congressional  investigation.    The  investigation  was  made,
first,  by  the  Senate  Committee  on  Post  Office  and  Civil  Serv-
ice,  under  the  chairmanship  of  Senator  Johnston.   The  latter
investigation  was  very  extensive  and  complete.   The  report
was  highly  critical  of  the  government  security  program.
"My  own activities  in  this field are  a  matter  of  record. My
report  to the  Senate at  the  time  we considered  the  passage of
the  bill  to  establish  the  Commission  speaks  for  itself.
"The   Commission   did  consist  of   12  members—six  Demo-
crats  and   Six  Republicans  —  four   appointed   by  the   Vice
President,  four  by  the  speaker  of  the  House,  but  in  each  in-
stance  the  presiding  officer  merely  performed  the  function  of
appointing    those   Senators   and   House   members   who   had
Sincerely
1   2
previously  been  selected   by  the  respective   Majority  and  Mi-
nority  leaders.   In  the  instance  of  the  Senate,  the  Vice  Pres-
ident,  to  be  sure,  did  perform   the   official   act  of   appointing
four  Senators, but  two  Democrats  were  selected  by the  Demo-
cratic  Policy  Committee  through   the  Majority  Leader,   and
the  two  Republicans  by  the  Republican  Committee  through
its  Minority  Leader.
"Now,   you   know   the   facts   of   life   about   Congressional
appointments.    So  why  try  to  mislead  your   readers?
"While  I  do  not  agree  with  many  of  the   observations  of
the  Commission,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  several  of  the  recom-
mendations   were  highly  critical  of  the  loyalty-security   pro-
gram.   Furthermore,  some   sound   suggestions  for   improve-
ment  were  made.   I  consider  the  report  to  be helpful,  despite
its  obvious  limitations.
"I   do  not   consider   your  comments  to  be  at   all   helpful.
They   exhibit   prejudice,  lack  of  intimate  knowledge   of   the
report,  and  preconceived  notions  of  what  is  right  or  wrong.
You  have  gone  out  of  your  way  to  emphasize  those  portions
of  the  report  which  are  highly  controversial  and  less  desir-
able."
yours,  Hubert   H.   Humphrey.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.   Stone's    Weekly,    July    29,  19S7
Is  Selling  Diseased  Poultry  A  Basic  Liberty?   White House  Shields  Dollar-A-Year Men
Germans  Overwhelmingly  Against  Nuclear  Arms  for  Their  Army
Diseased  Poultry:  One-third  of  food  poisoning  cases  each
year  are  due  to  diseased  poultry  and  26  poultry  diseases  are
communicable  to  humans.  Thanks  to  a  long  campaign  by  the
Amalgamated  Meat  Cutters  and  Butchers  Union,  both  houses
of   Congress   have  finally   passed   a  bill   for   compulsory   in-
spection  of  poultry  packing,  now  a  big  business.   Most  ludi-
crous  moment  in  the  House  debate came  when  Clare  Hoffman
of   Michigan,   the   least  modern   of   Republicans,   quoted   the
Declaration   of  Independence  against  poultry  inspection.
Nuclear   War:  According  to  a  German  public  opinion   poll
(London  Times,  July  9)   three  fourths  of  the  population  of
West  Germany  is  against  the  equipping  of  the  new  German
army  with  nuclear  weapons  and  the  storing  of  these  weapons
by  allied  forces  on  German  soil.  .  .  .  France's  High  Commis-
sioner   for   Atomic  Energy,  in  an   article  for   L'Express,   has
protested   the   use  of   the   term   "clean"   in   connection  with
atom  bombs  as  a  shocking   device  to  diminish  "justified   an-
guish  of  peoples  facing  atomic  war."   .  .  .  Silliest  aftermath
of   the  recent  civil  defense  exercises   (New   York   alone   had
2,339,012  "killed"  and  2,261,238  "wounded")  was  a  New
York   Daily   News   editorial  demanding  similar  statistics  on
"what  we  did  to  them."
Peace-Time   Dollar-A-Year    Men:   Despite   all   that   cam-
paign  talk  of  ending  corruption  in  government,  the  "modern"
GOP  White  House  used  the  troglodyte  Hoffman   in  a  covert
but  unsuccessful  attempt  to  block   passage   in  the   House  of
the  first  bill  (HR  7390)  to  regulate  the  business  men's   "ad-
visory  committees,"  with  which  the  government  now  swarms.
The  debate  showed  there  are  some  35,000  committees  of  this
kind  attached  to  the  government,  a  shadow  "state  within  a
state."   Fountain  of  North  Carolina  cited  a  series  of  scandals
in  Agriculture  where  "advisory  committees"  took   advantage
of  their  inside  position.   In  one  case  a  seed  advisory  commit-
tee  formed  a  syndicate which  bought  for  less  than   $2,000,000
seed  which  had  cost  the  government   16,000,000.   Celler  of
New   York,   who  has  waged  a  long   campaign  against   these
evils,  charged  that  in  oil  matters  the  government   is  a  mere
rubber  stamp  for  the  private  advisory  committees.   The   bill
will  probably  die  in  the  Senate  since  the   Administration  is
Words  Which  Would  Doom  Mankind
"We  do  not  propose  to  eliminate  nuclear  weapons  or
the  possibility  of  their  use.  .  .  ."
—Dulles  Broadcast  on Disarmament, July  21
strongly  opposed  even  to  this first weak  measure  of  regulation.
Mote  in  Our  Own  Eye:  Jovito  Villalba,  who  would   prob-
ably  be  President  of  Venezuela  today  if  its  dictator,  Jimenez,
the  oil  company  favorite,  had  not  voided  the   1952  elections
published  a  letter  in  the  Washington   Post  July  11  students  of
Latin  American affairs  should  not  miss.   "A  few  months  ago,"
Villalba  wrote,  "Henry  Cabot  Lodge  said  in  the  United  Na-
tions  that  wherever  Russia  arrives,  liberty  disappears.   Vene-
zuela  is  the  country  where  the  presence  of  the  United  States
is  most  evident and  at  the  same time  the  one  in  which liberty
is  most  absent."
IPS   on  Nightbeat:  Our   thanks  to  the  many  readers   who
telegraphed,  wrote  or  told  us  personally  how  much  they  en-
joyed   our  appearance  on  "Nightbeat,"   the  New  York   TV
program  by  John  Wingate,  Thursday,  July  18.   We  feel  that
we  succeeded  in  saying  boldly  and  forcefully   what  countless
others  wish  they  could  say to  Congressional  and  other  investi-
gators.   Those  Americans who  wonder  at  the  spectacle  of  in-
tellectuals  in  China  called  on  to  "repent"  their  criticism  of
the  regime  may  pause  and  consider  that  this  is  exactly  what
the  witch  hunters  ask  of  dissenters  in  this  country.   I  don't
know  why either  Mr.  Wingate  or  any TV  viewer  should  have
been  surprised  by  it  but  I  did  not  "repent"  any  cause  I  have
ever  supported.   Remark which  seemed  to  please  the  audience
most  (when  asked  about  the  references  to  me  in  the   Senate
Internal  Security  Committee's  "Handbook  for  Americans"):
"They're  just a bunch of  nuts,  and  I  mean  nuts."   I was happy
to  be  able  to  put  in  simple  bar-room  language   the  obvious
fact  that  these  witch  hunt  documents  are  the  product  of  para-
noid  minds, wacky members  of  Congress  buttressed  by wackier
ex-Reds  who  use  the  Daily  Worker   as  their  Bible-in-reverse.
I   hope   I  have   encouraged   others   to   take  heart   and   speak
up,  too.
If   You're  Not  Already  A  Subscriber,   You   Can   Have  the  Weekly   6  Months  On  Trial  for  Only   $2
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Aye.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     .......................................................................................
Street     '...............................................................................-......
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  .........................................................
7/29/57
Street
City      ........................................Zone............State..................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  Q    No  Q
/ F. Stones Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
1    F.   Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  'Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W.,  Washington  IS,  D.  C.
An   independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by   I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$!.  in  the  U.  S.:  $6  In  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED