I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957may13.pdf

============================================================

Hans  Bethe  Denies  (Privately)  That  A-Tests  Are  Not  Always  Detectible,  See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  19
MAY   13,  1957
'»'        WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
And  The  Supreme  Court  Buries  McCarthyism
While   the   Senate  last  week  was  burying   McCarthy,   the
U.  S.  Supreme  Court  buried  McCarthyism.  The  decisions  in
the  Schware  and  Konigsberg   cases- do  more  than  decide  that
radicals  have a  right  to  practice  law.   The  decisions turn their
back  on  an  era  in  which  the  mere  allegation  of  Leftist  sym-
pathy  or  affiliation  was  enough  to  put  a  man  outside  the  pale.
A  striking example will illustrate  how  unmistakably the  Court
has  turned  back  the  clock  to  an  earlier and  saner period.   One
of  the  charges  on  which  the  New  Mexico  Board  of  Bar  Ex-
aminers  refused   to  permit  Rudolph  Schware  to  take  its  tests
for  admission to  the  bar  was his  arrest and  indictment in  1940
for  recruiting  volunteers  to  aid  the  Loyalists  in  Spain.   The
Supreme  Court  says,  "even  if  it  be  assumed  that  the  law  was
violated,  it  does  not  seem that  such  an  offense  indicated  moral
turpitude.  . . . Many persons in this  country actively supported
the  Spanish  Loyalists,"  and   it  adds  cooh/,   "In  determining
whether  a person's  character is  good  the  nature  of  the  offense
which  he  has  committed  must  be  taken  into  account."   This'
has  a  positive  Rip  Van  Winkle-ish  flavor;  it  awakens from  a
20-year  sleep  the  forgotten  attitudes  most  thoughtful Ameri-
cans  shared  at  the  time;  it  expunges  two  decades  of  carefully
nurtured  nightmare.
Even  the  Court's  "Right  Wing"  Agreed
The  words  were  those  of  Mr.  Justice  Black,  but  no  longer
speaking  in  last-ditch  isolation  for  Black  and  Douglas  dissent-
ing.    Here  he  spoke  for  a  majority  which  included  not  only
Chief  Justice  Warren  and  our  new  (Catholic)   Justice,  Bren-
nan,   but  even—mirabile  dictu—Mr.  Justice  Burton.   Indeed
the  "right   wing"   of  the  Court  in  these  two  cases,  Justices
Frankfurter,  Clark  and  Harlan,  dissenters  as  we  shall  see  in
the  Konigsberg  case,  saw  no  reason  to  dispute  the  majority's
judgment  in  respect  to  Schware.   They  concurred  in Schware
and  their  concurring  opinion  indicates  the  change  in  atmo-
sphere  as  strongly  as  does  the  majority  decision.   These  three,
speaking  through  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter,  object  to  the  idea
that  it  is the  Supreme  Court's  function  "to  act as  overseer  of  a
particular  result  of  the  procedure  established   by  a  particular
State  for  admission  to  its  bar."    They  would  interfere  only
when  a man  is not  allowed  to  qualify  himself  for  the  bar  "on
a  wholly  arbitrary standard  or  on  a  consideration  that   offends
the  dictates of  reason"  and  thus,  in  their  opinion,  runs  athwart
the  Due  Process  clause.    Only  in  such  extreme  circumstances
would  Justices  Frankfurter,  Clark  and  Harlan  intervene.   But
they found  such  circumstances  in  the  Schware case.
The   circumstance  which   Justices   Frankfurter,   Clark   and
Harlan  found  "controlling" was the  fact  that  the  New  Mexico
Supreme  Court,  in  upholding   Schware's  exclusion   from   the
bar,  kid   its  main  stress  on  the  fact  that  Schware  was  admit-
The  Majority's Credo
"We  recognize the  importance  of  leaving States  free
to  select  their  own  bars,  but  it  is  equally  important
that  the  State  not  exercise  this  power  in  an arbitrary
or  discriminatory  manner  nor  in  such  way  as   to  im-
pinge  on  the  freedom  of  political  expression  or  asso-
ciation.   A  bar  composed  of  lawyers  of  good character
is  a  worthy  objective  but  it  is  unnecessary to sacrifice
'Vital  freedoms  in  order  to  obtain  that  goal.   It  is  also
important  both  to  society  and  the  bar  itself  that law-
yers  be  unintimidated—free  to  think,  speak  and  act  as
members  of  an  Independent  Bar."
—Mr.  Justice  Black,  Konigsberg  v.  Calif.  State  Bar
tedly  a  member  of  the  Communist party  from  1932  to   1940.
The  New  Mexico  Supreme  Court  said  it  felt  that  "one  who
has  knowingly  given  his  loyalty to  such  a  program  and  belief
for  six  to  seven  years  during  a  period  of  responsible  adult-
hood  is  a  person  of  questionable  character."     But  the   three
concurring Justices find this  "so  dogmatic an  inference as to  be
wholly  unwarranted."
End  of  A  Witch  Hunt  Axiom
Mr.   Justice   Frankfurter  writes,   "History   overwhelmingly
establishes  that  many  youths  like  the  petitioner  were  drawn
by  the  mirage  of  Communism  during  the  depression  era,  only
to have their  eyes  opened  later  to  reality.   Such  experiences  no
doubt  may  disclose  a  woolly  mind  or  naive  notions   regard-
ing  the  problems  of   society.    But  facts   of  history  that   we
would  be arbitrary in  rejecting  bar the presumption  .  .  .  that
response  to  foolish,  baseless  hopes  regarding  the  betterment
of   society  made  those  who  had   entertained   them  but   who
later  undoubtedly  came to their  senses  . .  .  'questionable char-
acters'."  That  Tom  Clark  and  Brownell's  friend,  John  Marsh-
all  Harlan,  should  have  joined  in  these  words  is  a  portent.
For  it  has  been  one  of  the  axioms  of  the  witch  hunt   period,
before  and  after  McCarthy's  own  rise  and  fall,  that  once  a
Communist  always  a  Communist,   or  at  least  a  suspect.    Not
just  Congressional  committees  but  also  the  State  Department,
in  its  passport   regulations,   underwrote   the  notion   that  one
could  believe  such  a  person  sincerely  non-Communist  only  if
he  informed  on  others,  and  thereby  enlisted   himself   in  the
witch  hunt.   This  was  also  one  of  the  axioms  of  the   Spanish
Inquisition.    Its  explicit  abandonment  by  minority  as  well  as
majority  throws  open  the  -windows  to  fresh  air.
II
A  few  years  ago,  when  McCarthy  was  riding  high,  it  is
difficult  to  imagine  the  Supreme  Court  even  agreeing  to  hear
the  Schware  and  Konigsberg  appeals.   The  mingled  facts  and
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 13,  1957
allegations  would  have  made  them  seem  too  disreputable   to
deserve  judicial  intervention.  Beside  his  past  membership   in
the  Communist party  and  his  indictment  for  recruiting   volun-
teers  for  Spain,  Rudolph  Schware  had  used  a  false  name  as  a
labor   organizer,   and   had   been   arrested   several   times   for
"criminal  syndicalism" during the  1934  general  strike  in  Cali-
fornia.   Normally—-or  at  least  by  the  standards which  had  be-
come  normal  during  the  cold  war  decade—this  would  have
been  regarded  as  more  than  sufficient   to  show  bad  character
and  therefore  disqualify   for  admission  to  the  bar.   Raphael
Konigsberg's  record  was  as  bad,  if  not  worse,  from  this  point
of  view,  because  his  political  derelictions  were  more   recent.
California's  rules  require  that  an  applicant  for  admission  to
the  bar  must  establish  the  fact  that  he  is  of  good  moral  char-
acter  and  does  not  advocate violent overthrow  of  the  govern-
ment.   Konigsberg  had   been   identified   as  a  Communist  by
an  informer  before  the  State's  own   [Tenney]  Un-American
Activities  Committee.   He  had  refused   on  First  Amendment
grounds  to  answer  any  questions  put  by  the  bar  examiners as
to  his  political beliefs and  associations except  to  swear  that  he
did  not  believe  in  violent  overthrow.   And  he  had  written  a
series  of  editorials  during  the  Korean  War  for  a  publication
called  the   California   Eagle  which  no  one  would   ever   have
mistaken  for  pieces  by  Walter  Lippmann.   Indeed  the  editors
of  the  Daily  Worker  might  well  have  rejected  some  of  them
as  on  the  intemperate  side.
No  Devotee  of  Understatement
The  selections  given  in  the  briefs  for  the  State  Bar  of  Cali-
fornia  show  that  Mr.  Konigsberg  was not  slavishly  devoted  to
the  cause  of  understatement.   "Not   all  the  criminal  gangs  in
American   history  put  together,"  he  wrote  in  one   editorial,
"were  as  great  a  danger  to  our  country's  welfare  as  are  the
generals  who  today  urge  that  American  youth  be  trained  as
'killers'.  .  .  . None  of  the  murders  have  been  so  sinful  as  a
Dulles  who  uses  religion  to  champion  the  anti-Christ.   None
such  a  threat  to  our  security  as  a  U.  S.  Attorney  General  who
denies  us the  right  to  bail  and  tells  brother  to  spy on  brother."
Another  selection  was headed,  "The  Cesspool"  and  subheaded
"Traitor!  Traitor!"   (Mr.   Konigsberg    is  not   the   kind   of
writer  who  spares  the  exclamation  point).   It  was  succinct,  if
not  calm.   "Betrayal  is  in  the  air,"  he  wrote.    "Judges  with
impunity  violate  our  constitutional  rights.  .  .  .  Stool  pigeons
are  the  new  national  heroes.  .  .  .  The  President   violates  his
oath  of   office   by  dragging   us  into  war."    Another   selection
said,  "To  consider  loyalty  to  America  as  identical  with   Tru-
Not  Impressed  by  'Criminal  Syndicalism'
"In  1934,  while  he  was  participating   in  a  bitter  labor
dispute  in  the  California   shipyards,  petitioner  was  ar-
rested  at  least  two  times  on  'suspicion  of  criminal   syn-
dicalism.'  .  .  .  The  mere  fact  that  a  man  was  arrested
has  very  little,  if  any  probative   value  in  showing  that
he  has  engaged  in  any  misconduct.   .  .  .  Moreover  here,
the  special   facts  surrounding  the  1934  arrests  are  rele-
vant   in  shedding   light   on   their   present   significance.
Apparently   great  numbers   of  strikers  were  picked   up
by  police  in  a  series  of  arrests  during  the  strike  at  San
Pedro  and  many  of  these  were  charged  with  'criminal
syndicalism.'    The   California    syndicalism   statutes   in
effect  in  1934  were  very  broad  and  vague."
—Mr.  Justice  Black  in  Schware  v.  Bar  Examiners
man,   Dulles  &  U.  S.  Steel  is,  to  me,  the  ultimate in  sacrilege.
.  .  .  Lynchers  of  Americans  and  engineers  of  the  doctrine  of
guns  over  butter."   Obviously  Mr.  Konigsberg   is  not  one  to
use  his  First  Amendment rights  sparingly.  The  horrified  bar
examiners  found  these  selections  not  only  heretical  politically
but  "morally  deficient."   His  own  intrepid  attorneys,  Edward
Mosk  and  Samuel  Rosenwein,  must  have  wondered  whether
the  Justices  of  the  Supreme  Court  would  not  hastily  pull  the
bedcovers  over  their  heads  after  reading  these  selections  and
deny  Mr.  Konigsberg   a  hearing.
The  majority  seems  to  have  regarded  these  brash  utterances
with  a  sense  of  humor  that  has  been  lacking  here  for   some
time.   Indeed  Mr.  Justice  Black  exhumes  from  the  record  and
cites  in  a  footnote,  with  an  almost  audible  chuckle,  an  edi-
torial  in which  Mr.  Konigsberg  in  his  machine-gun  prose  cen-
tered  his  fire  on  the  Supreme  Court  for  refusing  to  hear  the
Hollywood   Ten  and  said  this  made  "that  high   tribunal  an
integral  part  of   the   cold   war  machine  directed  against   the
American  people."   Mr.  Justice  Black  for  the  majority  finds
that  these  editorials  "fairly  interpreted   only  say  that  certain
officials  were  performing  their  duty  in  a  manner  that,  in  the
opinion  of  the  writer,  was  injurious  to  the  public.   We   do
not   believe   that   an   inference  of   bad   moral   character   can
rationally  be drawn  from  these  editorials.  .  .  .  Courts  are  not,
and   should   not  be,  immune  to  such  criticism.    Government
censorship  can  no  more  be  reconciled  with  our  national   con-
stitutional  standard  of  freedom  of  speech  and  press  when  done
in  the  guise  of  determining  'moral  character,'  than  if  it  should
be  attempted  directly."   It  has  been  a  long  time  since  a major-
ity  of  the  U.   S.  Supreme   Court  regarded   radical  utterances
with  such  Hyde  Park  calm.
How  the  New  Majority Evaluates  Evidence  of Past  Communist  Membership
"The   suspicion  that  Konigsberg  was  or  had  been  a   Com-
munist   was  based  chiefly  on  the  testimony  of  a  single  ex-
Communist   that   Konigsberg  had  attended  meetings  of   a
Communist   party  unit  in  1941.   From  the'witness'  testimony
it  appears  that  this  unit  was  some  kind  of  discussion  group.
On  cross-examination  she  conceded  that  her  sole  basis  for
believing  that  Konigsberg  was  a  member  of  that  party  was
his  attendance  at  these  meetings.   Her  testimony  concerned
events  that  occurred  many  years  before  and  her  identifica-
tion  was  not  very  convincing.  .  .  .
"Even  if  it  be  assumed  that  Konigsberg  was  a  member  of
the  Communist   party  in  1941,  the  mere  fact  of  membership
would  not  support  an  inference  that  he  did  not  have  good
moral   character.   There  was  no  evidence  that  he  ever  en-
gaged  in  or  abetted  any   unlawful   or  immoral  activities—
or  even  that  he  knew  of  or  supported  any  actions  of  this
nature.   It  may  be,  although  there  is  no  evidence  in  the
record  before  us  to  that  effect,  that  some  members  of   the
party   were   involved   in   illegal   or  disloyal   activities,   but
petitioner  cannot  be. swept  into  this  group  solely  on  the
basis  of  his  alleged  membership  in  that  party.
"In  1941  the  Communist  party  was  a  recognized  political
party  in  the  State  of  California.  Citizens  of  that  State  were
free  to  belong  to  that  party  if  they  wanted  to  do  so.   The
State  had  not  attempted  to  attach  penalties  of  any  kind  to
membership  in  the  Communist  party.  Its  candidates'  names
were  on the ballots  California  submitted  to  its  voters.  Those
who  accepted  the  State  at  its  word  and  joined  that  party
had  a  right  to  expect  that  the  State   would   not  penalize
them,  directly  or  indirectly,  for  doing  so  thereafter."
—Mr.  Justice  Black,  for  the  majority,  in  Konigsberg  v.  Calif.   State  Bar
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 13, 1957
III
The  three  dissenters  in  this  case,  Frankfurter,  Harlan  and
Clark,  do  not  find  Mr.  Konigsberg's  literary style any  evidence
of  moral  dereliction,  either.   Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  objected
only  that  it  was  doubtful  whether  Federal  questions  had  been
raised  before  the  California  Supreme  Court;  he  would   have
remanded  on  jurisdictional  grounds  and  asked  the  State tri-
bunal  to  certify  "whether or  not  it  did  in  fact  pass  on  a  claim
properly  before  it  under  the  Due  Process  clause  of  the  Four-
teenth   amendment."    Mr.   Justice   Harlan,   with  Mr.   Justice
Clark  concurring,  went  further.   They  objected  that  the bur-
den  of  proof  is on  the  applicant  for  admission  to  the  bar, and
that  the  bar  examiners had  a  right  to  ask  questions  about  his
political  affiliations  in  order  to  test  his  "bare  assertion"  that
he  did  not  believe  in  overthrow  of  the  government  by  force
and  violence,  especially  since  the  majority  did  not  go  so  far
as  to  hold  that  such  questions  were  privileged  under  the  First
Amendment.   Even  these  two  Justices  made  it  clear  that  they
were  not  arguing  that  a  man  could   be  barred  from   the  law
"because  of  bare  membership,  past  or  present,   in  the Com-
munist   party"   or   "because   of   his   political   views."     They
argued  only  that  the  bar  examiners  were  prevented  from dis-
charging  their   "statutory   responsibilities"   by  the  applicant's
refusal  to  answer  questions.     It  is  quite  a  change  when   the
Court's  right  wing  goes  no  further   right  than  that.
First  Amendment  Claims  Not   Frivolous
The   majority,   as  if  celebrating   a  kind   of   field   day   after
the  long  winter  of  judicial  evasion  and  abnegation,   has  no
time  for  such  craftsmanlike  legal  conservatism.    "The  State
argues,"  Mr.  Justice  Black  says,  "that  Konigsberg's   refusal  to
tell  the  examiners  whether  he  was  a  member  of  the  Commu-
nist  party  or  whether   he  had   associated   with   persons   who
were  members  of  that  party  or  groups  which  were   allegedly
Communist  dominated  tends  to  support  an  inference  that  he
is  a  member  of  the  Communist  party  and  therefore  a  person
of  bad  moral  character.   We  find  it  unnecessary  to  decide  if
Konigsberg's   constitutional   objections   to   the    Committee's
questions  were  well  founded.   Prior   decisions   by  this   court
indicated  that  his  claim  that  the  questions  were  not  improper
was  not  frivolous *  and  we  find  nothing  in  the  record  which
* Here,  in  a  footnote,   the  Court  cites  opinions   more  hon-
ored  recently   in  the  breach   than  the   observance:   U.  S.  v.
Rumely,  Thomas  v.  Collins,   West   Va.   Brd.  of   Ed.  v.   Bar-
nette,  Cantwell  v.  Conn,  and  De  Jonge  v.  Oregon  (all   past
landmarks  of  civil  liberties)  and  quotes  from  Jones  v.  Ope-
lika,  "Freedom  to  think  is  absolute  of  its  own  nature.  .  .  ."
A  Lifetime  of  Good  Citizenship
"Here,  42  individuals  who  had  known  Konigsberg   at
different  times  during  the  past  20  years  attested  to  his
excellent   character.  .  .  .  Included  among  them  were  a
Catholic   priest,  a  Jewish  rabbi,  lawyers,  doctors.  .  .  .
Even  more  significant,  not  a  single  person  had  testified
that   Konigsberg's   moral  character   was   bad  or   ques-
tionable  in  any  way.  .  . . The  mere  fact  of  Konigsberg's
past  membership in  the  Communist party, if  true, with-
out  anything  more,  is  not  an  adequate  basis  for  con-
cluding  that  he  is  disloyal  or  a  person  of  bad  character.
A  lifetime  of  good  citizenship  is  worth  very  little  if  it
is  so  frail  that  it  cannot  withstand the  suspicions  which
apparently  were  the  basis  for  the  Bar  Committee's  ac-
tion."
—Mr.  Justice  Black,  Konigsberg   v.  Calif.  State  Bar
indicates   that   his   position   was   not   taken   in   good   faith.
Obviously  the   State  could   not   draw  unfavorable  inferences
as to  his  truthfulness,  candor  or  his  moral  character  in  general
if  his  refusal  to  answer  was  based  on  a  belief  that  the  U.  S.
Constitution  prohibited  the  type  of  inquiries  which  the Com-
mittee  was  making.    On  the  record  before  us,  it  is  our  judg-
ment  that  the  inferences  of  bad  moral   character  which   the
Committee  attempted  to  draw  from   Konigsberg's   refusal   to
answer  questions  about  his  political  affiliations   and  opinions
are   unwarranted."    This   gives   new  weight   and   dignity   to
claims  of  First  Amendment   privilege.
It  is  always  hazardous  to  draw  straight  lines  from   general
propositions   in  current  cases  to  the  outcome  of  other   future
cases.    But  it  is hard  not  to  be hopeful  about  a  court  on which
a  majority   of  the  members,   [the  newest   judge,  Whittaker,
took  no  part],  regard  so  astringently  views,  facts  and  allega-
tions  which  until  recently  would  have  been  damning.     The
two  appellants,   Schware  and  Konigsberg,   though   men  with
honorable   war  and  civilian  records,  would  have  been  cruci-
fied  by  a  McCarthy.    Liberals,  middle-of-the-roaders  and con-
servatives  alike  on  this  Court  seem  prepared  to  take  an  adult
view  of  past  Communist  party  membership,  and  a  respectful
attitude  toward  First  Amendment  claims.  They  seem  prepared
at  last  here,  as  in  other   free   societies,  to  untangle  the   real
problems   of  Communism  from  the  hobgoblins   of   cold   war
demonology.    Whatever  that   evil  and   unscrupulous  adven-
turer  McCarthy  died  of,  a  black  sense  of  failure  and  public
rejection  hastened   his  sodden  end. His  punier  successors  are
likely  to  contract  similar  ailments  when  they  ponder  on   the
Schware  and  Konigsberg  decisions.    It  looks  as  if  the  witch
hunt  is  drawing  to  its  close.
The  Majority  Holds  Party  Membership  Alone  No  Proof  of Wrongdoing
"The  [New  Mexico] court  assumed  that  in  the  1930's  when
petitioner  was  a  member  of  the  Communist  party,  it  was
dominated  by  a  foreign  power  and  was  dedicated  to  the  vio-
lent  overthrow  of  the  Government  and  that  every  member
was  aware  of  this.   It  based  this  assumption  primarily  on  a
view  of  the  nature  and  purposes  of  the  Communist  Party
as  of  1950  expressed  in  a  concurring  opinion  [by  Mr.  Jus-
tice  Jackson]  in  Communications  Association  v.  Douds,  339
U.S.  422  [upholding  the  non-Communist  oath  provisions  of
the  Taft-Hartley  Act],   however  that  view  did  not  purport
to  be  a  factual  finding  and  obviously  it  cannot  be  used  as  a
substitute  for  evidence  in  this  case  to  show  that   petitioner
participated  in  any  illegal  activity  or  did  anything  morally
reprehensible.  .  .  .
—Mr.  Justice  Black  in  Schware
"Schware  joined  the  Communist  party  when  he   was   a
young  man  during  the  midst  of  this  country's  greatest  de-
pression.    Apparently  many  thousands  of  other   Americans
joined  him  in  this  step.  .  .  .  Later  the  rise  of  fascism  as  a
menace  to  democracy  spurred  others  who  feared  this  form
of  tyranny  to  align  with  the  Communist party.   After  1935,
that  party  advocated  a  'Popular  Front' ...  Its  platform
and  slogans  stressed  full  employment,  racial  equality  and
various   other   political   and  economic  changes.  .  .  .
"Assuming   that  some  members  of  the  Communist  party
during  the  period  from  1932  to  1940  had  illegal  aims  and
engaged  in  illegal  activities,  it  cannot  automatically  be  in-
ferred  that  all  members  shared  their  evil  purposes   or  par-
ticipated  in  their  illegal  conduct.  .  .  ."
v.  New  Mexico  Bar   Examiners
7   V
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  13, 1957
One  Easy  Way  to  End  Controversy  About  Jury  Trials  in  Civil  Rights  Cases
Hans  Bethe  Denies  (Privately)  That  A-Tests  Are  Not  Always  Detectible
At  a meeting  of  atomic physicists here,  Hans  Bethe,  perhaps
the  world's  foremost  authority  on  the  subject,  angrily  denied
the  British  government's   claim  that  not  all  atomic  tests  can
be  detected,  and  that  a  world  agreement  to  end  tests  would
therefore  not  be self-enforcible.   But  Bethe  is  still  inhibited  by
his  relations with  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  from  saying
this  publicly.
One   way  to  break  the   deadlock  over   jury   trials   in con-
tempt  cases  arising  out  of  civil  rights  legislation  would  be  to
provide that  the  juries  should  be  equally  divided  between  the
races.   The  jury  is  supposed  to  represent  the  opinion  of  the
community,  but  an  all  white  Southern  jury  only  reflects  the
opinion  of  the  white community.
During  the NATO  meeting,  the  German  Foreign  Minister,
von  Brentano,  held  a  press  conference.   He  indicated  in  reply
to  a  question  that  the  NATO  powers  had  agreed  that  they
would  make  no  disarmament agreement with  the  Soviet  Union
unless  Moscow  first  accepted  Western   terms  on  reunification
of  Germany, i.e.  that  the  reunited  Reich  become  a  member  of
NATO.   Little  attention  has  been  paid  by  the  press  outside
Germany  to  this  remark  but, if  true,  then  the  disarmament
talks  are  eye-wash and  the  real  purpose  of  the  arms  race  is  not
"deterrence"   but  pressure   on  Moscow   to  surrender   on   the
German   question.
The   London   Sunday   Times   (May  5)   interprets  the  new
Krushchev  plan  for  decentralization  of  industry as  determined
in  part  by  fear  of  atomic  war.   "One  atom  bomb  on  Moscow
under  the  old  system,"  it  says,  "would  have  crippled  any  war
effort."
Thomas  E.  Murray's  term  as  Atomic  Energy  Commissioner
expires   June   30   and   unless   some   public   support   can   be
whipped  up  he  is  unlikely  to  be  appointed  to  a  new five-year
term.  We  were  surprised  and  pleased   to  see  that  the  New
York  Daily  News  (May  8)   came  out  for  his  reappointment.
It  said  it  could  not  go  along  with  his  "ultra-noble"  ideas  on
the  H-bomb  and  thinks  him  wrong  9  times  out  of  ten.  "But
Murray  up  till  now,"  the  News  said,  "has  been  the  only  man
on  the five-member AEC who has had  the  courage  to  talk  back
Why   Not  Start  A   Cift    Sub   for   A  Sad  Sack
I. F.
Pleas
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska
Washington
B  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for   the
t    ....................................................
........................................Zone......
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
we  send  gift  announcement?
Ave.,   N.
15,  D.  C.
enclosed
W.
$5:*
......State.................
(1 yr.) additional:
5/13/57
Yes  O   No
D
In   Memoriam
Of  that  wonderful  breed  of  assorted  liberals,  radicals
and  idealists   who   made   the   New   Deal   what   it   was
few   remain  in  Washington,  and  of  that  few  there  are
fewer   still  who  have  not  abdicated  political  and  moral
responsibility  to  live  safely   reconciled  in  the  current
atmosphere.   Mrs. Frances   Wheeler   Sayler,   who  has
just  died  here,  was  one  of  those  few.  In  the  Women's
Bureau  of  the  Labor  Department,   with  the  La  Follette
Committee,  later  in  the  Committee   to  Abolish  the  Poll
Tax,    afterwards   as   legislative   representative   of   the
U.K.,  her  life  was  one  of  happy  service  in  the  cause  of
social   reform.    Even  recently,  though  terribly   and  fa-
tally  'ill,   she   found   ways  of   being  active,   and   ran  a
quietly  successful  campaign  to  open  the  movie  houses
of   Rockville,   Md.,   and   the   eating   establishments   of
Silver  Springs,  Md.,  to  Negroes.   As  a  person  she  radi-
ated  a  joyful   faith  and  kindliness.   This  issue  is   dedi-
cated  to  her   memory.
in  public  to  Chairman  Lewis  L.  Strauss"  and  "it  is  healthy  to
have  one  bold  No-man   on  any  government   commission."
Alger  Hiss's  In  the  Court of  Public Opinion  is a  better  book
than  Earl  Jowitt's  rather  condescending  volume.    Its  closely
argued  legal  analysis  leaves  one  with  a  feeling  of  reasonable
doubt  but  until  there  is  some  new  break  in  the  case  it  will  re-
main  the  biggest  question  mark  of  our  times.   Hiss  in  effect  is
called  upon  after   the  passage  of  so  many  years  to  prove  a
negative.  We  have  asked  Vern  Countryman, formerly  of  Yale
Law  School  to  review  the  book  in  our  next  issue.
Little-candle-in-a-naughty-world  note:  Walter  S.  Salant,  a
professional  economist,  and  H.  Field  Haviland,  Jr., a  profes-
sor  of  political  science  at  Haverford  College,  had  the  temerity
to  publish  a  joint  letter  in  the  Washington   Post   (May   4),
apropos  the Norman  suicide,  defending  the  study  of  Marxism
against  current  house-dick  ideology.    "If  anything  needed  de-
fense,"  Messrs.  Salant  and  Haviland  wrote  bravely,  "it  would
be  the  failure  of  a  serious  student  to  give  some  attention   to
Marx's  work."   This  was  read   with  a  gulp  in  Washington
where  in  many  homes  stray  volumes  of  Marx  were  long  ago
relegated  to  that  dark  spot  behind  the  furnace.
Liberal  Friend   With   This   Cheerful     Issue?
IF.Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.   P.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent  weekly   published  and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the   U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED