I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jun24.pdf

============================================================

What   Those  New  Decisions  Mean
The  Supreme  Court  Upholds  Academic  Freedom  in  The  Sweezy  Case,  Page  3.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  25
JUNE  24, 1957
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Congressional  Witch  Hunt  Is  Over
If  Torquemada  had  received  a  Papal  edict  ordering  him  to
cease  burning heretics  unless  actually  caught  defacing Church
property,  he would  have  been  no  more  appalled  than  the  staffs
of  the  House Un-American Activities Committee  and  the Sen-
ate  Internal  Security  Committee  by  the  Watkins   and  Sweezy
decisions.   A  deep  gloom  has  settled  on  both.   The  day  after
the  Supreme  Court  handed  down  its  verdict,  the  Senate com-
mittee  was  supposed  to  interrogate  several  long  harassed  of-
ficials of  a  Left  wing  union.   But  its  acting  chairman,  Senator
Hruska   (R.  Neb.)  meekly  consented  to  a  week's  postpone-
ment  on  request  of  defense  counsel,  Victor  Rabinowitz.   Mr.
Rabinowitz  said  he  needed  a  week  to  study the  Watkins  opin-
ion  and  advise his  clients.   It  was apparent  that  what  he  want-
ed  to  advise them  on  was  whether  under  this  decision  it  was
any  longer  necessary to  answer  the  kind  of  questions  in  which
these  committees  specialize.   The  House  committee  later  the
same  day  postponed  a  similar  executive  session  for  the  same
humbling  reasons.   On  both  committees,   staff   members  were
unusually  subdued  and  polite,  as  is  natural  in  men  threatened
The  Public  Pillory
"Merely   to   summon  a   witness   and   compel him,
against  his  will,  to  disclose  the  nature  of  his  past  ex-
pressions   and  associations   is   a  measure   of   govern-
mental  interference in  these  matters.  These  are  rights
which  are  safeguarded  by  the  Bill  of  Rights  and  the
Fourteenth  amendment."
—Chief  Justice Warren, in Sweezy  v.  New  Hampshire.
by  technological  unemployment.    For  while  no  one  here  in
Washington   is  sure  precisely  what  the  Court's  ruling  in  Wat-
kins  means,  there is  agreement  on  both  sides  of  the  fence  that
it  means  serious  trouble  for  both  inquisitorial   Committees.
A Natural  for the  Smithsonian
Our  own opinion  is that June  17,  1957, will  go down  in  the
history  books   as  the   day  on  which   the   Supreme   Court   ir-
reparably  crippled  the  witch  hunt.   The  Court  did  not  in  so
many  words  declare  ideological  inquisition  by  Congress  un-
constitutional under  the  First  amendment,  but  it  came  as close
to  saying that  as  is  probably  feasible.   A  few  more  cases  may
be  required  to  develop  clearly  the  full  implications.   But  when
these  appear  it  will  be  seen  that  the  House  Un-American Ac-
tivities   Committee   as  we   have  known   it   for   two   painful
decades  is  out  of  business.   So,  I  believe,  are  the  little  un-
American  committees  set  up  by  the  States  in  imitation  of  it.
The  Internal  Security Committee  of  the  Senate,  too, will  have
to  behave  quite  differently  if  it  is  to  survive  at  all.  The  Court
under  Warren   struck  four  mighty  blows  last  Monday  for  a
freer  and  saner  America.   The  Service,  California   Smith  Act,
Sweezy   and   Watkins   decisions   represent   giant   steps   away
from   the-  peculiarly  un-American  habits  engendered   in   the
7*                                                                                                 9
Limits  of  Congressional  Investigation
"There  is  no  general  authority  to  expose  the private
affairs  of  individuals  without  justification  in  terms  of
the  functions  of  Congress.  .  .  .  Nor  is  the  Congress  a .
law  enforcement  or  trial  agency.   These  are  functions
of   the  executive  and  judicial  departments  of  govern-
ment.  No  inquiry  is  an end in itself; it  must be  related
to  and  in  furtherance  of  a  legitimate  task  of  the  Con-
gress.   Investigations conducted  solely  for  the  personal
aggrandizement   of   the   investigators   or   to   'punish'
those  investigated  are  indefensible.  .  .  .  The  Bill  of
Rights  is  applicable  to  investigations  as  to  all  forms
of    governmental   action.   Witnesses   cannot   be com-
pelled  to give evidence against  themselves. .. . Nor can
the   First  Amendment  freedoms  of   speech,  press,  re-
ligion,  or  political  belief  and  association  be  abridged."
—Chief   Justice Warren, in  Watkins v. V.S.
era  which  began  with  Dies  and  closed  with  McCarthy.    The
best  thing  Chairman  Walter  can  do  now  is  to  bequeath him-
self  to  the  Smithsonian.
Where They  Made Their Mistake
We  would  not  blame  him  and  his  colleagues   if  after  all
these  years  of  witch  hunting,  they  really  suspected  witchcraft.
While  attention was  diverted  to  chasing  random  Communists,
who  had  time  to  suspect  citizens  as  solid  as  Eisenhower  and
Brownell?   Who   would  have  dreamt  that  they  would   pack
the    Court   with    Constitution-carrying   Republicans?    Who
could  have  foreseen  five  years  ago  that  the  first  Republican
victory  in  a  presidential  election  since  1928 would  give  us  a
court  like  this  one?  Where  Walter  and  Eastland  made  their
mistake  is  now  obvious.  They  investigated  the  wrong  party.
The  discerning  noticed  some  time  ago, of  course,  that  poor
Earl  Warren   had  fallen  prey  to  possession   by  a  liberalistic
succubus  beyond  hope  of  exorcism.   But  Harlan—hand  picked
by  Brownell—had  been  regarded   as  impervious  to  demoniac
wile.  Yet  it  was Harlan  who  wrote  the  Service and   California
Smith  Act  decisions.  'The  effect  of  the  former  is  moral.   Mr.
Service,  eight  times  cleared,  once  by  a  grand   jury,  six  times
by  loyalty security  boards,  and  once  by  a  Senate  investigating
committee,  was  nonetheless  fired  by Secretary of  State Acheson
under   pressure  from   McCarthy   and   a   weak-kneed  Loyalty
Review  Board.  Mr.  Service was McCarthy's  first  triumph,  and
one  of  the  China  Lobby's  earliest  targets.   Mr.  Justice Har-
lan's  ruling  was  procedural  and   45  too  complex   to  explain
here.   But  in  effect  it  held  that  once  a  Secretary  of  State  has
set  up  formal  regulations  to  provide  some  semblance  of  due
process  in  loyalty  cases,  he  has  waived  such  powers  of sum-
mary  discharge  as  were  conferred  on  him   by  the   so-called
McCarran  riders.   He  cannot  turn  around  and  summarily fire
(Continued   on  Page   Two")
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  H, 1957
{Continued  -from   Page   One)
a   man   who   has   been   cleared   by  the   normal   departmental
loyalty-security  procedures.   We  congratulate  Mr.  Service  and
his   faithful   counsel,   Charles   Edward   Rhetts,  on  their   long
fight  for   justice.
The  Same  Harlan
California's   was   the   first   Smith   Act   case   in   which   the
Supreme   Court  has  adjudged   the  sufficiency   of  the  evidence.
The  Dennis  decision  dealt   only  with  the  constitutionality of
the  Smith  Act.   The  Pittsburgh   case  was  remanded  for  a  new
trial  on  the  informer  issue.   Here  for  the  first  time  the  Su-
preme  Court  was  doing  what  Chief  Justice  Vinson  promised
it  would   some  time  do  when  he  wrote  Dennis.   It  was  evalu-
No  General  Power  to  Expose
"We  have  no  doubt  that  there   is   no   congressional
power  to  expose   for  the  sake  of  exposure.   The  public
is,   of   course,  entitled  to  be  informed  concerning   the
workings  of  its   government.   That  cannot  be   inflated
into  a  general  power  to  expose  where  the  predominant
result  can  only  be  an  invasion  of  the  private  rights  of
individuals."
—Chief  Justice  Warren, in  Watkins  v.  U.S.
ating  the  evidence  and  the  conduct   of  the  trial.   The  result
was  not  only  to  order  the  acquittal  of  five  of  the  California
defendants  but  to  set  standards  for   the  retrial  of   the   other
nine  which  will  make  new  convictions  in  future  Smith  Act
trials  much  more  difficult.    It  was  strange  to  get  this  decision
from  the  same  Mr.  Justice  Harlan  who  wrote  so  extreme  an
opinion  on  the  Circuit  bench  upholding  the  conviction  of  the
"second  string"  Communist  leaders.   Much  of  what  Mr.  Jus-
tice  Harlan  wrote   for  the  majority   (only   Mr.   Justice  Clark
dissenting   on  the   result)   is  fine  spun   Alice-in-Wonderland
nonsense  of  the  kind  bred  on  courts  trying  to  reconcile  with
First   amendment   freedoms   a  statute   which   makes   the   dis-
semination   of   ideas  a  crime.   What   Mr.   Justice  Black   and
Douglas  in  their   separate  opinion   assert   (see   box  on   page
four)   will  some  day  be  the  law.   But  in  the  meantime  it  is
helpful   to  have  Mr.  Justice  Harlan  insisting  that  there   must
be  some  semblance  of  "incitement  to  action"  to  make  a  Smith
On  The  First  Amendment
"Clearly,  an  investigation  is  subject  to  the command
that  the  Congress  shall  make no  law  abridging freedom
of  speech  or  press  or  assembly.   While  it  is  true  that
there  is  no  statute  to  be  reviewed, and  that  an  investi-
gation   is  not  a  law,  nevertheless   an  investigation   is
part  of  law-making.   It  is  justified  solely  as  an adjunct
to  the  legislative  process.   The  First  Amendment may
be  invoked against  infringement  of  the  protected free-
doms  by  law  or  by  law-making. .  .  .
"Nor  does  the  witness  alone  suffer  the  consequences.
Those   who   are   identified   by   witnesses    and  thereby
placed  in  the  same  glare  of  publicity  are  equally sub-
ject  to  public  stigma,  scorn  and  obloquy.   Beyond that,
there  is  the  more  subtle  and  immeasurable effect   upon
those  who  tend  to  adhere  to  the  most  orthodox  and  un-
controversial  views  and  associations  in  order  to  avoid a
similar  fate  at  some  future  time.  That  this  impact  is
partly  the  result  of  non-governmental  activity  by  pri-
vate  persons  cannot  relieve  the  investigators  of  their
responsibility   for  initiating  the  reaction."
—Chief  Justice  Warren  in  Watkins  v.  U.S.
Act   conviction  stick.   A   few   more   astringest  decisions  like
this  one  and  the  Act  will  die  on  the  vine.
A  Triumph  for   Edgerton
The   Watkins   and   Sweezy   decisions   were   a   triumph   for
three   brave   dissenters   on   the   Circuit   bench,   Chief   Judge
Henry   W.   Edgerton   and   Judge   David   L.   Bazelon   of   the
Court   of   Appeals   for   the   District   of   Columbia,  and   Judge
Charles  E.  Clark  of  the  Second  Circuit  in  New  York.   Judges
Edgerton  and  Bazelon  wrote  the  first  opinion  here  on   Wat-
kins,   2-1  for   acquittal   only   to   have   themselves   hastily  re-
versed  on  rehearing  by  the  full  bench.   More  important,  how-
ever,  is  the  fact  that  Chief   Justice  Warren  in  Watkins   and
Sweezy   has  largely  adopted   the  reasoning  of  that  noble  and
moving  dissent  Chief  Judge   Edgerton   wrote  in   1948   in  the
Bar sky  case  when  cold  war  was  just  beginning   to  stow  away
traditional  freedoms  in  deep  freeze.   Judge  Edgerton  was  the
lone   dissenter   a   decade   ago   against   the    decisions    which
sent   the   Hollywood   Ten,   the   members   of   the   Joint   Anti-
Fascist  Refugee  Committee,  Dr.  Edward  Barsky,  Helen  Bryan
and   Richard   Morford   of   the   National   Council   for   Soviet
American   Friendship   to  jail  for  contempt  of  the  House  Un-
What  the  Supreme  Court  Had  to  Say  of
"Our  form   of   government  is  built  on  the  premise   that
every  citizen  shall  have  the  right  to  engage  in  political  ex-
pression  and  association.    This  right  was  enshrined  in  the
First  Amendment  of  the  Bill  of  Rights.   Exercise  of  these
basic  freedoms  in  America  has  traditionally  been  through
the  media  of  political  associations.    Any  interference  with
the  freedom  of  a  party  is  simultaneously  an  interference
with  the  freedom  of  its  adherents.   All  political  ideas  can-
not  and  should  not  be  channelled  into  the  programs  of  our
two  major  parties.   History  has  amply  proved  the  virtue  of
political   activity   by   minority,  dissident   groups,   who   in-
numerable  times  have  been  in  the  vanguard  of   democratic
thought   and   whose   programs   were   ultimately   accepted.
Mere  unorthodoxy or  dissent  from  the  prevailing  mores  is
not  to  be  condemned.  The  absence  of  such  voices  would  be
a  symptom of  grave  illness  in  our  society."
—Chief  Justice  Warren, in Sweezy  v. New  Hampshire.
"In  the  political  realm,  as  in  the  academic,  thought  and
action   are  presumptively  immune  from  inquisition  by  po-
Political  Freedom  in  the  Sweezy  Case
litical  authority.   It  cannot  require  argument   that  inquiry
would  be  barred  to  ascertain  whether  a  citizen  had  voted
for  one  or  the  other  of  the  two  major  parties  either  in  a
state   or   national   election.    Until   recently,   no  difference
would  have  been  entertained  in  regard  to  inquiries  about  a
voter's   affiliations   with  one  of   the  various  so-called  third
parties  that  have  had  their  day,  or  longer,  in  our political
history.  .  .  .  Whatever,  on  the  basis  of  massive  proof  and
in  the  light  of  history,  of  which  this  court  may  well  take
judicial   notice,  be  the  justification  for   not   regarding   the
Communist  Party  as  a  conventional  political party,  no  such
justification  has  been  afforded  in  regard  to  the   Progressive
Party.   A  foundation  in  fact  and  reason  would  have  to  be
established  far  weightier  than  the  intimations  that  appear
in  the  record  to  warrant  such  a  view  of   the   Progressive
Party.    This  precludes  the  questioning   that   petitioner   re-
sisted  in  regard  to  that  party."
—Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter,   with  Mr.  Justice  Harlan,
concurring   in  Sweezy   v.  New   Hampshire.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  24, 1957
American   Activities  Committee.    In   those   days  the   victims
were  still  pleading  the  First  amendment,  not  the  Fifth,  but
except   in   the   case  of   Eisler  who  fled,  the   Supreme   Court
steadily  denied  them  a  hearing.    A  footnote  to  the   Warren
opinion   now   dismisses   these   old   decisions   as    "contrasting
views"   and  cites  with  honor  the  Edgerton   dissent   and  that
by  Judge  Clark  in  the  Josephson  case,  the  other  dissent in  that
period   which  made   a  fundamental  attack  upon   the   House
Committee.
The First  Amendment at  Last
This   line  of   attack,   now   adopted   by   a   majority   of   the
Court,  is  that  the  legislative  power  of  investigation  is  limited
by  the  First  amendment,  and  that  a  summons  to  appear  in  the
public  pillory  of  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee  or  a similar State  body  may  "abridge"  freedoms  of  speech,
press  and  assembly  by  intimidation.  This  way of  violating  the
First  and  Fourteenth  amendments  is  made  easy  by  the  adop-
"The  Stain  Is  Just  As  Deep"
"The  sanction  emanating  from  legislative  investiga-
tions  is  of  a  different   kind  than  loss   of  employment.
But  the  stain  of  the  stamp of  disloyalty is  just  as  deep.
The  inhibiting  effect  in  the  flow  of  democratic  expres-
sion  and  controversy  upon  those  directly  affected  and
those  touched  more  subtly  is  equally  grave."
—Chief   Justice  Warren, in Sweezy  v. New  Hampshire.
tion  of  vague  resolutions  sweepingly  permitting   investigators
to  make  their  own  preconceptions  a  measure  of  orthodoxy  and
a  mandate  to  harass   heretics.    Five   Justices   in  Watkins   —
Warren,  Black,  Douglas,  Harlan  and  Brennan—serve  notice
that  they  are  not  disposed  any  longer  to  punish  for   contempt
those  who  fall  afoul  of  what  any  current  House   investigator
may   consider   "un-American."      In   Sweezy,   five   Justices   —
Warren,    Black,   Douglas   and   Brennan    for   the   majority,
Frankfurter   and   Harlan   concurring—serve   notice   similarly
that  investigations   carried  on  by  such  States  as  New   Hamp-
shire  to  ferret  out  so-called  "subversive"  persons  will  likewise
be  disapproved   by  the  Court.   Where  there  is  the  possibility
of   infringing   First   amendment   rights,   neither   Congress   nor
State  legislatures   can  be  sure  any  longer  of  having  their  au-
thority  enforced  by  contempt  proceedings  unless  they  spell  out
carefully   by   specific   resolution    just  what   information   they
want  and  why.  And  the   excuse  had  better   be  a  good one.
This  casts  its  shadow,  too, over  that  vague  Senate   committee
mandate  to  investigate  anything  which  might   affect   "internal
security."
On  the  "Un-American" Committee
"It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  a  less  explicit  auth-
orizing   resolution   [than   that  establishing   the   House
Un-American  Activities  Committee].   Who  can   define
the  meaning  of   'un-American'?   What  is   that   single,
solitary  'principle  of  the  form  of  government  as  guar-
teed  by  our  Constitution'?   .  .  .  The  Government  con-
tends  that  the  public interest  at  the  core  of  the  investi-
gations  of   the  Un-American Activities  Committee  is
the  need  by  the  Congress  to  be  informed of  efforts  to
overthrow   the   Government   by   force   and  violence   so
that   adequate  legislative  safeguards   can   be   erected.
From   this  core,  however,  the  Committee  can  radiate
outward  infinitely   to  any  topic  thought  to  be  related
in  some  way  to  armed insurrection.  The  outer  reaches
of  this  domain are  known  only  by  the  content  of  'un-
American   Activities.'    Remoteness  of   subject   can   be
aggravated  by  a  probe  for  a  depth  of  detail  even far-
ther  removed  from   any  basis  of  legislative  action.   A
third  dimension  is  added  when  the  investigators  turn
their  attention  to  the  past  to  collect  minutiae  on  re-
mote  topics,  on  the  hypothesis that  the  past  may reflect
upon  the  present.  .  .  .  An  excessively  broad  charter,
like   that  of   the   House  Un-American  Activities  Com-
mittee,   places  the  courts  in  an  untenable  position   if
they  are  to  strike  a  balance  between  the  public  need
for  a  particular investigation  and  the  right  of  citizens
to  carry  on  their  affairs  free  from  unnecessary  govern-
mental  interference."
—Chief   Justice  Warren  in  Watkins  v. U.S.
Series of  Reversals  Expected
This  is  not  as  novel  as  it  appears  when   looked   at  in   the
perspective   of   committees   hitherto   regarded   as   sacrosanct.
Senator  McClellan  got  himself  a  specific resolution  to  investi-
gate   labor   rackets.   Congress   and  the   State  legislatures   will
have  to  act  the  same  way  in  dealing   with   radical   activities
hitherto  regarded  as  fair  game  in  open  season.   The  resolution
will  have  to  be  precise  and  in  addition  the  witness  will  have
to  be told  at  the  hearing  (and not  later  on  trial  for  contempt)
just  exactly  why  the  question   is  being   asked   him   and   why
the  information  sought  is  pertinent.   The  Court   does  not  say
in  advance  that  there  can  be  no  investigation  which  does  not
impinge  on  First  amendment  freedoms.   But  by  forcing Con-
gress  and  the  legislatures   to  be  precise  in  this  way  the  Court
makes  it  impossible   to  carry  on  the  witch   hunt   as  we  have
known  it.   The  difference  will  become  strikingly  visible  when
the  Arthur  Miller  and  Otto  Nathan  contempts   of  the  House
Committee  and  the  cases  of  the  newspapermen   who  invoked
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
What  the  Supreme  Court  Had  to  Say  of
"The  essentiality  of  freedom  in  the  community of  Ameri-
can  universities  is  almost  self-evident.   No  one  should  un-
derestimate  the  vital  role  in  a  democracy  that  is  played
by  those  who  guide  and  train  our  youth.   To  impose  any
strait   jacket  upon  the  intellectual  leaders   in  our  colleges
and  universities   would  imperil  the   future  of   our  nation.
No field of  education is  so  thoroughly  comprehended by  man
that  new  discoveries  cannot  yet  be  made.   Particularly  is
that  true  in  the  social   sciences,   where  few, if  any, prin-
ciples  are  accepted as  absolutes.   Scholarship  cannot  flourish
in  an  atmosphere  of  suspicion   and  distrust.   Teachers   and
students  must  always  remain  free  to  inquire,  to  study  and
to   evaluate,   to   gain   new   maturity   and   understanding;
Academic  Freedom  in  the  Sweezy  Case
otherwise  our  civilization  will  stagnate  and die."
—Chief   Justice  Warren,  in Sweezy  v. New  Hampshire.
"These  pages  need  not  be  burdened with  proof,  based  on
the  testimony  of   a  cloud  of  impressive  witnesses,   of   the
dependence   of   a   free   society   on  free   universities.    This
means   the  exclusion   of   governmental  intervention  in   the
intellectual  life  of  a  university.   It  matters  little  whether
such   intervention   occurs  avowedly  or  through   action  that
inevitably   tends   to   check   the   ardor   and   fearlessness    of
scholars,  qualities  at  once  so  fragile  and  so   indispensable
for  fruitful  academic labor.
—Mr.  Justice   Frankfurter,    with Mr.  Justice   Harlan,
concurring   in  Sweezy   v.  New    Hampshire.
1   0   ',
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  ?.!,, 1957
An  End  Promised  to  Punishment  of  Radicals  by  Defamation
(Continued  from  Page   Three)
the  First  amendment  before  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Com-
mittee come  up  on  appeal.  All  these  cases,  and  those  of  Harry
Sacher  and  Lloyd  Barenblatt,  will  almost  certainly  be  reversed
for  in  none  of  them  was  the  witness  able  to  learn  just  what
the  respective  Committees  wanted  and  why.   Beyond  that,  un-
der  the dicta of  both  Watkins  and  Sweezy,  it is hard  to  imagine
the  Court allowing  a  Senate committee to  investigate the  press.
As  Martin Dies  Planned  It
I  have  set  forth   in  boxes  through   these   pages   the  main
points  made  by  the  Court  and  the  concurring  Justices  so  that
readers  may see  for  themselves  what  is  here  summarized.   We
have  come  to  the  end  of  an  era.  Martin   Dies  at  the  very
beginning  of  it  made  clear  that  he  conceived  of  the   House
Un-American  Activities  Committee  as  a  kind  of  roving  grand
jury,  acting  not  in  traditional  secrecy  but  in  the  full  blaze  of
publicity  to  punish  by  defamation  those  radicals  who   could
not  be  reached   by  criminal  prosecution.    Now   we  have   the
Supreme  Court  saying  in  Watkins  that  Congress  is  not  "a  law
enforcement  or  trial  agency,"  and  that  it  cannot  expose  for  the
sake  of  exposure  in  the  area  of  ideas  protected   by  the  First
amendment.   The  Sweezy  decision  says  the  same  thing  as  re-
gards  investigations   by  State  legislatures.    It  stresses  heavily
protection   of   academic  freedom   as  well   as  political   liberty
from  such  inquisitions,  and  it  also  contains  a  side  remark  that
may  sound  the  end  for  that  type  of  question  which  is  designed
not  to  elicit  information  but  to  break  a  man  morally  by  mak-
ing  him  an  informer.  "The questioning,"   Chief  Justice War-
ren  said  of  the  interrogation   our  friend  Paul  M.  Sweezy  co-
editor  of  the  Monthly   Review   resisted  in  New   Hampshire,
"indicates  that  the  investigators  .  .  .  were  not  acquiring  new
information   as  much  as  corroborating   data  already  in  their
possession."
A  New  Birth  of  Freedom
The  Watkins  and  Sweezy  decisions  must  be  read  together.
They  promise  a  new  birth  of  freedom.   They  make  the  First
amendment  a  reality again.   They  reflect  the  steadily  growing
Black  and  Douglas  on  the  Smith  Act
"I  would  reverse  every  one  of  those  convictions [un-
der  the  Smith  Act] and  direct   that  all  the   defendants
be  acquitted.   In  my  judgment  the  statutory  provisions
on  which  these  prosecutions   are  based  abridge   freedom
of  speech,  press  and  assembly   in  violation  of  the  First
Amendment.  .  .  .  The  kind  of  trials  conducted  here  are
wholly  dissimilar  to  normal  criminal  trials.   Ordinarily
these  "Smith   Act'  trials  are  prolonged  affairs  lasting
for  months.   In  part  this  is  attributable  to  the  routine
introduction  in  evidence  of  massive  collections  of  books,
tracts,  pamphlets,  newspapers  and  manifestos   discuss-
ing  Communism,  Socialism,   Capitalism,  Feudalism   and
governmental  institutions  in  general,  which,  it  is  not
too  much  to  say, are  turgid,  diffuse,  abstruse,  and  just
plain dull.
"Of  course,  no  juror  can  be  expected  to  plow  his  way
through   this   jungle   of   verbiage.    The   testimony    of
witnesses  is  comparatively  insignificant.   Guilt  or  inno-
cence  may  turn  on  what  Marx  or  Engels  or  someone
else  wrote  or  advocated  as  much  as  a  hundred  or  more
years  ago.  Elaborate,    refined   distinctions   are  drawn
between  'Communism',  'Marxism',  'Leninism',  'Trotsky-
ism'  and  'Stalinism.'   When  the  propriety   of  obnoxious
or   unorthodox   views   about   government   is   in   reality
made  the  crucial  issue,  as  it  must  he  in  cases  of  this
kind,   prejudice  makes   conviction   inevitable   except   in
the   rarest    circumstances."
—Justices  Black  and Douglas, in  the  California   cases.
public  misgiving  and  distaste  for  that  weird  collection  of  op-
portunists,   clowns,   ex-Communist   crackpots,   and   poor   sick
souls  who  have  made  America  look  foolish  and  even  sinister
during  the  last  ten  years with  their  perpetual  searching  under
the  national  bed  for  little  men  who  weren't  there.   That sui-
cide  on  the  eve  of  the  San  Francisco  hearings  was  only  the
latest  and  most  dramatic evidence  of  the  harm  they  have  done.
The   full   measure  of  the  agony  and   suffering   they  have  in-
flicted  will  never  be  known.   We   are  grateful  to  the  Chief
Justice  and  to  the  Court,  and  we  may  all  be  proud  as  Ameri-
cans  that  the  great   traditions   of   our   country  had    sufficient
strength  to  overcome  them  at  last.
Celebrate  These  Historic  Decisions  by  Sending  A  Gift   Sub  to  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly, 5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City       ........................................Zone............State...............—
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............;..........................................
6/24/57
Street
City    ........................................Zone............State...................
Shall   we  send   gift   announcement?     Yea  D    No  D
/F. Stones  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.   187!).    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W., Washington  15,  D. C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the   U.  S.;  $6  Io  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Aaia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED