I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jun03.pdf

============================================================

Full  Text  U. S. Scientists Appeal Against H-Bomb,  P.  2
The  Story  Behind  Senator  Morse's  Alleged  Insult  to  President  Eisenhower,  Sec  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  22
JUNE   3,  1957
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
From  Cold  War   to  Condominium?
The   response  was  immediate.   The   stock  market  fell  and
the  German  Chancellor  flew  to  Washington  in  alarm,  but  not
over  the  revelation  that  there  really was  no  "clean"  bomb  and
that  by  I960  thermonuclear  attack  on  the  hitherto  impregna-
ble   United   States   could   inflict   82,000,000   deaths,   half   of
them   from   radioactive   fallout   alone.   The    news   that   cut
$1,800,000,000  from  security values  on  the  New  York  stock
exchange  last  Monday  and  brought  the  81-year  old  Adenauer
flying  across  the  Atlantic  again  was  the  news  that  President
Eisenhower  was  sending  Stassen  back  to  the  London disarma-
ment  talks  with  instructions  seriously  to  negotiate.   This  was
the  bad  news.
The   decision  was  reached  Saturday  afternoon   at  the  close
of  a  week-long  wrangle  with  the  headstrong  military princi-
palities  over  which  the  President  unsteadily  presides.  Monday
the  market  suffered  its  sharpest  decline  since  February  11  and
the financial pages  next morning,  trying to  spell  out  the causes,
noted   ''the  apparent   progress  of   disarmament  talks"    (New
York   Times).
The Fears Were  Exaggerated
The  market  as  usual  was  much  too  apprehensive.   By  the
time   the   German   Chancellor   faced   a   press   conference   in
Washington   Tuesday   afternoon,   prospects   had   brightened.
There  stood  the  tall  familiar  figure  in  a  heavy  blue  suit  and
vest,  the  very  picture  of  a  solid  German  burgher  and  pater
familias.  There  again  was the  flat  almost  Mongolian  face  with
the  heavy eyelids and  the  thin  slits  through  which  the  shrewd
old  eyes  looked  out  warily.   German  can  be  a  lovely  tongue,
but  Adenauer's  voice  as he  began  to  speak  had  that  harsh  and
unpleasant  tone  suitable  to  command  which  is  the  nightmare
of  Europe.  There  was  no  trace  of  humor   except   for  a  thin
smug  wisp  of  a smile about  the  thin  lips when  a  correspondent
asked  the  Chancellor   whether  he  had   discussed  aid  for   the
French  financial  crisis  with  the  President.  This  drew  a  curt
negative.
It  was soon  apparent  to  us  "damen  und  herren"  of  the  press
that  Dr.  Adenauer  was  satisfied  with  the  results  of  his  trip.
When  he was asked  whether  the  London  talks  might  have any
effect   on  Germany's   own   rearmanment   plans,   he   said  they
would  not,  that  the  negotiations  might  take  years. At  a  private
press  conference  with  the  German   correspondents  alone,   he
was  even  more  specific on  this  reassuring  point.   He  said  that
negotiations   for   mutual   inspection   over   the   distant   Arctic
might  last  ten  years.   In  this  leisurely  initial  stage,  Germany
would  be  affected  neither  by  inspection  or  disarmament  meas-
ures.  When  this   "initial   disarmament   agreement"   had  been
concluded,   as  the   joint   Eisenhower-Adenauer   communique
said,  "might  be  an  appropriate  time  for  a  conference  on  the
reunification  of  Germany  among  the  Foreign  Ministers  of  the
four  powers.  .  .  ."  In  the meantime  the  President  had  assured
the  Chancellor  that  we  would  do  nothing  "in  the  field  of  dis-
armament  which  would   prejudice   the   reunification   of   Ger-
many."  This,  if  meant  seriously,  is  quite  a  promise  because
the  German  view  and  Dulles'  view  and  the  dominant view of
the   American  military  is   that   any   measures   of   relaxation
prejudice  German  reunification;  they all  cling to  the  hope  that
by  keeping  the  screws  of  the  costly  arms  race  turned  tight  on
the  Soviet  bloc  Moscow  may be led  to surrender East Germany.
The Obstacles Alone Are  Clear
just  what  the  Administration had  decided  to  do  about  dis-
armament  was  unclear  before  Adenauer's  arrival;  the  joint
communique  left  it  even  more  obscure.  The  President  is  in  my
opinion   sincere,  otherwise  State  Department   and   Pentagon
would  have  cut  Stassen's  political  throat  long  ago.  The  bu-
reaucratic  convulsions  in  Washington   since  Zorin's   offer   in
part  to  accept  the  Eisenhower  "open  skies"  proposal  are  typi-
cal  of  what  happens  here  whenever  the  Russians give  in  and
agree  to  negotiate  on  American  terms.    Dulles  and  the  Pen-
tagon  want  no  negotiations  of  any  kind  and  shy  away;  Mos-
cow  could  agree  to  the  Eisenhower  open  skies proposal  in  toto
with  safety—Washington  would  begin  to  hem  and  haw  about
its  own  terms  once  they  were  accepted.  A  recognition  of  this
seemed  to  be  reflected  in  the  President's  own  exasperated  re-
mark  when  he  warned  at  his  last  press  conference  about  being
"picayunish."   But  Eisenhower's  forte  is  the  reconciliation  of
diverse  viewpoints,  and  it  takes  a  pretty low  common denomi-
nator  of  disarmament  to  reconcile  Dulles  and  Radford  with
Stassen.  The  suspicion here  is that  Stassen  has  authority to  ex-
plore  rather  than  to  agree,  and  that  we  would  like  to  obtain a
maximum  of  inspection  for  a  minimum  of  arms  reduction.
One  Firm  Point
Judging  by  the  violence  of  French  reactions,  the  one  firm
point  in  the  U.S.  program  seems  to  be limiting  the  production,
though  not  the  possession,  of  nuclear  arms  to  the  three  powers
who  already have  the  capacity  to  make  them.  This  is  an  essen-
tial  and  urgent  idea,  as the  reader  will  see from  the  text  of  the
American  scientists'  appeal  we  publish  on  page  two.  The  new
international  atomic authority  for  peaceful  development  of  the
atom  takes  on  new  significance against  this  background,  for  it
could  be  the  means  of  enforcing  such  a  monopoly  by  the  U.S.
and  the  U.S.S.R.,  with  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  third  and
minor  partner.   But  can  the  Superpowers  carry  on  the  world
struggle  between  themselves  and  at  the  same  time  police  the
world  jointly against  the  appearance  of  new  H-bomb  powers?
Would  such  a condominium  be  compatible  with  the  cold  war?
Can  it  be  brought  about  against  the  opposition  of  the  Ameri-
can  financial  and  military  interests  which  want  the  arms  race
continued,  and  the  Germans  who  fear  that  without   East-West
tension  the  Reich  will  lose  its  bargaining  power?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  3,  1957
Leading  Physicists  and  Biologists  Warn  It  May  Soon  Be  Too  Late  To  Avert  A   Cataclysm
Text  of  the  American  Scientists'  Appeal  for  A  Cessation  of  H-Bomb  Testing
Since  no  paper  had  yet  published  it  as  we  went  to  press,
we  provide  here  the  full  text  of  the  appeal   being circulated
among  American   scientists  for   a  cessation  of   nuclear  test-
ing.    Among   the  initiators  and   first   signers  were   Nobel
Prize   winning   chemist  Linus  Pauling  and  geneticist   Her-
mann   ].   Mueller;   Laurence  H.   Snyder,   president   of   the
American  Association  for  the  Advancement   of  Science;  Dr.
Edward   U.  Condon,  past  president  of  the  AAAS  and  for-
mer   head   of   the   U.  S.   Bureau   of   Standards;  Edwin   C.
Kemble,  L.  C.  Dunn,  O.  Veblen  and  Philip   Morrison.—
IPS.
We,  the  American scientists whose  names  are  signed  below,
urge  that  an  international  agreement  to  stop   the  testing  of
nuclear  bombs  be  made  now.
Each  nuclear  bomb  test  spreads  an  added  burden  of  radio-
active  elements  over  every  part  of   the   world.    Each   added
amount  of  radiation  causes  damage  to  the  health  of  human
beings  all  over  the  world  and  causes  damage  to  the  pool  of
human   germ   plasm  such   as  to   lead   to   an   increase  in   the
number  of  seriously  defective  children  that  will   be  born  in
future   generations.
So  long  as  these  weapons  are  in  the  hands  of  only  three
powers  an  .agreement  for  their  control  is  feasible.   If   testing
continues,  and  the  possession  of  these  weapons  spreads  to  ad-
ditional  governments,  the  danger  of  outbreak  of  a  cataclysmic
Even   Franco   Spain
Even    Franco    Spain    pokes   fun   at   the   House   Un-
American  Activities  Committee.    A  new  Spanish  movie,
"Hello,   Senor  Marshall,"   shown   in  Washington,  satir-
izes  the  excitement   created  in  a  Castilian  village  by  the
prospect   of  American   aid.   The  local   grandee   opposes
acceptance  because  so  many  of  his  ancestors  were   eat-
en  by  American   Indians;  his  ally,  the  village  priest,   is
armed  with  statistics  to  prove  that  most  Americans  are
Protestants   and  contact   with   them   dangerous.    In  a
nightmare,   the  priest  finds  himself   on  trial  before  an
Inquisitor   seated   high   up  on  a  huge   marble   judge's
bench   marked   "Un-American   Activities  Committee."
nuclear  war  through  the  reckless  action  of  some  irresponsible
national  leader  will  be  greatly   increased.
An  international agreement  to  stop  the  testing  of   nuclear
bombs  now  could  serve  as  a  first  step  toward  a  more  general
disarmament  and   the  ultimate  effective   abolition   of   nuclear
weapons,  averting  the  possibility of  a  nuclear  war  that  would
be  a  catastrophe  to  all  humanity.
We  have  in  common  with  our  fellow  men  a  deep  concern
for   the  welfare  of  all  human  beings.   As  scientists  we  have
knowledge  of  the  dangers  involved  and   therefore  a   special
responsibility   to  make  those   dangers   known.   We   deem   it
imperative  that  immediate action  be  taken  to  effect   an  inter-
national  agreement to  stop  the  testing  of  all  nuclear  weapons.
Can  There  Be  Political  Freedom  for  Unpopular  Minorities   Without  A  Right  to  Privacy ?
Supreme  Court  to  Hear  NAACP's  Appeal  from  Alabama  Disclosure  Orders
•When   the   Supreme   Court  last  week   agreed   to  hear   the
appeal  of  the  NAACP  from  orders  imposed  upon  it  by  the
Alabama   courts,   it  was   agreeing   to   confront   issues   it   has
hitherto   evaded.    One   of   these   is  whether   under   the   First
amendment,  an  organ  of  government,  State  or  Federal,  may
force  lawful  associations  to  reveal  their  membership  lists.   In
a  free  society  does  government  have  the  right  to  invade  the
privacy  of  opinion  where  publication  of  views  and   associa-
tions  would  subject  those  involved  to  ostracism  and  boycott?
Alabama   is  only  one   of   the   Southern   States   seeking  by
various  means  either  to  outlaw  the  NAACP   or  as  a  prac-
tical  matter  to  make  its  operations  impossible.   The   petition
from  the  NAACP   says  the  order  requiring  disclosure  of  its
membership  lists  would  subject   its  members  to  economic  re-
prisals  organized  by  the  White  Citizens'  Councils.   The  pur-
pose   is  to  prevent  Negroes   from   exercising  their   rights,   in
this  case—ironically  enough—their  right  to  try  and  enforce  a
Supreme  Court  decision  in  their  favor.
Until  now  only  radicals  have  felt  the  impact  of  the  new
blacklisting  devices  which  were  created  in  the  Truman   cold
war   era:   the  Attorney  General's   list,   registration    with   the
Subversive   Activities  Control   Board,   etc.   This   is  the   first
time  they  have  been  employed  against   a  non-Leftist   organi-
zation.   It  is  indicative  that  the  State  of  Alabama,  in  asking
the  Supreme  Court  not  to  hear  the  NAACP's   appeal,   cited
Justice  Jackson's  words   in  Joint   Anti-Fascist  Refugee   Com-
mittee   v.  McGrath,   the  first  (and   inconclusive)   test  of  the
Attorney  General's  list.  There  Mr.  Justice  Jackson  said  "mere
Other  Supreme  Court  Actions
The   additional   jail   sentences  of   from   two   to   four
years  for   contempt   imposed  on  fugitives   from   Smith
Act  convictions  were  without  precedent  in  American  or
English  law,   and  it  is  encouraging  that  the  Supreme
Court  last  week  agreed  to  hear  the  appeals  of  Gilbert
Green   and  Henry   Winston,  though  hearings  were  re-
fused  in  the  earlier  appeals  by  two  other  Communist
leaders,  Hall   and  Thompson.   The  issues  are  whether
sentences  of  more  than  one  year  may  be  imposed  for
contempt,   and  whether  a  fugitive   may  be  punished  in
this   way.
Though  we  do not  have  space  for  extended  comment,
we  want   to  call  the  attention  of  lawyers  to  the  very
interesting  discussion  of  the  Fifth  amendment  issue  by
Mr.  Justice   Harlan   in   the   concluding  section. of   the
decision   reversing   the   convictions   in   the   Gruhewald
case.   In  discussing  the  conviction  of  the  lawyer  Hal-
perin,   Mr.  Justice   Harlan   cites   Dean  Griswold's  The
Fifth  Amendment  Today  with  respect  as  authority-for
the  view  that  recent  history  "has  emphasized  anew  that
one  of  the  basic  functions  of  the  privilege  is  to   pro-
tect  innocent   men."
designation  as  subversive"  did  not  deprive  of  any  legal  right:
The  injury  which  resulted,  he  said,  were  "sanctions  applied
by  public  disapproval,   not  by  law."   Alabama  says  this  justi-
fies what  it  is  doing  to  the  NAACP.
The   grant   of   certiorari  may   indicate   that   the    Supreme
Court  is  now  prepared  to  take  a  more  realistic  view  of  die
new  blacklisting  devices.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  June  3, 1957
Is  the  Give-Away  of  Public  Resources  and  Funds  So  Different   from  What   Beck  Did?
The  Story  Behind  Senator  Morse's  Alleged  Insult  to  the  President
Just  what   Senator   Morse   did   say  about   President   Eisen-
hower  in  his  Detroit  speech  was  not  at  all  clear  when   we
went  to  press.   The  comparison  between  the  President  and
Dave  Beck  was  not  in  the  prepared  speech;  this  was  added
"off   the   cuff"   and   the   Senator  promised   to  put   the   actual
words  in  the  Congressional  Record  when  a  transcript  arrived.
To  make  a  personal  comparison  between  the  President  and
the  crooked  labor  leader  is  obviously  unjust  and  in  bad  taste,
though   objections   come   strangely   from    Republicans   who
pinned  the   "20   years  of  treason"   smear  on  Harry  Truman
only  a  few  years  ago.
No  Personal  Comparison   Intended
But  the  Senator  was  not  making  or  implying  a   personal
comparison.   An  examination  of  the  original  charge  as  made
on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  on  April  29  shows  no  more  than
excusable   political   hyperbole.    He   was   talking   of   the   an-
nouncement  four  days  earlier that  the  Office  of  Defense  Mobi-
lization   was  granting   tax   write-offs   amounting   to   at   least
$65,000,000   to  the  Idaho  Power  Company  for  two  dams  in
the  Hells  Canyon  area  of  the  Columbia  River  Basin.
Senator  Morse  compared   this  grant  of  interest  free  funds
to  the  Idaho  Power   Company  with  Beck's  borrowing  of  in-
terest  free  loans  from  his  union  treasury,  and  said  "I  think  it
is  also  time  to  speak  out  against  the  President  of  the  United
States  when  he  allows  this  kind  of  immorality to  run  through
his  administration,  and  does  not  put  a  stop  to   it."
Not   a  single  Republican   rose  at  that  time  to  defend   the
President.    Indeed  at  that   time,  with   the  ODM   announce-
ment  still fresh,  it  would  have  taken  a good  deal  of  intrepidity
to  defend  him.  Two  of  the  most  conservative members  of  the
Senate,  Byrd  and  Robertson  of  Virginia,  rose  to  record  their
agreement  with  Senator  Morse  on  the  Hell's  Canyon  affair.
A  $30,000,000  Tax   Subsidy
The   Eisenhower   Administration   has   thrown   its   weight
against  a  big  public  power  project  on  Hell's  Canyon  on  the
excuse  that  the  smaller  Idaho  Power  Company  project   could
be  built  without  cost   to  the   taxpayer.    But   Senator   Morse
showed  that  the  tax  write-off  given  the  Company  would  save
it  at  least  $30,000,000  in  taxes  over  the  next  five  years.
Morse  said  that  only  a  few  weeks  earlier  the  Administra-
tion   "walked   out  on  a  campaign  pledge"  of   tax  relief   for
small  business,  on  the  ground   that  the  Treasury   could   not
afford   it.   Yet,  he  said,  in  the  past  6  years  tax  write-offs  of
three  and   a  third  billion   dollars   had   been   granted   electric
power   companies.
The  Republicans  sat  silent  when  both  Robertson  and  Byrd
put  into  the  Record  letters  they  had  sent  then  ODM  Director
Flemming  last  year,  the  former  warning  specifically  against  a
write-off  for  the  Idaho  Power  Company  and  the  latter   urging
that  such  write-offs  be  limited  to  the  purpose  for  which  they
were  originally  provided,  i.e.  for  defense    facilities.
Senator  Robertson  even  put  into  the  Record  a  reply   from
Mr.  Flemming   in  which  the  latter   said  he  agreed  that  tax
write-offs   "should   not   be  used   to   solve   non-defense   prob-
lems."  The  ODM  was asked  to  hold  the  Idaho  Power  matter
in  abeyance.   Hearings  were   scheduled   to  begin   before   the
Modern  Republican  In  Action
"On  three  fronts  President  Eisenhower  now  has  op-
portunities  to  curb  the  expansion   of  public  production
of   power,  both  hydroelectric   and  atomic,  and   appears
reasonably   sure  to  use  them.   A  vacancy  on  the  TVA
opens   the  way  for  the  first  Republican-appointed  ma-
jority  in  that  agency's  history.   Another  impending  re-
placement  will  remove  from  the  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission  a  strong   voice   [Thomas  E.  Murray,  IPS]  urg-
ing  Government-financed  construction   of  atomic   power
plants.   And  Mr.  Eisenhower   has  a  veto  ready   in  the
event  Congress  enacts  a  last-chance   measure  to  author-
ize  a  Federal  power  and  flood  control   dam  at  Hell's
Canyon  in  the  Pacific  Northwest.   .  .  .
"His   repugnance    to   the   government    operation    of
power   plants   has  always  been  plain,  as  on  the   occa-
sion  when  he  cited  TVA  as  an  instance  of  creeping  so-
cialism.   His  disdain  was  further  emphasized  when  the
retirement  of  Dr.  Harry  A.  Curtis  from  the  TVA  this
month  received   no  official  White  House   notice   such   as
the  customary  note  of  appreciation."
—Thomas  O'Neill,  in  the  Baltimore   Sun,  May  27.
Senate  Finance  Committee  on  May  2.   Then  on  April  25  the
Eisenhower   Administration   "jumped    the   gun"    before   the
hearings   could  be  held,   and   authorized  the   Hell's   Canyon
write-offs  through   Flemming's  successor,  Mr.  Gordon  Gray.
Mr.  Gray  himself  was  summoned  as  a  witness  on  May  21
before  the  O'Mahoney  monopoly  subcommittee.   He  invoked
executive  privilege  six  times  when  the  Senators  tried  to  find
out  whether  in  the  Idaho  Power  Company  case—as  in  that  of
Dixon-Yates—there  had  been  direct  pressure  from  the  White
House  staff   to   issue  the   tax  write-off   certificates   before   the
Senate  Finance  Committee  could  look  into  the  matter.
Basic  Issues  in  The   Northwest
The   Hell's   Canyon   fight   is  a   fundamental   one   for   the
people  of  the  Northwest,  where  power,  water  and  flood  con-
trol  are  urgent   problems.    No   private  power   com'pany  will
build  adequate  multi-purpose  dam  projects  because there  is  no
profit  to  be  made  on  flood  control  and  water  storage.
As  Alex  Radin  of  the  American  Public  Power  Association
told   the   O'Mahoney   subcommittee  on  May  21,  the   public
high  dam  would  generate  1,124,000  kilowatts  of  prime  power
as  against   only   680,000   kilowatts   from   the   smaller   dams
planned  by  Idaho  Power.   The  high  dam  would  provide  use-
ful  water  storage  of  3,880,000  acre  feet  as  against   1,000,000
under  the  company  plan.   Plus  cheaper  power.
From  the  standpoint  of  the  public  interest,  the  tax  write-
off  was  a  give-away  of  public  funds  on  top  of  a  give-away  of
public  resources.
Last  year  the  Hell's  Canyon  bill  lost  in  the  Senate  by  only
ten  votes.   This  year  the  sudden  grant  of  the  tax   write-offs
and  the  indignation  of  Byrd and  Robertson  held  out  hope  that
enough  Southern  Democrats  would  change  their  mind  to  put
the  bill  over  when  it  comes  up  for  a  vote  early  in  June.
The  conservative  press  and  the  Republican  leadership  in  the
Senate  hope  to  distract  public  attention  from  these  facts  and
to  defeat  the  bill  pending  in the  Senate  for  a  public  high  dam.
on  Hell's  Canyon  by exploiting  Senator  Morse's  attack  on  the
President.
8   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   June  3, 1957
Claims  of  Swiss  Cloaking:  Corporation  to  American  Courts  and  Senate  Exploded
Annual  Report  of  I.  G.  Farben  Discloses  False  Testimony  in  U.  S.
In  unsuccessful  court proceedings  to  recover  control  of  I.  G.
Farben's    former   American   subsidiary,   General   Aniline  &
Film,  and  in  recent  hearings  before  the  Senate  Judiciary  Com-
mittee  on  pending  legislation  to  restore  alien  property  seized
during  the  war,  representatives of  the  Swiss  holding  company
Interhandel  swore  that  it  was  not  a  cloak  for  I.  G.  Farben.
Interhandel  representatives  testified  that  I.  G.  Farben  no  long-
er  had  an  interest  in  recovering   General   Aniline  &  Film,  a
company  now  valued  at  more  than  $100,000,000.
The  arrival  in  Washington   of  the  minutes  of  the  annual
meeting  of   I.  G.   Farben   stockholders   held   at  Frankfurt  on
April  5  shows  that  this  testimony  was  false.   The  annual  re-
port  read  at  the  meeting  in  Frankfurt  said,  "No  substantial
progress  has  been  achieved  during  the  past  year  in  the  en-
deavors  to  regain  the  Company's  property  abroad,  in  view  of
the  fact  that  the  seizure  of  German  property  is  still  in   effect.
However,"  the  report  went  on,  "there  is  hope   that  the  en-
deavors  started   in  the  U.  S.  toward  return  of.  German   con-
fiscated  private   property   will   be  successful,   especially  since
new  legislative  measures  to  this  effect  were  proposed   recently."
A  Useful  Precedent
"The   I.  G.,"  the  annual  report   revealed,  "is  not  only  di-
rectly  interested  in  the  passage  of  an  Act  to  return  property  in
the  USA,  but  it  also  expects  that  it  would  have  a  positive  in-
fluence upon  the  viewpoint  of  other  countries  in  which  I.  G.
property  was  confiscated."
This   is  a  reference  to  the  Paris  reparations  agreement   of
1946   in  which  the  Western  allies  agreed  to  keep  seized  Ger-
man  properties  in  their  respective  countries  in  lieu  of  repara-
tions.   The  annual  report  thus  proves  the  contention  of  Sen-
ators  opposing  restoration  that  return  of  GAF  to  I.  G.  Farben
would  be  a  breach  of  this  agreement  with  our  Western   allies
because  it  would   be  used  as  a  precedent  by  I.  G.  Farben  to
demand   the   return   of   properties   taken   over   in   Western
Europe.
The   translation  and  circulation  of  this  report  on  the  eve
of   the   Adenauer   visit   was  embarrassing  to   the   Chancellor
since  one  of  his  objects  in  coming  is  to  try  and  get   legislation
to  return  seized  German  properties.  The  Johnston   bill  which
would  do  so  is  still  bottled  up  in  committee  but  another  bill,
S.1639,   has   been   hastily  reported   out   without   hearings   to
block  the  proposed  sale  of  75  percent  of  the  General. Aniline
&  Film  stock  held  by  the  government.
Five  Senators  on  the  Judiciary  Committee  signed  a  minority
report   opposing    the   bill.    They   are   Kefauver,    Hennings,
O'Mahoney,  Neely  and Wiley.   They  point  out  that  the  bill  in
effect  tries  to  do  what  Interhandel  failed  to  do  in  the   courts.
Interhandel  sued   to  block  sale  of   GAF   and   to  recover   the
property  on  the  ground  that  it  was  really  Swiss  and  not   Ger-
man  owned.   The  courts  held  against   Interhandel.
The  Same  Cast  of  Characters
Another  embarrassing  revelation  in  the  annual   report   of
I.  G.  Farben  is  the  appearance  of  Dr.  August  von  Knierem  in
it  as  president  of  I.  G.  Farben.   Von  Knierem  was  a  member
of  the  inner governing  circle of  I. G.  during  the  30's  and  40's.
As  its  general  counsel,  he  arranged  the  transaction  by  which
I.  G.  Farben—as  soon  as  the  war  broke  out—tried  to   cloak
the  relationship  with  its  Swiss  holding   company   affiliate.
Von  Knierem was tried  but  acquitted  at Nuremberg  of  com-
plicity  in  the  waging  of  aggressive  war  but  lesser  executives
of   I.  G.  Farben  in  separate  trials  were  convicted  of  mistreat-
ing  slave  labor  in  the  notorious  labor  camp  and   crematorium
of   Auschwitz.   Much   of   the  human   experimentation    in   the
Nazi  camps  was  under  I.  G.  Farben   direction.
Though  Jews  were  turned  into  soap  by  this  German   chemi-
cal  cartel,  the  Jewish  public  relations  firm  of  Julius  Klein  and
the  Jewish  law  firm  of  Ginsburg,  Leventhal  &  Brown  here  in
Washington   are  working  for  the  lobby  behind   the   Johnston
bill.
Senator  Smathers  of  New  Jersey  in  a  speech   to  the   Senate
on  April  4  said  the  Ginsburg  firm  in  a  Foreign  Agents   Regis-
tration  statement  disclosed  that  it  was  getting  a  $25,000  re-
tainer  plus  a  contingent   fee  to  be  based  on  the  value  of  all
German  properties   returned.
Thin  Issue   Had  to  Go  to  Press  Early  Because  of  Memorial   Day
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska    Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name     .......................................................................................
Street     .....................:........................................................_......
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ........................................................:..
Street     ...................................................................
<!/3/r>7
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office-
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.     Post-dated  Mondays  but    pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington  15, D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited   by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
(5  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED