I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957apr22.pdf

============================================================

Special   Issue
How  A  Friend  of  Hitler's  New  Order  Reappeared After  the  War as  A  Wilsonian
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  16
APRIL  22,  1957
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
What  The  New  Biography  of Dulles  Discreetly  Left  Out
In  an   official  portrait,  no  one  is  surprised  to  find  a  wen
missing  or  a  wrinkle  retouched.   But  John  Robinson  Seal's
carefully  posed  biography  of  John  Foster  Dulles  goes  so  far
in  omitting  here  and  shadowing  there  that  Mr.  Dulles  often
becomes  downright  invisible.  Mr.  Beal  is  not  content  to  add
a  little  rouge.   He  blacks  out  whole  areas  of  a  half  century's
career.   Esthetically,  this  may  be  defended  as  an  improvement
on  the  original.   As  history,  it  is  conspicuous—and  most  re-
vealing—in  its  gaps.
Tne   Beal   biography   is  rewarding   when   studied   for   its
omissions.  I want to  begin with  an  early, hitherto unpublished
chapter  in  the  life  of  our  hero.   A  good  novelist,  a  different
kind  of  biographer,  might  see  in  it  the  leitmotif   of  the  whole
story,  from  which  all  the  rest  naturally  unfolded.   It  involves
the  relations—if   we  may  use  so  pompous   a  term—between
Mr.  Dulles  and  the  Wilson  Administration.
Now  A Wilsonian
In  recent  years  Mr.  Dulles  has  begun  to  portray  himself
as  a  Wilsonian  though  the  description  might  have  startled  his
friends  in  the  20's.   This  biography  begins  by  claiming  that
Mr.  Dulles  was  "one  of  five  close  advisers  to  Woodrow  Wil-
son  at  the  Versailles  Peace  Conference,"  a  somewhat  height-
ened  description  of  his  actual  role  on  the  Reparation  Com-
mittee.*   The  book  ends  by  describing  Mr.  Dulles   as   "one
who  absorbed  Wilson's  idealism  at  Versailles"   and  "spent  a
lifetime  trying  to  digest  that  experience"   in  the  quest  for  a
"durable  peace."                                     '   •
Mr.  Dulles  in  telling  his  biographer  the  story  of  his  first
diplomatic  mission,  in   1917,   perhaps  failed  to  mention  that
it  involved  a  sharp  and   fundamental   difference   of   opinion
between  the  young  Mr.  Dulles  and  his  idol.  This  incident,  at
the  very start  of  a  young  man's  career,  his  first  assignment  for
the  State  Department  he  was  one  day to  head,  deserves  fuller
if  less  glamorous  treatment  than  Mr.  Beal  decided  to  give  it.
Mr.  Dulles  was  already  working  for  Sullivan  &  Cromwell.
Mr.  Beal  relates  that   in   1917   Mr.  Dulles   went  to   Central
America  on  a  dual errand.   He  had  business  to  do  for  his law
firm  and   "a  special  agent's  commission  from   the  State  De-
partment."   President  Wilson  was  anticipating  America's  en-
trance  into  the  war  and  he  wanted  to  make  sure  that  Panama
would  synchronize  its  policy  with  ours.    "In   addition,"   Mr.
Beal  writes,  "it  was known  that  German  spies  were  operating
in  Central  America,  and  Wilson  wanted  arrangements  made
to  round  them up  when  the  time  came."
Mr.  Beal  says  Mr.  Dulles  carried  out  his  mission  in  Panama
* Harold   Nicolson's  memoir   of   Versailles,    "Peacemaking,
1919,"  mentions  Allen  Dulles  in  passing  but  not  John  Foster.
5
6  3
and  "the  spy hunt  was satisfactorily accomplished,  too."    Mr.
Dulles  "pursued  the  roundup  into  Costa  Rica  and  Nicaragua
on  horseback."    His   biographer   adds   that   "because   of   the
danger  involved,  President  Juan  Tinoco  of  Costa  Rica  insisted
on  presenting  Dulles  with  a  38-calibre  Smith  &  Wesson   re-
volver."    Then,   as  an  urbane  dinner  table  anecdote   should,
the  story  strikes  a  note  of  amused  depreciation.   Mr.  Dulles
used  the  gun  in  self-defense  only  once,  against  a  wildcat,  but
still  takes  it  along  to  Duck  Island  on  his  vacations  for  target
practice.   So  Mr.  Beal's  version  of  the  incident  ends.
A  Different  Kind  of  Intervention
I  found  this  account  frustrating, though  romantic.   My  curi-
osity  had  already  been  piqued   by  an  earlier   version  of   the
same  incident  in  a talk  made  by Mr.  Dulles  to  the   American
Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science,  and  printed   in  its
Annals  for  July,   1929.    Mr.  Dulles   spoke  on  "Conceptions
and  Misconceptions  Regarding  Intervention."     In  1929  there
was  hardly  a  country  in  Central  America  and  the  Caribbean
where  we  had  not  landed  Marines  at  one  time  or  another  to
enforce  obligations  to  U.  S.  bankers  and  business  men.   But
Mr.  Dulles   did  not  talk  of  that  kind  of  intervention.    His
theme  was that  the  refusal  to  recognize  a government  was  also
a  form  of  intervention,  and  as  such  to  be  condemned.    Mr.
Dulles  cited  the  seizure  of  power  by  General  Tinoco  in  Costa
Rica  in  1917,   and  his  eventual  overthrow  because  the  U.  S.
refused  to  recognize  him.
"I  was in  Central  America  at  the  time,"  Mr.  Dulles  related
in  1929,  "and  investigated  that  situation  for  the  State  Depart-
ment  and  made  a  report  which  went  to  the  President.   I may
say  that  my  report  recommended  a  recognition   of  the  revo-
lutionary   government,   and   this   recommendation    although
adopted  by  the  State  Department,  was  not  acceded  to  by  the
President."
Why  Did  Wilson  Disagree?
All  of  this  was  omitted  in  Mr.  Beal's  account.   The   omis-
sion  piqued  my  curiosity.  What  kind  of  a  man  was  Tinoco?
Why  did  Wilson   reject  the  Dulles  recommendation   that  Ti-
noco  be  recognized?   I  decided  to  have  a  look  into  those  an-
nual  volumes  of  documents  on  foreign  rektions  which   the
State  Department  publishes  after  the  events  have  safely  passed
into  history.   In  the  1917  volume,  I  found  a  great  deal  about
the  Tinoco  revolution  in  Costa  Rica  but  no  reference  to  Mr.
Dulles  or  to  a  report  recommending  recognition.   There  was
no  evidence  to  support  Mr.  Dulles'  recollection  that  the  De-
partment  had  ever  adopted  any such  recommendation.   On  the
{Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  22, 1957
contrary  the  cables  exchanged  between  the  U.  S.  legation   in
Costa  Rica and  Secretary of  State  Robert  Lansing  (Mr.  Dulles'
uncle)  were unremittingly hostile  to  Tinoco.
Why  They  Overthrew  Tinoco
The  very  first  report  to  Washington   the  day  Tinoco  over-
threw  the   legally  constituted  government   of   Gonzalez,   our
Minister  in  Costa  Rica  laid  bare  the  kind  of  a  revolution  this
was.    "Gonzalez,"  he  cabled   (p.   304-5),   "is  recognized  as
honest  and  -well  intentioned  and  Tinoco   as  an   accomplished
but  unscrupulous  man.   Gonzalez'  excellent   land  and  income
tax  measures  excited  the  hostility  of  the  privileged   classes."
The  Costa  Rican  Minister  in  Washington   protested  to  the
State  Department   (p.   312)   against   "the   notable   assistance
given   to   Tinoco   by  the   American   concern   known   as   the
United   Fruit   Company."    The   Costa   Rican   Minister   said
Tinoco  was  a  friend  of  Minor  C.  Keith  of  United  Fruit,  and
that  Keith  objected  to  the  new  income  taxes  enacted  by  Gon-
zalez  and  was  angry  because  Gonzalez  had  rejected  a  project
that  would   have   given  Keith   "control   over   all  the  water-
power  of  the  country."
The   old   official   records  even   throw   some   light   on   Mr.
Dulles'  romantic  story  of  how  he  rounded  up  the  German
spies  in  Costa  Rica  with  the  help  of  Tinoco's  pistol.   A  naval
intelligence  report  (page  236  of  the  1918  volume)  informed
Washington  that  whenever anyone  in  Costa  Rica  criticized  the
new  regime  he  was  promptly  thrown  in  jail  as  a  German  spy.
"In  the  meantime,"  the  naval  intelligence  report  added,   "the
real  German  spies  go  unmolested.  .  .  ."
Wilson  in  a famous speech  at  Mobile  in  1913  had  promised
an  end  to  "dollar  diplomacy."   In  refusing  to  recognize  Tinoco
that  pledge,  for  once,  was  honored.   The  U.  S.  helped   Costa
Rica  rid   itself   of  the  only  dictator  it  had  known   since   the
1870's.  This  is  what  Mr.  Dulles  years  later  was  still  criticiz-
ing  as a  form  of  intervention,  as  indeed  it  was,  though  not  the
kind  Sullivan  &  Cromwell's   clients  favored.
II
The  Tinoco  affair  is  of  a  piece  with  another  revealing  inci-
dent   Mr.   Beal  omitted,   Mr.  Dulles'   speech   at  Glen   Falls,
N.  Y.,  during his  unsuccessful  campaign  against  Lehman  for
the  U.  S.  Senate  in  1949.   Mr.  Dulles  was  barnstorming  up-
state  New  York  against  the  Fair  Deal,  attacking  "handouts  to
teachers"   and   "handouts   to  farmers,"  warning  that   Federal
aid  to  education  would  lead  to  thought  control,  and  attacking
Lehman's  ALP  supporters  as communistic.   At  Glen  Falls  Mr.
Dulles  said  that  unless  the  trend  to  statism  were  checked,  a
new  revolution  would  be  required.   "I  don't  believe  that  we
need  to  have  a  violent  revolution,  certainly  not  today,"   Mr.
Dulles  said  in  one  of  his  few  incautious moments.   "The   peo-
ple  still  have  it  in  their  power  to  check  this  thing,  but  if  we
don't  do  it  and  do  it  soon,  we  will  have  to  fight  our  way
back,  as  Thomas  Jefferson  said,  through  revolution."*  (Every
reference  based  on  the  full  report  next  day  in  the  New  York
Times,   Sept.   30,  1949.)     This   was  a  rare  glimpse  of   the
emotional   anti-New   Dealer   behind   the   casuistical  surface.
A   revolution  against  social   reforms  brought   about   by  ma-
*  "It  is  not  likely  that  Mr.  Dulles'  words  will  result  in  an
outpouring  of   Union   Leaguers  to  man  the  barricades  in  the
streets,"  the  Madison  (Wis.)  Capitol-Times  commented   (Oct.
5,  1949),  "so  he  will   probably   avoid  prosecution  because  of
the  'clear  and  present  danger'  rule.     But  we  confess  some
difficulty   in  straightening  out  legal  distinctions  between  his
position   and  that  of  the  11  Communists  who  are  now  being
tried  in  New  York   for  advocating  .forcible  overthrow  of  the
government."
jority  will  in  a  free  society  is  a  counter  revolution  like  that
fought  by  Tinoco  in  Costa  Rica  and  later  by  Hitler  and  Mus-
solini.   Mr.  Dulles'  instinctive friendliness  in  the  30's  to  the
world  counter  revolution  waged   by  the  Axis  powers   is  also
blacked  out  in  the  Beal  biography.
Honored Guests of Hitler
On  the  contrary,  the  unwary  would  gather  the  impression
that  Mr.  Dulles  was  so  antagonized  by  the  persecution  of  the
Jews  that  in  his  own  way  he  participated   in  the  anti-Nazi
boycott.   Here  is  Mr.  Beal's  swift  and  dulcet  summary  of  Mr.
Dulles'  activities  in  the  20's  and  30's.   "Late  in  the  1920's,"
Mr.  Beal  relates,  "the  firm  [Sullivan  &  Cromwell]   had  been
taking  on  representation   of  American  companies,  and  bank-
ers  having  European  activities,  and   opened   offices   in   Paris
and  Berlin.   Dulles  visited  these  capitals  on  the  average  twice
a  year,  dealing  in  Berlin  with  Hjalmar  Schacht,  president  of
the  Reichsbank.   On  one  trip,   shortly  after  Hitler   came  to
power,  as  a  result  of  the  negotiations  Dulles  was  conducting
with  his  bank  official,  Hitler  invited  Foster  and  Jane  Dulles  to
attend  a  Walter  Gieseking  concert  with  him.   It  was  the  only
time  Dulles  ever  met  Hitler.   Because  of  Hitler's  persecution
of  the  Jews,  and  the  increasing  difficulty  of  determining which
German   firms   were   involved   with   the   Nazi   government,
Dulles  discussed  with  his  partners  the  advisability  of  getting
out  of  business  in  Germany.   The  Berlin  office  was  closed   in
1934  and  German  firms  were  notified  that  Sullivan  &  Crom-
well  wished  to  sever  further   connections."
How  Dulles  With  Brilliant  Casuistry  Explained  Away  Axis  Conquests
"This  sequence  of  events   [the   seizure  of  Manchuria,  the
conquest  of  Ethiopia  and  the  annexation  of  Austria  and  the
Sudetenland],   which   we  can  trace  in  the   case  of   Japan,
Italy   and  Germany,   is   precisely   that   which   we  ought   to
have  expected.  .  .  .  By intelligent  planning  and by  utilizing
other  avenues  of  change,  we  could  have  prevented,  the  dy-
namic   pressure  from.becoming  explosive  and  have  assured
that   the  territorial  changes,  if   they  ultimately  proved  in-
evitable,    would   have  occurred  as  a  matured  development,
naturally  and  easily.  .  .  .  We  need  to  develop  in  world  af-
fairs  a  feeling  that  change  is  not,  per  se,  something  abnor-
mal  and  strange.  .  .  .  Rather  we  should  look  upon  change,
at  least  in certain  phases  of  the  national  domains,  as  normal
and   not   something   about   which   the   world   must   become
greatly  excited.  .  .  .  The ambitious  and dynamic  powers  bit-
terly   resent   a   dominant   world   philosophy   under   which
peace  and  international  morality  are  equated  with  the  pres-
ervation  of  rigidities  which  for  long  operated,  as  they  be-
lieve,  to  protect  selfishness   [sic!]  and  to  prolong  inequi-
ties.   The  mere  abandonment  by  the  status  quo  powers  of
such  a  philosophy  would  soon,  if  not  at  once,  assure  a  new
and  healthier  relationship."
—John  Foster  Dulles,  "War,    Peace  and  Change",  Ch. X,   1938.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  22, 1957
A  Masterpiece of  Facial  Surgery
This  is  a  masterpiece  of  facial  surgery.   One  hardly  knows
where  to  begin   in   restoring  the   subject's  original   features.
The   fact   is  that  Sullivan  &  Cromwell   has  been   representing
important   German   interests  for   more   than   half   a  century.
Sullivan   &  Cromwell   played   a  major   part   in   the   German
financing   operations   which   grew   out   of   the   Dawes   and
Young  Plans.    These  private  loans  from  1924  to  1929  aver-
aged  over  a  quarter  billion  dollars  a  year.   A  Justice  Depart-
ment   official   who   took  part   in  the   postwar  attempt   at  de-
cartelization   in   Germany   wrote   (All    Honorable   Men,   by
James   Stewart  Martin,   1950,   p.   53),   "Two   American  in-
vestment   banking   organizations   handled   the   bulk   of   this
private  lending  system  for  the  rebuilding  of  Germany.   They
were  Dillon,   Read   &  Company   of   New   York   and   the   J.
Henry   Schroder   Banking  Corporation.    Legal   work   on   the
Schroder  bank  loans  was  always  handled   in  Germany  by  the
firm  of   Albert  &  Westrich*,   and   in   the   United   States  by
Sullivan  & Cromwell,  the  firm  headed  by John  Foster  Dulles."
When  the  Hitler  regime  came in,  Mr.  Dulles  was chosen  to
negotiate  with  the  new  regime  on   behalf   of   the  American
bondholders.    The   fact   that   on   this  visit  he   and   his  wife
were  honored  guests  of  Der  Fuehrer  is  one  of  the  few  new
facts  brought  to  light  in  the  Beal  book;  it  would  have  been
deadly  information  in  the  1949  Senatorial  campaign.   On  the
other  hand,  it  is  strange  that  neither  Mr.  Dulles  nor  any  of
his  spokesmen  ever  before  claimed  that   "because   of  Hitler's
persecution   of   the   Jews,"   Sullivan   &  Cromwell   closed   its
Berlin   office   and   notified   German   firms   that   it   wished   to
sever  connections.   A  chance  to  portray  himself  as  a  stalwart
opponent  of  anti-Semitism would  have  been  very  valuable   to
Mr.  Dulles   in  the  New   York  campaign.
The Record of the  30's
Mr.  Dulles,  if  he  indeed  felt  that  way  about  Hitler's  per-
secution  of  the  Jews,  kept  it  a  secret  on  his  return  from  Ber-
lin.   Sullivan  &  Cromwell  continued  to  act  as  counsel  for  the
J.  Henry   Schroder  Banking  Corporation   which  Time  Maga-
zine  in  1939  described  as  "an  economic  booster  of  the  Axis"
and  Allen  W.  Dulles  continued  to  serve as one  of  its  directors.
The  close  relations  between  this  banking  house  and  I.  G.  Far-
ben  make  it  difficult  to  understand  Mr.  Seal's  statement  that
Sullivan  & Cromwell  "never  represented  cartels"  and  that  Mr.
Dulles  "never  had  anything  to  do,  directly  or  indirectly,  with
the  great  German   chemical  firm,  I.  G.  Farben."**   Sullivan
*  This  firm  has  an  ancient,  if  not  honorable,  history.   The
senior  partner,  Dr.  Heinrich  Albert,  came  to  the   U.  S.  in
1914,  supposedly  as  a  German commercial  attache  and  raised
"something    over   thirty   million   dollars    from    American
sources   friendly   to  Germany   to  finance  the  espionage   and
sabotage  activities  which  Franz  von  Papen  directed  in  the
U.  S.  during  World  War  I."   (Martin,   p.  52).    The  junior
partner,   Dr.  Gerhart  A.  Westrich,   came  here   in   1940   via
Siberia  as   von  Ribbentrop's  emissary   to  contact  American
big  business  men  and was  forced  to  leave  after  his  activities
were   exposed   by   the   New   York  Herald-Tribune.   "I   don't
believe  he  has  done  anything   wrong,"  Mr.  Dulles  told   tfiat
newspaper  at  the  time.   "I  knew  him  in  the  old  days  and  I
have  a  high  regard  for  his  integrity."    (See   N.  Y.  Herald-
Tribune,  April  13,  August  1,  2,  S &  10,  1940 and  N.  Y.  Times,
Aug.  10,  11  &  24,  1940).    All  this,  of   course,   was  omitted
front  the  Beal  biography.
"Some  Casual  Readers ..  ."
"War,   Peace   and  Change  was   a   profoundly  philo-
sophical  book.  .  .  .  Some  casual  readers—and  it  is  im-
possible  to  absorb  the  book's  message  casually  —  in-
terpreted  it   as  an  apologia  for   Hitler  and  Mussolini,
which  it  is  not."
—Beal's  biography  of  Dulles,  p.17.
"In  a  speech  at   Ohio  Wesleyan  University  in  1942
...  he  [Dulles]  rejected  union  of  the democracies:  'In-
deed,   the   unordered   interdependence   which   leads   to
war  actually  is  found  largely  between  the  democratic
and  non-democratic countries.  .  .  .  The  so-called  "demo-
cratic"  nations are,  generally  speaking,  the  richer  and
more  satisfied.    The  non-democratic nations  are,  usual-
ly,   the  poorer  nations.    Thus  a  federation  of   the  so-
called  democracies would,  to  others,  appear as  a  band-
ing  together  of  the  well-to-do  to  maintain  the  status
quo.' ...  In  speeches  such  as  this  he  enlarged,  refined,
and   added   to   the   basic   theory  be   outlined  in  War,
Peace  and Change."
—Beal's  biography  of  Dulles,  pps.  18, 19,  20.
&  Cromwell  were  counsel  for  I.  G.  Farben's  lifelong  Ameri-
can  associate  (through   two  world  wars),  Ernest  K.  Halbach
in  his  suit  against  the  Alien  Property  Custodian  in  the  Gen-
eral   Dyestuffs   case  and   in  combatting   the  anti-trust  indict-
ments  to  which  General  Aniline  and  General  Dyestuffs  plead-
ed nolo contendere.  (See  Howard  Watson  Armbruster's  monu-
mental  work,  Treason's   Peace:  German   Dyes   and   American
Dupes   (1947)  for  the  whole  story.   Mr.  Dulles  was  a  direc-
tor  of  International  Nickel,  which  was  sued   by  the   govern-
ment  in  another  anti-trust  cartel  action  for  a  price  fixing  al-
liance  with  I.  G.  and  for  illicit  aid  to  German  rearmament.
Moralist  In Action
During   the   war,   with   his   happy   facility   for   occupying
dual  roles,  Mr.  Dulles  was  at  one  and  the  same  time adviser
to  the  Alien  Property   Custodian  and  a  key  figure  in  an  un-
successful  cloaking  operation:  the  voting  trust  agreement  by
which   German   Bosch   sought   to  hide   its  continued   owner-
ship  of  American  Bosch,  which  controlled  the  output  of  fuel
injection   equipment. for   naval   diesel   engines.   (Martin,   p.
250).   Today  Mr.  Dulles  is the  one  top  official  of  the  govern-
ment  (neither  the  President  nor  the  Attorney  General   agrees
with  him)   who   favors  return  of   I.  G.   Farben's   American
properties,   despite   the   Paris  reparations   accord   of   1946   in
which  we  agreed  with  our  Western  allies  to  hold  vested  Nazi
properties   in  lieu  of  reparations.   Mr.  Dulles  told  the  Senate
Judiciary  Committee  in   1954   it  could   ignore  the  Paris  pact
because  it  was  an  executive  agreement   rather   than   a   treaty
and  therefore  did  not  bind  the  Senate,  a  curious  argument   for
so  indefatigable  an  international  moralist.   This,  too,   is  not
to  be  found  in  the  Beal  biography.
**  "The  J. Henry Schroder Banking Corporation and  its  law
firm, Sullivan  & Cromwell, had handled  the  banking and  legal
business   of  the  General  Aniline  firm  from  the  time  it   was
first   set   up   as   the   American  I.   G.  Chemical  .Corporation.
Throughout  the  war,  Allen  W.  Dulles,  a  partner  in   Sullivan
&  Cromwell  and  until  1944  a  director  of  the  Schroder  bank
in  New  York,  headed  the  European  mission  of  the  Office  of
Strategic   Services   in   Switzerland;  and  V.   Lada-Mocarski,
vice-president  of   the  Schroder   bank,  was   a   United  States
consul  in  Switzerland."   (Martin,  pp.   67-68).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  22, 1957
III
Mr.  Dulles  is  like  the  iceberg,  in  that  so  little  of  him  ap-
pears  above  the  surface.   The   full   story  of  his  activities  in
the  30's  may never  come  to  light,  but  the  little  that  is known
shows  that  he  was  one  of  those  who  believed  in  coming  to
terms  with  the  New  Order  represented   by  the  Axis.   One  of
Mr.  Seal's  interesting  omissions  is  the  article  by  Mr.   Dulles
published  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly   for  October,   1935,   called
"The   Road  to  Peace."   The  road  to  peace,   in  Mr.  Dulles'
opinion,  was  the  appeasement  of  the  Axis  powers.   Mr.  Beal
relates  that   in   1937   Mr.   Dulles   attended  a  European   con-
ference  and   "was   dismayed   by  the   fact   that   in   seeking   to
cope  with  the  problems  posed  by  Hitler  they  [the  European
delegates]   were  inhibited   by  narrow  nationalistic  considera-
tions  and  conventional  thought  patterns."  This  is  almost  ver-
batim  from  an  earlier  sketch  of  Mr.  Dulles  by John  Chamber-
lain  in  Life   magazine  for  August  21,  1944,  but  with  a  clari-
fying   sentence   omitted.    This   said,   "The    Rumanians,   the
Czechs,  the  Yugoslavs  and  the  Poles  among  them  refused  to
see  the  necessity  for  any  alteration  of  the  status  quo.  .  .  ."
The   main  obstacle  to  peace  was  the  unwillingness  of   the
victims  to  let  themselves  be  carved  up.
"Aggression"  Was  Put  in   Quotes
In   those   years  the   great   crime  in   Mr.   Dulles'   eye.s  was
devotion  to  the  status  quo,  an  odd  position  for  a  corporation
lawyer.   It  made  sense  only  if  one's  favored  clients  were  Ger-
many,  Italy  and  Japan  as  "have-not"   powers.   In  the  Atlantic
Monthly   article  Mr.  Dulles  disapproved  of  the   non-recogni-
tion  policy  applied  by  the  United  States  and  the  League  of
Nations  to  (as  he  phrased  it  tactfully)  "the  situation  brought
about  by  Japan  in  Manchuria."   He  thought  Japanese  expan-
sion  in  Asia might  reflect  "a  logical  and  inevitable  tendency"
and  added  icily,  "If  this were the  case,  such  changes  could  not
be  held  in  suspense  until  that  hypothetical  date  when  China
was  prepared  freely  to  acquiesce  therein  so  that  change  could
no  longer  be  treated  as  'aggression'."   The  quotations  around
"aggression"   are  revealing.
Mr.  Dulles  talked  with  Chiang  Kai-shek in  1938.   Just  why
Mr.  Dulles  saw  him  or  what  he  said  is  not  revealed  but  Mr.
Beal  says  cryptically,  "Dulles  concluded  that   Chiang  was  a
sincere  Chinese patriot  in  the  grip  of  forces  beyond  his  con-
trol.  .  .  .  This  appraisal  proved  positively  shocking  to  some
of,his  [Mr.  Dulles]   acquaintances."    Just  what  was  shocking
about   this   is  not   clear  unless  Mr.   Dulles   thought   Chiang
ought  to  have  accepted  Japan's  current  peace  offer  but  could
not  because he  was  "in  the  grip  of  forces  beyond  his  control."
Hitler  Wanted  Japan's  Hands  Freed
I  suggest  that  this was the  case.  Tokyo  at  the  time had  been
seeking  "through  Nazi  good  offices,"   (Frederick  L.  Schuman
in  his  International  Politics)   to  negotiate  peace  with  Chiang
if  he  would  recognize   Manchukuo  and  accept  Japanese   "ad-
visers."    Mr.   Dulles   in   his   own   account   of   his   visit   with
Chiang   (in   War  or  Peace,  p.  225)   says  the  Generalissimo
"was  at  the  time under  strong  pressure  to  make  a compromise
with  Japan.   He  discussed  it  with  me.   Terms   had  been  of-
fered  which would  have  been  very  advantageous  for  him  and
his  government."    Neither   Mr.   Beal   nor   Mr.   Dulles  men-
tions  facts  which  came  to  light  two  years  ago  when  the  State
Department  released  its  volume  on  U.  S.  Foreign  Relations,
1938,  The  Far  East.   The  U.  S.  did  not  think  Japan's  terms
at  all  advantageous.   On  the  other  hand  Berlin  —   looking
ahead   to   war   with   Moscow—was   intensely   interested   in
bringing   about   a  settlement  because  as  our  Ambassador   in
China  cabled  Secretary  Hull,  Feb.  28,   1938   (p.   107),   "A
Germany   involved   with   Soviet   Russia  can   hope   for   little
assistance  from  a  Japan  preoccupied  with  China."    It  was  at
this  juncture  that  Mr.  Dulles   turned  up  in  the  Far  East  to
sound  out  the  possibilities of  a  settlement.   A  cable  from  Am-
bassador  Johnson  in  Hankow   dated   March   5,   1938,    (pps.
119-21)   reports  a  conversation  "with  Mr.  John  Foster  Dul-
les,  well-known  writer  and  lawyer,  on  the  subject  of  media-
tion."    A  full  memorandum  on  the  conversation,  sent  home
at  the  time  by  Ambassador Johnson,  was  withheld.
Whatever  Chiang  told  his  visitor,  it  did  not  change   Mr.
Dulles'  outlook.    A  year  after   that  visit,  in  his  famous  dis-
cussion  with  Wendell  Willkie  at  the  Economic  Club  in  New
York,  he  made  the  prize  remark,  "Only   hysteria  entertains
the  idea  that  Germany,  Italy  or  Japan  contemplates  war  upon
us."   That  was  March,  1939.   This  also  is,  of  course,  omitted
by  Seal's  biography.  I  suggest  that  in  these  omissions lies  the
secret  of  Mr.  Dulles'  enthusiastic  later  activity  as  an  architect
of  the  cold  war,  the  framer  of  a  soft  peace  with  Japan  and
the  successful  advocate  of  German  rearmament.   Hence   the
blackout  in  this  official   biography.
Send   A   Gift   Subscription   to   A  Friend  and  Let   Us  Start  !t  With  This  Issue
I. F.  Stone's
Please  renew
CUroot
City     ............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street    ..........
City    ............
Shall   we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
...........................Zone............State................_
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
4/22/57
...........................Zone............State................_
gift   announcement T    Yes  CU  No  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone'*  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March   S,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August  and  December  at   SOI   E.  Capitol   St.,   Washington   >,  D.  C.
An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited  by   I.  F.   Btone;  Circulation  Manager   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
tB  IB  the  XI. 8.;  M  In  Canada;  $10 elsewben.    Air  1UU  rates:  «U  to  •nrope:  120  to  Israel.  Asia  mud  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED