I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957sep23.pdf

============================================================

The  Smith  Act's  Decline  and  Fall,  P.  4
How  Soviet  Rigidity  Defeated   Itself  in  the  UN  Debate  on  Hungary,  Pages  2  and  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  36
SEPTEMBER   23,  1957
»
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Justice  Delayed  Becomes  Justice  Denied
As  we  went  to   press  24  hours  before  the  showdown  in
Little  Rock,  the   course  of  events  in  the   school   crisis   could
most  easily  be  summed  up  by  saying  that  the  white suprema-
cists   seemed   to   be   successful   in   frightening   Presidents  and
little  colored  girls.   Appeasement  as  well  as  autumn  was  in
the  air  of  Washington,  and  one  could  only  predict  with  as-
surance  that  whatever  happens  in  Little  Rock  the  next  segre-
gation  crisis  will  be  worse.   The   next  crisis  will  occur   when
a  Southern  Governor  closes  down  the  schools,  not  with  Na-
tional  Guardsmen  on  the  excuse  of  preventing violence,  but
by  State  law  to  prevent  integration.   Across  the  Potomac,  in
Virginia,  where  the  most  genteel   of   the  South's  oligarchies
rules,   such  a  crisis  has  just  had  a  last-minute    postponement.
The  scene  was  the  heavily  curtained  and  dimly  lit  courtroom
on   the   second  floor  of   old   Alexandria's  modern   new   post-
office,   half-filled   with  an  audience  about  equally  divided  be-
tween  reporters and  spectators.  The  courtroom  was,  of  course,
non-segregated   but  the  dozen  Negro  spectators  sat   bunched
together  in  one  corner.   Oliver  Hill,  a  distinguished  looking
Negro,  the  first  to  be  elected  to  the  City  Council  of  Richmond
since  Reconstruction, appeared  on  behalf  of  7  colored  children
seeking  admission  among  21,000  white  pupils  in  Arlington
county,  a  semi-Northern  enclave  on  the  edge   of   the   South.
Though   their   cause   has   been   litigated   up   to   the   Supreme
Court   and   back,  Federal  Judge   Albert  V.   Bryan   granted   a
stay  on  his  own  order   for  their  admission   next  Monday,  so
that  another  round  of  appeals  might  begin.   This  is  a  form
of  legalistic  perpetual  motion  which  deserves  more  attention,
since  slight  changes  in  State  law  and  pleadings  may  keep  these
cases  in  the  courts  indefinitely.   Justice  delayed  may  thus  be-
come  justice  denied.
Secret  Talks  With  Faubus
The   Eisenhower  Administration  has  been   more  closely  in
touch  with  events  in  Arkansas  than   appears.    The   Governor
telephoned   the  Attorney  General   several  days  before  calling
out  the National  Guard  to  tell  Mr.  Brownell  what  he  planned
and   to  ask  what  the  Justice  Department   would   do  about  it.
Arthur  B.  Caldwell,  head  of  the  civil  rights  unit,  himself  a
native  of  Arkansas, was  sent  down  to  Little  Rock  to  talk  with
the  Governor   by  Mr.  Brownell  before  the  troops  were  called
out.    Mr.  Caldwell  was  helpful   in  the  Hoxie  matter   and  is
regarded  as  friendly  to  integration.    Just  what   transpired   is
a  secret,  but  those  who  have  been  closest  to  the  civil  rights
fight were  ready  to  blame  the  President  personally  rather  than
Mr.  Brownell  for  any  appeasement  of  the  Governor  and  for
the  Faubus  visit  with  Elsenhower.
Violators  of  court  orders  do  not  usually  have  the  privilege
of  being  received  in  the  highest  quarters.   It  is  said  in  criti-
cism  of  the  President  that  since  his  excuse  for  silence  on  the
10                                                                                                                                             1
school  situation  was not  to  interfere  with  the  courts,  he  should
not  have  interfered  by  allowing  the  Governor   to  confer  with
him   over   the   head   of   a  Federal   Judge   the   Governor   was
defying,   nor  give  aid  and  comfort  afterward  to  the  slippery
Faubus  by  saying  pompously  that  one  cannot  legislate  moral-
ity.    In   this  remark   Mr.   Eisenhower  wa?  only   repeating   a
favorite   Southern  chestnut.   The   answer   to  it   is  that   while
one  cannot   legislate  morality,   most  of   our  laws  and   courts
are   devoted   to  punishing  immorality.   The   unspoken   emo-
tional  premise  of  remarks  like  Eisenhower's  is  that  defiance
of   the   Supreme  Court  on   segregation   is  just  a  minor   pec-
cadillo,   and   unlike   most   lawlessness   not    really   immoral.
Speaking  of  morality,  Brooks   Hays,  the  mediating   Congress-
man  from  Little  Rock,  may  best  be  described  as  too  much  of
a  Christian  to  be  comfortable  about  segregation   but  too  much
of  a  politician to  vote  in  accordance  with  his  conscience.   He
voted  against  the  civil  rights  bill.
Warren  Olney's  Resignation
A  very  bad  sign  on  the  eve  of  the  Little  Rock  showdown
was  the  sudden  resignation  of  Warren   OIney  III  as  Assistant
Attorney  General   in  charge  of  the  criminal  division.   A  first
rate  lawyer,  an  idealist  and  a  firm  champion  of  Negro  rights,
Mr.   Olney  had   long   been   frustrated  in  the  Department   of
Justice.   His  friends  had  hoped   that  he  would   be  given   the
newly  created  post  of  Assistant  Attorney  General  in  charge  of
a  new  Civil  Rights  division.   It  was  Mr.  Olney  who  had  in-
vestigated  and  tried  so  hard  to  prosecute   the  election   frauds
in   Ouachita   Parish   and  other   sections  of   Louisiana.   Negro
leaders   had   confidence  in   him,   and   the   Southern    Senators
could  not  have  blocked  his  appointment  since  he  had  already
been  confirmed  as  an  Assistant  Attorney  General.   His   resig-
nation  creates  the  fear  that  the  Department   is  looking  for  a
more  compromising  character  to  fill  the  new  post.
Let's You and Him Fight"
The  Eisenhower  Administration's  first  reaction  to  the  Fau-
bus  defiance  was  to  put   out   a  feeler   and   see  whether   the
NAACP   would   carry  the  ball  for   it,  and   intervene   in   the
District  Court.    This  would   have  been  folly  since   it  would
have  reduced  the  Faubus  affair  to  a  quarrel  between  the  Gov-
ernor  of  Arkansas  and  the  NAACP.
A  public  statement  by  J.  Edgar  Hoover  on  something   other
than   Communism   or  juvenile  delinquency   is  a  great   rarity,
and  his  formal  statement  denying  that  FBI  men  would   escort
Negro  children  to  school   in  Little  Rock  provoked   consider-
able   amusement.    The   fact   that   the   FBI  were  questioning
people  in  Little  Rock  undoubtedly  scared  a  good  many  dem-
onstrators,  and  the  fact  that  FBI  men  were  scaring  Southern
racists  seems  in  turn  to  have  scared  Mr.  Hoover.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   23,1957
Even  Poland  and  Hungary,  Though  Voting  With  Moscow,  Took  A  Different  View
The  Soviet  Union  Defeated   Itself  at the  UN  Special  Session  on  Hungary
United  Nations, N.  Y.
The  special  session  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assem-
bly  on  Hungary   was  a  reluctant   and  apathetic  affair.   The
huge  and  modernistic  meeting  hall,  which  always  seems  like
a   Hollywood  setting  for  an   H.  G.  Wells  fantasy,   was  but
sparsely filled  most  of  the  time  and  the  debate  after  a  pain-
fully   slow  start  was  wound  up  in  a  rush  early  Saturday
morning   by  delegates  determined   to  have   their   week-ends
free.
There  was  a  general  feeling  that  the  Hungarian   question
had  degenerated  into  another  inning  in the  cold war,  that  the
Soviet   Union  had  already   been  amply  condemned,  and  that
further    condemnation   would   serve   only   to   emphasize   the
impotence  of  the   UN  and  to  make  the  Russians   more  ob-
durate.
In  addition  the  melodramatic   airlift   of  arms  to  Jordan
deflated  the  issue  to  pot-and-kettle  proportions   in  the  minds
of  many neutral  delegations,  since  the  U.  S. was  itself   visibly
if  less  brutally   intervening  against  a  government  it  did  not
like  in  the  Middle East.   Events  in  Little  Rock, on  top  of  the
bloody  repressions  in  Algeria,  gave  U.  S.  and  Western  moral
pretensions   a  sour  taste  on  Asian  and  African  palates.
Moscow,  Too,  A Santa Claus
Hungary   seemed   a  dead   issue   and  a   European   issue  to
Afro-Asian  delegates,  all  of  them  more  interested  in  matters
closer   home  and   none  of  them   anxious  to   antagonize   the
Soviet  Union nowUhat  it,  too,  is  in  the  business  of  dispensing
foreign  aid.    Typical  is  the  case  of  Ceylon,  a  member  of  the
special   5-nation   UN  investigating   committee   on   Hungary;
it  is  in  the  process  of  asking  the  Soviet  Union   (see  dispatch
from   Colombo in  the   Times  of  London,  Sept.  7)   for  trans-
port, farm  and  aircraft  equipment.    Under  the   circumstances
it  is not surprising  that  Ceylon abstained.
The  real  surprise  was  the  final  outcome.   The  dimensions
of  the  Russian  defeat  are  not  to  be  measured  merely  by  the
final  vote,  which  was  far   bigger  than  the  U.  S.   delegation
Expected:  60  in  favor  of  the  Hungarian  resolution,  with  10
abstentions  and   10  opposed.    The  moral   dimensions  of   the
defeat  are  better  measured  by  the  fact  that  none  of  the  ab-
stainers,  not  a  single  neutral  in  the  cold  war,  accepted  the
Soviet  version  of  what  happened  in  Hungary.     Even   Poland
and  Hungary,  though  they  voted  with  the  Soviet  bloc against
the  UN  resolution,   did  not  defend  Moscow's  view.
No Help  Needed
The  brief  remarks  of  Poland's   representative,  M.  Micha-
lowski,  contrasted  so strikingly with  the  speeches  of  the  other
Soviet  satellite  states  as  to  demonstrate  again  that  Poland
is  in  a  category  all  its  own.   M. Michalowski  did  not  say  one
word  which  could  be  interpreted   as  justification   of  the   Rus-
sian  intervention   or  of  Moscow's  theory  that  the   Hungarian
Gomulka's  Debt  to  Hungary
"Its  i.e.  [the  UN  report  on Hungary]  conclusions  cor-
respond  not  only  to  the  views  of  the anti-Communist
western  public  on  this  question  but  also   to  the  opin-
ions  expressed  by  eminent  thinkers,  scientists   and  ar-
tists  of  Europe  who have  Communist affiliations  or pro-
Soviet  felings.   Among  these  we  may  refer  to  Joliot-
Curie,  Vercors  and  Pablo  Picasso.    These  people  have
publicly   expressed   their   complete   disagreement   with
the  blood  intervention  of  the  Soviet  Army.  .  .  .  Let
us  not  forget   that  these   very  same  people  have  con-
siderably   influenced   the  minds  of   Russian  leaders   to
get  them  to  respect  the  Government  of  Gomulka,  which
is  reestablishing  with  a  wise  but  a  firm  will  the  sov-
ereign  characteristics  of  the  Polish   State."
—Mr.   Quiroga-Galdo   (Bolivia),   UN   Debate   on
Hungary,  Sept.  13.
October  was  a  counter  revolutionary  uprising  fomented  from
abroad.
Indeed  the  Gomulka  regime  could  hardly  have   underwrit-
ten  the  Soviet  version  without  serious  repercussions  at  home.
Poland  is  perhaps  the  only  country  in  the  world  for   which
Hungary  is  no matter  of  power  politics,  but  of  a  kindred  suf-
fering.   Poland's  journalists—notably  Marion  Bielicki  in  Po
Frosty,  and  Viktor  Woroszylski  in  Nvwa  Kultura—long  ago
gave  the  Polish  public the  same  picture  as  the  UN  report on
Hungary,   that   of  a   whole  people  united   against   an   alien
and  heavy-handed  regime.
Aside  from   a  few  mealy-mouthed  words  designed  to  ap-
pease  the   Russians   by  implying   that  the   UN  report  was
biased,  the  position  taken  by Poland  and  Yugoslavia  was  like
that  of  the  Asian  neutrals  rather  than  of  the  Soviet  satel-
lites.    M.  Michalowski  protested  that  the  UN  debate   merely
"reopens  and  irritates  wounds  which  had  slowly  and  pain-
fully  begun  to  heal."    Both  Poland  and  Yugoslavia   insisted
that  the  best  way  to  help  Hungary  was  by  bringing   a"bout  a
general  improvement  in  the  international  climate.    The  im-
plication  was  heretical  and  offensive,  since  Mr.  Sobolev  and
Mr.   Mod  had   already   explained   that   Hungary   no  longer
needed  help.     She  had  already  been  saved—from   Fascism,
by the  Red  Army.
Its  Own Worst  Enemy
Against  the  background  of neutral  distaste  and  general  in-
difference  to  what  had  become  a  thrice  told  tale,  the  Soviet
Union  would  have  done  better  for   itself   if  its  tactics  had
not   been  so  crude.     Some  readiness  to  recognize  the  real
grievances  behind  the  uprising,  some sign  in  the three  months
since  the  UN  published   its  report   of  internal  amelioration,
would  have  softened  up  many  of  the  neutrals.   Instead  there
Burma Expresses the  Prevalent  Asian-African  Point  of  View
"We  remain  convinced  that  what  occurred  in  Hungary
was  essentially  a  spontaneous  nationalist  uprising.  .  .  . We
also  adhere  to  the  view  that  this  nationalist  uprising   was
suppressed  by  the  armed  might  of  the  Soviet   Union.  .  .  .
We  regret  therefore  that  the  Soviet  Union  has  not  seen  her
way   to  withdrawing  her  troops.   .  .  .   [But]   we  think  it
would  be  a  great  tragedy  if  the  Hungarian  question  were  to
become  an  instrument of  the  cold  war. ....
"In  our  view  the  Algerian  question  belongs  in  the  same
category. ...  In  Algeria  blood  is  being   shed   every   day.
Why  then  was  no  thought   given  to  calling  a  special   ses-
sion  to  consider  the  grave  situation  in  Algeria? ...  It  is
—U  Thant  (Burma),  UN  Debate  on Hungary,  Sept.  12.
this   employment  of   a   double  standard  which  we   of   the
small  countries  cannot  help  but  deplore.  .  .  .
"Speaking  of  double  standards,  I  feel  I  must  refer  here
to  the  attitude  which  the  Assembly  adopted  towards   the
Kuomintang  aggression  against   my  own  country.   Repre-
sentatives  may  recall  that  my  delegation  furnished  clear
evidence   that   the   Kuomintang   aggression    was   master-
minded,  controlled,  directed  and  supplied  by  Formosa.    Yet
the   Assembly  would  not  permit  of   the  aggressor's  being
mentioned  by  name.  With  that  extreme  delicacy  which it  so
often   exhibits,  the  Assembly  referred  to  the  Kuomintang
troops  as  'foreign  forces'."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  23,  1957
Neutrals  Antagonized  by  the  Crude  Attacks  on  the  Integrity  of  the  UN  Committee
. By the  Stalinist  Rigidity  With  Which  It  Pictured  the  October  Uprising
have  been  savage  persecutions  of  intellectuals  and   workers.
Mr.  Sobolev  and  his  faithful  echoes spoke in  terms  so  simple-
minded   as   to   be  incredible.    The   pre-Twentieth    Congress
Stalinist  mentality  in  all  its  wooden  rigidity  was  on  display
in  this  black-and-white  picture  of  a  counter   revolution  run
hy  capitalists,  landlords  and  Horthyite  Fascists.    No  Soviet
spokesman  mentioned  the   workers  of  Csepel  and   no  names
were  cited  to  support  Mr.  Mod's  claim  that  Hungarian   in-
tellectuals  are  almost  unanimously  behind the  Kadar   regime.
Anna  Kethly, a  sad  phantom  wistfully  haunting  the  session,
was  branded  a  spy.    There  was  no  answer   to  Mr.  Lodge's
challenge  that  Budapest  explain  what  had  happened  to  Mr.
Kadar's  promises after  he  took  power  to  negotiate  the  with-
drawal  of  Soviet  troops, to  permit  free  elections,  to grant  the
right  to  strike  and  to  assure  freedom  for  scientists  and  writ-
ers.     Molotov  may  be  in  Outer  Mongolia  but  his  soul  went
marching  on all  week  in  New York.
A Non-Existent Member of Parliament
The  Soviet  speeches  were largely  devoted to  snippets  taken
out  of  context  from  the  Western  press.   These  ranged  from
the  distorted  to  the  imaginary.    At  one  point,  for  example,
the  Albanian  delegate  said  a  British  Member of  Parliament,
"a  Mr. John  Bird,"  told  the  press  on  August  30 that  a  visit
to  Hungary  had  strengthened  his  conviction "that  the  count-
er   revolution  in  Hungary   was  truly   a   counter-revolution"
and  that  the  UN  report  was  false.    On  returning  to  Wash-
ington  we checked this  with  the  British  Information  Service.
It  had  no  record  of  any  member  of  Parliament  named  John
Bird.    (Another  curious  case  of  mistaken  identity  or  coinci-
dence  which  arose  during  the  debate  was  when  Peter  Mod,
Hungary's   delegate,  was  challenged  to  say  whether   he  was
the  same  Peter  Mod who  signed  his  name  to  a  manifesto  is-
sued  by  a  revolutionary  committee  in  the  Foreign  Ministry
in  Budapest  last  October  demanding  the  withdrawal  of  Rus-
sian  troops.    Mr, Mod refused to say).
The  cheap  way  in  which  the  integrity   of  the  United   Na-
tions   Committee  was   attacked   also   alienated   neutral   and
friendly  opinion.    Uruguay,  the  only  Latin  American  mem-
ber  of  the   UN  committee  on  Hungary,  is  also   the   Latin
.American  country  which  is  most  truly  democratic  and  inde-
pendent  of  the  United  States.    Neither  Uruguay  nor  Ceylon
nor   Tunisia   can  be  dismissed,   as  the   Soviet   bloc  tried  to
dismiss  them,  as  U.  S.  puppets.    Moscow  hurt  itself  by  its
attack  on  the   committee,  and   by  slanderous   aspersions   on
the  Danish  member.
On  one point  there  seemed  to  be  general  agreement   among
the  neutrals  of'  both   Asia   and  Europe.    Mr.  Lall  of   India
The  Soviet  Truman-Ike  Doctrine?
"I  should  like  to  quote  from  the  article  in  Pravda  of
23  November 1956.  .  .  .:  'A  socialist  state  could  not  re-
main   an   indifferent   observer  of   the   bloody  reign  of
fascist  reaction  in  People's  Democratic  Hungary.  .  .  .
We  regard  our  help  to  the  Hungarian working  class  in
its  struggle  against  the  intrigues  of  counter-revolution
as  our  international  duty.'
"This  article ...  is  disturbing because  it  allows  us
to  assume—and  the  speeches  of  the  representatives  of
the   People's   Democracies  which  have  been   made  in
these  past  few   days  only  serve  to  confirm—that   the
idea  of  proletarian solidarity  is  considered  by  the  So-
viet  Union  to  be  a  positive  principle  of  law,  an  inter-
national   duty   capable  in  itself   of   justifying  foreign
military  intervention.
"Are   we  therefore   to   conclude  that,   whenever   the
Soviet   Union  feels  that   the  interests  of  the  working
class  of  any  country  whatsoever  are   jeopardized,   the
possibility  of  intervention  by  Soviet  troops  is  not  ex-
cluded?"
—Mr.  Na  Champassak  (Laos),  UN  Debate  on  Hungary.
welcomed  the  suggestion   put   forward  by  Ireland   that  the
best  way to help  Hungary  would  be to negotiate mutual  with-
drawal  of  American  and  Russian  troops  from   Europe,  with
the  area  to  be inspected  by a  UN  unit  recruited  from  neither
the  NATO nor the  Warsaw  pact  powers.  Mr. Aiken, the  Irish
delegate,  declared  that  in  such  an  agreement  lay  the  oppor-
tunity,  "perhaps  the  only  opportunity,  for  the  peaceful   lib-
eration  of Eastern  Europe."
Wan's Mission  A  Wan Hope
The  question,  as  Ireland's  delegation  put  it,  was  "not  how
strongly  we  can  express  our  abhorrence  of  what  Russia  has
done  and  is  doing  to  crush  the  oppressed  Hungarian  people"
but  "what  can  be  done  to  help  Hungary   recover  her  free-
dom?"    Unfortunately   the   general   impression   at   the   UN,
even  in  Western   circles,  was  that  the  U.  S.  was  more  con-
cerned  with  winning  a  cold  war  propaganda   battle  with  the
U.  S.  S.  R.  than  with  helping  the   Hungarians.
The  least  the  U.  S.  can  do is  to  keep  out  of  the  picture,  as
Prince  Wan  of  Thailand,  the  Assembly's  respected  President,
tries  to  carry  out  the  resolution's   mandate   "to  take   such
steps  as  he  deems  appropriate"  on  Hungary.    This,  if   the
pun  can be forgiven,  is at  the  moment  a very  wan hope.
The  Blinkers of  Rigid  Theory  Left
"Their  [i.e.  the  Soviet]  account  of  events  starts  from  the
assumption  that  all  historical  happenings  must  be  viewed
as  aspects  of  the  Communist conception  of  Marxism  and  of
the  class  struggle,  illustrating a  permanent conflict  between
'good*  Communist  and  'bad'  bourgeois  elements.
"While  it  is  admitted by  the  Soviet  Union  and  Mr. Kadar
that  errors  and even  'crimes'  may  occur in  a  Communist so-
ciety,  it  is  regarded  as  contrary  to  the  destined  course  of
history  that  such  shortcomings  could  ever  be  so  serious  as
to  call  in  doubt  the  superiority of  the  Communist  political
structure.   It  follows  that  any  radical  criticism,  such  as  a
call  for  free  elections,  will  be  presented  as  the  result,  not
of  a  genuine  wish  for  improvement,  but  of  'bourgeois'  ef-
forts  to  mislead  the  working  masses  and  reinstate  capital-
ism.
"The  Committee .  .  .  found  no  evidence  that  either  the
government  of  the  USSR  or  that  of  Mr. Kadar has  hitherto
1   4
Moscow  Baffled  by the  Uprising
published  anything  in  the  nature  of  an  objective  statement
of  the  facts  behind  the  Hungarian  uprising.   Various  indi-
cations,  however,  have  suggested   that  the  Soviet  authori-
ties  were  baffled  by  the  spontaneous  uprising  of  the  Hun-
garian  people.  .  .  .
"Thus,   the   Committee  has   become   aware  that   partici-
pants  who  were  deported  to  the  Soviet  Union  were   closely
questioned  regarding  the  causes  and  nature  of  the  uprising.
The   phenomenon  of   a   working  class   movement  directed
against   cherished   Communist   methods    and   ideals,    and
against  emblems  of  the  Soviet  Union  as  symbols  of   those
methods,  would  seem  to  have  caused  misgiving,  and  some
of  the  Hungarians  received  the  impression  that  their  inter-
rogators  were  not  unsympathetic."
—Report   of   the   UN   Special   Committee   on   Hungary,
Chapter  III,   "The   Uprising  As  Seen  by  the   USSR
and  by  the  Government   of  Janos   Kadar."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   23, 1957
The  Informer  System  Boomerangs  in  Connecticut  and  Collapses  in   Pittsburgh
New   Reversals  Speed  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Smith  Act
Readers  may  recall  the  front  page  headline  in  the   Weekly
last  October   15,  "Beginning  of  the  End  for  the  Smith  Act?"
Recent  events  indicate  that  we  were  not  too  optimistic.    Chief
Judge   Charles  E.  Clark   in  the  Second  Circuit  Court  of   Ap-
peals  has  just  ordered   the  acquittal  of  the  Connecticut  Smith
Act  defendants;  the  Pittsburgh   cases  have  been  dismissed  on
motion  of  the  government  by  the  Federal  judge  preparing  to
retry  them;   the   Denver   convictions  have   been   reversed   for
retrial  by  the  Court  of   Appeals,
On   October   9  the  government   will  announce  whether   it
is  to  retry  the  California  convictions  reversed  by  the   Supreme
Court   last  June  or—as  the  U.   S.  Attorney  who   prosecuted
them   suggests—dismiss   the   indictments.    The    Philadelphia
Smith  Act  defendants  will  ask—and   probably  win—reversal
of  their  convictions  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  on  October   22.
The   Supreme  Court   itself   reconvenes  October   14  with   the
Smith  Act  as  its  first  item  of  business—the  Scales  and  Light-
foot  membership  cases  are  items  No.   1  and  2  on  its  docket.
We  believe neither  membership conviction  will  stand  up,  and
that  we  are  seeing  the  last  of  the  Smith  Act  for  some  time
to  come.
Foreshadowed  By  Judge  Hastie
The  Act  remains  constitutional,  but  the  new  requirements
of  proof  make  it  a  dead  letter,  except  where  it  can  be  shown
that  defendants  actually  themselves  advocated   overthrow   of
the  government  under  circumstances  which  made  this  an  in-
citement  to  action.   People  can  no  longer  be  sent  to  jail  for
something  Marx  said  a  century  ago. This  stricter  requirement
was  foreshadowed  by  Judge  Hastie's  dissent  in  the  Pittsburgh
Smith  Act  cases,  and  sketched  out  by  Mr.   Justice  Harlan   in
reversing  the  California  Smith  Act  convictions.   This  was  the
first  occasion  on  which  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  actually  re-
viewed  the  evidence  in  a  Smith  Act  case;  the  original   Dennis
decision  was  confined   to  the  constitutionality of  a  peacetime
sedition  law.   Mr.  Justice Marian's  standard  has  been  applied
—and  made  less  obscure  and  more  forceful—by  Judge  Clark
in  the  Connecticut cases.   Judge  Clark  said,  "The use  of  law-
ful   speech,  an  agreement  to  share  abstract  revolutionary doc-
Item  Illustrating  the  Progress      .
Made  by  Political  Science
Since  1912
Washington,   Sept.  13—Robert   Todd   Lincoln,   son  of
Abraham   Lincoln,   declined   to   seek   the   Presidency   in
1912  because  he  believed  the  office  would  interfere  with
his  golf   game.
—Chicago  Tribune,  Sept.  16.
trine,  and  an  agreement  to  use  force  against  the  Government
in  the  future  do  not  add  up  to  a  conspiracy  presently  to  use
illegal  language."   Language  is  illegal  only  when  it  incites un-
lawful  action.   We  are  getting   back  to  normalcy  in  constitu-
tional law.
These  recent  cases  show  that  the  political  informer  system
is   also   in   decay.   Where   the   informers   are   scrupulous   in
their  testimony, it  boomerangs  against  the  government.  Judge
Clark  placed  stress  on  the  fact  that  the  FBI  had  infiltrated  the
underground   State   board   of   the   Communist  party   in Con-
necticut  but  had   "observed   nothing   even  mildly  incriminat-
ing."   On  the  other  hand,  where  the  informers are unscrupu-
lous  the  government  runs  into  trouble.   The  Pittsburgh  cases
were  remanded  by  the  Supreme  Court  last  term  on  proof  of
perjuries  by  the  informer Mazzei.  Of  the  other  informer  wit-
nesses  in  the  prosecution  of  Steve  Nelson  and  the  other  Pitts-
burgh  defendants,  Paul  Crouch   is  dead  and  Matthew  Cvetic
"unavailable."    Both  have  long   been  discredited.  Where   to
find  replacements  for  retrial  of  these  cases?
The  government  had  one  possibility,  an  FBI  plant  in  the
Pittsburgh  branch  of  the  Communist  party  named  Isaac Alex-
ander  Wright.   He  was  given  his  first  public  try-out  before
the   Subversive  Activities  Control   Board   last   summer   in   an
effort   to  make  the  Committee  to  Abolish  the  Sedition  Laws
register   as   a   Communist   front.    But   a   diary  kept   by   Mr.
Wright  fell   into  the  hands  of  the  defense  and   its  contents
were  so  sexually  scabrous  that  the  government  dismissed  the
case   rather   than   risk   the   public   scandal  cross-examination
would   have  created.   For   lack   of   other  witnesses,  the gov-
ernment  has  thrown  in  the  sponge  in  Pittsburgh, too.
Several  Schools  Are   Using   the   Weekly   in  the  Classroom—Write  Us About  Special  Bulk  Rates
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street    .............................
Piiv
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  ....................
Street    ..............................
City
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
......Zone....... .....State....................
mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
9/23/57
......Zone............State.. ..................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  Q    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  0. C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   V.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.   D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,   187(1.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday   except   th«  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekW   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in   tb   U.  S.;  t6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall  rates:  115  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED