I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957feb04.pdf

============================================================

The  Fifth  Amendment and  the Labor  Racketeer, P.  3
Exclusive;  A  New  Line  of  Attack  on  the  Un-American  Committee  and Its  Blacklist,  See  Page 2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  6
FEBRUARY  4, 1957
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.IB  CENTS
Congress  Moves  More  Slowly  on  Ike's  New  Blank  Check
The  President may  be  doing  fine  in  Mecca,  but  he's having
trouble   in  Washington.    Two   years  ago,  when  he   asked  a
blank  check  for  war  in  the  Far  East,  the  House  gave  it  to  him
next  day.  The  Senate acted  three  days  later.   There  were  only
three dissenting votes  in  each  chamber.  This  year's  request  for
a  blank  check  to  make  war  in  the  Middle  East  is  having  a
stickier  reception.  Mr.  Eisenhower made his request  in extreme
urgency  on  January  5,  but  when  the  House  finally  acted  25
days  had  passed  and  there  were  61  votes  in  opposition.    The
Senate,  less  easily  hurried,  resumes  public  hearings  this  week.
Our  Conscript  Fathers,  by  their  dignified  pace,  show  that  we
too  are  recovering from  the  cult  of  personality.
Actually  the  size  of  the  opposition  in  the  House  is  better
measured  by  the  vote  last  Tuesday  to  impose  a  gag  on  debate
than  by the  vote next  day on  passage.   The  vote  for  the  closed
rule  was  262  to  146.  Many  liberals  like  Celler   (D.  N.Y.),
Reuss   (D.   Wis.)   and   Roosevelt   (D.   Calif.)    were  sharply
critical  but  in the  end  felt  compelled  to vote  for  the  joint reso-
lution.   As  James  Roosevelt  said,  "I  cannot  take  the  risk  of
having  any vote  I  cast  in  this  great  body give  aid  and  comfort
to  the  designs  of  the  Kremlin."    What  he  really  meant  was
that  he  could  not  risk  having  his  vote  misrepresented.   Only
the  bolder  liberals  and  the  more  stalwart  isolationists  stuck  to
their  guns;  Clare  Hoffman   (R.  Micb.)   and  Chet   Hollifield
(D.  Calif.),  O'Konski  (R.  Wis.) and Multer  (D.  N.Y.)   thus
found  themselves  together.
The  Real  Weakness  of  the  New  "Doctrine"
A   careful   reading  of   the  favorable  report   made   by   the
House  Foreign  Affairs  Committee  indicates  that  even  the sub-
missive  majority  is  acutely  aware of  the  resolution's  shortcom-
ings.    The  report  urges  attention  to  the  problems  not  covered
by  the  resolution—the  Arab-Israeli  controversy,   the   resettle-
ment  of  Arab  refugees  and  the  reopening  of  the  Suez  canal
with  adequate  safeguards.   The  report  also  underscores,  with
soft   discernment,  the  weakness  of   the  so-called  Eisenhower
Doctrine.    It  says  the  nations  of  the  Middle  East   "evaluate
their  own  problems  and  the  world  situation  in  terms  of  their
own  individual  circumstances.  . . . Several  of  the Middle East-
ern  countries do  not  give  a  high  priority  to  the  Soviet  threat.
.  .  .  All  of  these  nations  give  top  priority  to  national  inde-
pendence  and  freedom  from  foreign   domination."
But  neither  in  the  bitter  speeches  of  the  House  nor  in  the
storm  gathering  in  the  Senate  have  there  appeared  men  in-
trepid  enough  to  translate  this  into  plain  English.   It  is  the
Middle  Eastern desire for  neutralism, with the threat  that  holds
for  U.S. bomber  bases,  which  lies  behind  the  crisis.   If  the
forthcoming  investigation  looks  for  understanding  rather  than
sensation,  it  will  see  that  the  trouble  began  when  Egypt  in
October  1951 turned  down  our  proposals  for  a Middle  Eastern
2  *
Command  like  NATO  and  SEATO.
A  stable  and  neutral  Middle  East,  in  which  legitimate  oil
and  transit  interests  can  be  safe,  is achievable.   But  $400,000,-
000  in  baksheesh  will  not  be  enough  to  create  a  permanent
protectorate.   Congressman  Hardy  (D.  Va.),  fresh  from  his
study  of  foreign   aid  follies   in  Iran  (see  page  4),   told  the
House  it  was  nonsense  to  talk  of  spending  that  amount  for
economic  development  in  so  short  a  time  with  no  advance
planning.   He  asked  whether  we were inviting  Middle  Eastern
rulers  "to  believe  that  we  stand  ever  more  ready  to  solve  our
diplomatic problems  simply by writing  out  more  checks for  the
U.S.  taxpayer."   We  are  trying  to  buy  the  desert   potentates
when  experience  has  shown,  as  Wayne  Hays  (D.   Ohio)   ex-
pressed  it,  that  they  can  only  be  rented.
Best  Not  Translated  Into   Hungarian
Until  we  recognize  that  we  cannot  treat  the  area  as  a pri-
vate  preserve,   the  Russians  will  make  trouble.    The  Russian
opposition  in  the  UN  to  an  international  police  force  to pre-
vent  a  new  outbreak  between  Egypt  and  Israel   speaks   self-
righteously  of  "a  dangerous  precedent  in  the  domestic   affairs
of   sovereign  states"—a  mouthful  which  will  read   strangely
when  translated   into  Hungarian.   Ever  since  Litvinov,  every
Soviet  definition  of  aggression  has  included  the  formation  of
armed  bands  like  Nasser's   jedayeen   on  the  territory  of  one
state  for  incursions  into  another,  but  Moscow  forgets  when  it
comes  to  the  Gaza  strip.   There  it  finds  Israel  "has  absolutely
no  reason"  to  demand  guarantees.
Congressional   debate   is  having   the   useful   byproduct  of
pushing  the  Administration  reluctantly  toward  a  policy  more
realistic  than  merely  bidding  against  Moscow   for  Egyptian
favor.    Nasser  is no  Galahad  of  anti-colonialism.  A  key  point
was  touched  in  the  Senate  last  Tuesday  by Douglas   (D.  ///.).
He  asked  Mansfield  (D.  Mont.)   whether  Egyptian  reoccupa-
tion  of  Tiran  at  the  entrance  to  Akaba  would  not  block  ship-
ping  access to  "the alternative  or  supplementary  pipeline  being
built  from  the  head  of  the  Gulf   over  to  the  Mediterranean
and  thus  we shall  have  lost  any alternative to Mr. Nasser's con-
trol  over   the   Suez  canal."   Mansfield   agreed   and   said   the
pipeline   "is  about  one-third   completed."    It  will   run   from
Elath  to  Haifa,  permitting  oil  for  Western  Europe  to  bypass
Suez.  Douglas  went on  to  criticize  Lodge's  position at  the  UN,
saying  that  once  the  Israeli  withdraw  and  the  Egyptian  troops
are  back  "the United  Nations  can  pass  whatever  resolutions  it
wishes,  but it will  be faced  with  an  accomplished  fact.  . . and
the  possibility  of  an  alternative  pipeline  will  be  out  of   the
question."   Mansfield  agreed  that  "the  best  possible  solution"
would  be  the  Canadian  proposal  that  UN  troops  move  in  as
the  Israeli  troops  move out. The  difference  is  between  appease- •
ment  of  a  dictator  and  a  settlement  fair  to  all.
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  4, 1957
Ike's  Judges  and  FDR's
Another  hopeful  straw  in  testing   the  judicial  wind
was  the  6-3  decision  by  the  Supreme Court  ordering  n
new  trial  for  Ben  Gold  (as  predicted in  our  last  issue)
on   the   ground  that  there  had  been  jury  tampering.
Politically  this  was  a  hot  case,  the  first  Taft-Hartley
non-Communist   oath  prosecution  on  which  the  Court
has  ruled.   Gold  as  leader  of  the  Fur  Workers was  the
foremost  Communist  in  the  trade  union  movement.   In
ruling  that he had  a right  to  a  new  trial, the  three  New
Dealers   left   on   the   Court   (Black,   Frankfurter  and
Douglas)   found   themselves  lined   up  with   the   three
Eisenhower  appointees  (Warren,  Harlan  and  Brennan)
in  Gold's  favor.   The  dissenters  were  the  two  Truman
judges  (Burton  and  Clark)   and  FDR's  one  conserva-
tive  appointee, Reed.
The  jury  tampering  came  about  when  a  member  of  t
panel  from   which  petit  jurors  are  chosen complained
to  the  U.S.  Attorney  that  she  had  received  a  copy  of
the   Afro-American   containing  an   advertisement   at-
tacking  the  Taft-Hartley  Act  inserted  by  another non-
Communist   oath   defendant,    Hugh   Bryson.    In    the
course  of  investigating,  the  FBI  also  questioned  three
members  of  the  jury  already  sitting  on  the  Gold  case.
The  majority  ruled  the  intrusion unintentional  but  said
that  did  "not  remove the  effect  of  the  intrusion."
Legislative  History  Cited  Against  The  Effort  to  Identify  and Blacklist   Individuals
A  New  Line  of  Attack  on  the  House  Un-American  Committee's  Powers
As  yet  unnoticed  by  the  press,  a  new  line  of  attack  on  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  has  been  launched
by  Telford   Taylor  in  a  brief  amicus  filed  with  the  U.S.  Su-
preme  Court  in  the  Watkins  case.   Taylor  has  dug  back  into
the  legislative  history  of  the  resolution  establishing  the  Com-
mittee  in  1938.   This  is  the  gist  of  his  argument:
"The   legislative  history  of  the  statute  and  resolutions estab-
lishing  the  Committee   .  .  .  clearly  shows  that  the   Congres-
sional  purpose,  in harmony with  the  wording,  was to  look  into
the  origin, contents and  channels of  distribution of  propaganda.
Nothing  in  the  legislative  history  supports  the extraordinarily
broad  construction  .  . . that  Congress  has authorized  the  Com-
mittee  to  identify  and  'expose'  every present, and  former  mem-
ber  of  the  Communist  Party.   A  resolution  (H.  Res.  88,  75th
Cong.  1st  sess.)   the  language  of  which  might  have  been  sus-
ceptible  to  such  interpretation  was  debated  and  rejected  by  the
House  of  Representatives  in   1937  shortly  before  Representa-
tive Martin  Dies  introduced  the  much  narrower  resolution   (H.
Res.  282,  76th  Cong.  1st sess.)  adopted  by the  House  in   1938,
the  language  of  which  is  identical  with  that  of  the  statute  un-
der  which  the  Committee  presently   operates."
Started  With  "Nazi"  Not   "Un-American"
The  language  df  the  resolution  establishing  the  Committee
has  an  interesting  history.   Taylor   shows  that   it  is  identical
with   that   establishing  the   McCormack-Dickstein   Committee
in   1934,   except  that  the  latter  used  the  word  "Nazi"  instead
of  "un-American."   This  was  an  investigation of  Nazi  propa-
ganda  activities  and  culminated  in  the  passage  of  the  Foreign
Agents  Registration Act.
In   1937   Congressman   Dickstein   introduced   a   resolution
calling  for  a  broader  investigation, no  longer  limited  to  propa-
ganda  but  including "the  character, objects,  extent  of  member-
ship  and  officers  .  .  ."  of  organizations  spreading   "slanderous
or  libellous  un-American  propaganda  of  religious,   racial,  or
subversive  political  prejudices.  .  .  ."  (Italics  added).
Taylor  asks the  Court  to  notice  that  the  Dickstein  resolution
"did  not  purport  to  embrace  the  membership  of  such  organi-
zations  in  years long  past,  and  in  that  respect  was  perhaps  less
sweeping  than  the  authority now  claimed  by  the   Committee."
But  it  did  "specifically envisage  the  'identification'  of  all  mem-
bers  of  'un-American  propaganda'  organizations."
Ham  Fish  Opposed  This One
This  new  resolution  ran  into  heavy  opposition  from  two  di-
verse  sources.  One  was  from the  liberals  in  the  House,  led  by
Maury   Maverick   of   Texas   and   Lindsay  Warren    of   North
Carolina,  who  were  prophetic  in  their  warnings.   The   other
was  from  rightists  not  wholly  unsympathetic  with  the  Fascist
and  Nazi  "shirt"  groups  mushrooming  up  around  the  country.
The   foremost  baiter  of  Reds,  pinks,   and  liberals  in  Con-
gress  turned  champion   of  civil  liberties  when  confronted  by
this  resolution.    Hamilton   Fish   of  New  York  had  been   the
chairman  of  the  prototype  of  the  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee,   the  committee  set  up  in  1930   to   investigate
"communist  propaganda   in  the  United   States  and  particularly
in  our  educational  institutions;  the  activities  and   membership
of  the  Communist   Party  of  the  United  States. ..."    •
Now,   while  the  manager  of   the  new  resolution    (Green-
wood  of  Indiana)  pleaded  that  it  was  not  a  question  of   free-
dom  of  speech  but  of  investigating  the  organization  and  drill-
ing  of  uniformed  men  in  this  country  by Nazi  German  agents
and  funds,  Fish  reversed  position.   "This  bill,"  he  protested,
"sets  up  an  un-American  checkup,  nothing  more  or  less,  and
restores  the  alien  sedition  (sic)   laws.   The  American  Legion
would  never  be  for  that."  The  resolution  lost  184  to  38.
Enter  Martin  Dies
It  was after  the  defeat  of  the  Dickstein  resolution  that  Mar-
tin  Dies  of  Texas  introduced  the  narrower  resolution,  omitting
reference  to  membership,  which  the  House  passed  in  1938,  es-
tablishing  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee.
The  history  is  not  new,  but  the  use  made  of  it  is.  Taylor  is
counsel  for  Robert  M.  Metcalf,  a  professor  of  art  at  Antioch
College,   summoned  before  the  House   Committee  in  Septem-
ber,  1954.   He  admitted  that  a  decade  earlier he  was  a  member
of  a Marxist  discussion group  but  declined  to  name other  mem-
bers.   Trial  of  Metcalf  for  contempt  has  been  held  up,  pend-
ing  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  on  the  Watkins  appeal.  This
is  similar  in  that  the  UAW   organizer  also  declined  to  name
others  he  had  known  as  Communists  a  decade  before.
Taylor  argues  that  the  legislative  history  shows  that  the  Un-
American  Activities  Committee,  unlike  the  old  Ham  Fish  com-
mittee,  was  never  intended  to  set  out  on  a  general  inquiry  to
identify  all  Communists  or  Marxists,  past  and  present.
Correction:  Mr.  Sydnor   H.   Walker,   assistant  to  the  Presi-
dent  of  Vassar, informs  us  that  we  were  incorrect  in  reporting
(our  issue of  Jan.  14)  that  Lloyd  Barenblatt  was  discharged  by
the  college as a result  of  his  subpoena  by the  House   Un-Ameri-
can  Activities  Committee.    On  investigating   we  find  we  were
wrong  and  regret  the  unintentional  reflection   on  Vassar.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  4,1957
The  Fifth   Amendment  and  The  Labor  Racketeer
George  Meany and  the  labor  movement  are  to  be  applauded
on  their  decision that  any  union  official  who  invokes  the  Fifth
amendment  "for  his  personal  protection  and  to  avoid  scrutiny
by  proper   legislative  committees  .  .  .  into  corruption  on  his
part  .  .  . has  no  right  to  continue to  hold  office  in  his  union."
A   properly  constituted  Congressional   committee  has   lawful
authority  to  investigate  labor  racketeering,  and  it  is  most  en-
couraging  that  the  Executive  Council  of  the  AFL-CIO  should
recognize  that  such committees  "by  reason  of  their  power  and
authority  to  subpoena  witnesses  .  .  .  have  means  beyond  those
of  the  labor movement  to  expose  and  bring  to  light  corrupt  in-
fluence." Gangsters  have grown  too strong  for  internal reform.
The  abuse  of  the  investigatory power  by the  Senate  Internal
Security   Committee   and   the  House  Un-American    Activities
Committee  should  not  be  allowed  to  blur  the  picture.  These
two  committees  invade  an  area  which  the  First  Amendment
plainly  closed  to  Congress.   Those  who  invoke  the  Fifth  as  a
last  resort to  avoid  becoming  informers  in  a  latter  day  Inquisi-
tion  can  be  defended  without  protecting   racketeers  violating
Airpower:  How  We  Don't  Know
The  report  on  Airpower  by the  Symington  subcommittee  of
the  Senate Armed Services Committee  is  in  the  tradition  of  the
scare  reports  used  by  arms  lobbies  in  Germany,  France,  Eng-
land  and  the  United  States  for  half  a  century.   Of  the  three
Senators  who  signed  the  majority  report,   two,  Symington  of
Missouri  and  Jackson of  Washington,  are  from  States  in which
the  aviation  industry  is  important;  the  third  is  Ervin  of  North
Carolina.   All  three  are  Democrats,   and  their  party   appears
here  again  as  the  parry  of  the  arms  race.   The  dissenters  are
Republicans,  Saltonstall  of  Massachusetts   and   Duff   of  Penn-
sylvania.
The  majority  report  is a slapdash  job.  The  subject  is  serious
but  all  it  does  is  pick  out  the  most  alarmist  testimony  it  could
find  on  every  aspect  of  the  subject  and  quote  this  with  a  mini-
mum  of  analysis.   Serious  students  should  obtain  the  text  for
themselves  and  compare  the  treatment  of  the  same  material  in
the  minority report.  A  striking  sample  is the  majority's fright-
ening  emphasis  on  the  grave  danger  of  a  surprise  attack.  This
ignores  testimony  like  that  given  by  Admiral  Burke  which  the
minority  cites:
Senator   Duff.  .  .  .  Admiral,  I  was  anxious  to  ask  this
question:  Considering  the  rimming  of   the  Soviet  by  the
various   bases  that  we  have,  together  with  the  setup  we
have  in  England,  Spain,  France,  around  the Mediterranean,
and  with  the  deployment  forward  of  part  of  your  carrier
force  in  the  eastern  area  and  in  the  Mediterranean, do  you
think  it  would be  credible that  the  Soviet  could organize  an
attack  that  would  be  a  complete  surprise  everywhere?
Admiral  Burke.   I  think  it  most  unlikely,  sir.
the  criminal  laws  with  impunity  in  an  area  over  which  Con-
gress  has  full  authority.   The  Fifth  amendment   protects   all
men  guilty  or  innocent  from  being  forced  to  give  testimony
which  may be  used  to  prosecute  them.   But  this  does  not  mean
that  a  trade  union  ought  to  keep  in  office  a  man  who  refuses
to  answer  questions  about  the  abuse  of  his  trust.   The   trouble
with  the  earlier  position  taken  by the  I.U.E.,  that  such  persons
be  put  on  trial  by their  unions,  is  that  in  some  unions  corrup-
tion  is so powerful  that  the  crooks  would  control  the  trial  ma-
chinery.   This  is  true  of  the   Teamsters.
The  Executive Council  is to  be commended  also  on  avoiding
the  cheap  demagogic  temptation  of  coupling  "communism   and
corruption."   The  former  is  a  political  problem  to  be  handled
by  unions  in  a  political  way.   The  latter  is  a  problem  of  law
enforcement.   By  limiting  its  Fifth  amendment  position  to  in-
quiries  into  corruption, and  by recalling  the  useful  role  played
by  Senate  investigations  in  the  past  (like  La  Follette's  before
the war),  the  Executive Council  has  treated  the  issue  with  the
seriousness  and  perspective  which  can  best  serve  labor's  cause.
That  the  Soviets  Did  Not  Do  It
The  kind  of  air  forces  a  country  should  maintain   depends
on  its  own  geographical  position.   There  are  as  many types  of
planes  as  of  weapons,  and  each  has  its  own  useful  sphere  of
activity.   The  problem  of  achieving  the  best  possible  air  force
is  not—as  the  Symington  report  would  make  one  believe—a
simple  problem  of  outproducing  every  enemy  in  every  type  of
plane.   Eisenhower,  as  a  soldier,  understands  this   thoroughly
and  has  expressed   it  several  times  but  never  clearly   enough.
This  is  a  task  of  public  education  he  had  better  tackle  soon.
The  most  dangerous  aspect  of  the  report  is  its  glib  discus-
sion  of   Soviet   capacities.   Historically   arms  lobbies   have  al-
ways  exaggerated   enemy  power.    But  one  has  only  to  skim
through  works  on  the  last war  to  see how poor  air  intelligence
proved  even  in  dealing, with  countries  much  smaller  and  more
accessible  than  the  Soviet  Union.
Students   of   logic  will   be  fascinated   by  the   way  the  ma-
jority  arrived  at  their  conclusions.    A  sample   is  on  page  50
which  quotes  an  interrogation   by  Fowler  Hamilton,  the  com-
mittee's  counsel,  of  Lt.  Gen.  Donald  L. Putt,  Air  Force  Deputy
Chief  of  Staff,  Development.    Gen.  Putt  was  asked  whether  he
thought  the  Soviets  had  the  capacity  in  1950-52  to  work  on
both  the  shorter  range  and  the  intercontinental   missile.    Gen.
Putt  thought  they  had.
Mr.  Hamilton.  So  far  as  we  know is  there  any  reason  to
suppose  that  they  did  not  do  that?    Do  we have  any  intel-
ligence  that  you  know  about  of  a  positive  character  that
indicates  that  they  did  not  do that?
General  Putt.    I  have  no  knowledge  that  they  did  not.
Our  Air Force Heads Seem  To
"Neither  President  Eisenhower  nor  any  other  American
would  think  of   letting   atomic  bases   be  planted  in   close
proximity   to  us.    We  have  no  moral  or  inherent  interna-
tional  right   to  plant  them,  thousands  of   miles   from  our
shores,  under  the  noses  of  other  nations."
_Charles  Edmondson's  last  protest  as  a  USIA      official,
Tokyo,  Jan.  27.
".-.  . all  the  information  we  get  indicates that  the  Soviets
are  very  much  worried about this  ring  of  bases  of  ours.  .  . .
I  often  think  that  I  would  hate  to  see  our  country  right  to-
Agree  With That  USIA Rebel
day,  the  United  States,  rimmed with  three  or  four  hundred
Russian  bases  in  Canada and  Mexico.  It  would be  a  pretty
bad situation here."
—Air  Force  Chief   of  Staff    Twining,  quoted  (p.  Ill)   in
the   Symington    committee    report    on    Airpower,
U.S. Senate, Jan.  30.
"It  is  a  great  comfort  to  me,  as  I  am  sure  it  is  to  you,
that  no  potential  enemy  possesses  a  system  of  bases  simi-
larly  located  relative  to  the  United  States."
—Air  Force  Secretary   Quarles,  same  report  (p.    US).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, February  4,1957
Did  U.  S.  Foreign  Aid  Funds  Finance  the  Overthrow  of  Mossadegh  in  Iran?
The  New  Spy  Arrests:  A  Question  of  Politics  and  Timing?
Nothing  could  be  more  valuable  in  counter  espionage  than
to  identify   enemy  agents.   They  can  then  be  watched,   their
contacts  noted,  false  information  fed  to  them.   To  arrest  them
is  to  end  these  possibilities,   and  to  put  the  foreign  power  on
notice in  the  headlines  to  cover  its tracks.
Against   this   background   of    normal    counter    espionage
strategy,  the  new  Soviet  spy  suspect  arrests  are  puzzling.   Ac-
cording  to  U.S.   Attorney  Paul  Williams,  the   suspect   Jacob
Albam  "replaced   the  second  secretary  of  the  Soviet Embassy,
Vassily  M.  Zubilin,  as a  dominant figure in  the  espionage  ring
after  World  War  II."    Zubilin  left  this  country  in  1944  and
Williams  says  this  present  case  has  been  under  FBI  scrutiny
for  more  than  ten  years.  Yet  so  far  the  only  charges  are  con-
spiracy  to  commit  espionage  and  failure to  register.   Was  it  not
possible  in  all  that  time  to  catch  the  suspects  in  the  act?
I  have  heard  reactionaries  in  Washington   say  that  if  the
climate  improves  too  much  it  is  always  possible  to  come  up
with  a  new  Hiss  case.   The  FBI  and  the  Justice  Department
are  acutely  aware of  the  public  relations  angle.   The  arrests  are
being   utilized—particularly   in   some  very  tendentious   leads
sent  out  by  the  Associated  Press—to  smear  all  refugees  just
when  there is a chance  that  Congress  might  revise the  Walter-
McCarran  Act  to  open  our  gates  wider  and  to  make  life  less
difficult  for  aliens  in  this  country.   The  new  arrests  deserve  to
be  studied  for  their  political  effect  and  timing.   As  usual,  too,
they were accompanied  by ballyhoo designed  to  convict  the  sus-
pects  in  the  press  before  they  were  even  indicted,  much  less
tried.
In  the  late  Roman Empire,  the  path  to the  purple  was often
paved  with  bribes  to  the  Pretorian   Guards.   Trie  CIA  once
boasted  that  it  overthrew  Mossadegh  in  Iran  (see  the  series  in
the  Saturday  Evening  Post,  Sept.  30  to  Oct.  13,  1954).   Now
the  new  House  Government  Operations  Committee  Report  on
U.S.  Aid  Operations  in  Iran  discloses  (p.  47)  that  after  Mos-
sadegh   was  overthrown   in   1953,  a  total  of   $1,700,000  in
"bonuses"  was paid  the  Iranian  Army,  gendarmerie  and  police
out  of  U.S.  "foreign  aid"  funds.   A  committee  employe,  asked
if  there  was  any  connection  between  the  palace  revolt  and  the
Moderate  Estimate
"Paris—Senior   NATO  experts  on  civil  defense  are
now  working  on the  'moderate' hypothesis that a hydro-
gen  bomb attack  on Britain  would  kill  at  least  a  million
people  outright.  The   NATO   Senior   Civil  Emergency
Planning  Committee has  agreed  on  this  as  one  of  the
basic  assumptions  it  must  make  about thermonuclear
war  in  the  NATO area  .  .  .  the  British  casualty figure
is  based on a presumption  of  a  certain amount  of  evacu-
ation,  provision  of  some shelters  and a  reasonable tacti-
cal  warning."
—Sunday  Times  (London),  Jan. SO.
bonus,  said  that  if  there were  it  would  have  been  censored  out
for  security  reasons.   Though  written  under  wraps,  the  report
is  a  vivid  picture  of  foreign  aid  abuses  by  native  sharpies  and
the  oil  companies  in  a  typical Middle  Eastern country where—
the  committee  reports—2  percent  of  the  people  own  70  per-
cent  of  the  land  and  literacy  even  in  the  cities  has  been  esti-
mated  at  no  more  than  7  percent.   Part  of  the  story  is  one  of
plain  thievery and  the  Committee  concludes  that  "if  our  for-
eign  policy  today in  other  lands  is  as  entangled  with  economic
aid  operations  of  the  kind  described  in  this  report,  it  is  leaning
on  a  poor  kind  of  instrument  indeed."
The  decision  of  Mayor  Wagner  not  to  greet  Ibn  Saud  was
foolish.   When  the  President  invites  the  head  of  another  State
to visit, certain elementary courtesies are  called  for.   New  York
City  has  one  of  the  great  Jewish  communities  of  the  world,
and  it  would  have  been  more  becoming  for  the  Jewish  leaders
of  New  York to turn  the other  cheek,  and to welcome the  Arab
monarch  with  a  statement  saying  that  they  hoped   his  visit
would  be  the  forerunner  of  peace  with  Israel.   This  is  not  a
visit  from  Adolf  Hitler.   It  is  a visit  from  the  ruler  of  an  Arab
country  who  naturally  feels  as  strongly  in  sympathy  with  the
Arabs  of  Palestine  as  those  of  us  who  are  Jews  feel  in  sym-
pathy  with  Israel.   There has  been  a  war,  and  there  must  be a
peace.   The  President's  gentle  and  thoughtful  rebuke  to  the
City  of  New  York  was  justified.
Reprints   of  Last  Week's   "Meditations   on  Toscanini"  Available  Free  on  Request
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street   .........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .........._..................................................................
2/4/67
Street
City  ..........................................Zone.,........State................_
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED