I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957may06.pdf

============================================================

One  of  Cvetic's  Victims  Wins  A  Victory  in  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  Page  2.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  18
MAY   6,  1957
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Guilty  of  Getting  A  Passport   Despite  the  State  Department
The  Real  Crime  Committed  by  Dr.  Otto  Nathan
The  conviction of  Einstein's  executor,  Dr.  Otto  Nathan,  for
contempt   of   the   House   Un-American  Activities  Committee
must  be   seen   in   perspective  to  appreciate   its  fine   flavor  of
bureaucratic  vindictiveness.    By  this  conviction  the  State  De-
partment  has found  a  way to  punish Dr.  Nathan  for  his temer-
ity  in  challenging  its  passport   procedures  in  the  courts.    Its
ally,   that   unhappy   xenophobiac,   Congressman   Walter,   has
found   a  way  to  take  out  on  Dr.  Nathan   his disappointment
that  he  could  not  even  get  his  passport  control  bill  out  of  com-
mittee last  year.
The  scene  in  court  called  for  a Kafka. The  shiny  newness  of
that  cavernous,  almost   empty  chamber  gave  it  an  air  of  me-
chanical  unreality, as  if  it  were  a  huge  judicial  jukebox.   Most
of  the  time there  were  only three  spectators,  two  friends  of  Dr.
Nathan's  from  New  York  and  an  elderly  retired  local lawyer
who  follows  civil  liberties  cases  with  an  ancient but undimin-
ished  passion.   There  was  one  reporter.   The  Judge,   Curran,
gray  and  white-faced, was constantly  picking his  nose.  The  one
witness,  Richard  Ahrens,  staff  director  of  the  House  Commit-
tee,  fresh  from  a  triumphant  appearance  before  the  D.A.R.  in
national  conclave  here  the  week  before,  read  the  transcript of
Dr.  Nathan's  appearance  into  the  record,  a  long  droning  per-
formance.   For  the  prosecutor,   William   Hitz,  Jr.,  as  for  the
Judge,  this  was  the  umteenth  performance  of  a  familiar  script,
ending  in  a  foregone  conclusion.    Did  the  witness  refuse   to
answer  the  question?   If  he  did,  he  was  guilty  of  contempt.
Next  case.  . . .
"And  Other  Similar   Information"
But  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  on  appeal   the  higher  courts
will  not  take  cognizance  of  the  background   which  made  Dr.
Nathan's   appearance   before  the  House  Committee  what   his
chief   defense   counsel,   Leonard   Boudin,  termed   a   "punitive
expedition."    If  the  State  Department  felt  there  was  good  rea-
son  for  denying  Dr.  Nathan  a  new  passport  when  his  old  one
expired  in  1952,  it  was  its  duty  to  hold  that   "quasi-judicial
hearing"  the  Court  of  Appeals  ordered  after  two  and  a  half
years  of  litigation.   It  did  not  hold  a  hearing.    It  did  not  ap-
peal.   It  gave  Dr.  Nathan  a  passport.  The  reason  it  evaded  a
test  was  clear  from  the  vague web  of  association  and  aspersion
the  prosecutor  tried  to  weave  about  Dr.  Nathan  in  his opening
remarks  at  the  contempt  trial.  While  the  Department   did  not
"actually"  have  information  that  Dr.  Nathan  was  a  Commu-
nist,  Mr.  Hitz  said,  he  had  been  "consorting  with  Communists
and  others";  he had worked  in the  Treasury  *  under  Harry  D.
* In  it  longr  and  distinguished  career  up  an  economist  in  this  country
nnd  in  Oermany.   Dr.  ftafhan  was  aiso  economic  adviser  to  Herbert
Hoover's   Emergency   Committee  on  Employment  in   1930-31.
White  "named  by  Elizabeth  Bentley,"  etc.;  he  at  times  asso-
ciated  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Charles  Recht,  attorney for  Amtorg
.  .  .  "and  other  similar information."
They  Tried  to  Get  A  Bill  Instead
Allegations   of   this  kind,  spread   upon   the   record,  would
have  cast  an unfavorable light on  State.Department  procedures.
The  Department   turned   instead  to  Congressman  Walter  for
new  legislation  to  give  statutory  basis  to  the  denial  of  pass-
ports  on  "guilt  by  association"   standards  and  to  validate  the
withholding  of  such  "evidence"   from  the  accused.   Mr.   Wal-
ter  introduced  a  bill,  HR  9991,   for  that  dual  purpose.   It  was
given  two  days of  hearings  last  May  before  a  subcommittee  of
House  Judiciary.  Mr.  Walter  is  chairman  of  this  subcommit-
tee  and  took  advantage  of  the  hearings  to  make  slanderous  re-
marks  about  Dr.  Nathan  and  about  the  judges  who  had  ruled
in  his  favor.   But  both  the  American  Bar  Association  and  the
Association  of  Immigration  and  Nationality  Lawyers  opposed
the  bill  as unfair and  unconstitutional. Chairman  Walter  could
not  get  it  out  of  committee.   He  thereupon  held   hearings  in
the  friendlier  atmosphere  of  his  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee  where  he  put  into  the  public  pillory  a  series
of   witnesses   who   had   defied   the   State   Department,    among
them  Dr.  Nathan  and  Arthur  Miller.
What  the  courts  will  have  to  decide  on  appeal   is  whether
the  fresh  inning Chairman Walter  gave  himself  in  consolation
before  the  Un-American committee  represented  a  real  legisla-
tive  purpose  or  a  vindictive  effort  to  smear  opponents  of  State
Department  passport   policy.  They   must  also  decide   whether
the  three  contempt  counts  against  Dr.  Nathan   were  not  frivo-
lous.   He  was convicted  of  refusing  to  say on  First Amendment
grounds  whether  he  was a  Communist,  but  the  Committee  had
just  read  into  the  record  the  non-Communist affidavit  the  State
Department   had  required  him  to  sign  with  his  application  for
a  passport.   He  was  convicted  of  refusing  to  answer  the  ques-
tion  of  whether  that  was  an  honest  affidavit,  but  his indignant
denial  that  he  had  ever  made  a  false  statement  in  his  life  was
answer   enough.   He   was  also  convicted   of   refusing  to  say
whether  he  knew  Mary  Price,  an  obscure  past  victim of  Com-
mittee  smears.   Just  why  Mary  Price  was  dragged  in,  appears
nowhere  in  the  record,  and  he  was  never  specifically  directed
to answer the  question.
Like   Einstein,   Dr.   Nathan   feels  that  the  witch  hunt  can
only  be  fought  by  refusing  to  submit  to  ideological  interroga-
tion.    He   declined  on  First  Amendment  grounds   to  answer
questions  he  could  safely  have  answered.   He  sought   by  this
means  to  make his  contribution to  the  preservation of  free tra-
ditions  in  his  adopted  country.  And   for  this  we  honor him.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  6, 1957
The  Witkovich  Case:  The  First  Unfavorable  Ruling Against  the  Internal Security  Act
One of Cvetic's Victims Wins A 1st Amendment Victory in the Supreme Court
One  of  Matthew  Cvetic's  victims  won  a  victory  for  himself
and  the  First Amendment in  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  last week.
He   is  George  I.  Witkovich,  a  printer,  of   Yugoslav  origin,
now   of   Chicago  but   formerly   of   Pittsburgh.     Cvetic  named
him  as  a  Communist.
Witkovich,  whose  family   had  befriended   Cvetic,  was   rail-
roaded  through   deportation   proceedings  on  that  sick-minded
informer's  word.  Without  counsel,  afraid  to  deny Communist
membership  under  oath  though  he  claims he  was never  a mem-
ber,  Witkovich  was  ordered  deported  in  June,  1953.   He  is a
man   in  his   early   fifties,   has   lived   in  this  country   for   forty
years,   and   has   an   American   born   wife   and   four   American
children,  two  of  them  sons who  served  in  the Army.
Inquisition  Unlimited
When  Yugoslavia   refused   to  take  Witkovich  back,  he  was
placed  under  supervisory  parole.   A  provision  of  the  Internal
Security  Act  of  1950  later  embodied  in  the  McCarran-Walter
Act  provides that a deportable alien  shall  be required  to  appear
from  time to  time before  an  immigration officer  and  "give  in-
formation   under   oath   as   to   his   nationality,  circumstances,
habits,  associations  and  activities  and  other  such information,
whether  or  not  related  to  the  foregoing,  as the  Attorney   Gen-
eral  may  deem  fit  and   proper."
As the  samples  in  a  box  on  this  page  show,  the  questions an
alien  may  be  required   to  answer  under  this  provision   range
from  what  papers  he  reads  to  what  movies  he  sees  and  may
also  include  (as  they  did  in  this  case)   requests  for   informa-
tion   about   other   persons   suspected   of   radical  activities.   In
Witkovich's  case,  questions  were  asked  seeking  to  link   him
with  "listed"  Yugoslav  language  papers,  though  the  particular
paper  for  which  he  works  as  a  printer  is  not  Leftist.
Such  questions  have  forced  other  deportable  aliens to  plead
the  Fifth  amendment  or  virtually  to  become  informers  for  the
Justice  Department.  Witkovich   had  the  nerve  to  refuse  to  an-
swer  on  the  ground  that  such  questions  invaded First  Amend-
ment  rights  and  Pearl  M.  Hart,  Chicago's  noted  defender  of
alien  and  civil  liberties  cases,  took  the  matter  to  court  when
he  was  indicted.
The  District  Court  Ruled  Against  the Government
Federal  Judge  Philip  L.  Sullivan  in  Chicago   dismissed  the
indictment,  holding  that  the  only  questions  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  could  properly  ask  a  deportable  alien  were  "to  make  sure
he  is  available  for  deportation."   The  Judge   ruled  that   "very
serious  constitutional  questions"  would  arise  if  the  statute  was
read  as  if  it  intended  "to  give  an  official  the  unlimited  right  to
subject  a man  to  criminal penalities  for  failure  to  answer  abso-
lutely  any  question  the  official  may  decide  to  ask."
The   government   appealed   to  the  Supreme   Court,  relying
heavily  on  Carlson  v.  Landon  (343   U.S.  988).   This  was one
of   the   worst  anti-alien  decisions  ever   handed   down   by  the
Court.   Just  five  years  ago  in  March,  the  Court  ruled  5-4 that
under  a  provision  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950,  the  At-
torney  General  could  deny bail  to  persons  arrested  for  deporta-
tion  on  the  charge  of  past  or  present  membership  in  the  Com-
munist party.
They  Even Wanted to  Know
What  Movies  He  Saw
In  the  Witkovich  case,  the  alien  was  indicted  for  re-
fusing  to  answer questions  put  to  him  by  the Immigra-
tion  and  Naturalization  service.   Here  are  some  of  the
questions:
"Do  you  subscribe  to  the  Daily Worker?
"Have  you  distributed petitions  or  leaflets   published
by  the  Slovene National  Benefit  Society  seeking  aid  for
yon,  in  your  behalf,  in  your  deportation case  since  the
order  for  deportation  was  entered  June  25,  1953?
"Since  the  order  of  deportation  was  entered  against
you  have  yon  attended  any  meetings  or  socials  at  the
Chopin   Cultural   Center,  1547  North   Leavitt    Street,
Chicago?
"Have  you  attended  any  movies  since  your  order  of
supervision   was   entered  at   the   Cinema  Annex,  3210
W.  Madison  St.,  Chicago?"
The    dissenting   minority   at   the   time—Black,   Douglas,
Frankfurter   and  Burton—protested  that  this  was  an  invasion
of  the  right to  reasonable bail guaranteed  by the  Eighth  amend-
ment.  The  government  in  this  Witkovich  case  argued  that  if
the   danger   from   aliens  suspected   of   communism  was   great
enough  to  warrant  denial of  bail  while  they  were  being  held
for  deportation  proceedings,  it  also  justified  some  invasion  of
First  amendment  rights  in  keeping   a  deportable   alien  under
political surveillance.
A  New  Court  and  A  New  Majority
The  result  of  the  appeal  shows  how  the  climate  of  opinion
on   the  Court  has  changed.  The   majority  five  years  ago  was
made  up  of  Reed,   Vinson,   Jackson,  Clark  and  Minton.   Of
these  only  Clark  is left  on  the  bench.
In  the  Witkovich  case,  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  upheld   the
District  Court  with  the  support  of   Black,  Douglas,  Warren,
Harlan  and  Brennan.   Clark  dissented  with  Burton. The  latest
appointee,  Whittaker,  did  not  take  part  since  he  was not  yet on
the  bench  when  the  Witkovich  case  was argued.  This  time  the
Court  split  6-2  in  favor  of  an  alien's  rights,  sharply  restricting
the  political  surveillance  the   Attorney   General  can  exercise
over  deportable  aliens  on  supervisory  parole.
This  is  the  first  decision  to  deal  unfavorably  with  a  provi-
sion  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950.   Here  again  we  find
the  Eisenhower   appointees—Warren,  Harlan  and  Brennan—
lined  up  with  the  New  Dealers  against  the  last  two  Truman
judges  on  the  bench.
The  effect  of  the  majority  decision  has  a  wider  significance.
The  reasoning  of  the  Clark  dissent  could  be  extended  to  citi-
zens.   "We  believe,"  Mr.  Justice   Clark  protested,  in  genuine
Truman  era cold  war  accents,  "that  the  counterbalancing   neces-
sity  of  preventing  further  detrimental   conduct   .  ,  .  substan-
tially   outweighs   'issues   touching  liberties'   which   might   be
raised  by the  interrogation."
This  was  the  kind  of   "balancing"   which,  beginning   with
the  loyalty  purge  when  Clark  was  Attorney  General,  soon  be-
gan  to  balance   out  many  traditional  liberties  for  aliens  and
citizens  alike.  The  hostility  of  the  court  to  that  kind  of  rea-
soning,  and  the  new  lineup,  are  hopeful.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  G,  1957
The  Anti-Trust   Story  Behind  That  Pre-Merger  Notification   Bill
Congress  Builds  A  Weak  Dam
By  A  Business  Observer
At  a  time  when  the  President  and  many  Congressmen  ex-
press alarm at  the  rapid  growth  of  mergers  in  this  country  and
talk   worriedly   of   "creeping   monopoly,"   it   is  disturbing  to
realize  that  the  actual  situation  may  be  worse  than  they know.
Attorney  General  Brownell  has  said  the  Justice  Department
may  miss  about  30  per  cent  of  the  current  mergers.    But  that
is  what  Senator  Taft  would  have  called  "an  informed guess."
The   information  on  which  it  is  based   is  so  scanty  it  is  prob-
ably  an understatement.
The   task  of  enforcing  our  antitrust  laws  is  lodged   in  the
Department  of  Justice and  the  Federal  Trade  Commission. But
when  it comes  to determining what mergers violate the  Clayton
Antitrust  Act  by substantially  lessening competition or  tending
to  create  a  monopoly,  both  agencies  face  a  serious stumbling
block.   To  learn  what  mergers  are  taking  place  they  must  rely
—as  any  ordinary  citizen  does—pretty  much  on  what  they  can
find   by  reading  the  financial  papers  and  manuals.
They  Learn  Too  Late
The   government  agencies  that  regulate  airlines,  railroads,
shipping  and  power  companies  have  good  information   about
their   industries  since  any  mergers   in  these  fields  must   have
their  advance  approval.   But  Justice  and  FTC,  with  a  vaster
share  of   the   economy   to  supervise,  have   no  such   resources.
What  is  worse,  the   information   they  finally  do  glean   often
reaches  them  too  late,  after  the  merger  is  accomplished.  Their
common  cry  is  echoed  on  the  Hill:  "You  can't  unscramble an
omelet."
To  remedy the  situation, both   House  and  Senate  this  term,
at  last,  are  considering  pre-merger  notification  bills.  The  law
they  may  pass  would  amend   the  Clayton   Act  to  require   all
corporations  with  combined  assets  of  $10  million  or  more  to
notify  FTC  and  Justice  in  advance  of  a  merger.  They   would
also  be  required  to  provide  relevant  financial  information  and
to  wait  60  days or  so  while  the  government studied  the  trans-
action  for  possible  monopolistic   effect.
Prospects   for  the  bill  are  good.   A  similar one  was  almost
passed  last  term.  This  year,  the  House  Subcommittee  on Anti-
trust  has  already  approved  it.   Hearings  on  comparable Senate
bills may start next month.
Banks  Were  Dropped
Unquestionably  such  a  law will  improve  the  quality of  anti-
merger  work.   But  is  it  enough?  The  bill  is  open  to  criticism
in  two  respects.    For  one  thing  regulation   of   bank   mergers
consummated  by  an   acquisition   of   assets   has   been    dropped
from   the  House  bill.   It  is  probable,  an  aide   says,  that   the
Against  the  Flood  of  Mergers
Senate  bills will  be  similarly  amended.   That  would  leave  reg-
ulation  of  banks  where  it  is now:  in  the  hands  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Board,  the  Federal  Deposit   Insurance  Corp.  and  the
Comptroller   of  the  Currency  Ray  M.  Gidney.   Banks  like  it
that   way  because   all  three   have  shown   sympathy  for   their
problems.    Mr.  Gidney's  sympathy  is  such  that  according  to
Representative   Celler   he  has  never  disapproved  a  merger.
Hit  or  Miss Enforcement
The  other  question  about  the  law  is to  what  extent will  the
economic  information   it  requires  be  sufficient?    Important  as
it  is  for  the  government  to  have  relevant data  about  a  particu-
lar  merger,  it  is  equally important  to  have  information about
the  industry  in  which  the  two  merging  companies  operate.   It
is  necessary  to  know,  for   instance,  what  their  share  of   the
market  is  and  what  products  they  and  their  competitors  make
before  an  intelligent  estimate  can  be  made  of  how  a  merger
will  affect  competition.   At  the  present  time  such  information
is  sketchy  and   results  in  hit-or-miss  enforcement  of  existing
anti-merger  law.
But  if  the  present  bills  make  no   provision   for   systematic
economic  reporting  they  may  not  need  to.    There  is  reason  to
believe  that  FTC  already  has  sufficient  authority  to  set  up  such
a  reporting program.  The  fact  that  it  has  never  done  so raises
another  doubt  about  the  efficacy  of  the  new  law:  how  strong
is the  will to enforce  it?
Do  We  Need  A  Pre-Merger Law?
There  are  those   in  the  Commission  who  say  a  prc-merger
notification   law  was  never  necessary.  They  say  the  same  sec-
tion  of  the  FTC  Act  that  compels  companies to submit data  for
the  agencies  quarterly  financial  reports  could  be  used  to  obtain
anything  the  new  law  would  give  them.  Early  in  Eisenhower's
first administration  there  was a  plan  afoot  in  FTC  to  meet  the
merger  wave  by  using  the  section  to  obtain  advance  notice  of
mergers.   Through   design  or  apathy  nothing  came  of  it.
Yet  Edward  F.  Howrey,  who  was chairman  then,  professed
to  be  worried  about   mergers.  The   high   incidence  in  recent
years,  he  said  in  a  1955  speech,  was  "disturbing."   But  he  pru-
dently  pointed  out  it  was  still  "well  below  the  pre-depression
rate  of  the  late  20s."   Alas  for  this  bit  of  reassurance.   Com-
paring  mergers  in  terms  of  numbers  tells  you  little about  their
economic  significance.   And  anyway,  the  totals  of  the  20s  have
been  revised  upward  in  later  years.    No  one  yet  knows  how
far   off  the  totals  of  the   50s  are.
Perhaps  FTC  has  temporized.   If  so,  one  should  recall  how
under  existing  laws  Congressional  prodding  in  recent  years has
invigorated  the  agency's  antimerger  work.   A  premerger   notifi-
cation  bill,  even  an  imperfect  one,  might  help.
On Mergers,  All the  Government  Knows  Is  What  It Reads in  the  Papers
MR.  PIERCE   (Committee   counsel):  Chairman   Gwynne,
are  there  many  instances  of  significant  mergers  where  the
Commission  is   not  informed   beforehand  that   the   merger
will  take  place?
GWYNNE  (Chairman,  Federal   Trade  Commission):  Oh
yes.    We  are  not  fully  informed  now  at  all.    We  just  read
it  in  the  paper.    And  there  are  many  mergers,   I  daresay,
we  don't  know  much  about  until  they  are  pretty  well  along.
REP.  HEATING:  The  Attorney  General  testified,  as   I
remember,  that  there  were  almost  30  per  cent  of  them  they
didn't  even  pick  up  by  scanning  the  journals.
GWYNNE:  I  don't  know  that  we  have  a  similar  estimate
but  I'm  inclined  to  think  it  is  something  like  that.
—Before   the  House  Subcommittee  on Antitrust, March  7.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  May  6,  1957
Another  Tip  to  Editors:   Aramco  Is  Also  Under  Investigation   in  Saudi  Arabia
Treating  the  Middle  East  in  1950   Like  Latin  America  in    1900
Events  in  the Middle  East have a  "this  is where we  came  in"
flavor. .  .  .  The. fleet, the  Marines,  the  use of  loans  to  bolster
up   shaky   dictatorships,  are   reminescent  of   Latin  American
policy  from  the  days  of  Teddy  Roosevelt  to  those  of   Herbert
Hoover.  .  .  . This  is the  big  stick  and  dollar  diplomacy  again.
...  It  is amazing to see how easily and  quickly the  Eisenhower
Doctrine  was  turned  into a  plain  and  simple  U.S.  protectorate,
Monroe  Doctrine  style,  over  the  Middle  East,  without outcry
from  Congress  or the country. .  . .
Moscow's  outrage  about  intervening in  the  affairs  of  sover-
eign  states  will  read  sourly  in  Polish  and  Hungarian.  .  .  .  The
same   excuses  of   Realpolitik   which  pro-Communists   used   to
excuse  the  Russian  smashing  of  the  Hungarian  revolt  are  the
same excuses  offered  for  American intervention to  keep  Jordan
from  falling  apart,  and  letting  war  break  out  in  a  scramble  for
the pieces. ...
Unfortunately  for  world  stability,  the  Eastern Mediterranean
is  not  the  Caribbean.  .  .  .  The  sooner  the  pacification  of  the
area  can be  handed  over  to  the  United  Nations,  the  better  the
chances  for  peace.  .  .  .  And  the  key  to  peace  lies  in  resettle-
ment  of  the Arab  refugees  and  an  Arab-Israeli settlement.  .  . .
Open  Subways  As  Well  As  Skies?
Nothing  will  come  of  the  Russian  half-way  offer   on  Ike's
"open  skies"  plan.  .  .  . That  plan  was  a  smart  publicity  stunt
put  forward  only  in  the  belief  that  the  Russians  would  never
accept  it.  ...    Only  a few days  before  the  new Soviet  proposal,
former   President   Truman   expressed    misgivings   about   the
"open  skies"  plan  and  suggested   that  nothing  be  done  until
"we  have  full  and  equal  inspection  on  the  ground  as  well  as
underground." ...  If  the  Russians  ever  accepted  that,  there
would  be an  outcry  in this  country against  letting  Russian  spies
"see  our  defenses",   etc.  . . . We're  only  going through  the mo-
tions  on  disarmament  because  the  pressures  of  the  arms  race
pinch  our  allies as much  as they  do  the  Soviets. ...
Saudi  Arabia  Suspicious,  Too
Bigger   publications,  picking  up   (but   without  credit)   the
Aramco revelations in our  issues of  April 8  and  April  15,  have
Why  Not  Send  The   Weekly   As  A   Gift
I. F. Stone's
Please,  renew
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
City     ............
Shall   we  sem
Weekly,  5618   Nebraska    Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.......... .................Zone............State..................
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
.-i/l!/"'"
gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
sparked  an  inquiry.  The   staff   of  the  powerful  Congressional
Joint  Committee on  Internal  Revenue  Taxation   has  been  re-
quested   by  Senator   Byrd  to   investigate  the   arrangement   by
which  the  oil  company in  1950  finally  agreed  to  give  Ibn  Saud
greater  revenue  but  in  the  form of  an  income  tax, which  could
be  paid  off at  the  expense  of  the  U.S.  Treasury.  .  .  .
These  same  bigger  publications do  not  seem  to  have  noticed
that  Aramco  is  also  under  investigation  in  Saudi  Arabia.  The
New   York   Jot/rihil   of   Commerce   (April   23)    revealed   that
Saudi  Arabia was  critical  of  Aramco  because  the  company,  in
figuring   its   50-50  split  with  Ibn   Saud,  has  been   fixing   the
price   of  crude   at   $1.97    a  barrel  but   actually   selling  it  at
Sidon,  the  outlet  of  the  Trans   Arabian  pipeline,  at  $2.69  a
barrel;  the  extra  72  cents  a  barrel  is  pocketed  by  Aramco  and.
not  shared  by  Ibn  Saud.  .  .  . Saudi  Arabia  is thinking of  estab-
lishing  its  own  company,  and  hoping  some  day  to  do  its  own
marketing.  .  . . Another  cloud  on  the  Middle  Eastern  oil  hori-
zon  is the  75  percent  profit  offered  Iran  by  Italy  for  an  oil  con-
cession  instead  of  the prevailing  50-50. ...
The  FBI  and  The  Witch  Hunt
In  a  detailed study by  a  staff  writer, the  Washington   Sunday
Star  (April  28)  decided  that  despite  disclaimers  so-called  con-
fidential  FBI  material  does  find  its  way  into  Congressional   in-
vestigating  committee  files.  The  Star's  reporter  quoted   an  ex-
FBI  man  now  a  committee  staff   investigator  as  telling   him,
"We   wouldn't   be  able   to   stay  in   business   overnight   if   it
weren't  for the Bureau." ...
In  this connection,  attention  might  be  called  to  a  "U.S.   gov-
ernment  executive  agency  security  report"  on  the  late  Herbert
Norman  which  Robert Morris  read  into  the  record  of  the  Sen-
ate  Internal  Security  Committee  on  March  12.  ...     This  said
that  when  Tsuru   Shigato,   a  Japanese   instructor  at   Harvard,
was  picked  up  for  repatriation  by  the  FBI  in  1942,  Norman
approached  the  FBI  to  obtain  custody  of  Shigato's   belongings.
.  .  .  "One   main  item  of  these  belongings,"  the  report  said,
"was  a  complete  record  of  the  Nye  munitions  investigation,
largely  prepared   by  Alger  Hiss."  .  .  .  This  wacky  attempt  to
link  Norman  through  Shigato  with  Hiss  is  typical.  .  .  .
Subscription  to  Your  Local  Library?
I. E Stones   Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
_ Washington,  D.   C.
Post  Office
I         (••    Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as  Second   Class   Matter   at   Washinston.  D.   C..  under  the  Act   of   March   3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  hut   pnh-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5B18  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
\n   independent   weekly   published  .and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
S.">   in   the   I'.   S.:   $(i   in  Canada:   .?1fl  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:  $1.1  to   Europe:   $20  to   Israel,   Asia  and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED