I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957aug19.pdf

============================================================

A  Review  of  Djilas's  Book,  "The   New  Class"  Ruling  Under  Communism,  See  Page  3^
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  33
AUGUST  19,  1957
'<»      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Key  to  the  Riddle  of  the  Talks  in  London
When  Disarmament   No  Longer   Means   Disarming
A  good  place  to  begin,  in  trying  to  understand  what  has
been  happening  in  the  disarmament  talks,  is  with  a  curious
statement  made by Secretary Dulles  at  the  press  conference  he
held  on returning from  the  talks in  London.    He  said  that  ac-
ceptance  of  the  American  "open  skies"  proposal  by  the  Soviet
Union  would make disarmament "almost  inevitable."  This  odd
phrase  is  the  key  to  the  labyrinthine  negotiations.
In One Lovely  Leap
Mr.  Dulles had  just put  the finishing touches on a  grandiose
global  proposal,  virtually  Utopian  in  its  sweep,  whereby  the
two  great  powers,  hitherto  and  still  morbidly  suspicious  of
each  other,  would  suddenly  open  themselves  up  through  the
skies  and  on  the  ground  to  complete  mutual  inspection,  leap-
ing  in one  bound  from  mortal enmity to  celestial  brotherhood.
Yet  now  it  appears  that  even  this  miracle  would  only  make
disarmament  "almost  inevitable."
Why   "almost"?  Why  "inevitable"?   Mr.  Dulles  has  the
skilled   lawyer's  capacity  for   choosing   every  word   carefully.
Let  us  suppose  that  in  London  he  had  been  negotiating   the
purchase  of  a  business, and  after  outlining  his  terms  in  great
detail  he  were to  conclude by saying that  if  the  buyer agreed  to
these  terms and  paid  the  purchase  price,  then  transfer  of  title
to him—that  is, the  buyer—would  become  "almost  inevitable."
Obviously  to  say  "almost  inevitable"  is  to  express  a  hope,  not
to  make a firm promise.
It  had  been  assumed  that  strict  inspection  was  to  be  the
price  and  the  safeguard  of  a  disarmament  agreement,  that  if
the  Russians opened  up  their  skies  and  gave  up  their   secrets,
we  would  agree  to  end  the  arms  race,  nuclear  testing  and  the
danger  of  an  atomic  holocaust.   But  Mr.  Dulles's  words,  care-
fully  examined, imply  no  such quid  pro  quo.
What Mr. Dulles "Thinks"
Let  us  go  back  and  look  at  his  actual  words  in  that  press
conference.    "If,  however,"   Mr.  Dulles   said,  "there  can  be
sufficient   inspection  to  diminish  appreciably  the  danger  of  a
sudden  surprise  attack,  that  will  change  the  atmosphere,  then
I  think  we will  really  be  moving  into  a  new  era  where  reduc-
tion  of  armaments will  be almost  inevitable."   Obviously  if  the
open  skies  proposal  were  offered  as  a  condition  of  disarma-
ment,  if  it were coupled  in the  current proposals  with a  definite
promise of  some arms reduction, he would  not  need  to  "think"
that  this  changed  "atmosphere"   would  make  some  reduction
of  armaments  "almost  inevitable."
The.full  meaning  of  this  becomes  clearer  if  one  looks  at
what  immediately  follows  it  in  Mr.  Dulles's  carefully  phrased
statement.   He  went  on  to  say  that  if  mutual  inspection  were
9*                                                                                                     1
agreed  upon,  "it",   i.e.  a  reduction  of  armaments  "might  not
even  depend  upon  an  agreement"   because  the  nations  them-
selves  would  realize  they  did  not  need  so much armament  un-
der  circumstances  which  made  successful  aggression   "by  an
initial  surprise  attack"  unlikely.    Mr.  Dulles's  words   disclose
not  only  that  the  U.S.  offer  omitted  any  specified  reduction  of
arms  but  implied  that  no  such  agreement   is  necessary.    Mr.
Eisenhower  made  the  same  point  at  his  own  press  conference
next  day when  he  said,  "If  you  can  relieve  the  world  of  the
great  fear  of  surprise,  devastating  attack, then  disarmament,  in
my  opinion,  will  follow  step  by  step  automatically."
The  key word  here  is  "automatically."   The  President  is  not
offering   arms  reduction  as  part  of  that  voluminous   package
proposal  Mr.  Stassen  has  been  unwrapping  so  slowly  in  Lon-
don.   He  is  not  even  offering  to  negotiate  an  arms  reduction
agreement   after   inspection  is  accepted.    He  is  saying  to   the
Russians  that  if  they  agree  to  our  proposals,  then  arms  reduc-
tion  will  "in  my opinion,"  i.e.  the  President's,  "follow  step by
step  automatically."   This  is  a  strange  way  to  make  a   horse
trade.
Mr. Stassen  Was Cryptic
To  understand  what  is happening  it  is useful  to  go  back  to
a  cryptic remark Mr.  Stassen made a  year  and  a half  ago when
he  appeared  as  the  first  witness  in  the  18  months  of  hearings
the  Humphrey  disarmament subcommittee has  been  holding in
Washington  and  around  the  country.  That  very first day,  Jan-
uary  25,  1956,  Mr.  Stassen said,  "I  think  it  is well  to  indicate
that  disarmament has  come  to mean  not  the  literal  meaning in
the  dictionary, but  any offer  to  reach  any kind  of  an  agreement
or  limitation  or  control  or  inspection  affecting  armed  forces
and  armaments.   It  has  taken  on  a  special  meaning  in  inter-
national circles."
The  public  has  assumed  that  the  disarmament  talks  were
concerned  with  disarmament.   Disarmament  has  not  changed
its  meaning  in  the  dictionaries.   To  disarm  still  means  to  re-
linquish  arms,  if  not  all  of  them,  then  at  least  some.  This  is
what  disarmament is  still  taken  to  mean  by  those  who  see  the
talks  as  reported   in  the  headlines.    But  that  is  not  what  it
means to the Eisenhower Administration.
Mr.  Stassen's  foray  into  semantics  was puzzling  at  the  time.
Subsequent  observation  of  the  painfully  prolonged   talks  has
made  it  significant.   Mr.  Stassen was trying to  prepare  the  pub-
lic  mind  for  the  fact  that,  in  the  lexicon  of  the  Eisenhower
Administration,  disarmament  no  longer  meant  to  disarm.   In-
stead  of  the  "literal  meaning",  disarmament—So  Mr.  Stassen
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August 19,1957
Travel  as  Subversion:   The  State  Dept.'s  Ignorance   Vaster  Far  than  Mr.  Gluck's
A  Strange  Case  of  Plagiarism  and
On  July  30,  during  the  Civil  Rights  debate,  Senator  John-
ston  of  South  Carolina,  who  has  always posed  as a  man  of  the
people,  revealed  hitherto  unsuspected  gifts  of  legal  scholar-
ship.   He  delivered  an  erudite  address  on  jury  trial,  beginning
with  the  juridical consequences  of  the  Norman  Conquest  and
ending   with  a  particularly  fine  quotation  from   de  Tocque-
ville.  Next  day,  on  July  31,  Senator  Chavez  of  New  Mexico,
also  made  a  speech  and  put  into  the   Congressional   Record
with  it  a  memorandum  on  the  history  of  jury  trial  furnished
him  by  the  Library  of  Congress.   The   memorandum  turned
out  to  be  word  for  word  the  same  as  the  history  of  jury  trial
in  Senator  Johnston's   speech  the  day  before.   We  know  the
Library  of  Congress  is  overworked  and   understaffed   but  we
think  it  goes  entirely  too  far  when  it  begins  to  lift  material
bodily  from  the  speeches  of  Southern  Senators.
Helpful  Hint for  Senator  Jenner
Except  for  cases  involving  the  diplomatic  and  consular  of-
ficials of  a  foreign  power,  and  those  in  which  one  of  the  48
States  is  itself  a  party,  the  Supreme  Court  has  only  appellate
jurisdiction.  Even  this,  the  Constitution  says, is  "with  such ex-
ceptions   and   under   such   regulations  as  the   Congress   shall
make."   Senator Jenner's  bill,  S 2646,  is based  on  the  cute  idea
that  Congress  can use  this  regulatory power  to  withdraw  from
the  jurisdiction of  the  Court  the  kinds of  cases in  which  it  has
made rulings the  Senator  does  not  like.   His  bill  would  forbid
the  Court  to  review  any  cases  (like  Wat kins')   involving  con-
tempt  of  Congressional  committees,  State  subversion  or  sedi-
tion  prosecutions  (like Nelson  or  Sweezy),  teacher  loyalty dis-
charges   (like   Slochower)    or   bar   examination   cases    (like
Schware   or   Konigsberg).      Senator   Russell  of   Georgia   ex-
pressed  friendly  interest  when  Senator  Jenner  introduced  this
novel  measure.  No  doubt  Southern  votes  could  be  won  for  it
by  adding  to   the   class  of   forbidden   cases  those   involving
school  integration,  voting  and  civil  rights  generally.   By  this
means  the  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  could
be expanded  and  contracted  like  an  accordion  to  suit  whatever
was  the  majority  opinion of  the  moment  in  Congress.
We  wonder  whether  Senator  Jenner  has  had  time,  on  re-
flection,  to  see  the  loopholes   in  his  ingenious  measure.    His
bill  would  still  leave  the  Federal  District  and  Circuit  Courts
A  Helpful  Hint  to  Senator  Jenner
in  operation.   Some  of  the  worst  decisions  (from  Senator  Jen-
ner's  point  of  view)  have  been  handed  down  by  these  lower
courts.   Examples  are  Judge  Youngdahl's  acquittal  of   New
York  Timesman  Seymour  Peck  for  contempt  of  the  Senator's
own   Internal   Security  Committee,   and   the   decision   of   the
Court  of  Appeals  on  the  Pacific  Coast  outlawing  the  use  of
anonymous   informants   in   Coast   Guard   security  screening
cases.   Jenner's  Southern  allies  can  cite similar rulings  on  inte-
gration  by  lower  court  Federal  judges as  unreliable  as  any  on
the  Supreme  Court.   Even  the  State  Courts  cannot  be  trusted. '
The  Nelson   case,  as  the  Senator  may  recall,  was  an  appeal
from  a  Pennsylvania  State  Supreme  Court  decision  reversing
Nelson's  conviction  under  a  State  sedition   act.   We   suggest
that  Senator  Jenner  withdraw  S  2646  and  prepare  a  broader
measure.  The  heart of  the  trouble  seems to  lie  in  the  existence
of  those  peculiar  institutions  called  courts,  and  that  Constitu-
tion  they  are  always  invoking.  We  look  forward  next  session
to  a  new  Jenner  bill,  abolishing  both.
More Ignorant  Than  Gluck
Poor  Mr.  Gluck  got  into  trouble  because  he  never  heard  of
Bandaranaike,   but   it   is  clear   from   the   State   Department's
latest  on  travel  to  Red  China  that  it  never  even  heard  of  the
Bill  of  Rights.  If  travel  may  be  restricted  because  it  would  be
"subversive  of  U.S.  foreign  policy",  why not  restrict  the  news-
paper  editors  who  subvert  U.S.  foreign  policy  by  criticizing
non-recognition  of  Peking  as  foolish?  .  .  .  Somebody  (Wash-
ington's  best  guess  is  that  it  was  John  Foster  Dulles)   stam-
peded  Eisenhower  into that  statement  promising return of  I.  G.
Farben's  American properties  on  the  ground  that  it  was  neces-
sary  to  help  Adenauer  get  re-elected.   But  nobody  asked  just
how  this  would  help  him.   Did  I.  G.  Farben  threaten  to  vote
Socialist?  .  .  .  One  inadvertent  confession  during  the  Civil
Rights  debate  ought  not  to  go  unnoticed.   Senator  Ervin  pro-
tested  (July  29,  p.  11695   Con.  Rec.)   that  the  same   election
figures used  to  prove  Negroes  disfranchised could  also  be  used
to prove  that  so were  most  whites.   "The  truth  is,"  the  Senator
said,  "that  North  Carolina  is,  in  large  part,  a  one-party  State.
.  . . There  is no  incentive  for  the people  to  come  out and  vote
under  those  conditions."  This  is  true  everywhere  in  the  Deep
South.
In  Tribute  to  Charles  E.  Wilson  Whose  Nomination  We  Criticized
Almost  five  years  ago,  in  Vol.  I,  No.  2 of  this  Weekly,  we
opposed  the  nomination  of  Charles  E.  Wilson  to  be  Secre-
tary  of  Defense.   We  are  happy  to  acknowledge,   on  his  re-
tirement,  that  we  were  wrong.   Mr. Wilson  not  only  proved
to  be  an  able  public  official  but  a  man  whose  humanity,  com-
mon-  sense  and  blunt   honesty   won  respect   and   affection.
Though  Mr.  Wilson  was  recruited   from  General   Motors,
the   country's   biggest   arms   contractor,   he   cut   the   arms
budget.   He  was  an  influence for  peace,  notably  in  the  Indo-
chinese  crisis,  where  he and retiring  Secretary  of  the  Treas-
ury   Humphrey    (a   less   colorful   but   equally    able    man)
weighted  the  scales  against  the  adventurism  of  Dulles, Rad-
ford  and  Nixon.
Studying   the   disarmament   question,   we   have   been   re-
reading  Mr.  Wilson's  testimony   before   the  Humphrey   sub-
committee.   Here  are  a  few  sample  bits  which  illustrate  his
quality:  "The  less  the  burden  of  armaments  on  peoples  like
the  Russians  and ourselves,  the  less  likelihood  of  war.  .  .  .
Bigger  and bigger  military  power,  in  my  opinion,  is  not  the
solution  for  the  problems  of  the  world. ...  If  we  had  twice
the  military  strength  we  have  now  or  have  had  in  the  last
five  years,  I  do  not  know  of  a  single  thing  different  which
would  have   happened  in  the  world  than  did  happen.  .  .  .
There  is  an  old  saying  that  perfection  is  the  enemy  of  the
good  and  I  do  not  think  that  we  should  decide  that  we  can-
not  make  any  progress  [in  disarmament]   because  we  can-
not  do  it  perfectly   to  begin  with."
Mr.  Wilson  deserves  a  vacation  but  is  too  young   to  re-
tire.   We'd  like  to  see  him  head  up  an  organization  to  bring
about  full  public  discussion  in  this  country  of   the  fateful
issues  in  the  nuclear  arms  race  and  the  means  by  which  it
may  be  ended.   Not  the  least  contribution,  is  his  repeated
assertion  that  American  business  can  maintain  a  high  level
of  activity  without  a  big  arms   program.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August 19,  1957
Djilas  Is  A  Brave  Man But  Still  Too  Much  the  Arid Communist Theoretician
How  Revolutionary  Idealists  May  Become  A  New  Ruling  Class
My  very  first  experience on  arriving in  Belgrade  in  the  Fall
of   1950  made  it  easy  for  me  to  understand  Milovan  Djilas's
book,  "The  New  Class"  (Praeger:  $3.95).  There  in  the  rail-
road  station  as  I  came off  the  train  was  a  woman  I  had  known
in  the  United States as a Yugoslav  Communist, a minor  official
of  the  Tito  government.  She  happened  to  be  in  the  station
when  I  arrived  because she  was  waiting for  her  new  cook,  a
girl  she  was  bringing  from  Montenegro,  the  primitive moun-
tain  south  of  Yugoslavia whence  "unspoiled"  help  might still
be obtained.   She burst  into  a  long  account about  the   difficulty
of  finding  reliable  servants  of  exactly  the  same  kind  I  might
have  heard  in  a  suburban  station  in  Westchester  or  Connecti-
cut.   Her  home, when  I went  there later for  dinner, was an  ex-
propriated  mansion;  its  linen,  silver  and  luxury,  the  elegance
of  the  dinner,  the  conversation, were upper  class.  For  the first
time   I  realized  how  quickly  the   sweet  fruits   of  power  can
transform  revolutionary  idealists  into comfortable  bureaucrats.
Another Who Chose  Heresy
This  is  "The  New   Class", of  which  Milovan  Djilas,  Tito's
old  comrade, dares to write in  a book smuggled  out  of  a Yugo-
slav  prison.  It  exists in  every  Communist country.  Resentment
against  its  special  privileges  and  the  omnipresent  secret  police
terror  with  which  it  protects those  privileges  explain  both  the
Polish  October,  which brought  Gomulka  to power  despite Rus-
sian  opposition, and  the  Hungarian  rising,  which  the Russians
crushed.  There  are still many people,  both  party members  and
sympathizers, who  recoil with  horror  from  this picture,  though
the   same  tendencies  are  blatant  in  the  upper   crust  of   the
American  labor movement and  the  Roman  Catholic Hierarchy
has  long  demonstrated that  power,  wealth  and  luxury  may be
enjoyed  without  private  property.   Just  as  Hegel  thought  his
dialectic  had  ended  with  that  flower  of  perfection,  the  hier-
archical  and  militaristic Prussian  State,  so  the  Communists  re-
fuse  to  believe that  the  dialectic of  change  may go  on  working
even  after  their  Revolution.   Camus  in  his  The  Rebel  says  that
in  the  end  every  revolutionist  becomes  either  an  oppressor   or
a  heretic.   Djilas  is  among   the  noble  company   who  chose
heresy.   Those  true  believers  who  remember  how  they  were
caught  short  by the  Krushchev  speech  two  years ago will  pro-
tect   themselves   from   further   surprises   by   reading  Djilas's
analysis  and  indictment.  They  are  the  words  of  a  brave  man,
written  out  of  that  personal   suffering  only  the   disillusioned
Communist  can fully  appreciate.
The  Heart  of  the  Indictment
"Man   may  renounce  much.   But  he  must  think  and
he  has  a  deep  need  to  express  his  thoughts.   It  is  pro-
foundly  sickening  to be compelled to  remain  silent  when
there  is  need  for  expression.   It  is  tyranny  at  its  worst
to  compel  men  not  to  think  as  they  do,  to  compel  men
to  express  thoughts  that  are  not  their  own.   The  limi-
tation  of  freedom  of  thought  is  not  only  an  attack  on
specific  political  and  social  fights,  but  an  attack  on  the
human  being  as  such.  .  .  .           The New  Class,  p. U6.
The   book's  limitations  lie   in  Djilas's  own  training   and
habits  as  a  Communist  theoretician.   Instead  of  giving  us  his
own  rich experience and  observation as a  lifelong Communist,
Djilas  devotes  himself  largely  to  that  quasi-theological  exer-
cise  which  has  long  constituted  Marxist-Leninist controversy.
Whether  as  defender  or  attacker,  the  ideologist  gives  himself
to  the  casuistical  task  of  fitting  his  own  views into  or deriving
them  from,  the  canon  of  Holy  Writ.   The  result  has  been  to
make Marxist-Leninist literature the  most arid  region  of  sterile
verbalisms  since  medieval  theology.   Djilas,  even  in   revolt,
like  so  many  ex-Communists,  cannot  shake  loose   from   this
stultifying tradition.
A  second  and  more  important  criticism  is  that  Djilas  does
not  go  beyond  polemics  to  a  program.   He  believes  Commu-
nism  justified  itself  in  Eastern Europe and  China  as  an instru-
ment  of  industrialization.  He  says  at  one  point  that  most  of
the  opposition  in  the  Soviet  countries  is  not  to  socialism  but
"to  the way in which it  is being  achieved. .  .  . The individual
rebels  against those  limitations which  are  in  the  interest of  the
oligarchy,  not  against  those  which  are  in  the  interests  of  so
ciety."   But  he  nowhere  tackles  the  question,  crucial  for  tlu
future  of  those  who  must  live under  Communism,  of  just  how
they  are  to  achieve  their  liberation  from  the  one  party  State
and  the  monolithic  dictatorship.   Given  peace  and  relaxation
of  tension,  the  situation  is not  hopeless.   The  iceberg  is already
cracked.   If   the   cold   war  gives  way  to  thaw,  it  will   melt,
though  not  without mighty splits  and  convulsions.   The  prob-
lem  is to  help a  new generation,  in  an  area  which  knew  little
of  freedom  before  Communism, to graft  onto  socialism  the  in-
stitutions,  the  legal  safeguards,  the  habits,  that  give  men secu-
rity  and  freedom to think.  This is the  practical  problem  Djilas
leaves  untouched,  and  it  is this  which  will  make his  book  dis-
appointing  for  the  younger  people  it  may surreptitiously  reach
in  the  Soviet  bloc.
The  Dialectic  Which  Haunts  Communism:  Words  of  Agony,  Despair  and  Truth
"The  internal  monolithic  cohesion   which  was  created   in
the   struggle   with   the  oppositionists   and   with   the   half-
Communist  groups  is  transformed  into  a  unity  of   obedient
counselors    and   robot-bureaucrats    inside    the    movement.
During  the  climb  to  power,  intolerance,  servility,   incomplete
thinking,   control   of   personal   life—which   once   was   com-
radely  aid  but  is  now  a  form  of  oligarchic   management—
hierarchical  rigidity  and  introversion,  the  nominal  and  ne-
glected  role  of  women,  opportunism, self-centeredness,  and
outrage   repress  the  once-existent   high  principles.  .  .  .
"Thus,   politicking    and   servility    replace    the    former
straightforwardness   of   the  revolution.   Where  the   former
heroes   who  were   ready   to  sacrifice   everything,   including
life,  for  others  and  for  an  idea,  for  the  good  of  the  people,
have   not  been   killed  or  pushed   aside,   they   become   self-
centered  cowards  without  ideas  or  comrades,  willing  to  re-
nounce  everything—honor,  name,  truth  and  morals—in  or-
der  to  keep  their  place  in  the  ruling  class  and  the  hier-
archical  circle.   The  world  has  seen  few  heroes  as  ready  to
sacrifice  and  suffer  as  the  Communists  were  on  the  eve  of
and  during  the  revolution.   It  has  probably  never  seen  such
characterless    wretches   and  stupid   defenders   of   arid   for-
mulas  as  they  become  after  attaining   power."
—Milovan  Djilas,  The  New  Class, p. 155.
1   3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August 19,1957
U.  S.  Military,  Dubious  Even  of  Ike's  "Open  Skies",  Shifting  to  "Limited  War"
Renunciation  of  Nuclear  Arms   Not   Promised  Under  Any   Circumstances
{Continued  from  page  One)
tried  to  explain—was  to  mean  "any  offer  to  reach  any kind  of
agreement  or  limitation  or  control  or  inspection."    An  agree-
ment  for  "control  or  inspection"  does  not  necessarily  mean
any  reduction  of armament.
Unfortunately  public  opinion  everywhere  assumes  not  only
that  these  negotiations  are  efforts  at disarmament  "in  the  literal
sense"  but  are  also  designed   to  end  the  menace  of  nuclear
testing  and  nuclear  war.
A Subject  They  Don't  Like to Discuss
This  is equally  fallacious.  Neither  the  Secretary of  State nor
the  President  mentioned  testing  or  nuclear  arms  in  their  press
conferences.   Neither  said  that  an  end  of  testing  and  a renun-
ciation  of  nuclear  arms  would  become  "almost  inevitable"  or
follow  "automatically"  from  acceptance  of  an elaborate  scheme
of  mutual  inspection.  The  omission  is significant.
The  most  important  sentence  in  Mr.  Dulles's  July  22  radio
broadcast  on  U.S.  disarmament  policy,  the  latest  authoritative
statement,   was,   "We   do  not   propose   to   eliminate   nuclear
weapons  or the  possibility  of. their  use.  .  .  ."  The  furthest  the
government  has  ever  gone  was  at  the  Geneva  meeting  of  for-
eign  ministers  where  Secretary  Dulles  "stated"  (the  words  are
Mr.  Stassen's  to  the  Humphrey  subcommittee)  "that  if  agree-
ment  could  be  reached  to  limit  nuclear  weapons  within  the
framework  of  an  effective  system  of  disarmament  and  under
proper  safeguards,  there  should  be  corresponding  restrictions
on  the  testing  of  weapons."  Thus  even  within  the  framework
of  a  disarmament  agreement,  the  Elsenhower  Administration
is  not  prepared  to  go  beyond  some  limitation on  nuclear  arms
and  "corresponding  restrictions"  on  testing.
Another Reason to Avoid Agreement
Mr.  Dulles  spoke  at  Geneva  of  "agreement  .  .  .  within  the
framework   of   an   effective   system  of   disarmament"   as   the
necessary  condition  of  any  such  limitation.   Obviously  if   no
agreement  need  be  reached,  if  disarmament  can  be  allowed  to
follow  "automatically"  from  mutual  inspection,  then  we  need
not  agree  to  any  limit  on  nuclear  arms  and  testing  but  can
make  such reductions  as we see fit.
This  reluctance to  make  any disarmament  agreement  reflects
the   Administration's  difficulty   in   reconciling   military   and
civilian  opinion. While  the  President  has  been  selling  the  idea
that  mutual  inspection  on  the  ground  and  in  the  air  would
make  some reduction of  armament feasible,  he  has  been  unable
to persuade the  military.  This  was apparent  from  Mr.  Dulles's
appearance  before the  Humphrey  subcommittee,  when  the  fol-
lowing colloquy  occurred:
Senator  SPARKMAN.   Mr.  Secretary,  do  the  military  people
believe  that  inspection  from  the  air  would  be  adequate?
Secretary  DULLES.  Not  alone;  no sir  ...    any scheme  which
the   United   States  relied   upon   as  a   dependable   inspection
scheme  would  include both  air  and  ground  inspection.
Senator  SPARKMAN.   Is  it  your understanding  that  the mili-
tary  would  feel  that  that  would  be  adequate?
Secretary  DULLES.   Perhaps  I  would  rather  let  the  military
speak  for  themselves  in  that  respect.   I  think  that,  in  the main,
the  military  people  do  not  have great  confidence in  the  efficacy
of  any  attainable  control  or  inspection  system.
This  testimony  must  be  read  against  the  background  of  po-
litical  realities  in  Washington.  The  armed  services  are  like
feudal  principalities before the  rise of  modern  monarchies;  the
President  can  call  on  their  services  in  time  of  war  but  cannot
dictate to them  in time of  peace. The  armed  services  acquiesced
in  the  "open  skies"  proposal  as  "pie  in  the  sky"  diplomacy, a
Utopian   scheme  the   immemorially   suspicious   Russians  were
unlikely  to  accept.  But  they  were  unwilling  to  go  along  with
any  concrete disarmament proposal  even on  the  basis of  mutual
inspection.   This  explains  the  missing  element  in  the  package
offer,   the  disarmament  plan   that  contains  no  provision   for
disarmament.
Indeed  now  that  the  Russians have been  moving  toward ac-
ceptance  in  part  at  least  of  aerial  and  ground  inspection,  the
military  are  shying  away  in  alarm  from  the  entire  Eisenhower
package  deal  and  are  beginning  to  sell  the  idea  that   nuclear
war  may  be  safely  waged  on  a  "limited"  basis.   This   would
shelve disarmament altogether.
Vacation  Note  to  Readers:  The  Weekly   Is  Not  Published  the  Last  Two  Weeks  in  August
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly, 5618  Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .........................................................................—.•••••••••
Street     .......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)  Name  .........................................................
8/10/57
Street
City      ........................................Zone............State................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington.  II.  (,'.. under  tin;  Act  of   March  3.  1879.    Post-dated   Mondays  hut   pub
llshed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W.,  Washington  15.  D.  C.
An  Independent  weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   P.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
SB  In  the   TT. S.:  *fl   In  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rated:  S15  t<> Europe:  S20  to   Israel.  Asia  and   Afrlr-o
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED