I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957apr15.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive:  Aramco's  Tax  Figures,  P.  3.
Memo  for  Mrs. F.D.R.;  The  Men Who  Defended  the  Malmedy Slayers  Now  Champion  I.G.  Farben,  P.  2.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  16
APRIL  15,  1957
<°'        WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
Was Norman Smeared Because He Opposed U. S. Suez Policy?
The  Canadian note  to  the  U.  S. in  the  wake of  the  Norman
suicide  is as  much  a  service to  this  country  as  to  our  northern
neighbor.   In  demanding,  as a  condition  for  continued  cooper-
ation  on  intelligence,  that  the  U.  S. government  give assurance
that  such  information will  not  be  passed  on  to  Congressional
committees,  Canada  raised  a  point  few  Americans  have  the
courage  to  discuss.   This  is  the  notorious  undercover  liaison
which  has  long  existed  between  the  FBI  and  perhaps  other
gumshoe  agencies  on  the  one  hand  and  Congressional  witch
hunt  committees on  the  other.   It  was  time  this  were  dragged
into the  light  of day.
Canada  has  done  us  another  service.   The   China  Lobby,
through  McCarthy  and  McCarran  and  their  successors, has  suc-
ceeded  since  1950  in  thoroughly intimidating the  U.S.  foreign
service.  A  few  years ago the  purge  was extended  to  the  United
Nations.    The  Norman   case  illustrates  how  easily  the  same
technique  could  be  applied  to  the  diplomatic  service  of  allied
countries.   We  are  glad  Canada  has  challenged  it.
No  Conversation  Private?
One  wonders,  on  reading  the  transcripts  released   by  the
Senate  Internal  Security committee, whether  the  Canadian Am-
bassador  to  Cairo  was  made  the  victim of  an  old  and  discred-
ited  political  slander  because he  (like  his government)  had  the
temerity  to  be critical of  U.  S. policy  in  the  Suez crisis.    Osten-
sibly   the   two  executive   sessions   in  which   Norman's   name
figured  were  devoted  to  raking  over  the  political  past  of  John
K.  Emmerson,  the  U.  S.  deputy  chief  of  mission  in  the  Leb-
anon.   Actually  the  purpose  of  the  hearings   seems  to  have
been  to  get  some pay  dirt  on Norman  since  the  sessions  other-
wise  merely  rehashed  stale  allegations  about  Emmerson's  serv-
ice in wartime  China  and  postwar Japan  which  a State Depart-
ment  loyalty board  dismissed  in  1952.
Norman  was  both  Canada's   Ambassador  to  Egypt  and  its
Minister  to  the  Lebanon.   The   committee   wanted  to   know
what  opinions  Norman  had  expressed  when  he saw Emmerson
in  Beirut  last  October  on  coming  to  present  his   credentials.
This  aspect  of  the  interrogation  has  been  little  noticed.    "Did
he,"   Senator  Jenner  asked,  "pass  any  opinion  upon  the  prob-
lems  confronting  the  world  in  the  Middle  East  at  that  time?"
Emmerson  said  Norman  was  "extremely  concerned":
Senator  Jenner:  Did  he  criticize  our  country  for  the  atti-
tude  we  took  on  the  English  and  French  invasions?
Mr.  Emmerson:  No,  because  that  had  not  taken place.
Senator  Jenner: That  was  not  discussed?
Mr.  Emmerson:  The  British  and  French  invasion  had  not
taken  place  when I  saw him. ...
Senator  Watkins  wanted  to  know  whether  there  was  "any
indication  in  your  two  hour  visit  with  him  in  Beirut  that  he
was  sympathetic   with   the   Communists?"    His   answer   was,
5    9
"none  whatsoever, absolutely none."  Was  it proper  for  a U. S.
Senate  committee to  inquire into the  views of  a  foreign  diplo-
mat?  What  connection  did  this  have  with  "internal  security"?
Why  was this  transcript made public when  the  witness  recalled
nothing  reflecting in  any  way  upon  the  diplomat?
The  answer is that when  the  committee failed  to  smear  Nor-
man  by turning  up  any  evidence  from  the  witness,  it  achieved
the  same effect  by giving  publicity to  remarks interjected  by its
counsel.  These  remarks  unfairly  distorted  testimony  the  com-
mittee  had  heard  six  years  ago  and  put  these  distortions  into
the  headlines.  This,  too,  has  escaped  attention  in  the  press.
At  the  hearing  of  March  12, Morris  told  the  committee  "As
far   as  Mr.  Norman  is  concerned,  there  was  this  direct  testi-
mony  by Professor  Wittfogel  .  .  . that  Norman  was a  student
of  his  in a  Communist group  in  Columbia  while  he  was a  pro-
fessor  there."  At  the  second hearing  on  March  21,  when  Sena-
tor  Watkins  indicated  doubt,  Morris  described  Professor  Witt-
fogel's  testimony by saying, "we  asked him  at  great  length  and
with  great  precision  whether  or  not  in  fact  Norman   was  at
that  time  a  member  of  the  Communist  party,  and  he  said  in
great  detail,  yes;  he  was."   Morris  said  the  Communists used
Professor  Wittfogel  "to teach  their young  groups. ... He was
the  teacher  that  went  to  the  cell;  he  was  the  one  who  taught
the group,  day by day, week  by week.  . .  ."
What  Wittfogel  Really   Said
Judging  by the  Lattimore case in  which  Professor   Wittfogel
also starred, this  German  ex-Communist  was not  the  most  reli-
able  of  witnesses.  But  he  did  not  say what  Morris  said  he  did.
The  Professor  appeared  before the Internal  Security  Committee
on  August  7,  1951.   He  testified  (p.  312,  Pt.  1, IPR  hearings)
that  in  the  summer  of  1938  he  went  to  Provincetown,  to  stay-
with  a  certain  graduate  student  at  Columbia.    Morris  asked
the  Professor  whether this graduate student  "in  the  summer of
1938  ran  a  summer  camp  or  a  summer  study  session?"   Prof.
Wittfogel  replied  "Not  that  summer"  but  added  that  this  stu-
dent   "was  a  very  skilful  man"   and  "He   had  sometimes,   it
seems,  study groups  assembled  in  his  house."   Professor  Witt-
fogel  said  this  man  was  a  Communist:
Mr.  Morris:  Was  this  study  group  that  he  ran  a Commu-
nist  study  group?
Dr.  Wittfogel:  Well,  it   was   a  discussion   group  among
friends,  of  people  who  belonged  to  his  political  creed;  there
was  no  problem  about  that.
When Morris  asked  the  Professor,  "Can  you tell  us anything
further?",  he replied,  "I  don't  remember whether  it was a per-
manent  group.   I  was  invited  a  very  few  times."  When  the
hearing  resumed  after  lunch   (p.   318),   Morris  said  "chrono-
logically,  we  had  gotten  as  far  as  Dr.  Wittfogel   relating  his
{Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  15,  1957
Light  on  That  Libby-Finucane  Committee   for  the  Return  of  German  Assets
Now  It's  I  G. Farben-In  1949  They  Sparked  McCarthy's  Defense  of SS  Men
Mrs.  Roosevelt  was  well  advised  when  she  refused  to  join
the  Committee  for  Return  of  German  and  Japanese  Property
here  in  Washington.    The  Committee  is  fighting  attempts  to
limit  return  of   enemy   assets  to  smaller  claimants;   it  is  the
sounding  board  for  big  German  interests  like  I.  G.   Farben.
The  chairman of  the  Committee  is Frederick  J.  Libby,  long  the
head  of  the  National  Council  for  the  Prevention  of  War,  and
the  secretarial  factotum  is  James  Finucane,  who  also  worked
with  Libby  on  the  National  Council.
A  decade  ago  Libby  and  Finucane  through  the   National
Council  for  the  Prevention  of  War  sparked  McCarthy's  cam-
paign  to  save  the  SS  men  convicted  of  massacring  American
prisoners  of  war  and  Belgian  civilians at  Malmedy  in  the  Bat-
tle  of  the  Bulge.   Those  like  Judge  Learned  Hand  and  Rabbi
Abraham  Cronbach  of  Cincinnati whose  names  are  being  used
by  the  new  Libby-Finucane   committee  ought  to  look  at  the
hearings  and  final  report  of  the  Senate  subcommittee which  in
1949  investigated  that  campaign  to  save  the  Malmedy slayers.
It  was  a  subcommittee  of  Senate  Armed  Services.   Raymond  E.
Baldwin  (R.  Conn.)   was  the  chairman. The  other  two  mem-
bers  were  Kefauver  and  Lester  C.  Hunt  of  Wyoming   whom
McCarthy  later  helped  by  calumny  to  drive  into  suicide.
The  Murderers  Went   Free
The  subcommittee  held   extensive  hearings  in  Washington
and  Germany  (Malmedy   Massacre  Investigation,  S.  Res.  42,
81st  Cong.   1st  Sess.  Parts  1  &  2)   and  made  a  report  to  the
Senate   on   October    13,   1949.     Senator   Baldwin   said   that
though  100 unarmed  surrendered  American soldiers  "were bru-
tally  shot  down  in  cold  blood  by  German  SS troopers,  to  this
day  not  one  has  been  executed  for  this  crime."    He  accused
McCarthy,  in  his  campaign   on  behalf  of  the  SS men,  of  ac-
cepting  "the   unsupported   affidavits   of  German   SS  troopers"
against  the  sworn  testimony  of  American  soldiers.
The    subcommittee   said   "the   most   provocative    sets   of
charges"  against  the  Americans  assigned  to  prosecute  the  SS
men  were in  an  article  from  The  Progressive under  the  byline
of  Judge Edward  L.  Van  Roden.   This  was extensively  used  by
McCarthy  to  "document"   charges  that  the  accused  men  had
been  mistreated.  The  National  Council  for  the  Prevention  of
War  circulated  the  Van  Roden  article  widely.
But  when  the  subcommittee  subpenaed  Judge  Van  Roden
"he   categorically    denied   having   written   the   article"    and
"denied  in detail certain of  the  more brutal parts of  it."  (Pages
842-3  of  the hearings).  Judge Van  Roden  said  the  article had
actually  been  written  by  James  Finucane.
The  article  spread  the  charge  that  American  interrogators  of
the  accused  SS men  had  postured  as  priests  for  the. purpose  of
obtaining  confessions.  The  subcommittee  said  the  sole  source
of  this  charge  was  a  Nazi  named  Eble  who  also  alleged   that
burning  matches  had  been  placed  under  his  fingernails.  The
subcommittee  on  interrogating him  discovered that  he  had  four
times  been  convicted  of  embezzlement  (under  Hitler).
"A   physical  examination  was  made  of  Eble,"  the  subcom-
mittee  said  in  its  final  report,  "to  determine  if  there  were  any
scars  indicating  burns  under  his  fingernails,  which  he  stated
had  become  infected.  No  evidence  was  found  to  support  this
claim.   The   doctors  who  examined   him  stated   that  in   their
The  Same   Vultures   Are   Back
The  Committee  for  the  Return  of  German  and  Japa-
nese  Property  complained  that  Mrs.  Roosevelt  refused
to  join  because  she  objected  to  returning  the  property
of  I.  G.  Farben.   The  Committee  press  release  referred
to   I.   G.   sweetly   as    "the    now   decartelized    German
chemical  company."
This  is  what  an  authoritative  recent  work  on  post-
war  Germany  (The   Colossus  Again:  Western  Germany
from  Defeat  to  Rearmament,  by  Alfred  Grosser,   1955,
p.  95).   has  to  say  of  I.  G.:
"The   same  influential  men  are  once  again  in  charge
of  I.  G.  Farben.   Fritz  Gajowski,  the  great  explosives
specialist,  has  regained  his  old  position  as  manager  of
Dynamit  A.  G.  at  Troisdorf;  Professor  Hoerlein  is  on
the  managerial  board  of  Farbenfabrik-Bayer  A.  G.  at
Leverkusen;  and  Otto  Ambros,  who  as  director  of  I.  G.
Farben  was  in  charge  of  chemical  products  at  Ausch-
witz,  the  infamous  German  concentration  and  extermi-
nation  camp,   is   'adviser'  for   the  development   of   the
former  I.  G.  Farben  factories  in  South  Germany."
opinion  the man  was a  pathological  liar.  .  .  . Those  citizens of
the  U.S.,  who  have  accepted  and  published  these  allegations
as  truth,  without  attempting  to  secure verification  of  the  facts,
have  done  their  country a  great  disservice."
The   subcommittee   concluded   that   neither   Finucane   nor
Judge  Van  Roden  had  told  it  the  "whole  truth."   It  noted  that
there  were  no  less  than  "three  German  generals,  one  an  out-
standing  SS general"  involved  in  the  Malmedy  case  and   "the
desire  of  their   compatriots   to  have  such  persons   released  is
undoubted."
McCarthy  Added  Anti-Semitic   Overtones
The  subcommittee  reported  that  the  National   Council  for
Prevention  of  War  had  maintained "a  constant  correspondence
with  certain  people  in  Germany"   interested  in  the  freeing  of
the  SS men.   It  said  the  circulation  by  the  National  Council  in
this  country  of  the  charges  made  against  the   Americans  as-
signed  to  prosecute  the  Malmedy slayers "have  been  most  dam-
aging  to  our  country,  and  to  the  cause  of  peace."    (McCarthy's
own  campaign  added  anti-Semitic nuances:  he  implied  that  the
prosecuting  staff  contained  "refugees"  biased  against  Nazis!)
The  report  said  the  subcommittee "feels  strongly that  proper
investigations  should  be made to  determine the  real  motivation
in  back of  the  activities of  this organization,"  i.e.  the  National
Council  for  the  Prevention  of  War  and  called  on  the  Defense
Department  "carefully   [to]    investigate  the  possibility  of  the
existence  of  a plan  to  revive the  German  nationalistic  spirit  by
discrediting  the  American military  government."   No  investi-
gation  was  ever  made.   Now  the  defenders  of  the  Malmedy
slayers  are  the  champions  of  I.  G.  Farben.
By  returning  these  properties,  the  U.  S.  would  violate  its
treaty  obligations  to  its  allies  in  order  to  give  Hitler's  ex-
henchmen  the  profits  their  subsidiaries  made  on the  Ameri-
can  side  during  the  war.   We  note  with  revulsion  that  the
Washington  law  firm  of  Ginsburg,  Leventhal  and  Brown,
and  the  public  relations  firm  of  Julius  Klein,  both  Jewish
firms,  are  registered  as  lobbyists  in  this  campaign.    The
maestro  on  the   German   side   is   Herman   J.   Abs  of   the
Deutsche  Bank,  a  former  director  of  I.  G.  Farben,  and  a
financial pillar  of  the  Hitler  regime.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

;. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  15,  1957
The  Hitherto  Unpublished  Figures  on  Aramco's  Tax  Credits  and  Depletion   Allowances
The  Billion  Dollar  Tax  Gimmicks  Oil  Enjoys   at  Home  and  Abroad
Here  for  the first time published anywhere are the  depletion
allowances and  tax  credits enjoyed  by Aramco since  1950  when
its   50-50  profit  sharing  arrangement  at   the   expense  of   the
U.S.  Treasury went  into  effect.   The  figures  are  in  millions of
dollars:
Tax  Credits:                Depletion                     Total
1950                   47.6                  58.5                 106.1
1951                    98.6                  84.4                  183.0
1952                  103.3                 91.9                 195.2
1953                  111.2                 98.8                  210.0
1954                 139.3               119.3                       258.6
1955                 176.5               148.2                       324.7
1956                      280.0                 152.0                      432.0
Total                     956.5                 753.1                    1,709.6
These  figures  are  staggering.  What  they illustrate  is  a basic
axiom  of  U.S. business  today.   The  real  way  to  make  money
lies  in  knowing  how  to  manipulate  the   tax  laws.   A  small
business  in  this  country  making  $5,000  a  year  pays  a  30  per-
cent  income  tax  but  one  of  the  world's  most  profitable petro-
leum  concessions  has  for  the  past  seven  years  paid  no  income
taxes  whatsoever  on  its  earnings  in  Saudi  Arabia.
Let  us  glance  at  those  figures  again.   That  total  of  almost
one  billion  dollars  in  tax  credits  since  1950  offset  dollar  for
dollar  the  higher  royalties paid  Ibn  Saud  in  the  guise  of  taxes.
An  oil  company  operating   at  home  and  paying  these  same
sums  in  royalties  could  deduct  them  as  an  expense  of  the  busi-
ness.   But  it  would  have  to  pay  a  corporate  income  tax  on  the
remainder.   In  Aramco's  bracket,  the  tax  would  be  almost  a
half   billion  dollars.   That  is  roughly  the  amount  lost  to  the
U.S.  Treasury  by  the  foreign  tax  credit.
Oil's  Midas  Tax  Touch
Now  glance  up  at  that  depletion  figure.  This  is  the  well
known  tax  gimmick  which  gives  the  oil  industry  its  Midas
touch.   Since  1926  the  tax  laws  have  allowed  oil  companies  to
take  271/2  percent  of  gross  income  as  a  depletion   allowance
before  taxes  "without  regard  to  the  amount  of  the  investment
or  the  amount  of  prior  depletion   deductions."   (See the  able
explanatory  memorandum  by  Paul   E.  Hadlick   put   into   the
Congressional  Record  March   27,  pages   3969-71  by  Senator
Williams  of  Delaware.)    Obviously  this  allows  the  oil  com-
panies  to  write  off  the  full  amount  of  their  actual  investment
many  times  at  the  expense  of  the  U.S. Treasury.
The  amounts  deducted  from  income  as depletion  allowances
would  otherwise  be  subject  to  tax.  In  Aramco's  bracket,  this
would  be  a  52  percent  tax.  In  other  words,  roughly  half  that
three  quarters  of   a  billion   dollars   in   depletion   allowances
since  1950  would  have  been  paid  to  the  Treasury.   Something
in  the  neighborhood  of  $800,000,000  in  taxes  have  been  lost
since  1950  through  Aramco's  foreign  tax  credit  and  depletion.
Footnote  on  "People's  Capitalism"
"A   recent   survey   on  this   subject    [distribution    of
stock  ownership]  shows  that,  first,  only   7  percent  of
American  families  own  publicly  held  stocks;  and, sec-
ond,  that  8  percent  of  this  stockowning  group   owned
over  four-fifths  of  the  stock.   It  would  appear   therefore
that  less  than  one  percent  of  all  American  families  own
over  four-fifths  of  all  publicly  held  stock.  .  .  ."
—Fulbright,  U.S. Senate, Mar.  27, p. S955CR.
Not  That   Backward
We  turned over  to  the  O'Mahoney  monopoly  subcom-
mittee  photostats  of  those   Saudi  Arabian  tax  decrees
we  turned  up last  week  and call  special  attention  to  the
fact  that  in  them  "backward"  Arabia  does  not   permit
depletion  allowances.   Similarly  another  "backward"  oil
producing  country  Venezuela,  in  a  tax  bulletin  supplied
us here by the Embassy,  says  "Percentage depletion . . .
which  is  the  usual  practice  in  the  United  States,  is  not
permissible   in  Venezuela."
Some  conception of  what  these  figures,  and  Aramco's  profits
mean, may be gathered  from an  estimate given  Senator  Dirksen
of  Illinois  by  F.  A.  Davies,  chairman  of  the  board  of  Aramco,
at  the  March  20 hearing  before the  O'Mahoney  monopoly  sub-
committee.   Mr.  Davies  was  talking  of  the  dangers  of  nation-
alization  and what  the  company would  lose.  He  told  the  Sena-
tor,  in  reply  to  a  question,  that  the  company's  net  depreciated
assets  in  Saudi  Arabia was  figured  by Aramco at  $471,000,000
but  that  in  the  event  of  seizure  little  more  than  half  of  this
would  fall  into  Ibn  Saud's  hands  since  some  $225,000,000  of
this amount was in  cash  and  accounts receivable  outside Arabia.
These   figures   give   some   conception   of   just   how   much
Aramco  actually  has  invested  in  Arabia.   Compare  this  with
the  $280,000,000   it  earned  tax  free  last  year  and  the  one  and
three  quarter  billion  dollars  in  tax  credits  and  depletion  al-
lowances  it  has  enjoyed  since  1950.
Aramco's  Own Tax  Loss  Figures
Aramco  itself  estimates,  in  figures  never  before  made  pub-
lic,  that  without  depletion  allowances—even  after  paying  Ibn
Saud's  share—it  would  have  paid  $61,000,000  in  taxes  to  the
U.S.  in  1955  and  $63,000,000  in 1956.
It  is  fantastic that  special  tax  privileges  should  be  afforded
oil  companies  abroad  where  profit  margins  are  so  much  wider
than  at  home.   There  is  no  sound  reason  of  public  policy  for
giving  them  special  tax  credits  to  "encourage"   them  to  invest
in  areas  where  oil  can  be obtained  so much  more  cheaply  than
in  the  U.S.  The  tax  law  ought  to  be  revised  to  plug  up  this
loophole.
It  is  equally  fantastic  that  the  oil  industry  should  enjoy  a
depletion  allowance  which  bears  no  rational  relation  to  real
depletion—unless  it  be  the  depletion   of  the  U.S. Treasury.
Senator  Williams  of  Delaware  has  been  waging  a  lone  fight
against  this  for  years  without  success—for  oil  bearing  Texas
is  enthroned  in  both  the  House  and  Senate  through   Speaker
Rayburn  and  Majority  Leader Lyndon  Johnson.
On  March  27 a  series of  attempts  to  give  some  tax  relief  to
small  business, and  to  cut the  depletion  allowances  were  beaten
down  without  even  a  rollcall  vote.   Senator  Fulbright  led  the
fight  for  relief  to  small  business;  Senator  Williams  tried to  cut
depletion  allowances  from  27V
2
  percent  to  20 percent;  Senator
Douglas  tried  to  apply  the  graduated  principle  by  cutting  de-
pletion  allowances  to  15 percent  on  oil companies  with  incomes
beyond  $5,000,000;   Senator  Carroll  suggested   changing  for-
eign  tax  credit  provisions.   All  spoke  in  vain.   We   recom-
mend  that  day's  debate  in  the  Congressional  Record  as  a lib-
eral  education  in  tax  realities.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  15,  1957
Here  Nobody  Cares  So Long  As They  Don't  Jump  Out Windows
(Continued  from  Page   One)
experiences  at a certain  Communist  study group  in the  summer
of   1938."    (Prof.   Wittfogel  had  said  "not   that  summer.")
The  interrogation  then  brought  in  Norman's  name:
Mr.  Morris:  Who  were  some  of  the  other  students  at  this
study  group?
Dr.  Wittfogel:  There  was  a  talented  and  pleasant  young
man  who  was  studying  in  the  Japanese  department  at  Co-
lumbia.   His  name  is  Herbert  Norman.
Mr.  Morris: Was  he  a  member of  this  study  group?
Dr.  Wittfogel: Yes.
Mr.  Morris:  To  your  knowledge,  did  he  know  it   was  a
Communist  study  group?
Dr.  Wittfogel:  Yes,  it  was  obvious.
Mr.  Morris:  To  you?
Dr. Wittfogel:  I think  it  was  obvious, in  general.
Mr.   Morris:  Was   it   obvious,   therefore,   that   he   was   a
Communist.
Dr.  Wittfogel:  Yes.
Inferences  from  Inferences
This  testimony in  1951,  inferring that  a  certain  study  group
must  have been  Communist,  and  inferring from  that  that  Nor-
man,  too,  must  have  been  a  Communist  [in  the  Canadian  in-
vestigation,  which  cleared  Norman,   he  proved   that   he  was
never  on  Cape  Cod],  is quite  different  from  Morris's  descrip-
tion  of  it  last  month  as  a  precise and  detailed  identification  of
Norman  as a  Communist  by a  man  who  had  taught  him  "day
by  day,  week  by  week"   in  a  Communist  study  group.    Prof.
Wittfogel   did  not  even  say he  taught  this  group  and  he  did
say  "I  was invited very few  times."   A hostile witness  who  tes-
tified   as  misleadingly  as  Morris  would   get  into   trouble.
Yet  the  news  was  made  by  the  distortions.    Even  the  New
York  Times  the  day after  the  suicide  said  Dr.  Wittfogel   testi-
fied that Norman  "was  a member  of  a Communist study  group
taught  by Dr.  Wittfogel  in  Provincetown  on  Cape  Cod,  Mass.,
in  the  summer  of  1938."   Norman   sick  from  overwork  may
well  have  despaired  that  the  truth  would  ever  catch  up,  and
feared  that  the  net  result  of  all  this  bad  publicity would  make
his  position  as  Ambassador  to  Cairo  untenable  and  ruin  his
career  in  the  Canadian Foreign  Service.  Who  put  Morris  up  to
this?   Is  there  a  Senator who  dares inquire?
More  important  than  the  mystery in  this  affair  is  its  plain
purport,  and  this  is the  numbing  of  the  American  conscience,
the  extent  to  which  we  have  come  to  accept  government  by
calumny.   Only  one  Senator,  Neuberger,  has  called  for  an  in-
vestigation;   no  one   else   in  the   Senate   has  uttered  a  word
against  the  Internal  Security  Committee.   A  few  newspapers
have  protested,  notably  and  eloquently  the  Washington  Post,
but  most  have done  no more  than  deplore  the  use of  "hearsay"
against  the  diplomatic  representative  of  a  foreign  country.   In
Canada,  all  three  major  parties  protest  and  Eisenhower's war-
time  Canadian  aide  has  sent  back his  citation.   But  here  there
is  bipartisan  silence.  The  President  himself  carefully   avoided
any word  in criticism of  the  Committee,  or  in regret  that  a man
died.   He  only  deplored  the  strain  on  relations  with  Canada.
Moral  cowardice  has  become  a  national  characteristic.
Every  "Name"  May  Destroy  A  Life
"Names"  and  more  "names"  are  the  passion  of  the  Internal
Security   and    House   Un-American   committees,   and   every
"name,"  like  Norman's,  may be one  more  life  ruined.  Not  to
give  names  one  must  either  invoke  the  Fifth  and  live  in  the
shadow  of  a  vague  dishonor,  or  invoke  the  First  and  go  to
jail.   In  either  case  the  land  of  the  free  and  the  home  of  the
brave  takes  it  all  for  granted.  The  mills  grind  on.   In  New
York,  the  House  Committee  turns to  the  world  of  music.  Here
in  Washington,  Alden  Whitman,  the  last  of  four  newspaper-
men  to plead  the  First before  Senate  Internal  Security  is  found
guilty  as  quickly  and  easily as  if  by  judicial  slot  machine.   Dr.
Otto Nathan,  Einstein's  closest  friend  and  executor,  is  ordered
to  stand   trial  next.*     Funny   people,   our   neighbors,   those
Canadians.   They  still  care.   Here,  so  long  as  a  man  is  not  a
foreign  diplomat  or  does  not  jump  out  windows,  the  public
hardly  notices.
* One  count  of  his  indictment,  alleging  that  Dr.   Nathan
had  refused  to  answer  the  question  whether  he  was  "identi-
fied"  with  the   National   Council  of  the  Arts,  Sciences  and
Professions,  was  thrown  out.   The  verb  was  too  vague   even
for  our  Federal  District  Judges.
Special   Offer:     We'll   Supply   Spare  Copies  of  This  Issue  Free  If  You'll  Pass  Them  on  to  Friends
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ...........
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street    ...........
City     .............
Shall   we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
...........................Zone......
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
...........................Zone......
gift   announcement?
......State................
(1 yr.) additional:
4AV57
......State.................
Yes  D   No D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I   F   Stone's  Weekly.     Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  it  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,   1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat   pub-
lished   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursday*   of   August  and  December  at  301  B.  Capitol  St., Washington  3,  D.  C.
An  Independent   weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IB  In  the  U.  8.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Hall  rates:  (IB  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED