I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957feb25.pdf

============================================================

More  Mid-East Revelations  Inside
Our  Ambassador   Explains  Saud's  Slaves  Are  Only  Negroes and  "Just  Like  Part  of  The  Family," Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  8
FEBRUARY  25,  1957
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Sanctions  for  Israel,  Bombers  for  Arabia
In  the  Senate  the  other  day  Humphrey  of  Minnesota  said
the  pervading  atmosphere  in  Washington  was  "characterized
by  the  Administration's   insistence  upon  using  ambiguous  and
generalized  appeals,   dramatically  presented   by  the   President
and   self-righteously   defended   by   the   Secretary   of   State."
Though  Senator  Humphrey  was  talking  of  the  way  the  Mid-
East  resolution  had  been  presented,  he  could  have  been  de-
scribing  the  TV  appearance  in  which  Mr.  Eisenhower  sum-
moned  Israel  to  surrender  or  face   sanctions.
The  President's  general  moral  propositions   were  unassail-
able,  but  his  presentation  of  the  facts  was  inadequate.    The
public  and  perhaps  the  President  himself   are  not  getting  a
candid  picture of  what  we  really have  been  doing  in  the  Mid-
dle  Eastern  crisis.  I  want  to  tell  a  documented  story no  news-
paper  had  yet  printed  as  we  went  to  press  on  the  morning  of
Thursday,  February 21,  to  illustrate  just  how  uninformed  Sec-
retary  of  State Dulles  manages  to  keep  the  country.
Remember  the  Desert  "Impassible"  to  Tanks?
The  story  begins  a  year  ago  February  16 when  the  Liberian
flag freighter  James  Monroe  in  Brooklyn  was  discovered  to  be
loading   18  M-41  Walker   Bulldog   tanks   for   Saudi   Arabia.
The  news  created  an  uproar  and  brought  about  a  Senate  in-
vestigation  because  the  Administration had  been  refusing  re-
quests  for  arms  from  Israel  on  the  ground  that  it  was  seeking
to  prevent  an  arms  race  in  the  area.   Secretary Dulles  was  sum-
moned  before  the  Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee.   His
efforts   to  explain  were  ingenious.    When   Senator  Smith  of
New  Jersey  asked  why  "if  we  send  tanks  to  Saudi   Arabia"
we  should  not  send  "corresponding   equipment"  to  Israel,  Mr.
Dulles  replied  that  the  State  Department  did  not  think   "the
problem  of  Israel  and  its  Arab  neighbors"  involved  "because
things  like  tanks  cannot  get  across  the  desert."    Apparently
Mr.  Dulles  had  never  heard  of  El  Alamein.
Now  imagine  the  uproar  if  it  had  become  known  at  the
time  that  we  had   also  sent   nine  B-26  bombers  to  Arabia.
There   would  have  been  no  question   that   these   could    "get
across   the  desert."    Just   a  few  of   those   B-26's  would   be
enough  to  make  a  shambles  of  Tel  Aviv.
The  evidence  that  we  have  sent  9  B-26's  has  been  available
here  to the  Senate  since  February  6  and  to  the  press  since  Sun-
day,   February  17.   It  appeared  when  there  was  released   for
publication  the  heavily  censored  transcript  of  executive  session
testimony  taken  by  the  joint  Senate  Foreign   Relations  and
Armed  Services  Committee  on  the  Mid-East  resolution.
On  page  644,  in  the  second  volume  of  those  hearings,   Sen-
ator  Russell  of  Georgia  was  questioning  George  Wadsworth,
our  Ambassador  to  Saudi  Arabia.   Senator  Russell  seems  to
have  been  as misinformed  as the  rest  of  us.   He  observed  quite
incorrectly  as  it  turned   out,  that  Ibn  Saud   "has   no   military
3                                                                                                                   3
air,   I  believe."   This  elicited  a  reply  from  the  Ambassador
which  is  marked  deleted  at  two  points   for   security   reasons.
But  in  the part  which  was not  deleted  one will  see that  he  re-
vealed  that  we had  sent  Ibn  Saud nine B-26s  "in  the  course of
the  last  three  years."
Last  Year  The  Information  Was  "Classified"
This  information  would  have  created  a  sensation  last  year,
when  the   18  tanks  were  pictured  as  an  isolated   and   unim-
portant  shipment.   Senator  Morse   almost   succeeded   then   in
eliciting  the  information  from  the  wily Mr.  Dulles,  who  puts
Ulysses  in  the  shade.   Senator  Morse  asked  the  Secretary  at
last year's hearing  if  we had  sent  any military aircraft  to  Saudi
Arabia.  The  Secretary's way of  replying  was  curious.   His  first
answer  was  that  we  had  sent  "some  shipments   .  .  .  but  no
jets."   When  Morse  then  wanted  to  know  whether  these  were
fighters or  bombers,  the  Secretary replied  that  he  believed  they
were  only  cargo  planes  but  reserved  "the  right  to  correct  the
record  if  necessary."
Perhaps  the  Secretary  thought  the  matter  would  be  forgot-
ten—as  it  was—before  the  record  was printed.   When  I  went
over  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee   a  few  days
later  and  asked  whether  any corrections  had  in  fact  been  made
by  the  Secretary  before  the  transcript  was  sent  to  the  printer,
I  learned  that  Mr.  Dulles  had  changed  it  to  read,  "We  have
sold  a  very  limited  number  of  military  aircraft  of  the   pro-
pellor  type."   (See  the  Weekly  of  last  March  5,  or  page  68 of
the  printed  record  of  the  Senate  hearing.   No  newspaper  but
the  New   York   Post  paid  any  attention   to  the  story  at  the
time).   There  was  a  rumor  then  that  some  four  to  six  B-26
bombers  had  been  sent  Saudi  Arabia,  but  when  the  press  of-
ficer  of  the  State  Department  was  asked  whether  fighters  or
bombers  were  among  those  "propeller  type"  planes,  he  said
the  information  was   "classified."
Will  Saud  Get Jet  Bombers  Next?
Every  detail  of  this  can  be  checked  from  the  public  record.
It  shows  how  easily  the  Department   gets  away  with  its  own
one-sided  presentation  of  the  facts.   The  story  is  also  impor-
tant  in  another  respect.   What  were  in  the  deletions   of  the
Wadsworth  testimony?   He  said  we  were  now  working  .on  a
plan  "which  would  double  the  size  of  the  army  and  strength-
en  the  air  force"  of  Saudi  Arabia.  Is  Ibn  Saud  to  get  jets  now
instead  of  just  "propeller  type"  bombers?   How  does  the  De-
partment   reconcile  this—and   indeed   the  new   multi-million
dollar   arms  aid  provisions  of  the  Mid-East  resolution—with
the  UN  arms embargo  on  the  area,  and  with  the  agreement  by
which  Saudi  Arabia  placed   its  armed  forces  under  Egyptian
command  last  April  21?   How  against  this  background   can
the  public  judge,  how can  Israel  trust,  Mr.  Dulles'  assurances?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  25,1957
From  the  1,000 Pages  of  Senate  Committee Testimony  on  the  Mid-East  Resolution
Despite  Heavy  Deletions  for  "Security"  Some  Vivid  Insights  into  Policy
Last  week-end  the  Senate  Committees  on  Foreign  Rela-
tions  and  Armed  Services  released  almost  1,000 pages  of
testimony   taken   in   public  and  executive   session  on  the
President's  Mid-East  resolution.  These  were  covered  inade-
quately  by  the  daily  papers,  which  looked  at  them  hurriedly
for   "news."   At   moments,  however,  in  prolonged  and  re-
petitive  interrogation  of  officials   accustomed to  slippery   re-
ply,  the Senators  succeeded  in  obtaining  vivid  insights  into
the  policies and personalities involved.   On  these two  pages,
as  indispensable  background  for  the  debate  in  the  Senate
and  the  sanctions  controversy  in  the  UN,  we  present  the
most  important  of  these  for   our   readers.—IFS.
No  Evidence  of  Soviet   Aggression
Senator   FULBRIGHT.  Mr.  Secretary,  is  there  any  significant
new  evidence that  the  Soviet  Union  is  planning  a  direct  ag-
gression  in  the  general  area  of  the  Middle  East?
Secretary  DULLES.  There  is  no evidence that  we are  aware
of.  (p.  25)
Langer  Did  Not  Press  The  Question
Senator   LANGER.  I  want  to  ask  you,  first  of  all,  whether
your  firm  represents  or  did  represent   any  oil  companies  in
the Far  (sic)  East?
Secretary   DULLES.  You  are  referring  to the firm that  I was
once a partner  of?
Senator   LANGER.  Yes;  the  firm  you  used  to  be  connected
Unsympathetic  to  the  Oil Companies
"I  sometimes  feel,  with  the  oil  companies,  that  you
are  a  little  unsympathetic,  in  your  hearings,  to  their
interests."
—Hon.  Geo. Wadsworth,  U. S.  Ambassador  to  Saudi
Arabia,  Mid-East  Hearing,  (p.  6SS)
with.
. Secretary   DULLES.   I  retired  from  it  in  1949.
Senator   LANGER.   Yes.   But   does  your  firm,  the  firm  you
used to  be with?
Secretary   DULLES.   You  say  "my  firm".  I  have  no  firm  at
the  present  time, Senator.    You mean  the  firm  from  which  I
retired  in  1949?
Senator  LANGER.  That  is right.
Secretary  DULLES.  I think that they may.  (p.  103)
Just  A  Question  of Wording
Senator   MANSFIELD.   Under  this  resolution,  do  we  propose
to  reward  Syria  and  Egypt  with  economic  and  military  aid?
Secretary  DULLES.  No, sir.  That  question and  answer  might
be  subject  to  misconstruction  unless  I  elaborate  a  little  bit.
Senator   MANSFIELD.  All  right.
Secretary   DULLES.   You  say  "reward"  them.  Certainly  we
do not  intend  to reward  them  with  economic aid.  I  do not  ex-
clude  the  possibility  that  under  certain   circumstances  they
might  get  economic  aid.   I  do  not  mean  my  answer  to  indi-
cate  they  would  necessarily  be barred.
Senator  MANSFIELD.  What  you mean,  Mr. Secretary, is that
you  do  not  agree  with  the  use  of  the  word  "reward"?
Secretary   DULLES.   Yes,  sir.   (p.   114)
Still  the  Instant  Retaliation  Policy
Senator   MANSFIELD.   Is  this  proposal  the  reiteration  of  the
1954   policy  of  instant  retaliation  at  places  and  by  means  of
our  own choosing?
Secretary   DULLES.   It  still  remains  a  basic  policy  of  the
United  States  that  if  war  is  forced  upon  us,  we  will  not
necessarily   confine  hostilities  to  the  places  that  the  enemy
picks,  (p.  118)
Let's  Not  Be  Crude  About  Sanctions
Senator  Sparkman.   Am  I  not  correct  in  my  under-
standing  that  there  is  outstanding a  long-time resolu-
tion  of  the  United  Nations  forbidding  Egypt  to  close
the  canal  to  Israel?
Mr.   [Jefferson]   Caffery   [former   U.   S.  Ambassador
to  Egypt].   There  is  such  a  resolution.
Senator  Sparkman.   Have  we  ever  invoked  economic
sanctions  against  Egypt  for  refusing  to  abide  by  that
UN resolution?
Mr.  Caffery.   No,  we  have not.
Senator   Sparkman.   Just   how   do  we  reconcile  our
position?    To  me  it  seems  absolutely  inconsistent.
Mr.   Caffery.    Inconsistent,  yes,  but   perhaps  practi-
cal.   .  .  .
Senator  Sparkman.   It  is  practical  because  we  can't
make   Egypt   obey   and   we   can   make   Israel,   is   that
right?
Mr.  Caffery.    I  would  not  put  it  quite  that  crudely,
(p.  802)
Inviting  the  Arabs  to  Attack  Israel?
Senator    MORSE.  Would  you  agree,   Mr.  Secretary,   to   an
amendment  which  provided  tha\;  if  arms   are   used   by   the
Arabs  against  Israel  or  vice  versa  we  would intervene?
Secretary   DULLES.   No;  I  do not  think  that  this  resolution
is an appropriate  place to deal with that  problem, Senator  . ..
Senator  MORSE.  You ship  these  arms  into  the  Arab  States
or  into  Israel  . . . and we may find ourselves  providing  them
with  the  very  sinews  for  war  in  the  Middle  East  that  could
very  well  lead to a third  world war.  Is that  not  a  possibility?
Secretary   DULLES.  That  is a  possibility. . . .
Senator   MORSE.  Well,  one  of  the  alleged  purposes  of  this
resolution  is  ...    to  reduce the  possibility  of  war.  Would  not
some  such  language  as  I  propose  make  it  clear  to  the  Arab
States  and  to  Israel  that  if  they  follow  any  warlike  activity,
we  will  intervene,  and  likewise  help  to  preserve  the  peace?
Secretary   DULLES.   I  would  think  it  was  wiser  here  to  fol-
low the  precedent that  was  set  in the  Southeast  Asia  Security
Treaty.  There  the United  States made clear  . . . that the only
armed  aggression  with  which  we  were  concerned  .  .  . was
Communist-armed  aggression,  (pps.  151-2)
Won't  Take  Arms  Unless  They  Can
Use  Them  Against  Israel?
Senator   MORSE.  Russia  is  doing  a  great  deal  of  propagan-
dizing  work  in  the  Arab  States  to  stir  up  animosity  between
the  Arab  States  and  Israel,  and  apparently  to  indicate  that
in  some  instances  she  would be  helpful  to  an  Arab  State  in
wiping  Israel  off the map as a  State. ... I  am briefly  asking
whether  you think  if  we put  the  language  I  proposed in  the
resolution,  namely, that  we would intervene  in  case  of  a  war
within  the  Middle East, that  would  cause  some  Arab  States
to  look  upon  the  resolution  with  less  favor  as  far   as  their
cooperation  is concerned?
Secretary  DULLES.  With  less  favor?
Senator   MORSE.   Yes.
Secretary    DULLES.   I  think   it  probably  would,  yes.   (pps.
152-3)
What  Does  Dulles  Mean  by  "Free   Nations"?
Senator   MORSE.  Mr.  Secretary, in  many of your  statements
that  I  have  read,  and  also  the  President's  speech,  the  phrase
is  used  over  and  over  again,  "The  free  nations  of  the  Middle
East."  Would you name  for  the  committee  the  nations  of  the
Middle East that are free  nations. ...
Secretary  DULLES.  The words 'free  nations'  used  I  am sure
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, February  25,1951
Senator  Ervin:  "Wouldn't  We Be Taking The  Side of  the  Government  Against  The  People?"
Dulles: We Are Helping to Maintain Law and Order All Around the World
by the  President,  and  whenever I  used them, I  used  them  not
to  describe the  internal  freedoms  of  the  people, but  whether
or  not the nation  itself  is free  from  foreign  domination. . . .
I  think  that  all  of  the  Middle  Eastern  countries  today  are
free.   None  of  them  are  Soviet  satellites  or  run  by  interna-
tional  communism. . . .
Senator  MORSE.  How many of  these  states that  we  seek  to
protect  under  this  resolution are  free  in  the  sense  that  you
have  just  used  the  term,  democratically  free,  in  that  they
have  parliamentary  governments, bills of rights,  and  are  free
from  a local  government that  cculd be classed as  totalitarian?
Secretary   DULLES.   I  do not  believe,  Senator, that there  are
many,  if  any  states in the  area  which would measure  quite up
to  what  your  and  my  ideals  are  in  the  respect,  (pps.  154-5)
In  Fact  We Might  Even  Help Keep Despots in Power
Senator  SYMINGTON.  But,  if  necessary,  you  would  support
a  police  force  in  a  country to keep  down  an  uprising that you
thought  was  wrong.  Is  that  correct?
Secretary   DULLES.   If  we felt  that  a  country was  unable by
its  own  resources  to  maintain  the  security  forces  necessary
for  internal  order  and  prevent  Communist subversion,  then
we  would  consider  assisting  them.
Senator  SYMINGTON. Would you do that  even though  it  was
fairly  clear  a  majority  of  the  people wanted  the  government
you  did  not  want?
Secretary   DULLES.   You  mean  that   most   of   the   people
wanted  Communism.
Senator   SYMINGTON.   Yes.
Secretary  DULLES.  Well, that  is  such  a  remote contingency
that  it  is  hardly  worth  answering,  I  think,  Senator.  There
are  no  people  in  that  part  of  the  world  who  want   Commu-
nism,  (pps.  158-9)
Does  Religion  Guarantee  Against  Communism?
Senator  SYMINGTON.  I  noticed  you mentioned the  religious
aspect  yesterday,  in  your  testimony  about  Communism.   It
has always  impressed me that  a great country like Italy, with
over  90  percent  of  the  people  Catholics,  nevertheless  has   as
perhaps  its  largest  party  the  Communist  party;  so I  do not
see how we  can  be sure that  they  do not  want  Communism if
it  will  improve their  lot  in  a  country,  say,  like  Syria.
Secretary  DULLES.   Most of  the  people in  Italy  who vote  the
Communist  ticket  do not  do so because  they  are  Communists
or  want  Italy  to  go Communist.  They do that  because that  is
a  vehicle for  registering  a  protest  against  conditions as  they
are.   It  is  not  really  a  desire  to  have  communism,  (p.  159)
Helping  the  Rulers  Against  the  People
Senator   ERVIN.   So that  would  put  us  having  Uncle  Sam
sticking  his  nose  in  all  of  the  nations  of  the  Middle  East  in
order  to  maintain  the  status  quo;  would  it  not?  And if  that
Our  Well  Informed   Ambassadors
Senator  Fulbright.   Did  the  State  Department  ask
your   advice   before   announcing   the   so-called   Elsen-
hower  doctrine?
Mr.   [George]   Wads worth    [U.   S.   Ambassador   to
Saudi  Arabia],   No,  Senator.
Senator  Eulbright.   Had  you  heard  about  it?
Mr.  Wadsworth.  I  heard  of  it  Brst  through the  Unit-
ed  Press   and  then  over  BBC.   [British   Broadcasting
Company],   (p.  659)
Senator  Fulbright.   Did  you  learn  about  the  Aswan
dam  offer  cancellation from  the  Department, or  did you
read  about  it  in  the  press?
Mr.  [Henry A.]  Byroade  [then  U.  S.  Ambassador  to
Egypt].  I  first  read  it  in  the  press,  sir.   (p.  717)
would  not  mess us  up  in  Arab  politics, what  would  it  do?
Secretary   DULLES.  I  think  that  to  maintain  a  government
which  is  strong enough not  to  be overthrown  by  subversion  is
not  to  become  involved  in  Arab  politics.
Senator  ERVIN.  Well,  it  certainly  is  taking  the  side  of that
government  against   the  side  of  the  people  of  that  country
which  do not  want  that  government;  is  it  not?
Secretary   DULLES.   I  think  to  maintain  security  forces,  to
maintain  law  and  order  in  the  country,  is  something  which
is  entirely  appropriate  for  us to  assist  in.  We are  doing that
all around the world. . . .
We  Might  Even  Aid  Nasser  to  Stay  in  Power
Senator   ERVIN.  You  are  not  proposing,  are  you,  to  go  in
there  and  use  some of  this  aid  to  strengthen  Nasser's  inter-
nal  forces,  his internal  security  forces,  are you? . . .
Secretary   DULLES.  We  have  no  present  plans  to  do  that;
no.. . .
Senator  ERVIN.  Well,  you  are  not  at  liberty  to  give  me  an
assurance  that  the  American taxpayers  will  not  be  support-
ing  the  Nasser  government within  a  few  months  if  we  pass
this  resolution  in  its  present form;  are  you?
Secretary   DULLES.   No,  sir;   I  cannot  give  you  any  assur-
ance  as  to  what  will be  done.  (pps. 345-6)
Nasser  As Sphinx
Senator  HUMPHREY. Did we tolerate  vicious attacks  against
our  aid  to  Egypt  in  the  Government-controlled and  censored
press,  without  effective  protest?  .  . .
Mr.   [Henry   A]     BYROADE   [then   U.   S.   Ambassador   to
Egypt].  I  protested  officially  and discussed it  with  him many
times.
Senator  HUMPHREY.  What was his  reaction?
Mr.  BYROADE.  I  never  could  quite  fathom  that.  [Deleted.]
(p. 745)
Our  Ambassador Explains Those Slaves Are Only Negroes and  Part of The  Family
Mr.   [Geo.]   Wadsworth   [U.   S.   Ambassador   to   Saudi
Arabia].   Now,  slavery  is  recognized  as  an  institution  by
Islam,  but it is not approved. . . . The institution  has exist-
ed,  it  is  recognized.  It  is  deplored—that  may  perhaps  be
too  strong  a  word—but  the  idea  was  that  it  would   grad-
ually  die out. ... If  a  child is born  to  a  slave  mother  from
a  freeman,  that  child  is  free.  If  a  child  is  born  to  a  slave
father,  that  child  is  born  a   slave.
Now,   where  are  they  born,  into  what  kind  of slavery?   It
is  domestic  slavery   only.   These  people  are  a  very  demo-
cratic  people. ... In  many  of the  great  families,  the  serv-
ants carry  the  name of  the  family  and  are  treated  as mem-
bers  of  the  family  and  take  pride  in  their  service.
Senator  Fulbright.   Tell  me  what  is  the  actual  difference
in  a  family  between one of  the  sons,  as  they  seem  to  have  a
great  many,  and  the  slave?   What  is  the  difference  in  the
way  he  is  treated?   Does  he  eat  differently,   does  he  have
different  quarters,  and  so  on?
Mr.  Wadsworth. Yes, he  has  different quarters.  He  works
to  earn  his keep. . . . These  fellows  aren't  exploited as, for
example,  many  were in  our  cotton fields only  a century  ago.
.. . Most of the slaves  came  from  Africa.  No Arab has  ever
been  a  slave.
Senator  Fulbright.   No.  They  are  all  Negroes,  are  they?
Mr.  Wadsworth.  Yes,  as  a  general  statement.   [Further
explanation  deleted  for  security.]   (pps.  670-1)
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  25,1957
The  Germans  Are  Obsequious in  Washington,  But  Getting  Ready  for  A  Change  in  Bonn
Arthur  Miller  and Dr. Otto  Nathan  Enter  Our  Own  Crucible
We  venture  to  predict  that  the  House   Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee  eventually  will   lose  its  contempt  actions
against  Dr.  Otto  Nathan  and  Arthur  Miller.   The  stated  pur-
pose  of  the  hearing  was  to  investigate  the  unauthorized  use
of  U.  S.  passports.   The  two  questions  Miller  declined  to  an-
swer  would  have  required  him  to  identify  other  persons  at  a
meeting  of  alleged   Communist  party  writers  in   1947.    It  is
going  to  be  difficult  to  convince  the  courts,  at  least  on  appeal,
that  these  questions  were  relevant  to  the  stated  purpose  of  the
hearing.   In  Dr.  Nathan's   case,  the  fact  that  in  1953  he  had
signed  the  "am  not  and  never  have  been"  affidavit   required
by  the   State  Department   for   a  passport   may  prove   an  ob-
stacle  to  conviction.    In  his  case,  too,   it  will   be  difficult   to
demonstrate  the  relevance  of  the  questions  asked.   Dr.   Na-
than  will  subpoena  Chairman Walter  in  an  effort  to  show  that
the  Committee  had  no  real  legislative  purpose   and  to  chal-
lenge  him  to  repeat  defamatory  statements  made  by  Walter
about  Dr.  Nathan  at  a  House  Judiciary subcommittee  hearing
last  May.   As Einstein's  close  friend  and  executor,  Dr.  Nathan
is  following  Einstein's  advice to  American  intellectuals,  which
was  to  defy  the  Congressional  Inquisition,  and  refuse  to  sub-
mit   to   interrogation   by  its   snoopers.    Fundamentally   these
hearings  are  a  form  of  psychological  warfare;  the  purpose  is
to  break  the  intellectuals  morally  by  making  them  crawl,  and
turning  them  into  informers.   In  resisting,  Dr.  Nathan   and
Mr.  Miller  deserve'applause  and  support.
In  Memory  of  Heyuiood  Broun
Come  Out  and  Demonstrate
The  American  Newspaper  Guild  recently  dedicated  a
library  here  in  Washington  to  the  memory  of  Heywood
Broun,  its  founder.    But  it  defames  his  memory  by  its
silence  on  an  issue   Broun  would  have  fought   —   the
newspapermen  facing  jail  for  refusing  on  First  Amend-
ment   grounds   to   submit   to   the   Senate   Internal   Se-
curity  Committee.   Indeed  the  New  York  local  and  na-
tional  offices  of  the  Guild  have  not  even  answered  the
letters  from   these  witch  hunt  victims  asking  its aid.
(If  Broun  were  alive  he'd  be  among  the  victims  and  the
Guild  wouldn't   have  the  nerve  to  defend   him.)
So  really  to  honor  Broun's  memory,  we  invite  news-
papermen  and  our  other  readers  to  a  meeting  in   the
Hotel  Woodstock,  127  W.  43rd St., New  York  City,  next
Friday  night,  March   1,  at  8  p.  m.  to  demonstrate  soli-
darity   with  one  of  these  victims,  William  Price, for-
merly  of  the  New  York  Daily  News,  who  goes  on  trial
for  contempt  March  11.   Murray  Kempton  of  the   New
York   Post,   who  carries   on   the   Broun   tradition,   has
agreed  to  speak.   So  will  Price  and  I.   Come  out  and
make  this  a  rousing  demonstration  of  the  kind  we  used
to   have   in   the   old   days   before   Americans   acquired
shadows,  and  began  to  walk  in  fear  of  them.—IFS.
In  preparation  for  this  year's  West  German   election   the
Social  Democratic  leader,  Herr  Ollenhauer,  has  visited  Wash-
ington  to  clear  himself  with  the  State  Department.  Mr.  Dulles
was  revealing   when  he  said  at  press  conference   last   week,
"Mr.  Ollenhauer  was gracious  enough  to  seek  my views  .  .  .
rather  than  try  to  impress  me  with  his." Herr   Ollenhauer
must  have  listened  dutifully.   He  held  a  press  conference  later
the  same  day  and  said  in  effect  that  if  the  Social   Democrats
came  to  power  they  would  not  renegotiate  unification  without
U.  S.  permission.   The  Germans  will  be  less  obsequious   once
they  get  an  Army.  Adenauer's  Minister  of  Defense  in  a  right
wing  Bonn  weekly  was  explaining  at  the  same  time  the   "po-
litical  meaning"  of  German  rearmament  and  hinting  at  a  re-
turn  to  a  Bismarckian  "'Machtpolitik"    (dealing   from  armed
strength).   Herr  Strauss  indicates  that  if  Moscow's  terms  are
satisfactory    (return   of   the   Oder-Neisse   lands?)    Germany
might  accept  the  status  of  an  armed  neutral.   When  U.  S.  re-
porters  questioned  Strauss  about  the  article,  he  said  it  was just
"theoretical."    Presumably  it  will  not  become  practical  until
after  the  U.  S. has  picked  up  the  tab  for  German   rearmament.
For  an  unusually  good  piece  of  reporting,   scantily  covered
by  the  press,  we  recommend  the  report  on  Russia  and  Eastern
Europe  filed  by  Chairman   Jamie'' L.  Whitten  (D.  Miss.)  of
the  House  Appropriations  subcommittee  for  the  Agriculture
Department.   Whitten  came  back  from  an  extensive  trip  last
Fall  impressed  with  the  friendliness  of  the  Russian  people,
the  backwardness  of  the  Soviet   Union   and  the    exaggerated
conceptions   of   its  strength   built   up   by  our   own   military.
Whitten  favors  relaxed  trade  barriers  arid  cultural    exchange.
Help    Us  Reach  More  Readers  With   This  Issue  By  Distributing  Extra  Copies  To  Your   Friends
I. P.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street   ................................
City  ...................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
......Zone..........State................_....
mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
2/25/B7
City  ..........................................Zone..........State................_.....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays   but  pub-
lished   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August  and  December  at  301  E.  Capitol  St.,   Washington  3,  D.  C.
An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  *8  In  Canada;  $10  elmewhere.    Air  Hall  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED