I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957oct07.pdf

============================================================

How  the  Advent  of  the  Missile  Makes  Limited  War  Even  More Hazardous,  See  Page  5
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V.  NO.  37
OCTOBER  7,  1957
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Mr.  Dulles  Proposes  Nuclear  Global  Recklessness   Instead
Worse   Than   Massive   Retaliation
It  is astonishing  how  little  attention  has  been  paid  at  home
to  the  implications  of  Secretary  Dulles's   opening   address  to
the  United  Nations  and  the  article  in  the  Autumn  issue  of
Foreign   Affairs     amplifying   the   same  ideas.    One   of   them,
which  has  been  hailed  as  marking  the  end  of  the   "massive
retaliation"  policy,  really  supplements  the  threat  of  massive
retaliation  with  something  far  worse—a  policy  of  global  nu-
clear   recklessness.   The   other   theme  initiates  a  new   propa-
ganda  line  in  the  campaign  to  prevent  the  cessation  of  nuclear
testing.   This  line—by  an  extraordinary  twist—seeks  to  pic-
ture  the  opposition  to  testing  as  opposition   to humanitarian-
ism  and  the  progress  of  mankind.   I  want  to  spell  them  out
here  for  the  full  consideration  they  deserve.
I
I  begin  with  a  remark  made  by  Secretary Dulles  to  the  UN
General  Assembly.  "We  want  to  end  the  risk,"  he  said,  "that
nuclear  weapons  will  be  spread  promiscuously  throughout  the
world,  giving  irresponsible  persons  a  power  for  evil  that  is
appalling   even   to   contemplate."     Despite   these   words,   the
promiscuous  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  throughout  the  world
is  exactly  the  policy  on  which  Mr.  Dulles  is  embarking,   the
very   course  which  he   says   quite   correctly   would   give   "ir-
responsible  persons  a  power  for  evil  that  is  appalling  even  to
contemplate."
The  Double-Talk From  London
This  danger  obviously  had  been  discussed   at  London,   for
there  are  sections  in  the  final  Western  disarmament  proposals
which  deal  with  it.  The  reader  may examine  the  full  text  for
himself  in  the  New   York   Times  for  last  August  30.   Super-
ficially   read,  these  proposals   seem  concerned   to  prevent   this
peril.   Actually  they  pave  the  way for  it  and  for  Mr.  Dulles's
new  policy.   A  close  examination  of  the  relevant  portions  of
the  text  are  doubly  revealing.   They  display  not  only  the  out-
lines  of  the  new  policy  but  that  fruity  legalistic  kind  of  phras-
ing  which  seeks  to  hide  the  full  purport  from  the  unwary.
Section  IV  deals  with  the  control   of  fissionable  material.
Paragraph  C  says  that  after  all  production  of  fissionable  ma-
terial  for  weapons   purposes  has  ceased,   "Each   party  under-
takes  not  to  transfer  out  of  its  control  any  nuclear  weapons,
or  to  accept  transfer  to  it  of  such  weapons.  .  .  ."
So far,  so  good.   Once  production  for  weapons  has  ceased,
the  spread   of  existing  weapons   to  new  countries  unable   to
produce  them  would  thus  be  stopped.   Unfortunately  the  sen-
tence  we  have  just  quoted  doe's  not  end  there.   It  goes  on  to
say,  "...  except  where,  under  arrangements  between  trans-
feror   and   transferee,  their  use  will   be  in   conformity   with
Paragraph  III."                                                                    \
10*
The  Ifs  and  Buts
Paragraph   III,   like  Paragraph   IV,  also  starts  out  in  one
direction  and  ends  up  in  another.   Paragraph  III  starts  out  by
saying,  "Each  party  assumes  an  obligation   not  to  use  nuclear
weapons.  .  .  ."   But  it  ends  by  saying,  ".  .  .  if  an  armed
attack  has  not  placed  the  party  in  a  situation  of  individual  or
collective   self-defense."    This   means,   of   course,   that   any
country  is  privileged  to  use  atomic  weapons  in  what  it  con-
siders  to  be its  own  defense  or  the  defense  of  an  allied  nation.
But  now  to  go  back.   If  Paragraph   III  is  read  with  Para-
graph  IV,  they  end  by  providing  that  even  after  all  produc-
tion  of  fissionable  materials  for  weapons  purposes  has  ended,
any   power   possessing  nuclear  weapons   is  free   to   distribute
atomic  arms  from  its  stockpiles  to  its  allies.                             ;
Since  most  nations  are  now  allied  with  either  the  U.  S.  or
the  U.  S.  S.  R.,  nuclear  arms  could   be  distributed   to  all  of
them  even  if  the  Western  proposals   for   disarmament   were
accepted  and  fully  implemented.   Mr.  Dulles,  in  his  Foreign
Affairs    article,  reveals that  this  is  exactly  what  he  intends  the
U.  S. to  do.
II
In  the  Foreign  Affairs    article,  published  a  few  days  before
his  speech  to  the  General  Assembly,  Mr.  Dulles  said  that  in
the  future  it  may  "be   feasible  to  place   less   reliance   upon
deterrence  of  vast  retaliatory  power."   This  is what  the  head'
lines  interpreted  as  the  abandonment   of  the  massive  retalia-
tion  policy,  though  the  sharp  eyed  reader  will  notice  that  he
speaks  only of  "less  reliance  upon   it."
Mr.  Dulles  says  that  as  an  alternative,   "It  may  be  possible
to   defend   countries   by  nuclear   weapons   so  mobile,   or   so
placed,  as  to  make  military  invasion  with  conventional  weap-
ons a hazardous attempt. For example,"  he  goes on,  "terrain  is
often  such  that  invasion  routes  can  be  decisively  dominated  by
nuclear  artillery."   Mr.  Dulles  goes  on  to  paint  the  new  pol-
icy.   "Thus,"  he  says,  "in  contrast  to  the  1950  decade,  it may
be  that  by  the  I960  decade  the  nations  which  are  around  the
Sino-Soviet  perimeter  can  possess  an  effective  defense  against
full-scale   conventional   attack   and   confront   any   aggressor
with  the  choice  between  failing  or  himself  initiating  nuclear
war  against  the  defending  country."
A  Border Bristling With Nuclear  Arms
But  nuclear  arms  can  be  used  for  attack  as  well  as  defense.
If   the   Sino-Soviet  perimeter   is  to   be   armed   with   nuclear
weapons,  the  countries  on  the  other  side  must  also  arm  them-
selves  the  same  way,  since  they  fear  attack  just  as  we  do.   A
round  the  world  border  would  bristle  with  nuclear  arms.
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  7,1957
(Continued   jrom  Page   Three)
Mr.  Dulles   speaks  of  the  "Sino-Soviet  perimeter,"  of   the
Chinese  as well  as  the  Russian  borders.   Consider  some  of  the
countries   along  that   border.    The   first   is  South   Korea.   If
South  Korea  is  to  be  armed  by  us  with  nuclear  weapons,   the
Russians  are  going  to  have  to  arm  the  North   Koreans   the
same  way.   The  next  "country"  on  the  perimeter  is  Formosa.
If  Chiang  Kai-shek  is to  have nuclear  arms,  Communist  China
will  have  to  have  nuclear  arms.   Do  we want  to  trust  Syngman
Rhee  and  Chiang  Kai-shek  with  nuclear  weapons?   Do  they
not  fit  Mr.  Dulles's  definition  of  "irresponsible   persons"   who
would  be  given  by  atomic  arms  "a  power  for  evil  that  is  ap-
palling  even  to  contemplate" ?
We Don't Even Trust Him With  Gasoline
The  U.  S.  has  rationed  the  supply  of  gasoline  to  Syngman
Rhee  because  it  does  not  trust  him,   because  our  military  au-
thorities  fear  that  if  he  had  enough  in  the  way  of  supplies  to
risk  it,  he  might   start  up  the  Korean   war  again.   Are  we  to
trust  with  nuclear  weapons  a  man  we  do  not  even  trust  with
gasoline?  And  are we  to  allow  Chiang  Kai-shek  nuclear  weap-
ons?   Those  U.  S.  supplied  planes  with  which  he  drops   leaf-
lets  on  the  Continent  could  as  easily  drop  atomic  bombs  one
night  and  unleash  a  world  conflict.    Is  this  new  policy  not  a
global  recklessness  worse  than  massive  retaliation?   Why  has
there  been  no  outcry  against  it?   Why   is  it  accepted  without
debate ?
Was  the  U. S.  Subject  to  Nuclear  Blackmail  at  London?
in
The   necessity   for   debate   and   clarification  is  indicated   in
an  almost  unnoticed  memorandum  by  former  Atomic  Energy
Commissioner  Thomas   E.  Murray   which   Senator  Wiley  of
Wisconsin  put  into  the  appendix  of  the  Congressional  Record
last  August  6.   The  text  may  be  found  at  pages  A6362;  it
has  not  been  published  elsewhere.  Mr.  Murray  dealt  with  the
very  subject  we  have  been  discussing,  the  transfer  of   nuclear
weapons.   His  warning  deserves  careful  consideration  not  only
because  as  an  Atomic  Energy  Commissioner  he  had  access  to
much  secret  information  but  also  because  he  is  himself  an  ad-
vocate  of  limited  nuclear  war  and   of  transferring  small  nu-
clear  weapons  to  alh'ed   nations.
Mr.  Murray  warned  first  of  all  that  in  talking  of   nuclear
weapons   for  our  allies  a  distinction  ought  to  be  drawn  be-
tween  small  atomic  arms  of  a  one  or  two  kiloton  capacity  and
the  larger  weapons.   Mr.  Murray  wrote  that  he  was  not  sure
"any  valid military purpose"  would  be  served  by making  these
larger  weapons  available.   He  warned  that  by  such  transfers
"our   own   control   over   the   appalling   possibility   of   all-out
nuclear  war  would  be  dangerously  diminished."
Scraps of  Paper  in A Crisis
"It  is true,"  Mr.  Murray wrote,  "that  no  transfer  of  weap-
ons  would  be  made  except  under  prior  agreement  with  our
allies  as  to  the  circumstances  in  which   these  weapons   could
be  used.   However,"  he  went  on,  "the  stability  of  such  agree-
ments  under  the  stress  of  actual  hostilities  is  open  to  serious
question.    If   a  nation  were  to  be  faced   with   the  imminent
possibility  of   major   aggression,   it  would  hardly  hestitate   to
use  whatever  weapons  it  had   in  its  stockpile.   .  .  .no  matter
what  its  agreements with  the  United  States  may  have  been."
Look  back  again  at  that  phrase  about   "the  imminent  pos-
sibility   of   major   aggression."    We   see  that   the   concept  of
''defense"   is  not  limited  to  actual  attack  but  also  to  what  a
nation   may  believe  is  "the   imminent  possibility"  of  attack.
What  if  a  nation  were  mistaken?   What   if  it  unleashed  the
big  weapons  in  error?   The  dangers  are  obvious,  among  them
the  danger  that  by giving out  such  weapons  we  might,  as  Mr.
Murray  warned,  lose  "control  over  their  use,  and  in  possible
consequence  .  .  .  control  over  our  own  destinies."
I low  much  more  does  this  reasoning  apply  when  we   are
dealing  not  with   responsible  powers   like  Britain   or  France
but  with  a  Syngman  Rhee  or  a  Chiang  Kai-shek ?
IV
Mr.  Murray  indicated his  belief  that  we  were  being  forced
into  just  such  dangerous  transfers  by  our  Western   allies  in
the  London  talks.   He  said  that  even  for  the  British,  now  the
third  nuclear  power  in  the  world,  nuclear  testing  costs  were
heavy  and  "many  [more]  Christmas  Island  tests  would  be  re-
quired  before  the  United   Kingdom   could   come  into   posses-
sion  of  weapons  designs  comparable  to  our  own.   Even  then,"
Mr.  Murray  added,  "once  designs  were  frozen,  the  cost  of  a
large-scale  production  program   [for  thermonuclear   weapons]
would  be  prohibitive  for  the  United   Kingdom."
Mr.  Murray  indicated  that  he  thought  the  U.  S.  was  being
subjected  to  a  squeeze  play  in  the  bargaining  negotiations  with
its   own   allies.    "In   these   circumstances,"   he   went   on,   "it
seems  evident  to  me  that  the  present  disarmament  negotiations
perhaps  are  being  used  as  a  sort  of  instrument  by  which  our
allies  win  from  the  United  States  an  agreement  to  transfer  nu-
clear  weapons  to  them."
"The  Mark  of A Great Nation"
Mr.  Murray went  on  to  suggest,   "As  a  condition  of  getting
England,  France  and  (possibly)   other  countries  to  forego  the
testing  and  production  of  nuclear  weapons,  the  United   States
is  being  called   upon   to  make  these  weapons  available.   Our
allies  say,  in  effect,  that  either  they  themselves  must  go  ahead
in   the   field   of   nuclear   weapons   or   else   the   United   States
must  make  it  worth  their  while  to  stay  out  of  the  field."
The  motive,  as  Mr.  Murray  saw  it,  was  not  merely  one  of
defense.    "They  want  the  prestige,"   he  wrote,   "that  attaches
to   the  capacity  to  make  nuclear  war;   this  is  presently   the
mark  of  a  great  nation.   Therefore,   they  present   the  alterna-
tives:  either  they  will  themselves  pursue  this  capacity,  or  else
the  United  States  must  endow  them  with  it."
Mr.  Murray  is  now  consultant  to  the  Joint  Congressional
Committee  on  Atomic Energy.  His  experience and  knowledge
give  this  warning  great  weight.   The  final  disarmament  pro-
posals,  as  we  have  seen,  provide  for   the  transfer   of  nuclear
weapons  to  allied  powers  from   stockpile  even   after   all  pro-
duction  has  ceased.
But  there  has  been  an  important  change  of   policy   in  the
meantime.   When   Mr.  Murray  wrote  that  memorandum,  the
discussions  among  the  Western  powers  in  London  were  in  the
context   of   negotiations  among   themselves  for   those  condi-
tions  on  which  they  could  agree  to  an  end  of  testing  and  pro-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 7, 1957
duction.   Mr.   Dulles's   new  outline  of   policy,   however,  en-
visions  continued  testing,  and  continued  production  in  order
to  have  more  and  better  nuclear  arms  to  distribute  to  all  the
countries  around  the  Sino-Soviet  perimeter.
The   New   Atomic   Delusions   Being   Fathered   by   Mr.   Dulles
Now   let  us  turn  to  the  new  line  of  argument  with  which
Mr.  Dulles  seeks  to  defend  the  idea  of  further   testing,  fur-
ther  development  and  further  production  of  nuclear  weapons.
In  the  Foreign  Affairs    article he  says,  "the  United  States  has
not  been  content  to  rely  upon  a  peace  which  could  be  pre-
served   only   by  a  capacity  to   destroy  vast   segments   of   the
human  race.   Such  a  concept  is  acceptable  only  as  a  last  al-
ternative."
"In  recent  years,"  Mr.  Dulles  goes  on,  "there  has  been  no
alternative.   But  the  resourcefulness  of   those  who  serve  our
nation  in  the  field  of  science  and  weapon  engineering   now
shows   that   it   is  possible  to   alter   the   character   of  nuclear
weapons.   It  seems  now  that  their  use  need  not  involve  vast
destruction  and  widespread  harm  to  humanity.   Recent  tests
point   to   the   possibility  of   possessing   nuclear  weapons   the
destructiveness   and   radiation  effects   of   which   can   be   con-
fined substantially  to  predetermined  targets."   (Italics  added).
"Discriminating" and "Refined"  Atomic  Weapons
"We   seek,  by  experiments  now  carefully  controlled,"   he
told  the United  Nations,  "to  find  how  to  eliminate the  hazard-
ous  radioactive  material   now   incident   to   the   explosion   of
thermonuclear   weapons.    Also,"  he  continued,   "we   seek   to
make  nuclear  weapons  into  discriminating  weapons,   suitable
for   defense  against   aftacking  troops,  submarines  and   bomb-
ers,  and  for  interception  of  intercontinental  missiles."
But  the  Soviet  Union,  Mr.  Dulles  went  on,  "seems  not  to
want  the  character  of  nuclear  weapons  thus  to  be  refined  and
changed.   It  seems  to  like  it  that  nuclear  weapons  can  be  stig-
matized  as  'horror'  weapons'."  In  Foreign  Affairs,    developing
the  same  theme,  he  wrote,  "It  is  precisely  this  evolution   that
Soviet  diplomacy  and   propaganda   strive  most   vigorously   to
prevent.    They  oppose   all  such  experimental   testing   of   nu-
clear  devices  as  is  necessary  to  find  ways  to  reduce   fall-out
and  to  reduce  size.  They  seem  to  prefer  that  nuclear  weapons
be  only  the  'horror'  type  of  weapons.   They  apparently  cal-
culate  that  humanitarian instincts will  prevent  us  from  using
such   weapons."
Enemies  of  Progress
In  the  United  Nations   speech,   Mr.  Dulles  amplified  this
last  note.   "Does   it,"   i.e.,   the  Soviet   Union,   he  asked   the
General   Assembly  unctuously  "perhaps   calculate  that,   under
these  conditions,  governments  subject  to  moral  and   religious
restraints,  thereby gain  a  special  freedom  of  action  and  initia-
tive  as  regards  such  weapons?"
This  seeks  to  create  the  impression  that  those  who   oppose
further  testing  are  not  only  tools  of  Soviet  propaganda,   but
are  wickedly  opposing   the   progress   of  mankind,  perversely
trying  to  prevent   the   development   of   "refined"   and   "dis-
.   criminating"  atomic  weapons.   The  opponents   of  testing  are
accused  of  deliberately seeking  to  keep  atomic  weapons  in  the
"horror"  class  so  that  religious  and  moral  persons   like  Mr.
Dulles  will  be  unwilling to  use  them!
VI
Finally  Mr.  Dulles  holds  out  the  prospect  that,  in  the  fu-
ture,  nuclear  testing  can  and  will  be  controlled  and  held  in
safe  limits  by  unilateral  action  of  the  U.  S.  and  the   United
Kingdom.    This  is  the  most  dangerous  fallacy  of  all.
The  Secretary  told  the  United  Nations  that  last  March  the
U.  S.  and  the  United  Kingdom  declared  "their  intention"   to
conduct  nuclear  tests  "only  in  such  a  manner  as  would   keep
(Continued   on  Page   Six)
How  the  Advent of  the  Missile Makes The Idea of  Limited  War Even  More  Hazardous
"All  the  analyses  that  were  made  of  the  strategic  impli-
cations   stemming   from  the  combination   of   nuclear   bombs
with  long-range   bombers  are  still  valid  as  applied  to  war-
fare  with  guided  missiles.   These  analyses  stress  the  fact
that  if  both  the  United  States  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  possess
the  means  of  delivering  hydrogen  bombs  on  each  other  the
result  will  be  a  stalemate,   a  balance  of  power  based  upon
fear   of   the  awful  consequences   of  a   total   thermonuclear
war.   If  the  stalemate  were  actually  broken  by  such  a  war,
then  the  methods  of  warfare,  whether  manned  bombers  or
guided  missiles  are  used,  could  not  bear  a  relationship   to
any  tenable  political  objective;  the  result  would  be  mutual
suicide.
"It  is  at  this  point  that  the  idea  of  graduated  deterrence
is   usually   discussed   in  an   effort   to  concoct   some   way   of
limiting  what  might  otherwise  be  a  global   war.   This  idea
is  concerned  with  the  graduated  use  of  force  and  its  limi-
tation  to  military targets  such  as  battlefields,  airfields,  and
warmak'mg  production  plants.   This   strategic   idea  is   put
forward  not  as  a  substitute  for  mass  retaliation,  but  rather
as  a  complementary plan  inasmuch  as  it  is  also  part  of  the
deterrent  idea  but  held  to  be  more  closely  related  to  tenable
political   objectives.    It   is   often   advocated   by   those   who
think  military  policy   should   be  based  upon  both   the   doc-
trine  and  the  capability   to  use  force  in  a  graduated   man-
ner,  and  thus  cut  down  the  destruction   of   warfare.
"When  this   idea   is   examined   in  the  light   of   the   capa-
bilities  and  limitations  of  ICBM's  and  IRBM's,  it  becomes
apparent  at  once  that  the  circular-error  probability   of  the
long-range  ballistic  missiles  is  such  that  no  guaranty  could
be  given  that  they  would  hit  only  specific  military  targets
rather  than  nearby cities.   Once  ICBM's  and  IRBM's  become
operational   and  plentiful,   their   capabilities    for   area   de-
struction   and  their   limitations  in   accuracy   would   create
conditions   within  which   the   idea  of   graduated   deterrence
could  not  thrive.  Graduated  deterrence,  aside  from  depend-
ing   upon  nations  honoring  a  new  rule  of   war,  would  also
have   to  depend   upon  manned  bombers   striking   only  mili-
tary  targets.   There  is  nothing in  the  history  of  warfare  to
date  that  gives  hope  to  the  idea  of  graduated  deterrence  as
a    realistic   method   of   controlling   a   war   after   it    has
started."
Guided  Missiles  in  Foreign  Countries,  A  Report  Prepared    by   the   Legislative    Reference   Service,   Library     of   Con-
gress,  February   1957,  at  Pages  ms-1501, Part  2,  House  Appropriations  Committee  Hearings  on the  Defense   Dept.
Budget,   the  most  sober  and   careful   study   of  its  kind   I  have  been able  to   find.—IFS.
1   4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 7, 1957
(Continued  from   Page   Five)
world  radiation  from  rising  to  more  than  a  small  fraction  of
what  might  be  hazardous."
"Indeed,"   Mr.   Dulles   told   the   General    Assembly,   "be-
cause  each  year  a  percentage   of  radioactivity  dies  away,  we
have  reason  to  hope  that  in  the  future  any  needed  testing  can
be  accomplished   without   any  material  raising  whatsoever  of
the  levels  of  radioactivity  in  the  world."
Rarely  has  so  much  pseudo-science  been  concentrated  in  so
few  sentences.   The  first  thing  which  needs  to  be  said  of  this
picture  is  that  control  of  testing  is  only  possible  on  a  world-
wide  basis;  as  more   and   more   countries   begin   to  test,   the
problem  will  become  too  big  not  only  for  the  U.  S.  and  the
UK  but  for  them  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  put  together.
The  second  is  that  when  Mr.  Dulles  talks  of  matching   the
new  radioactivity  from   tests  to  the   amount  which  annually
"dies   away,"   he   is  talking   of   the   so-called     "equilibrium"
point.    Theoretically,   as  the   recent   fallout   hearings  here   in
Washington    showed,    if   the   radioactivity   created    by   tests
were  held  at  a  constant  rate,   it  would   at  some  future  time
about  equal  the  amount  of  radioactivity  dissipated.
"Equilibrium" Does Not  Mean Safety
But  it  would   take  about  a  century  before  that  point  was
reached  and  even  if  testing  was  held  at  a  rate  no  greater  than
that  of  the  last  five  years,  the  achievement  of  the  equilibrium
would   not  be  the  same  as  the  achievement   of   safety.     The
amount  of  radioactive  fallout  at  equilibrium   would  be—so  it
was  estimated  at  the   hearings—from   eight   to   33  times  as
great   as  the   amount   today,   or   enough   to   constitute  a   far
greater  hazard.
On  the  other  hand,  if  Mr.   Dulles   is  talking  of   reaching
equilibrium   in   the  near   future,   then   this  would   require  a
very  sharp  reduction  in   testing.
What the  Joint  Committee Reported
This  very  question  was  explored   in  the  hearings  on   fall-
out  held  in  May  and  June  by  the  Holifield  subcommittee  of
the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.   In  its
recent   summary-analysis   of   those   hearings,   the   Joint   Com-
mittee  discussed  the  so-called   "equilibrium  level"  for. a  con-
stant  test  rate.
Where   Mr.   Dulles   speaks  with   such   easy  assurance,   the
Committee  found  a  host  of  uncertainties   in  trying  to  deter-
mine  "a  reasonable  future  permissible  annual  release   of  fis-
sion  products  from  indefinitely  continued  testing."   These  are
the  main  points  of  uncertainty spelled  out:
"1.  What  the  future  testing  pattern  will  be.   The  assump-
tion  has  often  been  made  of  a  constant average  annual rate  of
testing.   But  the  testing  up  to  now  has  been  sporadic.    The
concept  of  'present  rate  of  testing'  is  in  any  exact  sense  mean-
ingless.   Not  only  the  rate,  but  the  kind  and  location  of  test-
ing  are  important  and   difficult   to   predict."
(Thus,  it  may  be  explained,  the  amount  of  dangerous   fall-
out  will  vary  in  relation  to  the  height  at  which  the   weapon
is  exploded,  the  amount  of  fissionable  material  in  the   outer
shell  of  the  hydrogen  weapon,  the  interval  between  tests  and
the  area  in  which  the  tests  are  held,  whether  on  the uninhabi-
ted  seas  or  in  Nevada  or  Siberia.)
Is  Fallout  Uniform?
"2.  What  the   degree   of   nonuniformity  of   fallout,   in   the
atmosphere  really  is."    (Up   to  now  most   official  discussion
has  assumed  a  uniformity  most  scientists  do  not  believe  oc-
curs;  if  the  fallout  is  not  uniform,  then  averages   are  mean-
ingless  since  certain  areas  may  get  an  amount  of  fallout  al-
ready  sufficient   to  be  dangerous).
"3.  What  the  storage  times  in  different  parts  of  the  atmo-
sphere  -and   in   different   geographical    regions   of   the   globe
are."    (The   Atomic  Energy  Commission's  assumption  of  an
average  shortage  time  of  about  ten  years  now  appears  to  be
too  optimistic;  if  the  stuff  comes  down  from  the   stratosphere
much  faster  than  this,  the  danger  of  reaching  a  risky  amount
of  fallout  is  that  much   greater).
"4.  How  the  fallout  will  behave  under  the  different   geo-
logical  and  biological  conditions  that  exist  around  the  world.
"5.  How  fallout  will  distribute  itself  in  a  human  popula-
tion.   6.  Whether   a  threshold  for  radiation  damage  exists  or
not.   7.  How  to  arrive  at  an  acceptable  maximum permissible
concentration  of  radioactive  isotopes  in  man."
Guessing  In The  Dark
Where  Mr.   Dulles   speaks  so  confidently   of  holding   test-
ing  to  safe  limits,  the  Joint  Committee  concludes  after  hear-
ing   days   of   testimony   by   America's   foremost   scientists   in
the  nuclear  field,  that  "the   question  of  how  much  and  what
kind  of  testing  is  'acceptable'  is  very  difficult  to  answer  .  .  .
unless  one  is  willing   to  make  judgments   in  the  absence  of
. information."
The  impression  created  by  Mr.  Dulles,  that  unilateral  con-
trol  is  possible,  that  the  limits  of  safety  are  known  and  can
be  respected,  and  that  a  healthy  "equilibrium"  can  be  attained
in  the  near  future,  are all  dangerously  misleading.  Mr.  Dulles
has  never  maneuvered  onto  a  more  awful  brink  than   in  his
new  approach  to  the  problems  of  nuclear  weapons  and  nuclear
testing.
This  Is  A  Double  Issue  to  Make   Up   For  Unavoidable  Delay  in  Publication  Last   Week
STATEMENT  UKOriREI)  HY  THE   ACT  OK  AIT.fJST  24.  1912.  AS  A.MENDKD   BY  THE  ACTS   OF   MARCH   :!,   1(133.  AND   JULY   2.   104(1
(Title   «fl.   United   States'  Code.   Section   233)   SHOWING  THE   OWNERSHIP.   MANAGEMENT,   AND   CIKCTLATION   OF   I.   F.   Stone's   Weokly
pnhlished   4K  times  a  year  at  Washington   I)   C.  for   1037.    1.  The  names  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing  editor,  and   business
mi  natter   are-   Publisher    I.   K.   Stone.   !i(n8  Nebraska   Avenue.  Washington,'  I>.  C.   Editor,  same.    Managing  editor,   same.    Wuslness  manager.
Ks  her   M.  Stone.   iWilK  Nebraska  Avenue.  Washington.  I>.  C.    2.  The  owner  is:  (If  owned  by  a  eoriioration.  its  name  and  address  niUHt  be  stated
an  1 also  immediately  thereunder  the  names  and  addresses   of   stockholders  owning   or  holding  1  percent  or  .more  of  total  amount   of  stock.    If
no    owned  by  a  corporation,  the  names  and   addresses  of  the  individual  owners  must  be  given.    If  owned  by  a  partnership  or  other  unineor-
IMI  ated   firm   Its  name  and  address   as  well  as  that  of  oae.h  individual  member,  must  be  given.)     I.  F.  Stone,  5818  Nebraska  Avenue.  Washington.
P   C.   Esther  M.  Stouo,  5«18  Nebraska  Avenue,  Washington,  IX  C.    Teromy   M.  Stone.   Stanford   fniv.:   Christopher   I).   Stone,   Harvard;   Celia
M.   Gilbert,   Cambridge,   Mass.    3.  The   known   bondholders,   mortgagees,  and   other  security  holders  owning  or  holding  1  percent  or   more  ol
total  amount  of  bonds,  mortgages,  or  other  securities  are:  none.    4.  Paragraph  2  and    H  include,  in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  security  hold-
er  appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustee  or  in  any  other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation  for  whom  such
trustee  is  acting;  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the  affiant's   full  knowledge  and   belief  as  to  the  circumstances  and  conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the  hooks  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock  and  securities  in  a
eapaeitv  other  than  that   on  n  hona  tide  owner,    a.  The  average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of  this  publication  sold  or  distributed,  through
the  mails  or  otherwise,  to  paid  subscribers  during  the  12 months  preceding  the  date  shown  above  was:  (This  information   is  required   from
daily,   weekly,   semiweekly.  and   triweekly   newspapers   only.)    !).94<i.    Signed.  I.   F.   Stone.    Sworn   to  and   subscribed   before   me  this  30th   day
of. September  l!)r>7.    Alvin  I'.ernstein.    (My  commission  expires  7-31-19(50.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Double  Issue
Substituting  Global  Nuclear  Recklessness  for  Massive  Retaliation,  See  Page  3
/. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO. 38  '
OCTOBER  7,   1957
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  United   States  As  Three  Nations,  Not   One
The  problem   which  confronts  our  country  in  the   integra-
tion   crisis   may   be   illuminated   if   we   regard   the    United
States  for  a  moment  not  as  one  nation  but  as  three,  the  South
as  a  land  apart,  the  Negro  as  a  people  apart.   The   differences
among   the   three  may  be  seen   in  their  sharply  different   re-
sponses  to  the  President s  action  in  calling  out  the  troops  in
Little   Rock.   The   white  South   was  overwhelmingly  hostile;
the  white_ North—which  constitutes a  majority  of  the   whole
people—was   overwhelmingly  approving.    The   white   South
was  shocked   at   military   "occupation";    the  white  North  re-
lieved   that  we  were  not   to  give  in  before  mob   rule.    The
Negro s  reaction   was  of   a   different   kind.    The   Negro   felt
like  Cinderella.   When   a  station  wagon   guarded   by  Army
jeeps  took   little  Negro  children  to  and   from   school   instead
of  leaving  them  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  hate  alone,  the  Negro
felt  that  for  the  first  time  in  American  history  he  was  being
treated  like  a  first  class  citizen,  that  for  a  wonderful  moment
he  was  no  longer  on  the  outside,  wistfully  looking  in.
"Satchmo" Said  It
"Satchmo"  Armstrong's anguished  cry, "Sometimes  it  seems
like  the  Negro  doesn't  have  a  country,"  must  have  echoed   in
every  Negro's  heart  during  the  days  in  which  it  seemed  as  if
Faubus  and  the  mob  would  get  away with  it.   Amid  the hand-
wringing  over  Little  Rock  by  the   so-called  Southern   mode-
rates,  and  the  (lily white)  conferences  in  the  White  House  to
negotiate  withdrawal  of.troops,  and  to  let  Faubus  save   face,
it  is  forgotten  that  for  the  Negro  the  law  never  looked   more
truly   majestic   than  it   does  today   in  Little  Rock   where   for
once  the  bullies  of  the  South  have  been   put  on  notice  that
they  cannot  take  out  their  venom  on  the  Negro  and  his  chil-
4ren.
Quite   different   is  the  scene  through   white  Southern   eyes.
The  white  South  feels  like  an  oppressed  minority  because  the
white  North  has  interfered  to  prevent  it  from  oppressing  its
Negro  minority.  If  one  recalls  the  bitter  feelings  of  the  Irish
to  this  day  about  Cromwell,   it  is  less  difficult   to  understand
that  for  the  white  South  the  defeat  of  its  armies  only  a  cen-
tury  ago  and  its  occupation  by Northern  troops  are  memories
which  the  calling  out  of  the  Army  in  Little  Rock  makes  vivid
again.   The  white  South  feels  a  victim  of  injustice,  misunder-
standing  and  brute  force.   That  these  are  exactly  what  it visits
on  the  helpless  Negro  who  steps  out  of  line  merely  illustrates
the  capacity  of  human  beings  to  go  on  doing  to  others  what
they  violently  object  to  when  done  to   themselves.
When  three  groups  in  one  country  see  the  same   problem
in  such  sharply  different  ways,  it  is  difficult  to  find  a   common
language.   What  the  white  South  so  proudly  calls  its  way  of
life   looks   to   the   white   Northern   outsider   as  a   dark   and
tangled   complex   created   by  slavery,  reconstruction   and   sex.
The  mind  of  the  white  South  seems  sick  with  a  strange  hatred
for   the  Negro  people,  though  from  this  same  hated   people
have  come  beloved  playmates,  nursemaids and  mistresses.  The
outcry  against  "mixing"   is  revealing  in  the  century  of   Freud.
"Mixing"  is what  Southern  white  males  have  been  doing  with
pleasure  for  generations.   The  recurrent  outbursts  of  savagery
in  which Negroes  are  emasculated  is  a  symbol  no  special  train-
ing   is  required   to  decipher.    A  psychoanalyst  would   suspect
that  all  this  racialistic  hysterics  masks  a  longing   to  "mix."
But  what  can  the  crude  methods  of  politics  do  with  tensions
which  would  appall  a  psychiatrist?
Whose  Law?  Which Majority?
When  any  effort  is  made  to  change  this  "way  of  life,"  the
reaction   is  nationalistic.   White   Southerners   draw   together,
moderates  and  extremists, as  a  nation  does  when  under  attack
from  the  outside.  No  voice  is  raised  in  the  white  South  itself
to  say that  racialism  is an  illness,  an  anachronism.   The  mode-
rates  loyally  insist  that  they,  too,   are   for   segregation.     The
best  they  can  still  argue  today—it  may  be  less  tomorrow—is
the  need  to  uphold  the  law.   But  law  has  firm  sanctions  only
in  majority  views  of  what  is  moral.   The  white  Northern  ma-
jority,  which is also  the  majority  of  the  U.  S.,  feels  that  segre-
gation  is  obsolete   and  wrong,  though  Northern   whites  prac-
tice  segregation,   too,   in  their  own  way.   But  the  overwhelm-
ing   majority   of   whites   in   Hie  South  believe  segregation   is
right,  as  their  forbears  taught   themselves  to   believe  slavery
was  right.  The  proble'n  of  enforcing in  the  white  South  what
the  North  considers  "law"   but  the  South  doesn't  can  easily
become  insoluble.   Troops  may  be  an  answer  in  Little  Rock
but  they  will  not  prove  an  answer  in  Atlanta.
A  time  of  troubles  may  be  beginning,  the  most  serious con-
flict  of   our  generation,   poisoning  our   politics   for   years  to
come,  capable  of  fomenting  volcanic  eruptions  of   bloodshed.
Integration   cannot  be  stopped.    If   the  country  is  not   to  be
torn  apart  in  the  process,  every  American,  white  and  black.
Northern   and   Southern,   who   exercises   any  kind  of   leader-
ship,  must  be  willing  for  the  sake  of  our  common   country  to
take   an   unpopular   position   against   his   own  hotheads,   and
must  resist  the  temptation  of  the  easy  popularity  to  be  gained
by  pandering  to  the   thoughtless   emotions   of   his  own   "na-
tion."   If  America,  which  has  made  so  much  progress  in  two
centuries  toward  a  fruitful   and  inspiring  equality,  could   suc-
ceed  at  last  in  integrating  the  black  man,  too,  America  would
again  become   a  beacon  for  all  mankind.    The  ideal  is  great
enough,  the  dangers  acute  enough,  to  challenge  and  inspire  a
generation  //  the  leadership  can  be  found.   None  of  us  can
yet  comprehend   fully  how  much  depends  on  that  if.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  7, 1957
Only  the  Admiral  Speaks  Up  While  Civilian  Opinion  Is  Silent
Suppose  the  Russians  Sent  An  Atomic  Fleet  to  Practice  in  Our  Backyard?
A  reporter  at  the  Pentagon  for  the  Washington  Star  asked
why  those   recent  naval  maneuvers  in   the  Eastern  Mediter-
ranean  were  held  so  close  to  Russia,  only  30  miles  south  of
its  satellite,  Bulgaria.   He  reported  in  the  issue  of  September
29  that  an  unnamed  naval  authority  told  him   "the   Darda-
nelles  obviously  would  be  a  target  in  any  war.   Therefore,  it
is  imperative that  the  forces  which  would  be  called  upon  to
defend  that  area  should  familiarize themselves  with  the  ter-
rain."   We  wonder  how  we  would  feel  if  the  Russian  Navy
held  maneuvers  30  miles  off  Cuba  or  Panama,  explaining  that
this  was  so  it  could  familiarize  itself  with  the  terrain  in  case
of  war.
The   maneuvers  in   the   Eastern  Mediterranean  were  well
named.   They  were  called  "Operation   Deep  Water."    When
one  of  the  two  great  Powers  holds  war  games  in  the backyard
of   the  other  great   Power,  it  is  certainly  operating   in  deep
water.   The  possibility of  grave  incidents was  indicated  when
jet  interceptors  were  ordered  to  shoot  down  an   unidentified
plane  watching  the  maneuvers.  An  error,  a  nervous  or  trigger
happy  aviator  on  either  side,  and  there  might  have  been  seri-
ous  consequences.   It  indicates how  drugged  American  public
opinion  has  become  that  this  spectacle  is  taken  for  granted,
passed   over  without  comment.   No   one  asks  who   was  re-
sponsible   for   such  provocative maneuvers.
The  only person  who  expressed  misgivings publicly  was  the
Vice  Admiral,  Charles  R.  Brown,  in  charge  of  what  the  As-
sociated   Press  described  in  a  dispatch  from   his   flagship   as
"the  atom  armed  U.  S.  6th  fleet."  Admiral  Brown  wondered
just  what would  happen  if  he  had  to  shoot  those  things.   He
said  he  didn't  know  of  any  alternative to  massive  retaliation
but  he  thought  the  time  was  coming  "when  we  have  got  to
get  another  formula."   He  thought  that  when  the  day  came
"when  our  power  to  destroy the  whole  world,  to  commit sui-
cide—when  that  comes,  I  don't  know.  The  decision is beyond
the  President  and   it  is  beyond  Congress.    Humanity  has  to
make  this  decision."   The  musings do  the  Admiral credit.   He
said  what  civilians  seem  to  stupefied   to  say.   But   if  we   are
approaching  the  point  when  no  man  has  the  right  to  press
that  button, when  the  decision is  for  humanity  itself,  have  we
the  right  to  send  our  fleet  so  close  into  danger,  where  the
miscalculation  of  one  aviator  on  either  side  might  unwitting-
ly  make that final decision?
Warning  Against  Illusions  About  Democratic  Party  Foreign  Policy
.    Too   much  can  be,  and  already  is  being,  read  into   Dean
Acheson's  statement  at  a  press  conference  here  that  our  China
policy  needs  to  be  restudied.   Mr.  Acheson  spoke  as  chairman
of   a   newly   appointed    Democratic   foreign   policy   advisory
committee.   His  cryptic remark  that  Chiang  Kai-shek  "cannot
live  forever"  is  as  likely to  reflect  speculation  on  the  future  of
Formosa  as  an  American  base  as  on  the  unreality of  our  non-
recognition  policy.   The   remark  may  be  read  in  connection
with  Herbert   Feis's  article  in  the  New   York   Times  of  Sep-
tember  29  hinting  that  under  any  circumstances,  even  recog-
nition,  it  would  be  against  American  interests  to  let  Formosa
go  back  "under   the  unqualified  control"  of  Peking.
The  urbane  former  Secretary  of  State  is  refreshing  after  a
long  siege  of   Mr.   Duties.    But   except  on   the   question  of
China  trade,  there  was  little  in  his  necessarily  guarded  re-
marks  to  give  one  hope  of  a  better  foreign  policy  from  the
Democrats.    He  expressed  himself,  for  example,  against  any
cessation  of  nuclear  testing  and  his  opening  remarks  disclosed
that  same  oversimplified cold  war  Manicheanism  which  leads
straight   to   the   conception   of   inevitable   war   between    the
Forces  of  Light  (us)   and  the  Forces  of  Darkness  (them).
Thus  Mr.  Acheson,  who  shares Mr.  Truman's  weakness  for
dubious  historical  analogy,  spoke  of  the  century  before  the
first  World  War  as  one  in  which  the  Concert  of  Europe  was
able  to keep  the  peace  because  the  world  was  not  divided  into
hostile  ideologies.   This  would   have  startled  Monroe  at  the
beginning  of  this  period  and  Wilson   at  the  end  of  it.   The
Monroe  Doctrine  declared  the  Holy  Alliance  in  Europe  based
on  a  political  ideology  so  inherently  hostile  to  ours  that  we
could  not  allow  its  expansion  into  the  New  World,  and  Wil-
son  took  us  into  World   War   I  as  an  ideological   crusade  to
make  the  world  safe  for  democracy.  The  Nineteenth  Century
was  as  ideologically  divided  as  the  Twentieth;  Jacobinism  and
democracy  were  as  feared   as  Bolshevism.    To   assume   that
ideological  agreement  is  a  precondition  for  peace  is  to  make
an  assumption  that  renders  peace  impossible.
State  Department  Is  Hardening,
"U.  S.  Is  Softening   Passport  Policy"  said  a  headline  in
the   New  York  Times  of  September  26.   This  is  deceptive,
as  those  will  see  who  examine  for  themselves  the  speech
made  in  Baltimore  the  night  before  by  Roderic  L.  O'Connor,
administrator   of  the  Bureau   of  Security  and  Consular   Af-
fairs  in  the  State  Department.    This  is  the  most  definitive
statement  to  date  of  present  passport  policy,  and  it  shows
no  sign  of  retreat.
Mr.  O'Connor  insists  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  the
power   not  only  to  deny  passports  to  persons  suspected  of
aiding  the  Communist  cause  but  also  to  other  persons  when
in  his  opinion   the  applicant's  travel  would  be  "inimical  to
U.  S.  foreign  policy  or  detrimental  to  the  orderly  conduct
of  U.  S.  foreign  relations."  As  Mr.  O'Connor  said,  "a  trav-
eller  who  has  nothing  to  do  with  Communism   may  still  be
subject  to  restriction   for  reasons  of  foreign  policy."  Philo-
Not  Softening,   Passport  Policy
sophically,   the  State   Department   takes  its   stand  on  the
same  basis  as  the  Kremlin.   It  is  for  the  State,  not  the  in-
dividual,  to  decide  when   and.  where  he  may  travel.
It  is  on  this  basis  that  the  Department  has  finally  de-
cided  not  to  renew  the  passport  of  William  Worthy,  Jr.,  the
Baltimore   newspaperman,   to  punish  him  for  visiting   China.
The  coming   ACLU  court  test  of  that  decision  will  be   cru-
cial.    In   the   meantime,   State   will   duck   a   frontal    clash
with  public  opinion   by  subjecting  each  of  the  42  students
returning    from   China   to  separate   appeals   procedures   in
which   the  issue   will   get   lost   to  sight   in  a  bureaucratic
maze.   "We shall  inquire,"  Mr. O'Connor  said  of  those  sepa-
rate  hearings,  "what  the  individual's  intention  is  regarding
future   travel   were  he  again  to  receive  passport  facilities."
Those  who  knuckle  under  and promise  to  be  "good"  may  re-
tain   their  passports.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 7, 1957
On  the  Civil  Liberties  Front:  A  Significant  New  Retreat  on  the  Smith  Act
Some  Progress  Being  Made  in  the  Fight  Against  the  Attorney  General's  List
The  National  Lawyers  Guild  has  won  a  small  interim  vic-
tory  in  its  long  legal  fight  against  the  Attorney  General's   ef-
fort   to  put   it  on   his  list   of   subversive  organizations.    Un-
noticed  by  the  press,  a  special  attorney  appointed   by  the  At-
torney  General  to  hear  the  Guild's  complaint  has  struck  out  a
number  of  the  interrogatories  submitted  to  the  Guild.   These
interrogatories  represent  a  peculiar  device  worked  out  by  Mr.
Brownell  to  get  around  the  Supreme  Court's  ruling   several
years  ago  that  some form  of  hearing  must  be  accorded  by  him
before  putting  an  organization  on  the  blacklist.   The  Attor-
ney  General,  instead  of  filing  charges  and  holding  a  hearing,
propounds  a  long  list  of  questions  -which  he  insists  must  be
answered.   Whether   a  hearing  would  then  be  held   depends
on  the  Attorney  General.   The  questions,  often  involving  mat-
ters  of  opinion,  are  answered   (as  his  letter  warns  the  Guild)
under  penalty  of  Section  1001  of  Title  18  which  makes  it  an
offense  punishable  by  $10,000  fine  and  five  years  in  jail  for
false  statement.  David  J.  Coddaire,  formerly  a  member  of  the
Subversive  Activities  Control   Board,  sitting  as  special  attor-
ney,  has  now  recommended  on  objection  by  the  Guild  that  a
number  of  the  64  interrogatories  propounded   to  it  be  with-
drawn.   Among  these  questions  Mr.  Coddaire  would  disallow
are  those  which  ask  whether   the  Guild   ever  received  direc-
tives  "directly  or  indirectly"  from  the  Communist  party  and
whether  since  1946   it  had  ever  "collaborated   with  or  other-
wise  associated  itself"  with  any  organization  on  the  Attorney
General's  list.   Mr.  Coddaire  thought  the  questions  too vague.
Wide Range  of  Opinion Monitored
Interrogatories   30,  31,  32  and   37,  all  of  them  upheld  by
Mr.   Coddaire,   are  worth   attention.    They   show   the   wide
sweep  of  the  Attorney  General's   inquisition.   The   Guild  is
asked  to  supply  all  information  on  any  position   it  took   on
—among   other   subjects—disarmament,   admission   of   Com-
munist  China  to  the  United  Nations,  "atomic  energy  and  con-
trol  of  weapons   thereof,"   withdrawal  of  U.  S.  troops   from
Europe,  the  conviction  of  Luis  Carlos  Prestes  in  Brazil,  Mexi-
can  oil  expropriation,  the  Vogeler  and  Mindszenty  cases,  and
the  question  of  maintaining  diplomatic  relations  with  Argen-
tina  and  Spain.   The  Guild   is  asked  its  opinion  on—among
other   domestic  topics—loyalty   oaths   for   teachers,   Universal
Military  Training,   the  FBI,   Congressional   committees  inves-
tigating   Communism,   and   legalized   wire-tapping.    Some  of
the  questions  are  "loaded."   An  example:  the  Guild   supported
the  United  Nations  in  finding  North  Korea  guilty  of  aggres-
sion.   Question   32  asks  whether   this  was  eight   days  before
the   House   Un-American   Activities   Committee   accused   the
Guild  of  following   Communist  Party  line,  and  Question   33
whether  the  Guild  had  advance  knowledge  of  this  report.
How  the Press, Too,  Is  Policed
If  the  Attorney  General  has  a  right  to  go  over  the  opinions
of  organizations   with  a  fine  toothed  ideological  comb,  many
will  be  inhibited from  taking  positions  which  the  government
may   deem   critical  or  unorthodox.    The   inhibitory   effect   of
such  procedures   are  not  to  be  underestimated.  The   Supreme
Court,  in  a  petition  for  certiorari  just  filed  with  it,  has  been
asked  to  pass  on  the  Attorney  General's   right   to   blacklist.
The  petition  was  filed  on  behalf  of  the  Association  of  Lithu-
Be  Careful  What  You Say-
The Attorney  General  May Be  Listening
"Did  Robert  J.  Silberstein,  National  Executive   Sec-
retary  of  the  National  Lawyers  Guild  ever  make  the
following  statement  at  an  official  meeting of  the NLG?
" 'The  middle  class  may  hold  the  balance of  power  in
the   present   struggle   between  progress   and  reaction.
The  Guild  would  fall  far  short  of  performing its  duty
to  the  profession  and  to  the  people  if   it  failed  to  do
everything   within   its   power  to  exert   its   special   in-
fluence   as   a   bar   organization   toward   the   end   of
strengthening  the  progressive  forces  in  this  struggle.'
"If  so,  identify  the  subject  matter  under  discussion
and  detail   the   context  in   which  this  statement   was
made."
—Interrogatory    (22)    submitted    to   the    National
Lawyers   Guild  by  Attorney  General  Brownell.
anian  Workers  and  the  American  Lithuanian  Workers  Liter-
ary   Association.   The   former   is  a  fraternal   benefit  society.
The  latter  is  alleged  by the  Attorney  General  to  publish  three
Lithuanian   newspapers   "which   have   consistently    supported
and   implemented   policies,  aims  and   objectives  of  the   Com-
munist  party"—thus   the   press,   too,   can   be  policed.    Even
Judge  Prettyman,  who  has  written  some  of   the   most   reac-
tionary  decisions  of  the  cold  war  period,  objected  in  a  dissent
on  the  Court  of  Appeals  here  last  May,  that   the   questions
propounded   by  the  Attorney  General   to  the   Association   of
Lithuanian  Workers   were  in  many  cases  "impossible  to  an-
swer."    Judge   Prettyman,   dissenting,   thought   the   Attorney
General  ought  to  be  ordered  either  to  revise  his  procedure  or
dismiss  the  charges.
New  Definition  of  Membership
The  memorandum  filed  by  the  Department   of   Justice   in
the  Supreme Court  on  the  Scales  and  Lightfoot   cases  has  been
misinterpreted  by  the  press.   It  is  true  that  the  memo  begins
by  saying  that  both  convictions  should  be  reversed  for  a  new
trial  in  the  light  of  the  Jencks  decision.  But  the  government
obviously  fears  that  the  Court  has  more  drastic  action  under
consideration   in  handling   these  first  two  convictions  under
the  membership  clause  of  the  Smith  Act.   The  Court's  order
directing   reargument   on   Scales  and   Lightfoot    was   handed
down  June  3, the  same  day  as the  Jencks  decision  holding  that
defendants  have a  right  to  see the  original  reports  of  witnesses
called  by  the  government   and  to  use  them  for   purposes   of
impeachment.    If   the   Court   felt  that   Scales  and    Ligbtfoot
were  entitled   to  new  trials  under   that   decision,  new  trials
could  have  been  ordered  the  same  day.   Since  the  Court  did
not  do  so,  the  Department  of  Justice  in  its  memorandum  as-
sumes  that  the  Court  wants  to  hear   reargument  on  whether
the  membership  clause  is  constitutional.   The  Department,   in
an   effort   ao  avoid  an  unfavorable   decision,  retreats   signifi-
cantly  to  the  position  that  only  "active"  membership   is  pun-
ishable  under  the  Smith  Act.   In  a  suggested   instruction   for
juries  in  membership  cases,  it  defines  "active"  membership  in
such  a  way  as  to  make  it  clearly  applicable   only  to  Commu-
ist  party  officials  like  Scales  in  North  Carolina  and   Lightfoot
in  Illinois.   Ordinary  members  would  not  be  subject  to  pros-
ecution.   The  case  will  be  reargued  next  week.
1   5    '1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. f.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 7. 1951
ADA  Leader  Calls  for  Abolition of  House  and  Senate  Witch  Hunt  Committees
The  Really  Urgent  Task  for  Israel's  Tenth  Anniversary    Year
Next   year  will  be  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the   founding
of  Israel  and  high  level  committees  are  already  being  formed
in   this  country  for   the   celebration.   We   believe   the   most
urgent   task  for   the  anniversary year  is  a  mission   of  recon-
ciliation.   We   would   like  to  see  the   formation  of   a  world
Jewish  committee  to  make  new  homes  for  the  Arab  refugees.
Every  dollar  spent   for  resettlement  will  do  far  more  in  the
long  run  than  many  dollars  spent  for  the  arming  of  Israel.
It  cannot  live  forever  as  an  armed  camp  amid" hostile  neigh-
bors,  and  those  of  us  who  are  Jews  cannot  harden  our  hearts
against  the   sufferings   imposed  upon   the  Arabs  of  Palestine
by  the  birth  of   Israel  without  betraying  our   best  traditions.
The  refugee  camps  eat  away  the  moral  foundations of  Zion-
ism.    It   is  in  this—rather  than  in  the  military  equations of
the  Middle  East—that  the   real  danger   to  Israel  lies.   As  a
military  force,   Israel  must  always  be  Lilliputian;  only  as  a
moral   force  can  it  be  great.    It   is  only  over  the   rocky  road
to   reconciliation  with  the   Arabs   that   Israel   can   reach   the
Scriptural  vision  of  a  Jerusalem  whence  the  law-  may  go  forth
in  healing   peace.
Is Every Liberal "Pseudo" to the FBI?
Our   hat   is  off  to  Joseph   L.  Rauh,  Jr.,  defense  counsel  in
the  historic  Watkins  case  and  former  National  Chairman  of
Americans   for   Democratic   Action,   for   the   militancy  with
which  in  a  debate  with  Robert  Morris  before  the  Federal  Bar
Association   here   (Sept.   19)   he  called   for   the   abolition   of
the  Senate  Internal   Security  Committee  and  the   House   Un-
American  Activities  Committee.   Mr.  Morris,  counsel  of   the
Senate  committee,  attacked  the  Supreme  Court   for   "creating
a  new   legal   fiction   in   the  Watkins   case—freedom   of   asso-
ciation."   The  hatred  of  the  witch  hunters  for  the  ADA  and
men  like  Rauh  was  reflected   in  the  speech  J.  Edgar  Hoover
made   to   the   American  Legion   attacking   "certain   organiza-
tions"  which  "hypocritically  bar  Communists  from  their  mem-
bership,  but  .  .  .  launch  attacks  against  Congressional   legisla-
tion  designed   to  curb  Communism."   The   idea  that  anybody
might  oppose  repressive  legislation  on  principle  seems  com-
pletely  absent   from  Mr.  Hoover's   calculations;  every  liberal,
to  him,  is  a   "pseudo-liberal."
Worth  More  Attention  Than It  Got
"And    this   brings   me   to   the   next   national   goal   I
would  suggest—the  fashioning-  of  means  for  dissolving
the  'cold  war.'
"We  cannot   achieve  either  peace   abroad  or  a   more
abundant  life   at   home   by   keeping   our   own   economy
and   that  of   all   our  allies   artificially   stimulated  with
greater  and  greater   military  investments.   .  .  .
"Today  we  have  not  just  the  one  world  Willkie  de-
scribed  but  an  even  smaller  one  world—a  world  encased
in ....   an  atmosphere  which,  if  contaminated  in  any
part  of  the  world  by  radio-active  poisons,  becomes  con-
taminated  all  over.  .  .  .
"It  will  take  courage  to  give  the  American  people  a
foreign  policy  program  written  in  response   to  realities
abroad. ...  It  will  take  more  than  condemnations  of
communism.     It   will   require   offering   something    far
better   to   the  millions  of   people   in  the   so-called    'un-
committed'  areas   [than]   .  .  .  our  friendship  in  return
for  military  bases."
—Collins  of  Florida   at,  the  Southern  Governors'
Conference   in  Sea  Island,   Ga.,  Sept.  23.
The  Head  Count  on Communist China
Paul  W.  Ward,  covering  the  United  Nations  annual  debate
on  whether  to  admit  Communist  China,  figured  in  the  Bait/-
more  Sun  (Sept.  25)   that  the  47  nations which  voted  to  ex-
clude  Peking  represent  almost  805,000,000   people  while  the
27  which  voted  in  favor  of  Communist  China  represent  868,-
000,0  people.   The  7  nations  which  abstained  have  a  popu-
lation  of   109,000,000.   .  .  .  The   three  Scandinavian  States,
Ireland  and  Finland  joined  the  Soviet  bloc  in  voting  for  Pe-
king,   as  did   India,  Burma,  Indonesia,   Nepal,   Afghanistan,
Ceylon,    Syria,   Yemen,    Egypt,   Morocco,    the    Sudan    and
Ghana.  .  .  .  The  abstainers were  Israel,  Pakistan,  Cambodia,
Laos,  Portugal,  Tunisia,  and  Saudi  Arabia.  .  .  .  Saudi  Arabia
also  abstained  in  the  UN   vote  condemning  the  Soviet   inter-
vention  in  Hungary. ...  At  the  UN,  as  in  the  Syrian   affair,
Ibn   Saud   despite   that   White  House   buildup   as   America's
mainstay  in  the  Arab  world  has  been  playing  a  strikingly  in-
dependent  hand.  .  .  .
If    This   is  The   First  Time   You   Have  Seen  The   Weekly,  Subscribe  Now  Using  the  Blank  Below
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $3:*
Name       .........................................................................................
Street        .........................................................................................
City     ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..........................................................
10/7A>~
Street
City     ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?       Yes  D    No  D
IF.Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraika  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15.  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  n.  c..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1S7».    Post-dated  Monday*  but  pnb-
lished  every  Thursday  except   the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5018  Nebraska  Are..  N.  W..  Washington  15. D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
«   ir,   ,K    T-    «  -   <A  In  r.n.rto-   SIO  .1aoi»l,oro      Air  Malt  rates:  S1!i  to  Europe:  «2O  to   Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED