I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957mar25.pdf

============================================================

Fast  Tells  Why  He  Broke Away,  P.  2
At  the  Whittaker  Hearing;  Senator   Henninga  Defends   Congressional   Inquisition,  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.   12
MARCH  25,   1957
101
        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
A  Double  Game  of  Flim-Flam
The   hectic  comings   and   goings   between   Jerusalem   and
Washington  become  less  bewildering  if  one  realizes  that  what
we  are  witnessing  might  be  called  a  double  flim-flam.  The
Israeli  in  finally withdrawing from  Gaza  and  Sheikh  el  Sharm
knew  they  were  being  gulled  by  Mr.  Dulles  but  are  trying  to
outmaneuver  and  embarrass him  by taking  at  face  value mealy-
mouthed  phrases  never  intended  to  be  negotiable.   Privately
the  Secretary  of  State  has  been  explaining  in  vain  that  no  real
promises  whatsoever  were  made  to  the   Israeli.    But  as  the
Washington   correspondent  of  the  London  Sunday   Times  re-
ported  March  17,  "However   cogently  Mr.  Dulles   can  prove
that  the  President's  assurances  to  Israel  were  mostly  optical
illusions,  the  impression  created  in  Britain  is  that  they  must
have  had  real  substance"  and  if  they  are  not  fulfilled    "the
credit  of  the  United  States will  have  suffered  another devalua-
tion."  Mr.  Dulles  blames  the  Israeli  for  creating  this  impres-
sion,  and  feels  aggrieved  by their  tactics,  like  a confidence man
who  discovers  to  his  consternation  that  he  has  not  been  deal-
ing  with  honest  people!  They  picked  his  wallet  while  he  sold
them the Brooklyn  Bridge.
An  Easy  Way  to  Seal  Off  Gaza
That  decent  respect  for  the  good  opinion  of  mankind  on
which  Mr.  Dulles  harped  in pressuring the  Israeli  to withdraw
might  now  be brushed aside by him  as nugatory  if  they did  not
still  hold  powerful  military  cards.   Israel  can  hardly  reinvade
the Gaza strip at this  time,  risking a clash  with  United  Nations
forces.   But  the  Jerusalem   correspondent   of  the  New   York
Daily  News  in  an  exclusive  dispatch  last  Monday  quoted  an
informed  source  as  saying  that  Israel  has  a  bold  plan  ready  to
seal  off  the  Gaza  strip  against  any  mass  reentry  of  Egyptian
civil  and  military  personnel   by  putting  a  cordon   of   troops
across  its  southern   border.   The   United   Nations   Emergency
Force  would  thus  be  left  in  undisputed  control  of  the  Gaza
Strip,  a  conflict  with  it  would  be  avoided  and  Egypt  would
have  to  appeal  again  for  aid  to  the  UN.
How  Washington  would  react  to  such  a  move  is  not  at  all
clear.  The  joint   communique  extorted—that  seems  to  be  the
right  word  for  it—from  Mr.  Dulles  by  Israeli  Foreign   Minis-
ter  Golda  Meir  is full  of  that  baffling  sleight-of-hand  phrasing
which  years at Sullivan  & Cromwell  perfected;  the  Secretary of
State  is a  master  of  the  slippery  codicil.   A  better  guide  to  the
Administration's  real  attitude  may  be  found  in  the  answers
made  by  Mr.  Eisenhower  and  by  Mr.  Dulles  at  press  confer-
ences   before  Mrs.  Meir's  whirlwind  arrival  when  asked   in
substance  how  they  felt  about  the  quick  Egyptian  take-over  in
Gaza.   Colonel  Nasser  can  hardly  be  blamed  if  he  concludes
from  their  answers  that  the  U.S.  does  not  mind  if  Egypt  re-
sumes  control  of  the  Strip  and  limits  the  UN  force  to  the  bor-
der,  where  indeed  he  still  needs  it  as a  shield  against  Israel.
4                               .
When  the  President  was  asked  at  his  last  press  conference
on  March  13,  "Would  you like  to  see Egypt  delay taking  over
the  civil  administration  of  the  Gaza strip?",  he  had  an  oppor-
tunity  for  a  word  of  warning  to  Egypt.   Instead  Mr.  Eisen-
hower  took  a hands  off attitude.   He  replied,  "I  would  like  to
see  the  arrangements  made  that  the  United  Nations  and  Gen-
eral  (sic)   Hammarskjold  believes  will  be  the  most  conducive
to  bringing  on  conditions  in  which  real  negotiations  for  the
settlement  of  the  problems  can  be achieved."  When  much  the
same question was put  next day to Secretary Dulles  at  the  press
conference  he held  in  Australia at the  end of  the  SEATO  meet-
ing,  he  not  only  avoided  any  reproof  to  Nasser  but  succeeded
in  making  it  appear  that  Israel,  not  Egypt,  was  in  the  wrong.
One  of  Those  Non-Responsive  Replies
Since  this press  conference  in  Canberra  was scantily   covered
in  the  U.S.  press,  we give  the  crucial portion  here  from  the  of-
ficial  text  at  the  State  Department.    Mr.  Dulles  was  asked
"Was  it  the  hope  of  your  government  when  the  United  Na-
tions  first  moved  into  the  Gaza  strip  that  they  would  remain
for   some  considerable  time?"    Rather  than  admit  this,   Mr.
Dulles  evaded  the question.   "We  believe"  was his  reply,"  that
it  would  be  desirable  to  have  the  United  Nations  Emergency
Force  function  as a  barrier between  Israel  and  the  neighboring
Arab  countries.  That  has  been  difficult  to  work  out,  partly be-
cause  Israel has not  wanted  to  have  any elements  of  the  United
Nations  Force  on  the  Israeli  side  of  the  boundary  and  Egypt
has  not  wanted  to  have  them  exclusively  on  the  Egyptian  or
Gaza  strip  of  the  boundary."
This was hardly,  as Mr.  Dulles  likes  to  say, a  responsive  re-
ply.   Israel  did  not withdraw  on the  assumption  that  both  sides
of  all  its  borders  would  be  patrolled  but  on  the  assumption
that  the  United  Nations  would  take  over  the  Gaza strip.   Some
reporter  in  Australia  saw  this  at  once  and  asked  as  the  next
question,   "Did   the  Israeli  Government  agree  to  withdraw  its
forces  on  the  assumption   of   the   United   Nations   barrier?"
Again  Mr.  Dulles  managed  to give  an  anti-Israeli  twist  to  the
answer,  "No,"   he  replied,  "I  would  hardly  say  that,  because
Israel  itself  has  been  the  principal  obstacle  to  creating   that
barrier."
The  Doctrine's  Hidden  Corollary
The  State  Department   is  maneuvering  to  give  Nasser  an
out  and  put  Israel  in  the  wrong  by  pressuring  Ben  Gurion  to
admit  UNEF  to  Israeli  territory;  this  was  the  purpose  of  the
five power  meeting  held  at the Department  the day before Mrs.
Meir's  arrival.  The  only  way to  sell  the  Eisenhower  Doctrine
to  the  Arab  States  is  at  Israel's  expense.  This  is  the  unspoken
premise  of  Administration  policy,  the  key  to  Middle  Eastern
events.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  25, 1957
Howard  Fast:  "I  Felt ... A  Victim  of  The  Most  Incredible  Swindle  Of  Modern  Times"
What  America's  Foremost  Communist  Writer  Said  in  His  Farewell
On  this  page  we  present  the  heart  of  Howard  Fast's   ar-
ticle,  "My  Decision",  from  the  March,  1957, issue  of  Main-
stream,  successor  to  the  New  Masses,  telling  why  he  was
breaking  with  the  Communists,  and  a  sample  of  the  curi-
ously   defensive    reply   by   the   editors   of   that   publication.
Instead   of  denouncing  Fast,  they  plead  that  it  is  guilt  by
association.to  link  them  with  Krushchev  and Stalin!   That
a  Communist  publication  should  have  published  his  article
and  such  a  reply  is  itself   a  political  portent.  Not  so hope-
ful,  however,  is  the  fact  that  the Soviet  press  so far  has not
published  a  single  line  of  the  sensational  news  that  Amer-
ica's  foremost  Communist  novelist  whose  works  were  trans-
lated  and  treasured  in  the  Soviet   Union  had  broken  with
the  movement.  For  our part  we  take  our  hat   off  to  Howard
Fast  for  courage  and   integrity.—IFS
By  Howard  Fast
I  joined  the  communist  movement  for  two  reasons.   I  be-
lieved  that  in  the  Communist party  was  the  beginning of  a
true  brotherhood  of  man,  working  with  devotion  for   social-
ism, peace  and  democracy.  Secondly, I  believed that  the Com-
munist Party  offered  the  most  effective  resistance to  Fascism.
As  a  part  of  this,  I  believed,  as  did  millions  of  men  of  good
will, that  the  only  truth  about  the  Soviet  Union  was  the  pic-
ture  presented  by friends  of the  Soviet  Union. . . .
Nevertheless,   I  and  others  within  the  Communist  Party
realized  that  something  was  tragically  wrong  in  the  world
communist   movement   long   before   the   Krushchev   "secret
speech"  appeared.  We were  asked  to swallow such  absurdities
as  the  Soviet  theory  of  "cosmopolitanism".  We  saw  Jewish
culture  disappear in  Russia,  and all  our  pleas  for  explanation
brought  only  silence. ...
We  also  witnessed  many  disturbing  internal  factors  in  the
Communist  Party  of  the  U.S.,  a  destroying  rigidity  and  un-
bendingness, a narrowing  of approach  and  purpose that  made
it  impossible for  many  good people to remain  within  it.  These
things  marked  a  process  of  development,  both  in  myself  and
in  many  others.  Yet  it  did  not  prepare  us  for  the  explosive
and  hellish  revelations  of the Krushchev "secret  report." . . .
I  felt,  as  so many  did  then,  a  sense  of  being  a  victim of  the
most  incredible swindle  in modern  times.  .  . .
The  Hope  Was  Disappointed
I  waited  nine months before  I  took the step  I  am  explaining
here.   I  waited  because  it  was  my  whole  life  as  well  as  the
lives  and  hopes  of  so many dear  friends  that  was  involved;  I
also  waited  because  friends  whom  I  respected  argued  thus:
".  .  .  Now things  will  change.   Stalin  is  dead.   New leaders
are  in  power  now.  They  must  change."   It  was  at  least  a
hope. ...
What  was the result  of that  nine  months?  .  .  .  From  the
Soviet  Union  itself  we  learned  of  two  more  executions,  and
the  blood  hardly  dry  on the  Krushchev report!   From  Krush-
chev  himself  we were  treated  to  a  new  mode of  diplomacy—
diplomacy  by insult  and  vulgarity.   From  the  crisis  in  Egypt
we  learned  of  the  new  brink of-war  tactics  of  Soviet  foreign
affairs.   For  the  first  time, in  relation  to  Israel,  we  witnessed
the  elevation  of  anti-Semitism   to  foreign   policy.
In  November,  1956,  Premier   Bulganin  sent  notes  to  Great
Britain,  France  and  Israel.  The notes  to  Britain  and  France
were  both  reasonable   and  conciliatory   in  tone;  the  note  to
Israel  was  couched as  an  ultimatum  in  a  tone  both  shrill  and
insulting.   Since  Israel  was  the  least  culpable  of  the  three,
and  the  only  one  of  the  three  acting  in  terms  of  direct  na-
tional  security,  the  uncontrolled  prejudice  was  both  apparent
and  significant.
Socialism  Without  Democracy
In  Russia  we have  socialism  without  democracy.   We  have
Just  A  Bad  Check  That  Bounced!
"Consider  the  manner  of  his  [Fast's]  reasoning.   He
says  that  he  is  protesting  the  course  of  happenings  in
the  Communist  world,  and  that  the  Communist  Party
of  the  U.  S.  is  compromised by  events  which  are  most-
ly  beyond  its   control.   How  compromised?    By  mat-
ters  of   which   its   members  could   not   know,  by  acts
which  they  do  not  condone  and   in  fact   condemn?   If
a  friend  passes  a  bad  check  one  may  be  'compromised',
but  only  through  guilt  by  association,  to  which  How-
ard   Fast   does  not  subscribe.   Yet  so  much  of   th«s   ar-
ticle  is devoted to  Stalin  and  Krushchev that  one  might
think  he  was  resigning  from  a  party  to  which he  never
belonged:  the  Soviet  Communist Party."
—Editors  of  Mainstream,  Reply   to  Howard  Fast.
socialism  without  trial  by  jury,  habeas  corpus,  or  the  right
against  self-incrimination,  which is  no more  or  less than  pro-
tection  against  the  abuse  of  confession  by  torture.  We  have
socialism  without  civil  liberty. We have  socialism  without  the
power  of  recall  of  government.   We  have  socialism   without
public  avenues  of protest. We have  socialism  without  equality
for  minorities.  We  have  socialism  without  any  right  of  free
artistic  creation.   In  so many  words,  we have  socialism  with-
out morality.. . .
I  have  come  to  believe  that  within  the  very  structure  and
historical  development of  the  Communist Parties,  as  we know
them  in  recent  years,  there  is  an  almost  incurable  antithesis
to  the  socialist  democracy  which they  name  as  their  ultimate
goal.  In  a  struggle  against  fascism  and  colonial  oppression,
history   has   shown  these   parties  to  be  magnificently   disci-
plined  and  courageous,  but  in  other  circumstances  they  fall
prey  to  a  tragic  contradiction.   Programatically  for  freedom,
their  very  structure  denies freedom within  itself;  against op-
pression,   their  very  structure  oppresses   within  itself;  and
conceived  as  a  liberating  force,  the  monolithic  power  struc-
ture  chokes  both  the  democratic  process' and  the  liberating
thought.  Their   historical   development  has  been  toward  an
ever  more rigid  bureaucracy—and  this  very  process  nurtures
an  egotistic  and dehumanized  stratum  of leadership.  . . .
It  is  this  development  which  is  being  fought  by  a  great
many  American  Communists  who remain  within  the  organi-
zation  of  the  Communist  Party,  and  I  acknowledge  their  in-
tegrity  and  purpose.  But  can  one for  a  moment  believe that
a  similar  struggle  is  possible  in the  Soviet  Union?  . . .
Appeals  from  Eastern  Europe
Since the  appearance  of the  Krushchev "secret report"  nine
months  ago  and  since  my  initial  written  response   to  it,  a
number  of  things  have  happened  to  me  personally.   A flow of
letters  from  the  countries  of  Eastern  Europe  have  pleaded
heart-breakingly  for  succor—as  if  I  had  some  power  to  in-
tervene  against  the terrors  and  sufferings that  beset  them  or
some  special  persuasiveness  to  direct  toward  their  leaders.  I
am  afraid,  however,  that  criticism  of  any  validity  is  as  ab-
horrent  to  the  Kremlin  leadership   as  social  justice.  .  .  .
As a postscript  to the  above,  since  it  was written  I  received
the  inevitable  summons  from  the  House  Committee  on  Un-
American  Activities to  appear  before  them  as  a  friendly  wit-
ness.  I  made  no  bones  about  showing  them,  not  only  that  I
was  an  unfriendly   witness  but  that  I  utterly   despised   all
that  they  represented.   Nothing  I  have  said  about   injustice
and  petty tyranny  here  at  home, or  about  the  assorted  mad-
ness  of  our  foreign   policy  has  been  withdrawn  in  my  mind.
...  I  intend  to  continue  my  solidarity   with  all  people  of
good-will  in  America,  communist  and   non-communist,   who
fight injustice....
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  25,  1957
The  Whittaker  Hearing:  New  Supreme  Court  Justice  No  Friend  of  Academic  Freedom
How   Senator  Hennings  Defended   Inquisition-by-Congress
The  confused   view  even  among  liberals  as  to  the   proper
limits of  the  Congressional power  of  investigation  was vividly
disclosed  by  Senator   Hennings  of  Missouri  last  week.  This
was  during  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee hearing  on  the
nomination  of  Judge  Charles  Evans  Whittaker  to  the   U.S.
Supreme  Court.   Fyke  Farmer,  the  Nashville, Tenn.,  lawyer
who  won that  sensational  last  minute  stay  from  Mr.  Justice
Douglas  in  the  Rosenberg  case,  testified  against  the  appoint-
ment.   Farmer  was  counsel  for  Prof.  Horace  B.  Davis,  dis-
missed   despite   his   tenure   rights   from   the   University  of
Kansas  City  in  1953  after  he  pleaded  the  Fifth  amendment
before  the   Senate   Internal   Security   Committee.  When  Dr.
Davis  went   to  court,  Judge   Whittaker   dismissed  his   suit
without  trial   and  declared  that  the  public  "ought  not  to
stand  for  such reticence  or  refusals  to answer  by the  teachers
in  their  schools."
The  Whittaker  hearing  was  thus  the  obverse  of  the  recent
hearing  by the  same  committee on the  Brennan  appointment.
Judge  Brennan  was  attacked  by  McCarthy for  criticizing the
abuses  of  Congressional  inquiry;  Judge  Whittaker  was   at-
tacked  for  upholding  these  abuses  by  ruling  that  a  teacher
could  be  discharged  after  invoking  his  constitutional  rights.
To  the   delight   of   Chairman   Eastland,.  Senator    Hennings
soon  emerged  as  the  champion of  the  Internal  Security  Sub-
committee.
"Is  it your view, sir,"  Senator  Hennings asked  Mr.  Farmer,
"that  a  university  has  no right  to  dismiss  a  professor  unwill-
ing  to  give  a  Senate   committee  any  information  about  his
teaching  and  writing,  irrespective  of  the   Communist  ques-
tion?"
Mr.  Farmer   said  that  such  interrogation  was  outside  the
lawful  powers of  a  Senate  committee. This  seemed  to  startle
Senator   Hennings.   His  question  revealed  a  twofold   confu-
sion.   By  saying  "irrespective   of  the   Communist  question",
the  Senator  may  have thought  he  was  demonstrating  liberal-
ism.   But  even  the  reactionaries  have  never  dared   affirm   a
general  Congressional right  to investigate  ideas.  Their  excuse
has  always  been  (a  la  the  insidious  sophism of  Sidney Hook)
that   Communist  ideas  and   associations   were   in  a   special
category  as  conspiratorial  rather  than  heretical.   Hennings
implied  that  Congress  could  investigate  the  dissemination of
ideas  of  any  kind.
The  Wm. A.  Price  Trial:  A  First  Amendment Issue  That  Cannot  Easily  Be  Evaded
Hennings  Took  The  Same  Naive  Attitude  in  the  Press   Investigation
A  similar  attitude  by  Senator  Hennings  will  figure  in  the
appeals  of  the  newspapermen  now  being  convicted  for  con-
tempt  of  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  in  its   "in-
filtration   of  the  press"  hearings  in  January  of  1956.   In  the
summation  at  the trial here  of William A. Price,  found  guilty
of  contempt  after   invoking  the  First  Amendment,  attention
was  called  by  defense  counsel  Leonard  Boudin  to  the   col-
loquoy  between  Senators  Hennings  and  Eastland  with  which
those  hearings  opened. There  again,  in  an  effort  presumably
to make his  position as  a  liberal  clear,  the  Senator  from  Mis-
souri  said  the  hearings  were  not  an  attack   upon  the  New
York  Times  or  "upon  the  free  press"  but  merely  an  effort  to
uncover  possible  attempts  by  the  Communist party  "to  influ-
ence  or  subvert  the  American  press."
But  in  practice,  as  his  other  remarks  showed,  again  with
Senator  Eastland's  approval,  this  entailed  subjecting  the  edi-
torial  content   and  the  executives  of  the  American  press  to
scrutiny  by  a  Congressional  committee.   For   Senator   Hen-
ning  said,  "the  best  evidence of  any  subversion or  infiltration
...  is  certainly  the  product  itself,"  and  added  "I  do think
that  at  some later  time,  perhaps,  it  might  be appropriate  for
executives  of  some  of  the  newspapers  under  inquiry ...  to
be  called  and  to  testify   and  for  them  to  show,  if  they  can
show, that the  end product,  the  newspaper  itself  has  not been
influenced  by  these  efforts."  This  naively  assumes  that  de-
spite  the  First   Amendment,  giving   Congress  no  right   to
abridge  freedom of  the  press,  a  Congressional  committee  may
examine  editorials  and  editors  to  see whether  they  have  been
spreading   ideas   some  members  of   Congress  may  consider
subversive.
Let us take  a  concrete  example of what  such  an  attitude  in-
volves.  In  the  Whittaker  hearing,  Fyke  Farmer  quoted  from
an  editorial  in the  New  York  Times,  endorsing  certain  appre-
hensions  expressed  on  February   19,  1955,  by  Chief   Justice
Warren  in  a  speech  in  St.  Louis.  "Where,"  the  New   York
Times  said  of  attacks   on  persons  taking   the  Fifth  amend-
ment,  "shall   the   line  of  condemnation  be  drawn?   If   it  is
wrong  to  refuse  to  testify  against  one's  self  is  it  also  wrong
to  object  to  unlawful   search   and  seizure,  to  the  taking  of
property  without  due  process  of  law,  to  the  deprival  of  trial
by  jury,  to  the  infliction  of  cruel  and  inhuman punishments,
to the abridgment  of the freedom  of the press. . . ."
What  if  the  writer  of  that  editorial,  the  editor  in  charge
of  the  editorial  page  and  the  publisher  were to  be subpoenaed
—in  accordance  with   the   Hennings  suggestion—and   ques-
tioned  about  that  editorial?  What  if  they  were  questioned  to
determine  whether  it  was  an  "honest"  expression  of opinion
or  (in J.  Edgar  Hoover's  phrase)  a  "pseudo-liberal"   effort  to
shield  Communists? What  if,  in  order  to  determine  this,  they
were  questioned  about  their  schooling, their  past,  their  rela-
tives,  and  their  associations?   If  a  Congressional  committee
can  put  editors  in  the  pillory  and  smear  them  with  all  kinds
of  invidious questions to  determine  whether  their  writing  was
proper  or improper, the First Amendment would be shattered.
The  fear   of  such  inquiry  would  go  far   to  inhibit  non-con-
formity.
Those  New  York  and  Chicago  Hearings  for  Foreign  Language   and  Radical  Papers
The  House  Un-American  Committee  Already  Putting  Editors  in the  Pillory
This  is  no longer  a  hypothetical  situation.  The  hearings of
January,  1955,  by the  Senate  Internal  Security  subcommittee
were  cut  short  by  protest  and  never  dared  investigate  the
content  of  newspapers.   But  the  recent  hearings  held  by  the
House  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities   in  New  York
and  now  being  held  in  Chicago  did just  that.   Editors  of ob-
scure  foreign  language  publications,  with  circulations  so  tiny
as  to  make  the  attack  upon  them  ludicrous,  were  asked  all
kinds  of  questions  about  their  attitude  on  the  Korean  war
and  other  questions.   Little  attention  has  been  paid  to  these
hearings   because  they  involved  minuscule  and  little  known
papers,  or  men  who work  or  have worked on the  Daily  Work-
er  and  other  Communist papers.   But  these  hearings  estab-
lish  precedents  and  begin  the  task  of  winning  public  acqui-
escence  in the  Un-American notion that  Congress  has  a  right
to  police the  press  against  dangerous  ideas.
When  a  Senator  as  liberal  as  Hennings,  the  chairman  of
the  Senate  subcommittee  on  constitutional   rights,  shows  as
much  confusion  and  lack  of  understanding  as  he  does  on  the
fundamental   issue,   public  education   is  badly   needed.
4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 25,1957
Law  Needed  to  Guarantee  Free  Union  Elections;  Plot  Thickens  in  That  Spy  Case
Britain  at  Bermuda:  Sick  of  Arms  Race  and  Cold   War
The   Bermuda   Conference:    Even   America's   oldest   and
strongest  ally  can  no  longer  bear  the  burdens  of  the   arras
race  and  the  cold war:  military  retrenchment,  withdrawal  of
troops  from  Europe,  resumption  of  trade   with   China   are
necessary  if  Britain's  economic  back is not to be broken. . . .
If  this  point  is  grasped,  much  about  the  whole  world  situa-
tion  becomes  clearer. . . . Everywhere there  is creeping  infla-
tion  due  largely  to  the  abnormal demands made on materials
and  manpower  by the  continued  Eusso-American  quarrel,  its
divison  of  the  world, its  derangement  of  normal  trade  chan-
nels,  its  diversion  of  human  energy  and  wealth  to  the  most
expensive  and  murderous  military  toys  the  world  has  ever
seen. ... In  this  context,  at  home, the  most  hopeful develop-
ment  is  the  growing  revolt  in  Congress  against  the  notion
that  the military  budget  is  sacrosanct. ... It  will  spread  as
even  our  own  rich  country  cuts  necessary  expenditures  on
schools  and  health  and  roads  and  basic  necessities  in  a des-
perate  effort  to  cut  the  budget  without  touching  that  major
share  of it which goes to war preparations.  . . .
Guarantee  Free   Union  Elections:  The  McClellan   investi-
gation  is  doing for  the  labor  movement what  it  demonstrably
could  not  do for  itself—expose  the  finest  collection  of  phonies
who  ever  fattened  on  a  working  class  payroll.  The harm  the
NAM  and  similar  groups  can  do  with   these  revelations   is
less  than  the  danger  in  letting  the  cancer  of  racketeering
grow.   One way  to  block bad  labor  legislation  is  for  the  labor
movement  to  propose its  own  program.   One kind  of  reform
badly  needed is  a  guarantee  of  democracy within  unions.  A
law providing for  annual  elections, a  secret  ballot  and  an hon-
est  count under public auspices  would  help.  Dissenting  union
members  should  also  have  the  right  of  access  to  membership
lists  so  they  can  reach  them  for  campaign  purposes.
In   the   Game  of   Bluff:     The  U.S. did  call  a   Soviet   bluff
when  the   Aswan  dam   offer   was   withdrawn;   Nasser   was
turned  down  by  Moscow.  What  happens  now  if  the   Polish
loan  delegation  goes  home empty  handed,  or  with  little  more
than  some  agricultural  surpluses?  Fantastically  high  hopes
have  been  built  up  in  Poland,  and  the  other  satellites  are
watching.   If  Poland  fails,  Moscow  wijl  say  it  called  the U.S.
bluff  and  the  Stalinists  in  the  satellites  will  argue  that  the
only  hope  of  aid  lies  in  full  submission  to Moscow.
Too  Late  Again?:  It  is  almost  the  end  of  March.   In  the
House  the  civil rights bill still  has  to  get  out  of  Rules and  in
the  Senate  it  must  get  past  Eastland.  The  Southerners  may
succeed  again  this  year  in  blocking  legislation.
Two   and  Two: With  the   confirmation  of  Brennan   and
Whittaker,   Eisenhower  has  now  put  two  liberals   (Warren
Where  "Foreign Aid" Is  Going
The  latest   report  of   the   International  Cooperation
Administration  made  available  last  week  and  covering
the  quarter  ended  last  September  30  shows  total for-
eign  aid  fund  allocations in  that  quarter  of   $209,148,-
000.   Of  this  amount,  $162,202,000  or  almost  80  percent
went  to  "defense  support,"  i.e. maintenance  of  armies
beyond  the   economic  capacity   of   certain   allied  coun-
tries.
These  were  mainly   South  Korea,   South   Indo-China
and   Formosa.    Of   the   $209,148,000   total   aid   for   the
quarter,   $141,200,000,  i.e. better  than  two  thirds,  ac-
tually  almost   68  percent,  went  to   Korea,  Indo-China
and  Formosa.   And  of   $141,200,000  allocated  to  these
three  places,  $138,600,000,  or  more  than  98  percent was
for  "defense  support."
In  other  words  the  bulk  of   "foreign  aid" today   is
part  of  our  cold  war  with  Communist  China,  the  main-
tenance  of  huge  armies  in  the  countries  we  have  split
with   Peking.    These  aid   figures   do   not   include   the
amount  spent  directly  for  military  equipment.   This  is
"classified"  but  is  far  greater  than  the  "defense  sup-
port"  figure.
The  Hannah  report  made public last  week  by  the Sen-
ate  Committee  on  the  Foreign  Aid  program  discloses
that  tiny  Korea  "now  has  the  second  largest  army  in
the   free   world,   numbering   over   700,000  men,"   and
spends  more  than  half  its  budget  for  military  purposes
but  adds  comfortingly   that   to  maintain  an  American
army  in  Korea  "would  cost  between  6  and  10  times  as
much."   Thus  "foreign  aid" goes   chiefly   to  maintain
cheap  auxiliary  "coolie" armies  in  our  unresolved quar-
rel  with  Peking.
and  Brennan)   and  two  conservatives   (Harlan  and  Whit-
taker)  on the Court.  . .  . Plot  Thickens:  Borros  Morros, the
mystery   man  in  the  forthcoming  trial  of  the   Sobles  and
Albam  for  conspiracy to  deliver  secrets  to  the  U.S.S.R.,  was
described  on  September  15,  1949, before  the  Senate  Judiciary
Committee  ("Communist  Activity  Among Aliens in  National
Groups",  Vol. 2,  page  813)  as   the   Hollywood   contact  of
Vassili  M.  Zubelin,  "head  of  the  NKVD  foreign  information
service"   until   he  left  this  country   in  1944.   Now  Morros
crops  up  as  government witness  and  is  described  by the U.S.
Attorney  as  "a  loyal  and  respected  citizen."
Why  Not  Write  Us  For  Some  Free  Sample  Copies  for   That  Next  Meeting  of  Your  Union  or  Club?
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ...........
City     ............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)  Name  ..
Street
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
...........................Zone......
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
City    ........................................Zone......
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?
......State...................
(1 yr.) additional:
3/25/57
......State...................
Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C. .
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated Mondays  but  pub-
lished   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August  and  December  at  301  E.  Capitol  St., Washington  3   D   C
An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by   I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager   Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
|5  In  the  U.  8.;  16  In  Canada;  HO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $16  to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED