I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957aug12.pdf

============================================================

How  the  White  House  Muffed  Its  Chances  to  Defeat  the  South  on Jury  Trial,  See  P.  2.
/. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  32
AUGUST  12,  1957">'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
For  the  Civil  Rights  Bill,  Weak  As  It  Is
We  hope  the  House  will  accept  and  the  President  will  sign
the  Civil Rights Bill  as  it  is  emerging  from  the  Senate.  Weak
and  watered  down  though  it  is,  the  measure  could  still  be  a
powerful  instrument in  the  long  hard  fight  to  win  the  Negro
full  emancipation.  The  debate  in  the  Senate  illuminated  the
weaknesses  in  the  position  of  the  North,  the  Negro  and  his
friends.    It   showed   that   the   country  as  a  whole  was   little
aroused  on  the  issue, and  had  little  understanding of  its mean-
ing.   A  campaign  of  public  education   is  needed   to  let   the
wholfi  country understand  how  the  moneyed  oligarchy  of  the
South's  black  belt  counties  controls  the  State  governments  of
the  South  and  wields  vastly  disproportionate   power  in  Con-
gress.   A  campaign  of  public  education  is  needed  to  teach  the
whole  country  how  cruel  the  white  South  can  'be  in  dealing
with  the  black,  and  how  ingenious  and  protean  are the  devices
it   uses  to   nullify   every  effort   to   improve   the   black   man's
status.    The  six-man  bipartisan  Commission   on  Civil  Rights
the  bill  would  establish  could  be  the  means  of  educating  the
country.   It  would  give  the  Negro  a  national  forum.   This
alone  makes  the  bill  worthwhile,  and  could  lay  the  basis  for
stronger  legislation  later.
The Jury Trial Issue Was Crucial
The  strength  of  the  South's  position  in  the  Senate,  debate
is  that  it  succeeded  in  putting  the  North  in  the  wrong  morally
and   therefore   (on   so  fundamental  an  issue)   politically   by
taking   its  stand   on   the   trial-by-jury   issue.    The   issue  was
simple,  though   deceptively   so;  it  invoked  honored   symbols
and  stirred  deep  conditioned  reflexes.   All  the  answers  to  it
were  ineffective  because  they  were  complicated.   How   explain
the   intricacies  of   equity  and   the   technicalities   of   civil  and
criminal  contempt  to  a  vast  lay  audience,  especially  one  that
was  only  half  listening?   More  important,  the  answers  at  least
by  implication  attacked  the  fundamental  myths  of  our  society.
To  say  that  there  were  issues  or  occasions  on  which  juries—
twelve  good  men  and  true—could  not  be  trusted  was  to  say
that  the  Common  Man  was  faulty.   In  no  political  system  do
men  dare  disparage  the  sovereign  or  his  symbols;  in  a  demo-
cratic  society,  no  campaign  can  be  waged  successfully  that  is
unflattering  to the  ordinary voter.   The  Rousseauist  views from
which  the  streams  of  both   democratic   and  socialist  thought
derive  deifies  the  Common  Man.   If  he  seems  mean,  spiteful
or  ornery,  it  is  a  temporary  aberration  because  something  ex-
traneous—civilization,  or  feudal  oppression   or  capitalist  ex-
ploitation—has  sullied  or  deformed  his  shining  essential  self.
To  say  out  loud  that  a  plain  ordinary  run-of-the-mill  South-
ern  white  man couldn't  be  trusted  to  deal  justly  with  a  Negro
was  in  the  final  analysis  to  condemn  ordinary  people  every-
where.                                                                                                                                  1   2  '/
The Irrepressible Conflict  Again
To  say that  the  jury,  chosen  at  random,  tends  to  reflect  the
dominant  views of  the  community  and  cannot  rise  above  them
was  to  admit  that  we  were  confronted  by  two  distinct  com-
munities  in  one  nation,  a  white  Northern   community  pre-
pared  to  concede  Negro  equality  in  theory  and  to  accept   it
without  too  much  protest  in  practice,  and  a  white  Southern
community  determined  to  treat  the  Negro  as  an  inferior  in
race  and   status,  and-to  circumvent  every   effort   to  enforce
equality.   So regarded,  the  problem  was whether  the  Northern
majority  was  to  coerce  the  Southern  majority  or  back  down
before  it;  the  irrepressible  conflict  rose  to  the  surface  again.
Yet  to  face  this fully  was  to  abandon  the  creative fictions with
which  men  have  sought   for  centuries  to  subdue,  mold   and
civilize  the  savage  within   them.   What  happens   to   human
brotherhood,   what  happens  to  the  common  Godhead,   what
happens  to  the  solidarity  of  labor  and  the  mission  of  the  pro-
letariat  if  we  allow  ourselves  to  look  too  nakedly  at  a situation
which  is  race  against  race,  with  one  determined  to  keep  its
foot  on  the  neck  of  the  other?   If  white  workers  and  white
tenant  farmers  in  the  South  prefer  to  stand  with  their  white
overlords  and  rulers  rather  than  with  the  black  workers  and
black  tenant  farmers  who  share  their  economic  lot,  what  hap-
pens  to  the  assumptions  that  men  act  rationally,  that  they  are
basically  benevolent,  that  they  see  their  own  real  interests  and
act  upon  them,  that  they  are  perfectible  and  movable  in  pro-
gressive  direction  because  of  their  economic  interests,  and  that
these  interests  are  part  of  a  Cosmic  Plan,  the  old  divinity dis-
guised  as  Historical  Materialism  or  Progress?
The View from  Below Was Clearer
These  Hamlet  feelings  did  not  bother  the  Negro  because
looked   at  from   below,  his  painful  vantage  point,  the  whole
argument  was  a  white  man's  fraud.   The  realities  of  oppres-
sion  were  too  overwhelming  for  such  figments  to  be  ponder-
able.   To  the  Negro  the  question  was  simply  whether  he  was
or  was  not  to  be  treated  as  a  first  class  citizen.   But  to  the
white  man,  the  good  liberal  white  man  of  the  North,  the  in-
dispensable   ally  in  the  Negro's   struggle,   the   question  was
whether  he  was  going  to  be  "fair."   He  did  not  like  to  face
up  to  the  question  of  whether  one  could  be  fair  to  the  oppres-
sor without  being  unfair  to  the  oppressed.   Indeed  can  one  be
fair  to  the  oppressed  without  some  unfairness  to  the  oppres-
sor?   This  is  how  the  question  honestly  presents  itself   in  a
revolutionary  period  and   the   effort   to  win  equality  for   the
Negro  in  the  South  is a revolutionary  enterprise.  But  to admit
this would  be to abandon  the  hope  of  coaxing  and  jollying  the
South  along  into  obeying  at  last  what  it  had  resisted  for  90
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  12, 1957
The  Joker  in  The  Amendment  Giving  Negroes  "The   Right  To  Be  A  Juror"
How  the White House Muffed  Its Chances to Defeat  the South on Jury Trial
The  President  did  not  come  to  life  on  the  civil  rights  issue
until  the  fight  was  over,  and  political  capital  could  be made by
attacking  the  bill.
The  White  House  is  a  press  agent's  dream.   It  can  put'  a
subject  on  the  front  page  of  every  newspaper   in  the  world.
The  outcome  on  civil  rights  might  have  been  different  if  Eis-
enhower  and  his  aides  had  used  this  power  for  public  educa-
tion.
An  example:   On  July  24,  in  discussing  the  vote  frauds  in
certain  Louisiana  parishes  where  the  White  Citizens   Councils
purged   the  rolls  of  Negro  voters,   Senator  O'Mahoney,   chief
sponsor  of  jury  trial  in  civil  rights  cases,  laid  himself   open  to
devastating  retort.   O'Mahoney  said  it  would  have  been   "per-
fectly  simple"  for  the  Attorney  General  under  existing  law  to
indict  those  responsible   for  criminal  conspiracy.
The Jury Wasn't Interested
The  fact  is  that  the  Attorney  General  sought  just  such  an
indictment.   But  the  Federal  grand  jury  in  Louisiana  not  only
declined   to  indict  but   in   the   Bienville  and   Jackson   Parish
cases  "after  the  evidence  developed   by  the  FBI  had  been  out-
lined"  to  the  jury  it  "expressed  itself  as  not  wishing  to  have
any  of  the  witnesses  called  as  there  was  no  real  possibility  of
any  indictments  being  returned."   The  words  are  from  a  letter
by  Assistant Attorney General  Warren  Olney  III  put  into  the
Congressional  Record  by Senator Douglas  just before  the  final
vote  on  August  1  (see  pps.   12156-7)  where  it  went  almost
unnoticed.   How  effectively  the  White  House  might  have  used
that  letter  against  O'Mahoney   if  it  had  wanted  to!    A  jury
which  would  not  even  hear  the  witnesses!   This  little  publi-
cized  affair  could  have  been  used  to  dramatize  for  the  whole
country  the  untrustworthiness of  Southern  juries  where  Negro
rights  are  involved.
Another  example:  On  July  26,  Senator  Case  of  New  Jersey
put  into the  Congressional  Record  (at  pages  11645-7)  a  series
of   documents  supplied   by  Warren  Olney   on  the  refusal  of
both  State and  Federal.grand  juries in  Mississippi  to  indict  for
the   brutal  mistreatment  of   prisoners   in  Hinds   County   Jail,
Jackson,  Miss.   One  of  those  mistreated  was  a  white  sailor.
The  FBI  investigated; a  total  of  56  witnesses  was  found;  they
were  brought  before  a  U.  S.  grand   jury  in  Jackson,  Missis-
sippi,  from  June  4  to  June  13  of  this  year.   No  indictments
were  returned.
Senator   Case   had   photographs   of   two   victims  which   he
offered  to  show  his  colleagues.   The  documents  and  the  photos
Explaining  That  Kasper  Jury
"The  conviction  is   understandable.    First,   the   trial
took  place  in  Knoxville,  which  happens  to  be  a  hotbed
of  Republicans and  always  has  been,  even  back   in  the
days  of  the  war  between  the  States.   Second,  Tennessee
happens  to  be  the  State  that  elected  Estes  Kefauver,
traitor  to  the  South,  to  a  seat   in  the   U.   S.  Senate.
Third,  Tennessee  sentiment  is  not  Southern sentiment
and  we  can  thank  God  for  that."
—Jackson,  Miss.,  News,  P.  12145  Con.  Rec.  Aug.   1.
elicited  no  reaction  whatsoever.   The  White  House  could  have
rallied  public  sympathy  and  understanding by  using  this  ma-
terial.   Jim  Hagerty  is no  novice  at  using  the  press.  The  docu-
ments  would  have  brought  sharply  home  not  only  the unrelia-
bility  of   Southern   juries  but   the   need   for   Part   III,   which
would  have  given  the  Attorney  General  the  right  to  use  the
injunctive  process  to  stop  future  brutality  of  this kind.
That New "Right to Serve on Juries"
Another   example.    The   tide   was  finally  turned   in   the
South's  favor  on  jury  trial  by  tRe  Church  amendment  which
struck  out  of  existing  law  the  provision   (it  originated  in  the
GOP  dominated  80th  Congress)  that  no  one  could  be  a  Fed-
eral  juror  who  was  not  qualified  to  be  a  State  juror.   This
automatically   barred   most   Negroes   in   the   South.    Senator
Church    (D.,    Wyo.)     claimed   that   his   amendment   to   the
O'Mahoney   jury  trial  amendment  would  confer  on  the  Negro
"another  civil  right—the  right  to  serve  as  a  juror."   On  this
basis  he  obtained  as  co-sponsors  four  other   Western.   Demo-
crats,  Magnuson,   Jackson,  Murray  and  Mansfield,  and  three
Northern  Democrats,   Kennedy,  Pastore,  and  Lausche.   These
seven  alone  were  more  than  enough   for  victory,  since  a  shift
of  five  was  enough  to  decide  the  issue.
But   more   important   than   the   provision   repealed   by  the
Church  amendment  is  the  way  Federal   jury  panels  are  made
up  in  the  South.   They  are  drawn  from  lists  furnished  by so-
called   "key"   business  and  political   leaders  and  they   include
only  a  few  token   "trustworthy"   Negroes.   Douglas  said   that
"without  an   affirmative   change  in   the   practice   of   selecting
juries ...  the  likelihood  is that  few  Negroes  will  actually  be
called  to  serve."  That  explanation,   based  on  the   authoritative
study  by  a  respected   senior   Federal  Judge  some   years   ago,
could   also  have   been   made   effective   politics   by  the  White
House,  if  anybody  there  had  cared  enough  to  use  it.
Doesn't  John  L. Lewis  Read  the  United Mine  Workers Journal?
"The  United  Mine  Workers  of  America  .  .  .  support  ap-
propriate  legislation  looking  to  the  full  enjoyment  by  all
citizens  of  all  civil  rights.  .  .  .  Equally  important, however
...  is  the  right  of  all  men to  be  tried  by  a  jury.  .  .  . We
should  not  and  need  not  endanger  one  civil  right  in  an  ef-
fort  to  guard  and  secure  another.  .  .  .  Expanding power  of
a  central  government ...  is  allowable  only  when contem-
poraneous  safeguards  are  provided  for  protection of  all  citi-
zens  alike  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  .  .  ."
—John  L.  Lewis  telegram  on  behalf   of  the  United  Mine
Workers   to  various  Senators  backing  jury  trial  in  the  civil
rights  bill, p. 11880, Con. Rec. July  SI.
"Civil  rights  legislation  was  the  big  issue  of  debate  .  .  .
as  the  Journal went to  press.   As  usual, the  Dixiecrats  were,
in  effect,  fighting  the  Civil  War all  over  again  .  .  .  and try-
ing   to   tack  on  all   sorts   of. hog-tying  amendments  that
would  make  the  legislation  ineffective.   The  major amend-
ment  .  .  .  was  one  that  would  allow  jury  trials  of  anyone
accused  of  contempt. ...  It  is  obvious  that  no  southern
white  jury  will  convict  anyone  on  such  charges.  .  .  .  The
trial-by-jury  amendment is  as  phony  as  a  $3  bill.  .  .  .  The
civil  rights  bill  actually is  a  mild  measure.  .  .  ."
—Editorial,  United  Mine  Workers  Journal,  June  1957  is-
sue,  Text  at  P.  11905, Con.  Rec.  July  SI.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  12, 1957
How  the  South  Protected  Its  Friends  from  A  Witch  Hunt  in  Reverse
Civil  Rights  Will  Depend  on  the  Men  Eisenhower  and Brownell  Pick
If  the  Civil  Rights  Bill  becomes  law,  much  will  depend  on
the   President   and  the  Attorney   General—the  six  men   they
pick  for  the  Civil  Rights  Commission,  the  kind  of  man  they
choose  to  be  the   new  Assistant  Attorney  General   on  Civil
Rights,  the  speed  with  which  they  set  up  a  Civil  Rights  Divi-
sion   in  the   Department   of   Justice,  and   the   militancy  with
which  they  initiate action  under  existing  law  and  the  new  bill.
Unfortunately   militancy  is  not   the  outstanding  characteristic
either  of  Mr.  Eisenhower  or  Mr.   Brownell.
In   its  progress  through   the   House   and   Senate,   the   civil
rights  bill  was  steadily  crippled.   It  emerged  heart-breakingly
weak.   Even  the  investigating  powers  of  the  new  Civil  Rights
Commission  were  sharply  limited.   As  far   back  as  the   pro-
ceedings   in   the   House   Judiciary  Committee,   changes   were
made  which  will  make  it  hard  to  put  the  spotlight   on  the
worst  of  the  South's  white  supremacists.
Protecting  Their Own
From  Dies  to  Eastland,  Southern   reactionaries  have  shown
themselves  adept  in using  the  public  pillory for  suspected  radi-
cals.   They  have  proven  equally  adept  in  protecting  their  own
friends   from   exposure.    A  provision   of   the  bill  says  that  if
the  Commission  "determines  that  evidence  or  testimony at  any
hearing  may  tend  to  defame,  degrade  or  incriminate  any  per-
son"   it  shall  be  heard  in  executive  session.  The  bill  makes  it
a  crime  to  disclose  such  evidence  without  the  consent  of  the
Commission.
A  newspaperman  (if  this  provision  is  constitutional)   could
be  sent  to  jail  for  one  year  and  fined  $1,000  for   disclosing
some particularly sensational  bit  of  chicanery or  fraud  revealed
before   the   Commission.    By  contrast,   the   heaviest   penalty
which  could  be  assessed  by  a  judge  for  criminal contempt  of  a
civil  rights  order  would  be  six months  in  jail  and  $1,000  fine.
The Perjury  Hazard
The  Commission  can only  investigate  "allegations  in  writing
under   oath   or   affirmation."    There   are   many   parts   of   the
South  where  Negroes  may  fear  prosecution  for  perjury  if  they
dare  take  their  complaints  to  the  Commission  on  sworn  af-
fidavit.
The  only  allegations   the  Commission   can  investigate   have
to  do  with  voting  rights.   In  House  committee  the  Southerners
protected   the  White  Citizens  Councils   by  taking  out  of   the
bill  authority  to  investigate  allegations  of   economic   pressure
brought  on  persons  because  of  their  race  or  color.
On   other   than   voting   rights,   the   Commission   can   only
Brownell  No  Galahad
"One  wonders  at  the  vigor  of  the  opposition.  If  the
Attorney  General  of  the  United  States  is  as  dilatory
and  negligent   in  protecting  these  civil  rights  during
the  second  Eisenhower  Administration as  he  was  dur-
ing   the  first,  the  cause  of  freedom   will  not  have  ad-
vanced  very  much,  if  any,  by  January  1961.  .  .  .  Our
trouble  is  not  with  an  Attorney  General  mounted on  a
white  charger  intent  on  the  conquest  of  injustice,  but
rather  a  reluctant  politician moving  gradually  to  deal
with  the  periphery  of   a  serious   social,  economic  and
legal   problem   only   because  political  expediency   re-
quires  the  party  he  represents  to  do  something about  it
before  the  next  national  election."
—Senator  Clark   (D.  Pa.)   on  the  Civil  Rights   bill,
July  19.
study  "the  laws  and  policies  of  the  Federal  government  with
respect  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws"  and  "legal   develop-
ments  constituting  a  denial  of  equal  protection."    This   means
it  can  go  only  indirectly   into  the   many   unofficial   ways  the
South  deprives Negroes  of  their rights.
Pressure  on the White House
Among amendments which were beaten  down  on  the  Senate
floor were  several which would  have further  crippled  the  bill.
One   (by  Kefauver)   would  have  made  the   proposed   Com-
mission  a  legislative  instead  of  executive  agency,  thus  laying  it
open  to  constant  interference  from  the  Southern  bloc  in  Con-
gress.
Another  would  have  taken  from  the  Attorney General   the
power  given  him  by  the  bill  to  initiate  injunctions  on  his  own
initiative;  this  is  important  in  those  areas  where  Negroes  are
too  terrorized  to  dare  authorize  action  on  their  own  behalf.
Another   provision    saved   was   that   which   empowers    the
Federal   courts  to  intervene  in  civil  rights  cases  "without  re-
gard  to  whether  the  party  aggrieved   shall  have  exhausted  any
administrative  or  other  remedies."   This  prevents  relief   from
being  blocked  by  run-around  in  State  courts  and   agencies.
For  all   its  weaknesses,   the   bill  gives  the   Department   of
Justice  a  little  more  power  than  it  had  before  to  protect  Negro
rights  and  it  provides  an  investigating  Commission  which  can
do  a  great  deal  despite  the  heavy  limitations  upon  it.   Every-
thing  depends  on  the  men  in  charge,  and  the  support  they  get.
This   in   turn   will   require   constant   pressure   on   the   White
House.
Russell  Misstates the  Facts in
"I  have  never  failed,"  Russell  assured  O'Mahoney in  the
Senate  July  30,  "to  see  Negroes  on  panels  in  the  Federal
courts   of    nty   State."    Javits   thereupon   cited    Reece   v.
Georgia  in  which  the  Supreme  Court  as  recently  as  Decem-
ber  5,  1955, reversed  the  conviction  of  a  Negro  for  murder
in  Georgia  on the  ground  that  Negroes  were  "systematically
excluded"  from  the  grand jury  which indicted him.
Russell   indignantly  replied   that   this   ruling  was   made
"without  a  scintilla  of  evidence."   He  said  the  FBI  investi-
gated   and  found  Negroes  on  both   grand  and  petit   juries
in  Cobb  County,  Georgia,  where  Reece  was  tried.   Russell
An  Attack  on  the  Supreme  Court
was  given  unanimous consent  later  to  insert  in  the  Record
a  Justice  Department statement  showing—so  Russell  said—
that  the  Court's  finding  was  "simply  picked  out  of  thin  air."
But  the  statement,  when it  turned up  in  the  Record  (July
30,  p.  11770),  revealed  that  Russell  has  misinformed  the
Senate.   It  said  the  evidence   before  the  Court   showed  no
Negro  had served  on  a  Cobb County grand jury  for  18  years
at  the  time  Reece  was  indicted  on  October  23,  1955.   But
the  grand jury  list  was  revised  in  August,  1954  i.  e.  after
the   Reece  appeal  began,   and  since   then  juries  had   been
chosen  "without  unlawful  discrimination."
1   2    ~
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  12, 1957
Only  the  Right  to  Vote  Can Provide  As Potent  A  Symbol  as Jury  Trial
(Continued  from  Page   One)
years—equal  status  for  the  Negro.    It  was  hard  to  maintain
this  hope  and  at  the  same  time  argue  that  you  couldn't  even
trust  a  jury  of  Southern  white  men  within  the  inhibiting  con-
fines  of  a  court  of  law.
As Potent A Symbol for Counter Attack
I  stress  all  this  because  the  outcome  in  the  Senate,  which
depended  on  the  votes  of  liberal  Democrats  from  the  West
and  North  is  not  simply  to  be  explained   as  the  reflection  of
a  deal  on  Hell's  Canyon  or  cynical maneuvering  for  Southern
support   in  obtaining  the  I960  nomination.     Such  deals  and
maneuvers  are  themselves  limited  by  what  is  morally  accept-
able  and  therefore  politically  feasible.   It  was  only  on  so  re-
spectable   an   issue  as  jury  trial   that   such  men   as  Kennedy
would  dare  join  the  South;  it  was  only  on  so  potent  an  issue
that  such  liberals  as  O'Mahoney   could   be  won.   To   look  at
this  picture  clearly  is  to  see what  the  Negro  needs,  and  what
we  all  need  in  the  fight  to  make  civil  rights  a  reality,  and  to
break  the  power  of  the  Southern   oligarchy,   a  group   which
would  plunge  this  country  into  Fascism  if  need  be  to  main-
tain  its  undemocratic power.   This  is  to  turn  the  tables  on  the
South,  to  put  it  in  the  wrong,  to  wage  counter  attack  with  a
symbol  and  slogan  as  powerful  as  jury  trial.   The  slogan   to
match  it  in  our  society  is  the  right  to  vote.   The  first  is  to  use
the  expanded   enforcement   machinery—the  new  Civil  Rights
Division  of  the  Department  of  Justice  and  the  enlarged  pow-
ers  of  proceeding   by  injunction—to   test   the   good   faith  of
the  South  and  the  juries  on  whom  it  asks  us  to  rely.    The
best  answer  to  the  jury  trial  issue  is  to  use  the  bill  to  put  as
many  voting  right  cases  as  possible  before  Southern   juries,
and  let  the  whole  country  see  whether   or  not   they  can  be
trusted.   The  second  is  to  use  the  new  Commission  on  Civil
Rights  to  let  the  whole   country  see  how  undemocratic  the
South's  political  system  really  is.
What They Dare Not  Say  Openly
To  invoke  the  right  to  vote  as  the  South  has  invoked  the
right  to  jury  trial  would  be  to  throw  its  ruling  class  on  the
defensive.   The  truth  is  that  the  Southern  oligarchy  does  not
believe  in  a  right   to  vote;   it  is  fundamentally  Whig.    The
The  Southern Oligarchy's Real  View
"Between  September  1957  and  May  1958  any  South
CaroUman   who  wants   to   vote  in  the   primaries   next
June  will  have  to  obtain  a  new  voting  registration  cer-
tificate.  .  .  .  Representative James  P.  Harrelson  of  Col-
lelon  County  has  charged  that  the  measure  'is  designed
to  disfranchise  masses   of  working  people.'    He  main-
tained  that  'laboring  people  won't  have  the  opportunity
(o   fill   out   new   application   blanks  and   stand   in   long
lines,  waiting to  be  registered.'
"We  say   that  any  South   Carolinian  who  hasn't   the
patience  to  stand  in  line  to  obtain  a  registration  cer-
tificate,  isn't  fit  to  vote.  .  .  .  Let's  not  imagine  that  reg-
istration   of   all   South   Carolinians   is   desirable.   .  .   .
Every   effort   should  be  made  from  September   to  May
to  urge  all  able,  intelligent,  responsible,  property-own-
ing  South  Carolinians to  register.   Those  who  have  only
limited  education or  who  might  be  herded  to  the   polls
should  not  be   encouraged."
—Charleston   (S.   C.)   News   and   Courier,   June   84,
1957  re}jfhitcd    Con.  Rec.  Aug.  1,  p.   12170.
Southern  oligarchy  believes,  as  did  Alexander  Hamilton,  that
government  should  be  by  "the  rich  and  well  born,"  operating
through  a  restricted  property  franchise.   The   one  party  sys-
tem  of   the  South,  with  its  multitudinous qualifications  and
restrictions  on  the  right  to  vote,  disfranchises and  discourages
white  men  as  well  as  black.   This  is  how  the  Byrds,  Russells
and   Eastlands  operate.    But   they  dare   not   say  so  publicly.
They  cannot  openly  attack  the  democratic  idea.   They   cannot
say  they  do  not  believe  in  the  right  to  vote  without  exposing
their  real  position  to  the  white  majority  of  the  South  whom
they  and  their  kind  have  befuddled   and  led  by  the  nose  for
generations.   To  take  this  bill,  to  turn  the  Commission  into  a
national  forum,   to  initiate  as  many  legal  actions  as  possible,
would  be  to put  the  Southern  oligarchy  morally  and  politically
in   the   wrong   and   in   an   ultimately   indefensible   position.
Wherever  Southern  juries  do  their  duty  (as  some  will)   prog-
ress  will  be  made;  where   they  refuse,  the   South  will  hurt
itself.   The  North,  the  Negro,  and  the  friends  of  justice,  can
use  this  bill  to  regain  the  offensive,   not  just  in  Washington
but  within  the  South.  That  is  why  we  hope  to  see  it  signed
and  used.
I.*t  Us  Send  A  Copy  of  This  Issue  Free  to  Some  Friend  Who  Hasn't  Seen  the  Weekly  Before
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Are.,   N.   W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      ......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............8tate................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   .........................................................
Street     .................................................................
8/12/57
City      ........................................Zone............State................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as  Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879
Ilshed  every  Thursday  except  the last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  8818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  IB,
Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
..„.   _————.   ——     —  —— ..._   —————„_ „ August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  IB,  D. C.
An   Independent    weekly   published  and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
K   In  the   II.  S.;  16  In  Canada:  110  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $16  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED