I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jul15.pdf

============================================================

On  That  Clean  Bomb, P.  4
The  Joker  In  That  Bill  to  Get  Around the  Jencks  Decision,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  28
JULY  IB,  1957
'°'       WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
More   Meat,  Milk,  Butter—and  Blood?
In   its  article  signaling   the  purge  of   Molotov,   Malenkov
and  Kaganovich,  Pravda  cited  Lenin's  famous  attack  on  Kam-
enev  and  Zinoviev  for  betraying their  fellow  Bolsheviks a  few
days  before  the  October  Revolution  by  disclosing  the  prepara-
tions  for  the  rising  and  their  opposition  to  it.   Pravda  made
the  point  that  Lenin  "broke  with  all"  even  such  old  and  re-
spected  comrades when  they  "went  against  the  majority  of  the
party  and  the  Central  Committee."   The  parallel  was intended
to provide an  august  precedent  for  Krushchev's  own  attack  on
his  Old  Bolshevik  comrades.   Pravda  did  not  add  what  Krush-
chev  himself  said  of  this  incident  in  his  famous  secret  speech
at  the  20th  Congress.     Krushchev  pointed  out  that  dealing
with  Zinoviev and  Kamenev,  Lenin—unlike  Stalin—"did  not
pose  the  question  of  their  arrest  and  certainly not  their  shoot-
ing."    They  were  restored   to  responsible   position  and  were
honorably  referred  to  in  Lenin's  testament.    Will  Krushchev
in  dealing  with  his  opponents  follow  Stalin's  example  rather
than  Lenin's?
The  De-Stalinizer  Re-Stalinizes
In   his   speech   at   the   20th   Congress,   Krushchev   quoted
Lenin  as  saying  "Only  he  will  win  and  retain  the  power  who
believes  in  the  people.  .  .  ."  There  is little  evidence  of  belief
in  the  people   furnished'  by  the  manner  in  which  Krushchev
has  aired  the  struggle  in  the  Presidium.   The  Pravda  editorial
and  article  were  turgid  and  opaque;  the  Central   Committee
communique  was  too  obviously  one-sided   to  be  trusted;   the
popular  speeches  since  have  sought  to  denigrate  and  defame
rather  than  to  debate.   This  is  how  Stalin  operated,  how  he
prepared  the  public  for  his  great  blood  purges.    Krushchev's
opponents   are  already  being  called   "enemies  of  the   party,"
which  is  almost  as  bad  as  "enemies  of  the  people."  That  con-
cept,  originated  by  Stalin,  "actually  eliminated  the  possibility
of  any kind  of  ideological  fight  or  the  making  of  one's  views
known  on  this  or  that  issue,  even  those  of  a  practical  char-
acter."   Again,  the  words  quoted  are  Krushchev's.   The  accu-
sation  meant  death,  though,  as  Krushchev  said,  "in  regard  to
those  persons  who  in  their  time  had  opposed   the  party  line,
there  were  often  no  sufficiently  serious  reasons  for  their  anni-
hilation."    Were  Krushchev's  words  recalled  to  him  in  the
Central  Committee?
One  of  the  charges  Krushchev  makes  against  his  opponents
is  that  they  opposed  policies  which  move  toward  a  relaxation
of  international  tension.   It  is  implied  that  they  were  against
the  policies  of  peace  and  of  more  meat,  milk,  butter,  housing
and   loosened   restrictions  at  home.    They   were,  to  read  the
Central  Committee  communique,  against  all  that  is  good  and
hopeful  in  the  changes  since  Stalin's  death.   Why,  then,  were
not  the  proceedings   of  the  Central  Committee  made  public?
Not  Only  Unanimous  But  Identical
"It is  not  for  nothing that our party is  called  the  vol-
untary  militant  union  of  like-minded  Communists,  who
have  identical  ideological  and  political  views  and  iden-
tically  interpret  the  aims  and tasks  of  the  party.  .  .  ."
—Pra/vda,  On  Party   Unity,  July  S.
What   could   have  done   more  to  relax  international   tension
than  to  have Krushchev  say to  all  the  world:  "Look,  we  have
done  with  the  secretive  methods  of  Stalin.   This  is  where  I
and  my  colleagues  disagreed.   This  is  my  side.  This  is  theirs.
I  won  in  the  Central  Committee  and  I  want  the  people  of
Russia   and  the  world   to  know  why.   I  am  also  going  to
demonstrate  that  in  the  new  Russia,  unlike  Stalin's,  men  can
lose  their  political  position  without  losing  their  heads."   The
whole  world  would  have  breathed  more  easily  at  such  evidence
of  fundamental  change.   As  it  is,  even  those  most  for   peace
must  feel  disquietingly,  "Can  such  people  be  trusted?"
Malenkov  An Imperialist  Agent,  Too?
What  makes  the  shakeup  strange  and  the  official   explana-
tion  suspect  is  that  Krushchev  was  opposed   not  only  by  old-
fashioned  "hards"  like  Molotov  and  Kaganovich  but  also  by a
"liberalizer"  like  Malenkov  and  even  a protege  of  Krushchev's
like  Shepilov.    The  one  common  denominator   which   might
have  drawn  men  of  such  diverse  views  together  in  so  risky  an
enterprise   was  the   fear   that   Krushchev   was   becoming   the
same  kind  of  one-man  dictator  as  Stalin,  and  that  if  a  stand
were  not  made  soon  it  would  be  too  late.   One  might  believe
that  Molotov  and  Kaganovich  were  against  liberalization  but
who  will   believe  this   of   Malenkov?    The   short   period   in
which  he  was  in  power  with  Beria  as  his  First  Deputy  Pre-
mier  is  the  period  in  which  the  concentration  camps   were
thrown  open,  the  doctors'  plot  exposed,  the  secret  police  re-
buked,  amnesty  granted  and  a  reform  of  the  criminal  code
promised—a  promise  Krushchev  has  failed  to  honor.    Beria
was  executed  under  circumstances  never  fully  explained   and
on  charges  obviously  false.  Will  it  be  discovered  that  Malen-
kov,  too,  was  an  imperialist  agent?
We  believe  Krushchev's  opponents  were  condemned   by  a
Central   Committee   he   packed   with   his   own   henchmen   as
Stalin   did   before   him.   We   see  no   reason   to   believe   that
Krushchev  will  democratize at  home  or  in  the  satellite  states,
though  he  may  sweeten  his  victory  with  some  dramatic  eco-
nomic  concessions.   The  man  who  accused  Gomulka  of  being
a  Zionist  tool  might  as  easily  have  precipitated  a  blood  bath
in  Poland  as in  Hungary.  This is a  second  Stalin,  not  a liberal-
izer.
1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  15, 1957
Senator   Morse  and  Five  Other  Liberals  Try  to  Block  A  Jencks  Case  Phony
Will  The  Senate  Be Panicked  into  Acting  As Rubber  Stamp  for  the  FBI?
The  most  serious  aspect   of  the  legislation   being   rushed
through   Congress  to  circumvent  the  Jencks   decision  is  its
demonstration  of  the  immense political  power  exerted  by  our
secret  police, the  FBI.   It  is  a  grave  observation  that  in  Con-
gress  J.  Edgar   Hoover  commands  greater  influence  by  far
than  even  so widely respected  a  political  figure  as  Chief  Jus-
tice  Warren.   Though  few  members   of  Congress  give   evi-
dence  of having read  the  decision, a  bill  to  circumvent  it  was
reported  out  by the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee after  a  brisk
one  day  hearing   at  which  no  witnesses  were  heard   except
the   Attorney   General  and   an   assistant   Secretary   of   the
Treasury.    Identical  legislation   written   by  the   Department
of  Justice  has  been  approved  by  a  subcommittee  of  House
Judiciary  without  any  hearing  at  all.   It  is  painful  to  note
that  the  Justice  Department  measure  in  the  Senate  so  easily
and  quickly  obtained  as  sponsors   such  liberal  Senators  as
O'Mahoney,  Kefauver  and  Neely  as  well  as  Eastland.   It  is
worth  a  good  deal  to  the  FBI  that  in  the  Senate  this  should
be  known as  the  O'Mahoney bill,  thus  lending  it  liberal  con-
notations.
G-Men  Built  Up  as  National  Heroes
The   swift   action   in   Congress,   like   the    extraordinarily
phony  campaign  in  the  press,  reflects  fear  of  the  FBI   and
desire  for  its  favor.   Its   cooperation  is  valuable  to  news-
papermen;  its  hostility,  covertly  and  secretly  expressed  on  a
scale  far  wider  than  anyone  realizes,  may  be  deadly.   As  for
Congressmen,  as  Drew  Pearson   explained  in  a  most  cour-
ageous  column in the  Washington  Post  July  5, the  FBI   "has
a  complete  rundown  on  every  Congressman,  his  private  life
and  his  family.   Furthermore,   no  Congressman,  if   defeated
or  desirous  of  another  government  job,  can  become  a  judge
or  hold  government  office  without  clearance  from  the    FBI."
Added  to  this  fear   is  a  public  relations  apparatus   which
has  built  up  as  heroes  of  a  free  society  those  who  engage  in
a  political   surveillance  which  contradicts   its  very   essence.
Pearson   revealed  among  other  publicity  phonys  of  the   FBI
that  the truth  about  its highly  advertised  capture  of the  Nazi
saboteurs  during  the  war  was that  the  saboteurs  "telephoned
the  FBI  and  gave  themselves  up."   Secret  police practices  are
gaining  a  beachhead  in  American  life  from  which  our  chil-
dren  and  grand-children  may   suffer.
Against   that   background,   high   praise   is   due   Senator
Morse  and  five  colleagues  (Neuberger,  Murray,  Clark,  Hen-
nings  and  Langer)  for  blocking rubber  stamp  action  in  the
Senate  by  introducing  amendments  to  the   so-called  O'Ma-
honey  bill  which  might bury  it  for  this  session.  As that new
liberal  voice  from  Pennsylvania,  former  Mayor  Joseph  Clark
of  Philadelphia, said  in  supporting  Morse, these  six  Senators
see  no  reason  to  be  "panicked  into  action ...  on  a  scare
basis"  by  the  Attorney  General.  The  campaign  for  this  bill
has  proceeded on two levels  of  dishonesty, one for  the  general
public  and the  more ignorant  members of  Congress,  the  other
for  the  more  thoughtful  and  astute.   The  box  above  provides
a  sample  of  the  two  approaches.
While  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee in  an  official  report
Same  Day,  Same  Senator
"The   Court's  decision  .  .  .  threatens  the  whole struc-
ture  and operation of  the  FBI  .  .  .  makes life  100 per-
cent  easier  for  traitors  .  .  .  turns  government  records
into  a  free  peep-show  for  alien  powers."
—Sen.  Potter   (R.  Mich.)  in  the  Senate  July  1,  the
silliest  of  all  the  silly  speeches  on  the  Jencks  decision.
"It  should  be  emphasized,  in  view  of  the  wide  mis-
interpretation   and   popular   misunderstanding   of    the
opinion  in  the  Jencks  case,  that  the  committee  does  not
believe,  after  studying  the  decision  very  carefully,  that
a  defendant would  be  entitled  under  the  decision  in  the
Jencks  case  to  rove  at  will  through  government  flies."
—Report   No.  569  from   the  Senate   Judiciary  Com-
mittee  that  same  day  signed  (among  others)  by  Potter.
did  not  dare  underwrite  the  widespread  hysterical  and  men-
dacious  nonsense  which  Senator  Potter's  speech  typifies,  it
was  itself  dishonest  in  claiming that  the  bill  it  reported  out
"reaffirms  the   decision  of  the  Supreme   Court"  that  a  de-
fendant  in  a  criminal  trial  is  entitled  to  see the  original  re-
ports  of any  witness  produced by the  government.  The public
has  been  led  to  believe that  th^  only  difference  between  the
Jencks   decision  and  the  O'Mahoney  bill  is  that  the  latter
would  provide  that  the  reports  would  first  be  inspected  by
the  Judge  and  such  portions  handed  over  to  the  defense  as
he  deems relevant.
The  Crucial Joker
This  is  false.   Senator  Morse's  astute  and  vigilant  eye  has
brought  to  light  the  crucial  joker  in  the  bill.  The  bill  would
provide  for  the  production  only  of  such  earlier  reports  by
the  witness  as  were  signed  by  him  "or  otherwise  adopted  or
approved  by  him  as  correct."  In  practice,  as  Senator  Morse
pointed  out,  most  prospective  witnesses   interviewed  by  the
FBI  "are   not  given  the  opportunity  to  see  the  summary  of
their   interviews."   The  Supreme   Court   decision  upheld   a
traditional  rule  which  gave  an  accused  the  right  to  see "oral
or  written  reports."   The  O'Mahoney bill  would  apply  only
to  written  reports  signed  or  otherwise  authenticated   by  the
witness.  There  are  few  such in  the  FBI files, and  as  Senator
Morse  said  the  bill's  procedures  could  be  circumvented  al-
together   "by  the  simple  expedient  of  discontinuing  written
reports in the few cases in which informants  have  given their
information  in  that  form."   Another  important   difference  is
that  whereas  the  Supreme  Court  ruled  that  where  the  gov-
ernment   chooses  not  to  produce  the  original   reports   "the
criminal  action  must  be dismissed,"  the  bill  allows  the  Judge
either  to  "strike  from  the  record  the  testimony  of  the   wit-
ness"  whose  earlier  reports  have  been  refused,  or  declare  a
mistrial.    This   may   conflict   with   the   Constitution's    bar
against   double  jeopardy   as   well  as  with   the  due   process
clause.
"I Do  Not  Intend  to Allow  FBI Files to  Be  Made A Sacred Cow"
"The    Supreme   Court   held  in  the   Jencks  case   that  de-
fendants  in  a  criminal  prosecution brought  by  the  United
States  should have  access  to  earlier  statements  and  reports
of  government  witnesses.   And  rightly  so,  because,  let  me
stress,  it  would  be  a  police state  tactic  if  we  ever  imbedded
in  our  system  of  justice  in  the  United  States  any  power
in  the  Government  to keep from  a  defendant  information  to
which  he is  entitled in  order  to have a  fair  trial..
"I  do  not  care  whether the  information is  in  the  files  of
the  FBI  or in  any  other Government  files.  There  is  no place
in  America  for  a  police  state  tactic  which  keeps  locked up
from  free  men  and  women  charged with  crime,  information
which,  under  due  process,  they  are  entitled  to  have  if  they
are  to  have  a  fair  trial.  1 do  not  intend  to  allow  FBI  files
to  be made  a  sacred  cow in  our system  of  government. .  .  .
We  are  dealing  in  too  much  haste  with  a  precious  right  in
criminal  jurisprudence. ..."
—Morse   (D.  Ore.)  in  the  Senate  July  3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  15, 1957
Profile  in  Courage: Kennedy  Brave  on  North  Africa  But  Shies  Away  Closer  Home
Concern  for  Colored  Men's  Rights  Should  Begin  in  Alabama,  Not  Algiers
As one who loves France  and  all  it  symbolizes in the  world,
we  find  its  Algerian  policy  painful.   The  effort  to  keep  the
Arab  in  an  inferior  and  humiliating  status  is  poisoning  the
political  life  of  the  Republic.  It  has  degraded  the   Socialist
party  of  France.   It  has  led  to  the  suppression  of  civil  liber-
ties.    (Our  brave  friend   Claude  Bourdet's  weekly   France-
Observateur,  has  several  times  been  seized  by  the  police  for
exposing  the  barbarity  with  which  the   natives  have  been
treated  in  Algeria.)
Yet  we  found  Senator   Kennedy's   speech   in  the   Senate
July  2  somewhat  lacking  as  a  tocsin  of  freedom.    To  com-
plain  that  the  war  in  Algeria  "has  stripped  the  continental
forces  of NATO to the  bone . . . diluted the  effective  strength
of  the Eisenhower  Doctrine . . . endangered  the continuation
of  some  of  our  most  strategic  airbases"  is  hardly  to  speak
the  language  of  Patrick  Henry;  indeed  it  sounds  more  like
Admiral  Radford.
To say,  as  Senator  Kennedy did, that  our  policies in  North
Africa  "cannot  be tied  any  longer  to the  French" and  that  to
take  the  Arab  Nationalist   side  "will  pay  dividends  to  us  in
the  years  ahead"  is  pretty  plainly  to  say  that  we propose  to
ditch  the  French  and  play  up  to  the  Arabs  because it  better
serves  our  own  purposes.
Brave—At  A Safe  Distance
In  the  eyes  of  colored  men,  the  Algerian  struggle  is  only
another  chapter  in  the  effort  of  white  men  to  keep  them  as
hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water.   The  test  of  Senator
Kennedy's  idealism  will  seem  to  colored  men  a  matter  to  be
tested  much  closer  home  than  Algeria.   When  Kennedy  ob-
tained  the  floor  of  the  Senate  on July  2,  Senator  Russell  of
Georgia  had  just  finished  a  wild,  sweeping  and  feverish  at-
tack  on  the  civil  rights  bill  but   Senator   Kennedy  did  not
use  the  floor  to  answer  Russell.   Senator  Kennedy  is  bold  on
issues  safely  distant  in  time  and   space.   During  the  Mc-
Carthy  era,  the  Senator   from   Massachusetts   wrote  a  book
about  courage  —  the  courage  shown  by  other   Senators  on
other  occasions  in  history—but  he  himself  did  not   practice
what  he  described.   When  McCarthyism  was  the  issue,  his
own  profile  was  discreetly  set  in  silence.   It  is  characteristic
.that  on  the  eve  of  a  battle  to  enforce  the  rights  of  colored
people  in  our  South,  Senator  Kennedy  should  launch  a  cru-
sade  to  help  the  colored  people—in  Algeria.    He's  a   brave
man  away  from  home.
Just  how cautious  the  Senator  from  Massachusetts   can  be
was  demonstrated   when  Senator  Neuberger   of  Oregon  in-
terrupted  to  suggest  that  we  "set  an  example to  France" by
granting >self-government  and  Statehood  this  year  to  Alaska
and  Hawaii.   The  Southern   Democrats  are  sensitive  on  the
Correcting A Canard
In  England  the  revelation  that  the  Home  Office  was
tapping  telephones  has  precipitated  an  uproar  in  Par-
liament  and  the  press.  We  note  with  indignation that
the  London.New  Statesman  and  Nation  in  its  June 29
issue  reported,  "The  classic  comment  on  wire-tapping
was  made by  that  deaf,  but  pugnacious  American jour-
nalist,  I.  F.  Stone.   Things  have  got  so  bad  in  Wash-
ington,'  he  said,  'that  even  my  hearing-aid  is  tapped'."
We  hastened  to  check  this  canard  at  the  Department
of  Justice,   and  were  informed  that,  whatever  may  be
the  practice  of  Scotland  Yard,  the  FBI  never  taps hear-
ing  aids  except  on  express  authorization  of  the  Attor-
ney  General  in  cases  where  there  is  reason  to  suspect
espionage,  sabotage,  advocacy  of  overthrow  by  force
and,  violence  or  habitual  addiction  to  subversive  con-
versation.   Otherwise the  American's  hearing  aid  is  as
inviolate  as  the ear-trumpet  in  the  Englishman's  castle.
Let  Freedom Ring—
But  First  Count  the  Bases
"Now   I   should   like   to   stress   the   importance  of
France ...  If  there  is  any  doubt  about  it,  all anyone
has  to  do is  to  go there  and  count  the  air  bases  we use
and  all the facilities  we have  .  .  .  that  merits  consid-
eration  on  our  part,  and  a  caution as  to  the  delicacy of
the  problem  which  confronts  France."
—Senator  Dirksen,  replying    to  Senator   Kennedy's
proposal  that  we  support   Algerian  independence.
subject  of  Hawaii.   It  would  be  the  first  "colored"  State  in
the  Union.  Senator  Kennedy  said  he did not  want  to  "equate
the  situation  of  Algeria  with  that  of  Alaska  and  Hawaii."
He  said  the  Alaskans  and  Hawaiians  "want  to  make  their
ties  more intimate,  which is  not  the  situation  with  regard  to
the  Algerians."   This  is  correct.   The  French  don't  want  col-
ored  men  in  Algeria  to   become  more  independent  and  we
don't  want  colored  men in  Hawaii  to  become  "more  intimate."
The  result  is  the  same  in  both  cases:  denial  of  self-govern-
ment.   But  if  Kennedy wants  the  Democratic  nomination  in
1960,  he  cannot  afford  to  be  militantly  for  civil  rights  any
nearer  home  than  Algeria.   Even  Hawaii  is  too  close.
When  Senator  Dirksen  of  Illinois  suggested  during  the  de-
bate  on  Algeria  that  the   issue  of  freedom   was   universal,
"whether    they   be   Algerians   or   Irish,   whether   they   be
Orangemen  in  Belfast,  or,  for  that  matter,  whether  they  be
Negroes  in  our  own  country  who  are   seeking   self-govern-
ment,"  he  evoked  no  response  from   Senator   Kennedy.   We
are  not  wooing  the  Negroes  of  Montgomery,  Alabama,  for
bases.
When  A Russell 'Raves
Senator   Russell's   speech,  the   curtain-raiser   on  the  fili-
buster  now  underway  in  the  U.  S.  Senate,  deserves  a  close
reading.  When  so distinguished  a  conservative  as  Russell of
Georgia  can  speak  as  he  did,  one can  only  conclude that  the
white  South  is  in  an  irrational  state  of  mind.   "Nowhere  in
our  history," he  told  the  Senate,  "has  any  minority  group  in
this country  . . . been subject  to a  campaign  which  compares
to  that  being  waged  against  the  white  people  of  the  South
today."   He  said  "the   concentration  camps  may  as  well  be
prepared   now."   He  "unhesitatingly"  asserted  that  part  III
of  the  civil  rights  bill  was  written  to  make  it  possible  for
Eisenhower  to  use  the  Army "to  destroy  the  system  of  sepa-
ration  of the  races ... at  the  point  of a  bayonet"  and that
Elsenhower's  purpose  like  that  of  Sumner  and  Stevens  was
"to  put  black  heels  on  white necks."  One might  easily  infer,
from  Russell's  speech, that  the  one place  in  the  world  where
black  men  oppressed  white  was  below  our  Mason-Dixon  line.
The  Russell  speech  is  not  comedy,  except  of  a  bitter  kind.
He  is  no  Senator  Foghorn.   If  the  most  respectable   elements
of  the  South talk this way, what  can  one expect  of  the  crack-
ers,  the  rednecks  and  the  poor  white  trash  who gravitate  to
the  Klan?   Hill  of  Alabama, a  progressive  on  everything  but
the  sacred  right  to  hold the  Negro  down,  rose  to  say that  he
had  never heard  "a  calmer,  a more judicious, a more  logically
and  cogently  reasoned"   address  than   Russell's—though  the
Senate has  not heard  such  raving  from  a  responsible  Senator
since  the  "bloody shirt"  era.
From  the  North,  only  two  Senators  rose  to  reply,  Douglas
and  Dirksen,  both  of  Illinois.   The  former,  the  intellectual
leader  of  the  fight  for  civil  rights,  spoke  with  a  conciliatory
and   principled   statesmanship.    Dirksen   was   less    tactful.
"Seldom  in  my  long  legislative   experience,"   he  said,  "have
I  seen  within  the  frame  of  a  single  speech  so  many  ghosts
discovered  under  the  same   bed."
1  1 3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July   15, 1957
The  Right  to  Travel  Inches  Forward  in  the  Donald  Ogden  Stewart   Case
Unfit  to Print? The  New  York  Times  and  Mansfield's  "Clean"  Bomb  Speech
Clean  Bomb   Controversy:  The  New   York   Times,   which
often  seems  to  be  edited  by  Admiral  Strauss  whenever  atomic
news   is  involved,   gave   its  readers  no   summary  of   Senator
Mansfield's   thoughtful   speech  July  3  on  the  question   of  a
"clean"  bomb.   Mansfield  pointed  out  (1)   the  recent  Teller-
Lawrence  visit  to  the  White  House   recalls  their   misleading
and  politically   motivated  joint  statement  on  the  eve  of   the
1956  presidential  election  that  "the  radioactivity  produced  by
the  testing   program   is  insignificant"  (2)    their  assurance  a
"clean"  bomb  could  be  developed   was  contradicted  by  AEC
scientist  Dr.  Alvin  C. Graves who  testified  at  the  recent  fallout
hearings  "that  complete  cleanliness  in  hydrogen  bombs  was
impossible"  (3)  even  a  bomb  96  percent  clean   "would  still
release  more  fallout  than  the  atomic  bomb  dropped  on  Hiro-
shima"  and  asked  (4)   "Are  we  willing  to  give  our  formula
to  the  Soviet  Union  so  that  she  can  continue  her  tests  with-
out  contaminating  the  atmosphere?"    Mansfield  struck  at  the
implication  that  so  huge  an  explosive   force  as  the   H-bomb
even  if  "clean"  could  be  used  without  killing  "hundreds  of
thousands  of  innocent  people"  and  suggested   that  in   actual
warfare   the   military  could   find   good   strategic   reasons   for
using  dirty  bombs,  since  these  would  render  huge  areas  in-
accessible  to  the  enemy  without  any  need  to  occupy  them.
Right   to  Travel:   Inching   forward.    The   Donald    Ogden
Stewart  decision  was  a  defeat  for  the.State  Department.   Even
Judge  Prettyman,  who  dominates  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  the
District  of  Columbia,  said  he  doubted  "the  legal  validity of  a
regulation  which  would  peremptorily  deny  a  passport  to  any
person  who  ever  at  any  time  has  had  any  Communist  connec-
tions"   and   in  a  footnote  cited   the   Supreme   Court's   recent
decisions  in  the  Schware  and  Konigsberg  cases which  held  that
past  Communist  membership  could  not  be  the  basis  of  exclu-
sion  from   the  legal  profession.   The  Department   must  now
either  give  Stewart  a  passport  or  hold  a  hearing  and  rely  on
associational   effluvia   so  long  past  that  the  courts   on   appeal
may  reverse.   While  the  Stewart  case .deals  with  an   affidavit
which  denied  Communist  party  membership  for  the  past  15
years,  Corliss  Lament's  suit  will  test  the  new  passport  forms
which  require  a  non-Communist  oath  as  condition  for  a  pass-
port.   The  Department  is  heading  for  almost  certain  defeat  in
For  New  York  Readers:  IPS   on    "Night
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street    ...........
City     .............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street    ..........
City    ............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  5618   Nebraska    Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
...........................Zone............State................_
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
7/15/57
...........................Zone............State................_
gift   announcement?     Tea  D    No  D
In  Our Own  Backyard
"Ever  since  Colonel   Castillo   overthrew   the  Commu-
nist  infiltrated  regime  of  Col.  Jacob  Arbenz  Guzman  in
June,   1954,  and  dissolved   his  supporting   political  par-
ties,  no  opposition   parties  have   functioned   in  Guate-
mala."
—Delayed   cable  reporting   Guatemalan  student   pro-
tests  June  28  in  the  New   York   Times,  July   7.
another  case  just  argued  before  the  Court   of   Appeals  here,
that  of  Wilbur  Bruce  Dayton,  a  physicist  who  filed  an   affi-
davit  denying  that  he  was  ever  a  Communist  or  a  member
of  any  organization  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.   Denial  of
a  passport  to  Dayton  is  based  on  grounds  so  vague  that  the
Supreme  Court  might  use  it  to  set  some  outer  limits  at  least
on  the  State  Department's  powers.
Constructive   Suggestion:   As   important  as   Senator   Hum-
phrey's  warning  that  there  could  be  no  viable  world  disarma-
ment  agreement  without  Communist  China  was  his  sugges-
tion   (largely  ignored  by  the  press)   that  Korea—and  later
Vietnam—be  made  pilot  tests  of  arms  inspection   proposals.
Humphrey  said  that   "the   danger   of   an  arms   competition"
between  North  and   South   Korea   led  him   to   propose   that
before  the  armistice  breaks  down   completely   the  UN   com-
mand   should   be  authorized   to  negotiate   "new   military  ar-
rangements  providing  for  a  thinning  out  of  armed  forces  and
armaments  on  both  sides  of  the  armistice  lines  and  for   effec-
tive  .  .  . mutual  aerial  and  ground  inspection  of  the  type  that
both  the  United   States  and  the   Soviet  Union   have  already
accepted   in  principle."    Korea   could   thus  become   a   testing
ground  for  peace.
Funniest  Item   of   The   Week:   The  warning  by  that  distin-
guished  civil   libertarian,   Senator  James   Eastland   of   Missis-
sippi,   chairman  of   the   Senate  Internal   Security   Committee,
close  follower  of  the  Communist  movement,  that  passage  of
the  Civil  Rights  bill  would  reactivate  a  Reconstruction  statute
known  as  the  Compulsory  Informer  Act,  which  (so  he  says)
would   penalize  "anyone   who   neglects   or   refuses   to   reveal
information  relative to  ...    any violation  of  the  so-called  civil
rights  of  others."
Beat"  TV   This   Coming   Thursday    Night
IE  Stop's   Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  IS,  D. C.
An  Independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IB  in  the   TJ.  8.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Kail  ratei:  $15  to  Europe:  120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED