I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jan21.pdf

============================================================

Fingerprints for  Passports?  P.  4
Exclusive  Text:  George  Kennan  Tells  How East  Europe  May Be  Liberated,  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  3
JANUARY  21, 1957'»'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Volcanoes  We  Ignore—East  West  (and  South )
In  pre-inaugural  Washington   the  holiday  atmosphere  did
not  match  the  alarmist  headlines.  The  gay  bunting  and  the
special  parade  stands  which  lined  the  streets  from  the  White
House  to  the  Capitol  provided  their  own  commentary on  the
picture  of  imminent  catastrophe the  Administration  had  been
painting  for  a  reluctant  Congress.   So  did  the  relaxed  almost
bucolic  air  which  greeted  the  chance  visitor  to  the  Pentagon;
its  chiefs  huddled  secretly  for  another  kind  of  war—their  an-
nual  Armageddon with  the  appropriations  committees lying in
ambush  for  them  on  the  Hill.   A  less  reassuring paradox was
also  discernible. While  the  Administration still  insisted  on  the
urgent  necessity  for  a  blank  check  against  a form  of  aggression
no  one  expected,  it  was  ignoring  really  imminent  crises.
Liberation,  Like  Charity .  . .
Events  may  soon  prove  we  have  been  sitting  on  volcanoes,
and  paying  least  attention  to  those  closest  home.  The  danger
spots  in  the  order  of  their  urgency  are  our  own  South,  then
Eastern  Europe  where  a  new  explosion  may  come  at  any  time
in  Poland,   and  lastly  that  triangle  of  tension  between  Suez,
Aqaba  and  Gaza. Of  those  observing  this panorama none  have
more  right  to  be  bitter  than  our  own  Negroes.   The  violence
spreading  in  the  South  is  consigned  to  the  back  pages,  like
news  of  interest  only  to  colored   folks.    The  President  finds
time  to  visit  a  West  stricken  by  drought,  but  turns a  deaf  ear
to  appeals  from   a  South  whose  human  resources  have  long
been  wasted by bigotry.  Montgomery,  Atlanta  and  Tallahassee
have  "freedom  fighters"  as  brave as  Budapest's  but  they  don't
command   one  tenth   the  attention.   When   the   Governor  of
Georgia  tells  a  f ootstomping  legislature  there  will  be no  break-
down  of  segregation  "no  matter what  any court may rule",  and
the  head  of  the  Klan confers  like a  respectable  visitor  with  the
State  Attorney General,  mob  spirit  is  rising  high.  This  is  one
area  where Mr.  Eisenhower's  prestige  and  personality  could  do
much;  the  longer  he  shirks  the  obligations  of  leadership  the
greater  the  danger.
As  great  a  bitterness  may  be  felt   by  the  dissident  forces
struggling  in  Eastern  Europe  against  Russian  domination. This
is  another  area  in  which  the  Administration  has  evaded  its  re-
sponsibility.  Three  former   State  Department   officials,   George
Kennan,  Paul  Nitze  and  Benjamin V.  Cohen,  in  testimony be-
fore  the   Humphrey   disarmament   committee  of   the   Senate,
have  shown  that  the  one way to  liberate  Eastern  Europe  lies  in
Moscow's   offer   to  negotiate  a  mutual  withdrawal  of  armies.
But   this  runs  so  counter  to   official   policy  that   it  has   been
ignored  or slighted  by the  press.   We  reprint  the heart  of  Mr.
Kennan's  testimony on  Page  2;  it  is the  most  brilliant  analysis
we  have   seen  of  the  real  problem  in  Eastern  Europe.    Mr.
Nitze  told  the  subcommittee that  last  Fall,  when  it  became evi-
dent  that  unrest  in  Poland  and  Hungary  was greater  than any-
one  had  anticipated,  he  approached   acquaintances  in  the  Ad-
ministration  with  the  suggestion  that  we  offer  to  negotiate  a
mutual  withdrawal  but  nothing was done about  it.   If  the Red
Army  is  gotten  out  of  Poland  and  Hungary,  a  peaceful  evolu-
tion  toward more  independent  and  less  repressive  regimes  will
become  possible.   But  the  Russians must  have  assurance  that
they  will  not  become  forward  bases  for  attack  against  them.
The  Real  Question  in  East  Europe
The  price  of  liberating  East  Europe  is  a  change  in  our Ger-
man  policy.   If  there  is  to  be  a  neutralized  East  Europe,   its
cornerstone  must  be a  reunited  neutralized  Germany.  The  real
question  is  whether  we  care  more  for  an  unreliable   alliance
with  a  resurgent  rearmed  Germany than  we do  for  the  peoples
of  Eastern  Europe.  Until  this  is settled,  disarmament  will  only
be  the  occasion  for  a  sham  propaganda  battle.  The  new pro-
posals  presented  at  the  United  Nations  are  designed,   like  so
much  else  by this  Administration,  to  win  a maximum of  glam-
orous  publicity  with  a  minimum  of  substance.  We   are  now
ready    to  accept  the  Russian  acceptance  of  the  Western pro-
posal  of  several  years  ago  to  reduce  the  Russian army  and  our
own  to  2,500,000  men  each,  but  it  is  not  clear  how  much  in-
spection  we will  require  even  for  this.  The  program  as a whole
is  safely  perfectionist,  i.  e.  it  depends  on  the  establishment  of
inspection  controls  so  foolproof  that  the  General   Staffs   need
never  worry that  they  may  actually  be  required  to  scrap  weap-
ons.  The  problems   are  too  enormous   for   settlement   in  one
miraculous  package;  some  relaxation  of  tension,  some  growth
of   confidence,  some  settlement  of  political  issues  must  come
first.  The  danger  is  that  we  will  do  nothing  and  let  Eastern
Europe  stew  in  its  angry  juices  until  there  is  a  new  outbreak.
Congress  and  the  country  do  not  seem  to  be  in  a  mood  for
such   complex   realities.  The   mood   in  Congress   is  to   grant
Eisenhower a blank  check  on  manpower  for  war  in  the  Middle
East,  but  not  for  money  to  improve  the  possibilities  of  peace.
There  seems to be  special  anxiety over  reports  that  the Admin-
istration  is  considering  vast  water  projects  for  the  whole  area;
"TVA's  on   the   Danube"   are   as  unpopular   as  when   first
broached  by  Henry  Wallace;   the  constructive  potential   seems
to  arouse  more  opposition  among  the  men  who  really  count  in
Congress  than  the  blatant ringing  of  war alarums.  The  Middle
East  is  really  not  so  different  from  Eastern  Europe  in  that  the
key  to  a  settlement  with  the  Russians  may  lie  in  neutralizing
the  big  bomber  bases  in  Arabia  which  they  see  as  a  threat  to
their  own  security.  But  what  Mr.  Dulles  seeks  is an  American
protectorate.  The  Arabs  are  offered  baksheesh  and  a  promise
of  non-interference  in  their  quarrel  with  Israel   (Mr.  Dulles
last  week  dismissed  this  as  an  "intraregional"  problem,  as  if
that  made  it  less  a  threat  to  peace)  if  they  accept  U.S. hegem-
ony.  But  it  is too  late  for  a  new  style  colonialism  in  the  East.
1   ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  21,1957
Not  A  Line  of  This  Illuminating  Testimony  Appeared  in  the  New  York  Times
George Kennan  Tells  How  We  Might  Really  Liberate  East  Europe
// is a journalistic scandal  that the New  York  Times  did not
carry  a  line  on  the  testimony   of  George  Kennan,  once  the
State  Department's   "Mr.  X"   at  the  opening  of  the  Senate's
Humphrey   disarmament   subcommittee   hearings  January   9.
Mr.  Kennan's   testimony   indicates  how  the  Soviet  satellites
really   might   be  liberated.    We   believe   readers   will    find
Mr.  Kennan's  testimony  indispensable  for  an  understanding
of   what  is  happening  in  Eastern  Europe  and  of  the  political
preconditions for  making  any progress on disarmament  talks.
Since  this  testimony,   which  runs  counter  to   official     policy,
was  slighted   or  ignored  by  the  press  and  the  wire  services,
we  are  providing   the  heart  of  what  Mr.  Kennan  had  to  say
from  the  official   but  unpublished  committee   transcript.—IPS.
Mr. Kennan  told the Humphrey  Subcommittee:
"If  means  could  be found  for  the  peaceable  and  gradual  re-
traction  of  Soviet  power—I  am  speaking  here  of  Europe—to
levels which  would  be more  tolerable  with  world  stability, then
I  think  that  is  the  best  thing  that  can  happen  from  the  stand-
point  of  the  reduction  of  armaments  throughout  the  world.
"But  if  it  comes  in  the  way  of  a  flagrant  and  violent   defi-
ance  of  the  present  military  alliances  in  Eastern  Europe,  it  is
my  belief   that  the  Soviet  government   would   then   see  itself
compelled   to  take  action  much  more  violent  even  than  it  has
recently  taken  in  Hungary  and  the  main  sufferers  then  would
be  the  satellite  peoples  whose  fortunes,  I  am  sure,  we  all  have
at heart. . ..
"I  have  never  felt  that  there  was  any  great  possibility  of  ar-
riving at  any multilateral  agreement  for  the  reduction  of  arma-
ments,  of  conventional  armaments,  as  long  as  you  had  Ameri-
can  and  Soviet  forces  face-to-face  in  the  middle  of  Germany.
"I  believe  that  this  problem  has to  be  tackled  first,  and  that
only  when  some  solution  has been  found  to that  can you expect
a  mutual  reduction  of  the  size  of  armed  forces  and  even  then,
I  am not  sure  that  it  can come  by agreement.   I  think  it  might
just  come  by unilateral  action  on  both  sides. ...
What  the  Russians  Fear
"In  my  opinion   the  Soviet  leaders  are  sincere  in  their  be-
lief,  whether  or  not  they  are  right,  that  any  unilateral  with-
drawal  of  their  forces  from  Eastern  Europe,  any  withdrawal
that  is  not  balanced  by  some  compensatory  action  on  the  west-
ern  side,  would  in  the  present  circumstances  be  detrimental,
seriously  detrimental, both  to the  military security of  the  Soviet
Union  and  to  the  internal  security  of  the  regime.
"They  consider  that  if  any of  the  Eastern  European  countries
were  to  depart  from  the  Warsaw  Pact—and  it  will  be  remem-
bered  that  this  was  the  request  of  the  Nagy  government—it
would  almost  immediately  become  a  member  of  the  Western
military  bloc,  which  they  insist  on  regarding,   I  think   quite
wrongly,  as hostile  to  themselves.  .  . .
"On  the  other  hand  if  no  such  military  security  considera-
tions  were  involved,  if  there  were  no  Atlantic Pact  and  if  U.S.
forces  were  not  in  Europe,  if  the  Germans  were  not  a  member
of  the  Atlantic  Pact,  and  if  they  don't  have  to  fear  that  in  re-
leasing  the  Eastern  European  peoples  to  a  greater  freedom,  it
would  merely  be  consigning  these  people  to  inclusion  in  the
Atlantic  Pact  group,  then  I  think  there  would  be  a  real  ques-
tion  whether  they  would  consider  it  desirable  and   expedient
to  try  to  continue to  maintain  the  same sort  of  military  hegem-
ony  in  Eastern  Europe  that  they  have  maintained  up  to  this
time.  . . .
What  the  West  Must  Decide
"All  this  means,  as  I  see  it,  that  we  have  here  in  the  West
a  certain  basic policy  decision  to  be  made.   If  we  wish  to  con-
tinue  to  make things as  difficult  as possible  for  the  Soviet  gov-
ernment  in  Eastern  Europe—and  there  is  a  lot  to  be  said  for
that,  because  they  are  to  blame  for  their  problems  there  today,
and  I  have  no  sympathy with  them  in  the  problems  they  have
got—if  we wish  to  let  them  toss unaided on  the  horns  of  what
I think  is the  dilemma  in  which they have  involved themselves,
then  we  ought  to  continue  to  do  what  we  have  been  doing  in
recent  years,  and  to  make  no  new  proposals  with  regard   to
Germany  or  with  regard  to  a  general  European settlement.
"If  we cling  to our  present  position, I  believe that  the  Soviet
leaders  will  feel  that  they have  no  choice  but  to  cling  to theirs,
to  retain  their  troops  in  Eastern  Europe and  to  continue as  best
they  can  the  tragic  effort  to  repress  the  national  feelings  of  the
Poles  and  the  others.
"When  I  say they will  feel  that  they  have  no  choice,  I  mean
no  choice  from  their  standpoint,  because  they  v.il!  see  the  al-
ternative  to  that  as  a  disastrous  collapse  of  their  prestige  in
that  area,  and  one which  is  apt  to  carry  into  the  Soviet  Union
itself.  . . .
[The   alternative  is]   "some   shift  in  the  Western   position
directed   toward   the   eventual  reduction   or   redisposition   or
withdrawal  of  both  the  Soviet  armed  forces  in  Central  Europe
and   toward   the  early  political   unification   of   Germany,   and
toward  the  supplementing   of  the  existing  alliances  by  some
sort  of  a  general  European  security  pact.
Senators  Alarmed  over  Germany
SENATOR  SYMINGTON:  ".  .  . Would  you be willing  to  scrap
NATO  in  order  to  have  our  troops  get  out  of  Western  Ger-
many  and  Russian  troops  out  of  Poland  or  Eastern  Germany?
MR.  KENNAN:  "I   am  inclined  to  think  that   the   dangers
might  be  less  by not  having  Germany  in NATO,  if  the  Soviets
would  really get  out  of  Eastern  Europe.  When  we  established
NATO,  the  Germans  were  not  in  it,  and  it  was  not  intended
at  that  time,  as  I  recall  it,  that  they  should  be.  ...     If  we say
the  Germans are  to  remain  in NATO,  we  say we  are  going  to
hold  the  division  of Europe.  .  . .
SENATOR  HUMPHREY:  "Are  we  not  somewhat  on  the  spot
here  in  terms  of  the  German   reunification  question,   speaking
in  terms  of  any  demilitarized  zone,  lest  we  undermine  a  very
good  friend  in  the  West  German  Republic,  namely,   Chancel-
lor  Adenauer ?
MR.  KENNAN:  "That  is unquestionably  true.  . . . But it  is a
question  which  I  think  we  ought   to  explore  in  the  light .of
most  recent happenings.  .
"I  think  it  might  be  possible  for  the  satellite  peoples  to  re-
gain  a  real  independence if  that  came within the  framework  of
a  general  European  settlement  in  which  the  Western   powers,
including  ourselves,  would  also  make  certain   concessions."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  21,1957
The  Old  Red Menace-She  Ain't  What  She Used  to  Be
For  those  interested  in  watching  the  climate  of  opinion,  we
report  three  related—and  hopeful—items  at  the  very  begin-
ning  of  the  85th  Congress.  The  President's  annual  State  of  the
Union  message  this  year,  Elsenhower's  fifth,  was  the  first  to
contain  no  reference to  Communism or  "subversion"  as  a  do-
mestic problem.  A  bill  (S.  371)  to  repeal the non-Communist
oath  provisions  of  the  Taft-Hartley  Act  was  introduced  by—
of  all  people—Goldwater  (R.  Ariz.),  hitherto  a  faithful  fel-
low  traveller  of   the  National  Association  of  Manufacturers.
And  a newspaper  friend  on  the  other side of  the  political fence
tells  us  that  Senator  Jenner  (R.  Ind.)   said  sadly,  "I  have  so
few  friends  left  in  the  Senate that  if  I  had  a  heart  attack  there
wouldn't  be  enough  to  carry  me  to  the  cloakroom."
No   one  was  more  startled   than   Senator  McNamara   (D.
Mich.)  by  the  Goldwater   bill  to  repeal  the   non-Communist
oath  provisions  of  the  Taft-Hartley  Act.  McNamara,  the  only
trade  unionist  in  the  Senate,  introduced  a  bill  to  repeal  the
oath  early  last  session  (S.  3187)   but  couldn't  even  get  it  re-
ported  out  of  committee.  This  time  Goldwater  introduced  an
almost  identical  bill  before  McNamara  had  time  to  re-intro-
duce  his.  McNamara's  office  was  surprised,  indignant  and  be-
wildered.   Goldwater  is up  for  reelection in  1958,  but  Arizona
is  hardly  a  labor  stronghold;  no  one  seems  to  know  just  why
he  sponsored  this  legislation.   Goldwater's  own  explanation
in  a  press  release  is that  the  non-Communist oath  is  no  longer
needed  because  Congress  passed  the  Butler  bill  two  years  ago
allowing  the  Justice Department  to  act against  "Communist  in-
filtrated"  unions:  "The   Arizona  Republican  said  further  that
the  work  that  has  been  done  by  the  unions  themselves  in  re-
moving  Communists  from   their  ranks  is  an  additional   and
compelling  reason  for  the  adoption  of  his  amendment."  This
substitutes a gold  star  for  the  red  badge.  The  U.S.  Chamber  of
Commerce  must  be  wondering  what  infiltrated  Barry  Gold-
water.
Against  this  background  it  is  easy  to  understand  the  gloom
enveloping  our  colleague,  Mr.  Westbrook  Pegler.  "The   cam-
paign  against  communism  and  communists  is  over,"  he  wrote
bitterly  in  the  New  York  Journal-American  January  10,   "and
the fight has been  lost.  . .  ." He  added  that  "not  so long  ago a
friend  counselled  me  to  forget  communism  as a  personal  issue
involving  individuals .  .  .  Americans who were  'misled'  when
they  were  in  college  under  Roosevelt  are  extremely  sensitive
and  many of  them  now  occupy positions in which they  can  hurt
crusaders  who  reveal  the  errors  of  their  troubled  youth."  This
sounds  like  an  implied  threat.  Have  mercenary  syndicate  man-
agers and  greedy capitalist publishers, been  putting  pressure  on
an  independent crusading columnist?  Mr.  Pegler  hints  that  he
is  not  only under pressure  but  about  to  give  way. "There  have
been   martyrs   to   faith   in   ages   past   who  were   stoned   and
scourged,"  he  noted  darkly,  "and  driven  forth  to  live  in  hairy
skins in  caves.  But  to  suffer  and  die  for  God  is  not  exactly  the
same  as  to  endure  abuse  and  horrible  injustice  for   a  mere
political  cause."   Does  this mean  that Mr.  Pegler,  under  perse-
cution,  is about  to  throw  in  the  sponge ? We  had  hoped,  when
we came to  that bit  about "hairy  skins  in  caves",  that  he  would
stick  it  out.   It  would  have  been  an  inspiring  sight  to  see  Mr.
Pegler,  holed  up  in  the  Palisades,  nattily  dressed  like  Johnny
Weissmuller   for   a   Tarzan   picture,   resolutely   pecking   out
another  column  for  posterity,  tracing  the  income  tax  straight
back  to  Karl  Marx  or  linking  some  newly  appointed   deputy
collector  of  customs with a  man  of  the  same name  said  to  have
signed  an  appeal  for  the  Scottsboro  boys  in  1935.
U.  S. Press  Misleading  on  Meaning  of  Shift  from  Eden  to  Macmillan
The  replacement  of  Eden  by  Macmillan  is  being  presented
in  most  of  the  American  press  as  an  effort  to  placate  the  U.S.
But  the  British  press  pro  and  con  views  the  new  Cabinet  as so
completely  staffed  with  Eden  men  as  to  be  a  challenge  to  the
U.S.   and   a   declaration   of   continued   independent    policies.
Macmillan,  who  supported  Eden  on  the  Suez  adventure,  was
picked  over  Butler,  who  opposed  Eden  and  hoped  to  step  into
his   shoes   as   a   State   Department   favorite.   The   fact   that
Churchill  and  Salisbury  advised  the  Queen  to  pick  Macmillan
means  that  Britain's  two  leading  elder  statesmen  share  popular
resentment  over  U.S.  policy  on  Suez  and  wanted  Washington
to know  that  in  Eden's  resignation  Britain  was not  "knuckling
under"  to  Dulles,  a  pro-Axis  apologist  in  the  pre-war  days
when  Eden  risked  his  political  future  to  oppose   appeasement
of  Mussolini  and  Hitler.   The  new  Prime  Minister  was  like
Eden  an  anti-Axis  rebel  against  Neville  Chamberlain  and  at
home  an  advocate  of  a  progressive  conservatism.
The  Truman  article  on  the  Mid-East, presented  here  as sup-
port  of  Eisenhower,  appeared  in  the  London  Daily  Express  un-
der  headlines  an  inch  high,   "We  Let  Britain  Down."  This
was  based  on  Truman's  "I  would  ask what  the  American  peo-
ple  think  we  should  do  if  the  Panama  Canal  were  seized  in
violation  of  treaties  and  made subject  to  the  will  of  a  dictator.
I  know  what  I  would  do."    The  Truman  article  was read  as a
defense  of  Eden's  Suez  policy.
Eden and  Dulles  differed  sharply on the  cold  war;  Eden, like
Churchill  and  Salisbury, favored  negotiation  and  relaxation  of
tension.  Eden with  Churchill's backing  insisted  on  the  summit
meeting  and  brought  it  about  over  Dulles's  objections.   "It  is
no  longer  a  secret,"   Constantine   Brown,  the   well-informed
diplomatic  correspondent  of  the  Washington  Evening  Star  re-
ported   January  14,  "that  neither   President   Eisenhower   nor
Secretary  Dulles  was  enthusiastic  over  the  scheme  [of  meeting
Krushchev   and   Bulganin   at  Geneva].   But   once   they   had
agreed  to  make  that  useless  move  they  had  to  play  along  and
pretend  for  a  few  weeks  at  least  that  everything  was  fine  and
co-existence  between  the  wolf  and  the  lambs  was  around  the
corner."  This  is  an  interesting  sidelight  on  the  spirit  in  which
Eisenhower  and  Dulles went  to  Geneva.
One  of  the  areas  in  which  the  Macmillan  government  and
Washington  may  not  see eye to  eye is  the  Middle  East.   Lon-
don  expects  Washington  to  take  over  its  annual  $33,000,000
subsidy  to  Jordan  and  with  it  control   of  the  Arab  Legion.
British  opinion  like  French  is growing  more  pro-Israel  and  the
military  correspondent  of the  influential Sunday  Times  of  Lon-
don  (Jan.  13)  suggested  that  Britain ally  itself  with  Israel  and
make  Haifa   its  main  middle   eastern   base.  This   he  wrote,
"would  unquestionably   alienate  the  Arab  bloc,  but  a  strong
base  there  would  so  alter  the  balance  of  power  in  the  Middle
East  that  such  alienation  might  be  a  price  worth  paying."
1  2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  21,1957
How  Committee   Counsel   Robert   Morris  Might   Have  Lost  His  Right  to  Travel
Senator  McClellan  Suggests  That  All  Passport  Applicants  Be Fingerprinted
Some  interesting  testimony  by  Ashley  J.  Nicholas,   acting
chief   of  the  State  Department's  passport  legal  division,  has
just  been  released  by the  Senate Internal Security  Subcommittee
but  received  little  attention  in  the  press.   Mr.  Nicholas  said
that  if  the  present  trend  in  the  courts  continues  new  legisla-
tion  would  be  required  "if  we  are  to  continue  to  refuse  pass-
ports  to  Communists."
Senator  McClellan  (D.  Ark.) commented  that  he was  "very
apprehensive"   that  even  with  such   legislation   the   Supreme
Court  might  hold   "that  it  violated  a  constitutional  right  of
the  citizen."  The  Senator  said  that  "under  the  present  trend  of
decisions  we  might  expect  almost  anything  from  the  Supreme
Court"  and  added  solemnly,  "I  make  that  statement   publicly.
I  am  very  apprehensive  about  it." .What  makes  some  Senators
so  nervous  about  enforcement  of  the  Bill  of  Rights?
Mr.   Nicholas   himself   was  taken   aback   by   Senator   Mc-
Clellan's  proposal  that  maybe  what  we  needed  was  a  law  re-
quiring  all applicants for  passports  to  be  fingerprinted.  It  will
be  odd  if,  just  when  we're  about  to  revise  regulations  and  let
Russians  come  here  without  fingerprints,  we  decide  not  to  let
Americans  travel  abroad  without  them.
How  Frauds  Were  Stopped
The  Nicholas  testimony showed  that  in  the  30's  there  were
a  good   number  of  passport   frauds   by  Communist  function-
aries  and  agents  who  obtained  passports  under  false   names.
But  the  testimony  also  showed  that  these  frauds  were  stopped
under   the  criminal  law  not  by  interfering  with   everybody's
right  to  travel.   Several  people  went  to  jail.   "I  think  that  the
Communists  since  1940,"  Mr. Nicholas said,  "have  been  rather
afraid  to  try much  along  these  lines."
The  postwar  practices  of  which  Mr.  Nicholas   complained
were  of  a  different   category.   He  charged  that  a  number  of
people   "had misrepresented   in   their   passport    applications,
where  they  were  going  and  why  they  were  going.    For  in-
stance,  if  they  were  going  to  attend  a  Communist  youth  festi-
val  in  Prague,  Czechoslovakia,  they might  say they  were going
as tourists  to  France."
But  this  is  the  domain of  politics, not  crime.  Does  the citi-
zen  of  a  free  country, travelling  abroad,  have  to  tell  his  gov-
ernment  where  he  is going  and  why ?  If  he  can  attend  a  Com-
munist  sponsored  meeting  at  home,  why  can't  he  attend  one
abroad ?  Here  we  enter  an  area  in  which  the  right  to  travel  is
subjected  to  political  censorship.
This  may  be  seen  in  Mr.  Nicholas's   complaint  of  political
activities  abroad.  He  said  a  number  of  Americans went  to  the
Peking   Peace   Conference  "and took   part  in   anti-American
propaganda  and  spread   reports  of  germ  warfare  and   things
like  that. ..."   However  deplorable,   this  was still  no  more
than  free  speech.   Is  it  any  less  legal  abroad  than  at  home?
What  If  This  Were  Confidential   Information?
Mr.  Nicholas  is mainly concerned  with  the  right  to  keep  in-
formants   and   their  information  confidential   in   cases   where
passports  are  denied.   But  an  amusing  moment   in  his  own
testimony  shows  how  useful  it  is  for  an  accused   man  to  be
present  and  able  to  confront  a  hostile  witness.
The  passport  official  told  of  "one  trick  that  was  tried  once
without  success."   He  said  a man went  into  the  New  York  of-
fice of  the  passport  division  a  number  of  years  ago  "and ap-
plied  for  a passport  and  submitted  his  birth  certificate, but  said
he  didn't  have  his  pictures  with him;  so he  would  bring  them
back  later.   So  later  on  he  came  in  and  handed  in  some  pic-
tures,  but  they  were  the  pictures  of  Robert  Morris,  the  Com-
munist  leader."   This  startled   the   Senate   committee  and   its
counsel,  Robert  Morris.  The  following  colloquoy  occurred:
MR.  MORRIS.    Robert  who?
MR.  NICHOLAS.    Morris.    [Laughter].   I  mean not  Morris,
but  Robert  Minor.
MR.  MORRIS.   Minor?
MR.  NICHOLAS.    Robert Minor,  who  was one  of  the  leading
Communists   in  the  country,  and  Minor's  wife.   I  am  sorry,
Mr.  Morris.
MR.  MORRIS.   That  is all  right.
But  what  if  Mr.   Nicholas   were  a  confidential   informant
honestly  confused,  and  poor  Mr.  Morris  did  not  happen  to  be
a  Senate  committee  counsel ?
We'll  Se   Glad  to  Send  A  Sample   Copy   of  This  Important  Issue  Free  to  Any  Friends  You  Suggest
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street   .............
City  ................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   .............
City  ................
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
(or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.........................Zone........
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
.........................Zone........
gift  announcement?
..State....................
(1 yr.) additional:
1/21/57
..State........-...."-....
Yes  D    No  D
I. E Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I   F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of   March  3,  1879.  Pre-dated  Mondays  but  published
every  Thursday  eicept  the  laet  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  301  IB.  Capitol  St.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  An  Independent   weekly  pub-
lished  and  edited  hy  I   F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  In   the   U.S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere    Air   M»ll
rates: |15  to  Burope;  fZO  to  Itirsel,  \flrn  «cd  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED