I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957nov18.pdf

============================================================

Gen.  Bradley's  Plea for  Peace, P.  3
Flim-Flam  from  the  White  House:  Missiles  Expert  Contradicts  Ike  on  Re-Entry  Problem,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  44
NOVEMBER  18,  1957
i'
01
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
What  They  Cut  Out  of  That  Report  on  Soviet   Schools
That  report on  Education  in  the  USSR  which  the  U.S.  Dept.
of  Health, Education and  Welfare  issued  last  week  was  com-
pleted  in  October of  last  year.   Nervous  officials  kept  revising
it  all  over  the  Department  for   12  months.  When  finally  re-
leased  for  publication, it  omitted  the  two  points  about  Soviet
education  it  is most  important to  press  home in  the  U.S.  today.
One  is that  higher  education  in  the  Soviet  Union  is  not  only
free  but  that most  students are paid  a salary.  The  other  is that
scientists,  scholars and  teachers enjoy  a higher position socially
and  financially  in  the  Soviet Union  than  in  the  United  States.
Did  Folsom  Use An Earlier  Draft?
That   the  report  had   been  heavily  revised  came  to   light
when  the  released  text  was  compared  with  the  preview  by
Secretary  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare  before  the  Con-
ference  on  Engineering  and   Scientific  Education   in   Chicago
Nov.  2,  from  which  we  printed  excerpts  last  week.   Secretary
Folsom  in  discussing  the  forthcoming  report  on  Soviet  educa-
tion  stressed the  need  for  raising  the  teacher's  status  here  and
for  enabling  poorer  students  to  attend  college.    "Society  as  a
whole,"  Secretary  Folsom  said,  "benefits   from   the  education
of  each individual,  and  it  is only  proper  that  society share  .  .  .
the  cost  of  his  education."   Secretary  Folsom  went  on  to  con-
trast  Soviet  colleges  where  education  is  free  "and  all  but  the
weakest  students  are  actually  paid  to  go  to  college."   But  the
report, when  it appeared, did  not  seem  to  make  the  points  the
Secretary  had  stressed,  nor  contain  the  information  indicated.
Talents  Lost  Through   Poverty
The  revisions  and  the  fuzzing  of  these  basic  points   reflect
the  first  premise of  Eisenhower  education  policy,  which  is  that
schools  are  a  local  and  State  responsibility  while  universities
should   depend   more  on  private   and   corporate   gifts.   This
premise  lias  hobbled  the  work  of  the  various  committees  set
up  here  from  time  to  time  in  a  burst  of  publicity  to  study edu-
cation  and  science.   Secretary  Folsom,  in  his  speech,  cited  one
of  them,  the  President's  Committee  on  Education  Beyond  The
High  School.  It  has already  made two  reports,  one  in  Novem-
ber,   1956,  and  the  other  in  July   1957.
The  first  report  of  that  Committee  said  that  every  year  ap-
proximately  100,000  of  our  most  talented  high  school  students
do  not  go  on  to  college,  primarily  because  they  cannot   afford
it.   The  second  report,  last  July,  said  they  could  not  afford  it
because  20  percent  of  U.S.  families  earned  less  than  $1500  a
year  before  Federal  income  tax;  45  percent  less  than  $3,000;
60  percent  less  than  $4,000;  and  84  percent  less  than  $6,000.
Obviously  these families  cannot  afford  to  send  children  to  col-
lege  at  a  basic  cost  which  now  approximates  $2,000   a  year.
12'                                                                                      1
Omitted
"Consistent  with  the  official  esteem  in  which  science
and  technology  are  held  in the  Soviet Union, the  scholar
and  scientist  enjoy  high  salaries and a  number  of  privi-
leges  which  enable  them  to  maintain  a  living standard
—relative   to  that   of   most   of   the   population—higher
than   is   found  among  his  colleagues  in  any  Western
country."
—From  an  earlier  draft   of  Education  in  the   USSR.
"The    teacher,   the  unsung  hero  and  much  maligned
bulwark   of   our   educational   system,  occupies   a  pre-
ferred  position  in  Soviet society.   A  professor's  salary
and  prestige  equal  those  of  high  governmental and  in-
dustrial  officials."
—Norton  T. Dodge, as quoted in  an  earlier  draft.
The  result,  as  Secretary  Folsom  said,  is  that  "about  one-third
of  the  top  quarter  of  our  high  school  graduates  do  not  go  to
college ...  a  serious  national  waste."   Compare  the  Soviet
Union,  where  traditionally  higher   education   had   been  free.
From   1940  to  1955  fees  were  charged  but  these  have  since
been  dropped.   Students are  paid  a  monthly  stipend  to  cover
living  costs  and  these  stipends  are  increased  for  good   work,
and  may be  lost  for  bad.   An  earlier  draft  of  the  report  point-
ed  out  that  98  percent  of  the  student  body at  Moscow  Univer-
sity  received  such  stipends.   A  similar  system  here  would  de-
velop   talents   which   now   fall   by   the   wayside  because   of
poverty.
But What  Were The Teaching  Hours?
Departmental  bureaucrats with  a  sharp  eye on  the  desire of
the  White  House  to  hold  down  expenditures  cut  out  the  facts
which  would  have  provided  a  clear  picture  of  this  sharp  con-
trast.   They  did  the  same  in  discussing  teacher  sakries.   The
results  at  points  are  almost  ludicrous.   At  page  215  of  the  re-
port,  for  example,  it  is  said  that  "most  teachers  in  the  Soviet
Union  earn  about  double  their  base  pay  because  they  work
twice  the  number  of  hours  specified."    But  the   number  of
hours  specified  has  been  omitted.   Earlier  drafts,  according  to
officials  through  whose  hands  they  passed,  showed  that  Soviet
primary  school  teachers  got  their  base  pay  for  4  hours  a  day,
and  teachers  in  the  secondary grades  for  3  hours  a  day,  or  18
hours  a  week.   So  the  regular  schedule  is  not  a  heavy  one.
Extra  hours  and  even  such  extra  tasks  as  marking  papers  re-
ceive  extra  pay.   Here  a  teacher  in  secondary  schools  makes
considerably  less  than  a  factory  worker; there,  the  teacher  may
make  three  times  as  much.
{Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, November 18,1957
A  Week's Wistful  Understatements
"Obviously  a  nuclear  weapon  is   never  going  to  be
very  pleasant  for  anyone who is  in its  immediate target
area. ...  I  am not advocating  limited  war as  something
that  I  would  enjoy  engaging in."
—Dr. Henry  A. Kissinger, Face The Nation,  Nov. 10.
".  .  .  on  the  way  over  here  I  was  telling  Mr.  [J.
Edgar]  Hoover  I  couldn't  think  of  a  single  secret  we
had  in  the   government   that   hadn't   already   appeared
in  the  papers."
—President  Eisenhower at  the FBI  Academy,  Nov.  8.
"Peace  has  almost  fallen  into  disrepute,  even among
Christians."
—Rev. E.  O. Miller, St.  George's, N.Y.C.,  Nov. 10.
Flim-Flam,  Administrative  and  Scientific,  in  That  TV-Cast  from  the  White  House
Missile  Expert  Contradicts  Eisenhower  on  The  "Re-Entry"  Problem
The  only  thing  new  in  the  President's  first  TV   cast  on
science  and  security was not true.  . . . We  have not  solved  the
so-called  re-entry problem,  despite  that  odd  cone  put  on  view
in  the White  House  study. ...  A  top  missile  expert  at  an'off
the  record  briefing  of  top  newsmen  the  day  after  Mr.  Eisen-
hower  spoke  said,  "Absolutely,  positively  and  without  ques-
tion,  we have  not—repeat  not—solved  this  problem."  .  .  .
Nevertheless,  rather than  step  on  presidential  toes,  most news-
men  and  the  Associated  Press  left  this  out  of  their  story on  the
briefing.  . . . Only  the independent  and respected  Washington
Star  (Nov.  10)  used  this,  but  there  has  been  no  denial  from
White  House  or  Pentagon.  .  .  .  The  Administration's  press
agents  just  couldn't  resist  a  bit  of flim-flam. ...  It  is  quite
possible,  and  the  subject  is  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  Senate
investigation  to  open  next  week,  that  the  President  was  never
given  the  full  facts.  .  .  .  The  missiles  expert,  who  will  be  a
witness  in  that  inquiry, said  security prevented  him  from  ex-
plaining  why  the  cone  did  not  prove  we  could  get  a  missile
back  from  outer  space  without  its  being  burned  up  by the  tre-
mendous  friction.  . .  . The President's first  speech  was other-
wise  a  tepid,  uninspired  affair,  appallingly  poor  copy.  .  .  .
Can't  Even Get The Name  Right
Like  Stassen  on* disarmament,  Dr.  James  R.  Killian  of  MIT
is  to be a  "Special .Assistant"  to the  President  on  science.  .  . .
These  Special  Assistantships  leave  a  man  hanging  in  the  air,
with  no  power  of  his  own  except  the  dubious  one  of  access  to
the  President  (if  and  when),  an  easy target  for  the  heads  of
departments.  .  .  .  Left  wholly  unclear,  in  a  situation  where
clear  chains  of  command  are  important,  is  Dr.  Killian's  rela-
tionship to  the  so-called  "missiles  czar"  in  the  Pentagon,  Wil-
liam  M.  Holaday,  whose  own  relationship  in  turn  to  the  Sec-
retary  of  Defense  is as glamorously  ambiguous.  .  .  . Within  a
few  hours,  the  confusion on whether the  Army actually was or
was  not  to  launch  a  satellite,  showed  how  little  had  changed.
.  . . The President now has three  top  scientific  advisers,  Chair-
man   Strauss  of  the  AEC,  Dr.   Killian   and  Dr.   Howard  L.
Bevis,  of  Ohio  State, who  is chairman of  the  President's  Com-
mittee on  Scientists and  Engineers. . . . Not  one of  these  three
is a scientist. . . . All are  administrators.  . . . Dr. Killian was
trained  in  business administration. ... An  index  of  the  Presi-
dent's  vagueness:  Chairman  Strauss  is  his  oldest  scientific  ad-
viser,  his  mainstay  on  atomic  matters,  yet  at  the  dedication  of
the   new   AEC   office   building   at   nearby  Germantown,   Mr.
Eiseenhower   consistently   pronounced    his   name   "Strouse"
whereas the Chairman has always pronounced  it  "Straws".  . . .
Quis Custodiet... ?
Perhaps  the  new  Senate  preparedness  sub-committee  which
will  investigate  missiles  ought  to  begin  by taking  a  close  look
at  it  own  chief  counsel,  Edwin  L. Weisl  of  the  New  York  law
firm of  Simpson, Thacher  and Bartlett.  .  .  . Weisl  represented
Floyd  B.  Odium  of  Atlas  Corporation   in  the  famous  B-36
hearings  here  in  1948-9;  Odium  was  then  chairman  of  Con-
solidated  Vultee which  makes the bombers.  . .  . Weisl  said he
still  represents  Odium  but  Atlas  no  longer  controls  Consoli-
dated  Vultee.  .  .  .  Atlas is a  giant  investment  trust  which can
hardly  be  without  interest  in  the  missiles  field  Weisl  will  be
investigating.  .  . .
The New Civil Rights  Commission
Chief  reaction of  interested  Negro  groups  in  the  Capitol
to  the  new  Civil  Rights  Commission  were  (1)    satisfaction,
that  it finally had  been  appointed,  (2)  relief,  that  the  South-
erners  named  to  it  were  not  worse,  and  (3)  wry  comment,
that  th»one  Negro  chosen  is  an  Assistant  Secretary of  Labor
and  therefore firmly under Administration control.  .  .  .  There
is  still  considerable anxiety that  confirmation  of  the  members
by  the  Senate  and  appointment  of  the  full  time  staff   director
yet  to  be named  (also subject  to confirmation) may be  dragged
out  for  months.  .  .  .  The  Senate  Judiciary Committee  under
Eastland  will certainly  try  to  delay  action  as  long  as  possible.
Stevenson Hooked?
Many  old  friends  of  Adlai  Stevenson  feel  he  is  accepting
power  without  responsibility  by  becoming  a  "consultant"  for
the  forthcoming  NATO  meeting  instead  of  sketching  put  an
independent  foreign  policy  position  of  his  own.  .  .  .  That
Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists'  press  release, with  an  appeal
by  Soviet  scientists  for   a  world  parley  on  atomic   dangers,
which  we  published  in  our  issue  of  October  28,  finally  ap-
peared  in the New  York  Times  on November  10, page  32.   ...
Travel  Dept.:  Donald  Ogden  Stewart,  who  refused  to  sign
a  non-Communist affidavit  going  back more than  14 years, was
granted  a  passport  by  the  State  Dept.  under  judicial  pressure
but  Si Gerson  of  the Daily  Worker  was  refused  one.   The  last
Daily   Worker   correspondent  given   a  passport   was   Joseph
Clark,  who  quit  the  Party  in  disgust  after  returning.   Who  is
the  Department  protecting?  . . . The House  Un-American Ac-
tivities  Committee  is  so hard  up  for  publicity that  it  made  the
quixotic  "abolition"  campaign  of   the   tiny  Emergency. Civil
Liberties  Committee the  excuse  for  a  special  report  saying that
a  "plot"  to  destroy the  House  committee had  reached  "almost
nation-wide  proportions."  . . . Would  it were true. ... If  it's
a  crime  to  be  for  the  abolition  of  the  House  committee,  the
role  of  such criminals is a  growing  and  distinguished one,  be-
ginning with  Chief  Justice Warren  and  a  majority  of  the  U.S.
Supreme  Court. ...  A headline which  epitomizes current hys-
teria  was the  Washington  Post's two liner on  page  one Armis-
tice  Day,  "Finletter  Warns  Nation  It  Must  Control  Space."
.  .  . There  will  soon  be  no  room  left  for  God.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  18,1957
A  Text  No  U.S.  Paper  Published;  A  Great  Soldier on  Sputnik's  Real  Challenge
Gen.  Bradley  Calls  for  "Peaceful  Accommodation" Rather  Than  Missile  Race
The  great  soldier  who  led  the  First  Army  in  the  attack
on  the  Normandy  beaches,  General  Omar  N.   Bradley,   is
also  the  first  top  level   American  public  figure  to   launch
an   attack   on  the  real  challenge  of   Sputnik.    We  reprint
the   plea  he  made  at  the   St.   Alban's  School   convocation
here  on  Nov.  5.   We  believe  these  wise  words  deserve   the
widest  circulation,  and  urge  readers   to  order  reprints  in
bulk  for  mass  distribution.—IPS
By  Gen. of  the  Army Omar N. Bradley
The  central  problem  of  our  time—as  I  view  it—is  how  to
employ  human  intelligence  for  the  salvation  of  mankind.    It
is  a  problem  we  have  put  upon  ourselves.    For  we  have  de-
filed   our   intellect   by  the   creation   of   such   scientific  instru-
ments  of  destruction  that  we  are  now  in  desperate  danger  of
destroying  ourselves.    Our  plight  is  critical  and  with  each  ef-
fort  we  have  made  to  relieve  it  by  further  scientific  advance,
we  have succeeded  only  in  aggravating  our  peril.
As  a  result,  we  are  now  speeding  inexorably  toward  a  day
when  even the  ingenuity  of  our  scientists  may be unable to  save
us  from  the  consequences  of  a  single  rash  act  or  a  lone  reck-
less   hand   upon   the   switch   of   an   uninterceptable  missile.
For  twelve  years  now  we've  sought  to  stave  off  this  ultimate
threat  of  disaster  by  devising  arms  which  would  be  both  ulti-
mate  and  disastrous.
An  Electronic House of  Cards
This  irony can  probably  be  compounded  a  few  more  years,
or  perhaps  even  a  few  decades.    Missiles  will  bring  anti-mis-
siles,  and  anti-missiles will  bring  anti-anti-missiles.    But  in-
evitably,  this  whole  electronic  house  of   cards  will  reach  a
point  where  it  can  be  constructed  no  higher.
At  that  point  we shall  have  come  to  the  peak  of  this  whole
incredible  dilemma  into  which  the  world   is  shoving   itself.
And  when  that  time  comes  there  will  be  little  we  can do  other
than  to  settle  down  uneasily,  smother  our  fears,  and  attempt
to  live  in  a  thickening  shadow  of   death.
Should  this  situation  come  to  pass,  we  would  have  but  one
single and  thin  thread  to  cling  to.   We  call  it  rationale  or  rea-
son.   We  reason that no  Government,  no  single  group  of  men
—indeed,  not  even  one  willful  individual—would  be  so  fool-
hardy,  so  reckless,  as  to  precipitate  a  war  which  would  most
surely  end  in  mutual  destruction.
Was Hitler Amenable  to  Reason?
This  reasoning  may  have  the  benefit  of  logic.    But   even
logic  sometimes  goes  awry.   How  can  we  assume  that  reason
will  prevail  in  a  crisis when  there  is  ordinarily  so  little  reason
among  men.   To  those  who  would  take  comfort  in  the  likeli-
hood  of  an  atomic  peace  to  be  secured  solely  by  rationale  and
reason,  I  would  recall  the  lapse  of  reason  in  a  bunker  under
the  Reich  Chancellery  in  Berlin.    It  failed  before,  it  can  fail
again.
Have   we  already  gone  too  far   in  this   search  for   peace
through  the  accumulation  of  peril?    Is  there  any  way  to  halt
this  trend—or  must  we  push  on  with  new  devices  until  we
inevitably  come to  judgment  before  the  atom.    I  believe  there
is a way out.    And  I  believe  it  because  I  have  acquired  in my
lifetime  a  decent  respect  for  human  intelligence.
1  2 *                                                                                      1
It  may  be  that  the  problems  of  accommodation  in  a  world
split   by  rival  ideologies  are  more   difficult   than   those   with
which  we  have  struggled  in  the  construction  of  ballistics  mis-
siles.    But  I  believe,  too,  that  if  we  apply   to  these  human
problems,  the  energy, creativity,  and  the  perseverance  we  have
devoted   to   science,  even   problems   of   accommodation   will
yield  to  reason.    Admittedly,  the  problem  of  peaceful  accom-
modation  in  the  world  is  infinitely  more  difficult  than  the  con-
quest  of   space,   infinitely   more  complex   than  a  trip  to  the
moon.   But  if we will  only  come  to  the  realization  that  it  must
be worked out—whatever  it  may mean  even  to  such  sacred tra-
ditions  as absolute national  sovereignty—I  believe that  we can
somehow,  somewhere,  and  perhaps  through  some  as  yet  un-
discovered  world  thinker  and  leader  find  a  workable solution.
The Faith  We  Need
I  confess  that  this  is  as  much  an  article  of  faith,  as  it  is  an
expression  of  reason.    But  this,  my  friends,  is  what  we  need,
faith  in  our  ability  to  do  what  must  be  done.   Without  that
faith  we shall  never  get  started.   And  until we  get  started,  we
shall  never  know  what  can  be  done.
If  I  am  sometimes  discouraged,  it  is  not  by  the  magnitude
of  the  problem,  but  by  our  colossal  indifference  to  it.    I  am
unable to understand  why—if  we are willing to trust  in  reason
as  a  restraint on  the  use  of  a  ready-made ready-to-fire  bomb—
we  do  not  make  greater,  more  diligent  and  more  imaginative
use  of  reason  and  human  intelligence   in  seeking  an   accord
and  compromise  which  will  make  it  possible  for  mankind  to
control  the  atom  and  banish  it  as  an  instrument  of  war.
This  is the  real  and—indeed—the  most  strenuous  challenge
to  man's  intellect  today.  By comparison  with  it,  the  conquest
of  space  is  of  small  significance.    For  until  we  learn  how  to
live  together,  until  we  rid  ourselves  of  the  strife  that  mocks
our  pretensions  of  civilization,  our  adventures  in  science—in-
stead  of  producing  human  progress—will  continue  to  crowd
it  with  greater  peril.
The Satellite  On Which We  Live
We  can compete with a  Sputnik  and  probably  create  bigger
and  better  Sputniks  of  our  own.    But  what  are  we  doing  to
prevent  the  Sputnik  from  evolving  into  just one  more  weapons
system?    And  when  are  we  going  to  muster  an  intelligence
equal  to that  applied  against  the  Sputnik  and  dedicate  it  to  the
preservation  of  this  Satellite  on  which  we  live?
How  long—I  would  ask  you—can  we  put  off  salvation?
When  does  humanity  run  out?
If  enough  of  us  believe  strongly  enough  in  the  ability  of  in-
telligent  human  beings  to  get  together  on  some  basis  of  a  just
accord,  we  might  somehow,  somewhere,  in  some  way  and  un-
der  some  auspices  make a  start  on  it.
Unless  we  soon  get  started,  it  may  be  too  late.
We  can't  sit  about  waiting  for  some  felicitous   accident  of
history  that  may somehow  make  the  world  all  right.    Time  is
running  against  us, and  it  is running against  us with  the  speed
of  a  Sputnik.
If  we're  going  to  save  ourselves   from  the  instruments  of
our  own  intellect,  we had  better  soon  get  ourselves  under  con-
trol  and  begin  making  the  world  safe  for  living.
7   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  18,1957
U.  S.  Commissioner  of  Education   Glosses  Over  Our  Own Regimentation   of  the  Mind
Soviet  Union  Not  The  Only  Place  Where  Secret  Police  Watch  Schools
(Continued  from  Page One)
The Only  Occupation  Financially  Deteriorating
But  the  most  striking  contrast  obvious  in  the  earlier  drafts
was  between  the  college professor  there  and  here.   The  report
made last  July  by the  President's  Committee  on  Education  Be-
yond  the  High  School  pointed  out  that  college  teaching sal-
aries  in  this  country  are  "startlingly  low", that  teaching  was
the  only major  occupation  "in  which  there  has  been  a  relative,
and  in  the  senior  ranks,  an  absolute  deterioration  of  economic
status  in  this  country"  and  that  "quite  frequently  the  starting
salary  of  the  young  graduate  entering  business  or  industry  is
higher  than  the  pay  of  the  experienced  teacher  who  has  just
prepared  him." The  low  pay  itself,  as  Secretary  Folsom  said
in  his  speech  at  Chicago,   is  "simply  a  reflection  of  a  more
fundamental  fault—the  lack  of  respect   accorded  to   teaching
by  the public."  It  is important  to  change  both  the  salary levels
and  the  public attitude.   Earlier  drafts  of  the  report  on  Soviet
Education  (as  may  be  seen  from  two  typical  omissions  in  the
box on page one)  strongly  stressed  the higher  position  and  the
higher   respect  accorded  teacher,  scholar  and  scientist  in  the
U.S.S.R.    All  this  has  been  smudged   in  revision  because   it
touches  the  tender  nerve  of  Eisenhower  Administration fiscal
policy.  We  would "have  to  spend  as  much  on  education  as  on
strategic  bombers  to  make  the  educational  reforms  implied.
More  Cant About That American  Way
The  report  was  further  fuzzed  in  the  public  mind  by  the
kind   of   self-serving  cant  which  got  U.S.   Commissioner  of
Education  Lawrence G.  Derthick's  picture  in  the  papers  as  a
champion  of  the  American way.  "We  in  America,"  he  said  in
releasing  the  report,  "know  that  freedom  is  indispensable  to
good  education,  that  liberty  of  the  mind  accomplishes   more
than  regimentation."   But  any  sober  view  must  recognize  that
regimentation  has  increased  in  our  own  country,  that  educa-
tion  has  increasingly been  channelled  into  glorifying  a  quasi
mythical  free  enterprise,  that  teachers  have  been  brow-beaten,
textbook  writers  brain-washed  and  independent  minded   stu-
How  the Faculties Subsidize   Colleges
"in  1954  half  of  the  college   faculty  in  this  country
earned  less  than  $5400  a  year.    At  the  rates  then  pre-
vailing,  one  out  of   two  college  teachers   could   aspire
no  higher  than  a  lifetime  maximum  of  $7,000  a   year,
even  if  he  should  attain  to  the  rank  of  full  professor...
"At  present  salary  levels  the  teacher   in  effect sub-
sidizes   the  education  of  the  individual  student  and  the
benefits  that  society  derives  therefrom.  .  .  . On an over-
all  national  basis,  an  average  salary  structure  competi-
tive  with  comparable  professions   would  cost  over  $800
million  dollars  in  additional  annual  payroll.
"This  is  roughly   the  size  of  the  present  subsidy  of
higher  education by  its  faculties  in  a  single  year.    It  is
nearly   eight   times   the   total   alumni  contributions   in
1956.   It  is  also  nearly  eight  times  the  size  of   current
corporation  support  to  colleges  and  universities,  and
over  five  times  the  total  endowment  income.   It  means
that  college  faculties  as  a  whole  contribute  more dol-
lars  to  higher  education  than  all  other  individual  and
corporate  donors  combined."
—Second  Report,  the  President's  Committee  on Edu-
cation  Beyond  the  High  School, pps.  33-5.
pert  pictures  the  surveillance  maintained  by  the  Soviet  secret
police over  teachers,  students  and  administrative personnel  but
nowhere  notes  astringently that  a  similar  type  of  surveillance
through  a  network  of  FBI  informers  has  also  grown  up  here,
from  the  high  school  level.   Students  have  been  made  fearful
that  expressions  of  non-political  conformity may  cost  them  fel-
lowships  and  future  employment  while  many  excellent  teach-
ers have  been  exiled  from  the  educational  system for  unortho-
dox  political  views  or  associations,  present   or  past.    "Soviet
students,"   the  report   says  smugly,   "lack  the   encouragement
given  to  American students  to  freely  develop  critical  faculties,
learn  to  differentiate  between  opposing   points  of  view,  and
make  up  their  own  minds  on  controversial  questions."   Every
classroom  teacher  here  will  recognize  how  little  resemblance
this  bears  to  reality.  Can  we  achieve  improvement  if  we  en-
gage  in  such  self-deception?
dents  blacklisted under  the  impact  of  the  witch  hunt.   The  re-
The  Many  Kind  Notes  Coming  In  With  Renewals  and   the   Gift   Subs  Deeply    Appreciated
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street    .............................
City    ....................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $4  (1
(To)   Name   .....................
Street    .............................
City     ...................................
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
......Zone.......;....State....................
yr.)  or  $2 (6  mos.)  additional:
11/18/57
......Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
I.F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraskc  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as  Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated   Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W., Washington  16, D. C.
An  independent   weekly   published  and  edited   by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$9  in  the  U.  8.;  16  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED