I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jan07.pdf

============================================================

Annual  Index  and   The  O'Connor  Decision
Science  and the  Military:  The  Weak  FAS  Reply  to  Holtzoff's  Attack  on  Physicists,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V, NO. 1JANUARY  7,  1957
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Really  Dangerous  Vacuum  Is  Here  In  Washington
The  statesman whose  future  memoirs we would  most  like to
read  at  this moment are  those of  Nehru.   No  one  in  the  world
could  have been more surprised when what  is pompously being
called  the  new  Dulles  or  Eisenhower Doctrine  emerged  in  the
wake  of  his  pleasant  trip  to  Washington.   If  the  tenor  of  the
inspired  stories which preceded  and  accompanied his  visit were
any  clue  to  those  long  hours  he  spent  with  Mr.  Eisenhower at
Gettysburg,  he  must  have  been  startled  to  learn  on  returning
home  that  the  upshot  to  their  exploration  of  the  subtle  and
complex  problems  of  the  Middle  East  was  only  to  be  another
dose'of  Dr.  Dulles's  favorite  household  remedy, the  threat of
massive  retaliation.
In  retrospect  the  Washington  he visited must appear  to Pan-
dit  Nehru  a  Potemkin's  Village,  hastily  erected  to  flatter  and
impress.   He  was  greeted  as  an  Eastern  Sage  and   consulted
like  a  wise  Elder  Brother.  The  United  States  had  cut  itself
loose  in  the  Suez  crisis  from   Anglo-French  colonialism  and
abjured  power  politics.   Our  reliance was  to  be  on  the  United
Nations  and  on  the  moral  force  of  mankind. The  Grand  De-
sign   being   unveiled   in  private  talks  with   influential  corre-
spondents  was,  as  the  London  Economist  reported  on  Decem-
ber  15,  "a  very  different  matter  indeed  from   the  traditional
concept   of   'filling   a  vacuum'  with  military  bases,  alliances,
puppet   governments,   or   even   economic   subsidies."    India's
neutralist  Prime  Minister  was  cast  for  a  key  role  and  it  was
hoped  that  "a  man  like  Mr.  Nehru  might  be able  to talk  sense
to a Nasser  where  the  British  Navy could  not."
New  Start  on  Disarmament  Also  Promised
Everything  was  done  to  make  a  peacemaker  feel  at  home,
and   to  erase  any  impression   that  American  policy  was  too
prone  to  wave its  shootin'  irons.  There was  one  set of  inspired
stories  saying  that  a  major  premise  of  American  policy  was
now  the  fear  that  the  unsteady  Kremlin  if  too  hard  pressed
might  resort  to  war  in  desperation.  Another,  only  a  few  days
before  Nehru's  arrival,  said  there  had  been  approved  a  new
and  hopeful  plan  to  break  the  disarmament  impasse. The  Bul-
ganin  letter  of  November   17 was  to  be  seized  upon  for  nego-
tiations   looking   toward   an   immediate   reduction   in   armed
forces,  a thinning  out of  NATO  and  Warsaw  pact  troops,  and
even an attempt  to limit  and  control  development  of  the  dread-
ed  intercontinental  ballistic  missile.   Mr.  Nehru  must  have  felt
that  he was coming  to  a capital at  last  prepared  to welcome  his
message.   It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  charming  naivete  and  en-
gaging  sincerity with  which  Mr.  Eisenhower  discussed  these
hopes  for  peace  with  his  visitc* during  that  long  day  together
on the  farm.
Thos'e  whose  ears  are  attuned  to  the  realities  of  Washington
began  to  realize  the  very  next  day that  Mr.  Eisenhower  might
1 *
have  been  receiving  Pandit  Nehru  in  a  dream  world.  They
were  alone  together  on  December  17.   On  December  18  Mr.
Dulles  held  his first press  conference since  his  operation.  From
his  answer  to  that  very  first  question  about  the  Bulganin  mes-
sage  ("there  is  no  plan"),  it  was  clear  that  the  State  Depart-
ment was clinging firmly to  its own  version  of  what the  French
call  "immobilisme."  On  disarmament,  on  satellite  policy,  on
Germany,  there was  to  be no  change.  The  answers  all  reflected
the  same  cold  war  state  of  mind,  relying  on  containment  and
"situations of strength"  to  force  further  Soviet  retreats  without
the  necessity for  any  new  initiatives  in  diplomacy.  As  for  our
own  allies  in  NATO,  Mr.  Dulles  was almost  contemptuous  in
the  brisk way he  made it  clear  that  we  could  not  obligate  our-
selves to consult them.
The  Same  Old  Doctrine
This  was  the  spirit  in  which  Mr.  Dulles  earlier  proclaimed
massive  retaliation,  and  those  who  now  reread  his  answers  at
that  press  conference  will  better  understand  the  new   "doc-
trine"  being unveiled  on the  Middle  East. The  Dulles or  Eisen-
hower  Doctrine  is  like  the  Truman  Doctrine  before  it,  which
Mr.  Dulles  also  helped  to formulate, a unilateral  declaration  of
readiness  to  police  the  world  by overwhelming  force.  The  re-
appeatance  of  the  stale  formula  discloses  again  that  while  Mr.
Eisenhower  reigns,  he  does  not  govern;  Mr.  Stassen,  his  fa-
vorite,  may  have  the  President's   ear  but  Mr.  Dulles  firmly
holds his arm. The  successive revisions of  the  reply to  Bulganin
and  its  emergence  as  a  quick  brush-off  shows  who  is  the  boss.
It  is  not  the  reliance  on  threat  of  force  which  makes  the
"new"   approach  to  the  Middle  East  appalling.   It  is  that  the
problems  cannot  be  resolved  by force.  The  "new"  approach  is
really  only  the  old  lazy-minded  abdication   of  diplomacy  by
those who are supposed  to  be our  diplomats.   It  dodges  the  cru-
cial problems  of  Arab-Israeli peace and  a Suez settlement  while
covering  this  failure  with  the  loud  affirmation  of  the  obvious.
It  takes  no  new  declaration  to  make  clear  that  a  Soviet  attack
on  the  Middle  East  means  war;  that  has  been  clear  from  the
first  and  explains why  Stalin  backed  down  on  Iran.  THe  only
excuse  for  this  is  cynical.   It  is that  Congress  cannot  be  made
to  acquiesce  in  loans  for   the  Middle  East  except  by  a  war
scare and  the Red menace.
If  so the  price paid  is a heavy one.  We  dismiss  the  Arabs as
a  vacuum;  downgrade  Israel  to  a  minor  regional  nuisance;  an-
nounce that  the  Middle  East  is to  be our  preserve  after  helping
to  force  our  bitter Western  allies  out  of  it;  ditch  the  UN  just
when  it  was  hoped  that  it  might  begin  to  work.   Even  by  oil
company  standards,  this  is  not  wise  or  adequate  policy.   More
dangerous  than  that  vacuum  in  the  Middle  East  is the  vacuum
here  in  Washington.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jamtai-y  7,195T
The  FAS  Makes  A  Weak  Answer  to  Holtzoff's  Attack  on  Physicists
AAAS Report Reveals  How  Dependent  Science  Now  Is Upon  The  Military
The  conscience of  the   scientific  community is  uneasy.   In
1955  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Sci-
ence  set  up  an  Interim  Committee  on  the  Social  Aspects  of
Science.  This committee made its  report  at  the  1956 year end
to  the  123rd  annual  meeting of  the  AAAS in  New  York.  The
report  is  thoughtful  and  literate;  the  issue  it  raises  momen-
tous.   It  sees  a  scientific  revolution  underway  in  which  man
made  processes  are  beginning  to  equal  nature  in  their  size
and  intensity.  These may  be used for  good  or  evil, and  the  re-
port  asks  scientists to face  their  moral  and  civic  duty  "to de-
termine  that  these  new powers shall  be used for  the maximum
human  good."
Except  for  the  New  York  Times,  which printed  the  text on
December  31 and  published  a  friendly  editorial  next  day,  the
press  gave  this  report  scant  attention.   Yet  it  shows,  in  sta-
tistical  detail  and  with  considerable authority,  how lopsidedly
—and  dangerously—science  is  developing.  The  main  source
of  research  funds  for  both  private  industry  and  the  univer-
sities  is  now  in  the  Federal  government,  and  84  percent  of
Federal  expenditures  on  research  this  year  will  be  for  mili-
tary  purposes.
The  Emphasis  Is  On  Destruction
One  result  is  disproportionately  to  emphasize the  physical
(as  against  the  biological  and  social)  sciences,  i.e.  the  arts
which  destroy  as against  those  which may  heal.   Only  13 per-
cent  of  Federal  research  expenditure in  1954 went to  the  non-
physical  sciences.  Another  result  is  the  slighting  of  pure  re-
search.  Federal  agencies  allocate  90 percent  and  private  in-
dustrial  laboratories  about  97  percent  of  their  funds  to  ap-
plied  research  and  development.   Pure  research  is  the  step-
child.  The military,  to  phrase  it  unscientifically,  are  more in-
terested  in  the  bang  and  industry  in  the  buck.
This  "practical"  approach  may  prove  self-defeating.  The
report  says  the  progress  of  basic  science is  lagging  and that
"our  present  understanding   of  the  structure   of  atoms   and
molecules,  and  of  the  behavior  of  living  cells  goes  back  to
great  illuminating  propositions  that  are   25  years   or  more
old."  We  are  more  concerned  with  obsolescence  in  bombers
than  theories.
Anything  which  does  not  promise  immediate usefulness  in
war   or  in  sales  promotion  tends  to  be  neglected.   This  of
course  includes  the  non-lucrative  and  "civilian"  problems of
protecting  the  public from  the  noxious byproducts  of  the  new
technology.  The report  notes how little  attention  is being paid
to  the  health  hazards  in  nuclear  radiation, in  new  food  addi-
tives,  and  in  industrial  pollution  of  the  atmosphere.
Propaganda,  Not  Science
When  special  projects  to  deal  with  such  problems  are  set
in  motion, it  is  usually  for  some  ulterior  purpose,  as  in  the
National  Academy of  Science investigation  last  year  into  the
biological   hazards   of   radiation.   The  military    bureaucracy
seized  certain  tentative  conclusions out  of context  and  ignored
the  rest.  The  fact  that  the  Academy did  not  think   nuclear
testing  at  the  present  rate  an  immediate hazard  was  given
the  widest  publicity.   But  this  new  AAAS report  notes  that
nothing  has  been  done  to  implement  the  Academy's  recom-
mendations   for   safeguarding   the   population   against   the
growing  menace  of  radioactivity   from   all  sources,  military
and  civilian.  The  Academy  report  was  used  for   propaganda,
not  science,                                                       .       ,
Obviously  there  is  much  the  general  public  does  not  know
and  .ought  to  know which can  be learned/only  from  the  scien-
tist, if  he is  public spirited  enough and  courageous  enough  to
speak  out.  A  striking example  of the  service  he  may  perform
.is  indicated  by  the  way  discussion  of  the  radiation  peril  end-
ed  with  the  presidential   campaign.   Can  the  public  only  be
alerted  by  political   leadership,  and  by  sensationalism?    Is  it
not  the  duty  of  scientists  to  initiate  sober  discussion?
This  is  the  question  which  haunts  the  AAAS  and  lies  be-
hind  this  report.  The  first  obstacle which confronts  the  scien-
tist  anxious to  fulfil  his  moral  obligations  is  secrecy;  the  re-
port  shows the  price  of  military  subsidy has  been  an  inordi-
nate  growth  of  restrictions   on  that  free  communication  sci-
ence  requires.   The  report  also  shows that  private  industry,
for  competitive  reasons,  is  as  prone  to  secrecy  as  the  mili-
tary.  Like any kept  woman, science pays for  its  luxuries  with
its freedom.
A  Freer  Climate  of  Opinion
The  second  enemy  is  more  serious  still,  and  goes  unmen-
tioned  in the  report.  The  application  of  science to  social  prob-
lems,  the  appearance  of  the  scientist  on the  political  stage  as
a  leading  citizen,  depends  on  the  reestablishment   of  a   freer
climate  of  opinion. The  general  anti-intellectualism  on  which
this  report  dwells  has  been  intensified  by  Congressional  In-
quisition  and the  exaggerated  security  standards  it  has  foist-
ed  on the  government and  through  government  on the  labora-
tory.  The  price  of  a  grant  is  a  considerable  degree  of  con-
formity.
The  intellectual  is  prima  facie  an  object  of  suspicion  in
both  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  The  mentality  the  scientist
must  fight  was  evident  here  in  Washington  a  few  weeks  ago
when  Federal  Judge  Alexander  Holtzoff   sentenced  a  young
physicist,  Bernard  Deutch,  to  90 days in  jail  for  contempt of
the   House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.   Deutch  ad-
mitted  he  had  once  been  a  member of  the  Communist  party
but  declined  on  moral  grounds  to  name  others.
In  sentencing  him, Judge  Holtzoff  said  the  younger  genera-
tion  of  pure  scientists—he  emphasized  that  he  was  talking
only  of  "pure"  scientists—had  "succumbed  to  communistic
propaganda."   This  judge's  definition  of  "communistic"   tends
to  be  a  wide one;  he  is  a  rightist  and  was,  before  his  eleva-
tion  the  bench, legal  adviser  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  Those  sci-
entists  who venture  to  discuss   social  questions  must  expect
such  people  to  view  them  as  victims  of  communistic  propa-
ganda,  if  not  worse.   It  is  easier  for  the  scientist  to  remain
a   second  class  citizen,  voluntarily  abdicating  his  rights  in
order  to  live  more  comfortably.
Worse  Than  No  Defense   at AH
If  the  AAAS  intends  to  encourage  scientist   participation
in  political  discussion,  it  will  need  more  courage  than   the
Federation   of  American  Scientists   which  sent  a  protest  to
Judge   Holtzoff.   The  FAS,   the  last  major   organization   of
scientists-in-politics,  has  grown  timorous.   Its  letter  to  the
Judge  said  not  one word  in  condemnation  of  the  House  Un-
American  Activities   Committee,  nor  in  support  of  Deutch's
moral  courage,  nor  in  affirmation  of  the  need  for  freedom.
The  FAS  felt  that  Holtzoff's  remarks  implied  that   "the
future  of  this  country  and  the  freedom  of  the  world  may  be
in  jeopardy  because  of  the   ideological  unreliability  of  our
young  'pure'  scientists,  especially  physicists."  The  FAS  an-
swer  in  effect  was  to  assert that  most  of the  young physicists
were  ideologically  reliable.  The  denial  missed  the  point.
The  real  point  is that  science  is attacked  at  its  very  heart,
freedom  of  inquiry,  when  the  State  (like  the  Church  before
it)  is  permitted  to  judge  and  punish  scientists for  "idealogi-
cal  unreliability."  The  FAS  was  guilty  of  treason  to  science
when  it   acquiesced . weakly  in  Holtzoff's  premises.  Thought
cannot  be  "pure"  without   being  'dangerous,  and  there  Tiaye
been  few  great  scientists .from   Galileo  to  Einstein  who 'did
riot  seem  to  stale  minds  in  their- 'time  "ideologically  unrelt-
able."
This  is the  point  at  which scientists  everywhere  must  stand
and  fight,  or  sink  into  the  role  of  being  the  subordinates  and
collaborators   of  primitives  in  uniform.    The  AAAS  has  not
embarked  on an  easy  crusade.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, January  7,  1957
Every  Witness  Accused  of  Contempt  by  McCarthy  Has  Now  Gone  Free
Harvey  O'Connor's  Victory  Left  Me Carthy's  Batting  Average at  .000.
When  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  Washington  reversed   the
conviction   of   Harvey   O'Connor   for   contempt,  it   was   the
seventh  straight  defeat  of  McCarthy  in  one year.   O'Connor's
was  the  last  of  seven persons indicted for  contempt of  the  old
McCarthy  committee.   Last  year  all  seven  went  free.    Mc-
Carthy's  batting  average  was .000.
The  year  began  with  the  acquittal  by  Judge  Aldrich  in
Boston  of  Leon  J.  Kamin  for  refusing  to  name  associates  in
the  Communist party.   A few months later  the  companion in-
dictment  of  Wendell  H.  Furry  for  the  same  offense  was  dis-
missed.    On  July   6,  Judge   Pine   in   Washington  acquitted
Diantha   Hoag,  a  Westinghouse  worker.   She  was  charged
with  contempt after  she waived  the  Fifth  to  deny  espionage
or  sabotage  but  invoked  the  Amendment  again  when  specific
questions  were  asked  about  passage  of  information to  other
workers.
Then  on  August  14  the  Court  of  Appeals  in   New  York
unanimously  upheld Judge  Weinfeld's opinion  dismissing  the
contempt indictments of  Corliss  Lament, Abraham  Unger  and
Albert  Shadowitz. On December  20, the  Court of Appeals here
(Edgerton,  Fahy and Burger)  reversed  O'Connor's  conviction.
It  was  disappointing that  no  court  passed  on  the  question
of  the  First  amendment.  The  rulings  in  the  Kamin, Furry,
Lament,  Unger  and  Shadowitz  cases  held  in  effect  that  the
McCarthy  committee  could  not  ask  workers  and  scientists  in
defense  plants,  or  writers  and  teachers  about  their  political
associations  under  the  guise  of  investigating   economy  and
efficiency   in  government  operations.
The  O'Connor  case  was  decided  on  a  different  point.  The
court  held that  to  ask  whether  a  man was  a  member of  "the
Communist  conspiracy"  was  so vague  as  to  deprive  the  wit-
ness  of  the  Sixth  amendment right  to  know  exactly  what  he
was  accused of. The Court drew  a parallel,  as  the  reader  will
see,  with  the  Lattimore  case.   Since  the  O'Connor  decision
provides  some  additional protection  for  witnesses  and  the text
has  not  been  made  available  elsewhere,  we  print  it   here.
Full  Text  of Circuit  Court  Opinion in  The  O'Connor  Contempt  Case
PER  CURIAM :  Appellant was  convicted by a  District  Judge,
trial  by  jury  having  been  waived,  of  contempt  of  Congress
as   defined  in  52  Stat.  942  (1938),  2  U.S.C.  §  192  (1952).
1
The  indictment  charged  that  in  testifying  before  the  Perma-
nent   Subcommittee  on  Investigations   of   the   Senate  Com-
mittee  on  Government  Operations  appellant  refused  to  an-
swer  the  question  "whether   he  was  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist  conspiracy"  when  he  wrote  certain  books which  had
been  purchased  by  the  State  Department  and  distributed  in
United  States  Information   Centers.
Appellant   contends  that  neither   the   Committee  nor  the
Subcommittee  was  authorized by  the  Senate  to  make  the  in-
vestigation  during  which  the  question  was  asked.    He  chal-
lenges  also  the  pertinency  of  the  question,  with  special  reli-
ance  upon the  First  Amendment.   We do not  pass  upon  these
contentions, for  the  conviction in  any  event  must  be set  aside
because  the  question  asked  was  so  imprecise  and  ambiguous
that  appellant's  refusal   to  answer  was  not  a  crime.    We
point  out that he was not indicted for  refusing  to say  whether
or  not  he  was  a  member  of  the  Communist Party,  or  of  any
other  named  or  identifiable organization,  or  whether  or  not
he  had  engaged  in  any  particular   activity.
2
What  the  Sixth  Amendment  Requires
The  Sixth  Amendment to  the  Constitution  provides  that  in
all  criminal  prosecutions  the   accused  shall  be  informed  of
the  nature  and  cause  of  the  accusation.    So, also,  Rule  7 (c)
Fed.  R.  Grim.  P.   This  required  in  the  present  case  that  the
question  set  forth  in  the  indictment  be definite  enough  to en-
able  the  accused to  answer  it  with  knowledge of  its  meaning.
Unless  this  is  required  one who desires  to  answer  a  question
truthfully  can  have  no  assurance  of  being  able  to  do  so  be-
cause  of uncertainty  of the  meaning  attached  to  it  by  the  in-
terrogator.  In  Lattimore  v.  United  States, 94 U.S.  App.  D.C.
268,  215  F.2d  847,  we  held  void  for  vagueness  an  indictment
charging   the  defendant  with  perjury   in  denying  before  a
Congressional  Committee that  he was  a  sympathizer  of  Com-
munism  or  Communist interests.   We  held  that  the  accused
was  unable,  and  therefore  could  not  be  required,  to  defend
against  so vague  a  charge.   The  principle  applies  where  the
1
 The  section  provides  In  pertinent part:
"Every  person  who  having  been  summoned  as  a  witness  by
the  authority  of  either  House  of  Congress,  to  give  testimony
*  *  •  who  having  appeared,  refuses   to  answer  any  question
pertinent   to   the   question  under   inquiry,   shall   be   deemed
guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  * * *."
* Before  the  Subcommittee  appellant  said,  "I  am  not  asserting  the
privilege  against  self-incrlmlnation."    And  on  his  trial  he  refused  to
claim  this  privilege  when  asked if  he  was  a  member  of  the  Communist
Party.   He  indicated a  willingness  to  answer   If  directed  to  do  so  by
the  Court;  bat  the  Court  ruled  he  need  not  answer.
question  is  so  vague  that  the  witness  is  unable  to   answer
with  knowledge  of  its  meaning.    See,  also,  Traub  v.  United
States,  ——   U.S.  App.  D.C. ——,  232  F.2d  43,  47.
McCarthy  As  Witness  Helped  O'Connor
That  a  question  whether  the  appellant  was  at  any  time
during  the  course  of  many years'  in  "the   Communist con-
spiracy"  is  lacking  in  definiteness  is  shown  by  the  following
testimony,  at  appellant's  trial,  of  the  Committee Chairman
[McCarthy]  who had  asked  appellant  the  question:
"Q.  So  there  are  a  group  of  people  who  are  not
members  of  the  party  who could be  members  of  the
Communist  conspiracy.
"A.  They  could  be.
"Q.  Who  would  determine  who  these  people  are?
"A. I  dont  know.
"Q.  Would you undertake to  make that  judgment?
"A.  No."
One  cannot  be  held  guilty  of  criminal  contempt  for   refusing
to  answer  a  question  the  intended  scope of  which is  so  uncer-
tain  that  if  he  attempts  to  answer  it  truthfully,  according  to
his  understanding  of the  meaning,  he  runs  the  risk  of  being
indicted  for  perjury  because  others understand  it  differently.'
The  Government  urges,  however,  that  when  the  accused
was  before  the  Subcommittee  he  did  not  complain  that  the
question  was  too vague.   His  refusal  was  based  on the  First
Amendment  and  the  Committee's  lack  of  authority.  We dealt
with  a  similar  problem  in  Bowers  v.  United  States,  92  U.S.
App.  D.C.  79, 202  F.2d  447, where  we  held  that  the  question
of  pertinency  could  be  raised  at  the  trial,  though  it  had  not
been  raised  before  the  Committee.   We pointed  out  that  the
Fifth   Amendment  privilege  against  self-incrimination  is  a
personal  privilege  which  must  be  seasonably  asserted,  else  it
is  waived,  but  that  pertinency  of the  question  is  an  essential
element  of  the  crime  of  contempt  and  must  be  proved  at  the
trial.  It  is true that  pertinency  is  made an  essential  element
by  the  statute  defining  the  crime,  while  definiteness  is  not.
Note  1 supra.  But the  Sixth  Amendment to the   Constitution
makes  definiteness  an  essential  element  of  every.crime.   For
this reason  definiteness,  as well  as pertinency, must appear  at
the trial  itself.
5
Reversed.
'  The  books  were  written  in  the  years  between  1933  and  1950.
* The  existence  of  a   Communist  conspiracy   does  not   obviate  the
necessity  of  advising  the  witness what  is  meant by  such  a  conspiracy
when  be  is  asked  to  say  whether or  not  he  had  been  a  member  of  it.
* Whether  or  not   deflniteness   may  be  waived  at   tbe  trial  is  not
before  us.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  7, 1957
Toting  Up  Some  Stray  Accounts  From  the  Old  Year  to  the  New
Morally  and  politically,  the  most  inspiring  event  of   1956
was  the  Montgomery  bus  boycott.  .  .  .  And  the  most  depress-
ing  events  of  1957  are  likely  to  center  around  the  efforts  of
racists  to  maintain  segregation.   .  .  .  We  note  that   Southern
chivalry  is  already  at  work:  one  pregnant  Negro  woman  has
been  wounded  by  a  sniper  firing  bravely  from  ambush.  .  .  .
How  the  white  supremacy  atmosphere  addles  even  the  South's
better  brains was  evident  in  a  statement  issued  here  by  Senator
Sparkman.  .  .  .  "One  of  the  rules  on which  our  government  is
founded,"  he  said  piously,  "is  the minority must  have a way of
being  protected  from  a  ruthless  majority." .  .  . But  Sparkman
wasn't  talking  of  violence  by  the  white  majority  against  the
Negro  minority. ... He was talking  of the filibuster. .  .  . The
outlook  for  the  biennial  Senate  fight  against  unlimited  debate
is  not  rated  high  on  Capitol  Hill,  but  we'll  report  on  it  next
week.  .  . . We  like  best  the  Chicago Tribune's  characterization
of   the  filibuster,  "It   exalts  the  lungs  at  the  expense  of   the
brain."  .  .  .  Not  the  least  memorable  thing  about  that  vivid
film classic  "Baby  Doll"  (don't  miss  it)  are the  shots  of  those
deep  South  faces.  .  .  . White  supremacy  and  white  degeneracy
seem to go hand  in hand,  and  this  is what  Elia  Kazan  and  Ten-
nessee Williams  have  caught  magnificently  in  the  camera  lens.
A  Tobacco  Road  Classic
This  is  the  strata  at  which  the  Davis  subcommittee  of  the
House  District  of  Columbia  committee  aimed  in  its  report  on
conditions  in  the  integrated  Washington   public  schools.  .  .  .
This  collection  of  all  the  horrid  instances  of  sex  and  smut  the
committee  could  find  will  be  a  collector's  item  among  the  bib-
liophiles  in  the  small  town  poolrooms  of  the  South.  .  .  .  Some
of  the items are biologically  incredible. ...  An  example  is the
colored  girl  of   12  alleged  to  be  pregnant:  she  "had   already
had   one  child  before  she  came  to  school  and  was  bothered
about  it."  .  .  . They'll  be guffawing  over  this  report  all  up  and
down  Tobacco  Road.  .  .  .  But  the  low  level  of  the  report  and
its  obvious one-sidedness  and  unreliability  will  not  make  it any
the  less  effective  a weapon  for  a  Southern  counter-offensive in
Congress  this  session  against  integrated  schools.  .  .  .
We  don't  suppose  it  will  keep  the  stuffed  shirts from  hand-
ing  each  other  Peter  Zenger  awards as  usual  this  year,  but  the
feeble  spirit of  U.S.  newspaper  editors  was  demonstrated  when
it  took  first  the  twice  weekly  Afro-American    and   then   the
magazine  Look  to  challenge  the  State Department's  bluff   "bar-
ring"   U.S.  newspapermen  from  Communist  China.  .  .  .  The
Department's  own  press  release  No.  341  of  May  1,  1952,  said
that  while U.S.  passports  were not  valid  for  Iron  Curtain  coun-
tries,  "the   department  emphasized  that  this  procedure  in  no
way  forbids  American  travel  to  those  areas."  .  . .
Our  Humorous  State  Department
In  its  press  release  December   28,  implying  possible  action
under   the  Trading  With  the  Enemy  Act  against   the   three
newsmen,  the  Department   said  cutely  "It   should   be  clearly
understood  that  in  taking  this  action  the  United  States  is  not
motivated  by any  desire  to  deny  to  the  American  public  infor-
mation  about  Communist  China."  .  .  . We  pass  this  on  to  the
anthologists  of  the  deadpan.  .  . .
In  the  meantime  a  test  of  the  Department's  right  to  refuse
passports  without  disclosing  the  alleged  unfavorable  evidence
is  on  its  way  back  to  the  Circuit  Court  in  the  Weldon  Bruce
Dayton  case.  . .  . Unlike  Judge  Youngdahl  in  the  Boudin  case,
Judge  McGarraghy  on  December   21  in  the  Dayton  case  up-
held  the  use of  undisclosed  evidence. ...  If  the  Department
gets  away  with  this  in  the  higher  courts,  it  will  have  a  new
weapon   with  which  to  keep  reporters  from  travelling.   .  .  .
When  will  U.S.  editors  wake  up  to  the  close  link  between  the
right  to  travel  and  the right  to  report  freely ?  .  . .
The  New   York   Times,  though  still  silent  on  the  issues  in-
volved  in  the  contempt   cases  brought   against   several  of   its
staff  by the  Eastland committee,  launched  a  biting  editorial  at-
tack  the  day  before  Congress   opened  on  Eastland's  right  by
seniority  to  remain  chairman of  the  Senate  Judiciary  Commit-
tee.  .  .  . The  New  York  Journal  of  Commerce  (Dec.  31)  in  a
news  story  on  the  refusal  of  Texas  authorities  to  permit  in-
creased  oil  output  to  meet  Europe's  needs  in  the  Suez  crisis
says  softly,  "Some  oil  sources  .  .  .  could  not  help  feeling  that
certain  producers  are  interested  primarily in  achieving  the  low-
est possible  stock  level  in  order  to  force  a  general  rise  in  crude
oil  prices."  .  .  .  The  big  disappointment  at  the  year  end was
the  refusal  of  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court   (Warren,  Black  and
Douglas  dissenting)  to  give  30 New  York  City  school  teacher
victims  of  the  witch  hunt  a  hearing.
Thank  You  for  The  Many  Kind  Notes  Coming  In  With  Renewals
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
O* root
City   ................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)    Name   ..
Street   .............
City   ................
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........................ .Zone.......
for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4
gift  announcement?
..State.......................
(1 yr.)  additional:
1/7/57
..State.......................
Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Pre-dated  Mondays  but  published
every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  801  H.  Capitol  St.,  Washington   3,  D.  C.  An  Independent   weekly  pub-
lished  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Bather  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in   tbe  U.S.;  *6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall
rates:  $15 to  Bnrope:  120 to  Israel,  Ada  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED