I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957sep09.pdf

============================================================

Reuther's  Fight  on  Inflation)   P.  3
The  "Files"  Bill:  A  Victory  in  the  FBI  Campaign  Against  the  Supreme  Court,  See  P.  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  34
SEPTEMBER   9,   1957
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  First  Victim  of  The   Soviet  ICBM
Comment   on   the   Soviet   intercontinental   ballistic  missile
has  avoided  the  most  obvious  of  its  consequences.   This  is  the
destruction   of   the   Eisenhower   "open   skies"   proposal.    The
idea  was  that  continuous  aerial  inspection  of  the  bases   from
which  a  strategic  blow  could  be  launched  would  eliminate the
fear  of  a  nuclear  Pearl  Harbor.   In  this  improved atmosphere,
reduction  in  arms  would  become  feasible.
But  the  debut  of  the  long  feared   ICBM  opens  a  new  era.
Inspection  is  no  longer  the  key  to  relaxation  of  tension.   Air
fields   may  be  spotted   and   policed  from   the  air,  but   ICBM
launching  sites  may  be  widely scattered and  easily hidden.   A
strategic   strike   requires  measures  of   concentration   and   un-
usual  movement;  these  can  be  observed.   But  widely separated
ICBM  launching  sites  may  be  activated  quickly  and  unobtru-
sively,  underground.   In  addition,  most  important  of   all,  is
the  time  difference.    The   fastest  bombers  would  take  at  least
six  hours  to  reach  their  targets;  an  ICBM  can  make  the  trip
in   30  minutes.   This   would  be  the  maximum  warning  time
even  with  perfect  inspection,  assuming  that  a  country  devil-
ishly   determined   on   sudden    war   would    be   high-minded
enough   not   to   seize  inspectors  and   inspection   posts   at   the
zero  hour.
A  Public  Relations  Dilemma
The  Pentagon  will  not  be  sorry  to  see the  end  of  the  "open
skies"   proposal;   one  has  only  to  read  the  discussion  of  in-
spection    in   Henry    A.   Kissinger's   well-informed    Nuclear
Weapons   and  Foreign  Policy  to  gather   how  astringently  the
armed  services  have  always  regarded   it.    But  politically   the
collapse  of  the  aerial  inspection  approach  is  serious.   From  a
public  relations  standpoint,  the  "open  skies"  plan  was  all  the
U.   S.  had   to   offer   world   opinion   in  competition   with   the
Soviet's   "ban-the-bomb"   campaign.    So  long  as  we  could   go
through    the   endless   palaver   of   perfecting   a   100   percent
certain  aerial  inspection  plan,   we  could   avoid   the   issues  of
testing  and  nuclear  warfare.
Meanwhile  the  Pentagon   could  go  on  with  its  dream   (see
the  August  issue  of  Fortune)   that  we  were  so  far  ahead  tech-
nologically  that  we  could  soon  reestablish  something  like  the
atomic  monopoly   we  enjoyed   in  1945-49  and  then,  if   neces-
sary,  negotiate   disarmament.    The   State  Department,    for  its
part,  hoped  that  from  the   pressures   of   the  continued   arms
race,  it  could  exact  a  Soviet  surrender  on  Germany.   All  these
hopes   have   now   been   exploded.    Whatever   the   full   truth
about  the  Soviet  ICBM,  it  is  clear  that  the  Russians will  soon
have  that   "ultimate  weapon"   in  working   order,   apparently
before  we  do.
The  outlook  is  not  hopeless  /'/  public opinion  as  a  first  step
can  force  the  military  at  least  to  give  up  their  insistence  on
further  testing,  if  not  their  reliance  on  nuclear  weapons.   We
1    3
have  already  achieved  the  fabrication  of  a  hydrogen  warhead
small  enough  to  be  used  on  a  missile,  and  a  ban  on  tests will
not  block  development   of  an  ICBM.    Further  testing  means
(1)  that  other  nations  will  soon  have  nuclear  weapons,  thus
making  control  all  the  more  difficult,  and  (2)   further  pollu-
tion  of  the  atmosphere  by  fallout.   Of   this  problem   of   pol-
lution,  one  can  only  say  two  things  with  assurance   (1)   that
there   is   a   wide   and   uncomfortable   margin   of   ignorance
around  current  estimates  of  both  the  somatic  and  genetic  dan-
gers,   and   (2)    that   since   1931,    long   before   the   perilous
atomic  nucleus  was  unlocked,  scientific  estimates  of   the  safe
limits   of   radiological  exposure   have  proven   too   optimistic,
and  have  steadily  been   revised  downward.
In  Less Than  15  Years
The  latest  warning  in  this  area  is  that  given  by  two  scien-
tists  of   the  Naval   Radiological   Defense   Laboratory   in  San
Francisco  at  the  meeting   last  month   of  the   American  Insti-
tute  of  Biological   Sciences;   they  estimated   that   in   less   than
15  years  the  concentration   of  strontium  90   in  humans  as  a
result  of  nuclear  weapons  set  off  through  1955  may  reach  the
danger   point.    An   agreement   on   testing   is  feasible  because
monitoring  stations  500  miles  apart  would  be  enough   to  de-
.tect  violations  as  low  as  the  kiloton  range.    If  this  could  be
negotiated   apart   from   the   Rube  Goldbergian   complications
and  conditions   of  the  whole  Western  package   plan,  a  great
step  forward  would  be   accomplished.
A Military  Minuet  With  Moscow
What  is  required  is what  any  bureaucracy  hates  most  to  do
—some  new  thinking.   It  was  difficult   enough  for  the  Eisen-
hower  Administration  to  find  in  the  "open  skies"  proposal  a
common   denominator  low  enough  to  reconcile  Pentagon   and
State   Department.     To   find   a  new   formula,   especially   one
which   involves   real  negotiation,   would   be   even  more    diffi-
cult.    The   newspapers   generally   also   take  the   line  of   least
resistance—their  panacea  is  to  step  up  the  arms  race,  but  this
route  leads  only  to  bankruptcy,   moral   and  financial,  and  to
war.   As  for  the  military,  always  worried  lest  the  public  "re-
lax"   and  Congress  cut  appropriations,  they  probably   see  the
Soviet  ICBM   as  a  not  unmixed  blessing,  since  it  must  -raise
fear  and   tension.
The  military's  favored   nostrum  at  the  moment   is  the  one
Kissinger  puts  forward  in  his  brilliant  but  poisonously   delus-
ive  book.  This  is that, with  both  sides  fully  armed  for  mutual
suicide,  we  must  now  prepare   to  wage  limited  nuclear  war.
The   same   men  who   say  peaceful   co-existence   is   impossible
will  now  tell  us  that  we  can  go  into  a kind  of  military  minuet
with  Moscow,  politely agreeing  to  fight  nuclear  wars  but  only
on  a  limited  scale  and   for  limited  objectives.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  9,19B7
How  Congress  Was  Stampeded   by  A  Smear-and-Fear  Campaign   Against  the  Supreme   Court
Why  the  "FBI   Files"  Bill  May  Be Declared  Unconstitutional
The  so-called  FBI  files  bill  is  the  first  triumph  in  a  cam-
paign  to  create  public  distrust  of  the  judiciary.   In  this  cam-
paign   the  white  supremacists  and   the  FBI  have  a  common
interest,  since  both  regard  the  new  liberal  trend  as  a  menace.
The  real  menace  is  the  demonstration  that  we  have  reached
the  stage  where  our  secret  police  have  more  power  in  Con-
gress   than   any  other   agency  of   government.   In   a   session
which   saw  the  President   defeated   on   one   basic  issue  after
another,  J.  Edgar  Hoover  got  what  he wanted.
Respectable  and  even  liberal  elements  were  mobilized.   Not
only   the   Hearst   chain   but   usually  responsible   conservative
papers  helped  to  spread  false  reports.   "Supreme  Court  Ruling
on  FBI,"   the  New  York  Herald-Tribune   screamed  in  a  four
column  headline  across  page  one  on  August  10,  "May   Force
U.  S.  to  Drop  Abel  Case."   This  story  which  emanated  from
"not   to  be  attributed"   sources  was  so  completely   false  that
Assistant   Attorney  General   Tompkins   denied   it   next  day.
But  that  did  not  keep  it  from  reverberating in  the  press  and
Congress.
The  Whisper  That  No  One Can Be  Trusted
A  Senator   like  Clark  of  Pennsylvania  who  refused  to  be
stampeded  complained  to  a  visitor   that  even  the   American
Civil  Liberties  Union  was  putting  pressure  on  him  to  support
the  bill  the  Department   of  Justice  wanted.   The  FBI  orches-
trated  all  its  friends.   Semi-literate  Broadway  gossip  columns
suddenly   sprouted   eruditely  with   quotations   from  Jefferson
criticizing  the  judiciary.   Someone  ghosted  an  article  for  the
September   issue  of  the  American   Legion   Monthly   in  which
its  National  Commander  hinted,   "We  must  be  alert  to  the
fact  that  it  may  be  easier  for  the  enemies  of  our   Constitution
to  subvert  nine  Supreme  Court  Justices  than  96  Senators  and
435  Congressmen. ...  A  subverted  Supreme  Court  will  be
more  dangerous  to  us  than  an  infiltrated  Congress."  This im-
plication  is  that  no  agency  of  government  can  really  be  secure
against  subversion  or  infiltration. Only  the  FBI  can  be  trusted.
In  the  Senate,  thanks  to  the  brilliant  fight  waged  by  such
Senators  as  Clark,  Javits,  Morse  and  John  Sherman  Cooper,
the  bill  was  whittled   down  to  the  point   where   the   Hearst
papers  in  a  front  page  editorial  on  August  26  declared   it  had
been  "emasculated  by  pseudo  liberal  appeasers."   But  in  the
House   the  opposition   of  a  few  men  like  Celler   was  steam-
rollered.   In  conference   committee  the  vacillating  O'Mahoney
surrendered   and   substantially   accepted   the   House   version.
Only  Langer  and  Kefauver  voted   "No"    in  the  face  of  mis-
leading   reassurances   later  given   the   Senate  by  O'Mahoney.
The  House  passed  the  final  bill  on .voice  vote,  without  any
recorded  opposition.   It  is  time  for  reflection  when   Congress
shows  more  respect  for  J.  Edgar  Hoover  than  Earl  Warren.
The  Objectives   Were   Broader
The  objectives  of  the  campaign  against  the  Jencks  decision
went  beyond  a  desire  to  protect  the  FBI's  files.  The  original
bill,  introduced  by  Congressman  Walter  (HR  7915),  would
in  effect  have  enabled  the  Attorney  General  to  keep  from  a
court   "any   books,  records,  papers  or  documents"   he  consid-
ered  "confidential."   This  was  so  extreme  it  was  scrapped  in
the  House  Judiciary  Committee.
The   Department   of   Justice   substitute,    introduced   in   the
House   by  Keating  and   in  the   Senate  by  O'Mahoney  would
have  revised  the  Federal  Rules  of  Criminal  Procedure  to  cut
down  rights  of  pre-trial  discovery.   These   enable  defendants
in  many  types  of  cases,  from  murder  to  anti-trust,  to  see  cer-
tain  documents  for  the  adequate preparation of  their  defense.
The  philosophy behind  them  is  that  the  government's  inter-
est  lies  not  in  successful prosecution but  in  a  trial  so  full   and
fair  that  the  truth  can  be  determined.    Debate  in   the  Sen-
ate  uncovered  the   fact   that   the   Department  was  concerned
with  a  District of  Columbia  murder  case  (Fryer   v.  U.  S.  207
Fed.  2d   134)   where  the  Court  of   Appeals  allowed   the  ac-
cused   not  only  to  know  the  names  of   the  witnesses against
him   (as   is  traditional  in   a  capital  crime)   but   to   examine
their  statements  three  days  in  advance  of  trial.
Celler  in  the  House,  like  Clark,  Javits,  Morse  and  Cooper
in  the  Senate,  protested  against revision of  the  rules  of  crimi-
nal  procedure  without hearings.   These  rules  are  too  delicate
for  draftsmanship in  mob  scenes.   But  they  protested  in  vain.
The  final  bill  restricts pre-trial discovery  as  well  as  the  Jencks
decision  and  in  doing  so  may  prove unconstitutional.
The  Fifth  amendment  says  "No  person   shall  be  ...     de-
prived   of   life,  liberty  or  property   without   due   process   of
law."   Due  process   is  only  a  legal  term  for  fair  trial.   It  is
the  Supreme  Court,   not   Congress,   which  decides  what  con-
stitutes  a  fair  trial.   This  is  what  the  Senate  Judiciary  Com-
mittee  had  in  mind  when,  in  reporting   the  bill,  it  nervously
denied  any  intention  "to  nullify,  or  to  curb,  or  to  limit"  the
Jencks  decision  and  added,  "The   committee  believes  that  leg-
islation  would   be  clearly  unconstitutional  if   it  sought   to  re-
strict  due process."—          -    -•
Where  the  Bill   Conflicts
But  the  bill  does  restrict  due  process.   The  Court  ruled  in
]encks  due  process  required  that  "the  criminal  action  be  dis-
missed  when  the  Government   .  .  .  elects  not  to  comply  with
an  order  to produce,  for the  accused's  inspection  .  .  .  relevant
statements   or   reports   in   its   possession   of   government   wit-
nesses  touching   the 'subject  matter  of  their  testimony  at  the
trial."  There  are  three  rules  laid  down  here,  and  all  three  are
violated  by  the  bill.
(1)   The  case  need  not  be dismissed.   The  Judge  can  strike
the   testimony  of   the  witness   or   declare   a  mistrial   instead.
This  would   encourage  the  government   to  take  a  chance  on
refusing   the  defense   vital   evidence,   since   at  the   worst—in
the  event  of  a  mistrial—it  could  try  the  case  again.
(2)    If  the  government   does  elect  to  produce  the  witness'
earlier  reports,  they  go  under  the  bill  to  the  Judge  rather  than
the  defense,  a  procedure  the  Court  specifically  disapproved.
(3)   Most  important  of  all,   the  bill  limits  the  earlier  re-
ports   the   defense   could   demand   to   those   the   witness   had
signed  or  otherwise  approved  or  which  had  been  taken  down
stenographically   or  electronically.    This  is  the  biggest  loop-
hole  of  all.   The  debate  in  the  Senate  brought  out  that   the
usual   practice  is  to  have   the   informant   give   his   statement
orally,  and  to  have  this  written  down  in  summary  form  by
an  FBI  agent.
Such  summary  reports  of  oral  statements would  be  exempt
from  subpoena,  though  they might  be  essential—as  they  were
in  the  Jencks  case—to  test  the  veracity  of  the  witness.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  9, 1957
Behind  Walter  Reuther's   One-Man  Crusade  Against  the  Inflationary  Spiral
Some  Economic  Realities  Neither  Adam  Smith  Nor  Karl  Marx  Expected
Walter   Reuther's  campaign   for   lower   automobile   prices
must  be  seen  against  the  background   of  some  economic  reali-
ties  neither  Adam  Smith  nor  Karl  Marx  expected.   American
capitalism,  like  Russian  Communism,  bears  little  resemblance
to  its  idealized  image.   In  big  organized  industry  wages   are
now  determined  by  a  peculiar  kind   of  competition—compe-
tition  among  labor  leaders.   Their  popularity with  their  mem-
bers  and   their  standing   in  the   labor  hierarchy  depends   on
how  much  they  can  get  in  increased  wages  at  annual  or  bien-
nial   bargaining  sessions  with   the   managers   of  industry.
These  bargaining  sessions  have  the  spurious  ferocity   of   a
wrestling  match,  in  which  the  mountainous  contenders   make
up   by  groan   and   grimace  for   the   essential  unreality  of   the
contest.   The  lords  of  industry  look  forward  eagerly  to  being
pinned  to  the  mat.   Trade  unionism  has  become   their   profit
escalator.    Every  extra  dollar   in  wages  gives  them  an   excuse
for   several  dollars  extra  in  price  increases.
These   increases   are  made   possible   because   the   arms   race
has   created   a  cost-plus  economy   in  which   big  industrialists
can   afford   to   be  gentlemanly.   When   the   leading   company
puts  up   its  price,  its  competitors  (as   they  are  still   quaintly
called)  put  up  theirs  by  the  same  amount.
The  Unorganized  Are  The  Victims
This  happy  game   of   wage-and-price  leap   frog   in  the  or-
ganized  sector  of  the  economy  exploits  the  unorganized.    The
consumer,   the   smaller   businesses  which   have   to   fight   for
their  dwindling  share  of  his  dwindling  dollar,   the  folk   who
live  on  fixed  incomes,   the  unorganized   worker   and   profes-
sional  man,   all  these   are  the  victims  of  perpetual  inflation.
This  can  no  more  go  on  forever  than  could  that  New  Era
of  Herbert   Hoover's   in  the  20's,  but  it  is  as  hazardous  for  a
labor  leader  as  for  a  capitalist  to  be  socially  responsible.     The
average  trade  unionist,  like  the  average  investor,  is  interested
in  his  own  take,  not   in  the  over-all   effect   on  the   economy.
When  Mr.   Reuther  in  his  broadside  of   August   29  said   the
prerogatives  of  labor  and  management   should  not  be  "exer-
cised • in   a jvacuum  unrelated   to   the   needs   of   the   whole   so-
ciety,"  he  was  talking   a  language  risky  with  his  own  rank-
and-file—long  hair  stuff,   "sort  of   socialistic."
The  Reuther  proposal   for  a  $100   cut  in  the  price  of  next
season's  cars  was  smart  public  relations.   But  his  offer,   how-
ever  cagily  worded,  to  take  that  cut  into  account  at  next  year's
wage   bargaining   session,   took   courage.     The   average    auto
worker   will   not   relish   the   idea  that   he   might   possibly   be
called  on  to  make  a  contribution  from  his  own  pay  envelope
to  the  pro  bono  ptiblico  of  combatting  inflation.
A  Sudden  Stammer
Indeed  the  text  of  the  letters  to  the  Big  Three  which  Mr.
Reuther  released  on  August   18  seem   to  reflect  some   difficul-
ties  with  his  own  executive  board.    The   letters  are  brilliant
in   their   analysis  of   the   industry's   economic  and   sales   posi-
tion,  but  a  slight  stammer  develops  when  the  question   comes
up  of  just  what  labor  would  do  if  prices  wen   cut   $100.
At  one  point  Mr.  Reuther  speaks  of  submitting  to impartial
arbitration  if  "a  question  should  arise as  to  whether  the grant-
ing  of  our   demands  would   necessitate  a  restoration   of  part
or  all  of  the  $100   per  car  price  reduction."    At  another   he
speaks   of   "adjusting   our  demands  downward   to   the  extent
shown"  to   be  necessary  in  order   to  avoid   a  price   increase."
The  companies  might  have  challenged  this  contradiction,  but
only  at  the  expense  of  discussing  a  subject   they  would   like
to  avoid.
A   man's   size  can  be  measured   by  his   willingness  in   the
public  interest  to  take  positions  his  own  following  may  not
like.  Walter  Reuther  has  again  shown  himself  the  one  Ameri-
can  labor  leader  of  first  rank  who   still  has  this  kind  of  social
vision  and  daring.
A  System  of  Compulsory  Investment
The   Reuther  campaign   represents  the  kind  of   responsible
leadership   commensurate   with   the   huge   power   now   exer-
cised  by  a  great   trade  union.   The   campaign   cites  the   plea
made   recently   by  the   past   president  of   the   National   Auto-
mobile  Dealers  Association  pleading  with  the  manufacturers
to  absorb  increased  costs  in  pricing  new  models  and  estimat-
ing  that  this  might  be  a  difference  in  sales  of  a  million  more
cars.    Since  autos   are  our  most   important   consumer   durable
industry,  the  effect   would  be  felt  by  the  whole   economy.
In  his  original   letters  released  on  August   18,  Mr.  Reuther
showed  that  the  effect  of  a  $100  price  cut  and  a  million  more
sales  for   each  of  the  Big  Three  would  still  leave   them   with
profit  margins  after  taxes  far  above  the  national  average   for
manufacturing   corporations   generally:   18.9   percent   for  GM,
13.9  percent  for  Ford,  and   19.2  percent  for  Chrysler  as  com-
pared  with  the  manufacturing  average  of  12.1  percent.
These  percentages  are  figured  on  a  net  worth  which  itself
represents  a  vast  expansion   financed   out  of   exorbitant  earn-
ings  at  the  consumer's  expense.   Since  1947,   as  Mr.   Reuther
showed  in  his  statement   of  August  29,  GM's   net  worth  has
tripled,  Ford's  has  gone  up  by  two  and  a  half  times,  Chrys-
ler's  has  doubled.    Very  little  of  this  has  come  from  the  sale
of  stock.   Most  of  it  represents,  in  Mr.  Reuther's  vivid  phrase,
a  compulsory   investment  by  the  consumer.
If  we  had  a  President  with  a  flair  for  leadership,  he  could
utilize  Mr.  Reuther's  initiative.  What  is  true  in  autos  is  also
true  in  steel,  and  in  every  basic  industry.   Walter  Reuther  has
launched  a  one-man  campaign  to  educate  the  labor  movement
and  the  country.   Will  other   labor   leaders  join  him,  or  will
they  prefer  comfortably  to  acquiesce  as  junior  partners   (very-
junior)    in   a   continuous   price   gouge   which   spells   serious
trouble  for  the  future?
Stone  to  Speak  on  Disarmament in  Chicago, Detroit  and  Toronto
I.  F.  Stone  will  speak  on  disarmament  (under  the  some-
what   P.   T.   Barnumish   title,   "Will   Mankind  Destroy    It-
self?")  in  Chicago,  Sept.  20  at  8  p.  m.,  Curtis  Hall,  410  S.
Michigan;  in  Detroit,  Sept.  21  at  8  p.  m.,  Central  Y.  W.  C.
1    3     '/
A.,  2230 Witherell  at  Montcalm;  and  in  Toronto,  Sept.  22  at
8  p.  m.  in  United  Steel  Workers  Hall,  35  Cecil  Street.  Brad
Little,  peace   education  speaker,  American  Friends   Service
Committee,  will  be  co-speaker  in  Chicago.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  9, 1957
Dulles's  Feat:  Making  America  Look  Somehow  Less  Free  Than  Communist  Dictatorships
Pressure  Needed  to  Make  Brownell  Use Those  New  Civil  Rights  Powers
We  suggest   the  organization  of  a  League  to  Protect   the
Right  to  Vote:  as  a  means  of  putting  pressure  on  the  Attor-
ney  General  to  use  the  new  powers  given  him  by  the   Civil
Rights   bill.    These,   for   all  their   restriction,   considerably
widen  his  power  to  combat  effectively  the  kind  of  registra-
tion  frauds  for  which  Louisiana  juries  declined to  indict.   He
can  begin  injunction   proceedings  against   officials   who"  have
been  striking  Negro  voters  from  the  rolls.   Officials  who  per-
sist  can  still  be  sent  to  jail  for  civil  contempt  without  jury
trial  until  they  obey  court  orders,  and  can  be  punished  with-
out  jury  trial  for  criminal  contempt  if  the   sentence  is  no
higher  than  45 days  in  jail  and  a  $300  fine.
Newspapermen  for   Communist  China:  The  final  precipi-
tant  of  the  Dulles  decision  to  let  a  selected  group  of  U.  S.
newsmen  visit  Communist  China  may  have  been  the   news
that  New  York   Times  correspondent  Syd  Gruson  had  applied
to  the  Chinese  embassy  in  Warsaw  for  a  visa.   As  a  Canad-
ian,   Gruson   could  have  visited   Peking   for   the   New   York
Times   despite  the  State  Department   but  this   would  have
provoked  an  uproar  against   Dulles  in  the  rest  of  the  press.
As  it  is,  David  Lawrence  was  Dulles's  only  defender.   Even
the  Hearst  press  in  a  leading  editorial  August   25  said  that
in  allowing  a  restricted  form  of  coverage  Dulles  had  "moved
from  the  untenable  to  the  ridiculous."   If  the  State  Depart-
ment  hadn't  already  made  a  spectacle  of  itself,  it  could  have
turned   a  world  wide  laugh   on  Peking  for  the  charge  that
U.  S.  newsmen  were  fighting  the  Department  for  the  privi-
lege  of  coming to  spy!   Though  there  is  little  more  freedom
in  Russia  and  China than  in  Stalin's  time,  the  State  Depart-
ment  somehow manages  by  its  attitude  toward  U.  S. students
and  U.  S.  newsmen  to  make  our  own country  seem  to  be  the
place  where  men  are  not  free.
As  important  as  Howard  Fast's  defection  in  this  country:
(now  many  months  later  made  known  in  the   Soviet  Union)
was   the   effect   in  East   Germany  of   Alfred   Kantorowicz's
flight  to  the   West.   A  member  of  the   German  Communist
Party  since  1931,  a  veteran   of  the  international   brigade  in
Spain,  a  professor  of  contemporary literature  at  East  Berlin
University,   he   declared   "I   myself   have   contributed  .  .  .
to  bring  about  the  very  thing  I  meant  to  fight  against—the
lawlessness,  the  exploitation  of  the  workers,  the  spiritual  en-
slavement  of  the  intelligentsia,   the  arbitrary  rule  of  an  un-
worthy  clique who  defile  the  concept  of  socialism  as  once  the
Nazis  defiled  the  name  of  Germany."
Post-Mortem  on  McCarthyism:  A  report  to  the  American
Sociological   Society   annual   meeting   in   Washington   last
Not  the  Wife  of  A  Los  Alamos Scientist
Behind   the   peculiar  wording  of  that   statement  by
Congressman   Walter   accusing   Dr.   Henry   Spitz   of
Vienna  and  his  wife  of  being  Soviet  spies  is  a  correc-
tion.  A  week earlier  the  press  was  told  that  Boris  Mor-
ros   when   before   the   House   Un-American  Activities
Committee  had  named  the  wife  of  an  atomic  scientist
at   Los  Alamos  as  a  Soviet  spy.  If  true  this   was  a
black  eye  for  the  security  and  intelligence precautions
of  the  Atomic Energy  Commission.  Now, however,  Mr.
Walter   says,   "While   Dr.  Spitz   was  not  employed  at
the  U.  S.  Atomic  Energy  installation  at  Los  Alamos,  it
is  significant  to  note  the  close  proximity  his  Albuquer-
que  position  gave  him  to  the  Los  Alamos  installation."
Dr.  Spitz,   an   Austrian  physician  who  came   to   this
country  in  1939,  took  a  post  at  the  veterans   hospital
in  Albuquerque,  N.  M.  in  1949,  and  returned  with  his
wife  to  Vienna in  1950,  where  they  resumed  their  Aus-
trian  citizenship.  This  is  quite  different  from  the  origi-
nal  version  but  characteristically  the  correction  is  cov-
ered  by  a  new  denunciation,  another  instance  of  con-
viction  by  headline,  though  if  Morros  was  that   wrong
about  the  Spitzes,  he  might  conceivably  be  wrong about
about  them  altogether.
month  of  a  test  study  in  a  Western  Wisconsin  town  showed
the  "statistically  typical   McCarthy  supporter"  to  be  "more
likely  to  be"  a  Roman  Catholic,  of  German  or  Irish  extrac-
tion,  an  older  man,  with  less  schooling,  from  a  lower  income
group,  and  a  worker  rather  than  a  professional  man.  .  .  .
William  Proxmire,  Wisconsin's  new  liberal   Democratic  Sen-
ator,  was  a  reporter  on  Bill  Evjue's  Madison   Capitol-Times,
one  of  the  few  militantly  liberal  papers  left  in  this  country.
Jokes:  Overheard  at  a  Capitol  Hill  press  table  (1)  of  Sen.
John   Kennedy  and   his   brother,   Robert:   "They're   just   a
couple   of   professional   boys"   and   (2)   of   President    Eisen-
hower:  "He has  delusions  of  sincerity."  . .  .  From  the  Texas
Observer,  an  independent  liberal   weekly  published  in  Aus-
tin,   covering   the   recent   State   AFL-CIO   meeting   which
adopted   the  national   labor  organization's   civil  rights  plat-
form.    A  Latin  American  labor  delegate  told   the  story  of
a  Latin  attending  a  convention  in  Dallas  who  was   refused
service  in  a  cafe.    He  was  told,  "We  don't  serve   Mexicans."
"Madam,"  he  replied,  with  the  grace  of  a  cabaHero,  "I  don't
eat  Mexicans.    I  just  want  a  hamburger."
This  Is  The   Firsl  Issue   Since   August   19—The   Weekly   Is  Not  Published  the  Last  Two  Thursdays   in   August
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     .........................................................................................
Street    .........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ...........................................................
9/!>/57
Street
City    ......................................Zone............State..
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IF.Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
.Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
K.   Stone's   Weekly.     Knit-red   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  everv  Thursday  except   the  hist  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   nfilS  Nebraska  Ave..  X.  W.,  Washington  15. D.  C.
\n   independent    weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stunt
1
.    Subscription:
$n   in   th  r.  S.;   $«  in  Canada  ;  $10  elsewhere.    Air    Mn II  rates:  $1"i  t"  Europe;  $20  tn   Isrnel.   A«hi  and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED