I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957oct14.pdf

============================================================

4  Pages  on  That  Soviet  Moon
Inside:  Containment  Is  Dead,  The  Satellite  Is  the   ICBM's  Eye
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  39
OCTOBER  14,   1957
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
A  Terrifying  Stranger  Knocks  at  Heaven's  Gate
With   the  launching  of   the  first   artificial   moon   into   the
skies,  man  stands  at   last  on  the   threshold   of  the   universe.
Outside  takes  on  a  new  meaning.   There  new  worlds  beckon
a  new  Columbus.   The   Infinite,  on  which  mystics  brooded,
may  become  the  playground  of  the  astronaut  and  man  roam
where  God  is  supposed  to  have  presided.
Like  any  other  stranger,   knocking   at  a   new  door,   Man
must  nervously  adjust  his  tie  and  give  himself  a  quick  once-
over,  hoping  to  make  a  good  impression.   The  self-inventory
is  not  reassuring.  To  a  fresh  eye at  the  outer  world's  window,
the  newcomer  may  seem  a  creature  of  terrifying  habits.
Only   the   Excuses   Change
Wherever  man  goes,  he  brings  with  him  war.    His  poets
glorify  it.   Each  generation's  healthiest  youth  is  trained  for  it.
Any  difference  within  the  human  species  is  enough  to  serve
as  excuse  for  it.   Religion,  coloring,  national  jealousy,  capital-
ist  competition  for  markets,  deviations  of  dogma  among  com-
munists—the  excuses  vary,  the  behavior  remains  the  same.
One  may  easily  imagine  the  anxious  debates  of  an  inter-
stellar   conference   called   to   consider  the   danger.    What  if
men  transplant  their  feuds,  as  Spaniards and  Englishmen  did
after   crossing  the   Atlantic?   Theological  gibberish  was  im-
posed  by  fire  and  sword  on  the  bewildered  Indian.  What  if
the  Russians  reach  the  far  side  of  the  moon  and  demand  that
its  creatures eschew  bourgeois  ideas?   What  if  we  Americans,
suspicious   of   uncommitted   neutrals,   land   atom-armed   on
Mars  and  insist  that   the  inhabitants  adopt   free   enterprise?
The   human   race  may  seem  a  pest  which  has  suddenly   ap-
peared  out  of  one  small  planet,  making  unsafe  the  highways
among  the  stars.
A   Heterogeneous   Horde
Were  some  flying  saucer  to  land  cosmic  investigators  for  a
closer  look,  they  would  be  startled  to  find  that  mentally  men
live  centuries  apart.   Here  are  men  with  modern  instruments
so fine they  can plot  the  course  of  the  most  distant  suns.  Next
door  to  them  may  live  men  who  turn  for  guidance,  in  their
daily  newspapers,  to  horoscopes  like  those  cast  by  Babylonian
astrologers  millennia  earlier.   Here  walk  men  brooding  on  the
new  multi-dimensional  geometries.   Past   them   in   the   same
streets  walk   others   who   cross  themselves   when  they   see  a
black   cat.   Some  men   seem  the   harbingers   of   a  new   race;
others   seem   fresh   from   the   cave.    Little   wonder   that   so
heterogeneous  a  mass is  swept  from  time  to  time  by  outbreaks
of  madness,  from  the  St.  Vitus  dance  of  the  Middle  Ages  to
those  furnaces  into  which  some  human  beings  shovelled  sev-
eral  million   others   only  yesterday.    Ours   may  not   seem  a
wholesome  breed  for  stellar   immigration.
1   5
A  gleaming  metal  ball  hurtling  regularly  around  our  planet
may  be the  first  signal  of  intelligent  life  on  earth  to  observers
elsewhere  who  could  not  see  into  the  murky  depths  of  our
aerial  ocean.   They  might  be surprised  to  learn  that  the  minds
which  have  made  such  wonders   possible   nowhere   rule   the
human   societies   of   which   they   are   a   part.    Whatever   the
ostensible  form  of  the  society,  everywhere  the  cunning  gov-
ern.   Here  the  ruler  may be  a  Tammany-style  politician,  there
a  Commissar.    The  finer  minds  everywhere  are  subordinate
to  the  inferior.
The  two  contenders  for  mastery of  the  earth,  the  "commu-
nistic"  Russians  and   the   "capitalistic"   Americans  have   this
in  common.   Their   rulers  equally  distrust  the   "intellectual."
The  intellectual, like  a  special  breed  in  a  hive,  is  well  fed  so
long  as  he  devotes  himself  to  the  tasks  allotted  to  him  by  his
masters:  the  fabrication   of  new  weapons,  the  inculcation  of
ideas  to  keep  the  human  herd  submissive.  But  let  him  begin
to  speak  his  mind,  and  he  gets  into  trouble.   At  the  least  he
may  find  himself   deprived   of   livelihood;   at  the   worst,   he
may  be  imprisoned  as  "subversive"  or   "counter-revolutionary."
The   intellectual  on  both  sides  is  prized  and  yet  suspect,   fa-
vored  but  subjected.
Mechanical  Brains  Preferred
It  is  symptomatic  that  the  foremost  mind  of  our  time,  the
man  who  found  the  magic  formula  that  unlocked   the  atom,
was  exiled  from   his  German  homeland  as  racially  inferior,
and   regarded   in  America,  though   with  tolerance   because  of
his  greatness,  as  more  than  a  little  subversive,  while   in  the
Soviet  Union  his  theory of  relativity  was  taboo  as  "bourgeois."
The  rulers  everywhere  prefer  mechanical  brains.
Objectively  speaking,  it  would   probably  be  better  for   the
universe  if  man  remained  earthbound.   In   the  wake  of   the
first satellite,  we  give  no  sign  of  closing  ranks  and  facing  out-
ward  as  a  united  species.   There  is  no  sudden   sense  of  how
petty  has   become  all  that  once  divided  us.   There  is  little
reverent   wonder  for  the  adventures  which   could  lie   ahead.
Instead   there   is  intensified   fear,  and  a  demand   to  step   up
preparations  for  the  next  war,  which  must  now  be  fought  in
the  upper  skies  as  well.   Missile  stocks  are  up.   Nothing  has
changed  but  the  magnitude  of  our  potential  for  mass  murder.
As  the  sky  fills  with  satellites   and  the  sky  platforms   are
manned   and   armed,   will   Americans  and   Russians  shoot   it
out  in  the  wild  yonder,  destroying  each  other  and  the  world
with  them?   It  might  be  better,  after  all,  if  space  were  left
to  a  newer  species,  bred  to  live  in  peace  and  to  take  joy  in  di-
versity.   Our  first  reactions,  like  all  our  past,  show  how  un-
fit  men  are  for  the  heavens.   We   would  only  stain  red  the
Milky  Way.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Weekly,  October 14,1957
The  Military  on  Both  Sides  Need  Artificial  Moons  to  Aim  the  ICBM  Precisely  Enough
The  Secret  of  All  That  Enthusiasm  About  the  Geophysical  Year
When  the  Russians  last  August  announced  that  they  had
fired   off   an   intercontinental   ballistic   missile,   a   tantalizing
observation  was  made  by  the  Military  Correspondent   of   the
London   Times.   He  pointed  out  (Aug.   28)   that  an   ICBM
with  a  10-megaton  thermonuclear  warhead  would  cause  total
or  severe  damage  within  a  radius  of  7  miles.   "To  guarantee
the  destruction  of  an  airfield,"  he  wrote,  "the  missile  would
have  to  land  within  7  miles  of  it.   But  with  a  missile  travel-
ling   5,000  miles,  he  went  on  to  say  "an  error' of  less  than
one-tenth  of  a  degree  in  the  aiming  of  it  would  subtend  an
error  of  7  miles  at  the  target."   A  successful  shot' by  inter-
continental  missile  would  require  maps  far  more  exact  than
those  we  now  possess.    "It   may  be  doubted,"   he  said  sig-
nificantly,   "whether   anyone  knows  with   certainty  precisely
where  Moscow  and  New  York  lie  in  relation  to  each  other."
Despite   the   talk   on   both   sides   about   pure   science,   the
secret  of  why  the  military  of  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  are
so  interested   in   the   Geophysical   Year   and   in   an   artificial
satellite  is  because  they  must  have  far  more  precise  maps  if
they  are  to  use  the  ICBM  effectively.
With  that  London  Times  story  as  a  background,  it  is  in-
teresting  to  read  the  testimony  taken  by  the  House  Appro-
priations   Committee   earlier  this  year  on   the  earth   satellite
program   during   its   hearings  on   the   1958   Defense   Dept.
Budget.   (This  begins  at  page  881  of  Part  1).   Dr.  John  P.
Hagen,  director  of  Project  Vanguard,  the  code  name  for  this
program,  did  his  best  to  create  the  impression  that  the  satel-
lite  program  was  of  no  particular  military  importance.   But
he  did  say  it  would  provide  a  much  more  exact  knowledge
than  map-makers now  have.
•The  satellite,  Dr.  Hagen  explained,  would  be  fairly   close
to  earth,  "and  we  will  know  its" velocity  to  a  high  degree  of
precision.    If  we  then  measure  the  time  it  passes  over  two
different  points,  we  can  get  the  linear  distance  between  those
points."   Where  there  could  be  no  actual  surveying,  he  went
on,  as between  Hawaii  and  the  West  Coast  "we  really  do  not
know  the  precise  distance.   There  is  no  good  way  presently
to  measure  over  water  distances  because  of  the  deflection  of
the  vertical.   That   is  another  kind  of  thing  that  will  come
We'll   Blow   'Em   to   Bits—
If   They'll   Just   Wait    Awhile
Mr.  [Robert  L. F.]  SIKES  [D.  Fla.]  The  story   per-
sists  that  a  threat  by  the  Russians  that  they  might  use
their   guided  missile  capabilities   against   France   and
Britain  had  much  to  do with  the  decision  of  those  coun-
tries  to  withdraw  from  the  Suez.  We  presumably   know
something   about   the  location  of   those  sites.   If   they
are  within  range  of  the  capitals  of  Europe,  would  they
also  be  within  range  of   guided  missiles  launched  by
our  forces  at  sea?
Admiral   [Arleigh  A.]  BURKE   [Chief  of  Naval  Op-
erations].    Yes,   sir,   they  would  be  within   range'.
Mr.   SIKES.    What   principal   targets   in   Europe  or
Asia  could   not  now  be  reached  by  the  A-3-D   [inter-
mediate  missile]?
Admiral   BURKE.     Well,   there   are   very   few,    sir.
Right  in  the  very  center  there  is  a  small  area   which
could  not  be  reached.   However,  as  we  would  start  our
attack  well  out  at  sea  and we  would  not  try  to  get  into
the  center  of  Russia  at  the  start.   We  would  start  well
out   at   sea   where   they   would   have   the    maximum
amount  of  trouble  and  we  would  have  the  least   amount
of  opposition   and  strike  the  targets  which  are  nearest
the   sea   and  work   them   over   until   we   get   complete
superiority   and  then  we  would  work  closer  in  to  the
beach.  .  .  .
Mr.   SIKES.    Are   the   intermediate   range   missiles
now  operational  or still  in  test  stage?
Admiral   BURKE.    They  are  all  in  test  stage.
—House  Approp.  Com.  Hearings  on  the  1958   Defense
Bitdget, Ft. 1, p.  647.
out  of  the  satellite  experiment  if  and  when  it  is  successful."
An   Associated   Press   dispatch   from   Paris   on   October   7
quoted  a  General  Pierre  Gallois  along  the  same  lines.    "For
example,"   he  was  quoted   as  saying,  "everybody  knows  the
Dniepr  dam.  But  Soviet  maps  are  very imprecise.  To  plot  the
topography  precisely  it  would  have  been  necessary to  go  there
with  a  sextant  and  plot  its  coordinates.   To  direct  an  inter-
continental   bomb  with  precision,   the  photos  and  the  maps
supplied  by  the  satellite  will  be  of  considerable  utility."
The  race  for  the  satellite  is  a  race  to  give  the  new ultimate
weapon,  the  ICBM,  the  precise  maps  it  requires.
If  Only  the  Russians Hadn't Send
Mr.   [Jamie  L.]  WRITTEN   [D.  Miss.]  Dr.  Von  Braun,
you  said,  I  believe,  that  the  Russians  had  taken  many   emi-
nent  scientists  from   Germany   and  that  it  was  your  infor-
mation  after   utilizing  their  services  that  in  most  instances
they  had  had  the  plans  and  specifications  and  various  other
things  that  would  show  what  they  were  doing  written  first
in  German  and  translated  and  signed  by' Russian  scientists
as  though   they  were  originated  by  certain  Russian  scien-
tists.   Did  I  understand  you  correctly?
Dr.  [Werner]  VON  BRAUN,   [Director  of  Development
Operations,   Division  of  the  Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency,
the   man  who  was   in  charge   of   developing   the   V-2   for
Hitler].   Yes,   sir.
Mr.  WRITTEN.   I  believe  you  further  said  according  to
your  best  information,   that  the  Russians had larger  missiles
of   a   more   obsolescent   nature,   whereas   we  had  probably
smaller  weapons  with  more  modern  design.   Now  is  it  your
opinion   that  practically   all  of  the  German  scientists  have
Those  German  Scientists  Home
now  returned  from  Russia  or  are  no longer  occupied  or  kept
busy  in  this  program   in  Russia,  the  relatively  few  still  in
Russia?
Dr.  VON   BRAUN.    Yes,   relatively   few,   and  I  believe
their  contribution    to   the   Soviet   guided   missile   progress
should  not  be  overestimated.   I  believe  that  the  Russians
more  or  less  familiarized   themselves  with  the  V-2  and  had
these  German  engineers  and  scientists  make  a  few  propos-
als  and  then  sent  them  home.   But  whatever  the  Russians
have  now  is   probably   grown  on  Russian  soil  rather  than
designed  by  German  engineers.  . .'.
Mr.  WRITTEN.   Is  that  now  why  their  missiles  are  be-
coming  more  obsolescent  as  compared  with  a  country  where
we  still  have  you  folks  here,  and are  glad  to  have  you  here,
and  utilize  your  capacity?
Dr.  VON BRAUN.   Yes,    sir.
—House   Appropriations    Committee,  Dept.   of     Defense
Appropriations  for  1958,  Part  %, Pps.   151S-14-16.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  October U,  1957
As  Usual,  They're  Not  Surprised—Washington's  Stock  Reaction
But  Containment  Has Crumbled  and  the  Cold  War  Policy  Is Bankrupt
I've  been  covering  Washington  for  almost  20  years and  in-
variably  when  something  unexpected  happens  the  spokesmen
for  the  government—apparently  unable  to  think  of  anything
else—say  they're  not  surprised.   I  can  remember  the   State
Department   spokesman   that   sunny   December   Sunday  not
being   surprised  by  Pearl   Harbor.    Jim   Hagerty   made   the
same  lame  announcement at  the  news  of  the  Soviet  satellite:
Elsenhower  wasn't surprised.  I  never have been  able  to figure
out   just   what   not   being   surprised   is   supposed   to   prove.
When  people  entirely  lose  their  capacity  for  surprise,  they're
dead.   A  mummy is  immune to  surprise.
Even  knowing  these  people  here  as  I  do,  however,  I  was
myself  a  little  surprised  that  the  President,  meeting  the  press
just  before  our  own  press  time,  had  nothing  new  to  offer,  not
an  intimation  of  some  new  thinking  or  departure.   The   re-
action  here  illuminates  the  bankruptcy  of  Washington,   not
because  the  Soviets  "got  there  first"—our  own  satellites  will
Tough  Assignment
"4.  Play   your  news  in  such  a  way  that  the   public
will  not  interpret  this  development  as  an  indication  of
Soviet  superiority  in  science."
—Instructions  issued  to  the  U. S.  Information  Agen-
cy  on  how  to  handle  news  of  the  satellite.
soon  be  up  there,  too—but  because  there  is  so  little  evidence
of  any  willingness  to  assess,  and  to  adjust  to,  the  new  tech-
nological  realities.   These  were  apparent  before  the   satellite;
the  Soviet  moon  has  merely put  them  into  the  headlines.
Overnight   the   cornerstones   of   American  postwar   policy
have   crumbled.    Containment  is   dead;   the   ring   of   bases
around  the  Soviet  Union  are  all  vulnerable  to  intermediate
missiles;  the  Strategic  Air  Command  with  all  its  hot  air  press
agentry  and  fierce-faced  Generals  is  now,  aerially  speaking,
horse-and-buggy  era.   These  huge  subsonic  bombers  are  much
too  slow  not  only  for  modern  missile  defenses but  for  super-
sonic  jet  fighters.
All  the  cliches  which  went  with  reliance  on  these  obsolete
monsters  and  the  "situations  of  strength"  they  were  supposed
to  embody have  evaporated,  though  neither  the  President  nor
the  Secretary of  State seems prepared  to  face  up  to  it.   "Aerial
inspection" ?  The  Russians  will  soon  be  doing  it  with  satel-
lites.   Political  conditions:  the  reunification  of  Germany  on
Western  terms  as  a  condition  for  an  arms  agreement?    Ger-
Nothing  Like  A  First  Rate
Intelligence  Service
"Effective   as   communism   has  been  in  establishing
control  of  two  powerful  nations  and  imposing  its  will
on  a  number  of  satellite  countries,  it  is  beginning  to
encounter  difficulties  in  coping  with  the  complex  indus-
trial  and  technological   problems  of  today."
—Allen   W.  Duties,  director   of   the  Central   Intelli-
gence  Agency,   speaking   to  the  Advertising   Coun-
cil,  September  19,1957.
many,  the  central  point   in  Dulles's   thinking  has  been  by-
passed  geographically   and   technologically.
Worst  of  all,  much  more  serious  than  the  Russian victory
in  rocket  technology,  which  may  be  only  temporary,  is  the
damage  being  done  the  United   States  by  our  obdurate   un-
willingness   to  negotiate.    The   reluctance  to  see  Zhukov  is
more  than  a  social  blunder.   The  impression  spreads  that  we
are  unwilling  to  try  to  find  a  way  out  of  the  impasse  which
faces  mankind.   This  springs  from  the  simple  fact  that  the
military  bureaucracy here  fears  more  than  anything  else  any
relaxation  of  tension.
It  is  because  the  military  here  do  not  want  an  agreement
that  they  would  rather  see  the  defense  budget  cut unilaterally
than  to  have  those  reductions  used  as  bargaining  points  in  a
negotiation.    It  is  because  the  military  here  do  not  want  an
agreement  that  we  have  wrapped  up  our  disarmament  pro-
posal  in  a  package  so  impossibly  complex  that  the   Pentagon
could  find   ways  to  block   it  even  if  the  Kremlin   suddenly
accepted.
The  Russians  say  they want  peace.   Not  all  their  actions nor
all  their  past  support  what  they  say:  it  is  only  a  year  since
the  Hungarian  revolt  was  smashed,  and  only  a  few   weeks
since  they  began  a  new  foray  in  the  Middle  East.    But  our
good  faith  as  well  as  theirs  is  at  stake.   To  reject  all  propos-
als  to  talk  is to  put  ourselves  in  the  wrong.
The  best  guess  here  at  the  moment,  however,  is  that  the
result  of  the  satellite  will  not  be  a  fresh   start  toward   the
peace  which  is  now  so  urgent  but  the  cheap  and   easy  drift
into  a  greater  arms  race than  ever,  with  the  Democratic  oppo-
sition  making capital  of  popular  anxiety and  alarm.
It's  not  just  as  seen  from  the  stratosphere—even  here  on
the  ground,  our  political  leadership  looks  pitifully  small.
How  Completely  Congress Was Misinformed on Russian Missiles
Mr.  [Robert  L.  F.]   SIKES  (D.  Fla.).  How  do  we  deter-
mine  the  progress   the  Soviets  are  making  in  the  weapons
you  referred   to?
Dr.  [Clifford  C.]  FURNAS   [Assistant  Secretary  of  De-
fense  for  research   and  development],    I  think  in  order  to
get  the  rather   complete  and  authentic  story  on  that  you
would  need  a  briefing  from  the  Central  Intelligence   Agency,
which  I  presume  you  have.  .  .  .  Each  of  the  military  de-
partments  has  its  own intelligence   activities,  too.   I  can  say
we  get  them  from  all  three.  .  .  .
Mr.  SIKES.   I  believe  Senator  Symington  indicated  last
night  on  one  of  the  panel  programs  that  the  Russians  are
ahead   of   us   in  intercontinental   ballistic   missile   develop-
ment,  and  there  has  been  feeling  for  some  time  that  they
were  ahead  of  us  in  the  development  of  the  IRBM  [Inter-
mediate  Range   Ballistic   Missile].   I  know  that   is   contro-
versial.   What  does  your  Department  think?
Dr.  FURNAS.   From  the  evidence  I  have  seen  from  any
of  the  intelligence  sources,  I  can  certainly  state  that  I  am
sure  we  are  well  ahead  of  the  Russians  in  this  ballistic  mis-
sile field.
Mr.  SIKES.   Both?
Dr.  FURNAS.   Yes;  IRBM  and  ICBM.
—Dept.  of  Defense   Budget  for  1958, House  Appropriations   Committee  Hearings,  Ft.  1,  pps.  342-3.
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 14,1957
It   Means  Plain   Speaking   in   Polish,   and  Krushchev  Still  Fears  It
The  Really  Ultimate  Weapon  Still  Seems  to  be   Po  Prostu
The  encouraging  event  of  the  week  was  the  Polish student
demonstrations  against  the  closing  of  their  organ,  Po  Prostu,
which  means  in  Polish  "plain  speaking"    The  Soviet satellite
is  a  healthy  rebuke  to  our  own  military and  diplomatic wind-
bags;   the  Russians  remain,  as  they  were  in  the   Nineteenth
century,  one  of  the  great  peoples  of  the  world  in  their  poten-
tial  for  genius.   But  the  men  who  run  the  Soviet  Union  are
not  the  same  men  who  made  the  satellite;  Krushchev  is  no
Einstein  and  Zhukov  is  no  Lobachevski.   Nor   is  the  satellite
proof   of  the  superiority  of  socialism.   Supremacy  in  military
technology  was  not  Marx's  vision  or  Lenin's.   A  dictatorship
in  full  control  of  a  great  nation's  resources,  commanding  a
people  accustomed  to  a  very  low  standard  of  living,  can divert
manpower,  brainpower  and  materials  to  military  technology
on  a  huge  scale.
Though  They  All Suffered Under  Stalin
But  I  saw  enough  in  Eastern  Europe  last  year  to  convince
me that  its  intellectuals  want  more  than  anything else  freedom
of  expression.   Events  later  in  the  year  in  Warsaw  and  Buda-
pest,  demonstrated  again  that,  for  all  their  power,  this  free-
dom,  this  greatest  of  all  explosives,  is what  the  Russian  rulers
and  the  Communist  dictators  fear  everywhere.
Zhukov    suffered   from   Stalin's   rule.    Krushchev   says   he
trembled  under  it.  Tito  was  almost  destroyed  by it.   Gomulka
went  to  prison  under  it. Now  in  power  themselves  they cannot
or  will  not  tackle  the  hard   job  of  reforming  their   regimes
from  within  so  that  this  cannot  happen   again.
No  one,  they  say,  dared  speak  out  under  Stalin.   Who  dares
speak   out  under  Krushchev?   Like  Stalin,  he  has  begun   to
lecture  the  writers  and  artists  on  their  duties;  he,  too, aspires
to  be  the  universal  genius.    Under  Tito,  Djilas  goes  back  to
jail  for  a  longer  term  because  he  wrote  a  book,  and  in  Poland
Po  Prostu  is  banned  by  Gomulka.   How  these  masters  of  all
the  latest  weapons  fear  the  printed  word!   The  most  danger-
ous  of  all  inventions  is  still  Gutenberg's.
One  of  the  main  reasons  for  the  struggle  to  establish  a  real
peace  in  the  world  is  that  in  peace  those  forces  in  the  East
which  want  to  find  a  way  toward  freedom  will  have  a  chance
A  Footnote   from  Germany
Bonn,  Oct. 2^—The   18  West   German  scientists   who
signed   the  Gottingen  manifesto  early   this  year  have
reaffirmed   their  opposition  to  nuclear  weapons.    At   a
meeting  in  Heidelberg,  Professor   Gerlach,  of  Munich,
said  that  they  had  refused  to  take  part  in  the  public
debate  that  arose   out  of   their  declaration  because  of
the   election,  but   they   still   adhered  without   reserva-
tion   to  their  conviction.    They   would  later   reply   to
objective  argument  individually  and  jointly.
The  declaration,  which  appeared  on  April  12,  was  at
first   believed   to   have   awakened  a   latent   and   wide-
spread  longing  for  neutrality,  which  was   sufficient   to
alarm  the  Government.   Dr.  Adenauer  intervened,  and
two   scientists   recanted,  professing   to   accept   the   of-
ficial  view   that   defense   against   nuclear   attack   was
possible.     The   others   appeared   satisfied   with  assur-
ances  that  no  nuclear  weapons  would  be  made  in  west
Germany.
Now  it  seems  that  the  scientists   have  only  been bid-
ing  their  time,  and  have  closed  their  ranks.    The  Gov-
ernment  has  yet  to  make  up  its  mind  about  equipping
the  Bundeswehr  with  nuclear  weapons,  and  the  scien-
tists  may be  successful  in  raising  the  decision  above  a
political   level.    Although    their   reputations    are   suf-
ficient  to  give  the  Opposition, mainly  the  Social  Demo-
crats,   strong   moral,   as   well   as   expert,   support,   the
party   failed  to   make  nuclear   armaments   an  election
issue.
—The  Times  (London)   Oct.  3
to do so. War  alarms strengthen  thought  control  on  both  sides.
Relaxation  of  tension  is  the  path  to  liberation  of  the  mind
everywhere.   But  a  special  target  for  thoughtful  people  must
be  ultimately a  fundamental  revision  of  Communist  thinking.
A  vulgarized,  oversimplified  philosophy  of  simple  blacks  and
whites  (which  is  which  dependent  always  on  a   Politbureau's
fiat)   buttresses  there  the  universal  antipathy  of  men  in  power
to  any  criticism  of   themselves.
So  we  end  this  week's   letter   on  a  simple   affirmation   of
faith.   The  Russians have  themselves  a  shiny new  weapon,  but
the  Po Prostu demonstrations  show  we  have  an  older  and bet-
ter  one—when  we  wake  up  to  it—in  Jefferson.
Lei  Vs  Send  A  free  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name       .........................................................................................
Street       .........................................................................................
City     .........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
10/14/57
(To)    Name
Street      .......
City   ..........................................Zone............State..................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
I.F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraskc  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED