I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957mar11.pdf

============================================================

The  Paul  Sweezy  Case,  P.  3
How  Senator  Ervin  Intimidated  Negro  Witnesses  at  the  Civil  Rights Hearings,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  10
MARCH  11,  1957
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  The Middle Eastern  Crisis  Is Only Just  Beginning
On  February  11,  in  an  aide memoire  to  the  Israeli govern-
ment,  the  State  Department  said  that  "the  United  States,  on
behalf  of  vessels  of  United  States registry,  is prepared  to exer-
cise the  right  of  free  and  innocent passage"  through  the Straits
of  Tiran.  At  press conference on  February  19, when  Israel  was
still  being  pressured  to  withdraw  from  Sheikh  el  Sharm,  the
Secretary  of  State said  "the  United  States,  in  acting on  its  own
behalf  and  perhaps,  as  I  have suggested,  in  concert  with  other
maritime  powers  would,  I  think,  be  able  to  impress  on  that
body  of  water  an  international character,  the  benefits  of  which
would  inure to all maritime states."  This  seemed to be a  pledge
that  the  U.S.  would  send  ships  through  the  straits to  establish
their  international character,  and  open  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.
Yes  Becomes  Maybe
But  at  press  conference  last  week,  after   the  Israeli  with-
drawal  had  finally  been  set  in  motion,  what  seemed  to  be  a
firm  pledge   began  to  dissolve.  That  quality  of  Mr.   Dulles
which  Senator  Russell  described  as  "wrestling  with  a  moon-
beam"  made  its  appearance.    A  newspaperman referred to  the
promise  in  the  aide  memoire and  asked what  steps were  being
taken  to  fulfil  it.  "Well,"  Mr.  Dulles  replied,  "there  is no pre-
arranged  exercise  in  that  respect.   It  would  be  normal  that  a
ship of  United  States registry would  be going  through  it.  .  .  ."
This  sounded   alarmingly  vague  and  a  second   question  was
pressed,  "But  you don't  know of  any particular ship?"  To  this
he  replied—and  his  words  will  bear  study—"No,  I  haven't
looked  into  that.    Of   course,  that  is  a  matter  which  is  pri-
marily  under  private  direction.  The  shipping  companies  send
their  ships  where  they will.  We  assume that  one will  be  going
there,  but  that  is  not  based  upon  any  checkup  with  the  com-
panies."  This  implied  that  in  fact  the  State  Department  had
made  no  plans  and  taken  no  steps  to  send  a  ship  through  the
straits  as a test.   Indeed  it  appeared  from  the  next  question  and
answer  that  the  Department  had  not  even  taken  the  matter
seriously  enough  to inform shipping  companies that  it was pre-
pared  to  support  free  passage  through  the  straits.   Foe  when
the  Secretary  was  asked  whether  any  notice  had  been  sent  to
shipping  companies  "that  the  strait  is considered  to  be open,"
Mr.  Dulles  replied,  "Well,  I think  that  everybody is  supposed
to  have  read  the newspapers  in  that  respect,  particularly  if  they
are  in  the  shipping  business."  There  are  some  ugly  words  for
this  way  of  treating  what  seemed  to  have  been  a  pledge.
We  touch  upon  it  here  at  some  length  because  the  promise
to  send  a  ship  through  the  straits  seemed  to  be  the  one  firm
commitment  in  the  exchange  which  passed  between  Washing-
ton  and  Jerusalem,  the  one  step  which  depended  not  on  the
United  Nations  but  on  the  United  States  alone,  and  the  one
step  which  Mr.  Dulles  himself  had  said  was  clearly  in  accord
with  international  law.   It  thus  becomes  a  test  of  Mr.  Dulles'
No  Need  to  Go As  Far  As  Ghana
Amid  all  the  ballyhoo  in  our  press  about  Vice  Presi-
dent  Nixon's  visit  to  Ghana,  little  attention  was   paid
to  two  items  which  will  bulk  large in  the  eyes  of  Afri-
cans.  The  first  is  that  Dr.  W.  E.  B.  du  Bois,  the great-
est  living  Negro  historian,  who  wrote  the  story  of  the
black   continent   from   the   black   man's  point   of   view,
was  unable  to  attend  the  independence  celebration. The
State  Department refused  to  give  him  a  passport  un-
less  he  would  sign  a  non-Communist  affidavit.   The  sec-
ond  is  that  the  Rev.  Martin  Luther  King,  leader  of  the
Montgomery,  Alabama,  bus  boycott,  was  unable  to  get
any  response  from  the  Elsenhower  Administration  until
he  ran  into  Vice  President Nixon at  the  Ghana celebra-
tion,  where the  two  men  "shook  hands warmly"  for  the
photographers.   The  Vice  President  travels  all  the  way
to  the  Gold  Coast  to  woo  a  new  Negro  nation.  In  far
off  Africa,  Dr.  King  can  even  get  his  hand shook.   But
at   home  the  brushoff   greets   repeated  Negro  appeals
from    our   own   South   for   Presidential  intervention
against  racism  and  terror.    The  place  to  win  Africa's
friendship   is   still   Montgomery,   Alabama.
honesty.  With  it,  attention  should  be called  to Mr.  Dulles' re-
ply  when  asked  whether  he  discussed  with  King   Ibn  Saud
"who  was going  to  occupy  the  islands  of  the  straits  when  the
Israelis  move  out?"  Mr.  Dulles  replied  that  it  was  not  dis-
cussed  and  that  he  had  no  reason  to  suppose  there  would  be
any  alteration   in   the   arrangements   by  which   Saudi  Arabia
"consented  to their  occupation  by Egypt"  in  1950.  Though  the
straits  question  may  bring  a  revival  of  war  in  the  Middle  East
if  they are  again  closed  to  Israeli  shipping,  Mr.  Dulles  did  not
think  it  important  enough  to  discuss with  Ibn  Saud  when  he
was  here.    Is  this  a  responsible  way  to  conduct  diplomacy ?
Encouraging  Nasser  to  Be Intransigent
The  curious  replies  given by Mr.  Dulles  at  last  week's  press
conference  on  related  subjects,  particularly what  the  U.S.  will
do if  Egypt  bars  British  and  French  ships  from  the  canal,  must
encourage  Nasser  to  believe  that  he  can with  impunity  create
a  new  crisis  once  Israel  withdraws—and  be  rewarded  for  his
contumacy.  The  truth  is  that  the  Senate  last  week  took  part  in
a  dangerous  fraud.  There  are  few  Senators  left,  on  either  side
of  the  aisle,  who  trust  Mr.  Dulles  or  have  much  confidence
left  in  Mr.  Eisenhower  either  as  far  as  the  Mid-East  is  con-
cerned.  They  passed  a resolution which  can only  serve  to  make
the  country  believe  a  crisis  has  been  solved,  when  it  has  only
just  begun.   Mr.  Dulles  is so slippery  that  he will  end  by mak-
ing  us  distrusted  on  all  sides,  in  the  East  and  in  Europe.   His
own  light-fingered  cleverness  has  made  him  giddy,   and   he
has brought  us—as events may soon  show—to another  "brink."
3  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 11,1957
Northern  Liberals  Let  A  Southern  Senator  Take  Over  The  Day  Negroes Testified
Victims  of  Racist Terror  Subjected  to  Intimidating   Interrogation
By  Marvin  H.  Caplan
To  the  five  witnesses   the   situation   must   have  seemed
ominous.  They  had  come  before  the  Senate  Subcommittee on
Constitutional  Rights  to  describe  the  perils  they  faced  as
Negroes  living in the  South.  They came to urge, in  the  name
of  their  own self-preservation, the  passage  of  the  civil rights
bills  the  Committee is  considering.   They  found  a  Southern-
er  presiding  over  most  of  the  session.
The  regular  committee  chairman,  Senator  Hennings,  and
Nebraskan   Senator   Hruska   made   only  brief   appearances.
Other  assignments   and  the  Mid-East  debate,  an  aide  said,
took  them  away.  Senator  Sam J.  Ervin,  Jr.,  of  North  Caro-
lina  was  left   virtually  alone  with  the  witnesses.   He  soon
confirmed  any  misgivings  they  might  have  had.
One   of  the  witnesses  was   Gus  Courts  of  Belzoni,  Miss.,
who  told  again  how his  attempts  to  vote  led to  a  shotgun  at-
tack   upon  his   life   (See  Stone'a   Weekly,   Mar.   12,   1956).
"I  had  to  leave  my  $15,000  a  year   grocery   business,  my
trucking  business,  my  home, my  everything.   My  wife  and  I
and  thousands  of  us  Negroes  have  had  to  run  away.  We  had
to flee in the  night."
This  prompted  Sen.  Ervin  to  ask:  "Did  you  file  a   Federal
income  tax  for  1954?"
Courts  said  he  had.   An  auditor  handled  his  business  and
"whenever  he  told  me  what  to  send  in  I  sent  it  in."   Ervin
was  not  satisfied  with  that.   How  much  tax   had  he  paid ?
Was  it  state  tax  or  Federal  tax?   Under  incessant  questions
the  old man  grew  confused.   He was  not  certain  he  had  Fed-
eral  taxes.   Did  he  want  to  change  his  testimony  then  or
take  it  back,  Ervin  asked  in  a  manner  reminiscent  more  of  a
police  court  than  a  friendly  Senate  inquiry.
The  Belzoni  man  testified  that  after  he  was  shot  down  in
his  store  the  Chief  of  Police  ordered  him  to  a  hospital  two
blocks  away.  But  Courts  feared  they  would  finish  him  there,
so  though  he  was  bleeding  freely  he  had  a  friend  drive  him
to  a  Negro  hospital  80  miles  away.   Sen.  Ervin  pounced on
a  detail  in  the  testimony.   "You  say  you  got  there  in  40 min-
utes?  .  .  . You think  you were  averaging  two miles  a  min-
ute?  .  .  .  You were  travelling  pretty  fast  weren't  you?"
How  Many  Killings  Is  A  "Lot"?
Courts  also  told  how  his  friend  the  Rev.  G.  W.  Lee  was
shot  and  killed  for  refusing  to  take  his  name  off the  voters
register;  how  another  Negro  voter  was  shot  on  the   Court
House  steps  with  "more  than  50 people standing  around,  in-
cluding  the  sheriff."  He  told  how  a  signed  petition   he  and
others  sent  to  Gov. Coleman  asking  for  protection  somehow
found  its  way  back  into  the  hands  of  the  local  White  Citi-
zens  Council.  He  said,  "there  have  been  a  lot  of   Negroes
found  in  rivers.   Others  just  killed  in  broad  daylight."
A  "lot"?    Ervin  asked.   "How  many  does  the  word  'lot'
mean?"   Courts  could  recall  only  three  drownings,  only  two
where  he  personally  had  seen  the  bodies fished out.   One was
the  body  of  Emmett  Till.  Ervin  was  inclined to  discount  that
Hugo  Black  In  The  Good  Old t>ays
".  .  .  Senator Eastland  said  that  the  Supreme  Court
justices  who  ordered  the  mixing  of   the  races  in  the
schools  had  been  brainwashed.   Certainly something  of
the   sort   must   have   happened  to   Hugo  Black  who,
when  I  was  closely  associated  with  him  in  Washington
—and  I'm  telling  you   the   truth,  Mr.  Chairman—from •
1927  to  1933, was  an  ardent  champion  of  states  rights,
fearful  of  encroachments  upon  the  states  by  the  Fed-
eral  government  . .  ."
—Hugh  G.  Grant,  Augusta,  Go.,  one  time  law  clerk
to  Mr.  Justice  Black,  at  the  Senate  Civil  Rights
hearings.
We  Hold  These Truths To  Be  Self-Evident
".  .  .  it  is  inequality  that  gives  enlargement to  intel-
lect,  energy,  virtue,  love  and  wealth.   Equality  of  in-
tellect   stabilizes   mediocrity.  .  .  .  Equality  of  wealth
makes  every  man  poor.  Equality  of  energy  renders  all
men  sluggards.    Equality   of   virtue  suspends  all   men
without  the  gates  of  Heaven.   Equality  of  love  would
stultify  every  manly  passion, destroy every  family,  al-
ter  and  mongrelize  the  races  of men."
—-Leander  H.  Perez,  Louisiana District  Attorney   (25th
Dist.)  at  the  Senate  Civil  Rights  hearings.
since,  as  he  observed  the  next  day,  the   Till  case  "had  no
reference  to  any  matter  of  voting  rights."
Ervin's  tactics  prompted Clarence Mitchell, Director  of  the
Washington  Bureau  of  the  NAACP,  to  come  to  Courts'  de-
fense.   "I  would  say  with  all  respect  that  it  is  a  very,  very
difficult  experience  to  see  this  man, who  is  an  American  citi-
zen,  who has  been  shot  and  who has  been  exposed to  a  chain
of  events that  apparently  started  because he was  seeking  the
right  to  vote,  be  subjected  to  the  kind  of  cross-examination
which  unhappily  may  make  his  story   look  like  it  is  not  as
heart-rending  as  it   is."
The  sum  of  Ervin's  retort  was that  it  was  "heart-rending"
to  him  to  have  a  man  make  a  questionable  statement  to  a
Senate  committee.  The  next  day  the   Senator  was  able  to
produce  a  batch  of  telegrams  from  white  men  in  and  around
Belzoni   contradicting   points   in   Courts'    testimony.    The
promptness  with  which  he  obtained  this  and  other   material
strongly  suggested  that  fellow  Southerners  were   supplying
him  with  information  to  use  against  troublesome  witnesses.
A  Message  From  Senator  Eastland
There  was  more  evidence  of  such  Senatorial   cooperation
when  Mrs.  Beatrice  Young of  Jackson,  Miss,  testified.
Mrs.  Young told  a  terrifying  story  of  police  brutality.  A
family  quarrel brought  a  Deputy Sheriff  to her  door charging
that  she was hiding her  niece.  When she  asked  for  his  search
warrant   he  threatened   to  kick  down  the   door.   When  she
opened  the  door  "he  hit  me  in  the  head  with  his  blackjack
and  came  in."   He  took  her  to  jail  where  he  cursed  her  and
struck  her  again.  She  said  she  had  had  an  operation  on  her
head.  The jailer  said, " 'Girl,  let  me see where  you had  your
operation.'   I  went  to  show  him  and  he  hit  me on  the  head."
They  still  continued to  beat  and  mistreat  her  after  she  told
them  she  was  two  months  pregnant.   She  was  kept  in  jail
all  night  and  released  the  next  day.   She  was  in  bed  under
doctor's  care  for  a  week  and  lost  her  child.  Mrs.  Young de-
nied  "a  monstrous  allegation   originating   in  Hinds  County
Courthouse"  that  she  had  submitted  to  a  criminal   abortion.
"I  want  it  known  here,  now  and  always  that  the  reason  I
lost  my  child  is  because  of  the  sick  minds  of  the  men  men-
tioned  above.  God  forbid  such  injustices.   Gentlemen,  I  beg
of  you  to  do something  to  stop  these  un-Godly  acts."
Sen.  Ervin  was  ready  for  Mrs.  Young.   She  had  submitted
a  statement  of  her  case  a  week  or  two  earlier  to  the  House
Committee  considering  the  civil  rights  laws  and  Sen.  Ervin
was  able  to  produce, through  the  courtesy  of  Senator  East-
land's  office,  a  detailed  refutation  of  it.   This  was  an  affidavit
from  the  Deputy  Sheriff  denying  he  had  gone  to  her  house
without  a  warrant  or  that  he  had  struck  her  or  knew  she
was  pregnant  or  suffering  from  a  head  injury.
The  day's  hearing   ended  amid  conventional  pleasantries.
Sen.  Ervin  thanked  the  witnesses  and  said  what  a  fine thing
it  was to be  able  to  discuss  these  things,  disagreeing  in  some
cases  "without  getting  disagreeable  about  it."   And it  is true
that  except  for  badgering  Courts,  he  had  been  polite  to  all
the  others.   For  in  this  he  is  like  many  Southern   gentlemen.
Able  to  offer  Negroes  the  amenities,  but  not  justice.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March 11,  1957
Supreme  Court  in  the  Paul  Sweezy  Case Asked  to  Pass  on State Witch  Hunts
Is  New  Hampshire  Prosecuting  Real  Crime,  or  Hunting  Heresy?
While  Massachusetts  is moving 300 years late  to  acquit  her
witches,  New Hampshire  is just  beginning  to prosecute  hers.
In   1951,  the  New  Hampshire  legislature   passed  an  act  de-
signed  to  punish  "subversive  activities"  and  authorizing   its
Attorney  General to  investigate  "whether  subversive  persons
. . . are presently  located  within  this State." The dragnet  cast
by the  inquiry is indicated  in the  latest ruling  (February  28)
of  the  State's  Supreme  Court  which  3  to  2  upheld  the  con-
tempt  conviction  of  Dr.  Willard  Uphaus,  executive  director
of  World  Fellowship,  Inc.,  for  refusing  to  turn  over  a  list of
the  guests  at  its  summer camp  in  Albany,  N.  H.,  to  the  At-
torney   General.  The  first  appeal  from   New  Hampshire   to
reach  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  was  heard  here  on  March  5
when  Professor  Thomas  I.  Emerson  of  Yale  Law  School  ap-
peared  on behalf  of  Paul  M. Sweezy,  co-editor  of  the  Monthly
Review   and  an  internationally  known  independent  Marxist
economist.   Counsel  and  client  alike  deserve  salute  for  their
courage.
Two  issues  were  raised  by  the  appeal.   Victory  on  either
would  cripple  State  witch  hunts.  The  first  issue  arose  from
the  Supreme  Court  decision  last  April  in  Pennsylvania  v.
Nelson,   which  held  State   sedition   prosecutions   invalid   on
the  ground  that  the  Federal   government  under  the   Smith
Act  had  pre-empted  the  field.  The  question  raised  by  Profes-
sor  Emerson  in  the  Sweezy case  is  whether  New  Hampshire
could  validly carry  on a  State  investigation  in  an  area  where
it  could  not  legislate.  The  issue  was  cut  fine  for  the  defense
because  the  investigation,  while  authorized  by  joint  resolu-
tion  of  the  legislature,   was  actually   conducted  by  the  chief
law   enforcement   officer,   the   Attorney   General.  The   Court
could  thus  rule  on this  issue  without  passing  squarely  on  the
more  ticklish  question  of  whether  a  State  legislative   investi-
gation,  a  little  Un-American Activities  Committee, was  also
outlawed  by  the  Nelson decision.
The  First  Amendment  Issue
The  other  issue,  arsing  under  the  First  Amendment, was
cut  as  fine.  Under  the  New  Hampshire  statutes,  member-
ship  in  the  Communist  party  or  advocacy of  change  by  force
and   violence  are   required  to   prove   "subversive   activity."
Paul  Sweezy, delivering  a  guest  lecture  at  the  University  of
New  Hampshire,  denied under  interrogation  by  the  Attorney
General  that  he  was  a  Communist  or  had  advocated  forcible
change.   But  he  refused  to  answer  other  questions  about  his
views  or  the  content  of  his  lecture  on  the  ground  that  these
clearly  invaded  freedom  of  speech  under  the  First  Amend-
ment.   He  refused  on  the  same  grounds  to  answer  questions
about  the  Progressive  Party.
How  could  these  wider  questions  be  asked  under  a  statute
which  defined   subversive  activity  so  precisely?   The  Attor-
ney  General  argued  and  the  State  Supreme  Court  ruled  that
the  definition  included  persons  engaged  in  the  specified  con-
The  Subtlety  of  Heretics and  Witches
"Appellant  declined  to  answer  questions concerning
the  subject   of  his  lecture  or  its  content.   In  fact  he
would  say  nothing  further  than  that  he  did  not  advo-
cate  therein  the  overthrow of  the  government by  force
and  violence. .  .  .  The difference  between  advocacy of
subversive  doctrine  and  teaching about  what  such  doc-
trine  is  in  the  sense  of  objective  explanation is obvious,
at  least  on paper.  Subtleties  of  shading of  advocacy by
inflection,  gestures  or  even  mien,  are  not  so  obvious.
...  It  is  perfectly  possible  that  a  witness might  aver
under  oath  that  he  had  not  advocated subversive  doc-
trine,  when  in  fact  he  had  done  so,  whether intentional-
ly  or otherwise. . . ."
—Louis  C.  Wyman,  Attorney   General of  New  Hamp-
shire,  motion  to  dismiss  the   appeal   of  Paul   M.
Sweezy  in  the  U.S.  Supreme   Court.
duct  "whether  or  not  done  knowingly  or  wilfully."    This  left
the  permissive bounds  of  lawful-speech  perilously  indefinite,
since   a   person   who  honestly  believed   he   was   advocating
gradual  change  might  be  prosecuted  on  the  ground  that  he
was  really  preaching   revolution.
The  statement  in  the  box  above  from  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral's  motion  to  dismiss  indicates  the  true  nature  of  such
prosecutions.   In  the  prosecution  of  a  crime,  knowledge  and
intent   are   necessary   ingredients.    In   the   prosecution   of
heresy,  they  are  not  essential.   A  man  may  be  a  heretic,  he
may   be  spreading   heretical   notions,  without  intending   or
knowing  it.   The  question  is  not  whether  a  crime  was  com-
mitted  but  whether  there  was  deviation  from  orthodox  doc-
trine.   There  may  be  honest  error  in  heresy.   When  the  At-
torney  General argued  that  a  person  may  be advocating  sub-
versive   doctrine   without  knowing  or  intending  it,  he  was
plainly  looking for  heresy,  not  crime.
Indeed,  though  the  Attorney  General  argued  as  softly   as
any  cooing  liberal  dove  before  the  Court,  insisting  that  his
inquiries  were  "private"  and  purely  exploratory,   averring
that  he  did  not  accuse  Sweezy  either  of  Communism or  per-
jury,  the  nature  of  the  proceeding became clear  as  the  argu-
ment  unfolded.   When  judges  of  the   U.  S.  Supreme  Court
engage,  as  they  did  last  week,  in  the  exegesis  of  a  Marxist
scholar's  writings,  sampling here  and probing there  to  deter-
mine  whether  he  was  espousing  gradualism   or  revolution,
books  are  on trial.  This  was  the  the  Holy  Office  in  new  guise.
News  Note:  Despite  the  bad  weather,  the  ballroom of
the  Hotel  Woodstock in  New York  City  was filled March  1
for  fellow  newspaperman William Price  and  $700  was con-
tributed  to  aid  his  defense  on trial  this  week  for invoking
the  First  Amendment  before  the  Senate  Internal  Security
subcommittee.
How  Wacky  Can You  Get  Dept:  Subversive
". . . in modern warfare the civilian  population  may well
be a  prime target.  A bombing  raid  on New York  City  would
undoubtedly  be planned for  a  time  when  the  maximum num-
ber  of  people would  be  in  the  city.  The  most  important  fa-
cility  for  the  evacuation of  the  people  would  be  the  subway
system.   If  petitioner   were  a  member  of  the  Communist
conspiracy  he  would,  as  an  employe  of  the  transit  system
in  charge  of  a  train,  as  conductors  are,   be  a  very  real
threat  to  the  security  of  the  State  and  of  the  City."
—Chief   Justice  Conway, New  York  Court  of  Appeals,  up-
holding   the  dismissal   of  Max  Lerner,  a  New   York
City  subway  conductor,  as  a  security  risk  because he
invoked  the  5th  Amendment   when  asked  whether  he
was a  Communist.
Subway  Conductors  in  an  H-Bomb  Attack
".  .  .  the  anticipation  of  risks to  'the  security  and defense
of  the  nation and  of  the  state"  from  a  person  in  appellant's
position  strikes  me  as   a  submission   to  unreasoning  fear
rather  than  a  rational  basis  for  administrative  action.   The
job  of  opening  and  closing  the  doors  of  a  subway  train  is
hardly   one   of   the   'strategic   posts   in   transportation'   to
which  Mr.  Justice  Jackson  adverted  in  Dennis  v.  U.  S."
—Justice  Fuld,  dissenting.
The   Chief   Justice   seems   to   fear   that   if   an   H-bomb
dropped  on  New  York,  subversive  subway  conductors  might
refuse  to  open  the  subway  doors.  This  is  not  the  only  dan-
ger.  They  might  also  take  advantage  of  their  trapped  pas-
sengers  by  passing  out  sample  copies  of  the  Daily   Worker.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 11,1957
In  Memoriam:  Raoul  Wallenberg;  An  Anti-Hitler  Hero  The  NKVD  Murdered
Our  New  Supreme  Court  Justice  Belongs  to  the  Horatio  Alger Era
Our   new  Supreme   Court   Justice  belongs   to  the   Horatio
Alger    era  of  American  history  and  seems  to  share  its  naive
outlook.   Charles  Evans  Whittaker  is  the  boy who  quit  school
in  the  ninth  grade  to  earn  his  way trapping  and  farming;  the
office  boy  at  Watson,  Gage  & Ess who  grew  up  to  become  its
senior  partner;  the  poor  boy  who  lived  to  head  the  foremost
corporation   law   firm   in   Kansas   City,   representing   Union
Pacific,  Southern  Pacific,  the  big  utilities  of  the  Mid-West,  and
the  Kansas  City  Star,  that  journalistic  Gibraltar  of  safe  and
sound  Republican  conservatism.  His  appointment  caught  even
the  Missouri  papers  by  surprise:  their  "morgues"  contained
only  the  most meager  scraps  about  him;  he  had  been  neither  in
politics   nor  public  service;   he  had  defended   no  famous  or
humble  clients;  he  had  never  been  moved  to  stand  up  for  the
oppressed  or  the  outnumbered.   He  seemed  to  have  made  no
speeches.  Here  was  the  ideal  candidate  for  a  bank  presidency,
an  impeccable  nonentity  of  the  respectable  bar.
His  ideas  of  the  law,  as  expounded  in  fleeting  press  confer-
ences  here  in  Washington   and  later  back  in  Missouri,  fit  the
picture  perfectly.    He  thinks  the  judiciary  ought  to  "confine
itself  to interpreting the  law and  not  invoke  its own  philosophy
of  law."    He  was  quoted  as  saying  in  St.  Louis  that  he  never
holds  any  preconceived  ideas  when  approaching  a  case,  a  re-
mark  that  would-have  made  Mr.  Justice  Holmes  chuckle.   He
is  "not  conscious  of  any  leanings."   A  man  who  is  not  consci-
ous  of  any  "leanings"  is  a  man  who  has  all  the  conventional
leanings  of  his  time,  class  and  calling.   All  this   reflects   the
psychology   and  the  legal   philosophy  of  the  mid-Nineteenth
century,  both  content  to  take  at  face  value  the  surface  ration-
alizations  of  human  conduct;  it  is pre-Freud  and  pre-Holmes.
But  this  is  not  the  whole  picture  of  the  new  judge.    He
gives  the  impression  of  a modest  man,  with  a  sense  of  humor.
He  was  elected  head  of  the  Missouri  Bar  Association  although
neither  a glad-hander  nor  a  back-slapper.  Though  he  has  been
on  the  Federal  bench  less  than  three  years,  he  has  shown  him-
self  to  be  a  competent  jurist,  worthy  of  respect.   Unlike  Mr.
Justice  Brennan  (whose nomination was unanimously  approved
by  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee  last  week),  he  gives  no  in-
dications  of  any  liberal  emotions  and  will  almost  certainly  be
right  of  center  on  social  and  political  issues.  This   does   not
necessarily  mean  that  he  will  be  unfriendly  to  civil  liberties;
Charles  Evans  Hughes  was  a  prime  example  of  a  Wall  Street
corporation  lawyer who  also became a leading champion on  the
bench  of  First  Amendment rights.   It  is disappointing  to  have
an  Edgerton,  a  Hastie,  a  Dean  Griswold  passed  over,  but  it  is
pleasanter  to  have  a  Whittaker  than  a  Brownell.  This  is  an
honorable  and  devoted  man,  young  enough  to  learn.    Predict-
ing what a man  will  do  on  the  Supreme  Court  is hazardous;  at
least  there  is nothing in  Judge  Whittaker's  record  to  make  one
fear  the worst.
Another  Murder  in  the  Lubianka
We  cannot  pass  over  in  silence  the  news that  the  long miss-
ing  Swedish  diplomat,  Raoul  Wallenberg,   died  in   Moscow's
notorious  Lubianka prison  in  1947.   To  the  Jews  of  Hungary,
in  the  last  days  of  World  War  II,  this was an  angel  of  mercy.
No  human  being  ever  worked  more  devotedly  to  help  others;
he  issued  some   20,000   Swedish   "protective"   passports   and
rented  some  30  apartment  houses which he  converted  into  ex-
tensions  of  the  Swedish  legation  to  give  diplomatic  shelter  to
men,  women   and   children   otherwise   doomed   to   the   Nazi
furnaces.   No  country  but  Sweden  ever  allowed  a  diplomat  to
act  in  so  unconventional and  human  a  fashion,  and  surely  no
country   but   Russia   could   have   treated  him   so   barbarously.
Through   some  savage  stupidity  this  anti-Nazi  hero  was  ar-
rested  when  the  Red  Army  entered  Budapest.   He  disappeared
into  the  vaults  of  the  NKVD.   Repeated   inquiries  and  pro-
tests  from  Sweden  were  of  no  avail.   Now   Moscow   says  he
died  of  a  heart  attack  in  the  notorious   Lubianka  prison  ten
years  ago.   A  country  in  which  the  secret  police  can  treat  a
neutral  diplomat  so  cruelly,  high-handedly  and  unjustly  is  a
disgrace  to  world  socialism. The  Wallenberg  case  shows  what
can  happen  in  a country where  there  is no  right  of  counsel,  no
habeas  corpus,  no  real  restriction  on  the  police  and—among
its  heavy-handed  bureaucratic  rulers—no  feeling   whatsoever
for  justice.
We'll   Send   Sample   Copies   Free  to  Any  Friends   You   Name
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ........................................................................................
Street   ..„'......_............................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ........................................................
Street    ..................................................................
8/11/57
City  ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays   but   pub-
lished   every    Thursday    except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August  and   December   at  301  E.  Capitol  St., Washington  3,  D.   C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited  by   I.   V.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager    Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
J5  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED