I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957oct21.pdf

============================================================

MIT's  Prof.  Norbert  Wiener  On Why  the  Lag  In  U.  S.  Science,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  40
OCTOBER  21,  1967
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Lifting  the  Curtain  on  "Project  Sunshine"  and  the  AEC's  Madison  Avenue  Techniques
The "Hidden Persuader" in the Nuclear Testing Controversy
A  new  book  on  advertising  methods  has  popularized   the
term  "hidden  persuader."   Products  and  ideas  are  sold  indi-
rectly,   by  utilizing  phrases  with  benign  connotations  which
unconsciously  shape  the  public mind.  An  example  the  author
(Vance  Packard:  The  Hidden   Persuaders)  might  add  to  his
collection  appears  in  the  current  controversy over  nuclear  test-
ing.   This  is  of  immediate importance  now  when  the  issue  is
being  debated by the  United  Nations  General Assembly.
The  hidden persuader  in  this  case  is  the  effort  of  the  U.  S.
government  to  fight  off  the  demand  for  a  suspension  of  test-
ing  by  associating  radioactive  fallout  with  natural  radiation
and  sunshine,  thus  lending  it  a  benign  connotation.    Henry
Cabot  Lodge  told  the  Assembly  the  present  levels  of  fallout
from  testing  "are  extremely low ...  a  fraction  of  the  natural
radiation  to  which  man  has  always  been  exposed."   Britain's
Minister  of  State,  Commander  Alan  Noble,  echoed  the  same
line  when  he  assured  the  Assembly  that  radiation  from   tests
was  but  a  small  fraction   of  that  from   sources  such  as   "the
natural  radiation that has existed  since the  beginning  of  time."
"Under the  Rug": Strontium 90
The  keynote of  this  campaign  was  struck  when  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission,  finally  giving  way  to  pressure  from  Con-
gress  for  a  scientific  investigation  of  the  fallout  peril,   called
its  study,  "Project   Sunshine."    It  is  as  if  from  the  very  start
the  intent  was  to  make  us  assume  that  the  radioactivity  let
loose   by  nuclear   testing   was   something   like  sunshine   and
natural  radiation.   Pushed   into  the  background   was  the  fact
that  neither  sunshine  nor  natural  radiation  contains  the  new
cancer  creating' poison,   Strontium  90,  which  did  not   appear
in  the  world  until  the  first  nuclear   explosions.
The  fact  that  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  is  more  anx-
ious  to  manipulate  than  to  inform  public  opinion  is  evident
from  certain  little  noticed  passages  in  the  recently  published
hearings  held  by  the  Holifield  subcommittee  of  the  Congress-
ional  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  on  "The  Nature  of
Radioactive  Fallout   and   Its   Effects   on  Man."    These  throw
new  light  on  the  application   of  Madison  Avenue  techniques
to  the  fallout  debate.   Attention  should  be  called  to  the  testi-
mony   of   the   Atomic   Energy   Commission's   chief   scientist
spokesman  on  fallout,   Commissioner   Willard  F.  Libby  and
particularly  to  his  cross-examination  on  pages  1198-1200  and
1233  of  the  hearings,  now  available  from  the  Joint  Commit-
tee  here  in  Washington.
The  scientific  layman  may be  unable  to  cope  with  the  tech-
nicalities  of  physics  and  genetics,  but  he  is  qualified  to  judge
from    these   passages   whether   the   AEC   through   its   chief
spokesman   has  been  dealing   in  an  honest   and  above   board
1  1
1   S  3
manner  with  the  Congressional  committee  and  the  public.
The   subcommittee  questioned   Dr.   Libby   as  to  why   the
Atomic  Energy  Commission  had   chosen   the  name   "Project
Sunshine"  for  its study of  the  danger  from  fallout:
Representative  VAN  ZANDT.   Dr.  Libby,  just  how  did  you
arrive  at  naming  this  Project Sunshine?
Dr.  LIBBY.   Well,  it  happened  in  the  summer  of  1953  at
the  RAND  Corp.  [the  Defense  Department's subsidiary,  Re-
search  and  Development  Corporation—IFS]  at  Santa Monica.
I  have  been  trying  to  think  for  the  last  several  hours  just
how  it  happened.   I  do  not  remember and  I  do  not  know, Mr.
Van  Zandt.  We  recognized  the  need  for  some  name,  and  one
of  the  boys  in  the  meeting  invented this  name,  and  we  took
it.   I  am  sorry,  I  have no  better memory.
Hickenlooper  Lends A  Hand
Senator  Hickenlooper   (R.  Iowa),  always  the  AEC's   most
faithful  ally  on  the  Joint  Committee,  believing  that  this  dan-
gerous  question  had  been  safely  by-passed,  proceeded  to  de-
velop  the  "hidden  persuaders"   in  the  use  of  the  term  Project
Sunshine:
Senator  HICKENLOOPER.   Mr.  Chairman, May  I  ask  Dr.
Libby—as  I  understand it,  sunshine  is  stimulated  by  radia-
tion,  is  it  not?
Dr.  LIBBY.  Yes,  sir;  in  the  ultimate  sunshine  is  derived
from  radiation.
Senator  HICKENLOOPER.   And  sunshine,  as  we  know  it,
and  as  life  exists,  is  completely vital  to  life?
Dr.  LIBBY.   Yes,  sir.
Senator  HICKENLOOPER.   And  the  effect  of  the  sun  and
radiation  is  vital  to  life.   I  am  not  trying  to  say  how  the
term  came  up, but  it  seems  to  me  there  is  quite  a  close  cor-
relation  between  sunshine  and  the  effects  on  human  life  of
radiation.
Dr.  LIBBY.  I  am  trying  to  find  out  how  this  name  was
invented.  I am sorry  I have  not been  more  successful.  I  have
given  you  the  chronology  of  it.
Senator   Hickenlooper's   lyrical   enthusiasm   over    radiation
and  sunshine  was  too  much  for  Congressman   Chet  Holifield
(D.  Calif.),  the  chairman  of  the  subcommittee.   He  broke  in:
Representative  HOLIFIELD.  There is  this  exception,  how-
ever,  that  sunshine  is  beneficial  to  the  growth  of  life,  and
radiation  seems  to  be  the  other  way.  Is  that  not right?
Dr.  LIBBY.   At  least  radiation  has  many  deleterious  ef-
fects,  Mr. Holifield.   I  think it  has  a  few  good  ones.
No  one  asked  Dr.  Libby  what  these  good  ones  were  but
even  Congressman  Cole,  the  most  conservative  Republican  on
the  Joint  Committee,  was  troubled:
Representative  COLE.   Mr.  Chairman,  on  this  point  of  the
name,  Project  Sunshine,  I  fear  a  feeling  may  have developed
that  that  name  was  deliberately  selected  to  mislead  the  pub-
lic  with  respect  to  the  importance of  the  subject  under dis-
(Continued   on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 81,1957
A Swift  Summation from a Capital Which Has Two Dulleses  Too Many
How Much Is Enough In An Arms Race? Why  Is Co-Existence Unmentionable?
No   one  here  in  Washington   even  mentions  what   would
seem  to  be  the  obvious  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  So-
viet  satellite  and  ICBM,  and  this  is  the  need  for  launching  a
campaign  to  educate  the  American people  to  the  necessity  of
co-existence.   No   doubt,   despite   Soviet  advances  in   nuclear
rocketry,  we  could  wreck  Russia,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  Russia  could  also  wreck  us.   The  choice  is  between  liv-
ing  together   on  the  same  planet   or  dying  together   but  co-
existence is  still  an  unmentionable  here  and  it  is  easier  to  call
for   bigger  appropriations  to  build  us  bigger  weapons.    Even
the  ADA   talks   about   "penny-pinching"    and   that   sensitive
political   weather  vane,  Vice  President  Nixon,  is  separating
himself  a  little  from  the  Eisenhower  Administration  the  bet-
ter  to  protect  his  flank  against  Democratic  criticism  that  we
ought  not  to  put  "economy"  ahead  of   "defense."
A  Very Large  "Penny"
But  on  missiles that's  a mighty  big  penny  we've  been  pinch-
ing.   In  the  testimony on  the  1958  budget  before  the  House
Appropriations   Committee,    the   actual   figures   on    missile
spending  this  fiscal  year  and  last  have  been  ludicrously  cen-
sored  out  of  the  hearings.   But  a  research  memorandum   pub-
lished  in  the  same  hearings  shows  we  spent   almost  $3,000,-
000,000  last fiscal, year.  More  will  be  spent  this  one.   How
much   is  enough?    Some  people  talk   as  if   we  must   spend
every  dollar  defense  "requires"—as  if  this  were  an  ascertain-
able  figure!  But  in  an  arms  race  the  sky's  the  limit;  the  more
we  spend,   the  more  they  spend;   the  more  they  spend,   the
more  we  spend.
There  is  a  mutual  interest  in  putting  some  limits  on  arma-
ment,   but  this  requires  negotiation   and   negotiation   is  ana-
thema   in  Washington.    The   Democratic   opposition   doesn't
have  the  nerve to mention  the  word;  it's  easier  to  call  for  big-
ger  spending.   In  the  meantime  Krushchev  and  Duties  have
been  hurling  mutual  threats  at  each  other  over  the  Middle
East  quite  as  if  this  were  the  Nineteenth   century  in  which  a
somewhat   enlarged   Crimean  war   could   be  fought    without
really   disturbing   business  as   usual   in   the   world    capitals.
Everywhere  a  Nineteenth   century  nationalist   mentality   pre-
vails.   The  Arabs  would  like  to  attack  Israel;  Turkey   would
like  to  establish  her  hegemony  over  the  Arabs;  Russia  launch-
es  satellites  into  the  heavens  but  still  covets  that  minuscule
terrestrial  ditch at  the  Dardanelles.
The  missiles  are  intercontinental  but  not  the  minds,  and
Mr.  Dulles,  in  a  MacArthur-like  stance,  warned  Moscow   at
press  conference  that  in  the  event  of  an  attack  by the  Russians
At  the  Supreme Court
The  reopening  of  Court  showed  the  trend  toward res-
toration  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  still  running  strong,  The
first   two  convictions  under  the  membership  clause   of
the  Smith  Act,  Scales  and  Lightfoot, were  reversed  for
new  trials  under  the  Jencks  rule,  making  the  original
reports  of  informer witnesses  available  to  the  defense.
New  convictions,  if  obtained,  are  unlikely  to  stand  up
on  appeal  unless  the  government  has  stronger  evidence
than  it  dug  up  the  first  time.
As  in  Scales   and  Lightfoot  "confession   of   error  by
the  Solicitor  General" led  the  Court  also  to  reverse  the
convictions  of  three  persons  of  contempt  after  pleading
the  Fifth  amendment  before   the  House   Un-American
Activities  Committee in  Portland,  Oregon,  in  1954.  The
conviction  of  Willard  Uphaus  for  contempt  in  the  New
Hampshire  "witch  hunt"  was  vacated  by  the  Court  in
the  light  of   the  similar  Sweezy  case  last  term.   The
Court  agreed  to  hear  the  appeal  of  a  New  York  City
subway   conductor   discharged   as   subversive   under   a
State  security  act.   In  addition,  almost  unnoticed,  the
Court  allowed  the  Attorney  General  to  avoid  a  test  of
his  blacklisting  power  by  dropping  two  Lithuanian  as-
sociations  from  his  "list"  (see   discussion  in  our  issue
of  Oct.  7,  p.  7),  thus  rendering  their  appeal  moot.
on  Turkey,  the  Soviet  Union  would  not  be  "a  privileged  sanc-
tuary"—quite  forgetting  that  neither would  the  U.  S.  A.   Mr.
Dulles   enjoys  the  same  happy  gaps   in  his  thinking  as  Mr.
Krushchev,  who  remains  blissfully  sure—as  he  indicated  in
his  Reston  interview—that  a  nuclear  war  would  only  destroy
capitalism.
A  curious  feature of  the  satellite  crisis is  that  no  one  seems
to  say a  word  in  criticism  of  Allen  W.  Dulles  and  the  CIA,
though  obviously Central  Intelligence  badly miscalculated.  No
paper  we  have  seen  has  yet  picked  up  from   his  recent  San
Francisco  speech  that  smug  assurance  we  quoted  last  week  on
Russia's  inability  to  keep  up  with  the  new  technological  prob-
lems.
Krushchev's   defense   of   non-intervention   in   Syria   makes
sour  reading  after  his  intervention  in  Hungary.   But  wouldn't
it  be  better  to  have  an  agreement  among  the  big  powers  to
prevent  an  arms  race  in  the  Middle  East  than  to  let  the  drift
continue?   When  the  question  was put  to  Mr.  Dulles  at  press
conference,   he   said   unctuously   he   didn't   know   why   "the
Soviet  Union  and  the  U.  S.,  and  one  or  two  other  countries
should  set  themselves  up  as  a  kind  of  protectorate  over   the
Arab  countries."   Isn't  that  what  we  have  tried  to  do  single-
handed  with  the  Eisenhower  doctrine?
Japan's  Little  Noticed  Compromise  Proposal  for  Suspension  of  Nuclear  Tests
"In  the   absence   of   scientific   proof   to   the   contrary,   it
seems   only  reasonable  to  assume   that   as  long   as   nuclear
tests  are  continued,  the  cumulative  radioactivity  may  reach
dangerous  proportions  injurious  to  human  health.  .  .  .
"We  appreciate  the  purport  of  the  Western  approach  be-
cause  their  proposal,  while  providing  for  the  suspension  of
nuclear  tests,   encompasses   all  aspects  of  the   disarmament
problem.   However,  since  a  general  agreement  as   envisaged
by   the   Western   powers,   covering   such   a   wide   range  of
problems,  would  require  protracted  negotiations,  it   would
delay  the  realization  of  test  suspension.  .  .  .
"We  call  for  a  partial  disarmament  settlement,  and  for  a
moratorium  on  tests  lasting  no  more  than  one  year  within
which  time  negotiations   are  to  be  conducted  'to  reach  an
agreement  on  the  prompt  installation  of  a  supervision  and
inspection  system  to  verify  the  suspension  of  tests.' ...
"The   suspension   is   only   for   a   period   of  less   than  12
months.   And  the  atmosphere  in  which  negotiations  will  be
conducted  would be  much  less strained  if  not  greatly  calmed
by   the  suspension.    Furthermore,   suspension   of   tests  re-
quires  only  a  relatively  simple  system  of   supervision."
—Mr.  Matsudaira  (Japan)   UN  General Assembly,  Oct. 10.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 21, 1957
The  Developer  of  the  Mechanical  Brain  On Our Lag  in  the  Race  for  the  ICBM
Norbert  Wiener's  Diagnosis  of  the  Weakness  in  American  Science
By  Prof.  Norbert  Wiener
For  a  long  period,  and  to  a  very  large  extent,  up  to  the
Second  World  War  the  centre  of  American  science  was  the
individual  scientist  developing  his  own  ideas  after   his  own
fashion,   and   possibly  arriving  at   results   suitable   for   com-
mercial,  industrial and  military  development.  .  .  .
Industry  and  the  war  have produced  a  great  change  in  this.
Radar  and  the  atomic bomb  presented  us  both  with  enormous
possibilities   and   with   the   need   of   doing   something   about
these   possibilities  quickly.    The   pace  was   speeded   up   and
every  available young  man  was  thrown  into  the   effort.    As
many  of  these  young men  were  not  yet  in  a  position  to  work
freely  on  their  own,  and  as  much  of  the  effort  was  of  a mili-
tary  nature,  and  therefore  of  a  secret  nature,  scientific  tasks
were  divided  up  by  the  administrators of  science  into  small
pieces,   and   scientists  were   employed   for   very   specific   pur-
poses,  often  without  the  least  attempt  to  acquaint  them  with
the  larger  aspects  of  the  problems  on  which  they  were  work-
ing  and  even with  a  deliberate attempt  to  discourage curiosity
on  their  part  as  concerned  these  larger  aspects.
Here  let  me  say by  parenthesis the  secrecy of  military  effort
merely  reinforced  a  growing  policy  of  secrecy on  the  part  of
the  commercial  firms  who  regarded  the  intellectual  aspect  of
scientific  progress  as  secondary  to  the  task  of  getting  ahead
of  their  competitors.
Ideas Became  Un-American
Reinforcing  this departmentalization of  science was  a  grow-
ing  attitude of  worship  of  the  gadget.  The  automatism  of  in-
dustry,   and   particularly  of   new  high   speed   computing  ma-
chines,   led   to   a  philosophy   of   intellectual   development   in
which  the  creative  scientist  was  to  be  toppled  from  his  high
place  and  to  be  replaced  by  the  mass  effort   of  the  assembly
line.  The  unheard  of  speed  of  the  newer  computing  machines
completely  dazzled  those  who  had  the  task  of  applying  ideas
to  industry  or  military  purposes   and  led  to  the  attitude  that
ideas  were  no  longer   necessary  and  even  un-democratic  and
un-American.  .  . .
The   ideal   of   the   great   original   scientist   has   given   way
largely   to  that  -of   the   scientific   administrator   who   is   more
concerned  to  parcel  out  his  effort   and  to  keep  his  machines
and  ideas  busy than  to  develop  his  concepts.  .  .  .The  scientist
is  valued  in  accordance  with  the  amount  of  money  that   he
spends,  and  his  secrecy often  protects  him  from  the  inspection
which  would  force  upon  him  the  need  to  spend  this  money  to
good  advantage.
Second Rate Minds at  First Rate Machines
It  is  not  surprising under  these  circumstances  that  we  have
already  signs  that  the  machinery  of  scientific  investigation  is
creaking  heavily.  I  do  not  have,  nor  wish  to  have,  the  entre
to  the  hush-hush  work  being  done  on  inter-continental  mis-
siles,  but  the  merest  layman  may  be  pardoned   for   his  sus-
picion  that  all  is not  going  well.  .  .  .
I  have  had  an  early  and  sharp  interest  in  automatism  and
the  high  speed  computing  machine.   Let  me  try  to  disabuse
you   of   some  prevalent   delusions   concerning   it.    The   high
speed  computing  machine  is  not  only  an  ingenious  device  but
Though  Norbert  Wiener  of  MIT  is  one  of  the  mathe-
matical   and  scientific   geniuses   of   our  time,   and   the
Soviet  satellite  has  made  science  a  No.  1  concern,  the
press   generally   ignored   the   address   made   by   Prof.
Wiener  on  October  10  at  Wabash  College,  Crawfords-
ville,  Indiana,  where  he  sought  to  spell  out  the  weak-
nesses  of  our  scientific  effort.   Prof.  Wiener  was  one  of
those   who  developed   the   modern  "mechanical  brain."
We  believe  his  analysis  of  the  greatest  interest  at  this
moment  and  present  the  gist  of  it  here.
in   its  proper  field  it  is  indispensable.    It   has  given   us   the
ability   to  handle  problems  which   we   could   previously   not
even  have  approached,  but  there  is  one  thing  that  it  is  not—
a  replacement  for  intelligence. ...  In  fact  not  only  does  the
computing  machine  not   lessen   the   intellectual  demands  on
the  scientist,  but  when  properly  used  it  should  increase  these
to  an  almost  intolerable  point.   It  is  the  poorest   conceivable
policy   to   employ   second   rate   intellects   in   using   first  rate
machines.  .  .  .
Physicists Who Don't  Know  Physics
The  present  age  of  specialization  has  gone  an  unbelievable
distance.  Not  only are  we  developing  physicists who  know  no
chemistry,  physiologists  who  know   no   biology,   but  we  are
beginning  to  get  physicists  who  know  only  the  very  shadow
of  mathematics.   Moreover,   the  latter  day  physicist  does  not
know  physics.   He  proceeds  at  once  to  the  subtleties  of  quan-
tum  theory  without  a  good  fundamental  knowledge  of  classi-
cal  mechanics  or  classical  optics. ...
This  state  of  affairs  cannot  go  very  long.  .  .  .  Science  is  a
developing   subject  and   one  never   knows   in  one  field  how
soon  the  essentials  of  another  may  find  their  application.   For
example,  I  have  been  studying  the  physiology  of  brain  waves
and  in  this  I  found   it  indispensable   to  use  not  merely  the
analogy  of  spectroscopy  as  the  study of  electro-generating  net-
works,  but  even  the  most  intimate  and  technical  details.  .  .  .
The Scientist  as  Citizen
Apart  from  the  need  for  men  of  a  general  cultural  back-
ground  for  the  specific  purpose  of  intellectual  progress,  there
is  an   even  greater   need   for   a  broad   basis  of   education   if
democracy  is  to  survive,  or  even  if  society  is  to  survive—for
that  it  will  survive  is  by  no  means  a  foregone  conclusion.   So
long   as   we   depend    for   our   intellectual   development    on
quickly-trained  specialists,  on  neoteric   forms   like  the  axdoll
who  are  supposed   to  give  birth   to  ideas  before   they   have
emerged   from  the  larval  state,  we  shall  have  to  depend   for
the  thoughtfulness  and  understanding  which  make  society  and
democracy  possible  on  those  who  have  barely  enough   intel-
lectual   background   to   carry  on   their   controlled,    supervised
routine  work,  and  have  nothing  left  to  spare  for  their  duties
as citizens.
In   this   direction   there   lies   nothing   but    totalitarianism.
Democracy  depends  on  the  existence  of  a  large  part  of   the
community  with  intellectual  and  spiritual  resources  far  great-
er   than   those   they  will   be  called   to  exhibit   at   any  single
moment  or  in  any  single  direction.    Otherwise,  we  shall  sink
into  a  Byzantine  type  of  bureaucracy. ...
1    6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F. Stone's  Weekly,  October il, 1957
Holifield  Cuts Into  the  Double-Talk About  Cosmic Rays  and  Natural Radiation
Dr. Libby Finally Admits That Strontium  90 Makes  Bomb Fallout Different
(Continued   from   Page   One)
cussion.   Since  you  were  connected  to  a  rather  direct  degree
with   this   project   from   its   inception,   can   you  assert   un-
equivocally  that   the  selection   of  the  name  "Sunshine"  has
no  purpose  or  intent   of  misleading   or  minimizing  the  im-
portance  of  the  study?
Dr.  LIBBY.   Yes,  Mr.  Cole,  I  certainly  can.   It  never  had
any  purpose  to  mislead  or  be  flippant about  the  whole matter.
The  name  was  selected—and  I  am  afraid  perhaps  we  did  not
pay  too much attention  to  the  name  in  selecting  it.   But  there
was  never  any  intent  to  mislead  or  to  minimize the  import-
ance  of  the  hazards.
This   flat   denial   annoyed   Senator   Anderson    (D.    New
Mex.).  He  interrupted  with  an  angry  question:
Senator  ANDERSON.   I  thought  you  testified  you  did  not
know  how  it  was  selected.   If  you  did  not  know  how  it  was
selected,  how  could  you  know  the  circumstances  under  which
it  was  selected?
Dr.  LIBBY.   What  I  testified  to,  Senator  Anderson,  was  I
did not  understand  how the  word  "Sunshine" rather  than  any
other  word  was  taken.
Senator   ANDERSON.  Then  how  could  you  answer   Mr.
Cole's  question  in  the   affirmative?
Dr.  LIBBY.   Well,  we  certainly  did  not  select  this  word
with  any  intent  of  misleading  anyone  about  the  seriousness
of  this  subject.  That  is  all-
Representative   COLE.   The   witness   may   very   properly
testify  he  does  not  know  how  this  was  done, but  he  also  may
testify  he  does  know  why  it  was  not  done.
Senator   ANDERSON.   If   you  can  prove  a  negative,   you
can  go  to  it.
One  has  to  be  very  naive  to  believe  that  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission,  with   its   staff   of   trained   public   relations   men,
just  happened  to  call  its  study  of  fallout   "Project   Sunshine,"
picking  a  name  calculated to  lull  the  public  into   complacency
rather  than  to  alert  it  to  possible  new  dangers.   As  the  hear-
ings  went  on  Dr.   Libby  himself   constantly  equated   fallout
with   natural   radiation   until   Congressman    Holifield    again
broke  in  on  him  with  a  significant  line  of   questions:
Representative  HOLIFIELD.   Dr.  Libby,  to  make  the  pic-
ture  complete, is  it  not  true  that  there  is  a  very  important
difference  in  the  bomb fallout which is  not  contained  in  either
the  cosmic  rays  or  in  the  natural  radiation,  and  that  is  the
factor  of  strontium  90?
"Maybe ... A Small  Fib"
"What  is  seldom  realized  is  that  the  tests  themselves
are  enabling  us  to  develop  weapons  with  reduced  fall-
out  so  that  radiation hazards  in  the  event  of  hostilities
can  be  restricted  to  military  targets."
—Henry   Cabot  Lodge,  UN  General  Assembly   debate
on  nuclear  testing.
Senator  ANDERSON.  Doctor,  I  want  to  come  back
to  this  question  of  clean  weapons. ...  In  your  speech
you  referred  to  a  clean  weapon.  Do  you  still  feel  we
have  a  clean  weapon?
Dr.  LIBBY.  Well,  sir,  I  think  we  all  know  what  the
facts   are.    It   is  a  question  of  how  you  describe   the
situation.    We   certainly   have   succeeded   in  cleaning
them  up  to  a  great  degree.   If  you  call  cleaner  "clean,"
maybe  you are telling a  small fib. . . .
Senator  ANDERSON.  I  am  only  trying  to  say  that
a  lot  of  our  people  have  been  reassured   on  this  ques-
tion  by  this  co-called  clean  weapon,  and  it   is  still   a
dirty  weapon.  We  have  also  learned  how  to  make  our
weapons  even dirtier  than  they  originally  were.   I  think
i(  is dangerous  to use terms  like  . .  .  "clean"  when we
still  mean  "dirty" ...  I  just  hope  no  one  will  think
there  is  no  fallout  danger  when  it  comes  to  the  use  of
weapons  in  atomic  warfare,  because  it  will  come.
—The  Nature  of  Radioactive  Fallout   and  Its     Effects
on  Man,  Hearings   Holifield   Subcommittee,  Joint
Cong.  Committee   on  Atomic  Energy,  p.  1233.
Dr.  LIBBY.   Yes,   sir.
Representative  HOLIFIELD.    Which  gets  into  the  bones?
Dr.  LIBBY.   Yes,  sir.
Representative    HOLIFIELD.    Where    cosmic    rays    and
natural  radiation  do  not  have  that  particular   residual  effect
in  the  bones  of  people.   So  we  have  got  another  factor  and,
therefore,  your  analogy  there  must  take  into  consideration
also  this  new  factor  of  strontium  90  that  we  must  consider.
Dr.  LIBBY.   There  is  a  great   deal  of  truth  in  what  you
have  said,  Mr.  Chairman.   To  comment  on  your  statement
requires   a  small  technical  remark.    Biological—
Representative  HOLIFIELD.   Why  did  you  not  make  that
statement  first,  Dr.  Libby—
Representative  HOLIFIELD  (continuing).  Instead  of  mak-
ing   a  statement  which  was  susceptible   again   to   a  benign
interpretation?
The  question  was never  answered  by the  slippery  Dr.  Libby.
Help   Give  These   Facts  Wider  Circulation—Reprints  in  Bulk  Available  at  Reduced  Rates
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     ............................................................................._.......
Street     .........................................................................................
City    ..................:............ ...........Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
10/21/57
(To)   Name
Street    .......
City    .........................................Zone............State..
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D
No D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraskt  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.  F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the i :t  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated   Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  861   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D. C.
An   Independent    weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Ml. lager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
«5  in  th   U.  8.;  16  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $1B  to  Bnroi«;  «20  to  Israel,  Alia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED