I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jun17.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  Civil Rights
The  Real  Facts  Behind  All  That  Dixie  Oratory About  Magna  Charta
/. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    V,  NO.  24
JUNE  17,  1957
101
        WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 CENTS
Why   The  South  Now   Stresses  Trial  by  Jury
The  jury  trial  issue  has  enabled  the  white  South  to  take  the
offensive  for  the  first  time  this  year  in  its  fight  against  civil
rights  legislation.   Until  now  it  has  fought  a  defensive rear-
guard  action,  hampered  by  its  own  bad  conscience.    It   could
not  effectively,  so  soon  after  the  defeat  of  Hitlerism  and  in
a  world  of  rising  colored  nationalism,  fight  equal  rights  for
Negroes  frankly  on  grounds  of  racial superiority.  It  could  not
hope  really  to  carry  on  "massive  resistance"  to  the  Supreme
Court  without  encouraging  a  lawlessness  ultimately  dangerous
to  those  propertied  interests  for  which  its  Byrds and  Russells
speak.  It  could  not  openly voice its  true opinions.  The  home-
land  of  Jefferson  long  ago  passed  over  in  philosophy  to  the
Hamiltonian Whigs he fought.   The  real view of  the  oligarchy
which  rules  the  South  is  that  men  must  naturally  be  governed
(in   Hamilton's  phrase)   by  "the   rich  and  well-born."    The
logic  of  inequality  which  once  justified  slavery  and  now  sup-
ports  a  second  class  status  for  the  Negro  has  always  shaded
over  into  a  lordly  contempt  for  the  white  poor.   Emotionally
and  politically  the  South  is  an  island  of  racialism  and  upper
class   class  consciousness   in   a  world   otherwise  aggressively
egalitarian.   Its  true  views are  too  anachronistic  to  make  effec-
tive  politics.
Racialism  in  Respectable Form
In  this  perspective  the  jury  trial  issue  was  a  brilliant  sur-
prise  maneuver.  The  racialists  found  themselves  a  slogan  they
could  use without  blushing,  a  symbol  that  made  them  appear
to  be  leading  the  popular  and  democratic  forces.   Was  not
trial  by  jury  a  historic  weapon  for   the  defense  of   popular
rights  against  oppression?   On  this  issue,  they  could  invoke
symbols  which  command  veneration.   Was  not  trial  by  jury
established  in  Magna  Charta?   Did  not  the  colonists  complain
in  the  Declaration  of  Independence  that  George  III  had  de-
prived  them  of  it?   Is  it  not  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution?
Suddenly  the  South  could  appear  to  be  the  champion  and  de-
fender   of   fundamental   liberties.    Its   cherished  racial  myth
about  Anglo-Saxon  supremacy  could  reappear  in   respectable
form.   Was  not  trial  by  jury  a  basic  and  precious  possession
of  the  Anglo-Saxon  peoples,  and  was  it  not  threatened  by rep-
resentatives  of  the  lesser  breeds,  by Negro  agitators  and  alien
(often   Jewish)   radicals,  virtually  all  of  them  Yankees  and
most  of  them  from  New  York?   The  jury  issue  merged   the
appeal  of  great  traditions  with  the  covert  racialist  and  Fascist
tendencies  which  persist  like  a  chronic  paranoid  infection  in
the  mind  of  the  South, with  its strong  inferiority  and  persecu-
tion  complexes.
Instead  of  another  dreary  filibuster,  the  South  had  itself  a
crusade.  The  jury trial  issue  put  the  Northern  liberals  on  the
defensive  and  split  their  ranks.   At  the  heart  of  the  bill  were
those  provisions  allowing  the  Federal  courts  to  enforce  civil
Resolute—To Keep Negroes From Voting?
"The    California  Peace   Officers'   Association,  at   the
urging  of  Police  Chief  William  H.  Parker  of  Los  An-
geles  asks  Congress  to  be  careful  of  any  civil  rights
legislation   which  would  hamper  law-enforcement   of-
ficers. . .  . Parker  declared the  civil  rights  program of-
fered  by  the  Eisenhower  Administration  through  At-
torney  General  Herbert  Brownell  'would  put  the  police
out  of  business.'   He  said  he  opposes  a  proposal   to
establish  a  Federal  commission to  investigate  alleged
civil  rights  violations  by  local  law  enforcement  agen-
cies.  Parker  declared  such a  group  would  play  into  the
hands   of   Communists,   'who  know  they  cannot  bring
about  a  revolution  or  make  advances  in  the  face  of  a
resolute  police  force."
—Newspaper   clipping   put  into  the  Congressional  Rec-
ord  by  Congressman Davis  of  Georgia,  June  10.
9  3
rights  by injunction and  contempt  proceedings.   But hadn't  the
liberals  fought  "government   by  injunction"   as  far   back  as
the  Debs  case?  Hadn't  they  campaigned  for  the  anti-injunc-
tion  provisions  of  the  Clayton  Act  and  later  of  the  Norris-
La  Guardia  Act?  Hadn't  they fought  for  labor's  right  to  trial
by  jury  for  contempt  of  judicial  orders?  Weren't  they  now
being  inconsistent?   So  Kefauver  and  O'Mahoney  as  well  as
Butler were won  over  in  the  Senate Judiciary Committee to  the
Ervin  amendment  to  guarantee  jury  trial  in  civil  rights  cases.
Hennings  put  in  a  compromise  measure  allowing  jury  trials
in   criminal   contempts,   and   Celler—fighting   a   hard   long
weary  battle  in  committee  and  on  the  floor—was  pushed  into
apologizing  for  his  advocacy  of  the  Norris-La  Guardia  Act
as  a  kind  of  youthful  aberration.   Whether  or  not  the  jury
trial  amendment  passes  the  House  before  this  appears,  it  will
be  the  focus  of  a  long  bitter  fight  in  the  Senate  and  the  issue
will  haunt  us  for  years  to  come.    How  best  to  meet  it?
II
When  King  John  Bent  The  Knee
An  effective   answer  cannot  be  made  by  challenging   such
sacred  symbols  of  our  folklore  as  Magna  Charta,  nor  by  the
kind  of  intense  hair-splitting  over  equity  procedure  in  which
the  lawyers  of  the  House  have  been  engaging  for  days  as  this
is  written.   If  the  white  supremacists  wish  to  start  with  Run-
nymede,  we had  best  meet  them  on  that  same hallowed  ground
where   (as  Congressman   Barden  of  North  Carolina  put   it,
with   more  fervor   than   accuracy)   "the   British  people   met
King   John  and  made  him  kneel  and  assure  him  that   that
privilege—trial  by  jury—must  remain  and  be  a  part  of  their
law."
Now   the  most   important   characteristic  of   the   jury   trial
promised   (to   speak  somewhat  anachronistically)   in   Magna
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  17, 1957
Charta  is  the  very  characteristic  the  white  South  would  deny.
Magna  Charta  says "no  free  man  can  be  taken,  or  imprisoned,
or  exiled,  or  in  any  other  manner  destroyed,  unless  by  the
lawful  judgment   of   his  peers,  or  by  the  law  of  the  land."
What  did  "peers"  mean?   If  we  look  at  the  original  Latin
the  words  used  were  "parium  suorum"  which  means  literally,
"his  equals."   Magna  Charta  was  a  feudal  document,  product
of  a  feudal  world  of  fixed  classes.   The  guarantee  was  that  a
man  would  be  tried  by  men  of  his  own  rank  and  condition,
not  by  his  superiors  or  inferiors  but  by  men  of  his  own  class.
This  is  how  Blackstone  explained  it  centuries  later.
Not  the Negro's "Peers"
To  allow  the  rights  of  a  Negro  to  be  determined  by  a  jury
of   white  Southerners   today  would   be  as  repugnant   to  this
basic  idea  in  Magna  Charta  as  allowing  the  rights  of  a  small
tenant  farmer  to  be  determined  by  a  jury  of  barons,  i.e.  by
men  of  a  class  hostile  to  his  interests  and  anxious  if  it  could
to  wipe  out  his  rights  in  the  land.   This  idea  still  hung  on
many  centuries  later  in  the  principle  that  an  alien  indicted  in
England  (and  in  many  of  our  States)   had  a  right  to  a  jury
"de  medietate  linguae,"  made  up  half   of  aliens.   It  is  also
embodied  in  the  basic  principle  applied  in  American  consti-
tutional  law  where  Negroes  are  defendants.   As  Mr.   Justice
Harlan   said  in  a  leading  case  involving  a  Negro  in    1906,
"What  an  accused  is  entitled  to  demand,  under  the  Constitu-
tion  of  the  United' States,  is that  in  organizing the  grand  jury
as  well  as  in  the  empanelling  of  the  petit  jury,  there  shall  be
no  exclusion  of  race,  and  no  discrimination against  them  be-
cause  of  their  race  or  color."   (Martin   v.  Texas,   200  U.  S.
316).   Where  two  races  live  together   on  as  unequal  a  basis
as  do  whites  and  Negroes   in  the  South,  an  all-white  jury  is
not  that  jury  "of  his  equals"  a Negro  is entitled  to  demand  if
the  South  wishes  to  live  up  to  the  letter  and  spirit  of  Magna
Charta.    An   all-white  jury   is  a   jury   stacked   by  one   side,
neither  the  equals  of  the  Negro  whose  rights  are  at  stake  nor
fairly  representative  of  the  community  in  which  both  whites
and   Negroes   live.
How  does  it  happen  that  Negroes  are  rarely  to  be  found
even  on  Federal  juries  in  the  Southern  States?    Douglas  of
Illinois  *  called  the  attention  of  the  Senate  last  Monday  to
the  fact  that  the  Republican  dominated  80th  Congress  passed
a  law  saying  that  any  citizen  over  the  age  of  21  was  compe-
tent  to  serve  as  a  grand  or  petit  juror  in  a  Federal  court  un-
less  he  was  "incompetent  to  serve  as  a  grand  or  petit  juror
by  the  law  of  the  State  in  which  the  district  court  is  held."
This  was  contrary,  as  Senator  Douglas  said,  "to  the  recom-
mendations   of   the   famous  Knox   committee  which   wanted
uniform  Federal  standards  for  the  selection  of  Federal  jurors."
Senator  Douglas  said  it  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether
this  was  another  instance  of  the  kind  of  gentlemen's   agree-
ment  so  frequent  between  the  Republican  leadership  and  the
Southern  Democrats.    The  result  was  to  subject  the   Federal
jury  system  in  the  South  to  exactly  the  kind  of  covert   racial
discrimination  which  exists  in  its  State  courts.    In  many  of
An  Admission  and  A  Curious  Argument
"I  dare  say  that  the  chances  of  finding  a  Negro  who
had   taken   the   trouble   of   registering   or   taken   the
trouble  of  paying  his  poll  taxes,  who  had met  the  quali-
fications  of   an  elector  in  the  county,  would  be   about
one  out  of  a  thousand  in  a  normal  drawing  of  juries  by
chance   so  as  not  to  have  a  fixed  trial.   The   chances
would  be  one  to  a  thousand  of  having  a  Negro  on  the
jury  unless  you  deliberately  put  him  there.
"With  all  the  love  and  respect  we  have  for  people  of
all  races,  when  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme
Court,  or  any  other  court,  says  that  you  have  to  hand
pick  and  put  on  any  jury  a  particular  man,  or  a  par-
ticular  color   of   man,  or  a  particular   race  of   man,   it
amounts  to  jury  picking,  if  not  fixing,  by  the  Supreme
Court."
—Rep.  Whitten  (Miss.)  on  the  civil  rights  bill, June  10.
* The  indispensable  documents  in  the  voluminous  literature
already    generated   by   this   controversy   are   the   brilliant
memorandum   on  jury   trial   Senator   Douglas  put  into   the
Congressional  Record  April  18  (pages  5356-63)  and  his  ex-
haustive  speech  on  jury  qualifications   June  10  (pages  7675-
88).   The  Senator  deserves  highest  praise.
these  States,  a  man  must  by  State  law  be  eligible  to  vote  in
order  to  serve as a  juror.  The  practice  in  the  others  is to  pick
jurors  from  the  lists  of  registered  or  actual  voters.   This  ex-
cludes  most  Negroes  from  jury  service.  Senator  Douglas  gave
figures  from  nine  Southern  States  on  the  proportion  of  Ne-
groes  of  voting  age  not  registered  to  vote.   This  ranged  from
a  low  of  59.8  percent  not  registered  in  Florida  to  a  high  of
96.1  percent  not  registered  to  v6te  in  Mississippi.
How Juries Are Kept Lily White
These figures do not  tell the  whole  story.   The  Knox  report
(so  called  from  the  name  of  Federal  Judge  John  C.  Knox,
chairman  of  the  committee which  prepared  it)   disclosed  that
in  the  one-party South  there  is usually  only  one  clerk  and  jury
commissioner  (both  Democrats,  of  course)  and  they  write  to
so-called  "key  men"  in  the  community  and  ask  them  to  sug-
gest  jurors.   Senator  Douglas  said  no  one  knew  just  how  these
key  men  are  chosen  but  his  information  was  "that  in  practice
they  are  almost  exclusively  white  Southern  business  men  and
white   southern   political   and   professional   leaders."    Should
jury  trials  be  provided   for   contempt   of   civil  rights   orders,
Senator  Douglas   predicted,   the   jury  lists  "will  be  carefully
winnowed,  and  the  Negroes  of  the  South  will  have  very  little
representation  on  them."   A  registrar  held  in  contempt  for  re-
fusing  to  register  qualified  Negro  voters  would  be  tried—if
the  South  has  its  way—under  this  lily  white  jury  system.
A  jury  is  supposed  to  be  chosen  at  random  and  it  is  sup-
posed  to  be  impartial.    Blackstone,  another  venerable  monu-
ment  of  Anglo-Saxon  law,  says  (Book   IV,  350)   that  under
the  jury  system a  man  can be found  guilty  only  by  "the  unani-
mous  suffrage  of  12  of  his  equals  and  neighbors,   indifferently
chosen  and  superior  to  all  suspicion,"   i.e.  suspicion  of  partial-
ity.    It  would  be wrong  to  say that  a Negro  cannot  get  justice
from  a lily-white jury;  there  have  been  cases  where  such  juries
have  decided  against  white  men  in  favor  of  Negroes.   But  the
instances  are  few.    Such  verdicts  are  unlikely  where   white
supremacy  becomes  or  is  made  the  real  issue.   All  too  recent
examples  make  it  unnecessary  to  speculate  on  how  lily-white
juries  in  this  atmosphere  are  likely  to  react  if  asked  to  enforce
the  Negro's   right   to   vote   or   the   Supreme   Court's   school
decision.
During   the   bus   boycott   in   Montgomery,   several   Negro
churches  were  bombed  and  two  destroyed.   Two  young  white
men  were  arrested  and  confessed  during  their  preliminary  po-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  17, 1957
lice  interrogation.    They   were   nevertheless   acquitted   by  an
all  white  jury  on  May  30  after  a  frank  appeal  by  the  defense
for   a  verdict  which  would   "preserve   our  sacred   traditions."
White  supremacy, not  the  bombings,  was  the  issue.   Of   the
terrible  Till  case,  we  need  note  only  that  Congressman  Jamie
Whitten   of   Mississippi,   in  defending  the   independence  of
Southern  juries  during  debate  on  civil  rights  June   10,  did
admit  that  since  the  acquittal  in  the  Till  murder  "there  have
been  magazine  articles  by  the  two  defendants  which  would
lend   some  weight  to  the   belief   that   they  might  have  been
guilty."   White  supremacy  outweighed  even  murder.
Less  well  known  but  directly  relevant  to  the  question  of
jury  trials  in  civil  rights  enforcement  is  what  happened  last
year  in  Ouachita  Parish,  Louisiana.   The  testimony  given  the
House    Judiciary   Committee   by   the   Attorney   General   of
Louisiana  last  February  13   (it   begins   at  page  988  of   this
year's  House  Judiciary  Committee  hearings  on  Civil  Rights)
was  most  misleading  and  elicited  a  factual  but  indignant  re-
sponse  from  Assistant   Attorney  General  Warren   Olney   III
(at  page  1219  of  the  hearings  or  at  page  7681  of  the  June  10
Congressional  Record).
Neither  Democratic  Nor Republican
The   testimony  of   Jack  Gremillion,   the  Attorney  General
of  Louisiana,  and  the  rejoinder  of  Mr.  Olney,  provide  a vivid
example  of  how  hostile  lily  white  juries  react  even  to  election
abuses  thoroughly  investigated  and  attested  by  the  FBI.   The
FBI  investigation  showed  how  closely  the  Citizens'  Councils
controlled  registrations,  and  how  brazenly unfair  were  regis-
trars.    "Specifically,"  Mr.  Olney  wrote,   "in  the  case  arising
from  Ouachita  Parish,  the  investigation  by  the  FBI  disclosed
that  the  registrar   of  voters   in  examining  applicants  used  a
card  on  which  was  written  an  excerpt  from  the  Constitution,
which  card  was  given  to  the  registrar  by  the  Citizens  Council
of   Ouachita  Parish."    Apparently   it   was   impossible   for   a
Negro  to   interpret   this   correctly  no   matter  what   he   said.
"In   one  instance,"  Mr.  Olney  went  on,   "Mrs.   Mae  Lucky,
registrar  of  voters  of  Ouachita  Parish,  asked  an  applicant  for
registration  what  our  form  of  government  was.   The  applicant
replied,  'A  democratic  form  of  government.'   The   registrar
said,  'That's  wrong—try  again.'   The  applicant  said,  'We  have
a  Republican  form  of  government.'   The  registrar  then  said
that  that  answer  too  was  wrong  and  that  the  applicant  would
have  to  return  after  the  next  election  to  reregister."    In  an-
other  Louisiana  Parish,  Caldwell,  also  investigated  by the  FBI,
the  registrar  "even  refused  to   accept  white  persons   as  wit-
nesses  for  Negro  voters  on  the  grounds   that  the  witnesses
were   of   a   different   race  from  the   race  of   the    challenged
voters."
By  such  methods,  on  the  eve  of  the   1956   elections,   the
number  of   registered  Negro  voters   in  Ouachita   Parish  was
reduced  from  approximately  4,000  to  694.  In  Bienville  Par-
ish,  560 of  the  595 Negro  voters  were  stricken  from  the  rolls.
In  Jackson  Parish,  951  of  the  1,222 Negro  voters  were strick-
en.   The  results  of  the  FBI  investigations  in  10  parishes  were
submitted  to  a  Federal  grand  jury  without  eliciting  a  single
indictment.   Indeed,  "after  deliberating  in  private,"  Mr.  Olney
reports,  "the  grand  jury  announced  through  its  foreman  that
it  had, determined  that  there  was  no  possibility of  indictments
being  returned  in  the  Bienville,  Jackson  and  Ouachita  Parish
cases  even  though  the  evidence  was  presented  to  them  and  a
Lenin,  Hitler  and Jury  Trial!
"When   the   Russian  revolution  took   place   and   the
Bolsheviks  took  over,  there has  not  been a  jury  trial  in
Russia  since  that  time.   When  Hitler  took  over,  with
one  strike  he  abolished  the  states  and  all  jury  trials.
Did  this  help minority  groups?  Did  this  preserve any-
body's  civil  rights?"
—Rep.  Harden  (N.C.)  in  the House, June  10.
9  1
full   inquiry  conducted.   The   grand   jury  went  on  record  as
not  desiring  to  hear  any  testimony  in  connection  with  these
latter  cases."   When  a  jury  says  it  does  not  wish  to  hear  testi-
mony  and  will  not  be  swayed  by  evidence,  the  jury  system
has  broken  down  completely.   That  is,  the  jury  system  as  it
exists  in  the  South,  where Negro  rights  are  determined  by  lily
white juries.  This  is why  a jury  trial  amendment would  wreck
the  civil  rights  program.
Ill
What,  then,  is  the  alternative?   The  Constitution,  in  Ar-
ticle  III,  says  "The   Trial  of  all  Crimes,  except  in  Cases  of
Impeachment,  shall  be  by  Jury.  .  .  ."   But  the  Constitution
also  recognizes  and  incorporates  the  two  types  of  adjudication
developed  by  England,  law  and  equity.   It  says  "The   judicial
Power  shall  extend  to  all  Cases,  in  Law  and  Equity.  .  .  ."
And  there  was  no  right  to  trial  by  jury  in  equity,   Madison's
Notes  on  the  Constitutional  Convention  shows  a   suggestion
that  civil  cases  at  law  be  tried  by  a  jury  was  rejected  because
as  Nathaniel  Gorham  of  Massachusetts  argued,  "It  is  not  pos-
sible  to  discriminate   equity  cases  from  those  in  which   juries
are   proper."    The   idea   that   juries  were   not   "proper"   in
equity  was  taken  for  granted.
Long Before Those  Good  Men Proved True
It  took  close  to  five  centuries  after  Runnymede  before  the
jury  developed  into  its  modern  form  and  its  twelve  good  men
and  true  were  anywhere  good  enough  to  resist  the  wishes  of
the  Crown  and  the  great  landowners.   Long  before  then  ap-
peal  to  the  Chancellor,  the  "keeper  of  the  King's   conscience,"
enabled   English   peasants   to  obtain  some  protection   against
arbitrary  exactions  by  their  lords,  and  to  establish  some  form
of  tenure  in  the  land  they  tilled.   From  the  15th  Century  on-
ward,  "equity"  developed   in  England  as  it  once  had  in  an-
cient  Rome  as  (1)    a  means  of  mitigating   the  often   harsh
rigidity  of  the  law  and  (2)   as  a  means  of  preventing  wrong.
Instead  of  waiting  for  a  crime  to  be  committed,  the  intended
victim  could  apply  for  an  order  forbidding  an  enemy  to  com-
mit  the  wrongful  act.  This was the  beginning of  "injunction"
and  violations  of  injunction  were  punished  by  trial   without
a  jury  as  a  "contempt"  of  court.    A  judge  in  equity  could
imprison  a  man  until  he  obeyed  the  order  of  the  court  or  he
could   send  him  to  jail  for   a  fixed  term  for   violating  that
order.    These  are  commonplaces  of  the  law,  nowhere   more
fully  understood  than  in  the  South.   The  earliest  authoritative
decision  on  the  contempt   power   in  the  state  courts  was  in
Mississippi  (Watson  v.  Williams)   and  one  of  the  fullest  and
most  cogent  analyses  was  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  Virginia
^in  Carter's  Case.  This  is  the  procedure  envisaged  for  enforc-
ing  civil  rights.   Where  orders  of  the  court  were  violated  the
accused   would   have   full  rights   of  trial  and   appeal,   but   it
would  be  trial  by  judge,  not  jury.
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  17, 1957
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
The  Purpose  Was  Preventive
The  purpose  was  not  to  avoid  jury  trial.   The  purpose  was
to   prevent   infractions  of   civil   rights   before  they   occurred
rather   than  to  punish  them  by  the  criminal  law   afterwards.
Equity  in  this  sense  is  "preventive  law"—it  puts  an   official
on  notice  that  if  he  commits  a  certain  act  or  fails  to  take  a
certain  step  he  will  be in  contempt  of  court.  This  is the  mild-
est  of   the  methods   the  Federal   government   could   take   to
enforce  Federal  rights.   The  wholesale  denial  of  voting  rights
in  the  one  party  South  could  be  the  basis  of  Federal  interven-
tion  under  Article  IV  which   says  the  United   States  "shall
guarantee  to  every  State  in  this  Union  a  Republican   form  of
Government."    (That  registrar   in  Ouachita  Parish  was  right
in  the  sense  that  what  the  South  really  has  is  neither  a  re-
publican  nor  a  democratic form  of  government  but  a  scarcely
veiled    oligarchy).     The    Federal    government    could    cut
down  the  representation  of  the  Southern  States  in   Congress
for   restricting  the  right   to  vote.    For  the   14th   amendment
says,  "when  the  right  to  vote  at  any  election  for  the  choice
of  electors  for  President  and  Vice  President   of  the   United
States,   Representatives   in   Congress,   the   Executive  and   Ju-
dicial   officers   of  a  State,  or  the  members  of  the   Legislature
thereof,   is  denied   to   any  of   the   male  inhabitants  of   such
State,   being   21   years  of   age,   and   citizens   of   the   United
States,  or  in  any way abridged ...  the  basis of  representation
therein  shall  be  reduced  in  the  proportion  which  the  number
of   such  male  citizens  shall   bear   to   the   whole  number  of
male  citizens  21  years  of  age  in  such  State."   The   Federal
government   could   take   over  the   election   machinery  in   the
Southern  States  under  the  plenary  power  given  it  by  the  15th
amendment  to  enforce  "by  appropriate  legislation"  the  pro-
vision   that   no   State   shall   deny   or   abridge   any   citizen's
right  to  vote  "on  account  of  race,  color  or  previous  condition
of  servitude."   If  Northern   whites  were  not  basically  indif-
ferent  to  Negro  rights,  the  Negro's  second  class  status  in  the
South  would  have  been  ended  long  ago.   The  proposal  to  use
Federal  equity  powers  is  the  most  cautious  and  least   drastic
of  all  the  methods  Congress  might  use  to  protect  the  Negro's
rights.  The  oppressed  Negro  today,  like  the  English  serf  cen-
turies  ago,  must  look  to  equity  procedure  for  justice.
As  Mississippi's  Governor  Sees  It
Mr.  [Lester]  HOLTZMAN  (D.  N. V.)-  Do  you  think,
Governor,   that  if  we  pass  this  legislation  less  than  1
per  cent  of  the  Negroes  eligible  to  vote  in  Mississippi
will  actually  be  voting?
Governor  COLEMAN.  I  do  not  think  it  will  change
the   voting   situation   in   Mississippi   in  any   event.    It
might  reduce  it  although  you  could  be  justified  in  say-
ing  it  is  already  at  an  irreducible  minimum.
—House  Judiciary  Hearings  on  the  Civil  Rights  Bill,
739-U-
Surprised  That  Judges  Did Their  Duty
To  raise  the  issue  of  jury  trial  was  implicity to  declare  that
the  South  could  not  trust  Southern  Federal  judges.  This  never
occurred  to  the  South's. leaders  until  recently.   C. Vann  Wood-
ward  in  his  revolutionary  little  book  on  "The   Strange  Career
of  Jim Crow,"  which  everyone  interested  in  the  subject  should
read,  explains  how  the  South's   hopes   of  nullifying  the  Su-
preme  Court's  education  decision  were  raised  by  its  referring
of  enforcement to  local  judges.   "The  old  four  handed  Ameri-
can  game  between  the  South,  the  courts,  the  Negro  and  the
Constitution   has   been   going   on   throughout   our   history,"
Professor  Woodward,  himself  a  Southerner,  writes,  "and  the
South  knew  all  the  moves.  For  much  the  greater  part  of  that
period,  the  courts  had  played  into  the  hands  of  the  South
and  the  game  had  gone  against  the  Negro.    If  now  the  Su-
preme  Court  had  changed  partners,  one  could  still  place  one's
hopes  in  the  district  judges,  many  of  whom  were  natives  of
the  states  in  which  they  sat.   This  hope  was  most  explicitly
voiced  by  Lieut.  Governor  Ernest  Vandiver  of  Georgia,  who
rejoiced  that  'they  are  steeped   in  the  same  traditions  that   I
am.  .  . .A  "reasonable  time"  can  be  construed  as  one  year
or  two  hundred.  .  .  .  Thank   God  we've  got  good   Federal
judges'."    This  attitude   changed   when   Southern   born   Fed-
eral  judges  began   to  demonstrate  that   they  put   their  duty
ahead  of  their  prejudices.   Now  the  cry  goes  up  for  trial  by
jury   because  the  South   feels  that   it  can  control   the  juries,
keep  them  lily  white  and  depend  on  them  to  nullify  any  civil
rights  laws  or  orders.
Copies   of   This  Issue  Available  at  Reduced  Rates on  Bulk  Order.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     .......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City   ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub for  $2 (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name    ..............................................................................
Street     ......................................................................................
City       ........................................Zone............State..............._
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Tes  D    No  Q
IF.Stone's   Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated   Mondays  bat   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by   I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IB  In  the  U.  S.;  16  In  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  (15  to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED