I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jul08.pdf

============================================================

Holifield   on AEC  and  Fallout, P.  2
Must  Negroes  Rise  in  Budapest  to  Get  Elsenhower's  Attention?   Page  2
L F. Stone's Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  27JULY  8,  1957»'<"       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 CENTS
Hungary,  Too,   Had  Trouble  With  Its  Judges
Members   of  Congress  disturbed   by  recent  decisions  of  the
Supreme  Court  will  find  much  to  interest  them  in  the  report
of  the  United  Nations  Special  Committee  on  Hungary.   There,
too,  in  recent  months  the   efforts   of  the  government  to  deal
with   "subversive   activities  directed   from  abroad"   have  en-
countered  obstacles  in  the  courts.     "Evidently  under  the  in-
fluence  of  the  principle  of  the  independence  of  judges,"  as
the  Minister  of  the  Armed  Forces  and  Public  Security  Affairs
protested,   some  courts  proved  reluctant  to  apply  security  de-
crees.   "Newspapers  have  complained,"   the  United  Nations
Special  Committee  reports,  "that  in  many  cases  judges  have
acquitted  offenders  who  should  have  been  punished."    Wilful
judges  seem  to  be  a  problem  everywhere.
The  Newer   Jurisprudence
The  Hungarian  government did  not  wait  for  corrective  leg-
islation.   It  summoned  the  presiding  judges  of  its  law  courts
to  a  special  conference  in  Budapest   last  February  15.    The
Ministry  of  Justice  briefed  them  on  their  duty,  and  let  them
know  other  steps  would  be  taken  if  they  failed  to  do  it.   They
were  instructed  that  in  dealing  with  subversive  elements  they
must  be "tough, quick and  merciless."   In  lecturing  recalcitrant
judges,  the  Ministry explained  that  "a  basic condition  of  good
jurisdiction"  must  be  a   "correct   political   orientation."    Ac-
cording  to  some  members  of  Congress  this  is  what  our  Su-
preme  Court  lacks,  too.
No   one  would  be  so  crass  as  to  propose  that  we  imitate
Hungarian   methods  in  dealing  with  judges  who  shield  sub-
versive  elements.   But  it  is  possible  that  something  might  be
learned  from  Hungarian  experience.   Perhaps  when   Congress
adjourns  Senator  Eastland  or  Congressman  Walter  might  con-
sider  a  visit  to  Hungary  for  an  exchange  of  ideas  on  how  to
handle  judges  who  show  an  inadequate  appreciation  of  inter-
nal  security.
A  Common  Problem
It  may seem  indelicate  to  suggest  that  those  in  this  country
who  have  been  in  the  forefront  of  the  struggle  against  Com-
munism  might  find  anything  in  common  to  discuss  with  the
officials  of  a  Soviet  satellite  dictatorship.  But  the  United  Na-
tions  report  demonstrates   that  as  the  cold  war  abates  the  in-
sistence  of   judges   on   the   independence   of   the   judiciary  is
becoming  a  world-wide  problem  for  police  agencies,  whether
Communist   or   capitalist,   in  defending   social   order    against
subversion.
This  common  interest  is  most  easily  seen  if  we  start  with
basic  police  problems.    Our  police  are  upset  because  the  Su-
preme  Court  in  the  Mallory   case  has  just  reversed  the  convic-
tion  of  a  confessed  rapist  on  the  ground  that  he  was  held  by
De  Profundis
"The   House  Committee   on   Un-American  Activities
and   the   Senate   Sub-Committee  on  Internal  Security
have  been  rendered  as  innocuous  as  two  kittens  in  a
cage  full  of  rabid  dogs."
—Cong.  Donald  L.  Jackson  (D.  Cal.)  in  the  House
June   27  criticizing   the  Supreme   Court.
"As  a  result  of  the  decisions,  scores  of Communists
will  go  free.   The  decisions  have  shattered  the  morale
of  all  who have been working to  win  convictions against
Communism."
—Robert  Morris,  chief   counsel of  the  Senate   Internal
Security   Committee,  New  York   Times,  June  26.
the  police  until  he  confessed.   Our  District  of  Columbia  Po-
lice  Chief   Murray  protests   that  his   force  has  been   "hand-
cuffed"   by  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter's  ruling  that   "while  cir-
cumstances  may  justify  a  brief   delay  between  arrest  and  ar-
raignment  .  .  .  the  delay  must  not  be  of  a  nature  to  give  op-
portunity  for  the  extraction  of  a  confession."   Soviet   officials
would  have  no  difficulty  in  sharing  the  horror  of  our  police,
nor  in  understanding  Chief  Murray's  argument  that question-
ing  before arraignment often  protects the innocent.
Confessions  Ready in the  Freezer
A  recent  example  from  the  Soviet  world,  where  such  tac-
tics  are  regularly  employed,  shows  how  right  our  police  chief
is.   There  was  a  big  bank  robbery  in  Moscow  a  month  ago
(N.  Y.  Times,  June  28)  and  three  suspects  were  arrested.  All
confessed.   It  turned  out,  according  to  the  account  in  Soviet-
skaya   Rossiya   that   only  one  was  actually   involved   but   the
other  two  will  be  tried  later  for   other  crimes.   The   Soviet
newspaper  did  not  explain  what  those  other  crimes  were  or
whether  they  had  yet  been  committed.   But  since  the  culprits
and  their  confessions  are  already  in  the  hands  of  the  police,
it  is easy to  see that  many innocent  persons  will  be  saved  from
arrest  for  those  other  crimes  when  they  occur.
It  may be  harder  to  understand  what  Communist  and  capi-
talist governments  have  in  common when  it  comes  to  problems
of  subversion.   Ostensibly  their  subversives  are  trying  to  over-
throw  Communism  and  establish  capitalism while  ours  are try-
ing  to overthrow  capitalism  and  establish  Communism.  But  the
sophisticated  observer  will  not  be  confused  by  ideological  ter-
minology.   On   both   sides,   however   different   the   labels,   the
trouble  is  with   malcontents  and   "ag'in-ers."    Men   of   sub-
stance,  disposing  of  large  properties  on  the  one  side  or occupy-
ing  lucrative  government  posts  (with  dachas  attached)   on  the
1    0    I
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  8, 1957
Must  Negroes  Rise  in  Budapest  Before  They  Can  Get  Ike's  Attention?
The  UN  Hungarian  Report:  A  first  rate  job,  must  reading
for   the  independent-minded,  not  half   as  harsh  as  the  first
hand  account  of  the  London  Daily   Worker's   indignant  ex-
correspondent  Peter  Fryer  (Hungarian  Tragedy:   Pioneer  Pub-
lishers,  N.  Y.  $1).   The  picture of  a  regime  which  fell  apart
and  proved  to  have  no  base  but  its  own  secret  police.
Our  Own  Freedom  Fighters:  It's  a  pity  the  brave  efforts  of
the  Hungarian  people  will  become  a  cold  war  propaganda  in-
strument  and  that  in  the  eyes  of  the  colored  world  the  whole
affair   will   be   compromised   by   the   contrast   so  poignantly
focussed  by Wilkins  of  the  NAACP:  "When  Hungarians  re-
sist  oppression  they are called  heroes;  when  American  Negroes
.  .  .  resist  oppression  they  are  called  agitators."   The  UN  is
summoned  to  meet  by  the  same government  which  "does  not
say  a  mumbling  word  to  the  Deep  South  states  about  persecu-
tion,  nor  does  it  offer  to  aid  a  single  black  refugee."
"Betraying'  Secrets:  Greater  than  any  "betrayal"  of  defense
secrets  by the  press,  as alleged  by frenetic  Loyd  Wright,  in  his
appeal  for  an  Official  Secrets  Act  is  the  betrayal  of  humanity
itself   in  the  misinformation  policies  of  the  AEC.    (See  ex-
cerpts  below  from   Chet  Holifield  speech   in  the  House   last
Friday  which  the  press  largely  ignored).   That  "clean"  bomb
publicity  stunt visit  to  the  White  House  by Admiral  Strauss  is
only   the   latest   in  a  parade  of   murky  half-truths  to   block
cessation  of  bomb  tests  and  to  maintain  the  arms  race.
Disarmament  Prospects:  Rendered  even  poorer  by the  "fare-
well  statement"  of  retiring  AEC  member  Thomas  E.  Murray,
which  we  hope  to  discuss  more  fully  next  week.    Powerful
military,   scientific   and   industrial   bureaucracies   mobilize   to
maintain  the  arms  race,  but  Stassen  has  behind  him  only  the
inchoate  unorganized  hopes  of  ordinary  people  and  the  weak
good-will  of  the  President.   Adenauer  and  Dulles  still  insist
a  reunited  rearmed  Germany  in NATO  must be  the  price.
More  Victims  to  Go  Free:  Few  noticed  that  on  the  last  day
of  the  session  the  Supreme  Court  did  not  order  new  trials  for
Flaxer,   Sacher  and   Barenblatt   (contempt   of   Congress),  or
the Detroit  Smith  Act defendants.  Instead  the  judgments  were
vacated  and  remanded  to  the  Court  of  Appeals  for   reconsid-
eration  in  the  light  of  Watkins  and  the  California   Smith  Act
cases  respectively.    Similar  action  was  taken   in   the   case  of
those  convicted  for  contempt  of  the  Ohio  "Little  Un-Ameri-
Back  to  Good  Old Henry  III
In  upholding  the  State  Department's  right  to  restrict
travel   by   requiring   a   non-Communist    oath   of   appli-
cants  for  passports,  Judge   Prettyman   in  the  Court  of
Appeals  last  week  came  up  against  an  obstacle:  as  far
back   as   Magna   Charta,   the  right   to  travel   has   been
one  of  the  fundamental  rights  of  Anglo-American   law.
The Judge  bypassed  this  with  learned  ingenuity.    He
admitted   that   King   John   at   Runnymede   in   1215   had
been  forced  to  concede  the  right  to  travel.    "However,"
Judge  Prettyman   added,  in  what  he  seemed  to  think  a
clincher,    "John   died   shortly   afterward,   and   William
Marshall,  regent  of  Henry   III,  republished  the  Charter
without  the  guarantees  of  freedom   of  travel."
can"  Committee.  These  were  remanded  to  the  Ohio  Supreme
Court  in  the  light  of  Sweezy.   This  will  make  the  expense  of
new  trials unnecessary, and  ensures ultimate reversal.
Arthur  Miller:   Judge  McLaughlin's  opinion  voiding  one
count  but  upholding  the  other  in  the  Arthur  Miller  contempt
case  is  extraordinarily  vapid.   Reversal  on  appeal  is  certain.
McLaughlin  upheld  Count  1,  refusal  to  answer  "who  was  in
the  room"  during that  writers'  meeting  a  decade  ago,  on  the
grounds  that  Miller  failed  to  ask  the  House  Commitee  to  ex-
plain  its  pertinence.   McLaughlin  did  not   discuss  the   more
fundamental   question  of   whether   an   inquiry   into  passport
frauds  had  any  connection with  the  inquiry  authorized by  the
House   Resolution,  which   deals  -with   "un-American  propa-
ganda."
The   Passport   Decisions:  The  Court  of  Appeals  split  four
ways  in  the  Briehl  and  Kent  passport  cases.  Judge Prettyman
(see  box  this  page)   outdid  himself  in  far-fetched   arguments
to  justify  political  control  of  travel.   Judge  Bazelon  in  a  bril-
liant  and  exhaustive dissent  pointed  out  that  the  English  royal
writs  cited  as  precedents  by  Prettyman  were  tyrannical  hang-
overs  which  disappeared  a  century  before  the  American  revo-
lution.   The  Supreme Court  will  hardly  agree  with  the  sweep-
ing  view  of  State  Department  control  of  travel  espoused  by
Judge  Prettyman.
Tito  on  TV:   A   stuffy   performance,  ludicrously translated
in  which  Ed  Murrow  let  the  Yugoslav  dictator  get  away with
easy  questions,  none  at  all  about  the  imprisonment  of  Djilas.
Holifield  Attacks the  AEC for Giving Fail-Out The  Madison Ave. Treatment
"The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  approach  to  the  hazards
from  bomb  test  fall-out  seems  to  add  up  to  a  party  line—
'play  it  down.'  .  .  .
"Tardy  release  of  information   is  bad  enough.   But  there
is  something   worse.   That  is  the  selective  use  and  release
of  information  to favor  a  political  position.  . . .
"Whether  detection  of  large  bomb  tests  is  feasible  or  not
could  make  an  enormous  difference  in  possible  international
control  arrangements.   But  the  AEC  does  not  deign  to  en-
lighten  the  public  and its  scientists  are  muzzled.
"Do  the  members  recall  that  during  the  last  presidential
campaign  it  was  argued  that  bomb  testing  was  essential  to
missile  development?     Dr.  Libby  reiterated  this  position  in
substance  in  a  paper   presented  to  my  subcommittee.   But
Secretary  of  Defense  Wilson  recently  took  a  contrary  posi-
tion.   What  is  the  public  to  believe?
"The.  Administration  line  on  the  strontium  hazard  would
almost  persuade  one  that,  like  dishwashing  with  a  certain
detergent,  'It  is  almost  nice.'  The  study  project  on  the  fall-
out   incidence   of   this  bone-seeking  cancer-producing    sub-
stance  is  called   PROJECT   SUNSHINE,   truly   a  cheerful
name  for  such  a  deadly  agent,  as  if  it  were  a  tranquilizer.
But  the  people  of  the  world  do not  look  upon  a  global  poison
as  a  tonic.  . . .
"I  see  a  conflict   of  interests.   Is  it   prudent   to  ask   the
same  agency  to  develop  bombs  and  evaluate  the  risks  of
fall-out?   .  .  .  The  AEC is  charged  with  the  responsibility
of  weapon  development   and  they  are  doing  a  good  job  in
this  field,  but  an  adverse  judgment  on  their  part  on  bomb
testing  could  conflict  with  their  primary  mission.  .  .  .
"In  the  summer  of  1955  we  had  an  atoms  for  peace  meet-
ing  in  Geneva.   I  urge  that  an  equally  important  conference
of   international  scientists  be  convened  for   the  evaluation
of  the  radiation  risks  attending  nuclear  detonation  and  the
peacetime  applications  of  nuclear  power.   Bomb  testing  is
not  the  only  radiation  hazard."
—Chet  Holifield   (D.  Cal.),  chairman  of  the  recent  special  hearings  on fall-out,  speaking  in  the  House  June  28.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  8, 1957
"Ah  Could  Be  Elected ...  If  Ah  Wanted  To Wave  the  Bannuh  of  Bigotry"
Portrait  Of  A  Maverick  Virginian  Challenging  The  Byrd  Machine
By  Marvin   Caplan
If  courage  alone  could  win  elections  Howard  H.   Carwile
would   be  the   next  governor   of  Virginia.     He   is  the  only
Virginian   intrepid   enough   to  enter   the  July  9  Democratic
primary   against   Attorney  General   J.   Lindsay   Almond   Jr.
There  are  Democratic  "moderates"   in  the  state  who  fear  as
Carwile  does  that   the   "massive  resistance"   to  the  Supreme
Court   school   decision  which  Almond  advocates  may  wreck
the  public  schools.    But  Almond  is  the  gubernatorial  choice
of  Sen.  Harry  F.  Byrd  and  the  Democratic machine that  rules
the   state.   None  of   the   moderates  ventured   into  the   lists
against  him.  They  left  him  unopposed  in  the  primary  and
facing  in  the  November  general  elections  a  Republican  who
is  as  anxious  as  he  to  preserve  segregation.   At  a  time when
Virginia  needs  full-scale debate  on  the  most  crucial  issue since
the  Civil  War  there  was  to  be  nothing,  except  in  one  or  two
local  campaigns,  but  a  summer  of  silence.
Jefferson  Is A  Stigma
Then   to  the  chagrin   of  the  state  leaders  who  hoped   to
save  $200,000  in  election  costs  and  present  a  show  of  Demo-
cratic  unity,  Carwile,  a  maverick  Richmond  attorney,  jumped
into  the  primary.  He  entered  as  a  "Born   Again  Jacksonian
Democrat"   (Jefferson's  name,  he  feels,  has  been  so  misused
by  states  righters  it  has  become  a  stigma)   and  dedicated  his
A  Slim  Choice For  Virginia's Voters
"The  only  issue  between  Byrd  Democrats  and  Repub-
licans  in  Virginia  is  this: Who can  segregate   the  most
efficiently   and  stay  out  of  jail  the  longest."
—Howard  H.  Carwile,  Speech,  June  13, 1957
campaign  to  revive  the  Democratic  Party  of  Virginia  and  to
save  its  public  schools.
Announcing  himself   as  a  Democrat  was  a  new  move   for
Carwile  who  has  always  run   for   office   in  November   as  an
independent.   But  opposing  and  infuriating  the  Byrd machine
is  nothing  new.   It  has  been  the  substance  of  his  political  ca-
reer.   The  sound  of  his  opposition   is  not  new  in  the   South
either.   One  of  the  13  children  of  a  poor  tenant  farmer,  the
voice  he  raises  in  speeches  is the  furious  voice  of  the  Southern
dispossessed,  the  poor  white  sharecroppers  who  scratch  a mean
existence  from  other  men's  soil.
Evangelist Into Lawyer
"He  sounds  like  a  revivalist  minister!"  a  young  matron  ex-
claimed  after  a  recent  speech.   It  is  no  accident.   His  parents
were  devout  Baptists  and  he  grew  up  believing  as  they  that
he  would  someday  be  a  travelling  hell-fire  evangelist.   Some-
where  in  high  school  he  was  touched  by  skepticism;  he  deter-
mined  to  be  a  lawyer  instead.   He  graduated  in  1930 just  as
the  Depression   opened   a  vast  obstacle  between  him  and  his
ambition.   He  was  able,  only  through  terrible  deprivation,  to
wrest  an  education  from  a  small  fundamentalist  college  in
New  Jersey  and  a  law  degree  from  Southeastern  Law  School
in  Washington.   The  effort  broke  his  health.   He  came  down
with  TB  shortly  after  taking  his  bar  exams.   In  1942 while
still  convalescing  on  the  farm  he  entered  his  first  campaign.
He  ran  for  U.  S. Representative  from  his  District.   He  has  run
How  Virginia Can Comply With  The
School  Decision
"I believe in an assignment  program  . . . based  solely
on  the  common  sense  concept  that  every  child  in Vir-
ginia  should  be  required  by  the  local  school  board  to
attend  the  school  that  is  closest  to  his  home, provided
the  school  is  not  inferior."
—Howard   H.  Carwile,  Speech,  June   13, 1957
for  some  office  almost  every  year  since then,  twice  before  for
governor.   He   has  never  won  though   he  almost  made  the
Richmond  City  Council  last year.
Outwardly  undiscouraged,  he   says  he   considers  his  cam-
paigns  platforms  for  his  "crusades."    It  is  in  these  crusades
that  he  has shown  his true vocation:  reforming.   It  is generally
acknowledged  that  his  exposures over  a  period  of  10  years, of
brutality  in  the  Virginia prison  system  led  to  the  end  of  flog-
ging  and  other  inhuman  treatment  of  prisoners.   He  has  also
attacked  conditions  in  state  hospitals  and  mental  institutions
and  early  in  his  career  helped  end  Jim  Crow  in  CIO  unions
in  Danville.   For  the  past  few  years  in  Richmond  he  has  been
broadcasting  a  15-minute  weekly program  at  his  own  expense
on  which,  with  tips  sometimes  from   discontents  within  the
machine,  he  exposes  injustices  and  corruption.
No Banners  For Bigotry
Off   the   platform   and   away   from   his   crusades,   Carwile
creates   a   pleasant,   even   a   benign   impression.     A   plump,
spectacled  man  of  45,  father  of  an  18-month  old  son, he  is
surprisingly  soft-spoken  and  humorous.   He  knows  how  dif-
ferent  he  is  on  the  platform  and  knows,  too, how  close  his
shouting   rhetorical   style  carries   him   into   the   company   of
Southern  demagogues.   "Ah  tell  you frankly," he  said  smiling,
"Ah  believe  with  mah  gift  of  gab,  mah  use  of  language  and
mah  explosive  delivery it  is  not  immodest  to  say  ah  could  be
elected  to  any  office   in  the  South  if  ah  wanted  to  wave  the
bannuh  of  bigotry  and  race  hate."
Why  has  he  chosen  not  to?   The  immediate  answer  is  im-
passioned:  "To  take  the  wrong  position  for  selfish  motivation
—mah  whole  being  rebels  against it."
But  how   did   he,   a  white  Southerner,  come   to   feel   the
South's  treatment  of  Negroes  was wrong?   At  first  the  feeling
was  instinctive.  "Ah  seem  to  have  an inherent  tendency  to dis-
sent  and  to  rebel  against  the  status quo."  As  a   sharecropper's
son,   "Ah  saw  that  the  same  people  who  were  such  rabid  race
haters  were  putting  their  foot  in  mah  face."  Since  then  as  he
has  gone  on  to  defend  Negro  clients with  considerable  success,
he  has  come  to  see  race  hatred  as  a  sickness.
Though  his  position  is  far  from  the  prevailing  one  in  the
state,  he  still  feels  he  may win  July  9  if  the  machine  under-
estimates  him  and  fails  to  get  out  the  vote.   He  has  a  faith-
ful  white  and  Negro  following  and  good  labor  support.   But
it  is  all  on  too  small  a  scale.   His  chances  of  winning  are
small.    Even   so  the  voters  of  Virginia—even   those   liberals
who  are  put  off  by  his  vehemence-—owe  him  their   gratitude.
He  has  given  them  an  election,  a  clear  alternative  to  Almond
and  a  means  of  protest.   Virginia  taxpayers  seldom   get  that
much  for  $200,000.
1  0  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  8,  1957
Those  Investigative  Files  Were  A  Special  Target  There,  Too
(Continued  from  Page  One)
other,  should  have  no  difficulty  in  sensing  their  common  in-
terest  in  maintaining the  social  order  from  which  they  benefit
against  the  type  of  person  who  is  always  criticizing  his  gov-
ernment  and  trying  to  change  things.   We  call  them  "Reds"
and  they  call  them  "counter-revolutionaries"  but  this  is  only a
difference  in  language.   Once  this  is grasped,  Senator  Eastland
and  Congressman Walter  will  be surprfsed  to  see in how many
ways  Hungary's  problems  with  subversives  resemble  our  own.
Precious  Files  Destroyed
There,  as  here,  special  problems  have  been  created  for  the
government  by  the  effort  of  subversive elements  to  get  at  the
files  of   investigative agencies.   The   United  Nations   Special
Committee on  Hungary  reports  that  one of  the  demands  in  the
uprising  of   last  October   was  for   the  destruction  of  all   the
"screening"   records  so  carefully  built  up  by  the  secret  police
in  its  effort   to  watch  subversive  elements.   In  Budapest  and
other  cities  lawless  mobs  broke  into  the  headquarters  of  the
AVH,  the  secret  political  police,  and  destroyed  files  "contain-
ing  'blacklists'  with  information  and  reports  on  almost  every
inhabitant  of  the  country,  and  countless  recordings  of   tele-
phone  and  private  conversations."   This  shows  what  can  hap-
pen  when  subversive elements  get  out  of  hand.
A  special  target  in  Hungary,  as  here,  was  to  uncover   the
identity  of  those jpatriotic  citizens  who  made  it  their  business
to  help  the  police  keep  an  eye  on  dangerous  activities.   One
witness  told  the  United  Nations  Special  Committee  the  AVH
had  a network  of  100,000  informers.  Here  the  FBI  has  often
sought  by  public  statements  to  combat  prejudice  against  ex-
radicals  who  become  informers.   There   the  government   ap-
plied  our  FEPC  principle  to  their  protection.    "By  Law  II  of
1952,"  the  Special  Committee  reports,  "anyone  discriminating
against  a  person  who  acted  as  informer  for   the   AVH   was
punishable  by  up  to  six  months  in  prison."    Thanks   to  this
specially  protected  network  "present  in  all  offices  and  all  fac-
tories ...  no one knew,  even  when  talking  to  friends,  where
his  words  would  be  repeated  half  an  hour  later."   There may
be  pointers  in  this  for  the  FBI.
How  Handy  Those  Foreign  Plots
"Fundamental  to  the  point  of  view  which  produced
these   Supreme  Court  decisions   is  the  refusal ...  of
the  Court to  consider  Communism a criminal  conspiracy
to  advance  the  interests  of  an unfriendly  foreign  power.
.  .  .  This  is  what  makes  Communism  different  in  kind
from  other  unpopular minority  causes  which  the  Bill  of
Rights  is  designed  to  protect."
—Washington  Daily  News,  June  25
"While  the  Hungarian  working  people  called  for  cor-
recting   past   mistakes   .  .  .  the  counter-revolutionary
gangs  came  out against  the  people's  democracy,   against
socialism ...  to  have  failed  to  recognize  it  would  have
been  tantamount to  ignoring  the facts. ...  It  is  a  mat-
ter  of  common  knowledge  that  the  U.  S.  Congress   has
passed   a  law   appropriating   $100,000,000  annually   to
finance subversive  activities  in  socialist  countries."
—Pravda,  Feb.  10,  replying   to  a  letter  from  British
Labor  MP's   protesting  repression  in   Hungary.
Maximum  Safeguard
The  Hungarian  government  in  recent  months  has  hit  upon
an  interesting device for  preventing  subversives from  learning
what  the  police  have  on  them.   Congress  might  well  consider
this  in  drafting  safeguards to  get  around  the  ]encks  decision.
According  to  the  United  Nations  report  on  Hungary,   under
new  procedures  for  dealing with  "counter  revolutionaries,"  the
Public  Prosecutor  is  empowered  "to  bring  the  accused  before
the  Special  Court without presenting the  charges  in writing  or
in  advance."   This  takes  the  culprit  entirely by  surprise.
Should   Senator   Eastland  and   Congressman   Walter   visit
Hungary,  they  will  see  that  the  Soviet  system  has  an  advan-
tage  over  our  own.   While  the  Soviet  countries  have  written
Constitutions,  too, the  notion  that  their  safeguards  only  apply
to  persons  who  agree  with  the  government   is  firmly  estab-
lished  there.  The  "ag'iner"  is outside the  pale.   Even  "liberal"
Communists   like  Mao, Gomulka   and   Tito   draw   the   line
against  "counter  revolutionaries"  while  many  conservatives  as
well  as  liberals  here  still  defend  the  rights  of   Communists.
In  this  respect  we  cling  to  old-fashioned habits.  ,An  exchange
of  ideas  with  the  Soviet  bloc  might  help  to  correct  them.
We'll   Mall   Extra  Copies  free   of   This  Issue  to  Any  Friends   You  Name
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .......................................................................................
Street     .......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State................._
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ...........................................................
Street     ...................................................................
7/8/57
City      ........................................Zone............State..................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I    F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington.  D.   C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated   Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published  and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
S3  In  the  U.  S.;  »6  In  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED