I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957nov04.pdf

============================================================

Zhukov's  Demotion  Was  CIA's  Second  Major  Bloomer  in  One Month,  See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  42
NOVEMBER  4,  1957
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Real  Question  Now:  Is  Man  Himself   Obsolete?
The   biggest   news   of   the   week   was  neither  the   fall  of
Zhukov  nor  the  Macmillan-Eisenhower meeting  but  the  first
indications  that  France  and  Sweden  will  soon  be  joining  the
atomic  arms  club.   Jules  Modi  in  a  press  conference  at  the
United  Nations  said  France  would  use  its  fissionable  mater-
ials   for   atomic  weapons   if   no   disarmament  agreement   is
signed;  none  is  in  prospect.    A   few   days  later  came  word
from   Sweden  that  its  Minister  of  Defense  warned  that   the
Swedes  must  have  atomic  arms  by  1965   not  only  for   their
guided  missiles  but  for  tactical  use.   There  will  soon  be  five
atomic  powers,  instead  of  three,  immensely complicating  the
task  of  agreement  and  control.   Nuclear  weapons,  deadly  as
they  are,  will  soon  be  as  common  as  gunpowder.
The No.  1 Task  of  Our Time
The  wider  the  distribution of  atomic  arms  the  greater  the
chances  that  mankind  will  blow  itself  to  smithereens.   The
problem  is  no  longer  whether  war  is  obsolete.   The  problem
is  whether  man,  with  his   irrationality,  and   his  immemorial
tendency  to  settle  his  fratricidal  quarrels  by  mass  murder,  is
not   obsolete.    A   species   given   to   such   deadly  games  can
hardly  survive the  invention  of  weapons  so  destructive.  This
is  the  situation  which  faces  mankind  but  there  is  little  sign
that  human  leadership  is  facing  up  to  it.   On  the  other  side
of  the  current Great  Divide  (there  is one in every generation),
the   Russians  in   the   age  of   the   Sputnik  are  as  ludicrously
obsessed  with  Turkey  as  the  Czars  were  a  hundred  years  ago
in  the  age  of  the  gunboat.   On  our  side  there  are  no  signs  of
any  but  small  minds  at  work.   The  notion  that  the  future  of
humanity  now  depends  on  finding  a  way  of  teaching  it  to
live  together  is the  No.  1  task  of  our  time.  One  looks  for  it
in  vain  on  any  of  the  agendas.
With  all  the  billions  being  spent  on  arms  in  a  world   still
largely  shoeless   and  illiterate,  no  one  proposes   to  spend   a
few  millions  on  a  world  study  of  why  men  fight.  We  know
dangerously  little  of  the  explosive  aggressions  in  man.   Yet
the  only  security  today  for  any  and  all  of  us  is  to  find  a  der
fense  against  this  ultimate  weapon  within  ourselves,  the  ten-
dency   to   murder.    The    military   are   alarmed    lest    they
be  finally  eliminated  by  the  sheer  "impossibility"   of  nuclear
war.   Their  best  minds  hope,  as  U.  S.  Army  Chief  of   Staff
Maxwell  D.  Taylor   disclosed  in  a  speech  here,  that  we  can
find  a  way  to  limit  war,  so  that  the  Great  Game  can  go  on.
His  hopes  are  pinned  on  an  anti-missile  missile,  which  can
shoot   down  the  ICBM  in  mid-course,  and  thus  provide  an
umbrella  of  safety  under  which  war  may  be  resumed  on  the
more  "humane"  scale  of  the  past.   The  danger  has  brought
an  intensified  effort,  not  to  save  men,  but  to  save  war.
Fatal  Contradictions
While   the   Army  chief   at   least   shows   imagination,   the
political  leaders  respond  conventionally.    Inane  is  the   word
for   the  Macmillan-Eisenhower  communique.    In  one   breath
it  says  that  "the   indefinite  accumulation  of  nuclear  weapons
and  the  indiscriminate spreading  of  the  capacity  to  produce
them  should  be  prevented"   but  in  the  very  next  paragraph
it   talks   of   how   "international   security   now   depends    not
merely  on  local  defensive  shields,  but  upon  reinforcing  them
with   the   deterrent   and   retaliatory  power   of   nuclear  weap-
ons."   This  means  placing  nuclear  arms  in  all  the  hot   spots
of   the  world,  increasing  the  danger  that   some  accident,  or
Lilliputian   dictator  in   a   moment  of   megalomaniac   aberra-
tion,   may   set  off  the   final   conflict.    The   Macmillan-Eisen-
hower  panacea  is  "free  world  partnership"  in  the  pooling  of
scientific   resources—not   to   eliminate  war   but   to   make   it
more   deadly.    The   hope   is  still   for   another   technological
break-through  to  a  new  means  of  destroying  human  beings
en  masse  which  will  be  so  terrifying and  overwhelming  that
we  can  dictate terms  to  Them.   This  is  the  fantasy  of  a  sav-
age  on  whom  modern  science  confers  ever  bigger   clubs.
We Still Believe  in Magic
The  primitive within  us  has  never  been  more  visible  in  the
headlines.   The  President,  the  Head  of  the  Tribe,  after  pooh-
poohing   Sputnik,   which   the   Bad   People   Over   The    Hill
launched,  suddenly  sets  off  a  whole  series  of  rockets  of   our
own,  like  fire-crackers  for  children.   He  makes  a  speech  at-
tacking  "morbid   pessimism"  about  "free  enterprise"   and  the
stock  market  which   fell   5.6  billions   on  Monday,   rose   8.3
billions  on  Wednesday.    Even  papers  which  take  an  astrin-
gent  view  of  the  President's   scanty  knowledge  and  constant
golf  applauded.   Said  the  Chicago  Tribune,  "Coming  as  they
did   the   day  after  President   Eisenhower's  reassuring   speech
...  the  barrage  of  rockets  had  the  desired  effect.   Panic  mon-
gers  were  silenced,  the  people's  spirits  rose."  The  New   York
Daily  News,  which  otherwise  specializes  in  tough  guy  cyni-
cism,  said  "President  Eisenhower  is  the  man  who  can  clear
up  any  unjustified   worries  if  any  man  can"   but  at  the  same
time  hoped  he  would  get  himself  a  new  ghost  writer  capable
of  speaking  in  "short,  hard-punching  plain  English."    So  in
ancient  times  people  knew  a  mere  human  priest  spoke  behind
the  mask  but  believed  at  the  same  time  it  was  the  voice  of  the
god.   The  very  people  who  suspect  Ike  only  has  the  haziest
conception   of  what   is  going   on,   still   have   a   superstitious
faith  in  his  magic.   How  can people  this  primitive be  expected
to  respond  rationally  to  the  new  menace?
1    6     '/
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  4,1957
Capital  Round-Up:  Brownell's  Exit,  Too  Much Tact   on  Science,  If  Batista  Were  A  Syrian
Why  Not  Name the Rev. Martin Luther  King to the Civil Rights Commission?
President  Eisenhower  can  hardly  appoint  a  non-integrated
Civil  Rights  Commission,  but  so  far  there  has  been  almost  no
discussion  in  the  press  of  a  Negro  candidate.   From  a  world
point  of   view,  the   U.  S.  would   win   applause   if   the   Rev.
Martin  Luther  King  were  named;  the  Montgomery   bus  boy-
cott  and  its  application   of  Gandhi-ism  to  Negro  liberation
has  made  him  a  world   figure.   But  the  timid  White  House
is  more  likely  to  pick  a  non-controversial   Northern   Negro.
Congressman   A.  Clayton   Powell   suggested   the  Rev.  Archi-
bald  Carey  of  Chicago  and  Judge  Francis  E.  Rivers  of   New
York  as  Negro  members.   The   report   that   Adlai  Stevenson
was  asked  to  accept  a  place  on  the  Commission  is  taken  seri-
ously  in  Washington  and  some  of  his  friends think  he  should
take  it  if  he  can  have  the  chairmanship.   He  is  unlikely  to  be
a  candidate  in  i960  anyway  and  can  afford   to  forget  party
politics  for  an  assignment  in  which  his  great  gifts  could  be  of
historic  service.
Summing  Up Herbert  Brownell
Brownell:  The  most  disliked  Attorney  General  by the  press
in  this  generation;  he  hadn't  held  a  press  conference  for  two
and  a  half  years  when  he  quit;  one  reason  he  avoided  press
conferences   is  that   his   oily   evasions   always  got   him   into
trouble.   Brownell's  original  strategy  was  to  outdo  McCarthy,
and  if  there  had  not  been  a  change  of  tide  in  public  think-
ing  he  intended  to  make  the  Administration  the  chief  witch
hunter.    His   attack—in   concert  with  J.   Edgar   Hoover   and
Senator  Jenner—on  Harry  D.  White,  former  President   Tru-
man  and  "20  years of  treason"  was  as  low  as  any  blow  ever
struck   by  McCarthy  and   should   be  used  against  him   if   he
hopes,  as  rumored,  to  run  for  Governor  of  New   York.    A
sly,  unscrupulous,  slippery  politician.   His  successor,   William
P.  Rogers,  is  Nixon's  man;  a  back-slapper  and  glad-hander,
a   Dewey   protege,    a   friend   of   Eastland   though    pro-civil
rights,  and  stood  with  Hoover  inside  the  Department  against
recent  talk  of   liberalizing  loyalty-security  procedures   in   the
wake  of  the  Supreme  Court's  Cole decision.
Too Much  "Tact"
The  report  on  basic  research  made  to  the  President  by  the
National  Science  Foundation   suffers,  from  the  kind  of   tact-
fulness  to  be  expected  in  an  official   document.    It  speaks  of
a  shortage  of  scientists,  but  makes  no  mention  of  the  loyalty-
security  hysteria  which  has  driven  such  first  rate  minds   as
Robert   Oppenheimer  and   Dr.   Edward   U.  Condon   out  of
government.   The  report  stresses  the  importance  of   publish-
Economic  Bulletin
Very  Best  Expert  Opinion
For  any  of  our  readers  who  may  happen  to  be  in  the
stock  market  and  in  need  of  the  very  best  advice,  we
call  attention  to  the  newly  released  annual  poll  by  the
F.  W.  Dodge  Corporation  of  leading  U.  S.  economists
on  the  outlook  for  1958.
Dr.  George  Cline  Smith,  director  of   the  poll,  sum-
marized  these  expert  opinions  by  saying  most  of   the
economists    "forecast    general   increases   in   the   major
economic  indicator  series"  but  at   the  same   time   ex-
pressed   "considerable  concern.  .  .  ."
Will   industrial  output  —   like  Zhukov  —   go   up  or
down?    The  experts  on  business   seemed   to  be  as  di-
vided  as  the  experts  on  Russia.   Of  the  202   economists
polled,  30 percent  forecast  a  steady  rise  and  15  percent
a  steady  decline;  31  percent  thought  there  would  be  a
slump  in  the  first  half  of  next  year  but  a  recovery  in
the   second   while   8   percent   predicted   the   first   half
would  hold  steady   but   the   second   half   show   a  drop.
We  hope  investor  readers   will  find  this  clarifying.
ing  the  results of  research  to  avoid  duplication  and  waste,  but
it  makes  no  mention  of  the  Pentagon   mania  for   overclassifi-
cation  of  projects  and   documents.   The   report   touches  ever
so  gently  on  the  need  for  higher  faculty  pay  in  universities
and  aid  to  undergraduates,  but  instead  of  calling  for  Federal
subsidies  for  education  it  talks  weakly  of  the  need  for  stimu-
lating  more  private  funds  for  basic  research  by  tax   benefits.
The  report  shows  that  of  $2,810  millions  spent  by  the  Fed-
eral  government  on   research  and   development   in  1953-54,
$2,500  millions  went  for  military  projects.
Freedom Below The  Border
Argentina's  painful  struggle  to  establish  a  free  society may
break  down  on  the  shoals  of  the  oil  issue;  the  national   Con-
stituent   Assembly  meeting  to  reform  the   1953   constitution
collapsed  when  11  Conservatives   led  by  a  former  Ambassa-
dor  to  Washington   staged   a  walk-out  to  block  adoption  of
a   Radical  measure 'permanently   nationalizing  the   country's
power  and  oil  resources;  the  walkout  left  the  Assembly  with
three  short  of  a  quorum.  .  .  .  Guatemala  is  expected  to  slip
back   into   an   extreme   right   dictatorship   under    Ydigoras
Fuentes,  who  was  right  hand   man  of   the  dictator,   Ubico,
overthrown  in  1944  after  14 years of  absolute  rule.  .  .  .  Could
there  be  a  more  striking  contrast  than  the  intense  interest   the
State  Department   shows  in  who   governs   Syria  and   its  in-
difference  to the struggle  for  freedom  in  Cuba?  .  . .
The  U.S.:  Short  of  Scientists  but  Still  Destroying  Physicists  on  Suspicion
A  prime  example  of  how  the  government   hounds  an  in-
nocent   physicist,   preventing   him  from   working   either   at
home   or  abroad,   is   that   of   Weldon   Bruce   Dayton.     The
Court  of  Appeals  here  2-to-l,  speaking  through  Judge  Pret-
ty man,  has  just  upheld  Secretary   Dulles"  refusal   to   grant
Dr.  Dayton  a  passport   to  do  cosmic   ray  research  at   the
Tata  Institute  in  India.   The  Court,  with  only  a  weak   dis-
sent  from  Judge  Fahy,  ruled  that  the  Secretary  had  a  right
to  act  on  the  basis  of  evidence  undisclosed  to  the  physicist.
Dr.  Dayton  was  caught  in  the  backwash  of  the  Rosenberg
investigation.   He  has  been  through  three   grand  jury   ses-
sions  without ever  being  indicted.   He  is  not  accused  by  the
Department  of   ever  having  been  a  Communist,  nor  is  he
accused  of  having  done Any thing  wrong.   But  on  the  basis
of   long   past  associations,  and  the  fact   that  his  wife   ran
away   with   a   neighboring   scientist   who  disappeared    into
Mexico  at  the  time  of  the  Rosenberg  affair,  Dr.  Dayton  has
been  driven  out  of  employment  in  this  country  and  refused
a  chance  to  work  abroad.
The  denial  of  a  passport  becomes  in  effect  denial  of  the
right  to  pursue  work  as  a  physicist.   Whether  the   Depart-
ment   can  destroy   a   man's   career   without   giving   him  a
chance  to  defend  himself  is  the  question,  and  this  will  be
appealed  to  the  Supreme  Court.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  4,  1957
A  Page  of  Gleanings  from  the  Association  of  the  U.  S.  Army  Meeting  in  Washington
What  Gen.  Mickelsen Was Forbidden to Say About the Decline of the Bomber
On  October   31,  It.  Gen.   Stanley  R.  Mickelsen,   chief  of
the  Army's  Air  Defense  Command,  was  slated  to  retire  after
40  years  of  service.   Perhaps  in  the  belief  that  he  could  there-
fore  risk  it,  the  General  executed  an  interesting  maneuver  to
express  the  Army's point  of  view  at  his  scheduled  appearance
October  28  before  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Association  of
the  United  States  Army  here  in   Washington.
He  sent  out  advance  text  of  a  speech  criticizing  continued
reliance  on   strategic  bombing  and   massive  retaliation,  per-
haps  knowing that  the  Pentagon  would  force  him  to  tame  it
down  before  delivery.   It  did,  and  Gen.  Mickelsen  from  his
headquarters  in  Colorado  Springs  obediently  ordered  the  text
"killed"  but  too  late  to  keep  newspapermen  from  picking  it
up.
He  himself  delivered  an  address  from  which  the  teeth  had
been  drawn.   The   Associated  Press   in  the   Washington  Star
that  afternoon  gave  the  gist  of  the  suppressed  original,  and  a
little  of  it  crept  into  early  editions  of  next  day's  New   York
Times  only  to  be  cut  out  in  the  Late  City  Edition.   This  is
what  the  retiring General  would  have  said:
The Blue-Pencilled Remarks
"1.    Interceptor    aircraft    are    obsolescent,    usefulness   of
bomber  aircraft  will  fade  when  ICBMs  can  be  accurately  de-
livered.   Therefore,   the   presently   threatened   destruction   by
bombers  from  a  distant  land   is  diminishing  in  possibility  as
each  day  passes.
"2.  It  is  no  idle  boast  that  the  present  Nike  Ajax  missile
(an  Army  weapon)   can  reach  and  kill  any  bomber  that flies
today.   And  it  is equally  no  boast  that  the  Nike  Hercules  mis-
sile  soon  to  enter  the  air  defense  sites,  can  kill  even   whole
formations  of  planes  should  they  foolishly  present   themselves
in  that  way.   The   Hercules   missile  with  its  atomic  warhead
is  more  than  an  answer  to  the  pictured  mass  attack.
"3.  The  Army  points  the  way  for  America  to  shed   herself
of  any  stigma  of  the  Douhet   theory  of  mass  destruction   of
civilian  populations   .  .  .  the  Douhet  theory  is  tied   closely
to  the  single-weapon  idea  of  war  .  .  .  most  recently  asserted
by  advocates  of  complete  security  through   'air  power'."
Reversed  Roles
Our  diplomats   and  soldiers  seem   to  have  reversed
roles.    While   Secretary   Dulles's   contribution   to   the
Middle  Eastern  crisis  was  a  threat  of  massive  retalia-
tion  if  Turkey  were  attacked,  Gen.  Maxwell  D.  Taylor,
U.  S.  Army  Chief   of  Staff,   told  the  Association  of  the
U.   S.  Army   here  last   Monday    (Oct.    28),    "It  seems
clear  to  students  of   the   problem  that   the  factors  in
the   Middle   East   are   largely   political   and   economic,
with   purely   military   considerations   offering   little   to
effect  an  ultimate,   successful  solution."
Our Fascist  Mentor
These  remarks touched  the  most  sensitive  points  of  national
policy.   It  is  not  polite  to  mention  Douhet,  the  Italian  Fascist
General   whose  views  on  victory  by  airpower  through   mass
destruction   has   become   the   major   premise   of   our   military
and  diplomatic thinking.
But   if   modern   guided   missiles,   automatically   directed   at
supersonic   speeds,   have   made   the   slow   moving   subsonic
bomber  and   even  the  supersonic  interceptor   (dependent   on
human  reflexes)   obsolete,  then  the  continued  reliance  on  the
Strategic  Air  Command  is  an  expensive   delusion.
It  is  a  safe  assumption  in  the  arms  race  that  what  one  side
has,  the  other  side  has  or  soon  will  have.   If  the  Army  has
anti-aircraft  missiles  of  the  kind  General  Mickelsen   describes,
the  Russians  probably  have  similar  ones  ready  or  in  produc-
tion.
Indeed  as  early  as January  7,  1955,  in  Colliers,  Dr.  Walter
R.  Dornberger,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  Nazi  missile  sta-
tion  at  Peenemunde  during  World  War   II  and  is  now  mis-
sile  consultant  to  Bell  Aircraft,  wrote,   "the   USSR  has  pro-
duced   in   great   numbers   efficient   anti-aircraft  missiles   that
will  make  very  difficult  any  penetration  of  the  Russian  home-
land  and  destruction  of  its  strategic  targets."
In   censoring   Gen.   Mickelsen's   remarks,   the   Pentagon   is
fostering  the  foolish  disposition  to  laugh  off  as  enemy  propa-
ganda  recent  Russian  statements  that  the  strategic  bomber  is
obsolete.
Advice  to  H-Bomb  Survivors:   Sprinkle  Fallout  Off  the  Sidewalk   With  A  Garden  Hose
Dr.  Willard  F.  Libby  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission
made  no  reference  to  clean  radioactive  warfare  in  his  talk
on  nuclear  strategy  and  weapons  to  the  Association  of  the
U.  S.  Army   here  last  week.
On  the  contrary  Commissioner  Libby  said  that  "concen-
trated   areas  are  essentially   to  be  written  off  in  nuclear
warfare"  and  "that  people  living  in  major  cities  can  be  pro-
tected  only  to  a  limited  degree."   He  said  that  in  addition
to  its  blast  and  thermal  effects,  if  a  thermonuclear  weapon
is  fired  close  to  the  ground  "the   killing  effect  of  the  short-
lived  radioactivities  is  so  enormous"  that  the  fallout  "from
detonations  in  which  the  fireball  touches  the  earth's  surface
must  be considered  as  a  third  dimension,  or  third  major   fac-
tor,    determining   strategy   and   policy   in   wartime."   He
added  that  "a considerable  fraction"  of  the  area  of  a  major
nation  could  be  covered  "with  the  familiar  cigar-like   pat-
terns  of   local   fall-out   at  such  intensities  as   to  endanger
health  and  survival."
Having  painted  so  vivid  a  picture  of  what  can  be  done  to
a  great  nation  by  thermonuclear  attack,  Dr.  Libby  went  on
to  suggest  that  if   people  stayed  long  enough  in  shelters
and  took  certain  precautions  on  emerging,  some  could   sur-
vive.   Dr.   Libby   said  "cellars  are  pretty  fair   protection"
from  fallout   (without  explaining  how  many  cellars  would
survive  the  blast  and  fire  effects)  and  said  "They,"  i.e.   the
average   person,   "should   know   that  hosing  off  a  building
and  washing  down  the  sidewalks  with  water  will  probably
help  a  great  deal  in  reducing  the  fallout."  This  picture  of
the  average  citizen  emerging  from  his  cellar  to  sprinkle  the
fallout   off  his  building  and  sidewalk  with  a   garden  hose
after  an  H-bomb  attack  would  seem  to  qualify   Dr.  Libby  as
a  leading  humorist  of  the  thermonuclear   age.
1    6
     r
i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  4,1957
Zhukov's  Fate  Still  Clouded  at  Press-Time. But  Not  as  Clouded  as  CIA's  Crystal  Ball
The  Marshal's  Dismissal  Was Allen  Dulles's  Second  Big Error  in  One  Month
In  his  speech  to  the  Advertising  Council  in  San  Francisco
on  September   19,  Allen  Welsh  Dulles,   director  of  the  Cen-
tral  Intelligence   Agency,  complained   coyly  that  he  was  the
head  of  a  "silent  service"  and  could  not  advertise  his  wares:
"Often   we  know  a  bit  more  about  what  is  going  on  in  the
world  than  we  are  credited  with,  and  we  realize  a  little  ad-
vertisement  might  improve  our  public  relations."   Since  that
time,  CIA  has  had  some  advertisement.   It  guessed  wrong  on
Zhukov  as  it  guessed  wrong  on  Sputnik.
Mr.  Dulles  gave  the  advertising  men  two  bits  of   "inside
information"—one  was  that  in  the  Soviet  Union  "the  mili-
tary  seems   to  have  become  the   decisive   element"  and   the
other  was  that  the  Soviets  were  "beginning  to  encounter  dif-
ficulties  in  coping  with  the  complex  industrial  and   techno-
logical   problems   of   today."     Just   16   days  later    Moscow
launched   the  first  man-made  satellite.    Since  then,   Zhukov
has  been  dismissed  as  Minister  of   Defense.
Mr.  Dulles  gave  the  impression  that  Zhukov  was  now  the
power   behind  the  throne  in  Russia.   Krushchev  had   elimi-
nated   Molotov,   Kaganovich  and  Malenkov  last  June  "with
the  approval  of  the  military,  in  particular  Zhukov,"  and  now
only  two  members  of  the   Presidium  "are in  a  position   to
exercise  real  influence, Krushchev  .  .  . and  the  military,  pres-
ently  represented  by  Marshal  Zhukov."   He  made   headlines
with  his  modestly  phrased  prediction,  "I  have  no  crystal  ball
answer,  but  certainly  military  dictatorship  is  one  of-the  pos-
sible  lines  of  evolution  in  the  Soviet  Union."
'Intelligence" As a Form  of Flattery
This  has  long  been  the   theory   of   those   supposedly   "in
the  know"   in  Washington,   that  the  military  were  soon   to
take  over   in  Russia  and  that  we  could   "do   business  with
soldiers."   The  President  is  a  military  man,  and  this  theory
was  flattering  to  the  military:  "the soldier  is  a  sound   fellow,
unlike  those  politicians  and  fanatics."   Ike  knew  Zhukov  and
no  doubt  has  told  the  story of  his  meetings  with  him  a  dozen
times.   The  discovery  by  intelligence  that  the  President's   pre-
conceptions  were  right  is  the  kind  of  apple-polishing   familiar
in  all  bureaucracies.
Remarks  of  the  Week
Mrs.  Grace  Lorch,  subpoenaed  by  the  Senate  Inter-
nal  Security  Subcommittee in  Memphis after  comfort-
ing   a  Negro  child  outside  Little  Rock  Central   High
School:  "The   only  subversive  activities  I  know  about
are  the  ones  Senator  Eastland  and  his  crowd  are  en-
gaging in."
America's    newly    discovered   richest    "zillionaire,"
Jean  Paul  Getty,  to  an  interviewer  in  London:  "The
fundamental  strength  of  the  U.  S.  is  in  its   business
men.  .  .  .  Without  the  business  man,  who have you
got  left  in  the  United  States?"
There  is  another  factor  behind  this  theory.   Official  Wash-
ington  just  cannot  get  it  through  its  collective  head  that  Rus-
sia,  as  a  country,  irrespective  of   its  government,  has  certain
basic  strategic  needs  and   ambitions  which  derive  from   its
geography.    The   whole   Middle   Eastern   "crisis"   is  only  a
continuation  of  familiar   19th  Century  history,  but   Washing-
ton  prefers  to  attribute  everything  to  Communist  fanaticism.
If  the  trouble  is  due  to  fanaticism,  all  we  need  do  is  wait
and   overthrow  the  Communist  regime.    But  if   the  trouble
lies  deeper  and   reflects   Russia's  natural  aspirations,  then   it
is  necessary  by  diplomacy  and  negotiation   to  reconcile  Rus-
sia's  needs  with  Turkey's,  etc. But  negotiation  is  hard  work
and  it  is  easier  to  treat  the  whole  affair  as  melodrama.
From   this   derives  the   view  that   all   would   be   well   if
"practical   soldiers,"   i.e. men  devoid   of   strong   ideas,  (i.e.
again   like  Ike) took   over.   The   notion   that   military  men
would  be  less  concerned  than  "politicians"   or  "ideologists"
with  such  crucial  strategic  matters  as  U.  S.  bomber  bases  in
Turkey  within  a  short  flight  of  the  key  Soviet  oil  fields  is
fantasy   and   nonsense.    But   official   Washington    has   slept
easily  on  it  for  a  long  time.
This  may  help  readers  to  understand  why  for  several  days
after  the  curt  announcement  of  Zhukov's   dismissal,  so many
Washington   correspondents  continued  to  insist  that  this  was
only  the  prelude   to  a  bigger   post,   or  at  least  that  he  was
merely  being  "kicked  upstairs."    This  was  the  CIA  line,  as
it  was  fed  out  to  favored  newspapermen.
Let  Us Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy   to  A  Friend—It   Will  Help  Both Him  and  Us
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ...................;........................................................._........
Street    .........................................................................................
City    ........................__............Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4, (1  yr.)  additional:
11/4/57
(To)   Name
Street    .......
City    .........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  Q    No  D
I.F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebroskc  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  AJt  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  561?  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
t
  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation   Mt. lager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
*5  In  th  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  115  to  Burobe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED