I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957may27.pdf

============================================================

The  Prayer  Pilgrimage,  P.  2
The  New  Socialist  Forum,  the  Witch Hunters  and  the  Communists,  See  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  21
MAY   27,  1957
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Liberals  and  the  Military   Budget
The  most  striking political  phenomena  in  the  past  week was
the   way  American  liberals  abdicated  their   responsibility  in
dealing  with  military  spending.   One  voice  was  raised  here  to
warn,  "while  defense  expenditures  are  necessary, they  are  for
the  most  part  a  loss  rather  than  a  contribution to  the national
economy.  .  .  .  Defense  expenditures  drain  away  national re-
sources  which would  otherwise  be  devoted  to  building  up  the
nation's  capital  structure and  improving  the  people's  levels  of
living."   But  this warning did  not  come  from  Walter  Reuther,
but  from  Ralph  J.  Cordiner,  president  of  General  Electric, at
the  Eighth  Annual Armed  Forces  Day Dinner.  The  budgetary
manifesto  issued  by  the  ADA  over  the  signatures of  Reuther
and   58  other  liberals  uncritically   supported  the   President's
budget.  "Three  fifths  of  the  proposed  budget  goes  for  national
defense,"   was  all  their  statement  said  on  this  crucial subject.
"Surely  we  agree  that  the  security  needs  of  the  United  States
must  be  met  despite  the  cost."   It  is  strange  when  only  a  big
business  man  talks  as  liberals  used  to.
Begging  The  Real   Questions
Of  course  the  nation's  security  must  be  met  whatever  the
cost,  but  this is question-begging.  The  real  question  is  whether
we  are  to  accept  at  face  value  the  Pentagon's  notion  of  what
the  real  security  needs  and  the  real  costs  are.   Here  we  need
study  and  leadership  on  management  and  on  policy.   Is  the
money  being   spent  carefully  or  wastefully?    Are  the  intelli-
gence  and  planning  behind  the  military program  sound?  Are
the  country's  economy  and   fate  being  tied  to  an  arms  race
which  can  lead  only  to  military   domination   and  perhaps  to
war?  These  are  questions  on  which  liberals  and  labor  leaders
normally  spoke  out.   Today  they  are  silent.
A  report  filed  here  last  Tuesday  disclosed  the  kind  of  facts
and  made  the  kind  of  criticism  which  have  normally  come
from  liberals.   It  said  80  percent  of  all  military  procurement
and  95  percent  of  aircraft  procurement  was  now  spent  under
negotiated  mostly  cost-plus  contracts  rather  than  competitive
bidding,  and  that  millions  were  being  wasted  because  no  basic
cost  principles  had  been  worked  out,  and  procurement-audit-
ing  practices were  chaotic.   It  said  that  in  the  field  of  missiles,
a  costlier  project  than  the  atom  bomb,  evaluations  "have  con-
sisted   of   briefings   or   presentations   by   directly   interested
groups,  principally  contractors'  representatives  and  representa-
tives  of  the  sponsoring  Services."   It  found  that  rivalry  among
the  Services  in  the  development  of  missiles,  on  which  billions
are  being  spent,  "is  getting  completely  out  of  control"  and
leading  to great  waste, with  each  of  the three  Services  "striving
to  acquire  an  arsenel  of  weapons  complete   in  itself  to  carry
out   arty  and  all  possible  missions."    It  criticized  the   inflated
and  alarmist intelligence estimates of  Soviet power  which  were
6  *
The  Dollars  Make The  Difference
"In   this   whole   program   we   do   not   seek   to   buy
friends.   We  do  not  seek  to  make  satellites."
—The  President's  Foreign  Aid  Broadcast,  May  21.
"Since  foreign  aid  programs assist  in  making  bases
on  foreign  soil  available  to  the  United States  and  help
to  add military  strength  to  allies,  their  continuance  is
in  the  national  interest.  While  it  might  be  argued  that
allies  should  make  themselves  strong  without  our  aid
and  should  make  bases  available regardless  of  our  as-
sistance,  it  must  be  noted  that  there is  an  inclination in
some   free   countries  allied  with   us   to  divorce  them-
selves  from  any  involvment  in  the  conflict  of  the  great
powers  or  to  feel  that  their power  is  in  any  event  too
insignificant  to  be a  factor  in  the  outcome.  Our support
and  assistance  may  well  provide  the  decisive   element
in  the  decision  to  cast  their  lot  with  us  and  other  free
nations  in  a  common  defense  effort."
—Final  Report,  Special  Senate  Committee  to   Study
the  Foreign  Aid  Program,  May  IS,  page  9.
8  3
used  last  year  to  "sell"  Congress  an  accelerated  big   bomber
program  since  scaled  down  as  admittedly  based  on  false  in-
formation.
But  this  did  not  come  from  liberal  critics.   It  came  from  a
House  Appropriations  Subcommittee headed  by  Congressman
Mahon  of  Texas.  The  liberal  report  on  the  budget  put  out
last  week-end by the  Conference  on  Economic  Progress  treated
the  military  budget  quite  differently.  This  report,  by  a  group
in  which Reuther  and  Leon  Keyserling  are  the  guiding  spirits,
had  much  of  value  to  contribute  in  the  sphere  of  social  wel-
fare  spending  but  in  the  field  of  defense  spending  it  offered
not  one  word  of  critical  analysis.   Its  projected  ideal   budget
figured  actual  security  spending  in   1956  as  40  billions  and
proposed  by  I960  to  raise  this  to  44  billion  dollars.   It  gave
aid  and  comfort  to  the  Pentagon  by  estimating  that  military
spending  as  a  percentage  of  total  national  production  had  ac-
tually  fallen  in  the  past  four  years  "from  about  14  percent  of
total  national  production  to  about  9.6  percent—  a  decline  of
31  percent"  and  it  asks  "whether  we  are  risking  our  lives  by
these  slashes."   Is this liberalism?
The  Pentagon  as  Sacred  Cow
The  two  liberal  statements,  one  by  the  ADA'ers,  the  other
by  the  Conference  on  Economic  Progress,   made  headlines  as
liberal  support  of  the  President  on  the  budget.   And  on educa-
tion  and  social welfare  Eisenhower  does  deserve and  need  sup-
port   against  the   economy  bloc  in   Congress.    But  can  these
necessary  expenditures  be  saved  by  uncritically  accepting  the
military  estimates ?  By  treating  the  Pentagon  as  a  sacred  cow,
is  not  the  way  prepared  for  appeasing  the  economy  bloc  by
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 27,  1957
No   Such   Spontaneous   Outpouring  As   Once  Greeted  Marian  Anderson
The  Prayer  Pilgrimage  Must  Be Counted  Politically  A  Failure
I  had  hoped  to  see the  District  of  Columbia so clogged  with
Negroes  and  their  sympathizers  on  the  third  anniversary  of
the  school  decision  that  even  the  racists  in  Congress  would
have  felt  the  emotional  impact.   As  against  those  hopes  and
the  NAACP's  own expectations,  the  Prayer  Pilgrimage   must
be counted  a  failure.   As  compared  with  the  75,000  who once
turned out  spontaneously  to hear  Marian  Anderson  sing  from
the  steps  of  the  Lincoln  Memorial,  there  was  a  crowd  esti-
mated  by  the  police at  15,000  and  by  the  NAACP  at  27,000;
it  fell  far   short  of  the  50,000  which  had  been  announced  in
advance  as  the  goal.
With   400,000  Negroes   in   the   District   of   Columbia  and
another  400,000  in  nearby  Baltimore,   the   Pilgrimage   could
have  been  made  a  resounding  success  right  here  at  home.   It
is  revealing  that  though  Mordecai  Johnson  was  among  the
speakers  Howard  University  did  not  think  the  occasion  im-
portant  enough  to  suspend  classes.   On  the  eve  of  the  rally
only  700  rooms  had  been  volunteered  to  house  the   expected
50,000,  and  only  30  of  the  300-odd  Negro  churches  here  in
Washington  had  agreed  to  open their  doors  as  reception  cen-
ters.  I  spent  the  morning  walking  about  in  the  main  Negro
section  of  Washington  and  I  was  struck  by  the  number  of
churches  whose  doors  were  locked  and  whose  walls  bore  no
welcoming  banners.
The Deep South Untouched
The  eight  States  of  the  deep  South  are  not  only untouched
by  integration  but  have  dug  in  behind  new  legal   barricades
in  defense of  segregation;  the  lines  are  hardening;  Congress
again   will  almost   certainly   adjourn   without  passing   civil
rights  legislation;   the   NAACP  is   being   outlawed   in   the
South  and  its  few white sympathizers  terrorized. Yet  Negroes
here  did  not  feel  deeply  enough  to  pour  out  in  mass  demon-
stration.  The  folk  who came up  here  by  bus, train  and  plane
from  Montgomery, Mobile,  New  Orleans  and  elsewhere  in  the
South  command respect.  The  blame  for  the  poor  turnout  lies
with  the  Northern  Negro,  with  the  leadership,  with  the  white
liberals  and  with  the  Labor  movement.
'  Yet  there  was  only  one top  rank  labor  leader,  Jim  Carey,
on  the  steps  of  the  Memorial.  Except  for  District  65 of  New
York,  the  ILGWU  and  the  UAW,  there  was  little  sign  of
labor  activity  in  support  of  the  Pilgrimage.   Only  a  scatter-
ing  of  whites  were  in  the  great  crowd  before  the  Memorial,
and  only one white  Minister,  the  Rev. Ross  A.  Weston,  of  the
Arlington,  Va.,  Unitarian  Church  appeared  on  the  program;
Rabbi  Norman   Gerstenfeld,  the  other   white  who  was   sup-
posed  to  participate,  failed  to  show  up.   Senators   Douglas
and  Javits,  though  on the  printed  program,  pleaded  previous
engagements.    Of  all  the  white  churches  in  the  District  of
Columbia,  only  All  Souls  Unitarian  and  Waugh  M.E. opened
their  doors  to  receive  and  feed  the   pilgrims.
The  white  press  gave  the  meeting  the  barest  minimum of
advance  publicity;  the  United  Press  put  out  a  scare  story on
Black  Men Landed  Too
"Next  door,  in  the  State  of  Virginia,  they  are  cele-
brating  the   350th  anniversary  of   the  landing  of   the
first  white  men  at  Jamestown.  It  is  usually  forgotten
that  this  is  also  the  338th  anniversary of  the  coming of
the  first  black  men  to  America.  During  all  those  338
years  we  and  our  white  fellow  Americans have  sweat-
ed,  toiled,  sacrificed,  fought  and  died  for  our  common
country.  Yet,  today  from  some  of  the  talk  and writing,
one  would  think  that  we came here  only  yesterday,  that
out  of  a  kind  of  charity  we  had  been  permitted to  re-
main  here,  but  that  this  country  is  not  ours  as  much
as  it  is  any  man's."
—Roy  Wilkins, of  the  NAACP,  at  Prayer   Pilgrimage
Lukewarm  Northern  Liberals
"What  we  are  witnessing  today  in  so  many  Northern
communities   is   a   sort   of   quasi-liberalism   which   is
based  on  the  principle  of  looking  sympathetically  at  all
sides.  It  is  a  liberalism  so  bent  on  seeing  all  sides  that
it  fails  to  become  committed  to  either  side.   It  is  a  lib-
eralism  that  is  so  objectively  analytical  that  it  is  not
subjectively   committed.    It   is   a   liberalism  which   is
neither  hot  nor  cold,  but  lukewarm.   We  call  for  a lib-
eralism  from  the  North  which  will  be  thoroughly com-
mitted  to  the  ideal  of  racial  justice  and  will  not  be  de-
terred  by  the   propaganda   and  subtle  words  of   those
who  say,  'Slow   up  for   a  while,  you  are   pushing;  too
fast.'"
—Rev.  Martin  Luther  King,  at  the  Prayer   Pilgrimage,
May   17.
the  eve  of  the  pilgrimage  about  Communists infiltrating   the
gathering;  a  press  conference on the  eve by  the  Rev.  Martin
Luther  King  was  poorly  attended  and  marked  by  a  yawning
indifference  to  anything  but  this  Red  scare  story.   None of
the  top  men  from  the  top  papers  showed up.    The  arrival  of
the  most  significant  Negro  leader  this  country  has  developed
in  our  time  was  not  news.
»
Apprehensive  Leaders
The leaders  of  the  white  community were apprehensive  and
determined  to  play  the  affair  down.   But  at  the  risk  of  in-
justice  I  must  record  my  own feeling  that  the  Negro  leader-
ship  shared  some of this  apprehension.  The  Pilgrimag'e  seems
to  have  been  a  last  minute  compromise  between  those  whp
wanted  a  "March   on  Washington"   to  demand  action  from
Congress  and  those  who wanted  no  move toward   Washington
at  all.   Everything  was  done to  discourage  spontaneous  visits
to  Congressmen,  and  there  was  no  visible  effort  to  put  either
the  President  or  Nixon  on the  spot  by publicly  asking  for  an
audience.  That  invitation   Nixon  gave  Rev,  King  at   Ghana
seems  to  have  been eyewash  for  the  Africans.   Adam  Clayton
Powell  in  his  speech  did  depart  from  text  and  suggest  that
visits  be  paid  to  the  President  and  Vice-President,  and  to
Johnson  and  Rayburn  but  nothing  came  of  it.   I  believe  the
leaders  were  themselves  afraid  that  the  demonstration   might
get  out  of  hand.
Perhaps  one reason  for  the  disappointing  turnout  is that  it
had   no   concrete   political   objective.    Ministers   who   call
Negroes   to  walk  rather  than   ride  humiliated  have  a   pro-
gram;  but  a  summons to  prayer  is  not  action,  especially  for
, the  younger  generation  in  the  North  which is  not  as  religious
as  its  elders.  There  was  hardly  a  speaker   who  did   not  in
sonorous  voice  call  on  Moses to  go  down  into  Pharoah's  land.
I  could  not  help  but  be  moved;  this  is  not  mere  rhetoric  for
the   Negro.    But  there  is  a  new  generation   who  are   less
Negroes  than  ordinary  Americans  who happen  to  have  dark
skins,  and  we Americans  are  among  the  least  religious  of  all
peoples.   The  immense  and  wonderful  assimilative   power  of
America  is  doing  to  the  Negro  what  it  has  done to  the  first
and  second  generation  of  foreign  born  stock;  the  melting  pot
is  breaking   down  the  color  barrier,  too,  despite  the  greater
obstacles.  The result  is that  the  evangelists  and  demagogues
of   the   older   Negro   leadership   are   giving  way   to   newer,
quieter  and  more  honest  men.   Of  these  the  most   impressive
is  Rev.  King;  his warning  that  this  is  no time  for  demagogy
was  almost  a  rebuke  to  most  of  his  fellow speakers.  I  will be
disappointed   if  this  28-year   old  Minister   does  not   develop
into  one  of  the  great  Americans  of  our  time.   But  this   "pil-
grimage"  he  led  left  no  impact  on  the  Capitol.   It  will  take
more  than  prayer  to  move white  politicians  preparing  again
to  bury  the  civil  rights  issue.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  27,  1957
Can  There  Be  Common  Ground  With  Those  Who  Do  Not  Really  Believe  in  Freedom?
The New Forum for Socialist  Education Before the Internal Security Committee
The  mechanism  of  political  intimidation  was  nakedly  dis-
played   in  the   brief  hearing   held  by  the   Internal    Security
Committee  here  last  Monday on the  American  Forum  for  So-
cialist  Education. The formation  of this  group  was announced
on  May  12. The  hearing  was  held just  eight  days  later.  Five
persons  were  subpoenaed:   Clifford   T.  McAvoy,  former  New
York  Deputy  Welfare  Commissioner, long  prominent  in  the
American  Labor  Party;  Dr.  Albert  Blumberg,  a  Communist
awaiting   sentence   after   conviction  under   the  membership
clause  of  the  Smith  Act;  Bert  Cochran  of  the  American  So-
cialist;  Victor  Perlo,  one of  Elizabeth  Bentley's  victims;  and
Michael Zaslow.
Only   Dr.   Blumberg   appeared.     He   invoked   the    Fifth
amendment  on  everything  but  his  name.  There  was  nothing
even  in  the  questions  asked  by  Senator  Butler,  who sat  as  a
one-man  subcommittee,  or  by  Robert  Morris,  the  committee
counsel,  which  indicated  any  crime  other  than   participating
with   Communists  in   the   formation   of  a   broad  discussion
group.
Policing Thought
Whether  another  hearing  will  be  held  was  left  vague.  The
hearing  ended  with  a  request  by  Senator   Butler  to  the  Jus-
tice  Department  to  begin  proceedings  against  the  new  Forum
before  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.   Here  in  ac-
tion  again  was  the  monstrous  assumption  that  the  FBI,  the
Internal  Security  Committee  and  the  SACB  have  a  right  to
monitor  and  police political  discussion  in  this  country.  This
is   how  they   keep   watch   over   intellectuals   and   "internal
security"   in   Moscow,  too.   The   Forum   must   be   defended
against the  Inquisitors.
Politically,  however,  the  Forum  seems  a  dubious  venture.
Its  basic  assumption  is that  non-Communist  and  Communist
Leftists   can  through   discussion  find  a  common  ground   for
Socialist   "education."   I   doubt  it.   Not  only  in  the   Soviet
Union,  but  in  Yugoslavia  and  even  in  Poland, there  has  been
retrogression   in  recent  months  from  the  first  promise  of  the
de-Stalinization  campaign.  The  real  reform  within  the  Soviet
Union  which the  20th  Congress  seemed  to  presage  has  evapo-
rated.
The   Western   Communist  parties,  in  Italy,  France  and
Britain,  have  fallen  back  into  Stalinist  goose-step.   Only  here
in  the  United  States,  one  vigorous  faction  led  by John  Gates
and  his  colleagues  of  the  Daily  Worker,   have  been   fighting
for  a  new  departure.    But  the  Stalinist  wing  under  Foster
and  the  slippery  "Centrists"  under  Eugene  Dennis  can  prob-
ably  purge  the  Gates  group  whenever it  serves  their  purpose.
I   have   the  greatest   respect   for  the   Rev.  A.  J.   Muste.
Among the  members  of  the  National  Committee he  has  form-
ed  are  some  of  my  best  friends.   I  know their  purity  of  pur-
pose  and  independence of  spirit.  But  this  Forum  is  regarded
Bulletin  at  Press  Time
Teachers  Need  Not Inform
Another  indication  of  the  abating  witch  hunt  was  a
decision   by  State   Supreme  Court  Justice   Donald   S.
Taylor  in  New York upholding  the  ruling by  State  Edu-
cation  Commissioner  Dr.  James   E.  Allen  that   school-
teachers  could  not  be  dismissed  for  refusing  to  act  as
political  informers.
Judge  Taylor  ruled  on  two  appeals  brought  against
the  Commissioners' ruling by  the  New York City  Board
of  Education  and  the  Board  of  Higher   Education.  In-
volved  in  the  former  were  four   school  teachers   and  a
school  principal  who  acknowledged  past  membership  in
the  Communist  party  but  declined  to  identify   others
they  had  known.  Involved  in  the  latter  was  the  case  of
Associate  Professor  Charles  W.  Hughes  of  Hunter  Col-
lege,  who has  also  refused  to  be  an  informer.
City   Corporation   Counsel   Peter   Campbell   Brown
argued  that  the  refusal  to inform "impeded"  the  efforts
of  New  York City  to  root  suspected  Communists out  of
teaching.  Judge  Taylor  held  that  neither  the   Feinberg
law  nor  the  rules  of  the  Boards  of  Education  provided
for  discharge  on  refusal  to  inform.
by  the  Communists  as  the  first  step  toward   a  new  political
formation  in  which  they  can  play  a  leading  role.   And  until
the  Communist party  itself  is  dissolved,  I  see no way to bring
about  a  healthy  new  orientation  on  the   Left.
Adepts  at  Manipulation
The  Communists are  adept  in  the  organizational  tactics  by
which  a  small  tail  can  wag  a  large  dog.   They  will   stultify
any  new  movement  as  they  stultified  the  Progressive  Party.
As  soon  as  they  feel  strong  enough  to  do  so,  they  will  ride
herd  again  on  the  intellectuals,  making  them  swallow  what-
ever  rubbish  Moscow  regurgitates.  Let  us  not forget  how the
New  Masses  made  writers  of  Albert   Maltz's"  stature   crawl
when  they  dared  questioned  party  line.
How  can  those  of  us  who  really  believe  in  freedom  join
forces  with  those  for  whom  civil  liberty  is  but  a  cynical  and
self-serving   tactic,   to   be   abandoned   for   thought    control
wherever, they  are  in  command?  How build  a  new movement
to  meet   American  needs  in   alliance   with   people  who  will
jump  through  the  hoops  again  on  signal  from  Moscow?
There  are  still  good  and  devoted  people  in  the  Communist
party  but  they  will  not  make  reliable  allies  until  the  Party
disappears.   Until  then,  we  must  defend  its  rights  100  per-
cent  but  beware  any  attempt  to  reestablish  its  influence.
New  and  Encouraging Developments in  the  Field of Civil Liberties
Our  newest  Justice, Whittaker, joined  the  liberal  majority
last  Monday  in  a  7-2 per  curiam  order  affirming  a  3-judge
lower  bench  ruling  that  the  Attorney  General  had  no right
to  bar  a  deportable  alien  from  Communist  "activity."  The
appellant,  Mrs.  Antonia  Sentner,  came  here  at  the  age  of  8
and  has  lived  in  St.  Louis  for  nearly  30  years.   She  is  the
mother  of  two  native  born  children  and  the  wife of  a  Smith
Act  victim.   She  was  ordered  deported  in  1953.   The  super-
visory   restrictions  against   which   Mrs.   Sentner    appealed
were  so  ludicrous  that  she  was  only  allowed  to  "associate"
with  her  husband  if  such  associations   were  not  "in  further-
ance  of  the   doctrines,   policies  or  activities"  of  the  Com-
munist  party.
Another  encouraging  action  by  the  Supreme  Court  last
week   was  its   agreement   to  hear   the   appeal   of   Herman
8
Beilan,  a  Philadelphia  schoolteacher  discharged  for  "incom-
petency"  after   pleading   the   Fifth   amendment  before  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.   He  was  one  of
26  school  teachers   dismissed   after   the   House   Committee
held   hearings   in  that   city,   and  his  case  may   determine
those  of  others  now  on  appeal.
Argument  was  also  heard  before  the  full  bench  of   the
Court  of  Appeals  here  last  Monday  on  the  first  test  of  the
Immunity  Act  as  applied  to  witnesses  before  Congressional
committees.    The  defeatist    tenor   of  the   Senate   Internal
Security   Committee  pleading  was  only  another   indication
that  this  part  of  the  Immunity  Act  is  likely  to  be  thrown
out  as  unconstitutional.   The  portion  of  the  Act  upheld  last
year  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Ullmann  case  applies
only  to  witnesses  before  grand  juries.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

4
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 27,  1957
A  Congressman  From  Backward  Mississippi  Puts  Our  Liberals  to  Sharne
(Continued  from   Page   One)
cutting  everything  else  but  the  military ?   How  can  there  pos-
sibly  be  wise  and  adequate  expenditure  in  the  field  of  social
welfare  if  the  military  are  allowed   a  blank   check,  a  blank
check  they  fill  in  every  year  with  ever  larger  amounts?
At  page  94  of  the  Mahon  committee report  (which  was ac-
cepted  as the  full  House  Committee  report),  there  is a  separate
section  of  "additional  views"  filed  by  one  Congressman   who
felt  the  committee did  not  go  far  enough.    "I  firmly  believe,"
he  wrote   (though   only  to  have  his  words   ignored   by  the
press),  "that  about  30  percent  of  defense  spending  is  exces-
sive,  is  causing  inflation,  provides  no. real  defense,  and  by
being  built  into  our  domestic economy  constitutes a  real  threat
to  our  nation."   He  said  he  had  been  in  Russia  last  year  and
what  he  saw  "was  completely  opposite  to  the  impression  we
had   from   information  furnished  our   subcommittee   by  U.S.
military  witnesses."   He  felt  that  the  Russian military  menace
had  been  built  up  here  beyond  all  reasonable  proportions  in
order  to  scare  up  higher  military appropriations.
A  Huge  Gravy  Train
This  dissenter  protested  that  defense  had  become  a  gravy
train,  that  the  80  billions  spent  on  war  orders  with  the  50
leading  military contractors  had  tripled  the  value  of  their  stock
in  five  years.    He  pointed  out  that  in  the  case  of  the  aircraft
companies  the  government  paid  most  of  the  cost of  their  facili-
ties  and  gave them five year amortization  on  the  balance.    "Yet
the  total  profits  to  these  aircraft  companies,  with  little  invest-
ment  and  practically  no  risk,"  he  disclosed  indignantly,  "in-
creased  last  year,  though  total  sales  were  less  than  the  preced-
ing  year."   He  said testimony taken by the  subcommittee  in  the
past  three  years  showed  "great  waste",   and   "great  duplica-
tion."   He  warned,  "The   records  show  we  are  rapidly  tying
our  domestic  economy  to  the  military,  which  has  always  been
a  threat  to the  safety  of  any nation.  History  shows," he  added,
"that  in  Germany and  Japan  and  every  other  major  country,
whenever  the  domestic  economy  got  tied  to  the  military,  it  has
led to war."
This  dissenter  ended   by  recalling  that  five  years  ago  the
Chief  of  the  National  Production  Authority  "told  me privately
that  if  he  were  Joe  Stalin  and  wanted  to  wreck  the  economy
of  the  United  States,  he  would  declare  five years of  peace"  be-
cause  the  loss  of  military  spending  would  create  a  major  de-
pression.   "If  that  30  percent  extra  effort  due  to  war  and  the
preparedness  for  defense  is the  basis  for  our  material  prosper-
ity,"  this  dissenter  pleaded,   "then  why  not  continue  to  put
forth  that  30  percent  extra  effort,  not  in  needless  waste which
leaves  us  a  poorer  country  but  in  work  that  will  improve  our
country?   Why  can't  we  put  forth  that  extra  effort  in reforest-
ing  our  lands, harnessing  our  streams for  electricity, reclaiming
our  lands  through  soil  conservation  and  in  those  things  that
make  our  country  richer  and  better?"
It  Wasn't   Upton  Sinclair
Whose  name was  signed  to  this  moving  appeal ?  Not  Wal-
ter  Reuther  or  Upton   Sinclair  or  Alvin  Hansen   or  Reinhold
Niebuhr  or  Jerry  Voorhis  or  Arthur  M.  Schlesinger,  Jr.,  or
Robert  R. Nathan  or  Max  Lerner  or  Alex  Rose  or  Max  Zarit-
sky.  Their  names  were  signed  to  the  ADA  manifesto  of  the
59  in  uncritical  support  of  the  President's  budget,  its  swollen
military  estimates  included.  The  signer  of  this  "dissent"  was a
Democratic  Congressman  from  benighted  Mississippi, James  L.
Whitten,  a senior  member  of  the  powerful  conservative  House
Appropriations  Committee.   It  is a  melancholy  day  for  Amer-
ican  liberalism  when  its  leading  spokesmen  act  as  a  sounding
board  for  the  military budget  makers while  it  is  left  to  a  con-
servative  Mississippi  Democrat   to  say  what  Reuther,  Upton
Sinclair  or  Alvin Hansen  would  have  had  said  a few  years  ago.
Their  silence  today  reflects  the  vast  and  inhibiting  shadow
cast   across  American  life  by  the   sheer   size  of   the  military
budget.   Labor  as  well  as  capital  now  depends  upon  it,  and
labor  leaders, too,  would  rather  acquiesce  in  the  arms  race  than
risk  unemployment.  The  colleges  and  a  whole  stratyf  of  intel-
lectuals  live  off  the  search  for  ever  more  ingenious  weapons.
The  race  for  the  ultimate  destroyer  has  created  a  market  for
brains;  mathematicians  and  physicists  are  at  a  premium.   The
intellectuals,   like   the   capitalists   and   the   labor   leaders,   are
loath  to  bite  the  hand  that  feeds  them.   In  addition,  for  a lib-
eral,  who  has  in  his  time  signed  30 round  robins  and  joined  a
half  dozen  organizations  long  dead  but  now  suspect,  criticism
of  military budget  and  the  arms  race  is an  occupational  hazard.
He  might  be  accused  of  being  "soft  on  communism."
Bundle  Orders  of   This  Issue  Can  Be  Obtained  by  Peace  Groups  at  Reduced  Rates
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name      .....................................................•..••....—••••—•—••••••—••
Street    .......................................................................................
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .........................................................
5/27/57
Street
City   ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mond
»=•">•'  »-ery  Thursday  except  tbe  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington 15,
Independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by   I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
«5  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.    Air  Hall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Alia  and  Africa.
An
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED