I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957dec02.pdf

============================================================

Dr.  Teller:  Scientist  But  Not  Sage,  P.  2
Neglected  Text:  An  Asian  Views  the  Forthcoming   NATO  Meeting  With  Dismay,  See  Page  4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  V,  NO.  46DECEMBER  2,   1957i'°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Billions  to  Produce  Missiles,  But  What  About   Brains?
If  this  were  a  sane  and  sensible  capital,  it  would  be  devot-
ing  at  least  as much  attention to  the  deficiencies  of  our  schools
as  to  the  lag  in  our  missiles  program.   The  missiles we  turn
out  now  will  admittedly  be  obsolete   in  a  few  years  but  the
schools   will  determine  the  kinds   of   minds  which  will   be
operating   in  our  country  a  generation  hence.    Yet  there  are
no   glamorous   investigations  on   Capitol   Hill   dealing  with
schools  and  the  warning  signals  go  unheeded.   No  one  issues
subpoenas   for   the   officials   responsible   for   that   report   on
Soviet  education  whose  vital  omissions  we   tevealed   in   our
issue  of  November  18.   The  story  broke  into  the  press  sev-
eral  days  later  when  the  original  author  of  the  report,   Mrs.
Eleanor  S.  Lowman,  sent  out  a  letter  protesting   the  way  in
which   it  had   been   mishandled.   Even  then   the   New    York
Times  story   (Nov.   21)   managed—as  did  the   report  when
released—to  omit  the  two  features  of  the  Soviet  system  which
most  need  to  be  imitated  if  we  are  to  correct  our  own  deficien-
cies:  the  higher  salaries  for  teachers  and  the  fact  that  Soviet
higher  education  is  not  only  free  but  most  students  are  paid
while  they  go  to  college.   These  persistent  omissions  are  the
Freudian  slips  of  a  society  ready  to  spend  billions on  missiles
but  not  on  schools.
Business  Handouts  Inadequate
The  archetype  of  this  mentality  was  evident   when  former
President   Hoover   spoke  to  the  United   Engineering  Societies
in  New  York.    The  nearest  he  allowed   himself  to  come  to
the  crux  of  our  educational  problem   was  when  he  said  cau-
tiously,   "We   are  also  told  that  the   cost   of  training   in  our
universities  and  technical  schools  has  risen  beyond  the  reach
of   sufficient   numbers  for   the  national  supply.   That   is  also
true,  and  industry  is  striving  generously  to  remedy  the  situa-
tion."   These  are  the  deceptions   fostered  by  the  U.  S.  Cham-
ber  of  Commerce.   The  President's   Committee  on  Education
Beyond  the  High  School  reported   last  July  that  the   differen-
tial  between  college  teacher  salaries  and  comparable   levels  in
industry  represented   an  $800,000,000  a  year  hidden   faculty
subsidy  to  higher  education—eight  times  as  large  as the  $100,-
000,000   a   year   received   in   gifts   from   corporations.    The
dimensions  of  our  educational  problem   are  so  large  they  can
only  be  solved  by  the  Federal  government.    But  solution  con-
tinues  to  be  blocked  by  the  Administration's   insistence   that
education   is  primarily  a  local  and  State  matter,  and  that  the
universities  should  look  to  big  business  for   handouts.
If  America  a  half  century  hence  is  not  to  fall  back  techno-
logically  in  peaceful  competition   with  the  Soviet  bloc,  major
steps  must  be  taken  now.   The  three  main  weakpoints  are  the
teacher  shortage,  the  rural  schools  and  the  growing  cost  of  a
higher  education.    A  year  ago  the  National  Education   Asso-
ciation  estimated  a  shortage  of  122,000  teachers  and  reported
that  840,000   school  children  are  being  deprived  of   full-time
instruction   due  to  the   shortage   of   teachers  and   classrooms.
The  South  and  the  rural  areas  generally,  particularly  under-
privileged  minorities  like the  Negroes  and  the  Mexican  Amer-
icans,  represent  human  wastelands  where  much  talent  is  lost
forever.    A  recent  study  showed  that  half  our  high   schools
have  less  than  seven  teachers, and  more  than  half  do  not   offer
courses   in   physics  and   chemistry.    A   Joint    Congressional
Atomic  Energy  subcommittee  last   March   estimated   that   80
percent  of  the  U.  S.  potential  in  scientists  and  engineers  was
never  realized  because  of  inadequate high  school preparation
and  lack  of   facilities.
Not  the  Amount, But  Supply and  Demand
The  Soviet  education  report  shows  that  when  the  U.S.S.R.
wants  more  teachers  or  technicians,  it  solves  the  problem   not
by  compulsion  (as  we  are  led  to  imagine)   but   in  the   old-
fashioned  supply-and-demand  way  by  offering  higher  student
stipends  and  wages.    This  is  the  solution  to  our  No.  1  prob-
lem—the  teacher  shortage.   Whereas  the  average  number  of
elementary-secondary  pupils  per  teacher  in  the  Soviet  Union
has   fallen   from   33.1   in   1927-28   to   17.1   in   1955-56,   the
average  here  is  26.9  per  teacher.   It  was  a  vivid  commentary
on  the  causes  of  this  to  read   in  last  Sunday's  Hearst   press
(Nov.   24),   "Recent  aircraft  plant  cutbacks  in  the  Los  An-
geles   area  eased   the   local   teacher  shortage.    Teachers   came
back  to  school  from  better  paying  factory   jobs."
The  Federal  government  ought  to  begin  spending  at   least
as  much  on  schools  as  it  is  spending  on  missiles,  that  is  about
three  billion  a  year.   But  only  the  military,  in  the  name  of
defense,  and  in  the  pursuit of  new  methods  of  vaster  destruc-
tion  and   swifter   annihilation  seem  to   command   the   power
to  obtain  such  sums  from  Congress.   A  cynic  might  be  led  to
conclude  that  our  educational  problem   can  only  be  solved  if
we  hand  the  schools  over  to  the  Pentagon  and  let  the  output
of  scientists  and  engineers  be  handled  on  contract (  preferably
cost  plus)   with  private  industry.   If   there   were   a   General
Dynamics,  a  Boeing,  a  Curtiss-Wright,  in  education,  their  men
would   be  lining  up   Senators   and   Congressmen   for   higher
appropriations.   There  would  be  a  Symington  and  a  Jackson
constantly  harrying  the  Defense   Department   to  spend   more
on   education.    There  would   be  investigations   and   exposes.
Great  corporations,  operating  verticle  trusts  from  the  kinder-
garten  to  the  graduate  school,   would  be  combing   backward
areas  for  human  raw  material  and  the  professor  would   attain
new  eminence   once   dividends  were   dependent   on   him.    A
school  lobby  like  our  aviation  lobby  could  make  us  a  race  of
intellectual  giants  in  a  generation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 8,1957
The  Perfect  Scientist  to  Fit  the  Pentagon's  Preconceptions
"The   Father  of The  H-Bomb"  Opens  the  Johnson  Hearings
The  Johnson  hearings  promise  only  to  deepen  the  national
confusion.    This   is  an   investigation   which   starts  with   the
very  assumptions  which  need  to  be  investigated.  The  assump-
tions  are  that  the  answer  to  Sputnik  and  the  Soviet  ICBM  is
to  develop  swifter  and  more  destructive weapons  of  our  own;
that  the  path  to  peace  lies  in  stepping  up  world  tension  with
a  swifter  arms  race  and  a  tighter   noose  of  bases  around  the
Soviet  Union;  and  that  a  sane  world  can  somehow  be main-
tained  by diverting an  ever  greater  share  of  national  resources
into  new  electronic  monsters  of  destruction.
The  first  witness was well  chosen  to  reinforce these assump-
tions.   To  be known  as  "the  father  of  the  H-bomb"   seems  to
us  as  horrible  as to  be known  as  "the  mother  of  mustard  gas"
or  "the  inventor  of  the  crematorium"  except  that  the  H-bomb
will  destroy,  cremate  and  torture  on  a  far  greater  scale.   Dr.
Teller  does  not  seem  to  mind  his  soubriquet.   He  is  a  model
of   the  kind  of   scientists  we  really  like,  men  who  combine
great  technical  genius  with  the  same  amorality  as  our  military
and  the  same  cold  war  stereotypes  as  our  politicians.
More Primitive  Than Sage
The   wise  man  might  ask  himself,   "Why   do  men  hate?
Why   do   they   fight?   Why   are  they   impelled   to  kill   each
other?   How  can  we  straighten  out  their  natures?   How  can
we  find  the  ultimate  weapon  against  the  ultimate  enemy—
the  enemy  which  lurks  in  each  man's  heart,  the  hatred  of  his
brother?"
But  this  Dr.  Teller  is  no  sage.   He  is  half  scientist,  half
primitive,  fabricating  more  ingenious  clubs  to   carry  on   the
old  interminable  warfare.   In  his  thick,  almost  incomprehen-
sible  Hungarian  German  accent,  he  held  the  Johnson   com-
mittee  respectfully  entranced—the  perfect  witness  for  its  pur-
poses,   challenging   none  of   its  own   thoughtless   preconcep-
tions.   Spend  more  to  kill  more  was  his  message  as  it  is  the
committee's   approach.
Unthinking  wickedness was implicit  in  what  Dr.  Teller  had
to  tell  the  Committee  as  in  what  he  told  Ed  Murrow  the  day
before  on  See It  Now.   To  speak  of  Sputnik  as  a  "Pearl  Har-
bor,"   to  say that  the  emergency  is  greater  than  World   War
II,  is the worst kind  of  nonsense,  to  condition  the  public  mind
for  the  war  we  ought  all  to  be  trying  to  avoid.
Pearl  Harbor  was  an  attack.   We  have  not  been  attacked.
World  War  II  was the  greatest  contest  in  slaughter  the  world
has  yet known.   We  are  not  at  war.   Until  there  has  been  an
Slight  Confession
"Air  Force  officials  say,  however,   that  while  it  would
be  desirable   to   build   the   Warren   ICBM  base   under-
ground,  it  was  difficult  to  justify  the  increased  cost  at
this   time   under   the   tight   budget,   particularly    since
there  is  no  exact  knowledge   now  of  just  how  such  a
base  should  be  built."
—Washington  Post,  Nov.  23,  "Costs  Force  Shift   in
Plan  to  Put  First  ICBM  Base   Underground."
attack,  until  there  is war,  there  is  always a  chance  to  avoid  it,
if  we  wish  to,  and  it  is  the  possibility  of  avoiding  war  and
the  unparalleled  horror  of  the  next  war  which  need  to  be
emphasized.
Basic Problem  Not  Technological
The  basic  problems  in  avoiding  that  war  are  not  scientific
nor   technological.    They   are   political   and   diplomatic   and
ethical.   What  George  F.  Kennan  had  to  say  in  the  third  of
his  BBC  lectures  in  England  makes  more  sense  that  all   the
discussion  here  like  Dr.  Teller's—for  the  latter,  after  all,  is
not  much  more  than  the  beating  of  torn  toms.
The  first  step,  as  Kennan  advocates  it,  is  to  separate   the
two  main  contenders,  to  disengage  them,  to  put  a  space  be-
tween   them,  to  let  humanity  breathe   again.    Mutual   with-
drawal,  neutralization of  Germany,  this  is  the  path  toward  the
liberation  of  Europe from  our  recklessness  and  Soviet  rigidity.
The  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  mutual  terror  is  coming  apart
at  the  seams.   Krushchev  thinks  communism  would  survive  a
new  war  and  Dr.   Teller,  as  is  clear  from  the   box   below,
thinks  capitalism  could  survive.   Both  sides  are  drifting  into
an   attitude  of   mind   which   accepts   the   possibility  of   war,
begins  to  think  it  inevitable.
Those  who  read  Dr.  Teller's  testimony  will  see  for  them-
selves  the  questions  the  Committee  failed  to  ask.  What  hap-
pens  to  the  rest  of  mankind  as  poisonous   clouds  of   fallout
circle  the  globe?   What  will  happen  to  the  lands  in  between
as  the  two  monster  powers  fight?  How  do  we  organize  food
supply,  life  itself,  with  cities  crippled   perhaps  forever,   with-
out  phones,  trains,  gasoline,   fuel,  and  millions  dying?
We  have  assumed  that  only  a  madman  would  start  a  ther-
monuclear  war.   But  history  warns  us  there  have  been   such
madmen.   Indeed  the  Teller  testimony  shows  we  have   them
among  us.
Nothing Like A  Scientist  for  Balanced  and  Humane Views
Or  How  to  Kill  About  200  Million  People  While  We  Only  Lose   100 Million
"Of  course,   immediately   below   a  powerful    bomb   or   in
the  immediate  neighborhood  of  a  bomb,  you  may  find  there
is  not  very  much  you  can  do  unless  you  go  to  really  terrific
expense.  .  .  .  Most  of  the  damage  of  the  bomb ...  is  done
by  the fire storm  .  .  .  this fire  storm  is  likely  to  claim  more
victims  than  anything  else  .  .  .  how  to  get  a  system  of
shelters  which   can  withstand  the  fire  storm  where  people
can  go  and  stay   for  the   hours   while  this  fire  storm   is
raging,  and  be  supplied  with  the  necessities  including  air
[is  difficult].  .  .  .
"We  have  great  stores  of   food  supplies  which  we   con-
sider  a  nuisance.   In  time  of  war  these  food  supplies  .  .  .
may  be a life-saver  . .  .  take  this  food  supply  and distribute
it  in  such  a  way  that  it  should  be  safe  from  fall-out,  out
of  the  range  of  immediate  probable  targets. ...  A  country
where  the  masses  are  starving,  as  Russia,  I  think  will  be
in  a  very   difficult   position  to  match   us  along  this  purely
defensive  line.  .  .  .
"We  might  be  able  within  a  few  years  to  put  ourselves
into  a  position  where  the  Russians  can  hit  us  badly  but  not
so  badly  but  that  we  can  recover,  and  at  the  same  time  we
shall  be  able  to  retaliate  in  such  a  way  that  they  won't  be
able  to  recover."
—Dr. Edward  Teller,  at  the Johnson  Committee  Hearings.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 2,1957
While  the  Soviet  Bloc  Drifts  Back   Toward  Stalinism,  We  Move  Further  from  McCarthyism
Supreme Court Agrees to Hear Passport  Appeals; Dr. Otto Nathan Acquitted
In  one  important  respect  at  least  the  United  States  is  doing
better  than  the  Soviet  bloc.   The  "thaw"  in  the  civil  liberties
field  is  proceeding  here  but  freezing  up  there.   The  resigna-
tion  of  some of  Poland's  leading  writers from  her  Communist
party  in  protest  against  dwindling  liberties  of  expression,  the
savage  sentences  imposed  in  Hungary  on  some  of  her   fore-
most  writers,  and  the  Stalin-like  way  Krushchev  has  begun
to  lecture  the  writers  of  the  Soviet  Union   are   foreboding.
While  they  move  back  toward  the  standards  of  Stalinism,  we
at  least  can  boast  of  a  steady movement  away  from  McCarthy-
ism.
The  most  important  news  in  this  area  on  our  side  is  the
Supreme  Court's  agreement   to  hear  the  Rockwell  Kent  and
Dr.  Walter  Briehl passport  appeals.   This will be the first time
the  Court  has  passed  on  the  political  restrictions  which  the
State Department  since World  War  II  has begun  to  impose on
travel  abroad.
In  neither  case did  the  State  Department  ever  allege  reason
to  believe  the  applicant  was  going  abroad  for  any  improper
purpose.   Rockwell  Kent,  the  famous  artist,  asked  for  a  pass-
port  to  paint  abroad.   Dr.  Walter  Briehl,  a  well  known  Los
Angeles  psychiatrist, was  given  a  passport  in  1953  to  attend
a  mental  health  congress;  two  years  later,  when  he  applied
for  renewal  to  attend  similar  meetings  in  Geneva  and  Istan-
bul,  his  application  was  rejected.   Both  men  refused  to  sign
non-Communist  affidavits.
Is the Dept. Above  the Law?
One  of  the  questions  raised  in  the  appeal  is  whether  the
State  Department  can  go  on  ignoring  the  decisions  of  lower
courts.   The  Court  of  Appeals,  in  the  Dr.  Otto  Nathan   case
in  1955,  and  on  five  other  occasions  since,  has  directed  the
Department   to  grant  quasi-judicial  hearings  to  passport  ap-
plicants  but  to  no  avail.
"The   'hearings'  afforded   under  the  regulations,"  says  the
petition  to  the  Supreme  Court,  "are  still  based  upon  unsworn
broad  'allegations'  which  the  Secretary  recites  without   adopt-
ing.  His  agents  produce  no  evidence  against  the  applicant  but
choose  instead  to  examine  him  under  oath  as  to  his  political
associations  and  opinions.   The  decision  of  the  Passport   Of-
fice  is  based  upon  secret  reports  which,  in  turn,  are  based
upon  secret  informants,  of  whose  name  and  veracity  the  De-
partment  often  has  no   knowledge."
A Defeat for  Chairman  Walter
In   this,  connection  it  is  a  pleasure  to  record  the   directed
acquittal   of   Dr.   Otto  Nathan   whom   Chairman  Walter  of
the  House  Committee   set  out  to  punish  for  his  temerity   in
winning  a  passport  from  the  State  Department.   Dr.  Nathan,
who  is Einstein's  executor,  refused  on  principle to  say whether
he  was  a  Communist  or  whether   the  non-Communist  pass-
port  affidavit  he  filed  with  State  Department  was   truthful.
Dr.  Nathan  was  convicted  of  contempt  on  April  30  last.
But  on  June  17  the  Supreme  Court  handed  down  its  historic
decision   in  the  Watkins  case  which  cuts  the  ground   from
under   the   Walter   committee.    His   lawyers   petitioned    the
District  Court  to  reverse  that  conviction  in  the  light  of  the
Watkins  decision  and  Federal  Judge  Edward  M.  Curran  did
Recommended
Howard  Fast's  The  Naked  God:  a  picture,  drawn  in
agony  of  the  American   Communist   party  as  seen  from
the  inside,  by  its  once  leading  writer,  disillusioned  by
Krushchev,   disappointed  by  the  failure  of  internal  re-
form,   and  sick   at   heart   as   he   finally  realized   what
writers   were  up  against  in  the  Soviet  bloc  where  the
penalties  are  more  severe.   A  useful  reminder  to   pro-
gressives  that  while  it  is  essential  to  defend  the  rights
of   Communists  it   is  also  important   to  prevent   them
from   again  occupying  a  position  of  leadership  in  the
American   Left.   "Whatever  the  Communist   party  once
was,"   Fast  concludes,  "today  it  is  a  prison  for  man's
best  and  boldest  dreams.   Tomorrow   belongs  to  those
who   break    down   the   prison   walls   that   enclose   the
minds  of  men,  not  to  those  who  support  such  walls."
so,  though—as  he  said—"reluctantly."   This  was  the  first  re-
versal  of  its  kind  by a  District  Judge  but  it  will  not  be  the
last.
The  Lament  Case
Restrictions  on  travel  are  dying  out  with  the  House  Com-
mittee.   The  State  Department  is  trying  its  best  to  keep  it  a
secret  but  in  at  least   one  case—that  of  a  Quaker   and   his
family   bound   for   India—it   backed  down  when   a   passport
applicant  refused  to  sign  a  non-Communist  affidavit.   This  is
one  of  the  reasons   for  the  petition  filed  here  last  week  by
Corliss  Lamont  through   his  attorneys,  Leonard   Boudin   and
Harry  Rand,  asking  the  Federal  court's  permission  to  take  a
deposition   from   Secretary  Dulles  and  his  chief  passport  of-
ficial,  Miss  Frances   Knight.
Lamont,  who  is  challenging   the   non-Communist   affidavit
requirements,  wants to  ask  Mr.  Dulles  and  Miss  Knight  (1)
whether  they  have  given  others  a  passport  without  requiring
the   affidavit   and   (2)    whether   they  have  any  information
which  would  give  them  a  basis  even  by their  own  regulations
to  bar  Lamont  from  travel  abroad.
Tom Clark on the  Distastefulness of  Informing
Another   sign   of  the  lightening   political   atmosphere   was
the  Supreme  Court's  decision  last  Monday  in  the  Yates  case.
Oleta  O'Connor  Yates,  a  California  Communist  official,  was
found  guilty  of  contempt  and  sentenced  to  a  year  in  jail  on
eleven  counts  for  refusing  to  inform  on  others   during  her
Smith  Act  trial  in  1952.   The  Court  split.   Douglas,  Warren
and  Black  dissented  on  the  ground  that  her  imprisonment  for
70  days during  the  trial  for  civil  contempt  made  it  improper
also  to  punish  her  for  criminal  contempt  and   to  treat  each
refusal  to  inform  as  a  separate  count.
The   majority,   speaking  through   Mr.   Justice  Tom   Clark,
agreed  that  each  refusal   could  not  be  treated  as  a   separate
contempt  but  upheld  the  criminal  conviction.   However,  the
majority  regarded  the  sentence  as too  severe and  remanded   for
resentencing  by  the  trial  judge  "in  the  cool  reflection  of  sub-
sequent  events."   It  is  worth  noting  that  the  majority  spoke
of   her  "understandable  reluctance  to  be  an  informer"   as  a
factor   to   be  taken   into  account   in   reducing  her   sentence,
though   "legally   insufficient"   for   its  reversal.   Coming   from
the  pen  of  Tom  Clark,  this  is  indicative  and  memorable.
1   8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 2,1957
Neglected  Text:  The  Indonesian   Ambassador   Wonders  Why  We  Are  So  Panicky  Over  Sputnik
An  Asian  Views  the  Forthcoming NATO  Meeting  in  Paris  With  Dismay
This  is  an  abridged text  of  a  speech  the  Indonesian  Am-
bassador   delivered  in  Washington  Nov.  21  to  the  Confer-
ence   on   American   Library   Resources  in   Southern   Asia.
It  received scant  attention  in  our  cold  war  press.
"Asians  are  somewhat  confused  when  they  observe  that  the
knowledge   of   the   atom   becomes  not   a  matter  for   scientific
exchange  among  the  nations  of  the  world,  not  for  raising  the
standard   of   living,   nor   developing   the   mental  resources  of
the  world,   but  instead  is  devoted  almost  exclusively  to   the
service  of  destruction.
"Observe   what  has  occurred  within  the  month.   It  is  ap-
palling  that  the  moon  has  lost  its  romantic status  and  instead
has  become   a  way  station  in  man's  headlong  and  senseless
rush  to  annihilate himself.   Is  world  leadership to  come  from
a  civilization  which  views  the  moon  as  a  prize  of  war  to  be
used   as  a  platform   for   unleashing  more   pestilence  on   the
world ?
Almost  In  Panic
"Within   the   past  month   I   have  been   asked  repeatedly,
'What  is  the   effect   of  Sputnik  on  the   people   of  Indonesia?
Will   this  give   the   Asian   people   a   feeling   that   the   Soviet
Union  is  a  greater  military  power,  with  the  result  that  Asian
statesmen  will  be  more  influenced  by  Russian  policy?'  Behind
these  questions  is  a  fear,  almost  a  panic,  on  the  part  of  some
Americans  that  the  recent  show  of  military  might  will  have
a  serious  effect  on  Indonesian  statesman.
"Could  it  be  that  those  who  ask  the  question   about  the
effect   of  these  technological  revolutions  on  the   Asian  view-
point   rely   on   a   militaristic   and    materialistic   narrowness?
When  atomic  energy  was  discovered,  my  countrymen did  not
view  it  as  poised  military  airplanes,  bristling  statesmen,  and
mutual  distrust  among  nations.
A  Potential Blessing
"To  us  it  meant  a  source  of  power,  vital  to  the  welfare  of
an   underdeveloped   country  struggling   to   overcome   the  im-
balance  of  a  colonial  economy.   To  us  it  meant  electricity  in
the  far   reaches   of  our   islands,   where   families   still  live  by
candlelight.   To  us  it  meant  overcoming  a  negative  food  bal-
'To  Calif.   Readers:  Please  Help  Make  Los  Angeles  and
I. F.  Stone Speaking  in  Calif.
San  Francisco:  Pri. Dec.  13, First  Unitarian Church,
auspices,  I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.
Los  Angeles:  Tues.  Dec.  17, Music  Box Theatre,  7080
Hollywood     Blvd.,    auspices   Women   for    Legislative
Action.
Subject:  The  Real  Challenge  of  Sputnik.  $1.
ance,  and  it  meant  bringing health  to  a  country  whose  death
rate  under  colonial rule was  the  highest  in  the  world.
"We  see  now  that  the  announcement  by  the  Soviet  Union
of   their  launching  of   their  earth   satellite—Sputnik—causes
consternation   and  apprehension  among  the  Western  nations
and  the  leaders  of  the  Western  Powers  are  to  go  to  Paris  for
the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  meeting.
"But  it  seems  that  they  are  attempting  to  meet  this   fresh
technological   challenge   through   better  military  preparedness.
It   is  this   military  approach  designed   to   reestablish  interna-
tional   prestige  that   terrifies   the   people   of   Asia.    Even   the
term  'crash  program'  has  an  ominous  sound  to  my  country-
men.    I  believe  that  most  of  the   people  of   the  world   have
confidence   in  the  advancement  of  science  and  technology  in
the  United  States and  her  ability  to  meet  this  challenge,  with-
out  overemphasizing the  military  aspects  of  such  a  challenge.
Needed: A Crash  Program for Peace
"May  I  suggest  that  what  the  world  needs  is  a  'crash  pro-
gram'  for  peace.   Why   is  it  not   possible   for   the  leaders   of
nations  to  accept  a  more  philosophical  and  spiritual  approach
to  this  new  scientific  achievement?   I  suggest  a  conference  of
the  leaders  of  the  world   today.   At  this  meeting   should   be
President  Eisenhower, Mr.  Krushchev,  Prime  Minister  Nehru
and   President   Sukarno,   as  well   as  the  great  spiritual   and
religious  leaders  of  the  world.
"We  accept  the  fact  nowadays that  there  are  nations  having
different   points   of   view   and   ideologies   on   many   subjects.
But   it   is  becoming  increasingly  apparent   that,   in   order   to
prevent  the  annihilation   of  mankind,   such  nations  must  find
some  formula  for   co-existence."
San  Francisco  Meetings  A  Success  by  Alerting   Friends
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,
renew  (or  enter)
......................
gift  sub  for
we  send  gift
.......
$4
.....
(1
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
......2
yr.)
Ion
or
$2  (6
.................. .Zone.........
announcement?
...State
mos.)
...State
Yes  C
.................
additional
32/2/5
No
D
7  .
I.F.  Stones  Weekly
5618  Nebraskc  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   independent  weekly  published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  iu  the   TJ. S.;  *6  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $J!>  to  Europe:  ?2>:  to  Israel.  Asia  tnd   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED