I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957mar04.pdf

============================================================

/   Edgar  Hoover's  Attack  on ''Pseudo-Liberals",  P. 2
Inside  Story;  State  Dept.  and  U.S.  Oil Companies  Hostile  to  Israeli  Pipeline  Project,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  9MARCH  4, 1957
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The   Last  Stand  of  Low  Blow  Joe
The   first  member  of   the   Senate  Judiciary   Committee  to
arrive  for   the  Brennan  hearing  was  its  chairman,  Senator
Eastland,  resplendent   in  a  new  suit  of  brown  Harris  tweeds,
his  strong  jaws  clamped fiercely on  a  big  50-cent cigar. Rob-
ert   Morris,   counsel   of   the   Internal   Security  subcommittee
came along  soon after,  interrupting the  hard  casuistical wrestle
he  had  begun  the  day  before  to  determine  whether  Eugene
Dennis  was  still  a  Marxist-Leninist  or  had  lapsed  into  Buk-
harinism.  McCarthy,  fresh  shaven,  slipped  in  a  few  minutes
later,  taking a  seat  low  down on  the  commitee table,  and  grin-
ning  with  delight  as  the  movie  cameras  again  whirred  over
him.    Room  424  Senate  Office   Building,  the  Judiciary  Com-
mittee  hearing  room,  with  chairs for  scarcely three  score visi-
tors  and  only  two  small  press  tables  was  a  come-down  from
the  great  caucus room  on  the  third floor where McCarthy  had
battled  the  Army.  But  Joe  looked  like  an  old  trouper  who
had  finally  got  an  engagement  again;  the  standees  were  three
rows  deep;  the  room  was  like  a  Turkish  bath;  the  fall  guy
was  a  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  nominee;  it  looked   like  Joe's
chance  for  a  come-back in  the  headlines.
Had  He  Dared  Speak  of  Salem  Witch  Hunts?
Three  weeks earlier McCarthy had  failed  miserably to  block
the  nomination of  J.  David  Zelierbach  as  Ambassador  to  Italy
by  exposing  him  on  the  Senate  floor  as  a  former  director  of
the  Fund  for  the  Republic.   McCarthy  accused  the  Fund  of
trying  to  "discredit  any  committee  which  attempts  to  disclose
(sic)  Communists,"  but  the  Senate nevertheless  confirmed the
appointment  by  voice  vote.   Now   McCarthy  was  before  a
smaller  and  more  favorable forum,  or  at  least  so  he  had rea-
son  to  believe.  With  Eastland  in  the  chair  and  Senators Jen-
ner  and  Butler-on  the  other  side  of  the  table  for  moral sup-
port,  McCarthy went  into  the  old act.  In  that  flat  remorseless
metallic voice  "The Investigator"  preserves  for  posterity,  Mc-
Carthy  said  the  Supreme  Court  in  a  number  of  cases  soon  to
come  before  it  would  decide  "whether   Congress  will  be  able
to  pursue  its  investigations  of  Communism."   He  thought   it
important  "for the  American  people  to  know"  if  the  judges
"are  predisposed  against  Congressional  investigations  of  Com-
munism.".   He  said  that  he  wanted  to  learn  if  the  new  ap-
pointee  to  the  Supreme  Court  had  referred  to  Congressional
investigations  as  "Salem  witch  hunts"  and  "inquisitions"  and
had  accused  Congressional  committees  of   "barbarism."
All  the  old  tricks  were  on  display.   There  was  the  studied
discourtesy;  he  constantly referred  to  "Mr." Brennan,  though
Brennan  was sworn  in  last  fall  as a  U.  S. Supreme  Court Jus-
tice.   There was the  fake  drama.   McCarthy  had  "evidence."
The  evidence  "came  from  the  mouth  of  Judge  Brennan."  The
phrasing  implied  that  it  had  been  painfully  extracted.   It  was
only  the  heckling  from  Senator  O'Mahoney  which  finally  de-
3  *
Mr.  Justice  Brennan  Proved  Prophetic
"The   abuses took  on  modern  dress—not  the  rack  and
the  screw,  but  the  distorted  version of  the happenings
at  secret  hearings  released  to  the  press,  the  shouted
epithet  at  the hapless and helpless victim.  And  woe be-
tide  him  who  cried  protest  at  this  perversion of   the
legislative  inquiry!   He  was  thrust  in  the  mold  of  a
sympathizer  with  and  protector  of  those  who  plead  the
Fifth  amendment."
—Speech  by  Mr,  Justice  William  J.  Brennan,  Jr., in
Red  Bank,  N.  J., Feb.  25, 1955, to  the  Monmouth
County  Rotary  Clubs.
flated  this.   The  "evidence"  consisted  of  copies  furnished  Mc-
Carthy  by Mr.  Justice Brennan of  two  speeches  he  had  made.
One  was a  St.  Patrick's Day  address  to  the  Boston  Charitable
Irish  Society  in  1954; the  other  was  in  February,  1955.  Mc-
Carthy  did  his best  in the  familiar  style to  make it  appear  that
the  latter  was  an  address  at  Fort  Monmouth,  perhaps  to  an
assembly  of  those  very  subversives he  was  laboring  so hard  to
expose  at  that  time.  Mr.  Justice Brennan, a  short  round  faced
pleasant  looking  man, pointed  out  with  some  asperity that  the
speech  was at Red Bank,  N.  J.,  not  Fort  Monmouth,  and  to a
gathering  of  the  Monmouth  County  Rotary  Club.
Undecided  on   Satan's  Power?                                                               -.    .     ;
In  the  Inquisition  the  first  cause for  suspicion  was to  doubt
the  need  for  the  Holy  Office,  the  second  to  seem  skeptical  of
the Devil's  all-pervading  power.   It was to  these  two  questions
in  their  contemporary form  that  McCarthy  addressed  himself.
"Mr.  Brennan,"  McCarthy  began  his  interrogation,   "do  you
approve  of  Congressional  investigation   to  expose  the  Com-
munist   conspiracy?"   Mr.   Justice  Brennan   passed   this   one
easily.   He  not  only  approved  but  could  think  of  no  more  im-
portant   function.   But  at  the   second   question,   the  Justice
balked.   Would  he  agree,  McCarthy  asked,  that  the  Commu-
nist  party  was  not  just  a  political  party 'but  a  conspiracy  ta
overthrow  the  American way  of  life?   The  Justice  explained,
in  obvious  reference  to  the  pending  test  of  the  Internal  Se-
curity  Act  in  the  Communist  party  registration  case,  that  his
oath  of  office  forbade him  to  answer  questions  now  before  the
- court.   McCarthy felt  he  had  his  victim hooked,  and  proceeded
to  make him  sweat by  asking  the  same  question  several  times
more  in  slightly  different  forms.   Finally  McCarthy  sneerqd,
. "I'd  like  to  know  whether  the  young  man  agrees  with  the
Daily  Worker  and  all  the  Communist  line  papers",  to  which,
the  Justice still  replied  stubbornly, "I  cannot venture  any  com-!
ment  on  matters before the  court."
Justice Brennan  might  have  held  out  against  frontal  assault
by  McCarthy  but  began  to  give  way  when  Senator  O'Ma-
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, March i, 1957
Judge  Medina  Would  Seem  To Be  As  Suspect  By  This  Standard  as  Mr.  Justice  Brennan
J. Edgar Runs Interference for McCarthy With An Attack on "Pseudo-Liberals"
Two  speeches  on  Washington's   Birthday  provided  back-
ground,  one sinister,  the  other  ironic, for  McCarthy's  attack
on  Mr. Justice  Brennan.  The former  was  made  by  J.  Edgar
Hoover  at  the  Freedom  Foundation annual  awards  at  Valley
Forge.  The  latter  was  by  Judge   Harold  R.  Medina  of  the
Federal   Court  of  Appeals  for  the  Third' Circuit.
Mr.  Hoover's  speech  was  an  attack  on  what  he  calls  the
"pseudo-liberals,"  a  term  he  did  not  define.   He  is  not  pre-
pared  to  call  them  crypto-Communists  since  he  himself   ad-
mits  grudgingly,  "To  be  sure,  the  pseudo-liberals  proclaim
themselves  as  anti-Communist."   But  some  of  them,  in   his
opinion, merely  "seek  the  pseudo-liberal  cloak  to  conceal more
sinister   objectives"  and  this  is  "to  curtail  the  Government's
authority  to  defend  our  national  security."
The  FBI  chief  (the  text  of  his  speech  may  be found  in  the
Congressional   Record   for   February   21)   .complained,   "The
pseudo-liberal  has  increasingly  conceived  committees  in  the
name  of  defending  every  freedom,  but  none to  uphold  author-
ity."    Mr.  Hoover  said  these  "pseudo-liberals  have  become  the
ready  tools  of the  Communist conspiracy  and  their  refusal  to
recognize  the  difference  between  the  authority  for  the  com-
mon  good,  and  oppression,  has  aided  in  making  possible  an
era  of  Communist  expansion."
While  Mr.  Hoover  was  speaking  at  Valley  Forge,  Judge
Medina  was  addressing  the  Sons  of  the  Revolution  in  New
York.  "I  would  rather," Judge  Medina said,  "see  every Com-
munist  go  scot  free  than  abandon  or  water  down  or  in  any
way  diminish the  force  and  Vigor  of  a  single  one of  our  preci-
ous  freedoms,  and  this  particular   one  of  which  I  wish   to
speak  is  guaranteed  by  the  Fifth  amendment."
Can  Liberals  Be Authoritarian?
Were  it  anybody else but  the  Judge  who presided  over  our
first  Smith  Act  prosecution  of the  American Communist lead-
ers,  Judge   Medina  would  qualify   as   one  of   Mr.   Hoover's
"pseudo-liberals."   Where  Mr.  Hoover  at  Valley  Forge  called
for  a  "proper  balance between freedom  and authority,"  Judge
Medina  weighted  the  scales  on  the  side  of  freedom  against
authority.   This  is  what  Mr.  Hoover  means  by  a  "pseudo-
liberal."
But  since  the  liberal  tradition  as  it  has  come  down  to  us
from  Milton  and  Jefferson,  Spinoza and  Voltaire,  has  always
exalted   freedom   over   authority,   it   is   clear   that  for   Mr.
Hoover  any  real  liberal  is  a   "pseudo-liberal."
Mr.  Hoover's speech  and  McCarthy's  attack  on  Mr. Justice
Brennan  reflect  the  same  feverish  preconceptions—that  the
country  is  endangered  by  some vague kind  of  a  plot  in  which
people  who  call  themselves  liberals  are  trying  to  undermine
the  country's  power to  combat Communism.  If  Mr.  Hoover  is
right,  then  McCarthy  is  justified,  and  not  only  Mr.  Justice
Brennan  but  even  Judge  Medina  is  properly  suspect.
Mr.  Hoover's  speech  could  not  have  been  timed  better  for
McCarthy's  purpose.   It  provided  a  background  of  that  con-
spirator-around-every-corner  miasma  on  which  McCarthyism
fattened  before, and  could  revive  again.
Benedict  Arnold?  Judas  Iscariot?
"The  confidential  informant   is  more  than  a  valued
ally  of  the  modern  day  law  enforcement agency.  He  is
an  institution,  and  indispensable  part  of  all  walks  of
life.  While  it  is  a  simple  matter  to  trace  the  use  of
informants  back  through the  American Revolution and
into  Biblical  times. . .  ."
—J. Edgar  Hoover, Syracuse  Law  Review, Fall, 1958.
The head  of the  Federal  Bureau  of Investigation,  our  secret
police,  which has  been  extending  its  area  of  political  surveil-
lance  steadily,  shows  himself  to  be—like  McCarthy—a  man
to whom liberals are  prima  facie  suspect.  And like  McCarthy
he  is ready  to cut  corners  to  achieve his  purposes. This is  the
meaning  of  that  talk  about  achieving  a  proper  balance  be-
tween  authority  and  freedom.
Mr.  Hoover and  Confidential  Informants
An  article  by  Mr.  Hoover  in  the  Fall,  1956,  issue  of  the
Syracuse  Law  Review throws further  light  on what  he means.
It  is  called  "The  Confidential  Nature  of  FBI  Reports."
Mr.  Hoover's  article  confuses three  different  questions.  One
is the undoubted right  of the  executive branch  to  keep certain
papers  secret  from  the  legislative.   Another  is  the  ineradica-
ble police practice  of using informants.  The third—the  contro-
versial  one—is  the  growing  practice  of  using  the  testimony
of  informants  in  a  wide  range  of  loyalty  and  security  hear-
ings  involving the right to work and travel without giving ac-
cused persons opportunity to confront and cross-examine them.
Here  again  Mr. Hoover sees  occult forces  at  work.  "Subver-
sive  elements,"  he  wrote  in  the  law  review,  "have  launched
an  intensive  program  of  villification  and  lies  designed  to  dis-
credit  the  entire  concept  of  accepting  information  in   confi-
dence.  It  is  no  small  coincidence that  the  Communist party,
supported  by  its  'dupes'  and  sympathizers,  has   spearheaded
this   campaign."
Mr.  Hoover's  article  would  make  a  better  impression  if  it
admitted  that  informants  are  sometimes,  if  not  often,  unre-
liable  and  that  some  FBI  informers  have  proved  to  be  per-
jurers  or  psychotic.   One  would  never  guess  this  from   his
article, nor that  the real issue  is not the  use of "stoolpigeons"
but  the  habit  of  shielding  them  from   cross-examination   in
many  kinds  of  proceedings  serious  enough  to  blast   people's
livelihood  and  reputation.   Mr.  Hoover  never  faces  up  to  the
issue  of  how  this  can  be  reconciled  with  fair  trial.
How faithfully  Mr. Hoover fellow  travels  the  same route  as
the  Congressional  witch  hunters  is  also  reflected  in  the   tan-
gential  attack  the  FBI  chief  makes  in  his  article  on  John
Cogley  and  the  Fund  for  the  Republic report  on  blacklisting.
The  blacklist  is  the  principal  instrument  of  thought   control,
and  any  attack  upon  it  touches  a  sensitive  nerve.   McCarthy
may  be  defeated,  but  the  McCarthyite  disease  lurks  beneath
the  surface,  entrenched  in  powerful  positions.
A  Reminder  —  What  Hoover  Said  of  McCarthy  When  Joe  Was  Riding High
"McCarthy  is  a  former  Marine.  He was  an  amateur  box-
er.   He's  Irish.  Combine those,  and  you're  going  to  have  a
vigorous  individual, who is  not  going  to  be  pushed  around.
"I'm   not  passing   on  the   technique  of   Mr.   McCarthy's
committee,  or  other  Senate  committees.  That's  the  Sena-
tor's  responsibility.  But  the  investigating  committees  do a
valuable  job.   They  have  subpoena  rights   without  which
some  vital  investigations  could  not  be  accomplished.
"I  never  knew  Senator  McCarthy  until  he  came  to  the
Senate.   I've  come  to  know  him  well,  officially  and   person-
ally.   I  view  him  as  a  friend  and  believe  he  so  views  me.
"Certainly,  he  is  a  controversial  man.  He  is  earnest  and
he  is  honest.   He  has  enemies.   Whenever  you  attack   sub-
versives  of  any  kind, Communists, Fascists,  or  even  the  Ku
Klux  Klan,  you  are  going  to  be  the  victim  of  the  most  ex-
tremely  vicious  criticism  that  can  be  made.
"I  know.  But sometimes a knock  is  a boost. When certain
elements  cease  their  attacks  on  me,  I  know  I'm  slipping."
'. Edgar  Hoover, in  an  interview  August  22, 1953, with  the  San  Diego  Evening  Tribune, when  he  and  McCarthy were
vacationing  at  the  same seaside  hotel in  La  Jolla,  California.    (See  this  Weekly   for  Sept.  5,  195S).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  4,1957
Dulles  Soft-Pedals  Talk  of  Sanctions  to  Speed  Up  Vote  on  Mid-East
To look  down  on the  Senate from  the  gallery  these last  few
days  was  to  look  down  on  a  kind  of  sit-out  strike.   Despite
numerous  quorum  calls,  few  Senators  were  on  the  floor  most
of  the  time  and  the  chamber  by  its  desultory  and  lackadaisi-
cal  air  provided  its  own vivid  commentary  on what  the  Sen-
ate  thinks  of  the  Administration's  plea  that  the  Mid-East
resolution  is urgent.
As  we  went  to  press,  the  strategy  of  White  House  and
State  Department  was to create the  impression  that  the   U.S.
was  moving  away  from  sanctions in  order  to  mollify  the  Sen-
ate  and get it  to pass the  resolution. The  Senate, on the  other
hand,  which  is  overwhelmingly  anti-sanctions,  was stalling  to
see what  Mr.  Dulles  does  on the  issue  at  the  UN.   Mr.  Dulles
is  trying  hard  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  Senate  leader-
ship in order  to speed  a vote.
If  sanctions  come  up  before  the  Mid-East  resolution  has
been  passed,  a bi-partisan  coalition  can  put  an  anti-sanctions
amendment  on the  resolution.  This  is  what  Mr.  Dulles  fears.
One  Way  to  Train  Seals
Majority   Leader   Johnson,   in   his   protest   against
"government  by  leak" in  the  Senate  last  week, attacked
not  only  premature disclosures   but  disclosures  on  the
basis  of  favoritism  to  certain  newspapers.   "I certainly
hope,"  Senator  Johnson  said,   "we  can  devise   a  con-
sistent  method of  operation  that  will  treat  all  members
of  the  press  fairly  and  equitably.  .  .  ."   Behind  these
remarks  lies  the  story  of  one  of  the  ways  in  which  the
State  Department  succeeds  iy  manipulating  the  press.
A  correspondent  who  faithfully  echoes   the  State  De-
partment  line is  rewarded by leaks  and invited to  select
private  briefings  from  which  more  critical  correspond-
ents  are  barred.   If  correspondents  get  too  far  out  of
line,  they  run  the  risk  of  being  scooped  by  more  com-
plaisant competitors.
State  Dept. and  U.S.  Oil  Interests  Opposed to  Israeli Pipeline Bypassing  Suez
A  key  factor   in  the  question   of  guarantees  for  Israel  of
free  passage through  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  is  State  Department
hostility  to  the  idea  of  a  pipeline  from  Elat  to  Haifa   which
would  bypass  Suez.  This  is  the  background  against  which  to
study  the  tortuous  and  evasive  replies  made  by Mr.  Dulles  at
his  press  conference  of  February  19  when   asked  what  he
meant  by the  phrase  "free  and innocent  passage" in  his  prof-
fered  assurances  of  Israeli  access  to  the  straits  of  Tiran.
Egypt  could stop  ships carrying  essential war  or  other  ma-
terials to Elat  on the  ground  that this  did not  constitute   "in-
nocent"  cargo  and  thus  in  effect  restore  belligerent  rights  in
a  new  guise.  The  day  after  the  press  conference,   the   Wall
Street  Journal  in  a dispatch from  Washington helped  to  clear
up  Mr.  Dulles'  unwillingness  to  be  more  precise.
In  a  long  story  on the  plans  of  oil men  to  bypass  Suez  and
Syria, the  Wall  Street  Journal  said, "For   the  proposed  Israeli
line,  U.S.  officials  have  little  affection.  Israel  will  soon  com-
plete  a  small  eight  inch  line  from  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  .  .  .
They  would  like  to  build  a  larger  pipeline  on the  same  route
as  a  substitute  for  the  Suez  canal.  'That  would  be  scraping
the  bottom  of  the  barrel,'  declares  one  U.S.  diplomat,  'Can
you  conceive  of  any  Arab  country  allowing  its  oil  to  go  to
Israel?'  Israel  would have to  rely  on supplies from  non-Arab
Iran  shipped  along  a  sea route  which  Egypt  or  Saudi  Arabia
could  block  off  in  time  of  war,  officials  note."
What  the  WSJ story  did not "note" was that Iran  is one of
the  great  producing   countries  of  the  Middle  East,  shipping
from  the  Persian  Gulf;  that  Britain  and  France  still  have
large  interests  in  Iranian  oil;   and  that  the   Elat-to-Haifa
pipeline  would  serve  their  needs  against  the  hostility  of  the
Arab  States  and  the  U.S.  oil companies  allied  with  the  Arab
States.  In  the recent  Suez  crisis, Aramco obeyed  Saudi orders
not to  ship any  oil for  Britain  and  France  across  its  pipeline
to Syria.
Some  Troubles  Oil  Company  Press
Agents   Don't  Talk  About
"Lebanon  is  a  republic,  and its  present  President  and
Cabinet  are  very   favorable  to  the  West.    There   are
about  100,000 Palestinian  refugees  in  Lebanon, but  they
have  not  been  admitted  to  citizenship  out  of  fear  of
destroying   the  razor-edged  balance  between   Moslems
and  Christians  on  which  the   governmental   structure
(indeed,  the  peace  of  the  state)  is  based."
—Hamilton   Fish  Armstrong,   editor  of  Foreign   Af-
fairs,   in  his  report   on  foreign   aid  in  Lebanon,
Jordan  and  Iraq  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee  last   week.
Mr.   Armstrong   does   not   elaborate   but   we   will.
Lebanon's  Christians,  the  only  sizable  enclave   left  in
the  Arab   Middle  East,  live   in  fear   that  the   faster
growing  Moslem  majority    will   some   day  take  over.
To  a  Moslem,  a  "Christian  Arab"  is  an  anomaly.  Only
a  Moslem can really  be an  Arab. So the  Christian  Copts
are  second  class  citizens  in  Egypt  as  are  the  Christian
Assyrians  in  Iraq.   The  Christians  fear  the  same  fate
in  the  Lebanon.
Had the  Elat line  been  in  operation, it  could  have  been  used
for  Iranian  supplies to  Western  Europe.  But this  would  have
eased  the  squeeze  on Britain  and  France from  which  U.S.  oil
companies  profited  by a  price rise on crude and  gasoline,  and
it   would  have  undercut  Arab  power   to  blackmail  Western
Europe.   Elsenhower  and  Dulles  are  in  an  all-out  campaign
to  woo the  uncommitted   Arab  States;  therefore  the  thumbs
down  on an  Israeli  pipeline  which  would  end Nasser's transit
monopoly  at  Suez.
When  Britain  Threatened  War  Against  Israel  in  Defense  of  Egypt
One  reason   for   British  hostility   to  sanctions   against
Israel  is  that  Britain  herself   once  applied  armed  threat  to
get   Israeli   troops  out   of   Sinai   without   thereby   earning
Egyptian  credit.   James  G.  McDonald lifted  the  curtain  on
this  hitherto  secret  bit  of  history  in  his  recent   executive
session  testimony  before  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  and
Armed  Services  Committees  (pages  835-36).
McDonald  was  then  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Israel.   He  re-
called  that  in  December,  1948,  war  had  broken  out  again
and .that  Israeli  troops  "were  about  to  cut  off  the  Egyptian
army  at  El  Arish,  Rafah  and  near  Gaza."   McDonald  re-
ceived  an  urgent message  from  the  State  Department trans-
mitting  an  ultimatum   from  the  British   "that   unless  the
Israeli  troops  at  once  withdrew  from  Sinai,  Britain  would
enter  the  war  against  Israel."
McDonald  related  that  Ben  Gurion  "at  first  exploded  but
finally  he  said,  'Well,  we can take  on the  six  Arab countries,
but  we  really  can't  take  on  the  British  Empire,  too.  There
will  not  be  an  Israeli  hoof  on  Egyptian  soil  in  48  hours."
McDonald  told  the  Senators,  "I  have  often  wondered  what
Anthony   Eden  thought  about  that   British   act   of  saving
Egypt  in  December  of  1948  when  he  felt  himself  forced  to
launch  his  ill-advised  and  unfortunate  attack  on  the  Suez
eight  years  later."
3   •;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.-F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 4,1957
Justice Brennan's  Resistance  Undermined  By His  Own  Champion
{Continued  from  Page  One)
honey,  his  principal  champion  on  the  committee,   undermined
his  resistance.  The  prospect  of  defending  a  nominee  for  the
Supreme  Court  who  refused,  on  mere  legal  grounds,  to  take  a
firm  position  against  Satan  and  sin  was  too  much  for   O'Ma-
honey.  To  McCarthy's  delight,  O'Mahoney  began  to  "clarify"
the  question  for  Mr.  Justice  Brennan.   He  cited  the  Presi-
dent's  resolution  against  Communism in  the  Middle  East as if
it  were  authoritative  gloss  on  Holy  Writ  and  told  the  Justice
the  question  asked  by McCarthy  had  already been  settled.  "Do
you  believe,"  Senator  O'Mahoney   insisted,  all  but   prodding
the  Justice  in  the  ribs,  "that  international  Communism  is  a
conspiracy  against  the  United   States?"   "That,"  the   Justice
said,  taking  his  cue,  "I  can answer."   But  then  Senator  Jenner
wanted  to  know  whether  he  drew  any  line  between  interna-
tional  Communism  and  the  Communist  party  and  Brennan
again  tried  to  explain  that  there  were  particular  cases  before
the  court  involving  this  very issue.  Senator  Hennings  tried  to
rescue  him  with  a  series  of  questions  designed  to  show  that
conspiracy  prosecutions  were  peculiarly  dependent  on  the  par-
ticular  facts  in  each  case  but  this  was  too  subtle  to  save  him.
A  few  minutes  later  Brennan's  shoulders  were  pinned  to  the
mat.   When  McCarthy  asked  him,  "You  do  agree  that  Com-
munism  constitutes  a  conspiracy against  the  United  States?",
Brennan  finally  answered  "Yes."
Brennan's  Courage  Fails
The  retreat  had  begun,  and  McCarthy  pressed  harder.   He
wanted  to  know  about  those  speeches  the  Justice  had  made
criticizing   Congressional   committees.    He   soon   had   Justice
Brennan  saying,  "sorry  you  read  them  that  way"  and  "I  was
not  concerned  with  any particular  committee  as  such"  though
quite  obviously  they  were  aimed  squarely  at  McCarthy.    He
even  said  he  didn't  believe  he  had  called  those   investigations
"Salem  witch  hunts"  at  which  McCarthy,  in  his  best  inexor-
able  voice,  said   "Yes,   you  did,"   and  proceeded   to  quote  a
passage  from  the  Boston  speech  about  "practices  reminescent
of  Salem  witch  hunts."   McCarthy  tightened  the  screws.   He
wanted  to  know  what  were  those  "hopeful   signs"   Brennan
had  noted  in  his  Monmouth  speech  that  people  were  at  last
"sickened"  of  investigatory  excesses.   McCarthy  was  having  a
wonderful  time and  interjected  in  a  stage  whisper  while  wait-
ing  for  Brennan  to  reply,  "I'm   giving  him  a  good   opening
there."   Indeed,  he  was.   For  the  main  sign  at  the  time  was
the  discussion  beginning  in  the  Senate .for  a  censure  motion
against  McCarthy.  It  would  have  been  exhilirating  if  the  Jus-
tice  at  that  point  had  said,  "Of   course,  if  you  insist  on  the
truth,  I  was talking  of  you, Senator  McCarthy,  and  of  the  ris-
ing  reaction  in  the  country  and  the  Senate  against  your  abuse
of  investigatory powers."   But  Brennan only mumbled  vaguely
about  reformed  rules  of  procedure.    It  was  painful  to  watch.
Was  he  really compelled  to  crawl  in  order  to  be sure of  reach-
ing  the  Supreme Court?  The  new Justice was only saved  from
further  humiliation  by the  bell.   Senator  Eastland  recessed  the
hearing.   How  little  unalloyed  courage  there  is.
McCarthy  Throws  in  the   Sponge
What  happened  overnight  is  a  mystery.   For  with  the  new
Justice  on  the  ropes,  McCarthy suddenly threw  in  the  sponge.
At  8  a.  m.—two  and  a  half  hours  before  the  hearing  was  to
resume—the radio already carried McCarthy's  letter  to  Senator
Eastland  saying  he  thought  further  questioning  would   serve
no  useful  purpose  because  the  record  "now  confirms  that  Jus-
tice  Brennan  harbors  an  underlying  hostility  to   Congressional
attempts   to  investigate   and  expose  the  Communist    conspir-
acy."   It  was  a  pleasure  to  hear  gray-haired  Senator  Watkins,
looking  like  a  stern  Grant  Wood  elder,  comment  later  at  the
hearing  "I  completely  and  utterly  disagree  with  what  he  (Mc-
Carthy)  has said."  It  was even  more  cheering  to  have  Senator
Watkins  say  to  Mr.  Justice  Brennan,  "though  you  have  not
always  been  in  agreement  with  the  way  we  did  our  job,  a
good   many  Americans  have  that  same  point  of  view  and  I
don't   disagree  with  that  although   I  am  one  of  the  investi-
gators  on  the  Internal  Security Committee  and  have  been  since
it  was  organized."   Something  suddenly  had  made  McCarthy
lose  his  nerve;  perhaps  the  change  of  atmosphere  made  him
feel  his  fight  was  hopeless.   The  hearing  was  a  reminder  of
what  the  country  has  so  recently  and  narrowly  escaped.    It
looks  as  if  we  have  just  seen  the  last  stand  of  low  blow   Joe.
Extra  Copies  Still  Available  for   Your  Friends  of  Last   Week's   Sensational  "B-26's  for   Arabia"  Revelations
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol.  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street   ........................................................................................
City  .........................................^one..........State................_....
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..........................................................
Street    .........._........................................................
8/4/67
City  ..........................................Zone..........State................_....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
Room   205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Wathhiflton  3,  D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second   Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1870.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished   every   Thursday   except   the   last   two   Thursdays   of   August  and  December   at  801  E.  Capitol  St.,  Washington   3,  D.  C.
An  Independent  weekly   published  and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager   Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  *8  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED