I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1957
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1957jul22.pdf

============================================================

Historic  Text  the  U.  S. Press  Ignored
Soviet  and  Western  Physicists  Meet  on  Invitation of  Bertrand Russell
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   V,  NO.  29JULY  22,  1957
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Scientists  Warn  Mankind
As  we  went  to  press  on  July  18  not  a  single  newspaper
in   the   United  States  had   been  sufficiently     interested   to
publish   the  text  of   the  warning   issued   by  twenty   world
famous  scientists   of  the  Soviet   and  Western   blocs  after   a
historic  meeting  in  the  little  Nova  Scotian  fishing  village of
Pugwash   the   week   before.     Their   warning   against    the
annihilation  that  faces  mankind  in  the  nuclear  arms  race,
is  an  outgrowth   of  the  famous  joint  appeal   by   Bertrand
Russell  and  Albert  Einstein  two  years  ago.   The  meeting
was  made  possible  and  financed  by  the  Cleveland  capital-
ist,  Cyrus  Eaton,  a  man  whose  social  vision  matches  the
swee'p   of   his   business   enterprise.    The   full   text   of    the
statement  issued  by  the  scientists  and  of  their  subcommit-
tee  reports  follow.   The  fact  that  such  a meeting  could  take
place  is  itself   momentous.   We  are  appealing  to  our  read-
ers  to  help  us  reach  as  many  people  as  possible  with  their
message.   Extra  copies  are  available  in  bulk   order.—IPS
The Statement in Full Text
At  the  invitation   of  Lord  Russell,  and  through   the   gen-
erous  hospitality  of  Mr.  Cyrus  Eaton,  a  group  of  scientists,
drawn  from  about  ten  nations  and  widely  representative  of
different  political,  economic  and  other  opinions,  met  in  Con-
ference   at  Pugwash,  Nova   Scotia,  between   July  6  and   11,
1957.    Mr.  Y.  Shimonaka  and  Others  also  provided  valuable
assistance.
The  meeting  originated   in  the  suggestion   contained   in  the
Russell-Einstein  appeal,   that  scientists  should   meet  to  assess
the  perils  of  humanity  which  have  arisen  as  a  result  of   the
development  of  weapons  of  mass destruction.    Two  years have
passed  since  that  statement  was  issued  but  the  dangers  remain.
In  fact,  the  stockpiles  of  nuclear  weapons  have  increased,  new
nations  have  joined  the  ranks  of  those  producing   weapons,
or  trying to produce'them,  whilst  serious  misgivings  have  been
expressed  as to whether  the  continued  testing  of  such  weapons
may  not  result   in  damage   to  the  population.    The   general
belief  that  a  full-scale  nuclear  war  would  bring  universal   dis-
aster  upon  mankind,  and  the  recognition  that  it  is  technically
possible  for  both  the  two  great  contending  forces  to  visit  any
desired  degree  of  destruction  upon  an  enemy,  as  well  as  cer-
tain  political   developments,   have  created   an  atmosphere   in
which  it  was possible  for  us to  meet,  and  to  discuss  dispassion-
ately,  many important  and  highly  controversial  issues.
Tried to Be Impartial
The  international   problems   which  have  arisen  as  a  result
of  the  development   of  atomic  energy  are  of  two  kinds,  tech-
nical  and  political.    A  gathering  of  men  of  science  can  discuss
with  special  competence  only  the  scientific  and  technical  im-
plications  of  atomic  energy.   Such  discussion,  however,  can  be
fruitful   only  if  it  takes  into  account  the  political   problems
8  *
The  Twenty  Who Signed the Manifesto
Three  Soviet  scientists:  A.   M.  Kuzin,  of   the  Soviet
Academy  of  Scientists;  D.  P.  Skobeltsyn,  director  of
the  Lebedev  Institute  of  Physics,  Moscow;  A.  V.  Top-
chiev,  of  the  Soviet  Institute of  Silicates.
One  Chinese  Communist:  Prof.  Chou  Pei-yuan,  vice
rector   of   Peking   University.     One  Polish   Scientist:
Prof.  Marian  Danysz,  University  of  Warsaw.
Three  Japanese  'scientists:  Prof.  S.  Tomonaga,  de-
partment   of  physics,  Tokyo  University;  Prof.  Hideki
Yukawa,  director  of  the  Tokyo  Research  Institute  for
Fundamental  Physics;  Prof.  H.  Ogawa,  of  Tokyo Uni-
versity.
Two   Europeans:   Prof.   Hans   Thirring,   Univ.   of
Vienna,  author  of   the  first  book  on  the   H-bomb  and
Prof.   A.   M.   B.   Lacassagne,   L'lnstitut   du   Radium,
Paris.
Three  British, One Canadian  and  One Australian:  Dr.
E.  H. S.  Burhop, physicist,  Univ. College,  London;  Prof.
•  J.  Rotblat,  attached  to  the  British  atomic  energy   au-
thority,  Prof,  of  Physics,  Univ.  of   London,  exec.  vice
pres.   of   the   British   Atomic   Scientists    Association;
Prof.  C.  F.  Powell,  H.  H.  Wills  Physical  Laboratory,
Bristol,  Eng.;  Prof.  M.  L.  Oliphant,   director  of  post
graduate  research  in  physics,  National  Univ.  of  Aus-
tralia,  and  Dr.  Brock  Chisolm  of  Victoria,  B.  C., former
director  general  of  the  UN  World Health Organization.
Six   Americans:  Prof.  H.  J.   Muller,  Indiana  Univ.;
Prof.   Eugene   Rabinowitch,   Univ.  of   Illinois,   editor,
Bulletin   of   the   Atomic   Scientists;   Prof.   Paul   Doty,
Harvard,   former   president,   American  Federation   of
Scientists;  Prof.  Walter Selove,  Univ.  of  Penna.;  Prof.
Victor  Weiskopf, MIT, and  Prof.  David  F.  Cavers,  as-
sociate  dean,  Harvard  Law  School.
Three  of  these  signers  are  Kohel  prize-winners: Prof.
Muller,  Prof. Yukawa  and Prof.  Powell.
The  Two Who Declined to  Sign
John  Stuart  Foster,  Prof,  of  Physics  at  McGill  Univ.,
Montreal,  and  Leo  Szilard,  Univ.  of  Chicago  physicist,
who  thought  parts  of  the  statement  "too  strong."
1   1  3
which  are  the  background  to  international  negotiations.    The
signatories  of  the  Russell-Einstein  appeal  affirmed  their  inten-
tion  to say nothing  which  might  seem  to favor  one  rather  than
the  other  of  the  two  great  groups  of  powers  into  which  the
world  is  divided.   In  attempting  to  formulate  the  conclusions
which  followed   from   our  discussions,  we  too  have  tried   to
avoid   any   exacerbation   of   the   differences   between   nations
which  might  follow,  for  example,  from  emphasis  on  technical
considerations  unwelcome  to  one  or  other  of   the  two  great
powers.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   July   22,  1951
{Continued  from   Page   One)
Scientists As  Divided as Other Men
Men  of  science  are  now  well  aware  that  the  fruits  of  their
labors  are  of  paramount  importance  for   the  future  of  man-
kind,  and  they  are  thus  compelled   to  consider  the  political
implications  of  their  work.   Their  opinions  on  politics  are- as
diverse  as those  of  other  men.  These  facts make  it  difficult  for
a  conference  such  as  the  present  to  issue  an  agreed  statement
on  matters  which  are  controversial.   The   discussion  of   such
issues,  however,  allowed  the  points  of  difference  and  the  areas
of  agreement  to  be  defined,  and  led  to  a  measure  of  mutual
understanding  of  the  opinions  of  one  another.
The  main  work  of  the  meeting  was  centered  round   three
principal  topics:   (1)    The  hazards  arising  from   the  use  of
atomic  energy  in  peace  and  war;   (2)   problems  of  the  control
of  nuclear  weapons;  and  (3)  the  social  responsibility of  scien-
tists.   Three  committees  were  established  to  give  detailed  con-
sideration  to  these  topics.   Their  reports  to  the  conference  are
given  in  the  statements  appended   to  this  document,  but  the
principal  conclusions bearing  on  the  hazards  of  atomic  energy
may  be  briefly  summarized as follows:
Uneven  Fallout  the Serious Danger
Committee   I   on   nuclear   hazards,   made   an    independent
assessment  of  the  effects  of  the  nuclear  tests  carried  out  hither-
to.  From  the  details given  in  the  appendix,  it may be  seen  that
the  hazard,  compared  with  others to  which  mankind  is  subject
from   natural  causes,   is  small.   Nevertheless,   because  of   the
world-wide  distribution of  fission  products,  and  the  fact  that
some  areas  may  be  subject  to  effects  much  above  the   average,
dose  attention  to  the  dangers  should  be  maintained, especially
if  tests  of  bombs  which  give  large  radioactive fallout  continue
to  be  made.
The  committee also  considered  the  hazards arising from  the
peacetime  use  of  industrial  atomic power,  or  the  application of
radiations  in  medicine  and   industry.   Although  these  hazards
must  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  great  benefits  which  will
flow  from   such  applications, means,  of   greatly  reducing   the
attendant  hazards are  available  and  should  be  widely  adopted.
War Would Leave  No Country  Unscathed
The  above  mentioned estimates of  the  hazards  which  have
arisen  from  test  explosions  permitted  a  closer  examination  to
be  made  of  the  probable  consequence  of  an  unrestricted  nu-
clear  war.    This   examination  led  to  the   unquestioned   con-
clusion  that  a  general  war with  nuclear weapons  would  indeed
represent  a  disaster  of  unprecedented  magnitude.   The  radio-
logical  hazards would  be  thousands of  times  greater  than  those
due   to  the   fallout   effects   of   test   explosions.     In   the   com-
batant   countries,  hundreds  of   millions  of  people  would   be
killed  outright,  by  the   blast  and  heat,  and   by  the   ionizing
radiation  produced  at  the  instant  of  explosion  whether   bombs
of  the  so-called  "clean"  or  "dirty"  kind  were  employed.     If
"dirty"   bombs   were   used,   large   areas   would   be  made   un-
inhabitable  for  extended  periods  of  time,  and  additional  hun-
dreds  of  millions  of  people  would  die  from  delayed  effects  of
radiation  from  local  fallout,  some  in  the  exposed   population
from  direct  radiation  injury,  and  some  in  succeeding  genera-
tions  as  a  result  of  genetic  effects.   But  even  countries  not  di-
rectly   hit   by   bombs   woulld    suffer   through   global  fallout,
which,  under certain conditions,  might  be  of  such  intensity  as
to  cause  large-scale genetic and  other   injury.
Arms Limitation  Not  Enough
It  is against the  background  of  the  fearful  consequences   for
humanity  of  a  general  war  with nuclear  weapons  that  the  con-
clusions  of  Committee  II,  which  considered  problems  of  con-
trol,  must  be  viewed.   The  principal  objective of  all  nations
must  be  the  abolition  of  war  and  the  threat  of  war  hanging
over  mankind.  War   must  be  finally  eliminated,  not  merely
regulated  by  limiting  the  weapons  which  may  be  used.   For
this  purpose,  it  is  necessary to  reduce  tension  among  the  na-
tions;  to  promote  mutual understanding among  the  peoples;  to
strive  for  the  ending  of  the  arms  race;  and  to  provide  an  ade-
quate  control  system  so  as  to  give  substantial  protection,  and
permit  the  development  of  mutual confidence.
One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  in  international  affairs  in  re-
cent  years  has  sprung  from  the  fact  that  in  a  period  of  delicate
strategic  balance,  even  secondary  questions  acquire  strategic
significance;   in   such   a   situation,   they   are   rarely   subject   to
agreed  solutions  because  any  particular  solution  appears  to  be
to  the  strategic  advantage  of  one  rather  than  another  of   the
powers.   We  believe  that  it  is  unrealistic  to  depend  upon  any
sudden  increase  in  mutual  confidence and  that  it  is more likely
to  grow  from  small  beginnings.   In  this  situation,  even  small
agreements  covering  limited  fields  could  be  of  great  import-
ance.
Greatest  Peril  Now in Small  Wars
In  the  present  circumstances, we  believe  that  the   greatest
peril  comes  from  the  possibility  that  a  war  might  break  out
between  two  smaller  nations,  that  Russia  and  America  might
intervene  militarily  on  opposite   sides,  and  that  such   a  war
might  be  fought  by  using  atomic  bombs  in  combat.   We   be- •
lieve  it would  be very  difficult  to  limit  a  local  war  of  this kind
—particularly  if  it  is  fought  with  atomic  weapons   in  the  tac-
tical  area—and  that  what  may  start out  as  a  local  war  may  end
as  a  general  atomic catastrophe.   In  order  to  avert  this  danger,
political  settlements  aimed  specifically  at  eliminating  the  risk
of   the  outbreak  of  a  local   war  between   smaller  nations  are
needed.
The  conclusions of  Committee  III  on  the  responsibilities  of
scientists  state  our  common  conviction  that  we  should  do  all
in   our  power  to  prevent  war  and  to  assist  in  establishing   a
permanent  and  universal peace. This  we  can  do  by  contributing
to   the   task   of   public   enlightenment   concerning   the   great
dilemma  of  our  times;  and  by  serving  to  the  full   extent  of
our  opportunities,  in  the  formation  of  national  policies.    The
Committee  gives  a  statement  of  beliefs  and  aspirations suitable
for  scientists.in  the  modern  world.
Finally,  we should  like  to give  expression  to  the  high  degree
of  unanimity we  have  found  among  all  the  members  of   the
Conference  on  fundamental   aims.   We  are  all  convinced  that
mankind   must   abolish   war   or   suffer   catastrophe;   that   the
dilemma  of  opposing   power  groups   and  the  arms  race  must
be  broken;  and  that  the  establishment   of   lasting  peace   will
mark  the  opening   of  a  new  and  triumphant   epoch  for   the
whole  of  mankind.   We   earnestly  hope  that  our   conference
may  make  a  modest  contribution  to  these great  aims.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   July   22, 1957
Subcommittee  I  Reports  on  the  Hazards  of  Radiation
The   effects  of  radiation, from  nuclear  tests,  from  peaceful
applications,  and   from   the   possible  wartime  use  of  nuclear
weapons,  have  been  the  subject  of  much  concern  and  study.
We  have felt  it desirable  at  this  meeting  to  consider the  avail-
able  facts  bearing  on  these  problems.
With  regard  to  the  effects  of  nuclear testing,  we  have  found
that  separate  calculations  carried  out  independently  in  Great
Britain,  Japan,  the  USA,  and  the  USSR  have  yielded  results  in
good   agreement  with  one  another  on  the  amount  of  fallout
and  on  its  effects.
A  principal  effect   is  clue  to  strontium-90.   If,   as  some  evi-
dence  indicates,  the  production  of  leukemia  and  bone  cancer
by  radiation  is  proportional  to  the  dose,  even  down  to  very
small  doses,  then  we  estimate  that  the  tests  conducted   over
the  past  six  years will  be  responsible  for  an  increase  of  about
1 %  over  the  natural  incidence of  leukemia  and  bone  cancer
during  the  next  few  decades.   Over  the  next  30  years,  this  in-
crease  would  amount  to  about  a  hundred  thousand  additional
cases  of  leukemia and  bone  cancer.   The  correct  numbers  may
be   several  times  larger   or   smaller.   These   additional   cases
could,  however,  not  be  identified  among  the  10,000,000  or  so
normal  cases  of  the  same  diseases.
The Effect  on Future  Generations
A  second  principal  effect   of  global  fallout  consists  of   ge-
netic  mutations.   We   estimate  that   these  will   cause  serious
injury   to  about  as  many  individuals  as  those   in  whom   leu-
kemia  or  bone  cancer  will  be  produced   by  the   strontium-90.
However,  the  genetic  effects  from  a  given  amount  of  fallout,
unlike  the  effects  of  strontium-90  will  be  scattered  over  many
generations.
Peacetime  uses  of  radiation,  such  as  X-rays  in  medicine,  or
nuclear  power  production,  will  also  be  responsible  for  the  de-
livery  of  radiation  to  large  numbers  of  people.   Genetic   and
long-term  somatic  effects   will  result   from  this  radiation,  in
amounts  depending  on  how  much  radiation  is  received  by  the
reproductive  cells and  by  other  parts  of  the  body.
Medical  X-Ray  Worse Than Fallout
It  is important, in evaluating  the  effects  from  various  sources
of  radiation,  to  try  to  put  them  in  proper  perspective.     For
example,  the  radiation  received  by the  average  individual  from
medical  X-rays,  is  in  countries  of  more  highly-developed   tech-
niques,  considerably  greater   than  the  fallout   radiation   from
tests   at   the   recent   rate.    This   (does   not   mean),    however,
either  that we  should  stop  using  X-rays,  or  that  we  should  not
be  concerned  about  fallout  from  tests.    Great  benefits  to  man
are  obtained  from  the  use  of  X-rays,  as  well  as  from  the  in-
dustrial  use  of  nuclear  energy.  The   new  awareness  concern-
ing   the  deleterious  effects   of   radiation  is  leading   to  greatly
improved  techniques  in  the  use  of  X-rays,  and  to  more  rigor-
ous  precautions in  the  application  of  nuclear  energy.   By  these
means  it  will  be  possible  to  reduce  the   doses   received  from
medical  and  industrial radiation  to  levels  that  are  justifiable in
the  light  of  the  benefits  obtained.   It  is  useful  to   remember
that   modern   industrialized,  society   involves   many   develop-
ments  with  harmful  side  effects,  as  in  the  case,  for   example,
of  the  fumes  from  automobiles  and  from  industrial  establish-
ments.    Accurate evaluation of  the  damage  caused  in  this  way
has  not  been  made  but,  even  if  it  should  turn  out  to  be  con-
siderable,  no  one  would   expect  to  stop  using  all  automobile
engines  or  noxious  industrial  processes.
In  Many  Areas Heavier Than Average Fallout
With   regard   to   fallout   effects   from   tests,   it   should    be
recognized  that  the  effects  are  global,  and  exerted  upon  citi-
zens  of  all  countries,  regardless  of  whether  they  or  their  gov-
ernments  have  approved  the  holding  of  tests.  In  these  circum-
stances,   the   usual  criteria  as  to  whether   a   given   hazard   is
justifiable  cannot  be  applied.    According  to  the  figures  given
above,  many  individuals  will  be  affected,  although  the  num-
bers  represent  only  a  small  percentage  increase  over  normally
occurring  effects,   and   it  will  not  be  possible   to  say,  for  ex-
ample,  which  specific  case  of  leukemia  is  due  to  fallout   and
which  is  a  natural  case.   It  should   also   be  realized  that  ap-
preciable  areas  of  the  world  will  experience  higher  than  aver-
age  effects  from fallout.
We  now  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  effects  of  a  nu
clear  war.   It  cannot  be  disputed  that  a  full-scale  nuclear  war
would  be  an  utter  catastrophe.    Its  effects  would  be  thousands
of   times  greater   than  the  fallout  effects   from   nuclear   tests.
In   the  combatant  countries,  hundred   of   millions  of   people
would  be  killed  outright,   by  the  blast  and  heat,  and  by  the
ionizing  radiation   produced   at  the   instant  of   explosion.    If
so-called  "dirty"  bombs  were  used,  large  areas  would  be  made
uninhabitable   for   extended   periods   of   time,   and  additional
hundreds  of  millions of  people  would  probably  die  from  de-
layed  effects  of   local  fallout  radiations,  some  in  the   exposed
population  from  direct  radiation  injury  and  some  in  succeed-
ing  generations  as  a  result  of  genetic   effects.    Even  countries
not  directly  hit  by  bombs  would   suffer   through  global  fall-
out,  which  under  certain  conditions  might  be  of  such  inten-
sity  as  to  cause  large-scale  genetic  and  other  injury.
Subcommittee  2  Reports  Cessation  of Tests Would Relax Tension
In  this  age  of  atomic  weapons,  the  objective  of  all  nations
must  be  the  abolition  of  war  and  even  the  threat  of  war  from
the  life  of  mankind.   War   must   be  eliminated,  not   merely
regulated  by  limiting the  weapons  to  be  used.   The  advance-
ment  of  this  objective  calls  for:
1.  The   lessening  of  tensions   among  nations  and  the   pro-
motion  of  mutual  understanding   among  their  peoples.
2.  The  ending  of  the  arms   race.
3.  The  provision of  reasonable  safeguards  in  the  arms con-
1   1   '/
trol  system  to  give  substantial  protection  and  build  up  mutual
confidence.   The  development  of  atomic  armaments  has  now
gone  so  far   that   a  completely   effective   and   reliable   control
system  appears  to  be  no  longer   possible.
4.  The   initiation  of   a  step-by-step  process   to  develop  as
satisfactory   a  set  of   controls   and   safeguards   as   practicable.
The  prompt  suspension  of  nuclear  bomb  tests  could  be  a  good
first  step  for  this  purpose.
{Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  22, 1957
Subcommittee 3  Sees  Need  to Emphasize Mankind's Supra-National Interests
(Continued  from   Page   Three)
It  is  our   conviction   that   the  paramount   responsibility  of
scientists  outside  their  professional  work  is  to  do  all  in  their
power  to  prevent  war  and  to  help  establish  a  permanent  and
universal  peace.   This  they  can  do  by  contributing  to  the  full
measure  of  their  capabilities  to  public  enlightenment   on  the
destructive  and   constructive  potentialities   of   science  and   by
contributing  to  the  full  extent  of  their  opportunities   in  the
formation   of  national  policies.
To  this  aim,  scientists  of  all  countries  without   regard  to
political   and   economic   systems  can  dedicate  themselves  be-
cause  they  share  certain  common  beliefs.   Following  are  some
of  them:
1.  With  the  penetration  of  science into the  world  of  atomic
nuclei,  humanity has  entered  a  new  epoch.
The Political Responsibility of Scientists
2.  The  developments  of  science  and  technology  have  para-
mount  importance  for  the  future  of  all  mankind.   This  im-
poses  upon  scientists  the  obligation   to  be  more  actively  con-
cerned  with  matters  of  public  policy,  and  upon  political  lead-
ers,  the  duty  to  take  fully  into  account  the  scientific  and  tech-
nological  facts.
3.  As  consequence  of  man's  mastery  of   nuclear  forces,  a
war  can  now  cause  immeasurable  damage  to  mankind.
4.  If  the  achievements  of  science  are  rationally  employed,
they  could  enormously  increase  the  well  being  of  all  men.
5.  Scientific   and   technical   progress   is  irreversible.   With
humanity  basing  much  of   its  technological   progress   on   the
manipulation  of  nuclear  forces,  it  is  of  paramount  importance
that  war  be  made  permanently  and  universally  impossible.
6.  In  the  past,  nations  have  often  resorted  to  force  in  the
quest  for  natural resources  and  fruits  of  labor.   These  methods
must  now  be  replaced  by a  common  effort  to  create  wealth  for
all.
7.  The  security  of  mankind  demands  that  no  section  of  it
shall  have  the  capacity  to  destroy  any  other.    The  develop-
ments  of  science  and  technology  tend  to  break  down  barriers
between  nations  and,  in  effect,  to  unify  mankind.
/
"Co-Existence"  Not Just A Temporary  Matter
8.  The  need  of  all  parts  of  mankind  to  cooperate  in  the
growth  of  the  total  sum  of  human  knowledge  and   wealth,
despite  ideological   and   other   differences   which   may  divide
them,  is  permanent  and  not  a  matter  of  temporary   "coexist-
ence"  of  different  political  or  economic  systems.
9.  Tradition  tends  to  place  the  emphasis  in  the  education
of  youth  on  separate  ideals  of  single  nations,  including   the
glorification   of   wars.    The   atomic  age   urgently   requires  a
modification  of  these  traditions.   Without  abandoning  loyalty
to  national  heritage  or  fundamental  principles  of  the  different
societies,  education  must  emphasize  the  fundamental  and  per-
manent  community of  the  interests  of  mankind  in  peace  and
cooperation,   irrespective  of   national  boundaries  and    differ-
ences  in  economic  or  political  systems.
Science Requires Absolute  Freedom  from  Dogma
11.  Science  develops  most  effectively  when  it  is  free  from
interference   by  any  dogma   imposed   from  the   outside,   and
permitted  to  question  all  postulates,  including  her  own.  With-
out  this  freedom of  scientific  thought,  and  the  freedom  to  ex-
change   information  and   ideas,   full   utilization   of   the con-
structive  possibilities  of  science will  not  be  possible.
In  an  effort   to  get  the   widest   possible  dis-
tribution   for   this   historic    document    we   are
offering  it  in  bulk  orders of  500  or  more  at  only
2  cents a  copy  plus  postage.    Bulk  orders  of  50
or  more at  5  cents a  copy  plus  postage.
//   You're   Not   Already   A  Subscriber,  You   Can  Have  the  Weekly   6  Months  On  Trial  for  Only   $2
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
I'lease  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................_............
Street   ......................................................................................
City ........................................Zone............State................_
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ....:....................................................
7/22/57
Street
City      ........................................Zone............State................_
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stones Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  Marcb  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and  edited  by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$.1  In  the   IT.  8.:  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  SIB  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED