I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968nov04.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  On  New   York's  School  Crisis
The  Verdict  Of  A  Long  And  Patient  Investigation
"The    New    York   City   schools   have   failed   in   ghetto
areas,   in   most   desegregated   communities,   and   in   many
white   ones  as  well.   One  out  of  three  pupils  in  the  sys-
tem  is  a  year  or  more  retarded   in  reading  and  arithmetic
.  .  .  Public   education   was  for   previous   ethnic   groups   a
prime   means   for   social   mobility,   but   for   the   Negro   it
tends  to  block  mobility  and  to  increase   socio-economic   and
racial   segregation."
—David    Rogers,   110  Livingston   Street:   Politics    and
Bureaucracy  in  the  New  York  City  School  System,  p.  473
(Random   House,  $8.95).   We  recommend  it    highly.
r
. F.  Stone's  Weekly
T\T™*,  T>M,lt];
f
li
a
J    I?,'_Tl/"/,/,i/«i                           Qr
Now  Published Bi-  Weekly
VOL.   XVI, NO.  22
NOVEMBER   4, 1968
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
The  Mason-Dixon  Line  Moves  to  New  York
On   my  way  into  New  York  City  from   La  Guardia,  the
taxi  driver  told  me  his  daughter  after  a  first  year  as  teacher
in   a   black  ghetto   had   transferred   out   to   Long   Island   in
despair.   "The  children   were   wonderful,"   he   said.   "The
trouble  was  the  parents."    An  hour   later  at  lunch  a  Jewish
school    teacher    from    Brooklyn   complained    of    the    black
children   in   her   mathematics   class   for    slow   learners   but
said   the  black  parents,  when   she  called   on  them  for   help,
were  without   exception   not   only   cooperative   but   grateful.
But  teacher  and  taxi-driver  agreed   in  blaming  Mayor  Lind-
say,   though   just  for  what  was  not   clear.   Indeed  very  little
in   New   York's    crisis   is   clear,   perhaps   because   the   real
motivations  are  kept   hidden  as  shameful.    More   and   more
people,  particularly  among  the  striking  teachers,  and  in  the
Jewish  community,  are  flailing  about  in  hysteria.   A  sample:
I  asked  the  Brooklyn  schoolteacher  just  what  was  the  issue
in  the  strike.   She  replied  with  appalling  simplicity,   "Anti-
Semitism."   How  do  you  win  a  strike  against  anti-Semitism?
By  circumcising  all  gentiles  and  turning  Black  Muslims  into
Black  Jews?   "What   does   Mr.   Shanker   want,"   the   Mayor
asked  in  a  similar  vein  in  a  radio  interview  next  day,  "For
the  police  vans  to  come  into  the   [Ocean   Hill-Brownsville]
community,   arrest   them   and   send   them   to   New   Jersey?"
Is  the  Exodus  to  be  re-enacted,  this  time  with  a  black  cast?
A  Genius  With  Two  Heads
The   plain   truth   is  that  John   V.   Lindsay  is   in   trouble
because  he  suddenly  finds  himself   the  Mayor  of  a  Southern
town.    The   Mason-Dixon    line   has   moved   north,   and   the
Old  Confederacy  has  expanded  to  the  outer   reaches  of   the
Bronx.    Even   without   this   tide   of   racism,   it   would   take
a   genius   with   two   heads   to   govern   the   city   successfully.
Some   of   its   basic   problems   are   universal.    One    is   size.
Another  is  bureaucracy;  the  educational  bureaucracy  has  en-
trenched   itself   in   a   maze   of   regulations   beyond    effective
public  control.   A  third  is  poverty;  by  next  year  one  of  every
eight   New   Yorkers  will  be  on   relief.    The   city  is   choked
with   automobiles   and   people.    Even   if   all   eight   million
were  a  multiple   birth   from   the   same  mamma,  they  would
aggravate   the  hell  out  of  each  other.   But  in  New  York  as
elsewhere  those  of  a  different  color,  whether  black  or  Puerto
Rican,  are  no  longer  willing  to  accept   second  or  third   class
citizenship   submissively.    They   are   pushing   upwards   into
7
The  Stepchildren   of  The   System
"All  the  pathologies  of   the  system   get   played  out
most  dramatically  in  the  ghetto  schools.   Teachers  and
principals,  as  well  as  pupils  and  the  wider  community,
are  beaten  down  and  demoralized  by  experiences  there.
"The  PEA   [Public   Education   Association]  study   of
1955   and  the  Urban  League  Study  of  1963  showed  that
ghetto  schools  got   fewer   services  than   the  others  in
New  York  City.   The  recent  Sheldon-Glazier  fact  book,
Pupils    and   Schools   in   New    York    City,     documents
this    with   references    to   staffing.    Only   8%   of    the
Negro-Puerto  Rican  segregated  elementary  schools had
more  than  65%  regularly   licensed  teachers,  while  68%
of  the  segregated  white  elementary   schools  did.  While
ghetto   schools    have   many   more   compensatory  pro-
grams   and  more   expenditures   per   pupil  than  segre-
gated   white   schools,   the   bureaucracy   prevents   the
coherent,   integrated   use  of  these  'special  services,'  as
extra  teachers  and  staff  don't   understand   each  others'
role  and  the  fragmentation   is  even  worse  than  before.
In  New  York  City,  compensatory   programs  for  ghetto
schools  usually   mean   more  of  the  same."
—110   Livingston   Street   by  David   Rogers,  p. 277.
the  better  jobs  and  the  sunnier  places.   In  New  York,  the
country's,  and  the  world's  biggest  Jewish  city,  this  has  created
a  special  problem—a  confrontation  between  blacks  and  Jews.
This  is  rapidly  turning  Lindsay  into  the  world's  most  down-
trodden  WASP.
The   defeat   two  years  ago  of   his  proposal   for   a   civilian
review  board  to  hear  complaints   against  the  police  was  the
first  disturbing   signal   in   what   had   been   the   most   liberal
city  in  the  country.   New  York's   lower   middle   class  whites
were   reacting   like   their    counterparts    elsewhere.     In    the
struggle   over   schools   the   fears  have  now   spread   to   liberal
teachers   hitherto   sympathetic  to'  the   civil  rights   movement.
Conflicts  in  the  ghetto  with  Jewish  landlords  and  storekeepers
were  relatively  easy  to  contain.   But  the  teachers'   strike  has
churned  up  fears  in  an  educational  establishment  that  Jewish
teachers   and   principals   have   dominated   for   a    generation.
Now   that   black   unrest   seems  to   threaten   union    standards
and   their   jobs  they   are   reacting   like   less   liberal   and   less
intellectual  "ethnic"  groups.   The  Teachers'   Union  is  moving
(Continued  on Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  4, 1968
(Continued  from  Page  One)
closer   to   the   benighted   old-line   A.F.   of   L.  craft   unions.
A   formidable  anti-black   coalition   is   shaping   up.    One  of
its  victims may  be  the  good  name  of  the  Jewish community.
If   this  great  city   is  to  be  saved  from   race  war,  more
Jewish  intellectuals are  going  to  have  to  speak  up  in  ways
that  their  own  people  will  resent,  just  as  white  southerners
resented  those  who  spoke  up  for  the  Negro.   The  Teachers
Union  is  exaggerating,   amplifying   and  circulating   any  bit
of   anti-Semitic   drivel   it   can   pick   up   from   any    far-out
black  extremist,   however  unrepresentative,   and  using  this
to  drive  the  Jewish  community  of  New  York  into  a  panic.
Albert   Shanker   and  -the   Teachers    Union   are    exploiting
natural  Jewish  fears   of  anti-Semitism   in  order  to  win  the
community's  support  for   the  strike   and  for   its  major  ob-
jective,   which   is   to   prevent   effective   decentralization  and
community   control   of   the    school   system.     Unless   more
Jewish  leaders   speak   up  in   public  and  say  what   they  do
in  private,  this  manufactured hysteria  may  prove  a  disaster
for   both  the   black  and  the   Jewish  communities.   Peoples,
like  Generals,   tend  to  be  obsessed  by  their  last  war.   To
hear   some   New   York   Jews   talk   one   would   think    the
America  of   1968  was   the   Germany  of   1932.   They  do   not
see  that   they   themselves   are   caught   up   in  the   backlash
which  is  creating  in  Wallace-the  nearest  American  counter-
part  to  Der  Fuehrer,  that  they  are  joining  the  red-necks,
that  the  danger  lies  in  white  racism  not  black.  The latter  is
despairing  and  defensive;  the  former  holds  the  potential  of
a  new  Nazism  in  its   effort   to  maintain   white   supremacy.
It  would  be  eternally  disgraceful  were  Jews  this  time  to  be
among  the  Brown  Shirts.
A  Visit  to  Ocean Hill-Brownsville
To  visit   the   black  controlled  schools  which  have  stirred
such  forebodings  on  both  sides   of  the   controversy   is   like
waking   from   a   nightmare.    I   spent   Friday,   Oct.   25,  in
the   Ocean  Hill-Brownsville  district,   observing   classes   and
talking   with   teachers   and  principals  in  JHS   271  and   its
intermediate   school   neighbor,   IS   55,  and   the   visit   was
therapeutic.   It  was  a  day  without  pickets  and  I  saw  only
one   policeman.    The   atmosphere   was   incredibly    different
from   what   I  had  been   led  to  expect.   I  found   black   and
white   teachers,   Jewish   and  gentile,   working  together   not
just  peacefully  but  with  zest  and  comradeship.   The  cleanli-
ness   and   the   neat   clothing  of  the   children   reflected  well
on   the   homes  from   which   they   came.   The   classes   were
orderly.    There   was   none   of  that   screaming,   by   teacher
against   pupil,   and   among   the   children,  which  is  common
in  most  New  York  schools.   I  felt   at   the   end  of  the   day
that   the   racial   and  union  issues   were   terribly   overblown
and   that   the   real   concern  within   the   embattled   district
was   simply  to  create   effective   schools.   I   saw   no   reason
why  this  could  not  be  reconciled   with  proper  union  stand-
ards  and  I  felt  it  would  be  a  tragedy  if  this  experiment  in
community  control  were  shut  down.
I  watched  a  Mrs.  Naomi  Levinson  teach  an  English  class
full   of  eager  black  children.   I  read   some  of  the  touching
poems  and  essays   they  had  produced.   "It's   the  first  time
in  my  eight  years  as  a  teacher,"  she  told  us  proudly,  "that
I  have  been  allowed  to  use  unconventional  teaching   meth-
ods."   I  talked  with  another  teacher,  Leon  Goodman, whose
How  Few  Negro  Teachers  in  New  York
"There   is   no   greater  indictment  as   to   its    [New
York's]  racism  than  to  contrast  the  number  of  Negro
teachers  to  white  teachers  in  cities  like  Philadelphia,
Detroit   and   Chicago,   where   the   percentage   ranges
from  25%  to  40%  as  against  New   York  City  where
the  percentage  is  approximately  9%  to   10%."
—Richard  Parrish,  UFT  Assistant   Treasurer,   Vice
President,  and  a  founder   and  treasurer   of   the   Negro
American   Labor   Council,  The  United   Teacher,   10/7.
How  Teacher  Attitudes  Affect   The   Child
"The  'disadvantaged'  child  is   a  Negro-American,  a
Mexican-American,  a  Puerto  Rican  or  any  other  child
who  lives  in  conditions  of  poverty.   He  is  a  lower  class
child   who   performs   poorly   in   an   educational  system
that  is  staffed   almost  entirely   by  middle-class  teach-
ers ...   [It  may  be]  that  the  child   does  poorly  in
school  because  that  is  what  is  expected  of  him  .  .  .
We  have  explored  the   effect   of   teacher   expectations
with  experiments  in   which  teachers  were   led  to   be-
lieve  that  certain  of  their  pupils  could  be  expected  to
show  considerable  academic  improvement.  The teachers
thought  the  predictions   were  based  on  tests ...  In
actuality  the  children  designated as  potential 'spurters'
had  been  chosen  at   random  .  .  .  Nevertheless intelli-
gence  tests   given   after   the   experiment   had  been  in
progress  for  several months  indicated  that  on  the  whole
the  randomly  chosen children  had  improved  more  than
the  rest ...  In  our  experiment   nothing  was  done
directly  for  the  child  .  .  .  The  only  people  affected  di-
rectly  were  the  teachers."
—Rosenthal   and   Jacobson,   "Teacher    Expectations
for    the   Disadvantaged"    Scientific     American,    April
1968.
face   lit   up   with   pleasure   when   he   explained   the   new
methods  of  teaching  science  he  was  allowed  to  apply.   "We
get   them  to   think  rather   than   simply  to   copy  down  ab-
stractions   from   the   blackboard."    Both   impatiently  denied
that  they  had  encountered  any  anti-Semitism.*   I  sat  in  on
a   teacher-team   conference  of  five  English   teachers,   three
black,   two   white,   one   of   the   whites   a    delicate-featured
blonde   WASP,  the   other   an   intense   and   dark-eyed   Jew.
The  two  whites  were  volunteers.   One  of  them  had   brought
a  bongo  drum  into  the  classroom  to  use  with  the  reading
of   Vachel  Lindsay's  incomparably  rhythmic  "Congo"   as   a
way  to  awaken  the  children  to  the  wonders  of  poetry.   The
atmosphere  of  this  mixed  group  was  wholly  devoid  of   any
racial  self-consciousness or  tension.   One  felt  their  pleasure
in  working  together.   In   the   corner   of   one  classroom   we
watched   a  young  black   teacher   with  a   group   of  children
who   took  turns  at   reading   "The   Prince   and  the  Pauper".
On  the  blackboard was  the  assignment,  "Write  a  story  about
something  that  went  wrong   in  a  person's   life"  and   next
to  it  in  a  row  there  were  the   helpful   hints,  "No  money.
Sickness.   No  food.   No  light.   No  home.   No  friends.    No
job."  The words telescoped  the  familiar  annals  of the  ghetto.
The  only  racialism,  if  it  can  be  called  that,  was  in   the
evidence  of  efforts  to  awaken  black  pride.   There  were  some
vivid  water   colors  produced  in  a   new  painting   class   and
exhibited  in  a  hallway  as  "Soul   on  Paper".   Another  hall-
way  blackboard  had  "Black  Is  Beautiful"  written   not  only
in   French   and   Spanish   but   in   Greek,   Hebrew,   Punjabi,
Swahili,   Arabic   and   Esperanto.    One   room's   walls   were
covered  with  pictures   and  clippings  variously  headed   "Re-
ligion,   Statesmen,   Musicians,  Scientists,   Inventors,   Diplo-
mats"  showing   black   achievement   in  these  fields.
In   the   classroom   where   Leslie   Campbell   in  an   African
gown  over  his  normal  clothes  teaches  Afro-American  studies
there   were   posters   showing   "Our   Homeland"   and    "Our
Proud   and   Glorious  Past".   They  reminded  me  of   Zionist
posters  in  many  Jewish  Sabbath  schools.   There  were  also
posters  of  "The  Proud  Look"  and  "Black  Pictures  of  Christ."
Campbell  after   class   was  friendly   and  open.   He  described
himself   as   a   black   nationalist   revolutionary   but   said   he
found   himself   very   much   in   a   minority   on  the   faculty.
"Most  of  my  black  colleagues,"   he  said,  "are   simply  edu-
cationists"  though   they   agree   on  African   studies   for   its
psychological   value.   The   other   teacher   of   Afro-American
Studies  at  JHS  271,  Alan  Kellock, turned  out  to  be  a  young
white  man   who  has   studied   in  Egypt   and   Ghana  and   is
finishing  a  doctorate   in  African  history  for  the  University
of  Wisconsin.  He  said  he  had  encountered  no racial  prejudice
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November 4,  1968
in   Ocean   Hill-Brownsville.  What   purpose   did   he   see   in
Afro-American  history  courses?   "To  get  the  black children
to  feel  they  are  worthwhile  people.   To  give  them  a  sense
of   identity   and   dignity."     Kellock   obtained   his  teaching
license  last  summer.  He  feels  JHS  271 is  the  most  promis-
ing  place  to  teach  in  the  entire  city.
Teachers  Go  Sour,  Children  Lose  Interest
David   Rogers   in   his   blockbuster   of   a   new   book,   "110
Livingston  Street:   Politics   and   Bureaucracy   in   the   New
York   City   School   System"   quotes  an   authoritative   earlier
professional   study   of   the   city's   schools   by   Strayer   and
Yavner.    "The  greatest  failing  of  the  schools  today,"  they
found  as  he  did,  "is  the  failure  to  use  the  creative   ability
of   teachers."   When  I   read  this   afterwards,   I   understood
the  enthusiasm  I  had  found   in  the  two  schools  I   visited.
I   had  thought   of  community  control  as  a  kind   of  lesser
evil,  a  way  of  appeasing   black   dissatisfaction.    I   did  not
' realize  what  a  dead  hand  the  bureaucracy  has  fastened  on
the  schools  and  how  much  could  be  done just  by  lifting   it.
"Not  many  teachers  come into  the  system  sour,"  said  Percy
Jenkins,  the  Virginia-born  Negro   who  is  now  principal  of
IS  55,  "but   they   don't  stay   long  without   becoming  sour.
The  kids   come  in   with   lively   minds  but   by   the   fourth
grade   they   too   have   lost   interest."    Jenkins   himself,   a
graduate   of  West  Virginia   State  College,  had  been  in   "the
system"   15  years  and   risen   to  assistant   principal   before
he  was   chosen  to   head   IS   55  in  this  community   control
experiment.   "What  you  see  here,"  one  white  teacher   ex-
plained  later,  "is  a  function   of  the  principal,  of  the  fresh
directions  he  maps  out  and  of  the  commitment  brought   to
this  experiment  by young liberal  arts  college  volunteers  with
new  ideas."
I  spoke  with  Rhody  McCoy,  the  head  of  the  district;  with
his  assistant,  Lloyd  Hunter;  with  the  principal  of  JHS   271,
Wm.   H.  Harris,   and   with   his   white   assistant   principal,
John  Mandracchia.  I  have  never  met  a  more  devoted  group
of   people.   All  of  them  are   harassed   and   overworked   but
sustained  by  a  combination  of  desperation   and  joy,  desper-
ation  because  they  fear  the  experiment  may  soon  be  wiped
out  under  union  pressure,  joy  in  a  chance  to  demonstrate  in
the   little   time   they   have   what   community  control  could
accomplish.   They  are  enlightened  men;  one  forgets  all  the
nonsense   of  black   and  white   in  talking  with  them;  color
vanishes.   They  fear  black  extremism  as  much  as  white  mis-
understanding.    And  their  focus  is  on  the  child.
That    cannot   be   said   of   their   opponents.    The   child,
whether   black   or   white,   seems   to   be   the   forgotten   by-
stander   in  the  teachers'  strike.   The  Union's  rallying   cry
is  "due  process",  i.e.  for  teachers  and  its  concern  is  their
tenure.    Its   alliance   is   not  with   the   parents   for   better
education   but   with   the   employing   bureaucracy    for   the
maintenance  of  their  common  privileges.   The  "due  process"
issue  they  have  raised   is  a  monumental  bit   of   hypocrisy.
The  best  analysis  of  it  may  be  found  in  the  report  by  the
New  York   Civil  Liberties   Union,  "The  Burden  of   Blame."
A  Prestigious  Voice  Against  The  Teachers
"We  recognize  that  the  Ocean  Hill-Brownsville  con-
troversy  has  been  made  use  of  by  the  United  Federa-
tion  of  Teachers  and  the   Council  of   Supervisory   As-
sociations   and  other  organized   forces   of   entrenched
interests  to  discredit  the  possibility  of  successful,  re-
sponsible  community  involvement  in  the  schools  within
lawful   guidelines  that   protect  not   only   the   best   in-
terests   of   professionals   in   the   schools   but   of   the
children."
—Statement    released    Oct.   1   by    the    prestigious
Public  Education  Association   quoted   by  Nat      Hentoff
in  the  Oct.  17  Village  Voice,  where  he  noted  that  the
statement  had  not  appeared   in  the  New  York  Times.
The   unsatisfactory   teachers    were   transferred,    not    dis-
charged,  and  transfers   normally  are  made  without  hearing
or  charges;  the  teachers  prefer  it  that  way,  to  keep  their
records  free  from  blemish.
The   real   problem   is   how  to   keep   teachers   in   ghetto
schools.   The  Board  of  Education  regulations   are   designed
to  discourage  teachers   from  fleeing  them.   The   contractual
procedures   between   the   Board   and   the   Union   limit   the
teacher's   freedom   to   transfer.    "Yet,"   the   civil   liberties
union  reported,  "in  Ocean  Hill-Brownsville, the  UFT  sought
to   ignore  all  these   procedures  and  claimed  the  right   for
unlimited  numbers  of  teachers   to  transfer   out  at   will  for
the  duration  of  the  experiment,  to • abandon  the   experiment
for  as  long  as  it  continues   and  then  to  be  free  to  return,
presumably   when  'normal'  conditions   had  been  reinstated.
.  . .  Significant  numbers  of teachers  did leave  .  . .  Months
later,   when   the   Ocean   Hill-Brownsville  Local   Governing
Board  attempted   to  exercise  a   similar   unilateral   right  of
transfer,   the  UFT  cried  foul."
The   Board   of  Education's   notions  of   "due   process"   are
as   one-sided.   I   have   read   the   full   text   of   the   decision
handed  down  by  Judge  Francis  E.  Rivers  as  trial  examiner
in  the  case  of  the  transformed  teachers.  It  is  by  no  stretch
of  the  imagination   the  vindication   it  appears  to  be  in  the
headlines.
The  hearing,  by  screening  out  all  but   professional   wit-
nesses,  and  barring  not  only  parent  testimony  but  that  of
para-professional   school  aides,  and  by  applying  strict  rules
of   evidence  unsuited   to   administrative   procedures,   man-
aged   to  acquit  the  teachers   without  any  real   exploration
of  the  charges  against them.
The  Board  of  Education  is  past  master   at  manipulating
regulations  and  procedures   to   achieve   the   ends   it   seeks.
The  Rogers  book  shows  how  hard   it  is  even  for  teachers
and  principals  to  find  out  how  it  operates.    Only  a  Kafka
could  do  justice  to  the  murk  it  generates.   In  a  column  on
Due  Process  in  the  New  York  Post  Oct. 24, Murray  Kempton
provided  an  incisive  glimpse  of  these  operations  in  the  pro-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Civil  Liberties  Union  Blames  The  Teachers  Union  and  The  Board  of  Education
"The   current  school   dispute   in   New    York   City    has
yielded  nothing  but  discontent,  disorder, disobedience.  The
chaos  was  not  a  result  of  local  community  control.   From
the  beginning  the   central  Board  of   Education  attempted
to   scuttle   the   experiment  in   Ocean   Hill-Brownsville   by
consistently   refusing  to  define  the  authority  of  the  Local
Governing  Board.   The  United  Federation  of  Teachers  has
used   'due  process'  as  a  smoke-screen  to  obscure  its   real
goal,  which  is  to  discredit  decentralization,  and  to  sabo-
tage   community  control.
"Ironically   the   demand   for   decentralization  or,   more
properly,   community   control   of   the   schools   began   with
the  failure  of  the  central  board  to   effectively   implement
integration.   Board  of  Education  administrators  often  said
that  they  could  not  and  would  not  'tell  the  principals  how
to   run  their   schools.'   Integration  failed  at   least   partly
because  it   was  resisted  by  many   principals,  and  because
the  system  was  already   administratively  decentralized  to
the  point  where  recalcitrant  principals  were  not  forced  to
comply   with  Board  policy  on  integration.
"Integration  was  not  abandoned  by  black  parents  but  by
the  Board  of  Education.   The  demand  for  community  con-
trol  was  a  direct  response  by  ghetto  residents  to  the  lack
of  access  to  decision-making  processes  that  vitally  affected
the  lives  of  their  children."'
—Abridged   from   The  Burden  of   Blame:   A   Report   on
the  Ocean Hill-Brownsville  School  Controversy,  by  the  New
York   Civil  Liberties   Union,  156  Fifth   Ave.  NY    10010.
1 *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  4,1968
Sabotaging  Community  Control  as They  Sabotaged  Desegregation
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
ceedings   now   underway   against    four    JHS    271   teachers
accused   of   threats,   or   arts   of   terror,   against   attempts   to
reinstate  the  transferred   teachers.   Their  attorneys  were for-
bidden  to  see  the  reports  on  which  the  charges  were  based.
When    one   attorney   asked,   "Do   you   proceed   under   any
rules  and  regulations?"  the  reply  was  "We  do  not."  After
all  this  talk  about   due  process,   Kempton   commented,   "we
suddenly  discover  that  in  this  system  there  is  no   protection
for   anybody   except   the   conscience   and   good-will   of   the
Superintendent."
They  Fear   Democracy
All   bureaucracies   are   secretive,   none   more   so  than   the
New   York   Board   of   Education.   The   Rogers   book   is  an
<eye-opener,  particularly  in  its  account  of.how   desegregation
was  sabotaged  by  the  Board.   It  did  not  work,  Rogers con-
cludes   "because   the   bureaucracy  and   the   staff   made   them
fail."    It  was  out  of   the  frustration  created   by  the   failure
of   integration   that  black   and   Puerto   Rican   parents   turned
to   community   control.    This,  too,  is   being   sabotaged   by
the  Board  and  by  the  union.   They  fear  the   loss  of   power
and  privilege  if  democracy is  substituted  for  bureaucracy. They
have  the  support  of  all  the  unions  which  do  business  with
the  educational  system,  a  billion  dollar   business.   The  New
York  trade  union  movement,  like  its  educational   establish-
ment,  has   been  a  stronghold   of  white  supremacy.   This  is
where  and  how  the  racial  issue  arises,  and  the  Jewish  com-
munity  is  being  enlisted  because  teaching  has  been  a  Jewish
preserve   in   New   York   as   it   was   once   an   Irish   Catholic
preserve.   If  community control  is  crushed,  the  racial  struggle
will  take  on  more  violent  and  hateful  forms  to  the  detriment
of  both  the  black  and  Jewish  communities.
The  Jews,  as  the  more  favored  and  privileged  group,  owe
the   underprivileged  a   duty  of   patience,   charity  and com-
passion.   It  will  not  hurt  us  to  swallow  a  few  insults  from
overwrought   blacks.   It   is  no   more  wrong   to   invoke   the
No  Way  To  Get  Rid  of  Incompetent  Teachers
"Relations  between  teachers  and  ghetto   parents  are
severely   strained   in   New   York   City.    The''size,   the
rigidity,   and   the   militaristic   nature    of   the   school
bureaucracy  are one  reason  .  .  .  Teachers  and  parents,
both  victims  of  this  system,  have  been  taking   it  out
on  each   other,   and  the  ultimate   victim   is   the   child.
The   teachers,    frustrated    by   the   board's   failure   to
provide  adequate  facilities  for  the  so-called  'disruptive
child*  . .  . initially  demanded  the right  to  remove  these
children   from   their   classes   .  .  .   Many  Negro  and
Puerto   Rican  parents  were   enraged   by' this   demand
and  countercharged   that  incompetent   and  poorly  mo-
tivated   teachers  are  mainly   responsible  for  the   poor
education   of.  their   children.    Both   have  a  point.   The
board  is  developing   procedures   to  give  better  services
to  children  who  are  judged  disruptive,  but  it  has  not
yet  developed  adequate  procedures  to  remove,  retrain,
or  supervise   more  closely  incompetent  teachers."
—110   Livingston  Street   by  David  Rogers,  p.  480.
better  Jewish  tradition  against  Jewish  bigotry  than  to  invoke
the   better   American   tradition   against   white   racism.    The
genocidal  threat,   if  any, in  this  situation   lies   in   the   slow
death  and  degradation  to  which  so  many  blacks  and   Puerto
Ricans  are  doomed   in  our   slums.    To  wipe  out  the   slums
and  help  save  their  occupants  would  be  the  truest  memorial
to  those  who  died  in  Auschwitz.   When   an  idealistic  young
Mayor  and  the  Rabbi  who  tried  to  defend  him  are  howled
down  in  a  synagogue,  it  is  time  for  the  slap  that  can  alone
bring  hysterics to  their  senses.   Lindsay was  saying  "a  Jewish
philosopher—"  when  he  was  forced  to  leave.   The   philos-
opher   he  was  about  to  quote   was  Spinoza.   He,  too, was
thrown   out   of   the   synagogue  in   his   time.   We   ought   to
have   better   sense  today.                                   Oct. 29
* About   three-fourths    of    the    non-striking    teachers   in
Ocean   Hill-Brownsville   are   white   and   about   one   half   of
these  are  Jewish.
We'll   send  a  reprint  of  this  inue  to  a  friend  if   you  tend  a  stamped  self-addressed  long  envelope
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed   $6A)5  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of  Torment  (Random House)  regular price $7.95
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed
Name  ...................................................................................
IS:
Street
City  .
..............................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                "/4/68
5618  Nebraska Are,  N. W., Washington, D. C. 20015
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
L   F.   Stone'i  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.W..  Washington.  D. C.
An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  117  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED