I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968mar04.pdf

============================================================

Special  8-Page  Issue  Documenting  The  Tonkin  Gulf   Fraud
McNamara  and  The  Right  to  Lie
"The  Secretary  .  .  .  has  kept  secret  important communi-
cations  from  the  task  force  that  indicated  doubt  about  the
reported   attack   on  Aug.  4.  ...       Secretary   McNamara's
statement  is  a  classic  example  of  selective   declassification.
....   Security   classification   is   intended   to  protect  the
nation  from  an  enemy,  not  .  .  .  one  branch  of  government
against  another  or  the  public,  nor  to  protect  the  American
people  from  knowledge  of   mistakes.    I  do  not  accept  as
valid  the  view  of  Mr.  Arthur  Sylvester,   the  former   press
officer  of  the  Pentagon,   that  the  Government  has  a  right
to  lie  to  the  people  of  this  country."
—Chm. Fulbright  of  Senate Foreign  Relations  Feb. 21
F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi-Weekly                  *^
VOL.  XVI,  NO.  5
MARCH  4,   1968'<"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
We  Really  Know  Is  That  We  Fired  The  First  Shots
A   major,   if   inadvertent,   revelation   in   McNamara's   new
testimony   on   the   Tonkin   Gulf   affair   has   been    overlooked.
If  there  was  indeed   an  attack  involving   two  U.S.   destr&yers
on  the  night  of  Aug.  4,  1964,  we  began  the  attack,  we  opened
fire   first.   Indeed   the  only  shots  we  are  completely  sure  of
beyond  any  shadow  of  doubt  even  at  this  late  date  are  those
which  came from  our  own  vessels.    McNamara's  new  version
of   the  attack  contradicts  the   melodramatic   account   he   gave
four  years  ago,  two  days  after  the  incident,  behind  the  closed
doors   of   a  joint   executive  session   of   the   Senate's   Foreign
Relations   and   Armed    Services   Committees.      It   was   this
graphic,  but  (as  it  now  appears)  untrue  version  which  helped
stampede  the  Senate  into  voting  the  Tonkin  Gulf   resolution.
A  Mendacious   Melodrama
That  earlier  testimony  was  given  Aug.  6,  1964.    When  the
transcript   of   that  hearing  is  now   compared   with   the   new
one   held   by  the  .Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee,   one
can  begin   to  get   some  idea  of   the   full   dimensions   of   the
mendacity   by   which   the   Johnson   Administration   obtained
that  resolution  which  was  its  blank  check  for  war  in  South-
east  Asia.    "The   attack,"  McNamara   told  the  Senate  commit-
tees  four  years  ago,   "occurred  at  night.    It  appeared   to  be
a  deliberate  attack  in  the  nature  of  an  ambush.     Torpedoes
were  launched,   automatic  weapons  fire  was  directed  against
the  vessels  [the  Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy].    They  returned
the   fire."   (Our   italics.)
The   Secretary   put   it   even   more   vividly   when   Senator
Lausche  asked  him,  "Do  you know  how  many of  the  torpedoes
were  set  in  motion  and  what  small  arms  were  used?"
Secretary  McNamara.   It  is  difficult  to  estimate.    This
was   a- very  dark  night.    The  attack  was  carried  out  dur-
ing  the  night,  the  hours  of  darkness.    It  was  a  premedi-
tated  attack, a  pre-planned attack.    It  was  described  as  an
ambush  in  the  reports  from  the  commanders,  but  because
it  was night  it  is  very  difficult  to  estimate  the  total  amount
of  fire.
Senator  Lausche:  The  shots  were  again  initiated  by  the
North  Vietnamese?
Secretary  McNamara:  Yes.
General  Wheeler:  That  is  correct.
Thus  was  drawn  a  picture  of  "unprovoked  aggression."    It
was  magnified  and  emotionalized  by  President  Johnson  when
he  went  on  TV  after  the  attack  and  declared   "This  new  act
2  *
A  Record  of  Dishonor
"Our  Navy  played  absolutely  no  part  in,  was  not  as-
sociated  with,  was  not  aware  of,  any  South Vietnamese
actions  [attacking  North  Vietnam]  if  there  were  any."
McNamara  to  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Aug.  6,  196!
t
"Higher  naval  commands  were  made  aware  of   the
[commando]   operations    [against    North   Vietnamese
coastal  installations]   by  Commander U.S.  Military  As-
sistance  Command,  Vietnam, in  order  to  avoid  mutual
interference  or  confusion between our  patrols  and  those
operations." *
—McNamara    to   Foreign   Relations   Feb.   20,  1968.
The  two  passages  were  quoted  in  Morse's  speech m  the
Senate  Feb.  21  (see  our  pages  6,  7  and   8).
* Or, could  it  have  been,  to  coordinate  them ?
of  aggression,  aimed  directly  at  our  own  forces,  again  brings
home  to  all  of  us  in  the  United  States  the  importance  of  the
struggle   for   peace   and   security   in   Southeast   Asia."      This
was  echoed  in  the  same  high  dramatic  vein  by  Adlai  Steven-
son   at   the   UN   Security   Council   next   day:   "Without  any
shadow  of  doubt  .  .  .  planned  deliberate  military  aggression
against  vessels   lawfully   present  in  international  waters"   was
Stevenson's  description.    The   rhetoric  made  it  sound   like  a
new  Pearl  Harbor.
But  when  McNamara   appeared   before  the  Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee  a  few  days  ago  on  Feb.  20  he  knew  that
the  Committee  had  in  its  possession  documents  from  Defense
Department   files   which  cast  doubt   on   every  aspect   of  that
earlier  version.    He  had  to  tone  down  his  own  presentation
to  fit.  So in  his  prepared  statement,  as  given  out  to  the  press
that  day,  he  gave   a  very  different   picture  from  that  drawn
four  years  ago.
"At  about  9:39  p.m.,"  McNamara  now  related,  "both Mad-
dox  and  Turner opened  fire  on  the  approaching craft  when
it  was  evident  from  their  maneuvers  [our  italics—not  from
any  shots  but  from  their  maneuvers]  that  they  were  press-
ing  in  for  attack  positions.    At  about  this  time,  the  boats
were  at  a  range  of  6,000  yards from  Maddox  when the  radar
tracking  indicated  that   the   contact  had  turned  away  and
begun   to   open   in   range   [our   italics].     Torpedo   noises
were  then  heard  by  the  Maddox's  sonar.    A  report  of   the
torpedo  noise   was  immediately  passed  to   the  Turner  Joy
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, March 4,1968
(Continued   from   Page   One)
by  inter-ship  radio  and  both  ships  took  evasive  action   to
avoid  the  torpedo.    A  torpedo  wake  was  then  sighted  pass-
ing  abeam  Turner  Joy  from  after  to  forward.
Even  this  scaled  down  version  was  still  a  deceptive  picture
of   what   actually   had   transpired.     McNamara   released   his
statement   during  the   noon   recess   of   the   Feb.   20  hearing,
which  was  held  behind  closed  doors.    He  thus  jumped  the
gun  on  the  committee by getting  his  version  out  first,  perhaps
hoping  that  it  might  be  some time before the  Committee could
publish  the  full   transcript.*    Fortunately  Senator  Morse,   to
whom  the  country  owes  so much  in  this  whole  affair,  courage-
ously  defied  security  regulations  and  in  a  Senate  speech  next
day   (see  pages  6,  7  and  8)   made  public  much  of  the  intra-
mural  Pentagon  messages  obtained  by  the  Committee.     This
and  the  Committee's  anger  over  McNamara's  tricky  action  in
releasing  his  own  testimony brought  about  the  swift  publica-
tion  of  the  whole  record,  with  some  security  deletions.
Tricky  Text  and  Tricky  Tactics
If  the  transcript  of  the  two  hearings  and  the  text  of  Mc-
Namara's  prepared  statement  are  now  placed  side  by  side,  it
is  quite  clear  that  he  and  Secretary Rusk  and  General  Wheeler
lied—there  is  no  other  word  for  it—to  the  Senate  commit-
tees  four  years  ago,  and  that  McNamara  is  still  trying  hard  to
lie  about  it  now.    His  whole  performance  is  the  shameful
climax  of  what  many  had  believed  to  be  an  honorable  record
as  Secretary  of  Defense.    He  withheld  from   the  committees
then—and  in  his  prepared   statement  tried  to  withhold   from
the  public  now—many  crucial  facts  which  cast  doubt  on  the
whole  story  of  the  Aug.  4  attack.   You  have  to  go  from  his
tricky  language  to  the  Morse  speech  and  to  the  hearing  trans-
cript  to  learn  that  three  or  four  hours  after  the  supposed  at-
tack,  the  task  force  commander  on  the  Maddox  cabled   (see
box  top  of  this  page)   a  warning  that  "freak  weather,"   an
"overeager  sonarman"  and  the  absence  of  any  "visual   sight-
* Pentagon  and  State  managed  to  tie  up  the  transcript  of
the  August  6,  1964,  hearing  in  so  many  security  snafus  that
it  was  not  finally  released   until   more  than  two  years  later,
on  Nov.  24,  1966—Thanksgiving  Day  when  it  was   calculated
to  attract  as  little  attention  as  possible.
Bomb  First—Check  Later
Chairman  Fulbright:  We were  .  .  .  discussing ...  a
message   that  had  been  sent  by  Commander  Herrick  of
the  task   force   [who   was  on  board  the  Maddox].    It
reads,  "Review  of  action  makes  many  recorded  contacts
and   torpedoes   fired   appear  doubtful.    Freak   weather
effects  and  overeager  sonarman  may  have  accounted  for
many  reports.  NO  ACTUAL VISUAL  SIGHTINGS BY
MADDOX   [emphasis  added].    Suggest  complete  eval-
uation   before   any   further   action."    To   pin   it   down
again,  when  was  that  message  sent?
Secretary   McNamara:  .  .  .  Local   time  would  have
been  around  1:30  a.m.  Aug.  5.
Chairman   Fulbright:   Approximately  4   or   5   hours
after  the  attack  took  place?
Secretary   McNamara:  Yes,  perhaps  3  hours.  .  .  .
Sen.  Gore:  Was  this  after   the  search  for  debris?
Secretary  McNamara: Substantially  before  the  search
for  debris.  .  .  .
Sen.  Gore: Did  they  find  any  debris?
Secretary   McNamara:  I  do  not  believe   so.
—Foreign  Relations  hearing Feb. SO  '
Since  we  claim  to  have  sunk  two  and  possibly  three
PT  boats,  it  is  strange  that  there  was  no  debris.    Less
strange,  perhaps,  is that  the  retaliatory  attack  was  or-
dered  without waiting  for  any report  on debris.   A  Pen-
tagon  insert  at  p.  58 of  the  hearing  says  "The  instruc-
tion  to  search   for   debris   was  initiated   at   5:11   p.m.
EOT."   The  instruction  might  have  been  "initiated"  at
that  time  but  committee  records  show  that  the  actual
order  to  locate  debris  did  not  go  out  until  after  9  p.m.
EDT  Aug.  5  or  three  hours  after  the  order  to  attack
North  Vietnam.
ings"  cast doubt  o'n the  attack stories  and  called  for  "complete
evaluation  before  any  further  action."    No  one  would  know
from  his  accounts then  or  now  that  no" debris  had  been  found,
though  we claimed  to  have  sunk two  and  possibly three enemy
vessels,   and  that  we  ordered   our   retaliatory  attack  without
waiting  to  learn  the  outcome  of  a  belated  order  to  search  for
debris.
You  have  to  go  back  to  that  master  of  shyster  lawyer  lan-
guage,   John   Foster  Dulles,  to  match  McNamara's  perform-
ance.    If  an  attack  occurred,  how  is  it  that  not  a  single  cap-
tured  North  Vietnamese  naval  man,  including  one  who  was
Not  A  Single  North  Vietnamese  Naval  Captive  Had  Ever  Heard  of  an  Aug. 4  Attack
"As  a  final  point  on  this  issue  [whether  an  Aug.  4  attack
actually  occurred],   U.S.  naval  forces  in  the  three  and  one-
half  years  which  have  elapsed   since  the  August   1964  inci-
dents  have  captured   several  North  Vietnamese  naval  per-
sonnel.  These  personnel  were  extensively   interrogated.  One
of  these,  captured  in  July   1966,  stated   that  he  had  taken
part  in  the  2  August   1964  attack  on  the  Maddox,  and  his
account  of  that  attack  coincided  with  our  observations.     He
professed  no  knowledge  of  the  4  August   attack  and  said
that  he  believed  that  PT  boats  were  not  involved.    His  dis-
claimer  of  PT  participation  is  contradicted  by  information
received  from  a  later  captive.    A  North  Vietnamese  naval
officer  captured  in  July  1967  provided  the  name  of  the  com-
mander  of  a  PT  squadron.   In  intelligence  reports  received
immediately  after  the  4 August  attack,  this  Commander and
his  squadron  were  identified  by  name  and  number  as  par-
ticipants."
—McNamara's   prepared  statement  of  Feb.  20.    The  lat-
ter  part  of  this  is  a  pretty  feeble   effort    to  get  away   from
the  fact   that  not  a  single  captive  had  ever  heard  of  what
would  have  been  for  the  North  a  famous  naval   encounter.
Now  compare  McNamara's  version with  the  Navy's   own  re-
port   on  prisoner  interrogations   as  read  into   the  record  of
the  Senate  hearing  by  Fulbright   (  p.  75  Feb.   SIO   hearing):
"Extensive  interrogation  of  all  potentially   knowledgeable
sources  reveals  they  have  no  info  concerning  a  NVN  attack
on  U.S.  ships  on  4  August  1964.   They  stated  definitely  and
emphatically  that  no  PTS  could  have  been  involved.  . . . The
possibility  that  Swatows  [McNamara  testified  these  vessels
carry  no  torpedoes  and  a  footnote   p.  75  says   they   were
neither  designed  nor  intended  for  use  against  larger  ships]
could  have  committed  the  Aug.  4  attack  has  also  been  care-
fully  explored.    Here,  again,  all  sources  disclaim  any knowl-
edge  of  such  an attack ...  it  is  very  possible  that  PT  boat
crews  in  general  might  not  have  heard  of  this  attack  since
they  apparently  have  little  contact   with   other   ship  types.
...  On the other  hand,  source  [deleted  by  Pentagon  censor]
obviously   has   travelled   in   higher   circles  and  has  proved
himself  exceptionally  knowledgeable  on  almost  every  naval
subject  and  event  of  interest.    YET  HE  SPECIFICALLY
AND  STRONGLY DENIED  THAT  ANY   ATTA'  K  TOOK
PLACE."    [Emphasis  added.]
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 4,1968
very  cooperative  (see  box  bottom  of  p.  2)   denied  knowledge
of  any  such  attack?    How  is  it  that  Hanoi,  which  boasted  of
the  Aug.  2  attack,  has  always  denied  the  Aug.  4  attack?    If
Hanoi  attacked  on  August  4,  in  the  face  of  Johnson's  warn-
ing  after  Aug.  2,  how  is  it  that  its  entire tiny  fleet  was  caught
by  surprise in  our  retaliatory attack the  next  day ?   "Why,"  as
North  Vietnam asked  in  its own  White  Paper  which  has  been
kept  from  the  U.S.  public   (see  pages  4  and  5),   "does   this
small  country  with  its  negligible  naval  forces  embark  on  a
systematic  provocation of  the  U.S.  7th  Fleet  with   its  125  ves-
sels   and   650   airplanes?"     And   then   take   no   precautions
against  a counter-attack?
Familiar  Military  Habits
Fake  incidents  are  hardly  new  in   the  history  of   military
bureaucracies.   The  Japanese  military staged  one  near  Mukden
in  1931  to  begin  its  seizure  of  Manchuria  despite  parliamen-
tary  disapproval.  The  Pueblo  incident illustrates  another  noto-
rious military  tactic: they play incidents up  or  down  like  an  or-
ganist  depending on  whether  they want  to  make  or  avoid  war.
Faked  or  exaggerated,  the  Tonkin  incidents  were  used  for  a
war  buildup  the  White  House  and  Pentagon  wanted.  The  full
truth  is  still  hidden  and  we  applaud  Senator  Gruening's  de-
mand  that  the  staff  study  prepared  by the  Fulbright  Committee
be  released.   We  are  told  that  McNamara  urged  "  a  decisive
commitment"   in  Vietnam  on  Johnson   a  few  days  after   the
Kennedy   assassination.     If  the   Foreign   Relations  committee
digs  further,  it  will  find  that  both  the  bombing  of  the  North
and   the   commitment   of   combat   troops   to   Vietnam   were
planned   at  the  Pentagon   several  months  before  the   Tonkin
Gulf  incidents,  that  the  Tonkin  Gulf  resolution  was  prepared
beforehand,  and  that  the  course  pursued  beginning  in  July,
1964,   was  calculated  to  create  some  kind  of  incident  sooner
or  later,  to   justify    the   expansion  of   the   conflict    already   de-
cided  upon.    A  Rostow  Plan  No.   6  for   "PT-boat  raids  on
North   Vietnamese  coastal  installations  and  then   by  strategic
bombing  raids  flown  by  U.S.  pilots  under  either  the  U.S.  or
South  Vietnamese  flags"  was  disclosed  in  Newsweek   as  early
What  Was  The   Hurry?
Mr.  Seals:  In  the  light  of  the  testimony,  do  you  be-
lieve  that  Secretary  McNamara  took   adequate  precau-
tions   to   check   and  double-check   the   cable   from   the
Commander   of  the  Task  Force  [quoted  in  the  1-col  box
on  our p.  2]  and to  prove  to  himself,  to  his  satisfaction
at  least  that  an  attack  did  take  place?
Sen.  Fulbright:  I  do not .  .  .  Why did  we  have  to act
immediately  without  taking  time  to  evaluate  it? ...
We  were  in  no danger.   No  damage  was  being  done.
—On ABC-TV's  Issues  and Answers  Feb.  25
as  March  9,   1964.     The  coastal  raids  began   in  July,    1964,
by  vessels  we  supplied  the  South  Vietnamese,  with  crews  we
trained,  backstopped  by  intelligence  our  planes  and  ships  pro-
vided.    The  collection   of  such  information   was  the   business
of  those  "routine  patrols"  on  which  we  sent  our   destroyers.
We   cannot  claim  freedom  of  the   seas   for   such   missions.
If  Russian vessels backstopped  Cuban  naval attacks on  Florida,
we  would  take  counter-action  even  if  they  stayed  outside  our
3-mile  limit.   There  are  no  territorial  limits  in  war,  and  this
would  be  war.    We  merely  compounded  the  offense  and  as-
sured  an  "incident"  by  instructing  our   destroyers  to   ignore
North  Vietnam's  12-mile  limit.    Me  Namara  in  his  prepared
statement  fell  back  on  the  disingenuous  argument  that  we  had
no  "official  documentary"  evidence  of  this  12-mile limit.  Even
the  Geographer's   Office  at  the  State  Department  admitted   to
us  in  a telephone  inquiry that  it  had  always been  assumed  that
North   Vietnam's  limit,  like  China's  and  North  Korea's,  was
12  miles.    What   was  McNamara   waiting   for—an    affidavit
from  Ho  Chi  Minh?    Men  who  can  so  twist  the  truth  are  a
menace  to  national  security.    In  the  pages  of  this  special  issue,
as  gleaned  from  the  Senate  hearings,  Morse's   speech   and  the
North  Vietnamese  White   Paper,  one  can  begin  to  see  what
I  believe  will  prove  to  be  one  of  the  great  military  frauds
of  world  history,  the  curtain  raiser  for   our  disastrous  Viet-
namese  adventure,  which may easily and  soon  turn  into a wider
and  nuclear  war.    There  are  no  limits  to  what   such  leader-
ship  may  cook  up.    Khesanh  may provide  the  excuse.
An  Insider's   Anonymous  Letter  Hints  Reprisal  Rushed   to  Meet  LBJ's   TV   Deadline
"Getting  the  logs  of  the  Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy  may
be  of  some  use  to  you  in  trying  to  get  to  the  bottom  of  the
Tonkin  Gulf  incident,  but  it  really  won't  help  much.     What
you  most  need  is   the  record  of  events  of  communications
passing  through  the  national  military  command  and  control
center.    Most   of  them  have  probably  now  been  destroyed.
Whatever  study  was   made  on  the  basis  of  most  of  these
records,   fresh   after   the   event,   by   the   Weapons   System
Evaluation   Group   entitled   'Command   and   Control   of   the
Tonkin  Gulf   Incident,  4-5  August   1964,'  this  document   is
Top  Secret  and  it  is  very  tightly  held  because  it  is  based
in   part  on  the  tape  recordings  of   conversations  over   the
phone  of  the  President,  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  Admiral
Sharp  and  others  during  the  period  when  the  critical  de-
cisions  were  being  made.  .  .  .
"After  the  first  report  of  the  attack  there  was  a  report
there   probably   had  not   been   an  attack   at   all.     But   the
President  was  to  go  on  the  air  to  address  the  Nation  about
the  retaliatory  attacks  that  had  already  been  planned,  and
after  another  flurry  of  confusion  Admiral  Sharp  said  there
had  been  a  real  attack  after   all.
"At  this  point  the  Secretary  of  Defense  decided  to  advise
the  President  that  the  attack  on  the  Turner  Joy  was  real
and  to  order  the  retaliatory  attacks  and  go  ahead  with  the
speech  because  it  was  getting  very  late  for  the  address  to
the  Nation  and,  moreover,  the  retaliatory  attack  planes  had
been  kept  in  a  state  of  take-off   readiness  for  the  maximum
time.  .  .  .  Because  later  events  all  indicate  that  the  second
attack  was  at  best  a  trick  of  false  radar  images.
"I  am  sure  if  I  signed  this  I  would  lose  my  job.  .  .  . The
Tonkin  Gulf  incident,  upon  the  basis  of  which  the  resolution
was  so  quickly  obtained,  was  not  a  put-up   job.    But  it  was
not  the  inexcusable  and  flagrant  attack   upon  U.  S.  ships
that  it  seemed  to  be, and that  would  have  justified   the  reso-
lution  and retaliation  had  there  been  so.   It  was  a  confused
bungle  which  was  used  by  the  President  to  justify  a  general
course  of  action  .  .  .  advised  by the  military.  .  .  .
"One;  of  the  things  your  committee  should  really  look  into
is  the  constant  use  of  security  regulations  to  conceal  the
blunders  and the  connivings  in  the  field  of  national  security.
But  I  doubt  that  all  the  power  of  the  United  States  Senate
could  ever  penetrate  far  enough  into  the  supersecret  world
to  learn  much  about  what  goes  on.    Right  now  the  JCS  is
refusing  materials  in  their  field  wanted  by  people  working
on  Vietnam  for  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  most  obviously
because  they  are  fearful  it  would  serve  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense's  purposes,  not  theirs."
—Inserted  by  Morse at  pps.  8U-5  of  the  Feb. SO hearing
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  4,1968
From  North  Vietnam's White Paper  on  the  Tonkin  Gulf  Incidents
We  reprint   here  two  portions  of  a  White   Paper  issued
by  North   Vietnam   in  September   1964  on  the  Tonkin    Gulf
incidents.    Strangely    enough  neither   I  nor  anyone  else  I
know  who gets  material  from  Hanoi  ever  received  it.    This
leads  me  to  wonder  whether  postal  authorities   intercepted
copies  mailed  to  this  country.    The  new  Fulbright  hearing
discloses  that  North  Vietnam's   account,  as  given  here,  of
the   aggressive   actions  which   preceded   the  incidents   are
closer  to  the  truth  than  the   official    U.S.  version.    We  also
give  in  a  box  below  North  Vietnam's   explanation   of   the
second   attack   which  it   denies  ever  took  place.     Frankly
we  find  Hanoi's  explanation  of  the  Aug.  4  incident  incredi-
ble  but   so  is  so  much  of  this  strange      affair.
According  to  the  contentions  of  the  White  House  and  the
Pentagon,  U.S.  destroyers  have  been  subjected  to   "unprovoked
attacks"  by  "North  Vietnamese  PT-boats"  while  on  "routine
patrols"  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf.    In  the  light  of  facts  and  inter-
national   law,  such  contentions  are  untenable.     First   of   all,
the  United  States  has  no  right  whatsoever  to  send   warships
"patrolling"   along  the  coasts  of  the  Democratic   Republic  of
Vietnam.    For  a  long  time  now,  the  United   States  has  sent
part  of   the  Seventh  Fleet—totalling  about   30  destroyers  ac-
cording  to  an  AFP  report  of  August  2,  1964—on   continuous
operations  off  the  coasts  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet-
nam.     It    suffices   for   the   American   people   to   imagine   a
foreign  fleet  of  30  warships  permanently  "patrolling"  in  the
Gulf   of   Mexico  to  realize  how  impudent   and  arrogant   are
the  Johnson   Administration's  acts  in  the  Gulf  of  Bac  Bo.
As  a matter of  fact,  those  Warships  have  frequently  intruded
into  the  territorial waters  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet-
nam.    On   August  8,   1964,   U.S.   Deputy   Defense   Secretary
Cyrus  Vance  bluntly  stated  that  "Washington  did  not   recog-
nize  the   limit  of  North  Vietnam     territorial   waters   as  12
miles.    The  United  States",  he  said,  "recognized  a  limit  of
3  miles  and  American  ships  had  received  a  formal  order  not
to  move  inside  this   3  mile-limit."     (AFP   Aug.   8,   1964.)
The  "American  boats  in  the  past  had  moved  within  12  miles
of  the  North  Vietnam  coast".    This  amounts  to  clear   admis-
sion   of   U.S.   intrusions   into   the   territorial   waters   of   the
Democratic  Republic  of   Vietnam.
It   was  the-destroyer   Maddox   which  first  opened   fire   on
the  patrol  boats  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam   in
Vietnamese  territorial  waters  on  August  2,   1964.     At  mid-
night  August  4,   1964   (local  time),  the  U.S.   Defense   Secre-
tary  held  a  press  conference  in  Washington,   and  gave  a  de-
tailed   account,  according   to   the   chronological   order,   about
the  two  "attacks  by  North  Vietnamese   PT-boats".    But  he
made  absolutely  no   reference  to  the   position   and   activities
A  Key  Question   Never   Answered
Chairman  Fulbright:  How   do  you   account  tor   the
fact  that   the  North  Vietnamese  boasted  of   their   at-
tack  on  the  Maddox  Aug.  2  and  yet  vehemently denied
there  had  been  an  incident  Aug.  4?
Secretary   McNamara:  I   cannot   answer   that   ques-
tion,  Mr.  Chairman.   Their  damage'  might  have  been
greater  on  the  4th  than  it   was  on  the  2d,  I  just  do
not  know.
Fulbright:  Do  you  have  any  idea,  Gen.  Wheeler?
Gen.  Wheeler: I  have  no  idea,  Mr. Chairman.
—Foreign  Relations  hearing  Feb.  20,1968
of  the  Maddox  on  July  31  and  August  1,  1964.    While  as-
serting  that  on  August  2,  at  1230   (local  time)  the  destroyer
was  49  km  from  the  coast,  he  gave  no  indication  as  to  its
position   at   1508   (local  time),  when   it  was  reportedly   "at-
tacked  by  3  PT-boats".
As  a  matter  of  fact,  on  July  31  and  August  1,  the  Maddox
repeatedly   intruded   into   Vietnamese   waters,   and   threatened
and  provoked  fishing  boats  in  the  area:
—At  0530  (local  time),  on July  31,  it  was  sailing  5  miles
off   Vietnamese   coasts,   between   Mui   Doc   and   Hon   Gio
Island  (belonging  to  the  Democratic  Republic of  Vietnam).
From  the  coast,  its  registration   number  731  could  already
be  seen  clearly  through  binoculars.
—At   1430  (local  time),   on  August   1,  it   chased   three
fishing   boast   south   of   Hon   Mat   Island,   in   Vietnamese
waters.
—Finally,  on  August  2,  at  1500  (local  time),  while  sail-
ing   between   Hon   Me  Island  and  Lach  Truong,   about   8
miles  off  the  coast,   the   Maddox  encountered   and  opened
fire  on  Vietnamese  patrol  boats  thus  compelled  to  take  a
defensive   action   to   drive   the   intruder   off    Vietnamese
waters.
The  United  States  is  at  a  loss  to  give  convincing   evidence
about  the  "second  deliberate  attack  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf"  ac-
tually  taking  place.
As  pointed  out  [below},  the  "second  attack  by North  Viet-
namese   PT-boats"   on   the   U.S.S.   Maddox   and   the   U.S.S.
Turner  Joy  in  the  night  of  August  4,   1964   was  but  a  farce
staged  by  U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese  warships.    That  is  the
reason  why  the  Pentagon  was  unable  to  produce  any  evidence
to  this   effect.
In  view  of  its  being  a  sheer  fabrication,  the  story  presents
many   absurdities  which  cannot   be  explained.
During  his  August  4  press  conference,  McNamara   referred
to   the   Maddox   reporting   "radar   contact   with   unidentified
surface   vessels",   and  stated   that  the  "attack"  took   place  in
very  bad  weather   conditions.    He  said,   among   other   things
North  Vietnam  Charges  The  Second  Attack  Was  Simply  A  Staged  Fabrication
"In  the  day  and  night  of  August  4,  1964  no  naval  craft
of  the  Democratic Republic  of  Vietnam  was  present  in  the
area   where  the   U.S.   destroyers   were   allegedly   'attacked
for  a  second  time  by  North  Vietnamese  PT  boats.'
"The   alleged   'attack'   was   deliberately   staged   by   the
United  States  to  have a  pretext  for  carrying  out  its  crimi-
nal  designs   against   the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam.
"According  to  reports from  various  sources,  a  task  group
of  the  Seventh  Fleet  including  the  aircraft  carrier  Ticon-
deroga   and  the  destroyers   Berkeley,  Edison,   Harry  Hub-
bard,  and  Samuel  Moore  was  cruising  on  a  permanent  basis
in  the  South  China  Sea  off  Da  Nang.
"On  August  4,  1964  the   Harry  Hubbard  met   with  the
H.Q.  609  and  H.Q. 11  of  the  South  Vietnam  Navy  60  kilo-
meters   off   Da  Nang.     Thereafter,   the   South   Vietnamese
ships  did  not  return  to  their  base  Tien  Sa  (Da  Nang)   as
usual.    In  the  same  night,  from  2000  to  2200,  at  about  the
time  when  'North  Vietnamese  PT-boats'  allegedly  'attacked
the  Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy',  gun  shelling   was  heard,
flares  and  planes  were  seen  off  the   shores   of   the  Demo-
cratic   Republic  of  Vietnam  on  international    waters.
"That  is  what the  Pentagon  termed  'the  second  deliberate
attack'  on  the  destroyers   Maddox  and  Turner  Joy  or  'the
second Tonkin Gulf incident'."—North  Vietnam  White  Paper
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  4,1968
A  Background  Account  Hitherto  Not  Available In  This  Country
that  at    2242   (local  time)   weather  conditions  and   darkness
"hampered   the  operations"  of  the  covering  aircraft,  and  that
at  0032  on  August  5,  low  clouds  continued  "to  hamper   the
operations"  of  the  Air  Force.
Bad  weather  and  complete  darkness  preventing  the  identi-
fication  of  the  vessels,  how  then  could  it  be  asserted  that  they
belonged  to  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet  Nam?
Many   people   queried:   For   what   purpose   should   North
Vietnamese  vessels  "attack"  U.S.  destroyers?    Why  does  this
small  country  with  its  negligible   naval  forces  embark  on  a
systematic  provocation  of  the  U.S.  Seventh  Fleet  with  its  125
vessels  and  650  aeroplanes?
Again  in  view  of  its  being  an  out-and-out  fabrication,  the
story  presents  many loopholes:
—President  Johnson  said  that  following  the  August  2,   1964
"attack"  in  the  Gulf   of   Bac  Bo,  he  ordered   the   destroyer
Turner  Joy—then  in  the  Philippines—to  join  the   Maddox.
In  fact,  at  1930   (local  time)   on  August  2,  the  Turner  Joy
was  already  in  the  Gulf  of  Bac  Bo,  east  of  Dec  Ngang.    In
other  words,   it  must  have   received  the  relevant   instructions
prior  to  "the  first  attack"  on  the  Maddox.
—President  Johnson   also  said  that  following  the  "second
attack"  in  the  night  of  August  4,  1964,   he  ordered   the  air-
craft   carrier  Constellation   to  sail  to  the  Gulf   of  Bac  Bo  as
reinforcement  to  the  U.S.  Navy  there.    Actually,  the  Constel-
lation  left  Hong  Kong   in  the  morning  of  August   4,    1964.
This  was  confirmed  by  its  commander,   Captain  Frederic   A.
Bardshar  at  his  August   10,   1964   press   conference   (Reuter,
Aug.  10,  1964).   In  the  evening  of  August  4,  1964,   i.e.  prior
to  the  "second  attack,"  the  carrier  was  already  in  the  Gulf
of  Bac  Bo.
Judging  by  President  Johnson's   assertions,  it  would  appear
that  the  destroyer  Maddox  was  the  only  U.S.  warship  in  the
Gulf  of  Bac  Bo  in  the  evening  of  August  2.    As  a  matter  of
fact,  four  U.S.   destroyers  were  operating   at  that  time   along
North  Vietnamese  coasts,  namely  the  Maddox,  the Turner  Joy,
the  Samuel  Moore  and  the  Berkeley.
In  the  evening  of  August  4  and  prior  to  the  "second  at-
tack,"  11  U.S.  warships  belonging  to  the  Seventh  Fleet  were
already  on  the  spot:  Ticonderoga  task  group  with   the   air-
craft   carrier  Ticonderoga,   destroyers  Samuel  Moore,  Edison,
Harry  Hubbard   and  Berkeley;  Constellation   task  group  with
the  aircraft  carrier  Constellation,  destroyers  Preston  and  Fech-
Fatuous  Reply  to  A  Searching  Question
Chairman  Fulbright:  Gen. Wheeler told us  during the
Aug.  6  hearing  [in  1964]  that  the  North  Vietnamese
patrol  boats  were  found  dead  in  the  water  at  their base
as  the  U.S.  aircraft attacked.   If  the  North Vietnamese
had  actually attacked  the  Maddox  and Turner Joy,  why
would  they  leave  offensive  patrol  craft  tied  up  at  the
docks  without  any  alert?
Gen.   Wheeler:  I   suppose  they   presumed  since   we
had  not  retaliated   against  them  after  the  first  attack
on  Maddox  that  we  would  not  retaliate  when  they  had
a  second  attack,  Mr. Chairman.
The  Chairman: Well,  I  remember  from  your  testi-
mony  it  strikes  me that  they  are  extraordinarily  stupid.
If  after  having  attacked  at  approximately  9,  10  o'clock
in  the  evening  that  all  those  boats  are  in  their  berths
only  a  few  miles,  60  miles  away  without  any  alert  at
all,  sitting   there  quite  vulnerable to  destruction.
—Feb. 20,1968  hearing
teler,  and  the  U.S.S.  Gridley;  and  finally  the  two  destroyers
Maddox  and  Turner   Joy.
According  to  President  Johnson's August  4,  1964  statement,
the  air  strike  against  North  Viet  Nam  was  decided  following
the  "second  attack"  on  U.S.  warships  in  the  Gulf  of  Bac  Bo.
But,  according  to  the  Reuter  correspondent  who  attended
the  August  10,  1964  press  conference   aboard  a  ship  of   the
Seventh  Fleet,  the  pilot  of  an A-4 jet  based  on  the  carrier Con-
stellation—whose  name  was  not  given—said  that   the  pilots
were  informed   of  the  attack  against North  Viet  Nam   back  in
the  morning  of  August  4,  that  is  in  the  evening  of  August   3
(Washington   time).    {Emphasis  added.}
To  justify  its  war  act,  the. United  States  has  embarked  on
a   large-scale   diplomatic   move.
Pursuant  to  the  U.S.  plan  and  at  U.S.  request,  on  August  5,
the  UN  Security  Council  held  a  special  meeting  to  hear  U.S.
permanent  representative  Adlai  Stevenson  give  an  account  of
the  "Tonkin  Gulf    incidents."
The  August  5,  1964  air  raid  was  not  an  isolated  action:  on
the  contrary,  it  came  in  the  wake  of  a  series  of  other  U.S.  war
acts  against  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet  Nam:   shelling
of  Hon  Ngu  and  Hon  Me  Islands,  bombing  and  strafing  of
Nam  Can  and  Noong  De,  shelling  of  Ron  and  Deo  Ngang,
provocations  by  the  Maddox  in  Vietnamese  territorial  waters
from  July  31  to  August  2,   1964.
Evidence  from  American  Sources  Which  Supports  North  Vietnam's  Charges
"The   U.S.-North   Vietnamese  clashes   [in   Tonkin  Gulf]
had  been  preceded  by  sharp  U.S.-South  Vietnamese  debate
in  July  on  whether to  extend  the  war  to  North  Vietnam.
"U.S.  Ambassador Maxwell D.  Taylor  met  with  Premier
Nuguyen   Khanh   in   Saigon   July   23   and  reportedly   said
that  recent  South  Vietnamese  pronouncements  and  threats
of  carrying  the  war  beyond  South  Vietnam's  borders  were
contrary  to  U.S.  policy.
"Taylor   also   was   said   to   have   expressed   displeasure
with  a  statement  that  had  been  made  by  Vietnamese  Air
Commodore  Nguyen  Cao  Ky  at  a  Saigon  news  conference
July  22.    Ky  had  said  his  air  force  was  ready  to  launch
bombing  attacks  against   North  Vietnam  immediately.    Ky
also  said  that  for  the  past  3  years  South  Vietnamese  'com-
bat  teams'  had  carried  out  combat  raids  inside  North  Viet-
nam  fay  'air,  sea  and  land.'    Ky  asserted  that  more  Viet-
namese  pilots  and  infiltration teams  were  being  trained  for
combat   missions   against   North   Vietnam.    During  their
meeting,  Taylor  and  Khanh were  said  to  have reprimanded
Ky.    Khanh  was  said  to  have  assured  Taylor  that  the  U.S.
and  South  Vietnam's  war  policy  were  basically  the  same,
that  their  differences centered  only  on  timing  and  on  what
to  announce publicly."
—Facts  on File, p. 250, Aug.  5,1964.
Senator   Carlson.    Press  reports  indicate  there  is  a  con-
tinuous   infiltration   of   Southern   Vietnamese   into   North
Vietnam.    [Deleted.]
Secretary   McNamara.    This  is   such  a  highly  classified
subject,  Senator  Carlson,  it  is   difficult   for  me  to   answer
your  question  fully.
Senator  Carlson.    I  will  not  ask  you  to  discuss  it   then.
—Senate  Tonkin  Gulf  Hearing,  Aug.  6,1964
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'3  Weekly,  March  4,1968
Morse in  A  Hard-Hitting  Speech  Adds  Up  McNamara's  Mistatements
By  Senator  Wayne  Morse*
I  have  no  intention  of  letting  the  Secretary  of  Defense  go
out  of   office  on  the  assumption   that  the  testimony  he   gave
either   on  August  6,   1964,  or  .yesterday   represents   accurate
testimony  in  many particulars.    I  want to  say that  I  speak  with
great  sadness  for  I  have  exceedingly  high  regard  for  the  Sec-
retary  of  Defense.    I  think  he  is one  of  the  most  brilliant  men
in  public  life  that  I  have  ever  known.
Mr.  President,  on  August  6,  1964,  the  Secretary of  Defense
said  before  the  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations:  "The   Mad-
dox  was  operating  in  international  waters,  was  carrying  out  a
routine  patrol. ..."   That was a misstatement.   The  Maddox
was  a  spy  ship  at  that  time  under  instruction  to  stimulate  the
electronic  instruments  of North  Vietnam  to  carry out  a  spying
activity.    That  is  not  a  routine  patrol  for  a  destroyer.
Going  back  to  his  statement  of  August  6,  1964:   "It    [the
Maddox]  was not  informed  of,  was not  aware of,  had  no  evi-
dence  of,  and  so  far  as  I  know  today  has  no  knowledge  of
any  South  Vietnamese  actions  in  connection  with  the  two  is-
lands  [attacked  in  Tonkin  Gulf]  that  Senator  Morse  referred
to."   He  is  dead  wrong.   What  do  the  facts  show?   With  re-
spect  to  the  Navy's  knowledge  of  South  Vietnam's   operation
against  North  Vietnam,  first,  on  July  15,  1964,   in  approving
the  patrol  of  the  Maddox,  the  Joint  Chiefs cautioned  the  naval
commander  in  chief  of  the  Pacific  Fleet  that  "activity  in  34-A
operations   has   increased."
Keep  in  mind  that  "34-A  operations"  is  the  identification
mark  for  the  South  Vietnamese  bombing  boats  fully   equipped
by  the  United   States,  with  a  staff  trained  by  the  U.S.   Navy.
Our  Navy  was not  only  well  aware of  the  fact  that  those  boats
were  going  up  to  bomb  those  two  islands  3  to  6  miles   from
the  coast  of  North  Vietnam,  but  our  Navy  was  in  constant
contact  with  the  operation   and  knew  what  was  taking   place
step  by  step.
There  is  this  message,   for  example,   sent  out  to  the  naval
commander  in  chief  of  the  Pacific  Fleet  [July  15,  1964]:
"Activity   in   34-A  operations   has  increased.    These  34-A
operations   consisted   of   South   Vietnamese  patrol  craft   (the
crafts  supplied  by  the  United  States,  and  with  United   States
trained   crews)   bombarding   for   the  first  time  North   Viet-
namese  shore   installations."
Early  in  the  morning  of  August  4,   1964,   the  commander
in  chief  of  the  Pacific  Fleet  cabled  the  Maddox  and  in  that
cable  pointed  out:   "The   above  patrol  will:  (a)   clearly   dem-
onstrate  our  determination  to  continue  these  operations;   (b)
* Abridged  from  his  speech  in  the  Senate   Feb.  21.
Pentagon  Leaks  to  Morse
"As I  said  yesterday in  the  committee meeting in  the
presence  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  I  did  not  speak
on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  on  August 5  and  August  6
[1964]  without  having  some  information  to  justify  my
making  some  of  the  comments I  made.   I  served on  the
Armed   Services   Committee   for   years.     I   still  have
very  close  contact  with  highly  reliable  people.    I  had
a  call  from  the  Pentagon  Building  before  I  made  the
first  speech,  suggesting  that  I  ask  for  the  logs.    And
I  asked  for  them  in  the' speech.    The  call  also  sug-
gested  that  I  seek  to  find  out  what  the   Maddox  was
doing,  because  she  was  not  on  a  routine  patrol  mis-
sion,  but  was  acting  as  a  spy  ship."
—Morse  in  the Senate, Feb. 21
possibly  draw  NVN   (North  Vietnamese  Navy)   PGMS  (Pa-
trol  Boats)   to  northward  away  from  area  of  34-A  ops;   (c)
eliminate  DeSoto  [name  of  Maddox  patrol]   patrol   interfer-
ence  with  34-A   ops."
Why,  it  was  a  decoy  operation.    That  is  what  that  message
means.    You  follow  the   course  that  will  draw  the   North
Vietnamese  Navy  northward  and  'eastward  away  from  the  di-
rection  of  the  bombing  of  the  islands  of  North  Vietnam  by
the  South   Vietnamese  boats  equipped   by  the  United  States.
The   Secretary  yesterday  says  that   the   torpedo  attacks  were
some  2  days  after  the  bombing  of  the  islands.    What  would
cause  anyone to  believe that  the  North  Vietnamese knew  what
any  terminal  dates  for  our  operations  were?    The  ships  were
still  in  the  area.    Why  should  she think  there  were  not  going
to  be  further  bombardments?
We  still  do  not  know  whether  the  plan  was  just  to.bomb
those  two  islands  or  continue  other  bombardments.   I  do  not
think  we  .will  ever  know.
On  August  2  and  August  4,  U.S.  vessels  were  in  interna-
tional  waters  when  the  alleged  incidents  occurred.    Patrol  in-
structions  issued  in  January  1964,   in  part  were  as   follows:
"The  closest  approach  to  the  Chicom  coast  is  15 nautical  miles.
The  closest  point  of  approach  to  the  North  Vietnamese  coast
is  8  miles.    CPA  to  the  North"—that  is,  the  closest  point  of
approach—"to  the  North  Vietnamese  islands  is  4  miles."
If  we  hold  to  the  point  of  view  that  we  were  bound  only
by  a  3-mile  limit,  our  ships  were  always  in  international  wa-
ters.    But,  do  not  forget  that  there  is  another  point  of  view
of  the  enemy,  namely  they  do  not  recognize  the  3-mile  limit.
They  take  the  position—the  Secretary  of  Defense  disputed  it
yesterday,  but  I  think  the  record  is perfectly  clear—that  North
Vietnam  along  with  China  insists  on  a  12-mile  limit.   Under
Morse  Says  As  A  Spyship  The  Maddox  Could  Not   Claim  Normal  Legal Rights
"I  think  we  have never  come  to  grips  with  what  we  were
doing  long  before  the  2d  and  4th,  long  before  the  incidents
of  Tonkin  Bay.    The  fact  that  we  had  this  kind  of   pres-
ence  there,  that  we  were  stimulating  the  electronic  devices
.of  the  North  Vietr imese,  that  we  were  carrying  on  intel-
ligence  operations  was wrong.
"The  Maddox  was  on  this  occasion  a  spyship  and  quite
a  different  body  of  international  law  applies  to  spy  activi-
ties than applies to other  activities.    I  don't  think  we  should
have  been  there  and  especially  under  those   circumstances
when  the  Navy  and  the  administration  knew  that   South
Vietnamese  naval  vessels  that   we  had  furnished  and  the
personnel  that  we  had  trained  were  on  their  way  in  that
period   of   time  to   bombard  North   Vietnam   and  its   two
islands.   The  Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy  were  in  the  area
despite  all  our  talks  about  distances.    The  fact  is  that  the
North  Vietnamese  had  no  reason  to  believe  that  we  were
trying  to  keep  separate  the  South  Vietnamese  boat  opera-
tions  and  oar  patrols.    I  think  it  would  be  a  very  reason-
able  conclusion  if  they  thought  there  was  a  connection.    I
happen  to  think  there  was  a  very  clear   connection."
—Morse  at  the McNamara  hearing Feb. 20.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 4,1968
McNamara  Hid  From  the  Senate  and  the  Country  Four  Years Ago
the  circumstances,  with  the  shelling  taking  place  on  North
Vietnamese  islands,  with  this  kind  of  activity  on  the  part  of
our  destroyer,  which  was  not  a  routine  patrol,  that  that con-
stituted  an  act  of  constructive  aggression  on  the  part  of   the
United  States.    It  constituted  picking a fight.
That  was  really  the  beginning  of  the  escalation  into  North
Vietnam.    I  would  have  the  American people  remember  that,
as  I  said  back  in  my  speech  of  August  5,  1964, and   August
6,  1964  that  prior  to  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident  the  admin-
istration  did  not  produce  witnesses  before  the  Committee  on
Foreign  Relations who  testified  about  any infiltration of  North
Vietnamese  troops  into  South  Vietnam.    That  infiltration  be-
gan  after  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  incident.
After  the  attack on  the  Maddox  on  August  2,  the  Navy was
authorized  to  continue "routine  patrols"  in  the  Gulf  of Ton-
kin  and  to  double  the  force  by adding  an  additional  destroyer
the  Turner  Joy—to  the  patrol.    At  the  same  time,  the  State
Department   delivered  a  note  of  protest   to  the  North  Viet-
namese  Government.   The  note  concluded  with  the  statement
that  the  North  Vietnamese  should  be  under  no  misapprehen-
sion   "as  to  the  grave  consequences   which  would  inevitably
result  from  any  further  unprovoked  offensive  military  action
against  the  U.S.  forces."
After  the  incident  of  August  4,  Secretary  McNamara  told
the  committee  that  the  destroyers  had  come  under  continuous
torpedo  attack  and  that  they  had  sunk  two  of  the  attacking
craft.    He  gave  us  no  information  as  to  the  conflicting  points
of  view  even  in  the  military,  to  say nothing  about  conflicting
points  of  view  elsewhere.
Secretary  McNamara  testified  that—"Deliberate  and  unpro-
voked  nature  of  the  attacks  at  locations  that  were indisputably
in  international  waters  compelled   the  President  and  his  prin-
cipal   advisers   to   conclude   that   prompt   and   firm   military
response  was  required."
The  attacks  were  all  over,  whatever  they  were,   whatever
their  type.  The  Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy were in  no  danger
then.    And,  of  course,  what  would  reason  and  dedication   to
peaceful  pursuit  of  the  settlement of  disputes  have  called  upon
the  administration  to  do  at  that  time?
Well,  to  move  further  out  into  international  waters,  until
we got  the  matter  before  a tribunal  that  would  have  the  juris-
diction  and  the  authority  to  adjudicate  it.   That  was the  duty.
"Here  you  are  with  islands  3  to  6  miles  away,  being
bombarded   by   the   South   Vietnamese,   and  then   you
look  out  and  you  see  two  U.S. destroyers  not  too  far
away,  stimulating  the  electronic   instruments  of  North
Vietnam,  causing   great   alarm  and  concern   on   their
part;  moving to  the  east  and north  away from  the  area
of  the  bombardn^nt.    If  one  is  a  North  Vietnamese,
what  would  he  think?    He  would  not  think  that  those
boats  were on  a  pleasure tour.   This  was  a  provocative
patrol,  and  the  North  Vietnamese  knew it."
—Morse  in  the Senate, Feb.  SI
Instead,   we  had  a  visceral  reaction.    We   bombed.     The
greatest  military  power  on  earth,   the   greatest   firepower   on
earth,  the  greatest   Navy,  the  greatest  Air  Force,  the  greatest  '
ground  force—we  just  had  to  show  this  little  upstart,  North
Vietnam,  that  we  were  going   to  knock  out   some  of   their
patrol  boat  bases.
Although  the  original  plan  called  for  the  termination  after
2  days  of  the  runs  of  the  ships  into  the  Vietnam  coast,   the
commander  in  chief  of  the  Pacific  ordered  an  extension  of  the
patrol  telling  the  ships  that  a  termination  after  only  2  days
"does   not   in   my  view  adequately   demonstrate   the   United
States'  resolve  to  assert  our  legitimate  rights  in  these  interna-
tional   waters."
The  patrol  of  the  Maddox  and  Turner  Joy  was coordinated
with  operations  of  the  South  Vietnamese  against  North  Viet-
nam.    These  operations   took  place  on  the  night  of   August
3-4.     The   operation   included   the   bombardment   of   North
Vietnamese  radar  sites  and  a  security  post.    The  U.S.  com-
manders  knew,   moreover,   that  the  North   Vietnamese con-
sidered  the  patrol  of  the  two  ships  as part  of  this  South  Viet-
namese  operation.    Nevertheless,   despite  this  knowledge  that
North  Vietnamese   considered  the  U.S. patrol   as  part  of  an
attack  on  North  Vietnam,  the  patrol  continued.
As  for  the  second  incident  itself,  Mr.  McNamara  told  the
committee   that   there  was  no  doubt   that   the  attack  on  the
Maddox  and  the  Turner  Joy  had  taken  place  as  described.  He
even  told  the  committee  that  two North  Vietnamese  PT  boats
had  been  destroyed.    His  testimony  gave  no  indication  that
there  was  any  doubt  as  to  what  had  occurred.    The   reports,
however,  show  that  as the  hours  went  by after  the  second  inci-
dent  there  was  increasing concern  that  the  attack  may not  have
Why  So  Extensive A  Series  of  Reprisals  When  Our  Ships  Were  Not  Even  Damaged?
Chairman  Fulbright: Why  did  the  U.S. consider  it  neces-
sary  to  retaliate  against  North  Vietnam  in  a  manner  so
completely  disproportionate  to  the  offense?   .  .  .  Why did
we   not   protest   to   the   International  Control  Commission
as  the  North  Vietnamese  did  on  July  31,  two  days  before
the   first   incident,  when  Hanoi  formally   protested   attack
on  its  islands?
Secretary  McNamara:  Because  the  International  Control
Commission  has  a  record  of  failure  in  investigating  inci-
dents  of  this  kind.  .  .  .
Senator  Gore:  .  .  .  The  Administration was  hasty,  acted
precipitately,  inadvisably,  unwisely,  out  of   proportion  to
the  provocation in  launching  64  bombing  attacks  on  North
Vietnam  out  of  a  confused,  uncertain situation  on  a  murky
night,  which  one  of  the  sailors  described   as  dark  as  the
knob  of  hell;  and  particularly,  five  hours  after  the   task
force   commander   had  cabled  that   he   doubted   that   there
were  any  attacks,  and  recommended that  no  further  action
be  taken  until  it  was thoroughly  canvassed.  .  .  .
Senator  Pell:  I  must  say  I  agree  with  Senator  Gore  in
his   point  that  the   retaliation   seems   large   in   proportion
to  the  offense.   I  know  from  the  old  rules  of  land warfare
that  if  you  are  engaged  in  hostilities  or  occupying  a  coun-
try,  the  rule  of  thumb  given  to  a  commanding  officer   is
that  you  can  retaliate  ten  to  one.  At  least  that  is  what
we  were  taught  in  World  War  II.    It  seemed  to  me  that
in  these   two  attacks,  one  definite  and  one  quite   possible,
we   suffered   no  damage.    Therefore  why  did  we  feel   we
had  to  retaliate  on  the  basis  of  almost   infinity  from  th;
viewpoint  of   the  damage  we   suffered?
Secretary  McNamara:  Well  . .  .  the crime  was  not meas-
ured  by  the  amount  of  damage  done.    It  was  measured  by
the violation of our right to  navigate  freely  on the  high  seas.
—Senate  Foreign Relations  Committee Feb. 20
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 4,1968
If  the  Senate  Had Known  The  Truth  About  the  Tonkin  Incidents
taken  place  at  all.    I  think  it  did,  but  there  was  such  little
objective  evidence immediately  available  that  there was  doubt.
On  August  4  the  destroyers  reported  that  they  were  under
continuous  attack.    Within  the  next  few  hours  messages came
from  the  Maddox  and  Turner  Joy  describing  the  attack.    For
example,  at  11:15  a.m.  the  Turner  Joy  reported  that  five  tor-
pedoes  had  been  fired  and  the  ship  was  planning  to  ram  one
of  the  PT  boats.
Do  not  forget  that  PT  boats  carry  only  two  torpedoes.    In
fact,  there  is  great  doubt  in  the  record  as  to  whether  they  can
pin  down  more  than  one,  although   some  of  the  information
given  us  was  that  allegedly  22  torpedoes  had  been  fired.
Another  report  was  transmitted  that  seven  torpedoes   had
already  been  fired  at  the  destroyers,  and  two were  in  the  water.
The  Turner  Joy  reported,  "We  think  a  PT  boat  sunk  one  of
its  own  boats."     Then  a  message  arrived  that  the  ships  had
counted  22  torpedoes  fired.
It  was  primarily  on  the  basis  of  this  information  that   the
administration  set  in  motion  the  process that  would  lead  to  the
attack  on  North  Vietnam  some  10  hours  later.    It  should  be
noted   that  2  days  later,  on  August  6,  when   Secretary  Mc-
Namara  brought  the  account  of  the  second   incident   to  the
committee   he   gave   no   indication   that   there   were   second
thoughts  as  to  what  really  happened  in  the  Gulf   of   Tonkin.
He  was  positive  and  unequivocal.
Nevertheless,   within  a  few  hours  after   the   Maddox   and
Turner  Joy  had  reported  that  attacks  had  broken  off,  doubts
began  to grow.  In  another  message  the  operational  commander
aboard  the  Maddox  reported that  the Maddox  itself  had  scored
no  known  hits  and  never  positively identified  a  boat  as  such.
He  reported  that  "the  first  boat  to  close  the  Maddox  probably
fired a  torpedo  at  the  Maddox  which  was  heard  but  not  seen.
All  subsequent  Maddox  torpedo  reports  are  doubtful  in  that
it  is  suspected  that  sonar  man  was  hearing  ship's  own  pro-
peller  beat."
The  commander  in  chief  of  the  Pacific  Fleet,   only  a  few
'hours  before  the  retaliatory  airstrike  on  North  Vietnam,  sent
a  telegram  to  the  operational  commander  of  the  Maddox  and
Turner  Joy  as  follows:  "(1)  Can  you  confirm  absolutely  that
you  were  attacked?     (2)    Can  you  confirm   sinking  of   PT
boats?    (3)   Desire  reply  directly  supporting  evidence."
Morse  Predicts  A  War  Crimes  Trial
"Mr.   President,   eventually   they   will  try   us.    Re-
member  what  the  senior  Senator  from  Oregon  says  on
the  floor  of  the  Senate  today  when,  in  the  years  ahead,
we  get  tried  in  an international  tribunal  for  our  course
of   action  in  Vietnam.    We  will  be  found   guilty   for
that  course  of  action  in  bombing  those  PT  bases  with-
out   ever  attempting   to   get   the   incidents   settled  by
way  of  international  law."
—Morse  in  the Senate, Feb.  SI
Over  the  next  few  hours  the  demands  for  confirming  in-
formation  and  evidence  mounted.    Finally,  the  commander  of
the  7th  Fleet  asked  the  Turner  Joy  to  amplify  urgently  its  re-
ports.     The   following   is  from  the  cable:   "Who   were  wit-
nesses,  what  is  witness  reliability?—Most  important  that  pres-
ent   evidence   substantiating  type   and   number   of   attacking
forces   be  gathered   and    disseminated."
Well,  after  the  message  of  the  commander   of  the  Pacific
Fleet,  Admiral  Moorer,  urgently  asking  for  the  information,
the   President   appeared   on   television  to   announce  that   the
strikes   against  North  Vietnam  had   commenced.
As  I  have  already  said,  I  do  not  think  the  strikes  can  ever
be  justified.    I  do  not  think  that  at  that  time  there  was  any
need  to  go  to  the  self-defense  of  the  Republic.    There  was
a  need  to  meet  with  the  Security  Council,  and  fast.
So, when  we  take  the  whole  record—and  I  have  only  given
a  few  incidents,  but  I  have  given  enough  which,  under  the
doctrine  of  personal  privilege,  I  am  entitled  to  do,  to  answer
the  Secretary  of   Defense's   reference  to  me—I  want   to  say
that  in  my judgment  the  Secretary of  Defense  misled  the  com-
mittee  in  August   1964.
I  want  to  say that  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  the  admin-
istration,  including  the  President  of  the  United  States,  owed  it
to  Congress  and  to  the  people  of  this  country  to  tell  us  much
more  about  what  preceded  the  alleged—and  I  think  it  hap-
pened,  in  the  first  incident  at  least—attack  on  the  Maddox.
Had  they  done  it,  I  just  have  a  feeling  in  my  bones  that
the  Tonkin  Gulf  joint  resolution  would  not  have  passed.    Do
not  forget,  there  is  a  very  interesting  other  chapter   to  that
resolution  which  I  will  not  take  the  time  to  go  into  today.
It  was  drafted  before  the  incident.
We'll   send  a  reprint  of  this  special   issue  to  a  friend  if   you  send  a  stamped   self-addressed    long   envelope   and   lOe.
multiples  of  100  will  be filled  at  the  same  price postpaid.
Bulk   orders   in
We   Began  To   Expose  The  Tonkin
Gulf  Affair   Four  Years  Ago
As   readers  of  the  WEEKLY  know,  we  began  to   expose
the   discrepancies   in  the   Johnson  Administration's   account
of  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents   the  week  after  they   occurred.
Two  of  those  earlier  pieces  and  new  revelations  I  published
in  a  3-part  study  of  Senator  Fulbright  for  the  NEW  YORK
REVIEW  OF  BOOKS  are  reprinted  in  my  new  book,  "In   A
Time   of   Torment"    (Random   House)    available   to   readers
of  the  WEEKLY  at  $6.95  or  $1   less  than  the  publication
price.     You  can  still  get  a  copy  if   you  send  a  check  for
$6.95   with   your   name   and   address  to   the   WEEKLY   at
5618   Nebraska   Avenue,   NW,   Washington  20015.    New
readers  seeing  this  paper  for  the  first  time  can  subscribe  by
sending  $5  to  the  same  address.  Don't  forget  your  zip  code.
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington.  D. C.
An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;   $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED