I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968aug05.pdf

============================================================

How Johnson  Said  No   To  Peace  in  Honolulu
The  Price  of  Crushing  the  Czechs
The   Czechs   stood   alone   in  1938 against   German   im-
perialism.    Today   they   stand   alone   against   Russian   im-
perialism.    Moscow   shows   itself   again,   as   in   Hungary,
as  ready  as  Washington  is  in  Vietnam  to  crush  rebellious
nationalisms  in its  assumed  sphere  of  influence.  The bureau-
cratic   Soviet   regime  fears   that   if   it   allows   freedom  of
expression   in  Prague  it  must  ultimately  grant  it  in  War-
saw,   Kiev  and  Moscow.  The  price  of  crushing  the  Czechs
is   to   further  the   moral  decline  of   the   world  communist
movement,   and  to   build   up  a   resentment   in   the   Soviet
bloc  which  will  some  day  make  change  more  violent  than
it   might  have  been.   The  ideal  of   socialism   is   being  de-
stroyed   by   its   association   with  tyranny  over   the   mind.
Marx's  successors  are  ruining  Marx's  legacy.
L F, Stone's  Weekly
/VT/TVft)   fsttn/*  cim>si   T%v—\A/00laiM                                  ^^
Now  Published Bi- Weekly
VOL.   XVI, NO.  16
AUGUST  5, 1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
The  Farce  of  Self-Determination    in  South  Vietnam
The  guns  of  Cleveland  warned  again  that  racial war  is com-
ing  at  home  unless  we  turn  out  full  energies  toward  its pre-
vention.    But  Johnson  and  the  ruling  establishments  in  both
parties  are  still  intent  on  wasting  our  substance  in  the  search
for  an  impossible  victory in Vietnam.   On  this Johnson, Nixon,
Humphrey  and  Rockefeller  agree.    While  the  talks  in  Paris
have  served  to  lull  the  country  into  the  notion  that  peace  is
on  the  way, the   Honolulu   talks  were   designed   firmly   and
finally  to  continue   the  war  unless  the  other  side   surrenders.
Even  Johnson's  long-suffering Senate  Democratic  leader,  Mans-
field  the   Meek,   said   on  WMAL  (ABC)  July  28,   of   the
Honolulu   talks,   "It   appears   to  me  that  we  are  locked  in."
He   added,  "We  haven't  got  the  give,   the  flexibility  which
should   be  ours."    We   haven't   got   it  because   Johnson   and
the  Pentagon   don't  want  it.
A  Slap  In  The  Face  of  The  Other   Side
The   Honolulu  communique  was  a  deliberate  slap   in  the
face  at  the  other  side on  two  crucial  questions,  one  immediate,
the   other   long  range.     The   immediate  question   is  how   to
evaluate  the  lull  in  the  fighting  which  brought   the  number
of  Americans killed  in  combat  during  the  week  ended  July  20
to  the  lowest  point  this  year.    "Ever  since  last  May," Donald
Kirk  reported  from  Saigon   to  the  Washington  Star  July  17,
American  units  have  searched  for  enemy  troop   concentrations
and  encountered  only  minor  sporadic  contact."   The  rocket  at-
tacks  on  Saigon  have  ceased.    Prince  Souvanna  Phouma,  head
of  the  Laotian  government,   told  a  press  conference  in  Paris
July  26,  that  the  U.S. should  accept  this  lull  as  "a  sign  of
good-will"   from   Hanoi,   and   clear   the   way  for   substantive
peace  talks  by  stopping  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  alto-
gether.    When  U.S. combat  deaths  are  down  from  the  war's
all-time  peak  of  562  in  the  week  ended  May  11  to  the  1968
low  of  157 killed  in  the  week  ended  July 20,  a  lot  of American
mothers  and  fathers would  be glad  to take this  decline in  deaths
as  a  sign  of  that  reciprocity  we  have  been   demanding.
The  American  military  have  been  doing  their  best  to  hide
this  lull  from  view.    The   fighting   is  down   but  the  mimeo-
graph  machines  are  hot  with  press  releases  announcing   that
For  An  American  Negro   Congress
One  way   to  handle  the   problems  of   a  multi-racial
society   is   by   allowing   racial   or   cultural   minorities
to  have  their  own  regional   legislatures   with  consid-
erable   autonomy   in   internal   affairs.    Scottish    and
Welsh  nationalists  have  made  such  proposals  in  Great
Britain;  a   similar   system   exists   in   French-speaking
Quebec.    While   far   from   satisfactory,   this   is   more
responsive  to  minority  grievance  than  simple  rule  by
the  dominant racial  majority.  A  similar solution  needs
to  be  applied  here  to  the   black  community.   Though
it    is    not   regionally   concentrated,   this    community
should  be  recognized  as  a  nation  within  a  nation  and
given   its   own   representative   institutions   within   the
national   framework.    An   American   Negro   Congress
would   give   the   black  revolt  organized   focus   and   a
mechanism   for   peaceful  change,   instead   of   letting   a
few   extreme  Nationalists  polarize  the  racial  struggle
as   they   almost   did   in   Cleveland.   This   would   give
whites   a   chance   to   see   just   what   the   majority   of
blacks  want  and  to  reach  a  peaceful  accommodation.   It
would  avoid  the  fantasy  of  separatism  while  adjusting
to  realities.    If,   as   we  believe,  the   primary   demand
would  be  control  of   police,  businesses   and  schools   in
black   areas,   such   a   representative   body  could   nego-
tiate  a  pattern   of  nationwide  change,  with  whatever
help  from  the  Federal  government  was  needed  to  bring
it about.
new  enemy  offensives  are—or  must be—on  the  way.   It  looks
as  if  the  Pentagon,  like  Peking,  just  won't  be  satisfied  until
General   Giap  heats  up  the  war  again.    The  Honolulu com-
munique  contains  a  back-handed  admission  of   a  lull   in  the
fighting   and  in  the  bombardment  of   Saigon  but  declines  to
entertain  the  idea  that  this  might  represent  an  olive  branch
from  the  enemy.    This  is  the  language  of  the  communique:
They   [Johnson   and  Thieu]   agreed  that   the  pattern  of
military  activity  on  the  other  side  continues to  indicate re-
newed  action  at  some  time  in  the  next  two  months.    Mili-
tary  factors—enemy  regrouping   and  effective  allied   spoil-
ing  actions—appear  to  account  for  the  drop in  the  level  of
fighting  over  the  last  two  to  three  weeks,  including  the  lull
in  the  indiscriminate  attacks  on  the  civilian  population   in
Saigon.
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  5,  196S
{Continued  from  Page   One)
Practicing  Diplomacy  or  Buffoonery?
The  communique  and  Harriman's  script  at  Paris  must  make
the  other  side's  negotiators  feel  that  we  are  so  determined  to
continue  the  war  that  we  are  prepared  to  ignore  any  peaceful
signals  from  the  other  side.    They  must think  it  sheer  buffoon-
ery  for  Harriman  in  the  midst  of  the  lull  in  the  fighting  and
in  the  bombardment  of  Saigon  to  ask them  as he  did  on July 17
what  they  would  do  if  we  stopped  the  bombing,   "slow   the
pace  of  the  war  or  heighten   the  level  of  your  aggression?"
Harriman  claimed  that  he  had  had  "no  answer   whatsoever."
(AP   from   Paris   in  Washington   Star  July  17).    The  Paris
talks  began  May  13.    Since  then  U.S.  combat  deaths  per  week
have  dropped   by  72  percent,  despite    a.  sharp  increase  in  our
search-and-destroy  operations  which  increase  casualties.     The
other  side  may  wonder   why  this  is  riot  an   answer.     Their
chief  negotiator,  Xuan  Thuy,  complained  to David  Schoenbrun
in  an  ABC  interview  July  16,
Although  their have been no rocket attacks  on  Saigon  for
several  weeks,  the  Americans maintain  their  offensives and
send  out  their  bombers  on  ever  more  devastating  missions
in the  Saigon  region.   Furthermore, Americans have greatly
increased  tonnage  and  sorties   of  destructive  air  raids  on
North  Vietnam  since  the  [Paris]  talks  began.
While   the   enemy   has   «fe-escalated,   we   have   escalated.    If
Johnson  wants  to  avoid  a  successful  negotiation,  that  is  the
way  to  do  it.
II
The  longer  range  question  on  which  the  other  side  must  re-
gard  the  Honolulu   communique  as  an  affront,   another  piece
of  clownish  hypocrisy,  is  that  of  self-determination  for   South
Vietnam.    The  Honolulu  communique  closed  the  door  on any
political  compromise  and  did  so in  the  name  of self-determina-
tion.    It  said  the  U.S.  would  not  "impose  a  coalition  govern-
ment  or  any other  form  of  government  on  the  people  of  South
Vietnam."     It   said  they  had  the  right  to  choose  their  own
government.    This  is  double   talk,  double  think  and   d9uble
dealing.     We   have   been   imposing   governments   on   South
•Vietnam  ever  since  we  put  Diem  in  office.    Saigon  hasn't  had
a  government   in   14  years  which  would   not  have   collapsed
without  American  crutches.     It  hasn't  had  a  single   govern-
ment  which  dared  to  hold  a  really  free   election.
The   joint  communique  praised   the  new  Cabinet  of  Tran
Van  Huong  and  implied   that  it  was  more  democratic.    The
Bertrand  Russell  Appeals  for  The  Czechs
"Sir—For   the   third  time   in   three   decades   Czech-
oslovakia  is  on  the  brink.   In  1938 it  was  Munich  and
German  occupation.  In  1948  it   was  the  Prague  coup
and  Stalinist  rule.    In  1968  Czechoslovakia is  pushing
through  a  process  of  reform  within  a  socialist  frame-
work,  but  in  line  with  her  own  democratic traditions,
quietly   and  unprovocatively.  Yet   once   more  she   is
facing   interference  and  even  threats  of  intervention.
"The    Czechs   are   no  longer   'a   far-away  people   of
whom   we   know   nothing*.    Their   situation   is   being
watched  with  sympathy  and  anxiety  by  the  public  in
this   and  other  countries;  it   has  also   aroused   strong
feelings  in  many  communist  parties.   The  outcome  of
the  present  will  affect   the  prospects  of   European,  if
not   world,   political  development  for   years  to   come.
"Czechoslovakia  is  not  theatening  anyone.   She  has
a  right  to' self-determination, yet  she  freely  admitted
military  forces  of  the  Warsaw  Pact  countries  to  prove
•her  loyalty.  Should her sovereignty  be  destroyed  again,
this  would  gravely  damage  any  prospect  of  a  genuine
detente  with  the  Soviet  Union.   All  men  of   good  will
must  hope  that  this  does   not  happen."
—Letter   to  The   Times   (London)   July   24   by   Ber-
trand   Russell,   Kingsley   Amis,  Max   Beloff,     Benjamin
Britten,  Brigid   Brophy,  Julian   Huxley,   Paul   Johnson,
Lord   Soper,   Stephen    Spender,    Pliilip   Toynbee,   and
Arnold    Weaker.
day  that   communique  was  published   Donald   Kirk   reported
from   Saigon   to  the   Washington   Star  (July   21)   that   while
this  new  government  "appears  to  have  adopted  a  more  liberal
stance"   than   its  predecessor   it   "has   actually  clamped   down
harder  on  dissent  in  the  past  month  or  so than  in  the  previous
seven  months  of  Thieu's  presidency."    Dramatic  proof  of  this
was  supplied  four  days  later  when  a  military tribunal  in  less
than  three  hours  sentenced  Truong Dinh  Dzu,  the  peace candi-
date  who  came  in  second  in  the  presidential  elections,  to  five
years  at  hard  labor.  . "Our  men  in  Vietnam,"  Johnson  told  the
Governors   Conference   in   Cincinnati  after   his   return   from
Honolulu,   "struggle  to   protect   the  things   we  believe    in."
When  Dzu  pleaded  that  he  had  only  been  expressing  his  ideas
"on  how  to  put  an  end  to  the  war",  the  judge  of  the  military
court  told  him,  "As  a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  you
have  no  right  to  dissent  on  the  policy  of  the  Government  of
the  Republic  of  South  Vietnam"  (Washington  Post,  July 28).
Is this what we believe  in ?  Is this what bur men  are dying for ?
A  Constructive  Potential  for  Peace  the  U.S.  Consistently  Ignores  or Disparages
"The  establishment  of   the  Alliance  of  National,  Demo-
cratic  and  Peace   Forces  of  Vietnam  represents  a  serious
effort  by  Hanoi  and  the  NLF  to  open  a  political  dialogue.
The  Alliance  was  created  on  April  20-21  at  a  meeting  near
Saigon.   The  individual  leaders  are  professionals,   business
men,   intellectuals  and one clergyman.  All  are  city  dwellers.
With  one  exception,  they  are  not  known  to  hare   previous
involvement  with  the  NLF.   Nevertheless   we  assume   that
creation  of  the  Alliance  was  stimulated  by  the  NLF  and
North  Y'etnam.   The. program  closely  approximates  that  of
the  Front.   The  Alliance  and  the  NLF  have  publicly  stated
that   they   support   each   other.
"Rather  than  attempt  to  measure  the  degree  of  control
by  the  Front  and Hanoi,  we  believe  it  is  more  illuminating
to   analyze   the   motivation   behind   the   establishment    of
the  alliance.   The  NLF  is  largely  a  Communist  led,  nation-
alist  peasant  movement.  The  Alliance,  in  theory  at  least,
provides  the  first  political  framework for  bourgeois   nation-
alists  who  want  to  operate  independently  of  the  NLF   in
opposition  to  a  U.S.  military  presence  in  South  Vietnam.
Knowledgeable  non-Communists  with  whom  we  spoke  be-
lieve   the   basic   role   of   the   Alliance  is   to   help   open  a
political  dialogue  in  South  Vietnam  which  can  eventually
bridge   the   chasm   now   separating   the   Front   from   the
Saigon  government.
"The  impression is  enhanced  by  the  Hanoi  Foreign  Min-
istry's  statement  of  July  18  which omitted  the  oft-repeated
demand   that   the    future    of    South   Vietnam   'must'   be
settled   'in   accordance   with"   the   program  of   the   NLF,
further  evidence  that  the  Alliance  is  being  given   greater
importance   as   a   means   of   preparing   for   a   meaningful
exchange  with  non-Communist South  Vietnamese."
—Slightly   abridged   from   a  statement  July   22  by   San-
ford   Gottlieb  of  SANE   and   Rodney  Shaw   of   the   United
Methodist   Church   on  their  return  from   talks   in   Prague
and  Paris  with  spokesmen   for   Hanoi   and   the    NLF,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  S, 1968
One  Man  One  Vote—And  One  Opinion?
Johnson's  genius  for flim-flam was  evident  in  the   Honolulu
communique's  pledge  of  one  man,  one  vote,  as  if  this  were  a
question   of   reapportionment   in   our   rural  South.    But   the
communique  went  on  to  indicate that  the  one  man  could  only
get  that  one  vote  if  he  proved  he  had  the  one  opinion  favored
by  the  Saigon  regime.    Thieu   offered   and  Johnson   endorsed
the  cute  idea  that  anybody  could  participate  in  politics  who
agreed  "to  renounce  force  and  to  abide  by  the  Constitution of
Vietnam."    But  this  is  the  Constitution  under  which  Dzu  has
just  been  sentenced  without  right  of  appeal  to  five  years  for
talking  peace.    This  is the  rigged  Constitution  which  excludes
from  political  life  anyone  the  Saigon  regime  regards  as  pro-
Communist  or  pro-neutralist.    This  is  not  an  offer   of  recon-
ciliation  but  a  demand  for  surrender.
At   the  Paris  session  which  followed   the  Honolulu   talks,
Harriman  asked  the  other  side if  it  was  sincere  about  a memo-
randum   (see  box  bottom  of  p.  2)   it   issued  which   omitted
Point  3  of  Hanoi's  famous  Four  Points  and  spoke  instead  of
"the   South   Vietnamese   people's  right   of  self-determination
in  the  settlement  of  their  internal  affairs."     The   other   side
must  have  wondered  about  his  sincerity when  he  followed  this
up  by urging  them  to .deal with  the  Saigon  government.     Point
3,  which   U.S.   propaganda   has  consistently   distorted,   merely
demanded  that  the people of  South  Vietnam  be given the  right
of  self-determination "in  accordance with  the  program  of  the
National  Liberation  Front."    This  program  has  always  called
for  free  elections.    As  early  as  its  first  program  in  1962,   the
NLF  program  said:
"Put  into  force  democratic  liberties:  liberty  for  all  par-
ties  to  organize  and  to  act,  liberty  for  all  newspapers  and
books   to   appear,  liberty  for   all   religious   confessions   to
practice  their  faith,  liberty  for  all  political  organizations
to  present  candidates  for  the  National  Assembly  and other
elected  bodies  . .. election of  a new National  Assembly and
the  democratic  framing  of  a  new  Constitution." *
None  of   the   regimes   we  have   supported   in   Saigon,  from
Diem  through  the  successor  military  juntas,  has  ever   allowed
full   freedom   of   election   and   discussion   in   South   Vietnam.
Diem,  like  the  present  regime,  also  had  elections,  a  Constitu-
tion,  and  an  Assembly,  all  of  it  rigged  for  minority  control.
To  give  Saigon  the  controlling  voice  in  the  peace  talks  is  to
deny  self-determination,  not  to  affirm  it.
Humphrey's   Hawkish  Record  On  Vietnam
Washington—Despite   suggestions   to   the   contrary,
Vice   President   Humphrey  has   made  it   clear   he  has
no  intention  of  reversing  his  support  for  the  Vietnam
war.    He   is   so   deeply   committed   he   would   find   it
impossible   to   change   even   if   he   wished   to   do   so.
Humphrey's   record   on  Vietnam   back   to   his   earliest
utterances   on  the   subject   in   1950,  shows   him   to  be
a.   consistent   advocate    of    strong    action    there.     He
warned   time   and  again   that   the   "loss"  of  Vietnam
would  be  a  "tragedy"  and  "unthinkable."  In  1955  he
rebuked   Secretary    of   State   Duties   for   seeming   to
weaken   U.S.   support   of   the   Diem   government.    In
1962  Humphrey  suggested  that   South  Vietnam  might
wish   to   take   the   battle   into   North   Vietnam,  and
give  the   enemy  "a  taste  of   their   own  medicine."
—Don  Oberdorfer   of  the  Knight  Newspapers   in  the
Miami   Herald   June   19.   This   survey   is   the   best  we
have  seen  and  goes  on  to  spell   out   the   details.
* From  text  on  p.  192,  Georges  Chaffard:  Indochina,  dix
ans  d'independence.   Calmann-Levy,  Paris,  1964.
Ill
U.S.   propaganda   has  done  its  best   to  hide   these   realities
lest  the  American  people  realize  that  we  are  giving  an  unrep-
resentative  Asian oligarchy  control  not  only of  South  Vietnam's
future  but  of  our  own.    "American   officials  here,"  said  a  dis-
patch  from  Saigon  to  the  New  York  Times  July  25,  "are  con-
tending  that  the  government  is  probably  the  most   representa-
tive   in   South   Vietnamese   history."     The   paper's   headlines
over  the  story  proclaimed  "a  more  vital  regime",  as  if  to  atone
with  a  little  hoopla  for  its  usually  more  astringent   reporting.
But  the  further  one  read  the  more  the  illusions  evaporated.
"Many  of  them  quickly  concede,  however,"  Roberts  wrote  of
these  optimistic  U.S;  officials,  "that  it  is  the  middle  class  that
is  represented   broadly—and  not   the  peasantry."     This  con-
cession  is quite a  confession.    The  latest  edition  of  the  Army's
area   handbook   for   South   Vietnam   (April,   1967,   p.    248)
says,  "nearly  80 percent  of  the  South  Vietnamese are  peasants."
This  government  is so far  to  the  right  and  so pro-war  it  even
has  our  people  in  Saigon  worried.     "The   hawkishness  of  the
Assembly,"   said  this  same  forlorn  attempt  by  the  New   York
Times   to  be  a  little  optimistic,  "is  disquieting  to  Americans
here."    The  dispatch  asks,  "Why   is  the  Assembly  so militant
in  a  nation  in  which  many  people—and  particularly  those  in
rural  areas   [i.e.   the  80%   who  are  peasants]—appear  to  be
neutrals  who  are  willing  to  settle  for  anything  that  will  bring
them   peace?     Why   isn't   this   reflected   in   the   Assembly?"
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Upholding  The  Right  to  Conscientious
"Protection   of   conscience   demands  that   the   churches
should  give  spiritual  care  and  support  not  only  to   those
serving  in  armed  forces  but  also  to  those  who,  especially
in   the  light  of   the   nature  of   modern  warfare,  object   to
participation  in   particular  wars  they   feel   bound  in  con-
science to oppose ..  ."
—Human  Rights  statement   of   the   Fourth  Assembly   of
the  World  Council  of  Churches,  New  York  Times,  July   17
"There  is  clearly  a  right  to  what  has  been  called  'selec-
tive   conscientious   objection'   and,   if    we   take    Luther's
Christianity   seriously,   an   obligation   upon   the   Christian
convinced  of   the  injustice  of  a  war  to  refuse   to  partici-
pate  in  it  ...      It  is,  therefore,  urgently  incumbent  upon
national  Lutheran  bodies,  and  all  Christian  churches  which
adhere  to  the  'just  war'  concept, to'demand  of  the  temporal
authorities   the   same   recognition   of   the   rights   of   the
Objection  Against  The  Vietnamese  War
'selective   conscientious  objector'  that   they   accord  to  ad-
herents  of  the  Christian pacifist  tradtion. .  .  ."
—Statement   of   the   Task   Force   on   Peace  and   War   of
the  Washington   area  Lutheran  Social  Services.    Reprinted
in  Cong.  Record,  July   17,  S  8797.
"I yas  proud  to  serve  in  the  Navy  in  the  South  Pacific
at  Iwo  Jima,  Okinawa,  and  Indochina,  because  the  purpose
and  necesssity   of  our  struggle  was  clear.   Today,  however,
I   question  the  avowed  purposes  of   the   war  in  Vietnam,
and   I   question   a   system    of   conscription    which   forces
young  men  to  contradict  their  own  moral  commitment."
—Sen.  Mark   Hatfield     (R.-Ore.),   on  inserting   into   the
July   17  Congressional   Record  the  texts  of  statements   from
a   total   of   322  student   and  youth   leaders   declaring    that
they   "cannot   in  good  conscience  serve  in  the  military    so
long  as  the  war  in   Vietnam   continues."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  5, 1968
Never  Forget  That  Thieu  Is Johnson's  Puppet,  Not  the  Other  Way  Round
(Continued  from  Page   Three)
One  reason  for  the  unrepresentative  mood  and  character  of  the
Saigon  legislature,  the  dispatch  admitted,  is  that  "almost   no
peasants  or   working  class  candidates  filed  for   office,   appar-
ently  considering   the  government   to  be  the  province   of   the
educated  middle  class,  and  in  South  Vietnam  the  middle  class
tends  to  be  militantly  anti-Communist  and  conservative."     In
South  Vietnam  "the most  active  political   factions  tend  to  be
those   that   are   militantly   anti-Communist   such   as   Roman
Catholic  blocs."     So  "Catholics,   for  example,"  the   dispatch
goes  on,  "hold  half  of  the  Senate  seats  although   they  make
up   about   10  percent   of   the   nation's   population."     This  is
not  even   representative  of   South  Vietnam's   Catholics.     The
Army's   own   handbook    shows   that   half   the   Catholics   are
Northern   refugees  who  tend  to  be  bitter-enders  under   Father
Quyhn   while   the   native   South   Vietnamese   belong   to   the
moderate  section  led  by  the  pacific  Archbishop   of   Saigon.
Generals  Who  Practice  Free  Enterprise
The   South  Vietnamese  army  leadership  is  as  unrepresenta-
tive  as  the  regime   it  keeps   in  power.    We   recommend   the
scathing   description  of  it  in  Chapter   3  of  Lt.  Col. Wm.  R.
Corson's   new   book   The   Betrayal.     This   was  written   by  a
Marine  commander,   just   retired   after   25   years  of   combat
service  in  three  wars,  last  in  Vietnam,  and  with  wide  knowl-
edge  of  Asia.   Col. Corson   says  that  after   20  years  of   war
the  ARVN  leadership  "are in  no  hurry  to  pursue  the  enemy,
for   from   their  point   of  view  the  goal  is  not  to  defeat   the
enemy,  but  to  maintain  their  position,  and  enhance  their  per-
sonal   fortunes."     There  are   few   ARVN   commanders   near
U.S.  installations, he  goes  on,  who  "do  not  either  run  or  con-
trol   the   highly  lucrative  laundry,  garbage-artifact  store   and
roadside   'boom-boom'   [pidgin   English  for   brothel}  conces-
sions."    This  corrupt  officer  corps  "is  derived  solely  from  the
wealthier  social  class because  each  officer  is  required  to  possess
a  French-style  second  baccalaureate   (college   degree).    This
•requirement  effectively  excludes  men  from  peasant  or  working
class  families  who  are  not  allowed  to  attend  high  school."
Such   is  the   army  we  supply,  the   regime   we   support,   in
McCarthy  on  the  Paris  Talks
"[A   Democratic   platform   on  Vietnam   that   I   could
support]   would   probably   have   to   follow   pretty   much
what  I  have  been  proposing—that  we  negotiate  a  new
government   in   South    Vietnam ...   It   would   be  a
coalition   with  the  National   Liberation   Front,  proceed
to  de-escalate  the  war  as  a  condition  to  that  settle-
ment,  and  we  insist  that  the  South  Vietnamese  either
accept  it  or  carry  on  the  war  themselves. ...  If  you're
not   going   to   negotiate   that   kind   of   settlement,   I
don't  see  what  you  have  to  negotiate  unless  it's  sur-
render."
—Sen.   McCarthy    on   Metromedia    TV,   July    21.
"Elie  ABEL  (NEC  News):  Are  you  saying,  Senator,
that   the   Administration,   the   President,  do  not   want
meaningful   negotiations?
"Sen.   McCARTHY:  I  don't   know   what  they   want,
really.    I   don't   think   that   negotiations   can   come   to
very   much   unless  they   are   willing   to   accept   a  new
government   .  .  .
"ABEL:  But  is  a  new  government  in  South  Vietnam
something    that   we   and   North    Vietnam    ought    to
negotiate   about?
"MCCARTHY:  Yes,  I  think  so.
"ABEL:   Over  the  heads  of  the  South  Vietnamese?
"McCARTHY:  Well,  I  don't   quite   know  if  it's over
their  heads.   I  think  that  we're  in  constant   communica-
tion   with   them,   but   if   you   accept   what   both   Thieu
and   Ky   have   said,   that   they're   more   or  less   going
to   dictate   what   the   government  is,   then  I   think   we
have   to   .  .   ."
—Sen.  McCarthy   on  the  Today  show,  July   84.
South  Vietnam  in  the  name  of  "self-determination."     This  is
the   regime   to  which  Johnson   has  given  a  virtual  veto   over
our  peace  negotiations.    Until  Thieu  agrees  to  peace,  we  must
keep  fighting  his  battle  and  that  of  the  oligarchy  he  represents.
When  Johnson  locked  the  door  on  peace  in  Honolulu,  these  are
the  men  to  whom  he-gave  the  key.    But  let  us  never  forget
that  he  gave  them  the  key  because  he  wanted  an  excuse  to
block  a  settlement  in  Paris  and  to  continue  the  war.    If  South
Vietnam's  people  had  self-determination,  they  would  vote  for
peace.  That  is why we  keep  these  puppets  in  power.       July  28
We'll   send  a   reprint   of  this  special   issue   to   a  friend   if   you  send  a  stamped  self-addressed   long  envelope
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
FOR  STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time  of  Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City  ........................................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished  Q
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                   "/s/68
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington, D. C.  20015
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.      Second    Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday   at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington.  D. C.
•    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  317  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED