I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968aug19.pdf

============================================================

How  The Military-Industrial   Complex  Wrote  the GOP  Platform,   Pps.  2-3
Neither  A  Dove  Nor  A  New  Nixon:  Was  He  Implying  Use  of  Nuclear Weapons?
"How    do  you  bring  a  war  to  a  conclusion?   I'll  tell  yon
how   Korea  was  ended  .  .  .  Eisenhower  let  the  word  go
out ...  to  the  Chinese  and the  North  [Koreans]   that  he
would  not  tolerate  this  continual  ground  war  of  attrition,
and  within  a  matter  of  months  they  negotiated."
—Nixon  privately  to  Southern  delegates  as  printed   Aug.
7  in  the  Miami  Herald  from  a  tape  secretly  taken  by  one
of  them.  Eisenhower  claimed in  his  memoirs  that  he  settled
the  Korean   war   by  implying   that   he  would  use  nuclear
weapons  if   a  truce  were  not   signed.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
TVTsfeM I   Z)<M Jl/«*f£l^*/¥     ~R-t  \\/00n /«I                            ^r
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.    XVI,  NO.  17
AUGUST   19,   1968
«°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
Only  McCarthy  and An  End  to The  Bombing
The  only  hope  for  the  Democratic   party  and  the  country
at   this   late   hour   is   an   end   to   the   bombing   of   North
Vietnam   and   the   nomination   of   McCarthy   for    President.
Only  a  turn-about  toward  peace   and  a  fresh  face  untainted
by  collaboration  with  Johnson   offer   any  chance  of   bringing
a  victory  in  November  and  a  restoration  of  faith  in  normal
politics.   The  Nixon-Agnew   strategy  is  not  just  a  "Southern"
strategy   but   the   mobilization   of    white    backlash    against
black  aspiration  and   of  small  town   prejudice  against  urban
sophistication.   This   is  what  Rockefeller's   defeat  at  the  Re-
publican  convention  meant;  he's  no  liberal,  but  if  you  sub-
stitute  "urban"   for  liberal,  the  real  issue  becomes  clear.   He
symbolized   the   big   city,   and   the   big   city   involves   some
comprehension   of    the   black   man,   who   is   beginning    to
hold  its  fate  in  his  hands.
Only  The  Obverse  of  Nixon's  Policy  Can  Win
The   only   chance   for   the   Democrats    is   the   reverse   of
Nixon's   strategy.   Their   only  hope   is  a  policy  which  will
restore  them  to  leadership  in  a  coalition  which  includes  the
majority   of   the   blacks,   the   peace   movement   and   the   dis-
affected   youth.   They  cannot  win  by  a  "me,   too"   policy   in
the  South  and  the  racist  suburbs.   Nixon   may  well   feel  he
can  afford  to  antagonize  the  blacks  with  the  Agnew  candidacy,
and  play  to  the  right  because  the  war  and  its   concomitants
have  alienated  from  Johnson  and  Humphrey  the  blacks  and
the  youth  who  would  not   vote  for   Nixon   anyway.   Nixon
is  out  to  prove  to  Wallace's  followers   that   they  belong  in
the   Republican   party.    His   strategy   is  to   swallow   up   the
Third   Party  and  thus  win  a  majority.   The   counter-strategy
for   the  Democrats  is  to  win  the  elements  which  would   go
into   a   Fourth   Party.    Only   an   end   to   the   bombing,   the
opening  of  substantive  negotiations,   the  nomination   of  Mc-
Carthy  can  do  that.   The   alternative   is  to  put  the   country
further  on  the  road  to  repression,  race  war  and  political   dis-
integration.
The   moment   of   greatest   illumination   at   the   Republican
convention  came  when  Nixon   drew   cheers   by  promising  a
new   Attorney   General.    Ramsey   Clark   is  by   far   the   best
member   of   Johnson's   Cabinet,   a   liberal   Attorney   General
and  a  man  whose  policies  helped  to  keep  the  Poor  People's
Why  Hanoi  Spoke  of  "Shameless  Liars"
"The   number   of   North   Vietnamese   soldiers   now
entering   South  Vietnam  is   greater  than  at  any  time
in  this  war.   We  estimated  that  30,000  or  more  North
Vietnamese  soldiers  entered  South  Vietnam  in  July."
—Johnson   at   press   conference    July   SI.
"The   Pentagon   in   the   past   has   claimed  it   takes
4   to   6   months   to   refine   infiltration    figures.    Until
Wednesday   [July  31]   the  latest  available infiltration
figure  was   for  last   December."
—George  C.  Wilson  from  the  Pentagon  in  the  Wash-
ington  Post August  S.
"Week   by   week  the   number  of   North  Vietnamese
army   personnel   in   South   Vietnam  mounts   steadily."
—Harriman  at   the  Paris   talks,  July   31
"North  Vietnam Troop  Fullback  Estimated  at  50%."
—Christian  Science  Monitor  headline  same  day
march  from  ending  in  a  bloody  shambles.   That  and  Nixon's
attack  on   the   courts  for   being   too  easy  on   criminals   pro-
vided   a  measure  of   the   unthinking  fear   and   prejudice  to
which  he  intends  to  appeal  in  the  campaign.    His  target  is
not   the   worst   but   the   best   in   the   Democratic  years;  the
fight   against    the   Fortas   and   Thornberry   nominations   by
Northern   Republicans  and   Southern   Democrats   is   another
index  of  the  forces  Nixon  hopes  to  ride  into  the  Presidency.
The   Wall   Street   Journal   Aug.   9   reported   that   Johnson
was  planning   a  halt   to  the  bombing  that  would  pave  the
way  for   "a   triumphant   visit  to   Moscow"   and   convert   the
Democratic   convention    into   "a   big   wild   party"   for   his
birthday   Aug.   27.   This   may  reflect   some   wishful   scenario
dreamed  up  within  the  Administration.  No  last  minute trick
can   restore    faith   in   Johnson   nor    make   it   possible    for
Humphrey   to  erase  his  own  fervent  identification  with  the
hard-line   views   of   both   Johnson   and   Nixon.    Johnson   at
press   conference   July   31,   like   Nixon   at   press   conference
Aug.   6,   shut   the   door   on   any  political   compromise   with
the  NLF.   The  credibility  gap  Johnson   created   is  a  Grand
Canyon   which   cannot   be   refilled   in   a   day.    Johnson   can
ably   save   his   party   and   atone   for   his   ruinous   record   by
making  his  abdication   real  and  final,  taking  poor  Humphrey
with  him,  and  clearing  the  way  for  McCarthy.           Aug.   13
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  19, 1968
On National Defense, Space and Foreign Policy  The New  G. O. P. Platform.
All  political  platform-writers  cultivate   amnesia.   This  bene-
ficial  affliction  is  evident   in  that  portion  of  the  new  Republi-
can  platform   which   deals  with  National  Defense.    "All  the
world  was  respectful,"   it  says,  "of  America's  decisive  strategic
advantage  over  the  Soviets  achieved   during   the  Eisenhower
Administration."    On   the  contrary,  the   Eisenhower   Admin-
istration   was   accused   by   the   Democrats   and   the  aviation
lobby  of  allowing  first  a  bomber  gap  and  then  a  missile  gap
to  develop.   Both  turned  out  to  be  figments  of  the  armament
salesman's   imagination.    But  eight   years  ago  the   Democrats
were   accusing   the   Republicans  of   endangering   national  se-
curity   by  falling   behind   in   the   arms   race.    This   time   the
Republican   platform   makes  the   same  accusation  against  the
Democrats.   Kennedy  called  Eisenhower's  term  in  office  "years
of   the  locust"  in  which   "we   obtained  economic  security  at
the  expense   of  military  security."   This  time  the  Republicans
charge   that   "advanced   military   research    and    development
.have  been   inhibited   and  stagnated   by  inexpert,   cost-oriented
administrators."   [Our   emphasis.]
A  Mere  100%  Rise
One   difference  between   I960  and   1968    is  that   we  were
then  spending   some  $40  billion  plus  at  the  Pentagon  while
this  year  it  will  be  $80  billion  plus.   This  year's  requests  by
the   Joint   Chiefs   of    Staff,   before   Secretary   Clifford    pared
them   down,  was  $102   billion.   But  the  Republicans  do  not
think  those  who  administer  the  military  budget  ought   to  be
"cost-oriented."    It  is  they  who  now  talk  of  "gaps.
1
   Though
the   Democrats   are  spending   twice  as  much   as  did   the  Re-
publicans,   the   Democrats   are   accused   of   "frittering   away
superior   military  capabilities"   by   "standing   still"   and    "en-
abling  the  Soviets  to  narrow  their  defense  gap,  in  some  areas
to  outstrip us,  and  to  move  to  cancel  our  lead  entirely by  the
early  seventies."    The  Republicans  picture  the  Navy  saddled
with   "second-best    weaponry"    (the   TFX),     submarine  im-
provements    delayed    while    "the    Soviets    have    proceeded
. apace",   anti-submarine   warfare    "left    seriously   inadequate,
new  fighter  planes  held  up  and  new  strategic  weaponry   left
on  the  drawing  boards."    In  the  platform  plank  on  Science,
they   also   "deplore   the   failure   of   the   Johnson-Humphrey
Administration  to  emphasize  the  military  uses  of  space."   The
Republicans   "regard   the   ablility   to   launch   and   deploy  ad-
vanced   spacecraft   as   a   military   necessity."    The   platform
reads  as  if  written  by  General  Dynamics.
Vietnam   All  Over  Again
"I  point  out  that  this  [ABM  debate]  is  like   Vietnam
all   over   again   .  .  .  Three   years  ago  we  launched   a
ground   war   in   Vietnam.    We   were   stampeded    then,
as   now,   into   a   commitment   which   is   draining   our
Treasury,   dividing   our   country,   and   sacrificing   our
men   in   an   enterprise    that   never   had   a   chance    of
success  in  the first  place,  and everybody  knows  it     ...
Yet  here  we  are  launching   another   multi-billion  dollar
enterprise    on   grounds    as   flimsy   as   the   arguments
made   for   Vietnam   .   .   .   Fifty    billion   dollars   and  6
years   later,   they   will   all   grow   silent   again,   as  they
have  on  Vietnam,  while  they  privately  confess  it  was
all   a  big,   sad  mistake."
—Nelson   (D.-Wisc.)  in   the  Senate,  August  1.   His
amendment    to   delay    the   initial   construction   of    the
ABM   for   a  year  was   defeated,   46  to  27.
"The    [Gulf   of   Tonkin]    resolution    will   pass,   and
Senators  who  vote   for  it   will  live  to   regret   it."
—Morse   in   the  Senate,  August   6,  1964.
The   Republican  concern  for   the  military  is  again   evident
in  the  platform  plank  on  A  Healthy  Economy.   The   Repub-
licans  say  "such  funds  as  become  available  with  the  termina-
tion  of  the  Vietnam  war  and  upon   recovery  from   its  impact
on   national   defense"—our     italics—"will   be   applied    in   a
balanced   way  to   critical   domestic  needs   and   to   reduce   the
heavy  tax  burden."   The  first  priority  will  be  to  rebuild  our
"starved"  armed  forces.   In  our  July  8  issue  we  called  atten-
tion   to   a  series  of   Johnson   Administration  speeches   which
tried   to   prepare   public   opinion    for   the   news   that   even
if   the   Vietnamese  war   ended   there  would   be   little  money
available   for   domestic  needs   because   the   money  would   be
needed   by   the   military   to   cope   with   backlogs   of   delayed
weapon   improvements   and   depleted    inventories.    Did   not
the  Under  Secretary of  the  Treasury  on  June  25  explain  that
the  Military  had  been  fighting  the  Vietnam  war  "on   a  very,
very  lean  budget?"   Only  after  these  military  needs  are  met
will  the  Republicans  apply  what   is  left,   if  anything,  "in   a
balanced  way"   to  "critical  domestic  needs"  and  to   "reduce
the  heavy   tax  burden."    The   suffering   poor  will  be   helped
equally  with  the  suffering   rich,  but  only  after   our   suffering
military  have   been   taken   care   of.
In   its  special  study  last  May  24«of   the Military-Industrial
Complex,   Congressional  Quarterly   reported,   "One    Pentagon
source  told   CQ  that  'any  increment  over  $40  billion  in  the
Getting  Ready  To  Lose  The  Next  War, Too?
"Gen.  Wm.  C.  Westmorland  is  steadily  getting   members
of  his  old  Vietnam  war'team  into  top  spots  in  the  Army
headquarters   in   Washington.    The  swearing   in   yesterday
of    Lit.   Gen.   Bruce   Palmer,   Jr.,   as   Army   Vice   Chief   of
Staff,   is   only   the   latest   evidence   of   this   trend.     West-
moreland,   now   Army   Chief   of    Staff,   and   Palmer    also
were  one-two   in  the  Army  command  in  Vietnam.    Palmer
had  the  title  of   Deputy   Commanding   General   there  .  .  .
The  Vietnam   stamp   is   unmistakably   on  many   of   the   re-
cent   Army   shifts.    These   recent   appointments    show   the
Westmorland  team  is  in  position   in  strength  to  influence
the  future   policy  of   the  Army  and  the  Nation:
"Lt.  Gen.  Wm.  B.  Rosson,  Commanding    General   of   the
First  Field  Force,   Vietnam,   to  an  undisclosed  post  in  the
Joint   Chiefs   of   Staff   office   .  .  .  Lt.  Gen.   F.  C.   Weyand,
from   Commander   in   Chief   of   the   1st   Infantry    Division,
Vietnam,   to   Special   Assistant  for  Counter-Insurgency    for
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  .  .  .  Maj.  Gen.  Jos.   A.   Christian,
from  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff  for  Intelligence  in   Vietnam
to  the  same  intelligence   job  for  the  Army  Department   .  .  .
" 'We're   getting   our  best   at   the   top,'   said   an   Army
officer   with   Vietnam   combat   experience.    'The   Army   is
going  to  be  the  better  for   it."   .  .  .  The  critical   view  of
the   Westmorland   team   comes   from   officials   who   regard
its   performance   in  Vietnam  as  a  failure.   One  such  critic,
who  served   in  Vietnam  as  a  counter-insurgency   specialist,
said:
'My  God,  they're  putting  those  very  same  guys  in  charge
of   the   whole   Army!'"
—George  C.  Wilson  in  the  Washington   Post  July   30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  19,  1968
.  . . Reads  As  If  Written  By  General  Dynamics  For  A  New  Arms  Race
post-Vietnam  defense  budget  will  be  purely  due  to  pressures
by  the  military-industrial complex   rather  than  to  the  defense
needs  of  the  nation."    Congressional   Quarterly  in  that   same
study   said   "Several    highly   placed   Administration  and   in-
dustry   sources   said  cuts  totalling   $10   to   $15  billion  could
be  made  in  the  defense  budget  while  retaining  or  improving
the   current   level   of   national   security."    That   saving   alone
would   be  enough,   according   to  a  report   made   some   weeks
ago  to  Governor   Rockefeller,   to   scrap  our   present   welfare
system  and  initiate  a  system  of  guaranteed  minimum  income
for   the  poor.   But  the  platform's   long   and  lachrymose  plat-
form   plank   on  The   Poor   says  not  one  word   about   any  in-
come  guarantee.    On   the   poor,   the   Republicans   are   "cost-
oriented."
The  Same  Language  As  Rusk
One    paragraph     in   the    foreign    policy   plank    endorses
"limitation"  of  arms  provided  there  are  "trustworthy  guaran-
tees"  against  violation.   But  a  major  section  of  the  National
Defense   Plank  is  devoted   to  specific  areas  in  which  the  Re-
publicans    would    step   up   the   arms   race.    They   want   to
build   more   missile-armed   nuclear   submarines   and   to   stim-
ulate   military  research   in   an   effort   to   find   "major   innova-
tions"  in  weaponry.   They  pledge   "to   assemble   the  nation's
best  diplomatic,  military  and   scientific  minds   for   an   exhaus-
tive  reassessment   of   America's  worldwide   commitments   and
military  preparedness."    There  is  no   sign,  however,  of   any
retreat  from  a  Pax  Americana.   In  a  passage   of  the   foreign
policy  plank  which  sounds  exactly  like  Rusk,  the  Republicans
say,   "We   do  not   intend  to   conduct   foreign   policy   in   such
a   way  as  to   make   the   United   States   a  world    policeman."
But   the   very   next   sentence,   again   exactly   like   Rusk,   says
"However,  we  will  not  condone  aggression  or  so-called  'wars
of    national    liberation.' "    In   the   plank   on   Vietnam   the
party   does   express    its   concern   over   "hastily  extemporized
undeclared   wars  which   embroil   massive  U.S.   Army   forces
How  Seattle  Should  Learn  To  Stop  Worrying
And  Love  The  ABM
"Mr.    PELLY    (R.-Wash.):   Three   sites     [for     the
Sentinel]  are   under  study   inside  or  near  the  city  of
Seattle   and   its   vicinity,   and   we   are   having   great
difficulty    in   getting   the   Army   to   justify   whatever
decision   they   are   going   to   make   as   to   a   location.
The  people  in  my  congressional  district  do  not  want
any   antimissile   missile   located   in   or   near   the   city.
But   the   question   I   cannot   answer,   for   which   the
gentleman  could   give  me  information,  is  if  a  success-
ful   Sentinel  is  developed,  then  in  the  event  that  we
did  intercept  a  nuclear  weapon  coming  in  our  direction,
would   that  contaminate  the  atmosphere   to  the   point
that  it   would  result  in  a  "kill"  in  the  city  or  in  the
vicinity   where   these   Sentinel  sites   will   be   located?
"Mr.   S1KES   (D-Fla.):   Not   necessarily,   and   prob-
ably  not  .  .  ."
—House   debate  on  the   ABM,    July   29.
thousands  of  miles  from  our  shores"  but  the  solution  favored
seems   to  be  the   use  of   more   airpower.    For   the   next   sen-
tence   says  "It   is  time  to  realize  that  not   every  international
conflict  is  susceptible  of  solution  by  American  ground   forces."
(Our  italics).   Our  colonial  cops  will  travel  in  B52s.
If   there   is  any   doubt   about   the   OOP's   commitment   to
Pax   Americana,  Nixon   made  it  clear  at  his  Aug.   6  Miami
Beach  news  conference  when  asked  whether  he  now  thought
the  Vietnam  war  unwinnable,  "I  do  not  think  that  the  war
is  not  winnable  and   I  should   state  further  that   I  certainly
do  not  seek  the  Presidency  for  the  purpose  of  presiding  over
the   destruction   of   the   credibility  of   the   American   power
throughout  the  world."   This  paraphrases  Churchill's  famous
last  stand  for  British  imperialism.
Normally   our  next  issue  would   go  to  press  Aug.    27
but  that  will  be  the  day   before   the  Democrats  nominate
and   we  will  be  in   Chicago.   So  the  next  issue  will  go
to  press  instead  Sept.  3  and  be  dated  Sept.  9.
The  First  And  Essential   Step  Toward  Preventing   War  Between   The  Races
The  lessons  of  Vietnam  need  to  be  applied  to  the    con-
frontation   shaping   up   between   white   America   and   its
black  ghettoes.   The  situation  may  be  clarified   and  a  mu-
tually   tragic  outcome  avoided  if   we   drop   all   subterfuges
and  euphemisms.   We  must  be  prepared  to  see  first  of  all
that   we   face   a   black   revolt;   secondly,   that   the   black
ghettoes   regard  the   white   police  as   an  occupying   army;
thirdly,   that   guerrilla   war  against   this  army  has   begun.
The  guerrillas,  as  in  the  beginning  of  all  colonial  revolts,
are   but  a   handful.     But  they   have   it   in   their   power   to
widen  the  conflict.   The  effect  of  the  ambushes  which  have
begun  to  occur  in  various  cities  is  to  deepen  police   hatred
and   fear   of   the   blacks,  and  therefore   to  stimulate  those
very  excesses  and  brutalities  which   have  made  the   police
a   hated  enemy.   As  in  Algiers,  terror  and  counter-terror
can  mount  until  the  dynamics  of  the  struggle  mobilize  a
majority  of  the  oppressed  and  turn  guerrilla  war  into  mass
uprising.    All   the   "riots"   so   far   will   seem   minor   when
and  if  this  occurs.
What  is  the  lesson  of  Vietnam  and  other  colonial  wars?
That   the   key   is   political   and   not   military.    Repressive
measures    merely   intensify    the    political    struggle.    The
political   struggle  can  only  be  won  by  giving  the  colonial
population   some   form   of   self-government.
To  rid  the   ghetto  of   an  alien   police   is   the   first   step
toward   defusing   the   conflict.     Police   tend   to   be   brutal
in   every   society   when   they   confront   protest.    This   bru-
tality  is   worse  when  the   police  are  of  another  race   from
the  people  they  are  trying  to  control.   The  evidence  that
our   white   police   are  anti-black   has   been  overwhelmingly
demonstrated  in  a  whole  series  of  reports  and  outbreaks.
To  substitute  black  police  for  white,  and  to  let   the  black
community  control  its  own police,  would  be equivalent  to  the
first  step   toward   self-government   in   a   colonial   dispute.
The   white   police   tend   to   shut   their   eyes   to   organized
crime  in  the   black   community,  to   prostitution   and  drug-
peddling,   while   saving   their   zeal   for   black   militants.    A
black   police   force   run   by  the   black   community   could   re-
verse   that   emphasis.    Law   and   order   would   no   longer
seem   a   synonym   for   racial   oppression.   There   would   no
longer   be  that   atmosphere  in   the   ghetto   which   sets  off
conflagrations  through  a  mere  arrest  or  error.
A   few    police   shootings   in   Brooklyn,   Cleveland,   Los
Angeles  and  elsewhere  are  but   flashes   of   summer  light-
ning,   which  warn  of   a   coming  storm.   The   first  step  in
preventing   not   just   "riots"   but   war   between   the   races
is  to  let   the  ghettoes   police  themselves.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August 19,  1968
The  GOP  Convention  Was  Not  Without  Its  Cheering  Aspects
From   a  Marxist-Leninist point   of   view,  the  Republican
convention  was  clearly  a  victory  for   the   working  class.   A
poor  boy grew  up  to  defeat  a  Rockefeller  for  the  Republican
nomination.   Those  massed  millions  in  last-minute  TV   and
newspaper  advertising  failed   utterly  to  overcome   a  militant
armed  with  the  corrertd  political  line.   His  proletarian  loyal-
ties  were  so  little  affected   by  success  that  he  at  once  planned
to   celebrate  by  visiting   Moscow   and   discussing   his   future
plans  in  the  Kremlin.   He   was  unfortunately  dissuaded  by
nervous  bourgeois  advisers.
From  Dog  Pound  to  White   House
Another   cheerful  way   of   looking   at   the   convention   is
to   notice   how   firmly   the   party   has   committed    itself    to
turning  power  back  from  Washington   to  the  State  and  local
governments.     If    anything   happens    to   Nixon    after    his
election,  the  Presidency will  be  turned  over  to  a  Man  Who
only   six  short  years   ago  had   reached   eminence  no   higher
than  leadership  in  the  Kiwanis  Club  and  the   Parent-Teacher
Association  in  a  suburb  of  Maryland,  ranking  somewhere  in
the   rural   hierarchy  between   a   deputy   Sheriff   and   a  duly
elected  dogcatcher. The  Republicans  have  proven  again  that  in
America  anybody  is  liable  to   become   President.
The  convention  was  a  humbling   affair   altogether   for   Us
Ethnics.   It  was  hard  to  listen  to  Goldwater  and  realize  that
a  man   could   be  half   Jewish   and   yet  sometimes   appear   to
be  twice  as  dense  as  the   normal  Gentile.    As  for   Agnew,
even  at  a  convention  where  every  speech   seemed   to  outdo
the   other   in   wholesome  cliches  and   delicious   anticlimaxes,
his  speech putting Nixon  into  nomination  topped  all  the  rest.
If  the  race  that  produced  Isaiah  is  down  to  Goldwater   and
the  race  that  produced  Pericles  is  down  to  Agnew,  the  time
has   come  to  give  the  country  bade  to  the  WASP's.
TV  is ruining the  two-party  system.   Mayor  Daley  is smart
to  keep  that   electricians'  strike  going   through   the   Demo-
cratic  convention.  The  advantage of  a  national primary would
be  to  shield  the  American  public  from   too  intimate  a  view
of   its  politicoes  at  work  and  play.    It  would   take  a  comic
genius  to  duplicate  some  of   the   ideas  Republican   speakers
came   up   with.    We   remember   with   special   pleasure   that
,,,.     Sour  Footnote  on  A  Favorite   Panacea
The   Republican  platform,  like   all   the   Democratic
candidates  except  McCarthy,  advocates  private   enter-
prise  as  the  panacea  for  a  wide  variety  of  social  and
economic   problems  from  urban  blight   to   foreign   de-
velopment.    This   dreary   nonsense   is   being   parroted
everywhere.     Private    enterprise    doesn't    even    have
enough  social  responsibility  to  handle  the  far  simpler
problem  of  averting   inflation   by  limiting  increase   in
profits  to  a  reasonable  share  of  increased  productivity.
The  very  morning  the  GOP  convention  opened,  the
Wall   Street   Journal's    weekly    page    one    "Outlook"
column   called   attention    to   the   fact   that   "a   major
culprit"  in  the  creeping  inflation  of  the  past  two  dec-
ades  "may  be  corporate  profits."   That  paper's   analy-
sis   by   Alfred   L.  Malabre,  Jr., showed   that   in   the
three   periods  of   rising   factory   prices  in  the  past  20
years,   labor  costs   had  been   declining   and   corporate
profits    increasing    sharply    before    the    price    climb
started.
The  Korean  war  played  its  part  in  the  first  of  these
inflationary   periods   and  the   Vietnamese   war   in   the
third  and  current  one.   But  the  pattern  was  the  same;
higher  prices  were  not  needed  to  meet  labor  costs  or
sustain   profits.    In  the   peace-time   inflationary   surge
which  began  in  late  1955,  labor  costs  were  dropping
and  corporate   profits  had  risen   70  percent.    The   in-
flationary  spark  in  each  period  was  the    unrestrained
greed  of  private  or  corporate    enterprise.
passage  in  Ivy  Baker  Priest's  nominating  speech  for  Ronald
Reagan   in  which  she   said,   "We   cannot  afford   the   status
quo."   The  only  real  sense  we  could  get  out  of  that  remark
in   that   upper   bracket   assemblage   was   that   maybe   some
delegates  were falling  behind  in  the  payments on  their yachts.
We  had  always  assumed  that  the  status  quo  was  something
Republicans  could  never  have  too  much  of.    Another  ora-
torical  banana  peel  was  dropped  by  Agnew,  whose  style  of
delivery  reminds  us  strongly  of  W.C.   Fields.   In  nominating
Nixon,   he  quoted  his  hero  as  saying,   "Right   now  change
rules   America.   It   is   time   for   America  to   rule   change."
This  sonorous  tidbit  sounded  as  if  Nixon  were  casting  him-
self, as  a  modern  Canute.   The  G.O.P.  has  been  trying  for
years   to  hold   back   the   tides.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier Collection, "The  Haunted  Fifties" Out of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book.  In
A Time  of  Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name     ..............................................................................
Street      ........................................................................................
City   .................................... Zip................   State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                «/»/M
5618  Nebraska Ave,  N.  W-,  Washington, D. C. 20015
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   FV  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at   Washington.  D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D. G.
An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone':  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in  the  U.S.; S6  in  Canada;
SIO  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  117  to  Europe;  S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED