I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968oct07.pdf

============================================================

The  Rising  Cost  of  US. Militarism,  P.  2
How Much of  A Dove Is Humphrey's George Ball When Words Like These Infuriated Him?
"It  is   unthinkable,    incredible,    when   you  think   of   the
sufferings   of   these   [Vietnamese]   people.    That   is   why  I
am  saying   that  the  necessary  first  steps  should  be  taken
and  must  be  taken—and  see  what  will  happen  afterwards.
I   am   convinced—I   was   convinced   during   the   last   three
years   and  I  am  convinced   now—that   once  this  essential
first  step   [an  end  of  the  bombing  of  the  North]  is  taken,
very   meaningful  talks  will  take   place   leading   towards   a
peaceful  settlement   of  the  problem."
—UN  Secretary   General  U  Thant  to  the  press  Sept.  S3.
L K Stone's  Weekly
/VAri'llf f 4.//T/* T/li7X/    i<1— \\/  00lOtm                       ^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  20
OCTOBER  7,   1968
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
20  CENTS
Why  Hubert  Is As Tricky  As Dicky
It   is  a  delusion   to  believe  that   Humphrey   is  not  saying
what  we  want  him  to  say on  Vietnam  because  he  is  afraid  of
Johnson.    Humphrey's    wl«ole   record,   not   just   as   an   anti-
Communist  on  the  home  front,  but  on  Southeast  Asia  leaves
little  reason  to  believe  that  he  would  have  a  different  position
on  the  Vietnam  war  even  if  freed   from  Johnson's   influence.
Humphrey's  enthusiasm  for  American  intervention  in  South-
east  Asia  goes  back  to   1950   when   he   welcomed   Truman's
decision   to  give   financial   aid   to   the   French   and   to   their
puppet  Emperor,  Bao  Dai.   When  the  French  were  criticized
for  not  sending   troops  to  Korea,  Humphrey  defended  them
on  the  ground  that  they  were  already  "fighting  for  freedom
in   Indochina."     Humphrey   was   second   only   to   Nixon   in
readiness  for  U.S.  involvement.   When  Nixon  proposed  send-
ing  American  troops  into  Indochina  before  the  Geneva  con-
ference  in  1954,  Humphrey  was  not  prepared  to  go  that  far,
though  he  told  the  Senate on  April  19 of  that  year  he  thought
Nixon's  famous  off-the-record  speech  to  the  American  Society
of  Newspaper   Editors  was  "very  responsible,  considered,  ma-
ture  and  intelligent."   The  entente  cordials  between  them  far
antedates  the  current  campaign,  which  is  being  fought  like  a
gentlemanly  boxing  match.
Even  Rightists  Don't  Question  His  Record
Humphrey  is  a  prisoner  of  the  Johnson  Administration and
perhaps   even  more  so  of  the  labor  movement,  his  only  or-
ganized   support   outside  the  party  machines.   George   Meany
is  if  anything  even  more  hawkish  on  the  war  than  Johnson,
as  Meany   was  more   hawkish  than   Eisenhower.    Humphrey
would  take  all  the  enthusiasm  out  of  Meany's  support  if  he
were  to  shift  over  on  Vietnam.   But  the  essential  reason  that
Humphrey   holds  back  is  that  he  has  always  believed   in  the
war,  and  in  the  necessity  of  creating  a  bulwark  in  Vietnam
against  Communist  expansion  into  Southeast  Asia.   It  is  indi-
cative  that  the  highly  unfair  and  twisted  attack  made  on  him
by  Allan  Ryskind  of  Human  Events,  the   organ   of  the   far
rightists,  in  a  newly  published  book,  "Hubert",  is  unable  to
pin  on  him  any  dove-like  statement  about  the  Indochina  war.
"This  is  our  great   adventure,"   Humphrey   declared  expan-
sively  in  a  talk  less  than  a  year  ago  to  the  U.S.  Embassy  staff
in  Saigon,   "and   a  wonderful  one  it  is."    No  one  has  been
more   Gung   Ho   about   this   war   than   Hubert    Humphrey.
Eisenhower  and  Kennedy  as  well  as  Johnson  had  his  support
as  the  escalation  continued  and  the  U.S.  stakes  grew.
Unworthy   To  Be  Chief  Justice
Those   of   us   who   lived   through    the   witch    hunt
years   saw   the   nomination   of   Owen   Lattimore's   de-
fender,  Abe  Fortas,  to  be  Chief  Justice,  as  a  vindica-
tion,   an   immensely   satisfying    symbolism.     But   the
realities   uncovered   in  the   fight   against   him  left   a
bad  taste.   His   enemies   did  him  honor   but  the   flaw
was   in   a   love   of   power   and  money.   Fortas   could
have   insisted   after   his   elevation   to   the   bench   that
a  self-respecting   concern  for  the  separation  of   powers
forbade   him  any   longer   to  act  as   Lyndon  Johnson's
private   counsel   and  telephone   fixer.   The  worst   blot
was  the  American  University   affair,   when  his   former
law  partner  Paul  Porter   panhandled   $30,000  from  five
former  clients   to  pay   Fortas   $30,000  for  a  series  of
summer  seminars.   One of  the  donors  has  a  son  whose
appeal   from  a   fraud  conviction   may   soon   reach   the
Supreme   Court.    Why  as   wealthy   a   man  as   Fortas
needed  the  fee  passes  understanding,  as  does  Porter's
insensitivity.
The   Salt   Lake   City   speech   has   to   be   read   against   this
consistent  record.   Its  major  disappointment,  from  the  stand-
point  of  the  peace  movement,  does  not   lie  in   Humphrey's
tricky  position  on  the  bombing halt:  the  fact  that  like  Johnson
he  links  it  to   reciprocal  concessions  and   goes   further  than
Johnson  has  in  explicitly  stating  that  the  bombing  would  be
resumed  if  we  were  dissatisfied  with  the  other  side's  conduct
("bad   faith").    This  is  not   unconditional   cessation.    More
important  is  that  Humphrey   shows  no  readiness  whatsoever
for  any  political  compromise  in  the  peace  negotiations   them-
selves.   Essentially  he,  like  Johnson   and  Thieu,  call   on  the
other  side  to  lay  down  its  arms  and  accept  "free   elections"
under  South  Vietnam's  rigged  Constitution.   Humphrey  in  no
way  departs  from  the  cliches  of  Johnson  and  Rusk:  the  view
of  the  war  as  purely  an  aggression   from  the  North;  the  pre-
tense  that  land  reform   is  going   on  when   South   Vietnam's
oligarchic  legislature,  representative  of  the  landlord   class  and
not   the   peasantry,  has   already  overwhelmingly   rejected   it;
and   the  old  will-of-the-wisp  —  that   the  South   Vietnamese
army  will  soon  be  able  to  take  over  the  main  burden  of  the
war.    Without  a  fresh  view  of  the  past  and  the  present,  the
way  cannot  be  cleared  for  a  political  settlement  and  a  genu-
inely  representative  government   in   South   Vietnam.   This  is
what  Johnson  does  not  want  and  there  is  no  reason  to  believe
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  7,1988
We  Need  A  New  Organization  To  Defend  America  and  the  Dollar  Against  Militarism
The  Pentagon Gets the  Biggest  Budget  in  Our  History  But  It's  Not  Enough
Some   permanent   organization   is   needed   to   protect   the
United  States  from  the  mounting  costs  of  militarism and  the
military-industrial   complex.    Perhaps   it   ought   to   be" called
a  Washington-Eisenhower  Watchdog  Society,  from  the  names
of  the  two  great  soldier  Presidents  who  warned  the  country
against  these  dangers.   The  fight  ought  not  to  be  left  to  un-
organized  last-gasp  efforts  like  those  marshalled  in  the  Senate
last  week  by  Cooper  of  Kentucky  against  the  anti-missile and
Clark   of   Pennsylvania  for   an   $8   billion   cut   in   the   new
military   budget.    These    evils   will   destroy   the   dollar   and
undermine  free  government.
A  New  Step-Up  In  The  World  Arms   Race
The  two-day  debate  in  the  Senate,  more  than  half  of  it  in
secret  session,  signals  the  beginning  of  a  new  stepup  in   the
arms   race.    In   some   ways   the   most   alarming   speech   was
that  made  by  the  chief  defender  of  the  new  military  budget,
Russell   of   Georgia.    He   admitted  he   was  presenting  "the
largest  appropriation  bill  in  American  history",  just  short  of
$72  billions,  and  that  actual  military  costs  during  the  1969
fiscal  year  would  be  just  short  of   $80  billions.    But   Russell
insisted  that  substantial  increases  would  be  necessary  to sup-
port  the  war  and  "honor  our  commitments  abroad."
If   the   war   ends,   Russell   indicates,   we   are  going  to   be
pressed  hard  to  divert  Vietnam  funds  to  "modernizing"   and
replenishing  our  tanks,  missiles   and   bombers.    Russell   gave
some  figures  on  the  fantastic  rise  in  the  costs  of  maintaining
our   armed   forces   on   the   scale   to  which   they  have   become
accustomed.    A  medium  bomber   in  World  War   II   cost  less
than  |250,000;  the  latest,  the  RS-71,  costs  100  times  as  much
or   almost  $25,000,000.   The   M-16  costs   5  times  what   the
M-l  did  in  1946.
Clark,  in  a  magnificent  speech,  gave  some  striking  details
on  what  military costs  were  doing  to  poverty  programs  in  his
.own   state.    He   said  the   so-called   defense  bill  was  really   a.
bill  to  maintain  "an   offensive   capacity  as  the   policeman   of
the  world."   He  said  the  inflation  it  was  causing  was  "taking
money  out  of  the  hides"   of  the  poor  and  aged  and  all  who
live  on  fixed  incomes.   And  he  put  into  the  Record  ^(511706,
Oct.    1)   an   extraordinary   issue   of   Congressional   Quarterly
(Sept.  20)   summarizing  a  furious  debate  between  Secretary
Clifford   and  anonymous  Pentagon   rebels  over  military  waste.
But  all  his  cost-cutting  amendments  were  voted   down.
More  Power   For  The  Military   Monster?
As  Secretary  of  Defense,  Robert  S.  McNamara  often
showed  himself  surprisingly  obtuse.   He  never   seemed
really  to  grasp  the  dangers   of  the  military  mind  and
the  military  institution.   His   Montreal   speech,   for  all
its  liberal  veneer,  proposed  to  extend  the  power  of  the
military   bureaucracy  over  youth  and  over  our  society
in  the   name  of   social   betterment.    Secretary   Clifford
carried  on  the  same  theme  in  his  Sept.  26  address  to
the     National     Security     Industrial     Association—the
heart,  as  he  admitted,  of   the  military-industrial com-
plex.    Clifford   was   smug   and  superficial  in  declaring
that   the   dangers   embodied   in  the   complex   had  been
avoided.    He   was   downright   alarming   when   he  pro-
posed   that   our   "military-industrial   team"   turn    its
"unique  resources"   to  finding  the  answers  "to  complex
domestic   problems   as   it   has   found   the   answers   to
complex  weapons  systems."   Behind  the  veil  of  secrecy,
this   team   has   made   some   stupendously    wrong    deci-
sions,  as  in  Vietnam.   Its  motives  are  careerism,  profit
and  capacity   for  destruction,   working  within  an  insti-
tutional    framework   which   is   authoritarian    and   se-
cretive.    Were   they   to   run   the   country   socially,   it
would   be   a   totalitarian   state.    To   say,  as   Clifford
does,   that   "the  unity   of   America"   must   be   one   of
their   prime   concerns   is   to  invite   Big   Brotherism.
Despite  these  stupendous  expenditures,   Cooper  failed  by  a
vote  of  45  to  25  to  block  a  huge  new  item,  an   anti-missile
defense,  billed  as  just  a  little  $5  billion  one  against  China,
but  which  will  eventually grow  into  one  costing  $40  to  $70
billions  against   the   Soviet   Union,   and   be  worthless   —   as
McNamara   warned   —   when   it's   finished.   It   will   be  like
playing  poker,  Hart  of  Michigan   declared,  with  a  worthless
hand.   He  might  have  adde.d  it  will  be  the  most  costly   bluff
in   human   history.   Cooper's   most   telling  quotation   in   the
debate was this  —
This  concept  of  a  missile  attack  originating  in  China  any
time  in  the  near   future  seems  to  me  to  be  very   remote.
The  Chinese  are  not  completely  crazy;   they  are  not  going
to  attack  us  with  4  or  5  missiles  [all  they   may  have  by
the  mid-70s]   when  they   know  we  have   the  capability   of
virtually  destroying   their  entire  country ...  I  don't   like
people  to  think  that  I  am  being   kidded  by  this  talk  of  a
defense   against  a  Chinese   nuclear  attack.
That  was  Russell  himself  talking  at  the  anti-missile  hearings.
He   wants   a  big  anti-missile  program   against   the  Russians.
The   Chinese  may  not   be  crazy.   But  are  we  entirely  sane?
OWNERSHIP,   MANAGEMENT   AND   CIRCULATION
(Act   of  October  23,  1962:  Section   4369,  Title  39.  United  States  Code)
1.  Date  of  Filing  Oct.  1. 1968.
2.  Title  of  Publication:   I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.
.                         .
8.  Frequency   of   issue:   Every   other   week;   not   published   in   August.
4.  Location  of  known  office  of  publication:  5618 Nebra
Washington.  D.  C.  20015.
.
raska  Avenue,  N.W.,
.   .  .      .
5.  Location   of   the  headquarters   or  general  business   offices   of   the   pub-
Ushers:   G618 Nebraska   Avenue,  N.W.,  Washington,   D.   C.  20015.
6.  Names  and  addresses  of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:   I.  F.
Stone,  same  address.
7.  Owner   (If    owned  by  a  partnership   or  other  unincorporated   firm,   its
name   and   address,   at    well   as   that   of   each  individual   must   be   given):
I.   F.   Stone,   6618  Nebraska   Avenue,   N.   W.,   Washington,   D.   C.   20015;
Esther  M.  Stone,  same  address.
8.  Known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or
hoiding  1  percent   or  more  of  total   amount   of   bonds,  mortgages  or   other
securities   (If   there  are  none,  so  state) :   none.
9.  Paragraphs  7  and  8  include,  in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  secur-
ity   holder  appears  upon   the  books  of   the   company  as  trustee  or  in   any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation  for   whom
such  tr'istee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs   show  the
affiant's   full   knowledge  and  belief   as  to  the  circumstances   and  conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon
books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock  and  securities  in  a  caps
other  than  that  of  a  bonafide   owner.
the
capacity
Average No. Copies
Each  Issue During
Preceding  12 months
A.  Total   No.   Copies   Printed                        42.000
B.  Paid  Circulation
1.  Sales  Through  Agents,  News
Dealers  or  Otherwise                      2,116
2.  To  Term  Subscribers by
Mail,  Carrier Delivery, or  by
other  means                                        37,854
C.  Total  Paid  Circulation                                 39.970
D.  Free  Distribution  (including
samples)  by  Mail,  Carrier  De-
livery,   or  by   Other   Means                     200
E.  Total  No.  of  Copies  Distributed              40,170
F.  Office  Use,  Etc.                                           1.830
G.  Total                                                                42.000
Single  Issue Nearest
To Filing Date
45,500
2,324
40.993
43.317
250
43,567
1.933
45,500
I   certify   that  the  statements  made  by  me  above  are   correct   and   com-
plete.    I.  F.  Stone,  editor.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  7,1968
A  Triumph of   Greek  Subtlety  and  U.S.  Military  Aid
The  First  Military  Dictatorship With  A  Free  (But  Suspended)  Constitution
It   is  easy  to  imagine  -what  the   U.S.   would   be  saying  if
the  military  had   seized  power   in  Czechoslovakia,  written  a
Constitution  allowing  the  military  junta to  suspend  indefinitely
all  basic  freedoms,  asked  the  Czechs  to  vote  on  that  Consti-
tution  in  an  election   campaign   which  allowed   no  opposition
voice,  held  the  plebiscite  under  martial  law,  and  announced
that  99.2  percent  of  the  people  had  voted  approval.
How  the  Kremlin  must  envy  U.S.  technological  superiority
in  arranging  such  affairs!   How  clumsy  the  Kremlin's  maneu-
vers  in  Czechoslovakia  appear  beside  the  smooth  operations
of   the  Colonels   in  Greece!    The  Pentagon's   excuse  for   this
extinction  of  liberty  in  Greece  with  U.S.  arms  is  strategic  —
the  need  to  prevent  the  rise  of  a  possibly  neutralist  govern-
ment  on  NATO's  southern  flank.  The  Kremlin's  excuse  for
the  Czech  operation   is  strategic  —  to  prevent  the  rise  of  a
possibly   neutralist   regime,   outflanking  Poland   to  the   north
and   Hungary  to   the   south.    But  how   few   Americans  will
compare  them.   The  remains  of  our  Old   Left   is  as  ready  to
justify   the   extinction   of   liberty   in   Czechoslovakia   as   the
military  and  the  cold  warriors  are  to  justify  it  in  Greece.
A  Deft  Swindle
The  Greek  Colonels  must  be  given  high  marks  for  virtu-
osity.   The  new  Constitution  contains  all  kinds  of  democratic
guaranties  —  but  leaves  it  up  to  the  Colonels  to  decide  when,
if  ever,  they  are  to  become effective.   In  the  voting,  "yes"  slips
were  blue,   "no"   slips  black;  there  was  psychological   condi-
tioning  in  the  choice  of  colors.   The  voter  by  dropping  or
refusing   the  blank  ballots  could   ingratiate  himself   with   the
police   and  military.   The   two  correspondents   of   Le   Figaro
reported   (Sept.  30)   they  found  piles  of  "no"   ballots  strewn
all  over  the  floor  of  the  balloting  places   they  visited.   Many
feared  reprisals  if  suspected  of  voting  wrongly.
The  early returns were  too good.  The  London  Times  (Sept.
30)  carried  a  Frencvh  Agency  dispatch  saying the  first  returns
from  the  north  of  the  country "showed   100  percent  in  favor."
Alfred  Friendly   in  the  Washington  Post  (Oct.   1)   indicated
that  the  government  was  embarrassed  and  holding  back  early
returns   which   "smacked   too   much   of   those   traditional  to
dictatorships."    The   results  from  Athens  were  finally  given
as  75  percent  in  favor  "compared   with  99.8   percent  in  most
rural  areas"   (New   York   Times,   Oct.   1).    This  reduced  the
national  average  to  92.2  percent.  It  is  hard  to  know  how  to
assess  these  final  figures  since  the  regime  did  the   counting.
The  Colonels  must  be  spending  a  fortune  on   propaganda.
"35   foreign   writers,   of   which   five   were   American,"   the
Washington  Post  reported  from  Athens  (Sept.  29)   have  been
brought   here   as   guests   of   the   regime   with   transportation
expenses  and  hotel  bills  of  them  and  their  wives  fully  paid."
Kingsbury  Smith  of  the  Hearst   press,  Wm.  F.  Buckley  and
Erwin   D.   Canham,   editor-in-chief   of   the   Christian   Science
Monitor,  were  among  the  five.  "So  confident was  the  govern-
ment  in  the  purity  of  its  electoral  process,"  was  the  way  Mr.
Canham  admitted  this  in  an  Oct.   1  dispatch,  "that  it  invited
half  a  hundred  news  observers,  myself  included,  to  be  their
guests  at  the  voting."   With   guest-like  politeness,  Mr.  Can-
ham  went  on  to  say that  he  had  talked  with  leading  members
of  the  government.    "They  give  the   impression,"   he  wrote,
Add  Uses  of  A  Lame-Duck  President
"The  balance  of  opinion  inside  the  Johnson  Admin-
istration  is  tipping  toward  early  resumption  of  some
military  aid to  the  military  junta  in  Greece ...  At
least   since   January   the   Pentagon   has   been   arguing
that   the   current   military   boycott   is    self-defeating.
The  State  Department and  White  House  have  resisted
.  .  .  partly  because  of  strong   political   opposition  in
Congress  this  election  year  against  aid  to  a  dictator-
ship.   Today   American   officials   admit  that  the   more
of   a   lame-duck   President   Johnson  becomes   and  the
closer   the  90th  Congress   draws  to  its   end,   the  less
the  administration  has  to   worry  about  the   domestic
implications  of  resuming  military  aid."
—George  Sherman,  Washington  Star,  Sept.  25, who
notes  that  while  the   U.S.  held  up   supersonic   planes
it  "has  never  stopped   sending  Greece  spare  parts  and
ammunition   which,  politically,  are  far   more  useful   to
the   Greek   military    in   maintaining    internal    order."
"of  being  dedicated,  zealous   men."
Similar  VIP  tours  have  produced  similar  compliments  from
West  European  parliamentarians.   Two  British   Conservatives
issued  a  statement  on  their  return  (London  Time},  Sept.  19)
calling  the  military  "dedicated   and  able"  and  the  people,  "in
spite  of  what  had  been  written  by  hostile  writers,  happy  and
relaxed."    Six   French   deputies    returned   equally    euphoric,
according  to  this  same  story,  and  declared  the  Greek  economy
"wide  open  to  foreign   investments."
A  Scandal  in  Britain
These   happy   tidings   were   interrupted   Sept.   21   when   a
British   public   relations   man,   Maurice   Fraser,   obtained   an
injunction  forbidding  the  London  Sunday  Times  to  print  a
document  which  had   come  into  its  possession.   This  was  a
report  by  Fraser  to  his  employers  in  the  military  junta  boast-
ing  that  a  British  member  of  Parliament   was  on  his   payroll
"with  the  object  of  influencing  other  British  MPs."   A  week
later,  while  the  injunction   was  still  on  appeal,  the  Sunday
Times  said  another  British  MP  was  ready  to  raise  the   issue
in   the   House   of   Commons   as   a   breach   of   parliamentary
privilege.    The   Sunday   Telegraph   the   same   day  named   10
MPs  Fraser  had  flown  to  Athens  with  their  wives  on   VIP
tours.   "During  the  year,"  the  Telegraph  added,  "six   German
and  six  French  MPs  have  also  been  flown  to  Athens,  as  well
as  numerous  journalists,  bankers  and  business  men."
Freedom's   frontier  in  the  Balkans  is  now  the  world's  first
military   dictatorship  with   a  free   constitution,  and  the  first
free   constitution   which   provides   indefinite   suspension    by
the  military   dictators.   To   the  creation  of  this  paradox   the
U.S.  has  made  no  small  contribution.   Richard  J.  Barnet  has
just  published   a  new  book,   "Intervention   and  Revolution."
In  a  chapter  on  The  Subversion  of  Undesirable   Governments,
he  quotes  a  lovely  remark  by  Hubert  Humphrey  in  a  happier
day  during  a  Senate  investigation  of  the  Iranian  aid   program
in  1957.   "Do  you  know  what  the  head  of  the  Iranian  army
told   one  of  our  people?"  Humphrey   asked.   "He   said   the
army  was  in  good  shape,   thanks  to  U.S.  aid  —  it  was  now
capable   of  coping  with  the  civilian  population."   The   same
prowess,   due  to  the  same  aid,  is  now  on  display  in   Greece.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 7,1968
The  Lull  Is Over  and  Hard  Fighting  Lies  Ahead
(Continued  from  Page   One)
that  Humphrey  or  Nixon   are  any  readier  for  it  than  he  is.
The  Meaning  of  the  Wiggins   Appointment
Humphrey  repeated  that  stupefying  nonsense  about  how  on
March   31   Johnson    "sacrificed   his   own   political   career   in
order  to  bring  negotiations  that  could  lead  to  peace."   Every
day  makes  clearer  that  just  the  opposite   is  the  case.    Johnson
freed  himself  from  the  pressures  of  politics  in  order  to  carry
on  the  war.   His  line  has  hardened.   His  latest   appointment
of   a   U.S.   representative   to   the   UN   shows   he   no   longer
bothers  to  try  and  fool  public  opinion  at  home  and  abroad  by
naming  men  like  Goldberg  or  Ball  who  are  or  appear  to  be
doves.    Goldberg   was  himself   the   victim   of   Johnson;   he
really  thought   the  President  wanted  peace  when  he   stepped
down  from  the  Court  to  go  to  the  UN.   Ball's  reputation  as
a  dove  has  always been  overblown,  and  his  attack  on  U  Thant
for   advocating   an  end   of   the   bombing   showed   how   little
reality  there  was  behind  the  gossip   that  he  was  the   dove-in-
residence  of  the  State  Department.    I  myself  never   thought
his  dissent  on  the  war  much  more  than   a  reflection  of  his
fear  that  we  were  paying  too  much  attention  to  Asia  at  the
expense  of  his  old  clients  in  the  Common   Market.    But  of
his  successor,  Russell  Wiggins,   there  is  no  doubt.   Though  a
liberal  in  domestic   affairs,  Wiggins  made  the  editorial   page
of  the  Washington   Post  a  faithful   echo  of  the  Johnson-Rusk
line  on  Vietnam.   Johnson  no  longer   needs  to  pretend.
I  am  just  back  from  a  few  days  in  Paris  where  I  had  a
look  at  the  stalemated  Paris  peace  talks.   For  the  newsmen,
it   is  like  covering  a  glacier,  except  that   glaciers   sometimes
move  an  inch  or  so  a  year.   The  line  of  the  other  side  seems
to  have  hardened  with  our  own.   There  is  less  emphasis  on
the  Alliance   as  a   bridge   to   the  South   Vietnamese   middle
class  and  a  political  compromise;  the  NLF   is. back  in   the
center  of   discussion.   Apparently  Hanoi   was  preparing   last
March  to  make  so explicit an  offer  on  peace  talks  if  the  bomb-
ing  ended  as to put  Washington  squarely on  the  spot.  Johnson
outflanked  Hanoi  by making  his  own  offer  of  a  limited  bomb-
ing  pause  first.  It  was  a  skilful  ploy,  not  a  serious  proposal,
and  Washington   was  surprised  when  Hanoi  accepted  it.   My
Footnote   on  Humphrey's   Liberalism
A  sour  footnote   to  the  Humphrey  campaign  is  being
written  in  Minnesota  where  the  State's  Attorney   Gen-
eral   ruled  the   Communist  Party's   presidential   candi-
date   off  the  ballot  on  the   ground  that  the   party  had
been  outlawed  by  the  Anti-Communist   Control   Act  of
1954.     The   outlawry    provisions    were    fathered    by
Humphrey,   Morse   and   a   group    of   Senate    liberals
anxious  to  prove  they  were  not  "soft  on  Communism."
The  Justice   Department,   to  its   credit,   is  siding   with
the   Communists.    In   a   brief    amicus,   U.S.    Attorney
Patrick  Foley  warned  that  the  Act  "raises  problems",
i.e.   may  be  unconstitutional,  as  a  breach  of  the  First
Amendment.  The  Justice  Department   advises  the  Court
to  avoid  the  issue  by  holding  that  the  outlawry   pro-
visions  apply  only  to  the  Party  and  not  to  individuals!
We   sympathize    with   the   American   Civil    Liberties
Union   which  wants  the  court  to  meet  the  issue  and
strike  the  provisions   down  as  unconstitutional.   As  a
postscript   we   note   that   the   1954   amendments   were
to   the   Internal    Security    Act   of   1950   which   Nixon
fathered.   What  a  pair!
impression  is  that  Hanoi  did  so  because  of  pressure  from  its
own   allies.    My  impression  from   our   own   side  is  that   the
reason   we  do   not   stop   the   bombing  altogether   and   begin
substantive  talks  is  because  we  have  no  real  negotiating  posi-
tion  ready  except  a  Korean  solution,  i.e.  the  surrender  of  the
other  side.   There  is  a  lot  more  fighting  ahead  before  serious
negotiations  can  be  envisaged.   The  lull  is  over  and  the  NLF
spokesmen  elude  a  quiet  confidence.
The  outlook  is  bleak.   In  South  Vietnam,  the  jails  are  full
of   Buddhists  and   of   other  non-Communist  peace   elements.
At  home  it  is  as  foolish   to  rely  on  Nixon   for  peace  as  on
Humphrey.   Johnson   has  already  shown  what  he   thinks  of
Humphrey  in  arranging  for  Marvin  Watson   to  campaign  for
him.   At  lunch  in  Paris  some  North   Vietnamese  asked   me
to  explain  the  election  and  the  two-party  system.   I  said  it
was  a  triumph  of  the  dialectic.   It  showed  that  two  could  be
one  and  one  could  be  two,  and  had  probably  been  fabricated
by  Hegel   for   the   American  market   on   a   subcontract  from
General  Dynamics.  The  North  Vietnamese  are  Marxists  with
a  sense  of  humor,  but  none  of  us  were  really  laughing.
This  Is  The  Time  to  Send  A  Gift  Sub to  That  Youngster  Going  Off  to   College
FOR   STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time  of  Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  .................................... Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                "/VM
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington, D.  C. 20015
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at                     '.
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D. C.
An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   So  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada:
SIO  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  320 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED