I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968dec30.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  the Laird  Nomination
Do  We  Want  A  Secretary  of  Defense With  Views  Like  These?
"Step  One  of  a  military  strategy  of  initiative should  be
the  credible  announcement of  our  determination  to  strike
first  if  necessary  to  protect  our  vital  interests.   Step  Two
should  be  to  explore  the  use  of   limited  nuclear  reprisals,
to  learn how  this  can  be  combined with  coherent diplomacy.
...  It  is  obvious  that   willingness  to  undertake nuclear
reprisals   will   be  imperative   if   we   enter   the  initial  part
of   Phase   Four  where  the   United   States   and  the   Soviet
Union  each  have  a  devastating  strikeback capability."
—Melvin  Laird  in  his  book  on  America's  Strategy  Gap
/. K Stone's  Weekly
nUsTtiii   iJ'aihi'tch/ysi     i<i—  \\f0antt\\                               ^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI,   NO.  26DECEMBER   30,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
A  Goldwater  to  Head  the  Pentagon
As  show  business,  Nixon's  introduction  of  his  Cabinet  was
shallow  and  banal.    He  himself   seemed  like  a  bush   league
Ed  Sullivan.    No  less  than  10  times  the  TV  audience  was as-
sured  that  there  was  some  mysterious  "extra   dimension"  en-
veloping  what  seemed  to  be  a  random  assortment  of  the  kind
of  business  men  to  be  met  at  any  Rotary  Club  luncheon;  the
only  extra  dimension  visible  in  their  records  was  the  size  of
their  bank  accounts.    This  is  another  Cabinet  of  millionaires.
At first  glance  the  weakest  appointment  was Nixon's  law  part-
ner  John  Mitchell  to  be  Attorney  General.    At  a  time  when
that   office   requires   the  deepest   insights,  we  get  an   Attorney
General  who  has  spent  his  professional  career  as  a  municipal
bond  expert!    The  best  appointment  was  that  of  William  P.
Rogers   to  be  Secretary  of  State;  the  most  alarming,  that  of
Melvin  R.  Laird  to  be  Secretary  of  Defense.    Unfortunately
Rogers,  who  was  a  first-rate  Attorney  General   under  Eisen-
hower  and  gave  us  some  of  the  best  Federal  judges  ever  to  sit
in  the  South,  knows  next  to  nothing  about  foreign  affairs  while
Laird  is  all  too  well  equipped   to  be  effective  at  the  Pentagon
in  terms  of  his  own  outlook.    He  is a more  competent  and  less
open  Goldwater.   The  prize  in  the Nixon  package  has gone  to
the  military-industrial  complex.
The  No.  1 Task  of  The  Pro-Peace  Bloc
We  believe   it  the  duty  of  the  pro-peace   Senators  to  fight
confirmation  when  Laird's  name  comes  before  the  Senate.    A
President  has  a  right  to  pick  his  Cabinet,  but  the constitutional
requirement   for   Senate  confirmation  becomes   meaningless  if
treated  as  a  formality.   When  Senator  McCarthy  was  awarded
the  annual  Eleanor   Roosevelt  Peace  prize  Dec. 7  by  the  Na-
tional  Committee   for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy,  he  stressed  the
need   for   the  Senate  to  play  a  firmer  role  in  foreign  policy
during  the  next  four  years.    He  called  for, "More  vigorous
examination  of   the   views  of   nominees,. especially  for   those
offices  that  effect  foreign  policy  such  as  Secretary  of  State  and
Secretary   of  Defense."     We   look   to  him   for   leadership   in
giving  the  country  a  full  view  of  Laird's  record  and writings
in  the  confirmation  hearings  and  in  the  debate.    Ordinarily
nominees   for  Secretary  of  Defense  go  to  the  Armed  Services
Committee.    This  is  stacked  with  Senators who  share  the  mili-
tary  viewpoint;  the  only  maverick  on  it  last  session  was Young
of  Ohio.   There is  no  reason  why  the  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee  should  not  ask  to  examine  Laird,  too. In  practice  the
Secretary   of   Defense   often   has   more   influence   on   foreign
policy  than  the  Secretary  of  State.    On  two  of  the  major  issues
discussed  by  McCarthy,  Laird  sides  with  the  military.   One  is
the   maintenance    of   nuclear   "superiority"   which   means   an
Laird  Sees  Us  Already  Locked  In  Global  War
"We  are  now  locked  in  a  real  war,  joined  in  mortal
combat  on  the  battlefield,  each  contender maneuvering
for   advantage—as   frankly   as   Napoleon  at  Waterloo
or   Lee   at   Gettysburg,  only   on   a   scale   a   thousand
times   magnified.    Our   own  war, its   battlefield   and
its   maneuvers  for   advantage,   is   not   of   merely  geo-
graphical   dimensions  as   at  Waterloo  and  Gettysburg.
This  is  war  of  technology,  a  battlefield of  research  and
maneuvers   in   these   areas   for   break-throughs.    The
Soviets  will  use  every  trick  and  strategem  to  beguile
us   into  sacrificing  our  time  and  efforts  to   hopes  of
disarmament.    If   meanwhile  they   achieve   their   own
break-through  in  advanced  or  space  weapons,  they  will
revise  their  strategy;  and  instead  of  being  confronted
by   so-called  'wars   of   national  liberation',   the  world
will  face  all-out  nuclear  terror,  a  situation  from  which
our  own  nuclear  capability will  have  been  eliminated."
—A  House  Divided:  America's  Strategy  Gap by  Laird
endless,   sky's-the-limit  arms  race;  the  other,  the  building  of
an  anti-ballistic  missile  system.    If   McCarthy  means  to   lead
the  fight  on  these  issues,  the  fight  ought  to  begin  with  the
Laird  appointment.
Nixon  has  tried  to  create  the   image  of  a   non-ideological
Cabinet;   he   has   called   his   Cabinet   "pragmatic    centrists."
The  man  he  would  put  in  the  Pentagon   is  no  centrist.     His
legislative  score   for  1967   was  rated   at  100%  by  the U.S.
Chamber  of  Commerce,   85%  by  the  conservative  Americans
for   Constitutional  Action   and  7%  by  Americans  for  Demo-
cratic  Action;  he  is  liberal  on  health  legislation.     "A  steely
and  shrewd  politician ...  at  the  center  of  our  largest con-
servative  apparatus,"  was the  summation  of  the  National  Com-
mittee  for  An   Effective   Congress.     Neither  is  Laird  a  prag-
matist.    I  was  wrong  last  week  in  saying  that  he  would  be  as
surprised  to  be  called  a  practitioner  of  geopolitics   as  Babbitt
would  have  been  to  be  called  a  guru.    This  small  town Wis-
consin  lumber  dealer  is  quite  at  home  with  the  swamis  of  the
cold  war.   His  one  book,  "A  House  Divided:  America's  Secu-
rity  Gap"  (Henry  Regnery:  1962) warms  up  to  a  climax  in
which  he  calls  Christianity and  communism  irreconcilable  but
says   "positivism,   not  communism,  is  the  philosophical  virus
that  causes   our  paralysis."     In  his  native  Marshfield, Wis.,
just  using  such  words  in  public  would  be  enough  to  mark  a
man  down  as  suspect.     "It  is  a  profound   lesson  of   history,"
Laird  writes  in  a  peroration  worthy  of  his  fellow  Presbyterian,
(Continued  On  Page Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  SO,  1968
(Continued  From  Page  One}
John  Foster  Dulles,  one  of  Laird's heroes,  "that  as  any nation
increases  its  dedication  to  materialistic,  positivistic  criteria  at
the  expense  of  dependence  upon  God  and  the  truths beyond
history,  that  nation  has  begun  its  downward  course."    This
deep-seated   opposition   to   materialism   does  not   keep   Laird
from  worrying  about  "the  present  profit  squeeze"  nor  from
suggesting  as mandatory "a  major  overhaul  of  the  tax system",
by  which he  means a  shift  from  income  to  more  direct  taxes,
i.e.  from  the   rich  to   the  poor,   who  are  presumably  better
adapted  to  a  less  materialistic way  of  life.
Better  Dead  Than  Red
The  book  carries  a  modest  acknowledgment "for  able  edi-
torial  and  stylistic  assistance"  to  Karl  Hess,  who  surfaced  to
fame   two   years   later   as   Goldwater's   ghost   writer.    The
"strategy  gap"  the  book  seeks  to  fill  is the  lack  of  an  offensive
posture.    The  book  suggests  that  the  U.S.  take  the  initiative,
among  other  places  (1)   in  ridding  Cuba  of  communism (2)
in  any  future  East  German  or  Hungarian  uprising  and    (3)
in  effecting  "the  unification  of  Germany."  A  Pentagon  chief
with  such  aims  will  rarely  have  a  dull  moment.    These   are
high-wire  examples  of  the  brinkmanship Laird  so  admires in
Dulles. The  basic axiom of the  book is "better  dead than Red,"
though  expressed  in  the  fruitiest  and  most  full-bodied  Gold-
waterite  prose.     "Is  the  fact  that  more  lives  are  involved  in
decisions  today,"  Laird  asks  in  sententious reference  to nuclear
war,    "sufficient   in  itself  to  make  the  condition  of   life   [i.e.
liberty]  second  to the  primacy  of  biological  preservation."  The
answer  in  the  finest  tradition of  extremism in  the  defense  of
liberty,  is  "no."    This  overreadiness for  the  ultimate  sacrifice
was  considered  too  dangerous  for  the  White  House  in   1964.
It  would  be no  less  dangerous  in  the  Pentagon  today.
At  his  Pentagon   press  conference  Friday,  December   13*
when  a  reporter  asked,  "May  I  read  some  of  your  words  back
* In  his  book  (p.  134)  Laird  cites  as  an  example  of  Khrush-
chev's  "mastery  of   the   psychological  techniques  of  political
warfare"  his  "announcement  that  a  50-megaton  bomb   would
be  set  off  on  Halloween  eve."   He thus  became  the  first  Amer-
ican  statesman  to  discover  that  the  Kremlin   so  finely  tuned
its   moves  to  exploit  the  superstitious  twinges  of  the  West
' (perhaps as  an echo of  the  Pumpkin  Papers  in  the  Hiss case?).
We  hope  no  brooder  over a  crystal  ball  in  Moscow  finds  in  the
day and date chosen for  Laird's  first  Pentagon  press  conference
a  similarly  ingenious  way to  frighten  the  U.S.S.R.
Is There  A  Psychiatrist  In  The  House ?
Nightmare  Argument  For  Endless  Arms  Race
"Present    deterrence    rests    squarely    on   American
nuclear  superiority.   On  the  day  that  the  Soviet   Union
feels  there  is,  indeed,  a  balance  of  power,  it  will  move
forward  aggressively  at  multiples  of  her  present  pace.
On  that  day,  nuclear  war  will  become  not  only  think-
able  but  in  all  likelihood  inevitable.    On  that  day  we
will  not  be  losing  the  so-called   cold  war;  we  will  have
lost  it.   Hot  wars  will  lie  ahead,  negotiated   surrender
to  Soviet   expansion.
"Just  as  our  superiority   today  gives  us,  in  a  realis-
tic  view,  the  shield   behind   which  to  press  the   cause
of  freedom,  Soviet  superiority  or  even  parity   tomorrow
would  give  them  the  ultimate  shield  behind   which  to
press  the  cause  of  the  world's  communization.   We  can
rest  assured  that  the  Communists,  given  such  a  shield,
would  not  look  upon  nuclear  war  as  suicidal   or  as  an
exercise  in  blind  mass  destruction.   They   would   look
upon  it  first  as  a  means  to  advance   Communism,  and
finally   as   the   way   of   opening   the   last   stage   in
destruction   of   freedom—military   occupation   of    the
United   States."
—p.  51  Laird's   book  on  America's  Strategy   Gap
to you from  your book?"    Laird replied  "I  was afraid  someone
might  do  that."    The  words  read  back  to  him  were  that  "the
credible  announcement of  first-strike  initiative  is  the  sole  way
to  effective  disarmament  discussions  with  the  Soviet  Union."
Laird  claimed  this  was  the  thesis  not  only  of  his  book  but  of
a  report  concurred  in  six  years  ago  by  all  the  members  of  the
House  Defense  Appropriations subcommittee on  which he  has
served  since  1953.    He  said  that  was  "written  in  a  period  of
confrontation.    We  are  now  in  a  period  of  negotiations,  and
I  think that  that  should  be  considered  as  we  face the  future."
Laird  doesn't   seem  to  be  facing  the   future   very   differently
now  than  then.   The  ability,  if  necessary,  to  take  the  nuclear
initiative  and  strike  first  is  implicit  in  the  insistence  on  nu-
clear  "superiority"  which  is  a  central  theme  not  only  of  the
book  but  of  Laird's  major  expositions  of  defense  policy  since
and  indeed  of  the  Nixon  campaign.    The  Nixon  task  force
report  on  National  Security made  the  maintenance of  nuclear
superiority  its main recommendation.   It  assailed  "the  euphoric
hope"  that  peace  could  be  reached   by  replacing   superiority
with  parity.    It  said  the  U.S.  "must  be  prepared  to  crush  all
Laird's  Argument  For  Giving Nuclear  Arms  to  France  and  West  Germany
"The  third  step  necessary   for  a  strategy   of  initiative
.would  be  to  arm  our  NATO  allies  with  defensive  nuclear
weapons,   under   proper   controls.    If   West   Germany   and
France  could  use  defensive  nuclear  weapons,  Khrushchev's
strategy  to  disrupt   NATO   would  at  once  suffer   a  major
defeat.    Khrushchev   knows   this,   and   is   making   every
possible  effort  to  prevent  us  from  extending  the  power  of
the  nuclear  deterrent  to  our  allies.   And  the  present  Ad-
ministration  shows  every  indication  of  cooperation.
"President    Kennedy    seems    unwilling    to    contradict
Khrushchev   even  by  giving  unclear  arms  to   General  de
Gaulle.   It   is   a   peculiar   anomaly   when  a   great   nation
refuses   to  its  friends   the  military   secrets   already   long
since  stolen   by  their   common   enemy.   The  fact  is  that
Khrushchev's   nuclear   blackmail   strategy   which   he   uses
to  terrify   Europe  would   be  shattered  if   we  'nuclearized*
our  allies.  .  .  .  Nuclear  deterrent  in  the  hands  of  oar
allies  would  be  a  great  help  to  us.   It  would  provide  us
with a bargaining  weapon  for insisting, in  return,  that  they
meet  our conventional  force  requirements.  .  .  .  France and
Britain  would   no  longer  have  an  excuse  for  withholding
funds   that   should   go  into  their  own  conventional  shield
and   putting   them   into   nuclear   development   instead—
development  that  we  could  give  them.  .  .  .*
"The  fears  played  up  by  Soviet  propaganda  that  such
a   weapons  grant  would   allow  the  possibility  of   military
adventures  by,  say,   West   Germany,  are  unreasonable  and
totally   without   recognition  of   the  facts."   Here  a   foot-
note  says  "During  a  recent  breakfast  at   which   I  enter-
tained  the  German  Ambassador  to  Washington,  he  clearly
indicated  that  his  country  understood  this  and  that  such
control  of   nuclear  weapons   could   be  worked    out."
—From  Pages  86-89  of  Melvin  Laird's  A  House  Divided:
America's  Strategy   Gap  (Henry    Regnery,  Chicago,   1962)
*Henry   A.   Kissinger,   in   "The   Unsolved   Problems   of
European  Defense"  (Foreign  Affairs,    July  1962)  makes  an
excellent  case  in  an  examination  of  the  need  for   European
nuclear  defense.    [Footnote  in  the   Laird  book].
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  SO, 196g
threats  [our   italics]  to  the  peace  with  force  if  required",  in-
cluding  nuclear  weapons.    This  implies  first  strike  and  pre-
ventive  war.    Negotiation   in   this   context   becomes  another
form  of   dictation  through   intimidation.
The  Apocalyptic  Right
The   full   significance   of   the   Laird   appointment   becomes
clearer  if  one  goes  back  and  has  a  fresh  look  at  the  kind  of
men   on   the   task   forces  which   prepared   Nixon's   position
papers   on  defense  and  foreign   policy.     These   were  heavily
weighted  with the  military  and  apocalyptic rightists.   The  task
force  on  national  security "was  made  up  primarily,"  Congres-
sional   Quarterly   noted   in   a  study   Dec.   4  which  predicts  a
sharp  rise  in  military spending  under  Nixon,  "of  military  and
civilian   officials   associated  with  the   'massive  retaliation'  doc-
trine  of  the   1950s  and  members   of   Congress  who  favor   a
'tough'  military  line."    Many  of  them  are  men  whom  Laird
salutes  as  his  mentors  in  his  book—Admirals  Arleigh  Burke
and  Arthur  Radford  on   the  defense  task  force  and  on   the
foreign   policy   task   force  Professor   Robert   Strausz-Hupe  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  and  Prof.  Gerhart  Niemeyer
of  Notre  Dame,   both  mighty  Druids  in  the  dark  forests  of
geopolitics.    Other  kindred  spirits  on  the  defense  task  force
were  Craig  Hosmer,  Dr.  Edward  Teller's  faithful  mouthpiece
on  .the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic Energy,  and
Senator  Tower  of  Texas.    On  the  foreign  policy  task  force,
just  to  keep  it  from  slipping  too  far  left,  were  also  Robert
Amory,  who  lost  his  job  as  deputy  director  of  the  CIA  in  the
wake  of  the  Bay  of  Pigs;  Robert  C.  Hill  who  distinguished
himself  as  Eisenhower's  last  Ambassador  in  Mexico  by  indis-
creet  relations  with  the  right-wing  Sinarquisteu;  Prof.   David
N.  Rowe  of  Yale  and  Walter  Judd.    The  last  two  have  been
as  stalwart  as  Mao  himself,  though   on  the  other  side,  in  re-
sisting  revisionism  in  America's  China   policy.
These  task  forces  and  their  composition  do  not  fit that mask
of  moderation the  Nixon  public relations strategy  has  fashioned
for  his  debut.    Any  idea  that  the  work  of  these  Republican
troglodytes  on  defense  and  foreign  policy  can  be  dismissed  as
a  mere  campaign  exercise  will  be  dispelled  by  a  closer  look  at
Laird's  record,  his  book  and  his  associations.    He  is  one  of
them.    Along  with  Henry  A.  Kissinger,  the  new White  House
foreign    affairs   expert,   and   Kissinger's   deputy,   Richard   V.
Allen,  Nixon's  foreign   affairs   expert   during   the   campaign,
they  belong  to  a  closely  knit  mutual  admiration  society.    The
accolade  from  Kissinger's   colleagues   of  the   Harvard   liberal
Toward  More  and  Bigger   Vietnams
"We  must   accept  the   moral  responsibility   to   use
our  power  constructively to  prevent  Communism  from
destroying  the  heritage  of   our  world  civilization.   In
terms   of   military   strategy,   this   means   closing   the
strategy   gap   by  taking   the   initiative   in   all   areas.
While  we  have  the  power  we  must  aim  at  confronting
the  enemy  directly.  We  can  win  every  such  confronta-
tion."
—pps.   176-7  Laird   on  America's   Strategy   Gap
establishment   on   his   appointment   as  Nixon's   mentor   has
served  to  distract  attention  from  his  less  well-known  but  more
significant  ties with  these  right-wingers.    Laird's  book  is  com-
plimentary  in  its  references  to  Kissinger  as  it  is  to  Niemeyer
and  Strausz-Hupe.    Laird  told  the  Washington   Star  in  a  full
length   interview  Dec.   18  that   in   1964,   as  chairman  of   the
Republican  Platform  committee,  "he   relied  more  heavily  on
the  views of  Henry  Kissinger  than  those  of  Barry  Goldwater,"
while  Allen  in  an  interview with  the  New   York   Times   Dec.
14  disclosed  that  during  the  Nixon  campaign  he   "maintained
discreet  contact with  Dr.  Kissinger,  then  foreign  policy  adviser
to  Governor  Rockefeller."      Such  political   dexterity  must  be
close  to  genius.
Laird   in   his   book   also   acknowledges   the   inspiration   of
David  M.  Abshire  who,  with  Allen,  edited  a  huge  1,000-page
right-wing  symposium  on  National  Security:  Political,  Military
and  Economic  Strategies in  the  Decade Ahead  (Praeger:   1963)
for   the   Georgetown    Center   for   Strategic   Studies   and   the
Hoover   Institution   on  War,   Revolution   and   Peace.     Allen
himself  moved  from  the  first  to  the  second  and  is now  on  leave
to  the  White  House.    I lie  volume  carries  an  introduction  by
another  of  Laird's  heroes,  Admiral  Burke.    Among  the  con-
tributors  are Kissinger,  along with  such  seers  as Herman  Kahn,
Edward   Teller,   Senator   Jackson   and  Walt  Rostow.     When
Allen   three  years  later   published   a  study  for   the  American
Bar   Association   "Peace   or   Peaceful   Co-Existence?",   Laird
praised   it  in  the  Congressional  Record   (Aug.   26,   1966)    as
proving   "conclusively"   from   a   study  of   3,000   Communist
documents  (no  less!)  that  co-existence  was  only  a  more  de-
ceitful   way  of  seeking  world   domination  through  "a  many-
pronged  offensive".    This  is  back  to  the  "bogeyman  view  of
(Continued   On  Page  Four)
Laird  And  Kissinger  Look  Pleasing  As  A  Team  to  Military-Industrial-Space   Complex
"Appointment   of   Rep.  Melvin   R.   Laird   (R.   Wis.)   as
Defense  Secretary-designate   clears  the  way  for  a  MAJOR
EXAMINATION    OF    PENTAGON    POLICIES,   FROM
WEAPON    SYSTEMS    CONCEPT   DEVELOPMENT   TO
PROCUREMENT  POLICIES.  Rep.  Laird  was  a  vociferous
critic   of   the   way   the   Defense   Dept.   was   operated   by
McNamara,   often   concentrating   his   attacks   on  what  he
considered   to   be  misuse   of   cost-effectiveness   studies.
"On  questions  of  national   defense   policy,  REP.  LAIRD
IS  BASICALLY IN  AGREEMENT WITH  THE  STRONG-
DEFENSE,      STRONG-OFFENSE    IDEAS     OF    PROF.
HENRY   A.   KISSINGER,   named  by  Nixon  as   chief   na-
tional   security   adviser.   Rep.  Laird's   views  also  tend   to
coincide   with   those   of   the   Joint   Chiefs   of   Staff.    But
Congressional   sources   say   that   he  will  be  a  stickler   for
maintaining  strict  civilian  control  over  the  military.  The
first  indication  of  how  he  plans  to  operate  will  come  later
this   month  when  he   picks  his   civilian  service   chiefs,   a
series  of  choices  in  which  Nixon  has  pledged  to  take  only
an  advisory   role  .  .  .
"Rep.  Laird's  presence  in  the  Nixon  cabinet  will   affect
the  future  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Admin-
istration.   He  favors   a  FAR   BIGGER   MILITARY   ROLE
IN  SPACE,  EMPHASIZING  MANNED MISSIONS, WITH
FUNDING   TO  BE   TAKEN   FROM   NASA'S  CIVILIAN
SPACE  PROGRAM  IF  NECESSARY.   In  this  he  reflects
not  only  the  view  of  Nixon  but  that  of  a  growing  body
of    legislators.
"Although  Nixon's  science  adviser.  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,
will  have  formal  responsibility  for  finding  and  recommend-
ing   a   new   NASA   Administrator,   the   selection   may  be
heavily   influenced   by   the   views  of   Rep.  Laird.   HE   IS
NOT   FULLY  IN   AGREEMENT  WITH  DuBRIDGE  ON
PRIORITIES   FOR   THE   U.S.   SPACE   PROGRAM.   One
possible  upshot:  NASA's  Apollo  Applications  program,  al-
ready   a  victim   of   low  funding,  could  be  terminated   and
its   objectives   tied   to   the   Air   Force's   Manned   Orbital
Laboratory  program."
—Washington  Roundup:   Aviation   Week  &  Space  Tech-
nology,  December  16,  emphasis   in  original.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   December  30, 1968
A  Secretary  of  Defense  Who   Wants  A  Higher  Goal  Than  "Mere Survival"
(Continued  From  Page  Three)
the  50s.  Laird, Kissinger  and  Allen  will  prove  a formidable
team   in  fashioning  foreign  policy.
Prongs  or  Tentacles
Whether  prongs  or  tentacles,  Laird   sees  them  everywhere.
His   world-view,  like  that  of   Niemeyer   and   Strausz-Hupe  is
equally  compounded  of  demonology  and  melodrama.   During
the  hearings  on  the  fiscal  1966 budget  in  March,  1965, when
the  bombings  of  North  Vietnam  had  just  begun,   Laird  told
McNamara   (p.  121,  Pt.  3  House  appropriations hearings),  "I
think  there  is  a  good  possibility that  we  will  have  a  breakout
under  Communist  pressure  in  some  other  place  in  the  world
within  the  next  6  or  7  weeks.    It  seems  that  the  Communists
operate  this  way.    At  the  time  of  the  missiles  to  Cuba,  Red
China  attacked  India.    At  the  time  of  the  Bay  of  Tonkin,  that
incident,  when  we  were  completely  diverted  on  the.  situation
taking  place  in   the  Vietnamese  war, the   Communist-backed
rebels  marched   and   took   over   Stanleyville  [in   the  Congo],
which  was  a very  strategic place."    It  takes  a wide-angle  vision
to  link  together   in  one  cosmic  plot  the  Cuban  missile crisis,
the  Indo-Chinese  border  war,  the  Tonkin  Gulf  bombings  and
the  rebellion  in  the  Congo.
Had  Laird  been  Secretary  of  Defense  in  the  past  eight  years,
history  might  have  been  very  different.    He  thinks  we  should
not  have  backed  away  at  the  Bay  of  Pigs.    He  sees  Rostow  as
naive,  Rusk  as  soft  and  McNamara  as  a  positive  menace.     He
believes  President  Kennedy  made  a  cardinal  mistake  when  he
said  we  would   never  strike  first.     He   advocates  a  policy  of
nuclear  reprisal  along  the  lines  of  "a  policy  called  2X"  which
he  says  Dulles  considered  in  the  50s.  This  would  involve  a
steady  escalation  in  nuclear  reprisal  to  "the point  at  which  the
cost  to  the  enemy  would  outweigh  the  gain"   and  show  him
that  aggression   was  "unprofitable".    Though  an  opponent  of
McNamara's  cost  effectiveness  approach,   Laird  seems  to  have
a   touching   faith   that   such   reprisals   would   lead   an  enemy
calmly  to  sit  down   and  balance  gains  against  losses  and  de-
cide  that  crime  doesn't  pay, like  a  business  man  soberly con-
templating   a  poor   investment.
Something   of  this  approach   is  evident  in  Laird's  own   shift
away  from  support  of   Johnson   in  the  Vietnam  war.   Laird
began    to    lose    enthusiasm    after    Johnson    in    the    Johns
Hopkins   speech   announced   a  readiness  to  negotiate.     Laird
More  For  Arms,  Less  For  The  Poor
"A   stable,   growing   economy   is   essential   to   our
sustained  military  effort  in  the  cold  war  and  our  posi-
tion  of  economic leadership in  the  world.  A  flight  from
the   dollar   will   lead   to   an  overwhelming  Communist
victory,   equal   economically   to  loss   of   United   States
leadership   in    the    free    world.    The    present     profit
squeeze  will  create  increasing  unemployment, jeopard-
ize    technological    leadership    and    hinder    economic
growth.   A  major  overhaul of  the  tax  system  is  man-
datory;  otherwise  we  shall  face  a  serious   collapse  of
the   economy.    It   is   essential    to   establish    economic
priorities  to  win  the  cold  war,  to  give  first  priorities
to  the  nati&nal  security  budget,  and  to  spend  on  non-
defense  only  amounts  which  will  not  injure  the  stabil-
ity    of   the   dollar.    THIS   IS   A   SACRIFICE   THE
AMERICAN    PEOPLE    MUST    BE    WILLING    TO
MAKE."    [Emphasis   added].
—-p.  178  Laird's  House Divided.
has no  faith  in  the  Saigon  regime  and  believes  the  Communists
will  take  over  if  our  troops  pull  out.   This  is  also  the  view
of  the  Joint  Chiefs   of   Staff   which  would  like  (from   distant
echoes  we  have  picked  up)   to  keep  a  garrison   force  of U.S.
troops  there  indefinitely.    They  may  find  Laird  easy  to con-
vince.    Laird  warns  in  his  book  that  past  mistakes  have  been
due  to  our  failure  to  listen  to  the  military  in  political dis-
cussions.     He   describes  the   military  as   "highly    intelligent
citizens  with  a broad  grasp  of  our  military potential  and  future
needs   .  .  .  well-equipped   to  make  meaningful   recommenda-
tions  for  policy."  There  is  no  trace  in  this  description  of  that
astringent  eye  required  to  keep  the  military  within   bounds.
Not  to examine  Laird's views and  record  fully  in the  hearings
and  the  confirmation debate  would  be  a  gross  neglect  of  Sena-
torial  duty.    If  the  appointment  cannot  be  blocked,  at  least  the
•  country  should  be  put  on  notice  what  it  may  expect.    Laird  at
one  point   suggested   in  the  House  that   the  Peace  Corps   be
renamed  the  Freedom  Corps  because  "freedom  is the  important
issue"   and  "mere  survival  under  peace  is  not  the   important
message  we  wish  to  deliver  to  the  world."    To  confirm  Laird
as  Secretary  of. Defense  is  to  risk  the  likelihood   that  in   the
next  four  years  the  Pentagon's   course  will  be  set  on  higher
goals  than  "mere  survival."                               Noon,  Dec. 19
We'll   send  a   reprint   of   this    issue   to   a  friend   if   you  send  a  stamped   self-addressed   long   envelope
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The  Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time  of  Torment  (Random House)  regular  price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ............................
..................................  Zip................  State............
Indicate   if   gift   announcement  wished  O
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed$5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................    Zip................   State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
                    12
/
30
/
68
5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C. 20015
/ F. Stone's   Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Second   Class   Post:
An  independent  weekly  published  and
$10
ostage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.
nd  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED