I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968apr01.pdf

============================================================

Rockefeller  No  Loss to Peace Movement,  P.  2
Quasi-Religious  Note
On  Lincoln's  Birthday,  President   Johnson  went  down  and     calling  for  "blood,  sweat  and  tears."   More  recently  he  has
had   himself   photographed   making   a   speech   beside    the     tried  to  sound  like  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  about  to  land  on
statue  of  the  Great  Emancipator  at  the  Lincoln  Memorial.     Omaha  Beach.    We just  can't  wait  to  see  who  Lyndon  John-
A  few  days  later  at  Dallas   he  was  doing  a  Churchill  and     son  casts  himself  as  on  Easter   Sunday.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi-Weeklv                     **
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  7
APRIL  1,  1968WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
That  Latest  Domino  To  Topple  Was  LBJ's  Pet  General
Whatever  its  validity  in  Southeast   Asia,  the  domino  theory
is  working  splendidly  in  the  U.S.A.    McCarthy's  victory  in
New   Hampshire  toppled   Bobby  into  a  race  he  thought  un-
foreseeable  only  two  months  earlier.    The   combined  weight
of   McCarthy   and   Kennedy  has   knocked   Westmoreland  off
his  pedestal.     Johnson   has  decided   to  promote   him   out  of
Vietnam.    Johnson's  conversion  was  as  rapid  and  unexpected
as  Bobby's.    As  recently  as  February   16  the  President  told  a
press  conference  he  had  no  plan  for  Westmoreland   to  leave.
"If   I  had  to  select  a  man  to  lead  me  in  battle  in  Vietnam,"
Johnson   told  the  press  that  day,  "I  would  want  Gen.  West-
moreland."   Now  Johnson  suddenly  discovers  he  doesn't  want
Westmoreland   to  lead  him  in  battle  at  home.    The   pacifica-
tion  program  is  going  even  more  badly  in  California  than  in
the  Mekong  Delta,  and   Chicago  may  prove  harder  to  hold
than   Saigon.
Just  A  Joke—Or  A   Preview?
Plainly  a  revision  of   strategy  is  in   the  works.     My   own
little  scenario  for  the  next  few  months   was  drawn  up   as  a
joke  but  it  no  longer   seems  quite  so  funny   since  the   West-
moreland  announcement.    I  started  my  analysis  from  funda-
mentals.    Which   does  Johnson  hate  more—Ho  Chi  Minh  or
Kennedy?    You  don't  have  to  kidnap  Lady  Bird  to  learn  the
answer  to  that  one.    How  best  defeat  the  main  enemy,  when
you  can't  defeat  both?    By  making  peace  with  the  lesser  foe
and   concentrating   one's   forces   on   the  main   one.    What  if
Johnson  at  a  decisive  moment—  after  the  California primary
and  before  the  Democratic  convention—should  take  the  wind
out  of  the  opposition's  sails  and  make  a  dramatic  move toward
peace ?
This  might  bring  the  Johnson  strategists  to  a  related  ques-
tion.  Which  does  McCarthy  hate  more—Johnson  or  Bobby?
That's  also  an  easy  one.     McCarthy  and  Johnson   have   been
careful  to  keep  within  limits  in  discussing  each  other  even  in
private;   that's  hardly  true  of  what   they  say  of   Bobby,  and
Bobby  of  them.    What  if  the  Johnson  forces  were  to   exploit
this  personal  animosity   and  offer   McCarthy   second  place  on
a  Johnson  ticket pledged  to  negotiate  peace ?   McCarthy  could
then  say that  his  candidacy had  served  its  purpose  of  forcing
a  change  in  policy  on  Vietnam.    Johnson  could  use  the  peace
sentiment  mobilized  by  McCarthy  and  Kennedy  to  give  him-
self  greater  leverage  to  end  the  bombing  and  go  to  the  nego-
tiating  table.    A  Johnson-Nixon   campaign   would   then  be  a
Counsel  We  Expect  No  One  To  Heed
A   resolution    of   the   almost   insoluble   Arab-Jewish
quarel  is  made  the  more  difficult  by  the  arms  traffic;  a
major  UN  goal  ought  to  be  to  bring  it  under  world  con-
trol.    U.S.  tanks  and  planes  were  used  by  both   Israeli
and  Jordanians  in  their  latest   clash,   as  by  Greeks  and
Turks  in  the  Cyprus  conflict.   Soviet  and  French   arms
add constantly  to  the  tinder  in  this,  the  area  most  likely
to  set  off  a  new  world  war.   The  Israeli  see  their  latest
raid  as  a  necessary  answer   to  terrorist   actions  which
culminated   in  the  blowing   up  of   a  school  bus  in  the
Negev.   The  Arabs  see  terrorism  as  the  only  way  to  re-
cover  their  lost  land  and  pride.    The  spiral  of   violence
is  mutually  disastrous.  It  is  making  a  no-man's  land  of
Jordan's  East  Bank,  as  Arab  refugees  flee  further  east
for   safety.     The  Israeli   raid  has   made   heroes   of   the
fedayeen   and  recruited  their   ranks.   It  has  also  made
political  solutions  like  a  confederation  of  Israel,  a  West
Bank  Arab  state  and  Jordan  seem  all  the  more  illusory,
and  reconciliation  more  distant.    Yet  only  in  this  direc-
tion can Israel prevent  a new holocaust.    One thing which
will  never   come  from  the  mouth  of  a  gun  is  shalom.
replay  of  the  Johnson-Goldwater   campaign.    The  Democratic
party  would  be  reunited.    Kennedy—with  the  aid  of  a  dentist
to  keep  him   from  grinding   his   teeth   down   to  his  gums—
would   have  to   support   the   ticket  on  that  platform.     Most
observers   think   any   such   strategy   impossible,   and   believe
Johnson   too  emotionally  involved   in  his  war.    But  what   a
temptation  such  a  course  must  present  to  Johnson!    What  a
way  to  bump  off  Bobby! *
Johnson's  ferocious  rhetoric  at  Minneapolis about  those  who
dare  oppose  his  Kampf   in  Southeast  Asia  recalled  another  war
leader's  raucous insistence on Bin Reich,  Bin  Volk,  Bin  Fuehrer;
as  seen  on  TV,  only  the  little mustache  seemed  missing.   Some
conclude  from  this  and  similar  performances  that  Johnson  is
irretrievably  hooked  on  the  war.    I  am  still  inclined  to  give
him  the  benefit  of  his  credibility gap.    He  was  really  a  hawk
when  he  sounded  like  a dove  four  years  ago.   Could  the  stepup
in  hawkish  noises  now  cover  a growing  loss  of  enthusiasm  for
the  war?    There  is  some  reason   to  think   so.    His   reactions
to  the  seizure  of  the  Pueblo  and  the  Tet  offensive  have hardly
been  hawkish.    The  Administration has  done  its  best  to  get
the   Pueblo   affair   off  the   front   pages;   a  certain   desperation
{Continued  on  Page   Two)
*  And  at  no  greater  cost  to  the  White  House  than  a  nervous
breakdown  for  Walt  Rostow!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Afiril  1, 1968
{Continued  from   Page   One)
about  Johnson's  apparent  indifference  to  the  fate  of  the  crew
seems  to  have  crept  into  Pyongyang's broadcasts; if  the   affair
drags  on  much  longer  the  North  Koreans  are  liable  to  make
the  apologies just  to  get  the  crew  off their hands.    A  President
anxious  for  wider war  would  have used  either the  Pueblo  affair
or  the  Tet  offensive  as  an  excuse  at  least  for  partial mobiliza-
tion.    Two  months  have  passed  since  Tet,   and  the  President
still  can't  make  up  his  mind  about  the  troop  reinforcements
Westmoreland  asked for. Instead  he  is recalling Westmoreland.
Not   For  One  Second?
That   is  the  fact.     The   rest  is  smokescreen.    On   February
16  Johnson   angrily   denounced   press   reports   that  he   might
appoint  Westmoreland  to  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.     "I  have
never,"   he   said   indignantly,   "discussed   that   with   General
Westmoreland  for  one  second."     But  on  March  10  the   New
York    Times   disclosed   that   Westmoreland   wanted   206,000
more  men.   This  is  now  blamed  for  the  sharp  and  apparently
last-minute  rise  in  the  McCarthy  vote  in  the  New   Hampshire
primary  two  days later;  it  ran  15  to  20  points  higher  than  the
polls  earlier  had  conceded  him.
The   magnitude  of   the  Westmoreland   request   also  played
its  part  in  the  run  on  the  dollar.    The  day  after  the  leak  to
the  New   York   -Times,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury   Fowler   ad-
mitted   under  questioning  by  Hartke  in   the   Senate   Finance
Committee  that  so  large  an  increase  in  the  number  of  troops
might  add  $4  billion  to  the" budget   deficit.     The   Wall   St.
Journal  (March  14)  said  the  escalation might  lead  to  a  sharp
speculative  loss  in  gold  "even  before  the  extra  troops  them-
selves  added  to  the  dollar  outflow."    Orr  Kelly  reported  from
the  Pentagon  in-the  Washington  Star  (March   12)   that   "the
scope"  of   Defense   Secretary   Clifford's   high-level   committee
reappraising  Vietnam  policy  had   "broadened   dramatically  in
the  last  few  days."    "If  you  had  asked  me  a  week  ago,"   one
Pentagon  officers  told  Kelly,  "I'd   have  guessed   the   President
would   be  on   television  within   hours,   announcing   we   were
sending  more  men  to  Vietnam.    Now  I'm  not  so  sure."
The   problems   were   indicated  when   the   Joint   Economic
A  Spokesman  for  "Free  Asia" Offers
A  New  Definition of  False  Liberalism
Bangkok,    March    11—Thailand's    Foreign    Minister
Thanat   Khoman  said  today  he  hoped  nuclear  weapons
would  not  have  to  be  used  in Vietnam  but  the  U.S. would
be  justified  in  using  them  if  the  alternative  were  "de-
feat  and  annihilation  of  our  forces"  at  places  like  Khe
Sanh.  .  .  .  Mr.  Thanat  said  it  would  be  "false  liberal-
ism"  to  oppose  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  in Vietnam
as   a  last  resort.  .  .    Mr.  Thanat,  recently  hack  from
the  U.S.  where  he  received  medical  treatment  is  especi-
ally  incensed  by  American  and  other  critics  of   Presi-
dent  Johnson's  Vietnam  policy.  .  .  .
—R. H. Shackford   in Scripps-Howard  papers,  Mar. 11
Did  his  medical  treatment  perchance  include  a  brain-
washing ?
Committee  of  the  Congress   issued  a  report  March   18  calling
the   President's   balance   of   payments   program   "inadequate"
because  "it   does  little  about  reducing  our  military   expendi-
tures  abroad";   it  estimated  the  foreign  exchange  costs,  includ-
ing  Vietnam,   at   $4.3   billion.     It  warned   against   trying   to
meet  these  costs  "by  deflating" the  economy  into  a  depression."
In  supplementary  views,  one  member  of  the  committee,  Moor-
head   (D.-Pa.)   said  that  if  the  President  sends  200,000  more
troops  to  Vietnam   "he  risks  a  possible  collapse  of  the  inter-
national   monetary   system   which   for   two   decades   has   lubri-
cated  the  most  spectacular   prosperity  the  industrial  world  has
ever  known."
Another  but  little  noticed   factor  in  the  President's  decision
four  days  later  to  promote  Westmoreland   out  of  Vietnam  was
an  interview  in  which   Senator   Russell   of  Georgia,   chairman
of  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,  had  criticized  West-
moreland    for   sticking   to   what   Russell    called    "outmoded
World  War   II   tactics."     (Washington   Star,   February    29.)
In   criticizing  Westmoreland's   adherence   to   large   battalion-
sized  units  Russell   said  scathingly  that  "we  have  very  nearly
followed  the  strategy  of  the  French."    Indeed  Westmoreland's
silly   optimism   recalls  Navarre's   before   Dienbienphu.     The
coup  de  grace was Neil  Sheehan's  disclosure  in  the  New   York
Times  March   21  that   on  the  very  eve  of   the  Tet   offensive
Rockefeller No Loss to Peace Movement—His Record on Foreign Policy Hawkish
Behind  Rockefeller's  ignominious  silence  on  Vietnam    (see
adjoining   box)    is  a  more  consistently  hawkish   record   than
that  of  any other  candidate, except  perhaps  Nixon. The  Rocke-
feller  Brothers report  of  1958,  in  which  Nelson  played  a major
role,  was  an  effort  to  pressure  the  Eisenhower   Administration
into  larger  arms expenditures  for  Pax  Americana policies.   The
Kennedy  Administration's boost  in  arms  expenditures,  devel-
opment  of  "flexible  response"  for  limited  wars,  and  its  more
belligerent  foreign  policies  all  met  with  Rockefeller's  approval,
though  he  did  not  think  Kennedy  went  far  enough.     Rocke-
feller  \vas  for  a  second  try  at  Castro  after  the  Bay of  Pigs  and
he  supported  the  nuclear  test  agreement  reluctantly.    He  was
the  country's  leading  enthusiast  for   the   delusion   that   there
coul  1 be  civil  defense  against  nuclear  war.    He  was  for   U.S.
intf  L-vention   in   the   Congo,  where  the   Rockefellers  have   ex-
tensive  interests and  as  late  as March  19,  1967,  he  was fervent
in  his  support  of  Johnson  in  Vietnam.    GOP  doves  like  Gen.
Gavin  and  Sen.  Morton   have  deluded   themselves.
Big  Bold  Leadership  Dept.
Q.  Governor,   could   you   please   outline   for   us'  your
views  on Vietnam?
A.  Sure.    My  position  on  Vietnam  is  very  simple.  .  .
I  think  that  our  concept  as  a  nation,  and  that  our  ac-
tions,  have  not  kept  pace  with  the  changing  conditions.
And  therefore  our  actions  are  not  completely  relevant
today  to  the  realities  of  the  magnitude  and  the  com-
plexity   of   the   problems  that   we   face   in  this  conflict. •
Q.  Governor,  what  does   that  mean?
A.  Just   what   I  said.
Q.  Governor,  you  said  that  your  Vietnam   policy  will
offer  constructive alternatives to  President  Johnson  .  .  .
[and]  to  Mr. Nixon's  Vietnam policy  .  .  .
A.  Well,  I'm  not  in  a  position  to  discuss  anybody's
policies,  frankly. .  .  .
Q.  Governor  Rockefeller,  should   we   now   cease   the
bombing  of   North  Vietnam?
A.  I  am not  prepared to  make any  tactical  suggestion.
—At  the  Rockefeller   press  conference,   March   21.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  1,1968
Westmoreland  had  sent  Washington   a  confidential  report  pre-
dicting  that   1968  would  be  a  year  of  great  victories  in   1969
against  an  enemy  "increasingly  confined  to  staging   'frontier
battles.' "   These  giddy  forecasts were  made  while  the enemy,
from   bases  inside  South   Vietnam    (as  U.S.  intelligence  now
admits),  was  massing  60,000  troops  and  huge  stocks  of  am-
munition  for  his  massive  simultaneous  attacks  on  the  country's
cities  and  U.S.  military  bases.
It   is  surprising  that  Johnson   should   have   called   a   press
conference   the   very   next   day   to   announce   Westmoreland's
promotion.    Usually  press  leaks  of  this  kind  only  stiffen  John-
son's  resistance.   One  wonders  whether  this  leak  did  not  come
from  within  the  Administration  and  with  its  approval.     It  is
striking  that  when  the  President  was  asked  whether  the  West-
moreland  promotion  indicated  any  change  in  the  strategy  as-
sociated  with  his  name,   Johnson   replied  that  this  would   be
up   to  Westmoreland's   successor.     He   could   have  said  that
Westmoreland  as  Army  Chief  of  Staff  would  continue  to  de-
termine  strategy  but  he  didn't.
Not  the  Magnanimous   Type
Thus  many  different  forces  are  converging  toward  a  change.
How   far   it  will  go,  what  form  it  will  take,  remains  to  be
seen.    Within  little  more  than  two  months,  the  whole  situa-
tion—military  in  Vietnam,  political  in  the  United  States—has
been  drastically  transformed.    With  it,  the  chances  of  peace
have  risen.   I  myself  believe,  though  I  have  no  evidence  other
than  certain  atmospheric   subtleties  in  Pentagon  conversations,
that  the  new  Secretary  of  Defense,   Clark  Clifford,  is  pressing
for  a  fresh  and  astringent  look  at  the  whole  Vietnamese  war.
To   this  change   Senator   McCarthy's   brave   and   lonely   foray
into  the  primaries  has  made  a  major  contribution.     He  stuck
his   neck  out   when   prospects   looked   very  poor   indeed   and
New   Hampshire  was  his  reward.     I  share  the  bitterness  of
many  young  people  toward  Bobby  Kennedy  for  hastily  plung-
ing  in  to  steal  the  limelight  and  the  prize  from  McCarthy  as
soon  as  it  looked   promising.     It  would   have  been   magnani-
mous  of  Kennedy  to  come  out  in  support  of  McCarthy  in  the
primaries  and  then  let  the  convention   choose   between   them
but  Kennedy  is not  the  magnanimous  type.    The  race  between
them   is  becoming  a  race  between   college  idealists  and.  the
Kennedy  credit  cards.*
But  this  bitterness   should  not  lead  one  to  lose  sight  of  the
Where  The  "Strategy  of   Attrition"
(i.e.  Butchery)  May  Lead
Whether  General Westmoreland has  asked  for  a fur-
ther   206,000   troops,   or  whether  something  less  than
40%   reinforcement  would  satisfy  him,  he  has  made  it
clear  he  sees  his  military  problem  in  little  less   crude
terms  than a  slugging  match.  .  .  .  Does  the  Pentagon's
present  plan  for  winning  the  war  not  boil  down  to  ex-
changing  the  lives  of  American youth for  those  of Viet-
namese  youth  in  the  hope  the  time  will  come  when  no
young  Vietnamese are  left.  .  .  .  ?    Such  questions  re-
flect  the  fear  that  the  Pentagon  has  no  better  answer  in
North  Vietnam  than  the  Generals  of   the   first   World
War  had  in  France. ...  It  is  possible  the  Pentagon
calculates  that,  when  the  American public  realizes  that
bombing   and  firepower  cannot  stop  the  flood  of   men
and  material  flowing  North  to  South,  in  broad  streams
where  once  it  flowed  in  rivulets, a  climate of  exaspera-
tion  will  develop  in  which  it  would  be  possible  to  ask
for  a  reversal  of  President  Johnson's  ban  on  the  use  of
nuclear  weapons.
—Editorial  in  The  Times  (London)  March   It
political  realities.   Bobby  may  be  arrogant  and  power-hungry;
he   may  be   surrounded   by  the   same  group   of   opportunist-
intellectuals  who  surrounded  his  brother  when  he  got  us  into
the  Vietnamese  mess;  but  he  alone  has  the  money,  the  fame,
the  organization,  and   the  drive   for   the   formidable   task  of
taking  the  nomination  away  from  Johnson,  and  giving  us  some
hope  of  negotiating  peace.    The  latest  Gallup  poll  shows  him
outrunning  Johnson  among  Democrats  44  to  41  percent  while
Johnson,   though   slipping,   still  outruns  McCarthy   59  to   29
percent.     McCarthy   deserves   full   support   in   the  primaries
but  at  some  point  he  and  Kennedy  will  have  to  join  forces
unless,  as  I  indicated  in  my  little  joke at  the  beginning,  John-
son  should  pull   a  fast   one.     McCarthy's   last  minute  refusal
to  have  a joint  slate  with  Kennedy  in  the  District  of  Columbia
indicates  that   the   split   between   the  two   men   is  widening.
This  may  give  Johnson  unexpected   options  at  the  convention,
and   make  Kennedy  sorry  he  was  not   a  little   less  crude   in
dealing  with  McCarthy.    The  surprises  in  this  surprising cam-
paign   have  only  just  begun.
*  "Staff  members," said  a  Washington  Post  story  March  25
about  the  Kennedy campaign, "are  racing  around  the country
on  the  credit  cards  of  Joseph  P.  Kennedy  and  various family
enterprises."    The  rich  can  campaign on  credit.
Maybe  Somebody  Ought  to  Call  the
Gov.  Romney: The  [Detroit]  rioters  were  more concerned
about  indignities ...  at  the  hands  of  white  policemen and
others  than  they  were  about  issues  such  as  housing,   jobs
and  education ...  in  80 per cent  of  the  cases  the complain-
ants  are  not  talking  about  physical  brutality  of  any  type;
they  are  talking  about  the  treatment  they  received,  about
policemen  calling   Negro  adults  ' boys".   .  .  .
Sen.   McClellan   (D.  Ark.):  Is   there  any  report  on  the
Negroes  calling  a  white  man  "whitey"  and  "honky"?
Gov.  Romney: It  would  be  an  interesting  report.
Sen.  McClellan:  If  you  call  a  Negro  a  boy,  if  he  is  work-
ing,  in  my  section  of  the  country nobody  ever  thought  of  it
as  an  offense.    You  thought  of  it  as  a  friendly  thing.   You
say  the  same  thing  to  a  white  boy,  a  white  man.    It  is  a
common  term.    You  say,  'Boy,  do  this"  or  "Boy,  do  that."
It  is  no disrespect.  .  .  .
Gov.  Romney: When  we  travel  in  foreign countries  we  do
things  frequently  which  are  to  us  quite  normal,  but  which
Senator  "Boy" and See  What Happens
are  offensive  to  others.
Sen.  McClellan: ...  If  they  are  going  to  be  so  sensitive
about  being  called  a  boy,  I  guess  a  whitey  might  be  sensi-
tive  about  being  called  a  whitey.  .  .  .  People  will  have  to
ri<--  above  these  little  things.
^•v.  Romney:  I  agree  that  is  a  desirable  thing,  but  on
the  other  hand,  you  have  to  deal  with  the  hard  realities.
Sen.  McClellan:  We  can  deal  with  the  hard  realities  and
deal  with  them  in  a  hard  way,  sometimes,  instead  of  cod-
dling.    If  we're  going  to  try  to  patronize  or accommodate
all  of  these  little  whims.  .  .  .
—Before    the  McClellan   Committee,  March   19.   Another
tidbit  of  Romney's  testimony  was  his  observation  that  dur-
ing  the  Detroit  riot  it  was  lucky  that  the  East  Side  "cooled
off"   when  the  federal   troops  arrived,  because  "at  that  time"
the  paratroopers   "were  not  trained   in  riot  control,   to  my
knowledge,   beyond   that   of  just  going   in   and   demolishing
an  area."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  1,  1968
Excerpts  from  Anti-War  Speeches  by  Congressmen  from  Both  Parties  on  March  18
Revolt Against Johnson's Vietnam Policies and Escalation Spreads to the House
REP.    HORTON    (R.-N.V.):   There   is   increasing  evidence
that  the  war  in  Vietnam  is  in  the  gravest  danger  of  escalating
into  something  much  beyond  the  category  of   "limited   war".
It  cannot   be  stressed  too  strongly  that  Congress   did  not  in-
tend  in  1964,  and  does  not  intend  in  1968  that  the  President
be  permitted   to  send   additional   thousands   of   Americans  to
fight,  and  perhaps  to  die,  in  a  conflict  no  longer   influenced
by  the  House  and  Senate.
REP.  WOLFF  (D.-N.Y.):   I  believe  the  time  has  long  since
passed  for  the  House  of  Representatives  to  have  an   oversight
committee,   a  joint  committee  of  both  Houses   formed.    We
have  had  such  a  committee  in  other  wars.    The  Truman  com-
mittee  was  an  example  of  this.    I  believe  we  should  inves-
tigate  all  of  the  various  activities  that  have  gone  on  during
the  war  and  preliminary  to  it.
REP.    SCHWENGEL   (R.-lowa):   What   concerns   me   at   the
present  time  is  the  current  unwillingness  on  the  part  of  the
administration   to   consider   alternatives  to   its  present   course
of  action.    In  fact,  its  present  policy   is  framed   to  preclude
this   type   consideration.
REP.    SNYDER  (R.-Ky.):    Your   attention   is  called   to   the
last   paragraph   of   the   [Gulf   of  Tonkin]   message   that   the
President  had  sent  down   [in   1964]    in  which  he  said  in  es-
sence,  "Look,  it  is  August  now.  The  Congress  is  going  to  be
going   into  the   50  States  campaigning   in  this   election   year.
Modern   warfare  being   what   it   is"—and   we   all   remember
the   circumstances  which   brought   about   the   Second   World
War   and  Pearl  Harbor—"the  Executive  needs   the  authority
to  act  in   the   event   of   any  eventuality.     For   the   next   few
months,   from   August  until   Congress   reconvenes   in  January
the  Executive  needs  the  authority  to  act  in  the  event  of  some
circumstances  or  emergency  of  this  nature  occurring."    That
was  the  essence  of  part  of  the  President's  message.    I  do  not
have  the  exact  wording  here.    That  3-month  period  has  now
stretched  into  3y
2
  years.
REP.  BURTON  (D.-Cal.):   Mr.  Speaker,  some  of  the  Mem-
bers  of  the  House   were  not  here  during  the  course  of  that
debate.     If  my  memory  serves  me  correctly  .  .  .  we  spent  a
total  of  about  60  minutes,  some  57  or  58  of  those  60  minutes
being  utilized  by  proponents   of  the  resolution,  with  little  or
no   opportunity   even   on   this   side   of   the   aisle  to   question
those   managing   the   bill.     Also,   if   my  memory   serves   me
correctly,   we  were  given  virtually  no  notice.
REP.   HUNGATE   (D.-Mo.):    I  have   been   here   about   31/2
years  now  and  we  have  spent  more  time  in  discussing  cherry
marketing  than  we  have  on  this  vital  question  of  Vietnam.  . .
REP.   MORSE   (R.-Mass.):   The   issue   is  the   clarity   of   our
policies  in  Southeast  Asia—our  goals  and  objectives  and  the
means  used  to  achieve  them.
REP.   KEITH   (R.-Mass.):   Mr.   Speaker,   I  was  one  of   the
original   sponsors  of  this  resolution   last  year,  and   I   support
it   with   even   greater   urgency   today.    The   direction   of   our
efforts   in   Vietnam   seems   even   less  clear  today  than   at   the
time  of   the  original   resolution,   and   a  constructive   reassess-
ment  and  debate  by the  Congress  is now  needed.  .  . .
REP.   WOLFF  (D.-N.r.):   I  propose  before   the  week   is
out  to  offer  a  resolution  to  repeal  the  Tonkin  Gulf   resolution
Three  "Put  The  Brakes  On" Resolutions
The  excerpts  on  this  page  are  from  speeches  made  in
the   House   March   18  in   support   of   three  resolutions
which   would   put  the   brakes  on  the  Vietnamese   war.
The  one  with   the  widest  support,   by  Findley   (R.   111.)
calls  for  an  investigation  by  "appropriate  committees"
of  both  Houses  to  determine  "whether  further  Congres-
sional  action  is  desirable  in  respect  to  U.S.   policies  in
Southeast  Asia."   It  has  142  co-sponsors,  including  102
Republicans.    The  second  by  Moorhead  (D.  Pa.)    would
put  the  Congress  on  record  against  any  increased  mili-
tary   involvement   in  Vietnam.    It   has   26  co-sposors.
The  third,  by  Boland   (D.  Mass.)  opposes  any  increase
in  U.S.   forces  in  Vietnam   "without  the  explicit  consent
of  Congress."   It  has  17  co-sponsors.    Roughly  a  third
of  the  House  is  for  one  or  another  of  these  resolutions.
and  ask  all  Members  who  are  interested  in  once  again  reas-
serting  the  authority  of  the  Congress  to  join  me.
REP.   RUPPE  (R.-Mich.):   The   hard   fact   is  that   Southeast
Asia  has  a  long  history   of   Caucasian   colonial   intervention.
No   matter  how  well   intended  our  presence,   nor  how  great
our   sacrifices,   in   the   eyes  of   many  Asians  we  are   shackled
with   the  colonial   past.
REP.    GUDE   (R.-Md.):    The   United   States  has   obligated
more  than  $21  million  in  land  reform  assistance  since   1954
in   South   Vietnam.    What   has  been   the   result  of   that  ex-
pense?     Out   of   2.47   million   acres   of   land   available,   only
about  667,000  have  been  distributed  to  the   peasants.
REP.    FINDLEY   (R.-UL):    Secretary   of   State   Rusk   in   his
testimony  to  the  Senate  committee  the   other   day  placed   so
much  emphasis  on  this  idea  that  the  United  States  must  make
its  word   good.     If   making   our   word   good   necessarily   re-
quires,  let  us  say,  the  loss  of  20,000  lives  in  South  Vietnam,
and  the  use  of  over  a  half  million  people,  and  over  100,000
casualties,  then,  if  we have  a similar  commitment  to  Thailand,
does  it  necessarily  follow  that  without  any  further  reference
to  the  Congress  the  President  is  duty  bound  to  pour  an  equal
amount  of  resources  into  that  other  country?
REP.    LEGGETT  (D.-Cal.):   When   the   President  callously
pronounced  yesterday  that  in  spite  of  the  resentment  building
in  the  country he  was  sending  another  35,000  young  boys into
war,  I  now  say we are heading  toward  disaster.    I  am incensed
that  the  President's  hypnotic  trance  over  Vietnam  is catatonic
and  immutable  and  I  must  forthwith  withdraw  my entire  sup-
port  from  this  foreign  policy.    I  find  that  the  same  forces  in
the  country who  are blind  to  or  by early  inbred training  refuse
to  consider  the  root  causes  of  Negro  despondency  and  seek  to
resolve  the  problem  by arms,  are the  same ones  who  are  urging
the  United  States to escalate in Vietnam,  to  drop  atomic  bombs,
buy  mercenaries,  and  wage  all-out  war  against  Red  China.
REP.   MCCLOSKEY   (R.-Cal.):   We   believed  that  we   could
succeed  where  the  French  had  failed,  believing  that  somehow
our  good  motive  would  be  accepted  although  the  colonial  mo-
tives  of   the   French   had   been   understandably  repugnant   to
patriotic  Vietnamese.    These  beliefs  have  not  been  borne  out
by  the  facts.    The  Vietcong  are  nationalists  as  well  as  Com-
munists.    "Vietnam   for  the  Vietnamese"   may  be  as  inspira-
tional  an   ideal   as  our   own   Monroe    Doctrine.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  1, 1968
Int'l  Commission  of  Jurists Protests  Use  of  Napalm  and  Aerial  Bombardment
Hague  Convention  for  Protection  of  Civilians  Violated  by  U.S.  In  Vietnam
The  International   Commission  of  Jurists  in  Geneva  has
been  treated  by  the  U.S.  as  a  cold  war  instrument  and  was
once  alleged  to  have  Cl A   financing.   When  on  March  7  it
issued  a  moving  report  which  criticized   U.S.  military   tac-
tics  in  Vietnam   as  violations  of  international   law,  it  was
big  news  in  the  European  press  but  brushed  under  the  rug
in  the  U.S.   We  obtained  a  copy  and  print  an  abridged  ver-
sion  here,  including   its   comments   on  the  massacres  and
civil  wars  in  Indonesia  and  Nigeria:
The  spread  of  brutality throughout  the  world  and  its  con-
tagious  effect   on  humanity was  the  subject-matter of  a  state-
ment  made  by  the  International Commission  of  Jurists  in  Sep-
tember  1966.    This  statement  is unfortunately no  less relevant
today.    The  wave  of  brutality  that  was  condemned  then  has
gathered  momentum  and  threatens  to  submerge  the  world  in
a  cataclysm  of  horror.   The  unprecedented  scale  of  the  mas-
sacres  in  Indonesia,  for  example,  and  the  widespread  slaughter
that  is  accompanying the  civil  war  in  Nigeria  have  aroused  a
profound   sense   of   shame   and   indignation   throughout   the
world.    However,  the  present  situation   in  Vietnam,  where  a
steady  escalation in  brutality is taking  place,  is undoubtedly  the
most  striking  and  most  distressing  example.
Shooting  Prisoners  of  War
The  right  of  the  parties  to  a  conflict  to  adopt  means  of  in-
juring  the enemy is not unlimited.   Thus,  the  deliberate killing
of  a  prisoner  of  war,  which  was  instanced  by  recent  widely-
published  press  photographs  has  become  notorious.    Such  an
act  is even  more  inexcusable  when  it  is  committed  by  a  person
of  high  rank,  for  it  is  then  bound  to  be  regarded  as  an  ex-
ample  to  be  followed.   Under  any  view  it  must  be  considered
a  crime which  calls  for  sanction.
Attention  should  also  be  drawn  to  the  fact  that  on  the   19th
May  1967,   the  International  Committee  of  the  Red  Cross  in
a  communication to  all  governments  drew  attention  to the  need
to  provide  more  up  to  date  and  comprehensive  international
safeguards  for  civilian populations  and  other  victims of  armed
conflicts.    The  "laws  of  war"  date  from  the  Hague   Conven-
tions  of  1907,  before  the  invention  of  the  means  of  mass  de-
struction  used  in  modern  warfare such  as  napalm,  aerial  bom-
bardments,  chemical warfare  and  nuclear  weapons.    Its  provi-
sions   nonetheless   remain   relevant   today  and   do   provide   a
guide.    The  principle  set  out  in  the  Preamble  to  the  Conven-
tion,  which  requires  that  both  in  the  use  of  weapons  and  in
the  conduct of  operations the  civilian population  and  the  com-
batants  should  be  protected,  remains  fully   in  force.
Imagine  What  It  Can  Do  To  People
Washington,  March  18  (AP)—Napalm  is  being  burn-
ed  in  South  Vietnam  in  a  steadily  increasing volume.
Figures  compiled by  the  Defense  Department  show  the
Air  Force  alone  has  dumped  more  than  100,000  tons  of
napalm  on  Vietnam  since  1963.   The  Navy  also  drops
napalm  bombs,  and  the  Army  uses  large  quantities in
flame-throwers   but   they   have   not   compiled   tonnage
figures.    The  Air  Force  used  nearly  55,000  tons  of  na-
palm   in   1966   alone,   far   outpacing  the   32,215   tons
dropped  in  the  3-year  Korean  war.  .  .  .  The  big  1966
jump  in  napalm  in  Vietnam  paralleled development of
a  hotter  compound  called  napalm  B,  capable  of  turning
truck  engines  into  liquid  steel.  .  .  .
—Associated  Press  ticker,  March  18.  This  story  was
due  to  the  initiative  of  Robert  Horton,  the  AP's  man  at
the  Pentagon.    The  figures  cited  cover  1966.  We  asked
the   press    office    whether   later   figures   were     classified,
but  could  get  no  answer.
It  is  also  highly  desirable  that  strict  adherence  be  given  to
the  provisions  of  the  Geneva  Protocol   of   1925  which   "pro-
hibits  the  use  of  asphyxiating,  poisonous  or  other  gases  and  of
all  analogous  liquids,  material  or   devices."
The  parties  to  the  Geneva  Conventions  are bound  by  Article
1  not  only  themselves  to  respect  the  humanitarian  rules  con-
tained  in  these  Conventions  but  also  to  ensure  their  respect  in
all  circumstances.   Therefore   each  of  the   117  States  which  is
a  party  to  the  Geneva  Conventions  has  a  direct  duty  to  use its
best  endeavours  to  secure  the  observance  of  the  Geneva  Con-
ventions.     It  is  regrettable  that   this   collective   responsibility
arising  out  of  the  Geneva  Conventions  has  never  been   acted
upon  in  the  Vietnam  conflict.
In  present  circumstances  there  is  little  hope  that  the  voice
of  reason  will  persuade  the  belligerents   to  open   negotiations
for   a  cease-fire  and   a  peaceful  solution  of  the  Vietnam  con-
flict.    In  the  meantime,  however,  it  is  becoming  daily  more
important  that  the  United  Nations  and  the  Red  Cross  should
join  forces  in  an  effort  to  ensure  that  the  Hague  Convention
and  the  Geneva  Conventions  are  more  fully  respected.
Consultations  of  this  nature  could   equally  well  take  place
in  other  cases,   such  as  that  of  Nigeria  where  there  is   open
warfare,  or  the  Sudan  where  a  secret  war  is  being  carried  on.
It  is  imperative  to  the  stability  of  our  present  civilization  that
the  growing  brutality and  the  massacres  of  innocent  victims  in
Vietnam  and  in  other  strife-torn  areas  be  brought  to  an  end.
100 Israeli  Intellectuals Protest  Violations of  the  Rights  of  Man
"Israeli  citizens, Jews  and Arabs, are  subject  to  house ar-
rest  or  held  without  trial.    Collective punishments, notably
the  dynamiting  of   houses   and  the   imposition   of  curfews,
continue  to  be  inflicted  on  the  inhabitants of   the  occupied
territories  to  an  alarming  extent.   Families  of  workers and
peasants,  children,  women  and  elderly folk,  are  deprived  of
shelter  and  means  of  existence.    The  flood  of  refugees  flee-
ing  Gaza  and the  West  Bank  continues.   An  increasing  num-
ber  of  Arabs  are  driven  from  the  West  Bank  by  order  of
the  Israeli  military  governor.  .  .  .
"Where  can  these  methods  lead  us  except  to  an  abyss  of
hate?    Such acts  can  only  stiffen  the  clandestine  resistance,
make  new  victims  on  both  sides  and  breed  a  new  war  with
unforeseeable   consequences.     A   people   which  dominates
another   exposes   itself   to   moral   degeneration  and   under-
mines  its  own democratic regime.   A  people  which  oppresses
another  ends  by  losing  its  own liberty.
"Jewish  citizens!    Remember  how  non-Jews  came  to  our
help  in  our  moments  of  distress.    Misfortune  now  strikes
at  our  brother  Arab  people.   Do  you  think  it  just  to  wash
your  hands  of  this,  that  you  keep  silent?"
—Appeal   by  100  Israeli  intellectuals—novelists,  compos-
ers,  journalists,  clergymen,'professors,    doctors,  lawyers  and
film-makers—protesting     "violation   of  the  rights  of  man   in
Israel   and   its   occupied   territories",   translated    from    Le
Monde,  March  12.
3  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  1, 1968
Triumph  Of  Jefferson  Over  Lenin
Several  fundamental  observations   on  convulsions   in
the   Soviet  bloc:  The  first  is  that  the  best   youth  will
struggle   for  freedom  of  expression  even  if  brought  up
in  closed  societies;  to  speak  freely  is  as  natural  as  to
breathe.    The  second  is  that  any  bureaucracy,  however
idealistic  its  origins,  will  degenerate   in  the  absence  of
criticism;  so  we  see  the  Polish  Communists,   despite  a
belated  feeble  effort  to  the  contrary  by  Gomulka,  dab'
bling   in   anti-Semitism—just   like   Stalin   and   Czarist
Russia  before  them.   The  third  observation  is  that  "de-
Stalinization"  will  never  be  firm  until  Lenin's  authori-
tarianism  is  boldly  analyzed  and  abandoned.  The  fourth
is  that  peaceful  social  change  may  also  be  possible  un-
der  Communist   rule;  for  the  first  time   public   opinion
in  a  Communist  State  has  been  strong   enough  to  oust
the  leadership;  Novotny's  fall  in  Czechoslovakia   must
set  off  seismic  tremors  in  every  other  Communist capi-
tal.    This  is  not  a  revolt  against  material circumstance;
it  is  not  a  revolt  against  socialism—no  demand is  heard
to  restore   capitalism;  it  is  a  revolt  for  that  right   to
speak  which  is  the  first  essential  of  any  good  society.
It  is  the  triumph  of  Jefferson  over  Lenin.
Peace  Petitioners   Within  The  Government  Threatened  With  Suspension  and  HUAC
The  White  House  Applies A Double Standard to Employe Political Activity
The  White  House  has  a  revolt  on  its  doorstep  in  the  anti-
war  petition   more  than   1500   Federal  employes   have  signed.
Among  them  are  employes  of  the  Executive  Offices,  the  State
Department  and  the  Pentagon.    While  the  White  House  has
been  pressuring  the  Civil  Service   Commission   to  "do   some-
thing"   about   these   dissidents,   the   Administration  through
House  Majority  Leader  Albert  has  been  trying  to  get  a  law
exempting   D.C.'s   "Mayor"   Walter   Washington    from   the
Hatch  Act  so  he  could  campaign   for  Johnson.    Negro  radio
stations  in  Washington   are  already  running  local  Democratic
Committee  spots  urging  votes  for  Johnson  in  the  primary be-
cause  "he  gave  us  Mayor  Washington"    [a  Negro].     Never
did  the  title  carry  less  real  power.
The  Harshest  Dissenter  of  Them  All
If  Federal  employes  are  to  be  punished  for  expressing  dim
views  of  the  war,  the  most  eminent  candidate  for  punitive  ac-
tion  should  be  Wm.  McChesney  Martin,  Jr.,  chairman  of  the
Federal  Reserve  Board,  who  told  the  Detroit   Economics  Club
March  18  the  new  two-price  system  for  gold  was  only  "gim-
mickry"  and  would  not  solve  the  crisis.    He  warned  that  the
U.S.  was  militarily  overcommitted  around  the  world  and  said,
"At  some  point,  we've  got  to  get  leadership."
"That's  much  harsher  than  the  petition,  which  merely  asks
the  President  to  end  his  "reliance  on  military force  and  to  seek
instead  a genuine  political  settlement  in  Southeast  Asia."    The
employes  have  found  defenders  in  nine  House  liberal  Demo-
crats*  and  in  Ervin  (D.-N.C.)   chairman  of  the  Senate's  Con-
stitutional  Rights  subcommittee.    Ervin  told  the   Washington
Daily  News  March  20  that  they  had  the  same  rights  as  other
citizens  to  petition  the  government.
The  absence  of  any  real  authority  to  prevent  U.S.  employes
from  speaking  out  on  foreign  policy  is  indicated  by  the  intro-
duction   of  a  bill  to  allow  the  President  to  suspend  with  or
without  pay  any  employe  who,   in   a  time  of   armed   conflict
abroad,  in  any  way  opposes  the  war.    The  sponsor  of  the  bill
is  Chairman  Willis  of  House  Un-American   Activities   Com-
* Burton,  Brown  and  Edwards   (Cal.),  Dow,  Rosenthal  and
Ryan  (N.Y.),  Conyers  (Mich.),  Fraser  (Minn.)  and  Kasten-
meier  (Wis.).
mittee which  is  making  the  anti-war  movement  its  new  target.
Within   48  hours  Willis   issued  statements  attacking  (1)   ths
Federal  petition  and  (2)   the  movement  for  an  international
student  strike  April  26.
The   Committee  has  been   trying  since  the  late   30s—as  it
were—to  repeal   the  First  Amendment   as  un-American;  it's
lucky  Jefferson  is  dead  or  they'd  serve a subpoena  on  him.   Yet
this  oldest,  most  un-American  activity  of  Congress  was  given
$375,000   by  the   House   March   13;   only   78   nays  could   be
marshalled  for  the  Edwards  motion  to  recommit the  appropria-
tion  bill  for  hearings.   Its  counterpart  in  the  art  of witch-hunt-
ing,   the   Senate   Internal   Security  subcommittee,  was   voted
$400,000  by  the  Senate  two  days  later.    By  comparison,  only
$75,000  was  voted  for  an  inquiry  into  the  plight  of migratory
workers.    Between  Johnson's   recent   speeches   implying   that
opposition  to  the  war  is disloyal and  the  conditioned  reflexes  of
these  two  committees,  it  may  soon  be  open  season  on  peace-
niks.    But  we  believe  that  as  in  New  Hampshire  any  such  ef-
fort  will   backfire.
If  You   Ei
joyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier Collection, "The   Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English   Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
FOR   STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ............................
............................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ...............................................................
Street
City   ..
..............................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                 4/i/os
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington   D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in  the  U  S  •  $6  in  Canada-
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa                          "            ^»»»ua.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED