I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968apr15.pdf

============================================================

Premises and  Pitfalls   of  the Coming Peace  Talks,  Pps. 2-3
The  Most  Prophetic  Remark  of  the  Week
"We   have  just  de-escalated  one   war  and  escalated  another."
—Representative   Charles   C.  Diggs,  Jr.    (D.   Mich.),   a   Negro,  on  the  slaying  of  Dr.  Martin  Luther  King.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
7V7^«Mi   £Atj **/4 risia/4    «•»_  \\/a/jfoln\                           ^r
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  8APRIL  15,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
20  CENTS
The  Fire  Has  Only  Just  Begun
The  assassination  of  Dr.  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr., was  the
occasion  for   one   of   those  massive  outpourings  of  hypocrisy
characteristic  of   the  human  race.    He   stood   in  that  line  of
saints  which  goes  back  from  Gandhi  to  Jesus;  his  violent  end,
like  theirs,   reflects   the   hostility   of   mankind  to   those   who
annoy   it  by  trying  hard   to  pull   it   one  more  painful   step
further  up  the  ladder  from  ape  to  angel.
The  President  and  the  Washington  establishment had  been
working  desperately  up  until  the  very  moment  of  Dr.   King's
killing  to  keep  him  and  his  Poor  People's  March  out  of  the
capital;  his  death,  at  first,  promised  to  let  them  rest  in  peace.
The   masses  they  sang  were  not   so  much  of   requiem  as  of
thanksgiving,   that  the  nation's  No.  1  Agitator  had  been  laid
to  rest  at  last.    Then  a  minority  of  his  own  people,  and  not
all   of   them   the   ignorant   and   the   hungry,   celebrated   his
memory  with  an  orgy  of  looting  while  black  radicals  and  New
Leftists   hailed   the  mindless  carnival  as  a  popular   uprising.
Since  the  liquor  stores  were the  No.  1 target,  it  might   sourly
be  termed  the  debut  of  Marxism-Liquorism  in  revolutionary
annals.    Those  among   his  own  people  who  sneered   at  his
non-violent   teaching  as  obsolete   now  seized  upon  his   death
as  a  new  excuse  for  the  violence  he  hated.    Thus  all  sides
firmly united  in  paying  him  homage.
Investigate  the  Memphis  Police
Dr.  King  was  a  victim  of  white  racism.    Its  record  encour-
ages  such  murders.    Dr.  King  was  only  the  most  eminent  in
a  long  series  of  civil  rights  victims.    The  killers  are  rarely
caught,  even  more  rarely  convicted;   the  penalties   are  light.
The  complicity,   in  this  case,  may  go  further.    It  is  strange
that  the  killer  was  so  easily  able  to  escape  when  the  motel  in
which  he  was killed  was  ringed  with  police;  some  came within
a  few  moments  from  the  very direction  of  the  fatal  shot. Vio-
lent  anti-Negro  organizations  like  the  Klari  have  their  cells  in
many  police  forces.    The  Memphis   police   had  shown  their
hatred   in  the  indiscriminate  violence  with  which  they  broke
up  Dr.  King's  march  a  week  earlier.    The  Attorney  General
should  be  pressed  to  include  the  Memphis  police  in  his  inves-
tigation  of  the  slaying.
Though  Dr.  King  was  the  greatest  Southerner  of  our  time,
few  Southern  political  leaders  expressed  any  sorrow  over  his
passing.   Most,  like  Stennis  of  Mississippi,  ventured  no  more
than  antiseptic  and  ambivalent  condemnation   of  all  violence.
In  the  House  on  April  8  the  few  Southerners  who  spoke  de-
plored  the  riots  more  than  the  killing.    The  one   exception
was  Rep. Bob  Eckhardt  of  Texas  who  dared  call  Dr.   King
Bitter  Last  Words  It  Is  Dangerous To Forget
"Our    national   government  is   playing   Russian  rou-
lette  with  riots;  it   gambles  with  another  summer  of
disaster.   Not  a  single  basic  social  cause  of  riots  has
been   corrected.    Though   ample   resources   are   avail-
able,  they  are  squandered  substantially  on  war.  How-
ever,  the  inhumanity  and  irresponsibility  of  Congress
and  the  Administration are  not  a  reflection  of  popular
attitudes—legislation   to   abolish   slums   and   end   all
unemployment  have  been  endorsed  by  a  wide  majority
of  the  American  people  in  reputable  polls.   Yet,  these
positive   proposals,  like  the   recommendations  of   the
President's  Commission  on  Civil  Disorders  will  be  filed
away   to   gather   dust   if   the   people  do  not   generate
relentless  pressure  on  Congress.
"It  was  obdurate  government callousness  to  misery
that  first  stoked  the  flames  of   rage  and  frustration.
With  unemployment  a  scourge  in  Negro  ghettoes,  the
government    still    tinkers    with    trivial    half-hearted
measures,  refuses  still  to  become  an  employer  of  last
resort.   It   asks  the  business   community  to  solve  the
problem   as   though  its   past   failures  qualified   it   for
future   success."
—Dr.  Martin  Luther  King's   last  letter  asking   sup-
port  for  fcts  march  on  Washington.'
"my  black  brother."     Privately  many  white  Southerners  re-
joiced,   and   their   influence   was   reflected   in   the  scandalous
failure  to  declare  a  holiday  in  the  District  the  day  Dr.  King
was  buried.    Though   stores  closed,  government   offices   were
open  and  Negro  mailmen  delivered  the  mail  as  usual.    This
is  still,  despite  its  black  majority,   a  Southern-ruled  town;  it
shuts  down  on  Washington's  birthday,  but  not  Lincoln's.
The  most  powerful  of  the  District's  absentee  rulers, Senator
Robert  C.  Byrd   (D.   W.  Va.)   went  so  far  as  to  imply  in  a
Senate  speech  April  5  that  Dr.  King  was  to  blame  for  his
own  death.     Byrd  said  those  who  organize  mass   demonstra-
tions  may  "in  the  end  .  .  .  become  themselves  the  victims of
the  forces  they  set  in  motion."     While   Dr.   King   "usually
spoke  of  non-violence,"  Byrd  went  on  smugly,  "violence   all
too  often  attended  his  action  and,  at  the  last,  he  himself  met
a  violent  end."    This  should  make  Bryd  the  South's  favorite
criminologist.
Byrd  is the  Senator to whom the  blacks of  Washington  must
come  for   school   and  welfare  money.    As  chairman  of   the
Senate  Appropriations   subcommittee  on  the   District   of  Co-
lumbia  budget,  Byrd  wields  far  more  power   than   the  city's
figurehead Negro  "Mayor."    He  has  used  this key  position  to
{Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  15,1968
The  Basic  Premises  and Treacherous  Pitfalls  of  the  Coining  Peace  Talks
Johnson's  Tricky  Stance  and  Military  Hostility  Bear  Watching
We  are in  a new era of  American history.    After  the tumul-
tuous  events  of   the  past   two  weeks,   the   campaign   for   the
Democratic  Presidential  nomination  suddenly  seems  minor,  al-
most  irrelevant.   The  U.S.  faces  a  prolonged  period  of  inter-
nal  strife  and  economic  difficulties.     It  is  against  this  back-
ground  that  the  peace  talks on  Vietnam will  begin.   They will
be  extraordinarily  complex   and  slow.and   may  easily  break
down.    It  may  help  to  clarify  what  we  are  up  against  if  we
set  down  a  few  fundamental  observations:
1.  IN  AN  EDITORIAL  April  9  the  Washington  Post asked  of
the  negotiations,  "what  in  the  way  of  a  compromise  settle-
ment  could  we  accept  without  risking  all  that  we  have  been
fighting  for?"    The  question  reflects an  obsolete  frame  of ref-
erence.    We  have  to  start  by  recognizing  that  Vietnam  and
indeed  all  Southeast  Asia is  a  trap  from  which  we  must  extri-
• cate  our  country for  its  own  good.    Even  before  the  disorders
which  followed  the  murder  of  Dr.  King,  it  was  clear  that  this
was  a  quicksand.   In  it  the  dollar  was sinking  and  with  it  the
whole  structure  of  world  trade  and  prosperity.    The  money
needed   for' reconstruction   at  home  was  being   blown,  away
abroad.    Now,  to  put  it  bluntly,  we  must  recognize  that  we
may  soon  need  these  troops  at  home.
We  Must  Get  Out  of  Asia
2.  WHAT  WE   HAD  BEEN   FIGHTING  FOR  was  a  foothold
on  the  Asian  mainland  as  part  of  our  attempt  since  1947  to
enforce  a  Pax  Americana  in  the  world.    A  "Vietnam"  was
bound  sooner  or  later  to  happen.    Now  we  must   recognize
(1)   that  we  cannot  be  an  Asian  power  and  (2)  that  a  Pax
Americana  is  beyond  our  strength   and  means.    This  dictates
the  end  of  SEATO,  the  liquidation  of  the  Thai  bases  and  dis-
engagement  as  soon  as  possible  from  the  Chinese  and  Korean
civil wars.   We  have  to  get  out  of  Asia for  our  own  good  and
then  we  have  to  strive  for   the  building   of  a  world   order
•through  the  United  Nations  to  maintain the  peace.    We  can-
not  do  it  alone;  that  is  imperialism,  not  internationalism;  that
is  the  course  which  has  begun  to  bleed  and  bankrupt  us.
3.  THE  FINANCIAL  MARKETS  reflect  how  clearly  American
capitalists  understand  this.    A  striking  example   occurred   in
the  bond  market  the  day  Hanoi  charged  we  had  bombed  areas
near  the  Chinese  and  Laotian  borders,  far  to  the  north  of  the
If  The  Dirty  Dogs  Insist  on  Democracy
What  Chance  Is  There  For  Peace?
"Although  South  Vietnam's  President,  Nguyen  Van
Thieu,  seemed  more  receptive,  at  his  news   conference
today,  to  the  idea  of  negotiations,  few—if  any—Amer-
ican  officials  here  appear  to  believe  that  he  will  ever
accept  the  idea  of  coalition  in  any  real  sense.   Token
representation  for  the  Viet   Cong   perhaps.   But  .  .  .
as  these  Americans see  it,  the  enemy negotiators  would
insist—at   the   very   least—on   a  completely  represen-
tational   form  of  government."
—Gene  Roberts from  Saigon,  New  York  Times  April
3,  reporting  a  conversation  with   "a  high  State   De-
partment  official   .  .  .  mellow  over  a  glass  of   Scotch"
who  said  "We cannot  agree  to  a  coalition  government"
because  that  "would be losing  the  ball  game."
bomb  limit  presumably  set  by  the  President.    The  result  was
an   immediate  drop  in  the  price  of  bonds.     Investors  want
peace,  not  war.   Unfortunately the  combination of  our  power-
ful  military  bureaucracy,  with  its  suppliers;  the  anti-Commu-
nist  obsessions   frozen   into  American  thinking   by  the   cold
war;   and  the  small  town  Babbitts  who  dominate  so  many key
Congressional  committees  remain  obstacles  to  peace.
4.   IT  Is   DANGEROUS  to  trust  Johnson.     He   is   impulsive
and  emotional,  given  to  wide  swings  of  mood,  and  irremedi-
ably  a  trickster.    Even  though  the  objective  situation  calls  for
peace,  he  left  himself  free  in  his  "abdication"   speech  to  esca-
late  as well  as  de-escalate.   This  is  the  darker  and  more  sinis-
ter  possibility  in  his  claim  that  he  has  freed  himself  from  the
pressures  of  politics.    That  also  means  the  pressure  of  public
opinion.    He  is  still  obsessed  with  the  idea  that  he  can  win
the  restoration  of  an  independent  South  Vietnam  in  the  Amer-
ican  sphere  of  influence.    Even  if  we  could  get  it,  it  wouldn't
be  worth  it  because  sooner  or  later  the  war  would  flare  up
again  and  engulf  us  once  more  in  the  morass  of  combat  on
the  Asian  mainland.
5.  To   GUARD  AGAINST  unpleasant  surprise  from  Johnson,
it  would  be  well  to  beware  the  outburst  of  sentimental  non-
sense  about  his  noble   abnegation   of  power.    The   old   fox
hasn't given  up power.   He has regained  it.   The  other  Demo-
Medical  Profession  Warns  of  Dangers  In  New   Spray  for  Mob  Control—Mace
Chicago—The  disabling  riot-control  chemical  spray  Mace
is  coming  under  increasing  criticism  from  the  medical pro-
fession.   A  pediatrician  in  suburban  Skokie, who  asked  not
to   be  identified   because   of   medical  ethics,   said  that   he
recently   treated  a   teenage   boy  who  had  been   Maced  by
police.   The  boy,  the   doctor  said,   "spent   five   days  with
excoriations   (redness  and  bruises)  about  the  entire   eye."
He  said  that  skin  peeled  from  the  youth's  face  and  from
around   the   eye.   "There's   no   question   about   it   (Mace)
being   bad  for   the  respiratory  system   when  there   is   al-
ready  a  lot  of  edema  (swelling)  in  bronchial  troubles,  such
as  asthma."
The  doctor  said  that  .Mace  also  endangers  people  with
rheumatic   heart   trouble  or  a  congenital   heart   condition.
He  added that  pressure  from  the  spray  may  damage  eyes.
"It  works  by  displacing  oxygen,"  commented  Dr.   Quintin
D.  Young,  national  president  of  the  Medical Committee  for
Human  Rights,  "so  it  could  be  very  catastrophic."
"If  a  person  has  heart  tronble  or  acute  asthma,"  agreed
Dr.  Edward H.  Matters,  chief  physician  at  the  Cook County
jail,  "this  man could  suffer  a  fatal  dosage."  .  .  .  County
Sheriff   Joseph  Woods,  whose  men  widely  used  Mace  last
year,  also  defended  Mace  in  spite  of  the  reports  of   after-
effects   because   "anyone  prone  to  a  heart   attack   has  no
business   at  a  riot  or  agitating."    However,  at  least  one
city  has  second  thoughts about  the  use  of  Mace.  On  March
19,  use  of  Mace  by  police  was  ordered halted  in  Ann  Arbor,
Mich.,  until  the  chemical's  possible  dangerous  effects  could
be  studied.
—York   (Pa.)   Gazette   and  Daily,   April   4.   The   same
paper  the  same  day  carried  a  story  from  Waterbury,  Conn.,
reporting   the  use  of  Mace   on  a  group  of  twelve  children.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  15,1968
Best  Hope  Lies  in  Secret  Talks  Between  NLF  and  Other  South   Vietnamese
Rigged  Elections  Trapped  Us With  A  Pro-War  Minority  Regime  in  Saigon
cratic  candidates  dare  not  attack  him  because  his  votes  may
enable  him  to  control  the  outcome  at  the  Democratic  conven-
tion.    The  silence  and  caution  of  Chicago's  Daley  and  other
urban  bosses  indicates that  he  is  leaving his  option  open  for  a
draft.    He  has  left  Humphrey high  and  dry  and  made himself
the  parry's  center  of  power  again.    His   "abdication"   was  a
brilliant  stroke  of  politics.
Why  the  Korean  Talks  Dragged  On
6.  THE  BIGGEST  REASON  why  the  Korean  war  dragged  on
for   two  costly  years  after   the  peace  talks  began  is  that  our
military  and  the  right-wing  South  Korean  regime  of  Syngman
Rhee  were  opposed  to  peace  and  wanted to  go North  and  win
the  war.    The  same  situation  exists  in  South  Vietnam.    We
are  now   trapped   by  our   own   rigged   elections  which  have
created  a  democratic facade  for  a  military  dictatorship  of  die-
hard  Northerners  buttressed  by an  unrepresentative  legislature
in  which  South  Vietnam's  2,000,000  minority Catholics, many
of  them  refugees  from  the  North,  wield  vastly  disproportion-
ate  power.    The  government  we  support  is  a  government  of
pro-war   anti-social  reform   elements,  military  men,   absentee
landlords  and  urban  profiteers, all  of  whom  stand  to  lose  by
peace.    They  will  keep  us  at  war  if  they  can.    It  is  hopeless
to  talk  of  negotiations   between  this  "Saigon"  and  the   NLF
and  we  will  have  to  get  rid  of  it  to  achieve  peace.    A  repre-
sentative   government   would   not   be   Communist;   fair   and
honest   elections  might   not  even  produce   an  NLF   majority.
But  it  would   produce   an  overwhelming   majority  for   peace
and  with  that  government  the  NLF  could  and  has  offered   to
negotiate.    That  is  our  best  way  out  and  Vietnam's.
7.  THE  DIE-HARDS  WILL  USE as  their  propaganda  weapon
the  fear  that  a  new  regime  would  mean  their  death.     Better
to  offer  them  asylum  than  continue  the  war.   This  plea  comes
from  people  who  have  shown  no  mercy  to  their  own  oppon-
ents.    In  any  case  as  a  matter  of  blunt  arithmetic  the  war  is
killing  far   more  Vietnamese  than  any  Communist  or   NLF
victory  could.    As  David  Bonavia,  the  Saigon   correspondent
of  the  London  Times  wrote  April  8—
Let's  Paste  This  Memo  In  The  Hat
Of  Whoever  Negotiates  With  Hanoi
One  of  the  most  acute  of  U.S.  government  analysts,
recently  returned  from  Viet  Nam,  sums  it  up  as  fol-
lows:  "There are  three  things  worse  than  a  bad  settle-
ment  of  Viet  Nam  right  now.  The  first  is  an  invasion
of   the   North  and  a   confrontation  with   China.    The
second  is  the  same  bad  settlement  two  or  three  years
from   now   with   all   the   additional  casualties—which
is  about  the  best  we  can  expect.   And  the  third  alter-
native  worse  than  a  bad settlement  now  is  a  good  set-
tlement,   achieving   all   the   Administration's   demands,
four  or  five  years  from  now.  For  four  or  five  years  of
that  level  of  risk,  even  if   we  avoid  a  war  with  the
Chinese,   will   wreck   all   our  other   objectives   around
the   world   and  tear   our   own  society   here   at   home
into  shreds."
—Roger  Hilsman  in  the  April   Foreign  Affairs.
The  massacre  argument is  also  somewhat  illogical  if   it
entails  killing something  like  100,000  people  every  year  in
order  to  prevent  a  probably  smaller number  from  being kill-
ed  in  a  once-for-all  settling  of  accounts.   It  entails  an  as-
sumption  that  foreigners  are  qualified  to  judge  which Viet-
namese  should be  allowed  to live at  the  cost  of  the  deaths of
others—surely a very bold assumption,  and a dangerous one.
8.  THE  BEST  WAY  To    AVOID  this  stumbling  block  is  by
secret  negotiations  between  the  NLF  and  a  wide  spectrum  of
representatives  from  other  parts  of  the  population—the  Bud-
dhists,  the  sects,  the  Southern gentry  who  resent  domination of
the  puppet  regime  in  the  South  by  Northern  military men—
and  hammer out a humane and viable settlement  between  them.
At  a  time when  fresh  liberal ideas  and  new  demands  for  free-
dom  are  breaking  out  everywhere in  the  Soviet  bloc,  Ho  Chi
Minh  and  Pham  Van  Dong  should  help  guarantee  that  there
will  be  no  brutal  Stalin-style solution.   We  believe  and  hope
they  can.   The  success of  the  negotiations,  the  welfare  of  their
bleeding  and  battered  country  and  of  the  world  may  depend
upon  it.   The  Vietnamese have shown their unparalled bravery.
Let  them  now  demonstrate  an  equal  wisdom  in  fraternity.
A  Violation of  Our Treaty  Obligations Not  to  Use  Space for  Warlike  Purposes
"I   strongly    oppose    the    administration's   placing    the
manned   orbiting   laboratory   (MOL)   program   under   the
jurisdiction  of  the  U.  S.  Air  Force.  .  .  .
"I  strongly   oppose   the  action  of   Secretary   of   Defense
McNamara  when,  in  his  December  10,  1963,  news  confer-
ence,  Mr. McNamara  announced  without  prior  notice  of  any
kind  that  the  manned  orbiting  laboratory  program  would
be  assigned  to  the  Air  Force.   Neither  Congress  nor  the
scientific   community   of   the   country   had   had   any   prior
notice  or  inkling  that  this  was  to  be  the  case.
"It  is  complete  fiction  to  state,  as  Secretary  of   Defense
McNamara  has  assumed,  that  MOL is  completely  a  mili-
tary  task.  .  .  .  The  announcement by  Secretary McNamara
makes   a   fiction   and  is   in   direct   violation   of   the   ex-
pressed   intent  of   the  Congress  in  section  102(a)   of   the
original  Space  Act,  "The  Congress  hereby  declares  that   it
is  the  policy  of  the  United  States  that  activities  in  space
—Rep.  Fulton  (R.  Pa.)  in  comments  attached  to
should  be  devoted  to  peaceful  purposes   for  the  benefit  of
mankind.'...
"On  January  27,  1967,  the  United  States,  U.S.S.R.,  Great
Britain,   and   many   other   nations   signed   the   treaty   on
principles   governing   the   exploration   and   use   of   outer
space.     On  April   25,  1967,  the   U.   S.   Senate   ratified   the
treaty,   and  the   U.S.S.R.  similarly  ratified   the   treaty   on
May  18,  1967.   It  is  provided  in  the  space  treaty  that  space
shall  be  used  exclusively for  peaceful purposes.  Thus,  is  the
U.S.  policy on  the  use  of  space  facing  two  directions?    Has
the  United States  already been violating this treaty?
'•'Being  first  in  space  for  scientific  purposes  is  one  thing.
Being   first   in   space   to   better   deliver   weapons   of   de-
struction  or  nuclear  and  atomic  weapons  is  quite  another
field  entirely.   Do  the  American  people  want  the   admin-
istration   to   have   the   first   manned  orbiting   laboratory
solely   dedicated  for   military   purposes?"
the  House  Space   Committee's  latest  report  on   NASA.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  15,1968
How  the  "Man  in  the  House" Rule  Breeds  Fatherless  Child  Looters
(Continued  from  Page  One)
block  liberalization of  welfare  rules  not  only  in  the  District
but  in  the  country,  since  the  Federal  government  can  hardly
apply  elsewhere rules  more  liberal  than  those  he  will  allow  in
the  District.   Byrd  has  become  the  national  pillar  of  the  "man
in  the  house"  rule.    This,  as  the  report  of  the  Commission  on
Civil  Disorders  protested,    makes  it  necessary  for  the  unem-
ployed  father  to  "abandon  his  family  or  see them  go  hungry."
In  this  sense  not   a  few  of   the  child   looters   in  our   gutted
ghettoes  can  trace  their  delinquency  straight  back  to   Robert
C. Byrd.
The Distant Country of  the Ghetto
For  whites who  live  like  myself  in  almost  lily-white  North-
west  Washington   on  the  very  edge  of   suburbia,  the  ghetto
disorders  might  have  taken  place  in  a  distant  country .'.viewed
on  TV  like  Vietnam  (which  it  begins  to  resemble),  or  as  a
tourist  attraction  on  a  visit  in  the  bright  spring  sunshine  be-
fore  curfew  to  the  sullen  and  mined  ghetto  business  districts.
It  was  not  until  five  days  after  the  trouble  started  that  two
young  soldiers  turned  up  for  the  first  time  to  guard  our  own
neighboring  shopping   center—"as  a  precautionary  measure",
they  explained—and  tape appeared  on  its liquor  store windows.
Even  sympathetic  and   radical  whites  found   themselves   insu-
lated  from  what  was going  on  not  just by  the  military  cordons
but   even  more   by  an   indiscriminate  black  hostility.     Even
some  Liberal  and  Leftist  families  with  children  moved  out  of
integrated  neighborhoods   on  the  edge  of  the  ghetto  in  appre-
hension.    These  were  our  first  refugees  from  black   power.
Nothing   could   be   more   deceptive   than   the   nationwide
mourning.    Beneath  the  surface  nothing  has  changed,  except
perhaps  for  the  worst.    The  President  has  called   off  his  ad-
dress  to a joint  session  indefinitely.    His  Senate Majority  lead-
er,  Mansfield,  warns  the  Congress  not  to  be  "impetuous"  in
reacting  to  the  disorders.    How  fortunate  we  should  be  if  all
our  dangers  were  as  remote  as this  one!    The  new  civil  rights
bill,  if  It  passes,  is  more  likely  to  bring  new  evils  in  its  anti-
riot  provisions  than  reform  in  housing.
In  Washington,  as  in  most  cities  hit  by  black  violence,  the
police  and  the  troops  have  been  on  their  best  behavior  to  the
The  Fate  In  Store  For  AH Of  Us
"The  share  of   the  nation's  resources  now  allocated
to   programs  for   the   disadvantage)!  is   insufficient   to
arrest  the  deterioration of  life  in  central city  ghettoes.
Under  such  conditions, a  rising  proportion  of   Negroes
may   come  to   see   in  'the  deprivation  and  segregation
they  experience,  a  justification  for  violent  protest,  or
for  extending  support  to  now  isolated  extremists  who
advocate  civil  disruption.   Large-scale  continuing  vio-
lence  could  result,  followed  by  white  retaliation,  and,
ultimately,  the  separation  of   the  two  communities  in
a  garrison  state.  .  .  .  This  spiral  could  quite conceiv-
ably  lead  to  a  kind  of  urban  apartheid with semi-mar-
tial   law   in  many   major  cities,  enforced  residence  of
Negroes  in  segregated  areas,  and  a  drastic  reduction
in   personal   freedom   for   all   Americans,  particularly
Negroes."
—Report   of   the   National   Advisory   Commission   on
Civil  Disorders.
point   where  business  spokesmen  are  complaining   that   there
has  been  too  much  leniency  in  dealing with  looters.    For  once,
to  the  Administration's credit,  lives  have  been  put   ahead  of
property.    Had  police  and  soldiers  begun  to  shoot,  the  kill-
ings  would  have become  a  massacre and  the  riots a  black  revo-
lution.    As  it  is,  in  Washington  at  least,  the  black community
has  been  grateful  for   the   protection   afforded   it.     But  this
leniency  is  unlikely  to  survive  when  and  if  white  rather  than
black  areas  begin  to  go  up  in  smoke.   There  is  little  time  left
for  the  big  multi-billion dollar  program   which  can  alone  re-
habilitate  the   hopeless   and  bitter  generation   of   blacks  that
racial  discrimination and  the  slums  have  bred.    Whites  still
think  they  can  escape  the  problem  by  moving  to  the  suburbs,
and  as long  as they think  so, nothing  will be  done.   There  are
already   55,000  troops   in  our   110  scarred  cities—more  than
we  had  in  Vietnam  three  years  ago.    Already  the  police  talk
of  guerrilla  war.    If  it  comes,  a  half  million  troops  will  not
be  enough  to  contain  it.    A  looting  suspect  told  one  reporter
at a police station  here,  "We're going to burn  this whole  place.
It  might  take  years  but  we'll  do  it."     This  is  the  agony  of  a
lost  race speaking. If  we cannot respond with swift  compassion,
this  is the  beginning  of  our  decline and  fall.       Noon  April  9
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  Ha  Earlier Collection, 'The  Haunted  Fifties" Out of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of  Torment  (Random House)  regular  price  $7.95
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a.  sub  for   the  enclosed   $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street
City  ..
..............................  Zip................  State.....
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.,  Washington, D.  C. 20015
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington.  D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  J6  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada-
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  *20  to  brae).  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED