I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968nov18.pdf

============================================================

The  Billions  Our Air  War  on North  Vietnam  Cost, P. 3
When  Wall  St.  Investors Yawn  With  The New Left—First  Sign of  That New Nixon Unity
" 'My   impression  of   customer   response   to  the   election
frankly,    was   that   they   felt   ennui,'   commented    Richard
M.  Gordon,  a  securities  salesman  in  Hayden,   Stone.   'I've
not  had  a  single  buy  order  this  morning.'"
—From   the   New  York   Times  financial  page   morning-
after   investor  survey  Nov. 7.   The  stock  and  bond  markets
like  Students   for   a  Democratic  Society   seemed    to  think
the  election  results   made   no     difference.
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly                      **
VOL.  XVI,  NO.  23
NOVEMBER   18, 1968
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
No  Magic  or  Miracles  In  Nixon
In  one  respect  the  election  campaign  of  1968  was  standard.
In  most  elections  the  rival  candidates  try  to  sound   as  much
alike   as   possible.    This   is   true   even   of   campaigns   which
proved   turning   points   in  American  history.   No   one  could
have  been  more  equivocal  on  slavery  than  Lincoln.   FDR  in
the  1932  campaign  sounded  like  Herbert  Hoover.   The  voice
of  the  people  was  no  more  blurred  in  1968 than  usual.   To
get  a  majority  under  most  circumstances in  a  big  country with
a  wide  range  of  opinion,   it  is  necessary  to  get  down  to  a
pretty  weak  and  ambiguous  common  denominator.   The  lack
of   a  clear   choice   on   Vietnam   reflected   the   fact   that   both
parties,   like  the  country,  were  agreed  in  a  desire  to  get  it
over  with,  but  divided  as  to  whether  the  best  means  was  an
all-out  military  effort  or  negotiation.    The  close  vote  reflected
the  toss-up  character  of  die  decision,  and  the  campaign  ended
with  all  three  candidates  agreed  on  pursuing  negotiations  for
an  "honorable  peace",  whatever  that  means.
For  A  Tougher  Racial  Policy
The  other  decision  ratified  by  the  election  is  not  so  pleas-
ant.    If   you  add   the   Nixon   vote  to   the   Wallace   vote   to
Humphrey's  me-tooism  on  law  and  order,  you  are  forced  to
conclude  that  the  white  majority  is  for  tougher  action  to  deal
with  black  unrest,  though  the  country  is  still  far  from  a  new
irreconcilable   conflict.    Except   in   the   deep   South,   Wallace
proved   to  be  a  fringe   phenomena.   On  the  other   side  the
heavy  black  vote  for  Humphrey  shows  that  the  power  of  the
black  nationalists  and  extremists  has  been  even  more  exag-
gerated   than   that   of   the   Wallaceites.    It   is  clear  that   the
overwhelming  majority  of  the  blacks  are  ready  to  participate
in  normal  politics  if  it  offers   any  meaningful  choice  at all.
Meaningful  choices  often  turn  out  to  be  lesser  evils,  and  at
the   last   moment   to   blacks,   as   to   many   disaffected   white
radicals,  Humphrey  looked  like  a  lesser  evil  than  Nixon  and
Agnew.   Cleaver  and  Gregory  picked   up  only  a  handful  of
black  votes.   This  Humphrey   vote  means  that  there  is  still
time  and  room  for  racial  reconciliation.
We  don't  think  Nixon  is  the  man  who  can  bring  it  about.
Let  me  put  the  problem   in  large  terms.   What   the  French
call  "immobilism"   is  characteristic  of   human  society  every-
where,  irrespective  of  the  social  forms.   Most  rulers  of  human
societies   find   themselves   hemmed   in   by   the  circumstances
under  which   they  took   power.    Little  changes.   There   isn't
much  elbow  room  in  Washington   or  Moscow,  for   example,
without   radical   measures.    But   radical   measures   require   a
Maybe  Like  Mowing  The  White  House   Lawn
"Agnew   became   a   controversial   figure   during   the
campaign    and   there   had   been   considerable   specula-
tion  that  Nixon  would   put  him  on  a   back-burner    in
his  administration.   But  Nixon's  announcement  today
sounded   as  if  he  intends  to  give  Agnew  an  important,
but  closely  watched,*  role   in  the   administration.   'My
plan  is   to   give  him  some  new  duties  beyond  those
of  any  Vice  President,'  Nixon  said."
—Washington   Star   from   Key   Biscayne  Nov. 9
*Noting  that  the  "promotion"  would  deprive  Agnew
of   any   personal   staff   or   even  personal  press  repre-
sentative,   and   put   him  in   the   White   House   under
close  supervision,  the  Star's  correspondent  next  day
quoted  an  unamed  "foreign  reporter"  as  saying "Ag-
new  was  just  put   under  White  House  arrest."   We
hope  the   Secret  Service  tracks   down   this  sly   fellow
and   deports  him,  preferably   to   Greece,   where   the
Papadapoulos  regime  has  special  facilities  for  irrever-
ent   newsmen.
willingness  to  take  risk.  Khrushchev  showed  it  when  he  made
his  secret  speech  on  Stalin,  Pope  John  when  he  transformed
the  Roman   Catholic  Church,  de  Gaulle  when  he  got  out  of
Algeria.    Each   had   the   courage   and   the   insight   for   fresh
directions.   This  is  what  America  needs  to  deal  with  the  twin
problems  of  the  urban  and  racial  crises  at  home,  and  with
our  over-extension  abroad.   Nixon  hasn't  got  what  it  takes.
The  first  obstacle  is  the   strategy  which  brought   him   to
power.   His  base  is  the  South,  the  small  towns  and  the  com-
fortable.   This  does  not  necessarily  rule  out  radical  measures.
De  Gaulle  was  swept  into  power  by  the  very  forces,  military
and  colonialist,  he  was  soon  to  "betray"  by  his  magnanimity
in   Algeria.    Khrushchev's   constituency   was   a   Communist
party  hierarchy  matched  in  its  unimaginative  stuffiness   only
by  the  College  of  Cardinals  which  elected  John.    But  those
who   looked   closely  at  de  Gaulle's  past  and   John's,   if   not
Khrushchev's,  could  see  that  they  were  innovators.   There  is
no  sign  of  that  quality  in  Nixon.
Nixon   is  the  first  real  Republican  to  win  the   Presidency
since  1924  when  Coolidge  was  elected.   People  have  forgotten
that  Hoover,  like  Eisenhower,  had  been  so  apolitical  that  he
was  once  suggested   for  the  Democratic  nomination  in 1920.
With   Nixon  we  are  back  'to  the  genuine  article.    He  is  of
the  same  bland,  banal  and  Babbitty  breed  as  Coolidge   and
Harding.  Like them  he  symbolizes  the  desire  of  the  well-to-do
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  18,  1968
(Continued  from  Page  One)
and  of  small-town  America  for   "normalcy",   for   an  end   to
emergency  and  experiment,   for  a  Canute  that  will   somehow
hold  back  the  tides  of  change.   Like  Coolidge  and   Harding,
he  is  inescapably  insipid,  the  type that  vice presidents  of  banks
regard  as  solid   fellows.   That  kind  of  leadership  ruined   the
Republican  party  before  and  will  do  so  again.
The  Welfare  System  For  The  Rich
There  is  no  cheap  way  out.    The  first  choice   is   between
urban-racial  requirements   and  the  upper   class  welfare  system
which  is  the  military-industrial  complex   and  aerospace.   This
is the  gravy  train  of  the  suburbs,  the  technicians  and  the  new
millionaires   of   Texas   and   California   whose   gilt-edged   old
age pensions  depend  on  militarism  and  the  space  race.   These
are   the   richest   and   easiest   sources   of   tfie   contributions   a
Presidential   campaign  requires;  Kennedy  tapped  them  in  I960
with  the  "missile  gap"   nonsense;   Nixon   has  done  so  again
with  a  "security   gap",   a  "research   gap"   and  a   "submarine
gap,"   all  equally   nonsensical.    Nixon   knows  it,  as  Kennedy
knew  it,  but  that  won't  keep  Nixon  from  stepping  up  the
arms  race  just  as  Kennedy  did.   The  key  point   to  watch  is
what  he  does  about  the  anti-ballistic  missile;  only  a  program
of  this   size  can  support  the  complex   and   aerospace   in   the
style  to  which   they  have  become   accustomed.    It  is  hard   to
see  Nixon  breaking  loose  from  his  constituency  on  that   one.
So  Ae  course  is  set  for  a  lot  of  nonsense  about  letting   free
enterprise   solve  the  problems  of  the  ghetto.    He  will  try  to
win  over  a  thin  upper  strata  of  Negro  leadership,  but  without
alienating   his  base.   It  is  the  unexpected   outbreak  which  is
to  be  feared;   then   we  are  likely  to  see  resort  to  force  and
a  revival  of  witch-hunting  old-Nixon  style.  Both  will  intensify
racial  antagonism and  crisis.
This  is  the  danger  on  which  a new  opposition   should  focus.
Humphrey's   flabby   joint   post-election   appeal   with    Nixon
against  "divisiveness"   shows  that  he  is  as incapable  of  leading
it  now  as  he  was  before  the  election.  If  there  is  no   "divisive-
ness"  there  is  no  two-party  system  and  there  is  no  real  choice
again.   To  deny  choice  is  to  provoke  and  extend   the  really
dangerous  divisiveness  of  alienation  among  the  youth  and  the
The  Case  For  Coalition
"The   most   hopeful   way   of   achieving   a   peaceful
solution  would  seem  to  be  for  the  Americans  to  exert
pressure  on  President  Thieu to  permit some  established
middle-of-the-road   politicians,   such   as   Dr.   Dan  and
Mr.   Dzu,  to   make  contact   with  the   leaders   of   the
NLF  in  a  sympathetic  but  neutral  capital   in   South-
East   Asia.    Dr.  Dan  was   dropped  from   the   present
Cabinet  for  having  suggested   the  possibility  of  a  co-
alition  during  a  visit   to  the   United  States  and  Mr.
Dzu,  Thieu's  former  rival  in  the  Presidential   election,
is   in   prison   for   advocating   a   policy  which  is   now
generally  accepted  as  the  only  way  to   break  the  po-
litical   stalemate.
'The  formation of  a  Coalition  Government in  Saigon
could   serve   as   an  important  rallying   point   for   the
moderate  non-committed people of  South  Vietnam,  who
are  tired  of  coups  and  war  lords.   Many  of  them   al-
ready  see  the  establishment  of  a  Coalition  Government
as  the  only  hope  of  preserving  their  bourgeois  way  of
life.    These   small   capitalists    would   strengthen    the
hands  of   those  non-Communist  lawyers,   businessmen
and  doctors  who  have  slipped  away  during  the   past
few   years  to  join  the  NLF,  which,  of   course,  is   led
by Communists....
"If   such  a   coalition   could  obtain   support   of   the
middle  rank  officers  in  ARVN—who,  after  all,  are  the
sons   of   the  urban  middle  classes—they  could  render
the  organisation   of  a  successful  coup  extremely   diffi-
cult,  if  not  impossible.   The  South  Vietnamese  officer,
although  fighting  on  his  native  soil,  is  just  an  anxious
to  return  to  civilian life  as  the  American  draftee,  and
he  can  count  on  the  support  of  the  Vietnamese  towns-
woman,  for  whom  war  means  loneliness  and   misery."
—Clare  Hollingworth,  just  back  from   Saigon,  writ-
ing  on  The Next  Phase  in  Vietnam  in  the  Conservative
London  Daily  Telegraph,  Nov.  2.
blacks.   A  real  opposition   is  necessary  if   orderly  change  is
to  be  possible.   But  Humphrey  in  the  campaign  showed  him-
self  constitutionally  incapable  of  leading  such  opposition.   To
follow  him  will  only  ensure  another  defeat.   Only  McCarthy
began   to   open   up   the   real   issues.    If   he   could   develop  a
rapport   with   black   aspiration,   he   could   lead   an    effective
opposition,  inside  or  outside  the  party,  but  preferably  within
it.   There  is  no  substitute   for  that  coalition   the   Democratic
From A Portrait  Meant To Be  Friendly of  That Man in Saigon Who Blocks The Peace Talks
"Saigon—For   a   political   figure   who   must   depend   on
the   popular  vote,   Nguyen   Van  Thieu   [South   Vietnam's
military  President]   has  a  few  shortcomings  when  it  comes
to  stirring  the  masses.   Even  his  ardent  fans  admit  that  in
public  he  is  quiet,  dignified,   cautious,  withdrawn  and  un-
inspiring—in  a  word  dull.  .  .  .
"When   one   Cabinet   minister   complained   that   he   was
losing  key   personnel  to   private  industry  and  asked  per-
mission  to  raise   the  salaries   of  five  aides,   the   President
turned  him  down  on  grounds  that  this  was  against  regula-
tions   .  .  .  Mr.  Thieu  suggested  the  minister  simply  add
five   fictitious   names   to   the   payroll  and  give   the   newly
created  salaries  to  the  deserving  aides  .  .  .
"Not  everything  Mr.  Thieu  has  done  has  been  received
with  enthusiasm  by  U.S.   officials   here.   The  arrest  earlier
this   year   of   Truong   Dinh   Dzu,   runner-up  in   the   1967
presidential  election,   for  advocating  negotiations  with  the
Vietcong   sparked  charges   that   Mr.  Thieu  was  using   his
power  improperly  to   purge  political  rivals   [and   Dzu,  as
this   story   fails   to   mention  is  still   in  jail—IPS].    Also,
Mr.  Thieu  has  done  little  to  win  the  support  of  the  rural
population . .. Though  Mr. Thieu  has talked  about  agrarian
reform  and  about  relieving  the  disparity  between  the  war-
caused  privations  of   the   countryside  and  the   'luxury'  of
the  cities,  he  hasn't  made  any  changes  .  .  .
"Mr.   Thieu   betrays   an   extreme   sensitivity   about   his
position.    On  a   flight   to   Honolulu  last   summer,  accom-
panied   by  cabinet   ministers,   aides  and  bodyguards  .  .  .
Mr.   Thieu—quartered   in   a   private   cabin—was   asked   if
he  wanted  dinner,  but  he  declined.   The  others  were  served
and  later  Mr.  Thieu  decided  to  eat,  too.   His  meal  arrived
and  an  aide  remarked  that  it  was  the  same  steak   dinner
menu  served  to  the   others.
"Mr.  Thieu  became  highly   upset,  according  to   sources
who  witnessed  the  incident,  and  berated   the  airline   staff
for  serving  him  a  meal  similar  to  the  others.   Then  he  de-
voted  his  attention  for  the  rest  of  the  trip  to  planning  his
menus.   He  demanded  special   meals  on  special  chinaware
and  went  so  far  as  to  insist  he  be  served  breakfast  rolls
while   other   members   of   the   party   be   served   ordinary
bread."
—Peter   Karmin   Wall   St.  Journal   Oct.  SI,   "President
Thieu  Pleases  V.S.  By  Quiet  Efforts    to  Increase   Stability."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  18, 19G8
party  represents.   To  capture,  broaden  and  educate  it  seems  to
me  essential  if  the  country's  problems  are  to  be  solved  peace-
fully.
McCarthy  is  right  when  he  says  the  narrow  returns   show
that  Humphrey  might  have  beaten  Nixon  if  the  bombing  halt
had  come  earlier.   But  there  is  reason  to  doubt  that   Johnson
wanted  a  Humphrey  victory.   A  Humphrey  defeat  may  have
suited  his  vanity  and  calculations.   Johnson  worked  well  with
Elsenhower  in  the  50s,  and  may hope  to  work  as  closely  with
Nixon.   The  extraordinary  pact  reached  between  them  at  their
first  White  House  conference  after  the  election  must  encour-
age  the  ambitions  Johnson  may  nurture  to  be  an  elder  states-
man   of   the   bipartisan   Establishment.    The    Nixon-Johnson
agreement   may  seem  at  the  moment  to  safeguard  the  Paris
talks from  upset  by Thieu.  But when  two  such  tricky  operators
agree,  the  pro-peace  forces  had  best  be  on  guard.
A  Most  Intricate  Con  Game
There  has  rarely   been   such  an   opaque   con  game   as   the
Paris   talks,   and   it  is  not   surprising  that   all   sides  are   sus-
picious.    Hanoi   paid   an   unexpected   price.    It   did   what   it
said  it  would   never  do,  submit  to  conditions  for  a   bombing
halt.   It  agreed  to  sit  down  at  the  peace  table  with  the  Saigon
government.    "It  is  absolutely  out  of  the  question,"   Wilfred
Burchett  told   Tokyo  Shimbun  in  a  Phnom  Penh   interview
Oct.  30  on  his  return  from  Hanoi,  "that  North  Vietnam  and
the  NLF  would  talk  at  conferences  with  representatives  of  the
present   Saigon   regimes."   To   agree  to   sit   down   with   the
"puppets"  as Hanoi  has  done,  and  to  scale  down  the  fighting,
must   seem  to  the  NLF   a  repetition   of   1954   when   Hanoi
bought  its  independence   at  the  expense  of  the   South.
The  lull  around   the  DMZ  has  made  it  possible   for  the
U.S.  First  Cavalry  to  be  moved  southward   into  the   Mekong
Delta  for  "pacification"   operations.    "We  are  not  taking  any
inhibitions  on  our  own  military operations  in  South  Vietnam,"
Walt   Rostow   said   on   ABC  Issues  and  Answers   Nov.   10,
specifying   that  we  had  not   agreed   to  a  cease-fire  and  that
U.S.  and  ARVN  forces  were  "moving  out  into  the  country-
Add  Delusions  of   Saigon
"High  South  Vietnamese  officials   say   privately  the
bombing  halt  came  too  soon.   They  argued  again  today
that   the  enemy  was   approaching  military   defeat."
—Washington  Post  from  Saigon  Nov.  9
"Despite  the  official  figure  of  166,000 enemy  soldiers
killed  this  year,  the  North  Vietnamese  and  Viet  Cong
units  still   represent   220,000  men.   The  allied   camps
are    fortified    bastions,    surrounded   by   barbed   wire,
watch  towers  and  searchlights,  defended  by  tanks,  ar-
tillery  and  machine guns.   Few  Americans  venture  un-
escorted  any  distance  from  major  cities.
"The  South  Vietnamese  army  is  being  described  as
'tremendously   improved'   in   recent   months.    It   has
'gained  confidence  in  itself   and  now  even  engages  in
independent   operations.   According   to   more  skeptical
appraisals,  most  of  its   members  are  mainly  on  guard
duty.   Of  the  10  organized  divisions,  only  one,  in  the
north,  is  really  aggressively   active.   The  fact  that  the
Mekong   River  delta,  where  there   are   few   American
troops,  is  the  least  'pacified'  area  tells  its  own  story."
—Andrew   Borowiec,  Washington   Star,  Nov.  3.
"The   Government  in  Hanoi  and  the  political  arm  of
the   Vietcong—the   National   Liberation  Front—today
administer  over  1,800  of   the  2,500  villages  and  over
8,000   of   the   11,650   hamlets   inside   South   Vietnam.
Indeed,  Saigon  administers  less  than  eight  million  of
the  total   population  of   17  million  and  of   this   eight
million  some  four-and-a-half  million  are  soldiers   and
civil  servants  paid  by  the  state."
—Clare   Hollingworth,  London   Telegraph   Nov.   Z.
side;  pacification  is  accelerating."  While  U.S.  bombing  of  the
countryside  is  stepped  up,  the  NLF  is  expected  to  give  up  the
bombardment   of   the   provincial   towns   and   outposts   from
which  the  "pacification"  forces  operate.
It  is  enough   to  make  one  wonder  whether   those  "certain
outstanding  matters"  between  the  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  to  which
Nixon   referred  after  his  White   House   visit  might   possibly
include  an  agreement  to  let  the  Russians  finally  "pacify"   the
(Continued  on  Page   four)
Some  Figures  On  The  Total  Cost  Of  Our  Air  War  Against North Vietnam
Now  that  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  has  ended,  at
least   temporarily,  we   phoned  the   Pentagon   press    office
for  some  figures  on  what  it  all  cost.   The  Pentagon   tries
to  hide  this  by  lumping  aerial  figures  for  both  Vietnams.
The  figure  which  startled  us  most  was  for  the  total  bomb
tonnages  dropped  on  Vietnam,  North  and  South,  up  until
the   end  of   October.   This   was   given   as   2,948,057   tons.
When   we   asked   for   comparative   figures,   we   were   told
that   the   total   tonnage   dropped  in   World   War   II   was
2,057,244,   the   grand   total   for   both   the   European   and
Asian   theatres.    So   we  dropped  almost   50  percent  more
bombs   on  Vietnam  than  on  all   Eurasia   and  the   Pacific.
The   total   dropped  on  Korea,   North,   and  South,   in   the
Korean   War   was   635,000.    We  have  dropped  five  times
as   much  on  Vietnam.    We   asked   the   Pentagon   how   to
figure   the   cost   and  were  told   about   50  cents   a  pound.
This  means  the  bombs  alone  cost  about  $3  billion.
When  we  asked  whether  most   of   this   was  dropped  on
North   Vietnam,   we   were   told   only   about   a   fifth   was
dropped  on  the  North.   So  that  would  run  to  $600,000,000.
As  of   Oct.  29,  we  had  lost  914  fixed  wing  planes   and
10  helicopters  over  the  North.*   An  attack  or  fighter  plane
averages  about  $2  million,  a  helicopter  about  $250,000.  So
you  can  add  another  $2  billion  for  planes  and  helicopters
lost  in  combat  over  the  North.   That  brings  the  total   to
$2,600,000,000  for   the  bombing  of   the  North.
But  that  is  not  the  whole  story  of  plane  losses.   There
is  another  category  of  air  losses  not  due  to  ground-to-air
or  air-to-air  fire.  This  includes  planes  hit  by  mortar  fire,
damaged  in  accidents,   or  lost  in  Vietnam  through  other
causes.   The  grand  total   of   these   for   both   Vietnams   is
1,198  fixed  wing and  1,214 helicopters.   These  may  be  worth
roughly   another   $2   billion  for   the   fixed   wing   and   an-
other   $300   million   for   the   helicopters.    If   half   of   this
is  allocated   to  the  air  war  against   the  North,  it  would
bring   the   total   cost   of   the   attacks   on   the   North   to
$3,750,000,000.
To   this   must   be   added  the   cost   of   pilots   lost.    The
Pentagon   has   given   out   a   figuri   of   "more   than"   450
pilots   killed  or  missing   in  the   air   war  over  the   North.
The   mean   cost   of   training   a   modern   combat   pilot   is
$450,000.   That  would  add  another  $202 million to  the  cost,
bringing  the  total  up to  almost  $4  billion.   Never  was  more
money  blown  away  in  a  more  wicked   cause.
* The  combat  losses  in  the  South  during  the  same  period
was  315  fixed  wing  planes  and  906  helicopters.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, November 18,1968
Why  Both  South  Vietnamese  Factions  May  Fear  A  Sell-Out
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
Czechs  while  they  let   us   "pacify"   South   Vietnam   in   that
Korean-style  peace  Johnson  has  always  wanted.
In  this  murky  game  Thieu  is  as  fearful   of   a  sell-out  by
Johnson  as  the  NLF  may  be  of  a  sell-out  by  Moscow.   John-
son's   troubles   with   the   South   Vietnamese   regime    recalls
Eisenhower's  with  the   South   Koreans.    The   peace   talks  on
Korea   were  dragged   out   for   two  years  because   the   South
Korean  regime,  with  encouragement  from  the  U.S.  military,
kept   upsetting   the   apple-cart.    Syngman  Rhee,   like   Thieu,
didn't  want  the  war  to  end  until  we  had   reconquered   the
North  for  him,  and  he  exacted  concessions  which  still  keep
U.S.  troops  in  Korea  15  years  after  the  cease-fire,  with   no
peace  treaty  in   sight.   The   Rhee   dictatorship   repressed   all
those  who wanted  a peaceful  settlement,  as the  Thieu  dictator-
ship  does  today.
Ten  Newspapers   Shut  Down
In   Saigon   we   locked    ourselves   in   by  rigging    elections
which  give  die-hard  Catholic  refugees  from  the  North  control
of   an   unrepresentative   legislature   while   majority    Buddhist
and  pro-peace  elements  are  gagged.   In  the  last  few  days  no
less  than  ten   Saigon   papers   have   been   shut   down   or sus-
pended   for   pro-peace   views  while  Truong  Dinh  Dzu, the
peace  candidate  who  came  in  second  in  the  presidential   elec-
tions,  has  been  taken  from  his  Saigon  prison  to  a   notorious
penal  island  as  if  in  fear  that  he  might  escape  and  become
the  leader  of  a  compromise  regime.   Hundreds  of  Buddhists
are  in  prison  for  advocacy  of  peace,  and  only  the  die-hards
are  allowed  to  speak.   Thieu  obviously  feels  so  weak  that  he
thinks  even  sitting  down  at  the  same  table  in  Paris  with  the
NLF  may  fatally  undermine  his  regime   at  home.   He  fears
On  The  U.S. Navy's  Nixon  Gap
'The  Soviet  Union  is  making  a  very  impressive  bid
to  become  the  world's  No.  1  sea-power ...  At  the
end    of    President   Eisenhower's   administration   our
Navy   held  an  unquestioned  superiority  .  .  .  But new
civilian   leaders   of   the   Defense   Department  decided
we  could take  a  breather.  There  was  an  open  discount-
ing  of  the  Soviet  naval  threat  .  .  .  My  administration
.  .  .  will  restore  the  goal  of  a  Navy  second  to  none."
—Nixon's  "submarine  gap" speech  at  Norfolk,   Oct. 2
"Soviet  naval  propaganda has  been  extensively  and
successfully  employed  to  hide  the  fact  of  the  USSR's
very  great  and  potentially  disastrous  qualitative  naval
inferiority  vis-a-vis  the  NATO  naval  forces  .  .  . The
failure  of  Western  publicists  not  only  to  discredit  such
claims  but  to  heap  on  them  the  ridicule  that  they  de-
serve  all  testifies  to  ...     a  fundamentally ill-advised
willingness  to  magnify  the   Soviet   naval  'threat'  out
of   all   proportions  in  order  either  to   produce   sensa-
tional   articles   or  to  justify   larger   naval  appropria-
tions ...  In  no  other  area  does  the  West  have  such
a  commanding superiority  over  the  USSR  as  in  naval
power."
—Soviet  Naval  Strategy,  by  Commander  Robert   W.
Herrick,  U.S.  Navy   (ret.),  published  last  July   by  the
U.S.  Naval   Institute   at   Annapolis   with  a  foreword
by  Admiral  Arleigh  Burke.   Commander  Herrick  was
an  intelligence   officer    and  a  naval  attache  in  Moscow.
his  Popular   Forces  in  this  unpopular  war  may  begin  to  melt
away.
The  No.  1  business  of  a  new  opposition   must  still  be  to
watch  these  tricky  and  precarious   peace  talks.   Even  if  they
don't  break  up,  they  may still  leave  U.S.  troops  bogged   down
indefinitely  as in  Korea,  with  the  danger  of  another  major  war
in  the  Asian  quicksands.
Leo  Huberman  1903-1968
We  record  with  sorrow  that  our  old  friend  Leo  Huber-
man,  co-editor  with  Paul  Sweezy  of  the   Monthly Review
has  died  suddenly  in  Paris.   His  was  a  life  of  happy and
undeviating  devotion.  No  one  surpassed  him  in  clarity  and
grace  as  an  expositor  of  Marxist ideas.   As  an  editor  and
publisher   he   pioneered   in   many   areas,   notably  in  pro-
viding  a  sympathetic  view  of   the  Castro  revolution.   He
earned   an   honored   place   in   the   history   of   American
radicalism  and  made  a  notable  contribution  to  the  labor
movement  during  the  New  Deal  period.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone'*  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The   Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City  ...
..............................  Zip................  State....
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska Ave.,  N.  W., Washington, D. C.  20015
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone'l  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington.   D. C.
An  Independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  In  the  U.S.;  J6  In  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  »20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED