I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968apr29.pdf

============================================================

Covering  Up  the  Truth  About  the Pueblo, P.  4
How  Many  More  Cities  Must  Burn  To  Revive  That  One  Brief  Spark?
"The  Administration had  been  cool  to  the  riot  commis-     after   a  briefing   at  which  the  press  was  told  he  had  shelved
sion's  multi-billion dollar  recommendations,  except  for  the     plans  to  ask  a  joint  session  of  Congress  for  a  big   program
brief   spark  of   interest  after   Dr.  King's  death."                      like   that   urged   by   the  Commission   on  Civil   Disorders   to
—Washington   Post,  April   19,  from   the  Johnson   ranch      deal   with   black   unrest.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
/VT^Mfllt    £A* t £•»/•* iT/-ft/»vTS    *«*_  lA//>y)*3fA|                                ^^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVI,  NO.  9
APRIL  29,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.20  CENTS
Why  Not  Timbuktu  or  Easter  Island?
Lyndon   Johnson   does  not   give  the   impression  of   a  man
eager  to  reach  the  peace   table.   He   seems,  on  the  contrary,
sorry  that  he  ever  brought   the  matter  up.   Little  more  than
a  year  ago  in  his  letter  of  Feb.   6,  1967,   to  Ho   Chi  Minh,
Johnson  suggested  that  peace  talks  might  be  held  in  Moscow.
Now  he  balks  even  at  Pnom  Penh  or  Warsaw.   He  seems  to
have  Walt  Rostow  feverishly thumbing through  the  geography
books  for  places  Hanoi  would  be  most  likely  to  turn   down.
The   presence  of   an  Embassy  and   adequate  communications
are  among  the  conditions  sprouting  up  all  around  Mr.  John-
son's  often   repeated   "anywhere,   any  time".    But   the  latest
batch  of  10  suggestions  are  all  countries  in  which  Hanoi  has
no  Embassy.   And   in  two  of  them  the  only  places  remotely
describable  as cities—Kabul  in  Afghanistan  and  Katmandu  in
Nepal—may  not  even  have  a  telegraph  office.   Only  Timbuktu
or  Easter   Island   could  be  more   exotic.   Lyndon  Johnson  is
willing  to  show  up  anywhere  Ho  Chi  Minh  won't  go.
Negotiation  or  Sporting  Event?
In  that   earlier   letter   to  Ho,   Johnson   suggested   "bilateral
discussions."   Now   he   is  beginning   to  give  out  invitations
wholesale.    Each   invitation   adds   another   obstacle   to   the
choice   of   a   site,   and   if   talks   ever   do   get   underway   the
more  kibbitzers  the  less  the  danger  of  reaching  an  agreement.
One   of   the   newer   conditions   is   adequate   press   facilities.
Johnson  normally  is  not   so  tender   of   the  press.   He   is  no
goldfish-bowl   operator.    When   he   really  wants   to   make  a
deal,  he  gets  his  prospect   alone  and  pulls  down  the  blinds.
In  his  letter  to  Ho  last  year  suggesting  peace  talks  in  Moscow
Johnson  felt  sure  of  rejection  because  Hanoi  had  insisted  all
along  on  complete  and  unconditional  cessation  of   bombings
as a  precondition.   He  must  have  felt  equally  secure  on  March
31  when  he   asked   Hanoi   to  talk  while   bombing  went  on
between   the  17th  and   20th  parallels.   It  must  have  been  a
harrowing    experience    when   this   time   Ho   tricked   him   by
accepting.   The  White  House   may  be  piling   up  conditions
to  protect  it  from  a  similar  surprise  in  the  future.   Johnson
would   like  to  go  on  getting   credit  for  making  peace   offers
so  long  as  he   can  be   sure  nothing   will   come   of   them.
"Everything   is  unclear",  U  Thant  told  the  Associated  Press
as  he   left   New   York   April   20  for   Paris.   This  succinctly
summarizes  the  situation.   I  see  several  significant  strands  as
I  try  to  unravel   what   Johnson   has  been   weaving.    One  is
that  anti-aircraft   defenses   around  Hanoi   and  Haiphong   had
made  bombing  in  that   area   prohibitively   expensive.    Roger
Recipe  For  Race  War
In  the  controversy over  Mayor  Daley's  "shoot  to kill"
order,  one  vital  aspect   needs  emphasis.   Daley  would
make   the   policeman   an  instant   prosecutor,  jury  and
judge.    We  have  courts  to   determine   guilt.    Looting,
even  arson,  are  not  capital  offenses.   It  takes  only  the
slightest   encouragement  to   make   the   police   trigger-
happy   where   blacks   are   concerned.    Adam   Clayton
Powcll  was  right  when  he  said  at  his  Bimini  press  con-
ference  (New  York  Times,  April  20),  "First  we  shoot
to   kill   looters   and  shoot   to   kill   arsonists,    then   we
shoot   to   maim   persons   for   disorderly   conduct,  then
breach  of  the  peace  and  finally  we  shoot  niggers   just
for  being  niggers."   London's  tumultuous  Easter  dem-
onstrations,  including  a  bottle-throwing   at  the   Daily
Mirror   office,   were  contained  without  serious  trouble
by  bobbies  armed  only  with  night  sticks.   Here  police
brutality  has  been  the  immediate precipitant  of  almost
every  black  uprising.  The  quickest  way  to  turn  them
into   full-scale  race  war   is   to   weaken  restraints   on
police  forces   all   too   permeated  by  race  hate.
Hilsman,  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  For  Far  Eastern   Affairs
in   1963-64,   reported  in   the   April  issue  of   Foreign      Affairs
quarterly  that   "as   of   several  months  ago" the   bombing  of
the  North   was  estimated  to  have  cost  the  U.S. $6  billion
"while   the   dollar   value   of   the   facilities   destroyed   in   the
North  is  estimated  to  be  $340  million."   On  this  basis,  Hils-
man  said,  "some   experts  argue  that  an  end  to  the   bombing
might  actually  result  in  a  military  gain  rather  than   a  loss."
Hilsman   said   the   targets   are   few   and    most   of    them
easily  repaired.   He   quotes  one  discouraged  pilot   as  saying,
"The   hell  of  it  is  that  we  fly  through  all  that  flak  for  what?
To  attack  a  two-bit  bridge  that  we've  already  knocked   down
five  or  six  times.   The  damned  center  spans  are  now  made  of
wood,   and  they  put   them  up  again  in  hours."    In  any  case
the  weather  above  the  20th  parallel  has  been  bad;  the  mon-
soon  in  that  area  won't   lift   until  May.   So  in  the   haggling
within  Administration  councils,  it  was  decided   to  limit  the
bombing  to  the  Panhandle  where  there  has  been  little  anti-
aircraft.    As  an  extra  dividend  to  the  hawks,  it  was  decided
to  try  and  do  as  much  bombing  in  that  narrow  coastal  strip
as  had   previously  been   done   in   all   of   North   Vietnam.
The   second   strand   in   the   policy   shift   was  to   borrow   a
favorite  cliche  of  the  Kennedy  brothers  and  propose   to   shift
more  of  the  war  to  the  South  Vietnamese.    Johnson   always
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  29, 1968
{Continued  from  Page  One)
likes   to   steal   the   opposition's  thunder,   and   this   was   the
easiest   way  out   when   confronted   with   Westmoreland's   de-
mand  for  200,000  troops.   This  made  Gen.  Creighton  Abrams
the  logical  candidate  to  succeed  Westmoreland  since  he  has
been   working  with  the   ARVN   forces,  and   has   been   their
advocate  in  asking  for  more  and  better  weapons.*   As  Secre-
tary  Clifford   explained  at  his  press  conference  April  11,  the
ARVN  forces  are  to  be  given  "a  degree  of  preference"   in  the
supply  of   "our   most  modern   weapons"   because  we  want  to
"work  ourselves  into  a  posture,  where  the  South  Vietnamese
will  take  over  the  war."
Nothing   Learned   in  7  Costly  Years
This  is  really   clutching  at  a  straw.   There   wouldn't  be  a
half   million   U.S.   troops   in   South   Vietnam   if   the   Saigon
ruling   clique  over   the   past   decade  hadn't   demonstrated   its
utter  political  and  military  incapacity.  They  themselves   know
it.   "We  are  not  going  to  press  for  real  all-out  mobilization,"
' one  Senator  blurted  out  during  the  new  draft  law  debate  in
the   Saigon   legislature   (Washington   Post,   April   18),    "We
have   to   appease   American   public   opinion   by   showing   we
are  trying  to  do  something."    A  day  after  Robert   Kennedy
said  that  if  elected  President  he  "would  try  to  bring  Ameri-
can  troops   home  and   substitute  South  Vietnamese  soldiers",
Peter   Braestrup   reported    from    Saigon   (Washington    Post,
April  15),  "few  U.S.  or  South  Vietnamese  military  men  see
this  as  a  practical  proposition."    He  reported  that  if  the   U.S.
troops  pulled  out,  the  ARVN  forces  would  have  to  abandon
the  five  northern  provinces  including  Hue  and  Danang   "just
to  hold  their  own  further  South."   This  realistic  if   gloomy
estimate  illustrates the  continued  and  wondrous  capacity  of  the
U.S.  government  to  adopt  policies which  a  substantial  portion
of  its  own  military  and  diplomatic  bureaucracy privately  think
make  no  sense.
Nevertheless   this  decision  to  shift   the  burden  of  the  war
to  the  South  Vietnamese   must  have  decisive  impact  on   the
third   strand   of   policy—to  make  another   try  at  winning  by
peace  talks  what  the  U.S.  has  been  unable  to  win  by  military
* From  a  different     point   of  view   we  can't  see  much   sense
in  putting  a   World   War   II   tank   General  into  command  of
a  war  that  calls  for   political   finesse.
Immobile  As   Ever
Q.  Premier Nguyen  Van   Loc  of  South  Vietnam  has
made   another  South   Vietnamese  statement   opposing
a  coalition  government.   I'd  like  to  know  if  the  state-
ment  that  we  were  read  here  on  December  8  in  which
we   announced   our   opposition  to   the   imposition  of
any  coalition  government  on  South  Vietnam  and  said
that   we   oppose   any   proposal  which   would   turn  the
Government   of   South   Vietnam  over   to   the   National
Liberation   Front—whether   or   not   that   is   still   our
policy?       A.  Yes.
Q.  Could  I  go  a  step  further  and  ask  if  the   Secre-
tary's   sfatement   on   January   15—and   I   quote  him:
"The   future   of   South  Vietnam  could  not   be  decided
without   full   participation  of   the   legally   constituted
government   of    South   Vietnam."    Is   that    still   our
policy?       A.   Yes.
—State   De-fit.   Press  Briefing,   April   17.
means,  and  that  is  an   "independent"   non-Communist   South
Vietnam.
Johnson's   new  "peace"   offer   and  his   "abdication"   served
to  disarm  the  opposition   and  throw  the  peace  movement  off
balance.   (McCarthy  has  proven  much  smarter  and  abler  than
Kennedy   in   seeing   through   it.)     The   best   guess   is   that
he  did  not  expect  Hanoi   to  accept  his  offer,   and  this  would
give   him   a  chance  to   have   both   credit   for   a  peace   move
and   later   an   excuse   (when   the  monsoon   ends)   to   resume
full   bombing   of   the  North   if   he   wants   to.    Hanoi   by  its
qualified  acceptance  put  the  ball  back  into  his  court.   But  how
can  Johnson   pursue  the   policy  of  handing   over   the  war   to
the   South   Vietnamese,   how   can  he  get   Thieu   to   mobilize
more  men,  if  at  the  same time  he  agrees  with  Hanoi's   demand
that  all  bombing  end  before  peace  talks  begin?
As   I   reconstruct   the   scenario  of   events,  Thieu   must  ask
Washington   for  two  or  three  years  leeway  to  prove  that   he
can  take  over   the  war.   To  stop  the  bombing   and   enter   on
talks  now  would  pull  the  rug  from  under   the  Saigon   mili-
tary  regime  and  Mr.  Johnson's  hopes.  A  coalition  or  a  neutral-
ist   regime   would   seem   to  Johnson   that   "fake   solution"   he
says  he  will  never  accept.   So  Johnson   must  stall  as  long  as
he   can  before  going   to   the   conference   table,   and   seize   on
every  possible  way  to  delay  a  conclusion  when  he  gets  there.
If   there  are  no  talks  or  the   prospect   of   talks  breaks   down
The  One  Way  In  Which  Our  Troops  and  the  South  Vietnamese Army  Are  Alike
"We  thought   you  were  the   ice  cream  coming  in,"   the
American   corporal  shouted   in  a  disappointed  tone   above
the   roar  of   the   helicopter  engines   as   we   landed   at   the
old  French  fort—a  hilltop  landing  zone  commanding  High-
way   Nine   between   Khe   Sanh   and   the   Laotian   frontier.
Everyone  here  had  heard  vague  reports  about   proposed
peace   talks   between   Hanoi  and   Washington.    There   was
no   interest   in   where  the   talks   would  be   held   or   what
decision  reached.  "Charlie"—the  Viet  Cong—"can  have  the
whole  country  so  far   as   I'm  concerned,"  a  young   soldier
said,  adding that  the  theme  song  is,  "We Wanna  Go  Home."
The   lack   of   interest   in   the   course   of   the   war   is   in
strong  contrast  to  that  of  American  troops  in  World  War
II.   Men  were  then  deeply  interested  in  why  and  how  they
were   fighting;   this  is  hot  so  today.   Of  course,   there   are
many   exceptions  .  .  .
However,   there   is   among   every   group   of   officers   and
NCO's—especially  among  the  Marines—a  hawkish  set  who
would  like  to  bomb  more  villages,   burn  more  forests  and
napalm  more  mountain-sides.  They  resent  criticism  and  the
fact  that  the   public  in  the   United  States  is  not  100  per
cent   behind  the  war.
—Claire  Hollingworth,  London  Daily  Telegraph,  April  18
I   lived  in   Vietnam  for   thirty   months   and   became   ac-
quainted  with  many   Vietnam  Air   Force,   and  Army  men.
And   almost   without   exception   they   have   no   heart   for
this  war.   So  many  of   them  have  told  me,  Why  should  I
fight.   If  I  get  killed  my  Commander will  even  pocket  the
insurance  money  due  my  family.   Why  fight  for  men  who
are  getting   rich  by  selling  American  material  to  the  Viet
Congs.   The  home  I  lived  in   while  in   Saigon   rented   for
more  than  three  hundred  per  month.   The  Vietnam   official
who  owned  the  home  told  me  it  cost  him  sixty  five  hun-
dred  to   build.   Of  course  the   rent   was   paid  for   by    U.S.
taxpayers.
—From   the   letter   to   Sen.    Gruening   released   by   the
Senate  Subcommittee  on  Foreign  Aid  Expenditures,  which
charged   that  Ky   had   been  involved   in   opium   smuggling.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  29, 1S6S
too  early,  his  popularity  will  go  down  again  and  his  credi-
bility  gap  widen  as  never  before.   This  is  the  bind  in  which
Hanoi  has  put  him.
The  Always  Victorious  Press   Releases
But   Johnson   is  no   Joshua  to   bid   time  stand   still.    The
shadows  of  three  crises  lie  ahead.   One  is  military.   The   U.S.
military   are  doing  splendidly  again—in   the  field  of   public
relations.   Khe  Sanh  is  advertised  as  a  victory  for   airpower
and  "Operation   Complete   Victory"  (What  will  they  call  the
next   one?    Operation   Even   More    Complete   Victory?)   is
sweeping  the  enemy  victoriously  away  from   Saigon.   But   the
steady  resumption of  shelling  day  after  day  at  Khe  Sanh  indi-
cates  the  enemy  didn't  withdraw  very  far  in  that  area.    And
on   the  night  of   April   16,  for   the   first  time  since  Tet,   the
Vietcong   bombarded   a   South   Vietnamese   Reserve    Officers
School  on  the  outskirts of  Saigon,  killing  four  and   wounding
30   of   the   Saigon   military;   there   were   also   heavy  civilian
casualties  in  the  adjoining quarters  for  officers'   families.  This
attack   took   place  not   far   from   the  powerful   U.S.   air   base
at   Bien  Hoa   and   in   the   very  heart  of   the   area   supposedly
cleaned   up   by  "Operation   Complete  Victory".
One  of  the  most  experienced  war  correspondents  in   South
Vietnam,   Francois   Nivolon,    in   reporting   this   attack    (Le
Figaro,  April  18)   said   "it   has  proved   anew,   and  this   will
surprise  no  one  here,  that  it  is  almost  impossible   to  assure
the  security of  the  capital of  South  Vietnam  and  its  environs."
M.  Nivolon   recalled   that   after   the   Tet   offensive    represen-
tatives  of  the  U.S.  military  command  estimated  that  it  would
take   ten   divisions   absolutely  to   guarantee   the   security   of
Saigon.   That  is  roughly  half  the  strength  of  the  U.S.   Army.
It   is  clear   that   the   enemy  can  still   strike   almost   anywhere
he   chooses   and   that   surprises   may  lie  ahead.    One   cannot
exclude  a  new  offensive   strong  enough   to  unseat  the   Saigon
regime,   and   replace   it  with   Buddhist   and   other   non-Com-
munist  elements  willing   to  negotiate   peace.
Two  more  crises  loom  up.   One  is  reflected  in  the   tightest
money  market   since   1929;   it  threatens   to  throw   the   econ-
omy  into  a  recession  here  and  a  depression   abroad.    It   is
making  a  conservative  Congress   even  more  stingy  just   when
the  poverty  progarm   must  be  stepped   up.   This  brings  us  to
the  third  and  most  important  of  the  crises—that  represented
It's  Meant  After  All  To  Disable  People
In   Utah's  desolate,   wind-blown   Skiill  Valley,  Army
bulldozers  dug  trenches  late  last  month,  soldiers   from
the   Dugway   Proving   Ground   tossed   in   the   carcasses
of   about   6,000   sheep,   and  the   'dozers   shoveled   back
the  earth.   In  the  small  dining  room  of  46-bed  Tooele
Valley   Hospital,  over   the   Stansbury   Mountains  and
50  miles  to  the  east,   a  doctor  taking  a  coffee  break
heard  the  news  and  commented:  "The  sheep's  worries
are  over.   Now   I'd  start   worrying  about  people."
Added  surgeon  Kelly  H.  Gubler,  the  hospital's  chief
of  staff:  "It's   ridiculous  for  the  Army  to  deny  that  a
nerve-disabling  chemical definitely  caused  the  animals'
death,  or  to  softpedal  the  human  health  hazard.   Some
of  the  civilians  who  work  at  Dugway  live  in   Tooele.
They   are  instructed   to  go  to  Dugway  for   treatment
if   they   become  sick,   day   or  night,   but   I've   treated
workers  in  the   past   for   an  overdose  of   anticholines-
terase  agents,  even  though  the  Army  denied  they  were
contaminated  at   the   proving  ground."
—Medical   World   News,  April  lit.
by   the   Poor   Peoples   March   on   Washington    which   begins
a  week   from   now.
From  a  rational  point   of   view,   this  represents  a  national
opportunity.     It   is   based   on   non-violence  and   it   seeks   to
unite   the   black   and  white   poor.    Its  triumph   would   be  a
real  blow  to  that  "divisiveness"  which  has  become   Johnson's
favorite  new  theme.   From  a  black  point  of  view,  this  is  the
first  major   effort  to  help  the  Negro  poor.   The  new  housing
bill  passed  in  the  wake  of,  and  at  the  cost,  of  Martin  Luther
King's  life  will  only  help   the  well-to-do  Negro.   The  poor
blacks  riot  and  the  better-off   benefit.   Now  for  the  first  time
an   Economic   Bill   of   Rights  will   be  demanded   to  give   the
poor  of  both  races  jobs  and .minimum  income.   As  the  town
fills  up   and   shanty-towns   rise   in   the   parks   to   house   the
demonstrators,  friction  and  frustration  will  grow  to  dangerous
heights.    It  will  be  a  miracle  if   some  incident  does  not  set
off   a  new  wave  of  rioting.   The   American  system  is  caught
in   its  own  rigidities  and   needs   fresh   leadership   to  survive.
Johnson  is  still  giving  priority   to  the  war  in  Vietnam.   So
long   as   he   does,   we   cannot   hope   to   meet   at   home   the
gravest   confrontation   since   the   Civil   War.
April   22
It's  Not  Too  Early  To  Begin Examining  That  Blank  Check  We  Gave  NATO
The  testimony  last  week  to  the  Committee   on  Foreign
Affairs   by   NATO's   Supreme   Allied   Commander  Europe,
General   Lyman   K.   Lemnitzer,   left   in   doubt   the    precise
form  and  extent   of  United  States  commitments  under  the
North  Atlantic  Treaty ...  In  light   of  the  difficulty  we
have  encountered  in  attempting  to   fulfill   what  the  Presi-
dent   considers   to   be   a   commitment  to   South   Vietnam
under   SEATO   and   the   extent    of   our   military    support
to  48  nations  under  the  Foreign  Assistance   Program   .  .  .
I   strongly   urge   that   General   Lemnitzer   be  recalled   for
further  questioning.  .  .  .
I   further   request   that   this   testimony    occur   in   open
sessions  of  the  Committee.  Among  the  questions  to  which
adequate  answers  have  not  been   provided   are  these:
1.  In  the  event  that  another  NATO  nation  is  determined
by   our   President   to   be  under  attack,  does   he   presently
have   constitutional   authority   to   assign    forces    for   the
immediate  use  of   the  NATO  integrated  command?
2.  If  so,  does  our  government  consider  this  authority   to
be   conditional  or  limited  in   any   respect?     For   example,
must   the   country   under   attack   first   request    assistance?
3.  At  what  point,  if  any,  in  the  application  of  military
power  to  defend  a  NATO  nation,  would  the  President   be
required  to  secure  formal  approval  of  the  Congress?    Be-
fore  ground  forces  in  addition to  those  presently  in  Europe
are  sent?    Before  tactical  nuclear  weapons  are  used?    Be-
fore  strategic  nuclear  weapons  are  used?
4.  Does  the   President   have  authority   to  commit   U.  S.
forces  if  other  NATO  nations  .  .  .  fail  to  cooperate?
An  item  in  the  German  Press  Review   reveals  a  differ-
ent   kind   of   concern   .   .   .   Observing   that   the   U.   S.   is
"protecting"   South  Vietnam  largely   by'  destroying   it,   the
article  questioned  the  value  of  similar  U.  S.  protection  for
Germany.   Especially   significant  in  this   case   is   the   fact
that   Article   V  of   the   NATO  Treaty,   unlike   Article   IV
of  the  SEATO  Treaty,   lacks  the  safeguard  that  action  on
the   territory   of   an   ally   should   not   be   taken   except   at
the  invitation  of  such  an  ally.
—Letter  from   Rep.  Paul   Findley    (E.-IU.)   to   Chairman
Morgan   of  the  House  Foreign   Affairs    Committee,   April   9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stme's  Weekly,  April  29, 1968
An  Appeal  to  the  Peace-Minded  to  Help  the  Reelection  of  Morse  and  Gruening
How  the  U.S.  Press  Covered  Up  New  Revelations  About  the  Pueblo
AMERICAN   NEWSPAPER   editors   seem   to   be   a   timid lot.
Their   freedom  of   information   report  to  their  latest  annual
meeting   called   the   Pueblo   affair   "a   coverup  job". But   a
few  days  earlier  their  papers   cooperated   in  covering  up   the
revelation   on   the   Huntley-Brinkley   show   April   16  that   the
Pueblo  was  only   71/2  miles  from   North   Korea's   coast,   well
within  its  12-mile  limits,  before   its  seizure.   When   Defense
and  CIA  were  shown  photostats  of  the  Pueblo's   log  before
the  broadcast,  neither  denied  their  authenticity.  Yet  we  only
saw  the  story  next  morning  in  one  paper,  the  Baltimore  Sun.
The    London    and   Paris   papers    all   gave    it   a   big    play,
but  it  was  hard  to  find  in  the  U.S.   press.
THE  LONDON   TIMES  April   18  even  carried   a  New    York
Times   News   Service  dispatch   saying   that   some   of    these
photostats   had  been  given  to  the  New  York   Times.   But  they
did  not  appear  in  the  New  York  paper's  own  news  columns.
On  April- 20  the  New   York   Times   did  run  an  editorial  re-
ferring  to  "the  photographs  circulated  by  Pyongyang   purport-
ing  to  show  Pueblo   log  entries  within  North  Korea's   terri-
torial  waters  .  .  ."   At  press  conference   April  17  questions
about   the   Huntley-Brinkley   revelations   elicited   the    usual
equivocal   replies.     The    State   Department    spokesman    was
asked   whether  it  would   make  public  those   monitored   mes-
sages   the   government   keeps   alluding  to   as  proof   that   the
Pueblo  was not  in  territorial  waters.   "Well,  I  don't  want  to
anticipate  that,"  was  the  spokesman's   answer,  "but I  don't
want  to  rule  it  out  either,  for  the  present."   This  unwilling-
ness   to   produce   supposedly    conclusive   evidence   was   also
widely  unreported.  •
THIS  Is  A  GOOD  TIME  to  recall  that  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  who
is  in  charge  of  investigating  the  murder  of  the  Rev.  Martin
Luther  King,  delighted  white  racists  in  November   1964  by
calling  him  "the   most  notorious  liar  in  the   country."    Not
even  after  his  death  did  Hoover  offer  an  apology   .  .  .  Can't
•a  panel  of  distinguished  American  political  experts  alert  the
U.S.  public  now,  while  it  can  still  be  avoided,  that   a  new
Vietnam  is  brewing  in  Europe  under  the  Greek   dictatorship
we  support? ...  A  portent  not  to  be  missed  is  that Majority
Leader   Mansfield  joined   Gruening   and   Nelson   in    voting
The  Semantic  Wonders  of  U.S.  Foreign  Policy
My  next  word  is   "freedom."  Formerly  having  ref-
erence  to  the  absence  of  arbitrary  political   power  in
a  society,  the  term  is  now  defined  more  explicitly   as
the. political   condition  of  people   who  are  not  ruled  by
Communists.   Thus,  when  we  speak  of  "free   societies",
we   may  be  referring  to  such  peoples  as  the  British,
the  French,  the  Swedes,  the  Paraguayans,  the  Greeks,
the  Spaniards  and  the  Haitians.   There  are,  of  course,
varying  degrees   of   freedom  in  different  societies,   its
extent  being  measured  by  the  fervor  of  a  government's
hatred  of  Communism.  We  have  as  our  authority  on
this  point  no  less  a  semanticist   than  the  distinguished
Minority   Leader  of   the   Senate   [Dirksen]  who,  when
asked  if  he  thought  there   was  a  free   government   in
Greece,  replied  "Yes,  I  do.   Just  because  they   have  a
military  junta  for  a  specific  purpose  for  a  little  while
to  shove  back  the  Communist  influence  .  .  ."
—From   Senator   Fulbright's   delightful    address   on
Political  Semantics  to  the  American  Society   of   News-
paper   Editors,  Washington,  D.C.,  April  17.
against  the  new  defense  authomation  bill.   Morse  was  paired
against  it.
Hat's   Off:    To  Chairman  John  W.   Macy  of  the  U.S.   Civil
Service  Commission  for  declaring  that  the  Court  of   Appeals
decision  in  the  Panama  case  was  a  specialized  ruling  and  does
not   apply  to   the   circulation  of   general   anti-war   statements
by  U.S.   employees.   The  Panama  case  involved  a  policeman
who  was  asked  not  to  protest  publicly  the   decision   to   hire
Panamanian  citizens  on  that  hitherto  "lily-white"   force  in  the
tense   situation   after   the  1964 riots.   The  Court  upheld  his
discharge  and  said  freedom  of   speech   for   Federal    employes
was  restricted  in  such  circumstances.
SOS:  Morse  and  Gruening,  the  only  two  Senators
who  have  opposed  the  Vietnamese  war  from  the  be-
ginning,   need   help  badly   in  their  reelection   cam-
paigns.   Neither   are   millionaires.   They    deserve
emergency  support  of  all  kinds  and  you  can  reach
them  c/o  Senate  Office  Building,  Washington,   D.C.
Their  defeat  would  be  a  catastrophe  for  the   peace
movement.
We'll  Send  Free  Somple  Copies  of  This  Issue to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed   Envelopes
FOR   STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (RandonVHouse)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished   [3
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City  .
..............................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
                    4/29
/
68
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20015
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage  Paid   at   Washington.  D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington,  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.: $6  in  Canada:
SIO  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED