I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968oct21.pdf

============================================================

The Morality Play  By  The  Catonsville Nine, P.  2
First  Glad  Tidings  in  This  Election
"LeMay   Charges   Nixon   Plans  Left-Wing   Cabinet."—Washington  Post,  October 9
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
l\Tsw*i    iJaM  hi-irlsi/)s1    t<*-.\\/00tQlA\                         ^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVI, NO.  21
OCTOBER   21,  1968
'<"      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
The  Wilful  Blindness  of  McGeorge  Bundy
McGeorge Bundy's  speech  at De  Pauw University is a victory
for   the  peace  movement  and  a  justification   for   those  of  us
who  will  vote  for  neither  Nixon  nor  Humphrey.  It  is a victory
in  that  one  of  the  chief  architects  of  our  Vietnamese  policy
now  says  we  must  end  the  bombing  of  the  North   and  de-
escalate   the   American   military   effort,   irrespective   of   what
Hanoi  does.   The  speech  is  also  a  justification  for  the  election
cop-out  because this  Republican, who  was  in  charge  of  foreign
policy  at  the  White  House   for  Kennedy  and  Johnson,   this
symbol  of  the  bi-partisan  pro-war  Establishment,  sketches  out
a   new   consensus   for   a   new   Administration   which   would
neither  get  us  out  of  the  Southeast  Asian  quagmire  nor  fore-
stall  more  Vietnams  elsewhere.
No  Shame.   No  Regret.   No  Second  Thoughts.
The   logic   of   Bundy's  position   is  withdrawal.   The   man
who   advised   Johnson   three  years  ago  to   bomb   the   North
now  says  the  bombing  is  futile   and  that  the  war  cannot  be
won  no  matter  how  much  we  escalate  it.   He  says  an  annual
cost  of  $30  billion,  a  yearly  toll  of   10,000   American  lives,
"the  increasing  bitterness  and  polarization  of  our  people"  and
"the  growing  alienation  of  a  generation  which  is  the  best  we
have had" are  "now plainly  unacceptable.   So we  must  not  go
on  as  we  are  going."   But  then  he  turns  around  and  says  that
"we  should  cut  back  —  but  we  need  not  and  should  not  give
up."    This  man  who  was  so  arrogant  and  smug  three  years
ago   in   rejecting   the   anti-war  protests   of   his   old   academic
colleagues   is  still  unprepared   to  change  our  basic  course  or
to  admit  any  mistakes.   But  until  those  mistakes  are  clearly
faced  we  are  bound  to  repeat  them.   He  even  reminds  those
who  favor  the  bombing   and  escalation  that  his  own  shift  of
position   does   not   spring   from   "moral   outrage  or  political
hostility   to   the   objective."    This   is  a  confession   of   moral
callousness  and  wilful  political   blindness.
This   is  a  preview  of  the  best  we  can  expect   from  either
candidate.   It  is  not  good   enough.    Bundy  wants  us  to  cut
back  but  to  get  ready  to  keep  troops  indefinitely  in  Vietnam.
He  proposes   the  withdrawal  of   100,000   to   150,000   troops
in  1969 with  a  saving  of  $5  to  $8  billion,  and  a  comparable
reduction  in  1970.  These  puny  half-measures  will  not   free
the  funds  or  moral  energies  we  need  to  meet  our  racial  and
urban  crises.  The  Pentagon  can  swallow  up  those  few  billions
saved  and  grab  for   more  on  the  excuse  that  we  must  give
our  fighting  men, especially  since  their  numbers  have  been
reduced,  the  very  best  and  newest  equipment.   Bundy  would
have   us  dig  in   for   a  long  war  by  military   reforms   which
The  Men  to  Vote  For
We   welcome  McCarthy's   refusal   to   endorse  Hum-
phrey  and  hope  his  endorsement  of   Muskie  does  not
portend   a   slide   back   into   camp. Muskie's   colorless
record   in   the   Senate   was   that   of   a   loyal   Johnson
hack.    We   need   McCarthy   badly   to   save   as   many
Democratic  liberals  as  possible  from  the  tidal  wave  of
abstention   and   alienation.   A   Senate   without   Morse
or  Gruening,  the  two  firmest  peace advocates,  would be
a  disaster;  they  are  poor  men  and  need  help  urgently.
Gruening  was  defeated  by  a  cross-over  and  may  win
on   a   write-in.    We   strongly    urge   the    election   of
O'Dwyer   in   New   York,   and  such  Senate   liberals   as
McGovern   in   South  Dakota,  Clark   in  Pennsylvania,
Fulbright  in  Arkansas, Ribicoff  in  Connecticut, Nelson
in  Wisconsin  and  Church  in  Idaho.   Clark   in  Illinois,
Gilligan   in   Ohio,   Cranston   in  California,  Hughes   in
Iowa,  Eagleton  in  Missouri,  Mathias  in  Maryland  and
Collins  in  Florida  also  deserve  support.   These  could
become  the  nucleus  for  a  new  and  stronger  opposition
to  war  and  militarism in  the  next   four  years.
would  make it  possible  to  keep  combat  troops  there  for  longer
than  the  present  12-month  rotation.    Yet  he  seriously   offers
this  mishmash as  a  means  by  which  a  new  Administration can
"reknit   the   essential   relation   of   confidence   between   itself
and  the  nation."
To  hang  around   in   Southeast   Asia   is  to  invite  trouble.
Without  a  fundamental  revision  of  policy,  we  will   continue
to  bleed  away  our  youth  and  substance  in  this  trap  of   our
own   making.   Bundy  still   wants   an   American   protectorate
over   Southeast  Asia.    The   climax  of   his   folly   lies   in   his
assertion  that  "in  a  policy  of  cutback  there  is  still  ample  room
for   steadfast   support   of   our   friends,   and   ample   guarantee
against   defeat   imposed  by  the  external   aggressors ....
ample  demonstration for  all  who  live  in  the  area  not  only  that
we  keep  our  commitments  but  that  we  know  how  to  change
our   course  with   care   and   clarity."    Those   conceited   words
will  be  read  with  derision  in  Saigon,   Bangkok   and  Taipei.
What   if   the  withdrawal  leads   to  a  series   of    Dienbienphus
as  the  guerrillas  overwhelm  our  shrunken  enclaves?   What  if
the  Saigon  regime  collapses  as "our friends"  head  for  Switzer-
land  with  the  money  our  troops  have  spent  in  their  bars  and
bordelloes?  What  if  Thailand  erupts  into  a  second  Vietnam?
Bundy's  mini-imperialism is  a  recipe  for  new  disasters.
All  this  springs  from  Bundy's  unwillingness. to  reassess  a
past  for  which  he  bears  so  much  responsibility.   That  is  why
we  find  him  saying that  though  "the burden  of  this  war  must
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 21, 1968
The  Catonsville  Nine  Used  The  Special  Forces  Handbook  To  Make  Their   Own   Napalm
They  Pleaded  Guilty  Of Burning  Paper  Instead  of  Children
In  the  days  of   the  New   Deal   the  WPA  had   something
called   Living  Theatre.   Living  theatre  is  what  radicals  have
begun   to   produce.    One   example   is   the   black   comedy  a
wild  horde  of  hippies   and  yippies  wove  around   the   House
Un-American   Activities   Committee,   driving   it   to   suspend
its  hearings  into  the   Chicago   peace  demonstrations.    Those
shopworn   inquisitors  did   not  know  what  to   do  with  wit-
nesses   who   acted   out  the   procedure's   essential  irrationality.
Another   example   is   the   Morality   Play   the   Catonsville
Nine   have   been   enacting.    They   staged   their   first   act   on
May   17  when   they  entered   a  local  draft   board   in  Catons-
ville,  Md.,  and  burned  up  its  files,  with  napalm  they  manu-
factured  themselves  from  a  recipe  in  the  U.S.  Special  Forces
Handbook.   "Our  apologies,  good  friends,"  said  Father  Daniel
Berrigan,   the   poet-priest   who   was   one   of   their   leaders,
' "for  the  fracture  of  good  order,  the  burning  of  paper  instead
of  children."
Legalistic  Defenses  Avoided
The   second   act  was  in  a  Federal  court  in  Baltimore  last
week   before   Chief   Judge   Roszel   C.  Thomsen.    The   Nine
are  all  Catholic,  clergy  and  lay.   Their   types  are  recognizable
through  history:  the   stuff   of  which   saints  are  made,   moved
by   a   deeper   sensitivity   to  human   suffering.    They    joyfully
admitted   their   guilt,   like   early   brethren   preparing   for   the
lions.    No   legalisms  spoiled   the  second  act  curtain.
The   government,   in  its  own  dramaturgy,  picked   a  black
man  to  prosecute  them.   First  Assistant  U.S.  Attorney Arthur
G.  Murphy  said  the  morality  of  the  war  was  not   at   issue,
though   he  admitted  in  passing  that  a  reasonable  man  might
think   it   illegal.    The   issue,  he  said,  was  simply  destroying
property   and   obstructing   the   law.    The   chief   defense   at-
torney,  William  Kunstler,  insisted  "The   trial  is  not  as  simple,
.any   more  than   those   of   Jesus   and   Socrates  were   simple."
Judge   Thomsen,   like  a  certain   forerunner,  kept   washing
his   hands   of   the   affair   by  allowing   the   defendants  extra-
ordinary  latitude  in  explaining   why  they  did   it.   The   two
most   wondrous   characters   among   the   Nine,   the   ex-priest
Thomas   Melville   and  his   wife,   the   ex-nun,  were  even  al-
lowed   to   touch   on   the   sufferings   they   saw   in   Guatemala
which  ended  by  driving  them  into  the  arms  of  the  guerrillas
and  out  of   the   Church.    Their   quiet  sobriety  is  in   strange
contrast  to  the  traumas  that  so  transformed  their  lives.
The   trial   drew   some   2,000   zealots   from   all   over   the
country.   The   deepest   appeal   of  the  spectacle   for  them  was
To  Strike  A  Blow  for  Soviet   Freedom
We  urge  old  friends   of  the  Soviet  Union  to  boycott
the  coming   Embassy  reception  on  the   anniversary  of
the   Bolshevik   Revolution   as  an  act  of  solidarity   with
the  five   Russian   dissenters   who  have  just   been  sen-
tenced  in  Moscow   to   prison   and  exile  for  a  5-minute
demonstration   against  the  invasion   of  Czechoslovakia.
We    propose    a    public   statement    by   those    invited.
Friends  of  peace  and  freedom   and  socialism—all  three
damaged   by ° Soviet   actions—should   refuse   to   break
bread  and  drink  vodka  with  those  who  represent  these
betrayals.   Two  aspects  of   these  trials  are  especially
offensive.    One  is   the   packing   of   the   courtroom   by
toughs  from  the  secret  police  whose   assignment  is  to
jeer  at  the  defendants  and  call  for  harsher  sentences.
The  other  is  that  the  Soviet  Union  has  reached  a  point
where   Czarist-style  exile  is   regarded   as   milder   than
terms   in   the    prison    labor    camps—which   we   were
assured  some  years  ago  had  been  abandoned!   To  those
old  FSU's  who  are  still  under   the  influence   of  Stalin
era   delusions,    we    recommend    Solzhenitsyn's   novel
"The    First   Circle."    In   this   vast   canvas   of   Soviet
prison  life,   every   aspect  of  Soviet  reality  is   reflected.
In  pages  worthy  of  Gorky  or  Dostoyevsky,  we  can  see
that  the  Soviet  Union   has  itself   become   a  prison,  and
that  in  the  terrible  dialectic  of  its  development,  only
the  imprisoned  are  free.    "Not   everything  in  our  lives
is   so   black,"   a   prisoner   cries   at   a   midnight     get-
together,  "an  exchange  of  free  thoughts  without  fear,
without  concealment—we  didn't  have  that  in  freedom."
Once   jailed   for   long   terms,   a   man   need   no   longer
fear   that   network   of   informers   which   haunts   "free"
Soviet   society.    This   is   what   the   Czechs   fear.    This
is   what   the   five  dissenters   protested.   One  of   them,
a  student  poet,  said  in  Court,   "For   three  minutes  on
Red  Square   I  felt  free.   I  am  glad  to  take  your  three
years   [prison  sentence]   for  that."   These  five  spoke
for.  the  silenced.   They  represent  the  stirrings  of   re-
sistance   on   which   freedom   under   socialism   depends.
The  least   we   can  do   for   them   is   make  displeasure
felt  by  a  social  boycott.
in  Father  Daniel  Berrigan's  testimony  when  he  said,  "I  was
in  danger  of  verbalizing  my  moral  impulses  out  of   existence.
I  sought   a  way  to  defy   the  state  even  if  I  was  too  old   to
defy   the   draft."    Of   course  they  were   found   guilty.    Not
to  acquiesce  in  murder,  the  chief  and  most  ancient  business
of  the  State,  is  clearly  subversive.  On  November  8  they  will
be  sentenced.   The  third  and  longest   act  will  be  when   they
and  their  supporters  use  the  appeals  to  put  the  show  on  the
road.   We   cannot  think  of  a  finer  way  to  stir  the   sluggish
conscience  of  the  nation.
Vietnam  and the  Ghetto—A  Warning Parallel  By  One Of Our First  Big  City Black Mayors
"In   the   last   five   years   the   image   of   black   men   as
victims  of  repression  has  been  replaced  in  the  public   mind
by   black   men   as   assailants   and   aggressors—the   black
Viet   Cong  in  the  nation's  midst.   Police  agencies   around
the  country  are  stockpiling  tear   gas,    grenades,  shotguns,
and   other   diverse   types   of   anti-riot,   anti-rebellion   and
anti-crime  equipment.   In  other  words,  the  nation  is  stead-
ily   moving   toward   a   military   solution   of   a   social    dis-
organization,    just    as    the    United    States    in    Vietnam
stumbled  into  an  all-out  war.   The  great  fallacy  of  politics
and   political   opinion   in   1968   is   that   police   action   can
prevent  or  can  control  disorder  in  the  cities.   But  America
has  no  more  the  ability  to  conduct  a  successful  pacification
program   in  the  ghettoes  of  its  cities  than  in  Vietnamese
hamlets.   Either  the  separate  black  and  white  communities
become   one,   or  our  cities  will  become  shambles,  the   black
and   white   ghettoes   armed   camps   and   the   business    dis-
tricts  a  no  man's  land."
—Mayor   Richard   Hatcher   of   Gary,   Indiana,   speaking
at  De Pauw  University,  October 11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 21,1968
How  the  State  Department's  Efforts  on  Behalf   of  Standard  Oil  Boomeranged
The  Story  Which  Lies  Hidden  Behind  the  Peruvian  Military  Take-Over
We   must   confess  we   find   some   cause   for   cheer   in   the
Peruvian   coup   d'etat.    The   military  have   always  been   U.S.
pets   in   Peru   as  elsewhere   in   Latin  America;  in   this   latest
coup   dog  bit  man  —   the  military  turned   against  us.    And
in  a  way  the   State  Department   finds   especially  painful   but
which  will  give  satisfaction  elsewhere  in  Latin  America   —
by  cancelling  a  Standard  Oil   concession.   The   protection   of
this  concession  has  long  been  a  major  aim  of  U.S.  policy  in
Peru,  and  Secretary  Rusk  expressed   "concern"  over  it  at  an
impromptu  press  conference  Oct.  9-
A  Century  Old  Scandal
This  concession  has  been  a  focus  of  protest   for  a  century
or  more.    It   was  originally  obtained   by  British  interests   in
1826.    They  obtained   subsoil  exploration   rights  for   10  per-
tenencias  (about  100  acres  all  told)  for  a  nominal  sum.   An
engineering   survey  in   1914   disclosed   that  they  had  actually
been   utilizing   not   10   but   41,614   pertenencias   (or    about
416,140  acres).    The  ensuing  scandal  has  haunted   Peruvian
politics   ever  since.   It  did  not  die  down  when   International
Petroleum   Company,  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  Standard
Oil   of  New   Jersey,   took   over   these   huge  British  holdings
in  1926.   They  produce  80  percent  of  Peru's  crude  oil  and  90
percent   of  its  natural   gas.
The  State  Department   may  have  precipitated  the  take-over
it  now  deplores.   Frederick  B.  Pike  in  his  recently   published
The   Modern   History   of   Peru   (Praeger)    says  the   reformist
President   Belaunde  whom  the  military  have  just   overthrown
was hampered  by the  effort  "of  the  State  Department  to  wring
from  him  guarantees  to  maintain  the  favored  treatment   which
the   Peruvian    government    has   accorded    the     International
Petroleum   Company."
IPC  was  paying  only  50  percent  of  its  profits  to  Peru  while
other   oil   countries   were   getting   as   much   as   70   percent.
Belaunde  was under  pressure  to  get  better  terms or  nationalize.
Mr.  Pike  goes  on  to  say  sardonically  —
Apparently  feeling  that  continuation  of  the  conspicuous
privileges  of  U.S.  oil  interests  takes  precedence  over  mat-
ters  of  internal'Peruvian  reforms  and  renovation  projects,
the  pristine  spirit  of  the  Alliance  for  Progress  notwith-
standing,  the  Lyndon  Johnson  Administration  declined  to
cooperate   with   the   Belaunde   administration    unless   it
A  Mark  Twain  In  The   Pentagon
The  U.S.  Comptroller  General  wrote  an  illuminating
though  unintentional  footnote   Sept.   27  to  the   speech
Defense   Secretary   Clifford   made  the   day   before   to
the   National    Security   Industrial   Association.     Clif-
ford  boasted  that  "We  now  have  a  military-industrial
team  with  unique  resources  of  experience,   engineering
talent,   management   and   problem-solving   capacities"
which  could  be  used  to  find  "the  answers  to  complex
domestic  problems"  in  education  and social  welfare.  As
if  to  warn  us  not  to  take  this  public  relations   blarney
too  seriously,  the  Comptroller   General  filed  a  report
on  how  poorly  managed  is  the  Pentagon's  program  for
producing  something  as  simple  as  ammunition.   Army
Materiel  Command  turns  out  $1.6  billion  a  year.   The
CG   found   that  a   lot   of   it   is   defective   because   the
elaborate  testing  procedures  often  are  not  applied.  The
new   audit  found   some   of   the   same   deficiencies   un-
covered   in   earlier   investigations    in   1964   and   1961;
in    one   case    production   went    on   despite    repeated
"premature  explosions."   In  another,  30  percent  of  the
output  of   a   105  mm.  projectile   was   so   poor  it   had
to  be  marked for  "combat  emergency  use  only."   If  the
Pentagon  can't  even  keep  phony  ammunition  from  be-
ing   sold   the  Army,  its   computers  certainly   offer   no
magic  for  solving  social  problems.   We  must,  however,
compliment  the  Secretary  on  the  understatement  of  the
century   in   his   speech.    "Of   course,"   he   said,   "I  do
not  regard  the  Department of  Defense   primarily  as  an
instrument  of  social  welfare."   Mark  Twain  would  have
loved  that.
would  give  the  desired  assurances   of  following  an  indul-
gent   policy  toward  the   IPC.   This   Belaunde   refused   to
do  and,  as  a  result,  by  late   1965  was  still  not   receiving
the  share  of  Alliance  for  Progress  funds  that  his  Govern-
ment  had  earned  the  right  to  expect.
Since  Mr.   Pike  wrote,   Belaunde   gave  in   and   negotiated
a  new  contract  satisfactory  to  Standard   Oil.    Peru  recovered
title  to  the  oil  lands  but  at  the  expense  of  giving  IPC  refining
and  marketing  rights,  and  dropping  all  claims  for  back  taxes.
The  result  split  Belaunde's   party.   The   coup   followed.    But
the  military—who  received  $5  million  in  aid  from  Washing-
ton  last fiscal year  alone—abrogated  the  contract  and  national-
ized  the  oil  properties.   How  sad  when  we  cannot  even  trust
the  Latin  military  any  more.
The  Lawlessness  And  Disorder  Which  Go  Unmentioned  In  The  Campaign
"This  report  is   the  third  in  a  period  of   four  years  in
which   the   Southern   Regional   Council  has   attempted   to
tell  the  nation  of  the  deplorable  degree  of  failure  in  the
South  to  comply  with  the  law  of  the   land  agautst   racial
discrimination  in  education.   In  the  previous  two   reports,
in  1965  and  1966,  there   were  empirical  and   psychological
reasons    for   including   some   guardedly   optimistic,   some
hopeful  words.   This  time  there   seems   almost   no  hope.
"The   real   story   told   in   this   report   is   that   of   where
the  real  breakdown in  law  and  order,  all  along,  has  been.
Out   in   the   rural   areas   of   the   South,   where   law   en-
forcement  was  repressive  before  it  became  fashionable   to
be  so,  the  advent  of  the  guidelines,  the  threat  that  black
children  might  actually  go  to  school   with  white  children,
brought  a  wave  of  terror  unmatched  since  post-Reconstruc-
tion  whites  rode  around  in   bedsheets.
"A   passion   for   tranquility,   for   order,   has   led   many
a  responsible  reporter,  magazine,  newspaper,  and  television
network   to   announce  the   advent   of   another   school   year
as  an  occasion  of  'increased  desegregation,'  or  even  'mas-
sive  desegregation  without  violence.'   (An  example  of  such
was   the   story   which   ran   under  a   headline   proclaiming
that   school  desegregation  swept   peacefully   across  Dixie:
the   story    itself    recounted   instances   of   desegregators'
homes  fired  into—as   many   as   32  times—in  three  towns
in  one  state  alone.)
"Freedom-of-choice   was  a   fatal   blunder   .   .   .   Negro
parents,   who  had  from  the   first   simply   been    interested
in   getting    their   children   the   best   education    available,
failed  to  see  the  educational  value  of  losing  a  job,   being
shot  at,  in  order  that  the  children  might  attend  a   school
only  a  little  less  bad  than  the  'Negro'   one."
—From   "Lawlessness   and   Disorder,"   a   Southern   Re-
gional   Council   Report   issued   Oct.   IS      (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 11,1988
Macchiavellianism  Parading  As A  Search  For  Peace
(Continued  from  Page  One)
now  be  lifted"  that  does  not  mean  "it  should  never  have  been
fought"  nor  that  "we  are  required   now,  by  our  new  necessi-
ties,  to  lose  what  has  been   gained   in  the   strategic   sense."
What  have  we  gained?   We  have  made  a  mess  of   Vietnam
and   Vietnam   has  made  a  mess  of   the  United   States.    Yet
Bundy  is  still  pursuing   that  line  of  policy  to  which  we  have
several  times  called  attention  as  the  key  to  Johnson's   abdica-
tion.   This  is  to  reduce  the  level  of   conflict   to  a  point   the
American  people  will  tolerate  -for   a  long  pull  without   giving
up  the  basic  aim  of  restoring  a  South  Vietnam  under  Amer-
ican  control.   This  is  Macchiavellianism  parading  as  a  search
for  peace.   It  will  not  work  politically   and  it  will  not  work
militarily.   Yet  this  is  the  best  the  Establishment   offers   for
the next  four  years.
The  Same  Pro-War  Oligarchy
Bundy  says  that  a  nation  ready  "to  keep  at  least  100,000
troops   in   place   for   years"   cannot   be   accused   of   "faithless
withdrawal."  To whom would  we be faithless?  Three years ago
just  before  the  bombing  of  the  North  began  he  was  in  Saigon
trying  to  bring  peace  amid  the  warring  factions  on  our  side.
The  situation  there  is  worse  than  ever.   The  recent  rumors  of
a  new  coup  reflect  the  fears  of  the  die-hards  that  Big  Minh's
return  may  foreshadow  a  broader  government  and  peace  ne-
gotiations.    Bundy  will   not   admit   publicly  that   the   Saigon
regime  today,  with  a  military  junta and  a  rigged   Constitution,
has  the  same  unrepresentative  social  base  as  Diem's  dictator-
ship.   It  is  heavily  weighted   on  the  side  of   the   10  percent
pro-war   Catholic   minority  against   the   pro-peace   Buddhist
majority.   It  is  heavily  weighted  on  the  side  of  the   landlords
against  the  peasants.    It  is  heavily  weighted   on  the  side  of
North   Vietnamese  refugee  Generals  who  want  to   reconquer
the  North  against  a  South  and  Central  Vietnamese  majority
of    every   class  which  is  for   some  kind   of   compromise   with
. the  Viet  Cong  for  the  sake  of  peace.
In   the   name  of   "self-determination"    we  are   allowing   a
minority  to  prevent   the  majority  from   determining   its  own
Slain  For   Jaywalking
Humphrey  could  have  won  the  black  vote  if  he  had
had  the  courage  in  his  law  and  order  speech  to  move
from  generalities   little  different  from  those  of   Nixon
to  the   burning  question  of   black  community   control
of   its   own  police.   The  result   was  a  last-minute  re-
versal   by   a   national   coalition   of   Negro   leaders   in
Gary  which  had  expected  to   endorse   him.   In  Wash-
ington  we  have  just  narrowly  escaped  another   serious
outbreak  as  a  result   of  the  killing  of  a  Negro  who
had  been  jaywalking.   Whatever  the  full  story,  it   is
impossible  to  imagine  a  policeman  killing  a  white  man
simply  for  crossing  a  street  against   a  red  light.   A
survey  in  the  Washington  Post  Oct.  13  which  deserves
national  attention  shows  that  17  citizens,  13  of  them
black,  have  been  killed  by   police  here  since  Jan.   1,
1967.   Yet  no  policeman has  been  indicted  for  homicide.
A  long   history  of   police  complaisance  in  the   ghetto
toward  drug  sellers  and  prostitutes  combined  with  a
readiness   to  humiliate  and  harass   the  self-respecting
black   who  tries  to  insist   on  hia  rights   has  built  an
explosive  bitterness  everywhere.  Even  the  decent  po-
liceman,  doing  no  more  than   his   duty,   may   be   the
prisoner  and  victim  of  this  past.   Here  lies  the   real
key  to  "the  law  and  order"  issue  but  it  goes   unmen-
tioned   in   the   campaign.   This  is   the   most   frequent
provocation  to  a  growing black rebellion  but Humphrey
does  not  dare  to  deal  with  it.
future.   This  is  the  sham  Bundy  would  continue,  and  this  is
much   the   same  sham  bolstered   by  our   Special   Forces   and
Green  Berets  and  electronic  anti-guerrilla  sniffers  and  snoop-
ers  and   all  the  vast  panoply  of   our  military  power   in   the
Third   World.    The  only  way  to  free  our  resources,  financial
and  spiritual,  for  that  "greater   America"   Bundy  calls  for  is
to   free   us   from   militarist  delusions,   to   cut   the   Pentagon
down  to  size,  to  try  and  build  a  better  world   through   the
United  Nations  and  not  by  putting  navies  on  every  sea  and
armies  on  every  Continent  in  the   effort   at  a  Pax  Americana
which  can  only  bring  our  country's  ruin.   Only  such  a  New
Charter  can  win  the  best  of  this  generation   back  to   normal
politics.                                                                        October   15
We'll   send  a  reprint  of  this   issue   to   a  friend  if   you  send  a  stamped  self-addressed  long  envelope
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The  Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of  Torment (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                 10/21/68
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W., Washington, D. C.  20015
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at  Washington.  D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington,  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED