I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968jan22.pdf

============================================================

Why   Westmoreland   'Wishes He Had  Censorship,  P.  2
In  Saigon,  As  Here,  the  Youth  Feel  There  Is  Something  Wrong  With  This  War
"Boo  Zin Zah  [?]   is  a  14-year  old student.   He  and  his  schoolmates, he  said, do  not  want  to  fight  in  this  war.   The  stu-
dent  said  he  would  volunteer  if  he  was  told  to  fight  Cambodians or  Communist  Chinese  or  Russians, but  not  his  own  peo-
ple.   This war, he said,  had no  meaning.   He  said  it  is  Washington's  war  and  Peking's  war."
—Saigon  interview   (Huntley-Brinkley   show  Jan.  S)  reporting   the  opposition  there  to  drafting   18-year  olds.
IE  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly                      **
VOL  XVI, NO.  2JANUARY  22,  1968
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
20  CENTS
None  So Blind  As  Those  Who  Will  Not  See
A   new  stage   in   the   Vietnamese-American  tragedy   began
with  the  arrests  of  Dr.  Spock,  the  Rev.  Coffin   and  the.  three
other   leaders   of   the   draft   resistance   movement.     We   are
headed   for   escalation—in   repression   at   home   and   in   war
abroad.    The  two  are  the  obverse  sides  of  the  same  process.
There  is  an  historic  fitness   in  the  coincidence  of  the  arrests
with  the  Johnson  Administration's campaign  to  fuzz,   confuse
and  elude  the  possibility of  peace  talks  opened  up  by  Hanoi's
public  declaration  that  talks  "will,"  rather  than  "could,"  fol-
low  an  end  of  U.S.  bombing.    Our  favorite  headline  of  the
period  was in  the  Baltimore  Sun  Jan.  6.    It  said,  "U.S.  Hunt-
ing  Signs Hanoi  Seeks Peace.    Admits  Its  World-Wide  Search
Is  Without  Success."    Johnson  and  Rusk  are  cultivating  my-
opia.    They  wouldn't  be  able  to  see  a  peace  talk  offer   if   Ho
Chi  Minh  brought  it  personally  to  the  White  House   West
Gate.
Evasion   by  Loquacity
The  Administration's search  for   "assurances"  before  end-
ing  the  bombings  is  a  pantomime  for  the  naive.    In  a  local
New  York  TV  program   (WNBC  Jan.  7)   Edwin  Newman
asked  William  P.  Bundy,  Assistant  Secretary of  State  for  Far
Eastern  and  Pacific  Affairs,   "Now   would  I  be  correct  in  de-
ducing  from  what you  said,  that  if  we  had  an  assurance  there
would  be  no  increase  in  the  movement  from  North  to  South
{i.e.  of  troops  and  supplies]   that  that  would  be  sufficient   for
us?"    To  which  Bundy  replied  cryptically,  "Well,  that's  an
illustration  .  . .  one good  illustration."    Newman  never  got a
chance  to  interrupt  Bundy's  slippery  loquacity  long  enough  to
ask  just  how  many  "illustrations"   would  be  required   before
we  would  agree  to  talk.    Fulbright  cut  through  the  fog  by
telling  the  Associated  Press  (New   York  Post,  Jan.  9),    "The
Administration  is  only  interested  in  surrender."
From  the  Administration's  point  of  view  the  alarming  re-
actions   to  Hanoi's   offer   were   not   those   which   came   from
friendly  and  neutral  capitals  urging  us  to  negotiate  but  from
the  U.S.  embassy  in  Saigon.    The  fear  there  is  that  any  real
possibility  of  peace  talks  would   lead  to  the  collapse  of   the
South   Vietnamese   government.     Its   leading   figures   would
make  plans  to  follow  their  bank  accounts  into  exile  while  the
Jesser  men  would  begin  to  make  their  own  deals  with   the
NLF.    Johnson  escalated  the  war  in   1965   by  putting   U.S.
ground  troops  into  the  South  to  avoid  a  military  collapse.  The
1 *
The  Ultimate  Issue  in   Spock-Coffin
"Nothing   in   our  Constitution  is   plainer  than  that
declaration  of  a  war  is  entrusted only  to  Congress.   Of
course,  a  state  of  war  may  in  fact  exist  without  a for-
mal  declaration.   But  no  doctrine that  the  court  could
promulgate  would  seem  to  me  more  sinister and alarm-
ing   than   that   a  President  whose  conduct   of  foreign
affairs  is  so  largely  uncontrolled, and often  even  is  un-
known,  can vastly  enlarge  his  mastery over  the  internal
affairs  of  the  country  by  his  own  commitment  of   the
Nation's  armed  forces  to  some  foreign  venture."
—Mr.   Justice   Jackson   concurring  in   the   Supreme
Court's   6-to-S  decision  denying   President   Truman   the
right   to  seize   a  strike-bound   steel   plant   during   the
Korean  war   on  the  ground   that   such  sweeping   war
powers  could  not  be  exercised  in  a  war  Congress  had
not  declared   (Youngstown  V. Sawyer:  72  S.  Ct.   863).
Will  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Spock-Coffin     cases  hold
that   the  President   in   an   undeclared  war   has  more
power  to  draft   men  than  he  does  under   this  decision
to  draft   property    rights?
escalations  of   1968   will  be  aimed  to  prevent  a  political  col-
lapse.    The  bombings  of  Russian  and  Chinese  ships  in  Hai-
phong  harbor,  the  air  attacks  on  Yunnan  from  across  the  Laos
border,  the  itch  for  hot  pursuit  into  Laos  and  Cambodia,  and
the plans for  an  "Inchon  landing"  across the  DMZ  into North
Vietnam  are  the  familiar  symptoms  of  that  "politics  of  esca-
lation"  with  which  the  Johnson  Administration has  countered
every  opportunity  for  peace  talks  in  the  past.
Johnson  prefers  a  wider  war  to  a  compromise  peace.  Only
wider war can hide  from  public view how  quickly  his  pumped-
up  campaign   of  optimistic  forecast  has  collapsed.     The  suc-
cessful  attacks  all  over  the  country  on  U.S.  and  South  Viet-
namese  outposts  and  airfields,  up  to  the  very  outskirts  of  Sai-
gon   and   Danang,   show   how   very   far   the   enemy  is  from
military  exhaustion.    Politically the  Saigon  government  is fall-
ing  apart  even  without  peace  talks.   The  rigged  elections  gave
the  Catholic  minority  a  dominant  position  in  both  houses  of
the  new  legislature  and  seemed  to  assure  the  military  junta  a
built-in  pro-war  majority.     But  the  rejection  by  both  houses
of  the  military  decree  drafting  18-year  olds  shows  how   sick
of  the  war  even  this  once  die-hard  sector  of  Vietnamese  opin-
ion  has  become.    The  basic  shift  was  plainly  signalled  when
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  22,1968
(Continued   -from   Page  One)
Saigon's  Catholic clergy called  for  an  end  of  the  bombing  and
assailed  the  corruption  in  the  regime.    A  Buddhist-Catholic
alliance  against  the  war  is now  shaping  up,' and  even the  labor
movement—largely  created  by  the  CIA—is  swinging  against
us  with  the  police  attacks  on  the  electrical  workers'  strike  in
Saigon.*    The  regime's mass base  is dwindling to  the  handful
of  last-ditch patriots  who  own  the  brothels  and  the  bars.
Chiang's  Troops  for  Vietnam?
The  war  this  year  will  become  more  than  ever  an American
war,  and  our  army  more  plainly than  ever  an  occupying  force.
Escalation   will   require  more  troops,   and   perhaps   even  the
dangerous  step  —  already  rumored  here  —   of  bringing   in
Chinese  troops   from   Formosa,   a  step  which  would   inflame
Vietnamese  opinion,  and  create  more  tension  with  mainland
China.    Indeed  the  military  campaign  for  "hot  pursuit"   into
Cambodia  and  Laos  seems  designed  as  a  round-about  way  to
force  such  dangerous  expedients  and  partial mobilization. We
are  already  short  of  troops  to  deal  with  the  swarm  of  attacks
all  over  the  country,  and  to  shore  up  the  collapsing  effort  at
"pacification."     Any   serious  efforts   at   "hot   pursuit"  across
the  border  would  soon  force  Johnson  to  provide  more  troops
even  if  it  meant  higher   draft  calls  and  mobilization  of  re-
serves  in  an  election year.    U.S.  News  &  World  Report  esti-
mated   (Dec.   11)   that  the  Cambodian  sanctuaries  could   be
"cleaned   out"   with  three   U.S.   divisions.    But  to  get   three
more  divisions  would  require  a  stepup  in  the  draft  at  home.
This  means  more  draft  resistance  and  an  intensified   struggle
in  the  Negro  ghettoes.    To  shut  the  door  on  peace  abroad  is
to  invite  more  racial  conflict  at  home.    This  is  the  direction
of  Johnson's  policy  and  this  is  the  larger  dimension  of   the
unfolding   tragedy.
*An   AP   dispatch   we   saw   only  in  the   Washington   Star
Jan.  12  said  six  labor  leaders  were  arrested  by  the  police  as
they  left   a  bargaining   session  with  government   officials   in
Saigon.    Tran  Quoc  Buu,  chairman  of  the  Vietnamese  Work-
ers  Federation,  predicted  the  arrests  would  lead  to  a  general
strike  by  its  300,000  members.    "How  can  we  fight  against
the   Communists  under  these  conditions?"   he  told  the   AP.
"We  lose   all   right   to   fight   against   the   Communists  when
things   like  this   happen."     Until   now  Buu  and  his   unions
have  been  faithful  creatures  of  the   U.S.
Exporting  the  Credibility  Gap
"Rome,  Jan.  5—Italy's  Foreign   Minister   today   told
President  Johnson's  special  envoy  that  a  prompt  end  to
the  Vietnam  war  would  help  solve  the  U.S.  balance  of
payments   problem.    The   President's   envoy,   Nicholas
Katzenbach,  replied  that  the  war  in  Vietnam  had  not
caused  the  dollar  drain  and  had  only  a  slight  effect  on
the  U.S.  balance  of  payments."
—Special  from,  Rome,  Baltimore  iSun, Jan.  6
"Asked  how  long   the  curbs   [on  the  flow  of  dollars
abroad]  are  to  be  in  effect,  this  official  answered:  'You
tell  me  how  long   the  Vietnam  war  lasts,   and  then  I
can  tell  you'."
—Washington  dispatch,  Wall  St. Journal, Jan. S
Step  by  step  we  are  to  lose  at  home  all  we  claim  to  be
defending  abroad, from  free  enterprise to  free  speech.  Already
the  dollar  difficulties  created  by  the  war  have  led  the  Admin-
istration  toward restrictions on  freedom  to  travel, to  invest  and
to  trade.   These  have  alarmed  the  business community  at  the
same  time  that  the  Spock-Coffin  indictments have  inflamed  the
intellectual  community.   The  next  step  I  am  convinced  is  a
confrontation  with  the  Negro  community.    Whether   consci-
ously  planned   for   the   purpose   or   not,   the   attack  on   such
prominent  draft  resisters  as  Spock  and   Coffin   clears  the  way
for  the  indictment  of  Negro  militants.
To  incite resistance to  the  draft  is a  less  serious  offense  than
to  incite  race war  and  "burn,  baby, burn."    But  to  have  made
Negroes   the  target  of  the  first  indictment  would  have  been
too  dangerous.    Now   that   such  prominent   and    respectable
whites  have  been  indicted  it  becomes  easier  to  move  against
the  blacks.    This  risks  making  heroes  and   martyrs  of   men
whose  support  in  the  Negro  community  is  still  marginal,   but
considering  the  dependence  on  Negro  manpower  for   combat
troops  there  is  no  way  to  step  up  the  war  without  stepping
up  the  repression.    A  frontal  confrontation  with  the  Negro
militants  is all  the  more  unavoidable if  Johnson  is to  placate—
as  he  seems  determined  to  do—the  pressure   from   Congres-
sional  rightists  for  firmer  action  against  "crime  in  the  streets"
with  which  the  struggle  for  full  Negro  equality  and  the  strug-
gle  against  the  war  are  beginning  to  be  identified  in  a  grow-
ing  mood  of  frustration.    This  is  not  the  best  way  to   deal
with  problems  which  require  cool.
A  TV  Program Which  Explains Why  Westmoreland  Wishes  He  Had Censorship
Some   peace   group  ought   to  reprint  as  a  pamphlet  the
transcript .of  a  one-hour  interview  broadcast  Jan.  8  by  Na-
tional   Educational  Television   with   four   of   the   best    U.S.
correspondents   in   Vietnam:  Pulitzer   Prize   winner   Peter
Arnett  of  the  Associated  Press;  R.  W.  Apple,  Jr.,  of   the
New  York  Times,  Robert  Shaplen  of  the  New  Yorker  and
William  Tuohy  of  the  Los  Angeles   Times.
Among  the  revelations:  Gen.  Westmoreland,  who  advised
against  military  censorship  two  years  ago  would  now  rec-
ommend  censorship  if  he  had  the  decision  to  make  again;
that   while   Westmoreland  and  Washington   take   the  body
count  seriously  ' any  man who's  ever  been  in  the  field  .  .  .
knows  there  is  no  such  thing. ...  A  platoon  commander
fighting  for  his  life  .  .  .  simply  doesn't  have  time  to  count
enemy  dead"  (Tuohy).
In  Vietnam  corruption  is  "a  way  of  life"  (Apple).     "The
corruption  system   begins  at  the  very  top ...  in  Saigon"
(Arnett)  and  extends  to  the  very  bottom;  everybody  pays
the  man  higher  up  for  his  job  and  shares  the  graft  with
him.   The  four  Corps  commanders  are  like  the  Chinese  war-
lords,  the  real   rulers.    Reporters  who  write  stories   which
conflict  with the optimistic  views  favored  in  Washington  and
Saigon  are  smeared  and  "some  officials  have  gone  so  far  as
to  suggest  they're  even  card-carrying  members  of  the  Com-
munist  Party."   (Arnett)
In  the  Army's  own divisional  newspapers  "napalm  doesn't
exist"  (Arnett);   "they   can't  use  that  nasty  word   ambush"
(Apple)   and  'we  never  bomb  a  hut.    We  always   bomb  a
suspected   enemy   structure"   (Apple).     There   was   general
agreement  that  the  Dakto  fighting  was  (despite   Westmore-
land)  a  victory  for  the  VC,  not  the  U.S.,  since  it  inflicted
heavy  casualties  on  us  after  drawing  troops  from  populated
areas  to  fight  under conditions  most  unfavorable  to  our side.
Westmoreland's   prediction   of   a   "phase-down"   in   two
years?     "I've  been  in  many  parts  of  the  country,"   Arnett
said,  "And  there  aren't   many   areas   in  which  the   officials
believe  this  is  possible."    Shaplen  said  the  VC  and  North
Vietnamese  could  strike  anywhere  they  chose.    We  highly
recommend   this   program   for   the  feel   of   what  is   really
happening  in  Vietnam.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  22,  19G8
Thus  the  war  threatens  the  social  fabric  of  our  society  at
home.    As  the  months  pass  and  the  situation  worsens,  men
like   Spock   and   Coffin   and   Mitchell   Goodman   and   Michael
Ferber  and  Mark  Raskin  will  begin  to  look   more  and  more
like  the  true  patriots.    Wider  war  may  temporarily   increase
the  kind  of  pseudo-patriotic  hysteria  that  marks  most  wars  in
most  countries.     They   and  many  like  them  may  go  to  jail.
Neither   juries  nor   appellate   courts   can   be   counted   on   to
withstand   the  kind  of   atmosphere   wider   war  can  generate.
But  in  the  longer  run  the  moral  effect  of  their  willingness   to
go  to  jail  will  tell  on  the  national  mind  and  heart.    This  is
an  immoral  and  an  unjust  and  a  wickedly  foolish  war.  Only
pride  and  prestige  keep  us  from  backing  out  of  it  as  rapidly
as  we  can.    Those  who  oppose  it  perform   a  sacred   duty  to
our  country  and  to  mankind.
The  Outlook  in  The  Court
I  would  not  diminish  the  stature  of  the  challenge  by  the
Five  with  a  digression   into   the   legalities.     This  is  in   that
difficult   area  where  law  and  morality  sometimes  collide.    It
will  take  more  courage  than  I  think  the  Supreme  Court   com-
mands  to  bring  draft  resistance  appeals  within  the  protections
of  the  First  Amendment  though  the  complexities  of  this  con-
spiracy  indictment  may  easily  produce   technical  grounds  for
reversal  if  a  jury  convicts.    To  raise  the  Nuremberg  issue  at
the  trial  against  the  war  will  prove  difficult  and  is  unlikely  to
be  allowed   by  the  trial  judge.    The  government   may  hope
that  in  Boston  a  jury  heavily  weighted  with  Roman   Catholics
may  make  convictions  easier  to  obtain,  but  the  Church's  atti-
tude  is  changing   in  Boston   even  as  it  has  in  Saigon   and   in
Rome.     Surprises   are  possible,   and   the   doctrines   of   unjust
war,   unjust  law  and  resistance  to  tyranny as  obedience  to  God
run  as  deep  in  Catholic  theology   as  they  do  in  the   ideology
of  free   society.
But  it  should  never  be  forgotten   that  the  ultimate  appeal
is  to  public  opinion.    This  is  where  the  battle  will  be  won
or  lost.    The  strategy  of  the  Administration  is  to  identify  re-
sistance  to  the  war  with  Negro  extremism  and  with   romantic
youngsters   smoking   the   hashish    of   guerrilla   war.     There
never  was  such  an  unpopular  war.    There  never  was  a  war  in
Another  Vietnam  in the  Philippines?
Manila,  Jan.  12—The  man  who  directs  agriculture  in
the   Philippines,   Vice   President   Fernando   Lopez,   is
spending  thousands  of  dollars  to  import  a  top  Amer-
ican  society  dance  band  and  to  fly  in  a  flock  of  faded
European  nobles  to  help  him  celebrate  his   40th  wed-
ding  anniversary.   The  contrast  between  such  flamboy-
ant  high  life  and  the  grinding  low  life  in  the provinces
is  one  reason   reform-minded   politicians,  socially  con-
scious  churchmen plus  liberal  and  radical  youth  in  the
Philippines  talk  privately  of  a  coming  social   explosion.
For  hundreds of  thousands  of  Filipino  peasants  waiting
for  something  to  happen in  the  long  promised  land  re-
form  program,  there  is  no  money  at  all.  .  .  .  Guests
invited  to  the  Lopez  party  have been  Assured  that  three
fountains   will   keep   real   French   champagne   flowing
throughout  the  evening.  .  .  .  The  bulk  of  rural  families
live  on  $75  a  year.
—Peter  J. Kumpa  in  the  Baltimore  Sun Jan. 23
which  public  opinion  was  so  open  to  persuasion,  so  anxious
about  the  drift  of  events.    This  potential   for  peace  will'  be
lost   if   the   Administration   succeeds   in   driving   the    peace
movement  into  an  hysteria  of  its  own,   an  easy  catharsis  for
our  own  aggressive  impulses.    It  is essential  that  we keep  cool.
The  peace  movement  must  not  become  a  vicarious  war  move-
ment.    The  enemies' are  hatred  and  the  imprisoning  effects  of
military  technology.    We  only  illustrate  on  a  big  scale,  com-
mensurate with  our  power,  the  same  human  failings  to  be  seen
in  Nigeria  or  in  the   Arab-Israel  conflict.    We   won't  help
bring  the  country  to  its  senses  by  a  hate  America   campaign,
or  a  hate  campaign  of  any  kind.    We  won't  make  the  cause
of   peace   more  persuasive  by  joining  forces  with  those   who
would  burn  the  country  down.    We  must,  like  a  good   phy-
sician  or  nurse  in  a  mental  ward,  speak  with  calm  and  with
compassion   if   we   are   to   win   our   countrymen   away   from
disaster.                                                                     Jan, 15,9  a.m.
PRESS-TIME BOUQUET: To Women's  Strike
For  Peace,  Jeannette   Rankin  and  their  newly
organized   Rankin   Brigade  for   Peace  for   the
best  organized  and  most  impressive  peace  dem-
onstration  Washington  has  seen  in a  long  time.
Business  Men For  Peace  Mobilize  Retired Brass For A Bombing Halt  in Vietnam
Although  the  New   York  Times,  for  some  unaccountable
reason  buried  the  story  in  two  paragraphs in  its  back  pages,
the  4-month  old organization, Business  Executives  Move  for
Vietnam   Peace   pulled  off  a  publicity  coup  when  it   got   5
retired  Generals  and  an  Admiral  to  form  its   military  ad-
visory  committee and  to  call  for  an  end  of  the  bombing  hi
North  Vietnam  and  de-escalation  in  the  South.
The  Washington  and  Baltimore  press  gave   the  story  a
good  play  (Jan.  12)  but  elsewhere   it  was  ignored  or  muf-
fled,  though  the  press   conference  was  made  all  the  more
newsworthy  by  the  appearance among  the  dissident  military
of  the  foremost  U.S.  military  expert  on  Communist China,
Brig.  Gen. Samuel  B.  Griffith,  a  retired  Marine  who  recently
translated  Mao  Tse-tung's   treatise  on  guerrilla  war.   Gen.
Griffith  won  a  Ph.D. at  Oxford  for  work  in  Chinese military
history  and  is  now  a  research  fellow  at  Stanford's  Hoover
Institute.
U.S.  hawks like  to  quote  Mao's  remark  about  power com-
ing  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  gun.    Gen.  Griffith   put  this  in
truer  perspective  by  stressing  Mao's  precept  that  "politics
should  control  the  gun."    The  retired  Marine said  that  our
war  effort  in  South   Vietnam   should   have  been  70%  poli-
tical  and  only  30%  military  but  was   instead   "about  90%
military."    He  said  the  bombing  of  the  North  had  "no  de-
cisive  effect  whatever" on  the  fighting  in  the  South,  that  it
was  to  Peking's  advantage  to  bog  the  U.S.  down in Vietnam
and  that  the  war  wasn't   worth  the  commitment  required
to  win  it.    Gen.  Griffith  said  he  estimated  more  than  two
years  ago  that  victory would require 750,000  men  "and  now
it's  probably  more."
Harold  Willens,  the  Los  Angeles  real  estate   man  who  is
co-chairman   of   the   business-for-peace   group,  accused   the
Administration  of  "a  mindless  paralysis."    The  other  mili-
tary  assembled  by  the  business  men  for  their  military  ad-
visory  committee  are  Gen. David  M.  Shoup,  former  Marine
Corps  Commandant; Brg.  Gen. Robert  L.  Hughes,  who  was
on  MacArthur's staff  in  World  War  II;   Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.
Ford,  an  artilleryman who  commanded an  Army  division  in
Europe  in  that  war,  and  Rear  Admiral  Arnold  E.  True,  a
destroyer  commander  who  was  wounded  in   the  Battle  of
Midway.
The  new  military  committee   might  perform   a   valuable
function  if  it  invited  confidential  communications  from  sol-
dier  critics  serving  in  Vietnam.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  22, 1968
While  Deploring  A  Frameup  in  Moscow,  Will  They  Overlook  One  in  Newark?
A  Challenge  to  the  Liberalism-At-A-Distance  of  U.S.   Editors
We  hope  those  U.S.  editors  waxing  eloquent  on  the writers
convicted  in  Moscow  will  spare  a little  energy  to  look  into  the
conviction  here  of  the  Negro  poet  LeRoi  Jones  in  the   after-
math  of  the  Newark  riots.    We  are  against  political  trials  of
writers  anywhere.    The  hopeful  side  of  the  new  Moscow  trials
is  the  increased  daring  of  Soviet  citizens  in  defying  the  secret
police   both   outside  the  court   and   in   talking   with   foreign
correspondents.    An  ugly  smell  of  plain  old-fashioned  frame-
up  and  vigilanteism  exudes  from  that  Moscow  courtroom  in
which  Galanskov,  Ginzburg,  Dobrovolsky  and  Lashkova  have
been   convicted   and   we   urge   protest   by   American   writers
against  the  verdict.
Beat  Himself  Up?
But  for  most  U.S.  editorial  writers  to  condemn  the  Moscow
trials  is  only  an   easy  exercise  of   cold   war   reflexes.     We'd
have  them  prove  their  sincerity  by  a  close  look   at  the  Jones
trial.    That  doesn't  smell  like  a  rose,  either.    Jones's  heavily
bandaged   face  appeared   in  the  nation's  press  after  his  arrest
during   the  Newark   riot.     Police   admitted   he   didn't   resist
arrest  but  denied  beating  him,  though  witnesses  testified  they
had   seen  the  beating.    We  find  it  hard  to  believe  he  beat
himself   up.
Police  claimed,  after  they non-beat  him,  that  they had  found
guns  in  his  car.    Jones  insisted  at  the  trial  that  he  had  never
owned  a  gun.    Yet  the  prosecution  made  no  effort   to  rebut
his  testimony  by  tracing  the  ownership  of  the  guns.    On  top
of  this,  Judge  Leon  Kapp  in  his  instructions  to  an  all-white
jury  seemed  to  think  Jones  was  on  trialfor  possessing  deadly
poems  rather  than  deadly weapons.    The  Judge  dwelt  on  the
"diabolical"  character  of  a  poem  by  Jones  in  The  Evergreen
Review.    This  seemed  to  be  the  emotional  basis  for  the  sever-
ity  of  the  sentence:  two-and-a-half  to  three  years.    A  group
of   12  prominent  U.S.   poets  have  formed   a  Committee   on
Poetry  (PO  Box  582  Stuyvesant Station,  NYC  9)   to  back  an
On  Private   Enterprise   and  the   Slums
"Meanwhile  the  demand  for  profit—and  a  reluctance
to  take  unnecessary  risks—continues  to  be  a  source  of
resistance   or   passivity   among   many   in   the   business
community  when  the  subject   is  social  action.    A  recent
survey,  by  the  Fantus  company,   a  subsidiary   of   Dun
&  Bradstreet,   found   that   more  than  100  companies   of
700  major  corporations  indicated   a  willingness   to  build
new  plants  in  or  near  slum  areas.    But  not  one  said  it
would  do  so  under  present  conditions.    The   implication
was  that  they  would  invest  in  slum  areas  if  the  slums
were  eradicated."
—Somewhat   astringent   conclusion   to  an  article   in
the  New  York  Times  Annual  Business  Review  Jan.   8
glowingly   headlined   "Crisis   in   the  Slums:   Business
Rolls  Up  A  Sleeve  After   A  Summer  of  Rioting."
appeal  and  we  think  it  deserves  wide  support.
We'll  hardly  allay   this  gifted  Negro  • writer's  racial  bit-
terness  by  sending  him  to  prison  after   such  a  trial.
IMPORTANT   ANNOUNCEMENT
With  this,  the   16th   year   of   publication,   I
am  reluctantly   compelled  to    go  bi-weekly  as
a  means  of  cutting   down  the  burden  of  what
has   been   almost   entirely   a  one-man   writing
operation.    I ask  readers to  bear  with  me  while
I  try  this  means  of   adjustment.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed Envelopes
I. F.  Stone's Weekly      seis  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time  of  Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State....................
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ...
Zip..State..
1/8/68
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington.  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  520  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED