I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968jun10.pdf

============================================================

On  The Shooting  Of  Robert  Kennedy,  P.  2
How  Many  More Must  Die In  The Months  or Years Before That "Satisfactory  Solution"?
"He  (Humphrey)  told  the  students  that  the  United  States  ought  to  have  the   patience  to  stay   at   the  conference
table  in  Paris  for  months,  and  if  necessary   for  years,  until   a  satisfactory   solution   was   reached."
—Vice  President  Humphrey   at  St.   Paul,  New  York  Times  May  28
I. K Stone's  Weekly
T^T^mi   DAlltJ~rl*slsJ      J?«"  TI/^xlJ-l/At                      ^^
Bi- Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  12
JUNE  10,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
Playing  for Time  to  Continue  the  War
A  high  (and  hawkish)   Pentagon  official   told  a  friend  of
mine   recently,   "The   purpose   of  the  partial   bombing  pause
and  the  talks  in  Paris  is  to  reduce  the  fighting  to  a  level  the
American  people  will  tolerate  for  a  long  time  without  giving
up our  basic aim,"  i.e.  an  "independent"  South  Vietnam.  This
remark  I  believe  is  the  best  key  to  the  confused  and  tangled
talks   in   Paris.    A   similar   clue   may   be   found   in   Max
Frankel's   dispatch   from   Austin   in   the   New    York   Times
June  2.   "It  was primarily,"  he  wrote,  "to  buy  time  at  home
to   keep   waging   the   war's   military  and   diplomatic  battles
abroad  that  Johnson  accepted   the  dovish  counsel  of  at  least
a  partial  halt   in  the   bombing   on  March   31  and   threw  in
his  retirement   for  good  measure."    Frankel  added,  "So  far
the   tactic  has  worked   better   than  he   dared   to  hope.   The
bitter  controversy  has  abated  and  the  political  candidates  have
been  muted."   The  purpose  is  to  defuse  the  peace  issue  dur-
ing  the  election  campaign,  to  tread  water until  after  it  is over.
The  New  Asia  of  The  Same  Old Crooks
I  thought  at  one  time  that  Johnson  would  make  peace  as
the  best  way to  undercut  Bobby  Kennedy,  whom  he  hates,  and
elect  Humphrey  or  perhaps   even  run  for   reelection  himself
as  the  man  who  made  peace.   But  I  think  I   underestimated
Johnson's   craftiness.   His   strategy   is  to  undercut   McCarthy
and   Kennedy   by   appearing    to   seek   peace.    This   political
strategy  fits  his  immediate  and  urgent   economic  needs.   The
U.S.   cannot  escalate  the  war,  adding   another   200,000  men
to  those  already  in  Vietnam,  without  imposing   the  kind  of
wartime  taxes  and  economic  controls  which  would  be  danger-
ously  unpopular  in  an  election  year.   The  campaign  dictated  a
pause.   But  there  is  no  sign  that  Johnson   has  given  up  his
ultimate  aims  nor  changed  his  deep  emotional  attachment  to
this  imperialist  crusade  in  Southeast  Asia.   He  was  speaking
from   the  heart  when  at  the  Korean   Consulate  in  Honolulu
April  17  he  forecast  a  continued  American  protectorate  over
"the   New   Asia"—what  a  euphemism   for   Chiang  Kai-shek
and  the  corrupt   oligarchies  under  our  wing!   "I   deeply  be-
lieve,"  Johnson   said,  "that  my  successor—whoever  he  may
be—will  art  in  ways  that  will  reflect  America's  abiding  in-
terest   in  Asia's  freedom  and  in  Asia's  security."   This  will
certainly  prove  true  if  his  successor  is  Humphrey  or  Nixon,
Rockefeller  or  Reagan.
Much  that  may  seem  puzzling  falls  into  place  if  the  peace
talks  and  the  limited   bombing   pause  are  viewed  as  a  tactic
Why  Reward  A  Flop  of  A  General?
When   Westmoreland   was   appointed   head   of   U.S.
forces  in  Vietnam  April  25,  1964,  we  had  16,000  sol-
diers  there.   Now  we  have  545,000  and  are  no  closer
to   victory.   He   was   touted,   on   appointment,  as  "a
specialist  in  guerrilla  warfare",  a  claim  even  his  press
agents   soon   abandoned.    His   principal   achievement,
like  that  of  his  predecessor, Harkins,  was  a  series  of
optimistic  statements, all  proven  silly.  Westmoreland's
first,   after   six   months  in   charge:  "It  is   absolutely
inconceivable   to   me  that  the   Viet   Cong   could  ever
militarily  defeat  the  armed  forces  of  South Vietnam."
Less  than  six   months  later  we  were  pouring combat
troops  in   and  Americanizing   the   war  to   save   those
forces   from   collapse.   Every  few   months  Westmore-
land  has  announced  that  the  enemy   was  on  his  last
legs,  out  of  steam,  and  ready  to  give  in  if  only  West-
morland  got   more  troops.   In  four  years Westmore-
land's  troops  were  increased  by  3400  percent—no  less
—and  the  enemy  is  still  tottering.   At  the  LBJ  ranch
May   31,  Westmoreland  assured  the  country  that   the
enemy  was  "approaching  a  point  of  desperation"  and
his   forces  "deteriorating in  quality."  Commenting  on
this  and  similar  weekly  whiffs  of  marijuana  from   the
U.S.   Mission   in   Saigon,   Bernard   Weinraub  cabled
(New    York  Times  June  2),   "American  soldiers  in  the
field  would  only  grin  at  such  reports.   For  the  North
Vietnamese   soldiers   around   Dakto,   Pleiku,   Dongha,
Hue   and  Hoian  have   proved  to  be  tough—sometimes
brutal—soldiers  who  appear  in  many  cases  to  be  as
well-fed   and   well-dressed  and   well-equipped   as   the
allied  soldiers." Any  business  executive  who  had failed
as  miserably  and  talked  as  much  nonsense   (see   docu-
ment   on   p.   3)   as   Westmoreland  would   have   been
fired  long   ago.     Like   Harkins   his   alibi   is   that   the
U.S.    press   "impeded"   the   war.   (Donald   Kirk   from
Saigon,  Washington Star  May  27).  If  only  he  had  had
censorship   .   .   .   The   reward   for   all   this   cheerful
idiocy,  which  has  cost  so  many  lives,  is  his promotion
to  Army  Chief  of  Staff.   This  requires  confirmation  by
the  Senate.   Every  effort  was  being  made  to  rush  the
appointment   through.   McCarthy,   Kennedy   and  pro-
peace  Senators  ought  to  force  a  debate  in  the   Senate
and  spotlight  the  succession  of  military  hot  air  artists
to  whom  our  sons  are  entrusted.
for   a  breathing  spell.   There   is,  for  example,  beginning  to
percolate  through  Washington  bits and  pieces  of  off-the-record
talks  which  preceded  the  Paris  conference.   The   U.S.   nego-
tiators  seem  to  have  done  very   little  thinking  or  planning
for  any  kind  of  a  compromise political  settlement.   The   U.S.
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  10,1968
It's  Only  Unorganized  Violence  That  Still  Shocks  Us
THE  TERRIBLE  NEWS  AT  PRESS  TIME:  Our  heart  goes  out
in   sympathy   to   Mrs.   Kennedy   and   the   children   and   our
prayers  for   Robert  Kennedy's   recovery.   The   air   is  full   of
the  banalities  such   tragedy   evokes.    We   would   not   add  to
them.   But  amid  the  shock  over  this  one  act  of  unorganized
and   insane   violence,   we  wish   more   people   would   stop   a
moment  and  think  how  conditioned  we  are  to  take organized
violence   for   granted.    We   are   still   human,  enough   to   be
shocked   at   one   man's   shooting.    But   preparations  to   kill
millions   are   part   of   our   way   of   life,   not   only   here   in
America  but  everywhere  else  in  the  world.   We   spend   {80
billion   a   year   to  kill,   maim,   poison,   burn   and   asphyxiate
other   human   beings  at  will;  we  train   our  healthiest  youth
for  murder  and  enlist  our  best  scientists  to  devise  new  means
of  killing.   Giant  corporations  draw  profit   from   the  organi-
zation  of  means  for  slaughter.   We   live   in  a  huge  human
.abattoir  but  our  nostrils  are  so  conditioned  to  the  stink  that
we  no  longer  notice  it.   That  man  who  just  fell  into  a  ditch
in  South  Vietnam  with  his  guts  torn  out  by  a  bullet  from  an
American   helicopter   also  had   children,   perhaps   ambitions,
certainly  some  spark  of  that  wonder  we  call  a  soul.
WE   WISH   THERE  WERE   SOME  WAY  to  spread   a  rumor
that  the  poor  exude  strontium   90,  or  that  their   effluvia  was
turning   up  in  hair  tonic  and  causing  baldness,  so  we  could
get   a   strong   middle   class   response   to   the   Poor   People's
March.   Hypchondria  seems  to  be  the  one  way  to  arouse  the
middle   classes,   from   the   days  when  Upton   Sinclair's   The
Jungle   about   the   meat   packing   industry  made   them    fear
germs  in  hot  dogs  to  SANE's  campaign  against  nuclear  test-
ing,  which  alarmed  mothers  about  baby's  milk.   We   endorse
Bayard  Rustin's  call  for  support  of  the  June  19 march  in  soli-
darity  with  the  poor.   His   seems  to  be  an  effort   to  arrange
with  friendly   officials  to  give  the  Poor  People's  Mobilization
enough   of   a   victory   on   some   urgent   issues  to   send   them
'home  satisfied   and   encouraged  to  organize  for  further  pres-
sure.    But  even  this  needs  more   support   from  the   suburbs
than   is  yet  in   evidence.
THOUGH  IT  HAS  ALL  THE   EARMARKS  OF   A   DIRTY  cam-
paign   leak   from   the   White   House   to   Drew   Pearson,   the
latter's  charge  that  Kennedy  as  Attorney  General  had  allowed
the  FBI  to  tap  Dr.  Martin  Luther  King's  telephone   deserves
serious   investigation,  perhaps   by  the   Senate's   Constitutional
Is  Orwell  Alive  and  Writing  LBJ's  Speeches?
"Freedom   has   not   retreated   an   inch   or   foot   of
soil   that   freedom   held   in   1963.   Freedom   holds   in
1968."
—L.B.J.   speech   to   the   I.L.G.W.U.,   May   25.
"Generally,  I  found,  the   Greeks  hold  three  opinions
about  the  relationship of  the  United  States  with  their
country.   First,  the  United  States   had  quite  a  bit  to
do  with  the  coup.   Second,  the  United  States  finds  the
junta  acceptable.   Third,  if  the  United  States  wanted
to  change  the   Government,  its   influence  is   sufficient
to do so   ...
"Greece  is  a  full-blown  police  state  .  .  ."
—Rep.   Donald   Fraser    (D.-Minn.),   May   27,   upon
his  return  from   Athens.  (Con.  Rec.  E4666  May   27).
Rights  subcommittee.   J.  Edgar  Hoover  hated  Dr.  King  and
slandered  him  in  his  lifetime.   On   the   excuse  of   "national
security"   ever   since   the   beginning  of   World   War   II,   the
FBI   and   other   intelligence  agencies  have  wiretapped   many
respectable  liberals.   It  would   be  no   surprise  at   all   if   Dr.
King  was  among  them.    The  revelation   is  made   particularly
timely  by  the  wiretap  provisions  of  the  pending   crime  bill.
Long  of  Missouri  told  the  Senate  May  22  it  was  embarrassing
that  the  U.S.  was  preparing   to  authorize  more   wiretapping
just   when   Czechoslavakia   had   banned   both   wiretaps   and
bugging.
WHILE   TITO   PRAISED  THE   CZECHS,   the   liberties   allowed
in  Prague  are  still  forbidden  in  Belgrade.   We  were   happy
to   see  students   riots   hit   Tito's   capital.    This   is   a   good
moment   to   call   public  attention  to   the   fact   that   Mihailo
Mihailov   whose   book   Russian  Themes   has   just   been   pub-
lished  here  by  Farrar,  Straus  and  Giroux  is  still   in   prison,
most   of  the  time  in   solitary  confinement,   for   the   crime  of
telling  the  truth  about  the  Soviet  Union.
ON   A   MEET   THE   (SLEEPY)    PRESS   show   June   2,   Dr.
Grayson   Kirk   of   Columbia  admitted   "strong  moral   convic-
tions"   about   the   war   in   Vietnam   were   the   major   factor
in  student  unrest  but  nobody  asked  him  about  the   Institute
for   Defense   Analysis  contract,  a  hateful  symbol  of  growing
military   influence   in   the   academic  world.    Nor   was   there
any  question   about  the  gymnasium,  the   other   specific   issue
raised   by  Columbia's   students.    Dr.   Kirk's   smugness   about
the   police   provoked   no   questions   even   about   the   beatings
of  bystanders  and  medical  corpsman.
Mississippi's  Poor  Give  Eastland  and  Long A Rousing Welcome to  the Welfare  Rolls
"There   are   two   kinds   of   welfare'  for   the   poor:   Aid
to  Disabled  Persons   (to  get  this  you  have  to  be  blind  or
half-dead)   and  Aid  to  Dependent   Children  (this  is  what
all  those  Christians  cry  about:  Last  week  Senator  Russell
Long  said  about  the   poor  peoples   march  on   Washington
that   he  'wasn't  going   to  give  any  more  money  to  those
worthless   people   to  be  more  worthless.'   Honorable   Rus-
sell  Long  on  welfare.   How  much  a  month  is  incalculable.
His   family   is   the   chief   stockholder   in   the   Win-or-Lose
Oil  Company.  He's  worth  a  cool  million.  He  gets  a  27.5%
tax   credit.    It   comes   out   of   mine   and   my   co-workers
pockets.  It  is  welfare.)   Aid to  Dependent  Children amounts
to  $9  per  child  per  month.   The  most  you  can  get   is  $90
a  month.   If   you  have  over  10  children,  tough  shit.   The
only  people  who  fan  get  this  are  women  whose  men  have
left  them.  It  is  impossible  for  an  able-bodied  man  or  child-
less   able-bodied  woman  to   get   welfare.   This   applies   to
the  poor  only.   Honorable  Jim  Eastland  is  on  welfare.  He
'gets   $10,750*   a   month.    Honorable  Russell   Long   is   on
welfare.    He  gets   only   the   bankers   know  how   much  a
month.  My sister's child  is  on welfare.   It  gets  $9 a  month."
—Mississippi   Newsletter,    May    2.4   (Box   120,  Tougaloo,
Miss.  39174,  sub  $3  a  year).   This  is  one  of  the  beat  grass-
roots  publications  to  come across  our  desk  and  readers  may
wish  to  help  it   by  subscribing.
* That  was  for  1966.  Last  year,  according  to  the  May 23
Congressional    Record     (S    6180)     Eastland    Plantation,
Inc."   of  Doddsville,  Miss.   (Sen.  Eastland's  hometown)   re-
ceived  a  subsidy  of   $157,930,   or   $13,161  a  month,  about
what   1,462  ADC  children  get  in  Mississippi.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  10,  1968
Grim Picture of the War's Setbacks in A Secret Senate Foreign Relations Report
We  print  here   the  text  of   a  confidential   Senate   Foreign
Relations   Committee  report   based  on  classified    Defense    De-
partment   statistics.    This   gives   a   very    different     view   of
the  war  in  Vietnam  from  that  advanced  by  Gen.  Westmore-
land   May   30  at   the  LBJ   Ranch   (the   Westmoreland   text
is  in  the  June  S  issue  of   the  Weekly  Compilation  of  Presi-
dential  Documents).  The  Foreign  Relations  report  was  pre-
pared   by   Carl  Marcy,   the   Committee's    Chief    of   Staff.      It
was  leaked  to  the  Associated   Press   but  the   only   paper   in
which   we  saw  its   story   printed   was  the  Washington  Post
May   SB.   The  figures  on  which  the  report  is  based  are  classi-
fied   so  its   summary    of   them   could   be  presented   only   in
percentages.  It  is  impossible  to  reconcile  the  overall  picture
thus  disclosed  with  Westmorland's   claim  that  the   enemy's
"only   victories   of   the   last   few   years   have   been   in    the
propaganda   field."   The  figures  on  South  Vietnamese   Army
desertions—up   30%  over  the  last  year—hardly   support   the
General's  assertion   that  "the   Vietnamese   armed  forces   are
becoming   progressively    stronger."    Westmoreland    said,   "1
am  confident   that  the  enemy  is  receiving  false  reports   from
his   field  commanders."    If   Hanoi's   Generals  are   like   ours,
we're   sure    Westmoreland    is   right.    The   report    follows:
"As   noted   in   my  memorandum  of   November   29,   1967
to  all  members  of  the  Committee,  the  staff  has  received  every
month  from   the  Department   of  Defense   classified   statistical
information    on   Vietnam.    The    staff    has   summarized    the
most   recent   classified   figures   for   March,   submitted   by   the
Defense  Department  earlier  this  month,  and  has  reached  the
following   general   conclusions.    The  figures  to  support   these
conclusions   are  not   given   because  of  their  classified  nature.
"1.  The   percentage   of   population   secured,   according   to
reports  of  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam,  was  lower  in
March   1968  than  at  any  time  in  1968  or   1967.
"2.  The  percentage  of  hamlets  secured,  again  according  to
reports  of  the  Government  of  South  Vietnam,  was  lower  in
March  than  at  any  time  in  the  past  two  years.
"3.  According  to  the  Hamlet  Evaluation  System, adminis-
tered  by  the  United  States  Mission  in  Saigon,  the  percentage
of  population   in   Category  A,  B  and   C  hamlets—the   three
most   secure   categories—was   lower   in   February  and   March
1968  than  at  any  time  in  1967.   The  percentage  of  population
in  Viet  Cong  controlled  hamlets  was  higher   in  March    1968
than  at  any  time  since  June    1967.
"4.  Again,  according  to  the  Hamlet  Evaluation  System,  the
percentage   of  hamlets  in  Categories   A,  B  and  C  was  lower
in  February  and  March   1968  than  any  time  in  the  past  two
years.    The   percentage   of   hamlets   controlled   by   the   Viet
Cong  was  the  highest  since  July   1967.
"5.  The   infiltration   rate  was  higher  in  March   1968   than
That  Daring  Young  Herman  Kahn
On  the  Pentagon's  Flying   Trapeze
"By   the   way,  the   South   Vietnamese  Army  even
today  is  the  best  Army  in  Southeast   Asia,  except  the
North  Vietnamese."
"I   would   say   that,  outside   of   the   Philippines,   the
South  Vietnamese Government  is  the  most  democratic
in   Southeast   Asia."
"I  tend  to  think   we  could   cut   back   the   total   U.S.
manpower  in  Vietnam.   I  wouldn't  cut  back  right  away,
but  at  some  point  I  would  cut  back  if  only  for  political
purposes.    As   soon  as  we  were  clearly  doing  well,  I
would  make  this  even  more  credible  by  saying   'We're
winning  the  war,  so  we're  pulling  out  50,000  troops.'
They  might  not  be  fighting  troops,  you  understand,  but
largely   clerk-typists,  logistics,   and   such."
—Herman  Kahn, back  from  Vietnam,  where  he  went
on  a  Pentagon  contract,  in  U.S.  News  &  World  Report
June  3,  where  he  says  we're   doing  everything   wrong
but  could,  if  we  reform,  win  the  war  in  two  to  four
years,  and   concludes—no  doubt  to  the  satisfaction   of
the   contractor—with   a  plea  that  we  stick  it   out.
at   any  time  in   the   past.
"6.  The  number  of  enemy  political  and  military  defectors
under  the  "Open  Arms"  program  was  lower  in  March    1968
than   at  any  time  in   the  past   (and   was  about  a  quarter  of
the  monthly  average  in  1967).
"7.  The  number  of  South  Vietnamese  Army  desertions  was
higher  in  February  1968   (figures  have  not  been  made  avail-
able  for  March  1968)   than  at  any time  in  1968  or  1967,   and
the  number  was  about  30%  higher  than  the  monthly  average
in  1967.
"8.  Although  U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese  deaths  in  action
were   almost   equal   in   March    1968,    U.S.   losses   continued
to  be  higher  proportionately because  of  the
1
  fact  that  the  com-
bined  strength  of  the  South  Vietnamese Army,  Marine  Corps,
Regional   Forces   and   Popular   Forces—that   is,   South   Viet-
namese  strength  on  the  ground—was  about  50%  higher  than
the  combined  strength  of  the  U.S.   Army  and  Marine  Corps
strength—that  is,  U.S.  strength  on  the  ground.   United  States
deaths   in   action   in   March  were   about   twice   the   monthly
average  in   1967  and  almost  four  times  the  monthly  average
in   1966.    South  Vietnamese  deaths  in  action  in  March  were
50%   higher   than   the   monthly   average   in    1967.    Enemy
deaths   in   action   in   March  were   two   and   a  half   times  as
high   as  the  monthly  average  in    1967.
Secret  Directive  to  U.S.  Commanders Calls  for  Vietnam Victory  in  Three  Months
SAIGON—A    secret    directive   has    gone    out    to    all
U.S.  field  commanders  in  South  Vietnam  telling  them  to
win  the  war  within  the  next  three  months ...  to  break
the  current  military  stalemate  and  give  the  Americans  a
decisive  voice  at   the   Paris  peace  conference.   The  Com-
munists  are  clearly seeking  a  similar military breakthrough
for  the  same  reason.   Thus,  it  seems  certain that, far  from
reducing   the   violence  level,  the   Paris   talks   will  produce
some  of   the   bloodiest   fighting   of   the   war  in  the  weeks
and months  ahead ...
The  directive  was  believed  to  have  been  issued   May  6.
It  went  out  under the  name  of  Gen. William C. Westmore-
land,  outgoing  commander of  U.  S.  forces  in  Vietnam.  But
it  originated   with  Gen.  Creighton  W.  Abrams,  Westmore-
's  successor  .  .  .  With   Abrams  in  the  driver's  seat,
U.S.  military men  predicted a  more  aggressive  war.  While
there  will  be  no  change  in  basic  strategy,  these  sources
said,  U.S.  tactics   will  reflect   Abrams'  aggressive   person-
ality.   The  secret   directive  has  already  done  that.   .  .  .
"They   want   us   to   go   in   there   with   bells   ringing   and
lights  flashing,"  one   officer   said  after   reading   the  direc-
tive.
To  lose  contact  with  the  enemy  once  it  has  been   estab-
lished  will be considered  a tactical  defeat,  the  directive  said.
One   officer   said  the   directive  closed   with  the   stern  ad-
monition   that:   "You  will   hound  and  harass   the   enemy
until  his  influence   is  driven  from  the   land."
—Keyes   Beech,   Chicago  Daily  News,  May   25.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  10,1968
Vietnam War  Costs Have Just Risen More Than The $6 Billion Economy Cut
(Continued  from  Page  One)
is  ready  for  mutual  de-escalation, but  mutual  de-escalation  in
the   absence  of   a  political  settlement  merely  means  that   the
other   side  give   up   the   revolt  and   the  war   and   leave   the
military   junta   in   power   in   Saigon.  This   seems   to   be   the
shape  of  that  "satisfactory  solution"  for  which,  as  Humphrey
told   students  at  St.  Paul  May  27,  we  should  be  willing   to
stay   at   the   conference   table   "for   months   and   if   necessary
for   years."    This   is  what   Senator   McCarthy   sensed   in   his
interview  with  Frank  McGee  of  NBC  June  2,  when  he  said
the  government  wasn't  saying  or  doing  anything different  from
what  it  had  been  saying or  doing  "before  the  negotiations  sup-
posedly  began"—
We're  still  saying  no  coalition  government—Dean  Rusk
is—no  recognition  of   the  National   Liberation   Front,   ac-
celerate  the  war,  call  up  more  troops.   There  is  ho  pull-
back,   there   is   no  limitation  on  the   search   and  destroy
missions.
There  is  no  change  because  no  real  change  has  taken  place.
Still  Looking  for  Military  Victory
Jeremy   Campbell   from   Washington   in   the   London   Eve-
ning  Standard  May  8  and  Stuart  H.  Loory  from   Washington
in  the  Los  Angeles  Times  May  31  both  reported   that  John-
son's  March  31  "abdication"  address  was'preceded  two  weeks
earlier   by   a   dramatic  reversal   of   opinion   on   the   part   of
Johnson's   non-official   advisers  on   the  war.   A  panel   which
includes   retired   Generals   Bradley,   Taylor    and    Ridgway,
Douglas   Dillon,   McGeorge   Bundy  and   George   Ball,   had
always  before  been  for  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war,  the
only  dissenter  being  Ball.   After  their  meeting  March  18—so
goes  this  story—they  startled  the  President  by  reporting   that
continued  escalation,  intensified  bombing  and  increased  Amer-
ican  troop  strength  "would",  so  Loory  writes,  "do  no  good."
But   there   is  no   indication  that   these   somber   military  con-
clusions  had   any  firm  political  impact.   Far  from   preparing
the   public   mind   for   compromise,    the   Administration  has
shut  the   door  firmly  on  talk  of   a  coalition.    Westmoreland
was  allowed  to  use  the  forum  of  a  Presidential  press  confer-
ence   at   the   LBJ   ranch   May   30   for   another   of   those   silly
The  Meditations  of  Pandit  Nixon
"Miami,  June 2  (UPI)—Former Vice  President Nixon
relaxed   in   an   ocean-front   villa   today   counting   his
Dixie   support   and   deciding   whether   a    Mod-fashion
Nehru  jacket  might  help  his  appeal  to  youth   in  the
Republican   presidential   race."
—Washington  Post,  June  3.
If  that  doesn't  work,  why  not  spread  a  rumor  that
he  freaks   out  on  LSD?
performances   that   build  up  the  illusion  that  a  military vic-
tory  is  possible.   And  now  we  learn  that  on  May  6  a  secret
directive  was  issued   by  Westmoreland   to  U.S. commanders
in  Vietnam  calling  for  "a  major  breakthrough  to  a   military
victory"  (see box  on  page  3).    You  don't  waste  more  lives
if  you're   really  serious   about  peace.
With   the   mounting   frustration   of   the  Poor  Peoples  en-
campment,  we  walk  here  on  eggs.   The  Congress  is  exacting
a   $6   billion   cutback   in   expenditure   which   will   come   in
substantial  part  out  of  welfare.   At  such  a  time,  hardly  noticed
by  the  country,  Johnson  has  pushed  up  expenditures  on  the
war   by  more   than   the  whole  $6  billion   cutback.    On Feb.
12,  in  a  so-called  "zero  supplemental"  the  President  boasted
that   McNamara   had   cut   $6   billion   out   of   other   military
items  to  provide  additional  funds  for  the  war.   A  month  and
a   half   later,   in   his   "abdication"   speech,   Johnson   said   he
would   need   a   supplemental    appropriation   of  $2.5 billion
more  this  fiscal  year  for  Vietnam.   This  figure  has  had  to  be
revised   upward.    On   May   31,   with   only   40   days   left   of
this "fiscal   year,  he   sent   the  House  a   message   asking $3.9
billion   instead   of  $2.5 billion.    This  will   make   a  total  of
from   $6.5  to   $9.9  billion    extra   available—the   estimates
differ—for   Vietnam.    We  add  fuel  to  the  fires  of  war  even
as  we  pare  down  the  poor.
This  was  written   before   the   California   returns  were   in.
It   illustrates  the  urgent   necessity   that   McCarthy   and Ken-
nedy,   no   matter   who   wins,   join   forces    if   the    American
people  are  to  have  a  choice.   Otherwise  the  two-parry   system
will  become  a  one-party  rubber  stamp  for  Johnson's  con  game
and  Johnson's   war.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  Mew  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The  Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ...............................................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished  D
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ...............................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                 «/"/«»
56l8  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C. 20015
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington.  D. C.
An  independent  -weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   X5  in  the  U.S.;  f6  in  Canada;
SIO  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  fl7  to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED