I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968feb05.pdf

============================================================

Teddy  Kennedy's  Despairing Report from  Saigon,  Pps. 4-5
That's  Not  Restlessness—It's  Fear  of  Shipwreck
"Tonight  our  nation  is  accomplishing  more  for  its  people     a  great  ship  cuts  through  the  sea, the  waters  are  always
than  has  ever been  accomplished before.  .  .  .  Yet  there  is  in     stirred  and  troubled.  .  .  ."
the  land  a certain restlessness.  .  .  . Why?  .  .  .  Because  when                         —Johnson's  State  of  the  Union Message  Jan. 17
I. K Stone's  Weekly
/\7/-M^j   ^'if/A/'f  cinasv    7£i~. \Afanhlt\\                                  ^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVI,  NO.  3
FEBRUARY  5, 1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
The  Menace  We  Face  In  Asia  Is  Really  Our  Own
Instead  of  making  national  policy  from  "hand   to  mouth,"
i.e.  from  crisis  to  crisis,  it  might  be  well  to  stand   back  and
look  at  the  Pueblo  affair   in  longer   and  sobering  perspective.
This  warning  bell  should  remind  us,  first  of  all, that  we  are
involved  in  a  series  of  Asian civil  wars,  and  that  this involve-
ment  is  in   each  case  a  blank  check   on   our  manpower   and
resources  that  any  one  of  five  Asian  satellites  may  decide  to
cash  in  this  or  a  similar  flareup  at  any  time.    Our  national
credit,  honor  or  prestige  will  make  it  very  difficult  not  to  pay
up  when  called.    The  blank  checks  are  held,  in  the  order  of
their  issuance,  by  the  South  Koreans,  by  Chiang  Kai-shek,  by
the  South  Vietnamese,  by  the  Royal  Laotian  regime  and  by
the  Thais.    Added  up,  these  blank  checks  could  involve  us
in   war  with   close   to  a   billion   people,   10,000   miles  away,
spread  over  an  area  about  a  fourth  larger  than  the continental
United  States.   War  on  such  a  scale  would  cripple  our  coun-
try  even  if  in  the  end  we  "won."
The  Other  Side's  Blank  Checks
The   "domino   effect"  which   should   worry   us  is   the   fact
that   once   these  blank  checks  are  cashed  on   our   side,   their
counterparts  may  be  cashed  on  the  other.    North  Korea,  for
example,  holds  blank  checks  on  both  Moscow   and  Peking  in
the   shape   of   10-year  treaties  signed   in   July,   1961,  which
pledge  both  to  give  North  Korea  full   military  and  financial
aid.    So  long  as  fighting  is  confined  to  Southeast  Asia,  only
the  borderlands  of  China  are  affected.    But  North  Korea  has
a  common  border  with  the  U.S.S.R.  and  it  took  some  stern
efforts   by  Truman   last  time  to  keep   the   Korean   war  from
spilling  over  into  Soviet territory and  setting  off a World War.
Now  is  the  time  to  think  about  these  blank  checks.    It  will
be  too  late  when   they  are  called.
The   only  wise  policy  is  to  begin   to  disengage   now   from
Asia.    It  is  a  huge  quicksand.    The  danger  of  being  sucked
into  it  irrevocably  is  heightened  by  the  character  of  our  satel-
lites.    In  every  case  they  are  big  on  talk  but  poor  on  delivery.
The  three  main  satellites,  at  Taipei,  Seoul  and  Saigon,  are  all
opposed   to  any  compromise,   and  loudly  committed  to  recon-
quest  of  their   respective   rival  territories—as  long  as  we  do
the  fighting.   They  are  the  most  arrogant  poor  relations  in  the
world.    Though  all  three  of  them  have  already  failed  in  the
test  of  war, though   all  three  run  police  states  which   would
collapse  without  U.S. support,  though  the  ruling  classes  in  all
three  enrich  themselves  at  our  expense,  they  all  feel  that  these
Clark  Clifford  and  the  Battle  of  Khesanh
When   Clark   Clifford   left   the   White  House  in  1950,
the   then  Secretary  of  Defense  Louis  Johnson,  sent  a
letter  to  several  dozen  leading  U.S. corporations  pro-
posing  that  they  give  Clifford   a  retainer  as  Washing-
ton  counsel.    One  large  corporation,  to  which  Johnson
suggested    $10,000   a   year,   promptly   agreed   to   that
amount.   This  was  the  beginning of  Clifford's  career  as
Washington   handyman,  lobbyist   or  consultant.     Louis
Johnson,  resigning  himself  later  that  year,  sent  around
a  similar  letter  on  his  own  behalf  and  set  up  shop  in
the   same  way.  One   cannot   imagine   McNamara   or
Charlie  Wilson  thus  "passing  the  hat"  among  the  very
corporations  with  whom  they  do  or  did  business   from
the  Pentagon,  but  this  hitherto  untold  story  will shock
no   one   in   the   morally   corrupted   Washington  estab-
lishment.    This  was  the  beginning  of   Clifford's  meta-
morphosis  from  a  Truman liberal  to  an  affluent  nexus
between  the   military-industrial  complex  and  the   gov-
(Continued  on Page   Four)
Asian  tails  can  wag  the  U.S. dog  because  of  our  anti-Com-
munist  obsessions.   We're  like  a  drunken  sailor  being  steered
to  clip  joints  by  Oriental  sharpies.
The  South  Korean  regime  is  acting  up  in  just  this  way  in
the  Pueblo  affair.     "South   Korea  Urges   'Stern'  U.S. Action"
said  a  Washington  Post  headline  over  a  disptach  from  Seoul
by  Richard  Halloran  Jan. 26.     "South   Koreans,"   Halloran
wrote,  "often  remind  Americans that South  Korea  did  not  sign
the  1953 armistice."    Next  day  he  reported,  "There  is  much
sentiment   here  for   a  drive  to  the  Yalu  river  on  the Man-
churian  border  to  eliminate  the  North  Korean  regime."    This
is  a  useful   time  to  recall  that  neither   Diem   nor  any  of   his
successors  ever  accepted  the  terms  of  the  1954 Geneva  armis-
tice  in  Vietnam  and  that  Diem's  U.S. military  advisers,  like
Syngman  Rhee's  in  South  Korea  before  the  last  Korean war,
were  sure  that  their  protege  armies were  the  best  in  Asia  and
would  mop  up  their  northern   rivals  in  no  time  in  any  test.
Rhee  and  his  military  also  talked  big  about  marching  to  the
Yalu  but  were  pushed  back  to  Pusan  at  the  very  southern  tip
of  Korea  in  a  few  days  when  war  came  in 1950.
Few  commentators  have  stopped  to  notice  that  South  Korea
has  three  times  as  many  people  as  North  Korea  and  that  its
armed  forces  (612,000)  are  more  than  half  again  as  large  as
North  Korea's   (368,000).    Yet  Kim  II  Sung  accounted  it  a
(Continued   on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Static's  Weekly,  February  5, 1968
political   triumph   to  get   the   Chinese   armies  out   of   North
Korea  as  early as  1958  while  South  Korea  insists that  we  keep
U.S.  troops  on  its  territory.    We  have  50,000  there  now  and
we'll  need   at  least  10  times  that  number  if  the  Korean   war
flares up  again.
North   Korea's  Progress
If   our   propaganda   were   true,  the   North   Korean   regime
should  have  collapsed  long  ago.    When  the  war  ended,  our
bombers  had   literally  left  no  productive  facilities  standing  in
North  Korea.     The   country  was  wholly  devastated.    Yet  it
has  made  a  miraculous comeback;  Che  Guevara  once  told  me
that  nothing  in  his  tour  of  the  Soviet  bloc  so  impressed  him  as
the  economic  reconstruction  in  North  Korea   and  the  quality
of   its  industrial  products.    Even  Harry   Schwartz,   the   Soviet
bloc  expert  of  the  New   York   Times  recognizes  (Jan.  29)   the
"very  impressive  strides"  which  have  made  north  Korea   "one
of  the  most  industrialized  countries  of   Asia."
There  is  no  sign  that  the   South  has  in  any  way   matched
that  achievement  despite  the  hundreds  of  millions  of   dollars
of   U.S.  aid.    The  magnitude  of  that  aid,  the   supposed   ad-
vantages  of  "free  enterprise"   and  the  difference  in  population
should  have  more   than  compensated   for  the  South's   relative
poverty  in  coal  and  iron.    Our  propaganda   agencies  have  be-
gun  to  crank  out  the  same  line  they  used  in  Vietnam,  that  the
North   is  preparing  to  invade  the  South  because  the  economic
progress  in  the  South   had   made  the  North   despair  of  sub-
verting  it  peacefully.    But  I  have  before  me  a  clipping  from
the  Korea  Times  of  Seoul  for  Jan.  7  which  reports   a  nation-
wide  opinion  poll  conducted  by  the  South  Korean  Ministry of
Public   Information.     People   were   asked   whether   they   felt
there  had  been  any  improvement  in  their  daily  life  in  the  past
two  years.    Less  than  a  third  (31.2%)   thought   it  improved
and  even  they  only  answered   "slightly  better."    This,  from  a
government  poll  in  the  government-controlled  press  of  Seoul!
In  so  unstable  a  situation,  the  military  must  be  ready  for
trouble  and  getting  ready may  itself  set  it  off.   The  Pueblo  in-
cident  may  be  an  accident,  but   such  accidents  are  sooner   or
later  inevitable.    Some  conception  of  the  realities off  the  East
coast  of  North  Korea  may  easily  be  obtained  by  putting  the
charges  of  their  military  and  ours  side  by  side.    Their   radio
charges   a   large   number   of   intrusions   into   their   territorial
waters   by  South   Korean   and   U.S.   vessels.     The    Pentagon
charges    repeated    instances   in   which   our   ships   have    been
And  Isn't  Hot  Pursuit
What  We  Claim  the  Right
To  Practice   in  Cambodia?
"There   has   been   no   absolute  denial   by   American
sources  that  at  some   earlier   stage   during  that  night
the  Pueblo  might  not  have  been  sailing  within  North
Korean   territorial   waters.    If   she   was,   there   can   be
no  outright  assumption  that  North  Korea  was  acting
illegally,  since  the  principle  of  pursuit  from  inside   to
outside  her  territorial waters  could  be  held  to  apply."
—The  Times  (London)  January  25
"harassed"   in   the   same  waters.     Obviously   there   has  been
much  close  and  hostile naval contact  in  the  area.   The  simplest
explanation  why  no  aid  was  sent  the  Pueblo   is  because   (as
explained   in   a   Pentagon   backgrounder   in   the   New    York
Times  Jan.  25  by  Wm.  Beecher) :
There  have  been  many  cases   of   North  Korean  harass-
ment   of   intelligence  ships,   according   to   this  account,  so
neither    the    skipper   of    the    Pueblo,    Comdr.    Lloyd   M.
Bucher,  nor  Air  Force  and  Navy  commanders  expected  any
attempt  to  seize  the  vessel.    Such  ships  are  often  buzzed
by  aircraft,   photographed  by  helicopters  and  closely   ap-
proached  by  gunboats  of  other  nations  not  only  off  Korea
but  in 'many  parts  of   the  world.
Another  reason  the  Pueblo   might  have  felt  secure  is  that
the  North  Koreans  have  no  vessel  to  match  her.  .  This  little
906-ton   ship  "would   become  the  largest  vessel  in  the  North
Korean   Navy  if  her  captors  carried  out  their  threat  to   keep
her."    (UPI  from  Washington  in New  York  Times,  Jan.  25).
Navy  records  list  nothing   larger   in  the  North  Korean   Navy
than   two   540-ton   minesweepers.     Indeed   the    Washington
Star   (Jan.   25)   reported  a  Pentagon   backgrounder   in   which
the  question   of   reprisals  was  discussed.     One  proposal  was
to  seize  a  comparable  ship  in  the North  Korean  Navy  but  this
was  dropped   because  there  was  none  in  it  anywhere  near  that
big.     Maybe  one  way  to  solve   the   crisis  would   be  to  give
North  Korea  as  U.S.  military  aid  a  ship  big  enough   to  make
its  seizure  worthwhile.
The   Johnson   Administration,  according  to   a  Washington
dispatch  in  the  New   York   Times  Jan.  29  is  "confident   that
it  has  a  strong  legal  case"  in  the  capture  of  the  Pueblo.     If
it  is  so  certain,   the  civilized  thing  to  do  would   be  to   offer
to  submit  the  case  to  an  impartial  international  board  of  arbi-
tration  satisfactory to  both  sides.    It  is  possible  that  the   U.S.
The Wall  St.  Journal  Debunks LBJ's Reliance On Business  For  Job Training
"Last  year  I  directed the  Secretary  of  Labor  to  bring  to-
gether  in  one   unified   effort  all  the  various  manpower  and
related   programs   which   could   help   these   people   in   the
worst  areas  of  some  of  our  major  cities  and  in  the country-
side.    The  Concentrated  Employment  Program   was  estab-
lished  for  this  purpose.  .  .  .  Encouraged   by  our  test   pro-
gram  and by  the  progress  that  American industry has  made
in  similar  efforts,   we  should  now  press  forward. ...  To
launch  this  program  I  have  called  on  American industry  to
establish  a  National  Alliance  of   Businessmen."
—Johnson  message  Jan.  23 an job  training  program
"The  fact  is  that  these  grandly  publicized  endeavors  have
failed.  .  .  .  The  response  of   American  business   has   been
a  deep  and  surprising  disappointment  to  Federal  manpower
administrators.  .  .  .  The  goal  of  that  program,  aimed  at  19
urban  slums  and  two  rural  backwaters,  was  to  put  '25,000
—LBJ's  Job  Plan:  Failure  Warmed   Over
to  40,000  people  in  jobs'  within  six  months,  and  to  employ
100,000  to  150,000 more  in  an  additional 50 areas  during  the
current  fiscal  year,  Secretary  Wirtz  explained  [last  March
15],  .  .  .  Nine  months  after  its  enactment  the  Concentrated
Employment  Program  had  provided jobs  for  6,900   persons,
according  to  a  Labor  Department  summary  as  of  Dec.  15.
'Most'  of  the  6,900 jobs  are  in  industry, officials  say,  though
they  provide  no  breakdown.  .  .  .
"Private  industry's  disappointing  response   is  most  glar-
ingly   evident  in   examining  the   12,025  other   people   still
enrolled  in  some  kind  of  job  training  as  of  Dec.  15.  Exactly
552  of  these  were  in  on-the-job  training  for  a  private  em-
ployer.    In  Pittsburgh,  home  of  big  steel,  there  were  just
seven.    Oakland  had  8—which  was  8  more  than  there  were
in  the  nation's  biggest  city, with the  nation's  biggest  slums.
In  New   York  there  were  none."
,  by  James  P.  Gannon  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal  Jan.  22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stmie's  Weekly,   February   5, 19C8
does  have  a  good   legal   case   if   one   looks   only  at  the   spot
where  the  Pueblo  was  first  hailed.*    That  may  indeed   have
been   outside   North  Korea's   12-mile  limits.    But  we   doubt
whether  the  U.S.  would  have  a  good  legal  case  if  the  wider
circumstances  were  subjected  to  such  an  inquiry.    The   gov-
ernment  has  yet  to  state  categorically that  the  Pueblo  did  not
intrude   earlier  into  North   Korea's   territorial  water.    These
spy  ships  tend  to  zig-zag  in  and  out  of  territorial waters  be-
cause  they  cannot  get  into  the  necessary visual  range  of  coastal
radar  installations without  approaching  more  closely  to  shore.
They  cannot  "spook"  the  installations unless  they  come  close.
Is  There  A  Right  to  Spy?
Beyond  that  lies  a  broader  question.    Has  a  big  power  any
right   to  spy  out   the   defense  installations  of   a  small   power
whether  from  the  skies  or  the  seas?    Can  legal  limits   appli-
cable  to  fisheries,  commercial  traffic   or  peaceful  passage   also
cover  such  hostile  activities?    If  North  Korea  had  a  fleet  of
bombers   and   sent  out   electronic   ships   to  spy  out  the  radar
defenses   of   San   Francisco   or   New   York   from   offshore   in
preparations    for   attack,   would   we   leave   them   alone   just
because  they  kept  outside  our  territorial  limits  of  three  miles?
Or  would  we  claim  that  self-defense  gave  us  a  right  to  stop
their  activities?
For  citizens  of  Wonsan,  these  activities  off  its  shores  must
raise  terrifying  memories.     On  March   29,  1951,  a  U.S.   Ad-
miral  revealed  that  a  naval  task  force  had  been  bombarding
Wonsan  for  41  days  and  nights   "the   longest   sustained   naval
* Reuters  from  Tokyo  in  the  New  York  Times  Jan.  27  re-
ported  the  Washington  correspondent  of  Sankei  Shimbun  in-
formed  it  that  the  North  Korean  radio  on  Jan.  9  warned  the
Pueblo   action   would  be  taken  against   it   if   its   intelligence
activities   were  continued.    On  checking,   however,  we  found
this  report  untrue.   The  text  of  the  North  Korean  broadcast
warned  that  action  would be  taken  if  U.S.  spy  ship  intrusions
continued   but   did  not   mention   the   Pueblo   by  name.     The
Washington   correspondent   of   Sankei   Shimbun  told  us   the
reference  to  the  Pueblo  was  inserted  in  his  dispatch  by  error
in  Tokyo.    In  addition,  from  the   best   we  could  learn,   the
Pueblo  was  not  in  those  waters  two  weeks  earlier.  —IPS
Those  Dirty  Little  Devious  Reds
"Two   young  U.S.  Marines  told  today  of   two   weeks
of  captivity  by  the  North  Vietnamese,  who,  they  said,
tried  to  be  friendly.  .  .  .  The  catalogue  of  enemy kind-
nesses  included,  they  said,  the  gift  of  a  Gideon  Bible,
cigarettes,   cookies,  vitamin   pills  and   a   water-buffalo
steak  and  medical  treatment  for  their  bleeding  and  in-
fected  feet.    In  fact,  on  the  march,  North  Vietnamese
soldiers  gave  them  their  own  shoes  to  wear,  they  said.
The  Marines  said  they  were  not  pressed   for  informa-
tion.   The  only  hint  of  propagandizing came  when  they
were  asked  to  read  pamphlets  of  the  National  Libera-
ation   Front.     In   a   war   that   is   often    fought   without
Quarter   by   both   sides,   such   treatment    suggested    to
some   observers   that   the   marines'  escape   might   have
been  permitted   so  that   they  might  return  to  tell   their
story."     [Emphasis  added.]
—Tom  Buckley, Danang, New York  Times  Jan 27
How   fortunate    "some   observers"   are   available   to
wash   our   brains  clear   of   any   subversive   suggestion
there   might   be   human   kindness   on   the   other   side.
Couldn't  we  appeal  to  the  UN  Security  Council  against
this  diabolic  failure  to  mistreat  our  men?
or  air  bombardment  of  a  city  in  history."  Rear  Admiral  Allen
E.  Smith  exulted,  "In  Wonsan  you  cannot  walk  in  the  streets.
You  cannot  sleep  anywhere  in  the  24  hours,   unless   it  is  the
sleep  of  death."    (Paris  ed.  NY   Herald   Tribune   March  30,
1951).    For  Russia   and  America,  such  spying  and  counter-
spying  are  only  an  electronic  extension   of  mutual  deterrence.
For  a  small  power  it  seems  a prelude  to  devastating  attack.  Do
big  powers  have  the  right  so  to  undermine   the  defenses  of
small   powers   just   because   the   big   powers   can   afford    such
expensive   electronic   devices?
For  the  American  people,,  this  raises  disturbing   questions.
If   one  of  our  naval  vessels   is  caught  in  this  kind  of   cruel,
unfair  and  dirty  business,  do  we  let  ourselves  be  drawn  into
war  over  it,  or  do  we  keep  our  shirts  on  and  try  by  patient
negotiation    (and   if  necessary  apology)   to   recover   the   poor
chaps  we  have  sent  out  on  this  errand?    Nothing  could   be
(Continued   on  Page   Six)
An  Army Expert In  Guerrilla^ War  Sees A  New  Vietnam  Developing  In  Our Ghettoes
'During  the  next  few  years  organized  urban  insurrection
could  explode  to  the  extent  that  portions  of  large  American
cities  could  become  scenes  of  destruction  approaching  those
of  Stalingrad  in  World  War II.     ...
"While  application of  pure  military  firepower  would  be  a
poor  solution,  political efforts  might  prove  not  much  better.
There  are  measures   that   offer   a  better   solution   if  we  are
to  keep  our  cities  from  becoming  battlegrounds:  penetra-
tion   by  police  intelligence,   application  of   military  intelli-
gence,  and reliance  on  traditional   FBI  methods.  Such  efforts
must  begin  now.  .  .  .
"Furthermore,  there  will  also  be  needed  among  the  well
established   political-tactical-military  informants  those   who
can  help  guide  troops  and  police  through  the  maze  of  build-
ings,   stair-wells,   streets,   alleyways,   tunnels,   and   sewers
that  may  be  the  key  to  tactical  success.    In  the  countryside
we  would  call  this  elementary  or  'grass  roots'  intelligence;
in  the  city  there  will  be  a  similar  need.  .  .  .
"Such  cement-and-brick 'jungles'  can  offer  better  security
to  snipers  and  city  guerrillas  than  the  Viet  Cong  enjoy  in
their  jungles,  elephant  grass  and  marshes.    This  suggests
protracted  warfare  of   a   very   new   kind   if   city   guerrilla
forces   become  well  organized   by  dissident  and  determined
leaders.  .  . .
"Urban   riot   has   been   established   as   an   instrument  of
racial  rebellion.    But  the  riots  have  not  been  strictly  one  of
Negroes  clashing  with  whites;  often  the  rioters  were  reliev-
ing  their frustrations  at  their  ghetto  surroundings  and  rela-
tive  poverty,  and  upon  authorities.    It  is  important  to  re-
member  this,   especially   where  it   pertains   to  slums.    Vio-
lence   in   the   future   may   even   be   by   whites    protesting
against   poverty  and  their  environment.    White  or  black,
here  is  where  the  political  aspect  looms  large  because  com-
munist  elements  can  penetrate  urban  America  and  foment
serious  trouble.  .  .  .
" 'Fight  for  something'  is  an  old  American tradition.  Any
time  hence,  people  in  a  large  slum  in  a  congested   metropoli-
tan  area  could  fight  guerrilla  fashion  for  their  own  local
aims.    They  might  not  be  fighting  the  federal  government,
but  merely  the  city  or  the  state.    As  in  Vietnam  today,  the
fighters  by  night  could  be  workers  by  day.  .  .  .
"From  a  military  standpoint,  successful   warfare  against
urban-based  guerrillas  in  American  cities  could  be  as   diffi-
cult  and  prolonged  as  the  fighting  in  Vietnam  if  the  insur-
rection  is  well  organized."
—Col. Robert  Rigg  in Army  Magazine  January   1968
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  5, 1968
Teddy  Kennedy's  Despairing  Report  on  His  Latest  Trip  to  Vietnam
Abridged  from  Senator  Edward  M.  Kennedy's   address
Jan.   25  to  the  World   Affairs    Council  of  Boston:
One  left  Saigon  in  1965  feeling  things  were  going  to  get
better,  simply  because  they  could  not  get  worse.    I  left  with
the  hope  that  some  real  progress  was  on  the  horizon.    On
my  return  this  year  from  Vietnam,  I  am  forced  to  report  that
continued  optimism  cannot  be  justified.    I  found  that  the kind
of  war  we  are  fighting  in  Vietnam  will  not  gain  our  long-
range  objectives;  that  the  pattern  of  destruction  we  are  creat-
ing  can  only  make  a  workable  political  future  more   difficult;
and  that  the  government  we  are  supporting  has  given  us  no
indication  it  can  win  the  confidence of  its  own  people.
Some  in  Luxury,   Some  in   Tombs
Saigon  has  grown  over  the  past  three  years  by  almost  two
million  people.    The  contrasts  there  are  painful.    A  small,
privileged   segment   of   Vietnamese   society  is  thriving.    But
those  who  have been  driven  in  from  the  countryside and  must
now  live  in  the  streets  and  the  hovels  present  a  different  pic-
ture.    Vietnam  is  a  nation  in  which  reverence  for  the  dead  is
the  highest   trait  of  character.    Yet  I  saw  people   in   Saigon
who  are  forced  to  live  in  graveyards,  and  have  even  hollowed
out  tombs  to  find  shelter.    This  is  a  city  where  thousands  of
young  men  18  and  19 years old  flash  about  the  streets on  their
motorbikes,  wearing  cowboy  hats  and  leather  gloves,   exempt
from  the  war.    Yet  this  is  also  a  city  where  40  per  cent  of
the  death   toll   is  accounted  for   by  children  under  two  years
of  age,  children  killed  primarily  by  dysentery  or  pneumonia.
From  the  air,  Vietnam  is  a  beautiful  land,  but  when  you
descend  from  the  sky  you  see  clearly  the  pockmarks  of  war,
and  when  you  walk  through  the  villages  you  see  the  ravages
of  war  in  the  faces  of  the  sick  and  wounded  children.  Beyond
the   villages   abandoned   fields   stretch   to   the   horizon,   and
scorched  outlines  of  houses  burned  to  the  ground  sometimes
cover  more  than   half   the  land   area  of  a  province.    Whole
areas  which  have  been  bulldozed  to  the  ground  are  common-
place,   and   so  are  wide  corridors  of   defoliated   forests,   and
Heroes   Abroad  But  (Negro)  Bums  At  Home?
"From  time  immemorial  there  has  been  nobody  to  do
the  fighting  except  the  flower  of  our  manhood.    But  we
still  can't  condone   their  crimes  in  the  street."
—Mrs.  Richard  Hughes,  wife   of   New   Jersey's    Gov-
ernor,  replying   at   the  White   House   to  Eartha  Kitt's
anti-war  protest,  Washington  Evening  Star,  Jan.  19.
fields  that   once  produced  food.    Here   and  there  are  com-
pounds  of  long  sheds with  shiny  tin  roofs—the  refugee  camps
where  thousands upon  thousands of  people  have  been  herded
together,  uprooted  from  all  they  ever  knew  or  wanted.
I  had  the  opportunity  to  visit  more  than  25  refugee  camps
and  talk  to  hundreds  of  their  people.    We  tend  to  think  of
refugees  as  a  small minority  of  people  who  have  been  caught
in  a passing conflict.    But  when  I  discuss the  refugees in Viet-
nam,  I  am  talking  about  literally  25  per  cent  of  that nation's
population,  all  of  whom  are  disaffected,   all  of  whom  hold  a
strong  resentment for  whatever side  tore  them  away  from  the
simplicity  of  their  lives  to  the  squalor  and  the  bureaucracy  of
the  camps.    I  found   a  great  deal  of,  resentment  toward  the
United   States  among   these  people.     The   vast   majority—I
would  judge over  80  per  cent—claimed  they  were  either  de-
posited  in  camps  by  the  Americans  or  fled  to  camps  in  fear
of  American airplanes and  artillery.    Only  a  handful claimed
they  were  driven  from  their  homes  by  the  Viet  Cong.     The
French,  one  leader told  me,  committed many  sins  in Vietnam.
But  the  French  did  not  wipe  out  their  villages,  or  burn  down
their  homes,  or  herd  them  into  enclosures.
One   further   impression—and   perhaps   the   strongest  and
most  depressing—is  the  impression  of  the  Viet  Cong  them-
selves.    The  Viet  Cong  are  driven by  a  belief  in  the  Tightness
of  their  cause  that  comes  from  years  of  colonial  rule  and  in-
justice   inflicted   by  passing   governments.     This   belief   has
grown  strong  on  a  sense of  nationalism  carefully  nurtured  and
(Continued   on  Page   Five)
Clifford's  Talents  Would Be  Valuable If  Johnson  Moved Toward  Negotiation
(Continued  from  Page   One)
eminent.   To the  credit  of  newspaper  business,  his  lucrative
associations,   including  the  names  of   the  biggest   like   the
du  Fonts,  RCA  and  General  Electric,  have  been  published.
Usually  such  matters  are  left   to  Drew  Pearson  and  Jack
Anderson  but  this  time   they  could  be  read  in  a   brilliant
unsigned  portrait  in  the  New  York  Times  Jan.  20,  in  a  dis-
patch  by  Marquis  W.  Childs  in  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch
Jan.  21  (the   most  important   paper  in  Clifford's  home  state
of  Missouri)  and  in  two  admirable  personality  sketches  by
Richard   Harwood   in  the  Washington  Post  and  by  Patrick
Anderson  in  the  New  York  Times  Magazine  Jan.  28.
From  the  standpoint   of   the   military-industrial   complex
and  its  allies  in  Congress,  the  hated  McNamara  has  been
replaced   with   one  of   their   own.     Clifford   is   a   hard-liner
from   way   back;   he  helped  to  formulate  the  Truman    Doc-
trine.    From  Johnson's  standpoint,  he  will  have  in  the   Pen-
tagon  a  man  on  whom  he  can  utterly  rely,  whether  in  wid-
ening'the  war  or  (if  he  chooses)  in  the  politically  perilous
task  of  trying  by  negotiation  to  work  his  way  out.   Clifford's
popularity   on  the  Hill  and  his  personal  gifts  as  a  super-
smoothie  would  be  immensely  valuable  in  any  such  attempt.
So  would  the  fact  that  Clifford  is  primarily   a  man  of  poli-
tics  and  not  of  ideology;  a  shrewd  manipulator  of  things-
as-they-are  and  not  a   fanatic.
It  is  this  which  lends  added  interest   to  Clifford's   appear-
ance  Jan.  25  before  the  Senate  Armed  Services   Committee.
He   stroked   all   the   hawks   (except   Thurmond)    the   right
way,   down  to  a  friendly   reference   to  the  need  for  a  new
bomber.     But  he  also  for  the  first  time  set   forth   in   clear
language  a  negotiating  position  which  begins  to  offer  some
hope.'  Under  it  the  other  side  could  "continue  to  transport
the  normal  amount  of  goods,  munitions,   men  to  South  Viet-
nam"  after  our bombing  had  ceased.   This  is  very   different
from  Rusk's  formula   that  Hanoi  stop  its  "half  of  the   war"
if  we  stopped  the  bombing.  We  are  reprinting  what  Clifford
said  in  a  box  on  the  next  page.
Hanoi   wants   the   bombing   stopped   unconditionally    but
must  know  resumption   would  be  inevitable   if  it  followed  by
stepping  up  the  war.     Surely   a  tacit   understanding   along
these  lines  is  possible  while  peace  talks  begin.    In  this  per-
spective,  the  battle  building  up  around  Khesanh  as  we  go  to
press  must  seem  a  part  of  the  bargaining.    How  much   is
"normal"  supply?     How  much  is  tKV.cessation  of   bombing
worth  to  the  other  side  if  it  can,  despite  our  bombing,  not
only  continue  its  economic  life  and  furnish  the  few  tons   a.
day  needed  by  the  guerrillas  but  mount  what  Westmoreland
calls  a  "sizeable  invasion"  around    Khesanh?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February   5, 1908
Why   Saigon's  Corruptionists  Think  They  Can Do  As  They  Please
(Continued   from   Page   Four)
by  communist  political cadres.    It  is true  that  their  forces  have
been  depleted  by  our  weapons;  in  the  Delta,  we  are  capturing
14  and   15  year  old  boys.    But  it  is  just  as  true  that  in   the
past  six  months  there  has  been   more  enemy   activity  in   that
area  than  there  was  when  the  Viet  Cong  were  at  the  height of
their  strength.    I  believe  the  people  we  are  righting  for  do
not   fully   have  their  hearts  in  the  struggle.
We  are  losing  9,000  lives  and  spending  $30  billion  a year.
But  Saigon—faced  with  an  enemy  which  controls  more  than
half   of   its  land  area—has  yet  to  declare   a  state  of  national
mobilization.    Half  of  the  American  boys  fighting in  Vietnam
are  draftees.    But  in  Saigon,  it  is  common  knowledge   that  a
young  man  can  buy  his  way  out  of  the  draft,  or  if  he  is  in
service  can  buy  his  release.
Indifference   to  Civilian  Victims
South  Vietnam's  civilians who  have  been  injured  as  a  result
of  the  war  are  victims of  the  same  lack  of  concern.    Each  year
150,000   civilians  are  wounded   in   the  war,  and   more   than
25,000  are killed.    Only  150  Vietnamese  doctors  are  available
to  treat  these  civilian  casualties,  and  they  must  also  serve  the
entire  population   of  over  13  million.    And  yet  I  learned,  in
discussions  with  members  of  the  government,   that   they  plan
to  divert  many  of  this  meager  number  by  drafting  more   doc-
tors  into  the  military.
There  are  those  who  say  that  such  a  lack  of  compassion   is
normal  in  a  continent  which  has  seen  so  much  suffering   for
so  many  centuries.    In  matters  such  as  this,  they  maintain,  we
must  make  allowances  for  the  Asian  mind.    But  I  visited  more
than  twenty  provincial  hospitals   and  dispensaries.    I   entered
pediatric  wards  at  11  o'clock  at  night  and   saw  rats   in   the
rafters  and  filth  on  the  floors,  windows  without  screens,  chil-
dren  wide-eyed  with  pain,  and  no  Vietnamese  personnel  to
comfort   them  or  care  for  them.     And  I  cannot  believe   that
this  suffering   is  made  any  easier  by  the  cultural   background
of   the   sufferers.
I  say that  most  of  the  officials  in  Saigon  do  not  care  about
these  stricken  people;  that  they  are  more  interested  in  main-
taining  their  own  positions  of  power  than  in  helping  the  vic-
tims  of  the  war;  and  that  from  the  way  they  look  upon   the
people  outside  Saigon,  and  the  way  they  treat  the   peasants
elsewhere,   they  have  become  much  like  the  colonialists  who
If  Johnson  insists  on  reciprocity,   why  can't  Ho  Chi
Minh  promise  not  to  bomb  New   York   and  Chicago  if
we  don't  bomb  Haiphong  and  Hanoi?
trained   them.
Along  with  this  lack  of  urgency  and  this  indifference   to-
ward  the  enemy  and  toward  its  own  people,  the  government
of  South  Vietnam  is  infested  as  well  with  corruption.    Gov-
ernment   jobs  are  bought  and  paid  for  by  people  seeking  a
return  on  their  investments.    Police  accept  bribes.     Officials
and   their  wives  run   operations  in   the  black  market.     AID
funds  and  hospital  supplies  ate  diverted  into  private  pockets.
We  now  have  given  South  Vietnam  $30  million  a  year  for
refugee   relief.     In   my  many   conversations  with   the   hard-
pressed   American  refugee   personnel,   it   was   estimated  that
only  half  of  the  supplies  ever  reach  the  refugee.
If  negotiations  are  not  forthcoming,  or  if  they  face  a  great
delay,  we  must  ask ourselves whether  the  gains  we  can  achieve
are  worth  the  staggering  costs  we  now  incur.    American   offi-
cials  I  talked  to  in  Vietnam  are  emphatic  that  we  must  not
expect   too  much  from  the  central  government,  and  that  we
cannot  hope  for  an  end  to  our  involvement  for  another  five
or  ten  years.    It  is  easy  to  accept  five  to  ten  years  in  the  ab-
stract,  but  it  becomes  more  difficult  when  years  are  translated
into  dollars—another  Si50  to  $300  billion  at  the  current  level
of  spending.     And  I  find  it  impossible  to  talk  of  our  future
in  Vietnam  in  terms   of   another   50,000   to   100,000   young
Americans  dead.
I  believe that  if  we  cannot  achieve  negotiations  in  the  very
near  future,  we  should   begin   immediately  to   moderate   sig-
nificantly   our   military  activities  in  South   Vietnam   to   levels
more  tolerable  to  all  and  more  commensurate  with  our  limited
aims.    Our  overriding  goal  should  be  to  maximize the  safety
and  security  of  the  Vietnamese  people  and  our  own  soldiers,
rather  than  to  search  out  the  enemy  in  his  territory.
We   can  have  an  enormous  influence  over  the   government
of   South  Vietnam  if  only  we  choose   to  use  it.    They   know
that  if  we  were  not  there  they  would  collapse.     But   today
many   of   their   officials   believe   that,  because  of   our   fear   of
China  and  of  our  deep  concern  about  communist  advances  in
Southeast  Asia,  we  are  tied  to  Vietnam  irrevocably.    As  a  re-
sult,  I  believe  they  feel  they  can  act  as  they  wish  towards  the
war  and  towards  their  own  people.
The  Text  of  Clark  Clifford's  New  Negotiating  Offer  To  North Vietnam
Senator  Thurmond.    When  you  spoke  of  negotiating,   in
that  case  you  would be willing  to  have  a  cessation  of bomb-
ing.  I  presume  that  that  would contemplate that  they  would
stop  their  military  activities,  too,  if  we  would  be  expected
to  have  a  cessation  of  bombing.
Mr.  Clifford.   No,  that  is  not  what  I  said.    I  do  not expect
them  to  stop  their   military  activities.    I  would  expect  to
follow  the  language  of  the  President  when  he  said  that  if
they  would  agree   to  start  negotiations  promptly  and  not
take  advantage  of  the  pause  in  the  bombing.
Senator  Thurmond.    What  do  you   mean   by  taking  ad-
vantage  if  they  continue  their  military activities?
Mr.   Clifford.     Their   military  activity   will  continue   in
South  Vietnam,  I  assume,  until  there  is  a  cease  fire  agreed
upon.    I  assume  that  they  will  continue  to  transport  the
normal  amount  of  goods,  munitions,  men,  to  South  Vietnam.
I  assume  that  we  will  continue  to  maintain  our  forces  and
support  our  forces  during that  period.    So  what  I  am  sug-
gesting  is,  in  the  language  of  the  President,  that  he  would
insist  that  they  not  take advantage of  the  suspension  of  the
bombing.
Senator  Thurmond.   How  would  you  keep them  from tak-
ing  advantage  if  we  had  a  cessation  of bombing?
Mr.  Clifford.    There  is  no  way  to  keep  them  from taking
advantage.    If  they  state  they  are  going  to  refrain  from
taking  advantage,  and  then  refuse  to  do  go,  then  they  have
not  met  their  agreement,   and  the  conditions  for  the  nego-
tiations  have  failed.
Senator  Thurmond.    And  then  if   they  did  violate  that,
you  would  favor  then  resuming  bombing,  I  would  presume.
Mr.  Clifford.    I  would  assume  we  would  have  no  alterna-
tive.    —Senate Armed  Services Committee Hearing, Jan.  25
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  5, 1968
Capturing  An  Enemy  Spy  Ship  Is  Hardly  Piracy
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
sillier   than   the   voices  in   Congress   asking  us   to   deal   with
North  Korea  as  we  dealt  a  century  and  a  half  ago  with  the
Barbary  pirates.    Piracy  is  the  seizure  of   commercial  vessels
on  the  high  seas  for  loot.    The  North  Koreans  have  not  been
engaged   in  piracy.    They  may  have  mistaken  the  position  of
our   spy  ship  when   they  seized  it  but  that   is  hardly  piracy.
One  who  pleads   the   law  must   come   into  court  with   clean
hands  and  ours  are  not  clean.    In  any  case,  as  Senator  Mans-
field  said  in  the  Senate  Jan.   29,  "the   responses   in  the  Bar-
bary  Wars,  a  century  and  a  half  away,  are  not  necessarily  the
answers  for   a  time  and  place  when  nuclear  war  is  only  sec-
onds  away."    As  the  Wall  Street  Journal  said  in  an  editorial
the  same  day:
Remember  the  U-22?    If  the  U.S.  government considers
it  necessary,   and  it  doubtless  is  in  the  world  as  it   is,  to
send  a  lone  reconnaissance plane  high  over  Russia,  it  must
realize  the  risk  and  be  prepared  to  lose   the  plane.    The
U.S.  never  regarded  its  shooting  down  by  the  Soviets  as  a
cause  of  war.    Exactly  the  same  with  the  Pueblo. ...  If
the  U.S.  views  that  kind  of  mission  as  essential,  it  should
be  prepared  to  accept  what  can  happen  without overreact-
ing  to  the  point  of  risking  actual  war.
If   Pyongyang   did   seize  the   vessel   deliberately  to  help   the
North   Vietnamese,   they  have   certainly  succeeded.     For   the
impotence  it  dramatizes  is  the  best  possible  argument   for  dis-
engaging  from  that  war.
The  Greatest  Dissenter   of  Them  All
"And   I  can  tell  you  that  the  President  of  the  United
States  is  going  to  dissent  from  polls,  pickets, pundits,
propaganda,  and protests. ...  He is  going  to dissent  by
acting  in  the  national  interest.   He  is  going  to  dissent
by  following  the  road  of  responsibility,  no  matter  how
many  roadblocks  may  be  placed  there  by  people  who
lack  maturity,  good  sense,  courage,  decency  or  a  com-
bination  of  all  four."
—Lawrence  F.  O'Brien,  Pastmaster  General,   speak-
ing   to  the  Springfield,    Mass.,  Kiwanis  Club,  Jan.   12,
1968,  from   the  Congressional   Record,  Jan.  18,  1968,  p.
Hi 41.
Greece  as  Symbol  of  Our  Failure
More   importantly   the   Pueblo    affair    illustrates   how   we
may   be   drawn   into   wider   war   without   our   knowledge   or
consent   so  long   as  we  have   entangled   our   future   in   these
unsettled  Asian  civil  wars.    It  is  hard  to  know  what  is really
being  done  in  our  name   10,000  miles  away.    It  is  hard  to
control   our   own   armed   forces   and   even  harder   to   control
those  of  our  allies.    A  major  goal   of   a  wise  foreign   policy
would  be  to  disengage  from  them  by  encouraging  the  rise  of
representative  regimes  in  place  of  the  present  military  dictator-
ships  and  through   these  regimes  moving  toward  reunification
of   these  divided  countries.
It  is  20  years  since,  with  the  Truman  Doctrine,   we  set  out
to  "make  the  world  safe  for  freedom"  and  Greece,  the  coun-
try  whose   fate  was  immediately  at   stake,  is  now   a  military
dictatorship.     It   is   17  years  since   the   Korean   war   led   us
to  throw  a  protectorate  over  Formosa  and  South  Korea,   and
13  years  since  by  the  SEATO  pact  we  extended   this  to  all
Southeast  Asia.    Everywhere we  have  failed.   The  fruits  have
been  dictatorship and  war.    The  Pueblo  affair  warns  us  to  get
out  of  Asia.    The  despairing  voices  of  Greek   democrats   like
Melina   Mercouri   and   Andreas   Papandreou   warn   us   that
Greece,  where  the  Pax  Americana  was  launched,  may  become
Europe's  first  Vietnam   now   that   American   support   of   the
dictators  leaves  the  Greek  democrats  no  way  out  but  guerrilla
war.    Military  power,   military  thinking,  have  led  us  to  this
brink.    If  we  cannot   disengage  we  may  wake  up   some  day
and  find  that,  like  Rome,  we  have  through  the  sheer   weight
of  our  military  responsibilities  crushed   at  home  the   freedom
we  destroy  abroad.                                                              Jan.  30
HAT'S   OFF   l-o   National   Educational   Television   for   defying
Congressional   bullies   and   broadcasting    Felix   Greene's   moving
film  on  North  Vietnam  with   David  Schoenbrun's   brilliant  col-
oquy  about   it  with  Prof.  Robert    Scalapino.
PERSONAL  NOTE:  For  the   best   (and  only  account)    of  our
birthday  party   (it  was wonderful  fun)   see Michael  C.  D.    Mac-
donald  in  New  York's  Village  Voice  for  Jan.   25.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes
FOR  STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of  Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement   wished d
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................   State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                  2/5/68
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington, D.  C. 20015
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid    '
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.     Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published   and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.     Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada-
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mall  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED