I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968sep09.pdf

============================================================

Behind  the  Czech  Take-Over,  P.  4
The  Real  Reason  Why  The  Bombing  Of  The  North   Was  Restricted   Above  The  20th   Parallel,   P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
/\/^-fcii»   M^asini'scl^asi     $«•»_  \\//>f>lniti\                                               ^pp^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI, NO.   18
SEPTEMBER   9,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
When A 2-Party  System  Becomes  A 1-Party Rubber  Stamp
When   a   country   is  denied   a   choice   on   the   most  burn-
ing   issue  of   the   time,   the   war   in  Vietnam,   then   the two-
party   system   has   become   a   one-party   rubber   stamp.    This
is  the  first  and   essential  point  to  be  made   in   the   wake  of
the  Democratic   and  Republican  conventions.   The  Establish-
ment  and  the  military  have  locked  the  ballot  boxes.    If   the
results   are  an   intensified   alienation  among   the   youth   who
must  fight  this  war, an  increase  in  resistance  to  the  draft,  a
rise  in  street  demonstrations  and  violence,  this  is  the   cause
and  not  some  occult  conspiracy.   The  real  conspiracy  was  the
one   which    wove   together   Eisenhower's   last   inflammatory
message  to  the  Republican  convention   with  the  iron  control
Johnson   and   Daley   exercised    over   the   Democrats.     Both
parties,  both   candidates,   have   been   drafted.    The   Pentagon
has  won  the  election   even   before   the   votes   are  cast.
The  Ragged  Army   Which  Exposed  The  Truth
The   second    thing   which   needs   to   be   said   is   that   the
country  owes  a  debt  of  gratitude   to  the  tatterdemalion  army
of  yippies,  hippies  and  peaceniks—and  to  their  leaders  David
Dellinger,   Tom   Hayden   and   Jerry  Rubin—who   frightened
the   Establishment    into   such   elaborate    security   precautions
in  Chicago.   They  made  opposition   to  the  war  visible.   The
special   barbed   wire  fences   around   the   Amphitheatre   which
turned  "Stalag  '68"  into  the  favorite  joke  of  the   Convention,
the   system   of   electronically   checked   passes   so  intricate .that
it  led  to  a  whole   series  of  angry  clashes  with  the   delegates
themselves,  the  vast  concentration  of  police,  National  Guards-
men  and  troops,  as  if  in  preparation  for  a  revolution,  drama-
tized  for  the  whole   world   to  see  that  there  was  something
indelibly  undemocratic   about   this  Democratic   convention.
Of   course  security   precautions  were   justified.    The   Secret
Service,   the   FBI   and   the   Chicago    police   had   a   right   to
be   fearful    of   what   might   happen,    especially   if    Johnson
himself   had   turned   up   and   this   was  the   grim  eventuality
I   believe   they   had   in  mind.    But   the   question   not   to  be
lost   sight  of   is  why   for   the  first  time   in  American  history
a  convention   and  a  President   required   so  much   protection.
This  was  the   scandal   it   proved   impossible   to   hide   and
this   is   why   the   police   were   so   brutal   in   dealing   with
the   camera   men   and   the   reporters.    They   were   the   main
enemy  of  the  proceedings,   the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  country,
the   unwelcome   witnesses   of   the   rigging   within   the  Con-
vention   and   the   repression   without.    Johnson   and   Daley,
alike  in  so  many  ways,  are  alike  in  their  obsessive animosity
to  the  press.    Daley's  big  and  beefy   police   seemed   to  crack
the   skulls   of   the   TV   and   press   reporters   with   a   special
gusto   and   as   if   given   free   rein   by   their   masters.    Their
conduct   was   in   its   own   way   a   resounding   tribute   to   the
From  Chicago's  Pro-Police  Hearst   Paper
"Scores   of   people  under  the   Palmer  House  canopy
watched  in  horror  as  a  policeman  went  animal  when
a   crippled   man  couldn't  get   away  fast   enough.   The
man   hopped  with   his  stick  as   fast   as   he   could,  but
the    policeman    shoved   him    in   the    back,    then    hit
him   with  the   nightstick,   hit   him   again,   and  finally
crashed  him  into  a  lamppost.   Clergymen,  medics,  and
this   cripple  were  the  special  pigeons  last  night.   At
State   and  Adams  a  nightstick  cracked  open  the  head
of  a  clergyman who  didn't  move  fast  enough.  He  was
lying   in   a   store   doorway,  bleeding   heavily,  when   I
left ...  It  sickens  me  to  write  this  because    I   cm  on
the  police's  side,  and  I  went  out  at  1  o'clock  yesterday
to  write  exactly  what  I  saw   and  I  was  sure  it  would
bring  credit  to  the  police.  .  .  .  [Then  after  describing
the  arrest  of  Jerry  Rubin,  a  radical  leader,  on  a  quiet
street  walking  with  a  girl  friend]  Rubin  was  grabbed
off   the  street   and  rushed  to  jail  because  of   what  he
thinks.   This   is   the  way   it   is   done  in  Prague.   This
is   what  happens  to   candidates   who  finish  second   in
Vietnam.    This   is   not   the   beginning   of   the   police
state,   it  IS  the   police  state."
—Jack   Mabley   in   the   Chicago  American  Aug.   29.
First    Amendment.     It    also    gave    middle   class   whites    a
taste  of  the  police  brutality  which  is  an  old   story  to  blacks.
The  Convention  was  a  triumph  of  what  the  Russian Com-
munists  would   call  "democratic  centralism",  that   submission
of  "the lower   organs   of   the   party  to   the   higher"   which
they  are  reimposing  in  Prague.   The   delegates   chosen   were
less  representative  of  the  party  rank-and-file  than  of  the  party
machines,  and   the   committees  were  even   less  representative
than   the   delegates.    A   Citizens'  Committee,  to   include  re-
spected  retired  jurists,  ought  to  be  formed  to  take testimony
from   delegates,   demonstrators  and   the  police  on   the  whole
question  of  how  this  convention  and   the  protests  against  it
were  handled.   It  would  show  I  believe  that  security  was  used
as  a  way  to  control  the  convention.  If  assassination plots  were
as  thick  as  Daley  and  the  police  now  claim—and  Humphrey
idiotically  echoes   them—then   it  is  strange  that  no  attempts
were   made,   no   shots  fired,  no   bombs   thrown.    For   in   the
crowded  hallways  of   the  main  hotels  including  the   Hilton,
it  would  have  been  easy  for  an  assassin  to  take  a  potshot   at
any  one  of  the  candidates.   There  security  was   poor.
On  the  other  hand,  at  the  Amphitheatre,  guards  were  used
to  harass  McCarthy  and   McGovern   delegates.    The   opposi-
tion  on  the  floor  was  hamstrung  by  lack  of  phone  communi-
cations  and   by  the  arbitrary  and   arrogant  rulings  that   Carl
Albert  as  Chairman  applied  to  any  attempt  to  protest.    The
Johnson   steamroller   stopped    the    effort    of   the    Humphrey
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  9,  19G8
(Continued  jrom  Page   One)
forces   to  put   a   slightly   milder   face   on   the   pro-war   Viet-
nam  plank.   Not   the  slightest  deviation  was  allowed.    John-
son  and  Daley  are  masters  of  meticulous  detail,*   accustomed
to  rule   their  kingdoms   with  an   iron  hand.   So  it  was  that
a    convention    strikingly   cool    despite    its    unrepresentative
majority   to   any  mention   of   Johnson's   name  was   forced   to
wear   his  brand   in  the  platform  plank  on  Vietnam   and   the
choice  of  Vice  President.    A  candidate  who  might  have  pla-
cated    blacks    and    anti-war   delegates    was   Fred    Harris   of
Oklahoma.    But   he   was   the   vice   chairman   of   the   Kerner
commission    whose    report    Johnson    disliked.    Johnson    and
Daley   preferred   a  safe  and  bridle-broken  liberal  like  Muskie
of   Maine   (Johnson   put   a  saddle  on   him   long  ago),   with
an   appeal   to   Chicago's    Polish   Americans   and   an   "Ethnic"
offset   to   Agnew.
How  Daley  Provoked  Trouble
To  wander  in  Lincoln  Park  among  the  hippies  and  yippies,
to  drop   in   on   the   headquarters   of   the   New   Left   demon-
strators,   to   talk   at   random  with   the  youths  in   Grant   Park
and  the  streets  was  to  feel  that  in  revulsion  against  the  war
the    best    of    a   generation   were   being    lost—some    among
the    hippies    to    drugs,    some    among    the    radicals   to   an
almost   hysterical   frenzy   of   alienation.    There   were   a   few
among  them  I  am  sure  who  sought  deliberately by  taunts  and
obscenities  to   provoke   a  confrontation  with  the   police,   but
far    more   were   driven   to   angry   resistance   by   Daley's   un-
willingness  to  let  them   sleep   in  Lincoln   Park   and   to   grant
permits   for    peaceful    demonstrations  and    parades.     These
*  A   sample:   In   Chicago,   unlike   Miami,   reporters   with
credentials  did  not  get   assigned   seats   as  usual   at   conven-
tions.    This   seemed   odd.   We   learned  the   reason   why   the
night   of   the   balloting  for   nominees  and  the   final   session
when   I  and  many  other  reporters   were   unable   to  get   into
the   top   galleries   supposedly   reserved   for   us   because   they
were   packed   by  Daley   goons   from   the   Sanitation   Depart-
ment.
Authentic  Voice  of  The  Poor  At   Chicago
"The  basic  cure  for  poverty  is  money.   We  believe
that   the   way   to   do   something   about   poverty   is   to
give   people   the   money  they   need   to   meet   the   basic
necessities   of   life   at   least   at   a   minimum   level   for
health,   decency   and   dignity.    This   minimum   should
be  given  uniformly  by  a  simple  procedure to  all  people
who  are  in  need  without  degrading  investigations  and
harrassments.   We  suggest  that  the  absolute  minimum
standard   should  be  the   'low   income*   poverty   line   as
definied   by   Mollic   Orshansky  of   the   Social   Security
Administration.    This   level   provides   about   $4400   per
year  for  an  urban  family  of  four  with  a  $600  a  year
adjustment   for   additional  or   fewer   family   members.
It  would  cost  the  Federal  government  about  $20  billion
a   year   to   insure   every   family   an   income   at    tKis
level.   This  is  a  tiny  amount  when  measured  against
our   gross   national   product,  the   enormous   social   and
economic  costs  of  poverty,  or  our  military  commitment
abroad.   The   more   popularly  known  Federal   'poverty
line'  of   $3335  for  a   family   of   four  describes   a   level
below   which   everyone   is   desperately    poor."
—Dr.   Geo.  A.   Wiley    to   the   Democratic     Platform
Committee  in  Chicago   on  behalf   of  the  National   Wel-
fare   Rights   Organization   Aug.    22.
would    have   let   off   steam   and    been   far    easier   to   police
than   crowds   which   felt   their   elementary   rights   were  being
trampled.  Even  Joseph  J.  Lefevour,  president  of  the  Chicago
lodge  of  the  Fraternal  Order  of  Police,  in  the  middle  of  a
press   conference    called   to   defend    police    tactics,    admitted
(Chicago    Tribune,   Aug.    30),    "Most   of   the   kids   in   the
parks,"   i.e.   Lincoln   and   Grant   parks,   "have   been    orderly.
They've   obeyed   our   orders   and   joked   with   us.    But   then
their   leaders   work   them   up   to   fever   pitch   and    disappear,
leaving  the  kids  to  take  the  consequences."   But  could   they
have   been   worked   up   "to   fever   pitch"   without   the   brutal
nightly   sweeps   at   curfew   time   in   Lincoln   Park,   and   the
indiscriminate   and   sadistic  way   the   police   beat   and   tear-
gassed   not   only   peaceful   demonstrators    in   Grant   park   but
The  One  Fresh  Constructive  Proposal  Made  At  The  Democratic National Convention
"America    has    advocated   land    reform    all    over    the
world.   It   is  time  we  implement  land  reform  now  in  our
own  country.   We  must  end  the   devastating   poverty  that
is  destroying  our  rural  life  and  forcing  the   mass   exodus
to   our   troubled  cities.    We   believe   that   we   can  borrow
from   the  programs  of   the  Nsw  Deal   which  gave   hope  to
rural  Americans.
"Holmes   County,  Mississippi  was   the  model  for   federal
land  reform  nearly   30  years   ago.    In  1940  the   Farm   Se-
curity   Administration,   now   the   Farmer's   Home  Adminis-
tration,   turned   over   9,350   acres   of   land   to   poor   tenant
farmers.   With  federal  3%—40  year  loans,  106  farms  were
created,   including   36   cooperatives.
"Today,   these   farmers  and  their  children  comprise   the
most   vigorous   rural   community  in   our   state   and  black
people  here—because  of  their  economic  independence  from
the  white  power  structure—have  been  the  vanguard  against
racial   oppression   in   Mississippi.   Last   year   they   elected
Rep.   Robert   Clark,   the   first   black  legislator   to   serve   in
the   Mississippi  legislature   since    Reconstruction.
"There    were   many    other    such   land   reform    projects
initiated   under   President   Franklin  D.  Roosevelt.    In  1935
the  Resettlement  Administration  redistributed  large  plan-
tation   lands   to   10,000  poor   families.   This   land   was   ac-
quired  by  the  federal  government.   The  government  helped
build   community  facilities   on   this   land.
"These   projects  point  the  way  the  government   can  help
reconstruct   the   rural   South.    Today   we   call   for   federal
sponsorship  of  rural  community  development  projects  sim-
ilar  to  those  that  have  been  initiated  in  a  few  urban  areas.
These  projects  should  emphasize  farm  cooperatives   because
the  day  of  the  small  farm  is  ended.   Competition  demands
large-scale   modern   methods,   machinery   and  technical   as-
sistance.
"Poor   people  will  require  outright   grants  of   free   land.
The  government  should  also  sell  acreage  to  low  and  moder-
ate   income   people  at   a  nominal  fee   and  should   offer   low
interest   long-term   loans.    Land   should   be  made   available
from   federal   and   state-owned   acreage   and   from   private
land   now   being   subsidized   to   lie   unused   which   may   be
taken   under  the   power  of   eminent  domain.
"The    rural   farming   cooperatives    should    also    contain
cooperatively   owned  industrial  enterprises    as   well.   With
cooperative   farms   and   industrial   concerns    side   by   side
the    result    would   be   a   rebuilding   of    small    town   and
country  life  and  the  emergence  of  'new  towns'  with  streets,
housing,   public  utilities,  hospitals,   schools,  and  parks   sub-
sidized   by   the  federal    government."
—The  only  major   platform    plank  dealing   with  the  crisis
of   rural   poverty   in   the   Deep   South,  as   presented     Aug.
24    by    the    Mississippi     Freedom    Democratic   Party    in
Chicago.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  9, 1968
onlookers   behind   the   police's   own   barricades  in   front   of
the  Hilton?
Daley   has   long   run   a   one-party  state   in   Chicago,   with
just   that  combination  of   brutality,   social   welfare   handouts
and  cooperation  with  big  business  which  is  also  the   essence
of   Johnson's  own   conception   of   personal   government.     The
way  Humphrey   has   stepped   out   as  Daley's   apologist,   even
after   the   climactic   raid   on   the   McCarthy   headquarters   in
the   Hilton,   is   an   index   of   what   we   can   expect   from   a
Humphrey   Administration,  of   what   he   means   by   law   and
order,  and  of  what  lies  behind  his  platitudinous evangelism.
Another   index—to   be  forgotten   at   our   peril—was   his  ap-
pearance  before   the   Catholic  War   Veterans   on   the   eve  of
the  Convention  when   he   threw   away  a  moderate   prepared
script   and   delivered   a   warmongering   address.    These   two
events   have   finally   decided   for   me   that   Humphrey   is   no
lesser  evil  than  Nixon.   A  vote  for  Humphrey   is  a  vote   for
Johnson's   war   and   Daley's   police   state   tactics.
How  Preach  Patience  To  A  Draftee?
I   confess   that   I  do  not  know  what  to  do  politically  at
this    juncture.    The    three    main    ways   open    are    Allard
Lowenstein's   effort   eventually   to   take   over   the   Democrats,
Marcus   Raskin's   attempt   to   form   a   New    Party,   and   the
New   Left's   call  to  go  into   the  streets.   To   meet   the  crises
of    race   and   war   which   confront   the   country,   time   and
patience,  faith   in  persuasion,  are  required.    But  how   preach
these  virtues  to  a  youth  who  may  be  called   up  any  day  for
the   army?   The   war   is  destroying   our   country   as   we   are
destroying   Vietnam.    Hate   and   frenzy   are   poor   substitutes
for    political   thinking,   yet   the   enrages   among    the    youth,
with   their   romanticism   about   guerrilla   war,   may   set   the
tune   for   the   whole   country.     A  handful   may  provoke   the
government   to   such  over-reaction  as  to  polarize  the  country
between    extremes.
The    New    Left    and   even    its   moderate    allies   are    still
operating   in   a   fog   of   misconceptions.    The   main   one   is
that   "the   people"  are  against   the  war.   The  people  on   the
contrary  are  confused   and   divided.    To   say  that   the   streets
"belong   to   the   people"   as  Tom   Hayden    has   done   is   to
overlook   those   people  who  feel  the  streets   belong   to   them,
The   Same   Con  Man
"I   want   the   killing   in   Vietnam   to   stop,   but   we
cannot   stop   the   killing   if   North   Vietnam  insists   on
sending    another    150,000   new    aggressors    into    the
South  to  kill  Americans and  allies  since  Jan.  1  of  this
year."
—Johnson   to  the   V.F.W.   in   Detroit   August   19.
"We  also  estimate   that  in  this   year  to  date   there
have  been  in  the  neighborhood  of   150,000  North  Viet-
namese  come  down  into  South  Vietnam.   So  when  you
talk   about   the   increased   level   that   is   definitely  so.
There  has  been  an  increase.   Keep  in  mind,  as  I  said
once  before  though,  that   as   far  as   we  can  ascertain
in   the   main   these    are   replacements,   because   their
losses  have  been  high,  not  only  from  killed  in  action,
but   wounded,  illness,  desertion,   and  other   causes."
—Secretary    oj   Defense    Clark    Clifford      at   a   press
conference   in  the  Pentagon  four   days   earlier  Aug.   15.
too,    for   the   ordinary   business   of    their   lives.     "Let    that
party,"  Raskin  said  of  the  Democrats   the  other  day  in  calling
for   a  New   Party,   "be   the   party  of   the   cops,  the  military,
the   big   city   bosses   and   the   non-people."    There   are   an
awful   lot  of   "non-people."    The   need   is  for   dialogue,   not
monologue,   to  win  them  over.   If  law  and  order  really  break
down,  if  democratic  processes  are  abandoned,  it  is  we  of   the
Left,   the  anti-war  forces   and   the   intellectuals  who  will   be
the   first   to   suffer.     To    play   with   revolutionary   talk   and
tactics  as  the  New   Left   is  doing,  when   there   is  no   revolu-
tionary    situation,   is   to    act    as    the    provocateurs    for    an
American   Fascism.
The   deeper   tragedy   lies  in  the  increasing  abandonment  of
non-violent   tactics  by  black   and   white  dissenters  alike.    To
howl   down   those  with  whom   we   differ,   to   use  obscenities
instead    of    arguments,    to    abandon   persuasion    for    direct
action,   to   dehumanize  the   other   side  with   cries  of   "pigs"
and   worse   is  to  embark  on   a  game  the   rightists  are   better
equipped    to   play,   and    to   set   examples   which   American
Storm   Troopers   may   some   day  apply   to   us.    Hate   is  still
the  main  enemy  of   the  human  race,  the   fuel   that  heats   the
furnaces   of  genocide.    How   build  a  better   world   by  relaps-
ing  into  primitive  and  sanguinary habits?
The  Money  Value  To  The  U.S.  Of  The  Bombing Pause
Secretary    Clifford:   You   will   recall   that   the   bombing
restrictions  went  into  effect  on  March  31.   Since  that  time
there   has  been  a  very  substantial   change   in  the   rate  of
losses,  both  of   planes   and  of   crews.   In  the   four   months
after  the  bombing  restrictions   went  into  effect,  that  would
be   April,   May,  June   and   July   this   year,   we   have   lost
51   fighter   and   attack   aircraft   over   Vietnam   to   hostile
causes.    During  the   same   four  months   in   1967,  we   lost
126  planes.   This  indicates  plane  losses  in  that  four  month
period   are   down  60   percent.
Q.  This  is  over  North  Vietnam,  sir?
Secretary   Clifford:   Over  North  Vietnam.
With   reference   to   the   loss   of   members   of   the   plane
crews,  we  have  a  similar  type  of  heartening improvement.
Last  year,  taking  the  same   four  month  period,  124  crew-
men   were   killed   or   missing.    In   the   four   month  period
this  year,  63  were  either  killed  or  are  missing.
—Press  conference   at  the  Pentagon August  15.
The  Pentagon  estimates  the  average  cost  of  an   attack
or  fighter  plane  at  $2  million.   So  plane  losses,  according
to   the   Secretary's   own   figures,   cost   $252  million  in   the
four   months   since   the   bombing   restriction,  a   saving   of
$150  million  for  the  quarter  or  $600  million  on  an  annual
basis,   though   we   are   staging   more   raids   and  dropping
more   bombs   than   before.    The   latest    official    figure    as
given  by  Secretary   Clifford  May  28  to  the  House  Appropri-
ations   Committee   (p.   727   of   the   hearings   on   the   1969
second  supplemental) was  5,000  sorties  in  March  and  about
10,000   at   the   time   he   testified.    By   concentrating   the
bombing  on  the  more  poorly  defended  Panhandle  of  North
Vietnam  and  laying  off  the  highly  defended  areas   around
Hanoi   and  Haiphong,  air  losses   were  cut  sharply.   They
were   running  at   about  $1  billion  a  year.   They   are  now
running  at  about  $400  million.
To  these  figures  must  be  added  the  cost  of  pilots  killed,
lost   or  taken   prisoner.   The  Pentagon   estimates  the  cost
of   training   a   pilot   at    from   $375,000   to   $538,000,   de-
pending  on  the  type  of   plane.   If   you  take  $450,000  as  a
rough  average  then  the  cost  in  pilots  during  the  first  four
months  of  bombing  restriction  was  reduced  from  $55,921,000
to   $28,350,000,  or   on  an   annual   basis   $110,296,000.   And
pilots   are  not  that   easily   replaceable.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  9, 1908
Renewed  Cold  War  and  Renewed  Arms  Race  May  Cost  U.S.S.R.   and  U.S.   Heavily
The   Basic   Factors  Behind  the  Russian  Take-Over  of  Czechoslovakia
It  is  difficult   enough   to  find  one's  way  back  to  freedom.
It   is   even   harder   to   find   one's   way   to   a   freedom    one
never   had.    This    is   Russia's   problem.     I   use   the   term
Russia   because   this,   the   dominant   country   of   the   Soviet
Union  and  the  Soviet  bloc,  is  still  the  most  backward  of  the
nations   it  dominates,  exhibiting  even   as  under  Czarism,  an
abyss  between   its  sensitive  elite  on   the   one  hand   and   the
mtifik   on  the  other,  still  not  fully  emancipated  from  serfdom.
The   whole   is   still   ruled,   as   under   Czarism,   by   a   system
of   secret   police,   censorship  and   forced   labor  for   dissidents.
This   kind   of   rule   is   wholly   unsuited   to   the   Czechs,  as
the  Westernmost   Slavs,  the  most  advanced.   But   if   there  is
freedom    in   Prague,   how   can   one   go   on   denying   it   in
East  Berlin, in  Warsaw,  in  Kiev  and  in  Moscow  itself?   This
is  the  question  the   Russians  have  answered  by  their  brutal
occupation   of   Czechoslovakia.   Perhaps   the   Western    Slavs
cannot   hope   for   freedom  until   it   has   been   won   in  Russia
itself.
Words  For  A  Bitter  Laugh  in  Latin  America
"The  fact  that  a  small  nation  lives  within  the  reach
of  a  large  nation  does  not  mean  that  that  large  nation
is  entitled  to  move  in  on  it  to  reorganize  its  internal
affairs."
—Secretary    Rusk    at   press   conference,    Aug.    22,
speaking    of   the   Russian  invasion   of   Czechoslovakia.
As  in  Guatemala,  Cuba,  and  the  Dominican  Republic ?
And   as   in   Brazil,   Bolivia,   Colombia,   Venezuela   and
the   other   Latin    American    countries    in   which   our
Special  Forces  and  CIA  are  now  operating.
Sharing  Russian   Poverty   and   Backwardness
The  second  disparity  which  lies  behind  the  Czech   occupa-
tion   is  the  technological  gap  between  the  Germans   and  the
Russians,   now   as   ever   rivals   for   the   control   of   the   lands
between   them.    The   Czechs   are   badly   in   need   of   capital
goods  after  two  decades  of  exploitation  by  the  Russians  and
mismanagement  by  the  Communists.   Russian  industry  is  not
yet  advanced  enough   to  supply  the   machines.   The  Russian
economy   is  not   yet   rich   enough   to   provide  the   hard  cur-
rency  to  obtain  them  elsewhere.   The  nearest  and  the  easiest
place  to  get  the  goods  and  the  credits  is  in  West  Germany.
The   Russians   fear   more  than   anything  else  German   influ-
ence   penetrating  the   old   cordon   sanitaire.    So   the   Czechs
must  share not  only  the  political backwardness but  the  poverty
of  the  Russians.
The  consequences  will  be  felt  for  a  long  time.   In  Hungary
the  Russians  murdered  Nagy,  in  Czechoslovakia   they  are  al-
ready  calling  for   the  liquidation  of   40,000  "counter-revolu-
tionaries".    Dubcek   and   the   Czech   Communists   have   been
forced   to   become   the   prison   wardens  of   their   own   people
rather   than   see  the   heavier   hand   of   the   Russians   or   the
hard-liners  take  over.   A  new  terror  is  slowly  settling  down,
and  a  new  hatred  of  the  Russians  and  the  Communists  will
accompany   it.   The   hopes  of   democracy  under    communism
have  been  destroyed;  the  youth  of  the  bloc  will  now   begin
to  turn  more  openly  against  Communism  as  inevitably  linked
with   the   one-party   State.
Internationally  the  consequences  may  prove  as  serious.  One
of   the   first  signals   of   the   cold   came   with   the   Communist
seizure  of  power   in  Czechoslovakia   in   1948.    Then   Moscow
feared   the  Marshall   Plan,   as  it  now   fears  investment   from
West   Germany.    The    ease   of   the   occupation    has   stirred
natural  fears  in  West  Germany,  as  elsewhere  in  Europe.    The
result  has  given   the  Germans  another   excuse  to  balk  at  the
nuclear  non-proliferation   pact.    Renewed   cold  war  and  arms
race  are  in  prospect.    The   cost   may  prove   far   higher   than
acceptance  of  a  freer  regime  in  Czechoslovakia.
The   strengthening    of   the   hard-liners   in    Moscow    will
strengthen    the   hard-liners    in   Washington.    That   is   bad
news  for  us  and  them   and  the  rest  of  the   world.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier Collection,  "The    Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
We'll   send   a   reprint   of   this  special   issue   to   a  friend   if   you   send   a  stamped  self-addressed   long  envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time  of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City  ...............................  Zip................  State.......
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington, D. C.  20015
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington,  D. C.
An  independent  weekly   published   and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.:    $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED