I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968mar18.pdf

============================================================

How  We  Began  To Practice for  Atom  War   in  Vietnam,  P.  6
Any  Other  Goal  Would  Be  A  Surrender  In  Despair  To  Racism
"A  policy  of  separation can  only  relegate  Negroes  to  a     free   to   live   and   work   according  to   his   capabilities  and
permanently  inferior  economic status. .  .  . The  primary  goal     desires,  not  his  color."
must   be   a   single  society  in   which   every  citizen   will   be                            —Report  of  the  Commission on Civil  Disorders
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi- Weekly            ~
VOL.    XVI,  NO.  6
MARCH  18,  1968
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Can  36  Saints  Save  America?
There  is  a  Jewish  legend   that  God   decided   to  spare   the
world  from  destruction  for  its  sins  because  there  were  among
men  36 saints.   These  lamedvavniks  ("the  36ers"  in  Hebrew)
are  scattered,   obscure,   unknown;  the  Jew,   the  Gentile,   the
humble  and  the  learned  are  represented  among  them.    But
because  such  men  exist,  God  still  withholds  his  angry  hand.
The   legend   came  to  mind   when   a  Congressman,   Benjamin
Rosenthal,  a New  York  Democrat,  circulated  a  petition  pledg-
ing  members  of  the  House  of  Representatives  to  support  the
recommendations  of  the  Commission  on  Civil  Disorders   "and
to  affirm   the  priority"  of  the  tasks  it  outlined  over  all  other
"everyday  concerns."     It  was  circulated  to  the  434  members
but  only  36  signatures  came  back.    32  Democrats  and  4  Re-
publicans.*    It  may be  that  36  saints  were  enough  to  save  the
world.  We'll have to  scrape  up  more than  that  to save America.
Mankind's  Old Habits  and  Ancient  Enemies
If  one  is not  to  escape  into  fantasy  and  demagogy,  one  must
begin  by  recognizing  the  dimensions  of  the  challenge   offered
by  the  report.    Three  deep-seated  human  habits  are  the  main
roadblocks.    The  first  is  that  individually  or  collectively  peo-
ple  are  more  accustomed  to  act  after   a  catastrophe  than  before
it;  there  has  never  been   a  revolution,   including   the   French
and  the  Russian,  which  was  not  preceded  by  ample  warning
of  the  reforms  necessary  to  prevent   it.    Only  the  will  was
lacking  and  it  is  lacking  today.   Whites  as  a  whole  are  as  in-
different  to  the  warnings  of  race  war  as  are  cigarette  smokers
to  the  warnings  of  lung  cancer.    The   second   is  that   people
are  little  disposed  to  make  sacrifices  for  others,  especially   for
others  with  whom  they  cannot  identify  because  they  belong  to
a  different   class,  milieu  or  ethnic  group.    The  third   is  that
ancient  habits  and  deeply  entrenched   institutions  have  made
it  easy  to  organize  human  societies  swiftly  for  those  extraor-
*  Though  this  was  in  a  sense  a  test  of  instant   statesman-
ship,  requiring  an  overnight  response  to  make  a  press  dead-
line  next   day   and  two   additional  signatures—Kastenmeier
(Wis.)  and Ashley  (Ohio)—  have  since  come  in,  the  36 is  not
an  unfair  index.    The  32  Democrats  were  Adams  (Wash.),
Bingham    (N.Y.),    Brown   (Cal.),   Burton   (Cal.),    Cohelan
(Cal.),   Diggs   (Mich.),   Dent   (Pa.),  Dow  (N.Y.),   Edwards
(Cal.),  Farbstein  (N.Y.),  Eraser  (Minn), Gilbert  (N.Y.), Gon-
zales  (Tex.),  Holifield  (Cal.),  Jacobs  (Ind.),  McCarthy  (N.Y.),
Minish  (N.J.),   Mink  (Hawaii),   Moorhead  (Pa.),  Nix   (Pa.),
Ottinger   (N.Y.),   Price   (111.),   Rees   (Cal.),   Resnick   (N.Y.),
Reuss  (Wis.),  Rhodes  (Pa.),  Rosenthal  (N.Y.),  Roybal (Cal.),
St.  Onge  (Conn.),  Scheuer  (N.Y.),  Tenzer  (N.Y.)   and  Wolff
(N.Y.).   The  four  Republicans  were  Button(  N.Y.),  Halpern
(N.Y.),  McCloskey  (Cal.)   and  Reid  (N.Y.).
Lest  We  Destroy  Our  Cities,    Too,
In  Order  to  "Save" Them
"The     Commission  believes  there  is   a  grave  danger
that  some communities  may  resort to  the  indiscriminate
and  excessive   use   of   force.    The  harmful  effects   of
over-reaction   are   incalculable.   The  Commission  con-
demns  moves  to   equip  police  departments with  mass
destruction  weapons, such  as  automatic rifles,  machine
guns  and  tanks.    Weapons  which  are  designed  to  de-
stroy,  not  to  control,  have  no  place  in  densely  popu-
lated  urban  communities."
—Commission on Civil  Disorders,  March  4
dinary  spasms  of  destruction we  call  war  but  there  are  no  com-
parable habits  or  institutions  to  mobilize  them  quickly  for  any
remotely  equivalent  constructive  effort.
Back  in  the  Great  Depression,   on  J.  David   Stern's  news-
papers  in  New  York,  Philadelphia   and  Camden,  N.  J.,  we
used  to  write  editorials  urging  that  we  "fight  the  depression
as  we  fought  the  war."    If  we  had  a  Pentagon   for  social  re-
construction,   if  it  directed  an  army  of  welfare  workers  and
planners,   if  they  were  supported   by  a  network  of  industries
which  stood  to  make  a  direct  profit  on  their  efforts,   if  they
had  their  bugles  and  their  legends,   if  the  hearts  of  patriots
beat  faster  at  the  sound  and  sight  of  such  mobilization,  if  in
short  we  had  that  kind  of  a  military-industrial-emotional  com-
plex,  there  would  be  no  doubt  about  our  ability  to  clean  up
slums  and  rescue  our  black  brothers.
But  given  the  realities of  human  society,  there  is  little  won-
der  at  the  tepid  response.    Majority  white  political  leadership
is  as  little  disposed  to  launch  the  giant  effort  required  to  pre-
vent  a  civil  war  at  home  as  it  is  to  disentangle  from  the  civil
war  in  Vietnam.    We  cannot  prevent  the  one  without  ending
the  other,  but  the  Commission's  only  reference  to  the  war  is
at  page  232  (of  the  Bantam  Books  edition)  where  it  says  that
about  the  time  the  activities  of  SNCC  and  CORE  "declined,
other   issues,  particularly  Vietnam,   diverted  the  attention  of
the  country,  including  some  Negro  leaders,  from  the  issue  of
equality."    The  historian  will  find  it  incredible  that  this  Com-
mission  went  no  further  than  that  in  suggesting   a  link  be-
tween  Vietnam  and  the  problems  of  the  Ghetto!    Apparently
predictions  of  apocalyptic  disaster  took  less  courage   than  any
specific  comment  on  what  the  war  was doing  to  social  expendi-
tures.    Though  baby may burn,  the  Commissioners  were  afraid
to  ignite  Johnson.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  18, 1968
(Continued    -from   Page   One)
The  fatal  weakness  of  the  report  is  that  it  failed  to  recom-
mend  the  establishment  of  any  new  agency  on  which  to  focus
and  dramatize  responsibility  for  its  diverse   recommendations.
In   one   sense,   of   course,   this   is  everybody's  business—but
everybody's business always tends  to  become  nobody's business.
The  answer  at  the  Commission's  advance  press  briefing  was
that  the  job  was  so  big  that  it  belongs  to  the  Chief  Executive
himself.    That  was  hardly  a  responsive   answer.    The   Chief
is  also   Commander-in-Chief   of   the   Armed  Forces   but   that
does  not  keep  him  from  having a  Secretary  of  Defense  and  a
Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff.    When  we  had   a  Marshall  Plan   for
Western   Europe,  we  set  up  an  Economic  Reconstruction  Ad-
ministration.     That  is  how  one  goes  about   a  job  one  fully
intends  to  accomplish,  and   to  which  one  really  gives  over-
riding  priority.
Brush  Off at  The  White House
Two  years  ago,  after  a  similar  report  by  the  White  House
•  Conference  on  Civil  Rights,  the  President  at  least  appointed
an  interdepartmental  committee  to  consider  the  recommenda-
tions.    That  was  the   last   ever  heard   of   them.     This   time
Johnson  didn't  make that  much  of  a gesture.    It  was a week—
in  which  his  silence  grew  almost  scandalous—before  he  could
be  prevailed  upon   to  make  a  comment  on  it.    Then  all  he
would  say  was  that  he  put   it  on  his  recommended  reading
list—along  with  his  own  messages—and  that  he  was already
doing  "everything  that  we  could  conceive  of  that  we  had  the
resources  to   undertake."    He  could  have  made  political capi-
tal  with  Negroes   out  of  Nixon's   smug  Country  Club  remark
the  same  day  that  the  Commission  "blames  everybody for  the
riots  except   the  perpetrators"   but  again  Johnson   was  silent.
Nixon  .thought   the   nation   needed   "more   imaginative"  ap-
proaches   than   those   suggested  by  the   Commission.    Maybe
like  shipping   Negroes   to   the   moon ?    Nixon   wants   notice
served  that  if   "something   starts"  next  summer  the  law  will
move  in  with  adequate  force  "to  put  down  rioting  and  loot-
ing."      Attorney   General   Ramsey   Clark   has   already   served
such  notice  quietly  on  the  Rev.  Martin  Luther  King  in  con-
The  Disloyal  Despair  A  Stupid  War  Breeds
"It  makes  no  sense  whatsoever  to  me  to  be  fighting
a  war  10,000  miles  away  to  impose  so-called  democracy
upon  a  people  who  have  never  known  democracy  and
whose  corrupt  rulers do  not  want  it,  while, at  the  same
time,  because   of   lack  of  resources,  we  are  not  taking
the  necessary   steps   to  save   democracy  at  home."
—Gruening  in  the Senate, March  1
"Perhaps  the  most  revealing  and  disturbing  measure
of  the  rioters'  anger  at  the  social  and  political   system
is   their  response   to  a  question  asking   whether  they
thought   'the   country  was   worth  fighting  for   in   the
event   of   a   major   world  war.'    Of   the   self-reported
rioters,   39.4  percent   in   Detroit   and   52.8   percent   in
Newark   shared  the  view  that  it  was  not.  .  .  ."
—Chapter  2  of  the  Report  on  Civil  Disorders
nection  with  his  forthcoming march  on  Washington.    Johnson
will  not  let  himself  be  outflanked  by  Nixon  on  "crime  in  the
streets."     On   domestic,   as   in   foreign   policy,  Johnson   and
Nixon  are  shaping  up  as  Siamese  twins.*
One  of  the  cliches  they—and  all  the  rest  of  our  political
leadership,  including  Bobby  Kennedy—share   in  common   is
that  we ought  to  enlist private enterprise in  the  war  on poverty
and  racism.   One  fascinating statistic in  the  new  report  should
help  to  explode  this  comfortable  fallacy.    Long  ago  housing
was  an  area  in  which  we  did  enlist  private enterprise by  a sys-
tem  of   FHA   guarantees.    The   result  has  been  to  shift   em-
phasis  from  public  housing  for  those  who  need  it  to  better
housing  for   those  who  can  well  afford   it.     "In   the  31-year
history  of  subsidized   federal  housing,"  the  new  report  says,
"only   about  800,000  units  have  been  constructed. ...  By
*  Anyone  taken  in. by  Nixon's  sudden  pledge  to  end  the  war
if  elected  should  read  the  interview  he  gave  Robert  B.  Semple,
Jr.,  in  the  New  York  Times  March  11.  .He  specified  that  he
means   an   "honorable"   bargain  that   would   ensure   "self-de-
termination"  for  South  Vietnam,  that  could  not  be  construed
as  a  "defeat  for  the  United  States"  or  as  a  "reward  for  ag-
gression"  and  that   would  not   "encourage   further   wars   of
liberation"  in  the  Pacific.     Johnson,   too,   is   ready   to  make
peace  if  only  Ho  Chi  Minh  will  quietly  turn  himself   in.
Some  Glimpses  of  the  Realities  Behind  The  Headlines  About  Rioting   and  Snipers
"In   predominately    Negro   precincts   [in   one   particular
city],  over  three-fourths  of  the  white  policemen  expressed
prejudice  or  highly  prejudiced  attitudes  towards  Negroes.
Indeed,  close  to  one-half   of   all  the  police   officers   in  pre-
dominately   Negro   high   crime  rate   areas   showed   extreme
racial  prejudice  against   Negroes.    What  do  I  mean  by  ex-
treme  racial  prejudice?    I  mean  that  they  describe  Negroes
...  in  the  terms  of  the  animal  kingdom.  .  .  ."
—Professor   Albert  Reiss,  Director  of  the   U.  of   Michigan
Center  for  Research  on  Social   Organization,   testifying    be-
fore  the  Commission  on  Civil   Disorders.
"By  Monday  afternoon,  July  17, state  police  and  National
Guard  forces   were  withdrawn   [from   Newark].    That   eve-
ning,  a  Catholic  priest  saw  two  Negro-men  walking  down
the  street.     They   were  carrying  a  case  of   soda   and  two
bags  of  groceries.    An  unmarked car  with  five  police  officers
got  out  of  the  car.    Accusing   the  Negro  men  of   looting,
the   officers   made  them  put  the  groceries  on  the   sidewalk,
then   kicked   the   bags   open,   scattering   their   contents   all
over  the  street.   Telling  the  men,  'Get  out  of  here,'  the  of-
ficers  drove  off.   The  Catholic  priest  went  across  the  street
to  help  gather  up  the  groceries.    One  of  the  men  turned  to
him:  'I've just  been  back  from  Vietnam  two  days,'  he  said,
'and  this  is  what  I  get.    I  feel  like  going  home  and  getting
a  rifle  and  shooting   the  cops'."
—Chapter  1 of  the  Commission  Report
"Action   by   police   officers   accounted   for   20   and,   very
likely,  21  of  the  deaths   [in  Detroit].    Action  by  the   Na-
tional  Guard  for  seven,  and,  very  likely,  nine.    Action   by
the  Army  for  one.    Two  deaths  were  the  result   of   action
by  store  owners.    Four  persons  died  accidentally.     Rioters
were  responsible  for  two,  and  perhaps  three  of  the  deaths."
—Same.
"We  used  things  in  our  leads  and  headlines   during  the
riot   I   wish   we   could  have   back   now,  because   they   were
wrong  and  they  were  bad mistakes.  .  .  .  We  used  the  words
'sniper  kings'  and  'nests  of  snipers.'    We  found  out  when
we  were   able   to  get   our  people   into   those   areas   and  get
them  out  from  under  the  cars  that  these  sniper  kings-and
these nests of  snipers  were  the  constituted  authorities  shoot-
ing  at  each  other,  most  of  them.    There  was  just  one  con-
firmed sniper  in  the  entire  eight-day   riot.  .  .  ."
—A  newspaper   editor  testifying    before   the  Commission's
Poughkeepsie  Conference,   Chapter   15.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, March  18,1968
comparison,  over  a  period  only  3  years  longer,  FHA  insurance
guaranties   have   made   possible    the    construction    of    over
10,000,000  middle  and  upper  income  units."    The  FHA  was
a   bonanza   for   the   speculative   builder.     Private   enterprise
fought  public  housing  for  the  poor  because  slum  housing  is
highly  profitable.    The  slum  generally  is  a  high  profit  market
for  inferior  goods.    It  is  self-delusion  to  appeal  to  "the pri-
vate  sector"  to  eradicate  what   it  profits   from.     It  will   not
volunteer  to  profit  less.
The  Taxes  The  Rich  Escape
Everywhere  in   the   underdeveloped   world   we  preach   this
in  the  form  of  tax  and  land  reform.    But  we  are  unwilling
to  practice  it  at  home.   Here,  as  surely  as  in  Latin  America,
to  close  the  huge  loopholes  by which  the  great  fortunes  escape
taxation  would  free   billions  of  dollars  for   social  reconstruc-
tion.    Here,  as  in  Latin  America,  the  breakup  of  large  mech-
anized  landed   estates,  particularly  in  the  South,  would   give
landless  whites  and   blacks  a  way  to  become   self-supporting
and  self-respecting  and  keep  them  out  of  the  ghettoes.    The
only  difference  between  our  cities  and  Latin  America's  is  that
there the  poor swarm  in  shanty  towns  at  the  edges  of  the' cities
while  here  they  pile  up  in  misery  at  their  very  core.    Here
as there  if  the  poor  are  to  suffer  less  the  rich  must  pay  more—
in  taxes  and  in  privileges  and   in  lower  rates  of  profit.       It
is  time  to  act  at  home  on  the  advice  we  hand  out  so  liberally
abroad.
If   the   burning   in   Watts,  Newark  and   Detroit   did   not
awaken  the   country,  neither  will  the  warnings  of   this  new
report.  Predictions  of  disaster  have  become  so  common  they
seem   merely   to   whet   everybody's   expectation.     As   in   war
between  nations,  hate  and  fear  build  up  to  the  point where
men  on  both  sides  look  forward  to  the  outbreak  for   release
of  tension.    Both  sides  are  stocking  arms,  as  if  in  caricature
of  our  national  reliance  on  more and  better  weapons  as "deter-
rence."    "How  can we  as a people,"  the  new  report asks,  "end
the  resort to  violence while we  build  a  better  society?"   The
The  Private  Bias  Behind  the  Public  Stance
"No  fewer  than  thirty  of   the   witnesses   before   the
[Civil   Disorders]   Commission  referred  to   a   role   for
the   private  sector   in   meeting   those   urban   problems
which   contribute  to   civil  disorder.     We   believe  that
these  widely-shared  sentiments   about  the   role  of   the
business  community are  more  than  mere  rhetoric.   The
private  sector   has  shown  its   concern   and  capacity."
—The  Commission's  Private Enterprise  Panel March  3
"What  political  leaders  ought  to  tell  urban  Negroes
is  this:  The  doors  of  opportunity  have  been  closed  on
no  one  (which  is  far  nearer  the  truth  than  the  oppo-
site).    Statistics  show  that  vast   numbers  of  Negroes
raise   themselves  from  poverty  every   year.    There   is
no  reason   others  cannot   do  likewise.    Doing  it,  while
the  Government  may  be  able  to  assist  in  a  few  little
ways,   involves   mostly   individual   effort.     It's   up   to
you,  baby."
—Editorial  in  The  Wall St. Journal,  March   It
obvious  answer  is  to  set  a  better  example  by  ending  our  own
resort   to   violence   in   Vietnam   and   using  the   resources   for
reconstruction  at  home.    How   can  we     preach,  non-violence
to  our  colored  people when  we  practice  violence  as  a  national
policy  against  colored  peoples abroad  and  unofficially  through
the  police  at  home;  when  we  as  a  nation   are  unwilling   to
submit   disputes   to   some  kind   of   international   adjudication
but   insist  on   our   own  way—or   else,   i.e.  the   "or   else"   of
napalm  and  B-52s  and  maybe   (we  like  to  keep  them  guess-
ing)   tactical  nuclear  weapons as  well?    The  Gospel  says  he
who  lives  by  the  sword   shall  perish  by  the  sword.    What
we  need  is  a  new  crusade—a  pilgrimage  into  every  town  and
city   preaching  world   and   racial  peace—to  bring  the  lesson
home  to  our  fellow  white  citizens  before  the  country  is  torn
apart,  to  awaken  (as  Lincoln  would  say)  the  angels  of  their
better  natures,  to  open  their  minds  and  hearts  to  the  humilia-
tion  and  the  misery  white  supremacy  imposes on  colored  men
in  our  society.    Is  it  too  late?
McCarthy  Draws  The  Sharp Contrast Between  LBJ's  Budget  and  Negro  Needs
"Nearly  two-thirds  of  the  12  million  Negroes  now  living
in  our  nation's  cities  live  in  areas  marked  by  urban  blight
and  deterioration.    The  President's   commission  has  recom-
mended  that  six   million  new  units  be  constructed   for  low
and  moderate  income  housing  in  the  next  five  years;   six
hundred  thousand   of  these  homes   would  be  built   in   1969.
But  two  weeks  ago  the  President   issued   his  call  for  new
housing.    He  proposed  the  construction  of  only  2.35  million
units  over  the  next  five  years,  with three  hundred  thousand
to  be  built   next   year.
"Federal   statistics    show   that   the   male   Negro  is   two
times   as  likely   to  be  unemployed,  and  three   times   more
likely   to  be  working  at   an  unskilled  occupation  than   his
white   counterpart.     The   President's   commission    recom-
mended   the   creation   of   more   than   500,000  jobs  in   1969,
300,000   of   them   to   be  financed  by   private  industry  and
250,000  by  the  public  sector.    But  two  weeks  ago  the  Presi-
dent  issued  his  call  for  more  jobs  and  proposed! only  100,000
jobs  in  1969,  all  to  be  financed  by  private  business,  but  the
government   reports   more  than  700,000  non-whites   are  out
of  work  in  the  nation  today.   Without  a  massive  redirection,
the  future  is  bleak.  .  .  .
"The   President's   commission   reported   that   the   typical
rioter  was  a  teenager  or  young  adult,  a  high  school  dropout
who  was  a  life  long  resident  of  the  city  in  which  he  rioted.
According  to  a  report  last   week  by  the  Bureau  of   Labor
Statistics,  32.7%  of  the  job-age  non-white  youth  are  out  of
work  in  the  nation's  20  largest  cities.    What  is  the  Admin-
istration's  answer?    In  recent  weeks  President   Johnson  has
ordered   the   Neighborhood   Youth   Corps   to   help   170,000
fewer  youngsters  in  the   coming  year;  he  has  shut   down
16  Job  Corps  centers;  and  he  also  has  cut  35  million  dollars
from   the   emergency   summer   job   program   approved   by
Congress  last  year.
"Many  of  the  rioters  were  high-school   dropouts,   destined
from  birth  to  a  life  of  poor  education,  poor  jobs,  and  segre-
gated   housing.     The   President's   Commission   noted   that
schools  have  failed  to  'provide  the  educational   experience
which  could  overcome  the  effects  of  discrimination  and  de-
privation.    This  failure  is  one  of  the  persistent   sources  of
grievance   and  resentment   within  the   Negro   community.'
The  President's  answer  has  been  to  cut  federal  aid  for  edu-
cation.    Of  2.7  billion  dollars  authorized  last  year  by  Con-
gress   for   aid   to   elementary   and   secondary   schools,   the
President  expects  to  spend  only  1.2 billion  dollars,  or  about
44%  of  what  is  available.  .  .  .
"But   we   cannot   solve   any   problems   if   we   persist   in
wasting  manpower,  money  and  moral  energy  in  the  war  in
Vietnam."
—McCarthy  at Dartmouth  College, March  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  18, 1968
From   the  Senate's  Most  Vigorous  Upsurge  Yet  Against  the  Vietnam  War
Fulbright:  Tonkin  Gulf  Resolution  Void  Because  Fraudulently  Obtained
FULBRIGHT:  Insofar  as  the  consent  of  this  body  is  said  to
derive  from  the  Gulf   of  Tonkin   resolution,  it  can  only  be
said  that  that  resolution  like  any  contract  based  on  misrepre-
sentation,  in  my opinion,  is null  and  void. ...  If  the Admin-
istration  contemplates  an  expansion  now,  a  major  expansion,
or  a  step-up  of  the  war,  it  has  the  obligation, in  my opinion
to  consult  the  Congress,  especially with  the  Senate  and  obtain
its  advance approval. ...  Is  there  going  to  be  debate,  or  will
the  people  suddenly   be  confronted   with   an  increasing   war
burden  and  want  to  know  why  and  to  what  end?
CASE  (R.  N.J.): ...  it  is now  a question  as  to  whether or
not   the   war   is  winnable  without  the   destruction   of   South
Vietnam  and  much  of  American might  itself.  .  .  .
MILLER  (R.  Iowa):   If  at  that  time  somebody  had  told  me
that  the  conduct  of  a  war  after  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  resolution
would  be  a  prolonged  war  strategy ...  I  would  not  have
supported  the  resolution  [Miller  is  a  hawk]. ...
HATFIELD   (R.   Oregon): ...  I  do  not  believe  that  we
should   sit  idly  by  or,  in  the  name  of  blind  patriotism,  say
that  we  endorse  everything  a  President  does.  .  .  .  Congress
should  say to  the  President  very  clearly  that ...  if  he  deems
it  absolutely  necessary ...  to  expand  the  war,  we  should
share  in  the  decision making ...  it  should not  be the  decision
of  one man.  .  . .
CHURCH   (D.   Idaho):    During   the  Second  World  War   I
served  in  Asia.   I  came  away persuaded  that  Asia  is an  endless
morass  and  that  the  day  of  Western   control  of  Asian  affairs
had  passed.  .  .  .  We  are  the  last  [Western  power]  to  keep  a
foothold  on  the  mainland of  Asia.   Sometimes  I  think  we  are
fascinated   by  this  baited  trap  .  .  .  where  huge   populations
wait  to  engulf  us,  and  legions  of  young  Americans  are  being
beckoned  to  their  graves. ...  If  we  fail  now  to  assert  our
constitutional   responsibilities,   we  shall  have  only  ourselves   to
blame  for any disaster. ...
'     ROBERT  KENNEDY   (D.  N.Y.):   .  .  .  Every  time  we  have
had  difficulty  over  a period  of  the  past  7  years,  over  the  period
during  which  I  was  in  the  executive branch,  and  since  I  left
the  executive  branch,  the  answer  has  always  been  to   escalate
the  conflict.    It  has  always  been  to  send  more  troops.    And  at
the  time  we  sent  the  larger  number  of  troops,  or  increased
the  bombing,  we  have  always  stated  that  .  .  .  victory  is  just
ahead  of  us.  ...     Victory  is  not  just  ahead  of  us.    It  was not
in  1961 or  1962  when  I  was one  of  those who  predicted  there
was  a  light  at  the  end  of  the  tunnel.  .  .  .  More  troops,  or  in-
creasing  the  bombing,  is  not  the  answer.  .  .  .
Moreover   there   is  a  question  of  our  moral  responsibility.
Are  we  like  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament  that  we  can  decide
in  Washington,   D.  C,  what  cities,  what  towns,  what  hamlets
in  Vietnam  are  going  to  be  destroyed? ...  Do  we  have  that
authority  to  kill  tens  and  tens  of  thousands  of  people  because
we  say  we  have  a  commitment  to  the  South  Vietnamese  peo-
ple?    But  have  they  been  consulted—in  Hue,  in  Ben  Tre,  or
in  the  other  towns  that  have  been  destroyed?  .  .  .
As  to  our  own  interests  in  Vietnam,  could  not  the  Germans
or  the  Russians  have  argued  the  same  thing  before  the  begin-
ning  of  World  War  II—that  they  had  the  right  to  go  into
Poland,   into   Esthonia,   into  Latvia,   into   Lithuania,   because
Why  Doves  Coo In  Wall  Street
"One  of  the  more  impressive   demonstrations   of  anti-
war  feeling   is  under  way  these  days  in  about   the  last
place   that   peace   marchers    would   look   for   it—Wall
Street.    It's   a  demonstration    without   banners,   slogans
or   draft-card    burnings.      But   it's    unmistakable.      On
the  increasingly  rare  occasions  that  rumors  of  Vietnam
peace  negotiations  circulate,  stock  prices  go  up  sharply
—and  that's  about  the  only  time  they  do  go  up.   When-
ever   the  fighting  intensifies  or  threatens  to  intensify,
investors  sell  shares  in  enough   volume   to   produce   a
sharp  price  break.  .  .  .
Some  Wall  Street   descriptions   of  the  potential  bless-
ings   of   peace   sound   surprisingly   New   Leftish,    too.
"Peace  in  Vietnam  would   produce  a  dramatic  upsurge
in   the   market—a   psychological    explosion   that    would
push   the   Dow-Jones   industrial   average   over   1,000,"
says  Eldon  A.  Grimm,  senior  vice  president  of  Walston
&  Co.  .  .  .  Other  analysts  note  that  the  defense   indus-
tries  already   are  out  of   favor   with  many   investors—
perhaps  the  strongest  of  all  indications  of  Wall  Street's
anti-war   mood.    "Strange  as  it  may  seem,  in  view  of
the  faster  tempo  of  the  war,  there  is  a  definite  prejudice
against  stocks  with  a  high  national  defense  emphasis,"
says   Lucien   O.  Hooper   of   W.  E.  Hutton  &  Co.
—Victor  J.  Hillery,  Wall  St. Journal, March 6
they  needed  them  for  their  own  protection ...  as  a  buffer?
When  our  own  Marines  are going  into  Hue  to  recapture  it,
do  we have  the  right  to  stand  by and  merely  look  at thousands
of  South  Vietnamese  looting  Hue  that  has  been  liberated  by
us?  ...    When  this was brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Presi-
dent,  he  said  that  there  was  stealing  in  Beaumont,  Tex.     If
there  is  stealing  in  Beaumont,  Tex.,  it  is  not  bringing  about
the  death  of  American  boys.  .  .  .
TOWER   (R.   Tex.):   The  implication   has  been   made   that
we  have  suffered   a  series  of   very  great  defeats  in  Vietnam.
I  do  not  accept  that  thesis.  .  .  .
FULBRIGHT:  If  we   did   not   suffer   any  defeat  or   difficulty,
why  is  there  a  request  for   200,000  additional  troops?
TOWER:  Because  now  the  Administration   is  doing  what  a
number  of  us  have  been  saying  for  2i/
2
  years—that  you  can-
not  win  a  war  by  a  gradual  response  .  .  .  that  the  only way
...  is  through  massive  air  and  sea superiority  .  .  .  with  the
maximum  of   impact.   .  .  .
HARTKE  (D.  Ind.):  .  .  . not  only  are our young men  being
sacrificed  at  an  increasing  rate  but  .  .  .  the  whole   economic
system  of  the  U.S.  is  now  in  danger  of  collapsing  .  .  .  just
as  a  leach  bleeds  a  person  to  death,  this country  is  being  bled
of  its  treasure,  its manpower  and  its young  people.  .  . .
TOWER:  .  .  .  The  Soviets  may be  an  unpleasant  people,  but
they  are  not  foolish,  and   they  are  not  going  to  destroy  the
Soviet  Union  as  a  viable   society  by  initiating  thermonuclear
war  because  of  what  we  do  in  Southeast  Asia.  .  .  .
TYDINGS   (D.  Md.):   Our  forefathers  who  fought   against
colonial   rule  rejected  the  idea  that  one  person  could  commit
the  young  men  of  a  nation  to  battle  without  the  full  and  free
consent  of  the  people  of  that  nation.  .  .  .
NELSON  (D.  Wis.):  I  remember  standing  here  and  having
one  of  our  distinguished   colleagues   say,  "And   what  do  you
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  18,1968
know   about  military  policy  that   makes  you   so  much  wiser
than  our  military  experts  that  you  can  say  this  will  be  a  big
war?"    The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  the  instinct  of  those  of
us  who  opposed   this  policy  was  far  better  than  the  military
expertise  of  those  who  told  us we  ought  to  get  involved. ...
The  military  made  a  colossal  mis judgment. ...
The  question  is:  Do  you want  to  go  up  to  1.5 million men
or  2 million  men? ... Or  do you want  to  do everything pos-
sible  to  negotiate,  to  deescalate.  .  .  .  You  may militarily  sup-
press  the  guerrillas.   You  will  not  wipe  them  out.    They  do
not  have  to  fight  when  they  do  not  want  to  fight.  You  sup-
press  the  insurgency  and  you  sit  there  with  2  million  men.
And  when  you  leave,  they  are back  again.  .  .  .
I  object  to  the  interpretation   put  upon  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin
resolution,  that  it  was  a  vote  by  the  Senate,  with  only  two
dissenting  votes  [Morse  and  Gruening],  to  authorize an open-
ended   expansion  of  this  war. ...  If  the  Senator  from  Ar-
kansas  .  .  .  had  said  that  the  resolution  authorizes  a  ground
commitment  of  an  unlimited  number  of  troops ...  he  would
have  been  defeated  by  80%  of  the  votes  in  the  Senate.  .  .  .
FULBRIGHT:  I  believe  the  Senator  is  speaking  of  a  debate
on  Aug.  7,  1964.     Of  course,  I  was  relying  upon  the  truth-
fulness  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and
the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff.     At  that  time  I
was  not  very  experienced   in  dealing  with  these  gentlemen,
and  believed  everything  they  told  us.  ...    I  also  believed  the
President  of  the  United  States  when  he  said  that  his  purpose
was  not  to  fight  a  war  in  Asia  with  American  boys.    I  have
his  exact  statement  in  my notes.  .  . .
MANSFIELD  (D.  Mont.):  We  are  in  the  wrong  place,  and
we  are  fighting  the  wrong  kind  of  war.  .  .  . We  cannot  recall
the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  resolution.   If  I  knew  what  I  knew today,
I  would  have  voted  against  it.  ...     The  war  is  in  danger of
becoming  more  open-ended   than  just  Vietnam.  .  .  .  No  one
knows  how or  where  it  will  end.  .  .  .  There  will  be  ...    no
victory  for  anyone, only a legacy of  ...   hatred and horror.  . . .
Let  us  play  down  the  possibility  of   a  military  solution  and
play  up  the  possibility  of  an  honorable  negotiated  settlement.
McGovERN  (D.  S.  Dak.):  .  .  .  Our  policy  represents the
greatest  and  most  unfortunate  miscalculation  in  our  country's
history. ...  It  does  not  really  require  very  much  courage  or
patriotism  to  stand  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  and  cheer  our
Not  the  Road  to   Reconciliation
We  urge  support  for  Teddy  Kolleck,  Mayor  of  Jeru-
salem,  in  his  criticism  of  the  Israeli  military  for  blow-
ing   up  a  house  in  Arab  Jerusalem   because  they   sus-
pected   it   had  sheltered   an  Arab  terrorist;   the  blast
created  widespread   damage  in  an  Arab  neighborhood.
The  "get  tough" policies of  the  Israeli  military  threaten,
like  those  of  our  own  military  in  Vietnam,  to  increase
opposition  by  hitting  the  innocent  along  with  the  guilty.
We  also  believe  the  State  Department  justified  in  call-
ing  Israel's  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  is  a  party  to
the   1949  Geneva  convention  which  forbids    "collective
penalties"  and  punishment  without   proof   in   occupied
territories.     This   was   intended   to   prevent   what   the
Nazis  did  in  World  War  II.     Such  practices   can  only
embitter  the  Arabs  and  make  reconciliation  more  dif-
ficulty.    We  add,  as  a  sour  footnote,  that  our  own  prac-
tices    in   Vietnam—notably   "free   strike"   zones—also
violate   the  spirit   of  the   '49  convention   by  subjecting
innocent  civilians,  too,  to  shell  fire  and  napalm.
troops  on  to  their  death.  .  .  .
LAUSCHE   (D.   Ohio):   I   suggest   to  the   Chairman  [Ful-
bright]  that  instead  of  talking ...  he  introduce  a  resolution
.  .  .  one,  to  repeal  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  resolution;  two,  if  he
does  not  want  to  do that, then  a  resolution to  adopt  the Gavin
enclave  recommendation; and,  three,  if  he  does  not  want  to  do
either  .  .  .  then  to  present  a  resolution  to  declare  that  we pull
out  of  South  Vietnam and  raise the white flag of  surrender..  . .
CLARK   (D.  Pa.):  The  war  in  Vietnam  is  at  a  stalemate
which  neither  side  can  convert  into  a  military  victory without
leaving  the  country—and  perhaps  the  world—in  ruins.   I  for
one  have  felt  we  should  cease  the  bombing  of  the  North  and
pursue  de-escalation in  the  South.  .  .  .
GORE  (D.  Tenn.):  I  should  like  to  address  a  few  remarks
today  to  the  subject  of  a  Senator's  duty to  dissent. ...  It was
in  1775  that  Patrick  Henry  spoke  before  the  Second  Revolu-
tionary  Convention in  Virginia. ...  It  was in  that  speech  that
he  uttered  his  famous  plea  for  liberty or  for  death. ...  It  is
not  to  that  phrase  to  which  I  wish  to  make  reference.    I  shall
quote  him  more  in  point  on  the  question  before  the  Senate.
He  said:  ".  .  .  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  subject
ought  to  be  the  freedom  of  the  debate. ..."
—From  the  Congressional Record  of  March  7.
Why  U.S.  and  NATO  Policy  Leave  The  Greeks  No  Alternative  to  Revolution
"The   official  recognition   by  the  U.  S.  government  of   the
brutal,  dictatorial  regime  in  Greece  came  to  the  democratic
forces  of  our  country,  indeed  to  the  Greek  people  at  large,
as  a  shock.    But  what  was   even  more   shocking   was  the
open  and  enthusiastic   support  given  by  NATO,  in  the  per-
son  of  Admiral  Horatio  Rivero,  to  the  dictator  of  Greece—
not  to  mention  the  fact  that   the  junta   chief   has  been   of-
ficially   feted  on  the  U.S.S.  Roosevelt,  as  an  indication   of
warmth  and  friendship.  .  .  .
"What  are  the  Greeks  supposed  to  say  to  all  this?    How
are  they  supposed  to  react?    Our country   joined  the  alli-
ance  in  order  to  safeguard   its   freedom.    And  now  we  are
faced   with  the  bitter  fact   that  the  very   organization   we
joined  in  order  to  protect   this   freedom  is   arming  to  the
teeth  the  military  mafia  which  usurped  the  government  of
our  country  and  subjugated  our  people.  .  .  .
"The  colonels'  game  is  twofold.   At  home,  they  constitute
the  most  brutal,  the  most  barbaric  regime  Greece  has  ever
seen.    It  is   well  documented  by  now,  thanks  to   Amnesty
International,   that   tortures   which   defy   the   imagination,
and  terrorism  are  the  daily  diet  of  the  Greeks.
This   shaky   government   resorts   to   terror   as   the   only
means  for  its  survival.    Abroad,  they  wish  to  give  the  im-
pression   of   a   benign   and  transitional   government.     But
benign  they  are  not.    Nor  do they  intend  to  be  transitional.
For  it  should  be  clear  beyond  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  all
this   talk   about   a  plebiscite   on  a   democratic    constitution
followed  by  elections  is  material  for  the  public  relations
firms  they   are  hiring   almost   everywhere   in  the   west   to
plead  their  sinful   cause.  .  .  .
"There   is   no   doubt   that,   if   the   junta   were   isolated
morally,  militarily  and  economically,   it   would  collapse  of
its  own  weight.    Since,  however,  a  number  of  western  gov-
ernments   have   chosen   to  follow  the  example   of  the    U.S.
government  in  recognizing  and supporting  this  brutal dicta-
torship,,  the  Greek  people  have  no  other  alternative  but  to
organize   their   own  resistance  against   the   junta."
—Andreas  Papandreou  to A.D.A. in  Washington,  March 9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  18,1968
A  French  Correspondent's  Exclusive   Account  of  A  Nuclear  War  Game  Near   San^ Diego
How  the  U.S.  Marines  Prepared  in  1965  for  Atomic  War  in  Vietnam
In  the  summer  of  1965,  Marcel  Giuglaris,  Tokyo  corre-
spondent   of   Prance-Soir,   the   largest   evening   paper    in
Paris, was  taken  on  a  V1P  tour  of  U.S.  Navy    installations
in   California   and   the   Pacific.     In  his  paper   of   Aug.   3,
1965, he  described  this  mock  battle  preparation  for  the  use
of   atomic  weapons  in  Vietnam.    We  phoned  the  Navy   De-
partment,  reached  the   officer    who  arranged   the   Giuglaris
tour  and were  assured  that  his  stories  had proven  accurate.
Here  is  the  account  in  abridged    form:
By  Marcel   Giuglaris
The  United  States  is  prepared   to  use  tactical  atomic  bombs
in  South  Vietnam.   The  President  could  authorize their  use  in
case  a  region   like  Pleiku  or  Kontum   in  the  highlands,   for
example,  came  completely  under  Viet  Cong   control.
I  was  the  only civilian  and  journalist  among  200  officers  of
the  Pacific  fleet  and  marine units  gathered  to  direct  and  carry
out  maneuvers  on  a  scale-model  plan.    The   operation   took
place  in  the  war-room  of  the  Center  of   the  Command   and
Training   of  Amphibious   Forces   of  the  Pacific  at  Coronado,
near  San  Diego—the  biggest  American  naval  base  on  the  west
coast.    In  this  room  the  staff  of  the  amphibious  forces  in  the
Pacific  was  assembled.
A  Model  of  Vietnam
At our  feet, on  the  ground,  done  with  extraordinary accuracy
was  a  scale model  reconstruction  of  Vietnam  and  the  surround-
ing  sea.    On  the  sea  was  a  veritable  Armada.    Farthest  from
the  coast  was  the  Admiral's  flagship  which,  with  its  "heart"
of  telecommunications connected  to  Washington  and  to  all  the
ships,  planes  and  landing  forces,  constituted  the  "brains"  of
the  operation.  Around  the  flagship  were  protecting  destroyers.
Ahead, nearer  to the  coasts were the  transport  of  assault  troops.
From  the  flagship  came the  order,  "Begin  the  attack."   Sud-
denly,  the  sea  was  covered  with  landing  craft  which  emerged
from   the  mother  ships.     From   the  decks  of  their  transport
ships,  Sikorsky  helicopters  each  with  twenty-six  men  aboard
took  off   for  the  far  end  of  the  beach  to  disembark.
In   back  were  the  mountains,   swarming  with  Viet   Cong.
Without  doubt,  the  U.  S.  attack  was  a  surprise,  but  they  were
already  preparing  their  defense   and    counter-attack.
The   Index  for   1967   is  now  ready—You  can  have  a  copy  free   if
it  and  back  issues  in  a  claw  binder—There
"To  Prevent  The  Ultimate   Crime"
"To  our widows  and  orphans, to  our civilians mangled
and   burned  beyond   recognition,  to   our   dead  rotting
unburied  in  sun  and rain,  we  owe  nothing  less  than  the
truth:  this  is  not  a  struggle  for  freedom  or democracy;
it  has  become a  war  of  genocide.  .  .  .  We  urgently ap-
peal  to  the  world  community,  through  the  United  Na-
tions,  to  condemn  .  .  .  the  use  of  chemical warfare,
napalm  and  anti-personnel bombs.   Finally,  to  prevent
the  ultimate  crime against  mankind,  we  ask  the General
Assembly  to  forbid  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  by  any
party  in  this  conflict."
—Appeal  by South  Vietnamese  students  in  American
Universities,   March  1.
H   plus   6.     Suddenly  the   sky  cleared.     The   silence  was
almost  total.    Only  the  tanks  continued  to   fire.   Then,  from
the  far  end  of  the  room,  came  a  model  of  a  jet  plane  attached
to  a  steel  wire  which  whistled   as  the  plane  moved.    At  the
same  time,  a  voice  announced  on  the  loudspeaker:  "The  Presi-
dent  has  authorized   use  of   tactical   atomic  weapons   for   an-
nihilating   the   area  in   the   rear  where   the   concentration  of
'enemy  troops  is  located."
The  metal  wire  made  a  shrill  noise.    The  bomb,  dropped
from  the  plane,   exploded.     The   shape  of  a  mushroom   rose
over  the  model.   Everything  happened  so  quickly  that  surprise
was  complete.    Around  me,  all  Adams  apples   rose.    The  su-
perior  officers  stood  stiffly.    The  Marines  looked  at  each  other.
Someone   breathed   loudly.
Was  this a  simple  staff  exercise ?   No,  it  was  infinitely  more
than  that,  for  it  was  only  one  of  numerous  exercises  which
have  taken  place  on  the  west  coast  since  the  beginning  of  the
year.    In  Washington,   at  the  Department   of  Defense,   I  was
always  told  in  informed  circles  that,  "Since  spring,   1965,   the
war  in  Vietnam  isn't  just  a  continuation  of  the  war  in  Indo-
china.    We  think  we  are  involved  in  a  serious  business which
we  have  taken  in  hand,  and  which  we  have  definitely  decided
to  win.    We  refuse  to  accept  any  more  any  inherited   notions
about  the  war.    We  don't  want  to  run  the  risk  of  Dien  Bien
Phu."
you   send   a   stamped,   long   addressed   envelope—We   advise   keeping
is  much  in  the  Weekly  you  won't  find  elsewhere
FOR  STONE'S  NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new book,  In
A  Time of  Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................   State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly               s/is/ss
5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C. 20015
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,   N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  200IS
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington   D  C
An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  is  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada'-
110  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED