I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968may13.pdf

============================================================

Hanoi's  Strategy  In  Paris and  Saigon,  P.  4
An  Historic  Recommendation  On  Poverty  By  A  Group  of  Leading  Business Men
"The  present   system  of   public  assistance  does  not  work
well.    It  covers  only  8  million  of  the  30  million  Americans
living  in  poverty.   It   is  demeaning,   inefficient,   inadequate
and   has   so   many   disincentives  built   into   it   that   it   en-
courages   continued   dependency."
—From  a  report   by   the  Arden  House  Committee  of   12
business  men,  including  a  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Ford  Motor
Company,   to  Governor  Rockefeller,   recommending   an   in-
come  maintenance  system  like  the  negative  income  tax   to
end  abject  poverty.
L E  Stone's  Weekly
/\/sit4f    Dath/'Scl'MfSJ     n4_  \A/0/>iol\\                        ^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  10
MAY   13,  1968
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
20  CENTS
e  Rich  March  On  Washington  All  the  Time
No  other  Western  country  permits  such  a  large  propor-
tion  of  its  people  to  endure  the  lives  we  press  on  our  poor.
To  make   four-fifths     of   a  nation   more   affluent    than   any
people  in  history,  we  have  degraded  one-fifth    mercilessly.
—Report of the  Citizens Inquiry Into Hunger
To  see the  Poor  People's  March  on  Washington   in  perspec-
tive,  remember that  the  rich  have  been  marching  on  Washing-
ton  ever  since  the  beginning  of  the  Republic.   They  came  in
carriages  and  they  come  on  jets.   They  don't  have  to  put  up
in  shanties.   Their  object  is the  same  but  few  respectable  peo-
ple  are  untactful   enough  to  call  it  handouts.     Washington
owes  its  very  existence  as  the  capital  to  a  deal  for  the  benefit
of  wealthy  speculators.     They  had  bought  up  the  defaulted
bonds   issued   to  finance  the  Revolution,  paying  as  little  as
15  cents  on  the  dollar  to  the  needy  original  investors.    The
speculators  wanted  repayment at  full  face  value.    It  was  only
by  promising  to  move  the  capital  from  Philadelphia  to  a  new
city   to  be  built  on   the   Potomac  that  Alexander  Hamilton
could  get  enough  Southern  votes  to  swing  the  deal.
The  Trickle-Down  Theory
The  fiscal  and  banking  system  of   the   new  Republic  was
thus  solidly established on  the  basis  of  a  $20  million  handout
to  the  rich  and  on  the  Hamiltonian  theory  that  if  the  new
government  would  channel  enough  of  the  national  wealth  to
the  top   some  of   it  would  eventually  trickle  down.    In   the
meantime  the  farmer  and  the  consumer  would  pay  the  taxes
and  the  tariffs  to  keep  the  investor fat  and  happy.    Ever  since
then   the  public  treasury  and  the  public  lands  have  been   a
major  source  of  the  great  American  fortunes  down  to  our  own
day  of  never-ending oil  depletion  allowances.    The  tax  struc-
ture  and  the  laws  bear  the  imprint  of  countless  marches  on
Washington;  these  have  produced   billions  in  hidden  grants
for  those  who  least  need  them.    Across  the  facade  of  the  U.S.
Treasury  should  be  engraved,  "To   him  who  hath   shall  be
given."
One   easy  and   equitable  way  to  finance  an  end   to   abject
poverty  in  this  country  would  be  to  end  the  many  tax  privi-
leges  the   wealthy  have  acquired.     A   12-man   committee  of
industrialists  and financiers has just  recommended  to  Governor
Rockefeller  of  New  York  a  form  of  that  guaranteed  income
the  marching  poor  will  demand.    The  committee  proposes  a
negative   income   tax   to   raise   30   million   of   our   neediest
above  the  poverty  level.    Instead  of  paying  income  taxes  they
Just  Step  This  Way,  Folks,
And  See  How  We  Enrich  The  Poor
Lyndon  Johnson  reminds  us  of  an  old-time  carnival
medicine   man  who  just   can't   break   the   habit   of   the
phoney   spiel.     When   asked   about   the   Poor   People's
March  on  Washington  at  his  May  3  press   conference,
he  came  up  with  the  overstatement   of  the  century.   He
said   Congress   already  "has under  consideration   some
$80 billion worth  of  recommendations  that  the  President
has  submitted   in   connection   with  social  matters  and
welfare  and  poor  and  security  payments  and  additional
food  allotments  and  so  forth."    If  the  government  were
even  considering  $80  billions   for  welfare,  there  would
be  no  need  for  the  Poor  People's  March.   That  would
be  giving  poverty  equal  treatment  with  war;  $80 billion
is  what  we  are  going  to  spend  on  the  Pentagon.   John-
son's  slick   remark  sent  us  startled  to  the   budget   to
see  how  he  could  possibly  have  arrived  at  such  a  figure.
He  got  $80  billion  by  including  almost  everything   the
government  spends  on  domestic  affairs,  except  interest
payments.   To  reach  the  $80  billion  figure  you  have  to
add  up  just   about   everything   else   but  the   defense,
space  and  international   affairs  budgets.   Into  that  $80
billion  go  all  the  normal  expenditures  on veterans,  agri-
culture   and  commerce   as   well   as  almost   $40  billions
normally   paid   out   from   social   security    funds.    We
wouldn't  be  surprised   if,   hidden  away   here   and  there
in  this   compilation,   even   some   of   those   secret pay-
ments   to  the   CIA  thus  also  figure  as   welfare.   Who
knows,  after all, how  many  Marchers  may  be  CIA  men?
would  receive  enough   from   the  Treasury  to  bring  their  in-
comes  up  to  a  minimum  of   $3300   a  year   for   a   family  of
four.    The  additional cost  would  be  about  $11  billion  a year.
That  is what  the  more  obvious  tax  loopholes  for  the  rich  now
drain  from  the  U.S.  Treasury.*
Few  people  realize  that  our  present  tax  and  welfare  struc-
ture  is  such  as  to  encourage  the  wealthy  to  speculate  and  the
poor  to  vegetate.    If  a  rich  man  wants  to  speculate,  he  is  en-
couraged   by   preferential   capital   gains   and   loss   provisions
which  give  him  a  25%   cushion  against  losses  and  take  less
than  half  as  much  on  his  speculative  gains  as  on  his  normal
earnings.    But  if  a  poor  man  on  relief  took  a  part-time  job,
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
*  The  figure  is  from  a  staff  study  made  for  Senator   Prox-
mire  as  chairman  of  the  Joint   Economic   Committee  of  Con-
gress.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 13, 1968
Millions  In  Handouts  for  Rich  Farmers  While the  Poor  Starve
{Continued  from   Page  One)
he  had  until  very  recently  to  pay  a  100%   tax  on  his  earnings
in  the  shape  of  a  dollar-for-dollar  reduction  in  his  relief  al-
lowance.     Even   now  after   a  belated  reform  in  the  welfare
system,  a  poor  man  on  relief  after  his  first  $30  a  month  in
extra  earnings must  turn  back  to  the  Treasury  70  cents  on  the
dollar  while the  rich  man  need  pay  the  Treasury only  25  cents
of  every  dollar  he  wins  on  the  market even  when  his  normal
income  tax  rate  is  more  than  50  percent.    Such  is  the  topsy-
turvy  morality  of  the  Internal  Revenue laws.
Whence  Crime  In The Streets
A  heart-breaking  report  on  hunger  by  a  Citizens  Board  of
Inquiry  has  just  lifted  the  curtain  on  why  the  poor  are march-
ing.    In  the  richest  country  in  the  world  people  eat  clay  to
still  the  pains  of  an  empty  belly,  children  come  to  school  too
hungry  to  learn,  and  the  infants  of  the  poor  suffer  irreversible
brain  damage  from  protein  deprivation.    Much  of  the  crime
in  the  streets  springs  from  hunger  in  the  home.   Much  of  this
hunger  is  also  linked to  hand-outs  for  those  who  do  not  need
them.    Some  of  its  roots  may  be  found  in  subsidy  programs
designed  to  encourage  farmers  to  make  more  money  by  pro-
ducing  less  food.    The   effect   has  been  to  push  the  poor  off
the  land  and  into  the  ghettoes.   A  program  designed  30  years
ago  ostensibly  to  help   the  desperate  family   farmer  has  be-
come  a  source  of   huge  handouts  to   big  farmers  and  farm
corporations.
In   1967   the  42.7%  of  our  farmers  with  incomes  of   less
than  $2500  a  year  received  only  4.5%   of  total  farm  subsidies
paid  by  the  government  while  the  top   10%,   many  of   them
farm   corporations  or   vertical   trusts   in   food   processing,   re-
ceived  64.5%   of  these  subsidies.    The  contrast  between  these
handouts   for   rich  farming  interests  and   the   stingy  surplus
food  allotments for  the  poor  is  dramatically displayed  in  the
statistical  appendices  of  the  Citizens'  Report  on  Hunger.     In
the  calendar year  1966  a  quarter  billion  dollars  in  farm  sub-
sidies  were  paid  to  a  lucky landowning  two  one-hundreths  of
one  percent  of  the  population  of  Texas  while  the  28.8%   of
its  population   below  the  poverty  line  received   less  than   $8
million  in  all  forms  of  food  assistance.    Such  grotesque  mal-
When  A  Handout   Is  Free  Enterprise
"In  listening  to  the  arguments  against  limiting  farm
subsidies,  I  detected  support   from   the  other  side  of
the  aisle  for  the  idea  of  a  guaranteed  annual  income.
I  hope  that  support  will  persist  when  legislation  for  it
finally  comes  before  this  House.
"I  should  point  out  that  $10,000  is  a  substantial  sum
of   money.    Think   of   what   an  outcry  there  would  be
if  a  mother  on  welfare  with  a  dozen  children  in  New
York  were  to  receive  anything  like  $10,000  in  welfare
payments.  That  family  would  be labeled  welfare  chisel-
ers.   But  when a  farmer  receives  $100,000  for  not  grow-
ing  who  knows  what,  that  is  free  enterprise."
—Rep.   William  F.  Ryan  (D.-N.Y.),   May  1,  during
debate  on  the  Findley  (R.-Ill.)  amendment  to  the  Agri-
culture  Appropriation  Bill. This  amendment  would  have
placed  a  $10,000   ceiling  on  individual  farm   subsidies.
The  amendment  was  rejected   by  secret  vote,  129  to  79.
distribution  of  Federal  aid  is  not  limited  to  the  South.    That
same  year  the  U.S.  Treasury  paid  almost  $36  million  in  farm
subsidies   to  one-third  of   one  percent  of   the   population  of
Nebraska   while   only   $957,000   in   surplus   food    allotments
went  to  the  26.1%  of  its  population  which  is  in  poverty.  One
farm    company   in   California,   J.   G.    Boswell,    was   given
$2,807,633  in  handouts  by  the  Treasury   that  year   and   the
Hawaiian   Commercial   and   Sugar   Company  got    $1,236,355
in  Federal  sweetening.
Such  are  the  huge  hogs  that  crowd  the  public  trough.  Other
even  bigger   corporations   live  on  the  gravy  that  drips   from
the  military  and  space  programs.    We  may  never  reach   the
moon—or  know  what  to  do  with  it  when  we  get  there—but
the  race  for  it  has  already  created  a  new  generation   of  Texas
millionaires.    The   arms   race  and   the   space   race   guarantee
the  annual  incomes  of  many  in  the  country  club  set.
Even  before  the  marchers began  arriving, the  President  at his
latest   press  conference  was  already  inviting   them   to   leave.
Their  demands  would  be  "seriously"  considered,  he  said,  "and
then  we  expect  to  get  on  with  running  the  government  as  it
should  be."    For  years,  "running  the  government  as  it  should
be"  has  meant  financing  and  planning  these  programs   which
are the  welfare  systems of  the  American  upper  classes.   Three-
"Volunteers"—Or  Merely  Draftees  Who  Did Not  Have to  Be  Rounded Up  By  the  Police?
On  ABC's  Issues  and  Answers  March   31,  Walt   Rostow,
the   President's   Assistant   for   National   Security   Affairs,
painted  an  optimistic  picture  of  what  happened  in  South
Vietnam  as  a  result  of  the  Tet  offensive.   He  claimed  that
in  February  "about  20,000-odd- men joined  the  armed  forces"
and  that   "more  than  half   of   them  were  volunteers."   He
added  that  this  was   "two   and  a  half   times  the  level  of
a   year   ago."     Mr.  Rostow   cited   this   as   evidence   for  a
surge  of   patriotic  feeling.
A   rather   different   picture   is   provided   by   the   London
Times  correspondent  in  South  Vietnam.   He  reported  April
24  on  a  visit  to  the  III  Corps  induction  center  at  Cap  Diep
some   15   miles   north   of   Saigon.     He   said   that   about   a
third  of  the  young  men  called  up  had  to  be  arrested  by  the
police  but  that  the  camp   Commandant,    Major   Phu,   "said
this  was  an  improvement  over  last  year,  when  the  police
had  to   bring  in   four   out  of   every  five  conscripts."  Now
about   two-thirds   were   responding   to   the   draft.    "Major
Phu,"  he  wrote,  "claimed  that  this  was  due  to  an  upsurge
of  nationalist  spirit  after  the  bitter  fighting  at   Tet."   But
Major   Phu   unlike   Mr.  Rostow   did  not   claim   they   were
volunteers—only  that  they  no  longer  had  to  be  arrested.
The  London  Times  correspondent  wondered  whether  this
was   not   due  to   the   penalties  now  imposed   on   men  who
have  to  be  brought  in  forcibly.   These  men  cannot  become
non-commissioned  officers   and  do  not  have  the   option  of
serving   close   to   their   home   provinces.    "The   new    con-
scription  rules  are  pulling  in   more   recruits,"  the   London
Times   account   went   on,   "but   with   so   many   young   men
desperately  unwilling  to  join  the  Army,   and  especially  to
serve  in  the  front  line,  there  is  a  continuing  high  rate  of
desertions.   With  all  this,"  the  report  concludes,  "it  is  an
unconscious   irony   for  the   Government  to   talk  about  the
Vietcong   recruiting   their   troops  at   gunpoint."    A  similar
report   appeared   the   same   day   in   the   London   Telegraph
whose   correspondent   visited   the   same   induction   center.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May IS,  19U8
The  Last  Chance  for  A  Multi-Racial  and  Non-Violent  Outcome
quarters  of  the  poor  get  no  help.    Two-thirds  of  our  hungry
schoolchildren  are  not  reached  by  the  school  lunch  program.
But  finding  the  money  to  help  them  is  not  part  of  "running
the  government  as  it  should  be,''  i.e.  with  a  budget  allocated
80%   to  the   Pentagon   and   10%   to  health,  education  and
welfare.
A  Warfare,  Not  A  Welfare,   State
Ours   is  a  warfare,  not  a  welfare,  state.     And   unless   the
better   conscience  of   the   country  can   be  mobilized,   it  will
wage  war  upon   the  poor,   too.     Only   twice  before   in   our
history  have the  poor  marched  on  Washington—Coxey's  Army
of  the  jobless  in  1894  and  the  bonus  marchers  in  1932.    Both
times  they  were  easily  dispersed  by  force.    The  last  heartless
chapter  of  the  flinty  Hoover  Administration was  the  attack of
Gen.  MacArthur's troops  upon  the  encampment  of  the  bonus
marchers  on  the  Anacostia  flats.  This  time  the  shanties  will
not  be  burned  down  nor  the  poor  scattered  so  easily.    A  clash
could  set  off  the  hottest  summer  yet  of  our  nascent  civil  war.
The  poor   may  prove  an  irresistible  force.    The   Congress   is
certainly  an  immovable  object.
At  this  dangerous  juncture  we  need  a  crusade  of  the  pro-
gressive  well-to-do  to  supplement  the  efforts  of  the  poor   peo-
ple's  march.    We  are  glad  to  see that  SANE  and  a  group  of
other   organizations  is  calling  for  demonstrations  of   support
throughout  the  country  for  Saturday,  May  25.    We  need  vol-
unteers  to  stand  on  street  corners  and  collect  money  to  feed
the  encampment   of  the  poor  in  Washington.    And  we  need
an  army  of   young   white  idealists  to  ring   doorbells   in   the
suburbs  and  awaken  the  middle  class  to  the  crisis  the  poor
may  precipitate.    What  lies  ahead  may be  far  more  important
than  the   election.
We  wish  the  unaware  millions  of  the  suburbs  could  have
heard  the  extraordinary  collection  of  spokesmen   for  the  poor
whom  the  Rev.  Ralph  David   Abernathy  brought   to   Wesley
A.M.E.  Church  for  a  preliminary  rally  here  last  week.    The
volcanic   despair   of   our   Negroes,   Puerto   Ricans,    Indians,
When  A  Bureaucrat  Hears  Of  Hunger
The  verbal  tactics—the  official   releases—which  con-
front  a  simple  cry  of  hunger  have  been  heard  so  often
that  they  can  be  classified  quite  readily:  1.  I  deny  that
you  are  hungry.  Prove  it.    2.  You  are  the  exception.
3.  I  admit  the  facts  but  you  have  not  submitted  physi-
cal  and  biochemical  evidence  of   malnutrition, only  a
subjective  state  of  mind.  4. I  admit the  facts  but  there
are  countervailing policies  and  priorities  such  as  Viet-
nam,  crime, etc.  5.  Here  the  official  argues  the  problem
is   not  simply  hunger—but   hunger  plus   health,   plus
poverty,  plus  education, plus  unemployment, plus  tech-
nological  advances—and  that  consequently  he  lacks  ju-
risdiction.   6.  Failure  to  join  the  necessary  parties.   7.
Improper   venue.   8.  Prematurity   of   request.   9.   Im-
proper  forum.   10.  Remand  for  appropriate agency.   11.
Recrimination.   Here  the   official  admits  the  charge  of
hunger but  claims it  to  be  the  fault  of  the  hungry,  say-
ing  that  if  he  selected  his  diet  wisely  and  made  proper
use  of  available resources,  the  condition would not  exist.
—Citizens Report  on Hunger  in  the  USA.
Spanish  Americans  and  poor  whites  has  thrown  up  new  and
unknown   leaders   able   to   present   their   case   with   an   un-
taught  and  unmatchable  eloquence.  The  descendants  of  the  en-
slaved,  the  conquered  and  the  dispossessed   have  found  voices
which  makes  one  realize  what  human, resources  lie  untapped
among  them.    It  was  also  thrilling  in  a  time  of  rising  separa-
tion   to  join  hands   again  with   blacks  in  singing   We   Shall
Overcome  and  to  feel  how  truly  this  movement  stems  from
Martin  Luther  King's  teaching.     If  this  fails,   multi-racialism
and  non-violence  will  fail  with  it.    Yet  fail  it  must  unless  the
middle  class  and  the  suburb  can  be  aroused  to  pressure   Con-
gress  for  the  steps  required  to  wipe  out  poverty.    "There  is
nothing,"  Martin   Luther  King   said,   "except   a  tragic   death
wish,  to  prevent  us  from  reordering  our  priorities,  so  that  the
pursuit  of  peace  will  take  precedence  over  the  pursuit  of  war."
Now  is  the  time  for  the  white  and  the  fortunate  to  organize
themselves   for   this  work   of   solidarity.    This—it  cannot  be
said  too  often—may  be  our  last  chance.
From  the  Rev. Ralph David Abernathy's  Eloquent  Appeal  for  The  Poor  on  Capitol Hill
We  don't  think  it's  too  much  to  ask  for  a  decent   place
to  live  in  at  reasonable  prices  in  a  country  with  a  Gross
National  Product  of   800  billion  dollars.    Can  it  really  be
believed  that  we  really  don't  care  that  our  children  are  bit-
ten   by  rats,  that  we  are   packed  into  barren  cubbyholes,
plagued  by  roaches?     We  have  heard  that  when  zoos  are
planned,  great  care  is  taken  to  make  sure  that  an environ-
ment  is  created  where  animals   can  be  happy  and  feel   at
home.   Are  the  poor citizens of  this  land  entitled to  any  less
consideration   by  their  government?
The  unemployment rates  in  our  rural  and  urban  ghettoes
are   of   alarming   proportions.    We   are   here   because   we
want  to  work.   We  want  training  programs.   But  the  most
bitter   mockery  of   all  is   to  find  that  either   there   is  no
job  at  all  waiting,  or  that  we  are  once  again  condemned
to  exchange  our  manhood  for  dead-end  jobs  which  pay  a
boy's  wages.   Existing   programs  for  creating  jobs  simply
are  not  working.  The  Concentrated   Employment  Program
which   the   Labor  Dept.   predicted  would  produce  150,000
jobs  by  January  1968  produced  only  8,000  jobs.   We  must
see   to  it   that   the  welfare   trap  is  sprung   for  the   able-
bodied,  so  that  they  can  get  out  of  poverty  and  stay   out.
At  the  same  time  we  must  insure  support  at  a  civilized
level   for   those   who  are   too   young,  too  old  or  who  are
physically   or  mentally  disabled.   We   need   an  immediate
income   maintenance   program.   At  a  bare  minimum,  Con-
gress  should  set  a  fair  Federal  standard of  need for welfare
payments.    And  we  must,  in  the  name  of  God,  repeal  the
forced  work  program for  mothers  and  the  freeze  on  AFDC
mothers  contained  in  the  Social  Security  Act  of  1967.
We   have   heard   all   our  lives   that   there  are  no   gains
without   pains.   And  all  our  lives   we  have  had  to  endure
the  pains  without  gains.   Is  it  too  much  to  ask  that  this
time  if  taxes  are  raised   and  expenditures   cut,  it  not  be
done  at  the  expense  of  the  poor?  Must  we  support  a multi-
billion   dollar   space   program,  a   massive   defense   budget,
millions  for  supersonic  pleasure  planes,  tax  advantages  to
the  richest  and  most  powerful  corporations  in  the  world—
can  we  do  all  these  things,  and  yet  not  provide  a  job  that
pays   a  living   wage,  a   decent   house,  the   food   to  make
a  child  healthy  and  strong?
—The  Rev.  Ralph  David  Abernathy,  leader  of  the  Poor
People's  March,  to  the  Senate  subcommittee   on  Manpower,
Employment  and Poverty,  April  30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  13, 1968
The  New  Yorker's   South-East   Asia   Correspondent   Exposes  A  New  LBJ  Whopper
Nobody But Lyndon? Hanoi (Unlike Wash.)  Seems  to Know What It Wants
SOMETIMES,   IN   BETWEEN   SLEEP   and   waking,   as   in   the
opening  pages  of  Proust,  this seems  to  be  the  bluffiest   election
campaign  ever.  The  newest candidates to  enter  the  race  sound
like  Lyndon  B.  Humphrey  and  Lyndon  B.  Rockefeller  while
that  other  Republican  is  so  fiercely  loyal  to  LBJ  and  so  quick
to  growl  against  any  critics,  like  a  faithful   dog  at  the  White
House  West  Gate,  that  we  begin  to  think  of  him  as  Lyndon
B.  Nixon.
Sometimes   it's  hard  to   remember  whether  those   remarks
about  not  putting  up  the  white  flag  in  Vietnam  or  giving  in
to  crime in  the  streets came from  Lyndon B. Johnson  in  Wash-
ington  or  somebody  out  there  in  Indiana  named  Lyndon  B.
Kennedy.  Since we  clearly recall  that  Lyndon will  neither  seek
nor  accept  the  nomination,  the  only  man  really  running  seems
to  be  Eugene  McCarthy.
THE   NORTH   VIETNAMESE   are   proving   more   skillful   at
diplomacy  than   Johnson   and   his   team.     Johnson   talks   too
much  and  fibs  too  easily.    As  a  result  Hanoi  had  a  chance  to
exploit  his  "anywhere,  any  time,"   so  fully  that  he  could   not
turn  down  Paris,  though  it  hardly  meets  his  criterion    (No.
Six  or  Seven?)  about  a  place  which  gives  a  psychological  ad-
vantage  to  neither  side.    The  world  is  so  divided  over  Viet-
nam  that  only  the  moon  would  fill  the  bill  on  that  one.    But
Paris  is  the  Western  capital  most  hostile  to  U.S.  policy  and
most  likely  to  erupt  in  anti-American  riots  if  Johnson   tries
to  stall.    The   U.S.  would  have  been   better   off  in   Warsaw;
Communist  police  forces  are  tougher  than  ours  on  any  kind
of  demonstration.   Pnom  Penh  would  have  been  even  better,
for  this  tiny  Asian  capital  is  a  symbol of  successful  resistance
to  external  and  internal  Communist  forces;  a  model   of  that
stability  we  claim we  want.    (Perhaps  we  prefer  instability  to
any  demonstration  of  the  possibility  of   peaceful   co-existence
with  China).    Nobody  is  quite  sure  what  Johnson   is  doing
but   the  pattern   of  Hanoi's   action   is  growing  clearer.     Ap-
parently  it  had  planned  peace  talks  before  Johnson's   March
31  speech,  and  hopes  by  the  unsettling  effects  of  peace  talks
and   new   military  attacks  to   overthrow   the   Thieu-Ky  junta
and  bring  in  a  representative government  willing  to  negotiate
with   the   NLF.     If   the   White   House   really  wants   peace,
From  A  to  Z  and  Back  to  the  Old  Malarkey
In  my  first  weeks  as   Secretary   of   Defense   I   have
devoted   most   of   my  energies  to  a  comprehensive  re-
view   of   our  policies   and  programs   with   respect   to
Vietnam.     Among    the    more    important    conclusions
which   emerged   from  that   effort  was  that  the   South
Vietnamese   were   ready   to   bear   an  increasing   share
of  the  military  burden in  the  future  and  thereby   enable
us  to  level  off  and  in  due  time   begin   to   reduce   our
contribution.
—Clifford    to House  Armed  Services, April  30, 19C8.
The  military   program   in   South   Vietnam   has   made
progress ...  Major  U.S.  assistance ...  is  needed  only
until  the  insurgency   has  been  suppressed   or  until   the
national  security  forces ...  of  South  Vietnam  are  cap-
able  of  suppressing  it.   Secy.  McNamara  and  Gen.  Tay-
lor  reported  .  .  .  that  by  the  end of  this  year  the  U.S.
program    for   training    Vietnamese    should    have    pro-
gressed  to  the  point  where  1,000  United  States  military
personnel   .  .  .  can  be  withdrawn.
—Kennedy  White  House  Statement, Oct. 2,1963.
Washington   will  have  to  find  some  way  to  get  rid  of  Thieu
and  Ky  if  Hanoi  and  the  NLF  can't.    On  both  the  diplomatic
and  military  fronts,  Hanoi  seems  to  have  the  initiative,  per-
haps   because   only   Hanoi   really  knows  what   it  wants  and
has  a  plan  to  get  it:  to  wrest  a  political  victory  from  a  mili-
tary  stalemate.    It  has  a  real  chance  of  winning  this  because
unlike  Washington   it   is  prepared   for  political  compromises
while  we  are  still  the  prisoner  of  our  stale  cliches.
ADD  JOHNSON   WHOPPERS:  Pro-war  Robert  Shaplen,   the
New    Yorker's   correspondent  in  Vietnam,  points  out   from
Vientiane  in  its  May  4  issue  that  the  area  between  the   17th
and  the  20th  parallel  contains  27  percent  of  North  Vietnam's
people  and  not  10  percent  as  Johnson  claimed.
WHAT  HAPPENS:  To  the  term  "free  world"  when  freedom
bursts   out   in   Czechoslovakia   and    is   firmly   strangled    in
Greece?    When  Moscow  nervously  wishes  the  Czechs  would
be  a  little  less  open   about   their   freedom   and  Washington
wishes  the  Greek  military  would  be  a  little  more  discreet?
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed Envelopes
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement  wished  D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly              vivas
5618  Nebraska Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C. 20015
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The  Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED