I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968sep23.pdf

============================================================

Proof   That  Police Brutality  Is  Policy  In  Daley's  Chicago,  Pps.  2-3
The  StiU  Living  Though  Gagged  Voice  of  The  Old  Tolystoyan  Russia
"In  these  tragic  days  of   your   country   we  writers   of     there   existed  freedom  of  thought.  .  .  .  Forgive  us  and
Moscow  recognize  bitterly  our  own  helplessness.  .  .  .  We     forgive  Russia."—From  a  letter  by  88  Russian  writers   to
are  ashamed.  .  .  .  We  observed  your  struggle  with  envy,     the   Czechs   protesting   "our  present  Stalinist   methods  of
delighted   to   see   that   in   at   least   one   Slavonic   country      leadership"   in  The  Times  (London)   Sept.  11.
IF. Stone's  Weekly
T^Tft^tl    DsilllJrltasJ      ~D*   "O7"x»y»Ji7,..                  ^^
Now  Published Bi- Weekly
VOL.    XVI,  NO.  19SEPTEMBER  23, 1968
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Speech  For  A  New  (4th) Party Candidate
Fellow   Americans:  The  No.   1  cliche  of  the  tired   Viet-
namese  debate  is  that  the  war  can  only  be  won  by  political
means.   It  is  time  to  apply  that  wisdom  at  home.   We  are
at   the   beginning   of   two   revolutions,   one   by   the   blacks,
the  other  by  our  youth.   If  they  are  not  to  tear  our  country
apart,   we  must   recognize  that   they   are   not   the   result  of
some  esoteric  conspiracy  but  of  deep-rooted  disaffections   the
Vietnamese  war  has  exacerbated.   The  first  step  in  reducing
the   tension   and   dealing  with   those   causes   is  to   end   not
just  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,  but  the  war  itself,  and
not   just   the  Vietnam  war,  but  the   cancerous  growth   of  a
military  machine  so  huge  that  it  must  create  new  Vietnams.
The  War  May  Still  Be  On  In  1972
A  new  party  can  make  little  headway  this  year,  but  now
is   the   time   to   begin   to   build   it.    To   remake   American
society  peacefully  is  not   the  work  of   one  campaign.    It   is
foolish   to  assume,  first  of  all, that'the  forces  which  turned
the  two-party  system  into  a  one-party  rubber  stamp  for   the
war  will  somehow   disappear   after   the  election,  leaving   the
way   clear   for    peace.     Johnson    gave   up    the   Presidency
but  not  the  war.  Under  Nixon   or  Humphrey,   it  may  still
be  going   on  in  1972.  Or  conditions  in   one  of   the  many
Latin    American   countries    in   which   our    Special    Forces
operate   may   erupt   and   bring   full-scale  U.S.  military   in-
volvement.   Everybody  parrots  the  line  that  the  U.S. cannot
be  the  policeman  of  the  world  but  both  parties  are  committed
to   go   on   policing   just   about   all   of   it   outside  the   Soviet
bloc.   A  new  party  is  needed   to   clarify   the  distinction  be-
tween  unilateral  interventionism  and  internationalism.
But   the   more   urgent   issues   are   at   home.    The   lesson
of   Chicago   is   the   spillover   into   domestic   affairs    of    the
errors  our   military-intelligence   machine  committed   in  Viet-
nam,    where  its  sheer  size  and  elephantine clumsiness  escalated
the  rebellion.   The  main  enemy  to  the  maintenance   of  law
and  order  at  home  may  well  be  termed  Daleyism.   Daleyism
is  to  meet  protest  with   such  brute   force  as  to  transform   a
handful  of  protestors  into  an  army  of  the  disaffected.   With-
out  Daleyism,  a  tiny  corps  of  revolutionaries  could  not suc-
ceed   in  their  purpose,  which  is  to  create  an  atmosphere  of
civil  war, to  destroy  the  moderates  as  a  political   force  and
to  polarize  the  country  for   "confrontation."    It  was  Daley
who   managed   to   turn   a   disappointingly   small   turnout   of
Telling  It  As  It  Wasn't?
"I  think  it's   unfortunate  that   people  were   led   to
believe  that  the  police  waded  in  without  provocation.
To  the  contrary,  I  saw  a   policeman  get   stabbed   in
the  face  with  a  broken  beer  bottle,   cutting   his   eye
and  his  face  for   no  reason   at all."
—Humphrey   interview,  WCCO  Minneapolis  Aug. SI.
If   a   policeman  was   stabbed   in   the   face   with   a
beer  bottle,  cutting  his  eye, it  seems  strange  that  nd
such  vicious  attack   was   mentioned  either   in   Mayor
Daley's   official   report   (text   in   Chicago  Daily   News,
Sept.  9)   or  in  the   Chicago   Tribune's   special   8-page
supplement  of  the   same  date,  though   both  listed  all
policemen  injured   and  their   injuries.
protest  at  the  Convention  into  a  major  triumph  of   dissent.
The  vital  element   omitted  from  Daley's  White  Paper  and
from   his  TV  "rebuttal"  is  that  all  this  was  predicted   and
predictable.   On  August  1 a  Commission  of  respected  Chicago
citizens   turned   in   a   report   on   the   police   brutality  which
marked   the  April   27  peace   march  in  Chicago  and   warned
that  this  could  be  a  preview  of  the  Convention.*   On  August
7   two   dozen   Chicago    organizations   including   the    Cook
County  Bar  Association  sent   Mayor  Daley   a   memorandum
on   wiser   methods   for   handling   .demonstrations.    It   was
never  even  acknowledged.   "During  the  past  two  years,"  the
memorandum   warned,    "Chicago   has   been    the    scene   of
major  civil  disorders.   On  each  occasion  the  administration of
justice  has  failed  to  live  up  to  basic  and  historically  accepted
standards   of  law, fair   play   and   decency."    Daley's   "shoot
to  kill"  order  of  April   15  in  ghetto  disorders  signalled   that
cast  of  mind  which  made  him  an  ideal  bull  for  the  matadors
of  protest.   They  could  be  sure  of  blind  self-defeating  fury.
This  is  Daleyism.
A  new  party  is  needed  as  a  kind  of  mental  health  measure
for  the  nation's  politics.   We  are  threatened  with  a  renewal
of   the   paranoia  which   marked   the   McCarthy   period.    The
paranoid   sees  plots  where  the  physician  sees  an  inability  to
adjust.    Paranoia   is   also   the   professional   disease   of   police
agents  the  world   over.   A  society  which   relies  upon   them
for   political  guidance  is  in  for  trouble.    Stalin's  Russia  was
a  monument  .   paranoid  politics.   We  can  see police  paranoia
(Continued  on Page Four)
'See Pages 2 and 3.
6  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  S3,1968
Proof  That Police Brutality  During The Democratic Convention .
'  The  best  evidence  that  the  police  brutalities   which  marked
the   Democratic   National    Convention   were   not   the   result
of   provocation  but   of  deliberate  policy  lies  in  a  little  noted
report   on  "Dissent   and  Disorder"   made   public   on  Aug.   1
by   nine  distinguished   Chicago  citizens.*    They   investigated
the   similar   disorders   which   marked    the   April    27  peace
parade   in   Chicago,  when  SO  persons   were   injured   and  80
arrested.    The   report   expressed   the   fear   felt   in   Chicago
that  this  was  "a  dress  rehearsal"  for  the  Convention.   Here
are   their   conclusions  slightly    abridged:
The   organizers   of   the   April    27   peace   march   demon-
strated   to  the  Commission's   satisfaction  that  their   sole  wish
was  to   conduct   a   peaceful   march   without   incident.    Their
willingness   to  compromise   their   plans   reflected  a  desire  to
avoid   conflict  or   confrontation   with   the   City.   Other   cities
managed   similar  situations  without  incident.   New  York  City
had  an  April   27  Loyalty  Day  Parade   and  peace  demonstra-
tion.    Both   were   granted   permits;   neither   was   marred  by
serious   incident.   In  addition,  Chicago  police   officers   showed
on  May  4  that   they,   too,   were   capable  of   disciplined   pro-
fesional  action.   This  is  remarkable  since  the  May  4  parade
was  specifically  a  protest   against  the  police  and  their  actions
the  previous  Saturday.
A  Technique  for  Repression
But   City   officials   evidenced   no   such   attitude   toward   the
April    27   Parade.    There   was   a   concerted    effort    by   City
agencies   and   the   Park   District   to   prevent   the   Parade   or
to  destroy  its  effectiveness.    Parade  organizers  were  presented
with  a  series  of  obstacles  designed  to  discourage  them.  Parade
organizers   suggested   a   considerable   latitude  of   routes   and
'The  April   27  Investigating  Commission  was  chaired  by
Dr.   Edward  J.   Sparling,   president   emeritus  of   Roosevelt
University,  and  included   Warren  Bacon,  Vice  President  of
Inland  Steel  and  a  member  of  the  Chicago  Board  of  Educa-
tion;   Dr.   Edgar   H.   Chandler,  Exec.   Dir.   Chicago  Church
Federation;  Earl  B.  Dickerson, Pres.  Supreme Life  Insurance
Company;  Monsignor  John  J.  Egan;   Dr.  Joseph  P.   Evans,
Prof,   of   Neurological   Surgery,   Univ.   of   Chicago;  Prof.
Harry   Kalven,  Jr.,  Univ.  of   Chicago  Law  School;  Rev.  E.
Spencer  Parsons,   Dean,  Rockefeller  Memorial  Chapel,  and
Rabbi   E.   E.   Siskin,   Pres.,   Chicago  Board  of   Rabbis   and
North  Shore  Congregation  Israel.   Copies  of  the  full  report
may   be  obtained   for   $1.25  each  from  the   Roger  Baldwin
Foundation  of  ACLU,  6  S.  Clark   St.   Chicago,   111.  60603.
Prophetic
"Mayor   Daley's   'shoot   to   kill'  order  of   April   15,
regardless   of   its   technical   legality,   could   not   help
but  encourage  an  'anything  goes'  attitude  on  the  police
force.    The   Mayor's   repeated   insistence    that   'there
will   be   no   trouble   in   Chicago  this   August'   cannot
help   but  communicate  to   the   police  that   all   dissent
is  to  be  intimidated  and  repressed;  instead  of  prepar-
ing   police   to   deal   in   a   humane   and  constitutional
manner   with   the   trouble   which   may   very   possibly
erupt   around   the  Democratic Convention."
—Dissent   and  Disorder   (in   Chicago),   August   J.
times.   No  march  of  any  magnitude  can  be  conducted  without
difficulties   and   inconvenience,   but   the   peace   march   is  dis-
tinguished   from   others   by  the   City's  unwillingness  to   deal
with   such  problems.    The   refusal   of   public   officials   to  co-
operate   in  overcoming  these  barriers  amounts  to  repression.
The  use  of  public  property  for  political  protest  is  a  right,
not  a  privilege.   We  are  distressed  that  permit  procedures—
which   are   legitimate   only   when   used   to   regulate   the   use
of   public   property   for   reasons   of   traffic   and   safety—have
become  perverted  in  Chicago.    The  City  administration  must
realize  that  it  cannot  prevent  a  demonstration  because  officials
disagree  with  the  event's  ideology.   Nor  can  the  City  prevent
a  political  assembly  merely  because   difficult   traffic   problems
are   presented.
Many  difficulties  stemmed  from  the  excessive  concentration
and    visible   show   of    police   force.    With    no    basis    for
anticipation  of  trouble,   the  Police  Department  assigned   400
officers   to  the   Civic  Center   Plaza  alone.   Policemen   seemed
to  get   in   each  other's   way  and   even  worked   at   cross  pur-
poses.   And  this  display  of  police  force  presented  an  implicit
threat  to  the  marchers  from   the   very  outset.
Putting   the   causes   of   the   conflict   aside,   the   number   of
arrests  (80)   in  a  crowd  of  6; 500  was  not  in  itself  surprising.
Rather,   we   were   impressed    by   the   excess   of   force   and
brutality   used   in   making   particular   arrests.   There  was   no
resistance  by  those  arrested  to  justify  the  force  and  violence
of   the  arrests.   Policemen   also  employed   force  and   violence
as   a   method   of   controlling   pedestrian    traffic.    Those   in
police  custody  were  denied  many  of  the  constitutional  rights'
The  Same  Kind  of  Ineptitude  and  Brutality  Later  In  Evidence  During  the  Convention
At  times  police  worked  at  cross  purposes.   Along  Wash-
ington   St.,   police   officers   on   the   inside   of   the   sidewalk
were  attempting   to  carry  out  orders   to  disperse.   Mean-
while   police   along   the   outside   were   still   implementing
the  rigid  view  that   all  marchers  were  pedestrians,   to  be
prohibited   from   marching  into  the   street.   Consequently,
marchers   on  the   inside   of   the   sidewalk   were   being   in-
structed   to   disperse,   yet   were   unable   to   move  to   obey
the  order.   The  police  interpreted   this  inability  as  resist-
ance  to  a  lawful   police  command,  and  attempted  to   beat
people  into  submission.
The  attempt   by   police   to  disperse   the   crowd,  and  the
inability   (or,   at   times,   unwillingness)   of   the   crowd   to
comply   signalled   the   beginning   of   unprovoked  police   at-
tacks  on  demonstrators.
Unruliness  developed  in  the   crowd  as  well.   After   the
police  attacks  began,  a  number  of  individuals  threw  their
picket  sticks  at   policemen.   Commander  Riordan  was   hit
in  the  neck  and  required  medical  treatment.   But  this  did
not  justify  the  continued  police  actions,   far   in  excess   of
the  marchers'  unruliness.
Other  incidents   corroborated   by  multiple   witnesses:
Police   officers   (sometimes   in  formation)   chased   fleeing
marchers  through  the   Loop.   If   marchers   could  not  out-
run   the   police,   they   were   subject   to   beatings   by   police
clubs  on  their   backs  and  heads.
Parade  medical  aides,  identifiable  by  their   white  coats,
were  chased   by  police.
Other  demonstrators  were  pulled from  restaurants  where
they   had  sought   refuge   and  beaten   by  policemen.
In  few  cases  did  marchers  resist  arrest,  yet  many  were
beaten  while  offering  no  resistance.    In  at  least  two  cases,
girls   were  dragged   to   police   wagons,   one  by   her  heels,
another   on   her   buttocks.
—From  the  chapter   on  Police  Brutality  in   the  Citizens
Commission   Report    on   Dissent    and   Disorder
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  2S, 1968
... Was The Result Not  Of Provocation But Of Daley's Policy Toward Dissent
of   due   process.    Most   were   neither   told   of   the   right   to
contact  a  lawyer  nor   allowed   to  do  so  upon   request.
Police  judgments  of   the   danger   presented   by  a   political
group   can  be   unfairly   influenced   by  their   hostility   to   the
group's   beliefs   and   goals.    It   is   our   inevitable   conclusion
that   emotional   bias   must   have   led   to   the   brutality  which
characterized  the  Parade's  dispersal.  The  unreasonable  limita-
tions   City   officials   required   police   to   enforce   against   the
Parade   were   also   an   open   invitation  to   conflict.    At   the
very   least,   the  need  to  enforce   these  restrictions   aggravated
police   biases.    The   fact   that   newspapermen,   press   photog-
raphers   and   people   not   even   participating   in   the    Parade
were   beaten   indicates   the    indiscriminate   nature   of    force
applied.    Such  actions  are  clearly  not  in  the  interests  of   the
police   by   any   standards;  apparently    the   police  lost  control
of   themselves.
No  Police  Disciplined
We   again  emphasize  our   deep   concern   as  to   what   will
happen   if  police  confront  crowd  situations  where  control   is
really   difficult.    We   face   the  future  with  great  fears   unless
there  is  immediate  realization  of   the  need   for   better  train-
ing    of    policemen.     The    police    responsibility    to    remain
neutral  regardless  of  private  political  attitudes  toward   those
it  is  their  duty  to  protect,  must  be  more  strongly   emphasized.
Disurbing   evidence  of   the   lack   of   such   training  was   the
fact  that  Superintendent  Conlisk  and  Deputy   Superintendent
Rochford   were  present   at  the  Civic  Center  Plaza   on   April
27.   They  must  have  had  a  clear  view  of  many  unjustifiable
excesses  of  police  action.   We   are  aware  of  no  disciplinary
action   within   the   Police   Department   resulting   from   this
affair.    We   believe  that  this  implicit  tolerance  of   repression
on  the  part  of  high   officials   indicates  a  failure  on  the  part
of    the   City   administration   to   protect    First    Amendment
rights   or  perhaps   to  understand   them.    These  attitudes   are
inevitably   reflected   in   police   behavior.    The     effect     of    the
"shoot  to  kill"  order  cannot  be   minimized.
We   also  note   the   almost   complete   lack  of   press   cover-
age  of  the  rally  and  its  aftermath.   Although   we  are  aware
that   reporting    of   weekend    events   is   limited,    this    does
not  account  for  the  absence  of  fair  and  reasonable   coverage
The  Use  Of  Mace  As  A  Punitive  Weapon
"The   Commission   has   considerable   evidence    that
Mace   was   used   several   times   aganist   non-resisting
demonstrators.   Witnesses  confirm  that  beaten  demon-
strators   were   Maced   while   in   full   control   of   police
officers   on  the   Plaza   .   .   .   Many   arrested   persons
stated  independently  that  Mace  was  sprayed  into  the
gquadrol   where   they   were   held   pending   removal   to
Police  Headquarters.   Mace  was  designed  as  a  weapon
to  facilitate   arrest   where  oral  arrest  instructions  are
unsuccessful.   The  use  of   Mace  as  a  punitive  weapon
following  arrest,   as  happened  several   times  on  April
27,  is   reprehensible."
—Dissent   and  Disorder   (in   Chicago),  August   1.
of   an   event   which   stimulated   so   much   concern   among   a
large  number  of  citizens.   This  failure  of  the  press  to   fulfill
its   obligation   to  keep  the  public   accurately   informed   raises
disturbing  questions  about  the  pressures  faced  by  the  media.
This   failure   is   one   of   the   most  disturbing   features   of   the
entire     affair.
Our  witnesses  revealed  that  the  peace  movement  has  come
to   believe   that   the   First   Amendment    does   not   exist   for
them  in  Chicago.   This  conclusion   seemed  to  be  based  on  an
alleged    history   of   discriminatory    and   repressive   treatment
by   City   agencies   toward   the   peace   movement.    With   re-
spect   to  April   27,  the  peace  movement's   conclusions    were
reinforced   by  the  Park   District,  the  Department  of   Streets
and   the  Civic  Center   management,   all   of   which   attempted
to  discourage  the  Parade;  by  the  prominence  of  "Red   Squad"
photographers,  whose  activities- function  to  intimidate  partici-
pation   in  dissenting   activities;  and  by  the  ostentatious   bru-
tality  of  the  police.
This  disregard   for  human  and  civil  rights  is  not  new  to
Chicago.    Chicago    officials   have,   in   the   past,   allowed    (if
not  encouraged)    the  police  to  deal   harshly  with   minorities
they  think  will  not  be protected  by public  opinion.   We  make
this   observation   with   apologies   to   the   members   of    such
groups,   realizing   as   we   do   that   an   investigation    such   as
this   was   called   forth   only  after   an   act  of   repression   was
directed  at  a  parade  which  included  "more  influential"  mem-
bers  of  the  community.    [Italics  added.]
An  Appeal  From  Leading  Chicagoans  To  Humphrey  Which  Fell  on  Deaf  Ears
"Chicago  has  been  disgraced  by  the  thug-like  behavior
of  our  police  and security  forces  in  attacking  young  people,
newsmen   and  even  delegates   in   the   interest   of   a   false
and  un-American concept  of   law  and  order.   Security  and
law   enforcement   is  indeed   important   in  this  tragic  year
of  the  assassin,   but  the  job  of  security  forces  is  to  serve
the  democratic  process,  not  to  smother  it.
"There  has  been  provocation  of  police  by  protesters  and
some  of  them  obviously  do  not  share  our  commitment  to
nonviolent   methods   of   social   change.   Still,   there   is  no
excuse   for   policemen  yelling   'kill,   kill';   no   excuse   for
viciousness   and  excessive   force   against   unresisting   ar-
restees.     When   these   things    happen,   the    police   cease
being  a  professional   police  force   and  become  a  band  of
vigilantes.   Moreover,  police  brutality  only  plays  into  the
hands  of  those  who  have  lost  all  faith  in  our  institutions
and   who   are   seeking   conflict   rather   than   constructive
change.
"These   incidents  also  underline  the  validity   of  many  of
the   complaints   repeated    year   after    year   by   the   civil
rights  forces  of  our  city  that  police  brutality  is  not  just
an  occasional   thing,   not  just  an  aberration  by  misguided
individuals,  but  a  much  too  common  and  widespread  prac-
tice  in  the  ghetto.   These  incidents  have  given  the   media
and  the  white  community  a  glimpse  of  what  we  have  been
talking  about.   It  is  not  enough  to  protect  the  rights  of
newsmen  who  are  backed  by  some  of   the   most   powerful
institutions  in  our  society.   The  real  test  is  what  happens
to  the   weak  and  defenceless,   to   the  ordinary  citizen,   to
the   poor  and  the   black.
"We  call  upon  Vice  President  Humphrey  to  disassociate
himself   publicly  from  this   kind   of   'law   and   order*   and
this   way   of   conducting   his   party's    business."
—From  a  statement  issued  Aug.   29  on  the   convention
disorders   by   Chicago  representatives    of   16   organizations
including   the  CivH  Liberties  Union,  Friends  Service   Com-
mittee, American Jewish  Congress, NAACP,  Urban  League,
Catholic  Interracial   Council  and  B'nai  B'rith.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  23,1968
One  Rioter  Daley  Forgot  To  Mention
"That   night   [Monday]   Pierson,   too,    threw   rocks
and  bottles  and  hurled  insults  at  police  .  .  .  [Tuesday
night]  Pierson  threw   more  bottles  .  .  .  On  Wednes-
day  Pierson  was  in  a  group  which  lowered  an  Amer-
ican  flag  in   Grant   Park   and  raising   [sic]    of   a  red
flag.   This  touched  off  rioting  as  police  moved  in  .  .  ."
—Chicago  Tribune,   Aug.   31,  describing   the  activi-
ties  of   undercover  cop  Robert  L.   Pierson,  who    infil-
trated   the   Yippies    and   became  Jerry   Rubin's    body-
guard.
"§231.  Civil  Disorders ...  (3)  Whoever  commits or
attempts  to   commit   any   act  to   obstruct,  impede,  or
interfere  with  any  .  .  .  law  enforcement   officer   law-
fully  engaged  in  the  lawful   performance  of  his   official
duties   incident   to   and  during   the   commission   of   a
civil   disorder   .   .   .   Shall   be   fined   not   more   than
$10,000  or  imprisoned  not  more  than  5  years  or  both."
—From  Chapter  12  of   the   1968  Civil  Rights    Act.
The  Dehumanization  Of  Politics  And  The  World-Wide  Revolt  Of  Youth
(Continued  -from  Page  One)
in  the  mishmash   of  reality  and  fable  in  the   Daley  White
Paper.   We  can  see the  political  illiteracy  that  is  the  hallmark
of  the  rather  low  IQs  attracted  to  this  kind  of  work  in  the
passage  which   says   of   David   Dellinger,   a   product   of   the
pacifist  movement,  "He   is  alleged   to  have  admitted  being  a
Communist!"
Agnew's  62  Reds—Like  Joe  McCarthy's  81
The  Communists  may  soon  again  serve  the  modern  equiva-
lent  of  the  witch  mania   (as  the  "counter-revolutionary"    or
"Trotzkyite"   does   in   the   Soviet   bloc).    The   House   Un-
American  Activities  Committee  has  just  climbed   out  of   the
woodwork  to  announce that  it  will  investigate.   Spiro  Agnew,
the  Republican  candidate  for  Vice  President,   (to  the  dismay
even  of  Dirksen  and  Gerald  Ford)  declared  Humphrey   "soft
on  Communism"   and  told  an  audience  at  Annapolis *  that
he  will   "soon"  have  a  list  of   62  leading   dissenters  "with
Communist  leanings"—just   like  that  list  of  81  Reds  in   the
State  Department   Joe   McCarthy  claimed   to   have   18  years
ago.   The  old  movie  is being  replayed.
We   need   a  new  party  to   marshal   the   forces   of  sanity.
We   need   a  new  party  to   combat   Daleyism.    We   need   a
new  party  to  make  the  public  realize  that  the   issue  is  not
law  and  order  but  the  relation   between   "the   law"   and  dis-
order.   The  greatest  single  cause of  disorder  in  the  ghetto  lies
in   those   policemen   who   have   identified   "the    law"   with
racial  humiliation  and  harassment.   This  was  the   profound
truth   lit   up   by  that   wonderful   Freudian   slip   at   Daley's
press  conference  Sept.  9  when  he  said,  "the  police  isn't  there
to   create   disorder;   the    policeman    is   there   to    preserve
disorder."   (Washington  Post, Sept.   10).
If  war  is  too  important  to  be  left  to  the  Generals,   politics
is  too  important   to  be  left  to  the   police.    As  in  Vietnam,
repression   will   intensify   rebellion.    Yet   a   whole   industry
is  being  built  up  for  "riot  control".   The  military-industrial
complex  has  a  little  brother  in  a  police-industrial   complex.
Little   CIAs   are   springing   up   in   every   municipal    police
•Baltimore  Sun,  Sept.  12.
force,  with  all  that  notorious  capacity  for  misjudgment  that
has  marked  the  operations   of  Big  Brother.    As  in  Vietnam,
we  are   trying  to   deal  with   rebellion   by  dehumanizing   it.
We   refuse   to   see   that   the   disaffection    reflects    frustrated
human  aspiration  which  could  provide  the  energy  for   social
and   human   betterment.    To   end   the   alienation   would   be
to  mobilize  some  of   our   best  human   resources,   white   and
black.   But  we  are  trying to  deal with  revolt  as a  technological
problem.    The   line   of   least   resistance—and   most   private
profit—is   toward   the   development   of   new   means   for   re-
pression.   That  way lies   1984.
Perhaps   the   most   important   function   of   a   new   party,
bigger  even  than  ending  the  war  in  Vietnam  or  finally  giving
the  black  full  emancipation  in  our  society,  is  to  make  politics
human  again.   It  is  the  feeling  that  bureaucracy  everywhere,
whether  under  Communism  or  capitalism,  is  snuffing  out  the
human  that  explains   the  world-wide  revolt   of  youth.   Only
a   new   party   devoted   to   the   human   can   turn   that   revolt
away   from   nihilism   and   into   constructive   channels.     We
want   to   rebuild   America   in   line  with   its  own  best   tradi-
tions,  not  to  destroy  it,  or  to  let  it  destroy  itself.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book, In
A  Time of  Torment (Random House)  regular  price $7.95
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement wished  O
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a   sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   .,
..............................  Zip................   State.....
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska Ave,  N.  W., Washington,  D. C. 2001S
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage  Paid   at  Washington.  D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.
An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  S5  in  the  U.S.:   $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mall  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED