I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968dec16.pdf

============================================================

HUAC  and  The  Chicago Disorders: An   Obsolete  Circus, P.  3
Is  Nixon  Planning  To  Negotiate  Peace  Or  An  Indefinite  U.S.  Protectorate  In  Vietnam?
"Nixon's  campaign  headquarters  Nov.  3  announced  Nixon
hoped  to  be  spending  $87  billion  on  defense  by  the   fourth
year  of  his  Administration.    Aides  said  this  figure,  which
assumed  a  Vietnam   peace,  included   $10  to  $15  billion   for
rebuilding   and  policing   Vietnam  .  .  ."   (Italics  added).
—Congressional  Quarterly,  Defense   Outlook,  Dec.  6.
L K Stone's   Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly                       **
VOL.  XVI,   NO.  25
DECEMBER   16,   1968
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
Happy  Days  Ahead for the  Pentagon
Two   days  before   Nixon   was  to   unveil  his   Cabinet,   the
shape  of  things  to  come  was  pretty  well  prefigured  by  the
news  that  Senator  Jackson  was  his  first  choice  for  Secretary of
Defense  and  that  Congressman  Melvin   Laird  will  have  the
job  Jackson  turned  down.    These  are  not  the  choices  of  a
President-Elect  hell-bent  for  General  and  Complete  Disarma-
ment.    The  voluble  Jackson  is  the  most  faithful  purveyor  on
Capitol  Hill  of  the  arms  lobby's  most  melodramatic  alarums.
He  would  have  provided  a  "liberal",  Democratic  and  bi-par-
tisan  coverup  for  higher  arms  spending,  and  a  way  to  divert
fire  from  Nixon   as  this  cut  into  welfare  expenditures.     Per-
haps  the  reason  Jackson  turned  the  job  down  lies  in  Nixon's
November   2  promise  at  the  General  Dynamics  plant  in  Fort
Worth  to  make  that  billion  dollar  bust,  the TFX-Flll,   "one
of  the  foundations of  our  air  supremacy."    It  would  be  em-
barrassing  to  Jackson  to  fulfill  this  pledge  to  perpetuate  Mc-
Namara's  greatest  procurement  blunder  when  Jackson  on  the
McClellan  committee  was  a  prime  mover  in  the  TFX  investi-
gation,  and  fought  to  get  the  contract  for  Boeing.    At  a  time
when  the  demand  for  cancellation  of  the F-lll  contract  is ris-
ing  in  the  Senate  and  the  McClellan  committee  is  preparing
to  resume  its  investigation,  it  would  have  lookd  too  unprin-
cipled  suddenly  to  turn  up  on  the  other  side.*
A  Wide  Variety  Of   Gaps
In  Melvin  Laird,  Nixon  has  chosen  a  troglodyte  Republican
for  the  Pentagon  post.    This  small  town  mid-Western  lumber
merchant  has  been   an  able  and  hard-working  Congressman,
and  is ranking  Republican  on  both  the  defense  and  HEW  sub-
committees  of  Appropriations,  where  his  twin  passions  might
be  summed  up  as  more  money  for  defense  and  less  for  wel-
fare.  This  may  prove  a  succinct  preview  of  the  Nixon   years.
Ideologically  he  belongs  to  the  dogmatist  wing  of  the  Party,
clinging  with  fundamentalist passion  to  a  simple  faith  in  free
enterprise.    Like Nixon  he  is a leading Capper.   Nixon  raised
the  Security  Gap,  the  Research  Gap  and  the  Submarine  Gap
in  the  campaign.    Laird  in  1962  published  a  book  "A  House
Divided:  America's  Strategy  Gap."     We  have  been  unable  to
locate   a  copy  and   can  note  only  that   it  was  published   by
Henry  Regnery  of  Chicago,  a  firm  which  specializes   in   the
kind   of   political   pornography    designed   to   stimulate   tired
blood  on  the  aging  far  right.
As  Seen  From  The  Arms  and  Space  Industries
"Appointments  of  Harvard  Prof.  Henry  A.  Kissinger
as   chief   national   security   adviser   to   President-elect
Nixon  portends  a  highly  pragmatic  approach  to  Soviet-
U.S.   relations,  with  less  emphasis  on  'good  relations'
between   East   and  West.    A   non-ideological   analyst,
Kissinger   favors  tacit  international  arrangements  that
can  operate  even  in  the  absence  of  the   good  will  of
the  participants.   He  is  distrustful  of  arms  limitation
treaties and views  credibly  invulnerable  offensive  forces
as   the  most   effective   deterrent   to   nuclear   war.    He
once  said  about  summit  conferences:  'Negotiations  are
important.   But  it  is  essential  to  conduct  them  with-
out  illusions  .  .  .  We  do  ourselves  an  injustice  if  we
make  an  issue  of  the  desirability  of  relaxing  tensions
or  of  ending  the  Cold  War.  .  .  .'
"National   Aeronautics   and   Space   Administration,
industry  and  academic  circles  are  pleased  with  Nixon's
appointment  of   Lee  A.   DuBridge,   president   of   Cali-
fornia   Institute  of  Technology,  as  his  top  science  ad-
viser.   Although  a  decade  ago  he  denounced  the  entire
space  program  as  a  'boondoggle',  DuBridge  has  since
become  one of  its  firm  supporters.  He  favors   unmanned
space   exploration,   but  is   considered   sufficiently    per-
ceptive  politically  to  give  the   manned  program  more
than  his  token  support."   [Men   in  space  is  a  military
objective].   Emphasis  in  original.
—Aviation  Week   and  Space  Technology,  Dec.   9.
9
  For  a  detailed  account  see  my  twin  articles  on  Nixon
and  The  Arms  Race,  and  on  Gilpatric   and  General  Dynamics
in  the  next  (Jan.   2)  issue  of  the  New  York  Review  of  Books.
Clutchers  after  straws are  saying that  Laird,  unlike  Jackson,
is  at  least  a fiscal conservative, but  he  is unlikely  to  rein  in  the
military  until their  demands  are  really  astronomical.    Another
straw  is  that  while  a  hard-liner   on  Vietnam,  he  has   come
around  to  seeing  the  necessity  for  getting  out.    Last  July  he
told  the  Republican  platform  committee  that  the  U.S.  was  in
a  position  "where  the  only  route  open ...  is in   negotiation"
and  wanted  the  party  to  exploit  the  peace  issue  by  declaring
that  a  negotiated  settlement  could  only  be  reached   by  a  Re-
publican  Administration "unhampered  by the  mistakes"  of  the
past.    One  of  these,  in  Laird's  opinion,  was  not  hitting  the
North  sooner   and  harder.     His   appointment   may   lengthen
the  talks  and  the  war  by  encouraging  Ky  to  play  tough   in
Paris  since  Laird  in  the  past  has  opposed   any  kind  of  coali-
tion   regime   in   Saigon.     If   Nixon   now  puts   Henry   Cabot
Lodge,  Ky's  political  though  out  of  wedlock  papa,  in   charge
of  the  negotiations,  the  talks  might  easily  last  until  the   1972
campaign.
Evans  and  Novak,   who  are  close  to  Laird,  were  given   a
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 16, 1968
Wealthy  Farmers  Feed  at  The  Public  Trough  But  Oppose  Aid   To  The  Rural  Poor
Is  It  Subversive  to  Expose  the  Facts  of Hunger  in  Rich  America?
NEW    KIND   OF   SUBVERSION:   Robert  C   Maynard   and
George  Lardner,  Jr.,  in  an  exclusive  Washington  Post  story
Dec.  8  revealed  that  the  House  Agricultural  Appropriations
subcommittee  is  using  the  FBI  men  routinely  assigned  it  to
investigate  the   "objectivity"  of   organizations  which  earlier
this  year  reported   widespread  hunger   in  the  United   States.
The  chairman of  the  subcommittee  is Jamie  L. Whitten  whose
district  includes  Marks,  Miss.,  whence  the  Poor  Peoples  Cam-
paign  was  launched  last  spring.   Whitten   admitted  to  these
reporters  that  he  had  sent  complaints  to  the  FCC  about  the
CBS  show  "Hunger  in  America"  even  before  it  was  televised
last  May  21,  and  got  part  of  its footage  deleted.    FCC investi-
gators  are  also  questioning  participants  in  this  program.    We
hope  CBS will counter  with  a  new  TV  show  "Is  it subversive
to  mention  hunger  in  America?"
Rich  Farmers  On  Relief
ONLY   To   THEM   THAT   HATH:   Madera   in   California  is
one   of   the   richest   farm   counties   in   the   nation   but,   or
because   of   this,   it   has   the   highest   concentration   of   poor
families   (29.8%)   in  that   State.    Its   growers   in   1966   re-
ceived  more  than  $3  million  in  Federal  farm  subsidies.   An
opinion  survey  by  the  Office  of  Economic  Opportunity,  how-
ever,  found  them  overwhelmingly hostile  to  Federal   aid  for
the  poor.   The  National  Catholic  Reporter  (Dec.  4)   says  the
vote  was  81%  opposed,  only  13%  in  favor,  of  a  guaranteed
annual  income.  Their  own annual  Federal  subsidies to guaran-
tee  their   incomes  ranged   from   a  low   of   $5,000   in    1966
to  a  high  of  $133,555.
TYPICAL     U.S.      MILITARY      PROPAGANDA:     Our      mili-
tary  hate  truces  of  any  kind.   Every  time  we  have  one  they
get  busy  padding  out  figures  on  violations.    In  this  familiar
pattern   was  a  Saigon  dispatch   on  the  AP  ticker  Dec.   7  in
which   the   U.S.   command   spokesman   said   U.S.   reconnais-
•sance  had  uncovered   "at  least  461  indications  of  enemy  ac-
tivity"  in  the  demilitarized zone  since  the  bombing  of  North
Vietnam  stopped   on  Nov.   1,  though-only  36   (or   less  than
8%)    were   termed   "significant."    Apparently   we   retaliated
against   many   insignificant   something-or-other   because    the
briefing  officer   said  only  128  of  the  indications  were   serious
enough   to  warrant  retaliatory  fire  from  U.S.  planes,  artillery
and   warships.    So  if   you   deduct   the   36  cases  the  military
call   "significant"   from  this   128,   it  would   appear  that   92
cases,  though  not  "significant"  were  serious  enough  for  coun-
ter-fire.    What  kind  of  special  dictionary  does  the  U.S.  com-
mand  use?   Note  that  it  does  not  claim  these   were   hostile
Discreet  Message  to  Ky  in  Paris
"A  message  for  the  Vietnamese  (Asian)  community:
PEACE  IN   VIETNAM
"Let  Us  Hope  So.   But  Yes  or  No,  Is  Your  Financial
Future  Secure?—Can  You  Invest  Your  Savings  In  A
Secure,  Tangible,  High   Yield   Commodity   In  The   Ut-
most  Confidence  and  in  Complete  Anonymity?
"I  am  an  investment  SPECIALIST,  a  senior  execu-
tive  with  an  international  firm,  who  has  recently  re-
turned   from   over  a  year  in  the  Far  East,  including
many  months  in  your  country.    I  am  returning  shortly
VIA   NEW    YORK.
At  this  time  I  have  an  interesting  first  offer,  avail-
able  now  for  YOU  ONLY,   with  almost  unlimited  in-
vestment  opportunity  and  extraordinary  benefits.  Other
Southeast   Asian  Investors  have  seen  fit  to  substan-
tially   invest  in  this   manner  with   COMPLETE     DIS-
CRETION    ASSURED.    I   am   now   in   Paris   and   a
personal   appointment   can   be  arranged."
—Adv.  in  the  Paris  Herald-Tribune  Nov.   28
incidents,   but  only  "indications  of  enemy  activity".    What
activity?     Mere    movement?      Some   might-be   Viet    Cong
caught  on  our  radar  going  to  the  outhouse  at  night?    Or  a
peasant  in  the  open  who  looks  suspicious?
THE  BUREAU  OF  MINES  AND MINE   DISASTERS:  Congress-
man  Hechler  of  West  Virginia  in  a  statement  on  the  Farm-
ington  mine  disaster  revealed   and  protested   the  practice  by
which  the  Bureau  of  Mines   allows  the  coal  companies   and
the   unions   "to   revise   advance   drafts"   of   the   reports   it
makes   in   mine   accidents.    He   also   criticizes  Mine   Bureau
inspectors   who  tip  off  the  companies   in  advance  of   inspec-
tions. ' He  proposes  that  Federal   safety  law  enforcement   be
shifted  to  the  Department   of  Labor.   Interior   over  the  years
has  grown   to  be  a  faithful   tool  of  the  private  interests  it  is
supposed   to   regulate,   and   the   United   Mine   Workers   top
leadership   is  as  complacent   as  the   Bureau   about  these  re-
curring   disasters.
ONE   OF  THE  GREATEST HISTORIANS OF  MODERN GREECE,
Tassos  Vournas,  editor  of  an  underground   paper  during  the
German   occupation,   was  arrested   by  the  military  junta  last
year  and  sent  first  to  the  waterless  prison  isle  of  Yiaros  and
then   to  the  prison   isle  of   Leros.    He  has  TB,   is   seriously
ill  and  in  need  of  an  operation,  according  to  the  New   York
Greek   weekly  Campana.   He   may  die  unless  transferred   to
some  place  where  hospital  facilities  are  available.    You  may
be  able  to  help  by  writing  in  protest  to  the  Greek  Embassy
in  Washington,  with  copies  to  the  State   Department.
Chicago  Journalism  Review  Charges  Censorship  To  Protect  Chicago  Police
City   News   Bureau   in   Chicago   shapes   much   of   that
city's  news.  It  is  cooperatively  owned  to  cover  political and
crime   news   for   press,   radio   and   TV.    The   enterprising
and  peppy  Chicago  Journalism  Review  in  its   second  issue
(Dec.   6)   carries  a  story  by  Frank  Joseph,  former  night
city  editor  of  the  AP's  Chicago  Bureau  and  himself  a  City
News  alumnus  in  which  he  charges  the   Bureau  censored
and  doctored  the  reports  it  gave  the  National  Commission
on   Violence   about   the   Democratic   convention   disorders.
These  reports  were  requested  by  Daniel  Walker.
Walker  asked  for  eye-witnesses  accounts  by  Bureau  em-
ployees   who  had  seen  acts  of   disorder  or  violence.   Mr.
Joseph  charges  in  one  case  that  the  Bureau  management
cut  a  reporter's  description  "of  how  a  police  commander
had  threatened  him"   and  of  a  police  attack  on  a  photog-
rapher  in  which   "the   policeman  halted,  calmly  kicked  the
photographer  in  the   groin  and  walked   on."     The  bureau
executive  who  did  the  censoring  said,  "We  have  to  work
with  the  police."
The  Chicago  Journalism  Review  study  charges  that  by
such  tactics  young   reporters   are  "being  taught  to   lie—
to   string   along   with   the   cops."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December IB, 1968
Chicago  Hearings  Showed  How  Obsolete  This  Communist-Oriented  Circus  Has  Become
Now's  the Time  to  Press  Your  Congressman  to  Abolish  HUAC
THE   HOUSE  UN-AMERICAN   ACTIVITIES  COMMITTEE  never
showed   itself   more  inane,  boringly  repetitious  and   obsolete
than  in  its  hearings on  the  Chicago  convention  disorders.   It
grew   up  with  the  Communist  party,  got   many  of   its   staff
and  informers  from   it,  and  is  as  unable  as  the  aging  party
itself  to  adjust  to  a  new  world  of  radical  movements  which
not  only  draw  no  inspiration  or  money  from  Moscow,   but
are  hostile  to  it.   In  the  Committee's  heyday  it  was  enough
to  link  a  witness  through  some  mention  in  the  Daily  Worker
with  a  Communist  organization.   That   not  only  clinched  it
with   the   public   but   struck   terror   into  the   witness,   for   it
was  then  indeed  enough  to  cost  him  his  job  and  reputation.
Nothing   more  vividly  demonstrated  the  change  than  when
Committee  counsel   in   the   Chicago   hearings   began   grilling
Tom  Hayden  of  the  New  Left   about  his  role  in  the  book,
Mission   to   Hanoi.    Hayden   interjected   loudly,   "Oh,   you
mean   that   book   by  Communist  party   theoretician   Herbert
Aptheker."    It  was like the  exorcising of  a ghost.    From  then
on  Hayden was the  hunter,  the  Committee  the  hunted.   When
asked   just  what  is  your  business,  Hayden  replied   "To   put
you  and  your  committee  out   of  business."
Are  Snake  Dances  Un-American?
HUAC's   acting  chairman  Richard  Ichord   (D.   Mo)   said
he  was particularly  interested  in  where  peace  groups  got  their
money.   "I  don't  see,"  he  said,  "how  many  of  these  individ-
uals  live."   He  doesn't   seem  to  realize  on  how  little  those
devoted  to  peace  and  racial  justice  can  get  along  on.    He  is
looking  for  gold-from-Moscow.   HUAC's  counsel,  Frank  Con-
ley,  tried  by  prolonged  cross-examination  of  Rennie  Davis  to
probe  the  mysteries of  the  National  Mobilization  Committee's
finances.   Davis  estimated   that   it  had   spent  about  $15,000
from  January  to  August,  when   its  staff   numbered  over   200
people.    Ichord   said   that   "sounds   like   a   lot   of   money."
HUAC  spends  $375,000  a  year  on  much  less.   David  Dell-
inger  was  led  into  a  similar  maze  of   futile  questions   about
the  leases  and   sub-leases   at   5  Beekman  Street,   the  pacifist
center   in  New  York.    When  this  failed  to  turn  up  much,
the   Committee   explored—at   length—whether   the   Yippie-
practiced  Japanese  snake  dance  was  "offensive"  or   "defensive"
in  nature.
When   Congress  opens  in  January   a  new  battle   will   be
joined   to  end  HUAC's  existence.    Ichord   has  a  bill  ready
to  convert  it  into  a  Committee  on  Internal  Security;  this  will
only  give  this  worm-eaten  Inquisition   a  new  name  and  cover.
HUAC  Finally  Uncovers  A  Real  Dupe
Mr.   [Frank]  CONLEY   [HUAC  Counsel]:  Did  you
not   sign   up   as   a   delegate   to   attend   the   Soviet-
controlled   Communist   World   Youth   Festival   held   in
Helsinki,  Finland in  1962?
Mr.  [Tom]  HAYDEN: I'm  glad  you brought that  up.
Mr.  CONLEY:  Remember,  all  I  have  asked  you  is
did  you  sign  up.
Mr.  HAYDEN: Just  read it  again.  That  is beautiful.
Mr.  CONLEY:  Did  you  sign  up  to  make  that  trip?
Mr.  HAYDEN:  Say  the  whole  question  as  you  said
it.
Mr.  CONLEY: Did  you  not  sign  up  as  a  delegate
to    attend   the    Soviet-controlled   Communist    World
Youth  Festival  held  in  Helsinki,  Finland in  1962?
Mr.  HAYDEN: This  is  an  occasion  where  I  was  a
dupe  of   the   CIA   which  controlled  the  National  Stu-
dent  Association  at  the  time.   I  was  enticed  by  them
to  go  to  Helsinki  as  part  of  a  little anti-Communist
group  that   would  try   to  make  trouble  for  the  Com-
munists  .  .  .  Only  at  the  last  moment  other problems
here  in  this  country  prevented  me  from  going.   But  I
was  going  to  carry  Old  Glory  right  into  the  heart  of
Communism  at  that  time ...  I  signed  up to  go  as
sort  of  a  Radio Free  America, or  whatever we  thought
we  were  doing ...  I  was  a  member  of  the  group of
Americans  who  were  going  to  put  out  a  little  news-
paper  to  tell  the truth  to  all  the  Communists .  .  .
—From  HUAC's   Hearings  on  Chicago,  Dec.  2.
Now   is  the  time  to  ask  your  Congressmen   to  join  in   the
battle  to  abolish  HUAC  altogether.   At  the  opening  of  the
last  Congress  33  members—29  Democrats  including  Holifield
of   California  and  4  Republicans  including  Ogden  Reid  of
New   York—put   in  almost   identical  resolutions  embodying
the  recommendations  set  forth  some  years  ago  by  100 authori-
ties  on  U.S.  Constitutional  law  led  by  Prof.  Thomas  I.  Emer-
son  of  Yale.   The  resolutions  would  transfer  authority to  the
Judiciary  committee  but  limit  its  jurisdiction  to  "overt   acts"
and   sabotage,  eliminating  inquisition   into  ideas.    The  files
of  HUAC  have  become  an  enormous  cesspool   of   unproven
allegation  from  which  people  can  be  smeared  and  blacklisted
without  their  even  being  aware.   Any  right-wing  kook  has
access  to  them.    Holifield's  resolution  and  almost  all  the  rest
would  have  transferred  these  files  to  National  Archives with
the  instruction that  they not  be  opened  for  "official  or  public"
inspection.     HUAC   has   been   in  an  advanced  stage  of  de-
composition   for  years.   Now   is  the  time  to  bury  it.
That  Red  Juvenile  Delinquent  Under  the  Bed  Might  Turn  Out  To  Be  Watson's  Own*
Rep.   WATSON  [R-S.C.]:  One  final  question.   You  state
that   the   Government  and  the   American  people—the   old
fuddy-duddys  as  I  and  others,  were   unresponsive   to   the
young.   You  made that  statement.
Mr.  [Rennie]  DAVIS:  There  are  some  young  people  that
are  growing  up  like  yon.
Rep.   WATSON:  Do  you  speak  for  all  young  Americans?
Mr.  DAVIS:  No,  I  speak  for   myself.
Rep.   WATSON:  The  record  should  show  you  represent
only  a  small  fraction  of  America.
Mr.  DAVIS:  Mr.  Watson,  you  had  better  watch  out.
Rep.   WATSON:  What  are  you  going   to  do?
Mr.  DAVIS:  If  you  have  children-
Rep.   WATSON:  I  have  three  children.  I  assure   you  I
will  teach  them  responsibility  and  not   irresponsibility.
Mr.  DAVIS:  And   you  keep  that  up,  Mr.  Watson,  and
right  in  your  own  house  there  will  be  trouble  .  .  .  We
do  not  claim  to  speak  for  or  represent  all  young  people
in  the  United  States,   but  we  do  say  that  there  are  many
people  who  more  and  more  understand  that  it   is  people
like   you   that   are   destroying   America  and  the   hope  of
America  is  in  the  people  who  will  stand  up  to  people  like
you  and  make  it   right.
—From  HUAC's  hearings  on  Chicago,  Dec.  3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  16,1968
The  Two  Cold  War  Pundits  Who  Will  Fill  The  Rostow  Gap
(Continued  from  Page  One)
scoop  on  the  appointment  in  their  column   (Dec.   9)   and  re-
paid  the  news  beat  by  portraying  Laird  as  practically, though,
only  in  private,  a  liberal,  albeit  not   flaming.   Their  most  di-
verting  encomium  must  have  surprised  Laird  himself.   After
admitting   that   Laird  had   no   administrative experience  for
"one   of  the  world's  toughest  administrative positions"   they
reported   that  "Gov.  Rockefeller   (who  wanted  the  job  him-
self)   advised  Nixon   in  Palm  Springs  last  week  that  a  Mc-
Namara-type  administrator would  be  a  mistake  in  the  Penta-
gon  today  and  what  was  needed  was  a student  and practitioner
of  geopolitics."     In  Laird,   they  concluded,   "Nixon  has  ex-
actly   what   Rockefeller   recommended."      Laird   must    have
been  as  suprised  to  be  described  as  a  geopolitician  as  Babbitt
would  have  been  if  hailed  as a Guru.    But  Rockefeller's mean-
ing  is  clear  enough.   "No  McNamara-type"  translates  as  fewe,r
inhibitions  on   the   Joint   Chiefs  of   Staff,   and   "geopolitics"
(how  Hitler   loved  Haushofer,  too!) means  to  be  prone  to
those  global   nightmares   so  conducive  to  the  propagation  of
ever  larger  military  budgets.
A  Horatio  Alger  Character
Laird   is   a   consolation   prize   for   Rockefeller.     In   I960
Laird  pushed  through  the  Republican  convention  that  Nixon-
Rockefeller  "compromise"   plank  on  defense  which  suggested
to  Elsenhower's  displeasure  that  he  was  not  spending  enough
on  the  Pentagon.    Another  consolation  is  the  appointment  of
Henry  A.  Kissinger  as Nixon's  Walt  Rostow.    Professor   Kis-
singer's  career  has  been  described  as  a  Horatio   Alger   story;
an  ultra-bright German  Jewish  refugee  boy who  became Rocke-
fellow's  house  intellectual  certainly  has  a  sharp  eye  for   the
right  little  girls  to  save  from  the  right  runaway  horses.    In
the   late   1950s   he   put   into   literate   form   the   Rockefeller
Brothers  Fund  blueprint  for  higher  military  spending  and  a
wider  variety  of  arms,  including  the  small  and  clean   tactical
nuclear,  for  flexible  response in  brushfire fires on  the  periphery
of  the  American  empire  in  the  nuclear  age:  like  Vietnam.   He
is  a  smooth  and  flexible  fellow,  an  ambidextrous  academician,
who  will  give  Nixon  what  he  wants,  and  make  it  sound  in-
Why  Nixon  Will  "Root  Out"  The  Whiz  Kids
"The  hard  truth  is  this:  The  present  state  of  our
defenses   is   too   close   to   peril  point,   and  our  future
prospects  are  in  some  respects   downright  alarming."
—Nixon's  "Security   Gap'"  speech  over  CBS  Oct.  24
Q.  If  cost  limitations  were  removed, what  would  be
your  primary  recommendations  for  improving  defense
capability—nuclear  or  otherwise?
A. ...  If  what  you  mean  is:  'Could  the  security  of
the   United   States   be  significantly  enhanced  by   our
spending,  say, an   additional   $10   billion   a   year',   I
would   say   that   in   my  judgment  the   answer   is   no.
We   are   spending  all   that   we   need   to   spend  to  do
what  military  power  can  do.
—Questions  submitted  by  Senator   Strom  Thurmond
a  U.S.  Army  Reserve  Major  General,  to  Dr.  Alain  C.
Enthoven,  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  for  Systems
Analysis,  in  Part  I,  p.  161,  Status  of  U.S. Strategic
Power,  hearings  held  earlier  this  year  by  the  Senate's
Preparedness  subcommittee.  The  systems  analysts  are
the   so-called   "whiz-kids"  Nixon   pledged   himself   in
that  same  Security  Gap  speech  to   "root   out"  of   the
Pentagon.
tellectually  respectable.    Kissinger's  deputy  will  be  Richard  V.
Allen,  who  directed  foreign  affairs  research  for  Nixon  during
the  campaign,  a  contributor  to  Buckley's  National  Review  and
a  favorite  strategist  of  Young  Americans  For  Freedom.    His
training  as  a  cold  war  Clausewitz  began  at  the  Georgetown
Center   for   Strategic   Studies,  which   Admiral   Arleigh   Burke
helps  direct  in  right-thinking.*    Allen  is  now  on  leave  from
the  comparable   Hoover   Institution   on  War,   Revolution   and
Peace  which  long  ago  got  the  goods  on  Vladimir  Ilyich.   To-
gether  Allen  and  Kissinger  should  easily  fill  the  Rostow   gap.
We  can  only  conclude  by  suggesting,  at  the  risk  of  getting
into  trouble  with  the  SEC,  that  this  is  a  good  time  to  buy
stock  in  the  military-industrial complex.                          Dec.  9
*  We  blush  to  report  that  the  Centre  is  known  irreverently
on  rival  campuses  here  in  Washington  as  Burke's  Bughouse.
Nothing  is  sacred  anymore.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR   STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Tim
(To)  1
Street
City
Please
Name
Street
City
5618
e  of  Torment  (Random
Zip
House)  regular price  $7.95
...............  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement   wished  Q
renew   (or  enter)  a
Zip
sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly            "/is/es
Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington,  D. C.  20015
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.     Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington.  D. C.
An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $17 to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED