I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968may27.pdf

============================================================

What  Poland  Fears  in Prague, P.  2
This  Is  The  Real  Warning  That  Needs  to  Be  Sounded on  the  Poor  Peoples  March
"To  dwell  now  on  the  riot  potential  and  on  law  enforce-
ment  capabilities  and  on  the  use  of  gas  and  mass  arrests  is
to  miss  the  major  point  and  that  is  that  we  have problems
in  this  country  that  must  be  resolved,  that  one  of  them  is
the   immense,  the   difficult   plight  of   the   poor   in  America
today  that  has  to  be  addressed  and  addressed   courageously
by all  of  our people."
—Attorney   General  Ramsey  Clark   on  ABC's  Issues  and
Ansivei's  May   12  after   a  series   of  alarmist  and    inflamma-
tory  questions  about   the  Poor  People's   March.
Stone's  Weekly
I\/sitit     iJiSfl   i/*B-t rlsi/Jsl      $<*—  I/4/  y»/»*3/A*                               ^^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  11
MAY   27,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20   CENTS
Not  A  Sick  Society,  But  Too  Rigid  to  Save  Itself
The   race  is  on   in  our  society  between   its  constructive  ca-
pacity  and   a  growing   revolt—for   it  is  time  to  abandon  eu-
phemisms   about   riots—of   black   against  white.     The_  most
revealing  footnote  to  the  crisis  inexorably moving  down   upon
us  here  in  the  capital  was  a  small  advertisement  not   much
more  than  one  inch  square  in  the  Washington  Post  May  21,
strategically  placed  at  the  end  of  a  story  about  the  plans  of
the  Poor  People's  March  for  its  first  local  parade—
Boarding   Up  of  Houses  and  Businesses
Vandalized  or  Vacant
WE  PROTECT  WHAT  IS  LEFT
Emergency  Services  Radio  Dispatched
737-4477
ANY     TIME
The   question   is  whether   enough   pressure   can  be  organized
around  the  country  to  force  action  by  Congress  on  poverty  or
whether  we  head  for  another  spasm  of  city-burning  in  which
all  we  can  do  is  call  out  the  troops  and—in  the  words  of  that
ad—protect  what  is  left.
Too  Many  Paul  Reveres?
It  is  not  for  lack  of  alarms  and  alarmists.    No  period  ever
had  so  many  Paul  Reveres.     But  the  net  effect  on  substantial
portions  of  the  population   is  to  get  them  so  used  to  alarms
that  they  have  no  difficulty  in  turning  over  and  going  back  to
sleep.    The  Poor  Peoples  March  on  Washington   needs  to  be
matched   among   the   prosperous   by   a   campaign   for   a   re-
ordering  of  our  national  priorities.    Otherwise  the  Poor  Peo-
ples  March  will  prove  a  time-fuse,  setting  off  new  conflagra-
tions.    The  time  may  be  shorter  than  any  of  us  realize.    The
only  course  commensurate with  the  nation's  needs  is to  end  the
war   in  Vietnam   and  make   the  war  on  poverty  our  No.   1
business.     But  while   the  President   talks  about  realism   in  a
speech   to   the   Arthritis   Association,   he   himself   persists   in
his  bombing  of  North  Vietnam,  refusing  to  take  the  first  step
toward  ending  this  mindless  conflict.
The  prime  danger  to  our  country  lies  in  the  immobility of
its  institutions  and   its  social  conditionings,  class  and   racial.
A  prime  example  of  the  institutional  inertia  lies  in  the  latest
4  *
Why   Not   A  Nixon-Humphrey  Ticket?
A.  ...  I  really  don't  think  Vietnam  .  .  .  should  be
seen  by  any  of  the  candidates  as  a  political  issue.  It  is
too  dangerous  to  play  politics  with  peace.*
Q.  If   the   fighting   goes   on   through   the   campaign,
will  that  hurt  you?
A.  ...  If  Nixon  and Humphrey  should  be  the  can-
didates  in  the  general  election,  I  don't  think  our  views
of  the  war  would  be  too  far  apart.
—Humphrey,   U.S.  News  &  World  Report  May  27.
*  It's   a  pity  David  Lawrence's  interviewer   didn't  ask
Humphrey  whether  there  would  be  any  peace  talks  in
Paris  if  first  McCarthy  and  then  Kennedy  had  not  de-
cided  to  "play  politics  with  peace."
budget  requests  from  the  Pentagon.    A  survey  in  the   Wash-
ington  Post  May  19  disclosed  that  the  total   requests   of   the
military  to  the   new  Secretary  of   Defense   for  fiscal   1969   is
$102  billions,  the  highest  in  history,  a  billion  more  than  the
requests  a  year  ago  to  Secretary  McNamara  and  $23  billions
more  than  the  projected  1968  budget.    It  is as if  the  Pentagon,
with  all  its  16  outside  "think   tanks"  (at  a  cost  of  $1.7   bil-
lions)  and  the  untold  billions  we  spend  on  the  world's  largest
intelligence  network,  is  unaware  that  the  dollar  is  in  trouble,
the  price  of  gold  rising  again,  and  an  army  gathering  within
sight  of  the  Pentagon  whose   disappointed   hopes  may  prove
more  dangerous   than  any  foreign  foe.     The  military  go  on
with  their  expensive  and  lunatic  games,  squandering  hundreds
of   millions  on   all  kinds  of   fantastic   new  weapons,   already
thinking  of  World  Wars  IV  and  V.    It  is  spending   hundreds
of  thousands  of  dollars  in  universities to  study  the   problems
of   social  unrest   and   counterinsurgency   abroad   while   it   re-
mains  blissfully  blind  to  the  unrest  at  home.
Another  kind  of  menacing  rigidity  is  on  display  in   Con-
gress,   a  faithful   reflection   of   class  and   racial  conditionings.
A  Congress  which  has  no  trouble  raising  $80  billions  a  year
for   our  overgrown   military  machine—it  provides  guaranteed
annual   incomes   for   arms  suppliers—cannot  find  $6   billions
in  budget  cuts  without  reducing  the  relative pittance  we  spend
on  poverty  and   urban   unrest.     A   Congress   which   goes   on
year  after  year  allowing  billions  in  tax  loopholes  for  the  rich
cannot  bring  itself  to  enact  a  necessary  tax  boost  except  in  the
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 27,  1968
What  Would  We  Do  If  Hanoi  Really  Took  Us  Up  on  Free  Elections? .
AT  AN  OFF-THE-RECORD-BUT-PLEASE-USE  briefing  on  the
new  Tran   Van  Huong  Cabinet  in  Saigon,  the  State   Depart-
ment  suggested  that  if  you  add  'the  10%   vote  for  the  new
Prime  Minister  when  he  ran  for   President  last   Fall   to  the
vote  cast  for  Thieu  and  Ky,  you get  48%  for  the  new  govern-
ment  in  South   Vietnam.    This  wistful  arithmetic  still  falls
short  of  a  majority.     Actually,  with   seven   tickets   outlawed,
two  votes  for  every  soldier,  and  the  opposition  press  and  can-
didates  hobbled,  Thieu  and  Ky  only  got   35%   of  the   votes
cast.    The- total  vote  in  turn,  according  to  the  official  figures,
was  only  51%   of   those  old   enough   to  vote.     So  the   new
Cabinet  can  claim  only  45%   of  this  51%  or  less  than  one-
quarter  of  .the  voting  age  population.     The  Department   at-
tempts  to  picture  this  as  democracy  on  the  march  but  Thich
Tri   Quang,  leader  of   the  largest  organized   non-Communist
opposition,    the   militant  Buddhists,   is   still   in    "protective
custody",  along  with  Truong  Dinh  Dzu,  the  peace  candidate
who  polled  the  second  highest  vote.    The  new  Cabinet,  it was
indicated,  has  the  strong  support  of  Ambassador  Bunker;  his
expertise   in  jiggering  "free   elections"   was  demonstrated   in
the  Dominican  Republic.    Latin  America  knows  our  skill  at
"guided  democracy".    At  the  Paris  talks that  same  day  (May
18)  the  U.S.  spokesman emphasized  that  Harriman had  swift-
ly  replied  "yes"  when  the  North  Vietnamese  asked  whether
the  U.S.  would  "dare"  to  grant  "self-determination" to  South
Vietnam.    Harriman  cited  Johnson's  "one  man,  one  vote"  of-
fer.     The  elections we  held  in  1967,  like the  memory  of  those
we  failed  to  hold  in  1956,   must  make  the  other  side  fear  a
new  swindle.    Even  so,  if  Hanoi  is  clever,  it  might  put   John-
son  out  on  a limb with his  own  formula, and  saw the  limb off.
IN    1956    THE    ABORTIVE   HUNGARIAN  REVOLT    brought
Gomulka  out  of  jail  in  Poland  and  inaugurated  a  freer  Polish
regime.     It   -would   be  a  tragic  irony  if   in   1968   a  reviving
Stalinism  in  Poland  led  to  military  action  against  a  reviving
liberalism   in  Czechoslovakia.    Prague's   firmest   ally—in   this
strange  turn  of  events—lies  in  Budapest,  where  Kadar  slowly
and  cautiously  has  reconciled  the  Russians to  those  relaxations
of   rigid  party  rule  which   could   have   avoided   the   bloody
events  of   1956.    Kadar's  influence  in  the  Kremlin  is  on   the
side  of  holding  the  reins  lightly  in  Czechoslovakia,   but  Po-
land's  neo-Stalinists  fear  the  contagion  of  freedom,  especially
when  popular   revulsion  is  exposing   the   very   same  kind  of
frameups  and  anti-Semitism in  recent  Czech  history   (Slansky)
Financial  Note  for  Poverty  Marchers
"Speaking   of   big   business,   riot-control   equipment
stocks  appear  to  have  replaced  gold  stocks  as  the  hot
item   on   the   stock   exchanges.    Since   Jan.   1,   Bangor
Punta   Corporation,    makers   of   pistols,   tear   gas   and
chemical  mace,  rose  from  a  low  35%  to  a  high  61%;
Breeze  Corporation,  makers  of  tear   gas,   grenades  and
auxiliary   equipment,  from  17%  to  37%;  Baker  Indus-
tries,  from  28%  to  39%,  and  Wachenhut,  from   16 '/z  to
22%.  Though  these  stocks  have  slipped  some  from  their
highs,  all  on  balance  are  strong  gainers  and  bright  in-
vestment   prospects. for   those   who  don't   have  qualms
about  turning   a  quick   buck  on  the  unrest  in  the  cities.
''Indeed,  the  boom  is  still  to  come.   The  law-enforce-
ment   market   in  the   U.S.    right   now  is   a   $2.5   billion
item.    But  with  66  percent  of  the  nation's  police  forces
below   authorized  strengths  and  a  hot  summer   ahead,
there's  a  real  future  in  riot-control  equipment  stocks.
All  you  need  is  a  little  money  and  a  stone  conscience."
—John  Deedy,  Commonweal, May  10.
which  the  Polish  neo-Stalinists are  using  today.    It  is  Warsaw
now  which  is  pushing  Moscow  toward  a  new  armed  interven-
tion  lest  Czech  success  stir  a  new  liberal  upsurge  in  Poland.
ALMOST  EVERYWHERE MANKIND  seems   to  be   in   political
convulsion.     Georges   Pompidou,   who   was   still   the   Prime
Minister  of  France  as this  was  written,  summed  it  up  in  words
worthy  of  a  poet  and  prophet.     "The   events  which  we  have
just  experienced,"   he  told   the  National   Assembly  May  14,
even  before  the  student  demonstrations   had  widened   into  a
general  strike,  "are   not  just  a  flash  fire.  Our  civilization  is
being   questioned,  not   the  government,   not  the  institutions,
not   even   France,   but   the   materialistic  and   soulless   modern
society."    Generally  speaking  it  is  those  who  enjoy  the benefits
of  our  "materialistic and  soulless  modern  society",  like  middle
class  white  radicals in  our  own  country,  who  speak  of  them  so
disparagingly.     The   French   working   class   seems   simply   to
want  snorter  hours  and  higher  wages   in  and  with  which   to
enjoy  these  materialistic pleasures  just  as  here  blacks  in  revolt
smash  store  windows  to  get  television  sets  and  sports  jackets.
The  underclass  everywhere  wants  exactly  that  soulless   subur-
ban  living  whence  most  of  our  rebel   youth,  whether  hippie
or  New  Left,  has  emerged.    The  working  class  is  willing  to
give  up  its  chains  but  not  its  washing  machines,  while  the  in-
tellectuals  turn  on  the  air-conditioning  the  better  to   denounce
The  Good  Old  Days  When  Courts  Didn't
"Somebody   has  said,   'You   are   turning   the   clock   back.'
Let  me  say  to  Senators  that  I  want  the  clock  turned   back.
I  want  it  turned  back  to  law  enforcement."
—McClellan  defending   Title  II,  Crime  bill, May  6.
"The    crime   with   which   these   defendants,   all   ignorant
negroes  [sic],  are  charged,  was  discovered  about  one  o'clock
p.m.   on  Friday,  March   30,  1934.     On  that  night  one   Dial,
a  deputy   sheriff,  accompanied  by  others,  came  to  the  home
of  Ellington,  one  of  the  defendants,  and  requested  him  to
accompany  them  to  the  house  of  the  deceased,  and  there  a
number   of  white   men  were  gathered,  who  began  to  accuse
the  defendant   of   the  crime.     Upon  his  denial   they  seized
him,  and  with  the  participation   of  the  deputy  they  hanged
him  by  a  rope  to  the  limb  of  a  tree,  and  having  let  him
down,  they  hung  him  again,  and  when  he  was  let  down  the
second  time,  and  he  still   protested  his   innocence,  he   was
Care  How  Confessions   Were  Obtained
tied  to  a  tree  and whipped.  .  .  . The record  of  the  testimony
shows  that  the  signs  of  the  rope  on  his  neck  were  plainly
visible  during   the  so-called  trial.    A  day  or  two  thereafter
the  said  deputy,  accompanied  by  another,  returned  to   the
home  of  the  said  defendant  and  arrested  him,  and  departed
with  the  prisoner  towards  the  jail  in  an  adjoining  county,
but  went  by  a  route  which  led  into  the  State  of  Alabama;
and  while   on  the  way,   in  that   State,  the   deputy   stopped
and  again  severely  whipped  the  defendant,  declaring  that
he  would  continue  the  whipping   until  he  confessed,  and  the
defendant    then  agreed  to  confess  to  such  a  statement   as
the  deputy  would  dictate."
—The   good   old  days   to  which  McClellan  would  turn  the
clock  back,  quoted  by  Senators  Case  (R.-N.J.)  and   Tydings
(D.-Md.)  in  opposing   Title  II,  from  Brown  v.  Miss.   (1936)
in.  ichich   the  Supreme   Court  reversed   the  Miss.   Supreme
Court  which  had  held  this  confession   valid.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'ii  Weekly,  May  27, 1968
What  It  Means  to  Be  Poor
"The     [Civil    Rights]    Commission   has   brought   it
starkly  home  to  us  in  reminding  us  that  were  all  Amer-
icans  forced   to  live  as  jammed  together  as  the  people
in  several  of  the  worst  blocks  of  the  Harlem  section  of
New   York  City,  we   could   be  so   piled  on  one  another
that  all  200  million   of   us  would   be  fitted  together  in
three  of  New   York's  five  boroughs,  leaving  the  other
two  and  the  rest  of  the  United  States  totally   unpopu-
lated.     This  communicates   the  dimensions  of   what   it
means  to  be  poor."
—Mary  Keyserlinrj,   Women's  Bureau  Director  of  the
Labor  Dept.,  to  a  Washington  seminar,  May  13.
... Now's the Time to Get Out of Thailand Before It  Becomes A New Vietnam
materialist  technology.
WE  HOPI;  THOSE  MEMBERS  OF  CONGRESS  alert  to   foreign
policy  issues  will  demand  a  full  explanation  of  current   U.S.
negotiations   with   the  government  of   Thailand.    There  are
47,000  U.S.  military  personnel  there  now,  more  than  we  had
in  South  Vietnam until  mid-1965.    Now  is  the  time  to  begin
to  get  them  out  before  we  are  faced  with  a  full-scale  second
Vietnam.    For  four  years  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Bangkok  has
been  trying  to  get  a  status-of-forces  agreement  with  the  Thais.
We  need  a  pull-out, not  a  stay-in,  agreement.    The   presence
of  so  many  U.S.  troops  has  stirred  the  usual  troubles.    Even
the  government  is  hostile and  suspicious.    The  Thai  Premier
told  the  Foreign  Correspondents Club  in  Bangkok  his country
would   rely   exclusively,  now   and   in  the   future,   on   its  own
forces  in  dealing with  insurgency. When  a  U.S.  correspondent
asked  whether  our  troops  and  bases  would  be  allowed  to  stay
after  the  Vietnam  war  was  over,  the  Premier  replied  that  was
a  bridge  his  government  would  cross  when  it  came to  it.  Let's
cross  that  bridge  first,  on  the  way  out.
"NOTHING   CONSTRUCTIVE   CAN  COME   of   a   final   separa-
tion"  says  the  New   York   Times   (May  18)   of  the  split  be-
tween  the  Auto  Workers  and  the  AFL-CIO.    But  if  competi-
tion   is  the   life   of   trade,  it   may  also  be  the   life   of  trade-
unionism.     From   its   very   inception   the   unification   of   the
A.F.L. with  the  CIO  cast  a pall  on  the  latter,  drained  the  CIO
of  militancy  and  idealism.    It  was  a  marriage  of  inconveni-
ence,  a  surrender  of  Reuther  to  Meany.    A  monolithic  labor
movement,   frozen   into   immobility   by   Meany's   harsh   and
narrow  one-man rule, unsympathetic to  the  Negro, reactionary
in   foreign   policy  and   impervious  to   the   new   currents   in
domestic,  was  a  dead-weight in  the  scales of  national decision-
making.    The  real  question  is  whether,  after   all  these  years,
much  of  the  old  spirit  can  be  revived.
WORDS  THAT  WILL  REVERBERATE   BITTERLY   IN   GREECE:
Clifford's  defense  of  military  assistance  to  the  military  dicta-
torship   before   Senate   Foreign   Relations  May   17,    "Greece
continues  to  be  a sturdy ally  of  ours."    No  Senator  asked  why
we  unloosed  so  much  hostile  propaganda  against  the  majority
Papandreou   government  while  we  praise  this  cabal  of   semi-
literate  colonels  as  "sturdy?"    What  if  there  is  a  popular  up-
rising?    Will  we  send  U.S.  troops  to  crush  it  if  the   Colonels
can't?
ATTORNEY  GENERAL  CLARK  on  TV's   Issues  and   Answers
May  12  said there were  no  concentration  camps  in  this country
and  no  plans  to  prepare  them.    Nevertheless  Title  II  of  the
Internal   Security  Act  of   1950   provides  for   detention    camps
in  the  event  of  war  or  national  emergency  for  persons  who
might  commit  sabotage  or  espionage.    This  police  state  mon-
strosity  was  the  handiwork  of  panicky Senate  liberals.    They
put  the  detention  camp  provisions forward  as  a  substitute  for
the  Mundt-Nixon  Internal  Security  Act  only  to  have  the  right-
wingers  add  it  to  the  pending  bill.    The  liberals  then   voted
against  the  entire  measure  but  failed  to  block  it.    Humphrey,
a  major  mover  in  this  silly  maneuver, could  make  amends  now
by  proposing  a  repealer.
Checking  on  North  Vietnam's  Reply
"The  area  in  which  we  are  stopping  our  attacks  includes
almost   90%  of   North  Vietnam's   population,   and   most   of
its   territory.     Thus  there   will   be  no  attacks   around   the
principal   populated  areas,  or  in  the   food-producing   areas
of  North   Vietnam."
—LBJ's  "abdication"  broadcast  of  March  31.
"According  to  President  Johnson's  March   31  statement,
referred   to  by  the  representative  of  the  U.S.   on  May  13,  it
seems  that  the  areas  still  submitted  to  bombings   are   neg-
ligible.     In   fact,   it   constitutes   an   important   part   of   the
Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam,  extending  more  than  300
kilometers  in   length,   from   the   17th   to   the   20th   parallel,
with  a  population  of  nearly   4,500,000,  comprising    provinces
which  are  among  the  biggest   and  the   most   populated  in
Vietnam,   such   as   Than   Hoa  and  Nghean.
"Moreover,   since   March   31,  American   planes  have   con-
centrated   their  attacks  on  the  above-mentioned  area  with  a
much   greater    intensity   than   before.     They   have    bombed
Vinh  city  (capital  of  Nghean  province),   Thanhhoa,  Hatinh,
Donghoi  provincial  capitals,   populated  areas  and   economic
establishments  in  several  districts  of   these  provinces,  and
nearly  all  the  communes   of  the  Vinhbinh  area.    In  the  one
day   of   April   19,  1968,   alone,  for  instance,  there  were   as
many   as   500  sorties,   with   160   raiding   missions   of    U.S.
planes   over   North  Vietnam,   as   against   an  average  of   70
missions  a  day  before   the  announcement  of  'limited  bomb-
ing.' "
—Mr.  Thny  of  North  Vietnam in  the  Paris  talks  May  15.
to  Another  White  House   Whopperoo
An  effort  to  straighten  this  out  in  the  bowels  of  the  bu-
reaucracy,  State  and  Pentagon,  ran  into  the  usual   division-
ary   fog   of   words:  We  haven't   counted   them   (the   North
Vietnamese);   the   kind   of   government   they   have   in   the
North   shifts   people   around   as   they  please;  anyway   we're
bombing  trucks,  not  populated  places.  .  .  .
The  latest   U.S.  Army  handbook  on  North  Vietnam  says
90  percent   of  the   population  live  in  the   Red  River  delta
"and     the  adjacent   coastal  plain  to  the  south."     The  Delta
is  above  the  20th  parallel  but  the  plain  extends  "about  250
miles  to  the  Demarcation  Line"  on  the  17th  parallel.   Most
of  the  coastal  plain  is  below  the  20th  parallel.    No  figures
are  given  for  the  population below  the  20th  parallel.    But
the  1960  North  Vietnamese  census  report  which  the  hand-
book's  compilers  used  and  which is  available  in  the   Library
of    Congress    shows   that   almost    4,000,000   of   the   then
16,000,000  people in  North  Vietnam  lived  in  the  four  south-
ern   provinces  which  make  up   the   Panhandle.    The   odd-
shaped  northernmost  of  these  is  bisected  by  the  20th  par-
allel  but   most   of  the   province  below  the   20th  is  heavily
populated   coastal   plain  while  most   of   the   northern   half
above   the   parallel   is   sparsely   settled   mountain   country.
Robert  Shaplen   in  the  New   Yorker   for   May  4  estimated
that  27%  of  the  North's  people  live below the  20th  parallel.
One  Senator  told  us  a  State  Department   official   admitted
to  him  that  the  number  of  people  below  the  20th  parallel
was  closer  to  25%  than  10%.   The  10%  was  another   White
House  whopperoo.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 27, 1988
Is  the  Target  of  Congress  Crime  or  New  Means  of  Racial  Repression?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
regressive  form  of  a  10%  surtax  which—in  a  caricature of
equality—will  take  another  bite  from   the   envelopes  of   the
poorest  paid  as  well  as  the  undertaxed  rich.
A  Return  to  Legal   Lynchings
Even  worse  distortions are  evident  in  the  crime bill.     The
rising  rate  of  crime  is  a  reality none  would  deny,  but  its  roots
lie  in  the  festering  slums  and  in  racial  conflict.    Even  on  the
more   superficial   level   of   this   pending   legislation,  rational
priorities  are  ignored.     Effective   gun   control  is  voted  down
under  pressure  from   a  powerful  gun-selling  lobby  and   the
desire  of  the  white  suburbs  to  arm  itself   for  racial  war.    A
major  cause  of  disrespect  for  law  lies  in  the  corruption  and
brutality   of   poorly   trained   and   poorly   paid   police   forces
Title  I,  the  original  Administration Crime  in  the  Street  bill
sought   to  correct.     But  a  coalition   of   Southern   Democrats
with  right-wing  Republicans  and  some  mountain  State  Demo-
crats  like  Mansfield  of  Montana—to  his  discredit—sought  by
Title  II  to  turn  back  the  clock  of  a  whole  generation  of  wise
and  humane  Supreme  Court  decisions.    Fortunately  a  group
of  liberals  led  by  Tydings  of  Maryland and  Hart  of  Michigan
with  assistance from  the  American  Bar  Association  succeeded
in  defeating  efforts  to  abolish  Supreme  Court  jurisdiction  over
the  State courts by habeas  corpus  and  sharply  to  narrow  its  re-
view  powers  in  criminal cases.    But  they failed  to  block  those
portions  of  Title  II  which  seek  to  overrule  the  Miranda,  Mal-
lory  and  Wade  decisions  in  the  Federal  courts.
The  essence  of  these  decisions  is  to  give  the  poor  and  igno-
rant  the  same  rights  when  arrested  as  the  well-heeled.     Those
who  voted  to  overrule  these  decisions  were  really  saying,  as
Senator  Brooke  put  it,  that  "those  aware  of  their  rights  shall
be  entitled  to  them,  but  those  not  aware  shall  be  made  the
victims  of  ignorance."     It  has  taken  a  long  time  and   many
decisions  to  end  those  coerced  confessions  and  summary trials
which  were  once  the  legal  equivalent  of  lynching.    Title  II
as  passed  would   move  back  in  that  direction.    Its  target  is
not  so  much  crime  as  the  poor   and  the  colored.    This  is  a
bad  time  to  make  them  feel  second  class  citizens.    The  mood
Criminals  and  Communists
I   was   much  impressed   by   the   statement  that   the
criminal  section  of  the  American  Bar  Association   was
opposed   to  Title  II  of   this   [Crime]   bill.    I   discussed
the  matter  with  a  man  I  regard  as  one  of  the  finest
and  most  courageous  judges  in  America.    I  asked  him
why  the  criminal  section  of  the  American Bar  Associa-
tion  would  be  against  this  Title.     He  called   me  back
and  said:  "Senator,  can't  you  figure  that  one  out?    Do
you  know  who  is  the  criminal  section  of  the  American
Bar  Association?    Those  are  lawyers  who defend crimi-
nals.    Don't  you  realize  that  if  crime  has  increased  by
400   percent,  their   income   has   increased   by   400  per-
cent?"     They   have   a   vested   interest   in  crime,  and,
naturally,  they  would  be  in  favor  of  striking  Title  II,
because  they  are  in  favor  of  crime.   There  are  a num-
ber  of   law   schools  that  do  not  want  a  blessed  thing
done  about  crime.    I  just  cannot  understand  it.    Why
would  any  law  school  be  in  favor  of  a  400  percent  in-
crease  in  criminality?   I  have  tried  to  learn  why  peo-
ple  do  these  things,  and  about  the  best   explanation  I
can  get  would  be  to  say   that  it  is  impossible  to  con-
ceive  why—conceivably  it  might  be  a  Communist  plot
to  destroy  America.
—Long  (D.-La.)  in  the Senate, May  20   (abridged)
of  the  ghetto  street is  for  full  emancipation;  the  mood  of  Con-
gress   is  repression.    Between  them  lies  a  new  irrepressible
conflict.
An  ugly  tide  rises.    Fearful  local  bus  drivers  are  in  revolt
against  a  wave  of  robberies  which  culminated  in  the  murder
of   a  driver.    Burned-out  businessmen  in   the  ghetto   report
threats  of  new  burnings  if  they  reopen.    Mysterious  fires  in-
crease  in  numbers.    Mayor  Washington   outlines  a  program
for   rebuilding  the   three  areas  left   devastated  by  the  riots
which   followed   the   assassination  of   Martin  Luther   King.
But  his  hopes  of  luring  businessmen and  private  capital  back
to  the  ghettoes  seem  like  fantasies;  the  urban  gashes  here  are
no  more  likely  to  be  healed  than  those  in  Detroit,  Newark
and  Watts  without  public  funds   and  social  planning.    The
only  sure  sign  of  private  enterprise  at  work  is  that  advertise-
ment  offering  to  board  up  houses  and  businesses  vandalized
or  vacant.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier Collection, "The   Haunted Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House) regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed
Name  ...................................................................................
$5:
Street
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                3/
2
'/os
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington, D. C. 20015
F. Stones Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Seco
An  independent   weekly
md   Class   Postage  Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.     Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington,  D. C.
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED