I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968feb19.pdf

============================================================

Documenting:  The  Terror  We  Help  Impose  in  Greece  and  Guatemala, Pps. 2-4
While  We  Spend  Billions  to  Burn  Up  Vietnam's  Cities
"There  is  a  clear  and  present  danger  to  the  very  exist-     equality  real  for  the  black  man—was  bound  sooner  or  later
ence   :<f  our  cities.  .  .  .  The  central  issue  with  which  this      to  land  on  the  doorstep  of  each  of   us."
nation   has   temporized   for   the   last   100  years—to   make             —From  the  report  on  the  Newark  "riot"  February  10.
/. K Stone's  Weekly
i-Weekly                  **
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  4
FEBRUARY  19,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Saigon  Afire  Now  — Will  It  Be  Washington  In  April?
It  is no  longer  necessary  to  argue the  mendacity  of  our  lead-
ers  and  the  incompetence of  our  military.    Mr.  Johnson   has
assured  us  that  the   successful   surprise  attack  on   100  South
Vietnamese  cities  and  towns  was  really  a  Viet  Cong   defeat;
if  they  suffer  a  few  more such  defeats,  we'll  be  lucky  to  settle
for  a  coalition  government in  Hawaii.*    No  nation  ever  had
the  misfortune   to  be  led  by  a  bigger  team  of   clowns  than
those   Johnson   and   Rusk,   Westmoreland   and   Bunker,   put
through  their  daily  capers  in  Washington  and  Saigon;  their
body   counts  alone  are  enough   to   make  Bob  Hope  jealous:
these  seem  to  be  based  on  an  extension  to  warfare  of  install-
ment  credit  principles—count  now,  kill   later.
Some  Bodies  We'd  Rather  Not   Count
We  still  don't  know  what  hit  us.    The  debris  is  not  all  in
Saigon  and  Hue.    The  world's  biggest   intelligence  apparatus
was  caught  by  surprise.   Our  No.   1  Whiz  Kid,  the  retiring
Secretary  of  Defense  McNamara,  capped  his  record   of  mis-
judgments  on  Vietnam  by preparing  a  final  defense  "posture"
statement  in  which  he  reported  (see  box  this  page)  "a  drop
in  [Viet  Cong]  combat  efficiency  and  morale"!    The  day  he
read  this  report  to  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  the
Viet  Cong  made  their  nationwide  raids.    Neither  under  Jap-
anese  nor  French  occupation were  the  rebels  ever  able  to  stage
such  widespread  and  coordinated  attack.  Yet  we  have  500,000
troops  in  the  country  as  compared  with  the   60,000  of   the
French;  our  Army  is  incomparably  better  supplied  with  fire-
power  and  air  power;  and  for  three  years  we have  been  bomb-
ing   the  North   so  heavily   that  every  town   and   city   except
Hanoi  and  Haiphong   is  in  ruins.
When  the  bodies  are  really counted,  it  will  be  seen  that  one
of  the  major  casualties was  our  delusion  about  victory  by  air-
power:  all  that   boom-boom   did  not   keep   the   enemy   from
showing  up  at  Langvei  with  tanks.    Three  years  of   interdic-
tion  by  airpower  and  the  rebels  are  steadily  better  equipped;
the  days  when  they  depended  on  weapons  captured  from  our
side  are   long   over.    Another  casualty  is  the   reputation   of
*  Sir  Robert  Thompson, who  ran  Britain's  successful  anti-
guerrilla  campaign  in  Malaya  and  was  head  of  the  British
Advisory  Mission in  South Vietnam from  1961 to  1965, wrote
of  these  attacks  in  the  London  Sunday  Times  Feb.  11,  "In
terms  of  guerrilla  and  mobile warfare, Gen. Vo  Nguyen  Giap
has  achieved a master stroke in  South  Vietnam and has  great-
ly  enhanced his  reputation—if  such  a  thing  were  possible—
as  an  outstanding  General  and  victor  of  Dien  Bien  Phu."
The  Viet  Cong  Must  Have
Infiltrated  His   Computers
"Country-wide,   the   evidence  appears overwhelming
that  beginning  in  1966  Communist local  and  guerrilla
forces  have  sustained  substantial  attrition.    As  a  re-
sult  there  has  been  a  drop  in  combat  efficiency   and
morale. ...  I  should  caution,  however,  that  the Com-
munists   are  well  aware  of  the   deterioration   of   their
guerrilla  forces  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  etc.  .  .  ."
—From  McNamara's   annual   defense    budget   state-
ment   dated   Jan.   22  but  not   delivered  to  the   Senate
Armed  Services  Committee  until  Feb.  1  when  all South
Vietnam  was  under  surprise  attack.
Westmoreland   and  our  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.    On  TV  West-
moreland  and  Wheeler  began  to  look  more  and  more  pathetic
as  they  clung  to  those  inflated  body  count  box  scores  which
only  they  still  take  seriously.    It  is  as  if  they  mistake  the  art
of   warfare  for   the   demolition   and   extermination   business.
Giap  is  proving  that  superior  military  and  political  skill  can
win  over  vastly  superior  firepower,  i.e.  brain  power  over  bulk.
This  is  what  did  in  the  dinosaur.
Two  events  during  the  uprising  were  deadly.    They   will
never  be  forgotten  as  symbols  the  world   over  of  what   the
Pax  Americana  really  means  for  the  people  we  claim  to  be
protecting.    One  occurred  at  Bentre  after  it  was  shelled   "re-
gardless  of  civilian  casualties",  as  the  ordinarily  unemotional
AP  reported  Feb.  7,  "to  rout  the  Vietcong."    A  U.S.  Major
explained,   "It  became  necessary  to  destroy  the  town  to  save
it."    This  will  go  down  in  the  history  books  as 'typical  of  our
whole  Vietnamese  campaign.     The  whole  country  is  slowly
being  burnt   down  to   "save   it."     To   apply   scorched   earth
tactics  to  one's  own  country  is  heroic;  to  apply  it  to  a  country
one  claims  to  be  saving  is  brutal  and  cowardly.    Everywhere
we  call  in  artillery  and  air  rather  than  fight  it  out   hand-to-
hand  with  the  guerrillas;   this  has  been  characteristic  of  our
intervention  from  the  beginning  and  this  is  the  secret  of  why
the  rebellion   grows  ever  stronger.    It   is  we  who  rally   the
people  to  the  other  side.
The  other  incident  took  place  at  Khe  San  where  we  turned
away  not  only  civilian  refugees  but  allied  forces  fleeing  the
fallen  camp  of  Langvei.    We  not  only  refused   them  shelter
but  disarmed  them  before  driving  them  away.    The  best  ac-
count  was  a  magnificent  on-the-spot   piece   of   journalism,  by
(Continued  on  Page  Five)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  19,1968
Three  Pages  of  Documentary Evidence on America's  Shame
The  Fascism  U.S.  Arms  and  Influence  Impose  on  Guatemala  and  Greece
By  Father  Thomas  Melville*
In  recent  weeks,  Guatemala  has  been  in  the  world's  news
because  of  a  series  of  killings,  which  the  press  calls  a  series
of  vindictive measures on  the  part  of  the  right  and  left  wing
extremists.     Meanwhile   the   government   supposedly   main-
tains  the  position  of  left-center  while  trying  to  crush  the  vio-
lence  on  both  sides.    This  is  simply  not  true.    The  govern-
ment   almost  openly  supports  the   rightist  groups   and  many
of  their  members  hold  high   positions  in  her.
Three  Right-Wing  Terrorist  Groups
The   National   Liberation  Movement   (MLN)    which   was
started  by  assassinated  president  Castille  Armas  and   is  still
his  heir,  makes  no  bones  about  the  fact  that  it  controls  the
rightist  terrorists  called  the  'Mano   Blanca'   (White  Hand).
NOA   (New  Anti-communist Organization),  another  band  of
terrorists   on   the   right   is  headed   by   Colonel   of   the   Army
Maximo  Zepeda   Martinez  and  Lieutenants  Hugo  Edmundo
Alonzo  and  Luis  Dominguez,  all  on  active  duty.    The  head-
quarters  of  the  'Mano  Blanca'  is  in  the  main  police  building
in  downtown  Guatemala.    The  third  rightist  terrorist  group,
CADEG,   is  composed   of   landowners  to   'take  care'   of   any
'troublemakers.'    This,  of  course,, includes anyone  who  begins
protesting    too   loudly   about   the   injustices   of    the   actual
situation.
During   the   past   18  months,   these   three  groups   together
have  assassinated more  than  2,800  intellectuals,  students,  labor
Alliance?    For  Progress  or  Police  States?
"Many  of  us  have  been  pleased  at  the  attention  that
Latin  America  received  from  John  Kennedy  and   Pope
John,  but  not  with  the  results.    And  what  are  these
results?      Simply   that   the    old   order    of    injustice
and  tyranny  has  been  strengthened   and  not  weakened
by  this  interest.
"The   U.  S.  government   has   sent   jets,  helicopters,
weapons,  money  and  military  advisers  to  the   govern-
ment  that  only  strengthens  its  control  over  the  peasant
masses.    This  past  year,  1967,  salaries,  uniforms,  arms
and  vehicles  for  2,000 new  policemen  were  paid  for  by
the  Alliance  for  Progress.   This  year  another  1,500  are
projected   for   enlistment,   to   say   nothing   about   the
secret  intelligence  services   rendered   for  ferreting   out
all  'social  disturbers.'"
—Father  Thomas  Melville,  Catholic  Reporter, Jan.  31
* Writing   in  the   Jan.   31  issue  of  the   National   Catholic
Reporter,  P.O.  Box  281,  Kansas  City,  Mo.  64141,  $8  a  year.
We  commend  it  highly  to  our  readers.
leaders  and  peasants  who  have  in  any  way  tried  to   organize
and   combat   the   ills   of   Guatemalan   society.     The   'Mano
Blanca'  itself  admits  that  no  more  than  one  in  ten  of  these
is  probably  a  communist.
I   personally  know   a  good   friend  and   benefactor  of   the
Maryknoll   Fathers,   a   daily   communicant,    who   accused   a
Christian  labor  leader  who  was  trying  to  organize  a  union  on
his  big  sugar  plantation  of   Communism  and  thus  had   him
shot  by  the  army.    This  man   today,  like  many  other  land-
owners,   maintains  army  guards   on   his   farm   to   avoid   the
repetition  of  such  an  occurrence  in  the  future.
When  the  cooperative  I  started  among  the  destitute  Indians
of  Quezaltenango  was  finally  capable  of  buying  its  own  truck,
the   rich   tried   to  pay  the   drivers  to   run   the   vehicle   off  a
McNamara  Seems  As  Poorly  Informed  on  Latin  America's  Military  As  On  Vietnam
"Most  Latin  Americans aspire,  as  we know, to  a  peaceful
revolution  in  their   societies   and  their  personal   well-being.
Since  they  want  it  without  violence,  and  soon,  they   need
the  relatively  modest  military   and  economic  help  we  are
providing.    Without  this  help,  the  prospects   for   realizing
their  aspirations  would  be  slim  indeed."
—McNamara's  Annual  Defense   Report  Feb.  1.
"Over  the   past  5  years  a  new  wave  of  militarism   has
been   sweeping   across   Latin    America.     Between   March
1962  and  June  1966 nine duly elected,  constitutional,   civilian
presidents  were  deposed  by military  coups.  .  . .
"Significantly,  five  of  the  six  1962  and   1963  coups  were
triggered  by  elections—either  by  elections  just  completed
or  those   scheduled  for  the  near  future.    In  the  two  post
election   1962  coups,  the   Argentine   military   intervened   to
protect  itself   against   the  populist   Peronistas  whom  they
had  deposed  7  years  previous,  while  the  Peruvian   military
intervened  to  protect  itself  from  the  populist  Apristas  whom
they  had  ousted  14 years  earlier.   In  the  three  preelection
1963  coups,  the  Guatemalan  military  acted  to  prevent   the
restoration  of  the  populist  revolutionary  movement,  headed
by  Juan  Jose  Arevalo,  whose  previous  government  in  1945-
50  had  led  to  the  Arbenz  regime  which  the  military   ousted
in  1954.   The  Ecuadorean  military  acted  to  prevent  the  ex-
pected  return  of  populist  leader  Jose  Maria  Velasco  Ibarra
whom  they  had  deposed  2  years  before,  and  the   Honduran
military  intervened  to  prevent  the  expected  triumph  of  the
populist  Liberal  Party  candidate  Rojas  Alvarado.
"The   actual  threat  of  communism  also   fails  to   explain
the  military  motivation.    While  it  is  true  that  Bosch  re-
fused  to  outlaw  the  Communist  Party  and  that  there  was
evidence  of  Communist  influence  in  the  Goulart  and  Aros-
mena  administrations,   in  none  of  the  eight  countries  was
there   a  threat  of  a  Communist  takeover.     The  military,
however,  tended  to equate  populism  with  Communism.  . . .
"The   Alliance  for   Progress  may  have   also    contributed
to  the  current  wave  of  military  interventions.     For  it  was
the    view  of  many  Latin   American  military   leaders  that
U.  S.  Government's  public  advocacy  and  support  for  crash
programs  of. material   development  and  social  change   con-
ducted   through   the   medium  of   authentically   democratic
regimes  was tantamount  to  encouraging  political instability.
"When  the  Latin  American  political  spectrum  is   consid-
ered  as  a  unit,  the  armed  forces  today  are  an   antidemocra-
tic  force.     Except   in  those  six  countries  that  now  have
essentially   nonpolitical  military   institutions,  present   mili-
tary  rule  or  recent  military  intervention  has  prevented  the
triumph  of  governments  representative  of  the  popular   ma-
jority.   Without  the  restraining   effect  of  the  military,  popu-
list  governments  would  probably  be  in  power  in  most  Latin
American  countries  today. ... As the  military  continue  to
resist  populist  government  and  to  slow  down  social  reform,
more  pressures  will  increase  tending  toward  a  violent  social
upheaval. ...
—The  Latin  American   Military,   Survey   of  the   Alliance
for  Progress  for  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com.,  Oct.  1967.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  19, 1968
cliff.    When  the  truck  driver   wouldn't   be  bought,  at  least
four  attempts  were  made  to  run  it  off  the  road,  one  of  them
successful.     In  the  parish   of  San  Antonio  Huista,  where  my
brother,  also  a  Maryknoll  priest,  was  pastor,  the  president  of
a  land  cooperative  was  killed  by  the  town's  wealthy,  includ-
ing  the  mayor.
In  a  situation  such  as  outlined  above,  what  is  the  peasant
to  do?    He  can  do  one  of  two  things:  he  can  surrender  to
the  pressures  to  keep  him  down,  and  thus  renounce  his  hu-
manity;  or  he  can  protest,  grab   a  gun   and  defend  himself,
his  family  and  his  neighbors.    He  has  chosen  the  first  road
for  the  most  part  until  recently,  but  there  are  now  indications
that  he  will  do  so  not  much  longer.
The  Archbishop  and  The  Poor
And  where  does  the  hierarchy  stand  on  all  this?  .  .  . Re-
cently,  the  Archbishop,  in  the  face  of  criticism for  his  weekly
sermon  to  the  poor  to  conform   themselves   to  their  lot,   de-
clared  that  henceforth  his  birthday  would  be  a  "Day   for  the
Poor"  and  that  he  would   be  known   as  "the   Archbishop  of
the  Poor."    On  this  day  he  gives  out  surplus  food  and  old
clothing  to  the  people  that  come  begging   to  his  door.    Some
are  still  wondering what  happens  to  them  the  other   3<54  days
of  the  year.
In  a  meeting  a  few  months   ago  of  the  peasant  leaders  in
La   Democracia,  Huehuetenango,  the   Maryknoll   superior  of
Guatemala  told   the  assembled  group   that  Christ  said:    "The
poor  you  will  always  have  with  you,"  so  that  they  had  better
conform  themselves  to  their  misery  and  not  be  agitating  for
change.
Having   come   to   the   conclusion   that   the   actual   state  of
violence,   composed   of   the  malnutrition,   ignorance,   sickness
and  hunger  of  the  vast  majority  of  the  Guatemalan   popula-
tion,  is  the  direct  result  of  a  capitalist  system  that  makes  the
defenseless   Indian   compete   against   the  powerful   and  well-
As  Once in  Rome,  So  Now  in  Guatemala
Christians  Suspected  Of  Subversion
"This  is  not  a  matter  of  one  nun  or  one  priest  or
two  priests.    There  are  many  more  like  these  among
the  abundant  clergy.    The  government  should   conduct
a   detailed  investigation   of   all   residence   permits   to
make  sure  there  is  no further  danger that  a  whole  gen-
eration   of   youth   is   converted  to   Marxism   with   the
added  fanaticism  characteristic  of  the  Church."
—Clemente  Marroquin  Rojas,  Vice-President  of  Gua-
temala,  writing   about   the  Maryknollers   in   the   daily
Impacto  of  Guatemala  City,  quoted  in  National   Catho-
lic  Reporter,  Jan.  31.
armed  landowner,  my  brother  and  I  decided  not  to  be  silent
accomplices  of  the  mass  murder  that  this  system  generates.
We  began   teaching  the  Indians   that  no  one  will  defend
their  rights,  if  they  do  not  defend  them  themselves.     If   the
government  and  oligarchy  are  using  arms  to  maintain   them
in  their  position  of  misery,  then  they  have  the  obligation  to
take  up  arms  and  defend  their  God-given  right  to  be  men.
We  were  accused  of  being  communists  along  with  the  peo-
ple  who  listened  to  us,  and  were  asked  to  leave  the  country
by  our  religious  superiors  and  the  U.  S.  ambassador.    We
did  so.    But  I  say here  that  I  am  a  communist  only  if  Christ
was  a  communist.    I  did  what  I  did  and  will  continue  to  do
so  because  of   the   teachings   of   Christ   and   not   because  of
Marx  or  Lenin.    And  I  say here  too,  that  we  are  many  more
than   the  hierarchy  and  the  U.  S.  government   think.
When  the  fight  breaks  out  more  in  the  open,  let  the  world
know  that  we  do  it  not  for  Russia,  not  for  China,  nor  any
other  country,  but  for  Guatemala.    Our  response  to  the  pres-
ent   situation   is  not   because   we   have   read   either   Marx  or
Lenin,  but  because  we  have  read  the  New  Testament.
Another  Maryknoll  Priest  Warns  of  New  Vietnams  Brewing in  Latin  America
"Guatemala  smells  like  South  Vietnam  did  a  few   years
ago.    There  are  the  same  United  States  military  advisers
by   the   hundreds,  the   same   corrupt  power  structure,   the
same   fear   of   communism  to   the   point  of   paranoia,  the
same  group  of  peasants  weak  in  themselves  but  firmly  de-
termined  that  no  foreigner  is  going  to  overcome  them.
"Those  who  lead  the  Guatemalan  revolution  look  at  the
United  States  involvement  in  Vietnam  and  say:
'"You   Americans,   with   a   half    million   troops,   with
bombs,  with  napalm, with  an  air  force,  with  the  best  mili-
tary  expertise  in  the  world,  with  the  finest  technical  aid,
have  not  been  able  to  contain  the  situation  in  half  of  one
small  Asian  country.
" 'What  is  going  to  happen when you  are  confronted  with
ten  Latin  American  countries?     If  you  learn  your  lesson
in  Vietnam—we  might  say,  if  you  repent  of  Vietnam—you
will  not  be  destroyed.    If   you  repeat  the  Vietnam experi-
ence  in  Guatemala,  in  Colombia,  in  Bolivia,   in  Brazil,  in
Mexico,  in  Peru,  we  Latin  Americans  maintain  that  there
will  not  be  a  United  States.'
"As  a  North  American  priest,  I  believe  that  this  insight
of  the  Latin  American,  both  the  intellectual  and  the  com-
monsense   peasant,  is   correct.     Those   who   guide    United
States   foreign  policy  have  found  the  formula  for  the  de-
struction  of  the  greatest  nation  in  the  world.   The  formula
is  to  try  to  contain  or  to  destroy  valid  popular  revolutions.
We  cannot  do  it.    The  lesson  of  our  history   should   teach
us  that  raw  power  cannot  be  set  against  the  will  of   man.
"In  Guatemala,  the  United   States  is  standing   militarily
behind  an  oligarchy  of  2  percent  of  the  Guatemalan  people
who  possess  80  percent  of  the  land  and resultant  power. . . .
"Over   half   the   Guatemalan  people   are   suffering   from
malnutrition.    A  wage  of  50  cents  a  day  in  Guatemala  is
above  average,  but  meat  is  40  cents  a  pound  and  eggs  50
to  60  cents  a  dozen.   This  means  that  people  don't  eat  and
children  die  unnecessarily.    Of  the  70,000 a  year  who  die  in
Guatemala,  30,000  are  children.    Guatemala's  child  mortal-
ity  rate  is  40 times  that  of  the  United  States.  .  .  .
"The  so-called  extremist   right  is  directed  and  approved
of  by  the  army.   I  recall  a  visit  to  the  town  of  Gualan in
the  department  of  Zacapa.   I  went  there   with  a  team  of
students   from  the  National  University  to  establish  a   new-
youth  center.    A  week  after  the  group  was  organized,   its
president  received  a  death  warning  from  the  Mano  Blanca
(White  Hand).
"I  went  alone  to  visit  the  head  of  the  Mano  Blanca  and
asked  him  why  he  was  going  to  kill  this  lad.    At  first  he
denied   sending   the   letter,   but  after  a   bit  of   discussion
with  him  and  his  first  assistant,  the  assistant  said,  'Well,
I  know  he's  a  Communist  and  so  we're  going  to  kill  him.'
" 'How  do  you know?'  I  asked.
"He  said,  'I  know  he's  a  Communist  because  I  heard  him
say  he  would  give  his  life  for  the  poor.'
"With  such  a  definition of  communism,  we find  many  new
names  in  the  Communist ranks,  including  Christ's."
—Father   Blase  Bonpane,   of   the  Maryknoll   Order,   also
withdrawn   from    Guatemala   with   the   Melvilles,   in   the
Washington  Post,  Feb.  it.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  19, 1968
A  Report  on  Torture  and  Terror  Which  Shocked  Europe  But  The  U.S.  Ignored
What  That  Military  Junta  We  Arm  Is  Doing  to  Liberty  in  Greece
Amnesty  International   was  founded  in  1961  to  aid  politi-
cal  prisoners  in  all  countries.    It  has  branches  in  25 coun-
tries  and  its  chairman  is  Scan  MacBride,  former    Foreign
Minister   of  Ireland.     The  American  chairman   is  Michael
Straight,  former   editor  of  the  New  Republic.    It   sent   an
investigating  team  to  Greece  last  month  and  it   submitted
a  report  a  few   weeks  ago  to  the  Council  of   Europe   on  the
reign   of   terror   the   U.S.-armed   Greek   military   junta  is
imposing  on Greece.
To  Expel  Greece  From  Free  Europe
The   Council  of   Europe   was   formed   in  1951 to   be   the
Parliament  of  free   Western   Europe.    It   contains    NATO
and   non-NATO     countries.     Amnesty    International     has
consultative   status  with  the   Council.    As   a  result   of   its
report—which  has  gone  all  but  unnoticed  in  the  U.S. press
—the  Assembly   of   the   Council  voted  Jan.  81  to   exclude
Greece  from   the  Council  unless  it  restored    parliamentary
democracy   by  next  January.      This   action,  too, has   been
all   but  unreported   in   this   country,  where   public   opinion
accepts  with  docility   the  restoration  of  full   diplomatic   re-
lations  with, and  military  aid  to,  Europe's  newest   dictator-
ship  in  the  very   country  where  20  years   ago  the   Truman
Doctrine  launched  us  on  the  task  of  policing  and  maintain-
ing  a  "free   world."    We  have  obtained  the  Amnesty  Inter-
national   report   and  summarize   it  here:
The  report  begins  by  saying  that  of  the  284  prisoners sup-
posed   to  have  been   released   under   the  Christmas  amnesty,
some  were  simply  transferred  to  the  prison  islands  of  Deros
and  Yaros.    It  says  there  were  2,777  prisoners  detained  with-
out  trial  on  these  bleak  isles  at  the  end  of  January,  in  addi-
tion   to  numerous  others  held   without   trial  in  prisons   and
police  stations  throughout  Greece.    It  says,  "It  is  believed  that
of  these  detained  some  500  may  have  been  active  or  poten-
tially  active  Communists.    The  remainder  cannot  be  described
as  'Communists'  in  any  accepted  European  sense  of  the  word,
and  large  numbers  of  them  are  old  and   infirm,  having  been
arrested  on  security  files  prepared  in  many  cases  20  years ago.
.  .  .  The  prisoners  come  from  all  walks  of  life  and  include
parliamentarians,  professional  people,  intellectuals  and  artists."
Widespread   use  of   torture   was  reported.     The   Amnesty
International  delegation  took  testimony  from  16  persons  who
had  been  tortured  and  received  evidence  about  32  others  still
in  prison.    The  standard  initial  torture  is  the  falanga.    "The
prisoner  is  tied  to  a  bench  and  the  soles  of  his  feet  are  beaten
with  a  stick  or  pipe.    Between  beatings  the  prisoner  is  made
to  run   around  a  bench  under  a  heavy  rain  of  blows.     We
examined   the   feet  of   a  person  who   suffered   this   treatment
four  months  before  and  his  sole  was  covered  with  thick  scar
tissue.   .  .  .   Common   methods   accompanying   falanga  are:
pouring  water  down  the  mouth  and  nose  while  the  prisoner
is  screaming  with  pain;  putting  'Tide'  soap  in  the  eyes,  nose
and   mouth.   .  .  ."
"Numerous  incidents  of  sexually-oriented  torture  were  re-
A  Cassandra-Cry  Which  Fell  on  Deaf   Ears
"Today  the  Greeks  see  only  two  solutions   for  their
freedom:   help   from   abroad  or   civil  war.   If  Greece
comes  to  realize  that  it  is  abandoned  by  its  friends,  it
will  take  up  arms  to  fight  for  its   freedom  and  that
will  be  a  terrible  day  for  us,  for  Europe  and  for you.
If  armed resistance  is  the  only  solution for  the  Greeks,
we  can  be  sure  that  the  Communists will  join  in  that
resistance;  indeed  they  will  try  to  take  its  leadership.
Then  the  cry   will  be  heard,  'Save   Greece   from com-
munism'  and  there  you  have  the  ready-made  Vietnam
in  Europe."
—Melina   Mercouri,    before     the   Woman's    National
Democratic  Club,  Washington,  Post,  Jan. 23.
ported."    [The  details  as  given  in  the  report  are  simply  too
horrible  to  print—IPS.]    Other  techniques  reported  include:
rubbing  pepper   on  sensitive  areas,  putting  out  live  cigarettes
on  various parts  of  the  body,  and  use  of  electric  shock.
"Many  informants who  have  undergone  torture"  the  report
goes  on,  "consider  that  the  non-physical methods  were  more
difficult  to  bear.    Certain  prisoners  are  intentionally moved  to
cells  within earshot  of  other  prisoners who  are  being violently
interrogated.     This   has  caused  a  number  of  nervous  break-
downs.     One   informant  said   that   listening   to   the   cries  of
others  was  worse  than  undergoing  the  torture,  one  wanted  to
run  in  and  be  beaten  rather  than  listen  to  the  sufferings  of
another.    It  is reported  that  Mikis Theoderakis,  the  composer,
who  was  never  physically tortured,  suffered  a  nervous  collapse
under  this  method. ...
"Theats  to  kill,  maim  and  rape.     People  who  have  been
tortured  were  often  told  that  it  would  be  repeated  at  a cer-
tain  hour  in  the  night,  and  were  kept  in  constant  terror  by
threats  that  they  would  have  to  undergo  again  what  they  had
just  experienced.  .  .  .
"Signing  declarations is  considered  by  many to  be  the  most
inhuman   technique   of   the   regime.     Compulsion   to   sign   a
paper   denouncing  parents,  wife   or  political  beliefs  particu-
larly   affects   a   person   of   highly   developed   conscience   and
ideals.  .  .  .  One  particularly  moving  case  was  that  of  a  man
who  signed  in  order  to  be  free  to  see  his  daughter  who  was
dying  of  cancer.    She  died  before  he  was  released  and  he  has
had  a  nervous  breakdown.
"The   Security  Police   and   the   Military  Police   are  un-re-
stricted  today  in  Greece.    Since,  in  Mr.   P_attakos'  words,  'the
laws  sleep',  the  police  may  arrest  anyone,  in  any  place,  at  any
time,  with  no  obligation  to  charge  him  or  inform  anyone  of
his  arrest.  .  .  .  Those  who  have  particularly  suffered   at  the
hands  of  the  security  forces  are  the  young  people,  those  who
are  not  known  abroad,  and  those  believed  to  be  of  the  left."
Scenes  From  A  Tepid  Little  Comedy  Our  Military  Play  With  Those  of  Greece
"Although  .  .  .  the  junta  has  not  yet  set  a  date  for  free     one  whose  progressive  ideas  make  him, in  the  eyes  of  the
elections  .  .  .  there  is  some  movement towards  a  more  con-    right  wing,  likely  to  cooperate  with  the  Communists  .  .  .
stitutional   regime."                                                                           the  restrictions  contained in  it  may  easily  be  used  by  those
—McNamara  signaling  restoration  of  full  military  aid  to     in  power  to  stifle  all  opposition  in  Greece."
Greece  in  his  latest  defense   budget,  Feb  1.                                _From  an  exclusive  report   in  The  Times  (London)   on
"The  draft  constitution  is  based  on  an  attempt to  exclude     the   still   secret   draft    of   the   new   constitution   being  pre-
from  political  activities  not  only  the  Communists  but  any-    pared  for   Greek's  military  dictatorship,   Jan. 22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  19, 1968
(Continued  from   Page  One)
Newbold  Noyes   in  the  Washington  Star   Feb.   11.    The  de-
cision   was   based   it   is  clear  on   two   motives.     One   was   an
unwillingness  to  share  precious  supplies,  but  had   they   been
Americans  our  men  would have  shared  their  last  crust  to  give
them  shelter.    The  other  was  the  suspicion  that  there  might
be  Viet  Cong  among  them.    How  can  one  fight  a  successful
war   when   mistrust   of   one's  own   allies  is   so   deep?      Col.
Lownds,   the  commander  at  Khe   San,  acted   only   after   con-
sulting  higher  quarters  and  was  in  agony  over  the  decision.
"This  thing,"  he  told  Noyes,  "can   come  back  to  haunt  me—
all   of   us.     If   these  people   say  when   the   chips  were   down,
alter   getting  us   to  fight  for   you,  you  "wouldn't   protect   us,
then   the   whole   civic   action  business  here   goes   down   the
drain."      The  truth  is that  when  the  chips  arc  down  we  feel
It's   Nice  to  Be  Among   Friends
"In  the  small  northern town  of  Ap  Bon,  the  last  shot
was  fired  at   3:15  p.m.  on  Friday.    Ten  civilians  lay
dead   in   the   main  street.     Two   hundred   and   thirty-
seven  villagers,  including  many  women,  were  in  hand-
cuffs   as   suspected  Vietcong.    The   American  marines
led  them  away  past  a  sign  at  the  entrance  to  the  vil-
lage   which   read,   'This  village  is   pacified.     This  is   a
friendly  village.    Unload  your  arms.'"
—From  Saigon  in  the  London  Sunday  Times,  Feb.  4.
that  the  "gooks"   (or  whatever  the  similar  term  of  the  mo-
ment)   are  expendable.     To   the   darker   peoples   everywhere
this   incident  will  sound   (fairly   or  unfairly)   like   "whitey"
all  over  again.    Don't  think  it  won't   rankle.
The   idea  that  we  Americans  are  a  superior   race,  and  are
justified  in  using  any  means  of  mass  killing to  save   American
lives  will  be  the  argument  for  using  tactical  nuclear   weapons
in  defense  of  Khe  San.    It  is this  racial  angle  above  all  which
would  make  it  madness  for  us  to  add  nuclear  weapons  to  the
suffering  we  have  already  imposed  on  the  Vietnamese  people.
Let  just  one  "little"  tactical  nuclear  weapon   be  used  at  Khe
San  and  the  moral  devastation will  be  beyond  calculation.     It
will   stir   race   hate   among   the   colored   peoples   everywhere;
they  will  feel  that  again  they  and  not  whites  are  the   guinea
pigs  of  these  terrible  weapons.    The   Chinese  will  bank   this
away  as  moral  capital  for  the  day  when  they  can  wage  nuclear
war  on  us.    At  home  the  awful  split  among  our  own  people
will   be   vastly   deepened.     The   alienation   among   the   youth
and  for  every American  of  conscience  will  be  beyond   anything
Just  Before  the  Big  Uprising—
Maybe  We'll  Try  Voodoo  Next
"Psychological   warfare   experts   in   South   Vietnam
are  using  even  astrology  in  an  attempt  to  bring  Viet
Cong  over  to  the   Government  side   during  the   lunar
new  year  season  starting  Tuesday.   A  professional  as-
trologer   known   as   Thai   Son,   who  writes   a   popular
horoscope  for  Saigon  newspapers,  has  prepared a  fore-
cast   sheet   to  be  included  in  Tet  gift   packages.    The
Joint  United States-Public  Affairs  Office  says  the  sheet
makes   predictions  favorable  to   the   Government  and
unfavorable  to  its  enemies.   The  United  States  agency
is  advising  the  Government on  preparing  and  distrib-
uting  100,000  of  the  astrological   charts  as  well  as  28
other  items,  designed  to  boost  the  Chieu  Hoi,  or  'open
arms'  defection  program."
—AP  Dispatch,  from  Saigon,  Baltimore  Sun,  Jan.  28.
we  have   yet  experienced.     By  far   the   strongest   reason   for
getting  out  of  this  Vietnamese  war  as  soon  as  possible   is  be-
cause  sooner  or  later  it  will  carry  us  to  that  fatal  step,  that
crime  against mankind.
It  is  time  to  stand  back and  look  where  we  are  going.    And
to  take  a  good   look  at  ourselves.    A  first  observation  is  that
we  can  easily  overestimate  our   national   conscience;   a  major
part  of  the  protest  against  the  war  springs  simply  from   the
fact  that  we  are  losing   it;  if  it  were  not  for   the  heavy   cost
politicians  like  the  Kennedys  and  organizations  like  the  ADA
would  still  be  as  complacent  about  the  war  as  they  were  a  few
years  ago.     A  second   observation  is  that  for   all  the  poppy-
cock  about  the  Vietnamese  war  clashing  with  our  past  tradi-
tions  we  have  long  been  an  imperialistic  people.    The   Tru-
man  Doctrine  and  the  Johnson  Doctrine  are  only  extensions
of  the  Monroe  Doctrine,   new  embodiments  of  that   Manifest
Destiny  to  which  our  expansionists  appealed   in  a  less   cautious
day.    Bolivar  once  said  that  we  plagued  Latin  America  in  the
name  of  liberty;  today  we  do  it  to  a  growing  sector  of   the
world.    On  other  pages  of  this  issue  you  may  read  the  painful
testimony   of   what   Pax   Americana   means    in   practice    in
countries   as  distant  as  Guatemala   and   Greece.      Everywhere
we  talk  liberty  and   social  reform  but  we  end  up  by  allying
ourselves  with  native  oligarchies  and  military  cliques—just  as
we  have  done  in  Vietnam.     In  the  showdown,  we  reach   for
the  gun.
And   this  I  fear  is  what  we  are  going  to  do  at  home  in
dealing  with  the  rising  threat  of  a  Negro  revolt.    We   could
(Continued   on  Page   Six)
In  The  Lincoln  Tradition?—He's  Just  A  Black  Power  Agitator  to  These  GOP  Women
"What  I'm  going  to  have  to  say  may  not  appeal  to  you,
but  I  submit  it  is  solidly  in  the  Lincoln  tradition."
Speaking  was  John  C. Nevius,  Republican member  of  the
District  of  Columbia City  Council  at  the  Morning  Political
Study  Group  of  the  District  League  of  Republican  Women
yesterday.    "I  suggest  we  take  a  fresh   look  into  our  own
hearts  and  reassess  our  views  on  the  racial   discrimination
we  have  all  inherited,"  he  told  the  40  women.    "The  crime
of  today  is  a  bitter  fruit  from  our  traditions  of  discrimi-
nation."     Two  women  angrily   muttered,   "Nonsense",  and
walked  out.
"Many  of  these  people  are  culturally   deprived,  isolated.
Some  don't  even  know  how  to  flush  a  toilet,"  Nevius   said
[of  some  newcomers  to  the  District  from  the  rural  South].
"Disgusting"  said  a  woman  in  red  at  the  back.
"They  can  see  that  others  in  Washington  live  better,  and
as  a  result  they  are  bitterly  resentful.    The  principal  prob-
lem  is  that  they  don't  believe  anybody  cares."
"Why  should  we  care?"  one  woman  said.
Answering   a  query  about  the   Rev.  Dr.  Martin  Luther
King's   planned   April  March  on  Washington,   Nevius  said
that  while  he  understood  why  Dr.  King  and  his   followers
were  coming,  he  was  troubled  by  what  might  happen.    Dr.
King  is  a  peaceful man, and  the  people  with  him  are  essen-
tially  peaceful  but—"His  words  were  drowned  by  a  chorus
of  "Yaa-aah's".  "They  ought  to  shoot  them  all,"  one  woman
shouted,  twice.
—Carolyn  Wells,  Women's  Page, Washington  Post  Feb.  9,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  19,196S
(Continued  from  Page  Five)
be  in  the  first  stage  of  what  Mao  has   envisaged—a  world-
wide  colonial  uprising  against  American  power,  accompanied
by  a  complementary and  similar  rising  of  blacks  in  the  racial
colonies  that  our  ghettoes  have  become.    It  is  foolish  to  dis-
miss  Mao's   vision  because  the  guerrilla  movements  in  Latin
America   and    Africa   have   so   far   proven   unsuccessful   and
because  most  Negroes   still  want  only  to  be  accepted  fully  as
fellow   Americans.     These   facts   give   us   time   to   save  our
country  but  only  if  that  time  is  utilized  wisely  and   quickly.
So  long  as  the  war  goes  on  it  must  deepen  racial bitterness at
home  and  abroad  because colored  peoples  are  the  victims  and
because  colored  men  make  up   so  disproportionately  large  a
share  of  our  own  combat  troops  while  the  cry  rises  to  save
the  white  boys  from  the  draft  for  the  graduate  schools.    And
the  longer  the  war  goes  on  the  less  money  we  have  for  the
giant  tasks  of  social  reconstruction  at  home.    We  put  $2  bil-
lion  into  the  French  attempt  to  hold   Indochina.    We   have
spent   $65  billions  since  1954   on  our  own.     This   year  the
Thumb-Sucking  Might  Be  Safer
"A  State  Department   aide  said  yesterday  that,  bar-
ring  a  public  incident   such  as  the  Pueblo's   seizure,   it
is   almost    impossible    to   get   intelligence   operations
stopped  once  they  have  been  undertaken.    'Any  techni-
cal  information  gives  enormous   comfort  to  the   intelli-
gence  community,'  he  suggested."
—Walter  Pinc'as  in  the  Washington  Post,  Feb.  6.
war  will  easily  cost  $30  billions.    The  new  "defense"   budget
has  already  burst  its  seams  with  the  Pueblo   affair,  and  it  was
already  $80  billions.   These  stupendous  sums  are  the  counter-
part  of  the  precious  time  and  energy  we  waste.
Now  Martin Luther  King announces a new march  on Wash-
ington  for  April.   Negro  moderates  regard  it  as  the  last  gasp
of  the  non-violent  movement.    If   it  fails,  they  see  race  war
in  our  cities.    Dr.  King,  as  always,  is  playing  it  by  ear.     He
is  a  mystic.    He  has  no  concrete  program.    He  has  no  clear
aim  except  the  full  emancipation  of  his  people.    The  nearest
thing  to  a  concrete  objective  is  the  Conyers  bill  which  would
spend   $30   billions—the  cost   of   one   year   in   Vietnam—for
the  rehabilitation  of  our  slums  and  the  human  beings  twisted
Our  Generals  Smell  Bad  Even  To  Us
"Seoul,   Feb.   2—'They   can   smell   them.     They   can
smell  the  Americans.'    Roughly  translated  this  was  a
South  Korean  officer's  explanation  today  of  why   North
Korean   Communist   infiltrators   have   greater   success
in  crawling  around  Gl  outposts   than  outposts  manned
by   the   South   Korean   Army.     Americans   are   heavy
meat   eaters,   which  gives   them   an  odor  detectable   by
the   rice-and-vegetable   eating   Koreans   .  .   .   Shaving
lotion   and  chewing   gum   have   now   been   banned   for
American  troops  on  the  parallel,  but  no  one  is  about
to  take  away  their  hamburger  and  steak—snvell  or  no
smell."
•  —Baltimore  Sun, Feb.  3.
by  life  in  these  urban  jungles.    That  bill  hasn't  a  chance  in
this  atmosphere.    The  whole  trend  is  to  cut  rather  than  to
increase  welfare   expenditures.    The   emphasis  is  on   repress-
ing  crime  in  the  streets,  which  translates  into  repressing  the
Negro.    Johnson  gave  in  to  that  trend  by  calling in  his  crime
message  for  enactment  of  a  Federal  inciting-to-riot bill  which
the  Administration  liberals  have  fought  for  two  years.    The
Attorney  General,  like  the  new  report  on  the  Newark  "riots",
has  stressed  that  these  racist  convulsions  are  due  to  misery
not  conspiracy.   But  we  are  moving  inexorably  to  the   club,
the  gun  and  the  jail,  to  a  Vietnam  at  home.
Troops  are  being  trained  to  fight  urban  guerrillas.    GIs  in
Vietnam  are  being  offered  discharge  90  days early if  they  join
an  urban  police  force  back  home.     Dr.  King  promises  non-
violence  but  he  also  projects  a  vast  sit-down  to  bring  Wash-
ington   to  a  standstill  unless  it  prepares   to  give  the  Negro
what  he  wants.    If  he  fails,  more  Negro  youth  will  turn  to
the   revolutionary  way.    The   chances  of  avoiding  some  out-
burst  of  violence  during  those  April  demonstrations  will  grow
slimmer   the   longer   they   last.     Some   shooting,   even   acci-
dental,  may anger  even  Washington's   apathetic Negro  popula-
tion  and  set  off  racial  fighting  here  and  by  chain  reaction  in
other  cities.    To  move  toward  the  end  of  the  war,  to  show  a
readiness  to  spend  for  reconstruction  at  home  instead  of  devas-
tation   abroad,  would   change  the  whole   atmosphere.     Must
we  wait  until  the  fires  that  rage   in  Saigon   set   Washington
ablaze  too?                                                            6  p.m.  Feb.  12
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes
FOR   STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular  price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................   State....................
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   unshed  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street
City  ,
..............................  Zip................  State......
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C. 20015
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.    Washington   D  C
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   SB  in  the US-   $6  in  Canada'-    '   '
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  517 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.                                                    <^anaaa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED