I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968jul22.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  Reviewing Rockefeller's  Record As  A  Hawk
Identical  Twins
"Washington,  July  7  (UPI)—Vice  President   Humphrey         "Washington, July  8—Senator  John  G.  Tower, chairman
said  today  that  the  biggest   issue  in  the  Presidential cam-     of   Richard   Nixon's   'Key   Issues   Committee'   today   called
paign  was  crime  and  violence  in  America's  streets."                   crime  and  disorder  the  No.  1  issue  of  the  campaign."
—New  York  Times,  July  8.                                                           —New  York  Times, July  9.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekfa                       **
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  15
JULY  22,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
20  CENTS
The  Candidate  Least  Likely  To  Make  Peace
The  question  raised  by  Governor  Rockefeller's  4-stage  plan
for   peace  in  Vietnam  is  whether  you  can  sell  the  Brooklyn
Bridge  a  second  time  to  the  same  sucker.    Essentially  it  asks
Ho  Chi  Minh  again  to  call  off  the  war  and  withdraw his  men
on  the  same  promise  of  free  elections  later.    The  Rockefeller
plan  is  the  1954  Geneva  settlement  all  over  again.    Once  Ho
withdrew  his  forces  after   1954,   he  had  no  leverage  to  make
us  keep   the   Geneva  promise  of   elections  and   reunification.
He  would  be  in  an  even  weaker  position  this  time,  militarily
and  politically.
A  Lopsided  Proposal
•Under  the  devious  wording  of   the  Rockefeller  plan,   Ho
would  withdraw  all  his  forces  but  we  would  not  withdraw
all  of  ours.    As  he  withdrew  his  forces,  we  would withdraw
"the  bulk"  of  ours.    "The   small  U.S.  forces  left  in  Vietnam,"
the  Rockefeller  plan  says,  "would  be  confined  to fixed installa-
tions as long  as North  Vietnam  carries  out  its  commitments."*
Thus an  undetermined  number  of  U.S.  troops  would  remain  in
bases  around  the  country.   These  forces  would  not  leave, until
after  the  elections.     Only  our  side  would  have  the  means  of
enforcing    the   terms   of   the   settlement.     U.S.   troops   could
move   into   action   from   their   bases  on   any  violation,   real,
imagined  or  contrived.
The  Rockefeller  plan  is as lopsided  politically.    In  the   1954
agreement  there  was  no  restriction  on  those  who  could   par-
ticipate in  the promised  elections.    We  decided  not  to hold  the
elections   because   we   knew   that   Ho   and   the   Communists
would win.    One way to prevent  such  a victory this time  would
be  to  exclude  the  Communists.    The  Rockefeller  plan  says  the
NLF  will  be  "guaranteed  participation  in  the  political  life  of
the  country"   only  when   it   "ceases   guerrilla   operations   and
agrees  to  abide  by  the  democratic  process."    That  means  the
guerrillas  would  have  to  give  up  their  arms  and  then   satisfy
the  governing   authority  in  the  South  that  they  would  "abide
by  the  democratic  process"  before  they  could   campaign   and
vote.    This  governing   authority  under   the  Rockefeller   plan
would  be  left  to  the  existing  regime  in  Saigon,  with  its  rigged
When   It's   Dangerous  to  Oppose  Arson
More  than  2500  persons  have signed  the  "Call  to  Re-
sist  Illegitimate  Authority"  which  was  the  heart  of  the
case   against   Dr.   Spock   and  his   three   convicted  col-
leagues  of  the  anti-draft  movement.   So  strong  is  the
anti-war  sentiment  that  for  the  first  time  in American
history   a  war-time  President   has   virtually  abdicated
rather   than   risk   condemnation   at   the   polls.    If   Dr.
Spock's  was  a  crime, there  are  not  enough  jails  to  hold
all  those  who ought  to  be  there  with  him.   His  counsel,
Leonard  Boudin,  in  a  plea  before  sentence,  was  hardly
exaggerating  when  he  quoted  Burke's  speech  on  Con-
ciliation.    "It  seems  to  me  narrow and  pedantic,"  Burke
said  of  the  resistance  sweeping  the  American Colonies,
"to  apply  the  ordinary  ideas  of  criminal  justice to  this
great  public  contest."   No  Tory judge was  more fiercely
biased  than  Judge  Ford;  the  severity  of  the  two-year
sentence  for  what  was  little  more than an  expression of
opinion  matched  his  ill-tempered  conduct  of  the  trial.
Judge  Ford called their action akin  to  treason,  but  his-
tory  will  decide  that  the  treason  to  America's  welfare
and  traditions  was  the  government's.    Dr.  Spock's  de-
fiance  is  the  crown  of  his  career.    "There's  no  point  in
raising  children,"  he  said  with  devastating simplicity
some  years  ago,  "if  they're  going  to  be  burned  alive."
In  a  time  when  America has  been  led  to  believe that  its
safety  lies  in  its  capacity  to  deal  out  instant  immola-
tion,  whether  by  napalm or  H-bomb,  what  could  be more
incendiary  than  to  attack institutionalized arson?
* See text  Washington  Post  July 14.
Constitution   and   its   repressive   election   laws   under   which
Communists  and  "pro-Communists"   are  excluded.
What  does  the  phrase;—"to  abide  by the  democratic  process"
—in  the  Rockefeller  plan  mean?     Saigon  has  long   had  an
"open  arms"  program  for  Communists  and  other  NLF  mem-
bers  who  defect.    When  the  Saigon  military  in  charge  of  the
defector   camps  are  convinced   the  VC  have   renounced   their
past  views,  they  are  set  free  to  participate  in  the  normal  life
of  the  country.    Does  Rockefeller  mean  any  more  than  this?
In  a  US.   News  &  World   Report  interview  June  24,  Rocke-
feller  was  questioned  about  an  earlier  proposal  to  broaden  the
base  of  the  Saigon  government.     "Are  you  talking,"   he  was
asked,  "about  bringing  in  the  Viet  Cong  or  the National  Liber-
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'a  Weekly,  July  2S, 1968
(Continued  From  Page   One)
ation  Front?"    "No,"  was  his  answer,   "I   said    democratic
elements  and  I  do  not  consider  the  Viet  Cong  a democratic
element."
Additional  light  is thrown  on  what  Rockefeller  has  in mind
by  his  newly  published  campaign  book,  "Unity,  Freedom  &
Peace:  A  Blueprint  for  Tomorrow."    In  it  he  says  we  should
"accept  in  South  Vietnam's  political  life  any group  that  seeks
its  objectives through  the  political  process,  rather  than  by pur-
suing  them  by  force  or  subversion."   (Emphasis  added.)     On
ABC-TV's  Issues  and  Answers  July  14,  the  day  after  his  new
plan  was  released,  Rockefeller put  forward  the  same  formula
again.    He  said  the  Viet  Cong  could  participate  in  the  elec-
tion   "if   they  agree  to  drop  military  action  and  subversion."
You  can  stop  military  action  by  a  cease-fire  but  how  do  you
stop  "subversion"?
What  Is  Subversion?
At  one  time  Rockefeller  said  he  would  accept  even  a  Viet
Cong  government  in  South  Vietnam  if  it  was  the   result  of
truly  free  elections.    Now  he  says  the  Viet  Cong  cannot  take
part  in  elections  until  they  give  up  "force  and  subversion."
What  is  subversion?    The  New  Deal  was  constantly attacked
as  subversive.   Even  the  ADA  was  labelled  subversive during
the  witch-hunt  years  of  the  40s  and  50s.    In  Saigon  subver-
sion  is  anything  which  threatens  the  domination of  the  mili-
tary  junta  and  the  landlord-gentry class.   It  only  took  a Saigon
court  23  minutes the  other  day  to  find  the  leaders  of  the  new
middle  class   "Alliance  of   National,  Democratic  and   Peace
Forces"  guilty  of  subversion  in  absentia,  and  condemn  them
to  death  for  it.    If  the  NLF  has  to  satisfy  the  Saigon  regime
that  it  has  given  up  "subversion"  before  it .can  participate  in
the  political  process,  it  may  have  to  wait  a  long  time.
In  the  1954  agreement there  was a provision  that  no  one was
to  be  persecuted  for  the  part  he  had  played  in  the  struggle
against  the  French  and  their  puppets,   Diem  violated  it  and
sparked  the  rebellion  when  he  began  to  throw  many  of  the
former   Viet  Minh  fighters  into   concentration  camps.    This
time  there  would  be  no  guarantee  that  the  Viet  Cong,   after
laying  down  their  arms,  might  not  end  up  in  jail  again  be-
cause  they  had  not  convinced  the  Saigon  regime  that  they  had
sincerely  given  up  "subversion."    Thieu  and  Ky  couldn't  have
thought  up  a  cuter  peace   offer.
II
Nelson  Rockefeller  is  as  tricky  as  Nixon  and  as  glib  in  his
liberalism  as  Humphrey.    For  a  quarter  of  a  century  he  has
been,  if  anything,  more  consistently  and  ferociously  dedicated
than  either  to  the  cold  war  and  its  anti-Communist  obsessions.
Of  all  the  candidates  he  is  the  one  least  likely  to  draw  back
from  our  costly  effort  to  become  the  policeman  of  the  world.
His  position  on  civil rights  is liberal—it  could  hardly be  other-
wise  to  get  anywhere  in  the  politics  of  New  York—but  lib-
erals  fool  themselves  if  they  think  he  would  cut  down  military
expenditure   for   social   reconstruction.     No   major  figure  in
American  politics  has  worked  harder  than  Rockefeller  to  push
ever  higher  the  billions  we  allocate  to  the  Pentagon.    To  woo
the  Kennedy  forces  and  exploit   peace  sentiment,   Rockefeller
has  reluctantly   and   belatedly   been   persuaded   to  coo  like  a
dove.    But  his  whole  record  spells  hawk.
No   one  can  be  more   surprised   than   Eisenhower  to   hear
Belt-Tightening   Time  In   Congress
Sen.  CLARK:  I  wonder  what  happened   [in  confer-
ence]  to  the  money  for  the  special  summer  programs
under  the  poverty  setup.
Sen.  PASTORE:  Does  the  Senator  mean  food  for  the
undernourished  children  in  day  camps?
Sen. CLARK: Yes.
Sen.  PASTORE:   On  that  item,  the  amount  allowed
was  $10 million.
Sen.  CLARK:  What   was  the  amount  requested  by
the  Senator   [in  conference]?
Sen.  PASTORE: ... $32  million. . . . With  reference
to  the  neighborhood youth  program,  which  is  summer
jobs,  the  amount   [the  Senate]  inserted  in  the  bill  was
$75  million.  .  .  .  [In  conference]  we got  $13 million,
which  to me was a virtual  victory. . . . With respect  to
the   Headstart   program,  the  amount  sought  was  $25
million. ... On that,  we finally could  reach  a figure of
only  $5  million.. . .
Sen.  CLARK:  How  much  is  there   in  this  bill   for
Vietnam  and  other   military  affairs?
Sen.   PASTORE:   Almost   $4  billion   for    Southeast
Asia.    Our  committee  decided  to  cut  out  $80.3 million
for   military  construction   in  Vietnam  .  .  .  [but]  the
House  was  adamant  in  restoring  the  full  amount.
—Senate  debate  July   2  on  the  second   supplemental
appropriations    bill,  which   passed   64   to   1  with   only
Nelson   (D.-Wisc.)   voting   against   it.
Rockefeller  trying  to  sound  like  a  peace  candidate.    During
the  last  Republican   administration,   Eisenhower   was  not  cold
warrish  enough  for  Rockefeller  and  they  split  because  Rocke-
feller   did  not  think  he  was  spending  enough   on  the   armed
forces.    In  June,  I960,  Rockefeller  refused  to  join  other  Re-
publican   Governors   in   supporting   Nixon   as   Eisenhower's
successor.    Rockefeller  issued  an  almost  hysterical  statement
at  the  Governors'   conference   in  which  he   said  we  faced   a
"national  catastrophe"  unless  we  quickly stepped  up  our  mili-
tary  efforts.     Rockefeller  had   been  urging   an  increase  of   at
least  $3  billion  a year  in  the  military  budget.   He  did  not  come
out  for  Nixon until  the  latter  at a secret meeting  in  July  agreed
to  support  the  demand  for  bigger  arms  expenditures.    "There
must  be no  price  ceiling,"  said the  joint statement  which  sealed
their  bargain,  "on  America's  security."
Eisenhower   in   his   memoirs,   "Waging   Peace",   said   this
statement   "seemed   somewhat   astonishing,   coming   as  it   did
from  two people who  had  long  been  in  administration  councils
and  who  had  never  voiced  any  doubt—at  least  in  my  presence
—of  the  adequacy  of  America's  defenses."     Eisenhower  noted
that  the  Pentagon's  budget  had  risen  from  "less  than  $12  bil-
lion  before  the  Korean  war  under  the  Democrats  to  more  than
$41  billion  in  I960."    He  pointed  to  the  new  supersonic  jets
of  the  Air  Force  and  the  "revolutionary  new   submarine-borne
Polaris  missiles"  of  the  Navy  as  solid   evidence   of   increased
military  strength.    He  related  that  after  Rockefeller's    "catas-
trophe"   statement   in  June,   1960,    Eisenhower   dryly  told   a
meeting  of  Congressional   leaders  at  the  White  House,  "I  sus-
pect  that  Rockefeller  has  been  listening  too  closely  to  half-
baked  advisers."
One  of  those  "half-baked  advisers"  was Dr.' Edward  Teller.
He  was  the  one  scientist  on  the  panel  which,  under  Nelson's
chairmanship,  wrote  the  famous  Rockefeller   Brothers   Report
on   "International    Security:   The   Military   Aspect"  in    1958.
This  was a blueprint  for  a  U.S.  role as world  policeman  in  the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  22,1968
nuclear   age.     The   Strangelovian   touch   of   Dr.   Teller  was
exquisitely   visible  in   the   report's   most  wondrous  sentence.
"Very   powerful   nuclear  weapons,"   it  said,  "can  be  used  in
such  a  manner  that  they  have  negligible  effects   on  civilian
populations"     Such  was  the  Pied   Piperism  Rockefeller  was
prepared  to  follow.    The  report  called  for  the  complete  re-
organization   of   the  armed   forces.    One   innovation  charted
the  course  to  a whole  series  of  Vietnams.   It  called  for  mobile
forces  "tailored   to  the  gamut  of  possible  limited  wars which
may  range  from  conflicts  involving  several  countries to  minor
police  actions."     These  limited  war   forces   "may  require  a
highly  complicated  weapons  system  including   nuclear   weap-
ons."     (Emphasis   added.)     This   readiness  to   use  nuclear
weapons  in  limited  wars  anticipated  Goldwater  by  six  years,
though  Goldwater  suggested  nuclear  weapons  in  Vietnam  for
defoliation  purposes  only,  not—as  the Rockefeller report  did—
for  combat.
Aggression  You Don't  See,  Hear  or  Feel
Two  years  before  the  NLF  was  organized  in  I960,  Rocke-
feller  was  ready  for  intervention  in  Vietnam.    "Our   security
can  be  imperilled,"  his  report  warned  in  1958,   "not  only  by
overt  aggression  but  also  by  transformations which  are  made
to  appear,  insofar as possible,  as not  aggression  at  all."  Greece,
it  said,  "has  furnished  one  example,  Vietnam  another."    The
report  invented  the  phrase  "non-overt  aggression",  i.e.  an  ag-
gression  of  which  there  is  no  proof  in  overt  act, only  a  hunch
that  something  bad  is  going  on.    Interventionist!!  never  de-
veloped  a  more  useful,  if  paradoxical,  doctrine.    The   report
asked  us  to  "realize  that  non-overt  aggression  presents  issues
which  are  deliberately and  intrinsically unclear"  and  to  recog-
nize  that  "to  ask  for  certainty  in  these  situations  is  a  recipe
for  inaction."    This  implies  that  we  must  be  ready  to  resolve
any  doubts  in  favor  of  intervention.    There  is  an  occult  qual-
ity  about  the  phrase  "non-overt  aggression"   which  recalls  the
demonology  of  the  cold  war  and  the  witch  hunt  years  in  their
most  virulent  phase.
Ill
The  fact  is that  Rockefeller  has  always been  more  comforta-
ble  with  the  cold  war  liberal   Democrats  than  with  the  con-
servative  Eisenhower-type  Republicans.     His   "liberalism"   is
the  same  mixture  of   social   demagogy  at  home  and  military
intervention  abroad  which  has  characterized Democratic  policy
from   Truman   to  Johnson   and  Humphrey.     Rockefeller  can
claim  to  be  the  original  cold  warrior.    He  boasts  in  his  new
book  that  he  was  called  anti-Russian  and  pro-Fascist  when  he
fought   successfully  at   the  UN   organizing   meeting   in  San
Francisco  in  1945  to  admit  Fascist  Argentina   to  membership
over  Molotov's   objections—and  those  of  men  on  our  side  as
diverse  as Secretary of  State  Hull  and  Walter  Lippmann.  This
signalled   the  first  efforts   to  use  the  new  organization   as  an
Advice  He  Prefers   Not  To  Hear
"Defense  experts  both  in  and outside  the Government
have  told  Congressional   Quarterly  that  huge  cuts  can
be  made  in  the  defense  budget  while  retaining  or  even
improving   the   current   level   of   the  national   defense.
Highly   placed  sources   in  the   Pentagon   and  industry
told   CQ  that  cuts  totaling  at  least   $10.8  billion  could
be  made  in  areas  they  classified  as  'fat.'"
—Congressional  Quarterly   Weekly  Report,  June  S8
(reprinted   in  July  3  Cong.  Record,  S  8184).
"It  is  a  mistake  to  assume  that  when  the  war  is  over
in  Vietnam  there  will  be  a  sharp  and  substantial  drop
in  defense   expenditures."
—Clifford    at  press  conference, July  11.
anti-Soviet  bloc.   Rockefeller  also  boasts  of  the  part  he  played
in  the  adoption  of  Article  51  of  the  Charter,  which  allowed
for   "regional   groupings"   within  the  UN.    Originally  it  was
represented  as  an  effort  to  preserve  the  Monroe  Doctrine  but
it  led  to  the  very  development  the  United  Nations   was  in-
tended  to  avoid—the breakup of  the world  into  hostile military
blocs.    Rockefeller  now  boasts  that  it  was  Article  51  which
four  years later made  the formation of NATO possible.  Article
51  also  laid  the  basis  for  SEATO.
It  is  not  surprising  that  in  his  new  book  the  President  for
whom  Rockefeller  expresses  the  greatest  admiration  is  Tru-
man.    Rockefeller  admires  Truman   because  he  "decided  to
reverse  President  Roosevelt's   policy  of   accommodation  with
the  Kremlin,  decided  to  terminate World  War  II  by  dropping
two  atomic bombs  on  Japan,  [and]   decided  to  contain  Soviet
expansion   into  the   Mediterranean  by  offering   the   Truman
Doctrine  to  Greece  and  Turkey."     In  foreign  policy  Rocke-
feller  has  always felt  more  at  home  with  the  Democrats.  Much
of  the  military program  sketched  out  in  the  Rockefeller  report
of   1958   was  implemented  by  the  Kennedy  Administration;
one  of  Kennedy's  first  acts  was  to  send   Congress   a   special
message  boosting  military spending;  by  fiscal  1962  it  was  $10
billion   more   than   Eisenhower's  I960  figure  of   41   billion.
Since,  of  course,  it  has  been  doubled  by  the  Vietnamese  war.
But Kennedy wasn't belligerent  enough  for  Rockefeller.  Rocke-
feller  attacked him  for  suggesting  that  we give  up  Quemoy and
Matsu;  these  tiny  Chinese  offshore  islands  seemed   to  Rocke-
feller   "of   tremendous  significance"  to  "the   defense  of   free-
dom."    He  criticized  Kennedy  for  not  being  more  aggressive
in  Laos  and Vietnam, accused  the new President  of  mishandling
nuclear  defenses  in  "several   secret  exchanges  of  letters"  with^
Khrushchev   and  after  the  Bay  of  Pigs  wanted  him  to  make
another  attempt  to  topple  Castro.    He  was for  intervention  in
the  Congo  to  prevent  a  Communist  takeover  during  the  scare
created  by  poor  Lumumba's  effort   at   independence.
{Continued  on  Page  Four)
Naval  Intelligence Officer,  Fresh  From Vietnam, On The Ghoulish Folly of The Body Count
"Some  U.S.  combat  units really  count  bodies; others  prob-
ably  never  do,  but  under  pressure  from  higher  up,   report
whatever  'body  count'  would be  expected. ...  If  we are  try-
ing  to  convince  someone  that  we  are  winning  the  war  be-
cause  the  enemy   is  losing  more  men  than  we  are,  we  are
on  the  wrong  side  of  history.    If  this  were  true,  the  Con-
federacy   should  have  won  the   Civil  War  and  the  Allies
should  have  lost  both  world  wars.  .  .  .
"Apart   from  the  impression   we  are  creating   world-wide
that   we  are  ghouls  obsessed  with  the   gruesome  stacking
and  counting  of  cadavers,  the  danger  is  very  real  of  falling
victim  to  our  own  inflated  statistics.''
—Lt. Col. R. A.  McMahon  in Army  magazine for  July.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  22,1968
Rockefeller  Feared  the  Nuclear  Test  Ban  Might  Lead  to  Disarmament
(Continued  from   Page   Three)
Rockefeller  is  incautious  enough   in  his  new  book  to  give
himself  high  marks  for  courage  because  he  was  dubious  about
the   nuclear   test   ban   agreement   Kennedy   negotiated.     He
wanted  assurances  that  the  treaty  "does  not  prohibit  the  use
of  nuclear  weapons  to  repel   aggression   anywhere"   and  that
the   Kennedy  Administration—rather   than   use  the   treaty  as
a   first   step   toward   broader   disarmament  measures,   as  was
hoped  at  the  time—would  "take  every feasible step  to  preserve
the  ability  of  our  military  establishment  to  deter  and  defeat
Communist  aggression  against free  peoples  everywhere."    Like
his  scientist mentor  Dr.  Teller,  Rockefeller  feared  nothing  so
much  as  a  detente.    In  this  he  saw  eye  to  eye  with  the  mili-
tary.    It  is  in  keeping  with  this  record  that  Rockefeller  in  a
chapter  on  "Fiscal  Integrity"  in  the  new  book  nowhere  sug-
gests   any  cut   in   military   expenditures   or   in   the   escalatirig
costs  of  the  Vietnamese  war.    He  says  we  will  have  to   "dis-
cipline   ourselves   to   set   clear   priorities  and   to   make  hard
choices"  which will  demand  "rare  political  courage."    But  he
lacks  the  courage to  specify  what  are  the hard  choices he  would
make  if  elected.   His  whole  record shows that  for  him military
strength   comes  first,  and  that  military  strength   is  not  merely
defense  but  a  capacity for  intervention  anywhere in  the  world.
Not  Strange  He  Admires  LBJ
It  is  not  strange  that  Rockefeller's  admiration  for  Johnson
comes  through  in  the  new  book.    He  praises  Johnson's  "self-
sacrifice"  in  renouncing renomination and  sees  it  as a  "courage-
ous"  step  toward  "the  ending  of  our  own,  increasingly malig-
nant  controversy between  'hawks'  and  'doves'  and  a  long  step
toward  the  restoration  of  national  unity."    His  only  criticism
is  that  Johnson's   "peace   overtures  to  North  Vietnam   were
launched  in  a  manner  to  stir  concern  among  our  friends  in
Southeast  Asia  who  now  feel  themselves  directly  menaced."
He  sets  out  to  correct  this.    He  writes:
I  would  warn  our  adversaries  not  to  'overact'  to  our  cur-
rent  discomfiture in  foreign  relations.    In  commencing  our
new  quest  for  honorable  peace  in  Vietnam,  we  are  express-
The  "But"  Which  Led  To  The  Vietnamese  War
"We are  not  the  world's  policeman.   How peoples wish
to   govern  themselves,   and  how  they   wish   to  change
their  governments—that's  their  business.    Our  interest
runs  only  to  avoiding  the  kinds  of  violence   which  can
transcend   national   frontiers   and   threaten   the   wider
peace.     Second,   we  also  have  to  recognize   that,   what-
ever  our  own  intentions,   others   may  be  prepared   to
violate  frontiers  and  foster   local   turmoil   [as  in  Viet-
nam?]  for  their  own  ends.   We  must  therefore   be  pre-
pared  to  fulfill   specific  and' clearly   defined  mutual  fs-
fense  commitments  approved  by  the  President   and  the
Congress  of  the  United  States."
—Humphrey's   speech  of  July  12  designed  to  give  him
a  new  look  in  foreign   policy.    The  excerpt  shows  that
he  ends  up  sounding  like  Rusk  and   Johnson.
ing  a  sober  reassessment,  not  seeking  peace  at  any  price.
At  stake  in  this  judgment  is  not  only  peace  in  Vietnam  but
the  chances  of  peace  in  Asia,  the  Middle  East  and the  whole
world.    Our  adversaries  ought  not  to  conclude  that  we  will
be  unable  to  devise  an  effective strategy  against  their  'wars
of  national  liberation'  i.e.  subversion,  or  that  other   peoples
less  weakened  than  the  South  Vietnamese  will  not  rise  up
against  incursion  and  intrusion.
These  opaque  phrases  could  have  come  as  easily from  Rusk
or  Johnson.     They   suggest   no  more  than   a  tactical  retreat.
If  the  military have  their way, the  retreat will  be no  more  than
enough  palaver  at Paris to keep  the  home  front quiet  until  after
the  election  when  they  can  go  on  with  the  war  undisturbed.
Rockefeller  speaks  of  a  "sober   reassessment"   but  there  is  no
hint  that  this  would  extend  to  the  wisdom  of  our  involvement
in  land  and  civil wars  in  Asia,  much  less  to  the  idea  of  trying
to  impose  a  Pax  Americana.    On  the  contrary  Rockefeller   in
a  speech  in  Philadelphia  on  May  1 unveiled  a grandiose  vision
of  a  new  regional  grouping  under  American  leadership  which
would   ensure  "economic   progress   and  political   stability"  for
all  the  Asian  "hundreds  of  millions  living  in  the  great  crescent
from  Japan  throughout  India  to  Iran."    This  is  a  sure  way  to
more  and  bigger  than  Asian  Vietnams.                           July  16
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The   Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English   Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S  NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State.............
Indicate  if  gift   announcement wished  D
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed
Name  ...................................................................................
$5:
Street    ..........................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................  State......
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington,  D.  C.  20015
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.
An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;
110  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED