I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968jul08.pdf

============================================================

How  US  Bombing Doubled  After   "De-Escalation,"  See Boxes Pps. 2-3
When  "Reciprocity" Really  Means  Surrender
"We say  to  the  North  Vietnamese:  'We  will  stop bombing
if  yon  will  stop  infiltrating.'  What  does  that  add  up  to?
It  adds  up to:  'You  leave  to  our tender  mercy  the  Viet Cong
and  we   will  stop   our  bombing.'   Of  course  they   are   not
going  to  do  it.    Why  should  they?    Why  should  they  with-
draw  forces  unless  we  do?    We  talk  about  infiltration by
them.     We   have   more  than   500,000  men   in   Vietnam."
—Morse  in  the Senate  June  21. A  week  later  the  Lawyers
Committee  on American Policy  Towards  Vietnam  in  a  letter
to   Chairman   Fulbright   of   Senate   Foreign   Relations    at-
tacked   this   U.S.  demand  for   "reciprocity"   as  a  threat  to
peace  and  urged  public  hearings   on  the  issue.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
/\7rfT!ii»    £X* « /i/* r/r/r/rf     *<*—  \\/0/>ni&\                                 Vr
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.    XVI,  NO.  14JULY  8,  1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Billions  for  Missiles  and  Pennies  for  Poverty
The   day  the  poor  were   driven   out   of  Resurrection   City
was   the   day   the   Senate   voted   to   approve   an  anti-missile
system.   Monday  June  24  deserves  to  go  down  in  history  for
its   symbolic  significance.   Congress   turned  a  flinty  banker's
face  to  the  poor  but  took   the  first  step  toward  the   deploy-
ment  of  an  ABM  (anti-ballistic missile)  network  which  could
cost  more  than  their  most  Utopian  demands.   The  first  install-
ment  for  Sentinel,   the  "thin"  one,  is  $5  billion.    The  total
cost  of  the  big  one  the  military-industrial  complex  wants  can
easily  run  to  $50  billion.    Even  that  is  only  the   beginning.
For  the  ABM  will  set  off  a  new  spiral  in  the  arms  race,  as
each  side  builds  more  missiles  to  overwhelm  the  other's  anti-
missiles,  and  then  more  anti-missiles to  counter  the  new  mis-
siles.    "And  at  the  end  of  it  all,"  as Nelson  of  Wisconsin  told
the  Senate  that  day,  the  U.S.  and  the  Soviet  Union   "will  be
right  back  where  we  started,  except  out  of  pocket  $50  to  $100
billion."   •
No  Police  Barred  Them
While  the  chief  lobbyist  of  the  poor,  the  Rev.  Ralph  David
Abernathy  went  to  jail,  the  lobbyists  of  the military-industrial
complex   celebrated   their   biggest   victory.     The   ABM   will
prove  to  be  our  most   wasteful  handout.     But  the  lobbyists
who  sold  this  bill  of  goods  did  not  have  to  live  in  shanties  or
confront  police  lines  on  their  way to  the  Capitol.    The  clients
of  the  welfare  state  ought  to  get  acquainted  with  the  clients of
the  warfare  state.    The  decision  to  go  ahead  with  the  ABM,
Congressional  Quarterly  said  in  a  special  study May  24  of  the
Military-Industrial   Complex,   will   benefit   more   than   15,000
companies  including   such  major  defense  contractors  as  Gen-
eral  Electric,  General  Dynamics  and  Thiokol-Chemical.    One
brokerage  firm  told  its  customers   last   summer  that  the  day
Congress  approved  the  ABM  was   "the   day  they  will   shake
the  money  tree  for  electronic  companies."     In  the  last  quarter
of   1967,   after   Johnson  overruled   McNamara   and   approved
the  Sentinel,  75  mutual  investment  funds  "sold  $90  million
in  other  stock  holdings   [the   CQ  report   says]   and   invested
the  proceeds  in  electronics."
The  ABM  is  the  latest  break-through   in  the  arms  race  and
it  is  time to  recognize the  arms  race  for  what  it  is—the  social-
The  Changes  At  The  Court
"It  still  seems   a  happy  accident," we  wrote  in  the
Weekly  15  years  ago,  "that  produced  a  Warren  in  the
party   of   Nixon   and   Knowland,   and   determined  the
award  of  our  highest  judicial  office  to  a  Republican  as
respected,  humane  and  liberal  as  Earl   Warren."   We
were  the  only  publication on  the  Left   to  welcome  the
appointment.     The   Vinson  court,   packed  by  Truman
cronies,  tried to  read  the  cold  war  into  the Constitution.
The  Warren  court  helped  to  dissipate  the  miasma  of
McCarthyism  and  in  the  Brown  decision  sought  to  put
the  Negro  a  giant step  forward  to  full  equality.    If  the
hopes  it  aroused  have  been  disappointed,   the  fault   is
not  Warren's.    We  were  stung  to  tears  when  we  heard
the  new   Chief   Justice   declare   segregation  of   Negro
children  in  the  schools  "generates  a  feeling of  inferior-
ity  ...    that  may affect  their hearts  and minds  in a way
unlikely   ever   to   be  undone."    The  direct   and  simple
humanity  of   that  utterance   was  Warren  at   his   best.
The  Court  over  which  he  presided  has  ever  sought   to
widen  democracy  and  to  humanize law.
We  believe  his  successor  has  already  shown  he  will
carry  on  in  the  same  tradition,  and  it  is  a  happy  day
that   brings   the   defender   of   Owen  Lattimore   in   the
darkest  days  of  the  witch  hunt  to  the  Chief Justiceship.
We  also   welcome   the   appointment   of   Judge  Homer
Thornberry.    The   South   is   underrepresented   on   the
Court.    Thornberry  on  the   Fifth  Circuit   has  already
shown  a  consistency   and  strength  on  civil  liberties and
Negro  rights  few  would  have  suspected  from  a  rather
tepid   record   in   Congress.    Last   December  he  struck
down   as   unconstitutional   an   ordinance   under   which
anti-war   demonstrators    against   President   Johnson  at
Killeen,   Texas,   had   been   convicted;   he   could   have
dodged  the  issue.    He  dissented   sharply  when  the  Cir-
cuit    declined    to    hear   Stokely    Carmichael's   appeal
from  an  incitement  to  riot  conviction  in  Selma,  and  in-
dicated  plainly  that  he  felt  the  majority  was  being  un-
fairly  swayed  by  Mr.  Carmichael's  notoriety.
ism  of  the  rich.    It  is  the  welfare  system  which  supports  some
of  our  richest  corporations.     The  physicist  Ralph  Lapp,  who
did  so much  to  arouse  the  country  to  the  fallout  danger  in  the
campaign   against  nuclear  testing,  has  provided   the  best  over-
all  view  of  what  the  ABM  and  the  arms  race  really  mean  in
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  8,  1968
(Continued  from  Page  One)
his  new  book,  "The  Weapons  Culture."    The  spokesmen  for
the  poor   should  use  it  as  ammunition.    Dr.   Lapp   observed
that  the  so-called  free   enterprise  system  "has   been  distorted
into  a  kind  of   'defense   socialism',   in  which  the  welfare  of
the  country  is  permanently  tied  to  the  continued  growth   of
military  technology  and  the  continued  stockpiling  of military
hardware."    Dr.  Lapp  estimates  that  since  World  War  II  the
U.S.  has  spent  about  one  trillion  dollars—1,000  billions  or
1,000,000  millions—on  armament!    The  program  has  fallen
like manna on  the  country club  set and—with  the  related  space
program—created  a whole  new  generation  of  millionaires. We
could  have  cleaned  up  every  slum  and  solved  every  racial  and
social   problem  with  a   fraction   of   the   money,   thought   and
energy  which  went  into  military  hardware,  most  of  it  already
junked  as  obsolete.
As  Soon  As  Solidarity  Day  Was  Over
Solidarity  Day  brought  a  vast  throng   to  Washington   and
half   a   dozen   Establishment  phonies   hastened   to   address   it
from   the  Lincoln  Memorial.     But  no   occasional  upsurge  of
benevolent  feeling,   much  less  spurious   oratorical  generalities
about  poverty,  are  going  to  change  the  allocation  of  resources
between   those  who  grow   rich  on  weaponry  and   those   who
decay  on  welfare.    The  swift  liquidation  of  Resurrection  City
once  the  visitors  had   departed  was  the  reflection  of   a  more
permanent  solidarity among  those  who  fatten  on  the  waste  of
national   income.    Those   poor   shanties  the   police   destroyed
were  the  first  signs,  we  hope,  of  a  widening   and   continued
struggle  against  the  inhumanity and   the  irrationality  of   our
spending  policy.    During  the  House   debate   June   26  which
ended  with  sharp  cuts  in  the  welfare  budget,   a  typical   Iowa
Republican  opponent  of  the  poverty  program  said  the  country
did   not  have  "money  to  throw  away ...  on  this   type  of
luxury"  while  a  tightwad  on  the  Democratic  side  (Flood  of
Pennsylvania)  cried,  "What  do  you want?    Diamonds?  What
are  you going  to  use  for  money?    Cigar  store  coupons?"    But
when  it  comes  to  the  war  machine  and  the  space  program   the
Unsolicited   Testimonials  to   McCarthy
"The   nomination   of   Senator   McCarthy   would  cause
the   Republicans   the   most   trouble,   he   [Reagan]   said,
because  McCarthy   is  also  a  critic   of  the  Johnson  Ad-
ministration  and  would  offer  a  less  inviting  target  than
a  candidate  who  defends   it."
—Tom    Wicker   interview   with   Governor   Reagan,
New  York  Times,  June  24.
"It  [the   Humphrey  organization]  is  winning  the  dele-
gates  but it  is  worried  about  the  voters.  .  .  .  Their  dele-
gate  count   .  .  .  still   leaves   them   unhappy,   and  they
are  honest  enough  to  admit  it.  ...    They  don't  like  their
own   record  on  the   war—Mr.  Johnson's   and  therefore
Mr.  Humphrey's.  .  .  .  Many  of  them  have  trouble  deal-
ing  with  their  own  children.  They  face  the  charge  that
they  represent  the  political  bosses  while  McCarthy   rep-
resents  the  anti-war  sentiment  of  the  majority  of  the
people."
—James   Reston  from   Washington  same    day.
billions  flow  freely.
Mrs.  Green   of   Oregon   protested   that  this  same   Congress
had  voted  $4  billion  for  the  space  program.    "That  means,"
she  said,  "we  are willing  to  spend  more  dollars  for  outer  space
than  we  are  willing  to  spend   in  total  amount  of  tax   dollars
for  the  education  of  50  million  boys  and  girls  in  our  elemen-
tary  and  secondary  schools."    But  education,  unlike  the  race
for  the  moon,  does  not  rain  dollars  on  Houston,  Texas.     "It
makes  me  heart-sick,"  Mrs.   Green   cried,  'to  see  my  nation
spending  in  one  day  in  Vietnam  more  than  the  total  amount
of  increase  I  am  requesting  that  affects  2  million  teachers  and
the  quality  of  education   for   50  million  boys  and  girls."     It
is  not  only  the  blacks  nor  only  the  poor  who  suffer  from  the
huge   allocations  to  the  war  and   space  machines.     It   is  the
quality  of  American  life.    Urban  blight  and  pollution   could
be  ended  permanently  for  what  that  war  in  Vietnam  has  cost
us.     Abernathy's  little   army  has  been   fighting   a  battle   for
all  of   us.
Resurrection  City  is  supposed  to  have  been  a mess.    I  found
Hanoi  Charges   Sharp  Stepup  In  U.S.  Bombing  Since  LBJ's   Geographic   Limitations
"Since  31  March   1968  the  number   of  raids  against  North
Vietnam  has  increased  enormously.    Previously  the  number
of  raids  against  all  North  Vietnam  was  2,500  per  month  at
the   most   (in   January   and  March   1968).    The  number  of
raids  against  the  former  4th  zone  [below  the  20th  parallel]
after   31  March   1968  rose  to  more  than  3,500  in  April  and
to  more  than  4,700  in  May.
"Whereas   during   the   first   quarter   of    1968    the   daily
average  was  75  raids  for  all  North  Vietnam,   it  rose  to  115
in  April  and  to  152  in  May  for  the  region  extending   from
the  20th  parallel  to  the  Vinh  Linh  area.  .  .  .  The  number  of
targets  attacked  also  increased.    While   in  March   1968   the
U.S.   aggressors  bombed  2,000  targets  in  all  North  Vietnam,
they  attacked  2,300  of  them  in  April  in  the  former  4th  zone
and  3,700  in  May  in  the  same  zone.    The  attacks  were  ef-
fected   with   a   brutality   and  a   cruelty   much   more  severe
than  previously.  .  .  .
"B-52  strategic  superbombers  and  ultrarapid-fire   cannon
were  used  increasingly.    In  May   1968,   B-52   planes,  for  7
days  in  a  row,  conducted  32  carpet-bombing  strikes  against
the  Vinh  Linh  area.    The  same  zone  received  40,000  shells
launched  by  the  artillery  installed  south  of  the  demilitarized
zone  and  by  big  cannons  of  the  7th  fleet.
"Various  types  of  anti-personnel  bombs  were  used  more
frequently   and  in  greater  quantities.    In  May   1968   alone,
8,000   delayed-action   bombs   were   dropped   on   200  civilian
targets  .  .  .  and nearly  1,000  containers  enclosing  more  than
600,000   spherical   steel   pellet   bombs  were   dumped   on   the
same   zone  to   massacre   the   civilian   population.    Napalm
bombs  were  indiscriminately  dropped.  .  .  .  The  Americans
used  in large  quantities  phosphorus  bombs  and shells. ....
"The   main  targets  chosen  by  the   U.S.   imperialists  were
densely  populated  areas  and civilian  objectives.  .  .  .  Fifteen
markets  of   Nghe  An,  Ha  Tinh  and  Quang   Binh   province
sustained  in  May  1968,  16  attacks  with  400  explosive  bombs
and  a  great  mass  of  steel  pellet  bombs.  .  .  .  The  quibbles
advanced   by  the  Americans  on  peace  de-escalation,  absten-
tion   from   attacks   on   the   civilian   population   and  against
food-producing  areas  and  so  forth  are  deceitful  arguments.
In  reality  the  Americans  continue  to  step  up  their  aggres-
sive war...."
—Hanoi  radio  international  service  in  French  0747GMT
June  11  reporting   a  declaration  issued  by  the  North  Viet-
namese  war  crimes  commission  the  day     before.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  8, 1968
it  inspiring.    It  reminded  me  of  the  Jewish  displaced   persons'
camps   I  visited  in  Germany  after   the  war.    There  was  the
same  squalor  and  the  same  bad  smells,  but  also  the  same  hope
and  the  same  will  to  rebuild  from  the  ashes  of  adversity.    To
organize  the  hopeless,  to  give  them   fresh   spirit,  to  set  them
marching  was  truly  resurrection.    If   much  went  wrong,  that
was  to  be  expected;   what  was  miraculous  was  that   so  much
could  be  accomplished with  the  supposed   dregs  of  our  society.
Disorganization  is  hardly  a  novelty  in  Washington;   you  can
find  it  everywhere  from  Capitol  Hill  to  the  Pentagon.     The
striking thing  about  Resurrection  City  is that  there was so much
genuine  non-racialism.   The  organizers  have  been  given  very
little  credit  for  bridging  a  gap  everyone  deplores.     The   Rev.
Ralph   David  Abernathy  is  not  the  first  man   of  God   to   be
ridiculed  and  jailed.    The  wry  humor  of  the  poor  he  led  was
summed  up  for  me  by  that  touching  sign  on  one  of  the  mule
wagons.   "Don't  Laugh  Folks,"  it  said,  "Jesus  Was  A  Poor
Man."      It   would   be   tragic   if   their   voices   were   so  easily
smothered.
Mules  More  Precious  Than  Men
The  skewed  vision  which  afflicts  the  respectable   in  our  so-
ciety  was  beautifully   summed   up   in  the  outburst  of   concern
for  the  23  skinny  mules  that  finally  made  it  to  Washington.
The  first  edition  of   the   Washington   Daily   News   June   28
carried  across  its  front  page  a  picture  of  a  mule  in  clover  with
a  caption   saying  that  the  mules  had  been   moved   to   pasture
land   in   Columbia,  Maryland,  "where   the   meadows   go   for
$8000  an  acre and  their  next-door  neighbors  are  $15,000  show
horses   and  $20,000  stallions.    "They're  going  to  be   treated
better  than  any  mules  in  the  history  of  muledom,'  one  bounti-
ful   lady  says."   What  of  the  poor  hungry  human   mules  who
balked  at  their  heavy  burdens?
When  the  Vietnamese  war  causes   inflation,   the  poor  bear
the  burden  in  the  shape  of  higher  Jiving  costs;  they  eat  less.
When  higher   taxes  are  imposed  and  the  budget  cut  to  save
the  dollar  from  inflation,  the  poor  pay  again  in  the  shape  of
fewer  jobs  (see  box  at  the  top  of  this page)  and  reduced  wel-
The   Price  The   Poor  Pay   In  The  Tax   Bill
"The  very  heart  of  the  Kerner Commission  report  is
that  we  must  provide  more  jobs  for  the  Nation's  poor.
The  report  specifically   recommends  the   creation  of   1
million  public  sector  jobs  and  1  million  private  sector
jobs   forthwith.     Mr.  President,  how  can  we   begin   to
create  an  additional  2  million  jobs  when  we  are  taking
action  today  that  will  destroy  a  million  jobs?     I  have
in  my  possession  a  letter  from  Gardner  Ackley,  former
head  of  the  Council  of  Economic  Advisers  under  Presi-
dent  Johnson,  and  a  leading  proponent   of  the  tax   in-
crease.  Mr. Ackley assures  me in this  letter  that  the  tax
increase  will  eliminate   hundreds  of  thousands  of  jobs.
"Mr.  President,  if   we  add  to   the  tax   increase   that
mandate  for  expenditure  reduction,  this  whole  package
bill  in  my  view,  will  increase  unemployment by  1  mil-
lion.    Mr.  President,  let  us  ask,  who  are  going  to  be
those  who  are  among  the  million  to  be  laid  off?   .  .  .
"Garth   Mangum,   eminent  economist,  told   our  com-
mittee  and  told  it   truly  that  the  poor  have  been   the
price  stabilizers  of  our  economy,  that  we  have  achieved
price  stability  by  keeping  a  proportion  of  our  popula-
tion   out  of   work  and  the   incidence  of  unemployment
has  fallen  very,  very  heavily among  the  unskilled white
and  especially   Negro   American  citizens."
—Proxmire  (D.  Wise.)  in  the Senate  during  debate  on
the  tax  bill,  June  gl.
fare.    And  now  that  there  is  hope  the  Vietnam   war  may  be
ending   and  more   funds  available  to  help   them,   the   Under
Secretary  of  the  Treasury   tells  a  Town  Hall  audience  in  Los
Angeles  June  25  that  he  doubts  the  end  of  the  war  will  bring
any  sizeable  reduction  in  the  military  budget.     Mr.  Barr  esti-
mated   that   "a   cessation   of  hostilities  would   result   in   great
pressures   to  rebuild  stock  in  military  supplies  and  equipment
to  a  more  acceptable  level."    He  informs  us  that  "We  have
been  fighting  this  war  on  a  very,  very  lean  [only  $80  billion!]
budget."    How   dare  the  poor  be  so  obstreperous  when   the
Pentagon   is  so  hungry?                                                           July   31
We'll  comment in  our  next  issue  on  the Gromyko-John-
son  exchange  for  a  summit  conference   on  the  ABM  and
the  arms  race.
How  Little  Noticed  Official  Testimony In  Washington  Confirms  Hanoi's Charges
Secretary  of  Defense  CLIFFORD: The  restriction   of  the
bombing  to  the  20th  [parallel],  in  my  opinion, has  not  done
us  very  much  damage.    We  are  concentrating  our  force  in
a  smaller  area  down  where the  panhandle  of  North  Vietnam
begins,  and  the  whole  flow  of  traffic  that  comes   from  this
wide   area  up  here   [apparently  he  had  a   map  before  the
committee]   comes  down  into  the  handle  of   the  pan.    We
are  concentrating our  bombing  through  there.    We  are  in-
creasing  the  number  of  missions  over  that  area  very  sub-
stantially.    As   I   remember  the  figures,  they   were  some-
thing   like   3,000   [sorties]   in   February,   about   5,000   in
March,  7,000  in  April,  AND  NOW  THEY  ARE RUNNING
AT   AROUND  10,000  SORTIES   A   MONTH.     [Emphasis
added.]    We  are  destroying   more  trucks  than  ever  before.
—Testimony  at  p.  727 of  the  House  Appropriations   Hear-
ings  on  the  1969  second  supplemental.   The  Secretary  testi-
fied  in  executive  session  on  May  28  but  the  hearings   were
not   released   until   June   6.    This   shows   that  in  May   the
number  of  bombing  sorties  were  twice  as  great  as  in   March
before    the   President   announced   that   bombing   would   be
limited.   This   startling   figure   has   gone   almost   unnoticed.
Later  in  the  same  hearing  (at  p.  762)  some  idea  was  given
of    the   increase    in   bomb   tonnages    dropped.      Joseph    P.
Addabbo    (D.  N.Y.)   asked   whether  in  the  new   budget   re-
quests   allowance   was   made   for   what   he   supposed    was
ordnance  saved   by  the  restrictions  an  bombing   the  North:
Paul   H.   NITZE,   Deputy   Secretary    of   Defense:    Even
though   we   are   not   bombing  north   of   the   20th  parallel
..............................[deletion  by  censor],  at   the   present  time,
the  number  of   sorties   being  flown  in  North  Vietnam   has
not  decreased,  because  we  have  increased  the  rate  of  bomb-
ing—correct  me  if  I  am  wrong  General  Clay.    It  is  my  im-
pression  that  the  aggregate   number  of  sorties—
Major  General  Lucius  D.  CLAY,  Jr.,  U.S.  Air  Force:  The
total  number of  sorties  is  holding  fairly  constant.
Mr.  ADDABBO:  What  about  the  bomb  load?
Major  Gen. D.  L. CROW,  director,  budget,  U.S.  Air  Force:
I  can  give  you  the  pertinent  data.    Total   expenditures  in
the  month  of  March  for   Air  Force   munitions  were  91,700
tons.    In  February   it  was   78,100,  and  in  January  it   was
67,600.    So,  you  can  see,  on  a  comparable  basis,  even  though
we  have  stopped  bombing  north  of  the  20th  parallel,   as  a
consequence   of  the  additional  B-52  sorties  the  overall   ex-
penditure  of  munitions  have  considerably  increased.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  8,1968
Why   the  Full  Truth  May  Never  Be  Known  About  the  Siege  of  Khe   Sanh
Some  control   of  military  information   may  be  excusable   in
time  of  war,  but  it  is  the  duty of  the  press  to  prevent  abuse of
censorship  to  cover  up  military  blunders.  We  urge  the  News-
paper  Guild  to  investigate the  lifting  of  John  S.  Carroll's  ac-
creditation  as  correspondent  of   the  Baltimore  Sun   in   South
Vietnam.     Carroll  was  punished   for   a   dispatch  from   Khe
Sanh  (published  June  25)   which  first  reported  that  the  Ma-
rines  were  abandoning  that  base.    The  abandonment  moves,
as  Mr.  Carroll  reported,  were  already  visible  to  the  enemy.
We  suspect  what  got  Mr.  Carroll  into  trouble  was  that pas-
sage  in  his  dispatch  which  said  the  decision  to  abandon  Khe
Sanh  "is  certain  to  revive  the  earlier  debate  on  whether   Khe
Sanh  was 'worth  it.' "
Our  Not  Too  Bright  Generals
If  the  Joint  Chiefs of  Staff  can  avoid  it,  the  full  truth  about
Khe  Sanh  will  never  be  known.    If  it  were  known,  it  would
show—we  believe—that  its  members  just  aren't  very  bright.
Apparently  the  White  House  shared  these  doubts  because  in
an  unprecedented  move  two  weeks  after  the  siege  began,   it
shifted  responsibility to  the  Joint  Chiefs by getting  from  them
a  joint signed  statement  saying  that  after  conferring  with Gen.
Westmoreland—another  military  genius  who  has  since joined
their   ranks—   they  had   informed  the   President   Khe   Sanh
"could  and  should  be  defended."
But  Khe  Sanh  was  never  attacked,  except  by  long   range
artillery  our  air  attacks  were-never  able  to  silence.   Enemy
artillery  pinned  down  upwards  of  6000  Marines  and  a  token
force  of  South  Vietnamese  Rangers  for  weeks,  destroying  all
installations  above ground,  forcing  our  men  to  live  like—and
with—rats  underground.   The  death  toll  was  given  as  93  but
total  casualties  "were  said  to  have  been  as  many  of   2500"
(Washington   Post June  27  from  Saigon).    The  base  could  be
supplied  only  by air, and  no  one  knows what  this  cost  in  terms
of  plane  and  helicopter  losses.
The  Khe  Sanh  affair   seems  to  have  been  'an  enemy  feint.
It  tied  down  U.S.  combat  forces  in  the  Northern  hills  so  the
cities,  Saigon  included,  could  be  attacked  in  the  Tet   offensive
at  the  end  of  January.   Among  the  various  excuses  given  for
holding  on  to  Khe   Sanh  was  that  it   blocked   "five   natural
avenues    of  entry  from  North  Vietnam  into  South   Vietnam"
"Signals"  McCarthy   Could  Explore  in  Paris
The  North   Vietnamese   went   to  Paris—so  we   have
learned—prepared  for  a  political  compromise  in  South
Vietnam.    They  saw  the  newly  organized   South  Viet-
namese   Alliance  as  a  middle-class   group  which   could
be  the  cornerstone  of  a  broadly  based  provisional  gov-
ernment  in  which  both  the  NLF  and  pro-peace  elements
hi   Saigon  could  be  represented.     They   were   surprised
that  this  evoked  little,  if  any, interest   from  the U.S.
side.    Now  Wilfred  Burchett  in  an  article  for  the   Far
Eastern  Economic  Review  in  Hong   Kong  (see Stanley
Karnow's  dispatch  on  it  in'the  Washington  Post  June
27)   has  declared   that   Hanoi   is   prepared  to   accept  a
non-Communist   regime   "which   will   truly   reflect   the
nationalist   sentiments   in  South  Vietnam."  At  the  same
time  David  Dellinger,   back  from  talks  with  the   North
Vietnamese   in  Paris,   told  the  New  York   Times   (June
27)  they  were  ready  to  discuss  security    arrangements
for   all   Southeast   Asia   if   the   bombing   were   stopped.
The  Burchett  article  and  the  Dellinger  interview  indi-
cate   the  kind  of   fresh   approaches   to   the   deadlocked
talks  which  McCarthy  might  fruitfully  explore  in  Paris.
(New   York  Times  Feb. 10).   This  was nonsense.    It  couldn't
even  block  enemy  range-finders  from  the  jungle  covered  hills
all  around  it.    If   Khe   Sanh   "commanded"    invasion   routes,
it  would  be  wrong  to  give  it  up—as  we  are  now  doing—for
"mobile   warfare."     If   "mobile  warfare"   makes  better   sense
now,  why  wasn't  it  better  sense  in January?
Now,   amid  the  flood  of   military  double-talk   about   Khe
Sanh's   "inactivation",   they're  falling  back  on  the  old  West-
moreland  line  that  we killed  more  of  the  enemy than  they  did.
We  think  this  "attrition"  theory  is  dangerous  idiocy,  especially
in  an  Asian  war  where  the  manpower   on  the  other   side  is
many  times  our  own.
Warning  Postscript  For  The  Peace   Movement
"Administration    officials    like    Clifford   optimistically
play   up  progress   in   Paris   peace   negotiations;   THEY
SEEK  TO ANESTHETIZE  WAR  OPPOSITION  IN  THE
PRECONVENTION   PERIOD.    Others   like   Rusk  stress
Red  intransigence  in  Paris;  THEY   WANT  TO  BUILD
PUBLIC  ACCEPTANCE  FOR  VIGOROUS NEW  PROS-
ECUTION   OF  THE  WAR."   [Emphasis  added.]
—Washington   Wire:   Watt   Street   Journal,   June   28
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English   Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment (Random House)  regular price  $7.96
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................   State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for   the  enclosed   $6:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ...
.............................    Zip................  State.......
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington,  D.  C. 20015
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington,  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5 in  the  U.S.;  $6 in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED