I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968dec02.pdf

============================================================

A  Plea for Arab  Refugees,  P. 2
Where  Churchill  Split  East  And  West,  C.P.  Snow  Calls  On Them To Unite Against   Famine
"We  may   be  moving—perhaps   in   10  years—into  large
scale   famine  .  .  .   Many   millions  of   people  in  the  poor
countries  are going  to  starve  to  death  before  our eyes  .  .  .
upon  our television  sets ...  To avoid  the  catastrophe  .  .  .
there  has  to  be  something   .  .  .   more   positive   than  co-
existence  between  the  two  great  power  centres ...  To
avert  the  crisis  is   going  to  mean  sacrifices   such  as  rich
countries   have   never  contemplated,  except  in   major   war
...  It  is  the  duty  of  all  the  rest  of  us  ...     to  keep be-
fore  the  world  its  long-term  fate.   Peace.   Food.   No  more
people  than  the  earth  can  take."
—C.  P.  Snow,  Nov.   12,  at  Westminster  College,  Fulton,
Mo.,   where   ChurchiU   22  years   ago  in   his   famous   Iron
Curtain  speech   launched   the   cold    war.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
\T™,   T>*ilil;d>
0
J   Ri'WfaaLh,                    *r
Now  Published  Bi- Weekly
VOL.   XVI,  NO.  24
DECEMBER  2,    1968
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
NATO,  the  Poor  Czechs  and  the  Arms  Race
The   first   question   to   ask  is:   Is  the   USSR   stronger   or
weaker  because  of  the  Czech  takeover?   It  is  weaker.   In  the
first  place,   in  a  political   crisis,  the   Czech  army  proved   to
be  unreliable,   and  the  takeover  had  to  be  by  Soviet  troops.
This  must  cast  a  shadow  over  the  rest  of  the  Warsaw  pact.
How  reliable  would  the  Polish   army  be  in  a  similar  crisis?
In   the  murky  Polish   situation,   Soviet  interests  seem  to  be
threatened  from  two  sides.  Those who  want  liberalization  are
anti-Moscow.   But  so,  Moscow  fears,  are  the  die-hards  under
Moczar;  the  'same  extreme  Polish   nationalism  among   these
Communist   right-wingers    which    expresses    itself    in   anti-
Semitism   also  expresses  itself  though  more  covertly  in  anti-
Russianism.   No  one  knows  about  the  East  German  army,  but
Germans  are  even  more  anti-Russian  than  Poles.   The  Czech
takeover,  like  a  flash  of  lightning,   suddenly  illuminated   the
rifts   in  the  Warsaw   pact.    Nationalism   is  a  stronger   force
than   Communism   even   where   Communists   are   in   power.
Soviet  military  "efficiency"—against   deep  but  passive  resist-
ance—is  not  as  important  as  the  political  weakness  revealed.
It's   Not  A  Military   Problem
The  basic  imbalance  between  East  and  West  is  not military
but   technological.    Here,   too,   the  Czech  takeover  weakened
the  Soviet   bloc.    Of   all  the   Slav  peoples,  the   Czechs  have
the  most  skilled   labor   force.   Their   economy  has  stagnated
because  they  need  the  kind  of  machinery  only  the  West  can
supply  and  because  too  many  party  hacks  have  been  in  control
of  die  factories.   Had  the  Czechs  been  allowed  to  go  through
with  their  plans  for  a  half-billion  dollar  Western   credit  for
machinery  and  with   the   establishment   of   workers'   councils
in  the  factories  both  these  problems  could  have  been   solved.
If   the   Russians  want   all   the   Western   machine   tools   they
can   get,   why  not   the   Czechs?    The   changes  would   have
given  the  Soviet  bloc  an  increase  in  industrial  efficiency   and
labor  morale.   It  would  have  made  the  Czechs  and   Slovaks
more  rather  than  less  loyal,  as  would  the  political  liberaliza-
tion.  The  Russian  bureaucracy is  too fearful  to  take  this  route.
The  route  they  have  chosen  means  more  unrest  not  only  in
Czechoslovakia   but   in   the   Soviet   Union   itself   and   in   the
alienation  of  the  Western  Communist  parties.
The  second  question   is:  What  could  NATO  have  done  to
"save"  the  Czechs?   The  answer  is  nothing.    I  do  not  be-
lieve  the  Western  powers   were   taken   by  surprise.    Enough
The  Curtis  LeMay  of  U.  S.  Diplomacy
It   would   be  naive  to  assume  that  the  delay  in  the
Vietnam   peace   talks   is   entirely   due  to   the   Saigon
junta.   The  U.S.   military  are  using  the  withdrawal  of
Northern  forces  for  offensive  "pacification"  operations.
They  believe  the  longer  a  settlement  is   delayed,  the
more  the  Viet  Cong  will  be  weakened.   Thieu  may  also
be  encouraged  to  hold  out  until  Nixon  takes  over  by
the   emergence  of   Robert   D.  Murphy—a   retired   cold
warrior—as   Nixon's   foreign   policy   liaison   with   the
Johnson   administration.    Richard    Dudman   in   the   St.
Louis   Post-Dispatch   Nov..   17  says   a   former   senior
colleague  in  the  State  Department  called  Murphy    "the
Curtis   LeMay   of   the   diplomatic  set."   Mr.  Dudman
cites  Murphy's   memoirs,  "Diplomat  Among  Warriors"
(1964).    Murphy   was  political   adviser  to   Gen.   Clark
in  Korea  when  Elsenhower  decided  to  negotiate  peace.
Murphy   called   this   "a  bitter   pill   to   swallow"   and
thought  the   U.S.   should  have  used  all  its   power,  in-
cluding  nuclear  weapons,  for  a  clear  cut  victory.   Mr.
Dudman  also  reports  that  last   March   after   the  Tet
offensive   all   but   two   of   the   senior   consultants   to
Johnson  on  Vietnam  concluded  that  the  war  was  not
winnable  and  should  be  ended  as  soon  as  possible.   The
two  bitter-enders  were  Justice  Fortas  and   Murphy.
has  been  leaked  by  intelligence  agencies  in  their  own  defense
to  indicate  that  they  knew  what  was  coming.   It  is  hard  to
believe  that  Washington  was  not  explicitly  informed   in  ad-
vance  by  Moscow  to  avoid  the  risk  of  a  great  Power  confron-
tation.   The   State  Department  and  the  White  House  have
been   distinctly   unfriendly    to  the   Czechs  because  they  have
aided   the  other   side   in  Johnson's   war;   there  was  a  smug
satisfaction  in  some  quarters  here  that  the  Czechs  had  gotten
what  they  deserved.   It  is  only  after  the  fact  that  Washington
has  made  a  great-to-do  about  the  Czech  takeover,  not  because
it  has  any  sympathy   for  Prague  but   because  it   sees  this  .as
a  means  of  pushing  the  other  NATO  powers  into  spending
more  on  arms  and  relieving  some  of  the  burden  on  the    U.S.
in  manning  the  front   lines  in  West  Europe.
Even  with  this  pressure,  the  Brussels  meeting  of  the NATO
powers  only  elicited  pledges  of  an  increase  in  arms  spending
of  perhaps  one  percent.   The  reason  is  twofold.   The  first  is
that  the  NATO  powers  already  have  an  enormous  edge  in
military  power.   The  report  prepared  for  Senator  John  Cooper
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F, Stone's  Weekly,  December 8,1968
As  INEXORABLY  As  IF  WRITTEN  BY  SOPHOCLES,  Palestine
moves  toward  tragedy  for  both  Jew  and   Arab.   The  latest
Arab  terrorist outrage  in  Jerusalem  came at  a  particularly bad
moment.   For  U  Thant  at  the  United  Nations  and  the  rep-
resentatives  of  the  United   States  and  the  United   Kingdom
had  just  appealed  a  few  days  earlier  to  Israel  to  allow  some
250,000  Arabs  who  fled  across  the  Jordan  in  last  year's  six-
day  war  to  return  to  their  homes  on  the  West   Bank  or  to
the   refugee   camps   in   the  warm  Jordan   valley  which  had
previously   housed   many  of   them.    This   would   save  them
from  the  terrible  rigors  of  winter  in  poorly  improvised  shelters
on  the  wind-swept  Jordanian  highlands.    Both  the  Security
Council   and   the  General   Assembly  have  passed   resolutions
unanimously   asking   for   their   return   to   be   facilitated  and
Israel's  Foreign  Minister  Eban  promised  the  Assembly on  Oc-
tober  8  to  speed  action  on  reunion  of  families  and  "hardship"
cases.   Hardship   is  the  lot  of  all,  hardship  all  too  easy  to
understand  for   those  who  remember  as  I  do  the  cold   and
squalid  refugee  camps  for  "displaced"  Jews  in  Europe  after
the  war.
A  Gentle  and  Painful  Reproof
There  is  a gentle  and  painful  reproof  in  the  appeal  of  Mr.
Wiggins,   the   U.S.   representative  on  behalf   of   these   poor
Arabs.   "The  government  of  Israel  and  the  people  of  Israel,"
he  told  the  UN's   Special  Political  Committee  Nov.   18,  "can
never  be  counted   among  the  governments  and  people   who
lack   knowledge   and   understanding  of   the   miseries  of   the
exiled,    the   orphaned,    the   persecuted    and   the    homeless.
They  have  been  instructed  by a thousand  years of  history  .  . .
As another  winter  descends  on  the  refugees,  surely their  plight
will   touch   the  hearts,   move  the  minds  and   overcome   the
fears  of  Israel  and  inspire  an  act  of  generosity  and  confidence
that   will   give   the   whole   world   an   example   of  humanity
and  magnanimity."   There  are  nearly  50,000  vacancies  in  the
Jericho   camps   alone,   where   the   climate   is  warm  even   in
the  winter.   Empty  homes  await  others  on  the  West   Bank.
Their  return  would  provide  a  political  climate  in  which  new
solutions   would   become   possible   for   peaceful   cooperation
between  Israel  and  the  occupied  West  Bank.   Such  magnan-
imity  might  accomplish  what  military  victory  alone  can  never
do.   The   future  could   be  shaped   for   the   better  if   Jewish
voices   abroad   strengthen    the   humane   and   thoughtful   in
Israel   by  adding   their   voices   for   this  Arab  return   before
another  cruel  winter  adds  to  the  rising  toll  of  misery  and  of
Nixon  Plot  Against  The  Soviet  Air  Force
"The  F-lll  in  a  Nixon  Administration  will  be  made
into  one  of  the  foundations  of  our  air  supremacy."
—Nixon  at  Fort   Worth   (where   General   Dynamics
makes  the  F-lll),  Nov.  2.
Sen.   Russell   (chairman   of   the   Senate   Appropria-
tions  subcommittee  on  defense):   Mr.  Secretary   on  p.
16  of  your  statement,  you  discuss  the F-lll A  aircraft.
How  many  of  them  have  we  sent  over  Southeast  Asia?
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  Harold  Brown:  We  sent
six  and  have  sent  two  replacements.
Sen.  Russell:  You have  lost  three,  so  you  have  five?
Sec'y   Brown:  There  are  five  there   now.  .  .
Sen.  Russell:  Would  it  be  a  very  serious  matter  if
one  of  these  planes  were   recovered   by  any  potential
enemy  in  a  reasonably  good   condition?
Gen.  McConnell,  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff:  Yes,  we
have   got  quite  a  few  things  in  it   that   we  wouldn't
want  the  enemy  to  get  .  .  .
Sen.   Russell:  I   was  hoping   if   they   got  a  F-lll
they   would  fabricate   some  of   them  as   near  ours  as
they   could  and  see  if   they   had  as   much  trouble   as
we  did.  It  would  put  their  Air  Force  out  of  business.
—Pt.  1,  p.  103  of  the  Senate  hearings  on  the  1989
defense    budget  recently  released.  There  was  no   reply
from   either  the  General  or  the  Secretary   to  Senator
Russell's  little  joke,  which  reflects   majority   sentiment
among  Senators  dealing  with  defense   matters.
.  hate.    We   hope  the   Israeli  government   will  go  beyond   its
token  offer  to  take  back  7,000  more.
FOR  THE   FIRST   TIME   SINCE   THE   NIGERIAN   CIVIL   WAR
began,  22  leading  French  Leftists  of  various  shadings  have
issued  a  joint manifesto,  attacking  England,  the  Soviet  Union
and  Egypt  for  their  military  support  of  the  Nigerians.    The
manifesto   (Le   Monde,  Nov.   20)   declares  the  civil  war  has
become  a  genocidal  struggle  to  wipe  out  the  Ibo  people.   We
hope  American  Leftists  will  follow   suit.
How   SHAMEFUL  THE RELUCTANCE  of  the  U.S.  to  speak  up
in   the  Panagoulis   affair!    The   Pope,   the  Secretary   General
of  the  Council  of  Europe,  Andr6  Malraux,  the  Ambassadors
in  Athens  of  Belgium,  Holland  and  West  Germany  have  all
appealed   to  the  Greek  dictatorship  on  behalf  of  this   brave
young  man  who  tried  to  kill  the  dictator,  Gen.  Papadapoulas.
His  fate  is. still  uncertain,  though  his  immortality  in  Greek
annals   is   assured   for   his   bravery  and   his   refusal   to   ask
clemency.  The  U.S.  is muted  because this  bloody  regime  is  our
"frontier  of  freedom"  in  the  Mediterranean.
Footnote  For  That  Speech  About How  We're  Defending  Self-Determination  in  Vietnam
"Even   some   Government  officials   who  oppose   negotiat-
ing  with  the  Viet  Cong  admit  that  on  the  issue  of  peace
there's  little  doubt where  public sentiment  lies.  The  masses
want  peace,'  concedes  one  civil-servant.   'If  it  were  possible
to   hold  a   poll  in  which  the   people   could   freely   express
their   opinion,  they   would  overwhelmingly  want  President
Thieu  to  do  whatever  is  necessary  to  bring  peace  as   soon
as  possible.'
"U.S.   officials   did  in   fact,   conduct  a   small   poll   here
recently,   interviewing   about  two  dozen  Vietnamese   rang-
ing  from  high-ranking  civil  servants  to  truck  drivers.  Their
report  concluded  that  among  those  born  in  South  Vietnam,
the   U.S.   bombing  halt  was   greeted   with   'unqualified   en-
thusiasm*   and  there   was   'little   sympathy'   for   President
Thieu's   boycott   of   the  Paris  talks.    The  government   has
made  some  effort  to  win  public  sympathy  for  its  position
but  there  is  little  sign  of  success.   Several   days  ago,  the
regime  organized  a  rally  to  support  the  boycott  of   peace
talks.   The  crowd  consisted   of  less  than   1,000  civil  serv-
ants  who  had  been  given  the  morning  off  with  instructions
to  attend.   Though  surrounding  streets  and  sidewalks  were
clogged  with  normal  traffic,  only  a  few   passersby  showed
any   interest  in  the   patriotic   speeches.
"In  the  context  of  Vietnamese  politics,  however,  the  mood
of  the  man-in-the-street  majority  isn't  nearly  as  important
as   the   demands  of   some   much  smaller   groups.     Catholic
refugees  from  the  North,  the  army  officer  corps  and  other
militant  groups  are  highly  organized   minorities  and  their
influence   on  government   policy   is   profound."
—Peter  R.  Kccnn  from  Saigon:  Wall  St.  Journal  Nov.  14.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  2,1968
U.S.   Concentration   Camps
THERE   Is   So   MUCH   HYSTERICAL   TALK,   particularly  by
black  militants,  about  concentration  camps  that  a  therapeutic
service   will   be   performed   by   the   suit   which   a  group   of
radical  organizations,  black  and  white,  have  just  filed  in  the
U.S.   District   Court   for   the   District   of   Columbia   asking  a
declaratory  judgment  holding   the  detention  camp  provisions
of   the   1950   Internal   Security  Act  unconstitutional.  Are  the
six  camps  set  up  on  a  standby  basis  in   1952  under  the  Act
still   ready   for   this   sinister  use  or   have   they  been    "phased
out"   as  the  Justice  Dept  contends?   Is  it  true  as  alleged   in
the   suit  that  the  FBI  has  a  master   list  of  500,000   suspects
established   in  that   year  for   an   "Operation   Dragnet"  which
is  kept   up  to  date?   Only  in  open   court  can  the  full   truth
be  ascertained.   The  Detention   Camp  provisions  of  the  Act,
which   passed   over  Truman's   veto  shortly  after   the   Korean
war  began,  is  the  maddest  product  of  those  witch  hunt  years.
It   would   allow   the   government   in   time  of   war,   "Internal
Security   emergency"    or   insurrection   to   intern   any   persons
suspected   of   "probably"   engaging   at   some   future   time   in
"espionage   or   sabotage."     Never   before   in   American   law
has  there  been  a  provision  providing  imprisonment  for  possi-
ble  prospective   crime.   It   has   been   assumed   for   years  that
this  law  was  so  clearly  unconstitutional  that  the  government
would   never   dare   use   it.    But   it   is  far   better   to   test   the
law   now,   than   to   wait   for   some   new   period   of   reaction
when  the  Courts  themselves  may  be  intimidated  or  infected.
The   Citizens   Committee   for   Constitutional   Liberties,   22  E.
17th    St,   NYC   10003,   can   furnish   more   information   to
lawyers  and  others   interested.
WHEN  THE  BLACKSTONE  RANGERS  MISSPEND  a  few   thou-
sand   dollars   of   anti-poverty   funds   the   Senate   rings   with
speeches   and  the  press   plays  it  as  a  major   news  story.   But
when  defense  contractors   make  profits  of  43%   on   contracts
in   the   $10  billion   range   the   collective   yawn  can  be  heard
throughout  the   Establishment.    In   the   hearings   on   defense
profits  being  held  by  Senator  Proxmire,  it  was  brought   out
that  although  Defense  Dept.  contracts  amount  to  $43  billion
a  year,  "no  complete  and  comprehensive  study  .  .  .  has  ever
been  made  on  profit  actually  realized  by  defense   contractors."
The  Positively  Ultimate   Nuclear  Disaster
"Washington—If   a  nuclear   holocaust   were   to   wipe
out   most   of   the   humans   on   earth,   Senator   Richard
Russell   (D.   Ga.)   would   like   to   make   sure   that   the
survivors   are  Americans.    Or,  as  he  put  it  during   an
October   14  secret   meeting   of   the   Senate    [to   debate
the  antiballistic  missile;  Russell   voted   $5.5  billion  for
the  "thin"  Sentinel  system—IFS]:
" 'If   we   have   to   start    over   again   with   another
Adam   and  Eve,   then   I   want   them   to   be   Americans
and   not   Russians,   and   I   want   them   to   be  on   this
continent   and  not   in   Europe.""
—From   the  Army  Times,  November   20.
But  what   if  the  unimaginable,  the  ultimate  horror
occurred  and  the  American  "Adam"  turned  out  to  be
a   Negro ?
A  study  made  by  the  McNamara-established  Logistics   Man-
agement  Institute  stated  that  the  profit   rate  by  defense  con-
tractors  was  less  than  that  enjoyed   by  commercial  firms  but
Prof.   Murray   Weidenbaum   testified   that   this   finding   was
based   upon   profit   related   to   sales   rather   than   net   worth.
John   Malloy,   Deputy   Assistant   Secretary. of   Defense    for
Procurement,   said   that   he   didn't   "believe   a   new   study  is
needed"   on  excess  defense  profits.    While  we  were  reading
through   the  hearings   an  elderly   staff   member   of   the   Prox-
mire   Committee  assured   a   visiting   businessman  that   there
was  "no  urgency"  surrounding  the  hearings,  and  that  Nixon
"wouldn't   come   over  here  at  all"   with  his  embryonic  com-
mission  on  government  cost-cutting.   This  ranks  among   the
leading   certainties   of   the   new  Administration.
"How    ABOUT  JUSTICE?"  J.  Edgar  Hoover  was  asked   after
his  visit  with  Nixon   (CBS  Eve.  News  with  Walter   Cronkite
Nov.    14).     His   answer   should   prove   as   classic   as   Marie
Antoinette's   let'em-eat-cake.   "Justice",  Mr.   Hoover   replied,
"is   merely   incidental   to   law   and   order."    This   perfectly
reflects   the   state   of   the   mind   behind   the   current   cry   for
"law   and  order."   In   a  limited   sense,  of   course,   it  is  true.
But  the  fallacious  implications  become  apparent   if  one   puts
the  proposition  in  the  negative  form.   Could  one  reasonably
assert  that  injustice  is  merely  incidental  to  border?
The  Catholic  Bishops,  Justice  Douglas  and  Senator McGovern  All  Oppose  the  ABM
"It  is   to   be   hoped   that   the   early   ratification   by   the
Senate  of  the  Non-Proliferation   Treaty  .  .  .  will  hasten
discussion  of  across  the  board  reductions  by  the  big  powers.
Despite,  and  even  because  of,  the  provocations  in  Eastern
Europe  and  elsewhere,  the   U.S.   should   continue  steps  to
create  a  better   climate   for  these  discussions  .  .  .
"The   latest  act  in  the  continuing   nuclear   arms  race   is
no  doubt   the   U.S.   decision  to  build  a  'thin'  anti-ballistic
missile  system.   This  decision  has  been   widely    interpreted
as  the  prelude  to  a  'thick'  ABM system ...  In  themselves,
such  anti-ballistic  missiles  are  purely  defensive  .  .  .  Never-
theless   by   upsetting   the   present   strategic   balance,   the
so-called  balance   of  terror,  there  is  grave  danger  that  a
U.S.  ABM system  will  incite  other  nations  to  increase  their
Offensive   nuclear   forces   with   the   seeming   excuse   of   a
need  to  restore  the  balance."
—U.S.  Conference   of   Bishops   (B.C.),  Nov.   15.
"The   manufacture   of  these  systems  of   missile   defense
will  make  the  military-industrial    complex   rich,  will   result
in  the  production   of  huge  piles  of  junk  and  will  be  mean-
ingless  in  terms  of  survival."
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas,  chairing  a  discussion  of  the   ABM,
at  the  Centre  for   the  Study   of  Democratic  Institutions,  in
New   York   City,  Nov.  19.
"For    more   than   a   decade   the   pressure   had   been   di-
rected   at   Presidents   Elsenhower,    Kennedy   and  Johnson.
Presidents   Eisenhower   and  Kennedy   wisely   resisted   the
demands  for  the  Nike-Zeus  ABM.   If  they  had  surrendered,
we  would  have   wasted   an  estimated  $30  billion  on  a  sys-
tem  that  would  now  be  completely   worthless.   I   am   con-
fident that  the  system  now  being  pressed  will  prove  equally
obsolete  and ineffective  but  even  more  costly  and dangerous.
"I   believe   that   when   President   Johnson   finally   yielded
last  year  to  the  ABM  deployment  pressure,  he  committed
what  will  prove  to  be  next   to  the  Vietnam   escalation  the
major    blunder    of    his    Administration.     President-Elect
Nixon   could   perform   a   major   service  if   he   would   begin
his   Administration    by   ending    the   war   in   Vietnam   and
reversing  the  ill-advised   deployment   of  the   ABM."
—Sen.  McGovern  at  the  same  discussion  meeting.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  2,1968
Tito  Wants  Both  U.S.  and  Soviet  Navies  Out  of  the  Mediterranean Sea
(Continued  from  Page  One)
by  Alain  Enthoven,  assistant  secretary  of  defense,  in   October
for  Cooper's  meeting with NATO  parliamentarians did  argue
for   some  improvement  in  conventional  forces,  though   it  also
got  Enthoven  into  trouble  with  the  military.*    The   report
showed  that,  aside  from  the  Vietnam  war,  the  NATO  forces
were   already  spending   $75   billion  a  year  on   arms  against
the  Warsaw  pact's  $50  billion  and  had  5,470,000  men  under
arms  as  against  the  Warsaw  pact's  4,200,000,  including  naval
forces  almost  twice  as  big,  air  forces  a  third  larger  and   even
105,000  more  men  in  the  Army and  Marines.  The  disparity in
nuclear   power   is  even  greater.    The   U.S.   alone   has  4,206
deliverable  nuclear  weapons   against  the   USSR's   1,200.
No  Limited   Conflict
The   second   reason   for   the   reluctance  to   build   up   even
more  power   arises  from  the  West  European  conviction   that
a  war  for  Western  Europe,  the  biggest  industrial  prize  in  the
world,  could  not  be  limited  to  conventional  arms  so  there  is
no  point  in  buying  more  of  them.   As  for  the  nuclear  arms,
these  have  long  past  the  point  of  diminishing returns.  "What
is  the  meaning  of  'superiority',"  Wm.   C.  Foster  of  the   U.S.
Arms  Control  and  Disarmament  Agency  asked  the  Business
Council   in   Hot   Springs,   Va.   Oct.   19,   "when   both   sides
can,   under  any  circumstances,  inflict   100  million  casualties."
A  nuclear  war  for  Europe  would  destroy  Europe  and  be  the
mutual   suicide   of   the   two   great   Powers.    Therefore    each
tacitly  shuts  its  eyes  to  what  the  other  does  in  its  own   sphere
of    influence.     The    U.S.    is   not   going    to   plunge    into   a
holocaust   for   Czechoslovakia,  Rumania  or   Yugoslavia.
Detente  is  still  the  only  path  to  Europe's  salvation.   Europe
would   be   better   off  without  the  NATO  and   the   Warsaw
pacts.   What   Moscow   does   in  East  Europe  under   cover  of
the   Warsaw   pact   is  what   we   do   in   Latin   America   under
The  Bishops   Reply  To  Nixon
"For    us  deliberately   to   let   a  weaker  but  basically
expansionist  nation  achieve  parity  with  us  indicates  an
erosion  of  our  commitment  and  will  .  .  .  We  cannot
accept   this   [parity]   concept  and  survive  as   a   free
people ...  I  intend  to  restore  our  objective  of  clear-
cut   military   superiority."
—Nixon's   Security   Gap  speech   over   CBS,   Oct.  24.
"We  seriously  question  whether  the   present   policy
of   maintaining   nuclear  superiority  is   meaningful  for
security.    There   is   no   advantage   to   be   gained   by
nuclear  superiority, however it  is  computed,  when  each
side  is  admittedly  capable  of   inflicting  overwhelming
damage  on  the  other,  even  after  being  attacked  first.
Such   effective   parity   has   been   operative   for   some
years.  Any  effort  to  achieve  superiority  only  leads   to
ever  higher  levels  of  armaments  as  it  forces  the  side
with  the  lesser  capability  to  seek  to  maintain  its  su-
periority.    In  the   wake  of   this   comes   a   decrease   in
both  stability  and  security."
—U.S.   Conference    of   Bishops   (RC)    Nov.   15.
*  The  report,  dated   Oct.  22,  said  the   Czech  takeover  had
.made  no  major   change   either   in  the   short   or   long  term
threat  to  "NATO's  center  region"  and  instead   showed  some
reduction  in  "net  threat"  because  the  Czech army  had  proved
unreliable.   In  a  new  letter  of  November  7,  Enthoven   said
this  had  been  "misunderstood"   and  took  it  back.
cover   of   the  Monroe   Doctrine;   the  latter   is  our   equivalent
of   Moscow's   new   "Socialist   commonwealth"   doctrine,   as  so
many  Latins  from  Fidel  Castro  to  Juan   Bosch   have   learned.
The  Russians want  to  negotiate  before  the  nuclear  arms   race
sets  off  on   a  new   spiral  with   the   ABM   and   the   multiple
warhead;  we  should  negotiate.   The  higher  the  level  of  these
arms  the  more  terrible  the  devastation   to  both   and  all  sides.
Even  Tito,  the  most  menaced  by  the  new  Moscow   hard  line,
told    Paris-Match    in   an   interview    (Nov.    16),     "the    cold
war  leads  to  the  hot  war"   and  suggested   that  he  would   like
to  see  both  the  American  and  Soviet  fleets  out  of  the  Medi-
terranean  (as  has  the  Foreign  Minister  of  Spain).    "I   fear,"
Tito  said,  "that  one  day  they  will  clash."   Even   if   such   a
clash  were  kept  limited,  it  might  devastate  the   Mediterranean
lands   for   both   navies   have   nuclear   arms.    The   "ultimate
solution   of   the   problems   of   the  world,"   Defense    Secretary
Clifford  said  on  ABC's  Issues  and  Answers  Nov.   24  when  he
advocated  arms  control  talks  with  Moscow   despite  the  Czech
affair,   "does  not  lie  in  larger  armaments."    We  agree.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection, "The   Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This  Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available   at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   .................................... Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished d
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed
Name  ...................................................................................
$5:
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                    12/2/68
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington,  D. C.  20015
/ E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;    16  in   Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED