I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1968
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1968jun24.pdf

============================================================

Why  McCarthy  May  Be  Our  Last  Chance,  Page  3
The  One  Word  Manifesto  of  The  Poor
"I  can  still  remember John  L.  Lewis's  answer  [when  he  was  asked  what  labor  wanted].    In  one  of  his  testier  mo-
ments  he  said,  'Labor  wants more.   I  will  spell  it  out  for  you—M-O-R-E.'    I  can't really  improve on that.   That's  what  the
poor  people  want.    We  want  M-O-R-E."
—Rev.  Ralph  David  Abernathy  at  the  National  Press  Club  in  Washington,   June  15, chiding  newsmen  for   constantly
asking  what  were  the  aims  of  the  Poor  People's  March,  though  it  has  issued  a  50-page  list  of  proposals,  outlining    specific
steps   to  end  hunger  and   poverty.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi-Weeklv                      **Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.    XVI,  NO.  13
JUNE  24,   1968
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Spiking  the  Little  Guns  But  Not  the  Big
Of   course  there  were  genuine  elements   in  the  mourning
over  the  assassination  of  Robert  F.  Kennedy.     Most   people
are  decent,  when  the  issues  do  not  become  too  distant  or  ab-
stract  to  elude  their  sympathy.   Here  the  elements  were  sim-
ple:    a   widowed   wife,   fatherless   children   and   an   earnest
young  man;  imbued,  amid  the  other  mixed  motives  that  move
all  of  us,  with  more  than  average  idealism;  promising  a  great
potential  for  leadership.    But  mixed  with  the  grief  were  other
elements  with  roots  as  old  in  the  makeup  of  mankind:  super-
stition   and   a  desire  to  appease   the   dead,   especially  on   the
part  of  those  who  disliked  him;  the  ancient  feeling  about  the
blood   sacrifice,  which  runs  deep  in  all  religions,  and  especi-
ally  in  the  worship  of  a  Crucified  God  and  a  Sacrificed   Son.
There  was  also   love   of   pageantry,  particularly  in  funerals,
which   brought   out  the  crowds,   along   the   railroad   route   to
Washington,  and  the  viewers  before  the  television   machines.
Violence  is  their  most  popular  fare  and  the  second  Kennedy
assassination,  like   the  first,  provided   TV   with   a  wondrous
opportunity  to  exploit  violence  in  the  very  act  piously  of  de-
ploring  it.    The  main  element  here  was  the  Spectacle,  spiced
by  a  sense   of  guilt,  fed   by  all   those   sermons,   clerical   and
journalistic,  on  how  wickedly  violent  we  Americans are.    Vi-
cariously,  as  in  those  Westerns,  but  with  a  greater immediacy,
people  had  a  fine  sense  of  released  aggression   and  cleansing
contrition,  the  catharsis Aristotle  prized  in  tragic  poetry.
Where  Gun  Control  Should  Begin
We   dwell   astringently  on   these   unsavory  aspects   people
prefer  to  hide  because  we  would  like  to  see  the  shock  of  the
crime,   following   so   soon   after   the   killing   of   out   greatest
Negro  leader,  harnessed  to  purposes  that  match  the  real  moral
dimensions.    The  emphasis on  gun  control,  which we of course
approve,    strikes    us   as   a   prime    example    of   how    easily
people  can  be  led   to  miss  the   point.     If   we  indeed   value
human  life,  if  we  want  to  see  bloodshed   ended,  then  the  gun
control   should   begin   in  Vietnam  and   at  the   Pentagon.     If
the  President's  expressions  of  concern  were  more  than  conven-
tional  humbug,  he  had  the  power  to  show  it  by  some  signal
act,   like  an  end  to  all  bombing  in  North  Vietnam,  or  a  uni-
lateral  cease-fire  accompanied  by  a  plea  to  the  enemy  to  fol-
low  suit.    This  would  indeed  set  an  example  of   non-violence
and  show  the  world  that  America  had  the  will  to  set  a  new
Why  We  Hope  For  A  Spock  Trial  Reversal
Unless  peace talks break down and  the  war  escalates
after   the  election,  Dr.  Spock  and  his  three  convicted
anti-war  colleagues  will—we  believe—win  reversal  on
appeal.    The  Judge's  instructions  to  the  jury,  like  his
incautious   prediction   in  the   corridors  that   all  would
be  convicted,  were  themselves  prejudicial.   So  was  his
unusual  action  in  issuing  a  questionnaire to  the  jury
on  each  subdivision  of  the  one  count  conspiracy  indict-
ment.    So  was  the  odd way  juries  are  picked in  Boston.
The  main  key  to  reversal  is  the  conspiracy  count  itself.
As  Dr.  Spock's  counsel,  Leonard Boudin  asked  the jury,
how  could  the  Call  to  Resist—a  public  political  tract—
be  equated  with  a  conspiracy, especially  when  many  of
the  supposed conspirators did not  meet  until  after  their
indictment?     If  five  can  be  prosecuted,  how  about  the
other  2500  signers?     What  of  Bishop  Pike  and  Linus
Pauling?    Can such  signatures  be  regarded  as criminal
intent?    In  conspiracy,  agreement  can  be  informal,  it
can  be  oral,  it  can  be  implied, Boudin argued,  but  there
has  to  be  some  element  of  the  consentual.    He  said  the
case  should be called the  Search for  The  Missing Agree-
ment.    If   such  expressions   of   opinion  can  be  treated
as  conspiracy,  what  happens  to  the  First Amendment?
course.    For  the  United  States  and  its  President  are  today  the
world's   largest  practitioners  of   violence.
Granted   that  in  the  terrible   civil  war  in  Vietnam,   crimes
are  not  confined  to  one  side,  but  our  contribution,  and  John-
son's  contribution,  in  sheer,  impersonal,  mechanical  and  auto-
mated  slaughter,  by  bomb,  napalm  and  devilish   "anti-person-
nel"   devices  transcend  all  else  and  are  threatening  to  annihi-
late  a  nation  and  make  a  whole  area  unlivable,  even  for   the
innocent  beasts  of   the  jungle.    To  greet  the   occasion   with
the  appointment  of  another  typical  stuffed  shirt   Establishment
commission   to   regulate   control   of   hand   guns   and   rifles   at
home  is  revolting.    Of  course,  as  a  President,  Johnson   feels
deeply  about  an  unregulated  gun  traffic  that  is  a  threat  to  the
lives  of  Presidents  and  Presidential  contenders.    But  what  of
the  bigger   violence  into  which  he  would  thrust  some  of  the
best  of  our  youth?    How  does  the  fanaticism  which  fired  the
deaths  of  King  and  Kennedy  differ  from  the  stubborn  fanati-
cism  which  leads  Johnson  to  go  on  with  the  killing  in  Viet-
(Cont'mued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  24,1968
(Continued  from  Page  One)
nam?    How  can  we  expect  to  cut  down  racial  and   political
violence  at  home  when  we  train  our  youth  for  it  abroad?
The  Duty  of  The  Kennedy  Clan
It  is  not  Johnson  alone  whom  we  have  the  right  to  ask  for
evidence  that  the  words  they  used  in  mourning  are  more  than
smug  rubbish.    We  also  have  a  right  to  ask  it  of  Teddy  Ken-
nedy  and  the  Kennedy  clan.    Robert  Kennedy  before  he  was
killed  was  asking  for  a  unified   effort   by  the  peace  forces  so
that  the  American  people  could  have  a  real  choice  next  No-
vember.    He  regretted   that  he  had  listened  to  advisers  like
Sorenson  and  let  McCarthy  take  the  initiative on  peace.    The
finest  memorial  Teddy  and  the  Kennedy  clan  could  erect  to
Bobby,  the  best  way  to  show  our  best  youth  it  was  too  harsh
in  condemning  his  indecision,  would   be  to  throw  their  vast
political,  human  and  financial  resources  behind  McCarthy  and
the   peace   movement.     To   do   otherwise   is   to   downgrade
Bobby's  last  brave  stand.    This  is  particularly  true  if   Teddy
• accepts  what  Bobby  firmly  declined,  second  place  on  the  Hum-
phrey   ticket.     Bobby  felt   strongly  that   10  consecutive   pri-
maries  had  shown  that  he  and  McCarthy,  by  piling  up  from
70  to  88  percent  of  the  vote,  spoke  for  the  grass  roots  and
the   party's   rank-and-file   against   the   party   machines.     He
wanted  unification  of  the  peace  forces.    His  family  ought   to
make  good  on  those  last   wishes.    We   could   not  help   but
notice  the  symbolism  in  the  appearance—at  the  family's  re-
quest—of  four  Green  Berets  from  the  John  F.  Kennedy  Spe-
cial  Warfare   Center   (as  it  was  renamed  after   his  death)   at
Fort  Bragg  in  the  vigil  at  St.  Patrick's.    For  in  all  the  uproar
about  violence   these   Green   Berets   represent   to  the   colonial
countries  a  counter-revolutionary  force,  a  menace  to  the  aspi-
rations  of  the  poor  in  the  underdeveloped   world,  a  bulwark
(for  all  their  liberal  rhetoric)  of  the  oligarchy.   These,  to  put
it  plainly,  are  the  trained  assassins  of  the  Pax  Americana,  the
de  luxe  arm  of  the  rich  man's  war  we  wage  in  the   poorer
regions  of  the  earth.    We  do  not  think  their  appearance  at
St.  Patrick's  comports  with  the  deeper  understanding  in  John
•F.  Kennedy's  last  year  as  President  nor  with  the  direction  in
which  Bobby  Kennedy  was  developing.    Nothing  could   do.
more  to  wipe  out  the  unpleasant  implications  of  the   Green
Berets  at  the  bier  than  if  Teddy  were  resolutely  to  pick  up
the  fight  for  peace  where  his  brother  left  off, and  take  second
place  on  McCarthy's  ticket,  not   Humphrey's.
Bold  New  Policies  Dept.
Q.  Did  you  say  that  we  ought  to  broaden  the  base
of   representation  in  the  Vietnamese  Government?
A.  Right.
Q.  Are  you  talking about  bringing  in  the  Viet  Cong,
or  the  National  Liberation  Front?
A.  No.    I  said  democratic  elements,   and  I  do  not
consider  the  Viet  Cong  as  a  democratic  element.
—U.  S.  News  & World  Report  interview  with  Rocke-
feller,  June   &lt.
Of  course  Humphrey  is  getting  ready  to  readjust  his  image
again.    Bill  Moyers  has  forecast a shift.    But  we  have  as  little
faith  in  any  maneuver  by  Humphrey  toward  the  peace  move-
ment  as  we  have  in  Rockefeller's  multi-million  dollar   cam-
paign   of   demagogic  advertising   on  that  and  the   race   issue.
If  Humphrey's  past  position  on  Vietnam  was  mere  loyalty  to
Johnson,  why did  he  find  it  necessary  almost  two  months  after
Johnson's   withdrawal   from   the   race  to   tell   U.S.  News   &
World   Report  (May  27),  "If  Nixon  and  Humphrey   should
be  the  candidates  in  the  general   election.     I  don't  think  our
views  of  the  war  would  be  too  far  apart"?
Johnson  has  been  wooing  Moscow  with  the  carrot,  Nixon
has  hinted  he  would  use  the  club.    That  is  a  difference  one
would  have  thought   Humphrey   would   emphasize.  Why,   in-
stead,  did  he  go  out  of  his  way to  cuddle  up  to  Nixon,  as  he
is getting  ready now  to  cuddle  up  to  the  peace  forces?
Of  course  we  are  for  gun  control.    We  see  it  as  another
instance  of  how  powerful  interest  lobbies  dominate  the  gov-
ernment  and  are  allowed  to  profit  from  killing.    In  this  the
gun  lobby  is  like  the  cigarette  lobby,  which  spreads  its  adver-
tising  on  TV  unhindered   despite  all  the  findings  about   lung
cancer,  or  like  the  military-industrial  complex,   which  fattens
on  the  billions  spent  for  the  development  of  ever  more  terri-
fying  means  of  mass  production.    But  we  see the  gun  control
uproar  as  a  way  to  deflect  attention  from  the  more  fundamen-
tal  problems  of  the  Big  Gun  lobby.   Though  we  have  resisted
the'  conspiracy  theory  in  the  killing  of  John  F.  Kennedy,  we
believe  enough  has  come  to  light  clearly  to  show  a  conspiracy
in  the  killing  of  Martin  Luther  King   and  very  possibly  of
Robert  Kennedy.    A  well-heeled  crowd  of  white  supremacists
will  not  be  deterred  by gun  control  from  the  murder  of  other
black   leaders.     Kennedy  was  killed  by  a  hand   gun   but  if
Sirhan  had  associates  they  could  easily  have  eluded  gun  con-
Cooper  Opens  A  Bi-Partisan  Attack  On A  $5  To  $40  Billion  Folly
"First,   let   us   examine  the   'threat'   against   which  the
Sentinel  ABM  is  designed—the  threat  of  Communist China.
We  must  ask  as  reasonable  persons  if  it  is  likely  that  Com-
munist  China  would assure  its  own destruction by  a  nuclear
attack  on  the  United  States.
"Both  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union  have  the
nuclear  capability  many  times  over  to  destroy  each  other
and  we  have  been   assured   that  the  United  States  would
have  the  capability  even  after  a  first  strike  by  the  Soviet
Union.     An   ABM   defense   system—"thin"   or   "heavy"—
designed  for  protection  against  the  Soviet  Union  would  not
alter  this  ability to completely destroy  each other.   It would,
in  fact,  only  accelerate  the  arms  race.
"The  history  of  missile  technology  is  that  offensive  tech-
nology   will   always   out-distance  defensive   efforts.    Had
Nike-Zeus  been  deployed,  for  example,  it  would  have  been
obsolete  before completion. The Sentinel  system  now planned
for  deployment may  become  quickly obsolete.    It  is  not  de-
signed  to  defend against  MIRV  (missile  with  multiple war-
heads  and  independently targeted).
"The  United  States  cannot  afford  at  this  time  to  spend
money  on a  system  costing  5  to  7 billion dollars,  which  may
be  extended  to  a  heavier  system  costing  40 billion or  more,
unless  it  is  essential  to  our  security.    We  have  hopefully
learned  a  hard lesson  from  Vietnam.   We  did not  rigorously
consider  the  implications of  our  increasing  involvement  in
Vietnam  when  it  was  possible  to  extricate   ourselves  with
relatively  small  loss  and  at  a  time,  and  in  such  a  way  that
might  have furthered the  opportunity for self-determination
and  peace  in  South  Vietnam.   We  dare  not  fail  to  look  at
the  implications  of  the  deployment of  the  ABM."
—Cooper   (R.-Ky.)  in  the  Senate,  June  IS   (abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  24,1968
trol.    The   essence  is  not  gun  control  but  hate   control.
This  is  not  an  argument  against  gun  control;  there  are  far
too  many guns  around.    But  gun  control  will  not  prevent  in-
surrection  unless  we  end  the  frustration  in  the  ghetto  and  the
settlement  of  inter-human  disputes  by  force,  as  in  the  Pales-
tine   conflict   which  Sirhan  reflected,   and   above  all   in   Viet-
nam.    If  we  have  no  choice  in  November  but  Humphrey  or
Nixon—especially  if  Humphrey   is  accompanied  by  a  Teddy
Kennedy    sellout—then    the    nihilistic   anger   will    deepen.
Events  everywhere  have  shown  that   tiny  groups   of  revolu-
tionaries  can  polarize  whole  campuses  and  countries  when  a
malaise  of  this  kind  grows.
McCarthy  Is  Our  Last  Chance
Only  McCarthy offers  a way to  escape,  a way to  make  demo-
cratic  processes   meaningful   again,  a  way  to   preserve   peace
at  home  by  moving  swiftly  toward   it  in  Vietnam.     He  has
grown,  his  campaign  has  deepened,  his  appeal  has   widened.
All   of  us  professional   dopesters   and   commentators—myself
included—have  underestimated  him.  No  man  has  been  count-
ed  out  more  often;  no  man  has  made  the  polls  and  the  politi-
cal  consensus   look   sillier   more  often.    We   think  he  has  a
fighting  chance,  if  we  all  close  ranks  behind  him.
His   speech   to  the   Fellowship   of   Reconciliation   in   New
York  June  13  was  one  of  his   finest.   It  struck  a  new  note
when  it  said  that  in  Vietnam  we  must  end  the  war  "under
conditions  which  do  justice  not  only  to  our  honor  but  to  the
honor  of  our  opponents,  and  most  of  all  to  the  common  wish
to  live  and  to  rebuild."    This  recalls  de  Gaulle's  call  to  the
Algerian  rebels  for  "a  peace  of  the  brave"  with honor  to  both
sides.    He  called—as  the  next  step—to  a  liquidation   of  the
cold  war  atmosphere   and  an  arms  reduction  agreement   with
the  Soviet  Union   to  lift  the  menace  of  thermonuclear   war.
He   called   for   an  end  to  the  world   policeman   role  and   to
letting   American   policy   be   made—tail-wag-the-dog   style—
"by  small  and  often  undemocratic  governments  who  get  out
support  only  by  their  claim  to  be  anti-Communist."
McCarthy  may  be  our  last  chance  for  peace.    We  do  not
know  what  will  happen  after  the  election.   There  are  ominous
signs.    There  are  indications  that  the  conviction  of  Dr.  Spock
How  the  Viet  Cong  Use  Our  Firepower
"It's  of  really  no military  consequence.   It  does  make
headlines,  I  must  say."
—Westmoreland  on  the  VC  shelling  of  Saigon,  Wash-
ington  Star, June  11.
"In  fact,  the  Viet  Cong  have  discovered  a  way—the
discovery  was  made  accidentally  during  the  Tet   offen-
sive—of   using   the  American  firepower  against  them.
For  the  loss  of  a  dozen  or  so  brave  men  the  Viet  Cong
can  rely  on  showing  up  the  weakness  and  indiscipline
of  the  South  Vietnamese  Government  troops  and  they
can  count  on  a  whole  suburb  being  destroyed  in   the
process.    With  the  showers  of  rockets  and mortar shells
every  night  they  hope  that  an  overwhelming  demand
will  be built  up that  Saigon  should  be  evacuated,  especi-
ally  women  and children—but  where  to?    If  Saigon  is
not  safe  nowhere  in  South  Vietnam  is   safe."
—Murray  Sayle, London Sunday  Times, June  9.
and  three  associates  is  but  the  beginning  of  a  whole  series  of
prosecutions  intended  to  break  resistance  to  war  and  intimi-
date  the  peace  movement.  Why  the  further  prosecutions  in  the
works   if   the   Johnson   Administration   really   looks   toward
peace?    They  serve  a  political  purpose  only  if  the  war  is  to
escalate  again,  and  some  way  must  be  found   in  advance  to
prevent  effective   protest.
There  is  another  factor  which  makes  redoubled   efforts   for
McCarthy  urgent.    There  are  signs  that  the  Johnson  Admin-
istration  at  Paris  has  upped  the  price  for  a  complete  cessation
of  the  bombing  in  the  North.    At  one  time  its  position  was
that  we  would  only  stop  the  bombing  if  we  were  sure  talks
would  follow.    Talks  are  on  now.    The  San  Antonio  formula
and   the   Clifford   explanation   was  that   we  would   end   the
bombing  totally if  we  could  assume  that  the  enemy would  not
afterward  raise.the  level  of  supplies  and  reinforcements   into
the  South.     But  now  it  seems  that  Harriman  is  asking  that
Hanoi  agree  to  shut  off  aid  to  the  south  altogether  before  we
will  end  the  bombing.    This,  it  appears,  is  the  real  meaning
of  Harriman's  emphasis  on  restoring  the  DMZ  and  enforcing
the  1962  Laotian  agreement.    The  first  would  end  all  move-
(Contmued  on  Page  Four)
A  Brave  Civil  Rights  Commission  Report  Timed to  Help  The  Poor  Peoples  March
"The  South has  been  exporting  its  problems  North.  Many
of  the  unemployed, frustrated, hopeless  people  of  the  cities
are  migrants  from  rural  areas,  who  have  left  behind  other
unemployed,  frustrated  and hopeless  people  .  .  .   [G]overn-
ment  is  not  intervening  effectively  at  any  point  to  provide
people  who  have  been  victims  of  slavery  and  discrimination
with  an opportunity to lead  decent  and productive lives.  .  . .
Government  policy is  not  making it  possible  for  him  to  stay
on  the  land  or  work  in  the  towns  of   the  area,  it  is  not
equipping  him with  the  education  and skill  which  will enable
him  to survive in  the big  city or to obtain a job  once he  gets
there, and it  is  not providing any  place else for him to go....
"The  total  economic  dependence  of  black  people  is  not
confined  to  the  argricultural  sector  of  the  economy.   Even
when  family  income  is  from  nonfarm  employment,  extensive
underemployment  and  seasonal  employment  requires   that
families  seek  credit  from  others  in  order  to  survive.    The
Commission   heard  testimony  about  Bellamy,  Alabama,  a
company  town  owned  by  the  American Can  Company  and
the  site  of  one  of  their  large  sawmill  operations.   Frank
Fenderson,  an  employee,  who lives  at  Bellamy,  testified  that
his  total  take  home  pay  for  two  weeks'  work,  after  deduc-
tion  for  taxes,  rent  and  debts  owed  to  the  company  store,
was  five  dollars.  .  .  [W]hen  government  programs  fail  to
reach  people  they  remain dependent  upon  their  old  masters
—the  plantation  owner,  the  furnishing   merchant,  the  boss-
man.  .  .  .
"Companies   holding   millions   of   dollars   of   government
contracts  and required to  take  steps  to  provide  equal  oppor-
tunity  engage  in  blatant  discrimination.   For  example,  the
American  Can  Company  is  a  government  contractor.    Its
Company  town,  Bellamy,  is  totally  segregated.     Only  four
black  homes  have  running water and  inside  toilet  facilities;
every   white  house   has   running  water   and   inside   toilet
facilities.  .  .  .  Before  the  economic bondage  which  exists  in
Alabama  can  be  ended  it  will  be  necessary  to  develop  pro-
grams  to  assure  every  family  a  standard  of  living  adequate
to  provide  at  least  a  reasonable  chance  in  life.  .  .  [But]   it
is  not  enough  merely  to  shift  the  focus  of  dependency  from
a  plantation owner  to  a  government  agency.    People  must
be given some measure of  influence  or control  over  programs
and  decisions  which  affect  them.  .  .  .
—William  L.  Taylor,  Staff    Director   U.S.  Commission  on
Civil  Rights,  June  14,  reporting   on  Alabama.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  24,1968
Indications  That  We  Are  Stiffening  Our  Terms  In  Paris
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
ment  across  the  zone;  the  second  would  shut  off  the  so-called
Ho  Chi  Minh  trail  in  Eastern  Laos.
This  means that  the  price  is  still  surrender and  that  we  still
hope  to  use  the  bombing  of  the  North  to  end  the  war  in  the
South.   This  is beginning  to  leak  out  of  briefings  in  Paris  (see
Thomas  Fenton's   backgrounder  from  Paris  in  the  Perspective
section  of  the  Baltimore  Sun,   Sunday,  June  16)   and  out  of
briefings  in  Washington.     One  such  was  reflected  in  an  un-
signed  piece  on  the  opposite  editorial  page  of  the   Washington
Post,  June   15,  which  said  "This  double  request  is  acknowl-
edged  to  be  perhaps  a bit  more  [our  italics]  than  the  assump-
tion  in  President  Johnson's  San  Antonio  formula."    We  man-
aged  to  check  this  out  with  one  official,  but  only  on  a  not  for
attribution  basis.    The  explanation  given  was  that  in  asking
a  shutoff  of  both  the  DMZ  and  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail  Harri-
man  was  only  making  "proposals"  for  reciprocal  moves  which
would   lead  us  to  end  the  bombing,   not  setting  "conditions"
for   doing   so!
A  Distinction   Without  A  Difference
This  seems  to  us  a  distinction  without  a  difference.  It  must
stiffen  the  other  side  to  arrive  in  Paris  and  find  that  we  have
upped   our  terms—whether  as  "proposals"  or  "conditions"—
for   a  complete   cessation  of  the  bombing.     This   strengthens
the  evidence  reported  in  our  last  issue  (1)  that  Harrirnan  on
the  eve  of  Paris  showed  no  readiness  for  any  political  com-
promise  and  (2)   that  Johnson's  real  strategy  is  to  defuse  the
peace  movement   during   the  campaign  by  the  talks  and   the
limited  cessation.    After  the  election,  whether  the  victor  be
Humphrey  or  Nixon,  the  essential  Johnson  policy  can  be  con-
tinued  of  striving  to  restore  an  "independent"  South  Vietnam
under  our  wing.
We   still  believe  a  major  factor  in  limiting   the   bombing
was  to  end  the  extraordinarily  high  cost,  in  planes  and  pilots,
of  the  raids on  heavily  defended  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.  World
War   II  experience   showed  air  raids  most   effective   not  as  a
terror   weapon—Mary   McCarthy's   magnificent   series   from
Hanoi  in  the  New   York  Review  of  Books  shows  bombing  has
Saigon's  Failing  Grip
"With  enemy  forces  entrenched  on  all  sides  of  South
Vietnam's  capital  and  less  than  20  percent of  its  terri-
tory  under  the  Government's undisputed  control,  it   is
difficult   to  imagine  how  the   Government   can  end   the
war  without  talking  with  the  enemy.    More  and  more
government  officials  at  the  highest  level  recognize  this
in private..  . . Today  [Dr.  Phan  Quang]  Dan  [dismissed
as  Minister  of  State  for  saying  in  the  U.  S.  last  week
that  since Saigon  cannot kill  off  all  the  Viet  Cong it  will
have  to  end up by  talking  to  them]  is  regarded as hav-
ing   said   too  soon   what   many  Vietnamese  regard   as
inevitable."
—AP  from  Saigon  in  Baltimore  Sun,  June  17.
only  inspired  greater  resistance—but  as  a  means  of  attacking
transportation  routes.    We  have  increased  the  number  and  in-
tensity  of  our  air  raids  but  limited  them  to  the transportation
lines   of   the   panhandle.      "Admiral   Cagle's   pilots   claim,"
Keyes  Beech  of  the  Chicago  Daily  News  reported  from  the
nuclear  powered  flagship  USS  Enterprise  in  the  Tonkin   Gulf
(Washington  Post,  June  15)   "that  they  are  doing  a  more  ef-
fective  job   of   disrupting   Communist   supply   lines  to   South
Vietnam  by  concentrating  on  a  smaller  target  area  than  before
President  Johnson  imposed  the  bombing  limitation  on  March
31."     The  Rear  Admiral  himself  told  Beech,  "From  a  purely
tactical   military   viewpoint  I  see  no  point  in  resuming  the
bombing,  under  the  same  target   restrictions."
Even  Johnson   only  claims  that  we  are  destroying  20  per-
cent  of  the  shipments.    Our  guess  would  be  that  this  20  per-
cent   increase  in  costs  to  the   enemy   (if   Johnson's   estimate,
unlike  our  other  war  claims,  are  not  exaggerated)   is  paid  for
many  times  over  in  the  costs  to  us  of  the  bombardment.  Some
day  the  whole  truth  will  be  known,  and  we  suspect  the  dis-
parity-in  costs  will  prove  to  be  enormous.    In  the  meantime
it  is  not  cutting  down  the  pace  of  the  war  in  the  South  nor
our  casualties.   Its  only  effect  is  political,  to  disarm  the  peace
movement.     Peace   now   depends   on  reawakening  the   peace
movement  and  on  the  toppling  of  the  Saigon  regime  under
Viet  Cong  attacks.    It  is  there  that  the  issue will  be  decided.
If  You  Enjoyed  Stone's  New  Book,  You  Might  Like  A  Copy  of  His  Earlier  Collection,  "The    Haunted  Fifties" Out  of  Print  in This Country—
A  Few  Copies  of  The  English  Edition  Are  Now  Available  at  The  Original  Cut  Price  of  $4.95
FOR  STONE'S  NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  P.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of  Torment (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City  ............................
$5:
............................   Zip................  State.............
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished   D
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                  6/24/68
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W., Washington, D. C.  20015
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
56)8     Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at  Washington.  D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington.  D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED