I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961nov13.pdf

============================================================

Mansfield's   New  Proposals  on Berlin, P.  3
Joining  the  Dixiecrat  Cavalry  Won't  Make  Gen. Walker  A  Man  on  Horseback,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone?s  Weekly
VOL.   IX,   NO.  42
NOVEMBER   13,   1961
»'<>'      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
A  Victory  for  Peace  Nobody  Noticed  — And  Its  Lesson
We  will  probably  learn  little  of  what  Nehru  and  Kennedy
really  said  to  each  other.    But  it  is  a  pity  that  so  little atten-
tion  was  paid,  on  the  eve  of  the  great  neutral  leader's  visit,
to  the  significance  of  what  happened  at  the  UN  in  the  election
of  U  Thant  to  succeed  Hammarskjold, of  India's  part  in  that
achievement,  and  of  the  lesson  it  holds  for  the  problems  of
nuclear   testing,  of   Berlin  and   of   the   unstable  situation   in
Southeast  Asia.  U  Thant's  election, which saved the  UN,  dem-
onstrated  that  despite  the  deterioration  in  Soviet-American re-
lations,  quiet  negotiation  between  the  two  great  Powers  could
still  be  fruitful.  The  Russians withdrew  from  their  troika  pro-
posal  while  we  agreed  to  arrangements  in  the  UN  Secretariat
which  make  its  operations more  tolerable  for  them.    The   fact
is  that  for  some  years  the  top  Russian  representative  in  the
Secretariat  has  been  treated  as  an  outsider,  and  barred  from  its
inner  councils.    When  U  Thant   told  the  General  Assembly
Nov.  3 that  he would  name  "a  limited number  of  persons who
are  at  present  Under  Secretaries to  act  as  my  principal advisers
on  important .questions"  and  that  two  of  these  advisers  would
be  Ralph  Bundle  and  Georgi  Petrovich  Arkadev,  he  was  as-
suring  the  Russians of  a  change.    As Thos.  J.  Hamilton  wrote
in  the  Netv   York   Times  Nov.   5,  under  these  arrangements
"the  position  of  the  ranking Soviet  representative in  the  Secre-
tariat  will  revert  to  what  it  was  in  the  early  years.    After  the
Korean  war  began,  Mr.  Lie  barred  the  Soviet  representatives
from  participating  in  Korean  matters  and  Mr.  Hammarskjold
excluded  him  from  the  Congo  problem."    The   effect  was  to
make  the  UN  appear  to  the  Russians as a  Western  instrument.
We  would  have  been  as suspicious  and  infuriated  as  they were
if  the  roles  were  reversed.
How  India  Helped
The  Indian  contribution  was  to  insist  that  the  election  of  a
Secretary  be  negotiated   between   the   two  great   Powers,   and
not  thrown  into  the  lap  of  the  General  Assembly  to  become
the  occasion of  another  cold  war  battle. Krishna Menon,  whom
our  press  maligns  because  he  tries  to  play  a  mediatorial  role,
lined  up  the  neutrals  and  kept  the  pressure  on  both  sides.  The
result  was  an  extraordinary few  weeks  of  real  negotiation  and
mutual   concession   between   Mr.   Z'  rin   and   Mr.   Stevenson.
Neither  side  got  anything  like  the  full  demands  with  which  it
started  but  both  ended  with  considerable  victories.    Ours  was
sizeable  but  the  press  is so conditioned  to  cold  war  bell-ringing
and  so  myopic to  peaceful  solutions  that  it  has  hardly  noticed.
Our  victory  was  the  abandonment   of  the  troika  and  of   the
Russian  demand  for  some  veto  arrangement  inside  the  Secre-
tariat  itself.  The  basis of  the  settlement  rested  on  the influence
of  the  neutrals,  hostile  from  the first to  the  troika  idea, and  on
the  mutual  interest  of  the  two  great   Powers,  both  of  which
"Turn  Toward  Peace"
"I  oppose  the  present  drift  toward  war.    I  want   to
Turn  Toward  Peace.    The  United  States  should  set  its
own  course  in  foreign  relations  and  not  merely  react
to  the  threats  or  promises  of  the  Soviet  Union.    The
best  defense  against  communism  is  the  strengthening
of  our  commitment  to  freedom  and  democracy through
measures  consistent  with  these  ideals.      Freedom  and
democracy  could  not  survive  nuclear war,  but  they  can
flourish   in   peace.     Accordingly,   I   believe   we   must
Turn  Toward  Peace.    We  must  support  the  President
in  his  appeal  for  total  and  complete disarmament.  We
must  develop  world  law.  We  must  establish  construc-
tive   non-military   solutions  for   international  conflict.
The  United  States  can  take  initiatives  for  peace."
—"A  Declaration   of  Conscience  and    Responsibility"
sent  out  by  the  American  Friends   Service  Committee,
asking  signers   to  write  the  President   about   the  need
for  a  Turn  Toward  Peace,  and  to  encourage  all  groups
to  which  they  belong  to  cooperate  with  a  Turn  Toward
Peace  program.
realize—in  their  calmer  moments—that  some  international or-
ganization  of  this  kind  is  indispensable.
The  lesson  is  to  negotiate,  and  this  lesson  needs  immediate
applicability  to  Berlin,  which  has  become  an  obstacle  to  solu-
tions  of  broader  problems.    It  is quite  clear,  for  example,  that
until  the  possibility  of  war  over  Berlin  has  been  eliminated,
there  is  no  chance  the  Russians would  agree  to  the  establish-
ment  of  nuclear  test  listening  posts  on  their  soil.    The  chances
of  reviving a separate  treaty on  tests depends on a Berlin agree-
ment  and  a  relaxation  of  tension.   Yet  weeks  pass  into  months
without  negotiations  and  the  situation  steadily  grows  worse:
Are  we  to  blow  up  the  world  rather  than  have  travellers  in
civilian  clothes  show  their  passports  to  East  German   border
guards?    How   insanely  childish  can  we  get?    Now   a  new
Adenauer  government  has  been  established  on  the  basis  of  an
agreement   (of   dubious  legality  under  German   constitutional
law)   which  would   further   freeze   the  situation.    The   Free
Democrats  (a  combination  of  big  business—that  is, anti  social
welfare—"liberals",  plain  reactionaries  and  right-wing  nation-
alists)   have  imposed  terms  not  only  on  Adenauer  but  on  us.
They  demand  in  fact  that  the  Kennedy Administration go  back
to  the  Eisenhower  idea  of  a  "nuclear  NATO",  another   step
toward  full   German   acquisition   of   nuclear   weapons.     They
want  to  accord  not  even  de  facto  recognition  to  East  Germany.
While  the  big  industrialists behind  the  FDP  carry  on  their  lu-
crative  trade  with  the  Soviet  bloc,  we  are  to  shoulder  the  dan-
gerous  burden  of  pushing  back  the  Russians and  reuniting  the
(Continued    on   Page   Four)
1  6  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   IS,  1961
Another  Air  Force  "Gap"  This  Time  on  Shelters?—Time  to  Slap  Down  Nkrumah
Gen.  Walker: Thinks Dixiecrat  Calvary  Can Make Him A Man on Horseback
The  Walker  resignation  will  prove  a  minor  league   re-play
of  the  Truman-McArthur  controversy,  and  end  the  same way
—in  another  defeat  for  a  conceited  military  man.   Walker  has
McArthur's  arrogance  without  his ability; his prose  is as  purple
but  makes  less  sense;   the  release  of  his  resignation   through
South  Carolina  Strum  Thurmond's  office  showed  a  lack  of  any
feel  for  political  realities.    It's  hard  enough  to  sell  this  coun-
try  a  man  on  horseback;  it's  impossible  if  he  is  to  be  a  Dixie-
crat  cavalryman.    We  predict  that  Gen.  Walker's  crusade  will
be  rich  in  the  same  kind  of  silly prattfalls  as have  marked  the
public  appearance  of  that  other  doddering  Patrick  Henry,  Rob-
ert  Welch  of  the  Birch  Society  ("just  a Ku  Klux  outfit  without
the  nightshirts"  Harry  Truman  called  it  on  a  visit  here  last
week).  .  . .
Isn't  it  time  for  friends  of  the  new  Africa,  white  and  black,
to  form  an  organization  free  from  any  taint  of  colonialism  to
keep  an  eye  on  and  protest   such  gross  infringements   of  civil
liberties  as are  occurring  in  Ghana?   Nkrumah  first  picked  up
the  worst  habits  of  British  colonialism   with  a  preventive  de-
tention  act  under  which  he  can  jail  opponents  for  five  years
without  trial.    He  has  now  established   a  special  court   which
can  hand  down  death  sentences   for  political   offienses   without
jury  trial  or  right  of  appeal.   This  measure  was  enacted  in  the
wake  of  a  strike  by railway workers  against  a  wage  cut.     One
can  imagine  the  outcry  if  such  laws  were  imposed  by  an  im-
perialistic  power.    Like  Nkrumah's  sickening  personality  cult,
they  disgrace  the  cause  of  African  freedom.  .  .  .
One  of  those  Air  Force  financed  researchers  at  Rand   Cor-
poration,  Dr.  Leon  Goure,  is  about  to  bring  out  a  book   (al-
ready  hailed  by Life   Nov.  27)   in  which  he  claims  that  Russia
has  bomb  shelters  for  at  least  half   its  people.    But  Preston
Bowles   Replies   to   Birchwaterism
"Some   frustrated  citizens   seem   to   be  saying   that
communism  arises  from  socialism,  which  in  turn  stems
from  liberalism, which  in  turn  emerges   from  the  dem-
ocratic  ideas  written into  our  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence  by  Thomas  Jefferson.    This  notion  will  not  hold
water.
"Can  they  name  a  single  nation  which  had  achieved
a  reasonable measure of  economic well-being and  social
justice  that  has  been  overturned  by  the Communists?
"With  the  exception  of  those  nations  where  the  So-
viet   Army   has   imposed   Soviet   regimes,   communism
has  moved  toward  power  only  in  societies  which  were
reactionary   and  oppressive   .  .  .   where   people   were
illiterate  and  hungry,  and  where  they   had  abandoned
all  hope  that  their  problems  could  be  solved  by   any
other  alternative.
"The  only  realistic  answer  to  the  Communist chal-
lenge  is  more  democracy  and  progressivism,  not  less,
not  only  here  in  America  but  elsewhere   in  the  world."
—Under   Secretary   of  State  Chester   Bowles  to   the
10th  anniversary,  Adult  Education  Conferences   of   the
U.S.,  Washington,  D.C.,  Nov.   5.
Grover,  chief   of   the   AP's   Moscow   bureau   reported    (Balti-
more  Sun,  Nov.  2),  "This  correspondent  has  made  a  sustained
but  unsuccessful  hunt  to  find  either  a bomb  shelter  or  anybody
who  has  seen  one  in  the  Soviet  Union."   When  the  Air  Force
wanted   more   money  for   bombers,   it   leaked   stories  about  a
"bomber  gap".    When  it  wanted  more  money  for  missiles,  it
leaked  stories  about  a  "missile  gap"   which  seem  to  have  been
equally  exaggerated.     Now   the  Air  Force  wants   to  sell  the
idea  that  there  is a  "shelter  gap".   .  . .
A  Sample of  the Rightist War Hysteria  Cropping Up With Civil  Defense
"The  current  world  situation  compels  a  frank   appraisal
of  Civilian  Defense  as  an  instrument   for  saving  lives  and
as   a   means  of   maintaining  strong   civilian   morale  upon
which   to   build   positive   national  action.    Both   objectives
are  imperative to  survival  of  our  way  of  life  in  the  face
of  the  demonstrated  and  continuing  Communist  aggression
which   today  continues  to   advance   through  both  military
and  subversive  channels.
"There   no  longer   can   be   doubt   in   anyone's  mind  that
Russian  and Chinese Communist  aggression  is  both virulent
and  brutally  planned.   This  disease  must be  wiped from  the
face  of  the  earth.   The  psychopathic,  forced  withdrawal  of
a  great  people  behind  an  iron  curtain  at  the  will  and  com-
pulsion  of   a  relatively  small  group  of   organized,   insane,
power-hungry   bandits   cannot   be   allowed   to   continue.    A
showdown  must  eventually  come,  or  freedom   shall   be  no
man's  privilege.
"Whether  or  not  the  iron curtain can  be  breached  without
the  brute  force  of  arms,  the  world  cannot  longer  continue
with  any  degree  of  sanity  or  security  while  faced  with  the
continued  pressure  and  threat  of  Communist  enslavement.
Where  does   the  United  States   of   America  stand   in   this
situation?     It   stands   where   you,   the   individual   citizen,
stands—and  "stand"  each  citizen  MUST.   Now  is  the  time
for  commitment.   There  can  be  no  further  delay.
"At   present,   the  Civilian  Defense   Organization  is   the
most  obvious  and  most  opportune  instrument  for   recording
each   individual's   committed   stand   on  the  question  of   ap-
peasement  or  resistance  to  active,  Party-Line Communism.
It  is  highly  important  that  each  citizen  participate   actively
in  the  Civilian  Defense   Organization,  now.    Every   loyal,
true   American  should  stand  at   the   side   of   his   neighbor
wearing   an   army   band   of   the   Civilian   Defense    Corps,
pledged  to  support  and  to  uphold  the  Constitution  and  the
principles  upon  which  our  defense  rests.    There  can  be  no
equivocation.    Either  you  belong   now—committed  to  your
nation's  defense—or  you  do  not  belong,   and  so  stand  'un-
committed.'    Today,  no  commitment  in  this   matter  is   an
open  invitation  to  party-line  Communist  penetration.
"Civilian  Defense   is  an  adjunct  to  Military  Defense   in
any  military  action,  but  it   is   more  than  that   before   the
world  today.    It  is  the  strongest   evidence  of  a   defensive
attitude—not  an  aggressive  one;  but  one  which  also  dem-
onstrates  a  solidarity  and  preparedness   for  action,  should
action  be  necessary.     This  is  a  highly   important   position
in  the  world today  and  forces  the  Communist  into  the  open
for  all  to  see—an  exposure   which  can  destroy   his  life.
"In  Nutley,  during  Civilian   Defense   Week,  opportunity
will  be  given  to  each  person  as  a  citizen  to  join  the  Nutley
Civilian  Defense   Organization  and  thereby  to  commit him-
self  or  herself   to  defense  of  the  American  Way  of   Life—
the  way  of  freedom  and  liberty."
—From   4-page   pamphlet    issued   by  Nutley,   N.J.,    Civil
Defense   Organization,  complete  with  registration  form  and
loyalty   oath  swearing  non-membership   in  any  organization
advocating    overthrow    of   the   government.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  13,
Twin  Parleys  on  Germany Proposed—One  Of  Its  Smaller  East   West   Neighbors
Mansfield: "Stand  Firm", Repeated Like  A Litany, Won't Solve Berlin Problem
We'd    like   to  launch   an   experiment   with   our   readers.
One  thing  they  can  do  for  peace  is  to  let  their  representa-
tives  know  someone  is  listening.   On  this  page  we  present
excerpts   from   a  speech   made   in   Richmond,   Va.,   Nov.   3
by   Democratic   leader   Mansfield     of   Montana,   another   in
the   series  with   ivhich   he   has   been   trying   to   thaw   out
dangerously   frozen   American  positions  on  Berlin  and  Ger-
many.     These   have   made   him   unpopular    in   Bonn  and
brought   him   criticism   at   home   from   rightists   and   the
simple-minded.    If   you   like  what  he  had  to  say^will   you
write  and   tell   him  so?    Even  Senators   need   encourage-
ment.    And   send   us   a  postcard   to  say  you've  written  so
we  can  judge   the   response.—IFS
"Berlin  is  more  than  a  question  of  an  East-West  clash  over
a  city,  a  wall,  an  escape,  a  place  to  test  wills.    In  a  far  more
significant  sense  it  is  a  symbol  of  the  failure  of  total  victory  in
World  War  II  to  produce  the  conditions of  total  peace  in  Eu-
rope.    It  is  also  a  symbol  of  a  Germany  divided against  itself.
The   larger  division  of  Germany  is,  in  itself,   a  symbol  of   a
divided  Europe.    All  of  these  divisions, from  that  of  a  city  to
that  of  a  continent  intermesh  one  with  another  on   gears  of
fear.    There  are  German  fears  of  the  East.   There  are  Polish,
Czech  and  other  fears  of  Germany.    There  are  NATO  fears
of  the  Warsaw  Pact  forces  and  similar  fears  in  reverse.  There
are  capitalist fears  of  communism  and  communist  fears  of  cap-
italism  and  socialist  fears  of  both.    There  is  freedom's  anti-
pathy  to  totaltitarianism  and   the   totalitarian  hatred   of   free-
dom.
"All  these  and  other  difficulties  converge  at  Berlin  in  a  di-
rect  and  hostile  confrontation  of  military  forces.    It  is  no  an-
swer  to  these  deeper   difficulties  to  repeat  the  phrase  'standing
firm'  as though  it were  some  litany which  would  exorcise  them.
Nor  is it  an  answer  to  them  to  build  a  wall  as  the  Communists
have  done.  .  .  .
Events  Erode  The  Ground  Beneath  Us
"It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  a  responsibility   on  the   part
of  rational  men  and  women   to  think  beyond   'standing  firm'
and  dividing walls,  visible  or   invisible.  Of   course,  we  must
stand  firm  when  we  are  challenged   but  we  must  not  stand,
struck  dumb,  as events  erode  the  very  ground  on  which  we  are
standing.    There  is  a  responsibility to  do  more  than  to  stand
firm.  .  . .
"The   responsibility  is not  ours  alone.    It  is a  shared  respon-
sibility  but  it  is  a  vital  responsibility for  us  no  less  than  others.
As  it  is  discharged  and  only  as  it  is  discharged   in  all  earnest-
ness  in  contact  and  in  negotiation,  by  all  the  parties  concerned
can  we  hope  for  a  lifting  of  the  cloud  of  incipient  destruction
which  hovers  over  Europe  and  spreads  throughout  the  world.
"In   this  connection,  may  I  say  that  there  is  just  as  much
danger  of  error  in  the  assumption  of  too  great  a  responsibility
The  Seal  and  the  Salmon  But  Not  Man
"So  far  only  four  nations  have  tested  in  the  atmos-
phere.    But  there   are  at  least   a  dozen   other  nations
and  eventually there  will  be  more,  each  of  which  might
follow  the  same  course  if  they  are  so  inclined. Whether
they  do  so  now  or  next  year  or  years  hence,  it  must
be  clear  where  the  course  of  an  indiscriminate   national
testing  of   nuclear  weapons  in  the  atmosphere  on   the
basis   of   the   claim   of   self-defense   must  eventually
lead.   At  the  very  least,  it  must  lead,  as  it  is  already
leading,  to  a  world  which  is  increasingly   inhospitable
to   human  life   and  this,   without  war   in   any   formal
sense.    It  must  lead  to  a  world in  which  acts  of  serious
scientific  aggression   are  indulged  in  the  name  of   self-
defense.     By  treaty,  nations  have  protected  the  whale
from   indiscriminate destruction,  the  seal,   the   salmon
and   other   animals   and    fish.    Yet,   in   this   instance,
nations  have  not  been  able  to  protect  men,  women  and
children  from  the  wanton depredation of  nuclear  test-
ing   in  the   atmosphere."
—Sen. Mansfield   (D. Mont)   at  Richmond,  Va.,  Nov.  3
by  either  the  U.S.  or  the  Soviet  Union  as  there  is  in  the  as-
sumption  of  too  little.  .  .  .  The  fate  of  a  divided  Germany  is
not  ours  alone  to  decide.    It  rests  in  heavy  measure,  a  decade
and   a  half   after  the  war,  with  the  German   people  in  both
spheres  and  on  the  two  governments   which  represent  or  pur-
port  to  represent  them.    Nor  is the  fate  of  all  Europe  the  pri-
mary  responsibility  of  this  country  and  the  Soviet  Union   which
are,  in  reality,  nations  on  its   fringes.
"I  would  suggest,  therefore,  that  there  may  be  room  here
for  two  simultaneous  conferences  of  exploration,   separate   but
interrelated,  in  some  such  city  as Vienna  or  Geneva.    There  is
room   for   a  conference  of  the  foreign  ministers  of   the   U.S.,
France,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Soviet  Union  on  the  Ber-
lin   situation  and  other  vestigial  problems   of  World  "War   II
and  the  occupation.    And  there  is  room  for  a  conference  of
the  nations  of  Europe  on  both  sides  of  the  divided   continent,
of  the  nations  of  the  Warsaw   Pact  and  NATO  in  which   they
might  make  their  sentiments  known  on  the  security  and  other
problems   of   a  divided   continent—problems   in   which    their
stake  is at  least  as  great  as  is  ours  or  Russia's.
"And  I  may add  that  I  cannot  see that  it  matters  very  much
who  takes  the  first  step  toward   such   conferences.    What  is
far   more   important   is   the   courage,   wisdom,   restraint   and
patience  with  which   they  are  approached. ...  At  the  very
least  we  shall  be  able  to  bring  into  the  consideration   of  the
critical  problems  of  peace  in  Europe  the  thoughts  and   ideas
of  those  important  nations  of  Europe  which  have  been   shunted
aside  in  the  present   concern   of  the  larger  powers  with  firm
stands  and  excluding  walls."
Let's Leave "A Richer Heritage Than  A  Landscape  of  Fallout  Shelters"
tional  concern.  .  .  .  We  must  avoid  developing  a  national
obsession  with burrowing in  the  ground,  and,  in  the  process,
exclude  what  may  be  more  fruitful   ways  of  dealing  with
international   difficulties. ...  A   cover  of  earth   overhead
may  preserve  the  strain  of  human  life  but  it  will  scarcely
preserve  a  way  of  life.  .  .  .  We  owe  coming   generations
a   richer  heritage   than  a  landscape  of  fallout  shelters."
—Sen.  Mansfield    (D.  Mont)   in  Richmond,   Va.,  Nov.   3
"A  nuclear conflict  may  be  unthinkable  but  it  is becoming
more  and  more  apparent  that  it  is  not  impossible.    Since
that  is  the  case,  the  people  of  the  nation  are  wise  to  con-
sider  its  implications. ...  I  would  certainly  not  wish  to
discourage   sober   efforts   in   the   field   of   civil   defense   by
communities  of   individuals.    Nevertheless,  it  seems   to  be
essential   that   we   guard   against   stimulating  a   national
hysteria  by  commercial  exploitation  of  this  legitimate  na-
1  6  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's   Weekly,    November   13,  1961
Canada  Shows  How   New  Nuclear  Test  Negotiations  Could  Begin
O                                                O
(Continued   from    Page    One)
Reich   for   them.*     The   alternative,  they  threaten,   is  a  deal
with  the  Russians.  The  blackmail has  begun.  The  sooner  we
get  out  of  their  clutches  by  negotiating with  the  Russians  the
better;  both  sides  have  an  interest  in  putting   limits  now  on
German  power  before  it  is  too  late.    One  way  to  weaken  the
German  hold  on  Washington   is, as  Senator  Mansfield  suggest-
ed  last  week  (see  speech  on  page  three)  to  hold  parallel con-
ferences  on  Germany:  one  of  the  big  Powers,  the  other  of  the
smaller  European  States  East and  West  which suffered  so  much
from   Germany   in  the  past  and   fear   its  rebirth  as  a  nuclear
military  force.
Moscow  and  Washington   Voted   Together
Just  as  the   two  great  Powers   have  a  common   interest  in
keeping  the  German  giant  from  growing  out  of  control  again,
so they have  a  common  interest  in  ending the  arms  race and  in
particular  the  nuclear  aspect  of  it.  The  cost  is  enormous.  The
weapons   grow   more   deadly  and   both   sides  more   insecure.
When  the  Germans  and  the  Chinese  acquire the  weapons,  the
comfortable  symmetry of  the  Russo-American  tug-of-war will
be  upset  and  the  world  become  more  unstable.    Here, again
the  UN  exerts  a  useful  moral  influence.    The  spectacle  of  the
Soviet   bloc  and   the   inner   core  of   the   Western   bloc  voting
solidly  together  last  week  against  the  Indian  resolution  for  a
new  moratorium  pending  negotiation  of  a  new  treaty  showed
how  alike  are  the  motivations of  the  nuclear  powers.  It  should
shame  both  to  see  themselves  in  the  same  boat  with  the  rivals
they  so  self-righteously  condemn—"imperialists"  and  Commu-
nists  together.    It  should  sober  us  to  realize that  even  a  neigh-
bor  and  ally  so  close  as  Canada  deserted  the  Western  bloc  to
vote  with  the  overwhelming  majority  of  mankind  for  the  In-
dian  resolution.  What  Mr.  Bums  of  Canada  had  to  say should
be  thoughtfully  considered   in  Washington  before  we,  too,  re-
sume  atmospheric testing.    Mr.  Burns  said  a  new  moratorium
* The  text  of  the  48-point  coalition  agreement  has  not  been
published   and   only   partially  leaked   to   the   press.     Antony
Terry,   Bonn   correspondent   of   the   Sunday   Times   of   London
reported   (Nov.   5)  that  one  point  was  "A  guarantee  of  im-
proved  status  for  former  Nazis  and  members  of  the  SS."
pending  new  negotiations was  called  for  not  only  because of
the  radioactive  danger  but  because  the  purpose  of  the  tests  is
to  develop  even  deadlier  weapons  though   "As  we  have  been
told  so many times,  the  nuclear Powers  already  have  more than
enough   such  weapons  to  kill  half  of  humanity."    Mr.  Burns
pleaded  in  First  Committee  Act  30:
The  nuclear  Powers  assert  that  they  have  been  or  may  be
obliged   to  resume   testing   because  their  national  security
requires  it.   This,  in  the  view  of  the  Canadian delegation,  is
in  the   I<J)IK  run  a  grave  error.    A  series  of  tests  conducted
by  one  side  brings  about   a  subsequent  series  of  tests  con-
ducted   by  the   other—and   this  is   the  essence  of   and  the
most  dangerous  part  of  the  arms  race.    Can  masses  of  nu-
clear  weapons   confer   any  security  when  it  is  certain   that
if   the  Powers   owning  them  put  them  to  use,   they  will  go
down   together    in   mutual   destruction—destruction   which
will  extend   far   beyond  their  own  borders?
Mr.  Burns  skillfully  sketched  out  the  possibilities  of   nego-
tiation  on  the  issue  between  the  Big  Two.     He  pointed   out
that  both   are  agreed   on   general   and   complete  disarmament
but  that  the  Zorin-McCIoy  agreement  also  says,  "efforts  to  en-
sure  early agreement  on  an  implementation of  measures of dis-
armament,"   i.e.   partial   steps   like  a   nuclear   test   agreement
"should   be  undertaken  without prejudicing progress  on  agree-
ment  on  the  total  programme  ..."    Thus  negotiations  on  a
test  treaty  could   be  resumed   as  asked   by  the  Western   bloc
within  the  framework  of  general  and  complete  disarmament as
asked  by  the  Soviet  bloc.    But  Canada,  like  India,  sees  a  new
moratorium   as  essential      Surely,  Mr.   Burns  challenged   the
Soviet  Union,  it  could  not  seriously  intend  "to  go  on   testing
nuclear  weapons,  as it  has  been  doing  for  the  past  two  months,
at  intervals whenever  it  suits  its  purpose,   until  all  the  details
involved  in  a  treaty for  general  and  complete  disarmament  are
agreed  to  and  the  treaty signed.    Such  an  intention would  cer-
tainly  not  indicate  a  serious  desire  to  negotiate   in  good  faith
on  general   disarmament.     Continued   testing  would   provoke
an  intensification  of  the  arms  race  and  would  not  limit  it."  Mr.
Kennedy  for  his  part  has  talked  of  substituting  a  peace   race
for  an  arms  race. This  is the  point  at which  to  initiate it.  Man-
kind  will  be  grateful  to  us  if  we  have  the  patience,  the  re-
straint  and  the  wisdom  to  do  so  rather  than  to  begin   testing
on  our  own  in  the  air.                                        Noon,  Nov.   8
Our   Campus   Readers   Are   Growing   Swiftly—Why     Not   Send   Your   Youngster   At  School   A   Subscription?
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ...........................................................................................
Street
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/13/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  Q
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  0.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at   Washington.  D.  C.   Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday  in   Aagast
   an
d   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;    SG  in
Canada:   $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED