I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961dec18.pdf

============================================================

The  Eichmann  Verdict,  P.  4
The  Barenblatt  Ruling  Now  Haunts  Harlan,  Frankfurter and  Freedom of  the  Press,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  47
DECEMBER   18,   1961
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Questions  on  the  Eve  of  JFK's  Latin  American  Visit
In  their  talks with  the  West  Germans,  the Administration's
spokesmen  have  been  urging them  to widen their contacts with
the  East  Germans  as a  means of  peaceful  infiltration  and  even-
tual   reunification.     Kennedy  lieutenants  have   asked   why   a
powerful  government  like  that  of  Bonn's  should  fear  contact
with  an  unpopular  government  like  Pankow's.     If  this  logic
is  good  for  Germany, why  isn't  it  good  for  our  relations  with
Cuba?    Why  don't  we  send  a  Peace  Corps  to  Cuba?    Why
don't  we  lift  our  Iron  Curtain  and  let  Americans travel there?
Why  don't  we  make  America's  presence  felt  in  Cuba?    We
tell  the  Germans that  war  in  the  modern  world  is  too terrible
a  gamble  to' be  approached   without  making  every  effort  first
to  negotiate.    If  this applies  to  Berlin,  why  not  to  Cuba ?  Why
has  the  Kennedy  Administration rejected  every  one  of  the  pub-
lic  and  private  offers  of  negotiation  from  Havana  in  the  past
year,  and   of  mediation  from  friendly  Latin  American  coun-
tries?    Why  is  it  quietly moving  toward  warlike action,  using
pressure  to  line  up  Latin  American  support,   threatening  to
"go  it  alone"  otherwise?
Batista  Men Back  In  The  Picture
On  the  eve  of  the  President's  trip  The  New   York   Times
said  Dec.  13 that  in  Latin  America Mr.  Kennedy  is "identified
with  a genuine desire to  help  the  common  man."    It  is already
easy  to  exaggerate  that  identification.   There  are  Latins  who
regard  the  Alliance  for  Progress  as  Castro's  gift  to  the  hemi-
sphere,  a  program  which  would  never  have  been  launched  if
Fidel  had  not  frightened  us  into  it.    There  are  others,  more
cynical,  who  regard  it  as  a  facade  for  bribery  to  line up  hemi-
spheric  support   for  action  to  crush  Castro;   U.S.  News  and
World  Report  (Dec.  18)  reports  that  in  retaliation  for  Mexi-
co's  vote  against  intervention in  Cuba  Dec.  4  at  the  OAS,  pro-
jected  loans  to  Mexico  are  being  reviewed,  as  are  those   for
countries  which  abstained.    At  home  there  are  other  signs  of
a  toughening  attitude.    Prensa  Latina,  the   pro-Castro   news
agency,  has  been  indicted  for  failure  to  register   as  a  foreign
agent.    By contrast,  quietly  and  without  explanation,  the  gov-
ernment  has  voided  the  indictment of  Masferrer  obtained  with
such  fanfare   last  April  10,  seven  days  before  the  Cuban  in-
vasion.     This   ex-Communist  who   turned   Batista  "Senator"
and  gangster  was  indicted  for  violating  the  neutrality  laws  in
preparing  an  expedition  against  Cuba.    The   indictment  was
supposed  to  show  that  the  Batista  crowd  were  excluded  from
the  invasion.   Now  signs  multiply  that  they  are  back  in  the
picture;  Batista's secret police  chief  is training troops  in  Guate-
mala,  Batistianoes have  been  reported  recruiting  right  here  in
the  nation's  capital.
The  shadow  of  next  year's  Congressional  elections  already
falls  over  Cuba.    The  liberal  Republican  Javits  is  back  from
a  tour  of  the  Soviet  Union  talking  like  Khrushchev;  Cuba,  he
Setback  in  the  Anti-Castro Campaign
We  learn   of  a  serious   setback   to  plans  for   action
against  Castro.   The  Uruguayan Ambassador  in  Wash-
ington  admitted  to  the  Weekly  that  he  had  offered  his
resignation  in  the  wake  of  statements  (unreported  in
the  U.  S.  press)  by  the  Uruguayan President  during  a
State  visit  to  Brazil  April  7-8 that  the  Ambassador  had
disobeyed  instructions   when  he  voted   with  the   anti-
Castro   bloc  at  the  OAS  on  Dec.  4.    This  means  that
the  U.  S.  at  the  coming Jan.  10 OAS meeting  on  Cuba
can  count  on  only  13  votes  instead  of  the   14,  or  two-
thirds,  required   for   hemispheric  action.    We   learned
this  after  our  curiosity  was piqued  by  a  cryptic  AP  dis-
patch   from   Montevideo  in  last   Monday's   New   York
Times   (p.  35,  City  ed)  reporting  that   the   Executive
Council  of  Uruguay  had  "reiterated  its  opposition  to
any  intervention  in  Cuba  despite  Fidel  Castro's  recent
public  embracement   of  Marxism-Leninism."    The   AP
said  the  statement   was  issued  after   President   Haedo
met  with  U.  S.  Ambassador  Sparks  "at  the  latter's  re-
quest."    We  have  rarely   seen   a  bigger   story   better
buried.
told  a  TV  audience  Dec.  10,  is  "a  bone  in  our  throat."    He  is
prepared  to  support  military  or  economic  action  against  Castro.
Kennedy  last  year  attacked  Eisenhower  for  being  too  soft  in
dealing  with  Castro;   is  he  afraid   the  Republicans  next  year
will  say  that  of  him?    After   the  last  fiasco,  Kennedy  com-
plained  that  the  press  had  been  too  free  in  reporting  the  com-
ing  invasion.    Has  he  succeeded  in  convincing the  editors  to
hide the  truth  about  the  next  one ?   Why  have no  other  papers
followed  the  lead  of  the  Chicago Daily  News  in  exposing  the
new  training  camps  in  Guatemala  to  which we  referred  in  last
week's  issue?
Last  time  the  question  was  asked:  who  in  the  President's
entourage   had  spoken  up  against  the  dangerous  adventure?
Is  anyone speaking  up  now  against  the  whispers in  this capital
that   we  are  preparing   a   "Guatemalan   solution?"     On   the
eve -of  the  President's   Latin  American  visit,  we  want  to  pro-
test  as  strongly  as  we  can  against  a  new  invasion,  with  all  its
dangerous   chain  reaction  potential.    The   least  of  these  is  a
long  Algerian-type  guerrilla  struggle  in  Cuba,  which  will  split
the  hemisphere  against  us,  lining  up  on  Castro's  side  many
who  are  now  distrustful   of   him  and  prefer  cooperation  with
the  U.S.     The   worst   would   be  the  arrival  of    "volunteers"
and  military  aid   from   the   Soviet   bloc,  the   imposition  of  a
naval  and  air  blockade  to  keep  them  out,  and  the  danger  of
a  wider  conflict.
Shall  it  be  said  that  one  Mr.  K  takes  out  his  frustrations
with  Big  China  by  picking  on  Little  Albania while  the  other
Mr.  K  takes  out  his  frustrations  with  Big  Russia  by  picking
on  Little  Cuba?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  18,  1961
Majority   Would  Prefer   to  Stand   on  Barenblatt  and  Reject  New  Witch  Hunt  Appeals
Frankfurter  and  Harlan  Dislike  Facing  Up  to  Freedom  of  Press  Issue
In  the  six  First  Amendment  contempt  cases  just  argued, be-
fore  the  Supreme   Court,   four  from   Senate  Internal  Security,
two  from  House  Un-American,  Justices  Frankfurter  and  Har-
lan  showed  by  the  content  and  asperity of  their  questions  that
they  regarded  the  issues  as  settled  by  Barenblatt  and   resented
having  to  hear  them  at  all.    Since  it  only  takes  four  votes  to
grant  a  hearing,  it  looks  as  if  the  four  dissenters  in  Barenblatt
voted  to  review  these  new  convictions  in  order  to  make  the
majority  face  up  to  the  unpleasant  implications  of  the  earlier
ruling.
The  new  cases  are  embarrassing,  especially  for  Mr.  Justice
Frankfurter,  sensitive  as  he  is  to  reproaches  from  the  liberals.
The   Internal  Security  cases  raised  the  question  of  whether  a
committee  of  Congress  could  put  the  press  in  the  pillory.  The
Eastland  hearings  from  which  these  four  contempt  convictions
derive  led  the  Justice's  old  friend,  Walter  Lippmann,  to  pro-
test,  "Once  it  is the  accepted  principle  that  Congress  has  power
to  set  up  standards  of  newspaper  employment,  the  inner  spirit
of  the  First  Amendment will  be  deeply  impaired."
Eastland's  Main  Target
The   government   argued   that  the  decisions  in   Barenblatt,
Braden  and  Wilkinson  had  already  decided  the  issue.     The
first  held  thai  education,  though   like  the  press   a  "legtimate
and  protected  activity,"  could  be  investigated.    The  other  two
upheld  investigation of  "communist  propaganda."     Ergo  East-
land  had  a  right  to  launch an  inquiry  into  the  press  in  1955-56
with  America's  foremost  paper,  The  New   York   Times,  as  his
main  target.     Now   the  consequences  of  this  paranoiac  pro-
gression  uncomfortably confront  the  majority.
During   argument   of  the  Shelton   case,  Mr.   Justice  Frank
furter  asserted  that  it  was  within  the  power  of  Congress   "to
conduct  investigations that  result  in  damage   to  perfectly  in-
nocent  citizens  for  which  there  is  no  judicial  remedy."     But
here  the  harm  transcends  the  individual.    Can  Congress   de-
spite  the  First  Amendment  use  the  investigatory  power   as  a
means  of  harrassing  and  inhibiting  the  press?     This   is  the
question  raised  by the  appeals  of  Robert  Shelton,  Alden  Whit-
man,  Wm.   A.   Price  and   Herman   Liveright,  all   of   whom
First  Victory  for  the  Sit-ins
The  first  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  sit-in
cases  may  easily   be  circumvented.    Louisiana   has  al-
ready  passed  a  criminal  trespass  statute   which,  with-
out  so  much  as  mentioning  segregation,  would  give  the
police  a  new  weapon  against  sit-ins.   The  Baton  Rouge
cases  on  which  the  Court  passed  last  Monday,  agreeing
unanimously  on  reversal   of  convictions   for   disturbing
the  peace,  are  only  the  first  to  reach  our  highest  tri-
bunal.     Sooner   or  later   it   will   have   to   abandon   the
subterfuges   recommended   by  the   Department   of   Jus-
tice  and  rule  squarely  that  the  police  may  not  be  used
to  enforce   segregation.
Mr.   Justice   Douglas,   concurring,   alone   pointed   the
way  to  creative  adjudication.    He  would have  the  Court
rule  that  restaurants,   though  privately  owned,  are  in
the  venerable  formula  of  Munn  v.  Illinois  (1870)   "af-
fected  with  a  public  interest",  subject  as  such  to  many
forms  of  public regulation,  and  cannot  awfully  impose  a
racial  discrimination  contrary   to  public  policy.     Some
such  formula  will  have  to  be  adopted  by  the  Court  to
deal  with  Southern   nullification.   We  congratulate   the
sit-in    youngsters   on   their    victory   and   respectfully
salute  the  historic  changes  this  handful  of  brave  youth
has  been  bringing  about  in  an  incredibly  short   time.
acquitted  themselves  with  honor.    Defense  counsel  by  arguing
lesser  points  such  as  probable  cause  and  pertinency   confessed
their  despairing  recognition  that  Barenblatt  had  foreclosed   the
freedom   of   the   press   issue.     But   the   majority  may   dislike
being  forced  to  say  so  explicitly.
Of   the  other  two  cases,  the  Court   may  easily   brush   one
under  the  rug;  another  poor  teacher  ruined  for  having   been
a  Young  Communist  years  before.    But  the  other,  the  Gojack
case,  was  all  too  clearly  a  deliberate  campaign  to  use  the  Un-
American  committee  to  influence  a  union  election  and  smear
men  it  disliked.    There  could  not  be  a  clearer  case  of  exposure
for   exposure's   sake.    Here  the  Committee  was  demonstrably
acting  for  no  legislative  purpose  whatsoever,  but  carrying  on
a  vendetta.    Can  it  do  as  it  pleases  so  long  as  its  excuse  is
hurting  Reds?
Court  Unanimously  Orders   Reinstatement
"This  provision  of  the  oath  here  in  question,  it  is  to  be
noted,   says   nothing   of   advocacy   of   violent  overthrow   of
state  or  federal   government.    It  says  nothing  of  member-
ship  or  affiliation  with  the  Communist  Party,  past  or  pres-
ent.    The  provision  is  completely  lacking  in  these  or  any
other  terms  susceptible   of  objective  measurement.      Those
who  take  this  oath  must  swear,   rather,  that  they  have  not
in   the   unending   past   ever   knowingly   lent   their   'aid',   or
'support',  or.'advice',  or  'counsel',  or  'influence'  to  the  Com-
munist  Party.    What  do  these  phrases  mean?     In  the  not
too  distant past  Communist Party  candidates  appeared   reg-
ulary   and  legally   on   the   ballot   in  many   state   and   local
elections.    Elsewhere  the  Communist  Party  has  on  occasion
endorsed   or   supported   candidates   nominated   by   others.
Could  one  who  had  ever  cast  his  vote  for  such  a  candidate
safely  subscribe  to  this  legislative  oath?     Could  a  lawyer
who  had ever  represented the  Communist  Party  or  its  mem-
bers  swear  with  confidence  or  honesty   that   he  had   never
knowingly  lent  his  'counsel'  to  the  Party?    Could  a journal-
ist  who  had  ever  defended  the  constitutional  rights  of   the
of   Florida   Teacher   in   Loyalty   Oath   Case
Communist  Party  conscientiously   take  an  oath  that  he  had
never  lent  the  Party   his  'support'?     Indeed,  could   anyone
honestly  subscribe  to  this  oath  who  had  ever  supported  any
cause   with  contemporaneous   knowledge   that   the   Commu-
nist  Party  also  supported   it?
"The   very   absurdity   of   these   possibilities   brings   into
focus   the   extraordinary   ambiguity   of   the   statutory   lan-
guage.  .  .  .  While  it  is  perhaps   fanciful  to  suppose  that  a
perjury  prosecution   would  ever  be  instituted  for  past  con-
duct   of   the   kind   suggested,    it   requires   no  strain   of   the
imagination  to  envision  the  possibility   of   prosecution   for
other  types  of  equally  guiltless  knowing  behavior.    It  would
be  blinking  reality  not  to  acknowledge   that  there  are  some
among   us  always   ready  to   affix   a  Communist  label   upon
those  whose  ideas  they  violently  oppose."
—Mr.  Justice  Stewart  for   a  unanimous  court   ordering
the  reinstatement  of  a  Florida  school  teacher,  David  Walton
Cramp,  Jr.,  for   refusing    to  obey  a  state  law  requiring  an
oath  that  he  had  never  lent   "aid,   support,   advice,   counsel
or  influence    to  the  Communist  Party."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  18,  1961
The  Logic  of  Outlawry  Leads  to  Degeneration   in  Standards  of  Proof  and  Justice
Court  Allows  CP  Membership  to  Be  Proven  By  Inference  From  Opinions
When  a  badly  split  Supreme  Court  12 years  ago  upheld  the
non-Communist   oath   provisions   of   the  Taft-Hartley   Act,   it
salved  its  conscience  by  establishing  strict  standards  of   proof
as  to  membership  in  and  affiliation  with  the  Communist   Party.
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  in  particular   objected   in  his  concur-
ring  opinion  to  allowing  any  mode  of  proof  which  could   rest
on  "some  coincidental  parallelism  of  belief  with  some  of  the
beliefs   of   those   who   direct   the   policy   of   the   Communist
Party."
But  last  Monday  in  the  Killian  case  a  majority  of  five  in-
cluding  Mr.   Justice  Frankfurter  allowed   those   safeguards   to
be  swept  away.    In  passing  on  the  conviction  of  a  labor  leader
for  false  statement  on  a Taft-Hartley  oath,  the  majority  upheld
instructions  to  the  jury which  permitted  membership  to  be  in-
ferred  from  views  paralleling  those  of  the  Communists.
Even  Walter Objected
The   instructions  embodied   most   of   the   notorious   criteria
for  determining  membership  which  a  panicky  bloc  of   Senate
liberals  led  by  Humphrey   and  Morse  write  into  the   Internal
Security  Act  of   1954.    These  were  criticized  at  the  time  by
papers as diverse as the  Wall  Street  Journal  and  the  New   York
Post  for  making  conviction  possible  on  the  basis  of  parallel-
ism  of  opinion.    Even  Congressman   Walter  objected  to  these
criteria  in  the  House hearings  that  year,  declaring,  "If  I  should
advocate  public  housing—which  is  the  Communist   Party  line
at  this  moment—that  would  make  me  guilty  under  this  bill."
But  a  majority  of  the  Court  now  accepts  them  .in  Taft-Hartley
oath  cases,  though  Mr.  Justice  Whittaker   was  careful  to  say
that  the  Court  was  not  deciding  whether   these   membership
criteria  could  constitutionally  be  applied   in  a  criminal  prose-
cution  under  the  Internal  Security  Act.
The  shift  in  the  Court  reflects the  degeneration  of  standards
made  inevitable  by  the  logic  of  outlawry.    Normally   member-
ship  in  an  organization   is  proven  by  tangible  direct  evidence;
He  Even  Informed  on  His  Wife
"The   prosecution's   case   at   trial   rested   primarily
upon  the  testimony  of  a  single  witness,  Ondrejka, who
testified  that  he  had  been  a  paid  informer  for  the  FBI
for  the  period  1949-54 during  which  time  he  had  been
a  member of  the  Communist Party. .  .  .  Ondrejka testi-
fied  under  oath  that  while employed  by  the  FBI  he  had
courted  and  married his  wife  who  had  borne  him  three
children  in  this  period.   At  all  times during their court-
ship  and  marriage  Ondrejka  had  reported  his  wife's  ac-
tivities  as  a  member  of   the  Communist Party   to  the
FBI.    He  had  never  informed   his  wife  that  she   was
under  surveillance."
—Petition  for   Certiorari   to  the  Supreme   Court   in
Killian  v.  U.  S.  decided  Dec.  11.
the  act  of  joining,  a  membership  card,  the  payment   of   dues
can  all  be  attested.  But  once  you  declare  an  organization  partly
or  wholly  outside  the  law,  you  assume  that  many  of  its  mem-
bers  will  go  underground,   that  they  will  not  carry  member-
ship  cards,  that  there  will  be  no  record  kept  of  dues.
In  this  case  Mr.  Justice  Whittaker   admits  that  there  was
no  evidence  that  Killian  had  ever  formally  joined   the   Com-
munist  Party.    The  FBI  paid  informers  on  whom  the  govern-
ment  relied  never  did  establish  that  the  accused   labor   leader
was  a  member  on  the  date  when  he  took  the  oath.    But  the
Communists  in  the  labor  movement  having  been  driven  under-
ground,  the  Court  says  that  since  the  organization  is  presumed
to   be   "operating   secretly"   membership   necessarily    becomes
something   which  can  only  be  proven  in  "subjective"  terms.
Maybe  Killian  was  a  Communist  hiding  his  activities.    Maybe
he  was a non-Communist  who  agreed  with  the  Communists  on
certain  issues.    In  allowing  conviction  by  inference  from  par-
allelism,  the  standards  of  proof   and  of   justice  are  lowered.
Where  proof   of   party  membership   can  be   "subjective"    no
one  left  of  centre  is  safe  if  the  pendulum  swings  far   enough.
Dissenters  On The  Danger  of  Defining  Communist Party  Membership As  A  State  of  Mind
"It  is  evident  that   the  five  Justices   who  sustained   the
membership   clause   [of   the   Taft-Hartley non-Communist
oath  in  ACA  v.  Douds  12  years  ago]   considered member-
ship  to  involve an  externally manifested act  or  acts  of  asso-
ciation  and  admission, understood as  such  by  the  Party  and
by   the  member.  .  .  .  Accordingly,  since   the   Court  today
authorizes  an  instruction which permits  a  jury  to  convict  of
false  swearing  as  to  membership, conceived  as  a  purely  sub-
jective  phenomenon ...  it  goes  beyond  Douds  and  repudi-
ates  a critical assumption  of  that  decision.  .  . .
"Douds   was  decided  on  May  8,  1950.    Two  and one-half
years  later,  on  Dec.  11,  1952,  Killian  swore  that  he  was  not
a  member  of  the  Communist  Party.    Why  he  should  have
supposed  that  he  was  disavowing  anything  except  objec-
tively  manifested  Douds  sense  membership—the  most  natu-
ral  meaning  to  impute  to  the  oath,  and  the  one  explicitly
assumed  by  the  Court  in  upholding  the  constitutionality of
its  exaction—I  cannot  imagine.    To  convict  him  of, perjury
now,  on  the  assumption  that  membership  may  exist  without
externalized  application to  and  acceptance  into  the  organi-
zation,  is   to  trap  petitioner  in  the  backlash  of   an  unpre-
dictable  shift  in   construction."
—Mr.  Justice  Brennan  dissenting  in  Killian  v.   U.S.
"Beliefs  are  as  much  in  issue  here  as  they  were  in  the
Douds  case.     If   that  case  means  anything,  it   means   that
one  who  was  a  member  only  to  promote  a  lawful  cause  of
the  party  should  not  be  subjected  to  the  legal   odium  that
attaches  to  full-fledged  members.    The  fact   that   one  be-
lieves  in  peace,  disarmament, a  ban  on  nuclear  testing,  or
the  disbandment  of  NATO may  put  him  out  of  step  with  the
majority.    But  unless   we  toss  to  the  winds  the   tolerance
which   a   Free   Society   shows   for   unorthodox,  as   well   as
orthodox   views,  the   fact   that   a   person   embraces   lawful
views  of  the  party  should  not  establish   that  he  is  a  'mem-
ber'  of  the  party  within  the  meaning of  the  Act.    Member-
ship,  as  that  word  is  used  in  the  Act,  should  be  proved by
facts  which  tie  the  accused  to  the  illegal  aims  of  the  party.
If  beliefs  are  used  to  condemn the  individual,  we  have  our-
selves  gone  a  long  way  down  the  totalitarian path."
—Mr.   Justice    Douglas    dissenting   with   Chief     Justice
Warren  and  Mr.  Justice  Black  in  Killian  v.  I7.S.
"I  think  the  Constitution  absolutely prohibits the Govern-
ment  from  sending  people  to  jail  for  'crimes'  that  arise  out
of,  and  indeed  are  manufactured  out  of,  the  imposition  of
test   oaths   that   invade   the   democratically   indispensable
freedoms  of  belief  and  association."
—Mr.  Justice  Black  dissenting  with  Mr.  Justice   Douglas
in  Killian   v.   U.S.
1   8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  18,  1961
Why  Accuse  Heusinger   of  Genocide,  When  East  and  West  Prepare  Wider  Cremations?
Only  One  Lesson  Matches  the  Crimes  the  Eichmann  Trail  Recalled
Walking   around  East  Berlin  in   1959,   I  wandered   into  a
theatre  where  a  movie  was  playing  called  "Sterne"  (Stars).
The  stars  were  the  stars  of  David  the  Jews  wore  in  the  Hitler
period.    It  was  a  Bulgarian-East  German  film  about  a  Jewish
concentration  camp  girl  with  whom  a  Wehrmacht  officer  falls
in  love,  later  joining the  Partisans  when  she  is packed  into  the
freight  cars  for  Auschwitz.  . When  I  hear  that  the Eichmann
verdict  has  finally  been  handed  down  in  Jerusalem,  I  remem-
ber  a  scene  in  that  film  when  the  concentration  camp  inmates
first  hear  rumors  that  the  Germans  are  burning  up  people  in
crematoriums.    They  go  to  their  leader,  an  old  Jewish   doctor,
and  he  reassures  them  saying,  "Aber  die  Deutschen  sind  auch
Menschen,"   i.e.  "The   Germans  are  also  human."     He  feels
no  human  being  could  possibly  do  anything  so  wicked;  the
rumors  couldn't  be  true.
How  Easily  They  Excuse  Themselves!
I  cried,  remembering  the  survivors  with  whom  I  travelled
as  a  reporter  from  Poland  to  Palestine  in  the  spring  of   1946,
and  the  stories  they  told.  I  haven't  had  the  heart  to  follow  the
Eichmann  trial.  This  one  man  in  the  dock  is  too  trivial beside
the  mountainous toll  of  humilitation and  death  he symbolized.
Whether  sincerely or  not,  the  picture  he  drew  of  himself  was
a  picture  likely  to  appeal  to  many  Germans  as  guilty  as  he,
the  picture  of  the  fussy   bureaucrat  who  only  did  his  duty,  a
cog in  a machine.   How  easily  the  Germans  excuse  themselves.
But  we  learn  nothing  by  blaming  them.    Events  since  the
war  have prepared  greater  crematoriums.    Everywhere men ex-
cuse  themselves  the  same  way.    We  dropped  little  bombs  on
the  innocent  in  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki.    Now  we  and  the
Russians  together  are  prepared  to  drop  bigger  ones.    The  is-
sues  have  become  blurred.    Most  terrible  of  all  is  that  these
dreadful  truths  have  become  stale and  futile  commonplaces  we
all   ignore.
I  don't  know  what  the  verdict will be on  Eichmann. I  don't
care.  But  it  would  honor  world  Jewry  if  the  judges  were  to
refuse  even  in  his  case, with  all  it  implies",  to  impose  the  death
penalty  Israel  abolished.    It  would  be  a  noble  rebuke  to  an
Stalin  Too  Soft  On  Berlin!
" 'Zhukov, oh  he's  all  right,'  the  [Aerflot]  pilot  inter-
jected. ...  'If  Stalin  had listened  to  Zhukov  in  1945  we
would   not  be  about  to  have   a  war   over   Berlin.    He
never  wanted to  let  in  all  those  Americans.    It  was  we,
after  all,  who  captured  the  place.    Stalin  did  not  listen
to  Zhukov  and  let  them  walk  in.    And  now  look  where
we  are.    They  won't  get  out  without  a  war  and  Nikita
Sergeyich  won't  back  down  either.""
—Dinner   table   conversation  in  the  National   Hotel,
Moscow,   last   summer   as   reported    by   "Monitor"     the
Soviet   expert   of   The   Times   (London)    in  its   Nov.   30
issue,  one  of  a  series  on  his  trip  through  the   U.S.S.R.
Another  remark   he  reported,   "Do  you   know,  if   you
think  of  it,  during   the  cult  of  personality   we  had  al-
most  less  democracy   than  they  did  in  the  West"!
un-Christian  Christian world  and  to  a  still  brutal  Russian Com-
munist  world  of  death  sentences  for  minor  offenses,   to   two
worlds  which  share  the  poison  of  anti-Semitism  still   despite
the  Gospels  they  respectively proclaim and  the  horror  to  which
Hitler  showed  it  could  lead.    Let  Eichmann live  on  like  Cain,
with  the  Mark  upon  him.
It  is  more  important  to  recognize  that  the  Mark  is  on  all
of  us.    What  good   is  it  for  Moscow  to  accuse  Heusinger  of
war  crime  when  Khrushchev  himself  threatens  it  on  a  greater
scale,  and  we  do  likewise?    Would   an   extra-terrestrial  tri-
bunal  after  a  new  war  distinguish  between  Russians and  Amer-
icans  and  Germans?    Is  mass  murder  justified  for  any  reason
whatsoever?    Is  not  every  national   leader  a  war  criminal  if
he  does  not  recognize  that  no  dispute  justifies  risking  the  fu-
ture  of  our  common  human  species?
I  would  proclaim  a  day  of  meditation  on  the  crematoriums,
a  universal  Day of  Atonement.    I  would  remember  that we all
march  with  Eichmann  to  the  prison  or  the  gallows.    Whether
it  was  the  human  oven  or  the  H-bomb,  we  built   it.    To  be
human  is  to  be  guilty.    No  other  message  has  the  dimensions
to  match  what  this  trial  recalled.
Minor  Triumph  Dept.:  A*  press  time  the  ECLC  Bill  of  Rights  Dinner  had  been  reinstated  at  the  Commodore  for   Dec.   15  an  order  of
N.  Y.  Supreme  Court  Judge  Arthur  Markewieh   (who  was praised  for  this  by the  New  York  Times).
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name   .............................................................................................
Street    ..................................
City ............................................:
12/18/61
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name    ...............................................................................
Street      ...........................................................................................
City   ............................................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  IS,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Weekly  Not  Published   Last  Two Weeks  of  Year -  Next   Issue  Dated  Jan. 8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED