I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961may29.pdf

============================================================

Klansmen  in Alabama's  Police, P. 3
New  Frontier's  First  New  Idea—For  the  Tractor  Business,  P.  2;  Why We Behave  So  Oddly in  Korea,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  20
MAY   29,   1961
«>'       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15   CENTS
On   A  Certain  Blindness  to  the  Peril  of  Racism
Our   hat   is  off  to   the   Attorney   General   for   acting   with
vigor  and  dispatch  in  Montgomery's   outburst  of  white   racist
violence,  and  we  hope  the  President   will  move   into  a   posi-
tion  of  active  leadership   if  trouble  spreads,   as  it  is  likely  to
do.     For   this   is  one   of   these   strange  situations   in   which
law  and  order  are  no  longer  synonyms  but  suddenly   almost
opposites.     If  the  young  students  now  making  history  in  the
South   persist   in   insisting   that   the   government    uphold   the
law's  guarantee  of  equal  treatment  for  white  and  black,  there
will  be border.    If  they  and  the  Negro  community  are  per-
suaded  to  sink   back  into  acquiescence,   there   will   again   be
order.
The  South  Mistakes  Jesus  for  Marx
But  the  South  has  too  long  been  enabled  to  enjoy   order
at  the  expense  of  law,  to  persist  in  those   peculiar   customs
which  once meant  slavery  and  now  mean  humiliation  for  the
darker   half   of   its   citizens.    The   "Freedom   Riders"   have
achieved  the  first  great  success  of  Gandhi's  non-violent  tactics
in  America  by  striking  at  those  crucial  points  in  the  system
of   white  supremacy  where  direct   action   is  possible.     The
South  can  drag  its  heels  for  years  on  school  segregation,  as
it  has  for  decades on  voter  rights,  but  the  right  to  sit  unsegre-
gated  in  a  bus  or  at  a  lunch  counter  is  a  right  an  individual
can  enforce  for  himself  if  he  has  the  courage  to  face  up  to
insult  and  injury,  to  persist,  and  to  establish  his  moral  su-
periority  by  turning  the   other   cheek.    It   is  not  surprising
that  this  sudden  appearance  of  literal  fidelity  to  the   Gospel
should  so  startle  the  supposedly  pious  South  that  the  tactic
is  blamed  on  Marx  rather  than  Jesus.   The  "Freedom  Riders"
have  again  made Christianity  a  revolutionary creed.
Mr.  Kennedy has  said  in  another  connection that  things will
probably  get  worse  before  they  get  better.    This   is  true  in
the   South.    A  moment  is  rapidly  approaching,  perhaps   in
Mississippi,  when  Mr.  Kennedy  will   have  to  do  what   he
criticized  Mr.  Eisenhower for  not  doing—and  that  is to  bring
the  full  moral  force  of   his  high   office   to  bear.    The   fact
that  only  one  Southern  Senator,  Ervin   of  North   Carolina,
has  spoken  up  in  support  of  the  Federal  government's  action
in  Montgomery, that  the  whole  Alabama delegation  has asked
for  the  withdrawal  of  the  Federal  marshals,  that  the  Gover-
nors  of  Mississippi  and  Arkansas  have  spoken  up  in  support
of  the  Governor  of  Alabama,  that  they  all  blame  the   "agi-
tators",  indicates the  dimensions of  the  challenge.    The  South-
ern  mobster,  like  the  Communist  guerrilla   in  another  con-
text,  is  effective  because  he  has  tacit,  popular  sympathy;  the
Southern  white  may  deplore   violence,  but  he'd  like  to  see
the  Negro kept  down  in  an  inferiority  which  is profitable and
flattering  to  him.
Too  many  Southern  men  and  women  regard  freedom   to
J.  Edgar  Sees  the  Sit-ins  as  a  Red  Plot
"Communist   propaganda   has   always   been   quick   to
seize   on  problems  of  minority  groups.     Instances   in-
volving  the  Negro  race  have  been  prime  targets  in  this
barrage.    The  sit-in  demonstrations   in  the  South   were
a  made-to-order issue  which  the  party  fully  exploited
to  further  its  own  ends.  .  .  .  The  Communist   Party
strategy   was  not  to  openly   advocate  picketing,   inas-
much  as  this  would  tend  to  expose   its   members,  but
rather  to  get  behind  the  movement  by  urging   college
students  to  take  the  initiative.   The  importance   which
the  Communist Party,  USA,  has  placed  on  these  demon-
strations   were  sharply  brought   into  focus   when   Ben-
jamin  Davis,  the  party's  national  secretary  [a  Negro—
IFS],  told  the  Party  in  March,  1960,  that  these  demon-
strations  were  considered  the  next  best  thing  to  'prole-
tarian  revolution'."
—FBI   Chief   J.  Edgar  Hoover, testifying   on  the 1962
budget   in   the  newly   released   House   Appropriations
Committee  hearings,  p.  423.
humiliate  Negroes  as  their  most  precious  constitutional  tight.
The  struggle  for  equality  is  in  this  sense  as  irreconcilable  as
was  the  struggle  against  slavery.
In  this  struggle  public  attention  should  be  focussed  on  the
extent  to  which  a  curious  lack  of  antipathy  for  extreme  racist
organizations   like  the  Klan   affects   the   forces,  so-called,   of
law  and  order.    On  page  three  we  print   excerpts   from  a
published  report  by  Alabama  citizens on  the  extent  to  which
the  police  are  actually  infiltrated  by  the  Klan.    We  also  call
attention  to  the  recently  released  House  Appropriations  Com-
mittee  hearings  on  the  Justice  Department  budget.    Here  we
find  the  head  of  the  FBI  treating  the  sit-ins   (see  box  on  this
page)   as  a  Communist  plot   in  a  way  which  can  only  en-
courage  the  racial  paranoia  endemic  in  the  South.     Though
the  Klan  and  allied  organizations  have  been  growing  rapidly,
Mr.  Hoover  still  clings  to  the  senescent  and  dwindling  Com-
munist  Party,  USA,  as  our  No.   1  subversive  menace.    He
claims  to  have  "some   200  known  or  suspected,  Communist
front  and  Communist-infiltrated  organizations"  under   investi-
gation   by  the   FBI,   a  number  so  inflated   to  anyone  aware
of   the   realities  on   the   shrunken   American   Left   that   one
assumes  he  must  suspect  Marxist-Leninists  even  in  the  patri-
otic  bosom  of  the  DAR.    But  there  is  not  a  word   about
keeping  our  rapidly  expanding  network  of  racist  and   Fascist
groups  under  surveillance.    Mr.  Hoover  is  fierce  about  Reds,
pinks  and—a  favorite  target  of  his  scorn—"do-gooders",  but
he  never  seems  to  warn  against  racism,  just  as  Senator   East-
land  never  subpoenas  Klansmen  as  a  menace  to  internal  se-
curity  nor  Mr.  Walter  preachers  of  race  hatred  as  un-Amer-
ican.
7   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  89, 1961
Why  Wait  For  Fiascoes?    Why  Not  Farm  Equipment   (As  Well  As  Food)  For  Peace?
At  Last  the  New  Frontier  Turns  Up  A  New  Idea  — For  the  Tractor  Trade
It   is  unkind   to  suggest,  but  we  can't   resist  it,   that   the
New   Frontier   has  finally  produced   a  new   idea—a  way  to
stimulate  the  tractor  business.    A  few  more  unsuccessful  in-
vasions  below  the  border,  by  exiles  who  talked   of   fighting
to the  death  but  (judging  by the number  of  prisoners)  quickly
turned   themselves   in  almost  to  a  man,  and  there  will  be  a
boom   in  farm  equipment.
Having  unburdened  ourselves  of  that  nasty  joke,  we  now
want   to   praise  the   President   for   giving   the   green   light,
and  publicly  admitting  it,  for  the  prisoners-for-tractors   deal.
He  sought  to  fulfill   a  moral  obligation  to  the  exiles  at  con-
siderable  political  risk.    One   has  only  to  compare  his   atti-
tude  with  the  appalling  speech  by  Morse  in  the  Senate  Mon-
day,  with  its  implication  that  it  would  be  better  to  leave  the
prisoners  to  be  "liquidated"  than  take  a  step  which  Morse
said  might  "embarrass—yes,  jeopardize—the  welfare  of  this
country!"
Mrs.  Roosevelt's  Sure   Touch
Mrs.   Roosevelt,   with   her   sure   touch   for   the   humane,
stressed   the   fact   that   the   tractors   were   not   just   ransom
but  a  friendly  gesture  to  the  Cuban  people.    If  we  give  food
for  peace,  why  not  tractors  for  peace?    Why  not  offer   farm
machinery  on  long  term  credits  to  all  our  Latin  neighbors?
Why  wait  for  revolution  and  unsuccessful  counter  revolution ?
Why  not  act  wisely  in  advance?
There  is now  a real  danger  that  Congress  instead  of  investi-
gating   the  bad  advice  of   the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   and   the
CIA  will  take  out  its  frustration   on  the  much  safer  task  of
assailing  the  tractor  deal.     In  this,  we  salute  Senator   Gore
for   outspoken   good   sense   after   hearing  General   Lemnitzer,
the   Arrny   Chief   of   Staff,   in   executive   session   of   Morse's
Latin  American  subcommittee.    A  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  which
could  not  handle  successfully as miniature  an  operation  as  the
Cuban   invasion  certainly  cannot   be   relied   upon   for   more
distant   and    difficult   military   adventures.     Either   they   are
incompetent—and  there  is  plenty  of  evidence  to  suggest  that
none  of  them  are  geniuses—or  they  allowed  this  adventure
sloppily   to  go   forward,  knowing  it   would   fail   but   hoping
that  it  would  serve  to  force   the  President's  hand  and   push
us   into   direct  military   intervention.     (This  theory   I   have
The  One  Vote  Against   War  On  Cuba
"I  voted  against   the  resolution  because  I  favor  one
more  effort  to  talk  to  Cuba.    I  am  opposed  to  invasion
of   Cuba   supported   directly   or   surreptitiously   by   the
United  States.    I  am  opposed   to  a  blockade  of  Cuba,
because   that   would   lead  to  a  major  war  as   sure   as
night   follows   day.     I   voted   against   this    resolution
for  two  basic  reasons:
"First,  it  is  doubtful  that  the  U.S.  can  get  the  neces-
sary   two-thirds  of   the   members  of   the   OAS  to  sup-
port   sanctions,   and  if   our  attempt   at   sanctions  were
to  fail,  the  U.S.   would  again  be  exposed  to  the  world
in  u  \veak,  confused  position.    Second,  at  best  an  effort
at   sanctions   will   split   the   Latin-American     nations,
causing   them  to  choose   up  sides  at  a  time  when  we
need  cohesion  and  unity  in  this  hemisphere.    Further-
more,  if  sanctions  are  imposed,  Castro  would  only  be-
come  a  hero  and  stronger  in  Cuba  than  he  is  now.
"Sanctions    against    Cuba   through    curtailment   of
American   exports   have   already  cost   the   U.S.   a  loss
of   $545  million.    The  Iron  Curtain  countries  are  now
taking  over  our  exports  to  Cuba,  including  such  items
as   automobiles.    I  hope   we   don't   'sanction'  the   U.S.
out   of   the   $3  billion   trade   we   now   enjoy   in   Latin
America."
—Kowalski   (D.  Conn.)  explaining   his   -vote  May   17
against   a  resolution   for   sanctions   through   the   OAS
against  Cuba.    It   was  approved   402  to  2  with  little
discussion  by  a  herd-like  House.    The  other  'nay'   vote
was  cast  by  far-rightist   Clare  Hoffman    (R.  Mich.)  who
prefers   direct  action  against   Cuba  instead.
heard   from   Cuban  exile  sources.)      In   either  case,  Senator
Gore  is  right  and  a  shakeup  is  called  for.    The  Cuban  fiasco
was  a  lightning  flash  illuminating   for  us  the  inner  realties
of   our   vast   military  and   intelligence   bureaucracies.     This
revelation  ought  not  to  be  shoved  under  the  rug.
We   need   to   face   up   to  the   fact   not  only  that   counter
revolution  has  failed  but  that  Latin  America  will  not  support
us  in  action  against  Cuba.    To  recognize  realities,  to  resume
relations,  to  buy  Cuban  sugar   (and   reimburse  U.S.   property
owners   from   the  premium   above   the   world   price)   is  the
road  of  sanity and  the  one  way  to  restore  American  influence
in  Cuba.    Cuba  ought  to  be  the  first  assignment  of  the  peace
corps.
Five  Democratic  Congressmen  Question Offer  of Polaris  Subs to NATO
"It  is  with  great  concern  that  we  view  the  reported   offer
of  the  U.S.  to  commit  Polaris  nuclear  submarines  to  forces
assigned   to  NATO.    In  1954  Congress   enacted  the  Atomic
Energy   Act  which  provides  that  nuclear  weapons   may  be
used  only  at  the  direction  of  the  President.  This  law  reflects
the  deep  concern  of  the  Congress  that,  if  nuclear   weapons
were  under  the  control  of  other  nations,   the  possibility   of
all  out  war  would  be  increased   immensely.
"The  recent   offer  of  Polaris   submarines  raises   questions
which  are  of  vital  importance  to  the  Nation  and  the  people
we   represent   as   Members  of   Congress.
"1.  Under  the  present   offer,  who  will  have  ultimate  com-
mand  over  these   submarines?
'•'2.  If  there  is  aggression  in  Europe,   who  will  have  the
authority   to   issue   an   order   to   use   the   Polaris   nuclear
weapons?     (a)   To  what  extent  will  the  NATO  commander
participate   in   this   decision?      (b)   Will   the   other   NATO
nations  have  the  power  to  veto  a  U.S.  decision  to  use  these
Polaris  submarines?     (c)   Will  the  U.S.   Government  have
the  right   to  veto   a  NATO   decision   to  use  these   Polaris
submarines?
"3.  Does  this  offer   of   nuclear   submarines   indicate   that
the   Administration   has   decided   to   arm   NATO   with   any
other  nuclear   weapon?
"4.  How  does   the   U.S.   plan   to   integrate   these  subma-
rines  into  the  NATO  striking   force?
"We   would   very   much  appreciate   an   answer   to   these
questions   and  respectfully   request   that   no   final   decision
should  be  made  on  this  issue  until  Congress  has  the  oppor-
tunity  to  consider  this  matter   fully."
—Open  Letter  to  the  Secretary   of  State  May   18  by  five
Democratic   Congressmen:   Ashley,   Ohio;  Blatnik,   Minn.;
Kastenmeier,  Wis.;  Kowalski,  Conn,  and  Wm.  Fitts  Ryan,
N.Y.      The   letter   was   ignored   by   the   press.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May   29, 1961
We  Hate  to  See  Democracy   Go,  But   Feel   More  Secure  With  A  Rightist    Dictatorship
Why   the  Tail  Is  Allowed  to  Wag  the  Dog  in  Our  Satellite  Korea
Korea,  like  Iran,   is  another   of   those   convulsions   in   our
far-flung  but  crumbling  American  empire.    As  usual,   despite
our  open  society  and  free  press,  we  don't  really  know  what
happened  there.    But  if  we  stand  back  from  the  picture,  we
can   see  the  main  outlines.     The   logic   of   the   situation  in
Korea  indicated  that  there  would  soon  be  a  swing  to  the  left
or  to  the  right;  certain army leaders,  facing  cuts  in  their  own
power   and  payrolls,   acted   first.   Our   government  met   the
crisis  with  a  divided  mind.    We  didn't  like  to  see democracy
go  but  at  the  same  time  we  felt  that  maybe  a  comfortably
anti-Communist  military  dictatorship  would  be  a  better  safe-
guard  for  our  essential  interests.    Our  press  as  a  whole,  shar-
ing  this characteristic national mood,  reveals  a bit  of  the  truth,
enables  us  to  glimpse  the  Fascist-style  terror  in  the  wake  of
the  coup,  but  there  is  no  outcry  about  loss  of  civil  liberties
and  the  sufferings  of  the  South  Koreans  under  the  yoke  of
despotism.    That  rhetoric   we  reserve   for   Cuba.     In   brief,
we  dislike  dictatorships  imposed  to  bring  about  fundamental
social  reform.    We  "rapes  easy"  when  a  dictatorship   comes
along  to  prevent  social  reform.    This  is  the  pattern  of  our
policy  in  Asia,  as  in  Latin  America.
Korean  "Democrats"   As  Bad  As  "Liberals"
As  often  happens,  one  can  get  a  clearer  picture  from  the
press   abroad   than   at  home.     We   recommend   a  full   page
article  in  Le  Figaro  April  6.    It  provides  a  vivid  picture  of
events  since  the  Rhee  dictatorship  was  overthrown   in  April
I960:  the  disappointment   of  the  students   with   the  Chang
regime  and  the  extent  to  which  its  leading  "Democrats"   were
financed by  the  same  corrupt  "Liberals"  who  supported   Rhee;
bad  crop  conditions  (as  in  neighboring   China)   had  put  the
poor  farmers  in  hock  to  the  userers,  a  common  feature of  the
Oriental  countryside,  and  there  were  reports  of   peasant  ris-
ings.    There  was  enough   democratic  liberty  under   the  new
regime  to  give  discontent  a  voice  but  not  enough  vision  in  a
stodgily   conservative   government    to   satisfy   popular    aspir-
ation.    Korean   feeling,   strikingly   without  anti-Americanism
in  the  overthrow  of  Rhee,  began  to  change.    "For   the  first
time  since  the  bitter  Korean  civil  war,"   a  correspondent   re-
ported  from   Seoul  in  Eastern  World   (London)   May    1961,
Forbidden  Thoughts  Dept.
Judging  by  an  extension  of  remarks  in  the  Congres-
sional   Record   May  22,   Chairman  Walter  of   the   Un-
American  Activities Committee  has  been  upset  by  un-
favorable  reactions  from  college  campuses  on  his  plans
to  investigate the  Fund  for  Social  Analysis.   Hearings
were  to  have  begun  last  Monday but  Mr.  Walter  said
they  had  been  postponed  until  a  later  date.    New  sub-
poenas  call  for  a  hearing  on  May  31.    The  Fund  aids
research  on  problems of  Marxist  theory  and  its  appli-
cation  to  social  analysis.   Grants  have  been  made  by  it
to   Professors   Paul   A.   Baran,   Gordon   K.   Lewis  and
William   Appleman   Williams;  Drs.   Herbert  Aptheker
and   Bernice   Shoul   and   graduate   student   Martin   J.
Sklar.     In   the   Committee's  eyes,   of   course,  Marxist
studies  represent  forbidden  thoughts.
"signs   blackly  demanding   'Yankee,  Go  Home',"   began   to
appear  in  the  popular  demonstrations  against  the  Chang  gov-
ernment.    We  read  there  of  a  National  Union  of  US  Armed
Forces   Employes   clashing   with   the  police   before   the   very
doors  of  the  U.S.  Embassy.    U.S.  Army  authorities  were  re-
ported   fearful   of   this   anti-Americanism   and   distrustful   of
demands  in  the  Assembly  for  a  "status  of  forces"   agreements
which  would  have  subjected  our  GI's  to  the  Korean  courts.
Koreans  resented  our   efforts   to  tighten  up  on  corrupt   uses
of  our  aid  funds   and  to  enforce  fiscal  stabilization.    Above
all,  we  feared  renewed  demands  to  loosen  up  the  tight  wall
between  the  industrial  north   and  the  agricultural   South  of
that  unhappily  divided  land,  with  a  border  which  makes  that
between  East  and  West  Germany  seem  easy  and  open.
So  at  the  cost  of  appearing  ludicrous  and  undermining  re-
spect  for  our  military  command,  we  have  acquiesced  in  the
seizure  of  power   by  a  small  handful   of   military   mutineers
led  by a  "reformed"   ex-Communist.    We  pay  the  Army;  the
country  is  a  ward  of  the  United   Nations;   its  army—fantas-
tically  the  fourth  largest  in  the  world—would  dissolve   over-
night  without  the  quarter  billion  dollars  a  year  we  pour  into
the  country.    Yet  somehow  the  tail  wags  the  dog.     It  wags
the  dog  because  instinctively  that  is  how  the  dog  would  like
to  be  wagged.    This  is  the  secret  of  this  tragicomic  story.
Alabama  Police  and  Even  Bench  Infiltrated by Klan and Other Rightist Groups
the  majority  of  the  respondents felt  that  the  police
did  not  enjoy  the  confidence  of  the  Negro  citizens  to  such
an  extent  that  the  citizens would  feel  free  to  summon them
for  protection  in  case  of  threat  of  crime  or  harm  against
them.  .  .  .  The highest  recorded  vote  of  non-confidence was
for  the  local  officials  of  Montgomery and  the  next  highest
was  for  those  of  Birmingham.  .  .  .  AH except  six  of  the
Negro  respondents  felt  that  citizens  preferred  private  set-
tlement  of  their  grievances  rather  than  calling  the  police.
In  Montgomery  and  in  Birmingham the  sentiment in regard
to  this was  unanimous . .  .  the police  use  of  mounted posses
and  of  vicious dogs  as  guards  were  regarded  as  a  greater
threat   to   Negro  citizens  than  anything  the  police  could
guard  them  against.  .  .  .
"Another   item  that   seemed   to   be   symptomatic  of   the
unfavorable  attitude  of  local  officials  towards the  police  was
the  response  by  the  observers  [an  anonymous  questionnaire
had  been  sent  in  March  and April  of  this  year  to  '120  well
informed  observers' white  and Negro—IFS]  to  the  question
about  collusion  between  the  police  and  the  Ku  Klux  Klan.
About  65%  of  the  respondents  intimated that  local  officials
give  the  appearance  of  working  hand  in  hand  with  right-
wing  terrorist  groups  such  as  the  Ku Klux  Klan .  .  .  about
45  percent  of  the  respondents  indicated  that  local   officials
were  known  to  hold  memberships  in  the  Ku  Klux  Klan  or
in  these  right-wing  subversive,  terrorist  organizations.  .  .  .
"A surprising number  (18)  of  the  [46]  respondents stated
that  instances  had  been  reported  where  judges  seemed  to
be  influenced  by  right-wing,  terroristic  and  subversive  or-
ganizations  like  the  KKK.   Nine  of  the  respondents,  how-
ever,   noted  the  history-making cases   of   verdicts  against
Klansmen  by  Birmingham and Montgomery judges  in  cases
involving  crimes  by  Klansmen against   Negroes."
—Report    by   Alabama    Advisory    Committee    of    Civil
Rights   Commissiom,   first   brought   to   light    by   Fletcher
Knebel,  in  the  Cowles  Newspapers,   May   22-23.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  May  S9, 1961
The  SEP's  "Report  the  President   Wanted  Published"  Fosters  Military  Delusions
The  Real  Story  Behind  That  One  Viet  Village  Which   Defies   Guerrillas
The  Saturday   Evening  Post  last  week   (May   20)   printed
a  story  called  "The   Report  the  President  Wanted   Published."
It  carried  an  editor's   note  saying  that  their  story  was  based
on  a  report  from  an  Air  Force   officer   in  Vietnam  which  at-
tracted   President   Kennedy's   attention.    The   report   told  of
a  visit  to  a  region   of   South  Vietnam  which   "has   for  years
been  controlled  by  Communist  guerrillas."    It  dealt  with  one
village,  Binh  Hing,  which  had  nevertheless  held  out  against
the  Communists.
The  report  originally  was  classified.    "But  behind  the   offi-
cial  language  of  the  report,"  the  editors  of  the  SEP said,  "the
President  saw a  story  of  human  valor  and  dedication  to  free-
dom,  a  reminder  that  Communism   is  not  the   wave  of   the
future.    It  was  a  story,  he  felt,  that  many  people  ought  to
He  Knows  All  About  Them  From  TV
"Chairman  Richard B.  Russell  (D.  Ga.)  of  the  Senate
Armed   Services   Committee  wants  the   Army  to  find
another  name  for  its   Special   Forces—something  like
Rangers  or  Scouts.    The  Senator  told  Army  Secretary
Elvis  J.  Stahr,  Jr.,  not  to  let  the  word  'guerrilla'  get
mixed  up  in  the  name.
" 'I  rather  associate   guerrillas   and  bushwackers  to
be  on  the  side  of  the  bad  folks  on  television,'  Senator
Russell  said,  'and  the  Rangers  and  the  Boy  Scouts  on
the  side  of  purity  and  justice'."
—Army  Navy  Air  Force  Journal  May  20.
We  Thought   Congress   Was
Supposed   to  Give  That  Word
"The   Special  Warfare  Center  .  .  .  also   appears  to
have  an  open  line  to   the  desk  of   a   top  presidential
assistant  at  the  White  House.  .  .  .  Because  this  road
is  new  and  uncharted,  it  is  dangerous.    What,  for  in-
stance,  happens to  a  trooper if  he  is  captured—as  some
may  be—within  a  country  against  which  we  have never
declared  war?   .  .  .  Special  troopers  like  their  new
role.  .  .  .  Now  they  consider   themselves,  The   Presi-
dent's  Own,'  the  same  way  British  regiments  used  to
pledge  personal  fidelity  to  their  sovereign.    'When  he
needs  us,  we'll  be  ready,'  a  battle-scarred   major  said
the  other  evening.    'All  he  needs  do  is  give  the  word,'
chimed  in  a  young  lieutenant."
—Washington  Daily  News  May  15,  series  from   Fort
Bragg,  N.C.  on  our  "unconventional   warfare"    forces.
read,  and  he  wrote  a  memorandum  suggesting  that  the  report
would   make   'an   excellent   article   for   a   magazine   like   the
Saturday   Evening  Post."
This  SEP article,  in  our  opinion,  merely  fosters  the  inflated
hopes  aroused  by the  Army's publicity  campaign  about  counter
guerrilla  tactics.   This  one  village  is  about  as  atypical  as  any
to  be  found  in  Buddhist  and  Taoist  South  Vietnam.    It  was
established   by  Catholic   Chinese   refugees   led   by  a   Roman
Catholic  priest  who  had  been  a  lieutenant  colonel  in  Chiang
Kai-shek's  army.    Such  men  have  something  to  fight  for—
their  very  existence.
It  is  equally  obvious  that   the  native   Laotian  villagers  in
the   same  general  area   did  not   fight,   or  the   region   would
not  have  been  "for  years controlled  by Communist  guerrillas."
The  really  sobering   question   is  why  the .native  Laotians  in
that  region   either  supported   the   guerrillas   or  did   not   feel
hostile  enough   to  put  up  a  fight  against   them.
Handfuls   of  guerrillas   can  dominate  a  whole   countryside
only  when  the  government  is  weak,  corrupt   and   unpopular.
Newsweek's   cover   story  on   Southeast   Asia   (May   22)    pro-
vides   some   clues  when   it  tells  of  the   brutality  with   which
Diem's  so-called  reforms  in  South  Vietnam  have  been  carried
out,  like  his  effort,  now  suspended,  to  force  the  peasantry  into
Communist   style   "agrovilles"   which   combined   the   features
of  a  commune  and  a  concentration   camp.
One  Vietnamese   officer  engaged  in  anti-guerrilla  work  was
quoted  in  Newsweek   as  saying,  "It's  obvious  that  the   popu-
lation  knows  what's  going  on,  but  they  refuse  to  talk.    So
they  have  to  be  roughed  up—or  worse.    After  an   operation
of   this   sort,   those  who  aren't   Viet   Cong   [pro    Communist
guerrilla]    already  probably   will   be.     It's   a  vicious  circle."
The  fact  that  a village of  Roman  Catholic  Chinese  Nationalists
holds  out  is a tribute  to  their  courage,  but  has  no  real  bearing
on  the  problem  in  South  Vietnam.
Help  Vs  By  Selling  A  Sub  to  A  Friend  by  Phone  or  Over  Luncheon
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for
......................................... ..Zone. ......
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  raos.)  or  $4
we  send  gift  announcement?
the  enclosed  $5:*
.....State....................
6/29/61
(1 yr.)   additional:
.....State....................
Yes  D    No  D
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Entered u  Second  Clam  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  8,  187».    Post-dated  Mondays  but  publlahed  mry  Thurs-
day  except  the  U«t  two  Thursdayi  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  G.   An  independent  weekly
pnbliahed  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Hanacer.  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   >6  In  the  U.  S.;   16  In
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   $15  to   Europe;    (20   to   Israel.    Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED