I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jan23.pdf

============================================================

Dodd  Reviews A  Book  on  Cuba, P.  4
What  the  Senate  Did  Not  Explore  and  the  Public  Does  Not  Know  About  the  New  Secretary  of  State,  3-4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  3
JANUARY  23,  1961
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  New  President  and  the   Senate
On  the  eve  of  the  inauguration, another  kind  of  inaugural
message   could   be  read   in   the   first   actions   of   the   Senate.
The  hold  of  the  right-wing  Democrats  on  the  key  committees
was  strengthened  and   rules  reform  was  shelved   by  an  alli-
ance  of  the  new  Democratic  leadership  with  the  right  wing
Republicans.    A  little,  a  very  little,   discreet  intervention  by
the  new  President  would  have  tipped  the  scales  in  favor  of
rules  reform  and  given  his  liberal  supporters  a  chance  in  the
party  caucus  to  make  committee  assigments  a  little  less  lop-
sidedly   Southern   and   conservative.    This  detachment   from
urgent  tasks of  leadership  by  the  incoming  President  will  cost
his  program  dearly.
Victory  for  Rules  Reform  Would  Have Been  Easy
Few  realize  how  easily  the  motion  to  shelve  rules  reform
might  have  been  defeated.    A  shift  of  two  votes  would  have
been  enough  and  there  are  several  combinations  which  would
have  yielded  them.    The  vote  was  50  to  46,  and  a  tie  would
have  blocked  the  motion.    Two  votes  easily  shifted  if  pres-
sure  had  been  applied   were  those   of   Alaska's   Bartlett   and
Hawaii's   Oren   Young.    Their   votes   to   shelve   were   plain
sell-outs  of  new  States  with  multi-racial  populations;   Young
in  particular  voted  for  every  civil  rights  measure  last  spring.
It  is  a  scandal  that  the  Democrat   Oren  Young  should   have
voted  to  shelve  when  the  other  Hawaiian  Senator,  the  more
conservative  and  Republican  Fong,  voted  against  the   motion.
There  were  other  combinations  which  would   have   converted
that  50-46  into  48-48.    Wyoming's  new  Senator,  Hickey,  was
ready  to  vote  against  shelving  when  its  other  Senator,   McGee
supposedly  a  liberal,  talked  him  out  of  it.    Kennedy   could
have  put  both  into  the  other  column.    McGee  indeed  has  a
reputation  for  being  a  "leadership   man"  but  this  only  raises
the  question  of  whether  Lyndon  Johnson  or  Kennedy  is doing
the  leading.     Another  scandalous  vote  was  that  of   Chavez;
the   one   Senator   of   Latin   American   origin    betrayed   the
Mexican  American's  struggle  for  full  equality  when  he  voted
with   the   Southerners   while   his   fellow   New   Mexican,   the
"Anglo",  Anderson,  fought  for  them.    Gore  said  he  was  for
three-fifths   cloture   but   voted   to   shelve   (while  .the  absent
Kefauver  who  would  have  voted  with  the  liberals  was  incor-
rectly  listed  in  the  Record  as  paired  for  shelving).    A  bit  of
pressure  might  have  swung  Chavez  or  Gore  over,  and   indeed
changed  the  vote  of  the  new  majority  leader  himself.  For  the
wavering  Mansfield has  said  that  he  would  be  for   three-fifths
cloture  if  it  came  to  a  vote.    The   motion  to  shelve   could
have  been  defeated  and  three-fifths cloture  enacted  if  Kennedy
who   was  kept   apprised,   had   applied   pressure.     Or   could
it  be  true,  as  Smathers  of  Florida  is  reported  to  have  told  cer-
tain   Senators,   that  Kennedy   favored   shelving   of   the   rules
fight?
The  Monster  We  Can  No  Longer  Control
President   Elsenhower's   farewell,   with  its   eloquent
warning  against  the  dangers  of  a  huge  military  ma-
chine  and  armaments  industry,  came  too  late  for  this
issue.   We  pause only  to  note  that  it  was foreshadowed
in  his  earlier   State   of   the   Union   message   when   he
said,   "The   'bomber   gap'   of   several   years   ago   was
always   a  fiction,  and   the   'missile'   gap   shows   every
sign  of  being the  same."  We  wonder  whether  a  civilian
president,   without   Mr.  Elsenhower's   prestige   as   a
military  commander, will  dare  challenge  myths  of  this
kind.    Mr.  Elsenhower   himself   was  never   effectively
able   to  combat   these   high   pressure   public  relations
scare  campaigns  designed  to  serve  arms  manufacturers
hungry  for  orders.    From  a  military  view  these  "gaps"
were  folly;  the  billions  spent  on  obsolete  bombers  put
the  U.S.  behind  the  U.S.S.R.  in  the  race  for  the  ICBM.
How  is  the  ordinary  citizen  to  know  the  truth  when
it   takes  time  even   for   a  military  man   as  President
to  see  behind  bloated  intelligence   estimates?
Had  a  motion  to  shelve  been  defeated,  three-fifths   cloture
could  have  been  enacted  by  majority  vote  so  long  as  Nixon
was  still  in  the  chair.    This  would  have  given  the   outgoing
Vice  President   a  final  moment   of   glory.    The    Republican
leadership  could  easily  have  given  Nixon  this  victory.    The
Republicans  were  split,   18  for   shelving   and   16  against   it.
Javits,  who  led  the  battle   for   the  Republican   liberals,  was
surprised   by   the   defection   of   Saltonstall,   a   co-sponsor   of
majority  cloture,  and  by Miller  of  Iowa  who  had  given  a  com-
mitment  to  vote  the  other  way.    These  two  votes  could  easily
have  been  changed,   and  would   have  changed   the   outcome.
But  it  would   have  given  the  Nixon   liberal  wing   predomi-
nance  over  the  Goldwater  conservative  wing  of  the  party,  and
what  Clark  of  Pennsylvania   termed  the   "Goldwater  Demo-
crats"   allied   themselves  with  the  Goldwater   Republicans  to
ensure  conservative  control  of  the  Senate.
This  was a  sour  first  sally  at  the  New  Frontier.    But  what
happened  in  the  privacy  of  the  Democratic  caucus  was  worse
than  what  happened   in  the  full  daylight  of  the  Senate  floor.
There  Senator   Clark   fought   an  unrewarding  battle   to   give
supporters  of  the  Kennedy  program  better  vantage  points  in
the  key  committees.    His  first  objective  was  to  expand  and
change  the  steering  committee  but  while  he  was  named  one
of  three  new  members,  the  other  two  were  Williams  of  Dela-
ware  and  Dodd   of  Connecticut,   the  former  a  colorless  and
the  latter  a  fanatical  right-winger,   both  closely  allied  to  the
dominant  Southern  conservatives  who  still  fill  7  of  the   16
members  of  the  steering   committee.     Clark's   next   objective
was  to  expand  and  liberalize  the  Judiciary and  Finance  Com-
mittees.    He  failed  in  both;  indeed  in  the  case  of  Judiciary,
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  January   23, 1961
Rusk Hearing: What Senate  Foreign Relations Committee Did Not Explore...
The  hearing  given  Dean  Rusk  by  the  Senate  Foreign  Re-
lations  Committee  differed   only  in  minor   essentials  from  a
typical  State Department  press  conference.    Mr.  Rusk  is  abler,
more  cultured   and  subtler  than  the  usual  State  Department
spokesman  but  these  qualities  only  added  a  certain  aesthetic
pleasure  in gamesmanship to his  deft  evasions.   Most  members
of   the  Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee  are  not   as  well
informed  as  the  average  State  Department   reporter  and  their
questions  were  clumsier.    But  by  and  large  the  performance
was  the  usual  departmental  exercise  in  telling  the  press  and
public as little  as possible.    The  only  difference  is that  whereas
on  ordinary  occasions  this  leaves  the  press  frustrated,  on  this
occasion  it  left  a  general  glow  of  satisfaction.   This  was  at-
tributable  in  part  to  the  relief  that  Mr.  Rusk  had  succeeded
in  evading  the  taking  of  any  frozen  positions,  to  the  absence
of  moralizing  in  the  Dulles  style  and  to  an  eloquent   passage
on  the  acceptability  of  neutralism.    Above  all  it  was  reassur-
ing  to  hear  him  back  away  from  the  position  he  took  in  the
April  I960  issue  of  Foreign  Affairs    warning   (on  the  eve  of
the  Paris  meeting)   against  the  dangers  of  summitry.   While
admitting  that  he  had  "as  a  private  citizen,  expressed  some
concern,"  he  now  thinks  "it  would  be  improper  to  generalize
about  an  issue  of  this  sort."
Is  Senate  Scrutiny  to  Become  Empty  Ritual?
A  new  Secretary of  State,  facing  complex  negotiations,  can-
not   show  his  hand   in   advance.    But  the   constitutional   re-
quirement  of  Senate  confirmation  becomes  an  empty  ritual  if
the  hearing  on  the  nomination  produces  only  platitudes.    The
Senate's vote  to  confirm ought  to  be  based  on  something  more
than  wishful   thinking,   deference  to  the  President,   partisan
considerations  or  a  feeling  of  what's-the-use.   There  are  ques-
tions  in  between  the  too  specific and  the  too  general  on  which
a  nominee  may  properly  be  asked  to   express   his   opinions.
One  example  which  comes  to  mind  is  Mr.  Rusk's  answer  to
Senator   Wiley's   request   for   his   views   on   Latin   American
policy.    Mr.  Rusk's  lengthy  reply  was  in  sonorous  but  opaque
Foundation  prose,  and  ended  by  recommending  "more  alert-
ness  as  to  what   they   [the   Latin  Americans]   are   doing   in
the  cultured  world."    Mr.  Rusk  might  well  have  been  asked
his  views  on  such  grimier  hemispheric  problems   as  land   re-
form  and  the  virtual  State  Dept.  embargo  on  loans  for  public
development   of  basic  resources.    No   incandescent  sympathy
for  the  hungry  millions  to  the  south  of  us  shone  through  his
smooth  truisms  yet  the  future  of  the  hemisphere   depends   on
our  ability  to  break  away  from  conventional  diplomatic   pos-
tures.    I  was  sorry  that  Senator  Mansfield,  who  showed   in  a
speech   several   months   ago   that   he   views   black    Africa's
problems  freshly  (see  the  Weekly   of  last  Sept.   5)   did  not
Necrology
We  pause  to  pay  tribute  to  our  friend  Howard  Wat-
son  Ambruster  who  has  just  died  in  New  Jersey  at  82.
He  was  a  chemical  engineer  who devoted  his  life  to  the
fight  for  the  pure  food  and  drug  laws  and  against  the
international   chemical   trust.    His  major  work,  "Trea-
son's  Peace,"  tells  the  story  of  I.G.  Farben's  relations
with  Standard  Oil  before  the  war  in  a  business  con-
spiracy  which  became   a  weapon  of   economic   warfare
in  the  hands  of  Hitler.    Mr.  Armbruster  was  a  brave,
a  tireless  and  a  devoted  man.
On  Rusk's   Financial  Ties
Sen.  AIKEN:  One  other  thing:  This   newsletter   as
I  say  is  not  very complimentary to  you.   It  states  here:
'His   appointment'—  and  I   am  quoting—'his  appoint-
ment   means   that   the   Rockefeller,  Chase  Manhattan,
Standard   Oil  family,  oriented   toward  a   strong   Ger-
many  and  a  tough  colonial  policy, will  have  a  friendly
ear  in  the  topmost  job  of  the  Cabinet.'
Did  I  understand you  to  say  that  you  have  divested
yourself   of   securities   in  corporations?
Mr.  HUSK:   I  have  never  held  securities   in  corpo-
rations.
*             *            *
The   CHAIRMAN   (Fulbright):   Mr.   Rusk,   do   you
have   any   private  interests   that   would  possibly   con-
stitute   a   conflict   of   interest   situation   regarding   this
assignment?
Mr.  RUSK:  I  do  not  think  so,  Mr.  Chairman.  I  have
resigned   as   President   of   the   Rockefeller   Foundation
to   sever   all   ties   of   any   sort   with   the   Foundation,
which   will   be   effective   before   I  would  assume    office.
I  have  no  stocks   or  bonds  of   any   corporate  or   other
private  enterprise   which  would  produce   any  problem
there.   At   the  time  of   the  termination  of   my   service
with   the  Rockefeller  Foundation,  the   trustees   of   the
Foundation   expect   to   enter   into   a   trust    agreement
with  the  Chase  National   [sic]    Bank  to  provide  sever-
ance  pay  for  my  services,  which  will  involve  payments
over   a   period   of   years   under  that   trust   agreement.
—Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee,   Jan.   12.
"The   salary    of    the   president   of    the    Rockefeller
Foundation   is   held   in  strict   confidence,  trustees  and
officers   of   the   Foundation   said   last   night.     It   is  ru-
mored  to  be  between   $50,000   and  $75,000  a  year."
—New   York   Times,  Dec.  13,  "Post   Costs  Rusk  Big
Cut  in  Salary,"   on  appointment   as  Secretary   of  State.
press  Mr.  Rusk  beyond  pleasant  generalities  about  neutralism
to  the  more  specific  question  of  insulating   Africa  from   the
Great  Power  struggle.
A  striking  instance  of   the   Committee's   ineffectuality   was
the  way  in  which  Senator  Aiken  (R.Vt.)  handled   assertions
about  Mr.  Rusk  in  our  newsletter   of  December   19.    Readers
may  see  for  themselves  in  the  boxes  accompanying  this  story
exactly  what  we  said  and  the  questioning   to  which   it   gave
rise.    It  is  extraordinary  that  a  political  sensation   as  great  as
that   caused  by  Mr.  Rusk's  speech   in  May,   1951,   on   China
policy  should  pass  with  so  little  notice  on  the  occasion  of  his
return  to  the  State  Department   as  Secretary.     A  joint   Senate
committee  under  Senator  Russell  was  investigating   the   recall
of   MacArthur   by  Truman;  Generals  Marshall  and   Bradley
were  explaining,   in  the  latter's  memorable   phrase,  that  the
Korean  conflict was the  wrong war  at  the  wrong  time  and  the
wrong  place,  that  the  Korean  peninsula—doorway  to  nowhere
—was  a  dangerously   foolish   area  in  which  to  pin   down   a
major  portion  of  U.S.  military  power.    From  this  sprang  the
logic  of   limiting   the   war   and   negotiating   peace   with   the -
Chinese  Communists  once  South  Korea  had  been  cleared   of
its  invaders.
In  the  middle  of  this  national  debate,   with   the  Truman
administration  besieged,  Henry  Luce  arranged  a  dinner  at  the
Waldorf  Astoria  on  May  18,  1951,   under  the  auspices  of  the
China  Institute  and  invited  Dulles,  Rusk  and  Senator  Douglas
—who  was  then  supporting  MacArthur   against  Truman—to
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   January   S3, 1961
... And  Public Does Not  Know About  Man Kennedy  Chose as Sec'y. of State
speak.     Mr.   Dulles  was   in  the   department  as  a   token   of
bipartisanship;  his  rank  was  Ambassador  and  his  assignment
was  the  Japanese  peace  treaty.   The  trio  went  down  the  Mac-
Arthur  line.    Mr.   Rusk  as  Assistant  Secretary  of   State  for
Far  Eastern  Affairs  made  a  speech  which  was  haled  by  Time,
Life,   David  Lawrence,  Senator  Taft   and  the  rightist   Wash-
ington  Times-He,ald   as  a    reversal  of  our  China  policy  and
the  adoption  of  MacArthur's  views.    Mr.  Rusk  called  Com-
munist  China,  in  a  phrase  deserving  of  a  place  in  the  foot-
notes  of  history  as  a  memorably  colossal   misconception,   "a
Slavic  Manchukuo."    He  asserted  that  the  Kuomintang  alone
represented  the  Chinese  people,   called  on  them  to  rise  and
declared   that   under   no   circumstances  would   we   deal   with
Peking.    This  implied  unlimited  war  against  China  and  un-
dercut  the  Administration's position.    The  Washington  Post
(May  22)   reported   that  Rusk  "did   not  consult   in  advance
with  his  own  Department"  that  the  reactions  at  the  Pentagon
were  "sulphurous"  and  that  Acheson  was  "hopping  mad",  as
well  he  might  be  because  the  speech  was  orchestrated  with  an
uproar  in  Congress   where   43  Republican   Congressmen   and
even   Democrats   like   Gore   and   House   Party  Whip  Percy
Priest   demanded   his   resignation,   while   McCarthy   attacked
him  and  a  "treacherous  Red  clique"  in  the  State  Department.*
The  British  Ambassador protested  to  the  State  Department
that  the  Rusk  speech,  if   it  represented   policy,  would   make
it  impossible  to  negotiate  peace  in  Korea.    Walter  Lippman,
Lowell  Mellett,  Marquis  Childs  and  even  Arthur  Krock  wrote
critical  columns.    Secretary  Acheson  held  a  press  conference
May  23  in which  he  denied  any change  in  policy  had  occurred,
admitted  that  Mr.  Rusk's  choice  of  words  may  have  been  un-
fortunate  and  cut  off  questions  when  they  became  too  sharp.
Had   Rusk  been  discharged  he  would  have  become  the   hero
of  the  China  lobby;  as  it  was  he  was  quietly  smothered.    Six
months  later a  story from  Washington  in  the  New  York   Times
(Nov.   30,  1951)   said  Rusk  was  "expected   to  resign  soon  to
take  a  position  with  private  enterprise."     In  December  when
the  trustees  of  the  Rockefeller  Foundation   met  they  voted  to
make   Rusk   president   on   Chester   Barnard's   retirement   the
following  June.    Dulles   was  then   Chairman  of  the   Rocke-
feller  Foundation  and  I  can  state  with  assurance  on  the  basis
of  private  information that  he  got  Mr.  Rusk  the  job,  reported
*  Life   in   an   editorial   May   28,   1951,  praising   the   Rusk
speech   as   a   "Great   reversal   of   policy   in   Asia"   concluded
coyly,  "Anyone  is  bound  to  wonder  whether  a  Secretary   of
State  with his  [Acheson's]  past  can effectively apply  the  pol-
icy  spelled  out  last  week."   Did  Luce  and  Dulles  hold  out  the
hope  to  Rusk  of  stepping  into  Acheson's   shoes?
What  the  Weekly  Said  of  Rusk
"Mr.  Rusk   was   not  quite  the  colorless   State   Dept.
character   he   is   cracked   up   to   be.     He   became   the
hero   of   the   China   lobby   and   the   MacArthurites   in
1951  as   Assistant   Secretary   for   Far   Eastern   Affairs
and  left  the  State  Department  after  his  relations  with
Secretary  Acheson  became  strained.    He  went  to  the
Rockefeller   Foundation  and  participated  in   the  prep-
aration  of   the  Rockefeller  reports  which  advocated  a
stepped  up  arms  race  behind  a  smokescreen   of  diffuse
liberalism.     His   appointment  means   that   the   Rocke-
feller-Chase   Manhattan-Standard Oil  family,   oriented
toward  a  strong  Germany and  a  tough  colonial  policy,
will   have   a   friendly   ear   in   the   topmost  job   of   the
Cabinet."
—/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  Dec.  19, 1960.
(see  box  on  page  2)  to  pay  from  $50,000  to  $75,000  a  year.
This  was  not  too  bad  a  consolation   prize.
What  Time  Tactfully   Left  Out
In  a  cover  story  on  Rusk  last  December   26,  Time   quoted
the  1951  speech  with  approval  but  said  nothing  of  the  storm
it  had  stirred  up.     So  did  David   Lawrence's   U.S.  News  &
World   Report  of  the  same  date.    Who   would  have  dreamt
in   1951   that   the   ambitious  but   incautious  young   Assistant
Secretary  of  State  who  made  himself  persona  non  grata  with
the  Truman  Administration  by  playing  ball  in  this  way  with
its  political  enemies  would  turn  up  in  a  new  Democratic  Ad-
ministration   as  Secretary  of  State?    To  be  able  to  keep   all
this  so  well  hidden  from  the  view  of  the  Senate  and  the  pub-
lic,  and  perhaps  Kennedy  himself,  is  quite  a  feat.
A  question  from  Chairman  Fulbright  elicited  the  informa-
tion  that  Mr.  Rusk  is  drawing  some  kind  of  annual  payment
from   Chase  Manhattan,   the  bank  of  the  Rockefeller  family
and  Standard  Oil,   as  "severance  pay"   for  his  eight  years  as
president  of  the  Rockefeller   Foundation.     The   Rockefellers
through   their  holdings   in  Katanga  have  a  direct  interest   in
the  Congo  problem;  Standard  Oil  of  New  Jersey,  which  draws
a  major  portion  of  its  income  from  Venezuela,  has  a  similar
stake  in  Latin  American  policy.    These  are  but  two  instances
of   this   imperial   family's  world-wide   interests.     I   did   not
know  of  the  special  trust  fund  when  I  wrote  in  December  but
I  do  not  believe  I  exaggerated  when  I  said  the  Rusk  appoint-
ment  would  give  these  interests  "a  friendly   ear  in  the  top-
most  job  of  the  Cabinet."     It  is  a  strange  kind  of  prudery
about  moneyed  interests  that  shields  such  matters  from  ex-
ploration  by  Senate  committees  and  leaves  the  public unaware
of  their  existence.
Text of  Dean Rusk's Denial of  Strained Relations With  Acheson in  1951 Over  China  Policy
Sen.   AIKEN   (R.  Vt.):  Mr.  Rusk,  I  have  recently   been      vailed  at   that   time?
handed  a  certain  newsletter  which  does  not  give  you  a  very
high  rating  for  the  job  to  which  you  are  being  appointed.
According   to  this  newsletter   you  and  Secretary    Acheson
had   some   difficulties   in   1951,   Secretary   Acheson   felt   we
could   deal   with   the   Red   Chinese   government   and   reach
a  settlement  with  them,  that  you  held  that  the  Red  Chinese
government  did  not  represent  the  Chinese   people  and  that
we  couldn't  do  business  with  them,  and  this  document  says
you,   and   I   quote,   'left   the   State   Department   after   his
relations   with   Secretary    Acheson   became   strained.'
Is  that  an  accurate  summary  of  the  situation  which  pre-
Mr.  [Dean]  RUSK:  Not  at  all,  sir.    That  is  completely
inaccurate.
Sen.   AIKEN:  Did  you  hold-
Mr.  RUSK: When  I  was  serving  with  Secretary  Acheson
we  worked  together   on  all  lines  of  policy,  and  there   was
never  the  division  referred  to  on  any  of  these  major  ques-
tions;  and  I  left  the  Department  of  State  under  the   most
amicable  relations   with  Secretary   Acheson,   and  he  and  I
have  remained   warm  and  close   friends  ever   since.
Sen.  AIKEN:  Very   well.
—Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee,   Jan.   12.
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  January  23, 1961
Clark  Reveals  How  Wilson Cleared the  Way  for  His New  Freedom Program
(Continued   from   Page One)
two  liberal  aspirants,  Burdick  of  North  Dakota   and   Young
of   Ohio,   though   they  had   seniority  were   passed   over   for
Blakley  of  Texas  and  Young  of  Missouri,  just  as  Clark him-
self,  though  he  had  seniority,  was  passed   over  for  Dodd  in
filling  a  vacancy  on  Foreign   Relations.    The   sacred  rule  of
seniority  seems  to  be  waived  for  conservatives.
Eastland  and  Byrd  Guard  the  Vital  Passes
The   result  as  Clark  protested   on  the  Senate  floor  is  that
Judiciary  will  be  controlled   by  a  majority   opposed   to   civil
rights  and  Finance  by  a  majority  opposed  "to  tax  reform,  to
closing  tax  loopholes,  and  to  medical  care  for  the  aged  under
Social  Security."   These  majorities,   as  Clark  said,  "are against
the  program  of  the  President-elect  and  they  are  proud  of  it."
The  political  dynamism  of  the  new  Administration   depends
on  civil  rights;  its  economic dynamism on  creative  use  of  fiscal
powers.     Eastland  and  his  allies  are  in  a  position  to   block
the  first;  Byrd  and  his, to  block  the  second.   This  is  the  in-
augural  message  spelt  out  in  the  realities  of  the  Senate.
It  is  not  often  that  a  Senator  engages  in  original   historical
research.    Clark  did  in  this  battle.    Lyndon  Johnson's   right
hand  man, Bobby  Baker,  secretary  to  the  majority,  ruled  that
the  records  of  past  Senate  caucuses  were  open  to  examination
by  Senators  only,  not  by  their   staffs.     Clark   went   into   the
fading  records  on  his  own  and  reported   a  striking   story  to
the  Senate.    He  said  that  on  the  eve  of  the  New   Freedom,
when  Wilson  took  office  in  1913,  a  revolt  in  the  Democratic
caucus  expelled   some  28  ranking  Democrats  from  committee
chairmanships   and   replaced   them   with   newer    progressive
Senators  pledged  to  support  Wilson's  program.    The  result
was  enactment  within  a  few  months  of   a  sweeping   reform
program.    George  H.   Haynes,  in  his  history  of  the   Senate,
says  this  shakeup  took   place   "after   a  long  conference  with
President  Wilson."    The   revitalized   steering   committee   re-
ported  to  the  caucus  "We  propose  that  this  great  body  shall
be  democratic  not  only  in  name  but  in  practical   reality  and
that  the  charge  so  often  made  that  it  is  controlled   by  a  few
men  through  committee  organization  and  otherwise  shall  no
longer  have  any basis  in fact."   These are  the  dangerous  words
Senator   Dodd  Had  Better   Subpoena
These   Rival  Book  Reviewers
"A  solid,  carefully   documented   yet   dramatic  work
that  tells  the  story  of   Castro's  rise  to  power  and  of
the  manner  in  which  he  was  abetted  by  naive  Amer-
ican  sentimentalists,  deluded  liberals  and  open  philo-
Communists."
—Senator  Dodd  on Nathaniel  Weyl's  "Red  Star  Over
Cuba,"  p.  A173 Congressional  Record  Jan.  11.
"Although  the  book's jacket  proclaims  that  Mr. Weyl
'knows  his  Latin  America,'  his  work  suggests  that  he
not  only  lacks  any  first  hand  knowledge  of  the  Cuban
revolution  .  .  .  but  that  he  is  equally  unaware  of  the
political  realities  of  Latin  America.  .  .  .  Much  of the
information  presented  here,  painting  the  Cuban  revo-
lution   as   a   deliberately   Communist   undertaking,   is
based  on such  sources  as  ...    articles  in the newspaper
of  Dominican  Republic's Dictator  Rafael  Trujillo,  files
of   the  Batista  political  police.  .  .  ."
—Tad  Szulc,  Latin  American   correspondent  of   the
New   York   Times,  reviewing   Weyl's   "Red Star  Over
Cuba,"  Sunday,  Jan. 15.
"  'Red   Star   Over   Cuba'  is   basically  the  perennial
post-World  War  II  argument  about  who  'sold'  this  or
that  country  to  the  Communists. .  .  .  Mr. Weyl's  chief
villains  are  the  State  Department  .  .  .  and  the  Amer-
ican  press.  .  .  .  The  result  is  a  picture  of  devilishly
clever  and  well  organized  Communist  schemers.  .  .  .
It's  a  neat  explanation, but  a  dangerously illusory one.
.   .  .   Many   of   the   'proofs'  of   all   this  however,   are
highly  questionable,  such  as  reports  from   the   secret
police  files  of  former  Latin  American  dictators  .  .  .
the  faith  that  can  be  extended  Mr.  Weyl  is  reduced
by  his  errors  in  facts  that  are  easily  checkable,  such
as   confusion  of   Cuban   economic  czar  'Che' Guevara
with  quite  another  man  and  a  wildly  wrong identifica-
tion   of   the   archbishop  who  once  saved  Pidel's   life."
—Review   in   the   Wall   St.   Journal    Jam..  4   by   its
Havana   correspondent,  James   N.   Wallace,  whom   the
Cuban  government   has  just   expelled  in  a  move   this
Weekly   deplores.
and  the  inspiring  example  Baker  kept  safely  locked  away  in
the  old  records.    A  pity  they  were  kept  from  Kennedy,  too.
Holiday   Gift   Rates  Remain  in  Effect    Only   Until  Next    Week—Act   Now  for   Late   Shopping
I.   P.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  anb for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name
Street    ................
City   .....................
.....................Zone............State....................
1/23/61
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  CD
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebratko  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Clan  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Than
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:   ?10   fK~wher«?.      Air   Miil  rates:   $15   to     Kuro<  ••:    J^o   to      IHTH*-!      A^'.n    and      Afri'-M
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED