I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961apr10.pdf

============================================================

The  Un-Americans  and  the Birch Society,  P.  3
How  the  State  Department  Refused  to  Let  A  FOR Peace  Mission  Visit  Cuba,  Page  Two
/. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  13
APRIL   10,   1961
>'°<       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Only  A  Smoother   Sales  Talk  for  Intervention  in   Cuba
There  were  two  ways  in  which  Castro  could  have  betrayed
his  revolution.    One  was  to  let  it  slide  into  totalitarianism.
|The other  was  to  shelve  his  promises  of  economic  reform  and
tnake  the  private deals  Latin  American revolutionaries usually
make  with  the  big  U.S.  interests   in  their  countries.    If   he
had  chosen that kind  of  betrayal,  would  the  State Department
be  issuing  lengthy  statements documenting  it,  would  the  CIA
be  financing  training  camps  for   rebels  to  overthrow  him?
The  Weakest  Point  in  the  •'White  Paper"
There  are  a  second  set  of  questions  by  which  independent
opinion   abroad,  particularly  in   Latin  America,   will   judge
our   new  U.S.   "white  paper"  on  Cuba.    Did   Castro   slide
toward  the  totalitarian  camp  because  he  wanted  to,  or  be-
cause  U.S.  policies  left  him  no  alternative?   The  succession
of  tragic  events  which  left  Castro  completely  dependent  on
the  Soviet  bloc  for  his  oil  supplies,  his  sugar  market  and  his
hopes  of  industrialization—were  they  the  result  of  his  own
advance  planning  or  a  reaction  to  the  hostility  of  the  U.S.
oil   companies   and   the   ending   of   the   sugar   quota?     The
dynamics  of   any  quarrel  is  a  complex  process,   and  history
will  long   dispute   this  question.    But  one  thing  is  clear.
Perhaps   the   weakest  point   in  the   U.S.   government's  bril-
liantly  written   document   on  Cuba  is  that   section   in  which
if   tries  to  argue  that  the   U.S.  was  not   responsible.    Here
it'lapses  into  a  significant  vagueness.     It  is  true   that   Dr.
Calstro   was   "cordially   received"   on   his   visit  here   in   the
spring  of   1959.    But  it  is  also  true  that  he  was  unable  to
obtain   an   official  invitation,  that   Secretary  Herter   saw  him
in  a  hotel  room  to  underscore   the  unofficial   nature  of  his
visit,  that  Latin  America's  greatest  popular  hero  in  our  time
was  treated  as  a  second  class  visitor.    Aside  from  the  state-
ment  that  "American  officials  made  clear  to  him  the  willing-
ness  of  the  U.S.  government  to  discuss  his  country's economic
needs"  there  are  no  references  to  any  specific  offer   to  help.
None  was  made.    The  document  refers   to  suggested  nego-
tiations   but   these  were   cocerned   with   prompt,   immediate
and   adequate  payment  for   U.S.   properties   taken,  not  with
the  offer  of  a helping  hand in  the  economic and  social  reforms
Castro  had  promised.    Nobody   can  know  for  certain  what
was  in  Fidel's  mind  but  it,is  clear  that  we  began   pushing
him  in  the  direction  of  finding  help  elsewhere  very  early.
Even   now,   despite   the   claim  that  we  are  only   opposed
to  Castro  because  he  "betrayed"  the  revolution,  the  document
is  silent  in  the  area  of  economic  and   social   reform.    This
would  be  a  powerful  document  indeed  if  in  it  the  U.S.  gov-
ernment  plainly  said  that  it  would  not  ask  the  Cuban  people
to  turn   back  the   clock  on  agrarian   reform  nor   to   restore
the  public  utility  properties which  had  so long  been  notorious
for  high  rates  and  bad  service.    But  aside  from  an  approving
*  *
Nuclear  NATO  Buried  By  JFK?
"The   U.S.  has   decided   quietly   to  bury   the  Elsen-
hower   Administration's  proposal  for   an  independent
NATO  nuclear  deterrent  submitted  to  last  December's
meeting  of  the  NATO  Council.    It  reached  this  con-
clusion  partly  because  the  plan  imposes  too  heavy  a
financial  burden  on  the  European members,  partly  be-
cause  there  is  no  need  to  duplicate  the  existing  Amer-
ican  deterrent, which  already  has  an  'overkill' capacity
and  partly  because  the  '15  fingers  on  the  trigger'  idea
is  impracticable.    The  Americans  are  also  opposed  to
an   independent   nuclear   deterrent   for   Germany,  the
main  champion  of  which  is  the  German  Defense Min-
ister,  Herr  Strauss."
—London  Sunday  Times,  April  2
reference   to   "the   early  projects   of   land   reform"   (where,
one  wonders,  do  we  draw  the  line?)  there  is  no  pledge  not
to  ask  return  of  the  great  cattle  and  sugar  properties.     The
rhetorical  references  to  "the  spirit  of  Jose  Marti"  would  not
seem  so  empty  if  they  had  been  accompanied  by  some  plain
language  on  aid  to  the  industrialization program  and  the  fight
against  monoculture  which  Marti  saw  as  twin  necessities  to
end  Cuba's  poverty  and  gave  it  economic   independence.
There  is  no  denial  in  this  document  nor  elsewhere  of  the
mounting  volume  of  reports  in  conservative   anti-Castro   U.S.
publications  that  U.S.  influence  and  CIA  funds  are  strength-
ening  the  right  wingers  among  the  exiles,  and  forcing   the
left-wingers  to  acquiesce  in  a  program  which  would   restore
the banks,  the utilities and the land  (Baltimore  San,  March  5)
under  pain  of  losing  financial  aid.    The  April  8  issue  of  the
Saturday  Evening  Post  carries  an  article  on  the  exiles  which
makes  some  additional  revelations.    It   says  of   our  favorite
exile  group,  Varona's  Democratic  Revolutionary  Front,   that
it   is   "honest,   Catholic,   conservative  and   sternly  anti-Com-
munist"  but  "unfortunately"  it  has  "welcomed  into  its  ranks
a  number  of  old  politicians  of  the  pre-Batista  regimes  and
these  men,  in  the  eyes  of  most  Cubans,  do  not  represent  the
new   Cuba   the   revolution   sought   to   create."     As  a   result
Varona's  movement  has  been  losing  ground  to  the  Revolu-
tionary  Movement   of   the  People,  headed  by  Manuel  Ray,
an  ex-Fidelista,  "Leftist  by U.S.  standards",  who  wants  "Fidel-
ismo  without  Fidel."   While  this  movement  agrees  to  restore,
or  pay  for,  expropriated   lands  and  certain  business  proper-
ties,  the  Post  article  continues,   "it  insists,  though,  that  the
light,  power  and  telephone  companies  should  be  nationalized,
which  may  account  for  the  fact  that  our  help  to  Ray's  group
has  been  minuscule."   While  accusing  Fidel  of  betraying  the
last  Cuban  revolution,  we are planning to  betray  the  next  one.
The  new  document  on  Cuba  says  "the   North  American
journalist,  I.  F.  Stone,  initially  sympathetic   with  the  Castro
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  10, 1961
FOR  Warns  Effort   to  Overthrow  Castro  Will  Poison  U.S.-Latin  American  Relations
How  the  State  Dept.  Refused  to  Let  A  Pacifist  Mission  Visit  Cuba
In   the  following   account,  the  Executive  Committee of
the  Fellowship  of  Reconciliation tells  the  story  of  how  the
State  Department  refused   to  let  it  send  a  "peace  team"  to
Cuba.    The  FOR,  founded   in  1915,  describes  itself    as  a
religious   organization  "dedicated   to  finding   solutions   to
intergroup   and  international  conflicts   in  a  spirit  of  love
and  nonviolence  as  taught  by  Jesus  and  other  great  reli-
gious  leaders."    The  full  text,  released  to  the  press  March
S8  but  generally  ignored,  is  printed  here  as  evidence  of
the  Iron  Curtain  tee  have  ourselves  imposed   on  relations
with   Cuba.—IFS
"The  Executive  Committee of  the  Fellowship  of  Reconcilia-
tion   vigorously   protests   the   recent   decision  of  the   State
Department  refusing   permission  to  a  Fellowship  sponsored
'peace  team'  to  visit  Cuba.   We regret  that  an  attempt  by a
group   of  respected  leaders   in  church,  academic  and  peace
circles  to  search  for  means  of  reestablishing  peaceful  rela-
tions   between  the   two  governments,   should  be  considered
as  not  'in  the  best  interests  of the  United  States.'
"Like   many   other   Americans,   the   Fellowship   has   been
deeply  troubled   by  the  wide  divergence   between   reporting
and  interpretation  of  developments  in  Cuba  by  the   general
press  and  official  government   sources  on  the  one  hand,  and
by  an  impressive  number  of  well-informed,  independent  ob-
servers  on the  other.
Half-Buffoon,  Half-Knave?
"From  the former, the  American public have  been given  an
account   of  a  revolution   led  by  a  man  half-buffoon,   half-
knave  and  wholly  the  creature  of  international communism,
with  whom  it  is  hopeless   even  to  seek  for  any   agreement.
From  the  latter,  to  a  much more  limited  audience,  has  come
the  judgment  that  events  in  Cuba  have  marked  one  of  the
most   significant,   deep-going   social  changes   in  history,   of
profound  importance  to  ourselves  and  all  Latin  America,  and
the  assertion  that  great  opportunities  exist  for  reestablishing
good   relationships.
"From   the  former  we  have  had  a  picture  of  a   ruthless,
opportunistic  dictator  precariously  maintaining  power  in  the
midst  of  seething  unrest  and  likely  to  be  overthrown  at  any
moment  by patriotic opponents among his  own people.    From
the  latter we have reports  of a  government that has  alienated
thousands  of its  middle  and upper-class  citizens  by its radical
attempts   to  reform  the   economic  and  social  structure,  but
which  holds  the  devotion  of  the   poverty-stricken   peasants
and  workers  who  make  up  the   overwhelming  bulk  of  the
population,  and  who  could  be  overthrown  only  at  a  cost  of
enormous  suffering   and  bloodshed.
.  "In   the  interest  of  resolving  this  difference,  the   Fellow-
ship  of  Reconciliation  sent   its   own  reporter   to   Cuba  last
December.    His  report,  published  in  the  magazine, Fellow-
ship,  gave  considerable  support  to  the  charge  of  misinter-
pretation  made  against  the  general  press  and  government.
"In  the  light  of these  things, and in view of its  own historic
role   in   seeking  means  of  reconciling  groups   and   nations
in  conflict,  the  Fellowship  of  Reconciliation in  January  asked
nine  of  its  members  to  visit  Cuba.   The  trip  was  intended
to  be  an  effort   to  determine  for   themselves  the  truth  of
developments  there,  and  to  discuss  with  both  governmental
and  private  persons  possibilities   for   reducing   tension  and
increasing  understanding   between  the  two  peoples.    It  had
been  the  intention  of  the  group  to  include  officials   of  our
own  government  in  its  discussions,  sharing  with  them  any
insights  or  suggestions  growing  out  of  the  trip,  and  this
intention   had  been  communicated  to  our   government.
"This   'reconciliation   team'   bad   plane   reservations   for
January   20.   They  had  to  be  cancelled  when  the  State  De-
partment  on  January  19  officially  forbade  travel  by  Amer-
ican  citizens  to  Cuba  except  in  such  instances  where  such
The  Blockaded  "Peace  Team"
The  "Peace  Team"  denied  permission  to  visit  Cuba
by  the  State  Department  was  made  up  of:
Harrop  and Ruth  Freeman,  professor of  law,  Cornell,
housewife;  Alfred Hassler,  executive  secretary,  Fellow-
ship  of  Reconciliation,  and  editor,  Fellowship;  Charles
R.  Lawrence,  professor  of  sociology  and  anthropology,
Brooklyn  College,  and  Chairman,  FOR; Robert  Lyons,
executive   secretary,   New   England   Regional    Office,
American  Friends  Service Committee;  Wm.  Stuart  Nel-
son,   dean  of   the   college,   Howard   University; Mrs.
Annalee   Stewart,   legislative  secretary,  Women's   In-
ternational  League  for  Peace   and  Freedom;  Howard
Schomer,  president,  Chicago  Theological  Seminary  and
president  Int'l  FOR; Herman  Will, Jr.,  secretary,  Divi-
sion   of   Peace   and   World   Order,   General   Board   of
Christian  Concerns  of  the  Methodist  Church.
travel  would  be  'in  the  best  interests  of  the  United  States,'
which  has   been  interpreted   to  mean  only  journalists   and
business  men  and  cases  of  personal  or  family  emergency.
"The   Fellowship   applied   immediately  for   permission   to
make  the  trip  under  the  new regulations.    It  was  not  until
February   14 that  it  was  notified  that  the  request  was  re-
jected.   It  then  sought  and  received  appointments  to  discuss
this  action  with   officials   of  the   State   Department,   and  on
March  9  three  Fellowship  representatives  met  for  extended
discussions   with   officials   from   the   Security   and   Consular
Affairs  Division  and  the  Mexican and  Caribbean  Division  of
the  Department.
"The   Fellowship's   representatives    were   told   that   they
might  not  go  to  Cuba  because  our  Government  cannot  afford
them  protection  there.    We  recognize  that  the  Government
feels  a  responsibility  to  offer  such  protection  to  its  citizens
abroad,  though we would  not  request  it  for  ourselves. How-
ever, we do not  know of a  single instance  in  which  American
visitors   to   Cuba,  other   than   newspapermen  and  counter-
revolutionaries  have  been  molested.    We are  aware  also that
similar  restrictions  have  not  been  placed  on  travel  in  many
parts  of  the  world  where  danger  to  individuals  is  far  more
evident  than  in  Cuba, and  protection  at  least  as   difficult.
Policies  Which  Merely Worsen  Relations
"We  oppose  the  whole  policy  of  restricting  travel,  as  we
regret  our  government's  action  in  severing  diplomatic  rela-
tions  with  Cuba.   Historically  such  acts  have  rarely  served
other  than  to  exacerbate  the  situations  they  were  ineant  to
improve,  and  must  frequently   be  followed  by  painful  and
tedious  efforts   eventually  to  reestablish,  in  the  interests  _of
peace   and   understanding,   the   communications   so   easily
severed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
"Within  that  policy,  however,  we  maintain  that  efforts  to
improve  relations  between  the  countries  by  private   citizens
who   are  favorably  known  to  their  fellow   Americans,   are
consistent   with  our  nation's   stated   goal   of  establishing   a
peaceful   world.    Whatever   the  facts  may  be  otherwise,   it
seems  beyond  argument  that  any  attempt  to  overthrow  the
Castro  government,  whether  by  invasion  or  insurrection, will
result  in  the  cruel  slaughter  of  tens  of  thousands  of  Cubans
and  a  residue  of  bitterness  that  is  likely  to  poison  the  at-
mosphere  of  the  entire  hemisphere  for   generations.
"The  Fellowship  is  determined  to  continue  its  efforts,  in
every  way  open  to  it,  to  find  means  of  reconciling  this dis-
pute  and  averting   bloodshed,  and  in  this  effort   seeks  the
support   of   our   fellow   Americans,   and   particularly   those
whose  religious  faith  is  inextricably  entangled  with  admoni-
tions  to  return  good for  evil,  and  to  'agree  with  thine  adver-
sary  quickly'."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April   10, 1961
A  Lesson  for  Liberals:  This  Is  How  It  All  Started  A  Quarter  Century   Ago
The  Folly of Appealing to the Un-American Committee on the John Birchers
There  are   several   points   of  interest  in  the   exchange  of
letters  between  Congressman  Henry  S.  Reuss  (D.  Wis)   and
Chairman   Walter    of   the   House   Un-American   Activities
Committee  over  the  John   Birch  Society.    The  first  is   the
extent  of  the  Society's  campaign  against  Chief  Justice  War-
ren.    Mr.  Reuss  wrote  that  his  office  had  been  "flooded  with
letters  from   throughout  the  country  suggesting  that  Chief
Justice Warren  is a traitor  and demanding  his impeachment."
The  second point  of  interest  is  that  Mr.  Reuss  should turn
to   Mr.  Walter's   committee  for   an   investigation.     In   his
press  release,  Mr.  Reuss  said  he  was  not  asking  the   Senate
Internal    Security   Subcommittee  to   investigate   because   it
was  already  sending  out  a  form  letter  over  the  signature of
its  chairman,  Senator  Eastland,  calling  the  Society  "a  patri-
otic  organization."
Infested   by  the  Same  Types
But   anyone  who  has   been   around   the   Capitol   for   any
length   of  time  knows  that  the   staffs   of  both  these  witch
hunting  committees  are  infested  with  the  same  types  who
are  running  the  Society.
In  addition,  as  we  revealed  last  week,  the  ranking  Repub-
lican  on  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee, Mr.  Scherer
of  Ohio, is  an endorser  of the  John  Birch  Society.   Mr.  Walter
himself  is  too  able  a  lawyer  to  join  in  with  such  crackpots
but  basically  he  would  regard  the   Society  as  at   worst   a
misguided  ally  rather  than  an  enemy.   In  any'investigation
by his  Committee, the  Society would find itself  among  friends.
Congressman  Reuss  may have  written  his  letter  to  put  the
House  Committee  on  the  spot,  but  the  price  was  to  accept
the   assumptions   on  which   the   Committee   operates.     Mr.
Reuss  in  his  letter  said  "it  would  be  hard  to  imagine  more
un-American  propaganda  activities"  than  those  of  the  Birch
Society   and   therefore   asked   Mr.   Walter    to   investigate.
Then  Mr.  Reuss  went  on  to   say:
"Propaganda   organizations  have  the  right  to  free  speech
and  the  right  to  have  any  investigation   of  their  activities
conducted  with  due  process  of  law  and  full  regard  for   fair
play,  but  the  public  has  the  right  to  know  who  is  behind
these  activities,  how  they  are  financed  and  how  they   are
carried   on."
This  all  sounds  very  plausible  and  attractive  but  this  is
how  it  all  started  a  quarter  century  ago.    The Un-American
Activities  Committee was  originally  set  up  by  the  Dickstein-
McCormack  resolution  in  1934 to investigate Nazi  and Fascist
propaganda   activities  in  this  country.    Far-seeing   liberals
like   Maverick   of   Texas   and   Warren   of   North-   Carolina
Ronald  W.  May
We  note  with  sorrow  the   untimely  death  at   38  of
our   good  friend,   Ronald  W.  May,  gifted   Washington
correspondent   for   the   Madison,   Wis.,   Capital-Times
and  the  York, Pa., Gazette  and Daily.   He distinguished
himself  in  the  fight  against   McCarthy  and  it  was  he
who  last  year  exposed  the  racist  influences  at   work
behind   the   Un-American  Activities   Committee   and
forced  the  retirement  of  its  counsel,  Richard  Arens.
warned  that  it  would  become  a  menace  to  free  institutions.
Soon,  under  Dies  of  Texas,  the  main  target  of  the  Commit-
tee  was  the  New  Deal  and  its  first  great  success,  in   1938,
was  to  defeat   the  saintly  Frank  Murphy  for  reelection  as
Governor  of   Michigan.
During  the  30's  and  40's  it  held  an  occasional  hearing  in
which  native  Fascist  groups  were  interrogated,  never   very
harshly.    This  served  only  to  give  the  House  Committee  a
veneer  of  impartiality.     To  summon  the  John  Birch   Society
would  be  a  resumption  of  these  old  tactics  at  the  expense  of
making  it  more  difficult  to  fight  the  witch  hunt  in  principle.
The  only firm principle  is that  in  a free  society  it  is  no busi-
ness  of  the  government  to  police  the  arena  of  free  debate
and  decide what  ideas  are  outside  the  pale,  or "un-American."
A  vigorous  press  is  the  best  protection  against  crackpot  con-
spiracies   and  the  press  has  been  doing  an  extraordinarily
good  job  of  exposing  the  John  Birch   Society.
Mr.  Walter's  reply  to  Mr.  Reuss  revealed  that  the  House
Committee   "has   received   numerous  letters  regarding   the
John  Birch  Society."    Mr.  Walter   said  "most  of  them  con-
tain  the  general  complaint that  the  organization  is  'un-Amer-
ican', and the  specific complaint  that the  leader  of the  Society
has  made  charges   of  impugning  the  patriotism   and  loyalty
of   certain    individuals."
Mr.  Walter   expressed  the  view  that  the  individuals  ma-
ligned  have  their  remedy  in  the  civil  courts;  we  can  just  see
the  Chief  Justice   suing  for  libel.    As  for  the  general  com-
plaint,  he  said  "no  material  information"  had  been  received
.  to  indicate  that  the  Committee   "should,  or  could,  be  made
by  us  under  existing. statute  defining  the  authority  of  the
Committee,"
The  Committee's  authority   is  sweeping   enough  to  cover
any  activity  it  considers  un-American,  but  a  secret   society
under  a  Fuehrer, Nazi style, subverting  faith  in  the  Supreme
Court   and   the   White   House,  somehow  doesn't   seem   "un-
American"  enough  for  Mr,  Walter.
The  Acquittals  in  the  South  African  Treason  Trial   and  Our  Supreme  Court
AH  who love justice  must  salute  with  reverence  the  three
judges,  Rumpff,  Kennedy and  Bekker,  of  the  South  African
special  court  which  last  week  acquitted  the  remaining  de-
fendants  in  the  South  African  treason  trial.   It  is  extra-
ordinary  that  in  the  tense  atmosphere  of  South  Africa  three
judges  would  have  the  courage  to  defy  white  supremacist
pressure  and  throw  the  State's  case  out  of  court  after  a
four   year   prosecution   which  cost   South   Africa   close   to
a  half   million  dollars.
The  prosecution  began  in  December,  1956,  with  country
wide  police  raids  in  which  156  men  and  women, white  and
non-white,  were  arrested   on  charges   of   treasonable   con-
spiracy.    The  aim  of  the  raids  was  to  destroy  the  African
National  Congress  which  was  accused  of  being  Communist
infiltrated.   The  atmosphere'may  be  inferred  from  the  fact
that'the  chief  export  for  the  State  testified  that  frequent
use  of  the  words  "the  people"  and  "democracy"  were  indi-
cations  that   the  ANC's  Freedom  Charter  was Communist
inspired!
The   position   of   the  non-white  in   South  Africa  is   far
worse  than  in  Mississippi.   The  African  National  Congress
is  regarded   by  Afrikaan  majority  opinion  with  far   more
horror  than  the  NAACP.   Yet  three  judges  threw  out  the
case  without waiting  for  the  full  defense  to  be  submitted.
Our  Supreme  Court,  by  comparison,  has  acquitted  itself
very  poorly.    Though  the  atmosphere  here  is  far   milder
than  in  South  Africa,  our  Supreme  Court  during  the  past
two  cold  war  decades  has  upheld  one  repressive   measure
after  another,  notably  the  first  peacetime  sedition  act  since
the  Administration  of  John  Adams,  in  the  Smith  Act  trials
and  the  powers  of  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Com-
mittee  in  the  Barenblatt,  Braden  and  Wilkinson  eases.   We
hope  Justices  like  Frankfurter  and  Harlan  study  the  South
African  case  and  see how it  puts them and  their  pretensions
to  shame.
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   10,  1981
The  Fate  of  Nagy  Is  The  Fate
(Continued    -from   Page   One)
regime,  reported   after  a  recent   trip  to  Cuba:   'For  the  first
time,  in  talking  with  Fidelista  intellectuals,   I  felt  that   Cuba
was  on   its  way  to   becoming   a  Soviet-type  popular   democ-
racy'."    But,  of  course,  the  document  is  careful  not  to  quote
my  repeated   warnings  against  intervention  in  Cuba.    This  is
a  quarrel  in  which  each  side  is  its  own  worst  enemy.    Fidel,
by  the   unbridled   demagogy   he   has  permitted   in   his   press
and   radio   attacks  on   other   Latin   American   leaders,   makes
friends  for  the  U.S.    The  U.S.  government,  on  the  other  hand,
makes  friends   for   Fidel  by  talking   as  it  does  in  this  docu-
ment  of  "the   principle  of  non-interference  by  any  American
state  in  the  internal  or  external  affairs"  of  any  other  Amer-
ican  state,  while  so  openly  fostering  and  training  rebel  forces
for  sabotage  and  civil  war  in  Cuba.    The  U.S.  laws  and  inter-
American   treaties    against    foreign    intervention    which   we
quoted   in  our   issue  of  March   27  were   never  more   openly
violated   than   in   our   current   efforts   to   overthrow    Castro.
For  all  the  eloquence  and  polish   of  this  new  document   all
it  adds  up  to  is  to  provide  the  forces  of  reaction  in  our  own
country  with  a  smoother  sales talk  for  the  interventionist  plans
begun   under   Eisenhower   and   stepped   up,   I   regret   to  say,
under  Kennedy.
Compounding  Folly  With  Crime
I  appeal  to  American  liberals  to  face  up  to  the   realities
without  being  sucked  into  the  war  camp.    Policies  of  which
we  all  disapproved  helped  push  Castro  into  the  Soviet  orbit,
and  now  we  are  asked  to  compound  those  past  follies  with
the  crime  of  war  against  a  neighboring  people.    The  rationale
for   the   attack  on   Cuba   is   exactly  the   same  rationale   with
which  the  Russians  excused  their  attack  on   Hungary.
The   simple  premise  of   this   "white  paper"   is  that   since
Cuba  is  becoming  Sovietized,  any  action  against  her  is  justi-
fied.    The  simple  premise  of  Russian  action  against  Hungary
was  that  since  it  was  threatening  to  leave  the  Soviet  camp  any
action  against  Hungary  was  justified.    The  fate  of  Nagy  is  the
fate  we  are  preparing  for  Castro,  and  if  one  was  an  immoral
crime,  so  will  be  the  other.    As  the  tempo   of   intervention
in  Cuba  rises,  so  will  rise  the  tension  all  over  Latin  America.
Civil  war   in  Cuba  will  be  accompanied   by  civil  strife   else-
We   Are  Preparing  For  Castro
Fresh  Idea  on  the  Congo
"While  the  constitutional  problem  is  bound  to  come
to  the  forefront  of  any  discussion,  there  are,  of  course,
underlying  it  several  fundamental and  inescapable  eco-
nomic  and  financial  problems.    I  would  draw  attention
in  particular  to  the  investments—investments  of  which
the  status  now  seems  to  be  uncertain—which  belong  to
the  Central  Government  in  the  large  mining  and  other
companies.    If   the  profits   on  these   investments  were
available  to  the  unified  federal  government  envisaged
in  the  report   [of   the  Conciliation  Commission  on  the
Congo],   it  would  be  of   great   assistance   to   it   in   its
work.     Indeed,   if   the   proposed   Central  Government
were  to  ask  the  United  Nations  to  buy  out  the  foreign
interests   in   these   companies,  as   the   Government   of
Ghana  recently  purchased  the  foreign-held  gold  mines,
I  would  strongly  advocate  that  we  should  meet  their
request.   An  international company  in  which  the  Congo
already  owned  a  large  part  of   the  capital  could  run
the   various  enterprises  for   a   period   of   years,   train
Congolese  citizens  to  operate  them,  repay  the  capital
out  of   profits,   and  then  hand  them  over  to  the  Con-
golese   State."
—Mr.  Aiken, Ireland,  UN  General  Assembly  Mar.  28
where   in  the   hemisphere,   making   impossible  all  our  plans
for   fostering   gradual   reform,   forcing  us  to   strengthen   the
military  again  in  Latin  America,  and  thereby  speeding  up  the
chain  reaction  of  repression   and  revolt.    Never  did  our  coun-
try  have  so  much  need  for  patience  and  magnanimity.    Never
was  it  in  greater  danger  than  in  this  Lilliputian  quarrel  which
may  easily  end  by  tearing  the  hemisphere  apart.    Cuba  is  not
Guatemala.     Time  may  bring   many  surprises,   as  it   has   in
our  dealings  with  Tito  and  Iraq.    Let  us  turn  back  from  the
course  of  intervention  before  it  is  too  late.
Latin  American  policy  is  the  weak  point   of  the   Kennedy
administration  and  may  destroy  its  bright  hope.    Kennedy  is
following   in  the   weak  footsteps   of   Eisenhower,  notably  in
maintaining   the   ban   on   travel   to   Cuba   which   Eisenhower
imposed  just  before  Kennedy's  inauguration.    We  call  atten-
tion  to  the  document  we  publish   this  week  on  page  two  as
an  example  of  Iron  Curtain  tactics.    The  bar  against  travel  is
an   effort   to   build   a  monolithic   public   opinion   behind   the
interventionist    forces.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  A  Friend  if  You  Send  Us  A  Self-Addressed   Stamped  Envelope
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
4/10/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ..........................._......................................................_,
City       ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Ston«'i  Weekly.   Entered u  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  187*.   Postdated  Monday! but  published  every  Hum-
day  except  the  last  two  Thondayi  of  August  and  December  at   6618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  L  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  In  the  XI.  S.;   $6  In
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:   $1C  to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel.   Ada   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED