I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jan16.pdf

============================================================

Graham  Greene on Laos, P.  2
Second  (And  More  Hopeful)  Thoughts  on  McCloy  as  Kennedy's  Arms  Negotiator,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IX,  NO.  2
JANUARY   16,   1961
'°'      WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
Our   Air   of  Injured  Innocence  Over  Cuba
On  one  plane  of  our  national  consciousness,   it  is  assumed
with  approval  that  our  government  is  doing  all  in  its  power
short  of  war  to  overthrow   the  Castro   government   in   Cuba.
On  another  and  separate  plane,  we  take  it  as  an  affront  when
the   Cuban   regime   accuses   us   of   aggressive   intent.     Like
the  respectable bourgeois  in  a  French  farce  who  has  a  mistress
stashed  away  in  another  part  of  town,  we  manage  at  one  and
the  same  time  to  enjoy  illicit  pleasure  and  righteous  indigna-
tion.    The  average  American   reads  with   satisfaction   in  our
daily  press  and  weekly  picture  magazines  of  the  Cubans  being
trained   on   our   soil   and   in   a  growing   number  of   Central
American   hideouts  for   an   invasion  of   Cuba.     The   Sunday
supplements  treat  the  CIA  and  its  operatives  like  a  real  life
comic  strip  adventure  story;  we  get   a  vicarious  satisfaction
from   its  cloak-and-dagger  exploits;   we  marvel  at  the  broad
hints  of  its  adeptness  in  setting  conflagrations,  getting  rid  of
dangerous   characters   in   governments   we   do   not   like,   and
buying  up  men  of  the  lesser  breeds  on  our  borders.    But  let
the  Castro  regime  complain  of  such  activities  and  we  at  once
take  the  complaint  as  further  evidence   of   its  unregenerate
character  and  perverse  unfriendliness.
Would  We  Wait  for   Affidavits?
It  is  true  that  the  Castro   government   often  gets  its  facts
mixed   up,   like  a  suspicious  wife  who   nags   about   the   one
night  when  the  errant  husband  really  was  sitting  up  with  a
sick  friend.    But  we  in  our  turn  act  like  the  seasoned   repro-
bate  who  seizes  on  any  minor  error  of  accusation  to  work  up
a  fine  protective  lather  of  injured  innocence.    When   Castro
after   a  growing  number  of  terrorist  incidents,  including  the
bombing  of  a  department  store  in  Havana,   accused   the   U.S.
Embassy  of  acting  as  director  and  paymaster  for  such  activi-
ties,  and  demanded   that  we  cut  its  staff   to  11  men,  he  may
have  been   foolish  to  take  a  step  which   invited   a   break   in
relations  and  he  may  have  been  wrong  in  some  of  his  accu-
sations.    But  why  the  sudden  pretense  on  our  part  that  CIA
operatives  only  spend   their  time  translating  Pravda?    If   ter-
rorism  broke  out  in  our  country  after  the  Cuban   press   had
been   boasting   of   a  secret   agency   for   such   activities,  would
we  wait  for  affidavits  before  taking  action  to  stop  it?
Those  more  thoughtful  Americans  who  can  manage  to  get
the   transcript   of   the   Security   Council    debate   earlier   this
month   on   the   Cuban   charge   of   imminent   aggression   will
blush  to  see  this  process  in  full  operation.    The  Cuban   gov-
ernment  was  silly  and  overwrought   in  accusing  the   U.S.   of
being  "about  to  perpetrate  within  a  few  hours  direct  military
aggression"  and   it  was   clumsy   and   reckless   in   placing   so
much   reliance  on  a  wild  Uruguayan   newspaper   report  that
jsve  had  circulated  a  .document  to  all  Latin  American  foreign
ministries   declaring  that   we  would   intervene   militarily   to
Nothing  to  Hide?
"The  United  States  has  nothing  to  hide."
—Mr.   Wadsworth   at   the   Security    Council   Jan.   4
answering    Cuban   charges.
"Near  Guatemala's   Pacific  Coast,  35  miles  from   the
Mexican  border,  lies  a  new  solidly  paved, closely  guard-
ed  airstrip.  .  .  .  Could  it  be the base  for a cooperative
U.S.-Guatemalan-Cuban  exile  airborne   military  opera-
tion  against  Fidel  Castro?    Los  Angeles  Mirror   Avia-
tion   Editor   Don  Dwiggins  heard   about  the  strip   and
broke  a  story   reporting   it   had  been  built   with   U.S.
funds  in  a  mysterious  'crash'  program.  .  .  .  On the
subject  of  U.S.  participation,  no  official   in  Washington
had  a  word  to  say."           —Time  Magazine,   Jan.   6.
"Each  week  a  plane  leaves  Miami  International   Air-
port   with   50  to   60  young   Cubans   bound  from   local
staging  areas  for  one  of  three  secret  training   camps.
... As a  part  of  the  same  operation,  veteran fighter
pilots,  recruited   from   among  defectors   from   Castro's
own  air  force  and  from  Latin  American  countries,  are
training   at   what   was  once  a   dilapidated  airstrip  in
Guatemala."              —New   York  Daily  News,  Jan.  9.
"U.S.   Helps  to  Train  Anti-Castro  Forces
At  Secret  Guatemalan  Air-Ground  Base"
—Page   1,   headline,   New   York    Times,   Jan.   10.
"A  State  Dept.  official  specializing  in  Latin  American
affairs  turned  aside  all  questions  about  the  Guatemalan
base  with:  Don't  ask  us  about  it,  ask  the  spooks—the
Central   Intelligence    Agency."
—New   York   Post,  Jan.   10.
prevent  the  installation  in  Cuba  of  17—no  less—Soviet  rocket
sites.    This  gave  Mr.  Wadsworth  a  chance  to  term  Mr.  Roa's
charges   "empty,  groundless,   false,   fraudulent".     But   much
of  Mr.  Roa's  indictment  was  based  on  material  published   in
our  own  press  about  the  way  U.S.   government  agencies  and
big  businesses  have  been  helping  to  train  Cubans  and  Amer-
ican  adventurers  for  infiltration  and  invasion  of  Cuba.     Mr.
Wadsworth   dismissed  all  this  as  "a  welter  of  photographs"
and  newspaper  clippings.    Such  activities are  in  plain  violation
of  international  law  and  of  our  neutrality  statutes.     It  is  not
true  that  in  this  regard  and   in  regard   to  swiftly  built  new
air  bases  in  Guatemala   (see   box  on  this  page)   "the   United
States"  as  Mr.  Wadsworth  indignantly  exclaimed  "has   noth-
ing  to  hide."    Much   is  hidden.     It   is  significant   that   Mr.
Wadsworth   entered   no   specific  denials  to  any  item   in   Mr.
Roa's  complaint  except  the  Soviet  rocket  base  story.    To  deny
other  items  would  have  been  to  challenge  half  a  dozen   repu-
table  U.S.   publications.     Many  of  them,  moreover,  were  not
.  exposing   but  patriotically  boasting   of  these   activities.
The   charge  by  Mr.   Roa  which   most   called   for   rebuttal,
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  January   16, 1961
But  So  Far  Only  Freshman   Congressman  Fitzhugh  Ryan  of  New  York  Has  Come  to  His  Support
Roosevelt   Wins  Right  to  be  Heard  on  Budget  of  the   Un-Americans
Congressman  James  Roosevelt's  campaign  to  challenge  the
appropriation   for   the   House   Un-American  Activities Com-
mittee   this  year   has  made  a   little   headway  since  our   last
issue.     Omar  Burleson   (D.   Tex.),  chairman  of  the  House
Administration   Committee,  which  passes  on  the   budgets   of
all   House   committees,  wrote  Mr.   Roosevelt   that  while   his
committee  does  not  hold  public  hearings  it  would   be "per-
fectly  proper  for  you  or  any  other  Member  of  Congress"  to
testify   on  the  Un-American  Activities  appropriation   request
when  it  comes  before  the  Administration  Committee.     Mr.
Burleson  promised  to  advise  him  in  advance  and  added  that
when  the  bill  is brought  to  the  floor  of  the  House  he  would
be  glad  to  yield  "for whatever  statement  you  may  wish   to
make"   before   the  vote  is  taken.     On   the  other   hand   Mr.
Burleson  said  he  saw  "no  justification  for  outside  individuals
or   representatives  of   organized   groups"   to   appear.     This
would  be  the  first  time  in  the  Un-American  Activities Com-
mittee's  history  that  its  budget   was   challenged.
Walter   Accepts   Challenge
In  the  meantime  Congressman  Walter  told  Jack  Steele  of
Scripps-Howard  (New York   World-Telegram  Jan. 4)   that
while  it  was  not  customary  for  the  Administration   Commit-
tee  to  hold   public  hearings,   he  would   welcome   an  oppor-
tunity   to   debate   the   accomplishments   of   the   Un-American
Activities  Committee  with  Roosevelt  at  a  public   hearing.
So  far  only  one  other  member  of  the  House,  a  freshman
Congressman  from  New  York  City,  Fitzhugh  Ryan,  has  come
forward   to   support   Mr.   Roosevelt's   campaign.     Mr.   Ryan
(Princeton  and  Columbia  Law  School)  is  a  lawyer  who  was
for'seven  years  an  Assistant  District  Attorney  in   Manhattan.
He   is  the  first  anti-Tammany  Democrat   to  be  elected   from
New  York  City.   He  defeated  Ludwig  Teller  in  the  primaries
last  year  and  represents  the  20th  District,  the  West  Side  from
20th  to  110th Street.    Mr.   Ryan  campaigned   among   other
things  for  abolition  of  the  Un-American  Committee,  and  for
On  the  New  Frontier  in  the  Senate
We  hope  readers  have  noticed  the  charming  tableau
in  the  Senate   where  the  militant  New  Frontiersmen
are   grouped  around  Richard  Nixon  in  their  struggle
to  keep  Democratic platform  pledges  and  eliminate  the
filibuster.    Mr.  Nixon,  whose  liberalism  was  overlooked
in  the  recent  contest,   has  become  their   indispensable
man  because  as  presiding   officer   he  continues  to  rule
that  the   Senate   has  a  right   to  change  its   rules  by
majority  vote  at  the  beginning  of  each  session.    The
strategy   of  the   leadership   seems   to  be  to  postpone
a   vote  until   Johnson   can   take   over   as   Vice  Presi-
dent.   The  New  Frontier  in  the  Senate  looks strikingly
like  the  same  old  back  alley.
Behind   the   scenes,   where  the   committees   operate,
the  story  is  the same.  Senator  Joseph  S. Clark  (D. Pa.)
was  defeated  in  the   Democratic  Steering  Committee
9  to  7  in  his  battle  to  unseat   Byrd  and  Eastland   as
chairman  respectively  of   Finance  and  Judiciary,  and
to  liberalize  both  committee  by  enlarging  them.    In-
stead   Judiciary,   the   key   to   civil   rights,   was   made
worse  by  replacing  two  late  liberals,  O'Mahoney  and
Henr.ings,  with   two  conservatives,   Blakely   of   Texas
and  Long  of  Missouri.    The  vacancy  on  Finance  went
to   Fulbright.     Clark   was  denied   a   seat   on   Foreign
Relations  where  two  vacancies  were  filled  by  Syming-
ton   and   Eastland's   side-kick   Dodd   of   Connect'cut.
Though  Clark  has  two  years  seniority  over  him,  Dodd
was  promised  the  post  for  supporting  Johnson's can-
didacy  last  year.
As  for  young  Kennedy, he's beginning  to  look,  from
the  perspective  of  the  rules  fight,  more  and  more  like
that  other  New  Englander,  Silent  Cal  Coolidge.
a  re-evaluation   of  U.S. China   policy.
In   an  extension   of   remarks   in  the   Congressional   Record
Jan.  6,  Mr.  Ryan  said  of  the  HUAC   appropriation,  "It's  a
major  leak  that  needs  immediate  repair.    Hundreds   of   thou-
sands  of  dollars  annually  are  not  only  being  wasted  but  are
actually   being   used   to   humiliate   scores  of   loyal   American
citizens  and  to  embarrass  thousands  of  others."
Graham  Greene,  Author  of The Quiet American,  Bitter  About  U.S. Policy  in  Laos
"They   are  not  worth  much,  the  buildings  of  Vientiane,
and   the   people   who  inhabit   that   shabby    administrative
centre  had  little  to  live  for  and  less  to  die for.  One  hopes
that  Luang  Prabang  will  have.a  better  fate.    This  is  one
of   the  most  beautiful   towns  in  the   world,   with   a  royal
palace  the  size  of  a  very  small  country  house,  and   almost
every  four  buildings  a  temple—in  one of  them  the  footmark
of  Buddha:  a  town  of  bells   and  peace.
"One  cannot  believe,  now that  the  French  are  gone,  that
the  people  of  Laos  are  much  concerned  with  either  of  the
warring  parties:  there  is  not  the  fervent  common  enthusi-
asm,  which  made  the  war  in  Vietnam  a  national  war, and
it  is  tragic  to  think  that   a   western   power  has   brought
war  back.    Wasn't   Dien  Bien  Phu  a  sufficient   lesson?
"The   dream  of  a  neutral   Laos  was  a  good  one,  but   it
is  idle  to  think  that  neutrality  can  fail  to  have  a  certain
colouring  when  the  neutral  country  lies  on  the  borders  of
two   conflicting   systems.     Would  Sweden   be  more  secure
if  Finland  were  maintained  by  American  arms  and  money
as  a  neutral  state  with  a  western  tinge?    If  full-scale  war
develops  in  Laos  we  shall  have  a  heavy  load  on  our con-
science,  even  though  the  load  may  have  been  imposed   by
an   ally   and  not   by  our  own   Government.
"For   four  winters  in  Vietnam  I  was  an  unhappy   witness
of  the  disintegration  caused  by  the  intrigues   of  American
undercover  agencies  in  the  cause  of  an  unrealizable  dream—
the  dream  of  a  Third  Force;  nobody  with  any  knowledge
of  Laos  is  likely  to  deny  that  Prince  Souvanna's   Govern-
ment  had  been  undermined  by  the  aid  given  from  the U.S.
to  right   wing  forces.    At   least   the   Russian   aid  at   the
beginning  of  this  mad  competition  was  given  to  the  legal
government  of  the   country.
"One   is  painfully   reminded   of  the   Spanish   Civil War.
America  has  taken   on  the   role  played   then  by  Germany
and   Italy,  and   they   are   American   weapons   which   have
helped  to  destroy   Vientiane;  one  can  only  hope  that Eng-
land   will   not  play  again   her   former   pusillanimous  part
by   aiding,   with   her   ambiguous  diplomacy,   the   forces  of
the  right.
"Can  any  sane  person  believe  that  a  right  wing  govern-
ment  would  ever  be  allowed  to  exist,  contrary  to  the  agree-
ment  of  Geneva,  on  the  borders   of  China  and   the  Demo-
cratic  Republic of  Vietnam,  any  more  than  Guatemala  was
allowed  to  keep  a  government  under  communist  influence?"
—Graham  Greene, writing  to  The  London  Times, Jan.  4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  January   IB,  1961
Second  Thoughts  on  John  J.  McCloy's  Appointment  as  Kennedy's  Arms  Negotiator
Open  Mind  on  Disarmament  Shown  in   1952   Lectures  and  1956   Preface
We  want to  express  some  second  thoughts  on  the  subject of
the  appointment  of  John  J.  McCloy  as  President-elect  Ken-
nedy's  principal  disarmament  negotiator.    We  dismissed  him
in   a  sentence  last   week   as  able   and   likeable  but   a   Chase
Manhattan  Bank  man,  who  helped  prepare  the  way  for  Ger-
man  rearmament  as  U.S.   High   Commissioner  in  the   Reich.
Our  second  thoughts  derive  from  two  sources.    One  is  an
attempt  while  dashing  about  the  Capitol  on  various  journal-
istic  errands  to  think  through  the  political  realities.    Though
there  is  disquiet  everywhere about  the  arms  race,  disarmament
is  not  popular  either  in  the  country  or  in  Congress.    It  is  hard
to  visualize  a  two-thirds  vote  in  the  Senate  at  the  moment
either  for  a  nuclear  treaty  or  for  more  general  disarmament.
Only  a  man  who  has  behind  him  the  weight  of  substantial
moneyed  and  conservative  associations  can  possibly  win   ap-
proval  for  either  type  of  treaty.
What  of  His  Chase  Bank  Post?
But  one  may  ask,  how  can  one  expect  disarmament  from
the  retired  head  of  Chase  Manhattan,  the  bank  of  the  Rocke-
feller  family  and  Standard Oil,  and  from  a  man  with  links  of
friendship  as  close  as  Mr.  McCloy's  with  Chancellor   Aden-
auer  of  Germany.    These  names  hardly  connote   a   readiness
for  relaxation  of  tension  and  disarmament.
Indeed  they  do  not.    But  it  is  precisely  such  forces  which
must  be  persuaded  if  disarmament  is  to  be  achieved.     The
Soviets,   judging   from   the   latest   Pugwash   discussions   and
Khrushchev's  speeches,  are  determined  to  have a go  at talking
with  us  about   total  disarmament.    Total  disarmament  is  far
more  revolutionary  than  communism.    The  institution  of  war
is  far  older  than  that  of  private  property.     To  give  up  na-
tional  armaments  is  to  accept  the  beginnings  of  a  system  of
world  law  and  of  a  world  police  force,  and  the  end  of  im-
perialism  in  all  forms,  whether  capitalist  or  communist.
If  the  Russians  are  serious  about  this,  they  must  make  it
palatable   to  the  great   capitalist   interests   of  the  West.     It
cannot  be  negotiated  with  stray  intellectuals  or  pacifists.    The
masters  of   money,  the   major   families  and   financial   institu-
tions,  must  be  convinced.    For  such  purposes,   there  must  be
negotiation  with  just  such  men  as  McCloy.     It   is  no  good
saying  (as  I  did  last  week)  that  there  is  little  passion  for  dis-
armament  visible  in  his  past  record.    For  this  is  true  of  most
men.    It  is  only  from  a  growing  common   realization  of  a
common  danger  that  the  human  race  may  be  persuaded   slowly
to  move  back  from  the  abyss.
The  other   source  of  my  second   thoughts   was  a  most  in-
formative   portrait   of   Mr.   McCloy   in  the   New   York   Post
Jan.  9  by Theodore  Kaghan,  one  of  its  editors  and  once  chief
of  information  in  McCloy's  administration  in  Germany.   This
portrait  called  my  attention   to  two  books  I  have  since  read.
One  of  them  is  Mr.  McCloy's  "The  Challenge  to  American
Foreign  Policy",  the  Godkin  lectures  he  delivered  at  Harvard
early  in  1953.    The  second  is Mr.  McCloy's  preface  to  a  book
"Russia   and  America"   by  Henry   L.  Roberts,  published   in
1956.
There  is  much  in  both  with  which,  of   course,  I  do  not
agree.   But  both  bear  the  marks  of  an  enlightened  mind  with
whom  negotiation  should   be  possible.    The  spirit  they  ex-
Their  Hunger  Our  Opportunity
If   the   Chinese  Communists   denied   that   they  were
suffering   from   famine,   the   State  Department  would
no  doubt  accuse them  of  covering up.  Since  the  Chinese
admit  their  food  difficulties,   the  State  Department  in-
sists  they  must  be  exaggerating.    An  item  we  saw  in
the   London   Telegraph   (Dec.   30)   seemed  a  graphic
testimonial  to  the  reality  of  China's  distress.    It  was
from  Hongkong.    It  said  a  French  resident  of  Peking
just  returned  to  Hongkong declared  the  food  shortage
even   in   the   capital,   the   showplace  of   Chinese Com-
munism,  was   so  severe  that   it   reminded   him  of   the
last  days  of  the  German  occupation  in  Paris.    "People
automatically   join   any   queue   they   see,"  he   told   the
Telegraph,   "hoping   there  will   be  some   food   at   the
ends  of  it."    More  than  half  the  nation's  cropland was
damaged  by  drought,  flood  and  pests  in  1960, the  worst
year  in  this  century   for  China's  farmers.    The  same
Conservative  daily   carried   a  letter   from   a  Tory   MP
in  Us  issue  of  Jan.  3  pointing  out  that   the  meaning
of   the  crop  failures  can  only  be  appreciated  against
the  background  of   China's  endemic  misery.    A  1950
United   Nations   report   showed   that   China   had   the
world's  lowest  per  capita  income,  less  than  half  that
of   India.    China   under  Communism   is   an awakening
giant.    This  famine   may   be  our  last   chance  to   win
the  good-will of  her  people.   We  want  to  add  our  voice
to  the  rising  chorus  of  those  who  ask  whether  it   is
not  possible  in  some way  to  leap  the  barriers of  hatred
and  make  a  share  of  our  food  surpluses available.
press  is  not  that  of  a  John  Foster  Dulles.    We   recommend
them  to  thoughtful  readers.    In  the  Godkin  lectures,  early  in
1953,   McCarthy's   heyday,  one  will  find  Mr.  McCloy  had  the
courage  to  register  a  quiet  dissent  from  the  witch  hunt   (see
pages  18-19  and  80)  and  to  say  even  then,  "We  should  not
rule   out   the   possibility  of   discussing   at   an   appropriate—
though   it  now  seems  far  distant—time  a  total   disarmament
scheme  such  as  Grenville  Clark  proposes"  a  reference  to  the
plan  later  fully  blueprinted  in  "World   Peace  Through   World
Law"  by  Grenville  Clark  and  Louis  B.  Sohn   (Harvard   Uni-
versity  Press,  1958).
In  the  preface  to  "Russia  and America"  one  will  find  along
with  familiar  cold  war  stereotypes  and  a  seemingly  too  ready
acceptance   of   German   nuclear   rearmament   many   positive
ideas:  a  plea  that  Germany  accept  her  present  eastern  borders
to   make   possible   reconciliation   with   Poles   and   Czechs,   a
warning  against   "the   tendency  to  attribute  all  political  and
economic   developments   in   this   unsettled   world   to   Soviet
deviltry  and  cunning",  an  acceptance   of  neutralism   "as  the
depolarization  of  power  continues"  between  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.,
advocacy  of  cultural  intercourse  between   East  and  West  and
above  all  these  words  which  give  hope—
"Sooner   or  later  some  alternative  to  the  race  for  arma-
ments  will  have  to  be  found.    U.S.   policy   planning   should
devote  utmost  energy  to devising  such  a  break-through  .  .  .
breaking  the   atomic  deadlock  ought   to  be  a   major   policy
objective. ...  In  my view,  we  must  be  ready  to  consider  the
most   far-reaching  proposals,   including:  those   for   total  dis-
armament—universal,   enforceable   and  complete  with   inter-
national  control  and  inspection.    Although  in  the  past  such
plans  for  peace  through  disarmament  have  seemed  to  some
unrealistic  and  unobtainable,  our  present  perspective  encour-
ages  serious  study  of  these  and  related  proposals."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   January   16, 1961
An  Attack  on  Castro  Would  Invite  Hemispheric  Civil  War
(Continued   from   Page One)
because  most   pregnant   with  future  trouble,   was  his   charge
that   men  trained  in  the  camps  of  Miami,  Orlando,   Home-
stead,   Fort   Lauderdale   and   Fort   Myers,   Fla.,   were   being
moved  in  U.S. planes   to  Swan  Island  in  the  Caribbean  and
then   in  groups  of   150  to  Guantanamo.    This  was  not  sup-
ported   by  U.S. press  clippings  but  it  was  evident  from   Mr.
Roa's   speech   that  the  Cubans  have  an  extensive  intelligence
service,   and   it   is  dangerous   if   they  really   believe—true   or
untrue—that  Guantanamo  is  being  used  for  such  a   purpose.
This  could  spark  off  war,  and  there  may  be  forces,  Cuban  or
American,  which  would  like  Castro  to  believe  this  in  order  to
provoke   trouble.    We   think  more  responsible  U.S. agencies
should   make  sure  that  this  is  not   true,  or   if  true  that   the
practice  of   so  using  Guantanamo  is  ended,  and   that   assur-
ances  to  this  effect  are  given  the  Cuban  government.
No  Little   Errand  for  the   Marines
We  are  moving  toward  something  far  more  fateful  than  a
minor  colonial  police  operation  in  our  relations  with  Cuba.
It  is  indicative of  a kind  of  giddy  arrogance  that  the  very  day
Mr.  Wadsworth   on  Jan. 4  was  assuring  the  Security  Council
that  our  intentions  were  pure  as  driven  snow,   correspondents
were  being  given  a  background  not-for-attribution briefing  on
our  plans  to  choke  off  the  Castro   regime  with  a  sea  and  air
blockade.    This  was  the  common   source  of  all  those  stories
in  the  papers  of  Jan.  5  on  our  plans  to  "isolate"  Castro,  and
our  hope  for  such  a  blockade  also  explains  our  sudden  action
on  Jan. 4  in  voting  limited   economic   sanctions  at  the  OAS
against   the   Dominican  Republic,  a   move   Castro   could   not
.avoid  supporting  but  which  is  intended   to  win  Venezuela's
vote  later  for   similar  sanctions  against  Cuba.     To   blockade
Cuba   would   be   to   risk   international   complications   and   a
hemispheric  chain  reaction.    The  countries  which  stand  with
us  in  breaking  relations  and  which  might  support   stronger
action   are   provocative   symbols   of   all   the   Latin   American
masses  hate.    Five  of  the  six  represent  the  remaining dictator-
ships   in   the   hemisphere:   the   Dominican   Republic,   Haiti,
Nicaragua,   Guatemala  and   Paraguay.    The   sixth,  our   most
recent  acquisition  as  an  ally  against  Castro  is  Peru,  a  country
ruled  by a  small  oligarchy.     Except  for  El  Salvador,  nowhere
Scandalous  If   True
If   the  testimony  of  Dr.  Charles   A.  Santos-Buch   to
the  Senate   Internal  Security   Committee Jan. 10  was
true,  it  sounded  the  death  knell  for  the  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee.    It  could  hardly  survive  proof   that
the   full  page  ad  in  the  New  York  Times  with  which
it  started  its  activities  last  April  was  largely  paid  by
Cuban   government  funds   secretly   made  available  by
Raoul  Roa,  Jr.,  son  of   Cuba's   Foreign   Minister   and
a   member  of  its   delegation   to  the   U.N.    If   that   is
true,   then   Robert   Taber,  former   CBS  newsman   and
a   founder   of   the   Committee,  perjured   himself  when
he   assured   the   Senate   Internal   Security  Committee
last  May  that  none  of  the  funds  had  come  from   any
foreign   government.    We  find  it  hard  to  believe  that
Mr.  Taber   and  Mr.  Roa  would  be  so  irresponsible  and
foolish.    Mr.  Taber  in  a  statement  to  CBS  News  from
Havana,  where  he  is  working  on  a  book,  declared  the
story  a  fabrication.    We  suspend  judgment  until  Mr.
Taber  and  Mr.  Roa  have  told  their   side  of  the  story.
Dr.  Santos-Buch  seemed  a  reluctant  witness  and  under
pressure.     Since  by  his  own  account  he  as   a  Cuban
resident  here  wanted  to  avoid  any  link  with  the  Fair
Play  Committee,  why  did  he  take  $3500  from  Mr.  Roa
in  cash  and  then  put  it  in  his  own bank  account, paying
over   the  money  to  the   Times  later   with   a   certified
check?     This   seems   a   strange   way   to   cover   one's
tracks.
in  Latin  America  is  there  a  deeper  gulf   between   haves   and
have-nots   than   in  Peru.    We   couldn't   have   less  attractive
recruits  than  these  six  for  a  crusade   against   a  popular   hero
like  Castro.
This  is  a  made-to-order  recipe  for  a  hemispheric  civil  war.
We   see  Castro   as  a  pawn   in  our  global   struggle   with   the
U.S.S.R.    The  Latin  American  masses   see  him  as  their  first
honest   champion   since  the   Mexican   revolution   and   a  man
who  dared  defy  U.S.  oil  and  sugar  firms.  The  Latins  couldn't
care  less  about  our  cold  war.  To  drift  into  open   aggression
against  Cuba  is to  run  the  risk of  tearing  the  hemisphere  apart.
The   road   to   the   restoration   of   hemispheric   solidarity   runs
through  Havana.    The  sooner  we  restore  good  relations  with
Castro  the  sooner  we  can  channel  the  volcanic  forces  of  Latin
American  resentment   into  orderly  and   peaceful  change.    A
new  President  provides  a  chance  for  a  fresh  start.
We  Deeply   Appreciate   This   Year's  Record  Breaking   Flood   of   Holiday    Gift    Subscriptions
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   13,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street     ........
City   .....................
......................Zone............State....................
1/10/Cl
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street   .....................;..................................................,...............
City  ..................................... .....Zone.. ......... .State.......... ..........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
Second  closs
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Than
day  except  the  taat  two  Thursdays  of   Auxrust  and  Deremlier  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  1.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   ManaKer.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.   S.:   6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:   115   to    Europe;    $20   to   Israel,    Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED