I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jul24.pdf

============================================================

More  on Dodd  and  Guatemala,  See P.  3
Documentary;  Senator  dark's  Speech  Blueprinting  the  Way to  Attain  a  World Without  War,  Pages 2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  28
JULY  24,  1961
'01     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Nightmare  Both  K's  Must   Fear
July   19  Noon
It  was  a  pleasure  to  see  the  President  bounce  into  press
conference  today  looking  well  and  chipper  again.    His  most
reassuring  answer on  the  Berlin  crisis  was  not  put  into words
at  all,  but  it  was  eloquent  nonetheless.    "Mr.  President,"   he
was  asked,   "in   your  reply  to  the   Soviet  aide-memoire,  you
stressed  several  times  the  lack  of  the  right  of  self-determina-
tion  among  the  peoples   of   Eastern  Europe  and  within  the
week  you  have  issued  a  proclamation  looking  to  the  freedom
of   captive  nations.    Can  you  conceive,"   his  questioner  con-
tinued,   "in   the   event  of   any  popular  uprisings   in  Eastern
Europe  of  a  more  active role  for  the  United  States  in  support
of  those  uprisings than  was  the  case  in  Hungary  in  1956?"
Mr.  Kennedy's  verbal  reply  was only  to  say, '1 think  I  will
stand  on  the  statement  which  we  made  at  this  time."     But
the  real  answer  could  be  seen  in  the  vigorous  negative  shake
of  the  President's head  as  he  caught  the  drift  of  the  question.
Not  A  Sane  Way  to  Run  A World
The  question  touched  a  fearful  point.    It  is  apparent  that
Mr.  Kennedy,  always  cautious,  not  disposed  to  adventurism,
is  playing  it  cool  on  Berlin.    Given  the  nature  of  the  nation-
state  system,  he  and  Mr.  Khrushchov  are  engaged  in  an  un-
fortunate   but   recognizable  variant   of   primitive  combat,   in
which   each  must  scare  the  other   (and   his  own   followers)
to  make  a  compromise  settlement  negotiable  and  palatable.
Neither   intends  war;  that  flood  of  war  scare  and  mobiliza-
tion  stories  out  of  Washington  do  not  derive  from  the  White
House  but  from  the  Pentagon  where  there  is  a  lot  of  over-
heated  talk  about  this  being  it.    But  the  nightmare  that  must
haunt  both  as  they  begin  to  circle  each  other,  growling,   is
what  happens  if  some  unexpected  event  upsets  the  fierce  pan-
tomime  which  is  supposed  to  end  at  the  conference  table.    A
new  uprising  in  East Germany would  make  it  very difficult  for
either  Mr.  Kennedy  or  Mr.  Khrushchov  not  to  be  swept  into
a  war  both  wish  to  avoid.     The   Russians   just   conceivably
might  give  up  East Germany  at  the  conference  table  in  return
for   recognition  of  the  Oder-Neisse   line  and  a  demilitarized
Reich.    But  to  let  East  Germany  slip  via  an  uprising  would
threaten  Communist  rule  in  Hungary   and  Poland;   the  year
1956  like  the  year  1848   shows  how  quickly  revolt   spreads.
It  is  the  possibility  of  some  such  flareup  in  the  Reich  or  else-
where  on  this  unstable  planet  which  makes  it  hard  to  share
the  complacency with  which  some  observers  see  these  Russo-
American  preliminaries  as  mere  harmless  sparrings.    It's   an
appalling  way  to  run  a  world- when  basic  problems   between
nations  can only be settled  by cocking atomic pistols  and  seeing
whose  eyes  waver  first.
So  the  vigorous  shake  of  the  President's  head  was  comfort-
Good  News  on  Nuclear  Testing
As  we  go  to  press,  the  new  issue  of  Aviation  Week
(July  17)  brings  news  that  joint  investigation  by  two
private  companies, Raytheon and  Allied  Research   Asso-
ciates,   Inc.,   show  that   underground  radio   waves  can
be   used   to   detect   clandestine   nuclear   blasts   "which
would  be  difficult   to  spot  by  present   seismic  methods
or   to   distinguish   from   natural   phenomena   such   as
earthquakes."    They  found  that  "decoupling"  (muffling
the  blast   in  large  holes)   does  not   reduce   the   radio
waves.    Aviation  Week  says  "this  could  open  the  way
to  an  international   Inspection  system  which  would  be
mutually  satisfactory   both  to  the  U.S.  and  the   Soviet
Union."   A  network  of  3,000  small  unattended  stations
in  key  areas  of  the  globe  would  make  policing  possible
with  no  need  for  on-site  inspections   until  and  unless
an  alarm  were  given  by  one  of  these  radio  sentinels.
It  is interesting  that this  discovery  should  come from
private   concerns.     Research    for   improved    detection
methods  has  been  in  the  hands  of  government  agencies
hostile  to  a  test  agreement.    The  possibility  of  a  tech-
nological   break-through   underscores    the   President's
wise  caution  in  again  postponing  resumption  of  testing
(at  least  until  the  end of  the  year,  according  to  White
House  sources)   while  we  ask  the  UN  to  consider  the
problem.
ing,  as  was  his  remark  toward  the  end  of  the  press  confer-
ence  about  our  having  "the   patience  and  the  willingness  to
take  some  setback  without  taking  unwise  actions."    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  shows  no  disposition  to  be  panicked  himself,  or  to  panic
the  country, as was  evident  when  he  said  (in  reply  to  a  ques-
tion  about  his  speech  to  the  country  next  Tuesday),  "we  have
to  look  forward to  many  challenges  in  the  coming months  and
years.    So we  will  try  to  discuss  the  general  problem  that  the
United  States  faces  in  the  security field in  the  summer of   1961,
and  not  merely  tied  to  Berlin,  but  generally."    This  is  not  a
bugle  call  for  Armaggedon.    The  pattern  visible  in  the  bril-
lian  polemic  on  Berlin  read  today  by  the  President,  as  in  the
more  sedate  aide  memoire  released  yesterday,  is  to  use  words
strong   enough   to   satisfy   the   troglodytes   and   Neanderthals
in  Congress  and  the  Pentagon  while opening  the  door  to  nego-
tiations.    I  myself  think  that  if  the  Russians  do  not  overplay
their  hand,  an  agreement  is  possible  which  would  give  added
recognition  to  and  greater  stability  to  the  East  German  regime
in  return  for  firmer  guarantees  of  access  to  West  Berlin.   This
is  what  the  Adenauer  crowd  fears,  and  explains  why  his  De-
fense  Minister^  Strauss,  at  his  press  conference  here  July  14,
declared  frankly  that  Russia  was  not  aiming  at  the  "immedi-
ate"   take-over  of  Berlin.    "What  they  want,"  Strauss   said,
"is  diplomatic  recognition   of  East  Germany  by  forcing   the
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
1   1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   July   24,  1961
Penna's Senator Clark Offers A Hopeful Blueprint for A World Without War...
Though   almost  totally   ignored   by  the   -press,  the   speech
given  by  Senator  Clark  (D.  Pa.)   to  the  Senate  on  July  10
offers      the    one   hopeful     way    out    of    the   growing   world
crisis.     We  think   it   deserves   the   widest   possible   circu-
lation  and  discussion,  and  we  present   the  gist  of  it  here:
"My   purpose   this  afternoon   is  to  present   for   discussion
a   policy  for   peace  and   disarmament   which   I  hope  will  be
seriously  considered by the  President  of  the  United  States.  .  . .
Time  is  short.    By  fall  there  may  be  no  time  left.    There  is
obviously  a  struggle  going  on  right  now  within  the  executive
branch  of  our  Government   for   the  mind  of   one  man—the
President  of  the  United  States.    On  the  result  of  that  strug-
gle  may  depend   whether   \ve  and   our  children  live  out  our
normal  life  span.  .  .  .
"The   President   stressed   the  central  issue  in  his  letter  sub-
mitting  the  bill  to  create  the  proposed  Disarmament  Agency
to  the  Congress:
" 'Peace  cannot  be  brought  about  by  concentrating  solely
on  measures  to  control  and eliminate  weapons. ...  A  dis-
armament  program  .  .  .  should  drive  toward  the  creation
of  a  peaceful  world  society  in  which  disarmament,  except
for  the  forces  needed  to  apply  international  sanctions,   is
the  accepted  condition  of  international life.'  .  .  .
Not  a  Form  of    Gamesmanship
"It  is  important   to  understand   that   the  aim  of   this  new
agency  is  ...       total   and  permanent   disarmament   enforced
through  world   law.    This   is  no  effort   to  pursue  gamesman-
ship  in  weapons  systems  or  mere  'arms  control.'  .  . .
"Fortunately  there  are  individuals holding  high   office   who
are  urging   the  President   to   espouse  a  bold   U.S.   plan   pro-
viding  for  total  and  permanent   disarmament  .  .  .  under  a
system   of   world   law.     But   unfortunately  elsewhere   in   the
government  there  are  officials  who  object  to  any  change  what-
ever  in  the  status  quo—a  view  successfully  urged   upon   the
previous   Secretaries  of   State  and   President,   ever   since   Mr.
Stassen's   first   efforts   for   a   meaningful  disarmament   agree-
ment  were  torpedoed  at  the  London  Conference  in   1954.
"Any   specific   steps  to  implement   the   disarmament  policy
set  forth   now  in  the  pending  Disarmament  Agency  bill   are
viewed,  as  one  might  expect,  with  suspicion  and   distaste  in
certain  circles  at  the  Pentagon,  the  AEC  and  the  Budget  Bu-
reau   [This  is  the  first  hint  that  the   Budget  Bureau,  too,   is
hostile  to  disarmament—IPS].    Until   the  U.S.   disarmament
plan  is  announced,  we  will  not  know  for  sure  whether   those
No  Nuclear  Arms  For  Germans
"I  speak  most  respectfully  when  I  say  that  I  do  not
propose  to  let  the  population of  West  Berlin determine
this  issue  for  the  Western powers.   It  was  not  so  many
years  ago  that  there  existed  in  Europe  another  form
of   totalitarian   government  known  as   Nazi  Germany,
which   killed  thousands   upon   thousands   of   American
boys  and  boys  of  other  Western  powers,  and  extermi-
nated  some  6  million  Jews.    Here  is  one  Senator  who
has  always  taken  the  position,  I  may  say  to  the  brass
in  the  Pentagon,  that  it  is  not  safe  for  the  peace  of  the
world  to  give  nuclear  weapons  to  the  West  Germans."
—Morse   (D.  Ore.)  in  the  Senate  July  10
who  put  their  faith  in  arms  alone  or  those  who  favor  a  bold
U.S.  initiative  for  peace  have   prevailed.
"Speaking  for  myself,  and  as  one  Senator  only,  I  hope  the
President  will   endorse   a  U.S.   plan   for   disarmament,   peace
and  world  security  .  .  .  the  result  of  many  years  of  painstak-
ing   study  by  two  highly   qualified  experts,   Grenville   Clark
and  Prof.   Louis  B.  Sohn.   .  .  .  Here  are  its  major   outlines:
"First.    The  complete  disarmament  of  all  nations—rather
than  the mere  'reduction'  or  'limitation'  of  armaments. ...  In
the   nuclear  age  no  mere  reduction   in   new  means  of   mass
destruction  can be effective.  . . .
"Second.     A  permanent   world   police   force,  under   inter-
national  authority  to  forestall   or   suppress   any  breach   of   a
disarmament   agreement    or   other   violation    of   world    law.
"Third.    As  part  of  the  disarmament  treaty,  a  world   law,
in  constitutional  and  statutory  form.   .  .  .
"Fourth.    World  judicial  tribunals.  .  .  .
"Fifth.      Extensive  revision  of   the   Charter   of   the   United
Nations ...  to  include:
(a)    practically  universal  membership.   .  .  .
(b)    A   revision   of   voting   procedures   to   assure   that   the
larger  and  more  powerful  nations  have  an  equitable  voice  and
vote   in   the   general   legislative   assembly,  which   should   be
unicameral  .  .  .  and  in  which  there  should  be  no  veto.
(c)   Appropriate    executives   elected    by   their   reorganized
legislative assembly, holding  much  the  same relationship to  the
assembly  as  the  British  Cabinet   does  to  the  House   of   Com-
mons.
(d)    A   developmental   authority.     Since  one  of   the   most
dangerous   areas  for  future  conflict   lies  in  the  vast  disparity
between   the   economic  condition   of   the  underdeveloped   na-
Why  Should  New Drugs  Be Tried  Out  First  on  Patients  Just  to  Save  the  Cost  of  Tests?
"It  is   shocking  that  experimental  drugs  are  subject   to
no   FDA   [Food   and  Drug  Adm.]   regulation  of   any   sort
before  patients  receive  them.    Some  drug  houses   perform
extensive  animal tests  before  a  drug  is  first  put  into  man;
others  perform  almost  none.    It  is  reprehensible   for  man
to  be  the  first  experimental   animal  on  which  toxicity  tests
are  run,  simply  because  bypassing  toxicity  tests  in  labora-
tory  animals saves  time  and money.  .  .  .
"Does  support  of  these  proposed  changes   tthe  Kefauver-
Celler   bill   S   1552—the   Drug   Industry   Anti-Trust  Act-
would  give  the  FDA  authority  to  test  new  drugs  for   effi-
cacy  as  well  as  safety]  indicate  a  surrender  to  the  govern-
ment  of  the  doctor's  right  to  'individualize'  therapy?     Not
at  all.    The  changes   in  FDA  authority  would  merely  keep
worthless  drugs  off  the  market  and  provide  better   guides
to  the  use  of   those  drugs  allowed  on  the  market.   What
of   the  allegations  that  only  by   extensive   clinical  experi-
ence  can  the  true  efficacy   of  a  drug  be  established?     The
history  of  medicine  is  unhappily  replete  with  examples  of
useless  drugs  employed  for  years,  decades,   or  centuries  by
countless   physicians  before  a  few   properly  conducted  ex-
periments  proved  the  drugs  to  be  without  value.  .  .  .
"Nor  am I  taken with  the  notion that  many drugs  thought
to   be   useless   might   turn  out   to   have   some   worthwhile
application  if  given  to  enough  patients.    This  notion,  carried
to  its  logical  conclusion,  would  suggest  that  all  the  chem-
icals  in  the  world  should  be  on   the   market  since   one  of
them  may  be  the  cure  for   cancer."
—Dr.  Louis  Lasagna,  head  of  Clinical  Pharmacology,   Johns  Hopkins,  testifying   for  S  1552, Kefauver   Com. July  19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   July   24,  1961
Linked  to  K's  Offer  to  Accept  Any  Control  in  A  Disarmed  World
tions  and  those  of  Western  Europe,  the  U.S.,  the  U.S.S.R.  and
Japan,   the   world   of   organization   should   establish   its   own
development   authority   administered   by   an    economic    and
social  council.
(e)   Its  own revenue  system.  .  .  .
"This  plan  is  admittedly  bold;   some  will  say  radical;  but
so  was   the   Constitution   of   the   United   States.     This   plan
calls  for   a  yielding  of   a  limited  amount   of   sovereignty  by
the  nations  of  the  world   in  order  to  prevent   that  annihila-
tion  of  humanity which  a  third  world  war  would  bring.  .  .  .
"This  plan  will  find  little  favor  with  those  wedded  to  the
status  quo  .  .  .  [it]  is far  in  advance  of  public  opinion  in  this
country  today.  .  .  .  And  yet  if  it  were  patiently  and  fully  pre-
sented  by  the  Chief  Executive  and  the  overriding   needs   for
such  a  plan  to  reverse  the  arms   race  were  explained  I  am
confident  that  the  American  people  would  support  the  Presi-
dent.  . . .
Would  the  Russians  Agree?
"It  will  be  said  that  the  Russians  will  never  agree.    But
let  us  look  at  the  record—a  record  which  unfortunately  has
not  been  made  clear  to  the  American  people.
"On  June  4,  1961,   Premier  Khrushchev  at  Vienna  handed
an  aide  memoire  to  President  Kennedy  in  which  he  said:
" 'The  Soviet  government,  as  is  well  known,  has  already
more  than  once  emphasized that  the  Soviet  government,  on
its  part,  is  willing  unconditionally  to  accept  any  Western
control   proposals  if   the  Western  powers  accept   the  pro-
posal  for  general  and  complete  disarmament.  .  .  .  When
all  states  disarm  .  .  .  each  country  will  have  proper  guar-
antees  of  its  security. ...  In  these  conditions  we  are ready
to  accept any control  proposed  by the Western  powers.'  . . .
"I  suggest  that  the  least  we  can  do  is  put  Mr.  Khrushchov
to  the  test.    If  he  means  what  he  says  on  disarmament   con-
trols  and  we  can  get  him  to  recognize  a  strong  international
peace-keeping  authority  in  a  disarmed  world,   would   we  not
have  found  the  road   to  permanent  peace? ...  If  he  does
not  mean  what  he  says  let  us  at  least  call  his  bluff  and  make
our  own  position   abundantly  clear  to  the  world.  .  .  .
"There  remains  the  problem—and  perhaps  insoluble   prob-
lem—of  China.    All  agree  that  disarmament  without   Chinese
Communist   participation   can   never   be   effective.      President
Eisenhower  at  his  press  conference  Feb.  11,  I960  [said]  .  .  .
'Well,  it's  perfectly  clear  that  in  such  a  big  territory,  such  a
great  population   could  not  be  ignored  when  you  are  talking
about  general  disarmament.  .  .  .'
Cyrus  Eaton  Honored
Pugwash,   Nova   Scotia—Presentation   of   a   citation
to  Cyrus  Eaton   for   his   "devotion   and  dedication"  to
the  improvement of  international understanding  marked
the  conclusion  of  the  Tenth  Pugwash  Intellectual  Life
Conference   of   American   University   Presidents    here
July   16.    The  group,  which  has  been  in  session  here
since  July  7  under  the  sponsorship  of  the   Association
of   American  Colleges,   includes  Presidents   of  colleges
affiliated   with  the   major   Protestant   denominations   as
well   as   the   Catholic  faith.     The   college    presidents
unanimously   declared   "one   of   our  prime  tasks  is   to
work  for  international  understanding,  which  is   among
the  most  urgent  goals  of  American  society."    In  pay-
ing  tribute  to  the  Cleveland  industrialist,  the   educators
stated,   "We  join  in  appreciation  of   the   devotion   and
dedication   with   which   you   have   contributed    to   this
desirable  end."
"That   these  views  are  shared   by  President   Kennedy   and
his  principal  advisers,  I  have  no  doubt.  .  .  .
"It   is   entirely   possible   that   world-wide    efforts   for   dis-
armament  would  break  down  on  the  rock  of  Chinese  Commu-
nist  opposition.    Yet  how  do  we  know  until  we  try?  ...     Is
it  not  possible  that  if  we  could   come  to  an  agreement   with
the  Russians  .  .  .  behind  plans  for  total  and  permanent   dis-
armament,  the  dangerously   explosive   Chinese  situation  could
be  brought  under  control? ...
"A   Senator   from   Massachusetts,    speaking   on    December
11,   1959  about  the  expectations   raised  around   the  world  by
the  Russian  proposal   for   far-reaching   disarmament   and   the
considerable   disappointment   at  the   limitations  of   this   pro-
posal,  said:
" 'It  is  for  us  now  to  meet  these  expectations  with  far-
reaching  new  plans  of  our  own,  and  not  to  disappoint   the
world   by   treating   this   problem   merely   as   a   matter   of
psychological   warfare.    We   must   design   and  propose   a
program  that  combines  disarmament  with  the   strengthen-
ing  of  the  United  Nations  and with  world  development.  .  .  .
So  far  we  have  lacked  the  vision  to  present  a  comprehen-
sive  program  for  the  development  of  a  world  community
under  law.'
"Those  words  are  as  true  today  as  when  the  President  of
the   United   States—then   the   Senator   from   Massachusetts—
first  spoke   them.     Time  is  running   short.    The   East-West
disarmament  conference  is imminent.    A  comprehensive  Amer-
ican   plan   for   disarmament  under   enforceable  world   law   is
the  present  imperative  for  peace."
A  Correction  and  More  Light  on  Dodd's
In  our  issue  of  July  3  we  called  attention  to  a  table  in
the  Congressional  Record  of  June  21  (page  10,227)  which
inadvertently   disclosed  that  Senator  Thomas  J.  Dodd   (D.
Conn.)   was  registered  as   a  foreign  agent   for  Guatemala
in  1957-58.    We  were  wrong  in  saying  that  he  was  a  mem-
ber  of  Congress  in  those  years.    Mr. Dodd was  in  the  House
from   1952  to   1956,  but   not   in   1957-58.    The   tabulation
showed  that  Mr.  Dodd  was   paid  $24,999.96  by  the  Guate-
malan  government  in  1957  and  $41,666.62  in  1958,  the  year
he  campaigned  successfully  'for  election  to  the  U.S.  Senate.
We  are  in  a  position  to  add  a  few   more  details  to  our
earlier  report.    In  1956  Mr. Dodd's  last  year  in  the  House,
when  he  was  a  member  of  the  Foreign  Affairs  Committee,
Work  As  Foreign  Agent  for  Guatemala
he  was  able  to  raise  the  defense   support  allocation  to  the
Guatemalan    government   from    the    $5,000,000   originally
asked   by   the   Eisenhower   Administration  to   $15,000,000.
The  allocation  was  first  raised  in  committee  to  $10,000,000.
On  June  6,  1956,  Mr.  Dodd  made  a  speech  asking  for  more
funds  to  make Guatemala  (where  the  CIA  had  helped  over-
throw  the  Arbenz  regime  two  years  before)   into  "a  show-
piece  for  its  neighbors."    On  June  7  he  moved  an  amend-
ment   adding   another   $5,000,000  for   this   purpose   to   the
Mutual   Security   bill   and  on  June   11,  after   the  bill  had
passed   with  his  amendment,  Mr.  Dodd  made  a   statement
on  the  floor  "to  make  perfectly  plain  the  legislative  intent"
that  the  extra  money  was  for  Guatemala.
1   1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  July   24, 1961
Adenauer  Would  Rather  Risk  Nuclear  War  Than  Give  Up  Atomic  Arms
(Continued   from   Page   One)
West   to   negotiate   with   the   Uibricht   government   for   free
access  to  West  Berlin."    Is  this  so catastrophic?
The  New  Drang  Nach  Osten
Adenauer and  Strauss  have  sold  their  followers  on  the  belief
that  nuclear  rearmament  in  alliance  with  the  West  can  regain
for   the  Reich  not   only   "central   Germany"   (Mitteldeutsch-
land),  as their  propagandists  call  East  Germany,  but  the  lands
cast  of  the  Oder-Neisse  at  the  expense  of  Poland.    That  way
lies  war,  and  in  this  is the  danger  of  the  West  German  propa-
ganda   emphasis   on   "self-determination."     It   is   quite   true
that  the  Russians do  not  allow  self-determination  in  their  own
zone,  particularly  in  East  Germany.    Indeed   everybody   likes
self-determination   best   in  the  other   fellow's   back-yard;  ex-
amples : our  attitude toward  Cuba  and Nehru's  attitude  toward
Kashmir.    But  in  Eastern  Europe,   self-determination  for  the
Germans  will  be  an  unpopular  slogan  even  among  those  who
would  like  self-determination  from  the  Russians.    It  is  only
a  few  years   since  the  Germans  applied  their  own  form  of
self-determination  to  Eastern  Europe  which  remains   fearful,
especially  when  the  Germans  have  begun   to  arm  again,   this
time  with  nuclear   weapons.
Indeed  the  principal  reason  for  Strauss's  sudden  trip   here
was  to  emphasize  Germany's  right  to  nuclear  weapons  and  to
counteract  whispers  that  the Kennedy  Administration might  be
prepared   to  concede  a  denuclearized  Germany  in  bargaining
with  the  Russians.    Strauss  told  his  press   conference   at  the
Pentagon  that  the  decision  to  introduce  tactical  nuclear  weap-
ons  into  all NATO  forces was made  in  February,  1957.     "We
must  break  nuclear  weapons   into  two  categories—means  of
delivery  and  warheads,"   Strauss  went   on.     "The   means  of
delivery  weapons  must  remain  part  of  all  allied  forces.    That
means,  for  West  German  forces,  our  air   offensive   missiles,
our  air  defense  missiles  and  our  ground  missiles.    The   prob-
lem  of  nuclear  warheads  was  never  raised  by  the  West  Ger-
man  government.    If  Germany  is  involved  in  a  war  it  will  be
a  NATO  war.    If  there  is  a  NATO  war,  nuclear   warheads
would  be  released  for  use  of  the  allied  forces.    We   cannot
give  up  atomic  weapons  because  they  are  a  part  of  NATO
How  the  Satellite   Peoples   See  It
"In   a   recent   article   Senor   de   Madariaga   wrote:
The   satellites   are  as   restive  as   ever,  and  therefore
forbode  more  trouble  than  help  (for  Russia)  if  it  came
to  a  European  crisis.'    With  all  respect,  I  must   differ
directly   with   him.    Apart  from   East   Germany,   the
poorest  and  least   successful,  the  satellites  are  solidly
behind  Mr.  Khrushchev  in  his  present  attitude  towards
Germany.
"Not  to  put  too  fine  a  point  upon  it,  the  Poles,  the
Czechs,   and  the  Hungarians  fear  and  hate  the  Ger-
mans   to   an  extent   which   we   cannot   even  begin   to
comprehend  in  this  country.    And  the  Russians,  who
suffered   less  but  only  relatively,  at  the  hands  of   the
Germans,  are  not  far   behind.
"I  am  referring  not  to  members  of   the  Communist
Party,  nor  to  Ministers,  but  to  the  people.    They  are
horrified  by  the  prospect  of  Western  Germany  getting
atomic  weapons;  and  they  have  no  desire  to  see  Ger-
many  reunited.   This  gives  to  the  Soviet  Union  a  mas-
sive   psychological   support   throughout   Central   and
Eastern  Europe,  which  we  shall  underestimate  at   our
peril.
"The   reason  is   understandable  when   you   see   and
hear  of  it  at  first  hand.   Warsaw  and  Budapest  were
destroyed  by  Hitler's  orders. ...  In  all  four  of  the
countries  we  visited  the  Germans killed  and  killed  and
killed  for  five  interminable  years.    The  killing  was  not
confined  to  the  Jews;  and  it  is  not  forgotten."
—Lord  Boothby  (Ind.  C)  reporting  on a  trip  through
Eastern  Europe  in  the  London  Sunday   Times  July  16.
planning  for  Germany."    This  emphasis  in  public  seems  de-
signed  to  head  off  any  compromise  involving  a  denuclearized
Reich.    The   Adenauer  regime   would   rather   risk  a   nuclear
holocaust  than  give up  nuclear  weapons. This  is why  Adenauer
so  quickly  attacked  Willy  Brandt's  proposals  at  a  press  con-
ference  in  Berlin  July  7.    The  latter   suggested  that  a  peace
conference  could  be  called  to  determine  the   "foreign    policy
status"  (neutral?)  of  a  reunited  Reich  and  that  it  might   con-
sider  inclusion  of  a  reunited  Germany  in  an  atom  free  zone.
This,  to  Adenauer  and  Strauss,  would  be  a  loss  of  Germany's
freedom  to  determine its own  destiny.    For  them,  that  destiny
must  be  nuclear.    These  Germans  are  making  trouble  again.
Please  Send  LONG  Stamped   Envelopes  and  Specify    The  Issues  You  Want  Sent  As  Samples  For  Friends
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ...........................................„...........................„..._....._
Street   ..................................................................................._
City   ............—.........................Zone......._..State....................
7/24/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..........................................................................
Street   ........._.._.............,._........,....................„........,............
City   ...........—.........................Zone........_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  O
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered u  Second  Claw  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  nader  the Act  of  March  »,  187».   Port-dated  Monday*  but  published  every  Tho
day  except  the  but  two  Thursday!  of  August  and  December   at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  C.   An  Independent,  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.:   $6  in
Canada:   (10   elsewhere.    All   Mail  rates:   116   to   Europe:   (20   Io   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED