I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jun26.pdf

============================================================

From  Harlan's  Birth  Control Distent, P.  2
The  Supreme  Court  Is   More  Tender  With  Criminals  Than  With  Security  Risks,  Pps.  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  24
JUNE  26,   1961101     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Words  to  Be  Engraved  on  A  New  Rosetta  Stone
The  Berlin  crisis  brings  forcibly  to  attention  that  the  cap-
italist  and  communist  systems  have  one  charming   character-
istic  in  common.    Neither  asks  its  people  whether  they  want
to  risk  the  suicide  of  the  human   race  in  a  quarrel  over  ac-
cess  to  one  city;  or  indeed  whether   they  want  to  go  to  war
at  all.     Over   there,   where   the  workers   and   peasants   have
been  freed  from  the  heavy  yoke  of   monopoly  capitalism,  a
worried  Russian  can't   even  write  a  letter   to  Pravda,  or  go
to  a  peace  meeting.    Over  here,  where  such  channels  of  pro-
test   are  still   open   to  a  few,   these   are  too  few   to   count.
Congress  is  locked  in  fierce  contention  over  such   momentous
issues  as  whether   aid   to   education   shall   include  parochial
schools,  but  it  hardly  looks  up  to  notice  that  war  clouds  are
gathering   which   could   mean  the  end  of  our  species.     The
Russians  and  the  Americans  resemble   two  huge  herds  mov-
ing  toward  possible   conflict,  too   closely   packed  to  struggle
successfully   against  their   fate.    The   helplessness   of   human
kind  is  the  dominant  feature  of  the  planetary  landscape  as
the  crisis  approaches.
The  Nation-State  Jungle
The  next  feature  which  the  broad  view  turns  up  is  that
the   problems   of   American-Russian  relations  are   not   really
soluble  in  the  existing  frame  of  reference.    By  this  I  mean
the  system which  divides  the  planet  into  sovereign  nation  states
knowing  no  law  but  their  own  will  and  no  protection   but
their  own  strength.     Man  may  be  on  the  verge  of  visiting
the  stars  but  he  still   lives  in  a  jungle.    Armies,  spies,   and
the   constant   need   for   keeping  people  mobilized   with   fear
and  hatred,  are  the  pillars  of  the  nation  state  system.    Can
Russia  trust  us  and  our  allies  not  to  spy  out  her  secrets,  or
we  trust  them  not  to  spy  out  ours?    Can  X  trust  Y  not  to
cheat  if  he  can. get  away  with  it,  since  Y  regards  X  as  the
embodiment  of  all  evil  and  against  such  evil  the  end  justifies
the  means—and  X  regards  Y  in  exactly  the  same  way?   How
can  we  stop  testing  and  devising  new  monsters  of   destruction
lest  he  steal  a  march  on  us  and   come  up  with   some  new
whooper-dooper?    Given  such  a  world,  how  can  the  rest  of
mankind  expect   to  make  effective   protest  if   Americans   and
Russians  again  pollute  the  skies,  the  seas  and  the  earth  with
radioactivity,  or  chew  up  huge  quantities  of  basic  metals  on
vast  military  and  spatial  toys  while  millions  of  fellow   crea-
tures  are  lucky to  have  a  wooden  plow?
Woven  into  the  crisis  are  other  human  ways  that  help  to
make  it   difficult   to  resolve.     The   leader   of   the  herd   must
consider  not  only  the welfare  of  the  herd  but his  own prestige;
this  lost,  the  leadership  may  pass   to  someone   else;  indeed
he  may  be  trampled   down   by  those  behind   him.    Neither
leader  .is  a  madman  and  neither   leader  wants  war,  but  both
are  getting  themselves  into  a  position   where  one  must  back
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
7
On  the  Need  for  More  Testing
"With  further  testing  it   would  be  possible   to  im-
prove   the   weight-to-weight   ratios    of   warheads   for
such  missiles  as  the  Polaris  and  the  Minuteman.  That
is  their  explosive  power, now well  below  the  equivalent
of   a   megaton   of   TNT,   might   be   greatly   increased
without  increasing  the  warhead  weight,   thus  making
the  missiles  into  truly  strategic  weapons."
—John   W.  Finney   in  New   York   Times,  June  18
"The  Polaris  warhead  carries  destruction  equivalent
to  that  of  forty  Hiroshima  bombs  [800,000  tons  TNT].
The Polaris  weapons system  is  designed  to  hold  hostage
the  hundred  largest  cities  of  the  Soviet   Union.  .  .  .
Only  a  few  Soviet  cities  (Moscow  and  Leningrad,  for
example)  would  'require'  more  than  a  single  Polaris."
—Ralph  E.  Lapp,  letter  in  New  York  Times,  June  $1
Senator   ANDERSON:  I   wonder  if   either   or  both
of   you   [Admiral  Rickover  was   also   present]   would
comment  on  this  question  of  testing.    How important
is   future   testing   in  achieving  an  improved  warhead
for  Polaris—(Remainder  of  question  classified).
Admiral  (W.  P.)   RABORN  [Director,  Special  Proj-
ects,  Bureau of  Naval  Weapons,  Navy  Dept.].   I  would
be  glad  to  talk  on  that.   We  have  conducted  innumer-
able  studies  as  to  the  necessity   for  large  yield  war-
heads   and  invariably   all  studies   that   we  have  done,
and  all  that  I  have  seen  in  other  services   show  the
accuracy   of   delivery  means   more  than   increases   in
the  yield  of  the  warhead.    The  accuracy  of  both  the
land  base  missile  and  what  we  have  demonstrated  in
this  system  are  just  short  of  phenomenal.   They  are
a   lot   better  than  we  dared  hope  for.    (A   classified
portion  of  statement   follows.)
So  while  we  certainly  would  never  be  in  a  position
of   saying  we  could  not,  would  not,  welcome  reduced
weight   for   equivalent  yield  or  improved  yield  which
can  come  about  in  increased  testing,   we  are  certainly
not  in  the  position   at  the  moment  of  saying  we  are
in  dire  need  of  such  a  thing.
Senator  ANDERSON.   You  don't  really  need  it.
Admiral  RABORN.   We  are  not  in  dire  need.
Senator  ANDERSON.  (This  portion  of  the  question
is  classified).    I  am  only  interested  in  finding  out  be-
cause  apparently  something  might come out  of  Geneva
this  summer  [of  1960,  when  a  test  agreement  seemed
near—IFS].    I  was  hoping   for  a  little   guidance   as
to  how  disturbed  the  Congress  should  be  or  how  com-
placent  it  might  be  with  what  we  now  have.   You  are
not  hurting  for  it?
Admiral  RABORN.  I  think  I  represent   the  Navy.
(Remainder  of  statement  classified).
—Naval   Reactor  Program  and  Polaris  Missile   Sys-
tem.   Hearing   before   the  Joint   Committee   on  Atomic
Energy   held   in   executive   session  400  "feet    below  the
surface    of   the  Atlantic  on  the   USS   Nautilus,  April
9,  1960,  and  recently  released  in  censored  form.    This
is   the   hearing   which   provided   the   flurry   of   stories
about  the  $2.98  toy  Polaris  model  but  this  part  of  the
testimony   drew  little  attention.
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  26, 1961
Semi-Philosophical  Reflections  on  the  Supreme  Court's  Closing  Day
If  a  poll  taker  were  to  ask  almost  any  sampling  of  Amer-
icans  whether  they  believed  that  an  atheist  should  be  allowed
to  hold  public  office  in  this  country,  he  would  probably  find
very  few  who  thought   so.    Yet  the  Supreme  Court  of   the
United   States   ruled   on   its   final   day   of   the   closing   term
last  Monday   that  neither  the  States  nor  the  Federal   govern-
ment  could  require  affirmation   of  belief   in  God  as  a  require-
ment  for   public   office.     The   Court   did   so,  furthermore,  by
unanimous   vote.    Mr.  Justice  Black  wrote  the  decision   and
even  Justices  Frankfurter  and  Harlan  concurred  in  the  result.
This  unanimity  indicates   the  gap   between   the  thinking   on
the  Court   and  the  thinking   in  the  country.    The   concepts
applied  by  the  Judges  were  those  of  the  Eighteenth   Century
gentlemen   who   founded   our   country;   they   were   disposed
to  look  upon  religion  as  at  best  a  private  affair  and  at  worst
a  troublesome   superstition   which   had  brought  much   blood-
shed  into  the  world.    Our  generation,   on  the  contrary,  has
been   brought   up  to  hear  of  "atheistic"   and   "Godless   com-
munism";   religion—along   with   freedom—is   one   of   those
goods  for  which  we  are  prepared,  with   admirable   altruism,
to  destroy  the  world.    Yet  the  State  of  Maryland  will  obey
the   Court   and   now   issue   a   Commission   as  Notary    Public
to   Roy  R.  Torcaso  without  requiring  him   to   swear  belief
in  God  and  the  country  will  acquiesce  in  the  decision.
A  Secular  Priesthood
This   illustrates   the   extent   to   which   the   Supreme  Court
operates   as  a  secular  priesthood,   commanding  awe,   respect,
obedience   and  veneration,   through   the   manipulation   of   its
own  hallowed  symbols  and  dogmas.    The  law,  like  religion,
is only another  variety of  the  means  by which  some  semblance
of  order  and  civilization  is  maintained  in  our  rather  primitive
and   sanguinary  species.     Instead   of   God,   it  utilizes  a   less
anthropomorphic   abstraction,   Law  with   a   capital   L.     The
mob  is  subdued,  a  certain  amount  of  fairness  enforced,   and
conceptions  kept  alive  which  few  really  understand  but  which
are  nonetheless' essential  for   some  approximation   to  a   good
society.     One   of   these   is   separation   of   Church   and    State.
But  this  acquiescence  has  its  limits.     Maryland,  so  long  as
nothing   more  is  involved   than   a  freak  dissenter,   will   obey
easily,  salving  the  hurt  to  its  piety  by  continuing   to  enjoy
its  multitude  of   slot  machines,  its  usurious  loan   rates,   and
its  gold  brick  savings  and  loan  institutions.    But  where  more
fundamental  interests  are  involved,  the  Court  is  less   willing
to  risk  judgment.
The  Catholic  Church  will  forgive  a  little  eccentric   atheism
on  the  periphery  of  our  society  but  birth  control  is  not  only
Secularism   Upheld
"We  repeat  and  again  reaffirm  that  neither  a  State
nor  the  Federal  Government can  constitutionally  force
a  person  'to  profess  belief  or  disbelief  in  any  religion.'
Neither  can  constitutionally  pass  laws  nor  impose  re-
quirements   which  aid   all   religions   as   against   non-
believers,   and  neither   can  'aid   those  religions   based
on  a  belief  in  the  existence   of  God  as  against   those
religions   founded  on  different  beliefs."
—Mr.  Justice   Black  for  a  unanimous   Court  in  the
case   of   the   Maryland   Notary   Public  who  refused    to
declare  his   belief   in  God.
a  cherished  dogma  but  the  embodiment  of  its  hope  ultimately
to   create  a  Catholic  majority   in   the   United    States.     Con-
fronted   with  a  test  of  the  Connecticut  birth  control  law,  the
court  not   only  split   but  fragmented;   all   its  usual  divisions
of   liberal  and  conservative  collapsed   before  this   issue.    No
majority   opinion   could   even   be  arrived   at.    The  judgment
of   the  court,  declining   to  pass  on  the  issue,  was  by  Frank-
furter,   with  Warren,  Clark   and  Whittaker.     Brennan   con-
curred   in  the  result   but  not  in  the  reasoning,  while  Black,
Douglas,  Stewart  and  Harlan   all  dissented   in  different  ways.
In  this  case  Black  was  the  most  circumspect  and  Harlan   the
most  outspoken  dissenter.   The  latter  wrote  a brilliant  opinion
expounding   the   place   of   the   declaratory  judgment   in   our
constitutional   law  and  going   on  to   express  his  belief   (see
box  at  the  bottom   of   page  two)   that  the   Connecticut   Act
was  unconstitutional.    The   effect   of  the  decision  is  to   leave
in   force  that   system  of   hypocrisy   by  which   the   well-to-do
and  educated  are  allowed   contraceptives   while  the  -poor  are
denied  the  benefits  of  the  public  birth  control   clinics  which
could  teach  them  how  to  plan  parenthood.
The   idea  of  fair  trial  even  at  the  expense   of  letting   the
guilty   escape   is   at   least    as   old    as   the    Pentateuch    but
most  men  have  yet  fully   to  absorb  it.     In   several   notable
decisions  last  Monday  the  Court  took  steps  to  provide   greater
protection   against   arbitrary   police   practices.     In   the   Mapp
case   5-to-4,   Clark   joined   the   liberals   to   reverse   the    1949
Wolf  case  and  rule  that  henceforth  in  state  courts,  as  hitherto
in   Federal,   illegally   seized   evidence   could   not   be   used   in
criminal  trials.    In  a  unanimous  decision  by  Mr.  Justice  Bren-
nan,   the  Court   also   ruled   that   general  warrants   could   not
be  used   in  raids  for   obscene   literature;   the   decision   retold
the  fascinating  story  of  the  long  struggle  against  the  general
warrant  and   its  earlier  use  in  England   as  a  means  of   sup-
pressing  a  free  press.    In  another  decision,  6-to-3,  with  Har-
lan,   Clark   and  Whittaker   dissenting,   the   Court   reversed   a
From  Harlan's  Birth  Control  Dissent:  Conn. Law More Extreme  Than  Franco  Spain's
"The  secular  state  is   not  an  examiner  of   consciences;
it  must  operate  in  the  realm  of  behavior,  of  overt  actions,
.  .  .  what  is  involved  here  is  this:  the  State  is   asserting
the  right  to  enforce  its  moral judgment by  intruding  upon
the  most  intimate  details  of  the  marital  relation  with  the
full  power  of  the  criminal  law ...  to  enquire  into,  prove
and   punish  married  people  for   the   private  use   of  their
marital  intimacy.  .  .  .
"Though  the  State  has  argued  the  constitutional  permis-
sibility   of   the   moral  judgment   underlying  this   statute,
neither  its  brief,  nor  its   argument,  nor  anything  in  any
of  the  opinions of  its  highest  court  in  these  or  other  cases
even  remotely  suggests   a  justification  for  the  obnoxiously
intrusive  means it  has  chosen  to  effectuate  that  policy.  .  .  .
Indeed  a  diligent  search  has  revealed  that  no  nation,  in-
cluding   several   who   quite  evidently  share   Connecticut's
moral  policy,  has  seen  fit  to  effectuate  that  policy  by  the
means  presented  here.  .  .  ."
— Mr.   Justice   Harlan   dissenting   from   the   Court's   refusal   to  pass  on  the   Connecticut   law  which   makes   the   use
rather  than  the  sale  or  purchase   of  contraceptives   illegal.  In   a  footnote   he  points  out  that  even  the   anti-contracep-
tive  laws  of  Catholic  Belgium,  France,  Ireland,  Italy   and  Spain   do  not   go  that   far.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  26, 1961
... It  Gives  the Worst Criminals A Better Break Than Accused "Security Risks"
murder  conviction  because  the  weak-minded  suspect  had  been
coerced   into  confessing   by  prolonged  detention  without  ar-
raignment  or  legal  aid.   This,  the  Culombe  case,  will  infuriate
the  leading  spokesmen  on  this  subject  in  Congress,  most  of
them  Southerners   and  former   prosecutors.    The   House   has
just  passed  a  bill  to  get  around  the  Mallory  rule  requiring
prompt  arraignment,  and  a  similar  bill  has  been  introduced
in  the  Senate.     Here   the  Court   majority  stands   up   against
the  Congressional  majority  and  manages  to  protect  fair  trial
against  the  more  vengeful  spirit  on  Capitol  Hill.
Worse   Off  Than   Criminals
But  this  consecration  to  the  cause  of  justice  even  for   the
most  abhorrent   criminal  begins  to  falter  when  the  Court  is
confronted   by  cases  which   involve  no   allegations   of   crime
but  the  hobgoblin  area  of  "security."    The  same  Court  which
could  take  so  dispassionate  and  compassionate  a  view  of  mur-
derers,   narcotic  sellers   and   purveyors  of   obscene   literature
swung  5-to-4  against   Rachel  Brawner,   victim  of  the  security
mania,  a  short  order  cook  employed  in  a  private  restaurant
on  the  premises   of  the  Naval  Gun   Factory  here  in  Wash-
ington.     The  Admiral  in  charge  got  around  all   safeguards
in  such  cases  by  the  simple  expedient   of  taking  away  from
Mrs.   Brawner   the   identification  badge   without   which   she
could  not  get  on  to  the  premises.    Her  union,  the  Cafeteria
and  Restaurant  Workers,  tried  in  vain  to  get  a  hearing  for
her  and  finally  brought  this  suit;  the  AFL-CIO  filed  a  brief
amicus  pointing  out  that  "perhaps  several  hundred   thousand"
civilians  in  similar  jobs  would   be  affected   if  military  com-
manders  were  allowed  arbitrarily  to  refuse  access  badges  on
security  grounds.   The  situation  may be  found  eloquently  por-
trayed  by  Mr.  Justice  Brennan  in  the  box  below.    But  Mr.
Justice  Stewart  for  the  majority  allowed  the  naval  commander
to  do  as  he  pleased   at  the  expense  of   this  poor   woman's
reputation  and  livelihood.    The  suspected  "security  risk"  here,
like  the  suspected   "counter  revolutionary"   in  Soviet   society,
finds  it  much  harder  to  get  justice  than  the  worst  criminal.
In  two other  cases  last  Monday  the  Court  showed  its  capac-
ity  to  work  itself  up  into  a  fine  judicial  lather  over  appeals
which  hardly  deserved  a  hearing.    One  case  was  brought  by
Five  Contempt   Cases  To  Be  Heard
The  most  welcome  news  on  the  last   day  of   Court
was   the  grant  of   a  review   to   four   more  victims  of
the  witch hunt: Alden  Whitman,  Wm. A. Price,  Herman
Liveright  and Norton Anthony  Russell.   The  first  three
pleaded  the  First  Amendment in  the  Internal  Security
Committee's  1956 foray  into  newspaper business.  Rus-
sell  pleaded the  First  when  asked  by  House Un-Amer-
ican   about  undergraduate  activities  at   Antioch.     Set
down  for  argument  with  these  cases  is  that  of  John
T.  Gojack,  another  First  Amendment  case  of  unusual
interest.    The  majority  in  the  Barenblatt  decision  im-
plied  that  they  would  not  allow  the  House  Committee
to  operate  as  a  pillory  for  the  sake  of  exposure  alone.
Gojack,  an  official   of   the  United  Electrical  Workers,
was  summoned  in  hearings  called  in  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,
in  1955 on  the  eve  of  union  elections  and  designed   (as
Walter  then said)  "to give  known or  suspected  commies
...  a  full  glare  of  publicity."
a  Wisconsin   lawyer  who  objected   to  paying   $15  a  year  to
the  State  bar  association  on  the  ground  that  it  espoused  legal
views  of  which   he  did   not   approve.     The   other   case  was
by  six  railway  clerks   in  Bibbs  County,  Georgia,   bankrolled
by  some  anti-union  organization,  to  challenge  the  union  shop
agreement   with   the   Southern   Railway  on  the   ground    that
their  monthly  dues  of  from  $2.25  to  $3  a  month  were  used
to support  "ideological and  political  doctrines  and  candidates"
of  which  they disapproved.    The  good  ladies  of  Bibbs  County,
Georgia,  also  disliked  the  railway  union  paper,  "Labor," prob-
ably  the   best  labor   paper   in  the   country.    The   upshot   of
the  railway  suit  is  that  the  Georgia   courts  must  now  deter-
mine   how  much   of   the  dues  went   for  other  than  strictly
collective   bargaining   purposes—an   accounting   nightmare—
and  order  a  rebate.   We  thought  Justice  Frankfurter's   dissent
with   Harlan   made  more  sense  than  the  majority,  and   that
the  free  speech  issue  was  dragged  in  by the  heels.  The  Frank-
furter  dissent  surveyed  the  history  of  trade  unionism  and  the
political  activities  with  which  it  is  inextricably  entangled   here
and  abroad.    This  case  will  haunt   the  labor  movement   for
some  time  to  come,  and  give  a  handle  to  all  kinds  of  anti-
union   elements.
Branding A Naval Gun Factory  Cook  A Security  Risk  Without  Hearing  of  Any Kind
"If petitioner Brawner's badge had  been lifted  on  grounds
of  her  race,  religion  or  political  opinions,  the  Court  would
concede  that  some  constitutionally protected  interest  .  .  .
had  been  injured.    But,  as  the  Court  says,  there  has  been
no  open  discrimination  here.   The  expressed  ground  of  ex-
clusion  was  the  obscuring  formulation  that  petitioner  failed
to  meet the  'security  requirements'  of  the  naval installation
where  she   worked.    I  assume  for  present  purposes  that
separation  as  a  'security  risk,'  if  the  charge  is  properly
established,   is   not  unconstitutional.   But   the   Court   goes
beyond  that.    It  holds  that  the  mere  assertion  by  govern-
ment  that  exclusion  is  for  a  valid  reason  forecloses  further
inquiry.    That  is,  unless  the  government  official   is  foolish
enough  to  admit  what  he's  doing—and  few  will  be so  foolish
after   today's  decision—he   may   employ   'security   require-
ments'  as  a  blind  behind  which  to  dismiss  at  will  for  the
most  discriminatory  of  causes.
"What   sort   of   right   is   it   which   enjoys  absolutely  no
procedural  protection?  .  . .  under  today's  holding  petitioner
is  entitled  to  no  process  at  all.    She  is  not  told  what  she
did  wrong;  she  is  not  given  a  chance  to  defend   herself.
She may be the victim of  the basest  calumny.  . . . Petitioner
was  not  simply  excluded from  the  base  summarily,  without
a  notice  and  chance  to  defend  herself.    She  was  excluded
as  a  'security  risk,'  that  designation  most  odious  in  our
times.    The  Court  consoles  itself  with  the  speculation  that
she  may  have  been  merely  garrulous,  or  careless   with  her
identification   badge,  and  indeed  she  might,  although  she
will  never  find  out.    But  in  the  common understanding  of
the  public  with  whom  petitioner  must  hereafter  live  and
work  the  term  'security  risk'  carries  a  much  more  sinister
meaning.    It  is  far  more  likely  to  be  taken  as  an  accusa-
tion  of  communism or  disloyalty  .  .  .  the  Government .  .  .
ought  not  to  affix  a  'badge  of  infamy,'  to  a  person  without
some  statement  of  charges  and  some  opportunity to  speak
in  reply."
—Mr.  Justice  Brennan   dissenting   (with   Warren,  Black  and  Douglas)  from  Justice  Stewart's  5-4  decision  upholding
the  exclusion  of  a  cook  from   the  Naval   Gun  Factory  in  Washington   on  unspecified    security   grounds.
9  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  26, 1961
Brotherly  Milleniums  Reachable  Only  By  Brotherly  Blood-Baths
(Continued  from  Page  One)
down  or  slink  away  and  lose  face  unless  he  calls  the  other's
bluff.   The  stake is  suffering  beyond  imagination  for   millions.
This  is  more  or  less  realized,  but  the  realization  makes  little
difference  just  as  it  turns  out  to  make  little  difference  that
for  many  months  the  leaders  on  both  sides  have  been  saying
that  war  is'now  impossible.     Suddenly  it  is  quite  possible.
The  two  leaders  have  met.    They  have  made  clear  to  each
other  that  they  are  prepared  to  go  to  war  unless  the   other
backs  down.   Worse  than  war  by  miscalculation  is  war  by
cold   calculation.    We  are  prepared   to  call   the  other   side's
bluff   and   blow   everybody's  brains  out,   our   own   included,
rather  than  give  in.
Everybody's  Motives  Are  The  Very  Best
Another   odd  feature  of  the  human  landscape   in  this  cli-
mactic  year  is  that  both  sides  claim  to  be  moved  by  the  purest
impulses  of  human  brotherhood.    On  our  side  are  the  Chris-
tians  or  the  Judaeo-Christians,   who   believe—or   think   they
believe—in  human  brotherhood.     On  the  other   side  are  the
neks  of  Marx,   who  founded   another   creed   of   brotherhood.
Both  creeds  are  brotherhoods  of  the  oppressed,  dedicated  to
building  a  better  world  for  all  mankind,  in  the  here  and/or
the   hereafter.    Among   allies   on   both   sides   are   subsidiary
creeds   like   Mohammedanism,  which   also   postulate   human
brotherhood,   not   to  mention   the  Nineteenth   century   creed
of   free   markets  and   free   enterprise  as  the   only  true   road
to  the  greatest   good  of  the  greatest   number.    Everybody  is
intent  on  building  a  better  world  in  which  all  men  will  be
brothers  but  no  one  is  really  willing  to  start  out  by  being
fraternal   in  the  world  as  it  is.    The  unspoken   corollary  of
all  these  brotherly  creeds  is  that  the  millenium  can  only  be
ushered  in  by  a  vast  brotherly  blood  bath.    So  on  both  sides
men   are  devotedly  ready,  if  'ordered,   to   press  the   button.
Which  of  the  contending creeds  is  the  true  one?   Solomon
found  the  true  mother  by  watching  which  woman  preferred
to  give  up  the  baby  rather  than  have  it  cut  in  half.     Here
both  contenders  prefer  the   death  of   the  world   to   its   loss
to  the  other.    Clearly  both   are   false  and   neither   deserves
the   love  of  mankind.    On   one  side  is  a  caricature  of  so-
Albert  Deutsch
We  record  with  sorrow  the  sudden  death   in  London
June   17  of   Albert   Deutsch,   our  newspaper  colleague
of  many  years  on  PM,  the  New   York   Star,  the   New
York   Post  and  the   New   York  Daily   Compass.     His
pioneer   work   in  the  field  of   the  mentally  ill   earned
him  a  reputation  in  psychiatry.    His  sympathy  for  the
unfortunate  and  his  courage  in  speaking  up  on  their
behalf   made  him  a  beloved  newspaper  columnist  and
a  cherished   friend.
cialism,  on  the  other  a  caricature  of  freedom.    How  free  are
men  who  can  be  blown  off  the  map  at  any  moment  without
their  permission ?
Some  crisis  was  bound   to  arise.    For  many  months  men,
have  talked  of  co-existence.    But  the  leadership  on  both  sides
has   envisaged   co-existence  as   a   deplorable   and   distasteful
necessity,   arising   from   a   technological   misfortune:   it   was
no  longer  possible  to  destroy  others  without  destroying  our-
selves.    It  naturally  flowed  from   this  that  co-existence  was
not  really  to  be  peace,  a  lying  down  of   the  lion  with   the
lamb,  but  only  a  new  form  of  struggle,  more  insidious,  more
protracted,  leading  by  safer   means  to  the  extinction  of   the
other.     No   one  said,   we  must   learn   to   live   together,  we
must  stress our  similarities not  our  differences,  we  must  think
of   ourselves  as  one   species   on   a   small   planet,   as   indeed
sometimes  we  notice  that  we  are.   They  spoke  of  co-existence
as  only  a  new  and  more  intensified   form   of   class  struggle
while  we  saw  in  it  only  a  way  by  other  means  to  spread  our
own   system.    No   one  saw  it   as  a  breathing  spell,   in   the
shadow  of  monsters neither side wished to unleash, a breathing
spell  in  which  to  learn  that  we  are  all  parts  of  one  another.
Should  the  war  come,  those  who  survive  will  be  a  long,
long  time  rebuilding.    They  may  be  helped  to  build   sorrje-
thing  better   if   somehow  the   memory  can   be   preserved  .«pf
how  poorly  the  world  was  organized  and  the  species  cont'i-
tioned.    Should  the  crisis  pass,  it  is  by  a  study  of  this  land-
scape  that   we  may  possibly  find  our  way  out   of   peril ^o
something  more  stable.    The   sovereign  state  is  our   enerriy-
Only  if  it  dies  can  humanity  live.                   Noon,  ]une  »?7
You  Send  The  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelopes  and  We'll   Send  Free  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ............................................... ..........................„..._*..... —
Street    ......,...................................................................-........._.
City   ............ _ ....................
M
...Zone......._..State...«...............
6/28/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   .......................................................................... —
Street    ......... _ ................................................. _ .....................
City   ............ _ .........................Zone........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?
..State....................
Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stem's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C,.  under  the  Act of  March  8.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  Independent    weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   »B  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Ail   Mail  rates:   018  to   Europe;   $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED