I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961apr24.pdf

============================================================

The  New  Africa   Speaks  Up for  the New  Cuba,  P.  3
Documentary;  From  the  Charges  Made Against  the  US  by  Foreign  Minister  Roa at  the  UN,  Pages  2-3
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  15
APRIL  24,  1961
>,
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The Deed Was Done Quickly, But It's Macbeth Who's Dead
April   19, 9  p.m.
Here  in  Washington,  and  earlier  at  the  UN  in  New  York,
it  was  being  whispered   that  if  the  Cuban   deed   were  to  be
done,  it  would  be  best  if  it  were  done  quickly.   And   so,  it
seems,  these  Shakespearian  prayers  have  been  granted,  except
that   it   is   Macbeth    not   the   King   who   lies   slain.    The
rebel  invasion   of   Cuba,   as  this   is  being   written,   seems  to
have  been  crushed.   There  is  an  atmosphere  of  deep  gloom
at  the  State  Department.     The  President,  due  to  "the   press
of   business,"  has  just  announced  that  he  will  be  unable  to
witness  that  week-end  naval  training  exercise  off  the  Florida
coast,   and   the  Navy   followed   this  a   few   minutes  later  by
cancelling   the   exercise  altogether,   though   it   was   supposed
to  have  been  routine.     Several  hours  before  the   news   came
over  the  UPI  ticker  that  rebel  headquarters  had  lost  all  con-
tact  with  the  troops  on  the  beachhead  in  Las  Villas    ("Do
you  want  me  to  evacuate you?"  seems  to  have  been  the  last
words  transmitted  to  them  by  the  commander  of  an  offshore
supply   vessel),   the   AP's   State   Department   correspondent
John  M.  Hightower  had  already  filed  a  dispatch  saying  that
the  rebel  invasion  "was  reported  on  excellent authority today"
to  have  failed  to  set  off   "the   political   defections  and  upris-
ings"   on   which   the   expedition   had   counted.     The   failure
was  a  failure  of   intelligence,   and   it   is  being  said  jokingly
in  the  State  Department  press  room  that  after  the  U-2  inci-
dent  and  the  debacle  in  Laos,  the  Cuban  defeat  is  the  third
strike  against  the  CIA,  and  on  three  strikes  it  should  be  out.
Fidel   Castro  will   have   done   us  a  favor   if   his   cleanup   of
the  invasion  also  leads  to  a  cleanup  of  Allen  Dulles  and  the
CIA.    They   have   again   demonstrated   their   incompetence.
Counter  Revolutionaries   Too  Pink  for  Dodd
The  shattering  of  the  invasion  hopes  may  also  shatter  the
Kennedy   honeymoon.     The  post  mortems   had  begun   before
the   defeat  was  confirmed.     On   the  hill,  a   Senate   Internal
Security  subcommittee  under  Dodd   of  Connecticut  has  been
holding   executive  sessions  today  to  hear  complaints  from  the
wilder  right  wing  of  the  Cuban  emigration  against  the  Miro
Cardona  coalition.    A  preview   was  provided   in  last   night's
Washington   Star  where  its  right  wing  columnist   Constantine
Brown  attacked  the  Miro  Cardona  coalition  as  too  far   Left,
and   predicted   on   the   basis  of   earlier   hearings   by   Internal
Security  "should  the  present  counter-revolution   succeed,  there
will  not  be much  change  in  the  totalitarian  policies  of  Castro."
On   the  other   hand,   the  Left  wing  of   the   emigration   had
already   begun   to  grumble   bitterly   about   Kennedy.     Those
who   had   hoped   for   a   new   Fidelism   without   Fidel   were
disappointed  on  two  scores.    The  first  is  that  they  had   been
forced   to   accept  an   economic  and   social  program  tailored
to  the  moderate   right   and  inconsistent,   in  their   view,   with
the   hopes   aroused   by  the   Alianza   para   el   progreso.     The
second   is  with   the   invasion   itself,   in  which   they  had   had
The  Cast   Changes,   But  Not  the   Hypocrisy
"It  would  perhaps  be  in  order  for  me  to  inform  the
Council  that  while  the  reports  that  we  receive  on  the
situation  in Guatemala  are  incomplete and fragmentary,
the  information  available  to  the  United  States  thus  far
strongly  suggests   that  the  situation  does  not  involve
aggression   but   is   a   revolt   of   Guatemalans   against
Guatemalans."
— Henry  Cabot  Lodge  at  the  UN,  June  20,
"If  the  Castro regime  has  hostility  to  fear,  it  is  the
hostility  of  Cubans,  not of  Americans. ... If  the  Castro
regime  is  overthrown,  it  will  be  overthrown  by Cubans,
not  by  Americans.   I  do  not  see  that  it  is  the  obliga-
tion  of  the  United  States  to  protect  Dr.  Castro  from
the  consequences  of  his  treason  to  the  promises  of  his
revolution. ..."
— Adlai  Stevenson  at  the  UN,  April   17, 1961
little  hope  from  the   beginning.
One  of  the  key  points  to  watch,  I  had  been  told   earlier,
was  the   choice   of   military  leader   for   the   invasion   forces.
There  were  two  candidates.  The  candidate  of  the  anti-Castro
left  led  by  Manolo  Ray  was  Col.  Ramon  Barquin,  the   most
respected  military figure in  the  emigration,  an  army officer  who
had   been   imprisoned   by  Batista  for   revolting   against   him.
Col.   Barquin  was  named  military  commander  of  Havana  by
Fidel  and  defected  last  summer.    Col.   Barquin  was   against
any   large   scale   invasion,   predicting   that   it   would   be  dis-
astrous   if   attempted   because   the   time  for   it  was  not   ripe;
he  is  reported  to  have  said  that  it  would  be  militarily   difficult
and   psychologically   bad,  uniting  the   Cuban   people   behind
Castro  against  what  would  inevitably  appear  to  be  a  foreign
inspired   invasion.     He   was   in   favor   of   infiltrating   small
groups   and  working  from   within.    The   candidate  of   the
right  wingers  was  Captain  Manuel  Artime,  a  young  man  in
his  late  20's,  a  member  of  the  Agrupcion  Catolica,  who  had
served  for  a  month  or  two  with  Castro  in  the  Sierra  Maestra.
He  was  described  to  me  as  "the  pin-up  boy  of  the  CIA"   and
the  darling  of  the  right  wing  Diario  de  la  Marina,  which  only
last  Saturday  appealed   for   a  new  government   which   would
exclude  all  who  had  ever  served  with  Castro.    Capt.  Artime
was,   however,   to  be  forgiven   his   short   stay   under   Fidel's
banner  and  it  was  Captain  Artime'  who  was  chosen  to  com-
mand  the   invasion.    The   right  wanted   a  man   of   its  own
in  charge  of  the  troops,  and  a  man  who  shared  its   objective.
This  was  not   a  new  popular  uprising  but   a  beachhead   on
which  a  provisional  government  could  quickly  be   established
and   then  appeal   for   American  arms  and   American  military •
support.    The  paymasters   of  the  counter-revolution,  the  big
sugar   and   oil   and   other   companies   which   helped   finance
the   invasion,  didn't   invest   their   money  to   buy  themselves
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   S4,  1961
Abridged Version of Cuban Foreign Minister Roa's UN  Speech on April 17  ...
"I  must  announce  officially   on  behalf  of  the  Government
which   I  have  the  honor   to  represent  that  the  Republic  of
Cuba  was  invaded  this  morning  by  a  mercenary  force  which
came  from  Guatemala  and  Florida  and  which  was organized,
financed  and  armed  by  the  Government  of  the  United  States.
The   last  time  the  Revolutionary  Government  of   Cuba  was
represented   before  the   Security  Council,  the  representatives
of   the   Western   Powers   labelled   the   accusations  which   we
submitted  to  the  Council  with  proof  as  inventions.    It  is  the
Cuban   people   who   are   [now]    suffering   the   tragic  conse-
quences   of   those   'inventions.'     They    are   suffering    from
American   bombs;   they   are   being   strangled   by  American
agents.     Public  buildings  are  being   destroyed  by  saboteurs.
Sugar  cane  plantations  are  being  burned  by  piratical  planes
that  are  coming  from   Guatemala   bases.    These  crimes  and
depredations  have  been  sanctified,   paid  for   and   blessed  by
the  State  Department,  the  Pentagon  and  the  CIA.
Castro's  First  Reaction  to  Kennedy
"When   the   Democratic   Administration  took   power   on
20   January,   the   Revolutionary   Government   of   Cuba   had
certain  hopes  that  the  new  leaders  in  the  United  States,  who
had   learned   from  the  catastrophic  orientation  of  American
foreign  policy,  and  were  conscious  of  the  signs  of  the  times,
would   change  the   methods   and   objectives  of   the   previous
Administration   in  their  relations  of   cold-war   policy   regard-
ing  Cuba.    Had  we  been  given  even  some  hope   and  some
encouragement  on  that  fact,  you  can  be  sure  that  the  Revo-
lutionary  Government  of  Cuba,  in  proof  of  good-will,  would
have  withdrawn  the  item   [Cuba's   complaint  to  the  UN  of
US  aggression]   from  the  agenda.    But  that  hope  was  shat-
tered.     The  policy  of  power  of  the  Republican Administra-
tion  has  been  crudely  overthrown  by  the  Democratic  Admini-
stration,  and  replaced  by  an  even  greater  one.     In  order  to
evaluate  the  position   of   the   Cuban   government,   you  must
bear   in   mind   the   motto   of   the   present   President   in   the
course  of  his  electoral  campaign,  'Let  us  do  in  Cuba  what
we  did  in  Guatemala,  but  let  us  be  frank  and  state  it.'
"At  the  same  time  that  the  President  of  the  United  States
took   over   his   office,   Prime  Minister   Fidel   Castro   said   in
Cuba,   'What   decides   demobilization?     Demobilization   de-
pends  upon  the  change  which  has  just  occurred  in  the  admin-
istration  of  the  United  States.    The  new  President   has  just
made  a  speech  which  contained  some  positive  aspects.     We,
the   Cubans,   know   how   to   wait   calmly.     We   were   never
invaded  by  hatred.    We  were  never  invaded  by  hysteria,  not
U.S.   Aircraft   Carriers   Covering   Invasion?
"A  few   minutes  ago   the   President   of   the  Republic
of  Cuba,  Dr.  Osvaldo  Dorticos,  communicated to  me,  for
the   information  of   this  Committee,  that  at   5:30   this
afternoon,  after  shooting  down  a  B-26  plane  of  the  in-
vading   mercenary  forces,   a  jet   plane   of   the  Revolu-
tionary  Air  Force  of  Cuba  pursued  another  jet   plane
of  the  enemy  to  a  key  known  as  Cayo  Guano,  within
the  jurisdictional and territorial waters  of  Cuba.   When
they  arrived  at  this  key,  two  jet  planes  of  the  Cutlass
type  broke  in.    These   Cutlass  planes   are  planes   sta-
tioned  on  an  American  aircraft  carrier.    They   passed
over  the  Cuban  plane,  placed  themselves   at  either  side
of  the  B-26  invading  plane  and  escorted   it  as  it  with-
drew.
"The  Cuban  government  possesses  accurate  informa-
tion  from  its  pilots   to  the  effect  that   when  the  B-26
enemy  planes  are  in  danger  they  are  immediately  suc-
coured  by  jet  planes  which  take  off  from  an  American
aircraft  carrier  that  is  travelling  slowly,  cruising  south
of  the  Cuban coast,  close  to  the  Bay  of  Cochinos,  where
one  of  the  landings  of  the  invading  mercenary   forces
has  taken  place."
—Mr.  Roa, Cuba, at  the  UN  April  17  (night  session)
even  when  there  loomed  over  us  the  ghastly  danger  of   an
attack  by  a  powerful  enemy.    What  do  we  say  at  the  idea
that  peace  may  reign  in  our  country  and  in  the  world?    We
welcome   the   opportunity   and  we  welcome  that   peace  and
we  trust  that  the  government  of  the  United  States  will  cor-
rectly  guide   those  who  have  this  tremendous  responsibility
in  the  eyes  of  the  world.    We  shall  be  happy  for  any  cor-
rection  made by the  United  States and  any  redress.   We know
what   faces   the  new  President  of   the  United  States.     If   he
proceeds  honestly  along  this  new  path,   we  shall  be  happy
and  hope  for  his  success.    But  we  shall   await  facts  which
are  more  eloquent   than  words.'
"According   to   this   pronouncement   on   the   part   of   the
Prime  Minister,  which  was  made  known  in  the  note  of  the
Foreign   Ministry  on  27  February  and   sent  to   the   Foreign
Ministries   of   the   Americas,  the   Revolutionary  Government
would  follow  a  policy  of  patient  hope  and  await  new  events
with   open   doors.    The   tone  and  the  path   chosen  for   the
next  declarations of  the  new  President  and  those  who  cooper-
ated  with  him  clearly pointed  out  that  the  policy of  the  Demo-
cratic  Administration  was  going  to  be  one  of   even   greater
aggression   and   intervention   than   that   of   President   Eisen-
hower.    It  has  refused  to  recognize  that  the  Cuban  State  has
the  right   freely   and  spontaneously   to  develop   its  own   cul-
Was  Our Own Revolution Betrayed When
"Let  us  recall  the  details  of  the  great  American   revolu-
tion  of  independence,   for  example.    A  third  of  the  popula-
tion  of  the  thirteen  colonies  was  still  loyal  to  His  Majesty,
King  George   III   of   England.     Important  leaders    offered
Washington  the  royal  diadem.   Of  the  3,929,214 inhabitants,
about  1,000  exiled  themselves  and  lost  their  assets,  which
were  confiscated, and  were  prohibited  from  returning;  those
who   did  return  were   hanged.     It   was   declared   a   crime
against  the  fatherland  to  print  false  material  or  malicious
slander   against   the   Government.    The   Benedict    Arnolds
were  thousands in  number.   The  first  general  elections  were
held  13  years  later  and  there  was  only  one  candidate  pre-
sented.    Women  and  slaves  were  not  allowed  to  vote—and
We  Broke  Out  of  the  Colonialist  System?
there   were   a  million  of   them.
"And  here  is  where  we  might  ask  an  innocent   question.
Did  the  leaders  of  the  Federalists  betray  the  revolution  be-
cause   they   liberated  the   social   and  economic   forces   that
had  been  prepared  by  British  monopolists,  instead  of  limit-
ing  themselves  to  protesting  against  the  tea  tax,  the  paper
tax  and the  molasses  tax?    Had they  been  willing  to  trans-
act  and  negotiate   with  the  colonialist   system,   they  would
then  have  been  traitors  to  the  American  Revolution.    Thus,
we,  too,  would  have  been  traitors  to  the  Cuban  revolution
if   we  had  circumscribed our  revolution   to   the   colonialist
program   of   the  counter-revolutionary Council."
—Mr.  Roa,  of  Cuba,  at  the   UN  April  17
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   U,  1961
With  Some  Items  the   New York  Times   Did  Not  Print  in  Its  Excerpts
tural,   political   and   economic   life.     The  U.S. Government
has  undermined  the  two  pillars  of  the  Inter-American juri-
dical  system:  political  sovereignty  and  economic  security.  The
first  is  guaranteed  in  article  15  of   the  Charter  of  Bogota,
which  states  that  no  State  or  group  of  States  has  the   right
to  intervene,  directly  or  indirectly,  regardless  of   the  reason
in  the  internal  or  external   affairs   of   any  other   State.     The
second,  the  economic  security,  is  based  on  article  16  of   the
same  Charter,  which  states  that  no  State  may  devise  or  apply
coercive  economic  measures  to  frustrate  the  will  of   another
sovereign   State.
Judge  Warned  Not  to  Ask   Questions
"The   Revolutionary   Government  of  Cuba  knows—and  can
the  U.S. representative  deny  this?—that  the  Cl A  is  a  body
directed   towards   subversion   against   Cuba   and   spends   about
half  a  million  dollars  a  month  on  preparations  for  invasion.
This  has  just  been  shown  in  black  and  white  in  Time,  the
US.   News  and  World   Report,   the  Baltimore  Sun  and  the
Miami  Herald  of  14  April  where  it  is  stated  that  the U.S.
is  spending  $17,000  a  day  only   to   maintain   four   or  five
bases  in  Central  America.    Can  the  representative  of  the U.S.
deny  that,   on  22  March,   Alexander  Herman   communicated
to  Judge  Mitchell   D.   Schweitzer  a  message  from  a  federal
agency  not  to  ask  questions  of  a  Cuban  witness,  Carlos  Du-
quesne,  in  the  trial  being  held  at  present  in  the  General
Court   of   Sessions,   so  that  that   witness  would   not   have   to
reveal  any  military  secrets  which  he  heard   in  a  meeting  of
mercenaries  in  Miami  with  official  agents?    May  I  be  allowed
to  illustrate  this  series  of  questions  with  photographic   proof
that  I  will  hold  up  so  that  the  Committee  may  see  it.
"Is  it  or  is  it  not  true  that  these  anti-tank   guns,   57mm
guns,  manufactured  by  the  Firestone  Corporation,  which  were
dropped   by  plane   in  Escombray,  can  only  be  sold   through
treaties  between  governments?     Is  it  or   is  it  not  true   that
these   30-calibre   carbines,   M-l,   manufactured    by  the   IBM
Corporation  are  those  used  by the  Marine  Infantry of  the U.S.
as  a  substitute  for  the  45-calibre  Thompson  automatic  rifle?
Is  it  or  is it  not  true  that  this  type  of  transmitter  and  receiver,
with  a  range   of   1,000  miles,   is  specially  manufactured   for
the  Intelligence  Services  of  the  U.S.?   The  Cuban   delegation
wishes  to  know  what  principles  of  the  Charter   of  the   UN
authorizes   any   member    State   to   wage  an   undeclared   war
Did  We  Help  Bomb  Cuban  Cities?
"As  further  proof  of  the  interventionist  and  aggres-
sive  attitude  of  the  U.S. authorities,  we  have  the  fact
that   the   simultaneous    bombardment   of   these   Cuban
cities  coincided with  the  appearance in  the  atmosphere
of  a  large  number  of  solar  flares  which  make  it  im-
possible   to   carry   out   proper   radio   communications.
This  displays  the  high  level  of  technical  skill  passed
on  to  the  traitors  and  mercenaries in  the  camps  main-
tained   in  U.S. territory   and  in  Guatemala,  who  are
being   trained   by    the   Central   Intelligence    Ag"ency.
These  are  techniques  that  were  employed  during  the
Second   World  War  for   bombing   objectives   in   broad
daylight.     Obviously,   information   from    the   techno-
logical  and  meteorological  services  of  the  U.S. forces
had  to  be  utilized  to  this  end, so  that  the  targets  of
the  attack  would be  left  practically  without communi-
cations.     The   bombardment  of   various  parts   of   the
island   began   at  6  a.m. local   time,  just   at   the   time
when  solar  flares  were  recorded."
—Mr.  Roa, of  Cuba,  protesting   the  first  bombings  of
Cuban  cities  at  the  UN,  Saturday   P.M.,  April  15
against  another  member   state?
"A  U.S.  newspaperman,   I.  F.   Stone,   has   lifted   the   veil
from   another   conspiracy   in   Washington.      Stone   says   that
when  the  Department  of  Justice  announced  that  the  gangster
Rolando  Masferrer  was to  be  tried  for  violating  the  U.S. code
and  preparing  an  invasion  of  Cuba  from  Miami,  a  reporter
asked  the  official  of  the  Department   why  Jose  Miro  Cardona
was  not  being  tried  for  the  same  crime,  and  he  was  answered
with   silence.     But   Stone   goes   even   further   and   asks  why
Allen  Dulles  is  not  being  tried  for  violating  the  law  of neu-
trality,   since,  after  all,  he  is  the  main  architect   of  the mer-
cenary  counter-revolution.   [Mr. Roa  then  proceeded  to  sum-
marize  most  of  our   special   issue  of   April   17  on   Cuba   and
the   CIA—IPS.]     Can   the  U.S.  representative   deny   these
facts?    Can  he  convince  anyone of  the  sincerity of  the   official
declarations   that  there  has  been   special   vigilance   to   avoid
violations  of   Cuban   air  space?    Is  it  possible   to  hide   this
repeated  and  scandalous  policy  of  the  U.S.  Government,  aimed
at  liquidating   the   revolution,   intervening  in   matters   which
are  within   Cuban   sovereignty,   violating  Cuban   air   and  sea
space,   sending   weapons   to  kill   peasants   and   workers   and
explosives  to  sabotage  our  agricultural  production  and  hamper
our  industrial  development?"
The  New  Africa  Looks  at  the  New  Cuba  and  Explains   "Why  We  Always  Look  Red'
"States  engaged  in  the  decolonization  of  their  structure
always  discover,   and  are  appalled  by  the  fact  that  their
economy  is  not  adapted  to  the  needs  of  their  national  life
owing  to  foreign  exploitation.   Single  crop  economies  are
an   essential   characteristic   of   under-developed  countries.
A  revolutionary  government,  in  order  to  foster  comprehen-
sive  economic  development,  is  bound  to  alter  the  colonial
shape of  the  productive  system if  it  wishes  to  foster national
output  and  the  industrialization  of  the  country.
"Contrary  to  accusations  of  communist  infiltration  which
circulate  everywhere as  soon  as  an  under-developed country
engages  in  bold  reforms,  it  should  be  known  that  the  acts
which  succeed the  assumption of  power  are  the ineluctable
consequences  of   a  life  of  dependence  and  frustration  and
derive  mainly from  the  paramount claim  of  people  hitherto
subjected  to  a  feudal  regime.    In  countries  where  the  na-
tional   economy  is  under  the  control  of   foreign   interests,
misery  and  wretchedness  is  the  lot  of  the  indigenous  popu-
lation,  all  of  whose  labor  power  is  occupied  in  the  produc-
tion  of  raw  materials  required for  the  continued  expansion
of  the  trusts.
"In  the   field   of   production,   in   order   to  facilitate   new
crops  in  line  with  the  needs  of  the  people,  and  to  put  an
end  to  the  exploitation  of   the  peasantry,  in  order  to  call
a  halt  to  the  inevitably  catastrophic  repercussions  of   this
general  situation  on  national  output—in  a  word,  in  order
to  remedy  the  irrational  utilization  of   land  and  bring  to
an  end  social  injustice  and  misery,   fledgling   governments
must  always  engage  in  historic  acts  which  sometimes  be-
come  the  cause  of  ill-repute for  them."
—Mr.  Doumboya,  Guinea,  at   the   UN  April  17
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   April   24,  1961
No  Bridgehead:  No  Provisional  Gov't—And  It's Too  Late  for  the  Marines
(Continued  jrom  Page  One)
a  new  revolution.
No   doubt  the  defeat  will  be  disguised  as  a  lack  of  mate-
riel.   I  have  never  seen  a  military  force  equipped  so  quickly
with   tanks   and    jets,   at   least   in   the   headlines.    A   few
days  ago  it  was  being  leaked  by  the  Cl A  that  we  had   to
mount   an   invasion   quickly   before   Soviet   MIGs   arrived.
They  seem  to  have  been  supplied   more  quickly  than  anyone
expected   by  the  Lem  Jones  firm  which  was  hired  to   polish
up  public  relations  for  the  rebel  forces.    On  Tuesday  after-
noon,  Lem  Jones  put  out  a  bulletin  (see  the  account  in  the
Wall   St.   Journal   April   19)   saying  that   Soviet   tanks   and
MIGs  had   destroyed   "sizeable  amounts  of  medical   supplies
and  equipment"   on  the  Matanzas  beachhead,  "humanitarian
supplies   .  .  .  destined  for  the  Cuban  freedom fighters who
are  shedding  their  blood  to  overthrow  the  shackles  of  Com-
munism."    Thanks  to  this  communique,  the  headlines  in  this
morning's  papers  were  full  of  Soviet  tanks  and  jets  although
smaller,   more   sober   stories   buried   inside   the   New    York
Times,   the   Herald-Tribune   and   the   Washington    Star  ex-
plained  that  heavy  tanks  would   be  useless  on  that   swampy
terrain,  questioned  whether  Fidel  had  MIGs  and  pointed  out
that  these  planes  would   be  of   dubious  value  against   small
bodies   of   troops   with  mountain  forest   cover.     These   side
stories,  which   seemed  to  originate  from  responsible  sources
in   the   Pentagon,   said   the   fighting   was  essentially  a   small
arms  operation   but  the   Soviet  tanks  and   MIGs   fought   on
undeterred  in  the  headlines.
The  Stock  Market Was  Optimistic
On   the   stock   market  Monday,   the   stocks   of   American
firms  which  lost   property  in  Cuba  rose  hopefully  (see the
survey  on  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  financial  page,  April
18)    but   wiser   estimates   were   already   available.     Albert
M.  Colegrove  in  the  Scripps-Howard  papers  (see  New   York
World-Telegram   April  18)   said  most  business  men   operat-
ing  in  Latin  America  disagreed  with  the  rosy  hopes  of   the
rebels  and  quoted  one  U.S. business  man  from   Panama  as
saying,  "Why   don't  you  folks  up  there  in  Florida   stop  kid-
ding  yourselves?   Sure  Castro  has  lost  some  support  among
the  middle  class  people  who  still  remain  in  Cuba,  but  most
The  Lesson   in  the  League   and  Ethiopia
"The  lessons  of  history  teach  us  to  be  vigilant.    The
old  United  Nations   turned  a  deaf   ear  to  the  appeals
of   such  nations  as  Ethiopia,  and  this   fatal  failing   in
the  end  brought  about  the  downfall  of  that  organiza-
tion.    May the  United  Nations  act  today  in  such  fashion
that  reason  will  triumph  over  force.    The  very  fate  of
the  United  Nations  is  at  stake.    It  is  for  all  these  rea-
sons  that   all  peace-loving   nations,   and  more  particu-
larly   the   smaller   countries,   must   make   every   effort
to   induce   the   Governments  of   Cuba  and   the   United
States   to  settle  peacefully  this  dispute   which  has  set
them  against   each  other."
—Mr.  Doumboya,  Guinea,  at  the  UN  April  17
of  the  peasants,  who  comprise  the  great  bulk  of  the  'Cuban
population,    still   think  he's great."    These    business   men
seemed  to  have  a  more  realistic  view  than   such  liberals   as
the  editors  of  the  Washington   Post,  the  New   Republic  and
Max  Lerner  who  lined  up  so  quickly—and   as  it  turns   out
so  prematurely—with   the   war   crowd.     Now   it   is   difficult
to  see  what  the  anti-Castro  forces  can  do.   With  no  bridge-
head,  there  can  be  no  provisional  government  and  it  is  too
late  for  direct  action  by  the  Marines.    This  is  not 1917.
At   the   United   Nations   earlier   this   week,   one   felt  'that
the  Cuban  invasion  was  destroying  Adlai  Stevenson  and   the
U.S.  morally.    How   defend  the   indefensible  and   deny  the
undeniable?    But  the  defeat  of  the  rebel  forces  has  suddenly
turned  high  tragedy into  low  comedy.   The  Latins who  spoke
so  bitterly  in   private  and   were  so   conspicuously  silent   in
public  will  now  laugh   at  the  U.S.A.     It  is  better  that   the
defeat  came  now  and  quickly  before  the  flames  could  spread.
I  hope   we  are  not  going   to  try  and   retrieve  our  prestige
by  jumping  into  a  jungle  war  in  Laos,  and  that  the   bigger
Latin   countries  will   rescue  us  by  firmly  pressing   for   nego-
tiations  between   Washington   and   Havana.   We're   lucky  if
we  can  liquidate  this  David  and  Goliath   affair  with  no  more
than  this  minor  bloody  nose.    It  is  too  bad  that  our  own
folly   gave  Khrushchov  a  cheap   and   easy   chance   to  win  a
victory  of  prestige,  but  that  is  an  irretrievable  error.    Let's
not  compound  it  with  greater  folly  by  continuing  our   ven-
detta  against  Castro.
You  Must  Send  LONG  Self-Addressed    Stamped  Envelopes  If  You   Want   Free  Copies  Sent  to   Friends
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  AT*.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  snb  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............Stat«....................
4/24/61
ElUer  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ............................................»........................._...............
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
5618    Nebraska  Ava., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  P.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Entered  u   Second  Clu*  Hatter  at  Washineton.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8.  1ST*.    Poet-dated  Monday!  but  pnbliahed  every  Thurs-
day  except   the  lut  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent   weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   SB  in  the  U.  S.:   »6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:   $16  to   Europe:    $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED