I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961oct16.pdf

============================================================

Those  Who Can't Afford    Shelters  -  Do  They  Deserve to Die?, P. 3
AF  Thinking:  U.S.  People  Must  Be  Mobilized  for  "Complete  Eradication"  of  Soviets,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  38
OCTOBER   16,   1961
'°<      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
They'd  Rather   Be  Dead  Than  In  The  Red
The  Walker   affair   promises  to  blow  up  into  a  full  scale
assault  from   the  right.     Life   Magazine  (Oct.   6)   carries  an
editorial,  "Fair  Play  for  Gen.  Walker,"  which  does  not  men-
tion  his  membership in  the  John  Birch  Society.    It  criticizes
Senator  Fulbright  for  the  memorandum  in  which  he  called
the  Defense  Department's  attention  to  the  way  military  men
are  spreading  Tightest   ideas  in  public   seminars,  usually  in
association  with  crackpot  outfits.    As  Life   prefers  to  phrase
it,   Fulbright   "particularly   abhors   their   involvement   in   the
various  anti-Communist  crusades  and  educational  [sic]   move-
ments  which  have  been  spreading  in  the   U.S.   for   the  past
few   years."     Life    thinks  this   "as  phony  a  worry  as  could
well  be  added  to  the  burdens  of  an  anxious   republic."
Just  What  Elsenhower  Warned  Against
On   the  contrary  we  believe  the   Fulbright  memorandum
and  Secretary  McNamara's  praiseworthy  efforts   to  put   some
curb  on  the  military only  begin  to  touch  a  formidable  prob-
lem.      The  dimensions  of  that  problem  are  indicated  by  the
document  we  publish  on  page  two  this  week  from  the  Army
Navy   Air   Force  Journal   of  Sept.   30,  the  only  place  it  has
appeared   in   full.     This   is   the   1961   Statement   of   Policy
adopted  by,the  Air  Force  Association in  Philadelphia  recently.
This  Association is  spokesman  for  the  aviation-missile indus-
try  and  for  the  Air  Force.    It  represents  the  most  dynamic
segment  of   the  forces  which  thrive  on  the  arms  race.    Its
statement  of  policy  illustrates  the  dangers  to  which  President
Eisenhower  referred  when   in  his  farewell  address  Jan.   17
he  warned  against  the  "conjunction   of  an  immense military
establishment  and  a  large  arms  industry."
The   document  shows  that  this  military-industrial  alliance
has  fashioned  an  ideology  to  serve  its  interests.    It  is  out  to
remake  our  politics,   our  views  of  history,  and  our  morality.
It  calls,  of  course,  for  higher  expenditures  all  along  the  line
of  the  aircraft-missile program.    It  asks  new  substitutes  for
the  U-2.    It  wants  the  primary  emphasis  in  the  space  pro-
gram  to  be  on  military  uses.
It  advocates  a  sky's-the-limit  arms  race.    It  has  no  use  for
disarmament,  balanced  deterrents  or  arms  control  of  any  kind.
"There is no  reason  to  believe,"  it  says,  "that  nuclear  weapons,
no  matter  how  they  may  increase  in  numbers  and  ferocity,
mark  the  end  of  the  line  in  military  systems   development."
It  wants  national  policy  to  "prescribe that  the  choice  between
nuclear  and  non-nuclear  weapons  is  neither  moral  nor  polit-
ical."    It  says  "We   must  be  willing  and  able  to  risk  war"
and   the  goal   it  sets  is  "complete  eradication   of  the   Soviet
system."    It  is  on  these  "new  terms"  that  it  wants  the  Amer-
ican  people  mobilized.    Where  the  President  said,  "we  must
never  fear  to  negotiate,"  it  says  "we  must  never  fear  to   refuse
How  to  Poison  the   Public  Mind
This  is  a  report  on  a  wayward  piece  of   journalism
and  on  trouble-making by  the  German  Ambassador  to
Washington.   In  the  New  York  Times  Sunday,  Oct.  8,
Max  Frankel  turned  in  a  black  report  on  the  Kennedy-
Gromyko  conversations  and  it  reverberated   pessimism
around  the  world.   He  did not  give  his  source  but  later
the  same  day  the  German Ambassador,  Wilhelm  Grewe,
appeared  on  an  ABC .TV  show,  "Issues  and  Answers," •
and,  when  asked,  said  he  agreed  with the  Frankel  story
that  the  talks  had  gone  badly  and  indeed   represented
a  step  backward.    When  U.S.  and  British   correspond-
ents  checked,  not  a  single  State  Dept.  or  White  House
source  confirmed  this  account.   Indeed  next  day  Pierre
Salinger   allowed  himself  to  be  quoted  as  saying,  "it
is  incorrect   to  say   that   the  talks  have   gone  sour."
In   Monday   morning's   story   Frankel    identified    the
source  of  his  Sunday  account  as  "some  Allied  diplo-
mats." Was the  German Ambassador himself  the  source
of  the  Frankel  account,  which  Grewe  cutely   endorsed
on  TV  the  same  afternoon?    The,  not-for-attribution,
use-it-but-don't-quote-me  story  is  the  curse  of  Wash-
ington  journalism  and  this  was  a  particularly   flagrant
example.   We  believe  Mr.  Frankel   and  the  New  York
Times  owe  readers   an   explanation.
to  negotiate."    This  is  a  call  for  total  mobilization  for  total
war.    It  regards  co-existence  as  a  trap,  negotiation  as  a  delu-
sion  and  peaceful  agreement  as  impossible.    These  are   the
views  one  would  expect  from  an  industry  whose  expansion
would  be stunted  by arms  control,  whose  very  existence  would
be  threatened  by  complete  disarmament.    It  would  rather  be
dead  than  in  the  red.
A  large  contingent  of  Generals  headed  by  Air  Force  Chief
of   Staff   Curtis  Le  May  attended  the   convention,   but   none
took, exception  to  these  sanguinary  views.    It  is  only  a  step
from   the   premises  of   the   Air   Force   Association   to   Birch
Society  suspicions  of  any  President,  whether  Eisenhower   or
Kennedy,  who  enters  into  negotiation  with  the  Soviets.    Yet
privately  the  Generals  seem  to  have  indicated  their  agreement.
The  Army  Navy   Air   Force   Journal   said   they  came  to   the
meeting  "under  wraps  that  had  been  put  on  at  the  Pentagon'*
and  it  reported  that  one Air  Force  General  "spilled  the  beans"
when  he  told  the  convention  that  after  all  the  blue-pencilling
done  on  his  speech  at  the  Pentagon,   "I  .don't  have  a  hell  of
a  lot  to  say."     Industrial-military  organizations  like  the  Air
Force  Association  are  set  up  to  say  for  the  big  brass  what
they  cannot  say  for   themselves  in  public  without   appearing
insubordinate.    What  they  say  portends  tragedy  if  some  way
is  not  found  to  stop  them.
1   4   S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  16,1961
Full  Text  of  the  Air  Force  Association  1961  Policy  Statement
American  People  Must  Be  Mobilized  for  "Complete  Eradication"  of  Soviets
In  this,  our   15th  anniversary  year,  with  the  nation  in  grave  peril,
we  respectfully  acknowledge  the  heavy responsibility  that  weighs  upon
our  new  Commander  in  Chief—a  burden  that  is  his  alone.    And  we
are  well  aware  that  it  is  far  easier  to  advise  than  to  decide.
Nevertheless,   we  would  be  remiss  in  our  duty  as  Americans  were
we  not   to  state,   particularly  at  this  time,   our   deeply   held   beliefs,
our   aims  and   our   objectives.    We   offer   them   here,   together   with
our   pledge  of  personal   effort   and   sacrifice   to  achieve  them,  in   this
1961  Statement  of  Policy  of  the  Air  Force  Association.
Power  Equation
If   the   record   of   40   years   of   oppression,   aggression,   deceit   and
duplicity  had   not  already  done  so,  events  of  the  past  several   weeks
have  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  Soviet  system—regardless  of
what  form  it  may  take  at  any  given   time  in  any  given   part  of   the
world—is   incompatible   with   the   existence   of   freedom.
The   cloak  of  co-existence  no  longer  conceals  Soviet   aims.    Com-
munist  intent  and  Communist  power   stand  naked   before  the  world.
We   must  face  the  Soviet   system  with  the  only  force  it   understands
and  respects—even  stronger  power,  accompanied  by  the  avowed   deter-
mination   to  use  this  power  when  and  if  needed.
Freedom  or  Communism
Mankind   cannot   exist   indefinitely   in   a  world   that   remains   half-
slave  and  half-free.    Preservation   of  the  status  quo  is  not   adequate
as  a  national  goal.     Freedom   must  bury  Communism  or  be  buried
by  Communism.
Complete   eradication   of   the   Soviet   system  must  be  our   national
goal—our  obligation  to  all  free  people—our  promise  of  hope  to  all
who  are  not   free.
National   Alert
To  attain  the  level  of  national   power   needed   in  this  crusade,   the
energies   and  talents   of  the  American   people   must  be  mobilized   on
new  terms.    We   therefore  petition  the  President   to  declared   a  Na-
tional   Alert—a   new   and   higher   level   of   national   effort.     Such   a
declaration  would  establish   a  basis  on  which  to  build  and  maintain
the  power  we  need.    It  would  make  clear  to  the  Soviets  and  to  the
world  that  we  are  determined   to  back  our  words  with  action,  even
at  the  risk  of  war—that  we  seek  not  merely  to  preserve  our  freedoms
but  to  extend  them.
A  Credible  Deterrent
The  overriding   priority  of  the  day  must  be  the  unquestioned  cred-
ibility  of  our  nuclear  deterrent.    This  credibility  has  been   undermined
by  Soviet  confidence  in  its  own  rising   strength  and  by  Soviet   belief
that   the   U.S.   is  unwilling  to   engage   in   nuclear   war   in   behalf  of
freedom.
A  credible  deterrent  will  require  accelerated  military  programs  now
and  in  the  future.    We  consider  the  following  to  be  basic:
Greater   survivability   for   our   strategic   striking   forces;    airborne
alert  for  a  substantial  portion  of  the  Strategic  Air  Command;  expan-
sion  of  our   manned  bomber   programs,  including  rapid   development
and  production  of  the  B-70  as  a  high  priority  weapon  system;  accel-
eration   of   our   strategic   missile   programs   in   terms  of  numbers   and
effectivness;   improved   intelligence   and   reconnaissance   systems,  both
aeronautical   and  space-borne,   to  obtain   more  information  on   Soviet
capabilities   and   intentions,    and   to   guard   against   surprise    nuclear
attack;  greater   reliability   and  survivability  of   the  national  command
and  control   system  to   reduce  the   chances  of  war  by  error,  and   to
ensure  immediate,  effective,  and  sustained  employment  of  our   forces;
equipping  our  aerospace  defense   system  to  counter  the  full   spectrum
of  the  Soviet  aerospace  threat  as  evidenced  by  Soviet  progress  in  super-
sonic   bombers,   missiles   and   trained   aerospace   systems;   increase   of
our  ability  to  deter  or  promptly  prevail  in  situations  short  of  general
war;  accelerated  research  and  development  efforts  to  attain  and  main-
tain  technological   superiority   in  areas  of  our   choice.
National  Space  Program
Currently,  our  National   Space  Program  gives  priority  to  non-mili-
tary  applications.     It   fails   to   recognize   the   important   contributions
that  space  systems  must  make  to  the  extension  of  our   military  capa-
bility.    This  faulty  emphasis   must  be  reversed   to  utilize  U.S.   space
technology   as  a   prime   factor   in   the   international   power   equation.
All   phases   of   the   national   space   program   must   first   be   measured
against  the  yardstick  of  national   security   needs.
The  document  we  present  here  in  full   text,  a  call
for   total  war  and  perpetual  arms  race,  is  the   state-
ment   of  policy   adopted   by  the  Air   Force  Association
at   its   recent   meeting   in   Philadelphia   September   20
to  24.   Meager  newspaper  accounts  failed   to  give   the
full  flavor  of  this  extraordinary  pronouncement  which
clashes  directly  with  national  policy,  notably  on  Berlin
and  disarmament.   The  Air  Force  Association, financed
by  the  aviation-missile  industry  and   staffed     largely   by
retired    officers,     gives   the   Air    Force   a   mouthpiece
through  which  it  can  circumvent   censorship  and  un-
dercut   the   White   House.
Nuclear  Employment
National   policy  must  make  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  U.S.   will
not   hesitate   to   employ  its   nuclear   strength   in   response   to    Soviet
aggression—whether  that  aggression   takes  the  form  of  nuclear  attack,
non-nuclear   attack,  nuclear  blackmail,   aggression   by   Soviet  satellite
nations,  infiltration  or  subversion—should  the  military  situation  dictate
that  use  of  nuclear  weapons  is  in  the   best   interest   of  the   U.S.
National   policy   must   prescribe   that   the   choice   between   nuclear
and  non-nuclear  weapons  is  neither  moral  nor  political,  but  is  essen-
tially  a  military  consideration.     If   this   principle   is   not   recognized
as  national  policy  and  firmly  enunciated   to  the  world,   we  are   seri-
ously  compromising  the  effectiveness   of  our  nuclear  arsenal  and  thus
increasing   the   danger   of  general  conflict.
Survival  of   the  People
The  National  Alert  program  must  also  ensure  the  survival  of  the
majority  of  the  American  people  and  the  survival   of  viable   govern-
ment   machinery  in   the   event   of   general   war.     Needed    measures
include  protection   of  individuals,  military  and  civilian,  against  blast,
heat   and   radiation—including   fallout.    They   must   provide   for   re-
establishment  of   the   national   social   and   economic   fabric   following
a  general  war.
The  Only  Insurance
The  ability  to  fight,  win,  and  purposefully  survive  a  general  nuclear
war   provides   the   best,   indeed   the   only,   insurance   against   such  an
eventuality.    We   must  be  willing   and   able  to  risk   war,   and  make
sure  that  both  our  willingness  and  ability  are  firmly  implanted  in  the
minds   of   the   Soviet   leaders.     Only   from   such   a   position   can   we
then   apply  economic,   diplomatic,   technological    and   other   pressures
against  the   Soviets.
To  those  who  say  that  today  such  a  position   cannot  be  sustained,
that  deterrent   capability  cannot  be  achieved,  that  it  deteriorates   into
a  stalemate  of  bluff—to   these  arguments  we  reply,  "Your  stalemate
philosophy  of  despair   and  defeat  [sic].    Its  acceptance  by  the   U.S.
would   in  itself  break  the   'stalemate'   in   a  psychological   sense—and
in  favor  of  the  Soviets.   World  leadership  would  automatically  revert
to  the  loudest  rocket-rattler.    Initiative   would   pass  to  the  aggressor.
The   President   has  said,  "We   must  never  negotiate   through   fear.
But  we  must  never  fear  to  negotiate."    In  turn,  we  must  never  fear
to  refuse  to  negotiate  that  which  is  not  negotiable.    We  must  never
compromise  basic  principles.    We   must  never   appease.
Technological  Realities
The   stalemate   philosophy   ignores   the   realities   of   technological
progress.     The   advent   of   nuclear   weapons   has   changed   the   inter-
national  power  equation.    But  technology  can  also  wipe  out  equations
and  write  new  ones.    It  has  done  so  in  the  past.
There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  nuclear  weapons,  no  matter  how
they  may  increase  in  numbers  and  ferocity,   mark  the  end  of  the  line
in  military  systems  development.     New   weapons,   more  selective   in
application  and  less  destructive  of   life  and  property,   may  come  into
being.    Their  possession  by  one  side  and  not  the  other  could  surely
break   a  nuclear  stalemate  in   a  dramatic  fashion.    Thus,   the   search
for   new   and   advanced   systems  must   have   a   high   priority   in   our
military   research   and   development.
The  People  Are  Ready
We   believe   the   events   in   this   fall   of   1961   have   convinced   the
American  people,   if  any  were  unconvinced  before,   that   Soviet   aims
are  both  evil  and  implacable.    We  believe  the  people  are  willing  and
eager  to  respond  to  whatever  level  of  effort  may  be  required  of  them,
if   the  need  is  made  truly  clear.    We   are  convinced  that  the   people
are  ready  to  work  toward,  and  fight  for  if  necessary,  the  elimination
of  Communism from   the  world  scene.    Let  the  issue  be  joined.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 16,1961
A  Suburbanite  GOP  Leader   Invokes  Darwin  To  Say  What  Henry  Luce  Dare  Not
Those Who Can't  Afford  Bomb  Shelters -  Do They  Deserve to Die?
Adjoining  Washington,  in  suburban  Montgomery County,
Maryland,  a  group  of  junior  executive  types  led by  a  Prince-
ton  graduate  named  David  Scull  some  years  ago  ran  a  suc-
cessful  revolt  inside the  Republican party  and  took  over  from
the  old courthouse crowd.   Mr.  Scull  writes  a  column  in  the
Montgomery   County  Sentinel.   The  one  in  the  issue  of  Sep-
tember  21  was  headed  "Darwin  Was  Right."    It   discussed
the  recent  issue  of  Life   which assured  the  country that  97%
of  all  Americans  could  survive  a  nuclear  war.    "Of  course,"
Mr.  Scull wrote, "the  President  and  the  Editors  of  Life  know
that   millions  will  die  unnecessarily   in   the   event   of   such
a  war,  but.  . . .
"From  a  purely Darwinian point of  view, it  probably  will
not  be  calamitous ... if  ten  million  or  so  of  OUT sloppier
citizens  disappear  as  a  result  of  their  own  lack  of  ability
or   will   to  survive.    Many   of  these   second  class  human
beings  are  the  ones  who  are  right  now  asking  what  the
fuss  is  all  about  in  Berlin.    They  haven't  the  wit  to  un-
derstand   that  Western   Civilization,   human  freedom   and
the  dignity of  man  are  on  trial  at  the  Brandenburg Gate."
We  suspect  such  views  are  all  too  common in  the  country
club  set.   The  premise  of  the  private  shelter  program,  as  be-
gun  under Eisenhower  and  taken  over  by  Kennedy, is  that  in
the   event  of  thermonuclear  war   each  citizen  must  provide
his   own  protection  and  be  his   own  Secretary   of  Defense;
the  Defense  Department,   so-called,  turns  out  to  be  for  Of-
fense  only.    This  approach  is  favored  by  the  Generals,  who
fear   diversion  of   appropriations   to   civil   defense,   and   by
higher  bracket  taxpayers,  who  can  afford  to  build their own
shelters  and  do not  see  why  they  should  be  taxed  to  provide
them  for  those  who  can't.   This  is  the  same  "rugged  indi-
vidualist"   philosophy  advocated  30  years   ago  in  the   Great
Depression.    It  is  smugly  assumed  that  the  country  would
be  better   off  if  the   "unfit"  die.    Then  it   was  by  hunger,
now  it  will  be  by  thermonuclear  war.    This  application  of
a   pseudo-Darwinianism  to   oppose  welfare   measures   is  as
old  as  Victorianism,  and  its  use  to  justify  war  at  least   as
old   as   Kaiser   Germany.    We  should   be   grateful   to  this
obscure  suburban   Bismarck   for  bringing   into  the   open  an
idea  not  quite  suitable  for  presentation   in  full  color  photo-
Next  Step  in  the  Communist   Case
Applications  for  a   rehearing   are   little   more  than
a   ritualistic   gesture   in  the   Supreme  Court,  and   its
refusal  last   Monday  to  reconsider   its   decision  in  the
Communist  Party   registration   case  was  no  surprise.
But  that  decision,  as  we  explained  at   the  time,  only
marks  the  beginning  of  a  prolonged  legal   fight.   So
far  the  Court  has  merely  held  that  an  order  to  register
is  not  unconstitutional.    It  has  yet  to  decide  whether
under  the  Fifth  amendment  it  can  actually  force  any
officer  or  member  to  register  himself  or  sign  a  regis-
tration  statement,  since  this  would  be  requiring  a  man
to  acknowledge  activities  and  associations  which  might
incriminate   him.   In  the  decision  last  spring,  the  four
Justices   held  that  this   would  be  a  clear   violation  of
the  Fifth  amendment.  The other five  dodged  the  ques-
tion,  holding  that   they  did  not  have  to   decide   this
until  a  failure  to  register  was  before  it.    When  that
question   comes  before   the   Court   the   majority  may
shift  the  other  way, as  we hope it  will.   For  this  regis-
tration  statute  holds  the  seeds  of  danger  to  the  peace
movement  and  to  dissent  of  all  kinds.
graphs  by  mass  circulation  picture  weeklies.    He  makes  us
feel  it  will  be  a  positive  misfortune  if  war  does  not  break
out  after   all.
Mr.  Scull's  disapproval  extends  beyond the  poor  and  shift-
less.   He suggests  that  the  "second  class  human  beings" we
could  do  without  also  include  those  who  doubt  that   Berlin
is  worth  a  thermonuclear   war.    To  deal   with  this   group
requires  another  order  of  sacrifice.    A  mimeographed  form
being  distributed  by  Montgomery  County  Civil  Defense  at
PTA  meetings  lists  Mr.  Scull's  real  estate  firm,  Sterling  &
Scull,  as  builders  of  fallout  shelters  and  suppliers  of  energy
foods  to  stock  them.   Would Mr.  Scull  be  willing  to  set  an
example,  to  launch  a  new  patriotic   campaign,  to   open  a
Second  Front  in the  battle  of civil defense, by rejecting  orders
from  customers  whose  views  on  Berlin  have  not  first  been
certified  as  upstanding?
U.S.  Intelligence  Tries  Hard  to  Prove  Mrs.  K Wrong  About  Soviet  Shelters
"Moscow,  Oct.  6  (AP)—Mrs.  Nikita  Khrushchev  told  a
group  of  Western  'peace  marchers'  today  that  the   Soviet
Union  is making no effort  to  build  air  raid  shelters.   There
is  no  defense  in  a  nuclear  war,'  said  the  wife  of  the   Pre-
mier.    Therefore  we  are  not  building  any  bomb  shelters.
We  are  not  getting  ready.'"
—Washington  Evening  Star,  Oct  6
'There  is  no  evidence  of  shelter  construction  in  large
Soviet  cities.   There  are  no signs  posted  in  Moscow streets,
pointing  to  shelters,  as  in  New  York,  and  there   are  no
siren  tests  or  other  such  rehearsals."
—Moscow  dispatch,  New  York   Times,  Oct.  7
"If  Mrs.  Nikita  Khrushchev really  doesn't  know  that  the
Soviet  Union  has  an  extensive  civil  defense  program,   U.S.
intelligence  officers  will be  glad  to  give  her  some  facts  and
figures. .  .  .  Information  on the program  was pulled to-
gether  recently  for  the  Office  of  Civil  Defense  Mobilization,
now  the Office  of Emergency  Planning.  . . .
"The   memo  concedes  that   U.S.   information   on   Soviet
shelters   is  'far   from   conclusive.'    But,  it   continues,   the
indications  are  that   the  inclusion  of  'protective  construc-
tion   features'   in   new  apartment   houses   and   other   new
buildings  'has  been  a  standard   practice  in  many  centers
of  population  and  industry.    Basement   shelter*  already   is
available  'to  an  important segment  of  the  urban  population
in  many  areas  of  the  USSR,'  the  report  states.
"The  memo  concludes that  the  Soviet  civil defense  system
may  be  'considerably  less  than  adequate  in  terms  of  defense
against   large-scale  nuclear  warfare'  but  the  Communists
obviously  are  trying  hard."
—Story   by  David  Harriett  sent  out  by  North   American
Newspaper   Alliance,  Washington  Star,  Oct.  8.
"According   to  a  number  of  newspaper  reporters,  there
is  no  sign  of  any  fallout  shelter  beyond  that  provided  by
the  subways  of  Moscow, Leningrad  and  Kiev,  each  of  which
could  possibly  provide  for  about  20  percent  of  the  popula-
tion.   It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  Rand  witness   [be-
fore  the  recent  Holifield  shelter  hearings]  also  stated  that
the   Moscow  subways   could   shelter   two   million    people,
whereas   a  Library   of  Congress   study  calculates   that,   at
20  square   feet  per  capita   (the   U.S.  long-stay   estimate),
they   could   only  handle   375,000.    Dividing   the   7,500,000
square  feet  of  track  and  station  by  two  million  indicates
3.75  square  feet   per  capita;  apparently   the  sturdy   Mus-
covites  are  capable  of  standing  (sitting  would  require  six
square  feet)  in  the  same position,  motionless,  for  two  weeks
or  so,  while  engaging  in  all  of  those  basic  processes  essen-
tial  to  human   survival!"
—J.  David  Singer  on "Deterrence  and Shelters"  in  Bulle-
tin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists,  October, 1961.
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  16, 1961
Where  Dodd  Got  His  Inside  Dope?
"The  State  Dept.  said  yesterday  that  it  has  cancelled
the  visa  of  Michel  Struelens,   a  Belgian  who  heads  the
Katanga   Information   Service   in   the   U.S.      Struelens
has   maintained  an   office   in   New   York  but   has   been
a  frequent  visitor  to  Washington.    He  registered  under
the  Foreign  Agents  Registration   Act  with  the   Justice
Dept.   Struelens  reported that  the  Katanga  government
headed  by   Moise  Tshombe  gave  him   $140,000  in   the
last   year  as  operating  expenses.   .  .  .
"Among   Senators   whom   Struelens   contacted    was
Senator  Thomas  J.  Dodd  (D.  Conn.)  who  spoke  vigor-
ously  on  the  Senate  floor  in  support  of  Katanga  inde-
pendence   and   charged   that   many   Congolese    officials
were  pro-Communist."
—Washington  Post  and  Times-Herald,   Oct.  5
J.  Edgar  Challenged  on  Crime;  Hollywood  Blacklist   Hit  in  SEP  By  One  of  "The   Ten"
Despite  Berlin  Crisis,  West  Germany  Doing  Boom  Business With  Soviets
While  West   Germany   clamors  for   a  strong   U.S.   policy
toward   Russia   ("let's  you  and  him   fight"),   it  continues  to
do   a  booming   business  with  the   Soviet  bloc.     Figures   re-
leased  here  by  the  Dept.  of  Commerce  show  that  West  Ger-
many  is  by  far   the   bloc's   chief  Western   supplier.    During
1960  and  the  first  half   of   1961,  West  German  exports   to
the   Soviet   bloc  were   twice  as  large   as  Britain's  and   four
times  as  great  as  those  of  the  U.S.    The  totals  (in   millions)
were West  Germany:  $1,135;  Britain,  $572;  U.S.,  $293.   The
Commerce  Dept.   release   was   designed    to   mollify   rightist
critics.     It  showed  the   total   of   export   licenses   granted   for
U.S.   business  with  the   Soviets  during  the  first  six  months
of  this  year  was  50  percent  below  the  comparable  Eisenhower
period.    West   German   exports   hold   steady  despite   Berlin.
Local  Constable   Problem
John   Crosby's  column  in  the  New   York    Herald-Tribune
Oct.  2  and  the  reply  it  elicited  from  J.  Edgar  Hoover  Oct.  6
are  collector's   items  for  two  reasons.     One   is  the  rarity  of
any  attack  on  the  G-man  in  the  U.S.  press,  which  would  as
soon   advocate   atheism.    The   other   is  the  extraordinary  de-
fense  on  which  the  FBI  Chief   fell  back.    Mr.   Crosby  was
annoyed  by  one  of  those  pompously  melodramatic  radio  com-
mercials  by  Mr.  Hoover   exhorting  the  listener  to   cooperate
against   "the   ever  increasing   surge   of   crime."     Mr.   Crosby
pointed   out   that   every  time   someone   suggests   a   national
police   force   to   deal  with   the  nationwide  crime   syndicates,
Mr.  Hoover  shoots  the  idea  down  "and  so  docile  is  the  press
at  accepting  your  word  on   police   matters  that   all   attempts
to  grapple   with   organized   crime  on  a  national   level   have
been  successfully  throttled."    Mr.  Crosby  contrasted  with  this
Mr.   Hoover's   constant  flow  of  warnings  about  baby-sitters,
"smut   salesmen"   and   juvenile  delinquents.     "Nowhere   in
the   world,"   Mr.   Crosby  wrote,   "is   crime  more   profitable,
better  organized   or   less  bothered   by  law  enforcement  than
in  the  U.S.  and  you  have  been  the  top  cop  in  this  country
for   36  years.     How   do   you  explain   that?"     Mr.   Hoover
replied   that  the  column  was  "degrading   to  the  code  of  the
journalistic  profession,"   but   explained   weakly,   "Fundamen-
tally  crime  is  a  local  problem."    This  will  give  the  G-man
new  fame  as  a  wit  in  Las  Vegas  and  Miami.
SIGN   OF   THE   TIMES    CALCULATED    TO    MAKE
AMERICAN    LEGIONNAIRES    SEE   RED-UNDER-THE-
BED:  The  Saturday   Evening   Post,  perhaps  reverting  to  the
radicalism  of  its founder,  B. Franklin,  has  just  appeared   (Oct.
14)   with  an  article  by  Ring  Lardner,  Jr.,  one  of  the  Holly-
wood  Ten,  entitled  "My  Life  on  The  Blacklist,"  an  engaging
and  unrepentant  expose  of  how  Hollywood's  ostracized  writ-
ers  have  managed  to  live.    Who   would  have  dreamt  a  few
years  ago  that  one  of  the  Hollywood   Ten  would  be  telling
his  story  in  the  SEP  and  that  the  SEP  would  print  that  story
as  part  of  a  desperate  campaign  for  new  look,  new   readers
and  new  advertising?    We  rise  with  fraternal  hand  to  wel-
come   a   new   competitor   left   of   center.     We   love   feeling
crowded  for  a  change.
REUNION  ON  THE  OLD  (strike  that)  ON  THE  NEW
FRONTIER:   "[Secretary  of  the  Treasury]   Douglas   Dillon,
for   instance,  would   certainly  have   been   Secretary  of   State
if  Nixon  had  won  the  election—"  Joseph   Alsop   (Oct.    9).
"John  A.  McCone   [Kennedy's  interim  appointment  as  CIA
Chief]   would   probably   have   become   Secretary  of   Defense
had  Nixon,  a  close  friend,  been  elected  President."—Thomas
O'Neill,  Baltimore Sun  (Oct.  6).    Couldn't  a  place  be  found
for   Dicky,  too?
If   You've  Been  Reading  A  Friend's  Copy,   Why  Not   Subscribe  and  Pass  Yours  On  To  Someone  Else?
I.   F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for
.........................................Zone.......
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
...................................... ...Zone.......
we  send  gift announcement?
the  enclosed  $5:
....State....................
10/18/01
(1  yr.)  additional:
....State....................
Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED