I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961aug21.pdf

============================================================

Civil Defense   Critics  Gagged,  P.  2
Despite  Bipartisan   Support,   Outlook   Poor  for   U.  S.  Disarmament   Agency   Bill,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  32
AUGUST  21,   1961ioi     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Mr.  Khrushchev's  Escape  Hatch  on  Berlin
Noon,  Aug.  16
If   the  unforeseen  and  uncontrollable  does  not  happen—
an  uncomfortably big  if—it  looks  as  if  the  worst  is  over  in
the  Berlin  crisis.    There  is  an  almost  audible  sigh  of  relief
here  that  no  uprising  followed  the  cutting  of  travel  between
East   and   West   Berlin;  a  significant  silence  settled   on   the
worst  of  our  Senatorial and  military tough  guys when  it  looked
for  a  moment as  if  this  were  /'/;  the  gap  between  talking  war
and  really  wanting  to  make  it  suddenly  appeared,  and  it  was
wide.     There   is  more  understanding  than   appears   on   the
surface   that   the   outflow   of   refugees   from   East  Germany
forced  action,  and  since  the  deed  had  to  be  done,  it  was  best
that  it  was  done  quickly.    Indeed  this  unilateral  action  re-
moved  what  appeared  to  be  the  one  real  stumbling   block
of   negotiations.    The  West  seems  pretty  much  resigned   to
accepting  the  status  quo  in  East  Europe  for  the  time  being
anyway,  and  that  may  be  a  long  time.    The  Germans,  who
no  longer  enjoy  the  same  privileged   status  which  was  theirs
in  the  days  of  John  Foster  Dulles,  have  been  told  that  once
the  German  election  is  over  they  must  be  prepared  for  nego-
tiations  in   which   the  Oder-Neisse  line  will   be   recognized
r.nd  the  East  German  regime  given  at  least  de  facto   recog-
nition.    The  East  seems  ready  to  leave  Western  rights  in  and
to  Berlin  alone,  again  at  least  for  the  time  being.     Premier
Khrushchev  has  made  it  clear  on  several   occasions  that  this
can  be  had  for  de  facto  recognition  of  East  Germany.   Thus
despite  all  the  hullabaloo,  the  shape  of  a  settlement  is already
visible.    The  sticking  point  was  the  right  of  East  Germans
to  flee  into  and  out  of  Berlin.    The  West  could  hardly  be
expected  to  accord  this  at  the  bargaining  table.    Mr.  Krush-
chov  by  creating  a  fait   accompli   and  taking  the  odium  on
himself   has  in • this  brutal  sense  cleared  the   way  for   nego-
tiations.
The  Parachute  to  Safety
Like  one  of  his  cosmonauts,  Premier  Khrushchov  has  also
equipped  himself  with  an  escape  hatch  in  the  Berlin  crisis
from  which  he  can  parachute  safely  to  diplomatic  terra  firma.
If  the  situation  gets  too  difficult,  he  can  have  his  penny  and
his  cake  by  signing  a  separate  treaty  with   East  Germany—
and  presenting  that  as a  great  victory  at  home—while  reserv-
ing  Western  rights  in  an  annex.    The  advantages  of  leaving
the  question  of  these   rights   open   by  this   device  is  that   it
could  sidestep  a  crisis,  leave  the  Russians  with  another  handle
on  the  East  German  regime  and  put   some  crucial  issues  on
ice  whence  they  could   be  taken  out  and  utilized  again   for
purposes   of   bargaining   or   Blackmail.     The   East   German
Foreign   Minister,   Lothar   Bolz,   hinted   at   such   a   solution
when  he  told  the  GDR  Parliament  last  Friday  that  if  a  sep-
arate  treaty  is  made  at  a  Communist  bloc  peace   conference,
I
Terrific  Stuff-
Now  That  We're   Sure   It   Won't   Work
"The   plan  to  tax   Moscow  with  the  counter demand
for   the  self-determination   of   Germans  has   been  dis-
cussed  here for  several  weeks.   The  Administration has
shown  some  concern,  however,  that  such  a propaganda
effort,    aimed   primarily   at   the   independence-minded
peoples  of  the  uncommitted  nations,  might  at  the  same
time  encourage  a  popular  uprising  in  East  Germany.
"Such  an  uprising, it  was  feared,  might  have  drawn
West  Germany  and  the  United  States  into  open  con-
flict  with   the   Soviet   army.     Now   that   Moscow   can
demonstrate  an  apparent  ability  to  suppress  the  East
German    populace,    however,    the   self-determination
argument  is  to  be pressed."
—Max   Frankel,   fresh   from   a   State   Department
briefing,   in  the  New  York   Times  Aug.   IS.
provisions  regarding  Berlin  would  be  in  a  separate  annex.
"Our  willingness,"  he  said  (New   York  Herald-Tribune,  Aug.
12)   "to  sign  such  an  annex  shows  our  readiness  for  an  un-
derstanding  on  a  reasonable  solution  to  all  controversial  ques-
tions  which  might  arise  after  the  signing  of  the  peace  treaty,
because  of   the   'island'   position   of   Berlin   and   termination
of  the  Western  occupation  regime  there."    This  implies  that
the  "controversial  questions"  bound   to  arise  until  Western
agreement   is  obtained   would   be  left   open   in  the   separate
treaty.    This  hint  on  the  eve  of  action  splitting  the  city  has
been  given  much  too  little  attention.    It  seems  to  go  a  step
beyond  earlier  and  similar  suggestions   dropped   by  the  Rus-
sians.
The   line  laid   down  at  the  two  days  of  private  briefings
given  the  press  here  this  week  is  I  understand  that  we  acqui-
esce  in  the  shutting  off  of  East  Berlin,  that  we  are  ready  to
negotiate   but   that   we   are   also   prepared   for   war,   nuclear
if   necessary,  if  allied  rights   in  West  Berlin  are   threatened.
It  would  be  a  mistake  for  the  Russians to  overplay  their  hand
and  imagine  that  this  is  sheer  bluff.    The  confused  and  the
irresolute   may  turn  irrationally  stubborn  if  pushed   too  far;
the  mistake  that  Hitler   made  can  also  be  made  by  Khrush-
chov.    Mankind  has  been  brought  to  the  brink  by  the  Soviet
Premier,  and  it will  not  be  easy  to  edge  back  to  safety  without
a  slipup.    The  West  Germans  are  pressing  for  "strong  meas-
ures"—they  are  very  much  in  a  let's-you-and-him-fight  mood
though  they  would  be  the  first  victims.    Their   East  German
kinsfolk   do  not   stir  my  sympathy;  Germans   are  getting  a
very  mild  taste  of  what  they  imposed  on  the  rest  of  Europe;
they  are  not  being  shipped   as  slave  laborers  into  the   Soviet
bloc  or  fed  to  crematoria;  it  is  certainly  not  worth  a  world
war  to  save  them  from  forcible   communization,   particularly
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
1   2   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August Zl, 1961
As  In  Past  Years,  Only   Official   Viewpoint   Heard   at   Hearings  on  Nuclear  Shelter  Program
Opponents  of  Civil  Defense  Denied  Chance  to  Testify  at Holifielcl  Hearings
Though  civil  defense  is  a  highly  controversial  subject,  this
year's  Holifield  committee  hearings  on  a  nuclear  shelter   pro-
gram   refused   to  hear   any  opposition   witnesses.    As  in   the
other   hearings  on  the  subject  which  Congressman    Holifield
has  been  holding   annually,  the  witness  list  was  confined   to
spokesmen  for  the  AEC,  the  Naval   Radiological   Laboratory,
the  Rand  Corporation   and  other   official   agencies.    The   Na-
tional   Committee  for   A   Sane  Nuclear   Policy   asked   to   be
heard  but  was  told  by  Holifield  that  he  did  not  plan  to  call
any   "outside   witnesses."      The   cast   of   characters   at   these
hearings   remains  pretty   much   the   same  from   year  to  year
and  those—like  Governor  Meyner  of  New  Jersey  and  Senator
Young  of  Ohio—who  believe  civil  defense  a  delusion  in  the
nuclear  age—never  get   a  chance  to  present   their   point   of
view.
Still  Fighting  the  Indian  Wars
Civil   defense   gets   caught   between   two   strong    opposing
viewpoints,   one   of   the   military,   the   other   of   the   peace-
minded.     The   former   tend   to   regard   it  with   contempt   as
somehow  cowardly,  and  fear  it  may  divert  funds  from  arma-
ments.     At  last  year's  hearing,   General   Le  May,   now   Air
Force   Chief   of   Staff,   was  opposed   to  putting  "money   into
holes  into  the ground  to crawl  into. ...  I  would  rather  spend
more   of   it  on   offensive   weapons   systems  to  deter   the   war
in  the  first  place."    Admiral  Arleigh  Burke  seemed  to  think
civilians   ought   to   be   more   reliant   and   talked   about   "my
grandfather,  sir,  who  went  out  to  the  western  plains.  .  .  ."
When  Holifield   said  tartly,  "Your  grandfather  wasn't   faced
with  nuclear  fallout,"  Burke  insisted,  "but  he  was  faced  with
a  lot  of  other  things,  and  he  defended   himself."
On  the  other  hand,  the  peace-minded  hate  to  admit  that
nuclear  war  is  possible  despite  its  suicidal  character,  and   fear
—quite  rightly—that  shelter  programs  will  be  used  to  indoc-
trinate  the  idea  that  nuclear  war  can  be  fought  successfully.
Fortunately   a  substratum  of   common   sense  everywhere   has
made  ordinary  people  impervious  to  such  indoctrination.  But
there  is  an  in-between  group  which  fears  that  war  is  coming,
and   looks   about   for   some  advance  measures  to   give   what
protection   they  can  to  the   survivors.    Holifield,   a  humane
man,  belongs  to  this  group.    He  lacks  what  it  takes  to  fight
for  peace,  a  politically dangerous  cause,  and  falls  back  instead
on  the  fight  for  shelters.    He  himself  is  in  favor  of  a  multi-
billion  dollar  program  to  build  real  shelters  against  blast  and
fire  as  well  as  fallout  but  is  "going  along"  with  the  Kennedy
Administration's   weak   program   of   marking   basements    in
buildings  because he  hopes  the  program  will  be  expanded  and
because  he  understands  that  Congress   has  barely  been   per-
suaded  even  to  accept  this  much.
Kahn  Complains  of  His  Critics
Herman   Kahn  in  his  appearance  before   the   Holifield
hearings   on   civil    defense   shelters   for   nuclear   war
complained   about  reviews  of   his   book   On  Thermonu-
clear  War   and  told   about   his   new   Hudson    Institute,
which  is  to  be  a  sort  of  private   Rand   Corporation   of
his   own.     Kahn   put   into   the   record   an    unpublished
letter  to  Scientific  American,  protesting  James  R.  New-
man's   acid   review   of   Kahn's  book.     He   said   Walter
Millis,  another   reviewer,   was  "just  stark   raving   mad"
in  his  views  of  Kahn   "but  we  are  all  entitled  to  some
idiosyncrasy."    Kahn   seemed  especially   offended   with
one   unnamed    reviewer   who  wrote   "unless    thermonu-
clear  war  can  be  reestablished  in  the  public  and  official
mind  as  something  which  it  is  possible  both   to  fight
and   to   survive,   it   is   unlikely    that   there   will   be   a
thermonuclear    war."     Kahn   endorsed  the    Administra-
tion's  new  civil  defense  program  as  "the   right  way  to
get  the  business  done."    He  said  later  in  the  hearing
that  his  new  Hudson  Institute  hopes  to  get  a  contract
from   the   government   to  do  a   study   of   civil   defense.
I  would  like  to  see  a  special  Congressional  joint  committee
set  up  to  give  the  whole  subject  the  widest  kind  of  investi-
gation   with   all   viewpoints   thoroughly   aired.     The   peace-
minded   cannot   rationally  oppose  any  kind   of   civil  defense.
On  the  other  hand,  they  need  not  fear  indoctrination  in  nu-
clear  war.    This  year's  hearings,   like  last  year's  nuclear  war
hearings  before  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  back-
fired.     Even   presentations   by  AEC  spokesmen   designed   to
show  that  nuclear  war  was  feasible,  and  expert  computations
based   on  unrealistic  assumptions   to  present   the   facts   in  as
"moderate"   a  way  as  possible,   turned  out  to  be  so  horrible
that  they  only  added  to  public  awareness  of  the  suicidal  char-
acter  of  modern  war.    The  two  AEC  witnesses  at  this  year's
hearings  to  whom  I  called  attention  in  last  week's  issue,  Dr.
Charles  L.  Dunham  and  R.  L.  Corsbie,  both  tried  to  down-
grade  the  danger   of  nuclear  war.    But  peace  groups   could
do  worse  than  to  use  their  testimony,  when  these  hearings  are
published,  to* show  that  there  is  no  sane  alternative   to  peace
in  the  nuclear   age.
Implicit   in  the  new  civil  defense  program   is  the   writing
off   of  urban  populations   wherever  cities  are  hit.    Since  our
cities  are  apt  to  be  the  main  targets  of  any  retaliatory  strike,
the  Mayors  of  our  major   cities  ought  to  join  in  asking   for
a  full   inquiry.    The   only  real  civil  defense  for   cities  is  to
put  them  underground  and  even  then  we  would  find  that  as
the  warheads  grow  bigger,  the  cities  would  have to  go  deeper.
Civil  defense   becomes   another   dimension   of   the   arms  race
in  its  final  and  most  fantastic  form.    The  more  fully  all  this
can  be  debated,  the  more  it  will  awaken  people  to  the  need
to  act  for   peace.
West  Germans  Dubious  of  the  Kind  of  Shelter  Space  on  Which  Our CD Program  Relies
"Bonn,    Aug.    6   (AP)—West    Germany    plans   no   big
changes  in  its  admittedly  inadequate  civil  defense  program
despite  the  threat  posed  by  the  Berlin  crisis.  .  .  .  Experts
in  the  Interior   Ministry,  which  has  charge  of  civil  defense,
concede  the  civilians  of   West  Germany  would  be  largely
at   the   mercy   of   an  enemy   using  nuclear  weapons.    But
•they  say  the  public  here,  like  that  in  other  Western  coun-
tries,  is  not  ready  to  sanction  the  outlay  of  large  sums  to
get  effective   protection. ...
"Available   for   temporary   shelter   are  basements   under
private,  homes,   apartment   houses   and  business   buildings
plus  the  remaining  bunkers   [from  the  last  war].    Interior
Ministry  experts  look  upon  these  as  better  than  nothing,
but  emphasize  their  extreme  inadequacy  in  case  of  nuclear
explosion  and  fallout."
—New   York   Herald   Tribune,   Aug.   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  21,1961
Even  Humphrey,  Disarmament  Champion,  Reports  Heavy  and  Hostile  Flow  of  Mail
Despite  Bipartisan   Support,  Outlook  Poor  for  Arms  Agency  Bill
"The   awesome  character   of   modern  weapons   and   the
speed  with  which  they  can  be  delivered,   sharply   accentu-
ated  by  ideological   and  political  conflicts,  impose   an  ele-
ment  of  urgency  in  the  consideration  of  all  means  to  lessen
tensions.    Moreover,  the  arms  race  itself,   creates   an  ele-
ment   of  instability  and  insecurity."
—Secretary   of  State  Dean  Rusk
"The   means  by  which  we  can  avoid  both  a  debilitating
and  dangerous  arms  race  and  the  occurrence  of  war  itself
have  become  one  of  the  greatest  challenges  to  mankind."
—John  J.  McCloy,  the  President's  disarmament  adviser.
With   these  eloquent  statements,  these  two   top  Kennedy
administration  figures  last  Monday  opened   the   Senate  For-
eign  Relations  Committee  hearings  on  S.  2180,   to  establish
a  U.S.  Disarmament  Agency  for  World  Peace  and  Security.
The   hearings   push   forward   a  measure  long   advocated  by
Senator   Humphrey   (D.   Minn.)   and  pledged   by   Kennedy
in  his  campaign for  the  Presidency.    It  would  give  the  step-
child  of  disarmament policy  a  bureaucratic home,  with  direct
accessibility  to  the  President  and  the  Secretary  of  State,  and
centralize  within  it  control  of  such  key  projects  as  improve-
ment  of  nuclear test  detection,  a  matter  hitherto  left  to  agen-
cies  like  AEC  and  the  Pentagon  with  little   interest  in  dis-
covering  anything that  might  smooth  the path  to 'disarmament.
The   surprise  of  the  first  day's  hearing  was  a  letter  of   en-
dorsement  from  former  President  Eisenhower.    In  its  wake,
a  solid  phalanx  of  Republicans  were  testifying  for  the   bill
as  this  copy  was  being  written:  Henry  Cabot  Lodge,  General
Alfred   M.  Gruenther,  former  Secretary  of  Defense   Thomas
S.  Gates,  Jr.,  and  former  Secretary  of  State  Christian  Herter.
Another  Republican,  former  Secretary of  Defense  Robert  A.
Lovett,  turned  up  the  first  day  to  advocate  the  bill  but  an
outburst  on  his  part  (see  box  below)   threatened  to  do  more
harm  than   good.
Unfortunately,   despite   this   wide   bipartisan   backing,   the
outlook  for  passage  was  not  good  unless  a  lot  more   public
support  can  be  whipped  up  than  is  now  in  evidence.    The
reasons:  hearings  have  begun   too   late  in   the   session;  few
Senators   seem   interested—only   Humphrey   and   Symington
(the   latter  at  best  ambivalent  as  the  aviation  lobby's  chief
mainstay  in  the  Senate)  stayed  throughout  the  hearings.   The
public  cannot  easily  be  led  in  two  contradictory   directions—
toward  a  stepped   up   arms  race  and   toward   a  disarmament
Secret  Testing  by  the  Soviets?
Sen.   HUMPHREY:  "Just   so   the   headlines   do  not
distort   the   evidence,   do  you  have   any   evidence   that
there  is  clandestine   testing   going   on  by  the  Soviets?
Mr.  John  J.  McCLOY  [adviser  to  the  President  on
disarmament]:  No,  I  do  not  have  any  convincing  evi-
dence.
Sen.  HUMPHREY: Does  anybody  in  the  government
have  any?
Mr.  McCLOY:  All   I  can  say   is  that   I  have   never
seen  any  evidence which is  convincing  to  me, and I think
I  have  seen   it   all.
—Senate  Foreign   Relations   Committee,   hearing  on
Disarmament  Agency   Bill,  S  2180, August  H.
agency;  the  war  scare  has  discouraged  the  advocates  and  in-
furiated   the  opponents  of  the  bill.    Even  Humphrey,  who
has  been  engaged  in  a  long  and  usually  lonely  fight  for  dis-
armament  in  the  Senate  for   years,  admitted  the  second  day
that  while  editorial  opinion  is 90  percent  for  the  new  agency,
he  has  been  the  target  of  a  heavy  mail  "without   exception"
opposed  to  the  bill,  calling  him  "Communist"  and  "appeaser"
for  putting  it  forward  at  this  time.
Indicative  of  unthinking  public  temper  on  the  right  was
a  statement  put  into  the  record  in  disgust  by  Chairman  Ful-
bright  in  which  the  American  Legion's  National  Commander
Wm.  R.  Burke  told  the  Virginia  Legion  convention  in  Roan-
oke,   "If   the   survival   of   the   U.S.   means   that   Castro   and
Khrushchov  must  be  destroyed,  and  I   frankly   believe  that
it  does,  then  let  us  get  on  with  the  task."    Symington  asked
McCloy   whether   he  did  not  think  that  creating  a  Disarma-
ment  Agency  might   "affect  the  willingness  of  the  American
people  to  make  the  necessary  sacrifices  to  provide  the  various
forms  of  strength  and  the  will  to  use  them—both  of  which
are   necessary  to   our   survival."     McCloy   replied   that   the
"growing   knowledge"   of   the   "terrible   consequences   of   a
thermonuclear   war"    did   not   make   them    (the   American
people)   "scared   and   run   away"   but  that   "they  want   this
government  to  consider  seriously  the  possibilities  of   avoiding
such  a  war"  through  arms  control  and  disarmament  "because
the  alternative  is  so  terrible."    Symington  thought   this   "a
very  good  answer"  but  will  it  get  through  to  the   country
in  time  to  develop  sufficient  support?
Supposed  Elder  Statesman  Slips  Into  Slander  About  the  Peace  Movement
Mr.  [Robert  A.]  LOVETT  [former  Secretary  of  Defense]:
I  must  confess  to  a  degree  of  worry  in  that  area  of  security
requirements  .  .  .  because  it  seems  to  me  that  an  agency
of  this  extraordinary   power   [the   proposed   U.S.   Disarma-
ment  Agency]   .  .  .  one  that  cuts,  in  effect,   into  the  most
sensitive  areas  of  most  of  our agencies,  should  do  something
more  than  the  normal  security   checks.     This  would  be  an
almost  ideal  place  to  attempt   to  infiltrate.  .  .  .
"It  seems  clear  to  me  that  this  is  going  to  be  a  Mecca,
a  magnet,  for  a  wide  variety  of  screwballs ...  a  natural
magnet   for   those   rather   uninspiring    groups   that   have
slogans   'Better  Red  Than  Dead,'  'Surrender  and  Survive,'
or  the  give-up  groups. ...  It  will  be  a  great  pity  to  have
this  launched and shortly  become  a  Bureau of  Beatniks.  .  .  ."
Sen.   SYMINGTON:  As   a  matter  of  fact,  wouldn't  you
rather  be  Red  than  dead  is  a  slogan  that  was  coined  by
one  of  the  world's   great  philosophers   and  therefore   in  the
phase   itself   you  are   going   beyond   the  beatniks   to  those
people   who,  for  sincere   reasons  of  religion  or  because  of
developed   pacifism,  they   believe  that  any  agency  that  is
involved  in  the  disarmament  field  might   be  a  place   that
they  would  like  to  go  and  therefore  you  would  like  to  see
them  screened,  as  I  understand  it,  from  the  standpoint   of
being  sure  that  they  have  an  objective  approach.
—Sen.  Foreign  Relations  Hearing   on  S  2180,  Aug.  14
It   was  disappointing   to  hear  Mr.  Lovett,   an   otherwise
cultivated  man,  talk  in  such  terms  of  the  peace  movement.
We  challenge   Mr. Lovett  to  identify  a  single   group   foolish
enough   to  use  any  of   the  slogans  he  purports  to  quote.
As  for  "rather  be  Red  than  dead"  that  was  not  coined  by
Bertrand  Russell  at  all  but  by  Joseph  Alsop  in  hysterical
distortion   of   an  interview  with   Russell.
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  SI, 1961
The  World  Cannot  Go  On  Solving  Problems  by  Nuclear  Threats
(Continued  from  Page  One)
since  it  does  not  take  much  contact  with  the  West  Germans
to  sense  how  justifiably  the  Russians and  the  Poles  fear  them
and  their  hopes  of  regaining  their  old  territories  in  the  East
by  the  threat  of  nuclear  war.    The  price  Germany  is  paying
for   Hitlerism  is  mild  compared  to  the  price  it  imposed   on
Poland,  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  Jewish  people.    Eichmann
is  in  this  respect  a  typical  figure.
An  Almost  Hopeless   Problem
Unfortunately,  the  Russians  do  not  offer  a  solution   either.
The  world  cannot  go  on  in  this  way,  solving  problems  by
the  threat  of  nuclear  holocausts  as  Mr.  Khrushchov  is  doing.
West  Berlin's  position  is  abnormal,  but  so  is  East  Germany's.
A  united  Germany,  certainly  an  armed  one,  would  only  be
the  prelude  to  a  series  of  revanchist  crises.    But  a  divided
Germany  under Russian control  is  a  monstrosity that  can  only
feed  the flames of  German  nationalism  and  militarism. Poland
lived  close  to  a  century  divided  among  Russia,  Germany  and
Austria  but  Germany is not Nineteenth  Century Poland.  West
Germany  is  already  the  most  powerful  nation  in  Europe  west
of  the  Russian  border,  and   almost  inevitably  bound   sooner
or  later  to  play  a  fatal  role  again  in  human  affairs.     It  is  a
wan  hope  that  the  Russians may provide  a  better  regime  than
Ulbricht's  once  the  situation   is  stabilized;  how  remove  him
after  so great  a  triumph?  Adenauer has  rejected  every  broader
scheme,  from  Eden's through  Kennan's  to  Rapacki's,  by which
Germany  might  have  had  a  chance  of  peaceful  reunification.
If  his  regime  now  takes  the  path  of  trade  reprisals,  it   will
only  dig  the  ditch  deeper   between  the  two  Germanics,  and
between   the  two  Europes.     Facile   propaganda  about   "self-
determination"  is  a  bogus  Madison  Avenue  medicine  for  this
situation.    The  uncommitted  nations  are  quite  cynical  about
the   principle.    Angola   bulks   larger   in   their   vision   than
Germany.    They  understand  that  each  of  the  two  contending
blocs   is   enthusiastic   about   self-determination   only   in    the
other's  domain.    The   part  of  wisdom  is  to  negotiate   soon
and  as quickly  as possible,  not  just  with  West  Berlin  in  mind,
but  to  prevent  a  deep  split  which  must  sooner  or  later  bring
Freedom  of  Movement  Note
Just  to  teach  those  East  German bureaucrats  a lesson
and   make   starkly   clear   their   interference    with   the
right   of   free   movement,   the   State    Department    we
assume  will  now  cease  trying  to  get  a  new  bill  through
Congress   restricting   the  right   of  travel,  lift   the  Iron
Curtain  we  impose  on  Cuba,  China,  North  Korea,  North
Vietnam   and  Albania,   and  reverse  its   recent    refusal
to  allow  pro-Castro  newspaperman  Lyle  Stuart  of  The
Independent   (a  New  York  monthly)   to  visit  Cuba.
on  World  War   III.
The  battle  we  can  win  for  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men
will  be won  by subtler  and  more  honest  means.   Mr.  Khrush-
chov  has  hardly  increased  his  stature  in  the  world   by   big
talk  of  a  100-megaton  weapon  and  about  bombs  falling  on
the  Acropolis.    If   we  talked  that  way,  the  Russians  would
be  denouncing  us  for  war-mongering  barbarism.    I  hope  the
Voice  of  America will  beam  to  Russia  those  parts  of  Khrush-
chov's   fulminations   about  war  and  "grandeur"   which  were
censored  out  by  his  own  press.    There  is  a  dangerous  streak
of  primitivism  in  the  Soviet  Premier.    The  President  at  his
last  press  conference provided  a  contrast  which,  if  continued,
must  make  a  deep   impression  on  world  opinion.     His   re-
straint,  his  rebuke  for  the  wild  men  in  Congress  on   Cuba,
his  support  of  Senator Fulbright  against  our  military  rightists,
his  tone  and   style,  were  of  a  very  different   order,   though
both  he  and  Khrushchov  make  the  same  kind  of   speeches,
combining  military  threats  with   offers   of   negotiations.    We
are  particularly  heartened  by  signs  of  changing  attitudes  to-
ward  Cuba;  a  rapprochement  with  Castro  would   increase  re-
spect  for  our  country.    Let  us  approach   the  Berlin  crisis  in
a  big  way,  recognizing  Russia's  real  fears,  safeguarding   the
people   of  West  Berlin   as  we  are   honor   bound   to   do,   -  but
seeking  to  utilize  the  crisis  as  a  means  of  moving  a  sobered
world   closer  to  a  better  order.    This  is  a  challenge  to   all
that  is  best  in  our  traditions,  and  in  the  President;   here  an
ambitious  young  man  could  find  the   path   to   greatness   in
the  service  of  mankind.
Vacation—The   Weekly   Does  Not  Go  to  Press  the  Last  Two  Thursdays  in  August—Next   Issue  Dated  Sept.  11
VACATION  NOTICE
The  Weekly  does  not  go  to  press  the  lost  two  Thursdays
in  August.   We  are  closing  down  for  vacation;  no  changes
of  address  can  be  made  during  this  holiday  period.    I  am
on  my  way  to   Belgrade   for  the  neutrals'  conference   and
if   all   goes  well  our  next   issue  should   be  dated  Sept.   11.
We  take  advantage  of  this  notice  to  thank  our  readers  for
the   unprecedented  spurt  in  our  circulation  this  past  year,
and  to  express  our  appreciation  for  the   many  kind   notes
we  have  received.    No  newspaperman   has  ever  had  a   more
warmly  responsive  audience.  We  are  deeply  grateful  for  it.
IE  Stem's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered u  Second  Class  Hatter  at  Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.   Fort-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  In  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada;    $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:   116  to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED