I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961feb06.pdf

============================================================

27  Congressmen Introduce  Peace Agency  Bill, P.  2
Is  There  A  Missile  Gap?  How  Much Is  Enough?  Startling  Figures  on  State   of  Our  Armaments,  Pps.   2-3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IX,  NO.  5
FEBRUARY  6,   1961
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
As  If  the  Prophet  Jeremiah   Were  Caught   Cheering
At   the   risk   of   alarming  steady   customers,   inured   to   a
weekly  diet  of  apocalyptic  pessimism,  I  must  confess  that  I
am  becoming optimistic.   This  may  seem  in  its  way  perverse.
Just  when  a  new  President   sends   Congress   a  first  message
filled  with  perilous  tidings  at  home  and  abroad,  your  Wash-
ington  reporter  suddenly  begins  to  see  hope  ahead.    I  even
feel  a  little   embarrassed,  like  the  prophet  Jeremiah   caught
giving  three  lusty  cheers.    But  ever  since  John  F.  Kennedy's
first  press  conference,  I  haven't  felt  the  same.
The   swift   movement   of   events  here  is  bewildering;   one
would  have  to  print   morning,   evening,   noon   and  night   to
keep  up with  it.   The  appointments,  the  policy  positions,  have
something   in   them   for   everybody.    Mr.   Kennedy's   heroes
are  Churchill and  the  two  Roosevelts,  but  his  dazzling  sleight-
of-hand  most  resembles  de  Gaulle's—and  de  Gaulle,  remem-
ber,  for  all  the  misgivings  of  the  French  left  is  pulling  off
the  miracle  of  getting  France  and  the  French  Army  slowly
to  accept  the  idea  of  an  independent  Algeria.   I  believe  Mr.
Kennedy,  by a similar  dexterity,  may succeed  in  bringing  about
a  settlement, first with  the  Soviet  Union  and  then  with  Peking,
in  ways  and  on  terms  some  of  us  may  find  surprising   and
even  unpalatable,   but  the  result  can  pull  us  away  from   the
brink.
Bonn-Washington  Axis  Ending
Some  readers  may  remember  that   back  in   the   spring  of
1953,  we  shocked  some  of  them  with  a  piece  called,  "Chal-
lenge  to  the  Left:   Back  Ike  for  Peace",  which  proposed   that
we  circumvent the  pall  of  McCarthyism  and  make  Mr.  Eisen-
hower's  moves  toward  a  Korean  truce  the  rallying  point   for
public  support  of  a  broader  settlement;  we  asked  the  Left  to
get  rid  of  its  stereotypes  and  see  that  the  new  Republican
soldier  President was a potential  force  for  peace.    So he  would
have  been  but  for  Chancellor  Adenauer's  skillful   torpedoing
of  one  constructive possibility  after  another  on  the  way to  the
abortive  summit last  year,  and  the  tragic  accident  of  the  U-2.
The   latter  was  due   to   Mr.   Eisenhower's   lazy   slovenliness
about  his  job;  the  former,  to  the  pro-Bonn  orientation  which
John  Foster  Dulles  so  long  gave  U.S.  policy.    The  days  of
the   Bonn-Washington   axis  are  I   believe   over;   Adenauer's
sudden   moves  toward   a  settlement   with   Poland   reflect   his
fear   of   being  left   high-and-dry   by  bilateral  talks   between
Washington  and  Moscow;   "not  a  word  on  Berlin"  Die  Welt
of  Hamburg  complains  of  Mr.  Kennedy's  State  of  the  Union
message.
As  for  a  new  incident  or  provocation  similar  to  the  U-2,
its  possibility  is  not  to  be  excluded.    There  are  mountainous
bureaucratic  and  corporate   forces  against  a  settlement,   with
huge  funds  and  resources  at  their  disposal.    But  they  will  no
longer  find  a  slack  hand  and  an  absent  mind  at  the  White
JFK  Reading  Up  on  Red  China?
The  direction  of  the  new  President's  thinking  may
be  indicated  by  two  books  reporters  saw  on  his  desk
when  they  toured  the  newly  repainted  executive   office.
Lying  on  one  side  of  the  desk,  when  reporters  looked
in,  was  "Selected  Works of  Mao Tse-tung"  and  on  the
other,   Robert   J.  Donovan's   "Elsenhower:  The   Inside
Story."
The  Donovan book  tells  how  in  the  early  months  of
1953,  while  negotiating  the  Korean  truce,  Mr.  Eisen-
hower  "felt  that  it  was  unfortunate that  a  climate had
developed  in  which,  so  it  seemed  to  him,  it  was  looked
upon  almost as  un-American  even  to  debate the  merits"
of   recognizing  Red   China.    Donovan,   who   had   pri-
vate information as  an  authorized biographer,  reported,
"The  President  was  not  convinced  that  the  vital  inter-
ests of  the  United States  were best  served by  prolonged
nonrecognition   of   Red  China,"  and   "He  had  serious
doubts  as  to  whether  Russia  and  China  were  natural
allies."
Another   Donovan  disclosure  is  of   immediate  rele-
vance  for  the  new  President,  confronted with the  possi-
bility  that  the  UN  may  soon  vote  to  admit  Red  China.
A  similar vote  was  feared  in  1953 as  part  of  a  Korean
truce  settlement.    On May  27,  1953,  the  Senate  Appro-
priations   Committee  20-to-3   approved  a  Republican
rider  cutting  off  all   U.S.   contributions  to  the   UN   if
Red    China   was    admitted.     Mr.   Eisenhower   talked
Bridges  and Dirksen  out  of  it,  arguing  that  in  a  world
organization  "every  nation  must  expect  to  be  outvoted
at  one  time  or   another."
House.    I  cannot  tell  you with  what  pleasure  I  watched  the
new  President  at  his  first  press  conference;  his  performance
washed  away a  long-held  and  indeed  cherished   anti-Kennedy
bias.    Necessity  may  make  his  course  tortuous  but  the  direc-
tion  is  clearly  toward  peace.     I  feel  that  for   the  first  time
since  Roosevelt  we have a first-rater in  the  Presidency,  a young
man  of  energy,  zest  and  ability.    It  is  a  post  in  which  any
man  of  any  quality  must  grow,  but  when  a  man  starts  out
with  the  gifts  Mr.  Kennedy  so dearly  has,  we  have  the  right
to  hope  he  will  grow  to  greatness,  and  perform  valiantly  in
the  cause  of   mankind.
Many  difficulties  and  disappointments  lie  ahead.    The  nar-
row   victory  in   the   House   Rules   fight   will   invigorate   the
coalition   of  Republicans  and   Southern   Democrats,   who  see
that  Mr.  Kennedy  will  have  to  pay  dearly  in  concessions  to
get  the   precarious  margins  required   for   his   domestic  pro-
gram,  but  it  will  also  invigorate  Mr.  Kennedy,  and  I  predict
that   his  personal   appeal   over   TV   will   give   him  a   better
margin  in  the  next  House  elections  two  years  hence.     It  is
obvious  that  he  loves  nothing  better   than  a  hard  fight;  in-
deed  he  seems  to  have  a  weakness  for  seeing  an  Armageddon
(Continued  on  page  Four)
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February   6, 1961
Kennedy  and Elsenhower  Differ  on the State of Our  Missile Defenses  But. . .
The   most   striking   contrast   between   Mr.   Kennedy's   first
state  of  the  Union  message  and  Mr.  Eisenhower's   last  was  in
respect  to  the  state  of  our  military  preparedness.    The  latter
said  we had  ample deterrent  forces;  the  former,  that  "we  must
strengthen  our  military  tools."
Mr.  Eisenhower  left  office  with  a  series  of  warnings  against
the  forces  making  for  a  stepped  up  arms  race.    In  his  State
of  the  Union  message  Jan.  12  he  declared  that  "the   'bomber
gap'  of  several  years  ago  was  always  a  fiction,  and  the  'missile
gap'  shows  every  sign  of  being  the  same."    In  his   farewell
TV  appearance  Jan.  17  he  warned  against  the  growing  influ-
ence  in  American  life  of  "an  immense  military   establishment
and   a  large  arms  industry."     At  his  final  press    conference
next  day he  declared  that  armament  advertising  was  becoming
"a   great   influence,   almost   an   insidious   penetration   of   our
minds."
For  Protection  or  Bargaining?
Mr.  Kennedy  by  contrast  implied  that  our   defenses   were
inadequate.    "We  are  moving,"  he  said,  "into  a  period  of
uncertain  risk  in  which  both  the  military  and  diplomatic  possi-
bilities  require  a Free World  focce  so powerful  as to  make  any
aggression   clearly   futile."     The   reference   to   "diplomatic"
possibilities   is  puzzling.     Do   we  want   more   arms   against
aggression  or  to  be  in  a  better  bargaining   position?
Significantly,  Mr.  Kennedy  did  not  speak  of  a  missile  gap,
though  he  said  he  was giving  orders  to  "accelerate  our  entire
missile   program."    He   also   ordered   an   increase   in   air-lift
capacity   and   a  step  up   in  the  Polaris   submarine   program.
Just  how  much  these  increases  will  amount  to  in  dollar  terms
was  not  made  clear;  one  estimate  (New  York   Herald-Tribune,
Jan.  31)  is that  "in  due  course"  they  will  add  about  $1.5   bil-
lions  to  our  arms  budget.    These  increases   come  on  top  of
those  already  ordered   by  Mr.  Eisenhower:   a  $1,410  million
dollar  increase  in  arms  spending  plus  an  unspecified   increase
in  expenditures  for  production   of  nuclear  weapons.
The  real  test  will  come  on  the  reappraisal  which  Mr.  Ken-
nedy  has  ordered  the  Secretary  of  Defense   to  prepare  by  the
end  of  this  month  on  the  state  of  our  defenses.    On  this  he
proposes  to  make  his  recommendations.    The  new  President
Nuclear   War  Problems  Dept.
We  pass  on  to  thinkers  at  the  Rand  Corporation two
items  which  illustrate  difficulties   still   to  be  solved  in
carrying  on  themonuclear  war.   The  first  was  called  to
our  attention  by  an  article  in  the   London  Times  Jan.
25.   Its  Military  Correspondent was  writing of  Britain's
Rhine  Army,  which  is  part  of  the  NATO  Command in
Germany.    He  was  disturbed  by   its   concentration  on
nuclear  weapons.   He  did  find,  however,  that  the  Army
was  getting  rather  more  exercise  in  conventional  arms
than  one  would  have  thought  because  of  an  unexpected
technological   difficulty.     "It   so   happened,"  he   wrote,
"that  a  good  deal  of  training  in  conventional  war  was
carried  out,  rather  by  accident,  for  the  simple   reason
that  if  nuclear  weapons  are  used  at  all  freely  the  exer-
cise   comes   to  an  abrupt  conclusion   several   day?  too
early,   having   run  out   of    combatants."
The  other  problem  was  brought  to  our  attention  by
the  special   Atomic  Energy   Commission   study  on  the
reactor  explosion  in  Idaho.    This  showed   that   though
skilled  teams  and  special   equipment  were  available   it
took  six  days  to  get   the  bodies  of  the  three   victims
out   of   the   reactor.     The   bodies   were   so   "hot"  with
radioactivity  they  had  to  be  handled  with  the   utmost
precautions.
Query:  If   it   took   trained   and  equipped  crews   six
days  to  recover  three   bodies  in  a  peacetime   accident,
how  many  days  would  it  require  safely  to  dispose   of
10,000,000  radioactive  bodies  in  one  of  those  relatively
small  thermonuclear  attacks  from  which  Mr.  Herman
Kahn  says  we  could  easily   recover?
will   be  under   heavy   pressure  from   within   the   Democratic
party  and the labor movement for  a steep  boost  in  arms  spend-
ing.    A  sample  is  the  speech  by AFL-CIO  Sec-Treasurer  Wm.
F.  Schnitzler  which  was  reported  in  the  AFL-CIO   News   Jan.
28.    "The   peace  and  freedom  of  the  world,"  he  told  a  bever-
age  industry  meeting,  "is  imperiled   by  the  forces  of  aggres-
sive  and  godless  dictatorship.    The  dictatorships  have  man-
aged  to  get  ahead  of  us  in  rockets,  missiles  and  other  weapons
of  mass  destruction."
Mr.  Schnitzler   must  have  information   not  available   to  the
Pentagon.    The   Pentagon  reporter  of  the   Washington    Star
reported   Jan.   15,   "New    national   intelligence   estimates   of
26  Members of  the  House  Join  Kastenmeier in  Sponsoring  Peace  Agency Bill
"Mr.   Speaker:
"In  the  last  few  days  26  members  of  this  House,  from
both  parties,  have joined  me  in  introducing  a  newly  written
bill  to  create  a  National  Peace  Agency.
"That  bill  would mobilize the  creative  power  of  American
ideas  to  solve  the  great  problems  of  disarmament  and  of
reducing  international tensions.    It  would  involve   physical
and   social  scientists,  teachers,  public  officials,   and  private
citizens  in  an  attempt  to  bring  imagination  and  thought  to
bear  on  the  problems  of  achieving  peace.    These  problems
are  many  and  complex.    For  instance,  can  we  work  out  a
way   to  detect  tests   of   chemicr 1  and  bacteriological  weap-
ons?    We  do  not  know.   Wha(      inds  of  rearrangement  of
our   National   economy  could  ve   undertake,  if   the  arma-
ments  burden  upon  our  budget  were  to  be  reduced?   We  do
not  know.    Are  there  any  new  ideas  for  reducing  the  ten-
sions  that  plague  our  international  life?    We  do  not  know.
"We  could  try  to  answer these  questions if  an independent
agency   to   explore  new   approaches   to   peace   were   to  be
created.    Such  an  agency  could  also  train  the  experts  whom
we  will  need  to  man  the  inspection  posts   in  any  interna-
tional  disarmament  agreement.     Such  an  agency  is   neces-
sary  to discover the hard facts  upon which our State Depart-
ment   can  build  sensible   policy  in  negotiating   with   other
nations.
"For   these  reasons,   26  Members  have   joined   in  intro-
ducing   Peace   Agency   bills  identical   to   HR  3186.     Those
members  are  the  gentlemen  from  Wisconsin  (Kastenmeier
and   Johnson),   California    (Clem   Miller   and   Roosevelt),
Maryland    (Friedel),    Connecticut    (Kowalski),   Minnesota
(Blatnik  and  Karth),  New  York  (Pike,  Ryan. Cellar,  Multer
and  Halpern),  Alaska  (Rivers),  Missouri  (Moulder),  Penn-
sylvania   (Rhodes,  Nix   and  Toll),   Ohio   (Ashley),  Massa-
chusetts   (Donohue  and  Lane),  Illinois   (O'Hara  and  Ship-
ley),   Montana  (Olsen),   New   Jersey   (Rodino)   and   West
Virginia   (Staggers  and  Zelenko).
"We  hope  to  discuss  before  the  House,  during  the  next
few  weeks,  the  provisions  of  our  bill."
—Robert   W.  Kaste-imeier   (D.   Wis.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February  6, 1961
. . . Some  Stupefying  New Figures Show We Can Dump 30,000 MT on Russia
Soviet  missile  production indicates the  'missile  gap'  may  have
disappeared."    Two  years  ago  at  the  height  of   the  missile
gap   scare,  it  was  estimated  that  by  now  the   Soviet  Union
would  have  50  to  100  missiles  operational  "but intelligence
officers,"  said  the  Star,  "cannot  find  nearly  that  number."
A  Sober  British  Estimate
Britain's  Institute  of   Strategic  Studies  credits  Russia  with
about   35   operational   ICBM's   and   about   200   long   range
bcmbers,  a  total  of  235  instruments  for  long  range  delivery
of  nuclear  weapons  on  the  U.S.   Against  this,  according  to
figures presented  by the  Republicans on  the  floor  of  the  House
Jan.  25,  "the U.S. has  well  over  2,000  nuclear  carrying  ve-
hicles  capable  of  reaching  Russia."    The  figures  presented  by
the  Republicans  without  challenge  from  the  Democrats  (see
pages  1171-81 of  that  day's Record)  show  the  U.S.  has:
Two  Polaris  submarines  with  32  missiles  capable  of  reach-
ing  Russia;  about  16  Atlas  ICBM's;   "over  600  long   range
B-52  jet  bombers,  each  carrying  more  destructive,   explosive
power  than  used  by  all  the  combatants  in  World  War  II";
nearly  1,400 B-47 medium  range  jet  bombers  at  home  and
abroad  with  a  4500  mile  range  "and distances  beyond  with
air  to  air  refueling";   the  first  of  SAC's  B-58 Hustlers,   super-
sonic  medium  range  jet  bombers;   "fourteen   aircraft  carriers
able  to  launch  more  aircraft   than   the   entire  'Soviet  heavy
bomber  force";  "eighteen  wings  of  tactical  aircraft,  each  wing
with  a  substantial nuclear  attack  capability deployed  globally";
60  Thor   IRBM's   in  England,   capable   of   reaching   Russia;
and  30  Jupiter  IRBM's  being  deployed  in  Italy,  "from  which
Russia  can  be hit."
These  figures  cover  delivery  vehicles   in  being.    Planned
and  under  construction  even  before  any  step-up  by  the Ken-
nedy  administration  are: Minutemen   missiles,   600  to  be  in
operation  by the  end  of  1964; Atlas  missiles,  129  to  be  ready
by  the  end  of  1962; Titan  missiles,  126  to  be  ready  by  the
end  of  1962;  15  Jupiter  IRBM's  to  be  erected  in  Turkey;  and
four  more  Polarises  with  a  total  of  64  missiles  to  be  in  oper-
ation  before  the  end  of  this  year.    (Each  of  these  submarines
Why  Africans  Cheer  That  "Pirate"
"Henrique  Malta  Galvao,  who  led  the  group  of  men
capturing  the  Santa   Maria  and  who  was  formerly   a
Salazar   supporter,  served  as  a  deputy  for  Angola  in
the  Legislative  Assembly  in  Lisbon.    In  1947, as  high
inspector  in  Angola,  Captain  Galvao  submitted  a  con.
fidential  report  on  forced  labor  in  the  colonies  which
the  Government  refused  to  publish.    After   describing
how   Portuguese   policy  in   ten   years   alone—1937   to
1946—had  forced  over  one  million  Africans  to  flee  the
colonies  to  neighboring African areas,  Galvao concluded
that   their   situation   was  'worse  than   simple  slavery.'
Two years  later  the  report  was published  by the  under-
ground  and  in  1951 Galvao was  jailed."
—George  M.  Houser,  American  Committee  on  Africa,
which   has   appealed    to   the   President   not   to   inter-
fere   with  the  capture  of   the  Santa   Maria  except   to
safeguard    the   U.S. passengers,   on   the   ground   that
Galvao's   action  "has widespread  African    support."
equipped   costs  about  a  quarter  billion  dollars  apiece  and  the
Navy  wants  a  total  of  45  with  720  missiles,  no  less.)     All
these  missiles  can  reach  Russia.    The  figures  are  stupefying.
One  expert  estimate,  on  the  basis  of  the  figures  given   the
House,  is that  theoretically  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  dump
more  than   30,000   megatons  of  nuclear  arms  on  the   Soviet
Union.     It   has  about   3,000,000   square  miles   of   inhabited
area.    It  takes  about  1 megaton  to  render  1,000 square  miles
uninhabited  and  uninhabitable.     At  that   rate  it  would   take
3,000  megatons  evenly  spread  literally  to  wipe  out  the  Soviet
Union.    We  can  deliver  more  than  ten  times  that  much.
Another   way   of   looking   at   these   nightmarish   totals—
estimates  in  the   nuclear  war  hearings   before  the   Holifield
committee  were  that   500  megatons   would   kill   40  million
people   in  the  U.S.S.R.     At  that  rate,   it  would   take   2,000
megatons  to  do  the  whole  population  in.    We  have  delivery
capacity  now  for  15  times  that  much—and  many  times  more
in  1962 and  1964.   When  is  enough  enough?    We  hope  a
few  skeptical civilians, not  linked with  the  missile and  uranium
business,  can  get  in  on  Mr.  Kennedy's  reappraisal.
Some  Bombshells Real  and Metaphorical  Around  the  House  Un-American  Committee
In  a  rather  overwrought  press  release  accompanying   its
annual  report  recently,   the  House   Un-American  Activities
Committee  predicted  that  the  U.S. "faces  a  period  of  Com.
munist-fomented  violence."    The  violence   so  far  seems  to
be coming  from  the  other  direction.    In  Berkeley  a  religious
fanatic  invaded  the  University   of  California  campus   office
of  Prof.  Thomas  F.  Parkinson,  a  critic  of  the  House  Com-
mittee,  with  a  shotgun,   badly  wounding  him  and  killing  a
student,   Stephen   Mann  Thomas.    "God made  me   do  it,"
the  killer  told  police.    "I  hate   Communists."
In  Los  Angeles  there  have  been  two  unsolved   bombings.
In  September  a  bomb  was  thrown  at  the  office  of  the  Na-
tional   Committee  to   Abolish   the   Un-American   Activities
Committee,  and in December  the  home of  its  director,  Frank
Wilkinson,  was  bombed.   Two  of  his  children  were  home  at
the   time,   but  fortunately  neither  was   hurt.    Two   nights
after  the  bombing, a  swastika  was  painted  on  the  house  and
his   frightened   landlord   asked   him   to   move.    Wilkinson
himself   was   threatened  with  death  after   appearing  on  a
TV  debate,  and  a  hostile  campaign  in  sections  of  the  press
and  by   Fulton   Lewis  on  the   radio  have  made   it   difficult
to  find  another  landlord  willing  to  rent  him  a home.
Another  kind  of  bombshell landed  on  the  House  Commit-
tee  here  when  Marquis  Childs  made  some  startling   revela-
tions  about  the  film  "Operation  Abolition,"   in  his   column
in  the  Washington   Post  Jan. 27.    Mr.  Childs  reported  the
Defense   Department  had  bought   30  prints  of  this  film  to
show  new  recruits  and  had  tried  unsuccessfully  to  get  the
State  Department  to  buy  prints,  too.   Then  Mr.  Childs dis-
closed   that   Defense   bought   and  showed   the  film  despite
an  unfavorable  report  on  it.
"A  report  on  the  film  prepared  by  the  general   counsel's
office   in   the   Defense   Department,"   Mr.  Childs   revealed,
"said  that  the  House  Committee  seemed  to  have  encouraged
the  riots  with  the  apparent  end  of  showing  how  grave  the
opposition  to  the  Committee  hearings   was."
Publication  of  the  Childs  column  was  followed  (1)  by  the
appearance  in  the  Pentagon  that  same  afternoon  of  a  House
Committee  investigator  trying   to  find  out  who  wrote   the
unfavorable  report  and  (2)  a  telegram  to  Secretary  of  De-
fense  McNamara  from  Joseph  L. Rauh for  the  ADA  saying,
"In order  to  make  it  crystal  clear  that  the  new  Administra-
tion  intends  to  protect  the  civil  liberties  of  all  Americans,
it  is  hoped you  will  immediately  revoke  the  order  for  copies
of  the  film  'Operation  Abolition'  .  .  .  which  even   [House]
Committee  personnel  have  admitted  is  distorted."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  6, 1961
A  Nuclear  Test  Ban  Treaty  The  First
(Continued   from  page  One)
everywhere.    In  this  respect,  the  State  of  the  Union   message
would  have  benefitted   by  a  little  understatement.    This  is
neither  Britain  in  September  1939 nor  America  in  1933, nor
has  Fort  Sumter  just  been  fired  upon.
The  Similarities  Between E  and  E
In  one  sense,  of  course,  the  crisis  is  greater  and   global,
but  the  hangover  of  fervent  cold  war  cliches  still  impede  Mr.
Kennedy's   efforts   to  express  it  with  a  just  sobriety.    Much
of  what  the  President  will  do  in  this  connection,  the   peace
movement   will   find   incomprehensible   and   distasteful,   and
we  intend  to  criticize  watchfully  (see the  inside  pages)   but
no  longer   in  a  tone  of  despair.    In  moving  toward   peace,
Mr.  Kennedy  must  carry  with  him  somehow  a  party  and  a
labor  movement  strongly  attached  to  the  arms  race,  and  a
country  which  would  be  startled  if  it  too  soon  heard  an  en-
tirely  different   tune  on  Soviet-American  relations.     In   this,
Mr.  Kennedy's  problem  is  much  like  Mr.  Khrushchev's;  both
must  conciliate  rigid  fanatics  in  their  ranks;  both  must  make
co-existence  appear  as  only  another  form  of  struggle  to  liber-
ate the  other's  sphere of  influence; neither  can afford  to  appear
"soft",  the  one  on  capitalism,  the  other  on  communism.   But
both  are  master  politicians,  and  both  are  well  aware  of  the
crossroads  to  which  history  has  brought   them.
The  immediate issue,  the  crucial  main  point,  is  the  success-
ful   negotiation  of  a  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  and   its   ratifica-
tion  by the  Senate,  which  requires  a  two-thirds  vote.    This  is
a  formidable hurdle.   To  achieve this  arduous  goal,  the  neces-
sary  first  step  toward  wider  settlement  and  relaxation  of ten-
sion,  all  the  contradictions  and  compromises  plainly  visible
in  the  Kennedy  program  and  official   family—and  there  will
be  more  of  them—are  justified.    The  President  can  be  freed
from  these  political  necessities  only  by  a  more  aroused  and
better   informed  public  opinion.     Never   was  there   greater
need  for  a broader peace movement than  now;  never was  there
a  President  more  open  to   fresh   ideas  and  more  ready  for
flexible   tactics.     But   the   success   of   such   a   movement   in
affecting  the  course  of  events  will  depend  on  its  unconven-
tionality,  its  freedom  from  pacifist  and  party  line  stereotypes
Essential  — Cuba  the  Danger  Point
A  Different  View  of  China's  Famine
"In  coldest  objectivity  and  as  a  deterrent  to   mud-
dled,  wishful   thinking   in  the  West,  three  final  vital
points   must   be  stressed   in  this  survey  of   Mao Tse-
tung's  first  real crisis  in  12 years of  power.   The plight
and  prospects  of  China's hard-toiling  650  million  people
would  be  far  worse  hi  the  recurrent  famine  crisis  had
the   regime   not   ruthlessly   promoted   its   uneven  but
dedicated   programme   of   massive  reconstruction  and
industrial  expansion. . . .  Wishful  anticipation in Amer-
ica  that  the  communes  will  be  dissolved  or  emasculated
is  downright  nonsense."
—"Mao   Orders  A  Retreat  to  Farms  to  Fight  Fam-
ine,"  London  Sunday   Times  dispatch  from   Hongkong
Jan.  29.
and   a  demonstrated   independence   of   Moscow.    What  we
need  is  not  an  organization  to  sell  any  particular  panacea  but
to  draw  more  and  more  people  into  discussing  the  problems
of  foreign  policy and  of  peace.    What  we  ourselves  need  most
to  lose  are  the  chains  of  our  old  cliches.
Any   President's   power  to  act  is  limited   by  the  people's
power  to  understand.    A  whole  series  of  unstable  situations
abroad  may  easily  upset  negotiations  on  critical  wider  issues.
It  would  be  good  if  public  opinion  understood  that  many  of
Mr.  Kennedy's  problems  abroad  are  less  the  result  of  Soviet
machinations  than  of  the  CIA's,  the  heritage  of  poor  State
Department  policy  and  melodramatic  thinking  at  home.     It
is  silly  to  talk  of  Laos,  the  Congo  and  Cuba  as  tests  of  Soviet
sincerity.    Mr.  Khrushchov  cannot  chase  the  Pathet  Lao  out
of  the  jungle  for  us  nor  turn  Mr.  Lumumba  into  a  willing
tool  of  Belgian-American big  business  and  he  certainly  can-
not  control  Fidel  Castro.    If  Dr.  Castro  were  really  a  Com-
munist,  he  could  be  turned  on  or  off  like  a  party  line  spigot,
but  he  is a  real  revolutionary  and  a  handful.    In  Cuba,  more
than  anywhere else,  there  is  need  for  private  negotiation;   the
alternative is bloody intervention direct  or  covert, which  would
enflame  the  hemisphere;  it  is  by  our  attitude  toward  Cuba
not   by  new  promises  of   new  aid, manana,  that   the   Latin
American  masses will  judge us.   It  is  in  this  Lilliputian  quar-
rel  that  I  see the  greatest  danger.
1960   Index   Available  Free  to  All  Readers  Including  Netcstand  Buyers  —  Send  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street   ..................
City   ......................
....................Zone............State....................
2/6/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Z«me............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement 7         Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  f.   Stone'*  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Clan  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  t,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  bnt  published  erery  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  independent weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  In  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:   110  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  tit  to   Europe:    $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED