I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jun05.pdf

============================================================

Douglas  on  the American  Character, P.  3
Dodd's  Pre-Summit  Bombshell  About  the  Pugwash  Meetings  Proves  A  Dud,   See  Page  Two
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  21
JUNE   5,    1961
io'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Not  One  New  Idea  in  the  President's  Travelling  Bag
Writing   as  the   President  flies  off  to   his  meetings   with
de  Gaulle,  Khrushchov  and  Macmillan,  the  salient  feature of
the  trip  is  that  there  is  not  a  single  new  idea  in  Mr.  Ken-
nedy's  travelling bag.  Though  the White  House  is  full  of  sup-
posed  fresh  new idea men, the  President's  diplomatic overnight
kit  seems  to  be  packed  with  ideological  underwear  left  over
from  the Truman-Acheson-Dulles  era;  artificial  fabrics  that can
quickly  be  washed  and  dried  but  have  long  lost  any  glossy
attraction  they  may have  had.   There  is nothing  visible  in  the
bag  which  can  meet  the  President's  twin  problems—the  crea-
tion  of  a new  confidence  among our  friends  and  a new  respect
among  our   antagonists.
Through  de  Gaulle's  Eyes
In  Paris,  Vienna  and  London,  the  talks  he.  faced   called
for  a  more  subtle  diplomacy than  is  likely  to  be  supplied  by
the  warmed  over  cold  war  cliches  with  which  he  had  been
regaling  his   domestic  cheering   section   (a   rather  apathetic
one)  in  Congress and  the  country in  the  week before the  trip.
Each  of  the  three  world  leaders  with  whom  he  was  to  parley
see  their  problems through  spectacles  of  which  the  American
public  is  hardly  aware.    De  Gaulle   is  unwilling  to  put  his
country  completely  at  the  mercy  of  moves  on  which  it  is  not
consulted;  he  sees  our  actions  in  Laos  as  not  only  recklessly
repeating  France's  own  errors  in  Southeast  Asia  but  rudely
designed  to  push  the  French  out  of  a  dwindling  sphere  of
influence;   he  regards  our   highly  advertised  anti-colonialism
as  a  means  whereby  we  take  over  the  colonial  world  in  our
own  way  from   our  own  allies,  as  we  took  over  Iran   from
Britain.    He  fears  that  we  will  take  over   from   France  in
North  Africa   by  the  same  means,  and  he  is  engaged   in  a
subtle  game.    He  hopes  to  obtain  Moscow's   support  for  an
Algerian  settlement  favorable  to  France  by  playing  on  Rus-
sia's  fears  of  a  renewed  struggle  in  which  North  Africa  will
be  torn  apart  between  the  U.S.  and  Red  China.    The  latter
is  already  dangerously  influential  with  the  Algerian  Left  and
our  own  military-intelligence  bureaucracy  has  long  been  sym-
pathetic  with   the  views  of   the  Algerian  rightists  and   the
French  army;  these  see the  Algerian  struggle  not  as  a  nation-
alist  uprising  but  as a  Communist  plot  to  outflank NATO  in
North  Africa.    De  Gaulle  visions  France  as  the  keystone of
a  new  imperial  Third  Force,  buttressed  on  one  side  by West
Germany  and  on  the  other  by  North  Africa  and  those  new
French  speaking  African  States  which  remain  in  the  French
zone  of  influence.   This  would  change  the  face  of  the  West-
ern  world  and  the  character of NATO.   This  is not  a problem
which   can  be   met   by  hearty-  handshakes   and   an   offer   of
Polaris  missiles.    And  if  Mr.  Kennedy  tries  in  these  circum-
stances'to  talk  with  de  Gaulle  about  his  new  Freedom   Doc-
trine,  that  lofty  relic  of  the  Eighteenth  Century  will  feel  that
The  Way  to  Peace
"I  remember   one   time   Henry   Stimson   and  I  were
talking   after   the   war  and  I   said,   'How   do  you   get
peace  in  the  world?'
" 'Well,'  he  said,  1  am not  sure  but I  think  the an-
swer  is  that  you bring  people  to  Washington  who  think
it   is   possible.    When  they   get   frustrated   and  tired,
they   go  home,   or  you  send  them  home  and  get   more
people  who  think  it  is  possible  and when  they  get  frus-
trated  and  tired,  send  them  home  and  get  more  people
who  think  it's  possible.'   He  said,  'Eventually  you  may
get  a  more  orderly  rational  world.'
"Now  we  have  been  here  four  months  and we  are  not
yet   frustrated,   we  are  not  yet  too  tired  and  we  still
think   things   are   possible.     If   the   time   ever   comes
when  we  don't  think  they  are  possible,  then  they  ought
to  get  rid  of  us."
—Undersecretary   of  State  Chester  Bowles,  on   ABC-
TV's   Issues  and  Answers,  May  28.
he  is  dealing  with  a  Boy  Scout.
In  London,  on  his  return  from  Vienna,  Mr.  Kennedy  will
find  himself  in  a  capital  whose  traditional   reflex  to  change
whether  at  home  or  abroad  has  been  one  of  accommodation.
The  British  Crown  has  survived  by  it;   the  British  Empire
remains  a  multi-racial  Commonwealth  thanks  to  it.     Some-
times,  as  at  Munich,  this  instinct  for  accommodation  betrays
the  British  into  unwise  policy  but  usually  it  has  worked.    It
worked  in  India  and  Malaya;  it's  working  in  Africa  and  the
West   Indies.    Associated  with  this  characteristic,  for   which
the  British  polity  has  a  genius,   is  its  balance-of-power   atti-
tude  toward  the  Continent.     Taken   together,  these   explain
Britain's  repeated   efforts  to  find  an  accommodation   with  the
Soviet  Union  lest  antagonism  lead  either  to  a  disastrous  war
or  to  a  prolonged  tension  in  which  Germany  will  again  grow
too  powerful  for  Western   Europe's  safety.    Hence  Britain's
repeated   efforts   via  some  scheme  for   disengagement   or   an
atom  free  zone  in  Central  Europe.    In  such  a  broader  con-
text,  allaying   her  own  fears  and  Russia's,  Britain  has  seen
the  one  way  to  solve  the  difficult  problem  of  an  isolated  Ber-
lin  in  a  divided  Germany.    But  Mr.  Kennedy,  in  the  wake
of  the  Cuban fiasco, seems  to  have  reverted  to  the  same  sterile
rigidity  on  Berlin  that  marked  U.S.   policy  when  Adenauer
and  Dulles  worked  in  tandem.
This  unwillingness   to  compromise  in  any  way  on   Berlin
does  not  promise  well  for  Mr.  Kennedy's   meeting  with  Mr.
Khrushchov.    The  latter,  by  his  long  hesitation   to  play  his
final  card  and  sign  with  the  East  Germans,   shows  how  dis-
trustful   he,   too,   is  of   the   Germans,   albeit  his   own.    But
some  way must  be  found  at  least  to  regularize,  if  not  to  solve,
the  problem  of  a  divided  Germany  or  it  will  make  war  more
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
8   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   June  5,  1961
Dodd  and  Senate  Internal  Security  Picture  U.S.   Scientists  As   Weak-Minded
Pre-Summit  Bombshell,  Smearing  the  Pugwash  Meetings, Turns  Out  A  Dud
The  tone  of  the  report  issued  May  28  by  the  Senate  In-
ternal   Security  Committee   on   the   Pugwash  Conferences  is
that  U.S.  scientists  are  a  gullible  lot  who  cannot  be  trusted
out  without: nursemaiding  by  skilled  ideological  sleuths.    On
page  67,  with  an  air  of  discovery,  the  report   says  that  the
Prof.  N.   A.  Talensky  who  took  part   in  these  conferences
was  really  Major  General  Talensky,  the  noted  Soviet military
theoretician.     "It   is   questionable,"   the   report    says   sadly,
"whether   the   American  scientists  who  attended   were   fully
aware  of  Talensky's  background  and  career."    But  to  answer
this  one  need  only  turn  to  Appendix  X  of  the  report  itself
which  provides  the  transcript  of  a  TV  round  table  discussion
at  MIT  Jan.  3  among  participants in  the  last  Pugwash  con-
ference  at  Moscow.    On  page   108,   one  finds  this  colloquy
about  the  Soviet   representatives:
Mr.   [Jerome]  Wiesner:  And  then  there  were  the   two
military  boys,  General  Talenskii   [sic]    and  Admiral  Isakov
who  obviously  had  an  important  part  to  play  in  the  devel-
opment  of  military  strategic  doctrines  in  the  Soviet  Union.
Mr.  [Richard  S.]  Leghorn:  They  are  now  military  scien-
tists,  but  one  is  an  ex-admiral  and  one  an  ex-general.
Mr.  Wiesner:  Talianski   [the   name  appears  spelled  three
different   ways  in  the  Senate  report—IPS]  actually  edits
their  military   journal,  I  believe.
Our  scientists not  only  were  aware  of  who  Talensky  was  but
also  knew  that  Academician  Isakov  had   been   an  Admiral,
which  is  one  the  Senate  committee  missed.
Not  Enough  to  Hate  Communism—
You've  Got  to  Love  the   FBI,   Too
"As  the  philosophical  initiator   of  the  London  appeal
and  the  subsequent  Pugwash  Conferences,   Lord   Bert-
rand    Russell    has   set   the   background    and   tone   of
these  Conferences.    It  is  true  that   since  1920,  Russell
has  carried  on  an  energetic  and  continuous  theoretical
struggle  against  the  forces  of  communism.    He  admits
that,   'For   a  while   after   the   death  of   Stalin,   I,   like
others,  had hopes  that  the  Soviet  regime was   improving.
These  hopes  have  been  shattered  by   events   in   Hun-
gary'.     Simultaneously,    however,   and  for   some  unex-
plained   psychological   reason,   the   British   philosopher
has  entered  upon  a  frenetic  crusade  against  our   Fed-
eral  Bureau  of  Investigation  and  the  American   courts.
In  this  crusade  he  demonstrates  close  ideological   kin-
ship  with  Cyrus  S.  Eaton,  fellow  initiator  of  the   Pug-
wash  Conferences."
—The  Pugwash  Conferences.      A   Staff    Analysis   re-
leased   by  Senate   Internal   Security   Committee,   May
28, p. 89.
The  Same  Mentality  on  Both  Sides
The  notion  that  it  is  dangerous  to  allow  East-West  meet-
ings  of  scientists  is  one  that  the  Internal  Security  Committee
shares  with  its  Soviet  counterparts.    Senator  Dodd,  in  his  in-
troduction  to  the  report  as  vice-chairman  of  the  committee,
says  our  scientists  go  to  these  meetings  "with  an. open  mind,
full  of  trust and  a  desire  to  communicate and  cooperate.    The
Communist   scientist  comes  to   these  conferences  with  care-
fully   defined  political  directives."    Senator  Dodd  concludes,
however,  that   "given   the  facts,  and  properly  prepared,   the
free  scientist  can  be  more  than  a  match  for  the  Communist
scientist."    There  is  a  mirror  image  parallel  between  Dodd's
words  and  those  of  a  Czech  Communist  magazine  quoted  at
page  86  of  the  report.    This  says,  "In   some  countries,  espe-
cially  in  the  USA,  they  use the  scientist  in  an  organized  man-
ner  to  establish  contacts  with  scientists  and  educators  in  the
Peoples   Democratic  countries,  and  thus  they  try  to  create  a
channel  for  the  infusion  of  a  foreign  ideology  into  the  coun-
tries  of  the  socialist  camp. ...  It  is,  however,  necessary  to
help  our  scientists, to  arm  them with  arguments, creative ideas
of   scientific  socialism  and  political   information.    Only  then
will  they  be  able  to  resist.  .  .  ."    The  mentality is  the  same.
Senator  Dodd  says  he  is  sure  our  scientist  can  win  in  such
a  contest  "precisely  because  he  is  not  the  captive  of  an  in-
flexible  political   dogma."     But   the   impact  of   this   report
is  to  warn  our  scientists  that  to  depart  from   inflexible   cold
war  dogma  is to  risk  a smearing by his  committee.   Every  gen-
erous  impulse  toward  peace  is  presented  as  sinister.   Bertrand
Russell,  the  noblest  philosopher   of  our  time,  is  pictured  as
the  tool  of  a  conspiracy.    The   story  of   Soviet  espionage  is
rehashed.    The  shadow  of  the  witch  hunt  begins  to  fall  in
these  pages  on  two  of  the  President's  closest  advisers, Jerome
Wiesner  and  W.  W.  Rostow,  both  participants  in  the  Pug-
wash  meetings.    Cyrus  Eaton  is  smeared  again  for   helping
break  the  ice  between  East  and  West,  and  for  having  dared
to  criticize  the  head  of  our  secret  police.    And  Dodd  in  this
report  pursues  his  vendetta   against   Linus  Pauling   and   the
campaign  for   cessation  of   nuclear   testing.     Fortunately  the
report,  though  intended  to  be a  pre-summit  bombshell,  turned
out  to  be  a  dud.    The  press  gave  it  scant  attention;  the  old
McCarthy  odor  was  too  strong.
How  An  Innocent  U.S.   Scientist  Was
"Unfortunately,  the  subcommittee   has  not  been  apprised
in  any  detail  of  the  proceedings  and  the  general  social  at-
mosphere  which   prevailed  at  the  Pugwash  conferences   as
a  result   of  Cyrus  Eaton's  hospitality.    But  we  do  have  a
description  of  the  techniques  employed  by  Soviet  scientists
in  their  dealings  with  their  American   conferees.    We  cite
as  a  possible  pattern  the  story  told  by  Dr.  George  D.  Cart-
wright,  an  American  meteorologist  who  accompanied  a   Sov-
iet  expedition  to  the  Antarctic  in  1958.    We  quote  in  part
from  his  article  in  the  Saturday  Evening  Post:
" 'I   am  a  meteorologist.    My  primary   interests  are  in
forecasting  weather. ...  On Christmas  Day  I  was  still  the
same  quiet,   rather   retiring  meteorologist. ...  In  August
—The  Pugwash  Conference,    A   Staff    Analysis   released
Seized  by  A  Sturdy  Russian  Waitress
I  had  been  assigned  by  our  Government   as  the  first  Amer-
ican  to   accompany   a  Russian   scientific    expedition   to   the
south  polar  regions. ...
"'How  could  I  foresee  on  December  25  that  within   four
days,  half  seasick  and  carrying  more  vodka  than  was  good
for  me,  I  would  be  struggling  through  a  toast  in  Russian
...  or that  at  the big  'formal'  New  Year's  Eve  celebration
aboard  ship,  in  heavy  weather,  I  would  actually  be  dancing.
.  .  .  Late  in the  evening,  I  was  seized—despite  my protests
—by  a  tall,  sturdy  young  Russian  waitress. ..."
"Dr.  Cartwright   apparently   suffered   no  ill   effects   from
this  treatment,  but  it  is  conceivable  that  some  weaker  scien-
tist  might  not  be  so  fortunate."
by  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Subcommittee,  May  28,  p.  86.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   June  5,  1961
But   Frankfurter-Harlan   "Balancing"  Endangers  Separation  of  Church  and  State
Supreme  Court  Majority  Follows  Madison  In  Upholding  Sunday  Blue Laws
Though   Sunday  blue   laws   have   been   a   feature   of   the
American  landscape  since  the  first  days  of  theocratic  rule  in
Puritan  New   England   and   every  State  but   Alaska   restricts
business  activity  on   Sunday,  the   Supreme  Court   had   never
passed  on  their  constitutionality  before  last  week.   The  closest
the   Court  came  to  the  question  was  in   1950   when   it   dis-
missed  an  appeal  from  a  unanimous   decision   by  the   New
York  Court  of  Appeals  upholding  the  conviction  of  a  Jewish
butcher   for   selling   meat   on   Sunday   (People   v.   Priedman,
302  NY  75).    At  that  time  the  Court  merely  held  in  a  per
curiam  opinion  that  it  saw  no  Federal   question.    This  im-
plied  as  the  Court  ruled  explicitly   last  Monday,  that  Sunday
closing  laws  do  not  conflict  with  the  First  Amendment,  which
says  Congress   "shall  make  no  law  respecting   an   establish-
ment  of  religion,  or prohibiting  the free  exercise  thereof.  . .  ."
Two  Categories  of  Cases
Four   appeals   from   three   separate  States  were  before   the
Court.     These   fell   into   two  categories.     One   involved   the
general  question of  whether  a  Sunday closing  law is a  religious
or  a  civil  regulation.    The  Court   decided  8  to  1—only  Mr.
Justice   Douglas   dissenting—that   it   was   civil   and   secular.
The  other  category  of  cases  involved  the  question  of  whether
Sunday  closing  laws  are  unconstitutional  when  they  place  a
burden   on   sects—Jewish,   Seventh   Day   Adventist—which
keep   other   days  than   Sunday  as  their   Sabbath.     Here   the
Court  split  6-to-3,  Brennan  and  Stewart  joining  Douglas   in
dissent.
These   are  close  questions;   it  is  not   surprising   that   they
required  nine  separate  opinions   adding  up  to  some   50,000
words.     The   Justices   were   interpreting    constitutional    pro-
visions  born  of  an  atmosphere  strikingly  different   from  our
own  time  with   its  suffocating   religious   cant.     Indeed   were
anyone  to  express  himself   today  in  the  anti-clerical  way  of
Jefferson   and   Madison,   the   fathers   of   religious   liberty   in
The  Pictures  Came  Out  Fine—
Only  the  Invasion  Was  Blurred
"Laughlin  AFB,  Texas—Nothing  has  been  said,  but
a  U-2  photo  plane—the  same  type  that  did  high  alti-
tude  reconnaissance  over  Russia—flew  over  Cuba  just
before  the  abortive  rebel  landings.    The  mission—one
of  the  last  from  this  soon-to-be-closed base—gave  the
CIA  a  set   of  near-perfect  pictures  of   Cuban airfields
(and  the  planes  on  them)  and  military  bases."
—"Pentagon  Whispers",  Newsweek,  May   Z2
America,  he  would  be  regarded  as  subversive.    The  most  hal-
lowed  precedent  on  the  side  of  the  majority  is  that   Madison
himself  sponsored  a  bill  in Virginia  "for  Punishing  .  .  .  Sab-
bath   Breakers"   and   saw  no   inconsistency   between   Sunday
closing   laws   and   the   absolute   separation   of   Church   and
State  for  which  he  fought  successfully  in  Virginia  and  later
in  Congress.    The  view  had   already   been  well   established
by  the  time  of  Blackstone  that  Sunday  rest  laws  had  a  secular
social  utility  and  this  seems  to  have  been  the  view  of  Madison.
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  with  Mr.  Justice  Harlan   did   not,
however,  agree  with  the  reasoning  of  the  Chief   Justice  and
the  majority.   Instead  of  finding  a  way  out  as  they  did  by
declaring  that  the  Sunday  day  of  rest  is  now  a  secular  insti-
tution,  Frankfurter  and  Harlan  applied   familiar  "balancing"
techniques.    They  found  that  in  these  cases  "the  impediment
to  which  the  regulation   subjects  those  whose  religious   prac-
tices  are  curtailed  by  it"  was  "demonstrably  outweighed"  by
"the  value  to  the  state  of  achieving  the  object  of  a particular
regulation."    This   reduces   the   First   Amendment's    explicit
language  on  religion  (as  Frankfurter  and  Harlan  have  already
reduced  its  plain  language  on  freedom  of  press,   speech  and
assembly)  to  the  cloudy  vagueness  of  the  due  process  clause.
Here  lies  danger  to  separation  of  church  and  state  whenever
a  majority may  determine  that  some  other  consideration   "out-
weighs"   it.
Mr.  Justice  Douglas:  What  We  Americans  Have  Become  and What  We  Could  Be
"While  Americans  have  freedom   that  few  other  people
ever  knew,   the  cliches  that  Madison  Avenue  exploits  are
distortions.  .   _.  .  We  speak  of  the  free  press.    Yet  a  man
without  ten  million  dollars  would  have  a  difficult   time  to
establish  a  printing  plant   adequate   to  compete  with  our
prominent  papers.  .  .  .  Big  government,  big  business,   big
unions  mean  that  men  and  women  more  and  more  march
to  a  tune  played  by  a  few  superiors.
"We have been so vastly  regimented  that  almost  overnight
opinion  is  shaped to  fit  a  synthetic  image.   Mossadegh—the
first  man  who  brought  democracy  to  Persia's  villages  and
who  strived  to  get  a  constitutional  monarchy—became  over-
night  at  the  hands  of  our  press  a  clown,  a  demagogue,  a
neo-communist.     Kassim—an   ardent  nationalist—was  pic-
tured  as   a.  tool  of  communism,  when  in  truth  communism
suffered   in   his  regime  the   worst  setback  it   has  known.
Castro  became the  symbol  of  evil.  .  .  .
"We  have   also   suffered   a  decline  in  ethics.   .  .  .  The
Pentagon   official   looks  forward  to   the   day   when  he   is
Vice   President  of   the   company   doing  business  with  the
Pentagon.    The  forester  looks  forward  to  the  time  when
he  adds  to  his  retirement pay  by  getting  on  the  payroll  of
the  lumber  company that  he  is  supposed  to  keep  in  bounds
while  he  is  an  official  of  the  Forest  Service.  .  .  .
"Truman  and  Eisenhower  taught  us  to  find  security  in
arms,  not  in  ideas.    For  years  we  took  massive  doses  of
tranquilizers  that  helped  us  think  that  if  our  society  were
scourged   of   the   so-called  'subversive'  we   could  be   safe
behind  our  Maginot  Lines  of  bombs,  bombers,  and   fighter
planes.  .  .  .  The world, we  thought,  must  be  remade in our
image.    The  man  out  of  step  with  American  free  enter-
prise  was  a  dangerous  man.   That  intolerance  of  ours  was
close   competitor  to  the   communist's;   each   demanded   its
particular  type  of  conformity.  .  .  .
"I  hope  that  America's  only  dream  of   empire  will  be
the  common  good  of  humanity.    I  hope  that  America  will
come  to  realize  that  her  strength  is  not  in  fire  power but
in  ideas  of  justice,  tolerance,  equality.   One  expression  of
tolerance  would  be  feeding  the  people  of  the  world—even
those  who  have  been  taught  to  despise  us.    One  place  to
start  is  Red  China  where  the  rice  bowls  are  getting  empty.
Offering  to  feed  even  those  who  differ  with  us  would recast
America  in  the  image  of  Lincoln—the  man  who  set  us  a
standard   known  the  world  over  but  almost  forgotten  at
home,  'with  malice  toward  none,  with  charity  for  all'."
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas,  at  a  Seminar  on  the  American
Character,  Center   for   Study    of   Democratic   Institutions,
Washington,  May  29.
8  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   June   5,  1961
Madison  Avenue  Nonsense About  Our  Being  A  Revolutionary  Power,  Too
(Continued   -from   Page   One)
difficult   to   avoid.     The   problem   is  not   solved   merely  by
standing  firm  on  West  Berlin;   the   situation   is  intrinsically
infirm;  negotiation  should  be  seen  as  a  chance  to  make  West
Berlin's  position  safer  by  stabilizing  the  whole  German pic-
ture.    This  might  conceivably  be  bought  by  the  recognition
of  East  Germany.    De  facto  recognition  will   be  the   result
anyway  if  Moscow  signs  a  separate  pact;  we  are  not   going
to  war  if  East  Germans  behave  correctly  and  sign  the  passes
for  traffic  to  Berlin.
Both  Sides  Want  to  Dominate  the  World
The  other  two  main  problems  which  Mr.  Kennedy  had  to
discuss  with  Mr.  Khrushchev  also   require  a  flexibility  the
former  seemed  to  promise  in  the  early  days  of  his  Admin-
istration   but  which  vanished  after  the  Cuban  invasion  failed.
Much   is  made  on   our   side  of   the   fact  that   the  Russians
and  their  allies  see wars  of  colonial  liberation  as  "just  wars"
exempt   from  their   general   stand   for   peaceful   co-existence;
we  see this  as  evidence  of  a  Communist  plot  to  dominate  the
world  by  "nibbling  away"  (such  metaphors  reflect  the  child-
ish   nightmares  which   underlie   our   foreign   policy)   at   its
colonial  edges.    But  we,  too, see  these  struggles  as  inevitable
and  just—otherwise  why  did  we  vote   against   Portugal   on
Angola?    And  we,  too,  seek  to  control  these  areas  of  change
in  a  similar  ambition  to  dominate  the  world,  to  make  it  safe
for  free  enterprise,  which  is  really  what  Mr.  Kennedy's  new
Freedom   Doctrine   means.     In   Laos,   it   was  we,   not   the
Russians,  who  began  the  process  of  subverting  a  neutral  gov-
ernment  under  Souvanna Phouma  and  forced  him  to  call  for
Russian  aid  when  the  Thais  imposed  a  blockade  against  his
capital.    Mr.  Kennedy  cannot  talk  to  Mr.  Khrushchev  about
this  in  the  terms  of  our  propaganda  which  has  reversed  the
truth  about  Laos; they  may not  be  able  to  communicate at all.
The  most  difficult  problem  seems insoluble without  a  differ-
ent   international  climate—this   is  the   Russian  insistence  on
vetoes  in  international machinery.   In  all  objectivity we  must
recognize  that  this  is.  at  least  in  part,  a  reaction  to  a situation
in  which  the  Russians  have  been  in  a  permanent minority in
international   organizations  we   control   and   particularly   to
the  humiliating  way  the  UN  drove  the  Russians  out  of  the
A  Negro  Paper  Replies  to   'Cool   Oft'
"Mr.   Kennedy  with  the   issuance   of   his   statement
Wednesday   appears  bent  on  taking  on  the  role   of   a
man  who  kicks  over  the  pail  after  milking the  cow.   In
so  many  words,  young  Mr.  Kennedy  asks  Americans
to  abrogate  their  constitutional   rights  to  the  red-necks
and  ruffians  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi.    'Delay  trav-
elling   through   these  two  states,'  he  asks,   'until  the
present   state  of  confusion   and  danger  has  passed  and
an  atmosphere   of   reason   and  normalcy  has   been   re-
stored.'
"This   is   disappointing   advice.     It   is   especially   so
coming  from  the  nation's  top  law  enforcement   officer.
If  there  were  a  series  of  bank  robberies,   Mr.  Kennedy
would  not  dare  ask  the  banks  in  any  given  section   to
close."
—Editorial  in  Washington  Afro-American,  May  27
us  in  the  nuclear  test  talks;  an  agreement  is  impossible  with
a  Russian  veto;  the  Senate  would  never  accept  it.    But  the
Russians  are  unwilling   to  open   their   country  to   inspection
unless  assured  that   real   disarmament  will   follow,   and  Mr.
Kennedy  in  again  beefing  up  the  military  budget   shows  less
interest   than  ever  in  disarmament.    We   must  never  forget
that  the  arms  face,  the  cold  war  and  world  tension  represent
the  path  of  least  resistance  for  an  American  president  seeking
some  way  to  maintain  a  high  level  of   economic  activity  at
home  and   of   colonial  expenditure  abroad.     This   is   visible
again  in  the  President's  new  message  to  Congress  which  was,
we  suppose,  designed  to  frighten  the  Russians.   But  the  cold
war  Mr.   Kennedy  threatens   is  a  policy  that  failed  before,
and  for which  they are better  prepared  now.  It  doesn't  frighten
or  impress  the  Russians.   They  and  our  allies  would  be  more
impressed  if  we  had  the  resolution  to  resume  relations  with
Cuba  and   win   it   away   from   Moscow,   or   if   Mr.  Kennedy
instead  of  talking  about  his  freedom  doctrine  for  export  were
personally  to  campaign  for  it  in  the  South.    Above all, after
our  recent  attempt  to  destroy  Latin  America's  first  real  revo-
lution   in   years   by  force,   let's   not   continue   this   Madison
Avenue  nonsense  about  our  being  a -revolutionary power,  too.
1776  was  a  long  time  ago  and  if  Thomas  Jefferson  ever  came
back   to   today's   Washington,   he'd soon   be  subpoenaed   as
un-American.
Congo  and  let  the Belgians back in.   Now  this begins to  haunt
Many   Thanks  to  Those  Readers  Actively  Getting  Us  New  Subscriptions   —   We  Ask  Others  To   Try   It,   Too
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Street   ............
City   ............._..
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name   ..
Street   .............
City  ........... _
Shall  we  send
S  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.........................Zone.......~...State.......... ..........
8/5/61
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
.........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?          Yes  Q   No  D
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone'i  Weekly.   Entered  a»  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C,.  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  tiie  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  ts  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in
Canada;   »10  elsewhere.    Ail   Mail  rates:   116   to   Europe:   $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED