I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961oct09.pdf

============================================================

Soviet  Testing  Poisons Mankind's  Hopes,  P.  3
On  Those  Private  Shelters:  Are  We  Preparing  to  Fight  the  Russians,  Or  Each  Other?
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX.  NO.  37
OCTOBER   9,   1961
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
An  Appalling  Choice  to  Head  the  CIA
The  CIA  is an  intelligence organization  run  from  the  rather
stuffy   conventional  wealthy  business  man's  point  of  view.    It
is  staffed,  from  the  top  down,  by Wall  Streeters,  Ivy  League
dillerantes,   superannuated   Colonels   from   the   armed   forces
and   scholars  whose  loyalty  can  be  kept  certified  only  by  a
fanatical   anti-Communism.    The  main  lesson   of   the  Cuban
fiasco  is  that  an  organization  of  this  kind  cannot  be  relied
upon  to  know  what  ordinary people  are  thinking.    But  Presi-
dent  Kennedy  does  not  seem  to  have  learned  that  lesson  at
a.11.    In  replacing  Allen  W.  Dulles  by  John  A.  McCone,  he
picked  a  man   who   is  if  anything   considerably   less  literate
and   less  knowledgeable   than  Dulles,  and   fully  as  incapable
of  understanding the  resentments  and  the  aspirations that  are
the  dynamic  factors  in  today's   world.
Fortunes   Built  on  War  and  Arms  Race
Mr.  McCone's  rising  fortunes,  financial  and  political,  have
been   associated   with  the  war  and   the  arms  race.     In    1937
he  helped  to  form  the  Bechtel-McCone-Parsons    Corporation,
a  construction   and  engineering   firm.   In  January,   1941,  he
organized   and  became   the  president  of  the  California   Ship-
building  Company;   the   Bechtel   concern   was  then   given   a
management  contract to  run  the  shipbuilding company.    After
the  war  the  General  Accounting   Office   told  a  House  Mer-
chant   Marine   Committee   investigation   that   the   company
had  made  $44,000,000  on  an  investment  of   H 100,000.    The
same   committee  a   few   months   later   complained   that   Mr.
McCone's  company was  paid  $2,500,000  by the  government  to
take   over   a   shipyard   costing   $25,000,000    and   containing
surplus  material  costing  $14,000,000.
Mr.  McCone  did  not  confine  his  interests  to  shipbuilding.
Becfitel-McCone-Parsons   also   built   a   huge   installation   at
Birmingham,  Alabama,  during  the  war  for  the  Air  Force  and
became  a  leading  construction  firm  for  the  AEC.    Mr.  Mc-
Cone  also  organized   a  private  shipping  company  which   did
a  big  transport  business   for  some  of  the  largest  AEC  con-
tractors,  firms  like  Union  Carbide and  Dow  Chemical.    These
diverse  enterprises had  a  common  stake  in  armament  expendi-
ture,  and  Mr.  McCone  made  his  debut  in  public  service  as
a  member  of  Truman's  Air  Policy  Commission  which  in   1948
advocated   a  stepped   up   indefinitely   prolonged   arms   race.
The   report   became  ^the  bible  of   the   aviation   lobby.     His
views  recommended  him  to  the  alarmist  Secretary  of  Defense
Forrestal  who  made  Mr.  McCone  his  deputy.    In  1950-51  he
was  Under  Secretary   of  the  Air  Force.
With  the  Democrats  out,  Mr.  McCone  returned  to  Cali-
fornia,  and   Republican   politics.    There  his  principal,  asso-
ciations,  political  and  religious,   were  of  the  right.     He  be-
came  a  major   money  raiser  for   former   Senator  Knowland,
often   referred  to  as  the  Senator  from  Formosa,  and  he  was
Next  Step
We   wondered,   as   many   Democrats   must,  why   the
President  is  picking  so  many  Republicans  for  the  top
jobs  of  his  Administration.     It   has  been  explained  to
us  now  by  Mr.  James  Reston,  who  sees  Mr. Kennedy
regularly.     In   a  jubilant   report   over   the  President's
cleverness  in  naming  John  A.  McCone  to  head  the  CIA
(New   York  Times,   Sept.   29),   Mr.  Reston  says  Mr.
Kennedy   is  making   it   hard  for   the   G.O.P.   to   attack
his   foreign   policy  by   putting   Republicans   into   key
posts  dealing  with  security  and  foreign  affairs: McCone
at  the  CIA, Wm. C. Foster to  run  the  new  Disarmament
Agency,  Lucius Clay  as  his  special  emissary  to  Berlin,
Douglas   Dillon  as  Secretary   of   the  Treasury.    "How
can   Barry  Goldwater,"  Mr.  Reston  exults,   "find   fault
with  the  Administration's  intelligence  and  determina-
tion  when  two  solid  Republicans like  Allen  Duties  and
John   McCone  are  running  the  CIA?"    Now  that  Mr.
Reston  has  opened  our  eyes   to  this  strategy,  we  are
overcome   with  admiration,  too,   and  anxious   to  con-
tribute   to   it.      Wouldn't   it   be   even   more  devilishly
clever  if  Mr. Kennedy  just  went  ahead  and  made Barry
Goldwater  Secretary   of  State?
close  to  Cardinal  Mclntyre  of   Los  Angeles,  not  one  of   the
more  liberal  members  of  the  American  hierarchy.     In    1958,
Admiral  Strauss  picked  Mr.  McCone  to  succeed  him  as  chair-
man   of   the   Atomic   Energy   Commission;    they   shared    the
same  hostility  to  public  power   and   to  cessation   of   nuclear
testing.    At  his  nomination  hearing,  one  of  the  exhibits  was
an  angry  letter  Mr.  McCone   had  sent  in  1956,  as  a  Ca/tech
trustee,  to  ten  Caltech  faculty  members   (including   Harrison
Brown  and  a  Nobel  laureate  in  physics)  for  releasing  a  state-
ment  supporting  Adlai  Stevenson's  proposal  for   a  ban  on
H-bomb   testing.     Mr.   McCone,   a   friend   and   admirer   of
Edward  Teller,  accused  the  ten  professors  of  echoing  Soviet
propaganda  in  what  he  called  an  attempt  "to  create  fear  in
the  minds  of  the  uninformed  that   radioactive   fallout   from
H-bomb  tests  endangers  life."
To  control  the  nation's  intelligence  is  to  be  in  a   position
to shape  decisions of  war  and  peace.    The  CIA  is an  enormous
bureaucracy,   with   millions   at   its   disposal   to   corrupt   men
abroad  and  perhaps  at  home;  a  rival,  shadow  State   Depart-
ment  with  a  foreign   policy  even  less  enlightened.    Its   net-
work  of  cloak-and-dagger  operatives  abroad  move  in  a  murky
realm   where  provocations   can  make   peace  untenable.     The
U-2   was  one   sample.     The   Joint   Intelligence    Board   over
which  Mr.  McCone  will  also  preside  coordinates  all  the  mul-
tifarious   snooper   organizations   of   our   governmeent—there
must  be  half  a  dozen  beside  the  CIA  and  the  FBI—and  also
our  growing  para-military  agencies  which  can  engage  secretly
in  war.    Mr.  Kennedy  could  not  have  made  a  more  appalling
choice  for  so  crucial  a  post.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f-F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 9, 1961
On  Private  Shelters:  Preparing  to  Fight  the  Russians,  or  Each  Other?
Long  before  the  next  war  comes,  it  is  already  damaging
us  as  a  people.    A  kind  of  disintegration  is  making  itself  felt,
in  the  relation  of  State with  State, city  with  city,  and  neighbor
with  neighbor.   As  clearly  as  on  a  thermometer, one  may  see
(and  feel  the  chill)   of  a  sharp  fall  in  moral  sensibilities.    In
August,   Nevada   was   talking   of   mobilizing   a   5,000   man
militia  to  "protect  our  homes,  our   people"   from   California
refugees   fleeing   the  aftermath   of   thermonuclear explosions.
Now   a  friend  has  sent  us  a  clipping  from  the  San  Francisco
Chronicle  of  Sept.  23  which  reports a  speech  made  in Bakers-
field,   Kern   County,   California,    by   the   Bakersfield    Police
Chief,  just  appointed   Civil  Defense  co-ordinator  of   all  law
enforcement  agencies  in  the  county.    He   is  described  as  tell-
ing   the  Greater  Bakersfield   Chamber   of   Commerce  that  in
the  event  of  war  "the  greatest  danger  to  Bakersfield   would
not  be  from  an  atomic  bomb  or  its  fallout  but  from  the  hun-
dreds  of  thousands" of  survivors  fleeing  from  the  Los  Angeles
area.     He  said  it  would  be  the   job  of   his  law  enforcement
officers  to  stop  them  south  of  town  by  force  and  divert  them
to  the  desert.    "We  have plenty  of  them,"  he  said  meaning-
fully  of  law  enforcement  officers,  "and  they  are  expendable."
Neighbor  Changes  It  Meaning
This  sudden  appearance of  suspicion  and  hostility  between
state  and  state,  city  and  city,  is also  making  itself  felt  between
neighbors.    "Neighbor"   was  always  a  word  which  rang with
kindness  in  our  American  vocabulary;  it  conjured   up   a  pic-
ture  of  a  housewife borrowing  a  cup  of  flour,  it  recalled  re-
joicing  in  the  marriage  of  the  girl  next  door  as  if  she  were
one's   own   daughter.     Suddenly   neighbor   no   longer   con-
notes  a  friend,  but  begins  to  seem  a  potential enemy.   Only  a
few   weeks  ago  Time  magazine  (Aug.   18)   was  citing   -with-
out   disapproval  a   Chicago  suburbanite   who   was   going   to
mount  a  machine  gun   in  his  bomb  shelter  to  keep  out  un-
welcome  neighbors,  and  a  Texas  business man  who  was  stock-
ing  his  shelter with  tear  gas  for  the  same  purpose.    A  priest
in   the   Jesuit  weekly  America   (see  box  on  this  page)   now
declares  it  is  moral  to  use  violence,  even  to  kill,  in  order  to
keep  others  out  of  one's  shelter.     Betty  Beale,  one  of   those
society   columnists,  reports   from   the   cocktail  circuit   in   the
Washington   Post  Sept.   24  that   a-  CIA   official   said  shelters
were  being  installed  at  night  in  Washington.    He  said  neigh-
bors   curious   about  the  gaping   excavations  in  the  backyard
next  door  were  palmed  off with  casual  references  about  a  new
furnace  or  leaky  plumbing.    But  when  it's  time  for  the   tell-
tale  evidence  to  be  brought   in,  they  tell  the   bomb   shelter
companies  to  sneak  in  under  cover  of   darkness  lest   "come
Please  Father,  Just  One  More   Question?
"Indeed  in  the  Christian  view,  there  is  great  merit
in  turning  the  other  cheek  and  bearing  evils  patiently
out  of   the  love  of  God.   But  ...      I  doubt  that  any
Catholic   moralist   would   condemn   the   man   who  used
available  violence  to  repel  panicky   aggressors   plying
crowbars  at  the  shelter  door. ...  It  would  be  a nor-
mal   exercise  of   prudence   to   conceal   the   entrance,   if
feasible.   .   .   .   Does   prudence   also   dictate  that   you
have  some  'protective  devices'  in  your  survival  kit,  e.g.
a  revolver.  .  .  ?    That's  for  you  to  decide.  .  .  .  But
as  Civil  Defense  Coordinator  Keith  Dwyer  said  in  the
Time   story:   'There's   nothing   in   the   Christian  ethic
which  denies  one's  right   to  protect  oneself   and  one's
family."
—Father  L.  C.  McHugh,   S.J.,   Associate   Editor  of
the  Jesuit   weekly,  America, writing  cm "Ethics  at  the
Shelter  Doorway,"  in  its  issue  of  Sept.  30.
And  what  if  the  prudent   householder,   Father,  were
to  pull   the   body   of  just   one   (1)   of  these   "panicky
aggressors"  into  the  shelter  where  it  wouldn't  get  too
radioactive  to  be  edible  in  case  of  need?
the  day  they  need  it"  neighbors  may  try  to  get  in  the  shelter,
too.                                                                                                                     ;
Russians  are  far  away,  almost  an  abstraction,  characters  in
a   newspaper   serial   story,  people  you  have   never   seen,   not
quite  real.    If  there  is  an  exchange  of  thermonuclear  bombs
between   the   U.S.   and   U.S.S.R.,   it  may  be  months,   if   not
years,  before  either  will  know  what  has  happened   in  the  far
away   reaches  of   the   other.     The   deadly   exchange   already
begins  to  seem  impersonal,  like  a  hurricane.    The  menace  .is
the  refugee  from  the  next  state,  the  hungry  survivor  from
the  nearby  city, above  all  the  man  next  door.   Your  neighbor,
even   before  the   bombs   fall,   becomes   your  No.   1   enemy.
This  is  what  the  private  shelter  program   does  to   us.'    It
puts  every  man  on  his  own.    It  says  the  government  can  start
a  war  but  it  is  up  to  the  individual to  fend  for  himself.    It
envisages  the  survival  of  those  -who  can  best  afford   a  shelter.
Its  philosophy  is  the  philosophy  of  devil  take  the  hindmost.
It  is  rugged  individualism  carried  out  to  the  point  where  it
sacrifices  the  sense  of  nationhood   and  the  feeling  of  ne,,gh-
borliness.     A  community, a  nation,  is  more  than   a  nun.ber
of   people.     It  is  a  living  thing  bound  together  by  shared
experiences,  values,  interests  and   devotion.    Dissolve  tl  ese,
put  every man  on  his  own,  make every other  man  his potential
enemy,  and  you have  destroyed  what  you  talked  of  defending.
Something  precious, something  we  liked  to  think  of  as  Ameri-
can  in  the  best  sense,  is  already  slipping  from  us.
STATEMENT  BEQUIBED  BY  THE  ACT  OF  AUGUST  24,  1912,  AS
AMENDED  BY  THE   ACTS  OF  MARCH  3,  1933,  AND  JULY  2,  1948
(Title  39,  United  States  Code,  Section  233)  SHOWING  THE  OWNEB-
SH1P   MANAGEMENT,  AND  CIRCULATION OF  I.  F.  Stone's  Week-
Iv   published   48   times   a   year   at   Washington,   D.   C.   for   1960.    1.  The
names  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing  editor,  and
business  managers  are:  Publisher,  Editor,  and  Managing  Editor,  I.
F.  Stone,  6818  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C;  Business
Manager  Esther  M.  Stone,  6618  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.  Washington,
DC*.  The  owner  la:  (If  owned  by  a  corporation,  its  name  ana
address  must  be  stated  and  also  immediately   thereunder  the   names
and  addresses  of  stockholders  owning  or  holding' 1  percent  or  more
of  total  amount  of  stock.   If  not  owned  by  a  corporation,  the  names
and  addresses  of  the  individual  owners  must  be  given.    If  owned  by
a  partnership  or  other  unincorporated  firm,  its  name  and  address,  as
well  as  that  of  each  individual  member,  must  be  given.)    I.  F.   Stone,
8618    Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    Esther  M.  Stone,
5618  Nebraska   Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington,  P.   C.   Cella  M.  Gilbert,
Cambridge,   Mass.    Jeremy   -T.  Stone,  Menlo  Park,  Calif.    Christopher
D.  Stone,  New  Haven,  Conn.   3.  The  known  bondholders,  mortgagees,
and  other  security  holders  owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more  of
total   amount  of   bonds,   mortgages,   or   other  securities   are:   n»ne
4.  Paragraphs  2  and  3  include,  In  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  se-
curity   holder  appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustee  or
In  any  other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation,
for   whom  such   trustee   is   acting;  also   the   statements  in   the  $"•
paragraphs  show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and  belief  as  to  the  cir-
cumstances  and  conditions   under  which  stockholders  and  security
holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trus-
tees,   hold  stock   and  securities   In  a  capacity   other   than  that  of  a
bona  flde  owner.     B.  The  average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of
this  publication  sold  or  distributed,  through  the  malls  or  otherwise,
to  paid  subscribers  during  the  12  months  preceding  the  date  shown
above  was:   (This  information  id  required   from  daily,  weekly,  semi-
weekly   and   triweekly   newspapers   only.)    1S.581.   Signed.   I.    F.   Stone.
Sworn   to   and   subscribed  before   me   <bu   SOth   day    of    September   1861.
Alvin  Bernstein,  Notary  Public,  Washington,  D.  C.    (My  commission
expires 7-31-1*62.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October    !>,  1961
Continued  Russian  Tests  Poison  Mankind's  Hopes  As  Well  As  Its  Aii
How  to  sum  up  the  present   stage  in  disarmament   negotia-
tions?    Perhaps  the  first  point  in  an  objective  assessment  is
that   it  is  politically  necessary   for   both   great   Powers,   while
preparing  for  war,  to  talk  disarmament.    This  necessity  is  im-
posed  by  world   opinion.     Hence   the   characteristic  ambival-
ence   of   policy   in   both   Washington    and   Moscow.      Here,
thanks  to  strenuous  efforts   by  the  President   and   by  John   J.
McCloy,   Congress   was  miraculously  prevailed  upon   to  pass  a
ilaw  creating  a  U.S.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament  Agency,
for   the  first  time  a  separate   branch   of  the  government   has
been   established  to  deal  with  all  the   problems   involved   in
Hat's Off
To  Literary  Gazette   in   Moscow  for   its   courage  in
publishing   and   to   Soviet   poet   Yevgeni   Yevtushenko
for  writing  his  ode  on  Babi  Yari,   the  ravine  outside
Kiev  where  the  Nazis   massacred   140,000  Jews  during
the   occupation.    That   universal   and   unmatched  con-
science  which  was  the  glory  of  Russian  pre-revolution-
ary  literature  makes  itself  heard  again  in  Yevtushen-
ko's   protest   against   an   anti-Semitism   which  is   still
endemic   and  widespread   in   the   Soviet   Union  despite
40  years  of  the  Revolution.    The  scandal  is  that  there
are   no  plans   to   build   a   memorial  at   Babi   Yari   but
that  the  ravine  is  in  process   of  being  filled  in  for  a
sport  field  and  that  Yevtushenko  was  at  once  attacked
for  his  poem  in  the  organ  of   the  Russian  Federation
of   Writers,  which  is  controlled  by  party  hacks.     But
how   good  it  is  to  see   genuine  social   protest  opening
another  crack  in   the  Stalinist   glacier!     On  behalf  of
our  Jewish  brothers  in  Russia,  we  warmly  thank  Yev-
tushenko.
A  Little  Blood  As  A  Tonic?
•One  aspect   of   the   speech   made   by   Mrs.  Smith   of
Maine  in  the  Senate  Sept.  21  has  gone  unnoticed. What
did  she  mean  when  she  said  that  "our  deterrent  capac-
ity"  was   not  "inexhaustible"  but  "must  be  revitalized
appropriately   with   actions"?      A   moment   later    she
was   saying,  "We  cannot  expect   the   national  will   to
overcome   forever   the   enervating   effects   of   repeated
losses  without  its  being  revitalized by  the  new  strength
of   meaningful   victories."    Does   this   mean   we   must
have  a  little  war  to  "revitalize" our  deterrent capacity
and  achieve  some  military  victories  to  counteract  "the
enervating  effects  of  repeated  losses"?    Was  her  mean-
ing   spelled  out   more  clearly   by   the  Scripps-Howard
columnist   Richard   Starnes   (Sept.   27)   when   he   said
the   President's  speech   to  the   UN   ought  to  be   punc-
tuated   "by  swift   and   decisive  action"  adding,  "Cuba
is  an  attractive  target,  of  course,  but  there  are  factors
which   would  cloud  the   instruction   we   seek   to  admin-
ister.     Far  better  is  southeast   Asia,   where  we  would
be  fighting  admitted Communists. .  .  .  Laos  is  a  splen-
did   opportunity   for   spelling  out   the   lesson   that   we
have   the  means  and   will   preserve  freedom."    This   is
the   philosophy   of   that  old   democrat,   Bismarck,  who
also  believed  nothing  so  energized  a  nation  as  a  little
blood  and  iron.
the   search   for   disarmament   and   peace,   including   even   au-
thority   to   study   "the    scientific,   economic,   political,   legal,
social,  psychological,  military  and  technological  factors  related
to  the  prevention  of  war  with  a  view  to  a  better   understand-
ing  of  how  the  basic  structure  of  a  lasting  peace  may  be  estab-
lished."    At  the  same  time,  as  if  part  of  a  tacit  deal  to  win
support  on  the  right  and  among  the  Republicans,   the  man
put  in  charge  is  another   of  those  Republicans   like  McCone
(see  page  one)    who  rose  to  prominence   on  Truman's   cold
war  team.    Wm.  C.  Foster,  the  new  head  of  the  agency,  was
on 'he Gaither-committee which  recommended  a vastly  stepped
up  arms  race  to  Eisenhower.    He  had  been  very  much  a  cold
warrior.    There  are  good  people  who  say  he  has  "gotten  re-
ligion"  on  the  subject  of  disarmament.   We  can  only  hope.
The  Russians on  the  other  hand  have  taken  over  the   slogan
our  right  wingers  and  cold  warriors were  using  last  spring  in
pressuring   the   President  to   resume   nuclear   testing.     Their
slogan  was  "T'nT",  "Test  n'talk."    TNT   is  the  right   abbre-
viation  for  this  policy  because  it  is  explosive.    The  Russians
talk  total  disarmament  and  so  do  we,  but  they  have  just  ex-
ploded  the  16th  in  their  new  series  of  atmospheric  tests.    Un-
less  they  take  up  the  President's  offer   in  his  UN   speech  for
a  new  moratorium,  Mr.   Kennedy  will  be  forced   by  military
pressure  to  resume  testing  in  the  atmosphere,   too.     How  will
useful  talks be  possible  as  tension  rises with  new  tests  on  both
sides,   and   new   threats   of   new   monsters    in   the   wake   of
Khrushchev's   100-megaton  bomb?     It  is  not  only  the  atmos-
phere  of  mankind  but  its mind  and  soul,  and  its  hopes,  which
are  being  poisoned  as  the  Russians  continue   testing.
Two  Vivid  Glimpses of  the  Realities  U.S.  Intelligence  Misses  in  Korea
One  explosive  area  where   U.S.   intelligence  continues  to
4e  poor  because  blinded  by  a  simple-minded anti-Commu-
nism  is  in  South  Korea.    There  we  have  quickly  reconciled
ourself  to  a  new  military  dictatorship  and  its  leader,  Gen.
Pak  Chung  Hi  is  soon  to  be  given  the  prestige  of  a  visit
to  the  President.    Youngjeung  Kim,  head   of   the   Korean
Affairs   Institute   in  Washington,   complains   in  a  letter   to
(.he  Washington  Post  (Sept.  29)  that  the  new military  junta
has  just   sentenced   three   South   Korean   editors   to   death
for  the  "crime"  of  advocating  peaceful  reunification  of  their
.•ountry  without  eliciting  protest   from  a  single  U.S.  editor.
Foreign   Affairs   for   October   carries   a  bitter   attack   on
|     U.S.   policy  in  Korea  and its  "massive   ignorance"  by Ed-
ward  W.  Wagner,  assistant  professor   of  Korean  studies  at
(
     Harvard.   Prof.  Wagner  says  40  percent  of  the  farm  fami-
L
lies  must   subsist   on  one  acre  or  less,  that  in  the   urban
, areas 'unemployment   is   estimated   as   high   as   25   percent.
!Per  capita   income   is   under   $100  a  year.     In  the   North,
shut  off  from  U.S.  observation  by  an  Iron  Curtain  passport
policy   of   our  own,   extraordinary   progress   has   given   its
10,000,000  people   "a  higher  standard   of   living   than   they
have  ever  known.    And  as   these  people   have  never  lived
under   free   institutions,"   Prof.   Wagner   adds,   "the   harsh
features   of  Communist  rule  must  seem  less  crucial  to  them
than  their   material  progress."
South  Korea  has  neither  freedom  nor  progress.    Accord-
ing   to  Prof.   Wagner,   the  new  regime   has   wiped  out   all
deliberative  bodies,  down  to  the  village  level.   He   concludes
that  the  new  Generals  are  incapable  of  giving  South  Korea
the  "thoroughgoing   social   revolution  it  desperately   needs."
The  real   threat  to   South   Korea   today,   he  concludes,   "is
the  threat  of  subversion   by  invidious  comparison   .  .  .  be-
tween  Seoul  and  Pyongyang."    70,000  Korean  residents  of
Japan  have  just  underscored  this  by  choosing  repatriation
to  North   rather   than  South  Korea.     But  there  is  no  sign
whatsoever   that  Washington   understands  this.
1  0  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  9,1961
The  UN  Was  Supposed  to  Be  A  Universal   Organization,   Not  A  Cold  War  Tool
Suppose  Pravda  Praised  the  UN  for  Keeping  Capitalism  Out  of  the  Congo?
Two  aspects  of  the  battle  over  the  UN  Secretary-General-
ship  seem  to us noteworthy.   The  first  is that  it  is only  through
the  political  power  of  the  non-aligned  nations that  the  Soviet
Union   has  been   forced  to   retreat  from   its  troika   proposal.
The   second   is  that  the  U.S. rather  than  the   U.S.S.R.   now
seems  to  be  intransigeant.
Somehow  the  new  Soviet compromise  offer  is  represented  as
if   the   Russians  were   still   insisting  on   some  kind   of   veto.
Frederich  Kuh  of  the  Chicago  Sun-Times  (Oct. 3)   seems  to
be  the  only  correspondent  who  has  furnished  the  exact  words
of  their  statement  itself,  "The  Soviet  delegation,"  he  quoted,
"has  made  it  clear  that  it  does  not  have  in  mind  the  utiliza-
tion  of  the  veto  on  the  part  of  any  of  these  deputies  to  the
provisional  chief  of  the  United  Nations  administrative  body."
A  Variant  of  Neutral   Proposals
The   Soviet  offer   is  only  a  slight  variant  of   proposals   put
forward   at   last   year  s   session   by  various  neutrals.     There
would  be  one  Secretary  General  with  three  deputies.    Three
officials  high  in  the  Secretariat,  Bunche  of  the  U.S.,  Arkadiev
of  the  U.S.S.R.  and  Narasimhan of  India  would  be  the  depu-
ties.    The  new  provisional  chief  of  the  administration  would,
however,  be  instructed  to  "maintain  daily  cooperation"  with
these  deputies  "and seek  to  achieve  mutual  agreement  with
them  on  the  major  questions  of  the  work  of  the  secretariat."
A  great  deal  of   hypocrisy  surrounds  this  dispute  on   the
Western   side.    The   UN   was  set  up  on  the   basis  of   great
power  unanimity.    Since the  Soviet bloc  has  been  in  a  perma-
nent  minority,  its  safeguard  has  been  the  veto.    The  veto  has
been  circumvented, first by expanding the  powers  of  the  Gen-
eral   Assembly  and  secondly   those  of  the   Secretary   General.
The  Soviets  feel  that  the  West  has made  the  UN  Secretariat
an  instrument of  Western  policy  on  too  many  occasions.    In-
deed   "let  Dag   do   it"   became   a  favorite   State   Department
formula   in   difficult   situations.     If   the  organization  is  to   be
kept  together,  both  major  blocs  must  be  satisfied.    The   pro-
posal   for   bloc  deputies  to  be  consulted   seems   to  us  a  rea-
sonable  compromise.
One  has  only  to  read  James  Reston's  naively  revealing  ex-
Contrast
Which   is   un-American?     To   hold   a  meeting  built
around  the  theme,  that  democracy  is  "the  worst  form
of   government  there  is"?   Or   to   hold   a.  meeting   in
opposition   to   a   law   which   was   passed   only   over   a
President's  veto  and  barely  hurdled  its  first  Supreme
Court  test  by  a  5-to-4  vote?     The  first  meeting  may
be  found  described  by  the  AFL-CIO  News   (Sept.  30)
in  a  dispatch  from  Chicago  where  Robert  Welch  of  the
Birch   Society   called  democracy  "the worst   form   of
government   there   is."   The   second   meeting   was   a
"National   Assembly  for   Democratic  Rights"  held   in
New   York  Sept.  23-4  to  make  plans  for   fighting   the
Internal  Security   Act  of  1950  which  Congress  enacted
over  Truman's  veto.
The  Un-American Activities  Committee  subpoenaed
not   only   the   organizers   of   the   second   meeting   but
executives  of  two  radical  papers  which  accepted  adver-
tisements  announcing it,  a  new  extension  of  the  Com-
mittee's  authority.   A  handful  of  radicals  and  liberals
still  uncowed enough  to  fight  the  Subversive Activities
Control   Board   were  pilloried  last   week   by  the  Com-
mittee.    It  lifts  no  finger  to  subpoena,  to  investigate
or  even  focus  public attention  on  the  swift  mushroom-
ing   or  subversive   Fascist-style   organizations  on   the
right.     Indeed  its   staff   is   infiltrated  by   right   wing
crackpots  and  its  members lean  Birchward  themselves.
position  in  the  New   York   Times  Sept.  25  of  Kennedy's  atti-
tude  toward  the  UN  (on  the  eve of  the  President's  appearance
there)   to  see  what  this  fight  is  really  about.     As  Mr.  Reston
said,  "the  President  has never  been  particularly  idealistic  about
the  UN.    He  does  not  spend  his  evenings  dreaming  about  the
brotherhood  or  the  parliament  of  man"   but  he  sees  "an  in-
dependent  and  courageous   Secretary General,  able  and  willing
to  carry  out  the  instructions  of  the  veto  free  General  Assem-
bly"  as  a  useful  instrument  against  Communist   expansion,   in
short  a  way to  "keep  Communism  out  of  the  Congo."
But  the  UN  was  supposed  to  be  a  universal  organization,
not  a  cold  war  instrument.     How   would   we  feel  about  an
"independent  Secretary  General"  if  Pravda  explained  it  would
keep  capitalism  out  of  the  Congo?
Why   Not  Place  Bulk   Orders   to  Distribute  Recent  Issues  as  Means  of  Education  for   Peace?
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street   ........
City  .....................
......................Zone............State....................
10/9/61
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6
(To)    Name   ......................
Street    ................................
BOS.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
City  ..........................................Zone............St»te....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement 7         Tea  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone'
Septembe
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED