I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961feb27.pdf

============================================================

Special  Report  From  Cuba
Gulf   Between   Washington   and  Havana  Deeper   Even  Than  Between  Washington   and  Moscow
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  No.  7
FEBRUARY  27,   1961
°
10T
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
No   Painless  Diplomacy  for  The   Ache  of  Castroism
My  first  morning  back  in  Havana  I  bought  all  the  papers
and  went  to  work  on  them  after  breakfast  with  my  Spanish-
English  dictionary.    The  most  promising  item  seemed  to  be
a  two  column  editorial  on  the  front  page  of  the  Communist
paper  Hoy  with  a heading in  large  type,  "The  Worst  Enemy."
I  expected  a  diatribe  against  the  CIA,  Guatemala, American
imperialism  or  those wicked  ones  in  Miami.   Instead  it  turned
out  to  be  an  attack  on  careless  driving  and  automobile  acci-
dents.      "The    counter-revolutionary  enemies  with   all   their
attacks,  crimes  and  sabotage,"  Hoy  complained,  "have  caused
us  fewer  deaths  than  these  accidents."   There  are  people  who
will  find  it  discouraging to  learn  that  reckless  driving  can  still
be  a  main  topic  of  concern  in  Havana.
Little  Sign  of  Black  Marketing
Outwardly  at  least,  in  the  warm  February  sunshine,  Havana
seemed  to  have  changed  little  from  the  city  as  I  saw  it  last
August.    Lines  of  taxicabs  and  limousines  still  waited  outside
the  hotels  for  the  tourists  who  weren't   there.    More  build-
ings  seemed  to  have  one  or  two  soldiers  on  guard  in   front
of   them.    But  there  was  little   indication  either  of   siege  or
of   unrest.    The   only  visible  remains  of   the   great  January
invasion  scare  were  tattered  posters  saying  "Death  to  the  In-
vader"   with   a  tongue-in-cheek   quotation    from   Fidel,   "We
know  that  we  are  not  alone  and  that  an  attack  on  Cuba  will
lead  to  its  own  destruction.   But,  nevertheless,  we  don't  want
them  to  commit  suicide  on  our  coast."     In  the  early  morn-
ing   sunshine,   the   white  trucks  marked   Limpieza  de   Calle
(Street   Cleaning)   were  already  sprinkling   the  Prado   while
platoons  of  white  wings  swept  and  washed  the  square  behind
them.    There  was  no  sign  of  a  gasoline  shortage;   traffic   was
heavy.    Except  for  two  new  Soviet  magazines,  Union  Sovietica
and   China  Reconstruye,  and  the  absence  of  the  New    York
Times,  the  news  stands  seemed   unchanged.     There  was  no
sign  of  inflation  in  the  prices  marked  in  the  shop  windows,
nor   of   rationing   in   the   restaurants.     Only   once,   during   a
week's  stay,  was  I  to  be  accosted  by a  money  changer,   though
the  peso  on  the  black  market  is  supposed  to  be  less  than  half
the  legal  rate  of  one-to-one  for  the  dollar.    The   Castro  re-
gime  seemed  very  much  a  going-concern.
"Every   Home  A   School"
Despite   the   breaking   off  of   relations,   a   stray    American
encountered   no  signs  of  hostility.     On  the  contrary  he  was
made  to  feel  by  the  friendly  welcome  in  the  streets  that   it
was  a  positive  morale  builder  to  see  an  American.     Sloppy
Joe's  was  still  the  emptiest   and  most  mournful  looking  bar
in  town,  and  the  big  news  was  that  Castro  and  his  entire
Cabinet   were  going  out   to  cut   sugar   cane   Sunday.     Some
112,000  had  already  volunteered   to  cut  cane  with  them,  and
NOTICE
We  regret  that  we  were  unable  to  publish  last  week
in   order   to   make  possible  a   trip   to   Cuba,   on   which
we  begin  our  report  in  this  week's  issue.    Passport
validation  by   the  State  Department   and  special  visa
authorization   by   the   Cuban   Foreign   Ministry  came
suddenly   just   after   we   had  gone  to   press  the   week
before,    when   it   was   too   late   to   announce   this   in
advance.
the   papers,   along   with   instructions  on   where   to   mobilize,
were  warning  volunteers  to  bring  along  their  own  lunches.
The  newest  crop  of  wall  posters  proclaimed  this  the  year  of
the  struggle  against  illiteracy;  Cuba  hopes  in  one  year  to  do
what  UNESCO    says  would   take  ten:   to   teach   everyone  to
read  and  write.    Small  armies  of  teachers  are  going  out  into
the  countryside; housemaids  go  to  special  night  classes  in  the
towns;  signs  proclaim,  "make   every  home  a   school."
The  Don  Quixote  in  the  Family  of  Nations
In   official    circles,   and   among   supporters   of   the   regime,
there  is  an  atmosphere of  revolutionary euphoria  which strikes
even  a  sympathetic visitor  as  dangerously  unrealistic.   If  ever
a  little  country  was  giddy  with   success,  it  is  Castro's  Cuba.
My  purpose  in  going  down  to  Cuba  was  to  see what  changes
had  taken  place  since  my  last  visit  in  August  and  to   explore
the   possibilities  of   a  peaceful   settlement   between  the   U.S.
and  Cuba.  The  euphoria—and  the  demagogy—appalled  me.  I
set  off  to   Cuba   in   a   mood   of   optimism.     I   found  myself
returning,   not   in   despair,   but   in   that   mood   of   awed   and
helpless  wonder  with  which  one  looks  on  at  the  unfolding
of   an  heroic  tragedy.    The   gulf   between   Washington   and
Havana   is  deeper   even   than  that  between   Washington   and
Moscow.     The   Fidelistas   are   living   in   a   dream   world,   a
world   which   revolves  around   Cuba   but   as  they  see  it   also
contains  that  big  weakling   to  the  north,  the  United   States,
and  that  distant  but  doting  foster  parent,  the  Soviet  Union,
which  is  ready  on  notice  from  Havana  to  plunge  the   whole
world  into  atomic war  if  Uncle  Sam misbehaves.   There  were
moments  when  a  visitor  was  made  to  feel  that  if  we  North
Americans   are  not   careful,   Cuba   might   annex   the   United
States   and   liberate   its   suffering   people   from   the   yoke   of
monopoly   capitalism.     Castro's   Cuba   is   the   Don    Quixote
in  the  world  family  of  nations  today.
My  own  mission  was  perhaps  a  little  Quixotic,  too.    I  had
hoped   to  come  back  with  news  and  interviews  to  show  how
easily  and  painlessly  peace  could  be  achieved   between  Wash-
ington  and  Havana.   I  am  afraid  I  had  it  all figured out  in
advance.    I   expected   the   Cuban   leaders   to  see  that  it  was
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
2   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   February   27,  1961
How  Liberalize  Cuba  After  Making  Her  Dependent  on  Soviets  . . .
(Conl'iniied   from   Page   One)
impractical  to  create  a  completely  socialized  state  just  off  the
shores  of  the  USA;  to  learn  from  the  fate  of  Nagy  in  Hun-
gary  that  a revolutionary regime  has  to  be  circumspect  in  deal-
ing  with  a  big  powerful  neighbor;  to  be  ready,  as  similarly
placed   regimes  have  been,  to  avoid  the  provocative  and   to
work  out  a  modus  vivendi  within  these  political  realities.
I  felt  that  the  Castro  regime  could  save  the  agrarian  reform
and  the  industrialization  program  on  a  basis  of  socialism  if
it  was willing  to  settle  for  a  mixed  society,  to  negotiate  some
compensation  for  U.S.  properties,  and  to  restore  some.    Ob-
viously  it  could  not  give  up  the  sugar  and  cattle   latifundia
without  giving  up  its  raison  d'etre,  and  it  could  not  give  up
the   industrialization  program   which   is   the   counterpart  of
agrarian  reform.    But  in  between  there  were  possibilities  of
face-saving  concessions  which  would  do  the  Cubans  no  harm.
There  was  no  reason  why  such  concerns  as  F.  W.  Woolworth
should  not  be  allowed  to  resume  business,  or  that  room  could
not   be  found  within  the  area  of   industrialization  for   some
cooperation   with  foreign  firms,  as  has  been  done  in  Ghana
and  Guinea.
U.  S.  Fear  of  a  Soviet  Base
In  the  political  realm—I  might  as well  make  a  clean  breast
of  this—I  envisaged  a  declaration  of  ultimate  free  elections
and   ultimate   restoration   of   fundamental  political    liberties.
I  felt  that  Cuba  would  have  to  end  the  situation  in   which
the  Communist  party  was  the  only  legally  existing  party  in
Cuba,  perhaps  by  merging  it  in  a  united  revolutionary  party
led  by  the  Fidelistas.    I  could   see  the   U.S.   adjusting  to  a
one-party  regime  in  Cuba  of  the  kind  which  has  led  revo-
lutions  from  Mexico  to  Ghana.     But  I  could   see  no  possi-
bility  of  a  peaceful  settlement   if  Cuba  allowed   the  Commu-
nists  alone  to  operate  outside  the  framework  of  the  July  26
movement.    In  other  words  I  felt  that  Cuba  might   save  the
achievements  of  the  revolution  if  it  offered   some  face-saving
compromises  to  Washington   and  assurance  that  Cuba  would
not  become  a  Soviet  base  in  this  hemisphere.     By  this  last,
I  do  not  necessarily  mean  a  military base,  but  a  political  base.
Starting  with  this  all-too-neat  blueprint,   I  found   a  whole
series  of  negative  factors  in  Havana.    There  was  a  miscon-
ception  of  the  United  States  fully  as  distorted  as  our  view  of
Cuba.    There  was  a  heady  youthful  recklessness  which  can
lead  this  regime  very  easily  to  overplay  its  hand.    There  was
an  attitude toward  the  Soviet  bloc  which  can  only  be  described
as  a  naive  kind  of   infantile  leftism.    There  was  a   daring
conception  of  Cuba  as  the  leader   of  a  hemispheric   upsurge
against  Yanqui  imperialism which  portends  bad  relations  not
only  with  the  United  States  but  with  the  more  cautious  re-
gimes  to  the  south  of  Cuba.    It  is  a  pity Khrushchov  does  not
visit  Havana.    He  would  get  as  big  a  scare  in  Havana  as  he
probably  does  in Peking.
In  short,  your  wistful   liberal  pilgrim  found   himself   face
to   face   in  Havana  with  a  full-fledged   revolution,  in  all   its
creative  folly  and  self-deceptive  enthusiasm.   To  ask  it  to  be
sensible  was  like  asking  a  volcano  to  take  it  easy.   Nothing
could  be  harder  for  an  observer from  a  rich status  quo  society
than   to   understand   a  group   of   desperate   idealists  striving
within  a  short  time  to  remake a  poor  colonial  society  in  the
shadow  of   a  hostile  great  power.    Perhaps  it   could   be  at-
tempted  only  by  smoking  a  little  political  marijuana  to  keep
up  their  courage.    Every  Cuban  effort  for  reform  during  the
last  half  century  has  met  warnings—usually  true,  as  it  turned
out—that  the  U.S.  would  never  allow  it.    I  must  have  seemed
another   in   that   mournful   procession   of   warning  liberals.
U.S.   Won't  Let  Cuba  Be   Moderate
Walking  the streets, trying hard to  digest  the experience, one
had  to  recognize that  in  this  case  what  U.S.  policy  would  not
allow   were   moderate,   mixed-society   solutions.     These   are
possible  only  where  countries  are  still  able  to  deal  with  both
sides  in  the  East-West  struggle.     But  by  our  oil  and   sugar
policies,  we  have  made  Cuba  completely  dependent   on   the
Soviet  bloc;  one  might  as  well  ask  for   a  mixed   society  in
Outer   Mongolia.      Our   oil   embargo   would   have   brought
Cuban  economic  life  to  a  standstill  within  a  few  weeks  but
for  Soviet  oil  and  Soviet  tankers.    Our  refusal  to  buy  Cuban
sugar  would  have  been  as  disastrous  for  the  Cuban  economy
if  the  Soviet  bloc  had  not  come  to  Castro's  rescue.    Once  the
ties  with  the  U.S.   had  been  broken,  it  was  easier  to  barter
sugar   for   equipment  from   the   Soviet   bloc  and   set  out   to
industrialize  the   island  on  a  socialist   basis  than   to  try   the
long  drawn-out  process  of  luring  capitalist  investment  from
other  Western   countries  which  would  hesitate  to  allow  it  in
the  face  of  U.S.  hostility.   What  France  did  in  Guinea,  we
did   in  Cuba.    Castro,   like   Sekou  Toure,  was  left   with   no
alternative.     Indeed   Castro's   position   is  worse.     Guinea  is
still  bush  country.    Cuba  is  not;  its  sugar  mills,  its  transport,
its   electric  power,   depend   on   imported   oil.     Castro's   oil
supply,  his  sugar  market  and  now  his  industrialization  pro-
gram   depend   entirely  on  the  good-will   of   the   Soviet   bloc.
Like  the  fallen  maiden  in  the  melodrama,   Castro  may  well
cry  out  to  Washington,  "You  made  me  what  I  am  today."
On  the  Way  to  A  Popular  Democracy
With   this   economic   and   political   dependence   have   come
ideological   changes.     For   the   first   time,   in   talking   with
Fidelista   intellectuals,  I   felt   that   Cuba   was  on   its  way  to
becoming  a  Soviet-style  Popular  Democracy.     Again  for   this
the   U.S.  shares  responsibility.     A  combination  of   factors  is
pushing  Cuba  in  this  direction.    On  the  one  side  is  gratitude
toward  the  Soviet  bloc,  dependence  on  its  good  will,  a  desire
to  flatter  by  imitating  its  methods.     On   the   other   hand  is
repulsion  for  the  United  States,  and  fear  of  the  interventionist
groups  we  are  supporting.     The   familiar  chain   reaction  of
counter  revolution  is  at  work,  stirring  suspicion,   strengthen-
ing  the   secret  police   and   arbitrary  legal  methods;   these  in
turn  create  new  hostility  to  the  regime.    A  general  tighten-
ing  up  of  controls is in  progress,  though  the  only  visible  signs
of   opposition  in  Havana  are  religious.     There   are  placards
in  many  shop  windows asking,  "Will  your  child  be  a believer
or  an  atheist?"  and  announcing that  March  5  will  be  Cate-
chism  Day.    The  night  I  arrived  a  band  of  youths  in  ragged
procession   were   marching   down   the   Prado   shouting   the
Catholic  slogan,   "Cuba,  si;  Russia,   no."
It  is  to  Castro's  credit  that  there  are  few  signs  of   a  cult
of  personality,  but  the  press  is  completely  Fidelista.    While
the  bookstores are  still  full  of  heretical anti-Communist works,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   February   27,  1S61
. . . And  Setting  Poor  Example  by  Imposing  Iron  Curtain  011  Her?
there  has  been  a  steady  infection  of  totalitarian  ideas.   This  is
evident  when  one  brings  up  the  question  of  a  free  press  and
of   ultimate   free   elections.     On   the   former   one  encounters
vague Rousseauist ideas,  and  no  very  clear answers are  elicited.
There  seems  to  be  an  oversimplified   notion  that  so  long  as
the  press  is  freed  from  the  influence  of  big  business  monopo-
lies,  there  is  no  longer  a  problem.    The  press—so  goes  this
populist  mysticism—then  expresses  the  will  of  the  majority,
or  of  the  working  class  or  of  the  people's  state.    The  idea
that  a  free  press,  with  the  right  of  the  individual  to  express
dissenting  views, has  a  role  to  play  in  any  society,  capitalist  or
socialist,   begins   to   seem  as  counter   revolutionary  in   Cuba,
as  in  East  Germany or  Hungary.    As  for  free  elections,  I  was
told  that  once  the  economic  problems  of  a  society  are  solved,
there   was   no   need   for   politics;   all   problems   would   then
merely  be  technical,  and  could  be  handled  by  technicians!
In  the  Name  of  Liberty
It   is  difficult,   against  the   background  of   Latin  American
misery  and   U.S.   relations,   for   an   American   liberal   to   talk
with  his  Cuban  opposite  numbers  of  free  press,  free  elections
and  the  rule  of  law.    These  ideals  have  been  so  dirtied  in
practice;  Latin  Americans  have  known  so  little  of  them;  we
ourselves  have  so  far  abandoned  them;   that  it  is  very  hard
to  make  Latin  Americans see  any  reality  behind  the  rhetoric.
On  a  wall  in  Havana  I  saw  a  poster   which  quoted  Bolivar
as  saying,  "The   United   States  seems  destined   by  Providence
to  plague  America with  miseries  in  the  name  of  liberty."     It
was  not  pleasant  to  hear  Fidel  in  a  rather  demagogic   speech
the  Saturday  night  after   my  arrival  taunt  the  United   States
for  putting  down  an  iron  curtain  around  Cuba  and  forbidding
its   citizens   to   travel   there.     "What   do   they   confess   with
this?"   Castro  asked.    "Their  failure  and   their   fear   of   the
example   and  of   the  truth,  and  of   the   influence  that   Cuba
has  not  only in  Latin America but  in  the  United  States  itself."
How   can  an   American   liberal   argue   convincingly  in   Cuba
for   a  free  press  and  against  arbitrary  government   when  we
ourselves  set  up  barriers  to  free  communication?
I  had  no  way  of  really  judging  how  serious  are  the  inter-
ventionist  guerrillas  dropped   in  the  Escambray  hills  and  per-
haps  elsewhere.    But  I  am  inclined  to  suspect  that  these  ac-
tivities  give  the  Castro  regime  a  shot  in  the  arm,  a  danger
with  which   to  energize  and  mobilize  the  people,   costly  in
terms  of  militiamen  withdrawn  from  production  but  perhaps
worth  the  cost.    The   effect   is  to  give  the  regime  an   excuse
further  to  tighten  its  controls.    The  logic  of  the  struggle  is
to  destroy  the  moderates.    It   is  as  if  the   U.S.   felt   that   it
could   effectively   fight   Castroism   in   Latin  America  only  by
pushing   Cuba   into   the   Soviet   bloc   and   into   an   internal
struggle  with  the  Catholic  Church.    On  the  other  hand,  within
Cuba,  the  hostility  of  the  U.S.  has  strengthened  the  radicals
and  left  the  regime  with  little  alternative but  to  seize  more
properties   in  order  to  obtain   revenue,  to  wipe  out  middle
class  opposilion   and   to   press  forward   while   it  can   on   the
industrialization   of  Cuba.    At   the  same  time,  nnr   effort   to
mobilize  Latin  America  against  Castro,   foic\..»   Jiis  regime   to
lake  counter-measures and   raise  the   Latin   American  masses
against  us.    Thus   the  stage  is  being  set  for   a  hemispheric
struggle  unless  a  settlement  between  Washington   and  Mos-
Cubans  to  Train  in  Soviet  Schools
Major  Guevara  in  a  TV  report  of  Jan.  6  gave  some
figures   on   the   number   of   Cuban  students  and  skilled
workers  to  be  trained  in  the  Soviet  countries.    He  said
he  had  signed  agreements  covering  2400   people   "who
will  travel  to  the  socialist  countries,  with  the  exception
of   Mongolia   and  Viet   Nam   which   have  but  a  small
industrial   capacity,   to  take   courses  of  study  in  tech-
nology.   Of  the  total   of   Cuban  technological  students,
about   one-third  or  800  will   go  to   the   Soviet   Union;
180   industrial   workers   and   40  students   of   technical
subjects  will  go  to  [East]  Germany,  plus  20  engineer-
ing   students;   to   Czechoslovakia    are   going   200  engi-
neering  students,   50  science  students  and  350  skilled
workers,  a  total  of   600;   to  Peoples  China  are  going
a   total  of   200  skilled  workers;  to  Poland   are   going
60   university   students,   15  science   students,   and   180
skilled  workers,   a  total  of   255."     Hungary,   Rumania
and  Bulgaria  are  taking  smaller   numbers.
cow  can  bring  as  its  corollary  a  settlement  between   Washing-
ton  and  Havana.
When  China  Has  Oil  to  Spare
When  Washington  clamped  down  on  Castro's  oil,  he  could
turn  to  Moscow.     If   Moscow   were  now  to  bring   pressure,
he  has  nowhere  to  go.    If  China  had  an  excess  of   petroleum
and  a  fleet  of  tankers,  Castro  would  still  have  an   alternative.
Indeed,  the  Cuban  problem   illustrates  what  the  Kremlin  will
be  up  against  when  China  is  a  major  industrial  power.    The
Cuban  leaders  admire  the  Russians,  but  lean  toward   Peking.
There   is  a  curious  economic  reason  visible  in   the   compre-
hensive  report  Major  Ernesto  Guevara  made  over  the  Cuban
TV  January  6  on  his  return  from  the  Soviet  bloc.     Except
for   China,  no  other  country  in  the  Soviet  bloc  really   needs
Cuba's   one   export   commodity—sugar.    The   Soviet   Union,
as  Major  Guevara explained,  "is  at  present  the  world's  largest
sugar   producer.     Exactly  two   years   ago   the   Soviet   Union
beat   Cuba's  output   and   is   now   the   largest   producer   as  a
result   of   its  execution   of   a  vast  sugar   development   plan."
East  Europe  has  its  own  beet  sugar.
All  the  East  European  satellites  together  only   promise  to
take  300,000  tons  of  Cuban  sugar while smaller  token  amounts
as  gestures  of  good-will,  were  taken  by  the  Asian  satellites.
North   Korea,   20,000  tons;  North  Vietnam,   5,000   tons  and
Outer  Mongolia,   1,000  tons.    The  biggest  contract,  naturally,
was  with  the  Soviet  Union,  but  this  contained  a  curious  pro-
viso.    "The   Soviet  Union,"  Major  Guevara  said,   "undertakes
to  buy  2,700,000  tons  of  sugar'in  the  event  that  the   United
States  fails  to  buy  sugar,  an  event  which  seems  most  likely."
This  proviso  seems  to  reflect  two  premises,  one  economic  and
the  other  political.    The  first  is  that  the  Soviet  Union  does
not  need  sugar.    The  second  is  that  it  is  not  disposed  to  shut
the  door  on  a  resumption  of  normal  trade  relations between
the  U.S   and  Cuba.    The  Russians  could  shut  that  door  simply
by  a  firm  contract  to  take  over  the  bulk  of  the  Cuban  sugar
crop.    By  leaving  the  door  open,  they  also  leave  the   door
open   to  negotiations  with  Washington  in  which  Cuba  may
figure.     In  this  connection,   it  should   be  noted  that   if   the
summit   conference   hadn't  broken  down  last  year,  the   Rus-
(Cotitmued   on   Page   Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.   Stone's   Weekly,   February   37, 1961
Cuban  Leaders  As  Light-Headed  As The  Chinese  on  Subject of Nuclear  War
(Continued   jrom  Page   Three)
sians  would  have  been  much  less  ready  to  step  in  when   the
oil  embargo  was  imposed  on  Cuba   last   July.    The   Cubans
may  fear  a  rapprochement  between  Washington  and  Moscow.
Cuba  Shares  China's  Fears
In  this,  their  position  is  similar  to  that  of   China,  which
also  fears  being  isolated  by  a  Russo-American  understanding.
China's   economics,   like   China's   politics,   fit   those   of   the
Castro   regime.     China   is  buying   1,000,000   tons   of   sugar.
"With  the   Peoples   Republic  of   China,"   as  Major  Guevara
said  in  his  radio  report,  "the problems  are  entirely   different
because  sugar  is  very  scarce  in  China.    Our  agreement  with
China  for  a  credit  of  100  million  pesos  and  our  contract  to
supply  China  with   1,000,000  tons  of   sugar   will  be   imple-
mented  without  difficulty."     Indeed  China's  potential  market
could  easily make  Cuba  independent  of  the  U.S. sugar  market.
Major   Guevara  pointed  out  that  China   "is  a  country  with
less  than  two  kilograms  per   capita  annual  consumption   of
sugar  while  in  Cuba  the  figure  is  around  40  kilograms  and
in  industrialized  countries  between  30  and  40  kilograms   per
capita.   Were  China  to  raise  that  consumption  to  10  kg,  still
a  low  figure  per  capita  per  annum,  it  would  demand  Cuba's
entire  crop  of  7,000,000  tons,  or  a  lot  more  than  our  present
annual  output  of  6,000,000  tons."
Like  China,   Cuba  is  a  revolutionary  power   with   a  revo-
lutionary  mentality,  and  a  revolutionary  attitude  toward war,
even  in  the  atomic  age.   The  attitude  of  the  Castro   regime
is   indicated   in   another   section   of   the   Guevara    broadcast
where  he  said:
"Cuba  is  engaged  in  an  economic  war  and  nearly,  but
not  quite,  in  a  kind  of  warfare  which  is  not  simply eco-
nomic,  against  a  mighty   power  and  with  the  support  of
another   mighty  power.   We   of   Cuba  must   do   our   part
because  we  are  not  onlookers  in  this  struggle  between two
colossi  over  Cuba;  we  are  a  very  important,  a  most  im-
portant   part   in   that   struggle.   We   must   maintain   the
unity   of   our  people  and   the   spirit   of   our   people,  their
capacity   for   sacrifice,   present  and  expandable.  This  ca-
pacity  of   our  people   for   sacrifice  must  be  expanded  far
more   than  it   is   now  because  it   is   a  fact  known  to  one
Just  Be  Perfect—That's  All
"Cultivate   the   most  noble   sentiments   of   a   human
being.    Be  honorable  and  moral  and  always  set  a  good
example  for  others."
—"Duties   of   A   Good  Revolutionary,"   poster   of   the
Education   Ministry,   in   the  Sevilla-Biltmore,   Havana.
familiar  with  the  history  of  all  of  the  socialist  countries
that  here  in   Cuba   we  have  had  practically  no  experience
of   suffering.    Here  in  Cuba  we  mention  the  figure  of   20
thousand  dead  but  over  there  in  China  they  put  the  figure
at  20  million  dead.  .  .  .  China  and  the  Soviet  Union  know
the  vast  loss  of  millions  of  their  citizens.   They  love peace
deeply.   The  Soviet  Union  and  its  citizens  are  impregnated
with   the  thought   of   peace  and  the  conviction  that  they
can  win  all  of  their  goals  by  peaceful  means.  Yet, they
are  ready  to  go  to  the  destruction  of  all  they  have  in  a
war   characterized   by   the   use   of   atomic  weaponry  and
unimaginable  destruction  of  lives  simply  for  the  sake  of
maintaining   their   principle   and  protecting   Cuba."
Major  Guevara  is  the  least  demagogic  and  the  most  sober,
though  perhaps  also  the  most  revolutionary, of  all  the  Cuban
leaders.     It   is  to   be   doubted   whether   the   Chinese,   much
less  the  Russians,  are  quite  that  ready  to  die  for   Cuba;  the
real  danger  is  that  step  by  step  both  sides  in  the   East-West
struggle  may  be  drawn  into  positions  over  Cuba  where  they
can   no   longer   draw   back.     I   found   most   Fidelistas   quite
light-headed  in  their  attitude  toward  war, and  in  their  faith
that  the  Soviet  Union  would  cheerfully  risk  its  existence  to
support   Cuba.     Little   Cuba   is   in   fact   turning   against   us
the  whole  idea  of  massive  deterrence—the  idea  that  the  na-
tion  which  is  ready  to  risk  bringing  the  planet  down  in  nu-
clear  suicide holds  the  winning  hand.    In  this,  too, the  Cuban
psychology  is  like  the  Chinese  rather  than  the  Russians,  and
though  no  one  said  so,  I  suspect  that  like  Peking  the  Cubans
too  consider  us  a  "paper   tiger."    The   oil  and   sugar  com-
panies   by  forcing  us   into   an   intransigeant   attitude   toward
the  Cuban  revolution  have  created  a  problem   of   formidable
proportions  on  our  doorstep  but  the  full  implications and pos-
sible  solution  must  be  left  to  next  week's  issue.
Why  Not  Use  the  Blank  Below  To  Start  A  Gift   Subscription  With  This  First  Part  of  Our  Report  From  Cuba
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..._........._.........................*..................»........................•
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..._.....................................Zone............State....................
2/27/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   .......................,...................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  Q    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washinfton   15,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  IT. S.;   $6  in
Canada:   (10   elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   *16   to   Europe;   (20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED