I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961nov06.pdf

============================================================

Challenge  From  A  New  "Castro",  P.  2
AEC  Chairman  Seaborg  Sees  No  Need  Now  for  Resuming  U.S.  Atmospheric  Testing,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,   NO.   41
NOVEMBER   6,    1961
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Stalin's  A  Hard  Man  to  Keep  in  The   Grave
They  may  remove  Stalin's  body   from   the   tomb,   but  they
have  not   yet  removed   his   spirit   from   the   Party.    To   read
through   the   voluminous  transcripts  of   the   speeches   at   the
22d  Congress,  as  broadcast  by  the  Soviet  radio,  is  to  see  how
much  remains  unchanged:   the   low  and   vulgar  level  of  dis-
course  to  which  party  gatherings   fell   in   Stalin's  time,   the
obsequious  quack-quack  with   which  the   delegates   jump   up
to   repeat    the   same   stereotyped   phrases,   the    suffocatingly
Byzantine  adulation  heaped   on   Khrushchev   as   it   was   once
heaped  on  Stalin.    The  former,  too,  has  become   a  universal
genius,   beneficently    fructifying    literature,   military    science,
agriculture  and  Marxism-Leninism  with  his  wide-ranging  in-
sight,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  selected  paeans  in  the  adjoin-
ing   box.     The   Party's  Orwellian  capacity  for  -doing  exactly
what   it   disavows  is  seen   again   in   the   way   a   new   cult  of
personality   is  built  up   around  Khrushchev  in   the   very  act
of  fulminating  against  the  cult  of  personality!    Caesar  thrice
rejecting   the   crown  was   not   more   invitingly   modest   than
Khrushchev  when  he  told  the  Congress  on  the  27th:
While   coming   out   resolutely  against   all   the   abom-
inable  phenomena of  the  cult  of  the  individual, Marxist-
Leninists  have  always  recognized  and  will  recognize   the
authority  of  leaders.    But  it  would  be  wrong  to  single
out   this  or  that   leader,   to  set   him   apart   in   any   way
from   the   ruling   collective,   to   extol   him   inordinately.
This  is  contrary  to  the  principles  of  Marxism-Leninism.
You   all   know   how   strongly   Marx,   Engels   and   Lenin
came  out  against   those   who  lauded  their  merits.    Yet
the  great  role  of  the  founders  of  scientific  communism,
Marx,  Engels  and  Lenin,  and  their  gr.eat  services  to  the
working  class,   to  all   mankind,  simply  cannot  be  over-
stated.    (Prolonged  applause).
Still   Using  Stalin's   Vocabulary
Stalin's  body  is  to  be  removed  from  the  Lenin  tomb.   The
purger   is  to   be  purged.     But   Mme.   Furtseva   at   the   very
same   Congress    (see   box   on   the   back   page)   announces  as
Minister  of   Culture  that  the  arts  must  still  toe  the  line  of
"socialist   realism,"   which   was   Stalin's   formula.     Shelepin,
head  of  the  secret  police,  is  promoted   to  the  nine-man  Party
Secretariat,   the  highest  ruling   body   in  the   Soviet   Union—
the  first  time  the  secret  police  has  appeared   that  high  in  the
party   hierarchy  since   Beria   was   shot   in   1953.      Shelepin's
speech  on  the  26th  refers  to  the  "anti-party  group"  as   "po-
litical  corpses,"  a  coarse   and   minatory  phrase   right   out  of
Stalin's   vocabulary.     Kozloy,   Khrushchev's   No.   2   man,   in
presenting  amendments  to  the  governing  statutes  of  the  Party
on  the  28th,  declares  himself  against   "any  attempts   to  sup-
press   criticism"   but   adds   warriingly,   "Naturally    one   must
not  allow  a  situation  to  come  about   in  which  the  party  can
be  drawn  into  a  sterile  discussion  at  the  whim  of  some  small
group  of  muddle-headed   or  immature  people"  which   might
Another   Universal   Genius   (Like   S——)
"The   speeches  of  Nikita  Sergeyevich  Khrushchev on
the   problems  of   art   and  literature   are   giving  inval-
uable  aid  to  the  artistic  intelligentsia  in  their creative
work.  .  .  .  Nikita  Sergeyevich  Khrushchev set  for  writ-
ers,   artists,  composers,  workers  of  the  screen  and  thea-
tre,  supremely important  problems  of  creative work. He
profoundly   revealed.  .  .  ."
—Minister   of  Culture  Furtseva   to  the   22d   Congress.
"The   concrete  basic  tasks  of  the  armed  forces  .  .  .
have   been  concisely   and  expressively   set   out   in   his
historic   report ...  by  our  supreme  commander-in-
chief,   Nikita  Sergeyevich  Khrushchev.    (Stormy   Ap-
plause).     The   report   also   made   a   profound  analysis
of   the  character  of   modern  war.  .  .  ."
—Defense    Minister   Malinovsky,   22d   Congress.
"The    planting  of  corn  in  1961,  in  comparison  with
1953,    increased  almost  7.5  times.    We  all   know   that
in   this   is   the   great   service   of   Nikita   Sergeyevich
Khrushchev.    He  revealed   to  the  country  the   valiant
strength   of   corn,   made   us   love   it.   .   .   ."
—Deputy    Chairman,   USSR    Council   of    Ministers
Ignatov.
"The    activities  of   Comrade  Khrushchev—his   inex-
haustible  seething  energy,  his  truly  revolutionary Len-
inist  approach to  the  solution  of  complicated  questions
of   theory   and  practice.  .  .   ."
—Ukrainian  CP  Secretary   Podgorny,   22d   Congress.
"It  is  truly   difficult   to  estimate,  to  overvaluate  the
historic  importance  of  the  courage  of  the  CPSU  Cen-
tral  Committee,  headed  by  N.  S.  Khrushchev, in  elim-
inating   the   harmful   consequences   of   the   personality
cult."
—Lithuanian  CP  Secretary  Snechkus,  22d   Congress.
lead   to   "the   subversion  of   party  unity."    This  will  hardly
encourage   free  discussion.
Khrushchev    promised    more   democracy   within   the   party
but  the  fight  against  the  "anti-party  group"  is  carried  on  as
in  Stalin's  time  by  smears  and  threats.    If  the  opposition   is
as   bankrupt   and   impotent   as   Khrushchev    claims,   why   so
much   fuss  about  it?     If  inner  party  democracy   is  to  be  en-
couraged   as  a  guarantee   against   the   excesses   of   the   Stalin
period,  why  not  demonstrate  this  by  allowing  the   opposition
to  speak   for   itself   and  defeating   it  in  open  debate?     Why,
instead,  are  the  oppositionists   asked   to  humiliate   themselves
by  public  confession  of  error,  as  the  price  of  safety,  exactly
as  in  Stalin's  time?    Why  the  hints  of  trials  foe  their  crimes
under   Stalin,   when   every   one   of   the    leaders,    including
Khrushchev  and  Mikoyan,  were  able  to  survive  only  by  being
the  willing   accomplices   of   Stalin's  hatchet   men?
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
t   6  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   November   6, 1961
He  Asks  Whether  Our  Concern  Is  Really  With  Democracy   or  Only   With   Capitalism
British  Guiana's  Dr.  Jagan  Tells  Washington  Why   He  Is  A  Socialist
We  present  here  in  abridged   form   the  speech  made   to
the  National   Press   Club  in   Washington    Oct.  24  by   Dr.
Cheddi   Jagan,   Premier   of  British  Guiana.    Its    courage,
its  eloquence,  and  the  insight  it  provides  into  problems  and
attitudes   typical   of   the   whole   emerging   colonial   world,
merit   wider   audience.    Dr.   Jagan,   after    Castro,   is   the
second  warning  bell  for  American  policy  in  Latin America.
Will  we  heed  its  message  in  time?
I  am  told  that  I  am  a  controversial   figure.   I  am,  I  be-
lieve,  generally   dismissed   in  this  country  as  a  Communist.
Let  me  now  tell  you  where   I   stand.
First  of  all,  I  am  a  passionate  anti-colonialist.    I,  like  your
forefathers,   believe  that  colonialisfri  is  wicked.    I  believe  so
strongly   that   colonialism  is   utterly   wrong   that   I   would
gladly  accept  any  help  from   whatever  quarter   to  help  me
in  my  fight  against  it.
My  country  is  about  the  size  of  Great  Britain  or  Minne-
sota.    It  is  a  poor   country  but  it  has  considerable   unused
resources   and  great   possibilities   for   development.    At   the
moment,  however,  most  of  its  half  million  people  barely  eke
out   a   living   on  a  narrow   low-lying  coastal  strip  of   land
which  accounts  for  only  four  percent  of  our  land  area.   Al-
though  the  country  is  mainly  agricultural   we  still  have  to
import   many  agricultural   products.    This   is  not   the  only
paradox   in  our  situation.     In  a  country   so  largely  unoccu-
pied,  there  is  also  grave  land  hunger,  for  it  takes  sums  of
money   to   reclaim   and   then   protect   cultivable  land   from
floods, the  sea  and  the  jungle.
A  Typical   Colonial  Economy
There  is  almost  no  industry.    My country  depends  on three
or  four  main  products—sugar,  bauxite,  rice  and  timber—the
exploitation   of   two   of  which  are   in  the   hands   of   foreign
companies.     These  two,  sugar  and  bauxite,  account  for  75
percent  of  the  exports  of  the  country.    British  Guiana  today
presents   the   typical  pattern   of   a   colonial  economy.
I  am  dedicated  to  the'task  of  changing  this  pattern.   I
wish  to  see  rny  country  prosperous  and  developing.   Second
only  to  my  passion  for   the   independence  of  my' people   is
this  dedication'to  their  ecqnomic  advancement.   Now,  in  this
1  am  a  socialist.    By  this i  mean  that  I  am  in  favor  of  the
workers  reaping  the  full-fruits  of  their  labor  through  public
ownership  of  the  means   of  production,  distribution  and  ex-
change.    I  believe  that  it  is  only  by  planning  on  this  basis
and  with  a  scientific  assessment   of  our  situation  that  I  can
rapidly  modernize  our  economy.
I  believe ideally  in  the  nationalization of  all  the  important
means   of  production,   distribution   and  exchange.    This  will
ensure  a  fairer   distribution  of  a  country's  wealth  than  any
other  system.    But  I  also  have  to  recognize  things  as  they
are.   While I  reserve  our  right,  as  any  sovereign  nation  does,
to  nationalize whatever  industry  we  think  should  be  nation-
alized  in  the  public interest  we  have  explicitly stated  that  we
have  no  intention   of  nationalizing   the   existing   sugar   and
bauxite   companies.    These   companies  today   dominate   our
economy,  but  British  Guiana  is  still  largely  underdeveloped.
We  are  resolved  to  diversify  our  economy  and  to  industrial-
ize  it  rapidly  so  that  as  we  launch  new  enterprises  the   pro-
portion    of   our    national    income   produced   by    expatriate
enterprise   becomes   smaller   and  their  present   command  of
our  economic  life  weakened.    If  on  the  other   hand  it   ever
became  necessary  to  nationalize  any  industries, fair  and  ade-
quate  compensation  would  be  paid.
Part  of  the   New  Socialist  Tide
I  place  myself   in  company  with  other  nationalist   leaders
of  Asia  and  Africa.    I  believe  like  these  nationalist   leaders
that  the   economic  theories   of   scientific  socialism   hold   out
the   promise  of   a   dynamic   and   social  discipline  which  can
transform  an  under-developed  country  into  a  developed  one
in  a  far  shorter  time  than  any  other   system.
We  may  differ  from  you  on  the  way  we  organize  our  eco-
nomic  life.    You  have  as  your  dominant  philisophy  private
enterprise  but  let  us  not  forget  that  your  development  took
place   in  a   different   historical   epoch  when  conditions—eco-
nomic  and  technological—were  not  as  they  are  today.    But
we  certainly do  not  differ  from  you  in  our  political  objectives
which  is  the  establishment  of  a  democratic  way  of  life.
I  have  won  my  place  in  the   political  life  of  my  country
in  three  successive  general  elections.    I  believe  in  parliamen-
tary  democracy, by  which I  recognize  the  rights  of  opposition
parties,  freedom  of  speech,  freedom  of  worship,  regular  and
honest  elections,  an  impartial  judiciary  and  an  independent
civil   service.     I  have  struggled   for  these  freedoms  and   it
was  I  who  first  proposed  that  a  Bill  of  Rights   guaranteeing
every  citizen  his  fundamental  rights,  including the  right   to
hold  property,  buttressed   by  an  appeal  to  the  courts,  be  en-
trenched  in  the  new  constitution  of  British  Guiana.
Finally  may  I  touch  briefly  on  the  place  we  hope  to  take
in  the  world  when  our  independence  is  achieved  shortly.    I
mean  to  pursue  a  policy  of  active  neutralism.     Because  of
the  immensity  of  our  problems  I  am  forced  like  India  and
some  other  underdeveloped  countries   to   seek   aid   from   all
possible   sources.     I   have   however   made   no  secret   of   the
fact  that  I  will  not  accept   aid  upon  conditions  which  limit
the   sovereignty   of  my  people.    We  do  not  intend  to  be  a
bridgehead  or  a  base  for  anyone.   I  am  concerned  only  with
the  urgent  problems  of  the  social  and  economic development
of  my  country.    I  am  not  interested  in  the  cold  war  in  which
in  any  case  my  country  can  play  no  effective   role.
Faith  in  the  United  Nations
We  look  forward  in  due  course  to  taking  our  place  in  the
United  Nations  which  represents,  particularly   for  small  na-
tions, their  guarantee  of  independence  and  their  hope  for  the
future.     I  feel  that   my  country   can  in  our  contemporary
world  of  blocs  and  groups  play  a  part  in  bringing  about  a
better  understanding  among  nations.    In  a  sense  we  should
not  be  unqualified  to  do  so.   We  are   a  small,  people  mainly
of   Afro-Asian  descent.   We  are   situated   in  Latin   America
but  we speak  the  English  language  and  have  strong  ties  with
North  America  and  the   British   Commonwealth.
In  a  sense  our  visit   to  this  country,  our  request   to  you
for   aid,  is  a  test  of  basic  principles.    The  Government  of
the  United  States  has  stated  clearly  that  their  concern  is  to
foster  and  preserve   democracy,  that  the  internal   affairs  of
democratic   countries   are   their   own   concern.    What   then
happens   when   a  people   by  an   admittedly   genuine   popular
vote  are  for  a  socialist   economic  system?    Will  the   United
States  respect  this  decision ?    Or  will  she  withhold  her  aid
at  the  very  real  risk  of that  democracy  being  overthrown  by
a  dictatorial  uprising   based   on  the   people's   poverty?    Will
the   United  States  Government  give   in  to  pressure   groups
and  so  act  as  to  preserve   capitalism   by  sacrificing  democ-
racy ?
There   are   not   lacking,   even   within   this   country    itself,
writers,  thinkers,  scholars,  who  hold  that  when  the  Govern-
ment  of  the  United  States  uses  the  word  "democracy"   they
really  mean  capitalism.     If   these   men  are   right,  then  we
can  expect  no  help,  for  while  we  are  an  admittedly   genuine
democracy  we  are  also  admittedly   socialist.
Sooner  or  later  this  issue  had,to  be  squarely   faced  and
clarified   by   your   administration.     History   has   chosen   my
own   small  country  to  be  the   focus  of  this  problem.    The
decision  must  now  be  made.
Indeed,   gentlemen,   it   is   not   our   concept   of   democrar
which  is  now  on  trial,  but   yours.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  6,1961
Off  the  Capital Ticker  Tape:  Paradox  in  Indochina,  New  Criticism  of  the  AMA
JFK's  Shelter  Plea  to  Homeowners  Off  — A  Threat  from  West  Germany
Best  news  of  the  week  if  true  (and  my  own  check   leads
me  to  believe   it  is)  :  the  report  in  the   Washington   Post
(Oct.  30)  that  President  Kennedy  has  finally  turned  thumbs
down  on  a  plan  to  send  a  letter  to  every  homeowner  in  the
country  this  month  asking  him to  build  a  bomb  shelter.  .  . .
Most  disturbing  news   (next  to  the  Soviet   note  to  Finland):
Byrnum  Shaw's  dispatch   from   Bonn  in  the  Baltimore   Sun
(Oct.  28)   quoting   "qualified   informants"   in   the   Adenauer
government  as  saying  that  West  Germany  may  abandon  its
postwar   pledge   not   to  manufacture   atomic,    bacteriological
or  chemical  weapons  if  a  Soviet-American   agreement   should
deprive  it  of  "modern   weapons."   .  .  .
Grateful   salute:  to  Federal  Judge   Sidney   Silverman   for
acquitting   (albeit  only  on  a  technical  error  in  the   govern-
ment's  pleadings)  Martin  Yarus  and  Elliott  Sullivan  charged
with  contempt   of  the   House   Un-American  Activities   Com-
mittee.  .  .  .  The  Supreme  Court's  latest  decision  in  a  witch
hunt  contempt  case   (Hugh  de  Gregory   v.  Attorney   General
of  New  Hampshire)   shows  the  Court  is  still  5-to-4  in  favor
of  the  inquisitors.    In  this,  the  third  case  to  come  up  from
New  Hampshire  (Sweezy  and  Uphaus  were  the  others),  the
Court   without   opinion   upheld   a   conviction  for    contempt
of  that  State's  one-man  un-American   Activities    Committee.
Warren,   Black,  Douglas   and  Brennan   dissented.  .  .  .  This
does  not  bode  well  for  five  contempt   convictions  up  for   re-
view   at   this   term   of   court,   those   of   Norton    A.   Russell,
Robert  Shelton,  Alden  Whitman,  Herman  Liveright  and  Wm.
A.   Price.
Both  London's  Sunday  Times  and  The  Observer   (Oct.  29)
carry  stories  on   a  steady   flight   of   men   and   money   from
West   Berlin.   .  .  .  Fraternal  cheers:  to   Hank   Greenspun,
editor   and  publisher   of  the   Las  Vegas   (Nev.)   Sun  on  his
full  pardon  from  President  Kennedy  for  Neutrality  Act  vio-
lations   in  smuggling   arms  via   Mexico  to  the   Haganah  in
Israel's   1948  birth  struggle.  .  .  .  The day  after    Cambodia's
Ambassador,  Nong  Kimny,  held  a  press  conference  to  deny
charges  that  his  country  had  attacked   South  Vietnam,  Keyes
Beech  of  the  Chicago  Daily  News   (Oct.  31)  filed  a   dispatch
from  the  "invasion"  site,  calling  it  a  phony  thought  up  by
an  "agile  American   public  relations  man  who  gets  paid  an
Peccavi   (and  Penitence)   Dept.
Dear   Mr.  Stone:
What  page   of   I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  do  you   read?
"Where  the  President  said,  'We  must  never  fear  to
negotiate,'  it   says   'we  must  never   fear   to   refuse   to
negotiate'."
—Stone  discussing   Air  Force  Association  statement,
Weekly    of   Oct.   16.
"The  President   has  said,  'We  must  never   negotiate
through   fear,  but   we  must   never  fear   to   negotiate."
In   turn,   we   must   never   fear   to   refuse   to   negotiate
that  which  is  not  negotiable."   [Emphasis  now  added]
—Actual   AFA   text,  p.  2,   Weekly    of   Oct.   16.
Sincerely    yours,
Allen  H.  Barton
Assoc.  Professor  of  Sociology,   Columbia   Univ.
undisclosed   sum   of   money   to   make   President   Ngo   Dinh
Diem's   government   look  better  than  it   possibly   is.  .  .  ."
Tantalizing   mystery:  why is  the  only  democratic  government
in  what  was  Indochina,  the   only  one  which   does  not   have
a  pro-Communist   guerrilla  problem,  the  only  one  which  de-
feated  the  Communists  at  home  politically  without  suppres-
sion,  that  is  Cambodia,  treated  as  a  kind  of  suspect  step-
child  by  our  government  and  press,  while  the  Thai  and  South
Vietnam   dictatorships   are   our   honored   wards,   allies   and
pets ?  .  .  .  Prince  Sihanouk,. Cambodia's  chief   of   state,  is
one  of  the   most   enlightened   statesmen  in  the   world   today
but  the  CIA  twice  tried  to  get  rid  of  him  by  fomenting   un-
successful   rightist  uprisings.  .  . .
The  American  Medical  Association   is  trying  to  cover   its
scandalous   alliance  with  the  drug  industry  by  a  press  agent
gimmick:   a   highly   advertised    campaign   against   "quacks,"
little  quacks,  that  is,  but  the  truth  is  catching  up  with  it.
The  influential  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  in  a  series
of  recent  editorials  attacks  the  AMA's  board  of  trustees  for
opposition  to  Kefauver's   proposed   drug  reforms.
AEC  Chairman  Takes  Unhysterical  View
Mr.  SPIVACK  (Meet  the  Press):  At  one  time  you  said
we  can  go  a  long  way  toward  keeping  pace  with  the  Rus-
sians  even  if  they  continue  testing   in  the   atmosphere,  if
we  continue  testing   underground,  is  that  correct?
Chairman  SEABORG (Atomic  Energy  Commission):  Yes.
Mr.  SPIVACK:  Do  you  still   believe  that?
Chairman   SEABORG:  Yes,   I  still   believe  that.
Mr.  SPIVACK:  Then  you  really   don't  think  it  is   neces-
sary  for  us  to  test  in  the  atmosphere  in  order  to  keep  up
with  the  Russians,  despite  their  present  tests?
Chairman  SEABORG:  No,   I  said   we  could   go   a   long
way   toward  keeping  up  with  the  Russians.     If   you  raise
the   question   whether  we   could  keep   up  indefinitely,  for-
ever,  with  the  Russians  testing  in  the  atmosphere  and  our
testing   underground,   I  wouldn't   be  so   sure.
Mr.   SPIVACK:  What   about   these   25  or   26  tests   that
they   have  made  so   far,   can  we  test   in  the   underground
and  still  keep  up  with  them  despite  these  tests?
Chairman  SEABORG:  Yes,   I  believe  so.
Mr.  SPIVACK:  You  were  reported   as   saying   that   you
didn't  think  the  Russians  were  ahead  of  us  in  nuclear  de-
velopment.    Do  you  still   feel   that   way,  despite   these  25
tests?
Chairman   SEABORG:   Yes,   I  still   feel   that   way.  .  .  .
Mr.  FINNEY   (New   York  Times):  What  do  you  believe
are  the  objectives   of   this   [Soviet]   test  series?
Chairman   SEABORG: ...  to  improve  their   weapons
of  Whether  We  Need  to  Test  in  the  Air
arsenal  but  in  addition  they  apparently  have  non-technical
objectives  that  I  have  referred  to  earlier,  the   psychological
and  the  political  and  the   terroristic   objectives.
Mr.  FINNEY:  On  the  terroristic  point,  are  you  suggest-
ing  on  the  50  megaton  bomb  that  it  is  not  really   necessary
to  detonate  such  a  device  to  develop   it?
Chairman  SEABORG: That  is  right.    It  is  not  necessary
to  detonate  a  full  yield  of  50  megatons  in  order  to  develop
it.   Tests   at  smaller  yields,   yields   more  in  the   range   of
their  earlier  tests,   would  be  sufficient   to  develop  a  bomb
of   that  magnitude,  or  of  higher  magnitude.   .  .  .
Mr.  FINNEY:  If  the  Soviet  Union  develops  a  50  or  100
megaton  bomb,  do  you  feel  it  would  be  incumbent  upon  the
U.S.   to  develop  similar  weapons  to  have  a  counter  deter-
rent?
Chairman  SEABORG: No,  I  don't.  .  .  .
Mr.   SPIVACK:  Have   our   detecting   devices   been   im-
proved  in  the  three  years  of  the  moratorium?
Chairman  SEABORG:  Yes,  I  would  say  they  have.  .  .  .
Mr.  SPIVACK:  Dr.  Seaborg,   the   moratorium   with   the
Russians  was  on  testing  but  not  on  production.  Have   we
been  able  to  improve our  weapons  during.the  period  of  the
moratorium?
Chairman  SEABORG: ...  we  certainly  have   been  im-
proving   our   weapons   during   the   moratorium,   very   sub-
stantially.
—Meet   the  Press,  Oct.  29.
1  1  *
1  6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   6,  1961
The  Kirov  Assassination   —  Staged   to  Frighten  Stalin  Into  Terrorism
(Continued  from   Page   One)
Afraid  to  Look  Him  In  the  Eye
There  is  no   doubt   that   Khrushchev   hated   Stalin,  with  a
hatred   born   of   a  lifetime's  fear.     A  passage   in  his   speech
of   the   27th  vividly  recreates   the   terrorized   atmosphere   of
the   inner   circle  in  Stalin's   time.     "Stalin   could   look   at  a
comrade   sitting   at   the   same   table   with  him," Khrushchev
told  the  Congress,  "and say: 'Your  eyes  are  shifting  today.'
Afterward   it  could   be  taken   for   granted   that   the   comrade
whose   eyes  were   supposedly   shifting  was  under   suspicion."
And   suspicion  could   mean  a  fall  overnight  from  power   and
all   its  privileges   to  a  stinking  labor  camp  in  the   Arctic,  or
worse.     But  Khrushchev's   hatred   for   Stalin   does   not   impel
him   to  reforms  fundamental  enough   to  prevent  a  repetition
of  the  gross  inhumanity which  marked  the  Stalin  period.   The
22d   Congress  illustrates  how   weak  and   inadequate  was  the
putting  forward   of   "personality  cult"   as  an  explanation   for
what  vent  wrong  under   Stalin.    So  great   was  popular  bit-
terness  when  he  died  that  his  successors  had  to  throw   open
the   prison   camps   and   kill   the   secret   police   chief   Beria  as
their  scapegoat.     But  slowly  in  every  sphere  the  Khrushchev
party  bureaucracy  has  been  taking  back  the  greater  freedom
of  the  post-Stalin  "thaw."
Bureaucracies  everywhere  prefer   suppression   and   coercion
to  persuasion  and   criticism.    The   biggest   opposition   to  de-
stalinization   has   come   from   bureaucratic  inertia.     Khrush-
chev   on   the   27th/tried   to   cow  the   "anti-party"   group  by
threatening  to   reopen   the   Kirov   affair,   the   assassination  of
a  popular  and  "liberal"  Leningrad  leader  in  December 1934
which   inaugurated  the   Stalin   terror.     This   seems   to   have
been  the  handiwork  of  conspirators  in  the  Stalin  secret  police
apparatus.     The   real   lesson   is  that   they   hoped    thereby   to
frighten   the  dictator  away  from   liberal  reforms.    This   part
of   the  story  Khrushchev   did   not   tell.    Only  a  few   months
earlier  Stalin  had  abolished  the  GPU,   and  limited  the  powers
of   the   new   political   police   which   replaced   it.     The   Kirov
assassination  seems  to  have  been  designed  to  make  Stalin  fear
that   he   faced   a  murderous  opposition  which   could   be   met
only  by  again  strengthening  the   secret   police.
What   happened   before   can   happen   again.     The   day  is
The  More  It  Changes   .  .  .
"One   is   called   on  to   wage   a  resolute   struggle   for
high  ideological-artistic  level  of  art  works,  to  be  merci-
less  toward  any  deviations   from   the  principles   of   so-
cialist  realism.  The  most  important  task  of  art  experts
and  critics  is  an  uncompromising  struggle  against   hos-
tile  ideological   views,   exposing   the  reactionary   art  of
the  bourgeoisie,   giving   a  crushing   rebuff   to   revision-
ists  of  all  types  and  shades  .  .  .  resolutely  combatting
pseudo-innovation   and  formalism  and  all  distortions   in
art   .   .  .  abstract   painting  and   formless    music.   .   .  .
Reactionary  critics  of  Soviet  literature  and  art   accuse
our   writers   and   artists   of   tying   their   work   to   the
policy  of  the  party,  thus  allegedly   restricting  artistic
freedom.     To  this  there  can  be  only  one  answer:   We
understand   creative   freedom  differently."
—Minister   of  Culture  Furtseva   to  the   22d   Congress.
"Stalin  is  said  to  have  formulated,  in   conversations
with  writers,   his   doctrine  of   the  kind  of   truth   which
a  Communist  writer  should  seek   to  portray,  to  which
he   gave   the   name    Socialist   realism.   .   .   .   He [the
writer]   must   portray   reality   as   seen   by   the   party.
...  He  must  also  inculcate  in  the  masses  those   ideas
which  the  party  desires  to  inculcate.  .  .  .  The  purges
of  1936-38  during  which  a  number  of  prominent  writers
of   the   early   period   of   Soviet   literature    disappeared,
served   as  a  warning  that  from  creative  literary   free-
dom  to  charges   of  counter-revolution  was  only   a  short
step."
—Leonard   Schapiro:   The   Communist  Party   of   the
Soviet   Union,  p.   4(>5.
coming,   if   peace   can  be  preserved,   when   a  new   generation
in  Russia  will  get  rid  not  just  of  Stalin's  mummy  but  of  his
system.     The   day  will   come   when   they  will   borrow   from
our   own  Bill  of  Rights  to  establish,  under  socialism,   those
freedoms   of   speech   and   of   security  against   arbitrary   police
action  which  can  alone  eradicate  Stalinism.    Marx,  to  whom
a  statue  has  just  been  erected   in  Moscow,   never   dreamt  that
socialism  would  bring  into  being  a  system  under  which  mo-
mentous  decisions  of  war  and  peace,  like  the  Prussian  resump-
tion   of   testing,   could   be   taken   not   only   without   popular
discussion  but  without   even   letting   the  people   know.    To  a
new   Russian   revolutionary  youth   these   lines   are   dedicated.
Hear   IFS   on  a  Civil   Defense   Panel,  All  Souls  Church,  16th &  Harvard,  Washington,  8  P.M.,   Fri., Nov. 10
1.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ...........................................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
U/6/61
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City      ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?          Tes  D    No  D
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.   D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday    In   August   and   the   first   In
September  and  the  last  Monday   in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N,  W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED