I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961apr03.pdf

============================================================

Is  Armament  A  Form  of  Insurance? P. 3
Ranking  Republican  on  the  House  Un-Americans  Endorses  the  Crypto-Fascist   John  Birch  Society,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  12APRIL  3,   1961
>.«"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
On  Our   Light-Headed  Readiness  for  War   in   Laos
In  the  Laotian  crisis,  Washington  showed  that  light-head-
edness  which  has  from  time  immemorial marked  our  human
species  on  the  verge  of  war.    One  newspaper  headline  epito-
mized  the  mood,  "Kennedy  Loses  in  Pay  Fight,   Hailed  on
Laos."   A  coalition  of  conservatives  mustered  a.one-vote  mar-
gin  to  win  a  haggle  with  the  President  over  how  many  miser-
ably   paid   workers  should  get   an   extra   ten   cents  on  their
minimum  wage.    But  the  same  cautious  souls  were  ready  to
throw  their  lives  and  fortunes  into  the  crucible over  a  country
few   could  locate  on  the  map.    Despite   the  hand-wringing
just  a  few  years  back  over  the  warning  of  Sputnik,  the  Presi-
dent  will  have  serious  difficulty  in  getting  a  program  through
to  step  up  our  educational  system  in  competition  with   the
Russians.    But  nobody  rose  to  question  the  wisdom  of  squan-
dering  hundreds  of  millions  more  on  a  futile  jungle  war  that
can  lead  nowhere  but  to  frustration  or  a  wider  conflict.    The
wiser  heads of  the  capital  rushed  forward  to  demonstrate  that
they  were  not  to  be  outmatched  in  thoughtlessness.    Chair-
man  Fulbright  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations  told  a  television
audience  "This  is  an  example  of  where  we  ought  to  support
the  President  whether  we  agree  or  not"—apparently  on  the
principle  that   free   debate  were  best  suspended  when  most
needed.  And  Senator  Javits  of  New   York  said  U.S.  ground
forces  should  fight  if  necessary  "to   save  the  people  of  Laos
from   being  enslaved,"  a  remark  which  would   puzzle  most
Laotians.    While  dispatches  from  Vientiane  reported   (New
York   Herald-Tribune,  March  25)   that  "not   more  than  100
Laotians  had  even  heard  of  President  Kennedy's address"  and
the  Laotian  capital  was  "sleeping  off  a  riotous   celebration",
our  press,  radio  and  TV  were  whooping  up  the  war  fever.
The  calm  in  Laos  illustrated  the  advantages  of  not  possessing
modern  means  of  communication,  especially  since  these  show
themselves  most  efficient  in  transmitting  panic  and  engender-
ing  folly.
Strange   Ways  of  the  Inscrutable  Occident
On  a  more  sophisticated  level,  and  in  the  inner  councils  of
the  government,  there  was  general   agreement   that  this  talk
of  war  was  nonsense,  a  bluff  the  White  House  and  the  Pen-
tagon  were  hoping  the  Russians  would  not  call.    The  basic
consideration,  however,  was to  risk  intervention—or  seem to—
if  necessary  to  cover  with  big  talk  a  diplomatic  defeat.    Mr.
Kennedy,  far  abler   than  his  predecessor   and  more  than  all
else  a  cautious  man,  understands  that  he  is  the  heir  to  a  mess
in  Laos  which  we  have  ourselves  created.    He  is  sincere  in
saying  we  will  accept  a  neutral  Laos.    And  as  the  internal
situation  deteriorates  we are  belatedly  prepared  to  accept  recall
of   the.  International   Control  Commission,  a   14-nation   con-
ference  including  Communist  China  and  even  the  return  to
power  of  the  neutralist  Prince  Souvanna  Phouma  whom  our
As  Seen  By  Americans  On  The  Spot
"Said  an  American  soldier—one  of  the  hundred odd
here   in   mufti   to  train  Laotian  military  forces:   'We
should  be  proud  of  ourselves.    We  have  taught  them
[the   Laotians]  how  to  kill  each  other.    Pretty   soon
they'll  do it  as  well  as  civilized nations  do. .  .  .'
"Said   a   member   of   the   U.S.   Operations  Mission
which  along  with  the  military  has  spent  some  $300,-
000,000  to  aid  Laos:  'I'm  new  here.    But  why  is  it  that
in  every  country I  go  to,  the  other  side  seems  to  have
the  will  to  fight  while  we  do not.  .  .  .'
'The  [American]  diplomat  said:  'We  came  here  to
help  out.  .  .  .  We  were  determined  to   be  generous.
But  we  gave  the  money  and  the  goods  to  the  military
program.    We  neglected  the  economic  side.    And  the
money  we  did  give  to  help  the  country  went  into  the
pockets  of  the  rich  and  corrupt."
—New  York  Herald  Tribune,  from  Laos,  March 25
military   and   our   State  Department   people   have   twice,   in
1958  and  in  I960,  toppled  from  office.    All  we  ask  is  a  little
face-saver  in  the  form  of  an  immediate  cease-fire,  explicit  or
tacit.    Unfortunately  at  the  same  time,  as  this  is  written,  we
are  trying  to  line  up  the  SEATO  powers  in  Bangkok  for  a
strong  pronunciamento  which  would  make  it  look  as  if   the
Russians  were  backing  down  to  a  military  threat,  a  most  un-
wise  tactic  as  Prince  Souvanna  Phouma  was  quick  to  point
out   from   Paris.     If   face   must  be  saved   (such  are  the   in-
scrutable  ways  of  us  Occidentals)   it  must  be  saved  on  both
sides.
Our  position   in  Laos  is  weak  from  many  points  of  view.
Morally,  we  are  guilty   of  violating  the   Geneva   accords  of
1954  by  military  and  political  intervention  to  upset  the  neu-
trality  those  accords  were  intended  to  protect;   the  very  fact
that  our  military  must  operate  there  in  civilian  clothes  as  a
"Program  Evaluations  Office"   testifies  to  the  illicit  character
of   the   operation.     Politically,   our   Ambassador  J.   Graham
Parsons   (later  promoted   to  Assistant  Secretary  of   State   for
Far  Eastern  Affairs,  now  awaiting  transfer  to  Sweden  as  Am-
bassador   but  still  influential   in  our   councils   on  Laos)   has
been  pursuing  policies  which have  over  and  over  again  proven
themselves  bankrupt.    These  were  designed  to  install  a  mili-
tantly  anti-Communist  dictatorship  in  Laos  prepared   to  line
itself  up  with  SEATO.    The  most  striking  evidence  of  failure
came  last  summer  when  a  Captain  Kong  Le,  commander  of
the  crack  parachutists  who  were  the  only  pride  and   joy  of
our  military  in  Laos,  revolted  (in  disgust  with  the  corruption
we   created)   and   put   Souvanna   Phouma   back   in   power,
Militarily,  our  threat  of  intervention   is  weak  because   all   it
would   do   is  bog  down   U.S.   forces  in   a  mountain   jungle
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   3,  1961
Un-American   Chairman's  Ideological  Premises   Closer  to  Lenin's  Than  to  Jefferson's
Walter  Challenges  Kennedy's Order  Ending Controls on Incoming  Literature
Three  days  before  President  Kennedy  issued  his  order  end-
ing  the  practice  of  intercepting  incoming  books  and   news-
papers  from   the   Soviet   bloc,  Chairman   Walter  of   the   Un-
American   Activities   Committee  paid   a   visit   to   the  White
House.    The   purpose  of   the  visit  was  never   disclosed  but
four   days  after  the  President's  order  was  issued,  Mr.  Walter
introduced   a   bill,   HR   5751,   setting   up   an   Office   of   the
Comptroller  of  Foreign  Propaganda  in  the  Treasury's  Customs
Bureau.    The  bill  would  reinstate  the  practice  Mr.  Kennedy
had  just  ended.
Mr.  Walter,  in  a  statement   which  accompanied   the  intro-
duction   of  the  bill,  referred   to  the  President's   order   when
he  said  "Now   that  the  Executive  branch  of  the   Government
has  found   it  necessary  to  discontinue   the  Government's   prac-
tice  of  intercepting  Communist   propaganda,  mailed   into  this
country   from   abroad,   the  poison  will  be  pouring   into   the
veins   of   our   society   without   restriction."     The   bill   is  an
amendment   to  the   Subversive   Activities  Control  Act  and  it
was  referred   to  the   Committee  on   Un-American    Activities.
We  hope  liberal  organizations  will  demand   hearings.
The  State  As  Nursemaid
The  ideology  behind   this  bill  is  that  of  the  Soviet   rather
than   of   the   American   system.     Behind   this   legislation   are
two  old  ideas.     One  is  that  the   State   must  play   nursemaid
to  the  people  and  protect  them   from   dangerous   thoughts.
The  other  is  that  subversive  ideas  have  a  supernatural   power,
akin  to  some  noxious  poison  which   cannot   be  combatted   by
normal   debate.
The  very  language   used  by  Mr.  Walter  is  strikingly   like
that  which  has  been  utilized  to  defend  censorship   within  the
Soviet  Union  in  the  past.*    Thus  Lunacharsky,  Lenin's  Min-
ister  of  Education,  declared   early  in   1921,   "We   in  no  way
shrink   from   the   necessity   of   applying    censorship   even   to
Mistaken  Identity  Case
The  Supreme  Court  last  Monday  granted  certiorari
in  the  appeal  of  Robert  Shelton,   a  copy  editor  of  the
New  York  Times, from  a  conviction  for  contempt of  the
Senate  Internal  Security  Committee.   There   is  reason
for  believing  that  Mr.  Shelton's  conviction  may  be  re-
versed.    This  arises  from  the  emphasis  placed  by  Mr.
Justice  Stewart  in  the  Wilkinson  decision  on  the  fact
that   Mr.  Wilkinson  had  not   been   summoned  "as   the
result  of  an  indiscriminate  dragnet   procedure,   lacking
in  probable  cause  for  belief  that  he  possessed  informa-
tion  which  might  be  helpful  to  the  subcommittee."  The
Court  seemed  to  be  saying   that,  just  as  an  arrest   is
not   legal   without   "probable   cause",   so   a  committee
subpoena  was  not  valid  if  there  was  not  some   reason
to  believe  the  witness  had  information  on  the  subject
under    investigation.     Mr.   Shelton's    case — a    First
Amendment  contempt — is  peculiar  in  that  the  Internal
Security  Committee  had  a  subpoena  for  another  news-
paperman  of  the  same  last  name  who  does  not  work
for  the  New  York  Times,  and  changed  the  subpoena  to
fit  when  Senator  Eastland  learned  there  was   another
Shelton  on  the  paper  named  Robert.    The  petition  to
the  Supreme  Court  asked  whether  a  witness   could  be
punished    for    contempt   when    subpoenaed    "without
probable  cause  or  any  reason  to  believe"  that  he  had
ever  been  affiliated  with  Communists or  had  any  knowl-
edge  of  their   activities.
*We  applaud the  abolition  of  censorship  on  outgoing  news-
paper   dispatches   from   the   Soviet   Union.    We  are  talking
here  of  the  steps  taken  by  the   USSR   to  control  literature
within  the  Union  and  to  prevent  foreign  papers  and  books
from  entering  Russia,  as  Mr. Walter  would like  to  keep  them
from  entering   the   U.S.A.
belles-lettres,   since  under  this   banner   and   beneath   this   ele-
gant  exterior  poison  may  be  implanted   in  the  still  naive  and
dark  soul  of  the  great  mass  of  people.  .  .  ."    And  the  late
Andrei  Vishinsky  in  his  The  Law  of  the  Soviet  State  attacked
"the   liberal  screen  of  'free  press' "  as  a  freedom   "to  poison
the  minds  of  the  masses."    They,  like  Mr.  Walter,   believe
the  State  has  a  duty  to  protect  people  from  these  "poisons";
they  by censorship;  he  by labeling  and  import  control.
We'd   like  to  see battle  joined  on  the  issue,  and  Mr.  Walter
put  on  the  defensive.     His  attitude  is  far   closer   to  Lenin's
than  to  Jefferson's.   Hearings  on  this  thought  control  measure
would   be  an  opportunity   to  expose   the  strange   ideas  which
pass  for  Americanism  in  his  committee.    It  has  too  long  been
able  to  operate  unchallenged  as  the  citadel  of  a  police  state
mentality  more  truly  un-American  than  anything  it  has hunted.
House  Un-American's  Ranking  Republican, Scherer, Endorses John Birch Society
Unnoticed   by   the   press,   the   name   of   Rep.  Gordon  H.
Scherer  of  Ohio,  ranking  Republican  member  of  the  House
Un-American   Activities   Committee  appears   in   a   list   of
prominent   persons   endorsing   the   John   Birch   Society,   a
secret  order  of  right  wing  crackpots  led  by  a  retired  busi-
ness  man  Fuehrer  named  Robert  Welch.    The  list  was  put
into  the  Congressional   Record  March  22  (p.  4335)  as  part
of  a  speech  by  Rep.  Mendel  Rivers  of  South  Carolina,  de-
fending   the   society   and  calling   for   the   impreachment  of
Chief   Justice  Earl  Warren,  the  Society's   No.  1  project.
The  speech  was  headed,  "Earl  Warren's  Fellow  Travellers
Smear  John  Birch  Society"   and  it   said  the  attack  on  the
Society  carried  by  Time  (March  10)  was  "amazingly  simi-
lar"  to  one  that  appeared  earlier   in  People's   World   (Feb.
25),  which  "as  verified  by  the  research  staff  of  the  Senate
Internal   Security   Committee,  is   the   official   organ   of   the
Communist  Party  on  the  West  Coast."    Mr. Rivers  thought
this  odd in  "a magazine  like  Time, which purports to  expose
and  attack  communism.  .  .  ."
The  "amazing  similarity"  cited  by  Rivers  is   that  both
publications  picked out  the  names  of  Dean  Clarence Manion,
Spruille   Braden   and   Adolphe  Menjou  on   the   Council  of
the  Birch  Society.    Mr.  Rivers  did  not  question  the  origi-
nality  of  Time's  characterization  of  the  Society:  "Its   cells,
of  20  to  30  members  apiece  .  .  .  promote  Communist-style
front  organizations  that  do  not  use  the  John  Birch  name.
Carefully  avoiding  normal  channels  of  political  action,  the
society   accepts  the  hard-boiled dictatorial  direction  of  one
man  who  sees  democracy  as  a  'perennial  fraud'  and  esti-
mates  the  U.S.  is  40%  to  60% Communist-controlled."
Last  week  we  published  the  text  of   a  letter   signed  by
Senator  Eastland  for  the  Internal  Security  Committee call-
ing  the  John  Birch  Society  a  "patriotic"  organization.    Now
it  turns  out  that  Mr.  Scherer  of   the  Un-Americans  is  an
endorser.     These   self-anointed   guardians   of   Americanism
pure  and  undefiled  keep  strange  company.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   S,  1961
JFK  In  Boosting  the  Defense  Budget.  Calls  Military  Spending  A  Form  of  Insurance
Does  the  Arms  Race  Insure  Anything  But  A  Growing  Mutual  Insecurity ?
All  through  the  President's  special  message  on  the  defense
budget  last  week  ran  the  theme  that  money  spent  on  arms was
like  money spent  on  insurance.   This  is a  deceptive  metaphor.
A  man  buys  insurance  in  order  to  protect  his  wife  and
children,  knowing  that  he  will  some  day  die.    The  arms  race
is  not   insurance  against  death,  but   against  a  neighbor   one
does  not  trust.    You   assume  that  if  you  let  him  know  you
carry  a  revolver,   he  will  not   dare   to  attack  you.    This  is
the  theory  of  deterrence  in  its  simplest  form.
The   trouble  with  arms  race  insurance  is  that   both  sides
take  it  out  against  each  other.    Each   neighbor   regards   the
other  as  untrustworthy  and  himself,  of  course,  as  a  sterling
fellow.    To  deter  him  you  have  to  have  more  firepower  than
he  does.    If  he  has  a  revolver,  you  buy  a  shotgun.    If   he
sees  you  have  a  shotgun,   he  puts   metal  guards   around   his
windows.   To  meet  this  obstacle  to  swift  and  sure  deterrence,
you  put  in  a  stock  of  hand  grenades.    He  may  counter  this
with   a  small   second   hand   cannon   aimed   at  your  bedroom
window.
Second  Strike   Capacity
To  meet  the  threat  of  that  cannon  aimed  at  your  bedroom
window,  you  decide  to   put   in  some  second   strike  capacity.
You  aim   an   automatic  machine   gun   into   his   nursery,  and
wire  it  to  go  off  when  and  if  he  lets  fly  into  your  bedroom.
He  will  then  know  that  though   he  may  kill  you  and  your
wife  in  your  sleep,  his  children  will  die  with  you.
Put   in  these  terms,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  one  kind  of
insurance  this  provides  is  insurance that  neither  side will  sleep
easily  at  nights.
This   problem   is  soluble   only  when   looked   at   not   from
the  viewpoint  of  any  one  household  but  of  all  of  them.    We
meet  the  problem  in  community  living  by  forbidding   private
armament  and  allowing  firepower  only  to  the   police.
So  long   as  we  fail   to   apply  this   same  approach   to   the
world  community,  the  arms  race  only  supplies  an  increasing
insecurity.    Thus  Mr.  Kennedy,   in  stepping   up  the  Polaris
program,  calls  for   29  nuclear  submarines  "each   with  a   full
complement  of  missiles."    He  says,  "The   sooner  they  are  on
station,  the  safer  we will   be."
Each   Polaris   submarine  has   16  nuclear   missiles.     If   our
arithmetic  is  correct,  29  submarines  will  carry  a  total  of  524
missiles.   When  the  Russians know  we  have  524  nuclear mis-
siles  cocked  at  their  cities  and  bases  from  secret  places  under
the  sea,  will  we  really  be  safer?
The  Origin  of  Those   Missile
And  Bomber  Gap  Scares
"There  is  no  doubt  that  the  services  have  sometimes
utilized   inflated   estimates   of    enemy    strengths   to
strengthen  their  budget  requests  to  Congress.    There
have  been  marked  differences   of   opinion  between   the
services   based   on   differing   intelligence    estimates—
about   Soviet   missile   strength,   and,   some   years   ago,
about   Soviet   bomber   strength.     Each   service   has   a
natural   tendency   to  stress  those   elements  of   Soviet
strength  with  which  it  is  most  concerned."
—Hanson  W.  Baldwin,  New  York  Times,  March  27
The  Russians  certainly won't  feel  safer.    Their  answer  will
be  to  build   nuclear  submarines  of  their  own  and   ring   our
shores  with   them.    When  both   sides   are   ringed   by   secret
submarines   armed  with  enough   missiles   to  wipe   out   every
city  and  small  town  in  both,  will  we  feel  safer?    Oc  will  we
be  looking   around  for   some  new  super-monster   to  pile  on
top  of  all  the  existing  monsters  we  call  instruments  of  de-
terrence?    Can  either  side  really  be  made  safer  by  rendering
the  other  side  more  insecure?
Mr.   Kennedy   says,  and   we  are   sure   he   is  sincere,   that
"the  primary  purpose  of  our  arms  is  peace,  not  war."     But
this  is  what  men  have  always  said.    "If  you  want  peace,   pre-
pare   for   war"   is  one   of   the   oldest   fallacies   of    mankind.
The  President  is  objective  enough  to  note  that  "in  the  public
position   of  both  sides  in  recent   years,  the   determination   to
be  strong  has  been   coupled   with   announced   willingness   to
negotiate.    For  our  part,"  Mr.  Kennedy   added,   "we   know
there  can  be  dialectical  truth  in  such  a  position,  and  we  shall
do  all  we can  to  prove  it  in  action."    The  trouble  is  that  both
sides  want  to  deal  from  a  situation  of  strength,  and  neither
is  yet  willing  to  put  the  job  of  policing  the  world  in  the
hands  of  a  world  community.    There  is  no  other  way  out.
To  step  up  the  arms  race,  as  Mr.  Kennedy   is  doinff   with
tliis^£ewjnessage,meFely~a3ds  to "trie  tempo  of  madness.    We
began   by~ringing~the  Soviet  union" with  bases"RT contain   it.
The  Soviets  replied  by  developing  an  intercontinental   ballistic
missile  which  can hurl  death  on  our  cities  in  30 minutes.    We
counter  by putting nuclear  armed  submarines  in  secret  position
around  the  Soviet  shores.    The  USSR  may  reply  next  by  put-
ting  nuclear  weapons  in  orbit  on  space  ships  whirling  around
the  earth,  ready  on  signal  to  hurl  death  down  upon  it.    The
notion  of  deterrence  on  which  both  sides  operate   is  a  delu-
sion.    It  leads  to  a  dead  end  for  mankind.
Only  Solution  We  Can See  Is  To Plan  for  War  Against  Other  Planets
"Los   Angeles,    Mar.   27—(AP)—By    1965   the   United
States   expects   to  have:  708  Atlas,  Titan   and  Minuteman
ICBM's,  most of  them  stored  in  bomb-proof  pits;  236 Polaris
missiles  in  nuclear  submarines  and  150  additional  Minute-
men  on  trains  roving  100,000  miles  of  railroad  tracks,  hard
to  spot  and  harder  to  hit.
"Total:   1,094   ready-to-launch   nuclear   warheads,    any
one  of  which  could  wipe  out  a  city.   This  is  probably  two
or   three  times  the  fire-power  needed  to  blast   any  likely
combination  of  enemies  off  the  face  of  the  globe.    Even  if
Russia  by  1965 has  a  reasonably  good  anti-missile   missile,
with  this  overkill  of  200  to  300  percent  the  United  States
should   be  able  to   get   enough  missiles  through  to   make
any  future  war  a  literal   hell.
"So  in  1965  will  we  need  more  missiles?     If   we  don't,
what   happens  to   America's  vast   missile  industry?    The
industry  last  year  grossed  $6  billion  and  gave  jobs  to  300,-
000  people.    By  1965,  if  future  growth  matches  past  per-
formance,  it  could  begin  to  rival  the  $12  billion,  700,000-
worker  automobile   industry.
"Any  serious  dislocation  of  this  industry  would  have  a
depressing  economic effect. ...   A  survey  of  missile  execu-
tives  indicates  full  awareness  of  the  problem."
—New   York   Herald-Tribune,   March  28
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   S,  1961
It  Was  Not   Lack  of  Military  Means
(Continued   from   Page   One)
country  to  repeat  all  the  agonies  of  the  French  in  the  bloody
years  before  1954.    In  addition,  and  here  the  maps  shown  by
Mr.  Kennedy  at  his  White   House   press   conference  gave  a
false  picture,  it  is  not  true  that  the  Pathet  Lao  and   Captain
Kong  Le  merely  hold  three  northern  provinces;  if  that  were
true,  the  situation   could  be  contained  by  a  military  line  or
by  partition.     The   true  situation   may  be  seen  in   the   map
published  by  Le  Monde  in  Paris   (March  25)   which  shows
that   except  for   the   Mekong   River   valley   lowlands   which
adjoin  Thailand,  all  the  rest  of  the  country  from  north  to
south  is now "infected"  with  guerrillas.    They  hold  the moun-
tain  uplands.    According  to  a  series  of  three  articles  by  that
paper's   Far  Eastern  expert,  Robert  Guillain,  by  far  the  best
on-the-spot  report  I  have  seen  (March  24,  25  & 26-27),  all
the  east-west  routes  are  controlled   by  the  Pathet   Lao;  they
are  in  position  to  cut  the  country  in  half  at  Thakek.    There
is  no  longer  a  line  which  can be  held.
The  Same  Old  Errors
The   Laos   crisis   deepens   one's   disappointment   with   the
President's   special  message  adding   some  |2   billions  to  our
defense  budget,  boosting  both  the  monsters  of  massive  retali-
ation   (see  p.  3)   and  also  means  for  limited  war.    Though
Mr.  Kennedy's   requests  are  much  less  than  the  arms   lobby
had  been  led  to  expect  from  the  Democrats,   they   illustrate
that   the  line  of  least   resistance  in  our   society  when   faced
with   a   crisis   is   to   step   up   our   military   appropriations.
But  our  policies  in  Laos  did  not  collapse  for  any  caution  in
military  spending.    Their  failure  grew  out  of  our   inability
to  understand  social  and  economic  factors.    In  the  six  years
since   the   Geneva   accords   we  have   created   viable    regimes
neither  in  Laos  nor  South  Vietnam;  only  neutralist Cambodia
is  stable.    We  have  built  up  huge  armies  in  Thailand,  For-
mosa,   the   Philippines   and   these   two   Indochinese   satellites
which  either  lack  the  will  to  fight  or  are  geared  in  any  case
to  large  scale  modern  war  against  Communist   China.     They
have  neither  the   equipment,   the   training  nor   the   political
program  to  do  battle  in  the  countryside.   In  both  Laos  and
South  Vietnam,  in  addition,  mistreatment  of  the  large  racial
minorities  in  the  mountains  by  the  dominant  lowlander  Lao
and  Viets  have  given  the  Communist  guerrillas   friendly  ter-
Why  Not  Send  A  Gift   Sub  to   Your
Which  Caused  Our  Failure  in   Laos
Some  British  Views  of  Laos
"There  have   been   many   defects   in  past   American
policy,  including  the  support  of  unrepresentative  right-
wing  figures."
—London   Times,  from   Bangkok,  March    %7
"British  official  opinion  does  not  share  the  view  com-
monly   reported   from   Washington   that   in   Laos  Mr.
Khrushchov  is   simply   engaged  in  a  reckless  piece  of
brinkmanship   to  test  the  nerve   of   the  new  American
President  and  of  the  West  as  a  whole.    It  is  too  well
aware  of  the  fact   that  the  Laotian  civil  war  is  partly
the  result  of  rash  American  diplomacy   under  the  Eisen-
hower  Administration,  a  result  about  which  Britain  and
France  gave  repeated  warnings."
—Diplomatic   Corresp.,  London  Observer,  Mar.   26
"He  [Prince  Souvanna  Phouma  "the   most  consider-
able  of  the  Laotian   politicians"]  was  defeated  in   1958
[in  his  effort  to  build  a  neutral  Laos]  not  by  the   Com-
munists  but  by  the  Laotian  right  wing,  with  army  gup-
port    and   American    encouragement.     A   right   wing
government   took   over,   and  the   international   control
commission  was  got  rid  of  as  being  too  neutral.    The
integration   of  the  Pathet  Lao  troops  and  of  the  north-
ern  provinces  failed.    An  American  military   mission
arrived,   and  American   aid  poured in."
—Scrutator  in  London  Sunday   Times,  March  26
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ......................................,...••....••..•—...•.••.———————•—•
Street    ..........
City   ..............
.........
4/3/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  moB.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  ..............................................................
Street   ................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
rain  in  which  to  operate.
To  win  the  people  by  fair  treatment—is  this  so  difficult  ^
principle  to  understand  in  a  country  constantly  striving  at
home  by  democratic means  to  improve  economic  security  and
minority  rights?    Unfortunately  the  military  and   diplomatic
bureaucracies  by  tradition  and   training  have  little  taste  or
sympathy  for  democratic  policies,  and  these  make  or   distort
policy  in  the  act  of  carrying  it  out.    So  inextinguishable i
military  windbag  as  Admiral  Arleigh   A.   Burke,  Chief   of
Naval  Operations,  made  another  of  his  speeches  in  the  midst
of  the  Laotian  crisis  and  declared  "U.S.  military  power  must
be  prepared  to  safeguard  our  principles  whenever,   wherever
they  may be theatened."    (N.Y.  Herald-Tribune,  March  26.)
But  what  moral  right  do  we have  to  impose  "our  principles"
by  blood  and  fire  on  a  distant  peaceful  people  anyway?    And
just  what  did  American principles  have  to  do  -with  the  con-
niving  grafters  we  tried  to  impose  on  Laos?
Local  Editor?  Minister?  Library?                                    '
f.F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class    "
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.   Q.
,     <r  s,™.'.  W..MV—Entered  as  Second  Class Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C..  under the  Act  rf  March »,  187».    Post-dated  Mondays hot  published  every  Thnrs-
I.  F.  Stone .W«My. l^S^"^^^^ESL? aid^ecSber  at  6818  Nebraska  Av
&
.  N.  W..  Washington   D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
flay  except  tnewOT  nro  in^r»a»«          -g™^     Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   »S  in  the  U.  S.;   *6  in
P
                Canada:   110  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:   118  to   Europe:    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED