I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jul10.pdf

============================================================

Fulbright  vs. Rostow,  Pp.  2-3
While   Rostow   Peps  Up  Our  Guerrilla  Warriors,  Fulbright   Warns  Against   "Dirty  Tricks,"  See   Pp.   2*3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IX,  NO.  26
JULY  10,   1961•01     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
How the  U.S.  Could Regain the Initiative in Foreign Policy
Our   present  foreign  policy  difficulties   are  largely  of   our
own  making.   We  are  as  imprisoned  by  taboos  as  a  primitive
tribe.    In  discussing  Germany,  it  is  not  respectable  to  bring
up  the  possibility  that  the  Germans  (whom  we  have  had  to
fight  twice  in  one  generation)   may  again   prove  a   greater
menace  than  the  Russians;  so  the  idea  of  swapping  an  atom-
free   demilitarized   Reich   for   Russian   withdrawal   from   East
Europe  has  been  shelved  as  politically  unmentionable.    In  the
Far   East,  where  Formosa   represents   a  similar   problem   of
how  to  hold  an  ultimately  untenable  outpost,  we  are   afraid
to  examine  realities  because  our  political  leaders  are   frozen
stiff   with   fear   of   Chiang's   China   Lobby,   and   our   public
has   been   taught   to  see  Communist   China   as  a   hobgoblin.
Here  are  some  ways  in  which  we  could   seize  the   initiative
in  foreign  policy  if  we  had  the  capacity  to  break  out  of  our
own  self-imposed   obstacles:
Like  Hearst's  Yellow  Peril
TJ  The   Russians  have  become  as  adept  as  ourselves  in   the
technique  of   the   calculated   leak.    The   most  sensational  in
a  long  time  is  that  of  a  purported  secret  letter  from  Moscow
to  foreign  Communist  parties  accusing  Mao  Tse-tung  of  dis-
loyalty,  subversion  and  "incitement  to  World  War  III."    The
letter,   as  disclosed   by  Isaac  Deutscher,   Stalin's   biographer,
in  the  London  Sunday  Times  (July  2)   and  reprinted  in  the
Washington  Post  (July  5)   is  another  variant  of  a  theme  on
which  Khrushchov  has  often  played.    This  says,  "I  have  to
be  intransigeant  because  the  Chinese  are  breathing  down  my
neck"  and  "give  me  a  token  victory  at  least  on  Berlin  so  I
can  fight  off  the   advocates  of   a  'hard'   line  who   look   for
leadership  to   Peking."     Moscow   in   a  new   form   is  subtly
exploiting   the  fear  Wm.  Randolph   Hearst  popularized  many
years  ago  as  the   "yellow  peril."    Of   course,  the  Russians
do  not  do  it  overtly,  but  they  get  the  same  effect  by  accusing
the   Chinese  in  this   "secret  letter"  of   trying  to  divide  the
Communist  world  into  Western  and  Eastern  zones,  the  latter
under  Chinese  hegemony,  a  division  Moscow  rejects  as carry-
ing  "a  flavor  of  racialism."
But  why  should  we  be  dependent  on  leaks  from   Moscow
to  know  what  the  Chinese  are  thinking?  Why  shouldn't  we
be  free  to  play  it  either  way—to  save  Mao  from  the  Rus-
sians  if  that  suits  our  national   interest   instead  of   "saving"
Khrushchov    from   the   Chinese.     The   secret   letter   blames
Mao  for  Khrushchov's  hardened  line  on  a  nuclear  test  ban.
But  it  is  not  at  all  impossible  that  Russia  could  be  outflanked
on  the  nuclear  test  issue  through   China  if  we  really  wanted
a  test  ban.    Peking  has  several  times  offered  an  "atom   free"
Pacific.    This  proposal,  rudely  rejected  by  State  Dept.  spokes-
men   without   reflection,   would   seem   to   imply  that   China
would  be  prepared   to  renounce  nuclear  weapons  if  we  were
No  Other  Labor  Movement  Like  It
We  see  from  the  July  1  issue  of  the  AFL-CIO  News
that  the  AFL-CIO  Executive  Council  at  its  latest   get-
together   in   the   Poconos   called   for   renewed    nuclear
testing,   no  compromise  on  Berlin   (it   criticized  that
radical,   Mike  Mansfield,   for  suggesting  a  "free  city"
as  a  way  out),   emergency  powers  for  the  President,
and  steps  to  arouse  the  U.S.   public  and  stiffen  Britain
and   France   (whom   the   Council   regards   as   too   soft
on  the  subject).    In   addition,   it   called   for   stronger
OAS  action  against  Cuba.    In  every  other  country  of
the  free  world—even  West  Germany—the  labor  move-
ment  is  always  annoying  the   government  by  talking
about   the  danger  of  nuclear  war  or  some  such  topic
but  here,  thanks  to  George  Meany  and  Jay  Lovestone,
it   stands   in  every   crisis  firmly  to   the  right   of   the
Vatican  and  slightly  to  the  left   of   Barry    Goldwater,
somewhat  wary   of   Kennedy   as  it  was  of  Elsenhower
(both  suspect  for  appeasement),  and  wholly   in   accord
only  with  Konrad  Adenauer.
to  make  the  Pacific  an  atom  free  zone.    This  would  be  pop-
ular  in  Japan  and  throughout   Asia.    A  few  improved  Rus-
sian  warheads  will  not  change  the  world  balance  of   power;
nuclear   weapons  in   Chinese   hands  will   shake   the   world.
Now,  before  Peking  has  the  bomb,  is  the  time  to   negotiate.
China's  famine  is  the  greatest   opportunity   ever   offered   our
Food  for  Peace  program.    Recognition,  coupled  with  a -face-
saving  formula  for  an  autonomous  Formosa,  set  in  the  grand
design   of   an   atom   free   Pacific,   enforced   by   a   treaty   for
mutual  inspection   against  nuclear  testing  would  make  it  im-
possible   for   Russia   to   continue   lone   resistance   to   effective
safeguards.    This  is  how  a  modern   Richelieu,  as  free   from
ideological   nonsense  as  the  great  French  Cardinal  was  from
theological   prejudice,  would  play  the  political  cards  to  safe-
guard  America's  long  range  interests   in  a  stable   Pacific  and
in   preventing   the   creation   of   a   solid   Russo-Chinese   bloc
dominating   Eurasia.*
If  Another  way  to  free  ourselves  for  effective  foreign  policy
action   is  to  end   the   one-sided  presentation  of   the   nuclear
testing  issue.    Two  illustrations  of  this  may  be  found   in  a
little  noticed  speech  Senator  Humphrey  made  to  the  Senate
June  29.   Humphrey  revealed  that  the  President  "has  received
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
*  That  Kennedy  is  capable  of  such  perspectives  was  indi-
cated  when  he  told  the  Senate  June  14,  1960,  that  some  way
ought  to  be  found  to  bring  the  Chinese  into  tbe  nuclear  test
talks  "because  Chinese  possession  of   atomic   weapons   could
drastically  alter  the  balance  of  power"  and  added   "if  that
contact  proved   fruitful,   further   cultural  and  economic   con-
tact  could  be  tried.    For  only  in  this  way  can  we   inform
ourselves  of   Communist   activities,   attempt   to  restore  our
historic  friendship   with   the  Chinese  people.  .  .  ."
1  0  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   July   10, 1981
Contrasting   Speeches  by  Fulbright  and  Rostow  Reflect  A  Great  Debate  . . .
Last  May  15  Jim  Lucas  in  a  Scripps-Howard  series   from
Fort  Bragg,  N.C.   on  the  Army's  so-called   Special  Forces  for
guerrilla  warfare  said  its  command  "appears  to  have  an  open
line  to  the  desk  of  a  top  presidential   assistant  at  the  White
House."    The  description  seems  to  fit  Kennedy   aide  W.  W.
Rostow  who  spoke  June  28  at  the  graduation   exercises  of  the
U.S.  Army  Special Warfare  School  at Fort  Bragg.   His  speech,
of  which  we  give   excerpts   on  page  3,  is  worth   close  study,
especially   in  connection   with   a  thoughtful    address   made  in
the  Senate   next   day  by  Senator  Fulbright,  chairman   of   the
Foreign  Relations   Committee  (see   excerpts  at  the  bottom  of
this  page).    Indeed  on  dose  reading  of  the  two,   I  get  the
feeling  of  a  debate  within   the  Kennedy    Administration.
New  Adventures  in  North  Viet-Nam?
Fulbright,  the  one  top   Administration   figure   who  spoke
out  forcefully  against  the  Cuban  adventure,  seems  to  be  warn-
ing   in  his   Senate   speech   against   the   possibility   of   similar
new  episodes   and  against   the  mentality   behind   them  as  ex-
pressed  by  Prof.  Rostow.    In  this  connection,  there  are  signs
of  new  war  preparations  against  Cuba,  either  by  exiles  train-
ing  here  or  collectively  through  the  OAS,  and  of  secret  guer-
rilla  projects   elsewhere.    The   Wall   St.  Journal   May  16  on
"undercover  warfare"    plans   in  Washington   said   "Without
going  into  secret  details,  indications   can  be  reported  that  at
least  one  such  maneuver   is  being  blueprinted  at  this  moment
for   execution   in  a  vital   nation   distant   from   Cuba."    That
may  be  North  Viet-Nam.
For   all  his   sophistication   and   scholarship,   Prof.   Rostow
engages   in  self-delusion.     He   says   "our   central  task   in  the
underdeveloped   areas  is  to  protect  the  independence   of   the
revolutionary   process."    He  says  we  seek  a  world   in   which
The  Press  on The  New  Frontier
Before  the  Cuban  invasion,  exile  forces  were allowed
to  recruit  and  train  in  violation  of  neutrality laws  and
Florida  newspapers  suppressed  the  news  until  it  leaked
from   other   sources.     The   same   process   has   begun
again.    Two  groups  of   anti-Castro  adventurers  were
identified  by  the  Miami  Herald  June  27.    It  reported
naively  that  their  existence   had  been  known by  it  for
some  days  but  that  the  Herald  "feeling  that  the  story
is  within  the  sensitive  area  of  national  policy,   withheld
publication  until  after  the  matter  was  aired  in  Wash-
ington."    The  Herald  broke  the  story  on  the  Tuesday
after  Senator  George  A.  Smathers  of  Florida  had  dis-
closed  the  existence   of  one  group  on  a  Sunday  night
radio   show.
The  Herald's  queasy  phrases   are  disturbing.    It   is
the  job  of  a  free  press  to  report  law  violations,  par-
ticularly   when   they   may   have   the   tacit   support   of
government   agencies.     The   CIA   may   be    "sensitive"
about  such  reporting  but  has  that  become  a  standard
of  self-censorship?  These  groups  are  operating  openly;
in  fact  neighbors  complained to  the  police  about  them.
The  incident  illustrates  the   way  developments  which
are  known  in   one  city   or  State   may   be   kept  from
public  knowledge  elsewhere.  We  are  on  a  new  frontier
of  government-press relations  in  which  official   agencies
and  nervous  nellie  editors  can  and  do  conspire  to  keep
the  public  un-  or  mis-informed.
"each  nation  will  be  permitted  to  fashion ...  the  kind  of
modern   society  it  wants."    Is  this  why  we  try  to  marshall
the  hemisphere  against  Castro?    He  speaks  of'our  "religious
and   philosophical   beliefs"   about   the   "uniqueness   of   each
individual."    How  much  concern  is  there  for  the  individual
in  the  present  regimes  of  South  Korea,  South  Viet-Nam,  Tai-
wan,  Pakistan  and  Iran  which  he  names  as  the  special   objects
Fulbright   Warns  Against  the  New  Vogue
"My  fear  is  that  many  Americans, including  some  whose
judgment  is  generally  good,  are  drawing  the  wrong  con-
clusions.  .  .  .  The  lesson   of   Cuba,   they  suggest,   is   that
the  objective  was  the  correct  one,  but  that  the  means  em-
ployed  were  inadequate.    And  they   further   suggest   that
any  means by  which we  can  block  Communist encroachment
in  our hemisphere garden is  the proper course  of  action.  . . .
"It  is  suggested   with  some  frequency  that  U.S.   policies
would  be  improved by  an  infusion  of  the  more  mischievous
tactics  employed by  the  Communists;  that  with  some  appli-
cation  we  could  beat  the  Communists  at  their  own  game.
This,    I   think,   totally   misses   the   real    nature   of    the
struggle.  .  . .
"It  is  not  our  affluence,  or  our  plumbing,  or  our  clogged
freeways   that  grip   the  imagination  of   others.   Rather   it
is  the  values  upon  which  our  system  is  built.    These  values
imply   our   adherence   not   only   to   liberty   and   individual
freedom,   but  also   to  international   peace,  law   and   order,
and  constructive   social   purpose. ...  If  we  are  faithful
to  our  own  values,  while  following  an  intelligent   courage-
ous  and  consistent   line  or  policy,  we  are  likely  to  find  a
high  measure  of  the  support  we  seek   abroad.    But  if   we
fail   our  own  values   and  ideals,   utimately  we  shall  have
failed  ourselves. ...
"Some'may  object  that,  as  a  practical  matter,  the  fire
spread  by  communism  can  be  fought  effectively  only  with
fire.    I   disagree.   .  .  .  The  U.S.   cannot   guarantee   the
borders   of   a  neutral   country   against   infiltration,   or   its
villages   from   subversion.     But   the   U.S.   can   become   a
pivotal  force  in  enabling  well-intentioned   governments   to
bring   about   the   economic   and  social   reforms   that   their
For  "Dirty  Tricks"  in  Our Foreign   Policy
societies  are  understandably enough  insisting  upon.   Given
such  reforms,  subversion  efforts  fail.  .  .  .
"Cuba,  of  course,  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  has  been
transformed  into  a  Communist  oriented,  totalitarian  state.
It  is  idle  to  expect  the  present  Cuban  regime  to  reform,
to   collapse,   or  to   be   overthrown  by  its   exiles.     And  I
submit  that  to  overthrow  it  by  American  force,  or  by  some
combination   including  American  force,   would  be   self-de-
feating   and  would  create  more  problems   than  would  be
solved.   We  often  hear  that  the  existence  of  a Communist
regime  in  Cuba  is   intolerate  to  the  United  States.    But
is  that  really  the  case?     I  know  it  is   embarrassing  and
annoying  and  potentially   dangerous,  but  is  it  really   intol-
erable?
"The  possibility   of  Soviet  missile  bases  and  jet   aircraft
bases   in   Cuba  is  frequently  noted.    I  suppose   we  would
all  be  less  comfortable  if   the  Soviets   did  install   missile
bases  in  Cuba,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  our  national  exist-
ence  would  be  in  substantially   greater  danger  than  is  the
case  today.   Nor  do I  think  that  such  bases  would  substan-
tially  alter  the  balance   of  power  in  the  world.
"What   would  substantially  alter  the  balance   of   power
in  the  world  would  be  precipitate  action  by  the  U.S.   re-
sulting   in  the  alienation   of   most  of  Latin  America,   Asia
and  Africa. ...  In  Latin   America,   as  in  much  of  the
rest  of  the  world,  the  question  is  being  posed:  Can  social
and  economic  progress  proceed  apart  from  totalitarian   dis-
cipline?    It  is  our  duty  to  provide  a  credible  case  for  the
affirmative   side  of  this  debate.    Our  economic   and  philo-
sophical   resources,   if   wisely   used,   should   enable   us   to
succeed."—Fulbright's   Speech   to  the   U.S.  Senate  June  29
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July   10,  1961
. . . Now Being  Waged In The Upper  Levels of the Kennedy   Administration
of  our  solicitude?   The  equanimity  with which we  watch  the
rise  of  new  military  dictatorships as  in  Korea  and  the  com-
placency  with  which  we  gloss  over  the  Fascist  character  of
such   regimes   as  Diem's   in   South   Viet-Nam   contrast   too
strongly  with  our  implacable  hostility  to  revolutionary gov-
ernments  like Castro's which  have  dared  to  expropriate  Amer-
ican properties.
No  Guerrillas in  the  Congo
Prof.  Rostow  lumps  together  Cuba,  the  Congo,  Laos  and
Viet-Nam  as  similar  examples  of  what  he  calls  the  "inter-
national  disease"  of   "guerilla  war   designed,  initiated,  sup-
plied  and  led   from   outside  an  independent  nation."    But
these  are  very  different   situations.    There  was  no  guerrilla
warfare  in  the  Congo;  there  our  CIA  connived  with  the  Bel-
gians  to  get  rid  of  Lumumba  because he  would  not  knuckle
under  to  Western  capital.    Castro's  movement  in  its  guer-
rilla  phase  was  opposed  by  the  Communists  until  his  victory
was imminent.   In  Laos,  it  was we  who  upset  a  neutral gov-
essinent  and  provoked  a  civil  war.    As  for   divided   Viet-
Nam,  we  blocked  the  elections  for  reunification  pledged  by
the  Geneva accords  of  1954.    We  opposed  elections  in  Viet-
Nam  for  the  same  reason  Moscow opposes  it  in  Germany—
neither  power  favors  elections  where  it  is  sure  to  lose them.
Any  intellectual  in  the  underdeveloped  areas  reading  this
speech  against  the  backdrop  of  recent  events  is  apt  to  con-
clude  that  our  policy  is  much  like  that  of  Moscow's.    Both
sides  believe the  end  justifies  the  means;  they  want  a world
safe  for  communism,  we  want  a  world  safe  for  capitalism.
Where  the  sanctity  of  investments  is  honored,  we  overlook
any   assault   on   the   rights  of   the   individual.     Behind   the
How  High  Officials  Can  Be  Carried
Away  By  Their  Own  Hot  Air
"We  seek  two  results:  first,  that  truly   independent
nations  shall  emerge  on  the  world  scene;  and,   second,
that   each  nation  will  be  permitted   to  fashion,   put  of
its   own  culture   and  its   own  ambitions,   the   kind  of
modern  society  it  wants.   The  same  religious and philo-
sophical   beliefs    which   decree   that   we   respect    the
uniqueness  of  each  individual,  make  it  natural  that  we
respect  the  uniqueness  of  each  national   society."
—Rostow  at  Fort  Bragg  June   28  (see  box  below)
"The  U.S.  has  lifted  its  last  restrictions  on Domin-
ican  exiles  who  wish  to  return  to  the  Dominican  Re-
public.  A  ban was  first  imposed after  the   assassination
May   30  of   the   Dominican  dictator,  Trujillo.    Alfonso
Canto,  coordinator  of  the  Dominican  Liberation  Move-
ment,  had  charged  that  the  original   order   preventing
all  Dominicans  from  returning  home  was  amended  to
a  list  of  109,  blocking  primarily  his  group.
"Senor  Canto  said  the  U.S.  has  permitted  travel  by
persons  approved  by  the  CIA  and was  trying  'to  estab-
lish  a  puppet  government.'   In  Washington,  State  and
Justice   Dept.   officials   said   yesterday   only   that   the
travel   had  been  curbed  'in   the   best   interests   of   the
United  States.'  .  .  .  The  Dominican  Liberation  Move-
ment  has  been  critical  of  U.S.  support  for  the  invasion
of   Cuba  in   April."
—New   York   Times   (City   Edition)  July   4
gilded  rhetoric of  a  Prof.Rostow are  the  cynical  brutalities  of
military  and  intelligence agencies  operating  on  the  basis  of
anti-communist  oversimplications  and  as  arrogantly  bipolar  a
view  of  the  world  as  Moscow's.   It  is  Senator  Fulbright  who
speaks  for   our  better  selves.
Rostow  Salutes  U.S.  Guerrilla  Fighters
"When  this  Administration came  to  responsibility it  faced
four  major  crises:   Cuba,  the   Congo,  Laos  and  Viet-Nam.
Each  represented  a  successful  Communist  breaching—over
the  previous  two  years—of  the  Cold  War  truce  lines  which
had  emerged  from  the   Second  World  War  and  its   after-
math.    In  different  ways  each  had  arisen  from  the  efforts
of   the  international  Communist  movement  to   exploit   the
inherent  instabilities  of   the   underdeveloped   areas   of   the
non-Communist   world,   and   each   had   a   guerilla   warfare
component.    Cuba,  of  course,  differed  from  the  other  cases.
The  Cuban  revolution  against   Batista  was   a  broad-based
national  insurrection.     But  that   revolution  was   tragically
captured  from   within  by   the   Communist   apparatus;   and
now  Latin  America  faces  the  danger  of  Cuba's  being  used
as  the  base  for  training,  supply  and  direction  of   guerrilla
warfare  in  the   Hemisphere.
"More  than  that,   Mr.  Khrushchov,  in  his   report  to   the
Moscow  conference  of  Communist  parties  (January  6,  1961)
had  explained   at  great  length  that  the  Communists   fully
support   what   he   called   wars   of   national   liberation   and
would  march  in  the  front  rank   with   the   peoples   waging
such  struggles.   The  military  aim  of  Mr. Khrushchev's  Jan-
uary  1961  doctrine  is,  clearly,  guerrilla  warfare.  .  .  .
"Our  central   task   in   the   underdeveloped   areas,   as   we
see  it,  is  to  protect  the  independence  of  the  revolutionary
process   now  going   forward.  .  .  .  We  are  committed  by
the  nature  of  our  system,  to  support  the  cause  of  national
independence.  .  .  .  The  victory  we  seek  .  .  .  will  not be
a  victory  of  the  United  States  over  the  Soviet   Union.   It
will  not  be  a  victory  of  capitalism  over  socialism.    It  will
be  a  victory   of  men  and  nations  which  aim  to  stand  up
—W.   W.  Rostow   at   the   U.S.  Army   Special
As  He Would  "Doctors,  Teachers  .  .  ."
straight,  over  the  forces  which  wish  to  entrap  and  exploit
their   revolutionary  aspirations.  .  .  .
"To  make  this  vision  come  true  places   a  great  burden
on  the  U.S.  at  this  phase  of  history.    The  preservation  of
independence   has   many   dimensions.     The   U.S.   has   the
primary   responsibility   for   deterring   the   use   of   nuclear
weapons  in  the  pursuit  of  Communist ambitions.    The  U.S.
has  a major  responsibility   to  deter  the  kind  of  overt  aggres-
sion  with  conventional  forces,  which  was  launched  in  June
1950  in  Korea.    The  U.S.   has   the  primary  responsibility
for   assisting  the  economies   of   those   hard  pressed   states
on  the  periphery  of  the  Communist  bloc ...  for  example,
South  Korea,  Viet-Nam,  Taiwan,  Pakistan,  Iran.    The  U.S.
has  a  special   responsibility   of   leadership  in  bringing  not
merely   its   own  resources   but   resources   of   all   the   Free
World  to  bear  in  aiding  the  long-run  development  of   those
nations  which  are  serious  about  modernizing  their  economy
and  their  social   life.  .  .  .
"Finally   the   U.S.   has   a   role   to   play—symbolized  by
your  presence  here  and mine—in  learning  to  deter  guerrilla
warfare,  if  possible,  and to  deal  with  it,  if  necessary.  .  .  .
We  are  determined  to  help  destroy  this  international   dis-
ease;   that   is,   guerrilla   war   designed,   initiated,   supplied
and  led  from  outside  an  independent  nation.  .  .  .  This  re-
quires,  of  course,  not  merely  a  proper  military  program  of
deterrence,   but  programs   of   village   development,  commu-
nications  and indoctrination.  .  .  .
"I  salute  you  as  I  would  a  group  of  doctors,   teachers,
economic   planners,  agricultural   experts,  civil   servants,   or
those  others  who  are  now  leading   the  way  in  the   whole
southern  half  of  the  globe  in  fashioning  new  nations.  .  .  ."
Warfare    School,  Fort  Bragg,  North  Carolina,  June   28.    -
1  0
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   July   10,  1961
Just  Because  the  Russians  Might   Test,  Doesn't  Mean  the   U.S.   Must
(Continued  from   Page   One)
several   communications   from   friendly   nations,   as   well   as
important   neutral  nations,   urging   upon   us   not   to  resume
these  tests.    In  fact,  one  of  our  major  allies  finds  it  a  major
political  issue."    Why  should  these  matters  be  withheld  from
public   knowledge,   especially   since   their   publication   would
set  up   counter   pressure   against   testing  and   thus   give   the
President  greater  freedom  of  action?    The  other  point  made
by  Humphrey  which  deserves  fuller  public  discussion  is  that
the  Russians  to  get  a  Polaris  style  missile  or  more  compact
warheads  for  their   rockets  must  test  openly,  at   sea,  in  the
atmosphere  or  in  outer  space—not  underground.    Such  tests
can,  of  course,  be  monitored  from  afar,  they  cannot  be  con-
ducted  secretly.
Any  Neutron  Bomb Is  A  Long  Way From Testing
The   trouble  with   the   inquiry   ordered   by  the    President
June  28  from  his  Scientific  Advisory  Committee  is  that   the
questions  put  to  it  are  too  limited.    The  No.   1  question,
which  the  President  did  not  mention,  is  whether,  irrespective
of  what  the  Russians do,  we  have  any  real  need  at  this  time
for  testing.    The  President  himself  told  the  UPI  conference
here  in  Washington   June  8,  "I   know  of  no  test  which  is
necessary  at  this  time. ..."    The  neutron  bomb  and  the
anti-missile  missile are  still  long-shot  fantasies, glints  in  some-
body's  eye,  concepts  a  long  way  from  the  testing  stage.   If
we  have  no  immediate  need  to  test  anyway,  we  could  take
the  issue  to  the  UN  Assembly,  offer  to  abide  by  its  decision
and  put  the   Russians  on  the  spot.     If   they  resume  testing
and  we  don't,  I  believe  world  public  opinion  would  quickly
force   them  to  halt  and   for   once  we  could  win   an  inning
with   mankind.    To   narrow  the   study  by  the   scientists   to
whether  the  Russians  have  been  testing  or  could  test  clandes-
tinely  is  to  invite  a  foregone  conclusion.    There   is  no  evi-
dence  that  they  have but  there  is no  way to  prove  the  negative
proposition  that  they  have  not  tested   or  could   not  test  se-
cretly.    Here  again  the  President's hands  may  be  tied  because
the  public  has  been  led  to  assume—illogically—that  we  must
test  if  there  is  a  chance  the  Russians  might.
An  Act  of  Clemency  by  Kennedy
We  rise  to  applaud  President   Kennedy   for   an  act
of  kindness  and  considerable  courage  in  ordering   the
release  of   Henry   Winston,   one   of   the   11  top   Com-
munists  sent  to  jail  in  the   Smith   Act  trial  of 1949.
Winston   lost   his   sight   while   in   prison;   his   family
charged  that  delay  by  authorities  in  treating  him  for
what   turned  out  to  be  a  brain  tumor   was  responsible
for  his  tragedy.   Winston's  plight  was  called   forcibly
to  public  attention  when  Fidel  Castro  named  him  and
Albizu   Campos,   the   jailed   Puerto   Rican   Nationalist,
as   two  of   the   political   prisoners  for   whom   he   was
prepared  to  exchange  men captured  by  him in  the  abor-
tive April  invasion.   It  is  a  long  time  since  a  President
of   the   United  .States  dared   to   authorized    an   act  of
clemency   for   an   imprisoned   Communist;   this  so   far
as  we  can  remember  is  the  first  time  it  has  happened
since  the  onset  of  the  cold war.
In   this   connection   we  also   welcome   the   action   of
the  New  Jersey  State  Supreme  Court  in  voiding  the
disbarment  of  Abraham  J.  laser man,  who  was  one  of
the  counsel  for  the  defense  in  the  1949  trial.   The  con-
tempt   convictions   imposed   on  counsel   were  long   ago
reversed  on  appeal,  and  it  was  time  that  Mr.  Isserman
was  allowed  return  to  practice.    Chief  Justice  Joseph
Weintraub  earns  respect  by  this  calm  decision.
fl The  President  ought  to  put  Adlai  Stevenson  in  charge
of  the  newly  projected  peace  agency.    The  bill  to  establish
•  it,  which  went  to   the   Congress   last  week,  is  excellent   but
everything  depends  on  its  direction.    If  Wm.  C.  Foster  is
named  to  head  it,  as  at  present  reported,  we  will  be  putting
in  -charge  a  man  associated  with  plans  to  step  up  the  cold
war  and  pleas for  greater arms expenditure.   The  whole  moral
effect  will  be  lost;  it  will  look  like  a  propagandistic  gesture
to  cloak  a  resumed  arms  race.    Only  an  American  of   first
rank   whose  name  symbolizes  peace   can  make  this   project
meaningful.    Stevenson  is  the  ideal  man  for  the  job.    He  is
being  morally  ruined  as  errand  boy  for  the  State  Department
in  the  UN,  shamed  by  our  falsehoods  on  Cuba,  and  stultified
by  our  phoney  policies  on  the   Congo.     This   agency  could
again   make  him   a  national  asset  if   he  were  given   a   free
hand  to  run  it.                                                      •   Noon,   July  5
PLEASE   Send  Long  Envelopes  Stamped    If   You  Want   Free  Samples  of  Any  Issue  Sent  to  Friends
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  .........................................................................„..._......_
Street
City   ..........._..........................Zone......._.State....................
7/10/Bl
Bitter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ........................................................................._.
Street   ........._-...................-.....................................................
City   ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send   gift   announcement?          Tes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S-:  $6  in
r-mada:   $10  elsewhere.     Ail  Mail   rates:   $15  to   Europe;    $20  to   Israel.   Asia   and     Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED