I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961nov20.pdf

============================================================

Civil  Liberty?  Our  Press Couldn't  Care Less,  P.  4
Publisher  of  Scientific  American  Calls  Civil  Defense  A  Hoax, Firestorms Bigger  Peril  Than  Fallout,  Pp.  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  43
NOVEMBER   20,   1961
»<°'      WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
They'd  Rather  Have  Atomic  Arms  Than  Save  Berlin
To  understand  the  Kcnnedy-Adenauer  talks,  it  is  useful  to
go  back  and  reread  a  passage  in  a  book  review  the  President
wrote  during  the  campaign  last  year.*    In  it  he  said  that  the
instabilities which would result from  a  spread  of  nuclear weap-
ons  were  "equally  dangerous  to  Russian  and  American  inter-
ests"  and  added  that  it  was  the  "duty  of  American  statesmen"
to  "exploit"   this  "overlapping   interest."     In  his  address  to
the  United  Nations  on  Sept.  25  Mr.  Kennedy  indicated  that
in  the  Berlin  negotiations he  hoped  to  exploit  this  by  offering
to prohibit the  transfer  of  nuclear weapons  "to  nations that  do
not  now  own  them."    Mr.  Kennedy  has  seen  more  in  such
an  offer  than  a  useful  bargaining position.    Since taking  office
he  has  been  disturbed to  find  how  diffuse  the  President's sup-
posed  power  to  control the  use  of  nuclear weapons  has  become
as  these  have  spread  out   in   so  many  different   forms  to  so
many  foreign  bases.    But  this  is  the  sharpest  point  of   differ-
ence  between  Washington  and  Bonn.    The  main  purpose  of
the  Adenauer trip  is to  block  any  agreement which would  deny
nuclear  arms  to  Germany.
A  New  Stab-in-the-Back  Legend
To  the  Germans  it  has  been  patiently  explained  that   Mr.
Kennedy  is  not  proposing  an  atom  free  zone,  nor   suggesting
that  atomic missiles be withdrawn from  the  German  forces  but
merely,  as  part  of  a  Berlin  settlement,  to  freeze   the  present
situation,  under  which  atomic  warheads  remain under  our  con-
trol.    These  explanations  have  been  to  no  avail.    Indeed  for.
weeks   German   correspondents   here   had   great   difficulty   in
getting  their  papers  to  print  explanations  of  American  policy.
The  German  government,  instead  of  trying  to  awaken  its  pub-
lic  to  political  realities,  has  been  encouraging  a  wave  of  self-
pity,  a  new  variant  of  the  stab-in-the-back  legend—"America
has  let  Germany  down."     The  Kennedy  Administration  has
been  particularly disturbed  because  Bonn  made  no  effort  to  let
German  public  opinion  know  the  truth  about  the  business of
the   East   Berlin   wall.    Contingency  planning  in  which   the
Germans  participated  did  not  call  for  action  in  the  event  that
East  Berlin  were  cut  off.    It  was  access  to  West  Berlin,  not
East  Berlin,  which  was  to  be  defended  by  force.
More  Difficult  Than  The  Russians
The  truth  is  that  there  is  now  greater   difficulty   in  getting
down  to  negotiations  over  Berlin  with  Bonn  than  with  Mos-
cow.    The  Russians  have  lifted  the  deadline,   and  they  have
* Of  B.  H.   Liddell  Hart's  "Deterrent   or  Defense"  in   the
Saturday   Review  of  Literature,   Sept.   30,   1960.
offered  to  make  a  new  four  power  agreement  on  West  Berlin
and  then  embody  it  in  a  separate  agreement of  their  own with
East  Germany.    It  is the  West  Germans  who  are  obdurate and
would  leave no  room  at  all  for  bargaining or  maneuver.  Some
of  their  spokesmen  would  be  ludicrous  if  the  situation  were
not  so  dangerous.    On  the  one  hand  they  complain  that  they
do  not  think  the  American  public is  really  prepared to  plunge
into  nuclear  war  over  Berlin; on  the  other  hand,  they  are  un-
willing   to  make  the  slightest  concession  to  settle  the   issue
peacefully.  The  Germans have  been  told  that  reunification  can
only  be  brought  about  by peaceful  means.    The  White  House
has  suggested  increased  contacts with  East  Germany,  arguing
that  it  is folly  for  a  powerful state like West  Germany  to  fear
contacts  with  a  weak  one  like  East  Germany  ruled  by  a  hated
minority,  and  that  the  West  Germans  can  gain  much  from
peaceful  penetration  but  Bonn  stands  on  its  sterile insistence
that  it will accord  no  recognition of  any kind  to  East Germany.
This  hardly  leaves  room  for  negotiation,  and  without  it  West
Berlin  is  apt  to  wither  on  the  vine  in  an  atmosphere  of  re-
newed  threat  and  tension.    But  there  are  Germans  who  are
more  interested   in  maintaining tension  than  in  maintaining
West  Berlin,  for  heightened  tension  increases  their  chances  for
nuclear  weapons,  and  that  is the  No.  1  goal.
We've  Become  the  Suppliant
The  President  might  try  getting  tough  with  the  Germans.
Unfortunately   a  shift   in  the  power  balance  has  taken  place.
The  U.S.  is asking  Bonn  for  help  in  meeting  our  unfavorable
balance  of  payments  and  in  sharing  the  burden  of  aid  to  the
underdeveloped    countries.     Our   business   men   are   worried
about  access  to  the  huge  Common  Market  in  which  West  Ger-
many  plays  a  dominant  role.    West  German   representatives
here  have  said  bluntly  that  we'll  get  no  help  if  we  do  not
"stand  firm"  on  Berlin,  and  for  them  this  translates  back  into
the  question  of  nuclear  arms.
In  the  meantime  an  old  game  is being  resumed.  It  had  been
agreed  that  further  explorations  in  Moscow  would   be  left  to
our   Ambassador.     The   German    Ambassador   violated    this
agreement  by  his  own  meeting  -with  Khrushchev,  a   meeting
about  which  he  did  not  inform  his  Western  colleagues.  Natur-
ally  this  was  disavowed  by  Bonn,  but  it  served  the  dual  pur-
pose  of  sounding  out  Moscow  on  the  eve  of  the  Washington
talks  and  of  raising  the  spectre  of  an  agreement  with  the  East
if  the  Germans  cannot  get  what  they  want  in  the  West.    The
most  important  "overlapping  interest"  now  between  Washing-
ton  and  Moscow  is  settling  the  Berlin  question  and  bringing
the  Germans  under  control   before   they  get  nuclear  weapons.
Afterwards  it  will  be  too  late.
I  6 j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November  20,   1961
Publisher  of Scientific  American  Calls  Civil  Defense  A  Dangerous  Illusion...
We  present  here  an  abridged  version  of  a  speech  made  at
the   Commonwealth   Club   in   San   Francisco   Nov.    10  by
Gerard  Piel, publisher  of  the  Scientific   American,  and  the
author  of  the  recently  published,  "Science  in  The  Cause  of
Man,"    a  collection  of  brilliant  essays  on  a  aeries  of  urgent
problems—from   disarmament  to  governmental  secrecy—as
seen  by  an  unusually   perceptive  mind,  cultivated  in  both
science  and  the  humanities.
"No  one  in  this  audience,  I  suppose,  will  question   my  declaration
that   the  Soviet   Union,   by  resuming  the  testing  of   nuclear   weapons,
has   increased   the   danger   of   war.     I   suspect,   however,   that   I  must
document  my  charge  that  shelter-building  in  the  U.S.  also  brings   the
Third  World  War  closer.   When  you  have  apprehended  the  nature of
the  war  I  believe  you  will  join  me  in  the  conclusion  that  civil  defense
is  an  illusion—an  illusion  that   places  our  institutions   and  our   lives
in  jeopardy.
The  citizen  who  sets  out  to  study  thermonuclear  war  will  find  him-
self   richly   supplied   with   literature  by  his  government.     I   have  re-
viewed  this  material,  and  I  must  tell  you  that  I  find  it  to  be  incom-
plete  and  uneven  in  quality and  reliability.    This  literature  is  threaded
with  two  major  strands  of  bias.    One  strong  bias  originates   from  the
desire  to  envision  and  secure  a  significant  civil  defense.    This  human
tendency  is  entirely  understandable   in  relation   to  the  grave   concerns
of  civil  defense.    Equally  understandable  is  the  pressure  of  bias  that
flows  from  the  military  contribution  to  the  literature.    One  would  ex-
pect   military   people   to   argue   the   validity  of   military  solutions   to
political  problems.    It  is  perhaps  less  understandable—and  surely  less
creditable—that  their  quasi-independent  consultants  should   tell   them
what  they  want  to  hear.    But  you  should  not  be  surprised   to   learn
the  conclusion  to  which  pressure  from  this  quarter   leads.    That  is  that
thermonuclear  war  is  not  only  possible  and  probable  but  also  feasible.
A  Delicate  Paradox
The   objective  of   civil   defense   poses   a   delicate   paradox.     In   all
humanity,  we  must  encourage  measures  that  can  save  the  lives  of  in-
dividuals.    In  the  national  interest,  one  must  seek   to  minimize  the
number   of   casualties.    But   if   such  measures  enhance  the  feasibility
of   thermonuclear  war,   they   may   also  raise  the   probability  of   war.
At   best,   they  increase   the   likelihood   of   unprecedented   catastrophe.
At  worst,  if  the  assumptions  on  which  the  civil  defense  measures  are
predicated  prove  to  be  wrong,  they  expose  the  nation  and  its   people
to  unlimited  catastrophe.
In  the  present  atmosphere,  it  is  difficult  to  recall  that  16  years  ago
the  atomic  scientists  had  proved  war  is  obsolete.     To   recapture   the
mood  of  the  nuclear physicists  we  must take  a  still  closer  look  at  what
happens   in   a   nuclear  explosion.     The   escalation   from   kilotons   to
megatons   requires  reconsideration  of  civil   defense.
The  destructive capacity  of  still  larger  weapons  is  expressed  on  the
same  scale  of  TNT-equivalent  explosive  power.     But   this   scale  has
decreasing  relevance  to  the  true  nature of  these  weapons  as  they  grow
larger.    The  ranges  of  the  three  prompt  effects—initial  radiation,  heat
and  blast—increase  at  different  rates  with  increase  in  size.    This  is  to
say  that  the  three   concentric  circles  of  destruction  and   lethality  that
were  co-terminous  at  Hiroshima  increase  at  significantly  different   rates
as  technology  packs  more  violence  into  the  nuclear  warhead.   The  ini-
tial-radiation   circle  increases   most   slowly  because   this   radiation   is
absorbed   and  scattered,  and  it  falls  so  far  within  the  other   two  that
it   may  be   ignored.     The   circle  of   total  destruction  by  blast   grows
faster;   its  radius  increases  as  the  cube  root   of  the  increase  in   TNT-
equiv,alent  tonnage.  But  the  circular area  showered  with  thermal  radi-
ation  grows  the  fastest  of  all;  its  radius  increases  as  the  square   root
of  the  increase  in  power.    Thus,  the  area  engulfed  in  the  incendiary
Nuclear  War  Might  Even  Lower  Taxes
"As  reorganization  swings  into  recuperation,   prop-
erty  rights  will  have  to  be  untangled  and  the  costs  of
the  war  distributed  equitably.    Many. survivors  would
have   lost   everything,   while   others   might  find   them-
selves   richer   by   the   untimely   deaths   of   families   or
relatives.     In  the  event   of   huge  casualties,  a  lot   of
property  would  revert   to' the  state  by  escheat.    This
would  ultimately  be  sold,  and  the  proceeds  distributed
in  the  form  of  tax  reduction.  .  .  ."
—"The   Economy  Can  Survive  Nuclear  Attack"   in
the   Nov.    1961   issue  of  Fortune   Magazine.
effects  of  the  bigger  weapons  reaches  outward  far  beyond  the  perim-
eter  of  the  blast  circle.
The  tables  show  that  the  20  megaton   bomb,  which  is   1,000   times
bigger  than  the  20  kiloton  bomb,  has  a  blast  radius  of  between   5  to
6  miles  and  an  incendiary  radius  of   30  miles.     By  the   same   token,
the   50  megaton  bomb  tested   in  the  Soviet  Union   must  have  a  blast
radius   of   7   miles,   but   an   incendiary   radius  of   50;   a   100-megaton
bomb  would  have  a  blast  radius  of  8  miles  and  an  incendiary  radius
of   70.     If   100,   why   not   1,000   megatons?     Such  a   weapon   would
have  an  incendiary  radius  of   200   miles.
The   conclusion   to   be  comprehended   here   is  that   the   bigger   the
weapon   the   more   preponderantly   it   becomes   an   incendiary   weapon.
Not   much  is  said  about  firestorms  in  the  literature  of  thermonuclear
war.    There  was  some  experience  with  small  firestorms  ignited  by
ordinary  bombs  in  World   War   II;   the  firestorm  at  Dresden   is  esti-
mated  to  have  killed  300,000   people  in  a  single  night;  at   Hamburg,
some   70,000;   at   Tokyo,   some   200,000.     Blast-proof   bomb   shelters
afforded   no   protection  in  these   storms;   their   occupants   were  found
suffocated   and  cremated  when  the  shelters   were   opened.
The  incendiary  effect  can  be  magnified  still  further   by  bursting   the
bigger  weapons  at  very  high  altitude.    Since  most  of  the   atmosphere
lies  closer  to  the  ground,  there  is  little  loss  of  energy,   and  the   cone
of   effective   thermal  radiation  gains   a  still  wider   radius  at   its   base.
According  to  one  set  of  calculations a  1,000   megaton  bomb  detonated
at   satellite   altitude   could   set   six   Western—Western,   not    Middle
Western—states   afire.
It  is  evident  from  the  literature  that  no  adequate  consideration  has
been  given  to  the  incendiary  aspect  of  thermonuclear  war.    The   effort
to  establish  fallout  shelters  in  the  central  cities  will  provide  such  pro-
tection  if  fallout  is  the  hazard  to  which  the  population  is  exposed.   If
not,  these  shelters  will  trap  the  urban   populations   in  blast  and  fire.
The   individual  citizen  is   urged   to   provide  for   himself   the   fallout
"protection   best  suited  to  his  needs."    That   60  per-cent  of  the  popu-
lation  that  has  basements  readily  accessible  to  it  is  advised  to  install
a  "basement   shelter  that  can  be  built  with  solid  concrete  blocks  as  a
do-it-yourself   project"  for  $150  to  $200.    Again,   such  a  shelter  will
provide  protection  if  fallout  is  the  only  hazard  to  which  its  occupants
are  exposed.    Within   the  incendiary radius  of  a  big  bomb,   however,
the   basement   shelter   becomes   a  fire  trap.
The  idea  that  fallout  constitutes  the  principal  hazard  to  the  civilian
population  is  a  derivation  from   military  theory.    Remembering   Pearl
Harbor,   our  military  thinkers  are  convinced  that  the  enemy  will  lay
the  primary  weight  of  his  attack  upon  our  military  installation.    We
have  the  word  from  Gen.  Curtis  E.  LeMay,  who  commanded  the  20th
Air  Force  in  our  strike  against Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki:   "There  is  no
point  in  going  after  the  civilian  population  as  such."    The  first  attack
Veteran  Naval  Radiologist  Prefers  Wiser  International  Relations  to  Shelters
"A  grand  old  man  of  radiological  science  set  an  Assembly
subcommittee  to  sputtering  yesterday  when  he  said  'inter-
national  relations'  is  the  best  defense  against   nuclear  at-
tack—not   fallout  shelters.
"The    opinion   was   expressed   bluntly   by   Dr.   Robert   R.
Newell  at  a  session  here  of  the  interim  subcommittee  on  air
pollution  and radiation.  . . .  [He  said]  'I  don't  think  shelters
are  the  place  where  we  should  focus  our  attention.    I. think
we   should  explore   other   routes   with   a   lower   probability
of  death.  .  .  .'
"Dr.   Newell  is  professor  emeritus  of  radiology  at  Stan-
ford,  a  member  of  Governor  Edmund  G.  Brown's  radiologi-
cal  defense  advisory  committee  and  a  staff   member  of   the
Navy's  Radiological  Defense  Laboratory  at  Hunters  Point.
"The   octogenarian  said  crisply  that  in  case  of  a  nuclear
attack  there  is  a  '50  percent  chance  of  survival,  give  or  take
40  percent.'    Shelters  for  all  or  shelters  for  none  was  his
motto,  on  the  theory  that  a  short  supply  would  bring  noth-
ing  but  mass  death  by  starvation  or  suffocation.
"Assemblyman  Byron  Rumford  of  Berkeley  asked  for  his
alternative.     'International   relations,'  answered   the  scien-
tist.     'I  don't  think  we've  explored  other  ways  of   getting
along  than  military  strength.'"
—San  Francisco  Examiner,  Nov.   8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   W,   19lil
. . . Says  Danger  of  Firestorms  Greater  Than  Fallout  As Bombs  Grow  Bigger
by  the  enemy  would  therefore   be  what   is  called  a  "counterforce"  at-
tack,  directed  at  the  destruction  of  our   capacity   to  retaliate.
To   be   effective   the   weight   of   this  attack  would   have  to   be  con-
siderable.    An  independent  study  by  a  meteorologist  at  the  University
of  Arizona  shows  that  300  megatons  would  have  to  be  laid  in  a  few
minutes  upon  the   18  hardened  Titan  bases  that  ring  the  city  of  Tuc-
son.   The  same  considerations  apply  apparently  to  other  communities
where  missile  bases  have  been  installed  within   logistically   convenient
range:  Wichita  and  Salina,  Kansas;  Little  Rock,  Arkansas;  the  Rome-
Utica  complex  in  New   York;   Lincoln,   Nebraska;   Altus,   Oklahoma;
Abilene,   Texas   and  Pittsburgh,   New   York,   among   others.     With
heavy  ground-burst   attacks   directed   at  such   targets,   the   nearby  com-
munities   would   come   under   fallout   of   intensities   far   above   those
against   which   the   do-it-yourself   basement   shelter,   supplied   for   two
weeks  or  refuge,  could  afford   protection.
Population  An  Easy  Target
The  elaborate  studies  of  the  fallout  hazard  can  be  set  aside  entirely
if  the  attacker  should  choose  to  attack  the  population  directly.    As  the
expert  who  presented   the  hypothetical  3,000-megaton  fallout   attack  at
the  August  civil  defense  hearing  said:  "So  far  as  initial  impact  of  any
attack   is   concerned,   the   level   of   fatalities   is  extremely   sensitive   to
attack  design."    The   attacker  could,  for   example,  adopt   the  strategy
of  "counterforce  plus  bonus."    By diverting  10  per-cent  of  the  30,000
megatons,  or  3,000  megatons,  to  civilian  targets  he  could,  according  to
this  witness,  "kill   as  many  as  120  million  people."    He   would  take
as  his  bonus  the  substantially complete  destruction  of  U.S.  civilization.
The  population  is  a  soft  target  and  it  takes  fewer  megatons  to  kill   the
corporate   body  of  the   state  than  to  destroy   the   forces  that  are  sup-
posed   to  defend   it.
Civil  defense,  it  is  said,  "increased   markedly  our   ability  to  survive
war  if  it  is  fought  by  rational  methods."    But  there  is  little  reason  to
think  that  a  real  war  will  be  fought  by  the  rational  strategies  of  game
theory  that  are  supplied  as  inputs  to  a  computer.    The   experience  of
history  suggests  that  the  first  exchange,   if  "rational,"   will  trigger  an
unlimited   escalation   of    violence.      Not    only   the   U.S.A.   and    the
U.S.S.R.,  but  their  allies  and  satellites  and  the  neutrals  in  line  of  fire
face  the  same  dread   prospect.    We  are  assured   that  the  empty  world
of   "On   the  Beach"  is  pure   fiction.   But  the  firestorms  of   a  thermo-
nuclear  war   could   work  an  irreversible  disruption  of  the   social  and
moral  fabric  of  Western  Civilization.    The  kind  of  society  that  would
emerge   from   the   shelters   may  be  guessed   from   the   kind   of   society
that  is  preparing  to  go  into  shelters   now.
We   are  personally  witness   to  this  escalation,   in  the   rising  tide  of
callousness  and  brutality   here  at  home.     It  is  to  be  seen,  at  the   top
level  of  our  Government,  in  the  writing-off  of  Tucson  and  other  cities
by  the  siting  of  missile  bases  in  their  immediate  environs.    It  shames
our  people  befoie  the  world  in  the  climax  of  American   privatism  that
prescribes   a   sawed-off   shotgun   as  equipment   for   the   family   fallout
shelter.
The   civil   defense   program   of   our   Federal   Government,    however
else   intended,   must  be  regarded   as  a  step   in   the   escalation   process.
This  is  a  sinister  development   because  it  works  a  psychological  sub-
version   of   both   government   and   citizenry.  It   gives   the   sanction   of
action   to  the  delusion   that   a  thermonuclear   war   can  be  fought  and
survived.    It  encourages  statesmen  to  take  larger  risks  predicated  upon
First  Strike  Credibility  and  Post-Attack   Recuperative  Capacity.     It  dis-
engages  the  citizen  from   vigilence  over   the   rationality  and   responsi-
bility  of   his  elected   officials.
On  the  other  side  of  the  world  power  contest,  in  satisfaction   of  the
equations   of   war  game   theory,   it   invites   a   Pre-emptive   Strike.     For
the  dubious  protection  it  promises,  civil  defense   has  exacted  a  danger-
ous   cost   to   national    security.
The   Administration   has   yielded   to   pressure   from   essentially   two
If   You  Can't  Dig  A  Shelter
Buy   Yourself   A   Yacht
" 'When  the  Bomb  falls,'  read  a  recent   city  classified
advertisement   offering  to  sell   a   cabin   cruiser,   'climb
aboard  and  sail  away.'    This  is  not  so  dreadfully  ludi-
crous  as  it  sounds.   Americans  own  some  470,000   cov-
ered  boats  more  than  16  feet  long,  and  according  to  a
study   made   for   the   OCDM   by   Technical    Operations,
Inc.,  these  provide  potential  fallout   for  anywhere   be-
tween  2,000,000  and  5,000,000  people.    It  is  now  known
that  fallout  particles  disperse  rapidly  in  water;  and  in
water  that  is  deep  and  wide enough  vessels  can  provide
a  shelter  factor   of  at  least   100—equal  to  a  concrete
block  basement   shelter.  .  .  .  This  assumes,  of  course,
that  the  vessels  escape  blast,  fire  and  tidal  wave,  and
that   people  can  get  to  them  in  time."
—Fortune  Magazine,  November   1961.
quarters.     The    first   originates  with   irresponsible  politicians  in   both
parties  who  have  adopted  fallout  defense   as  a  mode  of  political  dyna-
mism.     The   second   and   much   more   significant    pressure    originates
with  the  military  and  its  commitment to  military  solutions,  backed  by
the  powerful  economic  interest  in  those  solutions  that  has  come  to  be
the   biggest   business   in   the   land.     But   a   primary   responsibility   for
this  hoax  on  public  opinion  must  be  laid  to  those  authors  of  fraud  by
computer   who   produced   the   literature  that  argues   the   feasibility   of
thermonuclear  war.
The  Administration's  purchase  of  this  hoax   raises  two  grim  possi-
bilities.    First,  it  may  have  seriously  compromised  its  capacity  to  rally
public  opinion  in  favor  of  the  settlements  it  is  seeking  to  negotiate  at
the   conference   table.     Second,   in   the   mood   of   mounting   fear   and
truculence,   the   Administration   may  find  it   has   provoked    demagogic
clamor  for  a  civil-defense  program  going  far  beyond   the  present   one.
Such  programs  have  been  studied.    The   down-payment  on  the   cost
of  taking  the  nation  underground  would  be  $150  billion.     But  that  is
only  the  fiscal  cost.    The  social  cost  of  going  underground  wouW  not
fall   far  short  of  the  total  transformation  of  our   way  of   life,   the  sus-
pension  of  our  civil  institutions, the  habituation  of  our   people  to  vio-
lence  and  the  ultimate  militarization  of  our   society.    By  that  time  it
would  surely  be  difficult  to  define  the  ideological   conflict  that  the  war
is  supposed  to  be  fought  about.    And  by  that  time,  the  technology  of
thermonuclear  war  will  no  doubt  be  equal  to  hunting  out   its  targets
underground.
If   this  analysis  suggests  that   a  third   alternative   to   the   choice  of
surrender  or  death  may  be  found   in  the  Garrison  State,  let  me  urge  a
fourth  alternative.   We   must  accept  the  truth  that  thermonuclear  war
cannot  settle  even   the   most  irreconcilable  conflict  to   anybody's   satis-
faction.  With  all  due  caution  we  must  seek  the  settlement  of  political
differences   by  peaceful   means.    Concurrently  we  must  seek   an  imme-
diate  halt   in  the  arms  race  and   thereafter  general   and   complete  dis-
armament  under  controls   that  will  protect  mankind  from   its  resump-
tion. The  two  elements  are  inseparable;  for  it  is  clear  that  there  would
be  no  German   problem  if  we  had  disarmament  and  that  there  can  be
no  convention  on  disarmament  that  does  not  include  China.
We  must  summon  our  wisdom  as  well  as  our  courage  in  this  epoch
of   danger.     If  we  enter  into  negotiation   in  distrust   and   fear  of   the
other  party,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  other   party  bears  the  same
distrust  and  fear  of  us.    Both  sides  are  driven  to  the  conference   table
by  the  same  iron  compulsion  that  flows  from  the  thermonuclear   inver-
sion   of   the   Golden  Rule.
The  Kind  of  Indoctrination  Being   Given  Fallout  Instructors   at  Oak  Ridge
"The   goodie-goodies    and   the   fancy   pants—the   brains
minus  the  brawn—are  most  apt  to  fall  by  the  wayside  when
war  comes.    Not  if  war  comes—just   when—says  the'Oak
Ridge  National  Laboratory  Psychologist  H.  B.  Hurt.
" 'There  will  be  a  war,"  Dr.  Hurt  stated  last  night.   'I  be-
lieve  this.    Lord,  I  hate  to  say  that.    But  I  know  it  is  just
a  question  of  when  and  the  main  thing  we  have  to  fear  is
people   out   of   control—more   even   than   the   atom   out   of
control,'  he  said.    Dr.  Hurt  spoke  at  the  final  Civil   Defense
fallout   instructors   training  session.
"Highly  intellectualized  people  are  more  likely  to   freeze
under  attack  than  other   people.    Goodie-goods   and  fancy
people  are  more  apt  to  panic,'  he  said.    Some  facts  of  life
are  so  damned  ugly.    I  have  seen  people  kill  each  other  for
food  and  in  lifeboats   during  World  War  II.    There   were
only  so  many  who  could  successfully  occupy  them.    I  have
seen  them  take  oars  and  beat  other  people  on  the  head  who
were  trying  to  get  in.
" 'I  recommend  that  everyone   with  a  fallout  shelter   in-
clude  a  gun  in  their  equipment. ...  I  recommend   shooting
anyone  who  tries  to  invide  a  fallout  shelter."
—The  Oak  Ridger   (Oak   Ridge,  Term.),  Nov.   8.
1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   20,  1961
Korean   Dictator   Honored  by  National  Press  Club  Though  He  Sentences  Editors  to  Death
Nationwide  Petition  for  Clemency  to  HUAC  Victims  Ignored  by  Press
It   is  curious  how   conditioned  our   press   is  to   a  bored   in-
difference  on  the  subject  of  civil  liberties.   Here  in   Washing-
ton  last  week  a  delegation  of  respected  religious  leaders—in-
cluding  Clarence  Pickett  of  the  Friends,  Dr.  Howard  Schomer
of  Chicago  Theological  Seminary and  Dr.  John  A.  Mackey  of
Princeton—went  to  the  White  House  and  the  Justice  Depart-
ment  with  a  national  clemency  appeal   for   Frank   Wilkinson
and  Carl  Braden,  both  in  jail  for  one  year  for  contempt  of  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.
Afterwards  they  held  a  press  conference  to  which  the  wire
services,  the   big  Eastern  seaboard   newspapers  including  the
New   York   Times,  and  the  few  liberal  papers  of  the  country
had  been  invited.   Not  a  single  reporter  (but  yours truly)  ap-
peared  and  not  a  line  was. printed  next  day  about  the petition,
though   its   3,000   signers  from   48   States   included  the  Rev.
Martin   Luther   King,   Grenville   Clark,   Reinhold   Niebuhr,
Harry   Golden,   Thurman   Arnold,   Norman   Thomas,   Irving
Brant,   Padraic  Colum,   Lewis  Gannett,   Archibald  Macleish,
Walter   Millis,   John   Nevin   Sayre,   Erwin   Panofsky,  Pitirim
A.  Sorokin,  George  de  Santillana,  Karl  Menninger  and  many
others  whose  names  normally  make  news.    The  petition  they
signed   was  a  sharp   attack  on   the   House   Committee   and   a
defense  of  First  Amendment  rights.
Don't   U.S.   Pressmen   Care?
Another  example:  The  new  military  dictator  of  South  Ko-
rea,  Gen.  Pak  Chung  Hui,  has  ended  his  country's  brief  spell
of  press  freedom  since  Rhee's  overthrow.    Many  newspaper-
men  are  in  jail  and  three  top  men  on  a  suppressed   Socialist
paper  the  "Minjuk  Ilbo"  have  been  sentenced  to  die.    Their
crime  was  advocating   reunification;   this   is  treason   in   South
Korea  though  patriotism  in  West  Germany.  The  International
Press   Institute  in   Geneva   appealed   on  their  behalf   in   vain.
The   Guardian   in  England   (Nov.   11)   did  likewise,  and  the
Washington  Post  which  hailed   Gen.   Pak  and  his  lieutenants
as  "well  motivated  young  men"  Nov.   10  turned  around   Nov.
14 and  questioned  the  death  sentences.    The  State  Department
has  utilized  its  battalion  of  trained  seals  to  launch  a  flood  of
friendly  stories  to  Gen.  Pak  on  the  eve  of  his  visit;  none  of
Stalin's  Habits  Outlast  His  Name
Three  recent  items  should  worry  thoughtful  Russians
anxious  to  get   rid   of  Stalin   era   habits.    One  is   the
news   that   the   South   African   government,   benighted
as  it  is,  nevertheless  granted   a  passport   to  the  Zulu
chief  Luthuli  to  go  to  Oslo  to  accept  the  Nobel  prize;
this  contrasts   with  Soviet  treatment  of  Pasternak  who
was   forced   to   refuse   the   prize.     The   second   is   the
open  letter   from   Trotzky's   widow  asking  a  review  of
the   1936  "show  trial"  of  Trotzky,  and  about  the   fate
of   her   son   Sergei   who  disappeared   after   his   arrest
on  the  eve  of  the  trial.    Khrushchev is  trying  to  do  to
Stalin  what  Stalin  tried  to  do  to  Trotzky—wipe  out  his
very  memory.   The  third  item  is  the  public  admission,
in  the  wake  of  a  story  brought  back  from   the  Soviet
Union   by   Rowland   Evans   of   the   New   York   Herald-
Tribune  (Nov.  6)  that  three  leaders   of  the  Leningrad
Jewish  community  were  sentenced  to  prison  in  a  secret
trial  last  October.    What  is  the  meaning  of  "socialist
legality"  when trials  can  be  held  in  secret?    Are  Soviet
Jews  again  to  be  treated  as  second-class  citizens  under
Khrushchev   as  they  were  under   Stalin?
the  stories mention  his  repressive  press  policies.    Now,   to  cap
it  all,  the  National   Press  Club  is  giving  Gen.  Pak  a  luncheon
the  day  we  go  to  press.
Third  example:  Ed  Murrow  of  USIA  courageously  took  ad-
vantage  of   a   speech   before   the   Public  Relations   Society  of
America  in  Houston,  Texas,  last  Monday  (Nov.   13)   to  strike
at  the  rising  tide  of  rightism.    He  attacked  those  who   "under
the  banner  of  patriotism  .  .  . would  exorcise  the  very  spirit  of
this  land  with  the  excuse  of  combatting  Communism."      He
said,  with  obvious  reference  to  Birchites  and  Walkerites   and
similar  screwballs,  "They  would  spy upon  their  neighbors  .  .  .
impeach  the  judiciary  .  .  . support  the  intrusion of  politics  into
the  military   .  .  .  impose   upon   the  land   stifling  uniformity
falsely  labelled  as  'loyalty'."    The  story  appeared   on  the  AP
ticker  but  the  morning   after   I  could   find   it  neither   in   the
New    York    Times   nor   the   Washington   Post,   though   both
agree  editorially with  these  sentiments.    To  jaded  city  editors
civil   liberties  just  isn't   news   unless   the   violation   occurs   in
Moscow.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    LONG  Envelopes
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
I.   P.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  ATfc,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ...........................................................................................
Street
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/20/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name     ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   .........................................^one............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?           Y.es  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postaice  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   In   August   and   the   first   In
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  In  January  at  S618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.  W..  Washington,  0.  C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  15  In  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:   (10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $16  to  Europe:  S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED