I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961oct30.pdf

============================================================

What  Ike  Said  on  Shelters,  P.  3
Judge  Edgerton  Writing to  the  Washington  Post  on Berlin  Calls  Ethics  of  the  Duel  Obsolete,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  40
OCTOBER   30,   1961
•«'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
U.S.   and  Moscow  Reverse  Roles  on  Testing  at  the   UN
United   Nations,   N.Y.,    Oct.  24
On  this,  its  16th  birthday,  the  United  Nations  is  demon-
strating  how  far  short  it  falls  of  the  world's  needs  and  the
moment's  urgency.    While  the   Russians  continue   with   the
most  intense  series  of  nuclear  tests  the  world  has  ever  seen,
the  UN   is  unable  to  pull   itself   together  for  action.    Since
Oct.  6,  in  its  First  Committee, on  which  all  of  its  101  mem-
bers  are  represented,  the  UN   has  been  unable  even  to  get
to  a  vote  on  two  rival  resolutions  on  nuclear  testing,   one
by  the  Western  Big  Powers  urging  swift  resumption  of  talks
at  Geneva,  the  other  by  India  for   a  renewed  suspension  of
all   nuclear   tests   pending   their   permanent  prohibition  by
treaty.     In   addition,  since  last   Friday,  Oct.   20,   the   Com-
mittee  has  been  unable  to  come  to  a  vote  on  an  emergency
resolution  by  the  Northern   countries  most   affected   by  Rus-
sian  fallout  asking  Moscow  to  call  off  its   50  megaton  test.
Even  the  news  of  a  30-megaton  test,  twice  as  great  as   the
15-megaton   U.S.  test  which  was  formerly   the   largest   ever,
failed   to  bring  action,  thanks  to  neutral  weakness  and   big
power   obduracy,  including   a   curious   byplay   in   which   the
U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  found  themselves  shoulder  to  shoulder,
as  it  were,   in   blocking   a  vote  on   the   50-megaton   protest.
The   petty   considerations   of   individual   nations,   large   and
small,  block  the  common  planetary  interest  in  saving  the  skies
from   pollution.     The   bankrupt   jockeying  demonstrates   the
need  for  a  Parliament  of  Man,  not  of  nations.    Adlai  Steven-
son  said  despairingly  in  his  speech   to  the  First   Committee
last  Thursday,  "Just  as  the  nuclear  bomb  itself  lays  open  the
inner   mysteries  of   science,   so  the   attempt   to   control   the
nuclear   bomb  cuts   to   the   core   of   our   political   ideas   and
mechanisms.    As  the  bomb  itself  represented  a  revolution  in
science,   so  the  control   of   the  bomb  may  in  the  end   mean
a  revolution  in  politics."
The  Big  Powers  Think   Alike
This  revolution—if  it  comes  in  time—will  be  more  funda-
mental  than  Marx's.     The   debate   has  served  to   illuminate
how   alike   the   two   great   contending   Powers   are   in   their
thinking.    Their  standards  are  the  conventional  ones  of  the
anarchistic  nation-state  system.    As  Mr.  Shaha  of  little  Nepal
said  after  Mr.  Stevenson  spoke,  "the  great  powers  think  alike
on  situations  involving  so-called  security  considerations."  Each
consequently  finds  it  easy to  quote  the  other  in its own  defense
since  the  underlying  logic  is  the  same  even  when  the   posi-
tions  are  reversed.  The  Western  powers  four  years  ago  would
not  hear of  a  nuclear  test  ban  apart  from  general disarmament
while  the  Soviets  were  for  separating   the  two.    Now  they
have  changed   sides.    As  Mr.  Krishna   Menon   said  sardon-
ically  last  Friday  after  two  full  weeks  of  inconclusive,  largely
procedural,   debate,  "I  find  that  it  is  rather  like  ladies'   fash-
Not   Quoting   Pauling   This  Time
In   1957  when   Czechoslovakia   led   the   fight   in   the
UN   for  cessation  of  nuclear  testing,  its  delegate Mr.
David  in  the  First  Committee  quoted  Dr.  Linus  Paul-
ing,    Nobel  prize  winning  chemist,  as  estimating  that
"tests   of   nuclear   and  hydrogen   weapons  carried   out
thus  far  were  responsible for  a  one  percent  increase
in  the  total  number  of  mentally  retarded  or  deformed
children."   (Nov.   7,  1957).   This  year,  when  Czecho-
slovakia   led   the   fight   in   the   Special  Political Com-
mittee  at   the   UN   against  "alarmist"  reports  of   the
danger  from  fallout,  Dr.  Pauling  was  no  longer  quoted
by   any   member   of   the   Soviet   bloc.     In   a   telephone
interview  with  Scripps-Howard  reporter  Gene  Worts-
man   (Washington Daily  News,  Oct. 19),  Dr.  Pauling
estimated   that   the   Soviet  Union's   50-megaton  blast
would  cause  40,000   babies   to   be   born   with   physical
defects   in  the  next  few   generations;  pollute   the   at-
mosphere  for  6,000  years  with radioactive debris which
would  produce  another  400,000  stillbirths; bring  about
"uncounted  cases  of  bone  cancer,  leukemia  and related
diseases";  damage  the  eyes  of  persons  within  several
hundred   miles  of   the   explosion;   and   bring   serious
illness  to  many  within  the  area  of  the  explosion.   Only
a  few  months  ago  the  Senate  Internal  Security Com-
mittee   was   pillorying   Dr.  Pauling   as   a  Communist
mouthpiece  for  insisting  (in  his  famous  petition  cam-
paign)   that   radiation  was  bad  for  people.    Now   we
srppose  the  other  side  will  be  denouncing  him  as  an
imperialist   tool.
ions.    If  you  wait  long  enough,  the  old  fashions  come  back.
The   argument  that  is  rejected  by  one  side  this  year  is  ac-
cepted  by the  next,  and  it  goes  round  and  round  in  this  way."
Thus  as  the  debate  here  -warmed  up,  Mr.  Godber   of  the
United   Kingdom   came  up  with   a  nifty   from  a  speech  by
Mr.  Zorin  in  the  First  Committee  three  years  ago,  Oct.  10,
1958.     Then  Mr.  Zorin   said,   "The   Soviet  government  con-
siders  that  it  is  essential  for  the  cause  of  peace  to   separate
the  question  of  the  cessation  of  the  testing  of  nuclear  weap-
ons  from  the  general  or  comprehensive  problem  of  disarma-
ment,   to   solve   it   separately   from   all   other   disarmament
questions."    This  brought   a  retaliatory  quotation   from  the
Soviet   side.    Mr.   Tarabanov   of   Bulgaria   said   that   during
discussion  of  this  same problem  in  1957,  the  United  Kingdom
representative  at  the  UN  had  said  "a  measure  of  that  kind
without  any  link  to  the  problem  of  disarmament—that  is  to
say,   a measure  contemplating  the  suspension  of  nuclear  tests—
could   have  a  negative   effect   on  world   security,  and   would
not   necessarily  facilitate   the   reaching   of   an   agreement   on
general  and  complete   disarmament."
The  Bulgarian  went  on  triumphantly  to  declare   that  the
United   Kingdom   delegate   in   1957   had   used   words  which
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
J   5   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October SO, 1981
exactly  sum  up  the  Soviet  position  today—"in  any  case  his
Government  was  not  prepared   to  take  that   risk  as  long  as
it  was  not  certain  that  there  would  be  real  disarmament,  and
it  must  attempt  to  improve  the  nuclear  weapons  upon  which
the   security  of   his  country  and   of   other   countries  rested."
The  Bulgarian  asked,  "What  practical  result  could  be  reached
with  a  separate  discussion  of  the  problem  of  nuclear  tests?"
In  answer  Sir  Michael  Wright  came  up  with  a  clincher.   Sir
Michael  reminded  the  Soviet  side  that  when  a  Pravda   cor-
respondent   asked  Mr.  Khrushchev   in  Oct.   1958   "what  his
views  were  about  making  a  link  with  disarmament  a  condition
for   a  nuclear  test  ban  treaty,  Chairman   Khrushchev's   reply
was:  'Is  there  any  surer  way  of  sabotaging  the  suspension  of
nuclear   tests   than   by  such   conditions?'"    Never   did   the
(capitalist  and/or  communist)   devil  more  brilliantly   demon-
strate  his  proverbial   capacity   to   cite   (the   other   fellow's)
Scripture  to  his  purpose.
The  Czechs  Quote  Ike
This  use  by  each  side  of  the  arguments  once  put  forward
by  the  other  reached  a  climax  of  comedy  in  the  Special  Polit-
ical  Committee.    There  the  Czechs  led  the  Soviet  bloc  in  a
week-long   fight   to  have  the   Committee   do  no   more   than
"note"  the  latest   report   from   the  United   Nations   Scientific
Committee  on  the  Effects  of  Atomic  Radiation.    The   report
itself   was  about  as  innocuous  as  anything  which  has   come
from   this  slow  moving  and  ambivalently  oracular   body,  on
which   the   U.S.   is  represented   by  two  scientists   notoriously
embalmed  years  ago  in  official  oils,  Dr.   Shields  Warren   and
Dr.  Austin  M.  Brues,  spokesmen  for  the  Tellerite  radiation-
won't-hurt-you  lobby.    The  Committee  in  its  three  page  re-
port   daringly   recognized   "that   the   resumption   of   nuclear
testing  since  the  publication  of  its  last  comprehensive  report
increases  the  urgency  for  intensification  of  relevant  scientific
studies."   A  25-nation resolution  in  which  the  Canadians  were
prime  movers  asked  the  Special  Political  Committee  to  express
concern   over  the  "sharp   increases"   in  radioactivity,  and   to
ask  the   radiation  committee  to  speed   up   its  comprehensive
report   and   perhaps  make  an   interim  one.     The  25-nation
resolution  also  invited  the World  Meteorological Organization
to  extend  its  weather  reporting  network  to  the  monitoring
A  Denial  from  The  New  York  Times
We  have  received  two  letters,  one  angry  from  Max
Frankel,   the   other  friendly   from  Clifton   Daniel,   his
managing  editor  on  the  New  York  Times,  about  our
page  one  box   (Oct.  16)   asking  whether  the  German
Ambassador   was   the   source   of   Mr.  Frankel's  story
in  the  Times Oct. 8  saying  the  Kennedy-Gromyko talks
had  gone  badly  and  represented  a  step  backward.   Mr.
Daniel's  letter  was   to  a  reader  of   the  Weekly,  Mr.
Frankel's  was   to  us.    Both  denied  that   the   German
Ambassador   was   the  source   of   Mr.  Frankel's   story.
Mr.   Frankel  doesn't   seem   any  longer  to  agree  with
his  own  scoop  because  in  the  New  York  Times  (Oct.
22)  he  wrote  that  while  the  Soviet  position  "had  not
changed ...  in  tone  it  was  now  moderate,  cordial
and  at  least  tolerable."   That  is  a  different  tune  from
the  one  he  played  two  weeks  earlier.    Then  his  coin-
cided  with  the   German   Ambassador's.     Mr.  Frankel
accused  us  of  poisoning  the  public  mind  by implying
that   his   story  came   from   Herr   Grewe,   who  agreed
with  it  so  heartily that  same  day  on  TV.    Mr.  Frankel
wrote  that  it  came  from  more  than  one  allied  source.
The  only  two  allied  sources  in  town  which  took  that
dim  a  view  of  the  Kennedy-Gromyko talks  were  the
Germans  and  the  French.    If   the  story   didn't   come
from  the  German  Ambassador  it  certainly  came  from
somebody  in  his  entourage.    We  still  think   the  New
York  Times has  no business  with  these use-it-but-don't-
quote-me   stories,   and  that   its   readers   had   to   look
pretty  closely  next  day  to  learn  that  the  White  House
had  denied  the   Frankel  story.    It   gave  the   German
Ambassador  a  world-wide sounding  board  for  his  cam-
paign  to  make  the  outlook for  negotiation  look  as black
as  possible.
of  radioactivity, in  cooperation  with  the  International  Atomic
Energy  Agency.    This  was  too  radical  for   the  Soviets.
The  Russians had  already  objected  at  the  IAEA  in  Vienna
to  any  such  reporting.    In  their  eyes  to  measure fallout  from
Soviet  tests is  cold  war  propaganda.    It  is  scientific  only  when
capitalist  fallout   is  to  be  monitored.    The   Czech  delegate,
Mr.  Pudlak,  accused  the  25  nations  of  attempting  to  railroad
through  an  "alarmist"  resolution.     Mr.  Pudlak  recalled  that
when  in  1957  the  Czech  delegation  took  the  initiative  in  the
First  Committee  in  insisting  that  the  UN   take  up  the  ques-
Famous  Appeals  Court Judge  Calls Ethics  of  the  Duel  Obsolete in  the  Nuclear  Age
"Because  the  rulers  of  Russia are  brutal  men,  should  the
U.S. be ready to join with them  in  destroying both  countries
and  much  besides?    The  President  said  in  his  recent  speech
to  the  United  Nations,  "We  shall  be  remembered  either,  as
the  generation that  turned  this  nation  into  a  flaming  pyre
or  the  generation that  met  its  vow  'to  save  succeeding  gen-
erations  from  the  scourge  of  war.'
"Though  'vow'  is  figurative,  'flaming  pyre'  is  the  literal
truth,  at  least  as  to  great  centers  of  population  like  New
York,  Chicago  and  Washington.    Against  a  flaming  pyre
there  is  no  defense.    It  follows  that,  at  least  as  to  great
centers  of  population the  campaign  for  shelters  is  only  an
anodyne  that  makes  nuclear  war  more  possible  by  making
it  seem  less  frightful.
"Yet  in  this  same  speech  the  President  said:  The  West-
ern  powers  have  calmly  resolved  to  defend,  by  whatever
means  are  forced  upon  them,  their  obligations   and  their
access  to  the  free  citizens   of  West   Berlin   and  the   self-
determination  of   those  citizens.'    This   means   that  these
powers  have  resolved  to  apply  in  the  present  crisis  a  na-
tional   morality  inherited  from  the  pre-nuclear  age.   .  .  .
"The  question  is  not,  should  we  turn  'this  planet  into  a
flaming  pyre'  rather  than  submit  to  control  of  the  U.S.  by
the  rulers  of  Russia.  .  .  .  The  present  question  is,  should
we   end  the  world  rather  than  negotiate   changes   in   the
status  of  West  Berlin  and  clarification  of  the  relations  of
West  Berlin  and West  Germany with  East  Germany.  .  .  .
"It  is  thought  that  we  should  lose  prestige  if  we  engaged
in  give  and  take  with  Russia,  and  it  seems  to  be  assumed
that  this  would be  worse  than  nuclear  war.   The  President
has  spoken  of  'humiliation.'    Such  attitudes  survive  from
times  when not  only  weapons but  ideas  were  more primitive
than  they  are  now.   If  a  gentleman  was  humiliated,  honor
called for  war.   Mankind can no longer  afford  such  attitudes.
Even  as  long  ago  as   1915,  when  the  Germans  sank   the
Lusitania,   President   Wilson  said   we  were  'too   proud  to
fight.'   A  mature nation may  well  be  too  proud to  turn this
planet  into  a  flaming  pyre  over  Berlin.    It  might  well  be
humiliated  by  any  thought  of  entering  a  nuclear  war  to
avoid  humiliation."
—Judge   Henry   W.  Edgerton,  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals,   in
a  letter  to  the  Washington  Post,  October SO.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 30,1961
tion  of  fallout  from  testing,  "Mr.  Wadsworth  of  the  United
States   justified   the   American  tests  as  a   necessary  step   for
the  defense of  the  country, and  he  was prepared  to  talk  about
tests  only  as  the   concluding  stage   of  one  of  the   programs
of  disarmament."    This  so  exactly  expresses  the  Soviet  posi-
tion  today  that  for  a  moment  one  suspected  that  Mr.  Pudlak
tongue-in-cheek  was  doing  a  Soldier   Schweik  on  the   Soviet
bloc.    Mr.  Pudlak  said  die  U.S.  and  the  United   Kingdom
would  be well  advised  not  to  support  an  "alarmist"   resolution
on  fallout   lest  this  prove   embarrassing   when   they   resume
testing.    "To  avoid  such  compromising  situations  in  the  posi-
tion  of  the  United  Nations,   depending  on  who  happens   to
be   carrying   out   tests   at   a   given   moment,"    Mr.    Pudlak
argued,   "I   should   recommend   that   the   Committee   adopt
the  Czechoslovak  resolution   which  .  .  .  does  not  voice  an
alarm."    The   Czechoslovak   delegate   even   appealed  to   the
example  of   an  elder   statesman  whose  views  are  not   often
treated  with  respect  in  the  Soviet  world.    "I  read  recently,"
Mr.  Pudlak  said,  "that  former  President  Eisenhower,  in  reply
to  the  question  whether  he wished  to  build  an  air  raid  shelter,
said  that  he  did  not  because otherwise  his  actions  might  cause
alarm  or  panic  in  the  whole  neighborhood  of  his  farm.  Well,
we,  as  an  organ  of  the  UN,"   Mr.  Pudlak  pressed  home  his
point,  "should   we  act  less  responsibly  than  President  Eisen-
hower?"
Try  This  Guessing  Game
To  show  readers  how  strikingly  the  powers  have  changed
sides  we  offer   a  parlor   game.    Here   are  two  more   sample
quotations  and  we  ask  them  to  guess  when  and   by  which
side  they  were  uttered.    Here  is  one,  "A  separate  approach
to  the  problem  of  suspending  tests  of  nuclear  weapons  was
impractical  because  it  did  not  go  to  the  heart  of   the  real
problem  confronting  the  world,  namely,  the  danger  of  war
and  the  use  of  weapons of  any kind  on  a  mass scale.   Even if
all  the  test  explosions  were  stopped,  the  stockpiling  of  atomic
and  hydrogen  weapons  would  continue ...  a  more  compre-
hensive  approach  was  imperative."    This  might  be  Khrush-
We  Use  The  Same  Flatfoot  Batiste Did
Our  hat   is  off  this  week  to  Tad  Szulc  of  the  New
York  Times  for  writing  and  his  paper  for  printing  a
story   (Oct.   22)  exposing  the  fact  that   Col.  Mariano
Faget,   an   anti-Communist  specialist   in   the   Batista
secret  police, was being used by our  immigration  service
to  screen  anti-Castro  refugees.    Mr.  Szulc  notes  that
Senor  Faget's  so-called  Bureau  of  Repression   was  so
ineffective  that  "the  entire  Communist apparatus"  sur-
vived  the  Batista  regime  intact.    Cuban  refugees  com-
plain   it    hardly   encourages    democratic   anti-Castro
forces  to find a  Batista  secret  service man  in  so strate-
gic  a   spot   here.    We  heard   in  Washington   as   Mr.
Szulc  did  before   the   Cuban  invasion,   that   all  anti-
Batista  elements  had  been  weeded  out.   It  turned  out
this   was  untrue  and  that  the  highest   circles  in  our
government  seemed  to  have  remarkably  little   control
of   its   cloak-and-dagger    operations.     The   news  that
this   Batista  man  is  still  operating   shows   the   need
for   a  shakeup.    A  shakeup  of  this   kind  is   exactly
what   will  not  come  about  if  a  man  like  McCone  is
confirmed  by  the  Senate  to  succeed   Dulles  at  CIA.
One  story  on  Cuba  we  did  not  see  in  the  New  York
Times  last   week  was  the  AP  dispatch   from   Buenos
Aires  (Washington  Star,  Oct.  18)  saying  that  a  com-
mittee  of  Argentine  handwriting  experts   had  "ruled
false  the  only  incriminating  document  among  material
handed  over  by  Cuban  exiles  to  support  their   charge
that  Fidel  Castro  has  interfered  in  Argentine  politics."
We  wonder  why  this  was  not  considered  fit  to  print.
chev  talking  now.  Actually it  is  in  the  official  summary of  the
speech  made  at  the  12th  Session  of  the  UN  by  Henry  Cabot
Lodge.    Here  is  another,   "The   question  of  the  discontinu-
ance  of  tests  of  nuclear  weapons  was  the  easiest  to  settle,  and
its  solution  would  have  the  most  far-reaching   consequences.
Apart  from  removing  a  serious  threat  to  mankind,  it  would
serve  to  clear  the  international  atmosphere  by  promoting  a
restoration  of  mutual  confidence;  it  would  make  it  easier  to
resolve  the  other  problems  of  disarmament, and  it  would  put
an  end  to  the  production  of  increasingly  destructive  nuclear
(Continued   on  Page   Pour)
Some  Items  on  the  Shelter  Follies  You  May  Not  Have  Seen  In  Your  Local  Paper
To  keep  readers  abreast  of  the  shelter  follies,  we  note
some  significant   items  they  may  not  have  seen  in  their
local  papers.    In  Newark  campaigning,  former   President
Eisenhower  told  a  press  conference  he  wouldn't   build  a
shelter  on  his  farm  because  it  might  alarm  the  neighbors.
The  New  York  Post's  gifted   Murray  Kempton,  who  was
there,  quoted  Eisenhower   (Oct.   18)  as  Saying,  "If  I  was
in  the finest shelter  in the  world  all  alone  with all  my  family
somewhere  else,  I just  think  I'd  walk  out.    I  wouldn't  want
to  live  in  that  kind  of  a  world."
Adam  Yarmolinsky,  special  assistant  for  civil  defense  to
the  Secretary  of  Defense,  told  a  Women's  National  Demo-
cratic  Club  luncheon  in  Washington  (Washington  Post,   Oct.
18)  they  had  nothing  to  worry  about  because  the  Capital
would  be  low  down  the  list  of  potential  targets  in  any   rea-
sonably  planned  enemy   attack  during  the  next  few  years
unless  "the   Russians  just  got  mad."     Let's  not  get  them
angry  and  let's  be  sure  the  Russian  General  Staff   reads
Marshal,  we mean  Mr. Yarmolinsky's  speech.   As  the  latter
projects  it,  the  Russians  only  have  enough  bombs  to  hit
at  military  targets  if  they're  going  to  be  sensible.     "Cas-
ualties  from  blast  and  fire,  as  a  result  of  an  attack,"  Mr.
Yarmolinsky  observed,  "even  on military  installations  would
run  into  the  millions" but  in  and  around  cities  many  could
be  saved  by shelters.   That  is,  if  our  estimates  of  the   Rus-
sian  stockpile—and  temper—are  accurate.
News  not  quite  as  bright  as  that  was  dug  up  by  John
M.  Goshko  a  Washington  Post  reporter  (Oct.   22)  assigned
to  find  out  what  happened  when  the  Army  Corps  of  Engi-
neers  made  spot  checks  in  White  Plains,  N.Y.,   and  an  in-
dustrial  corner  of  southeast  Baltimore  on  space  that  might
be  used  in  existing  structures  for  shelter.    Their  findings
indicate  there  may  not,  after  all,  be  space  enough  available
for  that  50  million—or  one  fourth   of  the  population—we
were  assured   so  recently   could   be  sheltered   in  existing
buildings.    Much   of  the  space  available  turns  out   to  be
"in  remote  areas  far   removed   from   urban   populations."
There  is  also  some  question  whether  the  national  survey
can  be  completed  by  the  target  date  of  December    1962.
It  is  a  good  thing  Khrushchev  lifted  his  deadline  on Berlin.
Peter   Bart,  who  covers  the   advertising   world   for   the
New  York Times,  reported  (Oct.   23)  doubts  about  the  line-
age  coming  in  from  shelter  manufacturers.  A»  A  result  two
leading   magazines,   the   Saturday   Review   and   the   New
Yorker,  have  declined  to  accept  shelter   »d»  at  this  time.
Among  doubts  reported  by  Mr.  Bart,  "Would  they  really
provide  protection  in  an  era   of  multi-megaton  weapons?
Was it a  good  idea  to encourage  private  shelten. . . . What
standards .should  be  imposed  on  shelter   manufacturers?"
Some  people  just  have  no  faith  in  free  enterprise.
t  1
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 30,1961
U.S.  "Filibuster"  Helped  Moscow  Block  50-MT  Protest  Resolution
weapons."   This  might  be  Arthur  Dean  speaking  now.  Actu-
ally  it  was  Gromyko  at  that  same  session  in 1957.
The  position  taken  by  the   Soviet  Union   in  1957 and  by
the  U.S. now  remains  the  right  one.   To  defend   its  own
testing  the  Soviet  Union  is  taking  positions  not  only  arrogant
but   ludicrous.    Mr.   Green   of   Canada   complained  that  the
Soviet  representative  in  Ottawa  refused   to  accept  a  protest
note  from   the   Canadian  government   "on   the   ground   that
the  proposed  detonation  of  a  50-megaton  bomb  was  a  matter
of  internal  concern  only  to  the  Soviet  Union.    Surely,"  Mr.
Green   observed  incredulously,  "it  is  not  possible  to  contend
seriously  that  filling  the  atmosphere  with  radioactive  dust  is
a  matter  solely  of  domestic  concern."    But  the  unhappy  Mr.
Stevenson  was  in  not  too  different   a  position  when  he  had
to  tell  the  First  Committee  that  we  reserved  the  right,  what-
ever  world  public  opinion,   to  make  atmospheric  tests, too.
Even  Buddha  Had First  to  Give  Up  His  Throne
On   this   issue  a  certain  community  of   interest   is  visible
between  the  two  great  Powers.   Thus,  on  U.S.  insistence,  the
original  Canadian  draft   on  the  dangers  of  atomic   radiation
in   the   Special   Political   Committee   was   watered   down   to
remove  a  demand  for  cessation  of  all  testing.    Last  night  in
First  Committee  the  U.S. helped  block  a  vote  on  the  Northern
resolution  against  the  50-megaton  Soviet  test  just  when  India
had  agreed  to  support  an  amended  version.    This  meant  Afro-
Asian  votes  for  the  resolution  in  the  wake  of  protests  stirred
by  the   30-megaton   Soviet  test.   At  this  juncture  Mr.   Dean
delivered  an  hour  long  speech  on  the  Geneva  test  talks  which
Mr.  Mezincescu  of  Rumania  ungratefully  called  "a  filibuster
pure   and   simple."     Before  Mr.   Dean   spoke,   Scandinavian
diplomats  had  spent  an  hour  trying  to  persude  him  to  post-
pone  his  speech  so  they  could  push  for  a  quick  vote  on  their
emergency  resolution.    The  U.S. feared  the  resolution   might
constitute  a  barrier  to  atmospheric  tests  of  its own.
Mr.  Dean  quoted  Mr.  Khrushchev  in  defense  of  the  Amer-
ican  position.    "Should  any  of  the  States,  in  the  present-day
conditions,  resume  tests  of  nuclear  arms,"  Mr.  Dean   quoted
from  a  statement  by Mr.  Khrushchev  on Jan. 16,  I960,  "it  is
not  difficult  to  imagine the  consequences.    Other  States which
possess  the  same  weapons  would  be  forced  to  take  the  same
road."     To   this   explanation,   the   delegate    from    Ceylon,
Women  to  Strike  for  Peace
Borrowing  their  cue  from  Aristophanes  who  has  the
Greek   women  in   Lysistrata   abjure   the   embraces   of
their   husbands  until   they   promise  to  make  peace,   a
group   of   Washington,  D.C.,   housewives   has  launched
a  women's  "strike  for  peace"  to  be  held  November  1.
They   plan  a  meeting   near   the  Washington   Memorial
and  the  presentation  of  petitions  to  Mrs.  Kennedy  at
the   White   House   and   for  Mrs. Khrushchev   at   the
Soviet   Embassy.  Groups  elsewhere   are  asked  to   send
telegrams.     Their   slogan   is  "End The  Arms   Race—
Not  The  Human Race."   As  a  husband  we  are  alarmed
at   this  move  toward  the   unionization  of   women  but
we  hasten  to  approve.    "We  are  unwilling,"  said  Mrs.
Dagmar  Wilson,  one  of  the  chief   local   sparkplugs  of
what  has  hopes  of  becoming  a  grass  roots  movement,
"to   face   annihilation,   or   grovelling   in   underground
shelters.    Women  spend  years   of  their  lives  bringing
up  children. ...  Now,  in  the  nuclear  age, all  women
have ...  an  even  clearer  and  more   urgent   duty,  to
work  for  peace   in  order   that  our  children  may  have
a  future."    Is  Mrs.  Smith  of  Maine  listening?
Mr.  Malalasekara  made  a  moving  Buddhist  rejoinder,   "We
are  aware,"  he  said,  that  the  Indian  resolution  for  a  mora-
torium  on  all  tests  pending  a  treaty  "may  put  the  U.S. at
some  disadvantage,  for  we  have  heard  it  said  that  the  Soviet
Union  is  maneuvering  for  a  position  in  which,  with  an  ap-
pearance  of  sensitiveness  to  popular  demand,  it  would  forego
the  announced   [50  MT]   test,  and  thus  be  relieved  of  crit-
icism  against  itself  for  the  recent  resumption  of  tests.  .  .  .
But  we  who  had  the  privilege  of  listening  to  President  Ken-
nedy  in  the  General  Assembly  heard  his  impassioned  appeal
for  a  peace  race  and  saw  how  earnest  was  his  desire  to  end
world  conflict. ... He  was,  we know,  also  voicing the  deepest
sentiments  of  his  people.    We  can  be  sure  that  neither  the
distinguished   President   nor   the   people   of   his   great   land
would   hesitate  to  undertake  risks,  to   sacrifice  many  advan-
tages,  in  the  cause  of  world  peace. ...  In  this  vale  of  tears
every  worth-while  choice  also  involves  some  kind  of  renuncia-
tion."   But  even  the  Buddha  had  first  to  give  up  his  King-
dom   before  he   could   live   by  such  noble   standards.     The
choice  is  between  humanity  and   practical   politics,   and   the
nature  of  the  nation-state  system  makes  humanity  the   loser.
If   you  send  a  stamped   self-addressed    LONG  envelope  toe'H  send  a free  sample  copy  of  this  issue  to  a  friend.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  .................................„........„........_.................................
Street
City   .........................................ione............State,..........«.......
10/30/61
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street  ........._...................._........................„............„..„.........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   the   last   Monday  In   August   and   the
September  and  the  last  Monday  In  December  and  the  first  In  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D. C.  An   independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.j  *6  in
Canada:   J10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rate*:  $16  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa,
first    In
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED