I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jun19.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive:  Bertrand  Russell's Letter  to Kennedy,  P.  3
Split  Judges,  Split  Consciences  and  Split  Hairs  Explain  Two  Liberal  Court  Decisions,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  23JUNE  19,   1961
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Hysteria  Is  No   Substitute  For  Diplomacy
The   situation  between   Moscow    and   Washington    is   bad
enough  without  the   hysterical   exaggerations   in  which  much
of  our  press  is  indulging.    The  New   York  Times,  I  am  sorry
to   say,  is  among   the   worst   offenders.      Its   editorial   (June
12)  on  the  Berlin question,  "The   Issue  Is  Peace,"  was frenetic
in   tone  and  striking  in  its  misrepresentations.    Thus  it  said
the  Russians  were  proposing  to  "establish  a  'free  city'  of  Ber-
lin  stripped  of  protecting  Western   troops."     But  the  text  of
the  Soviet  memorandum   on  Germany,  as  printed  on  page  13
of   that  same  day's  paper,  said   "As   a  guarantor   of  the   free
city,  token  contingents of  troops  of  the  U.S.,  the  United King-
dom,  France  and  the  Soviet  Union  could  be  stationed  in  West
Berlin,   nor   would   the   U.S.S.R.   object   to   the   stationing  in
West   Berlin   of   troops   of   neutral   countries  under   United
Nations  auspices.  .  .  ."
Not  An  Ultimatum
Similarly  the  next  day's  New   York   Times  played  the  sub-
mission   of   the   Soviet   memorandum   on   nuclear   testing   at
Geneva  under  scare  headlines,  "Soviet  Ultimatum  On  Atomic
Parley  Is Given  to  West."    By contrast  the  New   York   Herald-
Tribune  the  same  day  merely   said,   "Geneva   Gets  K's  Memo
on  Arms  Talk."    The  London  Times  headed   its  story  from
Geneva  on   the   submission  of   the   memo,   "Geneva    Nuclear
Tests  Pact  Outlook  'Even  Murkier'."    The  text  of  the  memo
as  printed  in  the  New   York   Times  last  Monday  was  deeply
disappointing  but  it  was  hardly  an ultimatum.
The  crux  of  the  problem   in  the  Reich  is  not  the   freedom
of  West  Berlin.    So  long  as  Western   troops,  token  or  other-
wise,   were  in   the   city,   any  attempt   to   cut   off  their  supply
lines   would   risk   world   war,  whether   the   Soviet   Union   or
East  Germany  were  nominally  in  control  of  the  access  routes.
The   real  change  which  Adenauer  fears  was  indicated  by  the
speech   he  made   in   Bamberg   saying  that   the   Soviet   memo
showed   Moscow's   major   interest   to   be   the   "perpetuation"
of   Soviet  postwar  gains  in  Central  Europe.     In  other   words
a   peace   treaty  would   give   international  recognition   to   the
present  boundaries  of  the  two  German  States  and  to  the  divi-
sion  of  Germany.   West  Germany  has  not  given  up  hope  of
taking  over  East  Germany  on   its  own  terms  and   of   "peace-
fully"   reestablishing  its   1937    frontiers.      The   issue   is   not
Berlin,   which  we  can  protect,   but   how   far   we  propose   to
go  in supporting  this German  dream—and  this German  dream,
one  may  add,  is  the  East  European  nightmare.    This  is  what
the   Soviet  memo   means  when   it  says,   "The    question   of   a
peace  treaty  is  the  question   of   the   national   security  of   the
U.S.S.R.  and  many  other  states."    We  can  negotiate  new  and
firmer  guarantees   for  West  Berlin   merely   in   return   for   de
facto   recognition  of   East  Germany.     If   we  don't   negotiate
and  Moscow  signs  a  separate  pact  and  hands  over  the  control
Mansfield  Talks  Sense  on  Berlin
"I  have  long  questioned  and  I  continue  to   question
a  status  quo  which  places  us  in  the  position,  in  effect,
of   pleading  with  or  urging  the  Russians  not   to  with-
draw  their  military  forces  from  the  Westernmost point
of   penetration   which  they   reached  in  Europe   in   the
wake   of   World  War   II;   yet   our  present   position   on
Berlin   requires   that   we   do   precisely   that.    Further-
more,  Mr.  President,  I  do  not   think  we  can  safeguard
most   effectively   our  own  interests  or  advance  the   in-
terests  of  peace  when  we  insist  upon remaining directly
under  a  Communist  sword  of  Damocles,  as  is  now  the
case   in  Berlin,  if   a  rational  alternative  may  be  found
to  that  position  through diplomacy.    Further, Mr.  Pres-
ident,   I   have   long   questioned   a   position   on   Berlin
which  was   assumed  immediately   after   World   War   II
and  has  been   maintained  unchanged  despite   the   enor-
mous  changes   which  have  occurred  in  both  parts   of
Germany   and   in   Europe   since   that   time.     Finally  I
question  a  position  which,  through subordinate irrespon-
sibility,  error  or  provocation  on  either  side  invites  the
precipitation  of   a  nuclear  conflict."
—Mansfield    (D.  Mont.)   to  the  Senate  June    11,
routes,  we  may lose  our  bargaining  power.    We  will hardly  go
to  war  if  East  Germans  instead  of   Russians  begin   to  stamp
the  military   traffic   passes  to  Berlin  as  they  already  do   those
for   interzonal   German  trade  and   travel.
A   little   less  frenzy   and   a  little  more  thought   is  also  re-
quired  by  the  Soviet  memo  on  nuclear  testing.    It  may  well
be  that   the   Russians  are  looking  for   an   excuse  to   resume
testing;   if  so,  it   is  to  our   interest  to  go  on   negotiating  and
force  them  to  bear  the  onus  of  resumption.    There   is  reason
to  suspect  that  the  Russians  would  be  glad  to  "test  n'  talk,"
the  formula  being  put  forward  by  the  pro-test  forces  in  Con-
gress.    We   have  made  many  more   tests  than   the  Russians;
we  are  well  ahead;  we  stand  to  lose  if  they  catch  up,  and  they,
rather  than  us,  might  turn  up  with  a  new  surprise  weapon  if
testing  resumes.    It  would   be  better  if,  instead  of   this  hob-
goblin  talk  about  secret  Russian  tests,  our  scientists  reported
soberly  on  what  renewed  testing  would  give  the  Russians.
The   Russian  demand  for   a  three-headed   executive  is  not
so   different   from   the   Security   Council   where   the   rule   of
unanimity  prevails.    It  may  not  be  good  enough  but   conceiv-
ably  it  may  be  better  than  resumption  of  the  race  in  nuclear
armament.    The   Soviet  memo   says  the  agreed   upon  on-site
inspection  quota  would   not  be  subject  to  veto  if  there  is  an
"objective   reading"   which   indicates  a  suspected   nuclear   ex-
plosion.    To  establish  monitoring  stations  on  Soviet  soil,   to
put  Westerners   in  them  and   to  have  a  quota   of   on-site  in-
spections  not  subject  to  veto  would  give  us  far  more  control
than  we  have  now.    We  ought  to  press  for  specifics  and  take
a  good  look  before   replying.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   June   19, 1961
Split  Hairs  Free  An  HUAC  Contempt   Victim  and  Produce   A  Pro-Communist    Ruling
Split  Judges  and  Split  Consciences  Explain  Two   Liberal  Court  Decisions
The  conservative Washington  Star  (June  7)  while  approv-
ing  was  apprehensive  about  the  new  Supreme  Court  rulings
upholding  the  membership  clause  of  the  Smith  Act  and   the
registration  provisions  of  the  Internal  Security  Act,  warning
its  readers that the  rulings were circumscribed and  by a margin
of  one  vote  only.    Both  points  of  anxiety  were  given  sub-
stance  last  Monday  when  by  a  shift   of  one  vote,  the  Court
reversed  the  conviction  of  Bernhard  Deutch   for  contempt  of
the   House  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  and   then  by
a  unanimous vote  reversed  an  anti-Communist ruling  by  the
New  York  Court  of  Appeals.    Both  liberal  victories,  though
limited,  indicate  that  changes  in  political  climate  and  in  the
composition  of  the  Court  may  yet  alter  the  outlook,  particu-
larly  as  so  many  questions  involved  in  the  Internal  Security
Act  are  yet  to  be adjudicated.
Not  "Pertinent"—By  165  Miles
In  the  Deutch  case,   Stewart   ruled  for  the  majority,   with
Frankfurter,   Harlan,   Clark   and   Whittaker   dissenting,   that
Mr.  Deutch  could  go  free  because  the  House  Committee  had
announced  that  the  subject  of  the  hearings  at  which  he  was
questioned  was  Communism  in  the  Albany, N.Y.,   area.    The
majority  ruled  that  the  questions  asked  Mr.  Deutch  were  not
"pertinent"   since  these  were  about  Communist  activities  in
Ithaca,   165  miles  from  Albany!    We   must  be  grateful  for
these  small  geographical  mercies.
The   other   liberal   decision   was   given   added   importance
because   it   was   the   first   in   which   the   Supreme   Court   has
passed  on  the  1954  amendments  to  the  Internal  Security  Act.
Herman  Kahn and  The  Pacifists
"The  list   [of  those  who  might  push  the  buttons  and
start  a  nuclear  war]  is  infinite.    The  RAND  Corpora-
tion's   genial  and  gigantic  Herman  Kahn,  a   physicist,
has  sounded out  some militant pacifist  groups.   They're
getting  madder  and  madder,'  he  said,  'and  they  believe
in  taking  the  law  into  their  own  hands.'    Might  such
men  join  the  Air  Force,  get  an  assignment  on  or  near
a  missile  base—perhaps  as  guards  or  typists—'borrow'
service   manuals  and  attempt  to  put   their  knowledge
to  use?    Or  might  civilian  outsiders,  possibly   groups
of   pacifist  fanatics,  equipped  by  Communists with  de-
tailed   firing   instructions,    sneak    into   launch-control
systems?    After  all,  the  Russians,  too,  would  like world
opinion  to  force  us  into  a  safer—and   less   alert—de-
fense   posture.     What  better   way  to  generate  the  re-
quired  pressure  than  an  accidental  'American'  nuclear
firing?"
—The  Chances  of  Accidental   War,   by  Peter   Wyden
(Associate    Editor),   Saturday   Evening   Post,  June   3.
One  of  these,  in  an  effort  to  put  the  Party  effectively  outside
the  law,  declared  it  was  not  entitled  "to   any  of  the  rights,
privileges  or  immunities" conferred  by  any  laws of  the United
States.    Relying on  this  the  New   York  State  authorities ter-
minated  the  Party's  registration  under  unemployment  insur-
ance  law,  depriving  its  employes  of  jobless  pay.    Mr.  Justice
Harlan   held   for   a  unanimous  Court   that   New   York   was
wrong  in  its  reading of  the  1954  Act  though  its  Section  2  de-
clares  the  Communist  Party  an  outlaw  and  this  has  been  the
unspoken  premise  of  recent  Frankfurter-Harlan rulings.
Distinguished   Group  Initiates  Pardon  Plea  to  President  for  Braden,  Wilkinson
"We,    the   undersigned,    herewith   earnestly   support   the
petition   for   executive   clemency   submitted   to  you  by  Carl
Braden  and  Frank  Wilkinson,  whose  appeals  to  the   Supreme
Court   of  the   United   States  were   denied   on  February  27,
1961,   by  a  decision  of  five  to  four.
"We  recognize  the  right   and  duty   of  Congress,  acting
through   its  Committees   to  insist  upon  answers  from   wit-
nesses   when   it   seeks  information   relevant   to  the  proper
exercise  of  its  legislative  powers,  but  we share  the  growing
public   indignation   at   the   obvious   abuses  of  authority   in
which  the  House  Committee  on  Un-American   Activities  so
often   indulges   and  its   use  of  the   investigating   power   of
Congress  to  punish  or  silence  the  Committee's  critics.
"It   is  disturbing   that  these  abuses  of  Congressional  au-
thority   are   not   only  resulting   in   a   growing    number   of
political  prisoner   who  are   imprisoned  not.  because  of  il-
legal  acts,  but  because  of  their  ideas,  but  also  in  the  repres-
sion  of  thought   and  speech  at   a  time   when  new  and  un-
orthodox   ideas  are  so  desperately  needed  to  meet  the  new
and   complex   problems   with   which   the   country   and   the
world   arc   now  faced.     Only   recently,  Mr.  President,  you
declared:
" 'For  at  all  levels  of  our  national  life,   each  man  is
called   upon   to  stand  for  what  he  believes  to  be  right
against   the   pressures   and   opinions   of   friends,    fellow
workers,  constituents   of   the   force   of   public   attitudes.'
"In  the  light  of  that  statement  we  ask  you  to  consider
the  intent  of  Mr.  Wilkinson  and  Mr.  Braden  as  they  pleaded
the  First  Amendment.    When   confronted   by  the  question,
'Are  you  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party?'  it  was  open
to  them,  by  pleading   the  Fifth   Amendment,   to  refuse   to
testify   and   yet   escape   punishment.     But   loyalty   to   the
Constitution,   as  they  interpreted  it,  forbade  them  to  do  so.
Agreeing  with   many  other  Americans,  including   a  strong
minority   of   the   Supreme   Court,   they   believed   that   the
Committee's   question   violated   the  First   Amendment.
"On that  ground  alone,  at  the  cost  of  great  risk  to  them-
selves,   they   refused   to   cooperate   in   the   violation.     The
Committee  had  forced  upon  them  the  necessity  of  making  a
choice  between   obedience   to   a   Congressional  statute  and
obedience    to   Constitutional   principle.      When   they   chose
the  latter,  rejecting  the  former,   they  were  not  flouting  a
law  for  their  own  personal  advantage.    They  were,  as  you
suggest,   'standing   for   what   they   believed.'    That   choice
may   have  been  made  in  error  just  as  may  the  dissenting
opinions  of  members  of  the  Court.    But  the  punishment   of
such  an  error  by  'imprisonment  in  a  common  jail  for  12
months'  gives  notice  to  all  the  world  that  We,  the  People
of  the  United  States  are  not  'politically  free.'
"We  therefore  appeal  to  you,  Mr.  President,  in  the  name
of  the  most  sacred  principles  of  the  Constitution,  that  you
exercise  in  these  cases  the  power   to  grant  reprieves  and
pardons   which   the   Constitution    wisely   delegates   to   the
holder  of  your   high   office."
Initiating  Signatures:  John  Haynes  Holmes,  James  Im-
brie,  Alexander   Meiklejohn,   Aubrey   W.  Williams,   Martin
Luther   King,   Jr.,    Herman   H.   Long,   Dorothy   Marshall,
Reinhold  Niebuhr,  Robert   W.  Kenny,  Henry   S.   Commager,
Grenville  Clark,  Justine  Wise  Polier,  Irving  Billiard,  Alger-
non   D.   Black,   Helen   L.  Buttenwieser,   Roland  Gittelsohn,
Dean  John  C.  Bennett,  Clarence  Pickett   (160   N.  15th    St.,
Philadelphia   2,  Pa.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   June   19,  1961
An  Appeal  the  Press  Ignored  During  JFK's  Visit  to  England  and  an  FBI  Man Received
Exclusive: Text  of Lord Bertrand  Russell's  Open  Letter to President Kennedy
To  the  President  of  the  United  States  of  America:                                '                                                                                                                                 '
"In  your  visit  to  Great  Britain  on  June  5,  which  we  must
all  hope  will  prove  fruitful,   it  is  important  that  you  should
take  cognizance,   not  only  of  governmental   opinion,   but  also
of  that  very  large  and  rapidly  growing  section   which   is  op-
posed   to   the   establishment   of   a   Polaris   base,   whether   at
Holy   Loch   or   elsewhere  on   British   territory      There   have
already,   as   you   know,   been   preliminary   protests,   but   very
much  larger protests  are  to  be expected  and  are  being  planned.
So  far  as  present  plans  are  concerned,  these  will  culminate in
nationwide  action  in  September.    I  have  been  asked  by   the
Committee  of   VOO, of  which   I  am  President,  to   put   before
you  the  reasons  for  such  action.
"There  are,   it  seems   to  me,  three  kinds  of   reasons  that
justify   our   protests   and   such   as  should  carry  weight  with
the  United  States  Government.
"The    first  of  these  reasons  is  the  importance  of  preserving
the  hitherto   cordial   relations  between  the  United   States  and
Great  Britain,  not  or.ly  in  Government  circles,  but  in  public
opinion.    It  is  inevitable, though  profoundly  regrettable,  that
agitation  against  a  Polaris  base  in  Great  Britain  should  gen-
erate  some  antagonism,  not  only  to  the  policy  of  the  British
Government,  but  also  to  that  of  the  United  States.   We  must
all  wish  that  such  antagonism  should  not  increase.
MacArthur   Agrees  With  Russell  on  War
"It   may   take   another   cataclysm    of   destruction   to
prove  the  bald  truth  that  further  evolution  of  civiliza-
tion  cannot  take  place  till  global  war  is  abolished.    No
longer  can  it  be  a  successful   weapon   of  international
adventure.     If   you   lose,   you   are  annihilated.    If   you
win,   you  stand  only  to   IOSP.
    v
r  '-mfjor  does  it  possess
even  the  chance  of  the  winner  of  the  duel.    It   contains
only   the  germs  of  double  suicide."
—General   Douglas   MacArthur    at   Michigan   State
Univ.   commencement,  East   Lansing,  Midi.,   June   11.
Doubts  As  to  British  Safety
"A  second  reason  is  concerned  with  doubts  as  to  the  safety
of   the  population   of   Great   Britain.    Experience  has   shown
that  there  is  uncertainty  as  to  where  missiles  will  land   and,
in  a  time  of  crisis,  it  would   probably  be  impossible   for   the
British  authorities  to  exercise  any  degree   of  control  over  the
action  of  Polaris  submarines.    There  is  a  distinct possibility,
which  has  been  emphasized  by  your  most  authoritative writer
Herman   Kahn,   that,   so  long  as  there  is  a   Polaris   base   in
Britain,  Russia  might   retaliate   against  Britain  alone.     Such
retaliation   might,   and   probably   would,   destroy   the   whole
population   of   Britain   in   the   course  of,   at   most   an   hour,
without  (again   I  quote  Herman  Kahn)   provoking   American
retaliation.    It  is  very  questionable  whether  British   member-
ship  of  NATO,  and   British   permission   of   American   bases
on   our   territory,  add   anything  to   the  strength  of  America,
while,  on  the  contrary, they  impose  upon  America an  onerous
obligation  which  it  may  prove  impossible to   fulfill.
"Third,   the   supreme   interest  of   the   whole   world—East
and  West  and  uncommitted  nations  alike—is  the  prevention
of  nuclear  war.    A  rapidly  growing  body  of  opinion  in  this
country  believes  that  Britain  could  be  more   effective   in   pre-
venting   a   nuclear  war   as   a  neutral  by  helping   to   suggest
agreements  which  could  be  accepted  by  both  East  and  West.
Hitherto  proposals  by either East  or  West  have  been  unaccept-
able  to   the   other   side  for   reasons,  partly  of   prestige,   and
partly   of   suspicion.     Proposals    by   neutrals   would   obviate
these  difficulties.     Such  a  policy  would  not  imply  that Britain
should  withdraw   from   the  search   for  the  solution  of   world
problems,  but,  on  the  contrary,  should  seek  such  solution  in
ways  promising  more  hope  of  success  than  those  which  have
hitherto  been  pursued   in  East-W
es
t  negotiations.
"The   danger  of  a  nuclear  holocaust  is  the  most  terrible  of
all  those  that  face  the  world   at  the  present  time,  and   those
for  whom  I  speak  are  persuaded   that  what  Britain  can  do  to
diminish   this  danger   can  best   be  done   by  the   adoption  of
a  radically  new  policy  by  the  British  Government—a  policy
devoted  to  the  presentation  of  world  peace  rather  than  to  the
entirely  illusory hope  of  the  victory  of  one  side.    It  is  in  the
hope  that  such  a  change  of  policy  could  be  carried out without
diminution   of  friendly  relations  with  the  United  States  that
I  am sending you this  open  Letter.
"Yours    faithfully,
Bertrand   Russell
Background   of  The  Letter:  British  Press  Tries  to  Blackout   Peace   Movement
The   letter   above    from   Bertrand    Russell   to   President
Kennedy  was  delivered  to  the   U.S.   Embassy  in  London  on
the  occasion  of  Kennedy's  recent  visit.    Two  delegates  from
the   newly   formed   Committee  of   100   which   Lord   Russell
heads  were  allowed  only  to  give  the  letter   to  a  Mr.  Camp-
bell   of   the   FBI.     The   letter   was   released   to  the   British
press  along  with  an  announcement  of  a  massive   demonstra-
tion   planned   by   the   Committee   of   100   for   September   in
which  10,000  would  block  the  roads  of  central   London  and
2,000.  occupy   the   piers   of   Holy    Loch   to   immobilize   the
Polaris  base  at  that  Scottish  port.    But  the  letter  was  re-
ported  only  in  The  Guardian  (Manchester)    and  the   London
Daily   Worker,   and  ignored   by   U.S.     correspondents.
A  correspondent  writes  us  that  the  British  press  is  now
doing   its  best  to  blackout  news  of  the  growing   movement
of  resistance  to  war  preparations   dramatized  by  the   vast
marches  and  the  Holy   Loch  demonstrations.
When  the  U.S.  peace  marchers  arrived  on  the  eve  of  the
Kennedy  visit,  the  government   was  anxious  that  the  Amer-
ican  marchers   and  Mr.  Kennedy's  arrival  not  be  too  closely
associated.     The  press   conference    given   by   the   marchers
was  well  attended  but  almost  wholly  unreported.    The  pick-
eting  by  the   Americans   of  the  Defense  Ministry  was   ig-
nored,  and  little  coverage  was  given  the  rally  in  Trafalgar
Square   where   8,000   turned   out   to   give   A.   J.   Muste   and
Bradford   Lyttle   what   our   correspondent   describes   as   "a
tumultuous  ovation."    After  the  rally, the  Americans  led  the
8,000  in  a  march  through   London  which  coincided  with   the
President's   arrival.     A   section   greeted    Kennedy   at   the
airport.
We  have   received   and  hope   to   print   in  an  early   issue
an   abridged   version   of   the   moving   speech   made   recently
by  Lord  Russell  to  the  National   Youth  section  of  the  Cam-
paign  for  Nuclear   Disarmament   in  which  he  explained  why
he  thought  civil  disobedience  a  necessary  tactic  in  the  cam-
paign  against  war.   This  eloquent  plea  by  Britain's  greatest
living   philosopher   was   subjected   to   savage   distortion   in
the  press.
9  J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   June   19, 1961
7-2  Ruling  Allows  Nuclear  Plant  to  Proceed   Before   Safe   Operation  Assured
A  Supreme  Court  Decision  Which
When   the   Auto   Workers   and   the   AFL-CIO   Electrical
Workers   began   their   long   fight   against   the   erection   of   a
nuclear  power  plant  near  Detroit,  Senator  Clinton  P.  Ander-
son  of   New   Mexico,   then   chairman   of   the   Joint   Congres-
sional   Committee   on   Atomic   Energy,   predicted    that   this
would  get  to  be  a  contest  "between  money  and  human  lives."
Money   won  when  the  Supreme   Court,   7  to  2,  reversed   the
Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  and   allowed
a  combine  headed  by  Detroit   Edison  to  go  ahead  with   con-
structiQn  of  the  plant  before  it  was  certain  that   it  could   be
operated   safely.
The  Court  of  Appeals  here  (first  2-to-l,  the  majority  being
Edgerton   and  Bazelon,  then  on  rehearing  by  the  full  bench
5-to-2)   had   upheld   the   unions'   complaint   that   the   AEC
had  had  no  right  to  authorize  construction  when  its  own  Ad-
visory   Committee   on   Reactor   Safeguards   failed   to   approve
the  plans  as  safe.    The  AEC  without  public  hearings  never-
theless  issued  a  "provisional  construction  permit."
Unrealistic   Majority  View
The   majority,   speaking  through   Mr.   Justice   Brennan,  ac-
cepted  the  utility view  that  the  safety  findings  could  be  made
after  construction  had  been  completed.     "But  when  that  point
is  reached,"  Mr.  Justice Douglas  protested   in  his  dissent  with
Mr.   Justice   Black,   "when   millions  have   been   invested,   the
momentum  is  on  the  side  of   the  applicant   not  on   the  side
of  the  public.    The  momentum  is  not  only  generated  by  the
desire  to  salv?.£e  an  investment.    No  agency  wants  to  be  the
architect  of  a 'white elephant'."
The   Department  of  Justice,  in  arguing  this  case,  and   the
majority   in  deciding  it,   misrepresented   the   intent   of   Con-
gress  and  of   the  Joint   Committee.     We   hope  that   Senator
Anderson  will  move  to  amend  the  act  and  make  clear  that
the   AEC  was  never  intended  to  authorize  an   atomic   plant
until  the  plans  had  been  certified  by  its  experts  as  safe.
The   day  after   the  Court's   decision,   the   Joint   Committee
opened   hearings  on  the  disaster  which   took   three   lives   last
January   in   the   SL-1   reactor   accident   in   Idaho.     The   first
witness,  AEC  Commissioner Robert  E. Wilson,  had  the  candor
to  admit  that  the  accident   might   have   been   prevented   but
May  Spell  Atomic  Danger  for  Detroit
Slap-On-the-Wrist  for  Gen.  Walker
When  we  phoned the  Pentagon  to  ask  just  what  was
meant   by   the   "official   admonition"  to   Major  General
Edwin   A.   Walker   in  Germany,  we   were  told  that   it
was  an  "administrative admonition",  and  made  "orally"
and  would  not  go  down  in  the  General's  record.    "So,"
we  said,  "this  was  about  the  mildest  thing  they  could
have   done  to  him."    The   Colonel   to   whom  we   were
speaking   answered,   "You   have   summarized   it   well,
sir."     Had   General   Walker's   "injudicious"  remarks
been  of  a  Leftist  variety  instead  of  crypto-Fascist,  we
can't  imagine  his  getting  oS  with  a  slap  on  the  wrist
which   paid   tribute,  as   the   Army  release   did,   to   his
"sincerity   of   purpose."    We   think  it   was   a  mistake
to  leave  the  investigation  of  General  Walker's activi-
ties  and  his   "pro-Blue"  program  of   indoctrination   to
his   own   superior   officer,   Gen.  Bruce   C.   Clarke.     His
report  is  being  kept  secret;  the  meagre  press   release
says   nothing   of   the   "pro-Blue  program  except   that
it   was   "not  attributable" to   the   Birch  Society.    The
fact  is,  as  Norman  Thomas  protested  recently  to  Sec-
retary   of   Defense   McNamara,   that   similar  paranoid
material   is  being  used  widely  for   indoctrination pur-
poses   by  the  armed  forces,  notably  the  movie,  "Com-
munism  on  the  March" which was  produced  by  another
crackpot  outfit.    At  a  time  when  events  in  Korea,  Al-
geria  and  elsewhere  have  shown  the  dangers   to   free
government  from  an  overgrown  military  establishment,
the   Walker  case  is  a  symptom,  calling  attention  to  a
disease.    We  hope  the  White  House  which  forced  this
action   in   the   first   place  will   order   a   fuller  civilian
inquiry.    Rightist  minded  Generals,  who  see  Reds  un-
der  every  bed,  are  a  potential  danger   to  our  Repub-
lic,   too.
for   six  failures  on  the  part  of  the  managing  and  regulating
authorities.
An  article  in  Harpers  for  June,  "A  Small  Atomic  Accident"
by  the  physicist  Ralph  E.  Lapp,  provides  a  vivid  account  of
the  Idaho  accident  and  says  it  "underscores  the  importance  of
thoroughly  testing  new  reactor  types  at  remote  sites  like  the
Idaho  AEC  station  before  they  are  used   in  power  plants  near
large  cities.    A  'large'  atomic  accident  involving  widespread
radioactive  contamination of  a  metropolitan  area  would  be  a
national  disaster."     Detroit  ignores  this  at  its  peril.
Reprints  of  Last  Week's  Special   Issue  on  The  Communist  Cases  Still  Available  for  Bulk  Orders
I.   P.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street   ..................
City  ..........._.........................Zone............State....................
6/19/01
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   ...............................................................................
Street   ........._..........................................................................
City   ...........—..........................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
I. E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C,.  under  the  Act of  March  8.  1879.     Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Ail   Mail   rates:   $15  to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   nnd     Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED