I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961may01.pdf

============================================================

Why  the Supreme  Court Is  Split,  P.  3
Documentaries:   Morse  Warns  Against   War  on  Cuba;  Bob  Kennedy  Absolves  the  CIA  in  Advance,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  16
MAY   1,   1961
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Rapid  Deterioration  in  Our  National  Leadership
Neither  men  nor  nations  can  take  the  law  into  their  own
hands  without  paying  a  price.    The  price  we  are  paying  for
our  undercover  war  against  Cuba  is  a  rapid   deterioration   in
our  leadership,  and   in  our  moral  standards.    According  to
Chalmers   Roberts   in   the   Washington   Post   April   23   the
President  made  a  significant  remark  at  the  National  Security
Council  meeting  called  the  day  before  to  discuss  the  Cuban
debacle  and  the  world  situation.    He  said  of  South  Vietnam
that   the  Vietminh  does  not   have  a  New   York   Times   re-
porting  how  many  people  it  is  sending  south  to  assassinate
officials  of  South  Vietnam.    "He  had  in  mind,"  Mr.  Roberts
wrote,  "the  pre-invasion  stories  in  the  American  press  about
-the   Cuban  fiasco,"   and   "what   has  come  out  of   the  Cuban
affair  has  been  a  determination  to  meet  the  Communist  para-
military  tactics  of  guerrilla  warfare,  infiltration,' sabotage  and
so  on."     Gen.  Maxwell  Taylor's   assignment  "now   is  going
to  try  to  figure  out  how  to  do   it."
.Animus  Against  A  Free  Press
These  remarks  of  the  President,   more  cryptically reported
in  the  New   York   Times  of  April  24,  are  alarming  in  their
implications.    In  the  first  place  they  misconceive  the  situa-
tion  in  South  Vietnam  as  seriously  as  our  government   does
that  in  Cuba.    The  real  causes  of  the  disintegration  in  South
Vietnam  lie  in  the  failure  of  the  Diem   regime  to  build  a
viable  government  in  the  seven  years  since  the  Geneva  set-
tlement;   its  corruption,   it   false  elections,   its   concentration
camps,   its   suppression   of   democratic  liberties,   its  mistreat-
ment  of  minorities,  are  the  causes  of  the  growing   rebellion.
In   the  second  place,  the  President's   animus  seems  to  be  di-
rected  not  at  the  follies  exposed  in  the  Cuban  fiasco  but  at
the  free  press  for  exposing them.    The  New  York  Times,  and
particularly  staff  members  Tad   Szulc  and  James  Reston,  has
acquitted   itself   in   recent  weeks  in  the   best  traditions  of  a
free  press.    It  has  brought  to  light  conditions  of  which  the
President  himself  seems  to  have  been  but  dimly  aware.    In
the  third  place,  the  President's  remarks  are  disturbing  because
they  indicate  he  is  out,  not  to  rid  our  foreign  policy  of  the
CIA's  incubus,  but  merely  to  improve   our  cloak-and-dagger
methods,  and  to  go  further  along  the  path  of  adopting   the
worst   practices   attributed   to   the   Soviet   bloc,   even   to   the
point  of  wistfully  eyeing  the  advantages  he  thinks  it  derives
from  the  absence  of  a  free  press.
The   failure  of   the   attempted   invasion   of   Cuba,   like  so
many  of  our  failures  in  the  postwar  period,  had  its  roots  in
an  inability  to  understand  popular  feeling.    But  in  the  brief-
ings  held  at  State  Department  during  the  first  two  days  of
this  week  for  visiting  editors—a  kind  of  mass  brainwashing
operation   in  which   no   time  was  allowed   for   any  but   the
official  point  of  view  and  little  time  for  questions   or  discus-
5
Out of  the  Mouths of  Babes  and  Diplomats
Senator  DODD:  What  do you  think  we ought  to  do?
He  is  confiscating  our  property.   He is  causing  trouble.
He  has  created  an  espionage  beachhead  in  the  hemis-
phere.
Mr.   [Arthur]    GARDNER   [Ambassador    to   Cuba,
1953-57]:  I   think  we  ought  to   morally  support   any
movement  of  Cubans  that  is  willing  to  take  the  job  on.
And   I   don't   think  there   is  any  question   that   there
are  such  people.    I  think  we  can't  do  it  ourselves,  be-
cause   you   know   we  can't   send   the   Marines   down.
That  would  be  the  most  terrible  thing  in  the  world.
—Senate  Internal  Security  Committee,  Aug.  27, 1960
sion—there  was  no  evidence  of  a  willingness   to  face  up  to
this  fact.    From  the  conceited  Berle  through  the  discombobu-
lated  Stevenson  to  the  smug  Allen  Dulles  not  a  single  official
was  willing  to   admit   that  our   intelligence  was  wrong  in
assessing  the  mood  of  the  Cuban  people.    Official   Washing-
ton  has  learned  nothing,  on  the  contrary  it  has  drawn  all  the
wrong  conclusions,  from  the  failure  in  Cuba.    The  Kennedy
Administration's  swift  slide  back  to  the   conventional   view-
point  of  the  stuffed   shirts  who  direct  our  intelligence,   mili-
tary  and   diplomatic  bureaucracies  is  evident   from  the   men
chosen  by  Kennedy  to  investigate   the  failure.    Only  a  few
weeks  ago,  the  President  was  enforcing  a  blue  pencil  on  the
inflammatory  remarks  of  Admiral  Arleigh  Burke,  one  of  the
biggest   windbags   in   the   military   establishment;   now   the
Admiral  is  to  assist  General  Maxwell  Taylor  in  the  investi-
gation.    Admiral  Burke  is  a  member,  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff;  one  of  the  points  which  ought  to  be  investigated  was
the  poor  advice  given  the  President  by  them;  how  get  a  real
investigation   with  the  Admiral  at  General   Taylor's   elbow?
Just  to  make  sure  that  the  inquiry  will  be  equally  impartial
in  assessing  the  role  of  the  CIA,  Allen  Dulles  will  also  serve
on  this  panel;  he  too  will   be  in  the  happy  position  of  in-
vestigating   himself.    In   addition,   Attorney  General   Robert
Kennedy  has  been  added   to  the   panel.     Like  his   brother,
he  had   been  acting   admirably  until   the   Cuban   crisis  came
along.    Now,  in  advance  of  the  investigation,   he  has  issued
a  disingenuous  opinion   (see  text  in  box  on  page  two)  which
would  so reduce  the  ambit  of  the  Neutrality  Act  as  to  absolve
the  CIA  and  big  business  paymasters  of  the  Cuban  counter
revolution   from  complicity.    General   Taylor   himself  is  su-
perior  in  intellectual  capacity  to  most  of  the  Pentagon   crowd,
but  as  a  professional   soldier   he  is  concerned   with  military
means  for  dealing  with  social  change;  events  have  over  and
over  again  demonstrated  their  futility.    There  is  not  a  single
man  on  this  panel  capable  of  approaching  the  Cuban  ques-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  1, 1961
Decries  Police  State  Tactics  Soviet  Style  and  Secrecy  in  the  Field  of  Foreign  Policy
Morse  Warns War  Against  Cuba  Will Set Us Back 50 Years in Latin  America
Senator   Wayne   Morse,   chairman   of   the   Senate   sub-
committee  on  Latin  American  Affairs,    was  the  first  man
to  raise  his  voice  in  the   U.S.  Senate  against  war  with
Cuba.  Excerpts  from   his  speech  of  April   24  follow:
"Aside  from  this  protocol  [see  box in  col.  2],  however,  the
other  treaties  to  which  the  U.S.  is  a  party  and  the  domestic
statutes  which  have  been  cited  clearly  are  intended  to  pro-
hibit  the  kind  of  activity   now  being  carried   on  by   Cuban
exiles.     To  give  this  activity   even  covert  support  is   of  a
piece  with  the  hypocrisy   and  cynicism  for   which  the   U.S.
is  constantly  denouncing  the   Soviet  Union  in  the  UN  and
elsewhere.  .  .  .  The  argument  is  made  that  we  must  meet
fire  with  fire;  that  we  must  beat  the  Communists  at  their
own  game.   I  reject  that  argument  for  two  reasons.    First,
if   we  follow  that  course  of  action,  we  must   adopt  police
state  techniques and tactics.  . . .  Freedom  is  worth  too much
as  a  human  system  of  government  for  us  to  surrender   any
of  our  freedom  to  a  police state  system  in  the  field  of foreign
policy,  dictated  by  denying  to  the  people  the  knowledge of
the  facts  of  their  own  foreign  policy,  whether  it  is  carried
out  through  the  CIA  or any other  agency.  .  . .
A  Thorn  In  Our  Flesh,  Not  A  Dagger
"My  second  reason   for   rejecting   the  argument   that   the
U.S.  must  itself  fight  in  Cuba  is  that  in  my  judgment,  Cuba
is  not  a  dagger  pointed  at  the  heart  of  the  United  States,
but  is  instead  a  thorn  in  our  flesh.  It  is  an  irritating  thorn
and  a  painful  one,  but  I  do  not  think  a  case  can  be  made,
on  the  basis  at  least  of events  to  date  and  prospective  events
of   the   immediate   future,   to   sustain   the   argument    that
there  must  be military  intervention  in  Cuba. .  .  .
"I  say  to  Senators  today  that  it  is  my  judgment  that  if
the  United  States  seeks  to  settle  its   differences  with  Cuba
through  the  use  of  military  might,  either  direct  or  indirect,
we  shall  be  at  least  a  half  century  recovering,  if  we  ever
recover,  the  prestige,  the  understanding,  the  sympathy  and
the  confidence  of  one Latin  American neighbor  after  another.
.  . . We would  set back  the  foreign  relations  program  of the
U.S.  in  Latin  America  by at  least  50 years  by so doing.  .  . .
"I   have  sat   in  the   offices   of  many  Presidents   of   Latin
American  countries.    Direct  action  on  the  part  of  the   U.S.-
against   Cuba  would  not  make  those  governments  more  se-
cure;  it  would  make  them  less  secure.  .  .  .  We must  weigh
The  Treaty  Somebody  Mislaid
"Each   contracting   state   shall,   in  areas   subject  to
its  jurisdiction  and  within  the  powers  granted  by  its
constitution,  use  all  appropriate  means  to  prevent  any
person,  national  or  alien,  from  deliberately  participat-
ing  in  the  preparation,  organization,  or  carrying  out
of  a  military  enterprise  that  has  as  its  purpose  the
starting,   promoting  or   supporting  of   civil  strife   in
another  contracting  state,  whether  or  not  the   govern-
ment  of  the  latter  has  been  recognized."
—Article   5,  Protocol  to   the   Havana,  Pact,   signed
by   the   U.S.  in  1957,  ratified    by   the  Senate  July   30,
1959,   "but   the   U.S.   instrument    of   ratification,"     as
Senator   Morse    told   the   Senate   last   Monday,    "has
never   been  deposited   with  the  Pan  American   Union,
and   the   protocol  is   therefore    not   in   effect     in   so   far
as  the   United  States  is  concerned.   The  clear   infer-
ence  is  that   the  delay   has  been  caused   by  sensitivity
to  the  fact   that  the   United  States  would   be  in  viola-
tion  of   the  protocol  if   it   completed    ratification."
Cuba  carefully  against  such  countries  as  Brazil, Venezuela,
Ecuador,   and   other   countries   where   economic  and   social
change  is rampant.  . . .
"I  know that  the  powerful  preventive war  group in the  U.S.
will  not  agree.    There  are  those  in  the  U.S.  who  take  the
position  this  very  hour  that  we  should  have  none  of  this
rule-of-law   approach   to  the   settlement  of  these   problems,
but  that  we  should  make  clear  the  U.S.  is  boss,  so  to  speak,
in  the  Western  Hemisphere,  and  lay  down  the  law  of  mili-
tary  might.    But  it  is  the  same  law  of  the  jungle,  whether
it  is  practiced  by  the  U.S.  or  any  other  power  in  the  world.
.  .  . Now is  the  time  to  follow  peaceful  procedures  [through
the  OAS  or  if  Castro  will  not  accept,  Morse  says,  then  the
UN]  in an  attempt  to  avoid a war,  not  to  put  them  into  prac-
tice  after  the  war  is  over  as  a  sort  of rehabilitation  program
in  order  to  bind  up  wounds we should  have  made  the  attempt
to  avoid  inflicting  in  the  first  place.
"If   all  of  these   attempts   at   seeking   an  honorable  peace
in  Cuba  through  resort  to  the  OAS  or  to  the  UN  result  in
failure,  I  still  would  not  advocate  direct  military  intervention
or  indirect   military   intervention  in  Cuba.  .  .  ."
Bob  Kennedy's Disingenuous Gloss  on  the  Neutrality  Act  Evades the  CIA's Role
"Whoever,  within  the  United  States,  knowingly begins  or
sets  on  foot  or  provides  or  prepares  a  means  for  or  fur-
nishes  the  money  for,  or  takes  part   in,  any  military   or
naval  expedition  to  be  carried  on  from  thence  against   the
territory  or  domination  of  any  foreign  prince  or  state,  or
of   any   colony,  district   or   people  with   whom   the   United
States  is  at  peace,  shall  be  fined  not  more  than   $3,000  or
imprisoned  not  more  than  three  years,  or  both."
—U.S.  Code,  Title  18,  Section  960
"There  have  been  a  number  of  inquiries   from  the  press
about   our  present  neutrality   laws  and  the   possibility  of
their  application  in  connection  with  the  struggle  for   free-
dom  in  Cuba.
"First,  may  I  say  that   the  neutrality  laws  are  among
the  oldest  laws  in  our  statute  books.   Most  of  the  provisions
date  from   the  first  years  of  our  independence,  and,  with
only   minor  revisions,   have  continued   in   force   since   the
18th  Century.   Clearly  they  were  not  designed  for  the  kind
of  situation  which  exists  in  the  world  today.
"Second,   the   neutrality   laws   were   never   designed   to
prevent  individuals  from  leaving  the  United  States  to  fight
for  a  cause  in  which they  believed.   There  is  nothing  in  the
neutrality  laws  which  prevents   refugees   from   Cuba  from
returning  to  their  country  to  engage  in  the  fight  for  free-
dom.   Nor  is  an  individual  prohibited  from  departing   from
the  United  States,  with  others  of  like  belief,  to  join  still
others  in a  second  country  for  an  expedition  against  a  third
country.
"There  is  nothing  criminal  in  an  individual  leaving  the
United  States  with the  intent  of  joining  an  insurgent  group.
There  is  nothing  criminal  in  his  urging  others  to  do  so.
There  is  nothing  criminal  in  several  persons  departing  at
the  same  time.
"What  the  law  prohibits  is  a  group  organized  as  a  mili-
tary  expedition  from  departing   from  the  United  States  to
take  action  as  a  military  force  against  a  nation  with whom
the  United  States  is  at  peace.    There  are  also  provisions
of  early  origin  forbidding  foreign   states  to  recruit   mer-
cenaries  in  this  country.   No activities  engaged  in by Cuban
patriots  which  have  been  brought  to  our  attention,  appear
to  be  violations  of  our  neutrality   laws."
—Attorney   General  Robert  F.  Kennedy,  April  21
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  May  1, 1961
Non-Conformist  Who  Cited  Declaration  of  Independence Excluded from  The  Illinois  Bar
Issue  That  Splits  the  Court  Is  Strict  or  Loose Construction  of Basic  Rights
The  issue  which  so  bitterly  divides  our  Supreme  Court  is
whether  the  fundamental  guaranties   of  the  Constitution  are
to  be  strictly  construed  in  favor  of  the  individual  or  to  be
trimmed,  "balanced"  and  made  subject  to  various  exceptions
in  favor  of  the  State.    On  one  side  are  the  strict  construc-
tionists,  the  liberals:  Warren,  Black,  Douglas  and  Brennan.
On  the  other  are  Frankfurter,   Harlan,  Clark  and  Whittaker.
Shifting    uneasily    between   them    is   Mr.   Justice   Potter
Stewart.
The  decision  last  Monday,  which  was  marked  by  an  un-
usual  rebuke  from  the  Chief  Justice  to  Mr.  Justice  Frank-
furter,  was  one  in  which  Stewart  joined  the  liberals.    This
•was  the  case  of  Willie  Lee  Stewart,  a  moronic  holdup  man,
thrice  tried  for  murder.    Stewart  joined   the  liberals  in  a
majority  opinion  by  Mr.  Justice  Black  which  set   aside   the
verdict.    The  verdict  was  set  aside  because  the  trial  judge
failed  to  declare  a  mistrial  after  the  prosecutor  let  the  jury
know,  when  the  defendant  took  the  stand, that  he  had  failed
to  take  the  stand  in  his  earlier  trials.
Can  Such  An Error  Be  Harmless?
This   stirred   such   sharp   feeling   on  the   bench  that   Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter   interpolated   oral  remarks  in  the  state-
ment  of  his  dissent   which  seemed  to  the   Chief   Justice   to
question   the  motives  of  the  majority,   and  thus  to   degrade
the  Court.   The  government  in  arguing  the  appeal  conceded
that  the  trial  judge  was  in  error  but  argued  that  the  error
was  harmless.    The  technical   rule   involved,  as«established
by  Federal  statute,  is  that  a  defendant's  failure  to  take  the
stand  is  not  to  be  used  against  him.    This  derives  from  the
Fifth   amendment's  provision  which  says  that  no  man   shall
be  compelled  to  testify  against  himself.    The  majority  held
that  a  man  on trial  for  his  life  has  a  right  to  the  full  pro-
tection  of  the  rules  established  for  fair  trial.   Whatever  the
actual  effect  on  the  jury  in  the  Willie  Lee  Stewart  trial,  to
let  the  verdict  stand  despite  the  erroneous  ruling  would  have
been  to  encourage  evasion  of  this  basic  guaranty.
When   the   question   of   strictly   applying    constitutional
guaranties   turns  up  however  in  political   cases  where   the
Communist  issue  may  be  involved,  Mr. Justice  Stewart  tends
to  switch   over  to  the  right  wing  of  the   Court.     Only   as
recently  as  last  December  12, Stewart  wrote  a  5-to-4  liberal
opinion   (in  Shelton  v.  Tucker)   holding  unconstitutional   an
Arkansas statute aimed at  the  NAACP requiring  every school
teacher  to  list  every  organization  to  which  he  had  belonged
in  the  previous  5  years.    Stewart   held  for  the  liberal  ma-
jority  that  this .impaired  a  teacher's  right  of  association.
But  last   Monday,  in  three  cases  involving   lawyers   and
linked  to  the  issue  of  Communism, Stewart  shifted  sides  and
enabled  Mr.  Justice  Harlan  to  write  6-to-4  decisions  which
"Balancing  Away" the  Bill of  Rights
"The  Court,  by  stating  unequivocally  that  there  are
no  'absolutes'  under  the  First  Amendment,  necessarily
take  the  position  that  even  speech  that  is   admittedly
protected  by  the  First   Amendment  is  subject   to   the
'balancing  test'  and  that  therefore  no  kind  of   speech
is  to  be  protected   if   the   Government  can  assert   an
interest   of   sufficient   weight  to   induce  this   Court   to
uphold  its  abridgment.  . . . The majority's   'balancing'
test  . . .  tells  us that  no right  to  think,  speak  or  pub-
lish  exists  in  the   people  that   cannot  be  taken  away
if   the   Government  finds  it   sufficiently  imperative  or
expedient  to  do  so.    Thus,  the  'balancing  test'  turns
our  'Government  of  the  people,  by  the  people  and  for
the  people'  into  a  government  over  the  people."
—Black  dissenting  in  Konigsberg  v.    California,
impair   the  rights  of  lawyers.    The  Court   upheld  the   dis-
barment  of  a  New  York  lawyer,  Albert  Martin   Cohen,  who
had  pleaded  the  Fifth   amendment   in  an  "ambulance   chas-
ing"  inquiry.    There  was  no  evidence  against  him;  only  the
inference  drawn  from   his  invocation  of  the  privilege.    The
political  implications  were  obvious  and  the  National   Lawyers
Guild  had  filed  a  brief   amicus  on  his   behalf.
In  the  other  two  cases,  Harlan  wrote  5-to-4  decisions  up-
holding  refusal  of  admission  to  the  bar  for  failing  to  answer
questions   about   Communism.    One  was  that   of   Raphael
Konigsberg.    Four  years  ago  a  majority  made  up  of  Black,
Warren,  Douglas,  Brennan  and  the  conservative  Burton  ruled
that  California  could  not  exclude  Mr.  Konigsberg   from   the
bar  on  a  record  devoid  of  any  evidence  against  him  except
his  invocation  of  the  Fifth   on  a  charge  of  Communist   mem-
bership   two  decades  earlier.    But   since   then   Stewart   has
replaced  Burton  and  cast  his  vote  against  Mr.  Konigsberg,
turning  the  earlier  minority  into  a   majority.
The  other  case  was  that  of  George  Anastaplo,  a  brilliant
young  man,  worthy  of  the  best  traditions  of  his  native  land
and  of  his  Greek  forbears.     Mr.  Anastaplo   got  himself  into
trouble   with   the   Illinois   bar   examiners   by   including   the
right  of  revolution  (in  words  taken  from  the  Declaration  of
Independence)  in  a  reply  to  a  personal  history  form  ques-
tion  asking  him  to  state  what  he  considered  to  be  the  prin-
ciples  underlying  the  U.S.  Constitution.    Though  there  was
no  evidence  that  he had  ever  been  a  Communist,  this  led  the
admissions   committee  to   put   the   $64  question   which  Mr.
Anastaplo—on   principle—refused   to   answer.    He   deserves
the  moving tribute  Black  paid  him  in  the  box below.
"If  We Are  To Keep Faith  With  the  Founders ... We Must Not  Be Afraid  To Be Free'
"This  case  illustrates  to  me  the  serious  consequences   to
the  Bar  itself  of  not  affording   the  full  protections  of  the
First  Amendment  to  its  applicants for  admission.   For  this
record   shows  that   Anastaplo  has   many   of   the  qualities
that  are  needed  in  the  American  Bar.    It  shows  not  only
that   Anastaplo  has   followed  a   high   moral,  ethical  and
patriotic  course  in  all  of  the  activities  of  his  life,  but  also
that  he  combines  the   more  common  virtues  with  the  un-
common   virtue   of   courage  to  stand  by  his   principles   at
any  cost.   It  is  such  men  as  these  who  have  most  greatly
honored  the  profession  of  the  law.  .  .  .  The  legal  profes-
sion  will  lose  much  of  its  nobility  and its  glory  if  it  is  not
constantly  replenished  with  lawyers  like  these.    To  force
the  Bar  to  become  a  group  of  thoroughly  orthodox,  time-
serving,  government-fearing  individuals  is  to  humiliate and
degrade  it.
"But  that  is  the  present  trend,  not  only  in  the  legal  pro-
fession  but  in  almost  every  walk  of  life.    Too  many  men
are  being  driven  to  become  government-fearing  and  time-
serving  because  the  government is  being  permitted  to  strike
out  at   those   who  are  fearless   enough   to   think   as   they
please  and  say  what they  think.   This  trend must  be  halted
if  we  are  to  keep  faith  with  the  Founders  of  our  Nation
and  pass  on  to  future  generations  of  Americans  the  great
heritage  of  freedom  which they  sacrificed so  much  to  leave
to  us.    The  choice  is  clear  to  me.    If  we  are  to  pass  on
that   great   heritage   of   freedom,   we   must  return   to   the
original  language  of  the  Bill  of  Rights.    We  must  not  be
afraid  to  be  free."
—Black  dissenting  in  the  Anastaplo   case
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  May  1,  1961
Kennedy's  Speech  to the Editors Sounded Like Bismarck  and Teddy  Roosevelt
(Continued   from   Page One)
tion  and  the  broader  problems  it  illustrates  with   the   inde-
pendent  mind  and  perceptive   spirit  they  require.
Duties  Brazens  It  Out
The   clearest   sign   of   deterioration   in   national   leadership
lay  in  the  tone,  the  implications  and  the  deceptions  of   Mr.
Kennedy's   speech   to   the   American   Society   of   Newspaper
Editors.    The  tone  in  its  arrogant  and  wilful  self-righteous-
ness  sounded  like   an   echo  of   Bismarck  and   Teddy   Roose-
velt;  this  was  the  Monroe  Doctrine  nakedly  restated  as Amer-
ican   domination  of   the   hemisphere;   here   was   exactly   that
doctrine   of   unilateral   intervention   Latin  America   so   hates
and  fears.    The  implications  were  of  a  return  to  the  worst
days  of   the   cold  war, with   a  readiness  to  extend   the  use
of   cloak-and-dagger   methods   on   a   wider   scale   than   ever
before.    The  worst  deception  did  not  come  out  until  several
days  later.    Mr.  Kennedy  spoke  that  Thursday,  April  20,  of
the  Cuban  affair   as  "a  struggle   of  Cuban  patriots  against  a
Cuban  dictator."     But  on  Sunday,  April  23  in  both   Wash-
ington  and  Miami  many  newspapermen  heard  but  few  dared
to  print  the  story  of  how  the  Cuban  Revolutionary  Council
was  taken  into  custody  in  New  York  on  the  eve of  the  Cuban
invasion,  kept   in  ignorance  of   it,  shut  off  from   all   contact
with  their   own   forces,   and   held   incommunicado  at  a  sup-
posedly  abandoned  airbase  in  Florida  while  statements  were
drafted  in  its  name  by  the  CIA  and  issued  through  the  Lem
Jones advertising agency in New  York.    Despite  White  House
orders  to  the  contrary,  Batista  men  were  not  weeded  out  of
the  invasion  forces  and  the  CIA's  notorious  Mr.  Bender  who
is  cordially  hated  by  all  but  the  extreme  right-wingers  still
ran  the  show.   Yet Mr.  Dulles  at  the  big private press  briefing
Tuesday   (not having   been   invited   we   are   not   bound  by
secrecy)   was  brazen   enough   to   claim   that   his   intelligence
estimates  were  correct  and  that  failure  was  due  solely  to  the
poor  Cuban  exiles  themselves!
Fidel  Castro  won   in  Cuba  by  provoking  Batista  into  de-
stroying  himself;  the  dictator  in  his  fear  and  frenzy   set  out
on  so  brutal  a  course  as  to  undermine  all  support   for  him-
Appeal  Against  War  With  Cuba
The  first   public  manifesto   against   intervention,   di-
rect  or  indirect,  in  Cuba  was  published  by  the   Fellow-
ship  of  Reconciliation  as  an  advertisement  in  the  New
York   Times   Sunday   Review   of   the   Week   April   23.
The  signers  were  Theodore  Brameld,  Henry  J.  Cadbury,
Wm.   C.   Davidon,   Paul   Deats,   Kermit   Bby,   Harrop
Freeman,  Erich  Fromm,  Maxwell  Geismar,  Robert Gil-
more,   Kyle   Haselden,   Alfred   Hassler,   Robert   Heil-
broner,  H.  Stuart   Hughes,   Charles  R.  Lawrence, Sid-
ney    Lens,    Robert   Lyon,    Lenore    Marshall,    Stewart
Meacham,   C.  Wright   Mills,  Herman   J.   Muller,   A.   J.
Muste,  Victor  Obenhaus,  Clarence  Pickett,  Derrell Ran-
dall,    John    Nevin    Sayre,    Howard    Schomer,    Dallas
Smythe,  I.  F.   Stone,   Norman  Thomas,   Sidney   Unger,
Amos  Vogel,  George  H. Watson,  Kale  Williams,  Howard
Yoder.  Murray  Kempton,  David  Reisman  signed   later.
self  except  among  his  partners  in  plunder.     I  have  all  along
feared  that  if  we  allowed  ourselves  to  be  drawn  into war  with
Castro,   he   would   provoke   us   similarly  to  self-destruction.
The  chain  reaction  is  already  in  motion,  and  all  Americans
of   sense  and  devotion  must  speak  up   quickly  while   it  can
still  be  stopped.    The  bright  promise  of  the  new  Adminis-
tration  is  being  quenched  by  its  own  panicky  folly;  the  mili-
tary  and  the  right  wingers  have  been  strengthened  within  our
own   government.     A   moral   obduracy  like   that   of   South
Africa's  is  apparent  in  the  unthinking  clamor  for   get-tough
policies.    The  danger  of  direct  invasion  seems  to  have  passed
for   the   moment,   but  the  new  emphasis  on  "para-military"
methods   has   an   ominous   ring;   "para-military"  formations
poisoned   the  life  of   the  German   Republic  under   Weimar,
assassinated  some  of  its  best  leaders,  and  paved  the  way  for
Nazism.    We  cannot  set  up  government   agencies  empowered
to  act  lawlessly  without  infecting  the  life  of  our  own  Repub-
lic.     To   fall   back  on   the   conspiracy   theory  of   history,  to
assume  that  human  convulsion  and  aspiration  are  but  puppet
movements  on  string  from   Moscow,  to  place  our  hopes  in
counter-conspiracy,  is  to  misread  man  and  history  to  our  own
ultimate  undoing.                                                      April  26
If   you   Send   LONG   Stamped   Envelopes   We'll   Send  A  Free  Copy   of  This  Issue  to  Your   Friends
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,    5618 Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington   15,  D.
N.  W.
C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.........................................Zone............State.......
'"ovi/ei
gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.) or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
Name  ..........................................
....................... ..................Zone........ ....State.......
we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D
No'a'
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Hatter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  »,  18T*.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  die  last  two  Thursday!  of  August  and  December   at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  3.:   16  In
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rates:   $16  to   Europe;   $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED