I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jan30.pdf

============================================================

Smuggling  Bowles Past  the Senate,  P.  3
Chief  Justice  Warren  Vividly  Depicts  the  Widespread  Abuses  of  Moving  Picture  Censorship,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  4
JANUARY  30,   1961
'»'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
If Only John F. Kennedy Were in Hans Christian Andersen
The  new  President  and  the  lovely  new  young  First  Lady
are  as charming as  any  Prince and  Princess out  of  a  childhood
book  of  fairy  tales.    How  could  one's  heart  help  but  warm
to  them  and  to  wish  them  well ?   There  is a  divinity that  doth
hedge  Presidents as  well  as  Kings,  and  there  must  be  few  of
us  who  do  not  hope  deep  down  that  by  some  magic this  new
monarch's   wand   will   wave   away   our   ills.     The   primitive
superstition  close  beneath  the  surface  of   our   selves   suffuses
the  beginning  of  a  new  reign  or  Administration  with  an  al-
most   religious  festivity;   the   bands  play,   the   troops  march;
past  errors  are  wiped  away,  the  country  is  reborn  for  a  fresh
start.
Eight  years  ago  the  country  could  place  its  reliance  on  the
father  image  of  an  old  soldier.    Now  our  talisman is  a youth-
ful  St.  George,  who  can  slay  the  dragon  or  charm  him  away.
The  mood  was  deepened  by  the  brisk  but  elevated  tone,  the
brief   but   comprehensive   sweep,   of   his   inaugural   message,
above  all  by  the  unmistakable  zest  of  his  "I   do  not  shrink
from  this  responsibility—I  welcome  it."     And  there  he  was
—the  eager  beaver—at  the  White   House  early  and  on  time
next  morning,  fresh  after  only  a  few  hours  sleep,  a   young
man' determined  to  make  good   in   a  new  job.    He   didn't
even  take  his  Sunday  off.   This  young  man   should   go  far.
After   a  part-time President,  away  on  sick  leave  or  vacation
much  of  the  time,  this  was a  change.
Something  for  Everybody
In  the  euphoric  post-inaugural  atmosphere   sober   reflection
seems  sacrilegious.    Right  and  left,   there  is  applause  for  the
inaugural  address.    How  could  it  please  such  diverse  people?
The  secret  lies  both  in  the  new  President  and   in   ourselves.
The   inaugural  message  had  something   in  it  for  everybody.
At  one  point  it  seemed  to  promise  a  step  up  in  the  cold  war,
at  another  an  intensified  search  for  peace.    At  one  point  there
was  cheer  for   those  who  want  greater   arms  expenditures—
"only   when   our   arms   are   sufficient   beyond   doubt"   (more
billions?)   "can   we  be  certain   beyond  doubt   that   they  will
never  be  employed."     But  the  very  next   paragraph    offered
cheer   to   the   advocates   of   disarmament—"both   sides   over-
burdened  by the  cost  of  modern  weapons,  both  rightly  alarmed
by  the  steady  spread   of  the  deadly  atom,  yet  both  racing  to
alter  that  uncertain  balance  of  terror  that   stays  the  hand  of
mankind's  final  war."     But  how  can  arms  be  made   sufficient
beyond  doubt  when  both  sides  are  racing  to  alter  an  uncertain
balance  of  terror?     Logically  these  propositions   cancel   each
other  out.    But  each  of  us  assumes  that  the  proposition   with
which  we  disagree  was  put  in  as  eyewash  for  our  adversaries.
So  wishful  thinking  shuts  off  the  inner  ear,  and  it  does  not
register  what  we do  not  wish  to  hear.
A  Master  of  Razzle-Dazzle
A  little  sleight-of-hand,  a  certain  modicum   of   chicanery,
are  inseparable  from  the  governance  of  men.    Mr.   Kennedy
was  after   all  the  nominee  of  the  Democratic  party;  he  was
not   elected  by  acclamation  at  a  convention   of   idealists   and
pacifists;  he  must  keep  very  disparate  elements  happy,  though
perhaps  only  happily  deceived,  if  he  is  to  achieve  a  sufficient
common  denominator  in  the  party  and  the  country  for  effective
action.    He   is  a  President,  not  a  dictator,  and   any  man  as
either   is  still  a  prisoner  of   the  habitual;   men   can  only  be
moved  a  little  way  beyond  the  familiar.    Mr.  Kennedy  gives
every  indication  of  being  the  greatest  master  of   manipulative
politics  since  FDR,   no  mean  man  at  razzle-dazzle.     It   is  a
necessary   quality,   and   we   must   be  patient.     But   in   being
patient  there  is  no  reason  to  shut  our  eyes  to  realities.    Mr.
Kennedy,  for  all  his  activism,  seems  to  be  a  rather  cautious
perhaps   even  conventional  man.     He  will   grow;   he   reads;
he can  be reached; he  has  potentials  of  sympathy and  of  vision.
But  at   the   outset  of   his  Administration  the   key  posts   are
occupied  by  much  the  same  types  representing  much  the  same
forces  as under  Mr.  Eisenhower.   Mr.  Kennedy  as a  politician
in  his  dealings  with  Congress,  the  military  bureaucracy  and
the   moneyed  powers  of   the   country  instinctively  looks   for
the  winning  combination,  the  line  of  least   resistance.    This
is  not   good   enough   to   cope  with   an  increasingly   unstable
world,  long  and  ludicrously  outgrown  its  nation-state  diapers,
menaced   by   the   religious   fanaticism   of   competing,   over-
simplified    and    delusive    ideologies.      Only   unconventional
measures  can  possibly  get  mankind  away  from  the  brink.
What  Sacrifices?    By  Whom?
To  see  how  little  signs  there  are  of  these  unconventional
measures  one  has  only  to  ask  what  was  the  meaning  of  Mr.
Kennedy's   declaration  that   "We   shall   pay  any  price  .  .  .
to  assure  the  survival  and  the  success  of  liberty."     Does  this
mean  that  we  are  prepared   to  pay  the   price   of   giving   up
sugar,  banana  or  oil  interests  in  Latin   America  to  show  our
neighbors  how  they  can  end  poverty  within  the  framework
of   a   free   society?    Above   all   are   we   ready   to   pay   the
price  of  adopting  those  wide  measures  of   social   reconstruc-
tion  to  replace  the  arms  race  and  save  liberty  from  the  gar-
rison  state?    Or  will  we  find  ourselves   ultimately  asked  to
bear  the  burden   of  piling  up   more   arms  in  the   fallacious
search  for  that  new  delusion,   a  balanced   nuclear  deterrent?
This  had  to  be  written  to  reach  the  printer  by  noon   Wed-
nesday,  Jan.  2).     At   press  time,  after   the  President's  superb
first  press  conference,   we  begin  again  to  hope.  A  new  tone  is
unmistakable.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  SO,  1961
The  Framers  Would  Have  Found  This  Ruling  Stranger   Even  Than  Talking   Pictures
Supreme  Court,  5-to-4,  Reconciles  Movie  Censorship  With  1st Amendment
Nine   years   ago   a   unanimous   Supreme   Court,   speaking
through  Mr.  Justice  Clark,  held   that  freedom  of   expression
in  the  moving  pictures  was  protected   by  the  First  Amend-
ment.     It   ruled   that   New   York's   censors   were   wrong   in
banning  Rosellini's  great  film,  "The   Miracle"  as  sacrilegious.
Now,   in  an   appeal   from   the   banning   of   "Don   Juan"   in
Chicago,   Mr.   Justice   Clark   in  a  5-to-4  decision   holds   that
moving  pictures,  though   protected   by  the  First   Amendment,
may  lawfully  be  subjected  to  prior  censorship.    The  idea  that
censorship  could  somehow—and  might  some  day—be  recon-
ciled  with  the  First  Amendment  would  have  seemed   stranger
than  talking  motion  pictures   to  the  framers  of  the   Bill  of
Rights.
A  Clear  Cut  Test   Case
Mr.   Justice   Clark   is  careful   to   circumscribe   his   ruling.
"We  are  dealing,"  he  says,  "only  with  motion  pictures  and
even  as  to  them  only  in  the  context   .  .  .  presented   in  this
record."    The  appeal  did  not  attack  the  specific  regulations
under   which  the  Chicago   police  censor   films.   It   presented
no  evidence  as  to  whether   "Don   Juan"  was  obscene  or  im-
moral.    The   Court  was  asked  to  say  that   movie   censorship
under  any  circumstances was  improper.    This  is  what  Clark,
Frankfurter,   Harlan,  Whittaker  and  Stewart  refused   to  say.
Philosophically,   this   creates   a  serious  fissure  in   the   dike
of   the   First   Amendment.    There  may  have  been    difficulty
from  the  first  in  reconciling   laws  against  libel  and  obscenity
with  the  First  Amendment's   absolute  bar  against  abridging
freedom  of  speech  and  press,  but  no  one  then  ever  dreamt  it
could  be  interpreted  to  include  censorship.    The  battle  against
censorship   had   been   won   long   before   our   Revolution—in
England  by  1695  and  in  the  Colonies  by  1725.    The  majority
by  acquiescing  in  a  police  practice  which  has  grown  up  with
the   movie   industry,   endangers   other   forms   of   expression.
The  evil  precedent  might  some  day be  extended.
Practically,  the  decision  will  encourage  gross  abuses.  These,
as  may  be  seen  in  the   box  below   from   the   dissent  by  the
Chief  Justice,  are  widespread.     If  censorship  were   outlawed,
the  police  would  be  compelled   to  use  criminal  statutes  against
On  Djilas  and  Mme.   Ivinskaya
We  welcome  the  release  from  prison  in  Yugoslavia
of  Djilas and  we  protest  the  sentences  imposed  in  Rus-
sia   on  Pasternak's  close  collaborator,  Olga  Ivinskaya
and   her  daughter.    Djilas,   who   had   the   courage   to
attack  the  ruling  class  habits  of  the  party  elite,  has
been  released  without  humiliating recantation  and with
unbroken  spirit.    In  the  Soviet  Union,  the  secret  police
seem  to  be  taking out  on  Mme. Ivanskaya  the  frustra-
tion  they  suffered  when  Khrushchov shielded Pasternak
from  them.    She  has  been  sentenced  to  eight  years  in
prison;  her   daughter   to   three,  on  vague  charges   of
currency  violation  in  connection  with  the  royalties  on
Dr.  Zhivago.    Pasternak   feared   they   would  be  perse-
cuted   after   his   death.    Mme.  Ivinskaya  spent   three
years  in  a  Siberian labor  camp under Stalin;  the  secret
police  had  hoped  then to  extract  a  false  confession  from
her  which  could  be  used  to  frame  Pasternak.    Writers
in  the  West  as  eminent  as  Bertrand  Russell  have  ap-
pealed  to  Khrushchov  on  her  behalf.    Surely  he  must
realize  that  the  habits  of  falsification   he  encountered
in   agriculture   recently  may   also   exist   in  his   police
apparatus.
obscene   performances   to   punish   the   showing   of   improper
films.   The  need  to  go  into  court  would  make  it  difficult   to
ban  movies  just  because  they  seemed  to  carry  ideas  some  po-
liceman   thought   dangerous.     By   allowing   censorship,   the
Supreme  Court  puts  the  burden  on  the  theatre  owner  or  pro-
ducer  to  litigate  his  way  to  our  highest   court  if  he  does  not
like  the  cop's  ruling.    It  becomes  easier  to  submit,  not  only
to  the  cutting  of  films  by  the   censor   but   by  avoiding   con-
troversial  ideas  in  making  them.
In   two   eloquent   dissents,   one   by  Warren   with    Black,
Douglas   and   Brennan,  the  other   by  Douglas  with  Warren
and   Black,  the  minority  argues   both   the  practical   and   the
classic   case  for   freedom   from   censorship,    citing   its   great
champions   from   Milton   to   Galsworthy.     But   I   fear   they
will  arouse  little  echo  in  the  country.    Freedom  has  become
an  item  of  export,  something  we  broadcast  over  Radio  Free
Europe.     At  home   most  of  us  are  content   to  let'  the   cops
tell  us  what  movies  we  can  see.
Chief  Justice  Warren  Vividly Depicts  the
"A  revelation  of  the  extent  to  which  censorship  has  re-
cently  been  used  in  this  country is  indeed astonishing.    The
Chicago  licensors  have  banned  newsreel  films  of   Chicago
policemen  shooting  at  labor  pickets  and  have  ordered  the
deletion  of  a  scene  depicting  the  birth  of  a  buffalo  in  Walt
Disney's   Vanishing  Prairie.    Before   World  War   II,   the
Chicago  censor  denied  licenses   to  a  number  of  films  por-
traying  and criticizing life  in  Nazi  Germany. .  .  .
"The   Memphis  censors  banned The  Southerner which dealt
with  poverty  among  tenant  farmers  because  'it  reflects  on
the  South.'  .  .  .  Maryland  censors  restricted a  Polish  docu-
mentary  film  on  the  basis  that  it  failed  to  present  a  true
picture   of   modern   Poland.    No   Way  Out,  the  story  of   a
Npfrro  doctor's  struggle against  race  prejudice,  was  banned
by  the  Chicago  censor  on  the  ground  that  'there's  a  possi-
bility   it  could  cause  trouble.'  .  .  .  Memphis  banned  Curley
because-  it  contained  scenes  of  white  and  Negro  children  in
school  together.    Atlanta  barred  Lost  Boundaries,  the  story
of  a  Negro  physician  and  his  family  who  'passed'  for white.
'• 'From  Joan  of  Arc' the  Maryland  board  eliminated  Joan's
Widespread  Abuses  of  Movie  Censorship
exclamation  as  she  stood  at  the  stake:  "Oh   God, why  hast
thou  forsaken  me?"  and  from  Idiot's  Delight  the   sentence:
'We,   the  workers  of   the   world,  will   take  care   of   that.'
Professor  Mamlock  was  produced  in  Russia  and  portrayed
the  persecution   of  the  Jews  by  Nazis.    The  Ohio  censors
condemned it as 'harmful.'  . ..  Spanish  Earth,  a pro-Loyalist
documentary  picture,  was  banned  by  the  board  in  Pennsyl-
vania.  .  .  .  Charlie  Chaplin's  satire   on  Hitler,  The  Great
Dictator,  was  banned  in  Chicago.  .  .  .   Ohio  and  Kansas
barred  newsreels  considered  pro-labor.  .  .  .  The  New  York
censors  forbade  the  discussion in  films  of  pregnancy,  vene-
real  disease,  eugenics,  birth  control,  abortion,  illegitimacy,
prostitution,  miscegenation  and  divorce. ...  A  police   ser-
geant   attached   to   the   [Chicago]  censor   boa re   explained,
'Coarse  language  or  anything  that  would  be  derogatory  to
the  government—propaganda*  is  ruled  out  of  foreign  films.
'Nothing  pink  or red  is  allowed,'  he  added.  .  .  .
"This  is  the  regimen  to  which  the   Court  holds  that  all
films  must  be  submitted."
—Warren  dissenting  in  Times  Film  v. Chicago, Jan.  23
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  30,1961
Our   Senators   On  China  Policy   Resemble   China's   Own  Mandarins  in  Their  Most  Foolish  Era
Bowles  Smuggled  Into  State  Dept.  Disguised  to  Look  Like  Walter  Judd
No   ship   of   state   ever   sailed   through   more  treacherous
waters  than  ours  in  dealing  with  the   China   question,   and
none  ever  found   patriots  so  eager  to  lock  the  wheel   tight.
The  hearings  given  Adlai  Stevenson  and  Chester  Bowles  by
the   Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee   on  their   respective
appointments  as  Ambassador to  the  UN  and  Under  Secretary
of   State  show  that  China  has   become   an   obsession   in   this
capital.    Indeed  it  deserves  to  be,  since  the  re-emergence  of
China  as  a  world  power  will  affect  the  lives  of  our  children
and  the  future  of  our  country  far  more  drastically  than   did
the  Russian Revolution.   The  latter  will  seem  by  comparison
a  distant  event.    It  would  have  been  normal  for  almost  all
the  questioning  to  center  around  China  policy,  if  the  domi-
nant  theme  of  the  anxious  queries  was  not  to  make  sure  that
both  men  were  safely  rigid  in  the  fixed  folly  of  non-recogni-
tion  and  non-negotiation.    Except  for  a  few  questions  put  by
Senator  Symington  (see  box  below)  at  the  end  of  the  long
session with Mr.  Bowles,  the  driving  force  of  the interrogation
was  to  make  sure  that  neither  of  these  men  had   any  fresh
ideas  on  the  subject  or  would  dare  broach  them  if  they  had.
Our  Senators  must  resemble  China's  Mandarins  in  those  eras
like  the  Nineteenth  Century  when  they  most  seriously  mis-
judged  the  Middle  Kingdom's  relations  with  the  outer  bar-
barians  whom  they  saw  no  need  to  recognize.
Sniffing  for  Heresy
Those   who  read  the  transcripts  for   themselves   (they  are
available   from   the   Committee   in   printed   form)    will   be
amazed  to  see  how  little  was  asked  or  said  about  Cuba,   the
Congo,   Laos,  nuclear  testing  or  Berlin.    The  atmosphere  re-
sembled  that  of  a  heresy  tribunal  designed  to   sniff   out  any
unorthodoxy  on  the   sacred  dogma  that  keeps  us  subject  to
Chiang  Kai-shek's  anachronistic delusions  on  Formosa.     Mr.
Bowles,   though   suspect,   was   saved   from   condemnation   by
skillful  party  cooperation.    He  was  flatteringly  introduced  by
the  rightist  Dodd  of  Connecticut,   as  if  thus  to  confer  upon
him  innocence  by  association.    Senator  Sparkman  then  spiked
Republican  guns  by  a  series  of  loaded  questions  designed   to
show  that  Mr.   Bowles  was  against   recognition,   sour   about
negotiation,  and  unwilling  to  see Peking  admitted  to  the  UN.
Providentially,  Sparkman  was  also  able  to  show  from  Edgar
Snow's  interview  with  Chou  En-lai  in  the  January  31   issue
of  Look  that  the  Red  Chinese  Foreign  Minister  had  attacked
Covering  That  War  In  Laos
"At  least  there  is   no  hypocrisy  about  information
and  censorship  in  Vientiane.   This  week  [Information]
Minister  Bouvan  reported the  Government's  interesting
charge  that  Russian  troops  had  joined  in  the   fighting
against   Royal   Laotian  forces.    There  was   a   stunned
silence  and  then  a  burst  of  incredulous laughter  from
correspondents.    The  minister  was  unperturbed. 'Well,'
he  said  reasonably,  as  he  tapped  the  Government  com-
munique,  That's  what  it  says  here'."
—Dispatch  from  Laos, London Sunday  Times,  Jan,  IS
"Bouvan  repeated long-standing Government charges,
doubted  by  most  Westerners  here,  that  troops  of  Com-
munist   North  Vietnam   are  aiding  the   rebels  and  in
fact   make  up  70  percent  of   their  forces.    This  time
he   said  new   'proofs'   consisted   of   (1)   hearing  rebel
commands  spoken  in  Vietnamese  and  (2)   discovery  of
thousands  of  chopsticks and  dog  bones  in  areas  where
the  rebels  had  camped.   Laotians  do  not  use  chopsticks
and  eat  dogs;  Vietnamese do.
" 'Your  excellency,' said  a  British  correspondent,  "you
are  not  serious.'
" This  is  what  the  Laotian  officers  told  me,'  Bouvan
replied."
—AP  from  Vientiane  in  Baltimore  Sun,  Jan.  22
Mr.  Bowles  personally   for  advocating  a  "two  Chinas"   solu-
tion.    All  this  took  the  wind  out  of  Republican  sails  and  en-
abled  Mr.  Bowles  to  pass  muster,  hastily disguised  to  resemble
Walter  Judd.    Such  are  the  stratagems   required   to  smuggle
a  liberal  into  a  high  post  at  the  State  Department.
Mr.  Bowles  was  forced  to  fall  back  on  the  view  that  there
is  nothing  we  can  do  except  sit  tight  for  20  or  30  years  until
something—just  what  is  not  clear—happens  in  China.     The
idea  that   some  changes  in  thinking  must   take  part  on  our
side  too  was,  of  course,  excluded.    In  the  meantime,  he  said,
we  have  to  find  some  way to  reach  the  Chinese  people.    Con-
spicuous  by  its  absence  was  any  suggestion   that  the  current
famine  in  China  might  provide  an  ideal  opportunity  to  do  so.
Perhaps   the   silliest   moment   in   the   hearing   came   when
Senator   Aiken   (R.Vt.)    said   that   if   the   UN   recognized   a
Peking  delegation  as representing  all  China  including  Formosa
"It   would   rip  a  great  hole  in  our  Pacific  defenses,   leaving
Hawaii  and  the  coast  of  all  the   Americas  open   to  possible
enemy  attack  across  the  Pacific."
Symington  Alone  at  Bowles  Hearing  Advocates  Better  Relations  With  Peking
Senator  SYMINGTON  (D.Mo):  How  could  there  ever  be
a  meaningful  arms  control  agreement,  skipping the  details,
without  recognizing  in  the  agreement  the  people  and  the
government   of  Red  China?
Mr.  Chester BOWLES:  Well,  if  we  did  not  take  into  ac-
count  the  650  million  people  of  Red  China  in  arriving  at  any
arms  control  agreement,  the  joke  would  be  on  the  rest  of
the  human  race.  .  .  .
Senator  SYMINGTON:  And, therefore, regardless  of  how
much   some  of   us   may  feel   today   on  either  side  of   this
problem,  there  is  not  anything really  more important  in  the
world  today  than  to  do  everything  we  can  to  improve  our
relationship  with  the  Chinese  Communists; that  is  correct,
is   it  not?
Mr.  BOWLES  [hedging]: We  must  begin  by  understand-
ing  what is  there,  the  enormous power that  has  been  gener-
ated  there.    I  understand this  is  a  major  factor.    One  of
the  most  tragic  things  in  the  last  few  years  has  been  the
narrowness  of  our  views  on  this  whole  question.  .  .  .
Senator  SYMINGTON:  With  the  growth  of  the  nuclear
club  and  in  the  strength  of  Communist  China,  it  seems  to
me  that,  for  the  first  time,  the  Russians might  perhaps now
be anxious to  work  out  something  that  is  meaningful  in  this
field.    And  I  cannot  see  how  an  agreement  c.:uld  be worked
out  unless,  at  the  same  time,  it   is  recognized  that  there
has  to  be  some  form  of  agreement with  the  Red  Chinese;
otherwise  there  never  could  be  meaningful  inspection.    Is
that  the  way  you  see  it?
Mr.  BOWLES: That  is  the  way  I  see  it.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  Jan.  19
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  30, 1961
Norman  Thomas  Appeals  to  Kennedy  to  Correct  Dangerous   Leak  on  Nuclear  Test   Talks
Scientist   of  Remarkable  Detachment  Named  Chairman   of   AEC
A  driving ambition and  an  extraordinary  political discretion
characterize  Kennedy's  nominee  for  the  chairmanship  of  the
Atomic  Energy Commission.   Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  a  Nobel
laureate  in   chemistry,  managed   to  spend   the   exciting  years
since  the  war   in  Berkeley,  first  in  the  Radiation  Laboratory
and  then  as  Chancellor  of  the  University  of  California,  with-
out  once  taking  a  position  on  the  fallout   and  testing   con-
troversies.    Dr.   Seaborg  lived   in  an  atmosphere  of  scientific
crusading,  closely  associated  with  the  late  Dr.  Ernest  O.  Law-
rence  and  Dr.  Edward  Teller,  both  campaigners  for  continued
testing,  but  "was  very  careful,"  as  one  scientist  told  us,   "not
to  take  a  position  on  anything."    Dr.  Seaborg  is  described  as
one  of  those  personally  benevolent  scientists  who  could  work
on  a  new  medicine  or  a  new  explosive  with  equal  devotion,
sealed  off  by  the  pure  fascinations  of  the  problem   from  dis-
turbing  concern  with  its  ultimate  human  consequences.     We
understand  the  position  was  first  offered   to  James  Fisk  and
then  Gordon  Clapp  but  not  to  Henry  D.  Smyth  of  Princeton,
who   combines   intellectual   distinction   and   rich   nuclear   ex-
perience  with  broader  human  horizons.    It  will  be  interesting
to  see  whether  the  Joint   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  suc-
ceeds  in  drawing  Dr.  Seaborg  out  on  the  many  controversial
issues  of  public  policy  on  which  he  will  have  to  pass.    There
is  talk  of  adding  a  biologist  to  the  AEC,  perhaps  Paul  Doty
of   Harvard.
Too  Much  Interest   in   Disarmament?
"Jerome   Wiesner,   of   MIT,  for   several   years   Ken-
nedy's   closest   science   adviser,   was   chosen   as   special
assistant    for   science    and   technology.      Wiesner   had
been   assumed   to   be   in   line   for   the   post,   but   what
seemed  to  be  a  long  delay  in  announcing   the  appoint-
ment   had  caused   speculation   perhaps   it   would   go   to
someone  else.
"A  fairly  reliable   source  says  that  Wiesner   himself
was  reluctant  to  take  the  job,  on  the  grounds  that  he
would  have  preferred  to  devote  his  full  time  to  prob-
lems  relating  to  disarmament.   The  same  source  reports
there  has  been  lobbying  against  Wiesner's  appointment
from  within  the  Defense   Department—on  the   grounds
that  he  was  too  much  interested   in  disarmament."
—Science,  Jan.  20
A  Leak  From  The   Pentagon?
That  alarmist  story,  "Kennedy  Aides Ask  Delay  in  Nuclear
Test  Ban  Talks"   (New   York   Times,   Jan.   15),   which  drew
an  open  letter  of  protest  to  Kennedy  from  Norman   Thomas
for   the   National   Committee   for   A   Sane  Nuclear   Policy,
seems  to  have  been   a  distorted   leak  from   someone   in   the
Pentagon  to  Times-man,  Jack  Raymond.   From  several  sources
in   close  touch  with  this  so-called  task  force  report   on  dis-
armament,  I  gathered  that  the  report  did  not  suggest   a  six
months   delay  in   the   nuclear  test  talks,  as  reported   by   the
Times,  but  only  a  postponement until  March  instead  of  open-
ing  them  as  scheduled  on  Feb.  7.    Several  of   those  named
as  part   of   this   task   force   disclaim   any   connection  with   it
except  insofar  as  they  were  asked  to  comment  on  drafts  sub-
Make  Friends   and   Influence   People   With   A    Gift
mitted  by  Jerome  Spingarn  of  the  National   Planning  Asso-
ciation,  who  acted  as  secretary.
Most   of   those   named   in   the   Times   as  members  of   the
task  force  are  cold  warriors with  little  interest  in disarmament.
One  of  them  is  Paul  H.  Nitze,  who  has  gone  to  the  Pentagon
as   Assistant  Secretary   of   Defense   for   International   Affairs
with   special   responsibility   in   the   disarmament    field.    Mr.
Thomas   said  the  story  seemed  designed  to  give  the   impres-
sion  that  the  ending  of  nuclear  tests  "is  of  comparative  in-
difference  to  advisers  in  your  new  Administration.    We   are
sure,"  he  added,  in  his  letter  to  Kennedy,  "that  this  was  not
your  intent  and  that  as  soon  as  possible  you  will  make  that
fact   clear."
The  story  in  the  Times  admitted  that  the  supposed   recom-
mendations  of   the   task   force   report   "appeared    to  conflict"
with  the  new  Secretary  of  State's  declaration   to  the   Senate
Foreign   Relations   Committee   that   the   new  Administration
expected  to  move  promptly  on  test  negotiations.    "However,"
the  story added  poisonously,  "it  is understood  that  in  thorough
briefings  by  the  outgoing  State  Department   officials  Mr.  Rusk
and  his  associates have  been  told  that  the  Russians  seem  to  be
losing   interest   in   the   negotiations   at   Geneva   on   banning
nuclear   tests."     This  may  be  the   trick  of   attributing   one's
own  feelings  to  the  other  side.
Sub  to  The  Weekly   —   Use  the  Blank  Below
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........
City   ......................
.....................Zone............State....................
1/30/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  jr.)  additional:
(To)    Name     ..............................................................................
Street   .......................................................................................
City        ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'1 Weekly.    Entered  u   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  $,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  end  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $6  In  the  U.   S.:   $6  In
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rates:  tlf   to   Europe;   (20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED