I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961mar13.pdf

============================================================

What  Kennedy  Ought  to  Do  About  Cuba,  Pps. 2-3
And  Now  It's   Un-American   to  Be  Frivolous  About  the  Communist  Party—See  Page  Four
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IX,  NO.  9
MARCH   13,    1961
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Time  to  Get  Us  A  New  Ambassador  in  Leopoldville
Washington,  March  8
Ghana's  Nkrumah   was  slated   to  get  the  red  carpet  treat-
ment  in  Washington  but  the  cordial  welcome  did  not  include
adequate  press  coverage  of  his  opening  speech  before  the  UN
General  Assembly  yesterday.   Even  the  New   York   Times  was
skimpy  and  in  the  absence  of  a  text  it  is  impossible  to  learn
just  why  his  8-point  program  for  peace  in  the  Congo  called
for  the  temporary  withdrawal  of  all  foreign  diplomatic  mis-
sions  from  Leopoldville.     But  it  is  possible   to  guess.     Last
September  23  in  his  address  to  the  General   Assembly  Presi-
dent,  Nkrumah  said  that  "but  for  the  intrigues  of  the  colonial-
ists  a  document  of  reconciliation  which  had   been  drafted  in
the  presence  of  my  Ambassador  in  Leopoldville  and  approved
by  both  Mr.  Kasavubu  and  Mr.  Lumumba  would   have   been
signed  by  them."     Mr.  Nkrumah   may  feel   that  pacification
of  the  country would  be  facilitated  if  Western   embassies  were
temporarily  withdrawn;  the  Russians  and  Czechs  were  driven
out  last  Fall  by Mobutu,  to  the  cheers  of  the  U.S.  press.   There
is  reason  to  suspect  that  our  embassy  under  Clare  Timberlake
is  one  of  those  which  has  intrigued  first  against  the  Lumumba
government,  then  for  Mobutu  and  the  secessionists,  and  more
recently  against  the  UN  command.
Pro-Mobutu  and  Anti-Dayal
According  to  Time  magazine  last  Sept.  26—it  was  gloating,
of  course,  not  exposing—Mobutu  set  up  his  military dictator-
ship  after   a  series  of  visits  to  the   U.S.   Embassy  and   "long
talks  with  officials  there."    Later  in  the  Fall,  Mr.  Timberlake
was   the   first   Ambassador   to   pay  an   official   call   on   Moise
Tshombe,  boosting  the  prestige  of  this  puppet  in  secessionist
Katanga,  where  Belgian  big  business  and  its  Rockefeller   allies
have  been  able  to  carry  on  their  mining  operations  as  undis-
turbed  as  if  the'Congo  were  still  a  Belgian  colony.    Rajeshwar
Dayal,  the  UN  Chief  of  Mission,  who  has  been  exposing  the
growing    Belgian    conftol   of   the   Kasavubu,   Tshombe   and
Kalonji  regimes  in  a  series  of  reports  to  the  UN,  has  earned
Mr.  Timberlake's  enmity.    Warren   Unna  of  the  Washington
Post,  visiting  Leopoldville  with  the  Mennen   Williams'  party,
reported   (March   5)   one  "school  of  thought"  in  the  Congo-
lese  capital   "accuses  U.S.   Ambassador   Clare   H.    Timberlake
of   being   so  distrustful   of   Dayal   that   he   has   cramped   his
effectiveness   with  a  personal  vendetta."     We  give  a  sample
on  page  three  of  the  distorted   anti-Dayal  stories  which   have
been   leaked  out  to  the  U.S.   press,  and  we  note   in  a   Wall
Street  Journal  Washington   dispatch   today  that   "the   U.S.   is
privately  pressing  in  UN   corridors   and   foreign   capitals   for
the  removal  of  India's  Rajeshwar  Dayal  as  UN   Congo  com-
mander."    The  man  who  exposed  the  return  of  Belgian  con-
trol,  who  reestablished   some  UN  reputation  for   independence
in  neutralist  eyes,  is  to  be  gotten  rid  of.    No  such  persistence
is  shown  about  finding  Lumumba's  slayers.    On  the  contrary,
3   *                                                                                           3
The  UN's    Main  Enemy  in  the  Congo
"The  general  picture is  that  the  Belgians  here,  with-
out   much   support  from   their   home  government  and
possibly    with    Brussels   disapproving,  are   trying    to
capitalize  on  Congolese  schisms  and  the  general  Con-
golese  discontent  with  the  UN  to  drive  the  UN  oper-
ation  out  of   the  Congo  in  the  hope  of  reestablishing
control  of   the  economy  and  indirectly   of   the   political
administration.   .   .  .   Belgian  interests,   including  the
Catholic   Church,   which   is   playing  an  ever-increasing
role  in  Congolese  politics  now,  control  the  three  Leo-
poldville  newspapers  and  are  using  them  for   a  viru-
lent   and  irresponsible  campaign  against  the   UN."
—Russell  Hotve  from   Leopoldville,  Wash.  Post,  Mar.  7.
on  this,  the  atmosphere on  Embassy row  in  Leopoldville  seems
quite  complacent.     Joseph   E.  Evans,  reporting  to  the   Wall
Street  Journal  Feb.  24  from  Leo quotes  "a  Western diplomatic
observer"  there  as  saying, "If  Lumumba  had  lived,  he  would
almost  certainly have  come  back  to  power  and  with  him   the
Soviets  in  full   force."     As  it  is,  this  dispatch  went  on,  "this
observer,  like  others,  figures  Soviet  grand   strategy   for  Congo
control  has  been  derailed  for  the  time  being."     Presumably
so  noble  an  end   justifies  even  murder  as  its  means.
Our   embassy  in  Leopoldville  seems  to  be  proceeding  in  a
straight  cold  war  line  while  the  Kennedy  administration  has
been  shifting  its  Congo  objectives.    Lumumba  was  murdered
in   Katanga   after   the  word   spread   that   the  UN   with   U.S.
support  was  moving  tpward  a  new  Congo  government  which
would  include  Lumumba.    This   idea  seems  to  have  been  as
unwelcome  to  our  embassy  in  Leopoldville  as  it  was  to   the
Belgians.    There  are  moments  when  Mr.  Timberlake  seems
to  be  operating  on  his  own,  as  in  the  recent  affair  of  the   U.S.
ships  suddenly  ordered  to  the  Congo.    On  March  6  the  State
Department   spokesman  here  announced  that  four  naval  ves-
sels  on  a  good-will  trip  to  South  Africa   had  suddenly  been
ordered  to  steam  north  to  the  Congo.    Next  day,  however,  the
spokesman  announced that  the  ships had  been  ordered  to turn
about  and  continue their cruise.   The  strange  thing  about  this
announcement   is  that  the  spokesman  said  the   earlier   "pre-
cautionary   step   was  taken  by  Ambassador  Timberlake   .
on  his  own  initiative"  and   the  Navy  Department   the   same
day  said  the  turn-around  was  ordered  "because   their  presence
is  not   required   by  the   United   Nations  in   Congo  waters."
But   questioning  at   State  disclosed   that   the   UN   had   never
requested  the  ships  in  the  first  place  and  that  Mr.   Timberlake
had   asked   for   the   ships   directly  to  the   Navy    Department,
only  informing  State  about  it  afterward.
Since  when  are  Ambassadors  allowed  to  summon  the  Navy
to  action  without  first  consulting  State  Department,   especially
in  touchy  situations where  this  would  undercut  declared  policy,
which  is  to  seal  off  the  Congo   from  intervention  by  any  of
the  great   Powers?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   March  IS,   1961
Glamorous   Ideas   About   Counter-Revolutionary   Guerrillas  Are  a   Pipe-Dream
What Kennedy Ought to Do About Cuba Is to Reverse Eisenhower's Policies ...
In  his  State of  the  Union  message,  Mr.  Kennedy  challenged
the  Communist  world  to  "open  and  peaceful  competition—
for  prestige,  for  markets,  for  scientific  achievement, and  even
for  men's  minds."   But  how  does  one  compete—without  com-
peting?    In  Cuba,  so far,  the  Kennedy administration  like  the
Eisenhower   administration   before   it,   is  simply   refusing   to
enter   into  the   game.     Mr.   Eisenhower   cut  off  oil,   stopped
buying  sugar,  forbade  Americans  to  travel  in  Cuba  and  broke
off   relations.     Mr.   Kennedy's  administration   is  reported   to
be  planning  a  further  step  in  the  same  direction—it  is  study-
ing   the   advisability   of   ending  Cuba's   last   imports   to  this
country:   in   molasses,   tobacco,   fruits   and   vegetables.    This
would  make  the   U.S.   trade  embargo  total.     Is  this  compe-
tition  with  the  Soviet  bloc  for  the  market  and  the  mind  of
Cuba?    Or  is  it  a  petulant  refusal  to  play?
Mr.  Kennedy  in  his  State  of  the  Union  message  said  that
"if   Freedom   and   Communism  were  to   compete   for   man's
allegiance  in  a  world  at  peace,   I  would   look   to  the   future
with  ever  increasing  confidence."    In  Cuba,  it  is  we,  not  the
Soviet  bloc,  which  is  choosing  the  path  of  war.    It  is we  who
are  training  Cubans  for  war  against  the  Castro   government,
dropping   them   in   the   Escombray,  supplying  them   by  air,
encouraging   and  financing  the  formation  of   a  rival  govern-
ment,  doing  our  best  to  foment  civil  war  in  Cuba  and  trying
to  line up  other  nations  in  the  hemisphere for  collective  action
against  her.    This  is  not  competing  for  allegiance  in  a  world
of   peace.     It   is  threatening  to  put   Cuba   to  fire  and   sword
because  we  can  no  longer  dictate  her  destiny.   This  is  exactly
what  we  criticized  when  the  Russians  did  it  to  Hungary.
Strange  Way  to  Encourage   Reform
Mr.   Kennedy  spoke   of   a  competition   between   Freedom
[his  capitals]  and  Communism,  but  what  the  Central  Intel-
ligence  Agency  seems  to  be  planning  is  to  restore  freedom
of  another  kind  in  Cuba.    If  the  report  carried  by  the  Balti-
more  Sm:  last  Sunday  March  5  is  correct,  we  have  forced  the
more  liberal  elements among  the  Cuban  exiles—the  exponents
of   Fidelismo   without  Fidel—to  give  in  to  the  conservatives
and   agree  to  an  economic  program  which  would  restore   the
land,  the  banks  and  the  utilities  to  their  former  owners   (see
box  below).    We're  going   to  lose   in  Latin  America  if  we
Still  Hoping  for  Another   Guatemala
"Though   the   Special  Forces   [training  for  guerrilla
warfare   at   Ft.   Bragg,   N.C.]   are  not   necessarily   in-
volved,  it's  no  secret   that  this  country  already  is  fur-
nishing  weapons  and  supplies  to  anti-Castro forces  in
central    Cuba's    Escambray    Mountains    and   training
counter  revolutionaries in  Florida  and  Guatemala.
"The   Army,   of   course,   insists   its   Special   Forces
are   designed   for   use   with   pro-Western  elements   in
native  populations  in  declared  wars  against  Red  gov-
ernments.    But  officers  at  Ft.  Bragg  and  the  Pentagon
stress   the  obvious  cold  war  potential,  too.    Asked  if
the  Special  Forces  have  ever  been  thus  employed  since
their  organization  in  1952,  and  you'll  get   this  reply:
'This  is  where  we  don't  talk'.  .  .  .
"But  in  at  least  one  instance,  the  U.S.  did   success-
fully  engineer  a  revolt—against  the  left-wing  govern-
ment  of  Guatemala  in  mid-1954."
—Wall  St.  Journal  dispatch  from  Ft.  Bragg,  Feb. 27
again   identify  that  word  Freedom  with  United  Fruit,   Chase
Manhattan   and  I.T.  &  T.    In  the  same  State  of  the   Union
message,   Mr.   Kennedy   said   "Cuban    social   and   economic
reform  should  be  encouraged."     Is  this  how  to  encourage  it?
In  Havana,  as  I  reported   in  the  Weekly   two  weeks  ago,  I
was  appalled  by  the  headstrong  intransigeance  of  the  Cuban
leadership.     Back  in  Washington,   I  do  not  find  any  greater
wisdom.    After  a  decade  in  which  military  power  failed   and
dictators  fell  all  over  the   hemisphere,  we  are  now  looking
to  military  means  again,  though  in  a  new  form.    This  time
our  hopes  are  pinned  to  guerrilla  forces.    Just  as  the  French
rightist  military  in  Algeria  read  Mao  Tse-tung   and  tried  to
adopt   his  methods,  so  our   leaders  have  begun   to  read   Che
Guevara's  little  handbook  on  guerrilla  warfare  and  have  the
bright  idea  of  adapting  it  to  our  needs.     There   has  been  a
series  of  coyly  boastful  stories  out  of  Fort  Bragg  where  the
Army  has  been  training  Special  Services  for  guerrilla  war.
But   these   stories  miss  the   whole   point.     Guerrillas  who
offer   peasants  aid  against  a  hated  landlord  or  village  usurer
are  one  thing.    But  can  you  see  a  U.S.  guerrilla  knocking  on
a  peasant's  door   late  at  night,   "Give  me  water;  hide  me;  I
bring  a  message  from  United  Fruit  Company;  we've  come  to
take  back  your  land"?    The  guerrilla's  strength  is  his  revolu-
The  Kind  of  New  Government  Our  Secret Agencies Are Shaping Up for  Cuba
"Miami,  Fla.,  March 4—A  secret  conference  of  anti-Castro
Cuban  leaders  opened  in  Washington today.   Its  purpose  is
to  choose  a  provisional  president  of  Cuba  and  a provisional
government.  .  .  .  Today's  'summit  meeting'  follows  another
secret   meeting,  held  in  New   York   earlier  this  week.    At
that  session  the  warring  factions  of  exiled  Cubans  buried
the  hatchet  and  agreed  upon  the  broad  outline  of   a  com-
mon  policy. ...  It  includes  three  main  points:
"1.  The   provisional   government   will   favor   agrarian  re-
form  as  proposed  in  the  Cuban  constitution  of  1940.    This
would  permit  the  farmers   to  purchase  their   land.
"2.  Urban  banks  would  be  returned to  private  ownership,
whether  foreign  or  Cuban.
"The  public  utilities  seized  by  Castro  would  be  returned
to  their  private  owners.  .  .  .
"This  week's   economic  agreement   reached  in  New  York
is  reported  to  be a complete  victory  for  those  Cuban leaders
who  are  not  only  against  Castro,  but  also  against   Castro's
economic  views.    The  other  main  group  of   Cuban  exiles—
the  one  that  favors  Castroism  without  Castro—agreed....
"The  word  here  is  that  the  warring  factions  were  pres-
sured  into  getting  together  by  an  agency  of' the  U.S.   gov-
ernment.    The  pressure,   it   is  stated,   took   the   form   of   a
threat  to  withdraw  financial  support  from   all  the  groups.
According  to  one  apparently reliable  source  here,  the  Cuban
groups   have  been   getting   about   $400,000   a   month,  pre-
sumably  from  the  same   agency.
"This   source   also   says   that   certain   U.S.  government
officials  are  taking part  in  the  Washington  meeting.   That,
accord
:
ng  to  this  source,  is  the  only  reason  for  holding  the
session   in  Washington."
—Howard  Norton  in  the  Baltimore  Sun,   March  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March   13,  1961
Will  Peasants  Welcome  Fighters  Seeking   to  Take  Back  the  Land  for  United  Fruit?
.  . . Only By  Restoring Relations  and Trade, Can We  Combat  Soviet  Influence
tionary   political   program.     Without   it,   he   is  only   another
version  of  the  World  War  II  commando,   able  to  kill  sentries
and  blow  up  bridges,  but  not  to  mobilize  the  masses.    Does
anyone  believe  Batista  could  have  been   saved  by  trained  de-
tachments   from   Fort   Bragg?     Or   that   Cubans   would   have
been  grateful  to  us  for  prolonging  the  struggle  and  teaching
him  more  efficient   ways  of  repressing  them?
Brazil  and  Argentina   Say   "No"
U.S.    policy   has   handed    Cuba   to   Moscow   on   a   platter.
Che   Guevara   came   back   from   his  "shopping  tour"   of   the
Soviet  bloc  with  an  impressive  list  of  factories  for  the  indus-
trialization  program.     At  relatively  small  cost,  in  return  for
sugar  and   other   products,   the  Soviet   bloc  can  within  a  few
years   make   little   Cuba   a   showplace.     Cuban    developments
can  put  us  on  the  spot  with  the  rest  of  Latin  America.    This
is  promising   to   become   the   biggest  challenge  the   U.S.   has
ever  had  to  face  in  this  hemisphere.    We  cannot  meet  it  with
military  means;   privately,  it  seems   to  be  admitted   here   that
Castro   cannot   be   overthrown   by  Cuban   counter  revolution-
aries.     Our   present   activity   along   these   lines   only   has   the
political   virtue   of   keeping   the   Eastlands   and.   McCormacks
happy  with  the  delusion  that  we  are  "doing  something"  about
Castro.     The   possibility   of   getting   collective   action   against
Castro  has  disappeared   with  the  failure  of  the  Berle  mission
to  Brazil,  Venezuela's  refusal  to  break  off  relations  with  Cuba,
and  Argentina's  latest  note  to  Washington.   With  Brazil  and
Argentina   both   opposed   (Chile   has   since   taken   the   same
position)    to   collective   action   against   Cuba,   "officials    here
agree,"   E.  W.   Kenworthy   wrote   from   Washington   in   the
New   York  Times  March  7,  "that  there  is  no  prospect  of  get-
ting  action  against  Cuba  by  the  OAS."    Direct  military inter-
vention   by  U.S.   forces  would  be  folly.    The  longer  we  drift
along   in  this  posture   of   impotent   hostility,  the  more  firmly
cemented   will  become  the  ties  between  Cuba  and  the  Soviet
bloc  on  which  our  policies  have  made  her   dependent.
A   reversal   of   policy   is  called   for.     The   situation   might
still  be  saved  if  we  were  prepared   to  swallow  our  pride  and
deal  with  Cuba  on  a  basis  of  equality.     Both  Brazil  and  Ar-
gentina  have  offered  to  act  as  mediators.    The  Russian  sugar
contract—as  I  explained  in  the  issue  of  Feb.  27—is  dependent
on  our  not  buying   Cuban   sugar.    Negotiations  are   possible
linking  resumption  of  sugar  purchases  with  compensation   for
American   properties.   Castro  himself  offered  this   in  a   speech
Trivial  Liberal  Victory
New   electronic   devices   are   bringing   an   Orwellian
police   state   closer   at   a   swift   rate.     If   the   Fourth
amendment's   guarantee  of   privacy   against   police  in-  '
trusion  is  not  to  be  made  a  dead  letter,   the  Supreme
Court   must  adapt  it   to  these  realities.    Edward  Ben-
nett  Williams,  in  arguing  the  Silverman  case,  pointed
out   that   new   devices  now   enable   the   police   without
wire-tapping  to  pick  up  conversations  300  yards  away,
through  an  open  window  or  across  a  busy  street.    But
the  Court,  speaking  through  Mr.  Justice  Stewart  last
Monday,   held   to   the   rule   that   eavesdropping  is   only
unconstitutional  if  there  has  been  a  physical  invasion
of  private  premises.    We  share  Mr.  Justice   Douglas's
disgust,   in  his   separate   opinion   concurring,   that   the
Court  should  still  rely  on  "the  trivialities  of   the  local
law   of   trespass"   instead  of   reversing  past   decisions
which   undercut   the   Fourth   amendment  "by  nice  dis-
tinctions  turning  on  the   kind  of   electronic  equipment
employed."     In  the   Silverman   case,   it   was   a  "spike-
mike"  the  police  used  to  listen  in  on  a  gambling  estab-
lishment.    This  was  disallowed only  because,  by  a  frac-
tion   of   an   inch   it  penetrated  a  private  wall.    If   the
police  had  bugged   the  .place  without  physical penetra-
tion,  the  majority presumbaly would not  have  objected.
in  Havana  March  7.   There  is an  extraordinary fund  of  good-
will  toward   Americans  in  Cuba   even   now.     It   is  time   the
Kennedy    administration   abandoned    the    drift    to   war    of
the   Eisenhower  administration   and   got   back   into   the  fight
to  preserve  Cuban  friendship  and  to  prevent  it  from  becoming
a  Soviet  satellite.    This  can  only  be  done  by  a  resumption  of
travel,  trade  and  diplomatic  relations.    Why  should  we  leave
the  Cuban  industrialization  program  to  Soviet  experts?    Why
shouldn't   we   demonstrate   good-will   and   technical   capacity
by  offering  help  in  this  program  ourselves ?   Just  as totalitarian
ideas  seeped  into  Cuba  with  Soviet  aid,  so  democratic  ideas
will  revive with  American aid  and  American  friendship.   Only
we  have  to  make  up  our  minds  whether  our   purpose   is  to
save  the   oil  and   sugar  companies,  or  whether   it  is  to   save
-—and  restore—free institutions.
But  peace  with  Cuba  alone will  not  end  the  challenge  which
has  emerged   with  Soviet  aid  to  Castro.     Only   a  far-sighted,
long-range   program,  of  unprecedented  dimensions,  can  main-
tain   U.S.   prestige  and   hemispheric  solidarity  in  the   face  of
Soviet  readiness  to  extend  aid  in  Latin  America.    I  want  to
sketch  out  some  ideas  on  this  in  the  next  issue.
That  Fake  Story  of  How  Dayal  Helped  the  Gizenga  Forces  to  Take  Luluabourg
".  .  .  there  is  the  strange  case  of  the  UN  refusal  to  inter-
pose   itself   between   the   local   pro-Kasavubu  command  in
Luluabourg  and  the   truck  fleet  of   soldiers   from   Stanley-
ville  who  took  over.    Dayal  claimed  that  Gizenga's  soldiers
were  peacefully  received.  .  .  .  The  U.S.   must  stop  standing
idly   by  while  the   UN—under  Dayal's   one-sided  policies—
in  effect   abets  Stanleyville's  conquest  of  the   Congo."
—Marguerite   Higgins   from    Washington,   N.Y.     Herald-
Tribune,  Feb.  27.
"The   [UN]    Secretariat   feels   that   Mr.  Dayal   has   been
shamefully  calumniated,  not  only  in  press  reports,  but  also
by  foreign  governments.  .  .  .  For  instance,  the  famous  so-
called  capture of  Luluabourg by  a  Gizenga  force  was  almost
entirely  fabrication.
"Only   300  Gizenga  partisans  turned   up   at  Luluabourg.
They  were  outnumbered  by  the  Mobutii  troops  by  10-to-one.
The  UN  maintained a  cease-fire,  arranged  parleys,  got  both
sides  to  deposit  their  arms  in  an  armoury  under  UN  guard.
Some  days  later,  the  Gizenga supporters  vanished  into  the
bush  and  were  not  spotted  for   48  hours,  wi.en  they  were
observed  returning  to  Stanleyville.    Meanwhile  some  West-
ern  diplomats  were  spreading  the  story   of   Mr.  Gizenga's
victory  which  was   'not  stopped  by  the  scandalous  Dayal'."
—rhilip    Dcane,   London   Observer,   March   5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  13, 1961
Debate  on  That  HUAC  Appropriation Shows  A  Startling  New  Item  in  the  American Credo
It's  Now  Un-American  to  Be  Frivolous  About  the  Communist  Party
During   the   debate,   if   it  can  be  called   that,   on  the   new
appropriation   for   the   House   Un-American    Activities   Com-
mittee,   Mr.  Walter  accused  Mr.   James  Roosevelt   of  having
"demonstrated    a  rather  frivolous  attitude  toward   the   Com-
munist   party."     We   couldn't  help  thinking  as  we  heard   it
that   the   U.S.A.   is   probably   the   only   country   outside   the
Soviet  bloc  where  a  man  can  make  himself  suspect  by  being
"frivolous"  about  the  Communist  party.
Radio  Moscow  could  not  be  more  insidious  than  to  broad-
cast  deadpan  the  debate  as  reported  in  the  March  1  Congres-
sional  Record.    The  impression  it  gives  is  that  the  most  pow-
erful   capitalist  nation  on   earth   is   terrified   of   communism,
so  terrified   that  to  question  the  power   of  communism  is  to
lay  oneself   open  to  suspicion  of  un-Americanism.
As  in  Iron  Curtain  Countries
An  American  must  be  almost  as  careful  as  a  Russian  when
he  talks  of  the  Communist  parry.
Mr.  Scherer  of  Ohio,  the  ranking  Republican  on  the  Un-
American  Activities  Committee,  told  the  House,  "Anyone  who
says  that  Communist  internal  subversion  stops  short  90  miles
from   our   shores   in  Cuba   is  either  a  fool  or   a   Communist
agent."    Mr.  Walter,  rebuking  Mr.  Roosevelt  for  skepticism,
said  "It  is admitted  by all  that  the  Communists have  infiltrated
every  phase  of  our  life."    Only  the  Committee  stands  between
them  and  triumph.    The   campaign  to  abolish  the  Commit-
tee,  Mr.  Dorn,  of  South  Carolina,  told  the  House,  "is  really
a  move  to  abolish  our  freedoms,"   then   "eliminate   Congress
and  enslave  the  American  people."
This  reference  to  slavery  was  not  meant  to  be  rhetorical.
Only  science  fiction  can  rival  the  perils  with  which  we  are
confronted.     Mr.   Fallen   of   Maryland   told   the   House   that
the  American  people  have  become  "the  No.   1  target  of  the
alien   ideology  that   practically   invented  subversion  and   has
developed  it  into  a  mighty  and  lethal  weagon."    Mr.  Scherer
explained  that  this  new  weapon,  "internal  subversion,"  was
so  powerful  that   "the   top   experts   in  psychological  warfare
frankly   state  that  the  Soviets  have  abandoned   the   centuries
old   concept   of   war."     They   see  the   Russians  preparing   to
They  Could  Go  Underground
And  Show  the  Film  in  Secret
"The   House   Un-American  Activities  Committee  is
preparing   material   defending   its   controversial   film,
'Operation  Abolition,'  the  ranking  minority  member  of
the   committee   said   this   morning.     Rep.   Gordon  H.
Scherer   (R.   Ohio)  told  members  of   the   Board  of   the
National   Federation   of   Republican  Women  about  the
new   material   when  several   of   them   said   they  were
'having  trouble'  showing  the  film,  and  asked  him  what
to  do.  .  .  .  Republican women  from  several  States  com-
plained   to   Mr.  Scherer  that  when  their  local  Repub-
lican  women's  clubs  showed  the  film,  literature  attack-
ing  it  is  handed  out  after  the  showing."
—Washington  Star  society  page,  March  3
seize  us  body  and   soul.    "They  believe,"   Mr.   Scherer   went
on  with  his  tingling  revelation,  "that  a  man  killed  by  a  bul-
let  can  mine  no  coal,  a  city  destroyed  mill  no  cloth.    These
experts  say  the   Soviets   seek   to  take   intact   the   peoples   and
their  possessions  so  that  they  can  be  put  to   use."
Presumably  all  they  need   do  is  to  slip  Das  Kapital   into
Mr.   Scherer's  mail  and   wait  for   the  poison   to  work.     But
here,  too,  the  Committee  stands  on  guard.    Mr.  Scherer   told
the  House  that  "after  a  long  series  of  hearings"  it  had  proven
"conclusively   that   10   million   pieces   of   Communist    propa-
ganda  in  13  different  languages  were  coming  into  this  country
each  year."    The   number   13  intrigues  us.     A   less   godless
movement,  respectful  of   ancient   beliefs,   would   have  added
or  dropped  one language,  just to  be on  the  safe  side.  .  . .
In  this  booby-hatch  atmosphere,   the  4l2-to-6  vote  was  not
surprising.    It  is  only  surprising  that  Mr.  Roosevelt   did  find
one  Congressman,  William  Fitts  Ryan  of  New  York  willing
to  speak  up  with  him  on  the  floor  and  four   others   to  join
them  in  voting  against  the  appropriation.     To   this   resolute
pair  and  to  Edith  Green  of  Oregon,  O'Hara  of  Illinois,  Kas-
tenmeier  of  Wisconsin  and  Ashley  of  Ohio  ought  to  go  some
kind   of   award.     Perhaps   for   being   the   only   members   of
Congress   unafraid   to  show  more  faith  in  the  U.S.   Constitu-
tion  than  in  the  U.S.  Communist   Party.
Reprints  in  Bulk  Available  at  Special  Rates  for  Last  Week's   Issue   on  the   Wilkinson-Braden   Decisions
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Aye^  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  mj   sub  for  the  enclosed  95:*
Street    ..............
City   ..._......„.....
3/13/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  moo.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ..........................._......„..,...........„............„...._...„..........
City   .....................~...................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
I.E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   r4.bro.ko  AY*.,  H.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Clan  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  S.  187*.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave..   N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  In
Canada;   110  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:   116  to   Europe;    120   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED