I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961dec04.pdf

============================================================

Finland  and  the Dominican  Republic,  P.  3
Sweden  and  Six  Pro-West  Neutrals  Propose  Universal Rapacki  Plan  at  UN,  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  45DECEMBER   4,   1961
°'°'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Adenauer's   Old   Game   and   Some  Lessons  of  the   Past
Two  historic  parallels  may provide  useful  guidelines  on  the
way   to  new  Berlin  negotiations.    The  first  is  the  course  of
events   under   the   Eisenhower  Administration,  between   No-
vember   1958  when  Khrushchev  demanded  a  new  status  for
West  Berlin  and  May,  I960,  when  Eisenhower's assumption
of   personal  responsibility  for   the  U-2  blew  up   the  summit
conference.    The  second  is  the  way  the  seizure  of  power  by
Hitler  ended  the  long  and  tangled  disarmament  talks  between
World  Wars  I  and  II.
The  main  lesson  of  the  first  is  to  be  wary  of  taking  signs
of  "thaw"  between  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  as  assurance of
a   peaceful   settlement  on   Berlin  so  long   as  Adenauer   and
de  Gaulle  have  a  virtual  veto  power  over  negotiating  terms
and   are  allowed  to   delay  talks  interminably.    Friendly   ex-
changes  between  Washington   and  Moscow   like  the  publica-
tion  in  Izvestia   of  the  President's   refreshing  interview  with
its  editor help  to  break  the  ice  but  they  are  falsely  reassuring
if   not   accompanied  by   resistance  to   German   pressure   and
fuller   education  of  the  U.S.  public  to  the  basic  issues.    The
course  of  events  under  Eisenhower  was  in  some  ways  similar
to  the  course  of  events  under  Kennedy.     In  both   cases,  on
the   plane   of   public  relations   there   were   gestures   and   ex-
changes  which  gave  hope  of  a  settlement  while  on  the  plane
of   diplomatic  preparations   Adenauer   was   successful   in   so
limiting   the   area   of   negotiations   as   to   make   a   settlement
unlikely.
Even  Dulles  Not  Rigid  Enough  For  Adenauer
It  is  useful  to  recall  that  even  John  Foster  Dulles  was  not
rigid  enough  for  Konrad  Adenauer.  When  Dulles   suggested
in  November,   1958,   as  a  compromise  that  maybe  East  Ger-
man   instead  of  Russian  officials   might   be  allowed  to   stamp
travel  passes  as  "agents"  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Adenauer  (and
Willy  Brandt,  too)   were  furious.    There  were  similar  con-
vulsions  in  Bonn  when   in  January,   1959,   Dulles  said   that
there   might   be   other   ways  of   unifying   Germany  than   by
free   elections,   the  first  public  hint   of   proposals   that  West
Germany  should   seek  closer   relations  with  East  Germany  as
a  means  slowly  of  reuniting  the  country.    Adenauer  lives,  as
Andre  Fontaine  said  in  Le  Monde   (Nov.   22),   in  terror  of
being  abandoned.    He  has  constantly  to  be  reassured  by  pri-
vate  letter  from  the  White  House  when  he  sees  the  forbidden
word   "disengagement"    in  the  press   or  hears   that   Secretary
Rusk   in  talking  with   Foreign   Minister   Gromyko   had   men-
tioned   that   subversive   phrase,    "European    security."     Any
formula  which  promises  a  framework  in  which  diverse  secu-
rity   needs   might   be   reconciled—and   thus   the   way   really
cleared   for   eventual   German   unity—sends   Adenauer  up   in
alarm.    He  is  like  the  neurotic  woman  who  rules  her  house-
Not  Exactly   Truthful
Q.  Minister, this  is  a  question  which  has  been  kick-
ing  around  here.    I  am  sure  you  can  put  an  end  to  it
right   at  this  moment.    Please   explain  your  reported
Nazi  background.
A.  My  only  reply  to  this  question  is  as  follows,  and
this  is  a  statement  which  I  have  already  made  in  the
past   before  the   Bundestag,   the   German  Parliament:
I  have  never  in  my  life   been  what  is  called   here   a
Nazi,  not  even  for  one  second.    I  have  neither  been  a
Nazi  prior  to  1933,  nor  have  I  been  a  Nazi  after  1933,
nor  do I  have  any  intention of  being  turned into  a  Nazi
at  this  time  through  misrepresentation.
—German  Foreign   Minister   Gerhard   Schroeder  be-
fore   the  National   Press  Club,  Nov.  22.
The  statement  issued  by  the  German  government  on
his  past  (as  printed  in  Die  Zeit  of  Hamburg  Nov.  24)
presents  the  facts   differently.    It   denies  that  he  was
ever  a  Storm  Trooper,  but  admits  that  he  was  a  Nazi.
The  official  biography  says  he  applied  for   membership
in  the  Storm  Troopers  in  the  winter  of  1933-34  but  his
application  lapsed  when  he  moved from  Bonn  to  Berlin.
He  did  however  join  the   Nazi  party  in   1933   and  re-
mained  in  it  until   1941  when  he  married  the  daughter
of   a  "non-Aryan"  banker.     (The  ratio   of   money   to
actual   Jewish  blood  had  to  be  very  wide  for  survival
in  such  cases.)    The  biography  claims  that  he  showed
his   negative   attitude   toward   Nazism   by   joining   the
Confessional  Church  in  1938.  Nevertheless   he  remained
in  the  Nazi  party  for  three  more  years.
hold  by  hysterics,  threatening  several  times  a  month  to  com-
mit   suicide—as  Adenauer   regularly   hints  that,   if   thwarted,
Catholic  capitalist  West  Germany  may  join  up  with   Moscow.
When  Mr.  Kennedy,  trying  hard  to  develop  a  more mature
public  opinion,   spoke   at   Seattle   recently  of   those   who  see
"only  two  choices:  appeasement  or  war,  suicide  or  surrender,
humiliation  or  holocaust",  he  was,  even  if  unintentionally,  de-
scribing  our  frenetic  West  German  ally.    During   the  recent
German  election  campaign,  both  Adenauer's  Christian  Demo-
crats^  and   Brandt's   Social   Democrats   were   passionately   in
agreement   that   negotiations  must   not  be  limited   to  Berlin,
that  Berlin's  interests  could  be  safeguarded   only  in  the  con-
text  of  wider  negotiations.     Now   they  have   come   whirling
about  full  circle  to  the  view  that  negotiations  must  be  con-
fined  to  Berlin  alone.    Adenauer  feared  that  wider  talks  on
European  security  might   create  another  obstacle  to  German
possession   of   nuclear   warheads,  that  provisions  against  sur-
prise   attack   might   put   Russian   inspectors   on   West  Berlin
soil.    In  short,  he  feared  a  wider  settlement  might  put  a  stop
to  West  Germany's  steady  expansion   in  military  power.     It
(Continued   on  Page   Pottr)
1   7  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  4,  1961
Way  Suggested  for  Neutrals   to  Take  Nuclear  Initiative  from  Deadlocked  Big  Powers
Sweden  and  Six  Pro-West  Neutrals  Propose  Universal  Rapacki  Plan
"The   Rapacki  Plan  envisages  the  creation  of  one  particular
atom-free  zone,  that  is,  in  Central  Europe.    In  our  proposal
we  should  like  to  apply  the  principles  underlying  the  Rapacki
Plan  on  a  universal  basis.    Why  should  not  Africa  or  a  part
of   the   African  continent   become  an   atom-free  zone  if   the
African   States  so wish? ...  It  could  be  raised   with  regard
to  other  areas  of   the  world   than   Africa.     We   realize  that
there   might   be   different   degrees   as  to  which   one   area   or
the  other  could  be  sealed  off  from  nuclear  weapons.
"It  may  well  be  desirable,  therefore,  to  lay  down   different
rules  for  atom-free  zones  in  different  parts  of  the  world.    A
rule  that  might  be  appropriate  for  conditions in  Africa  would,
perhaps,  not  be  equally  fit  or  applicable   in  Central   Europe.
It  is  obvious  that  an  over-all  ban  on  nuclear  weapons  tests,
as  well  as  the   establishment   of  atom-free  zones,  would  call
for  certain  controls.    The  problem  of  controls  in  connection
with  disarmament  is  very  complicated  and  important.   In  our
view  it  cannot  be  solved  by  one  single  formula;  the   solution
must,   instead,   be  adapted   to   the   object   of   the   controls   in
each  particular  instance.  .  .  .
Need  for  Test  Control  Exaggerated
"Let  me  again  express  my  feeling  that  the  demand  for  con-
trols,  as  a  condition  for  a  treaty  prohibiting  nuclear  tests,  has
been  given  excessive  importance  in  the  face  of  the  possibili-
ties  existing  today  of  detecting  nuclear  explosions  by  means
of  technical  devices.    On  the  other  hand,  a  certain  amount
of  controls  is  needed,  no  doubt.    I  might  add  that  this  was
acknowledged  also  by  the  author  of  the  Rapacki  Plan,  which
provides  for  a  control  system.  .  .  .
"In  a  statement  to  this  Committee  on  26  October   I  sug-
gested  that  in  view  of  the  failure  of  the  three  great  Powers
to  reach  an  agreement  to  ban  nuclear  weapons  tests,  another
approach  might  be  tried.    I  then  put  the  question   whether
the  initiative  could  not  be  taken  by  the  non-nuclear  countries
themselves.    If  the  report  which  the  Disarmament  Commis-
New  Non-Nuclear   Club  Proposal
The  other  nuclear  resolutions,  passed   by  the   United
Nations   at   this   session—against   testing   and   against
the  use  of   atomic  weapons—are  little   more  than   the
expression   of  pious  hopes  the  big   Powers   can   ignore.
But  as  we  went  to  press  a vote  was  nearing  on a  differ-
ent   kind  of   resolution   which  the   smaller   powers   can
implement   among   themselves.      This   was   offered   by
Sweden,   with   the   support   of   six   other    pro-Western
neutrals:  Austria,  Ceylon,  Ethiopia,   Libya,  Sudan  and
Tunisia.     This   combines   two   ideas,   one   put   forward
by  the  Polish   Foreign   Minister  Rapacki  for   an   atom
free  zone  in  Central  Europe,  the  other  by  Lord  Russell
many  months  ago  for  a  "non-nuclear  club"  of  smaller
Powers.     The  resolution   would  instruct   the    Secretary
General  to  ask  the  non-nuclear   powers   if   they   would
be  willing  to  "enter  into  undertakings  to  refrain  from
manufacturing   or   otherwise   acquiring   such    weapons
and  to  refuse  to  receive  in  the  future  nuclear   weapons
on  their  territories  on behalf  of  any  other  country"  and
submit  the  results  to  the  Disarmament  Commission  not
later  than  next  April  1.   Because  so  little  attention  has
been  paid  this   proposal   in  the  press  we  reprint   here
part  of  a  Swedish  speech  at  the  UN  explaining   it.
sion  is  to  receive  on  14  December  indicates  no  hope  that  the
Geneva  negotiations  will  be  resumed  under  present  circum-
stances,  we  could  instead  take  steps  to  find  out  if  those  many
countries  which  have  not   participated  in   the   Geneva   Con-
ference  and  are  in  favor  of  prohibiting  nuclear  weapons  tests
might  be  ready  to  assume  a  more  active  part  in  order  to  reach
a  solution;  they  might  form  a  'non-atom  club,'  .  .  .  under
which  they  might  undertake  not  to  manufacture,  not  to  im-
port  or  not  to  store  nuclear  weapons  on  their  own  territories
on  behalf  of  their  own  or  any  other  country.  .  .  .  We  are
attempting  to  open  new  roads  for  further   negotiations."
—Mr.  Unden,  Sweden,  in  the  UN  First  Committee,  Nov.   17.
Ceylon  Sees  The  Danger  of  World  Rule  By  A  Russo-American Condominium
"What  we  have  is  not  the  classic  armaments  race  of  the     before,   even   in  such   recent   history   as   the   Second   World
20th  Century,   when  the  fate  of  one  nation  or  an  alliance
of  nations  was  at  stake,  when  armaments   may  even   have
nurtured  the  economies   of  nations.    In  the  nuclear  race  it
is  the  human  race  that  is  at  stake,  and  while  a  few   nations
War  when  the  enemies  of  yesterday  have  become  the  allies
of  today.  .  .  .
"I  do  not  say  that  is  what  Moscow  and  Washington  want.
I  do  not  for  one  moment  suggest  that  this  is  what   they
may  still  benefit  economically   from  the  production   of  arm-     would   even   approve.     But  nations  achieve  objectives  not
only  in  policy  but  also  in  drift,   in  the  logic   of  evolution,
in  the  sudden  and  unforeseen   turn  of  events.  .  .  .
"Theories  that  human  beings  can  survive  a  nuclear  war
are  being   assiduously   cultivated  and  are  creating  the  illu-
sion  that  survival  is  a  distinct  possibility.     Mankind  is  thus
aments,   such   armaments   are  a  deterrent   to  the   develop-
ment  of  the  economies   of   the  new-born  states.  .  .  .  The
nuclear  arsenals .  . .  are a  deterrent  not to war but to  peace
and  to  peaceful   development.
"There  have  emerged   far  out  in  front  in  the  armaments
race  only   two  Powers—the   United   States  and  the   Soviet
being   hynotized  into  a  state  of  complacency,   and  there  is
Union—and  if  this  race  continues   unabated,  we  shall  soon     no  need  to  stress  here  how  dangerous  such  an  illusion  can
be.  ...
"We  want  a  peace  race,  no  different  from  any  other   race
fiud that  these  two  Powers  will  enjoy  the  military  domina
tion  of the world. ...
"Nor  is  it  too  far  fetched  to  envisage  an  evolution  from     in  which  the  participants  are  in  a  hurry  to  get  somewhere
this  rivalry  to  one  of   partnership—that   is   to  say   when     —in  this  case,  into  a  world  without  arms.  .  .  .  The  people
these  two  Powers  join  in  a  cartel,  when  they  discover  some     of  Ceylon  want  to  see  a  world  without  weapons,  a  world
bright  early  morning  that  they  have  more  in  common  than     without   war,   a   world   under   the   growing    power   of   the
their   differences.     Such   things   have   happened   in  history     United   Nations."
—Mr.  Malalasekera   of  Ceylon  in  the  UN's  First  Committee  debate  on disarmament,  Nov.  22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December    It,  1961
While  Each  Side  Accuses  the  Other  of  Colonialism,  Both  Practice  It
What  Russia  Did  in  Finland,  We  Are  Doing  in  the  Dominican  Republic
A  hated  phrase  in  Latin  America  is  "geographical   deter-
minism."     It  means  that  countries  living  close  to  the  United
States  must  watch  their  step,  not  go  too  far  left,  be  "practi-
cal."      But   "geographical   determinism"    is   not   peculiar   to
Uncle  Sam's  backyard.    Last  week  Finland  got  a  taste  of  it.
While   Mr.   Zorin   was   lecturing   the   U.S.   in   the   Security
Council  on  the  dispatch  of  a  fleet  to  the  Dominican   Repub-
lic—"according  to  the  UN  charter,"   he  said,  "no  country  is
entitled  to  intervene  in  the  domestic  affairs  of  another"—the
Finnish  President  was  being  summoned  to  Novosibirsk.     The
Russians  had   been   threatening   "joint   military  measures",   a
euphemism  for  the  reappearance  of  Soviet  troops  on  Finnish
soil,  but  were  placated   by  the  withdrawal  from  the  coming
Presidential  elections  of  an  oppostion   candidate  Moscow  does
not  like.     Mr.  Khrushchev's   "vote"  has  reelected   Finland's
President  Kekkonen.
A  Return  to  Gunboat  Diplomacy
Mr.   Stevenson   was  indignant  at  the   Security  Council  be-
cause  Cuba   had   termed   our   sending   of   a  small   flotilla   of
naval  vessels  and  Marines  to  the  Dominican   Republic  a  vio-
lation  of  the  Charter.     From  Washington's   point  of  view,  it
had   acted  quickly  to  prevent   the  Trujillo  'clan  from  taking
over  again.    But  however   salutary  the  immediate  effect,   this
was  a  return  to  gunboat   diplomacy  and  will  be  seen  in  Latin
America   as   a   dangerous    precedent.      The    Cuban    delegate
asked  the  Security  Council  "whether  a  great  Power  may  exert
friendly   pressure  to  defend  what  it  believes  to  be  the   best
Government   for   a  small   country."     This   speaks   for   Latin
America.     It  also  speaks  for   Finland.     The   Russian  excuse
is  fear  of   German   expansion   in   the   Baltic;  ours  of   Soviet
bases  in  the  Caribbean.
Our   quick   action   to   prevent   the   Trujillos   from   reestab-
lishing  themselves   would   evoke  a  warmer  response   in  Latin
America  were  it  not  plain  that  we  were  also  trying  to  install
in  their  place  as  right  wing  a  regime  as  we  can  get.    Balaguer
Look  Who  We're  Asking
To  Protect  Liberty  In  Cuba
"Torture  has  become  as  common  [under  Frondizi]  as
it  was  under  Peron. ...  in  July of  this  year,  a  Congres-
sional   investigating  committee,  which  had   turned  up
evidence  of  widespread  police  torture  practices  .  .  .  was
dissolved   after  a   group  of   policemen  fired  200  shots
against   the  Congress   buildings.  .  .  .   Censorship  has
become  rigid.  .  .  .  Newspapers  and  magazines  are  con-
stantly   confiscated;  more  than   30  have   been  perma-
nently   banned  since  Frondizi  became  President.     But
such  Fascist  groups  as  Tacuara,  which  is  protected  by
some  Army  factions  and  the  oligarchy,  and  which  de-
nounces   U.S.  democracy  as  a  'Judaeo-capitalist'   state
led  by  'Communist'  Kennedy,  go  unmolested ...  break
into  Jewish  cultural meetings  .  .  .  publish anti-Semitic
tracts  .  .  .  yet  not  one  of  their  leaders  is  ever  hauled
off  to  jail  ...     but  to  squash  [a  recent  3-day  general
strike],  police  jailed  600  labor  leaders.  .  .  ."
—Baltimore    Sun,    Nov.    25,   special    article     from
Buenos   Aires,  by  John    Gerassi.
was Trujillo's  man;  his  inaction  allowed  the  Trujillos  to  make
off   with  most  of  the  Republic's  cash.    The   Trujillos   owned
most  of  the  island's   business.    We're  afraid   this  might  be-
come  public  property  in  a  semi-socialist  State,   dangerous   for
"free  enterprisers"  like Standard  Oil  and  United  Fruit.    Latins
also  fear  that  the  Dominican   affair  will  provide  a   precedent
for  action  next  against  Cuba.
NOTICE  TO READERS
In  our  issue  of  Nor.   13  we  reprinted  some  fresh  proposals  on
Berlin  matte  by  Senator  Mansfield   in  a  little  noticed  speech.  As
an  experiment,  we  suggested  that  readers  who  like   It  show  their
appreciation  by  writing  the  Senator.  So  often  Senators  who  break
ground   In  such  stale  areas  of  public   policy  are  disheartened  by
the  lack  of  response.    The  response  has  been  extraordinary.    As
of   Nov.   29,  we  had   received  488  notices  from   readers  telling   us
they   hful   written.    The  Senator's  omce  is   so  swamped  that   ac-
knowledgements  have  been  held  up  awaiting  the  Senator's   return
later  this  month  from  South  America.     We  thank  our  readers  for
writing,  and  will  try  this  again  some  time  soon.—IFS
An  Appeal for  A Brave  Negro Widow Challenging the  Police  Who  Killed  Her  Husband
We'd   like-  to   call   the   attention  of   the   editors   of   the
Washington   Post   to   a  footnote   on  page   174  of   the   new
Civil  Rights  Commission  report  on  Justice.    This  footnote
reveals  that  the  present   Chief  of   Police  of   Dawson  City,
Georgia,  jailed  a  key  witness  in  the  fatal  beating  of  James
Brazier  and  held  him  without   charges   to  keep  him   from
testifying   before   a   Federal  grand  jury  investigating   the
affair   in  August,  1958.    The  Police  Chief  is   identified   in
the  report only  as  an  officer  "Y"  who  was  promoted to .Chief
of   Police  after  the  Brazier  killing.    He  is   W.  B.  Cherry.
The  Department of  Justice  set  this  grand  jury  into  mo-
tion  as  a  result  of  an  expose  published  by  the  Washington
Post   in  July  of   that  year.    The  reporter  was   Robert  E.
Lee  Baker.    The   grand  jury  refused  to   indict.    The  out-
come  might  have  been  different   had  it  heard  the  missing
witness,   a   man  named  Marvin  Goshay.     In   any  case,   if
the  Civil  Rights Commission  story  is  true,  the  Police  Chief
was  guilty  of  obstructing justice.    Since  this  was  the  Post's
campaign,  we  appeal  to  it  to  demand  action  by  the   Justice
Department.
The  matter   is   given  fresh   urgency   by  a  related  event
which  also  went  unnoticed  in  the  press.    Three  days  after
the  Commission's  report  was  released,   the  Supreme  Court
refused  to  review  the  case   of  Brazier  v.  Cherry.    This  in-
volves  a  $180,000 suit  brought  by  Brazier's  widow  against
the  Police  Chief,   Sheriff   Z.  T.  Matthews  of  Terrill  County,
and  three  other  police  officers.    The  Federal  District  Court
had  dismissed  Mrs.  Brazier's  suit.    The  U.S.  Court  of  Ap-
peals  for  the  Fifth   Circuit  reversed  this  ruling  2-to-l  and
the  Supreme  Court,  by  refusing  to  review,  cleared  the  way
for   trial.
Mrs.   Brazier   is   a   brave  woman,  and  has   already  won
something  for  her  people.    The  Circuit  Court  ruling  in  her
case  was  the  first  appellate decision  to  hold  that  a  widow
may  sue  under  the  Civil  Rights  Act.    The  account  of   the
case  in  the  Commission  report  shows  the  brutality  that  she
is  up against.   The  same  footnote  about  the  missing  witness
also discloses  that  he  was  found  dead  under  mysterious  cir-
cumstances  after  Mrs. Brazier  filed  her  suit,  a  suit  in  which
he  would have  testified.   Her  chances  of  winning  might  be
helped  if  the  Washington  Post  again  put  the  spotlight   on
her  case  and  prodded  the  Justice  Department  into  renewed
action.    What  is  the  good  of  these  investigations  if  nobody
does  anything  about  their  findings?
f   2   *
1   7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  4, 1961
Disarmament  After  World  War  I  Would  Have  Prevented  Hitler's   Rise
(Continued  from  Page   One)
appears  that  in  return  for  Adenauer's  agreement  to  let  talks
proceed,  Kennedy  had  to  drop  all  such  broader  subjects  and
promise  to  confine  the  talks  to  Berlin  alone.    Indeed  it  looks
as  if   Adenauer   consented   to   talks   only   on   conditions   that
make  it  unlikely  they  will  succeed.    The  Adenauer  entourage,
including   his   humorless    new   Foreign   Minister,   has   even
erected  an  edifice  of  legal-metaphysical  rationalization  on  the
typically   Germanic   view   that   Allied  rights   in   Berlin   stem
from   conquest  and  are  therefore  "inalienable"   and  superior
to  any  negotiated   agreement.     But  if  the  West   has  "inalien-
able"  rights  of  conquest  in  Berlin,  the  Soviet  Union  has  the
same  "inalienable"   rights  of  conquest  in  East  Germany  and
can  stay  on  there  forever.    A  windier  bunch  of  patent  medi-
cine  vendors  never  yet  turned  up  in  our  capital.
The  Same  Old  Comedy
Now  Adenauer  is  going  to  intercede  for  us  with  de  Gaulle
to  obtain  final  approval  for  negotiations.    This  little  comedy
was  also  played  out   under  Eisenhower.     Adenauer   and   de
Gaulle  between  them  delayed  the  summit  twice,  until  it  was
finally  held  only  in  May  I960,  when  Eisenhower  was already
on  his  way  out  as  President.    De  Gaulle  is  not  interested  in
a  German  settlement.     He   is  satisfied   with  a  divided Ger-
many  and  dreams  of  using  the  French  alliance  with  a  trun-
cated  West  Germany  as  the  core  of  a  new  Third  Force  which
can  mediate  between   the   "Anglo-Saxons"   and  the  Russians.
Between  de  Gaulle  and  Adenauer, one  may  be  sure  the  com-
ing  talks  among  the  Western  powers  will  be  long  drawn  out
and  end  in  leaving  as  little  room  for  negotiation  as  possible.
//  'must   never  be  forgotten   that  their   prime  aim  is  mainte-
nance  of  tension  between  East  and   West.     Relaxation  would
end  Germany's  hopes  of  emerging  as  a  major  nuclear military
power.
It  is  here  that  the  course  of  the  disarmament  negotiations
between  1919 and  1932 become  relevant.  Had  the  disarma-
ment  pledges  of  the  Versailles  pact  been  kept,  had  universal
disarmament    been    achieved,   Germany's    reviving   military
power  could  have  been  nipped  in  the  bud  and  the  emergence
They  Trade  While   We  "Crisis"
Cologne,  Nov.  24—In  spite  of  rising  political  tension,
German   trade   with   the  Soviet  bloc  grew    considerably
in  the  third  quarter   of  1961.  Compared  with  the  same
period  of  the  year  before,  imports  from  the  Soviet  bloc
rose  9.6  percent   to  520.2   million   marks   (about   $130,-
000,000)   and  exports  to  the  bloc  rose  8.9  percent   to
494.2  million   marks  (almost  $125,000.00).
—Die   Welt   (Hamburg)    Nov.  25.    Page   one  item
under  the  heading,  "Despite  Berlin  Crisis,  Trade   With
The  East  Grows."
of  Hitler  Germany  prevented.    The  one  sure  way  to  prevent
the  emergence  of  a  new  German  threat  is  through  universal
and  general  disarmament.  When  Mr.  Kennedy  told  the  editor
of  Izvestia  that  "if  Germany  developed   an  atomic  capability
of  its  own,  if  it  developed  many missiles,  or  a  strong  national
army  that  threatened  war,  then  I  would  understand  your  con-
cern,  and  I  would   share  it,"  he  was  making  an  admission
Bonn  will  find  very  distasteful.   What  if  West  Germany  be-
comes  strong  enough  to  turn  the  NATO  alliance  into  an  in-
strument  for  its  own  aggrandizement?    What  if  it  uses  the
Western   alliance  to  force  revision  of  its  Eastern  frontiers  on
threat  of  thermonuclear  war?    What  if  a  future  West Ger-
man   government,   once  fully   armed   by  our  help,  treats   the
NATO  pact  as  another  scrap  of  power  and  resumes  an  inde-
pendent  policy,  taking  over  by  force  the  warheads  stored  on
her  soil?    Or  makes  her  own?    Or  uses  her   thermonuclear
power   to  make  a  deal   with  Russia  at  the   expense   of   both
Poland  and  the  West,  as she  did  once  before?    The  only  real
security  either   side  can  have  against   resumption   of   the   old
German   blackmail  game  is  to  come  to  terms  now, to  bring
the  arms  race  to  an  end, to   begin   to  dismantle   the   terror
weapons  and  to  establish  a  world  of  law, in  which  an  inter-
national   inspectorate   and   an   international   police   force   can
make  sure  that  secret  war  preparations  do  not  go  forward  in
Germany  or'anywhere  else.    That  is  why  we  welcome  the  re-
newed  talks  on  testing  and  disarmament,  and  see  in  them  a
way  to  bypass  Berlin  in  the  search  for   peace.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    LONG  Envelopes
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .....................................................................,.......^........—
Street    ...........................................................................................
City   .............,..............................Zone.............State....................
12/4/01
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name   ...............................................................................
Street     ...........................................................................................
City   ......._..................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618     Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   K   Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.   C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday   in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.:  $6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED