I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961aug14.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  the Nuclear  Shelter Hearings
To  "Stiffen  National  Will" the  Kennedy  Civil  Defense  Serves  Up  the  Same  Phony  Figures  As  Ike's
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IX,  NO.  31
AUGUST  14,   1961
«»     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Like  Watching  A  Lunatic  Nightmare
The  new  civil  defense  program   and   the   hearings   which
have  just  been  held  on  it  here  by  the  Holifield   subcommittee
of  House  Government  Operations  are  part  of  the  Berlin  crisis
buildup.    The  intent  is  twofold:   to  make  the  Russians  be-
lieve  we  are  ready  to  risk  our  population  rather  than  give  way
on  Berlin  and  to  make  our  people  believe  shelter  may  easily,
quickly  and  cheaply  be  made  available  to  protect  them  from
thermonuclear   war.     In   the   language   made   fashionable   by
the   application   of  game  theory   to  war,   the  purpose   is  to
make   the   Great   Deterrent   credible,   to   make   the   Russians
really   believe   we  are   prepared   to   risk   national   suicide   to
drive  a  hard  bargain  or  make  them   back  down.     As  Frank
B.   Ellis,   the   new   director   of   Civil   Defense    Mobilization
(OCDM)  put  it  grandiosely   to  the  Holifield   subcommittee
at  the  opening  of  the  hearings,   in  civil  defense  we  are  deal-
ing  not  only  with   "the  survival  of  this  nation"  but—
"We are  also  dealing  with  the  National  Will—that  some-
what  intangible ingredient  which  charges  the  environment
of  our  daily  life,  either  positively  or  negatively  and  which
marks  the  difference  between  a  leader  of  nations  and  a
second-class  power.   If  we  are  to  remain  true  to  our  heri-
tage  of  freedom  and  face  up  to  the  problems  of  our  time,
we  must  take  reasonable  measures  for  the  protection  of
our   civilian  population.    The   taking   of   such   measures
symbolizes   our  determination  to   react   positively   to   the
Soviet  challenge,  rather  than  to  choose  the  part  of  piece-
meal  surrender.   In  the  critical  days  and  months  to  come,
I  shall,  under  executive  leadership  address  myself   to  the
stimulation  and  the  strengthening  of  the  National  Will."
A  Bismarckian Mystique
Bismarck  would  have  admired  this  mystique.    It  sees  civil
defense   as  a  means  of   total   emotional   mobilization.     The
conception   of  civil  defense  as  a  means  of  making  it   possible
to  skirt  closer  to  the  brink  for  purposes   of  hard   bargaining
was   outlined   by   Herman   Kahn   in   his   Rand    Corporation
(Air   Force)   study   of   "Non-Military    Defense."     In   it   he
said  that  civil  defense  "might  increase  U.S.  freedom  of  action
in   conducting   peacetime   foreign   policy   and   implementing
a  broad  deterrent  strategy. ...  In the years ahead,  willingness
to  make  foreign  policy  decisions  carrying  a  risk  of  war  may
be  important  to  meet  major  Soviet  challenges.  .  .  .  Deterrence
of   extremely   provocative   enemy  behavior   other   than  direct
attack   on  the  United  States  might  thus  be  maintained   as  a
credible  national  policy."    The  phrase  italicized  might  have
been  written  with  a  future  Berlin  crisis  in  mind.    Kahn  put
his  meaning  more  plainly  in  his   book,   On   Thermonuclear
War,   when  he  said,   "We   must   convince  the   Europeans  as
well   as  the   Russians  of   our   resolve   if   we   are   to   prevent
appeasement  or  an  undue  degree  of  accommodation."*     (Our
italics).
In  his  radio  and  TV  speech  on  Berlin  July  25,  President
Kennedy  set  this  new  civil  defense  effort  in  motion  by saying
Better  Stock  A  Spare  Pair  of  Eyes
"The  light  from  a   nuclear   explosion  is   dangerous
to  the  human  eye  at  ranges  of  many  miles  in  event  of
bursts  low  in  the  atmosphere or  on  the  surface,  vary-
ing   with   visibility.    At   the   test   sites   high   density
goggles   were   provided   to   the   observers   of   nuclear
tests,   and  there  was  an  extensive  warning  system  to
prevent  eye  injury.    Injury  may  range  from  a  tem-
porary  flash  blindness   to  burns  on  the  retina.    In  the
event  of   high  altitude  explosions  of   megaton  bombs,
that  is,  at  20  miles  or  so,  the  data  from   experiments
during  the  tests  above  Johnston  Island  in  1958  show
that   burns  to   the  retina   can  occur  as   far   away   as
300  nautical  miles.    In  such  high  altitude   explosions
the  light   pulse   is   emitted  very   rapidly—much  of   it
less  than  0.015  second,  the  time required  for  the blink-
ing  of  the  eye.    If  one  were  looking  in  the   direction
of   a   very   high   altitude  burst,  the   injury  would  be
produced  before  the  blink  reflex  could  react  to  protect
the   eye."
—"The  Effects     of  Nuclear  Explosions"   testimony   by
R.  L.  Corsbie   before   the  Holifield    committee,   Aug.   4.
"In  the  event  of  an  attack,  the  lives  of  those  families  which
are  not  hit  in  a  nuclear   blast  and  fire  can  still  be  saved—
if  they  can  be  warned  to  take  shelter  and  if  that  shelter   is
available."     The   glad   tidings   with  which   the   Secretary  of
Defense  opened  the  Holifield  hearings  was that  shelter   spaces
in  event  of  war  are  already  available  for  one-fourth  our  pop-
ulation.    "The   heart  of  the  President's  program,"  Mr.  Mc-
Namara  said,  "is  the  identification,  marking  and  stocking  of
available    community    shelter    space    in    existing    buildings
throughout   the  United   States.    Our   best  estimate  by  extra-
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
*  This  aspect  of  the  case  for  civil  defense  was  discreetly
passed  over  by  Kahn  in  his  own  testimony  before  the  Com-
mittee.    No   one  asked  him  what  he  would  regard  as  "an
undue  degree   of   accommodation"  in  the   Berlin  crisis.   As
this  issue  was  being  written, Premier  Khrushchov in  his  TV
address  of  August  8  said,  "I should  like  to  repeat  once  more
that  by  concluding  a  peace  treaty  with  the  GDR  [the   East
German  regime],   we   do  not  intend  to  infringe   upon  any
lawful  interests  of  the  Western  powers.    Barring  of   access
to  West  Berlin,  blockade  of  West  Berlin  is  entirely  out  of
question.    AH this  is  only  a  figment  of  imagination of  those
who  want  to  incandesce  the  atmosphere  in  order  to  prepare
war.  .  .  ."   The  issue  is  not  Berlin  but  whether  we  are pre-
pared,  by  dealing  with  the  GDR, to  give  it  de  facto  recog-
nition  and  with  that  to  recognize  the  division  of   Germany
and  its  present  boundaries.   This  issue  seems  to  us  to  call
for   discussion,   debate  and  negotiation,   not  muscle-flexing;
it  is  neither a  matter of  honor  nor  of  clear  national  interest
to  change   the  present   borders.    One  need  only  recall   two
world  wars  to  wonder  whether  a  united  Germany  is  to  the
real  interest  of  either  East  or  West.   These,  the  real  factors
of   decision,  are  passed  over  in  Kahn-style   gamesmanship.
1   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August lit, 1961
polation   from   pilot   surveys  made  in   the   past   is  that   this
program  will  identify  some  50  million  usable  shelter  spaces,
and   will   provide  a  minimum   of   shelter  for   approximately
one-fourth  of  our   population."
From   Incubation   to  Action
OCDM  Director  Ellis  expressed  it  more  pompously.   "As  a
result   of   the   intensive  planning,  research  and   technological
development   done  by  OCDM  and  others  over  the  past  years,"
he  told  the  hearing,  "shelter  is  now  ready  to  move  from  the
incubation  stage  to  the  action  stage,  beginning  logically  with
a  program  to  identify  and  make  use  of  the  shelter  potential
of  existing  buildings   (as  I  specifically   recommended  to  the
President).     As   a   result   of   sample   surveys  conducted   by
OCDM,  indications  are  that  about  one-fourth  of  our   people
could   be  adequately  sheltered   in   this  manner  very  quickly
and  at  minimum   expense."
This  warms  over  and  serves  up  again  some  very  dubious
figures  put   forward  by  Eisenhower's  OCDM   director,  Leo
A.  Hoegh,  more  than  a  year  ago.    He  told  the  Holifield  sub-
committee  in  March,   I960,  that  pilot   surveys  showed   "that
over  25  percent  of   the  U.S.   population   could   be  accommo-
dated   by   existing  shelter   space."     The   Holifield  committee
subjected   this  claim  to  devastating  analysis  in  the  report  it
filed  July  1  last  year  on  Civil  Defense   Shelter  Policy.    The
report  said   Governor   Hoegh's  estimate  was  based   on  pilot
surveys  of  existing  structures  in  only  four  areas:  Tulsa,  Okla.;
Montgomery,   Ala.;   Milwaukee,   Wis.;   and   part   of   Contra
Costa   County,  Calif.     In   examining  the   surveys  for   itself,
the  subcommittee  found  that  only  in  Tulsa  were  there   enough
shelter  spaces  for  25  percent  of  the  population.     The   spaces
in  Montgomery   were  only  enough   for   15  percent   and   those
in  Contra  Costa  County  for   71/2  percent  of   the   population.
The   Milwaukee  survey  was  limited  to   183  structures   in  a
20  block   area  and   provided   no  figures  for   the  whole  city.
The   committee   reported   that   "Governor   Hoegh's   oft-re-
peated   estimate  that  25  percent  of  the  U.S.  population  can
be  sheltered   in  existing  structures  is  not   borne   out   by   the
pilot   surveys";  that  these  constituted  too  small  a  sample  on
which   "to  base  a  firm  estimate  of  total  shelter  availability"
and  that  the  numbers  on  which  the  estimate  is  based   "fall
far   short  of  a  realistic  representation  of  existing  conditions"
since   they   refer   to   "unimproved   shelter   spaces"   and    "the
term  'unimproved'  refers  mainly  to  habitability, not  to shield-
ing   [against  radiation]."    "Moreover,"  .the  report   said,   "all
four   areas  surveyed  are   in   OCDM-designated    target   areas:
two  of  the  four  (Milwaukee  and  Contra   Costa   County)   are
Irrelevant  But  Vivid  Answer   Dept.
Mrs.   [Martha   W.]   GRIFFITHS   (D.   Midi.):  How
close  could   a   20-megaton   bomb  come   to   the   Empire
State   Building   and  still   have   it   remain   an  effective
shelter?
Civil  Defense  Director  [Frank  B.]  ELLIS:  Well,  that
is  a  scientific  question.    And  I  have  the  answer   to  it.
What  a  20-megaton  bomb  would  do  insofar  as  blasting
radiation   [sic]   is  concerned,   and  what  square  mile  it
would  affect,  Herman Kahn states  that  if  a  20-megaton
bomb  were  exploded  in  the  heart  of   Los  Angeles  and
a  man  was  standing  on  the  outskirts   of  a   California
town  20  miles  away  by  a  window, he  would  be  scorched
to   death.
—Holifield    bomb  shelter  hearings,  Aug.   2.
Herman   Kahnisms
Long  War   Man:  "In  the  Rand  Corporation  I  was
known  as  a  long  war  man  because  I  studied  wars  that
lasted  two  to  thirty  days.    That  was  long;  as  compared
with  the  wars  which  last   30  minutes  or  two  hours  or
eight   hours."
Some   People   Are   Never    Satisfied:    "It   should   be
possible   for  any   person   to   distinguish   between   wars
which   result,  say,   in  20  million  dead   Americans   and
wars   which  result  in  40  million  dead  Americans,   and
to  say  if  he  has  to  choose ...  he  prefers  a  war  in
which  there  would  be  20  million  dead  Americans.   Now
it  is  practically  possible  for  people   to  make  that  re-
mark,  you  know,  that   they  want  to  say,  'why   should
I  have  a  war  at  all.'"
Nixon   Corrected:   Nixon   was   wrong   in   saying   to
Khrushchov,  "We  must  live  together   or  die   together,"
Kahn  said,  "If  you  want  to  give   an  accurate  remark
you  must  start  by  saying  we  must  live  together  or  one
of  us  will  die."
Cheerful   News:   "You   have   arms   control   today   in
the  sense  that  neither  you  nor  the  Soviets  are  building
the   most   destructive   [weapons]  systems   possible,   as
far   as  we  know.    There   are  systems  which  could  be
built  which  we  are  not  building  simply  because   nobody
wants  to  own   them."
Concession:   "If   somebody   says,   'I  would  rather   be
Red  than  dead,'  he  is  a  coward,  and  I  think  very  prop-
erly  an  object  of  contempt  and  and  scorn.    If   somebody
says,  'I  would  rather  have  everybody  Red  than   every-
body  dead,' he  is  making  a  sort  of  a  reasonable  remark.
You  may  not  agree  with  it,  but  I  would  agree  with  it.
I  would  rather  have  everybody  Red  than  dead."
Joke:  "I  am  not,  of  course,  claiming   that  war,  you
know,   would  make   people   happier   or   more    normal."
—Herman  Kahn  at  the  Holifield   hearings,  Aug.  7.
in   so-called  critical  target   areas."     The   report   pointed   out
that  "in  the  event  of  a  nuclear  war,  structures  in  these  areas
are  apt  to  be  destroyed  or  severely  damaged."
The   subcommittee's  final  verdict  last  year  on  this   whole
program   is  still   applicable   to   the   program   as  refurbished
by  the  Kennedy  Administration.   "Undue  reliance,"  the  com-
mittee  concluded,   "on   existing  structures  which   afford   only
modest  shielding  creates  an  illusion  of  security  and  severely
understates  the  magnitude  of  the  civil  defense  requirements."
But   neither  Chairman   Holifield   nor   any   of   his   colleagues
challenged   these  same  estimates  when  put  forward  again  by
McNamara  and  Ellis.    Indeed  only  one  member  of  the  sub-
committee,   Mrs.   Martha   W.    Griffiths,   a   Democratic   Con-
gresswoman  from  Detroit,   put  sharp  questions  to  them.
No  one  questioned  McNamara   on  the  most  crucial  point
of   all.     He  said  "the   size  of  the   attack  we  are  presuming
here  is  a  very  large  attack"  but  no  one  pressed  him  for  spe-
cific   figures.   Yet  without   some   idea  of   the   size  and   char-
acter  of  the  assumed  attack  it  was  impossible  to  assess  the
amount  of  shelter  required  against  fallout  and  the  size  of  the
inescapable  casualties  from  blast   and   fire.   McNamara   said
10  to   15  million  lives   could   be  saved   by  his  program   but
he  did  not  say what  the  losses  would  be.    What  of  the   rest
of   the  45  to   50  million   people   in   these   marked   shelters?
Would  they  be  killed  by  blast  and   fire?   And  what  of   the
140 million  people who did  not  get  into  shelters?   How  many
of  them  did  his  computers  say  would  die?
At  one  point  McNamara   said  that  in  order   to  avoid   con-
fusing  the  planning  on  the  local  level  "it  would  be  wise  to
pick  an  attack  that  is  both  most  likely  and  also  the  largest—
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August H, 1961
and  I  believe   that  the  largest  is  the  most  likely—and   base
the   local  planning  on  that  assumption,"     Perhaps  the   com-
mittee  hesitated  to  draw  him  out  because  the  figures  would
be  so  horrifying  that  it  would  undercut  the  committee's  pur-
pose.     This  Holifield   committee   has   been   trying  for  years
to  sell  a  shelter  program.     But  casualties  of   the   immensity
involved  here  point  not  to  a  shelter  program  but  to  the  crim-
inal   insanity   of   not   doing   everything   humanly   possible   to
avoid  a  thermonuclear  war.
A  Grimmer  Picture  Inside  OCDM
Within   the   OCDM   itself   a  grimmer   picture  is   painted
than   the   one  given   in   the   hearings.     An   unclassified   but
unpublicized  study  (Shelter  OCDM-SA-61-12;  Operations  Re-
search  Office)   dated  June  of  this  year  studies  four  assumed
levels  of   attack  ranging  from   a  small   400   megaton   attack
to   a  large   23,000   megaton.     The   largest   attack,  assuming
no  protection   at  all,  would   kill   some   148  million   of   our
people,  or  about  80  percent.
McNamara   said  marking  existing  shelters  could  save  from
10  to  15  million  lives,  but  a  more  optimistic  estimate  came
from   a  later  witness,  Rogers  Cannell,  director  of  the  Emer-
gency   Planning   Research   Center   of   the   Stanford   Research
Institute,  consultant   to  OCDM  and  to  Adam  Yarmolinsky,
the   official   in  charge  at  Defense   Department.     Cannell   said
from  15  to  35  million  people  could  be  saved  by  the  program
of  marking  existing  shelter.     But  the  OCDM  report  for  in-
side  distribution  says,   "The   number   of   survivors  added   by
marking  would  amount  to  3  to  18  million."     The  best  esti-
mate  in  the  OCDM  report  is  that  when   "survivors   in  base-
ment  at  random"   are  added,  about  35  percent  of  our  people
(or   65  million)   would   emerge  after   it  was  over  while  65
percent   (or   120  million)   would   die.
To  get  the  benefit  of  this  marking  program,  people  would
have  to  be  swift,  daring   and   lucky.    Why   swift?     When
Mrs.   Griffiths   asked  McNamara   whether  his  program   would
provide  "a  sufficient   shelter  under  a  very  heavy  attack,"   the
Secretary   of   Defense   replied,   "It   depends   on   how   much
radiation  they  have  absorbed  prior  to  the  time  they  reached
the   shelter.     But   assuming   they  have   absorbed   very   little,
yes."   Why  daring?   Because  the  existing  shelter  is  in  large
public  and   commercial   buildings   in  the   heart  of   our   great
cities.    In  those  cities  which  were  hit  by  bombs,  these  build-
ings  would  be  death  traps,  not  shelters.    The  buildings  pro-
vide    shielding   against    fallout    when    bombs    have    fallen
elsewhere;  they  would  become  human  incinerators under  direct
attack.   This  led  Mrs.  Griffiths  to  point  out  at  the  close  of  the
McNamara   hearing   that   the  Detroit   district  she   represents
How  to  Be  (Relatively)  Lucky
".  .  .  .  in  areas  of  relatively  heavy  fallout   [after  a
thermonuclear  attack],  the  ingestion  of  all  the  fallout
on  one  square  foot   at  one  week  after  the  fallout  oc-
curred  might  be  sufficient   to  cause  death  to  adults  or
children  due to  irradiation  of  the  gastro-intestinal tract.
Fresh   milk   might   be   so   heavily   contaminated  with
Iodine-131   that   a   single   pint   would   contain  enough
activity  to  destroy  an  infant's  thyroid  gland.
"On  the  other  hand,  in  dealing  with  this  situation
we  will  have  to  give  up  for  the  time  being  and perhaps
for   a   generation  or  so   the   peacetime  radiation pro-
tection  criteria  geared  to  the  proposition of  reducing
the  possibility of  even  delayed injury  to  close  to  zero.
We   would  expect   that   the   incidence   of   leukemia   in
the  surviving  population  would  be  increased, probably
by  a  factor of  several  for  a  few  decades  and then taper
off.   A  similar  increase  in  bone  cancer  (but  a  smaller
number  of  cases)   might  appear  later  as   a  result   of
the  unavoidable  ingestion  of  strontium-90  in  food  over
the  ensuing  years.
"Neither  condition,  I  hasten  to  add,  would be  likely
to  become  a  principal  cause  of  death.    It  is  unlikely
that  even  leukemia  would  become  as  common  as  fatal
diphtheria  was   in  1900,  or  scarlet  fever  or  whooping
cough.     It   would   also   be   possible   that   a  relatively
high  incidence  of  thyroid  cancer  would  occur  in  those
who  had  been  infants or small children  at  the  time  and
who  had  inadvertently ingested  appreciable quantities
of  radio-iodine.
"When  compared  to  the  immediate  deaths   and  in-
juries  from  blast  and  fire  which  would  wipe  out  tens
of   millions  of   people,  these   delayed  effects,  although
they  might  involve  several  hundred thousand  persons,
over  a  number  of  years  would  be  relatively small.  .  .  ."
—Dr.  Charles  L.  Dunham,  director  Division  of  Biol-
ogy  and  Medicine,  AEC,   testifying   August   It  before    the
Holifield   shelter  hearings.   Dr.  Dunham,  who   strongly
resembles   Dr.  Pangloss  in   Voltaire's    Candide   in  his
capacity  for  finding  everything   for  the  best    (relatively)
in  this  (relatively)    best  of  all  possible  worlds,  may  be
remembered   from   his  optimistic    testimony   in   earlier
years  on  the  fallout   problem.   Dr.  Dunham  was  a  lead-
ing  spokesman  for  the  AEC's    radiation-is-good-for-you
thesis   (relatively,    that    is).
has  not  a  single  building  adequate  for  shelter,  that  her  people
are  8  to  15  miles  from  shelter   in  downtown   Detroit    "and
I   doubt   if   you  could   get   those   people   back   down   into   a
shelter,  or  if  anybody  in  his  right  mind  at  the  head  of   the
line   would   be  willing   to  try  for   the   interior  of   Detroit."
To  make  for  shelter  in  the  central  city,  if  it  was  still   there,
would  be to  gamble  that  Detroit  itself  would  not  be  hit  next.
Why   lucky?    This  brings   up  another   point  brought   out
Why  No  "Knowledgeable,  Intelligent"  Person  Need  Be  Seriously   Hurt  by  H-Bomb
"Survival  depends  on  how  much  this  man  has  found  out
about  weapons  effects,  about  the  precaution he  takes,  and
above  all  what  he  has  actually done.   For  instance  a  shelter
with  a  shielding factor of  100 makes  the  radiation tolerable.
Because  of  the  slower  rate  of  delivery  of  thermal  energy
from  the  high  yield  weapons,  he  can  reduce effectively   the
number  of  calories hitting him  if  he  ducks behind something
opaque.    After  a  few  seconds  the  bulk  of  the  thermal  en-
ergy   will  have  been  emitted  and  he  then  has   about   two
minutes  to  get  to  a  place  where  he'll  be  safe  from  flying
glass  and  other  missiles  created  by  the  blast  wave  which
travels  at  the  speed  of  sound.   Depending  on  the  meteoro-
logical  conditions,  of  course,  the  fallout  could  be  expected
to  arrive  in   around  20  minutes  to   an  hour  and  continue
to  fall  for  about  2  to  6  hours.    Thus  it  can  be  seen  that
the  effects  of  a  detonation  of  20  megatons  as  experienced
at  25  miles  do  not  confront  our  man  simultaneously.   If  he
knows  the  sequence  of   events,   and  if   he  knows  what  he
has  to  do  to  survive,  he  has  time  to  act.    He  does  have
to  act  correctly   the  first  time  or  take  the   consequences.
"At  such  distances  few  knowledgeable,  intelligent   people
need  be  hurt  seriously."
—R.  L.   Corsbie,  deputy   director,   biology  and   medicine,
AEC,   testifying    on  "The   Effects     of   Nuclear    Explosions"
before   the  Holifield    civil  defense   hearings,  Aug.   4.
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  14,1961
New  Delusion:  Evacuating  People  Into,  Instead  of  Out  of,  the  Cities
by  Mrs. Griffiths.     Many  months  ago  OCDM  gave  up   the
once  highly  advertised  idea  of  evacuating  cities;  there  simply
is  not  warning  time  enough.    People  in  the  open  countryside,
even  if  they  reached  it,  would  escape  death  from  blast  and
fire  storm   only  to  risk  death   from   fallout.     But   this   new
marking   program   rests   on   the   obverse   of   the   evacuation
fallacy,   on  what  might  be  called   evacuation  inward   instead
of  outward.    To  get  the  benefit   of  exisiting  shelter   in   the
downtown  areas,  millions  of  people  from  the  outlying  home
and  suburban  districts  would  have  to  be  brought  into  the  city.
This  colloquy  occurred:
Mrs.  Griffiths:  Do  you  think  that   the  rush  back  to  the
city  would  be  any  more  practical  than  the  rush  out?
Mr.   McNantara:  Yes.   The  rush  out   from   the  city   is
[im?] practical  simply   because   of   the  time.    The   possi-
bilities  of  obtaining  sufficient  warning  time  to  permit  evac-
uation  are  very  low, in  my  opinion.    But  the  possibilities
of   obtaining   time  to  move  into  the  marked  shelters  are
very  high,   and  certainly   warrant  the  very,   very  low   ex-
pense  of  marking  and  stocking  the  shelters.
Cheai>—And  Not  Worth  Much
To   say  that   the   program   "warrants   the   very,  very  low
expense  of  marking  and  stocking  the  shelters"   seems  weakly
to  admit  that  these  shelters  and  the  chances  of  reaching  them
aren't   worth   too  much.    "What   if   the   attack   occurred   at
night?,"  when  most  people  are  out  of  the  center  city, Mrs.
Griffiths   asked.     "Approximately   the   same   number,"    Mc-
Namara    replied    would    be   saved.    It    takes   little   imag-
ination    to   envision   the   panic,    the   jammed    streets,    the
abandoned  subways.   By day  or  night,  how  would  the  shelter
spaces  be  apportioned?    When   would   the   doors   be  shut?
How  would  the  mobs  left  out  be  controlled?    And  who  can
believe  that  the  great  cities  would  not  be  hit,  the  basic  as-
sumption  of  this  whole  program' ? •  The  OCDM  study  already
referred  to  says  our  ten  largest  urban  areas  contain  35  percent
of  our  manufacturing  capacity  and  25  percent  of  our  people;
the  100  largest,  two-thirds of  our  manufacturing capacity  and
one-half  our  people.    What  folly  to  assume  that  people  can
find  shelter  in  these  prime  targets!    On   the  second  day  of
the  hearings  there  was  this  exchange  with  Ellis:
Mrs.   Griffiths:   I  would  like  to  ask  you  if   this  shelter
program  is  for  all  practical  purposes  a  tacit  abandonment
of  the  hit  cities?
Specify     Which   Issue   in  Sending   Stamped   LONG
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
City   ................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ............
City  ...............
Shall  we  send
S  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15.  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
...................... ...Zone..... .......State....................
8/14/61
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
........................ ..Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
More  Reassuring  All  the  Time
"In  the  proposal   for  furnishing  food   [to  shelters]
.  .  .  here  is  an  area  in  which  it  might  be  reasonable
to  propose ...  a  large  element  of  self-help  .  .  • these
people   have  to  feed   themselves   anyway.  .  .  .
"I   notice   the   5-day   provision   there   [in    Secretary
McNamara's   statement]—of   course,   5   days,   I   think
two   weeks   would  be   nearer   the   time   that   might   be
required,   particularly   in  heavy   [fallout]   areas.   .  .  .
However  I  am  also  aware  of  the  fact  that  recent  tests
have  shown  that  people  can  live  for  30  days  without
food  if  they  have  plenty  of   water."
—Rep.   Holifield,    Civil   Defense    hearings,  Aug. 1.
Mr.  Ellis:  I  would  not  say  so.    I  would  say  that   every-
thing  has  to  have  a  beginning.
Mrs.  Griffiths:  I  would  agree  with  you that  it  is  a  begin-
ning.    But  I  would  like  to  point  out  to  you  that  a  shelter
program  that  is  not  fully  available  to  all  is,  for  practical
purposes,  a  selective  shelter  program.    That  is  at  3  o'clock
in  the   morning   in  every   major  city   in   America,   if   the
best   shelters   are   large   downtown   buildings,   the   people
that   you  will  save   will  be  skid   row  drunks,   prostitutes,
a  few  people  in   hospitals.
Mr.  Ellis: Yes.
Mrs.   Griffiths:   Maybe,  the   night   shift   on   newspapers.
OCDM  Director  Ellis,  the  stiffener  of  the  National  Will,
is  a  cheerful  fellow.    When  Holifield   asked  him  whether   the
Kennedy  program  like  Eisenhower's would  still  depend  largely
on  the  states  and  local  governments  to  finance  shelters,  Ellis
ducked  the  question  and  went  into  a pun  we  could  do without.
He   said   the  Federal  government   might   match   funds   spent
by  hospitals  and  said  the  Hotel  Dieu  in  New  Orleans   "oper-
ated  by  the  Sisters  down  there"  wanted  OCDM  to  put   up
50  percent   of  the  money  for  "a  tremendous   annex."     Ellis
said  no  funds   or  authority  for   such  help  was  available  but
suggested   such  a  program   "probably   in  church  construction
throughout   the   nation  [for  shelters],    coupled   with   a   real
church  revival  in  the  area  of  survival  and, coining  a  phrase,
you  would   have  a  revival  for   survival  in  America."     Our
country's  destiny  could   not  be  entrusted   to  a  gayer   fellow.
I  will  have  more  to  report  on  these  hearings  next  week.
I  want  only  to  say  now  that  I  cannot  find  words  to  express
the  anguish  I  felt  in  working  on  this  story.    It  was  as  if  I
were  watching  a  lunatic  nightmare.
Envelopes  for   Free  Sample   Copies   to   Friends
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every   Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail  rates:   (15   to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED