I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961mar20.pdf

============================================================

From  Nkrumab's   "Suppressed"    Speech  on Lumumba, Pps. 2-3
Kennedy's  Latin  American  Program  Inadequate  in  Size,  Machinery  and  Conception,  Pages  1  and  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,   NO.  10
MARCH  20,   1961
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Speaking  Loudly,  But  Carrying  A  Twig
Like  Mr.   Kennedy's   other   economic   messages,   his  long
awaited   Latin   American   program   turned   out,   when   un-
wrapped  from  its  tinsel,  to  be warmed-over Eisenhower.   The
strategy  of  keeping  his  actual  legislative  demands  to  a  bare
minimum   is  understandable  in   view  of   the   Congress   with
which  the  new  President  has  to  deal.    But  the  disparity  be-
tween  the  rhetoric  and  program  is  beginning  to  give  these
performances  a  distinct  flavor  of  the  mock  heroic.    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  strides  out  on  the  field  of  battle  declaiming  in  high  and
urgent  tones,  but  brandishing  no  more  than  a  twig.     Since
he  dare  not  wound  and  must  instead  cajole  the   Congressional
dragon,  it  would  be  better  if  our  St.  George  began  to  adapt
his   prose  style  to   his   humble   necessities.     At   home   these
realities  are  so  well  understood  that  the  wide  gap   between
advance  announcement   and  product  is  taken  for  granted  as
it  is  in  any  form  of  advertising  copy.    But  in  Latin  America,
which  expected  a  new  era  with  the  new  President,  this  pro-
gram  will  be  dangerously  disillusioning,  and  there  Mr.  Ken-
nedy  has  competition.    He  has  to  produce  a  product  to  com-
pete  with  the  hopes  aroused  by  Castroism.    And  though  few
Americans  will   be  aware  of   it—for   Latin   America  is   still
the  stepchild  of  our  concerns—our  neighbors  will  recognize
at  once  that  this alianza  para  progreso  boils  down  to  the  same
meagre  fare  cooked  up  hastily  by  Mr.  Eisenhower's  banker
advisers  at  the  Bogota  conference.
A  Revolutionary   Measure  of  Our Own
To  see this  program  as  our  neighbors  will  see  it,  one  must
take  a  good   look   at  the   agency   which   will  administer   the
bulk  of  the  new  program.    This  is  the  Inter-American  De-
velopment   Bank.    In   1959   after   Castro   had   launched   the
most   complete  agrarian   reform  the   land  hungry   masses  of
Latin   America  have   ever   known,   we   finally   rushed   steps
to  match  him  with  a  revolutionary   step  of  our  own—a  bank.
Ever  since   1889,   Latin  America  has  been  trying  to   sell  us
the  idea  of  establishing  an  Inter-American  Development  Bank.
It  took  the  threat  of  Castroism  to  give  this  project  the  neces-
sary  push.    In  June,  1959,   hearings  were  finally  held  and  it
went   through   Congress   with   the   support   of   such   radical
organizations  as  the  American  Bankers  Association  and   the
U.S.   Council  of   the   International   Chamber   of    Commerce.
As  a  concession  to  our  hungry  friends  to  the  south,  a   "Spe-
cial  Operations"  till  of  $150,000,000  in  soft  currency  loans
was  provided  but  the  rest  of  the  $1  billion  in  capital  was  to
be  loaned  out  on  a  sound  banking  basis  for  social   purposes
not  attractive  to  private  business  investment  and  for  technical
assistance  in  planning  other  projects  in  which  private  investors
would  be  interested.    The  underlying   purpose  was  to  create
a  better  climate  for  private  investment   in  Latin   America.
Only  $400,000,000  was  actually  to  be  paid  in  capital;  the
Latin  Aid  in  Safe  Hands
^Senator  MORSE:  I  want  to  say  clearly  that  I  very
much  favor  the  development  of  the  private  enterprise
system.  .  .  .  Yet we have  this  very  delicate  matter .  .  .
in  some  areas  of  Latin  America  a  domestic  policy  for
the  development  of  natural resources,  particularly oil—
in  some  instances  also  power. .  .  .  Where  a government
monopoly  exists,  whether  it  is  PEMEX  in  Mexico  or
whether  it  is  the  government  oil  monopoly  in  Brazil,
is  there  any  reason ...  to  fear  that  we  would  take
the  position  of  insisting  that  this  Inter-American  Bank
follow  the  policy  of  our own Government .  .  .  tliat  as
a  matter  of  national policy,  we  have not  favored direct
American  loans   to  the  development  of  these  govern-
ment  facilities?  .  .  .
Mr.   [T.   Graydon]  UPTON   [vice-president   of   the
foreign  department  of  the  Philadelphia National Bank
1950-58,  then Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, now
vice-president    of    the    Inter-American    Development
Bank]:  There  is  nothing  in  the  charter  of  the  Bank
that  would  prohibit  per  se  loans  to  any  particular type
of   enterprise.     However ...  we  think   that   private
capital  has  been  and  is  available  for  petroleum  oper-
ations  where  conditions are favorable. .  .  . Accordingly
we  would  question  whether   loans  for  these  kinds  of
operations  would  be  appropriate. ...
—Testimony  June  23,  1959,  before   the  Senate   For-
eign  Relations   Committee  on  the  Inter-American   De-
velopment  Bank,  which  will  now  administer   the  bulk
of    Kennedy's   new   aid   program   for   Latin   America.
rest   was  to  be   raised   on   the   private   money  market   with
$450,000,000  in  callable  capital  providing  the  investor  with
a  guarantee.    By tying  the  Bank's  operations  so  closely  to  the
money   market,   Latin   America  was  to   be  taught   a   lesson.
As   Dean   Acheson   told   the   House   Banking  and   Currency
Committee,  in  the  tone  of  a  schoolmarm  discussing  a  recalci-
trant  pupil,  "The   foreign  investor  is  not  encouraged  by  the
knout  in  the  hand  of  the  nationalist   demagogue.     Since  the
Bank's  success  in  expanding  the   resources   available   for  de-
velopment   loans  will   depend   on  its  ability  to  sell  its  own
securities  to  the  investing  public,  Latin  Americans—through
the  Bank—will  have  the  clearest  possible   demonstration  of
the   effect   of  their  conduct   upon   their  credit."    By  this  in-
genious   device,  the  landless   peon  was  to  be  taught  to  think
like  a  National   City  Bank  vice-president.
The  purpose  of  the  Bank,  as the  Hon.  T.  Graydon  Upton,
then  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  told  the  Senate  For-
eign  Relations  Committee  was  to  assist  Latin  American   coun-
tries  "in  mobilizing  their  own  resources  and  in  encouraging
domestic  and  foreign   private   capital   to  undertake   desirable
investments."    To   make   sure  that   this   institution   did   not
somehow  turn  sans  culotte,  Elsenhower's   friend,  Robert   Cut-
(Continiied   on  Page  Four)
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  March  SO, 1961
In  A UN  Speech the  U.S.  Press  Found Unfit  to  Print, Ghana's Nkrumah  . . .
While  President  Nkrumah  of  Ghana  was  treated  as  a
hero  in Washington, his  speech  to  the  UN  General  Assem-
bly  March  7  was  all  but   blacked  out  by  the   U.S.  press,
though—perhaps  because—it  threw  much new  light  on  the
way  the  Lumumba  regime  in  the  Congo  was   overthrown
and  Lumurnba  murdered.   Since  no  newspaper  in  the  U.S.
printed  the  text  or  an  adequate  summary,  we  provide  for
our  readers  on  these  two  pages  some  of  the    significant
passages  from  the  speech.
The   Force  Publique—Nkrumah   said  the   Force   Publique,
since  renamed  the  Congolese  National  Army,  has  "a  70-year
history  of  brutality"  which  goes  back  to  its  establishment  by
Leopold   II.     Nkrumah   warned  Hammarskjold   as  early  as
July  21,  I960,  and  Lumumba  six  days  later  that  the  United
Nations  "must   bring  this  disorganized  army  under   effective
control."     "It   is   impossible,"   Nkrumah   told   the   General
Assembly  last  week,"  for  a  country  like  the   Congo  to  be
ruled  by  a  military organization steeped  in  a  colonialist  tradi-
tion  of  brutality and  organized  for  the  purpose  of  suppressing
popular  liberties  in  an  inhuman  fashion."
The  UN  and  Mobutu—"Instead  of  disarming  this  force,"
Nkrumah  went  on,  "the  UN  stood  by  passively  while  Parlia-
ment  was  prevented  from  meeting  by  Mobutu   in  command
of  a  band  of  mutineers .  .  .  Mobutu  claimed  to  have  deposed
both   President   Kasa-Vubu  and   the   government   of   Patrice
Lumumba. ...  He had no  possible  claim  to  exercise  any legal
authority.    Nevertheless,  the  UN  authorities  in  Leopoldville
collaborated  with   his   so-called   College  of   Commissioners."
How  Mobutu  Paid  His  Soldiers—The  UN  set  up  a  Mone-
tary  Council.    Mobutu's  Finance  Commissioner,  Ndele,  was
given  a  seat  on  the  Council.  "Look  what  happens,"   Nkrumah
told  the  General  Assembly.    "Mutinous   soldiers  in  Leopold-
ville  paralyze  the   legitimate   government.     What   does   the
UN   Command   do?     Its   officials   sit   down   with   Ndele,   a
nominee  of  the  mutineers.   The  Monetary  Council,  the  key  to
the  control  of  the  Congo  administration,  is  put  in  the  hands
of  the  rebels.    Thus,  the  UN  Command  in  the  Congo  gave
Mobutu  complete  control  over  the  finances  of  the  States  and
put  him  in  a  position  to  hire  mercenaries  to  harass  and  arrest
the  political  leaders  of  the  Congolese  people.  .  .  . The  Com-
mand  actually  contributed  250  million  frances  .  .  .  instead
of   suppressing  the  mutiny  of  the  Force  Publique,  the   UN
actually  paid  for   it."
The   Congo  and  Katanga—Nkrumah   said  that  when   the
Behind   the   Mask   of   Ideological  Conflict
"One  of  the  most  dangerous  features  of  the  Congo
situation  is  that   one  section   of  the  people  has  been
influenced   to  oppose  the  other  on  ideological  grounds
which  are  by  no  means  understood  by  those  who  are
persuaded  to  act  in  accordance  with  them.   This  is  by
no  means  the  first  time  that  there  has  been  an  ideo-
logical  conflict   in  Africa.
"For    example,  in  the   1890's  there   were  the   most
serious  religious  wars  in  Uganda  between  Protestants
and  Roman Catholics.   By  a  curious  coincidence it  hap-
pened   that   the   Protestant   party   favored  the  United
Kingdom's  taking  over  Uganda  while  the  Roman Cath-
olic  party  favored  France.   The  press  at  that  time  in
the   United  Kingdom  and   in  France   became   inflamed
with  accounts  of  the  religious  persecution  of  the  rival
Christian   factions.    The   French   government   concen-
trated  on  the  injury  to  the  Catholics  while  the  United
Kingdom  newspapers   were  almost  unanimous   in  their
belief  that  the Protestants  were the real  sufferers.  . . .
"The  example  of  Uganda  should  be  a  lesson  to  us
all  that  ideological  disputes  have  often  concealed  more
practical   colonial   aspirations.   I   suggest,    therefore,
that   there  should  be  an  end  to  the  intrigues   in  the
Congo,  and  that  all  missions, including  those  of  African
• States,  should  be  withdrawn  so  that  there  is  only  one
centre   of  outside  influence—the   United  Nations."
—Nkrumah  to  the  General Assembly,  March  7
Congo   became  independent,   it   inherited   a  public   debt   of
roughly   350   million   pounds   sterling    (about   $1   billion).
The  servicing  and  redemption  of  this  debt  took  one-fourth
the  annual  budget.    The  greater  part  of  this  debt  had  been
incurred  in  developing  Katanga  province  so  that  it  could  be
exploited  profitably  by  Union  Miniere  and  other  large  enter-
prises.    In  return  for  this  debt,  the  Congo  government  in-
herited   "a  portfolio  of   some  240  pounds  sterling  of   assets
which  were  mainly  situated  in  Katanga  and  which  included
a  large  holding  in  Union  Miniere."    If  the  new  government
was  to  discharge  its  obligations,  it  had  to  have  control  over
Katanga  "in  which  the  assets  were  situated   and  which   pro-
vided  60  percent   of  the  national  revenue."     This  .was   lost
to  it  almost  immediately  by  the  secession  of  Katanga  under
Tshombe  and  his  Belgian  advisers.
How  Belgians  Fixed  the  Bank—The  Central  Government's
only  recourse  was  borrowing  from   the  Central  Bank.     But
Nkrumah's  Criticism  of  the  UN  in the Murder  of Patrice Lumumba
"History  recalls  many   occasions  when  rulers  of  States
have   been   done   to  death.    The   assassination   of  Patrice
Lumumba,  however,  is  unique  in  that  this  is  the  first  time
in  history  that   the  ruler  of  a  country   has   been   killed  in
the  very  presence  of  United  Nations  forces  which  he  him-
self   had  invited  to  his  country  to  restore  law  and  order.
That   such   a   thing  could  have   happened    must   make   all
those  of  us  who believe  in  the  United  Nations  anxious  about
its   future.  .  .  .  The United   Nations  cannot   restore law
and  order  in  the  Congo  if  it  takes  a  neutral  position  be-
tween  order  and disorder. ...
"Representatives   will   recall   that,   at   one  stage  in   the
affairs  of  the  Congo,  the  UN  authorities   on  the  spot   con-
sidered  that   their   mandate  of  non-interference   in  the   in-
ternal   affairs   of  the   Congo  nevertheless   entitled   them   to
prevent  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  Congo, Patrice Lumumba,
from   broadcasting  at   Leopoldville  radio  station.    He   was,
in  fact,  forcibly  prevented  from  doing  so  by  the   Ghanaian
troops  under  UN command. . . .
"The  Government  of  Ghana  considered   that  the   action
of  the  United  Nations  was  a  most  improper  interference  in
the  internal  affairs  of  the  Congo and  an  abuse  of  the  powers
granted  to  the  UN  forces  by  the  Security  Council.
"However  that  may  be,  one  must  ask  this  question.    If
it  was proper  for  Ghanaian troops  to  stop  Patrice  Lumumba
from  broadcasting  at  Leopoldville,  why  was  it  not  equally
proper  for  Swedish  troops  at  Elisabethville  airport   to  in-
tervene  to  save  Lumumba's life?    Why  were  the  Ghanaian
troops at  Port  Franqui  forbidden  to intervene to  prevent  the
arrest  of  Lumumba  by  the  Force  Publique?    How  was  it
possible  to  argue  that  the  UN  had  authority  to  prevent
Lumumba  from  broadcasting,  yet  lacked  authority  to  pre-
vent  him  from   being  murdered?"
—President  Nkrumah   to  the  General Assembly,  March  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F\  Stone'sJWeekly,   March  20, 1961
The  Common  Market  and  the  Congo
"It  is   rumored   [according  to  the   London  Financial
Times  of  Feb.  25]  that  the  European  Common  Market
countries  [of  which  Belgium  is  a  member]  are  about
to  extend  substantial  credits  to  the  Congo,  perhaps  as
much  as  3,000,000  German  marks.   What  has  happened
to  the  principle,  so  widely  canvassed  in  theory,  that
all   aid  should  be  channeled  through  the   United  Na-
tions?     Some   little  time  ago,   Mr.  Adlai   Stevenson
wrote  an  article  in  the  London  Sunday Times  in  which
he   pointed   out   the   absolute  madness  of  partitioning
Africa  economically  on  the  pattern  established  in  Eu-
rope.     Why,   indeed,   should   the   Congo   be   attached
economically   to  the  Common  Market?    Only  one  valid
reason  for  this  exists:  the  maintenance  of   Belgium's
financial  interests.    Yet  all  this  is  going  on  under  the
shadow   of   the   UN,   and  apparently   with  the   active
participation   of   the   UN's   experts."
—Nkrumah  to  the  General Assembly,  March  7
... Lifted the Curtain on How Lumumba Was Overthrown and Then Murdered
effective  control  of  this  had  passed  to  the  Belgian  National
Bank.     "In   the   months   before   independence,"    Nkrumah
said,   "the   Belgian   government   allowed   an   unprecedented
flight  of   capital  from  the  Congo   to  take  place.    In   conse-
quence,  the  Congo  Central  Bank  found  itself  unable  to  meet
its  obligations.   The  Belgian  National  Bank  thereupon  agreed
to   guarantee   the   Central   Congo   Bank   on   two   conditions.
First,   the   Central   Bank's  total   gold   and   currency   reserves
were  to  be  removed  from  the  Congo  and  lodged  in  Belgium.
Secondly,  the  monetary  policy  of   the   Central   Bank   was  to
be  agreed  with  the  Belgian  National   Bank."
The   Squeeze   on  Lumumba—When   Lumumba   took   over,
revenue  (thanks  largely  to  the  secession  of  Katanga)   was
only  one-tenth  of  what  it  had  been  while  essential   expendi-
tures  were  still  two-thirds  of  the  original   figure.   The   gov-
ernment  asked  for  advances  from  the  Central  Bank  but  the
Belg'an  National   Bank   refused   to   allow   this.     Lumumba
was  unable   to  pay  his  soldiers.     But  when   Mobutu  led  a
revolt  of   the  army,  the  Monetary   Council  was  set  up,   the
Central  Bank  was  allowed  to  raise  the  ceiling  on  its  advances
to  the  Congo  government,  now  in  the  hands  of  Mobutu,  and
the  UN  advanced  him  250  million  francs.   Now  a  new  Na-
tional  Bank  is  being  set  up  in  the  Congo.    According  to  the
London  Times   of  Feb.   25,  Ndele,  Mobutu's  financial  com-
missioner,  is  to  be  the  head  of  this  bank.    The  same  news-
paper  account  as  cited  by  Nkrumah   says  "experts   from   the
International  Monetary  Fund  who  were  present  at  the  forma-
tion  of  the  new  Bank  today  are  known   to  favor   immediate
budgetary   aid  for  the  Congo  from   the  UN   Congo   fund."
Nkrumah  said  this  constituted   "a  golden  handshake"  for  the
group  responsible  for  the  death  of  Lumumba.
Africa   Sacrified   Again  to  the  Quarrels  of  Outside  Powers—
"It   has  been   said,"  Nkrumah  told   the  General   Assembly,
"that  history  repeats  itself,  first  as  tragedy  and  then  as  farce.
We  must  make  certain  that  we  do  not  repeat  as  a  farce  the
tragedy  which  befell  Africa  as  the  result   of  the  Berlin   con-
ference   of   1885.     This  Conference  was  called  to  solve  the
problems   of   the   Congo."     Fourteen   leading   nations   were
represented  including   the   U.S.,   Britain,  Russia  and   France,
who  now make  up  four  of  the five permanent  members  of  the
Security  Council.    "The  only  interested  parties  not  represented
were  the  inhabitants  of  Africa  -whose  welfare  and  progress,"
Nkrumah  continued,  "it  was the  ostensible  object  of  the  Con-
ference   to  assist."    The   purpose   was  to   "exclude   colonial
rivalry—the  cold   war  of  those   days—by  friendly   agreement
on  how  the   Continent   should   be  divided   up."      Nkrumah
declared  that  the  Berlin  conference   "ushered  in  for   Africa
an  era  of  unparalleled   colonial  oppression."    He  called  on
the  UN   to   make  sure,  by  acting   only   in   full   consultation
with  the  African  States,  that  we  do  not  "repeat  in  the  Twen-
tieth  Century  the  errors  and  follies  of  the  Nineteenth."
Dismemberment    of    the   Congo—"In   the   same   way   as
Africa  was  broken  up  into  colonies  by  the  great   Powers   in
their  own  interests,"  Nkrumah   warned,  "so  today  the  Congo
is  in  danger  of  being fragmented   into  small states—the clients
of  one  or  the  other  of  the  great  Powers.    There  is  danger  of
this  being  done,  either  directly,  as  in  the  case  of  the  separatist
movement   in  Katanga,   or  indirectly  by  means  of  federation
imposed   through   outside  pressure  which   might   dismember
the  Congo  as  effectively  as  if  it  had  been  formally  partitioned
into  separate  states."    That  is  exactly  the  direction  in  which
the  Madagascar  conference  has  moved  since  Nkrumah   spoke.
On  the  Double Standard Applied by  the
"At  one  time  the  UN  authorities  interpreted  their  man-
date   as   giving  them   power  to  close   the   airfields   of   the
Congo  so  as  to  prevent   the   Lumumba   government   from
moving  troops  to  put  down the  rebellious  forces  in  Katanga
Province  despite  the  fact  that  the   Secretary   General  had
given  an  explicit  undertaking  that  the  Central Government
would  not   be  hindered  in  any  way   in  using   its   own  re-
sources  to  restore  law  and  order.
"In  contrast to  this,  the  UN  authorities on the  spot  appar-
ently  had  no  authority  to  seize   the  military  aircraft  de-
livered   to   Tshombe   by   a   U.S.   aircraft.    These   aircraft
were' apparently  a  part  of  a  consignment  of  aircraft  being
provided  to  Belgium  under the  auspices  of  the  NATO  treaty.
It  is  now  known  that  they  were  manufactured  in   France
and   that   the   aircraft   carrying  them  to  Katanga  stopped
in  Malta  for  some  days  for  repairs.  .  .  .
"I   ask  representatives  to   pause  for   a  moment  and   to
imagine  what  type  of  speeches  would  have  been   made  in
this  Assembly  if  these  aircraft   had  been  manufactured in
Czechoslovakia  for  Poland,  under  the  terms  of  the  Warsaw
UN  in  Its  Control of  the  Congo Airports
Pact,  and  then  had  been  delivered  to  Stanleyville  in  Soviet
aircraft   which  had   stopped  for   repairs   and   refitting  in
Rumania  on  its  way   out.
"It   is   not  in  dispute  that  these   aircraft  were   part  of
the  Belgian  order  placed  under  the  auspices  of  NATO,    It
is  not  disputed that  they  are  normally  fitted  with  7.5 milli-
metre  machine  guns  and  racks  for  55-pound air-to-ground
rockets  and two  110-pound  bombs.   Yet  the  delivery  of  these
aircraft  would  apparently never  have  come  to  the  attention
of  the  UN  if  the  affair  had  not  been  subject  to  presa pub-
licity.  .  .  .
"It  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  understand how  it  was  that
the  mandate  of  the  Security  Council  apparently  was   suffi-
cient   to  authorize  UN   troops  to  close   the   airfields  when
the   Government   of   Patrice  Lumumba   wished  to   use   the
airfields  to  move troops  against  Katanga,  and yet  the  man-
date   was   not   sufficient   to   prevent   the   Katanga   airfield
being  used  for  the  open  landing  of   Belgian  military  air-
craft  for  the  use  of  the  Katanga  forces?"
—President  Nkrumah  to  the  General  Assembly,   March  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  March  20,  1961
Is  This  "A  Vast  Effort,  Unparalleled  in  Magnitude  and  Nobility"?
(Continued  from   Page One)
let,  the  Boston  banker,  out  of  Old  Colony  Trust,  was  made
president.    Mr.  Upton,  who  had  been  vice  president   of  the
foreign  department  of  the  Philadelphia  National  Bank  before
going  to  the  Treasury,  was  made  vice-president.    Under  such
circumspect   direction,  the  Bank's  first  five  months  of   oper-
ations  have  been  marked  by an  exemplary freedom  from  hasty
action.    It  has made  only  two  loans—one  hard  money  loan  of
$3,900,000   at  5%   percent  to  Arequipa,  Peru,  for   a  water
system   and   a  $10,000,000   loan   at  41/2 percent   out   of   its
"Special   Operations"   till   to   hard-pressed   Bolivia.     These
driblets  and  their  interest  rates  will  be  compared   elsewhere
in  the  hemisphere  with  the  $100,000,000  10-year  credit  for
petroleum   development  machinery  which  the  Russians  gave
Argentina  at  2l/
2
  percent.
If   Only  They'll  Be  Patient
It  is to this  sedate institution that  Mr.  Eisenhower at  Bogota
last  year  proposed   to  assign  the   task  of   administering   his
new  Latin  American  aid  program,  and  thus  to  fight  the  in-
roads  of  Castroism in  the  hemisphere.    And  it  is this unimagi-
native  policy which  Mr.  Kennedy's  message  for  all  its  drama
is  implementing.   Of  the  $500,000,000  program,  $394 mil-
lion   will   be   assigned   to   the   Inter-American    Development
Bank  "under  a  special  trust  agreement"  to  apply  "on  a  loan
basis  with  flexible  terms,  including  low  interest  rates  or  re-
payment  in  local  currency"  (our italics)  for  a  carefully  speci-
fied  list  of  activities,  none  competitive  with   private  invest-
ment.    In   this  list  agrarian   reform   re-emerges  sanitized  as
"land  settlement  and  improved  land  use"—far  from  anything
as  crass as the  expropriation  of  semi-feudal estates.    The  other
purposes  specified  in  the  message  to  Congress   are   "housing,
water  supply  and  sanitation,  and  technical  assistance  related
to  the  mobilizing  of  domestic  financial  resources."    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  said  apologetically   at  one  point  in  his  message  that  of
course  "social   progress   is  not  a  substitute   for   economic  de-
velopment."     But  this,   he   indicated  in   the   message,   is  to
be  left  to  private  enterprise.    The   idea  of  loans  to   enable
these  countries  to  develop  their  own  resources  is  as  conspicu-
ous  by  its  absence  from   the  message  as  it  is  evident  in   the
thinking   of   almost   every  Latin   American  regime.    "U.S.
Sample  of  A  Moderate  Land  Reform
". . .  the  Betancourt  regime has  undertaken  ambitious
programs.   .   .   .   Agriculture   has   received   particular
attention.    Legislation  enacted  by  the  Venezuelan   Con-
gress  largely  exempts  land  now  in  efficient   cultivation
from  expropriation  and  gives  priority  to  settlement   of
government  owned  lands.  . . . We saw penetration  roads
freshly   cut  through  untapped  areas,   along   which   the
government  has  constructed  housing  that  is  being  made
available  to  farmers  on  long-term  credit.    Some   17,000
families  have  already  been  resettled.    The  program  is
moving  ahead  on  a  rational  basis,  but  it  is  under  criti-
cism  for  some  who  point  out  that  the  resettlement   of
the   estimated   350,000   landless   rural   families   at   the
present   rate  will  require  at   least   15  years  and $6.9
billion.     Left-wing   elements   are   demanding    distribu-
tion  of  large  estates  in  densely  settled  areas,   regardless
of  whether or  not  they  are  efficiently  operated,  and  free
grants  of  land  to  peasants."
—Special   Study   Mission  to  Latin  America,   Report
by   Cong.  Selden  (Ala)  and   Fascell   (Fla)   March   9.
business  concerns,"  Mr.  Kennedy  said  pointedly,  "have   also
played  a  significant  part  in  Latin  American economic  develop-
ment.    They  can  play  an  even  greater   role  in  the   future."
If  the  Latin  American  masses  will  only  wait.
This  program  is  triply  inadequate—in  financial  size,  in  the
character  of  the  administering  agency,  and   in  the   thinking
which  underlies  it.   "Our approach,"   Mr.  Kennedy  told  his
White   House   reception  for   Latin   American  diplomats   the
night  before  he  sent  this  message  to  Congress,   "must   itself
be  bold ...  a  vast  effort,   unparalleled  in  magnitude  and
nobility  of   purpose."     A  rhetoric  so  far   out   of   proportion
to  the  realities  is the  very kind  we  like  to  think  of  as typically
Latin.    Why   talk  as  Mr.  Kennedy  did  of  "the endless  ex-
ploration  of  new  frontiers"   when  he  holds   back  so  plainly
from  the  new  frontiers  of  fresh  social  thinking  and  looks  to
a  banking  institution  and  a  banker  mentality   to  give   Latin
America  a  peaceful  but  revolutionary  substitute  for  Castroism.
I  want  to  deal  next  week  with  the  magnitude  of  the  Castro-
ite  challenge  and  with  the  dimensions  on  which  any  program
must  be  built  which  hopes  to  compete  with  it.    Mr.  Kennedy
is  a  long  way  off  from  effective  answer.
You  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift   Sub   (If   You  So  Specify)     With  Our  First  Hand  Report  from  Cuba
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  .........................................................................................
Street
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
3/20/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  IT. S.;  $6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:   $15  to   Europe;    J20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED