I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jul17.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  On  The Drug  Trade
Kefauver  Reveals: How  AM A  Revenues Rose  After  It  Dropped  Its  Seal  of Acceptance
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  27
JULY   17,   1961
»'<"      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Low  Ethical  Content  of  Our  Ethical  Drug  Industry
The   American  Medical   Association  was   the   first   organ-
ization  to  appear  here  in  opposition  to  S.I552,  the  Kefauver-
Celler   bill  to   do  something   about   the   cost  and   quality  of
prescription   drugs.    Its  assistant  executive  vice  president,  Dr.
Ernest  B.  Howard,  as  smooth   and  sedative  a  witness  as  the
capital  has  seen  in  many  a  day,  told  the  Kefauver  committee
that  he  would  rely  instead  on  "a  free  market  and  a  [medical]
profession   educated ...  a  profession   fully    knowledgeable
in   a  free   market."     It  would  take  an   Ibsen   or  a  Shaw   to
do  justice  to  this  sham.    The   hearings   opened   by  Senator
Kefauver,   in   the   wake  of   the   report   his   Anti-Trust   and
Monopoly  Subcommittee  has  just  filed  (Sen.  Rep.  No.   448)
on  administered  prices  in  the  drug  industry,  promise  to  be
a  latter  day  morality  play  illuminating   the   realities   of   our
society.    In  no  area  of  our  economy  is  reliance  upon   a  free
market   more   illusory   than   in   prescription   drugs,   an   area
in  which  a  handful  of   giant   drug  firms  working   in   close
combination  exploit  the  sick,  the  helpless,  the  poor  and  the
aged;  where  pillars  of  society  like  the  clique  which  runs  the
AMA  lend  their  reputations  to  cover  a  barrage  of  misleading
advertising   to   the   physician;   and   where   the   channels   of
communication  are  themselves   clogged  and  poisoned   by  the
power  of  the  drug  advertiser.
A  Free  Market  Requires  A  Free  Press
A  free  market  presupposes  a  free  press—a  vigilant  press.
The  Kefauver  committee's   374-page   report  on  the  drug  in-
dustry  is  the  first  study  of  its  kind  ever  made.    It  is written
on   a  high   level   of   competence   and   embodies  many  stories
dug  out  in  a  way  which  would  make  a  reporter's   reputation;
its  exposure  of  the  high  costs  and  high  profits  of  this  indus-
try,    its   shady   practices   and   low   moral   standards,   would
make  exciting  reading  in  any  newspaper.    It  was  brushed  off
in  most  newspapers  with  a  few  paragraphs.     A  year  and  a
half   ago  the   Kefauver   committee's   first   revelations   in   this
field  did  hit  the  headlines.    But  now  that  the  formal  report
is  in  and  hearings  have  begun  on  remedial  legislation,   little
attention   is  paid   them.    With  a  few   honorable   exceptions
the  editorial pages  are  silent.  But  even  so conservative  a paper
as  the  New   York   Herald-Tribune   says   (July   7)    that   the
AMA   in  attacking  the  Kefauver-Celler   bill's  regulatory   fea-
tures   "and   insisting   that   the   medical   profession   should   be
the  sole  watchdog  over  the   efficacy   and  potential  side   effects
of  new  drugs"  is  using   "arguments   that  would  have  applied
almost  equally  forcibly  to  the  original  Pure  Food  and  Drugs
Act  half  a  century   ago."
The  second  day  of  the  hearings  was  marked  by  a  sensation,
but  in  only  a  few  papers  did  it  make  even  the  inside  pages.
The  AMA  came  to  Washington  to  oppose  those  sections  of
the   Ke/auver-Celler   bill   which   would   amend   the   Federal
The  Wondrous  Film-Flam  in  Wonder  Drugs
"While  the  [drug]  industry  spokesmen  would  have  us
believe  that  all  research  is  on  wonder  drugs  or  better
medicinal   products  this   is   no   more   true   than   the
euphemism  of   postgraduate  medical  education.   They
stress  that  there  are  many  failures  for  each  successful
drug.    This  is  true  since  it  is  the  very  essence   of  re-
search.    The  problem  arises  out  of  the  fact  that  they
market  so  many  of  their  failures.   Between  these  fail-
ures  which are  presented  as  new  drugs  and  the  useless
modification  of  old  drugs,  the  addition  of  zinc  to  vita-
mins  is  a  good  example, most of  the  research results  in
a  treadmill  which  moves  at  a  rapid  pace  but  goes  no-
where.   Since  so  much depends on novelty, drugs  change
like  women's  hemlines and rapid obsolescence  is  simply
a  sign  of  motion, not  progress,  as  the  apologists  would
have  us  believe. ...  I  doubt  whether  there  are many
other  industries  in  which  research  is  so  free  of  risks.
If  an  automobile does  not  have  a  motor,  no  amount of
advertising  can  make  it  appear  to  have  one.    On  the
other  hand,  with  a little luck, proper timing  and  a  good
promotion  program,  a  bag  of  asafetida  with  a  unique
medical  side  chain  can  be  made  to  look  like  a  wonder
drug.   The  illusion  may  not  last  long,  but  it  lasts  long
enough.    By  the  time  the  doctor  learns  what  the  com-
pany  knew  at  the  beginning,  it  has  two  new  products
to  take  the  place  of  the  old  one."
—Dr.  A,   Dale  Console,  former   medical  director  of
Squibb,  at  p.  127  of  the  new  Kefauver   committee  report
on  Administered   Prices:  Drugs  (Sen.  Rep.  No.  448).
Food,  Drug  and  Cosmetic  Act  to  give  the  Food   and  Drug
Administration  power  to  pass  on  the   efficacy   as  well  as  the
safety  of  prescription  drugs  and  to  establish  official  or   "gen-
eric"   names  for   them.    These  two  steps  would   enable   the
doctor  or  the  patient  to  save  money  as  do  institutional   buyers
by  ordering  under  the  generic  name,  with  full  assurance  of
quality,   without   being   dependent   on   higher   priced   brand
names.    This  would   go  far  to  restore  competition   in  many
drugs  and  is opposed  by the  big  drug  makers. The  AMA  came
down   to   argue   that   the   drug   industry  be  allowed   instead
to  police  itself.    Dr.  Hugh  H.  Hussey,  Jr.,  chairman  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  the  AMA,  outlined   a  program   of   this
self-regulatory  kind  on  which  the  AMA  proposes  to  embark.
Dr.   Hussey   gave   the   game   away  when   Senator   Kefauver
asked  him  why  he  thought  it  was  right  for  the  AMA  but
not  the  government   to  pass  on  the   efficacy   of   drugs.     Dr.
Hussey   answered,   "The   important   consideration   is  that   we
cannot  keep  a  drug  off  the  market."
Up  to   1955  the  AMA  had  at  least  taken   steps  to   keep
non-efficacious   or  falsely  advertised   drugs  out   of   the   pages
of  its  Journal.    Until   1955  only  advertisers  approved  by  the
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
1   0   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  July   17,  1981
AMA's  Council  on  Drugs  for  its  so-called  Seal  of  Acceptance
could  appear  in  the  pages  of  the  AMA  Journal.   Dr.  Howard
explained   that  the   Seal   of   Acceptance  program   was  aban-
doned  because  "it  was  not  as  good  a  program   as  we  should
have  had."    This  was  true,  but  it  seems  that  the  Seal  pro-
gram  was  abandoned   not   because  it  was  not  good   enough
but  because  it  was  too  strict  to  suit  many  large  drug  adver-
tisers.     The  Kefauver   committee  on  the   second   day  of   the
hearings  put  into  the  record  a  series  of  special  reports  by
the  Chicago  public  relations  firm  of  Ben  Gaffin  to  "determine
ways  in  which  the  sale  of  advertising  space  in  JAMA   and
other   AMA   publications   could   be  increased."    The    Gaffin
firm declared  that  "the  utilization  of  the  study  findings  netted
the   AMA   a  return   of   3600%.  in   increased   pharmaceutical
advertising  for   each   dollar   spent  on  the   research."      Gaffin
found   that  the  drug   industry  didn't  like  the  Drug  Council
because  the  Council  "is  always  trying  to  catch  it  doing  some-
thing  that  is  crooked."    "The   survey  also  found  that  the  Seal
of   Acceptance  helped  the  small  drug  advertisers  against   the
big  ones.     The   Gaffin   agency   boasted  that   its   survey   for
the  AMA  brought  about   "the   eventual  dropping  of  the  58-
year  old   Council  Seal  of   Acceptance  program."    Then   the
Kefauver  committee  produced  figures  to  show  that  the  AMA's
revenues  from  advertising   by  the  22  big  drug  firms  nearly
doubled  after  dropping  the  Seal  of  Acceptance.    It  went  from
$2,136,864  in  1955  to  $4,103,562  in  I960.
After  the  AMA  Dropped  Its  Seal
The   AMA   in   recent   years  has   become   more    dependent
on  drug  advertisers.    In  1950  its  revenue  from  members  and
readers  was  $5,000,000;  from   advertisers,  $2,600,000.   Ten
years  later  dues  and  subscriptions  had  risen  to  $5,900,000  but
advertising  revenue  was  $7,900,000  and  the  AMA  drew  an-
other  $1,500,000  or  so  from  the  sale  of  mailing  lists  and
exhibit  space  for  use  of  the  drug  manufacturers.     Even  some
of  the  most  famous  and  reputable  of  these  drug  houses  have
been   involved   in   advertising   tactics   which   hardly   qualify
A  Bland  Answer  Turneth  Away  Senators
Sen.  KEFAUVER:  I  gather about  $10  million  of  your
total  revenue  is   from   advertising.    Apparently  about
80%  of  that  conies  from  the  pharmaceutical  manufac-
turers,  so  that  you  are  getting  more  revenue  out  of  the
pharmaceutical  manufacturers  than  you  are  from  your
membership. ...  So can you be objective  when  the big
part,  the  major  part  of  your  revenue  comes  from  the
people  that  you  are trying  to  regulate.  .   „  ?
Dr.  [Hugh  H.]  HUSSBY,  Jr.  [Chairman of  the  Board
of  Trustees  of  the  AMA]:  Yes,  sir,  it  is  entirely proper
that  we  should  be  objective  and  we  are objective.
—Senate  hearings on S.  IS52,  July  8
them  for  self-regulation  in  harness  with  an  organization  like
the  AMA  dependent  on  them  for  revenue.     Here  are  a  few
sample  cases  from  those  unearthed  by  the  Kefauver  report:
Parke,  Davis:  One  of  the  problems   in  policing   the   drug
industry   is  the   difficulty   of   checking   on   what   the   "detail
men"   tell  the  physicians   on  whom  they  call  to  "sell"  new
drugs.    The  drug  firm's  instructions  rarely  become  a  matter
of   public   knowledge.     The   Kefauver   committee,    however,
did   come  into   possession  of   the  written   instructions  given
detail  men  by  Parke,  Davis  in  the  case  of  the  drug  Chloram-
phenicol,   sold   exclusively   in   this   country   under   the   trade
name   of   Chloromycetin.    This   has   a   larger   sales   volume
than  any  single  trade-name  ethical  drug   and   is  the   second
largest  selling  broad  spectrum   antibiotic.
In  June,   1952,   the   Food   and  Drug   Administration   dis-
continued  the  certification  of  this drug after  a  series  of  reports
that  its  use  was  associated  in  a  relatively   small   number  of
cases   with    blood    dyscrasias—particularly   aplastic    anemia,
which  has  a  fatality  rate  of  at  least   50%.     The   drug  was
allowed   back  on  the  market   after  a  study  by  the   National
Research   Council  on  condition  that  the  drug  company   be
required   to  warn   on  the   label   and   in   advertisements   that
it   "not   be   used   indiscriminately  or   for   minor    infections"
The  AMA  Does  Not  Require  "The  Whole Truth  and Nothing  But"  In  Its  Ads
Dr.   [Irene]   TILL   [Kefauver   Committee  Staff    Econo-
mist] : Mr. Chairman,  we would like first to  present  a  couple
of  ads  that  were  in  the  Journal  of  the  American Medical
Association,  one  for  Aug.  6,  1960, which says:  'Every  state-
ment  that  appears  in  AMA  publications  must  be  backed  by
substantiated  facts  or  we  won't  run  it.    That  is  why  you
can  rely  on  what  you  read  about  products  that  are  adver-
tised  in the  pages  of  the AMA scientific  journals.  .  .  .'
Mr.  Chairman,  we  looked at  a  few  ads,  and we  would  first
like  to  point  out  the  ad on DBI,  which is  an oral anti-diabetic
drug,   which   reads,   for   Feb.   25,   1961:   'Newest   JAMA
[Journal   AMA]   paper   reports   DBI   an   'oral   therapy   of
choice  in  management  of  diabetes .  .  .  from  the  mild  stable
adult  to  the  severe labile juvenile.'   Then it  goes  on to  quote
some  remarks  from  that  article.    Upon  examining the  arti-
cle,   which   is  entitled  'Clinical   Evaluation',   in  the   JAMA
Oct.  1,  I960,  we  found  of  the  104  patients  studied,  all  but
five  had  to  use  insulin  along  with  DBI  .  .  .  and we  noticed
in  addition  that  New   and  Non-Official   Drugs  says   in   its
1961  issue  on  side  effects  of  this  drug DBI:  The  usefulness
is   limited   by  the   frequency   with   which   gastro-intestinal
symptoms  such  as  oxemia, nausea  and vomiting occur.   . .  .'
None  of  these  remarks appear any place  in the ad. . .  .
Sen  KEFAUVER: What  do  you  say  about  that?
Dr.  [Hugh  H.]  HUSSEY,  Jr.  [Chairman  of  the  Board  of
Trustees  of  the  AMA]: I  have not  read  the  article,  Senator.
The  advertisement  does  mention  some  toxic  side  effects  as
I  heard  you  read  it.    The  advertisement  seemed  to.    There
is   one  point  in  connection  with   advertising   that   is   not
strictly  relevant  to  the  presentation   that  has  been  made,
but  is  relevant  to  our  total  consideration  of  the  problem.
In   my  estimation,  we   must  not  confuse   advertising  with
education....
*            *           *           *
Sen.  KEFAUVER:  And  you  are  aware  also  that  Miltown
or  meprobamate  is  addictive  under  certain circumstances?
Dr.  Hussey,  are  you  aware  of  that?
Dr.  HUSSEY:  You  used  the  term  addictive,  Senator.
Sen.  KEFAUVER:  Habit-forming.
Dr.  HUSSEY:  There  is  some  distinction in  the  sense  that
dependency  is  the  word applied in  the  case  of  this  drug.
Sen.  KEFAUVER: All  right,  dependency  then.  .  .  .
Dr.  HUSSEY:  There  is  that  tendency,  yes,  sir,  in  some
people.
Sen.  KEFAUVER: I  wish  you  would  look  at  this  adver-
tisement  [JAMA  March  11,  1961]   and  see  how  you  justify
that  with  your  claims  that  full  information  is  given.  .  .  ?
Dr.  [Ernest  B.]  HOWARD [Asst  Exec V-P of  the AMA]:
Chairman,  may  I  comment  on  this  item?
Sen  KEFAUVER: Yes.
Dr.  HOWARD:  We  do  not  require  in  advertising  copy
that  the  truth,  the  whole  truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth,
the  whole  story  about  a  drug,  be  told  in  advertising   copy.
—Senate  Antitrust  hearing on S.  1552, July  6.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   July   17, 1961
because   "certain   cases  of   serious  blood   dyscrasias  had   been
associated"  -with  its use.
A  Phoney  Spiel  for  the  Detail Men
The   Kefauver   committee   found   that   Parke,   Davis com-
plied  fully  with  these  instructions  in  its  advertisements  for
medical   journals,  where  the  editors  were  familiar  with  FDA
requirements.    In  those  directly  mailed  to  physicians,  on  the
other  hand,   it  watered   down   the   official   warning.    But  in
its  private  instructions  for   sales  talk   purposes  to  its   detail
men  Parke,  Davis  was  downright  misleading.    Its  detail  men
•were  instructed  to  say  that  Chloromycetin  had  passed  "three
intensive  investigations,"   that   this   represented   the   "highest
compliment"   ever   tendered   its  medical   staff,   and   that   the
•drug  had  been  "officially  cleared  .  .  .  with  no  restrictions on
the  number  or  the  range  of  diseases  for  which  Chloromycetin
may   be  administered."     The   words   "no   restrictions"   were
italicized  in  the  instructions   to  the  detail  men  although   the
Council   had  to  the  contrary   recommended   that   it  "not  be
used   indiscriminately   or   for   minor   infections"   because  of
the   blood   disease  danger.
Merck:  The  Kefauver  committee first  encountered  this  prob-
lem  of  "side  effects"   in  its  very  first  drug  industry  hearing,
•which  involved  the  cortical  steroids.    The  basic  discovery  in
this  field  was  cortisone,  used  by  arthritic  sufferers.    A  variant
was  Decadron  put  on  the  U.S. market  by  Merck  in  Novem-
ber,  1958.   The  need  for  caution  in  using  Decadron  seems
to  have  been  well  understood  within  the  medical  department
•of  Merck  &  Co.    Its  director   of   medical   research,  Dr.   Au-
gustus   Gibson,   admitted   in  a  letter   to  the  Kefauver com-
mittee   "that  the   beneficial  effects   of   cortisone*   are  unfor-
tunately  often  accompanied   by  undesired  ones.    These  may
range  from  simple  rounding  of  the  face  or  easy  bruising  of
the  skin  to  severe  mental  diseases  or  spreading  of   infection."
But  in  ten  months   Merck   captured  a  fourth   of  the  market
in  cortical  steroids  by  a  vigorous  advertising   campaign  which
stressed   Decadron's   "potency"   and  minimized   its   "side  ef-
fects."    Indeed  Merck's  first  "Dear  Doctor"  letter  in  Novem-
ber,   1958, informed   physicians  that  the  usual   adverse   side
effects  for  the  cortical  steroids  were  absent  in  Decadron.    The
Kefauver  committee  found  that  Dr.  Edward  Boland,  a  noted
The  Morality  of  Patents  on  Drugs
"It  is  also  not  generally  known that  most  countries of
the   world   do   not   grant   product   patents   on   drugs.
'Process' patents, i.e., patents  on  methods  and processes
of  producing   drugs  are  granted.    But  on  the  product
itself  49  out  of  77  countries  for  which  information  has
been  obtained do  not  award patents  hi  the pharmaceuti-
cal   field.   Of  the  17  foreign  countries  for  which  usable
price  information  was  obtained  for  the  [Antitrust  and
Monopoly]  Subcommittee  by  the  State  Department,  11
do  not  grant  patents  or«  ^fcarmacputical  products,  while
only  6  do.    Most  of  these  six  have  either compulsory
licensing  provisions  or  price  controls  on  drugs  or  both.
The  U.S.  is  the  only major  economic power which  grants
product  patents on drugs without imposing any  of  these
limitations  or  safeguards  to  the  public  welfare.
"The  practice  followed   by   most  other  countries  of
making  drugs an exception to  their patent  laws is  based
upon  the  simple  moral  belief  that  no  one  should  have
the  right  to  withhold  from  the  public  products which
are  vital  to  the  health  of  mankind.   No  one,  it  has  been
felt,  should  make  a  monopoly  profit  on  the  sale  of  such
products."
—Kefauver   opening  hearings  on S.  1552, July  5.
*  Earlier  Dr.  Gibson explained  that  he  was  using  the  term
•"cortisone"  to  cover  all  of  its  later  derivatives.
authority  and   one  of  the  first  to  engage   in   clinical   testing
of   the  drug   for   Merck  prior  to  its  release,   had   concluded
that  "the overall  incidence  of  adverse  reactions"   from Dec-
adron  was  about  the  same  as  that  of  similar  derivatives.   Yet
Merck   advertised  widely   "No   worrisome   side   effects   attrib-
utable  to  Decadron   have  occurred  as yet." Dr.  Gibson   reluc-
tantly  conceded  to  Senator  Kefauver,  "As  of  today  I  would
say  it  is  not  true."
Pfizer:   Dr.   Austin   Smith,  president  of  the    Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers   Association,  pompously   assured  the  Kefauver
committee  that  "the word  'advertising'  is  perhaps   something
of  a misnomer  when  it  applies  to  prescription  drugs.  .  .  . For
the   most   part,   our   advertisements   are   more   like    scientific
treatises   which   serve   the   purpose   of   'doctor   education'   in
new  drugs."
An  example  of  this  doctor  education  cited  by  the  Kefauver
committee  was  the  advertising   campaign  put  on  by  the  drug
house  of  Pfizer  for  Diabenese,  a  slight  molecular  modification
of  a  drug  known  as  tolbutamide  which  the  Germans  discov-
ered  in  the  early  1950's  and  which  was  successfully marketed
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Kefauver  In  Opening  Statement  Shows  The  Fabulous  Profits  of  the  Drug Industry
"According  to  the  PTC-SEC  [Federal  Trade  Commission]
the  rate  of  return on  net  worth  after  taxes  in  the  drug  in-
dustry   in  1959  was   18.1%  as  compared  to  10.5%  for   all
manufacturing.    According  to  the  First  National  City  Bank
of  New  York,  it  was  21.9% for  27 leading drug  corporations,
as  compared to  11.6%  for  all  manufacturing. .  .  .
"I  wish  to  emphasize that  these  figures  are  after  taxes
and  after  all  expenses,  including research.    The  profit  rates
for  a  number of  individual  drug  companies  are  astonishing.
Thus  Carter  Products in  1958 enjoyed a rate  of  return on  its
invested  capital  after  taxes  of  38.2%;  at  this  rate  it  would
recover  its  entire investment in less than 3 years.   American
Home  Products made  33.5%; Smith  Kline  &  French  33.1%;
Norwich  Pharmacal  Co.  23.7%; G.  D.  Searle  &  Co. 23.2%;
Sterling  Drug  22.7%;  Schering  Corp.  21.8%;  Parke,  Davis
21.6%;  U.  S.  Vitamin and Pharmaceutical  Corp. 20.9%; and
Warner-Lambert  20.1%. . . .
"Since  World War  II  the  stock  market quotations on drug
companies  have  soared.    Some  impression  of  the  extent  of
the  resulting  increase  in  values  can  be  gained  by  a  few  ex-
amples:  In  11  years  the  stock  of  American Home  Products
would  have  returned  $16,480  in  dividends  for  a  $10,000 in-
vestment.    In  addition,  the  capital  value  of   the  stock,   as
reflected  in  quotations  on  the  New   York   Stock  Exchange,
would  have  risen  to  $137,200  at  the  end  of  1959.    Such  a
rise  represents  nearly  14  times  the  initial  investment.   Be-
tween  1949 and  1959 another  company,  Smith,  Kline  &
French,  paid  in  dividends more than  double  the  initial  cost;
its   stock  appreciated  over  24  times,  the  stock  being  split
18  for  1 during  the  11-year  period.   The  orginal  investment
of  $10,000  at  the  beginning  of  1949  was  worth  $244,000  at
the  end  of  1959—an  appreciation  of   $243,000—and  the  in-
vestor  would in  addition have  received  $20,000  in dividends.
"These and similar profit  showings  are  made by  companies
which  manufacture  products  that  represent   the  difference
between  sickness   and  health  and  often  quite  literally   the
difference  between  life  and  death.".
—Kefauver   opening  hearings  on S.  1552, July  5.
1   0   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  July   17,  1961
The  Menace  to  the  Free  Market  Is  Also  A  Menace  to  A  Free  Society
here  by Upjohn  under  the  trade  name  of  Orinase.     Tolbuta-
mide  was  an  oral  drug   for   diabetes,   which  hitherto   could
be  treated  only  by  insulin.     Pfizer  launched  Diabenese  with
an  advertising  campaign  which  stressed  "almost  complete  ab-
sence of  unfavorable  side  effects,"  yet  the  Kefauver   committee
turned  up  a  memorandum  June  8,  1958 from   the  physician
in  charge  of  the  testing  program  for  Diabinese  before  it  was
marketed  in  which  the  President  of  Pfizer,  John  E.  McKeen,
was  informed,   "In   the  evaluation  of  Diabinese  we  have  en-
countered  an  incidence  of  toxicity  which,  at  the  least,   is  not
less  than  that  seen  with  Orinase.    We  have  encountered  six
cases  of  jaundice.    The  jaundice  in  each  instance  developed
after  3 to  4  weeks of  chronic daily treatment with  Diabenese."
Of   1,992 cases  tabulated   by  this  physician,  27   percent   re-
ported   one  or  more  side  effects.    This  tabulation  was  dated
August  15,  1958.  Yet  in  October  Pfizer  launched   an  adver-
tising  campaign  stressing   "almost   complete  absence  of   un-
favorable  side  effects,"   and  within  a  year  captured  one-sixth
of  the  market  for  oral  anti-diabetic drugs.
What  the  Kefauver-Celler  Bill  Would Do
The  Kefauver  hearings  resume  July  18.   The  drug industry
has  mobilized  a  battalion  of  lawyers and  press  agents  to  fight
improved   regulation.    The   Kefauver-Celler  bill  attacks  the
problem  from  two  directions.   One  is by increasing  the  power
of  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  to  inspect  pharmaceu-
tical  plants,  to  keep  useless  drugs  off  the  market,  to  license
drug  firms  in  order  to  maintain   quality   standards,  and   to
establish   generic  names  so  as  to  create  a   freer   market   for
drugs.     The   other  is  by  amendment  of   the   anti-trust  laws
to  prevent  the  drug  companies  from   getting   together   and
deciding  in  advance  which  shall  have  the  patent  and  which
the  licenses  on  a  new  drug,  and  to  require  compulsory  licens-
ing  of  product patents  for  prescription drugs  after  three  years.
The  Capitol  can  be  a  lonely  place  for  those  who  take  it
on  themselves  to  fight  the  moneyed  powers  of   our  society.
Senator  Kefauver's  long   and   difficult   inquiry  into  so-called
administered   prices  has  had   to  proceed  in   a heart-breaking
semi-obscurity,  though  it  has  demonstrated  how  huge  private
collectivisms  are  destroying  the  free  market  in  steel,  in  autos,
Brand  vs.  Generic Names
"The  principal,  though  not  the  only  reason   for  this
bill  [S.  1552]   is  that  ethical  drug  prices  are   generally
unreasonable    and   excessive.     They   are   unreasonable
whether  compared  to  costs,  to  profits   or  to  prices  in
foreign   countries     With   respect   to   costs,   prednisone
and  prednisolone,   leading  drugs  used  by  arthritic suf-
ferers,   represent   a  typical  case  in  point.    Under   the
big  drug  companies'   brand  names,  such  as  Meticorten
or  Meticortelone,  these  products  are  sold  to   druggists
for  around  18  cents  a  tablet  and  the  suggested  price  to
consumers   is  30  cents  a  tablet.    Yet  the  cost  of  pro-
duction  for  these   tablets   including   tableting,  bottling
and  packaging  is  no  more  than  1.5  cents  per  tablet.   An
arthritic  patient  will  frequently  remain for  long  periods
on  a  dosage   of   about   100  of   these   tablets   a   month.
Thus  he  pays  $30  a  month  for  his  medicine,  for  which
his  druggist   paid   around   $18  and  which  cost   around
$1.50  to  produce. ...
"In  the  case  of  unpatented  drugs  (and  this  is  an  im-
portant  reservation),   it  is  usually  possible  for  the  con-
sumer  to  achieve   substantial   savings   if  his   physician
writes  out  the  prescription  in  terms,  of  the   product's
generic  or  official  name  rather  than  in  terms  of  a  trade
name  or  some  particular  company.  . . .  When  sold  under
the  trade  name,  'Meticorten',  the  arthritic  drug,  predni-
sone,  retails  at  a  list  price  of  approximately  30  cents  a
tablet.    But  today  when  the  physician  writes   out  the
prescription  in  terms  of  the  generic  name,  prednisone
can be purchased  from drug  stores  in Washington,  D.  C.,
for  less  than  4  cents  a  tablet."
—Kefauver   opening  hearings  on  S.  1552, July  5.
in  bread   and   in   drugs.    These   corporate  giants   in  under-
cutting  the  free  market  also  undermine  free  society.    Their
power  through  advertising  has  reduced  a  free  press  to  a car-
icature   of   its  great   pretensions.     The   drug   companies   also
drug  the  public  mind,  particularly  through  the  newer  media
of  radio and  TV;  many  of  the  same  companies which  produce
"ethicals"  also  sell  widely  advertised  over-the-counter  drugs.
We  devote  this  entire  letter  to  the  drug  report  and  the  drug
hearings  to  awaken  thoughtful  Americans to  the  need  to  mo-
bilize  support  now  for  the  Kefauver-Celler  bill.    This  is  one
fight which  can be won.
Reprints  Available  at Low  Rates  in  Bulk  and  Free  Sample  Copies  Sent  If  You  Supply   Long  Stamped   Envelopes
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave,
Washington   15,  D.
Please  renew
Name  ..............
Street   ............
City  ........... _
Efter   gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   .........
City  ............ _
Shall  we  send
(or  enter)  my  sub
.......... ...............Zone.
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or
N.
C.
W.
for  the  enclosed  $5:*
7/17/61
$4(1
......................... Zone........_..J
gift  announcement?
ST.)
State
Yes
additional:
"D"
"Ni
"fi
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  ».  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  bat  published  erery  Thurs-
day  except  the  I.lot  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washinirton,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  tather   M.  Stone.     Subscription:    $5  in  the  U.  S.:   $6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Ail   Mail   rates:   $15  to   Europe:    $20   to    Israel,   Asia   and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED