I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961may22.pdf

============================================================

New  Military   Toothpaste  for  Social  Decay,  P.  2
Documentary.  181  U.S.  Historians   in  Open  Letter  to  President   Ask  Hands  Off  Cuba,  Sec  Page  Three
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,   NO.  19
MAY   22,   1961
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Why   A  Summit  Now   Seems  A  Dubious  Proposition
Since  meetings  at  the  summit  are  difficult  to  set  up,  arouse
great  expectations and  will  not  be  treated  casually  as informal
mutual  explorations  of  mind  by  rival  leaders,  the  talks  now
being  suddenly  arranged  between  Kennedy  and  Khrushchov
seem  to  us  of  dubious  value  and  dangerous  potential.     How
can   Mr.   Kennedy  successfully  survey  the   problems  of   the
planet  with  Mr.  Khrushchov   when   it  becomes  clearer  every
day   that   the  President  still   lacks  an   adequate  map   of   the
world?     How   and  what  can  we  negotiate  when  we  really
don't  know  where  we're  going?    In  this  respect,  Mr.  Ken-
nedy's  letter   to  Newsday   was  most   revealing,   and   what   it
revealed—we  regret  to  say—was  close  to  puerility.    The  let-
ter  was  intended  at  last  to  answer  questions  as  to  just  what
the  President  means  by  his  vague  calls,   often  repeated,   for
sacrifice.     We   have   suspected   for   some  time  that   this  was
little  more  than  a  subconscious   desire  on  a  young  man's  part
to  sound  glamorously like  Churchill  making  with  blood,  sweat
and  tears.    Sure  enough,  when  challenged   to  be  specific,  the
best  that  Mr.  Kennedy  and  his  White  House  staff  can  do  is
an  anti-climactic  message  jumbling  together   higher   highway
taxes  for  trucks,  defenses  of  "our  image  abroad"  (why   can't
we  send  this  verbiage  back  to  Madison  Avenue?)  and  higher
postal   rates!    This   was  ludicrous  but   another  part   of   the
letter   was  worse.     It   harped   again   on   the   need   for   self-
censorship  of   the   press—the  only  conclusion   Mr.   Kennedy
has  yet  drawn  publicly  from  the  Cuban   fiasco.   What  this
boils  down  to  in  practice,   given   the  nature  of  bureaucracy,
as  every  reporter  knows,  is  "when   we  make  mistakes,  don't
print  them."
The  Strongest  Nation  on  Earth—the  Most  Nervous
The  reply  to  Newsday  was  feeble  because  the  reality  came
through.     The   sacrifice   line   was  overblown   rhetoric.     Mr.
Kennedy  is  not  Churchill   and  the  USA  of   1961   is  not   the
Britain  of   1940.     We  are  the  most  powerful,   though  also
the  most  nervous,  nation  on  earth.    What  we  suffer   from  is
not  an  unwillingness  to  fight  but  an  unwillingness  to  think.
If  there  are  still  hesitations  about  the  wisdom  of  plunging
into  jungle  wars  in  Southeast  Asia  and  trying  to  dash  up  San
Juan  Hill  again  with  the  shade  'of  Teddy   Roosevelt,   this  is
not  disturbing.    On  the  contrary,  it  is  reassuring.    It   shows
there  is  still  a  little  sense  left.    What  we  need  are  not  sacri-
fices in  paying  higher   taxes  to  bloat  further  an   overextended
and  unmanagable  military  machine.     The  sacrifices  we  need
to  make  lie  in  the  realm  of  new  ideas.    We  need  to  sacrifice
old   cliches  about   free   enterprise   at   home   and   communism
abroad,  and  we  need  more  men  willing  to  risk  their   respecta-
bility  by saying  so  out  loud.    One  of  them  is  that  we  cannot
utilize  our  full  capacity  for  good  in  the  world  and  at  home
You  Just  Can't  Beat   Our  Laotians
"At  one  point   a  reporter  asked  a  Laotian  delegate
how  much  of  the  country  was  still  controlled  by   gov-
ernment  forces.    'AH  of  it,'  the  delegate replied prompt-
ly,  'We  control  all  of  the  provinces.    And  if  it   weren't
for  outside  interference from  the  Viet  Minh,  we  would
control  even  more'."
—Crosby  Noyes  from  Geneva,  Wash.  Star  May  15.
while  we  allow  a  handful  of  great  corporations  to  plan  our
economy  so  they  can  still  make  a  profit  while  running  it  at
three  quarter  or  half   capacity.    The  real  lesson  of  the  price
fixing  scandals  has  yet  to  be  drawn.    They   show   that  we
live  in  a  planned,  not  a  free  economy,  .but  we  leave  its  plan-
ning  to  irresponsible  corporate   commissars   opposed   to   full
employment.    Another   idea  which   needs   to  be  sacrificed   is
that  colonial  revolt  turns  left  because  of  a  conspiracy  which
can  be  shut  off  at  the  spigot   in   Moscow;   that  underdevel-
oped  countries  can  raise  their  living  standards  without  social-
ist  measures  and  need  only  wait  until  some  benevolent   West-
ern  capitalist  comes  along  to  build  factories   for   them.     In-
deed  fear  of  the  word  "socialism"—and  of  the  word  "plan-
ning"—is   a   crippling   national   neurosis.     Here   is   where
thought,   leadership  and   sacrifice  must  begin   if  our   country
is   to   rise  to   the   obligations   toward   the   rest   of  humanity
which  our  blessings  entail  upon  us.
Ruled  by  a  Mindless  Machine
If   Mr.   Kennedy's  program   grows   every  day  more   strik-
ingly   like   that   of   his   predecessor,   until   one   could   almost
believe  this  is  Mr.  Eisenhower  himself   after  a  rejuvenation
operation,  the  fault  does  not  lie  in  our  unwillingness  to  sacri-
fice.   It  lies  in  Mr.  Kennedy's.     He  is  unwilling  to  sacrifice
his   friendly   ties  with   the  Southern   Democrats,  and   to   risk
his  popularity  with  the  country,  by  embarking  on  a  program
which  measures  up  to  our  needs  at  home  and  abroad.    Over-
burdened  with  ceremonial  duties,  Mr.  Kennedy  is  more  and
more  the  creature  of  a  stale  governmental   bureaucracy  con-
ditioned   to  the  cold  war,  and  ready  when  in  doubt  to   reach
for  a  gun.    As  the  powers  of  state  are  more  and  more  cen-
tralized   in  the   President,   until   its  mammoth  burdens   grow
beyond  any  one  man's  grasp,  the   decisions   are  made   more
and  more  by  an  anonymous  army  of  bureaucrats,  civilian  and
military.    Czar  Nicholas  I  once  said,  "I  do  not  rule  Russia.
Ten  thousand  clerks  rule  Russia."    Mr.  Kennedy  may  some-
times  feel  tempted   to  say  the  same.    This   too  needs   airing
if    we   are    to   stop    lurching    from    one    supposed    crisis
to  another.    The  machine,  particularly  its  military  component,
is  becoming  so  huge  that  it  runs  itself.    Our  fate  is  at  the
mercy  of   its  sheer   momentum.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   May   S3, 1961
Concluding   Last   Week's  "When  the  Brass  Hats  Begin  to  Study  Mao  Tse-tung,   Beware!"
Guerrilla  War   — The  Dazzling  New  Military  Toothpaste  for  Social  Decay
In  reading  the  military  literature  on  guerrilla  warfare  now
so  fashionable at  the  Pentagon,*  one  feels  that  these  writers
are  like  men  watching  a  dance  from   outside  through  heavy
plate  glass  windows.    They   see  the  motions  but  they  can't
hear  the  music.    They  put  the  mechanical  gestures  down  on
paper  with  pedantic   fidelity.   But  what  rarely  comes  through
to them  are the  injured  racial feelings, the  misery, the  rankling
slights,  the  hatred,  the  devotion,  the  inspiration  and  the  des-
peration.    So  they  do  not  really  understand  what  leads  men
to  abandon  wife,  children,   home,  career  and  friends;   to  take
to  the  bush  and  live  gun  in  hand  like  a  hunted  animal;  to
challenge  overwhelming  military  odds   rather  than   acquiesce
any  longer  in  humiliation,  injustice  or  poverty.    These  mili-
tary  theoreticians,   astounded  by  the  success  that   such  hand-
fuls  of  men  can  achieve  under  a  Castro  or  a  Ho  Chi-minh
against   huge   and   well-equipped   armies,   think  their   tactics
can   be   duplicated  mechanically,  in   reverse,  like   a  drill,  if
only  their   recruits   can  be  taught   to   go  through   the   same
motions.
If  They  Failed  in  Cuba,  Can They  Win  in  Vietnam?
The  armed   services  are  oriented   to  battle  on  the  field  of
public  relations,  where  higher  appropriations  are  won.    They
have  to  deal  with  a  gimmick-minded  public,   which  is  used
to  mechanical   devices   and  looks  for   some  new  pushbutton
solution   whenever  confronted   by  a   new   problem.     So   the
dazzling   latest   military   toothpaste   for   social   decay   is  this
idea  of  our  using   guerrilla  methods,   too.     Nobody   notices
that  the  chief  theoreticians  on  our  side  are  a  group  of  French
colonels   who  not   only   failed   to  win   by  these   methods   in
Algeria  but  have  had  to  be  scattered  and  suppressed   by  the
French  government  because   they  began  turning  their   "dirty
tricks"  against  the  French  Republic    Nor   does  anyone  stop
to  consider  that  these  tactics  and  the  men  who  would  be  in
charge  of  them  have  just  had  an  easy  opportunity  in  nearby
Cuba,  and   failed   dismally.    The   same  Joint   Chiefs  of   Staff
which  lacked  the  competence  to  stage  an  invasion  of   Cuba,
and   the   same   intelligence  agents   who   could   not   correctly
"This  is  based  on  a  reading   of  the  special   double  issue
(Feb.-Mar.  1957)  of  the  Revue  Militaire  d'lnformation  which
ACSI   (Assistant   Chief  of   Staff   for  Intelligence)   has   been
circulating  in  translation   at  the  Pentagon.     This  issue  was
edited  by  Col.  Lacheroy,  right   hand   man  to  Gen.   Salan  in
the   coup   which   brought   de  Gaulle   to   power  in   1958,   and
reflects   the   thinking  of   the   French   Colonels  influenced   by
Mao  Tse-tung   whom  we  discussed  in  last  week's  issue.
What  Our  Latin  Neighbors   Fear
'"Many   Nicaraguans  were  unhappy  Wednesday  with
the   news   that   the   U.S.   is   giving   74  scholarships    to
their   military   officials   at   the   new   guerrilla   warfare
training  base  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone.    They   point
out  that   Panama  gets  only  36  scholarships;  Honduras,
32;  Venezuela,  28;  Ecuador,  25;  and  Bolivia  and  Costa
Rica,   11   each.     They   ask   why   the   smallest   country
[Nicaragua]   gets   the   most   trained   officers   and   'will
they  be  used  to  kill  patriots  and  keep  the  Somozas  in
power'?"
—Geo.  . Southworth,   Latin   American    editor,    the
Miami   Herald,   April   20,  from   Managua,    Nicaragua.
evaluate   the   mood   of   the   Cuban   people—can   they   be  ex-
pected  to  do  better,  let  us  say,  in  faraway  North  Vietnam?
Against  an  older  regime,  right  on  the  border  of  Communist
China ?
It  is  time  we  realized   that  the  brutal  surgery   of   military
and   para-military  methods   cannot   cure   complex   social   and
economic  problems.   The  CIA  got  rid  of  a  popular  reformer,
Mossadegh,  in  Iran,  but  the  makeshift  corrupt  regime  with
which  he  was  replaced  is  now  collapsing.    Guatemala,  where
the  CIA  got  rid  of  Arbenz,  is  ripe  for  new  trouble.    These
counter  conspiracies  only  postpone   crises  which   burst  forth
again  with  redoubled  force.    If  the  hundreds  of  millions  we
have  squandered  in  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  had  gone  into
public  improvements  during  the  past   decade,  both   countries
would  be  models  of  stability.    As  it  is,  the  only  stable  coun-
try  in  the  area  is Cambodia, where  the  CIA  tried  to  overthrow
Prince  Sihanouk  because  of  his  neutralism  and  failed.
It  is  said,  and  some  of  the  liberals  around  the   President
seem  to  believe  it,  that  these  methods  can  be  combined  with
economic  and  social  reform.    But  experience  is  against  them.
We  never  succeeded  in  getting  Chiang  or  Syngman  Rhee  to
make  reforms;  our  support  merely  strengthened   their  heavy
hand.    Can we  do  better  with  Diem  in  South  Vietnam ?    One
of  the  tasks  of  counter  guerrilla  forces  will  be  to  eliminate
suspected   subversive   influences   in   the   villages.     Can   this
be  done  without  eliminating  the  very  men  who  want  reform
and  leaving  the  dull  and  acquiescent?  '  Military  methods  of
this  kind  weaken  the  reform   elements  at  the  bottom  of  the
pyramid,  or  drive them  into  the  arms of  the  Communists,  and
at  the  same  time  strengthen  the  rulers  and  ruling  classes  who
are  the  principal   enemy  of   reform.    This  new  course   is  a
dead-end  street.    If  followed,  it  not  only  will  fail  to  spread
democracy  abroad  but  will  poison  it  at  home.
London  Times Man Sees U.S.  Unable  to Understand  Communist  Guerrillas  Not  Just  Thugs
"Notably   absent   in  ...        official   appreciation   of   areas
of  contest  like  Cuba,  Laos  and  South  Vietnam,  is  any  refer-
ence  to  the  ideological  nature  of  the  contest.    There  would
appear  to  be  a  national  inability  to  comprehend  that   sin-
cere  men  can  believe  in  communism.  .  .  .
"This  curious  block  in  the  national  thinking   appears   so
far   to   have  precluded  study   of   the   Malayan  experience:
the   social   and  political   components   of   the   strategy,   the
explicit  offer  of  reform  and  independence,  and  the  struggle,
as  Field  Marshal  Templer  said,  for  the  hearts   and  minds
of   the  people.    Persuaded  that  communist  infiltrators  can
only  be  Moscow-hired   thugs,  the  inevitable   reaction   is   to
answer  with  thuggery.   .  .
"Your  Correspondent   met  in  Malaya  and  Vietnam   com-
munists  who fought  a  guerrilla  war  against  Japan  for  four
years,  and  then  returned  to  the  jungle,  patiently   to  train,
indoctrinate  and  identify  themselves   with  peasants   of   the
same   colour,  race   and  tongue.     Britain  had  to   muster   a
large   army,  evolve   a   huge   intelligence   organization,   and
change  the  political  structure  of  the  country  to  defeat  these
men  who  led  only  a  few  thousand."
—The  Times  (London)   April  26  from    Washington.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   May  22, 1961
"The  Idea  of  National Interest  Must Not  Be Used ... To Smother Public  Debate"
181  U.  S.  Historians  in  Open  Letter  to  President   Ask  Hands  Off  Cuba
The  press  (except  for  a  brief  mention  in  the  New  York
Times   May  14)   has   ignored  an   extraordinary  letter   on
Cuba  sent   the  President  by  181  historians   at  41  colleges
and  universities.    We  believe   their  public  manifesto   re-
flects   a   revival   of   conscience   and  courage   on  American
campuses.    We  print  the  text  and  the  signers  below,  be-
lieving  that   for  a  publication  with  as  high  a  percentage
of   readers  as   ours  among  intellectuals  and  on  campuses
the  names,  too,  are  news  and  deserve  to  be  reported.—IFS
"We  the  undersigned  historians,  members  of  41  university
and  college  faculties,  wish  to  express  our  serious  concern  at
your  Administration's  apparent  attempt  to  fabricate  national
unanimity  in  support   of  a  Cuban   policy  whose  future  out-
lines  remain  obscure.
"The   ill-starred  intervention  in  Cuba  is  ended.    It  should
not  be  resumed,  openly  or  covertly.    At  worst,  it  could  bring
the  world closer  to  general war.   In  any  case,  it would weaken
the  position   of  the  U.S.  in  countries  determined  to  pursue
their  own  development, free  of  great-power  control.
"You   began  your   administration   on   a  note  of   promise.
The  U.S.  was  to  seek  a  meeting  of  minds,  to  prevent  the  test
of  arms.   In  less  than  a hundred  days,  in  dealing  with  Cuba,
our  government  has  in  effect  fallen  back  on  the  old  dich£:
'The  only thing  they  understand is  force.'    To  resort  to  force
is   to  preclude  understanding  and   to  undermine  confidence
in  this  country's  good  faith.
"Shortly   after   the   use  of   force   in   Cuba,  you  called   for
self-censorship  of  the  press  in  the  national  interest.    Were
it  not  for  truthful  reporting in  the  press, the  American  people
would   not   realize   the   dimensions  of   our   failure   in   Cuba.
Truthful  reporting  did  not  create the  fiasco  in  Cuba,  nor  can
the  mobilization  of  political  unanimity  redeem  it.    The   na-
tional  interest,  especially  at  this  critical  juncture,  can  only  be
found   in  open  debate.    The   idea  of  national  interest  must
not  be  used  as  a  slogan  to  smother  public debate.
"Further   intervention  in  Cuba  and   a  facade  of   national
unity  at  home  are  equally  dangerous.    We  urge  you  to  lead
America  on  a  path  of  peace through  negotiation  and construc-
tive  social  action."
—Open   Letter  to  President  Kennedy  signed   by  181  his-
torians  in  41  U.S.  universities and  colleges,  May  10.
The  181 With  the  Courage  to  Try  and  Mold  (As  Well  as Teach)  History
Univ.   of   Col.   (Berkeley):  Werner   T.   Angress,  Thomas  G.  Barrves,   Del-
mer  M.  Brown,  Walter  F.  Cannon,  Richard  Drinnon,  Richard  Herr,  James
F.   King,   Thomas   S.   Kuhn,   Joseph   R.   Levenson,  Bryce   Lyon,   Martin   E.
Malia,   Henry   P.   May,  Robert   C.  Padden,   Nicholas   V.   Riasanovsky,   Carl
E.    Schorske,   James   R.   Scobie,   Wm.   G.   Sinnigan.    Henry   Nash    Smith,
Clark  C.  Spence,  Kenneth  M.  Stampp,  George  W.  Stocking,  R.  A.  Webster.
Univ.   of   Col.   (Los  Angeles):   Eugene  N.   Anderson,   Keith  B.  Berwick,
Robert  N.   Burr,  John  W.   Caughey,   J.   S.   Galbraith,   Harold   M.  Hyman,
Jere  C.  King:,  Donald  B.   Meyer,  Doyce   B.  Nunis,   Theodore   Saloutis.
Univ.   of   Col.   (Riverside):   M.  L.   Rappe,   T.   H.   Van   Laue.
Stanford:    Claude   A.   Buss,   Frederic   L.   Cheyette.   Gavin   T.    Langmuir,
James   T.   C.  Liu,  Anatole  G.  Mazour,  Thomas   C.  Smith,   Gordon  Wright.
Reed  College:   R.  F.  Arragon,  Amin  Banani,  K.  Dundharker,  Richard  H.
Jones,  Marvin  Levich,  Lauro  R.  Martines.   David  Tyack,   Owen  Ulph.
San   Jose   State   College:   Chas.   Burdick,  Peter   M.   Buzanski,   Irma   E.
Eichhorn,    Gladus    Giimore,   Edgar   A.   Hornie,   Walter    Hngins,   Michael
Kay,  David  I.  Kulstein,  Lawrence  B.  Lee,  Jackson  T.  Main,  H.  B.  Melendy,
H.   Wayne   Morgan,   Robert   B.   Roberts,   Donald   E.   Walters,   Gerald   E.
Wheeler.
Univ.   of   III.:    Arthur  Bestor,  Robert   B.   Crawford,   Robert  Haan,   Robert
McColley.
Indiana    Univ.;    Robert   F.   Byrnes.    Charles   Leonard    Lundin,   Rena   L.
Vassar,  John  E.  Wiltz.
Univ.   of   Wisconsin:    Eugene   Boardman,   Richard   N.    Current,   Geo.   L.
Mosse.
Univ.  of  Mich.:   John  Bowditch,  Alexander  DeConde,  Albert  Feuerwerker,
John  Higham,  Irving   A.  Leonard.
Northwestern.:   Ray  A.  Billington.
Williams:   Milton   Cantor,   John   G.  Sproat,   Wm.   R.   Stanton,   Robert  G.
W.  Waite.
Smith:    Lols  Cohn-Haft,   Leona   C.   Gabel,   Eliz.   Koffka,   Ramon   Eduardo
I'.!!'-'.
Goucher:   Rhoda  M.  Dorsey,   Geo.  M.  Foote,  Wm.   L.  Neumann,   Kenneth
O.  Walker.
Columbia:   Robert   D.  Cross,   Chas.   B.  Forcey,  John   A.  Garraty,  Wm.  L.
Leuchtenberg,  Eric  L.  McKitrick.
New  .York   University:      Leo  Gershoy,   Henry   H.   B.  Noss.
Rutgera:   Traian    Stoianovich,   Warren   I.   Susman,   Donald    Weinstein,
Henry  R.  Winkler.
Univ.   of   South   Dakota:   Cedric  Cummins.
Pomona   College:  Margaret    G.   Davies,   John   H.   Gleason,   Vincent   H.
Learnihan,  Burdette   C.   Poland.
San   Francisco   State   College:   James   H.   Stone,   Theodore   R.   Treutlem,
Gerald  T.  White.
Univ.  of  Toledo:  Randolph  C.  Downes,  Mikiso  Hane.  Arthur  R.  Steele.
Dominican   College    of   Son   Rafacl:    Marshall  Dill,   Jr.
Bryn   Matur:   Felix  Gilbert.
Scrippa   College:   Nikki  Keddie.
Univ.   of   Arizona:    Herman   E.   Bateman,   James   A.   Beatson,   Russell  C.
Ewing,  Mario Rodriguez,
Claremont    Graduate    School:  Douglass    Adair,    Hubert    Herring,     John
Niven.
Sacramento   State   College:   Edward   D.   Beechert,   Jr.,   Gloria   G.   Cline,
Robert   Donaldson,   Edward   H.   Howes,   John   Motlow.
Univ.   of  Penna.:     Thos.   C.  Cochran,  Richard  S.  Dunn,  Holden   Furber,
Morton  Keller,  Arthur  P.  Whitaker.
Univ.   of   Minn.:   T.   A.   Krueger,   David  Montgomery.   Paul   L.  Murphy,
David  W.   Noble,  Stanley   G.  Payne,   Howard   Quint,  Romeyn  Taylor.
Univ.   of   Missouri:  James   L.   Bugg,   Jr.,  Allen   F.   Davis,   R.   M.  Jones,
Richard  S.  Kirkendall,  R.  E.   McGrew.   Chas.  F.   Mullett,  W.   V.   Scholes,
Tulane  Univ.:   Mary  B.  Allen,  Gerald  M.  Capers,  Chas.  Till  Davis,  Thos.
L.  Karnes.
Weslevan   Univ.:   Loren  Baritz,  Samuel   Hugh  Brockunier,  R.  Kent  Field-
ing,   Wm.   Kerr,  David   F.   Trask.
Washington   Univ.  St.   Louis:   Peter  T.  Cominos.  J.  H.  Dexter,   Ralph  E.
Morrow,  Peter  Riesenberg.
Univ.  of  Washington:   Gordon  Griffiths,  J.  E.  Van  de  Wetering.
Princeton:   David  D.  Bien,  Wm.  B.  Catton,   Leonard   Krieger,  Stanley   J.
Stein.
Yale:   John  M.  Blum,  Robert  S.  Lopez.
Harvard:   H.  Stuart   Hughes.
Cornell:  David   B.   Davis,   Edward   W.   Fox,   Donald   Kagan,   Walter   La
Feber,   Eugene   F.  Rice,  Jr.
Carleton  College:   Carlton  C.  Qualey.
Vanderbilt:   Alexander  Marchant.
Haverford:    Wallace  T.   McCaffrey.
Sacrameuto  State  College:   Sam  Ross.
Which  Paper  Do  You  Read—And  Which Officials  Do Its  Reporters  Talk To?
"The  Cuban  fiasco  .  .  .  has  raised  grave   doubts  in  the
Chief  Executive's  mind  about  top  Pentagon   military  lead-
ers.  .  .  .  The  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff,  Gen.
Lyman   L.  Lemnitzer,   and  the   Chief  of   Naval  Operations,
Admiral  Arleigh  Burke, gave  the  President  a  written  signed
opinion  that  the  operation  made  sense   militarily.   It   was
this  elaborate  Pentagon  approval, on  top  of  the  CIA's  ex-
pressed  expectations  of  a  Cuban uprising,  which apparently
led  the  President  to  swallow  whatever  doubts  he  may  have
had.  .  .  .  Only  two  men  raised  objections  to  any  important
degree.    One  was  the  President's  aide,  Arthur  Schlesinger,
Jr.  ...      [the  other]   Senator  J.  William  Fulbright."
—"Joint   Chiefs   in  Doghouse  Over  Cuba,"  Chalmers  M.  Roberts  in  the  Washington  Post,  May  H.
"It  is  now possible  to  report  on  high  authority  that  Gen.     to  the  invasion  plans. ...  In  the  military  establishment
Lyman  L.  Lemnitzer,  chairman  of  the  joint  chiefs  of  staff,      it  has  been  said  that  cautions  on  Cuba  were  overruled  by
wrote  a letter  to  the  President  in which he  objected  strongly      the  wishful   thinking  of   intellectuals."
—"Hint   Pentagon   Tried   to  Stop  Fiasco  in  Cuba",  Walter   Trohan,  in  the  Chicago  Tribune,   same   day.
7  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  22,  1961
Three  Items  Which  Show  Us  Less  Concerned  About  Freedom  in  Washington  Than  in  Cuba  or  Laos
We  Only  Seem  to  Be Vigilant About  Dangers to Liberty Away From Home
For  a  country  whose  leaders  sometimes  seem  to  be  itching
to  get  into  war  somewhere—anywhere—in  defense  of   free-
dom,  we  seem  remarkably  composed  about  possible  dangers
to  the  spirit  of  liberty  at  home.    We  cite  a  few  items:
1.  One   of   the  marks  of   a.  country  which  is  falling   into
totalitarian  ways  is  that  the  secret  police  become   sacrosanct.
Here  in  Washington  reporters  are  accustomed  to  ask  imperti-
nent  questions of  officials  from  the  President  down.    But  not
a  single  newspaper  has  had  the  temerity  to  ask  FBI   Chief
J.  Edgar  Hoover  to  comment  on  the  verdict  in  the  Meisen-
bach  case.    Mr.  Hoover,  as  you  recall,  blamed  the  San  Fran-
cisco  student  riots  on  a  student  who   (he  said)   attacked  an
officer.     This  is  also  the  version  given  by  the  Un-American
Activities  Committee narrator in  "Operation   Abolition."     But
when  this  student,  Robert  J.  Meisenbach,  was  brought  to  trial
the  jury  acquitted  him.   Meisenbach  claimed  it  was  the  other
way  around—that  the  officer   hit  him.    If  it  were  any  other
public  official   than  Mr.  Hoover,   the  press  would  have  been
demanding  that  he  explain.
A  Bill  to  Reinstate  an  Iron  Curtain  of  Our Own
2.  One  mark  of  a  totalitarian  society  is  that  the   govern-
ment   decides  what  you  can  read,  and   puts   down   an   iron
curtain    particularly   on    publications    from    abroad.      Two
months  ago  President  Kennedy,   to  his   credit,   stopped   the
practice  by  which  our  postal   officials  have  been   impounding
foreign  publications  containing  ideas  they  consider  dangerous.
Chairman  Walter  of  House  Un-Americans  at  once  put  in  a
bill  (HR   5751)   to  reinstate  this  practice.    Last  Sunday  the
Washington  Post  (May  14)  warned  that  the  bill  was  on  the
consent  calendar  and  might  slip  through   the  house  Monday.
It  called  for  "a  torrent  of   objections."
There  was  an  objection,  but  it  took   the  feeblest   possible
form.    Had  one  member  been  bold  enough  to  stand  up  and
object,   and  then  gotten  two  other  members  to  object  with
him   the   next   time  the   bill   came  up,   it   could   have   been
knocked   off  the   consent   calendar  altogether  and   sent   back
to  wait  its  turn  under  normal  procedures.    Instead  one  mem-
ber  privately  asked  one  of  the  official  party  objectors  to  have
Finest  Straddle  of  the  Year
"I  do  not  join  with  any  group,  whether  they  be  from
the   extreme   left   or   extreme  right,   in   their  vicious
personal  attacks  on either the  members  of  the Supreme
Court  or  the  members  of  the  Committee  on Un-Amer-
ican  Activities Committee."
—Congressman  Chet   Holifield    (D.  Cal.)  responding
to  pressure  from  home  that  he  "say  something"  about
the  House   Vn-Americam,  Activities  Committee.    From
a  speech  on  "The  Communist  Challenge  to  Democratic
Procedures",   an   extension   of   remarks   in   the  House
May  15, in  which, while declaring  himself   "still  critical"
of    "some   of    the   procedures   of    the   Committee"    but,
"aware   of   the   need   for   investigation    by   a  congres-
sional  committee  of  some  type,  into   these  movements
of    the   extreme    left    or   extreme   right,"    he   suggests
"perhaps   a  subcommittee   of   the  Judiciary   Committee
could   be  the  answer  to  this  problem.    The  term  'un-
American'   is   too   vague   to   lend   itself     to   clarity   of
meaning."
the  bill  passed  over  without  prejudice.     This   prevented    it
from  passing  last  Monday  but  leaves  its  status  on  the  consent
calendar  unchanged.    It  may  slip  by  next  on  Monday,  May
29.    Though  Mr.  Walter  was  setting  himself  up  against  the
President,  no  one  was  ready  to  challenge  him  publicly.
3.  Free   societies  jealous   of   their   freedom   are   wary   of
peacetime   sedition   laws.    The  Smith  Act  was  our  first  since
the  hated  Alien  and  Sedition  Acts  of  John  Adams.    In  the
Yates  case,  Mr.  Justice  Harlan   reduced  the  number  of  pos-
sible  prosecutions  under  the   Act  by  strictly  interpreting  the
word  "organize."    When  a  bill  to  widen  the  meaning  of  the
term  came  up  on  the   consent  calendar  earlier  this  session,
Mr.  James  Roosevelt   blocked   passage   by  objecting.     When
it  came  up  again  the  next  Monday,  Mr.  Wm.  Fitts  Ryan  of
New  York  was  intrepid  enough  to  object  but  this  time  two
more  objectors  were  needed  and  none  could  be  found  so  it
passed  on   a.  voice  vote,  after  a  scant  few  minutes  of  discus-
sion,  with  few  members  on  the  floor,  as  a  routine  measure.
Eternal  vigilance,  we  used  to  be  taught  at  school,   is  the
price  of  liberty.    But  the  only  place  we  seem  to  be  aroused
about  it  is  away  from   home.
The  Last  Two  Issues,  on  Guerrilla  War,   Available  as  Free  Samples   if   You   Supply    Stamped   Long   Envelopes
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska   AT*^,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sob  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Vame  ...................................................................................  .....
Street
City   ..
5/22/61
Knter  gift  sub  for  12  (6  raos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ............................................................................
Street    ..........................._.........................................._..........„...
City   ..........................................Zdne............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
5618  Nebraiko  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   IS,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
(.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered u  Second  Clan  Matter  at  WaaUngton,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S.  187*.    Pom-dated  Monday!  bat  published  everr  Thura-
ilay  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   Is   in   the  V.  S.;   16  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Wail   ratea:   $15  to   Europe:    120   to   Israel.   Asia   and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED