I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jul31.pdf

============================================================

Bertrand  Russell  Accuses  Both  Sides  of  Brainwashing  Mankind  Into  Nuclear  War
London, July  23 (Reuters)—British  philosopher  Bertrand  Russell  today  warned  that  the  lead-
ers  of East  and West  were attempting to brainwash  the  public  into  accepting  a  nuclear  war.    The
89-year-old Earl, who prefers  to  be known as  plain  Bertrand  Russell,  said:
"Most  people  in  this  country  as  well  as  in  other  countries  appear  to be unaware  that  the  gov-
ernments  of  East  and  West  are  solemnly  preparing   by  mutual  vituperation   to  create  a   general
state  of mind  in  which  the  public  will  acquiesce  in  a  large-scale  war."
The  veteran  campaigner  for  nuclear  disarmament  called  in  a  statement  for  a  massive   world-
wide  campaign  of  protest.   He  added:
"If  it were not happening,  I  should have  thought  it  inconceivable that  Ministers  hitherto  uncer-
tified  (for insanity)  could  calmly  contemplate  this  wanton  and  merciless  disaster.    Yet  it  is  so.
Statements  have  recently  been made  on both  sides  of  the  Iron  Curtain  claiming  that  in  a  nuclear
war  the  side  to  which  the  speaker  belonged  might  achieve  victory.
"This  is utter  nonsense and  must  be known to  be  nonsense  by  those  who utter  it  unless  they
are  criminally  ignorant  of  things  which  it  is  their  duty  to know. The peril is imminent  and deadly.
If  you  do nothing  during  the  coming weeks  of crisis  you  will  have  your  share  in  the  blame.    You
will  have your  part  in  the  crime  of  killing  all  those  whom you care  for.   The  governments  can be
stopped  in their  mad  folly, but  they  can  only be  stopped  by  a  vast  movement  of  protest."
L F. Stone's Weekly
VOL.  IX,  NO.  29
JULY   31,   1961
i°«      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15   CENTS
There  Will  Always   Be  A  Berlin
Some  therapeutic   perspectives   may  be  brought   to  bear  on
the   Berlin   crisis  if   one   observes   that   the   one-time   capital
of  Germany  is  not  the  only  spot  where  contending  nations
are  prepared  to  kill  and  die.    The  blood  shed  by  France  and
Tunisia   over  Bizerte,  the  long  and   tense   deadlock   between
India  and  Pakistan  over  Kashmir,   the  smoldering   truce  be-
tween  Arab  and  Israeli,   the  eager  readiness  of  Algeria,  Tu-
nisia,  Mali  and  Morocco   to  plunge   into  fratricidal  struggle
over  the  Sahara  once  the  French  have  been  forced  out—all
these   attest   the   stubborn   obduracy   of   the   human   species.
Ayub's  recent  visit  here  may  serve  as  a  reminder  that  if   the
great  Powers  were  not  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  but  Pak-
istan  and  India,  mankind  today  would   be  urged   to  line  up
not  over  Berlin  but  over  Kashmir;  Pakistan  would  be  calling
for   self-determination,   the   otherwise   pacific   Nehru    would
be  defying  the  UN   (as   indeed  he  long   has  on  this   issue,
where  his  native  Kashmir   is  at  stake)   and  propaganda,   in-
stead  of  offering  the  rival  merits  of  Communism  and  capital-
ism, would  be asking the  nations to  choose  between  the  Koran
and  the  Bhagavad-Gita,  or,  less  loftily   but  more   effectively,
between  the  defilers  of  the  sacred  cow  and  the  eaters  of  the
unclean  pig.    It's  a  quarrelsome  race  that  runs  this   planet,
and  it's  always  finding  itself  a  Berlin.
Ideologies  Differ  But  Not  Behavior
The  only  difference  between  this  crisis  and  umteen  others
that  history  records  is That Weapon  this  time  available.
Yet  nowhere  in  his  TV  broadcast on  Berlin  did  Mr.  Kennedy
say  the  words  mankind  needs  to  hear—that  there  is  now  no
alternative   to  learning   to   live   together,   that   problems   can
The  U-2's  Successor
If  the  Soviet  Union  were  putting  satellites  into  orbit
over  the  U.S.  with  the  avowed  purpose  of  subjecting
our  territory  to  reconnaissance,   it   is   not   difficult   to
imagine  the  demand  in  Congress  that  we  find  ways  to
shoot  them  down.    To  the  Tiros  III  and  the  Midas  III
satellites  launched  July  12  we   are   now  planning   to
add  a  Samos  III.    According  to  Missiles  and  Rockets
(July  24),  this  is  "part  of  a  stepped-up  effort   to  get
an  intelligence replacement for  the  grounded U-2  oper-
ational  as  soon  as  possible."   The  Tiros  is  for  weather
observations;  the   Midas  to  detect  flame  from   rocket
exhausts.    The  Samos  seems  to  be  neither  meteorolog-
ical  nor  defensive.    According to  Missiles  and  Rockets
(and  only  its  date  for  the  launching  has  been  denied
at  the  Pentagon),  it  is  "expected  to  scan  Russia  for
up  to  a  full   year—yielding  a  deluge  of   photo  data"
so  great  that  photo  analysis  units  are  being expanded
to  go  on  "a  three-shift-per-day  basis  when  the  input
begins."    What  if  these  satellites  are  shot  down?    Is
it  wise  to  embark  on  this  large  scale  aerial  espionage
without  fuller  consideration?    This  may  spell   serious
trouble  in  the   future,   as   great  or  greater   than  any
caused  by  the  U-2,  the  beginning  of   war  in  space.
no  longer  be  solved  by  resort  to  arms,  that  Our  most  urgent
mobilization  must  now  be  of  patience.    Who   Jays  this  first
and  unmistakably will  win  the  real  battle,  which  is  a  battle
for   men's   hearts   and  minds.    But  Mr.  Koinedy,   like   Mr.
Khrushchov,   as  Earl   Russell  warns   in   the   message   at   the
head  of  this  page,  is  preparing  the  public  Mind  for  nuclear
war,  if  necessary,  and  nurturing  the  illusion'that  victory  in
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
6   *
1   1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   July   31, 1961
it  is  possible.    In  this  stance,   the  two  K's   are  much   alike,
and   this   attests   the   superficiality  of  the   ideological  slogans
which   divide   them   as  compared   to   the   similarity   of   their
behavior.     The   first   response   on   both   sides   is  to   up   the
swollen  military  budgets,  to  mix  their   offers   of  negotiation
with  threats  of  war,  and  to  make  the  threats  meaningful,   as
they  say  at  the  Pentagon,  by  talking  of  nuclear  war  to  their
peoples  as  if  it  could  be  the  prelude  to  finally  making  the
world   safe   for    capitalism    or   communism.      Since   neither
is  bloodthirsty   and  both  are  basically  men  of  peace  one  can
only  conclude  that  the  leaders,   like  common  men   everywhere
(except   perhaps   in   Japan   which   had   a  slight   small  first
taste)   suffer   from   a   failure   of   imagination,   do   not   really
understand   what   they   are   talking   about   when   they   speak
of  nuclear  war.
Even  Voters  in  Minsk
Mr.  Kennedy's  TV  appearance  exhibited  the  characteristic
ambivalence   of  his  campaign   speeches.    It  proffered  a  little
mobilization  and  a  little   more   civil   defense,   a  little  more
for   limited  war  and  a  little  more  for  massive   retaliation,  a
little  more  hope  for  those  who  want  negotiation  and  a  few
more  hints  of  the  possible  areas  in  which   one  might  nego-
tiate.    It  stepped  up  the  arms  race  but  also  talked  of   the
need  for  going on with  our  "efforts  for  realistic disarmament."
It  was  at  one  and  the  same  time  minatory   and   conciliatory.
It  even  talked  of  satisfying   Russia's  "historical  concern  about
their  security   in  Central  and   Eastern   Europe,   after   a  series
of  ravaging  invasions"  and  spoke  feelingly   of   "the    Russian
people  who  bravely   suffered  enormous  losses  in  the   Second
World  War"   but  without  linking  this  to  their  fear  of  another
invasion   from   Germany,   how  a  part  of  that  Atlantic   Com-
munity  which  Mr.  Kennedy   called  "the   heartland   of   human
freedom"    but   which   all   Eastern   Europe   remembers   as   the
source  whence  came  a  cold  genocidal  ferocity  without  parallel
Another  Nuclear  Test  Detection  Discovery
At   press   time,   the  Joint  Congressional  Committee
on  Atomic Energy  was  opening  three  days  of   hearings
on  nuclear  test  detection  methods.    We  will  report  on
them   next   week.    We  note   that   the   advance  list  of
witnesses,   as   in   the   case   of   most   hearings   by   this
Committee,  is   made  up  preponderantly  of   men  from
the  official  agencies  with  the  official  point  of  view.  Last
week   we   reported   that   two   private   companies,   Ray-
theon   and  Allied  Research   Associates,   (according   to
Aviation  Week  of  July  17)  claimed  a  way  to  identify
underground  nuclear  tests  by  radio  waves.    Now  the
current   Journal   of   the   American   Acoustical    Society
brings   news   that   Bell   Telephone   Laboratories   have
discovered  a  way  to  convert  seismic   data  into  audio
tapes.     Listeners   were   then   able   in  over   90   percent
of   the  cases  to  distinguish   earthquakes  from   nuclear
explosions.     Such   identification   is  a  major   stumbling
block   to  inspection   and  agreement.    We  wait   to   see
whether   these   or   other   new   approaches   get   a   fair
airing  from  Pentagon   and  AEC  spokesmen  more  anx-
ious  to  prevent  agreement   and  resume   testing.
in  men's  annals.     In   short,  the  Kennedy   speech  contained
a  little  something  for   everybody;   it  embodied  a  tactic   cal-
culated  to  win  voters  even  in  Minsk,  though  Mr.  Kennedy
in  his  personal  postcript  counted  up  the  three  and  a   half
years  he  still  has  to  serve  in  the  White  House  as  if  he  were
a  prisoner  doing  time.
All  this  was  wrapped   up  in   semantic   war-breeding   con-
fusions,  perilous  delusions  and  incongruous  anti-climaxes.    It
was  almost  comic  to  be  told,  after  a  discreet  summons   to  a
final  Armageddon,  that  "wholesale  prices  are  actually  lower
than  they  were  during  the  recession"  and  to  be  asked   again,
as  in  the  TV   cast  after  Vienna,  to  do  something  about   the
postal   deficit.    It  was  also  amusing  to  see  that  in  his  call
for   sacrifice   and   a  fair   sharing  of   burdens   by  closing   tax
loopholes,   Mr.   Kennedy   shrank   at   sacrificing   Texas   and
Fulbright  Challenges  Goldwater  To  Say  What  He  Means  By  "Total  Victory'
"The   Senator   [Goldwater]   says   that   our  fundamental
objective  must   be  'total  victory'  over   international    Com-
munism.    I  must  confess  to  some  difficulty  in  understanding
precisely  what  'total  victory'  means  in  this  age  of   ideolog-
ical   conflict  and  nuclear  weapons. ...  It  would  be  bene-
ficial ...  if  those  who call  for  'total  victory'  would  spell
out  .  .  .  how  it  might  be  achieved  and  .  .  .  what  we  would
do  with  a  'total  victory'  once  we  had  won  it.    Is  it  to  be
won  by  nuclear  war—a  war  which  at  the  very  least  would
cost  the  lives  of  tens  of  millions  of  people  .  .  .   devastate
most   or  all   of   our   great   cities,   and  mutilate   or   utterly
destroy  a  civilization  which  has  been  built  over   thousands
of   years?
"Or can  'total  victory'  be  won  without  war—by  some  bril-
liant  stroke   of   diplomacy  or  by  arguments   of   such   com-
pelling   logic  that   the   Communists   will   acknowledge   the
error  of  their  ways  and  abandon  their  grand   imperialistic
design?     Perhaps   the   advocates   of   'total   victory"   believe
that  we  can  achieve  it  by  ...     engaging  in  an  unrestricted
nuclear  arms  race,  even  though  such  a  policy  would  provoke
similar  measures  by  the  Communist  powers.
"The  Senator  from  Arizona  suggests  that  the  periphery
of  freedom  'is  growing  steadily  smaller   in  direct  ratio  to
our  failure  to  act  from   strength.'    What  would  a   policy
of   'strength''involve?     Does   it  mean  a  military   invasion
of   Cuba  which  would  destroy   the  Castro  dictatorship  but
which  would  also  alienate  the  rest  of  Latin  America  and
necessitate   the   stationing   of   marines   in   Cuba  to   protect
an   American  imposed   regime   from   Fidelista   rebels   and
guerrillas?      Does   it   mean  the   commitment   of   American
forces  to  interminable  guerrilla   warfare  in  the  jungles  of
Laos,  a  war  in  which  the  advantages   of  geography   would
be  on  the  side  of  the  Communists?
"Even  more  perplexing  than  the  question  of  how  to  win
a  'total  victory' is  the  problem of  what  we  would  do with it?
Would  we  undertake  a  military  occupation  of   Russia  and
China  and  launch  a  massive   program   to  're-educate'  200
million  Russians   and  600  million  Chinese   in  the  ways   of
Western  democracy?   .  .  .
"The  Senator  says  that  I  favor  a  policy  of  'non-interven-
tion.'    I  am  indeed  opposed   to   policies   that   would  over-
extend   the   United   States,   especially    when   such   policies
find  little  support  elsewhere  in  the  non-Communist   world.
By  refusing   to  permit  our  national  strength  to  be  sapped
by  peripheral  struggles,  we  maximize  our  power  to  honor
our  obligations   and  commitments   all  over  the  world.  .  .  .
"There  are  limitations  to  foreign  policy.    We  are  neither
omniscient  nor  omnipotent  and  we  cannot  aspire   to  make
the  world  over  in  our  image.    Our  proper  objective   is   a
continuing   effort   to   limit  the   world  struggle    for   power
and  to bring  it  under civilized  rules.    Such  a  program  lacks
the  drama  and  romance   of   a   global   crusade.     Its  virtue
is  that  it  represents  a  realistic  accommodation  between  our
highest   purposes   and  the   limitations   of   human   capacity.
Its  ultimate  objective  is  indeed  'total  victory,'  not  for  our
arms  in  a  nuclear  war  or  for  the  goal  of  a  world  forcibly
recast   in  our  image,   but  rather   for  a  process—a  process
of  civilizing  international  relations   and  of  bringing   them
gradually  under a  worldwide regime  of  law  and order.  .  .  ."
—Senator   J.   W.   Fulbright   in   the   Senate   July    24.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   July   SI,  1961
cautiously  omitted  any  reference  to  depletion   allowances.    If
and  when  we  all  reach  Kingdom  Come,  the  oil  millionaires
will  arrive  with  their  precious  tax  offsets   intact.
From  a  conventional  point  of  view,  perhaps  this  conven-
tional  leadership  is  necessary,  since  the  men  Mr.  Kennedy
must  satisfy  in  and  out  of  the  government  are  conventionally
blinkered;   Dirksen   and   Halleck   bear   little   resemblance   to
St.  Francis  and  Gautama  Buddha.   We  must  be  grateful  for
small  mercies;  maybe  hints  of   negotiation   must  be  covered
by  threats  of  destruction.    We   hope   the  Russians  will   not
answer   by  another   arms   budget   escalation   but   will   make
unmistakable  their  readiness  to  negotiate  even  to  the  Amer-
ican  public,  which  is  slowly  being  pushed   into  a  war  psy-
chosis.    The   sooner  the   preliminary   sparring  and   opening
exchange  of  fierce  threatening  roars  is  over  the   better,   for
all  kinds  of  instabilities  (notably  in  East  Germany)  lurk  in
the  background  and  may upset  the  intent  of  the  two  Mr.  K's
to  keep  the  situation  from  slipping  out  of  their  control  and
into  war.   We  might   also   suggest,   just  to  emphasize  that
conventional  thinking  is  as  strong  in  the  Kremlin  as  in  the
White  House,  that  the  $3  billions  Mr.  Khrushchev  has  just
added  to  his  arms  budget,  if  spent  instead  on  improving  life
in  East  Germany,  might  not  only  stem  the  human  flow  out-
ward  but  bring  Germans  eagerly  Eastward.    Mr.  Khrushchov
should   remember  his  own  remark  about  missiles   not   being
sausages.
The  Delusions   of   Civil  Defense
Time  is  short.    Grave  delusions  are  fostered  by  the  Presi-
dent's  message  which  may  make  it  more  difficult  for  him  to
negotiate.     His   $200,000,000   extra   for   civil   defense   is  a
trivial   gesture   which   can  only  create  false   hopes   not   real
protection.    We  wonder  how  many  listeners  were  aware  of
the  terrible  meaning  of  Mr.  Kennedy's  qualification  that  in
the  event  of  an  attack  "the  lives  of  those  families  which  are
What's  At  Stake  for  the AMA
"The  AMA  .  .  .  cannot  help  feeling,   probably  cor-
rectly,   that  any  increase  in  the  federal  role  in   medi-
cine  weakens  the  resistance  to a  national  health  service.
This  may  be  especially   true   here,  for   the   professed
aim  of  the   [Kefauver-Celler]   bill  is  to  alter   the  cir-
cumstances  that  make  the  industry's  heavy  investment
in  promotion  profitable.     It  would  make  the  drug  busi-
ness  less  profitable,  reducing  the  economic  power  of  a
principal   political   ally  of   the  AMA.    It   would  .  .  .
sharply  reduce  the  amount of  promotion, and  this  would
reduce  the  AMA's  own  resources,  since  the  AMA,  in
fighting   the   increasingly    expensive   battle   against   a
government-financed  health   service,   has  come  to  rely
heavily  on  the   money   its   journals   earn   from   adver-
tising."
—Science,  July   H
not  hit  in  a  nuclear  blast  and  fire   [our  italics]   can  still  be
saved—if  they can be warned to  take shelter  and  if  that  shelter
is  available."    How  many  realize  that  the  cities  are  written
off  as  expendible,  that  they  will  be  turned  into  raging  crema-
toria,   and  that  only  in  rural   areas  distant   from   cities  and
missile  bases  can  fallout  shelters  be  of  any  conceivable  use?
"We   owe  that  kind   of   insurance,"   Mr.   Kennedy   said   of
shelters,   "to  our  families—and  to  our  country."    The  insur-
ance  we   really   owe  them   is  that   every  last   possibility   of
honorable  negotiation  will  be  exhausted  before we  think  even
of  limited  military  measures  or  of  such  "peaceful"   steps  as
blockades  of  the  Black  and  Baltic  seas,  a  "contingency"   plan
at  which  Chester  Bowles  hinted  on  Meet  the  Press, last Sun-
day.    This  is  not  touch  football,  and  blockades  mean war.
There  is also a dangerous  delusion that may hamper  negotia-
tion  in  the  new  emphasis  on  conventional  and  limited  war.
Here   we  come  to  a  striking   difference   between   the   Eisen-
hower  and  Kennedy  administrations.    Mr.  Eisenhower  ruled
out  mobilization  very  early  in  the  Berlin  crisis  because  he  did
Some  of  the  Distinguished  Physicians  Testifying  for  the  Kefauver-Celler  Drug  Bill
"The  essence  of  their  argument  [the   drug  manufacturers
and  the  AMA]  is  that  the  practicing  physician  is  the  only
one  who  can  determine  efficacy   and  that   he  alone   should
have  the  opportunity  to  grope  with  the  problem  of   deter-
mining  for  himself   whether  any  new  drug  is   good  or  bad
for  his  patient.    This  is  an  invitation  to  all   manufacturers
to  dump  into  the  hands  of  busy  practitioners  any  and  all
types  of  good  and  bad,  useful  or  useless  drugs  and  devices
and  let   them  learn,  at  the  expense   and  peril  of  their  pa-
tients,  whether  they  may be  of  help  in  each  instance  .  .  .
much  to   the  delight   and  profit   of   the   manufacturers."
—Dr.  Maxwell   Finland,  Assoc.  P.  of  Medicine,   Harvard,
testifying    July   25  for   the   Kefauver-Celler    Drug   bill.
"The  provision  that  advertisements  shall  include  a  warn-
ing  of  harmful  effects  and  a  correct  statement   of  a  drug's
efficacy  will  be  a  signal  to  the  doctor  to  learn  more  about
the  drug  if  he  sees  something   in  the  advertisement   with
which  he  was  not  familiar,  and  a  warning  to  abstain  fr.om
prescribing   until  he  does  obtain  further  information.   .  .  .
Any  companies  that  might   have   been   attempting   to  'get
by'  and  to   'shade  the  truth  a  little'  will   either   have   to
change  their  methods  or  go  bankrupt."
—Same  day.    Dr.  Harry   F.  Dowling,  professor   and  head
of   Dept.   of   Medicine,   University    of   Illinois,  since   1951.
"I would like  to  see  drug  costs  brought  down  to  a  reason-
able  level  .  .  .  not  only  to  curb  exaggerated  costs  but  to
prepare  for   tomorrow  when  new  developments   and   infla-
tionary  trends  will   make  all  drug  and  medical  care  costs
go  up.  .  .  .  Since  the  end  of   World   War  II,  medical  care
prices  have  moved   upward  more  rapidly  than  any  of   the
major  categories  in  the  consumer  price   index.   .  .  .  High
costs  are  just  one  phase  of  the  problem.    The  quantity  and
quality  of  the  promotion  and advertising  of   pharmaceuticals
by  the  drug  industry  is  undoubtedly  seriously   interfering
with   the  ability   of   the  average  physician   to   render   the
highest   quality  of   medical  care.     Even   a  large   teaching
hospital   such   as  my  own,  with  highly   sophisticated   pro-
fessional  control  and  supervision,   must  be  ever  on  guard
against  the  vigorous  pressures  of  the  drug  salesmen."
—Same,  July    21,  Dr.   Martin   Cherkassky,   director   of
Montefiore    Hospital   and  the  Greater   N.Y.   Hospital   Asso-
ciation.
"It  did not  seem  to  the  Physicians'  Council  that   educators
are  adequately   concerned   about  the  drift  of  influence   over
the  habits  and  beliefs  of  physicians  into  the  hands  of  the
promoters  of  drugs.  .  .  .  The  expenditure  for  promotion  is
nearly  four  times  that  of  the  medical  schools  annually.  .  .  .
A  defense   of  the  laissez   faire  attitude  by  manufacturers
is  that  well  educated  physicians   will  not  be  influenced  by
misleading   advertising.     This   would   seem   feeble   justifica-
tion  for  purveying  misleading   literature.  .  .  .  The Physi-
cians'   Council,  having   explored  every   possible   alternative
in   an   effort   to   improve   the   standards   of   promotion   of
pharmaceutical   products  on  a  voluntary  basis,  has   reluc-
tantly  concluded  that  legislation  is  necessary  in  the  public
interest."
—Same,  July   21,  Dr.  Julius  B.  Richmond,   Prof,   of   Med-
icine,  Syracuse,   on   behalf     of   the   Physicians'    Council.
1   1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   July   31,  1961
Mac Arthur  Warns  Kennedy  Against  Military  Adventures  in  Asia
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
not  think  limited  and  conventional  war  possible  in  the  heart
of  Europe.    There  was  therefore  no  need  to  call  up  reserves.
Mr.  Kennedy,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  won  over  to  the
views  of  his  military  adviser,  General   Maxwell  D.   Taylor,
who  quit  the  Eisenhower  Administration in  protest.    General
Taylor's  views  are  congenial  to  the  Army  of  which  he  was
Chief  of   Staff;  if  conventional  limited  war  is  possible,   then
more  funds  ought  to  go  to  the  Army  and  less  to  the  Strate-
gic  Air  Command.    The  Army  is  looking   for  some  way  to
turn  back  the  clock  and  resume  the  game  of  war  without  its
being  mutually  suicidal.    The  idea  that  armed  conflict  on  the
ground   over  Berlin   might   provide  a   "pause   for   reflection"
seems  to  us  dubious;  it's hard  enough  to  get  that  pause  be-
fore  fighting  begins;  once  it  starts  the  hate,  fear  and  enthusi-
asm  unleashed  make reflection unlikely.  To  make conventional
war  feasible  on  the  ground,  the  army  must  be  beefed  up,  so
we  have  the  beginnings  of  mobilization,  though  without   the
name.  The  atmosphere  created  is not  conducive to  negotiation.
The  More  Arms  The  Less  Diplomacy
•.  There  are  signs  that  Mr.  Kennedy  is  taking  advantage  of
the  Berlin  crisis  to  expand  forces  for   swift  mobile  military
action  by  conventional  means  in  those  peripheral  areas,  like
Southeast  Asia  and  Latin  America,  where  conventional  war
may  well  remain  possible.    The  danger  here  is  that  the  more
military  power  we  have  the  less  we  rely  on  diplomacy  and
the  greater  our  tendency  to  rush  into  situations  where  pati-
ence  is  wiser  than  intervention.    A  few  years  ago  we  might
thus  have  plunged   into  endless  trouble  over  Iraq,  which  was
supposed  to  be  on  the  verge  of  going  Red  but  has  become  a
prime  headache  for  Moscow.    Only  a  few  months  ago, had
more  airlift  been  available,  we  might  have  created  an  Algeria
all  our  own  in  Cuba.    Mr.  Kennedy  may  have  had  Laos  in
mind  when  he  said   he  intended   to   "have   a  wider   choice
than  humiliation  or  all-out  nuclear  war."   He  may  feel  the
current  negotiations  with  Red  China  over  Laos  as  humilia-
tion,  but  the  current  talks  are  far  better  than  compounding
the  past  errors  of  the  CIA  and  the  military  under  Eisenhower
in  Laos by plunging  into the  jungle with  American boys.  Our
military  machine,  fueled  by  another  $6  billion  since  Kennedy
took  office,  already  almost  too  monstrous  for  management,  is
Most  Reviewed  Book  of  The  Week
"Mr.  Speaker,  there  was  recently   published  a  book
titled   'The   Un-Americans,'  whose   subtitle,   describing
it  as  the  first  fully  documented  account  of  the  notorious
Un-American   Activities   Committee,  how   their   abuse
of  power  is  being  met  by  a  growing  opposition,  clearly
suggests  the  scurrilous  nature of  this  publication.   It  is
published  in  a  paperback edition,  over  300 pages,  priced
at  60  cents,  by  Ballantine  Books,  Inc., of   New   York,
and  is  obviously  meant  to  reach  as  wide  an  audience
as   possible.
"The  drive  to  discredit  this  committee coincides  with
the   present   massive   peace   effort   of   the   world  Com-
munist  conspiracy  which  is  designed  to  weaken  Amer-
ican  security,  to  disarm  and  to  destroy   us  ...      at  a
critical  stage   of  world  history,  with  Berlin  and Ger-
many  at  stake. ...  At  a  most  conservative  estimate,
the  Communist  Party  within  our  borders  will  be   ex-
pending  this  year  not  thousands  but  millions  of  dollars,
in  its  propaganda  efforts   .  .  .  and  the  dissemination
of  its  tainted  literature."
—HUAC   Chairman  Walter   in  the  House,  July  17
"Gore  Vidal  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for Con-
gress  from  the  29th  District  of  New  York  in  the  last
election.    Fortunately,  Mr. Speaker,  the  discerning vot-
ers  of  that  district  spared  your  party  and  this   House
the  onus   of   Mr.  Vidal's  membership  in   the   Congress
of  the  U.S.  A  few  weeks  ago  in  Life  Magazine,  Vidal
did   a   subtle   and  clever   smear   job   upon   the   distin-
guished   Senator   from   Arizona   [Goldwater].     In   the
Herald-Tribune  of  last  week  he  did  a  vicious  and  not
so  subtle  a  smear  job  on  the  Committee  on  Un-Amer-
ican  Activities.    He  uses  the  book  of   Frank  Donner,
'The  Un-Americans'  as  the  basis  for  his  attack."
—HUAC   Member   Scherer  in  the  House,   July   19.
much  too  eager  for  involvement  in  Asia.    We  noted  in  the
New   York  Herald-Tribune  the  day  after  the  President's  ad-
dress  that  General  MacArthur  on  his  recent  visit  to  Mr. Ken-
nedy  at  the  White  House  had  asked  if  he  could  be  frank  and
when  told  he  might  "proceeded   to  give  as  frank  a  talk  as  the
President  ever  had  heard.    Net  of  the  talk:  keep  U.S. troops
off  the  mainland  of  Asia  at  all  costs."    There  lies  the  biggest
trap  of  all  for  our  conventional  warriors,  a  quicksand  which
could  absorb a  major  share  of  our  youth  in  endless  "limited"
war.                                                                       Noon,   July  26
Fight   War  Fever  By  Letting   Us  Send   This   Issue   to  Friends   In  Stamped   Addressed   LONG   Envelopes
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew
Name  ..............
Street   ............
City  ........... —
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ,.
Street    .........
City  ............_
Shall  we  send
i
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
..........................Zone....... — .1
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
gift  announcement?
7/31/61
yr.)   additional:
Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
t.  t.   Stone'i  Weekly.    Entered  at  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C,.  Under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.     Subscription:   {5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Ail   Mail   rates:•  $15  to   Europe;    $20   to    Israel,    Asia   and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED