I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961sep25.pdf

============================================================

How  Ribicoff   Defied   the Drug Lobby   P.  3
In  Weakly  Resuming  Nuclear Tests,  Kennedy  Lets  the  Russians Off the  Hook, See Page 2
/. K Stone's Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NO.  35
SEPTEMBER   25,  1961
•»«      WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
Answering  Life  Magazine's, "97  Out  of  100  People  Can  Be Saved"
Almost   As   Safe  As  Ivory  Soap  Is  Pure?
Crisis  is  piling  on  crisis,  instabilities  mount  in  an  unstable
world,  frustration  is  added  to  frustration.    At  such  a  time  it
is  dangerous  to  spread  the  illusion  that  thermonuclear  war
may  be  a  way  out,  a  cleansing  thunder  storm  in  the  planet's
humid  summer,  or  a  cathartic that  would  magically purge  our
ills,  if  only we  are  ready  to  spend  a  cramped  week  or  two  in
underground  shelters,  emerging  on  a  world  from  which  com-
munism  had  happily  disappeared  but  where  free  enterprise
was all  set to go again.*  As  if  orchestrated  out  of  Washington,
mass  circulation  media  are  beginning  to  condition  the  public
mind  for  nuclear war.   The  Saturday  Evening  Post  (Sept.  16)
inaugurates  a new  department,  "The  Voice  of  Dissent"  with  a
piece  by  that  favorite  iconoclast  of  the  Air   Force,   Herman
Kahn.    The  Associated  Press  sends  out  a  series  of  interviews
with  Dr.   Edward  Teller,  on  how  exaggerated   are  fears  of
thermonuclear  war.    US.  News  &  World  Report  (Sept.  25)
runs  a  cheerful  cover  piece,  "If  Bombs  Do  Fall",  with  a  side
story  from  Japan  on  how  well  the  survivors of  Hiroshima  and
Nagasaki   are   doing.      Life    Magazine   (Sept.   15)    puts   a
civilian  in  a  reddish  fallout suit looking  like  a  partially  boiled
lobster  on  its  cover,  with  the  glad  tidings,   "How   You  Can
Survive  Fallout.    97  Out  of  100 People  Can Be Saved.  .  .  ."
Why  Bother With  Aspirin?
No  doubt  the  purpose  is to make our  threat  of  going  to war
over  Berlin  credible  to  Khrushchev,  as  indeed  it  should.    Our
ultimate  weapon,  Madison   Avenue,  may  be  able  to  sell  any-
thing  to  the  American  people,   even  the  notion—why   fool
around  with  aspirin?—that  one  little  bullet  through  the  head
and  that  headache  will  disappear.    Some  years  back,  the  Pen-
tagon   and   popular   magazines   were   advertising  how  many
Russian  cities  we  could   "take  out"   if  necessary.    Now   the
same  .moral  imbecility  is  being   applied   to   our   own   cities.
"About  five  million  people,"  Life   says lightly,  "less  than  3%
of  the  population,  would  die."     It  adds  hastily,  to  anticipate
any  vestigial  humane  twinges,   "This  in   itself   is  a   ghastly
number.    But  you have  to  look  at  it  coldly.  .  .  ."    Life   has
been   telling   us  righteously   that   the   Godless   Chinese  Reds
put  little  value  on  human  life.    Mao  is  willing  to  see  mil-
* "What  about  money?    Instead  of  destroying  all  old  bills
that  are  taken  out  of  circulation,  the  Government  is  storing
money  away  in  strongboxes  around  the  country.   Enough  $1
bills have  been  saved to last 8 months. . . .
"Bank  accounts safe?    Plans  are  being  worked  out  to  en-
able  you  to  write  checks  on  your  bank  account—even  if  the
bank  itself  were  destroyed."
—"//  Bombs  Do   'Fall   on   U.S."—U.S.   News   and   World
Report,  Sept.  25.
1   3   '/
Russell's   Latest  Appeal
"At  any  moment  of  any  day  the  slightest  miscalcula-
tion  can  bring  nuclear  war.    Rockets  are  poised   at  a
few  minutes' notice.    H-bombers are  continually in  the
air,  radar  is  totally  unreliable.   Radioactivity  kills  and
maims  our  children.   War  is  always imminent.
"To  use  the  vast  scheme  of  mass  murder  which  is
being  prepared,   nominally  for   our  protection,  but   in
fact   for  universal  extermination,  is  a  horror  and  an
abomination.    We  call  upon  people  everywhere  to  rise
against  this  monstrous  tyranny.
"We  call  upon  scientists   to  refuse  work  on  nuclear
weapons.    We  call  upon  workers  to   "black*   [boycott]
all work connected with them  and to use their  industrial
strength  in  the  struggle  for  life.   We  will  not  tolerate
the  incineration  of  human  beings  because  governments
are  occupied  with  idiotic matters  of  prestige."
—Bertrand  Russell,  appeal  for  "an  international   re-
sistance  movement"  to  nuclear  war,  issued  from  prison
Sept.  17  "when  3,000  police  struggled  to  clear  a  crowd
of  15,000"  out  of  Trafalgar   Square  "in  the  biggest  ban-
the-bomb  demonstration  held  in  London"  and  a  "pirate"
voice  of  nuclear  disarmament   broke  in   on  BBC   tele-
vision.    This  account  and  the  Russell  text  is  from  the
London  Daily  Telegraph,  Sept.  18.
lions  die  to  wipe  out  capitalism  but  Henry  Luce  is  willing  to
see  millions   die   to  wipe  out   communism.    Kennedy,   like
Khrushchev,  prepares  the  public mind  to  gamble  all,  if  neces-
sary,  on  Berlin.    This  is  the  real  mobilization.    Our  moral
scruples  and  our  good  sense  must  first  be  conscripted.
Worse  than  the  horror  is  the  levity,  the  transparent   men-
dacity  and  the  eager  commercialism.    A  happy  family  with
three  children  is shown  by Life   in  their  well  stocked  assemble-
it-yourself   prefabricated   steel   shelter,   only   $700   from   the
Kelsey-Hayes  Company  (and  soon  to  be  marketed  by  Sears,
Roebuck).    A  picture  shows  a  girl  laughingly  talking  on  the
phone  from  an  underground  shelter,  as  if  to  her  beau,  who  is
presumably  in  his  own  shelter  and  ready  to  take  her  to  the
latest  movie  as  soon  as  the  all  clear  sounds.    Grandmother's
old  fashioned  remedies  turn  out  to  be  best  after  all  even  in
thermonuclear  war.    "The  best first aid for  radiation  sickness,"
Life   advises,  "is  to  take  hot  tea or  a  solution  of  baking  soda."
Suddenly  thermonuclear  war  is  made  to  seem  familiar,  almost
cozy.    All  you  need  is  a  shelter,  a  well  stocked  pantry,  some
new  gadgets  like  geiger  counters.    The  budding  boom  in these
products  promises  to stimulate  badly lagging magazine  lineage.
Life's   editorial  hopes  Khrushchev   notices   "our   spontaneous
•  boom   in   shelter-building"   and   concludes  euphorically,    "He
{Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  tS,  1991
Humphrey  Warns;  We'd  Better  Take the  Initiative  Now  Toward  A  New  Agreement
                        ?
In  Weakly  Resuming   Tests,  Kennedy  Helps  Russian  Propaganda
One  day last  week  President  Kennedy was  so worried  about
U.S.  ineffectiveness  abroad  in  psychological  and  political  war-
fare  that  he  set up  a  Cabinet  level  group  to  study  the  problem
for  him.    The  next  day  he  resumed  testing.    The  President
is  concerned,  as  many  of  us  are,  by  the  capacity  of  the  Rus-
sians  to  "get   away  with  it"  as  they  did  on  test  resumption
with  a  minimum  of  world  protest.    But  he  makes  the  Rus-
sian  task  easier  by  weakly  following  their   lead.     The   best
information  I  can  get  is  that  the  reasons  for  resumption  were
political.    As  he  did  on  Cuba,  Mr.  Kennedy  decided  to  split
the  difference  between  appeasing  the  rightists  and   following
a  clear moral line.   The  result  is apt  to be the  same.   In  Cuba,
we  got  the  benefit  neither  of  a  forceful  nor  of  a  conciliatory
policy.    On. testing,  we  neither  terrorize  as  the  Russians  do
by  talking  of  a  new  monster  weapon  nor  win  a  propaganda
victory  by  setting  a  sharp  contrast  between  their  policy  and
ours.
Why  Didn't  They  (and  We)  Wait?
Two   questions  remain  unanswered  in  the   resumption  of
testing.    One  is why  the  Russians didn't  wait,  since  it  seemed
fairly  clear  that  if  they  didn't  start  testing  soon,  we  would.
The    other    is   why   Kennedy   acted   so   precipitantly.     At
first  it  was  said  we  feared  that  the  Russians  after   a  short
series  of  tests  would  put  us  on  the  spot  by  calling  for  a  new
moratorium.   Now  the  AP  quotes  unnamed  scientists   (Wash-
ington  Post,  Sept.  19)   as  fearing  that  the  Russian  tests  will
go  on  until  the  atmosphere  is saturated  with  radioactive debris
"but   just  short   of  an  unquestionable  health-hazard  point."
Thus,  so  goes  this  new  theory,  the  Russians will  prevent  us
from  engaging  in  atmospheric  tests,  too,  "lest  these  endanger
people  throughout  the  world."    When  supposedly  informed
opinion   oscillates  between  such  extreme  theories,   it  is  clear
that  we are  doing  some  wild  guessing.   It  would  be better  to
base  national  policy  on  our  own  conceptions  of  what  is  right.
Several  things  have  been  clarified  by  the  Soviet  resumption
of  testing.    One  is that  the  fear  of  secret  Soviet  testing  under-
ground  was  a  bogey  created  by  opponents  of  test   cessation
on  our  side.    If  the  Soviet  Union  had  the  means  or  the  in-
clination   to   secret  underground   testing,   it  would   not  now
be  devoting  so  many  of  the  detonations  in  its  current  series
to  weapons  in  the  small  kiloton  range.    The  second  is  that
it  was  equally  deceptive   to  argue  that   the   prolonged   test
The  U-2  and  New  Soviet  Tests
"Undoubtedly  a  number of  factors  hardened  the  Sov-
iet  attitude  on  test  talks  at  Geneva.   Soviet  successes
elsewhere,  reluctance  to  accept  even  a  partial  loss  of
sovereignty,  and  renewed  pressure  from   the  military
all  would  appear  to  be  contributory.   In  this  connec-
tion,  I  have  a  view  that  our  U-2  overflights  may  have
cast  their  shadow over  the  conference table  at  Geneva.
Soviet  secrecy  as  to  their  strategic  bases  was  a  price-
less  asset  and  must  have  given  the  Kremlin  a  great
sense  of  security.   This  position of  security  was  great-
ly  undermined  by  the  U-2  affair.   Generals  in  the USSR
must  have  viewed  their  fixed  ICBM  bases  as  highly
vulnerable  to  a  U.S.  first  strike  or  preemptive attack.
To  redress  this  loss  of  security  there  must  have arisen
a  strong  military  demand  for  solid-fueled,  mobile,  bal-
listic   missiles   of   intercontinental  range.    A   lighter
weight,  high-yield missile  warhead  would  then become
a  military  requirement of  high  urgency.   This,  in  turn,
would  generate  high  pressure  for   the  resumption  of
Soviet  tests  capable of  developing these  new warheads."
—Ralph  Lapp,  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists,  Sept,
talks  constituted  a  plot  by  the  Russians  to  keep  us  from  test-
ing.    In  retrospect,  it  looks  the  other  way round.    The  mora-
torium  tended  to   freeze   a  situation   in  which  we  were   far
ahead  of  the  Russians,  since  we  had  made  many  more  tests.
The   third   observation   is  that   we  would   have   been   better
off  with  an  agreement  even  on  Russian  terms,  including   the
troika.    No   special  network  is  required  to  detect  violations
of  the  treaty in  the  atmosphere  where  the  Russians are  testing
and  where  we  will  soon  be  testing,  too,  if  our  military  and
AEC  have  their  way.
The  case against nuclear testing  has  in  no way been  changed
by  Soviet resumption.   It pollutes  the  air of  mankind.   It  steps
up  world  tension.    It  speeds  up  a  nuclear   arms  race  that
leads   nowhere  but   mutual   destruction.     It   is  more   urgent
than  ever  to  stop  it.    Are  we  going  to  drift  along  in  the
Russian  wake,  or—as Senator  Humphrey  pleaded  in a  thought-
ful   but  unnoticed   speech   to  the  Senate  Sept.   16—take  the
initiative  toward  a  new  agreement?    Humphrey  warned  that
the  Russians  may  finish  their  tests  and  go  before  the   UN
General   Assembly  with  a  plan   for   test   cessation.    "Unless
we  take  the  initiative,"  Humphrey  told  the  Senate,  "we  shall
be  trapped  again  by  Soviet  propaganda."
Opponent  of  Test  Cessation  and  Advocate  of  Neutron  Bomb Changes His  Mind
"I  have  been  asked  by  the  editor  to  make  some  remarks
concerning  the so-called  'neutron  bomb.' ...  I  am  unfortu-
nately  not  permitted  by  security  regulations  to  state  my
views  upon  these questions with  any  precision.   I  therefore
confine  myself  to  general  statements.  .  .  .
"First,  I  do not  believe that  neutron bombs are militarily
advantageous  to  the  U.S.  nor that  they will alleviate any  of
our  military  problems.    On  the  contrary,  neutron  bombs,
like  hydrogen  bombs,  will  in  the  long  run  only complicate
our  lives,  increase  our  insecurity  and  possibly  facilitate  our
extermination.    Second,  I  do  not  support  any  of  the  argu-
ments  which  have  recently  appeared  in   the   newspapers
claiming  that  the  neutron  bomb  makes  it  necessary   to  re-
sume  testing  immediately. ...
"In  the  long  run I  do not  see  any  way  to  halt  the  merci-
less   advance   of   nuclear   technology,   except   by  complete
openness  in  nuclear  research.    The  objective  of  openness  is
of  such  overriding  importance,  that  it  is  worth  almost  any
risk  to  reach  it.    For  this  reason,  when  Khrushchev  offered
us  complete  openness  in  exchange  for  complete disarma-
ment,  we  ought  to  have  jumped  at  the  offer.    Despite  all
the  uncertainties  .  .  .  this  is  the  kind  of  a  bargain  that
would  in  the  long  run  make  sense."
—Prof.  Freeman J.  Dyson,  Institute  for  Advanced  Study,
in   the  September  1961  Bulletin  of   the  Atomic  Scientist!
(writing   before   Soviet  test  resumption);  18  months  ago  in
Foreign   Affairs    (April   1960)  Prof.   Dyson  argued  against
test  cessation  and  for  work  on  the  neutron  bomb.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'g  Weekly,  September tB, 1861
Documentary:  Ribicoff  Vigorous  Against  Medical  Abuses  in  Testifying  for  Kefauver Bill
"We  Give  Hogs  More  Protection  Than  People  Against  Worthless   Drugs"
Not  since  the  days  of  Harold  Ickes  has  a  Cabinet     officer
spoken  out  with  the  vigor  shown  by  Secretary   of   Health,
Education   and   Welfare     Ribicoff     in   challenging   the   drug
lobby  by  his  testimony  Sept.  IS  in  support  of  Senator   Ke-
fauver's   bill  S.  1552  to  protect  the  public  from  overpriced
drugs  and  misleading  claims for  them.   Press  coverage was
poor  and  we  provide  excerpts   here:
"The   first   and  most  basic  proposal   is  to  require  that  a
'new  drug'  be  proved  effective  before  it  may be  marketed  for
general   use  in  interstate  commerce.
"Mr.  Chairman,  I  am  firmly  of  the  opinion  that  the  time
has  come  in  the  United  States—in  1961—to  give  American
men,  women  and  children  the  same  protection  we  have  been
giving   hogs,   sheep  and   cattle  since   1913.     For   the  plain
fact  is  that  until  we  are  allowed  to  require  that  a  drug  be
proven   effective   before  it  is  marketed,  we  must  say  to   the
American  people:  a  hog  is  protected  against  worthless  drugs,
but  you  are  not.
No  Similar  Authority  for  Humans
"The   Virus-Serum-Toxin  Act  of   1913   forbids  'worthless'
biologicals  for  the  treatment  of   domestic  animals  and   pro-
vides  for  establishment  and  product   licenses  to  assure  com-
pliance  at  the  sources.    No  similar  authority  exists  with  re-
spect   to  drugs  for  human  consumption.
"There  has  been  a  great   deal   of  misunderstanding  over
this  requirement  of   proven  effectiveness.    The   proposal   is
really  quite  simple.    Under  present  law,  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration  requires  proof  only  of  safety  before  allowing
a  new  drug  to  be  marketed.    Even  if  the  PDA  has  reason
to  believe  that  the  new  drug  is  not  effective  for  the  purposes
claimed,  it  must  approve  the  new drug  application.  .  .  .
"For   example,  when  a  drug  is  presented  to  us  for   clear-
ance  under  the  new  drug  procedures  •with  labelling   offering
it  for  weight  reduction,  for   the  treatment  of   symptoms  of
arthritis   and  rheumatism,  or  for  other  conditions,   but  it  is
substantially  innocuous,  we  cannot  deny  the  new  drug  appli-
cation  on  the  ground  that  the  article  is  unsafe.    We  have  to
approve  it,  although   we  believe  that  the  promotion   of   the
drug  will  actually  violate  the  provisions  of  the  law  against
Inspections  Now  Few  and  Feeble
"A  food  and drug  inspector gets into  each  of  the  1200
drug  factories  once  every  4.6 years  on the  average.  .  . .
He  observes  manufacturing operations  that  may  be  un-
derway  at  the  moment. .  .  .  But  these  and other  steps
authorized  by  present  law  fall  far   short   of   allowing
him  to  make  a  true  evaluation. .  .  .
"Most  drug  plants  produce only  a  few  of  their  prod-
ucts  at  any  one  time.    The  inspector  generally  cannot
determine  .  .  .  the  processes  .  .  .  employed  in  his ab-
sence.  .  . .  Most  of  the firms we  inspect  voluntarily per-
mit  such  inspections  today.   However, in  the  32 months
ending  August  1961, 122  firms refused  to  permit one  or
more   phases  of   inspection.   .  .  .   This    hide-and-seek
method   of   attempting   to   inspect   questionable   drug
plants  is  an  absurdity.  .  .  .  The factory  inspection  pro-
visions  of  S.  1552  would  correct  this  situation  with  re-
spect  to  drugs  for  prescription  use."
—Ribicoff    testifying   for  S.  1552, Sept.  IS.
false  and  misleading  labelling.
"We  believe this state of  affairs  is indefensible.    We  believe
that  where  public  health  is  involved,  it  is  intolerable  to  per-
mit  the  marketing  of  worthless  products  under  the  rules  of
a  cat-and-mouse  game  where  a  manufacturer  can  fool   the
public until  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration finally catches
up  with  him.  . . .
"Let  me  make  it  absolutely  clear  that  we  are  not   dealing
here with  what  some  have  called  'relative  efficacy.'    The  claim
has  been  made  before  this  subcommittee  that  the   proposed
amendment  would  enable  us  'to  decide  the  relative  or  com-
parative  efficacy  of  a  new  drug  in  terms  of  drugs  already  on
the  market.  .  . .'
"The  proposed  amendments  would  merely  require  a  show-
ing  that  the  new  drug  described  in  the  application   is  safe
for   use  and  is  effective   in  use,  under  conditions   prescribed,
recommended  or  suggested   in  the   labelling   thereof.    This
would  not require a showing of  relatively greater  efficacy.  . . .
It  would  merely  require  that  a  drug  claimed  to  be   effective
for   a  particular  purpose   has   been   demonstrated   by   sound
scientific  procedures to  be  effective  for  that  purpose.    In  short,
it  must  live  up  to  the  claims  made  for   it."
An  Example  of  False Advertising  in  AMA Journal  At  Expense  of  Heart Patients
"With  more  than  400  new  drugs  coming  onto  the  market
each  year,  is  it  realistic  to  suppose   that  every  practicing
physician  can  make  an  accurate   determination   of   the   ef-
fectiveness  of  each  of  these  products?    If  there  is  any doubt
about  this,  let  me  cite  one  example  of  the  kind  of  unsup-
ported  claims  that  are  currently  being  made  to  the  medical
profession   and  relied   upon   by   physicians   in   prescribing
drugs.
"The  January   14,  1961,   issue  of   the   American   Medical
Association  Journal  contained  an  advertisement  for  a  prod-
uct  called   'Clarin',  which  is  heparin  potassium  in  a  tablet
to  be  taken   under  the  tongue.    The  advertisement   states
that   the  drug  has   'demonstrated  value'  in  'post-coronary
management,'  and  that  in  a  significant  number  of  cases  it
has   prevented   recurrent   heart   attacks.     Yet   in  the   1961
edition  of  New  and  Non-Official  Drugs,  a  publication  of  the
AMA's  own  Council  on  Drugs,  the  same  drug  is  given  the
following  appraisal:  'However,  there  is  as  yet  no  convinc-
ing   objective   evidence   that   heparin,   given  sublingually,
either  prevents  or  ameliorates  any  manifestation  of  cardio-
vascular  disease.    Hence,  the  use  of  heparin  potassium  in
the   hope  of   ameliorating  the   progress   of   atherosclerosis
must  be  considered   experimental.'
"The  drug  is  being  prescribed  for  these  unproved  condi-
tions.   While we cannot  estimate  its  total  sales,  they  exceed
$300,000  annually.    Local  prices  are  about  $8.50  a  bottle  of
50  tablets.    If  3  each  day  were  the  dose,  the  patient would
be out  over  $15 a  month  for  an  ineffective drug.  The burden
of  this  cost  falls  heavily   on  a  post  heart   attack  victim—
generally  one  least  able  to  bear  protracted  costs  of  main-
tenance  medication.   Physicians  prescribing  the  drug  in  re-
liance  on claims  such  as  are  made in  the  advertisements  are
unwittingly  experimenting  with  their  heart  patients,  at  the
patients'  expense."
—Secretary   of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare    Ribicoff    before   the  Kefauver   subcommittee  on S.  1552,  Sept.   13.
t   3   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  85,1981
Kennedy Told  Congressional  Leaders  War Would  Cost 70 Million U. S. Lives
(Continued  from  Page   One)
cannot  doubt  our  ability  to  wage  nuclear  war,  or  to  erase  his
cities."     Aren't  we  getting   our  people   ready  to   accept   the
erasure  of  ours?    We  used  to  think  thermonuclear  war  likely
only  if  lunatics came  to  power.    Well,  here  they are.
No  Time  to  Pile  Delusion  on Hysteria
I  am  not  arguing  for  surrender,  a  runout  on  Berlin, dis-
honor,   national   cowardice,   appeasement   or   better-red-than-
dead.    I  am  trying  to  say  that  when  a  nation  faces  problems
as  complex  as  those  which  now  face  ours  in  Germany,   the
United  Nations,  the  Congo,  Laos  and  the  resumption  of  nu-
clear  testing,   there  is  a  duty  on  every  publisher   and   every
writer  to  help  inculcate  sobriety  and  the  need  for   reflection.
The  President's  power  to maneuver and  negotiate is not  helped
by  piling  delusion  upon  hysteria,  by  making  people  feel  not
only  that  we  face  a  simple  choice  of  death-or-surrender  but
that  most of  us won't  die anyway—so why bother  to  negotiate?
Why   should  President  Kennedy  lend  his  name  to    Life's
wicked  stunt?    Nowhere   does  Life   tell  us  what  level   and
kind  of  attack  it  assumes  which  need  kill  only  3  percent  of
our  people.    The  latest  Rand  study  in  the  new  Holifield  com-
mittee  hearings  shows  3  percent  dead  as  the  result  of  "a  very
small  attack  delivering  300  megatons"  on  military  targets  ex-
clusively.    Even this small  attack,  if  aimed  at  our  cities  would
put  inescapable  deaths  (with  everyone in  some  shelter)   up  to
35  percent.    The  same  study  (p.  216, House  Gov't  Opera-
tions,  Civil  Defense,  Aug.  1961) shows  a  3,000  megaton  at-
tack  on  cities would  put  inescapable  deaths  up  to  80  percent.
The  new  Holifield  report  on  these hearings  says that  an  attack
half  this  size,  as  assumed  by  Secretary  McNamara,  would  kill
50  million  Americans  and  seriously  injury   20  million   more
(see  section  on  "Loose  Arithmetic" p.  55).   The  report  warns
that  the  existing  basement  space  on  which  the  Secretary  relies
to  save  10  to  15  million  lives  won't  do.   "All deaths  from
fallout  can be prevented,"  the  report  says,  "but  not  in  existing
buildings,   even   when   improved.     Nationwide,   the   largest
Death  In  A  Den  of  Wolves
Dag  Hammarskjold's   career  was  set  for  an   unhappy
ending.   Gospel  to  the  contrary,  the  peacemaker's  lot  is
an  accursed  one.    He  was  ringed  by  a  strange  coalition
of  enemies:  the  Soviet   Union,  the  great  copper   mining
interests  of  Katanga   and  Northern  Rhodesia   with   all
the   influence  they   command   in  Brussels,   London   and
New  York;  de  Gaulle  and  the  French   African   Catholic
bloc   which   radiates   out   of   Brazzaville   and  has  been
helping  Tshombe.     Senator  Dodd  was  attacking   Ham-
marskjold's   peace  efforts  in  the  Congo  a  few  days  be-
fore  his  death  as  a  Communist   plot  while  Moscow   was
assailing  him  as  an  imperialist   tool,  and  Peking  was
angrily   withdrawing   its   envoy   from   Stanleyville    be-
cause  Gizenga   (to  our  simple-minded   rightists  a Red)
had  joined   the   central   government!     Britain's  Tories
backed  by  Rhodesia's   white  supremacists  were  opening
an   attack   on   Hammarskjold   before   he   died,   and   an
evil  role  was  played  in  his  death  by  the  refusal  of  the
British   government   (until   after  he  died)   to  allow   the
Ethiopians   to  fly  three   jet   planes   over   East   African
territory  to  guard  UN  forces  from  Tshombe's  two jets.
More  attention   should  be  focused  on  this.    It  was  lack
of  air  cover  which  forced   his  fatal  night   flight.   First
Lumumba,  now  Hammarskjold,   are  the  victims  of neo-
colonialism    in   the   Congo.     The   United   Nations   and
world  peace  may  be  next,  particularly   if   Moscow per-
sists  in  its  obdurate  Peking-style  attitude  toward  the
UN.     Mr.  Hammarskjold   had  to  operate  in  a  den  of
wolves,   and  died  in  the  struggle  for  world law.
number  of  structures  do  not  afford   even  the  bare  minimum
factor  considered necessary to.bring  the  radiation  hazard  down
to  tolerable   levels."
Stewart  Alsop's  "Report  Card"  on  Kennedy  in  the  Saturday
Evening  Post  Sept.  16  disclosed  that  the  President  told  Con-
gressional   leaders  a  new  war  would   cost   70,000,000   dead
Americans.    Even  Dr.  Teller  did  not  go  beyond  saying  that
90  percent  of  our  population  could  be  saved.  Where did   Life
get  that  97%?   Was  it  a  copywriter's  bright  flash?   Just  as
Ivory  Soap  is sold  as 99  percent  pure,  is  thermonuclear  war  to
be  sold  as  97  percent  .safe?
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    LONG  Envelopes
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  AT<^  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  gub for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street   ...,...................................................-~............~............
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
9/25/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name       ...............................:..............................................
Street   .......................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement T          Tea  D    No  D
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.-  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   In  August   and   the   Brat   In
September  and  the  last  Monday   In  December  and  the  first  In  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. Stone,   Subscription:  $6  in.the  U.  S.;  $6  in
Canada;  (10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED