I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961aug07.pdf

============================================================

The  Delusions of  Civil Defense,   P.  3
How  the  Holifleld  Committee  Put  As  Pessimistic  A  Look  As  Possible  on  Test  Detection,  Pages  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  30
AUGUST  7,  1961ioi     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Mr.  K's  New  Communist   Manifesto
I  wish  every  reader  could  read  for  himself  the  new  draft
program   of  the   Soviet   Communist   Party.    The   text,   filling
eight  solid  pages  of  newsprint,  was  published  in  last  Tues-
day's  New   York   Times,  which  thereby  performed  a  public
service.    The  day  that  Pravda  reprints  in  full  a  similar  docu-
ment  the  Soviet  Union  will  be  showing  a  similar  confidence
in   the   ability  of   its   people   to   evaluate   for   themselves   a
critical   analysis   from   the   opposing   camp.     The    document
needs  to  be  read  in  full;  no  summary can  transmit  its  flavor.
Propaganda,  pro  and  con,  has  given  a  very  false  picture  of  it.
It  has  been  compared  by  some  newspapers  here  (even  before
the  text  was  available)   with  Hitler's  Mein   Kampf;    this  is
wicked   nonsense.     On   the   other   hand,   Soviet   propaganda
has  presented  it  as  a  new  and  fundamental  blueprint  for  the
future,   a  new  Communist  Manifesto.     It   does  not   live   up
to  this  advance  billing;  Marx  and  Engels  said  far  more  in
much  less.   This  is  more  like  a  Papal  encyclical;  the  nuances
can  only  be  grasped   by  specialists  in  the  theology  involved.
It  is  very  long  and  gets  quite  turgid.    It  is  disappointingly
vague  on  the  future.     In  many  ways  its  resembles   one  of
our  quadrennial  party  platforms,  full  of  familiar  cliches  and
glowing  but  safely  imprecise  promissory  notes.     Indeed  this
is  best  read  as  a  sort  of  campaign   document,  on  the  eve  of
a  new  Party  Congress,  in  which  Khrushchov  while   repeating
all  the  standard  Marxist-Leninist  phrases  to  keep  the  orthodox
happy,  pushes  ever  so  slightly  ahead  in  the  direction  he  has
charted.    This   direction   is  a  good  one,   toward   co-existence
abroad   and  a  more   relaxed   atmosphere   at  home.    This  is
what  has  made  Khrushchov  popular,  and  distinguishes  him
from  Stalin—who  is not  mentioned  even  once  in  these  50,000
words.     How   Khrushchov   must   have  hated   him   to   be  so
ungenerous.
The  Horrors  of  Capitalism
Most  of  the  first  half  is  a  rehash  of  party  dogma  as served
up   in  almost   every  official   document;   the   main  burden   of
these   pages   is  how   bad   things   are   in   the   outside   world
under  capitalism.  This  is  at  least  as  badly  distorted  a  view
of  life  on  our  side  as  our  press  and  writers  tend  to  give  of
life  on  theirs.    It  plays  up  everything  bad,  and   soft-pedals
everything  good.    It  adds  up  a  lot  of  half-truths;  this  oper-
ation,  by  the  laws  of  propaganda's  arithmetic,  creates  a  final
picture  three-quarters   false.    This  is  tailored   to  two  needs,
one  doctrinal,  the  other   practical.     The  doctrinal   one  is  to
make  the  facts  of  life  fit  a  picture  Marx  and  Engels  drew  in
1848.     They  said  that  while  the  serf  under  feudalism  "man-
aged  to  develop  into  a  bourgeois"  the  modern   laborer   "on
the  contrary,  instead  of  rising  with  the  progress  of  industry,
sinks  deeper   and   deeper   below   the   conditions   of   existence
of  his  own  class.    He  becomes  a  pauper,  and  pauperism  de-
Not  Through  War
"It  is  not  through  war  with  other  countries,  but  by
the  example  of  a  more  perfect  organization  of  society,
by  rapid  progress  in  developing  the  productive forces,
the  creation  of   all   conditions  for   the   happiness  and
well-being  of  man,  that  the  ideas  of  communism  will
win  the  minds  and  hearts  of   the   masses."
—New  Draft   Program,  Soviet  Communist  Party.
velops  more  rapidly  than  population  and  wealth."    This  has
proven   strikingly   untrue   in   every  modern   capitalist   State;
it  is  true  only  of   clerical-feudal  dictatorships  like   Franco's
Spain   or   Salazar's  Portugal,   backwaters  untouched   by  capi-
talist  development.*
The   practical   reason   for   drawing  so  black   a  picture  of
conditions  in  the  outside  world   is  to  reconcile   the  working
class  and  peasantry  in  the  Soviet  Union  to  living  standards
which,   though   improving,   are   still   miserably  low   by  com-
parison   with   ours.     Any  Russian   who   travels   abroad   will
see  for  himself  how  little  resemblance  life  in  the  West  bears
to  this  picture  of  enslavement,  mass  unemployment,  increas-
ing  misery,  and  growing   repression.    We  pick  out  of  this
pudding   of   distortions   a   sample   plum,   "Capitalism    exten-
sively  exploits  female  and  child  labor."   No  one  would  guess
from  this  the  vast  strides  made  in  half   a  century  away  from
such  exploitation   nor  how  much  more  intensively  the   labor
of  women  is exploited  in  the  Soviet  Union  than  in  any  West-
ern  state.    There  is  not  one  of  them  in  which  old  women
sweep  the  streets  to  make  a  living  as  they  do  in  Moscow.
The   sharpest   caricature   in   the   program   is   reserved   for
the  "welfare  state",   the  real  competitor  Sovietism  fears:
"The  advocates  of  the  bourgeois  state  call  it  a  'welfare
state',"  the  draft  program  says  scathingly.  .  .  .    "But  the
masses  see  from  their  own  experience  that  the  bourgeois
state  is  an  obedient  tool  of  the  monopolies  and  that  the
vaunted  'welfare'  is  welfare  for  the  magnates  of  finance
capital,  but  suffering  and  torture  for  hundreds of  millions
of  working  men."
This   is   demagogic   rubbish;   welfare   state   reforms,   won
in  the   face  of   bitter  opposition  from  finance  capital,  have
eased  the  lot  of  the  worker  in  every  Western capitalist  State;
Soviet  workers  will   be  lucky  if   they  reach   the   same  level
of   comfort   as  ours   in   the   next  two   decades,   as  we  hope
they  will.    But  this  kind  of  deliberate  falsity  leads straight
______          (Continued  on  Page   Four)
*  "The   bourgeoisie   during  its   rule   of   scarce   one  hundred
years,"   Marx   and  Engels   wrote   admiringly  in   the  Com-
munist   Manifesto,   "has   created   more   massive   and   more
colossal  productive  forces   than  have  all   preceding   genera-
tions   together."    That  was   in   1848.    The  next   100   years
were  to  show  that  they  hadn't  seen  anything  yet.
1  1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  7,1981
Holifield  Hearings  on  Research  In  Nuclear  Test  Detection  Methods
The  hearings  held  by  Chairman  Chet  Holifield  (D.  Cal.)
of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  into  the  research
work  in  progress   on  nuclear  test  detection  techniques  were
one-sided  and  slapdash.    There  was  a  time  when  Mr.   Holi-
field  was  one  of  the  few  conscientious  and  independent  men
on  this  key  committee.    Unfortunately  his   accession  to   the
chairmanship  has  completed   the  process  of  assimilating  him
to  the  Pentagon  and  AEC  point  of  view.    The  hearings  were
calculated  to  belittle  the  possibility  of  an  effective  system  of
inspection   and   so  to  pressure   the   Kennedy  Administration
to   resume   testing.     The   tone  was  set  the  first  day  of   the
hearing   by  Dr.   Richard  Latter  of   the  RAND   Corporation,
whom   the   Pentagon   picked   as  chairman  of   Project  VELA,
which  has  the  task  of  improving  these  techniques.    His  testi-
mony  showed  the' military  were  not  mistaken  in  their   choice.
No  Clues?
Dr.   Latter  treated   the  most  science  fiction-like  ideas   for
evading  detection  as  if  they  were  practically   achieved  while
regarding   with   stringent   skepticism   any  idea,   even   though
already   tested   in   the   laboratory,   for   improving   detection.
He. concluded  with  a  statement  so  sweeping  as  to  be  patently
untrue.    He  said  "research   has  as  yet  given  no   clue"   (our
italics)   "as  to  means  for  improving  the  Geneva  system   suffi-
ciently   to   permit   detection    and   identification   of   shielded
tests  in  space  or  decoupled   tests  underground."     Even  these
hearings,   cursory   and   prefabricated   as   they   were,   showed
that  there  were  a  number  of  promising  clues.
In   his  prepared   statement  Dr.   Latter  disparaged   one  of
them—the   possibility   of . using   electromagnetic   signals   to
identify  underground  explosions  (reported   in  Aviation   Week
of  July  17).     But  Rep.  Mel  Price  (D.  ///.)—the  only mem-
ber  of  the  Committee  who  asked  any  questions  designed   to
produce  more  information  rather   than  just  disparage  detec-
tion—elicited  a  different   view  from   another  VELA  witness,
Dr.  Charles  C.  Bates.    Dr.  Bates  indicated  that  the  electrical
signals  "were  much  larger  than  theory  called  for"   and  that
there  was  hope  by  this  means  "to  find  a  signal  that  the  more
you  decouple   [i.e.   the  bigger   the  hole  you  hide  it  in]   the
bigger    the   signal."      Dr.    Bates   said   "a   modest   research
effort"  was  underway  on  this  and  that  there  were  plans  soon
to  "actually  put  a  very  large  electrical  charge  into  the  earth
Geo.   Washington  and  Chiang  Kai-shek
The  next  time  the  issue  of  Communist  China   comes
up  in  Congress  we  hope  there  will  be  one  member   at
least  with  the  nerve  to  get  up  and  read  Washington's
advice  in  his  Farewell  Address  to -keep  from  "inveter-
ate   antipathies   against   particular    nations",   warning
that   "the   nation   which   indulges   toward    another   an
habitual  hatred ...  is  in  some  degree  a  slave."      U.S.
policy  has  been  enslaved,  not  so  much   from    antipathy
to  Red  China,  as  from  fear  of  Chiang  Kai-shek's  China
Lobby.     The   Senate   July   28   unanimously   passed   a
resolution   opposing   recognition   or   admission   to   the
UN   about   which   probably   two   dozen   members  have
serious   misgivings.     None   dared   voice   them   on   the
floor.   Verbose  and  inflammatory   amendments  by  Dodd
which  had  been  defeated  9  to  7  in  the  privacy  of  the
Foreign   Relations   Committee    were   accepted   on   the
floor  without   opposition.    Mao  Tse-tung  will   rank   in
history  as  one  of  the  greatest  men  of  our  age;    Dodd
called  him  "the   arch  dope  peddler  of  all  time."    Morse
next   day,   following  a  corkscrew  line  of  his   own,   op-
posed   recognition   and   admission,   too,   calling    China
"that  international  political  leper  colony"  but  thought
we   ought   to   debate   the   subject   at   the   UN.      Much
was   said  by   him  of   the   menace  of   a  nuclear   China
but   nothing   of   Peking's  repeated   offers   to  negotiate
an  atom  free  Pacific.    Fulbright  on  ABC  TV's  Issues
and  Answers  next  day  called  the  resolution  "a  ritual"
stemming   from  the  days  of  McCarthy,   doubted  whether
we   would   even   recognize   Outer   Mongolia   and   said
"in  this  field ...  we  more  or  less  take  our  orders"
from   Chiang   Kai-shek.
and  see  how  far  we  can  detect  it.'
Dr.   Latter  said  nothing  in  his  prepared   statement  of   the
work   being  done  at  Bell  Laboratories   (as   disclosed  in   the
current  Journal  of  the  American  Acoustical  Society)  on  trans-
ferring  seismic  data  to  audio  tapes  and  distinguishing  earth-
quakes  from  underground  explosions  by  ear,  another  new  idea
in  this   field.   When  Mr.  Price  asked  Dr.  Latter  about  this,
he  got  an  evasive  answer.   But  Dr.  Bates  was  more  optimistic
and  volunteered  the  information  that  the  University of  Michi-
gan,   using   similar   methods,   had   achieved   some  strikingly
encouraging  results.
The  crucial  weakness  of  this  whole  experimental  program
is  that  funds  and  personnel  are  controlled   by  the   Pentagon,
Pa.  Republican Only  Voice  in  Either  House  to  Question  Berlin  Crisis  Arms Buildup
"I   think   we   in   Congress   are   running   a   pretty   high
excitement   with   all   these   brave   calls   to   arms,   but   are
we  not  in  danger  of  jumping  off  the   dock,  if   we  do  not
give  the  policy  ample  and serious  study? ...  I  think  the
peoples  of   the   world   might   heave   a  sigh   of   relief,   and
help  us  make   up  our  policy,  and  support  us  when  we  do.
"We  must  go  slow  on  this  policy  because  we  are  at  pres-
ent  in  an  enormous' arms  race with  one  of  the  major  powers.
.  .  .  Everyone  on  this  floor  can  rest  assured  that  Russia
.  .  .  will  not  sit  still.    She  will  take  retaliatory  action  just
like  the  tariff  reactions.    We  take  an  action  and  somebody
else  takes  another  action,  and pretty  soon  we  get  retaliation
as  the  basic  method  of  policy.  .  .  .
"Under   Eisenhower   I   do   not   believe   he   immediately
jumped  and  reached  for  a  holster  and  pistol  when  he  made
a  broad  statement  of  policy.    My  recommendation ...  is
that  we  have  a  little  more  patience.  .  .  .
"The  world  must  enjoy  crises,  it  manufactures  so  many,
so  often.    This  may  not  make  for  serene  living  but  it   cer-
tainly  keeps  up  the  interest.    The  history  of   our  present
day  will  be  written  in  two  words,  'blank'  and  'emergency'
and  you  just  fill  in  the  blank  to  suit  the  particular  emer-
gency. ...  If  summit   meetings  lead  so  promptly   to  this
current    situation,    let    us    try    a    meeting    of    ordinary
people.  .  .  .
"I  still  remember  when  the  Korean  war  came  along.  .  .  .
I  asked,  'What  are  we  getting  into?    Is  this  really  a  war?'
I  was  assured  by  all  sides,  'Oh,  no;  we  just  have  a  police
action ...  we  will  get  through  with  this  in  a  hurry.'  .  .  .
What  are  we  getting  into by  our action  in  Congress  today?"
—Fulton  (R.  Pa.)  in  the  House  July  31,  the  only  mem-
ber   to   question   the   wisdom   of   the   bill   authorizing    the
President  to  call  up  250,000  reservists.    Three  days  earlier
the   Senate    unanimously    passed   this    bill   and    another
authorizing   $3  and   a   half    billion  dollars  more   for    the
armed   forces.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  7,1961
Designed  to  Create  Pessimistic  Headlines  and  Pressure  for  Testing
which   wants  to  resume  testing   and  is  not  at  all  anxious  to
prove   detection   feasible.     The   Joint   Committee   is   supposed
to  be  a  watchdog;  a  vigorous  committee  would  have  explored
all  these  possibilities   and   called   in  witnesses   from  the  pri-
vate   laboratories  working   on   these  new   clues   to  detection.
Holifield's  Vague   Invitation
Mr.   Price   and  the   committee's   executive   director,   James
T.  Ramey,  tried  to  explore  the  subject  in  depth  but  the  rest
of  the  Committee  was  uninterested   in  anything  but  evidence
to   support   its   pro-testing   preconceptions.     Dr.   Latter   ad-
mitted  that  the  subject  "involves   a  great   number  of  conjec-
tural  matters,"   that  he  was  a  pessimist   and  that   "you   will
find   scientists   who   are   perhaps   more   optimistic"    but   the
Committee   made   no   effort   to   find  them.     Holifield   stated
that   "if   there   is  any  body  of   opinion   that   is  founded   on
reputable   scientists   that   needs   to   be   expressed   before   this
committee  we  would  like  to  have  it."     This  vague  invitation,
of   which   few   scientists   will   be   aware   until   they   see   the
printed   record  months  from   now,   serves  only  to  give  the
Chairman   an  excuse   later   to  say,  "Well,  we  invited   oppos-
ing  points  of  view  to  express  themselves.  .  .  ."
Even   among   the   witnesses   employed   by  Project   VELA,
however,   it  was  apparent   that   there   were   sharp    differences
which  a  vigilant   committee  would   have   developed.     There
was   testimony   which   cast   doubt   on   Dr.   Latter's   easy   cal-
culations   about    "big   holes"   and   his   facile   Buck   Rogers
theories   about   putting    lead   shields   around   atomic   explo-
sions  millions  of   miles   out  in  space.    One  witness,  for  ex-
ample,   pointed   out   that   such   shielding,   even   if    possible,
Far-Sighted  Legislators
Although  disarmament   at  the  moment  looks  further
away   than   ever,   our   far-sighted   legislators    are   al-
ready  thinking  ahead  to  what  we  do  when  we  get  a
disarmament   agreement—and   it   breaks   down.     This
prescience  appeared   in  the  debate   over   the   proposed
dual   purpose   Hanford,   Wash.,   atomic  reactor  which
could  produce  power  as  well  as  plutonium.    Its  Demo-
cratic  proponents  (Holifield  in  the  House;  Pastore  and
Jackson  in  the   Senate;   all   three  hostile   to  disarma-
ment)  argued  (in  the  words  of  Jackson)  "Now  imagine
that   the   Communist   rule   decided   to   break   such   an
arms  agreement?     If   they   did  a   dual-purpose  NPR
could  easily,  cheaply  and  quickly  be  put  back  to  work
producing  plutonium   for  weapons."    The   Republicans,
fearful  as  ever  of  public power,  prefer  to  build  a  plant
which   could    make   only   plutonium.     They   lost   the
fight  in  the  Senate   but  won  it  in  the  House   and  the
matter  is  now  in  conference.
would   shut  off  only  x-rays  but   not  three  other   methods   of
detecting  shots  in  space:  magnetic  effects,   direct  radio   fre-
quency   signals   and   direct   optical   signals.    There  were   also
interesting   glimpses   in  the  testimony  of   other  methods   for
improving  detection  in  outer  space  and  underground:   a  radio
frequency   pulse   signal   which   would   only   be   improved   by
attempts   at   shielding;    the   discovery   that   after   shocks  can
be  used   to  distinguish   explosions  and  earthquakes;   the  still
to  be  fully   explored   possibilities  of   large   arrays  of   seismic
detectors   and   of   detectors   in   deep   wells.     All   these   were
hastily  passed  over  by  the  committee,  as  if  fearful   it  might
accidentally  stumble  on  grounds  for  hope.
On  the  Eve  of  New  Holifield  Hearings,  The  Case  Against  Civil  Defense
Too   late   for  • coverage   in   this  issue,  the   Holifield    sub-
committee   of  House   Government   Operations   was   opening
hearings   on  civil   defense    as  we  went   to  press.    The  ad-
vance   list   of  witnesses  indicated   that  this  was   to  be  an-
other   stacked    performance.      As   antidote   we   give   here
the   gist   of   a  statement   made    by   the   Eugene,   Oregon,
Peace  Information    Center   before   the  Oregon  State  Legis-
lature   on  the  State  Civil   Defense   Budget   last  Feb.   8:
"Studies  carried  out  by  Hugh  Everett   III  and  George  B.
Pugh  for  the  Institute  for  Defense  Analysis  and  presented
as  testimony  [actually   it  appears  only  in  the  Appendix—
IPS]   before  the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic
Energy   in   June   of   1959,   show   clearly   how   meaningless
current  civil  defense  efforts  are.
"Let   us   first   look   at   the   limitations   in   their   figures.
They  have  assumed  that  the  weapons  delivery  error  would
be  100  miles.     They   have   only   considered   deaths  due  to
fallout  and  occurring  up  to  60  days  after  the  attack.    Nev-
ertheless,  in  the  graph  which  represents  an  attack  propor-
tional   to   population  density,   the   total   casualties   in   the
untrained   population   with   emergency   instructions   to   re-
main   under  shelter   after   attack  range   from   60%  in   an
attack   with   2,000   megatons   to   98%   in   an   attack   with
20,000'megatons.   The  total  casualties  in  a  trained  popula-
tion  with  six  months  in  which  to  build  shelters  range  from
38%  to  89%  for  the  same  yield  of  weapons.
"Hanson   Baldwin,  military   affairs   editor  for   the   New
York  Times,  indicates  'studies  show   that   if   about  30%  of
the   population  of   any   country  is   killed,  wounded  or  put
out   of   action,  that  country  will  no  longer   function  as  a
rational   and   coherent   social   organization.'     Let   us   em-
phasize   that   in   the   smallest   all-out   conflict   of   thermo-
nuclear  weapons  referred  to  above,  even  with  a  well-trained
and  sheltered  civilian  population,  38%  of  our  nation  (68,-
000,000  Americans)  would  become  casualties   from  fallout
alone,  within  60  days—enough   to   render   our   society   in-
operable.  .  .  .  More  effective  programs  could  be  considered.
A  civil  defense  program  that  could  possibly  protect  a  ma-
jority   of   our  population   against   present   weapons   would
involve   permanent   underground   bomb   shelters   for   our
population,   for   manufacturing   facilities,   for   water   sup-
plies,   for  food ...  it   would  involve  permanently  living
underground   since  ballistic  missile  systems,   when   in   full
operation,  will  only  provide  about  15  minutes  warning  of
attack.  .  .  .
"Even  if  we  were  willing  to  accept  such  a  grotesque  way
of  life,  we  would  nevertheless   urge   the  rejection  of  civil
defense  programs  of  any  magnitude  because  .  .  .
"We  believe  that  civil  defense  is  in  itself   an   aggressive
act.  .  .  .  Gen.  Carl  Spaatz,  retired  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff
.  .  .  says:  'It  will  be  particularly  important  for  us  to  know
from  now  on  whether  the  Soviet  Union  is  building  civilian
shelters  for  its  own  people.    This  can  be  one  of  the  most
significant  indicators  of  its  intentions,  if  and  when  it  gets
ready  to  launch  a  surprise   attack.'    If  we  are  to  assume
that  civil  defense  preparations  in  Russia  are  an indication
of   hostile  intent,  how  do  we  expect  Russia  to  view  such
preparations   on  our  part?
"Second,  we  believe  that  civil  defense  negotiations  will
make  us  tend  to  rely  on  war  rather  than  negotiation.  .  .  .
The  false  sense  of  security  derived  from  civil  defense  will
tend  to  make  us  'quicker  on  the  trigger".  .  .  ."
1   2   ';
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  7,1961
The  Danger  Point  Lies  in  the  Awakening  Colonial  World
(Continued   from   Page One)
to  the  most  dangerous   self-delusions  in  the  draft   program,
"The  world  capitalist  system  as  a  whole  is  ripe  for  the  social
revolution   of   the  proletariat."    Why, then,   are  the Com-
munist  parties  losing  ground  in  every  Western   country,  even
in  Italy,  the  most  backward?    To  say  that  world   capitalism
is  ripe  for  revolution   is  to  risk  being  doped   by  one's   own
opium.    A  revolutionary  situation  has  a  fairly  precise  mean-
ing  in  the  Marxist-Leninist  lexicon;   this  is  certainly  not  it.
To  say  so  is  to  create  an  unreal  world,  as  unreal  as  our  pic-
ture   of   the   Soviet   Union   as  a  slave   state.
One  Lovely  Sentence
But  we  must  in  all   empathy  give  Khrushchov  the   same
allowance   we   do   Kennedy;   political   leadership   must   find
common  denominators  for   action,   and   these   are  necessarily
low  and  involve  the  soothing  repetition  of  the  familiar.    One
paragraph   and   one  sentence   ring   out  eloquently  from   this
morass  of  dull  verbiage;   the  first,  disavowing  war   but set-
ting  example  as  the  road  to  world  communism,  we  quote  in
the  box  on  page  one.  The  other  is  this,  and  it  speaks  more
truly  perhaps  than  the  drafters  themselves  realized:  "A  mighty
unifying   thunderstorm   marking  the   springtime   of  mankind
is raging  over  the  earth."    This  is beautiful  and  hopeful.    The
truth  is  that  if  peace  can  be  preserved  we  shall  move  into  an
era  when  the  two  systems will  become  more  unifyingly  alike.
This  draft  program  promises  much  in  the  future  which  the
welfare  state  has  already given  workers  in  the  West.    On  the
other  hand   capitalism  has   been  much   modified  from  what
it  was  in  1848; Marx  and  Engels,  in  espousing  the  progres-
sive  income  tax  then,  would  never  have  dared   believe   that
capitalist  states  would   ever  tax  capitalists  at  the  high   rates
to  which  they  have  grown  accustomed.    The  past   100  years
have  been  marked  by  the  steady  erosion  of  property   rights
everywhere,  the   steady  increase  in   the   power   of  the   State
over  the  economy,  the  successful  insistence  of  the  poor  every-
where  that  the  rich  be  taxed  for  their  benefit.     Socialization
advances  on  seven  league  boots  under  every  form  of  society.
In  this  perspective  the  human  family  can  grow   together.
To this end, Khrushchov  is making his contribution.   Along
with   the  stale  shibboleths   in   this  draft   program   are   fresh
departures:   on   the   possibility   of   using   democratic   means
We   Cannot  Send  Samples   to  Friends   Unless
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15.  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
........................................Zone........:...
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
.........................................Zone............
we  send  gift announcement?
8/7/61
yr.)  additional:
Y
a
es
e
"n""No"n
Still  the  Heavy  Hand
In   civil  liberty   and  the  arts,   the   new  draft pro-
gram  offers  little.   It  says  nothing  at  all  about  greater
legal   guarantees   of   the   person   againsl!   the   police.
In  discussing  freedom  of  speech  and  press  it  departs
in  no  way  from  the  Stalin  period  insistence  that  black
is  white.   The  party  bureaucracy  dare  not  admit  that
these  rights  are  still  real  in  the  West   and  exist   only
on  paper  in  the  East.   As  for  the  arts,  the  draft pro-
gram  clings  to  "socialist  realism."    Socialist    realism
is  Sinclair  Lewis's  George  F.  Babbitt's  idea  of  "whole-
some,"  "constructive"  and  "real"  art.    The  bureau-
cracy's  ideal  in  this  respect  is  the  same  Philistine  ideal
as  that  of  the  bourgeoisie.    Both  share  the  same dis-
taste  for   modern  art   and  for  critical  literature  and
are  wholly  unable  to  understand  the  creative   agonies.
"even    before   capitalism   is   overthrown   (to)   compel   the
bourgeoisie   to   carry   out   measures   that   transcend   ordinary
reforms";  on  achieving  socialism  peacefully  by  "paying  off"
the  property   owners;  by  appealing   for   the   widest  kind  of
front   for  peace  including   "that   section  of   the   bourgeoisie"
which  sees  that  thermonuclear  war  "would  not  spare  the rul-
ing  classes  of  capitalist   society  either"   (though  still  a  little
vague   on   the   fact   that   neither   would   it   spare   communist
leadership).     Mr.   K   cannot   bring   himself   to   say  openly
that  given  peace  the  West  will  become  more  socialized  and
the  Communist  East  more  liberalized,  but  this  is  his  direction
and  this  way  lies  peace.
The  danger  lies  in  the  colonial  world.    While  the  Soviet
Union   lines   up   in   favoring   "wars   of   liberation"   by   the
colonial   peoples,  we  are  beginning   dangerously  to   empha-
size  the   supply  of   arms  to   shaky  colonial   regimes   against
"subversion."    That  way  lies  our  appearance  on  the  side  of
the  counter-revolution.    This  would  be  fatal   to  us  and   to
peace.     The   wise   course   is  cooperation   between   East   and
West   in  colonial   development  on  a  planned   basis  through
international   organizations.     Communist    experts   and    big
business  men  already  find  themselves   working  side  by  side
in  developing   such  areas  as  Guinea.    All  the  new  countries
want  aid  from   both  sides.    To  regularize  this,  to  substitute
friendly  cooperation   for  hostile  competition,  is  a  first  neces-
sity  for  peaceful  relations  and  human  survival.
Tlou   Send   Long   Addressed   Stamped    Envelopes
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'5  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Hatter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   $15  to   Europe;   $20  to   Israel,   Asia   and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED