I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961mar27.pdf

============================================================

Look  Who  Eastland  Considers  Patriotic? P.  3
Challenge  and Appeal  to  Peace  Groups:  Get  Ready  Now  for A Senate Fight Over  A Nuclear  Test Treaty, P.  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  11
MARCH   27,   1961
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How  We   Can  Defeat  the  Russians   in  Latin  America
The  President's  special  message  to  Congress  on  foreign  aid
was  marked  by  a  welcome   change   in  manner  and   content
from  his  White  House  speech  to  the  Latin  American  ambas-
sadors  and  the  Latin  American  aid  message  which  followed
it  the  week  before.    The  prose  was  sober,  and  eschewed  the
razzle  dazzle  of  its  predecessors.    The  program   was  marked
by  constructive  steps  forward.    The  proposals  for   integrating
all   aid  agencies  under  one  organizational  roof;   the   recom-
mendation  that   Congress  make  longer  range  planning  easier
by  allowing  loan  authorizations  of  no  less  than  five  years  in-
stead  of  on  the  present  year-by-year basis;  above  all  the  idea
of  "long  term  development  loans  at  low  or  no  rates  of  interest
repayable   in  dollars"   over   as  much   as   50  years—all   these
deserve  public  support,  and  will   need   it  to  get  through  a
lethargic  Congress  with  a  growing  hostility  to  foreign  lend-
ing  altogether.
The  Kind  of  Sacrifices  We  Need
But  sympathy  for  the  President's   difficulties   "on  the  hill"
and  a  realization that  at  the  moment  it  would   be  impolitic
for   him  to  ask  for  more  should  not  lead  us  to  deceive  our-
selves.    This  is  not  an  adequate  program.    Until  and  unless
the   American  public  can  be  taught   to   see  the   foreign   aid
problem  in  much  bigger  terms—conceptually  and  financially—
we  are  not  going  to  have  an  adequate  program.    The  advan-
tage  of  a  trip  to  Cuba  and  a  talk  with  its  leaders  is  that  one
begins  to  see  the  challenge  in  its  real  dimensions.    The  Rus-
sians  have  several  advantages  over  us  in  the  foreign  aid  field.
The  first  is that  the  government  controls  the  whole  of industry,
and   can   make   direct   commitments  in   terms   of   machinery
and  materials  as  well  as  technicians;  the   best  we  can  do  is
offer   loans  and  grants  which  must  then  be  translated  on  the
open  market  into  the  wares  required.    The  second  is  that  the
Soviet  economy  is  geared   to  full  employment  and  maximum
output.    The  third  is  that  its  leaders  as  directors  of  a  huge
state  capitalist regime  are  prepared  to  support   underdeveloped
countries  in  large-scale  publicly  owned  enterprises of  the  kind
most  of  these  countries  need,  instead  of  forcing  them  to  wait
until  some  enterprising  investor  comes  along.    In  the   fourth
place,   the   huge   Soviet   economy   can  do   business   in   barter
terms,   even  for   commodities   like   Cuban   sugar   or   Egyptian
cotton  which  it  may  not  need.    The   planned   economy  thus
makes  it  easy  for  the  Russians  to  fulfill   their  political  objec-
tives  in  foreign  aid.   With  basic resources  comparable  to  ours,
the  Russians  in  this  respect  have  superior  economic  and  politi-
cal  tools.    Unless  we  are  willing  to  look  squarely  at  these  un-
pleasant   realities,  which   run   so   contrary   to   our   cherished
cliches  about  free  enterprise  and  our  childish  nightmare  fears
of  socialism,  we  are  not  going  to  win  out  in  peaceful  compe-
tition  with  them.    The  President   has  talked  of  the  need   for
No  Forced  Labor  in  Angola?
"Political  subjugation,  economic  exploitation  .  ,  . are
and  always  have  been  alien  to  the  Portugese  nation.
.  .  . The contention  that  forced  labor  exists  in  overseas
Portugal  is  a  shameless  and  deliberate  falsehood."
—Portugal's  Garin  to  the  Security   Council,  Mar.  15
"All   the  country's  newspapers  are  heavily  censored,
as  are  foreign  publications.   An  issue  of  an  American
news  magazine was  held  up  until  a  map  showing  the
growth  of   independent  African  nations  between  1950
and  1960  could  be  removed. .  .  .  Africans  are rounded
up   for   private  employers  by   professional   recruiters,
who  threaten  to  have  them  drafted  into  the  army  or
into   government  labor   gangs   for   even   lower   wages
than   the   $9  a  month  they  receive  from   private  em-
ployers.    If  there  is  a  shortage  of  labor  to  fill  a  work
quota,  Africans  are  often  taken  from  their  homes  and
sent  to  distant  labor  gangs,  even  though  they  have  al-
ready  worked  their  statutory  six  months.  .  .  .  Forced
labor  is  not  confined  to  males.    When  a  district  tribal
chief  runs  short  of  men  .  .  .  women  and  children  are
furnished   while  Portuguese  authorities  look  the  other
way."
—Look  Magazine   on  Portuguese  Angola,  Mar.  28
sacrifice  in  that  struggle.    The  most  important  sacrifice  is  to
get  rid  of  these  blocks  to  realistic thinking  and  to  find  leaders
willing   to  risk   their   respectability  by  saying  some  of   these
things   in  public.
With  their  assets,  the   Russians  can   easily  bring   about  a
sizeable  industrialization in  a  small  country  like  Cuba  within
a  few  years and  put  us  on  the  spot  by  enormously  raising  the
expectations  with  which  we  are  faced  in  the  rest  of  the  hemis-
phere.     The   makers  of   American  policy  should   study  care-
fully   the   report   made   last   January  6   over   TV   by  Major
Ernesto  Guevera,  Cuba's  industrialization  chief,  on  his  return
from  his  "shopping  tour"  of  the  Soviet  bloc.    He  listed  the
factories  promised  him  and  explained  Cuba's  plans.    Nowhere
in  the  world  have  we  been  able  to  offer   an   underdeveloped
country   such  swift  and  comprehensive  aid  in  industrializing
itself.    In  a  long  luncheon  talk  with  this  extraordinarily   able
young  man,  a  physician  who   became  a  soldier   and  now  an
economic  planner,  I  was  able  to  see  the  enormous   attractive
power  of  the  Soviet  bloc  in  Latin  America.    "Che"  Guevera
is  neither  a  Communist   nor  a  socialist  in  background.     But
as  a  Latin  revolutionary   embittered   by  first  hand   experience
with   U.S.   policy   in   Guatemala   and   now   in   Cuba,   he   has
been  completely  won  over  by  the  Soviets.    What   impressed
him  most  on  his  tour,  he  told  me,  was the  extraordinary  speed
with   which   the   Soviet   bloc   has   rebuilt   and    industrialized
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  March  27, 1961
Editorial:  Remember How Tragic  Was  Wilson's  Failure  to  Win  Senate  Approval for  the  League
Peace  Groups  Must  Prepare  Now  to  Support  JFK  on  Nuclear  Test  Treaty
Woodrow  Wilson's  failure  to  get  Senate ratification  of  U.S.
membership  in  the  League of  Nations  set the  stage  for  World
War  II.    John  F.  Kennedy's failure  to  get  Senate  ratification
of  a  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  might  set  the  stage  for   World
War  III.   I  suggest  that  all  peace  organizations  without  wait-
ing  for  conclusion  of  the  talks  in  Geneva  mobilize  to  drive
this  simple  point  home  in  a  national  campaign.    The   peace
movement  has  a  tendency to  start late.   This  campaign  should
be  organized  now  if  it  is  to  have  full   effect  in  enabling  the
President  to  hurdle  the  two-thirds  vote  barrier  in  the  Senate.
A  minimum  of  67  votes  will  be  required  and  they  will  not
be  easy  to  get.   Especially  important:  work  in  key  States  like
California   (where  former   AEC  Chairman  McCone  and   the
Joint  Congressional  Committee  Chairman  Chet   Holifield   of
Los  Angeles  are  opposed  to  a  test  ban  treaty).    Community
"seminars"  throwing the  whole  topic  open  to  the  widest  pos-
sible  discussion,  pro  and  con,  should  be  organized  as  quickly
as  possible.    The  aim  should  be  a  well-informed  public,  with
enough  built-in  sophistication  to  withstand  the  expected  scare
campaign  against  a  treaty.
A  Fight   Which  Can  Be  Won
Peace  groups   are  conditioned   to  being   wailing   walls  on
the  periphery  of   our   society.    In   the   coming   fight   over  a
nuclear  test  ban  treaty  they  will  for  the  first  time  be  working
in  the  realm  of  the  possible,  not  the  Utopian; supporting  the
President,  not  just  some  lone  voice  in  Congress.    The  nuclear
test  treaty fight will  test  our  mettle  in  the  big  league,  and  our
ability  to  eschew  various  types  of  stale  sloganeering—pacifist
and  party  line—and  translate  complex  technical   and  human
issues  into  effective  language.    To  fail  in  this  fight  would  be
tragic;  to  win  it,  would  be  to  begin  the  process  of  winning  a-
wider  public  than  ever  before   to  an  understanding   of   the
broader  and  deeper  issues which  must  be  tackled  next  on dis-
armament.    These  include  not  only  questions  of   inspection,
control  and  armament  elimination  but  the  construction  of  a
new  world  order  with  its  own  police  force  able  to  take  the
Something  Rotten  in  the  State  of  Laos
There  seems  to  be  an  idea  in  Washington  that  all
we  need  to  do  in  Laos  is  to  pour  in  more  military aid.
But  there  is  hardly  an  area  in  the  world  into  which
we  have  poured  more  aid  than   Laos.    The  U.S. has
spent  some  $300,000,000  by  now  on  the  Laotian   forces;
its  soldiers  are  the  highest  paid  in  Asia.   The  inflow of
dollars  for  the  army  was  so  heavy  that  it  set  off  an
inflationary  spiral  and  led  to  corruption.    Yet  now  we
learn  from   an  AP  dispatch  out  of  Vientiane  (Wash-
ington  Star,  March  18)  that   the  Laotian  troops   are
"battle-shy"  (that  is  too scared  to  fight)  and that  after
all  the  money  spent  on  this  army  "Only  one  man  in
five among  the  almost  30,000 troops  has  had  even  rudi-
mentary  training."   The  AP  attributes  this  revelation
to   a  report   sent   Washington   by  "U.S.  military   aid
officials   here,"  i.e.  in   Laos.    This   30,000-man   army
cannot  stand  up  to  a  Pathet  Lao  force  estimated   at
8,000  to   10,000  men,   or  a  third   its   size    A   General
Accounting  Office  auditor  warned the  Porter  Hardy  sub-
committee  of  House  Government  Operations  (U.S. Aid
Operations  in  Laos)  two  years  ago "the logistical sys-
tem   would  collapse  even  more  quickly  than   the   Lao
forces  would  disintegrate"   (p.  244).  The   warehouses
were  jammed  and  supplies  were  rotting   even  then.
place  of  anarchic national  state  armies.   There  has  never  been
a  bigger  test  of  the  good  people  who  want  peace  but  have
not  been  confronted  with  circumstances  that  gave  them  much
hope  hitherto  of  getting  it.
The  opening  offers  of  the  U.S.  delegation  at  Geneva  showed
a  welcome change  from  the  past.  For  more  than  a  year  during
the  last  talks  the  U.S. chief  negotiator,  Wadsworth,   had  to
stall   for   lack  of   instructions  from  home,   notably  on   outer
space  testing  where  the  Russians months  ago  offered  to  let  us
write  our  own  ticket.    Eisenhower  wanted  an  agreement  but
lacked  the  will  to  push  it  forward.    Kennedy  has  both   the
desire  and  the  will.    Many  difficulties  lie  ahead,  but  a  treaty
is  possible.   The  friends  of  peace  mustn't  wait  until  the  treaty
is  signed  to  get  busy.
The  Laws  and  Treaties  Violated  By  Allowing Our  Undeclared  War  On Cuba
"On  one  recent  day,  March  13, trucks  were  carrying  243
Cuban  volunteers   out   of  Miami  on  the   first   leg  of  their
trip  to  a  basic  training  camp  somewhere  in  the   Caribbean
area. . . .  Since  early  February,  Cubans  have  been  shipping
out  of  Miami  for  training  camps  at  the  rate  of  about  100
daily.    That  means  between  3,000  and   4,000  recruits  have
been  added  to  the  anti-Castro   forces  in  recent  weeks."
—From  Miami, "The  Big  Build-Up  to  Overthrow Castro,"
U.S.  News  &  World  Report,  March  27.
"Whoever,   within  the   United   States,  enlists  or  enters
himself,  or  hires  or  retains  another  to  enlist  or  enter him-
self,  or  to  go  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States
with  intent,  to  be  enlisted  or  entered  in  the  service  of  any
foreign  prince,  state,  colony,  district  or  people  as  a   soldier
or  as a marine or seaman  . . .  shall  be fined not more  than
$1,000  or  imprisoned not  more  than  three  years,  or  both."
—U.S.  Code,  Title  IS,  Section  959
"Whoever,  within  the  United  States,  knowingly  begins  or
sets  on  foot  or  provides  or  prepares  a  means  for  or  fur-
nishes  the  money  for,  or takes part  in, any  military  or naval
expedition  to be carried on from  thence against  the  territory
or  domination  of  any   foreign  prince   or  state,  or  of   any
colony,  district  or  people  with  whom  the  United  States  is
at  peace,  shall  be  fined  not  more  than  $3,000 or  imprisoned
not  more  than  three  years,  or  both."
—U.S.  Code,  Title  18,  Section  960
"The  High  Contracting  Parties  declare   inadmissible  the
intervention  of  any  of  them,  directly  or  indirectly,   and  for
whatever  reason,  in  the  internal  or  external  affairs  of  any
other  of  the  Parties."
—Article  1,  Buenos  Aires  Protocol  of    Non-intervention,
signed   by  U.S.  and  Cuba  among  others,  Dec.  23, 1936.
"The    High   Contracting   Parties,   solemnly    reaffirming
their   commitments made  in  earlier   international   conven-
tions  and  declarations,   as  well  as  in  the   Charter   of   the
United  Nations,  agree  to  refrain   from   the  threat   or  the
use  of  force,  or  from  any  other  means  of  coercion  for   the
settlement  of  their  controversies,  and  to  have  recourse   at
all  times  to  pacific   procedures."
Article   1,  Pact   of  Bogota,  American   Treaty   of    Pacific
Settlement,   by  U.S. and  Cuba among  others,  April  SO,  1948.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  March  27, 1961
An  Implicit  Admission  by  Senators  Eastland  and  Dodd  in  Their  Attack  on  Dr.  Linus  Pauling
Even  They  Haven't  the  Heart  to  Criticize  Japan's  Welcome  for  His  Petition
We   are  haunted  by  a  parenthesis   in  the   Senate   Internal
Security  Committee's  report  attacking  Dr.  Linus  Pauling.    It
occurs  on  page   16  where  the  Committee  indulges  in  a  sta-
tistical  non-sequitur.    It  says  that  if  we  take  the  11,021  sig-
natures  on  Dr.  Pauling's  1958  petition  against  nuclear  testing
and  subtract  those  from  the  U.S.  and  Japan,  "then  we  find
that  Communist  Europe,  led  by  the  USSR,  produced  almost
as  many  signatures"  as  the  rest  of  the  free  world   combined.
Just  what  this  proves  was  not  made  clear.   What  interests  us
is  not  this  dizzy  arithmetic but  the  parenthesis which  followed
mention  of  Japan.    This  referred  to  Japan  as  a  place  "where
for  understandable   reasons,  such  a  petition  could  be  expected
to  meet  with  considerable  response  no  matter  what  the  aus-
pices."     (Our   italics).
New  Cancers  Remind  Them  Every  Day
This   parenthetic  reference   is  worth   consideration.     What
are  the  "understandable   reasons"   which  make  Japan  a  place
where  a  petition  for  an  end  to  nuclear  testing  "could  be  ex-
pected  to  meet  with   considerable   response   no  matter   what
the  auspices?"    The  Committee  does  not  dare  to  give   these
reasons.    They   are  indeed   easily  understandable.    The   one
country   in  the   world   which   has  known   the   horrors   of   a
nuclear  bombardment,  the  only  one  which  knows  at  first  hand
the   frightful   dangers  of  nuclear   radiation,   the   place   where
Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  see  new  cancers  still  occurring  daily
as  a  result  of  those  mushroom  shaped  clouds  a  decade  and  a
half   ago,  is  not  a  country  which  is  apt  to  worry  about   the
politics  of  those  circulating  a  petition  in  any  way  designed  to
prevent  a  repetition  of  such  horrors.
Even  the  Internal   Security  Committee  is  sober  enough   not
to  upbraid  the  Japanese  for  signing  the  Pauling  petition   in
such  large  numbers  without  first  making   sure  that   he  had
never  been   associated   with  Communist   causes.     Indeed   the
Japanese   may  very  well   feel   encouraged   (and   we   would,
too,  if  we  did  not  have  to  live  in  the  shadow  of  a  witch
hunt)   that  an  end  of  testing  and  the  fight  against   nuclear
war  are  Communist  as  well  as  non-Communist  concerns.    It
is  good  that  a  common  realization  of  mankind's  common  dan-
ger  is  shared  on  both  sides  of  the  ideological   divide.    Even
Bad  News  for  the  Un-Americans
We  applaud  the  President  for  his  order  ending  the
practice  by  which  the  Post  Office  and  the  Treasury  for
the  last  11  years  have  been  deciding  what  Americans
may  read  by  intercepting newspapers  and  books  from
Communist  countries.    The  order  renders  moot  a  suit
brought  by  the  American  Civil  Liberties Union  to  end
this  thought  control  practice; it  cleanses  the  air  of  a
typical  cold war  totalitarian infection; it  is  also  a  blow
to  the  House  Un-American Activities  Committee.    For
the  last  four  years  the  Un-Americans have  been  taking
Irving  Fishman,  deputy  collector  of   customs  in   New
York,  on tour  for  hearings  in  which he puts  on  a horror
show  about  Red  propaganda  in  the   mails.    It   seems
that  a  cardinal  principle  of  the  American  creed  as  re-
vised  by  Chairman Walter is  that  the  government  has
a   right   to   police   the   mails  to   keep  out   dangerous
thoughts.    We  are  glad  to  see  that  the  President  has
put  a  stop  to  this  truly  subversive  nonsense.    We  also
note,  with  pleasure,  that  the  order  was  issued  despite
a   last   minute   visit   to   the   President   by   Chairman
Walter.     Another  unpleasant   piece  of   news  for   the
Un-Americans  was  the  announcement  that  250  college
professors  have  now  signed  an  ACLU  Academic  Free-
dom  Committee statement  calling  for  abolition  of   the
Committee.   It  looks  as  if  the  pall  of  fear  is  lifting.
Senators  Eastland  and  Dodd  don't  dare  give  the  Japanese  a
lecture  to  the  contrary.    They  exempt  Japan   from   criticism.
We  would  ask Senators  Eastland  and Dodd  as fellow  human
beings  to  consider  the  full   implications   for   a  moment.     If
our  country  should  some  day—God  forbid!—feel  the  horrors
of  nuclear  war  as  Japan  did,  will  not  the  same   "understand-
able  reasons"   make  our  country  as  little  concerned  as  Japan
with  the  auspices  of  any  action  to  prevent  a  repetition?    The
survivors   would   look   back  and   regard  literally   as  madmen
anyone  who  thought   that  anything  was  as  important  as  pre-
venting   such  a  hell-on-earth.    How  would   the  survivors  of
our  America  feel  tomorrow  about  Senators  so  twisted  in  their
minds  by  fear   of  Communism   that  their  main  concern   had
been  not  to  prevent  nuclear  war  but  to  pillory  a  great  scien-
tist  trying  to  prevent  it,  and  to  hunt  down  and  expose   those
who   tried   to   help   him   because  some  still   were   or   might
once  have  been  Communists?
Look  Who  Eastland  and  the  Internal  Security Committee Regard As Patriotic!
"Our  fear  of  the  John  Birch  Society  [a  new  secret  right
wing  order]  is  based  on  our  own  findings,  on  the  meticu-
lously  researched  articles  written  by  Gene  Blake.  .  .  .
"What  are  we  to  think  when  our  last  three  Presidents,
Roosevelt,   Truman   and  Elsenhower   are   accused   [in   the
Society's   literature]  of   being  Communists  or  Communist
dupes  . .  . when these  charges are levelled against  Secretary
of  State  John  Foster  Duties,  against  his  brother  Allen  .  .  .
against  the  Chief  Justice  .  .  .  when  the  honor  and integrity
of  the Vice  President  [Nixon]  are  questioned .  .  .  when  we
are  told  that  our  nation's  press  almost  without exception  is
Communist   infiltrated   and  inspired  .   .  .   when  all   loyal
Americans  are  accused  of  being  Communist  dupes  unless
they  subscribe to  the  radical and dictatorial direction of  one
self-chosen  man  [the  head  of  this  secret  society]?
—"Peril  to  Conservatives"  signed  editorial  by  Otis  Chan-
dler,  publisher  of  the  conservative  Republican  Los   Angeles
Times,  March  12,  read  on  the  Senate  floor  March  20  by
Senator   Young   (R.  North  Dakota)   in  calling  attention  to
the  menace  of  this new  secret  order.
Washington,   March  20  (UPI)—The  Senate   Internal   Se-
curity   Subcommittee  is   answering  queries  about  the  con-
troversial  John  Birch  Society,  a  semi-secret   anti-Commu-
nist  organization, by  describing it  as  apparently "a patriotic
organization,"  it  was  learned  today.
The   subcommittee's  evaluation  is   being   sent   out  in   a
form  letter  over  the  signature  of  James  O.  Eastland,   the
chairman,  a  Mississippi Democrat.   It  reads:
"The  John Birch  Society,  about  which you  asked  is known
to  be  a  conservative  anti-Communist organization.   How-
ever,   the   subcommittee  cannot  endorse   any  organization
officially.    We  are  happy  to  state  that  it  seems  to  be,  from
our  records,  a  patriotic organization."
—New   York   Times,  March  21
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  27, 1961
What  A  Giant  Our  Industrial  Society  Could  Be  If  Fully  Mobilized
(Continued   from   Page   One)
devastated  North   Korea.     His   heroes  are  men  like  Kirn   II
Sung  and  Ho  Chi-minh.    He   sees  the  Fideiistas   embarking
on  a  long   struggle   like  theirs  with   U.S.   power.     He   rep-
resents   a   Latin   generation   which   has   grown   cynical   about
our  repeated  protestations  of  a  desire  for   social  reform   and
is turning to the  Russians  for  aid  in  the  industrialization  which
can  alone  end  the  miserable poverty of  their  people.   We  must
learn  to  see  this  in  human  terms  if  we  are  to  deal  with  it.
We  cannot  do  so  if  we  regard  such  men  as  "Che"  as  sinister
puppets   in   some  occult   conspiracy.
Fidel  Was  Too   Conservative
To  meet  this  challenge  we  are  going  to  have  to  do  some
fresh   thinking.    To  preserve  the  free  values  we  cherish   (at
least  in  theory)  against  the  stultifying  thought  controls  which
are  the  price  of  the  Soviet  road  to  industrialization,   we  must
learn   from   them   (as  they  eventually  must  learn   from   us).
The   so-called  foreign   aid  problem   is  not  one  of   peripheral
charity.    It  calls  for   overhaul  of  our  economy.    The   Presi-
dent  touched  on  this  when  he  said  in  his  foreign  aid  message
that  "less  than  80  percent  of  our  industrial  capacity  is  now
in  use  and  nearly 7  percent  of  our  labor  force  is  unemployed."
Here  we  begin   to  see  the   larger   outlines   of   the   problem.
The  fact  is,  as  Secretary  of  Labor  Goldberg   recently  pointed
out,   that  each  of  our  postwar  recessions  has  left   behind   it
a  mounting  toll  of   permanent   joblessness.    The   fact   is,  as
Walter   Heller,  chairman  of  the  President's   Council   of  Eco-
nomic  Advisers  recently  told  Congress,  that  the  gap  between
what  we  are  now  producing  and  what  we  can  produce  is  $50
billion  a  year.    In  this  enormous  slack  we  can  measure  the
real  potential  of  our  giant  industrial  society  //  it  were    -fully
mobilized.      Against  this   backdrop,   the   President's   talk   of
$2.4   billion   in   economic  aid   for   the   whole   world   seems
ludicrously  small  and  Fidel  Castro's  proposal  at  Buenos  Aires
in   May,   1959,   for   a   10-year  $30   billion   aid   program   for
Latin  America—or  $3  billion  a  year—seems  too  conservative.
The  respected  UN  Commission  for  Latin  America has  esti-
mated  that  Latin  America needs  $2  billion  in  new investment
each  year  just  to  keep  up  with  its  population  growth  without
a  further  decline  in  its  miserably  low  living  standards.    Our
Congo's  Purse-Strings  in  Belgian  Hands
Another   g-limpse  of   the  purse-strings   by  which   the
Belgians   control   the  Congo  was   afforded   in  a   London
Observer   (March  19)   profile  of  Katanga's   secessionist
leader,  Moise  Tshombe.    "All  the  payments  for  Katan-
ga's   exports,"   it  reported,  "are   collected   in   Antwerp,
where   the  Belgians  operate   a  blocked   account  for  the
Congo.    It  is  from  this  account  that  they  release  funds
—not   Belgian,   but  Congolese  money—to  their  chosen
favorites  in  the  Congo.    This,  for  example,  is  the  way
they  help  General  Mobutu  to  pay  his  army."
The  portrait  said  of  Tshombe's  father   that   he   was
"a  remarkably  successful  business  man"  who  "got   into
difficulties"  but  was   "helped  to  his  feet   by  the   Union
Miniere,   Katanga's   mining   giant."     Tshombe    himself
seems  to  have  continued  in  this  pattern.     Although   he
inherited  a  considerable   estate,  "he  soon   ended   up  in
the  bankruptcy  courts.    Like  his  father  he  was  helped
to  his  feet  by  the  Union  Miniere."    The  Observer  said
that  at  the  time  of  independence   Tshombe   found  him-
self   without  political  allies  and  "his   own  tribal   party,
the  Conakat,  could  look  only  to  local  Belgians* for  sup-
port."   The  most  important  "local  Belgians"  in  Katanga
are  the  managers  of  Union  Miniere  du  Haut  Katanga's
vast   mining   operations.
press  laughed  at  Fidel  Castro  when  he  spoke  of  $3   billion
a  year  in  aid  and  we  lost  our  chance.    For  he  was  then  speak-
ing,  as  in  that  speech,  of  "ni  pan  sin  libertad  ni  libertad  sin
pan"  (neither bread without liberty  nor  liberty  without  bread)
and  still  rejecting the  Soviet  way.
If   we   can   subsidize  agriculture   with   food    exports    for
peace,  why  can't  we  subsidize full  industrial  employment  with
long   term   credits   for   foreign   development?     Why   should
basic  industries  like  steel  be  allowed  to  break  even  around  30
percent  of  capacity  and  operate  at  50  percent  when  the  world
is hungry for  capital  goods  and  our  place  in  the  world  depends
on  satisfying   these  aspirations?    If   we  had   the  vision   and
the  courage  to  gear  our  industry  by  planning  to  full  employ-
ment,  we  could  transform  Latin  America  and  the  world  and
leave  the  Russians  far  behind.    This  is  the  measure  of   the
challenge.   This  is the  real  call  to  greatness  for  our  generation
of   Americans.    This  is  really  a  New  Frontier,  yet  few  dare
even  to  talk  about  it.
This  Is  Last  of  Series  Growing  Out  of  Our  Recent  Trip  to  Cuba—You  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift   Sub  With  the  First
I.  F.
Pleas<
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington   15,  D.
N.
C.
W.
;  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
...................................;.....Zone............State
gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1   yr.)
we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes
"""""3/27/61
additional:
"n"
No"n
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   W  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   $15  to   Europe;    $20  to   Israel,   Asia   and    Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED