I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961mar06.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  the  Un-American Committee
Inside  Documentary;  Black's  Dissents  in  the  Braden  and  Wilkinson  Contempt  Cases,  Pages  2  and  3
L F. Stone's Weekly
VOL.   IX,  No.  8
MARCH  6,   1961
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
At   Least  One  Intellectual  Who's  Still   Safe
It  would  be  exaggerating  to  say  that  the  Supreme  Court's
decision   in  the  Braden  and   Wilkinson   cases  give   the   Un-
American  Activities  Committee  an  almost  limitless  grant  of
power   to   act  as  a  roving  national   pillory.     The   majority,
speaking  through  Mr.   Justice  Stewart,  feels  that   it  has  im-
posed   certain  restrictions.    Under   these  it   is  doubtful   that
the  Committee  could  force  a  disclosure  of  views  from  Barry
Gold-water  or  investigate  the  White  Citizens  Councils.     They
retain  intact their full  First  Amendment rights.    The standards
set  by  the  new  5-to-4  decisions  are  twofold.    The  Committee
must  either  have  some  "reason   to  believe"   that  the  witness
summoned  for  interrogation  is  a  Communist  or  that  Commu-
nists  -were  utilizing  some  legitimate   cause  in  which   he  was
engaged.    But  these  limits  are  broad  enough   to  bring  the
whole  spectrum  of  left-liberal  activities  within  the  Commit-
tee's  inquisitorial  orbit.
From  the  ADA  to  the  NAACP
What   the  majority   may  complacently  regard   as  a  restric-
tion  will  seem  to  others  the  broadest  invitation  the  Commit-
tee  has  ever  received  from  the  Supreme  Court,    This  appears
clearly  in  the  Braden  decision  where  the.majority   said   "in-
formation   as  to  the  extent   to  which  the   Communist  Party
was  utilizing legitimate  organizations  and  causes  in  that  region
[the  South]   was  surely  not  constitutionally  beyond  the  reach
of  the  subcommittee's inquiry."    Since  the  Communists  sup-
port  virtually  every  social  reform  and  particularly  the  Negro's
struggle  against segregation,  this  invites  the  Committee to  look
into  every  liberal organization from  the  ADA  to  the  NAACP
on  the  ground  that  the  Communists  may  be  "utilizing"  them,
whatever  that  means.
At  least  as  far  back  as  Chief  Justice  Hughes'  decision  in
the  de  Jonge  case  in  1937  and  as  recently  as  Mr.  Justice  Har-
lan's  decision  in  the  Yates  Smith  Act  case  of  1957,  the  Court
declined  to  remove  First  Amendment  protection  from  lawful
political  expression  even  though   these   might   in   some  way
be  associated  with  Communist  activity.    Now  we  have  Mr.
Justice  Stewart  saying  for  the  majority  in  the  Wilkinson   case
that  what  establishes  a  Governmental  interest   "overbalancing"
First  Amendment guarantees  "is  the  nature  of  the  Communist
activity  involved,  whether  the  momentary  conduct  is  legiti-
mate  or  illegitimate".    The  italics  are  ours,  and  point  up  a
doctrine  which  can  be  used  to  inhibit  and  discourage  a  wide
range  of  normal  democratic  activity.    Even  Speaker  Sam Ray-
burn,  speaking  on  TV  the  day  before  the  Court's   decisions,
said  of  the  changes  which  had  occurred  during  his  49  years
in  Congress,   "Nearly   every  step  that's  made  in  the   interest
of  the  folks  .  .  .  somebody  gets  up  and  calls  it  socialism."
The  Committee  and  its  dose  ally,  the  FBI,   see  plots  every-
where.     To  interpret   the  Committee's  power  so   generously
is  especially  dangerous  in  the  South  where  little  un-American
You  Never  Know
Mr.   [Richard]   Arens:  Did  you  have  any  experience
with   our  distinguished   chairman   [Rep.   Clyde  Doyle]
when  you  were  there  in  San  Diego?
Mrs.   [Anita]  Schneider:   Yes,  I  did.
Mrs.    Schneider:   Congressman   Doyle  and  the   other
members  of  the  Committee  appeared  in  San  Diego.    I
was  one  of  the  two  Communist  Party   organizers  or-
dered  to  distribute  leaflets  in  front  of  the  hearing  room.
Congressman  Doyle  received  one  of  the  leaflets.    When
he  saw  the  type  of  leaflet  that  it  was,  he  stormed   to
the   TV  camera,   showed   the  leaflet,  and  demanded   to
know  who  had  put  out  that   leaflet.
Mr.  Doyle:  I  want  to  state  that  I  did  not  know  at
the  time  I  was  served  with  that  leaflet  that  the  young
lady  was  an  undercover  agent  of  the  FBI.    I  thought
she  was  a  bona  fide  commie.
—House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  hearings
in  Los  Angeles,  Dec.  5-8,  1956, p.  6728.
committees  in  several  States  are  already  treating   the  move-
ment  for  integration  as  a  Communist  conspiracy  whose  foun-
tainhead  is  in  the  Supreme  Court  itself.
Efforts  in  the  South  to  terrorize  the  Negro  and  his  white
friends  in  this  way  give  a  pointed  immediacy  to  Mr.  Justice
Black's  dissent in  Wilkinson.    There  he  scornfully  rejects  the
majority  view  that  it  is  protecting  witnesses  by  requiring  that
the   Committee   have  some  reason  to  believe  them   Commu-
nists.    The   charge,   Mr.   Justice   Black  said,  -"is  so  common
that  hardly anyone in  public  life  escapes  it.    Every member  of
this  Court has,  on  one occasion  or  another  been  so designated."
To  assimilate  this  with  the  protection   afforded  by  the  "prob-
able  cause"   requirement  in  arrests  is  to  invite  the   dragnet
procedures  the  majority  claims  to  be  avoiding.    Indeed  it  is
hardly   a  secret   in   knowledgeable   circles  that   neither   Carl
Braden  nor  Frank  Wilkinson  //  a  Communist.    If  they  were,
they  would  have  taken  the  Fifth  as  scores  of  other  hounded
Communists  and   ex-Communists  have  done.   Both   took   the
First  amendment  and  refused  to  answer  on  principle,  as  have
some  two  dozen  other  intellectuals  now  awaiting  jail  because
they  decided  it  was  time  to  try  the  conscience  of  the  country
and  the  quality of  the  Court  by standing  on  the  First  Amend-
ment  and  risking  jail  to  fight  the  witch  hunt.
If   there   is  a  conspiracy  here,  Braden  and  Wilkinson   are
its  victims.    Braden  has  been  a  hated  target  of  the  segrega-
tionists  ever  since  he  helped  a  Negro  buy a  home  in  a  white
section  of  Louisville,  Kentucky.    The  last  day  of  his  trial  for
State  sedition  because  of  this,  when   it  looked   as  if  Braden
might  be  acquitted,  the  FBI  pulled  a  surprise  and  made  avail-
able  to the prosecution  a secret  paid  operative,  Alberta  Ahearn,
who  had  wormed  her  way into  the  friendship  of  the  Bradens.
Her  testimony  swung  the  jury,  though  Braden  took  the  stand
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
3   1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March   6, 1961
From  Black's  Dissent  (With  Warren  and  Douglas)  in  the  Braden  Case
"In  July  1958  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee  announced  its  intention  to  conduct a  series  of  hearings  in
Atlanta,  Georgia.  . . . Petitioner,  a  long-time opponent of the
Committee,  decided  to  go  to  Atlanta  for  the  purpose  of  lend-
ing  his  support  to  those  who were  fighting  against  the  hear-
ings.  .  .  .  Within  an  hour  of his  registration   [in  an  Atlanta
hotel   as   representative   of   the   Emergency   Civil   Liberties
Committee],  petitioner  was served  with  a  subpoena. . . When
he  appeared  in  response  to  this  subpoena,  petitioner  was  told
that  he  had  been  subpoenaed because  the  Committee was  in-
formed  that  'y°u  were  sent  to  this  area  by  the  Communist
Party  for  the  purpose  of  developing  a  hostile   sentiment   to
this  Committee.  .  . .'
"In  my view,  the  majority  by  its  decision today  [upholding
this  contempt  conviction]  places  the  stamp  of   constitutional
approval   upon  a   practice   as   clearly  inconsistent  with   the
Constitution ...  as  any  that  has  ever   come  before  this
Court.  .  .  .  This  case  involves  nothing  more  nor  less  than
an  attempt  by  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee  to  use
the  contempt  power  of  the  House  of  Representatives  as  a
weapon  against  those  who dare  to  criticize  it.    ...
The  Easiest  of  Accusations
"So  far  as  appears  from  this  record  the  only  information
the  Committee  had  with  regard  to  petitioner  was  the  testi-
mony  of  a  paid  informant  at  a  previous  Committee  hearing.
The  only  evidence  to  the   effect  that  petitioner   was  in  fact
a  member  of  the  Communist  Party  that  emerges  from  that
testimony  is  a  flat  conclusory  statement   by  the   informant
that  it  was so. ...    When  this  fact  is  considered  in  conjunc-
tion  with  the  fact  that  petitioner  was  not  accorded the  oppor-
tunity  to  cross-examine  the  informant  or  the  protection  of
the  statute  permitting  inspection  of  statements  given  to  the
FBI  by  paid  informants,  it  seems  obvious  to  me  that  such
testimony   is   almost   totally   worthless   for   the   purpose  of
establishing  probable  cause.    For  all  we know, the   informant
may  have  had  no  basis  at  all  for  her  conclusion  and,  indeed,
the   possibility  of  prejury   cannot,   in   view  of  its   frequent
occurrence in these  sorts  of cases, be entirely  discounted.  . . .
In  the  atmosphere  existing  in  this  country  today,  the  charge
that   someone  is   a   Communist  is   so  common  that   hardly
anyone  active  in  public  life  escapes  it.    Every  member  of
this  Court  has,  on  one  occasion  or  another,  been  so  desig-
nated. ...  If  the  mere  fact  that  someone has  been  called  a
Communist  is  to  be  permitted   to  satisfy   a  requirement  of
probable  cause,  I  think  it  plain  that  such  a  requirement   is
without  value.
"The  other  such  'protection'  afforded  to  critics  of  the  Un-
American  Activities  Committee  under  these   decisions  is  in-
cluded  in  the  majority's   so-called  balancing  test.  .  .  . The
truth  of the matter  is that  the balancing  test  . . . means  that
the  Committee may  engage  in  any  inquiry  a  majority  of  this
Court  happens  to  think   could  possibly  be  for  a  legitimate
purpose.  .  .  .  And  under  the  tests  of  legitimacy  that  are
used  in  this  area,  any  first  year  law  school  student   worth
his  salt  could  construct   a  rationalization   to  justify   almost
Newspaper  Editors  Next?
"Can  editors  be  summoned before  the  Committee and
be  made  to  account  for  their  editorials  denouncing  the
Committee,  its  tactics,   its  practices,   its   policies?     If
petitioner  can  be  questioned  concerning  his  opposition
to  the  Committee,  then  I  see no reason  why editors  are
immune.    The  list  of  editors  will  be  long  as  evident
from   the   editorial  protests   against   the   Committee's
activities,   including  its   recent  film,  Operation   Aboli-
tion."
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas, with  whom  the  Chief   Justice
and   Mr.   Justice   Black   concur,  dissenting   in   Frank
Wilkinson  v.  U.S.
any  question  put  to  any  witness  at  any  time.
"Thus,  in  my  view,  the  conclusion  is  inescapable  that  the
only  real  limitation  upon  the  Committee's   power  to  harass
its  opponents  is  the  Committee's  own self-restraint,  a  char-
acteristic  which  probably  has  not  been  predominant   in  the
Committee's  work  over  the  past  few  years.   The  result  of  all
this  is  that  from  now  on  anyone  who takes  a  public  position
contrary  to  that  being  urged  by  the  Un-American   Activities
Committee  should  realize  that  he  runs  the  risk  of  being  sub-
poenaed  to  appear   at   a  hearing  in  some  far   off  place,  of
being  questioned  with  regard  to  every  minute  detail  of  his
past  life,  of being  asked  to  repeat  all  the  gossip  he  may  have
heard  about  any  of  his  friends  and  acquaintances,   of  being
accused  by  the  Committee  of  membership  in  the  Communist
Party,  of  being  held  up  to  the  public  as  a  subversive  and  a
traitor,  of  being  jailed  for  contempt  if  he  refuses  to  cooper-
ate  with  the  Committee  in  its  probe  of  his  mind  and  associa-
tions,  and  of  being  branded  by  his  neighbors,   employer  and
erstwhile  friends  as  a  menace  to  society  regardless   of   the
outcome  of  that  hearing.    With  such  a  powerful  weapon  in
its   hands,  it   seems   quite   likely   that   the   Committee  will
weather   all  criticism,   even  though   justifiable,  that  may  be
directed  toward  it.    For  there  are  not  many  people  in  our
society  who will  have  the  courage  to  speak  out  against  such
a  formidable  opponent.    If  the  present  trend  continues,  this
already  small  number  will  necessarily  dwindle  as  their  ranks
are  thinned  by  the  jails.   Government  by  consent  will  appear
to  be replaced  by government  by  intimidation.  .  .  .
"I  believe that  true  Americanism  is  to  be  protected,  not  by
committees   that   persecute    unorthodox   minorities   but   by
strict  adherence  to  basic  principles  of  freedom  that  are  re-
sponsible  for  this  Nation's  greatness.  .  .  .  The principles  of
the  First  Amendment  are  stated  in  precise   and  mandatory
terms   and   unless   they   are   applied   in   those   terms,   the
freedoms   of  religion,   speech,   press,  assembly   and   petition
will  have  no  effective  protection.  Where  these  freedoms  are
left  to  depend  upon  a  balance  to  be  struck  by  this  Court  in
each  particular  case,  liberty  cannot  survive.    For  under  such
a   rule,   there   are  no  constitutional  rights  that   cannot   be
'balanced'  away."
The  Un-Americans  Concentrate  On Self-Glorification  and  Smearing  Their  Critics
"Self-justification   dominates   much   of   the    Committee's
work  and,  therefore,  its  expenditures.    Two  years  ago,  it
produced  a  document  entitled,  'Operation  Abolition',  which
was  nothing  but  a  series  of  dossiers  of  people  who  were
members  of  groups  seeking  the  abolition  of  the   Commit-
tee.    The   1960  Report  indulges  in  more  of  this  paranoid
and  costly  concern  .  .  .  and  is  justified  on  the  principle
that   if   'you're   against   us,   you're   un-American".    Thus,
two   separate  reports   on  the   San   Francisco   riot   incident,
which   the   Committee's  own  conduct   largely    precipitated,
were  deemed  necessary.  . .  . For what  other  committee do
we  provide such  expensive  tax-paid  insurance  against  public
misunderstanding? ... To spend  taxpayers'  money  explain-
ing  to  them  why  you  are  spending  it  is  an  act  of  self-levi-
tation. ...  In  the  tone  and content  of  its   self-glorification
work,  the  Committee  becomes  a  partisan,  rather  than  the
impartial  monitor  it  should  be.   And,  as  the  tone  becomes
more  querulous,  more  money  is  spent   in  the   Committee's
fight against  its critics....  [In]  the  1960 report,  one member
of  the  Committee so  far  lost  his  sense  of  proportion  as  to
claim  that  the  angry  students  in  San  Francisco  were  'toying
with  treason'—literally!"
—Rep.  Roosevelt  (Cal.)  testifying    Feb.  21  on  thu  budget
request  of   the   Un-American  Activities   Committee.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.   Stone's   Weekly,  March  6, 1961
From  Black's  Dissent  (With  Warren  and  Douglas)  in  the  Wilkinson  Case
"The   petitioner  .  .  .  has  for   some  time   been   at  odds
with   strong   sentiment   favoring  racial   segregation   in   his
home  State  of  Kentucky.    A  white  man  himself,  the   peti-
tioner  has  nonetheless  spoken  out  strongly.   .  .  .  This  ac-
tivity,  which  once  before  resulted  in  his  being  charged  with
a  serious  crime  [sedition,  after  helping  a  Negro  buy  a  home
in  a  white  area],  seems  also  to  have  been the  primary  reason
for  his  being called before  the  Un-American  Activities Com-
mittee.   For the  occasion . . .  appears  to  have  been  the  cir-
culation  of  two  letters,  both  in  the  nature  of  petitions  to
Congress.  .  .  .  One .  .  .  signed  by  petitioner  and  his  wife,
asked  those  who read  it  to  urge  their  representatives  to  vote
against   proposed  legislation   which  would  have  empowered
the  States  to  enact  antisedition  statutes  because  .  .  .  those
statutes   could  too  readily  he  used  against  citizens  working
for  integration.   The  other  petition,  bearing  the  signatures of
200  Southern  Negroes,  was   sent   directly   to   the   House  of
Representatives  and  requested  that  body  not  to  allow  the
Un-American   Activities   Committee  to   conduct  hearings  in
the  South  because,  so  the  petition  charged,  'all  of  its  activi-
ties  in  recent  years  suggests  that  it  is  much  more  interested
in  harassing   and  labeling  as  subversive  any  citizen  who  is
inclined  to be liberal  or an independent  thinker'.  .  . .
The  Indivisibility  of  Liberty
"The   majority   here   affirms   petitioner's   conviction   [for
contempt  in  refusing  on First  amendment  grounds  to  answer
questions  about  his  personal  beliefs  and  associations]   'upon
the  reasoning  and authority'  of Barenblatt  v. fJ.S.  . .  . the
majority  might well have,  with  equal  justification, relied  upon
a  much earlier  decision  of this  Court,  that  in  Beauharnais  v.
Illinois.  . . .  Ironically,  the need  there  asserted  by the State
of  Illinois and  accepted  by  a  majority  of  this  Court  as  suffici-
ently  compelling to  warrant  abridgement  of  the  right  of  peti-
tion  was  the  need  to  protect  Negroes  against  what  was  sub-
sequently  labelled  'libel ... of a racial  group'.  . . . Thus the
decision  in  Beauharnais  had  all  the  outward  appearance  of
one  which would  aid  the  underprivileged   Negro.    This  deci-
sion,  however,  is  a  dramatic  illustration  of  the  shortsighted-
ness  of  such  an  interpretation  of  that  case.    For  the   very
constitutional  philosophy that  gave  birth  to  Beauharnais  to-
day  gives  birth  to  a  decision  which  may well  strip  the  Negro
of  the  aid  of many  of  the  white  people who have  been  willing
to  speak  up  in  his  behalf.    If   the  Un-American   Activities
Committee  is  to  have  the  power  to  interrogate  everyone who
is  called  a  Communist, there  is  one thing  certain  beyond  the
peradventure  of  a  doubt—no  legislative  committee,  state  or
federal,  will  have  trouble  finding  cause  to  subpoena  all  per-
sons  anywhere who take  a  public  stand  for  or  against  segre-
gation.   The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  these  two  cases  is,  to
my  mind, clear.   Liberty  to  be  secure  for  any,  must  be  secure
for  all—even for  the  most miserable merchants  of hatred  and
unpopular  ideas.
Both  Barenblatt  and  Beauharnais  are  offspring  of  a  con-
stitutional  doctrine  that is  steadily  sacrificing  individual  free-
dom  of  religion,  speech,  press,  assembly  and  petition  to  gov-
Only  Need  to  Call  Them  Communists
"There  is  nothing  in  the  record  to  show  that   the
Southern  Conference  [Educational  Fund]  or  the  Emer-
gency  Civil  Liberties  Committee  or  the  Southern  News-
letter  had  the  remotest  connection with  the Communist
Party.   There  is only the  charge  of  the  Committee that
there  was  such  a  connection.   That  charge  amounts  to
little  more  than  innuendo. ... If  Watkins and Sweezy
decided  anything,  they  decided  that  before  inroads  in
the  First  Amendment  domain  may  be  made,  some  de-
monstrable  connection  with  communism  must  first  be
established and the  matter be plainly  shown to be within
the  scope  of  the  Committee's  authority.    Otherwise  the
Committee  may  roam  at  will,  requiring  any  individual
to  expose  his  association  with  any  group  or  with  any
publication  which is  unpopular with  the  Committee and
which  it  can  discredit  by  calling  it  communistic."
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas, with  whom  the  Chief   Justice,
Mr.   Justice   Black   and  Mr.   Justice   Brennan   concur,
dissenting  in  Carl  Braden  v.   U.S.
ernment  control.  . .  . For the presently  prevailing  constitu-
tional  doctrine, which treats  the  First  Amendment as  a  mere
admonition,   leaves  the  liberty-giving  freedoms  which  were
intended  to  be  protected  by  that  Amendment  completely  at
the  mercy  of  Congress  and  this  Court  whenever  a   majority
of  this  Court  concludes,  on  the  basis  of  any  of  the   several
judicially  created  'tests'  now  in  vogue,  that  abridgement  of
these  freedoms  is  more  desirable  than  freedom  itself.  .  .  .
The  very  foundations  of  a  true  democracy  and  the  founda-
tion  upon which this  Nation  was built  is the  fact  that  govern-
ment  is  responsive  to  the  views  of  its  citizens,  and  no  nation
can  continue  to  exist  on  such  a  foundation  unless  its  citizens
are  wholly  free  to  speak  out  fearlessly   for  or  against  their
officials  and their  laws.   When it  begins to  send  its  dissenters,
such  as  Barenblatt,  Uphaus,  Wilkinson,  and  now  Braden,  to
jail,  the  liberties  indispensable  to  its  existence  must  be  fast
disappearing.  .  .  .  Those  freedoms  are  being  destroyed  by
sophistry  and dialectics.  . . .
"The   majority's   approach   makes   the  First  Amendment,
not  the  rigid  protection  of  liberty  its  language  imports,  but
a  poor  flexible  imitation.     This  weak  substitute  is,  to  my
mind,  totally  unacceptable  for   I   believe  that  Amendment
forbids,  among  other  things,  any  agency  of  the  federal  gov-
ernment—be  it  legislative,  executive   or  judicial—to  harass
or  punish  people  for  their  beliefs,  or  for  their  speech  about,
or public criticism  of,  laws  and  public  officials.    The  Founders
of  this  Nation  were  not  then  willing  to  trust  the  definition
of  First  Amendment freedoms  to  Congress  or this  Court,  nor
am  I  now.   History  and  the  affairs  of  the  present  world  show
that  the  Founders   were   right.   There  are  grim  reminders
all  around  this  world  that  the  distance   between  individual
liberty  and  firing  squads  is  not  always  as  far  as  it  seems."
"We Will  Not  Save  Free  Speech  If  We  Are  Not  Prepared  to  Go to  Jail  in  its  Defense'
"I  have made this First  Amendment  challenge  of  the  Un-
American   Activities  Committee  as   a   matter   of   personal
conscience   and   the   responsibility   which  we  all   share   to
defend  the  Constitution  against   all  enemies.
"It  is regrettable  that  the  majority  of  the  Supreme  Court
today  has  sanctioned  the  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee's  efforts  to  silence  its  critics.    But  free  speech,  asso-
ciation  and  the  right  of  petition  cannot  he  long   abridged
by  any  branch  of  our  government.   It  is  the  very  nature
of   our   democracy  that   efforts   to   suppress   free   speech
create  greater   free  speech.    I  am  serenely   confident  that
for   every  voice  which  asks  for  abolition  of  the  Un-Amer-
ican  Activities  Committee  and is  silenced  in jail,  a  thousand
new  voices  will  be  raised;  and,  most  significantly,  many of
these  will  be  the  new  generation  of  American  students.
"The  Un-American Activities  Committee attempts  to  in-
vestigate  precisely  those  areas  of  free  speech  and  associa-
tion  in  which  the  First  Amendment  forbids   Congress   to
legislate.   The  Committee  will  some  day  be  abolished.   The
First Amendment will be restored  to full  vigor.   The Court's
minority  will  in  time  become  the  majority.    We  will  not
save  free  speech  if  we  are  not  prepared  to  go  to  jail  in
its  defense.    I  am  prepared  to  pay  that  price."
—Frank  Wilkinson, Feb. 27.
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March   6,  1961
Our   Best  Cannot  Survive  in  A  Society  Half  Free,  Half  Intimidated
(Continued   from   Page   One)
to  deny  under  oath  that  he  had  ever  been  a  Communist.    It
is  significant  that  though  his  conviction  was  finally  reversed,
no  effort  has  been  made  to  prosecute  him  for  perjury.   Wil-
kinson  has  made  himself  a  target  of  the  Committee  and  the
FBI  by  his  steadfast  defense  of  civil  liberties  and  by  his  cam-
paign  for  abolition  of  the  House  Committee.     The  only  wit-
ness who  ever  named  him  as  a  Communist  is a  woman  named
Anita  Schneider   (see  box  on  page  one)   who  talked  to  him
only  once,  and  then  to  try  and  arrange  a  meeting  against  the
Un-American  Activities  Committee!    She  was  playing  a  role
of  double  deception—an  FBI  paid  operative  who  joined  £he
Communists  to  spy  on  them  and  then,  of  course  without  dis-
closing  her  Communist  party  membership,   became  a   leading
figure in  the  Democratic  party  in  San Diego where  she led  the
fight  against  the  House  Committee.     Such  are  now  the  flora
and  fauna  of  our  free  society.
No  Better   Way  to  Discredit  the  FBI
When  Wilkinson  was  called  before  the  House   Committee
in  Atlanta  in  July,  1958,   he  was told  he  had  been   summoned
because  he  was  part  of  a  plot  "to  destroy  the  FBI  and  dis-
credit  the  director  of  the  FBI  and  to  undertake  to  hamstring
the work  of  the  Committee on  Un-American  Activities."    The
FBI   could   hardly   do  more  to   discredit   itself   than   to   use
secret  operatives  like  Mrs.  Schneider  to  infiltrate  the  Demo-
cratic  party  as  well  as  the  Communists,  and  then  help  organ-
ize  agitation  against  the   House   Committee,   presumably  re-
porting  to  the  FBI  those  she  had  herself   recruited  into  this
campaign!    Braden  and  Wilkinson   are  being  sent  to  jail  for
12  months  because  the  paranoid  underground   of  our  society,
sick  minds which  see  conspiracy  in  every movement  for  social
reform,  are  determined  to  make  the  FBI  and  the  House  Com-
mittee  sacrosanct  institutions,  too  dangerous  to  question.     In
fact  the  principal  efforts   of  the  House  Committee  in   recent
years have been largely devoted  to  hunting  down  and  smearing
its  own  critics,  as  Congressman  James  Roosevelt   (Col) (see
box   on   page   two)    and   John   Fitts   Ryan   (N.Y.)   showed
in  the  testimony they bravely  gave  a  week  before  to  the  House
Administration   Committee   in   opposing   the   $321,000   new
budget  of  the   Un-Americans.
A  Warning  From  the  Churches
"Because    there   are   many   serious   questions   being
raised   by   responsible    citizens   and  organizations    con-
cerning   the  sale  and  showing   of   the  film,  'Operation
Abolition'.  .  .  .  Because   of  the  effect  upon  freedom  of
expression   which  this  film  produces   by  its   implication
that  criticism  of  the  House  Committee  on  Un-American
Activities  must  be  Communist-inspired.   .  .  .
"Until   objective   and   convincing    answers   to   these
questions  are  provided  by  proper  authorities   not   par-
ties  in  interest   in  the  film  and  not  participants  in  the
events   recorded  in  it,  the  General   Board   [of   the   Na-
tional   Council   of   Churches]   advises    its   constituent
communions   and   their   members   NOT   TO   EXHIBIT
THE    FILM    'OPERATION     ABOLITION'    IN
CHURCHES  UNLESS  A  FULL  AND  FAIR  PRESEN-
TATION   OF   SUCH   FACTS   AS   ARE   AVAILABLE
RELEVANT  TO  THESE   QUESTIONS   IS  PROVIDED
BEFOREHAND,   AND   REFERENCE   IS   MADE  TO
THIS   STATEMENT   [emphasis  in  original]."
—National  Council  of  Churches  release,  Feb.  2S
As  students  of   Soviet   law  know,   its  crucial  point  is  the
vague  way  it  defines   "counter   revolutionary"  activity:  this  is
so  wide  as  to  make  any  criticism  of  the  existing  order   haz-
ardous.    A  similar  role  is  being  played  in  our  society  by  the
vague  standard  of  "un-Americanism,"  to  which  the  new  de-
cisions  give  added  power.     Our  best  traditions  cannot   long
survive  in  a  society  half  free,  half  intimidated.    Freedom  re-
quires  courage,  and  fear  of  Communism  has  led  the  majority
under  the  influence  of  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter's  legal  sophis-
tries,  to  balance  away  the  clear  mandate  of  the  First  Amend-
ment.    The  law  establishing  the  un-American  committee  has
all   too   clearly   abridged   freedom   of   speech.     Braden   and
Wilkinson  are  martyrs in  the  cause  of  liberty,  and  Mr.  Justice
Black  could  have  found  no  more  magnificent  way  to  celebrate
his  75th  birthday  than  in  the  memorable  dissents  with  which
he  protested  their  imprisonment. Though  only Roosevelt,  Ryan
and   Kastenmeier  were  prepared   to  vote   against  new   funds
for  the  Committee  as we  went  to  press,  we  are  hopeful  that  a
fresh  generation,  worthy  of  Jefferson  and  Lincoln,  will  wipe
out  this  monstrous  excrescence,  itself  the  most  un-American
of   all  un-American   activities.
The  Second  Part  of  Our  Report  from  Cuba  Had  to  Be  Postponed   Until  Next  Week  Because  of  These  Decisions
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618 Nebraska  Ave^  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street    .................................
City  ....                ...  ...........
v
** y    ••""•"*••••••""•"•"••""•""••••'
..
3/6/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mom.)  or  M  (1  jr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ........._.................................................._.._.....
Street   ..........................._...................................„.....„....„..__
City   ....................._...................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  Bend  gift  announcement?          Tea  O    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washiitfton   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
You  Can  Still  Start  A  New  Subscription   With   Last  Week's   Report   from   Cuba
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED