I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961feb13.pdf

============================================================

Conflict-of-interest    in  the Senate, P.  4
Associate  of  Paul  Nitze  at  Foreign  Relations  Hearing  Opposes  A  NATO  Nuclear  Deterrent,  See  Page  3.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,   No.  6
FEBRUARY   13,   1961
'<>'      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Fresh  Breezes  Everywhere  But  The   State  Department
A   fresh  wind   is  blowing  through   the   capital,   and   fresh
minds  and  a  new  accessibility  are  evident  everywhere—except
in  the  State Department.    Even  at  the  Pentagon,  the  dinosaur
of  our  bureaucracy, the  new  Secretary of  Defense  and  his  press
relations  chief,  Arthur  Sylvester,  have  begun  to  let  fresh  air
in  on  a stale atmosphere.   The  one place  where  nothing  seems
to  change  but  the  decor,  which  is  plush  and  modernistic,  is
at  the  State  Department.    Pleasant  but  conventional  are  the
adjectives   which  best   describe  the   new   Secretary  of   State's
first  press  conference.    There  could  hardly  be  a  greater  con-
trast  than  that  between  the  incisive  brisk  vigor  of  the  Ken-
nedy  press  conferences*  and  the  long-winded  caution  of  Dean
Rusk's.    It  is  true  that  he  appears  in  the  shadow  of  a  strong
President,  obviously  determined  to  be  his  own  Secretary  of
State,  and  in  the  midst of  slow  deep  changes,  like  the  breakup
of   the  ice  in  a  clogged   river  after   a  long  winter,  when  he
cannot  be  sure  of  his  footing.    Nonetheless  for  all  his  pro-
tective  banality,  and  non-committal  care,  Mr.   Rusk  was  re-
vealing.
Misrepresenting  the  Geneva  Accords
There  was,  for  example,  his  remark  when  asked  about  the
arms  being  supplied  from  both  sides  in  the  Laotian  struggle.
"The  assistance which  we have given  in  Laos,"  Mr.  Rusk said,
"has   been  channeled  through   the  arrangements  which  were
set  up  under  the  Geneva  accords."    John  Foster  Dulles  him-
self  could  not  have  been  more  disingenuous.    It  is  possible
by  legalistic  contortions  to  find  loopholes   in  the  Geneva  ac-
cords  for  limited  military  assistance  to  Laos,  but  the  accords
never  envisaged  the  kind  of  operation  under  which  we  have
poured   millions   of   dollars   worth   of   military  supplies   into
Laos,  and  made  it  a  military  satellite   of  the  United   States.
The  Geneva  accords  envisaged  a  neutralized  Laos  and  Cam-
bodia.   That  is why  neither  was  included  in  SEATO  and  why
we  had  to  disguise  our  military  mission  to  Laos  as  a  Pro-
grams   Evaluation   Office   with   its   U.S.    officers    in   civilian
clothes.     The   trouble   in   Southeast    Asia   stems   from   Mr.
Dulles's  determination   to  undercut  the  Geneva   accords,  first
by  preventing  the  promised   elections  to  unify  Vietnam   and
secondly  to  upset  the  results   of-  the  elections  which  had  uni-
fied  Laos  and  brought  the  Pathet  Lao into  a  coalition  Cabinet.
Until  we  face  up  to  the  bankruptcy of  this  policy  in  Laos,  no
real  progress  can  be  made  in  pacifying  the  area.
Then  there  was  the  revealing  way  Mr.  Rusk  answered  the
•Mr.  Kennedy's  third  as  we  were  going  to  press  was  some-
thing   of   a  letdown,  partly  because  of   the   poor   questions
asked  him  but  mostly  because  of  his   failnre  to   speak   out
on  the  shameful  white  boycott of  New  Orleans'  schools.  Here,
for  the  first  time,  he  fumbled and bumbled like  his  predeces-
sor  when asked  to  bring the  moral weight  of  his  office  to  bear.
Everybody's  Armament  Sugar  Daddy
"Another  delicate  aspect  of   the   U.S.   role  in  Laos
is   the   amount   of   American  military   equipment  that
has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  pro-Communist  Pathet
Lao  rebels.  .  .  .  Until  recently  most  of  the  military
equipment  in  rebel  hands  was   American  made,  much
of  it  captured  by  pro-Communist  forces  in neighboring
North  Vietnam  during  the  Indo-China  war."
—Associated  Press  from  Vientiane,  Wash. Star,  Feb. 5.
question  about  whether  he  thought   "perhaps   Mr.  Lumumba
should  be  released  from  prison  shortly  and  even  be  permitted
to  take  a  high  place?"    Mr.  Rusk  downgraded  Lumumba  by
lumping   him  with   other   prisoners.     "I   would   not   wish,"
he  said,  "to  comment  on  the  very  difficult  problem  of  the  re-
lease  of  political  prisoners.   There  are  a  considerable  number
of   them  being  held."     But  Mr.   Lumumba  is  no  ordinary
political  prisoner.    He  was the  Prime  Minister  who  called  on
the  United  Nations  for  help  only  to  be  thrown   in  prison,
and  then  kidnapped  and  handed  over  to  his  worst  enemies  in
Katanga  just  when  Mr.   Hammarskjold  is  reported  to  have
gotten  a  promise  from  President  Kasavubu  to  release  him  for
participation  in  the  January  25  round  table  conference   (see
London  Sunday  Times  Jan.  15).   In  the  eyes of  black  Africa,
Lumumba  is  a  martyr,  a  symbol  of  white  perfidy,  the   legiti-
mate Prime  Minister  of  the  Congo, punished  because he would
not  knuckle under  to  Belgian  imperialism.   Mr.  Rusk  referred
to  the  efforts  of  the  Conciliation   Commission  without  men-
tioning  the  fact  that  it  was  denied  access  to  Mr.  Lumumba,
the  most  important  figure  to  be  conciliated.    The  gap  between
the  way  the  Afro-Asians   (even  our  close  friends,  the  Liber-
ians)   see  Lumumba  and  our  over-simplified  picture  of   him
as  "Left-leaning"   must  be  closed  if  there  is  to  be  peace  in  the
Congo.    To  the  Afro-Asians, our  unwillingness  to  see  Parlia-
ment  convened  lest  it  reinstate  Lumumba  as  Prime  Minister
makes  our   rhetoric  about   freedom   and   representative   gov-
ernment  seem  hypocritical.
Effective   leadership   requires   public   education;   the   ignor-
ance  of  the  American public  about  Laos,  the  Congo  and  Cuba
is  so  great  that  it  hampers  a  shift  toward  more  flexible  and
realistic   policies.      Some  plain   and   honest   speaking   is   re-
quired.    By  this  standard  Mr.  Rusk  was  most   disappointing
on  Cuba.    His  prepared  statement  was downright  inane  when
it  said  that  among   "the   most  promising  activities"  in  Latin
America   "is   the  growing  scientific  and   technical    exchange
among  the  Latin  American  countries  themselves."   When  he
was  asked  to  fix  responsibility  for  what  he  delicately  referred
to  as  "the  .earlier  neglect  of  the  aspirations  of  the  Cuban  peo-
ple,"   Mr.  Rusk  replied   that   "the   primary  responsibility,   of
(Continued  on  page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  13,  1961
New   Ideas  Available   (But  Ignored)  for  Africa  and  Southeast  Asia
(Continued   from   page   One)
course,  goes  to  these  previous  regimes  in  Cuba,"  although  he
did  "think  that  the  rest  of  us  in  the  Inter-American system
might  have worked  harder  to  point  that  and  and  other  gov-
ernments   in   the   direction   of   economic  and   social  reform."
This  bland  nonsense  will  infuriate  Latin  American  opinion
which  remembers  the  Machado  and   Batista  regimes  as  our
creation  and  sees  the  hostility  we  show  (only  as  recently  as
El  Salvador)  to  every  regime  which  points  toward  economic
and   social  reform.    The  emphasis  on  self-help,   the  failure
even  to  mention  land  reform,  will  not  make  friends  for  the
new  Secretary  below  the  Rio  Grande.    His  description  of  the
kind   of   "total   national   effort   under   vigorous   leadership"
needed  in  Latin  America  fits  the  Castro  regime  better  than
any   other,   and   his  complaint  about  the   "wide-spread   con-
servatism"  which  blocks  progress  in  Latin  America  will  give
him  a  reputation as  a humorist.   Mr.  Rusk  seems to  be saying
that  the  campesinos  should  be  more  radical.
Muntinous  U.S.  Military  in  Laos
Mr.   Rusk  announced  that  for   the  first  time  in  history  a
President  had  come  over  to  the  State  Department  and  sat  in
on  a  Secretary's morning  staff  conference.    Mr.  Kennedy  will
have  to  sit  in  oftener  if  he  is  to  move  the  State  Department
out  of  its  deep  and  complacent  cold  war  groove.    Except  for
Mr.  Bowles  and  Mr.  Stevenson,  there  are  no  New  Frontiers-
men  in  the  State  Department;  men  like  McGeorge  Bundy,
W.  W.  Rostow  and  Jerome  Wiesner,  who  might  have  ener-
gized  the  Department,  have  been  shunted  off  to  the  White
House  where  they  form  what  may  become  a  rival  foreign
policy  organization.    It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  the  Presi-
dent  is  taking  a  hand  on  his  own,  seeing  the  Ambassadors
from   Laos,  the   Congo   and   Afghanistan,  dropping   in   un-
expectedly  at  State.    This   is  his  most  urgent  but  his  most
difficult  area of  action;  in  the  domestic  field,  he  has  organized
allies  in  labor,  among  ethnic groups  and  in  the  farm  country,
but  in  foreign  policy  the  country  at  large  offers  only  an  un-
organized   and   uninformed   anxiety   to   support   his    efforts.
The  bureaucracy is  hostile  to  negotiation;  Clare  Timberlake,
our  Ambassador  to  the  Congo,  came  back  from   Leopoldville
to lobby on the  Hill  and among the press  for  "strong"  policies;
he  is  pro-Belgian,  pro-Mobutu,  and  pro-Tshombe,  an  envoy
made  to  order  for   Union  Minifae    du  Haul  Katanga  which
has  just  reported  (New   York   Times,  Feb.  8)   a  banner  year
of  copper  output  despite  the  convulsions  elsewhere.    In  Laos,
there  are  similar  obstacles  to  new  policies.    From  Vientiane
Where  The  Dollars  Are   Wasted    .
The  President's   special   message  on  the   balance  of
payments   hardly   touches   on   the   two   root    problems.
One  is  the   huge   outlay—about   $3  billion  a  year—on
military   expenditures   abroad,   most   of   it   wastefully
spent  by  our  profligate  military,  and  utilized  for  pri-
vate  profit  by  cynical  allies  riding  the  cold  war   gravy
train.   The  other  is  the  torrential  flow  of  U.S.   capital
abroad  to  areas  where  it  is  least  needed,  namely  West-
ern  Europe  and  especially   Germany.    We  are  glad   to
see  that  Mr.  Kennedy  has  asked  the  Secretary   of  the
Treasury   to   report   by   April   1  "on  whether    present
tax   laws   may  be  stimulating"   this  outflow  "in  undue
amounts."     In   1960,   according   to   a   German   survey
(AP   from  Frankfurt,  Washington   Star,  Feb.   4),   one-
half   of   all   U.S.   investments   abroad   went   to   Europe
and  from  1955-59  one-third  of  the  $8.3  billion  invested
by   Americans   in   the   common   market   went   to  West
Germany   "where  they   employed  about   half   a  million
German  workers  at  wages  averaging  50 cents  an  hour."
Cheap  labor  and  tax  benefits  enable  these  branch  plants
to   undercut   American   exports   abroad;   resentment   is
built   up  against   U.S.   ownership   in   Britain   and   Ger-
many.   While  we  fight  socialist  measures  in  the  under-
developed  countries,   U.S.  capital  goes  elsewhere.   Soon-
er  or  later,  either  by  revision   of   the  tax  laws  or  in-
vestment   controls,   the   government    will   have  to   take
steps  to  redirect   the  flow  of  capital.
the  London   Times   reported   Jan.   30  that  one  of   the   U.S.
officers  attached  to  the  Laotian  forces  said  "the  only  possible
solution  was  to  crush  the  Pathet  Lao  by force,  and  added  that
if  the  new  Administration in Washington  changed  this  policy,
he  and  other   officers  would  resign."
In  a  capital  so  full  of  idea  men,  it  is  striking  how   few
new   ideas  are  visible   in  foreign  policy.     Yet   ideas  are  at
hand,  ignored,  to  provide  a  large  framework  for  the   Con-
golese  and  Laotian  problems.    Senator  Mansfield's  great  but
disregarded  speech  on  Africa   last  August   (see  this   Weekly
for   Sept.   5)   would  forestall  future  African  crises   (Angola
may  be  next)   by  a  Soviet-American agreement  to  neutralize
the   Continent,   forego   military  bases   anywhere  on   it,   and
join  through  the  UN   in  economic  development.    A  similar
grand  design  for  Southeast  Asia  was  put  forward  (and  simi-
larly  disregarded)  at  the  UN  in  September  by  Prince  Sihan-
ouk  of  Cambodia  (see  the   Weekly   of  last  Oct.   10)   when
he  called  on  the  powers  to  make  a  neutralized  buffer  zone  of
his  country  and  Laos.     It  is  by  such   large  and   foresighted
measures,   and   not   by  stumbling   from   crisis  to   crisis,   that
the  U.S.  may  regain  respect  and  initiative.
Governor  Nelson  of  Wisconsin  Denounces  Un-American  Activities  Committee
Madison,  Wis.—Gov.  Nelson  said  Tuesday  that  the  attack
by  Rep.  Walter  (D.  Pa.)   on  critics  of  the  House   Committee
on   Un-American   Activities   're-enforces   the  arguments  of
those  who  advocate   abolition   of   this  committee.'   Walter
had  denounced  a  group  that  published   a  newspaper   adver-
tisement   calling   for   abolition.    Walter   said   the   signers
included  Communists,   pro-Communists  and  those  who  trav-
elled  in  strange  company.
The  signers  included  Mrs.  Esther  Kaplan,  Gov.  Nelson's
private   secretary,    and   several   Wisconsin   professors   and
clergymen.     Nelson    was   asked   at   his   press    conference
Monday  to  comment,  but  said  he  had  not  studied  Walter's
statement.
He   said   Tuesday   that   Walter's   charges   against   'nine
respected  citizens  of  Wisconsin  who  chose  to  express  their
views  on  a  public  question,  were  'irresponsible  and  unwar-
ranted.'    'It  is  my  opinion   that   the  actions  of   this   com-
mittee   have    served   to   violate    constitutional    rights   of
freedom   of  speech  and  of  assembly,'  Nelson  said.    'In  an
effort  to  combat  a  system  that  denies  these  freedoms,   the
committee   has   undermined  the   very   freedoms   that   most
sharply   distinguish   our   democracy    from   the    Communist
system.'
He  said   he  would  ask   Wisconsin   Democratic   Congress-
men  to   'vote   against   the   continuation   of   this   committee
when  the  occasion  arises.' —Milwaukee   Journal,    Jan.   31.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  13,  1961
Associate  of  Paul  Nitze  Opposes  Giving  NATO  Strategic  Nuclear  Arms
The   press   seems   to   have   missed   the   strong   position
against  a  so-called   independent   NATO   nuclear  deterrent
taken   by   Arnold    Wolfers,     director   of    the    Washington
Center   of  Foreign  Policy  Research,  Johns   Hopkins    Uni-
versity,  at  a  hearing  before   the  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee   Feb.   3.   His   testimony   was   given   enhanced
interest   because   it   may   throw   light   on  the   vieivs   held
by  Paul  H.  Nitze,  whom  President  Kennedy   has   appointed
Assistant  Secretary   of  Defense   for  International   Security
Affairs,     The   topic   of   the  hearing  was   a  report   prepared
for   the  Senate  Committee   by  the   Washington   Center  on
"Developments   in  Military    Technology    and   Their   Impact
on   U.S.   Strategy   and   Foreign   Policy."    Mr.   Nitze   and
James  E.  King,  Jr.,   as  Research  Associates  of  the  Center
worked   with   Mr.   Wolfers    on  this  report.    Their   report
favored   creation  of   a   balanced   nuclear  deterrent   rather
than  disarmament  though  Mr.  Wolfers   admitted  that  such
a   balance   was   precarious.   The   Kennedy    administration
is   now   being   pressed   to  ask   Congress   to   authorize   the
Norstad   plan  for   a  nuclear  NATO.    Should   it   do  so,  it
will   place   strategic   nuclear   arms   in   the   hands   of   the
Germans  and   torpedo    hopes   for   disengagement   and   dis-
armament.   We  present  key  excerpts   from   the  testimony:
Mr.  WOLFERS:  To  supply  our NATO  allies,  individually
or  as  a  group,  with  strategic  nuclear  capability  did  not  seem
to  us  a  viable  solution  from   either  a  military   or  a  political
viewpoint.     Instead,  the   report   advocated   a  substantial  in-
crease  in  conventional  forces.  .  . .
"What  we  are  not  able  to  spell  out  today  is  a  program
that  would  make  our  allies  feel  sufficiently   secure  to  remain
our  allies  .  .  .  not  because they  do  not  think  this  country has
great  determination to  help  its  allies,  but  they  ask  themselves:
Would  we  commit  suicide for  Berlin  .  .  .?
"And   now  the  Germans  back  General  Norstad   with   the
idea  (of) ...  a  NATO  deterrent.  .  .  .  Now,  we  took  the
view,  and  I  still  hold  to  the  view,  that  this  is  a  false  road,
to  try  to  substitute  for  the  American  deterrent  or  to  try  to
find a  means of  triggering  the American deterrent.  .  . .
A  Futile  Military  Policy
"My  fear  is,  however,  that  if  we  play  with  this  idea  .  .  .
It  will  again  give  them  the  idea  that  somehow  one  can  get
around  strong  shield  forces  which  they  dislike  to  set  up,  and
escape  into  the  happier  realm  of  a  few  big  strategic  weapons
.  .  .  and  they  will  discover  after  a  while  that  they  are  back
again  where  they  are  today,  after  having  diverted  their  main
resources  into  this  futile  attempt. ...
"I  am  afraid  that  a  discussion   of  a  collective  deterrent  is
going  to  lead  to  considerable  political  trouble  .  .  .  because
the  question  arises:  Who  is  going  to  push  the  button?  .  .  .
Is  Turkey  going  to  push  the  button,  or  allow  Norway  to  push
the  button,  if  one or  the  other  is  attacked?  .  .  .
"I  am  rather  sorry  that  this  was  thrown   into  the  debate
the  last  months  of  the  last  administration,  and  that  the  new
administration  may  find  its  hands  tied  in  a  way  because  psy-
chologically  this  has now stirred  up a hornet's  nest.  . . .
"Nuclear  power  is a  very  powerful  thing.    I  think  it  needs
a  very  strong,  unified,  civilian  authority.    I  can  see  no  such
authority  except  the President  of  the United  States.  .  .  .
"The   Germans  say:  'You  have  got  to  give  us  tactical  nu-
clear  weapons.    We   cannot  be  a  second  class  army.'     This,
I  think,  is  inevitable,  and  I  do  not  see  anything  we  can  do
about  preventing  that  kind  of  a  spread,  except  by  some  arms
control,  denuclearization  control,  or  something  of  that  kind.
Behind  the   Cloak  of  NATO
"The  strongest  backer   [for   the  plan  to  give   NATO
its   own   nuclear   deterrent]   and  the   nation   with   the
most   to   gain   is   West   Germany,   whose   program   for
a  1,000-plane  combat  jet  air  force  by  tha  middle  1960s
will  make  it  the  strongest   force  on  the  west  European
continent.    This   force   hardly   can  be  effective   in   full
fledged  combat  unless  nuclear  weapons  are  immediately
available.   .  .  .  On  the  other  hand,  any  direct   proposal
to  grant  the  Germans  as  a  national  force—which   they
insist   they   are   not—use   of   nuclear   weapons    would
create   the   immediate  possibility  of   unresolvable   de-
bates  in  most  west  European  capitals   and  possibly  the
United  States  itself.   The  Germans  are  careful  to  point
out  that  their  forces—air,  ground  and  sea—are  NATO,
not   West   German.  .  .  .  West   German  pilots   already
are   being   trained   in   nuclear   delivery   techniques   at
a  special   weapons   training  site  outside    Germany."
—Aviation   Week,   Dec.   5,   1960.
What   I  do  think  these  countries  ought  to  realize  is  that  to
set  up  a  strategic  nuclear  arm  that  could   sufficiently   knock
out  the  Russians  to  deter  the  Soviet  Union—but  this  is  be-
yond  their  reach.    I  think  the  British  are  beginning  to  see
that  it  is  even  beyond  their  reach.  .  .  ."
Senator  SYMINGTON:  But  would  that  small  country-
would  they  not  feel  much  more  secure  from   the  standpoint
of   their   being   attacked,  although   of   course   they   could   be
destroyed,  if  they  could  in  turn  destroy,  for  example,  several
cities  in  Russia? ..."
Mr.  WOLFERS:  Yes,  But  the  Russians  would  only  be  de-
terred   by  something   that  makes  some  sense  to   do,   and   if
Switzerland  or  Denmark  can  knock  out  Moscow,   in   return
the  Russians,  even  after   having  lost  Moscow,   would   knock
the  whole  country  out of  this  earth.  .  .  .
"I  do  not  think  we  can prevent  some  of  our  allies,  we  have
not  prevented  it,  and  I  do  not  see how  we  can,  from  produc-
ing  a  small  supply  of  weapons  of  their  own  over  which  they
will  have  control.    I  do  not  know  how  the  Russians  would
prevent  the  Chinese  from  doing  it,  if  the  Chinese  ever  reach
that  point,  and  they  probably  will  and  very  soon.
"But  when  it  comes  to  the  use  of  our  own  strategic  force
or  of  that  part  of  the  strategic  force  which,  in  terms  of  ve-
hicles,  we  put  at  the  disposal  of  our  allies,  I  do  not  think
this  country should  give  up  its  key.    I  think  two  keys  is  the
only  safety  we  can  have.    I  do  not  think  we  can  allow  them
to  trigger  us  into  a  nuclear  war.  .  .  .
Senator  SYMINGTON:  "I  was  interested  in  this  double
veto;   you  call   it  two  keys.    I  think   Schelling   calls   it  the
double  veto.   There is no way to  stop  these  people from  using
this  bomb,  if  they  wanted  to,  practically  speaking,  is  there?"
Mr.  WOLFERS:   No.    They  could  grab  it  and  use  it.
Senator   SYMINGTON:   They   do   not   have   to   grab   it
because  they  have  got  it.    I  have  seen  it.     It  is  on   their
bases,  not  ours.    They  outnumber  us,  I  would  say,  guessing,
100  to  1,  and  we  have  very,  very  few  people  there,  so  the
100  to  1  figure  even  indicates  that  the  decision  is  not  ours
in  finality  at  all,  is  it,  if  they  want  to  do  it?
Mr.  WOLFERS:   They  would  hesitate,  of  course,  to  push
the  American  soldier  aside  and  say:  "Give  us  that  key".
Senator  SYMINGTON:  I  understand  that,  but,   neverthe-
less.  .  . .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  February  IS,  1961
The  Way  to  Disarmament   Might  Be  Cleared  If  Private  Interests  Were  Disclosed
Why  Should  Senators  Be  Exempt  from   Conflict-of-interest   Safeguards?
The   double  standard  applied   by  Congress   to   conflicts  of
interest   was  displayed  again  when   the   Senate   Aeronautical
and   Space  Sciences  Committee  approved   the   nomination  of
James  E.  Webb  to  be  the  new  head  of  the  National  Aero-
nautics  and  Space  Administration.    Mr.  Webb  was  required
to  divest  himself  of  all  connections  with  two  companies  in-
terested   in  the  space  programs.     He  had  been  a  director  of
the   McDonnell   Aircraft   Corporation   of   St.   Louis,   which
manufactures  the  Mercury  man-in-space  capsule   and  he  had
also  been  assistant  to  the  president   of  Kerr-McGee  Oil   In-
dustries,   Inc.
But  no   such   divestment   was  required   of   Senator   Robert
S.  Kerr   (D.   Okla),  chairman  of  the  board  of   Kerr-McGee,
when  he  succeeded  Lyndon  Johnson  as  chairman  of  the  Sen-
ate  Aeronautical  and  Space  Committee  a  few  weeks   earlier.
The  chairmanship  of  the  Space  committee  is  at  least  as  influ-
ential  a  job  and  calls  for  decisions  which  may  affect  the  earn-
ings  of  Senator  Kerr's  oil  company.
Making  Divestment  A  Farce
Mr.  Webb  has  no  special  qualifications for  the  NASA  job;
he  was  director  of  the  Budget   Bureau  under   Mr.   Truman.
According  to  the  Washington  Post  (Jan.   31)  he  was  recom-
mended   for  NASA   by  Senator  Kerr   and   Lyndon   Johnson.
Kerr  was  able  to  put  an  employe  into  the  most   important
civilian  space  job  in  the  administration  soon  after  taking  over
the  space  committee  chairmanship.    The  divestment  of  inter-
est  required  of  Mr.  Webb  takes  on  elements  of  farce  in  this
context.
Kerr-McGee  Oil  is  a  major   factor  in  uranium.    Of   $1.5
billion  worth  of  uranium  to  be  bought  by  the  AEC  by  the
end  of   1956   (see   AEC  press   release   C-277   last  Nov.  18),
almost  one-fifth   or  $292,000,000  will  be  purchased   from  a
Kerr-McGee  subsidiary,  Kermac  Nuclear   Fuels   Corporation.
This  is  the  largest  of  the  AEC's  27  domestic  uranium  con-
tracts.    In  addition  Kerr-McGee  has  an  interest  in  two  other
uranium  contracts,  a  $25,000,000   one  held   by  Petrotomics,
a  partnership of  Kerr-McGee  with  three  other  oil  companies,
Skelly,  Tidewater  and  Getty,  and  a  $14,500,000  contract  for
ore  from   a  Kerr-McGee  processing  mill   at  Shiprock,  New
The  Conclusions  Seem  to  Be  Ready
Even  Before  the  Study  Begins
Dallas,  Tex.—Air   Research   and  Development  Com-
mand  has  set  up  a  committee  of  about  15  prominent
scientists  and  industrialists  to  take  a  fresh,  completely
uninhibited  view  of  the  U.S.  Air  Force  space  programs
.  . .  ARDC  Commander  Lt.  Gen.  Bernard  A. Schriever
revealed.  .  .  .  This  report   will  provide  the Air Force
with  a  major  tool  in  promoting  a  much  stronger   and
wider-based   military   space   program.  .  .  .  The  Air
Force   will  seek   a   much   larger   role   in   the   national
space  program  than  it  has  been  permitted  in  the  past
because  of  previous  emphasis  by  top   U.S.   leadership
on  space  efforts  directed  toward  scientific  and  peaceful
pursuits.   The  report   is  also  to  be  made  available   to
the  National  Space  Council,  Gen.  Schriever   noted,  and
he  expects  that   under  the   strong   leadership   of  Vice
President   Lyndon  Johnson,  there  should  be  'favorable
changes'  in  the  Air  Force  position  as  well  as  the  civil-
ian  programs.
—Aviation   Week  and  Space   Technology,  Jan.  S3
Mexico.
The  market  for  uranium  will  be  affected  by  the  advent  of
nuclear  propulsion  for  rockets,  by  the  extent  of  space  explora-
tion   (which  promises  to  be  fabulously  expensive),   and  by
whether  we  allow   the   military  to   make  space   a   new  and
more  costly  dimension  of  the  arms  race.    All  these  matters
will  come  before  the   Space  committee  which   Senator   Kerr
heads.    In  addition,  his  vote  as  a  Senator  on  such  matters  as
a  nuclear  test  treaty,  further  nuclear  weapons  stockpiling   and
disarmament  will   affect   his  uranium  interests.     He   is  in  as
influential   a  position  as  a  Cabinet   officer,   and   with  similar
access  to  profitable  information.    Why  should  he  be  exempt
from   conflict-of-interest  safeguards?
In   the   Wilson   administration,  tariff   reform   was   brought
about   after   every  Senator  was  required  to   appear   before   a
Judiciary  subcommittee  and   disclose  his  private   interests   in
tariff  changes  and  the  lobbyists  with  whom  he  had   discussed
them.    The  way  might  well  be  cleared  for   disarmament,  if
every  Senator  were  similarly  required   to  declare  his  private
interests  in  the  arms  race.
In  Renewing  Ask  for   the   1960    Index,   But  Please  Send  Stamped   Envelope
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,    5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name  ...............................>..........................................................
Street   ......................................................................................
City   ..._.....................................Zone............State....................
2/13/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ................................._.......Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Av«.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   $15  to   Europe;    $20  to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED