I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961may15.pdf

============================================================

Silly  Season  at  the State Dept.,  P.  3
The  Contradictions   in  Our Feeble  Land  Program  for  Latin  America,  See  Page  2
/. JR Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,   NO.  18MAY   15,   1961
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
One  Algerian  Lesson  Kennedy  Can  Learn  From  de  Gaulle  While  There's  Still  Time
When  Brass  Hats  Begin  to  Read  Mao  Tse-tung,   Beware!
The  most  important  lesson  for  Washington  in  the  recently
attempted  Army  revolt  in  Algeria  has  gone  unnoticed  in  the
American   press.     Yet   that   lesson   could   hardly   be   more
timely.    The   core  of  the  revolt  lay  in  a  strange  group  of
offbeat   Colonels.    These   are  the   Colonels   who   started   the
fad   for  reading  Mao  Tse-tung  and   the   emphasis,  suddenly
fashionable  in  Washington,   on  using  "para-military",   "guer-
rilla"   and   "revolutionary  war"   tactics  against  the  Commu-
nists.   This  is  the  same  group  of  Colonels  who  helped  bring
de  Gaulle  to  power  in   1958   and  whom  he   began  quietly
transferring  out  of  Algeria  as  soon  as  he  could.    The  lesson
de  Gaulle  understood  but  Kennedy  hasn't  yet  grasped  is  that
when  military men  read  Mao  (and   Che  Guevara)   and   seek
to  turn  their  tactics  to  counter-revolutionary  purposes,  they
also   turn,  often   without   knowing   it,   into   Communists-in-
reverse,  i.e.  to  put  it  bluntly,  into  Fascists.    And  sooner  or
later  they  will  be  tempted  to  use  at  home,  against  their  own
people  and  government,  the  psychological  warfare,  the  brain-
washings,  the  cloak-and-dagger methods and  the  "dirty tricks"
they  are  allowed  to  utilize  in  colonial   areas,
Wanted—A  Docile  Population
The    distinguished   journalist   and    historian,   Alexander
Werth,  in  his  book  "The   De  Gaulle  Revolution"  which  has
just  appeared  in  England,  describes this  group  and  its  origins
in  a  passage  which  sounds  like  a  preview  of  military  ideas
now  bubbling  in  the  Pentagon.     "Ever  since  returning  from
Indo-China,  and  particularly  in  1957-58,"  Mr.  Werth  writes,
"it  was  fascinating  among  French   officers  in  Algeria  to  talk
about  Mao-Tse-tung,   and   about  the  primary  importance  in
modern  warfare   of   'psychological  action'."    Then  he   goes
on  to  describe  the  next  stage,  which  we  have  not  yet  reached
publicly.    "This  psychological  action,"  Mr.  Werth  continues,
"was  primarily  to  be  applied  to  the  'natives',  and  to  colonial
peoples  in  revolt;  but  gradually  the  idea  also  gained  ground
that  a   parallel   psychological   action   could   be   exercised  on
the  French  in  Algeria,  and  ultimately  on  France  itself."     Mr.
Werth   quotes  one  of  this  group,  the  notorious   Col.  Trin-
quier,  a  veteran  of  Indochina,  who  recently  tried  to  join  the
foreign  mercenaries in  Katanga,  as  telling  a  newspaperman  in
Algeria  in   1958,   "What  we  have  to  do  is  to  organize  the
population  from  top  to  bottom.    I  don't  care  if  you  call  me
a  Fascist;  but  we  must  have  a  docile  population,  every   ges-
ture  of  which  shall  be  subject  to  our  control."
The   traditional   American   principle   of   subordinating   the
military  to  civilian  control  takes  on  new  meaning  when  seen
against  the  background  of  the  putsch  these  Colonels  staged
to  put  de  Gaulle  into  power  in  1958  and  to  replace  him  with
We  Find  Ourselves  in  Good Company
"It  was  not  the  enemy,  it  was  our  own  people,  this
story   [that  Havana   had  been  bombed  by   Cuban   de-
fectors]   was  intended  to  deceive.   Was  it   in  the  na-
tional   interest    to   let    the    government   deceive   the
American people?"
—"When  the  Government Lies, Must  the Press  Fib?",
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  May  8.
"The     Cuban   tragedy  has   raised   a   domestic  issue
that  is  likely  to  come  up  again  and  again ...  is  a
democratic   government   in   an   open   society   such   as
ours  ever  justified  in  deceiving  its  own  people?  .  .  .
Neither  prudence  nor  ethics  can  justify   any  adminis-
tration  in  telling  the  public  things  that  are  not   so."
—"The  Right  Not  to  Be  Lied  To",  lead  editorial  in
The  New   York   Times,  May  10.
".  .  .  the  press  was  debased  [by  the   CIA   in  the
Cuban  affair]  for  the  government's purpose  .  .  .  the
American  people were the  only  ones  to  be  fooled. .  .  ."
—James   Reston  from   Washington—"The   President
and  The  Press,"  New  York  Times, May  10.
a  military  dictatorship  a  few  weeks  ago.    This  background
also  lends  heightened  significance  to  a  passage  in  an  anony-
mous  report  on  "Special  Warfare"   which  Lt.  Gen.   Arthur
G.  Trudeau,  the  Army's  research  and  development  chief,  has
been  circulating  among  senior  officers  at  the  Pentagon.     The
document  leaked  to  the  Army  Navy  Air  Force  Journal  which
published  the  full  text  April  8.    "The   U.S.  still  maintains a
wall  of  separation   between  politics   and  the   military,"  said
this  anonymous  military  expert.    "This  is  fine  for   our  do-
mestic  problems,   but   it   does  not   work   against  communist-
supported  guerrillas  where  political  and  military   action   are
one."     But  if  you  use  cloak-and-dagger  forces  abroad  on  the
assumption  that  you  are  dealing  with  a  vast  Communist con-
spiracy,  how  prevent  these  methods  from  being  used  against
suspected   radicals   at  home?    To  break   down  the  wall  be-
tween   politics   and  the  military,  to  invite  the  military   into
the  sphere  of  politics  is  to  undermine  the  Republic.    France
learned   that   lesson   again   a  few   weeks   ago.     We   should
benefit  from  it  while  there  is  still  time.
The  Danger  in  The  Foreign  Legions
There  is  a  close  corollary  of  this  proposition.     Jean  Plan-
chais  in  Le  Monde  (April  24)   discussing  the  different  ideo-
logical  currents  in  the  Algerian  military rebellion,  noted  two
points  of  danger.    One  was  the  Colonels,   who  had   drawn
from   their   Indochinese  contacts  with   Marxism   fuzzy   ideas
about  regenerating  their  homeland  with  a  "national  socialist"
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  IS,  1961
Documentary:   We  Want  to  Help  the  Peon  Without  Hurting  His  Feudal  Landlords
The  Contradictions  in  Our  Feeble  Land  Reform  Program  for  Latin  America
Mr.   [Lincoln]   GORDON  [consultant,   President's   task  force
on  Latin  America, Dept.  of  State]:  In  general  .  .  .  the  rate
of   economic  growth   in   Latin   America,  especially   up   until
2  or  3  years  ago,  was  not  bad.    The  bad  thing  has  not  been
so  much  the  general  rate  of  growth   as  it  has  been  the  way
in  which  it  has  been  distributed.    It  has  been  very  lop-sided
and  it  has  not  helped  the  people  in  the  countryside.
Mr.  [Otto  E. ]  PASSMAN  [D.  La.,  Chrm.  House  Appropria-
tions  Subcommittee  on  Foreign  Aid]:  Whom  do  we  blame
for  that?
Mr.  GORDON:  I  think  the  blame  has  to  be  put  on  the  eco-
nomic  and   social  structure  of   the  countries.    That   is  what
the  present  program  is  designed  to  work  out.
—Newly   released  House  Appropriations  hearings  on  Latin
American  aid,  the  "Alianza  para  progreso",  p.   119-
The   biggest   obstacle   in   most  Latin  American  countries
to  a  change  in  economic  and  social  structure  is  the  power
of  the  great  landowners.    Until  this  power  is  broken, little
social  reform  can be effected.    Yet  as  the  reader can  see  from
the  nest  excerpt  we  hope  to  bring  about  agrarian  reform
without  breaking  up  the  big  estates  on  which  the  power  of
this  feudalistic  ruling  class  rests:
Mr.  [Hugh]   ALEXANDER   [D.  N.C.]:  Doctor,  how  many
of   the   agricultural  projects   contained   in   your   justification
[i.e.  of  the  appropriations  asked]  will  result  in  a  breakup  of
vast  estates  of  the  present  landowners  of  Latin  America?
Mr.  GORDON:  Most  of  these,  as  I  recall,  Mr.  Alexander,
which  involve  land  resettlement,  are  for   settlement   in  open
lands  which,  in  some  cases,  are  already  held   by  public  au-
thorities.
Mr.  ALEXANDER:  The  Government?
Mr.   GORDON:  That  is,  Government  authorities.    In  some
cases,  they  are  open  lands  which  the  Government  is  buying
up  from  private  owners  under  a  land  reform  program.    The
breaking  up  by  expropriation  is  a  very  drastic  type  of   land
reform  and  in  general  I  think  we  would  hope  that  the  neces-
sary  changes  in  land  tenure  could  be  brought   about  by  less
drastic  means  than  that,  of  which  the  tax  means  is  one  of
the  most  effective.    The  essence  of  this  reform  in  the  State  of
Sao  Paolo  [Brazil]  is  a  progressive  tax  on  landholdings   on
which  the  rate  increases as  the  size  of  the  holding  gets  larger.
In  the  case  of  a  large  estate,  the  demonstration,   if  it  can  be
made,  that  this  land  is  really  being  utilized  to  the   greatest
effectiveness,   then   a  portion   of   the   extra   tax   is  remitted.
This  is  designed  to  encourage  the  sale  of  unused  land  because
the  man  does  not  want  to  pay  taxes  on  it  if  he  is  not  getting
anything  out  of  it.    It  is  designed  to  encourage  the  better
use  of   land   if  the   landowner   wants   to  hold   on  to   it.     I
would  say that  in  most  cases  this  is  the  type  of  land  reform
which  we  would  like  to  encourage.
—Same,  Pps.  204-5.
To  leave  the  great  estates   alone  or  subject  them  to  the
slow   processes  of   reduction  by   tax   reform  means   to   fall
back  on  public  domain  lands.    This  is  costly.    These  lands
are  mostly  covered  by  forest  or  jungle.    In  Peru  there  is
much  jungle  land  east  of  the  Andes  not  hitherto  accessible
from  the  west  coast.    A  vivid  picture of  this  public domain
was  provided  by  Mr.  Gordon  in  answer  to  a  question  from
Mr.  Passman:
Mr.  GORDON:  Mr.  Chairman,  let  me  give  you  an  example.
In   the  case  of   Colombia,  there   is  a  fair   amount  of  public
domain  land  and  where  the  kind  of  project:  under  consider-
ation  involves  assistance  in  the  construction  of   access   roads.
This  is  inaccessible  land  at  the  present  time  and  where  stuff
has  to  be  carried  on  men's  backs  to  get  it  to  market.
—Same,  Page   114.
While  our  Southern  Democrats  feel  a  natural  sympathy
for  the  large  plantation  owners,  they  are  also  worried about
competition  from  them  in  some  of   their  own  export  crops
like  cotton.   Thus after  testimony showed that  Latin America
was  an  area  of  food  shortages  despite  its  agricultural  char-
acter,  the  following  colloquy  occurred:
Mr.  [George  W.]   ANDREWS  [D.  Ala.]:  Why  don't   they
grow  food  crops  rather  than  cotton?
Mr.  [A.  A.]  BERLE  [Chairman,  President's  Task   Force  on
Latin  America]:  One  of  the  reasons  is precisely  the  difficulties
we have  had  with  the  land  reform  program.    For  a  plantation
owner,  it  is  always  more  advantageous  to  cultivate  a  lot  of
cotton   and  sell  it  for  what  he  can  get.    He  will   take   the
cash  crop.     The  peon,   or  the  little  farmer  on  the  land,  is
employed   during  the   cultivating   season,   otherwise   he   does
the  best  he  can  and  gets  nothing  out  of  it.
—Same,  p.  87.
Dr.   Berle   had   just   finished   testifying   that    "In   Latin
America  the  population  has  been  growing  faster  than  the
food  supply."   If  food  supply  is  to  catch  up  with population,
in  an  area  where  the  peons  are  illiterate,  both  human  and
natural  resources  must  be  organized by  large  scale  collective
farming   methods  under   government  direction.    But   this,
too,  goes  against  the  grain  of  our  own  conditioned thinking,
as  can  be  seen  from  this  revealing  colloquy:
Mr.   [John  J.]   RHODES  [R.  Ariz.]:  Throughout   the  state-
ments  there  has  been  mentioned  the  term  "land  reform"  from
time  to  time.   Will  the  ultimate  result  of  land  reform,  in any
case  that  you know  of,  be  that  the  government  of  the  country
will  own  more  land  than  it  now  owns?
Mr.  GORDON:  I  would  think  not  in  the  end  result.    The
normal   situation   where   the  government   is  buying  up   land
from  private  holders  is  that  it  makes  available  to  small  farm-
ers  on  something  like  the  Homestead   Act  type  of  procedure,
so that  in  due  course  the  small  farmer  gets  a  freehold  title.
Mr.   RHODES:  Is  it  our  intention  that  the  government   not
acquire  land  for  the  purpose  of  becoming  a  large   landholder
but  that  it  acquire  land,  if  it  does  acquire  it,  for  the  purpose
of  dividing  the  land  into  economic  tracts  so  that  an  average
farm  family  can  make  a  living?
Mr.  GORDON:  This  is  the  whole  concept  of  the  land   re-
form   idea. ...
Mr.  RHODES:  I  think  you  see my  point.    I  do  not  want  a
lot   of   collective  or   state  farms   in   South  America  or  any-
where  else  so  far  as that  is  concerned.
Mr.   GORDON:  I  am  completely  in  accord  with  that,   Mr.
Rhodes.
—^Same,  Page  237.
The  family  farm  is  having  a  hard  enough  time  surviving
in  the  United States.   It  is  hardly  a  viable  solution for illiter-
ate   peons  in  newly  opened  distant  jungles,   much  less  for
hungry  Latin  America's  food  shortages.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  May  IS,  1961
Documentary;  Lincoln   White  Dims  His  Lustre  As  An  Authority  on  Marxism
How  the State Dept.'s Spokesman "Declared" Cuba A Member of the Soviet Bloc
Lincoln   White,   official   spokesman   of   the   State   Bept.,
was  ragged  by  the  press  corps  May  2  when  he  issued  a
statement   saying   that   Castro's  declaration   of  a   Socialist
Cuba  meant  he  had  joined  the  Soviet  bloc.    In  equating
Socialism  with  Communism,  Mr. White  quoted  from  a  let-
ter  by  Jose  Marti,  Cuba's  leader  in  the  war  against  Spain,
opposing   Socialism,   apparently  unaware  that  Marti  wrote
this  almost  a  quarter  century  before   the  appearance  of
the  Communist  movement.   For  good  measure,  Mr.  White
also  compared Castro  to  Hitler  and  Mussolini.    From  the
official   transcript  we  present   these  excerpts  for  the  edi-
fication   of  our  readers:
Q.  Link,  since  you  distinguish  between   Communism  and
genuine  Socialism,  was  Marti  referring  to  genuine  Socialism
or  was he  referring  to  Communism  when  he  made  this  state-
ment?
Mr.  WHITE:  I  don't  know.
Q.  When  did  he  make  this  statement?
Mr.   WHITE:  Somebody  will   run   that   down   for   you.
Q.  Link,  do  we  regard  Cuba  now  as  being  a  member  of
the   Soviet  bloc?
Mr.  WHITE:  I  don't  think  it  makes  much  difference  how
we  regard  it.    Castro  certainly  does.    He  said  as much.  .  .  .
Q.  Link,   I  didn't  see  in  all  this  any  distinction   between
Socialism,  as  the   term  was  used   there   by  Marti,   and  your
statement,  from  any  other  type  of  Socialism.    Do  you  make
this  distinction  here?
Mr.  WHITE:  I  repeat  to  you  what  I  said  he  said  and  let
it  stand  at  that.
A  Sweeping  Indictment  of   Socialism
Q.  I  don't  know  what  is  so  amusing  about  this,  but  this
is  a  very  sweeping  indictment  of  Socialism  in  general  which
is  practiced  by  some  of  the  people  that  we  don't  normally
indict.     I   am  wondering   whether   there   is  any   chance  of
. getting  clarification  on  that  before  the  protests  start  coming
back  in.  ...      Are  you  saying  that  you  are  not  making any
distinction   between   Socialism  as  you—
Mr.  WHITE:  I  am  quoting  what  Jose  Marti  said.
Q.  Are  you  quoting   with   approval?
Mr.   WHITE:  This   is  the   George   Washington   of   Cuba.
This  is what  he  said.    I  am  relating  it  to  the  Cuban  situation.
Q.  But  this  George  Washington  we  refused  to  recognize
or  give  any  help  to  for  years,  Link,  and  it  would   be  inter-
esting  to  know  what  kind  of  Socialism  we  are  referring  to,
and  what  he  was  referring  to.
Mr.  WHITE:  Let  us  get  the  specific  reference,  and  you  can
read  it  in  full  context.    [The  quotation  turned  out  to  be  from
a  letter  by  Marti  to  Fermin  Valdez  Dominguez,  referring  to
Marxism.    This  was  in  May,   1849.]
Q.  When  you  bring  in  this  comparison   with  Hitler  and
Mussolini,  are  we  also  saying  this  country  [Cuba]  is  Fascist
as  well  as  Communist?
Q.   [From  another  reporter.]    What  is  the   difference?
Mr.  WHITE:  Exactly.    The  question  is—
Q.  You  say there  is  no  difference?
Mr.   WHITE:  A  little   different   approach;   the  objective  is
the  same.  .  .  .
Q.  Link,  in  this  connection,  do  we  have  anything  to  say
about  Castro  winning  the  so-called   Lenin  Prize?
Mr.  WHITE:  Let  facts  speak  for   themselves.
Q.  To  shorten  this  whole  thing  out,  -when  Castro  uses  the
word  Socialist,  it  is  the  American  view  that  you  can  substi-
tute  the  word   Communist.
Mr.   WHITE:  Exactly;  certainly.
A  Question  Never  Clearly  Answered
Q.  Well,  one  more  question.    Are  you  saying  in  this  state-
ment  that  Castro  has  become  a  Soviet  satellite  in  some  degree
subservient  to  directions  from   Moscow?
Mr.  WHITE:  John   [Hightower],  I  don't  know  how  many
times  we  have  pointed  out  that  the  motivations  of  the  Castro
people  in  this  Sierra  Maestra  for  the  betterment  of  the  indi-
vidual   was  applauded   and   accepted   by  practically   everyone
in  this  Hemisphere.    It  is  the  subversion,  the  taking  over  of
those  motives  by  extraterritorial  motives,  procedures,   and  so
on,  that  makes  the  basic  difference  between  the  Castro  revo-
lution  of  today.
Q.  Well,  that  is  the  reason  I  ask  the  question.    How  far
has  it  gone?    That  is  what  I  am  trying  to  find  out.
Mr.  WHITE:  Just  read  Mr.  Castro's   speech   and  you  will
see  how  far  he  has  gone.
Q.  A  lot  of  people,  interpreting   this  speech,  as  I   gather
in  comments  made  for  public  consumption   earlier  today,  are
a  little  unclear  on  just  how  far  he  has  gone.
Mr.   WHITE:  People  who   advise  me  are   not   unclear   in
any  way  about   it.
Q.  Is  Cuba,  under   Castro,   a  satellite  of   the   Soviet   gov-
ernment?
Mr.  WHITE:  It  certainly has  become  a  member of  the  bloc,
John  [Hightower].
Q.  Link,  a   moment   ago  you   said   extraterritorial.    You
meant   extracontinental.
Mr.  WHITE:  That  is  right,   extracontinental.
Soviet  Diplomats in  Washington  Not  As  Sure  As  State  Dept. Castro Is  Now Communist
"Fidel   Castro  may  have  proclaimed  his   Cuban  regime
to  be-'socialist'  but  the  Soviet  Union  is  by  no  means taking
him  at  his  word,  much  less  agreeing  with  the  official   U.S.
view   that   Cuba   is  now  in  the  Communist   bloc ...   a
sampling  of   Soviet  diplomats  here  in  Washington  shows
that  Castro  has  got  to  go  a  lot  further  before  he  rates  as
a  member  of  the  Communist  club.  .  .  .  Soviet  diplomats
here  point  out  that  he  has  yet   to  nationalize  all  private
property  or  to  organize  agriculture  into  collective  farms.
Nor,  most  important, has  he  yet  created a  'classless  society'
of   the   Cuban population.
"The  U.S.  has  said  that  Castro  has  taken  Cuba  into  the
Communist  bloc.   But  the  Soviet  diplomats,  asked if  Castro
might  indeed  be  taken  into  the  Warsaw Pact,  respond with
a  loud  'no.'    In  the  first  place,  they  explain,  the  Warsaw
Pact   is   a   military   alliance  of   the   European   Communist
regimes  and  Castro  is  not  in  Europe.  And  secondly,  as  one
frankly  put  it,  'why  antagonize   the  U.S.?'"
—Chalmers  Roberts  (one  of  the  most  persistent   questioners  in  the  transcript  above)  in  the  Washington  Post  May  8
7   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   May  15, 1961
British  Expert  Sees  "Comic  Strip  View  of History"  in  This  Military  Ideology
(Continued    -from   Page   One)
and  "national  communist"   revolution   which  recalls  the  Na-
tional  Socialism  of  Hitler.   The  other  was the  extent  to which
they  leaned  for  support  not  only  on  special  cadres  of  profes-
sional  soldiers  and  elite  elements,  like  the  parachutists,  but
on  Foreign  Legion  units  largely  composed  of  Germans.    We
are  recruiting  similar  adventurers  from  Central   and  Eastern
Europe   for   service   in   the   so-called   Special  Warfare   units.
They  seem  to  come  chiefly  from  right-wing   elements.     I  was
told   that   there  were   many  former   Chetniks   among   them;
these  were  the  Royal  Yugoslav  partisans  under  Mihailovitch,
who   collaborated    during   certain   periods   with   the   Nazis.
The  anonymous  memorandum  in  the  Army  Navy   Air   Force
Journal  ends  by  saying  "the   two  names  .  .  .  who  are  most
mentionable   in   this   field   are   Colonel   Ed   Lansdale,    OSO,
and  Slavko  N.  Bjelajac,  Special  Warfare."    When  I  reached
Mr.  Bjelajac  by  phone  at  the  Pentagon,   he  admitted  he  had
served  with  the  Yugoslav  Partisan forces under  Mihailovitch.*
The  Birch  Society  Mentality
It  is  no  wonder  the  revolting  French  officers  thought  they
had  American  sympathizers.    I  found  at  the  Pentagon   that
ACSI   (Assistant  Chief   of   Staff   for   Intelligence)   had  trans-
lated  and  circulated  widely  among  senior  officers  the  leading
"ideological"  work  of  these  French   Colonels.    This  was  put
together    by   a   Colonel    Lacheroy   under   the   pen   name   of
Ximenes  in  a  special   double   issue   (Feb.-Mar.   1957)   of  the
Revue  Mditaire  ^'Information.   Mr.  Werth  calls  it "amateurish
and  even  childish  in  its  starry-eyed  discovery  of  the  'revolu-
tionary   war   tactics'   of   Bolshevism,"   but   it   seems   to   have
been  regarded  as  hot   stuff   indeed  at  the  Pentagon   where  it
fit  neatly  into  the  Birch  Society  style  views  all  too prevalent
among  some  officers.     A  British  writer  who  served  in  Amer-
Open  Letter  to  the  President
".   .  .  We  are  opposed  to   any   further  intervention
in   Cuba,   direct  or  indirect.  .  .  .  Any   transformation
of  the  present  Cuban  regime  must  be  the  work  of   the
Cuban  people  themselves.  .  .  .  The  most  basic   issue
is  not  the  misplanning  and  incompetence of  the   CIA.
.  .  .  There  are  not  guns  enough  and  planes  enough
to  keep  Communism  out  of  Latin  America.  .  .  .  The
only  real  defense is  an  offensive  for  social  justice. .  .  .
We  believe  that  the  Cuban  revolution has  turned  upon
its  original  democratic aims.  .  .  .  But  we  also  believe
that  the  U.S.  must  bear  part  of  the  responsibility  for
this  tragic  development. .  .  .  Prom  the  present  debacle
we  must  derive  new  wisdom. .  .  .  Let  this  nation  now
declare  that  it  will  not  launch  or  direct  any  military
attack  upon  Cuba. ..."
—From  a  letter  to President  Kennedy  May  4  initiated
by   Norman   Thomas  and  also  signed   by  Lionel   Abel,
James  Baldwin,  Roger  Baldwin,  Dr. John  Bennett, Eric
Bentley,   Lcroy   Bowman,   Van   Wyck    Brooks,   Robert
Delson, Mark  -Van  Don-en, Rev.  John  La  Farge,  Patrick
German,  Prof.  Manuel  Gottlieb,  Rev.  Donald  Harring-
ton,   Robert   Heilbroner,   Nat    Hentoff,     John    Haynes
Holmes,  Rabbi  Isidore  Hoffman,    Darlington  Hoopes,  H.
Stuart  Hughes,  George K.  Hunton, Robert  M. Hutchins,
Murray  Kempton,  Wm.  Kemsley,  Seymour  Martin   Lip-
set,  Lenore  Marshall,  Emil  Matey,  Stewart   Meacham,
H.  L.  Mitchell,  A.  J.  Muste,  Clarence  Pickett,  Norman
Podhoretz,  Charles  Price,  Philip  Rahv,  A.  Philip   Ran-
dolph,   Dr.  David  Riesman,  Prof.   David  Spitz,   Irwin
Suall,  Mark  Starr,  I.  F.  Stone,  Walter    Uphoff,     Dan
Wakefield,    Edmund   Wilson,   Eletna   Wilson,   Frank    P.
Zeidler.
*  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  Cuban  exiles  who  told
Sam  Pope  Brewer  (New  York  Times,  May  7)  that  they  had
been  imprisoned  and  mistreated  for  objecting  to   the  pres-
ence  of  Batista  men  in  the  Guatemalan training  camps,  de-
scribed  some  of  the  supposed  CIA  men  in  charge  as  speaking
English   with   an   accent,   "perhaps   of    Central   European
origin."
ican  Combat  intelligence  during  the  last  war  criticized  these
French  military  ideologists   for  a  "comic  strip  concept  of  his-
tory"  which  tended  to  see  a  Communist  plot  behind  all  colo-
nial   insurrectionist   movements,   whether   left   or  nationalist.
(Paret:  The   French   Army  and  La  Guerre  Revolutionnaire,
Journal  of  the  Royal United  Service  Institution,  Feb.  1959,  re-
printed  by  the  British  Institute  for   Strategic  Studies  in   the
March-April,   1959,   issue  of  its  organ,  Survival.)     The  Steve
Canyon  comic  strip  mentality  is even  stronger  at  the  Pentagon.
(More   Next    Week)
I.   P.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  ATC^  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  snb  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   .............................  ...........Zone............State.................  .
5/15/81
Biter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  moo.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   .............................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea D    No  D
If   you  Send  LONG  Stamped   Envelopes   We'll   Send  A  Free  Copy   of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered u  Second  CUM  Hatter  at  Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  ».  1ST*.   Poet-dated  Mondays  bat  pabllahed  every  Thl
day  except  the  lut  two  Thursday!  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  1.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  If.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  In  the  U.  S-;   $6  In
Canada:   HO  elsewhere.     Air  Hall   rates:   $15  to   Europe:    $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED