I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jul03.pdf

============================================================

When  Khrushchov  Turns  Lieut.  Gen., Pp.  2-3
SANE  Suggests A  Compromise  Solution  for  the  Troika  on  Nuclear  Weapons  Testing.  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  25
JULY  3,  1961
<oi      WASHINGTON, D.   C.
15  CENTS
How  Kennedy  Could  Rejuvenate  His  Administration
For  a  few  hours  at  least,  to  short  wave  listeners  in  Latin
America  and  elsewhere,  it  seemed  last  week  that  the  U.S.  was
about  to  initiate  a  fresh  beginning   in  Cuba  policy.     Station
WURL   in  New   York  which  broadcasts  on   short   wave  in
Spanish  and  Portugese  to  Latin  America,  carried  this  story:
Its   reporter,   Leopold   Aragon,   said   he   went   up   to   Adlai
Stevenson  after  his  talk  at  the  National  Press  Club  here  last
Monday  and  told  Mr.  Stevenson  that  in  Havana  two  weeks
earlier  Fidel Castro  had  recalled  President  Kennedy's  inaugural
remark   about   never  fearing  to  negotiate  and   said   that   he
nevertheless   seemed  afraid  to  negotiate  with  Cuba.    Accord-
ing  to  Mr.   Aragon,  Mr.   Stevenson  replied   that   we're   not
afraid   to   negotiate   with   Castro.     "Any   time   Fidel   Castro
wants  to  negotiate  with  us,"   Mr.   Stevenson  was  quoted  as
having  said,  "all   he  needs  to  do  is  to  send  an  emissary  to
Washington  and  let  us  reopen  our  Embassy  in  Havana.    He
closed   the   Embassy.    He   broke  contact  with  us.    You  can
tell  Castro  we'll  negotiate  any  time  he's  ready  to  negotiate  in
good   faith."     Mr.   Aragon   claims   that   this   statement  was
made  in  the  presence  of  Secretary  of  Labor  Goldberg  and  of
the  president  of  the  Press  Club  who  were  leaving   the  dais
•  with  Stevenson  when  the  reporter  approached  them.
AH  We  Ask  is  Unconditional  Surrender
This  story  was  also  broadcast  here  in  Washington  late  the
sa'me  afternoon  on  WTTG,  and   created  the   hope   that  we
w  re  at  last  ready  to  break  out  of  our  stale  rigidity  on  Cuba.
Bi't  when  one  reporter  reached  what  he  described  as  "a  high
ac>  ninistration  source"   he  was  told  that  there  had   been   no
change  in  policy,  and  that  Castro  would  have  to  divest  him-
st\f    of   his  military  and   political   ties  with   the   Soviet  bloc
before  the  U.S.  would  consider  renewing  relations.    By  this
unrealistic  formula,  of  course,  Castro  would  have  to  give  up
ttts  ties  on  which  he  now  depends  for  arms,  oil  and  a  sugar
market  before  being  at  all  sure that  he  would  be  offered  alter-
native  sources  of  supply  and  markets  by  us.    This  is  tanta-
mount  to  a  request  for  his  unconditional   surrender.    Next
morning  before  going  into  an  executive  session  with  the  Sen-
ate  Foreign   Relations  Committee,   Mr.   Stevenson   entered   a
general  denial  of  the  Aragon  story  to a  UPI man.   The  denial
seemed  to  settle  it  until  the  State  Department  later  in  the  day
at  its  press  briefing  confused  the  picture  again  by  giving  out
a  somewhat  different  version.    Its  spokesman  said  that  what
Mr.  Stevenson  had  meant  was that  the  U.S.  is  ready  to  nego-
tiate  with  Cuba  on  such  "strictly   bilateral  matters"   as  trade
and  expropriation  of   American   property,   but  it  would   not
negotiate  "the   question  of  Cuba  becoming  a  beachhead   for
communism  in  this  hemisphere."    Despite   the  murky  rhe-
toric  this,  too,  sounded  a little  promising.    But  our  own  effort
to    obtain     elucidation     in    another    source    dealing    with
Cuban  policy  elicited  the  answer  that  whatever  Mr.  Stevenson
Adlai  Switches  on  Arms  for  Latins
Q.  What's the  role of the  military  in  the  Latin  Amer-
ican  picture  and  should  the  U.S.  aid  in  the  accomplish-
ment  of  this  role?
A-  I  have a  feeling  that  this  one came from  Congress
(laughter).    I  must  say  that  when  I  came  back   from
Latin  America  a  year  ago I  was  shocked  by the  extent
to  which  the  proportion  of  the  national   budgets  went
for   military  expenditures.    This  time  I  felt   somewhat
different.    The  problems  of  internal   security   are   very
great.    For   the   most  part   the   military,   which   has
often  been  the  bulwark  of  dictatorship  and  often  been
the  instrument  of  dictatorship,   are  showing   increasing
signs  of  responsibility,  of  democratic  conviction.    And,
of  course,  in  a  number  of  countries  at  least  they   rep-
resent  the  conservative  solid  secure  foundation  of  any
regime.
It's    again   a  subject   that  is   extremely    difficult   to
generalize  about.   My own feeling  is  that  as  a  matter
of  policy we  should help them  to  man  and  arm   sufficient
forces  for  internal  security  because  the  crisis  has  not
yet   been  reached.    Por   external   security   or  for   any
major  external  activity  or  for  any  major  contribution
to  the  hemispheric  defense,  I  think  they  are  unneces-
sary.
—Stevenson  at  the  National   Press  Club  June  29
might  have  said  there  was no  disposition  to  engage  in  bilateral
talks  of  any  kind,  except  that  of  course  if  Castro  wanted  to
send  an  emissary to  offer  compensation  for  American  proper-
ties  he  could  do so.
To   match   this   icy  attitude   one  has   to   go   back   to   the
days  of  Secretary of  State  Bainbridge Colby  who  believed  that
the  Russian  revolution  would  slink  away  abashed  and  disap-
pear  if  only treated with  the  right  degree  of  disdain.    It  seems
to  be  an  axiom  of   American  foreign   policy  that  the  right
way  to  deal  with  a  revolution  is  to  pretend  as  long  as  pos-
sible  that  it  does  not  exist.    It  took  16  years  before  we  recog-
nized  Soviet  Russia.    Only  now,   12  years  after  the  Chinese
Revolution,  we  are  sending  up  trial  balloons  about  the  possi-
bility  of  granting  Peking   equal  status  in  the  UN   Assembly
with   Taipeh   while   Chiang  keeps  the   seat  on  the   Security
. Council,  presumably  on  the  theory  that  Communist  China  is
on  a small  island known  as Asia just  off the  shores  of  Formosa.
Intervention   having   failed   in   China   as   it   once   failed   in
Russia,  the  bright  young  men of  the  New  Frontier  are  falling
back  on  the  mouldy  doctrines  of  non-recognition   and  contain-
ment  to  deal  with  Castro.    Even  if  we  can't  keep  China  out
of  the  UN   much  longer  maybe  we  can  solace  ourselves  by
expelling  Castro   from   the   OAS.     American   foreign   policy
makers  would   feel   bereft   if   they   could   not   be   unrealistic
somewhere  in  the  world.
My   own   feeling   is  that   President   Kennedy   would   find
(Continued   on  Page  Pour)
9   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  July   3, 1961
If Only There Were Some Way to Reach the Russian People With This Message...
I  venture  to  say that  Mr.  Khrushchov  made  as  unpleasant
an  impression   on  many  Russians  as  he  did  on  many  friends
of  peace  in  the  West  by  appearing  in  the  uniform  of  a  Lieu-
tenant  General  for  his  Kremlin  speech   of  June  21  and  by
the   complacent   way  in   which  he   discussed  resumption   of
nuclear  testing.
Mr.  Khrushchov's  overwhelming  popularity  within  Russia
and  in  many  of  the  Soviet  states  reflects  the  fact  that  he  has
to  some  degree  brought  about  an  opening  of  Russia's  win-
dows  on  the  West,  a  relaxation  of  tensions,  and  a  lightening
of   the   heavy  hand   which   marked  the   Stalin   period.     His
search  for  peace,  as  well  as  his  warm  and  earthy  personality,
have  won  him  popular   affection   at  home.
It's   Not  Nikita  the  General  They   Love
But  for  a  civilian  leader  to  don  a  General's  uniform,  and
to  hang  a  row  of  decorations  on  his  chest,  is  to  dramatize
his  readiness  for  war,  not  his  search  for  peace.    The  simplest
Russian  must have felt  a certain chill  to  see Nikita  Sergeyevich
in  uniform,   suddenly   become  a  General,  and  as  many  Rus-
sians  as  Westerners  must  have  wondered  just  why  Berlin  was
worth  the  gamble  of  a  World  War.
We  are  accustomed  in  the  West  to  hearing  our  more  light
headed  Generals  and  our  American  Legionnaires  talk  of  war
as  if  this  were  still   1914   or   1939,   i.e.  of  periods  in  which
war,  though  terrible  enough,  was  still  feasible  and  some  sem-
blance  of  victory  still  possible.    It  was  indeed  strange  to  hear
Mr.  Khrushchov  begin  to  talk  the  same  way.
Much  that  the  Soviet  Chairman  had  to  say of  the  West was
true.    It  is  true  that   "the   ruling   circles  of  capitalist  coun-
tries  lack  the  courage  to  say  openly  they  are  against  disarma-
ment.    They  pretend  that  they  are  ready  to  negotiate. ..."
(New    York   Times,   June   22.)      It   is  true   that   "Hitlerite
Generals  not  only  command  the  Bundeswehr  but  they  hold
key  posts  in  NATO  and  command  French   and  British  sol-
diers  whose  fathers fought  against  the Hitlerite  invaders.  .  . .
West   German  militarists  have  received  rocket  weapons  and
are  demanding  atomic  weapons"  (The   Times,  London,  June
22).
But  it  is  also  true  that  in  every  strata  of  Western  society,
including  the  military,  there  is  a  growing   number  of   men
who  realize  that  the  arms  race  hastens   to  a  dead  end   for
No  Evidence   of  Cheating
Mr.   [Robert]   McCORMICK   [NBC  News]:  Well,   if
the  Russians do not  want a  treaty—and  it  seems fairly
clear  they  don't—isn't  that  an  indication that  they  are
not  cheating  on  us?     If   they  are  cheating obviously
they  would  be  making a  lot  of  progress  while  we  were
doing  nothing.
Ambassador   [Arthur   H.]   DEAN   [Chairman   U.S.
delegation  nuclear  test  ban talks]:  Well,  all  I  can  say
is  that  we  have  examined  very,  very  carefully  in  an
effort  to  get  evidence  that  they  are  testing.    We  can't
find  any  evidence  that  they  are,   but  then   of  course
you  can't prove the  universal negative that  they are not.
—Meet  the  Press,  June  25
all  mankind,  and  look  about  them  for  a  way  out.    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  is  of  this  mind,  and  so  are  many  of  the  men  he  has
brought  into  the-government  with  him.    Mr.  Khrushchov's
speech  in  discussing  the  nuclear  arms  negotiations  hardly  did
justice  to  this  hopeful  element  in  the  West,   nor  gave  his
Soviet  listeners  any  real  idea  of  the  differences   between   the
two  sides,   of  the  sudden   change   in  the   Soviet   position   in
calling  for  control  by troika, or  of  the  many months  of  patient
negotiation   and  agreement  frustrated  by  it.
On  the  contrary Mr.  Khrushchov  went  on  to  prepare   the
public  mind   in   the   Soviet   Union   for   resumption   of   tests
in  the  tone  and  the  terms  we  are  accustomed  to  hear   from
our  own  Pentagon  people  and  their  satellite  scientists.    Here
are  his  words:
Quite  a  few  devices  which  need  practical  testing  have
been   developed   in   the   Soviet   Union.    This   testing,   of
course,   will   increase   the   fighting   power   of   our   armed
forces   and  enable  us  to  develop  even  better  atomic  and
nuclear   bombs,   enable  us  to   improve  the   technology  of
their  manufacture.
If   in  reply  to  the  resumption  of  nuclear  tests  by  the
Western  powers we  did  not  start  testing  our  weapons  we
would  damage  the  defense  potential  of   our  country  and
of  the  entire  Socialist community.
This   passage   is  worth   close   study.     In   the   first   place
neither   here  nor  anywhere   else   in  his   speech   is  there  any
reference   to   the   danger   of   fallout   from   resumed   testing.
He   does  not  even  say,  as  some  of   our  people  do,  that   he
will  keep testing  below  the  ground  or  in  outer  space to  reduce
fallout.    The  one  wholly  effective  place  to  test  new  weapons
The  Spirit of  Tolstoy  Cries  Out Again From Behind the  Facade  of  a  Soviet Man
anachronism  in  our  atomic  and  space  age,  which  has  come
"Many   things  I  have  seen  have  strengthened  my  con-
viction  of  the  merits  of  socialism  as  a  social  system  and
made  me  realize  keenly  once  again  the  significance  of  our
Revolution  for  the  progress   of  ordinary  people.
"Other  things,  however, have  forced me  to  the  conclusion
that  there  are  a  number of  very  fundamental  irregularities
in  the  home  and  foreign  policy  of   the   Communist   Party
of  the  Soviet  Union  under  your  leadership  which  I  cannot
bring  myself  to  accept.
"I   am  unable  any   longer   to   continue   to   subscribe   to
the   doctrine  of   a  merciless   and  irreconcilable  class   and
anti-religious    struggle,    carried   to    holocaustic   lengths,
which   forms   a  foundation  stone   of   Communist  teaching,
both   theoretical   and   political.
"I  am  possessed   by   the  conviction  that  every   kind  of
intolerance   towards  any   kind   of   person,   be   it   even   for
the  sake  of  the  loftiest  ideals,  is  nothing  but  a  tremendous
upon  us  so  suddenly—an  anachronism  which  can  only  be
explained  by  the  existence  of  a  certain   time-gap   between
human  thinking  and  reality.   •
"I   am   profoundly  convinced,   Nikita   Sergeyevich,   that
only  through  the  greatest  tolerance  towards  all  heterodox
individuals,  including  even  those  whose  thought  is   hostile,
is   the  only  means  of  salvation  for  humanity  from   mass
fratricide  and  degeneration—both  physical  and  moral—and
that  no  alternative exists  in  our  age.  .  .  ."
—From  o  letter  to  Chairman  Khrushchov  by  Oleg  Len-
chevsky,   a   Russian   engineer   who   went   to   England   in
April   on  a   Unesco   fellowship  in   his   own  field  of  saline
water   conversion  and  decided   he  could  no  longer  remain
a   member   of   the   Communist   Party.     He   was   granted
asylum  in  England.    His  letter  and  story  were  published
by  Edward   Crankshaw  in  the  London  Observer  June  SS.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  July   3, 1961
... Renewed Testing for "Better" Weapons Will Only Increase Our Mutual Peril
is  in  the  atmosphere  and  apparently  it  is  atmospheric  testing
•which  the  Soviet  Union  will  resume  if  "the  Western  powers"
begin  testing  again.    The  attitude  toward  the  earth's  atmos-
phere  is the  same  as that  of  our  military men—that  is,  a  right
to  pollute  it  is  assumed—and  Mr.  Khrushchov  is  as  uncon-
cerned  as they  are  about  the  effect  on  world  opinion.
The  peace  forces  in  the  West  have  stressed  the  existence
of  weapons  so  monstrous  that  they  already  endanger  all  man-
kind  and  of  stockpiles  that  can  do  the  job  of  destruction  sev-
eral  times  over.    But  here  is  Mr.  Khrushchov  talking  of  test-
ing  "to  develop  even  better  atomic  and  nuclear  bombs"  and
arguing   like  our   military  men   that   not   to   resume   testing
"would  damage  the  defense  potential  of  our  country."
The  "Better"  the  Bombs  the  Worse  Off  We  All  Are
The  truth  is,  of  course,  that  the  "better"  the  bombs  be-
come  the  more  insecure  become  both  our  countries  and  the
world.    We  would  both  be  better  off  without  the  A  bomb
and   the  H   bomb.    And  if   "even  better"   bombs   are  now
possible  we  would  both  be  better   off   if  the  plans  for  them
could  be  buried  and   forgotten.
A  speed  up  in  the  development   of  new  monsters  and  of
the  arms  race  will  damage  the  defense  potential   of  both  our
countries.    The  risks  in  a  resumed  arms  race  are  far  greater
for  the  Soviet  Union  than  the  risks  of  espionage  Mr.  Khrush-
chov  emphasized  in  his  speech.    But  the  Soviet  listener  was
not  given  the  facts  on  which  to  make  an  evaluation  of  his
own.
The   proposed   nuclear   test   treaty   would   not   open   the
Soviet   Union   to   unlimited   inspection.     Even   without   the
troika  veto,  it  embodies  severe  restrictions..   A  limited  num-
ber   of   inspections  a  year,  carried   out   under   restricted   cir-
cumstances,  holds  out  some  dangers  of  espionage  but  so  do
the  inspections  which  the  Soviet  Union  would  be  empowered
to  make  in  the  West.    And  on  both  sides  the  risks  of  espio-
nage  are  vastly   inflated   compared   to   the   risks   of   resumed
testing,   of  the  increased   tension  this  will  generate,   and  of
the  spread   in  nuclear   weapons   to  other   countries  this   will
bring   about.
Like  other  critics  of  American  policy,  I  am  often  quoted
in  the  Soviet  press  and  radio.    I  wish  it  were  possible   for
us,   who   are  neither   capitalist  warmongers  nor   enemies  of
Senator  Dodd's  Moral  Standards
Senator  Thomas  J.  Dodd  in  a  letter  to  the  New York
Times   June  26  calling   for   a   resumption  of   nuclear
testing  said  "communism is  utterly  without  humanity
or   moral  scruples."     An   item   in   the   Congressional
Record  a  few  days  earlier  (June  21)  throws  some  light
on   the   Senator's   own   standards.     It   shows   that   in
1957  and  1958,  his  last   two  years  as  a  Congressman
from   Connecticut,  he   received   $24,999.96   (1957)   and
$41,666.62  (1958)  from  Guatemala  as  its  agent.  Guate-
mala  was  dependent  on  American  aid  and  support.    It
paid  Dodd  in  each  of  these  years  more  money  than  he
was   getting  as   a  member  of   the  House,  which  was
$22,500  a  year.    He  was  in  a  position  to  help  mould
American  policy  in  favor  of  his  foreign  client.    This
is  probably  the  only  occasion  in  American  history  in
which  a  Congressman  was  at   the  same  time  on  the
payroll  of  a  foreign  government.    Some  months  after
his  election  to  the  Senate,  Fulbright  in  an  angry  col-
loquy  with  Dodd  brought  this  to  the  attention  of  the
Senate.    However,  this  was  stricken  from  the  Record.
The  fact   may  be  found  recorded  there  now  on  page
10227  in  a  complete  list   of  persons  registered  under
the  foreign  agents  registration  act  for  the  years  1955
to   1959.    Senator   Schoeppel   (R.   Ean.)   put  this  list
into  the   Record  in  order  to  attack  David  Lilienthal,
who  works  for  Iran's  development board.
socialism,  to  get  a  chance  to  argue  this  case  before  the  Soviet
public,  to  reach  our  Russian  brothers.    The  nuclear  test  treaty
represents   what  may  well   be  the  last  chance  for   mankind.
Our  new  President   could  still  get  a  treaty  past  the  Senate.
On  this  foundation  we  could  hope  to  move  forward,  despite
hostility  and  vested  interest,   to  the  more   difficult   problems
of  general  and  total  disarmament  and  of  the  system  of  world
law  they  require.
The  sudden  injection  of  the  troika  issue  may  well   reflect
the  desire  of   the  Soviet  military  bureaucracy—like  ours—to
resume  testing,  and  their  hope  of  provoking  us  into  testing
first.    It  has  suddenly  strengthened   all  the  enemies  of   dis-
armament  and  peace  on  our  side,  while  taking  the  heart  out
of  the  peace  forces  everywhere.   This  upsurge  of  nationalistic
military  thinking  in  the  Kremlin  was  painfully  symbolized
for   us   all   by  Nikita   Sergeyevich's   sudden   emergence,   be-
medalled,  as  Lieut.  Gen.  N.  S.  Khrushchov.
SANE  Offers  Troika  Compromise  and  Proposes  Assembly Meet  on Nuclear  Impasse
The   National   Committee  for   A   Sane   Nuclear   Policy
released  an  open  letter  to  President   Kennedy  June  22  on
the  impasse  in  the  nuclear  test   talks,  but  it  was  ignored
by  the  press.    The  letter,  over  the  signatures  of  Clarence
Pickett  and  Homer  A.  Jack  approved  the  test  ban  treaty
tabled  by  the  U.S.   and  the  U.K.  at  Geneva  April  18.    It
urged  continued  negotiation  at  Geneva  and  no  resumption
of  testing  except  under  UN  control  or  surveillance  by  the
British  and  the  Russians.    It  offered  the  following compro-
mise  for  the  troika  arrangement:
"a. The  administrator of  the  test-ban  organization  should
explicitly  be  a  national  of  a  neutral  state,    b.  Under  the
single  administrator there  should  be  three  deputy  admin-
istrators  (a  troika)  who  would  work  closely  with  the  ad-
ministrator  and  be  appointed'one  from  the  USSR  side,  one
from, the  US-UK  side,  and  one  from  the  neutral  side.    c.
The  administrator  could  be  replaced  at   any   time  during
his  three  year  term of  office  for  unsatisfactory performance
by  a  vote  of  six  or  seven  nations  of  the  11-nation  control
commission,    d.  The  inspection  system  should  be   explicitly
veto-free,   including   the   on-site   inspections   within   each
nation's   annual  quota."
The  letter  suggested   that  if  the  talks  at  Geneva  reach
a  dead  end,  the  U.S.  should  move  for  a  special  meeting  of
the  UN  Assembly.    It  said  this  would be  preferable  either
to  an indefinite  adjournment or to merging the  test  ban talks
with  the  general  disarmament  negotiations.    It  expressed
the  hope  that  the  McCloy-Zorin  talks  would  result  in  full
disarmament  negotiations  beginning  July  31  and  that  the
U.S.   at  that   time  would  present   "an  imaginative   set   of
proposals"   leading   toward   "total   disarmament  down   to
police  levels."
The  letter  praised  the  President  for  resisting   pressure
to  resume  testing  and declared that  "even  if  the  U.S.  tests
nuclear  devices  for  peaceful  uses  or  for  seismic  research,
this  would  be  quickly misinterpreted.
i   o   ;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   July   3,  1961
A  New  Collective  Assault  on  Castro  Will  Hurt  Us  in  Latin  America
(Continued   from   Page   One)
more  support  than  he  realizes  if  he  were  to  reverse  policy  on
Cuba.    The  Cuban  fiasco  broke  the  new  Administration  mor-
ally;  it  hasn't  been  the  same  since.    I  believe  its  moral  regen-
eration   could  be  found  in  going  back  bravely  to  the  Cuban
issue,   and  making   a  wholly   fresh   start.     The  first   step   it
seems  to  me  is  to  reinstate  the  tractors  deal;  we'll  look  like
cheapskates  if  we  let  a  few  million  dollars  stand  in  the  way.
If  we  can  spend  $45,000,000   on  an  invasion  of  Cuba,  we  can
spend  $28,000,000  to  bail  out  the  men  who  went  there  to
carry  out  our  policy.    To  let  the  deal  fall  through  is  to  em-
bitter   the  Cuban  exiles,   and  to  make  it  look   as  if  we  care
more  for  a  few  dollars  than  for  the  men  who  were  our  in-
struments.    The  next  step  is  to  resume  relations  with  Castro,
and  to  negotiate  a  package  deal  on  resumption  of  sugar  sales
and  compensation  for  American  properties.     If  the  U.S.  made
peace  with  Cuba,  it  would  be  worth  more  than  anything  else
we  could  do  to  better  our  Latin  American  relations.    It  would
mean  that  we  demonstrated  the  hard  and  honest  way our  pro-
claimed   belief   in   self-determination  and   our   desire   hence-
forth  to  abide  by  the  principle  of  non-intervention.     Castro
is  the  greatest  force  in  the  hemisphere  for  the  social  and  eco-
nomic  reform  in  which  we  claim  to  believe,  and  we  ought
to  bring  him  over  to  our  side  and  work  with   him.    Only
so  can  we  guide  the  coming  Latin  social  revolution  into  chan-
nels  hostile   neither   to  the   U.S.   nor  to   free   principles.    If
Mr.  Kennedy  made  such  an   about   face,   he  would  demon-
strate  qualities  of  leadership  that  would  restore  world  respect
and  his  own  self-confidence  and  revitalize the  forces  at  home
which   looked   so  eagerly  to  the  New   Frontier   for   a   fresh
start.
Adlai  Being  Taken  Into  Camp
Unfortunately  I  see  no  prospect  of  any  change  in  policy.
Mr.  Stevenson's   performance  at  the  press  club  in   reporting
on  his  trip  to  Latin  America was  discouraging.   He's  the  best
we  have  and   it's   not   good   enough.     I   have   just  finished
reading  Morris  H.  Rubin's  somber  report  in  The  Progressive
for  June  "Latin  America:  Dynamite  on  Our  Doorstep"  and
against   that   background   there   were   moments   when   Adlai
seemed  downright  inane,  as  for  example—when  he  said  "we
Morse  Protests  Latin  Arms  Aid
"I  wish  to  say  for  the  benefit  of  the  President  of  the
United  States  that  in  my  judgment  if  he  insists  upon
his  proposal  to  lift  the  ceiling  in  regard  to  American
military  aid  to  Latin  America,  we  will  pay  dearly  in
many   parts   of   Latin  America  so   far   as   America's
prestige  is  concerned,  and  we  shall  play  directly  into
the  hands  of  the  Communists throughout  Latin Amer-
ica.  .  .  .
.   "I  am  not   a  military  strategist,  but  when  I   listen
to   the   generals   from   the   Pentagon  on  this   point   I
doubt  that  they  are,  either.  .  .  .  Have  we  not  learned
anything   from   our   past   aid   for   so-called   internal
security?     Have  we  not  learned  yet   that  the  use  of
American  arms  for  such  purposes  in  the  past  in  Latin
America   has   caused  governments   to  topple  and  has
created  one  of  the   major  arguments  used  against   us
as  the  imperialist  of  the  North?"
—Morse   (D.  Ore.)  in  the  Senate  June  20
and  Western   ideals  have  no  firmer  friends  than  the  present
government  of  Peru."    Nothing  could  serve  more   effectively
to   discredit   "Western    ideals"   than   the   friendship   of   the
Peruvian   oligarchy.     The   underlying   drift   of   his   remarks
points  to  a  new  Cuban  fiasco.  The  plan  whose  outlines  were
visible  in  his  talk  is  first  to  hold   the  economic  conference
in  Uruguay  and  then  when  the  Latin  leaders  have  been  lined
up  by promises  of  aid,  to  launch  measures  for  collective  action
against  Cuba.    Mr.  Stevenson  thinks  it  "quite  possible"   that
after  the  Alliance for  Progress  meeting  in  Montevideo  "there
will  be  strong  leadership  in  Latin  America  to  deal  with  this
new  form  of  outside  intervention."     This,   and  Mr.  Steven-
son's  change  of  heart  in  favor  of  expanded  military  aid   (see
boxes  on  pages  one  and  four),   indicate  how  thoroughly   he
is being taken over by the  conventional-minded  in  Washington.
Behind  all  the  talk  of  social  reform  are  preparations  for   a
new  collective  assault  of  some  kind  on  Cuba.    This  attempt
if   made  will  sharply  polarize  the  hemisphere  to  our  disad-
vantage,  setting  the  masses  and  the   intellectuals   against  us
and  forcing  us  to  rely  more  and  more  on  the  military.   This
way  lies  a  second  and  greater  disaster  in  the  colossal  stupidity
of  our  David  and  Goliath  contest  with  Castro.
Why  Not  Send  a  Friend  the  Weekly   for  Six  Months  at  Only   $2—Vse  Blank  Below
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ......................................................................................_
Street    ...................................................................................._
City   ............_.........................Zone........_...State....................
7/3/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ................................._......................................_..
Street    ........._..-..............._.................„.................................
City   ............—.........................Zone........._..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?        Yes  Q    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C,.  onder  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada;   (10  elsewhere.    All  Mail  rates:   $15  to  Europe:   $20  to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED