I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961oct23.pdf

============================================================

A  New Korea  in  Vietnam ? P. 3
The  New  Frontier's   Private   Shelter  Campaign  Another   Case  of  "Warmed   Over  Elsenhower,"  P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IX,   NO.  39
OCTOBER   23,   1961
WASHINGTON,  IX  C.
15   CENTS
The  Bomb  The  President  Must  De-fuse
In  two  recent  speeches,  President  Kennedy  has,  we  hope,
begun   the   essential  task   of   his   Administration.   This   task
is  more  important  even  than  reaching  a  settlement  with   the
Russians.    The  No.  1  task  is  to  educate  our  own  people  to
the  realities  of  the  world  they  face.     In  his  address  to   the
United   Nations,   the   President  put   forward  with  Euclidean
simplicity  the  basic  axiom  of  our  time,  "Mankind   must   put
an  end  to  war,  or  war  will  put  an  end  to  mankind."     In
his  address at  Chapel  Hill,  he  picked  up  the  challenge  of  the
rightists  and  the  military  when  he  warned  against  the  illu-
sion   of   "total   victory  or   total   defeat,"   the   hysteria  about
being  dead  or  Red.    But  Mr.  Kennedy  will  have  to   develop
these   themes   in   a   great   campaign   of   public   education   if
he  is  to  fulfil  the  pledge  he  made  at  Chapel  Hill,  "while  we
do  not  intend  to  see  the  free  world  give  up,  we  shall  make
every   effort   to  prevent   the   world   from   being   blown    up."
If  this  is  to  be  more  than  rhetoric,  he  must  begin  with   the
most  explosive  element  of  all,  that  mixture  of  tension,  arro-
gance,    frustration   and    self-righteousness   which    threatens
to   detonate   our   own   people.     He   must   de-fuse  American
public   opinion.
Beware  the  "Take-Off" Point
One  of  the  President's   aides,  Prof.  W.  W.  Rostow,  has
propounded   a  new  concept  in  economic  theory,  the  idea  that
at  a  certain  point   the  economy  of  an  underdeveloped   coun-
try,  fructified   by  sufficient   investment,  will   reach   the   "take-
off"  point  from  which  it  can  soar  ahead  on  its  own  momen-
tum.    The  same  metaphor  may usefully be  applied  to  political
theory.     There   comes   a  point   in   hostile   relations   between
two  rival  nations   when   inflamed   public  opinion   in  one   or
the  other  or  both  may  also  reach  a  "take-off"  point.    This
is  the  point  where   the  tension   built   up  in  the   people   for
purposes  of  bargaining   and   bluff   gets  out  of  hand,   becomes
unendurable,   and   sweeps   the   country   into   war—"let's   get
it  over  with."    This  rhythm  of  tension  and  resolution   which
runs  deep  in  human  nerve fibres, evident  in  love  and  in  music,
also   makes   itself   felt   in   war   hysteria,   carrying    av,-ay   the
governors   in   the   mob   rush   of   the   governed    for   relief,
though  it  be  at  the  cost  of  self   destruction.    The  press  and
the   inflamed   rhetoric   do   for   the   public   what   drums   and
drugs  do  for  a  primitive  tribe:  send  them   off  to  war  in  a
frenzy.   . It   is  to   combatting   such   a  mood,   already   danger-
ously  high,  that  the  President  must  turn  his  attention.
This   is  a   dangerous   task.   It   requires  skill   and   courage
of   the  highest   order.     The   President   likes   challenges.     He
will  find  none  more  exhiliratingly   worthy  of  a  young  man's
devoted   best  efforts.     To  admit  that  the  nation's  opponent,
its  rival,  its  enemy  of  the  moment,   is  not  the   embodiment
of  all  evil,  is  always  a  hazardous  operation.     But  the   premise
German  Propaganda   At  Work
Instead  of  preparing the  German  public  for political
realities,  now  that  their  elections  are  over,  the  Ger-
man  government  has  launched a  propaganda  campaign
against  Britain  and  the  U.S.    The  independent German
weekly,   Der  Spiegel,  lifts  the  curtain   on  this  in   its
issue  of  Oct.  11.    One  of   the  instruments  being  used
is  the  "Society  for  Christian  Social  Teaching and Pub-
lic   Opinion  Formation"  in   Bonn   which   is   headed  by
the   Christian   Democratic  leader   Dr.   Krone   and   is
subsidized  by  tax   favors  as   "gemeinnutzig"   (socially
beneficial).     Its   organ,  "Politisch-Soziale  Correspond-
enz"  has  just   published   three  articles   attacking   the
readiness   of   Americans   and   Englishmen   to   discuss
recognition  of  the  East  German  government, the  Oder-
Neisse   line   and   the   armament   of   the   Bundeswehr.
Senators  Humphrey,  Mansfield  and  Fulbright  are  spe-
cial  targets.    Franz  Joseph  Strauss,  whom  Der  Spiegel
calls  "Atom  Matador,"  is  playing a  key  role.    His  two
press  assistants,  Col. Schmuckle  and  Major  von  Raven,
have   been   spreading    use-but-don't-quote-me   alarms
through  the  official  German  news  agency  to  the   effect
that  the  Soviet  satellites  are  already atomic-armed.
The   German   and  French  embassies   in  Washington
are  also  spreading  word  that  there  are  too  many  ad-
visers  around Kennedy  "tainted" with anti-Germanism.
Le  Monde  in  a  dispatch  from  Washington  Oct.  14  re-
flects  this.    It  puts  George  Kennan;  Foy  Kohler,  As-
sistant    Secretary    of    State    for    European    Affairs;
Llewellyn   Thompson,   Ambassador   to    Moscow;   and
Bohlen,   McGeorge  Bundy  and  Rostow  in   this  group
"espousing   the  theses  of  Walter  Lippmann."    On  the
other   side   Le   Monde   puts   Dean   Acheson   and  Paul
Nitze,   Assistant   Secretary   of   Defense   for  Interna-
tional  Security   Affairs.    It  has  become  hazardous  in
Washington  to  be  critical of  Chiang  Kai-shek.   Is  Bonn
out  to  make  it  dangerous  to  criticize  the  Germans?
of  the  delusion   about   total  defeat  or  total  victory,  at  which
the  President   struck   in   Chapel   Hill,  is  a  total  moral   view
of  the  conflict.    It  is  the  notion  that  all  that  is  good  is  on
our   side,  all  that  is  evil  on  the  other.     Once   that   view  is
accepted,   the   death   drive   for   total   victory   or   total   defeat
is  unavoidable.    How  can  one  compromise   with  total  evil?
The  path  to  peace  is  the  path  of  understanding  that  in  the
human   tragedy   good   and   evil   are   intertwined,   that   what
looks   like   legitimate    defense   of   one's   interests   from   one
side  looks   like  an  aggressive  threat   to  one's  interests   from
the  other,  that  the  enemy  is  our  own  distorted   face  in   the
mirror.  To  echo the  safety  sign,  the  face  you hate  may be your
own.     Those   who   call   themselves    Christian    must   recog-
nize  that  their  Gospel   teaching  springs  from   this   compas-
sionate   and   sorrowfully   detached   view   of   the   real   nature
of  human  conflict.    And  since  humanity  can  no  longer  afford
(Continued    on  Page   Four)
S   ',
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October S3,1981
Holifield,  No.  1  Democratic  Civil  Defense   Champion,  Critical  of  Kennedy  Plans
New  Frontier's Backyard Shelters Another Case of "Warmed Over Eisenhower"
Liberal  Democratic  dissatisfaction   with  Kennedy   broke  out
in  a  new  area  with  Congressman  Chet  Holifield's  speech  to
the   U.S.   Civil  Defense   Council  in  Los  Angeles  last   Tues-
day.     Softly,   timidly   but   unmistakably  Mr.   Holifield   indi-
cated  that  he  had  no  faith  in  the  Kennedy  civil  defense  pro-
gram.    He  predicted  plans  to  mark  existing  shelter  space  in
large   city   buildings   would   prove   disappointing:   "we   will
find  less  protection,  less  well  distributed,  than  would  consti-
tute  the  very minimum  of  what  can  be  called  a  national  fall-
out   shelter  program."     He  was  equally  dubious  of   reliance
on  private  shelters.    He  said,   "Many  individual  families  do
not  have  the  economic  means.    Tenants  are  not  about  to  be
building  shelters  for  their  landlords.    In  many  parts  of  the
country   there   are  not   enough   basements   or   even  backyard
spaces  for  widespread  family  shelter  construction."     He  indi-
cated   that  he  still  favored  a  nationwide  program   of  group
shelters  to  cost  somewhere  in  the  neighborhood   of  $20  bil-
lion  and  to  provide   some  protection   against   blast   and  fire
as  well  as  fallout.    One  of  Holifield's  scientific  advisers,  the
physicist  Ralph   E.  Lapp,   was  blunter  in  a  speech   on  civil
defense  a  few  days  earlier  at  Ford  Hall  Forum   in   Boston
(Oct.   8)   when  he  said  it  was  "already  clear"  that  the  Ken-
nedy   Administration's   policy   on   civil   defense   "is   headed
in  the  wrong  direction."
Rich  Man's  Philosophy
The   truth,  as  both   men   are   fully   aware,   is  that   in   no
area   of   public   policy   is   the   New   Frontier   more   clearly
"warmed   over   Eisenhower"   than   in   its   civil   defense   pro-
gram.    No   man  in   Congress   understands  this   better   than
Mr.  Holifield.    As  long  time  member  and  now  chairman  of
the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic Energy, he  knows  the  dimen-
sions  of  the  thermonuclear peril.    As  chairman  of  the  Mili-
tary  Operations   subcommittee  of   House   Government   Oper-
ations,  he  has  been  campaigning  since   1955   for   a  national
shelter  program.    His   efforts   to  rewrite  the  obsolete   pre-H
Bomb,  pre-ICBM,  Civil  Defense  Act  of  1950,  with  its  horse-
and-buggy  reliance  on   State,  community  and   individual  ac-
tion,  was  blocked  by  Eisenhower  and  is  still   blocked  under
Kennedy.    This  is  in  accord  with  the  basic  rich  man's  phil-
osophy   of   the   GOP,   which   seeks   to   hold   down    Federal
costs   (largely  financed  by  income  taxes)   at  the  expense  of
State   and   local   governments   (largely   financed   by   general
property  and  sales  levies).     Hence  the  emphasis  on   "States
rights"  and  "local  responsibility."    Kennedy   has  also  taken
over  Elsenhower's  reliance  on  private  shelters,  again  the  big
Shelter  Business  Mostly  Talk
"If   the  Berlin  crisis   and  the   Soviet  resumption  of
atmospheric  nuclear  tests  have  done nothing else,  they
have  made  the  construction  of  fallout  shelters  a  topic
of   lively  interest   throughout  the  U.S. ...  So  far,
though,  comparatively  little  of  the  talk  is  being  trans-
lated   into   action.     Business   Week   reporters,   asking
questions  in  20  cities,   found   that   a   few  dealers   are
making  sales.  .  .  .  But no groundswell  of  orders  has
appeared.  . . .  Even  in the Miami  area ... a  dealer
complains  that   fallout  shelters   are   the   'most   talked
about  and least  sold  item.'  .  .  ."
—Business   Week,   Oct.  7
taxpayer's  point   of   view,   and  Elsenhower's  makeshift  plan
for  utilizing  supposed   shelter   space  in  existing  buildings.
The  difference  is  that  while  Mr.  Holifield   spoke  up  with
pungent  scorn  against  this  program   when  offered   by  Eisen-
hower,  he  now  feels  himself  forced  to  speak  under  wraps.
Little  more  than  a  year  ago  his  subcommittee  (Hse  Rpt  No.
2069,  July  1,  I960)  said  the  plan  to  mark  existing  spaces  in
big   city  buildings  would   only  provide   "an   illusion   of  se-
curity"  since  the  shielding  thus   offered   would  be  quite  in-
adequate   for   the   fallout   intensities   to   be  expected.      (Dr.
Lapp  was  more  outspoken;   he  said  the  program  was  based
on  the  foolhardy  assumption that  cities  would  not  be  bombed
and  that  it  would  therefore  be  safe  to  congregate  the  popu-
lation  in  their  downtown  areas,  the  very  place  where  blast
and  fire  would  be  worst  if  cities  were  hit.)     Of  the  private
shelter   program   last   year's  report   said   angrily,   "There   is
no  sense  in  living  in  a  world  of  make-believe.    If  the  Fed-
eral  government  doesn't  supply  the  funds  and  direct  a  con-
struction  program  for   communal  shelters,   there  will  be  no
national  shelter   program."
In  continuing  to  propagate  faith  in  civil  defense  against
nuclear  war,  both  these  men  also  live  in  a  world  of  make-
believe.    Dr.   Lapp  in  his  speech   made  the  admission   (see
box  below)  that  even  the  best  civil  defense  could  be  effective
only  if  the  level  of  attack  was  below  7500  megatons.    At-
tacks  far  heavier  than  this  are  already  possible.     The  only
defense  now  is  to  face  the  fact  that  there  is  no  alternative
to  co-existence.    But  this  remains  too  dangerous  a   thought.
At  Los  Angeles,  Mr.  Holifield  fell  back  on  the  melodramatic
oversimplification  that  survival could  not  be achieved  "through
cowardly  surrender  to  a  ruthless  enemy  who  plans  to  destroy
our  way  of  life."     Such  rhetoric  is  the  real  cowardice  and
the  real  betrayal.
Advocate  of  Civil  Defense Admits Its  Limit  in  Thermonuclear War
"An effective—not  a  perfect—civil  defense  can  be  devised
for   certain  levels   of   attack.    I   do  not   subscribe   to   the
fantasy  advertised  on  the  cover  of  LIFE  that  '97  out  of
100  people  can be  saved.' ...  I  believe  that  if  the  level
of   attack  on  the   USA   does  not   exceed   3,000   megatons,
then  an  effective  civil  defense  can  be  programmed. .  .  .
The  3  million  square  miles  of  U.S.   territory  could  absorb
no  more  than  3  million  kilotons  of  fission  debris  or  3,000
megatons.    If   we   assume  40  percent  of   a   total  weapon
yield   for   local   fallout,  the   absorption  capability  of   the
U.S.   would  correspond  to  7,500  megatons.  .  .  .
"A  single   B-52  bomber  can  carry  a  bomb  load   of   48
megatons.   With continued nuclear  development,  this  bomb
load  -could  surpass  100  megatons.    A  nuclear  strike   with
100  B-52s—only   a  fraction  of   the   total   strategic   power
of  the  USA—could  then  unleash  a  total  of   10,000  mega-
tons.    Thus,  it  is  clear  that  for  the  first  time  in  modern
history  man's  power  to  destroy  assumes  continental dimen-
sions."
—Dr.  Ralph  E.   Lapp,   Boston,  Oct.  8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 2S,  1961
Why  Not  Negotiate  With  China  Now,  Rather  Than  After  Much  Lost  Blood  and  Treasure?
Must  We  Repeat  in  South  Vietnam  the  Follies  of  Korea  and  Laos?
On  two  occasions  since  1950   the   U.S.   intervened  in   the
countries  bordering  on  China,  and  now  we  may  be  on   the
verge,   as   the   Maxwell   Taylor   mission  to   South  Vietnam
indicates,  of  doing  so  again.    The  first  occasion  was  in   the
Korean  war,  when,  despite  warnings  from   Peking   through
New  Delhi,  we  crossed  the  38th  parallel  and  advanced  to  the
Yalu.    The  result  was  that  our  armies  were  forced  back  to
the  38th  parallel,  the  old  border  between  North  and  South
Korea  was  restored,  and  we  were  forced  to  negotiate  peace
with  China.    The  second  occasion  began  last  Fall  when  we
upset   the   neutralist  government  of   Souvanna  Phouma,   en-
couraged   the  rightist  Phoumi  Nosavan   to  revolt,  and   gave
him  arms  and  military  advice.   The  result  was  his  defeat,  an
increase  in  aid  from  North   Vietnam  to  the  pro-Communist
Pathet  Lao,  a  great  expansion  in  the  territory  they  held,  the
recognition   by  the   Pentagon   last  January  (before   Kennedy
took   office)   that   it  was  folly  to   be  drawn   into  a   distant
mountain   jungle   war   over   Laos,   and   again—negotiations
with  China.    Souvanna  Phouma  is  back  in  power,   and   our
man  Phoumi  Nosavan  will  be  back  in  his  Cabinet,   though
in  a  less  powerful  post  than  he  might  have  had  last   Fall.
Men  Looking  for  Trouble
Now   we're  on  the  verge  of   direct  intervention  in   South
Vietnam.   On  the  plane with General  Taylor  were an  assorted
bag  of  men  looking   for  trouble.    There  was  General   Van
Fleet,  who  told  a  visiting  Filipino  delegation  to  the  Korean
front  in  January  1952,   "Korea  has  been  a  blessing.     There
had  to  be  a  Korea  either  here  or  some  place  in  the  world."
Perhaps  he  hopes  for  a  new  Korea  in  South  Vietnam.    An-
other  on  the  plane  was  Joseph  Alsop,  who  has  been  dashing
out  to  Southeast  Asia  every  year,  and  announcing  that  "this
is  it,"   as  the  opening  journalistic shot  of  a  war  that  some-
how  never  materializes.    Then  there  is  W.  W.   Rostow,  an
amateur  enthusiast  of  anti-guerrilla  tactics,  the  White   House
What  Monty  Saw  In  China
"The  Chinese  people  have  been  through  a  bad  time
during  the  past   three   years,   due  to   a  succession  of
bad  harvests,   but   the  Central  Government  in  Peking
is   firmly   in  control.    Talk   of   large-scale   famine,  of
grim   want,  of  apathy,  of   a  restless   nation,  is  non-
sense. ...  I  visited  ten  major  cities  and many  other
towns  and  villages. ... I  saw no case  of malnutrition.
...  In  50 years  China  will  be  the  most  powerful  na-
tion  in  Asia,  perhaps  in  the  world.   From  the  Western
point  of   view  it   is  the   height  of   folly   not   to  make
friends  with  this  great   nation  and  to  trade  with   it."
—Field  Marshal  Montgomery,  reporting   on  his  new
trip  to  China  in  The  Sunday   Times  (London),   Oct.  15.
man  with  a  private  line  to  Fort  Bragg,  and  Brig.  Gen.  E.  G.
Lansdale,   reputed  to  be  the  "Quiet  American"  of   Graham
Greene's  novel.    He  is  now  in  Secretary  McNamara's   office
as  the  highest  military  official  for  our  new  "jungle   fighters"
and   paramilitary   forces.     The   "cream"   of   this   outfit   was
rushed   out  to  South  Vietnam   last  May  with   great   fanfare
but  the  guerrilla   activities  they  were  supposed   to  crush  have
grown  since  they  arrived.
Diem,   the   South  Vietnamese  dictator,   has  had   six  years
and   $2  billion   in  U.S.   aid  without  being   able  to  win   his
people  or  build  a  viable  regime.     He  has   150,000   soldiers
and   a   50,000-man  constabulary  but   cannot   cope   with   less
than   15,000   guerrillas.    There  are  three  U.S.  Generals   and
close  to  1,000  U.S.  soldiers  trying  to  prop  up  Diem's  army.
To  go  in  with  U.S.  troops  is  to  repeat  the  tragic  errors  of
France  and  invite  war  with  China.    The   lessons  of   Korea
and   of   Laos  is  that  this  will  end,   after   much  loss  of   life
and  treasure,  in  another  negotiation  with  China—or  a  World
War.    Why  not  negotiate  now,  and  provide  the  stable  politi-
cal  framework  in  which  the  Diem   regime  can  be  reformed
or  a  firm  democratic  substitute  found  for   it?
Marshal  Chen  Yi,  China's  Foreign  Minister,  Asks  for  Understanding   in  U.S.
"In  Warsaw   we  are   already   having   talks   at   the  am-
bassadorial  level.    At  Geneva  we  are  talking  at  the  level
of  deputy  Foreign   Ministers.    If  it  is  suggested  that  we
talk  at   Foreign   Ministers  level  we  should  have  no  objec-
tions.  .  .  .  China's   attitude  is  that  the  U.S.   must   take
the  initiative  in  any  new  moves. ...  If  the  U.S.   wants
China  to  take  the  initiative,  that  means  we  must  submit.
We  shall  not.    For  the  last  100 years  we  have  been  sub-
mitting too often. . .  ."
Marshal   Chen   Yi   predicted   that   unless   there   was   a
settlement  in  Laos  there  was  a  risk  that  war  would  spread
In  the area.  .  .  .  China's  territorial  security  was involved
there   because   Indochina   was  not  a  peninsula   like   Korea
where  a  war  could  be  contained.    Marshal  Chen  Yi  added
that  because  of  China's  present  agricultural  and  industrial
difficulties   there  was  apprehension   in  some  quarters   that
she  "might  carry  out  some  adventure  in  south-east  Asia."
This  was  groundless.    The  only  way  China  could overcome
her  difficulties  was through  her own  production.  .  . .
Mr.  Cole  said  his  travels  throughout  the  world  had  con-
vinced  him  of  the  deep-rooted  fear  and  apprehension   about
China,  particularly  when  she  possessed  atom  bombs.   This
was  especially   true  in  the   U.S.
Marshal   Chen  Yi  said   China  realized  there  were   such
fears.    "We  acknowledge  that  atomic  bombs  are   weapons
which  are much more  effective  for massacre.  . .  ."   He said
that  China  stood for banning nuclear weapons. . . . He said
that   apprehension  in  the   U.S.  about  China  did  not  arise
from   the   question  of   her   eventual  possession   of  atomic
weapons  but  from   "distorted  reports  which  describe  China
as  very,  very  vicious,  as  advocating  war  as  a  way  of  set-
tling  disputes. ... If  the  U.S.  is  apprehensive  about  China,
it  should  put  itself  in the  place  of  China.  .  .  .
The  Chinese  people  were  afraid,   for   example,  that   the
U.S.  would  use  Formosa  as  a  base  to  disrupt  the  country's
socialist   development.    "We  have   a   constant   fear   which,
we  cannot  relieve.    U.S.  military  bases  in  Taiwan, Okinawa,
Japan,   South   Korea,   South   Vietnam   and  the  Philippines
are  all  directed  against  China.   How  can  we  escape  fear?
The  U.S.  has  nuclear  weapons.   We have  none.  .  .  ."
Referring   to  discussion   about  a  seat  for   China  in   the
UN,  Marshal  Chen  Yi  said  there  was  a  big  loophole  in
American  efforts   to  postpone  China's  seating   for   another
year  by  labelling  it   an  "important   question."    "By  their
own  deeds  they  are  showing  that  the  UN  cannot  settle  any
important  questions.  All  important  questions  will  be  vetoed
in  the  UN.    So  people  will  naturally  ask  what  is  the  use
of  the  United   Nations."
—Interview  with  Walton  A.   Cole  of  Reuters,  reprinted
here  from   The  Times   (London),   Oct.  IS.
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  23,1961
Only  A  More  Mature  View  of  An  Ever  More  Unstable World  Can Save Us
(Continued    from   Page   One)
the  spendid  game  of  war,  it  is  to  just  such  fundamental  per-
spectives  that  we  must   turn   if   we  are   to  edge   back   from
the  brink.    The  President  at  Chapel  Hill  spoke  of  the  need
for  men  and  women  "willing  to  take  the  long  view,  undis-
turbed   by  prejudices   and   slogans   of   the   moment."      Dare
he  himself  take  it?
Still  the  Same  Cold  War  Stereotypes
Yet  Mr.  Kennedy,  even  if  he  shows  a  capacity  in  private
for   this  long  view,  is  very  far   from   acting  upon   it  or  ex-
pressing  it  in  public.    Except  for  the  occasional  hints  about
the   East's  genuine  fears   for   their  security  in   the   German
question,   Mr.   Kennedy  cautiously  remains  attached   to   the
politically   safe   black-and-white view   of   the   world   propa-
gated   by  the  government's   multifarious   agencies   of   propa-
ganda   since  the   cold   war   began.     His  principal  answer  to
the  opposition   is  to  point,  as  he  did   at  his  last  press  con-
ference,   to   the   stepup   since  he   took   office   in   our  military
preparations.    He  speaks  of  defending  national  interest,  but
hesitates   to   say  that   our   overriding  national   interest   today
is  in  peace  itself.     "Co-existence"   remains  a  forbidden   word
in   his  vocabulary.    How   can   the   same  man   warn   of   uni-
versal  cataclysm,  of   the  next   ten   months   deciding   the   fate
of  mankind  for  the  next  10,000   years,  as  he  did  before  the
UN,   and  then  boast  at  press  conference  that  the  output   of
M-14  rifles  has  been  increased from  9,000  to  44,000  a  month?
What   are  those   rifles  for—World   War   IV,  when  we  come
up  from  the  shelters?    How  can  he  talk  as  he  did  at  Chapel
Hill  of  the  need  for   "national  maturity"  and   lend  himself
to  the  wickedness  of  the  campaign'  to  assure  the  American
people   that  by  digging   a  hole   in  their  backyards  they  can
hide  from  the  thermonuclear  Apocalypse?
The   secret  of   health,   for   nations  as  for   men,   is   adjust-
ment  to  change.    Our  domination  of  the  world,  which  began
with   the   fratricidal    struggle   of   the   European   powers   in
World  War  I,  is  coming  to  an  end.    Russia  will  soon  equal
us  in  power,   and  China, will   later   surpass   both.    A  nation-
alist  rising  in  the  underdeveloped   areas  has  brought   a  clam-
orous  Third  Force  into  the  stale  feud  between  capitalism  and
communism.    There  are   instabilities  everywhere   which  may
Stop  That  50-Megaton  Monster
It  seems  to  us  the  clear  duty  of  the  neutral   nations
at  the  UN  immediately   to  sponsor  an  emergency  reso-
lution   demanding    that   the   Soviet   Union   call   off   the
50-megaton  test  Khrushchev  has  announced  for  Oct.  31.
The  best   calculations    at   our  U.S. radiation   hearings
in  1957 were   that   10  megatons   was   about   the   safe
annual  limit  for  atmospheric   explosions.    The  Russians
have   already   set   off   about   10  megatons.     Actually,
as  Dr.  Ralph   Lapp  pointed  out  on  a  TV  program   last
Sunday,  Oct.  15,  the  northern   latitudes   get   about   ten
times   as   much   radiation   from   Russian   tests   in   the
Arctic  as  from  American   tests  in  the  Pacific.    He  esti-
mates  that  3  megatons  would  be  the  safe  annual  limit
for   tests   in  the   Arctic.     The   Russians    have   far   ex-
ceeded   these   limits,   and   risk   serious   harm   to   their
people   (their  press  is  still   silent   on  their  own  tests)
as   well   as   others.     In  this   connection   we   were  im-
mensely   cheered   by   the   report    from    Moscow    in   Le
Monde   (Oct.  10)   which  said  that  at  the  Soviet   Poetry
Day   celebration,    "free   lance"  poets   gathered   around
the  statue   of  the  poet  Mayakovsky  and  dared   to  read
poems  against   nuclear  explosions.
at   any   moment  dwarf   the   Berlin   crisis.     A   revolution   in
Venezuela,   the   disintegration   of   the   Congo,    race   war   in
South  Africa,  may  panic us  into  war  by  chain  reaction  if  the
American  people  are  not  prepared   to  see  beyond  vastly over-
simplified    slogans   and    an   unconscious   national   arrogance
like  that  which  swept   the  Kaiser's  Germany  to  disaster  be-
cause   of   an   assassin's   bullet   in   the   then   distant   unstable
Balkans.    We  have  a  proud  and  secure  place  in  the  world  as
the   bearer   of  a  great  tradition;   in  the   long   run   Jefferson
will  be  a  source  of  universal  inspiration  for   youth   even   in
the  world  recast  by  Lenin  and  especially  in  that  world.    But
we  are  imprisoned against  wise  adjustment by  our  own  vapid
stereotypes,  and   by  irreconcilable allied  Canutes  in  the   Far
East  and  in  West  Germany.    On  the  level  of  practical  poli-
tics,  the  President   must  have  the  courage   to   strike  out  and
develop  a  more  mature   American   public  opinion  or  be  de-
feated   by   cries   of.  appeasement   when   he   brings   home   a
peaceful   settlement   on  Berlin.    On   the  higher   level,  this  is
his  chance for  greatness,  if  war  sooner  or  later  is to  be  avoided.
Why   Not  Order   Reprints   This   Issue   in  Bulk   for   Distribution  in   Your   Church  or   Synagogue?
I.  F.
Please
Street
City  .
Enter
/np    v
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Are.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
..................................... ....Zone............State....................
10/23/61
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
................................... ......Zone............State....................
we  send  gift   announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   tha   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D, C.  An  independent
weekly   published   and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   J15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED