I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961apr17.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  The  CIA  and  Cuba
How   Our  Cloak-and-Dagger  Agency  Violates  U.S.  Law  and  Shapes U.S.  Policy,  Pages  1-4
/. K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,   NO.  14APRIL   17,   1961<°<       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
When  Is  Bob  Kennedy  Going  to  Indict  Allen  Duties?
The  government's  purpose  in  indicting  Masferret  for  vio-
lating  the  Neutrality  Act was  a  limited  one.   When  reporters
at  a  hurriedly summoned  press  conference  in  the  Justice  De-
partment  asked  a  fuller  explanation of  the  indictment  obtained
in  Miami,  they  were  referred   to  the  article  in  the  April  8
issue  of  the  Saturday  Evening  Post  on  the  anti-Castro exiles.
This  said  that  to  the  Cubans  "the  greatest  psychological error
we  have  made  has  been  in  permitting   Cubans   of  the   Mas-
ferrer  stripe  to  remain  in  Miami."    This  ex-Communist  who
became  a  Batista  Senator  had  a  private  army  of  thugs  whose
atrocities   "made   him   the   most   hated   man   in   Cuba,"   and
according  to  the  Post  article,  "does  incalculable  damage  to  the
anti-Castro  cause.   He  hires  young  Americans who  have  more
guts  than  brains,  poses  with  them  for  the  newspaper  photog-
raphers, then  ships them  over to  Cuba where  they are  promptly
captured."    The  indictment and  the  State Department's  action
two  days  earlier  in  revoking  the  asylum  too  readily  granted
him  by the  Immigration  Service  in  January,  1959,  was  to  clear
U.S.  skirts  of  association  with  Batista  elements  in  its  under-
cover  activities against  the  Castro  regime.
When  Lawlessness  Is   Official
But  the  statute  under  which  the  indictment  of  Masferrer
was  obtained   (U.S.   Code,  Title  18,  Section  960,  quoted  in
our  March  27  issue)   covers  anyone  who  "knowingly  begins
...  or  provides  or  prepares  a  means  for"  any military  expe-
dition  against  a  country  with  which  the  United   States  is  at
peace.    When   one   reporter   asked   the   Justice  Department
press  officer  whether  this  section  would  not  also  cover  Miro
Cardona's   declaration   of   war   against   the   Castro  regime  in
New  York   two  days  earlier,   there  was  no  reply.    A   more
important   question   might   have   been   asked.    If   there   are
grounds  for  indicting  Masferrer,  there  seem  to  be  far  more
grounds  for  indicting  Allen  W.  Dulles,  chief  of  the  CIA.    I
do  not  suggest  that  Mr.  Dulles  has  been  acting  without  au-
thorization   in  the  aid  the tlA   has  been   giving   the  anti-
Castro  forces.    I  merely  state  that  as  a  matter  of  law  he  has
been  the  key  figure  in  a  conspiracy  to  violate  the  Neutrality
Act  on  a  scale  far  wider,  of  course,  than  the  ludicrous  little
Masferrer-engineered   invasion   of   last   October   4  for  which
three  young  Americans  paid  with  their  lives  in  Cuba.
Two  incidents  in  Florida  late  last  summer  and   early  Fall
first  brought  to  the  attention  of  local  law  enforcement  officials
and  the  press  that  undercover   activities  in  violation  of   the
Neutrality  Act  were  being  carried  on  in  the  Miami  area under
protection   of  the  CIA.    The  first  occurred  when  some  boys
passing  a  secret  Cuban  training  camp  near  Homestead   about
30  miles  from  Miami  threw  some  firecrackers  into  it  from  a
passing  truck.   The  Cubans  came out  shooting;  they  explained
to  the  police  later  that  they  thought  they  were  being  attacked
How  Castro  Combs  Out  The  Rebels
"This  cleaning-up  campaign  by  Castro's  men  in  the
mountains  of  Las  Villas  province  has  been  an  odd mili-
tary  operation.    Every  remote  farm  in  that  vast  area
became  a  kind  of  missionary  settlement.   The  civilian
army  had  orders  not  only  to  comb  the  hills  for  revolu-
tionaries,   but   to   teach  illiterates  to  read  and  write,
and  to  indoctrinate   them  with  revolutionary  principles.
One  thousand  latrines  were  constructed  by  the  militia
for  such of  their hosts  as  had not  even an outdoor privy.
Some   detachments  built   schools   and  set   up  classes;
they  tore  down  primitive  huts  and  built  new  breeze-
block  houses   in  their  places.    They  distributed  5,000
pairs  of  shoes  to  barefoot  children. ...  In  the  town
hall,   colour-washed  in   hyacinth  blue,   a   young  army
doctor   asked  the   mayor  for  supplies  of   electric  wire
wanted  urgently  for  the  surgery  he  had  started  in  the
mountain  village  of   Polovejo  where  he  treated  sixty
civilian  patients  a  day;  Castro's  troops  were  bringing
a  national  health  service  with  them.  .  .  .
"Throughout  Cuba,  from  the  part-time  soldiers  who
dig,   build  and  stand guard  after  working  hours  to  chil-
dren  dedicated to  the  revolution,  Fidel  is  sustained  by
a  spirit  of  fanatical devotion. .  .  .  Castro may be  losing
support,  but  he  still  has  a  powerful  majority  of   the
country  behind  him."
—London  Sunday   Times  report  from  Cuba,  April  9.
by  Communists.    One  16-year  old  boy  among  the   "attackers"
was  shot  in  the  head.    The  local  community was  indignant;
the  sheriff  and  his  deputies  descended  on  the  camp;  about  a
dozen  Cubans  were  held  on  charges  of  vagrancy or  disorderly
conduct;   two   were   held   for   assault  with   deadly  weapons.
But   when   Miami   reporters   checked   with   the   Sheriff,   they
were  told  by him  that  he  had  orders  from  Washington  to  lay
off.     All  those  arrested  were  let  out  on  bond.    None  were
prosecuted.
Those   reporters   who   pursued   the   story   in   Washington
were  told  at  the  Justice  Department  that  the  FBI  was  very
unhappy  over  the  situation  in  Florida,  that  the  FBI  felt  the
CIA  had  put  it  in  an  embarrassing  position.    Justice  Depart-
ment   officials   said   they  never  knew  who   might   be  a   CIA
agent  and  they  couldn't  enforce  the  Neutrality   Act  for   fear
that  someone  they  arrested  might  take  the  stand  at  his  trial
and   testify   that  he  was  working  for   the  U.S.   government.
During  the  fight  against  Batista,  there  had  been  prosecutions
of  violators  on  both  sides  but  then  ho  agency  of  the  govern-
ment  had  taken  a  hand  in  the  struggle.     Some  reporters  be-
lieve  that  it  was then  that  the  decision  was  taken  to  establish
anti-Castro  bases  in  the   Caribbean.     "We   don't  care  what
they  do  on  foreign   soil,"  one  Justice  Department    official   is
reported   to  have  said,  "but   as  long  as  activities  are  carried
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April   17,  1961
(Continued   -from   Page One)
on  within  the  U.S. they  are  embarrassing  under  the  Neutral-
ity  Act."   The  matter  is  supposed  to  have  been  thrashed  out
in  the  top  intelligence  coordinating  body  in  the  government.
At  one  time  it  was  even  suggested   that  a  special  grand  jury
be  convened   in  Florida  and  told  frankly  of  the  danger  that
indicted  persons  might  take  the  stand  and  claim  to  be  acting
for  the  CIA.    If  the  grand  jury on  grounds  of  national  policy
had  then  refused  to  indict,  Justice  Department  would  feel  it
had  been  taken  off  the  hook.    There  was  some  talk  of  bring-
ing  Cubans  from  the  Homestead   camp  before  such  a  grand
jury,  but  the  idea  was  abandoned  as  too  risky.    One  danger
obviously  was  that  an  independent  minded  grand  jury  might
have  turned   in  a  report   criticizing  the CIA.
The  Not-So-Abandoned  Airfield
The  second  incident  which  lifted  the  curtain  on  CIA  ac-
tivities  in  the  Miami  area  occurred  one  night  early  last  Fall
when  a  Hialeah  policeman  saw  a  four  engine  plane  without
markings   land   at  the  unused  Marine   Corps   Air   Station   at
Opa-licka,  northwest  of  Miami.    Two  or  three  years  ago pro-
ceedings  had  begun  to  have  this  field  declared  surplus.    Dade
County  Port  Authority  wanted  the  field  for  civilian  aircraft
since   Miami's   International   Airport   was   already   crowded.
The   Navy   approved   disposal   of   the  field;  the   matter  was
cleared  with  the  armed  services  committees  of  Congress   and
the  General  Services  Administration  took  charge  of  the  field
preparatory  to  releasing  it  to  the  Dade  County  Port  Authority.
Then  suddenly  the  whole  project   bogged   down.
The   landing   at   Opa-licka   reopened   the   question   in   the
minds  of  local  newspapermen.    A  Naval  guard  at  Opa-licka
said  the  mystery plane was  an  Air  Force  ship  which  had  been
forced  to  make  an  emergency  landing  for  repairs.    But  when
Miami  police  checked  with  the  Strategic  Air  Command  base
at  Homestead,   neither  the  Command  nor  the  Federal  Avia-
tion  Authority could  confirm  this.   When  the  General  Services
Administration  was  asked  what  the  Navy  was  doing  guarding
an  abandoned  air  field,  GSA  replied  that  this  was  classified
information   and  they  couldn't   talk  about  it.    A  newspaper
photographer   who  tried  to  take  a  picture  of  the   supposedly
abandoned  base  was  yanked  into  the  Navy  guard  house  even
though  he  had  been  standing  on  a  public  highway.   This sup-
posedly  abandoned  base  seems  to  have  been  made  available
Games  the  Belgians  Play  in  the  Congo
"Almost  all  non-Belgian whites were shocked to  learn
the  government  [i.e. the  Moise  Tshome  government  in
Katanga]   itself   distributed  the   machetes—two  truck-
loads—the   Africans  waved   under   the   noses   of   the
Swedes  [UN  troops].    It  is  clear  the  government  pro-
moted   the  demonstrations,  knowingly  risking  a mas-
sacre.     And  it   is   also   evident  the   Belgian   advisers
here  were  strongly  in  favor  of  taking  the  risk.
" 'No   responsible   government,'   said   one   diplomat,
'would  have  goaded the  mobs  to  take  matters  in  their
own  hands.    And  if   the  Africans  are   too  politically
immature   to  realize  this,  there  is   no  excuse   for  the
complicity  of  the  Belgians.'    He  pointed  out  that  not
heavily   armed   UN   forces  but  Africans  themselves—
and  possibly  Belgians—might  some  day  suffer  the con-
sequences   of   this  distribution  of   deadly   weapons."
—Dan  Kurzman,  Scripps-Howard,    from   Elisabeth-
ville,  Katanga,   Washington  Daily  Nebus,  April   6.
for  secret  use  in  the  fight  against  Castro.
Apparently  the  CIA  first  got  into  the  business  of   setting
up  exile  forces  in  November   or  December,  1959.    At  that
time   it  feared,   not   that   Castro  would   go   Communist,   but
that  he  would  prove  unable  to  run  a  competent   government
and  that  in  the  absence  of  a  regular  army  (which  Castro  had
dissolved)   the  country  would  fall  apart.    The  CIA  envisaged
a  Cuba  broken  up  into  several  areas,  each  ruled  by  a  sort  of
"war  lord."    It  began  quietly  to  set  up  small  groups  of  exiles
who  could  be  shipped  in  and  helped  to  take  over.    In  I960,
as  the  Cuban  revolution   moved  further  left,  defections  grew
and  relations  with  the  U.S. worsened,  the  CIA's  little  army
of   retainers  began   to  expand   until  by  now   its  initials   are
referred   to  jokingly  in  exile  circles   as  the  Cuban   Invasion
Authority.    Under  Eisenhower  the  CIA  seems  to  have  oper-
ated   under   very  general   directives  which   in   effect   gave   it
ample  leeway  to  shape  policy  as  it  saw   fit.   Its  political   ideal
seemed  to  be  a  kind  of  Christian  Democratic  government  for
Cuba,  which  would   be  moderately  rightist.     The   CIA   and
Cuban-American   big   business   interests   had   a  hand   in   the
formation  of  their  favored  group,  a  right-of-center   coalition,
the   Revolutionary  Democratic   Front   under   Manuel   A.   de
Varona  in  Mexico  last  June  22.
This  group  found  a  new  rival  after  Manolo  Ray, Castro's
first  Minister  of  Public  Works,   arrived  in  the  U.S. last  Oc-
Bold  Dispatch  Lifts  Curtain  on  Role
"Leopoldville,  the  Congo—The  Church's great  weapon in
Congolese  politics  is  the  Courrier  d'Afrique.    By  African
standards  this  daily  paper,  which  sells  only  in  Leopoldville
and  its  suburbs,  is  well-written,  attractively  made  up  and
expresses   a  fairly   free   opinion.
"All  shares  in  'Couraf  as  the  Congolese call  it  are owned
by   the   Flemish  daily   Het   Volk   (The People)   which   is
wholly  owned  by  the  Workers  Christian  Movement (Moc)
which   groups   and  coordinates  nearly   all   Catholic   adult
and  youth  organizations in  Belgium.   The  MOC  gets   its
policy  from  the  church  hierarchy  so  that  the  loyalist  area's
only  daily  paper  is  directly  controlled by  the  Vatican.  .  .  .
"Editor  Gabriel  Makoso  and  three  reporters  produce  the
paper.    It  subscribes  to  only   one  news  service—the Con-
golese  national  one, whose foreign  news comes  from  France
Presse,  a  French  government  enterprise.   It  gets  free  the
service  of  Dia, the  Vatican  agency. ...
"It  is  through  Couraf  and  its  acid-penned editor  Makoso
(and  to  a  lesser  degree  through  Presence  Congolaise  [its
Played  by  Catholic  Press  in  Congo
weekly  supplement for  native  readers])  that  the combina-
tion  of  Belgian  forces  appears  to  work.
"A  completely  fictitious  story  (for instance,  that  40,000
Indian  farmers  are  to  be  imported  by  the  UN  on  Dayal's
orders   to   take  over   the   land   of   Congolese  farmers)   is
suggested   to   Makoso  who  never  seems   inclined  to  check
facts.    Makoso  blazes  into  print  with  a  vituperative  piece
calculated  to  send  the  Congolese  into  the  streets  howling
for  blood.   Demonstrations are  thus artificially  created  and
then  pointed  to  by  ministerial  advisers, politicians,  priests,
or  others  as  evidence  of  a  wave  of  strong  public opinion
on  which  the  government should  act.
"Methodically  and  unfailingly,  every  time  UN  Congolese
relations  near  normal,   Couraf   starts   a  campaign  of   lies
which   a   few   days   later   has   ministers—even   President
Joseph  Kasavubu  himself—making  wild  speeches,  wrecking
cooperation  between  the  government and  the  international
organization  which  keeps  the  country  alive."
—Russell  Howe,  in  the  Washington  Post,  April   9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April   17, 1961
tober,   claiming   to   have   organized   an   underground    from
anti-Communist   elements   of   the   July   26   movement   in   all
but   one  of  the   Cuban  provinces.    His   left-of-center   move-
ment,  the  MRP,   the  People's  Recovery  Movement,   wanted
"Fidelismo  without   Fidel"  and  was  regarded   with   hostility
by  Cuban-American  business  interests  and  with  suspicion  by
the  CIA.    Time  Magazine  reported  January  27  that  Varona's
group  "apparently  gets  virtually  all  the  U.S.  financial  aid  to
Cuba's    underground    (estimated    to   range   from   $135,000
monthly  to  as  high  as  $500,000  on  occasions),  and  Mr.   'B.'
the  CIA  agent  in  charge  reportedly  has  suggested  the  M.R.P.
[Ray]  get  help  from  the  Frente  [Varona]."    Time  said  the
f rente  had  done  little  inside  Cuba  where  the  actual  sabotage
was  the  work  of  the  M.R.P.   • Ray  argued  against  an  invasion
and  for  aid  in  building  up  forces within  Cuba  but  found  little
favor  for  this  view  inside  the  CIA,  which  preferred  to  deal
with  men  whom  it  had  itself  "cleared"  and  checked  politically.
The  CIA  Nominates   a  Sugar   King
The  Ray group  hoped  for  more  sympathetic treatment  from
the   Kennedy   Administration,  but   was   at   first  bitterly  dis-
appointed   to  find  not  only  that  little  had  changed   in  Miami
but   even  that   Batista  elements   were  still  being   allowed   to
play  a  part  in  the  CIA's  invasion  plans.     In  late  February
or  early  March,  exiles  protested  to  Washington  that  the  CIA
in  a  meeting  with  them  had  even  insisted  that  former  sup-
porters  of   Batista   be  included   in   a  new  united   opposition
organization.    The  notorious  Mr.  B  referred   to  by  Time—
Bender  is  the  name—presented  exile  leaders  with  a  slate  of
18  names  as  candidates  for  a  legislative  council  which  would
pick  the  provisional  president.    This  list,  according  to  the
exiles,   included   the   Cuban   sugar   king,   Julio  Lobo;   Carlos
Marquez   Sterling,   whom   Batista  picked   to   succeed   himself
just  before  Castro   took   power;   and   Augustino   Batista,   no
relative  of  the  dictator   but  one  of  the  wealthiest   financiers
of  Cuba  during  the  Batista  era  and  of  course  a  Batista  sup-
porter.    The  exiles  also  complained  that  Felix  Gutierrez,  once
an   officer   of   Batista's   military  intelligence,    SIM,   had   been
placed  in  charge  of  a  new  recruiting  office  for  the  r,ebel  forces
Dr.  Spock  Appeals  for  The  Haugs
It   is   a   pleasure   to   report  that  in   Cleveland  four
Western  Reserve  University   faculty   members,   includ-
ing  the  famous  Dr.  Benjamin  Spock,  America's  fore-
most   authority  on  child   development,  have   had   the
humanity   to  file  petitions   in  the  U.S.   District  Court
there  asking   for  a  reduction  in  the  prison   sentences
imposed  on  Marie Reed  HaUg  and  her  husband,  Fred.
With  five  others,  they  were  sentenced   to   18  months
in  jail  and  to  pay   $2500  fines  each  for  conspiring   to
file  false  non-Communist  affidavits   with  the   National
Labor   Relations   Board.    Since   their   conviction,   the
Taft-Hartley   oath   has   been  repealed.    They   have  a
ten  year  old  daughter  and  Dr.  Spock  said  it  would  be
harmful  to  her  to  be  left  without  her  parents  if  both
go  to  prison.    Other petitions  to  the  court  attested  the
good  character  of  the  Haugs.   The  Supreme  Court  had
refused  to  hear  their  appeal.   Whatever  the  technicali-
ties,  this  use  of  the  conspiracy  mode  of  prosecution  to
enforce  the  Taft-Hartley  oath  was  a  form  of  political
persecution,  shameful  in  a  free  society  and  we  hope
the   Court  will  be  moved  to   suspend   the   prison   sen-
tences,  at  least  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Haug.
and  that  a  CIA  man  was  in  the  office  with  him.    The  exiles
charged  that  Masferrer  was  among  those  who  had  been  regis-
tered  for  service  in  the  army  by  this  recruiting   office.
A  story  by  Karl  E.  Meyer  in  the  Washington  Post  March
22  quoted  an  unnamed  "prominent   Cuban  exile"   as  saying,
"We  can't  fight  Fidel  and  the  CIA  as  the  same  time."    Ac-
cording  to  this  account,  the  MRP  had  threatened  to  disband
altogether   "in  protest  over  rightist  attacks"  and  meddling  by
the   CIA.     The   left-of-center   exiles   complained   that   MRP
members  had  even  been  assailed  as  cryto-Communists  in  pro-
grams   beamed   to   Cuba   over   Radio   Swan,   the   anti-Castro
station  on  an  island  off  the  Honduran  coast.    As  a  result  of
these  threats  and  protests  to  the  White  House,  there  seems  to
have  been  a  shakeup  in  the  CIA.    Mr.  B has  been  transferred
to  other  work.    The  MRP  has  been  given  wider  representa-
tion  in  the  new  united  National  Revolutionary Council  which
unites  Varona's  group  and  Ray's  under  Miro  Cardona.    But
(Continued   on  Page  Pour)
Debunking  Some  Dangerously  Rose-Colored Views  of  Diem's  Regime  in  South  Vietnam
"Among  the  hot  spots  in  the  cold  war  today,  one  of  the
hottest   is   South  Vietnam.    Here  a  real   shooting   war  is
going  forward  between Communist  guerrillas  and defenders
of  freedom."
—Leo  Cherne, N.Y.  Times  Sunday   Magazine,  April   9.
"It  is  not  the  progress  of  Communism  which  is  the  pri-
mary  source  of  popular  anxiety  and  discontent,  it   is   the
progress  of  Fascism,  the  Fascism  of  M.  Diem.    For  it   is
decidedly  a  Fascist  regime  which represents  or  is supposed
to  represent,   in  South  Vietnam,  the  cause  of  liberty  and
of   the  West."
—Robert   Guillian,   Far   Eastern   expert   of   Le    Monde
(Paris),  writing  from  Saigon  in  its  issue  of  April   6.
"The  agrovilles  in  the  Mekong  delta  are  the  most  dra-
matic   and   fruitful   pioneering   rural   ventures   since   the
Israeli  cooperative  farm,  the  kibbutz.    [The  kibbutzim  are
communes,  not  cooperatives—IFS].   The  agrovilles  are  per-
haps  the  most imaginative project  undertaken by  President
Ngo  [Diem]."
—Mr.  Cherne  in  same   article.
"As  the  Chinese  countryside has  its  popular  communes,
the  Vietnamese countryside saw  the  birth  at  the beginning
of   1960  of   the  agrovilles,   where  the  regime  has  aspired
to  regroup  a  part  of  the  peasants,  hoping  to  draw them
away  from  Communist  subversion  and  submit  them  to   its
political   education.     The   experiment,   conducted  in   haste
and  in  an  often  brutal  fashion,  has  been almost everywhere
a  political  and  economic  failure."
—M.  Guillian  in  Le  Monde.
"President  Ngo  was  as  emphatic  in  his  commitment  to
democratic  ideals  during  my  recent  conversation  with  him
as  he  was  when  I  first  met  him  days  after  he  assumed
the   seemingly   impossible   burden   of   restoring   a  broken
country  in  1954.
—Mr.  Cherne.
"The  present  regime,  in  fact,  operates  to  multiply  dis-
content   and  to   give  arms  to   the  Vietminh:  the  muzzled
press,  the  abolition of  all  liberty,  the  farce  of  a  false  par-
liamentary   regime,   the   paralyzing  dictatorship   exercised
by  the  Chief  of  State  whose  signature  is  required  for  the
slightest  affair,  the  corruption.  .  .  .  One  sees  South  Viet-
nam,  by  a  strange   and  fascinating   mimicry,  borrow  part
of  its  methods  from  North  Vietnam  and  China,  and  trans-
form  itself  more  and more into  a  bad  copy  of  a Communist
totalitarian  regime."
—M.  Guillian.
5   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  17,  1961
Is A  Secret  Agency  Using Lawless Methods Compatible With A Free Society?
(Continued  from   Page   Three)
the  Declaration   issued  by  the   Council  is  as  eloquent  about
private  enterprise  as  it  is  vague  about  social  reform  (see  box
on  page  four).
A  Hungary-in-Reverse  is  Feared
For  some  months  the  counter-revolutionaries  have  been ask-
ing  public   endorsement   from   the   Kennedy  administration.
This  the  White   Paper   gave  them.    But  it   also  gave  them
something  else,  and  that  was  the  appearance  that  a  big  inva-
sion  was  ready  to  start  with  U.S.  support.    This  impression
was  strengthened  by  a  whole  series  of  leaks  to  the  press  on
invasion  plans.    It  seemed  foolish  to  telegraph  the  news  of
an  invasion  in  advance.    But  this  was  not  so  foolish  if  the
purpose  was  political,  to  force  the  Administration's hand  and
to  build  up  public  support  for  action.   With  this  purpose  in
mind,  according  to  William  V.  Shannon  in  the  New   York
Post  April  9  the  CIA  had  begun  "planting  stories  about  the
Russians  training  Castro's  pilots  to  fly  MIGS  and  about  the
grim  prospect  that  unless  the  U.S.  acts,  it  will  soon  be  too late
to  prevent  Cuba  becoming  a  Soviet  base."     In  an  effort   to
counter  this  the  White  House  began  giving  out  off-the-record
stories  of  its  own,  and  Chalmers  Roberts  in  the  Washington
Post   (April   11)   reported   on  what  is  believed  here  to  be
very  high  authority  that  the  U.S.  "has  no  intention  of  getting
involved  militarily"  and  creating  "a  Hungary  in  reverse."
The   Cuban-American  big  business  interests  which,   along
with  the  CIA,  have  been  bankrolling  the  counter  revolution,
have  always  preferred  the  idea  of  a  U.S.  backed  invasion  to
a  home-grown   revolt  against  Castro  for  fear  the  latter  could
not  be  kept  under  control  and  would  inevitably  retain  much
of  the  social  gains  made  by  him.    These  interests  do  not  be-
lieve  Castro  can  be  overthrown  from  within  and  would  wel-
come  another  U.S.  occupation  to  maintain  "order"  and  enforce
the  return  of  their  properties.     It  is  here  that  the  rift  has
begun  to  appear  in  the  past  few  days  between  them  and  the
Kennedy  administration.    Miro   Cardona,   the  new  chief   of
the  counter  revolution,  would  like  armed  U.S.  support.      "The
Administration  in  Washington,"  he  told  the  Louisville  Cour-
ier-Journal   (Jan.   27),   "should   give  not   only  support  but
collaboration"  to  the  invading  forces.     But  it  is  my  under-
Revolution  A  La  U.S.   Chamber  of   Commerce
"The  free  enterprise system  has  been destroyed. .  .  .
We  emphatically  assure  those  who  have  been  unjustly
dispossessed  that  all  of  their  assets  will  be  returned.
.  .  . We shall  encourage  investment  in  private property,
both  national  and  foreign,  and  we  shall  give complete
guarantees    to    private    enterprise    and    to   private
property."
—Declaration  of  war  against  the  Castro  regime  is-
sued  April  8  in  New   York   by  Dr.  Jose  Miro   Cardona
for   the   Cuban  Revolutionary   Council.
standing  that  when  he  was  in  Washington  a  few   days  ago
and   asked  whether   U.S.   armed   forces  would   come   to   the
rescue  if  the  invading  forces  bogged  down,  he  was  told  that
the  Cubans  were  "on  their  own."     From  what  little  I  can
learn  the  Administration also  made  the  decision  against  per-
mitting  a  large-scale  invasion  in  favor  of  small  landing  par-
ties  of  exiles.
The  President  is  said  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  disastrous
consequences  for  U.S.  prestige  and  policy  everywhere,  espe-
cially  in  Latin  America,  if  we  get  involved  in  war  with  Cuba.
But  how  apply  the  brakes to  so  huge  a  propaganda  and  mili-
tary  machine?    Against  this  background  the   indictment  of
Masferrer   may  serve  to  chill  others,  and  prevent  the  situa-
tion  from  getting  out  of  hand.    The  seizure  of  the  Calypso
by  FCC  men  off  Florida  last  week  may  be  another  indication
in  the  same direction; the  Calypso was  broadcasting to  Miami
for   the  rebels.    But  the   process  of   disentanglement  is   not
easy.    The  U.S.  has  created  a  huge   secret  bureaucracy—the
CIA  today probably  has  as  many  if  not  more  employes than
the  State  Department—which  can  pursue  policies  of  its  own.
With  a weak President, it  can make policy.   Even for  a  strong
President,  it  can  create  serious  problems.    For  a  free  society,
the  CIA's  existence  raises  questions  of  the  gravest  kind   for
the   future.     A  government  agency  with   many  millions  of
dollars  at  its  disposal,  subject  to  no  public  check,  allowed
to  habituate   itself   to  the  use  of  criminal   methods   (that  is
what  cloak-and-dagger  means),  may  easily  become  a  menace
not  only  to  peace  abroad  but  to  free  government  at   home.
Noon,  April   12.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  A  Friend  if  You  Send  Us  A  Self-Addressed    Stamped  Envelope
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    5518  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street      ........................................................................................
City      ..........................................Zone............State....................
4/17/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City       ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  Q
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly.    Entered n  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Monday!  but  published  every  Thur»-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.  S.:   J6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:   116   to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED