I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961nov27.pdf

============================================================

Special  4-Page  Issue  on  Lawless Police Practices
Latest  Civil  Rights Commission Report  on  "Justice" Lifts  Curtain  On Some  Dark  and  Painful  Areas
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,   NO.  44NOVEMBER   27,   1961
»
J
°'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Negro,  the  FBI  and  Police  Brutality
We  turn  aside  this  week  from   more  resounding  events  to
devote  this  letter  to  the  report  on  "Justice"  by  the  U.  S.  Com-
mission  on  Civil  Rights.    The   Berlin  crisis  will  be  with  us
for  many  months,  Latin  American  convulsions for  many years.
But  this  newly  released  study  of  police  brutality,  particularly
to  Negroes,   offers   an  opportunity  that  may  not   occur  again
for  a  long  time.   The  report  seeks  to  turn  attention  to  a  dark
corner  of  our  national life,  where  the  poor  and  the  defense-
less  suffer;  many  months  of  patient  investigation went  into  it;
it  had  the  unanimous approval  of  six  Commissioners,  two  of
them   white   Southerners   and   one   a  Negro;   it   offers   some
thoughtful  recommendations and  it  dares  even  to  imply  some
criticism  of  that  sacred  cow,  the  FBI.    It  is  heart-breaking  to
see  how  meagerly   it  has  been  covered  by  most  papers,   how
quickly  it  is  being  brushed  under  the  rug.    No  phrase carries
more  opprobrium   in  the  United  States  than  "police  state  prac-
tices",   none   brings   forth   more   firmly  conditioned   reflexes
from  editorial writers  and  commentators.    But  no  burst  of  in-
dignation  has  greeted  this  report  on  police  state  practices  in
our  own  country,  behind  that  other   iron  curtain  which  shuts
off  from  view  the  realities under  which  the  Negro  lives  in  the
rural  South  and  in  Northern   slums.
Keeping  Them  In  Line  By  Fear
Eleven   "typical   cases  of   police  brutality"  are  reported   by
the  Commission  (one  of  them  is  reproduced  in  a  box  on  the
next  page)  and  there  are  many  others  in  the  extensive  foot-
notes.    Plutarch  tells  us  how  the  Spartans  terrorized  and  hu-
miliated  their  helots,  weeding  out  the  spirited,  to  keep  their
slaves  in  line;  the  "uppity"  Negro  is  a  target  in  the  South  for
the   same   reasons.     The   police  brutality   is  not   "senseless."
There  is  a  cold  racial  logic  behind  it:  to  maintain  the  Negro
in  subservient  status  as  a  source  of  cheap  labor.     As   Sheriff
Z.  T.  Mathews  of  Terrell  County,  Georgia,  told  reporter  Rob-
ert  Baker  of  the  Washington  Post,  after  the  fatal  beating  of
James  Brazier,  a Negro,  by two  police  officers  in  1958,  "there's
nothing  like  fear  to  keep  niggers  in  line."    In  the  beating  to
death  of  Bobby  Hall  by  Sheriff   Claude  M.   Screws  of   Baker
County,  Georgia,  an  FBI  agent  testified  at  the  Sheriff's   trial,
"Mr.   Screws  .  .  . told  me that  he had  had  trouble  with  Bobby
Hall,  that  he  seemed  to  be a  leader  .  .  .  when  a Negro  got in
trouble  with  the  law  that  he,  Bobby  Hall,  would  advise  him."
So  in  the  case  of  Brazier,  fatally  beaten  before  his  wife  and
four  children,  it  was  said  that  he  was  "uppity."    A  year  after
the  killing   Sheriff   Mathews   told  his  widow,   "I  oughta   slap
your  damn  brains  out.    A  nigger  like  you I  feel  like  slapping
them  out.    You  niggers  set  around  here  and  look  at  television
and  go  up  North  and  come  back  and  do  to  white  folks  here
like  the  niggers  up  North  do,  but  you ain't  gonna  do  it.    I'm
New  Light  on  the  Mack  Parker  Lynching
We   want   to  call  the  attention  of   the  Negro   com-
munity   to  certain  revelations  about   the   Mack  Parker
lynching   in  the   new   Civil   Rights   Commission  report
on   "Justice."    These   have   not   been   reported  in   the
newspapers   and   indeed   the   Commission  itse.lf   passes
over  them  without  comment.    Almost  two  and  a  half
years  ago  New   York  State's  two  Senators,  Javits  and
Keating,   were   assuring   Harlem   (June   7,   1959;   the
former   over  WPIX;   the.  latter,  over  WOR)   that   the
FBI  had  pulled  out  of  the  Parker case  because  it  found
no  violation  of  Federal  law.    Now,  at  page  42  of   its
newly   released   report   on   "Justice",  the   Civil   Rights
Commission  says  (1)   "The  Department  of  Justice  has
not  closed  the  case"  and  (2)  "There  is  evidence that  the
lynching  took  place with  the  cooperation of  jail  officials
who  had  the  duty  to  protect  Parker."   Earlier  efforts
to   obtain   indictments   were   under   the   Federal    anti-
kidnapping  statute   and  failed  for   lack  of   proof   that
Parker   was   still   alive   when   taken  across   the   State
line  by  his  killers.    But  if  there  is  now  evidence  that
jail   officials   cooperated  with   the   mob,  as   indeed   was
rumored   at   the   time,   prosecution   is   possible  under
Section   242   of   the   Civil   Rights   Act.     If   a   Federal
grand  jury  will  not  indict,  as  one  in  Biloxi,  Miss.,  re-
fused  to  do  in  January,   1960,   the  Justice Department
can  bypass  the  grand  jury  and  proceed  to  trial  by  fil-
ing   an  information.     Violations  of   242  are   only  mis-
demeanors,   and  do  not   require   indictments.   A   foot-
note  on  page  111  of  the  report  says  "An  information
has  been  used  by  the  Department of  Justice  only  once
and  then  successfully."    The  FBI,  this  new  report con-
firms,  "not   only  identified  many  of  the  members  of  the
lynch  mob  but  also  secured  admissions  from   some  of
them."   This  was  one  of  those  rare  occasions  when  the
FBI  has  done  a  thorough  job  in  a  civil  rights  case.    A
Sheriff   and  two  deputies  were  successfully   prosecuted
in  Georgia  a  decade  ago  in  the  Lynch  case  (189  F2d
476)    under  similar  legal  circumstances  and  their  con-
victions  upheld  on  appeal.    We  urge  the  Negro  com-
munity  to  demand  action  against  Parker's   killers.
going  to  carry  the  South's  orders  out  like  it  oughta  be  done."
Since  the  brutality serves  the  purposes  of  the  dominant  race,
it  is  not  surprising   that   the  police   are  rarely  punished   and
often  promoted.    One  of  the  two  officers  who  beat  Brazier  to
death  was  promoted  to  Chief  of  Police  in  Dawson  City,  Geor-
gia;  no  state  or  local  action  was  ever  taken  against  the  killers
and  a Federal grand  jury  refused  to  indict.    In  the  Bobby  Hall
killing,  white  eye-witnesses  made  it  possible  to  convict   Sheriff
Screws  in  a  Federal  prosecution  but  the  Supreme   Court  re-
versed   the   decision   in  a  landmark   decision   which   must   fill
Negroes with  despair.    In  it  a  badly  split  Court  held  in  effect
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
\  7 :
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.   Stone's    Weekly,   November   27,  1961
that  police  officers  who  kill  Negroes   are  guilty   of  violating
the  Federal   Civil  Rights  Act  only  if  there  was  "specific  in-
tent"  to  deprive  the  Negro  of  his  constitutional  rights.    If
the  killing  was  done  in hate,  meanness,  spite  or just  plain  fun,
it  doesn't  count, at  least  not  in  the  Federal  courts.   In  a  new
trial   Sheriff   Screws  was  then  acquitted  and  in   1958  he  was
elected  to  the  State  Senate  of  Georgia.
Fear  of  The  Southern  Oligarchy
The  Department  of Justice  has  not  been too  energetic  in  civil
rights  cases,  for  these  bring  it  into  conflict  with  the  Southern
oligarchy   in   Congress.    Frank   Murphy,  who  cared   deeply
about  basic  rights,  established  the  first  Civil  Rights  Section
of  the  Department  in  1939  and  Congress  elevated  it  to  a  Divi-
sion  in  1957.    The  new  report  says  "The  Truman  Committee
wrote  of  the  Civil  Rights  Section  in  1947  that  'the  total  pic-
ture ... is that  of a  sincere, hard-working, but  perhaps  over-
cautious  agency.'    This  same  statement  would  fairly  charac-
terize  the  Civil  Rights  Division  today  in  its  efforts   against
unlawful   official  violence."    This  is  putting  it  gently.    Since
its  establishment,  the  report  points  out,  the  Division  has  ob-
tained  convictions or  nolo  contendere  pleas  in  only  six  police
brutality  cases,  "not"   the  report   comments,  "an   impressive
statistical  record  for  a  period  of  over  three  years."   Inquiry
by  this  writer  disclosed that  only  one  of  these  six  successful
cases  was  racial,  involving the  brutal  beating  of  an  Indian  in
Idaho.   Though  four  of  the  six  cases  were  in  the  South,  none
involved  Negroes.    As  a  matter  of  fact  no  police  officer   has
been  convicted of  brutality  to  Negroes  since two  Sheriffs,  one
from  Texas  and  the  other  from  Alabama, pleaded guilty  after
indictment  in  1955.    There  has  not  been  a  conviction  in  a  po-
lice  brutality  case,  white or  colored, for  more  than  two  years,
since  Oct.  30,  1959,  though  more  than   1300  complaints  were
received  and  52 prosecutions authorized in  the  two  and  a  half
years  from  Jan.   1958  to  July,  1960.    This  is  not  much  of  a
record.
A  major  reason  for  the  poor  record  lies  in  the  attitude  of
the  FBI  on  which  the  Department  depends  for   investigation
of  civil  rights  complaints.  One  of  the  virtues  of  this  report  is
that  it   lifts   the   curtain,  however  queasily,  on  this  untold
aspect  of  the  story.   The  first  hint  of  this  appeared  in  a  foot-
note  to  the  report  of  Truman's  Committee on  Civil Rights  in
Ex-FBI  Man  Explains
"In   1961  a  [Civil  Rights]  Commission  staff  member
interviewed  a  former  FBI  agent  who  had  served  with
that  agency  for  many  years,  but  who,  in  his  capacity
at  the  time of  the  interview,  handled certain  complaints
of  civil  rights  violations, including police  brutality.  The
Commission   staff   member's  field  notes  state:
" 'I  asked  him  why  he  did  not  refer   tide  complaints
to  the  FBI,  especially  since  he  was  formerly  a  special
agent.    Mr.  [name  withheld]  stated   that  he  does  not
turn   civil   rights  cases   over   to  the   Bureau   [Federal
Bureau  of  Investigation—FBI],  because  they  don't  like
them.    He  explained  that   it   is  very  embarrassing   to
agents  to  have  to  investigate police  department  officials
in   the   morning  and   then  enlist   their   cooperation  on
other  cases  in  the  afternoon.    He  stated  that  the  Bu-
reau   distributed  a   monthly  bulletin   to  police   depart-
ments  all  over  the  country and  makes  no  secret  therein
of  the  kind  of  information in  which  the  FBI   is   inter-
ested,   i.e.   kidnapping,  bank  robberies,   but  never  civil
rights.     He   stated   that   the   Bureau   feels   that   civil
rights  shouldn't  even  be  in  there.''
—Justice,  U.  S.  Commission  on  Civil  Rights   report,
Nov.  17, footnote  on  page  219.
1947  which  said  there  was  "evidence"  that  the  FBI  considered
civil  rights  investigations  "burdensome."  Footnotes*  on pages
213-15  of  this  new  report  give  excerpts  from  an  exchange  of
letters  between  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  Attorney  General  Tom
Clark  which  Civil  Rights  Commission  staff  members  dug  up
in  the  Harry  S.  Truman  Library  in  Independence,  Mo.   In  a
letter  dated  Sept.  24,  1946, Mr.  Hoover  complained to  the  At-
torney  General  that  "as   a  result  of  the   aggressiveness  of
pressure  groups  or  as  a  result  of  newspaper  stories"  the  FBI
was  being  forced  to  expend  "a  considerable  amount  of  man-
power  investigating  murders,  lynchings and  assaults,  particu-
* It  is  indicative of  the  FBI's  untouchability  and  the  timid-
ity  of  its  critics  that  such crucial  matters  are  relegated  to  the
obscurity  of  footnotes.
The  Tragic   Story   of  the  Negro  War
"The  shooting  of  a  Negro  in Alabama:  1960.—The  follow-
ing  are  excerpts  from   a  statement  by  Theotis  Crymes,  an
Alabama  Negro:
" 'I  am  a  veteran.    I  served  in  the  Armed  Forces  of  the
U.S.  for  six  years.   I  have  a  wife  and  three  small  children.
But  after  having  been  shot  in  the  back  by  an  officer,  I  have
been  paralyzed  for  life,  and  am  now  confined  to  a  wheel-
chair.     I   tell   my   story   in   the   hope  that   somewhere  in
America   something   can   be   done   to   help   me   and   other
victims  of   injustice.
" 'On  the  night  of  March  19,  1960,  I  was  driving  home
from  Bessemer,  Alabama, to  Montevallo, a  distance  of  about
20  miles.   I  was  driving  about  60  miles  an  hour.    A  friend
and  neighbor, James  Morrow, was  with  me. When we  passed
through   Helena,  Alabama,  I  noticed  a  car   some   distance
behind   us,  but   paid  no  attention.    After   driving  about  4
miles  further,  this  car  caught  up  with  me  and  bumped  into
my  car  from  behind,  almost  knocking  my  car  off  the  high-
way.    I   pulled  over  and  stopped.    The  other  car   stopped
right  behind me, a  red  light  flashing  oh  the  top.    It  was  not
flashing  when  it  was  following  me  and  when  it  hit  me.
" 'I  got  out  of  my  car  and  an   officer   came  up • after   me
and  would  have struck  me with his  gun,  but  I  threw  up  my
hands  to  keep  from  being  struck.    I  asked  what  this  was
all  about,  and what  I  had  done.   He  then  asked  if  I  had  any
whiskey  in  my car  and  I  told  him  no.   He  made  me  put  my
hands  up  on his  car,  and  he began  to  search  me.   And  while
I  was  standing  with  my  hands  up  on  his  car,  he  shot  me  in
the  back,  paralyzing  me  from  the  waist  down.    My  friend,
Veteran  and  the  Alabama  Police  Chief
James  Morrow,  had  gotten  out  of  my  car  on  the  same   side
where  we  were  standing.    But  a  white  man  in  plain  clothes
who   was  with  the   officer,   got   out   and  pointed  a  carbine
rifle  at  him  and  made  him  get  back  into  the  car.    I  had
fallen   on   my  back  in   the  highway.
' 'I  looked  up  at  the  officer  and  asked  him why he  shot
me  down  like  this.   He  only  said  "Shut  up,  Nigger".'
"The   officer   who  shot   Crymes  was   the   Chief   of   Police
of  Helena,  Alabama.    After   an  FBI  investigation  the  De-
partment  of  Justice  authorized  a  Civil  Rights  Act  prosecu-
tion.    A  Federal  grand  jury  in  Alabama  returned  an  indict-
ment.    At  his  trial  the  Police   Chief   claimed  that   Crymes
advanced  on  him  with  a  knife  and  that  he  shot  the  Negro
in  self-defense.    Crymes  denied  this.    The   trial   jury  ac-
quitted  the  police  chief.
"This  case  presented  an  important  related  problem.  Being
a  veteran  and  now disabled,  Crymes  applied  to  the  Veterans
Administration  for  a  pension.    His  application  was  rejected
because,  according  to  the  Montgomery  office  of  the  Veterans
Administration,   Crymes'  disability   was   the   result   of   his
'own   wilful   misconduct.'    This   action   was   taken   before
it  was  known that  a  Federal  grand  jury  had  found   sufficient
evidence  to  warrant  indictment  of  the   Police   Chief.     Sub-
sequently,  the   claim   was   reviewed;   a   field   investigation
was  ordered;  and  the  pension  awarded  because   the  'Mont-
gomery   Regional   Office  .  .  .  determined   that  Mr.  Crymes
was  innocent  of  wilful  misconduct  in  the  shooting   incident
resulting  in  his  severe  permanent  injuries'."
—Civil  Rights  Commission  Report:  Justice, pps.  22-3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   27,  1961
larly  in  the  Southern  States"  where  it  was  improbable  that
violations  of  Federal  laws  had  occurred.    Mr.  Hoover  felt  this
hurt  the  "prestige"  of  his  Bureau.    Attorney  General   Clark
replied  the  same day  (the  fusillade  of formal  letters  seems  to
reflect   frigid   relations  between   them   on  the   subject)   that
while  many  such  investigations  proved  fruitless  "If  we  do  not
investigate,  we  are  placed  in  the  position  of  having  received
the  complaint  of  a  violation  and  of  having  failed  to   satisfy
ourselves that  it  is  or  is  not  such  a  violation."   The  Commis-
sion's  investigators  failed   to  notice  that  this  exchange  oc-
curred  just  two  months  after  four  Negroes  were  lynched by  a
mob  in  Monroe,  Georgia,  and  one month  before  Attorney   Gen-
eral  Clark  announced  that  he  was  ordering  a  Federal  grand
jury  investigation.    Had  Mr.  Hoover  been  opposing  an  FBI
inquiry  into   the   Monroe,  Ga.,  lynchings?     The  new  report
leaves  the  question  unanswered.    It  says  only  (footnote   134,
page  215),  "Such discussions between  the  incumbent  Attorney
General  and  the  Director  of  the  FBI  regarding  Bureau   in-
vestigation  procedure  in  civil rights  cases  continued into  sub-
sequent  years."
Negro   Rights    Expendable
This  delicate  subject  is treated  in  the  text  of the  new report
with  the  tactful   and  apologetic  circumspection  accorded   the
lamentable  weakness  of  a  reigning  monarch.    "It   has  been
reported,  from  time  to  time,"  the   Civil  Rights   Commission
says  (at  p.   61),
that  the  Bureau  has  little  enthusiasm  for   its   task   of  in-
vestigating  complaints of  police  brutality   [here  there  is  a
footnote  which  we  reproduce  in  a  box  at  the  top  of  page
two].    If  the  contention  is  accurate,  the  fact  is,  to  some
degree,  understandable.   The  Director  has  used  the  strong-
est  language  to  stress  the  need  for  cooperation  between  the
Bureau  and  law  enforcement  officials  at  all  levels.   Appar-
ently  without  this  cooperation  the  FBI  could  not maintain
the  excellent record  it  now  enjoys  in  the  enforcement  of  a
long  list  of  Federal  criminal  statutes.    Although  the  Bu-
reau states that  it  "has  not  experienced  any  particular  diffi-
culty  or  embarrassment  in  connection  with  investigation of
police  brutality,"  there  is  evidence  that  investigations  of
such   offenses   may   jeopardize   that   working   relationship.
The  very  purpose  of   these  investigations  is   to  ascertain
whether  or  not  State  or  local   officials  have  committed  a
Federal   offense.     Even   though   the  allegations   may   later
prove  groundless, the  investigation of  them  may  place  the
FBI  in  a  delicate position.
The  plain  meaning  of this is that  the  civil  rights statutes,  like
the  Negro  they  were   supposed  to  protect,  are  relegated  to
secondary  status,  expendable items  in  the  chase  for  bank  rob-
bers  and  stolen  cars.
A  careful  reading   of  the  report   and  the  footnotes   shows
that  the  FBI's  procedure  in  handling  civil  rights  complaints
is hardly  zealous.   In  most  cases  the  FBI  field  office  forwards
the  complaint  without  preliminary  investigation  in  so  bare  a
form  that  it  "frequently   lacks  those  minimal  facts   required
to  determine  if  a  violation  occurred  or  even  if  there  is  a  need
Like  Living  Under  A  Dictatorship
" 'I  was   born  in  North  Carolina  and  raised   in   the
Hills  of  Eastern  Tennessee,   and  I  am  in  favor  of   the
Civil  Rights  statutes  but  must  live  with  this  as  silent
as  the  grave.    I  see  my  clients  beat,  abused   and  run
over  all  the  time  and  there  is  nothing  much  I  can  do,
because  when  I  try  in  Federal  Court,  I  wind  up  with
the  hell  beat  out  of  me.'
"Communication  dated  March  18,  1961,  and   received
at  the  Commission  on  April  17,  1961,  in  response   to  a
questionnaire  sent  to  attorneys  in  connection  with  the
survey  on  complaints  of  police  brutality.    The  attorney
a  white  man  added,  'Please  do  not  expose   me  on  this
thought'."
—Justice,  U.  S.  Commission   on  Civil  Rights  report,
Nov.  17,  page  69  and  footnote,   page  227.
for  a  preliminary  investigation."   The  complaint  goes  to  the
Civil  Rights  Division  and  is  assigned  to  an  attorney.    If  he
wants   a   preliminary    investigation   "this   must   be   cleared
through  his  section  chief,  a  higher  Division  official,  and  Bu-
reau  headquarters   in  Washington."    This  leads  to   "time-con-
suming"  delays;  here  another  of  those  footnotes  whispers,   "It
has  been  claimed  that  delays  have  afforded  guilty  officials  the
opportunity  to  intimidate  complainants   and  witnesses."   If  a
preliminary  investigation  is  ordered,  "At  the  outset,  the  FBI
contacts  the  head  of  the  agency  and  advises  him  of  the  com-
plaint  which has  been  received  and  that  investigation  is  being
ordered."    This  advance  notice,  the  Civil  Rights  Commission
objects,   "can   jeopardize  a  section  242  [Civil  Rights]  case.
Police  force  superiors  may  adopt  an  unduly  protective   atti-
tude  toward  their  officers.    They  may  share  the  racial  preju-
dices  of  their  subordinates   and   of  their    communities."
They  Would  Have  Notified  Faubus
So  exquisite  is  the  FBI's  empathy   for   peculiar   regional
mores  that  "In   1959  a  case  of  an  allegedly  unjustified  killing
of  a  Negro  by  a  State  policeman  was  closed  because   of  the
[Civil   Rights]   Division's   reluctance   to   have   the    Bureau
[FBI]   notify  the  Arkansas  Governor  of  a  civil rights  investi-
gation  during  the  tense  school  situation  in  Little  Rock."  Ap-
parently  the  FBI  would have  refused  to  investigate  the  case
without  first  notifying Governor  Faubus.   There  are  even,  the
report   notes,   "some   victims  of   violence  who  distrust    FBI
agents,   believing  them   to  be  in  league   with   local    officers."
But,  the  report  goes  on  to  say  stanchly,  "the  Bureau  cannot,
on  their   account,  resign   its   heavy   responsibilities   in   those
fields  of  Federal  law  enforcement  that  requires  its  close  asso-
ciation  with  local  officials."    This  sounds  as  if  it  was   revised
by  the  FBI  before  publication.
The  report  recommends  three  main   reforms,  a  change  in
Section  242 of  the  Civil  Rights  Act  to  remove  the  stumbling
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
What  Does  Getting to the  Moon F.irst Matter, When We  Behave  So  Badly  on  Earth?
"Some   white   men   in   very   recent   years   have   kicked,
beaten,  or  shot  a  Negro  to  death  and  have  not  even  been
indicted  because  of  a  jury's  prejudice or  a  legal technicality.
.  .  .  These   people  who  are  trying  to  pervert  our  Western
ideal  of   the  dignity,  the  freedom  and  the  rights  of  every
human  person  are  not  Communists.   They  are  Americans,
but  white  Americans  denying  what  they  enjoy,  and  I  trust
cherish,  to  Negro  Americans.  .  .  .
"What  can  we  expect   for  the   future,  if   one-tenth  (and
predictably   at  the  end  of. this  century,   one-fifth)   of  our
population   are   second-rate  citizens,  getting   a  second-rate
education,   living   in   second-rate   houses,   doing   all   of   the
second-rate   jobs   for   second-rate   pay,   and   often   enough
getting  second-rate  justice?  .  .  .
"Personally  I  don't  care  if   the   U.S.  gets  the  first  man
on  the  moon,  if  while  this  is  happening  on  a  crash  basis,
we  dawdle  along  here  on  our  corner  of  the  earth,  nursing
our  prejudices, flouting  our  magnificent  Constitution,  ignor-
ing  the  central  moral  problem  of  our  times,  and  appearing
hypocrites  to  all  the  world.  .  .  .
"If  these  remarks  seem   intemperate,  the  facts   support
them.  .  .  .  Unless   there  is  some  fire,  most   governmental
reports  remain   unread,  even   by   those   to   whom   they   are
addressed: in this case  the  President  and  the  Congress.  .  .  ."
—Personal  statement  filed  by  the  Rev.  Theodore  M.   Hex-
burgh,  president   of  the  University   of  Notre  Dante,  member
of   the  U.  S.  Civil  Rights   Commission,  in  its  report   on  Jus-
tice,  released  Nov.  17.
1  2
1   7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's   Weekly,    November    27,  1961
FBI  Chief   Prefers  to  Curry   Favor  With  Southerners  in  Congress
Hoover  Could  Do  More  Than  Anyone  Else  to  End  Police  Brutality
block  of  the  "specific intent"  requirement  set  up  by the  Screws
case;  another  change  to  make  it  possible  to  sue  cities and  coun-
ties  for   damages   in  police   brutality  cases;   and  grants-in-aid
to  improve  police  training.    But  the  man  who  could  do  most
in  this  situation  is  J.  Edgar  Hoover.    Three  Federal  inquiries
in  the  past  generation  have  shown  that  police  brutality is wide-
spread,  and  not  confined  to  Negroes,  Mexicans   and  Indians:
the   Wickersham   Commission   report   in   1931,    the   Truman
Committee  in  1947  and  now  this  Commission  in  1961.     In  all
these  years  Mr.  Hoover  has  been  head  of  the  FBI,  in  charge
of  police  training  programs  through  the  FBI's  National  Acad-
emy.    The  FBI,  whatever  its  faults,  has  been  trained  to  avoid
rough   stuff.     Its  example   and  Mr.   Hoover's   admonitions,  if
they  were  forthcoming,    could   do  a  great  deal   to  make   the
brutal  cop  a  shunned   exception.     But  though   the  magazines
and  newspapers  are  full  of  articles  in  which  he  holds  forth  on
juvenile  delinquency,   smutty  books,  Communism,   hitch  hikers
and  other  of  his  favorite  menaces,  we  do  not  ever  remember
his  speaking  out  on  the  dangers  of  racism  or  the  disgrace  of
police  brutality.   Commission  attorneys reviewed  the  FBI  Law
Enforcement    Bulletin    from   January   1956   through    August
1961   and   found   only  one   item  dealing  with  civil  rights,  a
piece  by  Roscoe  Drummond  flattering  to  the  FBI.
Few  Complaints  Ever  Pressed
The  Commission  might  have  found  it  useful  to  study  Mr.
Hoover's  annual  appearances  before  the  House  Appropriations
Committee.    The  hearings  during  the  last  ten  years  show  not
a  single   occasion  on  which  Mr.  Hoover  has  spoken   against
police  brutality or  for  civil rights.   On  the  contrary his  presen-
tation  has  been  calculated  to  curry  favor  with  the  Southerners
and   reactionaries  on   the   Committee.     On   one   occasion   he
warned  against  Communist  exploitation  of  the  sitdown  move-
ment;  on  another  he  assured  the  Committee  that  civil  rights
cases  are handled  only  "by mature special  agents"  (1959  hear-
ing  on  the  I960  budget).    The  figures  he  gave  on  three  occa-
"But  the  Bombers  Might  Have  Been  Police!"
"Police  connivance  in  lynching  or  in  milder  forms  of
private  violence  is  less  frequent  now  than  in  the  past.
Yet  it  lives  on  in  the  memory   of  thousands  of  Negroes
and  reinforces  the  deep  fear  that  'lightning'  may  strike
again.    For  many  Negroes  this  raises  a  question  of'pro-
found    importance:   When    it   strikes    will    the    police
help  me  or  will  they  help  the  mob?  .  .  .
"In  the   late   1950s   a   member   of   the   Commission's
Alabama   Advisory   Committee   was   awakened   in   the
middle  of  the  night   by  a  telephone  call  from   a  Negro
woman   who   lived   nearby.     'Somebody   just   threw   a
bomb   and  took  off  the  side  of   our  house.    What  shall
I  do?'   The  Committee  member   replied,   'Call  the  police
right  away  and  get  them  out  there!'   The  woman  said:
'I  can't  call  the  police.    It  might  have  been  the  police
that  threw  the  bomb.    If  they  find  out  we're  not  dead,
they  might  come  back   and  throw  another  bomb.'    The
point  is  not  that  police  officers  threw  the  bomb,  but  that
the   instinctive   reaction   of   one  American   citizen   was
that   they  might   have   had  some   connection   with   the
attack."
—Civil  Bights  Commission  Report:  Justice,  p. 43.
Copies  of  this  and  the  four  other  Commission reports
may  be  obtained  for  $5.25 from  the  Supt.  of  Documents,
Washington   25,  D.  C.   The  price  covers  the   set.
sions  showed  how  very  few  complaints  against  police   officers
result  even  in  prosecution.    Mr.  Hoover  has  made  it  clear  that
the   FBI   acts  in   civil   rights   cases  only   because   ordered   to.
Finally   it  is  a  pity  that   the   Commission,  in  recommending
prosecution   by  information  (see   box   on   page   one)    where
Federal  grand  juries  refuse  to  indict  in  Section  242  cases,  fails
to  mention   the  biggest   obstacle  to  this  approach.     It  would
require  the  FBI  to  sign   the  supporting   affidavit.     This   the
FBI  does  not  want  to  do,  for   it  would  make  it  look   like  a
crusader  on  civil  rights.    It  prefers  to  crusade  on   safer  sub-
jects  and  against  easier -menaces.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    LONG  Envelopes
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ...........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/27/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street   .;.................................,....................................................
City   .........................................JSone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Avo.,  N.  W.
Washington  IS,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Clara  Ppstajre  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   In   August   and   the   first
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  V.  S.;  $6  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED