I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961sep11.pdf

============================================================

A  Message  from  Bertrand  Russell  on  Entering  Prison  for   Opposing  Thermonuclear  War
"To  all, in  whatever   country,  who  are  still  capable  of  sane  thinking   or  hitman  feeling:
"Friends:
"The  populations  of  East  and  West,  misled  by  stubborn  governments  in  search  of  prestige  and
by  corrupt  official  experts  bent  on  retaining  their  posts,  tamely  acquiesce  in  policies  which  are   almost
certain  to  end  in  nuclear  war.    There  are  supposed  to  be  two  sides,  each  professing  to  stand  for  a
great  cause.   This  is  a  delusion.    Kennedy  and  Khrushchev,   Adenauer  and  de  Gaulle,  Macmillan  and
(Jaitskell, are  pursuing  a  common aim,  the  ending  of  human  life.   You, your  families,  your  friends  and
your  countries  are  to  be  exterminated,  by  the  common decision of a  few brutal  but  powerful  men.   To
please  these  men,  all  the  private  affections,  all  the  public  hopes,  all that has  been  achieved  in  art  and
knowledge  and  thought,  and  all  that  might  be  achieved  hereafter,  is  to  be  wiped  out  for  ever.    Our
ruined  lifeless  planet  will  continue for  countless  ages  to  circle  aimlessly   round  the  sun,  unredeemed
by  the  joys  and  loves,  the  occasional   wisdom,  and  the power to create  beauty,  which have  given  value
to  human  life.   It  is  for  seeking  to  prevent  this  that  we  are  in  prison."
THK   EARL   RUSSELL
—Message  issued  by  the  89-year  old British  philosopher    on  entering  prison  for   7  days   (sentence
reduced   from   two  months   for   health  reasons)   after   he  refused    to  "keep   the  peace"  and  call  off   his
campaign   of  non-violent   civil  disobedience  against  thermonuclear  war.   See  page  three  for  the  state-
ment  Lord  Russell   read  in  court  September  12.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IX,  NOS.  33  & 34SEPTEMBER  11-18,  1961
= 101      WASHINGTON, D.   C.
15  CENTS
Observations  To  And  From  Belgrade
Reincarnation?    At  the  opulent  reception  held  by  Marshal
Tito  for  the  Non-Aligned  in  the  Hotel  Metropol,   Belgrade's
grandest,  a  Yugoslav  diplomat  told  me  that  when  the  Rus-
sians  announced  they  would  resume  nuclear  testing  he  asked
a  Soviet colleague  whether  Moscow  would  now  erect  a  monu-
ment  to  John  Foster  Dulles.    All  the  late  Secretary of  State's
favorite  doctrines appear  in  the  Soviet  explanations:  the  need
to  negotiate  from   a  situation  of  strength,  massive retaliation
(with  ever  more  massive bombs)   and  that  same  readiness  to
go  straight  to  the  brink  which  Dulles  advocated  years  ago  in
Life   Magazine:    It  looks  like  a  plain   case  of  reincarnation.
Indeed  Khrushchev  is  living  up  to  the  idealized  image  of  our
Pentagon   tough   guys:   exploding   bombs  in   the  atmosphere
(what's  all  this  nonsense  about  fallout?),  resuming  tests  on
the  very  eve  of   the  Belgrade  conference   (who   cares  about
neutrals?),   ignoring   UN   resolutions   (it's   only   a   debating
society),  acting  unilaterally  to  take  care  of  his   interests  by
threat  of  force  in  Berlin,  and  warning  the  world  off  by  an-
nouncing  the  Biggest   Bomb  Yet.     (And   if   100   Megatons,
why  not  1,000,  or  even  a  bomb  so  big  it  does  not  need  to
be  delivered  at  all  but  can  be  detonated  comfortably  right  at
home  in  the  assurance  that  it  will  kill   everybody  this  side
of   the   moon?)     The   Pentagon   must   be   full   of    Colonels
whose  dreams of  glory  are  one  day to act just  like  Khrushchev.
Our  New  Two-Party  System
Shall  We  Go  Khrushchevite,  Too?    Judging  by  the  atmos-
phere  on  returning  home,  this  is  exactly what  our  Alsops  and
Lawrences  and  the  forces  for  which  they  speak  would  have
Khrushchev on  Khrushchev
"It   is   not   difficult    to   imagine  what  would   be   the
consequences  if  any  State  were  to  resume  nuclear  tests
in  the  existing  situation.    The  other  nuclear  Powers
would  be  compelled  to  follow  suit.
"This  would  trigger  off  again  an  unlimited  race  in
the  testing  of  nuclear  weapons  by  any  Power  and  in
any   conditions.
"The   decision by  any  of  the  three  Powers  to  resume
nuclear   weapon  tests   would   be   difficult    to  reconcile
with   the  commitments   they  have  assumed  before  all
the  members of  the  United  Nations.  .  .  .
"If   one   of   the   parties  violates   the   commitments
assumed,   the   initiators   of   this   violation  will   cover
themselves   with   shame,   they  will   be  branded  by   all
the  peoples  of   the  world."
—Khrushchev  to  the  Supreme  Soviet,  Jan.  14, 1960.
us  do.    At  the  moment,  we  seem  to  have  a  new  two-party
system,  with  the  country  divided  between  the  Khrushchevites
who  would  have  us  follow  his  example,   ignore  neutral  and
world   opinion,   and   plunge   into  a  new  nuclear  arms  race,
and  the  anti-Khrushchevites  who  think  it  would  be  wiser  to
look  about  us  calmly  before  setting  out  on  a  collision  course.
This  is  not  a  football   match,  and  the  stickers  beginning   to
blossom   forth,   "Better   dead   than   Red,"   seem   a   trifle   pre-
mature.    There's  no  hurry  about   committing  suicide.     The
commentator  who  believes  in  peace  has  a  double  task.    One
is  of  denunciation;  there  is no  reason  why  the  Russians- should
be  allowed  to  get  away  with  arms  race  nonsense  we  would
not  accept  from  their  opposite   numbers  oa.oar  side.     The
1  3  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I,  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  11-18, 1961
other  is  to  try  and  understand  what  is  really  happening.    One
must   observe  that   Khrushchev   is  getting   results  by   tough
guy  methods  that  he   could   not   achieve  since   1958   in   his
repeated  attempts  peacefully  to  get  negotiations  going;  recog-
nition  of  the  Oder-Neisse   line  is  no  longer   a  political  un-
mentionable.    The   second   is  that  we  are  being  put   in  the
humiliating  position  of  having  to  give  in  because publicly  our
government  has  had  no  real  position  except  to  stand  on  the
status  quo  in  Germany.    This  invited  a  showdown  that  must
lead  to  war  unless  one  side  or  the  other  backed  down.    But
the  German  situation  could  not  go  <on  this  way,  with  no  real
effort  at  unification  but  no  disposition  to  recognize  division.
The  way  to  avoid  the  alternatives  of  war  or  humiliation  is  to
take   the   initiative  with   broader   proposals  of   our   own   for
Germany  and  Central  Europe;  to  hold   back  on  nuclear  test-
ing  (the  President  said  only  a  few  days  ago we  had  an  ample
atomic  arsenal)   and  to  seize  leadership  by  challenging   the
Russians  at  the  UN  to  accept  world  law  and  a  world  police
as   the   corollary   of   the   total   disarmament   for   which  they
declare  themselves  still  ready.   The  trouble  is that  the  tougher
Khrushchev   gets   the   greater   the   pressure  on   Kennedy   to
reply  in  kind.    The  confrontation  is  no  longer  in  the  domain
of   politics   but   of   anthropology.     As  the   two  hordes   heat
up  for  battle,  the  leaders  dare  not  appear  too  conciliatory  for
fear  of  their  own  followers.    The  courage  Kennedy  admires
never  met  a  harder  test  than  in  the  need  to  keep  cool,  to  size
up  the  opposition  and  not  to  become  its  mere  mirror  image.
What  will  we  have  to  offer  in  competition  with  the Russians
if  we  act  exactly  like  they  do?
Slow  Motion  Talks  at  Geneva
Is   the   Play   the  Thing?     I  went   abroad   pessimistic  and
I  came  back  more  so.    I  saw  the  Bay  of  Naples  again,  and
the  Roman  Coliseum  by  moonlight,  with  the  tender  eyes  of
a  farewell  visit.    There,  as  later  in  Paris  and  London,   the
sense  of  an  impending  final  tragedy  gave  pleasure  an  extra,
elegaic,  dimension.    In  Geneva  at  the  Palais  des  Nations  I
hung   about  the   corridors  with   the   other   reporters  outside
the  closed  doors  of  Salle  VIII  where  the  Laotian  and  nuclear
conferences   alternated  in   slow   multilingual  procession;   the
former  spent  a  whole  afternoon  while  I  was there  in semantic
wrestle  over   the   various  meanings  of   the   word   control   in
The  Broken   Pledge
"The  Council  of  Ministers  of  the  Soviet  Union  have
decided  not  to  resume  nuclear  explosions  in  the  Soviet
Union  if  the  Western  powers  do not  resume  the  testing
of  atomic  and  hydrogen  weapons.     Only  in  the   event
of   the  resumption  by  them   of   the  testing   of   nuclear
weapons  will  the  Soviet  Union  be  freed  from  this  self-
imposed   undertaking."
—Announced  in  Moscow,  August  28, 1959
English,  French,  Russian  and  Chinese;  at  the  latter,  our  readi-
ness  to  make  nuclear  concessions  seemed  to  grow  with   the
feeling  that  these  could  safely  be  made  because  the  Russians
had  lost  all  interest  in  any  agreement.    I  went  off to  Belgrade
that  same  dreadful  morning  the  kiosks  carried  the  news  that
the  Russians were  resuming  nuclear  tests.    On  my  way  back,
after  the  conference  of  the  non-aligned,  I  spent  my  last  night
abroad  with  Bertrand  Russell  and  his  American-born Countess
at  their  tiny  town  house  in  London,  to  which  they  had  re-
turned   from   their  home  in  Wales,  expecting   (rightly  as  it
turned  out)  to  go to  jail  three  days later.    Despite  the  gloomy
outlook,  it  was  a  joyful  three  week  tour.
The  main  impression  I  brought  back  was  of  the  immense
vitality  of  the  human   race.    Western  Europe  has  not  only
recovered  from  the  last  war  but  bounded  ahead.    On  every
street   in   Rome,   Paris   and   London,   there   was  evidence  of
construction  and  expansion;  the  busy,  intense  and   pleasure-
loving  crowds  moved  with  a  zest  that  must  have  been   fed
by  recollection  of  the  misery  so  recently  experienced  in  occu-
pation   and   bombardment.     Given   any  political   framework
in  which  it  is possible  for  men's  labor  to  achieve  some  result,
whether  under  capitalism,  communism  or  the  mixed  societies,
and  people  set  to  work  with   determination  to  rebuild  their
lives.    It  is  only  where  they  realize  that  the   problems   are
not   soluble   in   the   existing   political   framework,  as  in   the
problem  of  war  and  peace  between  the  great  nation  states,
that  they  turn   hopeless   and  are  unwilling   even  to   look   at
the  atomic  abyss  opening  like  some  surrealistic  horror   beside
the  normal highways  of  their  lives.
Everywhere  the  headlines  proclaimed  the  imminent  possi-
bility  of  war;  the  editorials  discussed  it;  the  radio  was  full
of  it.    But  in  the  cafes  and  on  the  streets,  at  the  lake  and  sea
A  Sour  British  View  of  The  'Heroes'  Demonstrating  in  West  Berlin
"First,   a  word  of  warning.    If   something   isn't   done  at
once  to  curb  the  West  Berliners  I  don't  like  to  think  what
might  happen  before  another  two  weeks  have  passed.  Don't
misunderstand  me.    I'm  not  excusing   the  East   Berliners,
or  rather  their  Communist  masters.    It  was  they  who  pre-
cipitated  this  crisis  on  Augst   13.    But  whatever   they   do
on  their   side   of   the   barrier   is   beyond   our   control.    We
can't  do  anything  about  it.    But  we  can  on  our  side.   And
at  the  Brandenburg  Gate,  in  the  British   sector,  we  did.
"For   two  days   a   West   Berlin   mob  massed   before   the
Gate  hurled  taunts   and  insults   at   the  Communist   Yopos
(Peoples   Police).    On  the  third  day,  when  the  Vopos  re-
sorted  to  tear  gas  and water-guns,'tie  West  Berliners  were
-ordered-'back  half  a  mile"  or  so'and'have  not  been   alloWfed
to  return;    A-high-British  office*  who-  was  there   told-  me:
•'There  was .".only   one'" word   for  .it-^provocation."    And   he
added:  Tm-not   going  to  be  dragged  into   World  War  III
by  a  bunch  of  Berlin  teen-agers  if  I  can  help  it.'
"Bnt   what   do  we  find  at   the  Friedrichstrasse    crossing
point,   which   the   Americans   control?      After   supper   the
other  night  I  went  along   to  see.     The  Patton  tank   which
had   been   there   all   day  with   its   guns   trained   on  'these
Goddam  Reds'  was  lumbering  out,  to  be  relieved  by  another
tank  for  the  night   watch.    The  pavements   on  either   side
were   chock-a-block   with   onlookers    and   a   nearby   vacant
bomb  site  was  packed  with  a  howling  mob of  teenage  louts
pouring  a  stream  of  unprintable  abuse  at  the   Vopos,
"Looking  on,  I  wondered.    These  young  toughs,  had  they
been  born  a  generation   sooner—wouldn't   you  have   found
them   in   Hitler's   Brownshirt   army,  beating   up   the  : 'dirty
Jews'?      And   these   older   people   on   the   pavement-r^-why,  .-
99%  of  them  must  have  voted  for  Hitler,  and  meekly  ac-
cepted,  if  they  did, not  actively .support,.a  far.more  odious
dictatorship  than-any  the  world  has  known. Txifore  or  since.
"And  these  are-the  people-whose-
<
coitrage''_ won  Lyndon ;
Johnson's  admiration,   arid  wfiose   lives   as   h&  put  it,   'are
linked with  those  who live  in  every  town  of  Western  Europe
and  the  United  States.'    Well,  if   we're  in  the  same   boat
with  the  West  Berliners,  we  should  ask  them  not  to  rock  it.
Especially   now,   when   we're  shooting  the  rapids."
—William  F arrest,  diplomatic  correspondent,  London  Daily  Mail,  from  Berlin, in  its  issue  of  August  S8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September   11-18, 1961
fronts,  on  the  Champs   Elysee  and  in  Piccadilly  at  the  theatre
hour,  wherever  men  gathered  for  work  or  holiday,  the  spectre
was  pushed  aside  with  the  instinct   that  leads  men  to   ignore
what  they  cannot  cure.    The  contrast  between  human   energy
in  digging  itself  out  from  the  debris  of  one  war  and  its apathy
before   the  threat  of  a  new  one  carries  a  message  we  should
not   ignore.     Men   feel   powerless   because   the   obsolete   and
anarchistic   nation   state   system  has   made   us   all   prisoners;
the  rulers  and  the  ruled  alike  move  compulsively  toward  dis-
aster,  playing  out  their  roles  in  a  dramaturgy  which  must  have
an  unhappy   ending.     Without  world   state   and  world   law,
we   move   to    a.  dead   end.     The   masses   feel   this,   and   go
about  their  business  as  indifferent   to  the  shadow  of  thermo-
nuclear  incineration  as  they  are  to  the  possibility  that   they
might  be  struck  down  by  a  motorcar  or  an  incurable  disease.
Resistance  Only  In   England
Only   in   England,    largely   under   Russell's    leadership,   is
there  any popular  resistance  to  the  oncoming  tragedy,  but  one
feels  that  for  all  the  thousands  marching  on  Aldermaston  or
sitting  in  Trafalgar   Square,  the  war   machine   will  not  be
slowed  up.    As  before  World  Wars  I  and  II,  the  thunder  of
approaching   battle  is   accompanied    by  the   counterpoint  of
disarmament   talks   and   pacifist  agitation   but   there   is  little
reason   to  believe   these  activities  will  be  any  more   effective
now  than  they  were  then.   There  is  no  common  denominator
between   the   pacifist  and   the   statesman;   they   live   as  if   in
separate   worlds,   moved   by  a  different   logic;   the  ruler   of  a
nation  is  as  unable  to  be  sensible  and  Christian  as  a  bank
president  is  to  unlock  his  vaults  and  feed  the  hungry.     Lord
Russell  advocates   neutral   arbitration   of  the  Berlin   question.
He  who went  to  jail  in  World  War  I  looked  forward  almost
exuberantly   to  going  back   again   in   protest   against  World
War   III,   but  he  is  not  at.all  optimistic.     Like  h<s  old  com-
rade-in-arms  Einstein,  whose  wonderful   collected   papers   on
peace  I  read  on  the  way  over  to  Europe   (Einstein   on  Peace,
edited   by   Otto   Nathan   and   Heinz   Norden:   Simon   and
A  Noble   Warning   on  Racism
"Very   often  complementary  and  in  every   case   in-
separable    from   colonialism    and   imperialism,   racism
can  never  be  condemned  enough  wherever  it  is  found
and  whatever  form  it  takes.    In  the  past  we  have  all
been  victims  in  various degrees  of  Western  racism.   But
it   would  be  wrong  to  believe  that   this  racism  exists
only  in  respect  to  the  so-called  colored  peoples.    White
racism  has  also  been  exercised   against   other   whites.
We  can  never  forget  the  extermination  by  Hitler  Ger-
many  of  Jews, gypsies  and other  peoples.   White racism
presently  has  a  less  brutal  but  as  odious  a  form  in  the
shape   of   segregation  or   apartheid   which  we  do  not
cease   to   condemn  with  indignation.
"But   racist   thinking,  racist   attitudes,   racist   meas-
ures  are  not  exclusively  a  characteristic  of  Westerners.
.  .  .   Certainly  let  us  condemn  racism,   all   racisms,
but  at  the  same  time  extirpate  from  our  own  spirits
and  attitudes  those  traces   of   racism   from   which  we
are  not  exempt.  .  .  .  We  must  avoid  the  possibility
that  past  humiliations  translate   themselves   now  into
an  anti-white  racism  as  much  to  be  condemned  as  the
anti-black  or  anti-yellow  racism  of  the   past."
—Prince  Sihanouk  of  Cambodia  addressing  the  Bel-
grade  Conference,  Sept.  3.
Schuster),    Russell   combines   a   deeply   pessimistic   view   of
man's  prospects  with  an  inexhaustible  joy  in  life,  and  a  pixie
sense  of  humor.     At  89  England's   leading  philosopher   has
thrown  himself  into  the  fight  for  peace with  gusto  but  without
illusion.   One  feels  in  talking with  him  that  the  peacemakers,
like  the   war-makers,   move   onto   the   stage  with   the   same
actor's  joy  in  fulfilling  a  predestined   role  and  expressing   an
inner  need.    This,  terrible  though   it  may  be,  is  how  man-
kind  plays,  and  a  good   time  is  had  by  all,  whether   heroes,
villains  or  mere  spear-carriers.   A  Blake  or  a Rilke  might  find
meanings  and  mysteries  in  the  spectacle  deeper  than  the  con-
ventional   formulations   that   stoke   men's   passions   for   their
roles.     When   newspaper   headlines   begin   to   proclaim   the
Bertrand  Russell  Explains  Why  He  Resorted  to  Non-Violent  Civil  Disobedience
"If   the   Court  permits,  I   should   like   to   make  a   short
statement  as  to  the  reasons  for  my  present  course.   This  is
my   personal   statement,   but   I   hope   that   those   who  are
accused  of   the  same  so-called  crime  will  be  in  sympathy
with  what  I  have  to  say.
"It   was   only   step   by   step   and  with   great   reluctance
that  we  were  driven  to  non-violent  civil  disobedience.
"Ever   since   the   bomb   was   dropped  on   Hiroshima   on
August  6,  1945,  I  have   been   profoundly   troubled  by   the
danger   of   nuclear   war.    I   began   my  attempts   to   warn
people  by  entirely  orthodox  methods.   I  expressed  my  fears
in  a  speech  in  the  House  of  Lords  three  months  after  the
bombs  were  dropped on  Japan.   I  called  together  scientists
of  the  highest   eminence  from  all  parts  of  the  world  and
am  now  Chairman  of  their  periodic  meetings.    They  issue
wise  and  reasoned  reports  concerning  nuclear  warfare,   its
probable   disastrous   results,   and  ways   of   preventing    its
occurrence.    No  newspaper  notices  these  reports  and  they
have  no  effect  either  on  Governments  or  on  public  opinion.
The  popular  press  minimizes  and  ridicules  the  efforts  of
those  working  against  nuclear  warfare,  and  television  with
rare   exceptions   is   closed   to   us.    In   recent   months   one
television  company,  and  only  one,  offered  me  two  minutes
for   general   platitudes,  but  when  I  said  I  should   wish   to
speak  on  Berlin  the  offer  was  withdrawn.
"It  has  seemed  to  some  of  us  that,  in  a  country  supposed
to  be  a  democracy,   the  public  should  know  the   probable
consequences  of  present  Great  Power  politics  in  East  and
West.     Patriotism   and  humanity  alike  urged   us   to   seek
some  way   of  saving  our  country  and  the  world.    No  one
can  desire  the  slaughter  of  our  families,  our  friends,  our
compatriots,  and  a  majority  of  the  human  race,  in  a  con-
test  in  which  there  will  be  only  vanquished  and  no  victors.
We feel  it  a  profound and inescapable  duty  to do  everything
in  our  power  to  make  the  facts  known  and  thereby  save  at
least  a  thousand  million lives.   We  cannot  escape  this  duty
by   submitting  to  orders   which,  we   are   convinced,   would
not  be  issued  if   the  likelihood  and  the  horror  of   nuclear
war  were  more  generally  understood.  .  .  .
"Non-violent   disobedience   was   forced   upon   us   by   the
fact  that  it  was  more  fully  reported  than  any  other  meth-
od  of  making  the  facts  known,  and  that  it  caused   people
to  ask what had induced us  to  adopt  such  a  course  of  action.
We  who  are  here  accused  are  prepared  to  suffer   imprison-
ment   because   we  believe   that   this   is   the   most  effective
way  of  working  for  the  salvation  of  our  country  and  the
world.    If  you  condemn  us  you  will  be  helping  our  cause,
and  therefore  serving  humanity.
"While  life  remains  to  us,  we  will  not  cease  to  do  what
lies  in  our  power  to  avert  the  greatest   calamity  that  has
ever  threatened  mankind."
—Bertrand  Russell's  statement  to  the  court  on  being  sen-
tenced   to  prison  Sept.  lg  in  an   effort     to  prevent  a  civil
disobedience  rally  against  nuclear  war  called  for  Sept.  17.
1   3   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  September   11-18,  1961
coming   of   the   incredible,   the   mystics   begin   to   seem   the
only  sober   observers.
The  Situation  in  Yugoslavia:  In  the  11  years  since  I  was
last  in  Belgrade,  it  has  become  a  modern  West  European  city.
Little  of  the  old  Balkan  town  is  still   visible  amid  the  sky-
scrapers,  fashionable  shops  and  new  high   apartment   houses.
The  progress  is extraordinary.    The  food  in  die cheap  popular
cafeterias    and    delicatessens    is   inexpensive   and    excellent,
indeed  better  than  the  heavy  cooking  in  the  big  hotels.    The
prices  in  the  shop  windows  are  about  at West  European  levels,
though  wages  probably  run  at  half  to  a  third  those  in  West
Europe.    But  the  people  look  well  fed  and  dressed;  there  is
a  noticeable  lack   of   tension.    There  is  an   air   of    efficiency
and   cleanliness   in  the  restaurants  which   contrasts  strikingly
with   the   slack  indifference  encountered   in   Moscow   eating
places.    There  is  no  sign  of   "socialist  realism"   in  the  arts
and  few  pictures  of  Tito.    The  crowds  run  to  applaud  and
cheer  when  he  goes  by with  his  handsome  wife  in  their  huge
open  Cadillac,  the  longest  I  have  ever  seen.    I  got  a  glimpse
of  them   at  the  reception  they  gave  in  the  Hotel  Metropol;
their   regal   bearing   amid   an   admiring   court   made   the   re-
maining   hereditary  monarchs   in  West   Europe   seem   rather
dowdy  and  bourgeois  by  comparison.
A  Freer  Kind  of Communism
Eleven  years  ago  the  brightly  colored  pamphlets  the  Yugo-
slavs  were  giving  visitors  about  their  new  system  of  workers'
councils  seemed,  when  one  began  to  ask  questions  and   look
around,  rather  overblown  and  propagandistic.    But Tito  really
seems  to  have  worked  out  a  different  system of  his  own,  a kind
of  Communism  which  allows  for  a  large  measure  of  initiative
and  enterprise  through  various forms  of  cooperative businesses
and   factory  councils  where   efficiency   is   awarded   by   profit
sharing.    Overall  controls  and  planning  operate  through  the
allocation   of   investment  funds  and  the  manipulation   of   the
interest   rate,   not   so   differently   from   central  banking   tech-
niques   in  a  capitalist  economy.    There  seems   to  be  a   con-
siderable  amount  of  competition  in  a  market  economy unusual
in  a  communist  country,  and  a  great  deal  of  participation  in
decision-making  at  the  level  of  local  government  and  in  the
various  kinds  of  business  enterprise.    There  is  a  distant  re-
semblance   to  Kropotkin's   ideal   of   a   communist   anarchism
based   on   the   free   association  of   enterprises   owned   by   the
workers  themselves.     Only   10  percent  of  the  farms  are  col-
The  Truth  Withheld
Moscow  radio  tonight   broadcast  summaries   of   the
speeches  made  by  Mr.  Nehru  and  President   Nkrumah
of   Ghana  at   the  Conference  of   Non-AHgned  Nations
in  Belgrade—but  omitted  their  reference  to  the  Soviet
decision  to  resume  nuclear  tests."
—Tanjug   Bulletin,  Belgrade,  Sept.  S
lectivized.     I   suspect   that   given   some  future  relaxation   of
tension   and   of  Russian  control,  many  of  the  satellite  states
are  likely  to  adapt  Yugoslav  methods  to  their  own   societies.
Tito's  system  seems  to  provide  a  more  pragmatic,  less   doc-
trinaire,  more  humane  Communism.
Tito's  remarkable  achievement  was  made  possible  by  two
forces.     One   was   Russian  opposition,   which   solidified   the
people  behind  him,  transforming  a  minority  dictatorship  into
a  broad  based  national  movement  of   resistance.    The  other
was  American  aid.    Rarely  have  we  acted  more  wisely.    We
demonstrated  that  we  were  prepared  to  help  breakaway  Soviet
satellites  without   asking  humiliating  concessions  or  the  aban-
donment   of  socialism.    At  the  Belgrade   meeting,   amid   all
the   anti-colonial  atmosphere,   the  Tito   regime   was  a   quiet
reminder  that  there  is  also  a  Soviet  colonialism,  and  that  one
Communist   ruler   managed   to   break   away  from   its   heavy
bonds  and  survive politically,  thanks  to  far-sighted  U.S.  policy.
The  time  may  come  when  Tito's  example  and  the  help  we
gave  him  may  lead  to  further  defections.    The  greatest  prize
of  all—if  we  had  the  resolution  to  exploit  Sino-Soviet  difficul-
ties  by  revising  our  Far  Eastern  policy—would  be  to  make  it
possible  for  Peking,  too,  to  cut  its  ties  to  Moscow.
It  is  in  this  longer  perspective  that  we  ought  to  view Tito's
Belgrade  conference,  and  not  be  swept   away  by  anger   over
his  extraordinarily   weak  and  apologetic  references  to  Soviet
resumption   of  testing   in  his   speech   to   the   conference.  -I
shared  the  disgust  and  anger  of  fellow  American  correspon-
dents  with  his  feeble  response.   But  it  would  be  wise  to keep
our  eye  on  longer   range  objectives.    The   fact  that  an   anti-
colonial   conference   should   have   been   held   in   Belgrade   at
all,  that  it  should  provide  an  alternative  center  for  a gathering
of  the  newer  Asian and  African  states,  that  Tito  should   have
escaped  the  isolation  Moscow  would  like  to  impose  on  him,
and  that  he  should  challenge  its  monopoly  of  Marxism  in  the
eyes   of   the   new   States—all   this   is   an   achievement    U.S.
A  Quiet British  Rejoinder to  Some of  Our  More  Hysterical  U.S.  Commentators
"It   is   being   maintained   by   some  that   any  willingness
to  talk  on  our  side  will  only  encourage  Mr.  Khrushchev's
greed,  and  that  a  Western  initiative,  for  halting  the  arms
race  and  getting  back  on  speaking  terms  with  the  adver-
sary   is   no  better  than  a  repetition   of   the   appeasement
of   the  thirties  and  a  demonstration  of   gelatinous  nerves.
Is   this  view  wise   and  brave,  or  foolish   and  hysterical?
"If   Khrushchev   really   resembled   Hitler   and   his   aim
were   the   military   domination  of   Europe,   a   military   re-
sponse  would  be  the  only  answer.    But  although  his  tactics
are  blustery  and  unpredictable,  there  is  no  more  mystery
about   Soviet   than  there   was   about   Nazi  .strategic  aims;
and .if  one  thing-is  certain  it  is  that  they  are  not  at  all
the   same.    In  fact,  the   habit  of   treating   Khrushchev  as
a   'super  Hitler'  is  about  as  absurd  as  his  own  effort   to
pin  the  same  label   on  Western  leaders.
"Anybody  in  the  Kremlin  today  would  be  worried  by  the
German  iftuation.    The  West  Germans are  being  built  up
by   NATO  into  a   major   military  power,  while  the   East
German   zone  has  long   shown  every   sign   of  becoming  a
dangerous  mess.   With the  prospect  of  nuclear  arms for  the
Federal   Republic,   Mr.   Khrushchev  may   feel   that   after
years  of  vain  expostulation  the  time  has  now  come  when
he   must  exploit   Western  weakness   in   Berlin   to   reverse
the  trend.    Mr.  George  Kennan  foresaw   in  1957  that  this
is  what  would  happen.                                                                     .'."•"••'..;'
"The  proper  Western  retort  is  not  to  panic  arid'give  up
something  for  nothing,  but' to  seek  ways' of  "breaKing*  the
.deadlock
   v
without_  yielding   either    fhe",'freedpm,"i»'f    West
Berlin  or  access" to  the  city.',  :i"   "'  "   "','."," V"„.•""•'
"What   could  be  called. gelatinous  would  be" to  let   the
risks  and  perils  pile  up  simply  for  fear'of  seeming'afraid.
Every  sane  person  should  be  afraid  of  a  nuclear  holocaust.
It  is  a  sign,  not  of  weakness,  but  of  sanity  and  strength
to  seek  ceaselessly  for  other  ways  of  dealing  with disputes."
—"Sensible  Fears"  The  Observer  (London)  Sept.  io.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  September   11-18, 1961
patience,   magnanimity  and   diplomatic   skill   made   possible.
We  need  more  not  less  of  these  qualities  to  preserve  our  in-
fluence with mankind.
Disappointment  in  Belgrade
The  Failure  of  the  Non-Aligned:  The  Belgrade  conference
was  a  disappointment.    It  disappointed  the  Western  bloc.    It
also  disappointed  the  peace  forces.    Its  tepid  attitude toward
Soviet  resumption  of  testing  antagonized  the  West  and  dis-
illusioned  those  who  had  looked  to  Belgrade  for  firm  leader-
ship  against  war.    Men  earn  respect  by  being  willing  to  pay
a  price  for  the  things  in  which  they  believe.    The  resumption
of  testing  by  the  Soviet  Union  was  a  major  challenge.    If  the
neutrals  had  declared  the  skies  the  common  property  of  man-
kind  and  denounced  any  power  for  polluting  them,  if   they
had  broken  relations  and  refused  any  further  aid  from  Russia
as  long  as  it  was  testing  and   declared  they  would  treat  the
U.S.  the  same way  if  we  resumed,  their  action would  have  had
impact.    If  the  underdeveloped   nations  had   said  they  were
ready  to   slow   up   their   development   by  refusing  aid   from
nations  which  test  rather  than  acquiesce  weakly  in  a  move  so
dangerous  to  the  future  of  the  planet,  they  would  have  met
the  crisis  on  the  high  plane  it  called  for.
To  understand  why  they  acted  as  they  did,  one  must  start
by  noting  that  these  nations  are  neither  unaligned  nor  neutral
in  a  full  sense.    The  Swiss and  the  Swedes  are  unaligned  and
neutral.    They  not  only  do  not  belong  to  either  bloc—they
do  not  need  to  ask  either  bloc  for  favors.    But  the  nations
gathered  at  Belgrade  are  aligned   on  a  narrow  tightrope  be-
tween  the  two  blocs,  recipients  of  favors  from  both,  suitors
for  alms  in  both  Washington  and  Moscow.    Their  future  and
their   precarious   independence,   the   independence  which  en-
ables   them   to   coquette   with   both   and   give   in   to   neither,
depends  on  the  maintenance of  tension  between  the  two  great
Powers.    They  can  hardly  act  as  peacemakers  when  they  are
the  beneficiaries  of  the  cold  war.    If  Moscow  and  Washing-••
ton  ever  came  to  terms  and  settled  down  to  a  really  peaceful
co-existence,  neither  would  be  ready  to  pour  out  millions  for
the  favor  of  the  so-called   non-aligned.     It  is  true  that   the
non-aligned   would   suffer   with   the   rest   of   us  from   a  new
world  war  and  that  they  resent  the  millions  spilled  out  and
wasted  in  the  arms  race;  nonetheless,  their  bargaining  power
depends  on  the  maintenance  of  suspicion,  rivalry  and  tension
between   Moscow   and   Washington.      This   does   not   make
for  moral  force  on  their  part.
Secondly,  the  non-aligned   are  no  better  morally  than   the
"Disheartening  Stupidity"
'Tokyo—A  general  dismay,  coupled  with  a  note  of
relief   in  left  and  extreme  left  circles:  these  are  the
first  Japanese  reactions  to  the  announcement  that  the
United  States  is  also going  to resume atomic explosions.
The  day   after   the  initial  Russian  decision  one  could
measure   clearly   the   enormity   of   the   political   error
committed  by  the  Russians.    The  psychological  victory
marked  up  by  the   U.S.   was   substantial,  not  only  in
Japan  but  in  all  Asia.    For  once  the  U.S.  had  a  for-
midable  propaganda advantage.   Soviet  reputation  was
terribly  damaged.    Mr.  Kennedy  became,  in  the   eyes
of  the  masses,  the  true  defender  of  peace.
"Eh  bien!    All  this  has  collapsed.    The  Americans
have  themselves  demolished  their  magnificent  position
and  today  one  hears  their  politics  accused  of   a  dis-
heartening   stupidity.    Japanese  opinion  is   disgusted
and   its   natural   tendency  will  be   to   'put   the  whole
world   in   the   same  basket.'    Japanese  opinion  is   in-
constant   and   forgetful.    The   Japanese   will   quickly
forget  that  it  was  Russia  which  started  testing  first.
For   them,  the   U.S.   and  Russia  are  now  equal.    The
American  decision  annuls  completely the  psychological
advantage  chalked  up  by  Washington  while  it  lessens
the  harm  Moscow had  done  Russia  and  the Communist
cause  by  resuming  tests."
—Le  Monde   (Paris)   Sept.  8.
aligned.    There  was  hardly  one  head  of  a  non-aligned   state
present  in  Belgrade  who  was  not  obsessed  with  some  quarrel
of  his  own  qualitatively  no  different  than  the  Berlin  problem.
If   the  non-aligned   had   set  up  an  international   agency  and
declared  themselves  ready to  submit  all  their  own  petty  bones
of  contention—Kashmir,  West  Irian,  the  Arab-Israel  quarrel
—to  arbitration,  they  would  have  set  an  example  for  Moscow
and   Washington   in   the   Berlin   dispute.     But   these   small
powers  are  as  obdurate  as  the   big  ones   when   it  comes   to
the  issues  on  which  they  feel  their  national  interests  are  at
stake.    Indeed  in  some  ways  the  smaller  powers  are  perhaps
even  more  nationalistic  than  the  large.    Their  sense  of  na-
tionhood   is  newer  and   less   secure,  won   by  sacrifices   whose
memory  is  still   fresh,    I  did  not  hear   a  single   speaker   at
Belgrade   speak   of   the   impossible   situation   created   when
issues   as  complex   as  Berlin   (or   Kashmir,   or   Palestine,   or
Algeria)   had  to  be  left  to  settlement  by  naked  force  or  the
threat  of  force  in  a  world  where  any  serious  instability  can
set   off  a   final   themonuclear   conflict.     The   idea   of   a   law
higher   than   national   egotism   never   turned   up  at   Belgrade.
There  were  moments  when  one  felt  that  these  smaller  nations
only  wanted  the  big  powers  to  desist  from  their  quarrels  so
A  London  Newspaper  Pictures  West  Berlin  Already  Dying  on  the  Vine
"Most   West  Berliners  are  realistically  taking  stock   of
their  new  position  in  the  light  of  possible  future  changes
in   the   status   of   their  city.    Despite   an   official   promise
of  a  big  relief   plan  to  keep  the  city  running,   thousands
are  quietly  making  plans  to  get  out.
"It  is  reported  that  removal  firms  are  booked  up  for  a
year  with  transport  of  household  goods  to  West  Germany.
Already,  industry  is  feeling  the  pinch  caused  by  a  declin-
ing  labor   force.
"The  economic  Wight  has  already  set  in  along  the  sector
borders  where  thousands  of  East   Berliners  used  to  come
across  and  spend  their  morfey.    West  Berlin  cinemas where
East  Berliners  could  get  seats  at  favored  rates  in  a  scheme
financed  by  the  Bonn  Government are  closed  by  the  dozen.
"Even  in  the  Kurfurstendamm,  in  the  fashionable  center
of   West  Berlin,  a  waiter  in  a  popular  restaurant  waved
his  hand  gloomily  towards  the  empty  tables,   Two-thirds
of  our  customers  used  to  come  from  East  Berlin.'
"East  Berlin is  having  its  worries, too,  in  a  different  way.
I   was   told  at   the  theatre  of   the  world  famous  Berliner
Ensemble,   which  specializes   in   performing   the   plays   of
Berthold  Brecht:  'So  many  of  our  actors  live  in  West  Ber-
lin  that  we  have  had to  cancel  two  performances  this  week.
'The  shadow   of  things  to  come  enters  into  every   con-
versation  in  West  Berlin  these  days.    Unthinkable  even  a
few  weeks  ago,  the  belief  is  now  growing  among ordinary
people  that  the  West  will  neither  go  to  war  ovo-  n-rVn
nor  be  able  to  negotiate  more  than  a  face-saving  cohitlcn
in  exchange  for  recoenizing  East  Germany."
—Dispatch  from  Berlin in  London  Sunday   Times,  Sept.  10.
1   3  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  September   11-18, 1961
Why  We  Have  Two  Strikes  Against  Us in  the  Anti-Colonial  Bloc
they,  the  smaller  ones,  could  safely  go  on  with  their own.
A  third  reason  for  the  failure  of  any  great  moral  force  to
make  its  appearance  at  Belgrade   was  that  too  many  of   the
heads  of  state  present  turned  out, when  shorn  of  their  anti-
colonial  glamor,  to  be  pretty  much  standard model politicians.
The  cascade  of  platitudes  and  demogogy  at  times  recalfcd  an
American  political  convention.    Nehru  spoke  with distinction
and  anguish.    Prince  Sihanouk  of  Cambodia,  as  always,  had
something   to  say, and   said  it  with   humor,   objectivity   and
concern  for  the  human  race  as  a  whole.    U  Nu  of  Burma and
Mrs.  Bandaranaike of  Ceylon  were  impressive.   But Suekarno
of  Indonesia  turned  out  to  be  the  kind  of  demagogue  who
says anything which  comes into his  head  and  sounds  sufficiently
tingling.    An  anthology  of  Throttlebottomisms  could  be  gar-
nered  from  the  other   speeches.
Through  African  Eyes
There  is  another  reason  why  the  Conference  did  not  speak
out  strongly  on  Soviet  testing.    For  .the  nations  present  from
Africa,  the  struggle  against  Western   colonialism  remains  the
overriding  concern;   they  resented   it  when  Nehru   said   that
"essentially"   the  era  of  "classic  colonialism"  was  over.    This
is  true  in  a  sense  but  it  is  more  true  in  Asia  than  in  Africa.
The  greater  objectivity  and  moderation  of  the  Asian  spokes-
men   reflected  their  firm  achievement  of   independence.    But
for   the  Africans  the   names   Angola,   South   Africa,   Algeria,
Bizerte,   the   Congo,   Kenya,  and   the   Rhodesias  conjure   up
urgent  and  immediate  scenes  of  suffering,  torture, oppression,
inequality   and   humiliation.     In   vast   stretches  of   his   own
great  Continent,  the  African  is  still  not  at  home.    The  busi-
ness  of  the  atom  bomb  and  of  nuclear  testing  (except  when
done  by  a  colonial  power  like  France  on  African  soil)  seems
a  distant  white  man's  affair.    No  doubt  many  would  secretly
be   happy   to   see   the   two   great   white   races   destroy  each
other  if  only  it  could  be  done  without  harming  the  rest  of
the  world.    To  the  African  we  Americans are  linked  through
NATO  with  the  Portugese,  French  and  British  power  against
which  they  are  still  struggling;  furthermore,  for  all  our  prog-
ress,  we  hardly  set  a  model  of  race  relations  at  home.    Presi-
dent  Kennedy  sent  the   Conference  a  message  on  the   right
of  self-determination,  but  we  ourselves  deny  it  to  Cuba  and
More  Alarming  Than  the  U-2
"It  had  been   said  that   the   position   was   much   the
same   as   last   year,  but  there  had  been   a  change   for
the   worse.     Last   year   they   were   astounded   and  dis-
turbed  at  the  attitude  of  those  who  controlled  American
affairs  over  the  flight  of  the  U-2  when  everybody  was
hoping  for  a  Summit  conference.     Nothing  could  have
been  more  calculated  to  prevent  a  conference   of   that
character   than   the   provocative  action   of   that   time.
Those  who  again  controlled  the  Pentagon   had  decided
they  could  go  one  better   than  the  U-2, and  he   could
think  of  nothing  more  provocative,  more  likely  to  cause
war,    than  the  presence  of   Polaris  missile   submarines
in  Soviet  waters.    If  one  of  these  submarines  was  de-
stroyed  the  balloon  would  go  up."
—Mr.  R.   Willis,  London   Typographical   Society,   at
the  an \ual  British  Trades  Union  Congress,  as  reported,
•in  The  Times   (London)   Sept.  8.
NATO  arms  help  to  crush  it  in  Africa.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Russians  may  oppress  Hungarians
and   lock   up  East  Germans   but  that's   a  long   way  off,  and
neither   are  colored  peoples.     But  more  important  than   all
this  is  that  the  existence  of   the  Soviet  Union   as  a  rival  of
the  Western  colonial  powers gives  the  anti-colonialist a  source
of  support  without  which  he  would  easily  be  crushed.    This
new  factor  was  clearly  visible   in  Cuba;  without   Soviet oil,
Castro  would  have  been  brought  to  his  knees  months ago.
Thus   these  peoples   struggling   for  freedom  against   Western
colonialism   are  not   disposed  to  be  as  critical  of  the   Soviet
Union  as  they  would  be  of  us.    This  is  a  bitter  pill  for  us
to  swallow  but  it  is  more  important  to  understand  than  to
resent  it.    The  remedy  is  not  to  brush  away  the  neutrals  but
to  win  their  confidence   by  patience  and   forbearance.     The
biggest   single  step  we  could  take   to   rehabilitate   our   repu-
tation   would   be  to   make   peace  with   Castro.    This  would
show  we  really  mean  what  we  say  about  self-determination.
If  we  wait,  and  behave  with  a  magnanimity befitting  our  size,
strength  and  traditions,  the  newer  States  will  have  their  own
frictions  and  disillusions with  the  Soviet  bloc,  as  has  Nasser.
A  clearer  view  of   the  world  will   assert  itself,   and  we  can
gain  friends  and  overcome  stereotypes.
Sorry  But  Difficulties    Abroad  Forced  the  Merger   of  the  September   11  Issue  With  This   One—IPS.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15.  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street    .....................................
City .........................................
9/18/61
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State.......... ..........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington   D   C    An  indeDendant
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription-   $5  in  the  U  'g   •  "I'™
epemlent
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     All   Mail   rates:   $15  to   Europe;   $20  to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa!     '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED