I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961may08.pdf

============================================================

The  New Attack  on  Segregated   Schools,  P.  2
Kowalski  (D.  Conn.)  Warns Against  New  Invasions and Proposes  We Negotiate  With Castro, See Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.   17MAY   8,   1961WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
When  the  Government  Lies,  Must  The  Press  Fib?
As  a  boy  in  small  town  America,  February  22  was  made
memorable  for  us  small  fry  by  red-white-and-blue  cardboard
hatchets  and  candied  cherries,  symbols  of  the  Father  of  Our
Country,  who  could  not  tell  a  lie,  even  if  the   consequence
were a painful  loss  of  prestige  in the  paternal woodshed.   Now
it  seems the  Parson Weems  story about  the  cherry  tree  may  no
longer  be regarded as quite  the  right  upbringing for American
youth.   Now  it  seems  that  no  truly  patriotic  American, especi-
ally  if  a  newspaperman,  is  supposed  to  tell  the  truth  once  our
government  has  decided that  it  is more  advantageous  to  tell  a
lie.     This  is  the  real  meaning  of  President  Kennedy's  appeal
to  the  American Newspaper  Publishers   Association  for   self-
censorship  in  the  handling  of  the  news.    Mr.  Kennedy  put  it
more  tactfully.    He  asked  editors  to  ask  themselves  not  only
"Is  it  news?"  but  "Is  it  in  the  national  interest?"   But  the
national  interest  in  a  free   society  is  supposed   to  lie  in   the
fullest   dissemination  of  the   facts  so  that  popular  judgment
may  be  truly  informed.    It  is  the  mark  of  a  closed  or  closing
society  to  assume  that  the  rulers  decide  how  much  the  vulgar
herd  shall  be  told.
Other  Adventures In  The  Offing?
The  President's  real  meaning  was  clearer  to  those  who  at-
tended  the  two-day secret  mass  briefing,  or  official  brainwash-
ing,  for  the  press  at  the  State  Department  earlier  in  the  week.
There   Assistant  Secretary  of   State  for   Public   Affairs   Roger
Tubby  seemed  to  be  implying  that  the  Cuban  invasion  might
have  worked  if  the  press  had  not  printed  so  much  about  it  in
advance.     He   wanted   newspaper   editors   to  ask  themselves
whether  a particular  bit  of  news  might help the  enemy,  and  to
ca'l  the  State Department  and  ask if  they  were  in  doubt.    One
newspaperman  present  who  had  the  spirit  to  challenge   this
was  Richard  Dudman  of  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch who  ob-
jected  that  Tubby  assumed   the  only  thing  wrong  with  the
Cuban  invasion was  that  it  didn't  work.    Assuming,  Dudman
asked,  that  it  was  poorly  conceived  whether  it  worked  or  not,
wouldn't   it  have  been  better  to  have  had  more  information
and  more public  discussion ? This  elicited  only  a polite  mumble
from  Tubby, an old State Department  hand  now back ki  service
who  shares  its  ineradicable  view  that  Papa  Knows  Best.   This
was  not  just  post  mortem  since  Mr.  Kennedy  himself  told  the
briefing  that  there  would  be  other  situations,  not  similar  he
hoped,   when   our  preparations   would   have   to   be  made   in
secret.   (I  see no  reason  why  American  readers  should  not  be
allowed  to  know  this  since  Soviet  bloc  reporters  present  were
allowed  to  hear  it  and  since  I  was not  invited  I  am not  bound
to  secrecy.)   This  opens  the wider  prospect  of  more  adventures
in  which  we  make  war  without  declaring  it  and  brings  us  to
the  incident  over  which  officials  at  the  briefing  expressed   the
S   *                                                                                                       67
All  For  The  Best
Sen.    ELLENDER   [D.  La.]  General,  I  do  not  want
to  get  into  any  kind  of  an  argument,  but  we  are  now
in  my  opinion  reaping   a  lot   of   trouble  from   things
we  have  done  in  the  past.   Of  course,  I  voted  to  build
strong  defenses  around  the  periphery  of  Russia,  and
here  the  people  are  squealing  like  stuck  pigs  because
of   the  incident  in   Cuba  right  next   to  our  door,  but
we  have  been  doing  that  to  Russia  for  the  past   seven
or  eight  years,  have  we  not?
Gen.    [Thos.   B.]   WHITE   [Chief  of   Staff   U;S.   Air
Force]:  Yes,  sir.
Sen.  ELLENDER: We  have built  up  armies  in  Laos.
We  have  built  up  armies  in  Iran.   We  have  built  up
armies   all   around   the   periphery  of   Russia,   and   we
are  bound  to  expect  retaliation.
Sen.    CHAVEZ   [D.   New   Mex.]:  We  also  have  an
air  base  within  150  miles  in  Turkey.
Sen.   ELLENDER:  I  say,  you  can  expect retaliation,
can  you  not?
Gen.   WHITE:  I  think  all  of  these  things  we  have
done  are  in  the  best  interests  of  the  free  world  and
of  the  United  States.
—Senate  Appropriations   Committee  hearing,  April  26.
greatest  irritation.
This  incident  illustrates  the  dangers  of  hastily  sweeping  the
Cuban  affair  under  the  rug  without  a  full  investigation.*   The
incident  was  the  bombing  of  Camp  Libertad,  the  military  air-
port  near  Havana  on  April  14, just  before  the  invasion  began.
This  bombing  was  covered  not  only  by  a  false  story  but  by a
false  plane  landing  in  Miami.  The  false  story,  quickly  scented
by  several  newspapers,  was that  the  bombing  was done  by de-
fecting  Castro  airmen  stationed  on  the  field.  The  false  plane
landing  story  was  fully  told  in  Time  magazine  April  28.    It
said  that  the  operation  against  Cuba  started  "with  a  surprise
attack  by  B-26  light  bombers  on  Cuban  airports"  to  destroy
Castro's  air  force.    "To  lend   credence  to  a  cover  story  that
the  bombings were by pilots  defecting  from  Castro's air  force,"
Time  reported,  "a  few  .30  cal.  bullets  were  fired  into  an  old
Cuban  B-26.    A  pilot  took  off  in  the  crate  and  landed   it  at
Miami. ...  A  reporter  noted  that  dust  and undisturbed  grease
.covered  bomb-bay  fittings  .  .  .  guns  were  uncorked  and  un-
fired.   The  planes  that  actually  did  the  bombing  never  were
seen."    Officials   at  the  briefing  sessions   made  it   clear   they
* Eisenhower   who  managed  to   go  through  the  years   of
McCarthyism  without  ever  uttering  the  term   "witch  hunt,"
suddenly  discovers  this  term  and  advises  against  a   "witch
hunt"  into   the   Cuban   debacle.    Obviously  a   full  inquiry
would  also  open  up  the  story  of  the  Guatemalan  affair  dur-
ing  his  Administration.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  .Weekly,   May  8,  1961
A  First  Hand  Report  from  Prince  Edward  County,  Virginia,  Where  the  School  Fight  Began
Attorney  General  Kennedy's  New  Move  to  Enforce  Integrated  Education
By  Marvin  Caplah
History   never  needs  much   space  for   its   decisive   battles.
Prince  Edward  County,  Virginia,  an  area  of  only  356  square
miles,  a  farming  community  of  at  most  14,000   people,  may
be  the  crucial  battleground  in  the  fight  to  integrate  the  public
schools  of  the  South.   The  unprecedented  move  by  the  Justice
Department  last  week  to  force  the  county  to  reopen  its  public
schools  is  simply  the  latest  in  a  series  of  crises  that  have  kept
Prince  Edward  in  the  world's  eye  for  a  decade.
Prince  Edward  first  came  to  national  attention  in   April,
1951  when  450  students  at  the  "drafty  shack"  that  served  as
a  Negro  high  school  went  on  strike.   It  was  an  unbelievable
act.    There  had  never  been  a  strike of  any kind  in  the  county's
whole  200  years.    The  students  refused  to  return  to   school
until  they were  assured  the  NAACP  would  sue the  county  for
a  new  building.    The  resulting  case  was  one  of  the  four  in
which  the  Supreme  Court  handed  down  its  historic  1954  de-
cision  against  school  segregation.    Prince Edward jumped  back
on  the  nation's  front  pages  when  the  white  community  re-
sponded   to  the   court's   order   to   desegregate   its  schools  by
threatening  to  close  them.    In  June,  1959,   it  made  good  its
threat.   For  two  years  now  the  public  schools  have  been  shut,
the  school  buses  idle.
What  White  Parents  Pay
Most   of  the  county's  1,400   white  students  attend  private
classes  in  stores  and  churches  in  Farmville,  the  county  seat;
classes  arranged  by the  Prince  Edward  County  foundation  and
paid  for   by  their  parents.    That  is  not   as  self-sacrificing   as
it  sounds.    White  parents  pay  only  about  $15  per  child  out
of   their  own  pockets.    A   system  of   state  and   local   tuition
grants  meets  the  rest  of  the  Foundation's  fees—$240  for  each
elementary  school  child  and  $265  for  each  high  school  student.
Of  the  nearly  1,700  Negro  students,  573  go  to  16  impro-
vised  centers  led  by  24  mothers  who  are  at  least  high   school
graduates.    Another  400  are  migrant  students,  leaving   their
homes  for  a  week,  a  month,  a  year  at  a  time,  to  go  to  school
elsewhere.    A  lucky  handful  of  these,  47  senior  high  school
students,  have  been  placed  by  the  American  Friends  Service
Committee  in  integrated schools  in  10  communities  in  6  states
and   are  almost  certainly  getting  better  educations  than  they
would  have  received  in  the  county.    The  remaining  700  or
800  are  lost  to  education.    Negroes  have  been  urged  by  the
white  to  accept  the  state  grants  and  set  up  their  own  private
school  system.    But  the  Negroes  fear  that  would  undermine
their  suit.    And  the  older  ones  remember  what  wretched  pri-
vate  schools  they  had   before  they  gained   segregated   public
schools  earlier  this  century.
In  an  attempt to  get  the  Negro  children  back  to  school,  the
Justice  Department,   for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of   the
school  cases,  is  seeking  to  intervene  in  the  NAACP's  suit  as a
full  plaintiff.    Heretofore  Justice  has  appeared  in  the  suits  as
a  friend  of  the  court.    If  the  Federal  District  .Court,  which
will  hear  argument  May  8,  lets  the  government   intervene  it
would  open  the  way for  the  Department  to  play  a  much  more
active  role  in  carrying  out  the  Supreme  Court's  ruling.    The
Department  is  also  prepared  to  argue  that  setting  up  private
"White   and   Negro   for   many   years   had   enjoyed
friendly   cooperative  relations.    They   worked   well  to-
gether ...  in  forging  a  better  life  for  both."
—The  Prince  Edward  County,  Va.,  Story,  published
by  the  segregationist  Farmville   Herald.
"No   Negro   child   in  this   community   has   access   to
a  movie,  or  a  gymnasium  or  a  bowling  alley  or  a  skat-
ing   rink   or  a  civil   service  job  or  any  clerical   job."
—The  Prince  Edward  County  Story, by Helen Baker,
American  Friends  Service  Committee  worker.
schools  with  public  funds  is  a  device  to  evade  desegregation.
To  the  white  South's  consternation,  the  government  has  also
asked  the  court to prohibit  all state  support  of  public education
till  the  county  schools  are  reopened  on  a  desegregated  basis.
Drastic  as  the  government's  action  seems,  it  was  inevitable.
The   conflict   in  Prince  Edward  is  now  deadlocked.    While
relations  between  whites  and  Negroes  are  superficially  friendly,
there  is  simply  no  discussion,  a  Negro  woman  says,  of   "the
heavy,  heavy  problem  on  our  hearts  here."    Two  attempts  to
improve  relations  were  quickly  squashed.    When  the  schools
dosed  in   1959,   a  group  of  40  businessmen,  alarmed  by  the
situation  and  the  loss  of  trade  when  74  Negro  teachers  and
their   families   moved   out   of   the   community,  held   a   secret
"meeting  in  the  woods"  to  discuss  what  could  be  done.    But
their   names  were  noted   by  spies;  abusive  phone   calls   and
threats  of  boycott  ended  their  attempt.    Later,  a  small  group
of  whites and  Negroes,  led  by a  faculty  member  at  Longwood
College  for  teachers  in  Farmville,   began  meeting  in  private
homes.    But  a  threat  of  expulsion  to  the  leader  stopped  these
sessions.   Small,  surreptitious  meetings  still  go  on.
However,  anyone  hoping  for  a  peaceful  solution  can  draw
encouragement  from  the  restraint  with  which  both  sides  have
been  acting.    There  has  never  been  any  real  violence  in  the
10  year  struggle.     It  is  a  docile  population,  an. observer  says,
led   by  a  few  strong-minded  men.    The   schoolless  children
have  tended  to  sink  into  apathy  not  delinquency.    Moderates
of  both  races  have  remarked  that  the  two  extreme  racists  in
the  white  leadership  have  been  pushed  into  the   background.
If  the  schools  open  in  September,  or  whenever  they  open,
no  one  in  Farmville  expects  the  violence  of  Little  Rock  and
New  Orleans.    But  Farmville  can  breed  its  own  nightmares.
The  few  white  parents  who  favor  integration  fear  that  when
the  schools  reopen  the  only  ones  attending  will  be  their  chil-
dren,  the  Negroes  and  "poor  whites."    They  are  afraid  that
the  Foundation,  which  is  now  building  a  $300,000  academy
for  the  upper  grades,  may  become  the  prestige  school  and  the
public  schools,  as  one  put  it,  "will  be  for   leftovers."
Both  sides  have  no  illusions.     They   expect  the  next  five
years,  at  least,  to  be  painful.    But  these  years  may  be  instruc-
tive  to  the  rest  of  the  South  which  has  been  watching  Prince
Edward  and  cheering  it  without  rushing  to  follow  its  example.
With  a  Southerner's  sure  sense  of  history,  it  may  be  that  even
those  segregationists  who  hail  the  county  as  "a  small  voice,
crying  boldly"  have  noted  a  simple  fact.    Only  thirty  miles
west  of  Farmville  is  Appomatox  Court  House,  the  surrender
.ground  of  the  War  Between  the  States.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   May  8, 1961
Recalls  Kennedy's  Own  Words  in  Inaugural,  "Let   Us  Never  Fear  to  Negotiate"
Kowalski  of Conn. First  Congressman  to Propose We  Negotiate With  Castro
The   only   professional   former   Regular   Army   officer     in
the   House,   Representative    Frank    Kowalski,    Democrat,
Connecticut,   is   also  the   first   Congressman   to  raise   his
voice  not   only   against   further   intervention  in   Cuba  but
for  negotiations  with  Castro.    His  "extension  of   remarks"
on  Cuba  in  the  House  April   27  was  generally  ignored  by
the  press.   We  give  excerpts  from  it   here.
"The   counterrevolution failed   because  it  had   no  roots  in
Cuba.    It  failed  because  it  had  no  appeal  for  the  farmer  and
the  worker.   It  failed  because  it  appealed  mainly  to  the  dis-
possessed.  .  .  .
"Whatever  Americans  may  think  of  Castro,  he  is  nonethe-
less  a  living  example  of  a  successful   revolutionist. ...  He
won  in  Cuba,  because  he  fanned  the  burning  desire  of   the
peons  for  land  and  reform.    He  has  maintained  himself  in
Cuba,  because he  fans  the  great  pride  of  Cubans  in  Cuba  and
in  themselves.  .  .  .
We  Also  Failed  to  Starve  Castro  Out
"So  much  for   the  invasion  which  failed.    We   have   also
failed  to  starve  Castro  into  submission.    The  sugar  embargo
has  failed  and  so have our  efforts  to  isolate  Cuba.   As  a  matter
of   fact,  these  efforts  have  aroused  sympathies  for  the  Cubans
throughout  South  America  and  in  many  parts  of  the  world.
The  great  Yankee  democracy is pictured  as a  heartless  colossus
crushing  the  little  people  of  Cuba.  .  . .
"It   has  been  reported  that  during  the  last  invasion,  great
masses  of  people  were  ready  and  armed  to  fight  off  the  in-
vaders.     Accordingly,  if   any   invasion   of   Cuba   by   'Social
Democrats'  [see  box  below]  or  any  other  group  is  to  succeed,
it  seems  quite  certain  that  U.  S.  military  forces  will  have  to
play  a  determining role.    The  invaders must  be  strong  enough
militarily  to  destroy sizable  Castro  forces  on  the  beaches  and
in  the  interior.  This will  require the  recruitment, training  and
equipping  of  major  rebel  invasion units.    It  will  require naval
and  air  support.    Bluntly,  it  will  require  at  least  limited  mili-
tary  intervention  by  the  U.  S.    This  course  will  lead  us  to
horrible  bloodshed  and slaughter.  .  . .
"Is  there  an  alternative, or  must  we  take  the  calculated  risk
of  supporting  with  military power  a  counter-revolution  against
Cuba ?  There must be an alternative.  . . .
"How   will  we  know  whether   some  acceptable   rapproch-
ment  is  not  possible  unless  we  try?    I  am  inclined  to  think
that  this  government  might  well  exercise  a  little  restraint  and
patience  with   Cuba.    Governments   and   regimes   have   come
and  gone  in  Central  and  South  America.   We  have  weathered
If  Talks  on  Laos,  Why  Not  on  Cuba?
"If   negotiations,   cease   fire,   and  a   neutralist   gov-
ernment   are   preferable   to   war   in   Laos;  if   endless
meetings  and  discussions  on  control  of  nuclear weapons
are  more  acceptable  than  unilateral  nuclear  testing;
if  insults and abuse can  be  endured  better in  the  United
Nations  than  a  clash  in  the  Congo,  then  surely  reason
dictates,  even  though  emotions  cry  otherwise,  that  the
United  States  is  big  enough  to  talk  to  Cuba."
—Rep.  Kowalski  (D.  Conn.)  in  the  House  April  27.
storms  before.   Castro  may  be  an  unpleasant  irritant,  a  thorn
in  our  side,  but  I  certainly  hope  no  one  believes  Cuba  is  a
serious  challenge  to  the  United  States.    I  suggest  that:
"First,  The   American  people   can  accept  the   land   reform
program  and  the  social  and  economic  changes  inaugurated  in
Cuba,  providing  the  government  of  Cuba  will  undertake  to
reimburse  the  original  owners  for  their  properties.
"Second,  The  American  people  are  ready  to  consider  the
reestablishment  of  normal  trade  and  commercial  relations  be-
tween  our  two  countries,  and  even  to  offer   economic  aid  to
Cuba  providing the  government  of  Cuba  will  cease  its  build-up
of  Soviet  armaments  in  this  hemisphere.
"Third,  The  American people  are  eager  to  extend  the  help-
ing  hand  of  a  good  neighbor  and  accept  the  Cuban  people  as
full  partners  in  the  inter-American  society  of  nations,  provid-
ing  the  government  of  Cuba  will  stop  -to  serve  as  a  base  for
Soviet  penetration  into  this  hemisphere.
"I  am  suggesting  that  there  is  room  for  exploration  of  al-
ternative   accommodations.     I   am  not   suggesting,    however,
that  this  Nation  can  stand  quietly  by while  Cuba  builds  up  a
base  hostile  to  our  way  of  life  and  dedicated  to  Soviet  Union
penetration  into  this  hemisphere.    What  I  am  saying  is  that
we  should  give  Castro  one  more  opportunity  to  demonstrate
to  the  world  and  to  the  United  States  that  he  is  not  a  tool  of
Soviet  subversion.    If  he  is willing  to  do  this,  he  has  nothing
to  fear  from  the U.  S. .  . .
"Mr.  Speaker,  before  we  support  another  invasion  of  Cuba,
an  invasion  which  ultimately  can  be  expected  to  involve  our
own  military forces,  let  us  pause  to  ponder  the  words  of  our
great  President:
" 'So  let  us  begin  anew—remembering  on  both  sides  that
civility  is  not  a  sign  of  weakness  and  sincerity  is  always  sub-
ject  to  proof.    Let  us  never  negotiate  out  of  fear.    But  let  us
never  fear  to negotiate.' "
Thinks  Outlook  Dubious  for  A  Counter  Revolutionary Invasion  by  "Social  Democrats"
".  .  .  other  invasions  of  Cuba  are  coming.   Who  will  be
the  invaders?    Reliable  sources  have  suggested  that  they
will  be  Social  Democrats.    Each  one  of   us  will  have  his
own  views  of  what  is  a  Social  Democrat, but  it  is  reason-
able  to  assume  that  the  U.S.  will  support  Cuban  patriots
with  liberal  views.    The  invaders  can  be  expected  to  sup-
port   progressive   social   and  land  reform   programs.    The
fundamental   political  objective  of   the  invaders  will  be  to
reestablish  freedom  and  democracy  in  Cuba.
"The  last  invasion  failed   to  communicate its  objectives
to  the  people  of   Cuba;  and  future  invasions,  I  regret  to
observe,  will  have the  same  difficulties.    For  in  a  popularity
contest  in   Cuba,  Castro  is  the  hero.    It  was  Castro  who
seized  the  sugar  lands.   It  was  Castro who seized  the banks
and  factories  from  foreigners  and  wealthy  Cubans.   It  was
Castro   who  seized  the   imagination  of   the   Cuban  people.
"As   Americans,  we   hope  patriots  will   find   a   way   to
ignite  the  spark  of  desire  for  freedom  which  could  destroy
Castro,  but  I  doubt  that  the  peons  and  the  bearded  ones
can  really  understand  the  noble intricacies  of  a  social dem-
ocratic   counter   revolution.    I   must   reluctantly  conclude
that  in  any  future  invasion  as  in  the  past  one,  they  will
remain  loyal  to  Castro.
—Rep.  Kowalski   (D.  Conn.)  in   the  House  April   27.
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   May  8, 1961
Is  It  In  the  National  Interest  To  Let  the  Government  Deceive  the  People?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
think  the  newspapers  should  not  have  exposed  the  falsity  of
this  story.   This  goes  beyond  the  standard  of  asking   editors
to  ask  themselves  whether  a  story  is  in  the  national   interest.
It  asks  them  to  print  as  true  whatever  the  government  may
think  expedient   in  a  given  situation.   It  says  that  when  the
government lies, the  press  should  fib.  This is how Izvestia  and
Pravda  are  edited,  but  it  hardly  fits  Jefferson's  idea  of  a  free
press.
We  Made  A  Pearl  Harbor  Attack  on  Cuba
This  incident calls  for  further  examination.  A  B-26  raid  on
Cuba's  military  airports  is  quite  an  operation.    We  still  don't
know  the  full  story.   Was  it  by  Cuban  or  American  pilots?
Where  did  the  planes  come  from  and  where  did  they  land
afterwards ?   Were  U.  S.  facilities  used ?   These  are  the  ques-
tions  Cuba  could  raise if  the  incident  were  ever brought  before
an  international  tribunal.   We  are  constantly   talking  of  the
"infamy"  of  Pearl  Harbor,  but  here  we  had  a  hand  in  a  sneak
attack  without  a  declaration  of  war  on  a  neighboring  country
with  which we  are  still legally  at  peace.  The  false  story which
covered   it  could  not  hide  the  truth  from   the   Cubans;  they
knew  they had  not  been  bombed  by planes  from  their  own air-
fields.  The  false  story—and  this  is  the  important  point—was
designed   to  hide  the  truth  from  the  American  press  and  the
American  public.   It  was  not  the  enemy,  it  was  our  own  peo-
ple,  this story  was  intended  to  deceive.  Was  it  in  the  national
interest  to  let  the  government  deceive  the  American  people?
Is  it  ever  in  the  national  interest  to  let  a  government  deceive,
not  a  supposed  enemy,  but  ourselves ?  Down  this  road  lies  the
garrison  state.
What   if  this  sneak  attack  were  on  a  larger  country  than
Cuba,  with  a  big  air  force  of  its  own,  able  in  return  to  bomb
our  cities ?   What  if  Castro  had  retaliated  by bombing  Miami ?
To  raise these  questions  is  to  see  the  danger  of  allowing  such
agencies  as  CIA  secretly to  make  war  on  its  own,  in  violation
of  law,  treaty  and  Constitution.    To  raise  them  is  to  see  how
indispensable  it  is to preserve some  check  upon  them  through  a
free  press.    To  raise them  is also  to  see on  how  dangerous  and
slippery  a  road  we  are  proceeding.
Nothing   Ever   Surprises   Our  Generals
Sen.   CHAVEZ  [D.  New  Mex.]:  General  White,  you
are  satisfied   that  they  did  succeed  in  putting  a  man
in  orbit?
Gen.   [Thos.   B.]   WHITE   [Chief   of   Staff   U.S. Air
Force]:  I  am  completely  satisfied  that  a  man  orbited
the  earth;  yes, sir.   I  am  convinced   that   failure  on
the  part  of  this  nation  to  recognize  the  warning,  the
challenge,   and  now   the   possible   threat   contained   in
this  achievement  and  in  the  Soviet's  well-rounded  and
growing  aerospace  force,  could  prove  disastrous.
Sen.   ELLENDER  [D.  La.]:  Have  we  not  been  doing
that   to   the   fullest   extent   for   the   past   four   or  five
years?
Gen.   WHITE:  I  believe  we  have  as   a  nation  been
rather  imaginative  about  the  future  of  space.
Sen.   ELLENDER:  Are  you  not  surprised  and dis-
appointed   to  note   the   great   progress   that   has   been
made  by  the  Russians?
Gen.  WHITE:  I  am  not  surprised.
Sen.   ELLENDER:  You  are  not  surprised?
Gen.  WHITE:  No, sir.
Sen.   ELLENDER:  You  expected  it?
Gen.  WHITE:  We  anticipated  it.
Sen.   ELLENDER:  In  other  words  that  communism
would  beat  capitalism?
Gen.  WHITE:  I  thought  you  asked  me  was  I sur-
prised   at   the   achievements   of   the   Soviets   in   space,
and  I  am  not  surprised  at  that.
—Senate  Appropriations   Committee  hearing,  April  26.
The  danger  will  not  be  met  by  the  currently  fashionable
proposal  to  take  cloak-and-dagger  activities  out  of   the   CIA
and  put  them  in  the  Pentagon.    The  danger  will  be  worse  if
authorization  for  secret  war-making  shenanigans  is  put  in  the
hands  of  the  military, with  the  far  greater  resources  at te dis-
posal;  in  any  case  the  Cuban  affair  was  a  joint  enterprise  of
CIA  and  the  armed  forces.    The  danger  lies  in  these   "para-
military"   activities  themselves  on  which   Mr.   Kennedy sud-
denly  sets  so  much  store.  To  embark  on  secret  warlike  activi-
ties  against  peoples  whose  governments   we  dislike,  is  to  set
out  on  a  course  destructive  of  free  government   and  of  peace.
Noon,  May  3
If   you  Send  LONG  Stamped  Envelopes   We'll   Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  Your   Friends
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or
Zone
...........State....................
*4
we  send  gift    announcement?
(lyr.)
....State
Yes
5/8/61
additional:
D
NO n
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered u  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  187*.   Poet-dated  Monday*  but  publUhed  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  1618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  In  the  U.  8.:  (6  in
Canada:   (10   elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:   »15  to   Europe:    $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED