I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jan09.pdf

============================================================

The  Swastika  Flies For  Walter,  P.  3
No  Passion  for  Disarmament   Discernible  in  Kennedy's  Disarmament  Appointments,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
•VOL.  IX,  NO. 1
JANUARY  9,   1961
<
01
     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Never  Were  So  Many  Warnings  Ignored  As  In   Laos
Washington,  fan.  4
At  a gay reception given  the  new  Congress  by the  Women's
National  Press  Club  here  last  night,  Chairman  Fulbright  of
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  seems  to  have  been
alone  in  taking  a  gloomy  view of  the  Laotian  crisis.*    "There
may  be  a  war  over  Laos,"  he  told  an  impromptu  interviewer.
"Once  again  they  may  call  us  the  War  Party.    Nobody   will
remember  that we Democrats  inherited  this situation  in  Asia."
Few  also  will  remember  that  the  Democrats  and  the  country
had  ample  warning  that  something  was  rotten  in  the  state  of
Laos.    In  1958  the  waste  and  corruption  which  marked  our
aid  program  in  Laos  were  disclosed  by  the  General  Account-
ing   Office,   publicized   in   the   Wall   Street  Journal,   Reader's
Digest  and  The  Reporter.   The  Porter  Hardy  subcommittee  of
House  Government  Operations   took  984  pages  of  testimony
on  the  Laotian  situation  in  the  spring  of  1959  and   published
a  scathing  report  on  the  role  played  by  our  Ambassador   J.
Graham  Parsons in  presiding complacently from  1955  to  1957
over  what  was  probably  the   most  corrupt   of   all   U.S.   aid
operations  and  in  railroading  out  of  the  country  for  "nervous
disorder"   a   General   Accounting   Office   auditor   who   came
"close  to  discovering  the  truth"  about  the  net  of  bribery  and
prejury  which  shielded  the  waste  of  millions  there.    Yet  Ful-
bright's   Senate   committee   remained   as   unaware   of    these
revelations  in  the  press  and  on  the  other  side  of  the   Capitol
as if  they  were  occurring  on  the  moon.    His  Foreign  Relations
committee  unanimously endorsed  Parsons  May  26,  1959,   for
promotion   to   Assistant  Secretary  of   State   for   Far   Eastern
Affairs,  a  post  in  which  he  was  confirmed by  the  Senate  with-
out  discussion,  and  from  which  he  has  been  helping   in  the
current  crisis  to  shape  the  policies  pushing  us  toward   direct
military  intervention   in  Laos.
Dulles  Didn't  Want  Peace  in  Indochina
The   Laotion  crisis  illustrates   how   ineffectively    democratic
controls  operate  in  overseeing  our  vast  American  empire  and
in  checking  on  the  activities  of  the  obscure  satraps  who  deter-
mine  its  destinies.    It  is  one  episode  in  a  story  of  costly  mis-
judgment.     We  spent  12,300,000,000  helping   France  carry
on  the  eight  years  of  futile  jungle  war  by  which  she  tried  to
keep  control  of  Indochina.    When  the  French  early  in   1954
began  to  talk  wearily  of  peace,  Dulles,  Nixon  and  Radford
tried  unsuccessfully  to  drum  up  support  for  U.S.  military  in-
* Other  somewhat  less  than  clairvoyant  comments collected
by  Do'othv  McCardle  for  the  Washington  Post:  Adlai  Steven-
son's 'Laos  is  serious  because the  loss of  any  territory  to  the
Communists  is  serious"  and  Hubert Humphrey's "Laos  is  no
more  important   than  any  other  place  in  the  world.   Latin
America  has  top  priority.    As  a  matter of  fact  we  have  to
deal  with  totalitarianism  all  across  the  board."
1  *
The  Genius  Whom  Kennedy   Is  Keeping  On
"There  is  reason  to  be  encouraged  by  the  trend  of
events  in  Laos.  .  .  .  The  open  identification  of  Laos
with   the  free   world,   the   elimination  of   Communists
from  the  Cabinet.  .  .  .  The  recent  grant  of  extraor-
dinary   powers  to   the   Phoui   Sananikone Government
for  a  period of  one  year  should  permit  the  sound  non-
Communist  elements  in  the  country  to  address  their
efforts  without  distraction  to  the  consolidation and  im-
provement  of  the  situation  .  .  .  without  any  risk  of
being  overthrown by  a  parliamentary  combination of
Communists,  neutralists  and  disgruntled  conservatives.
Then   on  January  25,   1959,  he   [Sananikone]  formed
an  even  stronger  government based  on  the   Lao  Horn
Lao  party,  the  army  and  a  younger  generation anti-
Communist   group   known  as   the   Committee   for   the
Defense   of   National   Interests.     The   Government   is
pledged   to  constitutional   reform  which   among  other
things  should  serve  to  diminish  the  political  possibil-
ities  of  the  Communists."
—Hon.  C.  Douglas  Dillon,  then  Under  Secretary  of
State,  testifying   March  11,  1959,  at  the  start  of   the
Porter  Hardy/   subcommittee  fHouse   Government  Oper-
ations)   inquiry   into   I7.S.   Aid   Operations   in   Laos.
Mr.  Dillon  has  been  named  Secretary   of  the   Treasury
by   Kennedy.
volvement.   When  peace  was  made  in  Geneva  in  July  of  that
year,  Dulles  refused  to  attend  the  conference  and  set  himself
to  undercut  the  settlement.   We  used  our  influence to  prevent
the   agreed   upon   elections   which  were   supposed   to   unite
Vietnam  in  July   1956   and  we  have  done  all  in  our  power
—and  spent  another  $300,000,000—to  block   fulfillment  of
the  Geneva  agreement  in  Laos.    This  called  for  reunification
of  the  country  by  free  elections  under  the  supervision  of  a
tripartite  international   Commission  (Canada,   India  and   Pol-
and)   and  the  establishment  of  a  coalition  government  with
the   Pathet   Lao  who  controlled   two  northeastern   provinces
adjoining  Communist  China  and  North  Vietnam.    The  neu-
tralist  Prince  Souvanna  Phouma  succeeded over  our  objections
in  holding  these  elections  in  1958  but  within a  few  days  after
the  International  Commission   left  Laos,  there  was  a  rightist
coup,  the  leaders  of  the  Pathet  -Lao  were  thrown  in  jail,  an
army  dictatorship  was  brought  into  power  and  the  civil  war
resumed.     In   1959   the   Laotian  rightists  did   their  best   to
bring  about  U.S.  military  involvement  with  stories  about   in-
vasions  from  China  and  North  Vietnam which  proved  untrue.
In  August  of  last  year  a  paratroop  battalion  under   Captain
Kong  Le  overthrew  the  rightists,  restored  Souvanna  Phouma
to   power   and   promised   investigation   of   the   military   and
civilian  leaders  "who  have  been  making  huge  profits"  out  of
the  instability  in  Laos.
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   January   9,  J96i
Pugwash  Conferees   Say  Russians  Serious  About   Discussing  Total  Disarming  But —
No  Passion  for  Disarmament  Discernible  in  Kennedy's  Appointments
Except   for   Prof.   Thomas   C.   Schelling  of   Harvard    (re-
ported   annoyed   because  the  Russians  did  not   take   his   idea
of  a  stabilized  nuclear   deterrent   seriously),  members   of   the
U.S.  delegation  to  the  recent  Pugwash  conference   in  Moscow
came  back  generally  encouraged  and  feeling  that  the   Russians
meant  their  talk  of  total  disarmament.    Among  the  encourag-
ing  items  reported  by  scientist-participants  was  the   friendly
reception   by  their   Russian   opposite   numbers   of   some   new
ideas  in  the  field  of  inspection  and  control.    One  was  the
ingenious  scheme  by  Prof.  Sohn  of  Harvard  for  dividing  the
U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  into  six  parts  -(see  box  below)  so  that
disarmament   and   control  could   proceed   in   six  "territorial"
stages.    Another  was  the  equally  ingenious   idea  by  Prof.  Jay
Orear  of  Cornell  for  writing   into  a  disarmament   treaty   the
right   of  the  international  inspectorate   to  interrogate   citizens
under  oath  as  to  possible  violations,  to  punish  violators  and
to  reward   informers.    This  would   involve  the   development
of  supra-national  loyalties,  and  fits  into  the  same  pattern   of
a  new  Russian  readiness  to  discuss  the  idea  of  a  world   police
force  as part  of  total  disarmament.    The  Americans  were  told
the  Russians would  accept  any  form  of  inspection  and  control
if  we  accepted  total  disarmament.
Whether  real   pr  bluff,   this  requires   effective  exploration;
Utopian  as  total  disarmament  may  seem  at  the  moment,  there
is  general   agreement   among   scientists  that  partial    disarma-
ment   is  not   practicable   in   the   nuclear   age.     Unfortunately,
among  the  men  so  far  appointed   by  Kennedy   to  deal  with
disarmament  problems,  there  is  no  sign  of  the  imagination  or
even  interest  required.    Most  of  them  are  cold  warriors  with
an  emotional  stake  in  the  arms  race.    John  J.  McCloy,   named
as  Kennedy's  top  official  for  disarmament,  is  a  man  of  great
ability  but  his  chief   claim  to  fame  is  the  role  he  played  in
resuscitating  and  rearming  Adenauer  Germany  as  U.S.  High
Commissioner  there  after  the  war.    Paul  H.  Nitze  who  will
have  special  disarmament  responsibilities  as  Assistant  Secretary
The  Magic  of   Number
Two  sessions  of  the  recent  meeting  of  the  American
Association   for   the   Advancement  of   Science   in   New
York  were  devoted  to  the  war  danger.     On  the  27th,
Sir  C.  P.  Snow  spoke  for  the  better  conscience  of   the
scientific   community,  warning  that   the   discovery   of
fission  had  turned  physicists  into  soldiers  without  uni-
form;  he  dwelt  on  the  dangers  of  soldierly  obedience
as  evidenced  by  the  horrors  of  the  Nazi  era.    He  went
on   to   contrast   the   "finite   risk"  in   any   nuclear   test
agreement   with   the   "certainty    of   disaster"   if    the
nuclear  arms  race  is  allowed  to  continue.
On  the  28th,  three  social  scientists   and  a  physicist
appeared  together  on  a   panel  dealing   with  disarma-
ment.     The   economist,   Kenneth   E.   Boulding   of   the
University  of  Michigan  said,  "Every  increase  in  arms
expenditures  increases  our  danger  rather  than  our  se-
curity."    Dr.  Jerome  Frank,  the   Johns  Hopkins  psy-
chiatrist,   declared   mutual   deterrence   was  "actually
increasing,   rather  than  decreasing,  the  threat  to  our
biological   survival."    Charles  Osgood,   (he  University
of   Illinois  political  scientist,  spoke  of   the   moral  de-
generation  accompanying  the  arms  race.
These   thoughtful  discussions   got   into   few   of   (he
papers.    What  made  the  big  headlines  were  some  fig-
ures  in  the  talk  by  the  physicist  Ralph  Lapp.   Dr. Lapp
said  we  now  had  1,000  H-bombs  each  capable  of   de-
stroying  a  city  and  enough  stuff   in  stockpile  to  make
50,000  more.    Dr.  Lapp  used  the   figures   to  show  the
madhouse  pace  at  which  we  were  piling  up  weapons
of   mass   destruction.     But   the   headlines  made  them
sound   reassuring.    How   to   get    disarmament  when
we  instinctively   think  that  the  more  H-bombs  we  have  .
the  safer  we  are?
of  Defense  for  International   Affairs  advocates  "arms  control"
not  disarmament.    The  new  Air  Force  Secretary,   Eugene  M.
Zuckert,   is  a  former  AEC  Commissioner   who  shares  Thomas
1
E.  Murray's  hostility  to  a  nuclear  test  agreement.    Roswell  L;
Gilpatric  the  new  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  also  advocates
a  stepped  up  arms  race.
                                                                                   ;
An  Ingenious  New  Scheme  for  Resolving
"By  the  end  of  the  1950's,  the  Western  powers  and  the
Soviet   Union  had  come   quite  close  together  on  the   goal
of   general   and  complete  disarmament  and   on   the   main
components  of  a  disarmament  plan.    They  continue,  how-
ever,   to  disagree   on  the  steps   which  should  be  taken   at
various   stages.   .  .  .  The  Western   proposals   stress  the
need   for   strict  controls   from  the   very   beginning,  while
the  Soviet  proposals  envisage  limited  controls  only  at  the
end  of  the disarmament process.  ...  .The  Soviet  bloc  objects
that   in  these   [Western]   plans   the   amount  of   control   is
not  proportionate to  the  amount  of  disarmament  and  that,
especially  in  the  beginning,  90  percent  of   controls  would
accompany  10  percent  of  disarmament.  .  .   v  It  seems  de-
sirable,  therefore,  to  devise  a  compromise  solution  in  which
disarmament  and controls  would  go  hand  in  hand.  .  .  .
"Let  us  assume  that  there  is  an  agreement  to  introduce
certain  disarmament  and  control  measures  over  a   six-year
period.  .  .  .  In  such  a  case,  the  territories  of  the  U.S.  and
the   Soviet   Union  would  be  divided  into  six  regions,  and
each  year  the  disarmament  measures  and the  accompanying
controls  would  be  introduced  to  one  of  these  regions.   At
the   end  of   the  six   years  all   the  territory   of   both  sides
would  be  covered. ...
"Before  the  beginning  of  the  first  year  of  arms  control,
East-West   Differences   on   Disarmament
each   country   would  submit   to   the   international   control
agency  two  lists,  prepared   in  accordance   with  an   agreed
questionnaire.    One  list  would  contain  an  enumeration  of
all  the  military installations  and  production  facilities, which
would  be  subject  to  continuous supervision  by  fixed  inspec-
tion  teams.    A  second  list  would  contain,  in  the  first  place,
the  national  totals  of  various  armaments, installations  and
production  facilities   which  are   subject   to   arms   controls,
and  in  the  second   place,   regional   totals   of   these   objects
of  control. ;  i  .
"The   choice   of   the   region   to  be   made   subject   to   dis-
armament   and  control   in   a  particular  year   would  be   in
the   hands  of   the   international   agency   (or   of   the   other
party  to  the  disarmament  treaty)  and  the  nation concerned
would  not  know  in  advance  which  region  would  be  chosen.
Consequently,   if   a   nation'should   put  a  disproportionate
number  of   armaments   in  a   particular   region  and   should
not  report  all  of  them  in  the  preliminary  list,  its  deception
would  be  easily  discovered  if  that  region  should  be  chosen
as  one  of  the  first  areas  to  be  thoroughly  inspected  .  .  ."
—From  a  paper   on   the   territorial   method   of   phasing
arms  control  presented  at  the  Pugwash  conference   by   Prof.
Louis  B.  Sohn  of  Harvard,   co-author  with  Grenv'Ile   Clark
of   the  monumental,   "World   Peace   Throuf'    World   Law."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   January   9, 1961
Few  Normal  Americans  Visible  in  the  Demonstrations  for  Walter's  Un-Americans
Rockwell's  Nazis  March  With  Swastika  Flag  to  Defend  House  Committee
By  the  standards  he  normally  applies  to  others,   Congress-
man  Walter   would   have  an  uncomfortable   time  explaining
the  kind  of  pickets  who  rallied   to  the  defense  of  his  Un-
American  Activities Committee  here  Jan.  2.   When  some  350
youthful   demonstrators  from   a  dozen  states  as  far   away  as
California  arrived  that  morning  to  picket  the  White  House
in  furtherance  of  the  campaign  to  abolish  the  Committee,  they
found   a  counter  demonstration   in  Walter's  favor.     Because
of   the  temporary  stands  in  front  of  the  White  House   for
inauguration,  all  were  shunted  off  to  the  far  side  of  Lafay-
ette  Park.    A  watchful  and  impartial  police  force  kept   the
demonstrators  safely  apart.
The  most  conspicuous  point,  the  sidewalk  in  front  of  the
U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce,  was  assigned  to  some  two  dozen
uniformed    members   of   Rockwell's    American   Nazi   Party.
They  paraded  with  the  American  flag  and  the  swastika  side
by  side  before  the  Chamber's  marble  entrance  as  if  to  drama-
tize  a  favorite  Marxist  thesis linking  Fascism and  big  business.
Their  banners  read  "Nazis  Support  the  HUAC",  "Only  Jews
and  Reds  Oppose  the  Committee"  and  "FOR  Helped  Russia.
You,  Too,   Jimmy?"
A  United  Front  of  U.S.  Fascists
On  the  same  side  of  the  street  but  in  front  of  the  adjoin-
ing  Hay-Adams  Hotel  was  a  rival  Fascist  group,  "Fighting
American  Nationalists",   marching  in  temporary  united   front
with  Rockwell's  Nazis.    Their  placards  included  "God   Bless
Walter"  and  "Remember   Who   Got  Alger  Hiss."    On  the
Lafayette  Park  pavement,  across  from  the   U.S.   Chamber   of
Commerce    marched   a  third   group   of   pro-Walter   pickets,
mostly  Hungarian  and  Cuban  refugees,  with  a  sprinkling  of
skid  row  characters  and  a  handful  calling  themselves  "Young
Americans   for    Freedom."      They    carried    banners    saying
Behind  the  Hollywood  Blacklist
We  hope  the  evidence  to  be  submitted  in  the  newly
filed $7,500,000  anti-trust  suit  against  the  major  Holly-
wood  studios  for  blacklisting   will  include  the   postwar
reports  of  the  Committee  on  Communism  of  the   U.S.
Chamber  of  Commerce.   The  famous-Holly wood  inves-
tigation   of  the   Un-American  Activities  Committee  in
1947  was  suggested  by  a  U.S.  Chamber  report  of   1946.
Attorneys   for   the   12  writers   and   actors  suing   the •
studios  will  find  in  these  reports  proof  of  a   concerted
plans  for   "community  action"  using  the  House  Com-
mittee,  the  American  Legion,  Counterattack   and  simi-
lar   agencies  to  drive  liberals  and  radicals  of   various
shades   from  the  entertainment  and  opinion   industries
and  from  a  wide  range  of  public  and  private  employ-
ment.   Behind the  witch  hunters  were  more  respectable
forces  and  it  is  time  they  were  called  to  account.
"Abolish?    No!    Strengthen?    Yes!"     These  seemed  a  trans-
lation   from  the  familiar  Cuban,   as  if  originally  devised   as
"Walter  Si—Castro  No."     Walter's  International   Anti-Corn-
intern  as  thus  made  visible  contained   few  specimens   identifi-
able  as  normal   Americans.
All   this   made   the   placards   carried   by   Walter    pickets
seem  superfluous.    We   hope   the  newly  organized   National
Committee  to  Abolish  the  House  Committee  on   Un-American
Activities  will   circulate   a  picture  pamphlet   on   this   week's
demonstrations.     Its  chairman,  Aubrey  Williams,   once  head
of   Roosevelt's   National   Youth   Administration,   spoke   with
sincerity  and  power  to  a  rally  held  by  the  student  pickets  in
All  Souls  Unitarian  Church  after  the  demonstration,  and  Dr.
Willard   Uphaus   fresh   from   jail  in  New   Hampshire   con-
tributed  an  inspiring  presence  and  moving  words  to  the  cam>
paign   to   end   the   Congressional    Inquisition.     But  nothing
could  be  as  eloquent  as  those  who  turned  out  to  defend  it.
Roosevelt  Opens  Campaign for  Public  Hearing  on  Un-American Committee Budget
"The  Committee has  made  a  tremendous  effort  to  obscure
the  real  issues   posed  by  its  activities.    It  has  done  this
through   a   massive  propaganda   effort   designed   to   prove
that  all its  opponents  are  Communists ... by employing
a  brand  of  logic  not  accepted  in  the   United  States   since
the  Salem  witch  trials. ...  It  goes  this  way:  the  Com-
mittee  is  anti-Communist;  anyone  who  opposes  the  Com-
mittee   is,   therefore,   an   anti-anti-Communist;   since   the
product  of  two  negatives  is  a  positive,  anyone  who  opposes
the  Committee is a  Communist  or at  least  a  dupe.  .  .  .
"The  heroic  campaign  to  make  the  nation  safe   for   the
Un-American   Activities   Committee  has   now  led   to   the
production  of a  motion  picture,  'Operation  Abolition.' . . .
The  film  concerns  itself   mainly  with   the   demonstrations
which  took  place  in San Francisco  last  May. ... Its  major
thesis is that  the  Communists want  to  see the  Un-American
Activities  Committee abolished.    However,  it  never  for  one
second   acknowledges  that   others—many   others—who   are
neither  Communists nor  Communist dupes  also  are  in  favor
of  the same  objective.  . . .
"Meanwhile,  however,  it  is  still  politically  dangerous  for
many  members  of  Congress  to  express  by  means  of  a  direct
vote  their  innermost  feelings  about  the  Committee.   I  know,
because  they  have  told  me.  .This,  I  think,  presents  a  chal-
lenge  to  the  press,  to  other   members  of  the   intellectual
community,  and  to  all  who  have  the  power  to  inform—or
to  misinform—the  public.    May  I  express  the  hope  that
they  will  rise  to  the  occasion  and  perform  their  educating
task  honestly  and  well  so  that  soon  it  will  be  possible   for
Congressmen  to  vote  their  convictions  and  do  away   with,
this   Committee.    Newspapers   like  the   New  York  Times,
the  San  Francisco   Chronicle,  the  Washington  Post  and  the
St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch  have  already  shown the way.  . . .
"Until   that  day  I  do  not  plan  to  move  formally  again
for  the  abolition  of  the  Committee,  lest  the  resulting   vote
mislead  the  public  into  thinking  that  this  Committee  really
has  the backing  of this  House.  .  .  .  However,  we cannot
await  the  millennium,  and  therefore  I  make  the  following
suggestion  as  a  step  in  the  right  direction.    Next   month
we  shall   be  examining  the  appropriation  requests  of  our
various  committees.  My recommendation  is  that  we scrutin-
ize  the  budget  of  the   Un-American  Activities   Committee
with  the  greatest  care  in  a  public  hearing  before  the  House
Administration   Committee. ...  I  shall  formally  ask the
Chairman  to hold  hearings  on the budget  request.  .  .  .
"If   we  scrutinize   the  budget  request   of  the  Committee
with  care—as  we  do  with  regard  to  the  budgets  of  other
committees—I  am  confident  that  we will  save  a  considerable
sum  of  money.   And,  as  a  happy  byproduct  of  our  economy
drive,  we  will  limit  the  power  of  this  Committee  to  em-
barrass  our  Nation,  to  humiliate  its  citizens  and  to  tarnish
the  good  name  of  this  House."
—James   Roosevelt   (D.  Col.)  in  a  letter  to  his  House   colleagues  dated   December   SI.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   January   9,  1961
Asia's  Highest  Paid  Army  (We  Paid  Them)  Also  Among  Its  Worst
(Continued   -from   Page One)
;    Mr.  Parsons  was  soon  back  in  Laos  last  fall  trying  to  upset
the   new   government.     According   to   disclosures   made  by
Prime   Minister   Nehru   at   a   press   conference   in   October,
Parsons   was  sent  to  Vientiane  by  the   State  Department   to
threaten   Prince   Souvanna   Phouma   with   loss   of   American
aid  if  he  did  not   "cease  his  attempts  to  negotiate   with  the
Communist  Pathet  Lao  movement  and  end  all  contact   with
Captain   Kong  Le,"  which  he  refused  to  do,  threatening  in
turn  to  ask  the  Soviet  Union  for  aid  if  U.S. aid  were  with-
drawn.    The  London  Economist  (Oct. 29)   in  reporting  these
revelations  by  Nehru  commented  that  "the  policy  of  grading
economic  aid  according  to  the  anti-communist  credentials  of
recipient  governments"  went   back  to  "Mr. Dulles's  dictum
that  "neutralism  is  immoral" " and  pointed  out  that  this policy
had  been  shown  to  be  not  only  obsolete  but  "counter-produc-
tive."    "Domestic  communism,"  it  said,  "has been  far  weaker
in  neighboring  Cambodia,  which  has  been  determinedly neu-
tralist  since independence  and  which  draws  aid  from  all  sides,
than  in  Laos,  where  a  succession  of  anti-communist  govern-
ments  have  paid  their  soldiers  and  civil  servants  out  of  the
American  taxpayer's  pocket."
How  We  Helped  the  Left  in  Laos
It  is  American  policy  which  has  strengthened  the  Leftists
in  Laos.   The  Porter  Hardy  report  in  June,  1959,  showed  that
the  State  Department  in  deciding  to  support  a  huge  Laotian
army  "despite  contrary  recommendations   by  the  Joint  Chiefs
of   Staff"   had  so  flooded  the  country, with  money  as  to  set
off  a  disastrous  inflation  which  doubled  the  cost  of  living  from
1953  to  1958 and  by  enriching  a  handful  of  Vientiane  mer-
chants and  officials  "tended  to  lend  credence  to the  Communist
allegation  that  the  Royal  Lao  government   was  'corrupt'  and
'indifferent'   to  the  needs  of  the  people."    Our   policies  by
cynically  supporting  anti-parliamentary  military  coups  when  it
served  our  purposes  has  also  discredited  democracy in  the  eyes
of   Laotian  intellectuals.    More   recently  we   pushed   Prince
Souvanna  Phouma  into  dependence  on  Moscow  by  supplying
the  rightist  military  forces  against  him  directly  and  through
Thailand  with  tanks  and  artillery.   This,   and  the  Thailand
economic  blockade  against  Vientiane,  led  Phouma  before  his
No  Need  to  Go  to  South   Africa
To  Find  Apartheid
"When   you  spend  a  lifetime  crashing  the  jungle  of
racial  barriers  and  you  achieve   this  kind  of  job,  it's
dismaying  to  have  to go back  to the jungle.  .  . . I'm
a  symbol  of  20,000,000  people."
-—E.   Frederick    Morrow,   a   lawyer,   first   Negro    to
serve  as  an  Administrative  Assistant  to  the  President,
telling   the  New   York    Times  (Dec. S3)   that    despite
five   years   work   in   the   White   House   his   only       offers
of   private  employment    were   of   a  nature  that   "would
confine    me   to  working   with   the   Negro     community."
recent  fall  to  ask  the  Soviets  for  gasoline  and  military  sup-
plies.    These  supply  flights  through  Hanoi  in  North  Vietnam
to  what  was  then  clearly  the  legitimate  government  of   Laos
now  figure  in  the  proof  unveiled  at  the  State  Department  of
outside  aid.   Prince   Phouma  fled  from   the  U.S.-supported
rebels   December   9.    The   worsening   situation   since  amply
confirms  the  Economist's  comment  (Dec.  24)   that  it  would
have  been  better  if  Prince  Phouma  had  "been  allowed  to pur-
sue  his  patient  task  of  conciliation, unhampered  by  an  Amer-
ican-aided   right-wing   rebellion."
Nothing   illustrates   more   vividly   the   bankruptcy  of   our
policy  in  Laos  than  the  repeatedly  demonstrated  weakness  of
the  Army  we  have  so  generously  supported  there.    It  is  the
highest  paid  army  in  Asia  and  variously estimated  (the  canny
Laotians  have  never  let  us  know  the  exact  numbers,  perhaps
lest  we  check  on  how  much  of  the  military payroll  is diverted
into  the  pockets  of  a  few  leaders)  at  from  23,000  to  30,000.
Yet  it  has  never  been  able  to  stand  up  against  handfuls  of
guerrillas  and   even  a  few  determined  battalions  like  those
mustered   by  Captain   Kong  Le.    We   can   only  hope  that
British,   French,   Indian   and   Japanese   objections   will  'now
keep  us  from  plunging  into  war  in  a  trackless  mountainous
jungle  land  where  our  superior  weapons  will  count  for  little,
but  where  we  may  easily  become  involved  in  a  broader  con-
flict with  neighboring  North  Vietnam  and  then  China.    The
path  to  peace  lies  in  reconvening  the  International supervisory
commission  and  in  returning  to  the  principles  of  the 1954
Geneva  accords.
For   Friends   You   Forgot:   Holiday    Gift    Rates   Still   in   Effect    During   January
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington    15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
1/9/61
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ......................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State:...................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No Q
I. E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'1 Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C.. onder  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.  S.;   6  In
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   $16  to   Europe:    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED