I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961oct02.pdf

============================================================

Kowalski  Warns  Against Frozen Fingers on Nuclear  Triggers,  P.  2
Humphrey  Replies to  Dodd  on the  Congo:  Some Nonsense  About  "Prague-Trained  Communists."    See  Pg.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  36
OCTOBER  2,   1961
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  GENTS
Bertrand  Russell's  Solution  for  the  Berlin  Crisis
When   I  talked  with  Bertrand  Russell  in  London   a  few
weeks  ago,  I  asked  him  what  he  would  say  to  Kennedy  and
Khrushchev   if  they  asked  him  what  to  do  about  the   Berlin
crisis.    Lord  Russell  proposed   that  they  call  a  conference  in
which   neutrals  would   have  the   deciding  vote  and  put   the
Berlin  question  to  arbitration.    He  thought  the  USSR  "very
much  to  blame  for  demanding  change  in  the  status  quo  by
means  of  military threat"  but  he  also  thought  the  West  "very
foolish  to  be  so absolutely and  pigheadedly  determined  not  to
recognize  the  East  German  government."    When  I  suggested
that  on  paper  the  two  sides  did  not  seem  to  be  too  far  from
agreement,  Lord  Russell  interjected,  "Don't  you  mean  super-
ficial  agreement?     The   real   question   is  who   is  to   be   the
top  dog  and  the  rest  is  talk."    Again  he  returned  to  arbi-
tration,  "the   only  solution  as  to  who  is  to  be  top  dog  is  to
say  nobody  is  to  be."     Under  arbitration  nobody  would  be
top  dog.    For  the  longer  run,  Lord  Russell  suggested  a  gen-
eral  treaty  establishing  a  system  of  arbitration  as  a  corollary
to  disarmament,  with  the  deciding  votes   in  each  case  to  be
cast  by  states  not  directly  involved  in  the  quarrel  to  be  arbi-
trated.    "I  don't  mean  to  sound  hopeful  of  this  thing  com-
ing  about,"   Lord  Russell  said,  "but  what  I  do  mean  is  that
if  it  doesn't  there  will  sooner  or  later  be  a  nuclear  war."
If  We  Really  Prefer   World  Law
Lord  Russell's  proposal  began   to  seem   less   Utopian   as  I
listened  to  President  Kennedy's  eloquent  and  moving  address
to  the  United  Nations  and  read  carefully  Mr.  Gromyko's  an-
swer.    The  President   rose  magnificently  to  the  occasion,  and
he  certainly opened  the  door  wide  to  meaningful   negotiation
on  Berlin  and  on  armaments.    Against  the  backdrop  of  reali-
ties  in  Washington,*  Mr.   Kennedy  spoke   with   clarity   and
vision.    But  if  it  is  really  true,  as  the   President  said,  that
"we  prefer  world   law,   in  the  age  of   self-determination,   to
world  war  in  the  age  of  mass  extermination,"  why  not   offer
to  do  what  men  do  every  day  in  a  world  of  law  and  that  is
submit  even  their  most  vital  interests  to  adjudication?    If  we
really-mean  it—and  I  believe  the  President   does—when  we
say   "let   us  call  a  truce  to  terror,"  then   why  not   formalize
this  and  make  it  a  reality  by  offering  to  lay  our  cocked  pistols
aside  and  take  our  dispute  over  Berlin  into  a  world   tribunal
for   world  arbitration?    If   it  is  true,  as  Mr.  Kennedy  said,
that  a thermonuclear  war no  longer  concerns  "the  great  powers
alone,"  but  would  "engulf  .  .  .  the  committed  and  the un-
committed  alike,"  have  the  two great  Powers  a right  to  impose
a  death  sentence  on  the  rest  of  mankind   in  a  quarrel   over
one  city  which   seems  as  distant   and   secondary  to  them   as
* On  page  two  you  can  glimpse  the  tepid  weakness  of  the
so-called  peace forces  in  Congress  and the  light-headed frenzy
spreading   among   the   Republicans,  even  liberals  like  Mrs.
Smith  of  Maine and  Javits  of  New  York.
Cassandra  Suddenly  Turns  Cheerful
"The  American  intelligence   estimate  prepared  at  the
time  of  the   first  sputnik  gave  the   Soviets  about  500
intercontinental  ballistic   missiles  by   the   end  of   this
year   [1960]  . . .  During  1958,  however  . . . new  and
lower  estimates  were  conveniently revealed  by  former
Secretary  of  Defense  Neil  McElroy, during his  presen-
tation   of   the   business-as-usual   1959   defense  budget.
This   second  set   of   estimates   gave  the   Kremlin  500
ICBM's  by the end of  1961.  . . . During  1959, however,
the   revised   estimates   were  revised   [downward]   yet
again.  . . .
"On  the   face  of   it,   there  is  something  very  fishy
about  these  repeated  strikingly  convenient  downgrad-
ing*  of  intelligence  estimates.    How  can  anyone  be  so
sure that  Nikita S. Khrushchev  was  lying, in  late  1958,
when  he  stated   that   Soviet   ICBM's  were  already  in
serial   production? ...  If  he  was  telling  the  truth
Khrushchev  must   now  have   at   least   150  operational
ICBM's.  The  highest  American authority, the  Strategic
Air  Commander, Gen. Thomas  Power  has  publicly said
that  150  ICBM's   could  'virtually  wipe  out'  the  atomic
deterrent. ...  In  order  to  save  some  hundreds of
millions  of  dollars,  the   Elsenhower  Administration  is
literally  playing  a  game  of  Russian  roulette  with  the
national  future."
—Joseph  Alsop,  Series  on  the  Missile  Gap,  put  into
Congressional  Record  by  Symington   Feb.  19,  1960.
"Mixed   but  broadly  encouraging  results  have  been
obtained   by   recent,   exceedingly  careful   recalculation
of   the   probable  striking   power   of  the   Soviet   Union.
.  .  .  Prior  to  the  recent   recalculation,  the  maximum
number  of  ICBM's  that  the   Soviets  were  thought   to
have  at  this  time  was  on  the  order  of  200—just  enough
to  permit  the  Soviets  to  consider  a  surprise   attack  on
the  United  States.   The  maximum  has  now  been  dras-
tically  reduced,  however, to  less  than  a  quarter  of  the
former   figure—well   under   50  ICBM's,   and   therefore
not  nearly  enough  to  allow  the  Soviets  to  consider  a
surprise   attack   on  this   country."
—Joseph  Alsop,  Washington  Post,  September   25, 1961.
Bizerte  or  Kashmir  or  Angola  to  us?    When  he  said   "man-
kind  must  put  an  end  to  war,  or  war  will  put  an  end  to
mankind,"  he  spoke  the  ultimate  truth.    But  these  words  be-
come  cruel  deceptions  if  we  leave  them  for  some  vague  future
which  may  never  come.    The  place  and  time  to  put  an  end
to  war,  and  talk  of  war,  and  preparations  for  war,  is  in  the
Berlin  crisis  and  now.
The  President  said  "unconditional   war  can  no  longer   lead
to  unconditional  victory."    The  bright  phrases  do  not  con-
jure  up  the  infernal  reality  of  the  world  after  the  next  war,
with   Berlin   gone,   and   both   sides   broken   into   fragments,
savagely  warring  over  food  and  shelter  in  a  world  too  devoid
of   communication  to  know  what  has  happened,   much   less
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 2,1961
Little  Mail  Reaching  Congress  About  Berlin  Crisis  and  Much  of  That  War-Minded
A  Few  Voices  But  Mostly  Tepid  Speak  Up  for  Negotiations  in  the  House
Wm.  Meyer  of  Vermont  and  Byron  Johnson  of  Colorado
were  badly missed in  the  House  last  week.   These  two  "peace
Congressmen"   defeated   in   last  year's  election   would   have
spoken  out  on  the  Berlin  crisis  with  the  vigor  it  deserves.
As  it  is,  when  peace  forces  on   the  Hill  tried   to  marshall
Congressmen  for  a  series  of  short  speeches  bucking  the  tide
of  war  hysteria,  few  could  be  found  to  speak  up  and  most
of  those  few  were  timid  and  tepid.    Congresswoman  Edith
Green  of  Oregon  got  a handful  of  members to  speak  up  with
her   last   Monday,   the   most   outspoken   being  Kowalski   of
Connecticut,  the  one  professional  Army  officer   in  the   House
(see  box below).
Opportunity  As  Well  As  Crisis
Mrs.  Green  complained  that  many  constituents  writing  to
her  "write  as  though  a  nuclear  holocaust  is  inevitable.    They
see  no  possible   areas  for   negotiation.     They   infer  that   to
negotiate   is   to   surrender.     This   assumption,"    she   said,
"should   be  challenged.  .  .  .  The  American  people   need  to
realize   that   negotiations  can   benefit   both   sides"   and   that
while  neither  side  can  win  all  it  wants  in  negotiation,"   the
alternative  is  nuclear  war."     Wm.   Fitts   Ryan   (D.,   N.Y.)
reported  a  similar  feeling  of  "fear,  frustration  and   fatalism"
and  urged  that  the  Berlin  situation  be  "regarded  not  only  as
a  crisis  but  as  an  opportunity"  to  increase  national  security
by  negotiating  a  zone  of  disengagement  and  disarmament in
Central  Europe.
Kastenmeier   (D.   Wis)   pointed   out  that   the   idea   of   a
nuclear  free  zone  in  Central  Europe  originated  in  the  West
with  the  Belgian  Foreign  Minister  Van  Zeeland,  and  added
"I   have  seen  very  few  situations  where  doing  nothing  but
standing  firm  is the  best thing  to  do."    Al  Ullman  (D.   Ore)
said  that  while we  must  be  strong  militarily "we  must  also  be
strong  in  new  ideas."    Detroit's  John  Dingell   (D.   Mich)
warned  that   "cessation   of  talking  may  very  well   mean  the
beginning  of   shooting."     Clem  Miller   (D.   Col)   analyzed
the  weaknesses  in  the  Communist  position  and  said  the  West
was   already   negotiating   from   strength   "not    only  military
strength  but  the  strength  of  freedom,  of  patience  and  of  an
increasing  good  will"  and  can negotiate  in  confidence.    Others
were  considerably less  specific.    George  M.  Rhodes  (D.   Pa)
The  Authentic  Flavor  of  War  Madness
"The  President   .  .  .  referring  to  events   associated
with  Castro's  Cuba  .  .  .  said  he  wanted  the  record  to
show   that   'our   restraint   is   not  inexhaustible.'   .   .  .
Neither  is  our deterrent  capacity  inexhaustible.  It  must
be  revitalized  appropriately  with   actions   as   well   as
words.  .  .  .  We cannot  expect  the  national  will  to  over-
come  forever  the  enervating  effects  of  repeated  losses
without  its  being  revitalized  by  the  new  strength  of
meaningful   victories."
—Senator  Margaret  Chase Smith  (R.  Maine)  in  the
Senate  Sept.  21,  criticizing  President  Kennedy  for  not
making  clearer  our  willingness  to  wage  thermonuclear
war  over  West  Berlin.
"I  think  the  chief  contribution  of  the  senior  Senator
from  Maine to  our  time  will  be  her  contribution  to  its
morale  and  to  its  fundamental  spiritual  understanding
of  the  crises  which  we  face.    Her  address  today   was
in  that  spirit.    I  think  this  question  is  critically  im-
portant  because  the  issue  'Better  Red  Than  Dead'  will
be  a  real  one  in  this   world,  and  it  is   high   time  we
steeled  our  souls  and  spirits  to  what  it  really  means.
Do  we  prefer  life  to   slavery?"
—Senator  Javits   (R.  N.Y.)   same  day.
called  for  "calm  and  flexible  negotiation."    Joelson  (D.    NJ)
said   "Honorable   peace   is,   of   course,  always  preferable   to
war."    Wm.  S.  Moorhead  (D.  Pa)   also  spoke  but  so  equiv-
ocally  it  was  hard  to  tell  just  where  he  stood  while  John
Brademas   (D.   Ind)    confined   himself   to  cautiously  admon-
ishing  unnamed  "extremist"  Republicans;  he  put  a  column by
Roscoe  Drummond  in  the  Record  to  support  his  rather  vague
position.    Jeff   Cohelan   (D.   Col)   the  previous  Saturday lim-
ited  himself  to  suggesting  that  the  Berlin  situation   "is  ob-
viously  a  far-reaching and  highly  complex  matter."    His  was
the  weakest  of  the   lot.
More  speeches  were  hoped   for  as  we  prepared  for   press.
If   any  materialize,  we  will  report  on  them  next  week.    So
far   the  "peace  forces"  on  the  left  of  the  Democratic  party
make  John  F.  Kennedy  look  like  a  radical.    One  trouble  is
that  remarkably  few  people  are  writing  their   Congressmen
despite  the  crisis,  and  of  these   few  many  are  war-minded.
Every  letter helps  and  more  are  desperately  needed.
Kowalski  Says  Our  Fingers  Have  Too  Long  Been  Frozen  on  Nuclear  Triggers
"Today   nothing  is   as  important  to   this   nation   as   the
need  to  relax  the  emotional   tensions   of   our  people.    We
have  been  'standing  firm'  so  long  now  with  fingers  frozen
on  nuclear  triggers   that   our  national   nerves   are   frayed
and  jagged.    And  they  might  well  be,  for  in  the  past  no
great   nation   that   mobilized   ever   demobilized   until    after
a  war.    I  think  it  is  high  time  we  began  to  challenge  the
Soviets  creatively,   with  imagination.    It  is  time  we  take
the  offensive   for  peace.    This  challenge  must,   of   course,
rest  on  two   points:
/'!)  The  free  society  of  Berlin  must  be  preserved.
"2)  Access   to   Berlin   must  be  guaranteed.
"But  this  is  not  enough.    I  believe  we  can  do  much  to
improve  the  whole   European  situation.    I  would  start  by
taking  the  Russians  up  on  their  slogans.    They  have   sug-
gested a  zone  in  Europe  free  of  nuclear  weapons—and  have
offered  a  disarmed  central  Europe.    All  right—let  us  see
if  this  is  what  they  mean.    They  have  offered  to  take  nu-
clear   weapons  out  of   East   Germany,  Poland  and   Czecho-
slovakia  in  exchange   for  a  denuclearized   West   Germany.
Such  a  zone,  free  of  nuclear  weapons,  would  provide  a  huge
cushion  of   space   which  would  allow  a  moment  of   reason
before   the  ultimate  irrationality   of   total   war.
"Finally,   if   we  were  to  link   a   denuclear   zone   with   a
second  stage  of  withdrawal  of  foreign  forces  from  the  zone,
we  might   well  begin   the  retreat   of   the  Red  Army  from
Eastern   Europe  and  thus  initiate  the  opportunity   for  real
freedom  in  this  area.
"Within  the  context  of  this  challenge,  the  formalities   for
settlement  of  the  Berlin  and  East  German crisis  would  fall
into  place.    I  see  no  future  in  standing  rigidly  like  wooden
soldiers   glued  to  a  board.    Let  us  take  the  offensive  for
peace."
—Con.  Frank  Kowalski   (D.  Conn.)  in  the  House,  Sept.  25
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 2,1961
Dodd  Spear-Heading  a  "Katanga   Lobby"  to  Build  Up  Support  for  Tshombe
Humphrey  Defends  Lumumba  and  Gizenga Against  Charges  of Communism
The  junior  Senator  from  Connecticut  has  been  acting  like
the  senior  Senator  from  Katanga.    On  at  least  four  occasions
in  the  closing  days  of  the  session   Senator  Dodd  was  on  the
floor  of   the  Senate  (Sept.  8,   11,  13  and   16)   to   denounce
the  activities  of  the  United  Nations  in  the  Congo  as  a Com-
munist  plot.    On  Sept.  11  he  released  the  text  of  a  wire  to
Adlai  Stevenson  at  the  UN,   and  on  Sept.  13  of  a  letter  to
President  Kennedy.    The   burden  of   these  was  to   demand
that  the  UN   call  off  its  action  against  Tshombe   in   Katanga
and   "take  no  further   action  against  white  officers   or  white
advisers  in  Katanga   province."
Just  Another  George   Washington
The  powerful  financial  interests  in  the  copper  and  cobalt
mines  of  Katanga  have  rallied  considerable  press  support   for
Tshombe.    Their   lobbyists  may  hope   to   repeat   the   success
of   the   China  Lobby.     Just   as  McCarran   and   McCarthy   a
decade  ago  made  State  Department  officials   fearful   of  objec-
tive  thinking  on  the  China  problem,  so  Dodd  may  intimidate
them  on  the  problem  of  the  Congo.    "Nameless  subordinates
at  desk  positions"  in  the  State  Department   were  pictured  by
Dodd  as the  villains  and  he  put  in  a  resolution  (S.  Res.  207)
for   a  Select  Committee  to  root  them  out.    The   strategy  is
to  identify  African  nationalism with  Communism  and  to  make
life  uncomfortable  for   State  Department    officials   who   dare
think  otherwise.    In  this  enterprise  Dodd  has  drawn  support
from   Keating  of  New   York,  Thurmond  of   South   Carolina
and  Yarborough  of  Texas.   The  Texan  told  the  Senate  (Sept.
16)    he   has   letters   from    Methodist    missionaries    calling
Tshombe   the  George  Washington  of  Katanga  and  saying  it
is  wrong  to  consider  him   "as   an  instrument  of   a   mining
company." *
On  September 21,  Senator  Humphrey  courageously  took  on
the   task   of   answering  Dodd.     Dodd's   thesis  was  that   by
naming  Lumumba's  Vice  Premier   Gizenga  as  Vice  Premier
of  the  new  Adoula government,  the  Congo  had  set up  a coali-
tion   dominated  by  Communists.     Humphrey  said   that   ever
since  Lumumba's  death   "we   have   fallen   into   the   peculiar
habit  of   describing  anyone  linked  with  him   in  any  way  as
* The  Union  'Miniere  du  Haut  Katanga  in  which   (as   we
pointed  out  recently  in  our  issues  of   Sept.  26  and  Oct. 10,
1960),  the  Rockefellers  have  a  large  and  growing  interest.
No  Senator  Like  Dodd  For  Thickening  A  Plot
Dr.  DODD:  With  respect  to  Mr.  Khrushchev's criti-
cism  of  Gizenga—
Mr.  HUMPHREY:  No,  that  was  Mr.  Hammarskjold.
I  was  mentioning  his  criticism  of  Mr. Hammarskjold.
Mr.  DODD:  Yes, of   course,  his   criticism   of Ham-
marskjold.    First  of  all  Khrushchev  is  a  devious  and
cunning  character,  as  we  all  know.    I  would  not  put
it  beyond  him  at  all  to  criticize  Hammarskjold  as  a
diversionary   tactic—and   what  a   wonderful   tactic  it
would  be—while  the  United  Nations  is  establishing  a
Communist  regime  [in  the  Congo]."
—U.S.  Senate,  Sept.  16
a   Lumumbist   and   as   a   Communist   by   association."     But
Humphrey   pointed   out   that   Lumumba   himself,    after   the
mutiny   of   the   Congolese   armed   forces,   did   not   act   like
a  Communist  but  appealed  first  to  the  U.S.  and  then  to  the
other  African   states  and  finally  to  the  UN  for  help,  before
turning  to  the  Soviet  bloc  for  the  aid  refused  him  elsewhere.
Humphrey  told  the  Senate  that  Lumumba's  "one  discernible
political  objective  was  to  maintain  the  unity  of  the  Congo  at
all  costs"  and  that  if  belief  in  a  unified  national  State  made
a  man  a  Communist  then   most  of  the  African  leaders   and
indeed  "the  heads  of  the  Belgian,  British,   French   and  U.S.'
Governments  are  also  infected  with  this  purported   malady."
Humphrey  said  that  as  for  Gizenga,  his  Vice  Premier,  "there
are  no  more  grounds  for  considering  Gizenga  an  actual Com-
munist  than  there  were  for  so  describing  Lumumba,"   and  he
disposed  in  an  acidly  satirical  passage  of  the  allegation  (see
box  below)  that  Gizenga  was  "a  Prague-trained   Communist."
Humphrey   declared   that   Gizenga   had   been   the   head  of
the  African   Solidarity  Party  which   "had  the   scarcely   novel
program  of  emphasizing  national  as  against  region  and  tribal
tendencies  in  the  Congo."    Tribalism  is  the  principal  weapon
against   the   emergent   nations  of   Africa,   and   regionalism   a
favored  refuge  of  large  private  interests  like  Union   Miniere.
Humphrey   said  "the  most   distressing   factor   to  me  in  this
peculiar  outburst  of  support  for  an  independent  Katanga"  is
that  this  would  cut  off the  normal  sources  of  half  the  Congo's
revenues.    "If  that  happens,"  Humphrey  warned,  "the  Congo
will   be   the   breeding   ground   of   Communist   subversion   in
central   Africa."
How  Long  Do  You  Have  to  Be  In  Prague  to  Become  a  "Prague-Trained Communist"?
"I  am  alarmed  by  the  role  of  the  United  Nations  in fos-
tering  the  creation  of  a  coalition  government  in  Leopold-
ville  with  Antoine  Gizenga  as  Vice  Premier  and  Christophe
Gbenye  as   Minister  of   Interior.    Both  of   these   men  are
Prague-trained  Communists."
—Telegram  Sept.  11 from  Senator  Dodd  to  Adlai  Stevenson.
"We  apparently  are  so  susceptible  to  the  need  for  de-
scribing   Congolese  politicians   in   doctrinal  language   that
the  American  press  has  managed to pin  the  label of  'Prague
trained  Communist'  on  Gizenga  and  others  of  his  personal
entourage.    On  the  basis   of   all   the   information   I   could
obtain  from  the Government, I have  found  that  Mr. Gizenga
has   spent  no  more  than  two   months  outside  the   Congo
throughout  his  career.    He  travelled  in  Europe  from mid-
December  1959,  until  early  February 1960.   Of  those  weeks
he  spent  roughly  half  in  Western  Europe  and the  other  half
in  the  Soviet   bloc  countries,  and  visited  Prague,  Czecho-
slovakia,  briefly  in  that  latter   period.
"All  I  can  say  on  this  score—and  I  have  checked  these
matters  carefully  with  the  security  division  of   the   State
Department—is  that  if   the   Czechs  can  turn  out   a  dedi-
cated  Communist after  having  a  visitor  for  several  days,
they  have  a  supernaturally  effective  indoctrination  system.
"On  the  other  hand,  this  system  of  indoctrination  pales
in   its   impressiveness  when  we  turn  to   the  case   of  Mr.
Gbenye,  a  Gizenga  follower  who  is  now  Minister  of  the  In-
terior  in  the  central  government,  for  he  is  described  as  a
Prague-trained  Communist  when  apparently  he  has  never
been  out  of  the  Congo."
—Humphrey    Senate   speech   on   the   Congo,   Sept.    SI
1  0
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 2,1961
Spreading  Delusions  About  How  Easily  We  Could  Smash  the  Soviets
(Continued   from   Page   One)
care  who  has  won.    If  unconditional victory is  no  longer  pos-
sible,  aren't  the  conditional  gains  of  arbitration  to   be  pre-
ferred  to  tense  negotiations  which  may  break  down  lest  one
side   or   the   other   appear—in   Russell's   words—top   dog?
If  as  Mr.  Kennedy  said  "we  are  committed  to  no  rigid  for-
mulas"  and   "seek  no  perfect   solution,"  if  the  real  concern
is  to  assure  "mutual  respect"  in  hammering  out  a  settlement,
what  better  way to  assure  this  than  by  arbitration?
Bargaining  Already  Underway
Real  fears  and   justifiable   suspicions   exist  on   both   sides.
The  East  fears  the  cloak-and-dagger  network  which   operates
out   of  West   Berlin,   and   the   formidably  growing   military
strength  of  West  Germany.   The  West  fears  that  to  recognize
East  German  control  over   access  to  West  Berlin  will  allow
Ulbricht  slowly  to  choke  off  the  free  life  of  that   city  and
absorb  it  into  his  huge  jail.    It  also  fears  that  acceptance  of
a  divided  Germany  may  prepare  the  way  for  disillusion  with
the  West  in  West  Germany,  a  resurgence  of  nationalism  and
a  new  version  of  the  Ribbentrop-Molotov  pact,  allying  Ger-
man  military  and  economic  power  with  the  Soviet  bloc.    The
East  says  it  is  ready  to  give  new  guarantees  for  a  free  West
Berlin  and  the  West  says—or  at  least  hints—that  it  is  ready
to  negotiate  new  guarantees  against  a  revived  militaristic  and
nuclear   Germany.     As   in   an   Oriental   market,   behind   the
angry  pantomime   of   mutual   rejection,  the   process   of   bar-
gaining   is  already  underway.    The   details   rather   than   the
principles  of  a  Berlin  settlement  are  the  stumbling  block:  the
precise  character  of  the  mutual  guarantees  and  the  means  of
enforcing  them.    Isn't  this  a  feasible  task  for  an  international
tribunal,  and  isn't   such   arbitration   implied   when   both   the
President   and   the   Soviet   Foreign   Minister   appeal   to   the
United  Nations,   inviting  it  to  take  a  hand  in  this   dispute?
Don't   both  see  UN   arbitration  as  a  face-saving  last   resort?
The  trouble  with  leaving  this  way  out  as  a  last  resort  is
that  we  may  never   get  there.    A  mood   of   frustration   and
of  a  dizzy  readiness  for  war  is  being  spread   in  our   country.
On  top  of  the  delusions  about  shelters  are  being  piled  new
delusions  about  the  weakness  of   the   Soviet  Union   and   the
relative  ease  with  which  we  could  smash  it.    All  the   forces
Political  Fallout  From  Soviet  Testing
"The   Soviet   and  Chinese  governments  move   along
dictatorial   lines.    They   don't   try   to   get   consent  of
their  people  for  a  change in  their  government's policy.
So  such  policies  are  not  submitted  in  any  sense  to  the
will  of  the  people.   This  is  one  of  the  great  lacks  in
these   countries   where   you   don't  have  real   political
democracy."
—Corliss  Lamont,  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  stead-
fast   "friends    of   the  Soviet   Union"  in   the   U.S.  com-
menting   in  a  New   York   radio  broadcast  Sept.   20  on
Soviet  resumption  of  nuclear  testing.   Dr.  Lamont  dis-
closed   that  18  days   before   the  Russians   resumed   nu-
clear  testing,  Soviet  and  Chinese  Communist  delegates
to  the  Japan  Council  Against  A  and  H  Bombs,  voted
unanimously   for   a  resolution   which   said,   "The   first
government   to  resume   tests   should   be  denounced  as
the   enemy   of   peace  and   of   mankind."
which   exaggerated   Soviet  power   when   they  wanted   bigger
arms  appropriations are  now  downgrading  Soviet  power  when
they  want  to  prepare  the  public  for  war.    Alsop's  silly  latest
(see  box  on  page  one)   and  the  gory  statistics  on  how  many
Russians  we  can kill  in  U.S. News  and  World  Report  for  Oct.
2  provide  examples.    The  momentum  of  war  psychosis  may
easily  get  out  of  hand.   The  President,  faced  by a  GOP  grow-
ing  increasingly belligerent  and  irresponsible,  and  with  all  too
little  peace  support  in  his  own  party,  must  take  his  courage
in  his  hands  and  begin  to  build  up  a  sober  understanding  of
the   Berlin   issue  and   possible   avenues  of   settlement   or   be
swept  away.    His  speech  to  the  UN—if   it  is  to   fulfill   its
promise—must  be  the  beginning  of  a  great  campaign  to  save
our  country  from  madness  and  the  world  from  war.
But  the  President  cannot  do  this  alone.    Too  many  people
demand  a  saintly  abnegation  from  Mr.  Kennedy  but  will  not
themselves  make  the  slightest  sacrifice  in  the  cause  of  peace.
We   need   a  nationwide  movement   to  counter   the   idea  that
the  choice  is  death  or  surrender;  these  oversimplifications can
be  fatal.    We  also  need  help  from  the  neutral  and  smaller
powers  in  the  shape  of  a  Grand  Design  to  arbitrate  on  Berlin,
and  save  the  UN  by  admitting  all  existing  governments   (if
Pankow  as well  as  Bonn,  why  not  Taipeh  as well  as  Peking?)
in  a  universal  settlement   to  forestall  a  universal  catastrophe.
Why   Not  Place  Bulk  Orders   to  Distribute  Recent  Issues  as  Means  of  Education  for   Peace?
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street    .....................................
City   .........................................
10/2/81
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the   IT.  S.;  $6  in
Canute;   110  elsewhere.    All   Mail   rates:   $15  to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED