I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961dec11.pdf

============================================================

Hemispheric  Warnings  to JFK   on  Cuba,  P.  4
Stevenson  at  the  UN On China: How to  Destroy  A Great  American  Asset  By  Stultification,  See  Page  Two
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  46
DECEMBER   11,   1961
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15   CENTS
The Menace Is on the Right But the Crackdown Is on the Left
Looked   at   from   abroad,   the   leading   nation   of   the   free
world  must  cut  a  silly  figure  with  the  indictments  the  gov-
ernment  has  just  obtained  against  the  Communist  Party.    At
a  time  when  right-wing  crackpot  organizations  are  more  nu-
merous  than  they  have  been  since  the  pre-war  Hitler  period,
and  a  time  when  the  Communist  Party  has  never  been  weaker
and  less  influential, the  government  suddenly  launches  a  large-
scale  legal  attack  upon  it.   Though  these  right  wing  organiza-
tions  are  serious  enough to  draw  fire  from  Kennedy  and  Eisen-
hower,  Johnson  and  Nixon,  and  though  they  reach  thousands
with  propaganda  subverting  confidence in  the  government  and
democratic  institutions,  the  registration  statute  the  government
has  now  set  out  to  enforce  would  not  have  the  slightest   effect
on  any  of  them.    Even  if  it  were  proven   that  a  right  wing
organization  were  linked  with  some  government  or  movement
abroad,  seeking—as  the  Nazi  and  Fascist  regimes  sought  be-
fore  the  war—to  undermine  American  freedoms,   the  statute
would  not  affect  them.    It  applies  only  to  Communist  move-
ments.    Its  impact  is only  on  the  Left.
The  Handiwork  of  Extremists
This  is not  at  all  surprising.    For  this  Act  was  the  product
of  an  earlier  and  similar wave  of  extremism.    Indeed  two  pub-
lic  figures  now  warning   against   the   dangers  of   right   wing
extremism,  former  Vice  President  Nixon  and  President  Ken-
nedy,  share  responsibility  for  the  Act,  the  former  as  an  active
sponsor   of  its  debut  in   1948   as  the  Mundt-Nixon   bill,   the
latter  as  one  of  the  Democrats   who  voted  to  override  Presi-
dent  Truman's  veto  of  the  bill  in  1950.     Few  remember  that
distinguished   lawyers   as  conservative   as  the   late   John   W.
Davis   attacked   this   registration    statute   as   unconstitutional
after  its first  emergence  in  1948  from  the  House Un-American
Activities  Committee.    Few  people  abroad  are  aware  that  the
government  has  been  forced  to  act  under  this  statute  now  be-
cause  the  Supreme  Court  earlier  this  year,  after  a  decade  of
litigation,  finally  upheld  the  registration   provisions.    But  few
Americans  will   realize  these  are  the  product   of  a  mentality
much  like  that  of  the  John  Birch  Society.    Great   conservative
papers  like  the  New  York   Times  deride  the  Birch  Society  for
proposing  to  compile  a  roster  of  "comsymps",  supposed  sym-
pathizers with  Communism,  but  few  notice  that  this Act would
have  the  government   draw  up  much  the  same  kind  of  list.
The  registration  provisions  of  the  Act  seek  to  force  the  regis-
tration  of  Communist  "action",  "front",   or  "infiltrated"  or-
ganizations  based   upon   their   supposed   degree   of  sympathy
with  or  control  by Communists,    The  Act  sets  up  a Subversive
Activities  Control  Board  to  measure  the  extent  to  which  any
organization's  views  parallel  those  of  the  Communist   move-
ment.    The  preconceptions   are  like  those  of  the  racist  crack-
One  Way  to  Reduce  Taxes
Some  interesting  arithmetic is  invited by  the  Internal
Security   Act   under  which  the   Communist  Party   has
just  been  indicted  for  failure  to  register.    The  maxi-
mum  penalty  is  5  years  in  jail  and  a  $10,000  fine  for
each  day  of  failure  to register.   Thus  the  sentence  theo-
retically  possible  for  one  year's  failure  to  register   is
1,825   years  in  jail.   Even  with  a  few  centuries  knocked
off   for   good   behavior,  Communists   should   seem   less
menacing  by  then.
The  fines  open  entrancing  vistas  for  the  U.S.  Treas-
ury.      The  fine  for   each   day's   failure  to   register   is
$10,000.    In  365  days  (no  allowance  is  made  for  Sun-
days   or  holidays  since   Communists  are   legally   pre-
sumed  to  be  atheists),   every  Communist  who  fails  to
register  would  be  subject  to  a  fine  of  $3,650,000.    The
Department   of   Justice  estimates,   perhaps   too   hope-
fully,  that  there  are  still  about  10,000  Communists  left
in  this  country.   If  all  of  them  fail  to  register  for  one
year,  the  fines  which  could  be  imposed  on  them  would
total  $36,500,000,000, enough  to  meet  almost   half   the
annual  Federal   budget.
It   would   seem   that   if   only  our  Communists  stand
firm  and  refuse  to  register,  and  Moscow  loyally  keeps
them  supplied  with  gold  from  the  Urals  and  Vorkuta
with  which  to  pay  their  fines,  the  rest  of  us  could  en-
joy  a  sizeable  tax  reduction.
pots   who   see  Communism   on   the   Supreme   Court    because
Communists  also  oppose  racial  segregation.
The  Attorney  General  was badly  advised  when he  issued  his
statement   saying  that   the  Communists  were  not  being   out-
lawed,  that  they  were  merely  being  asked  to  register,  as  others
are  required  to  register,  in  the  sale  of  securities,  in  the  estab-
lishment  of  welfare  and  pension   funds,  in  acting  as   lawyers
or  other  types  of  agents  for  foreign  governments.     None  of
these  registrations  expose  the  registrant  to  public  obloquy  and
to  the  threat  of  criminal  prosecution.    None  deny  him   the
right  to  a  passport  or  to  a  government   job  nor  force  him  to
put   the  yellow   badge   on  his  publications   or   broadcasts   by
affixing  to  them  so  invidious  a  label  as  "communistic."
Should  extremist  right  wingers  ever  come  to power,  this  Act
and   the   Subversive   Activities  Control   Board   it    established,
would  provide  the  framework  for  a  Fascist  regime,  permitting
it  to  purge,  blacklist  and  ostracize  liberals   and  moderates   of
all  kinds  by showing  that  some  of  their  views  paralleled  those
of  the  Communist  Party.    The  one  hope  is  that  the   penalties
attached  to  being  a  Communist   are  so  onerous  that  the  Su-
preme  Court,  we  feel  certain,  will  in  effect  throw  the  Act  out
as  a  violation  of  the  Fifth  amendment  when  the  government
actually  tries  to  jail  anyone  under  it  for  failure  to   register.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  11,  1961
Time  for  Adlai  Stevenson  to  Get  Off  Kennedy's  Team   Before  He's  Ruined  Morally
A  U.S.   Asset  Being  Destroyed  to  Give  Stale  Policy  A  New  Mouthpiece
The  sooner  Adlai  Stevenson  resigns  from  his  post  at  the
UN  and  gets  off the  Kennedy  team  the  better  for  him  and  the
country.    He  belongs  in  the  opposition,   where  he  can  bring
pressure  on  the  President  from  the  side  of  those  who  want
peace  and  sanity  in  the  world.    It  was  a  painful   experience
to  sit  in  the  UN  General  Assembly  the  opening  day  of  the
debate  on  admission  of  China  and  hear  Mr.  Stevenson  forced
to  recite  that  stale  rehash  of  hate,  inertia  and  political  cow-
ardice which  has  constituted  our  China policy  since  the  Korean
war  and  McCarthy's  attacks  on  Acheson.    These   led  Harry
Truman  to  relinquish  his  hands-off  policy  toward  the  Chinese
civil  war  and  extend  an  American  protectorate   over   Chiang
Kai-shek's   hated   and   defeated   plunderbund   in   their   last
refuge  on  Formosa.
The  U.S.  Shares  Formosa's   Bondage
Since  then  the  shrewd,  crafty  and  unscrupulous  men  around
Chiang  have  succeeded   in  becoming   a  major   and   poisonous
force  in  American politics.    Sometimes  one  feels  like exclaim-
ing   in   despair  that   it   is  not   the   Formosans   who   need   a
plebiscite   to  get  rid  of  the  Kuomintang  but  we.    Through
McCarthy  and  McCarran  they purged  the  State  Department  of
men  who  would  not  do  Chiang's   bidding;   even  today  their
brain-washing   operation   has   left   behind   monstrous  monu-
ments.    An  ex  Left  Socialist,  still  a  liberal  in  domestic  policy,
Douglas  of   Illinois,  has  become  the  mainstay  of   Chiang  in
the  U.S.  Senate.    Now  Stevenson,  asked  to  run  for  the  Senate
from   Illinois,  too,   is  compelled  first  to  get  up  and  make  a
speech  which  runs  counter  to  all  he  has  stood  and  fought  for.
Between  his  stand  on  China  policy  and  his  errand  boy  mis-
sions  in  Latin  America  to  prepare  the  way  for  a  new  hemi-
spheric  assault  on  Castro,  Stevenson  has  slowly  been  commit-
ting  moral  suicide.    A  great  American asset, an  American who
symbolized  for  millions  around  the  world  the  better,  wiser,
more  liberal   America,  this  asset  is  being  destroyed   because
Kennedy  lacks what  it  takes  to  change China policy from  what
it  was  under  Eisenhower.
The  most  ignominous  moment  of  that  ignominous  spectacle
the   day  debate  opened   came  when   Mr.   Stevenson   accused
China  of  training a  half  dozen  Cameroonians for  sabotage  op-
erations  in  their  native  African  country.    Mr.  Zorin  then  re-
minded  Mr.  Stevenson  that  the  U.S.  had  trained  and  sent  far
Just  Two  Years  Ago
"On  the  Communist  side,  the  concessions  would  in-
clude  the  extension  to  China  of  any  system   of   inter-
national   inspection   of  disarmament,  ending   the  threat
of  force  against  Formosa   and  subversion   in  Indochina,
a  peaceful  frontier  settlement  with  India,  free  elections
under  UN  supervision  in  Korea,  and  acceptance   of  the
right  of  the  inhabitants  of  Formosa   to  determine  their
own  destiny   by  plebiscite   supervised   by  the   UN.    On
our  side,  concessions  would  presumably  include  an  end
to  the  American  embargo  on  China's  admission  to  the
United   Nations   (not   to  be  confused   with   diplomatic
recognition),   the  evacuation  of  Quemoy  and  Matsu  and
the  inclusion  of  Korea  and  Japan  in  the  atom-free  zone
and  area  of  controlled  disarmament.
"Perhaps  neither  the  Russians  nor  we  ourselves  are
yet  prepared  to  talk  in  such  concrete  terms.    Yet  it  is
clear  that  no  general   control  of  disarmament  has  any
value  unless  it  includes  China,  and it  is  difficult  to  see
how  China  can  accept  international  control  when  it   is
not,  formally,  a  member  of  international  society.    More-
over,  as  a  member  of  the  UN,  Communist  China,  with
a   quarter   of   the   world's   population,   would   be   more
accountable   to  world  opinion  than  as  an  outcast."
—Adlai  Stevenson  in  Foreign   Affairs,     Jan.   1960
more  men  into  Cuba  on  a  similar  mission  last  spring,  yet  no
one  argued  that  the  United  States  should   be  excluded   from
the  United  Nations.    The  Cameroonian  delegate  himself  ob-
jected  to  having  his  country  used  by  the  U.S.  in  its  cold  war
battle  with China.
Never  has  propaganda  so  blinded  a  free  people  as  we  have
been  blinded  in  our  relations  with  China.    It  is  we,  not  the
Chinese  who  have  our  bases  thousands  of  miles  from   home
across  the  Pacific.    It  is  our  Navy  and  our  Air  Force  which
patrol  straits  as  close  to  China  and  as  much  a  part  of  China
as  Long  Island  Sound  is part  of  the  United  States.    It  is China
which  has  on  at  least  three  occasions  in  recent  years  offered  to
make  her  Pacific  shores  an  atom  free  zone,  and  it  is  we  who
have  rudely rejected  those  offers  without consideration and  put
nuclear  bases  around  China's  periphery.    Whatever   the   out-
come of  this year's  debate,  it  will be marked  even  among  those
who  vote  on  our  side  with  a  further  decline  in  respect  for  our
politics and our political leaders.
Cambodia  Says UN  Cannot  Solve  Major  World  Problems  Without  China's  Participation
"Let  us  take  for  example  the  question   of   disarmament.
Who  can  deny  that  any  agreement  on  disarmament—assum-
ing  that  one  can  be  concluded—would  be  considerably   weak-
ened,  if  not  rendered  largely  ineffective,  if  the  Peoples  Re-
public  of  China,  with  all  its  enormous  uncontrolled  military
potential  were  not  party  to  the  agreement?   .  .  .
"A  second  example:  according   to  the  opinion  of  compe-
tent   circles   China  will   soon   be  capable   of   making   atom
bombs.    What  purpose   would  be  served   by  an   accord   on
nuclear  armament if  this  did not  include China?  .  .  .
"In  1954,  when  the  so-called  Indochinese  war  attained   its
culminating  point,  with  the  Vietminh  forces  on  the  point  of
turning  the  tide  in  their  favor,  an  international   conference
was  hastily   convoked  to  find  a  solution  to  put  an  end  to
the  war. ..  .  China  came  to this  conference  and participated
in  full  equality.  .  .  .
"Again  in  May  1961,  when  the  Laotian  conflict   threatened
to  develop  into  a  large  general   conflict,  then  on  the  initia-
tive  of  our  Chief  of  State,  Prince  Norodom  Sihanouk,  a  new
enlarged   Geneva   conference   was   convoked,   this   time   in-
cluding  14  States  among   which  was  the  Peoples  Republic
of  China  .  .  .
"Why  was  it  judged  necessary  to  invite  Peoples  China  to
these  conferences?    Very  simply  because   it  was  thought—
with  good  reason—that  no  decision   could  be  taken  on  these
questions  without  the  agreement  of  China.  .  .  .  We  do not
understand  why  these  same  great  powers  are  opposed  to  the
presence  of  China in  our Assembly  when  the  United  Nations
are  confronted   with  problems  even  more   important?"
—Af.  Tioulmg  of  Cambodia,  UN  General Assembly  Dec. 1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   December  11,  1961
UN  Vote  for  Swedish  Resolution  A  Defeat   for  U.S.  Policy  and West  German  Ambition
Canada, Norway, Denmark Split NATO Bloc to Vote for  "Non  Nuclear" Club
The  U.S.  press  has  failed  to  cover  at  all  adequately  the  full
significance  of  the  vote  by  which  the  United  Nations,  sitting
in   First   Committee,   overwhelmingly   endorsed   the   Swedish
resolution  on  Nov.  30.    This  looks  toward  the  establishment
of  a  "non-nuclear  club"  and  a  series of  atom  free  zones around
the  world.    The  vote  must  be  seen  against  the  background  of
the  Kennedy-Adenauer  talks  and  the  West  German  campaign
to  take  control  of  NATO's  nuclear  warheads  from   the  sole
jurisdiction  of  the  U.S.  president,  and  give  Bonn  a  finger  on
the  trigger.     While  Adenauer  did   not   succeed   in  winning
Kennedy's  approval  for  this,  he  did  succeed  in  blocking  in-
clusion   in  Berlin  negotiations  of   any  proposal   for   an  atom
free  zone  in  Central  Europe.
A  Vote  of  Non-Confidence  in  Bonn
Both  these  objectives  of  German  policy  would  be  thwarted
by  the  Swedish  resolution.     It  seeks  to  set  up  a  "club"   for
nations  pledged  not  to  produce  nuclear  weapons,  not  to  ac-
quire  them,  and  not  to  allow  them  to  be  stored  on  their  soil.
Were  these  aims  fully   achieved,   they  would   not   only  end
Germany's  hopes  of  acquiring  nuclear  weapons  on  its  own  and
preventing  an  atom  free  zone  in  Central  Europe  but  would
also  force  a  change  in  U.S.  policy  toward  NATO.    The  U.S.
would  no  longer  be  able  to  store  nuclear  warheads  on  the  soil
of  non-nuclear  NATO  members  as  it  is  now  doing,  and  con-
sequently  be  unable  to  train  them  in  their  use  in  the  event
of  war.    This  is  what  the   U.S.  meant  when   it  complained
that  the  resolution  threatened  existing  defense  arrangements.
The  U.S.  representative,  Mr.  Yost,  argued  that  the  Swedish
resolution  "calls  into  question  the  right  of  free  nations  to  join
together  in  collective  self-defense,  including  the  right  of  self-
defense  with   nuclear  weapons   if   need   be."    This   pompous
sophistry  and   U.S.   pressure  were  unable,  however,   even   to
hold   NATO's   own   ranks  together.     Canada,   Norway   and
Denmark  voted  for  the  resolution.    The  U.S.  was  only  able
to  marshal  12 votes  including  its  own  against  it.   These  were
the  votes  of  the  remaining  NATO  powers   plus   Spain  and
Portugal,   and  Nicaragua  the  only  Latin  American  country  to
vote  with  us  against  the  "non-nuclear  club"   idea.    All   the
Bonn  Accuses  Shirer   of  Bias
"Bonn—The  West  German   government   has  adopted
the   unusual   expedient   of   attacking   William   Shirer's
best-selling   'Rise  and  Fall   of   the  Third  Reich'  in  an
official   Bonn  publication.    The  occasion  for   the  action
has   been   the   appearance   of   Mr.  Shirer's   account   of
Nazism  in  a  German  language  edition.  .  .  .
"The  German  government  has  been  dismayed  at  the
success  which  the  book  has  enjoyed  in  the  U.S.    They
regard  it  as  having  played  an  important  role  in  keeping
unpleasant    memories   of   the   past   alive   among    the
American  public.    The  government  publication  lodged  a
charge  of  anti-German  bias  against   Mr.   Shirer."
—Gaston  Coblenz  dispatch   from   Bonn  in   the   New
York   Herald-Tribune   Sunday,  Dec.  S.
Scandinavian  powers  voted  for  it;  so  did-Brazil  and   Mexico.
From  Asia  even  the  votes  of  generally  pro-Western  Thailand,
Pakistan  and  Israel  were  cast  for  the  resolution.   Not  a  single
African  vote  could  be  obtained  against  it.    Even  Nationalist
China,   South   Africa   and   U.S.   satellites   as  small   as  Guate-
mala  and  El  Salvador  could  not  be prevailed  upon  to  do  more
than  abstain.    The  final  vote  was  57  to  12,  with  32  absten-
tions.
The  Swedish  resolution  is  only  a  weak  first  step  but  it  can
be  used  to  set  forces  into  motion.    Under  it  the  Acting  UN
Secretary  General  is  instructed  to  poll  the  non-nuclear  powers
and  ask  them  whether  and  under  what  conditions  they  would
be  willing  to  enter  into  undertakings  not  to  produce,  acquire
or  store  nuclear  weapons.    He  is to  report  the  results  not  later
than  April  1.    The  peace  movement  abroad  should  be  alerted
to  the  significance   of  the  vote,  and   begin  to  arouse   public
opinion  to  shape  the  outcome.    This  could  be  turned  into  a
kind  of  world-wide  plebiscite  on  whether  the  peoples  of  the
earth  want  nuclear  weapons  to  spread  any  further.    It  would
also  give  the  smaller  powers  a  chance  to  get  around  the  stale-
mate  between  the  big,  and  initiate  action  on  their  own.    Par-
ticularly  among  Germany's  smaller  neighbors,  the  coming  UN
poll  provides  an  opportunity  to  speak  up  against  West  Ger-
many's  ambition  to  become  a  thermonuclear   power.
Kennedy's  Position  on Berlin  Talks  Contrasted  With  West Germany's
'•To  compare  what  President   Kennedy   said   to  Mr.  Adz-
hubei   with   the   West   German  Government's   statement   to
the  Bundestag   yesterday   is  not  altogether  fair.  .  .  .  Still,
the  statements  appeared  almost  simultaneously  and  covered
some  of  the  same  subjects.     Something   is  therefore   to  be
gained  by  setting   them  side  by  side.
"The  most  conspicuous  difference  is  in  the  tone  of   voice.
President  Kennedy  was  firm  on  specific  points.    He  empha-
sized  his  determination  to  defend  western   rights  in  Berlin,
and his  belief  in the  need  to  reunify Germany.  But  he  sought
what  common  ground  he  could  between   the  American  and
Russian  points  of  view.   This  spirit  seems  lacking  from  the
German   statement,   which   emphasizes   maximum   demands
and  minimum  concessions. ...  It  rejects  any regional   meas-
ures  against  surprise  attack  and  any  advance  settlement   of
frontier  problems.    On  foreign  aid  it  even  goes  as  far  as
to  state,   The   German  people   would  not  understand   if  we
were  to  enter into development  partnerships  with  states that
do  not  recognize  our  rights   of  self-determination.'
"On  specific  points   there   is   a  difference  of   emphasis—
which  conceals  a  basic  disagreement—on  the  role  of  nuclear
weapons  in  Europe.    The  German  Government   renewed  its
demand  that  NATO  should  become  an  atomic  force.    Apart
from  the  fact  that  the  present  arrangement  does  not  appear
to  put  the  western  forces  at  a  disadvantage,  the  idea  of  de-
centralizing  control  of  nuclear  weapons  runs  directly   coun-
ter  to  present  efforts  to  prevent  their  spread  and  to  raise
the   threshold   of   catastrophe   by   building   up   conventional
forces.     President    Kennedy   appears   to   share   this   latter
view.  .  .  .
"There  is  also  a  basic  but  vaguer   difference.    The  Ger-
man  statement  repeats  that  European  security  can  be  dis-
cussed  only  in connection  with  reunification.   President  Ken-
nedy  explicitly  recognizes  that  reunification  is  out  of   the
question   for  the  moment,  and  holds  out  hopes  that  if   the
Berlin  question  can  be  settled  'we  can,  in  my  opinion,  reach
a  peaceful  settlement  in  the  centre  of  Europe'."
—Editorial   leader  in   The  Times  (London)   Nov. SO
1  8  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  11, 1961
The  Way  to  Earn  Latin  American  Respect  Is  to  Leave  Castro  Alone
Hemisphere  Already  Split  by  JFK's  New  Moves  Against  Cuba
The  meeting  of  the  Organization  of  American  States  here
in  Washington  last  Monday  should  be  a  warning  to  the  Ken-
nedy  Administration  that  it  is  playing  with   dynamite  in  its
efforts   to  prepare  for  new  action  against  Cuba.    Though   it
won  agreement  to  a  meeting  in  Panama  Jan.  10,  it  did  so  at
the  expense  of  a  hemispheric  split.    Despite  Castro's  declara-
tion  of  Marxism-Leninism,  its scare treatment  in  the  U.S.  press
and   the  exertion   of  strong  pressure  over   the  week-end,   the
U.S.  was  unable  to  carry  most  of  the  hemisphere  with  it.
The  vote  was  14  to  2,  with  five  abstentions,  but  the  nega-
tive  vote  of  Mexico   (the  other  was  Cuba's)  and  the  absten-
tions  of  Argentina,  Brazil,  Bolivia,  Chile  and  Ecuador  meant  '
that  the  larger  nations  with  roughly  four-fifths   of  the   popu-
lation  and  area  of  Latin  America  did  not  vote  with  us.
Odd  Companions  on  The  New   Frontier
Those  who  lined   up  on  our  side  included  some  peculiar
recruits  for  a  new  crusade  to  make  the  hemisphere  safe   for
democracy:  The  dictator  Somozas  of  Nicaragua,   the  dictator
Stroessner  of  Paraguay,  the  dictator  Duvalier   of  Haiti,  Ydi-
goras  of   Guatemala,   the  military  junta  of   El  Salvador,   the
oligarchies  of  Panama  and  Peru,  and  Trujillo's  final  gift  to  the
Dominican  people,  Balaguer.
It  is feared  that  the  Panama  meeting  has  two  purposes.  One
is  to  create  an  atmosphere  in  which  a  new  armed  attack  on
Cuba  can  be  carried  out.     The   Cubans  claim  that   men  are
again  being trained  in  Guatemala,  Nicaragua,  and  Puerto  Rico
for  invasion.    The  New  York  Post  Nov.  21  carried  a Chicago
Daily   News   dispatch   by  Gerry  Robichaud   from   Guatemala
City  declaring that  Pedraza,  Batista's  most  hated  aide,   notor-
ious  for  the  torture  chambers  over  which  he  presided,  is train-
ing  an  invasion  group  in  Guatemala.
The  other  feared  purpose  of  the  Panama  meeting  is  again
to  set  up  as  in  the  early  50's  a  political  committee  as  a  cover
for  a  hemispheric  FBI  operation.    It  is  notorious   that  many
men   now  prominent  in  the  more  democratic  regimes  which
have  replaced  many  of   the   military  dictatorships  were  then
blacklisted   as  "subversive"   and   denied   the   right   to   travel.
Two  Versions,   One  From  Miami
The  Other  From  Havana
"Miami,  Dec.  2—(UPI)—Cuban  Premier  Fidel Castro
said  today  he  really  has  been  a  dedicated  Communist
since   his  college  days  but  he  concealed  his   views   so
it  would  be  easier  to  seize power."
—Washington   Daily   News,   Dec.   2,   under   banner
headlines  covering  most  of  page  one,  "Castro  Says   He
Was  Red  Right  From   The  Start."
"Havana,  Dec.  2—(AP)—Declaring  he  is  a Marxist-
Leninist  opposed  to  the  personality cult,.  Fidel   Castro
said  today,  The   world  is  on  the  road  toward  Commu-
nism'  and he is  taking  Cuba down  that  path. ...  In his
latest  address,  Mr.  Castro  said  that  during  his  years
as  a  student  at  Havana  University he  was  not  a Marx-
ist  because  he  was  'influenced  by  imperialist and  reac-
tionary   propaganda  against   the   Communists.'
"By  1953,  three  years  before  his   invasion  of  Cuba,
his  political  thinking  'was  more  or  less  like  what  it  is
now',  he  added,  but  it  was  only  after  he  came  to  power
that  he  developed  into  a  Marxist-Leninist."
—Washington  Sunday   Star,  Dec.  3.
Latin  Americans  fear  a  recurrence  of  this  on  the   excuse  of
hunting  down  Castro  agents.
The  way to  earn  the  respect  of  the  hemisphere  is to  let  Cuba
alone.    The  way  to  tear  the  hemisphere  apart  and  ruin  the
prospects  of  the  Alliance  for  Progress  is  to  make  it  seem  only
an  elaborate  bribe  for  a  mass  onslaught  on  the  first  leader  in
a  generation  to  give  Latin  Americans genuine  social  and  eco-
nomic  reform.    Many  leaders  who  take  an  astringent  view  of
Castro,  and  do  not  wish  at  all  to  be  beholden  to  Moscow,  will
rally  to  his  side  if  we  attack him.    So will  the  Latin  American
masses.    Castro  was  Kennedy's  first  big  mistake.   He  will  re
gret  it  if  he  tries  a  repeat   performance.
In   a  burst   of  Blrchism,   the   Commodore  Hotel   In   New   York
cancelled  a  memorial  meeting  to  have  been  held  there  last  Tues-
day   for   John   T.   McManus,   general   manager   of   the   National
Guardian,  and  a  Bill  of  Rights  dinner  scheduled  for  next  Friday,
Dec.   15,  by  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Committee  with  Carey
McWllllams  of  The  Nation,  and  I.  F.  Stone  as  sneakers.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  to  Friends  If   You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    LONG  Envelopes
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Knter
(To)
Street
City   .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for
........................................ ..Zone.......
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
..........................................Zone.......
we  send  gift  announcement?
the  enclosed   $5:
.....State....................
12/11/61
(1 yr.)   additional:
.....State....................
Yes  D    No D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
•'.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid   at   WashinKton.   D.   C.    Published   every    Monday  except   the   last   Monday    in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December   and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Avt.  N.  W    Washington. DC   An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Mansirer.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:  to   in  t
Canada:   $10  elaewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:   $20  to   Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
the  U.  S.:  S6  in
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED