I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1961
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1961jun12.pdf

============================================================

"Fateful   Moment In  the History  of  A  Free  Country"
From  the  Historic  Black  and  Douglas  Dissents  in  the  Communist and  SACB Cases,  Pages  2-3.
/. P. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IX,  NO.  22
JUNE  12,  1961
'»'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Supreme  Court  Betrays  the  U.S.  to  Its  Real  Enemies
The  heart  of  the  intricate  and  savage  Internal  Security  Act
lies  in  the  registration  provisions  which  the  Supreme  Court
upheld  5-to-4 last  Monday.   These  rest  in  turn,  to  a  consider-
able  degree,  on  proof   by  parallelism.     That  is  to   say,   the
Subversive   Activities   Control   Board   set  up  by  the   act,   in
determining   which   organizations   must   register   with   it   as
Communistic,  studies  the  extent  to  which  they  follow   party
line.     This   is  what   led   President   Truman   in   vetoing   the
measure *  on  September  22,  1950,  to  say:
"Obviously,  if  this  law  were  on  the  statute   books,   the
part  of  prudence  would  be  to  avoid  saying   anything  that
might  be  construed   by  someone  as  not  deviating   suffici-
ently  from  the  current  Communist  propaganda  line.   And
since  no  one could be  sure  in  advance what  views  were  safe
to  express,  the  inevitable  tendency  would  be  to  express  no
views  on  controversial   subjects."
As  In  Dante's  Hell
The  Supreme  Court's  decision  will  hurt  the  best  interests
of  the  United   States  in  three  ways.    The  first  and  most  im-
portant  was that  indicated  by the  Truman  veto  message.    The
decision  will  tend  to  inhibit  political  discussion  and  activity.
The  inhibitory potential  of  the  Act  takes  on  formidable  out-
lines  as  one  examines  its  ingeniously  interlocked  provisions.
Its  area  of   jurisdiction,  like  Dante's   Hell,   is  divided   into
various  degrees  of  damnation.   Three  categories  of  organiza-
tions  are  made  subject  to  the  inquisitorial  eye  of  the  Subver-
sive  Activities  Control   Board—the  very  name  would   make
Jefferson   wince.    The  condemned  are  divided  into  Commu-
nist   "action",    Communist   "front"   and   Communist   "infil-
trated"   organizations.    All   three   are  required  to  wear   the
scarlet  letter;  they  are  forbidden  to  mail  any  publication  or
other   communication  or  make   any  radio  or  TV    broadcast,
without  plainly  labelling   it   as  "disseminated   by   [name],   a
Communist   organization."      The   first   two   categories   must
register,  and  on  registering   their  members  lose  the  right  to
travel  (even  application  for  a  passport  becomes  a  crime),  to
work  in  defense  facilities,  or  to  hold  government   jobs;  they
are,   in  short,  reduced   to   second   class  citizens.     Communist
"action"  organizations,   though  not  the  other   two  categories,
must   register   their   members   as  well   as  their   officers,   and
failure   to   register   is  punishable   by  draconian   penalties:   a
fine  of  $10,000  and  a  prison   sentence  of  five  years  may  be
imposed'  for  each  day  of  failure  to  register.     A  delay  of   30
days  could  mean  a  fine  of  $300,000  and   150  years  in  jail;
longevity  will  henceforth   be  a  prime  requirement  for  Amer-
* A  Congress  afraid  to  vote  against  anything  labelled  anti-
Communist   passed   it   over   Truman's   veto.     Among   those
voting  to  override  in  the  House  were  Nixon  and  Kennedy,
the  former  a  sponsor   of  the  measure,  long   known  as   the
Mundt-Nixon  bill.
The  Bad  Example   We  Set
"Now,     when   this  country  is  trying  to   spread   the
high   ideals   of   democracy  all   over   the   world—ideas
that   are   revolutionary  in   many   countries—seems   to
be   a  particularly   inappropriate   time   to   stifle   First
Amendment  freedoms in  this  country.   The  same  argu-
ments  that  are  used  to  justify   the  outlawry  of  Com-
munist  ideas  here  could  be  used  to  justify  an  outlawry
of  the  ideas  of  democracy in  other  countries."
—Mr.  Justice   Black  dissenting  in  Communist   Party
v.  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.
ican   radicals.     Such  sanctions  will  not   encourage  marching
in  May  Day  parades.
The   second  way  in  which   the   Supreme  Court   hurt  our
country  was  in  defacing  its  "image"  abroad.     Even  in   the
most  despotic  country,  every  citizen  is  free  to  agree  with   the
government.   The  test  is freedom to  oppose  it,  and  to  oppose
it  fundamentally.   Just  as  there  will  be  no  freedom  in   the
Soviet   bloc  until   there   is  freedom  to   be   d»//-Communist,
so  the  measure  of  freedom  here  is  the  freedom  to  be  Commu-
nist.    By  this  test,  Great  Britain,  France  and  Italy  with  legal
and   open   Communist   parties  are   still   free   countries   while
we  descend  to  the  bastard  zone  with   South   Africa   among
those  which  impose  outlawry  of  one  kind  or  another  on  the
Communists,    and   their   sympathizers.      How   can   we   ask
liberalization  of  the  Diem  regime  or  mollify  the  brutal  police
state  imposed  on  Korea  by  the  new  military  junta  when  we
ourselves  revert  to  mechanisms  of  suppression?
"If   there   be  any  among   us,"   Jefferson   said   in   his  first
Inaugural   "who   would   wish   to   dissolve  this   Union   or   to
change   its  Republican  form   of  government,  let  them   stand
undisturbed  as  monuments  of  the  safety  with  which  error  of
opinion  may  be  tolerated  where  reason  is  left  free  to  combat
it."    If  there  be  any  such  among  us  today  they'd  better  hurry
down   and   register.     Mr.   Justice  Frankfurter   and   his   four
colleagues  no  longer  have  that  same  faith  in  reason.    We  are
participants  in  a  slow  degeneration   from  the  faith  that  once
made  America  a  shining  light  in  the  eyes  of  mankind.    In  a
country  where  freedom  of  the  press  was  regarded  as a founda-
tion  stone  of  liberty,  we  now  have  an  act  which  requires  of
all   registered   organizations   the   "listing,   in   such   form   and
detail  as  the  Attorney  General  shall  by  regulation   prescribe,
of  all  printing  presses  and  machines  including  but  not  lim-
ited  to rotary  presses  .  .  .  offsets  .  .  .  ditto  machines ... or
any  mechanical  devices  .  .  .  capable  of  being   used  to  pro-
duce   or   publish   printed   matter   or  material."    One  would
have  to  go  to  the  statute  books  of  the  Franco  or  Salazar  re-
gimes  to  match  this  meticulous  frenzy  in  fear  of  the   printed
word.    Is  this  America?
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  12, 1961
Black's  Historic  Dissent  in  the  Subversive Activities  Control Board  Case
"I   do  not  believe  that  it  can  be  too  often  repeated   that
the  freedoms  of  speech,  press,  petition   and   assembly  guar-
anteed  by the  First  Amendment must  be  accorded  to,the ideas
we  hate  or  sooner  or  later  they  will  be  denied  to  the   ideas
that  we  cherish.    The  first  banning  of  an  association  because
it  advocates  hated  ideas—whether  that   association   be  called
a political party or not—marks a fateful  moment  in  the  history
of  a  free  country.    That  moment  seems  to  have  arrived  for
this  country.  . . .
"This  whole   [Internal  Security]   Act,   with   its  pains  and
penalties,   embarks  this   country,  for   the  first   time,   on   the
dangerous   adventure  of  outlawing  groups   that   preach   doc-
trines  nearly  all   Americans  detest.    When   the   practice  of
outlawing  parties  and  various  public  groups   begins,   no  one
can  say where  it  will  end.    In  most  countries  such  a  practice
once   begun   ends  with   a  one-party  government.     There   is
something  of  tragic  irony  in  the  fact  that  this  Act,   expressly
designed  to  protect  this  nation  from  becoming  a  'totalitarian
dictatorship'  with   'a   single   political   party,'  has  adopted   to
achieve  its  laudable  purpose  the  policy  of  outlawing  a  party
—a  policy  indispensable  to  totalitarian   dictatorships.  .  .  .
Act  Called  Bill  of  Attainder
"In  my  judgment,  the  Act  here  under  consideration  is  un-
constitutional  on  at   least   three   grounds   in   addition   to  its
direct   conflict   with  the   self-incrimination   provisions  of   the
First  Amendment.   It  is,  in  the  first  instance,  a  classical  bill
of  attainder  which  our  Constitution  in  two  places  prohibits,
for  it  is  a  legislative  act that  inflicts  pains,  penalties  and  pun-
ishments  in  a  number  of  ways without  a  judicial  trial.    The
legislative  fact-findings as  to  Communist  activities,  which  the
Court—despite  the  constitutional   command  for  trial  of  such
facts  by  a  court  and  jury—accepts  as  facts,  supply  practically
all  of  the  proof  needed  to  bring  the  Communist  Party  within
the  proscriptions   of  the  Act.    The  Act  points  unerringly   to
the  members of  the  Party  as guilty  people  who  must  be  penal-
ized  as  the  Act  provides.    At  the  same  time,  these  legislative
fact-findings  fall  little  short  of  being  adequate  in   themselves
to  justify  a  finding  of  guilt  against  any  person  who  can  be
identified,   however  faintly,  by  an  informer,   as  ever  having
been  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party.    Most  of  whatever
is  lacking  in  the  legislative  fact-findings  is  later  supplied  by
When  Jacobins  Were  The  Bogies
".  .  .  the  Federalist  Sedition  Act ...  did  not  go
as  far  in  suppressing  the  First   Amendment  freedoms
of  Americans  as  do  the  Smith  Act  and  the  Subversive
Activities   Control   Act.     All   the   fervor   and   all   the
eloquence  and  all  the  emotionalism  and  all  the  preju-
dice   and  all   the   parade   of   horrors   .   .   .   were  not
sufficient  in  1798  to  persuade  the  members  of  Congress
to  pass  a  law  which  would  directly  and  unequivocally
outlaw  the  party  of   Jefferson,   at  which  the  law   was
undoubtedly   aimed.    The  same   arguments   were   then
made  about  the  'Jacobins,'  meaning  the   Jeffersonians,
with   regard  to  their  alleged  subservience  to   France,
that   are  made  today  about  the  Communists  with  re-
gard  to  their  subservience  to  Russia."
—Black's   dissent   in  Communist  Party   v.   SACB
administrative   fact-findings   of   an   agency   [the    Subversive
Activities  Control  Board]  which  is  not  manned  by  indepen-
dent  judges,  and  which  does  not  have  to  observe  the  consti-
tutional  right  to  trial  by  jury  and  other  trial  safeguards  un-
equivocally   commanded  by  the   Bill  of   Rights.     Yet,   after
this  agency  has  made  its  findings  and   conclusions,   neither
its  findings  of  fact  nor  the  findings  of  fact  of  the  legislative
body  can  subsequently  be  challenged   in  court  by  any  indi-
vidual who may later  be brought  up  on a  charge  that he  failed
to  register  as  required  by  the  Act  and  the  Board.    The  Act
thus  not  only is  a  legislative  bill  of  attainder  but  also violates
due   process  by  short-cutting  practically  all   of   the   Bill   of
Rights,  leaving  no  hope  for  anyone  entangled  in  this   legis-
lative-administrative  web  except  what  has  proved  in  this  case
to   be  one  of  the   most  truncated   judicial  reviews  that   the
history  of  this  Court  can  afford.
Violation  of  First  Amendment
"I  think  also  that  this  outlawry  of  the  Communist  Party
and  imprisonment  of  its  members  violates  the  First  Amend-
ment.     The   question   under   that   Amendment   is   whether
Congress  has  power  to  outlaw  an  association,   group  or  party
either  on  the  ground   that   it  advocates  a  policy  of   violent
overthrow   of  the  existing  government  at  some  time  in  the
distant  future  or  on  the  ground   that  it  is  ideologically  sub-
servient  to  some  foreign  country.    In  my  judgment   neither
of  these  factors  justifies  an  invasion   of   rights   protected   by
Black  Sees  A  Swarm  of  Informers  in  the  Wake  of  the  Court's  Smith  Act  Ruling
"In  1799  the  English  Parliament  passed  a  law  outlawing
certain  named  societies  on  the  ground  that  they   were  en-
gaged  in  'a  traitorous  Conspiracy ...  in  conjunction  with
the  Persons  from  Time  to  Time  exercising   the  Powers  of
Government   in   France.   .  .   .'    One  of   the   many   strong
arguments   made  by  those   who  opposed   the  enactment  of
this  law  was  stated by  a  member of  that  body,  Mr. Tierney:
" 'The  remedy  proposed  goes  to  the  putting  an  end  to
all   these   societies   together.     I   object  to   the   system,   of
which  this  is  only  a  branch.  .  .  .  These   attempts  lead  to
consequences  of  the  most  horrible  kind.  .  .  .  Those  whom
they  cannot  prove  to  be  guilty,  they  will  punish  for   their
suspicion.   To  support this  system,  we  must  have  a  swarm
of   spies  and  informers.  .  .  .'
"The  decision  in  this  case,  in  my  judgment,   dramatically
illustrates  the  continuing  vitality  of  this  observation.   The
conviction  of  the  petitioner here  is  being  reversed  because
the  Government  has  failed  to  produce  evidence  the  Court
believes  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  Communist  Party  pres-
ently  advocates  the  overthrow  of  the  Government by  force.
The  Government  is  being   told,  in  effect,  that  if  it   wishes
to  get  convictions  under  the  Smith  Act,  it  must  maintain
a  permanent  staff  of  informers  who  are  prepared  to   give
up-to-date   information   with  respect  to  the  present  policies
of  the  Communist Party. ...  I  dp not  disagree  with  the
wisdom  of  the  Court's  decision  to  compel  the  Government
to   come   forward  with  evidence   to   prove  its   charges   in
each  particular  case.    But  I  think  that  it  is  also important
to  realize  the  over-riding  pre-eminence  that  such  a  system
of   laws  gives  to   the  perpetuation  and  encouragement  of
the  practice  of  informing. ...  I   have   always   thought
that  this  Government was  built  upon  a  foundation  strong
enough   to  assure   its   endurance  without   resort   to   prac-
tices  which  most  of  us  think  of  as  being  associated  with
totalitarian   governments."
—Mr.  Justice   Black   concurring  in  Noto  v.   U.S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  12, 1961
... Calls Outlawry of A Party 'Fateful Moment in The History of A Free Country'
the  First  Amendment.   Talk  about  the  desirability  of  revo-
lution  has  a  long  and  honorable  history,  not  only  in  other
parts  of  the  world,  but  in  our  own  country.    This  kind  of
talk,  like  any  other,  can  be  used  at  the  wrong  time  and  for
the  wrong  purpose.     But  under  our  system  of   Government,
the  remedy  for  this  danger  must  be  the  same  remedy  that  is
applied  to  the  danger  that  comes from  other  erroneous  talk—
education  and  counter  argument.    If  that  remedy  is not  suffici-
ent,  the  only  meaning  of  free   speech  must  be  that  revolu-
tionary  ideas  will  be  allowed  to  prevail.*
Sympathy  with  A  Foreign  Regime
"This   conclusion   is   not   affected   by  the   fact   that   those
advocating  a  policy   of   revolution  are  in   sympathy   with  a
foreign  government.    If  there  is  one  thing  certain  about  the
First  Amendment  it  is  that  this  Amendment  was  designed  to
guarantee  the   freeest  interchange  of   ideas   about   all   public
matters   and  that,  of   course,   means   the  interchange  of  all
ideas,  however  such  ideas  may  be  viewed  in  other  countries
and  whatever  change  in  the  existing  structure  of  government
it  may be hoped  that  these  ideas  will  bring  about  .  . .
"The    freedom   to   advocate    ideas   about   public   matters
through   associations  of   the   nature   of   political   parties   and
societies  was contemplated  and  protected  by the  First  Amend-
ment.   The  existence of  such  groups  is  now,  and  for  centuries
has  been  a  necessary  part  of  any  effective  promulgation  of
beliefs   about   governmental   policies.     And   the   destruction
•of  such  groups  is  now  and  always  has  been  one  of  the  first
steps  totalitarian  governments   take.    Within   recent   months
we  have  learned  of  such  practices  in  other  countries.    Only
a   few  weeks  ago  an   executive   edict   outlawing   all   parties,
groups  and  associations  all   the  way  down   through   Rotary
Clubs  was issued  in  a  country  where  the  government  is  largely
in the hands  of a single man . . .
There  Are  Some  Countries  .  .  .
"I   am   ready   to   admit  that  strong   arguments   can
be  made for  saying  that Governments in  general should
have  power  to  suppress speech and  press.   These argu-
ments  are  particularly  strong  in  countries  where  the
existing   Government   does  not  represent  the   will  of
the  people. ...  It  is  plain  that  there  are  Governments
in  the  world  today  that  desperately   need  to  suppress
such  protests  for   they   probably   could  not  survive  a
week  or  even  a  day  if  they  were  deprived  of  the  power
to  use  their  informers  to  intimidate, their  jails  to  im-
prison  and  their   firing   squads   to  shoot  their  critics.
In   countries   of   that   kind,   repressive   measures   like
the  Smith  Act   and  the  Subversive  Activities   Control
Act  are  absolutely  necessary.  .  .  .  But  in  a  democracy
like  ours,  such  laws  are  not  only  unnecessary  but  also
constitute  a  baseless  insult   to  the  patriotism   of  our
people."
—Black  dissenting  in  Communist  Party   i).  SACB
*Cf.  Gitlow  v.  N.Y.  If   in  the  long  run  the  beliefs  ex-
pressed  in proletarian dictatorship are  destined  to  be accepted
by  the  dominant  forces  of  the  community,  the  only  meaning
of  free  speech  is  that  they  should  be  given  their  chance  and
have  their  way.'   Mr.  Justice  Holmes,  dissenting.
"I   am  compelled   to  say  in   closing   that   I  fear   that   all
the  arguments  and  urgings  the  Communists  and  their  sympa-
thizers  can  use  in  trying  to  subvert  Americans  to  an  ideology
wholly   foreign   to  our  habits   and  our  instincts  are  far   less
dangerous  to  the   security  of   this   Nation   than   laws   which
embark  us  upon   a  policy  of  repression  by  the  outlawry  of
minority  parties  because  they  advocate  radical  changes  in  the
structure  of  Government.   This widespread  program  for  pun-
ishing  ideas  on  the  ground   that  they  might  impair   the  in-
ternal  security  of  the  Nation  not  only  sadly  fails  to  protect
that  security  but  also  diverts  our  energies  and  thoughts   from
the  many  far   more   important  problems  that  face  us  as  a
Nation   in  this  trouble  world.
"I  would  reverse  this  case  and  leave  the  Communists   free
to  advocate  their  beliefs  in  proletarian   dictatorship   publicly
and  openly  among  the  people  of  this  country  with  full   con-
fidence that  the  people  will  remain  loyal  to  any  democratic
Government    truly   dedicated   to   freedom   and   justice—the
kind  of  Government  which  some  of  us  still  think  of  as  being
'the  last  hope  of  earth'."
—Mr.  Justice  Black dissenting in  Communist Party  v.  SACB.
Cynical  Reflection  of  Mark  Twain's About  American  Freedom  Cited  by  Douglas
"When  we  allow   petitioner  to  be  sentenced  to  jail  for
six  years  for  being  a  'member'  of  the  Communist Party,
we  make  a  sharp  break  with  traditional  concepts  of   First
Amendment  rights  and  make  serious  Mark  Twain's  light-
hearted  comment  that  'It  is  by  the  goodness   of  God  that
in  our  country  we  have  those  three  unspeakably  precious
things:  freedom  of  speech,  freedom  of  conscience,  and  the
prudence  never  to  practice  either  of  them.'
"Even  the  Alien  and  Sedition  Laws—shameful reminders
of   an  early  chapter  in  intolerance—never  went  so  far   as
we  go  today.   They  were aimed  at  conspiracy  and advocacy
of  insurrection  and  at  the  publication  of  'false,  scandalous
and  malicious'  writing against  the  Government.  .  .  .  There
is   here  no  charge  of  consipracy,  no  charge  of   any  overt
act   to   overthrow   the  Government  by  force  and  violence,
no  charge  of  any  other  criminal  act.  .  .  .
"We  legalize  today  guilt  by  association, sending  a  man
to  prison  when  he  committed  no  unlawful  act.  .  .  .  The
case  is  not  saved  by  showing  that  petitioner  was  an active
member.    None  of  the  activity  constitutes  a  crime.  .  .  .
Not  one  single  illegal  act  is  charged  to  petitioner.    That
is  why  the  essence  of  the  crime covered by  the  indictment
is  merely  belief—belief  in  the  proletarian  revolution.  .  .  .
"Of   course,   government   can   move  against   those   who
take  up  arms  against   it.    Of  course,  the  constituted  au-
thority  has  the  right  of   self-preservation.     But  we   deal
in  this  prosecution of  Scales  only with the  legality  of  ideas
and  beliefs,  not  with  overt  acts.    The  Court  speaks  of  the
prevention  of  'dangerous  behavior'  by  punishing those  'who
work  to  bring  about  that  behavior.'   That  formula  returns
man  to  the  dark  days  when  government  determined   what
behavior   was   'dangerous'  and  then  policed  the  dissidents
for  tell-tale  signs   of   advocacy.    What   is   'dangerous  be-
havior'  that  must  be  suppressed  in  its  talking  stage   has
had  a  vivid  history  on  this  Continent.   The  British  colonial
philosophy  was  summed  up  by  Sir  William  Berkeley  who
served  from  1641 to  1677 as  Virginia's  Governor:  "I  thank
God,   there  are   no  free  schools  nor  printing,   and  I  hope
we  shall  not  have  these  hundred  years;  for  learning  has
brought  disobedience  and  heresy  and  sects  into  the  world,
and  printing  has  divulged  them.  .  .  ."
—Mr.   Justice   Douglas  dissenting   in   Scales   v.   U.S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  12, 1961
Teaching  Our   Crypto-Fascists   How  To  Get  Around  the  Bill  of  Rights
(Continued   from   Page One)
"It   is  argued,"   Mr.   Justice  Frankfurter   said  for  the  ma-
jority,   "that  if   Congress   may  constitutionally   enact   legisla-
tion   requiring  the   Communist   Party  to  register,  to  list  its
members,   to   file   financial   statements,   and   to   identify   its
printing   presses,  Congress   may  impose   similar   requirements
upon  any  group  which  pursues  unpopular  political   objectives
or  which  expresses  an  unpopular  political  ideology.     Nothing
which  we  decide  here  remotely  carries  such  an   implication."
Never  was  a  learned  man  so  blind  to  the  obvious  lessons  of
history.   Harry Truman  showed  more  insight  when  he  warned
Congress   such  legislation   was  "a  clear  and  present  danger"
to  our  institutions  (see box  on  this  page).    Here  we  come
to  the  third  way  in  which  this  decision  harms  our  country.
At  a  time  when  right  wing   paranoid  organizations  like  the
Birch  Society  are  mushrooming,  when  our  military  and  intelli-
gence  bureaucracies  are  more  and  more  permeated  with  simi-
lar  views,  a  majority  of  the  Supreme  Court  has  shown   these
crypto-Fascist   forces  how   they   can  get   around   the   Bill  of
Rights   and  future  judges  how  easily  the  First  Amendment
may  be  "balanced"  away.
Murky  Principles  Make  Murky  Law
The   majority   has  betrayed   America  to   its   real   enemies,
those  who  would  destroy  freedom  in  the  name  of  anti-Com-
munism.     The   betrayal  was  made  the   more  inexcusable  by
the  legal  circumstances.   The  framers  of  the  Internal Security
Act  realized  that  under  the  Fifth  amendment  it  was  doubtful
whether  they  could   force  Communists   to   register   since  by
such  registration  they  would  be  incriminating  themselves.    So
they  put  a  Section  4  (f)    in  the  statute  which  says  that  no
one  shall  be  held  guilty  of  a  crime merely  because  they  were
a  member  or  an  official  of  the  Communist  party.    When  the
Court  finally  got  around  to  the  registration provisions,  it  also
had  before  it,  in  the  Scales  and  Noto  cases,  the  first  convic-
tions  under  the  membership  clause  of  the  Smith  Act.  These
membership  convictions  had  two  hurdles  to  overcome.    One
was  this  Section  4   (f)    of  the  Internal  Security  Act  which
says  that  membership  "per se"  is  not  a  crime  and  the  other
was  the  basic  legal  principle  that  guilt  in  our  law  is  supposed
to  be  individual.   The  majority  got  past  both  hurdles  by  re-
writing  the  Smith  Act  to  mean  that  membership  was  criminal
Truman's  Forgotten  Warning
"Laws  forbidding  dissent   do  not  prevent  subversive
activities;   they   merely   drive   them   into   more    secret
and   more   dangerous   channels.   .  .  .   Once  a   govern-
ment   is   committed  to   the   principle   of   silencing   the
voice   of   opposition,   it   has   only   one   way   to   go  and
that  is  down  the  path  of  increasingly  repressive  meas-
ures,   until  it   becomes   a   source   of   terror   to   all   its
citizens   and  creates   a  country   where   everyone   lives
in  fear.   We  must,  therefore,  be  on  our  guard  against
extremists  who  urge  us  to  adopt  police  state   measures.
Such   persons  advocate  breaking  down  the   guaranties
of   the   Bill   of   Rights   in   order   to   get   at   the   Com-
munists.    They  forget  that  if  the  Bill  of  Rights   were
to   be  broken  down,   all   groups,   even   the   most con-
servative,  would be  in  danger  from  the  arbitrary power
of  Government."
—Truman  to  Congress  August  8, 1950.
only  if  "active"  and  "knowing." *
But  having  held  that  Section  4  (f)  was no  bar  to  a  prose-
cution  for  membership,  the  Court  seemed  bound  to  hold  that
Communists  could  not  be  forced  to  register  since  this  might
be  their  first  step  toward  prison.    This  would   have   disposed
of  the  Subversive Activities  Control  Board.    Frankfurter  and
the  majority,  however,  divorced  the  issue  of  registration  from
the  issue  of  self-incrimination  and   said  they  could   not   pass
on  the  latter  until  some  Communist  was  actually  arrested   for
failure   to   register.     By  delaying  the   test,   they  allow'  the
SACB  to  move  fully  into  operation.    It  may  be  years  until
the  Fifth  Amendment  question  comes  up;  it  is  not  even  clear
whether  it  can  come up  in  a  meaningful  form  once  that  regis-
tration  has  been  upheld.    Eventually  the  Court  may  decide,
as  I  think  this  one  would,  that  no  Communist, can  be  forced
to  register.    But  in  the  meantime  the   SACB  will  be  well-
established,  the  mere  initiation  of  proceedings  against  accused
"front"   organizations  will  be  enough   to  destroy  them,   and
the  listing  of  organizations  and  names  will  give  this  country
a  new  and  more  noxious  form  of  blacklisting   with  which  to
threaten  dissenters  and  non-conformists.
* We  still  don't  understand,  however,  why  Scales  (who  quit
the  Party  after  Hungary)   goes  to  jail  for  six   years   while
Noto  (still  a  party  functionary)   goes  free;  murky  principles
make  murky law.
If   You  Send  Self-Addressed    Stamped   LONG   Envelopes   We'll   Mail   Free  Sample   Copies   of   This   to   Friends
I.   F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for
...........................................Zone.......
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
........... _ .........................Zone........
we  send  gift  announcement?
the  enclosed   $5:*
.....State....................
6/12/61
(1 yr.) additional:
....State....................
Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C,.  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bnt  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in  the  U.  S.:   16  in
Canada:   $10   elsewhere.    Ail   Mail   rates:   $16  to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED