I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963jan07.pdf

============================================================

From  Jail  to  Sloppy Joe's:  First  Day's  Progress  of  IFS  As  One  and  Only  Yanqui  Newsman  in   Castroland
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
• VOL. XI,  NO. 1JANUARY  7,  1963
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
Not  Easy  to  Be  A  Reporter -At  Large-In  Havana
"It's  a  long  time  since  I've  made  out  a  ticket  to  Havana,"
said  the  girl  at  the  airline  ticket counter  in  Washington.    On
the  plane  for  New  Orleans,  when  it  looked  as  if  we  were go-
ing  to  be late,  I  explained  to  the  stewardess that  I  was anxious
to  make the  connection for  Mexico  City  because I  had  to catch
a  plane  for  Cuba  next  day.   "Going  to  Cuba?'  the stewardess
repeated   incredulously.    After   dinner  she   came   back   and
asked,  "Aren't  you afraid?"    In  New  Orleans the  Mexico City
connection  had   left   and  several  of   us  were  routed  through
Houston.    When  a mink clad  fellow  traveler—if  she will par-
don   the   phrase—heard   I   was   going   on   to   Havana,   she
screamed  with surprise.    "You  going  to  Cuba?  I  didn't know
anybody  went  there  anymore."    I  began  to  feel  as  if  I  were
headed  for  the  moon.
Poor  Prelude  to  A  Peace  Mission
The  day  before  I  left  Washington,   Mr.  Kennedy  at  press
conference  had  announced  he  would  soon  be  imposing  new
restrictions  on  other  nations'  shipping  to  Cuba.    On  the  way
to  the  airport,  I  read  an  editorial  in  the  Washington   Daily
News  saying  "failure  of  the  Soviet  Union  to  live  up  to  its
agreement  with  Cuba  is  on  the  whole  a  good  break  for  the
United  States"  because  otherwise  "President  Kennedy's  rather
vague  promises  against  invasion  might  have  proved  embar-
rassing."    These  seemed  a  poor  prelude  to  a mission  of  peace,
even  by  one  well-meaning  Yankee  journalist,  slightly  over-
weight,  travelling  to  an  island  neighbor  on  which  his  govern-
ment's  blockade  was  imposing  hunger.    With  three  boxes  of
weight-reducing  Metrecal  wafer   in   my  capacious  brief-case,
in  the  happy  expectation   that  a  visit  to  Cuba  should   be  a
chance  to  get  a  little  fat  off, I  felt  like  a  repugnant  symbol of
the  gap  between  have  and  have-not  in  today's  world,  the  un-
comfortably  obese  on  one  side,  the  desperately  ill-fed  on  the
other,  confronting  each  other  in  an  incomprehension  far  deep-
er  than  any  difference  over  the  nature  of  God  or  the  sanctity
of   projperty.
In  Mexico  City,  there  was  the  same  sensation  of  travelling
to  a  land  cut  off,  besieged,   rendered   unfamiliar.    The  taxi
driver,  on  our  way in  from the  airport,  assured  me when  asked
how  people there  felt  about  Castto that  they were  good  Catho-
lics,  implying  that  as  such  they  were  naturally  hostile  to  all
sons  of  Satan.    The  well-stocked  bookstores  of  the  Mexican
metropolis,  two  years ago  full  of  works  about  and  by  Castro,
were  now  swept  clean  of  such  literature.    The  only  place  I
encountered  sympathy  for  Cuba  was  in  a  Mexico  City  phar-
macy.    I  had  with  me  a  list  of  medicines  urgently  needed  in
Havana  and  I  had  decided   to'  buy  what  I  could  in  Mexico.
When  I  explained  my purpose,  I was given  warm and  friendly
attention,  Helped with  my  selections  and  offered  a  10  percent
discount  on  my  $100   in  purchases.    I  took  the  discount   in
1 *
As  Cuba  Sees  It
"While  Cuba  allows the  relatives  of  the  invaders  who
caused  great  damage  to  leave,  the, U.S.  does  not  let  its
own  citizens  travel  to  our country,  even  for  a  few  days
—such  as  happened  with  the  students  who found it  im-
possible  to  come and see  with  their  own  eyes  the truth
about  the revolution."
—Hoy, Havana, Dec. 17.
extra  medical  supplies.    "Those  poor  people,"  said  the  clerk
in  Spanish,  of   the  Cubans,  as  she  wrapped   my  package   in
holiday  gift   paper.
At  the  airport  next  day,  it  was clear  that  the  Mexican  gov-
ernment  did  not  look  on  visits  to  Cuba  with  any  such  senti-
mental  eye.    As we cleared  the  last  immigration  barrier, every
visitor  leaving  for  Cuba  was  photographed,   dose  up,   by  a
police   photographer.     Then   a  long  wait   began.     First   the
Cubana  Airline plane  was late  in  arriving  and  then  it  was  kte
in  leaving.    A  rumor  spread  that  an  incoming  American  on
board  had  been  arrested  by  the  Cubans,  forbidden  permission
to  land,  and  ordered  back  to  Cuba.   Then  it  turned  out  that
the  Mexican  government,  which  is  trying  to  make  travel  to
Cuba  as  difficult  as  possible  for  North  Americans,  was  refus-
ing  to  let  two  Canadians and  an  American  get  off  the  plane
because  they  lacked  transit  visas.    Fortunately  the  American
was  married to  a  Belgian  woman.   Among  the  Havana-bound
passengers  waiting  (mostly  diplomats)   was  the  Belgian  Am-
bassador.    He  finally  loosened  the  noose  of  hostile  Mexican
regulations  and  obtained  permission  for  the  American and  the
Canadians  to  land  in  transit  and  thus  release  our  plane  for
the  return  flight.
We  set  off  at  last,  elated  but  hungry,  all  of  us  wondering
whether  the  Cuban  starvation rations we had  read  about  would
begin   on  the  trip.     But  our   fears  proved   unfounded,   and
Cubana  Air  Lines  served  us  an  excellent  dinner.    There  was
even  a  chess  set  on  board  with  which  I  and  a  Dutch  business
man  were  able  to  make  the  flight  of  almost  four  hours  pass
swiftly.    But  the  ordeal  of  entry  into  the  strange  new  world
of  Cuba  was not  yet over.   We  landed  a  little  after  midnight,
and  the  familiar  airport  seemed   less  festive  than  on  earlier
occasions.  There  Was no  band  to  serenade  us.  The  only  ban-
ner  in  evidence  said,  "We  are  thankful  for  the  fraternal  aid
of   the   Socialist   countries."    It  was  soon   evident  that   this
gratitude  did  not  extend  to  visiting  U.S.  journalists.    We  all
passed  the  health  officer  quickly  and  together,  but  every  time
I  moved  up  to  the  immigration  barrier   I  was  waved  back
while  others  were  cleared  through.    The  immigration    officer
in  charge  had  a  lean  and  hungry  look,  like  Cassius.    I  could
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  7,1963
not  catch  his  eye and I  had  a  vague  feeling  that  I  was  going
to  have  trouble.
Nothing  Ever  Lost  Under The Revolution!
Everybody  else  had  been cleared  through.    The  airport  was
empty  of  all  but  officials  and  porters when my  case  was  final-
ly  taken  up.   My money was  changed,  down to  the  last penny
at  the  official  peso-for-dollar  rate. My bags were  gone  through
carefully  and  the  medicines  I  had  brought  were  taken  from
me.   I  protested  that  they  were  urgently  needed  and  showed
a  letter  from  the  Medical Aid for  Cuba  Committee giving  me,
at  my  request,  a  list  of  the  medicines  most  in  short  supply
and  the  name  of  a  doctor  at  a  Havana  hospital  to  contact  on
my  arrival.    I  said  I  was  afraid  they  might  be  lost  around
the  airport.    An  angry  young  militant   shouted  furiously  at
me  that  under  the  Revolution  nothing  was  lost!   I  was  tired
and  cross  and  rather  relished  the  idea  of  a  good  fight  and
shouted  back  at  him  not  to  give  me  that  line  of  hooey,  or
words  to  that  effect.    The  militant  thereupon  insisted  that  I
be  given  a  receipt,  item  for  item,  and  a  customs  ticket  with
which  the  hospital  could  retrieve  the  medicines.*    But  I  had
clearly  marked   myself  in  his  Jacobinical   eye  as  a  counter
revolutionary  element.    While  he  looked  on  glaring,  another
agent   started   through   a   zipper   portfolio  I   was  carrying.
When  I  assured  him there  was  nothing  in  it  but  "periodicos"
(papers  and  magazines),  he  ruled  that  these  could  not  enter
Cuba  but  must  be left  at  the  airport  where  I  could pick  them
up  on leaving.  I  pulled  out  a  recent  issue  of  The  New  Yorker
in  protest  to  show  him  I  was  not  carrying   dangerous  liter-
ature,   though  I  afterwards   thought   nothing  could  be  more
subversive  to  morale  under  the  austerities  of  socialism  than
those  glittering  ads  it  carried.   I  don't  know  how the  argu-
ment  would  have  ended  if  the  immigration   officer  I  had  iden-
tified  in  my mind  as  "Cassius" had  not  interrupted  to  tell  me
that  I  would  have  to  go  with  him  to  the  immigration    office
in  Havana  for  questioning.    Two militiamen  with  him  picked
up  the  portfolio  along  with  my  two  other  bags  and  hustled
me  out  to  a  car  waiting  in  the  darkness  outside.
So  at  two  in  the  morning,  I  started  off for  Havana  in  an
automobile  with  two  militiamen  and  the  immigration   officer,
none  of whom could—or  would—speak  English.    When I  tried
to  find  out  what  was  up,  they  would  shout  "habla  espanol"
as  if  the  mere  attempt  to  speak  in  English  was  an  affront  to
Cuba's  newly  found  nationalist  dignity.    My  papers  were  in
order.   I  had  a  U.S.  passport  cleared  for  travel  to  Cuba and
I  had  a  visa  issued  by  the  Cubans  through  the  Czech  Em-
bassy  in  Washington.    Apparently   these   documents  merely
demonstrated  how  clever  imperialist   agents  could  be.    We
* A  doctor  from  the  hospital picked  up  the  receipt  from  me
two  days  later  and  went  to  the  airport  where  he  was  given
forms  to  fill  out  and told  to  return next  day.   I  never  did find
out  for  sure  whether  the  medicines  got  through.
seemed  to  be  short  of  gas  and  kept  stopping  along  the  dark-
ened  roads  at  gas  stations   only  to  find  them  closed.    I  had
a  vision  of  us  running  out  of  gas  and  of  making  the  long
march  into  Havana  with  my  captors  and  my  bags  on  foot.
But  luckily we  found  a  gas  station  open,  filled  our  tank  and
reached  a  police  station  on a  narrow  street  in  the  old city  of
Havana.   There  my  captors  were  greeted  with  warm  revolu-
tionary  abrazos,  and  no  doubt  felicitated  on  their  fine  catch..
They  disappeared   into  a  combination  police  dormitory  and
jail  in  the  rear  of  the  station.   I  found  myself  with  two new
guards.   They  refused  to  let  me  phone  the  hotel  at  which  I
was  supposed  to  have  reservations   and  told  me  I  was  being
held  incommunicado to  await  the  arrival  of  an  immigration
officer  in  the  morning.   I  refused  to  go  to  sleep  on  a  cot  set
up  for  me in  the  rear  just  outside  the  jail  cells  and  spent  the
rest  of  the  night  alternately  dozing  in  a  chair  and  roaming
around  the  police  station.
Trotzky's  Books  in  The  Jail  Library
It  was  dingy  and  it  smelled  like  police  stations  do  all  over
the  world.   It  differed  only  in  its'pictures  and  in  its  books.
The  pictures  on  the  wall  were  those  of  Jose  Marti  and  of
Camille   Cienfuegos,   the   latter   a    barbudo   of    Christ-like
beauty,  one  of  the  early  heroes  and  martyrs  of  the  Revolu-
tion.    The  only  picture  of  Fidel  Castro  was  one  torn  out  of
a  newspaper  and  pinned  to  the  bulletin  board  along  with  an
article  about  Maceo,  the  Negro  General  who  was  one  of  the
leaders  in  the  revolt  against  Spain.    On  the  blackboard  was
written  an  invitation  to  comrades  of  the  police  to  attend  the
wedding  of  one  of  them.    The  tattered  volumes  on  the  book-
'shelves were unlike those  to  be  found  in  the  police  stations of
any  other  country  in  the  world.   There  was  Plato's  Republic
and, of course, Don Quixote.   There  was  a  two volume history
of  the  Platt  Amendment  we  imposed  on  Cuba  after  the  war
with  Spain.    There  was  Liu  Shao  Chi's  "How  to  Be  A  Good
Communist"  and  Lenin's  "Bankruptcy   of  the   Second  Inter-
national."    There  was  Trotsky's  famous  attack  on  Stalinism,
"Their   Morals  and  Ours."    There  was  also  his  "Permanent
Revolution"  and  his  "Last  Testament  of  Lenin."   There  were
several  examples  of  the  inexpensive  Marxist  books the  Soviet
Union  exports  in  large  quantities  like  Kostantinov's  "Funda-
mentals  of  Marxist  Philosophy"  and  there  were  large  stacks
of  back  numbers  of  the  Peking  Review.
I  was  poorly  guarded  and  could  have  run  away  if  I  had
known  where  I  was.    But  this  would  have  meant  leaving  my
bags  behind  and risking  a  shot  from  the  pistols  of my guards.
In  any  case,  it  was  much too interesting  an  experience  to  run
away  from.  Of the  two guards, both  young, the  one in  charge
was  as  implacable  as  the.  well-bred  revolutionist   should  be
when  dealing  with  a  counter  revolutionary   suspect;  my  re-
peated  efforts  to  argue  him  into  making  a  phone  call  were
of  no  avail.   His  assistant, who  seemed  to  be  studying  an  in-
troductory  book  on aeronautical  engineering  during  the  night,
Canada's  Largest  Newspaper  Proposes  Mediation  of   the   US-Cuban   Quarrel
"It  is  time  that  the  Cuban  situation  was  reviewed  in  the
light  of  cold  common sense.    The  island  has  been  denuded
of  the  Russian missiles.    Russian technicians  have departed
by  the  thousands.   The  Bay  of  Pigs  prisoners  have  been
ransomed  and returned  to  the  Unuited  States.
"It  is   therefore   annoying   to  find  Mr.  Michael  Artime,
political  leader  of  the  abortive  1961'Cuban  invasion,  calling
for  the  Organization  of  American  States  to  take military
action  to  overthrow  the  Castro  regime.    We  trust  that Mr.
Artime's  U.S.  hosts  will  make  it  officially  clear  that  no  in-
vasion  of  Cuba  from  U.S.  shores  will  be permitted. The  U.S.
has  a  duty  to  the  world  to  keep  its  unruly  guests  in  order.
"It  should  do  more  than  that.    Blame  for  the  extremely
bad  relations   which  have  developed  between  the  U.S.  and
Cuba,  and  which  alone  enabled  Premier  Khrushchev  to  try
his  Cuban  venture,  can  be  laid  as  much  to  the  U.S.  as  to
Dr.  Castro.    When  he  first  came  to  power  Dr.  Castro  was
not  a  Communist.   Had  the  U.S.  then  dealt  with  him  as
they  have  dealt  with  other  dictators,  had  they  recognized
the   need  within   Cuba   for  revolutionary  reform,  however
painful  to  U.S.  interests,  Cuba  would  now  be  in  the   U.S.
and not  the  Soviet camp.
"There  is  no  reason  why  Canada  should  not  serve  as  a
mediator.    She  could  be  commissioned  by  the  OAS  or  the
UN.  The  goal  of  the  initial negotiations  should  be  the  gain-
ing  of  Dr.  Castro's  consent  for  a  committee of  Canadians  to
visit  Cuba  and study  the  economic  situation  with  a  view  to
determining  what  sort  of  help  is  needed.    This  committee
could  hope  to  succeed  only  if  it  had the  unofficial  blessing  of
a  United  States  that  had  decided  to  try  a  new  attitude  to
Cuba.    But  the  world  has  a  right  to  expect  that  even  the
great   and  powerful  U.S.   will   change   its   attitudes,  when
they  have  been  wrong.    Cuba's  ailment  cannot  be  cured  in
isolation,   but  only  through  contact.    It  is  time  that  the
treatment  was  begun."
—Toronto  Globe  and  Mail  (abridged)  Dee. 27.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  7,1963
was  friendly.    He  told  me he  was  a  campesino,  that  he  had
gone  through  only  five  grades   of  school  at  the  time  of  the
revolution  and  he  waxed eloquent on  its  benefits  though much
of  his  Spanish  I  could  not  understand.    As  we  were  standing
outside  the  station  talking,  a  newsboy  came  along  with  the
paper  Hoy,  organ  of  the  Cuban Communist Party.  He  bought
me   a    copy   and   we   settled    down   to   read    a   document
not  to  be  found  in  Communist  papers  anywhere  else  in  the
Soviet  world  except  Albania  and  North  Korea  and   perhaps
North  Vietnam—a  partial  text  several  columns  long  as  dis-
tributed  by  the  Chinese News  Agency  of  the  editorial,   "Pro-
letarians  of  All  Countries,  Unite  in  Order  to  Fight  Against
Our   Common   Enemy"   with   which   the   People's   Daily  of
Peking  Dec.  15  had  replied  to  Khrushchev's  defense  a  few
days  earlier  of  his  policy  on  Cuba*
In  Which  I  Quote  Fidel  to  My Guards
At   6  a.m.  my  campesino  friend   went   out   and   returned
with  two  long  loaves of  bread  and  a  large  can  of  coffee.  The
two  guards  settled  down to  their  breakfast  and  waved  me  to
join  them.    I  was  allowed  to  wash  up  in  the.lavatory  behind
the  police  barracks  which seemed to  be full  of  police sleeping
in  bunks  piled  three  tiers  high.  The  guards  broke  off  huge
slabs  of  bread  which  we  dunked  in  small  cans  of  coffee.   The
bread  and   coffee  tasted   good  and  I  settled   down  afterward
to  sleep  in  a  swivel  chair.    But  when  I  awoke  and  saw  it
was  past  nine  o'clock  and  there  was  no  sign  of  a   hearing
officer  I  began  to  get  restless.   When  a  new  shift  of  guards
came  on  and  I  heard  my  case  being  discussed with  the  night
shift,   I  renewed  my  efforts   at   a  phone  call.    In  my  rudi-.
mentary  Spanish,  using  the  fingers  of  one  hand  to  make my
point,  I  said  there  were  probably  three  or  four  periodistas
(newspapermen)  in  the  U.S.  still friendly  to  the  Cuban revo-
lution,  that  I  was  one  of  them,  that  I  had  brought   scarce
medicines  as  a  present  to  Cuba,  and  that  here  I  was  being
held  a  prisoner.   I  said  Che Guevara, Roa, Dorticos and  other
top  leaders  knew  me  and  all  they  had  to  do  was  telephone
* I  was  later  to  find  that  the  Cuban  papers  of  Dec.  13 and
14  had   published   in  two  installments   the   full  text   of   the
Khrushchev  report  to  the  Supreme  Soviet  of  Dec.  12.   The
issue  of  Hoy  in  which  I  read  the  partial  text  as  cabled  from
Peking  was  that  of  Sunday,  Dec.  16.    Revolucion,  organ  of
Fidel's  July  26  Movement,  is  not  published  on  Sunday.    Its
Monday,  Dec.  17  issue  carried   the   full   text   of  the   Peking
declaration,  covering more  than  a  full  page.  Thus  the  Castro
regime  supplied  the  Cuban  public  impartially   with  the   full
text  of  what  both  sides  in  the  Soviet  world,  the  Russian  and
the   Chinese,  had   said   in   their   bitter   dispute   over   Cuba,
thermonuclear  war  and  policy  toward  the   U.S.
to  check  my  identity.    "Look,"  I  said,  as  a  clincher,  "Didn't
Fidel  himself  in  a  recent  speech  attack  bureaucracia  and  isn't
this  an  example of  bureaucracy at  work?"  My words  seemed
to  make  an  impression  on  one  of  the  new  guards.    He  went
off  down  the  street—to  make  a  phone  call,  I  hoped.    In  the
meantime,  when  ten  o'clock  came  with  no  action,  I   thought
I  had better  raise  a  tantrum.    I  began  kicking  chairs  around
the  police  station   and  demanding  that  someone  who  spoke
English  be summoned. This  brought  angry  and  sleepy guards
pouring  out  of  the  barracks  and  finally  I  was  taken   inside,
and  a  policeman awakened  who  spoke  English.
There  was  a  furious  torrent  of  Spanish  from  the  guard  to
the  policeman Who  spoke English,  and  then  I  had  an  unpleas-
ant  surprise.    At  intervals,  through  the  night,  when  I  tried
to  make  a  phone  call,  I  was  assured  that  an   immigration
officer   would  be  there  at  9  o'clock,  and  it  was  implied  that
then  my  difficulties  would be  over.    But  now I  was  informed
by  the   English  speaking  policeman  that  nothing   could  be
done  for  me  because  it  was  not  an  immigration   matter   at
all,  but  was  in  the  hands  of  the • security  police.    With  this,
as  if  to  dramatize  the  hopelessness  of  further   discussion,  he
turned  over  in  his  bunk  and  went  back  to  sleep  again.
I  Feared  A Czech-Style  Frameup
It  had  been  a  comfort to  remember,  during  the  night,  that
Prof.  Samuel  Shapiro  told  me  before  I  left  the  States  that
he  had  twice been arrested  in  Cuba, once on arrival, again  on
departure,  for  incautious remarks  at  the  airport.   But  with
the  news that  the  security  police  were  in  charge  of  my  case,
I  began  to  feel  real  alarm.    I  suddenly remembered  the  fate
of  my  good  friend,  Mordecai  Oren.    An  Israeli  Left  Zionist
newspaperman,  he had  been arrested  by the  Czechs on a  visit
to  Prague  and  framed  for  espionage  in  connection  with  the
Slansky  affair   and  imprisoned  for   four  years.    I   recalled
that  when  I  met  him  at  the  Belgrade  conference  in  Septem-
ber,  1961,  he  told  me  of  the  methods  used  to  extract  a  false
confession  from  him.   He  had  given  me  a  copy  of  the  book,
as   translated   from   the   Hebrew   and  published   in  France
under  Jean-Paul   Sartre's  aegis   (M.  Oren:  Prisonnier  Poli-
tique  a  Prague;   Les  Temps  Modernes:  Juilliard,  1960)   in
which  he  told  the  story.    I  wondered whether  a  similar   fate
might  be  in  store  for  me.   I  had  said  to  my  wife  on  leaving
in  high  spirits  that  if  I  were  locked  up  in  Cuba  she  was  to
send  me oatmeal  cookies.   Now it  looked  as  if  this might  turn
out  to  be  a  prophetic  joke!
I  decided  I  had  better  calm  down  and  rest  up  for  a  pos-
sible  ordeal.  I  came  out  of  the  police dormitory  and  stretched
out  on two chairs  in  the  rear  of  the  police station  to  get  some
sleep.    My  audience  was   a  ragged  collection  of  two  dozen
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
The  Kind  of  "Liberation" Our  CIA's  "Freedom  Fighters"  Had  Planned  For   Cuba
"A  few  days  before  President   Kennedy's  inauguration,
the  CIA  moved  to  strengthen  its  hold  over  Guatemala—in
effect   presenting   his  new  Administration  with  a   fait   ac-
compli in which the  liberal  elements  among  the  Cuban  exiles
were  swept  from  positions  of influence.  . . .
"While  the  [Cuban  Revolutionary] Front's  leadership,  ex-
cept  for   [Capt.  Michael]  Artime,  was  not  consulted  about
the  purge,  the  CIA  came  to  rely  extensively  in  its  political
activities  on  a  shadowy  group  known around  Miami  as  the
'Cuban  CIA.'  .  .  .  The  exclusion   of  politically   'unsound'
fighters  and  favoritism  for  the  pro-Batista  groups  contin-
ued even after  President  Kennedy had  publicly assured  that
there  would  be  no  Batistianos  among  the  Cuban  freedom
fighters....
"But   even  the  pre-invasion  purges  were  not  enough,  ap-
parently,  for  the  CIA  operatives  and  their  Cuban  business
and  political  friends.    There  was  still  one  more  arrange-
ment  in  the  dark  to  assure  that  a  post-Castro  regime  con-
tained   no   trouble-makers.    This   top   secret   project   was
—The  Cuban  Invasion:   The  Chronicle  of  A   Disaster,
known  as  'Operation  Forty',  and  was  set  in  motion in  early
March  by  [Joaquin]  Sanjenis  and  the  intelligence   branch
of  the  Front.
"Curiously,   the  'liberators'  were  planning  to  repeat  the
policy  of  'Che' Guevara  when he  swept  down into  the  plains
of  central  Cuba and  left  his  political  indoctrinators  in  every
town  and  village  in  his  path.   The  difference  is  that  Gue-
vara   planted   procommunists,   and   the   'Cuban   CIA'   was
going  to  plant  what  at  best  can  be  called   unreconstructed
anti-revolutionaries.    As  'Operation  Fort;'  was  being  or-
ganized,  it  is  worth  remarking,  the  Kennedy  Administration
was  eloquently  affirming   its  support  for  a  noncommunist
but  advanced  social  revolution  in  Cuba.
"According   to  well-informed  Cubans,  'Operation  Forty'
also  had  a  second  task: that  of  assassinating,  if  necessary,
political  leaders   who  stood  in  the  way.    It   was  reported
that  the  project  included  a  hand-picked  task  force  of  pro-
fessional  killers  who  were  to  eliminate  obdurate   elements
which  might  object  to  a  return  to  the  good  old  days."
by  Tad Szulc  and Karl  E.  Meyer,  Ballantine  Books, 1962.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  7,1963
The  Vagaries  of  the  Secret  Police  As  Inscrutable  as  the  Weather
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
juvenile  delinquents  picked  up  off the  streets  and  locked  up
for  the  night.   They  had  poured  out  of their  cells  for  break-
fast  during  my  tantrum  and  now  their  chatter  ceased  and
they  looked  on  in  wonder  at  this  unexpected  diversion  with
their  bread  and  coffee.    I  shut  my  eyes  and  tried  to  sleep.
The  thought  crossed  my  mind  that  if  I  were  to  have  a  pro-
longed   stay   in  a   Cuban  jail,  I   could   grow   a   beard   and
emerge  a  barbudo.   I  must  have  slept  a  short  while.   When
I  opened  my  eyes  again,  there  in  the  doorway  of  the  police
station  was  the  guard  who had  seemed  to  be  impressed  with
my  story,  and  had  gone  off—I   hoped,  to  make  a  phone  call.
He  signalled  with  one hand,  the five fingers outstretched,  and
formed  "cinco  minutos"  with  his  lips.    It   sounded  as  if  he
had  indeed  gotten  help  for  me.  I  closed  my  eyes  again.  Then
I  heard  a  typewriter.    Within  a  few  minutes  I  was  given  a
one  page  document  in  quintuplicate  for  signature.    I  could
see that  it  was  a  release  but  I  refused  on  principle  to  sign
until  it  had  been  translated  into  English.    Now the  guards
seemed  to  be  anxious  to  get  rid  of  me  as  soon  as   possible.
They  awakened  the  same  English-speaking   policeman  in  the
barracks  and  brought  him  out  immediately.    It  was  an  un-
conditional  release  which  involved  no  concessions  on my part,
though  there  was  still  no  explanation  of  why  I  had  been  de-
tained  in  the  first  place.   I  signed  all five copies,  took  one for
myself  and  asked  that  a  taxi  be  summoned.   My anonymous
friend  among  the  guards  found  one for  me.   He and  a  plain-
clothesman  helped  me  with  my  bags.    They  had   not   been
searched   or  examined  again.    I   shook  hands   warmly   with
the  guard  I  suspected  of  having  made  a  phone  call  for  me
and  thanked  him  again.    I  was  free.    It  was  almost  noon
on  a  warm  sunny  Sunday  in   Havana.
I  Make  My  Own  Great  Leap  Forward
Finding  a  hotel  was  a  problem.    No reservations  had  been
made  for  me.   All  the  hotels  I  phoned  seemed  to  be jammed.
I  managed  to  reach  an  old friend  in  the  Cuban  Foreign  -Min-
istry.   He arranged  to  meet  me at  the  Havana  Riviera,  and
apologized  profusely  for  my  detention  but  he  was  as  mysti-
fied as  I  was  as  to  why I  had  been  held.    I  had  the  feeling
that  in  Cuba  the  vagaries  of  the  secret  police  were   accepted
as  one  might   elsewhere   the  vagaries  of  the  weather.    To
make  up for  what  happened  he got me a  room  at  the  Havana
Riviera.   This huge luxury  hotel,  built  by a  Las  Vegas  group
I  believe, is now a  Foreign  Ministry  hostel  for  visiting VIP's.
The   bedroom  assigned  me  was  palatial.    Its   huge   mirror
windows  looked out  on a  baby  blue  sea  and  the  great curve of
the  Malecon.    The  place  was  spotless,  the  only  sign  of  the
revolution  being  an  ashtray  on  which  was  imprinted  an  ap-
The  Real  Post-Cuba  Challenge
"Twice—in  the  1961  Berlin  crisis  and  in  this  year's
Cuba  crisis—President  Kennedy  has  rallied  the  nation
for  a firm stand,  at  the  risk  of  nuclear war if  necessary,
against  any  forcible change  in  the  power  relations  be-
tween  the  Soviet  Union  and the  U.S.   He  was  of  course
thoroughly  right  in  doing  so.    But  it  is  equally  impor-
tant  that having  resisted forcible change  in  the military
balance,  he  should  rally  the  nation  behind  a  sustained
effort  for  peaceful  diplomatic  changes  that  will  reduce
the  dangers  of  nuclear  conflict.   Defending  the  status
quo  is  not  enough;  being  willing to  risk  war  in  a  crisis
is  not  enough."
—St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch.
peal  to  the  proletariat  to  unite.   I  had  made  it  from  jail  to
gilded  palace,  as  the  Chinese  might   say,  in  one  great  leap
forward.
I  had  a  shave  and  a  hot bath  and  a  short  nap  and  then  set
forth,  as   befit   a  loyal   American,  to  celebrate  my  freedom
with  a  nostalgic   pilgrimage   to  Sloppy  Joe's,  the  bar  which
was  for   so  many  years  the   Mecca  of  thirsty  or  lonesome
fellow  American  tourists.    Strangely   enough  the  cab  driver
—and  this  itself   struck  me  as  a   sign   of  how  times  have
changed—had  never  heard  of  Sloppy  Joe's!    I  directed  him
to  go to the  Prado. There  I  got out.  I  walked past  the  familiar
but  now  boarded  up  curio  shops  and  the  equally   familiar
but  still  open  bars  like  Dirty  Dick's,  and  there,  miraculously,
was  Sloppy  Joe's,  open  too  and  still  in  business.    I  felt  as  if
I  were  on terra  firma  at  last.   There  were  only  six patrons—
two  of  them  shooting  dice—at  the  long  mahogany  bar,  prob-
ably  one  of  the  world's  longest.    The  walls  were  still  lined
with  pictures   of  American  celebrities  taken  on  past  visits
to  Havana—bygone  worthies  from  a  bygone  past,  from  Joe
Lewis  to  Joan  Blondell  and  Willie  Pep  to  Carole  Landis.   I
ordered  a  Daiquiri,  which  cost  only  90  cents  and  was  first
rate.    Despite   Marxism-Leninism,   Cuba's  Daiquiris   remain
the  world's  best.   The  bartender  observed  me  discreetly  but
curiously.    "You  English?"  he  asked.    "No,"  I  said,  "Amer-
ican."   He looked at  me warily,  as  if  I  were a  phantom.  "Any
other  Americans  here?"  I  asked  him.    "No,"   said  the   bar-
tender,  "in  Cuba,  Americans  feeneesh."    He  said  it  with  a
sweeping  gesture,  neither  sadly  nor  triumphantly  but  objec-
tively  and  with  finality,  as  of  an  unalterable  fact.    I   felt
like  the  last  Yankee  Imperialist,  unwelcome  and  no  longer
at  home.
Next  Week:  Cuba  Looks  Very   Different    From  Within  Than  Without
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street   ...................................................................................—
City   ............—.........................Zone.........-..State....................
1/7/63
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   .........—.........................................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone........_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington   15.  D.  C
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Seoond  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at  6818  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  S5  in  the  U.  S.;   S«  (n  Canada;  SIO  elsewhere.
Air  Mall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED