I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963jul08.pdf

============================================================

What  the  Germans Did  Not  Applaud*  P.  2
MIT  Professor  Says  Russian  Strategy  Makes  Fallout  Shelters  Worse  Than  Useless,  P.  3
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  15
JULY  8,  1963
B
HM       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.20  CENTS
When  the  Streets Are  Better  Than  the  Courts
The   slogan   of   the   Administration  in   its   fight   for   new
civil  rights  legislation  is,  as  the  President  put  it  in  his  special
message  of  June  19,  to  get  the  issue  "out  of  the  streets  and
into  the  courts."    But  the  truth  is  that  Mr.  Kennedy  was  not
prevailed  upon  to  issue  this  special  message  until  the  Negro
had  moved  out  of  the  courts  and  into  the  streets.    So  long  as
the  struggle  was  confined  to  the  courts,  progress  was  unbear-
ably  slow.   Nine  years  after  the  school  decision,  three  States,
Alabama,  Mississippi  and  South  Carolina  had  made  no  effort
to  comply.   In  others,  progress  was  ludicrous.   The  latest  fig-
ures   available   showed   that  the   proportion   of   Negroes,   in
schools  with  whites,  to  total  Negro  enrollment  was  0.013%
in   Georgia,   0.036%    in   Louisiana,   0.230%   in   Arkansas,
0.265%  in  North  Carolina,  0.532%  in  Florida,  and  0.556%
in  Virginia, i.e.  less  than  1  percent.
Where the Burden  Falls
The  reason  for  this  is  relevant  to  the  fight  over  a  public
accommodations  bill.     An  authoritative  work  on  the   school
segregation   cases   (Albert    P.   Blaastein   and   Clarence    Clyde
Ferguson,   Jr.:   Desegregation   and   the  Law)   says,  "Inherent
in   the  mode  of   enforcement  was  a  factor  of   delay—and  it
was  a  delay  which  could   easily  be  multiplied  manyfold  by
judges  reluctant to  give  cooperation  .  .  .  judicial  enforcement
is  dependent   upon   someone   initiating  litigation.     And  this
task  has  fallen   by  default  to  those  who   are  in  a  disadvan-
tageous  position  for  instituting legal  proceedings—the  South-
ern  Negroes."    This  also  applies  to  the  public  accommoda-
tions  bill,  whether  in  the  Administration  version  or  in  that
put   forward   by  a  group   of   Republicans  under   Lindsay   of
New  York.   Under  either  the  primary  mode  of  enforcement
is  for  the  aggrieved  Negro  to  sue  for  an  injunction.    This
takes  nerve  in  the  South,  money  and  patience.    The  first  is
growing  but  the  two  last  are  running  short.
It  is  true that  under either  bill,  the  Attorney General  could
bring  action  on  behalf  of  an  aggrieved  person.     But  in  the
maneuvering  for  a  compromise,  the  white  supremacists  will
seek  to  take  this  power  out  of  the  bill.    They  will  also  seek
to   obtain   an   exemption   for   smaller   establishments   broad
enough   to  exempt  businesses  in  the  small  towns  and  rural
areas  of  the  South  where  the  Negro  most  needs  help.    What
will  then  be  left  will  be  a  license  to  litigate  in  the  larger
cities.
The  courageous  Lindsay  has  been  ahead  of  the Administra-
tion  on  civil  rights  but  as  between  its  bill,  based  on  the  com-
merce  clause,  and  his  bill,  based  on  the   14th  amendment,
the  South  will  scent  advantages  in  the  latter.    The  Attorney
General  in  his  appearance  before  the  House   committee  was
not  only  tactless  in  dealing  with  Lindsay, a  valuable  Repub-
lican  ally,  but poorly  briefed  on  these  differences.    The Lind-
"Leaks" Designed to Make Trouble
That  New  York  Times  story   (July  1),   "New  Atom
Tests  by  Soviet   Hinted  in   AEC   Findings",   bad   its
origin   in   Dr.   Edward  Teller's   breakfast    conference
here   in   Washington   Jane   26   with   Republican   Con-
gressional  opponents  of  a  test  ban.   It  was  first  pub-
lished   by   Earl   H.  Toss   in   the   Washington    Sunday
Star  June  30.   Information  of  this  kind  is  supposed  to
be  classified,  bat  Or. Teller  and  Air  Force  "leakers" of
anti-test  ban  alarums  seem  to  be  able  to  spill  stuff  of
this  kind with  impunity.   There  seems  to  have  been  an
atmospheric  explosion   in  the  Soviet   Union  Jane  12,
two  days  after  the  President  said  the  1LS.  would  not
test  in  the  atmosphere  so  long  as  other  nations  didn't.
It  seems  to  have  been  in  the  one kiloton  range  or  less,
a  range  in  which  the  Soviets  have  set  off  chemical  ex-
plosions  in  the  past.    Mr.  Voss  quoted  one  unnamed
official   as  telling  him,   "The  tendency   now,   as   days
have  worn  into  weeks  without  discovery  of  radioactive
debris,  is  to  revise  sharply   downward  the  probability
the  disturbance  was  a  nuclear  blast."   Bat  Dr.  Teller
is  saying  it  might  have  been  a  "clean"  bomb  and  us-
ing  the  incident  to  "prove" that  even  atmospheric  tests
may  escape detection.
That  story  in  the  New  York  Times  June  30,  "UJS.
Considering   Cut  in  Its  Output  of  Atomic  Arms",  was
first   carried   by   the   UP1  wire  from   an   undisclosed
source  the  afternoon  of  July  25.   This  seems  to  have
been  another  of  those  Pentagon  leaks  designed  to  un-
dercut   disarmament   talks.    The   UPI   said   we  were
planning  a  possible  reduction  of  $1  billion  a  year  in
production  of  nuclear  fuel  for  stockpile.    Ever  since
1955  Ralph  Lapp,  author  of  the  recent  study  "Kill and
Overkill",  has  been  saying  that  our  stockpile   of  nu-
clear  material  was  far  beyond  any  possible  use.    Dis-
armament   officials   had  hoped   to  negotiate   with   the
Russians  an  agreement  to  stop  o"  sharply  reduce  fur-
ther  production.    The  disclosure   that  we  are  consider-
ing  a  sharp  cutback  in  nuclear  output,  anyway,  would
(1)   make  this  appear  no  concession  to  the  Russians
and  (2)   alert  Congressmen   from  uranium  mining  and
Plutonium  producing  areas.
say  bill  is  not  at  all  like  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1875  which
was  declared  unconstitutional   in   1883.     Instead  of   remedy
by  injunction,  it  made  discrimination  in  public  accommoda-
tions  a  misdemeanor  punishable  by $1,000  fine  or  one  year  in
jail.     In  addition  the  aggrieved   person   could   receive  $500
and  costs  for  the  offense.    This  was  based  on  the  view  that
the  14th  amendment  intended  to  give  the Negro  Federal  pro-
tection  for  full  rights  of   citizenship.     The   Court   read  the
Amendment  narrowly,  as  a  safeguard  only  against  State  ac-
tion.    Lindsay would  meet  this  standard  by  holding  that dis-
crimination  may  be  enjoined   "if  such  business   is  authorized
by  the  State  or  local  subdivision."    But  what  if   the  South
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
1 7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  8,1963
Two  Reminders  of  Reality  During  JFK's  Visit  to  the  Reich
The  Sentence the  Germans  in  the  Paulskirche  Did  Not  Applaud
For  us  the   climactic   moment  of  the  President's  trip  to
Germany   came  when  he  looked   across  the   Wall   in   Berlin
and  saw  the   sign   (see  box  below)  which  wanted   to  know
when  our  Potsdam   pledges  "to  uproot   German  militarism"
were  going  to  be  fulfilled   in  West  Germany.    Whatever   one
may  think  of  Ulbricht's  realm—where  youth  is  again  taught
to   obey   blindly   and   to   march—the  question   and   the   re-
proach  are  inescapable.    Instead  of  constantly  reassuring  the
West   Germans,  we  might   occasionally  think   of  reassuring
those  Europeans  on  both  sides  that  we're  not  going  to  aban-
don  them  to  a  remilitarized  Germany,  trained  by  NATO  in
the  use  of nuclear arms.
A  Gory Commitment
The  need  for  such  reassurance  must  have  occurred  to  Mr.
Kennedy  himself   from   the   absence   of   applause   at   a  key
passage  in  the  Frankfurt   speech  where  he  assured   the  Ger-
mans  that  the  U.S.  "will  risk  its  cities  to  defend  yours  be-
cause  we  need  your  freedom  to  protect  ours."   This  was  re-
ceived   with   enthusiasm   but   there   was   a   chill   when   Mr.
Kennedy  balanced  this  off  by   declaring   "we   work   toward
the  day  when  there  may  be  real  peace  between  us  and  the
Communists."    His  listeners  did  not  seem  to  like  this  idea
at  all.    One correspondent  (Carroll  Kilpatrick  in  the  Wash-
ington   Post   June   26)   noted   "Members   of   the    Bundestag
and   other  high   officials   in  the   Paulskirche   interrupted    the
President's   speech   with   applause   21  times.     But  they   did
not  applaud  that  sentence."
Though  the  Germans  want  us  to  risk  our  cities  to  protect
theirs,  few  of  them  seem  to  recognize  a  reciprocal   obligation
to  let  us  try  to  protect  our  cities   (and  theirs)  from  a  holo-
caust  by  negotiating  some  lessening  of  world  tension.    Every
time  agreement  with  Moscow is  even  faintly  possible,  as now
on  the   eve  of  the   new  test  ban  talks,  Adenauer   puts  ob-
stances  in  the  way.    In  his  very  first  words  of  welcome  to
the  President,   his  emphasis  was  placed  harshly  and  mean-
ingly  on  Mr.  Kennedy's  pledge  in  his  June  10  peace   speech
to  "make  no  deal  with  the   Soviet   Union  at  the  expense  of
other  nations  and  other  peoples."    It  never   seems  to  occur
to  Adenauer  that  we  might  make  a  deal  that  would  benefit
all  peoples.
The  reassurance  Adenauer  really  wants  is that  we will  not
end  the  cold  war.    With  it  would  end  Germany's   ability  to
play  East  and  West, the  U.S.  and  France  against  each  other
while  she  revives  as  a  major  military   power,  able  again   to
seek  her  ends  by  threat  and  blackmail.
It   would  be  folly  to  overlook   the   darker   forces   in   the
Reich.     On  the   eve  of   the   President's  visit,  the    National
Zeitung  und  Soldaten  Zeitung,  rightist  organ  of  the   Reich's
veterans,  proclaimed  across  its  front  page   (May  24)  "Ach-
tung!   Breslau!   Morgen  kommen  die  Deutschen"  (Warning!
Breslau!  Tomorrow  the  Germans  come)  in  an  article  about
the   Oder-Neisse  territories   taken  over  by  Poland.    A  neu-
tralist  German  journalist,  Lorenz  Knorr,  has  just  been   sen-
tenced  to  pay  300 marks  or  spend  30 days  in  jail  for  writing
an  article  in  which  he  charged  that  the five highest  Generals
in  the  Bundeswehr, notably  Gen. Fortsch,  were  guilty  of  war
That  Wall of  Our Own
At   the  Berlin  City   Hall  the  President   said,   "Free-
dom  has  many  difficulties  and  democracy  is  not  perfect.
But  we  have  never  had  to  put  up  a  wall  to  keep  our
people  in."   The  Berlin Wall  is  only  the  most spectacu-
lar  and  visible  form  of  the  restrictions  which  the  So-
viet  States  put on their  people.
But   this   habit   of   walling  citizens   in   for  political
purposes  has  been  creeping  up  on  us,  too.    Mr. Ken-
nedy  had  hardly  finished  speaking  when  the  State  De-
partment   disclosed    that   in   London  and  Amsterdam
groups  of   American  students  planning  trips  to   Cuba
had  been  warned  that  they  risked  legal  prosecution.
Americans,   unlike   Britishers,   Frenchmen, Germans
or  Scandinavians, are  not  allowed  to  visit  countries  of
which   the   government   disapproves.     This   walls   off
Cuba,  North  Korea,  China,  North  Vietnam  and  Albania
(on  which  Moscow  also  frowns).    In  addition, just  as
the  USSR   denies   the  right  to  travel  to  citizens   sus-
pected  of  being  anti-Communist,  so  we  deny  it  to  those
suspected  of  being  anti-capitalist.   Under  the  Internal
Security  Act,  members  of   registered  Communist  "ac-
tion"  or  "front"  organizations  are  forbidden   even  to
apply  for  passports.  Conversely,  the McCarran-Walter
Act  denies  visas  for  admission  to  this  country  unless
the  applicants swear  they  are  not  Communists or Com-
munist  fronters.    That  is  a  wall  of  which  many  for-
eign  visitors  are  painfully   aware.
East   Germans  who  scale   The   Wall   we   treat   as
heroes.    If  our  students  go  to  Cuba  they  risk  jail.
crimes   and  massacres  in  Russia.    Le  Monde   (June  1)   re-
ported  that  Herr  Knorr's  charges  were  so fully  supported   at
the   trial   by   Robert   Kempner,   former   U.S.   prosecutor   at
Nuremberg,  by  Lord  Russell  of  Liverpool  and  by   members
of  the  French  resistance that  Court  was  forced  to  scale  down
the  original  charges  from  "defamation   and  calumny"  to   "in-
sult"  under  circumstances   which  made  the  conviction  "prac-
tically  equivalent  to  an  acquittal."    These  are  the   Generals
and  these  are  the  forces  with  which  we  are  allied.
In  the  razzle  dazzle  of  the  German   visit,  Mr.  Kennedy's
tentative   moves  away  from   the  cold  war,  characteristically
ambivalent  to  begin  with,  tended  once  more  to  blur.    Our
vocabulary   and  the   German   is  not  the   same.    "Freedom"
for  too  many  of  them  is  not  the  individual  German's  right
to  speak  as  he  pleases  but  Germany's   freedom  to  operate  as
it  chooses  on the  world  stage.   This  has  ever  been  the  mean-
ing  of  "freiheit"  in  the  Reich.    We  would  be  unwise  to   for-
get  this,  and  unwise  to  be  taken   in  by  ballyhoo  about   the
Paulskirche   where   Mr.   Kennedy   spoke   as   the   "cradle  of
German   democracy."     The   Paulskirche    is   not   a   national
shrine  like  our  Independence  Hall  in  Philadelphia.    It  is  not
the   site   and   symbol   of   a   successful   revolution   but   of   a
ludicrous  failure,  the  scene  of  a  stillbirth  in  1848  from  which
the  best  German  liberals fled to  our  shores.   The  cradle  has
long  been  empty  and  unlamented.
The  Questions  Put  to  the  President  From  The  Other  Side  of  The Wall
Facing  him  [the  President]  from  the  Communist side  of
trfe  wall  was  an  East  German  sign  which  said:
"In  the  agreement  of  Potsdam,  United  States   Presidents
Roosevelt  and  Truman  undertook:
"To  uproot  German  militarism  and  Nazism.
"To  arrest  war  criminals and  bring  them  to judgment.
"To  prevent  rebirth  of  German militarism.
—Associated  Press  from   West  Berlin  June  26
"To ban  all  militarist  and  Nazi  propaganda.
"To   ensure   that   Germany  never   again   menaces   her
neighbors  and world peace.
"These  pledges  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  (East)  German
Democratic  Republic.   When  will  these  pledges  be  fulfilled
in  West  Germany  and  West  Berlin,  Mr.  Kennedy?"
Mr.  Kennedy  read  the  sign  but  showed  no  reaction.
, as published  the same  day in  the  Washington  Evening Star.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  8,1963
How   Enemy  Attack  Could  Evade  Anti-Missile  System   and  Achieve  Maximum  Damage
MIT   Professor   Says  Russian  Strategy  Makes  Fallout  Shelters  Useless
Unlike   the   Holifield    committee   civil  defense    hearings   in
past  years  which  have  given  a  forum   only  to  those  favor-
ing  shelters,  the  hearings  being  held  on  the  fallout   shelter
program  by  a  subcommittee  of  House  Armed  Services   un-
der  the  chairmanship  of  F.  Edward  Hebert  of  Louisiana  is
hearing  opponents  as  well.    We  give  here  an  abridged  ex-
cerpt  . from   the   striking   testimony   June   24   of   Wm.   F.
Schreiber,   associate  professor   of  electrical  engineering   at
MIT.    He  appeared   on  behalf   of  the  Boston  Area   Faculty
Group  on  Public  Issues.    Prof.  Schreiber  said:
"On  the  basis  of  a  careful  investigation   of  the  total  nu-
clear  war  threat  as  it  is  developing in  the  sixties  and  seven-
ties,   I  have   come  to  the   following   conclusion:  If   the   na-
tionwide  shelter  system  existed  today,  very  few  lives  would
be  saved  by  it  if  war  came  tomorrow.   Furthermore,   if  un-
dertaken  and  completed  in  mid-1968  as  proposed,  it  would be
essentially   useless   and   might,   in   fact,   actually    increase,
rather   than   decrease,  the   number  of  casualties   if   nuclear
war   came  then.     Thus  the   program   cannot  be   looked  on
solely  as  insurance  which  may  help  but  cannot  hurt.    It  is
rather  a  specific  defensive  strategy  which  may  work  under
some  specific  conditions,  but  which  may  be  worse  than   use-
less  in  many  situations   which  appear  to  me  more   likely.
Even Dirty Bombs
"Even   dirty   bombs  produce  no   local   fallout   unless   ex-
ploded  on  the   ground   or  low  enough  to  dig  a  crater.    A
substantial  fallout  threat  to  the  nation  can  be  produced  only
by  the  explosion  of  a  very  large  number  of  dirty  bombs  in
contact  with  the  ground.    We  must  therefore   consider  under
what  conditions  bombs  might  be  groundburst.
"At  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki,  the  bombs  were  airburst  to
maximize  the  area  of  destruction  by  blast.    As  a  result  no
one  died as  a result  of  local  fallout—there  was  none.   In  the
case   of  a   30-megaton  bomb  (the   probable   warhead   for   a
standard  Russian  T-3  ICBM)  the  area  covered  by  4  pounds
per  sq.  inch  overpressure,   a  level  useful  against  residential
construction  or  unprotected  aircraft,   is  doubled  by  a  5-mile
high  detonation, while  the  fire  area  is  tripled  by  an  optimum
(17  mile)   altitude   explosion   over   that   obtained   from   a
groundburst.    In  the  latter  case,  the  fire  area  is  in  general
substantially  larger  than  the  lethal  fallout  area  which  would
be  obtained  with  a  groundburst   of  the   same  weapon.    We
conclude  that  attacks  against  cities  would be  airbursts.   The
only  situation   in  which  groundbursts   are   called  for   is   at-
tacks  on  hard  missile  bases,  where  over-pressures   in  the  100
to  300 Psi  range  are  needed.
"A  recently  advanced  argument  for  the  establishment   of  a
fallout   shelter   system   concerns   the   possibility   that   if   an
area  around  a  city   is  interdicted   to  enemy  missiles  by  an
The Dead Even With  Shelters
How  many  Americans  would  die  in  a  nuclear  attack
even  if  we  had  shelters?    This  is  a  question  civil  de-
fense  officials  have  hitherto dodged,  offering  figures  on
how   many   would  be  saved   but   never   on  how  many
would  die  anyway.   An  official  estimate  has  now  been
smoked  out  for  the  first  time  by  the  Hebert  subcom-
mittee  of  House  Armed  Services  in  its   current  hear-
ings  on  the  fallout  shelter  program.   At  page  3093 of
Part   1  of  the  hearings   recently   released   there  is  a
chart   submitted  by   Assistant    Secretary    of    Defense
Steuart  L.  Pittman  which discloses  these  grim  figures.
The  chart  shows  fatalities  with  or  without  shelters
for   attacks   against   military-urban-industrial  targets
ranging   from   1,000   to   10,000   megatons.     At   1,000
megatons,  the  number  who  would  die  even  with  shel-
ters   is   given   as  50,000,000.   At   5,000  megatons,  the
deaths  even  with  shelters  would  be  over  80,000,000 and
at  10,000  megatons  over 100,000,000.
Though  the   chart  was  based   on  studies   of   attacks
up  to  13,000 megatons,  it  does  not  show  deaths  beyond
the  10,000  MT attack.   An  earlier  Institute  of   Defense
Analysis  study  estimated  that  an  attack  of  20,000 MT
would  kill  everyone   whether  with  or  without   shelter.
effective   anti-ICBM  installation,  he  would  adopt  the  tactic
of  upwind  groundbursts.    Thus,  the  argument  goes,  shelters
would  be  necessary  to  protect  the  city  dwellers.     However,
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  would  adopt  a
tactic  so  dependent  on  local  wind  conditions,  and  one  more-
over  which  produces  only  temporary  damage,  relatively  easy
to  avoid.    From  the  attacker's  point  of  view,  high  altitude
airbursts  produce  a  great  deal  of  physical  damage  in  addi-
tion  to  killing  people  on  at  least  as  large  a  scale  as  fallout.
"The  enemy  thus  could  plan  to  detonate  his  weapons  20 to
40  miles  above  the  ground,  avoiding  the  anti-missile  system
and  securing  nearly  maximum  incendiary   effect.
"It  appears  to  be  Russian  strategy  to  use  the  threat  of  a
counter-population  strike  to  prevent  us  from  exploding  our
much  more  numerous  counterforce  arsenal.   It  will  be  a  seri-
ous  error  to  overlook  clearly  stated  Russian  intentions  and
capabilities   of  attacking  our  cities,  as  well  as  other  targets,
in  case  of  war,  with  very  large  warheads.
"As  long  as  their  capacity  to  deliver  nuclear  weapons  by
ICBMs  remains  limited,  the   Soviets   would  almost   certainly
use  high  altitude  ground  bursts  of  large  bombs  in  attacks
against  cities,  causing  no  fallout  whatever  but  blasting  and
burning  vast  areas  around  their  targets."
Subsidies  for  Shelters  Below  the  Schools, But  None  For  The  Schools  Above Them?
"According  to  the  Administration, the   (fallout   shelter)
subsidy  program  should  result  in  the  construction  over  the
next  5  years  of  some  95,000,000 shelter  spaces   in  schools,
hospitals   and  other  non-profit   institutions.     The'  Federal
share  of  the  cost  of  these  spaces  is  projected  at  up  to  $2.50
per  square foot  or  $2.1 billion.
"What  kind  of  shelter  will  a  subsidy  of  $2.50  per  square
foot   help  buy?    The  school   board  in  my   town  has   just
planned  a  new  high  school  with  utmost  economy,  which  is
expected  to  cost  $14  per  square  foot.    Every  inch  of  space
in  that  building  will  be  used.    Extensive,  windowless,  em-
pty  underground bunkers  are  not  a  standard  part  of  this
or  any  other  school  construction.    There  is   no  reason   to
expect   that   heavily  reinforced   underground   construction
will   cost    substantially   less   than    economy    construction
above   ground.    The  present   scale  would  therefore   place
most  of  the  cost  burden  on  ourj local  school  taxpayers.  Our
local   voters   recently   turned  down  a   bond  issue   for   the
high  school  mentioned  above.    How  do  you  think  they  will
feel  about  being  asked  to  pay  the  cost  of  adding  another
underground  layer  to  the  school?  .  .  .
"Will   it   not   be   ironic  and  immoral  if   this   Congress
passes   a   subsidy   for   school    construction    underground,
while  refusing  general  sup-port  for  wholesome   school  pro-
grams  overground?     What  shall  our  children  think  of  us,
and  what  must  we  think  of  them, to  do  such  a  thing?"
—From  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Johan  W.  Eliot  on  behalf   of  the  Friends  Committee  on  National  Legislation,  June  18.
7  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  8, 1963
Demonstrations  Have  Hit  Property  Values   Badly   in  the  South
(Continued   from   Page    One)
proceeds   to   repeal    State   and   local   licensing   laws?     Then
there  would   be  no  ground   for  action  under   the   Republican
bill.    On  the  other  hand,  the  Federal  government  has  sweep-
ing  powers  under  the  commerce  clause.  That  is  the superiority
of  the  Administration  approach.
An  "NLRB" For Negro  Rights
A   better   approach   than   either   is  that   proposed    by   Con-
gressman   Wm.   Fitts   Ryan  of   New   York   in   the  five   civil
rights   bills  he  introduced   last  May  2,  the   best   in   Congress.
The  heart  of  these  measures  is  to  turn  the  Civil  Rights  Com-
mission  into  an  independent  administrative body  like  the  Na-
tional   Labor   Relations   Board   or   the   Interstate   Commerce
Commission    with    power    to    issue    cease-and-desist     orders
against  racial  discrimination  of  all  kinds,  whether   in  employ-
ment,   labor   unions,   housing  or  public   accommodations,    and
to  get  its  orders   enforced   in  the  Courts  of  Appeals  as  other
commissions  do.    This  would   bypass   refractory  segregation-
ist  Judges  in  the  Federal  District  Courts  of  the  South  and  give
all  minorities  a  specialized   forum   in  their   struggle  for   full
equality  of  opportunity.    This  would  do  for  the  Negro  what
the  NLRB   did   for   labor.
The  Negro  must  ask  a  lot  to  get  a  little.    Unless  he  and
his  friends  unite  on  some  such  sweeping  demand—and   back
it   up   by   peaceful'  and   dignified   demonstration—he   is   un-
likely  to  get   even   a  crippled   version  of   the  more   moderate
reforms  asked  by  the  Administration.   Much   disappointment
lies  ahead  in  Congress.     In  the  meantime  and  in  any  case,  the
streets  remain  more  effective  than  the  courts.    In  many  South-
ern  cities,  as  in  Montgomery   and  Birmingham, business  prop-
erties  cannot  find  buyers;  property  values  fall  as  new  invest-
ment  shies  away   from   fear  of   race  protest.  These  sanctions
more  direct  than  any  court  order   hit  white  racism  where   it
hurts.    The  Negro  must  keep  the  heat  turned  on,  not  only  to
force   some  action  out   of   Congress   but   to  make  segregation
as  costly  as  possible,  and   Io  keep   up   the  spirit   of   his   own
peoplt-.      Tricky    new    laws,   disillusioning  endless    judicial
appeals,  would  only  wear  out  the  Negro's  explosive   hopes.
Revolutions  are  not  won   in   courthouses.
The  turning  point   for  the  Negro  began  with  the   Mont-
Free  Copies   This  or  Other  Issues  Sent  Free    If
A Breath  of  Fresh  Air  on Cuba
"Those   who  propose  the  establishment  of  an Ameri-
can  backed  Cuban  government-in-exile  at  Guantanamo
Bay  are  suggesting   that  we  violate  our  treaty   rights.
The  U.S.   Government  has  a  signed   treaty  with  Cuba
which  gives  us  permission  to  operate  a  naval  base  on
Cuban  soil  as  a  coaling  naval  station  only.    It  is  both
morally  repugnant  and  politically  unsound  to  suggest
that  we  flaunt  our  treaty  obligations  by  attempting  to
set   up  a   military   force  at  Guantanamo  aimed  at   the
overthrow  of  the  Cuban  Government.  .  .  .
"Isolating   Castro  and  refusing   to  talk  to  him  may
be  a  practical,  temporary  expedient.    It  is  not  a  posi-
tive  or permanent  policy.
"Our  present   position  seems  based   on   the   doubtful
assumption   that  Castro,   shut   off  from  hemispheric  aid
and  political  support,  will  wither  away.    But  will  he?
And  if  he  does,  what  then?     Do  we  have  in  mind  a
positive  political  alternative  to  Castro?   The  exiles  ap-
pear  hopelessly   divided, sharing  only  a  hatred  of  Cas-
tro.    Do  they,  or  we,  wish  to  restore  the  economic  and
political   conditions   that   existed    under    Batista—the
very   conditions   that   insured   the   success   of    Castro's
grab  for  power?  If  not,  how  much  of  Castro's  changes
will  we,  or  they,  accept?    Do  we  accept  the  expropria-
tion   of   our  sugar   and  cattle   lands?     The  seizure  of
the  oil  refineries?    The  land  reforms?   .  .  .
"We  resent   the  presence   of   Soviet   forces  in  Cuba;
yet,   we   cannot   entirely   deny   Castro's  claim   that   he
invited  them  to  come  because  of  his  fear  of  an Ameri-
can-assisted  invasion  of  his  island. ...  At  a  later  date,
I  hope  to  suggest  certain  constructive steps  that  might
be  taken  to  open  the  way  to  a  more  satisfactory  rela-
tionship with Cuba."
—McGovern  (D.  S.Dak.)  in  the  Senate  June  27.
gomery  bus  strike  when  he  learned  what  the  humblest   could
do  where  litigation  had  long  failed.    There  is  no  doubt  that
Southern  racists  would  like  to  provoke   disorderly  scenes  this
summer  to  turn  opinion  against  the  Negro.    But  the  answer
to  that   is  not   to  call  off  the  demonstrations   but   to  step  u i
the  discipline.    The  Negro  can  give   himself   a  dignity   the
white  man   has   denied   him.     With   all   due   respect   to   the
President,  the  Negro  can  only  win  his  struggle   if  he  keeps
it  in  the  streets,  and  maintains  the  momentum   of  his  belated
mass  awakening.
You   Specify     Which   And  Send  Stamped   Envelopes
I.P.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ,
Street
City   ............_.,.........................Zone.............Stat«....................
7/8/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  .........................................................................~.
Street    .........—........................;..................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone.......-_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  Q    No  D
IF. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I   F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.   S.:
$6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED