I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963apr15.pdf

============================================================

McNamara    Testifies  For  A   Test  Ban,  P.  3
Khrushchev's  Animus  Against  Independent-Minded  Writers  No  New  Phenomena.  See Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  9
APRIL  15,  1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
Debasement  of  the  Coinage  and  Corruption  of  The  Word
Let's  take  it  slow  and   easy,  like  a  first  grade  class.     We
live  in  the  free  world.    In  fact  we  are  the  leader  of  the   free
world.    The  other  world  is a  world  of  one  party dictatorships.
There  people  are  denied  the  right  to  vote.    If  they  try  to  dem-
onstrate  the  police  rush  them  off  to  jail.    Or  set  the  dogs  upon
them.    That's  bad.    To   combat   such  wickedness,  we   spend
$50  biHion  a  year  on  arms.    We   spare  no  expense  anywhere
to  combat  the  forces  of  evil.    Our  armies,  our  secret   agents,
are  on  all  the  continents,  alert.    But  somehow   all  these   big
words  and  high  purposes  seem  to  evaporate  when  things  hap-
pen   in   Le  Flore  County,   Mississippi,  or   Birmingham, Ala-
bama,  or  Albany,  Georgia.    It's  as  if  the  Free  World  were  a
myth,  a  fairy   tale,,  a  bit  of  advertising  copy  not   intended  to
be  taken  seriously.    Men  trying  to  exercise  the  right  to  vote
are  shot  at.    Men  and  women  kneel  to  demonstrate  in  prayer
and  dogs  are  set  upon  them.    Men  are  beaten,  and  then  jailed
for   resisting  arrest.    They've   even   begun   to  arrest  them   for
resisting  the  dogs.*  The  machinery  of  the  State  governments,
their  courts,  their   Jaw  enforcement  officers,   are  mobilized  to
maintain  rule  by  one  party  and  one  race.    But  Congress  and
the  press,  the  lawmakers and  the  opinion  makers,  the  White
House  and   the  churches,  don't   really  get  excited  about  this
the  way  they  do  about  events,  let  us  say,  in  Berlin.
The  U.  S. and  Free  Elections
We  have  grown  accustomed  as  a  nation  to  living  in  a  fine
haze  of   big  words   nobody   really   takes  seriously.    This  de-
basement  of   our   ideological  currency,  this  corruption  of   the
word,  confronts  us  on  every  hand.    It's  not  the  Negro  alone
to  whom  the  Free  World  appears  as  a  fraud.    President  Ken-
nedy  at  Costa   Rica  had  hardly  finished  calling  for   "an   un-
yielding  defense  against  all  who  seek  to  impose  new  tyrannies
on  the  Americas"  when  a  new  military tyranny was  established
in  Guatemala,  the  third  in  a  year:  First  Argentina,  then   Peru,
now  Guatemala.    In  each  case  the  military  took   over   in  fear
of   free  elections.    Though   free   elections  bulk   large   in   our
official   rhetoric,   there   is  some   evidence  that  we  shared  that
fear.    CBS  April  4  and  Bert  Quint  from  Guatemala  City  in
the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  April  7  both  reported   that  the
Guatemalan  army  chief,  Peralta,   made  discreet  soundings   as
to  what  the  U.S.   reaction  would  be  before  venturing  to  take
power.    Quint  wrote  that,  like  the  Guatemalan  army,  the   U.S.
believed   free   elections   would   bring   Juan   Jose   Arevalo   to
power   again  and  "Washington  felt  he  could  not  be   trusted."
Dictatorships   are  allowed  to  stage  fake  elections   in  Paraguay,
If  Only The  Holy  Father
Were  In  Guatemala
The   U.S.   seems  to   be   feeling   the   kind  of   disquiet
about  the  Vatican which marks  our  relations  with  Latin
America.    We  want  regimes  which  are  liberal,  but  not
too  liberal,  and  particularly  not  liberal   enough  to  have
relations  with  Moscow.    The  new  Ecumenical  Council
so  far  has  been  gratifyingly  liberal,  but  the  Pope's  ex-
change  of  messages  with  Khrushchev  and  the   audience
he  gave  Adzhubei  have  raised  questions.    Time  Maga-
zine  as  always  has   been   the  first  to  ring  the  alarm.
One  reason  for   the  visit  here  of  Cardinal   Bea,   it   re-
ported  April  5,  was  to  "let   the  White  House  know  the
reasoning   behind   Pope  John's  surprising   new  willing-
ness   to   negotiate   with   Communism."    It   quoted   the
Cardinal  as  telling  a  friend  in  Home  (who.  of  course,
at  once  told  it  to  Time),  "The   U.S.  is  angry  now.    I'm
afraid  they  will  soon  be  angrier."   The  Cardinal  denied
this  when he  was  in  Washington  April  5.   But  two  days
later  in  the  Washington  Post,  Chalmers  Roberts  wrote
that  while New  Frontiersmen   "deeply  involved in  coun-
tries  with  Catholic  populations  have  been  hopeful  that
more  liberal   Church  views  would  aid  these  programs,"
they  express  concern   "lest   any  feeling  that   the  Pope
might   be  going   too  far   in  any   East-West   diplomatic
move   might   hinder   the   movement   toward    liberaliza-
tion."   In  Latin  America,  liberals  who  go  too  far  know
what   is  in  store  for   them.    If   similar   methods   were
applied  to  Rome,  our  press  would  begin  to  describe  the
Pope  as  "left  leaning."   We  mig^t  wake  up  one  morn-
ing   to  learn   that   the   Swiss   Guards  had   taken   over,
assuring   the  U.S.   that  free  elections  would  be  held  as
soon   as  the   College   of  Cardinals  had   been   purged  of
suspect  elements.    They  might  even,  with  modest   help
from   the   CIA,   arrange   the   election   of   someone   like
Francis   Cardinal   Speltman,   guaranteed    to   make   the
Vatican  safe  for  free  enterprise  again.
* "Police  Break  Up  Alabama  March," said  a  headline in  the
New   York  Times   April  8,  "Birmingham   Protest   Ended   as
Negro  Attacks  Dog."    The  constitutional  rights  of  the  dog
seem  to  be  firmly  established  in  Alabama.
Nicaragua  and  Haiti  without  U.S.  interference  or  loss  of  Alli-
ance  for  Progress  aid.    But  free  elections  are  stopped  without
protest  from  us,  if  not  with  our  connivance,  where   we  fear
the  results.  The  test  is not  whether  Guatemalans  trust  Arevalo
but  whether   we  do.    This  is  what  people  below  the  border
call  Yankee   Imperialism.
The  Alliance for  Progress  bathes  Latin  America  in  speeches
calling  for  agrarian  and  social  reform.    Arevalo  gave  Guate-
mala  some  measure  of  both  while  he  was  President   between
1945  and  1951.  After the  long  night  of  the  Ubico  dictatorship
(a-very  pleasant  period  for  United  Frutt  Company),   Arevalo
gave  Guatemalans  a  taste  of  civil  liberties.     Apparently   this
taste  was  not  to  our  liking.    Though  the  Communist   Parity
was  never  able  to  achieve  legal  status  until  after  he  left   office
and  he  even  upheld  the  closing  down  of  its  paper,  "Qctubre";
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  15,1963
Ehrenbourg  and  Yevtushenko   Scolded  for  Works  Attacking   Anti-Semitism
Khrushchev's  Fresh  Assault  on  Independent  Writers  No  New  Line
The   fresh   attacks  Khrushchev   has   unleashed   on   Russia's
more   independent   minded   writers  and   artists  cannot  be dis-
missed   as  political  maneuver   to   appease   rightist   opponents.
His  past  pronouncements  on  art  and  literature have  been  more
consistent  than  people   realize.     In  1957, when   he  had con-
solidated  his  power,  Khrushchev  lined  up  against  the  literary
rebels  who  had  made  the  years  1954-57  "an  interval of   free-
dom."     Then,  and  at  the  1959 Writers  Congress,   he  attacked
Dudintsev,  whose  "Not By  Bread  Alone"  was  one  of  the  first
novels  of  social  protest  to  appear   after   Stalin  died;  Khrush-
chev  called   it,  "a   malodorous   bouquet."      In  July   I960,   he
said  those  who  charge  that  literature  is  fettered  in  the  Soviet
Union  do  not  understand  "the essence  of  our  socialist  system,"
its   "monolithic  unity."    Khrushchev   said  Soviet  writers  and
artists  "find  an  inexhaustible  source  of  creative  inspiration  in
Party  policy"  and  in  this enjoy  "a  totally  unrestricted  freedom
of  creation."  This  mystical  nonsense  is  indistinguishable  from
Stalin's.
When  Conformity   Is   Revolutionary
The  Writers  Union  of  the  USSR  has  just  ended  a  four  day
conference   with   a   letter   to   the   Central   Committee   of   the
Communist  Party.    This  letter  in  its  obsequious  tone  also  re-
calls  the  Stalin  era.  "We  are  deeply grateful,"  it  said,  "to  the
Central  Committee  and  to Nikita  Sergeyevich  Khrushchev per-
sonally,  "for the   timely  criticism  of   such  writers  and  artists
who  have  deviated  frqm  the  revolutionary  and  realistic  tradi-,
tions  of  Soviet  art  and  for  the  wise  directives as  to  the  path
to  follow.   .  .  ."    But  the  erring  writers  to  whom   this  letter
refers   are  the  very  ones   whose   independent   work   had pro-
duced  fresh  hope.    In  this  inverted  vocabulary  the  words,  like
images  in  a  mirror,  must  be  taken  in  reverse.    Those  who  re-
belled   against   a   dull   conformity  were   accused   of   deviating
from   the  "revolutionary"   tradition  while   those  who   refused
to  varnish  over  the  unpleasant  aspects  of  Soviet  life  were  ac-
cused   of   deviating   from   the   "realistic"!    The. line   of   the
writers'   conference   was   set   by  Khrushchev   in   a   speech   of
March  8.    In  the  arts,-his  target  was  modernism  of  all  kinds.
In    literature,   he    attacked    the    non-Conformists,    especially
Ehrenbourg,   their  defender,   and   a  group   of   younger   poets,
particularly  Yevtushenko.     This,  too,  was  in  a  familiar pat-
tern.    Almost  every  Soviet  writer  of  importance—from  Maya-
kovsky  and   Babel  to  Zoshchenko   and   Akhmatova—has  had
trouble  with  the  regime.
Khrushchev  seemed  most  annoyed with  those who have  most
shed  credit  on  Russia.    He  criticized  Yevtushenko   and   other
One  Way  to  Correct  "Distortions"
Premier  Khrushchev complained in  his  speech  to  the
writers  and  artists  March  8  that  "the position  of   the
Jews  in  our  country  has   been  depicted  in  a  distorted
manner."  One  way  to  correct  "distortions"  would  be  to
end  the  restrictions on  the  baking  of  matzoth  (unleav-
ened  bread)  for  Passover.    Even  in  the  worst  days  of
Stalin,  the  authorities  were  not  so  vindictive  as  to  in-
terfere   with   the   baking   of   matzoth.     It   was   in   the
Khrushchev  era, in  Kharkov,  in  1957, that  restrictions
began  to  be  applied.   Last  year,  for  the  first  time,  they
were  enforced  throughout the  Soviet  Union.   The  Jews
not  only  are  no  longer  allowed  to  use  public   bakeries
for  matzoth but  have been  forbidden to  use  the matzoth
ovens  on  the  premises  of  synagogues  in  Riga,  Lenin-
grad   and  Kiev.    The  Jews  have  been  told  they  could
make  matzoth  at  home,  but  eight  Jews  in  Moscow,  in-
cluding  two  women,  have  been  arrested  on  charges   of
illegally  selling  home-made  matzoth!    All  this  hardly
accords  with  Khrushchev's claim,  "With  us  there  is  no
Jewish  question."
writers  for  speaking  too  freely  on  their  trips  abroad,  although
they  provided   a  refreshing  contrast   with  the  old   days   when
every   Soviet  visitor  sounded   like  a  gramophone   playing   the
same  cracked   party  line  record.     They  may  not   be  allowed
to  travel  abroad  again  until  they  have  become  more  "mature."
Ehrenbourg's  1954 novel,  "The Thaw,"  gave  its  name  to  the
springtime  which  followed   the  death   of   Stalin  but   Khrush-
chev  attacked  it  as  "incorrect,"  a  deadly  word   in  the   Soviet
lexicon.    Khrushchev  said  he  did  not  like  the  "literary  image"
of  "the thaw,"  for  this  "gives  a  picture  of  a  time  of  instabil-
ity  ...    of fluctuations of  temperature  .  .  .  when  it  is  difficult
to  foresee  how  and   in  what  direction  the  weather   will   de-
velop."    "Now,"  he  said,  thanks  to  the  liquidation  of  "the
personality  cult,"  "all  people  in  our  country  breathe   freely."
But  on  the  other  hand  this  does  not  mean  "the time  has  come
for   laissez  faire"   since  the  Party  is  "implacably   .  .  .  against
any  ideological  vaccilation."    How  breathe   freely  while   care-
fully  watching  your  step?
Soviet   Jewry;   for  one, will   breathe   less   freely   after   this
speech.    For  Khrushchev's   greatest  animus  seems  to  be  against
its  foremost  defenders.    "The  Thaw"  exposed  the  anti-Semi-
tism  of  Stalin's  latter  years.    Khrushchev's   other   main  gripe
was  against  Yevtushenko's  Babi  Yar.   He  could  have  praised
this  poem  as  evidence  that  a  new  Soviet  generation   was  striv-
ing  to  wipe  out  such  relics  of  the  past  as  anti-Semitism.    In-
stead  Khrushchev  seems  to  bear  the  poet  a  grudge  for  having
dared  to  bring  the  subject  up.
The  Gratifying  Support  of  Progressive   People  Elsewhere—Especially  in  Cuba
"We  can  only  be  gladdened  by  the  right  attitude  toward
the  ideas  of  our  party  on  the  part  of  progressive  people  in
foreign  countries.    Here,  for  instance,  is  what  one  of   the
most   prominent   representatives   of   Cuban   culture,   Juan
Marinello,  writes: 'Abstract  art  proceeds,  in  the  final  count,
from  frankly  reactionary  ideas  and  interests.    It  is   neces-
sary  to  fight  against   it,  as  is  done  in  the  Soviet  Union." *
—llichev  to Soviet  artists  and  writers  March  7.
"•They  [the official   Communist  parties]   are  not  revolu-
tionaries  but  bureaucrats.    They  are  satellites.   .  .  .  When
Khrushchev  criticizes  abstract  painting,  the  satellites   here
ask   me  to  forbid  abstract  painting.    But   I  tell   them  our
adversaries  are  capitalism and  imperialism, not  the  abstract
painters.' ...  At  this  very   moment,  a  big  exhibition  of
abstract  art  is  all  the  rage  in  Havana."
—Interview  with  Fidel  Castro  in  Le  Monde  March  23.
*And  as  was  done  in  one other  country.  "To  Hitler,"  Wm.
L.  Shirer  wrote  in  The  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Third   Reich,
"all   modern  art  was  degenerate  and  senseless.    One  of  his
first  acts  after   coming  to  power  was  to  'cleanse'  Germany
of  its  decadent  art."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  15, 1963
But  He  Sidestepped  Senator  Jackson's   Charge  We  Have  Been  "Proliferating"   Weapons
Secretary  McNamara's  Testimony  in  Favor  of  A  Test  Ban  Treaty
Thin   important    testimony   by   the  Secretary    of    Defense
in  closed   session  last   February   before    the  Senate   Armed
Services   Committee   has  just   been  released  with  so-called
security   deletions:
SECRETARY  MCNAMARA:   At   the   present  time  it  seems  to
me  that  it  is  very  much  in  our  interests  to  look  ahead   5,  10
even   15  years,  at  the   position  of   Communist  China  and   at
the  position,  as  a matter of  fact,  of  other  powers  in  the  world.
As  a  nation  I  personally  believe  -we  will  be  far  less  secure
15  years  from  now  or  10  years  from  now  if  nations  not  now
possessing  independent  nuclear  arms  do  then   possess  them.
One  of  the  major  objectives  of  the  test  ban  in  my  opinion
should   be  to  deter   the  further  proliferation   of    independent
nuclear  forces,  [deleted].    I  don't  mean  to  imply  that  a  test
ban  of  the  kind  currently  being  discussed  will,  without  ques-
tion,  accomplish  that  objective,  but   I  believe  it  would  take
us  a  step  closer  to  it,  and  furthermore  we  could  experiment
with  it  for  a  time  to  determine whether  we  were  accomplish-
ing  the  objective.  That  to  me  is the  major  appeal  of  a  test  ban.
SEN.   JACKSON  (D.  Wash) :  Do  you  seriously  believes  that
an  agreement  between  the  U.S.  and  the  Soviets  would  deter
the  Chinese from  going  ahead  and  achieving a  nuclear device?
SECRETARY  MCNAMARA:   I  think  there  is  a  substantial pos-
sibility  that   it  would.
SENATOR   JACKSON:   Mr.   Secretary,  might   I   just  observe
that  while  there  was  a  test  moratorium  between  the  Soviets
and  the  U.S.,  the  French  went  ahead  and  tested.
SECRETARY   MCNAMARA:  They  did.  They   did  indeed.
SENATOR   JACKSON:  So  I  mean  we  can't  even  control   the
French.     How   can  we  expect   the   Chinese  to  listen  to   the
Russians ?
SECRETARY   MCNAMARA:   I  think  there  is  considerable evi-
dence   that   the   Russians   have   been   helping    the    Chinese
in  development  of  their  nuclear  weapons.     I  say  have  been,
and   I  don't  mean  are  today.
SENATOR   JACKSON:   The   evidence  is,   I  understand,  they
have  withdrawn technicians.
SECRETARY  MCNAMARA:   I  think  there  is  considerable  evi-
dence  that  they  have,  but  I  would  imagine  that  as  the  years
go  by  they  will  resume  their  assistance  to  China,  unless  there
is  a  test  ban.    In  any  event,  that  to  me  is  one  of  the  major
reasons  for  entering  into  a  test  ban.
SENATOR  JACKSON:  In  that  same  sense  I  must  say  that  we
have  been  guilty  of  proliferation.    [Deleted].
SECRETARY   MCNAMARA:   No,   sir,  I  don't   believe  so.
SENATOR  JACKSON :  On  some  of  these  sites  and  bases  where
you  have  got   a  couple  of   people   around   [deleted],  if  they
Army  Chiefs  for  Atmospheric  Testing
Sen.   SVMINGTON  (D.   Mo):   General   Wheeler,   do
you  think  nuclear  testing   in  the  atmosphere   is   neces-
sary  for  the  security  of  the  United  States?
Gen.     Earle    G.   WHEELER    (Chief    of    Staff,    US
Army):  I  think  the  answer  to  that  has  to  be  'Yes',  Mr.
Chairman.    It  seems  to  me  that  as  long  as  the   Soviets
proceed   with  these  tests   of   theirs  that   we   must  do
everything  we  can  to  keep  up  with  them.    I  do  not  pro-
fess  to  be  an  expert  in  the  nuclear   field.   However,  on
a  recent  trip  out  to  the  Nevada  test  site  I  was  told  that
the   underground   testing   had  proved   to   be   far   more
valuable   than   many   people  had   ever   anticipated,   but
still   there   are  certain  things   that   we   must   know  in
order  to  get  the  best  mix  and  the  best  capabilities from
our  weapons.  .  .  .
Sen.  SYMINGTON: Mr. Secretary,  do  you  agree with
the  position  of  Gen.  Wheeler?
Secretary   of  the  Army  Cyrus  R.  VANCE:  I  do,  sir.
—Senate  Armed  Services   Committee.
wanted   to  take  over  the   devices,   they  wouldn't   be  able   to
do  so?
SECRETARY  MCNAMARA:  I  know  this  has  been  a  matter  of
concern   to   the   Joint   Committee   [on   Atomic   Energy]   for
some  time. .. .
SENATOR   JACKSON:   Mr.   Secretary,  isn't   it  a   fair   rule   to
lay  down  that  the  art  of  concealment  proceeds  forward  much
faster  than  the  art  of  detection?  .  .  .
SECRETARY  MCNAMARA:  I  don't  believe  it  is  fair  to  say  so.
SENATOR  JACKSON:  I  am  talking  about  underground   tests.
SECRETARY  MCNAMARA:   Right.
SENATOR   JACKSON:  With   all   of   the   devices.
SECRETARY   MCNAMARA:   Right.     I  would   say  that   to   a
layman,   as   I  am,   the   art   of   detection   has   advanced   more
rapidly  than  the  art  of  concealment  in  the  last  18  months.
SENATOR  JACKSON:  Who  supports  this  position?    I  would
be curious.   You  and  I  are  laymen  in  this  field.  I  don't  know
anything  about  it.    I  just  listen  to  the  experts.
SECRETARY   MCNAMARA:   I  don't  know   that   I   have  dis-
cussed  this  particular  question,  the  rapidity  of  the  advance  of
the  art  of  concealment  in  relation  to  that  of  detection  of  un-
derground   explosions  with   any  expert,   but   I   give  you  my
personal  observation  based  on  an  evaluation  of  both  conceal-
ment  and   detection  techniques  over  the   last   18  months.     I
would  be  happy  to  have  experts  made  available.
SENATOR   JACKSON   (who   opposes   a  test  ban):   Mr.   Sec-
retary,  let's  just  forget  about  that.
Pentagon's   Top  Scientific  Research  Chief  Sees  No  Security  in  Arms Race
Sen.  THURMOND  (D.  S.C.):  Should  not  we,  in  view  of
their  goal  of  world  domination  and  their  past  record  of  bad
faith,  take  no  chances  whatever  and  go  forward  and  try  to
stay  ahead  of  them  in  every  way  possible  in  testing  and  in
armaments  and  in  development?
Dr.  Harold  Brown   (Director   of   Research   and   Engineer-
ing,  Defense  Dept.):  I  think  that  in  the  absence   of  agree-
ments  which carry  enough  inspection  so  we  can  be  sure  they
are  lived  up  to,  we  should  make  sure  that  our   armaments
are  in  good   condition,  and  that   is  the  reason  for  the  in-
crease  in  the  Defense   budget.  .  .  .
But  while  we  have  been  becoming   stronger   in  the  sense
that  we  now  have  bigger  bombs  than  we  had  10  years  ago,
and  we  have   better   weapons,   we  have  not  been   becoming
more  secure.    So  that  although  in  the  absence  of   enforcible
arms  limitation  agreements,   we  have  to  keep  on  with  our
half  of  the  arms  race,  I  do  not  think  that  we  should   believe
that  that  is,  in  fact,  going  to  make  us  secure  in  an  absolute
sense.    It  may,  and  I  think  it  will,  and  has,   prevented   a
deliberate  attack  on  us  by  the  Soviets.
But  if  it  does  not  prevent  diffusion  of  nuclear   weapons,
I  do  not  see  that  it  will,  and  if  it  builds  up  more   armament
on  both  sides  we  cannot  really   feel  secure.
—Newly  released  Senate Armed  Services hearings, p.  U80.
l>  '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  15, 1963
If  Arevalo  Was  An  Extreme  Leftist,  FDR  Was  An    Anarcho-Syndicalist
(Continued   from   Page One)
though  United  Fruit  lost  none  of  its  lands  to  agrarian   reform
while   Arevalo  was  President   and   though   it  took   four   years
for   him   just   to   legalize   agricultural  trade   unions,   Arevalo
figures  in  our  newspapers  as  "an  extreme  Leftist."    If  Arevalo
was   an   "extreme    Leftist",   Franklin  D.   Roosevelt   was   an
Anarcho-Syndicalist.
Technology  Marches   On  At  Last
At  Costa   Rica,  Mr.   Kennedy   said  we  and   the  six  Central
American  governments  would  "build  a  wall  around  Cuba  .  .  .
a   wall   of   dedicated   men   determined   to   protect    their   own
freedom  and  sovereignty."     Of  the  six  countries,  two  are  now
plain  military  dictatorships; two,  Panama  and  El  Salvador,  are
ruled   by  hated   oligarchies;   only  two, Costa   Rica   and Hon-
duras,  have  freely  elected  popular  governments.     Their   secret
service  chiefs met  together   in  Nicaragua  to  erect  an  Iron  Cur-
tain   around   Cuba,   to  apply  stricter   police   state  methods   to
their  own  people.    This  was  a  wall  not  of  dedicated  men  but
of  Little  Metternichs.    In  one  sphere  at  least  these  backward
countries  have  now   come   fully   abreast   of   us.      "Representa-
tives  of  the  Central  American  and  U.S.  governments"   the  AP
reported   from   Managua   April   5,   "recommended    last   night
that  their  citizens be  kept  out  of  Cuba  by  stamping  their  pass-
ports,   'Not  Valid   for   Travel   to  Cuba.'     The  U.S.   uses   the
same  system  to  baf  Americans   from  Red  China."    Thus  tech-
nology  marches  on.  But  how  keep  Latin  American  youth  from
asking,   "If   conditions  in  Cuba   are  as  bad   as  the  U.S.   says,
why  is  it  so  anxious  to  keep   us  from  seeing  for    ourselves?"
We   Americans  used   to   pride   ourselves  on   being   a  plain
spoken   people.     But  the  windy  euphemism   affects   our   rela-
tions  with  all   the   world.     An   example,   around   which   the
annual  legislative battle  has  begun,   is  the  case  of  foreign aid.
Most  of  this  is  really  an  annex  to  our  military  budget.     The
Clay  commitlee  reported   that  12%   of  this  year's.foreign   aid
went  in  direct  military  or  related  economic  assistance to  main-
tain  2,000,000   men  under  arms  along  the  Sino-Soviet  border.
The  Committee  calls  this  "the  frontier  of  freedom."     It  is  in
fact   almost  entirely   a   chain  of   military   dictatorships.     The
otherwise   chilly   Clay  committee   gives   this  part   of   the pro-
gram  warm  support,   though   it   recommends   some   cuts, par-
ticularly  where   "sophisticated   weapons"   are  going   to   armies
Don't   Forget  1962  Index    Mow   Available   Free  If
The  Bitter  View  From
Below  The  Border
"In  1914  Henry  Ford  fixed  the  minimum salary  of  his
workers  at  $5 a  day.    In  1945  these  same  Yankee  work-
ers  had  their  own  automobiles,  refrigerators,   television,
libraries.     On   the   other   hand   our   workers   continued
under   an   enslaving   feudal   agriculture   which   ground
men  up  until  they  were  dregs.   On  beginning  my  presi-
dency,  in  1954,  visiting  a   coffee   growing  area,   I per-
sonally  verified  the  fact  that  field  workers  were  earning
4  cents  a  day.    I  spoke  with one  of  them.    He  was  mar-
ried,  and  had  5  children.    His  wife  had  lost  almost   all
her  teeth.    The  children  had  neither   school  nor  medi-
cines.  Our  popular  Guatemalan  revolution  offered   work-
ers   a   minimum   salary,    schools   and   hospitals.     Thus
began   our  "komunismo." *    No  one  ever   called   Henry
Ford  a  "komunista";  his  North   American  workers  be-
long  to  another  race  and  another  political  zone  of  the
world.    The  workers  of  the  south,  on  the   other   hand,
are   regarded   as  human  material   of  the   second   class,
and   of  their  low  salaries  is  created   the   prosperity   of
others,    some   in   the   U.S. and   others   here   in   Latin
America."
—Juan   Jose   Arevalo:  AntiKomitnismo   en  America
Latina  (Buenos  Aires,   1959).
*A  term   coined  by   the   former   President    of   Guate-
mala   to   satirize   the   tendency   of  "gendarme   govern-
ment,"  the  U.S.  and  the  Catholic  Church  in  his  country
to  label   Red  all  who  favor  social   reform.
I.F.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................................................................................—
Street   ....................................................................................—
City   ............................................Zone........-...State....................
4/15/OS
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   .............................................................................
Street    ........„._..................._...................................................
City   ..........._..........................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
"of   value  largely   for   internal  security  purposes."     Ordinary
guns  and  tanks  are  good  enough   to  hold  people  down.     The
humane  aspects  of   foreign   aid   are  only   a  thin  sugarcoating
on  a  Pentagon   pill.    Since  the  Marshall  Plan  ended,  we  have
spent  $50  billion  on  foreign  aid.    Of   this,  $30  billion  went
for   armament,   another  $15   billion  to  bolster   the   economies
of  those  same  dictatorships  so  they  could   support   such   large
armies.    Of  the  remaining  $5  billion, $3.5  went  for   develop-
ment,  $1.5  for  technical  assistance.   Thus  of  every  dollar  of
foreign  aid,  only  10  cents  went  for  constructive  purposes,   90
cents  for  military.    No   wonder   we  can  no   longer   afford   to
speak  plainly.    Unfortunately  the  validity of   free  speech,  free
elections  and  free  institutions  suffers  in  the  minds  of  a  whole
new   generation   from   our   abuse   of   fine   words   for   shabby
purposes.
You  Send  Long  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Envelope
I.F. Stone's Bi- Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  BUWeekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S-;
$6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:    $lf>   to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED