I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963apr01.pdf

============================================================

Special  Report  from   Santo  Domingo
How  Latin  America's   Bloodiest   Dictator   Laid  the   Foundation  for  A  Socialist   State
I.  F. Stone's Bi- Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  8APRIL   1,   1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
A  Peaceful   Challenge  to  Castroism
Just  east  of  Cuba  in  the   incomparably  blue  Caribbean   lies
the  island  of   Hispaniola.    Its  western   one-third,  just  across
the  Windward   Passage  from  Cuba,   is  occupied   by  Haiti;   its
eastern   two-thirds  by   the   Dominican   Republic,   barely  half
the  size  of  Cuba  in  area  and  population.    It   is  there  that   a
real  answer  to  Castroism  may  be  given.     I  have  just  spent   a
week   in  its  capital,  Santo  Domingo,   oldest   city  in  the   New
World,  where  its  first  democratic  government   in  more   than
30 years has now  been  inaugurated under  President  Juan  Bosch.
Competitive  Co-Existence
The  Dominican  Republic has  known  only  two  short  periods
of   free  government   in   its  history,   both   in   this  century,   the
more  recent  in  1924-29.    From  1930  until  his  assassination  in
May,  1961,   it  was  ruled  by  one  of  the  cruelest   and   greediest
dictators  Latin  America  has  known,   and   the  world's   oldest,
antedating  Salazar's  in   Portugal   by  two  years.    By  the   time
he  was  killed,  he  had  obtained  control  of  two-thirds  to  three-
fourths  of  the  Republic's  sugar  mills  and   its  industries.    Its
best  pastures  and   farm  lands,   about   10  percent  of   the   pro-
ductive  area  of  the  country,, had  been  vested   in  the  Trujillos.
If   Stalin  built  socialism  in   one  country,  Trujillo   in   a   sense
built  it  in  one   family.    With  the  flight  of  his  heirs  and  re-
tainers,  the  Dominican  Republic  found   itself  the  owner  of  a
major   part  of   the   country's   productive   facilities.     No   other
government   in  Latin   America   is  in   so  fortunate   a   position.
It   can  plan   its  economy   and   push   agrarian   reform   without
the   need  at  the  very  outset  to  expropriate  private  holdings,
foreign   or   domestic.     The   circumstances   were   never   more
propitious  for  an  experiment   in  democratic   socialist   develop-
ment,  without  terror,  class  war  or  dictatorship.    Here,  if  any-
where,  the  Alliance  for  Progress  and  the  Kennedy   Adminis-
tration   may  provide   a  democratic   answer   to   Castroism.     If
Cuba  is  to  be  a  showcase  of  Communism,  the  Dominican   Re-
public  can   be  a   showcase   of   democratic   socialism.      Bosch's
inauguration  on  February  27  was  also,  in  this  sense,   the  in-
auguration   of   a  competition    in   the   Caribbean.
The  Kennedy  Administration seems  to  be  fully  aware  of  the
opportunity  and  the  challenge.     Santo  Domingo's  two  luxury
hotels,  the  Embajador  and  the  Jaragua,   are  full  of   American
experts.     A  small  army  of   Americans,  volunteer  and   official,
have  invaded  the  island.    I  caught   a  glimpse  of  Mr.   Justice
Douglas,  an  old  friend  of  President   Bosch's,  who  had   been
invited  to  advise  the  Constituent   Assembly  now  writing   the
Republic's  new   Constitution.     The   Dominicans   have   a   pas-
sion  for  Constitutions;  this  will  be  their  24th   since   1821,   a
record   equalled   only   by  Venezuela    in   a   hemisphere    where
the  number  of  constitutions  seems  to  be  in  inverse  ratio  to  the
amount   of   constitutional   government.     The   veranda   of   the
Underdeveloped  North   Americans
Fresh  from  a  Latin  country,  I  find  the  report  of  the
Clay   committee  on  foreign   aid  appalling.    It   is   not
just  its  cold banker  fish-eye.  Its  reliance  on  free  enter-
prise  and on  the  possessing  classes  in  Latin  America  for
development  is  nonsense.    The  landowning class  has  no
interest  in  an  industrial development  which  would  sop
up  its  cheap  labor  supply; the  business  men  are  mostly
importers   whose   profitable  symbiosis   with   U.S.   capi-
talism  would be  disturbed  by  native  industries.    Worst
of  all:  nowhere  in  the  report  is  agrarian  reform,  the
sine   qua   non  of   Latin  development,  even  mentioned.
George  Meany,  in  his  dissenting   opinion,  accepts   this
stress  on  private  enterprise  and  also  makes  no mention
of  agrarian  reform!   This  contrasts  with  the  latest  re-
port  of  the  Inter-American Development Bank  which  is
several  degrees  left  of  the  Clay  committee  and Meany.
It  says  the  domestic  Latin market  cannot  be  developed
without   agrarian  reform.    That   Americans  like  Clay
and  Meany  do  not   understand  this   will  make  Latins
despair.
luxurious  Embajador  is  full   of   Americans,  military  advisers,
banking  experts,  special  emissaries  of  the  White  House,  mili-
tary  men  training  the  army,  and  no  doubt  a  full   contingent
of  CIA  and  FBI  men.    A  favorite  joke  is  that  the   telephone
book   of   the   American   Embassy   is  thicker  than   that   of   the
capital   city.    There  must  be  close   to   500  Americans  in   the
Republic,   and   I   must   say  that   from   the   Ambassador   down
they   seem   a  much   more  sympathetic  and   intelligent   crowd
than  is  usually  marshalled  by  our  foreign   service.    The   Am-
bassador,    John   Bartlow   Martin,   a   Saturday    Evening   Post
writer   and   a   first   rate   journalist,  who   published    the  first
expose  of  Trujillo  in  an  American  magazine  back  in  1938,   is
no  conventional   diplomat.     He   and   his  wife   are  very  sim-
patico.    They   seem   to  have   an   excellent   staff   around   them.
In   his   first   speech   a   year   ago   the   Ambassador   could   say,
"when  I  speak  of  the  danger  from  the  left,  I  am  not  talking
about  reformers,   or  liberals,  or  even  non-Soviet   Marxists.     I
am   talking   about   men   who   take   orders   from   Moscow   or
Peking   or   Havana.   .   .   ."     That   reference   to    "non-Soviet
Marxists"  must  represent  a  high  water  mark  in  daring   sophis-
tication   for   the   U.S.   foreign    service.
Yet   a   certain   wariness  exists   between    the   U.S.   Embassy
and  the  new  Bosch  regime,  like  that  of  a  blushing  bride  who
knows   too   much   about   her   aged   Lothario   bridgegroom    to
trust  his  apparent   change  of  heart.    The   record  of   the   U.S.
in  the  Dominican  Republic  inspires  as  little  confidence  as  did
our  record  in  Cuba.    No  Latin  dictator  had  warmer  U.S.   sup-
port    than   Trujillo.      The   Truman    Administration    courted
(Continued  on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  1, 1963
(Continued   from   Page   One)
him,  Eastland  praised  him  in  a  speech  to  his  puppet  Con-
gress,  Smathers  and  Speaker   McCormack  were  his  friends,
Cardinal   Spellman  blessed  him  at  his   Congress   of   Catholic
Culture  in  1956;  Standard  Oil  (NJ),  Alcoa  and  Pan  Am  were
in  his  claque.    All  this  during  the  years  when  he  murdered
and  robbed  his  people.   When  Castro  and  Betancourt  jointly
supported   an  invasion  to  overthrow  Trujillo  in  June,   1959,
and  a  few  of  the  patriots  escaped  to  the  hills,  the  U.S.  threw
a  naval  cordon  around  the  island  to  prevent   reinforcements
from   reaching,  the  Trujillo  forces.    It  is  true  that  Trujillo's
downfall   seems  to  have  been  the  result  of  U.S.   policy—he
was  the  victim  of  a  deal  with  Betancourt,   in  which  we  op-
posed  the  Dominican dictator  after  he  tried  to  kill  the  Vene-
zuelan  leader,  in  return  for  Betancourt's   aid  against   Castro.
But  after   Trujillo  was   killed,   our   first   response   was  to
support   what   looked  like   Trujilloism   without   Trujillo:   the
regime   established   by  his  retainer,   Balaguer,   and  his   son,
Ramfis.     When  popular   revulsion   made  this  politically   im-
possible,  we  shifted  grounds,  prevented  a  Trujillo  restoration
rather  than  see  a  revolution,  and  insisted   on  the  free   elec-
tions  which  brought   Bosch  to  power.    But  few  Dominicans
can  feel  sure  we  may  not  again   support   a  military   strong
man.     Korean   experience   is   only   the   latest   reminder   of
what  Latins  know  so  well—how  easily  we  reconcile  ourselves
to   military   dictatorships.
Bosch  Dares  Challenge   Esso
Bosch's  first  steps  in  power   seem   designed   to   disengage
himself  from  Washington.    His   speech  February   19  on  re-
turning   from   his  trip  to  the   U.S.   and  Europe  emphasized
the  latter  rather  than  the  former  as  the  source  of  new  de-
velopment   contracts.      Indeed    several    days    later    Angel
Miolan,  the  head  of  Bosch's  Dominican  Revolutionary  Party
(PRO)  said  Bosch  "got   four  times  as  much  in  practical   re-
sults"—in  the  shape  of  credits  and  technical  aid—during  his
month  long  tour  in  Western  Europe  as  he  did  in  his  visit  to
the  U.S.    Soon  after   the  inauguration   Bosch  announced  the
signing   of  a   15-year   $150,000,000   agreement   with  a   Swiss
consortium   (including  the   Bank   of  America)   to  build   two
dams   for   irrigation   and   hydroelectric   power,   and   for   an
aqueduct  to  supply  fresh   water  to  the  capital.     Bosch  ad-
mitted  he  might   have  had  better  terms  and  lower  interest
rates  if  he  had  financed  the  projects  from  international   or-
ganizations  but  argued  that  it  would  take  a  year  or  two  for
those  banks  to  make  preliminary  studies   and  come  to  deci-
sions  and  that  work  was  needed  urgently  to  cope  with  un-
employment  and  hunger.    But  one  wonders  whether   another
motive  in  dealing  with  this  international  consortium  was  not
to   lessen   his   dependence  on  Washington,  which  plays   the
major   role  in  such  international   institutions   as   the   World
Bank   and   the   Inter-American   Development   Bank.     Bosch
also   touched  a  tender   nerve   when  he  complained  that   the
Council  of  State  which  ruled  the  country  before  the  elections
bad  secretly   concluded  a  contract   with   Standard   Oil  for   a
refinery   on  terms   unfavorable   to   the   Dominican  Republic.
Bosch  said  he  had  received  better  offers  in  Europe   and  had
warned  Standard  Oil that  the  contract  would  be  reviewed  as
soon  as  he  took   office.     Bosch  said   he  did   so  although   he
knew  "my  attitude   would  be  used  in  spreading    throughout
A  Caribbean   Tito
Fidel   Castro's   sensational    interview   with   Claude
Julien  in  Le  Monde  (Paris)  March  22  and  23  will  not
come  entirely  as  a  surprise  to  our  readers.   For  in  the
third  and  final  installment  describing  our  own  trip  to
Cuba  (Jan.  21 issue)  we  pointed  out  that  Castro  in  his
speech  of  January  3  had  contradicted  Khrushchev's ac-
count  of  why  he  put  missiles  in  Cuba.   Khrushchev said
he  did  so  only  to  help  Cuba.    Castro  said  then,  as  he
told  M. Julien,  that  he  was  persuaded  to  take  the  mis-
siles  in  order  to  correct   the  Soviet  "missile   gap"   as
compared  with  the  U.S.    Nor  will  our  readers  be  sur-
prised  that  Fidel  sneered  at  the  satellite  states  for  their
subservience  to  Moscow, notably  on  such  questions  as
abstract  art.    "Our  adversaries,"  Fidel  said,  "are   capi-
talism  and  imperialism,  not  abstract   art."     Fidel   said
he  was  so  angry  with  Khrushchev  at  the  time  of  the
missile  crisis  that  he  would have  "boxed  his  ears"  if  he
came  to  Cuba.   Though  Castro  denied  he  had  said  any-
thing  "unfriendly"  to  Khrushchev,  and  indeed  in   this
interview  expressed   gratitude  for  his  aid,  he  did  not
directly  deny  this  quotation.   Castro  also  differed  with
the  Chinese  and  insisted  that  the  U.S.  was  no  "paper
tiger."   The  interview  deepens  our  feeling  that  Castro
is  as  naturally  independent as  Tito,  and  that  a  flexible
U.S.  policy  could  still  wean  him  from   the  Soviet  bloc,
to  a neutral  position.
the  world  the  report  that  I  am  hostile  to  foreign  private  in-
vestments  in  this  country,  that  I  am  a  Communist,  that  I
am  a  Fidelista,  or  that  I  am  something  else  still  more  radi-
cal."    The  President  elect's  prediction  proved  correct.  Though
little  has  appeared  in  the  U.S.  press  about  the  Standard  Oil
contract,  a  campaign  to  picture  Bosch  as  somehow  linked  to
Communists  has  already  begun,  though  he  and  his   entourage
are—like  most   Socialists   elsewhere—passionately  anti-Com-
munist  and   anti-Castro.
But  Bosch  and  his  group  do  not  wish  to  jeopardize   their
chances  for  a  moderate  and  peaceful  social  reform  by  polar-
izing  Dominican  politics  between  Left  and  Right.    They  see
the  necessity   for  private  capital  in  Dominican  development
—the  country,  like  Cuba,  is  short  of  technicians  and  has  no
domestic  source  of  capital  and  capital  goods.    Castro  got  his
from   the   Soviet   bloc.    They   must   obtain  theirs  from   the
West.    A  revolutionary  solution  for  the  Republic's   problems
is  politically  impossible;  the   U.S.  would  reply  with   an   in-
stant  blockade,  the  Russians   are   in  no  position   to  take  on
another  Cuba;  the   Chinese  could  only  supply  inflammatory
pamphlets.    The  Bosch  group  would  not  turn  East  even  if
they   could—they   are   far   more   deeply   and   philosophically
anti-totalitarian   than  their  detractors;  one of  them  is  a  grad-
uate  of  a  Communist  as  well  as  a  Nazi  concentration   camp.
But  they  hope  to  avoid  the   dangers   of  reliance   on  private
capital  by  diversifying  their  sources,  by  reducing  dependence
on  the   U.S.  and  particularly   by  avoiding  the  appearance  of
being   simply  a  U.S.  satellite.
I  gather  that  there  are  politically  sophisticated   American
officials  who realize  that  the  real  U.S.  interest  in  the  Domini-
Little  Progress  in  the  Alianza  So  Far  For  Latin  Workers  or  Peasants
"Mexico  City—(AP)—Labor  leaders  from  11 Latin  Amer-
ican  countries   say   workers   are  being   denied   the   benefits
they  expected  from  the  Alliance for  Progress.   In  a  declara-
tion  signed  here  they  demanded  that  no  Alliance  for  Prog-
ress  funds  be  granted  to  unstable  governments  which  may
decide  to  'divert  them  to  other  ends.' ...   As one  delegate
put  it,  'the  working class  has  been  completely  disregarded
in  the  plans  of  the  Alliance.'
—Miami  Herald,  March  15.
"During  1960-61,  according  to  FAO,  Latin  American  food
agricultural  production  declined  approximately  2%  and  food
production   dropped  below  that  of  the  previous   year  when
there   had   also   been   declines   relative   to  the   prior   year.
There  are  no  statistics  showing  any  appreciable  improve-
ment   in  rural   income  levels;   indications  are   to  the   con-
trary,   showing  that   as   a   result   of   economic   and  demo-
graphic  factors  most  campesinos  are  now  in  a  worse  plight
than  they  were a few years  ago. . . ."
—Social   Progress   Trust   Fund   (Alliance   for    Progress)
Inter-American  Development  Bank,  Zd  annual  report.   Mar.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  1, 1963
can  Republic  is  not  to  have  Juan  Bosch  salute  the  anti-Com-
munist  flag   every   few  days  in  response  to  attacks  in   the
Chicago   Tribune,  but  simply  to  make  a  success  of  his   pro-
gram.    If  this  is  done  in  part  with  European   capital  all  the
better.    The  U.S.  does  not  need  another  satellite.    It   needs
a  demonstration   in  Latin   America  that   peaceful  reform   is
possible,  and  that  U.S.  aid  can  be  obtained  without  a  demean-
ing   subordination.     But   whether   this   magnanimous   spirit
can   survive   the   more   conventional   views   in   Congress,   the
press  and  much  of  the  foreign   service   remains  to  be   seen.
The   American   community  felt   chilled   when   Bosch   in   his
inaugural   speech  failed  to  praise  the  Alliance  for  Progress
or  to  make  an  attack  on Castroism,  the  two current  hallmarks
of  loyalty  to  the   U.S.  party  line.    But  neither   would  have
been  politically   wise.
The  Church's  Red  Scare  Failed
The  Alliance  for   Progress  has   been   oversold   to  its  own
detriment,   and  is  now  being  widely  attacked  for  failure   to
undo,  in  two  years,  four  and  a  half  centuries  of  exploitation,
misery   and  ignorance.    It  would  be  a  rather  mangy  flag  to
unfurl   at  the  start  of  a  new  and  hopeful  Latin    administra-
tion.   Within  a  fortnight  of  Bosch's  inaugural  moderate  labor
leaders  from   11  Latin  countries  complained  in  Mexico  City
that  labor   \vas  being   denied   its  benefits  and  the   Bank   for
Inter-American  Development  reported  that  the  peasants  were
worse  off than  before.    The  oligarchy  is  still  hoping  by  ex-
ploiting   U.S.   obsessions    about   Castroism    and   Communism
-to  divert  the  Alliance  into  another  global  handout  of  dollars
they  can  salt  away  abroad.    Bosch  resisted  pressure  to  make
an  attack  on  Castroism  because  he  feared   it  would  split  the
country  between  right  and  left  on  an  extraneous   issue,  and
make  him  a  prisoner  of  the  right  and  the  Army.    Bosch  de-
feated  the  Union  Civica  Nacional,  the  party  of  the   conserva-
tive   oligarchy,   two-to-one;   a  last   minute  attempt   by   the
Church  to  smear  him  as  a  Red  redounded  in  his  favor   with
both  the  middle  class  and  the  workers;  he  won  more  than  60
percent   of  the   votes.
The   campaign   can  best  be  understood   in   Roman   terms.
Trujillo  was  not  a  modern  totalitarian  dictator,   though   his
control   was  total;   even   a  social  club   could  not  be   formed
without  making  El  Benefactor  its  honorary   president.     Tru-
jillo  was  like  one  of  the  Caesars  in  the  degenerate  days  de-
scribed  by  Tacitus.    His  power  rested  on  a  pampered   Army,
and  a  network  of  informers.     He  was  all  but  deified,  and  he
hated  particularly   the  old  oligarchy   which  looked  down   its
nose  on  him  as  a  mixed-blood.     The  Union   Civica  Nacional
was  a  patrician   republican   oligarchic   opposition,   again  like
its   Roman   counterparts.    Its   candidates  for   President  and
Vice  President,  Piallo  and  Baquero,  were  men  of  integrity.
One  Way to  'Manage' News
"And  finally  the  case  of  the  great  newspaper   chain
which  printed stories  that  Russian  planes  had overflown
the  southeastern   United  States,  stories  which  were  ab-
solutely   and  completely   untrue.     The   Defense   Dept.
said  they  were  untrue,  the  White House  said  they  were
untrue,  the  Chief  of  the  US  Air  Force  said  they  were
untrue,  the  Chief  of  the  Continental Air  Command said
they   were  untrue.    Yet   it   is   more   than  two  months
since   I  talked  to  the  editor  of   these  newspapers  who
adamantly  refused   to  back  down  on  his  story.     I   of-
fered   to  have  any   top   official   of   the   government   he
chose—including  the  President  of  the  United  States—
call  him  personally  and  tell  him  the  facts,  if  he  would
admit   that   his   newspapers   were  wrong.     I   am  still
awaiting  the  answer to  that proposal.
"That  is  'news management' in its  purest form."
—White   House   Press  Secretary   Pierre  Salinger  to
the  Women's   National  Press  Club  March   22.
They   managed,   perhaps   because   they   were   physicians,   to
walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  and  earn  their  bread
without    ever    collaborating    with   the   dictatorship.     Their
clean   record   was   an   affront   to   weaker   folk,   who  had   to
knuckle  under.
At  the  same  time  Fiallo  and  Baquero  had  only  the  vaguest
slogans   as   substitute   for   a   program   with   appeal   to   the
plebeian   masses  who  were  really   outside  their  aristocratic
field  of  vision.    They  alienated  part  of  the  middle  class  by
emphasizing   a  fierce  de-trujillo-ization;   Fiallo   even   visited
Germany  to  study  de-Nazification  there.    But  Hitler  had  an
enthusiastic   following,  a  party,  a  philosophy.    Trujillo's  one
party  was  built  only  on  fear.    Except   for  a  small  circle  of
murderers   and   grafters,   he   had   no  base.     Almost    every-
body  at   one  time   or  another  had   to  bend  his   neck   before
the  dictator.    Bosch  campaigned   for  national   reconciliation;
he  pledged   himself  to  root  out  Trujilloism   in  the  economic
and  social  sphere,  not  to  stage  a  giant  purge.    This  won him
friends   on  the  moderate   right  and  in  the  centre  while  his
promise   to   restore   democratic   liberties,   his   idealism,   his
magnetic   eloquence,  his  gift   for  parable   (he  is  a  talented
writer)   and  his  program   made  it   impossible  for  the   badly
splintered   Left   to  put   a  candidate  in  the  field  against  him
even  if  it  had  been  able  to  do  so.
There   are   two   Moscow-oriented  tiny   Communist   parties,
both  with  their   base  among  well-to-do  intellectuals,   and  re-
(Conthmed  on  Page  Pour)
The  NAACP  Wins  A  Precarious  Victory Against Witch Hunts  in  the  South
The  Supreme  Court  last  Monday  5-to-4  reversed  the  con-
tempt  conviction of  a  Florida  NAACP  official   for  refusing
to  bring  the  membership  rolls   with   him  to   a  legislative
committee  investigating  Communist   infiltration.     The   two
Kennedy  appointees  turned  up  on  opposite  sides;  Mr.  Jus-
tice  Goldberg wrote the  majority  decision  while  Mr. Justice
White  joined  Harlan,  Clark  and  Stewart  in  dissenting.   The
new  ruling continued  the  see-saw  battle  of  the  Court  since
Barenblatt  overruled  Watkins   and  gave  the  green  light  to
use   of   the   legislative   pillory   wherever   the   presence   of
Communists  or  other  "subversives"  is  suspected.    Mr. Jus-
tice  Goldberg's  tortuous  reasoning   tried  to  reconcile   these
two   conflicting  opinions  and  held   that   an  avowedly  anti-
Communist  organization like the  NAACP  cannot  be  put  into
the  pillory  unless  some  firm  basis   is  laid  for  believing  it
infiltrated.    This  weak  ruling  opened  itself   to  Mr. Justice
Harlan's  rejoinder that  it  "requires  an  investigating  agency
to  prove in  advance the  very  things  it  is  trying to find out."
Considering  the  political  power  of  the  Negro  and  the  obvi-
ous  danger  that  his  organizations  in  the  South  can  be  de-
stroyed  by  Red  hunts,  it  is  disturbing that  the  balance  in
his  favor  on  the  court  is  so  precarious.
Black  and  Douglas  concurring  took  their  stand  on  firmer
grounds.    Black  said  the  investigation  abridged  the   First
Amendment  right  of  association.    He  said  this  includes  the
right   "to  associate   with  Communists  or anti-Communists,
Socialists  or  anti-Socialists,  or,  for  that  matter,  with  peo-
ple  of  all  kinds of  beliefs,  popular or  unpopular."   Douglas,
in   an   eloquent  opinion   said   "The   views   a  citizen  enter-
tains,  the  beliefs  he  harbors,  the  utterances  he  makes,  the
ideology  he  embraces  and  the  people  he  associates   with  are
no  concern  of  government.   That  article of  faith  marks  the
main  difference  between  the  Free  Society  which  we  espouse
and  the  dictatorships  both  on  the  Left  and  on  the   Right.
.  .  .  Where  government  is  the  Big  Brother,  privacy   gives
way   to  surveillance.    But   our  commitment   is    otherwise.
By  the  First  Amendment we  have  staked  our  security  on
freedom  to  promote  a  multiplicity  of  ideas,  to  associate  at
will  with  kindred  spirits,  and  to  defy  governmental  intru-
sion  into  these  precincts."    But  this,  the  traditional  Ameri-
can  philosophy,  is   a  minority  view  on  our  highest  court.
This  is  what  the  Communist  bogey  has  done  to  us.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Sione'K  Bi-Weekly,  April  1, 196.1
Bosch's  Strategy  Not   So  Different   From  Kennedy's  at  Costa   Rica
(Coiiliinied  from   Piige   Three)
ferred   to  disparagingly   by  the  more  fiery  student   leaders   as
"the  party  of  peace."    They  were  illegalized under  the  Coun-
cil   of   State,   as   was   the   Fidelista   MPD    whose   base,   also
miniscule,    is   among   the   Ittmpenproletariat    in   the   terrible
shanty  towns  which  ring  that  side  of   Santa  Domingo  which
faces  away  from  its  dulcet  ocean  breezes.    It  is  tainted  by  the
fact  that  at  least  one  of   its  leaders  was  "imported"  by  Tru-
jillo  in  his  latter  days  to  frighten  the  U.S.  with the  spectre  of
a  deal  with  Castroism.    The  legal  moderate   left,  the  June  14
movement,  named   for  the  unsuccessful   landings   in   1959,   is
split  between  a  more  and   a  less  Fidelista  wing.    The  entire
Left  and  part  of  Bosch's own  just-to-left-of-centre  party would
be  antagonized  by  an  attack  on   Castro.     If  this  hot   issue  is
left   alone,  then   Bosch  can  hold  the  support  of  the  moderate
left.     Success   for   his  program   would   isolate   the  extremists.
This   is  not   so  different   from   the   strategy  Kennedy   himself
seems   to   have   been   pursuing.     He   utilized   the   Betancourt
visit  and   the  San  Jose  conference  to  emphasize  the   need   for
domestic  reform  and  sidestep  the  demand  for  military  action
against  Castro.     As  one  intelligent law  student  told  me,   "If
we  have  to  choose  between  Union  Civica  (the  right)  and  the
PSP   (the   orthodox   Communists),  we'll   go   with   the   PSP.
If   we   have  a  chance   to   choose   between   Bosch    (democratic
reform)    and    Fidel    (revolutionary   action),    we'll    choose
Bosch."     The  U.S.  had  better  choose  him,  too.
Social  Christian  Demogogues
But   Bosch   is  up   against   a   redoubtable  foe.     While   the
Union  Civica  has  been  demoralized   by  his  landslide,  the  party
which  finished  a  poor  third,  the  Partido  Social  Christiano,  is
out  to  destroy  him.    As  a  Catholic party,  it  has  strong   U.S.
connections.     In   the   trade  unions  and   in   the   university,  it
out-demagogues  the  most  demagogic  elements  of  the  left;   the
Social  Christians have  already  pulled  one  short  lived  minority-
strike    in    publicly   owned    sugar    mills   where    wages    have
doubled   since  Trujillo   fell.     The   Social  Christians  are  play-
ing  on  the  Communist  phobia  of  the  U.S.  press  and  the  native
oligarchy.    It  has  already  spread  reports  which   the  Venezue-
lan  government  has  formally   denied  that  on  the  eve  of   the
inaugural  Bosch  refused  to  join   in  an  anti-Castro  declaration
with   Betancourt,  Orlich   of   Costa   Rica   and   Villeda   Morales
How  Do You Say  'Free  World'  In  Korean?
"Seoul,  Korea,  March  23 — (AP)  — Anti-government
demonstrations,  without  precedent in  two  years  of  mili-
tary  rule,  broke  out  in  five  cities  yesterday  despite   a
show   of   force  from   strongman  Gen.  Chung   Hi  Park.
But  an  array  of  150  admirals and  generals,  some  sum-
moned  from  units  at  least  theoretically under  U.S.  con-
trol,   assembled  in  Seoul   and  vowed  support   of   Park
and military  rule. . . .
"A  wave  is  disappointment  swept   the anti-military
movement   when  it   was   learned  that  President  Ken-
nedy,   at  his  press  conference   Thursday,   did  not   pub-
licly  press  Park  to  honor  the  promise  he  has  made  re-
peatedly  to  relinquish  power to  civilians  this  year.   Mr.
Kennedy   said   the   U.S.   is   closely   following  'present
discussions  about  the  return  of  democratic  government
in  South  Korea,'  prompting  one  anti-military  observer
to   observe,   'What   he   means   is,   fight   it   out   among
ourselves'."
—Washington  I'ost,  March  23.
of   Honduras.     In   a  speech   of   March   19,  Bosch   nailed   this
as  a  lie  and  also  claimed  that   the  Social  Christians  had   the
aid  of  "a  great  number  of  Cuban  exiles  in  the  United   States,
particularly  in  Miami,  people  who  have  little  to  do  but  write
for    little   papers   and    for   radio   stations—-to   portray   us   as
Communists."
Free  elections  and   the  hopes   aroused   by  Bosch   have   exer-
cised  a  beneficent  influence  in  the  Dominican  Republic.     But
under  the  surface,  should  he  fail,  are  volcanic  forces.     Slow
hunger   walks  the   streets;   every  person  with   a  job   supports
a   horde  of   cousins   from   the   country.     The   villas   on   the
ocean   side  of   town   are   almost  as  luxurious  as  Miami;   the
shanty-town  on  the  other  side  breeds  disease  and  despair.     In
Bosch's   speeches   there  breathes   a  moving  love  for  his  people
and   a  deep   devotion.     The   cynical  oligarchy  easily   ignores
the  verdict  of  the  election  and  has  already  picked  its  candidate
for   a  new  military  dictatorship.    In  the  coffee  houses,  among
the   students,   one   find   a   promising  generation;    intelligence
and   idealism  shine  in  their  brown   faces,   they   are   eager   to
learn.    Given  ten  yqars  of  peace  and  education,  and  this  rich
little  island  republic  will  have   its  own   technicians  and   engi-
neers  and   can   really  be  the  master  of   its  destiny.    We   can
earn  their  gratitude  or  deserve  their  contempt.
Free  Sample  Offer   Still  Holds  Good  for  March  18  Jssue  on  Nuclear  Testing
I.F,  Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..............................................~........................~.............—
Street    .......................................................................—........—
City   .............:..............................Zone.............State...................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   ..................................................-......................—
Street    .....................................................................................
City   ............_.,.........................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  _,end  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IF. Stone'sBi-  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.   C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
ie's  Hi-Wii-Hv        S.-.-OM.I  flii<s   IVKin-.;.!  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    PuMisheil  every  other  Mon.lay  at    r.filS  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  WaEhincton,  D.  C.
ATI   ii-.li-im'i.liTit  l.i-wi-.-Uy   i>uUif)i<-d  ami  edited  by  I.   !•'.  Stone:  Cireulal ion  Manauer.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   sr>  in  the  U.  S.;
ft',   in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:      >•  I.",  to   Europe;   Hu   to   Israel.  Asia  and   Afrira.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED