I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963oct28.pdf

============================================================

Special  8-Page  Issue  on   Vietnam
For  Official  Mythology  of  the  War  and  the  Testimony  of   Independent  Observers,  See  Boxes
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  21OCTOBER  28,  1963°
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Will New Chances for Peace Be Another Lost Opportunity?
The  history  of  Indochina  since  the  war  has  been  a  history
of   lost   opportunities.     Ho   Chi   Minh's   Viet   Minh   worked
closely  with  the  OSS during  the  second  World  War,  and  took
FDR's   promises   of   colonial   liberation   seriously.     So   pro-
American  was  its  orientation  at  one  time  that,  as  Oliver   E.
Clubb,  Jr.,  writes  in  his  The   U.S.  and  the  Sino-Soviet   Bloc
in  South  East  Asia   (Brookings,   1962),   "Vietnam's   declara-
tion  of  independence  began  with  lines  from   America's  own
Declaration   of   Independence   and   its  first  constitution  more
closely   resembled   that  of   the   U.S.   than   that   of   the   Soviet
Union."    Hopes  of  American  support  were  dashed  when  the
Truman  Administration acquiesced  in  France's  effort  to  restore
colonial  rule.     Ellen  J.   Hammer   in  her  book,   The   Struggle
for   Indochina    (Stanford,   1952)    tells   the   story  of   another
blasted   Vietminh  hope.     Ho   Chi  Minh   risked  his   political
leadership  to  reach  a  moderate  agreement  with  the  French  on
March  6,   1946,   accepting  a  limited  independence  within  the
French   Union.     Because   of   this   agreement   the   Viet   Minh
permitted  the  French  to  reoccupy  Hanoi  without  a  shot  being
fired.     The   French   troops   "fresh    from   the   liberation   of
Paris"  were  hailed  "as  the  incarnation  of  Free  France."     But
French   promises  were  broken,   and  a  war  began   that  was  to
cost  France  $5  billion  dollars  and  the  blood  of  many  of  her
best  young  professional   soldiers  before  Dien   Bien  Phu  and
the  Geneva  agreement  marked  her  defeat  8  years  later.
Ho  Ready  to  Accept  An  Independent   South
Another  of  these  opportunities   is  now  being  lost.    The  in-
ternational  situation  makes  this  a  favorable  moment  to  nego-
tiate  an  end  of  the  war  with  China  and  North  Vietnam.    The
latter  would  like  resumption  of  its  normal  trade  relations  with
the  South;  it  fears  expansion  of  the  war  would   risk  destruc-
tion   of  its  resources   by  American  bombardment   and   end  its
precarious  independence   of  China.    The  most  important  reve-
lation  in  Bernard  B.  Fall's  forthcoming   book  The  Two  Viet-
Nams  (Praeger,  1963)    is  that  the  North  Vietnamese   leaders
in  three  interviews  given  Westerners  last  year   (the   London
Daily  Express  in  March,  Dr.  Fall  in  July  and  Col.  Jules  Roy
of  L'Express   in  December)  made  it  obvious  to  all  three   that
North  Vietnam   "had   backed  away  from  outright   conquest  of
South  Vietnam  and  was  veering  toward  a  negotiated   solution
embodying  the  existence  of  a  neutral   South   Vietnamese   state
that  would  not  be  reunited   with  the  North  for  a  long  time
to  come."
A  representative   of  the  National  Liberation  Front  of  South
Vietnam  in  a  clandestine   interview  with  Georges  Chaffard  of
Le  Monde   (Aug.   24)   during  his  visit  to  Saigon  last  summer
also  set  forth  a  program   for  an  independent   South  Vietnam
to  be  established   in  free  elections.    "We  have  not  fought  all
these  years,   in  the  worst   conditions,"  he  told  M.  Chaffard,
Another  Official     Myth
Those  Lovely  Strategic  Hamlets
''The  strategic  hamlet   program  is   producing  excel-
lent  results.  .  .  .  The  hamlets are  governed by  councils
elected  by  secret  ballot.    In  addition  .  .  .  the  govern-
ment   is  supplying  the  hamlets  with   schools,   medical
aid,  cheap  fertilizer,  low  interest  agricultural  loans.  .  . .
Morale  in  the  countryside  has  begun  to  rise.  .  .  ."
—Secretary  Rusk's  April  22  speech  on  Vietnam.
"Not  far  from  the  town  of  Vinh  Long  is  the  model
strategic  hamlet  of   Phuoc  Nguon.  .  .  .   Life   is   regi-
mented  in  Phuoc  Nguon.    As   in  every  other  strategic
hamlet,  those  who  know  what  is  good  for  them  join  the
regime's   National   Revolutionary   Movement,   the   only
political  organization  permitted  in  the  hamlets.  .  .  .
"The  lack  of  democratic  rights  exercises  the villagers
only   to  the  point  that   they  rarely  appreciate  the   ap-
pointed  village  chiefs.    But  the  evidence  suggests  that
they  do  resent  the  demands  made  upon  their  time  and
labor.    The  average  peasant  today  is  required  to  spend
almost  as  much  time  on  unproductive  and  unpaid  gov-
ernment   work   as   he  spends   in  the    fields.    His   basic
freedoms  may  be  no less  than  they were in  the  past, but
he   is   now  obliged   to   suffer   an   almost  commune-like
regimentation.  . . .
"The   peasants   need   permits   to   leave  the  hamlets.
They  are  watched,  spied  on.  .  .  .  Like  the  peasants  in
Viet  Cong  villages,  they  are  required  to  listen  to  hours
of   political  indoctrination  each  week.    The   rice  they
grow  fetches  a  low  price  and  is  sold  by  the government
for   a  high  price.  .  .  .  The  result  has  often  been  un-
happy.    'Too  many  lessons  are  being  copied  from   the
Communists  in  the  strategic  hamlets,'  said  one  West-
erner  who  had  come  to  Vietnam to  help  Diem  win  the
war."
—Denis  Warner:  The  Last  Confucian    (1963).
"to  end  by  replacing  one  dictatorship  with  another.   None  of
us  can  accept  a  relation  of  dependence  on  the  North."    The
domestic program  outlined  was  a  moderate  one,  with  a  friend-
ly   attitude  toward   foreign   investments.     "We   wish   to   be
realists,"   M.   Chaffard   was  told.     "We   know   the   difficulties
of  our  compatriots  in  the  North,  and  we  have  also  studied  the
example  of  the  states  of  Black  Africa.    There  is  no  question'
of  wishing  to  install  systematically  a  Popular   Democracy   in
the  South. ..."   The  desire  is for  a neutral  regime  which  can
deal  with  both  sides  in  economic  development.     Both  Peking
and  Hanoi  last  year  called   for  reconvening  the  Geneva   Con-
ference  to  make  peace  in  South  Vietnam.    For  North  Vietnam
a  neutral   regime   in  the   South   would   enable   it  again  to  ex-
change   its  coal   and   industrial   products   for   the   rice  of   the
South.    If  East  and  West  Germany  can  do  an  enormous   trade,
despite  sharp  political  differences, why  not  North  and   South
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
1   0   j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October 28,1963
(Continued  from  Page One)
Vietnam,  especially  since  such  trade would  go  a  long  way  to-
ward  ending  the  trade  deficits  of  both?    For  China,  looking
for  new  ties  in  the  West  to  fight  off  the  isolation  imposed  on
her  by  Russia,  the  ending  of  the  war  in  South  Vietnam would
remove  one  major  obstacle  to  better  trade  relations  with  the
West.    This  is  an  ideal  time  for  the  West  to  negotiate.
Two  Different  Policies  Toward Communism
Unfortunately  we  still  have  two  basic  policies  for  dealing
with  Communist  regimes.   In  Eastern Europe  we  seem  to have
given  up  containment for  conciliation.  We  reward  the  Kadar
government  in  Hungary  for  liberalization  at  home  by  resum-
ing  relations.    We  continue  to  give  support  to  Gomulka  in
Poland   as   a  means  of   encouraging   some   independence   of
Russia.    Ever  since  Tito's  break  with  Stalin,  we  have  moved
away  from  the  notion  that  the  Communist  world  is  a  faceless
monolith  run  from  Moscow,  and  sought  to  foster  centrifugal
forces  within  it.    But  in  the  Far  East,  as  in  our  dealings  with
Cuba,  we  still  cling  to  the  older  view  that  the  only  way  to
deal  with  a  revolutionary movement  is  to  do  all  in  our  power
to  starve  it  out.   If  we  were  treating  East  Asia  as  we  treat
East  Europe,  we  would  be  actively  exploring  the   differences
between  China  and  Russia, and  those  between  North  Vietnam
and  China,  for  leverage with  which to  end  the  costly uprising
in  South  Vietnam.   But  we  still think  of  China  and  of  North
Vietnam,  as  we  did   in  the  twenties  of  Russia,  as  untouch-
able  regimes.
The  lack  of  a constructive policy  in  East  Asia becomes  more
understandable  when  one  looks  back  and  sees  that  the  change
in  our  policy  toward  Eastern  Europe  was  a  reaction  to  events
in  that  area  rather  than  the  result  of  any  diplomatic initiatives
on  our  part.    Churchill,  after  Stalin  died,  flew  to  Washington
and  urged  us  to  negotiate  with  Melenkov,  but  the  State  De-
partment  insisted  nothing  had  changed.    It  was  not  until  the
20th  Congress  and  the  upsurges  to  which  it  gave  rise  in Hun-
gary  and  Poland   that  we  began  to  recognize  belatedly  that
something   was  happening   in  the  Soviet  world.     The  policy
of  detente  in  recent  months  was  largely  made  in  Moscow,  and
our  continued  freeze  in  the  Far  East  also  shares  the  made  in
Moscow  label.    For  suddenly the  conflict  between  the  Chinese
and  Russian  ruling  bureaucracies has  led  the  latter  to  seek  the
isolation  of  China.    Thus  Russian  policy  and  the  policy  im-
Where  Do  The  Viets  Get  Their  Weapons
Q.  General,  does  Viet  Cong  get   its   recruitment  and
arms  at  this  point  mainly  through  infiltration  through
Laos  or  Cambodia  or  mainly  from  inside   South  Viet-
nam?
Gen.  Earle  G.  Wheeler,  U.S. Army  Chief  of  Staff:  It
is  a  combination.  .  .  .  They  get  arms  from  about   three
different   sources.    One, stuff   that  is  actually   toted   in
from   up  in  North   Vietnam.    For   example,   we   found
57-millimeter   recoilless   rifles   made   in   China   as   far
south  as  the  Delta.     They   also  have   some   local pro-
duction  of  weapons.    These  are  usually  rifles  of  a  kind.
They  are  very  crude.    Single-shot   affairs,  but  if   they
hit   you  they  will   kill  you.   There   is   no  doubt   about
that.    Then,  of  course,   some   of  the   stuff  is   captured
from  the  Vietnamese.
To  answer  a  question  I  know  someone   will  ask,  we
are  now  capturing  more  weapons  from  the  Viet   Cong
than  they  are  capturing  from  the   Vietnamese.
—Briefing   at  the  Pentagon,  Feb. 4, 1963.
Compare  This  The  Official  Myth  With  the  Box  Below
posed   on  us  by  our  China  lobby  converged.    The   path  of
least  resistance was  to  accept  Russian overtures  in  the  West—
while  pursuing  the  old  rigid  cold  war  policy  in  the  Far  East.
It  should  be  obvious  by  now  that  problems  arising  in ter-
ritories  contiguous  to  China  can  no  more  be  settled  without
her  than  Caribbean prolems  can  be  settled  without  the  United
States.    The  Chinese  taught  us  a  lesson  at  the  38th  parallel
in  Korea  which  we  seem  unwilling  to   acknowledge   at   the
17th  parallel  in  Vietnam.    China  in  effect  warned  us  that  if
we  crossed  the  38th  parallel  it  would  intervene;  its  "volun-
teers"  forced  us  back  to  the  parallel.   To  end  the  Korean war,
we  had  to  negotiate  with  China.    The  West  had  to  negotiate
with  China  to  settle  the  Laotian  conflict.    There  will  have  to
be  negotiations  with  China  again  to  end  the  South  Vietnamese
war.
The  primary  obstacle  to  the  negotiation   of   such  a  settle-
ment  lies  in  Washington.     Kennedy  cannot  afford  to  go  into
the  campaign  next  year  and  face  a  Republican  cry  that  under
the  Democrats  we  "lost"  Vietnam,  whether  by  withdrawal  or
negotiation.    The  politically  safest  course  is  to  "stand  firm,"
i.e.  to  follow  the  line  of  least  resistance,  though   this  means
continuation   of  a  war  that  most   observers   agree   cannot  be
won,   and   could   at   any   time   expand   dangerously.      As   in
McNamara  Blushes  To  Learn  that  Captured Viet  Cong  Rifles  Are  U.S.  Made
Saigon,   Vietnam,  Oct.  13—When   Robert   S.   McNamara
was   inspecting   South   Vietnamese   defenses   recently,    he
paused  curiously  before  a  display  of  weapons  captured  from
the  Communist  Viet  Cong.    Pointing  to  one  in  the  pile,  the
Secretary  of  Defense   asked,   "This  one's  from   Communist
China,  isn't  it?"
"No,"   replied   a  Vietnamese   officer.    "It's  an   American
57-millimeter  recoilless  rifle,  seized   by  the  Viet   Cong  and
recaptured  by us."
McNamara,  blushing,  turned  to  Gen. Maxwell  D.  Taylor,
chairman  of  the  U.S. Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  and  said,  "My
G«d,  I  didn't  recognize  it."   McNamara  had  reason  to  feel
embarrassed.     For  the  biggest  supplier  of  modern   weapons
to  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  is  the  United  States.   An  official
American  breakdown  of  a  cross-section  of  arms  taken  from
the  Viet  Cong  in  recent  weeks  shows  that  nearly  one  out  of
three  was  marked  "made  in  the  US."   And  only  one  in  50
came  from  the  Communist  bloc.   These  were  mostly  Chinese
but  included  some  dated  Czech  and  Soviet   models.
About   half   the   total   weaponry   of   the    pro-Communist
forces  is  what  the  military  lump  together  as  "French  and
old"—all  made  before  the  French   evacuated   Indo-China  in
1954  and  some  tracing   to  the  World  War  I  era. .  .  .
The  official  military  line  is  that  the  weapons   captured  by
the  Viet  Cong  are  not  so  important  when  it  is   remembered
that   Government   troops  are  taking   arms   from   them,  too.
For  the  first  six  months  of  1963 for  example  figures  show
that  the  Government  side  lost  3,000  weapons   and  captured
2,700.    But  the  statistics  are  deceiving  in  view  of  the  differ-
ence  in  the  quality  of  the  arms  exchanged.     The  Viet  Cong
yields  largely  outmoded  weapons  and  home-made  pipe  guns
and  obtains   factory  fresh   American   models.
As  one  informed  observer   put  it,  "the weapons  exchange
figures  would  be  encouraging   only  if  we  were  in  the  plumb-
ing  business."
—Louis  R. Rukeyser  in  the Baltimore Sun, Oct. 14.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  28,1963
France,  the  national   interest  is  to  be  subordinated  to  the con-
venience  of  the  political   leadership;  we  will  go  on   pouring
out  blood   and  treasure;  we  have  already  sunk   some  $5 bil-
lions   in   the   Indochinese    quagmire.     The    Administration's
hope  is  by  a  little  pressure  on  Diem,  at  least  for  some  face-
saving  reforms,  and  a  lot  of  flim-flam  at  home,  to  keep  this
tragic  comedy  going  at   least   until   after  the   1964  elections.
The  political   realities  of  Washington,  not  the  military  reali-
ties  in   Saigon,   explain   the  Oct.  2  White  House  statement
that Gen.  Taylor  and  Secretary  McNamara  had  "reported  their
judgment   that  the  major  part  of  the  U.S. military  task"  in
South  Vietnam  "can be  completed   by  the  end  of  1965,"  i.e.
a  year  after   the   elections.     Never   was  a   crystal  ball  more
clearly  clouded   by  politics.
Kennedy's   Moral   Responsibility
The  outcry  about  Diem  diverts  attention   from  the  policies
of  Kennedy.     The  inhumanity  which  has  made  a  world  scan-
dal  of  South  Vietnam  has  its  origin  as  much  in  Washington
as  in  Saigon.    The  uprooting  of  the  rural  population  and  its
incarceration   in   stockaded   villages,   the   spraying   of   poisons
from  the  air  on  crops  and  cattle  in  violation   of  the   Geneva
convention,   the   use  of   napalm   for   attacks   on   villages   sus-
pected  of  harboring  rebels—these  policies  were  all   formulated
and  directed  out  of  Washington.   The  familiar  belief  that  the
end  justifies  the  means  in  any  conflict  with  Communism   was
enough   to  wipe  out  qualms,  if  any, about  the   mistreatment
How  The  War  Against  Diem  Started
"What  happened  in  South  Vietnam  during  the  next
five  years   deserves   to  be  listed   near   the  top  of   the
success  stories  of  the  postwar   period.     By  plebiscite,
the   Emperor   Bao   Dai   was   replaced   by   a   Republic,
with  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  as  President,  with  an  elected  Na-
tional  Assembly,  and  a  written   Constitution.  .  .  .
"Although  North  Vietnam  inherited  most  of  the  in-
dustry  of  Vietnam,  and  although  its  population  is  larg-
er,  it  fell  rapidly  behind  South  Vietnam  in  food  produc-
tion,  the  number  of  children  in  school,  and  in  standards
of   living.  .  .  .  This  was  competition   which  the  Com-
munists   apparently   could  not  endure.    Very   likely   it
was  one  of  the  reasons  why  they   decided   in  1959 to
renew  their  assault  on  South   Vietnam."
—Secretary  of  State  Rusk,  "The Stake  in  Vietnam",
before   the  Economic  Club  of  New  York,  April  22,  1963.
Compare  Thii The  Official  Myth  With  the  Box Below
of   the  Vietnamese.     It  was  only  the  unexpected   clash  with
the  Buddhists  which   brought  relations  between  Washington
and   Saigon   to  a  crisis.    The   spectacle  of  a  U.S.  supported
Catholic  family   dictatorship   oppressing  the   majority   creed,
the  international  repercussions  in the  Buddhist world  and Ken-
nedy's  own  Catholicism   made  this  most  embarrassing.    Above
all,  in  the  cant  of  the  cold  war, religion  is  sacred,  God  being
regarded  as  safely  on  our  side  in  the  struggle  against   "athe-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Noted   French  Historian   Describes   How  the  Uprising   Against   Diem   Began
The  "mistakes"  of   the   South,  from  1957 onwards,   were
to  furnish  opportunities  to  Communism  and  to  the  move-
ment  for  reunification which  operated  under  its  aegis.    As
if   not  satisfied  with  the  re-establishment  of  calm  and  se-
curity,   the  Diem  regime,  haunted  by  a  strange   desire   to
bring  back  into being  the  society  of  former days,  when  there
were   no  sects  and  no  Communists,  and  reckoning   that   it
would  itself  be  safe  in  the  future,  accentuated   its  authori-
tarian  and  repressive  character.    There  are'serious   reasons
for   supposing  that  it   was   encouraged  along  this  path  by
certain  American  activist  milieux.  .  .  .
The  Diem  government  .  .  .  launched  out   in  1957 in   to
what  amounted  to  a  series  of  man  hunts. ...  A  consider-
able  number  of  people  were  arrested  in  this  way  and  sent
to  concentration  camps.  .  .  .  This  repression  was  in  theory
aimed   at   the   Communists.    In  fact,  it   affected  all   those,
and  they  were  many—democrats,  socialists,  liberals,  adher-
ents  of  the  sects—who  were  bold  enough  to  express   their
disagreement  with  the  line  of  policy  adopted  by  the  ruling
oligarchy.  .  .  .
In  1958  the  situation  grew  worse.    Round-ups  of   "dissi-
dents"  became  more  frequent  and  more  brutal.    The  enemy
(those  suspected  of  Communist activities  or  of  being   affili-
ated  to  the  sects)  were  difficult   to  apprehend.    The   areas
where  they  took  refuge  .  .  .  with their  marshes  and  forests,
were   not   favorable   for   operations  by   government   forces.
Moreover  the  way   in  which  many  of  the   operations   were
carried  out  very  soon  set  the  villagers  against  the  regime.
The  Communists,  finding  themselves  hunted  down,  began
to  fight  back.    Informers  were  sought   out  and  shot  in  in-
creasing  numbers,  and  village  chiefs  who  had  presided  over
the   denunciations,  village   notables   and   members   of   the
militia  who  took  part,  were  frequently  treated  in  the  same
way.      The   people   of   the   villages,   thus   intimidated,  fell
silent.    Diem's  police  and  -army   saw   their  sources   of   in-
formation  drying  up  one  after  another.    To  make  good  the
lack,  they  resorted  to  worse  barbarity,  hoping  to  inspire  an
even  greater  terror  among  the  villagers  than  that  inspired
by  the  Communists.   And  in  that  fateful  year  of  1958  they
overstepped   all   bounds.     The   peasants,   disgusted   to   see
Diem's  men acting  in  this  way,  lent  their  assistance  to  the
Communists....
In  December  1958   the  death  of   some   20  Viet   Cong   de-
tainees  in  the  Phu  Loi concentration  camp  served  to  fan  the
flames of  anger  of  the  guerrillas. ...  In  the  course  of  that
December  and  the  following  January  armed  bands  sprang
into  being  almost   everywhere.  .  .  .
What  did  the  authorities  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of
(North)  Vietnam do in  the  face  of  these  sad  circumstances?
They  protested   in  diplomatic notes.    The  members   of   the
Viet   Minh  cadre  in  the  south,  who  had  been  promised  by
Hanoi   that   unification   would  be  rapidly  achieved,  had   to
listen  to  the  bitter  remarks  that  were  made  to  them  about
the  inability of  the  North to do anything  about  the  Diem  dic-
tatorship.    The  overriding  needs  of  the  world-wide  strategy
of   the  Socialist  camp  meant  little  or  nothing  to   guerrilla
fighters   being  hunted  down  in   Nam-Bo.
It  was  in  such  a  climate  of  feeling  that,  in  1959,  respon-
sible  elements  of  the  Communist  Resistance   in  Indo-China
came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  had  to  act, whether  Hanoi
wanted  them  to  or  no.    They   could  no  longer  continue  to
stand  by  while  their  supporters  were  arrested,  thrown  into
prison  and  tortured.  .  .  .
The  point of  view  of  most  foreign  governments,  especially
in  the  West,  is  that  the  fighting  going  on  in  South  Vietnam
is  simply  a  subversive  campaign  directed  from  Hanoi  .  .  .
it  leaves  out  of  account  the  fact  that  the  insurrection   ex-
isted  before  the  Communists  decided  to  take  part,  and  that
they  were  simply  forced  to  join  in.    And  even  among   the
Communists,  the  initiative  did  not  originate  in  Hanoi,  but
from  the  grass  roots,  where  the  people  were  literally  driven
by  Diem  to  take  up  arms  in   self-defense.
—Philippe  Devillers.  French  scholar  who  lived  for   some
years  in  Vietnam  during   the  Indochinese  war  and  once  ad-
mired  Diem.  His  book, Histoire  du  Vietnam  1945-51 has  be-
come  a standard   work  on  the  causes  and  early  stages  of  that
war.   This  excerpt  is  from  North  Vietnam  Today:  Profile  of
a  Communist  Satellite,  ed. by  P.  3.  Honey   (Praeger,  1962).
t i :
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October 28,1963
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
istic  communism."    Religious  persecution  could  not  be  recon-
ciled  with  holy  war.    So  Mr.  Kennedy  in  his  interview  with
Walter  Cronkite  on  CBS  Sept.  2  ventured  the  opinion  that
"in   the   last   two   months  the   government"    of   Diem    "has
gotten  out  of  touch  with  the  people."    This  ranks  with  the
best  understatements  of  our  time;  Diem   quite  obviously  has
been  out  of  touch  with  his  people  a  good   deal  longer  than
two  months.*     Mr.   Kennedy  condemned   the   repression  of
the  Buddhists  but  again  his  choice  of  words  was  tepid;   he
called  it  "very  unwise."    The  words  reflect  neither  moral  re-
vulsion  nor  human  sympathy  but  only  cool  calculation.    At  a
press  conference  a  week  later  he  summed  up  his  policy.    The
test  of  official   action  in  our  government  or  Diem's  was  to  be
whether  it  might  "handicap   the  winning  of  the  war."     This,
and  not  justice for  the  people  of  South  Vietnam  or  the  estab-
lishment  of  a  decent  regime  there,   is  our  No.   1  aim.    All
else  is  subordinate  to  it.    When  the  main  objective  is  thus
military,  our  main  reliance  is  on  the  Pentagon  and  on  cloak-
and-dagger  operations.    The  government  becomes  a  prisoner
of  the  end  and  the  means  it  chooses.    The  type  of  men,  men-
tality  and  institution  brought  into  play  determines  the  course
of  events  and  constricts  the  choice  of  alternatives.
Kindred  Spirits
The   CIA's  dominant  outlook,   even  more  under   McCone
than  under  Dulles,  sees  Communist  conspiracy  in  every  type
of  colonial  struggle  and  gravitates  instinctively  to   repressive
measures  for  dealing  with  it.    The  alliance  between  the  CIA
and  Ngo  Dinh  Nhu,  whose  special  forces—his  Storm Troopers
—have  been  getting  $3,000,000  a  year  from  CIA,  is  not  acci-
dental  but  reflects  a  kinship  of  spirit;  McCone's  religious  and
apocalyptic  views  are  much   like  those   of   Vietnam's   ruling
family.    The  President  has  recalled  John  H.  Richardson,   the
CIA  chief  in  Saigon,  under  pressure Jrom  Ambassador  Lodge,
but  there  is  no  way  of  knowing  what  if  any  changes  in  CIA
policy  will  be  made.    A  cloak-and-dagger  organization  is  by
* Diem  seems  to  be  out  of  touch  altogether.    The  Austral-
ian   newspaperman,   Denis   Warner,   in   his   new   book,   The
Last   Confucian,  writes,   "Diem   talks   but   never   listens;   he
looks  but  never  sees.    Any  Ambassador  who  can  get  in  500
words  in  a  4-hour conversation  with  him  feels  that  he  is  just
about  hitting  par  for  the  course.    Diem  talks   monotonously
and  repetitively,  rambling  from  one  subject   to  another   and
never  talking  a  problem  through  .  .  .  never   does  he  spark
with  humor.   Twin  threads  of  thought  provide  the  only   con-
tinuity.    One  is  the  assumption  that  he  is  right   and  knows
best;  the  other  that  he  is  the  victim  of  lies  and  calumny."
The  Situation   In  the   Villages
"The   first   target   was   the   people  themselves.     The
patient   poor  farmers  were  given  the  choice   either  of
supporting   the   Viet   Cong   by   providing  supplies   and
recruits  or  of  suffering violence.  .  .  .  Another important
target   were   the  civil  servants   of   the  Republic.  .  .  .
Hundreds  .  .  .  have  been  murdered  by  this  Viet  Cong
terror.     Their   sacrifice  must   not   be   forgotten   for   it
was   made  for  all  free  men."
—Roger  Hilsman,  Ass't  Secretary   of  State  for   Far
Eastern  Affairs,    at   the  1963  Conference   on  Cold   War
Education,  Tampa,  Fla.,  June  H,  1963.
Compare  This  The  Official  Myth  With  the  Box  Below
its  very  nature hard  to  control.    It  is  difficult  enough  for  the
White  House  to  keep  a  firm  rein  on  the  State  Department  a
few  blocks  away;  it  is  almost  impossible  to  control  a  distant
underground    operation   attracting   a   local   entourage   of   in-
formers  eager  to  jump  on  the  gravy  train.    The  intelligence
supplied  by  such  a  network  is  probably  a  good  deal  less  re-
liable  and  perceptive  than  that  which  the  careful   reader  can
get  for  himself  from  the  American, British  and  French  press.
Certainly  no  one  following  the  press  reports  would  have  been
as  silly  as  was  Secretary  McNamara  when  he  told  a  Congres-
sional  committee  that  there  were  three  times  as  many  Catho-
lics  as  Buddhists  in  South  Vietnam,  and  that  the  latter  con-
stituted  only  about  ten  percent  of  the  population.    This  was
a  real  scoop,  comparable  to  the  discovery that  Ireland  is  large-
ly  populated   by  Protestants.
Whether   Secretary   McNamara   was  the  victim  in  this  of
the  CIA  or  of  military  intelligence  no  one  knows.    But  the
latter,  too,  must  be  a  rich  source  of  misinformation.    Louis
R.  Rukeyser  in  the  last of  a  revealing 6-part  series from  Saigon
in  the  Baltimore  Sun  Oct.  18 wrote  that  at  the  military  head-
quarters  of  Gen.  Paul  D.  Harkins,  "all  is  sweetness  and  light.
The  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  are  being  licked,  one  is  told,  and  it
is  only  a  matter  of  time  before  the  assisting Americans can  go
home  victorious."    The   French  had   a  whole  series  of   such
Generals  in   Indochina;  victory  was  always  just  around   the
corner.
The  Kennedy  Administration,  like  Eisenhower's  and   Tru-
man's  before  it,  has  carried  on  its  Indochinese policies  behind
a  thick  smokescreen  of   official   falsification.     The  contrast  be-
tween  propaganda, and  reality  is  visible in  Eisenhower's  forth-
coming  memoirs   (Mandate   for   Change:  Doubleday)   where
Ike  begins  his  part  of  this  story  by  describing  the  Vietminh
in  the  customary  way  as  "so-called   "patriots'"  and   "Chinese
supported   rebels."     He   recalls   with   approval   the   NATO
Independent  Observers Report  Quite A  Different  Picture  from  The  Villages
"In  the  countryside   many  of  Diem's   officials  came  to  re-
gard  their  government  jobs   as   open   licenses  for   larceny.
They  often  extorted   money  from  the  peasants,  demanding
protection   money   from   merchants   and   manipulated   the
prices   farmers   got   for   their   crops.     Thus   the  Viet   Cong
guerrillas  could  gain  popular  approval  by  occasionally  mur-
dering  a  corrupt  official.    Soon  they  had  thousands  of  peas-
ants   eager   to  supply  them  with  rice  and  information."
—Don  Schanche:  Saturday  Evening  Post.  Jan.   6,  1962.
"Out   in  the  more  remote  villages  of  mud  and  wattle,   the
government  is  identified  as  the  man  in  uniform  who  comes
on  a  punitive  raid,  or  with  a  heavy  bodyguard,  and  who  al-
ways   wants   something—money,   labor   or  even   those   sus-
pected,  sometimes  incorrectly,  of  working  for  the  Viet  Cong.
•    "The  Viet  Cong  cadre,  on  the   other   hand,   is   barefooted
and  dressed   in  black  like  every  other   peasant.     He  makes
tax  demands,  but  they  are  not  excessive.    He  is   meticulous
about  paying  for   food   and  lodging,   and  scrupulous,   also,
in  his  relations   with  village  girls  and  with  the  villagers'
property.    To  begin  with,  he  does  not  talk  Communism  or
Marxism,  but  exploits   local   grievances,   and  is  at  pains  to
implant   the   idea   that   the   Vietnamese    have   thrown   off
French  colonialism   only  to  be  saddled   by  President   Diem
with  American  colonialism.    It  is  simple   propaganda,   but
effective."
—Denis  Warner:  The  Last  Confucian  (Macmillan,  196S)
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W..
Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  bi-weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;   {6  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  115  to  Europe;  {20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  28, 1963
resolution   of  Dec.   17,  1952,   on  the  basis  of  which  the   Tru-
man  Administration  next   day  launched   its  program   of  mili-
tary  aid  to  the  French.    This  resolution  said  the  war   "was
essential  to  the  defense  of  liberty"  and  "in  harmony  with  the
ideals  and  aims of  NATO."    But  Ike  himself  could  not  have
taken  these  ringing  phrases  very  seriously.    For  he  confesses
that  he  did  not  want  to  intervene  in   1954   without   at   least
token  forces  from  other  nations  to  "lend  real  moral   standing
to  a  venture  that   otherwise   could  be  made   to  appear   as  a
brutal  example  of  imperialism."     This  need   "was  particularly
acute"   Ike  adds,   "because   there  was  no  incontrovertible   evi-
dence  of  overt  Red  Chinese   participation  in  the   Indochinese
conflict."     Later   in   the   story   Ike   makes   another    admission
that  the  government  did  its  best  at  the  time  to  keep  from  the
American  people.    "I  have  never  talked  or  corresponded   with
a  person  knowledgeable   in  Indochinese   affairs,"   Ike  now  dis-
closes,   "who   did  not  agree  that  had   elections   been   held   as
of  the  time  of  the  fighting,  possibly  80  percent   of  the   popu-
lation  would  have  voted  for  Ho  Chi  Minh."    What  the  gov-
ernment  said  in  public  was  very  different  from  what  it  knew
in  private.    The  truth  then  and  since  has  been  that  we  were
financing  a  war  to  impose  on  the  Vietnamese   a  regime   they
did  not  want,  first  that  of  the  French  and  then  that  of  Diem.
Our  Official  Mythology
An  elaborate   mythology  has  been  built  up  by  the  Kennedy
Administration  to  cloak  our  role  in  what  the  French  are  call-
ing  the  second  Indochinese  war.    The  first  article  of  faith  in
this  mythology  is that  the  war  broke  out  not  because  of  Diem's
failure  to   satisfy   his  people's  aspirations   in   South   Vietnam
but   because   of  his   success.     As  Kennedy   wrote   Diem   Oct.
26,  1961,   "The   Communist  response  to  the  growing  strength
and   prosperity  of  your  people  was  to  send   terror   into   your
villages,  to  burn  your  new  schools  and  to  make  ambushes  of
your  new  roads."    This  myth  was  further   amplified   in   the
two  volume  Blue  Book  on  the  war  put  out  by  the  State  De-
partment  a  few  weeks  later,   "A  Threat  to  the  Peace:  North
Vietnam's    Effort   to   Conquer    South   Vietnam."     Here   the
genesis   of  the  war  was  spelled  out  even   more   glamorously,
Rusk  Hails  Democracy  Under  Diem
"Critics  have  complained  that  South  Vietnam  is  not
a   full  constitutional  democracy  and  that  our  aid   has
been   subject   to   waste   and   mismanagement.     Let   us
make  clear  that  these   criticisms  are  hot  merely  alibis
for   inaction.    For   in  passing   judgment,  let   us   recall
that  we  are  talking  about  a  nation  which  has  been  re-
sponsible  for   its   own  affairs   for  less  than  a  decade,
about  a  people  who  have  had  no  peace  since  1941  and
little   experience    in   direct   participation   in   political
affairs.    Their  four  national  elections,  their  thousands
of  elected  hamlet  councils,   and  their  forthcoming  vil-
lage  council  elections  show  steady  movement  toward  a
constitutional   system   resting   upon   popular   consent."
—Secretary  of  State  Rusk,  "The  Stake  in  Vietnam",
before   the  Economic  Club  in  New  York,  April  22,  1963.
Compare  This  The  Official  Myth  With  the  Box  Below
"The    years   1956   to  I960  produced   something   close  to  an
economic  miracle  in  South  Vietnam.  .  .  .  The  economic  and
social  advances   scored   by  the   South   Vietnamese   up   to   last
year  made  it  plain  that   Hanoi's   program   for   peaceful  take-
over  had  little  or  no  chance  of  success.    If  they  were  to  win
the  Communists  had  to resort  to force.  . . . South  Vietnam was
outstripping   the  North  in  the  same  fashion   that  West   Ger-
many  had   exceeded   the   achievements   of   the   'socialist'   East.
The  leaders  in  Hanoi  apparently   could   not  accept  that   pros-
pect.  They  decided  on  a  course  of  violence.  .  .  ."    The  State
Department   has  never  tried   to   sell   more   obvious   nonsense.
Guerrilla  war  cannot  be  stirred  up  among  a  contented   people.
Yet  this  has  been  the  official   line  ever  since.
In  part  this  myth  was  made  necessary  by  the  position  Ken-
nedy  took  on  Vietnam  in  the  I960  campaign.    The   book  of
foreign   policy  speeches   edited  by  the  distinguished  historian
Allan   Nevins   for   the   campaign   as  Kennedy's   "Strategy   of
Peace"   also   hailed,   and   virtually   took   credit   for,   "a   near
miracle"   in  South  Vietnam.    One  of  the  speeches  was  made
in  1956  to  Diem's  sounding  board  in  this  country,  the  Amer-
ican  Friends  of  Vietnam.    Nevins   said  "exceptional   interest"
(Continued  on  Page  Six)
A  Leading  Authority  on  Vietnam  Describes  the  Realities  of  Government by  Diem
"On  April  26,  1960,  18  highly  respected   citizens,  includ-
ing   several   former  Cabinet  Ministers,  submitted   an   open
letter  to  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  warning  him  of  the  disaffection
of  the  people:
"'A   Constitution  has   been   established   in  form  only;  a
National  Assembly  exists   whose  deliberations   always  fall
into  line  with  the  Government;  anti-democratic  elections—
all  these  are  methods  and  "comedies"  copied  from  the  dic-
tatorial   Communist  regimes.   .  .   .  Continuous  arrests   fill
the  jails  and  the  prisons  to  the  rafters  .  .  .  public opinion
and  the  press   are  reduced  to  silence.  .  .  .'
"With   the   progressive  destruction  of   even   the   hope  of
institutional  reform  from  within, all  opposition  to  the Diem
regime  has  had  to  be  of  a  revolutionary nature.    The  para-
troop  putsch  of  November  11,  1960,  was  the  first  indication
of  that  new  ugly  mood,  although  it  was  conducted,  as   its
own   leaders   took   pains   to   point   out,   in   a   'gentlemanly'
fashion.. ..
Having  survived the  putsch,  the  regime,  in  a  first  fright,
announced  on  Nov.  17  a  'sweeping  reform  program."    But
at  the  same  time  .  .  .  began  a  'purge'  of  known opposition-
ists.    The  Committee arrested  the  18  signers  of  the  April
26   manifesto,  and   coached   mobs  ransacked   the   offices   of
five  newspapers  that  hat]  shown  themselves  lukewarm  to-
wards  the  regime.  .  .  .
"When   the   promised  reforms   were   finally   unveiled  on
Feb.  13,  1961  .  .  .  they  were  hardly  of  the  kind  that  would
win  the  support  of  the  villages.    The  bulk  of  the   'reform'
consisted  simply  of  promises  that  the  various  judicial  and
economic   institutions   embodied   in   the   1956  constitution
would   finally   be  brought  to  life   and   that—now   that   the
villages   were  heavily  Communist-infiltrated   —  provincial,
municipal  and  village  councils  would  be  set  up  again.    No
promise  was  made that  they  would  be  elective  in  character,
as  they  traditionally had  been  in  Vietnam before  during  the
colonial  era   and  even  in  the  midst  of   the   Indochina  War
under  the  defunct  Bao-Dai  regime. ...
"Thus  the  long  awaited  establishment  of   local  self-gov-
ernment,  widely  considered  to  be  essential  to  the  success  of
the  'strategic  hamlet'  program,  also  became  a  meaningless
distortion.    In  May,  1963,  however,  Saigon  finally  yielded
to  American advisers  who  maintained that  the  only  way  to
win  over  the  village  population  was   to  give  it  some  real
responsibility  .  .  .  the  new  'reform'  will  leave  the  villages
about   as   much  leeway  as   the  Communist  village  admini-
stration  does."
—Bernard  B.  Fall   of  Howard   Univ.  in  his    forthcoming
book,  "The   Two  Viet-Nams"    (Praeger).
1   1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

6
/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  28,1963
(Continued  -from  Page  Five)
attached  to  this  speech  because  despite  fears  at  the  time—
the  faith  of  friends  like  Senator  Kennedy  was  actually  well
founded.    The  U.S.  had  the  wisdom to  grant  South Vietnam
about  $500  million in  various  forms  of  assistance.  .  .  . The
little  republic  truly  became  what  Mr.  Kennedy  calls  it,  a
proving  ground  of  democracy.   It  has  produced  in  its  Presi-
dent,  Ngo   Dinh  Diem,  one  of   the  true  statesmen   of   the
new  Asia.  .  .  .  Vietnam  is  a  country  of  which  the   West
may  feel  proud.
It  would   have  been   embarrassing   to  admit   so  soon  that  our
statesman  friend  was  a  bust.     A  second   reason  for  the  myth
that  the  revolt  against  Diem  was  fomented   from  outside  was
to  marshal   international  support  against  it.    In  his  speech  to
the  UN  General  Assembly  in  New  York  Sept.  25,  1961,   Ken-
nedy  cited  South   Vietnam   as  a  threat  to  the  peace.    "South
Vietnam,"  the  President  said,  "is  already  under  attack—some-
times  by  a  single  assassin,  sometimes  by  a  band  of   guerrillas,
recently  by  full  battalions.  .  .  .  No  one  can  call  these  'wars
of  liberation.'    For  these  are  free  countries  living  under  their
own  governments."
JFK's  Own  Troubles  With  Diem
But  this  picture   of   a  peaceful   and   democratic   regime   at-
tacked   from   outside   soon   became   difficult   to   reconcile   with
Kennedy's  own  troubles  with  the  Diem  regime.    Two  months
later   (Nov.   29)   he  was  questioned  at  press  conference  about
the  bitter  attacks  suddenly  launched  against  the  U.S.   by   "the
government   controlled   press   in  Vietnam,   apparently   because
we  are  asking  for  political  reforms  in  exchange  for  our  mili-
tary  and  economic  assistance."    Kennedy  in  a  rather   fumbling
reply  said  the  U.S.  was  trying  to  get  the  Diem   government
to  take  "steps  which  will   increase  the   sense  of   commitment
by  the  people  of  Vietnam  to  the  struggle."    If  Vietnam  was
a  prosperous   and  democratic  state,  why  this  worry   about   an
inadequate  sense  of  commitment  to  the  struggle  by its  people?
The  truth  is  that  the  problem   was  not  one  of  "inadequate
commitment"  by  the  people  to  the  Diem  regime  but  of  posi-
tive  hostility.    To  go  through   a  pile  of  books  and  articles  on
the  revolt  against  Diem  as  I  have  been  doing  in  the  past  few
weeks  and  to  compare  these  unofficial   accounts  with  the   offi-
Diem's  Land  Reform
"A  land  reform  program,  patterned  on  the  land  re-
forms  in  Japan  and  on  Taiwan,  was  pressed  forward—
123,000  heads  of  families  become  small  landowners.    A
comprehensive  system  of  agricultural  credit  was  set  up.
Thousands   of   Vietnamese   were   moved  into   the   high-
lands  to  raise  industrial  crops."
—Secretary  of  State  Rusk,  "The  Stake  in  Vietnam",
before   the  Economic  Club  in  New  York,  April  22,  1963.
Compare  This  The  Official  Myth  With  the  Box  Below
cial  pronouncements  of  the  Kennedy   Administration   is  a  dis-
turbing  experience.   On  each  page  of  this week's  special  issue,
I  have  given  a  sample  of  these  official  myths  and  with   each
an  excerpt  from  some  independent  scholar  or  journalist'writ-
ing  on  the  same  subject.    The   reader  will  quickly  see  from
these  contrasting  "boxes"  that  on  every  major  aspect  of   the
war   the  Kennedy   Administration   has  sought  to  deceive   the
country.    To  bolster  up  these  myths,  it  has  cooperated    with
the  Diem  regime  in  making  it  as  difficult  as  possible  for  in-
dependent   American  journalists  to  get  the  truth.    Only  a  few
weeks  ago  the  Moss  subcommittee  on  government  information
of  the  House  of  Representatives   reported   (Sept.  26)   that
"In  recent  weeks  the  American  public  has  been  surprised
by   developments   in   Vietnam—developments   which   have
been  many  months  in  the  making  but  which  the  American
people  are  just  now  discovering.    The  restrictive U.S.  press
policy  in  Vietnam—drafted  in  the  State  Department's  pub-
lic  relations  office  by  an  official  with  an  admitted  distrust
for  the  people's  right  to  know—unquestionably  contributed
to   the   lack   of   information  about   conditions   in  Vietnam
which   created   an  international   crisis.     Instead   of   hiding
the  facts  from  the  American  public,  the  State  Department
should  have  done  everything  possible   to  expose   the  true
situation  to  full  view."
The  final  sentence  is  incredibly  naive.    In  30  years  experi-
ence,  the  writer  has  never  yet  known  the  State  Department  to
expose   any  true  situation  to  full  view.    "Papa  knows  best"
has  always  been  its  basic  attitude.    The   official  criticized,  very
unfairly,  since  he was  only  conforming  to  the  department's  tra-
(Continued  on  Page  Eight)
Diem's Land Reform As Summed Up By  A Reporter  With  Long  Experience  in  Indo-China
A  meager  1.4% of  U.S.  aid,  or  $15  million, went  to  agri-
culture  between  1955  and  1960.    The   much  vaunted  rural
help  program did not  exist.    Land  reform  was  a  flop.  .  .  .
"In  marked  contrast  to  the  land reform  on  Taiwan,  where
landlords   were  allowed  to  keep  only   3  hectares   (about   7
acres)   of   medium-grade  paddy field" or  twice  that  area  of
dry   land,  or  in  Japan,  where  ten  acres  of  land  in  the  rice
areas  was  a  family  minimum.  South  Vietnam's  land  reform
has  been  anything   but  radical.    A  landlord  in  South   Viet-
nam  may  retain  up  to  100  hectares  of  rice  land  and another
15  hectares  for  burial  grounds  and  ancestor   worship.  .  .  .
"The   program  lacked  regulatory   machinery   to   control
tenant-landlord  registration,  and  all  sorts  of  side   arrange-
ments  were  entered  into  to  defeat  its  intention.    In  Central
Vietnam,   where   there   are  at   least   100,000  farms   of   one
hectare   or  less,   each   village   has   public   lands   which,   in
theory,  it  rents  out  at  reasonable  rates  to  the  poorest   peas-
ants.    The  idea  is  that  the  public  lands  should  provide  both
village  revenue  and  relief.    In  practice,  the  system  usually
works  as  yet  another  means  for  squeeze   and  graft  by  ap-
pointed  village  chiefs  and  one  of  the  worst  forms  of  land
exploitation.    No   security   of   tenure   is   given   beyond   the
crop  year,  and  there  is  no  incentive  for  crop  or  land  im-
provement  when  the  poor  peasants  are  allowed  on  the  land.
More  often  than  not  they  do  not  get   a  chance  at  all,  and
the  land  goes  to  the  richest  and  most  prominent  landlord.
"In  areas  where  a  lack  of  security   had  for  many   years
prevented   the   landlords   from   visiting   or  collecting   rents
from   their  properties,  the  peasants   regarded  Diem's   land
reform  as  an  added  tax,  or  worse.  .  .  .  All  they  knew  was
that   Diem   had  brought   the  landlords  back.    To  be  sure,
they  had  to  pay  taxes  to  the  Viet  Minh  and  were  liable  to
compulsory   service   as   porters   or  as   guerrillas,   but   they
knew  the  money  did  not  go  to  the  profit  of  absentee  land-
lords.    Thus,  in  September  1957,  when  they  discovered  that
in  addition  to  the  payment  of  what  they  regarded  as  exor-
bitant  rentals,  they  now  faced  the  payment  of  high   prices
(from  $7  to  $428  a  hectare)   for  land  they  had  once  all  but
regarded  as  their  own  they  did  not  often  respond  with  the
enthusiasm    that    Saigon    and   Washington    attributed    to
them."
—Denis  Warner,  an  Australian  journalist  who  has  been
covering  Indo-China  since  World  War  II,  writing  in  his  new-
ly  published   book,  "The  Last  Confucian."    (Macmillan).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Special ADVANCE-OF-PUBLICATION Offer to  Readers of  I.E   Stone'sBi-Weekly
We  announce  the forthcoming  publication  of
THE
HAUNTED
FIFTIES
by  I.  F.  STONE
A  collection  of  Mr.  Stone's  most  important  writings
in  the  first   decade  of  this  journal.
"In this country one contemporary  journalist
has   over   a   period   of  many   years   distin-
guished  himself   in  reporting  and  interpret-
ing the  news—that  less  glamorous  part  of  it,
at  least,  which  has  not  to  do  with   crime,
communism,  sex,  and  baseball.    The  excep-
tion  is  I.  F.  Stone.   The  qualities  of  the  ex-
ceptional   man  pervade  and  inform  all  that
he has  written  and  have  kept  the  bulk of  the
pieces  in  this  collection  very   much  alive."
—from  the Preface  by James R.  Newman
To  Be  Published  by
Random  House  on  November  4,  1963
Regular  retail  price:  $5.95
SPECIAL   OFFER  TO   BI-WEEKLY
READERS  ONLY:  $4.85  (SAVE  $1.10)
I.  F.  Stone's Bi-Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Avenue,  N.W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please   send  me   ............  copies  of  THE  HAUNTED  FIFTIES   by  I.  F.   Stone   at
$4.85  per  copy  (a  saving  of  $1.10  from  the  retail  price  of  $5.95),  plus  50c  per  copy
for  shipping  and  handling.    My  check  or  money  order  is  enclosed.    I  understand  that
if  for  any  reason  I  care  to  return  the  book  for  a  prompt  refund,  I  may  do  so  within
ten   days   after   receiving  the   book.     (District   of   Columbia  residents   must   add  18e
sales  tax.)
NAME
ADDRESS
"SK  THIS  COri'ON
NOW  TO  ORDER
"THE   HArXTF.D  FIFTIES'
AT  THK  SPECIAL
READER'S  DISCOUNT
CITY  ................................................................     STATE  ...............
Autographed?    Yes  D    No
ZIP  CODE
t   1  5
\
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  28, 1963
Freedom  of  Information  Is  A  No.  1  Casualty   of  The   War
(Continued  from  Page Six)
ditional  press  policy,  is  Carl  T.  Rowan,  now  Ambassador  to
Finland,  then  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Public
Affairs.    The  Moss  subcommittee  called  attention  to  a  speech
in  which  Rowan  talked  of  the  public's  "right  not  to   know,"
said  that  "in  a  period  of  undeclared  war, we  constantly  must
decide  how  far  we  can  go  in  providing  the    well-informed
populace  without  which   a   'free   society'   becomes   a  mockery
without  violating  our  oath  to  protect  this  country"  and com-
plained  that  too  few  newspapers  "are willing  to  weigh  their
stories  against  the  national  interest."     But  the  Moss  subcom-
mittee  did  not  mention  that  Rowan was  only  developing  ideas
put  forward  a  few  months  earlier  after  the  Cuban  debacle  by
Kennedy  in  his  speech  before  the  American  Newspaper  Pub-
lishers  Association.   The  purport   of  that  speech  was  that  if
and  when  the  government  decided  on  a  policy  of  undeclared
war,   the  press  ought  not  to  publish  matters  which  would  let
the  public know  what  is  going  on.    The  effort  to  manage  the
news  has  never  been  more  blatant  than  on  Vietnam.
The  Army  Prints  A  Birchite  View
In  some military  circles suspicion  of  the  press  seems  to  have
reached   Birchite  dimensions.    Thus  Dr.   Fall,   in  his   book,
"The    Two    Vietnams,"    discloses    that    the   U.S.  Army's
most  respected  publication,  the  Military  Review   of  the  U.S.
Army  Command  and   Staff   College,  ran  an  article  in  its  May
1962  by  Suzanne Labin  "a  French  socialist with  extreme  right
wing  leanings."
The   article,   according  to   Dr.   Fall,    "flatly   accuses any-
one  who  does  not  support  Ngo  Dinh  Diem ...  of  being  a
participant  in  an  immense  campaign  .  .  .  launched  by  the
Communists  and  their  dupes."    A  milder  variant  of  the  same
conspiracy  charge  was  made  by  Joseph  Alsop,  always  a  faith-
' ful  satellite of  the  military,  in  a  column  of  Sept.  23.    While
generously  absolving  his  colleagues  in  Saigon  of  being  under
Communist   influence,   Alsop  accuses  them  of   engaging   in  a
deliberate  campaign to  discredit and  unnerve Diem..   This may
help  to  explain  why  Also  seems  to  be  Mme.  Nhu's  favorite
correspondent:  Dr.   Fall  in  his  book  recalls  that  even   Time
once  poked   fun  at  her  for  suggesting  creation  of  a  commit-
tee  of  foreign  correspondents,  preferably headed  by  Alsop,  to
On  Spraying   Poison  From  The  Air
Q.  How   successful,   General,   has   your   aerial   spray
program  been  to  destroy   rice  crops   of  the  Viet   Cong
and  their  hiding  places   in  underbrush?
Gen.   Earle  G.  Wheeler,  Chief  of  Staff,  U.S. Army:  I
don't   think   I'd  better   comment   on  that,   if   you   don't
mind.
—Briefiing   at  the  Pentagon, Feb. 4,  1963.
"Recently   there   have   been   efforts   [in   Vietnam]   to
pierce  this  cover   in  forest   areas  by  having   airplanes
spray  out  defoliants—chemicals  which  will  poison   and
kill   the   leaves.     Such   sprays   are   used   commercially
along  the  rights  of  way  of  railroads   and  power  lines
in  America,  but  their  real  utility  in  operations   against
guerrillas  still  seems  open  to  question.  To  obtain  mean-
ingful  results  large  areas  have  to  be  treated  and  in  the
tropics  new  growth  appears  distressingly   quickly.  Then
too  there  are  serious  psychological   and  political  draw-
backs.    The  government's   act  of  spraying   poison  from
the air, no matter how  carefully  the  flights  are  directed,
is  not  likely  to  endear  it  to  the  population  of  the  region
concerned.  .  .  .  The  insurgents  are  certain   to  blame
all  subsequent  crop  failures  and  epidemics  on  these tac-
tics  and  a  considerable   number  of  people   may  believe
them."
—James  Eliot  Cross:  Conflict  in  the  Shadows.    The
Nature  and  Politics  of  Guerrilla  War   (1963).
hammer  out  a  general  line  to  which  they  would  all   adhere,
just  like  the  boys  on  Pravda.    This  was  another   glimpse  of
the  mentality  Robert  Guillian  described  in  Le  Monde   (April
16,  1961).    "One  sees  South  Vietnam,"   he  wrote  from Sai-
gon,  which  has  since  barred  him, "by  a  strange  and  fascinat-
ing  mimicry, borrow  part  of  its  methods  from  North  Vietnam
and  China,  and  transform  itself   more  and  more  into  a  bad
copy   of   a  Communist   totalitarian  regime."     The   desperate
attempt  to  hide  the  truth  about  this  hopeless  but  savage  war
is  pulling  our  government  in  the  same  direction,  toward   the
rewriting  of  history  in  an  attempt  to  impose  a  party  line  myth
on  the  press  and  public.    Unless  there  is  a  counter   campaign
of  pressure  to  bring  home  the  truth,  the  war  will  drag   on,
poisoning  the  air  of  freedom  at  home,   imposing  misery  on
the  bewildered  people  of  South  Vietnam  and  risking  a  wider
conflagration.
Extra  Copies of  This  Issue  Available  in  Bulk  Orders  of  100  or  More  at  5<  Or  We'll  Send  Free  Copies  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed
Envelopes  for  Mailing
I.F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................_
Street
City   ............._...........................Zone.............State....................
10/28/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   .........................................................................—
Street    .........—.........................................................................
City  ..........._,.........................Zone...........State...............»...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Tea  D    No  D
LEStone'sBi-Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Stone's  "The  Haunted  Fifties"  an  ideal  gift  for  students  who  missed the  McCarthy years
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED