I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963jan21.pdf

============================================================

Completing  Our  Report  on  Cuba
The  Revolution,  As  Seen  Through The  Eyes  of  Its  Supporters,  Still  Commands  Enthusiasm  and  Devotion
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  3
JANUARY  21,  1963
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Fresh  Light  on  The  Mystery  of  The   Missiles
The  only  top  leader  I  saw  in  my  ten  days  in  Havana  was
Armando  Hart,   the  Minister  of   Education.    But  this  ener-
getic  and   devoted   young   man   spoke   only  of   the  successful
campaign   against   illiteracy   and   his   mounting   problems   as
more  and  more  Cubans  began   to  go  to  school,  and   to   stay
there  for   a  higher   education,  all  safely  non-political   topics.
I  did  not   succeed   in  talking  with  Prime  Minister  Castro  or
any  other  top  leader  capable  of  discussing foreign  policy  ques-
tions.     Knowledgeable   persons    told   me   Fidel   was    going
through  an  agonizing  reappraisal  in  the  wake  of  the  missiles
affair,  that  until  he  spoke  on  Jan.  2  no  one  knew  what  the
new   line  would  be,  and  that   lesser   men   would   hesitate  to
discuss   such   delicate  matters.     I   found   my  old   friends   in
Havana  asking  the  same  question  about  the  missiles affair  that
I  heard  in  Washington:   why  did  Khrushchev  put  them  into
Cuba   in  the  first  place  if  he  was  so  ready  to  take  them  out
again ?   The  consensus among  reporters  with  whom  I  spoke—
and  these  included  men   from   Soviet  bloc,  uncommitted  and
Latin  American  countries—was  that  Khrushchev  had  made  a
mistake.    Nobody   spelled  this  out  but  obviously  the  mistake
was  to  believe  that  he  could  get  away  with  placing  nuclear
missiles  in   Cuba.
Cubans  Satirical  About Nikita
The  removal  of  the  missiles  stirred  anger  among  the  Fidel-
istas,  and  I  was  told  that  Fidel  had  gone  several  times  to  the
University  to  appeal  to  the  students  to  be  quiet.    Cubans  made
up  a  little  poem  which  went  like  this:
Nikita  Nikita
Lo   que  se  da
No  se  quita
i.e.   Nikita,  Nikita,  what  you  gave,  you  can't  take  back.     In
the   eyes  of   the   Fidelistas,   the   purpose   of   the   missiles  was
simply-to  deter  an   American  attack;  they  turned   against  us
our  own  favorite  theory  of  deterrence.     But  if   I  had   had  a
chance  to  talk  with  top  leaders   I  «mld  have  raised  the  ques-
tions  which  did  not  occur  to  the  ordinary  Fidelista:  Did  the
Cubans  realize  that  these  missiles  could  be  quickly  observed,
that  theirs  would  be  soft  bases  which  could  fairly  easily  be  put
out  of  commission  by  conventional   attack,  that  their   presence
in  Cuba  would   make  Cuba  a  first  target  in  the  event  of  war
between  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.,  that  the  missiles  would   raise  ten-
sion  and  increase  risk?    The  political  questions  were  as  deli-
cate  as  the  military.   The  Russians  had  agreed  to  remove  the
missiles  without  consulting   Casfro.    For  a  man—and  a  peo-
ple—as   sensitive  about   their   national   dignity,   this   was  an
affront.     An  island  besieged  by  the  U.S.,   and  so   dependent
on  the  U.S.S.R.,  could  hardly  afford  open  discussion  of  such
questions.
Now  that  Castro  has  made  his  long  awaited  speech  of  Jan.
On  Betraying  Revolutions
It   has   become   a   familiar   charge   in   this  country,
particularly  among  those  who  vacation  in  Palm  Beach,
a  stronghold  of  proletarian  rectitude,  that  Castro  has
betrayed  the  Cuban  Revolution and  Jose  Marti.    Since
returning  from  Cuba  a  number  of  items  have  made  us
wonder  whether  this  was   an  isolated  case   of  revolu-
tion-betrayal   or   an  epidemic.
The   right  of   revolution   was   asserted   as   a  funda-
mental   principle   in   the   Declaration  of  Independence,
and  is  applied  in  our  policy  toward  Castro.    But  there
seemed   to   be   no   great   uproar   back  home  when   the
Communist  Party  was  convicted of  refusing  to  register
under  a  law  which  blacklists  any  party  or publication
found   to   be   dissominating   revolutionary  ideas.    Our
First    Amendment    guarantees    complete    freedom   of
political  expression.    But  nobody  here  seemed  unduly
upset  when a  handful  of  liberals couldn't even  get  them-
selves  recognized   on  the  opening  day  of   Congress   to
make  a  motion  for   abolition   of   the   Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee.   There  was  no  wave  of  indignation
a   day  later  when  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Com-
mittee,   under   Senator   Dodd,   put   Pacifica  Foundation
in  the  pillory  because  it  has  been  allowing full  freedom
of  expression  over  its  radio  outlets  and  even permitted
an  ex-FBI   man  to   criticize   our  secret   police  and   its
chief,  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  last  Fall.
We're  still  waiting  for  the  White  House  or  the  At-
torney  General  to  suggest,  even  off-the-record  to  a  few
trusted  reporters,  that  such  activities  betray  the  Amer-
ican   Revolution   and  Thomas   Jefferson,   much  less   to
urge   those   elements   in   the   Kennedy    Administration
secretly  disaffected  by  undemocratic practices  to  arise
and   fight.
2  and   discussed  the  missiles  affair,   some  illumination  can  be
found   by  comparing   the   three   versions  now   available,   the
Russian,  the  Chinese  and  the  Cuban.    Khrushchev's   version,
as  set  forth  in  his  foreign  policy  address  to  the  Supreme  Sov-
iet  Dec.  12,  was  that  the  missiles  were  placed  there  at  Cuba's
request,  for  "exclusively  humanitarian  motives."     Khrushchev
said,  "Our  aim was only  to  defend  Cuba."    The  U.S.,  he  said,
was   trying   "to   export   counter-revolution"    and    threatening
Cuba  with  invasion.   "We  were  confident,"  he  said,  "that  this
step"  i.e.  placing  the  missiles  "would  bring  the  aggressors  to
their   senses."     Realizing  "that   Cuba   was  not    defenseless,"
they  would  be  "compelled  to  change   their  plans"  and  "then
the  need   for  retaining  rockets   in  Cuba   would   naturally  dis-
appear."
This  was the  kindergarten  version.   What  if  the  U.S.,  once
the  missiles  were  removed,   changed   its  plans   again   and   in-
vaded?    If  the  Cubans  were  satisfied  with  this  version,   they
would  hardly  have  published   the  full  text  of  Khrushchev  in
their  press  only  to  follow   it  up  a  few  days  later  by  printing
first  a  partial  and  then  the  full  text  of  the  reply  made  by  the
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,   January  21,1963
Chinese  in  the  Peking  People's   Daily   Dec.  15.
The  Chinese  were  anxious to  answer  Khrushchev's charge
that  theirs  was  a  policy  of  adventurism   which  might   have
plunged  the  whole  world  into thermonuclear war.  The Chinese
replied  that  while they were opposed to  "the  imperialist policy
of  nuclear blackmail," they  also  saw  no  need  whatsoever  for
socialist  countries  to  use  nuclear  weapons  as  chips  in  gam-
bling  or  as  a  means  of  intimidation."   This  implied  that  the
missiles  were  emplaced  by the  Russians  as  "chips"  in  a  stra-
tegic  game.    "To  do  this,"  the  Chinese  said,  "would  really
be  committing  the  error  of  adventurism."    They  went  on  to
say  that  "if  one has  blind  faith  in  nuclear  weapons"  and  "be-
comes  scared  out  of  one's  wits  by  imperialist  nuclear black-
mail,  one may  possibly  jump from  one  extreme  to  the  other
and  commit  the  error  of  capitulationism."   The  Chinese  said
the  Cubans  had  committed neither  but  implied  the  Russians
were  guilty   of  both.    They  quoted  with  approval  Castro's
statement  that  the  way to  peace  "is  not  the  way  of sacrificing
or  infringing  upon  people's  rights,"  a  sideswipe  at  Khrush-
chev, and  praised  the  Cubans because "far  from  being  fright-
ened  by  U.S.  nuclear  blackmail,  they  insisted   on  their  five
just  demands."
A  Puzzling  Chinese  Remark
This  must  have  been  music  to  Fidelista  ears.   The  Chinese
went   on  to   make  a   puzzling  remark.     "The   whole  world
knows,"  the   Chinese  said,  "that  we  neither   requested   the
introduction  of  nuclear  weapons  into  Cuba  nor  obstructed   the
withdrawal  of  'offensive'  weapons  from  that  country."     For
them,  therefore,   the   Chinese  concluded,  "there   can   be  no
question  whatsoever  of  'adventurism',  still  less  of  'plunging
the  whole  world  into  a  thermo-nuclear war'."
The  Chinese  have  an  influential  Embassy   in  Havana.    To
say  that  they  did  not  obstruct  the  removal  of  the  missiles  is
to  say  that  they  did  not  advise  the  Cubans  to  resist  the  .re-
moval.    That  much  seems  clear.    But  why  should  they   feel
it  necessary  to  say  that  they  had  never  "requested"  the  plac-
ing  of  nuclear  missiles  in  Cuba?   No  one  assumed  that  they
did.  Castro's  speech  of  Jan.  2  throws  some  light  on  this.  He
suggested   that  the  emplacing  of  the   missiles  in  Cuba  had
been  requested  by  the  Russians.    "We  agreed  with  the  Soviet
Union  on  the  weapons  which  were  set  up  here,"  Fidel  said,
"because  we  understood  that  we  were  fulfilling   two   obliga-
tions:  one toward  the  country, fortifying  its  defenses  in  view
of  imperialist  threats,  and  one  obligation  towards  the  peoples
of  the  socialist  camp."    This  contradicted  Khrushchev's   ac-
count.   It  implied that  Castro  allowed  the  missiles  to  be  set
up  in  Cuba  not only  to  deter  U.S.  attack  but  also  because  he
was  persuaded  that  in  doing so  he  would  be  fulfilling,  an  obli-
gation  to  the  Soviet  bloc.   Was  it  to  help  right  the  Soviet
missile  gap  by  placing  IRBM's in  Cuba ?   Castro  did  not  say.
But  this  reference  in  his  speech  would  help  to  explain  what
the  Chinese  meant  when  they  said   they  had  not  requested
the  placing  of  missiles  in  Cuba,  and  then  went  on  to  call  the
emplacement   "adventurism"   and   the   swift   removal    "cap-
itulationism."
No  Word  of  Praise  for Khrushchev
Castro  in  his  speech  of  January   2  had  no  word  of  praise
for  Khrushchev.  Castro  did not  say,  as  Khrushchev  did, that
with  the  U.S.  no-invasion  pledge,  there  was  no  further  need
of  missiles  to  deter  a  U.S.  attack.    On  the  contrary   Castro
said  that  while  "the   Soviet  government,  in  search  of  peace,
arrived  at  certain  agreements  with  the  North  American  gov-
ernment"  this  did  not  mean  that  Cuba  had  renounced   "the
right  to  possess  the  weapons we deem proper  and  to  take  the
international  steps  we  deem  pertinent   as  a  sovereign  coun-
try."     He  said   over  and  over  again  that  he  did  not  believe
U.S.  pledges  and  he  would  not  allow  inspection.    The  Krem-
lin  is  not   accustomed   to   such   cooly  independent   language.
As  for   the   Sino-Soviet   struggle,   Castro   alone  of  all   the
Soviet  leaders  declared   his  neutrality   between   Moscow  and
Peking.   This,  too,  is  unheard  of  in  the  bloc.   There  personal
rivalries  have  always  taken  on doctrinal  forms, and  questions
How  Peking  Sees  Cuba  and  The  U.S.
"When  Mao-Tse-tung  enunciated  his   famous  'paper
tiger'  theory,  he  was  not, of  course,  implying  that  the
United  States  was   harmless,   but  that   it  was   not  in-
vincible  and  need  not  be  feared.    For  power  in  Mao's
eyes  is  not  power  if  it  does  not  have  the  'spirit  of  the
people'  behind  it.    But  there  was  another  nuance  to  this
'paper  tiger'  concept  which  we  usually miss—that  power
itself   under   certain  circumstances is  itself  powerless.
I  think  the  Chinese  would  use  Cuba  as  an  excellent his-
torical  example  of  this.  America,  with  all  its  prodigious
military  equipment  and  a  navy  that  would  dwarf  all  the
other  navies  of  the  world  combined,  is  confronted  and
challenged   by  6,000,000   people  on  a   puny   island  not
one  hundred  miles  from  America's  shores—and  is  un-
able  to  use  her  power  against  them.    Here  indeed,  the
Chinese  would  say,  America  has  proved  herself  a paper
tiger.    America  finds  herself  unable  to  deploy  her  mas-
sive   military  strength  against   the   Cuban   people  be-
cause  to  do  so  would  set   off  a  chain  reaction  of  revo-
lution  throughout   Latin  America."
—Felix  Greenc:  China—The  Country  Americans  Are
Not  Allowed  to  Know  (1962  revised  Ballantine   paper-
book  edition  originally  published  as  Awakened   China).
We   recommend  it   highly,   along  with  Edgar    Snow's
Other  Side  of   The  River,  as  a  vivid   and   sympathetic
first  hand  account,  the  next  best  thing  to  a  visit.
of   doctrine  in  turn   have  been  debated  in  the    intransigent
tones  of  medieval theological  dispute,  in  which  the  loser  was
doomed  to be outcast  as a heretic. Castro  stood  aside  from  this
furor   theologicus.  In  his  January  2  speech  the  Cuban  spoke
of  the  split  with  sorrow.  . He  said  Cuba  was  forced  to  carry
on  its  struggle  for  economic  development  in  "a  bitter  situa-
tion"  amid  "discrepancies  in  the  bosom  of  the  socialist  fam-
ily."    The  very  word  chosen  must  raise  eyebrows  in Moscow
and  Peking.   Castro  could  hardly  have  picked  a  weaker  word
than  "discrepancies"  for  what  they  regard  as  a  mortal  quar-
rel.    He  said  "we  see  with  clarity  here,  from  this  trench  90
miles  from  the  Yankee  empire,  how  much  cause  for   concern
these  discrepancies  can  be,  how  much  unity  is  needed,  how
much  all  the  strength  of  the  entire  socialist  camp  is  needed
to  face  up  to  these  enemies."    He  announced  that  "the   line
of  our  people" was  to  be "to  struggle  for  unity"  in  the  social-
ist  camp  so  that  it  could  present  "a  united  front  to  the  im-
perialists."    Unity  "inside  and  outside"  was  his  watchword.
This  neutralism  in  the  Soviet  cold  war  will  be  as  unpalatable
to  Moscow  and  Peking  as  India's  neutralism  in  our  cold  war
has  been  to  us.
No  Better  Listening Post  on  Soviet  Rumbles
There  is  no  better  place  than  Havana  to  listen  in  on  the
controversies  shaking  the  bloc.   I  did  not  speak  with  Chinese
but  I  did  speak  with  Russians,  Poles  and  Yugoslavs.     They
cannot  dismiss  the  Sino-Soviet  struggle  as  easily  as  Castro.
For  Castro  the  problem  is  to  save  unity  so  he  can  get  help
from  both  sides  in  his  struggle  against  American  strangula-
tion.    For  these  others  the  problem  is  more  complex.    "The
Cubans  wanted  to  join  the  bloc,"  one  Yugoslav  said  bitterly,
"to  have  its  advantages  but  then  did  not  wish  to  accept  its
obligations."    He  thought  it  sheer  madness  for  the  Cubans
to  expect  the  Russians  to  risk   a  thermonuclear   conflict  on
their  behalf.   From  the  Yugoslav  and  Polish  points  of  view,
Castro  fails  to  see that  a  Chinese victory  would be  the  end of
"different  roads  to  socialism,"  and  that  Castro  would  be  the
first  to  find  this  unbearable.    For  Poles  and  Russians,   the
Cubans  seem  not  to  understand  that  while  Khrushchev  may
be  too  cautious  for  their  taste,  his  downfall  would  threaten
the  greater  freedom  within the  Soviet  bloc which followed  the
death  of  Stalin  and  the  defeat   of  the  Old  Guard.    In  their
opinion  the  very  same  Fidelistas  who  cheer  China's  "paper
tiger"   line   would   be   the   first   to   rebel   if    Chinese-style
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'8  Weekly,   January  21,1963
thought  control  were   to  be  imposed  on  Cuba.    As  for   the
Russians,  their  friendliness  for   Cuba  in  no  way   interferes
with  their  obvious  desire  for  friendlier relations  with  the  U.S.
These  talks  in  Havana  showed  me that  wherever  American
policy was  to  some degree flexible and  pragmatic,  rather  than
rigidly  ideological, this  paid  off.   The  Yugoslavs,  the   Poles,
the  Russians—none  took  as  dark   a  view  of  the   possibilities
of  peaceful  co-existence as  the  Cubans  or  the  Chinese.    This
difference  does not  have  its  origin  in theory  but  in  experience.
We  treat  communism  as  negotiable—everywhere  but  in  Cuba
and  China.    We  have  diplomatic  relations   with  most  of  the
bloc.    We  do  some  business  with  them.    We  have   cultural
exchanges.    We even  extend  aid  to  two  Communist  countries,
Yugoslavia   and   Poland.    But   China  and   Cuba  are   outside
the  pale.   Is  it  any  wonder that  they,  knowing only  our  rigid
hostility,  are  rigidly  hostile  in  return ?
Cubans  Faced The  Crisis With Courage
One  way  to   look   at   the   recent   crisis   is  that  we  were
brought  to  the  brink  of  thermonuclear  war  because  we  had
driven  an  island  neighbor  so  far   into  fear  and  enmity  that
it  was  willing  to  emplace  nuclear  missiles  against  us.    We
can  be  back  on the  brink  again  very  easily  by  misjudging  our
relations  with  Cuba.    From   all  I  could  learn,  the  events  of
that  awful   week-end  when  the   world  came  so  close  to  de-
struction  brought   Castro  new  support  from   among  his  own
people,  as  the  Russian  threat  once  evoked  support  for   Tito.
People  who  had  never  volunteered  before  came  out  for  mili-
tia  service.    Those  foreign  observers  who  were  in  the   front
line  trenches  when  a  U.S.  attack   was  expected  at  any  mo-
ment  said  they had  never  seen  anything like it  in their  experi-
ence  of  war.    "The  sense  of  the  people's  courage,"  said  one
East   European   observer,   "was   a   physical,   tangible   thing.
You  felt  it  in  your  skin  and  in  your  spine."    Of  course,   he
added,  the  Cubans have  no  conception  of  what  a  modern  war,
even  a  "conventional"   one,  would  be  like.    "Everybody   was
running  around  with  pistols,  as  in  the  Wild  West,"  he  said.
"They  did  not  realize  that  in  a  real  war  they  might  never
see  the  enemy at  all,  much  less  engage  in hand-to-hand  com-
bat  with  him."    The  Cubans  are  a  brave  people  with  a  great
tradition,  fighting  after  a  half  century  to  complete  a  revolu-
tion  we  twice  thwarted  before,  once  when  they  defeated   the
Spaniards  at  the  beginning  of  the  century  and  again  in   1933
after  they  overthrew  Machado.
Like  The  Spirit  in  Israel's  Greatest  Days
A  visit  to  Havana  for  any  foreigner  today  is  both  frustrat-
ing  and  inspiring.    Red  tape  and  inefficiency  are  suffocating
and   in  the   middle  echelons  of  the   bureaucracy—the  worst
echelons  everywhere—one  meets  officials  who  seem  to  arrive
late   and  leave   early   and  devote  themselves   in  between   to
keeping  up the  morale  of  the  cigar  industry  by smoking their
way   gloriously  through   the   revolution.     Appointments   are
made  and  broken  in  the  most  maddening  fashion.    Petty   offi-
cials  drag  out  the  simplest  tasks  to  magnify  their  own sense
of  importance.   One  finds  in  oneself  a  sudden  sympathy  with
the  "imperialists"   who  have  to  do  business  in  these   Latin
lands  of  a  manana  that  rarely  comes.    But  then  one  encoun-
ters  a  very  different  type   of   official,   some  young  guerrilla
soldier  turned  administrator,  whose  sobriety  and  devotion  are
at   once  apparent.     I  was  often  reminded  at   such   moments
of  the  best  chaverim  (comrades)  whom I  had  known  in Israel
in  the  greatest  days  of  its  struggle.    Indeed  Castro's  Cuba
often  recalled  Israel,  in  the  courage  of  its  people  in  the  face
of  such  great  odds,  and  in  the  spirit  of  the  Fidelistas.    There
is  no  way  of  knowing what  portion  of  the  Cuban  people  are
with  Fidel  but  everyone with  whom I  spoke  felt  that  his  sup-
port  was  substantial.    The  spirit  of  the  Fidelistas  is   difficult
to  explain  to  persons  like  ourselves  who  live  in  a  stable So-
ciety,  indeed  a  society  which  often  seems  stalemated   at  dead
center.'  For  the  Fidelistas—and  they  are  particularly  strong
among  the  youth  and  the  Negroes—the  Revolution  is  still  in
its  first  uncorrupted phase.    For  them  the  experience  is  like
Jailed  Americans  Better  Treated
"On  Jan.  5,   the   Swiss   Ambassador  and   two   other
officers   of   the   Swiss   Embassy   in   Havana,   acting  on
behalf   of   the   U.S.   Government,  visited  the  American
citizens  imprisoned on  the  Isle  of  Pines,  Cuba.    Accord-
ing  to  the  Swiss  report  of  the  visit,  the  men  have  been
quartered  since  Dec.  28  in  a  large  wing  of  the  prison,
the  address  of  which  is  Pavilion  2,  Salon  A,  Recluserio
Nacional,  Nueva  Gerona,  Isla  de  Pinos.    They  have  the
use  of  a  larger  interior  courtyard where  they  are  now
able  to  exercise  in  the  fresh  air.    The  new  quarters
have   running  water,   good   sanitary   facilities,   showers
and  beds.   The  prisoners  told  the  Swiss  representatives
the  guards  are  treating  them  well,  and  that  they  are
now  getting  more  food.    The  Swiss   observed   that  the
prisoners'   health   had   improved   and   was   in   general
satisfactory.    Their  morale  also   is   reported  as   good.
The  Swiss   found  the  prisoners'  condition  much  better
than  on  their  previous  visit,  stating  that  their  attitude
was  calm  and  dignified  and  advising  their  families  not
to worry."
—State  Dept.  Release  No. 15, Jan.  9,1963.
love.    They   live  in   a   springtime   of  mankind   when   words
which  have   grown  overblown  and  empty   elsewhere  become
meaningful—love  of  country,  devotion,  selflessness,   readiness
to  sacrifice  one's  life  for  others,  the  joy  of  struggling  to  end
misery  and  to  build  a  better  society.    How  speak  of  these
things  to  the  jaded  intellectuals  of  Washington?
Elsewhere  youth  has  turned  beatnik   in  the  shadow  of  the
mushroom  cloud.    In  Cuba  the  same  youth  still  believes.    A
whole  new  generation   of  technicians,  scientists,  doctors  and
engineers   are   Tbeing  developed  from   them   to  replace  those
who  have   fled.   The  best  and  most  promising   youth  are  be-
ing  brought   in  as   becados—50,000  of  them—given  scholar-
ships   (becas)   and  stipends  to  make  it  possible  for  them  to
study.    It  was  the  holiday  season  and  I  was  unable  to  talk
with   them.    But  a  girl  who  is  teaching  some   of  the   pre-
medical  students   English   spoke  glowingly   of  their  enthusi-
asm  and  devotion.
The  First   Air-Conditioned  Revolution
Without  hope,  faith  and  charity,  Castro's  Cuba  cannot  be
understood.    We underestimate   its  grass  roots  strength  and
we  overestimate   its   difficulties.     A  Britisher  who  had   gone
through   the  London  blitz,  a  Pole  who  had  seen  his  country
forced  to  make  a  revolution  in  a  land  levelled  by  war  and de-
populated  by  Nazism,  a  Yugoslav  who  knows  at  first  hand
what  the  Partisans  went  through,  a  Russian  who  had  seen
war  in  all  its  appalling   fury—such   observers  told  me  they
regarded  the  Cuban  revolution  as  a  de  luxe  affair,  the  stand-
ard   of  living   as   extraordinarily   high,   the   food   supply   as
phenomenal   for   a   country   undergoing   so   fundamental   a
revolution  against  the  will  of  so  powerful  a  neighbor.    It  is,
thanks  to  the  kind  of  buildings  we  Yankee  Imperialists  left
behind,  the  world's  first  air  conditioned  revolution.  They  keep
'the  air  conditioning  on  even  in  December  when  it  is  hardly
needed.   It  is  also,  thanks  to  the  existence  of  a  huge   Soviet
bloc,  getting  a  level  of  aid  from   abroad   such   as  no  other
revolution   has   ever   enjoyed.    An   American   engineer  who
spent  a  lifetime  in  the  automotive  industry  in  Detroit  and  is
now  running  a  Cuban government  laboratory  for  products  re-
search  and  automation  told  me  the  machine  tools  being  sup-
plied  by  the  bloc  are  of  very  good  quality.    He  said  even  a
country  like  North  Korea,  so recently  levelled  by war,  is  send-
ing  Cuba  first  class  milling  machinery.    "They  may  be  short
of  consumer  goods,"  he  told  me,  "but   the  task  of  supplying
capital  equipment' and  technicians  for  a  country  as  small  as
this  one  is  'chicken  feed'  for  the   Soviet  bloc."    He  is   very
optimistic  about  the  future.    He  thinks   Cuba  will  be   grow-
ing  its  own food  needs  in  three  or  four  years  and  he  says  a
geological   survey  has  found  not  only  many  valuable  metals
1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   January  21,  19G3
No  Milk  in  Havana's Hotels  But  Babies  Get  Theirs  Daily
like  cobalt  but   petroleum.    If   Cuba  can  supply  its   own  oil
and  food,  it  will  really  be  independent.
The  true  Fidelistas   are   a  pleasure   to  talk   with.    One of
them  was  the  young  soldier  in  charge  of  the  new  fishing  port.
When  I  told  him  the  U.S.  fears  this  will  be  a  Soviet   naval
base,  he  said,  "We  are  building this  port  in  Havana.    We  are
building   a   refrigerating    plant,   a   canning  plant,   a  fileting
plant.  You  will  be  able  to  see  for  yourself  that  our  purpose
is  fishing."   Traditionally Cubans have  paid  little  attention  to
the  food  potential  of  the  seas  around  them.  In  other  quarters
I  was  told  that  Cuba  hopes   also  to  fish  the  little  touched
South  Atlantic,  that  the  Russians  can fish the  North  Atlantic
from  their  own bases  but  that  for  South  Atlantic  fisheries  it
will  be advantageous  to  them  to  have  fish  processing  and  ship
repair  facilities  in  Cuba.    Others   spoke   of  the   plans   going
forward  for  automation  in  the  sugar  fields.  Part  of the  revo-
lution's  problems  arises  from  its  success  rather  than  its  fail-
ure.    Labor  is  growing  short.   The  hard  work  of  cane  cutting
is  not  popular  and  peasants   are  no  longer  forced  by  hunger
and  misery  to  take  on  such  back-breaking  tasks.    They   are
also  eating  more,  and  supplying  the  cities  with  less.   My own
impression  in  the  shops  was  that  price  control  and  rationing
were  working fairly  well,  and  there  was  more  available  than
I  had  been  led  to  believe.    In  everything   the  children  come
first.    Milk  was  impossible to  get  in  Havana's  best  hotels  but
a   Mexican  reporter  told  me  of  visiting  a  fishing  village   in
Oriente  where  every  morning  a  truck  came  over  bad  roads  to
deliver  28  litres  of  milk  for  the  28  babies.    Those  people  in
Havana  with  babies   all  told  me  they  got  their  milk  ration
regularly.    If   Hayana   is  poorer,  the   countryside   is  richer.
And   in  the   hotels   at   night   one  sees   a  whole  new  class  of
Negroes  and  mulattoes,  the  men  in  dinner  jackets,  the  girls
in  new  style  half-bustle   dresses,   enjoying  themselves   where
hitherto  only  the  rich  and  the  foreigner   played.    The   sense
of  full  racial  equality  and  ease  is  one  of  the   most  pleasant
experiences  for   the  guilt-burdened white  American  in   Cas-
tro's  Cuba.
The  Poorest  Way  to  Make  Policy
.  It   was   my  sixth   visit   to   Cuba—three   times   before   and
throe  times  since  the  Revolution.    I  did  not  encounter   ene-
mies  of  the  regime.    I  did  not  visit  the  prisons,  or  study  the
workings  of  the   block  system  which  is  supposed  to  give   the
Castroites  eyes  and  ears   everywhere  against  the  threat  of
sabotage   and   our   CIA,  but   must   work   some  injustice   too.
The  Cuba  I  picture  is  a  Cuba  as  it  appears  through  friendly
Announcement
In  December  the  Weekly  completed   10  years  of   publica-
tion.    They  were wonderful  but  gruelling  years.  The  Weekly
succeeded  without   ever   appealing   to   readers  for   financial
help   because  it   was,  on  the   editorial   side,  a  one-man   job,
from  writing  to  proofreading  and  on  the  business  side except
for  the   past  year  a  one-woman  job,  my  wife's.     In   Decem-
ber  there  also  occurred a  birthday  which  put  me  well  beyond
the  age  of  consent.    I  cannot  take  the  next  ten  years  at  the
same  pace.    I  am  therefore  turning  the  Weekly  into  a  bi-
weekly   (this  is  what  the   Postoffice,  Webster's  to  the   con-
trary,  calls an  every-other-week  publication).  I  hope  on this
less  tense  basis  to  be  able  to  do  a  better  and  more  thought-
ful   job,  to  get  out  of  Washington   oftener   (particularly  to
Latin  America,  where  the  big  storm  is brewing)   and  to  pub-
lish    special   supplements   from   time   to   time.      We    have
absorbed   repeated   increases   in   all   costs,   including   a    400
percent  rise  in  2d   class  mail   rates,  over  the   past  ten   years
without   raising  our   $5   price,   and  with   further   mail   rate
boosts  in  the  offing,   we  are  leaving  the  subscription rate  at
$5.      The   newsstand   price   goes  to  20   cents.      Regretfully
but  hopefully.
eyes.    This,  of  course,  is  not  the  whole  truth.    A  revolution
is  a  complex phenomena, a  tragic  struggle  to  be fully  grasped
only  when  seen  from  many  points  of  view  with   compassion
for  the  exiles as  well  as  the  victors.    But  I  believe  it  is  dan-
gerously  misleading  to  make  policy  and  form  opinion, as  we
do   back   home,   almost   exclusively   on   the   basis   of   hostile
views.    To  look  at  Castro's  Cuba   only  through   the  eyes  of
those  who  have  fled,  to  concentrate   on  the  negative  aspects
as  our  press  does,  to  exaggerate  these  and  even  to  falsify,
is  to  make  it  almost  impossible  to  fashion  flexible  and  wise
policy.    For   years  we  read  in  our  press  that  the   Russian
Revolution  and  then   the   Chinese  was   on  the   verge  of  col-
lapse.    Every  time  we  are  confronted  with  a  new  revolution
we  take  to  the  opium  pipes  of  our  own  propaganda.     Those
who  try   to  be  objective  or  friendly  are  dismissed  as  dupes,
and  sometimes—as  the  Stalin  years  demonstrate—they  were.
But  events  have  also  shown  that  in  the  long  run  the  dupes
prove  less  misleading than  the  doped.
You  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift   Sub  at  $4   With  The  Three  Issues  on  Cuba  If   You  So     Specify
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street   ................................................................................... —
City   ...........................................Zone..........-..State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ......................................................................... _
Street    ......... _ ..................._...................................................
City   ........... — .........................Zone.......~...State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  Q    No  D
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Claw  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday   In  December
and  the  first  In  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.   F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   SB  in  the  U.  S.:   S6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  $16  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED