I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963jul22.pdf

============================================================

Bertrand  Russell  on  the  U. S.  War   in  Vietnam,  P.  3
How  the   New  Leader  Got  $3,000  From   Chiang   Kai-Shek's  Press  Agents,  Page  2
The  Inescapable  Loneliness  of  the  Black  Man's  Life  in  America
"An   African   Ambassador  who   had  experienced  several
times  refusals  of  service  in  restaurants  finally  complained
to  the  Department  of  State  when  his  wife  and  8-year  old
child  were  denied  a  glass  of  water.   The  Ambassador  wrote
to  me  that  he  had  Ijeen  an  officer  in  the  French Army dur-
ing  World  War  II  and  had  led  his  men  into battle.    He  said
that  even  under  battle  conditions  he  had  treated  the  chil-
dren  of  the  enemy  with  enough  kindness  and consideration
to  spare  them  a  drink  of  water  from  his  canteen. .  .  .
"A  counsellor  of  an  African  embassy:  'The  result  is  that
a  black  diplomat  is  rather cut  off, he  withdraws to  himself
and  sees  only  his  own  people.   This  creates  constant  resent-
ment  in  our  staff.    Some  of  us  are  rather  bitter.    There  is
so  much  about  America which  is  good.    What  America  has
done  for  the  underdeveloped countries  is   wonderful.    But
here,   in  this  matter,  we  are  dealing  on  a  personal  level.
When  people  come  to  our  country,  we  try   to  make  them
feel   more  at   home  than  in  their  country.    Our  general
feeling  here is  'I  am  forever  a  stranger.'"
—Secretary  of  State Rusk  on Civil  Rights, July  10.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  16
JULY  22,  1963
•>">'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.20  CENTS
In  the  Name  of  Marx  as  Once  in  the  Name  of  Jesus
The  end  of  the  Sino-Soviet  conference  and  the  happy  be-
ginning   of   the   Khrushchev-Harriman   talks   has   distracted
attention  from  another  momentous  meeting  in  Moscow.    The
mission  from  Peking  and  the  mission  from  Washington   over-
shadowed   a   mission   from   the   Vatican,  the   arrival   of   two
papal   envoys  to  attend  the   golden   jubilee  of   the  Patriarch
Alexis,  "the  first  time,"  the  Associated  Press  reported,   "that
the  Vatican  has  assigned  clergymen  to  attend   a  major  cere-
mony  of  the  Russian  Church  since  the  great  schism  of   1054"
which   occurred  after   "Catholic  missionaries  in   Russia  were
imprisoned   and   murdered."     Nine   centuries  ago   the   East-
West   split  was  between  Rome  and   Moscow;   the   bitterness
was  between  Christians,  as  we  see  it  now  between  Marxist-
Leninists;  the  doctrinal   differences   between   the  Eastern  and
Western  Churches  were  as  subtly  hair-splitting  and   as   diffi-
cult  for   the   innocent  heathen   to  understand  as  is  the   doc-
trinal  dispute  between  the  Muscovite  and  the  Chinese  Marx-
ists.    Blood  was  shed  in  the  name  of  Jesus,   as  it  may  some
day  be  shed  in  the  name  of  Marx;  in  both  cases,  behind  the
dogma  the  sophisticated  will  scent  the  clash  of  rival  bureau-
cracies,  then  of  priests,  now   of  commissars,  seeking  to  con-
solidate  and  extend  their  power  in  mutual  fear  and  suspicion.
It  is  not  by  enlistment  in  such  ancient  forms  of  power  strug-
gle  that  intellectuals  can  help  mankind  find  its  way  to  safety
in  the  thermonuclear  age.
Mao  Defied  Stalin  and  Ignored  Lenin
Power  and  not  dogma   is  at  stake.     For   Mao  to  rehabili-
tate   Stalin   is  nonsense;  if   Mao   had   obeyed   Stalin,   Chiang
would   still  be  in   power.     For   Stalin  like   Khrushchev   put
Russian  state  interests  ahead  of  revolution  elsewhere.  Equally
nonsensical  is  Mao's   claim  to  be  the  more  perfect  Leninist.
Under  Lenin  revolutionary workers  seized  power  in  the  cities,
and  then  worker  armies  fastened  their  power  on  the  country-
side.    Under  Mao  revolutionary  peasants  seized  power  in  the
countryside  and  then  peasant  armies  captured  the  cities.     In
both  countries  a  monolithic  hierarchic  party  ruled  from  above
wields  power;  in  both  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  is  a
Reminder  to  Leftist   Super-Dupers
"The  main  thing,  don't  you  see,  is  to  put  an  end  to
imperialism   as   quickly   as   possible;   but   how—with
what  losses—this  will  be  achieved  seems   a  secondary
question.   To whom,  it  is  right  to  ask,  is  it  secondary?
To  the  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  who  are  doomed
to  death  in  the  event  of  the  unleashing  of  a  thermo-
nuclear  war?    To  the  states  that  will  be  erased  from
the  face  of  the  earth  in  the  very  first  hours  of  such  a
war?"         —From  Moscow's July  U  letter  to Peking.
myth.    The  "cult  of  personality"   is  one  of  the  topics  in  dis-
pute   between   them   but   in   one   country   there   is   a   cult   of
Khrushchev  and  in  the  other  a  cult  of  Mao.  In  1956  Mao  was
the  "liberal"  and  Khrushchev  was  saying  Stalin-style that  the
Hungarian  revolt  might  have  been   avoided   "if   a  couple  of
writers  had  been  shot  in  time."  Then  Mao  in  inviting  a  "hun-
dred  flowers  to  contend"   seemed  to  be  wedding  John   Stuart
Mill  to  Karl  Marx—until  the  experiment  showed   such  wide
resentment   in   China   against   power-corrupted     Communists
and    stultifying   thought   controls,   that   the   lid   had   to   be
clamped   on   again.     The   two   rivals   feel   for   each   other's
weak  points.    Mao's  aborted  "great   leap  forward"  and  large-
ly   abandoned   Communes   threaten   his   internal   prestige,   as
does  the  failure  of  Khrushchev's  efforts  peacefully  to   solidify
the  East  German  regime.     Mao  and  Khrushchev,   like  Pope
and   Patriarch   almost   a   thousand   years   ago,   move   toward
schism.    Like  warring  Christians  before  them,  warring  Marx-
ist-Leninists   would   sooner   co-exist   with   the   heathen   than
with  each  other.    While  Moscow  reaches  Westward  for  agree-
ment,   so   does   Peking;    the   Chinese   have   been   trying   for
months  to  replace  Soviet  ties  with  new  trade  arrangements  in
London,  Ottawa   and  Paris.
The   growing   split   between   Moscow   and   Peking   has   its
good  and  its  bad  side.    The  good   side  is  that  with  the  split,
as  with  the  split  that  brought  Protestantism  to  birth,  the  ex-
istence  of  rival  power  centers  and  rival  dogmas  in  the  Com-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  22,1963
Fulbright  Sheds  New  Light  on  the  Links  Between  Formosa  and  Madison  Avenue
How  the  New  Leader  Got  $3,000  From  Chiang  Kai-shek's  Press  Agents
The  CHAIRMAN (Sen.  Fulbright):  On  page  3  of  the  an-
nex  [to  the  public  relations  agreement  between  the  Hamilton
Wright  Organization   and  the  Chiang  Kai-shek   government]
the  last paragraph  reads as  follows—
"Assist   in   arrangements   to   publish   an   article   entitled
'China,  the   U.S.  and  the  Continuing  Struggle'  in  the  New
Leader  magazine  and  to  publish  and  distribute  copies  of  said
article  to  representative  citizens, -writers  and  leaders  in  the
United  States."   Do you recall  that ?
Mr. Hamilton WRIGHT,  Sr.:  Vaguely.
The  CHAIRMAN: How  did  you  fulfill  this  agreement?
Mr.  WRIGHT,  Jr.:    I  got  bamboozled  on  this  one.    The
New  Leader  came  to  me  and  hit  me  up  for  a  little  money
that  this  would be  a  great  thing  to  have  and  I  fell  for  it.
The   CHAIRMAN:  Was   this   article   favorable   to   Free
China?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.: Oh, yes.
The  CHAIRMAN: Did you  pay  the  New  Leader  to  publish
it?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.: Not the  full  amount, no.
The CHAIRMAN: How much  did you pay?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.: I  don't  remember.
The  CHAIRMAN: Did you pay  them  $3,000?
Mr.  WRIGHT, Jr.:   It  could  be, if  that  is  what  the  sum  is.
The  CHAIRMAN:  Did  you  report   to  the   Department  of
Justice  that  you paid  the  New Leader ?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.:  I hope so.
The  CHAIRMAN:  I  don't   believe  you  did.    We  couldn't
find  it.
The  CHAIRMAN: Tell  me, have  you  paid  other  magazines
in  similar  fashion  for  printing  articles  of  this  kind ?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.: Not to my knowledge.
The   CHAIRMAN:  Are   subsidies   for   articles  commonly
practiced  in  public relations ?
Mr. WRIGHT, Sr.: What  is that  again,  are what?
The CHAIRMAN:  Are  subsidies—?
Mr.  WRIGHT,  Jr.:   Only  subsidies  in  the  case  of  perhaps
travel  expenses,  things  like  that.   I  think  that  is  quite  com-
mon  in the  industry.
The  CHAIRMAN: The  direct  payment  of  a  magazine  to
publish  it  is not  common ?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.:  Not in our business at  all.
Mr.  WRIGHT,  Sr.:  We  have  never  done  this,  outside  of
this  one thing that  I can remember.
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.:  That  is the  exception.
The  CHAIRMAN: That is all you can think  of?
Mr. WRIGHT, Sr.:There may be one or two others.
Mr.  WRIGHT,  Jr.:   Do  you  know  of  any?    I  don't  know
of  any,  either.
Mr.  WRIGHT,  Sr.:  We  operate  on  the  theory  that  our
material,  if  it  is  not  interesting   enough  to  justify  publica-
tion  by  a  legitimate  magazine,  it  has  no  business  being  pub-
lished.
The  CHAIRMAN: This  was  interesting  enough,  wasn't  it?
Mr.  WRIGHT, Jr.:   You mean  the  New  Leader  article?
The  CHAIRMAN:  Did  you  have  to  pay  the  $3,000  because
it  wasn't  interesting  enough?
Mr.  WRIGHT,  Jr.:   No,  Mr.  Chairman,  I  have  got  to  say
that  if  I  was  as  well  informed  then  as  I  am  today,  I  would
never  have  done that.    I  was  approached  by  the  editor,  and
was  really  led  down  the  road  that  this  would  be  a  great
thing  and  would  enhance  my  standing  with  the  Chinese  and
the rest. . . .
Senator  AIKEN:  You  say  it   [the   New  Leader]   is  highly
intellectual ?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.:   Supposedly.
Mr.  WRIGHT, Sr.:  This  comes under  the  category  of  prob-
ably  a  dozen  magazines  that  live  by  the  seat  of  their  pants,
and  exist  strictly  on  contributions   from  different  people   to
publish  stories  that  certain  groups  consider  very   favorable
Senator  Douglas   Explains
"I  find  that   the  Committee  of  One  Million  did  sub-
mit  a  manuscript  to  me  in  June  of  1959  opposing  the
recognition  of  Communist  China.    I   found   myself   in
general  agreement  with  the  sentiments   and  arguments
contained    in   the    article,    and   after    making    some
changes  in  it,  authorized  its  distribution  over  my  sig-
nature.    I  was  informed  that  the  manuscript  had  been
prepared  by  the  Hamilton  Wright  organization,  but  I
was  not  informed  that  this  company  was  in  receipt  of
any  retainer   [$300,000  a  year]  from   the  Chinese  Na-
tionalist  Government.   I  have been  very  careful to  keep
myself  aloof  from  the  Chinese  Nationalist Government
and  have  insisted  that  the  Committee  of  One  Million
should   not   receive   any   direct   or  indirect   subvention
from   it.    Indeed  on  March   5,  1959,  after   an  inquiry
from  my  office,  Mr.  Marvin  Liebman,  of  the  Committee
of  One  Million,  wrote  to  my  administrative  assistant
that  the '. . . organization has been  unique in surviving
through  the  years  on  the  relatively  small  contributions
of  public spirited  Americans.  . . .'"
—Letter  from  Senator  Douglas  to  Senator   Fulbright
in  the foreign  agents  investigation.
to  their  interests.    They  have  no  circulation,  they   have  no
standing,  they  have  no prestige  at  all,  and  I  personally  never
pay  any attention  to  them  personally  at  all.  .  .  .
The  CHAIRMAN:  You  say  in  this  same  "New  Plans  for
1959"   cooperation  with   "anti-Communist   groups"—
"This  year  we  will  give  fullest  cooperation  to  groups  such
as  'The  Committee  of  One  Million'—as  you  know  we  have
already  agreed  to  assist  the  magazine  New  Leader   with  a
contribution   of   $3,000   to   enable   them   to   publish  Richard
Walker's  sensational  anti-Communist  story,  'China,  the   U.S.
and the Continuing Struggle.' "
The  CHAIRMAN: But  here  again   in  all  these  cases   the
fact  that  this  material  was  prepared  by  an  agent  of  a  for-
eign  government  does  not  appear,  is  that  correct?
Mr.  WRIGHT, Sr.:  Just  a  minute.   I  am  thinking  back  on
this.    And  I  don't  think  anything  that  was  proposed  in  this
statement  was done.
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.:  Except  the New Leader. ...
Mr.  WRIGHT, Sr.:  Let  me just  get  into  this  a  little  deeper
and  by  way  of  trying  to  be  helpful  and  understanding,  here
is  Life  Magazine  with   13  pages  of  pictures   in  color  on  the
art  treasures of  China.
The  CHAIRMAN:  Did  you  pay  anybody  in  Life  Magazine
to do that?
Mr. WRIGHT, Sr.: Tut,  tut,  I should say  not.
The  CHAIRMAN:  Did you give  them  any free trips?
Mr.  WRIGHT, Sr.:  No,  sir;  no,  sir.    Life  Magazine,  thank
God,  and  there  are   probably  several   hundred   publications
here,  you can't  touch them with  a  20-foot pole.
The CHAIRMAN: Not  many  of them  are  as  rich  as  Life.
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.: That  is right.
Senator AIKEN: Did they  pay  you ?
Mr. WRIGHT, Jr.:  No, they  didn't.
Mr. WRIGHT, Sr.: Pardon  me, sir,  I don't understand  it.
Senator AIKEN: I  asked  did they pay you?
Mr. WRIGHT, Sr.: No.   We sell  nothing.
The   CHAIRMAN: You  are   paid   by  the   Government  of
China.
Mr.  WRIGHT,  Sr.:  We  are   paid   by  the   Government  of
China  to  do this  work  and  whether  we  are  successful  or  not
depends  on  our  ability.     We  don't   always  hit   a  home  run
every  time.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  inquiry  into   foreign
agents  executive  session,  March  25,  released  July   10.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  July  22,196S
A  Glance at  the  World  Law  We  Violate  in  Vietnam  and  Cuba
How  the  U.S.  Can  Best  Advance  the  Cause  of World  Peace Through  Law
"Peace  through  law"   is  a  favorite   of  our  State  Depart-
ment.   A  world  conference  on  the  subject,  organized  by  the.
American   Bar   Association,  has   just   been  held  in   Athens.
Two  leading  U.S.  lawyers  have  been  named  to  an  executive
committee  which  will   establish   a  permanent  World  Peace
Through  Law  Center.     "We  suggest  that  the  best  way  to  be-
gin  this  noble crusade  is  to  get  our  own government  to  obey
the  law.
One  place  would  be  in  South  Vietnam.   In  the  letter  pub-
lished  below  Lord  Russell  calls  attention   again  to  the   fact
that  we  are  using  poisonous  chemicals  as  a  weapon  of  war
against  the  anti-Diem  rebels.    The  Geneva  Protocal   of  1925
which  we  signed  forbade  the  use  of  gas,  poison  or   bacteria
in  war.    Strictly  speaking  the  Protocol  does  not  apply  be-
cause  we never ratified  it,  though  all  the  other  great  Powers
including the  USSR did.
Two  U.S.  Anti-Poison  Weapon  Statutes
But  our  own  researches  after  receiving  the  Russell  letter
have  turned  up  two  earlier   treaties  prohibiting   the  use  of
"poison  or  poisoned  arms"  which  were  ratified  by  the   U.S.
and   embodied  in  U.S.  law.    The  1899  Hague  Convention  to
this   effect   can  be  found   in  32  U.S.  Statutes-at-Large   1803
and  the  1909  Hague  Convention re-enacting  the  same  provi-
sion  can  be  found  in  36 Statutes-at-Large  2277.   It  would  be
refreshing  if  we  announced  that  we were  going  to  obey  these
laws  and  cease  the  use  of  poison  as  a  weapon-  in  Vietnam.
Another  law  we  seem  to  be  violating  in  South  Vietnam   is
the  Geneva  Convention  of  1949  for   the  Protection   of  Civil-
ians  in  War-Time.   It  was  ratified  by  the  U.S.  in  1955.    Its
terms  apply  to  war  "or  any  other  armed  conflict," and  were
intended  to  prevent  the  horrors  the  world  saw  in  the  Nazi
and   Japanese  occupations.   It   forbids   "individual   or   mass
forcible  transfers,"  like  those  of  the  Diem  regime  in  forcibly
evacuating  peasants   from   their   villages   to   "concentration
centers."*
A  second  striking  example  of  our  lawlessness   is   afforded
by  our  relations  with  Cuba.   Our  punitive  freeze  of  Cuban
bank  accounts, like  the  noose  of  trade  and  travel  embargoes
we  tighten around  Cuba, are  in  clear  violation  of  the  Charter
of  the  Organization  of  American States  which  we  signed  at
Bogota  in  1948,  and  later  ratified.    Article   15  forbids   any
form  of  interference by  arms  or  otherwise  in  the  affairs  of
another   inter-American  State   and   Article   16  forbids   any
Sauce  Only  for  The  Little  Geese
"Geneva,  July   10—Adlai  Stevenson,  U.S.   Ambassa-
dor  to  the  UN,  warned  the  developing  countries  today
they  may  be  the  first  to  suffer   from  any  violation  of
the  rules  and  principles  of  the  United  Nations."
—Washington  Post, July  12.
"United  Nations,  N.Y.,  July  10—Britain  told  the  UN
Colonialism  Committee  today  that  it  would  not  permit
a  subcommittee  to  visit  British  Guiana."
—Same  Paper, Same  Day, Same  Page.
An  investigation   was  voted  by  the  UN   Committee
into  the  delay  in  fulfilling  Britain's  promise  to  grant
British  Guiana  independence.    It  may  also  throw  light
on   U.S.  pressure  to  delay  independence   and  the  part
U.S.  funds   and  agents  have  played   in  the  racial  and
labor  conflicts of the  colony.
American  State  to   "use   or   encourage   the  use  of   coercive
measures  of  an  economic  or  political  character"  against  an-
other  American State.
Freedom   of  the  seas  is  a  historic  principle  of  world  law
for   which  we  fought  the  British  in   1812,   but  now  we  are
doing  our  best  to  prevent  the  Spanish  from  resuming   pas-
senger   shipping   service   to   Cuba   and   threatening   action
against  countries   whose   ships  take  supplies  to  the  island.
The  same  can  be  said  of  freedom  of  the  air.    We  are  trying
to  get  Mexico,  Spain,  Canada  and  Britain  to  shut  off  all  air
travel  to  Cuba.   "Privately,"  Henry  Raymont  wrote  in  the
New   York   Times  July   12,  "U.S.    officials   acknowledge  that
several  countries  feared  that  to  implement   a  total  ban  on
Cuban  air  travel  would  be  in  violation  of  the  International
Civil  Aviation  Agreement"  to  which  both  the  U.S.  and  Cuba
are   signatories.     It   seems  that  to  us,  as  to  the  German
Kaiser  when  he  invaded  Belgium  in  1914,  treaties  are   but
"scraps  of  paper."   This  is  a  poor  way  to  advance  the  cause
of  world law.
* We  wish   every  thoughtful   American   could  read,   "The
War  in  Vietnam",  by  Hugh  Deane  (Monthly   Review  Press,
333  6th  Aye.,  NYC  14, 50c),  a  pamphlet  which  sets  out  the
whole  terrible  story  with  eloquence  and  painful   precision,
Bertrand   Russell  on  U.S.  Use  of  Poisonous  Chemicals  in  South  Vietnam
Dear  I. F. Stone:
I  am  disturbed  by  the  fact  that  I  have  not  been  able  to
make  known  to  the  American  public  the  facts  concerning
the  use  of  chemicals in  Vietnam.    When  I  originally  raised
this  point  in  my  letter  to  the  New  York  Times,  the  New
York  Times  attacked  me  editorially for  failing  to  provide
evidence.    In  my  reply  to  this  attack  I  devoted  five  para-
graphs  to  specific  documentation  with  regard  to  the chemi-
cals  used.   The  New York  Times  published  my  letter,  omit-
ting  all  the  particular  references  to  chemicals, attempting
to  create  the  impression that  my  accusations were without
substantiation.
The   U.S.   Government   has   been  charged  by   the   South
\ ietnam  Liberation  Red Cross,  after  a  year's study by them
of  the  chemicals  sprayed  in  South  Vietnam  and  their  effect
upon  the  health  of  human  beings,  animals  and  crops,  with
using  weed  killers  which,  in  the  large  doses  used, are  harm-
ful;   with   using   white  arsenic,   various  kinds   of   arsenic
sodium   and   arsenite   calcium,  lead   manganese  arsenates,
D.N,P.   and   D.N.C.   (which   inflame   and   eat   into  human
flesh),  and  calcic cyanamide  (which  has  caused  leaves, flow-
ers  and  fruits   to  fall,   killed  big  cattle  like  buffaloes   and
tows,  and  seriously  affected   thousands  of  the   inhabitants
of   South   Vietnam;  with   having   spread   these   poisonous
chemicals  on  large  and  densely  populated  areas  of  South
Vietnam.                                                              '
Admittedly,  the  South  Vietnam  Liberation  Red  Crosses,
as  its  name  suggests,  allied  with  those  opposing   the   U.S.
supported  Diem  regime, but  its  published findings cannot  be
ignored  since  it  has  urged  international  investigation  of'the
situation.    The  use  of  these  weapons,  napalm   bombs  and
chemicals,  constitutes  and  results  in  atrocities.
I  am  disturbed  that  it  should  be  possible  for  newspapers,
to  behave  so  brazenly.    It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  ihe
editor  of  the  New York  Times,  in  reply  to  a  private   protest
of  mine  about  this, stated  that  the  reason that  my  evidence
on  chemical warfare  was  not  published  was  because  it  was
known  all  along  to  the  New  York  Times!
The  New  York  Times  of  January 19,  1962,  stated  that  of
2600  villages  in  Vietnam,  nearly  1400  had  been  destroyed
because  of  military action  by  the  U.S.  and  the  Diem Gov-
ernment.    I  should  be  grateful  if  you  would  allow  me  to
make  these  facts  known  to  the  American  public.
Bertrand  Russell
8  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  22, 1963
It's   Not  Progress  to  Make  Peace  With  Moscow  for  War  on  China
(Continued   from   Page One)
munist  camp  must  end  thought  control.     It  is  true  that  Mos-
cow  and  Peking   each  has  its  own  system  of  thought   control,
as  Luther  and  Calvin  had  their  own  in  the  struggle  with  the
Papacy.    But  the  existence  of  so  many  rival  "one and   only"
true  interpretations  of  the  Faith   became   an  object  lesson  in
pluralism  and  opened  the  door  to  the  right  to  think  for  one-
self.    We   may  hope   for  a  similar  development   in  the    stuffy
Communist  world.    To  read  the  Russian  statement   is  to  see
how  Khrushchev  is  pushed,  for  popularity,  further  along  the
pathway  to  destalinization.    There  is  no  doubt  that  Khrush-
chev  has  the  better  side  of  the  argument,  both  internally  and
internationally;  the  Russians want  more  freedom  at  home  and
they  want  peace  abroad.    The  weakest  point  ideologically  in
the  Chinese  latest  blast  at  Moscow   is  its  attempt  to  prove  the
need   for   a   continued   hard-line  dictatorship.    The   Chinese
contend   that   dictatorship  is  required   because   "class   contra-
dictions"   still  exist.    But  the   classes  they   specify  are   hood-
lums,  idlers and  such.    These  are  not  classes  at  all  in  a Marx-
ist  sense,  and  the  excuse  recalls  Stalin's  similar rationalization
for  terror  in  the  30's and  40's  long  after  landlord  and  bour-
geois  had   been   wiped  out.   The   "class   enemies"   he  killed
were  often  the  most  devoted  of  his  own  party  comrades.
Negro  and  Indian,  Malay and  Chinese
The  bad  side  of>the  split  is that  in  a  world  of  growing  race
tension,  the  split  between  Moscow   and  Peking  will   seem  to
millions  only  another  variant  of  an  omnipresent  struggle  be-
tween   rich   whites   (in   this   case   Russians)   and   underpriv-
ileged  colored  peoples  (in  this  case  Chinese).    There  is  evi-
dence  that  Peking  is already exploiting  this,  and  playing  on  a
While  Man's  Peril  to  the  colored  man's  revolutionary strug-
gle,  as  some  Americans  once  spoke,  and   some  Russians  may
again,  of  a  Yellow  Peril.    This  is  a  poisonous  half  truth.    It
is  not   by  eliminating  the   white  man,  whether  "imperialist"
American  or  "revisionist"  Russian,  that   the  "revolution"  can
be  made  secure.   The   revolution  man  needs  runs  deeper  than
that.     The  struggle  of  Negro  and  Indian  in  British  Guiana;
of   Negro   and   Indian   in   Africa;   of   Malay  and   Chinese  all
over  South  Fast  Asia;  of  "brown"   India  and  "yellow"  China
shows  that  the  worse  angels  of  man's  nature  do  not  need  a
white  skin.     Internecine  hates  and  tribal  rivalries  will'  survive
And  How  About   Genghis   Khan?
Senator  TALMADGE:  Does  it  not  seem  to  the  able
Senator  from  Mississippi  that  something   so  far  reach-
ing  might  have  been  devised  by  Nero,  Macchiavelli  or
Hitler,   instead   of  by   Federal    officials   at   the   present
time?
Senator   STENNIS:   It  [the President's   civil  rights
bill]  is  the  broadest   and  most  comprehensive  language
the  Senator  from  Mississippi  has  ever  seen  on  any  sub-
ject   of   this   kind.     It-  would  grant   dictatorial    power.
Whoever  drew  the  actual  language   is  bound   to   have
had  something  like  this  in  mind.
—U.S. Senate, July  11.
the   white   race.     The   Chinese   thesis  that   there  can   be   no
peace  until  "imperialism"  is  destroyed  is  only  another  variant
of    the    familiar    "just-one-more -war-to-make-the-world-safe-
for-something-or-other."    In  every  major  war  of  history,  men
have  been  mobilized  by  the  false  hope  that  just  one  more  big
bloody  mess  and   all  would   be  well.    Mao   comes   in   where
Woodrow   Wilson   went  out, and   just   in   time   to   have   the
H-bomb  punctuate  this  folly.
On   the  international plane,  the  Sino-Soviet  split  is  not   to
be  welcomed   even   if   it  leads  to   a  limited   nuclear  test   ban
agreement  between  Washington  and  Moscow.    Peace  between
U.S.   and   U.S.S.R.   is  not   real  peace  if   it  merely  reflects   the
beginnings  of   a  bigger   struggle   between   Russia  and  China.
We   believe  our  government   should  seize  the  opportunity  to
make   a   nuclear   test   ban   agreement,   and   match    Moscow's
declaration   in  its  latest  blast  at  Peking  that  it  would    never
use  nuclear  weapons   first.   But  if  we  are  wise,  we  will sup-
plement  a  Russian  agreement  with  a  Chinese  agreement  on  a
nuclear  free  zone  for  the  Pacific  while  there  is  still  time.    We
are  for  a  reconciliation  with  Russia  and  a  reconciliation with
China.     To   substitute   one   kind   of   East-West   struggle   for
another,  to  move  toward  an  entente  with  Russia  in  prepara-
tion   for   an   even   more   cataclysmic  future   struggle  against
China  is  not  progress.     Reconciliation  is  mankind's need,  and
we  who  drove  Peking  to  extremes  by  our  hateful   policies  of
embargo  and   isolation,  should  be  the  ones  to  make  the  first
move.     It  is  by  magnanimity,  and   not  by  missiles,  that  man's
future   may  be  made  secure.                                                  July   16
Thi>  Hi-Weekly   Is  hot  Published   in  August—Next   Issue  Dated  Labor  Day  Goes  to  Press  August  27
I.F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ............
City   .................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)    Name   ..
Street   ............
City  ...............
Shall  we  send
Bi-Weekly  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
......................... .Zorie.............State....................
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4'(1 yr.) additional:
..........................Zone......... ...State....................
gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone'sBi- Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington    15,   D.  C.
Second  class;
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  V.  Stone's  Ui-Weekly.    Second  Clnss  PoslaKC  Paid  at   Washinjrton,  D.  €.     Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  Ausust  at  3618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..
Washington,  D.  C     An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and   edited  bv  I.  V.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  btone.    Subscription:
S5  in  the  U.S.;  S6 in  Canada:  SIO elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $13  to  Europe:   S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED