I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963sep02.pdf

============================================================

In  Tribute  to Senator Kefauver,   P.  2
Reuss  in  Sedition  Bill  Debate  Revealed  State  Dept  Effort  to  Shut  Off Criticism  of  Diem,  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  17
SEPTEMBER   2,  1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20   CENTS
Why   and  How  Did  Peace  Suddenly  Break  Out?
To   return   to  Washington   after   a  month's   vacation  in  so
eventful   an  August  is  to   feel   like  a  Rip  Van   Winkle,   but
one  pleasantly awakened  to  a  world  he  never  expected  to  see.
The   President,   the   Secretary   of   State   and   the   Secretary  of
Defense   have   been   eloquently   speaking   the   language    one
heard   earlier   only   from   fringe   groups    like   SANE   which
seemed   to   be   crying   in   a   nuclear   wilderness.     Peace   has
broken  out,  and  hope  leaps  up  again.    The  chances  of  defeat-
ing   the   limited   test   ban   so   swiftly   negotiated   in   Moscow
appear   almost   non-existent;  one   influential   Midwestern   Re-
publican   Senator  warned  his  party  colleagues   privately  they
could   not   afford   to  be  lined  up   for   radioactive  fallout   and
against   peace.     The    scientific   community   is   almost   solidly
against  Dr.   Teller;   the   Air   Force   and   its  satellite   Senators
like  Thurmond  and  Jackson  know  they  are  licked.    The   real
need  is  to  mobilize  an  alert  public  opinion  to  keep  the  Ad-
ministration  from  being  made  prisoner  by  the  malcontents  at
home   and   abroad,   particularly   those   West   Germans   who
would   like  to  make  further  moves  toward   peace  impossibly
difficult.     For  this  it  may  be  useful  to  summarize  the  sudden
change  in  the  world  picture  as  it  appears  to  one  observer.
A  New  Enemy
Historically,  old  enmities  among  nations  have  usually  been
resolved   by  the   appearance   of   newer   rivals.    This   is  what
happened   to  the  centuries  old  struggle   between  England   and
France  when,   midway  in  the  War   of   1870,   it  became  clear
that   Germany   had   suddenly   grown    formidable   enough   to
threaten  both  of  them.    Something  of  this  sort  has  happened
in  the  relations  between  the  U.S.  and  the  USSR.    Some  time
between  last  March  and  June,  the  struggle  between    Moscow
and   Peking   reached   the   point   where   it   overshadowed   the
struggle  between  Moscow  and  Washington.    The  former  was
more  dangerous  to  Khrushchev  because  it  threatened  his  poli-
tical  position  at  home  and  within  the  bloc.     For  him,   Mao
represented  an  immediate  political  danger;  for  Russia,  which
has  still  not  forgotten  the  centuries  when  it  was  ruled  by  in-
vaders  out  of   Asia,   the   new   China  represented   a   potential
threat.    Overnight  Khrushchev  accepted  the  limited  treaty  he
had  always rejected  before  as  advantageous  to  the  U.S.,  which
is  more  advanced  in  underground   testing.    He  did  so,  in  my
opinion,  because  it  gave  him  his  first  concrete  achievement  in
the   campaign   for   co-existence   on  which   he   has   staked   his
career,  and  even  more  because  it  isolated  China.    The  treaty
rests  on  three  areas  of  mutual   interest  to  the   U.S.   and   the
U.S.S.R.     One   is   to   prevent   the   emergence   of   a   nuclear
China  which  would  be  a  menace  to  both.     A  second  is  their
common   interest  as  the  two  great   nuclear  powers   in  main-
taining  their  near  monopoly  as  long  as  possible.     The   third
—the  one  neither  talks  about—is  to  keep  Europe  divided  and
The  March
Back  from  a  month in  Western  Europe,  forced  to  go
to  press  the  day  before  the  march  on  Washington,   I
can  only  contribute  my  own  reaction  from  a  freshened
perspective.    It  is  one  of  hope.    Seen  from  afar,  the
racial   convulsion  shaking  our  country   seems   the   in-
vigorating  reflection  of  an  enduring  vitality  and  ideal-
ism.    Just  what  the   march  will   mean  nobody  knows.
Its  impact  on  Congress  will  not  be  tangible.    But  as  a
symbol,  particularly  as  it  visibly  unites  the   conscience
of   the   white   community   with  the   aspiration   of   the
Negro,  it  can  have  a  subtle  and  enduring  effect.    The
road   ahead   is  not   smooth;  there  will  be  much  racial
trouble  in  the  North;  this  revolution,  like  every  other,
will   have  its   follies  and  its  crimes.    But  I  have  the
feeling  that  justice  will  be  achieved  more  easily  than
we  expect.    The  last  generation  wiped  out  the  sweat-
shop.    This  one  will  complete  the  Negro's  liberation,
the  final  fulfilment   in  that  myth  of  equality  which  is
our  country's  pride  and  the  source  of  its  creative  en-
ergy.    The  March,  the  deference  paid  to  it  in  almost
every   quarter   from   the   President   down,   the   moral
health  this  reflects,  shows  that  in  1963  we  Americans
are  as  a  people  not  wholly  unworthy  of  our  past.
subordinate  because  a  united  Europe  with  nuclear  arms  would
—in  terms  of  population,  resources  and  technology—be  a  far
greater  threat  than  China  is  likely  to  be  for  many  years  to
come.    The  problem  is  not  ideological.    Were  Europe   from
the  Channel  to  the  Pripet  marshes  Communist,  it  would   be
too  big  for  Russian  control,  and  it  would  be  a  greater  head-
ache  for  Moscow   than  is  Communist   China.    On   the   other
hand,  our  "chicken  war"  with  the  Common  Market  and  our
difficulties  with  de  Gaulle   are  only  a  slight  taste  of  the  eco-
nomic  and  political  troubles   we  would   have  with   a   united
capitalist   Europe,   competing   against   us   for   the   markets  of
Latin  America,  Africa  and  Asia.
I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  Kennedy  and  Khrushchev  are
not  moved  by  the  danger  of  nuclear  war  and  the  burden  of
the  arms  race;  both  the  danger   and  the  burden  are  so  great
that  no  one  could  sit  in  the  seat  of  power,  with  full   knowl-
edge  of  the  facts,  and  not  be  appalled   and  inspired   to   seek
some  way  out.    But  the  freedom  of  action  possessed  by  both
men   is  so  circumscribed  by  the   nature   of   the   nation    state
system,   and   the   life-and-death   dependence   of   each    nation
on   its   own   military,   i.e.    its   machinery   for   murder,    that
they  have  little  room  for  maneuver  even  when  mutual  inter-
ests  appear.    To  see  this  one  need  only  imagine  what   would
be  happening   now  in  the   Senate   if  the   President   had   pre-
sented   a   treaty   outlawing   all   tests   or   initiating  substantial
disarmament.    Conversely  it  is  not  hard   to  imagine   Khrush-
chev's  problems  with  his  own  bureaucracy   if  he  had  agreed
(Continued   on   Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  &, 196S
A  Don  Quixote,  But  One Who Tilted  Against  Real  Monsters,  Not  Windmills
Estes  Kefauver  Was  A  Bold  Non-Conformist  in  the  Senate's  Smug  Club
No  sooner  had  Estes  Kefauver  been  elected  to  the   House
in   1940  when  he  became  one  of  the  few  Southern   Congress-
men  to  fight  for  repeal  of  the  poll  tax.    His  maiden   speech
in  the  Senate  nine  years  later  was  against  the   filibuster.   He
was  the  only  Southern  Senator  to  support  the  Supreme  Court's
school  desegregation   decision;  the  only  one  who  did  not  sign
the  Southern   Manifesto.     He   believed  in  democracy  with  a
small  d:  in  the  Senate,  he  antagonized  the  oligarchy  by trying
to  break  the  dead  hand  of  raw  seniority   precedence  and  to
institute   election   of   committee   chairmen  by  the   committees
themselves.     In   the   Democratic   party,   he   challenged   the
bosses;  they  never  forgave  his  exposure  of  the  links  between
the  big  machines  and  crime.    They  took  Stevenson  as  a  lesser
evil  in  1952.    Still,  a  poor  man  in  politics,  with  the  profes-
sionals   against   him,  Kefauver  got  as  far   as  the  vice  presi-
dential  nomination  in  1956.    His  finest  epitaph  was  the  sign
somebody   hastily   scrawled   over   his   headquarters   in    1952
when  the  machine  politicians  barely  stopped   him,  "Nobody
wants  Estes  but  the  people."    Not  since  Norris  and  La  Fol-
lette  has  anybody  in  the  Senate  been  so  consistently—to  use
old-fashioned   language—for   "the   people"  and  against    "the
interests"  as  Estes  Kefauver.
An  Amazingly   Effective  Maverick
•  The  language  is  old  fashioned  because  acquiescence  in   the
domination   of   American   life   by  giant  corporations   is   the
mark  of  our  time;  they  rule  by  sharing  power  with  the  big
wheels  of  the  labor  movement  and  by  comfortable adjustment
to  the  demands  of  the  welfare  state.    Big  business,  big  labor
and  big  politics  enjoy  an  Era  of  Good  Feeling,  in  which  each
shows  a  fraternal   concern  for  the  others'   racket.    Kefauver
seemed  a Don  Quixote  amid  (if  this  be  the  right   expression)
the  Cool  Cats.    Several  obit  writers referred  to  him  as  a  tilter
against   windmills.     But   the   windmills  of   Cervantes   were
imaginary   monsters.     Those   against  which   Kefauver   tilted
were  real:   the  effort   in  the  Dixon-Yates   scandal  to  let  the
private  power   crowd  take  over  TV A;  the  gross   overcharges
of  the  steel  giants  and  the  uneconomic  nonsense  of  the  auto-
mobile  industry;  the  ugly  greed   with  which  the  drug  com
:
panics  market  their  often  dangerously  untried  nostrums   and
exploit  the  aged  and  the  sick.    He  died  in  the  midst  of  a
fight  to  expose  the  efforts  of  the  big  drug  companies  to  pre-
vent  the  sale  of  lower  priced  drugs  in  Latin  America.    In  this
Words  Which  Needed  Saying
"Many  of  the  ills  from  which  our society  is  suffering
arise  from  the  fact  that  the  AFL-CIO  has  lost  much
of  its   vision,  its   ideajism,  and,  with  it,  its   power  to
exercise  any  major  influence  over  the  course  that  our
society  takes.    Its  voice,  with  pitifully  few   exceptions,
is  indistinguishable  from  the  voice  of  other  conserva-
tive  organizations."
—Ashby  G. Smith,  president,  National   Alliance   for
Postal  Employes   (largely   Negro)   at  its  golden  anni-
versary  convention,  in  New  York  City,  Aug.  22, which
protested   the   continued  hostility   of   the   (largely   lily-
white)  AFL-CIO  Postal  Clerks.
area  Kefauver  left  behind  the  first  two  major  reforms  of  their
kind  since  1914:   the  Kefauver-Celler  Act  of  1950   tightening
up   the  anti-trust  laws  and   last   year's  Kefauver-Harris   bill
tightening  up  the  pure  food  and  drug   laws.    Nobody   ever
achieved  more  against  greater  odds.    His  administrative  price
hearings  are  an  eye-opener  to  our  economic  realities,  and  paid
off  richly in  curbing  steel  and  drug  prices.    Behind  the  scenes,
a  mere  inquiry  from  his  anti-trust   subcommittee   was   often
enough  to  stop  a  corporate  steal.    Kefauver  in  this  sense  was
indeed   a  tribune   of   the  people,   wielding   a  one-man   veto
made  possible  by  his  integrity,  industry  and   courage.
This  last  of  the  Southern  Populists  affected  the  manners  of
a  mountain  rustic,  but  he  was  one  of  the  few  really  sophisti-
cated  intellectuals  in  the  Senate.    Some  of  Wall  Street's  best
corporation  minds  came  off  second  best   in  his  deft  cross-ex-
aminations.    With   all   this   went   a   devotion   to   traditional
American  freedoms  few  have  shown  in  the  past  two  haunted
decades.    He  voted  several  times  against  the  House  Un-Amer-
ican  Activities  Committee  in  the  House;   he  was  one  of   the
ten  Senators  who  voted  to  uphold  Truman's   veto  of  the  In-
ternal   Security  Act's  thought   controls   in   1950;   he  was  the
only  Senator  to  vote  against  outlawry  of  the  Communist  Party
in  1954.    In  1955,  in  the  fight  over  the  Formosa  resolution,
Kefauver   was  one  of  the  few  who  tried  to  keep  the  doors
open  in  the  Far  East  for  a  United  Nations  settlement  of  the
dispute   over   both   Formosa   and   the   offshore  islands.     His
speeches  then  showed  the  same  bold  non-conformity  and  in-
sight  that  marked  his  entire  career.    We   salute  his   passing
with  sorrow  and  grateful   reverence.
How  Catholics Are  Treated By  The  Castro Regime On Which We Make Covert War
"Dorothy  Day,  editor  of  the  Catholic  Worker,  said  news
is   being   'managed   or   mismanaged'  so   that   tensions   be-
tween  the  United  States  and  Cuba  are  increased.  Miss  Day,
who  recently  toured  Cuba,  said:  'I  am  publicly  accused  of
being  a  Har  when  I  have  stated  during  lectures  that  I  was
able  to  get  to  daily  mass  and  to  receive  communion in  all
the  cities  I  visited  there.
" 'Who  among  the  readers   of  our  Catholic  and  secular
press  realize  that  the  church  in  Cuba  sent  two  representa-
tives  to  the  Vatican  Council  in  Rome,  that  Cuba  is  the  only
Marxist-Leninist  country  which  has. a  representative  at  the
Vatican   and  that   the   government  in   Cuba  ordered  three
days  of  mourning  on  the  death  of  Pope  John?
"'I  would  say   that  the  Catholic  press  in  this  country
hag  taken  part  in   this   mismanagement  of   news  just   as
the  secular  press  has'."
—VPI   from   Chicago  in  the  Washington   Post  Aug.   W,
reporting  on  press  symposium  in  the  Catholic  Critic.
"Mexico   City,   Aug.   9   (UPI)—British   author  Graham
Greene  said  here  that  Cubans  'live  better  than  in  the  days
of  Batista,'  and  that  'there  is  no  religious  persecution,  and
anyone  can  hear  mass  whenever  he  wishes.'    The  author
returned  yesterday  from  Havana, where  he  was  a.guest  of
the  Cuban  government  for  the  July  26  celebration.    There,
is  plenty  of  work  in  Cuba  today  for  everyone,   the  students
are  serious,  well-behaved,  and  I  felt  that  the  Cuban  people
are   happier  than  before,'  Greene  told  airport   reporters."
—A  dispatch  on  the  VPI   ticker  Aug.   9  printed   by   few
if    any    U.S.   papers.     Greene,   author   of   "Our   Man    in
Havana,"  is  a  Roman  Catholic.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  S, 1963
Reuss  Disclosed  State  Dept  Effort  to  Shut  Off  Criticism  of  Diem  Regime
Vietnam  Crisis  Underscores  the  Dangers  in  the  New  Sedition  Bill
David  Halberstam,  who  has  been  doing  a  brilliantly  inde-
pendent  minded  job  of  reporting  from  South  Vietnam  for  the
New  York  Times,  wrote  in  its  issue  of  Aug.  24  that  the  crisis
had   "underlined  what  some  sources  here  consider  to  be  one
of   the  gravest  sicknesses  of  the  vast  and  talented  American
mission  here—a  vast  divergence  between  what  the  people  in
the field are  seeing  and  reporting  and  what  the  highest  Amer-
ican  authorities  are  reporting.    Some  observers,"  he  continued,
"see  the  heads  of  the  mission  so  tied  to  the  Ngo  family  that,
as  one  source  said,  'their  world   is  completely   different   from
ours.    It's  like  we're  in  different   countries'."
Busk's  Instructions  to  Saigon
But  the  State  Department   in  Washington,  instead   of  wel-
coming  independent  reporting  from  South  Vietnam  as  a  cor-
rective,  has   been   doing   its  best   to   shut   off  reporting   that
differs  from  the  official  Diem  line.    The  evidence  of  this  was
presented  by  Congressman  Henry  S.  Reuss  (D.  Wis.)  on  the
floor  of  the  House  July  16  during  debate  on  the  Administra-
tion's  bill  to  extend   the  sedition   law  to  cover  any  writings
or  utterances  abroad  which  may undermine  the  morale  of  the
armed  forces.
Mr.  Reuss  told  the  House  that  on  May  24  the  Moss  sub-
committee  on  government  information  had  held  an  executive
session  on  complaints  from  U.S.   correspondents   in   Vietnam
about  their  access  to  news.    He  said  the  transcript  was  still
classified   but  that  he  had  succeeded  in  declassifying  the  in-
formation  he  was  about  to  give  the  House.    He  disclosed  that
American  information  policy  in  Vietnam  has  been   governed
"by  a  cable  sent  within  the  last  2  years  from  the  Secretary  of
State  to  the   Ambassador  in  Vietnam."     This  cable  set  out
as   one   of   its  principal   guidelines   "that   critical   articles  by
American  newsmen  on  Diem  and  his  government   are   likely
to  impede  the  war  effort."     Roger  Hilsman,  Assistant  Secre-
tary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  tried  under   questioning
by  Mr.  Reuss  at  the  hearing  to  dismiss  the  Rusk  directive  as
"just  a  fuzzily   written  cable."    Mr.  Reuss  pointed  out  that
this  passage  was  not  at  all  fuzzy  and  that  the  U.S.   Ambas-
sador  in  carrying  out  these  instructions   "has   got  to  do  his
level  best  to  suppress  such  articles."
"The    official   position   of  the   U.S.  government   appears   to
be,"  Mr.  Reuss  told  the  House,  "that  criticism  of  Diem,  how-
ever  justified,  will  impede  the  course  of  our  operation   there.
If   It's   Southern,  It's  Not  Seditious
Mr.   JOELSON   (D.   N.J.):   Where   there   is   a  civil
rights  disturbance  and the  National  Guard  is  activated,
if   the  Governor  of  the  State  involved  were  to  impor-
tune  the  National  Guard  or  even  order  it   to  defy  or
go  contrary  to  the  orders  of  the  President,  would  the
Governor  of  that  State  be  chargeable  with  sedition?
Mr.  POFF   (R.  Va.):  I  could  not  imagine  that   the
Attorney  General  would  so  misinterpret  the  patent  in-
tent  of   the   Congress.
—During   the  July   16  debate  on  the  sedition  bill.
Would  this  not  be  an  attempt  to  cause  insubordination,   or  to
obstruct  enlistment   in  the  U.S.   armed  forces?    If   it  is,  the
newsman  who  writes  about  Diem's  persecution  of  the  Buddh-
ists,  or  his  oftrimes  curious  administrative  practices,   would  be
liable  for  fine  or  imprisonment  as  a  seditionist.    We  ought  to
be  enlarging  the  frontiers  of  freedom,  at  home  and   abroad,
not  contracting  them."
An  effort  to  recommit  the  sedition  bill  was  defeated   338-40
and  it  then  passed  on  a  voice  vote.    We  hope  that  liberals  in
the  Senate  will  block   its  final  passage.     The   sedition   act  it
would  extend  to  utterances  abroad  is  the  notorious   1917   stat-
ute  under  which  so  many  repressive  follies  were   committed
and  the  saintly  Eugene  V.  Debs  sent  to  jail.    It  is  now  appli-
cable   in   peacetime   because   of   the   permanent   "emergency"
declarations  under  which  we  live.    Its  extension  to  utterances
abroad  was  made  necessary,  the  House  Judiciary   Committee
said   in  reporting  it,   "by  reason   of  our  military,   diplomatic
and   commercial  commitments  around  the  world."
These  expensive  and  explosive  imperial  commitments  make
it  more  necessary  than  ever  to  have  the  freest  possible  dis-
cussion  of  foreign  policy  issues.    South  Vietnam  is  only  the
latest  and  most  dramatic  example  of  the  costly  and  humili-
ating  errors   in  which   they  may  involve  us.    The   Attorney
General,  in  asking  for  the  bill,  was  vague  but  its  floor  man-
ager  Rep.  Poff   (R.   Va.)   cited  the  broadcasts  from  Cuba  of
Robert   F.   Williams   and   the   aborted   attempt   to   prosecute
Powell's  China  Monthly   Review  after  the  Korean  War.     Mr.
Poff   said  there  was  no  guarantee   "that  a  similar  case  might
not  at  any moment  develop  in  South  Vietnam  where  the  U.S.
today  has  American  officers   and  troops  actively  deployed."
How  Buddhists  Are  Treated  By  The Catholic Regime We Support  in Vietnam
"Many  Vietnamese  Catholics  (the  Archbishop  of  Saigon,
Mgr.  Nguyen   Van   Binh   among   them)   disapprove   of   the
policy  of  arbitrary  clericalism  on  the  part  of  the  President
of  South  Vietnam,  the  Catholic  Ngo  Nhu  Diem.   The  prin-
cipal  weapon  of  this  policy  is  a  statute  promulgated—under
French  rule—by  the  former  Chief   of  State,  Bao  Dai,  de-
signed  to  aid  Christian missions.    It  imposed  upon  Buddh-
ism  and upon  Buddhism  alone  the  status  of  a  private  asso-
ciation.    Buddhist  monks  were  therefore  obliged  to  ask  for
official   authorization  of   any   public   activity.
"When   the   Diem  government  was   established   in  1955,
it   promised  to  annul  this  statute.    The  promise   was  not
kept.    On the  contrary,  the  Catholic  Church benefitted  from
exceptional  privileges.    In  Hue  market  I  was  able  to  buy
food  supplies—oil,  maize,  cheese—bearing  the  words,  'Not
to  be  sold  or  exchanged—gift   of  the  people  of  the  USA.'
These  supplies  were  sent  by  the  Americans  to  Catholic  or-
ganizations  to  be  distributed   free  in  the  countryside.   But
they  were  often  sold  openly. ...
"The   police   tortured   one   of   my   students,   Phan   Dunh
Binh,  to  get  his  signature  at  the  bottom  of  a  document  ac-
cusing   the  Buddhist  chief  priest   of  working  for  the  Com-
munists.    One of  my  colleagues,  a  German,  was  allowed  to
see  this  student  a  few  days  later;  he  was   unrecognizable.
"After   these   events  I  protested   officially,   with  three  of
my   colleagues,   against   the  tortures   and  against   the   fact
that  in  taking  away  our  patients  the  authorities  were  stop-
ping  us  from  carrying  out  our  medical  duties.    We  later
resigned  and  decided  to  leave  South  Vietnam."
—Erich   Wulff,    a  West  German  who  spent   two  years  as
a  doctor in  Hue,  where  the  attacks  on the  Buddhists   began,
writing  Aug.  18  in  the  London   Observer.
8  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  2, 1963
Why  Not  Explore  China's  Proposal  for  A  Nuclear  Free  Pacific?
(Continued   from   Page    One)
to   open   Russia  to   mobile   inspectors   or   other   international
controls.
Only  A  New   World  Order
What  follows  from  this  is  the   need   for   the   peace   move-
ment   to  focus  on   the  inescapable  necessity  of   a  new   world
order  if  further  progress  toward  peace  and  disarmament  is  to
be  made.    The  spread   of  nuclear  arms  cannot  be  stopped  by
an   American-Soviet   condominium.     The   reasons   which   led
the   British  to   develop   their  ov/n   independent   nuclear   mur-
der  machine  are  the  same  ones  which  move  the  French   and
the  Chinese.    This  limited  treaty  will  not  stop  Swiss,   Swed-
ish   and   Israeli   progress   toward   the   Bomb.     We   used   our
Bomb  first  in  war  without  preliminary testing;  they,  too,  may
test  underground.     Only  if  the  nuclear  powers   give  up  their
nuclear  weapons  can  the  spread  be  stopped,   and  then  only  if
some  kind  of  world  federal  order  with  full  inspection  powers
can  police   such  an  agreement   and  guarantee  security  against
aggression.      Within    some   such   framework   many   political
problems   which  now  appear   insoluble  may  be  solved,   espe-
cially  the  reunion  of  all  the  divided  countries  from  Germany
to  Korea   and  Vietnam.     It  should   not  escape  attention   that
the   greatest   opposition   to   the   treaty  has   come   from   those
countries  which  have  not  yet  achieved  reunification,  and   fear
to  see  their  disunion  become  frozen  and  permanent.    In  this
respect  Adenauer  and  Mao,  on  opposite  sides  of  the  political
spectrum,   reflect   very  similar  political  conditions.     In   these
divisions  are  the  seeds  of  new  war.
Everybody   is  willing  to  give   up  what  they  do  not   have.
China,  like  Russia  when  it  was  non-nuclear,  launches  a  cam-
paign   to  ban  the  bomb   it  does  not  have  but  is  desperately
trying  to  acquire.    France,  without  long  range  missiles, talks
of  banning  means  of  delivery.   In  both  cases,  the  opening  for
negotiation   should   be  exploited.     It  would   be  to  our  long
range  national  advantage  to  explore  the  Chinese  proposal  for
a   nuclear  free   Pacific;   it  would   be  worth   withdrawing  our
nuclear  forces  from  the  Far  East  in  return  for  a  nuclear  free
China.    De  Gaulle's  proposal  for  a  conference  on  means  of
delivery  should  be  taken  up;  this  offers  a  means  both  to  bring
back  France  within  the  framework  of  disarmament  talks  and
It  Takes  More  Than   Megatons
Events   in  South  Vietnam  should  be  a  reminder,  in
the  midst  of  the  test  ban  debate,   that  national   power
is  not  measured  in  megatons  alone.    Our  7th  fleet  off
Vietnam   probably   carries   enough   nuclear   power   to
make   all   Southeast   Asia   uninhabitable.    But   for   all
this  power  we  cannot  make  the  Diem  regime   behave.
We  are  easily   humiliated  by   our  pigmy  satellite   be-
cause  we   are  the  prisoners  of  our  own   oversimplified
anti-Communism,  and  of  the  instinctively undemocratic
military  and  foreign  service  bureaucracies  on  which  we
depend   in   these   distant   imperial  adventures.     These
bureaucracies  made  a  joke  of  our  anti-colonialist  pre-
tensions  in  South  Vietnam  by  the  kind  of  people  they
put   into   power.    The   father   of   that   wilful   spoiled
darling   Mme.  Nhu,  who  has  just  resigned  as  Ambas-
sador  in  Washington, was  the  puppet Foreign  Minister
under   the   Japanese   occupation.    President  Diem  had
been   Bao   Dai's   Minister   of   the   Interior   under   the
French.     These    aristocratic   and   wealthy    smoothies
have   known  how  to  serve,   and  to  use,   Americans  as
they   did  Japanese   and   French   before   us.     Pentagon
and   State   Dept  (see  p.  3)   have  helped  this  medieval
minded   family   clique  to   deceive  the   U.S.   public.    It
is  time  to  establish  a  broadly  based  Committee for  a
Democratic  Foreign  Policy  in  South  Vietnam,  to  bring
the  facts  home  (we  highly recommend Helen  B.  Lamb's
account   in   the   August   10  Nation   of   the   Vietnamese
exile   movements  in   Paris)   and  to   end  the   nonsense
that  there  are  no  alternatives  to  Diem.    His   concen-
tration  camps  must  be  full   of  them.
to  focus  attention  on  the  next  big  problem.    If  missiles  and
planes  could  be  eliminated, the  fangs  of  the  nuclear  monster
would  be  drawn.    It  is  only  by  bringing  large  and  magnani-
mous  perspectives  to  bear  that  Kennedy  and  Khrushchev   can
make   further   progress   on   the   road   upon   which   they   have
made  a  first  small  tentative  step.    We  need  to  think  in  terms
of  the  planet  and  of  the  human  race  as  a  whole  if  we  are  to
secure  the  future   for  our  children.
One   way  to  dramatize  a  new   human   order   would   be  a
joint  Russo-American  trip  to  the  moon,  planned   by  an   inter-
national  scientific  body  on  which  Chinese  and  Swiss,  German
and    French,    British   and    Polish    scientists,   among     others,
would  serve  as  a  symbol  of  human  unity.
IPS   Will  Speak   on  Sun. afternoon,   Sept.  15  at  New  York  City  Town  Hall  Welcome  for  Students  From.  Cuba
I.F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ............
City   ..................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ...„...._
City  ..........._
Shall  we  send
Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
........................ ..Zone.. .......... .State
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)
.........................Zone...........Stat«
gift  announcement?         Yes
'"""""S/S/'ea
additional:
....................
D    No D
IF. Stone's Bi- Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.     Semn<!  Class  PostuKe  Paid  at  WashinKton,   D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at   C618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..
\Vf-shington    P.    C'      > n   in<l<-l"'ndt>nt  bi-wt'.-kly  published  and   edited  by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M,  Stone.    Subscription:
S'':
n
  thi-  !'.S.-    S<;  in  Cuimila;".S10  elsewhere-.    Air  Mail  rates:  513  to  Kuroue:   SiO  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED