I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963mar04.pdf

============================================================

dark's  Fight  Against  the Senate Oligarchy,  P.  3
Cong.  Ryan,  Opposing  $360,000  for  HUAC,  Tells  How  It  Issued  A  'Handbook  for  Saboteurs',  Page  2
F.  Stone's Bi-  Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  6
MARCH  4,  1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
Basic  Economic  Ills  No  Mere  Tax  Cut  Can  Cure
Conventional  economists  and  commentators  seem  reluctant
to  look  at  two  aspects  of  our  economy   in  the  current  contro-
versy  over  its sluggishness.    One  of  these  has  to  do  with  mili-
tary   spending.     This,   according  to  the   figures   used   by   the
President  in  his  talk  to  the  American  Bankers'  Association, is
running  close  to  $55  billion  a  year.   Spending  for  arms repre-
sents  more  than  half   the  Federal   budget   and  more   than   10
percent  of  gross  national  product.    This   is  an   artificial  shot-
in-the-arm  for  the  economy,  an  enormous  boondoggle—as  we
used  to  say  in  the  New   Deal   period.    FDR  never  dared   to
spend  on  anywhere near  this  scale  to  stimulate  the  economy.
Mr.  Kennedy  told  the  bankers the  economy  has  been  slug-
gish  for  five  years.    During  those  live  years  the  artificial  stimu-
lus   of   the   arms  race  and   the   space   race  has   been  steadily
stepped  up.    Five  years  ago  in  fiscal  '59  the  total  together  ac-
counted  for  $46.5  billions.   Next  fiscal  year  the  arms  race will
cost  $56  billion  and  the  space  race  $4  billion—a  total  of  $60
billion.     An   economy  that  continues  to  be  sluggish  despite
such  huge  infusions  of  government  spending  is suffering  from
something  fundamentally  wrong,  something more fundamental
than  a mere  tax  cut  can  cure.
Nothing   Sluggish  About  Profits
Another  aspect  of  the  economy  which  nice people  don't  talk
about  has  to  do  with  profits.    The  economy  may  be  sluggish
but  corporate profits  are  blooming.    Standard  Oil  of  New  Jer-
sey,  du  Pont  and  General  Motors  all  reported   1962  their  most
profitable  year ever.   The  steel  companies  are singing  the  blues
but  if  you  read  the  footnotes  to  their  annual  reports  and  see
the  millions  extra  they  have  deducted  from  net  earnings  and
added  to  depreciation   account  under  the  new  depreciation   al-
lowances,   you  will   see  they   shifted   cash   income   from   one
pocket  to  another.    The   Wall  Street  Journal   (Feb.   20)   re-
ported   that  corporate   profits   in   the   final   quarter   of    1962
"probably   reached  a  peacetime   record."     The   February  issue
of   "Economic   Indicators"  prepared   for   the  Joint   Economic
Committee  of  Congress  shows  that  in  the  sluggish  years  from
1958   to   1962   corporate   profits  after   taxes  rose   from    $18.8
billion  to  $26  billion,  a  peacetime  high.    Even  more  striking
was  the  rise  in  profits  after   taxes  plus  "capital  consumption
allowances";  the  latter  include  depreciation   and  capital   out-
lays  charged  to  current  accounts—this  is  where  real  profits  are
hidden.    These  rose  from  $41.4  billions  in  1958  to  $55.2  bil-
lions  in  1962.     These  figures  hardly  support  the  notion   that
tax  cuts  are needed  in  corporate  and  upper  brackets.
In  a  brilliant  analysis before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,
Leon   H.   Keyserling   called   the   President's    tax  program   "a
pigmy  sent  out  to  do  a  giant's   job."     The  truth   is  that   the
tax  program  is  largely  irrelevant.    The  rate  of  unemployment
Seven  Years  and  $2  Billions  Later
".  .  .  it  would  be  a  disservice  to  my  country  not  to
voice  a  deep  concern  over  the  trend  of  events  in  Viet
Nam  in  the  7  years  which  have  elapsed  since  my  last
visit.  .  .  .  AH of  the  current difficulties  existed  in  1955,
along  with  hope  and  energy  to  meet  them.    But  it  is  7
years  and  $2 billion  of  U.S.  aid  later.   Yet substantially
the  same  difficulties   remain  if,   indeed,  they   have  not
been  compounded."
—Sc'n.  Mansfield,  letter  submitting  his rr/wt  on a re-
cent  vis-it  to  Via   Nam  with  Senators  Boggs  (Del),   Pell
(K.I.)   and  Smith  (Mass),   Feb.  25.
"It  is  most  disturbing  to  find  that  after   7  years  of
the   Kepublic,  South  Viet  Nam  appears  less,   not  more,
stable  than  it  was  at  the  outset,   that  it  appears  more
removed  from,  rather than  closer  to,  the  achievement  of
popularly  responsible  and  responsive  government.   The
pressures   of   the   Vietcong  guerrillas  do   not   entirely
explain  this situation."—From   the  report    itself.
at  the  bottom  of  our  society,  among  the  youth,  the  unskilled
and  the  Negro  is  twice  the  average.    To  create  full   employ-
ment  for  them  requires  more  direct measures,  among  them edu-
cation   and  urban  renewal.    The   President's   program   seems
based  on  the  view that  if  taxes  are  cut  among  the  more  fortu-
nate  elements   of   our   society,  some  of   it  will  trickle  down.
Much  of  it,  on  the  contrary, will  only  trickle  into  the  cash  sur-
pluses  of  the  big  corporations  and  the  wealthy.
Profits  do  well  in  a  sluggish  economy  because  a  major  sec-
tor  of  American  industry  is  able  to  fix  prices  so  it  can  break
even  at much  less than  full  capacity  and  full  employment.    But
in  the  current  controversy  over  the  tax  program   only  Walter
Rcuther  has  had  the  nerve  to  attack  this  problem  of   "admin-
istered  prices."     He  told  the  Joint  Economic  Committee  that
major   companies  in   autos  and   steel   price  their  products   to
break  even  "well  below  50 percent"  of  capacity.    In  their  eyes
a  goodly  margin  of  unemployment  is  "healthy,"  helps  keep
labor  in  line  and  wages  down.    They  plan  price  and  output  to
do  quite well  for  themselves  in  a  sluggish   economy.
While  advocating  a  tax  cut  in  the  lower  brackets  as  an  eco-
nomic  stimulant,  Mr.  Reuther  had  the  temerity  to  suggest  that
we  need  economic  planning  for  full  output.    This  is  regarded
here  as  perilously  close  to  that  dangerous  word,   "socialism,"
though   Business  Week   not  so  long  ago   (April   1962)    said
economic  planning  accounted   for   "the   long  and   remarkably
stable"  boom  in Western  Europe.   Our  economy  depends  (1)
on planning  for  war,  i.e.  the  arms  and  space  races,  and  (2)   on
administered  prices,  i.e.  private  planning  for  maximum  profit
at  less  than  full  capacity.   But  public  planning  for  peace  and
abundance—that  is taboo!
2   J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  4,  1963
Its  Only  Law  in  Two  Years  Corrected  Its  Own  Error—'A  Handbook  for  Saboteurs'
Cong.  John  F.  Ryan's  Testimony  Attacking  the  Huge  Cost  of  the  HUAC
On  Feb.   21   the  House   Administration   Committee   ap-
proved  a  record  high   $3110,000  one-year  appropriation   for
the   Un-American   Activities  Committee.     Only  one  mem-
ber  of  the  House,  Wm.  Fitts  Byan  (D.)   of  New   York   ap-
peared  before   the  Administration  Committee  to  oppose   the
appropriation.     We  present  here  the  salient  portions  of  his
testimony:   '
"The   Un-American   Activities   Committee's    demands   for
funds   are   becoming  an   increasingly   heavy  burden  on  this
House.    It  has  asked  for  an  appropriation    ($360,000)   higher
than  any  in  its  25-year  history.    One can  only  speculate  at
this  point  how  the  HUAC's  present   request  compares   with
those   of  other  Committees.     The  record   for   the   87th  Con-
gress  is  all  too clear.   Of  the  19 Standing  Committees  only 2
were  given  more  than  the  HUAC.  The  $681,000  appropriated
for  the  HUAC  during  the  [2  years]  87th  Congress  was  con-
siderably  more  than  twice  the  sum  allocated  to  the  Banking
and  Currency  Committee   ($250,000),  more  than  three  times
as  much  as  Foreign  Affairs  ($155,000)  and  Armed  Services
($150,000),  and  more  than  9  times  as  much  as  Agriculture
($75,000).    Although  three  of  the  most  important   Presiden-
tial  proposals  were  directed  to  the  Ways  and  Means  Commit-
tee  last  year,  this  Committee  made  do with  $25,000  for  both
sessions  of  the   87th    Congress.
A  Mammoth Printing  Bill
"By  any  test,  investigating   'un-American'  activities  has
been  an  expensive   operation.    Exact  figures  are   difficult   to
come by, but  the  printing  bills  for  HUAC reports  during  the
87th  Congress  came  within  a  few  thousand  dollars  of  equal-
ling  the  total  cost  of  printing  for  all  other  Committees  of  the
House.   As usual,  the  60-member  HUAC staff  was  the  largest
in  Congress.   It  was roughly  four  times  as large as  the  staffs
of  the  Committees  on  Foreign  Affairs   (15),  Armed   Services
(16)  and  Education   and  Labor   (14),  and  five  times  the  size
of  the  Banking  and  Currency  staff    (10).
"Such  substantial   expenditures   might  reasonably   be  ex-
pected  to  lead  to  significant results.    In  one  sense  they  have:
the  HUAC has  had  ample  resources  to  continue  its  campaign
of  harrassment  and  intimidation  against  groups   espousing
what   it  regards  as  'un-American'  opinions.     Traditionally,
however, a  Committee has  been judged  by its  contributions  to
legislation.    By  this  criterion,  the  output  of  the  HUAC  has
been  notably  unimpressive.    Considering  that,  according  to
the  Committee's  Annual  Report  for   1961,  its  'primary  func-
tion'  is  'holding  hearings  for  legislative  purposes',  one  might
conclude  that  the  Committee had  a  rather  inactive two years.
"Five bills were  actually  reported  out by the  HUAC during
the  87th   Congress.     Of  these  five,  one  was  defeated;  three
others   passed   the   House  and  were  quietly   interred   in  the
Senate.    The  fifth—the  sole  legislative  product,  be  it  noted,
of   two   years   and   a   $681,000   appropriation—passed   both
House  and  Senate  and  was  signed  by  the  President.
"What  was  the  character  of  this  bill?    HR  9753  amended
a  provision  in  the  Committee's  own  Internal  Security  Act of
1950  that  had  required  the  Defense  Department   to  publish
a  list  of  strategic  defense  facilities  at  which Communists  and
infiltrators   were  not  to  apply  for  jobs.    This   requirement,
according   to   a   witness   from   the   Department   of  Justice,
'created  a  situation   dangerous  to  the  national   defense,  and
jeopardized  the  national  security,  since  that  list  could  be used
as  a  guidebook  for  sabotage  and  for   the  selection  of   military
targets  by  any  potential  enemy.'    One may  concede that  this
correction   of* the  Committee's  mistake  was  highly  desirable.
Whether  so  high  an  appropriation   and  so large  a  staff  were
needed  to  effect  this  purpose  is  a  question  the  taxpayers  may
well  ask.
"Mr.  Chairman,  today  I  have  confined  myself  to  presenting
to  you  the  financial  costs  of  maintaining  this  ever-growing
Committee.    These   are   the  most  readily  measurable   costs,
hence  the  ones  of  which  it  is  easiest  to  speak.    But  I  would
remind   you  that   the   most   serious   cost   of   supporting   the
HUAC  arise  from  the  damage  that  it  has  done, and  is  doing,
to  our  constitutional   liberties.     These   are,   ultimately,   the
costs  that  we  shall  one day  have  to  face."
An  Example of  Mr. Walter's Strange  Conception of  What  Constitutes  Americanism
To  declare  a  man stateless,  to  make him a  man without  a
country,  is  one  of  the  severest   penalties   any   government
can  impose.    It  was  used  as  a  major  tool  of  oppression  by
pre-war  Fascist  regimes,  and  it  is  still  imposed  by  the  So-
viet  criminal  code—and  Franco's—for  political   opposition.
No  penalty  is  more totalitarian in  spirit.   The  UN  Declara-
tion of  Human  Rights seeks  to  forbid  it.
Yet  Chairman Walter of  HUAC  has  taken to  the warpath
against  what he  calls  "the left  wing  of  the  Supreme  Court"
for  trying to prevent  this  obnoxious practice  from  establish-
ing  itself  in  American  law.   The  Court  on  Feb.  18  did  not
go  so  far  as  to  declare  it  unconstitutional to  impose  state-
lessness  as  a  penalty.    It  merely  ruled  that  a  draft  dodger
could  not  be  declared  stateless  without  a  jury  trial  by  mere
administrative  process  within  the  State  or  Justice   Depart-
ments.    Yet  to  Mr.  Walter  even  this  tentative  affirmation
of  free  legal  principles is  suspect.    He  is  considering  intro-
duction  of   a  bill  to  override  "Messrs.  Goldberg,  Warren,
Douglas,  Black and  Brennan."
Of  the  two  cases  before  the  Court,  one  was  redolent  of
racial  prejudice  against   Mexicans,  the  other  of  the  witch
htlnt  during  the  McCarthy  period  against  radicals.    One  of
the  appellees,  Francisco  Mendoza-Martinez,  an  American by
birth  but  with  dual  Mexican  citizenship because  of  his  par-
entage,  served  a  prison  term  for  draft  dodging  only  to  be
declared  stateless  and  ordered  deported  five  years  later  by
our immigration  service.
The  other,  Dr.  Joseph  Henry  Cort,  was  one  of  those for-
mer  Communists who  fled  abroad in  the  McCarthyite  50s  in
fear  of  persecution.    He  had  a  research  fellowship at  Cam-
bridge  in  polio,  from  which  he  had  himself  suffered.    The
long  arm of  the  witch  hunt  reached out  for  him.   The  State
Department  revoked  his  passport,  then  his  draft  board  or-
dered  him  home.    He  felt  that  his  physical  disabilities  and
political  past  barred  him  from  induction  and  that  the  real
purpose  was  to  subject  him  to  Congressional   subpoena  or
prosecution   under  the  Smith  Act.    U.S.   pressure   on  the
Home  Office  deprived  him  of  asylum in  England and  he  took
refuge  in  Czechoslovakia, where  he  has  made  an  interna-
tional  reputation  in  the  study  of  heart  disease.     When  he
tried  to  return  home  and  do  military  service,  the  State  De-
partment  declared  him stateless  and barred him.   The  ECLC
brought  a test  suit  on his  behalf.
In  three  previous  rulings  the  Supreme  Court  has  upheld
deprivation  of  citizenship.    But  in  the  first  two  it  was  on
the  grounds that  U.S.  citizenship had been  voluntarily relin-
quished,  in  one  case  by  marriage and  the  other  by naturali-
zation  in  another country.   It  was  not  until four  years  ago
that  a  5-to-4  Frankfurter decision  for  the  first  time upheld
imposition  of  statelessness   as  a  penalty,  in  that  case  for
voting  in  a  foreign  election.   Now  his  successor,  Goldberg,
has  tipped  the  scales  the  other  way  and  held unconstitu-
tional  a  statute allowing deprivation  of  citizenship,  at  least
without  a  jury  trial.   To  Walter's  twisted  vision  this  looks
"leftist."    It  is  by  such  strange  standards  that  he  deter-
mines what  is "un-American."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  4, 1963
50  Years  Ago A  Senate  Revolt  Against  Its  Oligarchy  Made  Reform  Program  Possible
Clark  Defies  the  Club  "Code"  to  Expose  the  Senate  Establishment
The  Senate,  like   most   clubs,  schoolyafds   and  I   suppose
'prison  compounds, is  ruled  by  inside  cliques,  buttressed   by
their  bully boys,  and  surrounded  by toadies.   The  code makes
squealing  the  prime  offense,  and  the  hoi  polloi  are  rewarded
with  minor  favors  if  they  "take  it"  in  silence.    For  several
years  running,  Senator  Joseph  S.  Clark  (D.  Pa.)  has   defied
this  code  to educate  his  colleagues and  the  public on the  reali-
ties  behind  the  Senate's  facade.    On  Feb.   19,  20  and  21  he
took  the floor in  another  lonely  battle  against  what  he  termed
the  Senate   "establishment."     He  said  this  was  "almost  the
antithesis  of  democracy  .  .  .  not  selected  by  any  democratic
process  .  .  .  quite  unresponsive  to  the  caucuses  of  the two
parties,  be they  Republican  or  Democratic ...  a  self-perpetu-
ating  oligarchy."    But  though  encouraging  notes  were   pri-
vately  passed  to  him  by  members of  the  cowed majority,  only
two  members  in  those.three  days  had  the  nerve  to  support
him  publicly—Douglas  of  Illinois and  Proxmire  of  Wisconsin,
and  only  14 others joined them  in  a  test  vote  Feb.  26.
Kennedy  Congress  in  Name  Only
"We  now  stand,"  Clark  said  in  the  first  of  his  three  ad-
dresses, "at  the  beginning  of what  might  be called  a  Kennedy
Congress,   but  actually  it  is  not  a  Kennedy  Congress,  and  it
seems  to  me that  it  is  not  going  to  be  a  Kennedy  Congress.
The  principal  reason  why  it  is  not  going  to  be  a  Kennedy
Congress,  so far  as  the  Senate  is concerned,  is,  in  my  opinion,
that  we are  operating  under  archaic,  obsolete  rules,  customs,
manners,  procedures  and  traditions—and  because  the  opera-
tion  under  these  obsolete  and  archaic  setups  is  controlled  by
this   oligarchical   Senate   establishment,   a   majority   of   the
members  of  which,  by  and  large,  are  opposed  to  the  Presi-
dent's program."
Senator   Clark  did  not  say  so  but  the  President's  program
is  itself  to the  right  of  the  platform  on which  he  won election,
but  not  far  enough  to  the  right  to  suit  the  coalition  of  con-
servative  Southern  Democrats  and  Republicans  who  dominate
Congress.    This  Administration  may  be  physically  fit  but  it
is politically  flabby;  on Capitol  Hill its  most  spectacular  hikes
are  all  retreats.  • Its  tax  and  economic programs  are   feeble,
its  social   reform   measures   watered   down.    It   compromises
every  battle  before  it  begins.    But  it  is  still  too  liberal  to
suit  the  oligarchs  who run   Congress.
The  fight  waged  by  Clark  is  one  which  was  waged   before
the  first  World  War  by  the  elder  La  Fbllette.    The  target
then   was   a   clique  of  wealth   Republican  oligarchs  led  by
Aldrich  of  Rhode Island.    But  in  1913  when  Woodrow  Wilson
was  elected, the  Democrats  captured  control- of  the  Senate  for
the  first  time  in' 16 years.   Democrats,  Progressives  and  Bull
Moose  Republicans  joined  hands  in  a   Senate   revolt   which
discarded  seniority,  put  younger  men into  chairmanships  and.
made  it  possible  for   a  majority   on  Committees  to  override
the  chairmen.    The  result  was  that  Wilson  was  able  to  put
through  one  of  the  greatest  programs  of  social  and  economic
JFK  Afraid  to  Fight  the  Oligarchy
Sen.  CLARK  (D.  Pa.):  Where  is  the  program  of  the
President  of  the  United  States   going  to  get   stalled?
Where  was  medicare  bottled  up  last  year?    Where  is
the  tax  bill  and  the  tax   reform  bill  in  jeopardy  this
year?    It  is  in  the  Finance  Committee. .  .  .
Sen.  MANSFIELD  (D.  Mont,  and  Majority  Leader):
A  few  months ago  I  received  a letter  from  the  Senator
from  Pennsylvania at  which  time he  made  the  sugges-
tion   that  because  of   the   increase   in  the   Democratic
membership  in  the  Senate,   the  ratio   in  the   Finance
Committee  should  be  changed  in  proportion.
I  thought it  was  a  good  idea.   I called  it  to  the  atten-
tion  of  the  President.    He  said,  'That  is  your  business;
it  is  the  Senate's  business.'    He  indicated  that  he  was
interested   in  the  tax  bill,  but  so  far  as  the  ratio  of
membership  on the committee was  concerned,  he  showed
no interest....
Sen.   CLARK:  While  no  doubt  it   is   true   that   the
White  House  did  not  inject itself  in  such  fashion  as  to
apply  pressure concerning  the  size  of  the  Committee  on
Finance,  I  suspect   that  those  who  know  the   President
of  the  United States  would not  be  far  off  if  we  felt  that
he  would  not  have  been  seriously   disappointed   if   he
found  that  the  size  of  the  Committee  of  Finance   had
been  increased,  or  a  more  favorable  Democratic   ratio
—In  the  Senate,  Feb.  19.
reform  this  country  has  seen,  establishing  the  Federal  Re-
serve   system,   lowering   the  tariff,   setting  up  the   Federal
Trade  Commission, reforming  the  civil  service,  enacting pure
food  and  drug  legislation  and  tightening  up  the  anti-trust
laws.    Clark  would  like  to  spark  a  similar  revolt  today  but
the  majority   and  the  White  House  are  scared   stiff   of  the
Senate   oligarchy.
In  a  complex  and  masterly  analysis,  Clark  showed  that  in
passing  out  the  Senate  Committee  assignments  for  this  Con-
gress  the  Southern   oligarchy   in  the  Democratic   party   dis-
carded  seniority  where  it  suited  them  in order to punish  those
who  fought   against   the   filibuster   and   reward   those  who
voted   with  the   Southerners.     They  kept  their  citadel,  the
Finance  Committee,  from  being  expanded  but  expanded   the
Foreign  Relations  Committee  (see  box below)  over  its  chair-
man,  Fulbright's,  wishes,  in  order  to  give  rightists  control of
it.   The crusade  on which  Clark  has  been  engaged  requires  a
courage  the  Kennedy  Administration  has  not  yet  exhibited—
to  wage  a  losing  battle  for  the  sake  of  a  public   education
which  can  alone  make  victory  ultimately  possible.    It  must
join  Clark  in  his  fight  for  rules  reform  or  see its  whole  pro-
gram  smothered  again.
Foreign  Relations  and  Armed  Services  Stacked  Against  Test  Ban and Disarmament
Sen.  CLARK  (D.  Pa.):  I  now  turn  to  the  vital  assistance
of   the  Republican  members  of  the  establishment in  main-
taining  control  of  the  Armed  Services  Committee, a  com-
mittee  very  important  indeed to  our national security.  .  .  .
Certainly  the  establishment in  its  control  of  the  Armed
Services  Committee  is  not  notorious  in  its  support  of   the
present  or  past  administration's  efforts  to  obtain  test  ban
and  disarmament agreements  with  the  Soviets.    I  am  sure
this  position is  sincere, but  1 point out  that  this Committee,
as  anyone  who  wishes  to  run  his  eye  down  its  membership
will'inevitably  conclude,  is  controlled by  a  bipartisan  coali-
tion  of  the  establishment  which,  I  do  not  believe,  when  the
chips  are  down,  will  give  support  to  certain  efforts  by  the
President  to  ameliorate the  cold  war  situation,  or  to  curtail
that  military  and industrial  complex which  President  Elsen-
hower  referred to....
The  next  Committee  of  which  the  establishment  has  con-
trol  is  the Foreign  Relations Committee ...  as  a  result of
the   two  new  appointments  [Smathers  of   Florida  by   the
Democrats  and  Mundt  of  South  Dakota  by  the  Republicans,
both  right  wingers—IPS]   which   are  being  made  to  that
Committee,  the  program  of  the  President  in  foreign  affairs
is  in  jeopardy  so  far  as  that  program  is  under  the  control
of  the  Foreign  Relations Committee.-/*! the Senate,  Feb.  20.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Wcekly,   March  4,
Betancourt   and  Nelson   Rockefeller  in  Alliance  to  Pressure  JFK
GOP   Senator  Attributes  Cuban  War   Party  Leaks  to  CIA  and  Pentagon
The  future  historian  of  the  recurrent  Cuban  crisis  should
pay  particular  attention  to  a  sinister  sequence  in  the   present
outbreak.    All  was  relatively peaceful  until  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral's  interview  with  U.S.  News  and  World   Report  (Jan. 28)
and  the  Miami   Herald.    His  denial  that  the  Bay  of  Pigs  in-
vasion  failed  for  lack  of  air  cover  proved  explosive.     It  im-
plied  that  the  failure  was  due  to  the  mismanagement  of  our
military-intelligence  bureaucracy.    It  was  then   that  the  roof
fell  in.
In  the  wake  of  the  interview,  leaks  stirred  up  a  series  of
speeches   by  Republicans   and   rightist  Democrats.     One   Re-
publican  Senator,  Hugh  Scott  (R.  Pa.) has  since  said  publicly
that   the   leaks   came   from   military   and   intelligence    sources
angry   with   the   Administration.    This   was   in   a   statewide
radio-TV   broadcast   carried  by  Pennsylvania stations  Feb. 24.
The  columnist  Holmes  Alexander  was  interviewing  Scott  and
Senator  Clark  (D.  Pa.).   This  deserves  wider  attention:
Military  Vendetta,  Not  Scuttlebutt
Alexander  asked  Clark,  "Don't  you have  a  pretty  good  idea
of  where   Senator   Keating  and   Senator  Goldwater  get  their
information  ?"    Clark  said he  thought  it  was  scuttlebutt  picked
up  at  the  Officers'   Bar  Club  in  Guantanamo  or  from   Cuban
refugees.    "What* wanted  to  suggest  to you,"  Alexander  said,
"is  that  some  of  these  Republican  Senators  are  getting   their
information   from   what   is  called   'hard   policy'   men   in   the
Pentagon  and  in  the  CIA."    Clark  said  he  didn't  believe  this.
At  which  Scott  chimed  in  and  said,  "Well  you  ought  to  begin
to  believe  it  because  let  me  tell  you  that's  where  it  is  coming
from.   It's coming  from  people  in  the  very groups  you  [Alex-
ander]  have  named.    Some  of  these  very  people  have  people
working  under  them  who  are  horrified  at  the  continual weak-
ening of  the defense  of this country through  its foreign  policy."
Coming  from  a  Republican  Senator  this was  impressive.  He
attributed  the  leaks  to  people  "horrified"  at  the  "weakening"
of  our  defenses.    Their  horror  was  well  controlled  until  the
Bobby  Kennedy  interview  implied  that the  world's  biggest  and
most  expensive  war  and  intelligence  machine was  too  incom-
petent  to  pull  off  a  small  scale  invasion  only  90  miles  from
1962    Index   Now   Rently   Vree,  if   You   Send
I.P.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .......................*......*..................*...............................•.•..._
Street   .......................................................................^........._
City   ..........._.........—..............Zone......._.State....................
3/4/IB
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ...........„..........................„..............„............„..—_
Street   ....__.................._.........................___...............
City   ...........__.........................Zone.......^...Stat«............«......
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tes  D    No  D
To  Keep  The  Hemisphere  "Free"
"Prohibit  travel  to  Cuba  .  .  .  limit  all  activities (lec-
tures,   festivals,   art   and   sport   missions,    congresses,
dramas,  exhibitions, etc.)  that  tend  to  favor communist
propaganda  .  .  .  exercise  strict control over  the  broad-
casts  of  the  legally  established  radio  stations  for  the
purpose  of  severely  punishing  those  guilty  of carrying
on  propaganda activities  of  a  communist  nature  .  .  .
establish  a  postal  control of  printed  matter entering  or
leaving  a  country.  .  .  .  Circulation  of  any  publication
containing  subversive  propaganda of  a  communist na-
ture  should  be  prohibited  .  .  .  prohibit  the  showing  of
films  produced  in  the  countries  of  the  communist  bloc
and  those  others  produced  in  other  countries  which,  in
the   judgment   of   the   governments,  favor   communist
propaganda  .  .  .  exercise  control  over  television  pro-
grams that  favor communist  propaganda.  . .,"
—Report  released  Feb.  20  by  the  Special   Consultative
Committee   on  Security   of  the OAS.
our  shores.    The  truth  hurt,  and  the  President  was  to  be  pun-
ished  because  his  brother  had  blurted  it out.
In   the   shadows  behind   the  present   uproar   over   Cuba  is
also  an  alliance between  Betancourt  of  Venezuela  and  Nelson
Rockefeller,  Esso's  gift  to  U.S.  politics and  a  leader  of  the  war
party.    Standard  Oil, fearful   for  Creole  Petroleum   in   Vene-
zuela,  one  of  its  richest  properties,   has  long  been  for  action
against  Castro.    So  has  Betancourt.
Few  Americans realize that  under  pressure  from  U.S.  inter-
ests,  Betancourt has  moved  right  of  center  in  Venezuelan  poli-
tics.    The  three  party  coalition  which  brought   him  to   power
broke  up  over  Cuba  and  left  him  only  with  the  (Catholic)
Christian  Socialists as  allies.   There  have  been   two   splitoffs
from  his  own Action  Democrat/Ca  party  in  discontent  with  his
weak  policies,  particularly with  the  world's  slowest  and  most
expensive  "land  reform,"   a  reform  whfch  has  left  the  pow^r
of  the  great  landowners  intact.    He  has  lost  control  of  Con-
gress,  and  has  ruled  for  months  under  suspension   of  constitu-
tional  guarantees.    If  revolution  is  to  be  prevented   in  Vene-
zuela,  Betancourt  should  move  leftward.    Instead,  with Nel-
son,  he  has  been  moving  toward  war  with  Cuba.
Long  Stamped   Self-Addressed    Envelope   for    It
IF. Stone's Bi- Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington  IS,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F;  Stone's  Bi-Wcekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  1.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:-  $5  in  the  U.  S.:
$6  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  515  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED