I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963may13.pdf

============================================================

How  Free Enterprise   Works   in  Space,  P.  3
The  Negro  Upsurge  Is  Beginning  to  Split  Kennedy's  Liberal  Senate  Democrats,  See  Page  3
F. Stone's Bi -Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  11MAY   13,   1963
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
20  CENTS
How   Super  Power  Becomes  Super  Impotence
The   importance  of  all  the  excitement  over   Laos  does   not
lie  in  the  questions  on  which  our  newspapers   focus  attention.
The   importance  of   Laos  is  that   it  dramatizes  the   impotence
of  the  world's  super-powers,  with  their  super  armies,  and  their
super  bombs.    It  is truly  comical.    The  other  day  Roger  Hils-
man,  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  gave
an  interview  to  four  newspapers  (Washington  Star,  April  28)
on  the  Laotian  crisis.     One   sentence   stuck  out.     "The    skir-
mishes  that  pushed  back  the  Neutralist  enclaves,"  i.e.  the  pro-
Communist  advances  in  the  Plain  of  Jars  which  made   those
screaming  headlines  in   our   papers,   Mr.   Hilsman  disclosed,
"did  not  have  more  than  100  men  on  each  side."
The  Laotions  Couldn't  Care  Less
Yet  these  skirmishes between  poorly  armed  handfuls of  sol-
diers  in  this  distant  little  land  sent   Harriman  flying  to  see
Khrushchev   as   special   emissary  for   Kennedy.     The   upshot
seems  to  be  that  the  Russians  (and   even  the  Chinese)   have
very   little   control   over   what   is  happening    in   this   roadless
jungle  country.   We  and  the  Russians each  have  some  3,000,-
000  men  under  arms.    We   both  have  bombs  with  which  we
could  wipe  all  Laos  off  the   face  of  the  earth   in  one  attack.
The  Laotians  yawn  at  both  of  us.   Thanks  to  the  $10  billion
a  year  increase  in  military  spending   under  Kennedy,   we  are
ready  to  fight  any variety of  war:  the  ultimate war,  limited  nu-
clear   war,   conventional   mass   scale   war,   conventional   little
wars,  and  even  anti-guerrilla  wars  (with  small  detachments  of
Special  Services  trained  to  crawl  through  the  high  grass  and
cut  an  enemy's  throat  with  a  knife  before  he  can  say  thermo-
nuclear).    We  even  have  a  small  army  of  CIA  men  in  Laos—
but  all  they've  been  able  to  do  in  the  past  few  years   (if  we
may  be  forgiven  the  irresistible  pun)   is  to  louse  it  up   even
more.
The   greatest   military   power   on   earth   is  ineffective.      We
wield  the  most  terrible  firepower  the  world  has  ever  known,
but   few  people  seem   to   be  afraid   of   it.     In   Laos,   we   are
helpless.     In  Vietnam,  our  intervention   is  enabling  our  Viet-
cong  adversaries  to  exchange   their  home-made   weapons    (see
box  top  of  col.   2  p.  2)   for  new  model  U.S.   arms.    Cuba?
Castro  thumbs  his  nose  at  us  with  impunity.   We're  afraid  to
send  the  Marines  into  Haiti.    We  acquiesce  as  the  democracy
we  claim  to  defend   goes  under  to  military  coups  in   Argen-
tina,  Peru  and  Guatemala.     In  Korea,  where  we  intervened  in
force,  the  South   is  as  much  a  dictatorship  as  the  North  but
with  less  industrial  progress.    We   seem  unable  either  to  in-
timidate  our  enemies  or  to  make  our  allies  behave.  To  reverse
Churchill's   famous  remark,  in  our   case  never   have   so  many
armed  with  so  much  been  able  to  do  so  little.    Super   power
The  Dog That  Bit  The  South
We  do  not  deplore  events  in  Birmingham.    We  wel-
come  them.    It  is  thrilling  to  see  the  Negro  people  of
the   South   asserting   itself.     Their   reception   is   news
only  to  the  wilfully  ignorant.   The  only  difference be-
tween  current  events  and the  past  is  magnitude.     What
the  police have  long  been  accustomed  to  doing  with  the
individual  Negro  who  resisted  humiliation,  they  cannot
do  in  secret  when thousands  mass.    So  the  whole coun-
try  sees  the  police brutes,  with  their billies,  their  guns,
their   electric   prods,   their   dogs.     We   applaud    Chief
Judge  David  L.  Bazelon  of  the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals
for  the  District  of  Columbia.    In  a  speech  to  the  Fed-
eral  Bar  Association,  he  brought  down  on  himself   the
anger  of  Southerners  in  Congress  by  his  astringent  re-
marks  on  the  use  of  police  dogs.    He  questioned   "the
use  of   terror  evoked  by  the   threat  of   setting   beasts
against  human beings."    The  police  claim  this  is  effec-
tive.    "Assuming   for   the  moment  that   it   is,"  Judge
Bazelon  said.    "A  full  scale  reign  of  terror  might  be
effective,   too.     But  could   we  respect  ourselves  if   we
instituted  one?"    That  picture of  a  police  dog  lunging
open-jawed  at  a  Negro  on  the  front  pages  of  the  news-
papers  May  4  was  worth  a  million dollars  to  the  cause
of  Negro  liberation.   That  dog  was  the  dog  that bit  the
South  and  in  full  view  of  the  whole  world.
seems  to  have  become  super  impotence.
The  weapons  have  become  so  terrible  both  big  powers  are
afraid  not  only  to  use  them  but  afraid  even  to  use  lesser  arms
lest  the  conflict   soon   escalate.    Yet   neither  dares  get  off  the
treadmill  of  the  arms  race  for  fear  the  other  fellow  will  some-
how  come  up  with  a  new  monster,  more  terrible  still.     The
nature  of  weaponry,  the  emergence  of  the  colonial  peoples  to
independence,   the  world-wide  revulsion  against  nuclear   arms,
and  the  irrepressible  fight  of  the  darker  and  hungrier  peoples
against  Western  white  domination,  makes  it  ever  more    diffi-
cult  to  use  war  as  an  instrument   of  policy,  but  we  pour  out
more  billions  on  armament.    The   military  machine   runs  on
mindlessly,  despite  its  dwindling  utility  for  anything  but  sui-
cide.    Secretary  McNamara  in  talking  of  his  troubles  told  the
newspaper  editors  at  their  meeting  in  Washington  that  while
the  1964   arms  budget  was  $10  billions  more  than  Elsenhow-
er's,  it  was  still  $13  billion  less  than  the  military  chiefs  asked.
He  said  that  new  ideas  for  new  weapons   were  coming   along
so  fast  that  "even  if  we  were  to  draft  every  scientist  and  en-
gineer  in  the  country,  we  could  still  develop   only  a  fraction
of  the  systems  that  are proposed."    He  might  have  added  that
the  more  deadly  the  weapons  become  the  more  frightened  we
are  of  using  them.    The  Chinese  call  us  paper  tiger.    They're
wrong.    We're  a  giant,  but   muscle-bound.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May IS,  1963
Revealing That  the  U.S.  Might  Agree  to  As  Few  As  Six  On-Site  Inspections
The  Story  Behind  Symington's  "Scoop"  on  Meet  the  Press
On  Meet  the  Press  April  28,  Senator  Symington  (D.   Mo)
claimed   that  he  had   succeeded   in  declassifying  information
which  showed  that  the  U.S.  might  accept  as  few  as  six  on-site
inspections   a  year  in  the   current   test   ban  talks  at   Geneva.
This  revelation  has  a  curious  history.
It   was   declassified   from   the   executive   session   testimony
given  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  on  February  26
by  Dr.   Harold   Brown,  director  of  defense  research   and  en-
gineering,  the  Pentagon's   top   scientific   official.     Dr.   Brown,
who  was  formerly  with  Dr.  Edward  Teller  at  the  Livermore
Laboratory  and  then  shared  Dr.  Teller's  hostility to  a  test  ban,
has  since  changed  his  mind.    This  has  made  him  a  target  for
those   like   Senator   Symington   who   are   against   a   test   ban
agreement.    The  result  of  Symington's  disclosure  was  to  make
Dr.   Brown   look   like  one  of   those   "soft"   negotiators   about
whom  the  hard-liners  on  Capitol  Hill  are  complaining.
Tipping  the  U.  S.  Hand
But  the  disclosure   also  had  another   effect.    The  desire  to
put  Dr.  Brown  on  the  spot  seems  to  have  led  the  Senator  to
do  on  TV  exactly  what  he  himself  had  criticized  a  few  days
earlier  in  the  same  hearings.
Symington  on  February  20  had  objected  to  speculation  in
the   newspapers   that   the   U.S.   negotiators   in   Geneva   might
take  fewer  than  7  on-site  inspections  a  year.    "As  one  of  our
great  industrialists  of  this  country,"  Symington  asked  Secre-
tary  McNamara  that  day,  "if  you  said  the  price  of  a  car  today
is  $2500,  but  next  month  probably  would  be  $2000,   do  you
think   you  could   make  a  sale?"     McNamara   replied,   "It   is
tough  enough  to  sell  cars without that kind  of  a pricing  basis."
But  when  Dr.  Brown  came  before  the  committee  on  Feb-
ruary  26,  Senator  Symington  drew  him  into  a  discussion  de-
signed   to   show   just   how   few   on-site   inspections   the   U.S.
would  agree  to.    The  actual  figures  and  some  of  Dr.   Brown's
answers  explaining  his  reluctance  to  go  into  them  were  de-
leted  from  the  printed  record,  as released  to  the  press  April  4.
Now  it  turns  out  that  the  Senator  succeeded,  through  pres-
sure  on  the  Pentagon's  Capitol  Hill  liaison  people  in  getting
this  part  of  the  record  declassified.
It  is  a  pity  no  one  on  the  Meet  the  Press  program   knew
this  background,  or  was  aware  that  the  Pentagon  security  offi-
cers  insisted  also  in  restoring   (on   pages  484-5  of   the  hear-
ings)   previously  deleted  remarks  in  which   Dr.   Brown   had
objected  that  negotiations  were  not  made  easier  by  disclosing
the  government's  fall-back  position while  talks  were  going  on.
Confidential  to  Barry  Goldwater
Philadelphia,  April  29  (AP)—Sen.  Barry   Goldwater
(R.  Ariz)  said  today   this  country   should   act  now  to
bomb  out  railroad  and  highway  facilities   used  by  the
Chinese  Communists  to  supply  men  and  munitions   to
Southeast  Asia.
—Washington  Post, April  30.
Q.  How  does  the  Vietcong  get  its  weapons?
A.  Most   Vietcong  weapons  now  are  new   U.S.   mili-
tary   weapons,   captured   in   ambushes   on   government
units  and  attacks  on  outposts.    Often  a  Vietcong  unit
is  organized  initially  with  no  weapons.    The  political
organizer  tells  his  men  and  women  they  must  fight  at
first  with  handmade  arms—spears,  daggers,  swords  and
crude  shotguns.   To  get  better  weapons,  the  unit  must
capture   them   from   the  enemy.    The  system  evidently
works.    Vietcong  arms  now  include  modern  recoilless
cannon,   heavy  mortars,   good  machine  guns  and  very
large  supplies  of  submachine  guns."
—Malcolm  W.  Browne, for  the  past  year  and  a   half
chief   Associated  Press  correspondent  in  South  Vietnam.
This   backgrounder   was   carried   on  the  AP   ticker.    I
saw  it  in  the  Rochester  Times-Union,  April  25.
The  full  record  now  shows  that  despite  this  argument,  Sym-
ington  persisted.     He  wanted  to  know  whether  just  one  on-
site  inspection  a  year  would  be  acceptable?    Two?     Three?
To  each  of  these  questions  Dr.  Brown  replied  "unacceptable."
When  Symington  asked  about  four,  Dr.   Brown  said  he  was
"not   happy  with  four."    Symington  then  asked,  "How   about
five?"    Dr.   Brown  replied,   "I   am  somewhat   unhappy  with
five."    Then  Symington  asked,  "Six?"  to  which  Dr.  Brown
replied:
But  I  think  you  could  live  with  six  or  seven   providing
that  you  can  get  inspection   procedures   that   were   accept-
able,  and  providing  the  decision  on  when  an  inspection  was
made  was  not  subject   to  loss  of  negotiation   on  each   one.
So when  Symington  was  asked  on  Meet  the  Press,  "is  there
any  indication  we  would   accept   even   fewer  than  7   [on-site
inspections]  a year?",  the  Senator  replied  dramatically,  "Well,
it  was classified,  but  I think  that all  this  information   should  be
given  the  American  people  and  therefore  it  has  been   declas-
sified."    Then  he  added,   "Dr.   Brown,  who  is  the  head  en-
gineer  and  scientist  in  the  Pentagon   building,  has  stated  that
he  thinks  six  would   be  satisfactory;  that   is  one  less."     We
can't  quite  figure  out  whether  this  "scoop"  calls  for  a  Pulitzer
or  a  Lenin  Prize.
Two  Footnotes  to  Lord  Russell's  "Arrant  Nonsense"  About  South  Vietnam
"It  is  an  atrocity  because  such  things  as  napalm  bombs
are  being  used—bombs  which  do  not  simply  kill,  but  which
burn  and  torture-—and  that  chemical  warfare  is  employed
to  destroy  crops  and  livestock  and  so  to  starve  the  people
ot  South Vietnam."
—From  a  letter  by  Bertrand  Russell   to  the  New   York
Times  May   4  replying   to  an  editorial  in  which  it   accused
him  of  indulging   in  "arrant  nonsense"  about  Vietnam.
"The   chemicals  are  also  being  used  [in  Vietnam]  to  de-
stroy  food  crops  in  areas  that  support  Communists  and  are
established  beyond  a  doubt  as  Communist  controlled."
—From  extension  of  remarks  by  Cong.  Joseph  E.  Karth
(Dem-Farmer-Labor,   Minn)   on  "Herbicides   in   the   Fight
Against  Communism",  Congressional  Record  May  2, p.  2722.
"A  troubling  question  is   whether  the   use  of   poisonous
sprays  is  a  valid   technique  of  warfare.    That  is,  will   the
military   results   be   offset    by   political   disadvantages,   by
resentment  over  the  destruction  of  food?
"The   same   dilemma   arises   over   the   use   of   strafing,
bombs,   rockets   and   napalm   to   destroy   peasant   villages
where  ground-fire   has  indicated  the  presence  of  guerrillas."
—"Political  Reaction  A   Problem  in   The   Use  of   'Dirty'
Tactics  to  Fight  Viet  Cong  Guerrillas,"  report  from   Viet-
nam  by  Richard  Dudman,  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch,  Feb.   6.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May IS,  1963
Javits  Splits  the  Northern  Democrats  from  JFK;  Ryan's  Model  Civil  Rights  Bills
How  the  Negro  Upsurge  Is  Beginning  to  Make  Itself  Felt  in  Congress
The  Negro  upsurge,  if  it  continues,  may  have  a  major  im-
pact  on  Congress.    It  may  move  the  Northern  liberal   Demo-
crats  away  from  the  Kennedy   Administration  and  into  a  new
kind  of  Republican  coalition,  this  time  for  more  militant ac-
tion  on  Negro  rights.    The  possibility  appeared   in  the  unex-
pectedly  large  vote  cast  May  1  for  the  motion  by  the  Repub-
lican  liberal,  Javits,  of  New   York,   to  deny  Farmers  Home
Administration   funds   to   States   which   discriminate  against
Negroes.
A  Mere  Shift  of  Five  Votes
The   Javits  move  was  in   accordance   with   the   unanimous
recommendations  of  the  U.S.  Civil  Service  Commission  asking
the   President   and   Congress  to   consider   cutting   off   Federal
funds   to   such  States  as  Mississippi.     Javits  tacked   an  anti-
discrimination  amendment  onto  an  appropriation  bill.    In  the
House  this  is  known  as  a  "Powell  amendment."     The  Javits
move  in  the  Senate  brought   some  startling  results.    First  was
the  size of  the  vote  for  it:  38  to  47;  a  shift  of  five  votes  would
have  meant  victory.  Secondly,  every  Republican  but  one  voted
with  Javits,  even  those  whose  dedication  to  white  supremacy
(like  Mundt  of  South  Dakota,  Pearson   of  Kansas)  had  pre-
viously   been   thought   unshakeable.     Only   such   an   economic
conservative  as  Young  of  North   Dakota   refused   to   break
faith  with  the  southerners.
Most  important  of  all,  the  Democratic  liberals  split.   Doug-
las  (///),  Hart  (Mick),   Nelson  (Wis)  and  Long  (Mo)   voted
with   Javits   while   Humphrey   (Minn),    Clark   (Pa),    Morse
(Ore)    and   McNamara    (Mich)     voted   against   him.     How
long  can  they  (and   such  Democrats  as  Bayh,  McCarthy,  Mc-
Govern,  Pastore  and  Pell)  resist if  pressure  from  the  Negroes
rises?    If  all  the  Republicans  and  some  Northern    Democrats
should  vote  for  civil  rights  measures,  it  will  become  increas-
ingly  difficult  for  the  Administration to  hold  the  line  and  con-
tinue  its  present  strategy  of  wooing  the  Southern   Democrats.
The  vote  came  only  one  week  after  a  Washington   conference
held   by  the  National   Committee   against  Discrimination  in
Housing  protested  the  torpor  which  has  marked   enforcement
of  Kennedy's  order  on  housing.     One   official   remarked,   "It
must  have  been  written  in  invisible  ink."
Javits  intends  to  raise  the   segregation   issue  on   every  ap-
Racism  in  Rural  Lending
The  U.S.   Farmers  Home  Administration  Javits   (R.
N.  Y.)  tried  to  bring  under  an  anti-discrimination  rider
makes  loans  to  laborers  and tenants.    It  is  administered
through  county  committees,  usually  of  three   farmers.
Javits  told  the  Senate  there  was  not  a  single  Negro on
these  committees  anywhere  in  the  U.S.    He  also  called
attention  to  a  study  of   nine  rural   counties   in   South
Carolina   by   the    Southern    Regional    Council.    This
showed  that  in  the  last  three  years  only  nine  loans  had
been  made  to  Negroes  to  help  them  acquire  their  own
farms.    Though  Negroes  are  roughly  half   the  popula-
tion  in  these  counties,   they  received  less  than  5%  of
the  total  farm  ownership  loans  and  only  7%  of  those
for  farm  housing.  Obviously  county  committees  in  such
areas  look  with disfavor  on  Negro  loan  applicants  who
"get  out  of  line."   Javits  said  denial  of  Federal   loans
becomes   another   economic   sanction   against   Negroes
"who  have  the  temerity  to  want  to  vote."
propriation  bill.    He  and  Senator  Hart  (D.  Mich)   have  also
asked   every  department   of   the   Federal   government,   in   spe-
cific  letters,  to  tell  them  what  it  is  doing  about  discrimination
in  the  programs  it  administers.    Between  them  they  will  make
it  very  uncomfortable  for  Democratic  liberals  to  toe  the  cau-
tious  Kennedy  line  on  civil  rights.
In  the  House,  Wm.  Fitts  Ryan  of  New  York,  its  most  mili
;
tant   Democrat,   has  introduced   the   most  comprehensive   and
advanced  civil  rights  program   yet.    On  education,  he  would
require  a  desegregation   plan  from  every  school   district,  with
Health,   Education   and   Welfare   assistance.     On   voting,   he
would  abolish  literacy  tests  and  install  Federal  registrars  where
local  officers  discriminate in  registration.     A  third  Ryan  bill
would   provide   criminal  and   civil   sanctions   against   police
brutality  and  other  violations  of  civil  rights  by  State   officers.
A  fourth  bill  would  widen  the  powers  and  duties  of  the  At-
torney  General  in  civil  rights  cases.    The  most  far-reaching  is
the  bill  which  would  set  up  a  permanent  Civil  Rights   Com-
mission  modelled  on  the  National  Labor  Relations  Board  with
power  to  issue  cease-and-desist  orders  against   race  discrimina-
tion   in  housing,   trade   unions,  banking  and   business.     The
package  hasn't  a  chance  at  the  moment,  of  course,  but  it  sets
a  goal  for  the  civil  rights  movement.
"Free  Enterprise"  in  Space—But  The  Government  Still  Foots  The  Bill
The  Communications Satellite  Corp. seems  destined to  be-
come  a  monument to  the  inanity  of  extending  "free  enter-
prise"  into  space.    This  Corporation was  supposed  to  take
over  the  expense  of  setting   up  a  network  of  satellites   to
carry  all  kinds of  messages  around the  world.    It  has  voted
its   chairman,  Leo  D.  Welch  of   Standard  Oil,  $125,000  a
year  and  its   president,  Joseph  V.  Charyk,   $80,000.    They
have  proceeded  to  rent  "Tregaron,"  Washington's  most  pa-
latial  estate,  for  their  offices.    In  the  meantime  they  are
putting  off  the   issuance  of   stock   for   another  year  or  18
months   while  the   expense   of   developing  the  satellites   is
borne by  the government.
Congressman  Wm.  Fitts  Ryan  of  New  York  recalled  be-
fore  the  House  Committee on  Science  that  the  decision   to
hand  communications satellites  over  to  a  private corpora-
tion  was  defended  on  the  ground  that  "private  enterprise
would  have more  flexibility,  greater  speed."    Mr. Ryan pro-
tested   that   NASA   programmed  $43  million  for   work   on
communications  satellites   in  fiscal   1963  and  is  asking  $51
million  more  for  fiscal  1964. Mr. Ryan  wanted to  know  why
the  taxpayer  should   go  on  financing   work   from  which  a
private  corporation will  profit.
In  the  fight  last  year  against  handing  over communica-
tions  satellites  Senators   Kefauver,  Morse,  Gruening, Gore
and  others  predicted  that  the  government  would  still  foot
the  bill  and  asked  why  the  rush  to  set   up  a  private  cor-
poration.     Now   the   incorporators  and  directors   speak   in
leisurely   terms  of   anticipating  an  operational   system   by
1965.    In  the  meantime we  hope  the  15  Senators  who  tried
to  block  confirmation  on  April  25  will  keep  an  eye  on  Mr.
Welch.   They  will  find,  if  they  look  into  it,  that  he  has  been
doing  work  on  the  side  for  his  old  company  by complaining
to  U.S.  officials  against  the  refusal   of  the  Dominican  Re-
public's  Juan  Bosch  to  play  ball  with  Standard Oil.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  13, 1963
A  Nuclear  Free  Zone  for  Latin  America:  One  Way  to  Deal  With  Our  Cuban  Fears
Unfulfilled   Reform   Promises  Behind  Italy's  Slight  Shift    Leftward
The  truth  about  the  Italian  elections  is  that  the  Pope's  en-
cyclicals  and  "the opening   to  the   Left"   are   still   unfulfilled
promises.     A  strong  Communist  vote  is  a  necessity  to  make
the   Catholic-Left   Socialist  alliance  deliver  the  goods  against
strong  pressure  from   Italy's  ttnregenerate  capitalists and  land-
owners.  .  .  .  While  the  U.S.  talks  of  preventing  the  prolifer-
ation   of   nuclear   weapons,   it   is  cold   to.  the   5-power   Latin
American  proposal   for  a  nuclear-free  hemisphere.    The   Ger-
mans   fear   all   nuclear-free   zone   proposals   as  an   obstacle   to
their  own   nuclear  rearmament  and   we   frown   on   the  Latin
proposals  because  it  is  also  addressed  to  Cuba.     But  if  we  fear
nuclear  arms   in  Cuba,   why   not   support   this  proposal  ?  .   .  .
And   why  not   a  nuclear  free  zone'for   the  Middle   East  as  a
foundation   for   Arab-Israeli  peace?   .   .  .
Castro  and  Yevtushenko
Castro's   eyes  must  have  been  opened  to  certain  Soviet  reali-
ties  by  the   pointed   exclusion  from   his  welcoming   reception
of   his  friend   and   Cuba's   champion,   Yevtushenko.     The   lat-
ter's  poem  on  Cuba  was  too  freedom  loving  for  Khrushchev's
bureaucratic  tastes.    In  this  connection  we  heartily  recommend
Patricia  Blake's  warmly sympathetic account  of  the  Soviet  poets
in  the  latest   issue  of  Encounter.  .  .  .  The   Chicago   Tribune's
Ottawa  correspondent   (April  21)  reported  that  Canada's  new
Prime  Minister,  Pearson,  will  accept   atomic  arms  unwillingly
and  favors  diplomatic  recognition  of  China.  .  .  .  Wider  pub-
licity  ought  to  be  given  former  Ambassador   James  J.  Wads-
worth's   address   at   Franklin   and   Marshall   College    (York,
Pa.,  Gazette,  April  26)   in  which  he  said  the  Soviets   would
not  cheat   on   a  test  ban  because   it  would   not   be  in  their  in-
terest  to  do  so.    ...
As  basic  ammunition  for  all  peace  groups  we  highly  rec-
ommend   the  joint  study  "A   Strategy  for  American   Security"
by  Seymour  Melman,  Dr.  Benjamin  Spock  and  other   scholars.
It  spells  out   in  dollars  and   cents  an  alternative  to  the 1964
military  budget.     (Copies  can  be  obtained   from   Lee   Offset.
Inc.,  (Dept  ST), 48  E.  21st  St.. New   York   10,  N.Y., for
50  cents  each).   .  .  .  We   hope  liberal  groups  will   organize
soon  against  both  the  rightist:  idea  of  a  "Cold  War    Academy"
Washington's Biggest  Bore
The  House  Un-American Activities  Committee  is  get-
ting   to  be  Washington's  biggest   bore.    The  hearings
begun  while this  issue  was  being  prepared  for  press  are
running  true  to  form.    It  is  a  painful  experience  to  sit
there  hour  after  hour  while  the  Committee  pieces  to-
gether   obscure  little   ads   from   The   Worker  and  The
National  Guardian  to  prove  that  on  a  certain  night  in
July   1961  some  minuscule  group  for  peace  with  Cuba
heard  .some  radical  make  a  speech   (with   refreshments
and  slides  thrown  in,  all  for  99  cents).    Its  one  start-
ling  revelation  so  far  is  that  a  Negro   free  lance  pho-
tographer  got  his  passport   extended   in  Cuba  although
he  had  expressed   pro-Castro  views.    We  welcome  this
evidence  that  the  State  Department  is  being  infiltrated
by  the  First  Amendment.   We  wish  the  same  could  be
said  of  the  Committee.  Just  what  it  is  trying to  prove
by  subpoenaing  writers  who  have  expressed  pro-Castro
views  is  not  clear—except  perhaps  that  free  speech  still
survives  un-Americanly  in  the  USA.     Its  most  promi-
nent  target,  Leo  Huberman,  was  on  the  stand  at  press
time;   perhaps   questioning   will   bring   out   how   much
money  the  government  might  have  saved  if  before  the
Bay  of  Pigs  disaster  it  had  fired  the  CIA's  Cuba  divi-
sion  and  listened  instead   to  the  warnings  his  Monthly
Review   (only   $6   a   year)   was   printing  at   the  time
against  an  invasion.    Conrad  Lynn,  Negro  lawyer  for
the  Monroe,  N.  C. defendants,  gave  a  rare  exhibition  of
frankness,   self-respect   and  contempt  before  the   Com-
mittee.    Its  failing  power  to  intimidate  was  being  dra-
matically  demonstrated   at  the  other  side  of  the  Capi-
tol  where  Women  Strike  for  Peace,  HUAC's   most  re-
cent  smear  target,   was  holding  a  rally  on  the  Capitol
steps  and  being  addressed   by  Senator   Javits   of   New
York   and   Rep.  Kastenmeier  of   Wisconsin!
(there  should   be  no  place  in  a  free  society  for  a  school  to
teach   an   official   idology  and   train  CIA-type   cold   war   intel-
lectuals)   nor   for   the   State   Department's    idea  of   a  Foreign
Service  Academy.    The  Foreign   Service   suffers   too   much   as
it   is  from  being  an   ingrown   clique  of   upper   class   minded
dilettantes.    The  wider  the  education   and  the  wider  the  area
from  which  it  is  recruited  the  better  for  American   diplomacy.
We  don't  need  a cookie-pusher's   "West  Point.".  . .
Extra  Copies  Now Available  of  Our  Special   Mar.   18  Issue  on  Nuclear  Testing  at  4c  Each  Plus  Postage  in  Bulk
I.F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ............
City  .................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ............
City  ..........._
Shall  we  send
Bi-Weekly  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.) additional:
........................ ..Zone... ....—..State.... ......... .......
gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
IE Stone'sBi-  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at   6618   Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.   S.;
$6  in  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:   $15  to  Europe:   ?20  to  Israel.  Asm  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED