I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963sep30.pdf

============================================================

Is  Russia  Moving   Toward  War  With  China? P.  2
Why  So  Many  Bombings  Unsolved?    Because  Justice  Dept.  Nullified  The  Law
Senator  Heating  of  New  York the  other  day  suggested  an
on  the  spot  Senate  inquiry  in  Birmingham to  determine why
"not   one"   of   21  racial   bombings   there   had   been   solved
"despite   adoption   of   a   Federal   anti-bombing  statute   in
1960."    He  can  get  the  answer  closer  home  by   questioning
Justice   Department  officials.     He   will  find  that   for   two
years  after  the  law  was  passed,   it  continued   to  hold  that
bombings  were  primarily  a  local  matter.
This  is  the  hitherto  unpublished story:  That  the  Act  was
being  nullified  first  became  apparent  after  Clarence  Mitch-
ell,   Washington  representative   of   the   NAACP,  wired  the
Department   on  Jan.  7,   1962,   asking   for   action   in   three
church  bombings.    The  response,   on  Jan.  25,  from  Bourke
Marshall,   head  of   the   civil  rights   division,   was   that   "in
view   of   specific   provisions   contained  in   the   (1960)   Act,
matters  of  this  kind  fall  within  the  primary jurisdiction  of
local   law   enforcement  agencies."
Mr.  Mitchell  replied  that  the  wording  and  intent  of   the
Act   was   exactly   to   the  contrary.     This   elicited   a   reply
dated  March  1,  1962,  in  which  Mr.  Marshall  said,   "I  think
I  should  make  it  clear  that  the  policy  of  the  Department  is
not  to  defer  to  local  authorities  in  all  cases"  and  "It  will
be  my  practice  to  initiate   Federal   investigation   in  appro-
priate  circumstances."
Just   what   the   appropriate  circumstances   are   was   not
spelled  out  but  the  Department  was  still  moving  on  reluc-
tant   feet   when  the  NAACP  earlier   this   year   asked   it   to
investigate   the  bombing  of   Medgar  Bvars'  home   shortly
before   he   was   killed.    The  response  was   that   since   the
bombing   was   done  by   Molotov   cocktail,   it   did  not   come
within   the   terms   of   the   act.     The   NAACP   pointed   out
that  the  Act  defined  as  explosive  any  "mixture"  that  could
be  detonated  by  "concussion."     But  by  then  Evers  had  been
killed  and  the  Department  therefore  classified  that  bombing
as  "moot"!    This  correspondence  is  available  to  the   Sena-
tor  whenever  he  wants  to  see  it.
F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  19SEPTEMBER   30,   1963•»'<"       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
20  CENTS
The  Wasteland  In  The  White  Man's  Heart
It's  not  so  much  the  killings  as  the  lack  of  contrition.   The
morning   after   the   Birmingham   bombing,   the   Senate   in   its
expansive  fashion  filled  35  pages  of  the  Congressional  Record
with  remarks  on  diverse   matters  before   resuming   debate   on
the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty.    But  the  speeches  on  the   bombing
in  Birmingham  filled  barely  a  single  page.    Of  100  ordinarily
loquacious  Senators,  only  four  felt  moved  to  speak.    Javits  of
New  York  and  Kuchel  of  California  expressed   outrage.     The
Majority  Leader,  Mansfield,  also  spoke  up,  but  half  his  time
was  devoted   to  defending   J.  Edgar  Hoover  from  charges  of
indifference   to  racial  bombings.     His   speech   was   remarkable
only  for   its  inane  phrasing.    "There  can  be  no   excuse   for
an  occurrence   of  that  kind,"  Mansfield  said  of  the   bombing,
in  which  four  little  girls  at  Sunday  school   were  killed,    "un-
der   any  possible   circumstances."      Negroes  might   otherwise
have  supposed   that  States  rights  or  the  doctrine  of   interposi-
tion  or  the  failure  of  the  Minister  that  morning  to  say   "sir"
to  a  passing   white   man  might   be  regarded   as  a   mitigating
circumstance.     Even  so  Mansfield's   proposition   was  too  radi-
cal  for  his  Southern   colleagues.     Only  Fulbright  rose  to  asso-
ciate  himself   with   Mansfield's   remarks   and  to  express   con-
demnation.    There  was  more   indignation   in  the  Senate   over
Nhu's  pagoda  raids  in  Saigon.
No  National  Day  of  Mourning
If  four  children  had  been  killed  in  the  bombing  of  a  Berlin
church  by  Communists,   the  country  would  be  on  the  verge  of
war.    But  when  four  Senators  (Hart,  Kuchel,  Humphrey   and
Javits)   framed  a  resolution  asking  that  the  Sunday  after  the
Birmingham  bombing  be  set  aside  as a  national  day  of  mourn-
ing,  they  knew  their  fellow   Senators  too  well  even  to   intro-
duce  it.    They  sent  it  on  to  the  White  House  where   it  was
lost  in  the  shuffle.    Despite  the  formal  expressions  of  regret,
Another  Fact-Evading  Mission
Five  months  after  his  inaugural,  President   Kennedy
sent   Vice   President   Johnson   to   Vietnam  on   a   fact-
finding  mission,   where  the  latter  haled  Diem  as   "the
Churchill  of  today!"    Five   months  later  Mr.  Kennedy
sent  General  Taylor  and  Walt  W.  Rostow.    Every   few
months,   the   White   House   sends   another  fact-finding
team   to  Vietnam.    Now  it   is   sending   Secretary   Mc-
Namara  and  General  Taylor.    To  the  future  historian,
these   missions   will  appear  not  as  efforts  to  find  the
facts  but  to  evade  them.    One  fact  is  that  a  clique  of
rich  Catholic   mandarins  can't  go  on  ruling  a   Buddhist
country.    Another  fact  is  that  you  can't  go  on  pouring
napalm   on   villages   and   poisons   on   crops,   uprooting
people  and  putting  them  in  prison-like   compounds,  and
expect   to   be   liked.    A   third  fact   is   that   you   can't
stabilize  Southeast  Asia  without  coming  to  terms  with
its  biggest  neighbor,  China.    A  talk  with  Sihanouk  in
Cambodia,  or  de  Gaulle  in  Paris,  with  a  view  to  medi-
ation—this  is  what  the  occasion  calls  for,  not  another
frantic   mission   to   Saigon.
the   sermons,   the   editorials   and   the   marches,   neither   white
America  nor  its  leadership  was  really  moved.    When  Martin
Luther   King   and   six  other  Negro   leaders  finally  saw  the
President  four  days  after  the  bombing,  it  was  to  find  that  he
had  already  appointed  a  two-man  committee  to  represent  him
"personally"  in  Birmingham,   but  that  both  men  were  white.
This  hardly  set  a  precedent  for  bi-racial  action.    If  Mr.   Ken-
nedy  could  take  a  judge  off  the  Supreme  Court  to  settle  a
labor  dispute,  he  could  have  taken  one  of  the  country's  two
Negro  judges  off  the  Court  of  Appeals  to  dignify   a  mission
of   mediation.     He   might  have  insisted,  for   once,   after   so
terrible  a  crime,  on  seeing  white  and  Neero  leaders  together,
(Continued   on  Page   Eight)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  30,1963
Rostow's  Dayton  Speech  Rewrites  History  to  Make  Germany  Our  No.  1  Ally
The  Test  Ban  Treaty — Move  Toward  Peace  or  Russian   War   on  China?
The   violence  of  Sino-Soviet  controversy  may  cast  a   differ-
ent  light  on  the  test  ban  treaty.    It  may  represent  Moscow's
willingness  to  sign  on  the  West's  terms  in  order   to  protect
itself   in   Europe   while   it   prepares   for   a   basic  struggle   in
Asia.    The  tone  of  the  Soviet  press  is now  worse  than  that of
Stalin's  time  in  the  attack  on  Tito,  for  it  has  moved  to  the
most  crass  propaganda  against  the  Chinese  people  themselves,
picturing  them  as  ill-mannered  barbarians, urinating  on  Rus-
sian  railroad platforms  and  spitting  on  the  floor  of  the  Lenin
Institute.    This   has  the   smell  of   emotional  preparation  for
war.*     It  may  well  be  that   huge   Russian  wheat  purchases
reflect  this  as  much  as  the  poor  crops  all  over  Europe   (too
wet  in  Western,  too  dry  in  Eastern  Europe).
The  Test  of   Co-Existence
Moscow  rightly  rebukes  Peking  for  its  border  disputes  with
India   but   itself   engages   in   equally   irresponsible  bitterness
with  Peking  over  the  poorly  marked  Asian  borders  between
them.    The  detente  with  the  West  may  merely  be  a  byprod-
uct  of  Khrushchev's  personal  struggle  with  Mao.    It  would
be  a  disaster for  a  large  section  of  mankind  if  the  two  Com-
munist  giants  were  to  engage  in  war,  and  the  peace  movement
ought  to  keep   clear  of   the  propagandists  exaggerations  of
both  sides  and  stir  up  pressure  for   mediation.    Moscow   is
right  in  its  co-existence  line,  but  the  test  of  that  line  is  its
willingness   to  co-exist  with   China,   as  the  test  of  ours  is  a
willingness   to  co-exist  with   Cuba.
The  possibility  that  we  are  the  victims  of  euphoria  in  the
atmosphere  created  by  the  test  ban  treaty  is  strengthened  by
the  President's  speech  to  the  United  Nations.    His  prose  has
improved,  but  the  substance  is  vague.    Indeed   one   suspects
that  the  joint  moon  proposal  was  put  in  at  the  last  moment
because  without  it  there  would   be  nothing   concrete  in   the
speech  "to  make  a  headline."    The  failure  of   the  Russians
to  mention  it  in  their  press  seems  to  indicate  that  their  mill-
Brazil   Suggests  The  Next   Step
In   opening   general   debate   at   the   United    Nations
18th  session,  Brazil's  de  Araujo  Castro   recalled   that
his  country  first  suggested  the   idea  of   a  limited  nu-
clear   test   ban  and  proposed   the  next   step—a   treaty
which  would  forbid  underground  tests  above  the  limit
of  detectability,  to  be  revised  downward  as  the  capac-
ity  for  detection  improved.   This  proposal  was  ignored
by  the  press  but  ought  to  be  taken  up  by  peace   organ-
izations.    Attention  should  also  be  focussed  on  Brazil's
renewed  call  for  "a  unanimous  agreement  bringing  into
effect   the   de-nuclearization  of   Latin   America."     The
State  Dept.  is  cool  to  this  because   it  fears  the  prece-
dent   for   Central   Europe   and   because     "unanimous"
would   include  Cuba.    Also   attention  worthy:   Brazil's
suggestion   that  an  agreement  to  divert  a  mere  1  per-
cent  of  world  arms  expenditures  to  a  UN  Capital  De-
velopment  Fund  would  give  it  $1,200,000,000  a  year.
* There  is  the  smell  of  coming  war,  too,  in  the   appearance
of   Life  Magazine  Sept.   13  with  a  special   issue  on   Russia,
portraying  not  only  Khrushchev  but  Malinovski  and   Suslov
as  fine fellows  while  Time  of  the  same  date  has  a  cover  story
on  China  as  'The  Arrogant   Outcast."    Does   Luce's   sudden
pro-Russianism  reflect  hope  of  an  attack  on  China?
tary  like  ours  are  fearful   of  giving  away  military  secrets  in
such   an   enterprise.     Even   better   than   a   Russo-American
agreement  to  go  to  the  moon  arm-in-arm would  be  a  Russo-
American  agreement  to  give  up  this  billion  dollar  boondoggle
altogether   and   spend   the   money  jointly   here   on   earth   for
less  favored   peoples.
In  our  opinion,  U.S.  policy  continues to  move  along  a hard
line.     The   clearest  indication  of   its  basic  direction  may  be
found  in  W.  W.  Rostow's  speech  at  Dayton,  Ohio,  Sept.  18
on  "The   Role  of  Germany  in  the  Evolution  of  World  Poli-
tics."     This   marks  a  new  stage  in  the  rewriting  of  history
to  make  Germany  our  No.   1  ally  in  Europe.    We  must  be,
says  this  key  presidential  adviser,  not   only  Germany's   "re-
liable   ally"   but   its  "true  partner."     This   means  that    "the
problems  posed  for  us  by  negotiations  with  Moscow  looking
towards  control  of   atomic  weapons  touch   vital  interests  of
each  nation  of  the  Atlantic  community,  which  require   reso-
lution  within  the  family."    That  means  a  German  veto.    In
the  meantime,  over  British  objections,  we  go  ahead  with  our
plans  for  a  nuclear  Polaris  fleet  in  which  the  Germans  will
play  a  major  role.    The  line  still  is  to  stand  fast  in  the  hope
that  the  Russians will  some  day  throw  in  the  sponge  and  give
up   Eastern  Germany.     Serious   trouble   with   China   might
speed  that  day.                                                                   •    Sept.  23
U.S.  Officials  Begin  to  Feed  Out  A
Some  warmer currents  in  the  icy  relations  between  Wash-
ington   and  Peking   deserve   notice.    For  the  first  time   in
the  long   and  frozen-faced  series  of   meetings   between   the
U.S.  and  Chinese  Ambassadors  in  Warsaw,  news,  and  cam-
era  men  were  allowed   in   (AP   in  Washington   Post,  Sept.
12)   to  record   an  exchange  of   curt  bows   and  half   smiles
when  the  119th  session  opened   Sept.  11.
U.S.  sources   have  been  feeding  out  a  milder  line  toward
Communist  China  in  talks  with  newsmen.   Bernard  Gwertz-
man,   Soviet   specialist   of   the   Washington    Star   reported
Sept.  12  State  Dept.  officials  were  worried  lest  the  (in  their
opinion,  incorrect)   Russian  description   of  the  Chinese   lead-
ers  as  "nuclear   madmen"  take   so  strong  a  hold   on   U.S.
opinion   as    to    "inhibit    future    U.S.    policy    toward    the
Chinese."    The  Wall  St.  Journal  Sept.  17  carried  a  similar
Washington  article  saying  that  Mao's  bark  was  worse  than
his  bite  and  reporting  "U.S.   analysts"  also  disputed  Indian
charges  of  an  aggressive  border   buildup.    The  same  note
Milder  Line Toward Communist China
was  struck  by  Joseph   Kraft  in  his   Washington   Star  col-
umn   Sept.   20,   concluding    that   "in   time   it   might   prove
fruitful   to   deal   with   Peking   on   Southeast   Asia,   where
Soviet  influence  has  evaporated."
Whether   such   talk  had  something   to  do  with   the  visit
here  by  Chiang's   son  is  not  known  but  several  days  later,
Col.   Ray   Cromley,   with   good   Pentagon    connections,    re-
ported  (Washington   Daily  News,  Sept.  19)  that  there   was
a  split  between  Chiang  and  Kennedy.    He  said  the  former
wants  to  step  up  mainland  raids  while  the  latter  wants   to
cut  back  military  aid  and  make  Formosa  a  showplace   "of
what   free   enterprise   can   accomplish."
Against  this  background   the  advocacy   by  U.S.   Chamber
of   Commerce   President   Nieland   of   trade   with   mainland
China  no  longer  seems  merely  the  voice  of  a  business  mav-
erick.    The  outlines   of  a  wiser   policy   are  faintly   visible.
We  have  always  believed  that  Chinese  extremism  in  part
reflected  U.S.   imposed   outlawry.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,
Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
16  in  the  U.S.;    *6  in  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $16 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Special ADVANCE-OF-PUBLICATION Offer  to  Readers  of IF.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
We  announce  the forthcoming  publication  of
THE
HAUNTED
FIFTIES
by  I.  F.  STONE
A   collection   of   Mr.   Stone's   most   im-
portant   writings   in   the   first   decade
of  this  journal.
To  Be  Published  by
Random  House  on  November  4,  1963
Regular  retail  price:  $5.95
SPECIAL  OFFER  TO   BI-WEEKLY
READERS  ONLY:  $4.85   (SAVE  $1.10)
"In  this  country  one contemporary  journalist  has  over  a  period  of  many
years   distinguished  himself  in  reporting  and  interpreting   the   news  —
that  less  glamorous  part  of  it,  at  least,  which  has  not  to  do  with  crime,
communism,  sex,  and  baseball.   The  exception  is  I.  F.  Stone.    The  quali-
ties  of  the  exceptional man  pervade  and  inform  all  that  he  has   written
and  have kept  the  bulk  of  the  pieces  in  this  collection  very  much  alive."
— from  the  Preface   by  James  R.  Neivman
FOR  A  COMPLETE  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS,  SEE  THE  NEXT  TWO  PAGES
7  *9   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Here  are  the pieces from   I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  you've  always wan
Contents
The  Army  and  the  Mind   of  Youth
Loyal   Coastgiiardsman   Comes  Home
Preface    by  James  R.  Newman
Introduction
OVERTURE
Note   to  the  Rest  of   the  Universe
1.  THE  EISENHOWER  ERA  BEGINS
From  Mink   to  General  Motors
Challenging  the  Left:   "Back  Ike  for   Peace"
How   Ik:'  Earned  His   Afternoon   Off
2.  JOHN  FOSTER   DULLES:  PORTRAIT  OF  A
LIBERATOR
3.  MCCARTHY  RIDES  HIGH
Otiis  Ctntodiet   Ctistodem?
Soup   Opera   Hero
The Silence in  the Senate
A  Skeptical Army General
The   J.   Edgar   Hoover-McCarthy   Axis
The  P.B.I.  Since  the  Witch   Hunt
4.  A  FEW   WHO  FOUGHT  BACK
Bleak  Landscape   of   the  Resistance
Man   A u,tin si   Myth
'I  he   Cate   of    the   Cooperative  Teacher
Charlie  Chaplin's  Farewell Custard
Einstein.  Oxnam,  and  the  Inquisition
McCarthy's   Bh/j,   and  Two   Who   Called  It
f>.   AN   ATTEMPT  TO   COMPEL   INFORMING
IP'hy   the   Pilgrim   Fathers    Left
In   ihi-  Footsteps   of   John  Lilbnrne
6.  THE  DEATH  OF  STALIN
A   Chill   Falls   on   Washington
From  Moscow:  A  New   Kind   of  Confession
7.  CHURCHILL   ABANDONS  THE   COLD  WAR
8.  THE  NEW  CHIEF  JUSTICE
From  Vinson  to   Warren
May   17,   1954
9.  THE  DOWNFALL  OF  McCARTHY
Redoubtable   Gambler
The   First  Welts   on  Joe   McCarthy
The   Cost  of   Anli'communism
Guilty
10.  FETISH  OF  THE  FIFTIES:  SECURITY
Incommensurate  Equation:  Justice  and  Security
The  Army  Commissions  Franz    Kafka
Morality:   A   Security  Problem
The   Oppenheimer   Verdict
Loyalty   and  Double    Jeopardy
11.  FIRST  CALL  FOR  A  TEST  BAN
12.  THE  DRIFT  OF  FOREIGN  POLICY:
SANITY  OR  WAR
Oiiemoy  and   Matsti
Toward   Global   Negotiations
Molotov   at  San   Francisco
McCarthy's   Secretary   of   State
Foreign   Policy  and   Melodrama
Mutual   Inspection:   John   Meets   Ivan
13.  THE  PRESIDENT'S  ILLNESS
14  THE  SICKNESS  OF  THE  SOUTH
The   Murder   of   Emmett   Till
The   White   Race:  Alabama  and   Algeria
Eisenhou-er  Goes  Neutralist—on   Civil   Rights
15.  THE  FREE  MIND  AT   WORK
The   Vindication   of   Owen  Laltimore
Harvey  O'Connor:  Fulfillment    of  a  Responsibility
Barrows  Dunham:  Acquittal
Albert   Einstein
16.  NATIONAL  SUICIDE  AS  A  FORM  OF
DEFENSE
17.  U.S.S.R.:  THE  TWENTIETH  CONGRESS
The  Meaning   of  Khrushchev's   Revisions
Historic  Moment   in  the  Soviet   Union
18.  A  VISIT  TO   MOSCOW
This  Rival   Giant
Natasha's   Ready   Answers
The  Soviet  Criminal  Code
The   Legacy  of   Stalin
19.  IN  THE  FRESHER  AIR  OF  POLAND
20.  THE  PRESIDENCY,   1956
Who   Is  Eisenhower?
The   GOP's  Own   Personality  Cult
21.  HUNGARY
The  Workers  Rise  Against  the  Workers'  State
The   Soviet   Government   Smashes   Soviets
22.  THE  EISENHOWER  DOCTRINE
Grand   Design
A  Readiness  to  Police  the   World
The  Mote  in  Mine  Own  Eye
23.  MENTAL  CLIMATE  OF  THE  FIFTIES
Freedom  of  the  Press: A  Minority   Opinion
The   First  Amendment  and  the  Twentieth   Congress
On   the  Death   of   Toscanini
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

keep
TO  ORDER  "THE   HAUNTED  FIFTIES",  USE  THE  COUPON  ON  THE  NEXT  PAGE  *>
24.  IKE  IN  ACTION
The   Easy   Way   Out
Those  Bull  Sessions  with  Zhukov
25.  TOWARD  THE  PREPOSTEROUS  WAR
Misguided    Missiles
The   Responsibility   of   the  Scientist
Military   Minuet
26.  THE  MIND  OF  NIKITA  KHRUSHCHEV
Is   This    Marxism?
No   Competition  in   Ideas
27.  THE  LIBERAL  COURT  OF  EARL  WARREN
The   Court  Turns   Back  the  Clock
The   Watkins   and   Sweezy   Decisions
28.  THE  BLACK  MAN'S  BURDEN
Nobody   Io  Vote   For
Nixon   Was  Cordial  in  Ghana
The   Beginnings   of   a  Revolution
29.  A  STRANGER  KNOCKS AT HEAVEN'S GATE
30.  OUR  WAR    ECONOMY
The   Liberals   and   the   Military   Budget
'I'he   Inflationary     Spiral
Creeping   Socialism   or  Stumbling   Capitalism
31.  THE  AMERICAN   SECRET  POLICE
The   I'-Bl   Investigates    Itself
}.  Edgar   Honrer   Reports
The   Menace   of   C)rus   Eaton
32.  COEXISTENCE:  CHOICE  OF  RISKS
The   Latest   Treachery   of   Nikita   Khrushchev
The   Chance   to  End   Nuclear   Tests
33.  THE  MARINES  IN  LEBANON
Gunboat   Diplomacy   in   the  H-Bomb   Age
Khrushchev   Breaks   Out   of    Containment
34.  RACIAL  EQUALITY  IN  CRISIS
The   Line   Outside   the  Court
Civil   Rights   and   Civil   Liberties
The   Wall  Between
The   Evasions  of   Eisenhoiver
35.  LITTLE  ROCK:  A  PIECE  OF  FOREIGN
CORRESPONDENCE
When  the Bourbon Flowed
In  the Delta  Country
36. FREEDOM OF THOUGHT, HERE  AND
THERE
Boris   Pasternak
Delicacy  in   Journalism
The   Daily  Worker
37. THE PENTAGON, THE MOON, AND
PUGWASH
A   Nifty    Retaliation  Base
Modern   Sanhedrin
38.  CHINA:  FANTASY  AND  REALITY
The   Chinese   7th  Fleet  in  Long   Island   Sound
Dnlles  and  the  Decline   of  Ancestor    Worship
39. DULLES: COLD, ARROGANT, RUTHLESS
40. THE REVIVAL OF GERMANY
There   Is  No   Anguish   in   Them
Berlin:   Divided   City  in  a  Divided    World
Socialism  and   Communism
Partnership   with    Krupp
The   Warning   on  the  Synagogue    Walls
41.  THE  KHRUSHCHEV  VISIT
Arrival   of   a   Wizard
The   Sali'snianshtp   of   K.
Peace   Is   Beci'ttiing  Respectable
42.  ON  THE   ECONOMIC   FRONT
Lagging   Labor  Leaders
The   Myths   that   Menace   America's   Future
43. THE SUPREME COURT RETREATS
The   Bill tin dug   Dochine   of   Felix    Frankfurter
Sex   Upsets   the  Court
Undercutting   the   First   Amendment
Daisy   Bales  rs.  Little  Rock
B.iljming    Ati-ay   the   Fifth    Amendment
The   Internal   Security  Act   Upheld
41.  DEBUT  OF  THE  NEW  FRONTIER
//   Only   John   F.  Kennedy   Were   in   Hans   Christian
Andersen
45.  NO  WAY  TO  HIDE
Almost   as  Safe    as  Ivory   Soap   Is   Pure?
Is  This  How   Kennedy    Wages   a  Peace  Race?
The   Mythology    of   the   Anti-Missile    Missile
One   Wistful    Hope   on  a  Bleak   Horizon
The   Hidden    Truth   About   the   Nuclear   Arms  Race
46.  OUR  FEUD  WITH  FIDEL
Our   Air   of   Injured   Innocence   over   Cuba
Two   Months   Before    the   Bay  of   Pigs
The    Deed    Was   Done   Quickly,    but   It's    Macbeth
Who's   Dead
Time,  the  Monroe  Doctrine  and  War   on  Cuba
Not   Easy  to  Be  a  Reporter—At   Large—in  Havana
Castro's   Own   Brand   of    Marxism-Leninism
Fresh  Light   on  the  Mystery   of   the   Missiles
47.  EPILOGUE
Words   to  Be  Engraved   on  a  New   Rosetta  Stone
INDEX
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  SO,  1963
The  Moral  Sore  of  Our Cuban  Policy  Tainted  JFK's  Appearance   at  the  UN
On  Students,  The  Right  to  Travel  and  the  Right  to  Disagree
A  week  after  the  leaders  of  the  student  trip  to  Cuba  went
before   the   Un-American   Committee,   the   Free   Cuba   News
here  put  out  a  special  report  on  the  visit.    It  said  a  student
group  in  Cuba  succeeded  in  smuggling  a  letter  into  the  men's
room  of  the  Havana  Riviera  while  the  Americans  were  there
and  then  phoned   their  leader,  Levi  Laub,  to  tell  him   where
it  was  hidden.
If  the  American  students  have  a  sense  of  humor,  this  letter
must  strike  a  sympathetic chord.    For  the  Cubans  complained
that   they  had   "no  right  to  unrestricted   travel   abroad"  and
could  not  speak  freely  at  home.    Maybe  they  and  the  Amer-
icans  ought   to  form   a  joint  committee.
Hardly   Pure  Essence  of  1776
For  the  leaders  of  the  American  students have  been  taken
before  a  grand  jury  in  New  York.  Their  indictment  is  sought
for   breaking  the   travel   ban.     Our   dissident  student  leaders
are  also  charged—as  no  doubt  their  opposite  number  are  in
Cuba  when  they  speak  up—of  being  "foreign   agents."     Ap-
parently—to  echo  the  President's  own  words   to  the  UN—
Cuba  is  not  the  only  country  where  "the   fruits   of   the   revo-
lution"  have  been  "falsely  betrayed  from  within."    Denial  of
freedom  to  travel  and  denial  of  freedom  to  disagree  are  not
exactly  the  pure  essence  of   1776.
Cuba  can  defend   its  restrictions   as  a  necessity  so  long  as
the  CIA  infiltrates  the  country and  provides  planes  and  bombs
for  attacks  from  Nicaragua.    But  our  restrictions  are  a  moral
sore.    Our  policy  toward  Cuba  taints  all  our  pretensions,  as
it  did  Mr.  Kennedy's  appearance  before  the  United  Nations.
Didn't   his   advisers   realize   that   when   he   warned   against
"chronic   disputes"   and   said  "the   badge   of   responsibility  in
the  modern  world  is  a  willingness  to  seek  peaceful  solutions,"
many  at  the  UN   would  ask—under  cover  of  the  applause—
"Well,  what  about  Cuba?"
Even  as  we  relax   elsewhere,   the   noose   on   Cuba   is  being
tightened.    Secretary  Rusk  in  a  TV   interview  on  Issues  and
Answers  Sept.  15  said  that  while  Russian  troops  were  being
moved  out  of  Cuba   "the   problem   is  not  so  much   (military)
units   now   as   technicians   and   advisers."      Out   attempt   to
strangle   Cuba   undercuts   those   Marxists,   from    Khrushchev
down,  who  stake  their  future,  in  the  titanic  Sino-Soviet  split,
on  a  declaration  of  faith  in  America's  good  intentions.
It  is  natural  under  the  circumstances  that  the  few  pathetic
and   hounded   pro-Castro  organizations   in   this   country  have
Why  I  Withdrew   from  The  New  York  Meeting
"After   listening  Thursday  night  in  Washington  to  a
panel  discussion  by  the  students  just  back  from  Cuba,
I  felt  that  if  I  went  on  as  moderator  with  such  a  panel
Sunday  at  Town  Hall  in  New   York  I  would  be  com-
pelled   either   to   engage  in   prolonged   argument   with
the  participants  or  appear  to  acquiesce  in  their  views.
These  views  seem  to  me  a  mixture  of  naivete,  Negro
nationalist   distortions    (understandable   enough   in   the
light  of  the  Negro's  anguish  but  still  distortions)  and
out-of-this-world  leftism.  I  defend  their  right  to  speak
I  believe  they   performed   a  public   service  in  breaking
the  travel   ban.    I  think  it  a  joke  at  the  expense  of  our
country   when  a  Congressional  committee  regards  it  as
un-American   to   fight   for   freedom   of   travel.     This   is
why,  before   realizing   the  narrow  range  of  opinion  rep-
resented,  I  originally  accepted  the  invitation  to  be  their
moderator.     But   I  do  not   wish   to  be   identified    with
what   I  regard   as   hysterical   exaggerations   hurtful   to
an   honorable    settlement   between   the   United   States
and  Castro's  Cuba."  —Statement  issued  Sept.  13.
tended  to  be  under  pro-Chinese  line  leadership.    This  is  true
of  the  student  trip  to  Cuba  which  was  organized  and  led  by
a  small  ousted   pro-Peking  offshoot   of   the   U.S.   Communist
Party,  the  so-called  Progressive  Labor  Movement.     Its   tactics
before   the   Un-American   Committee   made  good  reading  in
Peking  but  bad  politics  in  America.    It  gave  the   Committee
a  chance  to  associate  peace  with  Cuba  and  freedom  of  travel
with   pictures   of   screaming  beatniks  being   hauled   out   by
the   police.
The  police  were  brutal.    The  Committee  is  an  abomination.
But  I  don't  want  to  carry  coals  to  Newcastle.     I  want  to  'talk
sense  in  the  bosom  of  the  family.    The  student   leaders  had
a  chance  to  make  fools  of  the  Committee;  its  oafish  informer
had  nothing  really  damaging  to  say  about  them  or  the   trip.
They   could  easily  have  turned  the   scales  of  opinion   against
tht  Committee  as  did  Women's   Strike  for  Peace.    They  chose
instead   to  make  an  old-fashioned  agitprop   demonstration   in
the  fashion  set  by  Moscow  in  the  early  30's.
The  PLMers   really  believe  peace  with  Cuba   is   impossible
until   capitalism   is  overthrown   in   America.     Neither    Cuba
nor  the  rest  of  the  world  can  wait  that  long.  The  same  crowd
is  organizing  a  new  trip  to  Cuba.    We  hope  more   sensible
students   will   wrest   leadership   from   them.     The   cause   of
peace  and  travel  deserves  advocates  with  better  sense.
Business  Week,   After   On-The-Spot   Survey,   Finds   Economic   Upturn   in  Cuba
"Los  Angeles,  Sept.  20  (AP)—A  high  State  Dept.  official
said  today  that  an  unrelenting  squeeze  from  the  U.S.   isola-
tion  policy  and  massive  Castro  mismanagement  has  made
a   shambles   of   Cuba's   once-healthy   economy.     Edwin   M.
Martin,  Ass't  Secretary  of  State  for  Inter-American   Affairs,
gave  this  assessment  in  a  speech  on  Cuba  and  Communism
in  Latin   America  before  the  World  Affairs   Council."
—Washington  Post,  Sept.  21.
"Far    from  being  in  a  state  of  collapse,   Cuba's  Soviet-
supported  economy  now is  showing  signs of  an upswing.  . ..
This  is  the  conclusion  that  was  reached  by  a  Business  Week
reporter  after  a  tour  of  the  island.  .  .  .
"Cuba  boasts  these  achievements  on  the  industrial  front:
About  25  light  industry  plants  have  been  put  into  operation
.  .  .  manufacturing  everything  from   picks  and  shovels   to
.sulphuric  acid.  .  .  .  Despite  a  U.S.   embargo  on  spare  parts,
the   Cubans   have   managed   to   keep   in   operation   oil   re-
fineries  seized  from  Americans  and  the  Nicaro  nickel  plant.
.  .  .  With   Japanese  and  Soviet  help,   Cuba   is  rapidly   ex-
panding  its  commercial  fishing  industry.  .  .  .
"This  progress  refutes  any  notion  that  Cuba's  economic
situation   might   generate  all-out   opposition   to  the  Castro
regime.    There  are  still  shortages  of  food  and  many   con-
sumer  items,  particularly  in  the cities.   But no  one  is  starv-
ing   in   Cuba,   and   many   Cubans—including   students   and
peasants  who  form  the  backbone  of  Castro's  support—are
eating  better  than  ever."
—Business  Week,  Sept.  14.
1   o ;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weckly,  September  30,1963
For  Black  Birmingham,  It's  Martial  Law  With  Insult  and  Carbine
(Continued   from   Page   One)
instead   of   giving   a   separate   audience  four   days   later   to   a
white  delegation  from  Birmingham.    It  is  as  if,  even  in   the
White  House,  there  are  equal  but  separate   facilities.
The  Negro  leaders,  facing  the  TV  cameras  outside  the  Ex-
ecutive   Offices    that   Thursday   afternoon,   looked   like   men
pursued   by  despair,  afraid   that  at  the   slightest  misstep  they
might  be  trampled  under  by  the   hopeless  fury   in  the  ranks
behind  them.    The  white  delegation,  the  following  Monday,
had   underling  written   all   over   it.     The   President   of   the
United  States  could  take  time  out  to  hear  white Birmingham,
but  the  Mayor  was  too  busy  and  sent  his  secretary.   With Jiim
were   neither  the   Big   Mules   nor   their   Northern   capitalist
overlords;  it  is  as  if  they  had  assigned  their  office  boys  to  see
the  President.     If  what  they  (old the  press  afterward  was  a
sample  of  what   they  told   the   President,   he   too   must   have
despaired  of   finding   a  solution.     Even  these   supposed mod-
erates  could   not   shake   loose   from   the   mythology   of   white
supremacy:  if  only  outside  agitators  like  Martin  Luther   King
would   stay   away  peace   and   quiet  could   be   restored;   many
Negroes  favored  segregation,  but   apparently  were   afraid   to
say  so  except  privately  to  their  white  friends.    Hire  a  Negro
policeman?    That  was  a  "profoundly   difficult,"   "almost   im-
possible,"  problem.     Just  why  was  never  explained;   perhaps
Negroes  do  not  look  good  in  blue,  with  brass  buttons.
Our  Ancient  Double Standard
Four  centuries of  white  supremacy  have  left  their  indelible
mark  in  the  double  standard  we  whites  instinctively  apply  to
race  relations.    The  Attorney  General,  rejecting  a  Negro  ap-
peal  for  Federal  troops,   said  hearts  could  not  be  changed   by
bayonets.     But   few   stop   to  think  that   the   alternative  is  to
leave  the  Negro  community  of  Birmingham  to  the  bayonets
of   the  State  troopers.     Gene  Grove   in  the  New   York   Past
Sept.  20  vividly  pictured  how  the  Negro  community  is  ruled.
When   one  reporter   approached  Col.  Al  Lingo  of   the   State
police  "with  a  question,  the  only  reply  was  a  shotgun   in  the
belly.    Wednesday   night  the  troopers   beat   an   aged   man   in
the  Negro  district  of   East  Thomas   and   a  young   boy  in   the
A  Problem  in  Race Mixing
When   the   civil   defense   bill   passed   the   House   the
other  day, a  first  term  Republican  Congressman  from
Louisville,  Ky.,  a  Mr.  Gene  Snyder,  tried  to  attach  an
anti-discrimination   amendment  to  it.     His  amendment
would   have   denied   funds   to   any   State   or  institution
which  failed  to  give  "satisfactory  assurances"   that  no
one  would   be  excluded  from   fallout   shelters   "because
of   race,  color  or  creed."    He   was   defeated   93  to   53.
This  will  be  reassuring  to  the  South.    Whatever  hap-
pens  to  the  country  in  a  nuclear  holocaust,  everything
possible  is  being  done  to  keep  white  supremacy intact.
The  problem,  however,  may  prove  complex.   Going  in,
it   will   be   easy   to   solve;   separate   entrances, plainly
marked,   may  be  provided  for  white   and  colored.     But
afterward—can   anyone  be  sure   of   ever  sorting   them
out?
Negro  district  of   Parker   Heights,   both   for   failing  to  move
off  the  street  fast  enough.  Yesterday  morning  they  rode   down
the  street  with  carbines  perking   from   every  window,   shout-
ing  at  Negroes  sitting  on  their  porches   to  'get   back   in  the
house,   niggers,  get  your  ass  the  hell   off  the   street'."     The
Mayor's  Secretary  looked  surprised  when  a  reporter  asked  him
if   he   thought   the  manners  of   the   State   troops   toward   the
Negroes  were  not  provocative.    He  found  no  fault  with   it.
Such   ways  and   language,   after  all, are  accepted  institutions
in  the  South,  the  way  "peace  and  quiet"  have  been   preserved.
When  I  was  in  Germany,  I  felt  the  empty  wasteland  of  the
German  heart.     I  feel  the  same  way  about  the  hearts  of  my
fellow  white  men  in  America,  where  the  Negro  is  concerned.
The  good  people  there  as  here  are  in  the  minority  and  weak.
Just  as  many  Germans  feel  it  was  somehow   the  fault  of   the
Jews  that  they  got  themselves  cremated,  so  many  whites   here
North  and  South,   feel   that  the  bombing  wouldn't   have hap-
pened   if  the  Negroes  weren't  so  pushy.     As  a  white   house-
wife  in  a  Birmingham  supermarket  told  Robert  Baker  of   the
Woshiiiglon   Post   (Sept.   19),  it  was   "terrible"   but   "that's
what   they  get   for   trying  to   force   their   way  where   they're
not  wanted."  Worse  than  the  bombing   is  this  inhuman   chill.
We'll  Be  Glad  to  Send  A  Copy  of  This  Issue  Free  to  A Friend  If  You Send  A  Long  Stamped   Envelope
I.F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly  5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name   ......................................................................................—
Street
City   ............................................Zone.............State....................
9/30/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ........................................................................._..
Street    ........._...........................................................................
City   ............._..........................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
I.F. Stone's Bi- Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED