I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963dec23.pdf

============================================================

Gunnar  Myrdal   on Automation  and  the Negro, P.  3
Castro's  Startling  New  Account  in  The  New  Republic  of  Why  He  Wanted   Nuclear   Missiles,   See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,   NO.  25
DECEMBER  23,  1963
<°<       WASHINGTON, D.   C.20  CENTS
A  Crisis  and  A  Turning  Point  Approaches  in  Vietnam
The  war  in  Vietnam  is  being  lost.    Only  a  few  weeks  ago,
Secretary  McNamara  and  General  Taylor   reported  on  their
return  from  Saigon  that  "the  major  part"  of  our  military  role
there  could  be  "completed  by  the  end  of  19.65."    Now  Han-
son  W.  Baldwin,  our  most  respected  military  expert,  writes
(New  York  Times,  Dec.  7)  that  "unless  public support  in  the
U.S.  and  among  its  allies  can  be  maintained  during  years  of
-frustration,   there  is  no  possibility  of  victory."    The  italics  are
ours.    President  Johnson  at  his  first  meeting  with  the  press
that  same  day  announced  that  Secretary  McNamara  is  going
back  to  Vietnam  on  another  tour  of  inspection.    It  begins  to
look  as  if  the   Secretary  of  Defense  has  become  a  commuter
between  Washington   and  Saigon.
A  Shift  in  U.  S.  Policy
It  is  clear  that  we  are  heading  for  a  new  crisis  in  South
Vietnam;  rebel  attacks  are  mounting  in  size  and  frequency;
the  loss  of  arms  to  them  is  growing.    At  the  same  time Cam-
bodia  has  formally  asked   Britain  and   the   Soviet  Union  as
co-chairmen  of  the  1954  Geneva  Conference  on  Indochina  to
reconvene  it.    In  August  of  last  year,  when  Cambodia  asked
the   Geneva   conferees  to   reassemble  and   guarantee   its  neu-
trality,  President   Kennedy  shied   away  from  the   idea.    But
this  time  the  attitude  of  the  American  government  seems  to
have  changed.    When  the  Foreign  Minister  of  Cambodia  was
here  to  attend  the  President's  funeral,  he  spoke  with  Under
Secretary  of  State  Harriman  and  was  assured  that  we  would
not  place  obstacles  in  the  way  of  reconvening  the  conference
for   this  purpose.     The  first  Geneva  conference  met,  it  will
be  recalled,  to  end  the  Korean  war,  and  then  went  on  to  end
the  first  Indochinese  war  as  well.    The  new  session  could  be-
come  a  vehicle  for  the  peaceful  ending  of  the  war  ia  South
Vietnam  too.    We  are  approaching  a  turning  point,  either  to
risk  widening  the  conflict  by  intervening  with  our  own  com-
bat  troops,   or  settling  the  war  at  the  conference  table.
Prince  Sihanouk  of  Cambodia  indicated  these  wider  possi-
bilities  when  he   called   for   an  independent   South   Vietnam
linked  in  a  neutral  confederation  with  Cambodia.     "The   re-
unification  of  Vietnam  is  the  end  to  be  attained  but  it  is  for
the  moment  premature  if  not  impossible,  as  responsible  lead-
ers  of  North  Vietnam  have  admitted   to   me,"   said   Prince
Sihanouk  (Agence  France-Presse,  Le  Monde,  Dec.  4),   adding
that  he  thought   "the   Communist  camp  would   content  itself
with  a  South  Vietnam   completely  neutral,  as  is  Cambodia."
An  article  in  the  Peking  Review   (Nov.   22)   confirms  this
view.    China  would  like  new  trade  ties  with  the  West  to  re-
place  the  broken  trade  ties  with  the  Soviet  Union.    Peace  in
South  Vietnam  would  remove  a  major  obstacle  to  such  rela-
tions.    In  South  Vietnam  itself  the  National  Liberation  Front
has  made  dear  in  a  clandestine   interview   (Le  Monde,   Aug.
How  The  CIA  Makes  Us  Look  Two-Faced
"Many  are  asking  themselves whether America  is  the
liberal  "brain  trust"  which  worked  alongside  President
Kennedy  or  rather  the  services  (still  unpurged)  of  M.
McCone,  successor  of  M.  Allen  Dulles,  the  man  of   the
Bay   of  Pigs   of  sinister   memory.    President   Johnson
would   render   his  country  an   immense  service   if   he
ended  this  ambiguity, if  he  took  steps  to  make  Amer-
ica's  government  one  in  whose  word  foreigners   could
at  last  believe.
"Southeast   Asia,   in  particular,   is   full   of  not  very
"quiet"  Americans,   sometimes  camouflaged  as   diplo-
mats,  sometimes   simple   adventurers  one  can  disavow,
who  vie  with  each  other  in  stirring  up  trouble  in  coun-
tries  of  which  they  know  little,  mistaking  for   sincere
friends  mercenaries  who  make  game  of  them,  consider-
ing  as  enemies  those who try  to  talk frankly  with  them
—all  persuaded  that  they  are  playing  a  great  role and
will  make their  personal  idea  of  'Americanism' triumph.
"The  United  States  could  do  well  without  these  imi-
tation   Macchiavellis  who  only  exasperate   Asian   gov-
ernments   and   peoples,   perfectly   aware   of   their   in-
trigues  big  and  little."
—From  an  editorial  on the  "two  faces"   of   the  Ameri-
can  government  in  the  Nov.  29  issue  of  Realites  Cam-
bodgiennes  in  Saigon,  the  first-rate  weekly  which  is  the
unofficial    organ  of  Cambordia's  Prince  Sihanouk.
24)   that  it  did  not  wish  to  "exchange  one  dictatorship  for
another.     A   democratic  South  Vietnam,  an   honorable   and
face-saving  peace  are  possible.
Unfortunately  the  U.S.  public  has  been  conditioned  to  such
oversimplified   and   fallacious  views  on  Asian  foreign  policy
as  to   make  negotiation   difficult.     The   Cambodian   Foreign
Minister  had  a  friendly  talk  with  the  new  President,  but  if
Mr.  Johnson  were  a  combination  of  Macchiavelli  and   King
Solomon  he  would  still  have  trouble  with  this  one.    Three
ideas  widely  held  in  this  country  are  obstacles  to  a   sensible
settlement.    One  is that  problems  arising  in  the  areas  border-
ing  China  can be  settled  without  taking  its views  into  account.
We  had  to  negotiate  with  China  to  end  the  Korean  war  and
we  will  have  to  sit  down  at  Geneva  with  China  again  to  end
the  Vietnamese  war.    The  second  is  that  neutralism  is  a  men-
ace  second  only  to  Communism,  though  the  only  one  of  the
three  Indochinese  states  which  is  stable  today,  free  from  guer-
rilla   war   and   any   internal   Communist   threat   is  neutralist
Cambodia.
The  third  obstacle  to  peace  is public  acceptance  of  the  CIA
as  a  proper  agency  of  government.    The  first  thing  to  be  said
of  the  CIA  is  that  in  Southeast  Asia,  at  least,  it  has   proven
itself   politically  incompetent.     Its  favorite  Indochinese   pro-
teges,  Diem  in  South  Vietnam  and  Phoumi  Nosavan  in  Laos,
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
1   3   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 23,1963
The  New  Republic  Publishes  A  "Blockbuster"  of  An  Interview  by  Jean  Daniel
Castro's  Startling  New  Account  of  Why   He  Asked  for  Nuclear  Missiles
There  are  three  important  points  to  be  noted  in  the  sen-
sational  "talks  with  Kennedy  and  Castro"  by  Jean  Daniel  in
the  Dec.  14  issue  of  The  New  Republic.    The  first,  of  course,
is  that  it  offers  an  entirely  new  version  of  the  events  which
led  up  to  last  year's  missile  crisis  over  Cuba.    According  to
Castro,  six  months  before  the  missiles  were  emplaced  Cuba
was  informed that  a  new  invasion under  CIA  sponsorship  was
being  planned.    These   reports  were  discussed  with  Khrush-
chev's  son-in-law  Adzhubei  when  he  was  in  Havana  on  his
way  to  Washington.     Cuban  alarm  was  increased  when  Adz-
hubei  reported  that  President  Kennedy informed  him  that  the
U.S.  had  decided  it  could  no  longer  tolerate  the  existence  of
the  Castro  regime  and  reminded   the  Russians  that  the   U.S.
had  not  intervened  when  they  invaded  Hungary.    The  mis-
siles,   according  to   Castro,   were  emplaced   to   deter   a  new
invasion.
Cuba's  Demilitarization  Offer
It  is  a  pity  the  United  Nations  is  not  independent  enough
to  investigate  this  thoroughly  in  Havana,  Moscow  and  Wash-
ington.    It  throws  new  light  on  the  formal  Cuban  offers   to
the  UN  in  September,   1962,  just  before  the  crisis,  to  accept
demilitarization  if  offered  firm  international guarantees  against
aggression.    This  fits  Castro's  account,  for  in  effect   it  would
have  done  peacefully  what  was  soon   done  under  threat  of
war—removal  of  the  missiles in  exchange  for  a  qualified  U.S.
agreement  not  to  invade.
The  second  point  to  be  noted  is  Castro's  remark,  "for  us
Cubans  it  didn't  really  make  so  much  difference  whether  we
died  by  conventional bombing  or  a  hydrogen  bomb."     Here
is  the  key  to  that  proliferation which  will  soon  make  this  a
most   dangerous   planet   unless   a   new   world   order   can   be
brought  into  being.    Each country, however tiny, will  be ready
to  risk  the  future  of  the  planet  if  its  own  existence  is  at  stake.
Moscow  felt  that  only  nuclear  arms  could  deter  an  American
attack.    Curiously  this  is  what  John  Foster  Dulles  advocated
in  a  Foreign  Affairs    article  (Autumn.  1957)   when  he  pro-
posed  to  abandon  massive  retaliation  for  the  distribution  of
nuclear  weapons  to  all  our  allies on  the  Sino-Soviet  periphery
so  "as  to  make  military  invasion  with  conventional  weapons
a  hazardous  attempt."    This  was  Khrushchev's  strategy.
The  third  point  could  be  a  key  to  peace  with  Cuba.    M.
Daniel  asked   Kennedy   if  we  could   tolerate   "economic   col-
lectivism."    The  President replied  by citing  our  good  relations
with  Tito  and  Sekou  Toure.    When  M.  Daniel   reported  this
The  Right  to  Travel
The  Internal   Security   Act  of  1950  was  the  first  law
in  U.S.  history  to  make  a  man's  politics  the  test  of  his
right  to  travel.  It  is  good  news  that  the  Supreme   Court
has  agreed  to  hear  a  clear  test  of  these  provisions  in
appeals   brought   by   Elizabeth   Gurley   Flynn   and   Dr.
Herbert   Aptheker,   leading   functionaries   of   the   Com-
munist  Party.    This  will  probably  also  decide  a  related
test,  that  of  Milton  S.  Mayer,  who  was  refused  a  pass-
port  because  he  declined   on  principal   to  state  whether
or  not  he  was  a   Communist.
Another   type   of   the   new   travel   restrictions   which
have  grown  up  since  the  second  World  War  must  wait
on  disposal   of  six  pending  Cuban  travel  cases.    They
will  test  the  State  Department's  right  to  put  little  Iron
Curtains  around  countries  of  which  it  does not  approve,
like  China  and  Cuba.    The  latest  of  these  cases  arise
from  indictment  of  four  of  the  59  students  who  went  to
Cuba  last  summer.    It  is  a  pleasure  to  record  one  minor
victory.     A   Federal   judge   in  New   York   has   rejected
an  attempt  by  the  U.S.   Attorney's  office  to  restrict  the
four  to  New  York  City  and  its  environs  so  they  could
not  accept  invitations  from  colleges  around  the  country
to  speak   about   their   trip  and  their  prosecution!
to  Castro  the  latter  replied,   "Why   am  I  not  Tito  or   Sekou
Toure?    Because  the  Russians  have  never  done  us  any  injury
such  as  the  Yugoslavians  and  the  Guineans  have   complained
of  in  the  past,  and  the  Americans  have  never  given  us  any
of  the  benefits for  which  these  two  nations  congratulate  them-
selves  today."
M.  Daniel  was  invited  by  Kennedy  to  come  back  and  talk
with   him   after   seeing   Castro.     The   distinguished   French
journalist,  an  editor  of  L'Express,  felt  that  he  could  thus  play
the  role  of  an  unofficial   emissary.    Castro's  answer  was   not
that  of  a  puppet  but  of  a  man  with  no  alternatives.    It  is  a
tragedy  that  the  President's  death  cut  short  what  might  have
been  a  fruitful   dialogue.    The   fact   is  that   Cuba   is  in   the
Soviet   camp   because   it  has  no  alternative.    It   is  the   only
country  to  emerge  from  the  anti-colonial  struggle  which  has
joined   the  Soviet  camp;  all  the  others   have  been   left   free
by  U.S.  policy  to  deal  with  both  East  and  West.    Adhzubei
himself   in   talking   informally  with   reporters   at   the   Soviet
Embassy  during  that  visit  asked,  "You  get  along  with  Guinea,
why  not  Cuba?"    From  all  indications  the  Russians  would
be  relieved  if  a  wiser  U.S.  policy  enabled  Cuba  to  move  into
a  neutralist  position.    Until   then  there   will  always  be   the
danger  of  a  new  world  crisis  over  Cuba.
Smathers  Who  Hates  Castro  Also   Hates
Senator  Smathers  of  Florida,  a  leading  advocate  of  action
to  "liberate"   China,  is  also  carrying   on  a  crusade  to  liber-
ate   Florida   fruit   growers  from   the  need  to  pay  halfway
decent   wages  to  the  migrants   and  the   miserable   foreign
workers  who  pick  their  crops.    In  both  campaigns  he  seems
tor have  had  too  much  White  House  influence.
Just  three  days  before  President  Kennedy's  assassination,
a   Catholic   priest  who  heads  the  National   Catholic    Rural
Life   Conference    protested   this   influence.     Last   July   the
Labor  Department   set  a  minimum  wage  for  these  workers
in  Florida   of  95  cents  an  hour.    Though  this  was  20  cents
less  than  the  Department  of  Agriculture  (notably  sympa-
thetic  to  growers)  had  set  for  unskilled  labor  in  the  Florida
Decent  Wages  for  Florida  Farm  Workers
sugar    cane   harvest,   the   growers   protested   to   Senator
Smathers.    According   to  this  priest,  Father  James  Vizzard,
Smathers  was  turned   down  by  Labor   Secretary  Wirtz   and
by  Attorney  General  Kennedy,  but  persuaded  President  Ken-
nedy  to  suspend  the  rate  and  order  rehearings.
"I  am  not  so  unsophisticated  as  to  be  shocked  when  poli-
tical   deals  do  occur,"   Father   Vizzard  testified   at   the   re-
hearing   in  Washington.      "But   I  hope  I  never  become   so
cynical  as  not  to  be  outraged  by  a  deal  like  this  which  sells
down  the  river  the  poorest  of  America's  poor.    It  is,  to  say
the  very  least,  demeaning  to  the  office  of  the  President  that
he  should  pay  a  political   debt  or  buy  a  vote  or  do  a  favor
with  pennies  snatched   from  the  hands  of  the  poor."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 23,1963
From  Dr.  Gunnar  Myrdal's  Testimony  Dec.   3  Before  the   Clark  Subcommittee  on  Manpower
Famous  Swedish Expert  Sees Automation  As Blessing  If  Economy  Is Planned
Since   May   20   a   Senate   subcommittee   under    Senator
Clark  (D.  Pa.)  has  been  holding  hearings  which  may  have
historic  impact.    They  deal  with  the  problem  of   retraining
and  fully   utilizing   the  nation's   manpower   in  the  light  of
the  twin  crises  created  by  automation   and  the  Negro   up-
rising.    Here  we  give  some  excerpts   from   the  plea  made
before   the  committee  Dec.  3  by  the  famous   Swedish   econo-
mist  Dr.  Gunnar   Myrdal   for   more  economic  planning   by
government   to  end  America's   "relative    stagnation."
Dr.  MYRDAL:  I  am  not  using  this  word  "automation"  so
much,  because  after  all,  it  is  a  very  old  story.    It  is  techno-
logical  progress.    We  have just  as  much  automation  going  on
in  Sweden.    Our  agricultural  population   is  shrinking  just  as
rapidly.    Our  trade  unions,  differently  from  yours,  are  all  for
automation.    But  the  explanation  is  very  simple,  and  that  is
full   employment.    If  demand   is  kept  up,   if  the   economy  is
expanding,  then  automation  is  good  for  everybody.    It  is  the
basis  of   higher   wages   for   workers,   and   it   is  the   basis  for
more  production.
Expansion  of  Demand  Needed
The  basic  problem,  more  basic  than  automation,  is  the  fact
that  there  is  not  enough  expansion  of  demand  in  this country.
There  are  many people  who  are  not  living  an  affluent  life  in
America,  and   you  have   the   export   markets   and  everything
which  is  needed  in  underdeveloped   countries.    And  in  addi-
tion  we  in  the  rich  countries  should  gradually  see  a   change
where  more  and  more  of  the  labor  force  is  utilized  for  serv-
ices,   teaching,   nursing,   caring   for   old   people,   caring   for
culture,   scholarship.
But  that  is  a  process  which  does  not  go  automatically,  and
particularly  if  you  start  out,  in  America,  with  a  rather  high
unemployment,  I  think  there  is  a  transitional  problem.    With
this  great  tremendous  stream  of  young  people  which  you  are
getting  into  the  labor  market  now,  you  must  be  very  careful
to  give  more  education,  and  more  vocational  education  also,
to  these  youngsters  so  they  may   fit   into  the  greater  America
of   the   future.
You  have  a  very  excellent  educational  system  for  the  great
majority  of  Americans  who  live  in  an  affluent  society,  but  a
rather  bad  situation  for  those  who  live  in  the  slums,  the  rural
slums  and  the  city  slums.    And  in  addition  to  that,  since  you
cannot  very rapidly make  a nurse out  of  a half-illiterate Negro,
Q.E.D.
"I   am  sometimes  very  surprised  when   I   meet   in-
dustrialists  in  this  country.    I  find  them tremendously
knowledgeable  in  their  particular  field,  and  I  find  them
full  of  superstitions  and  idiotic  ideas  as  soon  as  they
start  to  talk  about  the  country."
—From  Dr.  Myrdal's  plea for  more  government   plan-
ning   before   the  Clark  subcommittee,  Dec.  3.
"Mr.  Rubel   [head  of  the   Union  Oil  Company]  said
profits  'should  rank  right  alongside  such  hallowed  con-
cepts  as   home  and  mother  and  the   American  flag'."
—From  the  New   York   Times  account  Dec.  5  of   the
Nat'1  Assn  of  Manufacturers   annual  meeting.
you   have  transitional  employment,   i.e.   to   employ   them   in
reconstruction,  where  there  is  a  rather  simple  problem  of  re-
education.    And  it  is  almost  a  (good)  fortune  that  you  have
such  tremendous  amounts  to  be  done   in  reconstructing  your
cities  and  modernizing  your  transport   system.
I  am  very  much  against  all  those  radicals  who  say that  you
can  solve  the   problem   just  by  giving   the   unemployed    full
wages,  or  nearly  full  wages,   because  there  is  nothing   which
can  cure  unemployment   except   employment.
I  am an  old  Puritan  in  many ways  and  I  believe  that  I  am
speaking   for  ordinary  Americans.    It  is  the  dignity  of   life
to  be  employed   somewhere,  and  to  do  something  for  society.
Well,  what  you  have  to  do  is  of  course  to  have  very  much
greater   expenditures   for   real   city   renewal,   not   the   city  re-
newal  you  have  had  up   to   now,   which   has  been   building
houses  not  for  poor  people,  but  rather  middle  class  people,
and  driving  the  poor  into  new  slums.
There  is a  lot  of  construction  work  which  needs  to  be  done,
and  the  speeding  up  of  educating  what  I  call  the  under  class,
where  they  are  dropping  out  of  school.    I  realize  that  this  is
a   tremendous   thing,   because   it   will   cost   very  much   more
money  of  the  budget.    I  believe that  this  is bound  to  make  the
country  richer,  because  here  you  have  a  vast  amount   of  un-
utilized   resources   in   your   unemployed   and   your   underem-
ployed.    It  would  make  the  country  richer,  and  of  course  also
prepare  it  to  carry  a  very  much  bigger  burden  for  the  public
expenditures.     Here  you  cannot  rely  upon   industry,   private
industry.—Before   the   Clark   committee,  Dec.  3.
Dr.  Gunnar  Myrdal  Opposes  Priority
"I  believe  that  everything  should  be   done   to   put   the
Negroes  on  the  basis  of  equality,  so  far  as  the  law  is  con-
cerned.    And  I  am  optimistic  enough  to  believe  that  (all
this  can  be  done)  within  a  period  of  ten  years.   However,
you  will  still  have  many  of  the  problems  left.    There  will
continue  to  be  discrimination against  Negroes  in  a  society
where  you  do  not  have  full  employment, a  very  important
pre-condition  for  giving  reality  to  legal  equality.
"In  addition  to  that,  sir,  there  is  also  the  fact  that  be-
cause  of  the  history  of   the  Negro,  he  is  less   efficient   in
many  ways.   Perhaps  half  of  the  grown-up Negroes  are  for
all  practical  purposes illiterate.
"I am,  however,  not  for  preferential treatment of  Negroes,
and  I  will  try  to  explain why.   First,  because I  do not  think
it  is  politically  wise.    Nobody  sitting  in  this  room  feels  re-
sponsible  for  having brought  Negroes  as  slaves  to  America.
Treatment  or  Job  Quotas  for   Negroes
That  argument  that  we  have  a  guilt  does  not  work  politi-
cally.    I  mean  we  are  responsible  for  the  society   as  it  is
now,  and  not  for  the  whole history.
"But  quite  aside  from  that,  I  think  it  is  wrong,  because
Negroes  are,  it  is  true,  perhaps the  largest  portion  of  what
I  would  call  the  under-class  in  America,  but  they  are  by
far   not  alone.    You  have   poor  whites  all  over  the   place.
You  have  the  Puerto  Ricans,  you  have  the  Mexicans,  you
have  the  workers in  agriculture in  many  places.    It  will  be
absolutely  wrong  to  give  priority  to  one  group, even  if  it  is
the  biggest  group.    What  you  have  to  do  is  to  make  life
decent  and productive for  all  these  poor people  in  the under-
class.    I  think  it  is  very  unfair  and  against  American prin-
ciples   to  discriminate  in  favor  of   any   group  because   of
color.    It  is  almost  as  bad  as  doing  the   opposite."
—Dr. Myrdal  before   the  Clark  committee, Dec. 3.
1   3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Wcekly,  December  23,19G3
How  Long  Are  We  Going  to  Support  An  Assassination  Agency?
(Continued   from   Page One)
have  been  utterly  discredited;  the  latter  only  opened  the  door
to  Communism,  the  former  had   to  be  "removed"   when  his
failure  and  instability  became  too  notorious.     The  one  Indo-
chinese  ruler  the  CIA  has  always regarded  with  disfavor  is  the
only   one  who   has   succeeded.     Cambodia   under   Sihanouk's
leadership,   Majority   Leader   Mansfield  told   the   Senate   the
other   day  (Nov. 20), "has developed   within  its  borders  a
remarkable  degree  of  progress  and  political  cohesion  and sta-
bility  and  a  level  of  human  freedom  and  political   participa-
tion  in  the  life  of  the  nation  which  exceeds  most  if  not  all
of  the  other  nations  of  southeast  Asia."    Yet  as  the   Wash-
ington  Post  said  in  a  recent  editorial  (Nov. 14),  the  CIA
"has   for   a   long   time  tended   to   consider   the   non-aligned
Sihanouk  as  a  pernicious  fellow."
Does  The  Right  Hand  Know?
The   second  thing  to  be  said  of  the  CIA   is  that  the  very
existence  of  a  secret  agency  which  boasts  of  "cloak  and dag-
ger"   activities  in  countries  with  which  we  are  at  peace cre-
ates   suspicions  which   poison   our   foreign   relations.     Both
President   Johnson    and   Secretary  Harriman   denied   to   the
Cambodian  Foreign  Minister  that  the  CIA  had  been   engaged
in  plots  against  its  government.    But  no  one  can  be  sure  that
the   right   hand   of   our  government   really  knows  what  this
left   hand   is   doing.
Cambodia's  first  charges  of  a  CIA  plot  were  made  in 1959
when   it  expelled   Victor  Matsui,  an   official   of  the  U.S. Em-
bassy   for   activities  incompatible  with   diplomacy;   Cambodia
claimed  that  rebel  groups  had   been  given  radio  transmitters
with  which  they  kept  in  touch  with  the  U.S. Embassy.   The
next  incident  was  the  capture  of   an  anti-Sihanouk  emissary
with  270  kilograms of  pure  gold  for  the  rebels;  he  confessed
that  he  had  been  in  contact  with  CIA  agents  not  only  in  Cam-
bodia   but   in   Washington.      Later   an   elaborate   "gift"   was
presented   at  the  Royal  Palace  and   turned  out  to  be  an  in-
genious   bomb  intended  to  kill  the  King  and   Queen;   three
members  of  the  Court  lost  their  lives  when  it  exploded.     It
had   come   by  ship   from  Vietnam  and   its   intricacy   led   the
Cambodians  to   suspect  skilled  CIA   hands   at  work.     Then
Slowly  Catching  Up
"Under  Ngo  Din  Diem,  the  hamlet  program   aroused
deep   popular   resentment   .  .  .  tens  of  thousands  of
peasants  were  forced  to  leave  their   homes  and  build
new   surrounded  by  barbed-wire   barricades.     Commu-
nist   propaganda   focussed   effectively   on  the   most  ob-
jectionable  aspects  of  the  program  calling  the  hamlets
concentration  camps.'  .  .  .  This   charge,   according  to
U.S.  officials,  was  all  too  accurate  in  many  instances."
—New   York   Times  from   Saigon  Dec.  3.
As  long  ago  as  The  Weekly  of  April  17,  1961,  in  call-
ing  attention  to  some  dangerously  rose-colored  views of
Diem's  regime,  we  compared  the  picture  drawn  of  these
hamlets  by  Leo Cherne  in  the  New  York   Times  Sunday
Magazine,  April  9,  1961, with  that  drawn  by  Robert
Guillian,  the  Far  Eastern  expert  of  Le  Monde  (Paris)
three  days  earlier.    Cherne  called  them  Diem's  "most
imaginative  project  . . . the most  dramatic  and fruitful
pioneering  rural  ventures   since  the  Israeli   cooperative
farm,  the  kibbutz."    M. Guillian  said  this  rural  experi-
ment  "conducted  in  haste  and  in  often  brutal  fashion,
has  been  almost   everywhere   a  political  and  economic
failure."    We're  glad  to  see  the  Times   catch  up.
they  learned  that  the  secret  rebel  radio  was  operating  from  a
house  in  Saigon  under  the  very  nose  of  U.S. and  Vietnamese
authorities,  and  felt  this  could  not  happen  without  their  con-
nivance.     Another   assassination  attempt   came   last    spring,
when  the  President  of   Communist  China  visited  Cambodia.
Conspirators  were  caught  in  an  attempt  to  mine  the  road  over
which  he  would  pass  with  Prince  Sihanouk  on  his  way  from
the  airport.   The  latest  incident was  the  confession  of  a  rebel
infiltrator    from    South   Vietnam   that    anti-Sihanouk   forces
worked  out  of  strategic hamlets near  the  Cambodian  border  in
close  liaison  with  both  Vietnamese  and  U.S. military  authori-
ties.    These  are  the  incidents  which  led  Prince  Sihanouk   to
break   off   American  aid, fearing  that   aid   agencies   were   a
means   by   which   hostile   American   agents   penetrated    his
country.
Again  I  ask—in  the  wake  of  our  own  President's  assassina-
tion—how  long  are  we  going  to  maintain  what  other  nation's
consider  an  assassination  agency  of  our  own?
Warmest  Best  Wishes  for  the  Holidays  and  the  New  Year
I.F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please   renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .....................................................................................—
Street    .......................................................................^........—
City   .............._...........................Zone.............State....................
12/23/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ........................................................................._..
Street    .........—.................._....................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone...........State..............._...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
IF. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington    15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.,
Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;  $6 in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED