I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963apr29.pdf

============================================================

Some  Revelations From  Our  Military,  Pps. 2-3
Suppose  Not  Negroes  But  Men of  Property  Were  Being  Beaten   in  Mississippi?
Of  course  we  don't  mean  it  seriously.    We're  merely  put-
ting  it   forward   as  a  classroom   exercise  in  jurisprudence.
But   let   us  suppose  it  was  not  the  rights  of  Negroes  but
the  rights  of  property  which  were  menaced  in  Mississippi.
Let  us  suppose  that,  thanks  to  a  sudden  disappearance  of
racism,  poor  whites  and  Negroes  had  suddenly  united  and
elected  their  own  men  to  the  State  government,  replacing
even  the  Sheriffs  and  the  police  officers.    And  suppose  that
these   new   law   enforcement  officers   began   to   harass,   to
beat,  to  shoot  and  occasionally  to  kill  men  of  property  on
one  excuse  or  another—failure  to  pay  minimum  wages  on
the   plantations,  or   failure  to   provide  fair   accounting  in
mills  and  stores.   Suppose  that  when  property  owners  tried
to  demonstrate  police  dogs  were  set  upon  them.    Suppose
that  when  they  tried  to  appeal  to  the  Civil  Rights  Commis-
sion  in  Washington, the  Mississippi  legislature  passed   spe-
cial  laws   (like  Sections   2155.4,  2155.5   and   2155.6  enacted
in  1960)  making  it  a  crime  punishable  by  five  years  in  jail
to  make  false  statements  to  any  Federal  investigator,   pro-
viding  that  in  such  prosecutions  the  two-witness  rule  for
perjury   would  be   suspended   and   one   witness   would  be
enough  for  conviction,  and  applying  this  sanction   even   to
immaterial  statements   (that  is,  any  inconsequential  slip  of
the   tongue).     Suppose  the  Attorney   General   had   timidly
refused  to  allow  the  Civil  Rights  Commission  to  hold  pub-
lic   hearings   in   Mississippi   lest   this   disturb   the   atmos-
phere!     Suppose  bombs   had   been   thrown,   not   into   some
poor  NAACP  or  CORE  office,  but  into  (forgive  the   expres-
sion)   A  BANK.    Suppose  the  Civil  Rights   Commission  in
desperation  had  then  called  on  the  President  and  the  Con-
gress   to   suspend   all   Federal   aid   to   Mississippi   until   it
agreed  to  safeguard  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  by  the
Federal   Constitution.     Q.  would   this   suggestion   evoke   a
shush-shush   of  legalistic  horror   from   the   liberal   pundits
of  the  great   newspapers?     Or  would  the  U.S.  Army  take
over  Mississippi tomorrow?
/ F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,   NO.  10APRIL   29,   1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
"To  Live  As One Family"  -   John  XXIII
A  cultivated  Roman  from  the  better  days  of  the  Antonines,
come  suddenly  back  to  life,  would  be  delighted  by  the  Pope's
"Pacem  in  Terris."    He  would  be  enchanted  to  find  that  this
obscure  neo-Jewish  Gnostic  cult  of  the  Christians,  with  their
familiar  myth  of  the  God  re-arisen  each  spring,  had  preserved
for    two   millennia   the   humane   traditions   of   Roman   Stoic
philosophy  and,  best  of  all,  the  great  creative  idea  of  Roman
law:  a  universal  empire,  enforcing  the  peace  throughout   the
civilized  world,  on   the   basis  of   a  common   citizenship  open
to  all  from  Gibraltar  to  the  Black  Sea,  in  Rome,  the  mystic
City  which  became  a  world   and   gave  it  several  centuries  of
tranquillity.    A  kind  of  new  Pax  Romana  is  the  Pope's   plea.
No  "Just"  Nuclear  War
The   rich  and  crowded  pages  of  this  great  document con-
tain  much  that  is  revolutionary  for  Catholic  doctrine,  notably
its  abandonment  of  talk  about  "just  war"  and  "unjust  war"
for  the  rejection  altogether  of  nuclear  war, and  the  new  tol-
erance  it  breathes  for  other  sects,  abandoning  the  older  Catho-
lic  idea   (so  like  the  Communist)  that  "error  has  no  rights."
The   encyclical   must   also  have   a   massive   impact   on   Italian
and  world  politics  by  its  new  attitude  toward  co-existence,  in
the  foimer  supporting  that  "opening  to  the  Left"  which  can
alone  give  Italy  a  firm  majority   and   a  sure  course  of   social
reform,  in  the  latter  pointing  the  way  to  a  modus  vivendi  for
East  and  West.
But  none  of  these  momentous  shifts,   not  even  the  Pope's
call  for   disarmament  and   a  nuclear   test   ban,   equal   in   im-
portance   his  healing  proposal  for   a  new  world  community.
Technology,   the  Pope  says,  is  more   and   more   forcing  men
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
Two  Tails  Which  Wag  Their  Dogs
Newspaper  editors  must  have  been  tantalized, during
Nixon's  speech  to  them,  by  a  feeling  that   somewhere
they  had  heard  all  this  before.    If  on  returning  home
they  check  the  clippings  in  their  "morgues"  they   will
see  where  this  Twilight  Zone  feeling  originated.    The
speech   was  a  replay   of  the   1962  campaign  when   Ike,
Nixon   and   Dulles   were   going   to   "unleash"   Chiang
(only  to  put  the  leash  quietly  on  him  again  soon  after
taking  office)   and  to  substitute   liberation   for  contain-
ment   (only  to  tell  the  East  Germans  in   1953  and  the
Hungarians  in  1956  to  contain  themselves).
Eight  years  later,  it  was  the  turn  of  the  Democrats
to  accuse  the  Republicans  of  being  too  cautious.   Nixon
now   is   saying   what   Kennedy   said   in    1960.     Then
Kennedy  wanted  action  on  Cuba,  and  Nixon  was  shak-
ing  his  head   over   such  irresponsibility.     Now  Nixon,
always  a  man  of  principle,  seems  to  think  he  could  win
in  1964  by  reversing  roles  and  shifting  sides.   He  told
the  press  he  feels  the  GOP could  win  on  the  very  same
issues  as  in  1960  "because  turning  those  around,  Presi-
dent  Kennedy  will now be  on  the  defensive."    Anything
for  a  vote.  The  "ins"   are  sobered  by  power.  The  "outs"
exploit  frustration.
China   and   Cuba   play   similar   roles   on  both   sides.
The  China  Lobby  there  accuses   Khrushchev  of  being
soft   on  capitalism   as   the   Cuba   Lobby   here   accuses
Kennedy  of  being  soft  on  Communism.   Castro  in  his
interview   with  Le  Monde  threatened   to  box  Khrush-
chev's  ears;  Miro  Cardona  has  just  boxed   Kennedy's.
The  common  fear   which  alone  unites  all  otherwise   ir-
reconcilable   Chinese  and  Cubans  is  of  a  settlement   be-
tween  U.S.  and  USSR.    That  would  end  the  ability  of
the  Sino-Cuban  tail  to  wag  the  dog  in  the  politics  of
both  the big Powers.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  29,1963
These Nightmare Glimpses  of the  Military  Mind  in  Action  Explain  Why
The   selections  on  these  two  pages  from   the  just   pub-
lished  testimony   on  the  1964  Defense   Dept.  budget  (Ft.  2)
before    the   House   Appropriations    Committee    •may    help
us  understand   better  why   the  Pope  spoke  so  urgently   in
his  peace message:
Mr.  [Geo.  H.]   MAHON   (D.  Tex) :  General,  what  is  your
thinking   in   regard   to   the   development  of   a   100-megaton
bomb?    We  apparently   are  not  interested  in  developing  this
weapon.    The  Soviet  Union  has  boasted  of  having  the  large
bombs   and   the   Soviet  Union  has   actually  tested   a   much
larger  weapon  than  we  have.  .  .  .
Gen.    [David   M.]   SHOUP   (Commandant, US  Marines):  I
think  it  is  just  as  important  that  we  have  one if  they  have
it.  ...
Mr.  MAHON:  What  would  you  say  to  the  argument  that  if
we  have  say   100  megatons   in  10  separate  missiles  that   it
would  be  more  effective   in  devastation   and  deterrent  than
just  say  one  100-megaton  bomb.
Gen.    SHOUP:   When  you  get  into  this  kind  of  bomb,  shoot-
ing  from   100  to  200  miles  high—and  to  date  no  one  knows
how  to  stop   one  of  them.     Some  of  these   days,   hopefully,
the  U.S.  will  find  out  how  to  shoot  down  those  other  things
that  have  come  down  through  the  atmosphere,  but  the  bomb
I  am  talking  about  doesn't  have  to  come  down  through   the
atmosphere.     It   will  burn   the   place   up  without  it.     (pp.
339-40)
Just  A  Couple  Over  New  York  and  New  England
Mr.  MAHON:  Would  a  100-megaton  weapon  in  our  posses-
sion  and  operational  be  a  deterrent,   in  your  judgment  Gen-
eral?
Gen.    Curtis   E.   LEMAY   (USAF   Chief   of  Staff):   I  think
it  would.     *  *  *
Secretary  [Eugene  M.]   ZUCKERT  (of  the  Air  Force)  :  The
deterrence  is  a  matter  of  trying  to  judge  the  other  fellow's
state  of  mind.   If  a  100-megaton  weapon—the  Soviets  have
it—  make  them  feel  better  but  on  the  other  hand  they   are
still  going  to  be  concerned  about  what  kind  of  damage  they
are  going  to  receive.   I  do not  think  the  kind  of  damage  they
are   going  to  receive  is  determined  by  whether  or  not  we
have  a  100-MT  bomb  or  a  few  100-MT  bombs.
Mr.   MAHON:   A  couple  of   100-megaton   bombs  detonated
in  a  high  burst  where  they   could  not  be  very  well   inter-
cepted  might  immobilize  the  New  England  area,  New  York
and  New England,    (p. 446)
Faith  in  Counter-Force Evaporates
Mr.  MAHON:  I  would  like  to  ask  Admiral  Anderson  about
his  interpretation  of  counterforce  strategy.
Admiral  Geo W.  ANDERSON  (Chief  of  Naval  Operations) :
Off   the  record.     (Discussion   off  the  record).
We  Never  Burn  'Em  Up Unless—
Gen.  LeMAY  (USAF  Chief  of  Staff):  If  you  have  to
go  in  there  and  there  is  cover  around  where  weapons
could  be  concealed  that  could  fire  on  the  choppers  (heli-
copters),  you  should  beat   it  up  with  your  fixed  wing
fighters  before  they  go  in,  at  the  same  time  covering
them  until  they  get  on  the  ground.    You  can  do  this
with  fixed  wing  airplanes  that  have  the  capability  for
accurate  fire  and  delivery  of  heavy  munitions.   YOU
CAN  CARRY  QUITE  A  LOAD  (our  emphasis—IPS).
If  you  try  to  do  this  with  the  chopper,  it  is  not  a  good
firing  platform.  You  cannot  hit  anything  with  it.  They
cannot  carry  much  of  a  load  of  weapons.    So,  this  is
not  the  way  to do it.
Mr.  [Dan'1 J.]  FLOOD  (D. Pa.):  Now you have  this
problem.    We  are  going  in  to  Point  A.   I  have  guer-
rillas  and  these  Reds  all  around  the  area.    My  intel-
ligence  reports  where  they  are.    They  are  practically
and  traditionally tied  in  to  local  villages  and  local  peo-
ple.   Now you  are  back  to  the  question  which  has  been
appearing  in  the  newspaper  all  week.   I  have  to  go  in
there.   I  have  to  go  in  tonight.    Are  you  going  to  go
in,  as  in  these  pictures  you  showed  me  here  the  other
day,   and  clobber  everything  and  everybody  with   na-
palm   and   rockets   and   .50-caliber   machine  guns,  kill
everybody  and  burn  everything,  so  the  choppers   put
down  and  all  they  do  is  have  a  nice  hot  mess  because
everybody  is  dead?
Gen.   Le MAY: No;  it  is  not  advocated  to  bomb indis-
criminately.    It  is  only  those  targets  that  have  been
clearly  identified  as  enemy  targets.
—1964  Defense   Budget   Use   hearings,   pps.  483-4.
Mr.  Wm.  E.  MINSHALL   (R.  Ohio):    What  happens  to  the
hardened  bases?
Admiral  ANDERSON:  Off the  record.  (Discussion off record).
Mr.  MINSHALL:   Pardon   me,  Mr.  Chairman,  for   interrupt-
ing,  but  this  hardened  target  concept  has  been  explained  to
us  by  Mr.  McNamara  and  other  experts,  and  you  are  an  ex-
pert,  and  not  one  of  them  has   come  here,  Mr.  McNamara
included,  and  said  that  we  could  knock  them  all  out.    They
have  still   said  that  we  would  suffer   untold   damage.
Admiral  ANDERSON:  That  is  right.
Mr.   MINSHALL:   What  makes  you  think   the  Soviet  Union
is  just  going  to  target  on  our  military  targets?
Admiral  ANDERSON:  Off  the   record.
Mr.  MINSHALL:   That  is  a  wild  concept,  in  my  book.
Mr.  MAHON :  Of  course  if  there  are  Soviet  submarines  at
sea  that  can  launch  medium-range  ballistic  missiles  you  cer-
Gen.   Taylor  Says  India,  Not  China, Started  Last Autumn's Border  Fighting
Mr.  [Robert  L.  P.]  SIKES  (D.  Fla.):  Let  me  talk  about
Red  China  and  the  Indian  operation.    Did  the  Indians  ac-
tually  start   this  military  operation?
Gen.    [Maxwell  D.]   TAYLOR  (Chr'm,   Joint   Chiefs  of
Staff):   They  were  edging   forward   in  the  disputed   area;
yes,   sir.
(Discussion  off the  record).
Mr.  SIKES:  Is  the  area  of  the  neutral  zone  on  territory
that  was  formerly  claimed  by  India  or  claimed  by China?
Gen.  TAYLOR: In  most  cases claimed by both.
Mr.  SIKES:  Where  is  it  with  relation  to  the   generally
accepted international boundary ?
Gen.   TAYLOR: That  is  hard  to  say  because  there  is  no
generally  accepted   international  boundary.   I  am  sorry  to
be  vague  about  this, but  I  can  assure  you that  I  spent  sev-
eral  hours  trying  to  find  out  where  the  McMahon  line  is.
Actually,  you  find  the  maps  differ  on  this.   The  terrain  is
so  terribly   rugged,   there  has   been  no  accurate  mapping
and  no  accurate  boundary  lines  or  markers   placed.
Mr.  SIKES: Is  the  proposed  neutral  zone  generally  with-
in  territory  which  was  occupied  prior  to  all  of  this  activity
by Indian or  Chinese forces?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  Most  of  it  was  unoccupied  by   anybody.
General  Hall,  are  you  an  expert  on  this  subject?
Gen.   HALL:  Yes,  sir.    I  would  say  in  general  it  was oc-
cupied  by  neither  force,  but  that  the  NEFA   [North  East
Frontier  Agency]   was   occupied  predominantly  by  Indian
forces.    One thing  I  think  it  is  very  important  to  point  out
is  that  the  Chinese  Nationalists,  when  they  were  in  control
of  China,  did  not  recognize  this  line  either.   So  it  is  not  a
question  of  the  fact  it  is  a  Chinese Communist line  vis-a-vis
an  Indian  line.    It  is  an  Indian  line  that  has  never  been
recognized  by  either   the  Chinese  Communists  or  the  Na-
tionalists.
—Dept.  of  Defense   1964  appropr.   hearings   before   House
Approp   Com,  Ft.  2,  released  April  19,  pps.  9-10.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  29,  1963
. . . The  Pope  Spoke  So Urgently  of  the  Need  for  Peace  and  Disarmament
tainly  wouldn't expect  to  take  all  of  them  out?
Admiral  ANDERSON:  No  sir.
Mr.   MAHON:  What   does  counterforee  strategy  mean   to
you?
Admiral   ANDERSON:  Off  the  record,    (pps.  340-41)
Pushing  Hard  to  Create  New  Monsters
Mr.  [Gerald  R.]   FORD  (R.  Mich.):  I  detect  a  tendency on
the  part  of  some people to  accept  the  philosophy that  mutual
deterrence  or  nuclear  stalemate   is  inevitable  regardless  of
what  we  do  dollarwise,  programwise,  or  otherwise.    Do  you
accept   the   philosophy  that   mutual   deterrence   or   nuclear
stalemate  is ineviltable?
Gen.    LEMAY:   No,  I  do  not  accept  that  philosophy  at   all.
...  In  other  words,  if  we  stop  trying,  we  certainly  are  not
going  to  succeed in  defending ourselves.  .  . .
Secretary   ZUCKERT:  I  do  not  think  anybody  in  the  Penta-
gon  in  a  position  of  responsibility  believes  we  are  going  to
get  some  kind  of  balanced  situation  that  is  going  to  perpetu-
ate  itself.   That  is  why  all  of  us—Navy,  Army,  Air  Force—
are  pushing  at  these  technological  frontiers   all  the  time  to
find  out  what  may  be  the  key  to  the  next  weapon  system
or  the  next  development that  will  upset  any  balance,    (pps.
580-81).
Chemical  and  Biological  War
Mr.  [Robert  L.  F.]  SIKES  (D. Fla.):  In  the  present  world
situation,  where there  seems to  be  an  effort  to  find  a  way  to
win  wars  without  resorting  to  nuclear  strikes  .  .  .  there  is
a  possibility that  chemical and  biological  materials   will  play
a  much  more  important  part  than   they  have  played  here-
tofore.     That   would  particularly   be  true  if   the   Russians
were  to  demonstrate  a  very  pronounced  capability  in  that
field.    Does  that  possibility  concern  the  Department   of  the
Army?
Secretary  [Cyrus  R.]  VANCE  (of  the  Army) :  Yes,  it  does
concern  the  Department  of  the  Army  and  to  that  end  sir,  we
are  procuring  additional  munitions  during  the  coming  years
which  would  increase  rather  substantially   our  capability  to
deliver  chemical and  bacteriological  materials  on target.    In
addition,  we  are  increasing  the  funds  for  chemical  and  bio-
logical  research   and  development  so  as  to  press  forward   in
new  types  of  weapons  which  may  be  able  to  be  used  in  such
a  situation. . . .
Mr.  SIKES:  Does intelligence  tell  us  what  the  Russians  are
really  doing  in  this field.
Secretary   VANCE :  Our  intelligence  indicates  that  they  are
devoting  considerable  attention  to it.  .  . .
Mr.  SIKES:How  far   are  we  going  in  the  way  of  warning
system  and  in  providing  a  gas  mask  and  similar  defensive
measures?
On  Cuba  As  Soviet   Base
Mr.   [Jamie   L.]  WRITTEN  (D.  Miss.):  With  Cuba
being  a  Communist  stronghold   in  the  Western  Hemi-
sphere  doesn't  it  make  an  ideal  base  for  further  steps
forward  into  South and Central  America.  . . ?
Gen.    Maxwell  D.  TAYLOR  (Chrtn,   Jt.   Chiefs  of
Staff):  I  would say  that  Cuba  is  an  island   surrounded
by  seas  which  we  control  absolutely:  that  any  move-
ment  of  men,  material   and  things  of  that  sort  from
Cuba  would be known by  us.
—1964  Defense  Budget,  Hse  App.  hearings,  pps. 14-15
Gen.    [Earle   G.]   WHEELER   (US   Army   Chief   of   Staff):
They  are  in  the  hands  of the  troops,  but  we need  better  types.
Mr.   SIKES:  I   would  assume  the   civilian   population   was
almost   completely  unprotected   in  these  fields?
Secretary   VANCE:  That  is  right,    (pps.  188-90).
Not  A  Few  Russians  in  Cuba
Gen.   SHOUP:  I  am  not  much  of  an  expounder,  but  we  seem
to  have  so many  words  today  about  some Russian  forces  that
are  about  90 miles  away.    I  think  we  ought  to  think   about
what  we  are  going  to  do  when  they  are  3%  miles  away  in
submarines  with  Polaris-type  armament.   And it  is  going  to
come  to  pass.   What  are  we  going  to  do when  they  put   tre-
mendous-sized  nuclear  weapons  in  satellites  or  even  in bomb-
ers?   When you might  have  to  get  but  three  or  four  of  them
over  this  continent  to  burn  the  whole  darn  thing  up.
These  are  the  serious  problems  that  are  confronting   this
nation,  more  than  a  few  Russians  down  in  Cuba.    (p.  339)
End  of  the  White  Race
Gen.    SHOUP:  Now,  about  the  casualty   business.    I   have
said  for  the  last  2 years  that  when  the  nuclear  exchange of
the   magnitude  that  is   possible   occurs—and  there   will  be
even  greater  capability  later—that  we  will  have  not  millions
but  700 to  800 million  dead.   Although  I  did not  give  him  the
figures,  that  is  exactly  the  figures  Khrushchev  used  in  the
past  month.   I  have  no  communication with  him  nor  he  with
me,  but  that  is  exactly  the  same  figure.
We  are  then   looking  at  a  situation   where  we  have  the
white  race  or  the  Caucasion  race—and  I  don't  know  whether
it  would  be  good  to  eliminate  the  white  race  from  the  face
of  the  earth  or  not  but  I  am  convinced  that  a  nuclear  ex-
change  will  do it.    Within  a  matter  of  years  afterward   the
white  race  is   finished.   There  will  be  a  little  bit   of  New
Zealand  and  Australia  left  but  you  have  plenty   of  yellows
and  browns  to  take  that  over  in  a  matter  of  a  few  years,
(p.  337)
Admiral  Anderson  Dismisses Submarine Fears  in  That  New Cuban Fishing  Base
involved  to  ———.    [Number   cut  by  censor—IPS].
Mr.  [Geo.  H.]  MAHON  (D.  Tex.):  Now I  would  like  to
talk  about  a  matter  involving  the  Cuban  fishing  fleet  and
the  use  of  ports,  the  possible  use  of  ports  in  Cuba  by  the
Soviet  fishing  fleet  and  by  the  Soviet  submarine   fleet.   Will
you  give us the  picture  on that?
Admiral  [Geo.  W.]  ANDERSON (Chief  of  Naval  Opera-
tions):  Yes,  sir;   I  will.    On  the  25th  of  September,  just
before  the  outbreak  of  the  Cuban crisis,  the  Cubans  and  the
Soviets  signed  an  agreement  for  the  construction  of  a fish-
ing  port  in  Havana  for  Cuban  and  Soviet  use.
On  Jan.  17, 1963,  the  Cubans  announced that  the  planning
was  complete  and   the   construction   for   the   fishing   port
would  start  in  February   1963,   with   completion   scheduled
for   December   1963.    The  announcement  reiterated   Cuban
sovereignty  over  this  facility.
In  July  1962,  Soviet  fishing  boats  arrived  in  Havana  and
have  since  operated  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  Carib-
bean.   They  have  been  joined  by  others,  bringing  the  total
In  addition,  three  fish  factory  ships  have  called  at  Cuban
ports,   probably   bringing   in  fish  from   the   Soviet   Union.
The  Cubans  have  bought  five  fishing  boats   from   Japan,
three  of  which  already  have  been  delivered  to  Cuba.
Cuba  has  a  significant  shortage  of  protein  in  their  diet,
dating  from   the  slaughter   in  1961  of  breeding   stocks   to
replace  imports   from   the  U.S.    The  establishment   of   the
fishing  fleet  in  Cuba  is  an  efficient  means  of  supplementing
the  source  of  the  protein  in  the  diet.    The  Soviet  Union  is
helping   to  support   the   Cuban   economy.    However,  there
are  no  additional  gains  to  the  Soviet  Union.
(Discussion  off  the  record).                                                                               ,•
Admiral  ANDERSON: To  date,  we have  seen  no  evidence
that   Soviet  submarines  have  operated   from  Cuban  ports.
We  also  believe  that   if  they  went  into  Cuban  ports  we
would find out  about  it  very quickly.
—Ft.  2  1964 Defense   Approp  House  hearings,  p. 349
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  29, 1963
"Bands  of Robbers" -   But Now  Armed  With  Nuclear  Thunderbolt
(Continued   from    Page    One)
"to  work  together  and  live  as  one  family."     In  this  context
the  nation-state  system  is  obsolete.    The   problems  of  security
and  peace  have  grown   too  complex   to  be  solved   within   it.
Not   lack   of   good   will,   the   Pope   sees,   but   "structural   de-
fects"   in  the  existing  order  hinder  their  solution.    "Today,"
His    Holiness   pleads,    "the    universal   common    good    poses
problems   of   world-wide   dimensions,   which   cannot   be   ade-
quately   tackled   or   solved   except   by   the    efforts   of   public
authorities ...  in  a  position  to  operate  in  an  effective   man-
ner  on  a  worldwide  basis."     This  would   not   supersede   but
supplement  existing  political  structures,  creatiqg  law  in  their
relations.     Otherwise,    as   he    quotes    from    St.   Augustine,
"What  are  kingdoms  without  justice  but  bands  of   robbers?"
And  those  bands  of  robbers  are  now  armed  with  the  nuclear
thunderbolt.   .  . .
The  Only  Vision  That  Can  Save   Us
This  is  the  Vision  which  can  alone  save  us:  the  conception
of   one  family,  one   race,  one  planet,   one  universal   creed  of
human  brotherhood   broad  enough   to  encompass  us  all,  based
on   a   Declaration   of   Human   Rights   enforcible   everywhere.
Within  this  framework  of  law,  all  is  possible:   a  nuclear  test
ban,   disarmament,  reunification    of   divided   countries   from
Germany  to  Korea,   a  new  era  of  creative  co-existence  with-
out  fear  or  hatred
1
  which  must  lead  ultimately   to  a  common
human   society,  both   socialistic   and   spiritually  free.      Other-
wise we  are all  on  a dead-end street.
The   Pope   says  that   the   same   moral   law   "which    covers
relations   betwen    individual   human   beings    serves   also    to
regulate  the  relations  of  political  communities   with  one  an
:
other."     This,   unfortunately,   describes  what   should   be,  not
what   is.     Between   man   and   man,   resort   to   murder   is   not
allowed.     Not    so   among   Nation    States,   where   murder   is
the   final   sanction,  and   preparation  for   it  the  main  business
of  the State.
To  kill  or  be  killed  is  the  higher  law  of  nations,  and  this
makes  them  moral  monsters.    "It  would  be  absurd,"  the  Ro-
man  Pontiff   says,  "even  to  imagine that  men  could  surrender
their   own   human  attributes,   or   be   compelled   to   do   so,  by
the  very   fact  of  their  appointment  to  public  office."     It  may
Tributes  We  Could  Do   Without
It  seemed  as  though  everybody  this  year  celebrated
the  anniversary of  the  Warsaw  Ghetto.    The  President
sent  a  message  to  a  gathering  in  Carnegie  Hall.    The
Poles  treated  it  as  a  solemn  national  holiday.    It  was
marked  even  in  Moscow.    Everybody  used  it  for  their
own  purposes:  in  Germany to  show  they  were contrite,
in  Poland  to  make  anti-German propaganda,  in  Russia
to  overcome the bad taste  abroad of  its  stale anti-Semi-
tism.    But  of  all  these  mourning  powers,  not  a  single
one  is  acting   to  prevent  the  drift   toward  war  in  the
Middle   East.     Bonn   finds   all   kinds  of   legal   excuses
for  inaction  when  Israel  protests   that  German  scien-
tists   are  building  rockets   for  Egypt.     Averell  Harri-
man  fatuously  assures  a  New  York  Congressman  that
the   U.S.   cannot    interfere   because   if    the   Germans
weren't   building  these   rockets,   the   Russians   would!
The  Arabs   fear  the  Israeli  are  manufacturing   a  nu-
clear  weapon.    The  Israelis  fear  ex-Nazis  are  prepar-
ing  Egypt  for  another  try  at  that  "final  solution."    A
united   Arab  onslaught   on   Israel,   possibly   escalating
into   a   wider   war,  could  still   be  forestalled,  Arab-Is-
raeli  reconciliation  sought.    East  and  West  mourn  the
Warsaw  Ghetto.    But  neither  will  lift  a  finger  to  pre-
vent  a  new  and  greater  tragedy  for  the  Jewish  people.
be  absurd,  but  it  is  true.    This  is  exactly  what   appointment
to  the  highest   office   does  in  the  existing  international   jungle.
The  No.  1  man  in  the  White  House  or  the  Kremlin  is  put
into  a  position  where  he  may  feel  compelled  to  do  what  he
would   never   do   as  a  moral   individual,   give   the   signal   to
consign  hundreds  of  millions  of  human  beings  to  a  final  hell
—as   could   have   happened    last   October   over   Cuba,   if   one
man  hadn't  backed  down  and  another  had  pressed  the  button.
Power   to  murder,  not  morality,  determined   the   outcome.
The   Nation   State   system   dehumanizes   the   ruler   and   the
ruled.    To  make  us  feel  morally  absolved  for  preparing  mass
cremation,   we   create   caricatures   of   our   adversaries.     They
are   made   to   appear   not   our   brothers   but   less-than-human,
there  "Reds",  here   "capitalists."     In  this   lawless   world   we
bear  the  mark  of  our  ancestor  Cain  and  are  compelled   to  go
on  killing  our  brother.    The  Bomb  forces  a  new  answer,  and
His  Holiness   offers   us  a  new  one,  which   is  an  old   one,   but
with  a new  urgency  and  in  a new  form.                         April  23
Send   Free   Copies   of   This   to  Friends    If    You   Send   Stamped   Addressed   Long   Envelopes
I.F. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
I.F.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................
City
_..........................Zone........_..State....................
4/2D/IB
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   .................................,.......................................—
Street    ......... _ .........................................................................
City   ........... _ .........................Zone.......—.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
Second  class
postage  paid
at    .
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
An  independent  bi-weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  55  in  the  U.  S.;
S6  in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED