I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963jun10.pdf

============================================================

US  Rejects  A   Castro  Olive Branch, P.  3
The  Remark  by  James  Baldwin That  Attorney  General Kennedy  Didn't Understand
Dr.  Kenneth  CLARK  [Professor  of  Psychology,   CCNY]:
What  do you  think  can  be done  to  change—to  use  your  term
—the  moral  fibre  of   America?
Mr.  James  BALDWIN: I  think  that  one  has  got  to  find
gome way of  putting  the  present  Administration  on the  spot.
One  has  got  to  force  somehow,  from  Washington,  a  moral
commitment,  not  to  the  Negro  people,  but  to  the  life  of  this
country.   It  doesn't  matter  any  longer  and I'm speaking  for
myself,  James  Baldwin,  and  I  think  I  am  speaking  for  a
great  many  other  Negroes,  too.   It  doesn't  matter any  long-
er  what  yon  do to  me;  yon  can  pnt  me  in  jail,  you  can kill
me.   By  the  time  I  was  17,  you'd  done  everything  that  you
can  do  to  me.   The  problem  now  is,  how  are  you  going  to
save  yourselves?    It  was  a  great  shock  to  me—I  want  to
say  this  on  the  air—the  Attorney  General  didn't  know—
Dr. CLARK: You mean the Attorney  General of  the  U.S.?
Mr.  BALDWIN: Mr. Robert  Kennedy—that  I  would  have
trouble  convincing  my  nephew  to  go  to  Cuba,  for  example,
to  liberate  the  Cubans  in  defense  of  a  government   which
now says  it  is  doing  everything  it  can  do, which  cannot  lib-
erate  me.   Now,  there  are  20,000,000  [Negro]  people  in  this
country,  and you  can't  pnt  them all  in jail.   I  know how my
nephew  feels,  I  know  how  I  feel,  I  know  how  the  cats  in
the  barbershop  feel.    A  boy  last  week,  he  was  sixteen,   in
San  Francisco   told  me  on  TV—thank  God  we  got  him  to
talk—maybe  somebody  thought  to  listen..  He  said,  "I  got
no  country.   I  got  no   flag."   Now,  he's  only  16  years  old,
and  I  couldn't  say,  'You  do.'   I  don't  have  any  evidence  to
prove  that  he  does.   They  were  tearing  down his  house,  be-
cause  San  Francisco  is  engaging  as  most  cities  are  engaged
in  something  called  urban  renewal,  which  means  moving
Negroes  out.    It   means  Negro  removal,   that  is   what  it
means.    The  Federal  government  is  an  accomplice  to  this
fact.    Now,  we  are  talking  about  human  beings.     There's
no  such  thing  as  some  abstraction  called  the  Negro  prob-
lem.     These   are  Negro  boys  and  girls  who  at   16  and  17
don't  believe  the  country  means  anything  it  says  and  don't
believe  they  have  any  place  here.
—Interview  by  WGBH-TV,  Boston, in  New  York  May  24
immediately  following   Mr.  Baldwin's  now  celebrated  inter-
view  with  Attorney   General Robert  Kennedy.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  13
JUNE  10,  1963
=
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
We'd  Be Better  Off Without  This  Inspection  Nonsense
There  is  good  reason  to  suppose  that  the  latest  Kennedy-
Macmilian  note  to  Khrushchev  on  a test  ban  proposes  that  the
deadlock  be  broken  by a scientific  study "to  determine," as  the
Associated  Press  reported  (Baltimore  Sun, May  31)  "whether
on-the-spot  inspections  are  needed  to  detect  sneak  atomic  ex-
plosions."     It  is  hard  to  decide  whether  this  is  just  a  ploy  or
serious.  What  makes  it  seem  a  ploy  is  that  the  Soviet  govern-
ment  has  several  times  declined  to  cooperate  in  joint  efforts
on  test  detection.    What  makes one  wonder whether  it  is seri-
ous  is  the  similar  secretiveness  of  our  own  government.    Is  it
ready  to  disclose  to  the  Russians  what  it  is  unwilling  to  tell
our  own  people?
Don't  Forget  Rusk's   Admission
Last  March  11,  for  example,  Secretary Rusk  told  a  hearing
before  Senator  Humphrey  that  our  capacity  for  detecting  vio-
lations  of  a  nuclear test  ban  are  "better  than  can  be  fully  dis-
closed."   Senator  Humphrey  has  been  trying  for   months   to
persuade   the   Administration   to   release   a   classified  report
showing  how  efficiently  we  have  been  able  to  monitor Russian
earthquakes  over  the  past  five  years.    Is  this  new  offer  of  a
scientific   study  only  another  ploy  our  military-scientific bu-
reaucracy  feel  sure  the  Russians will  reject?
The  truth is  that  the  human  race would  be  better  off  if  the
stubborn  and  secretive  great  Powers  agreed  to  a  test  ban with-
out  inspection.    Even  if  either  side  now  accepted  the  other's
number  of  on-site  inspections,  months  could  easily  be  spent
in  negotiating  the  "modalities"  of   inspection—how  large  an
area  would  be  covered,  how  the  inspection   teams  would  be
made  up,  what  would  happen  if  either  side  demanded  inspec-
tion  in  a  particularly sensitive  area  on  the  other  side's  terri-
Bef ore It  Is  Too Late
W.W.  Rostow popularized the  idea of  a  take-off  point
in  economic  development.    We   are—in  quite  another
and  sinister   sense—nearing   a   take-off   point   in   race
relations.     As   the   wave   of   Negro  demonstrations
spreads,  there  is  danger  that  some  unexpected incident
—the  assassination  of  a  beloved  Negro  leader,  the kill-
ing  by  police  of  a  child  demonstrator,  or  some  desper-
ate  act  by the  Negroes  themselves—may  set  off a series
of  race  riots  North  and  South.    To  guard  against   so
terrible  an  outburst,  to  open  a  channel  of  communica-
tion  between  the  races,  to  facilitate  friendly  dialogue
between  them,  to  set  an  example  for  similar  action  at
the  community  level,  we  urge  a  White  House  confer-
ence  as  soon  as  possible  of  white  and  Negro  leaders  to
form  a  national  inter-racial  committee.    No  new  civil
rights  bill  could  have  the  healing  effect  of  moral  lead-
ership  thus  brought  to  bear  at  the  highest  level.
tory,  etc.    Even  if  the  shoals  of  negotiation   were  navigated
and  a  treaty  adopted,  the  inspection  provisions  would   be  a
constant  source  of  suspicion  and  recrimination.    The  Admin-
istration's  experience   with  inspection   after  the   Cuban   crisis
should  be  a  lesson.    Every  time  Khrushchev   belched   after
dinner,  there  would  be  a  Keating  on  the  Senate  floor wavint
a  security  report  and  asking  why  we  were  not  digging  up  the
Kremlin   walls  to  determine  what  was  the  burp  which  ex
ploded  there  at  7:15   p.m.   Moscow   time  the  night  before
The  Russians  would  not  be  the  only  difficult  ones.'  Wait  unti  i
they  demanded   the  right  to-dig  around   near  a  secret SAC
base  out  west.
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  10, 1963
A  Good  Point  From  Which  to  Launch  A  Renewed  Attack  on  HUAC
JFK  Gives  Witch  Hunters  Power  to   Look  at  Everybody's  Tax   Returns
The   most  nauseating  political   event  of  the  fortnight  was
President   Kennedy's  action  in  signing  an  order  allowing  the
House   Un-American  Activities  Committee,   in   this   Congress
as  in  the  last,  to  violate  the  privacy  of  income  and  other  tax
returns.    This  new  order   gives  the   Committee  authority  to
engage  in  a  large  scale  fishing  operation   in  Federal   tax  rec-
ords  from  1947  to  1963.     "Any  information  obtained  by  the
Committee  is  confidential,"  the  AP  explained,  "although  facts
pertinent  to  an  investigation  may  be  reported   to  the  House."
That's  about   as  confidential   as  a  sewing  circle  secret.    Like
.his vote  to  override  Truman's  veto  of  the  Internal  Security Act
in  1950  and  his  silence  during  the  fight  against  McCarthyism,
this  again  shows  how  little  commitment  Kennedy  has  to  First
Amendment  rights.    Is  there  no  way to  challenge  this invasion
of  privacy  in  the  courts?    If  some  Congressman  introduced  a
bill  to  deny  indiscriminate  and  wholesale  access  to  tax  records
by  uny  committee,   it  would  be  a  useful  way  to  carry  on   the
fight against  the  un-Americans.  .  .  .  Or,  alternatively, a  Con-
gressman  might  demand  that  if  this  authority  can  be  used  to
look  for  financial  backers  of  liberal  and  Left  organizations,  it
ought  also  to  be  used  to  uncover  the  secret  financial  backers
—and  the  earnings—of   the   Birch   Society  and  other  crypto-
Fascist  groups.  .  .  .  Especially  now,  in  the  wake  of  Chairman
Walter's  death,  would  be  a  good  time,  and  this  order  a  good
occasion  for  a  counter-attack.  .  .  .
Blank  Check  Subpoenas
Although   Mr.  Walter  was  a  champion  of  strict  procedure
in  administrative  cases  involving  property  rights,  he   allowed
his  HUAC   staff   to  indulge  in  the   loosest  kind  of  practices.
A   sample   was   involved  in   a  case  decided   by  the   Supreme
Court  last  Monday  (Dawson   v.  Wheeler).  William  Wheeler,
an  investigator  for  the  Committee  in  Southern  California,  ob-
tained  a  number  of  blank  subpoenas  signed  by  Walter,   and
then  proceeded  to  fill  the  names  in  as he  pleased.    The  Solici-
tor  General  himself  conceded   on  appeal   that  no  such   power
had  been  delegated  to   Wheeler.
One   of   those   whose   names  had   been   filled   in,  a  certain
Admiral  Dawson,  was  never  even  called  by  the  Committee  to
Good  Question
Dear  Mr. Stone :
I   have   been   an   avid,   almost   incorrigible   reader   of
your  newsletter   for  the  past   several   years,   considering
you  one  of  the  most  objective  reporters   around   (prob-
ably  because  I  generally   agree  with  you).    I  would  like
to  ask  you  one  question,  however,  which  I'd  appreciate
your  answering  if  convenient—that  is,  why  do  you  por-
tray   President   Kennedy  as  a  man  that   would  like  to
implement  a  good  liberal  policy  on  all  fronts  but  hasn't
got  the  guts  to  do  it?    I  have  seen  no  indication  in  his
entire  career  that  he  has  any  real  liberal  sentiments  at
all,  on  anything.    He  seems  to  be  no  more  of  a  liberal
than   Governor  Rockefeller.     Is   it   true   that   he   is  a
well-intentioned  weak  man?    Or is  he  a   non-intentioned
non-entity?"
Robert  Hurwitt,
Searsdale,  N.  Y.
I  wish  I  knew.—IFS
testify.    But  Wheeler,  by  serving  this  unauthorized  subpoena
on  Dawson  at  the  latter's place  of  employment,  caused  his dis-
charge.    Dawson   sued  Wheeler   for  damages  and  lost  in  the
lower  courts.    One  of  the  questions  before  the  Supreme  Court
was   whether   a   Committee   investigator   under   such   circum-
stances  was  liable  for   injury   caused  by  illegal  and  malicious
issuance  of  subpoenas.    Justice Douglas  for  the  majority  held
that  the  Federal  Tort  Claims  Act  does  not  reach  that  far  but
Justice  Brennan  with  the  Chief   Justice  and   Black   protested
that  the  case  should  have  been  remanded  to  the  trial  court  to
see  whether  such  a  suit  might  not  be  entertained  under  Fed-
eral  common  law.
For  the  second  time  in  three  years  the  Supreme  Court  last
Monday  refused  to  hear  an  appeal   from  the  FCC's  practice
since   1958   of   requiring   applicants  for   licenses  to  answer  a
non-Communist   questionnaire.     Judge   Washington    in   the
Court  of  Appeals  protested   in  an  earlier  case  that  this  was
based   on   no   legislative  authorization.    The   practice  was  a
McCarthy  era  innovation.    No   political   tests  were   imposed
by  the  FCC  in  its  first  24  years  of  existence.    Black,  Douglas
and  Brennan  thought  the  appeal  should  have  been  heard.
Majority  of   Supreme   Court  Now  Ready   to   Outlaw   Electronic    Eavesdropping
While  the   Supreme   Court  6-to-3  on  May  28  upheld   the
use  of  a  concealed   recorder  to  take  down  a  bribe  offer  to  a
Federal  tax  agent,  the  lineup shows  that  there  is  now  a  ma-
jority  on  the  Court  against   electronic   eavesdropping.     The
majority  speaking  through  Mr. Justice  Harlan,  insisted  that
this  case  (Lopez  v.  U.S.)   did  not  involve  eavesdropping   at
all   in  the   proper  sense.     "The   government,"   the   majority
said,  "did  not  use  the  electronic   device  to  listen  in  on  con-
versations  it  could  not  otherwise   have  heard.     Instead   the
device  was  used   only  to  obtain  the   most   reliable    evidence
possible   of  a  conversation   in  which  the  Government's   own
agent   was   a  participant   and  which   that   agent   was   fully
entitled  to  disclose."
On  that  basis  Mr.  Justice   Black  went  with  the  majority.
Some   years  ago   Black   dissented   strongly   when   the   Court
(in  On  Lee  v.  U.S.)   refused  to  hold  that  Fourth   amendment
guarantees  were  violated  when  an  electronic  device  was  used
to   enable   a   Federal   agent   to   listen   in   from   outside   a
Chinese  laundry  on  a  conversation  between  a  narcotics  sus-
pect  and  an  informer  specially   wired  for  this   eavesdropping
operation.     Brennan,   Douglas  and  Goldberg,   dissenting  in
this  new  case,  argued  that  On  Lee  should  be  reversed.    The
Chief   Justice,   though   with  the  majority  in  Lopez,  agreed
with  the  dissenters that  the  Fourth  amednment  should  cover
electronic  eavesdropping.   With  Black,  this  makes  five  mem-
bers  ready  to  reverse   On  Lee  v.  U.S.   when  an   appropriate
case  arises.
"Electronic  surveillance,"   Brennan  said  for  the  dissenters
in  the  tax  bribe  case  "destroys  all  anonymity   and  all  pri-
vacy;  it  makes  government  privy  to  everything  that  goes on.
In  the  light  of  these  circumstances   I  think  it  is  an  intoler-
able  anomaly  that  while  conventional   searches  and  seizures
are   regulated    by   the   Fourth   and   14th   Amendments   and
wiretapping  is  prohibited  by  Federal  statute,  electronic   sur-
veillance   as  involved  in  the  instant  case,  which  poses  the
greatest  danger  to  the  right   of  private  freedom,  is   wholly
beyond  the  pale  of   Federal  law."    It  looks  as  if   it   won't
be  much  longer.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  10,1963
A.  I*  Strong  From  Peking  Reports  Split  Deep  and  U.S.  Postal  Censors  Like  Soviet's
Castro  Put   Out  An  Olive  Branch  to  U.S.   Before   Leaving  for  Moscow
On  the  eve  of  his  trip  to  the  Soviet  Union—so  we  are  in-
formed   by  a  trustworthy  source—Fidel  Castro  went   to   the
Swiss   Embassy  in   Havana,   which   represents   U.S.   interests
there,  and  proposed  that  he  visit  Switzerland  on-  his  return
from  Moscow  for  a  discussion  of  how  Cuban-American  rela-
tions  might  be  improved.  .  .  .  The  Swiss  were  ready  to  act
as  hosts  but  the  State  Department  turned  thumbs  down.  .  .  .
If   the  Kennedy  Administration  weren't  so  afraid   of  risking
some  leadership  on  this,  as  on  other  questions,  such  informal
discussions  could  have  been  used  (1)  to  explore  the  problem
of  compensation  for   expropriated   U.S.   property  owners  and
(2)   Cuba's  formal  offer  before  the  missile  crisis  last  Fall  to
consider   demilitarization   if   given   firm   international    assur-
ances  against  aggression.  .  .  .  This  hitherto  unpublished   story
gives  added  interest  to  the  fact   (see  box  below)  that   Castro
in  his  main  speech  at  Moscow  May  23  spoke  of  his  desire  for
normal  relattions  with  the  U.S.  .  .  .
A  Victory  for   Khrushchev
Castro's  original  itinerary  was  to  have  included  Peking,  Al-
geria  and  Sweden  as  well  as  Moscow.   .  .  .  We  are  told  he
wanted  to  visit  Sweden  for  purposes  of  trade  and  to  demon-
strate  his desire  for  close  ties  with  the non-aligned  world.  . . .
But  the  Swedish  trip  was  dropped   after   the  Swiss  visit  fell
through.    The  Russians  talked  him  out  of  a  trip  to  Peking,
and  the  visit  to  Ben  Bella,  whom  Castro  admires  more  than
almost  any  other   leader   in  the  world   today,   was  then   also
dropped  in  order  to  have  a  face-saving  excuse  for  not  visiting
China. ...  In  the  giant  contest  between  Peking  and  Moscow
for  leadership  of  the  Communist  world,  Castro's  signature  on
the  joint  communique  in  Moscow  upholding  peaceful   coexist-
ence  is  regarded   as  bigger  victory  for  Khrushchev   than   the
adhesion  of  the  Indonesian  Communist  Party  to  Peking's  side.
.  .  .  Castro  today  is a  symbol  to  the  youth  of  the  Soviet  bloc
of  revolutionary purity;  the  Chinese  made  criticism  of  Khrush-
chev's  conduct   in  the  Cuban   missile  crisis  a  main  point  of
attack;  to  have  Castro  turn  up  on Khrushchev's  side  is a  defeat
for  Mao.  .  . .
Slight  Crack  in the  Iceberg?
West  Coast  business  interests  anxious  for  revival  of
trade  with  China  have  encouraged  the  formation  of  a
Committee  for  the  Review  of   Our  China  Policy,  with
former   Congressman  Charles  0.   Porter  of  Oregon  as
co-chairman.    The  Committee  feels  slightly  encouraged
because  of  a  letter  from  McGeorge  Bundy. Porter  asked
permission  to  send  a  plane-load of  business  men  to  the
Canton  Trade  Fair  next  Fall,  or  alternatively,  to  meet
with  Chinese  representatives  in  Hongkong.    His  letter
was  sent  to  the  President  March  26.   The  reply,  from
Bundy,  was  dated  May  17.    It  said  a  reply  had  been
delayed  pending a review  of  policy  "which  is  still  under
way."    In  the   meantime  public  discussion  of   foreign
policy,  "and  particularly  our  policy  toward  the  Peiping
regime,"  Bundy  wrote,  "is  most  desirable."  This  might
portend   a  slight   crack  in   the   iceberg   of   our  China
policy.    We  wait  to   see   the   outcome   of   that   policy
review.
The  May  15  issue  of  Anna  Louise  Strong's  newsletter   from
China  (her  address  is 9  Tai  Chi Chang,  Peking),  reports  that
the  split  between   Peking   and  Moscow   is  as  fundamental  as
that  between  the  2d  and  3rd  Internationals,  and  later  between
Stalin  and  Trotzky.    She terms  it  the  third  of  Maxism's  Three
Great   Debates. ...  In  a  private  letter  to  us  she  complains
that  while  the  Chinese  are  publishing  what  the  other  side  is
saying  in  this  debate,  the  U.S.  postoffice—like  the  Russian—
is  returning   undelivered  pamphlets   sent  here   explaining   the
Chinese  side.  .  . .
The   monolithic   Communist   world   of   Stalin's   day  is  dis-
appearing.  . . . Thorez  in a  closing  address  to a  3-day meeting
of   the   Central   Committee   of   the   French   Communist   Party
(Le   Monde,  May  15)   said  the  idea  of  a  one-party   State  was
"a  Stalinist  error."  .  .  .  While  supporting  Khrushchev   on
peaceful   co-existence  he  upheld   creative  freedom   for   writers
and  artists. ...  So did  the  Italian   Communist  leader,  Togli-
atti,  in  his  interview  with  K.  S. Karol  (New   Statesman,  May
24),  where  he  defended  Nekrassov,  Vozniessenski  and  Yev-
tushenko.  .  .  .  It's  only  in the  Kremlin  that  Stalinist   stuffiness
hangs  on    ....
What  Castro  Said  in  Moscow About  His  Desire  for  Peace  With  the  United  States
"The   U.S.   maintains  a  rigid  economic  blockade  of  our
country  and  applies  pressure  on  all  countries  under  its  in-
fluence  to  hinder  trade  with  Cuba.   Thousands  of  counter,
revolutionary  elements  are  receiving  military  and  subver-
sive   training   on    U.S.    territory.    Counter-revolutionary
agents  and  arms  are  being  contiually smuggled  into  Cuban
territory.   Yankee  warships  and  aircraft  systematically vio-
late  our  sea  and  air  space.    Recently,  a  pirate  plane  from
an  American  base  bombed one  of  our  oil  refineries.    Finally,
the  U.S.  continues  to  occupy  a  portion  of  our  territory  on
which  it   has  a  military  base  where  murderers   of  Cuban
workers  have  gone  unpunished  and  from  which  saboteurs
infiltrate   our   country   and   all   sorts   of   provocations   are
staged.
"In  the  face  of  this  policy  of  aggression,   Cuba  has  de-
clared  its  wish  to  live  in  peace  and  maintain  normal  rela-
tions   with   all   countries  of   the   continent,   including   the
United  States.    An  example is  Cuba's  relations with Canada
and  Mexico, Brazil  and  other  Latin American countries. The
U.S.   people   themselves  have  suffered   from  their   govern-
ment's  economic  aggression  against  Cuba.   They  have  been
deprived   of   such  products  as   our  tobacco,   unequalled  in
quality  by  any  other  available  on  the  world  market,  and
sugar  for  which  U.S.  consumers will  this  year  pay  close  to
one  billion  dollars  more  as  a  result  of  the  very  high  prices
the   U.S.  government's  scheming  against   Cuban  sugar   has
caused  on  the  world  market.
"The  U.S.  people are  themselves  victims of  this  unreason-
able  policy.    U.S.  policy  against   the   Cuban  revolution  is
completely  bankrupt  and  the  U.S.  government  has  suffered
a  major  political  defeat  as  a  consequence.    Hatred  for  the
Cuban  revolution  is   being  fanned  by  unscrupulous   politi-
cians   who   are   blackmailing   the   present    administration,
pushing  it  to  the  brink  of  war.
"Our  people,  like  all  people  of  the  socialist  camp,  want
peace  to  forge  ahead  and  build  a  better  life.    (Applause)."
—From  Premier  Castro's  speech  in  Moscow  May  2S.   Our
press  ignored  it  except  for  a  brief   item  in  the  New   York
Times  May  24  which  came,  significantly   enough,  from   Reu-
ters,  the  British  news  service  not  AP  or   UPI.
5   *
6   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  10,1963
Angry  Letters  from  Constituents  Behind   Dodd's  Partial  Switch  on Testing
The  U.S.  Not   Solely  Dependent  on  the  Seismograph  to  Police  A  Ban
(Continued   from   Page   One)
The  truth  is  that  a  nuclear  test  ban  agreement  can  be  ade-
quately monitored  without  inspection.  The  truth  appears  when
one  juxtaposes  two  questions.    The  first  is—can  one  be  sure
of  detecting  every underground  test?   The  answer  is  no.    Ob-
viously   if   a  test   is  made  small   enough   and   buried   deeply
enough,   it  might  escape  detection.    The  other  question  is—
could  a  cheating  power  be  sure  of  escaping  detection?     The
answer  is  no.    The  earth's  crust  is  so  anomalous,  the  eccen-
tricities  so  strange,  that  no  cheating  power  could  be  sure  of
escaping   detection.     Only   recently,   for   example,   a   North
Canadian  station  with  ordinary  seismic  equipment  detected  a
five  ton  shot  (five  tons,  not  kilotons)  more  than  2500  miles
away  in  Oklahoma.   Then  also,  as we  know  but  won't  explain
publicly,  the  preparation  of  underground  testing  is  a  complex
affair,  calling  for  a  large  mobilization  of  men  and  materials.
It  would  be  unlikely  to  escape  detection  by  our  electronic  and
other   intelligence   in   the   Soviet  Union.     We   are  not   just
dependent   on  the  seismograph.
Inspection  Is  Not   Disarmament
Somebody  has  got  to  begin  to  educate  the  American public
to  these  facts  before  we  have  another  round  of  testing.    Ever
since  Dulles,  the  U.S.  public  has  been  conditioned  to  think  of
inspection  as  somehow  a  form  of  disarmament;  it  is  indeed
the  only  form  acceptable  to  the  Pentagon  and  the  CIA.    We
are  asking  the  Russians to  take  the  risk  of  remaining perma-
nently  behind  in  certain forms  of  military nuclear  technology
by  agreeing  to  a  test  ban.    That   risk  for  them  is  far  more
real  than  the  bugaboo  of  cheating.
A  breakdown  into  a  new  round  of  testing  would  be  a  ca-
tastrophe.    The   Russians  may  resume  atmospheric  testing  in
the  Fall.    Their  military  are  as  ready  to  discount  the  dangers
of  fallout  as  ours;  their  logic  is  the  same  as  the   Pentagon's.
Against  the  backdrop  of  so dire  a  possibility, the  Dodd-Hum-
phrey  resolution  for  a  test  ban  on  atmospheric tests  only  seems
a  parochial  maneuver  in  the  little  egocentric  hothouse  of  the
U.S.  Senate.    A  flood  of  protesting  letters—800  is  the  figure
The  Poison and The Peril Rise
"Measurements  of  strontium-90  in  food,  supplies  and
the  total diet  in  the  U.S.  show that  the  levels  rose  from
a  value  of  4-8  strontium  units  (SU)   in  1961  to  8-13
SU  in  1962,  and  may  rise  to  a  peak  value  of   50  SU
in  1963."
—Federal  Radiation  Council  Report,  June  1.
"The  accelerating  pace  of  weapons  testing  over   the
past   decade  is   self-evident  from   this   table.    The  40
megatons   of   fission   yield   detonated  in   the  inclusive
years  1957-8  is  only  slightly  less  than  the  sum  total
of  all  tests  conducted  up  to  the  beginning of  1957. Simi-
larly,  the  101 megatons detonated in  the  inclusive years
of  1961-62  is  slightly  larger  than  the  total  of  all  test-
ing  conducted through  1958.   These  yields,  when com-
pared  to  the  10  megatons per  year* reference condition
developed   by   the   Joint  Committee   in   1957,  suggests
that  unusually  high levels  of  stratospheric fallout could
be  anticipated in  1963  and  1964."
—Introductory   statement  as  the  Joint  Committee  on
Atomic  Energy   opened   radiation   hearings  June   3.
—A  panel  of  experts  in  1957  figured  that  10  megaton
a  year  was  a  safe  upper  limit  for  testing.
around  the  Capitol—has  forced  Dodd  to  make  this  gesture,
and  Humphrey  has  joined  in  though  he  knows  the  Russians
have  rejected  this  offer  before  and  will  again.    They  claim  it
puts  them  at  a  disadvantage,  that  we  have  the  know-how  and
the  resources for  underground  testing.  Humphrey  joined Dodd
because  the  latter  can  no  longer  picture  the  agitation  for  a  test
ban  as  a  Communist  plot  when  he  himself—though   only  in
this  limited  form—recognizes  its  logic.    But  the  Republicans
who  blocked  our  adherence  to  the  League  of  Nations   after
World  War  I  also  recognized  the  logic  of  a League,  and  killed
the  treaty by  "reservations"  not  by frontal  attack.   The  Dodd
resolution  gives  him,  as  it  does  such  other  sponsoring  Sen-
ators  as  Keating  and   Scott,  Dominick  and   Lausche,  an   out
with  pro-test  ban  constituents.    But  it  must  seem  to  the  Rus-
sians  only  another  bit  of  evidence  that  we're  not  really  serious
either  about  a  test  ban  or  disarmament.
Of    AH  Those  Who  Mourn  Pope  John,  How   Few   Will   Take   to  Heart   His   Message?
I.F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ............................*.......................................•........~......._
Street    .............................,.........................................—........—
City   ...........—.........................&>ne......._..State....................
6/10/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ........................................................................—.
Street   ........._.................._....................................................
City  ...........—.........................Zone.......—.State.........™.......
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
LEStone'sBi-Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15.  0.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618 Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  J5  in  the  17.  S.;
$6  in  Canada;    SIO  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:   S16  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED