I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963may27.pdf

============================================================

Surprise  —  Castro Praises Kennedy,  See Pps.  3-6
AEC  Pentagon  Plot  to  Upset  Nuclear  Test  Talks?,  Page  2;  A  Blow  to  The  McCarran  Act,  Page 7
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,   NO.  12
MAY   27,   1963
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Must  We  Wait  for  Blood  to  Be  Shed?
Two  notable  trips took  place  in  the  past  fortnight.    Gordon
Cooper  orbited  the  earth  22  times  without  mishap  and  Presi-
dent  Kennedy  visited  the  South,  making three  speeches,  with-
out  once  uttering  the  word  "Negro"  or  mentioning Birming-
ham.    The  two  feats  were  not  strictly  comparable.    The  for-
mer  was  technological  while  the  latter  might  be  described  as
a  triumph  of   reticence,  but   both   set  records.     Two   of   Mr.
Kennedy's   talks  were   in   Alabama,  where   police   dogs  have
been   bitten   by  Negroes   recently  but   Mr.   Kennedy   avoided
offense   to   either   dog   or   Negro   lovers.     In   his   speech   at
Muscle  Shoals,  he  confined  himself  to  the  TVA,   and  in  his
speech   at  Huntsville,  to  the  nation's  space  program,    offering
moral  leadership  on  both  issues.
Like   A  Certain  Predecessor
Mr.   Kennedy's   discretion  in  Alabama   recalled   one  of   his
predecessors,  Dwight  Eisenhower,  who  also  showed   a  remark-
able equanimity in  the  midst  of  racial  rioting,  as  Mr.  Kennedy
often   remarked  in  his  election  campaign.     In  Mr.   Kennedy's
third   speech,   across  the  border   in  Tennessee,  which   is  half
Southern,  Mr.  Kennedy  half  touched  on  the  race  issue.    Like
General  Eisenhower  he  made  his  main  theme  the  importance
of  law  and  order,   but  he  did  not  harp  on  the  subject.    At
the  very  beginning   of  his  speech   Mr.   Kennedy   noted,  with
exemplary  delicacy,  that  "This  Nation   is  now  engaged   in  a
continuing  debate  about   the   rights  of   a  portion   of   its  citi-
zens."    Toward  the  end  he  ventured  to  assert  that  while  no
one  could   "deny  the  complexity  of  the   problems   involved",
no   one   could   "gainsay   the   fact   that   the   determination   to
secure  those  rights  is  in  the  highest  traditions  of   American
freedom."     In  between  he  talked  about  Cordell  Hull,  J.  Percy
Priest,   Commodore    Vanderbilt,   Jefferson  and   John    Adams
with  quotations   from  Goethe  and   Aristotle.     He   quoted   so
copiously   from   the   latter   on   the   problem   of   the   Olympic
Games,   that   a   confused   listener   might   have   imagined   that
maybe  he  was  exercised   over  discrimination  against  the  Spar-
tans.    One  sentence  in  Mr.  Kennedy's  Nashville  address  stood
out  as  another  example  of  that  mellifluous   counterpoint   af-
fected  by  his  speech  writers.     "For   liberty  without  learning  is
in  peril,"  Mr.  Kennedy  declared  lyrically,  "and  learning  with-
out  liberty  is  in  vain."    The  applicability  to  Birmingham  was
not  immediately  clear  but  the  epigram  should  give  equal  pause
to  Bull  Connor  and  the  Rev.  Martin  Luther  King.  .  .  .
There  may  be  tragedy  around  the  corner.    Only  the  Negro
knows   what   savagery   lies   barely   below   the   surface   among
Southern   whites.     Only  the  Negro  knows  what   murderous
resentments  have  piled  up  among  his  own  people.    It   would
take  very  little  to  set  off  a  chain  of  racial conflagrations  North
Only  Way  Now  To Save  Jim  Crow
The  logical  answer  of  the  white  supremacists  to  the
Supreme  Court's  sit-in  decisions   is  to  stage  sit-ins  of
their  own  in  the  legislatures  of   Mississippi, Alabama
and  other Southern States  until  all  Jim  Crow laws have
been  repealed.    The  moral  of  the  decisions  is  that  Jim
Crowism  in  restaurants  and  lunch  counters  can  only  be
enforced  where there  are  no  Jim  Crow laws  and  officials
make  no  statements,  as  they  did  in  New   Orleans,  to
encourage    discrimination.     Otherwise,   as    the    Court
ruled,  the  refusal  to  serve  Negroes   is  so  linked  with
State  action  as  to  run  afoul  of   the   14th amendment,
which  guarantees  the  equal  protection  of  the  laws. Only
where  there  is  no  official  Jim  Crow  policy  may  owners
of  private businesses,   under  these  rulings, exercise  their
right   to  refuse  to  serve  some  of  their  customers.    To
this  muddled acceptance  of  a  private right  to  discrimi-
nate,   we   prefer   the   clear   reasoning   of   Mr.  Justice
Douglas's   concurring  opinion.    "When  the  doors   of  a
business  are  open  to  the  public," he  wrote,  "they  must
be  open  to  all  regardless  of  race  if  apartheid  is  not  to
become  engrained in  our  public places."   This  will  some
day be  the law.
and  South.    The   Birmingham  demonstrations  are  tailing  off
into  disillusion.    The  moderate  whites  there,  as  elsewhere  in
the  South,  have  shown  themselves  spineless.    Their  insistence
that  they had  promised  to  hire only  one  Negro  as  a  sales clerk
in  one  store  left  the  Negro  moderates   out  on  a  limb.    The
decision   to  expel   or   suspend    1,081   Negro  students  because
they   demonstrated   for   their   rights   was  brutal,  and   Martin
Luther  King's  reaction  to  it  weak.    Given  Negro  bitterness
and  State  police  brutality and  anything  can  happen.
The  national  leadership  ought  to  be  as  big  as  the  danger.
Two  steps  could  give  Negroes  some  hope.    One  would  be  a
Presidential  announcement  that  a  special  squad  of  Federal  in-
vestigators—not  FBI  men,  the  Negroes  don't  trust  them*—
were  being  sent  South   to  prepare  civil  rights  prosecutions  in
the  wave  of  beatings,  shootings  and  unlawful  arrests  by  police
officials   during   the   past   two   years.    The   other   would   be  a
White  House  conference  of  leaders  from  both  races North  and
South  to  map  an  end  to  racial  discrimination  altogether.  Must
we wait for  blood  to  be shed?                                            May  21
—  "Colored  Birminghamians  frankly  said  they  did  not  have
too  much  confidence  in  FBI  agents  stationed  in  Birmingham.
They  go  fishing  and  play  weekend  baseball   with  these  local
cops,'  one  observer  said,  'you  know  they  aren't   going  to  do
anything to  embarrass  their  friends."
—Afro-American,   May  14.
"The  wording  of  the  announcement   [that  FBI  men  were  'on
the  scene  and  offering  assistance']  suggested  they  would  act
only  at  the  request  of,  and in  cooperation  with, local  officials."
—New  York   Times, May  IS.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 27,  1963
The  Mystery  of  The  Three  Suddenly  Cancelled  Nevada  Tests,  Two  of  Them  Atmospheric
Was  This  An  Intrigue  by  AEC  and  Pentagon  to  Blow  Up  Test  Ban Hopes?
Though  ours  is  supposed   to  be  an  open   society,  The   Case
of  the  Three  Cancelled  Nuclear  Tests  indicates  that  not  only
the  public  but  even  the  President  knows  too  little  about  what
really  goes  on  in  our  government.     At  his  press  conference
on  May  8,  Mr.   Kennedy  said  he  was  not   hopeful   about  a
test  ban  agreement  and  feared  that  "perhaps  the  genie  is out of
the   bottle   and  we'll  never  get   it  back   in   again."     But  he
thought   a   new   round   of   testing,    i.e.   atmospheric    testing
"would  be  a great  disaster."
Like  the  Poor  Unmarried    Mother
Mr.  Kennedy  would  hardly  have  spoken  in  this  way  if  he
had  known  that  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  the  De-
fense  Department  that  very  afternoon  were  issuing  a  press  re-
lease  announcing  the  resumption  of  atmospheric  testing.    It  is
true  that  the  one  full  atmospheric  nuclear  test   involved  was
only,  as  the  unmarried girl  said  of  her  baby,  a  little  one.    But
the  announcement   brought   an  instant  sour  reaction  in   New
York,  where  the  UN  General  Assembly was  convening  a  spe-
cial  session,  and   in  Geneva,  where  angry  neutrals  talked  of
bringing  the  matter  before  the  UN,  especially since  our  under-
ground   tests  this  year  had   already  put   us  in  violation  of   a
resolution  passed  by  the  Assembly  last  year  (with  U.S.  con-
currence)   asking  all  countries  to   refrain   from   nuclear  tests
after  January  1,   1963.
The  joint  announcement  by  AEC  and  Defense  was  worded
very  trickiJy.    It  did  not  speak  of  atmospheric  tests  at  all.    It
spoke   of   three   "sub-kiloton   detonations"   to   be   set   off   in
Nevada   this  month.     It  said  that  two  of  these,  one  nuclear
and   the   other   chemical  but   "with   a  short-lived  radioactive
tracer",  would  be  "detonated   as  ground  bursts".    The   other
nuclear   device  would  be  set  off  "in   a  shallow   underground
emplacement."     Such  shallow  underground   explosions  often
burst  and  vent  their  radioactivity  into  the  atmosphere.    "Most
of  the   radioactive  particles  produced   by  the  nuclear  detona-
tions,"  the  press  release  went  on  reassuringly, "are  expected  to
fall  back  to  earth  inside  the  Test  Site."    As  for  that which  fell
outside,  "precautions  will  be  taken,"  it  said,  "to  hold   off-site
radiation  well  below  established  safety  criteria."    The   release
also  said  "the  two  surface  detonations"—again  avoiding  the
term  atmospheric—"will  provide comparative information  on
the  effects  of  nuclear  and  chemical  high  explosives."
Except   for   the  New   York   Herald-Tribune,   most  newspa-
pers  and  wire  services  missed  the  significance  of  this  release,
as  its  wording  intended  them  to.     Few  caught  on  that  this
meant  resumption  of  testing  in  the  atmosphere,  with  all  the
risk  of  provoking  the  Russians  to  join  in.    The   Herald-Trib-
une  May  9  front  paged  a  story  by  Don  Irwin,  "The   Test  Ban
Genie  Is  Out—We'll  Fire  Two."  Radio  Moscow  warned  in  an
English   broadcast  May   12,  'By  beginning   a  new   series  of
atmospheric  nuclear  blasts,  the  U.S.  is  imposing  on  the  world
a  nejv  round  in,the  atomic  arms  race.    However,"   it  added,
"one  thing  is  clear.    The  USSR  is  not  going  to  stand  idly  by
watching  the  U.S.  perfect  its  nuclear  weapons.  .  .  ."
It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  AEC  and  Defense  would  ven-
ture  on  an  atmospheric  test  without  White  House  clearance.
It  is  possible  that  just  as  the  wording  of   the  announcement
fooled  most  of  the  press,  the  details  may  also  have  been  cal-
Why  Cheating  Is  Difficult
"Under  a  test  ban  agreement,  the  probabilities   work
against   trie  potential  violator,  not   for  him.    The   vio-
lator  does  not  wish  to  be  caught  an  average  number
of  times  or  a  certain  percentage  of  the  time.   Since  the
whole  point  of  cheating  is  ruined  the  very  first  time  the
violator   is   caught,   he   must   take   the   most   extreme
sensitivity  reading  on  record  and  then  add  a  margin  to
that.    But  he  must  go  even  further.    If  you  are  using
your  own  equipment   [for   detection],  the  violator  never
knows  how  good  it  is.    He  must  assume  it  is  at  least  as
good  as  his—and  then  add  another   safety  margin  to
that.     He   must   beware   of   lucky   or  rare  pickups   by
your  side  and defectors  on  his.    By  this  time,  his  tests
are  so  small,  his  precautions   so costly, his security needs
so  great  and  the  stakes  of  getting  caught  so  high,  that
the  cheating   game  may   not  be  worth   the  candle—it
costs  too  much  to  play  for  what  one  can  hope  to  gain."
—Proxmire   (D.   Wis.)   in   a   notable  Senate   speech
May   17  advocating  a  nuclear  test  ban  agreement.
culated  to  slip  past  scrutiny  by White  House  staff.  "Many  high
level  American political  advisers,"  Murray Marder  reported  in
the   Washington   Post  May   15,  "were   caught  by  surprise  to
read  that  the  U.S.  was  going  to  conduct  a  nuclear  test  above
ground."     On   April  24  Kennedy   and  Macmillan  had   sent
Khrushchev  a  letter  urging  action  on  a  test  ban.    It  hardly
made  sense,  before  he  replied,  to  announce  atmospheric  test-
ing  on  May  8  and  give  the  Soviet  military and  the  Kremlin
hard-liners  another  chance  to  argue  that  the  West  was  insin-
cere  and  Khrushchev  too  trusting.    In  any  case,  on  May  13,
after  a  reply  reached  the  White  House  from  Khrushchev,   the
AEC  and  the  Defense  Department  jointly  announced  cancella-
tion  of  tests.    No  explanation  was  given.    If  the  Joint   Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy  were  the  independent   watchdog   it
was  supposed   to  be,  it  would  investigate  this  strange   affair.
Was  this  a  bureaucratic intrigue  by  those  in  the  AEC  and  the
Pentagon  who  want  resumed  atmospheric  testing  to  precipitate
a  new  round  «nd  blow  up  the  nuclear  test  talks ?
Neither  the  press  nor  White  House  officials   are  discussing
this  affair   honestly.    We   call  attention  to  an  interview  with
the   President's   Special   Assistant   for   Security   Affairs,    Mc-
George  Bundy,  which  was  published  in  the  Washington  Star
May   19.    Three,  other   newspapers—the   Detroit   News,   the
Newark   News  and  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch—held  the  in-
terview  jointly  with  the  Star.    None  of  them  had  their  facts
straight,  as  indicated  by  their  final  question,   "Why  did   the
President    cancel   three    underground    nuclear    test    shots?"
Instead  of  correcting the  error,  Mr.  Bundy withheld  the  fact
that  two  of  these  shots  were  to  have  been  in  the   atmosphere.
"It   became   apparent,"   he   replied,   "that   there   was   a   real
chance  that  the  Soviet  Union  might   be  going  to   large-scale
atmospheric   testing   again  and  might   have  had    considerable
propaganda   success   in   pretending   that   the   reason   for   that
serious  decision  was  this  very  small  set  of  quite  unimportant
U.S.  tests.    They  would  be  useful,"  he  continued,   "but   they
are  not  urgent  in  any  major  sense.    In  this  situation,  the  pos-
sible   international   political   effects   became   more   significant
than  the  immediate  advantage  of  holding  the  tests,  so they  will
not  be  conducted."    This  was  hardly  the  whole  truth.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  27,1963
Full  Text  of  Premier  Castro's  Interview   With    ABC-Television
Castro  Says  He  Needs  Soviet  "Technicians" Till  Assured  of  Peace
Because  it  opens  the  door  to  reconciliation  with  the   U.S.
and  because it  was  so swiftly   brushed  under  the  rug  by  our
press,  we  thought   our  readers  would  like  to  see  for   them-
selves  the  full   text  of  the  interview  Premier  Fidel   Castro
of   Cuba  gave  Lisa  Howard  of  ABC-TV  as  broadcast   May
10.    It   strengthens   our   belief    that   the   peace   movement
should  press  our  government   for   two  steps  toward   better
relations   witli  Cuba.    If   Lawyer   Donovan  could  success-
fully   negotiate   release  of  prisoners   (including   Cl A   men),
why  can't  he  go  back  and  explore  (1)  on  what  terms  Cuba
would   compensate   U.S.  property   owners  and  (2)   on  what
terms  it  would   be  ivilling  to  negotiate   demilitarization   of
the  island,  as  proposed  by  the  Cuban  Council  of   Ministers
to  the  UN  last  September.     Of  course  recognition,   resump-
tion  of  trade  and  guarantees  against  U.S.  aggression  would
have  to  be  part  of  a  settlement  but  this  is  how  we  ended
our  quarrel  with  Cardenas  after   he  seized  U.S.  oil  proper-
ties  in  the  late  30's.   A  demilitarized   Cuba  would  end  fears
of  a Russian  base  on  our  doorstep.
We  are  happy  to see  that  similar  proposals  were  made  by
Norman   Thomas  in  a  recent  letter  to  the  President.    This
letter  also  recalled  that  last  Nov.   27,  after   Mikoyan    left
Cuba,  the  Cuban  newspaper,   Revolucion,  organ  of   the   Fi-
delista  movement,   offered    to  accept  on-site  inspection  by  the
UN   if  we  in  return  would  allow  similar   UN  inspection  of
"anti-Castro   training   camps  on  U.S.  soil  for  mercenaries,
spies  and  saboteurs."    Thomas  asked  the  President,   "Would
you  not  even  now  earnestly   explore  this  possibility   of  back-
ing  up  your  own  position  against   military   intervention  by
effective     agreement   for   two-sided   UN   inspection—almost
certainly   more   effective     inside   Cuba  than  our   continuing
air  reconnaissance'?"   Thomas  said  "This  plan  would  leave
no  excuse  for   the  presence  of  Russian  military   in  Cuba"
and  "could  speed   the  setting  up  of  a  nuclear  free  zone  in
Latin  America   such  as  five  of  our  neighbors  requested."
Finally  as  the  crowning  point  of  negotiation,  the  veteran
Socialist   leader  suggested,   "after    the  denuclearization    of
Cuba  and   the  withdrawal    of   the  Russian  military    force,
might  you  not  propose  to  turn  over  our  Guantanamo  base
to  be  made  some  sort   of  a  hemispheric  center  for   health
and  recreation?"
LISA   HOWARD:   Doctor  Castro,  were  the  missiles  placed  in
Cuba   because   Khrushchev   wanted   them   there   or   because
you  asked  for  them?
In  other  words,  in  this  situation  where  did  the  initiative
lie?
PREMIER   FIDEL   CASTRO  OF CUBA:   Tell   her   that   I   do   not
feel  that  this  is  the  right  moment  to  hold  a  detailed   discus-
sion  on  those  historic  events.
However,  she  must  also  understand that  at  the  same  time
I  am  extremely  interested  that  all  those  details  should  be-
come  known;  but  tell  her  the  following:
After  a  few  days  the  Soviet  and  the  Cuban  governments
both  realized  that  we  had  to  take  certain  measures  because
of  the  imminence  of  an  invasion of  the  country  that  we  felt
had   been  planned  and  was  going  to  be  carried  out.    These
measures  had  to  come  from  the  idea  of  persuading  the  ag-
gressors  that  an  invasion  of  Cuba  would  inevitably  lead  to  a
third  World  War.
It  was  on  the  strength  of  that  conviction  that  we  took  the
de  facto  measures we  took—we  did  not  waste  time  with  mere
words—we  merely  had  to  stop  the  possibility  of   aggression.
From   that   point  of  view  you  can   say  that  it   was  simul-
taneous  action  on  the  part  of  both  governments.
HOWARD :  Doctor  Castro,  looking back  on the  October  crisis
with  hindsight,  do  you  think  it  was  wise  to  have  permitted
the  missiles to  be  placed  on  Cuban  soil  in  the  first  place?
CASTRO:  Tell  her  that  looking backwards  and  placing  our-
selves  in  the  same  circumstances  as  those  of  the  time,  I  still
feel  that  it  was  correct.
HOWARD:  Why?
CASTRO:  I  had  already  told  you  earlier  that  we  began  with
the   need  to  take  certain  measures  in  order  to   force   the
United  States  to  put  aside  their   ideas  of  invading  Cuba.
The  fact  that  aggression   was  being  prepared   was  made
obvious  later   and  was  proved  by  no  less  a  person  than  the
Chairman    of    the    counter-revolutionary     council    himself.
Surely  that   is  the  best   proof  that  anyone  could  expect  to
offer.
HOWARD:   What   is  the  purpose   of  the   Soviet  troops  that
now  remain  on  Cuban  soil?    Do you ...  Do you really  feel
that  this  large  a  military   presence   is  necessary  for  the  de-
fense  of  the  island?
CASTRO:   Tell  her  that  if  they   call  troops  the  technicians
that  are  still  in  Cuba  at  this  moment,  that's  an  entirely
different   thing.
But  you  must  explain  to  her  that  these  experts  and  these
technicians   are  here  in  our  interest  in  the  interest  of  Cuba.
We  are   having   both   our   personnel   and   our   armed   forces
trained  by  these   technicians.
I  consider,  and  you  must  make  her  understand   this,  that
in  the  present  circumstances,  and  until  we are  truly  and  sin-
cerely  assured  of  a  policy  of  peace  towards  us,  we  will  have
need  of  those  technicians   to  train   our   personnel   and   our
armed  forces.
HOWARD:  Are  you  telling   me,  Doctor   Castro,  that  there
are  no  Soviet  troops  and  armaments  on  Cuban  soil?
For  Peace  Between   USSR  and  China
CASTRO:   You  call  Soviet  troops;  we  call  technicians.    You
understand?
And  really  they  are  training  our  troops.    Is  clear?    Really
they  are  training  our  troops.    They  are  the  instructors   of
our  troops.    That  is  the  truth.
HOWARD:  And  they  are   not  Soviet   troops   themselves?
CASTRO:  They  are   Soviet  technicians.    I  think  that  if  we
are   attacked   those   technicians  are   going   to  fight  with   us
against  any  aggressor.
HOWARD:   No  member  of  the   Communist  bloc  can   ignore
the  ever-widening  ideological  schism  between  Red  China  and
Soviet  Russia,  with  Mao  Tse-tung's  emphasis  on  war   as  a
useful  instrument  of  national  policy,  and  Mr.  Khrushchev's
conviction  that  the  world  must  develop along  lines  of  peace-
ful   coexistence.
As  between  these   two   schools  of  thought   where  do  you
stand,  sir?
CASTRO:   Yes,   it   is  true.     There   are   certain    differences
between  the  points  of  view of  the  leaders  of  the  Soviet  Union
and  the  leaders  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China.
But  I  do  not  believe that  those  differences  of  view  are   in
any   way   different   from   those  that  exist   between,  for   ex-
ample,  DeGaulle or  Kennedy.   I  believe that there  is  no abso-
lute  or  insoluble  contradiction  between  the  views   expressed
by  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  views  expressed  by  the  Peoples
Republic  of  China.    And   I   do  not   believe  for   one  minute,
nor  could  I  accept  or  be  convinced,  that  the  policies  of  China
are  intended  to  set  up  war  as  part  of  a  national  policy.
Since  that  is  what   I  believe,  then   obviously  our  position
must  be  to  struggle   in  order  to  strengthen   and  improve  the
relations  between  these  two  great  countries  of  the  Socialist
camp.
That  is  our  position.
HOWARD:  It   has   often   been  reported   that   your   alliance
with  the  Communists inside  Cuba  is  a  precarious   one.    And
in  January   of   1962  you  denounced  the   Cuban  Communists
for  shunting aside  the  Fidelistas  and  taking  all  the  top  posts
for  themselves.
What   is  the   situation   now  today   in   Cuba   between   the
Fidelistas  and  the  old  line Communists?
CASTRO:  Tell  her  that  as  the  revolution  advances  the  unity
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Wcckly,  May  27, 196.
Denies  Political  Strings  Attached  to  Aid  from  Soviet  Union
of  all  the  revolutionaries becomes  greater  and  stronger  every
day.
The  criticisms that  we leveled  at  first  against  the  sectarian
positions  that  existed  in  the  country  were  intended  merely
to  overcome  and  to   correct  certain   mistakes  that   at  that
time  divided  us.
Once  we've  overcome those  mistakes  then  the  unity  among
all  the  revolutionaries  in  Cuba  today  is  greater  than  it  ever
was  before.
I  have  heard  that  in  the  United  States  they  speak  many
times  about  division  between  old  and  young  communists.    I
can  tell  you  that  it  is  only  a  theory ...  a  theory.    That  is
not  true.    If   somebody  in  the  United  States  is  thinking  to
solve  our  problem  based  in  that  division,  is  a  mistake.    Do
you  understand?   And  do you think that  your  .  .  . the  people
of   United  States   will   understand   my   English?
HOWARD:   I  think  they  will.    Dr.  Castro,  in  an  interview
in   Le   Monde,  you  criticized   the  leaders  in  the  Soviet  satel-
lite  countries  for   their  total   subservience   to  Moscow.     Are
you  able  to  be  any  more  independent  when  you  are   almost
totally  dependent  on  Moscow  for  your  economic  survival?
CASTRO:  Tell  her  that  I  don't  know  whether  she's   aware
of  the  fact  that  when those  interviews were  published in  the
French   newspaper  Le   Monde   I  made  a   clarification   right
away.    I  stated  that  I  had  given  no interview to  any  reporter
of  that  newspaper.
Castro  Claims  He  Was  Misunderstood
We  did  hold  an  informal  conversation  at  the  home  of  the
Director  of  the  newspaper  Revolution  and  during  that  con-
versation  we  talked  of  many   subjects.
But  there  were  no translators  present  while we  were  talk-
ing  and  since  the  reporter   did  not  know  Spanish  very  well,
many  of  the  subjects that  we did  refer  to  in  our  conversation
were  misunderstood  by  the  reporter   and   he  then  published
them  in  a  completely  different   way  from   the  way  in  which
we  had  discussed  them  at   the  home  of  the  director   of   the
newspaper.    It  was  that  misunderstanding on  his  part  that
misled  the  readers.
HOWARD:  Then   I   shall   rephrase   my   question.
CASTRO:  Really  I  rejected   .  .  .
HOWARD:   Let  me  just  ask  this  then,  do  you  leel ...  I
say,  I  will  rephrase  my  question  and  ask  do  you  feel  that
Cuba  has  any  chance  of  being  independent  of  Moscow when
you  are   almost  totally  dependent  on  Moscow  for   your  eco-
nomic  survival?
CASTRO:   Tell   her   that   as   far   as   we  are   concerned   the
Soviet  Union  never  attached  any  political  conditions  whatso-
ever  to  the  economic  assistance   she  offers   us.
It  is  true  we received and  we  are  still  receiving  assistance,
but  this  is  assistance  that  is  basically  economic and  it  comes
primarily   from   the   Soviet   Union,   and   we   are   extremely
grateful  for  the  help.
But,    I  repeat,  that  assistance  has   never  been  sent  to  us
with  any  conditions.
You  can  tell  her  too,  that  in  the  United  States  they  use
certain  slogans,  certain  cliches,  certain  ideas  that  they  accept
almost  as  though  they  were  axioms  or  truisms.
But   I  believe  that  what  is  thought   in  the  United  States
and  the  way  things  are  analyzed there  will  finally  lead  them
to  understand  exactly  how and  why  Cuba  is  acting  as  she  is.
We  are  merely  and  completely  exercising  our  rights  to  self-
determination.
HOWARD:  Cuba  now  finds  itself  isolated  in  the  hemisphere.
No   longer  on  speaking  terms   with   most   Latin   American
countries;  the  victim  of  an  economic  blockade;  and  with  al-
most  all  of  your  support  coming  from  ports  six  and   seven
thousand  miles  away.    Can  you,  Doctor  Castro,  possibly  con-
tinue   to   exist   as   a   viable   economy  in   this   isolated    at-
mosphere?
CASTRO:  Yes,  it  is  true,  it  is  entirely  true.    We  are  the
victims  of  a  great  economic  blockade.    We  are   the   victims
of  a  general  program  of  isolation  on  the  part  of  a  powerful
nation.    But, anyway,  despite  all  this  we  have  met  the   diffi-
culties.    We  have  overcome many  of  these  obstacles  and  de-
spite  all  this,  again,  we  are   sure  that  we  will  manage  to
get  ahead.
HOWARD:   Doctor  Castro,  since  you  assumed  power  nearly
300,000  people have  fled  the  island, and  the  recent  emigrants
have   been  doctors,  lawyers,  teachers,   as   well   as   workers.
How  do  you  account  for  this  exodus, and  the  exodus  that  is
still  continuing?
CASTRO:  Tell  her  that   I  think  her  figures  are,  well,  shall
we  say,  exaggerated.    Not  that  many  have  left   the   island.
Nor  is  it  true  that  they  were  all  rich  or  all  poor.     The
majority  of  the  Cubans that  have  left  the  island  were  of  the
higher   and   middle-classes.     They   were   people   who  in   the
past   occupied  high  posts.
But  furthermore,  remember  that  from  Cuba  to  the   United
States  there  has  always  been  a  very  great  current  of  emi-
gration.    However,  before   the  revolution  there   was  a  limit
sot  to  the  number  of  Cubans  that  could  enter  your  country.
After  the  revolution  there  was  no  limit.    There  was  no quota
to  the  Cuban  emigration  to  the  States.
I   am   convinced  that   if   the   doors  of   all   the   other  Latin
American  republics were to  be  allowed  to  open  for  completely
free  emigration to  the   United  States   of  America  more  peo-
ple  would  leave  those  countries than  have  so  far   left  Cuba
for  the  United  States.
I'll    go  further,  I'll  give  you   an   example.     Take   Puerto
Rico  for  instance.    The  United  States  constantly  argues  and
says  that  in  Puerto  Rico  they  enjoy  a  very  high  standard  of
living,  that  there  is  set  up  a  very  sound  social  and  political
system,  and  yet  we  know that  more  than  one  million  Puerto
Ricans  have  fled  from  their  island  to  the  United  States  of
America.
Now,    if  we're  going  to  judge  the  system  or  the  state  of  a
country  on  the  strength  of  the  number  of  persons  that  leave
or  escape  from  that  country  to  go  somewhere  else,  then  we
must  realize  that  Puerto  Rico  is  the  worst  country  of  all.
HOWARD:   But  perhaps  I  should  have  phrased  it  differently.
Many   of  the   most   recent   emigrants—and   I   saw   many  of
them   in   Miami—were  not   people  of  money;   and   many  of
them  had  originally  been  with  the  revolution.     How  do  you
explain  that  emigration?
Some  Americans  Emigrated,  Too,  In  1776
CASTRO:  Well,  because  there  are   some  people  who  desire
to  emigrate  to  the  United  States,  in  search  of  a  better  stand-
ard  of  living  perhaps.    And  also,  there  are  cases  of  persons,
who   because  of  disagreements   with   the   revolution,  decided
to  leave  the   Island   to  go  to  foreign   countries.
But  in  many  cases  that  argument  is  a  mere  pretext.   The
political  pretext  is  merely   added.    The  true  reason   under-
lying  their   emigration   is  economic.
Now,   I  can assure you that  those  who left  the  island  before
the   revolution   were   purely   the   poorer   classes.    That   was
prior   to  the  revolution.    The  emigration   that  followed  the
revolution,  on  the   whole,  is  the   emigration   of   the   higher
classes.
When   the   revolution   occurred   in   the   United   States  of
America,  for  example,  don't  forget,  there  were  many   Amer-
icans  who left  your  country  and  who  went  to  Canada.    They
were  people  who  didn't  like  the  American  way  of  life.    They
were  people  who  didn't  agree  with  the  independence  of  the
United  States.
HOWARD:  Dr.  Castro,  the  United  States  and  other  nations
of  the  OAS  are  deeply  concerned  about  the  exporting  of  your
revolution  to  other   nations  in  the  hemisphere,   the  training
of   subversive   agents,   the   sending   of   subversive   material
throughout  the  hemisphere,  and,  in  fact,  the  San  Jose  meet-
ing  pledged  to  stop  the  flow  of  men,  funds,  arms  and  propa-
ganda   to  other  nations   of  the  hemisphere   from   Cuba.
Why  do  you  feel  at  this  early  and  very   difficult  stage  of
your  own  development  that  it  is  necessary  to  export  your
revolution  to  other   nations   throughout   Latin   America?
I.  K.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postajre  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at,  5618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and   edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  55  in  the  U.  S.;
S6  in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   SIS  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Wcckly,  May  27, 1963
Willing  to  Discuss  Compensation   for  U.S.  Property  Owners
CASTRO:   Tell   her  that   I   thought   it   was   the   other   way
around.    I  had  thought  that  it  was  those  countries that  were
more   concerned   with   exporting   counterrevolution   to  Cuba
rather  than  we  to  them.
Tell  her, too, that  there  is no proof in existence that we have
sent  weapons  or  arms  to  any  other  country  of  Latin  Amer-
ica  in  order  to  start  revolutions  there.
On  the  other  hand,  we  do  have  thousands  of  proofs  that
the  arms  and  the  weapons   sent  by  the  United  States  and
many   other   countries  into   Cuba  have  all  been  intended  to
raise  counterrevolutions  here  in  Cuba.    In  our  Island.    That
is  the  truth  of  the  story.
Ask  her  why  they  always  look  at  things  from  a   different
angle?    If  they  want  to  know  what  we think  we'll  tell  them.
We  think  that  revolutions  cannot   be  exported.     We  believe
that  revolutions either  do  occur  or  they  don't  occur.    If  con-
ditions  of  an  objective nature  are  conducive  to  the  revolution
then  the  revolution  will  take  place  in  that   country.
Furthermore,  there  has  also  to  be  an  adequate  degree  of
political  awareness  in  the  people  of  a  country  so  that  they
are  able  to  carry  out  a  revolution.    But  that  you  cannot ex-
port  anymore  than  you  can  export  counterrevolutions.
Now  I  ask  myself   a  question.    If  a  country  feels  that  it
has  the  right  to  export  counterrevolutions what  right   has
that  country  to  deny  another  country equal  rights  to  export
revolutions?
Revolution  Not  Exportable
HOWARD:  The  point  is,  are   you  exporting  counterrevolu-
tion?    The   San   Jose   meeting  pledged  to   stop   the  flow  of
arms,  men,  funds   and   material,   subversive,  from   Cuba  to
other  nations.
Now  why  do  you  think  they  made  such  a  pledge?   Are  you
exporting   revolution   or   are   you  not  exporting revolution?
CASTRO:  We  cannot  be  exporting  something  that   cannot
be  exported.
HOWARD:   So  your   answer   is  that   you   are   not   training
men   and   you  are   not  sending  arms   or   material   to   other
countries  to  create  revolution?
CASTRO:   Well  there   is  one  thing  you  must  bear  in  mind.
She  spoke  of  propaganda.     That's  one  thing.    We  do  have
radio  stations.    We  do  have  speeches   of  the  revolutionary
leaders  and  information  from   Cuba  itself   and  we  make  all
this  known  in  Latin   America.
But  this  is  something   very   similar   to  what   occurs   with
the  radio  stations  in  the  United  States  in  Florida  for  ex-
ample  and  many  other  parts  of  the  country  where  you broad-
cast  programs  where  you  publish  where  you  make  known  the
points   of   view   of   your   country  of   the   United   States  of
America.
And  when  all  is  said  and  done  you  know  we  do not  possess
the  enormous resources  of  the  United  States  government, nor
do  we  possess   the  training   centers  that  the   United  States,
has  so  we  cannot  compete  with  your  country  in  the  training
of  people  from   all  over  Latin  America.
HOWARD:   But   as   a   dedicated   Marxist-Leninist   don't   you
feel  that  it's  important  and  necessary  to  export  your  revolu-
tion?    Isn't  that  part  of  your  philosophy?
CASTRO:   What   I  think  is  that  the   idea   ought  to  be  de-
fended  if  you like  the  idea  . . . and it  is  what  you do,  too.
And  your  idea  and  the  ideas  of  the   United   States,  your
ways  of  living  .  .  .  many  of  your  ideas  didn't  come  from
Europe?
HOWARD:   There's  a  body  of  liberal  opinion  in  the   United
States  which  contends  that  you  turned  to  Soviet  Russia  be-
cause  you  had   no  alternative,   because  by   1960  the   United
States  had  closed  its  doors  to  you.    And  they  believe that  if
the   United   States   could   have   accepted   the    expropriations
with,  of  course,  a  pledge  by  you  for  compensation, you would
have  remained  with  the  West,  or  at  least  neutral.
Are  they  correct?    Or  was  your  revolution  inevitably  go-
ing  to  turn  in  this  radical  a  direction?
CASTRO:   Tell   her  that   it   is  true  that   when   the   United
States  suspended  the  sugar  quota  of  Cuba,  when  the  United
States  closed  all  the  doors  to  trade  between  Cuba  and   the
United  States,  Cuba  had  no  other  alternative  from  the  eco-
nomic  standpoint  than  to  tighten  its  economic relations  with
the  Soviet  Union.
She   now  wants   to   know  what   would  have   happened   if
those  measures  had  not  been taken;  if  the  United  States  had
accepted  expropriation.     Well,  I   don't   know.    But   I   don't
believe  that  you  can  answer   a  question   like  that  just  cate-
gorically.
We  can't  know  exactly  how  events  would  have  followed  if
such  a  stand  had  been  taken  by  her  country.    But  I  do be-
lieve,  and  of  this  I'm   convinced,  that  relations   would   have
been  very  different  from  what  they  are  now.   They  certainly
would  not  have  been  the   same.
Then   she  wants   to   know   whether   our   revolution   would
have  been  a  radical  revolution.   I  believe  it  would  have  been.
It  was  going  to  be  a  radical  revolution.   But,  naturally,  I
believe,  that  it  was  the  hostile  attitude  of  the  United  States
that   contributed  to  making  it  more  radical.
HOWARD:  Then  you're  saying  that  in  the  very  beginning
you   did   not   intend   to  break   off  relations  with  the   United
States.
CASTRO:   No.
HOWARD:  Do you, in  fact,  ever  intend  to  issue  compensation
for  the  expropriated  lands  and businesses?
CASTRO:  To  whom?
HOWARD:   To  the  United  States companies.
CASTRO:   Ah,  the   United  States  companies!    Because  we
have   compensated  many   Cubans—businessmen.     We   have
compensated  them.
And   in  respect,  in  regards  to  the  American   interests,  do
they  want  to  speak  with  us  about  that?    If   they  want  to
speak  with  us  about  indemnification,  in  honorable conditions
for   Cuba  and  for  the  United  States,  we  can   speak.
HOWARD:  This  is  a  question  you  are  willing  to  discuss?
CASTRO:    Yes.
HOWARD:  Before  your  revolution  succeeded, Dr.  Castro  you
often  spoke  of  that  revolution  and  the  aims  of  that  revolu-
tion  in  terms  of  liberty and  freedom.    You  pledged elections
within  eighteen months,  and  you  pledged to  uphold  the  rights
of  opposition parties  even  during  the  transitional  stage.    But
there  have  been  no  free  elections  and  there  are  no opposition
parties.
Why,    Mr.  Prime  Minister,  did  you  create  a  revolution  so
completely  different  from  the  -one  that  you   promised?
The  Promises  He  Kept
CASTRO:  Tell  her  that  we  made  a  revolution  .  .  .  one that
has  meant  freedom   for   the  exploited   peoples  of  our   island
.  . . for  the  peoples  who had  no schools,  who had  no  hospitals,
who  had   no  employment  or  jobs,  who  did  not   possess   the
land  they  worked.  We  did  not  plan  and  we  did  not  carry  out
a  revolution  granting  freedom  for  the  exploiters  nor  for  the
privileged  classes.
We  promised  our  people  agrarian  reforms—we've   carried
that  promise out.   We  promised  them  urban  reforms.     We've
lived  up  to  that  promise,  too.    And  we  promised  that  we
would  wipe  out  illiteracy,  and  that   promise   we  have   also
fulfilled.
HOWARD:   But  what  about  free  elections  and  what   about
opposition  parties?    Because  that  was  part  of  your  pledge,
too.
CASTRO:   In  your   point   of  view  that  is  the   only  way   to
freedom  and we are  trying  to find different  ways  .  .  .
HOWARD:   No, no I'm  quoting  you . . . I'm  quoting  you . . .
those  were  your  words   in  the   Sierra  Maestra.    You  said
there   will   be  elections  within   eighteen   months,    opposition
parties   during   the   transitional   stage.     These   were   your
words,  not  mine.
CASTRO:   But  the  situation  changed.  The  situation   changed.
Because  since  the  beginning  we  have  been  under  condition
of  war  against   us.    Not  a  normal  situation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  27, 1963
Castro  Praises  Kennedy  for  Ending  Attacks  Against  Cuba
And  the   situation   of  a  revolution,  if  you  analyze   in   the
history   all   the   revolutions—French   revolution  and   Soviet
revolution  and the ... all the  revolutions  in the  history, you
can  see  that  the   situation   changed  very   much.    And  new
conditions  appeared.
In  Cuba  while we  were  doing  the  revolution new  situations
appeared.     I  think  we  have  walked  long  distance,  long   dis-
tance  in  the  revolution,  and  your  idea  about  freedoms  are
not  the  only  idea  that  exist.
HOWARD:   Do  you  intend  eventually  to  have  free  elections
and  opposition  parties  and  a  free   press?
CASTRO:  Well,  you know  .  .  .  not  in  the  bourgeois  concept
of  elections.    We  have  a  revolutionary  concept.    And  I  be-
lieve  that  for  those  false   Democratic  institutions  to  exist—
well  well—no  they  can't  really  exist  in  the  middle  of  a  state
of  exploitation.    They  simply  cannot  exist.
Ignorance  and  want  can  exist.    You  have  first  of  all  to
liquidate  one  in  order   to  allow  true  conditions  of  freedom
really  to  exist.
We  simply  don't  use  the  same  blueprint.
HOWARD:   Basically  I  was  wondering  did  it  inevitably have
to  go  in  the  direction  with  the  communist  bloc?   If  the  situ-
ation   had  been  different  at   a  particular   point—might  you
have  not  gone  with  Soviet  Russia?
CASTRO:   Well,  I  think  that  the  radicalization  make  us  to
seek  the  friendship  of  the   Soviet  Union.    It   was  our  very
own  necessity  that  led  us  to  it.    Our  needs  made  us,  forced
us  to  improve  our  relations  with  the  Soviet  Union.
Sees  Rapprochement   Possible
Anyway,  we  truly  believed  and  we  felt  that  our  country
should  enjoy  relations  with  all   countries,  with   all   nations
and  we  should  enjoy  all  types  of  relations—diplomatic  rela-
tions—political   relations—commercial   relations—but   it  was
the  attitude  of  the  United  States  towards  us  that  forced  us
to  this.    The  United  States  only  wanted  one  single  type  of
relations,  fundamentally economic.
HOWARD:  There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  conjecture  as  to
precisely  when  you  became  a  Communist.
In   1960,  as  late  as   1960,  you  were  still  saying  that  you
were  not  a  Communist  and  that  you  felt  that  Communism
violated  basic  freedoms.
But  then  on  December  2nd,  1961,  you  declared  that  you
were  a   Marxist-Leninist.     Why  and   when   did  you  change
your  mind  about Communism?
CASTRO:   Tell  her  that  the  ideas  of  Marx  have   influenced
and  today  have  great  influence  all  over  the  world ...  in-
cluding   among   men,  statesmen,   politicians   who  don't   call
themselves  Communists  nor  Marxists.    At  least  they  haven't
done  so publicly.
Many  of  his  ideas  have  been  quoted  and  accepted.     I  re-
ceived   my   first   impressions   of   Marx—
HOWARD:  My  question  was  .  .  .  why  Dr.  Castro  changed
his  mind  .  .  .  why  he  changed  his  mind  about  Communism?
CASTRO:   Well,  tell  her  that  from   the  time  when  I  was  a
student  when  I  first  began  to  read  the  textbooks  of  Marx,  I
could  see  the  influence  of  Marx  and  his  ideas.    Although,  at
the  time,  I  was  not  a  Communist.
I  did,  however,  have  a  growing  conviction  of  the  advan-
tages  of  the  socialist   system  as  against  the  ideas  of  capital-
ist  systems.    And  then  in  my  mind  too  there  took  place  a
process  of  development  of  the   idea.    But   what  contributed
most  to  my  change  was  the  revolution  itself—the  experience
we  gathered   during  the   revolution  itself.    And,  of  course,
especially   all  that  we  learned  from   the   United  States  of
America.    How  a  capitalist  and  powerful   country  treats  a
weak  and  an  underdeveloped  nation.    And,  comparing  that
with  the  way  a  social  country,  like  the  Soviet  Union  behaved
towards  our  underdeveloped nation.
HOWARD:  Dr.  Castro,  do  you  feel  there  is  any  basis  for   a
return  to  normal  relations  with  the  United  States  and  Cuba
with   you  as   Prime   Minister?     And  do  you  desire   such   a
rapprochement?
CASTRO:  I  think  it  is  possible  the  United  States  govern-
ment  wish  and   in  that  case   we  would  be  agreed  to   speak
and  to  find  the  basis.
HOWARD:  What  conditions?
CASTRO:   It  is  not  only  our  matter.
Oh!    The  fine  points.
For  example,  the  conditions  ought  to  be  discussed.    But  I
have  not  studied  that  possibility.    But  I   think   that  as  a
basis  the  points  that  Cuba  established  when  the  crisis.
And  I  think  that  something  has  been  advanced.    I  think
the  United  States  has  given  some  steps  in  the  way  of  peace
and  I  have  looked  at  the  steps  with  good   eyes.
HOWARD:   Do  you  think  right   now  with  the   exchange  .of
your  prisoners   and   our  prisoners   who  were   down  here  in
Cuba  that  these  recent  events  show that  there  is  a  beginning
of  a  rappi-ochement?
CASTRO:  It  is  the  beginning, ...  It  is  possible  if  we can
use  it,  if  the  United  States  wants  it,  it  is  the  beginning  of
better  relations.    Tell  her  that  it's  a  way  of  diminishing  ten-
sion.   That  it's  one way—and  just  as  all  the  other  steps that
the  United  States  government  has  given  are  other  steps—
like  stopping  the  piratical   attacks  against  Cuba—All   these
are  steps  in  the  right  direction.
I   believe  that  they   are   wise  and   intelligent   steps.    Be-
cause  the  enemies  of  Kennedy want  to  force  him  into  a   cor-
ner  .  .  .  into  an  abyss,  and  that  abyss  is  the  case  of  war
with  Cuba.
HOWARD:  If   the   United   States   was   willing  to   end   the
blockade  in  exchange  for  a  withdrawal  of  all  Soviet  troops,
or,  however  you call  them,  technicians,  .  .  .  and  armaments
from  Cuban  soil.   And  an  end  to  the  exporting  of  your  revo-
lution  from   here  to  other   nations   in  the  hemisphere   .  .  .
would  you  be  willing to  agree  to  these  two  things.
CASTRO:   Tell   her  that  I  have  already   answered  her   re-
garding  the  exporting  of  revolutions.  And  I  have  also  spoken
to  her  about  the  question  of  technicians.    But  I  think  that
all  these  problems ...  all  these  problems  of  the   technicians
...  of  the  Soviet  technicians  are  of  interest  to  us—to  the
Soviet  Union.    They're   of  interest  to  the   United  States  of
America.   And, of  course,  they're  also ...  to  Cuba,  of  great
interest.    They   can   be  discussed.     And   we  should   discuss
them  among  all  three  of  us.
HOWARD:  Are  you  anxious  to  sit   down  and  talk   to  Ken-
nedy?
Wants  Three  Way  Discussion
CASTRO:   I  don't  think  it  is  good—the  United  States  wants
to  discuss  it  with  the  Soviet  Union  without  us.    To  discuss
without  us  ...    without  us  with  the  Soviet  Union.    Tell  her
I  think  we must  discuss  all  these  problems  between  all  of  us.
HOWARD:  Then  you  would  like  to  sit  down  and  talk   with
Kennedy?
CASTRO:   I  cannot  answer  it  ...    if  I  don't  know  one  thing
about  that  .  .  .  about  what  President   Kennedy.  .  .  .
HOWARD:  In  other  words  you  must  know  what   President
Kennedy  thinks?
CASTRO:   (nods).
HOWARD:  Mr.   Prime  Minister,  do  you  think   it   would  be
possible  some  day,  in  the  future,  for  you  to  steer  a  neutral
course ...  to  become  the  Tito  of  the  Caribbean?
CASTRO:   Tell  her  that  our  ideal  is  not  neutralism   .  .  .  but
peace.    When  there  is  peace  among  all  countries  .  :  .  when
there  are  no blocs,  then  there  will  be no neutralism   .  .  . that
is  our  ideal.    But  I  don't   certainly  want  to  set  myself   up
as  any  Tito  of  the  Caribbean  area.
HOWARD:   Mr.  Prime  Minister,  if  you  could  live  over  again
the  last  five  years  would  you  do  things  differently?
CASTRO:   I  think  now  we  have  more  experience.    It  is  pos-
sible  that  we  could  do  better.     But  I  think  with  the   same
intentions.
Somebody  asked  it  to  (Benjamin)  Franklin  . .  .  something
like  that.    He  said  he  would  live  again  how  he  had  lived.
And   that   is  my   answer.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  27,  1963
Conservative    Jurist   Sets  Up  Guide  Lines  That  Would   Cripple  Witch   Hunting
Court  Reverses  First  Two  SACB  Registration  Orders  Against  Party  "Fronts"
In  the  long  and  bitter  fight  waged  in  the  late  40's  to  pre-
vent  passage  of  the  Mundt-Nixon   bill,  which  became  the  In-
ternal  Security Act  of  1950,  its  sponsors  were  forced  to  make
one  concession  after  another  to  allay  criticism.    A  footnote  to
the  decision  just  handed  down  by  the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals
here  in  the  case  of  the  National  Council  of  Soviet American
Friendship  recalls  one  of  these.    Nixon,  then  a  Congressman,
told  the  House  that  his  bill  even  required  that  when  the  Sub-
versive  Activities  Control   Order  ordered   any  organization   to
be  registered  as  a  Communist   front,   the   Court   of   Appeals
"must  find  that  the  decision  by  the  board  is  sustained  by  a
preponderance  of  the  evidence,  a  standard which  I  may  say,"
Nixon   continued,  "goes  much  further   than  any  law  on   the
books  governing  appeals  from  administrative  bodies."
The  Court  Takes  Them   Literally
Now  the  Court  of  Appeals,  in  its  first  two  rulings  on  Com-
munist  "fronts,"  is  taking  these  and  similar  safeguards  in  the
statute  at  their  face  value,  and  applying them.    As  a  result  the
first  two  decisions  deal  an  almost  mortal  blow  to  the   "front"
provisions  of  the  Act.    The  decisions  not  only  reverse  regis-
tration  orders  by  the   Board   but   set  up   judicial  guide-lines
which  must severely limit  its witch hunting activities.
The  first  decision, against  the  defunct  Labor  Youth  League
(see  box below),  rules that  the  Board  may not  register  organi-
zations  which  no  longer  exist.    This  should  lift  a  pall  of  an-
xiety  from  persons  who  belonged  to  them  in  the  past,  and
remove  the  fears  of  exposure  which  the  FBI  and  the  Immigra-
tion  Service  have  used  to  create  and  coerce  informers.     The
second   decision,   in  the  National   Council   case,   sets  up   such
strict  evidentiary  standards  that  the  Board   will  be  unable  to
blacklist  organizations  merely  because  their  viewpoints  paral-
lel  "party  line."    The   decisions  are  given   added  weight  by
the  Judge who  wrote  them.    Senior  Judge Prettyman  is one of
the  most  respected   conservatives  on  the  Federal   bench.     He
spoke  for  a  unanimous  panel  of  three,   the  other   two   being
Chief  Judge  Bazelon,  a  liberal,  and  Judge'Danaher,  a  conser-
vative.
Judge  Prettyman  ruled  that  since,  as  its  sponsors   claimed,
this  was  not  meant  to  be  "a  punitive  statute  for  past   affairs",
the  government  must  prove  that  an  organization  is  presently
a  front  in  order  to  make  a  registration  order   stick.    It  must
also  prove,   as  the   statute  requires,   that   the   organization   is
"directed,  dominated  or  controlled"  by  the  Communist   Party.
Curbing  The  Witch  Hunters
"The   theory   of   the   statute   respecting   Communist
fronts  is  that  the  Communists  disguise  their  true  ob-
jectives  and  foster  organizations  with  declared  objec-
tives  which  are  attractive.    Thus,  almost  by   definition,
many   members  of   a   Communist    front   are   unsympa-
thetic  to  Communist   aims  or  Communist   philosophy....
"Is  a  person  who  was  a  member  of  the  Communist
Party  in  1942  or  1944  to  be  presumed  to  remain  a  mem-
ber  in  1951-3?     The  former   were  war  years,  in  which
the  U.  S.  vigorously  sought  the  continued  help  of  So-
viet  Russia. ...  To presume  that  merely  because  a  per-
son  was  a  Party   member   in  the  years  of  the  war  he
continued  to  be  a  member  after  1950,   paying  dues  and
subject   to  Party  discipline,   would   be  unrealistic,   con-
trary  to  the  probable   factual  situation,  and  unjust.  .  .  .
"The   rudimentary   elements   of  justice  deny   that   a
person  can  be   found   formally   and  officially   to  be  a
member  of  the  Communist  Party  merely  upon  the  state-
ment   of  one  person  that  another  person  told  him  so.
.  .  .  Finding  these  individuals  to  be  Party  members  is
not   the   mere  assignment   of   a   colloquial   appellation.
The  imagination   runs   riot   if   we  contemplate  the  re-
sults  of   a  ruling   that,   if   a  highly  placed  member  or
officer  of  some  organization  says  so-and-so  is  a  member
of  that  entity,  such  a  statement  relayed  to  the  witness
stand  by  a  third  person,  without  more,  is   acceptable
proof.  .  .  .  Promoters  are  notoriously  optimistic  about
the  membership  of  the  organizations  they  sponsor."
—National   Council  of  American-Soviet  Friendship   v
Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.
The   evidence  must  be  more  than  hearsay  and  the   fact   that
certain  persons   were  Communists  in  the  war  years  will   not
support  the  presumption  that  they  remained  so  in  the   changed
circumstances  of  the  50's.    In  addition  to  reading  the   statute
strictly,  the  Court  regarded  with  astringent  and  skeptical  eye
the  testimony  of  a  whole  squad  of  well-known  FBI  informers
headed   by  Louis  Budenz.    Judge  Prettyman   found  their  evi-
dence  of   direct   Party  control   "insubstantial."      He   declined
therefore  to  infer  control  from  the  parallel  between   the  Na-
tional   Council's   views   and   those   of   the   Communist  Party.
This  strict  standard  of  proof   should   doom   the  hopes   of  the
Act's   sponsors.     They  hoped  that,  using  "proof   by  parallel-
ism",  the  Subversive  Activities  Control   Board  would  be  able
to  blacklist  many  kinds  of   radical  and   liberal  organizations,
denying  their   members   the  right  to  travel   and   to  work   in
government  or  defense  plants.
Why  The  Court  Refused  to  Order  the   Registration   of   A  Defunct   'Front'
"Meaningless  in  many  ways  though  the  formal   listing  of
a  non-existent  organization  on  the  register  would  be,  the
people  who  had  in  years  past  been  members  .  .  .  would  be
enveloped  in  a  cloud,  faced  with   the  possibility  of  drastic
events  if   some  Government   official,   or  some  unneighborly
neighbor,  or  some  uncordial  fellow  employe  should  choose  to
accuse  them  of  holding  illegally  a  Government   or  defense
plant   job.    The  [Subversive  Activities  Control]  Board  says
that  if   sanctions  under  this  statute  are  sought  against  a
person,  alleging  him  to  be  a  member  of  a  Communist   front,
he  can  defend  in  any  criminal  action  brought  against   him;
he  can  show  he is  not  a  member.    But  the  application  of  the
sanctions  does  not  always  depend  upon  criminal  prosecution.
A  discharge  from  a  job,   a  refusal  of  a  passport,  or  a  re-
fusal  of  a  job  applied  for  do  not  involve  criminal  proceed-
ing."
—Judge  Prettyman  in  Labor  Youth  League  v.  Subversive
Activities   Control   Board.     The   reasoning   by   which   the
Court  reversed   the  Board's   order   to  register   the    defunct
Labor  Youth  League  would  seem  to  apply   also  to  six  other
defunct   alleged  "front"   organizations  against  which  orders
to  register   are  pending   on  appeal.     These   are   the   Civil
Rights  Congress,  the  Jefferson    School  of  Social  Science,  the
California   Labor  School,  the  Washington  Pension   Union,
the  Colorado  Committee  to  Protect  Civil  Liberties  and  the
American  Peace   Crusade.
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  May 27,1963
AFL-CIO  Goes  to  Bat  Against  Bill  Allowing   Discharges Without  Hearing
Debate  on  NSA  Bill  Shows  Diminished  Fear  of  HUAC  in  The  House
A  declining  fear  of  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee
may   be  seen  in  the  fight  waged   on  the  floor  of  the  House
the  other  day  against  HR  334,  a  bill  sponsored  by  Chairman
Walter  and  HUAC.    When  this  bill  came  up  in  the  closing
days  of  the  last  session,  only  24  members  voted  against  it.    It
was  too  late  for  action  in  the  Senate  and  died  with   adjourn-
ment.   This time the opposition  was almost  doubled:  40  mem-
bers  voted  'Nay'  and  four  others  were  paired  against  it.   There
is  a  chance  to  block  passage  in  the  Senate.
An   "Eavesdropping"  Agency
The  bill  is  a  bill  to  regulate  the  hiring  and  firing  of  em-
ployees  by  the  National  Security  Agency.    The  NSA's  opera-
tions,  as one  sponsor  of  the  bill  put  it,  "are'so  highly  sensitive
that  no outsider  can  actually  describe  its activities."    The  hear-
ings  on  the  bill  were  so  secret  that  even  members  of  Congress
were  refused  access to  the  transcript.    The  NSA  is, from  jour-
nalistic  accounts,   a  gigantic   electronic   "eavesdropping"   ap-
paratus  for  listening in  on  Soviet  communications.   This  made
it   all   the   more   shocking   when   two   employes,   Bernon   F.
Mitchell  and  Wm.  H.  Martin,  both  sex  deviants,  turned   up
as  defectors  in  Moscow  in  August,  I960.
It  turned  out  that  these  two  men  had  been  hired  without  a
full  field  investigation,  and  it  was obvious that  NSA's  internal
surveillance  was  inefficient;   a  shakeup  followed   the  news  of
their  defection.   There  was  no  opposition  to  the  bill's  provi-
sion  making  full  field  investigations mandatory.    Opposition,
arose  to  a  provision  giving  the  Secretary of  Defense  summary
power  to  dismiss  any  NSA  employe  without  a  hearing  of  any
kind.
Pressure   from   government   employe   organizations,   which
suffered   from   summary  loyalty-security  procedures,   led   the
AFL-CIO this year to  oppose  the  bill for  the  first time.   Three
senior  Democrats,  Moss  (Cat.),  Holifield  (Cal.)  and  Dingell
(Mich.)   sent  out  a  round  robin  against  this  provision.   There
was  no  evidence to  show  that  both  men  could  not  have  been
fired  under  existing  procedures  if  their  sexual  deviations  had
been  discovered  in  time.    These  existing procedures  are  sum-
mary  enough:  employes in  sensitive positions have  no  right  to
I.F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .............................................................................._....__
Street    ...............................................................................__
City   ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
5/27/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ........................................................................._
Street    ........._..................._...................................................
City   ...........——.........................Zone.........~..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
The 44 Who Said  'No' to  HUAC
Of   the  40  who  voted  against   HR  334  the   Walter-
HUAC  bill,  four  were  Republicans—Lindsay  and  Rob-
ison  of  New  York, Curtis  (Mo.)  and  Alger  (Tex.).   Of
the  Democrats,  13 were  from  California:  Brown,  Came-
ron,  Cohelan,  German,  Edwards,  Sisk,  Hawkins,  Holi-
field,  King,  Moss,  Roosevelt,  Roybal  and  Sisk;  5  from
New  York:  Celler,  Dulski,  Farbstein,  Gilbert and  Kyan;
3  from  Minnesota:  Fraser,  Olson  and  Staebler;  2  from
Oregon:   Mrs.  Green  and  Duncan;  2  from   Michigan:
Dingell   and  Nedzi;  2  from   Hawaii:  Gill  and  Matsu-
naga;   2   from   Maryland:  Long  and  Sickles;  2   from
Wisconsin:  Kastenmeier  and  Reuss.    The  others  were
Karsten   (Mo.),  O'Hara   (111.),  Gonzales  (Tex.),  Ashley
(Ohio)  and Moorhead  (Pa.)    In addition four  Congress-
men   were   paired   against   the  bill:   Mullter   (D)   NY,
Mosher   (R)   Ohio,  Mathias  (R)   Md.,  and  MacGregor
(R)   Minn.    Suggestion  to  readers  who  are  their   con-
stituents:  Why  not  write  and  praise  them  for  it?
confront   accusers.     The   fault   lay  with  NSA   slackness,   not
with  lack  of power  to fire.
It  is  an  index  of  the  changing  climate  that  there  was  no
objection  in  either  House  or  Senate  when  this  same  power  of
summary   dismissal  was  given   the   Director  of   the   CIA   in
1947.     Perhaps  what  aroused  so  much  opposition  this  time
was  the   spectacle   of  a  Committee,   which   is  supposed  to  be
the  watchdog   of  true  Americanism,  coming   forward   with  a
measure  which  denies   an   accused   person  safeguards   of  any
kind.    Even  in  the  case  of  a  super-secret   agency,  it  was  too
much  to  have HUAC  implying that  it  would  somehow  be  un-
American  to  allow  an  accused   employe  to  know  the  charges
against him.
Some  kind  of  prize  should  go  to  Mr.  Waggoner  of  Louisi-
ana  for  his  answer  in  the  debate  to  those  who  objected   "that
people  are  going  to  be  dismissed  without  being  informed  of
what  their  crimes  might  possibly  be."     Said  Mr.  Waggoner,
"It  is  my  firm  opinion  that  a  man  guilty  of  subversion  need
not  be  told  because  he  knows  full  well  to  begin  with  for  what
he  is  being  dismissed."     If  Kafka  were  still  alive,  he   could
sue  the  Congressman  for  plagiarism.
IF. Stone's Bi- Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
For  The  Sake  of  Peace  With  Cuba,  Help  Give  This  Issue  Wide  Circulation
We'll  Send  Free  Copies,  If  You'll  Send  Stamped  Addressed   Long   Envelopes
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED