I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963sep16.pdf

============================================================

8-Page  Special
Senate  Foreign  Relations  on  Why  Khrushchev  Changed  His  Mind,  Pps.  3-6
Republican  Silly  Season  on  Capitol Hill  as Test  Ban  Debate  Opens
Sen.   (Jack)    Miller    (R.    Iowa)—Mr.   President,   first    I
should   like   to   ask   the   Senator   whether  the   Soviet   Union
lias  ratified   the  treaty.
Sen.   (Wm.)   Fulbright   (I).   Ark.)—They   have  signed   it.
1  do  not  know  that  they  have  ratified  it  as  such.    Of  course,
(hey  do  not  have  the  same  procedures  that  we  have.  .  .  .
Sen.  MILLER—The  point  I  wish  to  make  is  that  I  have
seen   nothing   reported  to  the   effect   that   the   Presidium  of
the  Soviet  Union  has  ratified  the  treaty.  .  .  .
Sen.   FULBRIGHT—Since   the   Senator   raised   the   ques-
tion,  my  assistant,  who  keeps  up  with  these  matters,  says
that  the  Presidium of  the  Supreme Soviet  has  approved  the
treaty,  but  it  has  not  yet   been  deposited.  .  .  .
Sen.  MILLER—As   I  understand  it,  until   the  treaty   has
been  consummated by  a  deposit  or  an  exchange   of  the  docu-
ments,  it  would  be  possible  for  the  Soviets  merely  to  with-
hold  the  filing  of   the  document.  .  .  .
Sen.   FULBRIGHT—What   harm  does  the   Senator   think
would  come  to  us  if  the  So\iets  should withhold such  filing?
Sen.  MILLER—Its  effect  would  be  to  leave  us  up  in  the
air. ...  It  would  be  possible  for  the  Soviets  to  sit  on  the
treaty   for   6  months  or  1  year  or  5  years.
Sen.   FULBRIGHT—Does   the   Senator   mean   that   under
the   circumstances,  the   United   States   would   be  inhibited
from   testing  or  doing  as   we   pleased?
Sen.  MILLER—We  would  be,  so  far  as  the  other   signa-
tories   of   the  treaty   are   concerned.
—On  the Senate floor, September  9.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,   NO.  18SEPTEMBER  16,   1963
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
20  CENTS
How   It  Hurts  U.S.  Security  If  The  Soviets  Stop  Testing!
As  the  test  ban  debate  began,  the  contrast  was  striking  be-
tween  the  country  and  the  Senate.     In  the  scientific  commu-
nity,  the  only  scientist  who   could   be  found   to  support   Dr.
Edward   Teller   was  his   close   associate,   Dr.   John   Foster   of
Lawrence   Radiation   Laboratory,    long   a   Teller    stronghold.
The   newly  formed   National   Committee   Against  the   Treaty
of   Moscow  turned   out   to  be  another  of   those   rightist,  front
letterhead   organizations  (see  p.  7  "A   Chiang  Kai-shek  Press
Agent   Helps   Launch   an   Anti-Test   Ban   Committee").     Its
membership  is  bare  of  any  scientist; all  it  could  attract  were
some  old  China  Lobby   hands  and  the  usual anti-Communist
and   ex-Communist   stalwarts  who   serve   as  the  Marxist-Len-
inist   theoreticians  of   Birchism-Goldwaterism.     It   is  only  in
the  Senate  that  the  anti-test  ban  forces  were  able  to  mobilize
respectables   like   Russell   of   Georgia   and   Stennis   of   Missis-
sippi;  the  political  psychoanalyst will  suspect  tiiat  these  South-
erners  reflect  a  regional  feeling,  like  Peking's,  that  the  treaty
is  somehow   a  racist  plot,  though  of  course   in  the   reverse  di-
rection.     Except   for  Goldwaler,   the  Republicans  arc  nervous
about  opposing  the  treaty  so  strong  is  sentiment  for  it.    F.ven
so,  many  Republicans   and   some  Democrats  like   Jackson   of
Washington  are  hoping   that   something   will   yet  turn   up   to
give  them  an  excuse  to  vote  against  it.
Stennis  "Bombshell"  a  Dud
The   level  of  the  debate  shaping  up  in  the  world's  greatest
deliberative  assembly  is  foreshadowed    in  the  box  at  the   top
of   this  page.    The   calibre  of   the  opposition   was  evident   in
the   Stennis   committee   report,   the   long   awaited    bombshell
which  turned  out  to  be  a  veritable  Nike-Zeus  of  a  dud.     Its
exaggerations  were  too  much  even  for  Symington  and   Salton-
stall;  they  filed  their  separate  disagreements.    But  Jackson  and
Margaret  Chase  Smith  went  along  unblushingly  with  Stennis,
So  One  Way  to  Keep  The  Vieteong  Poorly
Armed  Would  Be  to  Slow  Down  the  War
"American  military  men   have   maintained  in    official
briefings   that   the  war   effort   against   the  Communists
has   not   suffered  so   far   despite   the   political   turmoil
going  on  in  the  country.  .  .  .  Figures  on  the  number of
contacts  with  the  enemy  and  on  losses  on  both  sides   are
officially   stated   to  be  close  to  the  weekly  average  for
this  year.    One  spokesman  noted  that   these   averages
continued   to   show   a   Vielcong   lead   in   weapons   cap-
tured.    Roughly  the  figures  show  that  for  every   two
weapons  captured  by  Government  forces,  the  Commu-
nists  capture  three.    About  one-fourth  of  the   weapons
lost  by  the  Vietcong,  however,  are  home-made  ones  in-
ferior  to  those  they  capture  from   the  government."
—From  Snigon,  the   AVic   Ym-k     T'UIU-K,   Sept.   1.
Strom  Thurmond  and  Barry  Goldwater.    Though  they  admit
the   testimony  was   unanimous  in   asserting  that    vvc   had    "a
clear  and  commanding  lead   in  nuclear  weapons  systems  over
any  one  or  any  combination  of   potential  enemies"   they man-
aged  to  raise  alarm.    The   results  don't   look   as  pood   in  the
text  is  in  the  headlines.   The  ingenuity  they  were  compelled
to  exercise  is  demonstrated   by  the   climactic  eighth   point   in
their  statement  of  the  supposed   military  disadvantages  to  the
U.S.     This,   which   deserves  some  kind  of  prize,  is  that    "the
treaty  will  deny  to  the  U.S.   a  valuable  source  of  information
on   Soviet  nuclear  weapons   capabilities"  because   "the   analy-
sis  of  radioactive  debris  generated   by  nuclear   explosions   has
long  been   a   source   of   basic   intelligence   on   Soviet   nuclear
weapons  programs"  and  this  will  be  shut  off  if  the   Russians
—with  sinister  fidelity  to  their  word—cease  testing  bombs   in
the  atmosphere!
Maybe   if  Goldwater   stops  being  so  mean  to  Castro,   Fidel
will  unseal  those  caves  and  try  out  a  few  off  Miami.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  September  16,1963
From  the  Picnic  Atmosphere  of  the  March  to  More  Sober  and  Basic  Perspectives
Civil  Rights  Movement  Moves  Back  Toward  Socialism  For  Answers
The  March  is  over,  but  it  will  never  be  forgotten.     Every
one  who  was  there  had  his  own  special  moment.    Mine  was
to  stand  in  the  early  morning  inside  the  Union  Terminal  and
watch  the  thousands  pouring  in  from  New  York  and   Pitts-
burgh  and  Chicago,  and  suddenly  to  feel  no  longer  alone  in
this  hot-house  capital  but  as  if  out  in  the  country  people  did
care.   Of  the  Marchers  themselves,  I  along  with  almost  every
other  observer  was  impressed  with  their  gentle  sweetness,  a
tribute  to  the  Negro  people,   who  have  managed  by  humor
and  faith  amid  so  much  suffering  not  to  be  soured.
The  Treadmarks  of   Oppression
For  me  the  heroes   of  the  March,   or  heroines,   were  the
gnarled   old   colored   ladies   on   tired   feet   and   comfortably
broken   shoes,   the  kind   who  walked   into   history  in   Mont-
gomery.    Amid  the  well  dressed  middle  class  Negroes   and
their  white  sympathizers were  many  black  folk  misshapen  by
malnutrition  and  hard  work.   They  carried  upon  them  a  story
more  plainly writ  than  any  banner.    These  were,  literally,  the
downtrodden   and  the  treadmarks  of  oppression  were  visible
upon  their  faces.    They  sang,  "We  shall  not  be moved."   But
those   who   saw  them—and  what   life   had   done   to  them—
were  moved.
Then  it  was  a  pleasure  to  see  amid  the  Marchers  so  many
old-time   radicals,   the   unquenchables   of   so  many  vanished
movements,  many  of  them  long  ago  forced  out  of  jobs  and
pulpits,  now  joyously  turning  up  again,  with  the  feeling  that
they  were  at  last  part  of  a  mass, upsurge,   no  longer  lonely
relics.
With  Lincoln  behind  them,  and  those  eager  thousands  be-
' fore   them,   the   speakers   at   the   Memorial   were  inevitably
dwarfed  and  on  the  whole  disappointing.    None—not  even
Martin   Luther  King,  who  is  a  little  too  saccharine  for  my
taste—broke  through  to  the  kind  of  simple  purity  of  utter-
ance  the  place  and  the  occasion  called  for.    The  price  of  hav-
ing   so  many  respectables   on   the   bandwagon  was  to   mute
Negro  militancy—John  Lewis  of   SNCC  had   to  tone   down
his  speech  under  pressure  from  Archbishop  O'Boyle—and  the
rally  turned  into  one  of  support  for  the  Kennedy  civil  rights
program.     Somehow  on  that   lovely   day,  in   that   picnic  at-
mosphere,   the  Negro's  anguish  never  found  full   expression.
-  Far  superior  to  anything at  the  Monument  were  the  discus-
sions  I  heard  next  day  at  a  civil  rights  conference  called  by
the  Socialist  Party.    On  that  dismal  rainy  morning-after,   in  a
dark  union  hall  in  the  Negro  section,  I  heard  A.  Philip  Ran-
dolph   speak   with   an   eloquence   and   a   humanity  few   can
Quite  A   Confession
"I  have  always  contended   that   the  so-called   disad-
vantage  of  the  Negro  was  no  greater  than  that  of  the
white  at  the  bottom  of  our  economic   heap,  and  •!  am
convinced  that  the  20  million  Negroes  in  this   country
are  better   off  insofar   as  educational   facilities,   income
and  dropouts  in  school  are  concerned   than  are  the  20
million  whites  who  are  at  the  very  bottom  of  our  eco-
nomic  heap."
—Sen. Russell  (D. Geo.), on Meet  the Press Aug.  11.
achieve.    When   he   spoke   of   the   abolitionists,   and   of   the
heroes  of  the  Reconstruction,  it  was  with  a  filial  piety  and  an
immediacy  that  made  them  live  again.    One  felt  the  presence
of   a  great   American.    He   reminded  the   black   nationalists
gently  that  "we  must  not  forget  that  the  civil  rights  revolu-
tion  was  begun  by  white  people   as  well  as  black  at  a  time
when  the  winds  of  hate  were  sweeping  the  country."    He  re-
minded  the  moderates  that  political  equality  was  not  enough.
"The   white   sharecroppers   of   the   South,"   he   pointed   out,
"have  full   civil  rights  but  live  in  bleakest  poverty."     One
began  to  understand  what  was  meant  by  a  march  for   "jobs
and  freedom."    For  most  Negroes,  civil  rights  alone  will  only
be  the  right  to  join  the  underprivileged  whites.    "We  must
liberate  not   only  ourselves,"   Mr.   Randolph   said,  "but   our
white  brothers  and  sisters."
The  direction  in  which  full  emancipation  lies  was  indicated
when  Mr.  Randolph  spoke  of  the  need  to  extend  the  public
sector  of  the  economy.    His  brilliant  assistant  on  the  March,
Bayard  Rustin,  urged  an  economic  Master  Plan  to  deal  with
the  technological  unemployment that  weighs  so heavily on  the
Negro  and  threatens  to  create  a  permanently  depressed   class
of  whites  and  blacks  living  precariously  on  the  edges  of  an
otherwise   affluent   society.    It  was  clear  from   the   discussion
that  neither  tax  cuts  nor  public  works  nor  job  training   (for
what  jobs?)  would  solve  the  problem  while  automation  with
giant  steps  made  so many workers  obsolete.    The  Civil  Rights
movement,  Mr.  Rustin  said,  could  not  get  beyond, a  certain
level  unless  it  merged  into  a  broader  plan  of  social   change.
In  that  ill-lighted  hall,  amid  the  assorted   young   students
and  venerables  like  Norman  Thomas,  socialism  took  on  fresh
meaning  and  revived  urgency.    It  was  not  accidental  that  so
many  of  those  who  ran  the  March  turned  out  to  be  members
or  fellow  travellers  of  the  Socialist  Party.    One  saw  that  for
the  lower  third   of  our   society,   white  as  well   as  black,   the
search  for  answers  must  lead  them  back—though  Americans
still  start  nervously  at  the  very  word—toward  socialism.
The  Pap  in  JFK's  Pep  Talk  for  Business,  "If  You  Fail,  America  Fails'
In  a  pep  talk  for  the  big  business  crowd,  written  for  the
September   issue  of  Nation's   Business,   Mr.  Kennedy  wrote
"If  you  fail,  America  fails."    This  seems  to  us  dangerous
pap.    Every  time  the  business  crowd  has  failed  in  the  past,
America  has  succeeded.    The  Panic  of   1907  reformed   the
banking  system.    The  stock  market  crash  of  1929  led  to  the
New  Deal.     There  is  no  reason   why  America   should   fail
if  big  business  fails  again,  as  it  is  failing.
The  extent   of   that   failure,  and  of   Mr.  Kennedy's,  was
visible  in  his  major  emphasis  on  tax  reform  to  provide  a
better   climate   for   investment.     The   investment    climate
could   hardly   be  better.     Corporate   profits   in   the   second
quarter  of  this  year  were  the  highest   ever.
The  gap  between  the  mounting  prosperity  at  the  top  and
the  growing  hopelessness  at  the  bottom  of  our  society  will
not  be  closed  by  making  big  business  even  more  profitable.
Nor  will  it  be  remedied   simply  by   government   spending.
Fifty  billion  a  year  is  already  being  pumped  into  the  econ-
omy   for   arms   without   giving   us   full   employment.     The
need  is  for  measures  of  public  planning   more  radical   than
anything  American  society  has  ever  seen.   This  way,  again,
America  can  succeed  when  big  business  fails.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Test  Ban  Supplement
From  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  Report  on  the  Test  Ban  Treaty
Why  Did  Khrushchev  Change  His  Mind  on  A  Limited  Ban?
The   limited   test  ban   is  an   American  proposal.     Its   sub-
stance   "was  first  offered   by  President  Elsenhower,  who,   with
British   support,   proposed   in   a  letter   to  Chairman   Khrush-
chev  on  April  13,  1959,   a  prohibition  on  atmospheric   tests
up   to   50  kilometers.     On-site   inspections  would   not   have
been  required.    Mr.  Khrushchev  rejected  the  President's  pro-
posal  on  the  ground   that  it  would  not  attain  the  basic  goal
of   "preventing   the   production   of   new   and   ever   more   de-
structive   types   of   nuclear   weapons."      The   Soviet   Govern-
ment  held   this  position  until  July   1963   when   it  agreed   to
the  three-environment  treaty  before  the  Senate.
Why   has   the   Soviet   Union   accepted   what   heretofore   it
has   consistently  rejected ?
The  question  is  relevant  and  important,  but  any  evaluation
of   Soviet  motives   is  necessarily  speculative.     It   is  generally
felt  that  the  decision  arose  from  a  number  of  considerations,
most  of  them  related.    First,  the  large  Soviet  tests  series  of
1961    and    1962   provided   some   assurance   that   the   Soviet
Union   could  accept  the  technological   consequences   of  a  test
ban  treaty.    Although  it  is  difficult  for  one  power  to  evaluate
the  technological  knowledge  of  another  power,   Soviet  scien-
tists  presumably  are  confident  that   in  many  critical  areas  of
nuclear  weaponry  they  have  achieved  a  rough  technical  parity
with  the  United   States.
The  Sobering  Cuban  Crisis
Second,  the  Cuban  missile  crisis  of  the   fall   1962   was  al-
most  certainly  a  sobering  experience.    Nuclear   war  abruptly
became  less  an  abstract  possibility than  one  of  harsh  immedi-
acy.    As  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  told  the  committee:
During  this  past   year,  for  the  first  time  in  history,
nuclear  powers  had  to  look  at  a  nuclear  exchange  as  an
operational  matter.    Men  had  a  chance  to  peer  into  the
pit  of  the inferno.
Third  is  the  Sino-Soviet  schism,  to  which  the  question  of
nuclear  warfare  is  closely  related.    Should   the  objectives  of
international  communism  be  gained  through  war  and military
supremacy  or  by  other   less  hazardous  means?    In  part,   this
appears   to   be  a   doctrinal   struggle   between   the   established
church  adjusting  its  policies   to   shifting  tides   and   new  re-
quirements,   and   the   isolated   church   militant.    Perhaps   in
larger  part,  the   struggle   transcends   ideology   and   reflects  an
inevitable  conflict   of   interests   between   a  united   and   expan-
sionist   China   and   one   of   her   historic   antagonists,  Russia.
The  quarrel  has,  of  course,  created  new  issues  and  new  prob-
lems  throughout  the  Communist  world.    It  is  widely  believed
that  Chairman  Khrushchev,  communism's  apostle  of   coexist-
ence,  required  some  kind  of  tangible  expression  of  his  policy
as  a  practical  political  matter.    The  test  ban  treaty  is  popular,
not  only  in  the  Soviet  Union,  but  also  in  the  East  European
satellites,  which  recently  have  shown  signs  of  restiveness  and
slightly  more   independence  of   close   Soviet   control.    Thus,
the  limited  test  ban  could  strengthen  Mr.  Khrushchev's   poli-
tical  base,  both  at  home  and  throughout   most  of  his  empire.
Fourth,  the  social  and  political  ferment  in  the  Soviet  Union
may  have  encouraged  the  Soviet  leadership  to  reach  an  agree-
ment  that  would  allow  some  diversion  of  resources  away  from
nuclear  weapons  development  and  toward  the  consumer  goods
area.*    The  burden  of  the  arms  competition  has  had  a  de-
In   this   special   4-page   supplement    we  present   the
text  of  the  political  analysis   and  the  conclusions   from
the  report  made  by  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee  on  the  test  ban  treaty,  and  an  excerpt  (on  p.  5)
from   the  eloquent  speech  with  which  Majority    Leader
Mansfield    opened   debate  on  its   ratification.     A   fuller
public  understanding   is  important  to  pave  the  way  for
further   steps   toward   disarmament   and   we'd   be  glad
to  send  copies  of  this  issue,  with  this  historic   report
in  it,  free   to  any   of  your  friends   or  neighbors  if   you
will  send  stamped   self-addressed     envelopes.
pressing   effect   on   Soviet  economic  growth.     In   the   past   5
years,  Soviet  military investment  has  risen  significantly,  while
the  rate  of  increase  in  the  gross  national  product  has  dipped
sharply.    A  cause  and   effect  relationship  has  been  indicated.
Finally,  Soviet  leadership  seems  to  share  Washington's   con-
cern  with  the  problem   of  proliferation  of   nuclear   weapons.
The  treaty  provides  no  guarantee  against  proliferation;  how-
ever,   leaving   aside   France   (already   a  nuclear  power)   and
mainland  China,  it  should  strongly  inhibit  the  spread  of  nu-
clear  weapons.    The  committee  heard  testimony  that  a  num-
ber  of  countries  have  the  human  and  material  resources   to
develop   nuclear  weapons  over  the  next  decade.    But  as  the
Secretary  of  State  told  the  committee:
Most  of  the  countries  with  the  capacity  and incentive
*  *  *  have  already  announced that  they  will  accept  the
self-denying   ordinance  of   the  treaty.    While   this   does
not  guarantee  that  they  will  never  become  nuclear  pow-
ers,   their   renunciation  of   atmospheric  testing  will   act
as  a  deterrent  by  making  it  much  more  difficult  and  ex-
pensive  for   them   to  develop  nuclear weapons.
Secure  Second-Strike
For  the  United  States,  the  rationale  of  the  treaty  has  not
changed  significantly  since  the  first  proposal  of  this  kind  was
put  forward  in  1959.     The  balance  of  risks  in  a  limited  test
ban—possible   advantages   and   disadvantages  to   the   United
States  and,  indeed,  to  Western   civilization—appears  to  favor
the   treaty.    U.S.   strategic   forces  are  superior  to  the   Soviet
Union's;  whatever  progress  Soviet  science  may  have  made  in
improving  Soviet  weapon  capabilities,  a  nuclear  attack  against
the  United   States  on  any  scale  would   assure  the   devastation
of  the  Soviet  Union   in  a  retaliatory  blow.    The   security  of
the   United   States   and   its   allies   rests   ultimately  with  this
second-strike  capability.
The  treaty  is  a  recognition  of  the  hazard  posed   by  an  un-
limited  continuation  of  the  nuclear  arms  race  over  an   indefi-
nite  period.    As  the  arms  increase  in  variety,  number,   refine-
ment,  and  destructive  power,   so  presumably  will  the   danger
that  they  might  be  used,  either  by  accident  or  design.    This
is  a  prospect  that  confronts  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet
Union  quite  impartially,  and  one  upon  which  their  interests
meet.
* "Communism  cannot   be  depicted  as   a   table   laid  with
empty   plates   and  occupied  by   highly  conscious   and  com-
pletely   equal-  people.    To  invite  people  to  such communism
is  tantamount  to  inviting  people  to  eat  soup  with  a  fork."
Nikita  Khrushchev's opening  speech  to  the  Communist Party
Central  Committee  Plenum,  March  5,  1962.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-WeMy,  September  16, 1963
CONCLUSIONS
The  committee  finds  the  balance  of  risks  weighted  in  favor
of  the  treaty.     It  is  possible   that  by  testing  underground    the
Soviet   Union   will   slowly   erase   the   technological    lead   the
United   States  possesses   in  some  critical  areas  of   nuclear   de-
velopment.    But  it  is  equally  true,  as  the  hearings  indicated,
that   this   gap   could   be   closed   much   more  rapidly  if   unre-
stricted  testing   were  continued.     In   short,   the   effect   of   the
treaty  will  be  to  slow   the  rate  and   significantly   increase   the
expense   of   Soviet   progress   in   those   technological   areas   in
which   the   United    States   has   superiority,   while   confirming
such  progress  as  both   sides  may  achieve  to  the   underground
environment,   where  the  United   States  has  a  broad   advantage
thanks  to  its  experience.     In  that  light,  now  would   seem   to
be  a  good  time  to  stop.
For  the  United  States,  the  returns  on  further   atmospheric
nuclear   testing  appear  to  have  sharply  diminshed.    Much  of
what   remains   to   be   learned   can  be   achieved    underground.
Admittedly,  further  information  on  weapons  effects  would   be
useful   and   would   simplify   certain   design   problems.      How-
ever,  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union  appear   to   face
roughly  comparable  uncertainties  and  difficulties,  in  this  ratlia
broad   area.
Teller's   Dissent
Dr.  Teller  dissented  from  the  general   view,  saying:
To  acquire  more  knowledge  in  order  to  know  how  to
defend  ourselves,  this,  I  would suggest,  is  not  quite prop-
erly  called  an  arms  race.    This  treaty  will  not  prevent
the  arms  race.    It  will  stimulate  it.    This  treaty  is  not
directed  against  the  arms  race.    This  treaty  is  directed
against   knowledge,  our  knowledge.
The  committee  disagrees.    The  treaty  is  directed  against  the
arms  race.    The  refinement  of  nuclear  weapons   is  the  expHcit
purpose  of  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  of  this  kind.     All   such
knowledge    is  relative.     Perhaps   the   ultimate  knowledge  of
nuclear   ballistic  missiles—at   least,   the   only   certain   test   of
the  missile  systems—would  mean   launching  a  large  salvo  of
ballistic   missiles  with   nuclear   warheads   over   a   distance   of
several  thousand   miles  and   intercepting  these  weapons   with
anti-ballistic   missiles,   also   equipped   with    warheads.
An   unrestricted  competition  to   develop   offensive  systems
that  will  continue  to  remain  technologically  far  in  advance  of
defensive   systems,  and,   conversely,   to   strive   for   defensive
missiles  that   can   close   this  gap,   would   amount   to   an   arms
race.    Of   that  there  can  be  little   doubt.
Dr.  .Bradbury  told  the  committee:
I  am  somewhat dubious  that  one  can  ever  find  out  in
practice  all  that  one  would  ideally  like  to  know  and  one
maj   have  to   rely   on   simply   what  one   has   found  out
and   what   one   can   extrapolate   from   existing   experi-
mental knowledge.
It  is  not  feasible  frankly   to  take  an  existing  ballistic
missile  site,   a  Titan  site,  and  drop  a  10-megaton  bomb
On  the  Ending  of  the  Last  Test  Ban
"In  1958,  an  informal  and   unofficial   moratorium  on
nuclear   testing   by   the   U.S.,   Britain   and   the   Soviet
Union  began.    Technically,  it  ended  on  Dec.  29,   1959,
when  President   Elsenhower   stated   that   the   U.S.   con-
sidered  itself  'free  to  resume  nuclear  weapons  testing'
subject   to   advance  notification  of   such   intention.     In
fact,  the  moratorium  ended  on  Sept.  1,  1961,  when   the
Soviet   Union,  after  what  must   have  been   a  long  and
secret   preparation,  commenced   an   intensive   series  of
atmospheric  nuclear  weapons   tests.     In  response,   the
U.S.  began  testing   underground  2  weeks  later  and  re-
sumed  atmospheric  nuclear  testing   in  April   1962."
—The  Nuclear  Test  Ban  Treaty  Report,  p. 2.
over  it.    I  don't  think  you  would  like  it  or  anybody  else
would.    Unless  you  do  that  experiment,   you  can  always
say,   "I  will  not  know  exactly  what  will  happen."    You
have   to  rely   on  what   you   can   deduce  now   on   strictly
precise   experiments,   and   my   general   feeling   is   *   *  *
that   I  would  be  willing  to  take  the   risk  that   we   now
can  take  with  existing  knowledge,  although  admittedly
one  is  taking  a  risk.    *  *  *  I  doubt  that  you  would  ever
know  all  that  you  possibly  could  know.
Dr.  York  expressed   similar  concern   about  a  relentless   com-
petition  for  constantly  improved   and   more   refined  arms:
It   is   my  view  that   the   problem  posed   to  both  sides
by   this  dilemma  of   steadily   increasing  military  power
and  steadily   decreasing   national  security   has   no   tech-
nical  solution.  If  we  continue  to  look  for  solutions  in  the
area  of   science   and  technology   only,  the  result   will  be
a  steady  and  inexorable  worsening  of  this  situation.
I  am  optimistic  that  there  is  a  solution  to  this  dilem-
ma:  I  am  pessimistic  only  insofar  as  I  believe  that  there
is  absolutely   no  solution   to  be  found  within  the   areas
of   science   and  technology.
Replying  to  a  question   he   added:
*   *  *  I   am   concerned  primarily   about   the   fact   that
*  *  *  if  we  do  not  do  anything:  about  the  arms  race,   the
security   of   the   United   States    will   just    get    steadily
worse,  will  get  less.
No  Security  In  Arms  Race
Dr.   Kistiakowsky's  statement   also   reflected   this   concern:
I  do  not  believe  that  we  or  any  other  nation  can  find
any  real  security  in  a  continuing  arms  race.    It  is  now
evident   that   the   United   States   and   the   Soviet    Union
each  have  the  capability  to  deliver  an  utterly  devastat-
ing   attack  on  each  other.    To  talk  of   winning   such   a
conflict   is  to  misuse  the  language;   only  a  Pyrrhic  vic-
tory   could  be   achieved   in   a   nuclear   war.     Under   the
present  conditions  of   unrestrained  arms   race   it   is   cer-
tain  that  the  numbers  of  warheads  each  side  might   de-
liver   will   increase,  as   will   their  yields.    Perhaps    even
more  threatening  is  the  prospect  of  an  increasingly  large
number   of   countries  having   nuclear  weapons,   with  the
concomitant   increase   in  the   probability   that   some   will
be  used  and  that  uncontrolled  escalation  will  follow.
From  Norman  Thomas's  Statement  on  the  Treaty  to  Senate  Foreign  Relations
"Critics   of   the   treaty   (declare)   that   'You   can't   trust
(he   Russians'.  .  .  .  As   a   matter  of   sorry  fact,  nothing  in
history   warrants   a  belief   that  you  can  trust  the  disinter-
ested  good  faith  of  any  national  government in  relation  to
others  outside  of  what  it  thinks  is  in  the  national-interest.
"I  assume  the   treaty   will   be   ratified.     But   if   it  should
be   ratified   in   the   carping   political   spirit   of   Gov.   Nelson
itcckefeller,   for   example,   much   of   its   advantage   will   be
lost.  . . .
"I   know   that   your   recommendations,  and  certainly  the
Senate  debate,  will  emphasize safeguards  against   military
risks.    I  profoundly  hope  that  you  Senators  will  not  do  this
at  the  price  of  a  querulous  and  exaggerated  suspicion which
will  detract  from  the  value  of  the  treaty  and  its   usefulness
as  a  first  step  to  further   progress."
—Test  Ban  Hearings,  Pps.  985-7.
\.  V.  Stone's  Bi-\\'eekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at   Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other   Monday  except  in  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.,
Washing  ,n,    L>.   C.    An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and   edited  by   I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  ManaRer,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
S5  in  the  U.S.;   50  in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   Slu  to  Europe;  S-0  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  16, 1963
Dr.  Brown  was  asked  whether  he  regarded  the  treaty  as  an
arms  limitation  agreement,  and  he   replied:
It   does   limit   arms  development.     It   does   not   reduce
armaments  but  it  does  reduce  arms  development.     I  be-
lieve  that  unless  we  get  some  kind  of  arms  limitation  as
well  as  maintaining  our  own  military capability  the  next
10  years   are  going  to  see  further  degradation   in  every-
one's  security  as  other  nations   obtain  nuclear   weapons,
less  responsible   ones   than  have  them  now,  I  think  that
will   make  everyone   less   secure.
I  don't  say  this  treaty  is  going  to  solve  that  or  pro-
duce  the   millenium,  but   I  think  in  the   absence   of   this
treaty,  which  has  represented  the  first  step,  no  one  can
go  on  to  anything  else.
The   committee,  no   less   than   the  President,  believes  that
no   treaty  however  much  it  may  be  to  the  advantage  of  all,
however  tightly  it  may  be  worded,  can  provide  absolute secur-
ity  against  the   risks  of   deception  and   evasion.    But   it  can,
if   it   is   sufficiently   effective   in   its   enforcement    and   if   it   is
sufficiently   in  the   interests   of   its  signers,   offer   far   more  se-
curity  and  far  fewer  risks than  an  unabated, uncontrolled, un-
predictable  arms  race.
An  Identity  of  Interests
The   committee   believes   that  the  treaty   reflects  an  identity
of   interests  in  the   specific  area  of  containing  the   arms  com-
petition.    Both  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet Union  appear
to  have  a  sober  appreciation  of  the  hazard  implicit  in  the  con-
tinuation  of  such  a  competition  between  the  world's  two  great
powers  over  an  indefinite  period  of  time.    Both  appear  to  be
persuaded   that  the  limited   treaty  will   not  appreciably   affect
the  balance  of  military  power;  also,  the  clear  political advan-
tages   it   offers   will  strengthen   the  national  security  of   each.
First,  the  treaty will  inhibit the  proliferation  of  nuclear  weap-
ons,  thus  reducing  the   danger   of   accidental  or  catalytic  nu-
clear  war,  as  well  as  nuclear  war  by  design.    The  committee
was   impressed   that   by  the   day   it   approved   the   treaty   82
nations  had  acceded.    Leaving  aside  France,  already  a  nuclear
power,   and  mainland  China,  this  number  includes  all   those
countries  thought  to  have   the   capacity  and/or   incentive  to
develop  nuclear   weapons.
Second,  the  treaty  has  already  deepened  and  complicated   the
divisions  within  the  Communist  orbit;  this,  on  balance,  rep-
resents  a  net  gain  for  the  rest  of  the  world.    It  bears  heavily
on  the  position   of  China,  communism's  second-ranking  and
On  Khrushchev's  Mind  and   Mood
SENATOR  PASTORE.    The  one  impression  I  got  in
the   hour   that   we   spent   with   Khrushchev   in   Moscow
was  the  fact  that  he  was  not  exactly   a  man  of   peace
but   he  was   afraid  of   a  nuclear  war.
SENATOR    SPARKMAN.     What   did  he   talk   about
the  most?
SENATOR  PASTORE.    He  talked  about  coffins.    He
said  this  will  be  a  world  of   coffins.     And  one  big   im-
pression   I  got  was   that  he  knows  how  terrible   a  nu-
clear   war   is   or   might   be,   and  I   think  he   wants   to
avoid  it   as   much  as  we  do.
—Nuclear  Test  Ban  Hearings,  Page  3Jt2.
most  militant  power.    China  is  expected  to  explode  a  nuclear
device  in  the  near  future,  possibly  next  year.    Although   the
distance  from   there  to  even  a  crude  nuclear  weapons  system
is   considerable,   the   event  will   nevertheless   impress    Asians
deely  with  Chinese  strength  and  potential.    But  the  unwill-
ingness  to  sign  this  treaty,  together  with  a  generally  defiant
attitude,  may  further  isolate  China  from  her  Asian  neighbors
and,  of  course,  from  the  rest  of  the  world  as  well.    This,  in
turn,  should   encourage  greater   resistance  to   Chinese   expan-
sionist  policies.   The  treaty  would  also  seem  to  formalize,  and
thus  simplify,  the  unwillingness of  the  Soviet  Union  to  assist
China's  nuclear  development  program.
This   identity  of  United  States  and   Soviet  interest  in  lim-
iting  the  arms  race  is  a  reflection  of  what  Dr.   Shulman,  one
of   the   foremost   American   authorities   on  the   Soviet  Union,
described  as  the  "limited  adversary relationship"  between  the
two  powers.    He  said:
*  *  *  We  are  engaged   in  an  extremely  serious  conflict
but  it  is  neither   total   nor  absolute.     In  certain  aspects
of  our  confrontation,  the  security  of   each   side   is  inter-
locked  with  the  security  of  the  other.    It  is   therefore
possible  to  have  some  measures   which  the  Soviet   leaders
feel   may  serve  their   interests,   and  which   we,   for   rea-
sons  of  our  own,  regard  as  in  our  interests  as  well  * * *.
Since   1954   there  has  been   a  very   considerable   evolu-
tion  of   the   Soviet   appreciation   of   the  effect  of   nuclear
war   *  *  *  an  increasing   sobriety,   and  this   has   a   deep
effect  on  the  Soviet  attitude.    Within  the  past  year  and
a  half   there  has  been  a  substantial   increase   in  the  dis-
cussion   in   Soviet   journals   of   what   in   this   country   is
called   arms   control,   and  what   the   Soviets   call   partial
measures   of   disarmament.
That  Fallacious   Faith  in  the  Magic  of  Military-Nuclear    Technology
"One   detects    in   the   few   articulate   opponents    of   this
Treaty,  a  consistent  theme  which  suggests  a  basis  for  the
remaining   doubts   and  hesitancies.     It   is,   apparently,   the
belief  that  our  scientific-military  complex  is  so  superior   to
all   others   that   if   not   subjected    to   any   limitation  as   to
nuclear   testing,    it   will   produce   an   amazing   advance   in
military-nuclear  technology.     The  complex,  it  is  suggested,
will  achieve  some   incredible  breakthrough  so  as  to  widen,
once   and  for   all,  the   gap   as   between   ourselves   and   the
Soviet   Union.
"Have  we  not  in  reality  followed  precisely   such  a   course
since  the  first  atomic  bombs   in  the  New   Mexico  flats  and
over   Hiroshima  and   Nagasaki?
"And  what   has  happened,  Mr.  President?     We  began   in
1945  with  the  atomic  bomb,  with  what  we  believed  was  the
decisive  gap,  the  ultimate  gap.     By  1949,  four  years   later,
the  Russians  began  to  close  that  gap  with  their  first  atomic
test.    In  1952,  we  opened  what  we  believed  was  the  decisive
gap,  the  ultimate  gap,   with  the  first  explosion   of   the  im-
mensely  more  powerful  hydrogen  bomb.    And  by  1953,  nine
months  later,  that  gap  too  began   to  close  in  a  Soviet   test
of  a  similar  type  of   weapon.
"So   we   must   ask   ourselves,    Mr.   President,    what   has
happened  in  alt  these  years   of  unrestricted  testing?     Has
the  gap  widened  with  the  free  rein  which  has  been  allowed
to    the   scientific-industrial-military complex?      Have    we
gained   the   absolute   advantage,    the   ultimate    advantage
which  will   guarantee   the  nation's   security?     The  truth   is
that   the   gap   has   not   widened.    On  the   contrary,   it   has
narrowed  almost  to  the  vanishing  point.
"Once   no   nation,  except   ourselves,   could   have  inflicted
on  any  other,  tens  of  millions of  nuclear  deaths  in  a  matter
of  hours.    Now,  we  ourselves,  no  less  than  others,   are  sub-
ject   to   a  catastrophe   of   this   magnitude.    We   have   pro-
\ided  not  security  for   the  nation  but  only   insurance    that
if  our  civilization is  put  to  the  nuclear  torch  by  any   hand,
others  will  be  consumed  in  the  same  stupendous   blaze."
—Mansfield   (Mont.)  in  the Senate, Sept.  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  16, 19S3
Dr.   Shulman   explained   further   that—
the   (Soviet)   shift   to   "peaceful   coexistence"   emphasis,
originally   a   tactical  alteration,  has   been   evolving  and
deepening   into  a   polcy   directed  to   power-bloc  politics
rather  than  toward  social  revolution.   At  the  20th,  21st
and  22nd  party  congresses,   and  in  the  new  Communist
Party  program, this  policy  has  acquired doctrinal under-
pinnings,  related  to  the  possibility  of  a  peaceful  transi-
tion  to  socialism,  and  the  noninevitability of  war  *  *  *.
Dr.   Shulman   believes  that   the   deep   changes   at   work   in
the   Soviet   Union   derive—
not  from  the  proletariat, but  from  nationalism,  which  is
fragmenting  the  polarization of  power,  from  technology,
which  is  increasing  the  destructiveness  of  war;  and from
the  continued  industrial  transformation  of  the  advanced
industrial  states,   which  has  if  anything  increased  their
power   and   their  prosperity.    What  the   Chinese  Com-
munists  are  now attacking as  "revisionism"  is  in  fact  an
effort  by  the  Soviet  leadership,  perhaps  not  wholly  con-
sciously,  to  adapt  its  policies  to  this  reality.
These  changes  are  in  part  accountable  to  Western   strength
and   determination   and,   as  such,   reflect   credit   on   the   basic
postwar   policies   we   have   followed.     Thus,   it   is  critically
important—for   this   and   other   reasons—that   the  solidarity
and   determination   of   the   Western   alliance   be   maintained.
We  have  seen  the  tendency  of  the  alliance  to  loosen   when-
ever  the  Soviet  threat  appears  to  have  receded  somewhat.    An
easing  of  cold  war  tensions  would  impose  new  stresses  on  the
relationships   between  the  Western  nations;  the  treaty  should
lead  to  even   stronger   efforts   to  improve   these   relationships
and  the  institutions  through  which  the  West  seeks  to  promote
unity  of  purpose  and  policy.
What   Europe   Must   Recognize
This  will  be  difficult.     For  the  United  States  it  means  that
decisions   affecting   the   future   of   Western   Europe   must   be
made  with  West  European  participation.    Thus,  the   United
States   must  find  and   maintain  a   delicate  but   true  political
balance,   and   avoid  giving   even  the   impression  that   it  may
be   unilaterally   disposing   of   major   questions   dividing  East
and   West.     Europeans   for   their   part,   must   recognize   that
such  questions  are  not  static,  but  changing.    Also,  Europeans,
in  order  to  play  their  role,  will  hopefully  maintain  the  pace
of  the  movement  toward  regional  and  supranational  solutions
to  their  major  tasks,  recognizing  that   these  have  grown   too
On  Keeping  the   War  Labs  Manned
"Some   concern   was   expressed   over   the   ability  to
maintain   the  vitality  of   the  laboratories  with  a  lim-
ited  test   ban  in  force.    Among  others,   the  Chairman
of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Sea-
borg,  provided  reassurance  on  this  score.    In  response
to  questions, Dr.  Seaborg  observed  that  "we  didn't  lose
very   many   scientists   from   the   Commission's   labora-
tories  during   the  3-year  moratorium   on  testing.     He
added  that  the  problem  would  be  eased  under  the  test
ban  treaty  because  of  the  continuance   of   underground
testing.
"Dr.  York,  a  former  director  of  the  Lawrence Radi-
ation    Laboratory,    stated    that    laboratory   personnel
grew  by  50  percent  during   a  period  that  roughly  co-
incided   with   the  moratorium."
—Nuclear  Test  Ban  Treaty  Report,  Page  19.
large  for  any  one  of  Europe's  sovereign  powers   to  contain.
In  short,  the  movement  toward  European  unity  and  Atlantic
partnership  that  has  been  gathering   force  since  World   War
II  should  proceed   unaffected   by  the  rise  and  fall  in  the  tem-
perature  of  the  cold   war.
A  good  part  of  the  committee's  time  and  attention  during
the   hearings   was  devoted   to  military  considerations.    This
treaty  does  bear,  though  perhaps  not  heavily,  on  the  military
balance.    But  its  thrust  is political.    And  among  other   things,
it  illustrates  that   military  considerations  cannot   be   divorced
from   political  considerations;  they  are  inseparable,   especially
in   the   nuclear  age.     The   maintenance   of   a  strong   military
position   is  clearly  essential   to   the   national   security  of   the
United  States.    But  exclusive,  or  excessive,  reliance  on  mili-
tary  considerations  could  undermine  national   security  by  en-
couraging    comparable    military    efforts    by   others,    thereby
strengthening   the   destabilizing   forces   ad.rift   in   the   world,
possibly  creating  new   ones.
.  This   treaty  offers   the   prospect   of   a  gradual   lessening   of
tensions,  of  a  start  toward  the  progressive  elimination  of   the
danger  of  nuclear  war.    Thus,  the  committee   (by  a  vote  of
16  to  1)  recommends  that  the  Senate  give  its  advice  and  con-
sent  to  the  ratification  of  the  pending  treaty.
—The   Nuclear    Test   Ban   Treaty   Report   of   The    Senate
Foreign   Relations  Committee,
The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  Insisted  on  A  Swift   and  Easy  Escape  Clause
"Any  party  can  withdraw   from   the  treaty  'if   it  decides
that   extraordinary  events,   related  to   the   subject   matter
of   this  treaty,  have  jeopardized  the   supreme  interests  of
its  country.'    This  is  a  remarkably  flexible  provision.   Ac-
cording   to   Secretary   of   Defense   McNamara,  the  original
withdrawal   provision   was   'modified    specifically'   to   take
account  of   the  views  of   the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff.
"Secretary  of  State  Rusk  emphasized, and  the  committee
understands,  that  the  language  of  Article  IV  is   sufficiently
permissive   to   enable  the   United  States   to   denounce  and
withdraw   from   the  treaty  whenever  its   security   interests
might   be  adversely  affected   by  activities  pertinent  to   the
treaty.    This  means  that  in  addition  to  possible  violations
by  the  Soviet  Union,  the  U.S.  could  abrogate  the  treaty  if
nonsignatories  or  even  other  [sic]  signatories,   should  test
clandestinely   or  otherwise  engage   in  nuclear  experiments
deemed   prejudicial   to   U.S.   national   security."
—Nuclear  Test  Ban  Treaty   Report,  P. 7.
The  draft   treaty  for   a   limited   test  ban   submitted   by
the   U.S.   and   Britain   to   the   Geneva   arms   conference   on
Aug.  27  of  last  year  was  more  guarded.    It  provided  that
if   any  party   to   the   treaty   determined   that   some  other
party  had  violated   its  terms,  or  that  unidentified  nuclear
explosions  had  occurred,  or  that  a  State  not  party  to  the
Treaty    (like  China  or  France)   had   conducted   explosions
which  might  jeopardize  the  national   security   of  the  com-
plaining  member,  it  could  call  for  a  conference  of  all   sig-
natories.
After   the  conference,  or  60  days   after   it  had  been   re-
quested,  the  complaining  member  could  on  60  days   notice
•withdraw  from  the  Treaty  if  it  felt  this  necessary  "for   its
national  security."   The  draft  said  "The  notice  of  the  with-
drawal  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  detailed  statement  of  th&
reasons   for  the   withdrawal."
Under  the  treaty  as  it  now stands  a  signatory  can  with-
draw   without   giving   its  reasons  or  calling   a   conference.
This  is  broad  enough  to  allow  resumed  testing  any  time  a
nation's  laboratories   develop  some  promising   new  monster.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  16, 196S
New  Leader's  Demand  for  A  Correction  Leads  Us  Up  A  Curious  Madison  Avenue  Trail
A  Chiang  Kai-Shek  Press  Agent  Helps  Launch  an  Anti-Test  Ban Committee
While  we  were  on  vacation,  an  angry  letter   from  Myron
Kolatch,  executive  editor  of  The  New   Leader,  arrived  at  our
office   protesting  that   we   had   done   an   injustice  to   his   bi-
weekly  in  our   July  22  issue  by  reprinting  testimony  before
the  Fulbright  lobby  investigation.    Mr.  Kolatch   claims  that
the  witnesses,  Hamilton  Wright,  Sr.,  and  Jr.,  were  wrong  in
testifying  that  they  gave  $3,000  to  The  New   Leader  to  pay
for   publication  of  an  article  on  China.
It  turns  out  that  the  Wrights,  who  were  public  relations
men  for  Chiang Kat-shek,  did  not  give  the  money  directly  to
The   New   Leader  but  to  Marvin  Liebman,  another   Chiang
press  agent,  who  in  turn  passed   it  on  to  The  New   Leader.
The  Evidence  Was   Indisputable
We  learned  from  another  newspaperman  who  was  assigned
to  write  a  correction  for  his  own  paper  that  Mr.  Kolatch,  in
good   faith,   on  Mr.   Liebman's   assurances,  first  denied   that
the  money  had  ever  come  from  the  Wright  organization.  Mr.
Liebman,  however,  admitted  that  this  was  the  source  of   the
money   after   the   Wrights   furnished   the   reporter   with   the
number  of  the  check.   We  hope  that  the  experience  will  make
The  New   Leader  wary  of  relations  with  Mr.   Liebman.
Mr.  Liebman's  office  at  79  Madison  Avenue  in  New  York
is  the  headquarters  of   an   extraordinarily  long   list   of   right
wing  organizations.   The  latest  to  make  its  appearance  was
the   National   Committee   Against   The   Treaty   of   Moscow
which  placed  a  full  page  ad  in  The  Washington  Post against
the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  Sept.  5.    The  signers  were  mainly
from  Buckley's National  Review  plus  such  assorted  characters
as  Spruille  Braden,  Max  Yergan,   Russell  Kirk,  Karl  Witt-
fogel  and  Admirals  Ben  Moreel  and  C.  M.   Cooke.
Among  the  other  organizations  which  operate  out  of   Mr.
Liebman's  public   relations  firm  are  the   Committee   of   One
Million  Against  the  Admission  of  Communist  China  to  the
United   Nations    (of   which  he   is  secretary),   the  American
Committee  for  Aid  to  Katanga  Freedom  Fighters,   the  Amer-
ican  Afro-Asian  Educational  Exchange   (which   circulated   the
New  Leader article  on  China  the  Wrights  helped  to  finance),
the  American  Jewish  League  Against  Communism,   Inc.,   the
Emergency  Committee  for   Chinese  Refugees   and   the   Com-
mittee  for  the  Monroe  Doctrine.
In  addition  Dr.   Fred   C.  Schwarz  of   the   Christian   Anti-
Communist   Crusade   used   Mr.   Liebman's    office   during   the
former's  unsuccessful  venture  into  New  York  in   1962.     Mr.
Liebman  also  helped  to  organize  Young  Americans  for   Free-
dom,  and  for  a  time  Douglas   Caddy  as  national  director  of
YAF   ran   the  organization   from   a   desk   in  Mr.   Liebman's
office.    It  is,  as  one  can  see,  a  busy  place.
One  of  the  other   businesses  with  which  Mr.   Liebman  is
associated  at  the  Madison  Avenue  address  is   Communications
Distribution,  Inc.    The  kind  of  communications  it  distributes
may  be  gathered  from  the  June,  1962,  issue of  the  John  Birch
Society  magazine,  American   Opinion,   which   carried   a   two
page  layout  of  the  film  "Nightmare  in  Red"  and  a  one  page
description   of   "The   War   In   Katanga"   by  Ernest   van   den
Haag,   "being   distributed  by   Communications    Distribution,
Inc.,  in  behalf  of  The  American  Committee  for  Aid  to  Ka-
tanga  Freedom  Fighters."    These  are  Moshe  Tshombe's  boys.
Another  of  these  films  was  advertised  in  the  May  7,   1963,
issue  of  The  National  Review  offering  a  Communications  Dis-
tribution  product   called   "A   Generation   Awakes,"   the   story
of  Young  Americans for  Freedom.    The  ad  begins,  "Are  You
Looking  at  the  Next  President?    You  may  be  when  you  see
Barry  Goldwater  in  a  new moving  picture.  .  .  ."
Mr.   Liebman  was  a   member  of   the   Young   Communist
League  and  the  Communist  Party  from  1938   to  1945.    Since
leaving,  he  has   flowered.   Richard  Dudman   touches  on  his
career  in  his  book,  "Men   of  the  Far  Right"  published  two
years  ago.     It  is  a  pity  the  Fulbright   investigation   did   not
question  Liebman  as  well  as  the  Wrights.
First  Possible  Signs  of  An  Olive  Branch  from  Washington to  Peking?
A  first  cautious   olive  branch  in  the  direction   of  Peking
is  seen  by  some  informed   persons  here  in  Washington  in
the   concluding   paragraphs   of   a   speech   made   in   Hawaii
August  20  by  Roger  Hilsman,   Assistant  Secretary  of  State
for   Far  Eastern   Affairs.
Mr.  Hilsman  ended  a  review  of  U.S.   poli :y  in  the   Pacific
by   saying   that   while   the   Chinese   Comm mists   had   con-
demned  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  as  a    "< irty  fraud,"  the
American    government    hoped   that   "an   at 'areness   of    the
clear   benefits   to   all   mankind   of   the   Nuclear   Test   Ban
Treaty   will  eventually   bring   the  leadership  in  Peiping   to
change  their   approach   and  their   attitude.      This  was  not
the   tone  of  irreconcilable  hostility.
The  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs
went  on  to  quote  that   portion   of   President  Kennedy's  ad-
dress  at   American  University   in  which  he  said  we   must
"persevere  in  the  search  for  peace  in  the  hope  of  construc-
tive  changes"  inside  the  bloc.   This  would  seem  in  this  con-
text   to  extend  to  Peking  the  same  possibility  of   peaceful
negotiation   as  Moscow.
Mr.  Hilsman  ended  by  saying  that  there  did  not  appear
to   be   "any    immediate    likelihood"   of    such   constructive
changes  "on  the  Mainland  of  China."   But  he  was   confident
"that  the  lasting  values  we  seek,  for  ourselves  and  for  the
peoples  of  the  Pacific,  will  prevail   over  the  dogmas  of  war
and  struggle."   The  language  is  safely  ambiguous  but  dif-
ferent   from   the  language  of   a  crusade  to  liberate  China,
much  less  to  restore  Chiang  Kai-shek.
Another  sign  which   points  in  a  sober  direction  may  be
seen  in  a  speech  made  by  Majority  Leader  Mansfield   in  the
Senate   Sept.  6  on  the  Chinese
:
Russian   "Convergence"  in
Asia.     After   surveying   the  long   history   of   Sino-Russian
border  disputes,  Senator  Mansfield  said  "it  would  be  unwise
to  dismiss  the  likelihood  of  a  growth  of  tension  at  various
points   of  contact   along  the  thousand  miles  of  this  vague
frontier."    He  said  "Some  might  anticipate  with  relish  the
prospects  of  these  clashes,  even  if  they  were  nuclear."
"But    that,   Mr.  President,"   Mansfield    told   the   Senate,
"would   be  a  most   distorted  view   of   nuclear  realities  and
contemporary  international  relations.    For  if  the  flames  of
a   great   nuclear  conflagration   are  lit,   it  will   matter  little
who  holds  the  match  or  where  in  the  world  it   is   struck.
Even  the  vastness  of  Central  Asia  would  be  insufficient   to
contain   the  holocaust  or  to  confine   it  to  the  two  massive
Communist   powers  of   Eurasia."
This  differs  reassuringly  from  the  foolish  view  which  re-
gards  the   isolation  of   China   and  the  possibility   of   Sino-
Russian  war  as  a  boon  to  the  rest  of  mankind.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.-F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  16, 1963
De Gaulle  Offers  A  Way  to  Get  U.S. Off  the  Hook  in  Vietnam
How  much  better  informed  the  French  are  on  Vietnamese
affairs   than   we   Americans.    Several   days  before   the   news
leaked   from   Saigon   that  Ngo   Dinh  Nhu's   private  pagoda-
raiding   troops   were   on   the   CIA   payroll,  we   heard   from
French   sources  in   Washington   that  Nhu—for   all  his   anti-
Americanism—was   the   beneficiary   of   close  CIA   ties.
The  First   Revolt  in  CIA
The   news  leak  marks  a  further  stage  in  the  deterioration
of  the  Vietnamese  regime.     It  means  that   revolt  has  spread
from   Vietnam's  usually  docile  Buddhist  monks  to  the  ranks
of  the  CIA  itself.    The  leak  showed   that  the  CIA  men  on
the  spot  were  all  but  unanimously against  further  payment  of
U.S.  funds  to  these- special  troops,   a  kind  of  Vietnamese  SS,
and  took  the  mutinous  step  of  spilling  the  story  to U.S. news-
men   in  Saigon   when   the  monthly   stipend   of  $250,000  was
paid  on  schedule.    Vietnam's  may  not  be  the  first  revolt  in
history  led  by  Buddhist  monks—though  it  is  the  first  we  ever
heard  of—but  this  is  certainly  the  first  mutiny  by  CIA men.
Conditions   must  be  pretty   bad  when   our   own   trained   anti-
Communist   cloak-and-dagger   men   find   U.S.  policies   .more
than  they  can  take.
Mr.  Kennedy's  two  TV   interviews  on  the  Vietnam  situa-
tion,  first  on  CBS  and  then  on  NBC, showed   him  at  his  un-
guarded   worst—the  cold  fish  in  the  man  was  plain   as  day.
Not  one  word  of  sjmpathy  for  Vietnam's  monks  or  students.
Not  one  word  of  moral  indignation  over  their  mistreatment.
All  he  could  say  was  that  it  was  "unwise."    He  talked  as  if
the  Vietnamese  affair   were  part  of  some  ideological  game  of
touch  football  we  had  to  win.    His   cliches—and   ours  as  a
nation—are  showing.    How   much  longer   will  we   refuse   to
see  that  the  struggle  for  freedom   in  Vietnam  is  now  against
Diem  and  against  us?
If   we  were  wise,  instead  of   weakly  stubborn,   we   would
welcome  dc  Gaulle's  initiative  as  a  means  of  getting  us  off  the
hook  and  providing  a  graceful  way  out.   De  Gaulle's   right
to  speak,  we  forget,  is  solidly  based  on  France's  membership
in  SF.ATO  and  its signature on  the  1954  accords  which  ended
the  war  in  Indochina, accords we  have  broken  by  blocking  the
free  elections  (hey  promised  and  sending  troops  into  the  area.
Next  Asian  Explosion?
"How   many  Americans   are  aware  that  Chiang's rem-
nant   Chinese  army   has   ruled  Taiwan   by  martial   law
ever  since  it  arrived   in  1949?      How  many  Americans
know  that  their  military   aid  program  enables  Chiang's
soldiers   to   rig    and   control    elections?      How   many
Americans  know  that   while  Taiwanese  make  up  about
75   percent   of   Chiang's   army,   virtually   all   of   its   top
ranking   officers  are  Chinese,  that  half  of  this  army   is
stationed  on  the  offshore  islands  of  Quemoy  and  Matsu
as  much  to  keep  these  men  away   from  home  as  for  any
other  reason,  and  that  the  Taiwanese  soldiers  on Tai-
wan  itself  are  not  issued  live   ammunition?     In  short,
we  shall   eventually   face  the   same  specter   in  Taiwan
that   we   are   now   facing   in   South   Vietnam.     In   my
judgment  the  time   is  long  overdue  for  drastically  re-
ducing  military   aid  to  Taiwan."
—Abridged  from  a  speech  in  the  Senate  Sept.  4  by
Morse   (D.  Ore.) which   few   if   any   papers   reported.
The  Senator  put  into  the  Congressional   Eecord   an  ar-
ticle  from   the   current   Harper's   Magazine   by   Albert
Axelbank,  who  was  United  Press  International    bureau
manager   in  Formosa   from  late  1960 to  the  middle  of
1962,  on  the   police  state  regime   in  Formosa.
It  seems  that  privately  de  Gaulle   warned   our   government
against  this  course  two  years  ago  when  our  military  interven-
tion  began.     His  stand  is  not  new, his  course  has  been con-
sistent.    He  cold-shouldered   attempts   by  Diem  and  Nhu   to
make   official   visits  to   France.     He   has   consistently   backed
Prince  Sihanouk  of   Cambodia's   efforts   to  establish  peace  in
the  area  by  its  neutralization.
A  series  of  recent  articles  in  Le  Monde   by  one  of   its edi-
tors  just  back  from  both  parts  of  Vietnam  showed  that  Diem
has  brought  all  his  opponents  close  together,  that  a  coalition
for   a  deneutralized  South  Vietnam  is  politically  possible  and
that  the  hard  pressed  North  Vietnamese  regime  would  like  to
resume  its traditional trade with  the  South  (coal  for  rice)  and
open   its  doors   toward   the  West,  particularly. France   where
it  already has  a  commercial  mission.
On  April  6,  1954,  Kennedy  rose  on  the  Senate  floor  to  tell
France  "the blunt  truth"  that  it  could   not  win  in  Indochina
against  a  hostile  people.    That's  all  de  Gaulle  is  saying  now.
Give  Your  College  Bound  Son  or  Daughter  A  Sub  to  The   Bi-Weekly    at   the   Special    Gift    Rate   Only    $4
I.P.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please   renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ....................................................................................—
Street
City   ............~..........................Zone.............State....................
9/16/03
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   .............................................................................
Street    ........._......................................................................
City   ..........._.........................JSone.......».State........-......._...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
LEStone'sBi-Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N,   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone  Will  Speak  on  Vietnam  in  San  Francisco,  California,  October  25,  1963
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED