I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963feb18.pdf

============================================================

Special   8-Page  Issue:  Eastland  on  the  Witness  Stand
"Q.  You  Can't Remember One Fact,  Can You, Senator?    A.  No,  Sir,  I  Certainly  Can't."    See  Pages  2  to  7.
F.  Stone's Bi-  Weekly
VOL.  Xf,  NO.  5
FEBRUARY  18,  1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Using  McCarthy's  Tactics  to  Stir  Up  War  on  Cuba
Not   since  McCarthy's heyday  has  the  Capitol  seen  so  un-
scrupulous  an  affair  is  the  resurgent  uproar  over  Cuba.   There
is the  same flourish of  deceptively precise numbers; the  charges
make  the  front  pages  while  the  answers  are  relegated  to  the
inside;  the  very  effort   seriously  to  reply  is  seized  on  as  evi-
dence  that  something  must  be   amiss.     If   the  McCarthyites
couldn't  find  a  card-carrying  Communist  in  the  State  Depart-
ment,  they  could  always  fall  back  on  an  ADA-er;  if   Nelson
Rockefeller  and  Keating  can't  find  long  range  nuclear  missiles,
they  can  come  up  with  four  combat  battalions.   As  a  last  re-
sort  they  can  always   insist  that  the   Administration  prove   a
negative,  and  prove  it  absolutely.    "Can  you  then  say,"  a  re-
porter  asked  Defense  Secretary  McNamara  toward  the  close of
his   extraordinarily   impressive  two-hour  intelligence briefing,
"that  you  are  personally  convinced  that  there  is  absolutely  not
one  single  offensive  system  in  Cuba,  of  any  kind,  any  place,
anywhere?"     The   Secretary   could   only  say  he  was   satisfied
beyond  reasonable doubt that there were  no  offensive  weapons
systems  in  Cuba.   Nobody  can  be  absolutely  sure  of  anything.
Try  proving absolutely that  John  F.  Kennedy didn't die  in  the
Bay  of   Pigs   invasion   and   that  the   present  occupant  of   the
White  House  was  not  dropped  into  his  place  by  enemy  agents
working   through   a   network   of   interior   decorators.     There
has  never   been   a  politics  like  ours   for   fostering  epidemics
of  paranoia.
JFK  Just  As  Bad  In  1960
There  is an  evil wind  blowing  here  in  Washington,  and  the
efforts  of  the  President  and  of  Defense   Secretary   McNamara
in  two  press  conferences  to  fight  off the  vultures wheeling  over
Cuba  command  respect  and  sympathy.    But  in  all  objectivity
the  unscrupulous  demagogy  of  the  Republicans  on  the  Cuban
issue  is  no  different   from  Kennedy's   in  the  I960   campaign.
He  himself  is only  reaping  what  he  helped  to  sow  by  his  own
performance  at  the  Orange  Bowl  in  Miami  not  so many  weeks
ago.
The  U.S.  is  losing  all  sense  of  proportion.     In  the  uproar
over  a  Soviet  military  mission  on  the  island  of  Cuba,  no  one
recalls  that  the  number  of  our  own  military  missions  in  for-
eign  countries  has  grown  from  14  in  1950  to  69  in  1963,  and
that  48  percent  of  our  military  mission  expenditures  this  year
are  in  the  Far  East  on  the  borders  of  China—as  far  from  home
as  are  the  Russians  in  Cuba.    The   latest  issue  of  an   Invest-
ment  Review  published  by  Reynolds  &  Co.,   120   Broadway,
N.Y.,   discusses  the  part  played  by  Westinghouse   Electric  in
developing   our  new  nuclear   powered   Navy.     "The    nuclear
powered   aircraft   carriers,  escorted   and   screened   by   nuclear-
powered   missile  cruisers  and   nuclear-powered   attack   subma-
rines,  comprise   a  revolutionary  atomic  task   force  of   tremen-
dous  range  and  striking  power,"  this  investment  study  relates
Gentle  Reminder  From  U  Thant
"Q.  Mr.  Secretary-General,  as   everyone  knows,  you
played  ait  active  role  in  trying  to  prevent  the  confron-
tation  between  the  U.S.  and  the  Soviet  Union  in  the
Cuban  crisis.    That  crisis  was  not  exactly  settled  inas-
much   as  on-site  inspection  was   not   achieved   and  no
invasion  pledge  was  given  as  far  as  the  U.S.  is  con-
cerned.   Now  there seems  to be  a  report of  a  new  build-
up,  a  Soviet  military  build-up  in  Cuba.   What  do  you
feel  that  you  might  be  able  to  do  at  this  point  to  try
to  continue  your  efforts  to  ease  the  situation?
"The  Secretary-General:  First,  of  all  the  UN  is  not
in  possession  of  the  full  facts  regarding  the  develop-
ments   in   Cuba.     Of   course,   there   have   been  public
statements    from    important    quarters   regarding   the
presence   of   a  large   number  of  Soviet   technicians  on
Cuban  soil.    But  these  phenomena, if  I  may  say  so,  are
very  delicate,  and  if  one  says  that  the  presence  of  So-
viet  technicians  on  Cuban  soil  constitutes  a  threat  to
peace  in  the  area,  others  may  say—they  are  actually
saying  it—that  the  presence  of  the  American troops  in
South  Viet-Nam  also  constitutes  a  threat  to  peace  in
that  particular  area.   Of  course,  if  you  go  on  discussing
these  phenomena, there  will  be  no  end  to  this  debate.
What  we  should do  now, in  the  context  of  the  develop-
ments  in  Cuba  or  in  South Viet-Nam or  in  Ruritania or
anywhere,  will  be  to  explore  the  means  of  easing  ten-
sions  and bringing about better understanding between
the  Powers  primarily  involved.   I  think  this  is  the  only
sensible thing for us to  do."
—U  Thant's  Press Conference  at  the  UN  Jan.  3,9.
and  then  goes  on  to  say,  "A  portion  of  this  force  was  thrown
around   the   island   of   Cuba  during   the   recent   crisis  and   its
devastating   potential   was  one  of   the   major   contributions   to
the   successful    removal   of   alien   offensive     weapons   from    the
Western   Hemisphere."      Yet  in  a  country  which  can  marshal
such  cataclysmic  firepower,  enough   to  blow  the  whole   island
of  Cuba  to  a  radioactive  Kingdom  Come,  a  reporter  asks  the
President   whether   Cuban  torpedo  boats  armed   with   18-mile
range  defensive  missiles  could  not  be  "used  in  an  attack  on  the
United  States!"
One  of  the  questions  put  to  Mr.  McNamara  was  whether
some  of  the  information going to  critics  on  Capitol  Hill  might
not  be  coming  from  within  the  Defense  Department.    He  re-
plied  that  he  had  no  reason  to  think  it  came  from  any  depart-
ment  of  the  government.     But  when  one  looks  at  the  makeup
of  the  U.S.  Intelligence  Board  one  wonders.   No  less  than  ten
sleuthing   agencies  are  represented  on  this  board:  CIA,  DIA
(Defense  Intelligence  Agency),  State,  Army, Navy,  Air  Force,
National   Security  Agency,  Joint   Chiefs   of   Staff,   AEC   and
FBI.    The  art  of  molding  public  policy  by  leaks  and  by  the
use  of   journalistic  stooges   is  well   developed   among   them.
(Continued   on  Page  Eight)
2    '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  18, 1963
The  Senator  Who  Couldn't  Recall  Anything But  His  Name  and  Address
We  print  here  as  a  public  service  the  major  portion  of  the
interrogation   of  Senator  James   0.  Eastland  January   30  in
the  retrial  of  Robert  Shelton  for  contempt of  the  Senate  In-
ternal  Security  subcommittee of  which  Eastland  is  chairman.
Joseph  L. Rauh, Jr.,  counsel for  Shelton,  subjected  the  Sena-
tor  to  a  brilliant  and  courageous  examination.   For  once this
Mississippi  McCarthy was  given  a  taste  of  his  own  medicine.
The  difference  is  that  were  some  helpless  witness  before  him
to  engage   in  similar  contradictions,  evasions  and  lapses  of
memory  he  would  be threatened  with contempt if  not  perjury.
The  Senator  began  by  denying  that  he  discussed  his  testi-
mony in advance with  Jules  Sourwine, his  subcommittee coun-
sel,  and  ended  by  contradicting  himself.   Shelton's  case  grew
out  of  hearings   in   1956  at   which  the   Eastland  committee
tried  to  smear  the  New  York  Times.    Rauh's  effort  to  deter-
mine  whether  any  such  investigation  had  ever  been  properly
authorized  elicited  a  series  of  evasions.    The  original  hear-
ing  backfired.    There  was a  revolt  within  the  Internal  Secur-
ity  Committee.   Eastland  had  to  get  rid  of  Sourwine;  the
latter  spent  several  years  of  exile  in  Nevada  before  coming
back  to  his  old  job.   Eastland's  inability  to  recall  this  affair
except  in  a  vague  way  taxes  credibility.    Shelton  was  sub-
poenaed   by   mistake   but   Sourwine  claimed  that  . he   sub-
poenaed  Shelton as  a  result  of  a  letter from  an  informer.   He
refused,  however, to  submit  it  in  evidence.   Rauh  challenged
Sourwine's  credibility  on  this.    The  sensation  of  this  second
trial  was  Sourwine's  admission that  while  this  attack  on  his
credibility  was  before  the  courts  on  appeal,  he  destroyed  the
document.    Eastland   was  evasive  on  this,  too,    Shelton  was
found  guilty  again,  but  we  believe  will  win  on  appeal.
"Q.  You  Can't  Remember  One Fact,  Can You. Senator?    A.  No,  Sir,  I  Certainly  Can't"
The  Cross-Examination of  Senator  James  O.  Eastland
Q    Will  you please  state your name, sir?
A    James  O.  Eastland,  Doddsville,  Mississippi.
Q    And  you  are  Chairman  of  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee?
A    That's  correct, sir.
Q    And   you   are   Chairman   of   the   Subcommittee   on   Internal
Security ?
A    That's  correct, sir.
Q    Senator  Eastland,  Exhibit  10  of  the  Government  is  the  citation
of  the  defendant,  Robert  Shelton.    There   is  included  in  it  a   report
from   your  committee.    I  would  like  to   ask  you   if  that  report   was
made  by you?
A    Yes, sir, it  says  so.    I  don't   remember  it,  but  it  says  so.
Q     You  don't  deny  that  that  report  is  yours?
A     No,  sir, I  wouldn't  deny  it.    I  judge  it  solely  because  my  name
is  on  it.
Q    Senator  Eastland,  when  did  you  become  aware  that  we  had  a
subpoena   for  your  appearance  here,   sir?
A    I  became  aware—Mr.  Cheatham  told  me  that  there  was  a  forth-
with  subpoena,  and  it  was  the  day  that  I  spoke  in  Senate  against  the
motion  that  is  now  pending.    I  could  have  known—-I  don't  know.
Q    Were  you  in  town  on  the   15th  and  16th of  January,  Senator
Eastland ?
A    Well,  I  was  in  town  the  day  that  I  was  assigned  to  speak.    I
have  a  business in  Mississippi  and  it  had  been  my  intention  to  go  and
come  back  on  Sunday,  but  I  was  assigned  a  day  to  speak,  and  so  I
did  not  go.
Q    So, you  were  in  town  on  the  15th  and  16th?
A    Yes,  sir.  Oh,  I  have  been  here since  the  day  Congress  convened.
Falsely  Reported  Out  of  Town
Q    Do  you  have  any  idea  how  the  return  on  the  first  subpoena  for
your  appearance. came  to  hare  the   words  Senator  Eastland  is   out  • of
town  on  it?
A    No,  sir.   I  talked  to  Mr.  Cheatham.    I  got  a  letter  from you,
sir,  in  which  you  made  that  statement.    I  talked  to  Mr.   Cheatham
about  it  today  and  he  told  me  that  his  report   to  a  Deputy   Marshal
was  that  I  was  unavailable.
Now,  if  I  was  called—the  Sergeant-In-Arms  of  the   Senate  is   sick
and  in  Arizona.   There  are  two   men  who  act  as  Sergeant-At-Arms.
Now,  I  don't  remember  if  the  other  one  ever  contacted  me.    I  know
Mr.  Cheatham did.
Q    I  show  you  the  subpoena,   Senator  Eastland,  and  call  your  at-
tention  to  the  fact  that  it  says  as  follows,  you  can  follow  me:  "Not  to
be  found.    Information  received  from   Assistant  Sergeant-Of-Arms  of
Senate  Senator  Eastland  is  out  of  town."
A    I  don't  know  which  Assistant  Sergeant-At-Arms.    You  have  got
two  there.    Mr.  Cheatham  told   me  that  he  informed  the   Marshal's
office  that  I  was  unavailable, that  I  was   speaking.
Q     You   don't   know   how  it  got  on  the  subpoena  that   you   were
out  of  town  when  you  weren't?
A    No,  sir.
Q    Have  you  had  a  chance  before  coming  here  to  talk  to  any mem-
bers  of  your  staff  about  this  testimony  you  are  about  to  give?
A    Well,  yes,  I  have  talked  to  Mr.  Davis  and  I   have  talked   to
Mr.   Sourwine.
Q    Did  you  talk  —
A    But  not  about  the  testimony  I  am  about  to  give  because  I  don't
know  what—I  am  your  witness.    At  least  I  was  subpoenaed  by you,
and  I  don't  know  what  information  you  want.
Q    What  was  your  discussion  with  Mr.  Sourwine,  Senator?
A    Well,  I  don't  remember.    I  can  remember  these  hearings  in  a
general  way  and  I  have  asked  him  questions  about  the  hearings   and
I  have  asked  questions  about  the  rules  under  which  we  were   operat-
ing  back  in  1956.  Then  I  made the  same inquiry about  the  rules  from
the  Clerk  of  the  Committee,  Mr.  Joe   Davis.     Maybe  I  asked  them
something  else.     If  I  did, I  don't   remember.
Q    Did   you  discuss  Mr.   Sourwine's  testimony   that   he  gave  here
with  him?
A    No,  sir.
Q    Senator  Eastland,  at  the  previous  trial  the  United  States  Attor-
ney  who  is  here,  in  answer  to  a  bill  of  particulars .on  what  was  the
question  under inquiry before  your  committee at  the  time  Mr.  Shelton
appeared,  said  as  follows,  and  I  now  quote:  "The  Government con-
tends,  and  the  indictment states,  that  the  inquiry  being  conducted  was
pursuant  to  this  resolution.    We  do  not  feel,  and  it  is  not  the  case,
that  there  was  any  smaller,  more  limited  inquiry  being    conducted."
In  your  view  does  that  correctly  state  the  question  under  inquiry
before  your  committee  at  the  time  Shelton   testified?
A    Well,  I  think  the  facts  are  these:  As  I  recall,  Senate  Resolution
366  gave  the  Judiciary  Committee  power  to  investigate,  to  protect  the
internal  security  of  the  country,  that  the  chairman  of  the  committee
at  that  time  set  up  a  subcommittee.    Now, before  I  was   appointed
Chairman  of  Internal  Security  we  had  had  investigations  on  a num-
ber  of  subjects.   One  of  them  was  communist infiltration  and  domina-
tion  of  mass  media  of  communication,  and   these  particular  hearings
would  come  under  that  head.    It  was  an  investigation  of  the   infiltra-
tion  of  newspapers.    And  those  are  the  facts,  as  I  recall  them,  as  to
the  extent  of  the  depth  and  the  extent  of  the  infiltration  and  what
we  could  do,  within  the   limits  of   the  Constitution,   to   protect  this
country.
Q    Let  me  ask  you  —
A    Now, that  was  the  legislative  purpose.    That   is  —  well,  that
is what  I  have got  to say.
Q    Well,  let  me  ask  the  question   again,   since   I   don't   feel  you
answered  it.
A    The   best  way  I  can  answer  the  question   is  to  tell  you  what
the  facts   were.
Q    Senator,  for  once  you  are  not  asking  the  questions,  I  am.
A    I  know  that,  I  understand  that,  but  I  say  the  best  way  I  can
answer  your  question   is  to  tell  you  what  the   facts   were,   and   those
are  the  facts  as  I  recall them.
If  You  Asked  A  Question, Senator?
Q    Senator,  if   you  asked  a  witness  a  question   and   be  didn't   an-
swer  it,  would  you  take  bis  way  of  answering?    I  am  asking  you  a
question,  and this  is the  question:
A    Go  ahead.                       '             .
Q    At  the  first  trial  Mr.  Hitz  stated,  and  I  am  going  to  read  you
what  he  said  as  the  question  under  inquiry.    I  want  an  answer  from
you  whether  he  was  right  or  wrong,  on  the  basis  of  your  knowledge
of  what  the  question  under  inquiry  was.   This is  Mr.  Hitz'  statement:
"The   Government  contends,   and  the   indictment   states,   that   the  in-
quiry  being  conducted  was  pursuant  to  this  resolution.    We   do  not
feel,  and  it  is  not  the  case,  that  there  was  any  smaller,  more  limited
inquiry  being  conducted."
Do  you  or  do  you  not  agree  that   that  statement   correctly   reflects
the  position  of  the  committee  at  the   hearing?
A    Well,  of  course,  all  the • power  —  well,  part  of  the  power   we
have  got  extends  from  that  resolution.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  18, 1963
Q    I  asked  you  whether  you  agreed.    I  think  this  can  take  a yes
or  no  answer,  Senator.
A    Well,  I  don't  think  it  can.   I  think  the  facts  are  what  should
control.
Q    You  won't  answer  the  question  then?
A    Yes, I  have  answered  your  question.    I  have  given  you  what
the  facts  were,  what  the  facts are.
Q    I  asked  you  Senator,  whether  you  agreed  or  disagreed  with  Mr.
Hitz'  statement that  there  was  no  smaller,  more  limited  inquiry  being
conducted  than  the  whole  resolution.   Was  Mr.  Hitz  right  or  wrong?
A    The  only  way  I  can  answer  is  to  give  you  the  facts,  sir.
Q    Now  I  will  read  you  what  Mr.  Sourwine  said  at  this  trial  and
ask you  if  you  agree  with that.
A    All  right.
Q     (Reading:)   "I  repeat  my  question.    Did  you  ever  say that  the
question  under  inquiry  at  the  January  6  hearing  was  the  scope  and
extent  and  activities  of  the  communist  conspiracy  against   the   United
States?   "I  believe I did, yes,  sir."
My  question  to  you, Senator  Eastland,  is:  Do  you, too, agree  with
Sourwine's  answer  that  the  question  under  inquiry  was  the   commu-
nist  conspiracy  against  the  United  States?
A    Well,  of  course,  that  is  true  of  all  the  hearings.    We  were pro-
ceeding  at  that  time  into  infiltration  and  domination  of  mass  media of
communications,  is  the  way  I  recall  it.
Q    Senator,  when  did  that  hearing  get  started?
A    Well,  now, I  am  informed  that  it  was  in   1956.    I  didn't  re-
member  the  date  of  the  hearing,  whether  it  was  '55  or   '56,  and  I
have  been  advised  that  it  was  '56.
Q    How  did  it  get  started ?
A  Tip  From  Military   Intelligence
A    Mr.  Sourwine  —  well,  to  begin  with,  I  bad  received   informa-
tion  from   intelligence  —   some   intelligence   agencies   connected  with
the  Army   and  Navy  that  one  of  the  principal  objectives  of  the Com-
munist  Party  was  the   infiltration   and  control  of  the  press,  radio,  and
television.     I   had  received  that  information   over  a  period   of  years,
beginning   about   1956 —   '46.    Now,  I   don't   remember   whether,
when  I  became  chairman  in  19)),  whether  Sourwine  —   whether  we
laid  out  an  agenda  of  what  we  were  going  to  do  in  that  Congress.    I
don't  remember.    And  how  they  got  started,  frankly,  I  don't  remember.
Q    There  are several  different  things involved there.
A    All  right,  sir.
Q    You  were  referring  to  a  rule  of  the  Senate  that  no  hearing  —
A    No,  no;  I  am  talking  about  —  if  I  remember  correctly,  in 1955
there  were  some  rules  for  investigating committees that  were  changed.
It  was  based  on  some  of  the  McCarthy  hearings.   Now, the  only  thing
I  can give  you  is  my best  recollection.    I  think  it  wasn't  a  Senate  rule,
it  was  a  committee  rule,  and  one  of  them  was  that  you  had  to  have
two  witnesses  to  take  testimony,  if  you  could  get   two   witnesses,   if
they  were  available.    Another  one  was  —
MR.  HITZ:  Excuse  me.    Do  you  mean  two  Senators,  sir?    You
said  two  witnesses.    Do  you  mean  two  Senators?
[Wm.   Hitz,   the   Assistant   U.   S.   Attorney,   who   prosecuted   the
Shelton  case.]
THE  WITNESS:  Yes, sir.   If  you  could  get  two.   If  you  couldn't,
you  could  go  ahead.   Now, another  one  was, as  I  recall,  that  the  full
committee  —  I  mean  the  full  subcommittee  must  authorize  an  investi-
gation.    Now, that   is  my  best  recollection   and   I  could  be  just  as
wrong   as  a  wet  spell.
Q     Senator,   are  you   referring  to   the   rule   of   the   subcommittee
which  reads   as  follows:   "No   major   investigation   shall   be  initiated
without  approval  of  a  majority  of  the  subcommittee"?
A    Well,  now,  what  year  is that ?
Q    This  is  the  one  you  give  out  now.   I  can't  tell  you  when  it
was  adopted.    Can  you  tell  me  when  that  was  adopted?
A    Well,  I  think  that  rule  was  adopted  in 1955.
Q    Now, if  that  rule  was  adopted  in  '55,  can  you  tell  me  whether
there  was  a  meeting  of  the  subcommittee  to  go  into  the  question  of
investigating  of  the  press ?
A    Yes, sir, I  can  tell  you  that  at  that  time  it  was  approved  first
by  the  subcommittee.    I  don't  remember  that   meeting,  but  I  can  re-
member  the  meeting  that  approved,   in   my  office,   that  approved   the
open  hearings  here  in   Washington.
Q    I   asked  you  about  the   executive  committee  —   the  executive
hearings,   Senator.
A    Yes,  sir,  every   major   investigation   had   the   approval    of   the
subcommittee.
Q    There   was  an  approval   of   the   subcommittee   of   the   investiga-
tion  into  what  you   referred   to,  communists   in  mass  media,  prior  to
the  executive  —
A    There   was  an  approval   by  the   subcommittee   of   the  particular
hearings in  New  York  City.
Q    Prior  to  the  executive committee  hearing ?
A    Yes, sir.
Q    Are  you  sure  of  that?
A    Yes,  sir.
Q    Are  you  sure  —
A    I  am  sure  of  it,  yes, because  I  made  the  rules.
Q    You   are   sure   there  was  an   executive   committee   hearing   —
strike  that.    You  are  sure  there  was  a  meeting   of  the   subcommittee
before  the  —
A    We  didn't  —
Q    Let  me  finish  the  question,  Senator.    I  don't  interrupt  you.
A    All    right,  sir.   Excuse  me.
Q    Are  you  sure  there  was  a  meeting  of  the  subcommittee  in  ')),
before   the   executive  hearings  in  New   York,   authorizing   those  hear-
ings?
A    Now,  I  got  —
Hard  to  Get  a  Yes  or  No
Q    Yes   or  no.    Are  you  sure?
A    Veil,  now, what  you  want  is  the  truth,  isn't  it?
O    I  want  you  to  give  us  the  truth,  yes, sir.
A    All   right.    That   is  what  I  am  trying  to  do.
Q     You   can  explain.     Yes  or  no,  are  you  sure,  and  then   explain.
A    Well,  I  can't  answer  it  yes  or  no.
THE  COURT:  You  may  explain.
THE  WITNESS:  I  approved   in  every  instance,  got  the   approval
in   every   instance   of   the   full   committee,   full   subcommittee,    of   an
investigation.
Q    Let  me  try  again.    Was  the  executive  hearing   in  New   York
approved  by  a  meeting  of  the  subcommittee   prior  to  those   executive
hearings  in  New  York   in  the  year  '55?
A    Yes, sir.
Q    You  are  sure  of  that?
A    Yes, sir.
Q    Now, if  I  tell  you  that  Mr.  Sourwine  said  there  had  been  no
meeting  at  all, what  would  you  say?
A    Well,   I  would  think  that  a  lot   of  things   happened   that   he
doesn't  know  about.    For  instance,  we  get  a  majority  on  the  Senate
floor,  and  if  I  wanted  authority  to  hold  some  hearings,  we  call   the
members  back  into  Cloakroom  and  discuss  it   and  go   forward   with
the  hearings.    There  were  no  minutes  made,  but  we  would   have  a
majority  of  the  subcommittee.
I  can  remember  very  definitely   the   meeting  in   my  office   that   au-
thorized  the  open   hearings.
Q    Let's  stick  to the  executive committee hearings.
A    All  right,  sir.
Q    Are  you  now  testifying  that  you  had  a  meeting  on  the   Senate
floor  of  your  subcommittee  —
A    No,  I  can't  remember where  it  was, but  I  said  in  every  instance
I  received  the  approval  of  the  subcommittee.   And  we  had  people  that
would  object  to  a  hearing   unless  —  members  of   the   subcommittee,
unless  the  approval  was  first  secured,  and  in  every  instance  I  did  that.
Now,  that  doesn't  necessarily  mean  that  the   staff   had  to  be  there,
but  we-would  get  a  majority  together   and  discuss  it  and  approve   it.
Q    It   is  now  your  testimony  that  a  majority   of  the   subcommittee
met.    Was  this  called  as  a  meeting  of   the  subcommittee   or  was  this
just  —
A    That   is  the   way  we   handled   it.     In   fact,   the   full    Judiciary
Committee   has  met   off   the   Senate  floor  a  number   of   times   and   ap-
proved  bills,  nominations.
No  Records  Kept?
Q     Was  there  any  record  of  this  meeting?
A       I  wouldn't  think  so.
Q    Did  you  tell  —
A    If  there  has  ever  been  a  record  —  I  don't  know  about   records
of   the   executive  meetings   of   any   subcommittee.     They   frequently
don't   keep  records.    Now, the  full   committee  does.     And  we  could
very  well  have  had  a  meeting  and  Mr.  Sourwine  know  nothing   about
it.   He  is  over  in  the  Senate  Office   Building.
Q    It   is  your  testimony  you  had   a  meeting  on  the  floor  of   the
Senate  —
A    No,  I  didn't  say that.
Q    Where was  this  meeting,  Senator ?
A    I  don't  know,  but  I  said  my policy was —
Q    Who  was there,  Senator ?
A    Wait  a  minute now.  Wait  a  minute now.  I  don't  know.    My
policy  was, in  every  instance,  to  get  the  permission   of  the  full  sub-
committee,  and  I  had  to  because  we  had  members  on  the   subcommit-
tee  who  would  object  to  meetings,  to  hearings,  unless  we  did   receive
the  approval.
Q    This  is  a  meeting  that  you  don't  remember  where  it  was?
A    I don't  remember where  it was.
Q    And  you  don't  remember  who  was  there?
A    No.
Q    And  you don't  remember when  it  was ?
A    No.
Q     And  you  don't  have any record  of  it ?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. f\  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  IS,  1063
A    We   keep  no  records.
Q     But  you  are  sure  it  existed ?
A     Because  of  my  policy  and   because  we  couldn't  have  called   the
hearings  if   we  had   not   received   the   approval  of   the  subcommittee;
there  were  members  \vho   would   object.     That   is   my  answer.
Q     On  page  72  of  the  record  of  the  earlier  trial.  I  read  you   from
what  Senator  Hennings  said  at  the  opening  of  this  hearing:  "I  would
like  to  have  the  position  of  the  committee,  if  it  be  the  position  of  the
majority   of  this  committee,  since  the   committee  has   not   met   to   de-
termine  whether  one  policy  or  another  is  to  be  pursued  in  the  course
of   these  hearings  —"    Was   Senator  Hennings  wrong  when  he  indi-
cated  that  the  committee  hadn't met?
A    Well,   I  don't  know  whether   he   was  there  or  not.    That  was
the  open   hearings,  and   I  remember  the  meeting  very  definitely   in  my
office.
Q     Senator   Hennings   said   there   tras   un   meeting,   Mr.   Sourwine
said  there   u>as   no  meeting,  you   can'I   renumber   ii'beii   it   was,   where
il  was or  who  u'as  there?
A    No,   sir.
Q     But  you  say there  was  a  meeting ?
A    I  say  there  was  a  meeting  to  authorize  every   single  investiga-
tion,  and  I  say  that  because  of  the  views of  some  members  of  my  sub-
committee.     There   could   not   have   been   an   investigation   had   there
not   been   prior   approval  by  the   full  subcommittee.
Nothing  Seems  to  Surprise  Him
Q     Did   you  find  it  surprising  that  Mr.  Sourwine  was  unaware  of
that  policy?
A    Well,   you   read   the   rules  of   the   subcommittee.    1  judge   he
knows  what  the  rules  are.     I  don't  know.
Q     Do  you  know  at  the  first  trial  Mr.  Sourwine  testified   that  that
rule  had  never  been  followed '!
A     It's  not  followed  now.
Q     He  testified  it  had  not  been  followed  at  the  time  of  this  hearing.
A     It  hasn't   been   followed  in  several  years,  but   at  that  time   and
to  the   time   I   became  Chairman  of   the   Judiciary  Committee   it   was
scrupulously   followed;   and   as   I   recall,   Senator   McClellan   was   the
moving  spirit  in  getting  the  full   committee  to  authorize  an  investiga-
tion  because  of  the  experience  he  had  had  on  the  McCarthy  Committee.
Q     Why   does  your  committee  not  keep  a  record  of  these   meetings
if  the  rule  requires  that  there  be  such  meetings?
A    The   rules  never  required  that  a  record  of  the  meetings  be  kept.
But  we  kept  none  and  have  never  kept  a  record  of  subcommittee  meet-
ings.
Q     You  didn't  mean  to  say  before  that  there  are  no  records  of  the
subcommittee  meetings,  did  you.  Senator?
A    Well,  there  could  be  records  of  some  of  them.    Certainly  there
can   be   records   of   some   of   them.     I   can't   say  that   we   haven't    —
where  we  take  testimony, of  course  there  is  a  record;  but  I  would  say
this,  that  in  most  of  the   meetings  where  decisions  are  made  or  bills
are  reported  out  there  is  no  official    record.
Q     Let's  stick  to  meetings   where  hearings  are   started.
A    All  right,  sir.    There  could  have  been   some  where  there  was  a
record,  but  I  don't  recall  it.
Q     Are  you  willing  to  try  to  produce   a  record  of  the  meeting  you
remember   that   Mr.   Saumiiie   has  testified    didn't   exist?     Are   you
willing  to  try  and  produce  ft  record   of   that   day?
A      If   there  was  such  a  record,   but   as  a  rule   we   kept   no   records.
We  just  got  the  agreement,   discussed   the   matter   and  got  the   agree-
ment  of  a  majority   of  the  subcommittee  and  then  we  proceeded.     That
is  u-hiit  we  customarily   did.
Q    What  did  you  get  the  consent   of  the  subcommittee  to  at  this
meeting ?
A    Well,   I   would   discuss   the   subject    afld    the   witnesses,    what
information   they   had.
Can't  Remember  Where,  When  or  Who
Q     You   told   this  subcommittee  meeting,  that  you  can't   remember
where  or  when  it  was  or  who  was  there,  what  information  you  had?
A     I  did  that  in  every  case.    The  only  meeting   that  I  can  remem-
ber  when  I  was  chairman,  the  details  of  it,  was  in   my  office,   preced-
ing  the  open  hearings,  and  there  is  a  reason  that  I  can  remember  that.
Q     Senator,   let's  stick  to  the   meeting   I  am  talking  about,   if  you
don't   mind.
A     All  right.
Q     You   mentioned   before   that  you  told   the   Senators   at   this  in-
formal   subcommittee  meeting   —
A     I  mentioned  —   wait   a  minute  now  —   I   mentioned   that  my
policy  was,  when  we  got   permission.
Q    What   did   you  tell   them  at   this   meeting?
A    Well,  I  judge  I  told  them  that  we  had  witnesses  and  outlined
the  information.
Q    What   information?
A    Well,  I  can't  recall  what  any  of  them  testified.     I  don't  remem-
ber.    The  only  person   that   I  remember  testifying  at  this  hearing  was
•j.   man   named  Knowles.
Q     No;   I  am   asking  you  what  information   you   said  you   had  of
this   subcommittee   meeting  prior.
A     I  don't   recall  that,  5/r.
Q     It's  only  eight  years  ago,  isn't  it?
A     Yes,  just  eight  years  ago.
What   Happened  20  Years  Ago
Q     Doesn't    your    subcommittee   continuously   ask   people    things
about  what  happened  fifteen  or  twenty  years  ago,   Senator?
A     Yes,  sir;  but  as  I  told  you,  sir,  I  have  heard   hundreds  of  wit-
nesses  and,   I  judge,  several  hundred   hearings   in  the   meantime,  and
I  am  just  a  human  being,  I  can't  recall  all  of  them.     If  there  is  some-
thing  that  calls  it  to  my  attention,  as  what  happened  in  my  office  when
the   open   hearings   were   authorized,  why,  I   can  remember   that.     It
would  have  to  be  something  like  that.
Q    Senator,   doesn't   this   particular    hearing,    because   of   the    New
York   Times   aspect,   slick   in  your  mind   pretty   well?
A    No.   sir.
Q     You   don't   remember   a   considerable   public   controversy   over
this  hearing ?
A     Yes,  sir;  that  came  up   after   the  hearing  started.    Certainly,   I
remember  that,  but  I  can't  tell  you  who  testified  or  what  they  testified,
except  Mr.   Knowles.
Q     You   cannot   tell   us  anything   about   the   subcommittee  meeting
prior  to  the  executive  hearings   except  that   it  was   held ?
A     I  can't  remember  the  details  of  any  of  it.     I  told  you  that  my
policy  was  to  get  clearance  from  the  subcommittee  before   we   started
hearings  and  that  we  did   that   under  a  rule  that  was  adopted   when
Senator  Kilgore  became  chairman  of   the  committee  in   1945.     I  can
tell  you  what  my  policy  was.     I  also  told  you  that  it  was   necessary
to  get   approval   of   the   subcommittee  because   certain   members   of   it
would  not  agree  to  hearings  unless  the  subcommittee  had  first  cleared
it.    And  we  tried  to  have  a  unanimous report  and  have  always  tried
for   the  subcommittee  to  be  unanimous in  whatever  it  did.
Q     Senator,  would  you  do  me  the  courtesy  of  answering  one  ques-
tion   yes  or  no?     Can  you  remember   anything  about   this   committee,
subcommittee   meeting,   except  that   it   was   held ?
A    No,   sir,  I   remember  nothing   about   it.
Q     Thank  you.    At  the  opening  of  the  first  Shelton  trial  Mr.  Hitz
stated  that  in  his  opinion  —
Q     (Reading:)   "A   man   off   the   street   could   be   called   off   the
street  and  asked,  'Are  you  one  of  the  persons   that  we   have   a  duty
to  protect  this  country  from?' "
/.t   /'/   your   position,  as   chairman   of   the   subcommittee,  that   your
subcommittee   can   call   a   man   off   the   street?
A    Well,   I  think   when  we  have  a  legislative  purpose,   we   can.
Q     You   feel  that  you  could   just  issue  subpoenas   to  the  first  ten
people  going  by?
A    Where  there   is  a   legislative  purpose,   we   have   the   power   to
investigate.
Q     And  you  could  issue  a  subpoena   to  the  first  ten  people  going
by  the   Senate   subcommittee  hearing   room   and  call  them   in   and  ask
them  are  you  a  communist?
A     I  haven't  studied  that  question,   Mr.  Rauh;  it  calls  for   a  legal
answer   that  I  haven't   studied.     I  don't  know.
Q     Has  your  committee   ever   called   anybody   on   that   theory?
A    Not  that  I  know  of,  no  sir.    Now,   there  have  been  people  sub-
poenaed   since   19i6  and   investigations   held   that   I  don't   know   any-
thing  about  because  I  don't  have  the  time  to  devote  to  this   subcom-
mittee that  I  should,
Q     You  sign  all  the  subpoenaes,  don't  you,   Senator?
A     Yes,    sir.
Admits Responsibility
Q    So, you  are responsible,   aren't  you?
A     Yes,    sir.
Q    Well,  how  much time do you devote  to  this?
A    Well,    I   generally   know   when   they    bring   me   subpoenaes    —
wait  a  minute.    I  made  a  mistake  when  I  told  you   that  I  had   signed
all  subpoenaes.      I  have   not.
Q     Who   does?
A     I  sign  some  and  Mr.  Pace  has  signed   some,  my  Administrative
Assistant,  under  my  authority.
Q    Does  Mr.  Sourwine  sign  any?
A    No,   sir.
Q    Does  Mr.  Sourwine  have  any  authority  to  sign  any  subpoenaes?
A    No,  sir.
Q    You  don't  remember  anything  about  the  Shelton   case,  do  you?
A    No,   sir.
Q     Did  you  ever  hear  of  Willard  Shelton?
A    Well,  I  fudge   I  presided   when  he  testified.     The   record  shows
that.
Q     You  presided  when  Willard  Shelton   testified?
A    /   say  I   judge   that.      I   hare   been   informed    the   record   shows
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Bi-Wi-ekly,  February  18,
Q      If    I  tell  you  WillarJ  Shelton  didn't  testify,   what  would  you  say?
A    Well.    I   would   say    I   ii\is   wrong,   of   course,   but   I   don't   re-
member.
Q     At  the  time  you  signed  a  subpoena  for  Robert  —  for  WillarJ
Shcltun  did  you  know  anything  about  Willard   Shelton?
A    We  had  discussed the  —  he  told  me  what  information  he  could
get  from  the  witnesses.   Now,  as  for  an  individual,  I  don't  remember.
Q     At  the  time  you  signed   a  subpoena  for  Willard  Shelton  did
you   have   any   information   about  Willard   Shelton?
A     I  can't  answer  that  question  because  I  don't   remember.
Q     At  the  time  you  signed  the  subpoena  for  Willard  Shelton  did
you   have  any   information   about   Robert  Shelton?
A    I  couldn't   answer   that   question.     I  don't   know.     I  don't  re-
member.
Q    Does   the   subcommittee   keep   any   records   of   why   they   sub-
poena  people?
A    No,  sir.
Q     Isn't  it   a   fact   that  you   signed   these   subpoenaes  because   Mr.
Sourwine   said   they   would   give   you   some   information?     Isn't   that
the   way   it   worked ?
A    We   discussed  what  information   he  had,  and   it  was  up   to  me
to  determine whether to  subpoena them  or  not,  and  that  is what  I  did.
Q     But  you  can't  remember  anything  he  told  you?
A    No   sir,  I  don't   remember  any  of  the  details  of   it.
What  Reston  Reported
Q     Are  you  familiar  with  a  piece  in  the  New  York  Times  of  Fri-
day,   January  6th,   while   these   hearings   were   going   on,   about   the
problem  of  who  issued  these  subpoenaes?
A    No,  sir.
Q    You  didn't  read  the  Times   about   yourself?
A    Of   course  I  did.     I   remember  the  Times   attacked  me  during
the  hearings,  but  what  they  said,  I  don't  remember  that.
Q     I  am  going  to  read  you  a  statement  by  Mr.  Reston  and  ask you
for   once  if  you  will  say  yes  or  no,  whether  it's  true.    This   is   from
page  104  of  the  record  of  the  first  trial.    Here  is  Mr.  Reston's  state-
ment  in  the  New   York  Times  of  Friday,  January  6,   1956:
"When   more  than, fifty    subpoenaes   were   issued   to   people   in   the
press,  radio  and   other  fields   of   communication    on   behalf    of   the   com-
mittee  last  November,  Mr.  Sourwine   was  the  only  person  who  seemed
to  know  anything   about  them.    They   were  issued  under  the  name  of
Senator  Eastland,  but  when  this  reporter  called  the  Senator  about  them,
he  said   he  did   not   know   they   had   been   issued,   did   not   know   the
hearings  had  been  called,  and  said  he  would   hare  to   call  Mr.   Sour-
wine  to  find  out  the  facts."
I  ask  you,  yes  or  no,  did  you  tell  Mr.  Reston  you  didn't  know  they
had   been   issued,  you  didn't  know  the   hearings  had  been   called   and
you  would  have  to  call   Sourwine   to  find  the   facts?
A    No,   sir,  I  don't   remember  anything  about  that.
Q    You  don't   remember  a  thing  about  that?
A    No,  sir.
Q    Was  Mr. Reston right  or  wrong?
A    Well,  I  don't   remember  anything   about   it.     I   have   told  you
what  the   facts   were   in   connection  with   the   subpoenaes.
Q     Do  you  have  any  explanation  if  this  isn't  correct  —
A    We  had  a  policy  that  a  lot  of  times  what  we  were  going  to  do
we  didn't  tell  the  press.
Q    You  had  a policy of what?
A    What  we  planned  to  do  we  did  not  tell  the  press,  and  I  could
have  been  following   that  policy   if  I  told   him  that,  but   I  don't  re-
member.
A  Sort  of  No Comment?
Q     Are  you  suggesting   that  saying  to  a  reporter   that  you  didn't
know  they  had  been   issued,  that  you  didn't   know  the  hearings  had
been  called,  was  a  sort  of  a  no  comment?
A    Let's  put  it  this  way:  I  don't  remember,  but  I  would  have  the
leeway  to  handle  it  as  I  desired  by  not  telling  the  press  anything.
Q    Do   you  consider   this   not  telling   them  anything?
A    Well,   I  certainly  —   if  I   said   that,   I  didn't   disclose   what   I
planned  to  do.    What  is  the  date  of  that,  sir?
Q     Friday,  January  6,  1956.    Did  you  read  this  piece  at  the  time?
A    Oh,  I  could   have.    I  judge  I  did.
Q    I  take  it  you  are  saying  Mr.  Reston  was  not  correctly  quoting
you  when  he  said  you  didn't  —
A   I  just  tell  you  I  don't   remember   anything  about   it.    That  is
the  truth.     I   can't   remember   what   a  newspaper   said   about   me  last
year  or  eight  years  ago.    This  was  eight   years   ago.
Q     Senator,  do  you   have  any  idea  how   many  years  back  your   sub-
committee  goes  in  asking   witnesses   about  things?
A    Well,   we  try  to  get  what  they   remember,   of   course,  what   the
facts   are.
Q    How  jar  back do  you  go?
A    Well,  that  all defends   on  the  case.
Q     Would   you   be  surprised   if   I  told   you   I   was  in   front   of   your
own  subcommittee  last  week   and  they   went   back  to   1944   and   made
a   lady   tell  about   1944?     Would   that   surprise   you   any?
A    Well,   she  answered  the  questions,  didn't   she?
Q     Senator,  I  am  not  asking  you  to   remember   your    conversation
with  Mr.  Reston  now.     I  am  not  asking  you  to  remember  what  you
told  him  or  that  conversation.    I  am  now  asking  you  if  he  was  cor-
rect  on  the  facts  when  he  said  that  you  did  not  know  the   subpoenaes
had   been  issued?
A    Well,   I  did   know  the   subpoenaes   had   been   issued.
Q     But  you  don't  deny  you  may  have  told  him  that  and  he  accu-
rately  reported   it?
A     Certainly   I  don't   deny  it.     I  just  don't  remember.
Suppose  It's   An  Accident
Q     Senator,   if   a   witness  comes   before   your  committee   and   says
he  is  a  victim  of  accident, what  do  you  do  about  it  at  your  committee?
A     If  a  witness  comes  and  says  he  is  a  victim  of  an  accident?
Q     He   is  a  victim  of   accident   in   being   called   before   your   sub-
committee,  what  do  you  do  about   it?
A     I  don't   remember  that  that  has  ever   happened.
Q    Are  you  pretty   sure  it's   never  happened?
A    I  don't  know.    I  don't   remember.
Q    Do  you  have  any  procedure   for  quashing  subpoenaes,   Senator,
before  your  subcommittee?
A    Oh,  I  judge  I  could  withdraw  a  subpoena.    I  have  never  looked
into  it.
Q     Have  you  ever  done  it  at  a  hearing ?
A    I  don't  know.
Q    Have  you  ever quashed  a  subpoena  at  a hearing ?
A    I  don't    remember,
Q    Hare  you  ever,  at  your   hearings,  ever  counted   up  the   number
of   times  a  witness  has  said,  I  don't   remember,   and  used  it  as  a  ques-
tion  of  his  credibility.  Senator?
A    No,  sir.
Q     Now,   Senator,  I  will  have  to  read  you  a  good  bit  of  the  open-
ing  of  the  hearings,  since  you  can't  remember  anything  about  it,  and
try  to  refresh  your  recollection  on  the  opening  of  the  Shelton  public
hearing.
You   understand,  do  you   not,   that   the   present   trial   is   based   on
questions  he  refused   to  answer  at  that  hearing?    Do  you  understand
that?
A    I  have  been  informed  that.
Q    This   is  on  page  83  of  the  record  of  the  first  trial:
"Mr.  Shelton:  I  fail  to  see why  I  am  involved in  this  hearing,  which
the  chairman  said   on  Wednesday   stems  from   the   Burdett  testimony.
There  was  no  reference  to  me  in  the  Burdett  testimony   nor   in  the
testimony  of  Clayton Knowles."
Senator  Eastland, at  the  time  you  overruled  the  objection  what  in-
formation   did   you   have  about   the   witness  before   you ?
A    I  can't  remember.     I  knew  at  the  time.
Q     You   don't   remember  anything  about  it,  do   you ?
Q     Isn't   it   a   fact   that  you   simply  said   overruled  automatically?
A    No,   sir,  because   I  knew  what  he  was   —
Q    What  was he  called  for?
A    Well,  I  said  we  knew  he  had information.
Q     What  information did  you  know  he  had ?
A    Well,  at  the  time  we  knew  what  information   he  had.    We  had
information    that   he   would   testify    to   certain   facts,   but   I   can't   re-
member.
Can't   Remember  One  Fact
Q     You   can't  remember   one  fact,   can  you.   Senator?
A     No,   sir,  I  certainly   can't,     I  don't   remember   the   man.     I  be-
Here  Knowles   is  the   only   witness   whose   testimony   I    remember.
Q     On  page  89  of  the  same  hearings  Mr.  Shelton  stated  as follows:
"I  am  involved  in  these  hearings  as  a  victim  of  accident."    Now   do
you  remember it,  Senator ?
A    No,  sir.
Q     He  said:  "I  am  involved  in  these  hearings  as  a  victim  of  acci-
dent.    The   subpoena  first  served   to  me  was  originally  made  out   in
the  name  of  a  person  who  does  not  work  on  my  paper.    A  committee
aide,  when  told  that  there  was  no  such  person  on  the  Times,  insisted
on  knowing  if  there  was  anyone  with  a  similar name  employed   there.
There  were  a  few,  but  the  only  one  that  interested   your  man  was  the
sole  similar  name  in  the  news  department,  mine.    At  the   executive
hearings  the  committee   counsel   tried  without  success  to  link  me  with
a  certain  New  York  newspaper.    He  was  unable  to  establish  any  con-
nection  because  I  never  worked   for  the  paper  under  discussion.    Yet  I
have  been  called  back  here  today.    It  appears  to  be  just  another  step
in  a  campaign  to  discredit  the  paper  for  which  I  work."
My  question  to  you,  Senator  Eastland,  when  you  overruled  the  ob-
jection  of  Mr.  Shelton  that  he  was  involved  in  these  hearings  as  a
victim  of  accident,  what  did  you  know  as  the  basis  of  overruling  that
objection ?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  18,  1963
A    Well,  I  knew  at  the  time  what  information  we  could  get  from
him,  but  I  can't  remember  at  this  time.    I  don't  know.
Q    I  am  asking  you  whether,  as  chairman  of  the  subcommittee,  you
felt   any  legal  obligation  to  tell  him  why  he  was  not  a  victim  of  acci-
dent  when  he  said  to  your  committee,  I  won't  answer  because  I  am
a  victim  of  accident?
A    No,  sir.
Q    Now,   is  there   now,   having  gone   through  that,   is  there  any
procedure  whereby  a  witness  before  a  committee can  get  a  subpoena
quashed ?
A    I  say I  haven't  studied  it.    I  judge  I  could  quash  a  subpoena,
certainly.    The   committee  could,   of   course.
Q    Why   didn't   you  answer  this  statement,  I  am  a  victim  of  an
accident,  then,  or  else  quash  the  subpoena?
A    I  don't  recall  anything  about  it,  sir.
Q     Senator,   what  legislation   was  under  consideration   by  the  sub-
committee  at  the  time  you  called  the  witnesses  from   the  New   York
Times  in  executive  and   public  session?
A    Well,  it  was  a  study  of  communist  infiltration  and  control  of
mass  media  of   communications,  and   these   hearings   were  communist
infiltration  in  the  press,  newspapers,   these  particular  hearings.     It's  a
question  that  has  been  on  study.    You  have  got  Constitutional  limi-
tations  and  we  were  seeing,  first,  if  there  had  been  infiltration;  second,
the  extent  of  it.    If  we  found  those  two  things;  third,  what  we could
do  about   it  within  the  Constitutional  limitations.
What  Legislation?
Q    I   repeat   my  question.    What   legislation  did   you  have  under
consideration  at this  time?
A    Well,   I   have  said  we  had  no  legislation.    We   had  no  bills
pending  that  I  recall.    Now,   we  could  have.    I  wouldn't  think  so,
though.
Q    You   have   indicated   you   can't   remember   any   bills   pending.
Can   you  remember  any  legislation  that   was  even  suggested,   if   not
pending,  to  which  this  might  be  relevant ?
A    No,  sir.    As  I  said,  as  I  recall,  it  was  a  study  to  see  what  we
could  do,  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  being  what  it  is,  and
we  first  had  to  find  out  what  the  problem  was.
Q    Well,  I  will  now  read  you  the  questions  that  he  is  on  trial  for
not  answering  and  then  ask  you  the  question.    "Count  One  —  Are
you,  sir,  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party  U.S.A.?    Count  Two  —
Did   you  ever  have  any  conversation  with  Matilda  Landsman?"
Can  you  indicate  in  any  way  the  relevance  of  that  to  any  pending
bill  or  any  tegislation  even  under  discussion  that  wasn't   a   pending
bill?
A    I   don't   remember   any  pending   bills.    What   the  discussions
were,  I  don't   know.
Q     The  answer  is  no,  isn't  it ?
A    Well,  the  answer  is I don't  know.    I don't  recall.
Q    On  May  2nd   1961,   or  thereabouts,  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate
did  you  refer  to  the  Watkins  case,  among  others,  as  being  pro  com-
munist ?
A    I  don't   recall.
Q    Do   you   recall   ever   having   listed   the   Watkins    case,   among
others,  as  being  pro  communist?
A    I  think  so.    I  think  I  listed  a  number  of   cases  as  being   pro
communist,  but  when  it  was  and  wh.it  was  in  what  I  said  at  the  time,
the  Congressional   Record  speaks  for  itself.    I  don't   recall.
Vague  Even  on  Watkins
Q    But  now  to  ask  it  more  generally,  Senator,  you  do  agree  with
me  that  you  have  called  the  Watkins  decision  pro  communist?
A    I  say  I  could  have,  yes.    I  think  so.
*Q    Now,  at  the  time,  therefore,   prior  to  the  Watkins   case,  when
you  were  examining  Mr.  Shelton,  presumably  you  were  not   follow-
ing  the  Watkins  case  because  that  was  pro communist?
A    Well,   I   can't   answer  anything  about  examining  Mr.   Shelton
about  something  I  don't  remember.
Q    All  right,  let  me  put  it  this  way—
A    I  don't   know  whether  I  examined  him,  whether   counsel  ex-
amined  him,  or  whether  members  of   the  committee  examined  him.
I  just  don't  remember.
Q    All  right,  let's  try  to  clear  it  up.    Do  you  remember  you  were
there  at  the  New   York   Times   open  hearings?
A     Oh,  yes,  I  was  there,  but  was  in  and  out.    I  was  there  most
of  tht  time.
Q     You  were  there  —   if   I  tell  you  that  the  record  shows  you  were
there  for   the   Shelton   hearing,  will   you   accept   that?
A     I  have  been  informed,   yes,  that  the   record  shows  that;  and  if
it  does,  I  was,  of  course.
Q    All  right.    Now,  the  Watkins  case  was  decided  in  June,   1957.
My  question   is  very  simple.   Were  you  following   the   principles  of
that  case  back  on  January  6,  1956?
A    I  don't  remember  at  this  time  what  the  Watkins  case  held.
Q    Senator,  in  your  entire —  you  just  referred   to  the  fact  that  you
tried  to  be  fair  to  all  the  witnesses  that  come  before   your  committee?
A    Yes,  sir,  we  have  tried  rery   hard  to  be  fair   with  all  the   wit-
nesses.
Q    Can  you   name  a  single   witness   who   has  ever   said   he   didn't
remember  as  often   as  you   have  said  it  this   .afternoon?
A     Well,   I  don't  know,   but  there  are  very  few   men  in  this  coun-
try,  except   a  judge,  that  hears  as  many  witnesses  as  I  hear.
Q     I   just   asked   you  a  simple  question.
A    Well,  I  know.    I  caught  the  implication  in  your  question.
Q     I   was  asking  you   if   you  could  name  one  witness   before   your
committee  that  ever  said,   I   don't   remember,  I  don't   recall,  I   don't
know,  as often  as you  said.
A      I  can't  answer that  question.    I  don't  know.
Q    Senator,  when  did   you   first   hear  about  an  alleged  letter   from
a   confidential    informant    by  the   pseudonym   of   Finbar  to   the   Senate
Internal  Security  Subcommittee?
A    During  this  trial.
Q    During  this  trial?
A    Yes,  sir.
Q    Did   you  first  hear  when   you   read  Mr.   Sourwine   testified    he
destroyed  it?     Is  that  when  you  first  heard   it?
A    No,  sir, I  beliefe   he told  me.
Q    Mr.  Sourwine  told  you?
A    Something  about it.   And  then  I  read  —
Q     When  did  he tell  you that,  Senator?
A     It  was  after   he  had   testified.
Eastland  Contradicts  Himself
<2    /  thought  you  told  us  at  the  opening  you  hadn't  discussed  his
testimony  with  him.
A    No,   I  didn't   say  that.    1  did  discuss  his   testimony.
Q    Oh,  you  did  discuss  Mr.  Sourwine's  testimony  with  him?
A    In general, yes,  sir.
Q    Well,  the  record  alone  will  reflect  whether  you  said  that  or  not.
A    Well,  yes,  the  record  will  reflect  it.    He  told   me  he  testified.
I  haven't  been  into  details  with  him  about  what  he  testified.
Q    Did  he  tell  you  he  testified  he  destroyed  a  letter?
A    Yes,  sir,  something  about  the  letter.    And  then  I  saw  a  state-
ment  you  made  to  the  newspapers   about   it,  to  the  papers  about   it.
I  read  that.
Q    You  saw a statement  I  made ?
A    Yes,   sir.
Q    You  mean  in  cross-examining Mr.  Sourwine ?
A    Well,  I  couldn't  tell  you.    I  don't  know.    Yes,  you  said  you
were  going  to  ask  me  what  authority  he  had  to  destroy  a  letter.
Q    What   authority  did  he  have  to  destroy  a  letter,   Senator?
A    He's  got  the  same  authority  to  destroy  a  letter  that  you  have
to  destroy  one  in  your  own   office   that  you  don't  think   is  any   use.
Q    Well,  now  is  there  a  procedure  for  destroying  documents?
A    I  don't   know  of  it  if  there  is.
Q    Did  you  ever  tell  him  he  was  authorized  to  destroy  documents?
A-   I  never  heard  of  this  letter  until  this  trial.
Q    Lets  go  to  the  other  question.    You   said   Mr.  Sourwine  had
authority   to  destroy  documents  the  way   I   have  in   my   office.      From
whence  —
A     I  said  if   he  considers  that  they  are  no  longer    useful.
Q    From  whence  does  that  authority   come?
A    Well,  now,  frankly,  I  have  never discussed  it  with  him.    I  have
never  conferred   any  such  power  on  him.    I  have  never  taken  any  such
power  away  from  him.    I  have  never  discussed  it,  and   I   have  never
heard  of  that  letter  until  this  trial.
Q    You  have  never  given  him —
A    But  it's   all  right  with   me,  when   he  thinks  a  document  or  a
letter  is  no  longer  of  any  use,  to  destroy  it.
Q    It  was  all  right  with  you  that  he  destroyed  that  document  at
the  time  the  case  was  pending  in  the  Court  of  Appeals?
A    I  don't  know  when  he  destroyed  it,  sir.    I  knew  nothing  about
that.
Right  to  Destroy  Key  Document
Q    This  case  was  pending  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  at  that   time.
Now,   do  you  still  think  it  was  all  right   to  destroy   the   document,
Senator ?
A    I  don't  know  anything  about  it,  Mr.  Rauh.    I  don't  know  what
the  letter  was,  I  don't   know  what  it   meant  or  what   it   has  to  do
with  the  hearing.
Q    Well,  let  me  see  if   I  can  clarify   that  for  you.
In  the  light  of  the  challenge  to  Mr.  Sourwine's  credibility  on  this
letter,  I  ask  you  if  you  still  think  it  was  all  right  for  him  to  destroy
the  letter?
MR.  HITZ:  Excuse  me.    I  object  to  that.  . It  is  wholly  irrelevant
what  Mr.  —
THE   COURT:   All  right,  the  objection  is  sustained.
Q    Would   you  have  authorized   the   destruction  of   that   letter   if
'you  would  have  known  it  related  to  Mr.  Sourwine's  credibility?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  18, 1963
MR.  HITZ:  The  same  objection.
MR.  RAITH:  I  would  like  to  be  heard   on  this,  Your   Honor.
THE   COURT:   All  right,  you  may  be  heard.
MR.  RAUH:  There  is  a  serious  question  of  credibility  in  this  case
of  Mr.  Sourwine.    Mr.  Sourwine  has  apparently  destroyed  this  docu-
ment  without  authority.    I  am  trying  to  find  out  what  kind  of  au-
thority  he  had   to  destroy  documents.
THE   COURT:  That   may  be,  but   the   understanding  of  this  par-
ticular  witness  that  is  presently on  the  stand  is  that  he  has  no  knowl-
edge  of  the   letter.
MR.  RAUH:   I  take  it  you  sustain  the  objection.
THE   COURT:   I  sustain  the  objection,  yes.
Authority  to  Destroy  Documents
Q    Can  you  tell   us  anything  at  all,   Senator   Eastland,   about   the
authority  of   any  member  of  your  staff   to   destroy  documents?
A    Well,  of  course,  I  have  never  conferred  authority.   I  judge  that
some  authority goes  with  the  position  that  a  man  holds,  and  I  would
judge  that  when  he  thought  that  a  document  or  a  letter  had  no  fur-
ther  use  he  would  have  the  right  to  destroy  it.
Q     And  that  would  be  true  even  of  a  document  which  related  to
his  own  credibility?
A     You   see,  I   can't  go  into  that   because  I   don't   know   anything
about  the   letter.     I  nerer   saw  the   letter,   I   never  heard  of   the   letter
until  this  trial.    And   I  think  there  is  some  mix-up   in  the  dates   be-
cause,  as  1  recall,  he  told  me  it  was  destroyed  when  we  were   moving
from  the  old  Senate  Office    Building   to  the  new  Senate  Office    Building,
Q    When  did  he tell  you  that,  Senator?
A     Yesterday.
MR.   RAUH;   Mr.   Reporter,   would   you   please   read   the   question
and   answer  that   1  asked  you   to   look   up  at  the    intermission?
THE   REPORTER:   Shall   1  read   it?
THE   COURT:   Yes,  you  may  read  it.
(The    Reporter   read   the   record  as   follows:    "Question:    Did   you
discuss  Mr.  Sourwine's   testimony   that   he  gave  here  with  him?    An-
swer:  No,  sir.")
Q    Do  you  want  to  change  that,  Senator?
A    What  I  meant  was  that  I  didn't  go  into  the  details  of  his  testi-
mony  here.    Of  course  I  asked  him  if  he  testified, and  I  think  I  related
several  things  that  he  told  me.    This  letter  business was  one  of  them.
In  fact,  the  first  time  I  heard  about  the  letter  was  from   him  during
this  trial.
Q    It  wasn't  accurate,  then,  to  say  you  hadn't  discussed   —
A    Then   I  read  your  statement  —  yes,  I  was  accurate  because  I
meant  the  details of  his  testimony here.    I  haven't  been  into  that  with
him.
Eastland  Tries  to  Explain
Q    You  first  said  you  hadn't  discussed  it  at  all.    Now,  how  much
did  you  discuss?
A    No,  that   is  what  I  meant,  that   I  hadn't  gone  into  the   details
of  his  testimony with  him.    I  haven't.
Q    Well,  now,  one thing  came out,  you  discussed  the  letter.   What
else   did   you  discuss  with   him?
A    Well,  I  asked  him  what  day  —   I  mean  when  the  letter  was
destroyed,  and  he  told  me  it  was  when  we  moved  from  one  building
to  the  other,  that  it  was  in  a  safe  and  that  he  found   some  personal
stuff   of  Senator  McCarran's   in  the   safe.
My  discussions  with  him  have  been  principally  to  refresh  my  recol-
lection  about  what  happened  at  the  hearing  because  I  don't  remember
anything  about  the  hearing.    I  believe  he  told  me  —  yes,  he  told  me
that  he  testified  that  he  had  brought  a  number  of  names  to  me  and  that
he  wanted  subpoenas  and  discussed  in  general  terms  what  information
they  had  before  the  subpoena  was  issued.    I  believe  he  told  me  that.
Q    Do  you  recall  testifying  at  the  trial  of  Seymour  Peck?
A    I   remember   testifying   in  Judge   Youngdahl's   Court.     I  don't
remember  the  name  of  the  witness  —  I  mean  the  style  of  the   case,
excuse  me.
Q    It  was  in  Judge  Youngdahl's   Court  back  on  May  22nd  1957.
You  do  remember  that?
A    Yes,  sir,  I  remember  testifying.
Q    Do  you  remember  Mr.  Telford   Taylor   examining  you  at  that
time?
A    Since  you  mentioned  it,  I  believe  he  did  examine  me,  yes,  sir.
I  believe  that  is  who  it   was.
Q    Page  227  of  the  transcript   in  the  Peck   case,  Mr.  Taylor   says:
"I  wanted  to  ask you  to  describe  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was
decided   that   this   subject  —"  that   is,  the   communist  infiltration  of
communications  —  "would   be  inquired  into  by  the   subcommittee."
Answer  by yourself:
"Now   wait  a  minute.    Do  you  mean —
"Question:  The  hearings  involving   mass  infiltration.
"Answer:  Infiltration of  mass  communications?
"Question:  Mass  communications,  yes.
"Well,  it  was  a  subject  that,  under  the  title  Strategy   and  Tactics
of  World  Communism,   we  had  been  investigating  for   a  number  of
years.
"Well,  can  you  be  any  more  specific   about  when  it  was  decided  to
go   into   this   field   of   mass   communications?
"To   go  into  the   field   of?     No,   I  wouldn't  know."
I  take  it,  therefore,  you  have  recollected  this  meeting  you  had  since
you   testified   in  March   1957,   is  that  correct?
A    No,  sir.    Was  he  one  of  the  witnesses  at  these  hearings ?
Q    Yes.    You  didn't   remember  that  subcommittee   meeting  at  this
time.
A    Well,  I  didn't  connect  the  two  up,  but  certainly,  as  I  told  you,
we  had  —  I  couldn't  hold  a  hearing  until  I  got  the  approval  of  the
subcommittee,   because   members   of   the   subcommittee   would   object;
and   that  is   the   way   I   remembered,   that   we   would   first   get   their
approval.
Q    But  you  didn't  remember  it  in  '57,  did  you,  Senator?
A    Oh,  I  don't  recall  the  details  of  that,  sir.    We   had  Winston
Burdett,  I  believe,  in  '55,  in  the  summer  of  '55.    I  can  remember  his
testimony.
Investigating  Every  Cell
Q    You  testified  at  this  same  hearing,  at  page  232:  "We  were  in-
vestigating  every  communist  cell  in  any  business,  in   any   profession,
that  we  could  find,  and  there  were  no  specific  instructions  about  mass
communications.   When  we  got  information  about  a  communist  cell,
wherever  it  was,  we  would  see  what  facts  could  be  developed  and  we
would  do  that."
Do  you  remember  —
A    Oh,  yes, that  is  correct.
Q     That   is  correct.    Do  you  remember   this,  your  testimony:
"We   were  after  each  communist  cell  that  we  could  find  in  any  in-
dustry  in  the  United  States and  we  were  after  them  to get  a picture—"
A    Of  course,  that  was  our  duty  under  Senate  Resolution  366,  and
that  is  what  we  did,  try  to  perform  the  responsibilities  the  Senate  had
placed  upon   us.
Now,   this  one  present  subject  is  one  segment  of  that  overall  duty;
and  generally  we  have  investigated  every  communist  cell  that  we  could
get  information  on,  yes,  sir,  as  a  basis  for   legislation.
Q    Is  it  the  purpose  of  the  committee  to  get  every  cell  past  and
present  and  the  names  of  all  the  people  in  every cell?
A    We  got  what  information  we  could,  yes,  sir.
Q     Is  it  your  purpose  to  get  as  many names  of  communists  as  there
were?
A    No.
Q    What   is  the  purpose?
A    The  purpose  was,  of  course,  to  get  the  extent,  get  what  they
were  doing,  and  see  what  legislatively  we  could  do  to  hamper  com-
munist   infiltration   and   domination   in   this  country.
Q    Therefore,   the   purpose  was  to   get   all  the   cells   and   all   the
people  in  the  cells?
A    I  say I  think  that  the  Senate  Resolution  366  places  that   respon-
sibility  on  the  Judiciary  Committee,  and  the  Judiciary  Committee  has
passed  it  on  to  the  Internal  Security Subcommittee.
Q    Do  you  remember  in  what  authorization that  was?
A    But  this  is  just  one  segment  of  the  overall  picture.    What  you
have  asked  me  is  the  overall  picture.
Q    That  is  correct.    And  is  the  overall  picture,  then,  that  the  com-
mittee  feels  it  should  get  all  the  cells  past  and  present   and  all   the
people   in   them   on   the   record ?
A    On  the  record?
Q     Yes,  so that  you would  —
A    Get   full   information,  certainly.    Where  there   is  a  conspiracy
to  overthrow  the  Government  of  the  United   States  by  force  and  vio-
lence,  I  think  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Congress  to  pass  appropriate  legis-
lation  that  can  curb  it.    That  is  what  we  have  tried  to  do.    The  Sen-
ate  certainly  has  given  the  Judiciary  Committee  that   power.
Q     Mr.  Sourwine  testified  that  29  of  the  35  witnesses  called  in  ex-
ecutive   session   were   present   or   past   employees   of   the   New   York
Times,  and   15  of  the   18  witnesses  called  in  public  session  were  past
and   present   members  of   the   Times,   except   for   one,   who   was   the
brother  of  a  present  employee  of  the  Times.    Is  that  your  recollection?
A    I  knew  most  of  the  witnesses  were  employees  of  the  New  York
Times.    I  can't  tell  you  what   number.
Q    But  you  did  know  most  of  them  were  from  the   Times?
A    Yes,   sir.
"Come  Clean,  Just  Once"
Q    Senator,  wouldn't   you,  just  as  you   have  said  to  so  many   wit-
nesses,  come  clean  once  and  tell  us,  isn't  it  a  fact  that  the  sole  purpose
was  to  get  at  the  New  York   Times?
A    Why?   No.    Why?
Q    I  asked  you  a  question.
A    I  said  no.    The  answer   is  no.
Q    All   right.   That  is  your   answer.
A    That's  right.
MR.  RAUH:   No  further  questions.
2   1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  18, 1963
The  Broader  Political  Purposes  of  the  Furore  Over  Cuba
(Continued   from    Pcige    One)
This  is  a  good  time  to  remember  that  the  recent  national jit-
ters   over   a  non-existent  missile   gap   was  stirred  up   by   Air
Force  intelligence  through  Senators  like  Symington  and journ-
alists  like  the  AIsops  behind  the  backs  of  Eisenhower  and  Al-
len  Dulles.     The   larger  our  intelligence  community  becomes
the  bigger  the  menace  it  represents  to  responsible  government.
A   Weapon  Against  McNamara
John  A.  McCone,   who  presides  over  our  proliferating net-
work   of   more   or   less  autonomous  and   mutually  suspicious
gumshoe  agencies,  is  himself  a  rightist  Republican  Catholic of
apocalyptic  holy  war  views.    The  furore  over  Cuba  serves  two
political  purposes.     One  is  to  block  a  general  settlement.    As
the  Wall  Street  Jonnitil  reported  the  day  after  the  President's
press  conference,  "New   easing  of  cold  war  tensions fades fur-
ther  into  the  future.    Russia's  military  presence  in  Cuba  be-
comes  a  major  obstacle  to  any  U.S.-Soviet  accord.    Domestic
political  pressure   may  force  Kennedy  to  make  withdrawal  a
prerequisite  for   agreement   on   a  nuclear  test  ban,   Berlin,  or
any  other   issue.    But  Russia  can't  retreat  easily,  for   weaken-
ing  its  position  in  intra-Communist  strife  with  China."     The
other   purpose   is  to   discredit  Defense   Secretary   McNamara.
The   Air  Force  crowd  and  its  industrial  allies  are  bitter   over
his  readiness  to  end   bomber   production  as  obsolete   and   his
recognition   (in  his  new  budget  presentation,  see  box  on  this
page)   that  counter-force  strategy   is  no   longer   feasible,   and
that  the  arms  race  is  approaching  a  dead  end.     It  is  this  and
the  growing  Latin American crisis  (as  the  President  said)  that
the  country  ought  to  be  discussing,  not  these  artificial  night-
mares  over   Cuba.
."Ask  not  what  your  country can  do  for  you,"  Mr.  Kennedy
needs  to  be  reminded,   "but  what  you  can  do  for  it."     At  his
Feb.  7  press  conference  he  declared  himself  ready  to  precipi-
tate  the  greatest  crisis  in  world  history  if  it  should  turn  out
that   Soviet  offensive   weapons   were  returning  to  Cuba.     But
this  readiness  to  sacrifice  us  all  in  a  nuclear  holocaust   is  not
matched  by  a  readiness  to  put  his  own  future  on  the  line  in
an  effort  to  save  the  country  and  the  peace.    The  meagre  mail
coming  to  Capitol  Hill  on  Cuba  indicates  that  this  is  still  an
ersatz   tempest   confined  to   the   politicoes.     Bold    leadership
End  of  Counter-Force  Illusions
"As   the   events   of   last   October   have   so    forcefully
demonstrated,   expanding  arsenals  of   nuclear   weapons
on  both  sides  of  the  Iron  Curtain  have  created  an  ex-
tremely   dangerous  situation   not  only   for  their  posses-
sors  but  also  for  the  entire   world.     As  the  arms  race
continues  and  the  weapons  multiply   and  become  more
swift  and deadly,  the  possibility  of  a  global  catastrophe,
either  by  miscalculation  or  design,  becomes  ever  more
real.
"More   armaments,   whether   offensive    or   defensive,
cannot  solve  this  dilemma.    We  are  approaching  an  era
when  it  will  become  increasingly  improbable  that  either
side   could   destroy    a   sufficiently   large   portion   of   the
other's   strategic   nuclear   force,   either  by   surprise  or
otherwise,   to  preclude   a  devastating  retaliatory   blow.
"This  may  result   in  mutual   deterrence  but  it  is  still
a  grim  prospect.    It  underscores  the  need  for  a  renewed
effort  to find some  way,  if  not  to  eliminate  these  deadly
weapons  completely,   then  at  least  to  slow  down  or  halt
their   further   accumulation,  and  to  create   institutional
arrangements  which   would   reduce  the  need  for  either
side  to  resort   to   their   immediate   use   in  moments  of
acute   international  tension.    The   U.S.    and  the  Soviet
Union,  as  the  two  great  nuclear  powers,  are  the  nations
most  directly  endangered  by  these  weapons  and  there-
fore   have  a  great  mutual   interest  in  seeing  to  it  that
they  are  never  used."
—Secretary   of  Defense   McNamara    on  new   military
budget   to  House   Armed  Services  Committee,  Jan.   30.
could  put  the  peddlers   of  hysteria  on  the  run.    The   present
policy  of  neither  war  nor  peace  in  relations  with  Cuba   must
end  sooner  or  later  in  war;  the  vultures  will  not  be  satisfied
until  Cuba  has  been  invaded  though  it  be  at  the  risk  of  World
War   III.    The   only  sane  solution   is  demilitarization  of   the
island   under  international  guarantees  as   the   Cubans   them-
selves  suggested  at  the  UN  last  Fall.    But  this  means  recog-
nition   of   Castro,   resumption  of   trade   and   negotiations,   the
honoring  of  Inter-American  treaty  obligations   not  to  use  co-
ercion  in  this  hemisphere  against   regimes  we  dislike.     Only
such  a  course  can  avoid  war,  and   clear  the  way  for   peaceful
resolution   of   Latin  America's   volcanic   problems.      But   this
would  require  Mr.  Kennedy  to  rally  and  lead  public  opinion
in  a  way  he  has  never  before  attempted,  and  to  risk  his  poli-
tical  career.    This  is  what  he  could  do  for  his  country.
We'll  Be  Glad  to  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  Friends,  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Envelopes
I.F.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .............................................................................—....—
Street   ......................................................................._........—
City   ............................................Zone.............State....................
2/18/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   .........................................................................—
Street    ........._._-..................._...................................................
City  ...........—.........................Zone........_.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
I.F. Stone's Bi- Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,    N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Pamphlet  Reprinting  Cuban  Visit  Articles  Now  Available  for  25c  or  15c  in  Bulk
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED