I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963feb04.pdf

============================================================

Behind  de  Gaulle's  Revolt
Rejected  Britain  Was  Only  Recently  Itself   Getting  Ready  to  Reject  The  Common Market
I.  F. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  4
FEBRUARY   4,   1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
End   of  the  Russo-American  'Century'
Anybody  who  opposes  American  policy  is, by out  definition,
insane.    So  de  Gaulle  has  now  joined  Castro  in  Washington's
booby  hatch.    Even  the   ordinarily  urbane  Economist    speaks
of   his   scheme   for   a   French-dominated  Western   Europe   as
"demented."     The  truth  is  that  France,  like  Cuba,   and  with
France  most  of  Western  Europe,  wants  to  be  free  to  control
its  own   destiny   independently  of   U.S.   policy.    De   Gaulle's
revolt  in  the  West,  like  Mao's   revolt  in  the   East,  signals  a
historic  change,  the  breakup  of  the  Eastern  and  Western  blocs
we  have  known  since  the  Second  World  War,   the  beginning
of  a  new  configuration in  world  politics,  the  end  of  a  Russo-
American   "century"  that  has  lasted  characteristically,  in  this
era   of   swift   military   technological   change,   all   of   17  years.
And   as  the   blocs  break  up,   Moscow   and   Washington    both
to  inch  their  way  toward  a  settlement  on  Berlin  and  nuclear
testing.    We  are  on  the  threshold  of  a  new  era.
Decline  Of  The  Holy  War  Mystique
Moscow  has  been  slow  to  respond  to  the  Western  split,  as
we  have  been   slow  to  respond  to  the  Eastern,  because   both
capitals  have  been  alike  in  their  naive  view  of  world   affairs.
An   ideological  haze,  there  of  a  vulgarized  Marxism,  here  of
a   semi-mythical  "free   enterprise,"   has   made   it   difficult   for
either  capital  to  understand  what  history  so  plainly  teaches—
that  national  interests  and  not  ideologies  are  the  main  springs
of  the  relations  between  nations,  and  that  their  alliances  and
friendships   ebb  and  fall   like  the   tides   of   the   sea  with   the
changes   in   their   internal   and   external   needs.     This   calm
perspective,  which  Richelieu  knew  and   de  Gaulle   applies,   is
difficult   for  people   to  grasp  who  have   been   brought   up  on
the  holy  war  mystique  with  which  both   Moscow   and  Wash-
ington  have  invested  their iquarrels.    Not  the  least .important
aspect  of  the  corning  change  is  that  it  may  develop  saner  ways
of  looking  at  the  world.
The  breakup  of  the  blocs   is  not  due  to  the   intransigence
of  de  Gaulle.    It  is  due  to  two  changes  in  the  sphere  of  mili-
tary  technology.   One  is  the  slow  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  to
new  nations  despite  the  effort  of  the  two  nuclear   superpowers
to  maintain  a  monopoly   on  their  respective   sides.    The   re-
sentment  France  feels  at  our  unwillingness   to  help  her  into
the  nuclear  club  must  be  similar  to  that  which  China  feels  at
the  equally  uncomradely  attitude  of  Moscow  when   asked   to
share  its  nuclear   secrets.     France   has,   nonetheless,    achieved
the   bomb,   and   China   soon   will.    Whatever  the   immediate
military  significance,  the  psychological   impact  is  not  to  be  un-
derestimated.    Possession  of  The   Bomb   is  the   status  symbol
of  world  politics;  just  as  France  impressed  Germany  with  her
achievement,  so  Peking  will  impress  Tokyo.    Closer   relations
between   China  and  Japan,   like  those   between   Germany   and
France,  are  in  the  cards  and  will  also  run  athwart    America's
Great  Design.    This  Great  Design,  when  astringently   exam-
Tired  of   the   Cold  War
"From  the  point  of  view  of  the  U.S.,  it  is  clearly  in
our   interests   to   welcome   negotiations   on   Berlin,   on
Germany,  or  indeed  on  any  and  all  European  problems
in  which  we  are  involved.    In  the  absence   of   a  more
stable   situation  in   Berlin   and  hence   in   Europe,   the
prospects   at   best   can  only   be   for   a   continued  drain
on  our  resources   for   many  years,  without  clear  indi-
cation  of  how  or  when  this  drain  will  be  ended.  .  .  .
".  .  .  the  increases  in  Common Market tariffs  on  agri-
cultural  products,  as  against  former  European  national
tariffs,  carry  grave  implications  for  the  foreign  trade
of   the   U.S.    Agricultural  exports  constitute  a  major
element   of   export   to   Western   Europe   and   a  major
source  of  exchange   earnings.  .  .  .  These   tendencies  in
the   Common  Market,  moreover,  take  on  added  signifi-
cance  in  the  light  of  an  expanding trade  between  West-
ern   Europe   and   the   Communist  nations   of    Eastern
Europe. .. .
"If   there   are   grounds   for   concern  with  European
attitudes   toward   foreign   aid,   even   more   serious   is
the   European  reluctance  to   increase   contributions   to
the  common  defense  of  the  West   under  NATO ...  if
the   Europeans   believe   that   peace   can   be    sustained
without   the  addition  of   the   promised  European   divi-
sions  .  .  .  there  is  no  reason   to  reject   the  possibility
that   it  can  be  maintained  with  fewer  American  divi-
sions  in  Europe.  .  .  .
"Finally,   inasmuch   as   there   is   little   likelihood   of
Western  Europe  adopting  trade  inhibitions  comparable
to   our  own,  we   should   consider   equalizing   the  com-
mercial   opportunities  of   our   own   people   in   Eastern
Europe,  particularly in  the  realm  of  agricultural  com-
modities  and,  in  this  connection,  reexamine  both   Ex-
ecutive   procedures  and   pertinent   legislation."
—Berlin  In  A  Changing   Europe:  A  Report  made  to
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  at  the  Presi-
dent's  request  by  Majority   Leader  Mansfield   and  Sena-
tors  Boggs  (Del),   Pell  (R.I.)  and  Smith  (Mass)   Jan.  28.
ined,   is  nothing   more   than   perpetual   containment   and   cold
war.    The  secondary  powers  East  and  West  are  sick  of  both.
There  are  signs  (see  box  on  this  page)  that  we  are,  too.
The  second  technological   change  is  the  obsolescence  of  the
liquid  fuel  intermediate  range  missiles  we  set  up  in  Western
Europe   and   their   replacement   by  Polaris   submarines.     The
IRBM's  we  are  now  removing  from  Turkey,  Italy  and  Britain
were  originally,  established,   like  Moscow's  in  Cuba,  to  over-
come  an  unfavorable  gap  in  intercontinental  missiles.    Their
removal  from  Italy  and  Turkey  has a  double  significance.  From
one  point  of  view,  it  may  be  seen  as  a  response  in  kind  to  the
removal  of  the  Soviet  missiles  from  Cuba.    The  Turks  were
as  attached   to  their  missiles  as  the  Cubans  were;  the   Ameri-
cans  manning  them  were,  like  the  Russians  manning  those  in
Cuba,  a  guarantee  that  any  attack  by  the  superpower  neighbor
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
1   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  4,1963
would  bring  the  other   superpower   at  once  into  the   conflict.
Only  a  few  months  ago  the  Turks  were  protesting  against  any
deal  equating  their   bases  with   Cuba's.     Now   they  are  sud-
denly  to  be  removed,  ostensibly  to  be  replaced  by  a  multi-
national  Polaris  force.    But  the  Associated  Press  in  the  first
report  on  the  missile  evacuation  (Washington  Star,  Jan.   24)
admitted   that  this  force  would   not  be  ready  "until  close  to
1970."  In  the  meantime, the  AP  quickly added,  "the  U.S.  has
more  than   enough   long   range   missile  power   to   shield   the
alliance."    This  is  what  Russia  told  the  Cubans.    The  fact  is
that   both   the  missiles  in  Turkey   and   the  missiles  in  Cuba
were  of  a  kind  suitable  only  for  a  first  strike.     Their  with-
drawal  on  both   sides  eases  tension,  even  at  the   expense  of
making  smaller  allies  feel  less  secure.
Ready  For  a  Fortress  America
The  other  aspect  of  the  missiles  removal  is  of  more   long
range  significance.    The  development  of  the  ICBMs  and  the
Polaris  means  that  we  no  longer  need  European  bases.    The
earlier  feeling  of   Atlantic  Community  comfortably  idealized
the  fact  that  we  had  to  put  our  troops  and  missiles  in  Europe
as  forward   bases  of   containment  against   the   Soviet  Union.
Technology  has  made  such  forward  bases  vulnerable  to  Soviet
attack   and   unnecessary    for   American    strategy.      Militarily
speaking,  we  are  ready  to  be  a  Fortress  America,  whose  long
range  missiles  and  widely  ranging  submarines  can  cover  the
globe   from   our  own  emplacements   and   bases.    So  it  is  im-
portant  to  notice that  de  Gaulle's  declaration  of  independence
from  the  United  States  came just  at  the  time  when  we  became
technologically  independent,  in  a  military  sense,  from  West-
ern  Europe.     At  the  same  time  Western   Europe,   thanks  to
its  amazing  recovery  and  the  Common   Market,  became  eco-
nomically  independent  of  the  United  States.    The  most  dra-
matic  evidence  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  figures  on   com-
parative  gold  holdings  given  in  the  last  report  of^  the  Council
of  Economic  Advisers  to  the  President.    At  the  end  of   1948
the  U.S.  held  71  percent  of  the  free  world's  gold  and  Western
Europe  only   15  percent.    By  June  of  last  year  our  share  of
the  gold  supply  had  fallen  to  40  percent,   theirs  had  risen  to
44  percent. The  six countries of  the  Common  Market  between
them  have  surpassed   the  U.S.   in  volume  of  exports  and  im-
ports  combined.    Its  population,  only  slightly  less  than  ours,
Liberty,  Like  Charity  .  .  .
If  the  Procurator  of  the  Soviet  Union  were  asked  to
speak  on  civil  liberties  and  devoted  himself  exclusively
to   denouncing    their   infraction   in   the   United   States,
he  would  evoke  snorts  of  derision.    This—in  reverse—
is  what   Attorney   General   Robert   Kennedy   did  in   his
address  before   the   10th   anniversary  of   the   Fund  for
the  Republic's   Centre  for  the  Study   of  Democratic  In-
stitutions.    The  talk   was   to  be  on  Civil   Liberties   and
the  Cold  War,  but  at  the  last  minute  he  changed  this
to  Civil  Rights   and  the   Cold   War.     He  did  speak  out
strongly  against  violations  of  civil  liberties,  but  only  in
the   Soviet   Union,   South  Africa   and  Ghana.     He  said
not  one  word  about  their  decline  at  home,  or  our  own
need  for  a  refresher  in  Jeffersonianism.     What  he  had
to  say  of  the  Soviet  Union's  failings  was  quite  true  if
—like  his  jokes—hardly  new.     But  only  to  talk  of  the
mote  in  the  other  fellow's  eye  was  less  than  Christian
in  a  speech  so  well  larded  with  references  to  God.    One
of  the  luncheon   guests  summed   up  the  disappointment
when  he  said,  amid  the  weak  spatter  of  barely  polite
applause,   "Well,   we've   just   won   another   victory    in
the  cold   war."
now  represents  the  largest  single  trading  bloc  in  the  world.
The   interests  of  the  Common  Market  coincide  with  those
of  the  United  States  and  Britain  neither  in  the  economic  nor
in  the  political  sphere,   much  less   in  the   military.    From  a
military  point   of   view,  both   the   French   and   the   Germans
resent  our  pressure  on  them  to  raise  the  number  of  their  con-
ventional   troops;   they   see   themselves   as   expendable   foot-
soldiers  in  a  nuclear  army.    From  an  economic  point  of  view,
the  United  States,  the  British  Commonwealth   and  France  are
competitors  in  agriculture.    France  would  like  to  utilize  the
common  market,  first  to  expand  its  farm  production   (at   the
expense  of  the  surpluses  we  are  already  producing)   and  sec-
ondly   to  gain   a  preferred   position   in   the   West   European
market  for  Algeria  and  the  tropical  products   of  the  French
speaking  Africans   (at  the  expense  of  Latin  America).    Po-
litically,  de  Gaulle  has  long   resented  Anglo-American  dom-
ination.    We  turned  down  his  proposal   for  a  3-power  direc-
torate  over NATO  in  1957  and  he  has  been  on  an  independent
line  ever  since.    His  biggest  argument  now  for  covert  Ger-
man  cooperation  is that  a  deal  between  Kennedy  and  Khrush-
chev  would  freeze  a  divided  Germany  permanently;  Moscow
Timely  Reminder:  The  Efficiency  of  the  Defense   We're   Getting   for  $50  Billion-A-Year
In  an  interview  with  David  Kraslow  of  the  Knight  News-
papers,    Attorney    General    Robert   Kennedy   disclosed   that
no   U.S.   air   cover   of   the   Bay   of   Pigs  invasion  was   ever
promised   or  planned.     The  Attorney  General  was   a   mem-
ber  of  the  4-man  commission  which  investigated  the  abor-
tive  attack  on  Cuba.    This  contradicts  the  many  now-it-can-
be-told  accounts  that   the  failure   was  due  to  a  last-minute
order  countermanding   plans  for  air  cover.   The  Bay  of  Pigs
debacle,  the  Attorney  General  told  Mr.  Kraslow,  could  not
be   attributed   to   "any   single   factor.     There   were  several
major  mistakes.    Victory  was  never  close."    Yet  the  basic
plan,  as  the  Attorney  General  said  in  an  interview  with  the
U.S.   News  & World  Report,  was  "approved  by  our  military,
the  Pentagon,  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  as  well  as  the  CIA."
The  failure  was  the  failure  of  our  military  and  intelligence
bureaucracy.
This  bureaucracy,  if  not  the  largest,  is  certainly  the  most
expensive  of  its  kind  in  history.   The  new  budget  estimates
sent  Congress  a  few  days  before  these  interviews  were  pub-
lished  show  that  we  are  now  spending  more  than   $50" bil-
lions  a  year  on  it.    In  fiscal  '64  this  will  reach  $56  billions,
$20  billions  more  than  ten  years  earlier.    In  those  ten  years
we  will  have  spent  more  than  $400  billions  on  our  military
establishment.     How   much    additionally    has   gone   to   the
CIA  is  a  secret.    We  suspect  it  wasn't  skimpy.
Yet  this  enormous  machine  could  hot  competently  plan  a
military   task  as  easy  as  the  invasion  of  an  island  only  90
miles   away,   its   skies   open   to   constant   surveillance,   its
shores   easily    infiltrated    by   agents,   its    communications
readily   monitored,   its  weapons  then  only  the  cast-offs  we
gave  Batista  and  he  left  behind.   The  Generals  and  the  spy
chiefs  whose  pictures  smile  or  glower  at  us  regularly  from
the  covers  of  our  big  magazines  turned  out  to  be  better  at
press  agentry  than  war.     "What  if  such  botched  planning,"
the  Washington  Star  asked  in  an  editorial,  "had  formed  the
basis  for  a  major   U.S.   military   operation?    We  would  be
lucky   if  anyone  had  gotten  out  alive."    There  is  no  doubt
the  $50 billions  a  year  we  give  the  Pentagon  could  do  a  lot
of  damage.    The  doubt  is  how  many  of  us  would  be  around
when  it  had  gotten  through  with  our  defense.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  4,19SS
would  never  relinquish  East  Germany  to  a  U.S.   dominated
Atlantic  Community  but   might   do  so  to  a  genuine   Third
Force,  especially  if  the  Common  Market  offered  trade advan-
tages  to  the  Eastern  bloc.    Beyond  that  lies  his  old  dream  of  a
Europe  united  from  the  Atlantic to  the  Urals,  and  he  sees  this
coming  with  the  split  between  Moscow  and  Peking.
British  Hostility  to Common  Market
The  question  of  Britain's  adhesion  to  the  Common  Market
has  been  vastly  oversimplified  in  this  country.    If  de  Gaulle
hadn't  rejected  Britain,  it  is  quite  likely  that  Britain  would
soon  have  rejected  the  Common  Market.    Few  seem  to  recall
that   three   British   elder   statesmen,   Lord   Avon   (Anthony
Eden),   Earl  Attlee   (Clement   Attlee)   and  the  Marquess  of
Salisbury  only  a  few  months  ago  opposed  Britain's  entry  into
the  Common  Market, that  virtually  every  British  farm,  business
and  labor  organization  had  come  out  against  joining and  that
Gaitskell   was  about  to  exploit  British  national  and  imperial
feeling  by making  opposition  to  the  Common  Market  Labor's
main  theme  in  the  next  elections.    "It  means the  end  of   1,000
years  of  history  and  the  end  of  the  Commonwealth,"   Gait-
skell  said  of  joining  the  Common  Market  in  a  radio  address
last  September.     Macmillan's  Conservatives  were  badly   split
on  the  question.     Now   Macmillan  can  have  the  best  of  all
possible  worlds—de  Gaulle  rather  than  Britain  has  taken  the
onus  of  breaking  up  the  talks,  the  Conservatives  are  united
again,  and   London   can  utilize  American  resentment   against
France  to  solidify  that   "special  relationship"   with   Washing-
ton  which  the  British  prize  and  de  Gaulle   resents.
There  has  been  oversimplification,  too,  in  our  press  reports
of  opposition  to  de  Gaulle  from  his  European   partners.     In
the  16  months  of  negotiation   over  Britain's  entry,  they  have
been  unanimously  opposed  to  the  concessions  Britain  asked.
The  talks  had  made  little  progress  on  the  three  main  questions
of  a  common  tariff,  a  common  agricultural  policy  and  what  to
do  about  Britain's  partners  in  the  Commonwealth  and  in  the
European  Free Trade  Association,  the  so-called  "Outer  Seven."
No  Place  for   Kowalski
We  regret   the   acceptance  by  former  Congressman
Frank  Kowalski   (D.  Conn)  of  an  appointment  by   the
President  to  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.
This  is  a  kangaroo court  set  up  by  Congress  over  Pres-
ident  Truman's veto  as  a  means  of  blacklisting  radicals
and  radical  organizations.   A  liberal  like  Mr. Kowalski
can  only  dignify  it  by  his  presence;  he  cannot  hope  to
change  its  character.   Its  built-in  verdicts  and  its  po-
tential  for  thought  control  helped  to  turn  one  of  Mr.
Kowalski's   predecessors    on   the   board,   Harry  Cain,
from   a  McCarthyite  into  a  crusader  for   the   Bill  of
Rights.    Only  once  before  has  a  liberal  been  appointed
to  the  SACB.   This  was  when  Truman named a  maver-
ick   Republican' from  Indiana,  Charles  M.  La  Follette,
to   the   first   Board  in  October,  1950.    La  Follette,   a
former  Congressman,  was  already  a  marked  man with
the  Rightists  for  his  exposure  of  Nazis  in  German  in-
dustry  as  a  military  governor  in  the  Reich.    His  ap-
pointment  was  killed by  the  Internal  Security Commit-
tee  of  the  Senate,  then  under  Pat  McCarran. McCarran
refused  to  report  the  nomination to  the  Senate  for  con-
firmation,  and  with  the  close  of  Congress   in  October,
1951,  La  Follette's  interim  appointment  ended.   Maybe
Eastland  will  do  the  same  for  Kowalski.   He   deserves
a  better  fate  and  a  more  decent  job.
De  Gaulle's  point  that  admission  of  Britain  with  all  its  world-
wide  connections  would  fundamentally  change  the  nature  of
the  European  Common  Market  can  hardly  be  disputed.     Nor
can  .one  deny  that  our  hostility  to  allowing  European   neutrals
like  Sweden  and  Switzerland  into  the  Common   Market   and
our  anxiety  to  get  Britain  in  reflects  a  desire  to  tie  any  Euro-
pean  combination  securely  to  us  politically.     Finally  the   "in-
terdependence"  Kennedy  offered  Europe  in  his  July  4  speech
last  year turned  out  in  the  Cuban  crisis  to  be  a  one-way  street.
When  we  felt  our  vital  interests  involved,  we  took  the  world
to  the  brink  of   nuclear   war  without   consulting   our  allies.
But  when  Britain  and  France  felt  their  vital  interests  endan-
gered  in  Nasser's  seizure  of  the  Suez  Canal,  we  joined   hands
Three  Prize  Exhibits:  What  Anti-Castro  Fanaticism  Is  Doing  to  the  U.S.
There  may  be  some  dispute  as  to  what  Castro  is  doing
to  Cuba.   There  can  be  none  as  to  what  he  is  doing  to  the
U.S.    We  offer  three  items.    One  was  the  release   by  the
Senate   Internal  Security   Committee  of   hearings  charm-
ingly  entitled,  "Attempts  of  Pro-Castro  Forces  to  Pervert
the  American   Press."    This  contains  rather   wild   charges
made  by  a  Cuban  refugee  against  six  American  journalists
who  visited  Cuba,  and  reached  conclusions  too  friendly  to
Castro.    The  effect  is  to  put  U.S.  newspapermen on  notice
that  this  Senatorial  Big  Brother is  listening.   Any  observa-
tions  in  Cuba  which  do  not  fit  the  preconceptions  of  Chair-
man   Eastland  or  Vice  Chairman  Dodd   may  result  in   the
issuance  of  subpoenas.   This puts a  "handle with  care"  sign
on  freedom  of  the  press.
The  second item is  the  news that  the  Medical  Aid  to  Cuba
Committee   is   dissolving.    The  reason   given   is   that   the
$25,000,000  in  medical  supplies  given  Castro  as  part  of  the
ransom  for  the  Bay  of  Pigs  prisoners  makes  its  work  un-
necessary.    The  truth   is   that   the   going  over  given  this
group  by  the  House Un-American  Activities Committee  was
enough   to   frighten   away   much   of   its   support.   Though
medical  supplies  were  not  included in  the  U.S.  embargo on
Cuba  for  humanitarian  reasons,  the  Cubans had  no  dollars
with  which  to  buy  them.    The  Committee  sought  to  raise
the  dollars  only  to  find  that   humanitarianism  even  when
ostensibly  government policy  was  un-American.    Melitta  del
Villar  acquitted  herself   before  the  Committee with  a  wit
and  courage  which  has  been  matched only  by  Dagmar Wil-
son  of  the  Women's Strike  for  Peace.    But  the  damage  was
done.
The  third  item  is  the  ruling  handed  down  by  Judge  Ed-
ward  Weinfeld  in  New  York  in  the  Santiesteban  case.   This
is  the  case  of   the   Cuban  diplomat  who  was   arrested   on
charges   of   sabotage   November  16  with  a  burst  of  melo-
dramatic  publicity.   This  is  the  first  case  in  which  the  U.S.
has  instituted  criminal   proceedings   against   a  member  of
another  country's  mission  to  the  United  Nations.    The  ac-
cused  was  arrested  even  though he  had  entered  this  country
on  a  diplomatic  passport  to  which  the  State  Department
had  affixed   its  visa.    The  effect   of  the  decision  is  to  cast
doubt  on  the  immunity  of  all  members  of  diplomatic  mis-
sions  to   the   UN   below  the   rank   of   Ambassador,   though
international  law  customarily grants  such  immunity  to  an
Ambassador's   staff   and  entourage.    If   the   UN   were   in
Moscow  and  this  was  the  ruling  of  a  Soviet  court,  the  up-
roar  of  outrage  is  easy  to  imagine.    Here  the  decision  is
taken   for  granted.   There  hasn't  been  a  peep  of  protest
out  of  the  UN.    Santiesteban, in  lieu  of  $50,000 bail,  is  still
in  jail  where  it  is  impossible to  prepare  safely  for  his com-
ing  trial  since  in  too  many  cases  our  government  has  wire-
tapped   conversations  of   lawyer   and  client  when  held  on
prison  premises.   This  is  the  example  we  set  of  justice.
2  *
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  4,  1963
Only  Way  to  Prevent  the  Spread  of  Nuclear  Weapons
with  Russia  to  stop  them  lest  Arab  resentment  endanger   our
oil  holdings   in  the  Middle   East.    From  these  two  traumatic
experiences   stem  the   desire   of   both   the   British  and   French
to  have  an  "independent   nuclear  deterrent"  and  our  own  un-
willingness  to  encourage  this  lest  they  then  obtain  the   power
to  blackmail  us,  by  threatening  to  precipitate   a  nuclear  war
unless  we  support   them.
The  Myth  That  We're  For  Free  Trade
From  a  longer  range  world  point  of  view,  de  Gaulle's  nar-
row  nationalism  is,  of  course,  wrong.     But  we  can  only  hope
to  change  it  when  we  set  a  better  example.    We  do  not  seem
to  realize  what  a  strange  spectacle  we  make  in  the  role  of  a
crusader  for  freer  world  trade:  no  country  in  the  world  wraps
its  industrial   and   agricultural  producers   in  so  many   protec-
tionist  featherbeds.    Under  our  "Buy  American"  policies  we
have  been  paying  35%  more  for  aluminum and  30%  more  for
steel  than  foreign  bidders  offered.    NATO  awards  in  Europe
are  made  to  the  lowest  bidder  but  here  the  armed  forces  give
domestic  suppliers  an   advantage  which—in   the   case   of   the
Navy—runs   up   to   50%.      While   Secretary   of   Agriculture
Freeman  has  been  scolding  the  Common  Market  for  shutting
out   U.S.   farm  products,   he  has  been   pleading  at  home   for
higher  tariffs  on  cotton  textiles  and  for  curtailing  imports  of
woolens.    In  the  middle  of  last  year's  free  trade  crusade  for
the  Trade  Expansipn  bill,  the  White  House  struck  a  blow  at
Belgian  industry by  a  100%   increase  in  tariffs  on  woolen  car-
pets  and  glass.    As  seen  from  abroad   our  "Food  for  Peace"
program   is  a  dumping  operation   at  the   expense   of   foreign
agriculture.    Indeed  our  enthusiasm  for  the  Common   Market
has  begun  to  wane  sharply  with  its  restrictions  on  U.S.  farm
products.  Angry  anti  de  Gaulle  speeches  by  Morse  and  Ful-
bright  last  week  were  triggered  off  in  part  at  least  by  restric-
tions  on  apples  (Oregon)  and  poultry  (Arkansas).
To  the  resentment  over  our   protectionism  must  be  added
the  ill will  engendered  by  our  effort  to  impose political restric-
tions  on  F.ast-West  trade,  as  in  our  recent  campaign  against
German  and  Japanese  steel  for  the  Soviet  oil  pipeline  system;
here  our  policy  is  the  tool  of  the  oil  trust  in  its  effort  to  keep
out  cheaper  Soviet oil.   Not  until  we  free  our  own  trade  from
all  kinds  of  restrictions, political  and  economic,  can  we  expect
other  countries to  forego protectionism.
Working  Class   Victory
The  great  filibusters  of  the  past  have  been  all-night
sessions  of   the   Senate,   in   which   mavericks   held   the
floor   with   the   stubborn    endurance    of   five-day   bike
racers.    No  such  vigor  marks  the  current  Southern  fili-
buster   against   any   change   in   the   cloture   rule.     In
checking  back  on  the  first  ten  days  of  this  year's  fili-
buster,  we  found   that  the  shortest  session  was  3  hours
and  21  minutes;  the  longest,  5  hours  and  55  minutes.
The  leadership  and  the  forces  in  favor   of  a  change  in
the  rule  allow   this  leisurely   pace  which  suits  the  ma-
jestic   Bourbons  of  the  South.    This  is  how  one  wages
a   fight   about   which   one  does  not  really  care.    When
the  liberals  filibustered  last   July   against  the   Commu-
nications  Satellite   bill,  the   Senate  was   worked   a  12-
hour   day.     This   year   the  average  session  during   the
first  ten  days  was  4.9  hours.      Thus  the  Senate  became
the   first   section   of   the   American   working   class   to
achieve  a  25-hour   week.    Our  congratulations.
Much  the  same  is true when  we  come  to  the  problem  of  pre-
venting  the  spread  of  nuclear weapons.    The  Soviet  agreement
to  permit  two  or  three  inspections  a  year  has  given  new  im-
petus   to   a  nuclear  test  ban.     But   even   if   an   agreement   is
reached  it  will  not  automatically*solve  the  Nth   country  prob-
lem.    China  will  not  give  up  testing  without  political  nego-
tiatfons.    Recognition and  an  atom  free  Pacific  would  certainly
be  part  of  Peking's  price.    In  Europe  our  offer  of  that   Rube
Goldbergian  device,  a  multilateral  Polaris  force  with  polyglot
crews  and   a  committee  for   each   trigger,   will  not   long  put
off   the  evil  day  of  new  nuclear  Nth   powers.     France  is  on
her  own;  China  soon  will  be;  Sweden,  Switzerland  and  Israel
are  on  their  way.    So  long  as  neither  the  U.S.  nor  the  USSR
are  willing  to  say  that  they  will  never  use  the  nuclear  bomb
first, but  reserve  the  right  to  strike with  it  if  they consider  vital
interests  at  stake, how  can other  nations  be  asked  to  forego  the
weapon ?    In  any  alliance,  the   power  which  has  the  nuclear
weapon  is  the  boss;  it  can  determine  life  or  death  for  all  the
rest.    This  is. what  de  Gaulle  sees.    What  he  does  not  see  is
that  thermonuclear  power  has  made  the  whole  system  of  na-
tion  states  obsolete  and  suicidal.    The  only  way  Washington
and   Moscow   can  prevent  the  spread   of  these  weapons   is  to
relinquish  them  before  it  is  too  late.
YOM  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift   Sub   With   The  Cuban  Series  For  Only   $4  But  Please     Specify
Stone's  Visit  to  Cuba
The  3  installments are  now available  reprinted
as  a  pamphlet  at  25c   for  single  copies  or  15c
in  orders  of  25  or  more.    Book  store  and  news-
stand  orders  solicited  at  the  wholesale  price  of
15c  returnable.
Send  orders to:
I.  F.  STONE'S  BI-WEEKLY
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.
Washington   15,  D. C.
I.F. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.:
$6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED