I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963dec09.pdf

============================================================

One  of  the  Americus  Four   Tells  His  Story,  Pps.  3  &  6
President  Johnson :  Lower  Level  Than  JFK  But  The  Country Could  Have  Done  Worse,  See  Page  2
F. Stone's Bi -Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  24
DECEMBER  9,  1963
|°'       WASHINGTON, D. C.
20  CENTS
We  All  Had  A  Finger  on  That  Trigger
There  was  a  fairy  tale  quality about  the  inaugural  and  there
was  a  fairy   tale  quality   about   the   funeral   rites.     One   half
expected  that  when  the  lovely  princess knelt  to  kiss the  casket
for   the  last  time,  some  winged  godmother  would  wave  her
wand  and  restore  the  hero  whole  again  in  a  final  triumph  over
the  dark  forces which  had  slain him.   There  never  was  such  a
shining  pageant  of  a  Presidency  before.    We   Watched  it  as
children  do,  raptly  determined  to  believe  but  knowing  all  the
time  that  it  wasn't  really  true.
Of   all  the  Presidents,  this  was  the  first  to   be  a  Prince
Charming.    To  watch  the  President  at  press  conference  or  at
a  private  press   briefing  was  to  be  delighted   by  his  wit,  his
intelligence,  his  capacity and  his  youth.   These  made  the  ter-
rible  flash  from  Dallas  incredible  and  painful.    But  perhaps
the  truth  is. that  in  some  ways  John  Fitzgerald  Kennedy  died
just  in  time.    He  died  in  time  to  be  remembered  as he  would
like  to  be  remembered,  as  ever  young,  still  victorious,  struck
down  undefeated,  with  almost  all  the  potentates   and   rulers
of  mankind,  friend  and  foe,  come  to  mourn  at  his  bier.
Impasse  at  Home and  Abroad
For  somehow  one  has  the  feeling  that  in  the  tangled  drama-
turgy  of  events,  this  sudden  assassination  was  for  the  author
the  only  satisfactory  way  out.    The  Kennedy  Administration
was  approaching  an  impasse,  certainly  at  home,  quite  possibly
abroad,   from   which   there   seemed   no   escape.     In   Congress
the  President  was faced with  something  worse  than  a filibuster.
He   was  confronted  with   a  shrewdly   conceived   and   quietly
staged  sitdown  strike  by  Southern  committee  chairmen  deter-
mined  to  block   civil  rights  even   if   it  meant  stopping  the
wheels  of  government  altogether.    The  measure  of  their  suc-
cess  is  that  we  entered  this  final  month  of  1963  with  nine  of
the  13  basic  appropriation   bills  as  yet  unpassed,  though  the
fiscal year  for  which  they  were  written  began  last  July  1  and
most  of  the government  has  been  forced  to  live  hand-to-mouth
since.    Never  before  in  our  history  has  the  Senate  so  dragged
its  heels  as  this  year;  never  before  has  the  Southern   oligarchy
dared  go  so  far  in  demonstrating  its  power  in  Washington.
The  President  was  caught  between  these  old  men,  their  faces
set  stubbornly  toward  their  white  supremacist  past,   and   the
advancing   Negro   masses,   explosively   demanding   "freedom
now."    Mr.  Kennedy's  death,  like  those  of  the  Birmingham
children  and  of  Medgar  Evers,  may  some  day  seem  the  first
drops  portending  a  new  storm  which  it  was  beyond  his  power
to  stay.
In  foreign  policy,  the  outlook  was  as  unpromising.    It  was
proving  difficult  to move toward  coexistence a country so long
conditioned  to  cold   war.    Even  when  Moscow   offered   gold
for  surplus  wheat,  it  was hard  to  make  a  deal.    The  revolt  in
Congress  against  foreign  aid  illustrated  how  hard  it  was  to
The  Real  Test  of  Our  Morality
One  way  to  demonstrate to  the  world  in  the  wake of
the   President's  assassination   that   we   are   a  civilized
people  would be  to  pass  a  law  forbidding the  CIA  ever,
directly  or  indirectly,  to  finance  or  plan  the  killing  of
a  foreign  leader  we  dislike.
carry  on  policy  once tense fears  of  Communism  slackened  even
slightly.    The  President  recognized  the  dangers  of  an  unlim-
ited  arms  race  and  the  need  for  a  modus  vivendi  if  humanity
was   to   survive  but   was  afraid,   even  when   the  Sino-Soviet
break  offered   the  opportunity,  to  move  at  more  than  snail's
pace  toward  agreement  with  Moscow.     The   word  was  that
there  could  be  no  follow  up  to  the  nuclear  test  ban  pact  at
least  until  after  the  next  election;  even  so  minor  a  step  as  a
commercial  airline  agreement  with  the  Soviets  was  in  abey-
ance.    The  quarrel  with  Argentina  over  oil  concessions  lit  up
the  dilemma  of  the  Alliance  for  Progress;  however  much  the
President  might  speak  of  encouraging  diversity, when  it  came
to  a  showdown,   Congress   and   the   moneyed  powers   of   our
society  insisted  on  "free  enterprise."     The  anti-Castro  move-
ment  our  CIA  covertly  supports  was  still  a  spluttering   fuse,
and  in  Vietnam  the  stepping  up  of  the  war  by  the  rebels  was
deflating   all   the   romantic  Kennedy   notions   about   counter
guerrillas,  while  in  Europe  the  Germans  still  blocked   every
constructive  move  toward  a  settlement  in  Berlin.
Essentially   Conservative
Abroad,  as  at  home,  the  problems  were  becoming  too  great
for  conventional  leadership,  and  Kennedy,  when  the  tinsel was
stripped  away, was  a  conventional  leader,  no  more  than  an  en-
lightened   conservative,  cautious  as  an  old   man   for   all   his
youth,  with  a  basic  distrust  of  the  people  and  an   astringent
view  of  the  evangelical  as  a  tool  of  leadership.    It  is  as  well
not  to  lose  sight  of  these  realities  in  the  excitement  of  the  fu-
neral;  funerals  are  always  occasions  for  pious  lying.    A  deep
vein  of  superstition  and  a  sudden  touch  of  kindness  always
lead  people  to  give  the  departed  credit  for  more  virtues  than
he  possessed.    This  is  particularly  true  when  the  dead  man
was  the  head  of  the  richest  and  most  powerful  country  in  the
world,  its  friendship  courted,  its  enmity  feared.    Everybody
is  anxious  to  celebrate  the  dead  leader  and  to  court  his  suc-
cessor.    In  the  clouds  of  incense  thus  generated,   it  is  easy  to
lose  one's  way,  just  when   it  becomes   more   important   than
ever  to  see where  we  really  are.
The  first  problem  that  has  to  be  faced  is  the  murder  itself;
Whether  it  was  done  by  a  crackport  Leftist  on  his  own,  or  as
the  tool  of  some  rightist  plot,  Van  Der  Lubbe  style,  the  fact
(Continued   on  Page   Eight)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 9,1963
Any  Honeymoon  With  Congress  Is  Likely  To Be  Short;  Bobby  Baker  LBJ's  "Heel"
Johnson  Far  Below  JFK  in  Sophistication,  Breadth  and  Taste
through  a moderately liberal program.    Johnson  is not  a racist
or  a reactionary; he  once  told  a  visiting  civil  rights  group  that
he  had  learned  all  he  knew  on  the  subject  from  Aubrey  Wil-
liams   (of   the  Southern  Conference  Educational  Fund,   once
Johnson's  boss  in  the  New   Deal's   National   Youth  Admin-
istration)   and  Mary  McLeod   Bethune.     As  a  shrewd   poli-
tician, he  knows he  must move slightly leftward  and  make civil
rights  his  No.  1  issue  if  he  is to  change  the  view  of  him  as a
Southern  politician,  with  a  basically  standpat  philosophy.     In
Texas  the  liberals distrust  him  deeply  for  running out  on  them
and  his  New  Deal  past;  the  conservatives hate  him  for  having
been  a  more  than  loyal  Kennedy  lieutenant  on  civil   rights.
The  scramble  for  positions  of  influence  with  the  new  John-
son  administration  makes  it  almost  impossible  to  get  an  ob-
jective  view  of  the  man;  everybody  from   the  politicians   to
the   Washington    correspondents   are,   with   few   exceptions,*
outdoing   themselves  in  flattery  of   the   new  monarch.     His
vanity,  his  thin   skin   and  his   vindictiveness  make   even   the
mildest  criticism,  or  approach  to  objectivity,  dangerous.
The  Perfect   Extrovert
The  negative  aspects  of  Johnson  are  these.    In  sophistica-
tion,  education  and  taste,  he  is  a  sharp  drop  from  Kennedy.
He  has  hardly  read  a  book  in  years;  never  reads  when  he  can
help  it;  prefers  to  get  information  by  ear,  but  rarely  listens.
He  is  one  of  the  most  long-winded   men  in  Washington;   a
Babbit,  with  a  remarkably  small   stock  of   basic  ideas;   these
consist  of  a  few  cliches  about  freedom,  which  he   translates
largely  into  the  freedom  of  the  entrepeneur  to  make  a  buck.
Money  and  power  have  been  the  motivating  passions  of  his
life.    He  was a New  Dealer  when  that  was the  road  to  power,
he  became  a  conservative  when  that  was  the  way  to  stay  in.
He  is the  perfect  extrovert,  with  no  convictions  and  a  passion
for   "getting  things  done,"  anything.    He  rose  as  rapidly  as
he  did  in  the  House  and  later  the  Senate  by  endless  sitting-at-
the  feet,  after  hours,  of  Sam  Rayburn  and  later  Senator  Rus-
sell.     Then   he  listened,  the   respectful  and  flattering  young
man;  he  had  a  genius  for  ingratiating  himself  with  the  old
men  of  the  Southern  oligarchy.   But  he  kept  his  lines  open  to
the  liberals,  in  order  to  deal  with  them,  too,  and  he  likes  to
picture  himself  as  a  Westerner   rather  than  a  Southerner.
Johnson's   skill  as  a  legislative  manipulator   may  be  over-
estimated.     In   the   Eisenhower   period,   he   was  an   effective
middle   man   between   the   Republican   and   Democratic   con-
servatives.    In  the  special  session  of  I960,  after  the  election,
however,  he  and  Kennedy  together  found  it  impossible  to  put
* The  only  exception   we  have  noted  is  James  Reston  who
dared  write  in  his  column  (New  York  Times,  Nov.  27)  that
Johnson  was  "tyrannical   with  his  personal   staff,    disorderly
about   administration  and   apoplectic   about   characters    who
write  sentences  like  this  .  .  .  more  thin-skinned  about  press
criticism  than  anybody  .  .  .  since  the  last  President  Johnson
...  he has tended  to  regard  dissent  as  perversity ...  as if
criticism  were  not  a  duty  in  a  free  society  but  a  crime"    For
a  bureau  chief,  for  whom  access  to  the  White  House   is  a
necessity,  this  took  courage.
The  Southern  Oligarchs   Unsoftened
The  Republicans  suddenly  feel  a  chance  to  win  the  next
election  and  he  will  have  a  very  short  honeymoon.    The  Ken-
nedy  assassination has  not  softened  the  hearts  of  the  Southern
oligarchs  and  their  coalition  with  the  Republicans  may  easily
and  quickly  be  resumed.    The  vulnerable' point  of  the  new
President  is  his  old  protege,   Bobby  Baker,  a  mercenary  cork-
screw  of  a  character  whose  extraordinary  influence  in  the  Sen-
ate  throws  a  horrifying  light  on  the  decayed underside  of  that
august  institution, and  on  Johnson's  own  aesthetic  standards.
The  Republicans  may  have  trouble  in  exploiting   the  Baker
case,  however,  because  it  probably  links  up  with  as many ugly
deals  on  their  side  of  the  aisle  as  on  the  Democratic  side.    It
will  take  all  Johnson's  skill  and  eYiergy  to  hush  up  this  scan-
dal  and  get  action  out  of  Congress.    Men  like  Fulbright  and
Benjamin  V.  Cohen  will  be  good  influences in  this administra-
tion,  but  on  the  whole  Johnson  like  Truman  will  bring  a  lot
of   rather  unseemly  cronies  to  town  and  its  level  of  literacy
and  civilization  will  fall  again,  as  it  did  after   FDR.
The  hope  is  that  men  change  and  grow.    A  man's  past  is
not   necessarily  a   guide   to   his   future,   especially  when   he
reaches  the  highest  posts  of  a  society.   The  sense  of  role,  the
maturing   effect   of   responsibility,  the   consciousness   of   duty
and  love  of  country,  the  sense  of  humanity  and  history,  all
have  their  effect.    Tom  Clark,  a  one-time  Texas  lobbyist,  not
much  of   a  lawyer,  but  a  decent  human   being   and  never  a
racist,  has  made  an  honorable  record  and  grown  in  stature  on
the  U.S.  Supreme  Court.    There  may be  surprises  in  Johnson,
and  we wish  the  new  President  luck.   The  manner  and  energy
of  his  debut  stir  hope.
Oswald's  Mexican  Trip  May  Prove The Key  To The Assassination
The  Left   would  like  to  find  a  way  to  blame   it   on  the
Right;  the  Right  would  like  to  blame  it  on  the  Left;  the
Arabs,  in  the  ever  irresponsible   Egyptian  press,  are  trying
(because  of  Rubi)  to  blame  it  on  the  Jews.    We  have  had
phone  calls  from  readers  around  the  country,  offering  jig-
saw  puzzle  theories  of  how  the  Kennedy  assassination  hap-
pened.     We  think  it   dangerous   to  spin  theories  from   so
few   facts.
The  press  learned   something   from  the  McCarthy  years,
and  handled  the  fact  that  Oswald  seems  to  have  been  some
kind  of  a  leftist   with  great  restraint.    Not  so  many  years
ago  there  would  have  been  screamer  headlines,  in  some  sec-
tors,  at  least,  "President  Killed  By  Red."    For  this  we  can
all  be  grateful  and  for  the  new  Administration's  wise  move
in  heading  off  Eastland  and  the  House  Un-Americans  by
appointing  a  top  level  Commission   under  the  Chief  Justice
to  examine  and  report  on  the  facts.
The  killings  maybe  just  what  they  appear  to  be,  or  they
may  be  part  of  a  plot.    If  they  are,  it  will  take  consider-
able  time  and  hard  digging  to  find  out.    What  this  requires
is  much  more  police  work  by  police  more  trustworthy   than
those  of  Dallas  and  less  sympathetic  to  the  right  than  the
FBI.    It  is  always   dangerous   to  draw  rational   inferences
from   the   behavior   of   a  psychopath   like   Oswald.     But   it
would  be important  to know  who financed his  trip  to  Mexico,
and  why  he  took  steps  which  at  once,  in  a  more  panicky  at-
mosphere,  might  have  linked  the  Russians   and  the   Cubans
with  the  slaying.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 9, 1963
Difficult  to  Organize  the  Poorest  and  the  Wealthiest  Among  Negroes  . . .
By  John  Perdew
In   case  you  should  wish   to  introduce   this  article   you
should  know  that  1  am  SI,  a  student  on  leave  from  Har-
vard  College, a  field  worker  with  SNCC.    I've  spent  five
months  in  southwest  Georgia, partly  in  Albany  and  partly
in  Americus.   I  spent  20  days  (June  19-July   9)  in  jail  in
Albany   on  charges  of  disorderly  conduct,  defacing   public
property,  resisting  arrest,  and.  assault  with  intent  to  mur-
der.    I   was  released  on  $1900   bond   (cash).     I   spent  85
days  (August   8-Nov.  1)  in  Sumter  County  jail  on charges
of   inciting   to  insurrection,  interfering   with  a  lawful    ar-
rest, . rioting,  unlawful   assembly,  and  assault  with  intent
to  murder   (state   charges)   and  resisting  arrest   and  dis-
orderly   conduct  (city   charges).    I  was  released  by  order
of   a  three-judge  panel  of   federal   judges   on  $2100   bond,
which   declared   the   insurrection   and   unlawful    assembly
statutes   unconstitutional   and   all   eight   peace   warrants
lodged  against  me  invalid.    The  court  is  in  recess  and  will
convene  again  after   Dec.  1  to  decide  whether   to  issue  an
injunction  restraining   local   officials    from  depriving  people
of   their  civil  rights  under  color  of  law.
Participants   in  the   civil  rights   movement  today   are   not
given  to  utopianism,  but  a  theme  which  lies  behind   picket
lines,   mass  demonstrations,   and   arrests   is   the   attempt   of
American  blacks  to  feel  the  pain  of   oppression   which  they
have  so long  suppressed  and  find  the  strength  to  overcome  it.
This   became  painfully  apparent   to   me  during   my  three
month  stay  in  the  Sumter  County  Jail  in  Americus,  Georgia,
on   charges   of   inciting  to   insurrection.     One   of   the   black
prisoners  there,  a  man  in  his  forties,  could  not  stop  calling
me  "sir",  even  after   I  tried  for  several  weeks  to  break  his
habit.    For  him  the  pain  of  communicating with  me,  a  white,
was  so  great  that  he  avoided  me  as  much  as  possible  even
though   he  knew  I  was  in  jail  because  of  civil  rights  work.
The  way to  relationships of  mutual  respect  between  white  and
black  is  blocked  by  deep  counter  currents  in  the   personalities
of,  I  would  say,  the  majority  of  Southern  blacks.
Still  Jim  Crow  Despite  ICC
Surface  events  in  the  racial  struggle  mean  little  until  one
can  understand  why,  in  Albany, Georgia,  in  spite  of  an  ICC
ruling  which  ended  segregation  in  the  bus  terminal  there,  few
blacks  use  the  formerly  "white"  waiting   rooms.     After   two
years  of  mass  demonstrations,  boytotts,  and  voter  registration,
Albany  blacks have  little  to  sho^y  for  their  suffering  in   official
desegregation,   and   the  balance  weighs  heavily  against   even
casual  integration.    The  scale  of  success,  however,  is  the  peo-
ple's  state  of  mind,  and  there  are  at  least   several  hundred
blacks  in  the   city  who  can  now  face  a  white  man  without
the  need  to  feel  servile.    These  are  the  ones  who  have  faced
beatings,  jail  and  the  wrath  of  the  white  man  with  aggres-
sive   non-violence  and   have   experienced   at   least   temporary
unity  in  the  long-divided  Negro  community.
There  is  at  least one  basic institution through  which  South-
ern  blacks  (I  use  "black"  rather  than  "colored",  which  is  the
euphemistic  word  attached  to  segregated  facilities)  attempt  to
release  and  rectify  the  frustrations  which  result  from  inferior
status.    Country  churches  in  particular  have  evolved  a  "lan-
guage"  of  music  and  preaching  and  patterns  of  intense  emo-
tional   possession   which   are   baffling   and   embarrassing   to
whites  used  to  more  formal  and  "rational"  means of  religious
expression.     The   elaborate,   shifting   chords   and   embellish-
ments  of  a  "common  meter"  hymn;  the  rising  cadence  of  the
We  asked  one  of   the   Amerieus  Four  to  write  his
story  for  us  and  we  are  proud  to  present  in  his  own
words  the  reactions  of  John  Perdew  of  Denver  to  the
situation  in  the  South.    It  breathes  an  objectivity, a
humanity   and  a   selflessness   characteristic  of   SNCC.
This  article  is  given  new  meaning by  the  news  that  a
grand  jury   in  Americus  has  reindicted  Perdew  along
with  the  other three  (Ralph W. Allen  of  Melrose,  Mass.;
Donald  Harris  of  New  York  City  and  Thomas  McDaniel
of   Americus)  for  assault  with  intent  to   murder  and
rioting.    The  widest   possible   public  support   must  be
mobilized  for  these  heroic  young  men  if  the vindictive
authorities  of  Americus  are  not  to  succeed  in  finding
some  way  to  keep  them in  prison  for  many years.—IFS
black  in  the  pulpit  singing  the  Word;  the  shouts  of  the  old
bent  ladies  in  the  Amen  Corner;  the  pleading  prayers  of  the
grimacing  deacon—all  are  media  through  which,  I  think,  the
most  oppressed  blacks  may  convince  themselves  that  their  af-
flictions represent  the  road  to that  "great  gettin'-up  mornin'  ".
The   most   talented   and   sensitive  SNCC  workers   enter   a
country  church  and  speak  in  the  language   of  black  religion
but   with   the   message   that   suffering,   while   a   source   of
strength,   is   dehumanizing,    that   retreat   only   intensifies   it.
Black  churches,  for  this  reason  and  for  convenience,  become
the  site  of  mass  meetings,  the  most  regular   feature  of   the
Movement,  and  old  hymns  carry  new  words,  themes  such  as
"We  shall  not  be  moved",  "We  shall  overcome",   "This  little
light  of  mine,  I'm  gonna  let  it  shine".
A  totally  different   reaction  to  segregation   consists  entirely
in  an  attempt  to  be  "white".    Students  at  Negro  colleges  in
the  South,  many  teachers  at  all  levels,  some  ministers  with
relatively  wealthy  congregations,   and  aspiring  politicians  and
professionals  deny  their  "roots"  in  black culture.  Straightened
hair,   a  flashy  car,   esoteric   cultural   tastes   and   formal,   re-
strained  church  services  become  symbols  of  the  escape.    The
result,  in  terms  of  the  Movement,   is  that  many,  though  cer-
tainly  not  all,  of  the  upper   classes  in  the  Negro  community
will  not  actively  identify   themselves  with  the   Movement.
In  canvassing  for  voter  registration  I  have  found  the  most
response  from  people  in  the  middle  ranges  on  the  Negro  in-
come  scale.    The  very  poor  are  frequently  afraid  of  me  as  a
white  (sometimes  they  will  not  answer  the  door,  other  times
they  will  agree  to  everything  the  canvasser  says  in  order   to
get   rid   of  him).     Or   they   are   realistically   or   irrationally
afraid  that  they  will  suffer  eviction,  firing,  or  even  "legal"  or
physical  intimidation.   Ignorance  and  apathy  as  well  obscure
the  connections  in  their  minds  between  their  personal  failure
to  register  and  the  fact  that  from  top  to  bottom  the  "govern-
ment  is  a  white  man".    At  the  upper  end  of  the  scale,  busi-
nessmen  are  threatened  with  white  boycott,  revocation  of  li-
censes,  litigation,  and  property  damage  if  they take  an  uncom-
promising  public  stand  for  black  interests.    Teachers,  ideally
a  powerful  force,  usually  in  my  experience  succumb  to  subtle
pressures   from   principals  and   the   school   board,   much   as
teachers  all  over  the  nation  willingly  or  not  steer  away  from
"controversial   issues".     All  of  these  pressures  reinforce  the
tendency  to  disavow  "black  roots"  in  a  drive for  respectability.
Only  the  most  confident  and  aggressive  leader  can  counter-
act  the  forces  which  maintain the  status  quo,  for  on  the  level
(Continued  on  Page   Six)
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,
Washington,   D.  C.   An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;   $6 in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates;  $16 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

What  the   Reviewers  Are   Saying   About   I.   F.  Stone's   Book
"THE   HAUNTED   FIFTIES
tl
Donald  Mintz  in  the  Washington  Star  (Nov.  4):
"Mr.  Stone's  little  journal. . . is one of  a fa-
vored   few   small  journals   whose   influence    is
greater  than  their  subscription  lists.  . . .  With-
in  a  few   pages  of  the  beginning  of  the  book,
all  insidious  notions  of  skipping  here and  skim-
ming  there  vanish.  . . . Mr. Stone's  reports and
polemics  have  survived  very  well  indeed.  .  .  .
primarily   because Mr.  Stone  is  so  remarkably
clear  minded  . . . with  a power  of  penetration
that  must  make  other  commentators   despair.
.  .  .  Genuine  conservatives   should  enjoy  Mr.
Stone  nearly  as  much  as  radicals."
Gerald  W. Johnson  in  The  New  Republic (Dec.  14):
"His   astonishing   quality  is  not  that   he  is
independent  but that, being independent,  he has
survived.  . . . He is controversial in a day when
controversy  is  equated  with  sin.    He  is   bold,
when  courage  is  next   door  to  treason.    He  is
non-mercenary  ivhen  indifference     to  money  is
close  akin  to  forgetting   God.   He  is  extremely
diverting  when  being amusing  without  being on
television  is  usurpation."
Emile  Capouya in  The  Saturday Review  (Nov.  16):
"That   one-man  journal  was  founded  in  the
days  when  Senator  Joseph  McCarthy  was  mak-
ing  the  rules  around  here,  and  I  suppose  it  is
one  of   the   reasons  that   McCarthy's   triumph
was  not  more  complete  in  his  lifetime,  nor  his
heirs  more firmly in power now. ... Mr. Stone's
reportorial  prose is  beautifully   clear . . . clean
as  good  French."
Quincy  Howe  in  Book  Week  (Nov.  24) :
"In   this  age  of  Hearst   task   forces,   Time-
Life    writer-researcher-biographer   teams,  and
Readers    Digest    condensations,   I.   F.    Stone
stands   out   as   the   embodiment   of   do-it-your-
self   journalism."
Senator  Joseph  S.  Clark  (D.  Pa.):
"/ am glad you have  collected  your pieces and
given  them  this  permanent   form.     It   is  our
guarantee  that  there  will  be  an  alternative   to
the  pap  in  tomorrow's   history   books,  just  as
there  is  an  alternative   to  the  pap  in   today's
newspapers   in  your  splendid   newsletters."
Wm.  German  in  San  Francisco  Chronicle  (Nov.  3):
" 'The  Haunted  Fifties'  . . . measures  up to
a   remarkable   vivisection    of   a   nervous   and
stange  decade. . . . The wonder  and excitement
of   those  10  years  comes  back  strongly   as   Mr.
Stone's   scalpel   sifts   through   the  weekly   bits.
.  .  .  More  power  to.this  cheerful    prophet."
Sam  Galabow  in  the  Charlotte  (N.C.)  Observer:
"This  book  is written  by  a man  with a  great
sense  of  social justice. .  .  . It  is  amazing  that
one  man  can  be so fearless  and  brave,  that  one
man  can  refuse   to  tolerate  cruelty  and   injus-
tice, that  one man  can persevere  in  the  search
for   truth,  and  that  this  same  individual   can
also  feel   cheerful   about  the   human  race  and
believe   that   man   ultimately    will   solve   his
problems."
Virginia  Kirkus'  (Book)  Service  (Oct.  1):
"It  has  been ten  years  since  I.  F.  Stone  has
appeared   in  hard  covers:  a  long  time,  indeed,
and  readers of  this  book  are  likely  to agree  both
that  it  was  much  too  long  and  well  worth  the
wait.   As  a  collection of  contemporary  articles
on  every  conceivable political  and  moral  aspect
of  the  troubled times  between Elsenhower's  and
Kennedy's   first   months  in  the   White   House,
this   volume   is   nothing   short   of   astounding.
What  Stone  saw  so  clearly  and  fought  or  advo-
cated  then,  nearly  everybody  holds  to  be   self-
evident  now . . .  This  is  contemporary   history
of   the  finest,  most  readable  sort."
If   You  Want  to  Add  A  Gift   Subscription  to  A  Book  Order
As  A  Combination  Christmas  Gift  You Can  Do  So For Only  $3   Extra
Add  A  Note  to  That  Effect   to  the  Coupon  on  the  Next Page
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

SPECIAL  PUBLICATION  Offer   to  Readers  of  I.E. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
We  announce the publication  of
THE
HAUNTED
FIFTIES
by  I.  F.   STONE
A  collection  of  Mr.  Stone's  most  important  writings
in  the  first  decade  of  this   journal.
"In  this  country one contemporary  journalist
has   over   a   period   of   many   years   distin-
guished  himself  in  reporting  and  interpret-
ing the  news—that  less  glamorous  part  of  it,
at  least,  which   has  not  to  do  with  crime,
communism,  sex,  and  baseball.    The  excep-
tion  is  I.  F.  Stone.   The  qualities  of  the  ex-
ceptional  man  pervade  and  inform  all  that
he  has  written  and  have  kept  the  bulk of  the
pieces   in  this  collection  very   much  alive."
—from  the Preface  by James  R.  Newman
Published  by
Random  House  on  November  4,   1963
Regular  retail  price:   $5.95
SPECIAL   OFFER  TO   BI-WEEKLY
READERS   ONLY:   $4.85   (SAVE   $1.10)
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Avenue,  N.W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  stud   me   ............  copies   of  THE  HAUNTED  FIFTIES   by  I.  F.   Stone   at
$4.85  per  coy     (u  saving  of  $1.10  from  the  retail  price  of  $5.95),  plus  50c  per  copy
for  shipping  cud  handling.   My  check  or  money  order  is  enclosed.    I  understand  that
if  for  any  rea <on  I  care  to  return  the  book  for  a  prompt refund,  I  may  do  so  within
ten   days   after   receiving  the   book.    (District   of   Columbia  residents   must   add  18c
sales  tax.)
NAME
ADDRESS
USE  THIS  COUPON-
TO  ORDER
"THE    HAUNTED  FIFTIES'
AT  THE   SPECIAL
READER'S  DISCOUNT
CITY  ................................................................    STATE   ........................    ZIP  CODE
Autographed?    Yes Q    No Q
1   3   -,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 9,1963
. . . Washington  Evasive  and FBI Often  Unsympathetic  to  Brutality  Charges
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
of  personal   contacts  all  but  the  most  militant  need  a  lot  of
pushing  to  rise  out  of  short-term  thinking  and  passivism.    It
is  clear  that  youth  are  the  most  active  leaders  and   followers
in  this  Movement,  but  the  most  charismatic  leaders  are  often
defeated  by their  heroic  image  when,  for  example,  their  awed
followers   ask  for   autographs   and   lavish  praise  rather   than
risking  jail  and  violence.     An   everyday  principle   in   SNCC
work  is:  balance  between  the  hardest  demands  of  a  militant
movement  and  the  compromise  necessary  to  maintain  enthusi-
asm and  communication.
Despite  endless  condemnation  of  the  effects  of  white  domi-
nation  in  propaganda,   a  basic  submission  to  authority  some-
times  emerges  in  the  strangest  places.    A  southwest  Georgia
police   chief   once   entered   a  mass  meeting   wearing  his   gun
and  was  greeted  not  with  a  mass  exit  or  cold  silence  but  with
uncertain  applause.    A  skillful  law  officer  can  blunt  the  edge
of   the   strongest   leadership.     Journalists,   ministers,  parents,
and  teachers  can  apply  similar  pressures  in  creating  an  aura  of
conventionalism   —  in  phrases   describing  the   "well-dressed,
middle-class"   Movement—which  obscure  the  originality   and
depth  of  change.    Paternalism  as  well  undermines  resentment
and  determination  by  a  superficially  friendly   atmosphere.
The  Whites,  Too,  Are  Fearful
I  think  it  can be  argued  that  segregation  both  feeds  on  and
spawns  mutual  fear   between  black  and  white  and  that   this
fear  interacts  with  clear  economic  pressures.    If  violence  may
be  said  to  indicate  fear  in  the  aggressor,  then  it  becomes  clear
why  it  is  in  the  blackest  counties  and  towns  of  the  South  that
lynchings   and   beatings   are  the   commonest.     One   Georgia
sheriff   revealed  his  fear   of   a  black  SNCC  worker  when  he
forgot  to  lock  him  up  after  a  conference  with  lawyers  outside
the  cell  block.    Another   sheriff   once  caned  a  SNCC  lawyer
who   came  to  his   jail   to  see  about   a  white  SNCC   worker
whom  the  sheriff  had  ordered  beaten  by  prisoners.    The  most
rabid  segregationist  propaganda  reveals  a  fear  of  sexual  and
cultural  pollution.
But  the  unbelievable intimidation which  official  and  private
whites  wreak  on   "uppity  niggers"  would   be  impossible   to
perpetuate   without   economic   support   and   incentive.     The
white  employers  and  businessmen  rely  on  the  local  monopo-
lies  which  protect  them  from  retaliation.    If  they  antagonize
the  black  population   by  kicking  a  customer  or  firing  a  black
worker,  they  still  in  most  cases  run  the  area's  only  grocery  or
furnish  the  only  source  of  employment.    Only  a  well-organ-
ized  and  timely  boycott  can  restrain  the  white  who  is  driven
to  such  behavior.    And  only  massive  voter  registration   and
organization   can   restrain   local   politicians   and   law    officers
from  arbitrary intimidation.
Strategy  then   is  complicated   when   it   is  unclear   whether
deep  prejudice  and  fear  or  expediency  are  driving  a   specific
aggressor.    In   any  case  "justice"  in  the   Black  Belt   can  be
accurately   symbolized  by  the   token   prosecution   of   the  Bir-
mingham  bombers  and  the  threat  of  execution  levelled  against
me  and  three  other  civil  rights  workers  in  Americus,  Georgia.
Will   the   Movement   for   racial   equality   turn   to   violent
tactics,  and  if  it  did  would  this  tactic  achieve  the  end  of  inte-
gration?    I  think  the  answer  to  both  questions  is  "no".     Or-
ganized  violence   will  not  come  because  the  individuals  cap-
able  of  violence  in  the  black  population   are  least  ready  for
sustained    discipline.    Gang   leaders   frequently   work   with
SNCC   but   our   insistence  on   non-violence   forces   them   to
choose  between  discipline  within  the  Movement  and  violence
against  each  other.    The  end  of  one  such  leader's  association
with   SNCC   could   be   placed   at   the   time   when   he   was
wounded   in  a  battle  with   a  rival  black  gang.     If   violence
were  adopted  as  a  tactic,  I  think,  the  effect  of  it  would  be  to
confirm  and  strengthen  white  fears.
Where  is  the  federal  government  in  all  of  this?    My  con-
tact  with  the  most  active  local  representatives   of  the   federal
government,  agents  of  the  FBI,  has  been  less  than  enchanting.
While  perhaps  one  third  of  the  local  agents  I  have  met  have
been  fairly  impartial  Northerners,   the  others,  natives  of  the
South,  have  taken  statements  from  me  with  poorly   disguised
skepticism  and   sometimes   antagonism.     I   have   also   talked
with  sympathetic  Justice  Department   investigators,   but   their
province  is  generally  strictly  limited  to  the  evidence   related
to  intimidation  of  prospective   voters.
Official   statements  from   Washington   are   usually   evasive
concerning  allegations   of  police   brutality:   "there   is  no  evi-
dence",   "investigations  are  underway  (after  three  months!)",
or   "we   have   no   authority   to   deal   with   this   issue".     But
SNCC  has  submitted  hundreds  of  sworn  affidavits  specifying
cases  of  police  brutality,  and  the  FBI  is  in  possession  of  pho-
tographs   showing   bruises  and  welts  which  we  suffered   as  a
result  of  official  violence.
A  symptom  of  the  attitude  of  the  federal  government  to-
ward  civil  rights  is  Kennedy's  appointment  of  a  judge  to  the
southwest   Georgia   district   court   who   has   consistently   ren-
dered  unfavorable  decisions   in  cases  involving   racial  issues.
His  views  on  race  relations  were  well-known  before  his  ap-
pointment.
Where,   then,   does   the   Movement    stand    in    southwest
Georgia,  and  where  is  it  going?    Voter  registration  is  receiv-
ing  the  greatest  emphasis  in  anticipation  of  the  elections  next
November.     Albany,  Georgia,  saw  a  Black  run  for  Mayor  in
October  this  year.    An  inevitable  problem  is  low  turnout—
in  this  case  roughly  60%  of  the  registered  Negroes,  10%  of
whom  apparently   voted   for   one  of  the   two  white   segrega-
tionist  candidates.    White  reaction  to  the  candidate  was  sur-
prisingly  favorable,  and  he  received  a  few  votes  in  all-white
wards.    Political  pressure  has  a  high  potential  in  towns  like
Americus,  where  almost  50%  of  the  population  is  black,  yet
only  10%  of  the  eligible  blacks  are   registered.
The  history  of  Albany,  I  think,  has  shown  that  momentary
crises  are  not  effective  in  bringing  a  change  unless  they  are
backed   by   substantial   and   visible   economic   and    political
power.    Where  once  over  700  people  went  to  jail  during
demonstrations,  now  potentially  active  participation   is  limited
to  a  few  tireless  workers.
The  Movement  is  reaching  far  greater  economic  sophistica-
tion   in  selective  patronage,   in  a  producer's   co-operative   for
farm   owners   and  workers   (aimed   at   combatting  price   dis-
crimination  and  seasonal  unemployment),  and  possibly  com-
bination  with  white  workers  in  union  activity.     Meanwhile,
the  currents  of  fear  and  pain  and  courage   continue  to   clash
in  the  Black  Belt.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 9,1963
SNCC's  Devoted   Handful,  Determined   to  Change   The  World,  Recalls  Earlier  Martyrs
Where  Caesar's  Lions  Failed,  Can  the  South's  Cattle  Prods  Win?
There  is nothing  wrong  with  our  younger  generation  when
it  can  produce  a  movement  like  SNCC.  Not   since  the  great
pre-revolutionary  generation  in  Russia,  its  assorted  Narodniks,
SR's,  Marxists and  Tolstoyans,  has  any  great  power  produced
as  devoted  a  group  of  youngsters  as  the  four  hundred  or  so
Negro  and white young men and  women  of  the  Students  Non-
Violent  Coordinating  Committee,  which  held  its fourth  annual
conference   here   in   Washington   at   Howard   University  the
week-end  of  Nov.  29.
Non-Violence  Their  Deepest  Faith
I  have  had  the  privilege  over  the  past  few  years  of  getting
to  know  a  few  of  them.    They  are  an  impressive  lot.    Purity
is  the  only  word  for  their  intrinsic  quality—the  absence  of
self-seeking  or  of  vanity.   They  are  the  stuff  of  saints.    They
are  determined  to  change  our  country,  and  for  them  the  most
fundamental  change  of  all  is  to  win  by  non-violent  means,  to
answer  hate  with  love.    They  stand  in  a  line  that  runs  back
from  Gandhi  to  Tolstoy  to  Thoreau  to  St.  Francis  to  Jesus.
I  regard  them  with   reverence.
To  be  with  them  was  a  moving  experience.     They   draw
sustenance,  the  whites as well  as the  blacks,  from  Negro  roots.
Most  of  them  are  not  religious  in  any  conventional  sense,  but
the   whole   movement   is  steeped   in  Negro   religiosity   at   its
best.    On  one  side  of  their  nature,  they  are  sophisticated  in-
tellectuals;  on the  other,  they  feel akin to  the Negro racial  past.
"We   have   a   mandate,"   said   their   chairman,   John   Lewis,
"from  our  forefathers  who  were  slaves."    One  moment  they
were  talking  of  the  need  for  a  planned  economy  and  the  next
they  were  singing,  "Like  Christ,  they  died  for  you  and   me."
They  are  ragged  and  ill-fed  but  their  eyes shine.    Against  just
such   a  consecrated   few,   powers   more   formidable   than   the
lily-white  South  have  fallen  in  the  past,  Czars  and  Caesars.
Cattle  prods  will  not  help,  any more  than  it  once  helped  to
feed  them  to  the  lions.    The  South  has  a  right  to  be  terrified.
Robert  P.   Moses,   the   director  of   SNCC's  voter   registration
drive,   used   an   unforgettable   metaphor   when   he   spoke   of
SNCC's  work  as an  "annealing  process."  This  young  ex-school
teacher  from  New  York,  with  his  round,  brown  African  face,
told  the  conference,  "Only  when  metal  has  been  brought  to
white  heat,  can  it  be  shaped  and  molded;  this  is  the  annealing
process.    This  is  what  we  intend  to  do  to  the  South  and  the
country,  bring  them  to  white  heat  and  then  remold  them."
The  vision  which  provides  a  pattern  for  that  remolding  is
The  Lunacy  in  the  South
Three   speakers    at   the   SNCC   convention   provided
vivid  glimpses  of  the  lunatic  atmosphere   in  the   South.
Norman  Thomas  said,  "There  was  a  time  when  I  some-
what   romantically    thought    Elsenhower   or    Kennedy
should  have  taken  children  to  school  personally   in  the
Southern  school  disputes,  but  after  being  in  Mississippi
I  would  be  afraid  to  have  them  do  so."    Robert  Moses
said  the  reaction   in  Jackson,   Miss.,  to  the  President's
murder   was   one   of   "indifference   or  suppressed   joy."
Wm.   Hansen   of   Howard   University   was   in   jail   in
Helena,  Arkansas,  when  Kennedy  was  shot.    "A  trusty
came  in  with  a  grin  on  his  face,"  Hansen   related,   "and
said,   'Hey,   boys,   the   President's   been   shot.'    A   few
minutes   later   he   came   back   and  shouted,   'Hey,    he's
dead.'    The  trusty   and  the  cops  were  jumping  up  and
down  with  glee."
beyond  race;  it  seeks  the  emancipation  of  Man  from  his  own
suicidal  divisions.    Bob  Moses  is  a  sober  seer,  and  does  not
fool  himself.    "The  problem  of  the  Negro  is  not  the  same  as
that  of  the  European  immigrant,"  he  told  the  conference.  "He
could   be  accepted   gradually  as  part  of  a  broader   European
community.   Our  country and  the  world  have  not  yet  grappled
with  the  problem  of  creating  a  community  broad  enough   to
encompass  the  Negro  and  the  African."    When  it  comes,  it
will  have  to  be  big  enough  to  hold  all  mankind.
The  Mexican,  the  Puerto  Rican, the white unemployed,  were
not  forgotten  at  this  conference.    James  Baldwin  and  Bayard
Rustin,  like  Lewis  and  Moses,  saw  the  Negro's  problem   in
broad  human  terms;  to  emancipate  himself,  he  must  emanci-
pate  the  rest  of  us,  from  unemployment,  from  prejudice  and
from  war.    Baldwin  spoke  with  the  fury  of  a  Hebrew  pro-
phet;   Rustin  with  the  objectivity  of   a  still  youthful  Negro
elder  statesman, who  believes as  a  lifelong  pacifist  and  Social-
ist  that  only  in  a  broader  movement  can  the  Negro  hope  to
win  jobs  and  freedom,  and  make  a  revolution  "in   a  serious
sense."
SNCC  originated  in  the  Fall  of  I960  out  of  the  sit-in  stu-
dent  movement  which  began  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  in  the  spring
of  that  year.    Never  have  so  few  managed  to  make  a  bigger
impact  in  a  smaller  space  of  time.    They  cheered  when  Lewis
in  his  closing  speech  said,  "We'll  march  through  the  heart  of
the  South  as  Sherman  did."     Though  an  unarmed  few,  they
have  already  set  a  whole  region  trembling;  the  earth   shakes
again  as  always under  the  footsteps  of  faith.
Will  This  Dubious Affair  Be  Used  For  More  Warlike  Action  Against  Cuba?
We  welcome  the  successful  conclusion  of  Venezuela's  elec-
tion  and  we  can  see  no  sense  in  its   terrorist   opposition.
But  we  regard  with  suspicion  the  charge  by  the  State  De-
partment  and  the   Betancourt   regime   that  an  arms  cache
found  on  Venezuela's   shores  was  of   Cuban  origin.
The  fullest   account   we  have  seen  in  the   U.S.   press  of
this  arms  cache  appeared   in  the   Baltimore   Sun  Nov.   30.
This  made  clear  (1)   that  the  arms  were  of  Belgian   manu-
facture  and  (2)   that  they  were  linked  to  Cuba  by   rather
obscure  means.    A  State  Department  spokesman  quoted  by
the  Sun  said  "modern  laboratory   techniques"  now  made   it
"possible  to  raise  serial  numbers   and  seals,   even   though
efforts  have  been  made to  erase  them." Such  evidence  should
be  submitted  to  an  international  body  more  worthy  of  con-
fidence than  the  OAS before  a  verdict  is  handed  down.
Cuba  today  is  a  tightly   blockaded  isle.    Our  planes  and
our  naval  vessels  watch  all   that   goes   in  and  comes  out.
The  Castro  government,  which  denies  that  it  sent  arms  to
the  Venezuelan  terrorists,  would  be foolish  in  the  extreme  to
run  this  blockade  with  an  arms  shipment  which  would  give
its  enemies  just  the  chance  they  have  been  looking  for.    We
hope  more  objective  forces  at  the  UN  can  be  mobilized  to
prevent  this  charge  from  being  used  as  an  excuse  for  more
warlike  action  against  Cuba.
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December  9,1963
The  Danger  in  Canonizing  Kennedy  As  An  Apostle  of  Peace
(Continued   from   Page   One)
is  that  there  are  hundreds  of  thousands  in  the  South  who  had
murder  in  their  hearts  for  the  Kennedys,  the  President  and  his
brother   the  Attorney  General,   because  they  sought   in  some
degree  to  help  the  Negro.    This  potential  for  murder,  which
the  Negro  community  has  felt  for  a  long  time,  has  become  a
national  problem.    But  there  are  deeper   realities  to  be  faced.
Wouldn't  We  Be  Happy   to  Kill  Castro?
Let  us  ask  ourselves  honest  questions.    How  many  Amer-
icans  have  not  assumed—with  approval—that  the  CIA  was
probably   trying  to  find  a  way  to  assassinate  Castro?     How
many  would  not  applaud   if  the  CIA  succeeded?    How  many
applauded  when  Lumumba  was  killed  in  the  Congo,   because
they  assumed  that  he  was  dangerously  neutralist  or   perhaps
pro-Communist?     Have   we  not   become   conditioned   to   the
notion  that  we  should  have  a  secret  agency  of  government—
the  CIA—with  secret  funds,  to  wield  the  dagger  beneath  the
cloak  against  leaders  we  dislike ? Even  some  of  our  best  young
liberal  intellectuals  can  see  nothing  wrong  in  this  picture  ex-
cept  that  the  "operational"   functions  of  CIA  should  be  kept
separate  from  its  intelligence  evaluations!   How  many of  us—
on  the  Left  now—did  not  welcome  the  assassination  of  Diem
and  his  brother  Nhu   in  South  Vietnam?    We   all  reach  for
the  dagger,   or  the  gun, in  our  thinking   when   it  suits  our
political  view  to  do  so.    We  all  believe  the  end  justifies  the
means.    We  all  favor  murder,  when  it  reaches  our  own  hated
opponents.    In  this  sense  we  share  the  guilt  with  Oswald  and
Ruby  and  the  rightist  crackpots.    Where  the  right  to  kill  is
so  universally  accepted,  we  should   not   be  surprised   if   our
young  President  was slain.    It  is not  just the  ease  in  obtaining
guns,  it  is  the  ease  in  obtaining  excuses,  that  fosters assassina-
tion.   This  is  more  urgently  in  need  of  examination than  who
pulled  the  trigger.    In  this  sense,  as  in  that  multi-lateral  nu-
clear  monstrosity  we  are  trying  to  sell  Europe,  we  all  had  a
finger  on  the  trigger.
Murder   In  Our  Way  of   Life
But  if  we  are  to  dig  out  the  evil,  we  must  dig  deeper  yet,
into  the  way we  have  grown  to  accept  the  idea  of  murder  on
the  widest  scale  as  the  arbiter  of  controversy  between  nations.
In  this  conrfection,  it  would  be  wise  to  take  a  clear-sighted
view  of  the  Kennedy  administration because  it  was  the  first
U.S.  government  in  the  nuclear  age  which  acted  on  the  belief
that  it  was  possible  to  use  war,  or  the  threat   of  war,  as  an
instrument  of  politics  despite  the  possibility  of   annihilation.
It  was  in  some  ways  a  warlike  administration.    It  seems  to
have  been  ready,  soon  after  taking  office,  to  send  troops  into
Vietnam  to  crush  the  rebellion  against  Diem;  fortunately  both
Diem  and  our  nearest  Asian  allies,  notably  the  Filipinos,  were
against  our  sending  combat  troops  into  the  area.    The   Ken-
nedy  administration, in  violation  of  our  own  laws  and  inter-
national  law,  permitted  that  invasion  from  our  shores  which
ended  so  ingloriously in  the  Bay of  Pigs.    It  was  the  Kennedy
Administration  which  met  Khrushchev's  demands  for  negotia-
tions  on  Berlin  by  a  partial  mobilization  and  an  alarming  in-
vitation  to  the  country  to  dig  backyard  shelters  against  cata-
clysm.
We  Can  Easily  Bluff  Once  Too  Often
Finally  we  come  to  the  October  crisis  of  a  year  ago.    This
set  a  bad  precedent   for  his   successors,   who  may  not   be  as
skillful  as he  was  in  finding  a  way  out.   What  if  the  Russians
had   refused   to  back  down   and   remove  their   missiles  from
Cuba ?   What  if  they  had  called  our  bluff  and  war  had  begun,
and  escalated?   How  would  the  historians  of  mankind,  if  a
fragment   survived,   have   regarded   the   events   of   October?
Would  they have  thought  us  justified  in  blowing  most  of  man-
kind  to  smithereens. rather  than  negotiate,   or   appeal   to  the
UN,   or   even  to  leave  in  Cuba   the  medium   range   missiles
which  were  no   different   after   all  from  those  we  had   long
aimed  at  the  Russians from  Turkey  and  England?    When  a
whole  people  is  in  a  state  of  mind  where  it  is  ready  to  risk
extinction—its  own  and  everybody  else's—as  a  means  of  hav-
ing  its  own  way  in  an  international  dispute,  the  readiness  for
murder  has  become  a  way of  life  and  a  world  menace.     Since
this  is  the  kind  of  bluff   that  can  easily  be  played   once   too
often,   and  that  his  successors   may  feel   urged   to   imitate,   it
would   be  well  to  .think  it  over  carefully   before   canonizing
Kennedy  as  an  apostle  of  peace.
Free  Copies  of  This  Issue  Still  Available  If  You   Send  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelopes
I.F.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .............................................................................
b
........_
Street    ....................................................................................—
City   ......................................
12/9/63
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  ........................................................................._.
Street    .........—.................._...................................................
City   ...........—.........................Zone...........State...............~...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  Q    No  D
IE Stone  sBi-Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Why  Not  Send  the  Bi-Weekly  for  Christmas  and  Save  Shopping?    Use the  Blank  Above—Special  Holiday  Rates
In  Effect—$4  for  1 Gift  Sub; 2  for $7.50;  3  for $11;  4  for $13;  5  for  $15
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED