I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963jun24.pdf

============================================================

Special  Six-Page  Supplement  on  Radiation
In Mississippi, It's  Not  Just  The Assassin's Bullet,  It's  The Law and Order
"On  Dec.  7,  1961,  I  was  called  to  the  County Attorney's
Office.    His  name  is  Mr.  T.  H.  Pearson.    He  was  concerned
about  a  campaign against  the  downtown  merchants  to  get
them  to  employ  Negroes  and  to  use  courtesy   titles  instead
of   boy,  girl,   aunt,  uncle,  preacher  or   nigger.
Mr.  Pearson  told  me  if  I  did  not  use  my  influence  to  put
a  stop  to  this  campaign  he  was   going  to  put  me  in  jail.
When  I  refused,  he  called  the  Chief  of  Police,  Mr.  Ben  Col-
lins,  and  told  him,  'Carry  this  nigger  to  jail.'    I  was   ar-
rested  without   a  warrant.    While  I  knew  this  was  illegal,
I  went  peacefully  because  there  is  no  defense  from  a  bullet
in  your  head  for  resisting  arrest,  legal   or  illegal.
"On  March  3,  1962,  I  was  arrested  while  in  bed  with  my
wife.    A  white  boy  had  complained  that  I  had  tried  to   get
him   to  secure  me  a  white  woman.   After  he  was  not  able
to  get  one,  he  charged  I  made sexual  advances  toward him.
1   presented  witnesses   at   the   trial   who   substantiated   my
activities  during  the  day   [but  was  found  guilty].
"The  case  was  overruled  and  remanded  by  the  State  Su-
preme  Court.    Upon  discussing  this  with  the  Justice  Dept.
agent,  Mr.  John  Doar,  I  was  called  by  the  press,   as  some-
one  had  been   informed   I   had   made  a   complaint.     I   was
promptly  sued  for  $40,000  and  a  judgment  against  me  ren-
dered.    The  men  involved were  Mr.  T.  H.  Pearson,   County
Attorney,  and  Mr.  Ben  Collins,   the  Chief  of   Police."
—Aaron  E.  Henry,  head  of  the  NAACP   in  Miss.,    before
the  House   Judiciary   Committee  June   13.   Last   March   4,
the  windoivs  of  his  drugstore  were  smashed   for  the  seventh
tune  in  two  years.    On  April  5  his  home  was  firebombed;
on  April  20  a,  hole  blown  through  the  roof   of  his  drugstore.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,   NO.  14
JUNE  24,   1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20   CENTS
Destiny  May  Soon Call, But Will Mr. Kennedy Be at Home?
When  President  Kennedy  was  inaugurated,  he  spoke   with
the  joyful  zest  of  a  young  man  who  had  a  date  with  destiny.
But  now   it  looks   as  if,  when  destiny  comes  calling,  he'll   be
away—on   a  cold  war  junket  to  Germany  and   a  sentimental
visit  to  Ireland.    It's  not  that  Mr.  Kennedy  can't  come  flying
home  quickly  if   the   racial  situation—as   they   Say—suddenly
"deteriorates."      It's   not   the  flying  time   that   counts.      It's
the  symbol.     For  what  the  trip  to  Europe   says  to  Negroes,
unmistakably,  is  that  they  are  still  a  secondary  consideration.
The  main  line  of  Administration effort,   the  line  of  least  re-
sistance,  is  still  the  same  old  cold  war,  and  not  the  cold  war
the  Negro  has  faced  for  a  hundred   years  as  he  has  tried  to
make  Emancipation  a  reality.
In   the   atmosphere   of  Washington,  which   is  like  that  of
a  reigning  monarch's  court,  it  seems  churlish  to  say  this  just
when  the  President  has  at  last  made  two  speeches  of  the  kind
we've   all   been  -asking   for—his   eloquent   plea   at   American
University  June  10  for  a  fresh  start  toward  peace  and  his  civil
rights   talk  on  TV   the   next  night.     But  the   President   had
hardly  finished  making  his  plea  for  whites  to  understand  the
Negro's  feelings   when   it  was  punctuated   by  the   murder  of
Medgar    Evers   in   Jackson,   Miss.     This   gave   another   twist
of  agony  to  the  Negro's  awakening,  and  within  a  few  hours
had  made  the  President's  appeal   seem  little  and  late.
Humiliation  Is  The  Word
No   white  man,  from  the  President   down,   can  really  un-
derstand  the  Negro's  feelings.    For  this,  one  must  know  what
it  is  to   feel   rejected  from  birth,  and   to  be  made  to   wonder
in  the  dark  night  of  our  hearts  whether   we  may  not   indeed
be  a  nigger.    Humiliation  is  a  word  which  figures  honorably
in  Mr.  Kennedy's  strategy  of  peace,  not  to  back  an  opponent
into  that  dangerous   corner  where  he  must  knuckle  under  or
unleash   mutual  suicide.    But  few  of  us  seem   to   understand
that  humiliation is what  the  Negro's  struggle  is all  about.    To
be  deprived  of  manhood,   to  be  denied   the  right  to  hit  back,
Only  1,299  Years  To  Wait
"In   11   States   of   the   Old   Confederacy,   Mr.   Hollis
[exec.   director  of   the   Citizens  Councils   of   America]
said,  since  the  1954  school  desegregation   decision   only
four-tenths  of   1  percent  of  all  Negro  children  are   at-
tending  desegregated  schools.    At   that  rate,  he  said,
it   would  take  1,299  years  to  have  all  of   them  in  de-
segregated   schools,   'and   it  will  take  longer   than  that
in  Mississippi'."
—Was/iington  Star  from   Jackson,  Miss.,  June  16.
to  have  no   job  and   depend   on  your  wife's  support,   to  be
beaten   by  the   cops  with   impunity,  to   be   drafted   for   some
crazy  white  folks'  crusade  for  freedom  far  away  when   there's
a  bigger  and  more  genuine   one  to  be  fought   at  home:  how
can  a  white  man   really  know  what   it  means   to  be  inside  a
black  skin   in  America?
It   would   be   refreshing,   if   for   once,   somebody   made   a
speech   on   civil   rights   and   skipped   all  that   stuff   about   the
Declaration   of   Independence   and   the   Constitution,   or   ad-
mitted  frankly  that  from  the  beginning   they  were  as  plainly
marked  "for   whites  only"  as  any  Mississippi  drinking  foun-
tain.     As   truly   as  Athenian  democracy   was   based   on   slave
labor,  ours  has  rested  in  no  small  part  on  Negro  slavery  and
cheap  Negro  labor.    Racism—let's  face  it—has  been   a  cardi-
nal  feature  of  the   American  Way,   and  we  carry  it  with  us
to  all  the  lands  we  garrison.
In   this  perspective   the   shot   that   killed   Medgar   Evers,   a
hero  slain  for  seeking  to  liberate  his  people,  was  not  simply
the  act  of  barbarity  which  the  White  House   termed   it.     It
was  part  of  the  system  the  South  has  used   for   a  century  to
keep  the  Negro  in  his  place.  To  Negroes  it  must  have  seemed
a  cruel  joke  for  the  Justice  Department   to  react  in  the  Evers
killing  by  announcing   that   it  was  placing  the   "full   investi-
gatory  machinery"  of  the  FBI  at  the  disposal  of  the   Jackson,
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  34,  1963
The  FBI  Hasn't  Solved  A  Single  Southern  Racist  Killing  Yet
(Continued    From   Page   One)
Miss.,  police  department.     The   FBI   hasn't   solved   a  single
one  of  the  shootings  which  have  marked  the  Negro's  strug-
gle  for  freedom.    In  1955  the  Rev.  Geo.  W.  Lee  was killed
for  leading  an  NAACP   voters  drive  in  Mississippi.     A  sec-
ond  leader  in  this  drive,  Gus  Courts,  was  shot   but   escaped
death    two   years   later.     Evers   told    Althea   Simmons,   an
NAACP  field  secretary,  last  Fall  that  he  with  Lee  and  Courts
was  on  a  death  list  of  nine  drawn  up  by  white  segregation-
ists  after  the  1954  school  decision.    The  FBI  never  seems  to
manage   to   spy  on   such   conspiracies.     FBI   men   looked   on
passively    when    Negroes    and    a   white    sympathizer    were
dragged  from  a  porch  and  beaten  by  police  in  Jackson  only
a  few  days  ago.    The  FBI  lives  in  cordial  fraternity  with  the
cops  who  enforce  white  supremacy.    To  offer  the  FBI  in  the
Evers  killing  was  to  add  a  touch  of  farce  to  a  tragedy.
There's  A  Wall  Nearer  Home   Than  Berlin
Mr.  Kennedy,  like  the  rest  of  us,  has  much  to  learn  in  the
racial  crisis.    It  will  not   be  solved  by  fitful  leadership.     He
cannot  make  one  good  TV  talk  and  then  rush  off  to  be  photo-
graphed   at  the  Wall  in  Berlin.    He'd   better  stay  home  and
concern  himself  with  the  no  less  real  wall  between  white  and
black  at  home.     He's  hynotized  by  all  this  nonsense  about  a
multilateral   nuclear  NATO  force;  he'd   do  better  to   organize
a  multilateral force  at  home  in  the  racial  crisis—flying  squads
with   Negroes,   Mexican   Americans,   Puerto   Ricans   and   In-
dians  on   it  to  bring  hope  to  our   untouchables  and   second
class  citizens  before  there's  blood  in  the  streets.    The  coming
debates  in   Congress   and   the   filibuster  will  only   exacerbate
racial  tension.    We   dare  not  forget   that   in  Birmingham,   as
in  Albany,  Ga.,  and   in  Jackson,  Miss.,  weeks  of   demonstra-
tions  have  as  yet  met  only  evasion  or  blank   refusal  to   end
grievances.    Or  that  in  the  North  a  storm  also  rises  against
lily   white  trade   unions   and   "unsegregated"   schools   which
are  all  Negro.
An   air  of  the  synthetic  has  always  hung   over  Mr.   Ken-
nedy's  chrome-plated  rhetoric   about   the  peril   of   our  times.
But  it's  here.    He  has  made  a  start  on  moral  leadership   in
the  racial  crisis.     He   has  also  picked   up   again  the   crusade
for   peace  he  launched  at  the  UN   two  years  ago  and   then
African   Appeal   on  Test  Ban
"It  may  very  well  be  that   science  may  in  the  future
show    beyond    doubt   that   on-site   inspections    may   no
longer   be  needed   to  identify  suspicious  seismic  events
or   to   control   adequately   a  test   ban   treaty.     For   the
time    being,    however,    the   three   African    delegations
recognize  that   three,  four  or  so  yearly   truly   effective
inspections   —   or   an   adequately    proportionate   figure
spread  over  more  years  —  may  be  needed  to  dispel  mu-
tual   suspicions.   .  .  .
"Since   there  is  general  agreement,  however,   that  the
number  of  on-site  inspections  is  less  relevant   than  the
terms  of  the  modalities   or  conditions   for  the  adequate
and   effective   conduct   of   such   on-site  inspections,   the
three  delegations  therefore   exhort  the  nuclear  Powers
to  rise  above   quarrelling   on  an  insignificant    difference
of  one  or  two  inspections,  and  to  accept  a  reasonable
quota    of   inspections   contingent   upon   adequate   and
effective   modalities   of   inspection."
—Joint   Memo   by  Ethiopia,  Nigeria   and   the    VAR
to  the  18-nation  disarmament   parley   at   Geneva   June
10  based   on  the  views  of  the  Addis  Ababa    conference.
dropped.    His  new  speech   defied   the  military  bureaucracy  to
pledge  that  we  would  not  resume  atmospheric  testing  if   the
Russians  didn't.    The  new  radiation  hearings  which  we  dis-
cuss  in  a  special  supplement  this  week  shows  that  the  fallout
peril  will  become  real  if  the  Russians  detonate  new  monsters
and  we  follow  suit.    But  the  President  cannot  expect  to  place
nuclear    weapons    in   the    hands   of    the   Germans    behind
NATO's  facade  and  proceed   to  build  up  a  missile  force  of
stupefying  size  without  making  the  Russians  skeptical  of  our
assurance  that  we  mean  them  no  harm.    Much   in  his  Amer-
ican   University  speech   was   truly   inspiring;   but   part    also
embodied   the  old  blindness.    In  Vietnam  we  are  as  surely
imposing  our  system  on  an  unwilling  people  as  the  Russians
did   in  Hungary;  Cuba   is  hardly  a  monument   to  the   world
law  we  preach.     Peace  abroad  like  peace  at  home  requires  a
painful   national   self-analysis,  a   facing   of   bitter   but   tonic
truths.    Both  are  full  time  tasks  of  leadership,  not  to  be  met
by  occasional  speeches.     It  is  not  easy  to  be  the  man  in  the
White  House  today.    It  is  from  no  lack  of  sympathy  for  the
troubles  which  beset  him  that  we  ask  for  more.
June   18
Another  Defeat  for  HUAC,  Justice  for  Blinded  Communist  in  Supreme  Court
Several  victories  for  the  politically  persecuted  were  hand-
ed  down  by  the  Supreme  Court  last  Monday   in  its  final  day
of   term.     In  three  cases  the   Court   showed  a  new   5-to-4
lineup,   with   Warren,   Black,  Douglas,   Brennan   and   Gold-
berg   against   White,   Clark,   Harlan  and  Stewart.
The   Chief   Justice   for   this   liberal   majority    of   five   re-
versed   Edward   Yellin's   conviction   for   contempt   of    the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.    Here  the  Court
strictly  construed  the  Committee's  rules  in  favor  of  a  First
Amendment   witness.    Under  the  rules—which  the  Commit-
tee  advertises  as  evidence  of  fairness  but  rarely  observes—
a  witness  may  be  heard  in  executive  session  where  a  ma-
jority   of  the  Committee  determines  that  a  public  hearing
might   "unjustly   injure  his   reputation."    In   Yellin's  case
a   request   for  an  executive  session  was   rejected  by   Staff
Director  Richard   Arens  without  consulting  the  Committee.
The  same  majority  of  five,  this  time  speaking  through
Mr.  Justice  Goldberg,  reversed  two  deportation  orders,  one
for  brief  membership  in  the  Communist  Party  in  1949   and
1950.     This  would  have  sent   back   to   Mexico  a  man  who
came  here  as  a  boy  in  1920  and  has  since  raised  an  Ameri-
can  born  family.    The  majority   held  that   the  government
had  failed  to  prove  that  this  brief   membership  was   that
"meaningful   association"   required   for   deportation   under
the  Galvan   and  Rowoldt  cases.
The  second  decision  was  another  deserved  defeat  for  our
xenophobic   immigration   service.    It   had  twice   sought   to
deport  a  Swiss  resident  alien  because  he  had  for   several
hours  one  afternoon  crossed  the  border  into  Ensenada,  Cali-
fornia.    The  Court  ruled  that  such  a  visit  did not  constitute
a  fresh,  "entry"  allowing  deportation  for  an  offense  which
was  not  grounds  for  deportation  at  the  time  of  the  alien's
original  admission.
In  a   fourth   case,  with   only  White  taking  no  part,   the
Court   unanimously   joined   the   Chief   Justice   in   upholding
the  right  of  the  Negro  Communist  leader,  Henry  Winston,
to  sue  the  government  for  loss  of  his  sight  due  to  prison
negligence  while  serving  a  Smith  Act  sentence.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Behind   the  Scenes  at  the  Radiation   Hearings
The First  Public Warning That Safety Standards Were  Being Manipulated
"Estimates  indicate  that  in  a  number  of  regions   of   the
U.S.   the  radiation  dose  received  by  the  thyroid  glands  of
infants   and  small  children  may  reach   a  level   of   1.5  rem
over  a  12-month  period.  .  .  .  This  amount  is  3  times  the
quantity  of  radio-iodine recommended by  the  Federal  Radia-
tion  Council as  a  maximum  limit for  the  average  population
in  one  year  from  the  peacetime applications of radioactivity.
"The   Council  has  been  quick  to  point  out  that  this  quan-
tity  of  radio-iodine  does  not  necessarily   mean  that  a  level
of  contamination  has  been  reached  which  demands  the  ap-
plication  of   widespread   public  health  preventive  measures
to  protect  the  population from  undue  exposure.    The  Coun-
cil  argues  that  nuclear weapons  testing  cannot  be  construed
as  a  peacetime operation  and  hence  the  protective  standards
which  have  been   established  for   peacetime  do  not   neces-
sarily  hold  for  contamination  from  fallout.  .  .  .
"It  is  not  possible  to  know  all  of  the  reasons  why  the  PRC
decided  that  its  radiation standards  do not  apply  to  environ-
mental  contamination  from  fallout.     One  of   the  principal
ones,   however,  is   undoubtedly   that   the   U.S.   government
would  feel  somewhat  embarrassed  if  public  health authori-
ties  were  to  institute  protective  measures   to  prevent   the
intake  of  radio-iodine  by  the  population during  a  time  when
its  own weapons testing  is  contributing to  world  contamina-
tion  problems.
"It   may   be   anticipated,  however,  that   our   government
may   be  embarrassed  regardless   of   what   action   the   FRC
now  takes.    If  it  reverses  its  stand  and institutes  its  peace-
time  radiation  standards  on  the  fallout  problem,  and  if   in
consequence   preventative  measures   are   instituted  in   this
country,  one  may  expect  other  countries  to  complain  that
they  do  not  have  the  means  to  protect  themselves.
"On  the  other  hand  if  the  Council  decides  to  institute  a
new   series   of   radiation  protective  standards   which  apply
only  to  fallout  and which  are substantially higher  than  those
applying  to  peacetime  applications of  radionuclides,  reper-
cussions  may  also  develop  because  such  standards  would  be
well  in  excess  of  those  internationally agreed  upon  and  pro-
mulgated   by   the   International  Commission   on  Radiation
Protection."
—Prof.   Russell  H.   Morgan,   Johns   Hopkins,   before    the
American  Public   Health  Association,  last  Dec.  12,  Miami.
This   little  noticed   speech  was   the   first   public   warning  of
what  was  going  on  behind  the  scenes  in  the   FRC.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XI,   NO.  14
JUNE  24,   1963WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
20  CENTS
How  the  Pentagon  Protects  Itself  from  Fallout
To  understand  the  radiation  hearings   just  held  by  a  sub-
committee   of   the   Joint   Committee   on   Atomic   Energy   one
must  glance  briefly  at  the  long  and  secretive  campaign   waged
by  the  military  in  recent   years  to  free  itself  from  the   health
standards  established   for   radioactivity.    Much   of   this   story
is  unknown  not  only  to  the  public  but  to  most  members  of
Congress.     It  helps  explain  why  the  Federal  Radiation  Coun-
cil  after  four  years  of  existence  still  has  set  no  health  stand-
ards   for   fallout,   why   it   is   reluctant   to   authorize   counter-
measures  when   and  where   fallout   levels   approach   limits  re-
garded  . as  dangerous   under   existing   international   protective
standards,   and   why   it  would   like-  to   establish   special—and
looser—standards  where  fallout  is  concerned,   so  as  to  protect
the  military  from  pressure  at  home  and  abroad   for   cessation
of   atmospheric   testing.
A  Loophole   for  the   Military
Few  people  are  aware  that   even  if  the  Federal   Radiation
Council   establishes  health   safety  limits  for   fallout,   the  mili-
tary  already  has  a  loophole  through  which  it  can  evade  these
regulations.     This  loophole  was  obtained   by  a  kind   of   sit-
down  strike  waged  by  the  Pentagon  and  the  AEC  against  the
Federal  Radiation  Council,    This  "strike"  won  for  the  mili-
tary—in  an  Eisenhower  executive  order—what  they  had   been
unable  to  obtain  on  Capitol  Hill.    This  is  the  story.
In   the  spring   of   1959,   there   was  strong   public   agitation
to  take  radiation  health  standards  away  from  the  AEC,  which
shared  the  military's   desire   for   continued   testing,  and  place
it  in  the  Public  Health  Service.    To  head  off  legislation  de-
Chaos in Health Protection
"The  statement  of  the  Federal  Radiation  Council  that
its   previously   published   radiation   standards   do   not
apply   to  fallout  has   produced  chaos  for   those  public
health  authorities  at  the  Federal,  State  and  local  levels
who  live  in  regions  where  Iodine-131 fallout  contamina-
tion  is  unusually  high.     Indeed,  until  the  Council  an-
nounces  the  levels  at  which  it  does  believe  preventive
measures   should   be   introduced   to   protect   the   public
health,  these  authorities  must  act  on  their  own  without
the  counsel   of  the  Federal  authorities  which  has   been
established  by  law  to  provide them  just  such   guidance."
—Dr. Morgan  in  the  speech  quoted  above.
signed  to  do  this,  Eisenhower  on  August   14,  1959,   set  up  a
Federal  Radiation  Council  to  fix  national   standards  of   radia-
tion  health  and  safety.   Ten  days  later  John  A.  McCone,  now
head  of  the  CIA,  then  chairman  of  the  AEC,  turned  up  with
the  military  at  a  hearing   on   Capitol   Hill   before   the   Joint
Committee   on   Atomic   Energy   with   an   amendment    to   the
Atomic  Energy   Act.*    The   effect   of  the  amendment    would
have   been   to   give   the   military   exemption    from    national
health   and   safety   standards.     The   possibility   that   the   new
Federal   Radiation   Council   might   set   fallout   standards   and
that  these  might  interfere  with  weapons  testing  was  not  men-
tioned.    But  McCone  himself  admitted  that  "as  atomic  weap-
*Amending  the  Atomic  Energy   Act  and  Authorization   of
Stanford   Accelerator   Project:   Hearing   by   the   Joint   Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy,   Aug.   26,   1959.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Wcekly,  June  24, 190-1
ons,  nuclear  propelled   vessels   and   other   military  reactors  in
the   custody  of  military  departments   became   more  numerous,
the  requirements  of  military  readiness  in  training  and  maneu-
verability  may  exert  more  and  more   influence  toward   less  re-
strictive  safety  procedures."     Yet  he  was  proposing  to  open
the  door  to  looser  standards.    "In  other  words,"  Senator   An-
derson   (D.  N.AL),   then   chairman  of   the   Joint    Committee
asked  McCone  "if   you  thought   certain  [safety]   requirements
were  necessary  for  a  military  reactor,  the  Department   of   De-
fense  can  just  tell  you  to  pay  attention  to  your  own  business?"
McCone  replied,   "That   is  correct."     The   bill  was  never  re-
ported  out  of   committee.
What  Ike  Gave  Them
The  military, with  the  help  of  the  AEC,  then  proceeded   to
win   by   executive   order   what   they   had   failed   to   obtain   in
legislation.     The   Federal   Radiation   Council   was   set   up   by
Eisenhower  August   14,  1959,  with  its  main  purpose  "  to  test
and   fix   national   standards   of   radiation   and   fallout   safety"
(Facts   on  File,  Aug.   13-19,  1959).    But  it  took  nine  months
before   the   FRC  had   its  first  executive   order   ready   for   the
President   establishing   its   "Radiation   Protection   Guides."     I
am  told  that  one  reason  for  the  long  delay  was  the   difficulty
in  getting   the  Secretary  of  Defense   and  the  Chairman  of   the
AEC  to  come   to  meetings   of   the   Council.      (The    chairman
was   the   Secretary   of   Health,    Education   and   Welfare;   the
other   member   was  the   Secretary   of   Commerce.     The   Secre-
taries   of   Labor    and   Agriculture   have   since   been   added.)
DOD    and   AEC   stayed   away  until   a  compromise   had   been
reached   on  health   and   safety   regulations.    This   compromise,
as  embodied   in  the  first  executive   order,   gave   the    Defense
Department   the   loophole   it  wanted.    •
The   executive  order   signed  by  Eisenhower  May   13,  I960,
recommends   first   of   all   that    "The    Federal    agencies   apply
these   Radiation   Protection   Guides-  with   judgment   and   dis-
cretion,   to   assure   that   reasonable  probability   is  achieved   in
the  attainment  of   the   desired   goal   of   protecting   men   from
the  undesirable  effects   of  radiation."    This  was  to  make  the
standards   somewhat   less  than   mandatory.     But  then   it  went
on  to  say  "The   Guides  may  be  exceeded   only  after   the  Fed-
eral  agency   having  jurisdiction  over  the  matter   has   carefully
Fallout  No Different
Rep.    Melvin    PRICE,   Chairman,   Subcommittee    on
Radiation,   Joint   Committee  on   Atomic   Energy:   Just
how  do  you  expect  to  educate  the  public  that  limits  on
radiation  from  one  source   are  not  applicable   to  radia-
tion  from  fallout?
Dr.  Gordon  M.  DUNMXG,  Operational  Safety  Divi-
sion,   Atomic   Energy    Commission:  A   roentgen   is   a
roentgen  is  a  roentgen.    I  don't  think  you  can.    I  don't
think   you   should,   for   just   that   reason,   I   think.     A
roentgen  is  a   roentgen."
—Joint  Committee  radiation hearing, June  4.
considered  the  reasons  for  doing  so  in  the  light  of  the  recom-
mendations  in  this  paper."    This  loophole  is  far  larger   than
that  which  the  AEC  had  asked   for  the  Defense   Department
the  previous  summer.     The   bill   which   the  Joint   Committee
refused  to  report  out  would  have  required   "the  President  .  .  .
to  the  extent  he  deems  necessary  in  the  national  interest"   to
make  a  finding  and  issue  an  order  before  the  Defense  Depart-
ment   could   exceed   health   and   safety  standards.     Under   the
Executive   order,   however,   the   Defense    Department    can  ex-
ceed  these  standards  on  its  own  without  referring  the  decision
to  the   President.
The   loophole   so  far   has   been   unnecessary.     The    Federal
Radiation  Council  soon  proved   to  be  no  more  than   a  facade
behind   which  the   military   and   the   AEC   continued   to   run
the  show.     The   extent  of  the  FRC's  inactivity  was   indicated
in  May  of   last  year  when   the  National   Advisory    Committee
on  Radiation  under  the   respected   Dr.   Russell   H.  Morgan  of
Johns   Hopkins  reported  to  the   Surgeon   General  that   unless
greater    effort    were   put    into   the   development    of   counter-
measures  against  Strontium-90,  Iodine-131   and   other   fallout
poisons   "the   nation   may  well  be  faced   in  a  few  years  with
contamination   problems   which   cannot   be  easily  solved."     It
also  noted   politely  but  unmistakably  that   "primary    responsi-
bility  for  the  direction  of  the  nation's  countermeasures  effort
against  environmental  contamination  has  not   focussed   in  any
one  place  of  the  Federal   government."      The   FRC  was   sup-
posed   to  be  this  focus.
The   farce  begun   under   Eisenhower  continues   under   Ken-
How  the  Federal   Radiation  Council  Dodges   Its   Responsibility   on   Fallout
"One  important  result  of  the  hearings held  June  4-7, 1962,
was  the  [Joint  Atomic  Energy]  Committee's  attempt  to  ob-
tain  clarification  of  the  applicability of  radiation  protection
standards.     In   his   capacity   as   chairman   of   the   Federal
Radiation  Council,  Secretary   [of  HEW]   Celebrezze   replied
in  a  letter  of  August  17,  1962,  but  instead  of  clarifying  the
matter,    Air.   Celebrezze's   statement   introduced  extraordi-
nary   confusion,   and  this  confusion    persists.
"Before   Mr.   Celebrezze's   reinterpretation,   it   was   gen-
erally  assumed  that  the  Radiation  Protection  Guides  (RPG)
are  applicable to  the  present  situation.    The  FRC  now  holds
that   we   are   not   currently   engaged    in   'normal   peacetime
operations'  and  that  the  KPG's  were  developed  specifically
'in  connection with  the  industrial  use  of  ionizing  radiation."
This  flatly  contradicts the  FRC  staff  report  (May  13,  1960)
in  which  'only  major  nuclear  accidents'  are  specifically   ex-
cluded   from   peacetime  uses.     In  addition,   the   U.S.   Public
Health   Service,  a   division   of   Mr.  Celebrezze's  HEW,   has
consistently  referred  to  the  IJFG's  with  reference  to  fallout.
"The   FRC  can,  of  course,  reinterpret  the  applicability  of
its    recommendations,   but   endless   public   confusion   could
have  been  avoided by  a  frank  statement  that  the  interpreta-
tion  has   been   changed.     It   is   doubtful,   however,    whether
the   FRC  can   with   impunity   fail   to   discharge   its   lawful
obligations;  it   is   charged   by   Public  Law  86-373  with   the
formulation  of  radiation  standards.     According   to  Mr.  Cele-
brezze,   more   than   three   years   after   its   formation,   the
Council  has  yet  to  establish  standards  applicable  to  fallout.
This  seems  incredible.
"In  the   absence   of  standards,  public  health   officials   and
individual  physicians cannot  adopt  a  meaningful  policy   with
respect   to  countermeasures.    This  problem  has  been   com-
pounded  by  the  US  Public Health  Service  policy  of  referring
to  the  RPG as  the  relevant  guide  when  the  cumulative  year-
ly  dose   from   a  particular  isotope  appears   to  be  below   the
RPG  and  referring to  Mr.  Celebrezze's  statement  of  August
17,  1962,  or  the  FRC  statement   of  Sept.   10,  1962  when  the
RPG  is   exceeded."
—Letter   to  Chairman   Price   as   the   radiation   hearings
opened   June      :>  from   the   Greater  St.   Louis  Citizens'   Com-
mittee   for   Nuelcar    Information.
I     ]•'   Stone's  Bi-Woekly     Second  Class   Post.-iKe  Paid  at  Washincton.  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,    N.   W..  Washington,  D.  C.
An  m'ii'penikm  U-wtvkly   fuMiyhcil  nml  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  ManaKer,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;
fi   in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  S15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  24, 1363
nedy.    The  Federal  Radiation  Council,  for  all  its  high  sound-
ing   name,  is  little  more   than   a  subcommittee  of   the  Presi-
dent's   Cabinet.    It  meets  no  more  than  a  few  times  a  year,
and  about  all  the  busy  Cabinet  members  who  comprise  it  have
time  to   do   is  to   sign   the   papers   prepared   for   them.     Its
budget   for   the   fiscal   year  now   ending   was   the  microscopic
sum   (for   Washington)    of   $48,000.      Its   chairman,   HEW
Secretary   Celebrezze,   testified   at   the   radiation  hearings   that
now  he  was  going  to  insist  that  the  Council—after  four  years
of   existence—have  a  full   time  staff!     Until  now   it  has   de-
pended  on  part  time  help.
AEC  and  Army  Still  Run  The  Show
The   man   who   runs  the   Federal   Radiation  Council   is  its
executive  director,  Dr.  Paul  C.  Tompkins.    He  was  formerly
head   of   the   U.S.   Naval   Radiological   Laboratory   and   went
from  there  to  the  AEC,  from  which  he  was  assigned  this  year
to  the  FRC.     His  opening   statement  disclosed  that  his   salary-
was  still  paid  by  the  AEC.    Thus  an  AEC  employe  holds  the
key  post   on  the   FRC.     In   the  background,  working   closely
with  Dr.  Tompkins,  is  another   figure   whom   many  scientists
regard   as  the   real  power   behind   the   scenes   in  the  field  of
radiation.     He   is  Lt.  Col.   James   B.  Hartgering.   one  of   the
U.S.  Army's  leading  radiologists.  He  is  assigned  by  the  Army
to   the   staff   of   the   President's   Science  Adviser.  Dr.   Jerome
B,  Wiesner.    Dr.  Wiesner  sits  on  the  FRC  as  the  President's
representative,  and  Col.   Hartgering  is  Dr.  Wicsner's assistant
in  charge   of   radiation  matters.     He   plays  a  leading  part   in
the   discussions  at   the   FRC   on   these   second   echelon   levels
where   the   decisions   are   really   made.     Between   them   the
AEC's  Tompkins  and  the  Army's  Hartgering   run  the   show.
One   of  the  objectives  of  the  military  scientific  bureaucracy
which   these   two   men   represent   is  to   control   the   hearings
which  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  has  been  hold-
ing  on  radiation  almost  every  year  since  1957.     These  have
become  steadily  more  one-sided.  Except  for  the  U.S.  Weather
Bureau  and  its  chief  spokesman  Dr.  Lester  Machta,  this year's
Misleading  the  Public  on Thyroid  Perils
"On  June  29,  1962,  a  group  of  children  from  the   St.
Lonis  was  sent   to  New   York  for  thyroidal  iodine-131
measurements.     According   to   the   New    York   Times
("Tests   Find  Levels  of  Fall-Out  Safe,"  July  8,  1962),
Mr.  Merrill  Eisenbud  reported  that  'tests  completed  at
the  New  York  University Medical  Center  indicate  that
the   amount  of   radioactive   iodine  entering  the  thyroid
glands  of  children has  not  approached  the  danger  level.'
Not  mentioned was  the  fact  that  one  cannot  count  Io-
dine-131   over   the   thyroid  after   decay   has   occurred.
Is   it   possible   that   Mr.  Eisenbud   and  the   US   Public
Health  Service,  which  sponsored  this  expedition at  con-
siderable  public  expense,  were  unaware  of  this?    What
possible   purpose  could  be  served  by  giving  the   public
such   misleading  reassurance?"
—Letter  from   the  Greater  St.  Louis  Citizens'   Com-
mittee  for  Nuclear  Information    to  Chairman  Price  at
the  Radiation  Hearings,  June   3.
scheduled   witnesses   were   all   safely   dedicated    to   the   Pen-
tagon-AEC  viewpoint.     As  one  angry   scientist  in   an   official
agency  put  it  privately,  "Dr.   Tompkins   arranged  the  hearings
and   then   appeared   at  them   as  chief   witness."     Private   and
public  protest  led  Rep.  Mel  Price  (D.  III.)   who  presided  over
the  hearings  to  say uneasily at  their  start  he  was  "giving  con-
sideration"  to  a  second  round  of  hearings  later  at  which  non-
governmental   witnesses   would   be   heard.     But   as  this   was
being  written  the  latest  word   from  the'  Joint   Committee   was
that  there  still  had   been  no  decision.    There  will  be  no  sec-
ond  round  unless  scientists  and  public  spokesmen   vigorously
press   for   it.    Fortunately  Senator   Bartlett  of   Alaska  insisted
on  being  heard,  and  his  statement   (see   boxes   on  pages  five
and   six)    provided   a   breath   of   fresh   air   at   the    hearings
and  a  taste  of  what  thev  would  have  been  like  if   independent
scientists  had  been  there  to  challenge  the  official  presentations.
These   bureaucrats  are   masters   at   public   relations.    They
know  how   to  achieve  a  minimum  of  publicity  when  that  is
what  they  want.    Through   a  question   slipped   to   Chairman
Senator  Bartlett  Accuses  Government of   Failing  to  Protect  Nation's  Children
"In  the   coming   year   levels   of   fallout   are   expected   to
increase  four  fold.    In  the  years  ahead,  no  one  can  say  that
these  levels  will  drop:  many  would  bet  they  will  continue
to  increase.    If  we  continue  to  drift,   as  a  nation,   putting
off  decisions  as  to  the  amounts  of  poisoned radio-contami-
nants  we  will  allow  ourselvs  to  absorb,  thereby  postponing
the  application of  protective countermeasures  in  the  isolated
cases  where they  are  needed,  we  may  find  one  of  these  years
that  it  is  too  late.    Let  us  not  dwell  on  the  dimensions of
such   a  discovery.
"Our   present   efforts   in   the   field   of   radiation  measure-
ment  and control are  inadequate  in  my  opinion,  and  they  are
confused.    The  U.S.  Government  is  not  doing  what  it  could
or  should  do  in  this  field.  .  .  .
"The  Radiation  Protection Guide  for  a  12-month  intake  of
Iodine-131   is   set   at   36,500  microcurics  'as   an   acceptable
health  risk  for  large  population  groups  for  a  life  time, com-
patible  with  the  orderly  development  of  nuclear  industry in
the  U.S.'    This  level  is  set  conservatively  in  order  to  pro-
tect  the  infants,  children  and  the  unborn  who  are  particu-
larly  sensitive to  contaminant.    Should  this  level  be  reached
the   Public  Health  Service   advises   that   'counter-measures
should  be  considered  and  surveillance increased.'
"According   to   a  Public  Health  study,   10  percent   of   all
male  infants  under  one  year  drink  1,3  liters  of  milk  a  day.
A  child  in  Palmer,  Alaska,  consuming  one  liter  of   milk  a
day  from  Sept.  29,  1961,  to  Sept.  29,  1962,  would  have  re-
ceived   39,660   micromicrocuries   of   Iodine-131.    A   child   in
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  consuming  a  liter  of  milk  a  day  from  May
1957  to  April  1958  would  have  received  91,250 micromicro-
curies  of  Iodine-131.    A  child  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  con-
suming  a  liter  of  milk  a  day  from  Oct.  25,  1961,  to  Oct. 25,
1962,   would   have  received  37,040  micromicrocuries  of   Io-
dine-131.    A  child  in  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  consuming  a  liter
of   milk   a  day  from  Oct.  25,  1961,  to  Oct.  25,  1962,  would
have  received   32,060   micromicrocuries of  Iodine-131.
"Children  in  Salt  Lake  City,  St.  Louis,  Palmer  and  Minne-
apolis  have  received  more—some  have  received  far   more—
Iodine-131   than  is   considered  an   'acceptable   health   risk.'
Yet  no  counter-measures of  any  kind  have  been   suggested
or  ordered  by  the  Federal  government.   There  is  even  some
question  whether  the  Federal   surveillance  network  analyzes
samples  quickly  enough  to  make  counter-measures effective.
There  is,  however,  no  doubt  the  network  is  so  loosely   con-
structed   that   many,  many  cases   of   high   Iodine-131  con-
tamination   go   entirely  undetected  and  unevaluated."
—Senator   Bartlett    (D.   Alaska)     before     the   radiation
hearings  of  the  Joint  Committee,  June  4.    He  was  the  only
independent   witnisi,  heard.
1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  24, 1963
Price  by  a  newsman,  for  example,  attention  was  called  to  the
fact  that  the  monthly  tabulations  on  fallout  in  milk  are  sent
out  by  the  Department  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare   for
•release  in  Saturday  morning  papers,   the   poorest   day  of   the
week  for  a  release  as  every  press  agent  knows.    Similar treat-
ment  was  given  the  FRC's  Report  No.  4  on  Fallout   through
1962,   issued  on  the  eve  of  the  hearings.    When  government
officials  have  a  report  they  want  fully  publicized,  they  invite
all  the   reporters  they  can  to  an  advance  briefing,  call   their
attention  to  salient  points  and  give  them  several  days  in  which
to  digest   it  before  they  have  to  write  their  stories.     In  this
case  only  a  handful  of  reporters  were  called  in  Friday  after-
noon,   May  31  and  the  report   was  for   release  next  morning,
June  1.    This  was  the  long  Memorial  Day  week-end,  one  of
the  worst  in  the  year  for  a  release.
Figures  Too  Huge  to  Be  Hidden
But  some  things  cannot  be  hidden.    The  FRC  report   and
the  testimony  showed  all  too  plainly  that  the  level  of  testing
and  the  amount  of  fallout  have  been  growing  at  a  giant  pace
unbelievable  a  few  years  ago.     One  way  to  set  the  figures  in
perspective  is  to  look   back  at  the  panel  in  the   1957   hearings
which  estimated  that  from  2  megatons  to  10  megatons  a  year
of   testing  would  constitute  a  reasonable   amount  without   un-
due   danger   to   the   health   of   mankind.     In   the   six  years,
1945-51   inclusive   total   fission   yield  was   seven   tenths   of   a
megaton  or  little  more  than  a  tenth  of  a  megaton   a  year.    In
the  five  years  1952-56  inclusive,  the  total  was  53.1   megatons
or  a  little  more  than  10  megatons  a  year,  100  times  as  much.
In  the  two  years  1957-58   the  annual  megatonnage   doubled
to  20  MT  a  year.    In   1961   this  rose  to  25  MT  and  in   1962
tripled  to  76  MT.    These  are  the  fission  yield  figures,  not  the
total  yields.    The   fission   produces   poisons  like   Strontium-90
and   Iodine-131.
With  the  appearance  of  thermonuclear   weapons,   the  total
yields   have   grown   even   more.     The   total   yields   provide   a
clue  to  the  amount  of  Carbon-14  with   its  long  term   genetic
hazards.    The  first  H-bomb  was  exploded  in   1952.     In  the
five  years   1952-56,   total   yield  of   bombs   exploded   was   113
MT,  more  than  20  MT  a  year.    In  '57-58,  it  was  85  MT  or
40  MT  a  year.    In   1961   it  was  120  MT  and  in  1962   it  was
217MT.  This  is a  total .yield  of  535  MT,  or  535,000,000  tons
of  TNT   equivalent,  in  9  years  of  testing  or  almost  60  MT  a
Cat  Out  of  The  Bag
Health  Not  The  Only  Consideration
"The  [Federal  Radiation]  Council  has  concluded  that
it  is  not  practical, at  least  at  the  present  time,  to  pro-
pose  fixed  levels  of  radionuclide concentrations  in   en-
vironmental  media  at  which  health  protection  action  is
required.     If   they  were  set   only   to   avoid   dangerous
levels  of  exposure,  they  would be  too  high  to  have  much
practical  significance   for   most  problems.    In  addition,
such  guidelines  would  open  the  door  to  the  acceptance
of  unnecessary  exposures  resulting  in  an  undue  risk  to
the   public  health  which  is  not  really   necessary.
"Conversely,   if   they   are   set   low,   as   they  properly
should  be  for  health  protection purposes  alone,  the  way
will  have  been  opened  to  impose an  unwarranted impact
on  the  economy  of  the  nation  which  cannot  be  justified
by  the  magnitude  of  the  health   risk."
—Dr.  Paul  C.  Tompkins,  executive  director,  Federal
Radiation  Coitncil,  at   the  radiation  hearings,  June   It.
"The  health  implications  associated  with  fallout  and
the  possible  influence  of  protective  measures  on the   U.S.
economy  and  the  national  security  are  major  consider-
ations   to   which   proposed   actions   would  need   to   be
related."
—HEW   Secretary   Celebrezze   explaining   to  the  radi-
ation  hearings  June  G why  the  Federal  Radiation  Coun-
cil,  of  which  he  is  chairman,  is  reluctant  to  establish
firm  fallout    danger   standards.
year.     These   stupendous   figures   are   the   equivalent   of   350
pounds   exploded   for   every  man,   woman   and   child   on   the
planet.
Another  way  to  measure  what  has  happened  is  to  look  back
at  the  Joint   Atomic  Energy   Committee's   report   on   its  first
radiation  and   fallout   hearings   in   1957.     Then   it  concluded
gingerly  by  saying  "it  would  appear  that  the  consequences  of
further   testing  over  the  next  several  generations   at  the  level
of  the  past   5  years  could   constitute  a  hazard   to  the  world's
population.     If  the  level  of  future  testing  rises,  then  the  haz-
ard  could  be  greater  and  could  arrive  sooner."    The  level  to
which   that   report   referred   was   10  megatons  of   fission   and
20  megatons  of  total  yield  per  year.  Last  year  the  total fission
yield  was  almost  8  times  greater  (76MT)  and  the  total  yield
was  more  than  10  times  greater   (217  MT).    In  addition   to
the  steep  rise  in  volume  of  testing,   new  dangers  have  come
Alaska's Bartlett Asks: What  Is The Good Of  Guidelines, If  They're  Not  Used?
"I  cannot  help  feeling  that  the  hesitancy  in  applying  the
Radiation  Protection  Guide to  fallout  is  caused  by  the  fear
that   Range  III  levels  may   be  attained  and  that   counter-
measures  may, therefore, be  called  for.    Officials   responsible
for  such  matters  have  publicly  expressed   concern  that  the
application    of    counter-measures   might   have    unpleasant
economic   consequences.
"The  fear   of   the   economic  consequences   resulting  from
the   implementation  of   counter-measures   should   have   no
place  whatever in  the  calculation  of  acceptable  limits  of  ex-
posure.    There  is  time  enough  to  worry  about  the  economic
cqnsequences   after   the   public  has   been   protected.    When
a'can  of. food  is  infected with  botulism,  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration  does  not  hesitate   to  inform   the  public  be-
cause  it  fears  the  economic  results  of  its   announcement.
"If  the  Federal  Radiation  Council is  not  prepared  to  rec-
ommend  counter-measures   when  third  range   danger  levels
are  attained,  then  why  does  it  not  say  so  and  clearly?     If
the  Guide  does  not  apply,  let  us  be  told;  let   the  Govern-
ment  stop  using  it.    Let  it  be  dropped  at  once.    It  is  re-
sponsible   and  indefensible   to  continue   its   use  and  at   the
same    time   refuse    to   act   when   its    guidelines    indicate
action.  .  .  .
"What  makes  the  authorities  so  unwilling  to  recommend
counter-measures?    Both  Minnesota  and  Utah  last  year,  on
their  own  initiative and  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  Fed-
eral  Radiation  Council,  took  positive  action  and  temporary
steps.   What  was  the  effect  of  this  action?    Was  there  pub-
lic  panic?    Was  there  severe  economic  dislocation?    I  doubt
it.    The  American  people  are  sensible.
"In  fact,  if  the  American  citizen  was  confident  that  coun-
ter-measures  would be  taken  when  unusual  amounts  of  fall-
out  were  present,  a  good  deal  of   the  mistrust   and  appre-
hension  that  surrounds  the  subject  in  the  public  mind would
disappear."
—Sen.  Bartlett   (D.  Alaska)   at   the  radiation   hearings
June  4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  24, 1963
to  light.    In  1957  the  Committee  discussed  only  Strontium-90
and  Cesium-137.     Since  then  the  importance  of  many  short-
lived   nuclides   has   been   discovered,   particularly  Iodine-131.
And  we  have  also  discovered  the  dangers  in  the  Carbon-14
produced   by  fusion   in  the  big  thermonuclear  weapons.     Yet
the   theme   song  of   the   Federal   Radiation  Council   and   the
AEC  and  the  military  as  presented  in  these  new  hearings  and
in  the  latest  FRC  report  is  still  that  there  is  no  danger.     The
levels,  the  FRC  said,  "fall   far  short  of   figures  which  would
cause  concern   or   justify   countermeasures."
The   Menace  of  Iodine-131
Insofar   as   Iodine-131   is  concerned,   this  certainly  is   not
true.     The   figures   as  presented   in   the   official   reports   and
testimony  are  as  tricky  as  an  Insull  balance  sheet.    But  a  care-
ful   reading  is  not  reassuring.    For  example,  Dr.  Gordon   M.
Dunning  of  the  AEC  figures  that  the  highest  national  average
of   Iodine-131   in   milk   occurred   from   Sept.   1961    through
August   1962   and   reached   34  picocuries  per   liter.     Both   he
and  the  FRC  estimate  that  80  picocuries per  liter  would   give
an  average  dose  to  infant  thyroids  of  0.5  rem,  which   is  the
dosage  that  is  supposed   to  mark  the  beginning  of  danger  in
the  RPG's   (Radiation  Protection   Guides).    This  means  that
the  national  average  for   12  months   at  that  time  was  almost
half  the  RPG.     But  those  who  have  studied  Iodine-131   close-
ly  know  that  national  averages  are  very  deceptive   in  dealing
with  it.    The  fall  of  Iodine-131   is  as  unpredictable  as  sum-
mer  weather.    The  problem  is to  deal  with  "hot  spots"  where
a  heavy  fall  may  endanger  a  considerable  number  of  children
unless  countermeasures  are  swiftly   taken.
On   page   39   of   the   FRC   report   one   will   discover   that
though   80  picocuries  per  liter  is  figured  to  produce  0.5  rems
over  a  year,  the  FRC  "rounds  this  out"  to  100  in  figuring  its
yearly  RPG  of  36,500  or  100  per  day.    That  is  25%  higher,
.quite  a  "rounding  off."  If  the  80  picocuries  figure  is  applied
it  comes  out  to  29,200  picocuries  a  year.    On  that  basis,  the
latest  report  released   June  8  shows  three  milksheds  over   the
danger   point   for   the   year   ended    last   April   27:    Palmer,
Alaska,  with  38,050;  Salt  Lake City, with  31,920,  Kansas  City,
Missouri,  with  30,070.    It  also  shows  Des  Moines,  Wichita,
and  Spokane  were  past  21,000  picocuries  for  the  12  months;
Laramie,  Wyoming  and  Omaha,   Nebraska,   past  19,000;  Dal-
las  and  Oklahoma  City  past   18,000.    Should   not   such  areas
Still  Stalling
"On  June  18,   1962,  we   wrote  to   the   Secretary   of
HEW   asking   whether   the   radiation   protection    guides
established  by  the  Federal  Radiation Council  were  ap-
plicable  to  the  problem  of  fallout. ...  In  response  the
Secretary  made clear  that  the  guides  established  by  the
Federal  Radiation  Council  were  not  applicable  to  fall-
out.  .  .  .  One  year  later  we  find  that  no  action  has  been
taken  to  clarify  this  situation. .  .  .  We  have  been   told
by  Dr.  Tompkins,  the  new  acting  Executive  Director  of
the  FRC,  that   'Within  the  next   year  the  Council  will
make  some  positive recommendations dealing  with  this
problem.'    It  is  my  hope  that  the  FRC  will  not  require
a  full  year.  .  .  .  Unless  the  FRC  acts  with  dispatch,  a
Pandora's   box   of   ill-timed,   ill-advised  and   uncoordi-
nated  action  may  be  opened."
—Chairman   Mel    Price    (D.    III.)    of    the   radiation
subcommittee   of   the  Joint   Committee   on  Atomic   En-
cryy   at  its  hearing  June  4.
begin   to  plan   countermeasures  if   testing   resumes?
Dr.   Dunning   said  the   highest   measured   sample   of   milk
showed   9,000   picocuries   of   iodine-131   per   liter  at   Snyder-
ville,  Utah,  on  July  20  of  last  year,  more  than   100  times  the
RPG.     Dr.   Forrest  Western,  director  of  the  AEC's   Division
of  Radiation Protection  Standards,  testified  that  a  forthcoming
article  in  Science  by  Pendelton,   Lloyd  and  Mays  of  the  Uni-
versity  of   Utah   would   show  that   they  found   milk   in  their
area  which  could  have  delivered  a  dose  of   14  rems  "if   used
by  an  infant  during  the  period  of  high  activity."   This  would
be  28  times  as  much  as  the  RPG  of  half  a  rem  or  500  milli-
rems  per  year.    Dr.   Western  himself   said  he  knew   of   one
child  who  had   received  16  rads   (equivalent   in  this   case   to
rems)  to  the  thyroid  or  32  times  the  RPG  for  one  year.    Dr.
Western  said  the  whole  subject  was  "controversial"   and   "has
been  under  detailed   study  by  the   AEC  for   a  year  or   more,
and  we  expect  in  the  not  too  distant  future  to  issue  a  report
on  this  subject."     The   gossip   in  scientific  circles  is  that   this
report,  when  released,  will  show  that  the  iodine-131   problem
is  more  serious  than   has  yet  been   admitted.
The   reassurances  are   based   on   the   unspoken    assumption
that  there  will  be  no  more  testing  and  that  fallout  will  gradu-
ally   die   away.     Chairman   Price   asked   Dr.   Dunning   after
some  reassuring  30-year  and  70-year  figures,  what  would  hap-
FAS  Estimates  1962 Fallout  Cancer  Damage to  U.S.  Embryos  Equals 1960 Polio Deaths
"The  available  data  obtained  in  large-scale   medical  sur-
vey  studies  indicate  a  direct  relationship  between  childhood
cancer  mortality  and  the  amount  of  radiation received  dur-
ing  the  embryonic  stage.    This  direct  relation  has  now  been
shown  to  hold  down  to  levels  as  low  as  that  resulting  from
a   typical  X-ray  picture  during  pelvimetry.     This   also   is
approximately   equivalent  to   the   amount  of   radiation  re-
ceived  by  individuals anywhere  in  the  northern  hemisphere
as  the  result  of  the  release   of  100  million  tons  of  nuclear
fission  energy  into  the  lower  stratosphere  at  polar  latitudes.
The  release   of   such   large   amounts  of   radioactive  debris,
comparable  to  that  resulting  from  the  1962  USSR-US  test
series,   must  therefore  be  regarded  as  producing  a  definite
increase  in  cancer  mortality among  children  born  within  one
or  two  years  following  this  test   series.
"For   the   U.S.   the  data  lead  to  an  expected  increase   of
2.5%   to  10%  in  the  normal  childhood   cancer   mortality  of
1  per  1,000  children  born.    This  amounts  to  100  to  400  addi-
tional  deaths  to  be  expected,  which  is  roughly  comparable
to  the  number  of  individuals that  died  of  polio  in  the   U.S.
during  1960.  .  .  .
"Analysis  of  these  studies  reveal  that  the  human embryo
is  more  sensitive  to  a  given  amount  of  radiation  than  the
adult  by  a  factor of  about  20  to  30.    Since  furthermore  most
of  the  radiation  from  an  atmospheric  explosion  is  received
within  a  short   period  of   six   to  12  months,  the   particular
seriousness   of   the   effect   on  the   embryo  during   the   nine
months  of  its  development  is  apparent.  .  .  .
"Dr.  Ernest   J.   Sternglass   in  a  paper  just   published   in
Science  showed  that  a  direct  relation  exists  between  radia-
tion  and childhood  cancer. ...  A  dose  of  1  roentgen   given
in  the  course   of  a  one-hour  series  of   X-ray  pictures   can
be   regarded   as   producing  essentially   the   same   effect   as
1/1000   roentgen   per   hour  from   fallout   over   a   period  of
1,000  hours."
—Federation  of  American Scientists  (Pittsburgh   branch)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Bl-WeeUy,  June 21,1963
pen   if  atmospheric  testing   resumed..    Dr.   Dunning  said   it
would  take  "many  days
1
'"  to  work  out  the  answer  but  that  he
would  submit  it  for  the   record.    lit  is  hard  to  believe  that
figures do  not  already  exist  to  estimate  the  results  of  resumed
testing  since  (the military  have  been  pressing   for  it.    From
one  witness,  Dr.  John  H.  Hairley,  director  of  the  Health  and
Safety  Division  of  the  AEC,  Chairman  Price  did  manage  to
get  an  estimate.   Dr.  Hanky  said  that  a  series  of  tests  com-
parable   to  those  of   1962 "would   essentially  double   these
figures."    He  was  speaking  of  Caesium-137,  and  I  am  told
that  other   radionnclides  would  increase  in  about  the  same
proportion.    If  you  begin  to  double  the  figures,  they  grow
less  reassuring.
Weakening  The  Safety  Standards
The   answer  of  the  military-scientific  bureaucracy  is  that
there  is  nothing  to  worry  about  but  that  one  way to  keep  us
from   worrying  is  to  raise  the  safety  standards   for   fallout.
The  insiders  began  to  work  on  this remedy last  Fall  after  the
alarming  rise  in  Iodine-131.   Col. Hartgering  helped  to  set
up  an  ad  hoc  group  under  Dr.  Tompkins,  then  in  the  AEC,
which  sent  around  a  proposal—so  I  am  Hold—to  multiply
existing  standards  by ten  times or  more.   This would  in  effect
bring  population  standards  for  fallout  up  to  present  occupa-
tional  standards  for  peacetime  pursuits.    The  proposal  found
little  support.    The  first  public  discussion  of  this  came  in
a  scathing  speech  (see box  p.  3)  which  Dr.  Russell  Morgan
made  to  the  American  Public  Health   Association   in  Miami
last  December.    But  it  was not  until  this  year's  hearings  that
this  "solution"  came  to  public  attention.    Both  the  FRC and
Dr.  Tompkins  presented: the  matter  in  terms  of  avoiding  dis-
ruption  to  the  food  industry  and  to  agriculture,"not  the  mili-
tary.     Nobody   would   guess   from   their   presentation   that
application   of  cmintermeasuires  would  arouse  public  concern
about  testing  and  increase pressure  on  the  Pentagon  to  end  it.
Secretary  Celebrezze  alone  referred  delicately  (see box  p.  6)
to  the  fact  that  "national  security"  is  also  a  major  consider-
ation.   National  security  here,  of  course,  does  not  mean  na-
tional  security  against  fallout  poisons  but  the  security  of  the
military  against  pressures  to  end  testing.
The    military-scientific   bureaucracy   is   applying   counter-
measures  of  its  own.    On  the  eve  of  the  hearings  the  AEC
announced   that   it   was  launching   "a   comprehensive,   long
range  program"   for  the  study  of   radioactivity  at  its  Liver-
Positively  No  Danger
Senator  AIKEX:  Is  there  any  hope  of  recovery  for
these  thousands  of  children  that  have  been  receiving
more  iodine-131  than  is  supposed  to  be  safe  for them?
Dr.  TOMPKINS  (exee.  dir.  Federal  Radiation  Conn-
til):  There  will  simply  be  no  noticeable  health  effect
as a consequence  of  these  exposures.   So  these  children
are  not  in  danger.   They  are  being  threatened with  a
serious  overt  risk  to  their  future  safety.    My opening
remarks  are  that  these  levels  are  not  dangerous.
—Radiation Hearings, June  4-
"A  series  of  test  explosions  totalling  100  megatons
of  fission  product  equivalent explosive force, comparable
to  the  combined tests  of  the  USSR-US  in  1961-%  could
be  expected  to  produce  a  9-months*  dose  to  the  bone
marrow  [of  embryos]  anywhere  from  150  to  300  mr.
[and] ...  then  one would expect  an increase  in  child-
hood  cancer  mortality between  2J>  and  10%  for children
born  within  about  a  year  after  the  last  atmospheric
test  series. . . .
The   special  hazard  that  these  short-lived   isotopes
[Strontium-89,  Barium-140 and  Iodine-131]  present  for
the  development  of  childhood  cancer  should  be  noted:
(i)   These  isotopes  give  off  their  radiations  in  a  tune
short  compared  with  pregnancy  and  the  critical  phases
of  rapid cell  division associated  with organ  and  skeletal
formation,  unlike  the  ranch  longer  lived  Strontium-90
and  Cesium-137,  for  which  the  appropriate integration
time  is  the  whole  adult  life  span,   (ii)  In  particular
Iodine-131   is   known   to   have   produced  leukemia  in
adults  (who   are   much  less  sensitive   than   children)
when  administered  in  large  therapeutic  doses. ...
"The  principal  danger  of   Iodine-131  may  therefore
not  be thyroid cancer, which  is  normally extremely  rare
in  children and treatment for  which leads  to  better  than
90  percent  recovery, but  rather  leukemia,  which  is  the
highest  single  cause  of  death  in  children 4  to  14 hi  the
U.S.  (other  than  accidents)  and  affects  about  one  in
every  thousand."
—E.  J.  Sternglass  in  Science  for  June  7.
more,  California,  laboratory  and  that  this  would  "place  spe-
cial  emphasis on  early  fallout—that  fallout  which  follows  a
nuclear  detonation within hours or  days,"  the  most  important
of  these  being  Iodine-131-    Livermore  laboratory  is  Dr.  Ed-
ward  Teller's  stronghold.    It  wouldn't  be  surprising  if   after
a  few  months  of  study  at  Livermore,  word  began  to  leak  to
the  Republicans  in  Congress  that  Iodine-131  was  good   for
babies.
I.F.  Stone's Bi-Weekly  5618 Nebraska  Are,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C
Please  renew  (or  enter)  mj  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Street
City  ....
..Zone...State_
S/24/6S
Enter  gift   sub for  $2  (6  mas.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ....____...__________________
Street    _____.______..._______________-
City   ________.....__.Zone___State______
Shan  we send  gift  annonncementT        Yes  D    No  D
mSttme'sBi-Weetty
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
ff'e'll   Semi  free   Copies   of  This   Io  friends   If  You  Send  Slant ped.  Addressed   Envelopes
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED