I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963nov11.pdf

============================================================

How  Little  Taxes  Our Multimillionaires  Pay,  P.  2
The  Fateful  Question  in  Vietnam; What  If  Its  People, After  Diem's Overthrow, Want  Peace?   See  Pagej^
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  22
NOVEMBER  11,  1963
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Civil Rights Compromise Stronger Than Kennedys Wanted
One  way  to  begin  an  examination  of  the  compromise  civil
rights   bill   is  with   a  passage   censored   out   of   John  Lewis's
speech  to  the  August  28  March  on  Washington   by pro-Ad-
ministration   forces.     The   head   of   the   Student  Non-Violent
Coordinating  Committee  had  wanted  to  say:
We  have  learned,   and  you   should   know,   since  we   are
here  for  Jobs  and  Freedom,  that  within  the  past  10  days
a   spokesman  for   the   Administration   appeared  in   secret
session  before  the  committee  that  is  writing  the  civil  rights
bill   and  opposed   and  has  almost   killed  a  provision  that
would  have  guaranteed  in  voting  suits  for  the  first  time
fair   Federal  judges.    And  I   might  add,  this  Administra-
tion  bill,  or  any  other  civil  rights bill,  will  be  totally  worth-
less  when  administered by  racist  judges,  many   of  whom
have  been  appointed  by  President Kennedy.
Curbing  the  District  Judges
The   fact  is  that  among  the  provisions  the  Administration
did  not  want  but  was  forced  to  accept  in  the  compromise  bill
is  the   one  referred   to  by  Mr.   Lewis.    The  Administration
wanted  all  suits  involving the  appointment  of  voting  referees
heard   in  the  Federal  district  courts.     Many  of   the   District
Judges,   including  some  appointed   by  Kennedy,   are  racists.
The   compromise   bill   would   deprive   these   judges   of   their
power  to  drag  their  heels  in  such  suits.    It  calls  for  -the  sub-
mission  of  voting  right  suits  to  a  3-Judge  court  to  be  named
by  the  Chief  Judge  of  the  Circuit  with  expedited   procedure
and  a  direct  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court.    While  the  com-
promise  bill  waters  down  the  voting  provisions  of  the  sub-
committee   bill   by  making  these  applicable   only   to   Federal
elections,   this  new  procedure   would   at   last  make   workable
the  existing  voting  referee  provisions  of  the  I960  Civil Rights
Act  which  apply  .to  State  as  well  as  Federal  polls.
The  compromise  bill,  while  weaker  than  the  subcommittee
bill,  is  a  good  deal  stronger  than  the  Administration bill.  The
compromise  contains  a  number  of  provisions  absent  from  the
Administration   bill.     Among   these   is   a   Fair   Employment
Practices  Commission;  this  FEPC  would  not  be  as strong  as  in
the  subcommittee  version,   which  would  have  allowed  it  like
other   regulatory  commissions  to   issue  orders   enforceable   in
the  Courts  of  Appeal.    It  must  act through  the  District   Courts
but  it  has  the  option  of  filing  its  suits  either  where  the  viola-
tion  occurred   or  where  the  company's  or  union's  main   office
is  located.   This  means  that  big  national  concerns  can  be  sued
in  the  North.    The  Administration  did  not  want  a  Title  III
allowing  the  Attorney  General   to  enforce  civil  rights  of  all
kinds;  Title  III   of  the  compromise   is  stronger  than   Robert
Kennedy   wanted   though  not  as .strong  as  the  subcommittee
bill.     The   Administration  didn't   want   a   permanent   Civil
Rights  Commission,  as provided  by the  compromise.    Nor  the
provisions  for  a  census  to  reduce  the  South's  representation   in
No Thanks to the  Attorney General
The  day  a  3-Judge Federal  Court  in  Georgia declared
its   incitement   to   insurrection   statute unconstitutional
and  ordered  four  civil  rights  workers held  under  it  set
free,  Senator Case  of  New  Jersey  protested in  the  Sen-
ate  against  the  indifference  of  the  Justice Department
to  this  prosecution.   He  declared  it  a  "shame"  that  the
Department  had  not  been  represented  in  the  court  pro-
ceedings.     He  said   he  had  written  Attorney  General
Kennedy  to  express  his  disappointment  about  his  "con-
tinued  reluctance" to  act,  and received  in  reply  a  letter
from   Bourke   Marshall   which   would   be   funny   if   the
situation  were  not  so  serious.    Senator  Case  said  that
though  it  was  three  months  since  the  original  arrests
were  made  and  though  it  had  been  apparent  from  the
start  that  the  purpose  was  "to  discourage  voter  regis-
trations  by  Negroes,"  the  Justice Department  was  still
"investigating."   Though  few  if  any  papers  seemed  to
report  Senator  Case's  protest,  we  think  it  deserves  at-
tention.    If  the  students had  to  depend on  the  Attorney
General,  they  would  still  be  in  jail,  facing   a  possible
death  penalty  under  a  statute  the  Supreme  Court  held
void  a  generation  ago  in  the  famous  Angelo  Herndon
case.
Congress  if  it  continues  to  violate  Negro  voting  rights.     Nor
the  invocation  of  the   14th   amendment  as  well  as  the  com-
merce  clause,  a  move  which  widens  the  orbit  of  enforcement.
The  compromise bill  was  sold  to  the  press  by  the  Attorney
General  as  a  victory  for  «ason  and  bipartisanship.    The  fact
is  that  it  illustrates  the  value  of  militant  action.    In  the  Judi-
ciary   subcommittee,   the   Young   Turks   like   the   Democratic
Kastenmeier   of   Wisconsin   and   the   Republican   Lindsay  of
New  York  by  raising  the  ante  forced  the  Administration  to
accept  more  than   it  wanted.    It  had   to  do  so  because  there
were  enough  votes  in  the  full  committee  to  vote  out  the  sub-
committee  bill;  the  Republicans,  by  helping  to  vote   it   out,
would  have put  the  Administration on  the  spot.   The  Admin-
istration's   strategy   is  to  cut   down   the  Negro's   bargaining
power  by  making  a  bipartisan  alliance  with  the  Republicans,
and  enable  itself  to  stand  as  a  champion  of  moderation,   with
the  least  possible  damage  to  its  ties  with  the  Southerners   and
the   least   possible   risk   of  a  kickback   from  Northern   white
suburbia.    This   strategy   invites  graceful   retreats   to  get   the
bill  out  of  the  Rules  committee  in  the  House  and  through  the
Senate,  which  is unlikely  to  act this  session.    Unless  a  vigorous
grass  roots  organizing  campaign  is  begun  now,  in  the  neigh-
borhoods,  where  effective  pressure  can  be  brought  to  bear  on
Congressmen    and   Senators,   what  finally  emerges   from   the
Senate  next  February   or   March   will  only   be  a  shadow   of
this  bill.
!  t  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weckly,  November  11, 1963
The  Fateful  Question:  Call  for  A  Mobilization  of  Conscience  on  Cuba  and  Vietnam
What  If  The  People,  After  Diem's  Overthrow,  Vote  for  Peace?
The  state  of  mind  in  Washington   in  the  wake  of  Diem's
overthrow  was  neatly  mirrored in  two  statements,  one before
and  one after  the  coup, by  Rep.  Zablocki (D.  Wis.), just  back
from   Vietnam  as  chairman  of  a  Special  Study   Mission  to
Southeast   Asia.    The  day  before  the  coup  Zablocki  warned
against  any  such  attempt.    "The  lesson  of  Cuba  must  not  be
forgotten,"   he  reported.    "Batista  was  bad  but   Castro   is
worse."    After   the  coup  Zablocki  told  the   House  the   U.S.
should  demand  definite  commitments  for  free  elections  and
vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war.    But  what  if,  in  free  elec-
tions,  the  people  were  to  vote  for  peace?    Or  for   reunifica-
tion  with  the  North  under  Ho  Chi  Minh?    Would  we  even
risk  such  a  verdict  by  allowing  neutralist,  anti-war  or  pro
Communist  candidates?
Democracy  With  A  Big  But
The  answer  seems  obvious  to  the  victorious  Generals.   On
the  one  hand  they  said  they  would not  set  up  a  dictatorship
because  "well  aware  that the  best  weapon to fight communism
is  democracy  and  liberty."    But  in  the  very  next  breath  they
also  said  that  they  would  not  allow  "a  disorderly  democratic
regime."    In  Saigon  a  street  rally  calling  for  a  neutralist
government  was  forbidden  and  its  banners  torn  down.   Cen-
sorship   continues.    Only  prisoners   the  military  regard   as
non-communist  are  being  released;  only  parties  they  regard
as  non-communist  will  be  allowed.    In  practice  this  means
that  if  there  is  to  be  a  choice  between  democracy  and  con-
tinuance  of  the  war,  it  is  democracy  that  will  go.
This  is  the  reality  the  pro-Kennedy liberals  will  not  allow
themselves  to  see.    Saigon  is  like  Paris  after  the   liberation;
the  people  dance  in  the  streets.    But  the  Washington   Post
(Nov.  5)  in  a  leading  editorial  thinks  "the  cause  of  freedom
need  not  sink  with  the  passing  of  the  old government!"     This
is  Orwellianism  with  a  vengeance.    "The   cause  of  freedom"
is  not  the  Vietnamese  desire  for  freedom  from   a  U.S.   sup-
ported  tyranny;   "the   cause  of  freedom"  is  soap   advertising
lingo  for  continuation  of  cold  and  hot  war.    Yet  the   Wash-
ington  Post   goes  on  sanctimoniously  to  say  that  Diem   "re-
fused  to  respond  to  the  feelings  of his  own people."    The  con-
servative   Washington   Star's   editorial    (Nov.  4)   was  more
honest.    If  the  people turn  on  a  new  government  "force  may
have  to  be  used ...  we  cannot  be  too  squeamish."    If  the
Vietnamese  don't  want  strategic  hamlets,  prison   for   those
who  oppose the  war,  napalm  on  suspect  villages,  we'll  back  a
new  dictatorship.    This  cabal  of  Generals  headed  by  a  weak
turncoat  who  has  served  any  and  every  regime  foreign  and
domestic  will  bring  neither  peace  nor  freedom  to  Vietnam.
In  the  case  of  Vietnam, as  in that  of  Cuba, we need  a Com-
mittee  to agitate  for  a  truly  democratic  foreign  policy:  peace
Dr.  Pauling and  The  Moon Race
We  are   sure   the   Nobel  Peace   Prize  Committee  in
Norway  will  not  let  itself  be  disturbed  by  the  petulant
editorial  in  Life  Magazine  (Oct.  25)  calling  its  award
to  Dr.  Linns  Pauling  "an  extraordinary  insult  to  Amer-
ica."     On  the  contrary  the  award  will  encourage  all
those  scientists  who  stood  with  Dr.  Pauling  when  his
campaign   to  bring  home  the   dangers   of   fallout   was
subjected  to  derision  and  smear  in  such  publications  as
Henry  Luce's  Life  and  Time,  the  foremost  journalistic
supporters  of  Dr.  Edward  Teller.
We  would  like  to  see  a  committee  of  American  sci-
entists   formed   to   take   up  and   spell   out   in  concrete
terms   Dr.  Pauling's   protest   against   the   race   to   the
moon   in  his  address   to  the   100th  anniversary   of   the
National  Academy  of  Sciences  here  Oct.  22.   Dr.  Paul-
ing  said  we  were  at  the  point  "when  it  would  be  pos-
sible,  if  only  the   money  were  available,  to  determine
the   structure  of   an   enzyme"  which   "determines   the
way   the   human   body  functions."    Dr.   Pauling  cited
Prof.  Wm.  Fowler's   claim  that   when  we  get   to   the
moon  we  will  know  whether  the  10  isotopes  of  tin   are
present   in  the   same  ratios   as   on  the   surface  of   the
earth.    "For   the  same  amount  of  money,"  Dr.  Pauling
said,  "we  could  answer  1,000  interesting  and  important
questions  about  the  human  body  and  about  the  world
we  live  in  for  every  one  question  answered  about   the
moon."
"I  believe  it  is  a  pitiful  demonstration  of  something
wrong   with   our   system  of  values,"  Dr.   Pauling   told
the  National Academy, "when  we  are  planning  to  spend
20  or  50 billion dollars  to  put  a  man  on  the  moon,  prin-
cipally   for   reasons   of  national  prestige,  rather   than
putting   this   money   into   a   sort   of   engineering   that
would  use  essentially   the  same  people,  the  same  com-
puters,  the  same  big  instruments  to  decrease  in  a  really
significant    way   the   amount   of   human   suffering    on
earth."
Why   not  a  report   which  would  draw  up  a  balance
sheet  of  what  could  be  accomplished  for  human  welfare
with   these    funds?      Better   than   a   Russo-American
agreement  for  a  joint  trip  to  the   moon  would  be  an
agreement  not  to  make the  trip  and  spend  the  money on
earth   instead.
in  Vietnam,  lifting  of  the  embargo  that  strangles  hurricane
ravaged  Cuba.  Can  America's  better  conscience be mobilized?
Douglas  Reveals  How  Little  U.S.  Multimillionaires Pay  in  Federal  Income Taxes
"I  rise  to  state  the  urgent  need  for  tax  reform  and  to
protest  its  slow  and  quiet  strangulation.    There  are,  in  the
hearings  of  the  Finance  Committee on  the  pending  tax  bill,
some  shocking figures .  .  .  furnished  by the  Secretary  of
the  Treasury  .  .  .  showing  that  in  1959  there  were  20 per-
sons  in  this  country  with  incomes—adjusted  gross  incomes
—of  more  than  $500,000 who  paid  not  a  penny  in  Federal
income  taxes  in  1959. ...  15  persons  having  incomes  of
more  than  $1 million  [and]  5  persons  having  gross  incomes
of   more  than  $5  million  who  did  not  pay  a  single  cent  in
taxes.
"Adjusted  gross  income does  not  include interest  on  State
and   municipal   bonds.     It   does   not   include  write-offs  for
drilling  and  developmental costs  in  the  oil and  gas  industry.
It   does  not   include  one-half  of  capital   gains.    All  these
were  in addition.  . . .
"These  figures are  shocking  when  one  considers  that  any
worker  with  a  wife  and  two  children  who  is  earning  just
$100   a   week  .  .  .  pays   about   $456  in  Federal   income
taxes. . . .
"Of  course,  not  every  multimillionaire escapes  wholly  tax
free,  as  these  five  managed  to  do.   But  the  average  multi-
millionaire  comes  surprisingly  close  to  achieving  just  that.
. . . There  were, in 1959,  37 people  whose  total  incomes  . . .
came  to  more  than  $5 million  and  they  paid  on  the  average
a  little  less  than  25%  of  their  total  income  in  Federal  in-
come  taxes.    That  is  only  somewhat  higher  than  the  first
bracket  rate  of 20 percent.  .  .  .  Furthermore  the  tax  cuts
passed  since   1954  have  gone  almost   entirely   to  the  large
taxpayers."
—From   a  speech  by  Douglas   of   Illinois   to  the  Senate
Nov.  1  which  few   papers   reported   despite   its   sensational
revelations.    Douglas  said  that  since  there  was  no  chance
of  getting  a  tax  bill  this  year  anyway,   there  was  no  excuse
for  the  Administration's  dropping  tax  reforms  for  the  sake
of   a  speedy   tax   cut.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Sterne's Bi-Weekly,  November  11, 1963
Glimpses  from  The  Record:  Why  Senate  Liberals  Under Morse  Want  to  Cut  Foreign  Aid
Eight Democratic  Senators See Our Latin Arms Program  Menace to  Democracy
Foreign   aid  for   many   years   has   been  supported    by  a
coalition  of   U.S.  military  men   (anxious   to  dump   obsolete
arms, usually  at  inflated  prices),  big  business  (glad  to  have
the   "climate"    for   investment   abroad   sweetened   by   U.S.
handouts)   and  humanitarians  (ready  to  support  a  program
top-heavy  with  military  aid  to  dictators   for   the  sake  of  a
relative  trickle  of  funds   for   genuinely   humane    purposes).
That  coalition  is  breaking  down.   In  the Senate  an  alliance
of   liberals  and  right  wing   anti-spenders   led  by  Morse,   is
trying   to  cut  down  a  program  in  which  for  every  5  cents
which  may  help  the  poor,  95  cents  goes  to  crooked  allies  of
our  military.    Because  this  debate  is  being  poorly   covered,
we  give   some  excerpts   here.    The  most  important   of   the
foreign   aid  amendments   is  that  by  Gruening   (Alaska)   to
to  halt  further  military  assistance  to Latin  America.    This
was  co-sponsored  by Ervin  (N.C.),  Nelson  (Wis.), Proxmire
(Wis.),  Cannon  (Nev.),  McGovern  (S.  Dak.), Morse  (Ore.)
and  Smathers  (Fla.).  Here,  abridged,  is  a  bit  of   Gruening's
Senate  speech  Nov.  1  on  the  folly  of  Latin  military   aid:
By  Senator  Ernest  Gruening
Recent   events   in  the   Dominican  Republic  and   Honduras
give  added  emphasis  to  remarks  I  made  last  year  about  the
dangers  we  were  running  in  continuing   to  supply  arms  to
Latin  America.   A  year  ago  those  supporting  military  assist-
ance  to  Latin  America  claimed  the  following  five  objectives:
1st,  hemispheric  defense;  2d, standardization  of  weapons;  3rd,
modernization  of  weapons;  4th,  reduction  of  force;   5th,   in-
doctrination  of  the  military  as  to  their  role  in  a  democracy.
That   was  last  year  before  I  showed  on  the  floor  of  the
Senate  Aug.  2,  1962  that  not  only  were  none  of  the   objec-
tives  achieved,  but  as  to  some  the  exact   contrary  was  the
result.   So this  year  there  is  a  'new  look'  to  the  presentation
of  the  military  assistance  program   for  Latin  America.
Now  It's  "Internal  Security"
The  new  look  was  described  to  the  Senate   Appropriations
Committee  by  Brig.  Gen.  W.  A.  Enemark  in  these  terms:
"It   is  charged  that  a  threat  of  direct   aggression  to  the
hemisphere  is  not  realistic.   We agree.   It  was  precisely  for
that  reason  that  the  primary  emphasis  of  our  military  assist-
ance  program  for  Latin  American  was  changed  from  hemi-
sphere  defense  to  internal  security.  . .  ."
But  under  the  guise  of  internal  security  and  civic  action,
it  is  still  no less  a  dangerous  program  and  should  be  stopped.
I  am  not  alone  in  this.   On  Sept.  28,  1963,  our  able  and  dis-
tinguished   majority   whip,  Mr.  Humphrey,  stated:  "We  will
weaken   and  perhaps  cause   the  failure   of  the   Alliance   for
Progress  unless  something  is  done  to  implement  an  effective
arms  control  agreement  in  this area."   And, indeed,  only  yes-
terday  Mr.  Humphrey  said:  "I  thoroughly  agree  with  the
Senator  from  Alaska  and  other  Senators  that  in  most  Latin
American  countries  there  is  a  waste  of money  in  the  procure-
ment  of  military  equipment.    If  it  is  desired   to  reduce  ex-
Our  Secret  Deal to  Aid  Franco
"In  payment  for  bases,  the  U.S.  has,  through  fiscal
1962,  extended  $1.173  billion  in  economic  aid  to  Spain
and  $524  million  in  military  aid.    She  is  down  for  tens
of  millions  more  in  military  aid  next  year.
"A   few   weeks  ago   it   was   announced  that   a   new
agreement   extending  our   'leases'   has   been   reached.
What   is   in   that   agreement  is   still   unknown  to   the
American  people  and  to  most  of  Congress.    It  is known
to  call  for  an  undisclosed   amount  of   military  aid  to
Spain.    It  has  also  become  known  that  the  agreement
does  not  permit  the  U.S.  to  use  the  naval  base  at  Rota
for   our  Polaris  submarines.    Since  the   Strategic   Air
Command  bases   in   Spain  are   steadily   decreasing   in
importance,  it  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  see  what pur-
pose  has  been  served  by  this  agreement.  .  .  .
"Imagine   the  hue  and  cry  that  would   go   up  if   an
executive  agreement  of  this  kind  were  worked  out  in
secret—and  held  in  secrecy—with  Indonesia,  or  British
Guiana,  or  Algeria,  or  some  other  totalitarian   govern-
ment   of   the   Left.     But  little  is   said  about  a  secret
agreement    with   a   totalitarian   government    of    the
Right.  .  .  ."
—Sen. Morse  Nov.  1  on his  amendment   to  cut  foreign
aid  to  Spain,  Portugal,  Greece  and   Turkey
penditures  in  the   [foreign   aid]   bill,  that  is  a  good  place  to
start."
Indeed  it  is.    Hence  my  amendment.     Since  the   inception
of  the  Latin  American  military  assistance  program  in   1951,
we have  poured  over  half  a  billion  dollars into Latin  America.
Let  us  judge  the  program  on  the  basis  of  its   performance.
Can  we  point  with  pride  to  Peru  where  a  year  ago  August
military   hardware   supplied   by  the   U.S.   was   used   by   the
military  forces  there  to  take  over  from  the  civilian  rulers of
that  country?    Can  we  point  with  pride  to  the  Dominican
Republic?    Can  we  point  with   pride  to  Honduras?    There
again  U.S.  arms  made  possible  the  coup.    In  the  minds  of
the  people  of  Peru,  the   Dominican  Republic   and  Honduras,
are   we  not   aligned   with   the   military   cliques   which   have
thrown  out  the  governments  selected  by  the  people  them-
selves ?
Always  the  usurpers  claim  they  come  in  to  fight  Commu-
nism,  but  within  the  last  few  days  other  dispatches  told  how,
on  taking   over,  the  junta  had  jailed   Communists,  expelled
them,  and  driven  them  from  the  Dominican  Republic, so  that
presumably  that  country  was  free  of  Communists.   Yet  now
the   government   of  the   Dominican  Republic  has   suspended
freedom  of  speech  and  freedom  of  assembly,  in  order  alleged-
ly  to  prevent  Communists  from  subverting  public  order.  The
truth,  of  course,  is  that  it  was  done  to  prevent  the  people
from   voicing  their   opposition.    This  is  what  we  can  expect
in  every  such  military   takeover.
Morse Protests NATO's MLF Plan As  Scheme  to  Give  Germans  Nuclear  Arms
"Unless   Congress   is  firm  now,  the  American  people  are
going  to  find  themselves  saddled  with  the  cost  of  another
NATO  venture,  one  of  the  most  expensive  and  least  useful
—the  Polaris-carrying  surface   fleet.   One  would  think  that
at  a  time  when  the  American  government  has  been  trying
to  persuade  our  NATO  partners  to  start  putting  up  their
fair  share  of  the  conventional  forces,  it  would  have  better
judgment  than  to  propose  a  nuclear  fleet  for  which  we  are
offering  to  pay  40  percent  of  the  cost!
"What  a  sham  we  are  making  of  the  notion  that  NATO
is  a  multi-lateral  alliance!    It  is  a  German-American  alli-
ance,  as  this  proposed   nuclear  fleet  makes  embarrassingly
clear. ...  I  have  not  heard  any  clamor  from  the  German
people   to   become   a  nuclear   power.    They   know,   as   the
world   knows,  that   any   step   in   the   direction  of   nuclear
weapons  for   West   Germany   is   considered  by   the   Soviet
Union  to  be  a  grave  threat  to  her  security.  .  .  .
"Of  even  greater  concern  to  me  is  the  constant  implica-
tion  in  all  these  discussions  that  once  the  nuclear  fleet  is  a
reality,  the  U.S.   would  be  willing  to  give  up  the  control
of  its  warheads. ...  In  my  opinion,  the  time  for  Britain,
France,  Holland,  Italy   and  Belgium  to   indicate  their   re-
jection  of  nuclear  weapons  for  Germany  is  right   now."
—Senator Wayne  Morse  (D.  Ore.)  Nov.  1 release  to press.
I 1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  11, 1963
The  Story  Behind  the  Raids  On  An  Inter-Racial  Lawyers  Guild  Affair  in  New  Orleans
Eastland  and  Sourwine  Sued  for  $500,000  in  Anti  Civil  Rights   Conspiracy
In  South  Africa,  a  brave  Judge  throws  out  the  indictment
of   11  opponents   of   apartheid   for   "sabotage"   but   the   de-
fendants  are  at  once  rearrested.
       T
n  Louisiana,  another  brave
Judge,  Bernard  J.  Cocke  of  the  State  Criminal  Court,  throws
out  charges  of  Communist  conspiracy  against  James  A.  Dom-
browski,  executive  director  of  the  Southern  Conference  Edu-
cational  Fund,  its  treasurer  Benjamin  E.  Smith  and  the  latter's
law  partner,  Bruce  C.  Waltzer.    But  they  find  that  the  pri-
vate  papers   illegally  seized  from   them  in  the  arresting  raids
have   been   spirited   out   of   the   State,  to  Mississippi  and   to
Washington,   for  use  in  further  harassing  actions  by  Senator
Eastland.
A  True  Son  of  the  American  Revolution
This  is  the  background   of  the  $500,000  suit  filed  by  Dr.
Dombrowski  and  the  SCEF  in  the  U.S.  District  Court  here  in
Washington   against  Eastland,  his  counsel  Jules  Sourwine,  the
heads  of  the  Louisiana  State  Police,  and  the  chairman  of  the
Louisiana   Un-American   Activities   Committee.     Jim    Dom-
browski,  a  saintly  man,  a  Doctor  of  Theology  from   Union
Theological  Seminary,  a  lifelong  fighter  for  racial  justice, him-
self  Southern  born,  descendant  of  a  Polish  General  who  came
here  to  fight  under  George  Washington,   has  long  been  a  tar-
get  of  Eastland.    Nine  years  ago,   when   the  informer   Paul
Crouch  named  Dombrowski  as  a  Communist  before  Eastland's
Internal  Security  Committee,  Dombrowski   denied  the  charge
under  oath  and  Eastland  never  dared  prosecute   him  for  per-
jury.    This  hasn't  prevented   Eastland  and  his  friends   Gov-
ernors  Wallace  and  Barnett  from  smearing  Dombrowski   and
through   him  the  anti-segregation  movement.
The   suit  charges   Eastland  and   his   fellow   plaintiffs   with
conspiracy  that  was  intended  to  defame  and  to  strike  terror
among   advocates   of   integration.    On   Oct.   4,   just   as   the
National   Lawyers  Guild   (with  the  Louisiana  chapter  of   the
American  Civil  Liberties Union)   was  opening  an  inter-racial
workshop   in  New   Orleans  on  civil  rights,  100  State   police
raided  the  meeting,  the  SCEF  offices   and   the  homes   of   the
three  men  arrested.    Smith  and  Waltzer   were  taken  into  cus-
tody  at  the  workshop.    The   streets  outside  their  homes   and
The  Missing  Ounce
An  Elsenhower  appointee  to  the  Federal  bench  in  the
District  of  Columbia, Geo.  L.  Hart,  Jr.,  a  Virginia Re-
publican,   has   administered  an  implied  rebuke   to   the
Kennedy  Administration in  the  case  of  Alden Whitman,
reconvicted  of  contempt of  the  Senate  Internal  Security
Committee.    Judge  Hart  not  only  suspended   a  fine  of
$500  and  6  months  in  jail  but  waived  any requirement
to  report  during  10  days  probation.    Judge  Hart  said
the  "trials  and  tribulations" during  the  eight  years  the
case  has  been  in  the  courts  was  punishment  enough.
Were  this  any  ordinary  case,  neither  Mr. Whitman
nor   any  of   the  other   seven   contempt  cases   reversed
by  the  Supreme  Court  last   year  would  have  been  re-
indicted.    The  same  ground  on  which  the  Court  threw
out  the  indictments makes  it  doubtful  that  new  convic-
tions  can  stand  on  appeal.    The  Kennedy  Administra-
tion  reindicted rather than risk a  fight  with the  Internal
Security  Committee  and  the   House   Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee.
It  is  a  commentary on  these  cases  that  Judge  Hart,
who   presided  over   the   Whitman  retrial   and   Judge
Keech,  who  presided  over  the  earlier  contempt  trial  of
John  T.  Go jack  are  refusing  to  take  any  more  of  them
and  there  is  difficulty  in  finding  judges  here  willing  to
preside  over  the  others.    The  cases  are  relics  of  an  at-
mosphere  a  decade  ago  of  which  most  Americans  are
ashamed.     Several  of   the   defendents,  like   Mr.  Whit-
man,   are  victims  of   an  attempt  by  Eastland  and   his
counsel   Sourwine,  to  smear  America's   greatest   news-
paper,  the  New   York  Times.    With  just  an  ounce   of
courage   and   moral  conviction,   the   Attorney   General
might  have  won  applause  by  refusing  to  reindict.    The
ounce  wasn't  there.
the  SCEF  offices  were  cordoned  off  for  three  hours  while  the
premises  were  ransacked.    Next  day,  perhaps  in  fear  that  the
charges  might  not  stick,  the  records  were  "subpoenaed"  from
the  State  Police  by  Eastland's  Internal  Security  Committee  and
later   (despite   a  suit  for   recovery   in   Federal   Court  in   New
Orleans)   removed  from   the  State.     South   Africa   is  not   the
only   place   where   racists   ignore   court   decisions.     The   suit
against  Eastland  will  test  whether  they  can  get  away  with  it.
The  Haunted  Fifties  by  I.  F. Stone   (Random  House)  still  available  at  special  reduced  rate  of  $5.35  (postpaid).
Specify   if   you  want   it   autographed.
I.F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street
City   ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
11/11/93
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  moa.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................,..............„.........._...
Street    ........._..................._...................................................
City   ...........—.........................Zone......._..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Tea  D    No  D
IF. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  B618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,
Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED