I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963nov25.pdf

============================================================

Special  8-Page  Issue  on  That  New  Berlin  "Crisis"
How  A  Coincidence  Strangely  Like  The U-2  Affair  Upset A  Detente and Brought Us  Close to  the  Brink  Again
F. Stone's Bi -Weekly
VOL.   XI,   NO.  23
NOVEMBER   25,   1963
»'<>'       WASHINGTON, D.   C.
20  CENTS
The  Hidden  History  of the  Incidents  on  the  Autobahn
The  peculiar  thing  about  the  recent  incidents  on  the  Berlin
autobahn  was  the  date  on  which  they  began.    This  was  Octo-
ber  10.    But  for   these  incidents,  it  would  have  been  a  red
letter  day  for  peace.    On  October   10,  representatives  of  the
U.S.,   Britain  and   the   Soviet  Union   deposited   at   the   State
Department   the   diplomatic   instruments  formally   ratifying
the  nuclear  rest  ban  treaty.    From  Moscow  that  day  Premier
Khrushchev  sent   messages  to  President  Kennedy  and  Prime
Minister  Macmillan  saying  the  treaty  showed  that  the  most
complicated  problems  could  be solved  even  by nations of  differ-
ing  social  systems if  they  had  a  genuine  desire  to  do  so.    In
Washington    on   October   10  the   President   sent   Congress   a
message defending  the  sale of  wheat  to  the  Soviet  Union.  And
at  the  White  House,  as  if  to  dramatize  the  change  in  atmos-
phere,  the  President  held  his  first  meeting  with  Soviet  Foreign
Minister  Gromyko  since  their  conference  of  bitter  memory  on
the  eve of  the  Cuban  missile crisis one  year earlier.   The  stage
seemed  set  at  last  for  substantial  progress   toward  peace.
Just  in  Time  to  Upset  The Thaw
Then,  as  if  maleficent forces  were  at  work,  just  as Secretary
of   State  Rusk  was  preparing   to  leave  the  State  Department
for  the  scheduled  meeting  at  the White  House with  Gromyko,
word  was  rushed  to  him  that  the  Russians  had  held  up  two
U.S.  military  convoys  on  the  Berlin  autobahn  and  were  re-
fusing  to  let  them  proceed  unless  the  troops  dismounted  for
a  head  count.    The  incident  was  as  if  made  to  order  for  the
enemies   of   peace.     The   New   York   Herald-Tribune   under-
scored  the  point  in  page  one  headlines  next  morning,   "Irony
of   Kennedy-Gromyko   Talks—First   Cuba;   Now   A   Berlin
'Incident'."    Time   magazine  (Oct.   18)   said   "For   once,  talk
about  a  thaw  in  the  cold  war  seemed  realistic.    And  then,  for
some  mysterious  reason  that  would  require  a  Communist  mind
to unravel, the  Russians deliberately tried  to unthaw  the thaw."
This  was  characteristic  of   how  the  press   handled   the   story
from  there  on  in.    But  even  the  meagre  facts  provided  in  the
first  news  dispatches  from  Germany  indicated  a  good  deal  of
on-the-spot   confusion  as  to  just  what  the  proper    procedure
for   checking   U.S.   convoys  was.    If  the  reporters  were   con-
fused,   it  was  not  impossible  that  the  Russians  at  the   check-
points  were,   too.
The  UPI  from  Berlin  (Washington  Daily  News,  Oct.  11)
said  the  Army  insisted  the  Russians had  no  right  to  make  U.S.
troops  dismount  for  a  head  count  "and  said  the  soldiers  could
be  counted   in  the  vehicles,  as  is  the  usual  procedure."    On
the  other  hand,  an  Associated  Press  dispatch  from  Berlin  the
same  day  (Washington  Post,  Oct.   11)  said  "When  unusually
large  numbers  of  troops   are  being   carried   in  convoys,   they
sometimes  dismount  to  be counted  by the  Russians."   The  AP
Practically  A Soviet  Tradition
We  don't   know  who  is  now  the  head  of  the   Soviet
secret  police,  but  his  three  predecessors,   Yagoda, Yez-
hov  and  Beria  were  each  in  their  turn  executed  as  for-
eign   agents.     Objectively   speaking,   as   the  Marxist-
Leninists  like  to  say,  the  present  man  in  charge  seems
to  be following  in  their  footsteps.  To  arrest  Prof.  Barg-
hoorn  just  in  time  to  upset  the  30th  anniversary  of  the
resumption   of   U.S.-Soviet   relations,   the   wheat  sale,
and  new  cultural  exchange  negotiations  was  a  master
stroke.    In  Stalin's  day  they  would have  shot  him  first
and  then  settled  down  to  investigate   whether  he  was
working  for  the  CIA,  the  Germans or  both.
Khrushchev,  like  Kennedy,  seems  to  suffer  from  an
internal  opposition in  his  own  bureaucracy  which  would
like  to  trip  up  better  Russian-American relations.    We
applaud  the  quick  release  of  Prof.  Barghoorn,  and  the
firm  stand  by   the  President  which  brought  it   about.
We  believe  that  every  blow  against  the  Soviet   secret
police  system  is  a  blow  for  peace  and  a  favor  to  the
people  of  the  Soviet  Union.   We  hope  a  new cultural
exchange   will   be   made   contingent  on   a   promise   to
activate  at  last  that  clause  in  the  Roosevelt-Litvinov
recognition  agreement  which  promised  that  when  any
American  was  arrested  in  Russia our  authorities would
be  notified   and  given  a  chance  to  see   him   "without
delay."   We  still  remember the  ugly  way  Anna  Louise
Strong  was  arrested  in  Moscow  as  a  spy.
added,  however,  that  "the  Western  Allies  feel  that  dismount-
ing  for  border  checks  is  a  'courtesy'  and  not  a  procedure  that
must  be  followed  at  all  times."
But  then  it  turned  out,  after  the  convoy  had  been  released
only  to  be held  up  a  second  time  at  the  other  end  of  the  auto-
bahn  several  hours  later,  that  the  Russians  not  only  were  un-
aware  of  this  supposed   U.S.   regulation   but  had   deliberately
been  kept  in  the  dark  about  it.    A  later  Associated  Press  dis-
patch   (York,   Pa.,  Gazette  &  Daily,   Oct.   14)   quoted   "high
administration  sources"  as  giving  "this  assessment  of  the  con-
voy  incident:  The  Russians apparently  thought  the  18-vehicle
U.S.  convoy  carrying  61  men  and  supplies  was  varying  from
customary  procedures.     The   U.S.,   for  its  part,   has  kept   its
exact  operational  procedures  on  the  Berlin  route  a  secret  be-
cause  it  maintains  there   should   be  no  interference  with   its
access  to  Berlin."    What  then  were  the  "customary"   proce-
dures  to  which  the  Russians  were  "accustomed"?    How  could
we  blame  them  if  they  failed  to  observe  procedures  we  kept
secret  from  them?    These  questions  were  neither   raised  nor
answered.     "U.S.   convoys  have  been  dismounting  their   per-
sonnel,"  this  dispatch  said,  "when  they  numbered   more  than
30  passengers   so  it  would  be  easier  for  the  Soviets  to  check
them  through,  but  the  Russians  were  not  informed  that  the
1   2   ;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  25,1963
U.S.  had  decided  on  30  as  the  dividing  line."
Clay's  "Counter-Erosion"  Strategy
To  keep  the  U.S.  regulations  secret  from  the  Russians  was
asking  for  trouble,  especially  on  so  sensitive  a  highway  as  the
autobahn  to  Berlin.    Indeed,  if  this  were  the  whole  truth,  one
wondered  why  there  have  not  been  more  incidents  in  the  past
over  refusal  to  dismount.    The  Allied  military  traffic  on  this
autobahn  is  very  heavy.    "The   total  number  of  vehicles  mov-
ing  each  way  on  the  autobahn,"   said  a  special  story  in   the
London   Sunday   Times   (Nov.   1),   "average   nearly  30,000  a
year;  of  these  roughly  18,000  are  American, 9,000  British  and
1,000   French."     Checking  procedures  have   developed   over
the  years,  "based  on  the  Russians'  admitted  right  to  be  satis-
fied  that  road  vehicles  are  carrying Allied  traffic."     The  Rus-
sians  were  told  how  many  men  were  in  each  convoy  and   left
to  check  this  as  best  they  could.    The  practice  of  dismount-
ing  to  facilitate  a  head  count  began   in  August   1961   after  a
1500-man  battle  group  on  its  way  to  Berlin  in  the  crisis  at-
mosphere  created  by  the  erection  of  the  Wall  dismounted  to
speed  up  its  clearance.   Thereafter  the  custom  seems  to  have
become  general   as  a  convenient  way  to   facilitate  clearance.
Gen.  Clay  when  he  got  to  Berlin  in  September   (see  the  As-
sociated  Press  backgrounder,  Washington  Star  Nov.  9;   Wash-
ington  Post  Nov.   10)   seems  to  have  felt  however  that  this
new  practice  of  dismounting represented  an  "erosion   process"
which  was  wearing  away  Allied  rights  on  the  autobahn.    The
Associated   Press  story  suggests  that  on  his  urging  there  then
began  a  counter  process.    "This  was  the  beginning,"   the  AP
said,   "of   the   British  and   American  tactic  of   dismounting
troops  of  larger  convoys but  not  when  relatively few  men  were
involved."     For   a  clearer  picture  of  this  "counter   erosion"
process  one  must  turn  to  a  revealing article  by  a  former Army
officer  who  was  stationed  in  Berlin  and  is  close  to  Gen.  Clay,
Jean  Edward  Smith,  writing  in  The   Reporter   for   Nov.   21.
This  was  the  strategy  Clay  suggested,  according  to  Smith:
"Instead   of  a  refusal   to  dismount,  the  response    should
be  varied:  First,   a  few   small   convoys   with  only   drivers
should   be  sent   through.    These  need   not   dismount   since
their  numbers  could  be  ascertained  easily.    The  size  of  the
convoys    not   dismounting   could   be   gradually   increased.
Simultaneously,   however,   larger  convoys  should  make  this
trip   and—as   usual—should   line   up   for   the   Soviet    head
count.    In  other  words,  the  Russians  were  to  be  kept  guess-
An  Invitation to Trouble
"The  vagueness  of  arrangements   for  inspecting  mili-
tary   convoys   to  and  from   Berlin   is   an  invitation   to
trouble  as  well  as  to  genuine   misunderstanding.    The
Americans  have  been  in  the  habit  of  dismounting   pas-
sengers  if  their  number  exceeded  30  excluding   drivers
and   co-drivers.     The   British   set   the   figures   a   little
higher.    There  is  no  ruling  on  the  number  of  vehicles
or  the   density   of   their  passengers,   and  no   standard
practice  among  the  western  powers  themselves.     It  is
therefore'as  difficult  for  the  Russians  to  know  whether
something   new  is  being  tried  out  on  them  as  it  is  for
the  Western   powers  to  know  whether  they   are   being
subjected   to  deliberate  harassment.    The  Russians  can
help  repair  the  impression  they   have  made  by  joining
a  sensible  agreement   on  the   subject."
—Editorial   in   The   Times   of   London   Oct.  17,   the
morning  after   a  British  convoy  to  Berlin  was  held  up.
ing,    the  size   of   the  convoys   not,  dismounting   would   get
larger   and   larger   until   finally   the   precedent   had   been
eroded.    The  success  of  this  maneuver  clearly  depended  on
the  Russians'  not  realizing  what  was  happening.  .  .  .  This,
then,  was  the  situation  when  the  first  incident  occurred  last
month.    We  were  still  nibbling away  at  the  precedent   set
in  August,   1961;  and  the   U.S.   garrison   in  Berlin,   taking
advantage  of  the  growing  detente,  elected  to  try  the  issue
once  more  on  October  10.
So,  according  to  this  account,  the   incidents  were  precipi-
tated  by  the  U.S.  military, taking  advantage  of  the   thaw,  as
an  attempt  to  "nibble  away"  at  Soviet rights of  inspection,  not
the  other  way  around,  as  our  press  presented  it.    Smith  says
the  idea  of  dismounting only  if  the  number  of  combat  troops
exceeded   30,  without  counting  drivers  or   assistant  drivers,
"was  not  a  standing  practice."    He  says  it  was  worked  out  in
negotiations  with  the  Russians.    Indeed   it  was  not   devised,
he  writes, until  "Friday afternoon,  October  11,  as  a  means  for
extricating  the  convey  held   at  Babelsberg,   and   subsequently
was  imposed  on  the  U.S.  Berlin  command  from  Washington."
According  to  Smith,  "the  first  time  the  people  in  authority  in
Berlin  learned   of  the  formula  was  when  they  saw  it  in  the
papers,"   and  "they  were  subsequently  ordered  to   comply."
What  is  Smith's  authority  and  what  are  his  sources?   This
former   Army  officer   is  now   Faculty   Scholar  of   Public   Law
and  Government  at  Columbia.    His  new  book,  "The   Defense
How  A  Leading  Pentagon   Sob  Sister  Whooped  the  Story  Up
"Washington—Soviet   Foreign   Minister   Andrei   A.   Gro-
myko,  for  the  second  time  in  a  year,  has  been  the  center-
piece  of  treacherous   October  tidings  pushing   the   U.S.   and
Russia  into   an  eyeball-to-eyeball    confrontation   that   could
lead  to  conflict.
"President  Kennedy,  aids  said,  is  furious  and  determined
not  to  be  the  first  to  blink  in  the  crisis   over  the   blockade
of  an  American  convoy  on  the  Berlin  Autobahn.    The  Pres-
ident,  it  is  reliably  learned,  has  taken  personal  charge.  .  .  .
"President  Kennedy  began   the  effort   to  convey   to  Mos-
cow  the  seriousness  of  the  situation  by  making  a  protest   to
Mr.  Gromyko  during  a  White  House  visit  Thursday.    Dur-
Mg   and   after   the   White   House   meeting,   Mr.  Gromyko
exuded  sweetness  and  light  in  the  pattern   of  last   October.
"It  has  been  standard  operational  procedure  in  Berlin  for
the  Russians  to  try  to  take  advantage  of  periods  of  detente
to  extend  their   authority   a  little   in  the  expectation   that
American  desire  for  a  Cold  War  breather   would   motivate
the  U.S.  to  look  the  other  way.   There  have  been  occasions
in  the  early   1950s  when  it  worked    This  time  the  Soviets
miscalculated.   .  .  .
"Mr.   Kennedy  has  committed  his  prestige  to  a  policy  of
detente   and  getting   along   with   the   Russians.    Now   the
Russians  are  pulling  the  rug  from   under  him  for  all   the
world  to  see.
"Is  the  wheat   deal   at  stake?     Is  the  detente  at  stake?
said  a  top  official:  The   Russian   people  have   been   hungry
before.    If  the  Russians  thought  they  could  take   advantage
of  the  situation   to  get  a  stranglehold   on  Berlin—and  con-
trol  of   American   troop  movements   would  give  them   that
stranglehold—they  wouldn't   let  a  wheat   deal  stand  in  the
way.     What   we  have   to  convey   to  the  Russians  is   that
there  is  a  lot  more  at  stake  than  the  wheat  deal.    What  is
at  stake  is  war  and  peace'?"
—Marguerite  Higgins,  New  York  Herald-Tribune,  Oct.  12.
That  unnamed  top  official—could  he  possibly  be  Lt.  Gen.
William   E.   Hall,   U.S.   Air   Force,   recently   retired,   this
newslady  warrior's  husband?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  25, 1963
of  Berlin,"  claims  to  be  based  in  part  on  exclusive  interviews
with  General  Clay.    It  takes  a  hard  line  on  the  German  ques-
tion  and  is  critical  of  President  Kennedy  and  the  New   Fron-
tiersmen  for  seeking  fresh   approaches  to  the  German  prob-
lem  and  abandoning  the  intransigent positions  of  the  Aden-
auer-Dulles  period.    It  pictures  an  "anti-Clay  axis"  at  work  in
Washington.      Rusk,    Stevenson,    Rostow,    Schlesinger    and
Bohlen   are   all   mentioned  unfavorably  and   the   President's
proposal  for  a  Berlin  access  authority  is  pictured  as  appease-
ment.    The   book   is  written  as  a  defense  of  General  Clay's
position,  as  is  The   Reporter  article.
Too  Close  to  Shooting  for  Comfort
The  defense  of  Clay  by  Smith  in  The   Reporter  illustrates
the  risks  incurred  by  the  probing  operation   of   October   10.
Smith  writes that  "General   Clay  emphasized  gradualness  and
flexibility."  Smith  criticizes the  October  10 probe.  "The  requi-
site finesse was  lacking,"  he writes.    "Under  the  Clay  formula,
flexibility  was  an  essential ingredient."    Smith  says that  "when
it  appeared  that  the  Soviets  were  going  to  balk,  as  soon  be-
came  evident,  the  convoy  should  have  dismounted  before  the
issue  was  joined.    As  it  was  the  convoy  commander—acting
under  orders  which  were  far  too  rigid—refused   to  give  in,
and  national  prestige  was  involved."     Smith  said  that  General
Clay  in  Berlin  "chose  his  issues  with  incomparable  skill,  and
in  no  case placed  himself  in  the  position  where  the  U.S.  would
bear  the  responsibility  for   firing   the  first  shot."     Unfortu-
nately,  Smith  continues,  in  his  analysis  for  The  Reporter,   "the
first  autobahn  incident  was  not  so  carefully   selected.    For  if
the  Soviets  had  not  decided  to  allow  our  convoy  through  we
would  have  had  no  choice  but  to  shoot  or  dismount.    And  no
one  has  ever  assumed  that  the  U.S.  should  go  to  war  over  the
reluctance  of  soldiers  to  dismount."    We  seem  to  have  come
very  close  to  that,  however,  in  the  autobahn  incidents.
Smith's  sources  in  West  Berlin  seem  to  have  felt   differently
about  this.    The  fact  that  the  Soviets  gave  in  and  let  the  first
two  convoys  proceed   without  dismounting  from  Marienborn,
made  it  look  as  if  the  risk  had  paid  off.    "In   West  Berlin
at  that  time,"   Smith  writes,  "the   military  assumed  that   the
U.S.  had  scored  a  cold-war  victory."
Our   military  had,  in   fact,  chalked   up  two  cold  victories.
One  was  over  the  Russians.    The   other,   which  Smith  only
touches  on  in  another   context,   was  over  Kennedy.     For  as
Smith  says  in  describing  the  situation  when  the  original  con-
voy  was held  up  the  second  time  at  the  other  end  of  the  auto-
bahn  outside  Berlin  late  on  the  night  of  the  10th,    "President
Kennedy  undoubtedly  was  in  an  uncomfortable   position   that
night.    He  had  firmly,  perhaps   irrevocably,   committed   him-
Perfectly  Reasonable
Berlin—U.S.   Major   Gen.   James   H.   Polk,   the   man
who  must  make  the  big  decisions  in  this  divided  city,
quickly   put   the   latest   U.S.   Soviet   crisis   over   Berlin
access  rights  in  perspective  yesterday.     "They  are  try-
ing  to  make  the  point  that  they  are  the  ones  who  are
calling  the  shots  on  the  autobahn,"  the  American   Ber-
lin   commander   said.    "We  are  determined   that   they
will  not  make  it.     I  can't  predict   what   will   happen,"
he   added   grimly.     "My  only   answer   is   that   we   are
ready  for  anything  and  are  prepared  to  cope  with  it."
Gen.   Polk  said  the  Allied  procedures   are   "perfectly
reasonable."    He   added:   "A  Soviet   officer   can   count
the  men  sitting  inside  the  trucks—if  he  can  count."
—Myron   Kandel   in   the  New   York    Herald-Tribune
from  Berlin, Nov.  7.
self  to  an  election   campaign  based  on  peace  and   prosperity,
and  on  improving  relations  with  Russia.    Perhaps  the  Soviets
even   shared   this  desire,  but   now,   because   of   incidents  not
really  designed  by either  side  [but  Smith  had  just finished say-
ing  they were  designed  by the  U.S.  military!—IFS],  the  whole
accord—to  say  nothing  of  Mr.  Kennedy's   campaign   pitch—
seemed  to  be  drifting   away."
It  is  a  pity  the  Berlin  military  cannot   be  called   before  a
Congressional   investigating  committee  and  asked  who  author-
ized  this  probing   operation,   and  who  picked   the  day  when
the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  was  to  be  formalized  and  Gromyko
was again  to be at the White  House.    The  coincidence,  the  un-
leashing  of  a  new  cold  war  atmosphere,   remind  one  of   the
U-2  flight  scheduled   just  in  time  to  disrupt  the  Paris  confer-
ence.
Smith   criticizes  the   October    10th   operation   for   lack  of
flexibility.    If  the  purpose  was  not  so much  to  set a  new  prece-
dent   on  the   autobahn   as  to  poison   the   atmosphere  against
further   negotiations,   rigidity  was   useful.     Few   Americans
realize  how  carefully  planned  the  incidents  of  October   10th
were  and  the  risks  incurred.   Once  the  Russians refused  to  let
the  convoy  pass,  contingency  plans  were  put  into  effect  which
might  easily  have  escalated.    Let  us  notice  first  that  two  con-
voys  met  at  the  Marienborn  checkpoint  and   refused   to  dis-
mount.    One  was  eastbound   to  Berlin,  the  other  was  west-
bound  from  Berlin; the  latter,  the  larger  one,  with  73  men  in
25  vehicles,  had  passed  through  the  checkpoint   outside  Ber-
lin   without  incident.     Presumably  its  men   had   dismounted
It  was  essential  for  this  convoy  to  reach  Marienborn  without
delay  in  order  to  make  a  joint  stand  there  with  the  incoming
convoy  because  the  first  step  in  the  contingency  plan  was  to
block   all   traffic    on  the  autobahn.    This  required   large  con-
The  Enemies  of  Any  Relaxation  of  Tension  Were  Jubilant
"One  would  love   to   know   his   name,   so   one  could   send
him  a  letter  of  thanks.    Whom?    To  the  man  who,  in  the
Kremlin,   has   fabricated   this   incident   on   the    Autobahn.
Perhaps   it   was   the   big   chief   in  person:  he   merits  our
gratitude.    For  he  has  opportunely  reminded  us  how  dan-
gerous  a  thing  is  this  famous   detente   [i.e.   the   relaxation
of   tension  between  the  U.S.   and  the  USSR]."
—Editorial   in   Berliner   Zeitung,   quoted   in   Le    Monde
(Paris)  Oct. 1S-H,  as  typical  of  Berlin press  reaction.
"An  ironic  byproduct   may  be  something   of  a  tonic  for  a
host  of  ills  now  sapping  alliance  solidarity.  .  .  .  Revival  of
the  Berlin  crisis  as  a  live  threat   to  Europe,  this  reasoning
goes,  could  improve  the  climate  for  a  number  of   pending
measures  for  strengthening  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Or-
ganization.    These  include:  A  broad   U.S.   backed   plan   for
closer  coordination   and  more  equal  sharing  of  the  cost  of
NATO  defense;  a  campaign  to  prod  lagging   NATO   part-
ners  to  fulfill  their  treaty  obligations,  and  a  program  for  a
multi-lateral  nuclear  surface  fleet  armed  with  Polaris  mis-
siles   and  manned   by   mixed   crews   from   a   half-dozen   or
more  nations.   But  if  this  is  indeed  the  likely  upshot  of  re-
newed  Berlin  tension,  what's  in  it  for  Mr. Khrushchev?"
—Wall  St.  Journal,  Nov.  6.
1  2  j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  25,1963
voys  in  both  lanes.    This  was  the  first  time  the  U.S.  military
ever  tried  this,  and  it  might  have  led  to  serious  trouble.    The
fact  that  all   traffic  was  blocked  was  only  disclosed  two  days
later  at  a  press  conference  in  Berlin  (see  New   York   Times,
Oct.  13),  where  it  was  described  as  "a  successful  bid  to  break
the  first  Soviet  attempt  to  detain  the  troops."
How  We  Blocked the  Autobahn
The  spokesman   at  the  press  conference   boasted   that  within
an   hour   the   Russians  processed   and   released   both   convoys.
Whether  this was  because  of  the  road  block  or  because  of  mes-
sages  from  Gromyko  in  Washington   to  Moscow  is not  known.
When  the  Berlin-bound  convoy  reached  the  other  end  of  the
autobahn  three  or  four  hours  later,  it  was  again  held  up  for
refusal  to  dismount.    Here  again  a  similar  double  play  seems
to  have  been  prepared.    A  second  convoy  headed  for  West
Germany   had   already  been   cleared  through  the   checkpoint.
It  was  made  up  of   164  men  on  26  vehicles,  and  it  had  no
trouble   clearing,  presumably  because  its  men   dismounted  to
be counted.    But  it did  not  move on;  it waited  for  the  inbound
convoy  (New   York  Times,  Oct.  13,  p.3  col. 4).   This  meant
that  again  there  were  large  convoys   in   both   lanes,   one  al-
ready  cleared  in  the  westbound   lane,  the  other  newly  halted
in  the  eastbound  lane  where  it  had  refused  to  dismount  for
counting.    The  two  convoys  were  again  in  position  to  block
all  traffic   in  both  directions.
An  even  more  risky  ploy  seems  to  have  been  used  in  this
second  encounter.    According  to  the  New   York   Times   (Oct.
12)   from  Berlin  "Shortly  before  noon  yesterday,  [i.e.   Friday
the  llth],   the  Army  ordered   Lieutenant  Fields   [who   was
in  command  of  the  Berlin-bound  convoy]   to  test   Moscow's
intentions  by  raising  the  barriers  at  the  Babelsberg  checkpoint
in  an  attempt   to  get  away  without  permission.     The   Soviet
officer   in  charge  then  moved  up  two  armored  personnel  car-
riers  with  50  soldiers  to  block  the  autobahn."    What  if  Lt.
Fields  had  been  shot  when  he  raised  the  barrier  and  tried  to
go  through  without  permission?    This  was  a  dangerous  place
to  play  games  but  the  Russians  backed  down   again,  and  on
the  12th  the  convoy was allowed  to  proceed  without  dismount-
Soviet  Press  Release  on  Nov.  Incident
"On  4  November  a  U.S.  military   convoy  consisting
of  12  vehicles  refused  to  submit  to  the  customary  con-
trol  at  the  Soviet  crossing   and  checkpoint  in  Marien-
born.    It  did  not  proceed  on  its   scheduled  route  from
the  German  Federal  Republic  to  West  Berlin.    The  of-
ficer  in  charge  of  the  convoy, who  produced  documents
pertaining  to  the  trucks  and  the  U.S.  military  person-
nel  travelling  in  them,  declared  that  he  could  not  pa-
rade  his  military  personnel;  nor  could  he  give  orders
to  open  the  sides  of  the  trucks  for  checking  the  mili-
tary   personnel   shown   in   the   documents.    He   added
that   he  would  be  relieved  of   his  command  if   he  did
this.    The  conduct  of   the   military  personnel   in   this
instance  distinctly  departed  from   the  rules   governing
the  passing  of  U.S.  military  personnel   through  Soviet
crossing   and  checkpoints   previously   observed   by   U.S.
military  convoys.
"The   reference  by  the  Americans  to  instructions  is-
sued   among  the   U.S.   troops   in  Germany  and  which
violate  the  rules  laid  down,  of  course,  cannot  have  any
validity  for  Soviet  crossing   and  checkpoints.    At   the
conference   of   the   commanders-in-chief   of   the   allied
powers  on  June  1945  it  was  clearly  laid  down  that  'So-
viet   troops  will   guard,  patrol   (kommandodienst)   and
regulate   traffic   on   the   roads   mentioned.'     For   many
years  no  complication  arose   in  this  connection  at  the
crossing   and  checkpoints.     The   rules   governing   the
passing  of  military  personnel  and  supplies  of  the  three
powers  through  crossing  and  checkpoints are  known  to
the  American military  authorities.   The  incident  creat-
ed  by  the  convoy  in  question  has  thus  been  clearly  ar-
tificially  created by  the  U.S.  military authorities  guided
by  some  erroneous  considerations."
—From  Nov.   6  statement  by  Soviet  press   officer    at
Marienborn,  as  broadcast  by East Berlin radio  that  day.
ing.    But  in  the  meantime  the  cold   warriors  had  had   their
inning.    The  New   York   Herald-Tribune   under  banner   head-
lines  the  morning  of  Oct.  12  spoke  of  another  eyeball-to-eye-
ball  confrontation  (see  box  p.  2)   and  suddenly  Major   Gen.
James  H.  Polk,  U.S.  Commandant  in  Berlin,  was  being  called
"No   Nonsense"   Polk.     This   publicity  buildup   might   have
What  Khrushchev  Actually  Said  to  the  Visiting  U.  S. Businessmen
MR.  JAMES  H.  BINGER,  president,  Honeywell  Regula-
tor  Co.:  We  were  all  very  happy  to  learn  this  morning that
the   American  convoy  blocked  on  the   road  to   Berlin  had
been  allowed  to  proceed.    Could   you  tell  us  why   it   was
stopped?
MR.  KHRUSHCHEV:  A  certain  procedure  has  been  fixed
for   the   control  of   allied  military   units  using   the   Berlin
autobahn.    Every  time  that   military  personnel  of  Ameri-
can,  English  or  French  units  have  respected  this  procedure,
they  have  been  allowed  to  pass.     When  they  have  not  re-
spected  it,  they  have  been  held  up,  and  it  will  always  be  so.
As  soon  as  the  American  officers  allowed  the  procedure
utilized  for  years,  they  were  authorized to  proceed.    There
was   no   reason   why   the   American  soldiers   had   to   stay
blocked  for  two  days.    In  fact,  I  was  surprised   that   they
were  able  to  stay  so  long  in  their  trucks.    They  must  have
hidden  resources.    But  that  is  an  internal  problem  in which
I  do  not  wish  to  interfere.
It   is   difficult   to  say   what  would  have  happened  if   the
customary   procedure  had  not  finally  been  respected.    Per-
haps  neither  you  nor  I  would  be  here  today.    We  would
certainly  not  have  given  in  and  it  would  have  been  neces-
sary  to  pass  over  our corpses.    It  is  you  who  provoked this
incident.    For  our  part,  we  want  no  tension  of  this  kind.
MR.    RICHARD   CLURMAN,   chief    of    correspondents,
Time-Life:  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  if  there  had  not  been
an  agreement  about  procedure,  you  would  have  given  the
order  to  fire  and  a  war  could  have  resulted?
MR.   KHRUSHCHEV:  We  have   given  no  order  of   this
kind,  but  a  soldier  is  a  soldier.   He  has  his  instructions  and
if  someone  wants  to  infringe  them  by  force,  it  is  inevitable
that  he  will  resist  by  force.   A  soldier  is  not  a  Minister  of
Foreign  Affairs.    He  does  not  engage  in  negotiations.    He
applies  his  orders.    That  is  a  law  that  applies  as  much  to
your  soldiers  as  to  ours.
It  is  clear  that  you  wished  to  put  us  to  a  test  of  nerves.
We  responded  by  placing  our  armored  vehicles  across  the
road   in   order   to   test   your  nerves   and  see   whether   you
would  shoot  or  not.    You  did  not  do  it,  and  we  are  very
happy  about that.
A VOICE: But  what rule  did they violate?
MR.  KHRUSHCHEV: As  for  that,  I  advise  you  to  ask
your  Ambassador,  Mr. Kohler.
—November  6 interview  with  U.S.  business  men  arranged
by  Time-Life.     Translated   from  L'Express   (Paris,  Nov.  14)
the  only  place  where  we  found   the  text   available.
I.  P.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.,
Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;   $6 in  Canada;   $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  ?16 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  25, 1963
cost  the  rest  of  us dearly.
The   crazy  comedy  was  repeated,   this  time  by  the   British
on  October   16.    On  that  day  the  Russians  held  up  a  British
convoy  of  nine  trucks  and  28  officers  and  men  for  nine hours
at  the  Babelsberg  checkpoint  after   they  refused   to  dismount
for  counting.   The  Russians  finally  waved  them  through  but
three  hours  later,  at  the  other  end  of  the  autobahn  in Marien-
born,  they  were  again  held  up  for  three  hours.    Again  the
Russians   gave   in.     Here   again   the   same  strange  numbers
game  took  place.    According  to  the  Times  of  London   (Oct.
17)   "The   British  procedure,   which  the  Russians  have  pre-
viously   accepted,   has  been   that   troops  should   get  out  only
when  the  number  of  men  is  above  a  certain  figure—which  is
not  being  disclosed  because  it  is  felt  it  would  become  a bar-
gaining  point  for  the  Russians—or  if  the  number  of  men  in
any  one  vehicle  exceeds  a  certain  number."
Almost  Gilbert  &  Sullivan
Not  only  were  the  British  pursuing  the  same  tactics  as  the
Americans  in  not  telling  the  Russians what  the  magic number
was  at  which  convoys would  dismount,  but  the  British number
seemed   to  be  different   from  the   Americans.    For  next  day,
the  Russians passed  four  British convoys without trouble.    The
Times  of  London  reported  (Oct.  18),   "The  Russians this time
appeared  to  be  conciliatory.    According  to  the  British  under-
standing  of  the  procedure   they  were  entitled   to  ask  all  the
men  to  leave  their  vehicles,  as  the  convoys  each  consisted  of
about  60  men.    They  left   only  those  vehicles,  however,  where
the   number   exceeded   the   established    figure."    Apparently
the  British,  unlike  the  Americans,  had  two  sets  of  numbers,
one  for  the  total   number   in  the   convoy,  the   other  for   the
number  in  each  vehicle.    The  Times  in  an  editorial  (see  box
at  top  of  col.  2  on  our  page  2)   seemed  to  think  this  might
breed  a  dangerous  confusion,  and  its  diplomatic  correspondent
(Oct.   18)  said  the  Allies were  in  consultation  on the  problem.
He  reached  almost  Gilbert   &  Sullivan  heights  in  explaining
the  situation.    After  saying  that  a  Foreign   Office  spokesman
had  said  he  believed  the  Allied  position  was  "perfectly  under-
stood"  by  the  Russians,  the  Diplomatic   Correspondent  went
on  to  say—
The  fact   is,  however,  that  the  normal  practice   of   each
of   the   western   allies—in  leaving   vehicles  to  be  counted,
for  instance,  if  the  number   of  men  in  the  convoy  is   con-
They  Know, But  We Don't
Berlin—Perhaps   a   Martian   newspaper   will   report
some   day   that   humanity   was   obliterated   from   the
Earth  after   an  American   soldier   refused   to   drop  his
tail  gate.    If  his  readers  are  puzzled,  they  will  be  no
worse  off  than  the  Earthling  outsiders  who  try  to  fol-
low   the   intricacies   of   the   international  debate   over
Berlin.  . . .
Unfortunately  the  terms  under  which  the   Americans
and  British  and  French  will  dismount  never  have  been
made  public.    Everyone  knows  that  30  troops  riding  as
passengers   are  a  magic  number;  above  30,  dismount;
30 or  less,  no.
But  the  formula  is  more  complicated  than  that.    Its
details  are  a  Western  military  secret   known  only   to
the  Russians,  the  East  bloc  countries  and  possibly   the
Red  Chinese.
—Henry   L.  Trewhitt,   the   Baltimore    Sim's   corre-
spondent  in  Germany,  Nov.  10.
siderable—have  never  been  exactly   stated  to  the  Russians,
because  the  allies  claim full  and unrestricted access  as  their
right,  and  wish  to  avoid  any  implication that  their  normal
and  well  recognized  practices,  which  have   grown   up   for
convenience,  cannot  be  varied.   Clearly the  Allies would not
put  forward  to  the  Russians  an  alteration  of  their  rights.
If,   however,   misunderstandings   of   their   normal   practices
can  lead  to  serious  incidents,   there  is  a  case  for   making
clear  the  sort  of  procedure  which  they  are  each,  normally,
prepared  to  accept.
This  would  seem  to  reserve  the  right  for  the  Allies  to  act
abnormally,  or  eccentrically, when  they  so  choose,  leaving  the
Russian   checkers   to   decide   whether   to   shoot,   wave   them
through,  or  summon  a psychiatrist.
As  a  result  of  these  doubts,  the  Western   allies   proceeded
to  draw  up  common  rules  and  presented  them  to  the Russians
on  Oct.   29.    This  led  to  new  confusion   because  the  British
customarily  lowered   the  tailboards  on  their   vehicles  to  make
it  easier  for  the  Soviet  checkpoint  officer  to  count  the  men  in
them.     "The   Americans,"   according  to   the   London   Times
(Nov.   8),   "whose  tailboards were  lower,  and  therefore  less
of   a  hindrance  to  checking,  refused  to   lower  them."     The
French  had   no  tailboard  problem,  since  they  normally  send
their  troops   to   Berlin   by  rail  anyway.    A  compromise  was
finally  reached;  tailboards  were  to  be  lowered  if  over  6  feet.
"The   Russians  were  not  consulted  on  the  memorandum"  ac-
New  Yorker  Suggests  The  Berlin  Incidents May Be  A  New  Form of  Bloodless Combat
".  .  .  Then  the  Russians  shifted  their  demands,  and  asked
that   the   tailgates   of   the   trucks   be  lowered,   so   that  our
troops  could  be  counted  while  remaining  inside.    Again  we
refused—not  because  Western   troops  always  refuse  to  low-
er   their   tailgates  but  because   Allied   rules   call   for   such
lowering   only  when  tailgates  are  more  than  six  feet  high.
In  this  case,  as  we  told  the  Russians,  the  tailgates   were
less  than   three  feet   high,   and  on  this  firm  mathematical
ground  we  drew  the  line  and  took  our  stand.    Once  again
the   Russians   changed   their   demands,   and  asked   that   the
American  troops  stand  inside  tbe  trucks  to  facilitate  a  head
count.   This  was  going  too  far.    Without  even  bothering  to
work  out  the  mathematical   justification,   we  took  our  stand
and  remained  seated.    However,  as  the  Times  reported  the
next  day,  our  soldiers  'climbed  off  their   trucks   repeatedly
to  eat,  sleep  and  relax'  during   the   long   ordeal,   and   this
gave  the   alert   Khrushchev   the  basis  for  his    misleading
'victory' statement.
"All  this  may  still  seem  a  little confusing   until  one  real-
izes  that  both  superpowers—apparently   convinced   that   a
nuclear   war   would   leave   neither  victor  nor  spoils—have
devised  a  substitute  form  of  combat,  which  produces  head-
lines   but  no  casualties,   and  provides   precisely   the   same
number  of  victors  as  there  are  participants.    The  very  pet-
tiness  of  the  argument   adds  a  safety   element.    Who  ever
heard  of  two  superpowers  going  to  war  over  three  feet  of
tailgate?     Perhaps  the  best  analogy  is  to  a  certain  social
ritual  that  most  people  have  participated  in,  or  at  least  ob-
served,   during  their  formative  years.     The  ritual  consists
of   two  small   boys'  standing   toe  to   toe   on  an  imaginary
line,   surrounded  by  an  audience   of   their  peers,  and  chal-
lenging  each  other  to  step  over  the  line.  Sometimes  there's
a  bit  of  pushing  and  shoving,  but  almost  always  the  crisis
ends  without  bloodshed.     Almost  always.    At  least  9  times
out  of  10."
—The  New  Yorker:  Talk   of  The  Town,  Nov.   16.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  25,1963
cording  to  the  London  Times  "as  the  essence  of  the  Western
position  is that  they  have  unrestricted  right  of  access  and  agree
to  certain  procedures  as a  matter  of  general  convenience."    At
the  same  time,  according  to  this  London  Times  "Guide  to  In-
cidents   on   Berlin   Access   Routes"   (Nov.    8),   the   Western
memorandum   was  not  published.   "The   Western  allies,"  the
diplomatic  correspondent   of  the  Times  said,  "preferred   not  to
establish   a  clear-cut  position   in  public   which   might   make   it
harder  for  the .Russians  to  withdraw  in  case  of  dispute."    An-
other   motive  may  have   been   not  to  embarrass   the   Russians
unduly  by  making  it  appear  that  the  West  was  dictating   traffic
regulations   for  the  autobahn.     If  so  this  was  upset  by  a  leak
to  the  press.    "Unfortunately,"   Neal  Acherson,  Berlin   corre-
spondent   of   The   London   Observer    revealed    in   his   paper
(Nov.    10),   "this  action  was  leaked  by  a  West  Berlin   Senate
official   to  visiting  American   journalists.     It   Jooked   as  if   the
Russians  were  taking  Allied  instructions  about  how  to  run  the
autobahn.     Possibly,  as  a  direct  result,   the   American   convoy
was  stopped  at  Marienborn."    This  was  a  reference   to   the
incident  of  Nov.   4  to  which  we  now  turn.
A  New  Set  of  Rules
According  to  the  London   Times  account  of  Nov.   8  quoted
above  the  Nov.   4  incident  was  the  result  of  a  deliberate  test.
"No   acceptance  of   the   Western   memorandum    having   been
received  for  five  days,"  the  Times  reported,   "the   U.S.   govern-
ment,  which  had  a  convoy  due  to  leave  Berlin   sent  it  off  in
12  vehicles  with  44  men  in  all—i.e.  fewer  than  30  passengers,
if   drivers   and   co-drivers   are   excluded—a   form   deliberately
chosen   to  test   whether   the  Russians  accepted   the   procedure
announced   in   the   memorandum."      This   memorandum    rep-
resented   a  new   stage   in  the  autobahn   troubles.     Earlier  the
U.S.  was  trying  to  whittle   away  the   custom   of    dismounting
large  convoys.    Now   they  were  presenting  the  Russians  with
a  new  set  of  rules  for  the  autobahn  under  their  control.    Five
Checkers  Not  Allowed to Check?
"Sir—Am  I  the  only  one  who  is  puzzled  by  the  lat-
est  installment  of  the  Berlin  crisis?     There  seems  to
be  general  agreement   that   Russian  checkpoints   exist,
presumably  for  the  purpose  of  checking,  and  that   we
do  recognize  that  they  have  some  right  to  know  how
many  allied  servicemen  proceed  to  or  from  Berlin,  al-
though  the  Russians  did  not  usually  bother  with  count-
ing  small numbers.
"The  three   Western   powers  informed  the   Russians
about  the  number  of  troops  which they  have  a  right  to
send   past   the  checkpoint  without  the   Russians  count-
ing  them.    Two  questions  immediately  arise.
"The  first  is   that  no  checking  authority  could   pos-
sibly   concede   the   principle  that   it  must  always   take
the   word  of   those   checked   about  their  own   numbers.
It   must  reserve   the  right  occasionally  to  see   whether
they  are telling  the truth.
"Secondly,   and   more   important,  the   Soviet   cannot
possibly   concede   the   principle  that  the   checking   pro-
cedure,   their  procedure,  can  be  determined  by  the  uni-
lateral  declaration  of  the  Western  powers.     To  all  in-
tents  and  purposes   we  compelled  them  to  act.    Having
done   so,   we  sound   the   alarm,  talk  of   'blockade'  and
speculate   about   their  far-reaching  motives.     What   is
the  point  of  all  this?"
—Letter  in  The  Times  of  London  Nov.  11 by  A.  Nove,
Dept.   of   International   Economic  Studies,    University
of  Glasgow.
days  seems  a  rather   short  time  to  wait  for   a  response  to  so
basic  a  precedent.    For   if  the  West  fears   a  whittling   away
of  its  rights  on  the  autobahn,  so  does  the  East.    Certainly  this
picture  is  different   from  that   conveyed   to  newspapermen  by
the  State  Department  on  Nov.   4,  that  the  Russians  were  try-
ing  to  change  practices  which  had  existed  for  many  years.*
*  The  formal  protest   note   of   Nov.  6   got   around  this   by
Those  Russians  Just  Don't  Understand  Good  Old Teamster  Union   Practices
We  keep  having  these  tieups  on  the  autobahn  to   West
Berlin.    Mr.  Khrushchev  says  any  one  of  them  could  lead
to   a  nuclear  holocaust   and  the   end  of  civilization.   True.
But  fear  not.     Neither   side  will  ever   yield.
As  you  know,  the  Russians  get  to  check  every  convoy  of
troops  we  send  over  the  autobahn  to  West  Berlin.    And  if
there's  more  than  30  passengers  in  the  trucks,  they  have  to
get  out,  line  up  and  be  counted.    A  typical  cold  war  agree-
ment.    Very  simple.    Theoretically.
But  take  the  last  tie-up.    Along  come  12  United   States
trucks.     "Stop"  says   the   Russian  colonel.     And  he  peeks
inside.    "Aha!"  he  says,   "you've   got  one,  two,  three,  four,
five ...  44  soldiers  in  those  trucks.'    That's  more  than  30.
Now  that  I've  counted  them,   they've  got   to   get   out  and
get  counted."
"Hold  it"  says   the  American  colonel.    "You  counted  the
drivers,  too.    Drivers  don't  count."
"So,  okay,"  says  the  Russian colonel,  "we  don't  count  the
drivers.    You've  got  one,  two, three ...  12  trucks.   Twelve
trucks,   12  drivers.    Twelve   from   44   that's   let's   see,   32.
Hah!   Everybody out!"
*'Hold  it!"  says  the  American  colonel.    "We  got  24 driv-
ers.    Count  them  for  yourself.    Those  24  in  the  front  seats
are  drivers  and  those  20  in  the  back  seats  are  passengers.
What's  the  matter, can't  you  count?"
"You   mean   it   takes   two   drivers   to   drive  one  truck?"
says the  Russian.
"Right,"  says  the  American.    "One  steers  and  the  other
lights   his   cigarettes,   wipes   the   windshield,  scratches   his
back  and  hollers  'Look  out!'  when  necessary.    Just  like  the
Teamsters  Union.   It  is,  sir.  the  American  way!"
"Bah!"  says  the  Russian  colonel.     "I  am  checking  with
Moscow."    So  he  does.
"Don't  back  down!"  cries  Moscow.    And  rushes   up  rein-
forcements.
"Don't   back  down!"   cries   Washington.     And  rushes  up
reinforcements.
All   Soviet  forces  are  alerted.    All  United  States   forces
are  alerted.    NATO  is  alerted.    Rockets  presumably  swivel
ominously   into  position.     France   and  Britain  cry,   "Don't
back   down!"     And   rush   up   reinforcements.     To   defend
America's   inalienable  right   to  have   two   drivers   in  every
truck.
Forty-two   hours   pass.     Personally,   I   don't   know   how
World  War  II  was  averted.    Because  both  sides  claim  they
didn't  back  down.    But  42  hours  is  a  long  time  to  sit  in  a
truck.
Well,  whatever,  I'm  glad  we   didn't  blow  up civilization.
This time.
But  don't   get   me  wrong.    I'm  sure   we're  all  willing  to
die  for  our  right  to  have  two  drivers  in  every  truck.    Just
as  all  Russians  are  willing  to  die  for  the  egalitarian  prin-
ciple  of  one  truck,  one  driver.    Moreover,  if  you're  looking
for   a  reason   to  destroy   civilization,  it's   as   good  as   any.
If  you're  looking  for  a reason.
—Arthur  Hoppe,  Washington  Star,  Nov.  12.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  25, 1963
The  Nov.  4  incident was carefully  prepared  from  the  West-
ern  side,  and  apparently,  unlike the  Oct.   10,  with  full  knowl-
edge  of  higher  quarters.     The  Baltimore  Sun  reported   from
Berlin  Nov.   6  that  the  Nov.   4  convoy  was  "the  first  direct
challenge"   since  Oct.   10,  "All  American  convoys  since  then
have  been  formed  in  such  a manner  that  they  would  dismount
under   their  own   rules."     The   knife-edge   issue  drawn   was
neatly  phrased  by  the  Baltimore  Sun's   correspondent   in  Ber-
lin  (Nov.   11)  when  he  said,  "The   Russians  say that  they  have
to  count  the  soldiers  moving  over  the  'road.    The  Western
allies  agree  but  they  decide  what  arrangements   are  made   fot
counting  them."    The  same  dispatch   threw  further  light  on
the  argument  when  it  said,  "The   Russians  complain  that  they
cannot  see  to  count  men  inside  a  dark  truck."
Russian  Compromises Rejected
The  Russians  seem  to  have  met  the  "crisis"  by  offering  to
compromise.     If   the   men   would   not   dismount,   they   asked
that  our  men  lower   the  tailgates  for   counting.    When   this
was  refused,  they  asked  if  the  men  in  the  truck  would   stand
up  to  be  counted.    This  was  also  rejected.    These  offers   to
compromise  were  described  by  Allied  spokesmen  in  a  belliger-
ant  and  arrogant  manner.   They  said  (Baltimore  Sun,  Nov.  6)
that'  "during   the   last   two  days,  three   separate  and  entirely
arbitrary  demands  were  made  by  Soviet  authorities  to  change
existing  procedures.     These  were:   demand   to  dismount;   to
lower  tailgates,  and  for  personnel  to  stand  in  the  trucks  to  be
counted.    All  were  flatly  rejected  by  U.S.  authorities."     Since
we  recognize  the  Russians'  right  to  count  and  check  the  num-
bers  against  the  convoy  papers,  this  seems  a  very  chip-on-the-
shoulder  attitude.**
some  ingenious  wording.   It  said  that  in  stopping  the  convoy
the  Russians  were  acting  "in  contradiction  with  the   estab-
lished   procedures  followed  up  to   the   present   time  by   the
Allies.    The   pertinent   procedures  currently   in  effect   were
communicated  by  the  3  governments  to  the  Soviet  military
authorities  last   Oct.  29."    So  the  rules  had  been   in   effect
all  of  8  days!
**  Compare  the  statement  made  by  the  new  British Prime
Minister  while  the  convoy  was  still  being  held.    He  said  that
"so  far  as  he  knew  there  was  nothing  sinister  about  the  dis-
pute  in  the  Berlin  corridor.  .  .  .  The   dispute  is  about  the
opening  of  tailboards  on  the  vehicles  which  carry  the   troops
How  East  Germany Saw  It
"Cold   war   propagandists   had  a  field  day   early   in
October,  when  they  tried  to  play  up  a  procedural  dif-
ference  on  the  West  Berlin  border  into  an  'internation-
al  crisis'.  .  .  . The conditions  for  the  use  of  this  motor
highway  by  military  transports  have  never  been  clear-
ly  defined  in  international   agreements;  a  confused,  and
confusing,  series  of   precedents  have   grown   up   since
1945,  and  arguments  between  American convoy   officers
and  Soviet  guards  have  recurred  at  irregular  intervals
over  the  past  18  years.  .  .  .
"Observers  in  Bonn  stated  that  there  was  some  indi-
cation   that   the   incident   had  been   provoked  by   local
American  commanders,  in  cooperation   with  West  Ger-
man   militarist  circles,   to  upset   the   present   tendency
towards  relaxation  in  the  German  question.
"It  was  pointed  out  in  Berlin  [i.e.  East  Berlin—IFS]
that  the  incident  showed  how  important  it  is  for  the
powers  concerned  to  conclude  a  proper  detailed  agree-
ment  on  the  legal  status  of  West  Berlin  and  its  com-
munication  routes.  Until  such  an  agreement  is  reached,
minor  local  differences  can  be  used  by  anti-relaxation
forces  to  create  a  major  incident."
—Democratic  German  Report   Oct.  18,  a    fortnightly
published  in East  Berlin  by  the British journalist,  John
Peel, Krausenstrasse  9, Berlin  W  8, an  unofficial    organ
of   the  East  German   regime's  point  of  view.
It  is  as  if  our  military  were  spoiling  for  a   fight.   The  con-
voy  was  blocked  at  Marienborn  9  a.m.  local  time  Nov.  4.  "At
midnight,"  the  UPI  reported   (New   York  Daily  News,   Nov.
5),   "the   convoy  suddenly   moved  out  •without  Soviet  permis-
sion.   It  rolled  about  a quarter  of  a  mile  past  two  road  barriers
but   was  blocked   about   400   yards  inside   East   Germany   as
Soviet   armored   cars  and  five  trucks,  presumably   laden  with
troops,  rolled  up  to  stop  it.  ...    West  German   truck  drivers
who  passed  through  the  checkpoint  reported  that  the  armored
cars  carried  mounted  machine guns."   This  effort  to  crash  the
border  was  made,  according  to  the   Baltimore   Sun  account,
(Nov.   5)   "apparently  after  a  midnight   deadline   set  by  the
U.S."     It  was this  which  brought  about  that  danger  of  shoot-
ing  and  war  to  which  Khrushchev   Referred   in  his   interview
with  the  U.S.  business  men  (see  box bottom  of  p.   4).
to  and  from  Berlin'."    (The   London  Times,  Nov.  6.)
"Our  Tailboards  Are  Our  Bulwarks  Against   Communism"
(The   dramatic   inside  story   of  the  Marienborn   crisis,  as
related  by  Major-General  Sir  Roderick  Talltrouser,   Deputy-
Director  of  Western  Face,  in  a  specially  written new  instal-
ment  of  his  memoirs,   "Forty   Years   of  Saving   It.")
MARIENBORN!     Throughout  the   annals   of   the   free
world   the  name  will   ring   like   a  clarion  call.    Whenever
they  hear  it,  men  will  lift  their  heads  proudly  and  say:—
"Our   tailboards  were   never  lowered!"
The  truth  is  that  for  41  hours  the  Americans  remained
in  their  lorries  on  the  autobahn  and  valiantly  refused  all
Russian  requests  for  co-operation in  counting  them.   They
refused  to  dismount.   They  refused  to  stand  up.   They  re-
fused  to  lower  their  tailboards.
As  soon  as  we  at  Face  H.Q.  were  informed of  the  Ameri-
can's  position,  we  sent  out  -a  British  and  a  French  convoy
as  relieving  forces,  with  strict  instructions  to  remain  seat-
ed  and  keep  their  tailboards up  at  all  costs.    The  Russians,
I  regret  to  say,  took  this  as  the  opportunity  to  play  a par-
ticularly  dirty  trick   on   the  American  commander.    They
told  him  that  at  Babelsberg,  at'the  other  end  of  the  auto-
bahn,  the  French  had,  in  fact,  lowered  their  tailboards.
Fortunately,  he  refused  t» Believe it.    "What?"  he  must
have  said  to  himself.    "Is  it  likely  that  the  French,  who did
not  lower  their  eagles  at  Austerlitz  or  Borodino,  have  low-
ered  their  tailboards  at  Babelsberg?"
The  views  of   my  American  and  French  colleagues   and
myself,   I  may  say,  were  in  the  closest  harmony  through-
out  the  crisis.    At  one  joint  stag  meeting  the  warm  emo-
tional  tone  rose  to  such  a  pitch  that  I  became  somewhat
carried  away.   I  stood  up  and sang  to  the  assembled  West-
ern  officers:   "British  tailboards  never,  never   will  be  low-
ered."
At  this,  I  am  proud  to  say,  there  was  applause,  and  my
French  colleagues  jumped up  and  declared:  "Us  ne  baisse-
ront   pas!"    The  senior  American  general   present  added:
"Be  assured,  gentlemen,  that  when  the  time  comes  to  stand
up   and   be  counted,  we   will   sit   down  and   refuse   to   be
counted."    It  was  truly  a  moving  moment.
—Michael  Frayn,  London  Observer, Nov.  10.
IFS  to  Speak  for  Peace  in  Vietnam  8  p.m.  Dec.  5  at  Palm  Gardens,  310  W.  52nd  St.,  New  York  City,  under
9                                                                        Auspices  of  Studies  on  the   Left
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  25, 1963
Khrushchev  was  not  the  only  one  who  saw  grave  possibil-
ities  in  the  confrontation,  though   these  possibilities  were  not
advertised   by  U.S.   military   spokesmen   until   after   the  crisis
had   passed.    Thus  Myron  Kandel   from  Berlin  in  the   New
York   Herald-Tribune  (Nov.  6)   after  the  convoy  was  released
said  Allied  officials  had  been  meeting  in  Bonn  and  Berlin  on
next  steps  to  be taken  under  their contingency  plans  and   "Offi-
cials   have   confided  privately  that   invoking   some   of   these
measures  runs  the  risk  of  East-West  bloodshed."    The  Balti-
more  Sun's   correspondent   (Nov. 7)   said   "evidence   grew  to
indicate  that  the  autobahn  incident  came  nearer  the  point  of
explosion  than   anyone  has  admitted  publicly."     Earlier   the
New    York'   Herald-Tribune    (Nov. 5)    had   reported    from
Washington  that  the  government's  reaction  to  the  new  holdup
"was  one  of  studied  calm.  .  .  .  Officials  said  there  was  a  de-
tailed   contingency  plan  that  had   been   worked   out  well   in
advance  with  the  British,  the. French  and  the  Germans,   'It's
quite  a  bag  of  tricks',"  an  unnamed'official  was  quoted  as say-
ing.    Both  the  Herald  Tribune  and  the  Wall  St.  Journal  drew
a  parallel  with  the  Cuban   crisis,  the  latter  saying  (Nov. 6)
after  it  was  over  that  the  "latest  Russian  blockade  became,  in
its  way,  almost  as  flagrant  and  frightening  a  test  of  Western
will  as the  Soviet  move  to  slip  missiles  into  Cuba."
More  Trouble  May  Lie   Ahead
Fortunately   the  Nov. 4  convoy  in  one  crucial  detail  had
different  orders  from  that  of  Oct. 10.    The  men  in  the  latter
were   not   allowed   to  dismount   even  to   answer  the   calls  of
nature.    In  the  case  of  the  former  "There  was  no  lack  of  op-
portunity  to  count  the  men," the  New   York   T-imes'   reported
(Nov.  7),   "for  they  showed  themselves  freely  in  periodic mo-
ments  of  relaxation  and  for  a  night  time  bivouac  at  the  side
of  the  road."    This  allowed  the  Russians  a  face-saver.    They
could   claim  that   they   had   counted   the   men   in   accordance
with  th^ir  normal  procedures.    These  counting  procedures  ob-
viously  are  not  limited  to  dismounting.    As  one  U.S. official
told   the   Washington   Star   afterwards  (Nov. 6)   "It's  quite
obvious  that  their  procedures  are  quite  flexible."  That's  more
than  can  be  said  for   ours.
But  what  happens   next  time?    Nothing  has  been   settled.
What  if  next  time  U.S. troops  stay  in  their  trucks  and can-
not  be  counted?   What  if  a  dispute  arises  as  to  whether  there
Bonn  Was  Pleased
Bonn,  Nov.   9—A   measure  of   wry  satisfaction  was
evident  in  Bonn  this  week  as   officials   followed   efforts
of   the  U.S. to  extricate  one  of   its   military   convoys
from  a  Soviet  blockade  on  the  Berlin autobahn.
Unlike  Washington, Bonn  had  no  doubt  from  the  mo-
ment  a  previous U.S. convoy  was  held  up  a  month  ago
that   Premier  Khrushchev  had   chosen   deliberately,   to
squeeze  the  West  where  it  hurt.   When the  Soviet's  au-
thorities  set  in  motion  a  conflict  that  could  conceivably
escalate  into  world war,  West  German  officials  are  cer-
tain that  no room is left  for  "local misunderstandings."
From   the  point  of   view  of  West  Germany,  the   So-
viet  leader  has  thus  performed a  useful  service.    Even
the   most   pro-American  officials   in   Bonn   have   been
troubled  in  recent  months  by  what  they  regard  as  an
imprudent   dream   in   Washington  that   the  intractable
problems  of  Germany  and  Berlin  could  be  at  least  tem-
porarily  by-passed  in  a  drive  for  detente  with  the  So-
viet world.
—New  York   Times  Sunday  Review  Section, Nov.  10.
are  30  or   31  passengers?    "This  argument   has  not  yet  been
settled,"  a  Western   official  told  the  Associated  Press   in Ber-
lin   (Baltimore  Sun,  Nov. 11).   "Our plans  are  based  on  the
expectation  of  more  trouble  in  the  near  future."     Major Gen.
James  H.  Polk  our  commander   in  Berlin  told  the  Baltimore
Sun  (Nov. 7),   "We   are  ready  for  any  type  incident."     Its
correspondent  said,  "Neither  Polk  nor  John  A.  Calhoun,  chief
of   the  U.S. mission,  appeared   to  be  optimistic  that   further
incidents  could   be  avoided."     Folk's  attitude  may  be  gath-
ered  from  his  statement  at  press  conference  in  the  same  dis-
patch  when  he  said  he  would  "not submit  our  troops  to  degra-
dation  and  harassment."     Why   was  it  suddenly   degradation
to   allow   themselves   to   be   counted   standing  up   instead  of
sitting  down?                                                                                                                         •
If  the  Nov.  4  orders  had  not  left  a  loophole  for   counting,
if  the  Russians  had  not  backed  down,  if  shooting  had   started
from  either  side  when  the  convoy  crashed  the  barrier,  a World
War   might  have  been   precipitated.     Berlin   is  the   neuralgic
nerve 'of   East-West   confrontation.     As  serious   as  the   light-
minded  way  such  great  risks  were  taken   over   such   picayune
issues  was  the  way  the  whole  .affair   was  misrepresented   by
U.S.  press  and'  officials.
••Jxfra  Copies  of  This  Issue  Available  in  Bulk  Orders  of  100  or  More  at   50!  Or  We'll  Send  Free  Copies  If   You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed
Envelopes  for  Mailing
I.P.  Stone's
Please  renew
Name  ..............
Street   ............
City   ..................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   .........._
City  ........... _
Shall  we  send
Bi-Weekly  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
.........................Zone......... ...State...................
11/25/63
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
.........................Zone............State....................
gift   announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
IF. Stone's Bi- Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
The  Haunted  Fifties  by  I.  F. Stone   (Random  House)  still  available  at  special  reduced  rate  of  $5.35  (postpaid).
Specify   if   you  want   it   autographed.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED