I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963mar18.pdf

============================================================

Special  8-Page  Issue  On  A  Nuclear   Test  Ban
The  Fight  That  May  Decide  Whether  There  Will  Be  A  World  War   III
If—and  it  is  stilt  a  big  if—a  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  emerges   from   the  Geneva  talks,  the  Senate  fight  over   its  con-
firmation   will  be  the  most  important  this  country  and  the  world  has   seen   since  the   Senate   rejected   Woodrow  Wilson's
League  of  Nations  in  1919.    Had  Wilson  won,  that  might  have  prevented  the  rise  of  Hitler  and  World  War  II.   The  stakes
in  the  coming  fight  over  a  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  will  be  as  momentous.   The  need  for  wide  and  informed  support   will
be  urgent.   To  help  toward  public  understanding  of  the  issues  we  are  devoting  this  double-sized  special  number  to  cover-
age  of  two  related  events—the  four  days  of  hearings  on  test  detection  held  last  week  by  the  Congressional  Joint  Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy   and  the  full-dress  speech   made  by  Senator  Hubert  Humphrey in  the  Senate  on  the  subject  last
Thursday.    Both  were  poorly  covered  by  the  press.
/ F. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  7
MARCH  18,  1963
"»        WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
Our  American  Mass  Mania  About  Secret  Nuclear   Tests
When   the   history   of   our   times   comes  to   be  written,   the
current  furore  over  the   possibility  of   secret  nuclear  tests  un-
derground  or  in  outer  space  will  be  recognized   for  what  it  is
—a  form  of  mass  delusion,  like  those  which  once  set  whole
countries  crazy  with  the  fear  of  witches.    It  will  take  its place
with  other  instances of  human  credulity  and  superstition.    The
word  superstition  may  seem  strong  when  we  are  dealing  with
the  very  latest  advances  in  technology,  but  our  national obses-
sion  with  nuclear  weapons  belongs   in   the   realm   of  ancient
magic—  the  Bomb  stirs  in  our  still  primitive  unconscious  the
reverence   the  Canaanites  once   felt   for  their  Moloch;   it  too
is  both  God  and  Fiery  Furnace.    We   regard  science  with  the
awe  a  tribesman  accorded  his  witch  doctor—who  knows  what
will   be  the   next  miracle  of   destructiveness  to  emerge   from
this  mumbo-jumbo  of   mathematical  formulas?    We   live  in
fear  that   some  other  tribe  may  outdo   our   magic,  may  some
dark  night  work  up   a  more  devilish  device  than  ours,  may
le.\t  it  when  we're  not  looking.
Operation Self-Destruction
For  four   days  last  week   I  sat  in  on   the  hearings  held  by
the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  on  the
problem  of  detecting  secret  nuclear  tests,  and   I  watched   on
Thursday   when   Hubert   Humphrey   of   Minnesota   took   the
floor  before  an  almost  empty  Senate  and  an   indifferent   press
gallery  to  challenge  the  enemies  of  a  test  ban  agreement.     I
felt  as  if  I  were .listening  in  on  an  Operation  Self-Destruction,
the  marshalling  of   fear  and   mistrust  to  block   a  first  agree-
ment   that  might  move  mankind  slowly  back   toward   safety.
The  Joint  Committee  has  degenerated   into  a  tool  of  the  AEC
and  of   the  worst  elements   in  the  Pentagon,  particularly   the
Air  Force.    One-time  and  part-time Democratic  liberals on  the
Committee  like  Senator  Anderson  of  New   Mexico   and   Con-
gressman   Chet   Holifield   of   California   have  joined  up   in  a
coalition  with  the  rightists  to  undercut  the  Kennedy  Admin-
istration's  moves  toward  a  nuclear  test  ban.
The  atmosphere  of  the  controversy  is  one  in  which  the  most
distant   and    fantastic   possibilities   for   hiding   tests,   under-
ground  or  in  outer   space,   are  listened  to  eagerly.    The   pro-
AEC  Admits  The  Limitations
Of  Tests  Underground
"The  underground  testing  program  has  proved  quite
successful.     In   some   experiments,   tests   underground
have  proven  to  have  a  distinct  technical  advantage  in
containing   rather   than   releasing   radioactivity  to   the
atmosphere.    It  must  be  recognized,   however,  that  this
method  of  testing  is  an  expensive  process  even  though
operational  efficiencies  have  increased   with  our  experi-
ence;  also  certain  type  tests  such  as  effects  tests  and
many  high  yield  detonations  can  only  be  carried  out  in
the  atmosphere  and  in  the  environment  to  which  they
pertain  and  at  their   particular  design   yield."
—Jan.  198.1:  Annual  Report  of  AEC   for  '62,  p.2-!3.
Read   this  closely.   The  only  evidence  to  support  the
claim  of  success  is  that  "in  some  experiments"  under-
ground,  the  radioactivity   has  been  contained.   This  in-
dicates   that  in  others  it  was  not  contained.    On  the
other  hand,  these  tests  are  "expensive",  i.e.  even  by  the
A EC's   opulent   standards.     Finally,   you   cannot   tell
what   "effects"   a  weapon   will  have  unless  you  test  it
above  ground;  you cannot  test  large  detonations  under-
ground  and  you  cannot  extrapolate  from  small  to  large
but   must   test   weapons   "at   their   particular   design
yield."   Why  are   such  striking  admissions  left   buried
on  p.  233  of  a  report  few  will  ever  read?
ponents  of  a  test  ban  are  expected  to  dispose  of  these   possi-
bilities   by   proving   negative   propositions.      You    remember
when  the  Russians photographed  the  other  side  of  the  moon?
What  if  some  Senator  suggests   they  have  already  dropped  a
small  expedition  on  the  back  side  of  the  moon,  and  are  test-
ing  weapons   on   it?     How   would   one  go  about   disproving
this?    One  could  disclose  our  intelligence  capacity  for   mon-
itoring  Soviet  space  activity,  and  argue  it  was  most  unlikely
that  the  Russians could  have  dispatched   an  expedition  to  the
moon  without our  knowing  about  it.   But  one  could  not  proie
it  tl'id  not  happen.    What  if  the  Kennedy  Administration  hid
the   news  of   a   moon   expedition   to   save   itself   from   public
criticism   for  not  getting  there   first?   What  if  the  Russians
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  18,  1963
(Continued   from   Page   One)
have  a  new  device  to  render  themselves  invisible  on  their  way
to  the  moon?    This  is  the  type  of  question,  surmise  and  sup-
position  that  one  encounters   in  trying  to  demonstrate   what
every  informed  scientist  admits—that  the  kind  of  cheating  the
Russians  might  do   in  far  outer   space  would   be  too   fantas-
tically  costly  to  be  worth  it,  that:  cheating  underground  would
be  of   only  marginal  value,  and   that  the   chances  of   getting
caught  in  either  case  would  be  substantial enough   to  make  a
violator  pause  before  risking  it.
A  "Lead  Balloon"  in  Outer  Space
The   opponents   of  a  test  ban   are  always  coming  up   with
ingenious   gimmicks  which   make  headlines  and   create  mis-
trust.    When  sober  scientists rebut  them,  the  rebuttal  is waved
aside  or  ignored.    An  example  is  the  idea  put  forward  by  the
Rand   Corporation   that   a  lead   screen  could   be  hoisted   into
outer  space,  and  hung  on  a  balloon  in  front  of  an  outer  space
test   and   so  shut  off  the   tell-tale  gamma   rays  which   would
otherwise  disclose  the  test  to  monitors  on  earth!    This  is  the
kind  of  Buck  Rogers  business which  crops  up  in  the   speeches
of   Senators  like  Dodd.     Fortunately  there   was  an   indepen-
dent  minded  scientist from  Los  Alamos,  Dr.  Herman   Hoerlin
at  the  hearings  on  March   8,  whose  plain  speaking  annoyed
the  military.    Dr.  Hoerlin  said  he  had  been  out  in  the  field
during  the  Johnston  Island  area  for  four  or  five  months  and
was  well  acquainted with  the  difficulties  even  for   "a  straight-
forward  test  series"  in  near  space.    "Now,"  he  told  the  Joint
Committee,  "when   it  comes  to  the  point  to  launch  a  vehicle
with   a   weapon,   to   launch  also   instrumentation  that   brings
diagnostic  information   back,  and   if  one  wants  to  display  in
addition  the  equivalent of  a  lead  balloon,  one  really  gets  into
a  very  complicated  pattern."    Dr.   Hoerlin  said  the  effort   in-
volved  in  such  a  test  would  be  "quite  tremendous."  Dr.   Hoer-
lin   testified   (see  box  on  page  7)   that  efforts  at  secret  testing
in   outer  space  would  be  "extremely   difficult"   and   "a   waste
of  scientific  manpower."    But  how  few  people  will  ever  know
of  his  testimony and  how  much  weight  would  it  have anyway
with  those  whose  first  premise  is  that  the  Russians  are  super-
human  and  super-diabolic, and  want  a  test  ban  agreement  only
to  cheat  on   it?     How   combat  irrational  views  with  rational
argument ?
The  Joint  Committee  operates  like  a  rubber  stamp  Parlia-
ment  with  no  opposition.     At  point   after   point   one  missed
the  absence  of  at  least  one  member  with  the  energy  and  inde-
On  Site  Inspection  by  Congressmen!
"Whereas  the  security  of  the  US  and  the  strength  of
free  world  alliances  are  directly   affected   in  any    con-
sideration  of  arms  control  and/or  disarmament;  and
"Whereas    the    18-Nation    Committee   on   Disarma-
ment,  meeting  in  Geneva,  is  considering  steps  toward
general  and complete disarmament;
"Resolved  by  the  Senate   (the   House  of  Representa-
tives  concurring),  That  it  is  the  sense  of  the  Congress
that  the   American  negotiating  positions  in  arms   con-
trol   disarmament   include   these  safeguards:
"(1)    Complete   on-the-spot   inspection   of   all   areas
involved   in  arms  control   or  disarmament   agreements
with  Members  of  Congress  included  as  members  of  the
inspection  team.  .  .  ."
—Senate   Concurrent  Resolution  21,  by  Curtis     (for
himself),    Beall,  Bennett,  Dominick,  Pong,   Goldwater,
Hruska,  Jordan  of  Idaho,  Lausche, McClellan,  Mechem,
Metcalf,    Mundt,  Randolph,  Robertson,  Scott,  Simpson,
Tliurmond,   Tower  and  Young   of  North  Dakota.
pendence  to  subject  witnesses  to  sharp  inquiry  from  a  stand-
point   friendly   to   a  test  ban.    No   one   asked,   for   example,
about  the  failure  of  any  witness  in  four  days  of  testimony  to
discuss  the  ease  with  which   on  February  2,   1962,  the   AEC
immediately  detected,  identified   and  located  the  first  (and  so
far  as  we  know  only)  Russian underground   test  at  their  Cen-
tral  Asian  proving  grounds   in  Semipalatinsk.    Of   the   hun-
dred  or  more  stations  around  the  world  now  cooperating  with
us,  how  many  detected  this  shot?    How  many  identified  it  as
nuclear?    How  many  located  it  in  the  Central  Asian  Russian
proving  grounds?     What   were   the   various  estimates  of   its
size ? Why  was  none  of  this information offered  or  demanded ?
No  questions were  asked  and  no  information  offered   about
the  "unannounced"   i.e.  secret   tests   in  our  own  testing   pro-
gram.    These  provided  an  authoritative way  to  determine  the
efficiency   of  our  policing   apparatus.     The   whole  series  was
monitored  by  a  network  of   Coast   and   Geodetic   seismic  sta-
tions.    How  many  of  the  "unannounced"  tests  were  detected
by  this  network,  how  many  identified  and  located?    One  may
be  sure  that  if  the  results  were  poor,  the  Air  Force  or  other
official  opponents  of  a  test  ban  would  have  leaked  them  to  the
press  long  ago.    Secretary  of  State  Rusk  admitted  at  a  hearing
chaired  by  Senator  Humphrey  March   11  that  our  capacity  for
detecting  violations  of  a  nuclear  test  ban  are  "better   than  can
be   fully   disclosed."
(Continued   on  Page   Six)
Holifield  Tries  to  Overawe  A  Scientist  Who  Doubts  Importance  of  Small  Tests
Rep.   Chet   HOLIFIELD    (D.  Cal):  You  are  eliminating,
in   effect,   any  concern  as  to  the  improvements  of  weapons
which  could   obtain   under  a  2  or  3  kiloton  test  in  alluvium.
Dr.  Frank  PRESS  [Pres.  Seismological  Society  of  Amer-
ica,   Caltech]:  That  is  right.     Now,   speaking  as  a  private
citizen  and  not  an  expert  I  would  say  that  when  I  think  of
the   possibilities   that  he  has  for  weapons  development  un-
der   the  circumstances,  I  do  not   think   it   is   a  risk   to  our
security.
Rep.   HOLIFIELD:  May  I  ask  you,   have  you  been  thor-
oughly  briefed  in  the  degree  to  which  advancements  can  be
made  with  an  average  of  3  kiloton  power  of  test  explosions
or  less?
Dr.  PRESS: I  have  had discussions  with  people  who know.
Rep.  HOLIFIELD:  With  weapons  development  people?
Dr.  PRESS:  With  weapons  development   people.     But  I
would   like   to   add  that   I  am  not   an  expert   in  this  field.
However,   I   have   framed   an   opinion   on   the   basis   of   the
discussions  that  I  have   had.
Chairman   PASTORE   (D.   R.I.):   You   mean   you   have
based  an  opinion   as   to  what   weapons  development   might
take  place?
Dr.  PKESS:  As  to  the  threat  to  our  security  by  a  weap-
ons  development   program   which   has   to  be  undertaken   in
deep  cavities,   in  large  cavities,   or   in   small   yields   under
alluvium  coupling.
Kep.  HOLIFIELD:  And  you  are  aware  of  the  improve-
ments  that  have  been  made  in  the  Nevada  test  series  with
that   level   of  testing?
Dr.  PRESS:  Not  as  a  specialist,  but  as  a  listener  in  dis-
cussions that  have taken  place.
Rep.  HOLIFIELD:  Unclassified  discussions,  or  classified?
Dr.  PRESS:  Some of  these  were  classified.
—Joint  Conyr.  Atomic  Energy   Committee,  March  7.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  18, 1963
Humphrey's  Disregarded  Senate  Speech  Challenging  Enemies  of  Test  Ban
We  present  here  the  heart  of  the  great  speech  made  by   Sen-
ator  Hubert  Humphrey  in  the  Senate  March  7 for  a  nuclear
test  ban  treay.    That  speech  received  scanty  coverage  in  the
press  though  it  included  some  rather  sensational  revelations,
as  may  be  seen  from  the  boxes  at  the  bottom  of  pages  three
and  four.     We  recommend   a  reading   of   the  full   discussion
in  that  day's  Congressional  Record  to  all  thoughtful   students
of   the  subject.    Hubert  Humphrey  again  showed  his   capacity
to  come  through  in  a  big  way  on  a  fundamental   issue.
First,  it  is  argued  that  the  United  States  should  not  enter
into   a   test   ban   agreement   because   we   should   develop   the
neutron  bomb,  a  bomb  which  is  free   from  fission  products.
Now  what  is  the  answer  to  this  claim:  the  main  interest
of  the  United  States  in  the  neutron  bomb  is  in  preventing  the
Soviet  Union  and  other  countries  from  developing   it.     That
is  our  first  interest.    The  test  ban  agreement  would  prevent
the  development  of  such  a  weapon.     The   neutron   bomb,  if
it  can  be  developed,  would  be  more  useful  to  countries  which
did   not  already  have  a  heavy  stockpile  of  high   cost  nuclear
weapons,  because  the  neutron  bomb  would  be  cheaper.     The
Soviets  and  other  countries  are  more  likely  to  obtain  a  neu-
tron  'bomb  with  continued  testing  than  under  an   agreement,
because  with  no  inhibition  on  testing   nuclear  weapons,   nu-
clear  technology  is  more  likely  to  spread.    But  the   United
States  has   such  a  large   stockpile   now   of   various  kinds  of
nuclear   bombs  and  nuclear  warheads  that   there  is  no  great
military  need  for  this  weapon.    And  in  terms  of  obtaining  a
pure  neutron  bomb,  this  is  considered  extremely  difficult,  next
to  impossible,  to   develop.
We  Don't  Need  A  Neutron  Bomb
If  one  is  talking  about  a  bomb  with  fewer  fission  products
involved,  the  U.S.  already  has  made  substantial  advances  in
this   field.   We  do  not  need  to  test  and   develop   a  neutron
bomb.    It  would   be  to  the  advantage  of  the  Soviet   Union,
which  has  fewer  resources  than  we  have  and  fewer  quantities
of  fissionable  material  than  we  have,  to  develop  a  neutron
bomb.
Second,  it  is  argued  we  need  to  continue  to  test  in  order  to
perfect  an  anti-missile  missile.
The  answer:  This  is  not  correct.    The  performance  of  the
Our  Lopsided Press on the  Test Ban
"Not    too   many   months   ago   President   Elsenhower
warned  this  country   about  the  power  of  the  military-
industrial  complex   in  our  economy  and  in  our  political
life.    I  think  that  warning  was  well  justified.    I  share
the  concern  of  my  friend   [Senator  Humphrey]  that   the
industrial-military   complex   in  this  country   is  such  an
effective   agent   for  promoting  expenditures  in  the  de-
fense   system,   in   the   interest,   really,   of   keeping   the
arms   race   going,   that   they   blanket    the   press   with
propaganda    that   they   want   to  give  to   the  American
public,  in  the  interest  of   why  we  are  for  tests.    The
other  position  is  not  given  to  the  American  public,  and
we  are  led  to  believe  by  columnist  after  columnist,  by
scientists,   even   by   Senators,   that   those   who  seek   a
test  ban  treaty   seek   something  that  is   dangerous  to
our   security,    and   that   no   patriotic   American   would
dare   stand   up   for   an   agreement   which   the   Senator
from  Minnesota  and  I  know  would  be  a  sensible  agree-
ment  for  the  President  to  propose  to  this  body."
—Clark  (D.  Pa.)   in  the  Senate, March  7.
anti-missile' missile does  not  rest  primarily  on  nuclear  weapons
tests.    It  rests  primarily  on  other  kinds  of  activities  such  as
reliability   of   guidance,    distance,   performance,    electronics.
In  addition,  the  nation   sending  a  missile  to   its  target   has
the  advantage  over  the  nation  trying  to  erect  a  defense  against
such  a  missile.    The  efforts  to  build  anti-missile  missiles  and
then  to  build  better  missiles  to  counteract  anti-missile  missiles
is  a  sure  way to  add  another  $20  to  $25  billion  to  the  nation's
armament   effort,   which   we  will   do   in  the   absence   of   any
agreements  to  curtail  such  weapons.    I  for  one  would   rather
see  effective  agreements  to  stop  this  spiralling   arms  race  than
to  see  both  the  US  and  the  USSR  exhaust  their  economies  in
such   efforts,   which   will   give   neither   an   absolute   military
advantage.
Third.    It  is  argued  that  the  Soviet  Union  has  already  per-
fected   the  anti-missile  missile  by  test.    There  has   been   no
demonstration   of   such  a  capability.    We   have  no   such   in-
formation.     Furthermore,    an   anti-missile  missile    knocking
down   an   incoming  missile  launched   under   ideal   conditions
for   being  intercepted   is  not  proof   of  an  anti-missile   missile
Humphrey  Complains That  A  Leak  Undercut  U.S.  Bargaining  Power  at  Geneva
"It  is  not  very  easy  to  be  a  negotiator  for  the  U.S.   when
the  U.S.  negotiating  position  appears  on  the  front  pages  of
the  newspapers  24  hours  before  he  even  has  official  notice
of   the  Government's  position.
"It  seems  to  me  that  somebody  in  this  Government   had
better  find  out  why  there  are  so  many  leaks  of  highly   con-
fidential,   highly   sensitive   information    which   is   essential
to  the  conduct   of  our  negotiations  with  foreign  powers.
"When  I  attended  the  conference  at  Geneva,  I  knew   the
position  of  the  Government   and  I  knew  what   modification
had  taken  place.   I  had  to  stand  before  delegate  after  dele-
gate  and  deny  that  I  had  any  special  information,  because
our  Government   was  not  ready  to  present  it  at  the  nego-
tiating  table.    Nevertheless,  newspapers  in  the   U.S.    pub-
lished  the  U.S.   position  24  hours  before  a  single  American
delegate   was   permitted   to   acknowledge   he   had   the   in-
formation.
"I  talked  with  the  Italian   Ambassador,  the  Ambassador
from   Sweden,   the   Ambassador   from    Brazil,   the   Ambas-
sador  from   Canada  and  the  Ambassador  from   the   United
Kingdom.    Everyone  of  these  Ambassadors "asked  me,  'Sen-
ator,  we  hear  that  your  Government  is  now  going  to   offer
seven  on-site  inspections  instead  of  8  to  10.   Is  this  true?'
I  happened  to  know  that  it  was  true  at  that  hour,  but  my
Government   had  not  permitted   me  to  say  it  was  true,  be-
cause  we  were  not  yet  ready  to  expose  our  position  at  the
conference   table.    WE  WANTED  TO  GET   SOMETHING
IN  RETURN   BEFORE   REVEALING   OUR  HAND.    [Em-
phasis  added.]    But  the  story  appeared  the  day  before  in
the  Washington  Star,  in  the  Paris  edition  of  the  New  York
Herald-Tribune,   and  in  the  European  edition  of   the   New
York  Times.
"If  anyone  at  the  White  House,  or  the  FBI,   or  anywhere
else,  should  read  these  remarks,  I  hope  he  will  seek  out  the
professional'  leakers  instead  of  chasing  down  every  alleged
leftist   under  every  sagebrush."
—Humphrey   (D.  Minn.)  in  the  Senate,  March  7.
The  leak  to  which  the  Senator  referred  first  appeared  in
the  Washington  Star,  often  a  vehicle  for  Air  Force  leaks.
The  effect  was to stir  protest  in anti-test  ban  circles against
a  new 'give-away'  at  the  expense  of  weakening  the  Govern-
ment's  bargaining  position  at   Geneva.
3  *
3   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  18, 1963
Idea  That  Cheating  Could  Change  Balance  of Power  Called  Poppycock
capability  under  wartime,  surprise  attack  conditions.
Fourth.     It  is  argued   that  we  need  to  continue  to  test  to
develop   bigger   weapons   in  order  to  overcome  such   obstacles
as  anti-missile  missiles  or   missiles   hardened   in   the   ground.
It  is  argued  that  we  need  to  test  to  develop  more  tactical  nu-
clear  weapons   to  use  in  limited  war  situations.    It  is   argued
we  need  to  test  to  reduce  the  weight  of  a  given  yield  of  nu-
clear  warheads  of  specific  missiles.    My  answer  to  such  asser-
tions  is  that  as  long  as  there  is  an  arms  race,  the   U.S.   must
stay  in  it  and  build  a military force  strong  enough  to  deter  the
Soviets  from  starting  a  nuclear  or  conventional  war.    But  our
objective  is  to  limit  the  Soviets  and  to  slow  them   down,   not
merely  to  keep  adding  to  our  stockpiles.     It  is  our  stated  goal
as  a  nation  and  as  a  people  to  end  this  mad  arms  race  under
adequate   safeguards.
On  The  Danger  of   Cheating
Fifth.     It  is  argued  that   if  the  Soviets  cheat  on  an   agree-
ment  to  stop  testing  they  can  force  the  U.S.  into  surrendering
completely   to  the  Communists.    That  is  poppycock.     In   the
first  place   it  would   be   difficult   for   the   Russians  to   conduct
even  one  clandestine  test  without  considerable  risk.    In   the
second   place,   it  would   be  extremely  difficult   to   cheat   on   a
series  of  tests,  which  is  what  any  violator  would  want  to  do
to  attempt  to  gain  a  military  advantage.    In  the  third   place,
our  Defense  Department  believes  that  no  amount  of  cheating
under  the  kind  of  verification   system  being  proposed   by  the
U.S.,  could  alter  the  strategic  military  balance.
Sixth.     It   is  argued   that   the   verification   system   proposed
by  the  U.S.  is  less  effective  than  that  proposed  previously.    In
many  ways  the  verification  system  is  more  effective,  given   the
advances  made  in  the  art  and  science  of  identification  of  weap-
ons  and  tests  and  events  which  might  be  confused  with  weap-
The  Real  Risk  to  National   Security
"We  have  heard  primarily  of  the  difficulties  involved
in  a  ban  on  further  testing.    Almost  all   of   the   criti-
cism  has   been  levelled  at   the   possibility  of  cheating.
The   other   alternative  or  risk  has   seldom   been  men-
tioned,   namely,   the   risk   of   unrestricted  nuclear  test-
ing,  which  would  give  the  Soviet  Union  nuclear parity
with  the  U.S.  and  alter  the  balance  of  power.
"As   of   this   date,   the   balance   of   power   is   in  our
favor.    The   balance  of   power  5  years   ago   was   even
more  in  our  favor.    Ten  years   ago  it  was  unmistak-
ably  in.our  favor.    Had  we  been  able  to  obtain  a  test
ban  treaty  6  years  ago,  the  Soviet   Union  today  would
be,   for   all   practical   purposes,   a   second-rate    power."
—Sen. Humphrey  (D. Minn.), in  the Senate, March  7.
ons   tests.     The   verification   system   would   come   into    effect
sooner  than  the  one  previously  proposed.    The  system  would
be  operated  or  supervised   by  U.S.-U.K.  nationals   and,   there-
fore,  would  not  have  to  await  the  training  of  a  new  corps  of
technicians.    The   system   detects  underground   events   in   the
Soviet  Union  and  identifies them  better  than  was  estimated  in
any  previous  control   system   proposed.
Seventh.    It  is  argued   that  the  verification  system  is  weaker
because  it  does  not  include  stations  on  Soviet  territory.    The
U.S.   no   longer   needs   internationally  manned   detection    sta-
tions  on   Soviet   territory,   because   our   ability  to   detect   and
identify  makes  this  unnecessary.     However,   both   the  US  and
the   U.S.S.R.   have   proposed   as   a   supplement    to   the   basic
verification   system   that   automatic   recording   stations   for   in-
creased  detection  and  identification   of  underground  events  be
installed   on   each   other's  territory.    The.sealed   instruments
and  records  of  these  would  be  picked  up  and  serviced,  respec-
tively,  by  personnel  who  are  not  nationals  of  the  territory  on
Humphrey  Charges  Truth  About  Our  Test  Detection  Ability  Being  Withheld
"Today   I  have  in  my   office,   for   my   personal  use,   docu-
ment  after  document  which  is  labelled  'secret.'    I  am  told,
'Do  not  use  it;  just  look  at  it.'    But  when  I  want  to  engage
in   debate  with   those   who   hold   a   different   point   of  view
on  the  issue  of  nuclear  tests,  and  when  I  need  the  evidence
—such  as  evidence  on  the  VELA  project  or  data  on  research
by  the  Dept.  of  Defense  and  particularly  by  the  Air  Force—
I  am  told,  'You  cannot  do  that;  it  is  secret.'    Mr.  President
I  do  not  know  how  one  can  possibly  come  to  an understand-
ing   regarding   this   issue   if   all   the   evidence   ft   labelled
'secret.'     Mr.  President,  the   people  of   the   United   States
are  getting  sick  and  tired  of  this  so-called  secrecy.  .  .  .
"When   my  colleagues  read  the   secret   reports  and  read
what   the   Senator   from   Minnesota   [Mr.  Humphrey]  has
said,  they  should  also  read  the  material  [i.e.  secret  material
available  to  Senators—IFS]   from   which   I   drew  this   con-
clusion.    I  wish especially  to  bring  to  my  colleague's   atten-
tion   what   I   have   just   stated   so   I   repeat   the    sentence:
'Moreover,  the   U.S.   system   is   capable  of   detecting  some
seismic  events  below  the  presumed  'threshold',  so  that  no
nation   could   be  sure   that  its   clandestine  tests   would  go
undetected.'
"That  is  a  masterpiece  of  understatement.   The  fact   is
that  our  detection  capability  is  much  greater  than  the  press
has  led  us  to  believe on  the  basis  of  the  information  it  has
received  from  the  U.S.  Government. ...
"This  question of  the  identification  of  underground  events
has  become  of   such   interest  to  my  colleagues   and   others
that  I  have  requested  the  administration  to  make  available
to  the  public  the  5-year study  of  the  detection and  identifica-
tion  of  underground events  in  the  Soviet  Union.   This  covers
the  period  from  1958  through  1962  and  it  shows  precisely
how   many   events  were  detected,   and  the   ways   in  which
they  can  be  judged  to  be  identified in  varying  degrees,  and
the   geographical   areas  in   which   they   occur.     This   study
shows  clearly  why  the  number  of  inspections  and  the  num-
ber  of  detection  stations  can  be  reduced without  in  any  way
diminishing  the  effectiveness  of  verification.  .  .  .
"When  the  Air  Force  wanted  to  prove  that  Skybolt  was
what  was  needed  to  supplement  our  defense  posture,   news-
paper  stories  were  spread  all  over  the  United  States   say-
ing  what  a  marvellous weapon  it  was,  even  though  later  the
President  had  to  tell  the  American people  it  was  'off  target,'
that  it  was  not  all  the  Air  Force  said  it  was.    But  the  Air
Force  wanted to  publicize  it,  and  they  used  it  to  shoot   the
President  out  of  his  negotiating chair  at   Nassau.
"But  when  it  comes  to  the  issue  of  advances  in  seismol-
ogy,  we  are  handcuffed.     I  will  abide  by  the  law  but  I  do
not  like  it.    I  have  said  to  the  President  and  to  those  re-
sponsible  for  our  position  on  nuclear  tests  that  the  Amer-
ican   people   need   to   know  the   facts.     Tell   the  American
people  of  our  detection  system.    Tell  them  what  we  have.
We  are  always   telling   them  what   a  big   bomb  we   have.
Tell  them  what  a  good  detection  system  we  have.    I  do  not
say  it  is  foolproof  or  perfect.    I  merely  say  the  results  in
3  years  of  research   are  phenomenal,  and  I  challenge   any-
one  to  prove  the  contrary."
—Humphrey   (D.  Minn.)   in  the  Senate,  March   7.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  18, 1963
Soviets  Would  Have  No  Veto  Over  Conduct  of  On-Site  Inspections
which  the  stations were  located.    The  US  has  proposed  7  such
stations;  the  USSR  has  proposed   3.
Eighth.    It  is  argued  that  the  number  of  inspections  being
proposed  by  the  US  is  not  adequate.    The  number  of  inspec-
tions  is  adequate   when   one  compares   the  number  with   the
total   number  of   events  in  the   Soviet  Union  that  would   be
highly  suspicious.   At  one  time  the  US  proposed  to  have  12
to   20  inspections  when   it  thought   there  might   be   as  many
as   70   to   100   unidentified   underground   events   equal   to   a
19-kiloton  explosion.    At  the  same  time  we  proposed  not  to
inspect  for   3  years  any  event  which  was  below  this  period.
We  were  proposing  to  inspect  roughly  1 out  of  5  unidentified
events  above  the  equivalent of  19  kilotons.
Today   we   are   proposing   that   all   unidentified   events   be
subject   to  inspection—no  more  moratorium;  no  threshold—
even  though  we  presumably  are  not  worried  about  small  tests
any  more  than  we  were  then.    We  simply  think  this  provides
greater  deterrence  to  a  cheater.    As  to  large  seismic  events,
the  number  of   those  that  are  really  most  suspicious,   that  is,
that  give  no  indication of  being  an  earthquake,  number  only
about   a  dozen,   as  compared   with  the   previous   estimate  of
from   70  to  100.     We   can  easily  maintain  the  same  ratio  of
inspections  to  number   of   events  and   have   some   inspections
left  over  for  the  smaller  events.
U.S.   Position   Stronger
It  has  been  stated  that  the  US  position  now  gives  the  Soviet
Union  a  veto  on  a  control   body  for  a  test  ban  treaty.     The
Soviet  Union  would  have  no  veto  over  the  conduct  of  an  in-
spection.    The  US  would  pay  for  its  own  detection   stations,
and   it  would  pay  for   its  own  participation  in  on-site   inspec-
tions.  We  would  not  rely  on  a  tripartite  arrangement.  There-
fore,  any  control  commission  would   not  have  authority   over
this  expenditure.   In  this  sense,  the  US  test  ban  position  gives
a  greater  degree  of  flexibility  to  the  US  than  under   previous
positions.
I  know  about  this  because  it  is  one  point  about  which   the
Soviet  delegates   became  very  angry  when   it  was  presented   to
them.    When  we  reduced  our  required  number  of   inspections
from  8  to  7,  we  also  tightened  up  on  the  method   of   inspec-
tion,  the  question  of  the  composition   of  the  inspection  team,
of   access  to  the  .site  of  the' inspection,  of  the  duration  of   the
inspection,  and,  finally,  of   the   analysis  of   the   data   yielded
Hosmer's Arithmetic  of  Nationality
Rep.  Craig  HOSMER   (R.  Cal):  If   you  have  14  ex-
perts   and  7  were   from   the   U.S.   and   U.K.,  two   Ca-
nadians,  two  Swiss,  two  Czechs,  two  Poles,  do  you  have
any  opinion  of  how  effective  that  team  might  be  able
to  do  its  job?
Dr.  J.   P.  RUINA   (Dir.  ARPA):  I  would  say   that
team   is  less  effective   than  14  who  are   US,   UK  and
Canada  alone.
Rep.  HOSMER:  Do  you  have  an  estimate  of  by  what
magnitude  less?
Chairman   PASTORE:  I  hope  we  are  not  trying  to
be  funny.     I  hope  that   the  witness  will  not   lose   his
patience.    He  has  been  very  nice  up  to  now.    I  realize
he  has  been  here  all  day.    I  hope  the  Congressman  will
keep  this  witness  within  his  own  competence.
Rep.  HOSMER:  I   think   I  have  every  right-
Chairman  PASTORE:  The  question  is  ridiculous, Mr.
Congressman.    By  what  factor  will  it  make  any  differ-
ence   if   you  have  two  Swiss  as   against   two  Italians.
What   are   we   getting   into   here?
Rep.  HOSMER:  We  will  substitute  the  Italians   for
the  Swiss.    Would  your  answer  be  the  same?
Dr.   RUINA:  I   have  no  competence  to   answer   the
question.    I  have  never  worked  in  a  team  with  Swiss
or  Italians.
—Joint   Cong.  Com.  on  Atomic  Energy,   March   5.
by  the  inspection.
Mr.   President,   I  am  not   discussing   a  theoretical   subject.
For  hours  I  sat  across  the  table  from  one  of  the  most  able
and   determined   men   I  have   ever   met,   the  Deputy  Foreign
Minister  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Mr.  Kuznetzov.    When  we  re-
minded  him—because  we  wanted  to  retain  a  negotiating   po-
siton—that  we  wanted  to  preserve   an  area  of  agreement,  he
reminded  us  that  we  were  toughening   our  positions  and  were
making  it  more   difficult.     He  was  a  good  deal  more   correct
than  were  some  of  our  critics  in  the  United   States.
It  is claimed  that  the  test  ban  policies  pursued  by  the  Eisen-
hower   and   the  Kennedy   Administrations   have   cost   the   US
a   lead   in  nuclear   weaponry.     Actually   it  would   have   been
more  in  the  US  interest  if  a  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  could  have
been  achieved  in   1958   and   1959.     The  arms  race,  including
nuclear  testing,  is  buying  the  US  less  security  than  we  would
have  with  effective  arms  control  and  disarmament   agreements.
—Humphrey  (D.  Mtnn.)  in  the Senate,  March  7.
Hosmer  Doesn't Want Any  Optimistic  Statements Cluttering Up  The Record
Dr.  J.  P.  RUINA  [Director,  Advanced  Research   Projects
Agency  Dept  of  Defense,  in  charge  of  research   designed  to
increase  nuclear test  detection  capability in  outer  space and
underground]:  You  cannot  assign  a  probability  number  to
the  effectiveness of  a  single  inspection,  any  more  than  you
can  assign  a  probability number to  that  of  the  solution  to  a
single  crime.    But  the  fact   is   that   "perfect"   crimes  are
planned   and  executed   but   nevertheless   often   leave   cluse.
Criminals  do  get  caught,  particularly if  they  must commit
a  long  series  of  crimes  to  achieve  their  objectives.
My   own   general  conclusion,  though,   is   that   a   cheater
would  have a  difficult  time  persuading  himself  that  he  could
risk   thorough  inspection  of   a  site   at  which  a   clandestine
test  had  actually  taken  place,  particularly  so  if  the  treaty
closely   safeguarded  the   rights   of   the   inspecting   team  of
experts   to   reasonable   size   and  to   reasonable   use   of   spe-
cialized  equipment  and  techniques  that  are  being  developed
for  this  purpose.
Rep.  Craig  HOSMER   (R.  Cal):  Mr.  Chairman,  I  would
like  stricken  from   the  record  the  witness'  last   statement,
in  as  much  as  he  has  no  competency   to  express  such  an
opinion  which  he  acknowledges   to  be  an   opinion.
Chairman  John  O.  PASTORE  (D.  R.I.):  He  stated  it  as
an  opinion.    I  think  the  record  ought  to  stand   and  people
can  pass  their  own  judgment  on  the  competency.    I  think
the  witness  has  a  right  to  make  the   statement.
Rep.   HOSMER:  We  are  to   hear  witnesses   in  the   area
of   their  expertise.    This   witness  is  stating  an  opinion  in
an  area  in  which  he  is  not  an  expert  and  therefore  it  clut-
ters  the   record.                                                                                      /
Chairman  PASTORE:  If  the  Congressman   thinks  so,  he
has  a  perfect  right  to  think  so.    I  think  the  record   ought
to  stand.
—Joint  Congr.  Atomic  Energy  Committee,  March   5.
3   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  18, 1963
(Continued    from   Page  Two)
No  Hurry  About  These  Tests
Another   area   the  Committee   failed   to  explore   has  to  do
with  the  delay  in  carrying out  nuclear  tests  for  the  purpose  of
improving  detection   methods.     At  the  Committee's   hearings
in   July  1961,  three   months   before   the   Russians  broke   the
moratorium  on  testing,  Defense  Department   witnesses  stressed
the  need  for  resumption  in  order  to  improve  means  of  detec-
tion.    A  program   for  this  purpose  was  outlined  to  the  Com-
mittee  and  it  was  told  "there  is  a  strong  possibility  that  these
tests  will  provide  an  indication  of  some  new  way  of   identify-
ing  an  underground   nuclear  explosion   which  may  have  been
overlooked   in  the  course  of   theoretical   analysis."     But   once
testing   was   resumed   the   Defense   Department   managed   to
restrain  its  enthusiasm  for  that  kind  of  testing.    The  program
outlined   to   the   Committee   in   July,  1961,  was  sidetracked.
Eighteen  months  later,  in  January  of   this  year,  the   Atomic
Energy  Committee  in   its  report   for  1962 noted   briefly   that
"no  nuclear  detonations  have  been  authorized  to  date   solely
for   the  VELA  UNIFORM   research  program,"  i.e. the pro-
gram  to  improve  means  of  detection.    Major  General  A.  W.
Betts,  USA,  director  of  the  AEC's  division  of  Military  Appli-
cations  told  the  Committee  on  March  7,  "At  the  time  under-
ground  weapons  testing  was  resumed,  it  was  necessary  to  re-
direct  our  resources  and  efforts  in  full  support  of  the  weapons
test   program."     The   VELA  UNIFORM   experiments   were
limited  to  those  which  could   be  held   "in   conjunction  with
the  underground   weapon   tests."    Nobody,   of   course,   asked
Gen.  Betts why  tests  to  improve  means  of  detection  were  con-
sidered   of   less   importance  than   weapons   improvement   nor
why  the  program  outlined  in  July,  1961, has  been  reduced  so
sharply.    The  present  program   calls  for  one  10  kt  shot  at  a
depth  of  1200  feet  in  granite  (Project  Shoal)   to  be  fired  some
time  next  Fall.    Strictly  speaking  this  is  the  only  shot  being
prepared  to  study problems  of  improving  detection.    The  jest
of  the  nuclear  test  program   (Project   Dribble,  a  lovely  name
for  it)   consists  of  three  shots  to  be  set  off  in  two  Mississippi
salt  domes  to  study  means  of  hiding   a  nuclear  explosion,  in
accordance  with  the  Teller-Latter  "big hole"  theory.
This  "big hole"  theory  may  be  dubious  as  science  but  re-
Really  Devilish  Play
Sen.   Wallace   F.   BENNETT   (R.   Utah):  Can   they
bait  us  or  trap  us  into  using  our  seven  inspections  on
incidents  that  obviously  are  not, or  rather   incidents  on
which  we  will  find  no  evidence  of  violation  so  that   for
the  rest  of  the  year  they   are  pretty   well   free   to vio-
late?  .  .  .    Supposer   our  seven  were  gone  by  the  first
of  June,  and  then  our  seismologists  turned  up  a  series
of  very,  very  suspicious   events  and  we  no  longer  had
an  opportunity  to  go  in?    Would  we  have  the  right  to
abrogate  the  treaty  or  would  we  be  bound?
Dr.  Franklin  A.  LONG  (Assistant  Director   for Sci-
ence  and  Technology,  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament
Agency):  We  always   have   the  right   to  abrogate  the
treaty.
—Joint   Congr.  Atomic  Energy   Com.,  March   8.
mains  useful  as  a  public  relations  gimmick  to  stir  mistrust  of
a  nuclear   test  ban  agreement.     Four   years  ago  Dr.   Edward
Teller   and   his   assistant,   Richard   Latter,   unveiled   it   as   a
method  for  hiding  tests  in  excavations.    It  was  said  that  this
would  make  it  possible  to  disguise  a  300  kiloton  shot  to  look
like  one  kiloton.    Although   a  vital  part  of  their  computation
was  the  assertion  that  hard  rock  or  salt  would  muffle  an  ex-
plosion  by  two  and  a  half  times,  and  it  has  since  turned  out
that  instead  it  magnifies  the  shock  by  two  or  three  times,  two
experts  from  Teller's   Livermore  Laboratory  assured  the  Com-
mittee  that  the  "big hole"  theory  was good-as-new.    Only  now
they  said  it  would  reduce  the  apparent   size  of  a  hidden   shot
by  190  instead  of  300.  This  was  based  on  extrapolation  from
a  1,000  pound  or  half  ton  chemical  explosion.    This  is a  long
way  from  the  300  kiloton,  or  300,000  ton, nuclear  explosion
with  which  the  Teller-Latter  theory  made  its  debut.    The  real
problem   is   whether   the   enormous   cavity   required   by   the
theory  can, as  a  matter  of  practical  mining  engineering,   be
constructed.    Several  hints  of  the   difficulty   appeared   in   the
testimony  but  the  Committee  failed  to  pick  them  up.    At  one
point  on  March  6,  Dr.   Charles  C.  Bates,  chief   of  the   Vela
Uniform  branch,  which  has  to  do  with  underground   testing,
burst  out  with  the  statement,  "Dr. Latter  is  not  a  mining  en-
gineer,  and  he  also  postulated  a  cavity  size  that  will not  stand
(Continued   on  Page  Seven)
Somehow  Whatever  Might  Help  Toward  Disarmament  Gets  Labelled  Secret
"Let  me  point  out  that  when  the  so-called  Berkner  report
was  prepared—and,  by  the  way,  it  was  conveniently  'leaked'
to  many  sources—I  received  a  copy.    I  had  it  locked  in  the
safe   in  my   office.     Members  of   the   Disarmament   Subcom-
mittee  had seen  it,  but  I  could not  release  it.   When  I  wanted
to  speak   on  the  subject   in  the   Senate,  all  the   material   I
needed  was  marked  'secret.'    Finally,  I  served  notice   that,
if   need  be,  I  would   ask  that   the  galleries  be  cleared,   the
doors  to  the  Senate  Chamber  be  closed,  and  the  Sergeant  at
Arms  guard  the  doors,  and  then  I  would  disclose  the  report
to   the   Senate   under   these   extraordinary     circumstances.
The    Berkner    report    provided    considerable     information
which  was  needed   in  order   to  improve  seismology.
"As  a  result   of  that   difficult   and  hard-fought   battle,  we
were  able  to  put  millions  of  dollars  into  advance   research
programs   for   the   improvement   of   seismographic   instru-
mentation.     It   was   planned   to   spend   over   some   5  years
approximately   $200   million   to   improve   seismology.     But
unless  some  of  us  had  stirred  up  a  fuss,  at  that   time,   the
Berkner   report   would  have   stayed  in  the  archives,   gath-
ering  dust. ...
"Frankly   many   members   of   this   body   feel  strongly   in
opposition  to  our  test  ban  policy.    Possibly  they   have  not
read  the  secret  material.   Perhaps  they  have  access  to  some
secret   material  I  do  not   have.     There   is   so   much   secret
material,   particularly  in   the   Joint   Committee   on   Atomic
Energy,   that  it  is  pretty  hard  for  an  ordinary   Senator   to
get  in  there.    That  is  the  trouble  with  secrecy.    We  get  so
secret  that  we  do  not  dare  to  talk  among  ourselves  or  think
for  ourselves.    But  I  have  read  a  good  many  secret   docu-
ments  and  I  am  going   to  read   some  more  in  my  capacity
as  a  U.S. Senator.    I  am  a  member  of  this  Government.    I
have  all  the  clearance   anyone  can  possibly  have.    I  intend
to  be  able  to  discuss  the  relevant  portions  of  this  'classified'
information,  at  least   in  terms  of  their  general  conclusions.
"For  months  I  have  wanted  to  release  a  document  show-
ing   that  the   industrial  leaders  of   our  country   favor dis-
armament;  that  the  industrial  leaders  of  365  of  the  largest
corporations   of   this   country   have   demonstrated    that   we
could   enter   into   a   disarmament   agreement    without   any
serious  domestic   economic   impact.    The   report   cannot   be
released.     It   is   labelled   'Confidential.'     The   Senate Com-
mittee  on  Foreign  Relations   will  not  release it."
—Humphrey   (D.  Minn.)  in  the  Senate,  March   7.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  18, 1963
(Continued   from   Page   Six)
up  if  he  tries  it,"  but  a  series  of  angry  questions  from  Hosmer
shut  him  up.    General   Betts   said  in  his  prepared   statement
that  the  first  nuclear  short  in  a  "big  hole"  could  not  be  held
until  early  1964   and  that  the  precise  date  was   "questionable
due  to  the  complexity  of  the  cavity  construction."
Huge  Cavity   for  So  Small   A  Shot
No  one  on  the  Committee  pointed  out  that  this  shot  will
only  be  100  Ions,  not  kilotons.    Yet  even  for  so  small  a  shot,
one-tenth  of  a  kiloton,  a  cavity  of  95  foot  diameter  and   two
2,000  foot  shafts  will  be  required.    A  cavity  of  95  ft.  diam-
eter   is  as  tall  as   a  9-story   building.     A   Bureau  of   Mines
official   whom   I   reached  during  the   hearings  estimated   that
the  two  shafts  and  the  cavity  would  require the  excavation  of
some  40,000  tons  of  salt.    If  eight  ton  trucks  are  used,  this
means  5,000  truckloads.    Nobody   asked  how  so  extensive  an
excavation  and  removal  job  could  be  done  without  attracting
the  attention  of  intelligence.
The   most  striking  example   of  the   Committee's   failure   to
ask  the  obvious  question  was  in  regard   to  alluvium.    Allu-
vium  is  now  the  favored  medium  of  the  anti-test  ban  forces.
In  the  recent  test  series  we  discovered  that  tests  in  alluvium
were  muffled.     The  Air  Force  expert   Carl   Romney  told   the
Committee  we  could  now,  from  outside  the  Soviet  Union,  de-
tect  explosions  at  2,000  miles  or  more  "of  about  1  kiloton  in
granite,  2-6  kilotons  in  tuff,  and  10-20  kilotons  in  alluvium."
Alluvium  is a  soft  soil,  defined  by  the  dictionary  as  "soil,  sand,
grave]  or  similar  detrital  material  deposited   by  running  water
and  especially during  recent  geologic  time."    Members  of  the
Committee  seized  on  this  to  assume  that  the  Russians  would
therefore  do  their  testing  in  alluvium.   There  were  even  esti-
mates  that  by using  alluvium they  could  hide  tests  of  up  to  70
kilotons.    If  the  experts  had  wanted  or  been  allowed  to  speak
On  The  Buck  Rogers Nonsense
About  Hiding  Tests in  Space
Rep.  Jack  WESTLAND  (R.  Wash):  Doctor,  I  think
if   I  was  going  to  cheat   and  conduct  a  nuclear  test,  I
would  not  put  it  in  space  with  the  testimony  you  fel-
lows have given here.
Chairman  PASTORE  (D.  R.I.):  In  other  words,  is  it
fair  for  us  to  assume  that  if  any  nation,  being  party
to  an  agreement  not  to  shoot  in  space,  dared  to  do  so
clandestinely   that   the  time  and  the   trouble  and   the
impossibility  of  the  task  would  be  such  that  it  would
be  better  for  them  to  abrogate  the  agreement?
Dr.  Herman  HOERLIN   (Los  Alamos,  who  had  just
been  testifying  on  the  problem):  Testing   in  space  in  a
clandestine  manner  is  extremely  difficult   and  in  a  way
would  be  a  waster  of  scientific  manpower.
—Joint   Com.  on  Atomic  Energy,   March   8.
plainly  it would  have  been  seen  that  this  was  nonsense.  Buried
here  and  there  in  mountains  of  unnecessary  and  confusing  de-
tail—a  favorite  way  of  hiding  the  truth—were  occasional  ad-
missions  which   escaped   notice.     One   witness  said   alluvium
deep  enough  for  use  in  nuclear  tests  was  only  to  be  found  in
a  few  desert  areas;  even  Dr.  Romney  admitted  in  passing  that
"most  shots  in  alluvium  were  followed   by  the  formation   of
surface  collapse  craters"  which  would  reveal  that  an   explosion
had  taken  place;  another  witness  said  alluvium  could   not  be
used  for  explosions  larger  than  15  kilotons,  it  was  too  soft  to
contain  larger  blasts;  the  witness  who  testified  on  "big   hole"
theory   tried   to   explain   to   Chet   Holifield   that   you   simply
couldn't   build   a   "big   hole"   in  alluvium;  another    disclosed
that  a  station more  than  2,000  miles  away in  Northern  Canada
had  with  ordinary seismic equipment  detected  a  2  kiloton  shot
in  alluvium  during  our  recent  test  series.    But  these  were  not
(Continued   on  Page  Eight)
Soviet  Experts Proven Right:  Did  Our Experts Exaggerate to  Block  A  Test Ban?
"In  addition   to  improving  our  ability  to  identify  earth-
quakes  in  the   Soviet  Union,  the   U.S.   has   found   that  the
number   of   earthquakes  in   the   Soviet  Union  of   a  certain
magnitude  is  much  lower  than  was  originally  supposed.    In
fact,  it  is  at  least  2'/
2
  times  lower  than  we  had  earlier  cal-
culated.    When  the  question  came  up  at  Geneva,  the  Soviet
representatives  tried  to  tell  the   U.S.   that  we  were   exag-
gerating  the  number  of  earthquakes  that  took  place  in  the
USSR  but  we  refused  to  believe  them."
—Humphrey   (D.  Minn.)   in  the  Senate,  March   7.
What  the  Soviet  Experts  Said
"Thus,  on  the   basis   of   a   more  careful  analysis   of   the
new  seismic  data,  the  Soviet  experts  have  come  to  the  con-
clusion  that  the  annual  number  of  earthquakes  throughout
the   world  equivalent  to  explosions   of   given   yield   are,   if
anything,  smaller  than  the  numbers  estimated  at  Geneva in
1958  and  not  1.5  or  2  times  greater  as  is   asserted   in  the
U.S.  documents."
—Statement   by  the  Soviet   experts   at   Geneva,   Dec.  18,
1959,  appended  to  Technical  Working   Group  2  Report.   (The
easiest   place  to  find  this  document   is  at   page   605  of   the
Joint   Atomic   Energy    Committee's    1960  hearings   on  test
detection.)
What  Our  Experts  Now  Admit
"We  have  learned  that  the  number  of  earthquakes  which
produce  seismic  waves  of  the  same  size  as  an  explosion  of
given  yield  and  in  a  given  medium  are  less  by  a  factor  of
2  or  3  times  than  had  been  estimated   previously."
—Dr. J.  P. Ruina, director  of ARPA, the Pentagon  agency
for  improving   test  detection,  opening  the  Joint    Committee's
new  hearings  on  the  subject,   March  5,  1963.
All  The  Errors  in  the  Same  Direction
"Having  uncovered many  errors  as  mentioned  above,  and
even  some  misrepresentation in  U.S.  statements,  the  Soviet
experts  note  that  they  all  tend  in  single  direction—towards
reducing  the  estimates  of  the  control  system's  effectiveness
[i.e.   the  system   agreed  on  by  the  experts  a  year   earlier
in  1958  to  police  a  test  ban].   The  Soviet  experts  therefore
cannot  regard  these   shortcomings  as  resulting   from  care-
lessness   or  coincidence,  and  have  come   to   the   conclusion
that  there  has  been  tendentious  use  of  one-sidedly developed
material  for  the  purpose  of  undermining  confidence  in  the
control   system."
—Statement  by  the  Soviet  experts,   Dec.  18,  1959.
Air  Force  Was  Most   Wrong
These  new  "findings" were  used  at  the  time  by  the  U.S.
delegation  to  upset  the  1958  agreement.    It  is  worth  noting
that  in  the  paper  on  "Earthquakes  in  the  USSR"  presented
by  Dr.  Carl  F.  Romney,  the  Air  Force  expert  at  the  new
hearing   March  5,  it  is  disclosed  that  while  the  Rand  Cor-
poration  overestimated   the  number  of   Soviet   earthquakes
by  2.5 times,  Dr.  Romney's  agency  (AFTAC)   overestimated
by  4  times,  i.e.  it  made  the  problem  of  distinguishing   explo-
sions  from  earthquakes  look  in  this  respect  four  times  more
difficult  than  it  has  turned  out  to  be.   The  Air  Force  is  the
foremost  opponent  of  a  test  ban.—IFS.
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  18, 1963
(Continued   from   Page  Seven)
brought   together,   as  they  are  here,  and   I  predict   that   refer-
ences  to  alluvium  will  form  a  deep  geologic  strata  on  the floor
of  the  Senate during  the  coming  debate  on  a  test  ban.
Little  Alluvium  in  The  USSR
But   the  most   obvious  limitation   was  never  mentioned   in
any  of  the  prepared  statements  nor  elicited  by  the  most natural
question  of  all,  which  no  one  asked—and  that  was:  how  many
areas  in  the  Soviet  Union  have  alluvium  which  could  be  used
for   testing?    When  I  inquired  outside  the  hearing   room,   I
learned  that  a  map  prepared   by  the  Military  Geology  branch
of  the  U.S.  Geological  Service  last  October  showed  there  were
only  two  small  areas  in  the  Soviet  Union  with  alluvium   at
depths   sufficient   for   nuclear  explosions.     One   is  directly  on
the  Iranian  and  Afghan   borders,  the  other  is  between  Tash-
kent  and  the  Aral  Sea  about  400  miles  from  Iran.    At  those
distances  we  could  detect  shots  at  a  fraction  of  a  kiloton.   Al-
ong  the  Iranian border  we  also  have  many  acoustic,  electronic
and  visual  devices to  learn  what  is going  on.    Yet  it  was  not
until  the  closing  hours  of  the  hearings  on  Friday,  March   8,
that  Dr.  Franklin  Long   of  the  Arms  Control  and  Disarma-
ment  Agency  showed  this  map  to  the  Committee  and  by  then
most   of   the   Committee   and   the   press   had   left.     The sig-
nificance  of  this  was  never  driven  home.
All  the  Committee  wanted  was  to  elicit  the  fact  that  one
couldn't  be  absolutely  certain  of  detecting  all  tests,  even  any
series   of   tests.     If   seismic  equipment   were   made   infinitely
sensitive,   we  would   register  the   fact  that  the   earth   is  con-
stantly  quivering like  a  jelly.    If  only  nuclear  explosions  were
made  small  enough,   at  some   "fire-cracker"  level  they  could
theoretically  be hidden  among  these  minute  earthquakes.    The
Committee  was  not  interested  in  approaching  the  subject  from
the  other  angle.    If  a  violator  wanted  to  cheat,  how  could  he
be  sure  of  escaping  detection ? The  answer  is  that  he  couldn't.
Even  in  the  veiled  official  presentations,  one  could  see  that  a
violator  could  never  be  sure  that  some  unexpected  freak—like
the  Canadian  station  which  detected  2  kilotons  in  alluvium  at
more  than   2,000   miles—might  not   trap  him.     The   use  of
seismometers  in  array  and  in  deep  holes  is  turning  out  to  be
a  way  of  raising detection  capacity  by  as  much  as  tenfold.  The
two   non-official   witnesses,    Dr.   Jack   Oliver,   the   Columbia
And  What  If  They  Test On
The  Back  Side  of  the  Moon?
Rep.  Jack  WESTLAND   (R.  Wash):  You   mentioned
one  thing  about  a  test  behind  the  moon.    I  believe   you
said   you  could  detect   it   with   proper  equipment.
Cdr.  Donald  E.  CHANDLER  (USN),   [Chief   VELA
SIERRA,   the   project   concerned   with  detecting    outer
space  tests].    The  resonance   scatter  techniques  affords
a  reasonable  means  for  detecting  such  tests.
Rep.   WESTLAND:   Do   you   think   the   Soviet   could
get  any  information  out  of  a  test  that  was   conducted
on  the  other  side  of   the   moon?
Cdr.  CHANDLER: We  are  getting  into  a  realm  that
is   somewhat   again   outside   of   my   particular   area   of
speculation.
Rep.   WESTLAND:    If   you   could   not   get   any   in-
formation  out, do  you  think   they  could?
Cdr.   CHANDLER:  There   is   always   an   advantage
when  you  know  where  and when  to  make  your  measure-
ments.    If  you  are  conducting  a  test,  you  have  a  con-
siderable   advantage.     For   instance,   the   Russian   shot
where  they   orbited   a  small   space   vehicle   behind   the
moon—I  am  sort  of  stepping  out  of  my  field  completely
—this  could   have   been   done   with   two  small   vehicles,
one  behind  the  other,  one  conducting   the  test  and  the
other   making  the   measurements.
Rep.  WESTLAND:   And  one  came   out   from  behind
the   moon  and  told  them  what  went   on.
—Joint   Congr.  Atomic  Energy   Com.,  March   8.
geologist,  and  Dr.  Frank  Press,  of  Caltech,  currently  President
of  the  Seismological  Society  of  America,   were  optimistic.   The
former  showed  how  easily most  of  the  earthquake  areas  of  the
Soviet  Union  could  be  monitored  by  seismic  stations  buried  in
the  Pacific  ocean  bottom  offshore.  Dr.   Press  said  that  a  com-
bination  of  diagnostic  aids  would  make  it  much  easier  to  dis-
tinguish  quakes  from  explosions.    But  this  optimism,  like  Dr.
Ruina's  hopeful  conclusions,  got  no  welcome  from  the  Com-
mittee  (see  boxes  on  pages  two  and   five).   The   Committee's
prime  interest  was  in  digging  up  material  to  cast  doubt  on  a
test  ban,  not  to  prove  its  feasibility.   The   Committee   wasn't
interested  in  figures  to  prove   it  improbable   that  old   women
could fly on  broomsticks.    It  prefers  Rand  Corporation   studies
showing  that  if  miniaturized  jet  engines  were  put  in  the  rear
end  of  the broom  and  operated  by  transistor,  then.  .  .  .
//   You  Send  Stamped  Long  Envelopes   We'll   Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  Friends
I.F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ............
City  .................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)    Name   ..
Q*f.
A0
f
City  ..........._.
Shall  we  send
Bi-Weekly   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
..........................Zone.............Statc....................
3/18/03
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.) additional:
.........................Zone.......-....State....................
gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IF. Stone's Bi-  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Second  Edition  Stone's  Trip  to  Cuba  Pamphlet  Now  Ready  at  25  cents
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED