I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963jan14.pdf

============================================================

Six  Pages:   Continuing  Our  Report from  Cuba
Castro Attacks the  CP, P.  3;  Yevtushenko's Stirring Message to  Cuba, P.  4;  Le  Monde  on Fidel, P. 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XI,   NO.  2
JANUARY   14,   1963
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Castro's  Own  Brand  of   Marxism-Leninism
Cuba,  seen  from  within,  looks  very  differently   than   from
without.   Food  may be  poor  and  lacking  in  variety, but  there
is  enough  to  eat  and  no  sign  whatever  of  starvation;  indeed
one Latin  American  reporter,  who had  been  all  over  the  coun-
try  in  the  past  few  months,  told  me  he  thought  the  poor  peo-
ple  of  Cuba  were  better  fed  today than  in  any  other  country
of  Latin America.   I  had  been  led  by  the  U.S.  press  to  expect
to  see  a  city  slowly  being  strangled  by  blockade;  instead  the
streets  were  lively,  taxis  plentiful  and  the  number  of  private
cars  surprising  for  a  country  so  dependent   for   its  oil  on  a
distant  source  of  supply.    The  guaguas  (buses)   seemed  de-
crepit  and  were terribly  overcrowded  in  the  evening  rush  hour
—but  that  is hardly a  condition  peculiar  to  underdeveloped  or
socialist  countries;  bus  commuters  of   the  world  everywhere
are  ready  to  unite.    Finally,  neither  in  the  streets  nor  at  the
university,  in  the  shops  or  restaurants,  nor  in  their  homes,
do  the  Cubans  seem  a  people  cowed.    The  notion  that  Rus-
sian  troops  may  be  in  Cuba  to  help  Fidel  hold  his   people
down  is  the  silliest   delusion  the  U.S.  government  and  press
have  ever encouraged.    I  saw no  Russian soldiers  and  only an
occasional  Russian  civilian  in  Havana,  a  city  where  everyone
seems  to  be  carrying  a  pistol,  a  sten  gun  or  a  machine  gun.
If  the  Cuban  people  and  the  Fidelistas  were  as  permeated  by
discontent  as  Washington   seems  to  think,  they  could   shoot
the  place  up  and  mow  any  stray Russians down  any  time they
wanted  to.   Nowhere  in  the  Soviet  bloc  are  the  people  them-
selves armed as in  Cuba.
We  Speeded  Up  Cuba's  Sovietization
Cuba,  only  90  miles  away,  is  today  unmistakably a  part  of
the  Soviet world,  and  Havana  is  a  Soviet  capital.    The  news-
stands   carry  only   Soviet   publications.     The   bookstores   no
longer  display  the  works  of  heretical  Communists  like  Victor
Serge;  the  objective  or  hostile   accounts  of  Communism  one
could  still  buy there two years  ago have  disappeared  from  the
shelves.    The  young  Cuban  studying  English,  even  when  he
wants  to  read  Huckleberry  Finn  or  Moby  Dick,  reads  them  in
inexpensive  Soviet  editions  I  saw in  bookstcae  windows.    The
movies   show  the   same   "Our   Nikita"  film  as  in   Moscow;
Polish,   Bulgarian,   and   Chinese  films  have   replaced    Holly-
wood's.   Partly  this  is  our  own  fault.    We  have  made  dollar
exchange  available  abroad  in  many  countries  for  the  import  of
U.S.  magazines  and  books;  we  have  been  trying  for  years  to
get  U.S.  publications  into  Moscow.    But  in  Cuba  we  shut  off
the  export  of  U.S.  publications  and films by our  trade  embargo
policies  long  before  Cuba  had  become  Sovietized   culturally.
If  we  think  it  would  be  good  for  U.S.  policy  and  for   better
understanding  to  have  the  New  York  Times  on  sale  in  Mos-
cow,  why  not  in  Havana?    If  we  negotiate  the  entry  of  U.S.
films  into  the  Soviet  Union,  why  not  into  Cuba?     Alfredo
Cool—On  All  But   Cuba
"As  a  man  who  does  not  ordinarily  betray  his  emo-
tions.  President  Kennedy  presented  a  rather   surprising
televised   figure   when   he  visited  the   returned  Cuban
prisoners  of  war  in  Miami.    His  fire  in  declaring  that
they  would  deserve to  march  at  the  head of  the column
that   should  one  day  liberate  Havana  was   hardly   in
keeping  with  the  often-remarked  Kennedy  coolness.  No
one  reading   the   speech  would  find  in   it   any  precise
commitment.    But  the  mood  did,  and  it  is  a  good  bet
that  the  exiles  have  taken  it  as  an  implicit  promise of
American  help  in  the  physical  overthrow  of  the  Castro
regime  by  revolt.   It  is  notoriously  unwise  of  states-
men  in  a  host  country  to  whet  the  expectation of  exiles
for  a  triumphant  return  to  their  homeland.   Previous
U.S.  Presidents  should have  learned  that  in  their  deal-
ings  with  the  Formosan  Chinese.    Certainly Churchill
learned  in  World  War  H  that  exile  armies  and  their
labyrinthine  politics  can  be  vexatious.   The  day  may
come  when President  Kennedy  will  regret  his  fiery  ex-
uberance  in  his  speech  to  the  Cubans."
—San Francisco Chronicle, Jan. 1  (Abridged)
Guevara,  head  of  the  Cuban  Institute  of  Art  and  Movie  In-
dustries,  in  a  speech  to  the  First  National  Congress  of  Cul-
ture,  held  in  Havana  while  I  was there,  said  "we  are  not  the
enemies  of  the  artistic works  of  any  country"  and  expressed  a
hope  for  North  American  films.  The  policy of  pulling  down
an  iron  curtain  of  our  own  on  Cuba,  of  non-intercourse  and
embargo,   has   fostered   Sovietization  in   culture   as  in   other
realms.    It  has  speeded  up  the  liquidation  of  the  American
presence  and  of  American  influence in  this  lovely  neighboring
isle.     A   more   self-defeating  policy   would   be   difficult   to
imagine.    I  am  not  speaking  only  in  abstract  terms.    I  sud-
denly  felt  jealous  as an  American  to  see none  of  our  films  ad-
vertised  outside  the  movie  houses.    And  I  felt  disturbed   to
notice  the  changed   attitude  toward   Americans.    I  went  out
of  my way everywhere to  say I  was  an  American,  to  see  what
the  response  would  be.   For  the  first  time,  the  response  was a
chill.    I  was not  treated  rudely—the  Cubans  are  too  gentle  a
people  for  that—but  nobody  opened  up  to  me,  and  the  an-
nouncement  tended  not  to  encourage  but  to  stop   conversation.
We  have  succeeded  in  making  ourselves  unpopular  in  one  of
the  few  places  in  Latin  America  where  North  Americans  were
genuinely  liked  in  the  past,  even  by  those  critical  of  us  po-
litically.
To  say  that   Cuba  is  now  part  of  the  Soviet  world   is  no
longer  the  end  but  merely  the  beginning  of  political  analysis.
For  the  Soviet   world  is  no  longer  monolithic   and   securely
centralized  as  in  the  days  of  Stalin.     In  Cuba,  one  is  at  the
very  heart  of  the  growing  struggle  between  Moscow  and  Pe-
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  14,1963
king,  a  struggle  as  fierce  but  of  far  larger  dimensions  than
that   between  Stalin  and  Trotzky.    Then   the   instrument  of
state  power  was  securely  in  the  hands, of  one  faction.    Now
each  has  its  capital  and  a  mighty  country  at  its  disposal.    Of
all  the  schisms  that  have  rent  world  communism  since  1917,
this  is  the  most  momentous,  for  there  are  huge  armies  and
resources—and  fundamental national  conflicts—on  both  sides.
But  Cuba  is no  mere passive  bone  of  contention between  these
two  giant   rivals.   On  the  contrary,  just  as  Fidel  Castro  by
sheer  uncompromising  verve  and  nerve  has  made  this  little
island  of  less  than  7,000,000  people  the  catalytic factor  in  the
relations  of  two  continents,  of  Anglo-Saxon  North  America
and  its  Latin  neighbors  to  the  South,  so  he  has  made  Cuba  a
positive  and  independent  factor  in  internal Soviet  bloc politics.
Why  Cuba  Is  Popular  in  The  Bloc
The   split   between  Moscow  and  Peking,   Khrushchev  and
Mao,  is only the  most  obvious  and  sensational of  the  turbulent
convulsions  today  in  a  Soviet  world  coming  alive  again  from
its  Stalinist  Ice  Age.    Less  sensational but  in  many  ways more
important  for  the  future  is  the  tough  rear  guard  action  being
fought  by the  "dogmatists"—the hard  liners—against  a  youth
whose  appetite  for  freedom  has  only  been  whetted  by  the  zig-
zags  of  the  Khrushchevite  thaw.     These   liberal  forces  find
their  inspiration  in  Cuba.    "The   Albanians,"  one  shrewd  So-
viet  bloc  observer  told  me,  "are  only  tribal  gangsters.     They
carry  no  weight  elsewhere  in  the  bloc.    But  the  Cubans  are
another  story.    They  are  like  early  Christians.    The  honesty,
the  selflessness, the  revolutionary purity of  the  leadership  cen-
tered  around  Fidel  Castro  represent  a  new  and  thrilling  phe-
nomena  for  Soviet  youth.    They  grew  up  in  the  stuffy  atmo-
sphere  of  bureaucracy  and  repression.    They  have  never  seen
a  revolution  in  its  first  and  marvellous  phase.    A  new  and
inspiring  wind  blows  out  of  Cuba,  and  Fidel  and  Cuba  are
immensely  popular  everywhere  in  the  bloc.    For  Khrushchev,
China  is  a  foreign  policy  matter.    But  Cuba  is  in  a  curious
way  a  domestic  matter.    Mikoyan,  you  will  notice,  did   not
spend   23  days  in  China.    He  spent  them  in  Cuba.    This  is
a   measure  of   its  importance."     Khrushchev   cannot   ignore
Cuba's  popularity  at  home  in  the  Soviet  Union  because  Fidel
is  popular with  the  same forces  which  see in  Khrushchev  their
best  hope  of  winning  and  widening  the  fight  against  neo-Stal-
inist  dogmatism.
Interlocked  with  these  divergent  views  on  foreign  and  do-
mestic  policy  are  those  controversies  which  center  about  "dif-
ferent  roads  to  socialism"—the  question  of  how  much  free-
dom   shall   be  granted   the   various  Soviet   regimes   and   the
The  Last  Refuge  of  Romantic  Illusion
"A   frail   and   weak   child,   Romantic   Illusion,   roved
homelessly   over   the   earth.     Hastily   and  maliciously
businessmen  stepped   on  it.     Newspaper   vendors,   pro-
claiming  their  lies,  in  turn  kicked  it  with  their  elbows.
The  howls  of   the  twist   and  the  outcry  of   atomic   ex-
plosions  terrorized  it.    There  was  nothing   left   but  to
pick  nuclear  mushrooms.    It  wanted  to   die.
"It  did  not  die.    It  put  its  little  feet  into  the  water
without   breaking   the  reflection   and  went   to  a  small
island  called  Cuba.    That  frail  child,  Illusion,  put  on  an
olive  green  cap,  the  high  boots  of  the  soldier.  It  knotted
around  it,  the  two-colored  fringe  of  the   26th  of   July
and  took  a  gun  into  its  hands.    And,   in  this  the  un-
romantic  century  of  cybernetics,  that  smaH  island  trans-
formed   itself   into  a  great   continent   full   of   romanti-
cism,  longing  for  battle."
—The    Russian   poet   Yevtushenko    in   Revolution,
Cuba's  Fidelista  daily,  November  29,  1962.
various  Communist parties  in  the  non-Communist world.  One
reason  for  the  convulsions  shaking  the  bloc  is  that  consider-
able  freedom   and  considerable  polycentrism  has   developed;
life  stirs  again in  the  bureaucritized  corpse of  Marxism-Lenin-
ism.    Cuba,  on  the  far  periphery  of  the  Soviet  world  geo-
graphically,  not   even  fully   accepted  as  genuinely  "Marxist-
Leninist"  much  less  as  a  member  of  the  Warsaw  Pact,  has
become   in   a  paradoxical   way   the   cross-roads  of   Sovietism
ideologically.    Cuba  is  at  the  very centre of  its  decisive battles.
Cuba  is  the  one  nation  in  the  Soviet  world  which  is  still
not  securely  either  in  the  Russan  or  the  Chinese  camp.    It  is
the  only  place  in  the  Soviet world  where  the  full  texts  of  both
Khrushchev  and  Mao  are  regularly  and  impartially  published.
Castro,  though   dependent   on  Russia  and  the  Russian  bloc,
said  not  a  single  word  in  praise of  Khrushchev  in  his January
2  speech  on  the  fourth  anniversary  of  the  Cuban  revolution.
On  the  contrary, he  said  very  cooly,  "The   Soviet  government,
in   search  of  peace,   arrived   at  certain  agreements  with   the
North  American government,  but  this  does  not  mean  that  -we
have  renounced  this  right,  the  right  to  possess  the  weapons
we  deem  pertinent  as  a  sovereign  country.    And  for  that  rea-
son  we   do   not   accept   the   unilateral   inspection   that   they
wanted  to  establish  here  with  the  only  purpose,  of  the  im-
perialists,   to  humble  us.    And  there  was  no  inspection  and
there  will  be  no  inspection.    And  if  they want  inspection,  let
them  permit us  to  inspect  them."   This,  in  the  Cuban  context
and  atmosphere,   was  not  just  telling  off  Kennedy.     It  was
also  telling  off  Khrushchev.
"In  No  Country  Have  I  Seen  Such  Intimacy  Between. A  Leader  and His  People'
"In  no  country   have  I  seen  such  an  intimacy  between  a
leader  and  his  people.    Everyone  knows  that  Fidel  Castro
may  appear   anywhere  and  at  any  moment;  it  may  be  in  a
restaurant  or  it   may  be  in  an  isolated  village  where   his
helicopter  will   set   itself   down.    He  is   not   adored   as  an
inaccessible  chief,  but  loved  with  an  overwhelming   affection.
Let  him  appear,  and  people  study  his  face,  listen  carefully
to  his  voice:  'He  is  tired,'  'He  is  still  hoarse.'    And  they
shower  him  with  advice:  'Fidel,  you  must  rest,'  Take  care
of  yourself.'    Everyone  talks  to  him  of  his  own  case,  tells
him   his  troubles,   complains   of   an  injustice,   compliments
him  on  such  and  such  decision,  and  each  time—and  this  is
the" miracle—Fidel  responds  as  if  he  knew  personally  each
man  who  speaks  to  him..   Hence  his   extraordinary   popu-
larity.
"There  is   no  question  with  which  he  does  not   occupy
himself.    In  the   middle   of   the   most   important    problems,
he  will  address  himself  suddenly  to  women  in  order  to  tell
them  they  will  soon  again have the  sandals  with  straps  they
love  so  much  to  wear.    Several  months  ago  he  learned  that
the  children  of  the  Sierra  Maestra  had  not  yet   forgotten
the  bombardments  of  Batista's  air  force;  every  time  they
hear  a  plane,  they  are  seized  with  fright.    Fidel  thought  it
over  and  hit  upon  the  idea  of  sending  planes  loaded  with
toys  to be  sent  down by  parachute.     Thus  the  idea  of  death
perhaps  will  no longer  be  associated  in  their  minds  with  the
flight   of  planes."
—From  a  Report  on  Cuba, in  Le  Monde   (Paris)   Jan.   I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  U, 196S
American  official  propaganda  comforts  itself  with  the  idea
that   Castro  lost  prestige   in  the  missile  affair.     But  as  seen
from  Havana,  it  is  not  Castro  who  has  lost  prestige  in  recent
weeks.    It  is Kennedy  and  Khrushchev  who  have  lost prestige.
Castro's   answer  to  the  missiles   removal   agreement   was  his
Five  Points  and  his  refusal  to  permit  inspection.    Castro  ex-
plained  privately  according  to  one  account,  that  a  big  power
could  place  and  remove  missiles  without  loss  of  prestige,  but
that  for  Cuba  prestige  was  an  almost  material  thing  it  could
not  afford   to  lose.    So  in  his  darkest   recent  hour,  with  the
news  that  Khrushchev   over  his  head  had  negotiated  removal
of  the  missiles with  Kennedy,  Castro  sat  down  and  wrote  his
Five   Points,   among   them   the   return   of   Guantanamo,   and
made  Khrushchev  accept  them!    It  was  Russia  and  America
which  had  to  give  way on  inspection,  not  Cuba.    On  the  heels
of  that,  Castro  made  Kennedy  pay  the  full  $62,000,000  fine
imposed  on  the  exiles  who  attempted  the  Bay of  Pigs  invasion.
When  the  cash  and  freight  costs  are added  to  the  $53,000,000
in  food  and  medicine,  Castro  got  every  last  dollar  of  that  fine.
Months  ago  he  would  have  ransomed  them  for  $28,000,000.
We  refused  and  ended  up  by  paying  $62,000,000.    Can  the
Fidelistas   be  blamed  if   they   feel   that   Castro   emerged   with
increased,   Kennedy  and  Khrushchev   with  diminished,    pres-
tige?    One  of  the  smallest  countries   on  earth  made  the  two
giants  of  the  planet  accept  its  terms.    Is  it  any wonder  if  some
Cubans  go   beyond   even  the  Chinese  and  regard   both   U.S.
and  USSR  as paper  tigers ?
Some  European  Communists  regard  Cuba  as  under  Chinese
influence.    This  is  a  gross  oversimplification.     Fidel's   Marx-
Old  Stalinist   Out
"Havana  (French  Press  Agency)—The  rector   [head]
of  the  University  of  Havana,  Juan  Marinello, has  been
virtually  ousted  from  his  post,  according to trustworthy
sources.    Rector  Marinello   has   been  vigorously  criti-
cized  by  the   students,  who  sent   a  letter  recently   to
Prime  Minister  Fidel  Castro  in  which  they  denounced
him  (Marinello)  as  sectarian.
"They   reproach  Juan  Marinello  with  the  harshness
of  his  Marxist-Leninist  line.    The  well-known Univer-
sity   rector  belongs   to   the   group  of   the   "Seven  Old
Stalinist  Communists."  His  case  has  been  discussed be-
tween  Castro  and  the  delegates  of  the  University  who
asked  for  his  (Marinello's)  departure.   The University
of  Havana as  a  Marxist center  is  considered as  'oppor-
tunist   Krushchevite.'    The  discharge  of  the  rector  is
to  be  announced  in  the  next  few  days."
—Diario Las  Americas  (Miami)  Jan.  5
ism-Leninism  is  a  compote  all  his  own.    In  foreign  policy,  it
is  true,  he  is  close  to  the  Chinese  viewpoint,  for  both  Cuba
and  China  are  treated  as  outcasts  and  enemies  by  U.S.  policy.
He  also  shares  China's  hostility  to  Yugoslavia,  since Tito  is  a
beneficiary  of  U.S.  aid—but  internally Castroism  is more  Tito-
ist  than  Tito  himself.    No   country  in  the  bloc  is  so  surely
pursuing  its  own  different   road  to  socialism.    In  press  rela-
tions  with  Western   correspondents,  Cuba  is  almost  Stalinist.
In  dealing  with  the  arts,  the  students  and  internal  discussion,
Cuba  has  passed  safely  through  a  brief  Socialist Realist  phase
and  is  now  by  Soviet  standards  avant  garde.    For   Cuba,   as
How  Castro  Attacked the  Communist  Effort   to  Become  A  Privileged   Ruling  Caste
"The  tendency to  mistrust  everybody  who  could  not  claim
a  long  record  of  revolutionary  militancy, who  had  not  been
an  old  Marxist  militant  .  .  .  the  sectarianism  of  believing
that  the  only  revolutionaries,  the  only  ones  who  could  have
positions  of  trust,  the  only  ones  who could  hold  a  post  on a
People's  Farm,  on  a  Cooperative,  in  the  government,  any-
where,  had to  be  old  Marxist  militants.  .  .  .
"That  policy  introduced  extraneous  matters  into  the  in-
tegration  process  [of  merging the  three  Cuban revofutionary
movements—the  13th  of   March  Revolutionary Directorate,
Fidel's   26th  of  July  Movement  and  the   Popular  Socialist
Party  as  the  Cuban  Communist  Party  was  called—into  a
united  party, the ORI—IFS] ..  . and so  many,  many months
after   the   forces   had  been   officially   integrated,   one  found
someone  who  would  come  out  and  say:  'He's  not  a  member
of  the  Party.'    To  what  Party  was  he  referring,   if   there
already  was a  new organization  here?  .  .  .
"To  what  did such  a  state  of  affairs  give  rise?  To  vanity,
to  the  domination  of   influence,   to  privilege.    What  would
this   engender   but   conditions   which   would   earn   the   old
Communists  the antipathy and suspicion of  the masses?  . . .
"Add  to  this  the  fact  that  if  an  old  Communist made  mis*
takes,  nothing  was  done  to  him;  he  was  not  removed  from
his  post,  nor was  he  disciplined  in  any way ...  it  was  an
established  method  for  the  indulgence  of  all  faults;  to  cre-
ate  a  caste  spirit,  to  create  a  clique  spirit.  .  .  .  Some  com-
rades  had lost  all  sense of  control.   They  imagined they  had
won  the  Revolution in  a  raffle.  .  .  .
"How  were  the  ORI  nuclei  formed?    I'm  going   to   tell
you  how.    In  every  province  the  general   secretary   of  the
PSP  [Cuban  Communist party]  was  made  general  secretary
of  the  ORI; in  every  municipality, the  general  secretary  of
the  PSP  was  made  general  secretary  of  the  ORI;  in  every
nucleus,   the  general   secretary—the  member  of  the  PSP—
was  made  general  secretary.    Is  that  what  you  would  call
integration?     Comrade  Anibal  Escalante   [the   now   exiled
Communist  who  was  top  general  secretary  of  the  ORI]  is
responsible   for  that  policy.
"What  resulted  from  this? ...  If  extreme  sectarianism
still  remains,  it  will  once  again  give  rise  to  anti-communism
and  to  confusion.    Because  many  people  will  ask:  'Is  this
Communism?    Is  this  Marxism?   Is  this  socialism?    This
arbitrariness,   this   abuse,   this   privilege,   all   this,   is   this
Communism?
"'If  this  is  Communism,'  they  will  say  like  the   [Cuban]
Indian  Chief  Hatuey:  When  Hatuey  was  being  burned  at
the  stake,  a  priest  came  up  to  him  to  ask  him  if  he  wanted
to  go  to  Heaven,  and  he  said,  'No,  I  don't  want  to  go  to
Heaven  if  Heaven  is  all  of  this.'    Do  you  understand me?
I  have  to  speak  clearly.  .  .  .
"That  sectarianism  fosters  anti-communism anew. ... To
isolate  oneself   from  the  masses  when  one  is  in  power,  that
is  madness.    It  is  another  matter  to  be  isolated  by  the  rul-
ing  classes  .  .  .  but  to  be  divorced  from  the  masses  when
the  workers,  the  farmers,  the  working  class  is  in  power,  is
a  crime.    Then  sectarianism  becomes  counter-revolutionary.
"The  organization  of  the  ORI  nuclei  was  begun,  but  the
nuclei  were  secret;  they  were  secret.    Can  you  conceive  of
forming   a  secret  nucleus   exactly   as   it   would   have   been
formed  under  Batista?  .  .  .  Our party  has  to  be  organized
using  Marxist  methods,  not  the  methods  of  Louis  XIV.  .  .  .
"One  must  demand that  he  [the  man  picked  as  member
in  the  ORI  nuclei]  assume  his  responsibilities  so  that  the
people  may  see  that  being  a  member  of  the organization
does  not entitle one to  privileges ...  to  the right  to meddle,
or  to  favors  of  any  sort.   No!   Let  everyone be  aware  that
belonging  to  that  organization  may  be  a  great  honor,  but
that  it  also  means  more  sacrifice,   more  work  than  others
.  . .  fewer  privileges  than  others."
—Castro's  speech  March  26,  196S  against  sectarianism
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  U, 196S
seen  from  the  West,  has  lost  considerable  intellectual  freedom
but  Cuba,  as  seen  from  the  Soviet  East,  now  has  more artistic
and  intellectual  freedom   than  any  other  member  of  the  bloc
except   perhaps   Poland.      In   some  ways  Cuba   is  Trotzkyist
without  knowing   it—here  the  revolution   is  permanent,   the
foreign   policy   revolutionary  rather  than  collaborationist  but
the  domestic  policy  in  the  arts  and  thought  freer.
Almost  An  Anarchist  State
Indeed  as'seen  from  within,  the  island  often  seems  to  be
anarchist,  and  hard  to  fit  into  the  conventional  lineaments  of
Marxism-Leninism  altogether.   It  was a revolution  made  with-
out  a  Party  and  is  today  in  many  ways  a  government  without
a  State.   There are organs  of  administration but  no  legislature,
not  even  of  the  Communist  rubber  stamp  variety;  no  visible
local  or  provincial  governments.    Fidel  roams  the  island,  his
own  inspector  general,  in  constant  touch  with  popular  feeling,
carrying  on  the  government   under  his  hat.     Celia   Sanchez,
Perhaps  We'd  Better  Free  The  US
Before  We  Free  Cuba
"We  are  patriotic American students  from  campuses
all  over  the  U.S.    We  are  not  transporting  missiles  to
Cuba,  only  open  and  inquiring  minds.   To  form  a  more
perfect  opinion  of  Cuba  and  our  policy  towards  it,  we
must  be  permitted  to  travel  there.    The  State  Dept.
has  already  formed  its  opinion.    Jefferson  said:  'Error
of  opinion  may  be  tolerated  only  where  reason  is  left
free  to  combat  it.'    Reason  cannot  be  free  where  it  is
subject  to  bans  and  criminal  action."
—Ad   Hoc  Student   Committee   for   Travel   to   Cuba,
protesting   the  State  Dept's   travel  ban.
secretary  to  the  offices  of  both  President  and  Prime  Minister,
is  said  to  be  the  one  firm  central  organ  of  government   which
can  be  located with certainty in  one  appointed  spot.   The  term
Popular  Democracy   is  Orwellian  double  talk   in  Eastern   Eu-
Yevtushenko  Defends  Abstract  Art   and  Creative  Freedom  in  Message to  Cuba
"The  Soviet  Union is  an  example for  Cuba.   Also,  Cuba  is
an  example  for  the  Soviet  Union,  especially   for  our  youth.
We  were  the  first  country  to  build  socialism.   It  is  impos-
sible  to  be  first  without  making  mistakes.   We  made many.
It   would  be   absurd  to   suppose  that   all   these   were  only
Stalin's  fault,   even  though   he  may  have  been  personally
responsible  for  many.   I  don't  think  that  Stalin  was  a cynic
who  made  high  sounding  speeches   about  communism  with-
out  believing in  it.    Stalin  had  faith  in  communism,  but  men
were  only  construction  material   to  him.    He  forgot  that
they  were  also  the  future  inhabitants  of  the  building.   And
he  forgot  that  the  means  must  be  worthy  of  the  end.
"He  who  lacks  scruples  can  jeopardize  the  higher  ends
and  cause  men  to  forget  them,  as  in  this  case  the  end  is
transformed   into   the   means   for   justifying   the   lack   of
scruples.   How can  we  explain  the  death  of  so  many  worthy
men,  unjustly accused?   How can  we  explain forgetting  the
most  vital  needs  of  workers and  farmers,  and  the misman-
agement  of  public  funds,  channelled into  the  construction of
gigantic   monuments  and  imposing  buildings?
"How  can  we  justify  the  implacable  criticism  and  perse-
cution  of  the  best  writers  who,  for  love  of  their  country,
refused  to  paint  reality  in  rosy  colors—and  the  praise,  way
out  of  proportion, of  mediocre  writers  who  have  the  spirit
of  lackeys  and  who  agree  to  show  life  as  a  confectioner's
shop  of Communism?
"Communism  is  the  supreme  incarnation of  the  truth. Can
we  arrive at  the  truth through  lies?  Won't the  truth change
into just  another lie?   We  can well  imagine  that  the  Soviet
people  must  have  strength  of  titanic  proportions   if  it  has
maintained   its   faith   in   communism  despite  all   its   unde-
served  sufferings.
"It  is  of  singular  importance for  us  that  all  the  countries
who  follow our  experience  elect  only  the  good  means.   That
will  be  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  morally  justify  our
mistakes,  go that  the  countries  which start  their  own  social-
ist  construction  do  not  make  the  same  ones  again.
"We  do  not  want  those  countries  to  forget  again  that  in
addition  to  building  Communism  the  people   must  eat,   be
dressed  and  live.    Today  we  have  achieved  that  our  people
live  well,  that  those  who  build communism are  well  fed  and
dressed.
"We  do  not  want  these  countries  to  repeat  the dogmatiz-
ing  tendencies  which  we  denounce  in  our  governmental  and
party  organization.   This  is  why  it  is  of  particular impor-
tance  to  us  that  the  Cuban  people  energetically  condemned
the  dogmatism of  some  of  its  public  figures,  attacking  it  by
its  roots.     [Reference  to  the  Escalante   affair,  see  box  on
p.  3.]    Dogmatism  and bureaucracy  contradict  the  essence
of  revolution.
"An  inevitable  consequence  of  dogmatism  is  the   shifting
around  of  history.   To  make  the  past  look  better  or  to  in-
terpret  it  tendentiously  implies unavoidably that  the  present
is  made  to  look  prettier  or  is  falsely  interpreted.
"Therefore  it  assumed  particular  importance  for  us  that
Fidel   Castro  energetically  attacked  the   intentions   of   the
falsifiers  who  dared  suppress  some  lines  of  the  legacy  of
Jose  Antonio  Echevarria   which  did  not  coincide  with  the
concepts  of  the  dogmatists.*
"We  do  not  want  those  countries  to  repeat  the  mistakes
which  we  made  in  the  realm  of  literature.    In  the  years  of
the  personality  cult,  and  despite  it,  notable  literary  works
were  produced; but,  in  general,  all  the  literature  went  along
artificial  paths  in  order  to  hide  and  cover  up  difficulties  and
deficiencies,   to  sounding  the  golden   fanfares   so  that  cer-
tain  sobs  could  not  be heard.    During  the  period  in  question,
our  literature  resembled  the  theme  of  Gogol's  story,  "The
Picture."    The   painter  Chatkov,   in   order   to   satisfy   his
clients,  never  failed  to  eliminate  from  all  his  paintings  all
kinds  of  wrinkles.
"We  also  don't  want  the  painters  of  the  countries  which
build  socialism  to  repeat  our  mistakes  in  the  realm  of  the
Fine  Arts.   Our  country is  one of  the  originators  of  modern
pictorial  art.    Russia  was  the  cradle  of  realists  in  painting,
but  also saw  the  birth of  Kandinsky, Malevich,  Chagal, Gon-
charova.    But  despite   this  for  a  long   time  our  painters'
themes  were  no  more  inspired  than  the  portraits  of  Stalin
with   or   without   pipe,   farmhouses   luxuriously    decorated
with  artistic  plates,  or  petrified  and  inexpressive   faces  of
workers  in  stereotyped  poses  before   foundries.
"The  dogmatic  criticism  which  we  had  to  live  with  for
many  years  stated  that  abstract   art  is  a  product  of  cap-
italism  and that  to  paint  pictures  of  that  kind  means  to  fall
into  the  snare  of  capitalist   ideology.    I   know   personally
many  of  the  Cuban  painters  who  were  represented  at  the
Moscow  exhibit  and I  know  to  what  point  they  are  true  to
their  revolutionary  ideas.    Many of  them  are  abstract  paint-
ers.   Is  this  logical?    And Picasso?    There  is  a  real  citizen
and  Communist.   Has  he,  too,  fallen  into  the  snares  of  cap-
italist  ideology?"
—Abridged   from   an  article  by  the  Russian  poet  Yevtu-
ehenko,  "I   Spoke   Four   Hours   With   Fideal",  in   Revolu-
tion  (Havana)   Nov.  29,  1961.
•A  reference  to  the  speech  made  by  Castro  March  13 of
last  year  in  honor  of  Echevarria,  one  of  the  heroes  in  the
struggle  against  Batista.    Fidel   scolded   "sectarians"  who
omitted  from  the  final  testament  of  Echevarria,  a   pious
Catholic,  those  lines  in  which  he  said,  "We  are   confident
that  the  purity  of  our  intentions  will  bring  us  the  favor
of   God,  to  achieve  the  reign  of  justice  in  our  land."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   14,19U3
rope,  for  its  bureaucratic  police   regimes  are  neither   popular
nor  democratic.    But  Cuba  in  its  own  peculiar  way h  a  Popu-
lar  Democracy,  a  kind  of  continuous  town  meeting  under  a
popular  dictator,  very  much  like  the  demagogues   (the  word
in  Greek  merely  means  leaders  of  the  demos,  or  people)  who
led  the  poor  against  the  rich  in  the  Greek  city  States.    Marx
and  Lenin  would  be  delighted  perhaps   but  certainly  a  little
confused  by  what  goes  on  in  Cuba  today  in  their  name.
They  Mistook  Castro  for  A  Kerensky
For  one  thing,  Cuba  is  the  one  Soviet  State  in  which  the
Communist  Party  not  only  does  not  rule  but  is  on  notice  that
it  had  better  behave  itself.    On  this tropical  island, everything
grows  fast,  even  ideologies,  and  few  Americans  are  aware  of
the  swift   ideological  changes  which  have  been  occurring  in
Cuba.     In  December,    1961,   Fidel  made  his   famous   speech
declaring  himself  a  Marxist-Leninist.   Three  months  later  he
made  his   first  anti-Communist  speech,  driving  a  Communist
leader  into  exile  and  purging  his  followers  from  the  govern-
ment.     (See   box  on  page  3).     In  the  intricate  maneuvers
which  went  on  between  the  Fidelistas  and  the  Communists,
the  latter  thought   they  could  take  over  the  new revolutionary
organization   (OKI)   into  which  Fidel   sought   to  merge   his
July  26  movement,  the   13th  of  March  Revolutionary  Direc-
torate  and   the   Popular   Socialist   Party   (as  the  Communists
call    themselves).      A   Communist,   Anibal   Escalantc,    was
made  general  secretary of  the  OKI  and  sought  by  tactics  like
Stalin's  to  take  over,  putting  his  men  into  key  positions  and
making   Communist   party   loyalty  the   first   qualification   for
membership.
In  addition, according to  Fidel's  speech  of  March  26,  1962,
which  drove  Escalante  into  exile,  a  whispering  campaign  was
begun   "against   the  prestige  of  certain  well  known  and   very.
valuable  comrades"  who  were  regarded  as  too  independent  of
the  CP  clique.    Che  Guevara  is  reported  to  have  been  one  of
their  targets,  for  he  fought  this  tendency  to  "sectarianism"  in
filling  the  key posts  of  government  and  industry.   Some  Com-
munists   seem  to  have  made  the  mistake,   among  others,  of
regarding  Fidel  as  a  petit  bourgeois,   perhaps   even  a  sort  of
Cuban  Kerensky,  who  could  be  replaced  by  them  as  the  revo-
lution  proceeded.    This  was  how  they  regarded  him  when  he
was  up  in  the  hills  fighting  Batista  and  some  of  the  same  at-
titude  seems  to  have  survived.   For  in  the  speech  Castro  com-
Do-It-Yourself-Quiz  on  Agrarian   Reform
We  suggest  that  readers  give  themselves  a  little  quiz
on  the  Cuban  exiles,  though  the  questions  we  suggest
are  not  so  difficult  as  to  warrant too  elaborate an award
for  correct  answers.    1.  Why  was  it  that  the  exiles   in
the   Orange   Bowl,   so   fervent   in   shouting   "guerra,
guerra"   (war,  war)   were   so   unresponsive   when   the
President   pledged  support  for   agrarian   reform?    2.
Could  it  be  that  most  of  them  would  prefer  restoration
of  the  happy  system  under  which a  small  section  of  the
Cuban  people  waxed wealthy  at  the  expense  of  the  rest
as  a  junior  partner  in  U.S.  exploitation?    3.  Read  the
list  of  the  great   companies—many  with  Latin  Ameri-
can   subsidiaries—who   chipped  in   (though   mostly   at
the  expense  of  the  Treasury)   on  the  ransom  and  ask
yourself:   Would  they   have   ransomed   an    expedition
against  Batista,  or  any  other  Latin  dictator who  played
ball  with  U.S.  big  business?    Would they  have  chipped
in  on  this  one  if  they  thought  seriously  the  overthrow
of  Castro was  a  crusade  for  agrarian reform?    A  suit-
able   prize  for   the  correct  answer   might  be  a  dozen
bananas.
plained   that   some   people   "after   having   skimmed   a   little
Marxist   book"   went  around  saying  that   his   famous    1953
speech,   History   Will   Absolve  Me,   "was  a  reactionary   docu-
ment."    Castro  admitted  that  this  speech   "was   not  yet  the
expression  of  a  Marxist mind,  but  it  was  the  expression   of  a
young  man  who  was  leaning  toward  Marxism  and  who  was
beginning  to  act  like  a  Marxist."    But  he  said  its  value  lay
not  in  "its  theoretical,  economic  and  political  content"  but  in
the  fact  that  it  was  a  denunciation  of  the  Batista   dictatorship
"made  in the midst of  the bayonets of  a hundred  soldiers  .  . .
a  task  a  bit  more  difficult  than  that  of  posing  as  a  revolution-
ary  now."    Wounded  pride  is not  the  least  important   element
visible   in  this   speech,   a   turning   point   in   Cuba's   internal
politics.
Seen   in   perspective,   Fidel's    "I   am   a    Marxist-Leninist"
speech  outflanked  the  Communists  and  made  it  possible   for
him  to  attack  them  three  months  later  without  seeming  to  be
engaged   in  a  rightist  maneuver.    The   strangest  part  of   the
whole   affair   is  that  the  Chinese,  everywhere  else,   complain
that  the  Russians  help  bourgeois  nationalists  in  the   colonial
world  rather than  Communists, but  in  Cuba  they  support  Fidel
rather  than  the  Cuban  CP.    More  gently  but  as  unmistakably
How  Castro  Replied  to  Kennedy's  Promise  at  Miami  of  Agrarian Reform
"But   the   curious   thing,   conld   Kennedy   be   changing?
(Crowd  laughs.)    The  curious thing  is  that  he  speaks  of  our
offering  an  end  to  economic  exploitation  and  then  immedi-
ately  says:  'Under  the  Alliance  for  Progress,   we  support
for  Cuba  and  for  all  the  countries  of  this  hemisphere   the
right  to  free  elections  and the  right  to  the  free  exercise  of
basic  human  rights.    We  support  agrarian  reform.'  (Crowd
laughs.)      Could   Kennedy  be  converting  to  Marxism-Len-
inism?    (Crowd  laughs.)
"The  fact  is  that  in  this  country  more  than  100,000  peas-
aijt  families  paid  rents,  which  at  times  were  50  percent  of
their  products.    Who  finds  a  peasant  along  the  length  and
breadth  of  the  country  paying  rent  now?    More  than  100,.
000  exploited  peasants  became  owners  of  their  lands.   (Ap-
plause.)    But  why  does  this  gentleman  think  that  the  peas-
ants  are  with  the  revolution?  .  .  .
"It  is  very  curious  that  we  hear  the  chief  of  the  Yankee
empire   speak   of   economic   exploitation,   agrarian  reform,
and  such things.  When,  before,  did he  speak  of  such  things?
Never.  Of  course,  they  do  not  speak  sincerely,  but  how  long
have  they  been  speaking  this  language?     (Crowd  shouts.)
Who  were  their  teachers?     (Crowd  shouts.)    The  Cubans.
Too bad we  have  such  bad disciples.    (Applause.)    And  this
gentleman  uses  a  strange  language,   a  revolutionary   lan-
guage.   This  is  curious.    He  is  going  to  create  some  prob-
lems  with  the  reactionaries   because,  although  the  reaction-
aries  know  that  what  he  says  is  a  story,   they  also  know
that  one  must  not  play  with  words.    The  Latin  American
latifundistas  are  going  to  say:  'Well,  if  we  will  distribute
our  lands,  you  must  distribute the  oil,  the  copper,  the  iron,
and  all  the  monopolies  you  have  here.'    Those   are  the  ir-
reconcilable  contradictions  of   imperialism.    How  can  they
use  this  language?
"He  then says:  'We  support  the  agrarian  reform  and  the
right  of  each  peasant  to  own  the  land  he  works.'    That   is
precisely  what  we  said,  but  we  are  the  only  ones  who  have
done  it."
—Castro Jan.  2 as monitored  in  Washington
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'8  Weekly,  January  U, 1963
The  Soviet  Burden  in  Cuba  Is  Far  Lighter  Than  Our  Own
as  in  Ben  Bella's  Algeria,  the  Communists  are  being  liqui-
dated  as  an  independent  political  force.    Fidel  is  constructing
a  new  party,  as Tito  did,  and  when  that  job  of  organization  is
accomplished  he  will  have  not  only  full  command  at  home  but
greater  maneuvering  power  in  foreign  policy.    No  ruler   ever
managed  to  exercise  more  political  independence  in  a   situa-
tion  more  intrinsically  dependent   than  Fidel's,  for  his  is  the
only  Soviet  bloc  country  which  is almost  entirely shut  off  from
trade  with  the  non-Soviet  world.    As  in  his  original  landing
against   Batista,  Fidel's  main  resource  is  nerve,  and  we  will
never  be  able  to  think  straight  about  Cuba  until  we  abandon
the  notion   that  this  soldier-statesman  is  a  puppet,  a  fool   or
a  "nut."
Fidelismo  Pragmatic  in  Action
In  attempting,   however  imperfectly,  to  sketch  in  some  of
the  nuances  of  Cuba's  position,   I  do  not  want  to  leave  the
impression  that  I  think  Fidel  Castro  is  in  any  way  an Ameri-
can   style   anti-Communist.     In   reading   the   I-am-a-Marxist-
Leninist  speech  and  in  revisiting  Cuba,  I  felt  that  this  speech
had   been   doubly   distorted   in  the   U.S.     The   right   wingers
seized   on   it  to  say,  "You   see,  Fidel  was  a  Communist  all
along."    Persons  like  myself,  friendly  to  Cuba,  and  with  a
lifelong  acquaintance  with  Communists,  simply  could  not  see
Fidel  Castro  as  a  Marxist-Leninist and  interpreted  the  speech
as  some   kind   of  maneuver  to  assure  Soviet  support.     I   no
longer  think  this  true.    I  think  the  speech  is  to  be  read  as  a
truthful   statement.    Castro  in  his  own  mind   has  become  a
Marxist-Leninist.    He   sees  the  one  party  socialist  state  as  a
swift  means  of  development.     He  believes  the  Cuban  revolu-
tion  would  have  been  crushed  without  Soviet  aid  and  orienta-
tion.    He  may  also  regard  Marxism-Leninism  as  the  philoso-
phy  furthest  removed  from  the  U.S.  and  therefore  most  likely
to  keep  his  revolutionary  youth  from  contamination  by  the
U.S.    But  at  the  same  time,  for  him,  Marxism-Leninism is  not
the  same  as  accepting  dictation  either  by  the  Cuban   Commu-
nist  Party  or  by  the  Soviet  bloc.    This  is  his  revolution.    He
wouldn't  have made  it  if  he  had  gone  by  the  Marxist-Leninist
book,  and  he  won't  let  theory  stand  in  the  way  of  any  action
needed  to  preserve   it.    Under   the  surface  of  their   oversim-
How  'Containment'  May  Crack
"New   York   (AP)—Any   worsening   of   relations  be-
tween  the  U.S.   and  Brazil  holds  the  ironic  possibility
that  the  enormous  sums  of  U.S.   dollars  invested  there
could  be  used  indirectly  to  help  Cuba  out  of   its   eco-
nomic  troubles.    Washington   has  expressed  grave   con-
cern   about  Brazil's   economic  and   political   direction.
One  of   the  factors   in  this  concern  is   a  recent  trade
commission  set  up  by  Brazil  for  expanding  trade  with
the   Communist  bloc.
"Sympathetic  toward  Fidel  Castro's  Cuba,  the  Brazil-
ian  government has  been  steering  what  its  leaders call
an   independent  course.     But   in   Washington,    officials
view  this  as   leaning  toward  a  dangerous  neutralism.
.   .  .  With  Brazil's  financial  situation  worsening  and
inflation   raging,   Brazil   badly  needs   heavy   industrial
equipment   for   its   development  program.     The  Rus-
sians  have  it.    What  the  Russians  might  have  in  mind
is  a  triple  trade play—from  the  Soviet  Union  to  Brazil
to  Cuba.
"Brazil  produces much  of  what  Cuba  needs:  Medical
drugs,  automobiles,  trucks,  buses,  motor  vehicle   parts,
farm   equipment,  shoes   and  meat."
—Miami  Herald,  Dec. 24
plified—often    downright    "infantile    Left"—theories,    these
Cuban   "Marxist-Leninists"   are  pragmatic.    When  Che  Gue-
vara  told  the  students,  "If   we're  Marxists,  we  got  their  our
own  way,"  he  was  giving  us  a  basic  insight  into  the  Fidelista
movement.
An   equally   pragmatic   LI.S.  foreign   policy  could   come   to
terms with  Cuba  if  it  were  willing to  accept  the  basic aims of
the   Castro   revolution.     On   that  basis,   in  my  opinion,   the
problem  of  compensation  could  be  solved  and   the   fear  of  a
Soviet  base  on  our  doorstep  dissipated.    Time   is  on   Fidel's
side;  his  problems  and  Cuba's  are  minor.   We  exaggerate  the
burden  on  the  Soviet  bloc;  it  can  easily  provide  the  machine
tools  and  technicians  to  make  a  success  in  so  small  and  rich
an  island.    All  they  need  to  do  is  to  make  a  showplace   for
6,500,000  Cubans  and  we  will  be  on  the  spot  with  the  200,-
000,000  in  the   rest  of  Latin  America.    With  that   sobering
statistic  I  bring  this  second  installment  of  my  report  to  a  close.
More  on  Cuba Next   Week
You  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift   Sub  With  the  First  Issue  on  Cuba
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street    .........................................„.............„............._........._
City   ...........................................Zone.............State....................
1/14/83
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  ...................................................................,....._..
Street    ............-.:..................—...................................................
City   ............_.........................Zone........._..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yea Q    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebrosko  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday   except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday   In  December
und  the  first  In  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.   F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  In  the  U.  S.;  16  in  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  $16  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED