I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1963
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1963oct14.pdf

============================================================

McGoverns  Fight Against  Overkill,  P.  3
The  No.  1  Menace  to  Latin  American  Freedom  Is  Our  Military Aid  Program,  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XI,  NO.  20
OCTOBER  14,  19G3      <£££*>
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
The  FBI's  Indifference   to  Civil  Rights
20  GENTS
The  most  important  single  omission  in  the  latest  report  of
the  Civil  Rights  Commission is  its  failure  to  make  any  men-
tion,  much  less  study,  of  the  FBI's  relationship  to  the  strug-
gle   for   civil  rights.    J.  Edgar  Hoover's  firm  position   as  the
capital's  No.   1  Sacred  Cow  makes  the  omission understand-
able.     The   poor   harassed   Commission   has   enough   on   its
hands.     But   sooner   or   later  this   question   will   have   to   be
opened   up.     This   heroines  clearer  when  one   takes   note  of
the  clear  arid  inescapable, though  unspoken, implication  of  the
latest   findings.   This  is  that  the  Negro  cannot  count  on  liti-
gation  but  must  resort  to  wider  measures of  non-violent  dem-
stration  in  the  streets  if  he  is  to  win  freedom  from   discrim-
ination  within  the  measurable  future.    Nearly  ten  years  after
the  school  desegregation  decision, only  8  percent of  the  Negro
pupils  in  the  South  attend  schools  with  while  children.  After
six   years  of   Federal  suits,  the   number  of   registered  Negro
voters   in   100  of   the   worst  counties  in   the   South  has   risen
only  from   5  to  8.3  percent;  in  the  Louisiana,  Mississippi  and
South  Carolina  counties, the  number  of  Negroes   registered  is
actually  less  than  it  was  six  years  ago.     More  demonstrations
mean  more  clashes  with  the  police.    The  police  in  the  South,
insofar  as  the  Negro  is  concerned,  are  not  upholders   of  law
but  the  main  instrument of   a  police  state  designed   to  main-
tain   whites   as  the   master   class.    This  is  evident   from   the
listing  of  suits  pending;  many  are  against  Sheriffs   and   other
police   officials   for   the  beating,  intimidation   and   baseless  ar-
rest  of  voter  registration  drive  workers.
Too  Fraternal  With  The  Cops
This  is  the  most  overt  form  of  civil  rights  violation  by  law
enforcement  officials.     But  the  FBI  has  long  been   notoriously
reluctant  to  impair  its  fraternal  relations with  local  and   State
police  officials   by  a  too  vigorous  inquiry  into  civil  rights   in-
fractions.     In  past  years,  the  figures  given  by  Mr.  Hoover  in
the  annual  appropriations   hearings   have  tended   reassuringly
to  show  the  police  and   their   friends   in   Congress   how   few
complaints  ever  reach  the  stage  of  prosecution,  much  less  con-
viction.     In  recent  years,  as  the  civil  rights  struggle   became
politically  potent,   fewer  figures  have  been   supplied   lest   this
furnish  ammunition  to  Mr.  Hoover's   critics.    Even  the  num-
ber  of  complaints  is  no   longer   given.    Thus   last   year   Mr.
Hoover  provided  a  table  showing  that  the  number  of  "bomb-
ing  or  racial  matters"   had   risen   to  4,077  in  the  fiscal  year
1961,   or  37%  above  I960,  while  "civil  rights"  cases  were  up
29%   to  2,903.    But  no  figures  were  given  to  show   in  how
many  cases  arrests  were  made  or  convictions  obtained.    Even
the  number  of  complaints  were  not  given  in  this  year's  hear-
ings.    Indeed  it  would  have  been  very  embarrassing  to   show
how  many  "bombing  or  racial  matters"  had  occurred  in fiscal
1962  when  the  Justice  Department   now  claims  that  it  did  not
FBI  Still  99%%  Lily-White
We  seem  to  have  obtained  the  first  exact  figures  on
the   number  of  Negro  FBI  men.   This  is  how  our  un-
expected  scoop  came  about.    The   1963  report  of   the
Civil  Rights  Commission  says  a  questionnaire  was  sent
out  to  local  and  State  police  officials  to  determine how
many  employ  Negroes.    "The  Commission's  statistical
survey,"  the  report  declares,  "establishes  that  law  en-
forcement  agencies  throughout  most  of  the  nation  are
staffed  exclusively  or  overwhelmingly  by  whites."    We
were  puzzled  by  the  failure  to  give  figures  on  the  ra-
cial  composition  of  the  Federal  government's  own  po-
lice,  the FBI.
When  we  telephoned the  Civil  Rights  Commission  to
find out  why, an  official  suggested  that  perhaps  the  fig-
ure  was   kept   secret  to  protect   the   FBI's   confidential
informants.     This   didn't   seem   very   plausible,   unless
the  FBI   was  using  bleached  Negroes  to  infiltrate  the
Ku  Klux  Klan.  We  pressed  for  a  definite  answer.  Later
we  were  informed   that   a   staff   report  showed  that   as
of  the  end  of  1962, the  FBI  had  10  Negroes  among  its
6,030  special  agents   and   3   Negroes   in   another  cate-
gory,  known  for   some   unexplained reason,   as  Special
Agents,   Limited.      Could   this   mean   that,   like   some
Negro   deputy   sheriffs  in  the  South,  they  couldn't  ar-
rest  white  men?    My  informant  was  sure  it  was  noth-
ing  like  that.    He  added  that  "as  of  today"  and  since
the  staff  report, the  FBI  had  hired  5  more  Negroes  as
special  agents.    This  still  leave  the  FBI  almost  99%%
lily-white,  or  neck-and-neck   with  Ivory  Soap.
apply  the  anti-bombing provisions  of  the   1960   Civil  Rights
Act  for  two  years  because  there  were  no  important  bombings
until  those  in  Shreveport,  La.  early  this  year.    The  anti-bomb-
ing  provisions  of  the  I960  Act  were  intended  to  bring   the
FBI  into  the  picture  at  once  in  racial  bombings  but  the  FBI
has  shown   as  little  enthusiasm  for   getting   into  these  as  into
civil  rights   cases.
Every   year,   in   the   appropriations    hearings,   Mr.   Hoover
presents  a  chart  "to  refute  what  we  heat  so  frequently,   criti-
cizing  the  use  of  confidential  informants."     This  shows   the
amount  of  stolen  property  recovered  and  the  number  of   fugi-
tives  arrested  through  the  tips  of  confidential  informants.  But
Mr.   Hoover  has  yet  to  report  tips  leading   to  arrests  in  the
mounting   toll   of  murders  and   bombings   in  the   civil   rights
struggle.    The  day  after  the  Birmingham  church  bombing  in
which  four  little  girls  were  killed,  Joseph   L.  Rauh,   Jr.,   of
Americans  for  Democratic  Action,  sent  President   Kennedy   a
telegram  in  which  he  said  the  increasing  number  of  such  out-
rages   made  more   shocking   "the   failure  or  reluctance   of   the
FBI  to  infiltrate  right  wing  subversive  elements."    This  was
not  the  first  time  the  Administration  was  asked   to  step  up
(Continued   on   Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

,  /.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  14, 1963
The  No.  1  Menace to  Internal  Security  Are  the  Armies  We  Finance  and  Train
The  Only  Sure  Way  to  Stem  the  Anti -Democratic  Trend  in  Latin  America
The  surest  way  to  end  the  epidemic  of  military  take-overs
in  Latin  America  would  be  to  end  our  military  aid   program
in   the   hemisphere.      The   original   excuse  for   the   program,
when   it  began   in   1946,   was  hemispheric   defense.     But   "the
great   majority   of   civilians,"   Edwin   Liuewen   wrote   in   his
book,  "Arms  and  Politics  in  Latin  America"   (Praeger)   have
been  led  by  experience   "to  fear  their  own   armed   forces   far
more  than  they  do  the  Russians."    Lately  the  excuse  has  been
internal  security  and  "civic  action."    But  militarism  is plainly
the  No.   1  menace  to  internal  security  in  Latin  America,  and
the  kind  of  civic  action  to  which  the  military  gravitates  is  to
take  over  the  government  and  the  Treasury  whenever  they  can.
These  armies  are  now  the  largest  single  source  of  graft  in  the
hemisphere  and  the  biggest  single  obstacle  to  the  reforms  the
U.S.  claims  it  wants.  In  a  foolish  speech   (see  adjoining  box)
to  a  hemispheric  military  conference  in  the  Canal  Zone  last
July,  Teodoro  Mdscoso  disclosed  that  Latin  American military
expenditures  are  now  running  at  one  and  a  half   billion  dol-
lars  a  year,  or  more  than  our  government  made  available  last
year  to  the  Alliance for  Progress   of  which  he  is  U.S.   Coordi-
nator.    This  literally  takes  bread  from  the  hungry.    The  ex-
cuse,  according  to  the  report   on  the  foreign   assistance   pro-
gram  sent  Congress   by  the  President  last  August   28,  is  that
"well-trained  and  effective  armed  forces"   provide  "the  stabil-
ity  and  internal  security  necessary during  the  critical  period  of
economic  and   social  reform."     The  overthrow   of  democratic
regimes   in   Honduras   and   the   Dominican   Republic   by   the
military  we  financed  and  trained  is  only  the   latest   evidence
of  how  untrue  this  is.
The  Lesson   Fidel  Taught
The  only  country  in  Latin  America  with  a  stable  and   free
society  is  also  the  only  one  without  a  standing  army  of  any
kind—Costa   Rica.    Fidel   Castro   taught   the   hemisphere   an
invaluable  lesson   when   he   at   once   dissolved   Batista's   army
and  sent  our  military  mission  packing.    Our  first  move  where
democratic   regimes   appear^as   they   did   in   the    Dominican
Republic  and  Honduras—-should  be  to  withdraw  our  military
missions,  and  encourage  the  new  regime  to  cut  the  army  down
to  size.    Our   military  tend  all  too  often   to  share  the  tough
guy  attitudes  and  political  backwardness  of  the  Latin  military,
particularly  the  tendency  to  see  as  Communistic  any  proposal
for  social  and  economic  reform;  such  attitudes  by  our  military
encourage  local  take-overs.     Senator  Humphrey  in   1957  and
Senator  Gruening  in  August  of  last  year  warned  against   mili-
tary  aid  and  the  military  mind   in  Latin   America   but  to  no
avail.   Working  with  the  military  were  rightist  Catholic  par-
ties  in  both  Honduras  and  the  Dominican   Republic,  and  be-
Just  Before  The  Roof  Fell  In
"The   trend   clearly   is   away    from    'personalismo',
from  coups  and  revolutions  which  bring  a  mere  change
of  faces  without  any  change  in  policy,  away  frohi   the
suppression   of   legitimate  opposition  elements;   away
from   callous  disregard   for   the   real   problems   of   the
majority  of  the  people.    With  few  exceptions,  the  mili-
tary  in  Latin  America  today  are  showing  a  greatly  in-
creased  sense  of  political,  economic  and  social  respon-
sibility,  including  their  prime  duty  of  supporting  con-
stitutional  civil   government."
—Teodoro   Moscoso,  Coordinator   of   the  Alliance   for
Progress,   at    the    196.1   Conference    of    the   American
Armies,  Panama   Canal   Zone,  July   19.
hind  both  were  U.S.  interests  hostile  to  reform,  United   Fruit
in  Honduras,  Standard  Oil  of  New   Jersey  and  Puerto  Rican
Sugar   Company   in   the   Dominican   Republic.     Standard   Oil
has  been  lobbying  against  Bosch  in  Washington   because  he  re-
sented  the  terms  of  an  oil  refinery  contract  hastily entered  into
after   his   election   but   before  he   took    office.     Puerto   Rican
Sugar   Company  'hostility,   like  that   of   the   native  capitalists,
becomes  understandable  when   one  notes  that  the   30  cents  a
day  which  used  to  be  paid  common  labor  under  Trujillo   had
gone  up  under   Bosch,   in   some   cases  to   $2   a   day.    These
forces   drove   out   the   most   gifted   democratic   leader   Latin
America  has  had   in  a  long  time.
Those  liberal  Senators  like  Gruening   and  newspapers  like
the   Washington   Post  which   advocate  a  kind  of   Eisenhower
Doctrine   for   the  Caribbean,  with   interventions  like  that   in
Lebanon  to  support  democratic  governments,   seem  to  us  well-
intentioned  but   deluded.     It   is  not   accidental  that  the   only
government  against  which  we  have  taken  strong  measures  was
Castro's;  even  our  action  against  Trujillo   was  motivated  by
the  desire  to  set  a  precedent   for  a  blockade   of   Cuba.     Sup-
port  for  really  democratic  governments  and  for  social  reform
in  Latin  America  is  at  best  lukewarm,  half-hearted   and   con-
fined  to   a  fringe   element   of   thoughtful   liberals   and    some
businessmen.    United  action  is  only  possible  against  the  men-
ace  of   communism,   real   or   imaginary;  only  then   does   the
country  and  the  Congress  really  spring  to  arms.    Under   such
circumstances,  any  new  doctrine  of  intervention,   whatever   its
origins,  will   soon   be  used   to   stiffen   U.S.   support   for   gen-
darme  government.     Latin  American   democrats   will  instinc-
tively  and   wisely  fear   us  most  when   we  come  bearing   such
gifts.     It's   not   more   intervention   that   Latin   America   needs
but   less—and   the  first  step  should   be  to   end   military  aid
altogether.    That  billion   and  a  half   spent  on   armies  would
do  more  good  spent  on  roads,  schools  and  shoes.
Dominican  Republic  Got  More  U.S.  Arms  Aid  Per  Capita  Than  Any  Other Latin  Land
"The  U.S.   supplied  the  Dominican  Republic  during  fiscal
year    1963   far   more   military   aid   for   its   size   than   any
other  country   in  all  of  Latin  America.  .  .  .  We  have  built
up  the  power  of  the  military  junta.  .  .  .  American  military
aid  in  Latin  America  has  built  up  in  country  after  country
a   powerful   military  caste,   nondemocratic  in  its   ideology,
nondemocratic  in  its   philosophy   and  nondemocratic   in  its
tactics,  for  military  castes  the  world  around  are  not  noted
for  their  belief  in  the  institutions   of  democracy.   .  .  .
"It  (U.S.  military  aid)  is  responsible  for  building  up  the
power   of   the   Fascist   regime   of   the   military   which   has
taken  over  under  Col.  Elias  Wessin  y  Wessin.    Who  is  he?
He  is  a  man  with  a  sordid   record   of  Fascist  police  state
leanings  in  the  Dominican  Republic.  .  .  .  The  President  of
the  Dominican  Republic  .  .  .  sought  to  remove  this  Fascist-
oriented  police  state  Colonel.  .  .  .  When  he  (Bosch)  tried  to
exercise   his  constitutional  power,  the  military   took   over."
—Morse  (D.  Ore)  in  the Senate Sept. 30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October U,  J9CS
McGovern  Quotes  Ike  Against  JFK  In  Fighting  to  Cut  Down  Military  "Overkill"
Kennedy Afraid to Venture A World Peace  Through World Trade  Campaign
How  can  we  expect  the  poor  Latin  Americans  to   control
their  military  when  we  do  so  poor  a  job  with  our  own ?    The
Senate  had  just  finished  ratifying  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty
when  the  leadership  called  up  a  $47  billion  military   budget
and  in  little  more  than  an  hour  obtained  its  approval  77  to  0,
with   23  not   voting.    These  astronomical   annual   totals   are
usually  approved  in  cursory  fashion.   This  year  McGovern  of
South  Dakota  dared  question  them  and  put  his  challenge   to
a  vote   though   he  knew  he  would   be  snowed   under.    Mc-
Govern   followed  up   his  August  2  speech   on   "overkill"   by
moving  for  a  10%  or  $5  billion  cut  in  projected  additions  to
weapons  and  nuclear  stockpile.    His  argument:  that  we  were
wasting  on   "overkill"   resources  which   could   go   to  build  a
stronger   America  and   a   more   stable   world.     His   cut,   he
argued,   would   still   leave   the   new   Kennedy    military   and
atomic   budget   ten   billions  higher   than   Eisenhower's   last!
The  Democrat,  McGovern,  in  attacking  arms  spending,  found
himself  quoting  Eisenhower  against  the  sharp  rise  under  Ken-
nedy.     But  no  Republican   rose  to  support  him.     Only  an-
other  Democrat,  Randolph  of  West  Virginia,  backed  him  on
the  floor  and  in  the  vote.    Two  others,  Nelson  of   Wisconsin
and   Morse   of   Oregon   were  paired   for   the   motion.     Peace
groups  ought   to  use  the  McGovern   speeches  of  Aug.   2  and
Sept.   24  as  ammunition  and   get  ready  for   the   next   round.
Sooner  or  later  the  country  will  wake  up.
A  Little  Evangelism   Needed
A  little  moral  leadership,   a  little  evangelism,  would  help.
But  Kennedy,  like  Eisenhower,  lacks  taste  or  capacity  for  it.
The  Administration's  hesitations  about  selling  wheat  to  Rus-
sia  are  another  indication  of  Mr.  Kennedy's  unwillingness  to
take  the  risks  of  leadership  for  peace.    His  idea  as  always  is
not  to  mobilize  the   latent   idealism  of   the  country—he  has
no   real  faith   in  it—but   to  make  a   deal   behind   the   scenes
with   Dirksen    and   Halleck.     Maybe   he   will   feel   himself
stronger   now  that  Eisenhower  has  spoken   out  in  favor  of  a
wheat   deal  if  "it   is  a  good   horse  trade."    Characteristically,
Ike  is  anxious  to  disavow  any  deeper  moral  or  political  pur-
pose.    He  doesn't  want  us  to  be  "altruistic."     He   sees   "no
principle"  involved,  only  "material  gain."    Thus  small  minds
reduce  great  occasions  to  their  own  dimensions.    In  the  Sen-
ate  Oct.  3  Javits  of  New  York  in  a  comprehensive   discussion
of   East-West  trade   pleaded   that   the   possibility   of   reducing
"tensions   among   nations   through    mutually   beneficial   eco-
On  Mme.  Nhu's  Optimism
"It's  not  really  a  war any  more. ...  I  am  optimistic
because  the  strategic  hamlets  have  made  it  impossible
for  the  Viet  Cong  to  score  new  successes."
—Mme.  Nhti,  at  Paris  press  conference,   Washington
Post  Foreign  Service, Oct. 4.
"American  military  sources  also  disclosed   that  two
Vietnamese  strategic  hamlets  were  overrun by  an  esti-
mated  battalion  of   Communist  rebels  in  the  Dak   Bot
region,  20  miles  southeast  of  the  Provincial capital  of
Pleiku.     The   source   said   the   attack   occurred  early
Monday  and  that  the  Communists  drove  the   hamlets'
estimated    2,000   inhabitants  back   in   the   mountains
from  which  they  had  come  only  4  months  ago."
—AP  from   Saigon,  in  adjoining   column,  same   day-
nomic  relations  has  been  demonstrated   over  and   over   again
in  history."    Humphrey,  in  despair  over  the  hesitation,  told
the  Senate  he  thought  we  had  already  missed  the  boat  on  a
wheat  deal  and  provided  a  succinct  answer  to  objections   from
the  right:  "I  never  have  heard  of  a  people  who  have   become
more  placid,  more  pliable   or  more  reasonable  because  they
were  hungry."   A   "world   peace   through   world   trade"   cam-
paign  is his  objective,  but  Kennedy  holds  back. He  doesn't  like
to  venture  beyond  sure  things—a  treaty  against  nuclear  testing
when  both  sides  are  satiated  with  testing,   and  now   perhaps
an  agreement  not  to  put  bombs  in  orbit,  a  step  neither  side
considers  militarily  worthwhile  anyway.
From  Khrushchev's  point  of  view,  the  scene  is  a  bitter  one.
With  Kennedy  as  before  with  Eisenhower, he  staked  his  poli-
tical  position  on  the  possibility  of  a  detente  with  the  United
States.    Now   he  sees  it  may  even  be  impossible  to  buy  U.S.
wheat   for   gold   without   undergoing   a  humiliating   political
debate,  with  the  possibility  of  rejection.    Leading   the  fight
against  the  sale  of  U.S.  wheat  to  Russia  is  his  old  opponent,
Adenauer.    To  us  he  says  "only  the  stupidest  calves   choose
their  own  butcher."     But  extensive  tables  put  into  the   Con-
gressional  Record   by  Javits  show  that  Western  Germany  en-
joys  by  far  the  biggest  Western   trade  with  the  Soviet  bloc—
almost  $1.5  billions  in  1962.    A  survey  on  the  financial  page
of  the  New   York   Times  Oct.  6  showed  that  one  third  of  the
100  million  bushels  of  wheat  equivalent  in  flour  bought  by
Russia  from  Western   Europe  recently  came  from  West   Ger-
many,  the  bulk  of  it  being  milled  from  U.S.  wheat.     Oct.   8
OWNERSHIP,   MANAGEMENT   AND
CIRCULATION
(Act  of  October  23,  1962;  Section  4369,  Title  39,  United   States   Code)
1.  Date  of  Filing:  September   25, 1963.
2.  Title  of  Publication:  I.  F.  Stone's Bi-Weekly.
3.  Frequency  of   issue:   Every   other  Monday  except  during   August.
4.  Location  of  known  office  of  publication:  5618 Nebraska   Avenue,   N.W.,
Washington.  D.  C. 20015.
5.  Location   of   the   headquarters  or   general  business  offices   of   the    pub-
lishers:    5618   Nebraska   Avenue,   N.W.,   Washington.    D.   C.   20015.
6.  Names  and  addresses  of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:   I.   F.
Stone,  same  address.
7.  Owner    (If    owned   by   a.  partnership   or   other  unincorporated    firm,    its
name   and   address,   as   well   as   that   of   each   individual   must   be   given):
I.   F.   Stone.   5618   Nebraska    Avenue,   N.   W.,   Washington,   D.   C.  20015;
Esther  M.  Stone,  same  address.
8.  Known  bondholders,   mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or
holding  1  percent   or  more   of   total   amount   of   bonds,   mortgages  or  other
securities   (If   there  are  none,   so  state):   none.
9.  Paragraphs  7  and  8  include,  in  eases  where  the  stockholder   or  secur-
ity   holder  appears   upon   the   books   of   the   company   as  trustee  or  in   any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the   name  of   the  person  or  corporation  for   whom
such  trustee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full   knowledge  and  belief   as   to  the   circumstances   and  conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company   as  trustees,   hold   stock   and  securities   in  a   capacity
other  than  that  of  a  bonafide  owner.
Average No.  Copies
Each Issue During      Single Issue Nearest
Preceding  12 months         To Filing  Date
A.  Total   No.   Copies   Printed                        21,580
(Net  Press  Run)
B.  Paid   Circulation
1.  To  Term  Subscribers  by
Mail,  Carrier  Delivery,  or  by
other  means                                         19,037
2.  Sales  Through  Agents,  News
Dealers   or   Otherwise                           1,312
C.  Free  Distribution  (including
samples)  by  Mail,  Carrier  De-
livery,   or  by   Other   Means                       75
D.  Total   No.  of   Copies  Distributed              20,424
(Sum  of  lines Bl,  B2  and  C)
21,000
19,101
1,200
200
20,501
I   certify  that   the  statements  made  by  me   above  are   correct   and   com-
plete.    I.  F.  Stone,  editor.
0   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  14, 1963
Hoover  Admits  He  Spies  on  Negroes,  But  Silent  on  Racists
(Continued   from    Page    One)
surveillance   of   racist  and   rightist   organizations.     A  similar
proposal  was  made  privately  by  Walter  Reuther  to   Attorney
General   Robert  Kennedy  in  the  Fall  of  1961.*
A  Wide  Range   of   Snooping
In  the  annual  budget   hearings,  Mr.   Hoover   boasts   a  net-
work   of   informers  in   liberal   and   Leftist   organizations.     A
minuscule  Communist  Party  is  his  excuse  for  surveillance over
a  wide  spectrum  of  opinion.     "Since   the  Communist   Party,"
Mr.   Hoover  told   the  House  Appropriations   Committee   this
year,  "carries   on  many  and  varied  activities  to  infiltrate  and
manipulate  various  segments  of  American  life,  we  must  have
broad   and  penetrative  coverage   so  that  we  may  be  aware  of
the  plans  and   tactics  of   this  subversive organization."     Just
how  "broad  and  penetrative"  this coverage  is  may  be  gathered
from   Mr.   Hoover's   boast  that  the   FBI   had   "approximately
165  known  or  suspected   Communist  front  or  Communist   in-
filtrated   organizations   under   investigation."     It   takes   hard
searching  to  find  a  half  dozen  genuine  Communist   front  or-
ganizations  nowadays.    Mr.  Hoover  met  this  objection  by  ex-
plaining  that  while  "some   of   these  organizations  are   created
by  the  Communists"   many  are  "legitimate   non-subversive  or-
ganizations"   which   the   Communists  have  urged   their  mem-
bers   to   join.     This   admits  that   many   "legitimate  non-sub-
versive"   organizations  are   among   the   165   watched   by   the
FBI.     Among   them,  according  to  Mr.  Hoover's  presentation
to  the   House  Appropriations  Committee,   are   "organizations
in   the   peace,   youth,   political,  trade  union,  Negro,  disarma-
ment,  and  nuclear  testing   fields."   This  list  indicates  how  far
the  FBI  reaches  into  respectable  organizations  with  legitimate
purposes,  many  of  them   shared  by  the  Kennedy  Administra-
tion.     Notice   that  Negro  organizations  are  included   among
those   over  which  the  FBI   keeps  watch.     In  the  fiscal   1962
budget   hearings,  in  explaining  that  the  FBI  had   "some  200
organizations  .  .  .  now  under  investigation"  Mr.  Hoover  said
that  the  Communists were  exploiting  the  Negro  sit-in  demon-
One  Way  to  Solve  the   Race   Problem
"Many  military  commanders  are  aware  of  the  plight
of   Negro   personnel.     With  few   exceptions,   however,
their  policy  has  been  to  yield  to  the  racial  practices  of
the   community.     One   [military]   installation   in   Ala-
bama  is  faced  with  a  delicate  problem  because  it  trains
foreign  nationals as  well  as  Americans.    The  military
authorities  have  solved  it  by  issuing  'passports'  to  col-
ored  foreigners  to  enable  them  to  travel  unmolested  in
the  community.    For  the  American serviceman no  such
protection  is afforded."
—IffUJ    Report  of  the  Civil  Rights  Commission.
Tarts  of  a  24-page  memorandum submitted  to  the  Attor-
ney   General   by   Mr.  Reuther  may   be   found   in   the   recent
book,    "The    Far    Right"   by   Donald   Janson    and    Bernard
Eismann.
strations.    It  is clear  that  the  FBI  watches  the  Negroes  closely.
It  is  not  at  all  clear  that  they  watch  anti-Negro  organizations.
Mr.   Hoover   dwells  at  length   each  year  on  internal   secur-
ity,   but   the   menace   is  always  on   the   Left.     In   this  -year's
hearings,  Mr.  Hoover   took  time  out  to  dwell  on  the  insidious
dangers  behind  the  Communist  campaign   for  peaceful  co-ex-
istence.    But  he  never  seems  to  see  any  danger  in  the  para-
noid  racist  propaganda  that  has  created  a  sickness  in  the  South
which  may  erupt   into  the  worst   menace   to  internal   security
since  the  Civil  War.     Mr.   Hoover  is  not   only   incapable  of
seeing  this  but  shares  the  pathological   obsession   with  the  Red
Menace  characteristic  of  racist  and  Fascist  groups.     His  power
and  influence  are  rarely  turned  against  these  kindred  mentali-
ties.    In  this year's  hearings,  he  said  he  had  only  95  telephone
wiretaps   in  operation,   and   that   these   "are   utilized   only   in
cases  where  the  internal  security  of   the  country  is  involved,
or  where  kidnapping  or  extortion   may  bring  about  the   jeop-
ardy  of  a  human   life."     We   are  as  opposed  to  wire-tapping
as  we  are  to  political  espionage,   right  or  left.    But  it  is  Mr.
Hoover   who  makes  and  applies  the  rules.    We  wonder  how
many,  if  any,  of  those  wiretaps   are  used   to  protect   internal
security  or  human  life  against  well  known  hate  groups  which
breed   the  madness  that  ends  in  these  bombings.     It  is  time
a  group  of  representative  citizens  asked   the  President  to  set
up  a  Commission  to  investigate  the  role  of  the  FBI  in  the  civil
rights   struggle.     It  -is   serious   when   the   Federal   agency   on
which  Negroes  must  depend  for   investigation   of   civil  rights
cases,  is  so  indifferent   to  them.
IFS  Speaks  on  Vietnam  in  San Francisco,  at  8  p.m.,  October  25  at  150  Golden  Gate  Avenue,  and  8  p.m.,  October  28  in  Los Angeles,  at  the
Music  Box  Theater,  7080  Hollywood  Boulevard
OFFER  EXPIRES  MIDNIGHT, NOVEMBER  4
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Avenue,  N.W.
Washington  15,  D.C.
Please   send   me    ........   copies   of   THE   HAUNTED
FIFTIES  by  I.  F.  Stone  at  $4.85  per  copy  (a  saving  of
SI.10  from  the  retail  price  of  $5.95),  plus  50c  per  copy
for  shipping  and  handling.    My  check  or  money   order
is  enclosed.    I  understand that  if  for  any  reason  I  care
to  return  the  book  for  a  prompt  refund,  I  may  do  so
within  ten  days  after  receiving  the  book.    (District  of
Columbia  residents  must  add  18c  sales  tax.)
NAME        ......................................................................................
ADDRESS
City  ...
........  STATE   ..................  ZIP  CODE
Autographed?    Yes  D    No  D
LF.Stone'sBi-Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Stone's  "The Haunted  Fifties"  an  ideal  gift  for  students  who  missed  the  McCarthy  years
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED