I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954dec13.pdf

============================================================

McCarthy  and  Mail  "Covers":  A  Postal  Police  State  Skeleton,  See  Page  3.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 45DECEMBER  13,  1954„       WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
What Reuther Reported to  the  CIO and the  Press Ignored:
The Witch Hunt  Hits The Factory  Worker
A  vivid  picture  of  the  way  the  witch  hunt  is engulfing the
factory   worker   was  drawn   by   Walter   P.   Reuther   in  his
annual  report   as  President  of  the  CIO  to  its  convention   in
Los Angeles last  week.   But  a  combination  of  fear  and  indif-
ference  seems  to  have muffled  what  he had  to  say.   Few  news-
papers  carried   any   reference  at   all  to   this  portion   of   his
report.   One  had  to  search  closely  even  through  the  12-page
pre-convention   issue  of  the  CIO   News,  which   covered   the
annual  report,  before  one  found  on  page  7  at  the  tail  end
of   a   story   about   school   segregation   the   single  paragraph
which  was deemed adequate.   This  said  only  that  the  position
of   government   employes   and   defense   plant   workers   had
"deteriorated"  during  the  past   12  months  and  that  defense
plant   security  programs  must  be  watched   closely,   lest  em-
ployers  use  them  as  "a  vehicle  of   anti-unionism."
Those  who  turn  to  the  report  see that  the  CIO  has  been
engaged  in  a quiet  battle  with  the  Defense Department.    The
security  program  has  been  extended  to  the  point  where  the
Department  "proposed  to  require  every  defense  worker  with
access  to  any  classified  information  to  fill  out  a questionnaire
naming  under  penalties  of  perjury  every  person  he  has  ever
associated  with,  no matter  how  many  years  back,  who,  at  any
time  in  his entire  life,  had  ever  belonged  to  any  of  the  240  or
more   organizations  on  the  Attorney  General's  list."    This
requires  the  worker  in  defense  installations  of  any  kind   (a
category  broad  enough  to  cover  most  of  American industry)
not  only  to  exhume  his  own  political  past  for  inspection  but
those of  all persons with  whom  he had associated.
Workers  Must  Become Informers
Reuther   reported   that   the   Defense   Department   finally
agreed   to  modify  this.     It   now  requires  "only"  that   the
worker  report  his  associations during  the  past  five  years  with
persons  who  had  been  members  of  those  organizations  within
that  period.    "Even  as  limited,  however,"  Reuther  informed
the   CIO,   "many  employes  will   find   the  questionnaire  im-
possible  to fill out  and abhorrent  in  principle."   It  might  take
a  worker  months  to  locate  all  his  past  associates  over  five
years  and  ask them,  please, to  tell  him  whether  in  that  period
they   ever   belonged   to   any   organization   on   the   Attorney
General's  list.   The  idea  is fantastic.    It  requires  ^he  factory
worker  to  become  a  private  detective,  an  unpaid  assistant  to
the   FBI,   an  informer  with   his  neck   in   a  noose.     Serious
criminal  penalties  not  only  for  perjury  but   for  wilful  mis-
statement  or  omissions attach  to  such  questionnaires.
The  extent  to  which  American  labor  has  acquiesced  in  its
gleichshaltung  is  indicated  by  how  little  attention   this  de-
velopment  has  received.    "Your  officers,"   Reuther   told   the
convention,  "are  also particularly concerned  lest  the  informa-
tion  on  these  questionnaires  come into  the  hands of  employers
who  might  use  the  'derogatory*  information  thus  gained  by
them  against  militant  union  men."    Indeed  the   corporations
which  once  shamefacedly  hired  labor   spies  may  now  right-
eously  carry  on  the  same  kind  of  activity  behind  the  facade
of   a  plant  "security"  system  set  up  to  cooperate  with   the
government.    The  potential  of  this  for  anti-unionism  will  be
felt  the  first  time  a  major  recession  makes  it  politic  for  in-
dustry  to  launch  a  full  scale  attack  on  organized  labor.
The Same Security Risk  Double Talk
Those   who  want   a  clearer  picture   of   the   danger   than
Reuther's  restrained   account   may  find  it   in   the   October,
19J4,  issue  of  Factory  Management  and  Maintenance  where
ex-FBI  man  Albert  J.  Tuohy   (an  editor's  note  explains  that
Tuohy  directed  investigation of  the  Hiss,  Remington,  Bentley
"and   Canadian  spy  ring  cases")   tells  "What  You  Can  Do
About  Communists  In Industry." Tuohy  is director  of  security
at  Republic  Aviation.    Tuohy  says  the  answer  is  "Fire  'em!
. . . And that's  exactly what we did to 250 of them  this year."
Nor   do  they   have  to   be  Communists.    "Of    those   250,"
Tuohy  went  on,  "only   1J  were  known   Communists.     No
matter.    They  all  get   the   same  treatment."    All   security
risks,  Tuohy   explains,  are  "not   necessarily  subversives,   not
necessarily  disloyal."    So  the  factory  worker  faces  the  same
miasma   which   renders   miserable   the    life   of   the   Federal
employe.
Tuohy  is  a  very  sophisticated  fellow,  and  his  article  is  well
larded  with   liberal  sentiments.    But   one  passage  describing
the  work  of  his security  organization   ("All  but  one ... an
ex-FBI   agent.")    illustrates  what   Reuther   fears.     "We're
alert," Tuohy  writes,  "to  which  men are becoming  prominent
in  plant  organizations  ranging  from  hobby  and  sport  to  reli-
gious  and  political   groups.    We  know  who  is  running   for
office   and  who  has  been  elected  in  the  various  organizations.
A  quick   look  through   personnel   and   security  files  usually
tells  us all we need  to know."  Can  employers with  so extensive
a  system  of  plant  espionage  be trusted  not  to  use it  for  union-
busting?
Reuther   realizes   the   danger,   obviously    sees   that    civil
liberty  is  no  longer  merely  a  matter  of   concern   for   a  few
embattled   intellectuals   and   stray   non-conformists   in   the
teaching  and  other  professions,  recognizes  that  the  issues  are
becoming  vital  to  the  factory  worker  and  the  trade  unionist.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
1   8  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'*  Weekly,  December  IS, 1954
The  Meaning  of McCarthy's  Attack  on  Ike
The  violence  of  McCarthy's  attack  on  the  President  is  a
measure   of  his  desperation.    He  first  sent  the  statement  to
Mundt  who  refused   to  read  it  for  him,  remarking  that  he
could  accept  no  responsibility "for  an  attack  upon the  Presi-
dent."  McCarthy then turned  up and  read  it  himself.  Mundt's
attitude   and  Knowland's  quick  disclaimer  of  sympathy   are
indicative.   McCarthy is  no  longer  playing  practical   politics.
But  the  sensational  exchange  between  McCarthy  and  the
White  House,  in  retaliation  for  Elsenhower's  "well  done"  to
Watkins,  should  not  hide  the  more  serious  difficulties  of  the
Administration.   Knowland is  entrenched  as  majority  leader
and  Bridges  is headed for  the  chairmanship  of the Republican
policy  committee  in  the  Senate.   The  China  Lobby,  the  pre-
ventive  war  crowd, the  trouble-makers  occupy key  posts.
The  President   deserves  applause  and  support  for  the  ex-
traordinary   restraint  he  has  shown  under  pressure  at  home
and  provocation  from  abroad.   What  we  are   seeing  is  the
painful  task  of  slowly  extricating the  United  States from  the
cold  war,  and  preparing  the  way  for  peaceful   co-existence.
Only  a  General  at  the  head  of the  conservative  party, backed
by  big  business,  could  do  it.   If  the  Democrats  were  in,  the
air  would  resound  with  cries  of  treason.
It  is  unfortunate  that  we  have  been  pushed  as  a   nation
into  so  undignified  a  position  by  a  policy  of  half  war,  half
peace   with   the   new   China.   We   cannot   logically   finance
Chiang, operate  CIA  monkey business and  refuse  to recognize
Peking  without  running  into  just  the  kind  of  humiliation
we  are  now  suffering  in  the  case  of  the  11 aviators.
But   as  a  matter   of  practical  politics,   our   China  policy
cannot  be  reversed  in  a  day.   A  "cooling off" period  is  neces-
sary  and  it  is  the  job  of  the  neutral  powers  and  of  Moscow
to  sober  up  a   Peking   which  begins   to   seem   "giddy   with
success."
The balance of forces in Washington  is precarious.  It  would
be  criminal  folly  for  Moscow  or  Peking  to  take  for  national
weakness  what  the  President  is  doing in his  search  for  peace.
If  they  want  co-existence,  they  had  better  not  undercut  the
one man who can  bring  it  about.
McCarthy  and  the   Catholics
What   really  unnerved  the  more  intelligent   McCarthyites
is  that,  though  there  are  large  blocks  of  Irish  Catholic  votes
in  the  urban  areas  which  are  traditionally  Democratic,  these
if  really  pro-McCarthy  had  no  influence  on  the  censure  vote.
Of    seven    Catholic   Democratic   Senators,    six     (Mansfield,
Murray,  O'Mahoney,  Chavez,  Burke  and  Pastore)   voted  to
condemn  McCarthy.  The  seventh,  Kennedy, is  ill.  McCarran,
the  only  Democratic  Catholic  Senator  who  would  have  sup-
ported  McCarthy,  is  dead.  The  two  other  Catholic  Senators,
Barrett  of  Wyoming  and  Purtell  of  Connecticut,  voted   for
McCarthy  but  both  are  Republicans.  Most  of  the  East  Coast
hierarchy,   particularly   Cardinal   Spellman,   is   indeed   pro-
McCarthy, but  they  were  also mostly anti-Roosevelt, and  then
too the  clerical  bark  was  no clue to the  electoral  bite.
Mendes-France  and  the  H-Bomb
At  the  last  minute,  on  objections  from  Secretary  Dulles,
Mendes-France  eliminated  from   his  United  Nations  speech
in   New  York   a   proposal   (like  Nehru's)   for   a   standstill
agreement  to  end  further  H  and  A  bomb  tests.   The  news
leaked  to  Paris-Presse.  The  French  Prime  Minister's  think-
ing  is  reflected  in  an  article  in  the  latest  issue  of  his  friend
Servan-Schreiber's   L'Express   which  reprints  the  warnings
about  the  danger  of  radioactivity  expressed   by  the  French
physicist,   C.  Noel  Martin.   While  in  Washington,  Mendes-
France  joined  the  British  in  opposing  the  Dulles plan  for  a
SEATO  meeting  at  Bangkok  to frame  a  new  agreement  for
common  action  against "internal  aggression" or  "subversion."
Anglo-French  objection  sees  this  as  a  step  toward  the  kind
of  interventionism exemplified  in  Guatemala.
When  Junker  and  Samurai   Have  The  H-Bomb
Possession  of  the  H-Bomb  may  act  as  a  brake  on  war  in
the  hands  of  two  such  powers  as  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.
For  all  their  differences,  neither  has  a  hereditary   military
caste  nor  a  tradition  which  glories  in  war.   For  both  peoples
war  is  an  unpleasant  necessity.   But  what  happens  when,  as
is inevitable, these  dread  new weapons are  in the  hands  of  the
Germans  and  Japanese,  which  have  such  a  caste  and  such  a
tradition?   At  the  end  of  the  road  opened by  East-West   con-
flict  over  Germany  and  Japan  stands  a  new  Hitler,   armed
this  time  with  the  capacity  to  turn  the  whole  earth  into  a
crematorium.
The  Old  Japan  Begins  to  Re-Emerge
A  visit  to  the  U.S.  seems  to  be  dangerous  for   European
statesmen.  Adenauer  went  home to  lose  an  election, Mendes-
France  to face  an  Assembly slipping back into  its  old splinter
habits,  Yoshida  to  lose  his  job  as  Prime  Minister.   His  suc-
cessor   is  worse.   Washington  finds  consolation  in  the   fact
that  Hatoyama  is  so fiercely anti-Communist, Moscow  in  the
fact  that  he is for  diplomatic relations  with  Russia  and  China.
Both  Washington  and  Moscow  blind  themselves  to  the   fact
that  with  the  change Japan  swings  back  further  to  the  pre-
war   type  of  mentality  which  cost  America  and   Russia   so
much  in  the  past.
Georgia's  Chain  Gang  System  Before  The  Supreme  Court
Article  VIII  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  forbids "cruel  and  un-
usual  punishments."   The  clause  is  invoked  by  an   appeal
which  has just  been filed here  in the  U.S.  Supreme Court on
behalf  of  Edward  Brown by  the  Philadelphia lawyer,  David
Levinson, and counsel for  the NAACP.  The Court is asked to
overrule  an  extradition  order  from  Governor  Herman  Tal-
madge  of  Georgia  which  has  been  upheld  by  the  Pennsyl-
vania  courts.   Seventeen  years  ago  Brown  was  arrested  for
the  accidental death  of  a  man.   On  the  advice  of  a  white
attorney,  he  pleaded guilty  and  was  sentenced to  life  on  the
chain  gang.   This  is  his  terrible  story,  as  told  in  the  bald
language  of  an  NAACP release:
"Brown   testified   in  the   lower  courts  that  he  had  been
subjected   to   all  sorts  of  cruel  treatment  which  included
being  placed in a  sweat  box .  .  . with  no ventilation  except
a  two-inch  opening, with  no  toilet  facilities  or  water.   He
was  beaten  with  blackjacks,  rubber  hoses  and  other  instru-
ments.
"On  December  19,  1937,  he  escaped  and  on June  21,  1940,
was recaptured.  Despite  the  promises  of the  Georgia  Prison
authorities  that  the  chain  gang  system  was  no  longer  in
existence  .  .  .  the  moment Brown  was  back  in  the  State of
Georgia,  he  was  subjected to  even more cruel  treatment.
"Brown  escaped  again   on  September  22,  1940,  and   was
at  liberty until  1947 when he was recaptured.   The  treatment
on his recapture was the same as before  except for  chains ...
"On  two  occasions  he  was  put   in  the  'stretcher'  which
resembles  a  medieval rack.  Once he was  strung  from  a  tree
by  the  wrists  and  beaten  until  the  blood  dripped  from  his
body.   On  another   occasion  when  he   had   caught   cold  he
was  given  a  half  pint  of  castor   oil,  staked  to  the  ground
and  covered  with  molasses  to  attract  insects  and   animals.
On  this  occasion  the  warden's  son urinated  in  his  face.
"In  January  1950, he escaped once more  and fled to  Phila-
delphia.   In  April  1952  Brown  was  taken  into  custody  and
put  into  jail  at the request  of Governor Talmadge  . .  ."
Help  Us Reach  More  People  Next  Year  With  the  Message  of  Peace
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December IS,  1154
McCarthy's  Charge That Investigators Put  A "Mail  Cover" on  Him
Opening  The  Door  on  A  Police  State  Skeleton  in  The  Postoffice
McCarthy,  always  a  stickler  for   civil  liberties   where  his
own  are  involved, put  the  spotlight  on  a  real  issue  when  he
protested  the  "mail   cover"  put  on  him  by  the  Gillette  sub-
committee.    •
It  is  a  crime to  interfere  with  someone's mail  in  order  "to
pry   into  the  business  or  secrets   of  another."    It   is  also  a
crime  for   a  postal   employe  "unlawfully  to  detain   or  open
any   letter."   Despite   these   two  provisions  of   the   law,   it
appears  that the postal service is accustomed to place "covers"
on  the  mail  of  suspected  persons.   Such  a  "cover"  was  used
in  the  McCarthy  investigation.
David  H.  Stephens,  the  chief  postal  inspector,  testified  on
the  matter  at  the  one-day hearing  held  by  the  special   Fer-
guson-George  committee  on  December  2.   Stephens explained
that  the  postoffice   imposes  such  "covers"  at   the  request  of
police  or  other   government  investigators.   But  he   insisted
that  no  letters  are   opened   and  that  the   postoffice   merely
reports  "what  the  exterior   of  the  letter  discloses,"   i.e.  the
postmark,  the  return   address  and  any  similar  information.
Stephens  also  said  the  postal  employe "may  not  in  so  doing
in  any  way  retard  the  handling  of  the  mail."   Whether   a
"cover"  can  be  operated  without  delaying  the  mails  is  open
to  question.
No  Test  Because Secret
The  practice  of  imposing "covers" rests  on  a  postal  regula-
tion  which says  that  "to  aid  in  the  apprehension of fugitives
from  justice,  a  postmaster  may  give  to  officers   of  the  law,
upon   proper   identification,   information   regarding   the   ad-
dresses,  return  cards  or  postmarks   on  mail,  but   shall  not
withhold  such  mail  from  the  addressee  or  delay  its  delivery."
There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  in  other   cases,  as  in  Mc-
Carthy's,   the  use  of  a  "cover"  is  not  limited  to  fugitives.
It  would  be miraculous in the  current  atmosphere  if  "covers"
were  not  used  for   political  espionage.  The  legality   of  the
regulation  has  never  been  tested  because  people  never  know
when  their  mail  is  being watched.
A  legal  test  would  start  with  the  leading  case  on  the  sub-
ject,  an  1877  Supreme Court  decision  (96  U.S.  727)  in  which
Mr.  Justice  Field  ruled  that  letters  or  sealed  packages   "in
the  mail  are  as  fully  guarded  from  examination  and  inspec-
tion,  except  as  to  their  outward  form  and  weight,  as  if  they
were  retained  by  the  parties  forwarding them  in  their  own
domicile.   The  constitutional  guaranty   of  the   right  of   the
people  to  be  secure  in  their   persons  against  unreasonable
searches   and  seizures  extends  to  their  papers,  thus   closed
against  inspection, wherever  they  may be . .  ."  The question
to  be  decided  by  the  courts  is  whether  reporting  the  source
and  character   of  a  man's  mail  from  outward  examination
is  not  equally  an  invasion of  his  privacy.
Never  Before  Against A Senator
The  unpopularity  of  McCarthy  and  his  own  readiness   to
use  improper  methods  should  not  blind  us  to  the  gravity  of
the  charge.   The  chief  postal  inspector  testified  that  he  had
never  before  heard  of  a  mail  "cover"  being  used  against  a
U.S.   Senator.
A  grand  jury  inquest  is  certainly  called  for.   Even  more
important  would  be  a  full  Senatorial  investigation  to  deter-
mine  just  how  widespread  the   practice  is.   McCarthy  has
opened  a  door  on  a  real  police  state  skeleton  in  the   postal
service.  But  there  ought to be opposition to  McCarthy's  effort
to  make  ex-FBI   man  Paul  J.   Cotter,  chief  counsel  of  the
Gillette   committee,  the   goat   of  that   inquiry.    McCarthy's
interrogation   of  Cotter   showed  how  eager   he  is  to  punish
Cotter  for  his  temerity  in  daring  to  investigate   McCarthy's
bank  accounts.
Cotter  told  an  interesting  story  in  his  own behalf.   He  said
he  and  McCarthy had  mutual  friends  and  when  he  took  over
the   job,   "I   felt   that  perhaps   by  sitting   down   with  him
De Prof undis
Westbrook  Pegler  at  a McCarran Memorial Meeting  in
(appropriately   enough)   Lost   Battalion   Hall,   Queens,
N.  Y.,  Dec. 6,  said  small  crowds  at  recent  pro-McCarthy
rallies  were  "melancholy  and depressing."  "Let's  face  it,"
he  said, "we have  been  laying  some terrible  eggs  lately—
let's  not  kid  ourselves.   We're  a  minority.   I  don't  know
why   we  can't  turn  out  a  good  crowd."  (Source:  N.Y.
Journal  American,  Dec.  7).
[McCarthy]  .  .  .  and discussing  a  lot of  these  allegations
and  finances  informally  that  we  could  clear  up  a  lot  of  this
smoke."
McCarthy  declined  to  talk  with   Cotter   informally   about
the  financial  charges  against  him  "but   suggested,"   accord-
ing  to  Cotter,  "that  we meet  at  a  dinner,  my  wife  and  Miss
Kerr  and  he  and  another  chap  and  his  wife,  at  this  third
party's  house."   Cotter  said,  "That  I  did  not  want  to   do,"
explaining later  in the  hearing  "I  did not  feel  the  place  to do
it  was  at  a  social  gathering."  This  refusal  to  be "shmoosed"
does  credit  to  Cotter.
The  Intermediary Was Robert  E. Lee
When  McCarthy  pressed   Cotter  to  give  the  name  of  that
third  party,  Cotter  reluctantly   identified  him  as  "Bob  Lee",
that  is  now  Federal   Communications  Commissioner  Robert
E.  Lee.   Though  this  was  one  of  the  "hottest"  items  in  the
testimony,  so far  as  I  know  not  a  single  newspaper  or  radio
commentator  has  published the  fact  that  Lee was  the  inter-
mediary.   Cotter   said   when   McCarthy  declined  to   discuss
the  charges,  a mail "cover" was ordered to  determine whether
he  had  other  banking  accounts  and  through  what   brokerage
houses  and  third  parties  he  was  speculating.
Cotter   said   he  was  familiar  with  mail  covers  from   his
work  with  the  FBI  and  other  investigating  agencies.   "It  is
a  pretty  common  practice,"  he  told  the  committee.    "When
I  took  this  investigation,"   Cotter   said  to  McCarthy  during
the  hearing,  "I  was quite  as  willing to  clear  you as  to  deter-
mine  any  information ...  I  have  a  number  of friends who
are  great  admirers  of  yours."
Cotter  said  the  actual  mail  cover  order  came from  another
ex-FBI  man  employed  by  the  committee,  Francis  X.  Plant,
whom  the  McCarthy committee tried  to  hire.   Cotter,  giving
Plant's  credentials,  said  Plant  was  "with  Whittaker   Cham-
bers  during  the  Hiss  trial."
Jean  Kerr  and  The  Soy  Beans
McCarthy  wanted  to  know  why  a  mail  cover  was  also  put
on  Jean  Kerr,  then  his  fiance.  "It  was  Jean  Kerr,"  Cotter
explained,  "who  went  down  and  made  that  transfer   of  the
money  you  got  from  the   new  Congressman  from  Michigan
[Bentley].  You had  her  take  the  money out  of  the  bank  and
send  it  to  the  chap  in  Wisconsin  who put  it  in  the  brokerage
account  and  bought  the  soy  beans  with  it.   So  this  was  all
an  intimate  group  to you . .  ."  McCarthy  dropped that  line
of questioning.
The mail  cover apparently  was  imposed without  the  knowl-
edge  of  any  member  of  the  Gillette  committee.   Senator  Hay-
den  pointed  out  that  in  one  McCarthy  hearing   McCarthy
told  a  witness,  "We  have   600  of  your  telephone  calls   re-
corded."  Hayden  said  this was  the  equivalent  of  a mail  cover.
Nobody  asked  McCarthy  if  he  or  his  staff  used  mail  covers.
A  safe  guess  is  that  McCarthy's  ex-FBI  men  have  used  this
device as readily as ex-FBI man Cotter.  Since this may be the
last  chance in  a  long  time  to really  explore  the  practice,  it  is
to be hoped that liberal  Senators will  press for  a full  inquiry.
By  Giving  A  Gift  Sub for  Christmas  at  Our  Special  Rate  of  Only  $4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  IS, 1954
Reuther  Fails  Even  to  Mention  The  1st and  5th  Amendments
(Continued  from   Page One)
No  doubt  he  also understands  the  cord  which  binds  the  mania
about  "security"  to  the  world   tension  which  gave  it  birth.
The  shocking  thing  about  the  report  is  how  timidly  it dis-
cusses  civil   liberty   and  how  equivocally  it   touches   on   the
related  problems  of  foreign  policy.
Here  are  some  of  the  vital   omissions.    There  is  not   one
word  in  the  report  about  the  Fifth  Amendment  or  the  First.
What  if  a  worker,  confronted  with  one  of   those  question-
naires,  does  not  want  to  hazard  perjury  or  prosecution,  and
pleads  the  Fifth?    What  if  a  worker  invokes  the  First  and
declines  to  accept  the  restriction  on  his  basic  freedoms which
these  questionnaires  impose?   What  if  he  declines  on  moral
grounds  to  inform  on  others,  especially when  this  may  mean
exposing   a  friend   to  trouble  as  serious  as  deportation   for  a
matter  as slight  as having  been  a member  of  the  International
Workers  Order.   '(This  is  no  far-fetched  example—a  61-year
old  Baltimore  grandmother  faces  deportation  for  just  that.)
When  the  Bill  of  Rights  thus  begins to  mean  bread and  butter
to  workers,  how  can  Reuther  discuss  the  situation  without
once  mentioning  the  Fifth  or  the  First?
Doesn't  The  5th  Apply  to Workers?
The  Courts  have  held  again  and  again  that  the  Fifth  is  a
shield  for   the  innocent,  and  that   no  presumption  of   guilt
attaches  to  its  invocation.    Yet  the  General  Electric Com-
pany  and  other   concerns  have  begun  to  discharge  workers
who plead  the Fifth.    A suit brought  by  the United  Electrical,
Radio  and  Machine  Workers  against  General Electric  has just
been  tried  and  awaits decision  in  Federal District  Court   here.
Where  does  the  CIO  stand  on  this?    Will  it  lend  its  weight
to  an  appeal  if  the  decision   goes  against   the  UE?   Will   it
protest  the  new  Fifth  Amendment  firings  at  Bethlehem  Steel?
Reuther  in  his  report  applauds  Flanders  for  launching an
attack  on  McCarthy,  and  called  (the report  was  written  in
advance)   for  the  latter's  censure.    But  beyond  this  there  is
not  one  word  in  the  report  about  the  Congressional  inquisi-
tion   generally.    A  Congressman  as  far   right   as  Walter   of
Pennsylvania  was  daring  enough  to  propose  the  abolition  of
the  Un-American  Activities  Committee  before he  was  vetoed
by  the  House  Democratic  leadership,  but   Reuther   does  not
even  mention  the  committee.    Nor  the  Senate Internal  Secur-
ity  Committee,  that  other  arm  of  the  witch  hunt.    Nor  the
McCarthy  hearings  on  defense  plants  which  precipitated  the
General  Electric  firings  and  provide  an  easy  mechanism  for
collaboration  between  anti-labor  employers  and  the  Congres-
sional  inquisitors.
There  is  no  mention  in  the  report  of  the  need  to  reform
investigating  committee  procedure  or  to  limit  its  scope,  both
matters  vital  now  to  the  labor  movement.    There  is  not  one
word   of   condemnation  for   passage   of   the   immunity   bill,
which   makes  it   possible  to   strip   witnesses  of   their   Fifth
amendment   privilege.     Nothing   is   said   of   the   fact   that
Eisenhower  and  Brownell  put   through  a  bill  which  for   the
first   time   in   American   history   could   deprive   native   born
radicals  of   their  citizenship,  converting  them  into  stateless
persons.    These  are  all  measures  which  add  to  the  atmosphere
of   fear   and  repression  that  is  beginning  to  engulf   workers
as   well   as  intellectuals.
Soft  on  the  Democrats
Of   all  the  repressive  measures  in  the  last  session  of Con-
gress,  Reuther  mentions  only  one, the  anti-Communist law.
Those  who  turn  to  the  text   of  what  he  said  will  see  how
weak  it  is.   Who  would  guess  from  this  discussion  alone  that
the  liberal  Democrats  fathered  the  worst  provisions  of   this
law,  that  it  applies  not  only  to  Communist  "dominated"  but
to  Communist  "infiltrated"  unions,  and  that  the   Humphrey-
Morse  amendment   established  standards  so  loose  and  vague
for   determining  who   is  a  Communist   as   to   threaten   any
radical,  militant   trade  unionist   or  liberal?    Or  that  a  man
adjudged  Communist  by  these  standards  may  be  sent  to  jail
five  years  for  failing  to  register  under  this  new  law?    This
is  how  the  information  in  those  security  questionnaires  may
lead  to  frame-up  and  jail.   And  this  is why  repeal of  the  new
law—for  which  Reuther  fails  to  ask—is  of  vital  concern   to
the  labor  movement.
Next  Week:  The  C.I.O.  and  Foreign  Policy.
Use  This  Blank  to  Send  a  Xmas Gift  Sub to  a  Friend  and  Please  Get  Your  Renewal  in  Now
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. c.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Namp
Strppt
City
Enter  this  gift
CTo) Na mo
Street
City.
sub for $4 more  (money enclosed) :
12/13/64
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED