I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954dec06.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  Is  the  CIA  Compatible With Co-Existence?
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER 44DECEMBER  6,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
Communist  China  and  The  13: Who  Is  to  Blame?
1.  Last  June  the  British  representative  in  Peking  delivered
a  list  of   missing  United   Nations   prisoners   to   the   Chinese
Communist   government.    The  eleven  U.S.   airmen  now  sen-
tenced  as  spies  were  on  that  list.   Only  negative  replies  were
received.   Peking  thereby  left   the  impression  that  these  men
were  dead.   This  was  bad  faith.
2.  Spies   are  not   sent   out   in   the   uniform   of   their   own
country.  The  rules  of  war  merely  embody  good  sense  in  pro-
viding  that  a  man  arrested  in  his  country's  uniform  is  to  be
treated  as a prisoner of  war,  not  a spy.   The  11  airmen  should
have  been  exchanged  in  "Operation  Big  Switch"  last  year.
In  holding  them  back,  Peking  violated  the  Armistice  Agree-
ment  and  the  Geneva convention  on  the  treatment  of  prison-
ers  of  war,  which  provides  that   prisoners  shall  be  "released
and  repatriated  without   delay  after   the   cessation  of   active
hostilities."    All   the   Soviet   States  were  signatories  of   that
convention,  which  was concluded just  before  the  Communists
took  over  China.   Peking  has  invoked  its  terms  in  the  past
and  thereby  recognizes its  moral  authority.
Held  Incommunicado  Two Years
3.  Under  the  Geneva  convention,   certain  safeguards  must
be honored  if  prisoners of  war  are put  on  trial.   Among  others,
"No  moral  or physical  coercion  may be exerted ...  to induce
him  to  admit  himself  guilty  of  the  act  of  which  he is  accused."
At  least  three  weeks before  the  trial  opens,  the  neutral  nation
which  serves  as  "Protecting  Power"  under  the  convention  is
supposed  to  be  notified.   The  prisoner  is  supposed  to  have  the
service of  counsel and  at  least  two  weeks to  prepare his defense.
Three  months  is  the  maximum a  prisoner  may  be  held  await-
ing  trial.   These  men  were  held  incommunicado  two  years,
and   no   one   knew   about   the   trial   until  the  verdict  was
announced.
4.  Under   the   circumstances,   the   confessions  are  suspect.
No  liberal or  radical in  this  country  would  accept  a confession
obtained   by   holding   a  man   secretly   for   two   years,  under
conditions   where  he  could   be  told   that   the  world  and  his
family  thought  him  dead—and  that  he  would  be dead—unless
he  confessed.  These  men  could  have been  killed  in  prison  and
no  one  would  have  been  the  wiser.   The  accused  may  have
told  the  truth  or they  may have  agreed to  confess on  a  promise
that  they  would  get  less  than  the  death  penalty  and  therefore
have  a  chance  of  some  day  reaching  home  again.
5.  Part  of  the   case  against  the  Americans  may   also  have
been  built  up  by  offering   leniency   to  arrested  Chinese  who
would  testify  against  them.   Thus  the  broadcast  from  Peking
said  of   alleged  CIA   and  Nationalist   agents  parachuted  into
China,   "there  are  a   few   who   have   been   intimidated   into
working  for  the  secret  service  and  the  intelligence   agencies
of   the   United   States   and   the   traitorous   Chiang   Kai-shek
12*                                                                                                      1   •;
clique.   Having  been parachuted,  they  saw their  own  powerful
country   and  the  happy  life  of  the  people  and  realized   that
what   they  did  was  a  crime   against   the  motherland.     Con-
sequently  they   gave  themselves  up  to  the  People's   Govern-
ment.   They  were  subsequently  treated  with  leniency."   (Lon-
don  Times,  Nov.  25).
The  Case of  the  Two Civilians
6.  Some  but  not  all  of  what  can  be  said  in  defense  of  the
airmen  applies  as  well  to   the   two   civilian   defendants.   As
the  Christian  Science Monitor  said  November  26,  "Their  case
is  far   less  clear.   One  was  reported  by  his  family  as  working
for   the  Central  Intelligence  Agency."   The  Army   say*  they
were  "hitching"  a  lift  from  Korea  to  Tokyo.    The   Chinese
claim   they   were   arrested   in   Kirin   province,    Manchuria.
"It   is  hard  to  understand,"   the  Monitor  said,  "how   such  a
flight   could  stray  over  China,  and  we  wonder  if  this  is  the
whole  story."   It  may  be  indicative  that  while  the  sentences
imposed  on  the  airmen ranged  from  four  to  ten  years,  one of
the   civilians   was   given   life   imprisonment   and   the   other
civilian  20  years.
7.  The  suspicion that  the  two civilians may  be in  a  different
situation  is not,  of  course, proof.  "Persons who accompany  the
armed   forces  without   actually  being  members  thereof"  are
also  protected   by   the   Geneva   convention,   and   this   would
cover  civilian  employes of  the  Army.  It  would  be important
to  know  whether  the  names  of  these  two  were  on,  previous
lists  of  the  missing  about  whom  inquiry  was  made  through
the British  at Peking.  If  they were  not  on earlier lists, it'might
mean  that  they  were  on  some  secret  mission.   This  like  other
details  cries  out   for  independent   investigation.    Perhaps  the
Neutral  Nations  Repatriation  Commission  would  take over  the
task  if  requested  by  both  sides.
Peking  Ready  to Dicker
8.  The  one  good  point  in  the  situation  is that  none  of  the
Americans  have  been  executed,   as  were  some  of  the   Chinese
alleged  to  have  worked  with  them.  The  Chinese  government
obviously  is prepared  to  dicker.   The  worst  point,  and  the  one
on  which   Peking  most   deserves  condemnation,  is  that   the
manner  and  timing  of  this  affair  undercuts  all  who  have  been
working  for  peace and plays into the  hands  of  Chiang  Kai-abek
and  the  interventionists.   This  is  not  the  way  to  bring  about
co-existence.
9.  At  the  same  time,  our  own  government  would  be  in  a
better  position  to  do its  duty  and  help  the  13  Americans,  and
others  who  may  still  be  held  in  China,  if  it   were  not   for
the  silly  position  into  which  we  are  forced  because  we do  not
recognize   China.   Renter's  described   the  ludicrous   procedure
(Continued  on  page  2)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

2I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  6, 1954
which  took  place  when  we  made  our  protest  in  Geneva.  "As
neither  consul  could  go to  the  other's consulate,"  it  reported,
"the   procedure  involved  meeting  in  a  hotel  room  which  was
taken  for  the  occasion,  the  cost  of  the  room  being  paid  by
both  governments."  (London  Times,  Nov.  25).   One  wonders
whether  the  consuls  spoke  or  merely  clicked  their   heels.
10.  The  most  important   factor   in  the  whole  picture,   the
one  which  perhaps  explains  our  failure  to  demand  a  United
Nations  investigation,  is  the  role  of  the  Central   Intelligence
Agency.  The charges  against these  13 men may  be unfounded.
They  may  be  innocent.   It   is  easy  to  laugh   at  the   specific
charges  as  the  Washington  Star  did in  its  review  of the  week
last  Sunday  (Nov.  28)  when  it  said,  "No  intelligence   officer
in  hia  right  mind  would  send  Caucasians  into  Manchuria  as
spies.  Nor  would  he  send  11 of  them  on  one  plane."  But  the
broader  picture   is  different.   As  the  Star  went  on  to  say
about   Peking's   charges    of   "230    American   and   Chinese
Nationalist"  agents  apprehended   since   1951,   "the  figure  is
probably  much  too  small.   Chiang  Kai-shek  claims  the  main-
land  is  swarming  with  his  agents.  If  only  106 of  them  have
been  killed,  this  must  be  good  news  to  the  Formosa  govern-
ment."  But  we  have  been  financing  Chiang  and  our  Central
Intelligence  Agency  has  been  boasting  of  carrying  on  exactly
the  kind  of  activities  of  which  Peking  complains.   Our   gov-
ernment  does not  come into  court  with  clean  hands.
11.  An   impartial   investigation   might   clear   the   13  but
what  would it  say of the  general  charge broadcast  by  Peking?
"The   primary  design  of  the  American  aggressors  and   the
traitorous    Chiang   Kai-shek   clique   in   parachuting    these
special  agents  on  the  mainland,"   Radio  Peking   said,  "is  to
group  together  the  remnants   of  revolutionairies  in  the  Chi-
nese  mainland,  plan  and  organize  armed  insurrection,  estab-
lish  so called 'guerrilla bases' and 'parachute landing grounds,'
collect  military   and  political  information  on  China,  and  set
up  secret  communications for  the  agents  and  supply  agents
who continue to  sneak  into  China."  Perhaps  it  is just  as  well
that  the  American  press  did  not  print  the  broadcast   (again
we quote from  the  text in  the  London Times  of  Nov. 25).   The
average  American might take this  as a pretty fair  description
of  what  he  assumes  Chiang  is  doing  with  our  help,  and  what
he  has  been  led  to  believe the  CIA  is  secretly  doing  in  China
and  elsewhere.   Against  that  background  it  is a  little  difficult
for  us  to  strike  an  attitude  of  high  moral  indignation.  We
are  ourselves  partly  to  blame  for  the  fate  of  the  Thirteen.
Is The  CIA  Compatible With   Co-Existence?
The  answer  to  the  question  is  "Yes"   if—but  only  if—  the
CIA  is  to  function  as  orignally  intended.  It  was  established
by  the  National   Security  Act  of  1947,  which  was  designed
to  unify  the  armed  services.   Section  102 set  up  a  Central  In-
telligence   Agency  "for   the  purpose  of  coordinating  the   in-
telligence   activities   of  the  several  Government  departments
and  agencies  in  the  interest  of  national  security  .  .  ."  The
purpose  was  to  eliminate  evils  arising  from  the  existence of
competing   and   overlapping  intelligence  services.   One  was
that  they  jealously  withheld  information  from   each   other.
Another   was  that  they  tended  to  find  whatever  best  served
the  interests  of  their  own  particular  branch  of  the  service.
Naval  intelligence  could  be  counted  on  to  discover  that   the
Russians  were   building   ships   so  fast  that   we  had  better
increase   our   naval  appropriations;   Air   Force  intelligence
could  be  depended  on  not  to  underestimate  the   Soviet  Air
Force  at  budget time;  etc.
The  CIA  was  not  conceived  of  originally  as  an  instrument
of  political  espionage  or  political warfare.   The  1947  act  ex-
plicity   provided  that   it   should  "have   no   police,  .subpena,
law-enforcement  powers  or  internal  security  functions."
Johnson  Feared  "Military  Fascism"
A  dangerous expansion of  powers became evident with  the
passage   of   the   Central  Intelligence  Agency  Act   of   1949.
This  for  the  first  time  gave  CIA  its  peculiar  freedom   from
Congressional  budgetary  supervision.  Alarm  was  created  in
Congress  by   Section    10 (b)   which   says   "The   sums   made
available  to  the   Agency  may  be  expended  without   regard
to   the   provisions  of  law   and   regulations   relating   to   the
expenditure  of  Government  funds;  and  for  objects  of  a  con-
fidential,  extraordinary,  or  emergency  nature  .  .  ."   In  the
Senate,  Johnson  of  Colorado said  this  was  the  most  sweeping
legislation  Congress  had  been  asked  to  pass  except  for   the
Atomic  Energy  Act.   He  said  he  feared  "military  Fascism"
and   the   establishment  of   a   "Military   Gestapo"   (May  27,
1949).   Senator   Langer,  citing  an  admission  in  the  House
committee  report  on  the  bill,  said  this  was  the  first  time  in
the  history  of  the  House or  Senate  that  they  had  been  called
upon  to  pass   a  proposed  statute  "without   having  full   and
detailed  information  of  the  provisions  of  the  bill."
Over  and  over  again  critics  in  House  and  Senate  were  as-
sured  that  fears  were  unfounded,  that  the  CIA  would  solely
be  an  instrument  of  military   intelligence.   But   a   different
direction  was  soon  given  it.   John  Foster  Dulles  in  a  speech
before  the  Bond  Club  in  New  York  early  in   1948   (see  the
series  of  articles  on  "Intelligence"  by  Hanson  W.  Baldwin  in
the  New  York   Times  in  March  of that  year)  touched  on  the
need  for  a  cloak-and-dagger  type  agency  to  carry  on  "liber-
ationist"  activities.   The  continued  hostility   of  the   armed
forces  to  unification  in  intelligence,  as  in  other  aspects  of
their  work,  pushed  the  new  agency  toward  becoming a  super
OSS  instead  of  a  top  coordinating body  for  intelligence;  such
activities  promised  the  kind  of  glamor  publicity  every  Wash-
ington  agency  seeks  to  maintain  and  extend  itself.   "Though
CIA   officials   do  not  admit  it  publicly,"   Time  magazine   re-
ported  August   3  of  last  year,  "the   agency  was  from  the
start  engaged   in  a  wide  range   of  'covert  activities':  espi-
onage,  aid  to  resistance  movements  and  perhaps   sabotage.
Armed  with  all  the  traditional  devices  of  espionage  and   a
few   20th  century  improvements,  such   as  plastic   explosives
.  . . CIA agents  spread  across  the  world."
What  are  these agents doing?  One of the  earliest  glimpses
was given by the  Washington  Post  in  an  editorial  on January
0,  1953, which seemed to  be based  on special information  from
informed    sources.    The   paper   cited   five   instances   as   a
"sampling  of  exploits  which  have  been  the  subject  of  many
whispered  complaints."   The  first  was  the  CIA's  subsidizing
"of  a  neo-Nazi organization"  in  Germany which  had  marked
1: aders  of  the  Social  Democratic party  for  "liquidation."   The
second  was   holding   a  Japanese   citizen  incommunicado  for
eight   months   "under   excuse   of   cross-examination—a   job
initially  undertaken  by  General  Willoughby's  Army  Intelli-
gence  and  passed  on  to  CIA."    The  third  was  tapping   the
telephones  of  Jose  Figueres,   the   President   of  Costa   Rica.
The  fourth  proved rather  prophetic:  "Abortive  effort  by  CIA
undercover men to start  a revolution  in  Guatemala  and blame
it   on  the   United   Fruit   Company."    The   fifth   concerned
Burmese,  Siamese  and  Vietnamese  suspicion  that  CIA  was
supporting  the   activities  of  the   Chinese  Nationalist   forces
in  Burma.   According  to  the   Washington   Post,  the   Burma
episode  "led  to  the  resignation  in  disgust  of  one  of  the  best
and   most  respected   of  our  career   Ambassadors."
(Continued  on Page   Three)
End  Justifies  the  Means?
The  Saturday  Evening  Post  series  on  CIA  ended  by
saying that  CIA would  continue to  carry  on "whether the
squeamish  like  it  or  not ...  If  American  policy  of  corn-
batting   communism  is   moral,  the  procurement  of   in-
telligence  to  carry  out  that  policy is  moral  as  well." The
procurement  of  intelligence may  be  "moral"  by accepted
standards  of  international  morality, but  are  sabotage and
murder  moral  if  carried on  for  good  ends?   If  CIA  be-
lieves  the  end justifies the  means,  are  all  moral scruples
abandoned?   Is   it   safe   to   give   a  blank  check  to   an
agency  of  government which believes  it  may do anything,
even  to  sabotage  operations  in  which  innocent  people
may  be  killed?
What  Better  Christmas  Gift  Than  A  Subscription  to  A  Paper  Still  Fighting  for   Peace?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'»  Weekly,  December  6,  1954
A  New  and  More  Dangerous Form  of Dollar  Diplomacy
This  tendency of  the  CIA  to  become  an  autonomous  under-
cover  "State  Department"   using  cloak-and-dagger   methods
instead  of  diplomacy  can  now  be  documented more fully  from
CIA's  own  boasting.   The  Saturday   Evening  Post   (Oct.  30,
Nov.   6,  Nov.  13)  ran  a  three-part  article,  "The   Mysterious
Doings  of  CIA," an  official  portrait  done with  CIA's  approval.
In   this   series  the   CIA  takes   credit   for   the   overthrow  of
Arbenz  in  Guatemala, of  Farouk  in  Egypt  and  of Mossadegh
in  Iran.   This   is  "dollar   diplomacy"   in  a   new  and  more
melodramatic  guise, utilizing  secret  agents,  sabotage  and  sub-
vention   instead  of  the   Marines  to   overthrow   governments
we—or  the  CIA—dislike.
Another  activity  which  is  neither  diplomacy  nor  military
intelligence  is  sabotage.   "Besides   its  spy  network  and   the
open  CIA  function  of  research,"  the  Saturday   Evening  Post
reported,   "the   agency   operates    a   super-clandestine   third
force—the  top  secret  activity  of  aiding and  abetting freedom
forces  where  the  patriotism  of captive peoples may  be fanned
from   a   spark   into  action."   Or  where  even  a  handful  of
malcontents  may  be  mobilized  for  lawless  activity:   "In  an-
other  country,  where  the  resistance  movement  is  small  but
daring,  a  CIA  agent   dispatched  a  band  of  saboteurs  to  a
trestle  on the  main  Red rail  supply  line"  and  the  bridge  was
blown  up.   When  railroads  are  blown  up,  people  are  killed,
property   is  damaged.   This   is  war,   carried   on  secretly   in
peacetime  against  countries  with  which  we  are  at  peace  and
have  normal  diplomatic  relations.    This   is  dirty   and   dan-
gerous   business,  a   violation   of  international  law,   and   of
common  morality.
Against  this  background  it  becomes  possible  fully   to  ap-
preciate  what   Mansfield   of  Montana  told   the   Senate   last
March  10  in  calling  for  the  establishment  of  a  Joint  Con-
gressional  Committee  to  act  as  a  "watchdog"   over  CIA  ac-
tivities.    "We   cannot   permit   CIA,"   Mansfield   said,    "any
more  than  we  can  permit  any  government  agency  to  have
free  reign  to  do  anything  it  wants  anywhere  in  the  world.
If  its  agents  play  carelessly  with  fire,  the  whole world  might
get  burned."
Domestic  Danger  as  Well
A  secret  agency,  operating  with  virtually  unlimited  funds,
represents   a  domestic  as  well  as  an  international   danger.
The  Washington  Post, after  exposing  the  CIA in  1953,  seems
to  have  been talked  out  of  supporting  the  Mansfield  proposal.
It  said last  March  23 that the  arguments  for  such  supervision
would  be forceful  "if  the  agency had  any  powers  within  the
U.S.  or  over  U.S.  citizens, but  the  agency  does  not.   It  oper-
ates  only  in  the  foreign  field."  But  there  is  evidence  that
CIA  operates  at  home as  well  as  abroad.   One  example  was
provided  in  the  Saturday   Evening  Post  series.   "The   CIA,"
it  said,  "maintains  its  own recruiting   system  .  . . Youthful
college  students   do  not   even  know  they  have  been  quietly
marked  as  possible  intelligence  officers."   The  process  of  re-
cruiting begins  when "Former  G-2 [military  intelligence]  and
OSS   officers,   now  members  of  the  faculties  of  some  eighty
of  our  top  institutions  of  higher  learning,  look  over members
of  their  junior  year  classes  with  an  eye  for  prospective  CIA
material."  If  this network can  operate  secretly  for  recruiting,
it  can  operate  secretly  for  other  purposes.
The   Washington   Star  of  December  30,  1952,   carried   an
article   asserting  that  "the   CIA  established  an  intelligence
service  in  the  United  States,"  though  as  we  have  seen  it  is
forbidden  to  do this  by  law.   Senator  Mansfield  cited  the  case
of  the  two  CIA  agents  who last  year  spread  the  false  report
that  Owen Lattimore  was  about  to flee the  country  and later
refused   to  testify   when   subpoenaed.  "Does   this   incident,"
Mansfield  asked,  "mean  that  the  CIA  is  getting  into  the  in-
ternal  security  field  in  competition  with  the  FBI?   Does  it
mean  that  officials  of  this  Government  agency  can  defy   the
courts?"
How   much  of   CIA's   activity   is   devoted   to   blowing   up
bridges  in  Poland  or  watching  radicals  in  America?  Nobody
What  Can  Be  Done  About  CIA?
The   Atomic   Energy    Commission,   which   handles
secrets  no  less  vital  than  those  of  CIA,  is  subject  to
supervision  by a Joint  Congressional  Committee.  Mans-
field  of  Montana,  backed  by  two  dozen  other  Senators,
has  tried  two  years  in  succession  to  get  a  vote  on  a
resolution  to  establish  a  similar  committee  to  supervise
CIA.   Last  year,  it  was  again   bottled  up  by  Jenner,
McCarthy's  friend,  in  the  Senate  Rules  Committee.  The
one  hope  of  putting  some  check  on  CIA,  limiting  it  to
normal  functions  of  intelligence,   and  keeping  it  from
acting   as   a   super   State   Department   and   sabotage
agency,  big  enough to  blow  up  hope  of  world  peace,  is
to  establish   such  a  committee.    Mansfield  will   reintro-
duce  his  resolution  next  session.
knows.   How effective  is  it  at  the  job  it  is  supposed  to  do—
military   intelligence?    Nobody   knows   that   either.    CIA
claims  the  U.S.  intelligence system  is  second  only  to  that of
the   U.S.S.R,    "I   do   not   know,"    Mansfield   commented,
"whether  this  is  a  boast  of strength  or  a  confession of  weak-
ness.   Hanson  Baldwin  has  reported  that  some  observers  be-
lieve  it  is  actually  not  as  effective,  in  terms  of  end  results,
as  the  British  Secret  Service  with  roughly  3,000  employes, or
the  Israeli  service,  with  roughly  300."    Mansfield   said  esti-
mates  of  CIA's  personnel  run  from  8,000  to  30,000,  and   its
annual  expenditures from  $500,000,000  to  $800,000,000. That
is  a  lot  of  men  and  money to  be  used  without  supervision.
Could  Precipitate  a  Third  World  War
A  network  of this kind, by  miscalculation, could  precipitate
a third  world war.  Its  control of intelligence  gives  it  strategic
power  over  policy  decisions.  Its  blank  check  to  act   against
communist  influence  everywhere  may  easily  be  used  against
any   government  which  seems   "communistic"   to  American
business   interests.     What   happened   in   Guatemala  could
happen  on a larger  scale  in Mexico.  What  happened in Egypt
could  happen  on  a  larger  scale  in  India.   Any  liberal,  any
radical,  any  neutralist  may  easily  appear  suspect  in   CIA's
eyes.
Congress  and  the  country  ought  to  know  more  about  the
man  who  heads  CIA  and  wields  all  this  power.   Allen  W.
Dulles,  its  chief,  is  much  less  well  known  than  his   brother,
John  Foster.  But  the  former,  like  the  latter,  showed  no such
crusading  liberationist   zeal  before  the  war   when   Fascism
threatened  to  envelop  the  world.   As  a  partner   in  Sullivan
&  Crowell  and  a  director  of  the  Anglo-German  J.   Henry
Schroder   Banking   Corporation,   Allen  W.  managed  to  co-
exist    quite    peacefully    with    Fascism    and   Nazism.    The
Schroder  bank  helped  Hitler  obtain  raw  materials   and  for-
eign  exchange  with which  to fight the world boycott.   Another
of  its  directors,  V.  Lada  Mocarski,  served  with  Dulles  in  the
OSS  during   the  war,   operating  out  of  Switzerland.    How
happy  the  German clientele  of  the  Schroder  bank  must  have
been  to  have  influential   friends  in  both  camps  during   the
conflict.
The  Dulles  brothers  represent  capitalist  forces  quite  con-
tent  to  do business with the  Hitler  regime,  for  all  its  crimes,
so  long  as  it  promised to  be  an  effective  instrument  of  world
counter-revolution.   These  latter  day  Metternichs   skillfully
emerged  after   the  war   to  take  over  direction  of   national
policy,  helping  to  revive  a  Germany  safe  for  their  corporate
clients  and  a  world  unsafe  for  socialism.   This  is  the  spirit
in  which  they  carry  on  today.   The  blank  check  of  the  CIA
is  a  blank  check  in  the  hands  of  men  who  do  not  believe  in
co-existence,   who  are   devoted   to   "liberation,"   who   never
waxed  emotional  over  Fascist  totalitarianism,  and  who  may
use  their  power  to  turn  back  the  slow  ebb  tide  away   from
world  hate  and  tension.
Use the  Blank  on Page 4  to  Send the Weekly  to a Friend at the Special Rate of Only $4 a Year
.1   8  .;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  6,  1954
Why  Not  Call Him  Gerald  L. K. McCarthy  In  The  Future?
As  we  went  to  press,  the  Senate  of the  United  States  had
at  last  cut  down  to  size  the  most  unscrupulous  boor  ever  to
sit  among  its  members.   Four  test  votes  culminated  Wednes-
day  night  in  censure  67  to  20  on  the  first  count   brought
against   McCarthy  by  the   Watkins   committee.    McCarthy
never  got  more  than  21 votes  on  any  test,  and  a  majority  of
Republicans  had  joined  a  solid  block  of  Democrats  on  every
vote.   The  vote  marked  a  very  deflationary   week  for  Mc-
Carthy;  he  had  ignominiously failed  to  come  anywhere  near
filling Madison  Square  Garden in  New York  on  Monday night
and   similar  rallies  in   Chicago  and   Los  Angeles  had   been
cancelled.   The  letters  spread  on  the  record  by  Senator  Ful-
bright as the final debate opened on censure  showed the  crack-
pot,  screwball  nature  of  his  following.
It  has  been  a  bad  18 months  for  Low  Blow  Joe.   His  luck
began  to  sour  last  year.  In  July  of  1953  he had  to  get  rid of
J.  B.  Matthews  as  staff  director  in  the  wake  of  protest  over
the  latter's  discovery that the Protestant ministry  was a  nest
of  Communists.  A year  later, the  Mundt investigation  forced
Roy  Cohn  out  as  his  counsel.  Last  October,  deserting  a  sink-
ing  ship,  his  prize  FBI  man,  Francis  P.  Carr,  resigned   as
staff   director.   In  less  than  a  month,  when  the   Democrats
take  over,  he  will  lose  his  sounding  board  as  investigating
committee  chairman.   In  the   next  few  weeks,  he  will   try
vindictively  to  crush  a  few  victims   small  enough  so  they
can't  fight  back.  We hope they  will  go into  court  on  motions
to  quash  their  subpoenas  and  so  delay  his  lame  duck  inqui-
sition   until  his   abused  authority  expires  with   the   end  of
the  year.
With  Joe's  deflation,  watch   for   more  opposition  to  his
chief  Senatorial  supporter,  Jenner.   The  conservative  Wash-
ington  Star  rebuked  Jenner   Wednesday  for  his  attack  on
Flanders,  but  noted  that  it  was  not  so  surprising   when one
recalled  his  speech  calling  General  Marshall  "a  living   lie."
Jenner  seems to be on a  par  with  some of those letter writers
to  whom  Fulbright  called  the  Senate's  attention.
Hiss:  Congressional witch  hunters  decided  not  to  summon
him   when   they   realized   that   he   would   again    deny   the
Chambers   charges   under   oath,   forcing    them   to   recall
Chambers  and  embark  on  a  repeat  performance.   They  de-
cided  public  opinion  would  not  stand  for  a  new  prosecution
of  Hiss  on  the  same  charges  and  that  his  re-appearance  on
the  witness  stand  might  redound  in  his  favor,  giving  him
the  broader  platform  he  seeks  from  which  to  fight  for  vindi-
cation.  Our  favorite  headline  of  the  week  was  the  New  York
Daily  News  "Hiss  Comes  Out  Fighting."   We  applaud  the
tone  and  content  of  his  statement  on  leaving  prison  and  be-
lieve  he  deserves  the  widest  support  in  his  determination  to
clear  his  name.  It  would  go far  toward  changing  the  atmo-
sphere  if  he  could  do  so.
Remington:  There  is  no  good  reason  to. believe  his  murder
had  anything  to  do with  politics.   Political  prisoners  report
little  anti-Communist  feeling  in  jail.   The  murder,  however,
may  be  used  by  Congressman  Joel  T.  Broyhill   (R.,  Va.),  to
resume  his  attacks  at  the  next  session  on James  V.  Bennett,
the  Federal  director  of  prisons.  Broyhill  accuses  Bennett  of
being  too  kindly  in  dealing  with   political   prisoners.   The
Remington  murder  would serve  some useful  purpose  if  it  led
to  the  organization  of  a  group  designed  to  protect  political
prisoners—the  United  States,  to  its  shame, now has  a  grow-
ing  number—and  to  help  their   families.
The  German  Elections:  The  Social  Democratic  victory  in
Hesse  is  no  cause  for  rejoicing.   The party  had  distinguished
itself   chiefly  by  its  skill  in  evading  the  1946  socialist  consti-
tution  of  Hesse,  which called  for  the  nationalization  of  heavy
industry  and  utilities.   The  Social  Democrats  are  more  na-
tionalistic  than  Adenauer, ready  to make capital  of the  Saar
issue,  prepared  to  enter   into  a  coalition  with  the  rightist
Refugee  party,  and  not  opposed  in  principle  to   rearmament.
Student  rioting  against  rearmament  would  be  more  encour-
aging  if  it  did  not  take  a  mob form.   The  Christian   Demo-
cratic  Minister   Without   Portfolio,   Franz   Joseph   Strauss,
facing  an  uproariously  hostile  audience,  made  the  most  im-
portant  observation  of  the  campaign  when he  said,  "If  crock-
ery  throwing  is  to  replace  political  argumentation   then  we
are  back  in  1932  again."  What  the  campaign   demonstrated
above  all  is how little  attuned  the  Germans  are  to  democratic
processes.
Two  Spanish  Items  The  American  Press  Did  Not  Carry:
Five  men  were  sentenced in  Madrid November  25 to  from  12
to  20 years  in jail  for  Freemasonry;  leading  business  men  in
Barcelona  went  as  a  deputation  to  the   Civil  Governor  on
November  22 to  protest  the  Franco  regime's  restrictions  on
business  . . . The California  CIO Council  convention in  Oak-
land  last  month  rejected  a  resolution  proposing  that  the new
Anti-Communist  Control  Act  be  amended  and  voted  instead
for  its  outright  repeal  .  .  .  Vigilant  Society   Guards  Itself
Against  Subversive  Teachers:  One  of  the  little  known chap-
ters  in  the  life  of  Andrei  Vishinsky  is  that  in  1913  when  he
was  about  to take up  a  professorship  in  criminal  law at  Kiev
University,  the   Tsarist   authorities   intervened   on   political
grounds  .  .  .  The Illinois  Supreme  Court  has  overruled  a
requirement  that  Chicago  Housing   Authority  tenants  must
sign  loyalty  oaths  or  face  eviction.   The  Court  ruled  that  to
exclude  persons  "solely  because  of  membership  in   organi-
zations  designated   as  subversive  by  the  Attorney  General"
bore  no  reasonable  relationship   to  the  eradication   of  slums
and  the  construction  of  low-cost  housing.
Use  This  Blank  to  Send  a  Xmas Gift  Sub to  a  Friend  and  Please  Get  Your  Renewal  in  Now
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name _________
Street
fSty
SOI  E. Capitol, Wash. 8. D. C.
my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
7.nnA                StntA
Enter this gift  sub  for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name.                         .            ....          _..,,....
Street
City
7«ne              Stj.te
12/6/54
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  at
Second  Class  Mall
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED