I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954apr05.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive:  Defense  Department  Opposes  New Treason  Amendment,  Page 4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2, NUMBER 11APRIL  6,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Warning:  The Drift  Is  Toward  War and  Fascism
The  Delusions  of Mr. Dulles
The  key  words,  the  fateful  phrase,  in the Dulles ad-
dress  to  the  Overseas  Press  Club  was  "by  whatever  means."
This   was  a  new   departure.     To   understand  on  what   un-
charted  seas  it  would  launch  the  U.  S. if  not  the  United  Na-
tions,  one  must  compare  it  with  what  President  Eisenhower
said  on  Indo-China  last  April  and  Dulles  last  September.   The
former  said that  the  Korean truce  would  be a fraud  if  it  mere-
ly   released   aggressive  armies  for   attack  elsewhere.   Dulles
warned  that if  Communist China  sent its own army into  Indo-
China  that  would  result  in  grave  consequences which  might
not  be confined  to  Indo-China.    These  were  clear and  explicit
warnings  against  a  Chinese  military  invasion  of  Indo-China.
This  is fully  within  the  power  of  Peiping  to  avoid,  and  an  in-
vasion  would  be  a  concrete  move  people  everywhere  could
understand.
But  Dulles  went  beyond  this  Monday  night.    He  said  the
imposition  "on  South-east  Asia"  of  Communism  "by  what-
ever  means  .  .  .  should not  be passively accepted, but  should
be  met  by  united  action."   This  calls  for  united  action  not
merely   against   an   invasion  by   China   but   against  internal
change  "by  whatever  means"  brought  about.    This  is broad
enough  to  cover  not  only  revolution,  but   a  peaceful   settle-
ment  that  might  set  up  a  coalition  regime  in  Indo-China  or
even  a  democratic  election  in  which   the   Communists   law-
fully  won  a  majority.
It   is  not  intended  to  imply  that  the  Communists   could
muster  a  majority  in   Indo-China   today  in   a  free   election.
The  point  is  that  U.  S. policy  is  being  laid  down  which  says
in  advance that  we  will  not  accept  certain  political  ideas  in
the  area  "by  whatever  means"  chosen.    This  is  hardly  com-
patible  with  our  usual  insistence  on  free  elections.    This  is
not  an  extension  of  the  Monroe  Doctrine—as  Dulles  hints—
but  of  the  Holy  Alliance  the  Monroe  Doctrine  was  intended
to  combat.    For  the  Holy  Alliance  sought  by  force  to  stamp
out   those  revolutionary  ideas  which  the  French   Revolution
had  brought  into  the  world,  and  to  stifle  even  those  moderate
movements which Their  Most  Christian  Majesties  feared  might
trend  in  the  same direction.   "It  was this  so-called  Holy  Al-
liance,"   H.   A.  L.  Fisher  writes  in  his  History   of   Europe,
"which  muzzled  intellectual   life  in  Germany,  stamped   out
the  constitutional   movements  of  (Italy,  restored  autocracy   to
Spain,   refused   to   recognize   the   insurgent   democracies   of
South  America  .  .  ."  This  is the direction  in  which  we have
been  drifting  since  the  intervention  in  Greece.   The   implica-
tions  of  the  Truman  Doctrine  are extended  and  made  explicit
by  the  Dulles  declaration.
II
The  dangers  in  this  commitment   lie  in  its   diffuse
character.   A warning to China  not  to invade Indo-China  may
be met  with war.   The  nuclear weapons on which  we rely may
be  used  with  telling  force.    The  policy  may  precipitate  world
war  but  at  least  it  is  calculable.    But  what  do  we  do  if  the
Chinese  do  not  intervene  and  yet  Indo-China   does  not   settle
down   comfortably   into   what   we   consider   a   safely   anti-
Communist  groove?   We  can  destroy  the  country  with  our
favorite  weapon.   We  can  blast  its  pro  and  anti  Communists
impartially  with  lesser bombs  and  napalm as we  blasted  Korea.
We  can  send  our  own  soldiers  in  to  fight  the  guerrillas   in
their  own  way,  but  past  experiences  of  our  own  in  Mexico
and  Nicaragua do  not  promise that  we  should  be  more  suc-
cessful   than  the  French  in  such  a  course.     None   of   these
alternatives  would  endear us  to  Asia, and  one of  them—use of
our   new   nuclear   weapons   against   human   beings—would
make  us  odious  to  all mankind.
There  is  something  to  be  said  for  reliance  on  force  if  force
works.   But  there  is nothing  more objectionable  than  a  policy
of  force  which  can  only  hurt  and  destroy  without   creating
stability  of  any  kind.    It  is important  to  focus on  that phrase
"by  whatever means"  because  Dulles  did  his  best  to  hide  its
full  implications  by  pretending  that we were  somehow  helping
a  great  popular  movement  in  Indo-China.    One  need  go back
no  further  and  to  a  source  no  more  liberal  than  the  Judd
committee  report  of  last  week-end  to  see  how  false  this  is.
This  Congressional  study   group  made  a  trip  to  Indo-China
under  the  chairmanship  of  Congressman  Walter  H.  Judd,  a
rightist   Republican   and   ex-missionary   who   sees   the   world
through  the  same eyes as Chiang  Kai-shek.   Their  conclusions
—no  "Munich"  in  the  East—are  the  same  as Dulles,  but   the
facts  they  brought  back  do  not  support  their   conclusions.
What  does  the  report  say?  First,  that  "the   country  is  war
weary   and   would   welcome  peace."     Secondly,   that   inde-
pendence  is  a  political  necessity,  that   "the   near  monopoly"
Ho  Chi  Minh  "has  enjoyed  on  nationalist   sentiment   will  be
broken  if  Viet  Nam  achieves  by  peace  what  Ho  Chi  Minh
professes  to  seek  by  war."    With  peace  there  must   come  a
complete  renovation  of  the  government.     "The   present   gov-
ernment,"   the  Judd  report  says,  "has   been  hand-picked   by
Bao  Dai.     Some  of  its  members  not   only   have  no  popular
support  but  have  been  associated with  anti  popular  movements
.  . . The current  situation  is expressed  in military  terms.  But
the  real  problem  is a weak  political  base."
5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  S, 1954
This  is  not   the  kind  of  problem  which  can  be  solved  by
force.    The  only  "strong"  government   which  can  be  estab-
lished  by  military  means is a  rightist  and  authoritarian  regime
like  that  of  Papagos  in  Greece  or  Rhee  in  South  Korea.    To
shut  the  door  on  conciliation,   to  rely  on  force,  is  to  set  in
motion  a course of  action  which  must  end with  our  supporting
something  close  to  Fascism  in  the  name  of  freedom.
Ill
Even  this  might  be  defended  in  a world  eager  above
all  for  peace  if  it  could  be kept  confined  to  Indo-China.   But
a  repressionist  policy  must  create  tension  in  the  Far  East.    To
understand   Chinese  reaction  we  need  only  imagine  the   con-
sequences  if  Communist  China  were pouring  money,  ammuni-
tion   and  technical  aid  into  Mexico  in   support   of   a  regime
hostile  to  the  U.  S.   The  situation  is further  complicated  by
our  call  for  "united  action" and  our  hope of  intervening  with
Asian  allies  instead  of  our  own  men.    The  only  Asian  allies
willing  and  ready  are  the  soldiers  of   Chiang  Kai-shek,  and
here  again  it  is useful  to  compare the  Dulles  picture  with  that
in  the  Judd  report.
Dulles  would  have  them  rescue  us  under  the  guise  of  res-
cuing  them.    "Should  the  free  nations,"  he  asked,  "facilitate
and  encourage  the  bloody  liquidation  by  the  Chinese   Com-
munists  of  these  free  Chinese  on  Formosa?"    But  the  danger
Formosa   fears  is  not   "liquidation"   but,  as  the  Judd   report
reveals,  being   allowed  to   die  peacefully  on  the   vine.
"Inadequate  numbers,'.'  the  report   says  of  Chiang's  forces,
"will  push  the  Army's  age to  a  point  where its  combat  capa-
bilities  will  diminish.    Most  observers  agree  that  the  decisive
date  will  be  in  about  five  years.   Thus  the  government  must
weigh   the   possibilities  of   a  mainland  invasion  while  it   has
offensive  potential,  or  risk  the  danger  of  supporting  an  over-
aged  military   establishment."
The  report  goes on to  say, in  a flash of illumination,  "It    [i.e.
Chiang's  regime]   is  not  unmindful  that  the   Chinese   Com-
munists  may  choose to  sit  this one out.    The  choice of  alterna-
tives,  open  to the National  Government," the  report  concludes
lamely,  "can  only  be  made  in  the  light  of  many  interrelated
factors  not  the  least of  which is the  role of  the  United  States."
In  plainer  language this  means that  whether  Chiang's  army
just  dies  away  of  old  age depends on  whether  in  the  next  five
years  we  use it  for  war  on  the  mainland, either  in   Indo-China
or  against  China  itself,  in  which  case  we  will  be  drafting  an
elderly  flea  for   use  against  a  vigorous  young   elephant.     In
this  connection,   in  view  of  all  the  talk   about   the  political
advantages  of  using  Asians  against  Asians,  it  would  be  just
as well  to  take note  of  another observation  in  the  Judd  report.
"In   northern   Viet  Nam,"  the  report  says,  "the   memory  of
the  unpleasant  Chinese  military   occupation   in   the   postwar
period   has   sharpened   local   animosities   against   the   Chinese
community."   Chiang's   army  has  been  there  already,  and—
though   "fellow   Asian"—is  none  too  popular.     The  notion
that  intervention   with  Chiang's  troops   would  be  politically
more  palatable  than   the  use  of  our  own  is  another  of   the
minor  delusions  Mr.  Dulles  has  fostered.
IV
A  major delusion is that  "united action" can be obtained
'by  a speech which,  only  a few  weeks before  a peace  conference
with  Communist   China,  slams  the  door  on  negotiation  and
demands  unconditional  surrender  to  American  objectives  in
Korea  and  Indo-China.     This  may  achieve  unity   with   the
Republican  Senators  of  the  China  Lobby  bloc  but  not   with
Britain  and  France,  or  New  Zealand  and  Australia, much  less
India  or  Burma.    The  dangers  they  might  be  willing  to  face
after  a  conference  at  which attempts  at  negotiation  and  com-
promise  had  failed  are  not  dangers they  will  freely  risk  in  the
wake  of  a  speech  which  seems  to  torpedo  the  conference  in
advance.     Dulles   terms   his  position  "soberly  rational"   but
what  is sober or  rational about  a position which  could logically
be  taken  up  only  if  we  were  the  conqueror  of  East  Asia,  and
not   in  the  wake  of  a  military  stalemate  in  which  we  were
fought  to  a standstill by  far  more  poorly  equipped  North  Ko-
rean  and  Communist  Chinese  forces?
Only  those who mistake rigidity for  strength  will think  that
Dulles  has  taken  a  strong  position.    His  position  reflects  the
weakness  of  the  Eisenhower  Administration.   For  while   the
big  business  men  who  are  at  its   core  want  disengagement,
economy  and  relaxation  of  tension,  they  have  been  impelled
by  their  own  extremist  wing  and  the  character  of  the  Demo-
cratic  opposition  to  take  up  attitudes  which  must  bring  a
third  world  war  closer.    The  extremist  wing  has  long  set  its
course  toward  war  with  China,  while  the  Democratic   oppo-
sition—instead  of   calling  for   peace—are  critical  of  the   re-
laxed  arms race  and  as ready at  the  next  election  to  accuse  the
Republicans  of  "losing"  Indo-China   as  the  Republicans  have
been  to  accuse  them  of  "losing"  China  itself.   The  atmosphere
in  Washington   is  such  that   few  members  of  Congress  dare
oppose  anything,  whether  in  the  direction  of  the  police  state
at  home  or  war  abroad,  which  would  put  him  in  the  position
of  opposing  something  which  is advertised as anti-Communist.
The tide here is running toward war and fascism,
though  few  are lunatic  enough to  want  either.   The  President,
who  opposed  military  intervention  in  Indo-China  only  a  few
weeks   ago,   now   will   not   commit   himself   against   sending
troops.    The  whole  world  fears  an  atomic  holocaust  but   the
best  lead  the  Administration  can  give  is  a  frigid  and  meager
statement   by  the  head  of  the  Atomic  Energy   Commission.
In   the   Senate,  where  Douglas  already  calls  for   war,   only
Stennis of Mississippi points out  the  obvious.  "Atomic energy,"
he  interrupted   Symington's   febrile  appeal  for   a   bigger   air
force  to  say last  Tuesday,  "has  reached  the  point  where  there
is  no  effective  defense,  where  there  is  no  security  to  be  had
against  it."     Only  one  voice,  Chet  Holifield  of  California,  is
thereupon   raised  in  Congress   to  hint   that   jointr  action   for
peace  is  thus  the  only  way  out.   The  silence  of  the  liberals
is  thunderous.    Our  friends  and  allies must  save us  and  them-
selves  from  our  impotence.    A  great  nation  is  being   driven
toward  catastrophe  like  a  herd  of  sheep,  moved  onward  and
held  together   by  the  nips  and  growls  of  a  few  fierce  dogs.
A  free  people  has  rarely  exercised  less  control  over  its  own
destiny.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

JT.  F.   Stone's   Weekly,  April   S,  195k
L E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Bdttor  and Publisher,  L  P.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  205,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  >J
a  year;  Canada,   Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western   Hemisphere,  $«;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by   1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;   for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  matt.
Single  copy,   15  cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.   Entered   as  Second   Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
Vol.  2, Number  11
April  5, 1954
Wire-Tapping  Mythology—
Brownellism  In  Action
In  their  morning mail last Tuesday, members  of the  House
were notified  by the  majority  whip that  there would  be a vote
on Wednesday, Thursday or Friday on a  bill to authorize wire-
tapping.   The  notification was  extraordinary  in  that  no  bill
had yet been reported,  and the House Judiciary  Committee was
only  to  begin meeting  on a  bill  that  morning.  The notice re-
flected the  intense pressure  suddenly turned on by  Republican
leadership,  under urging  by  Attorney  General  Brownell  and
FBI Director J.  Edgar Hoover.
Brownell  and  Hoover  had  already  won  a  notable  success.
Last  July, after  three  days of hearings,  House Judiciary  Sub-
committee  No. 3 had  unanimously  reported  H.R.  477 by  its
chairman, Keating  (R., N.Y.), an able lawyer and (in the past)
legal  conservative.   Reating's  bill   authorized  -wire-tapping
in  "security"  cases but  only  after  the  issuance  of  a  permit—
the  equivalent  of a  search  warrant—by  a  U.S. judge.  In  this
the  bill  followed  the  procedure  of  New  York  State,  -where
wire-tapping  by  the  police  is  legal  when a  judicial  order  has
been  obtained.
The  report   favoring  the  Keating  bill  was  a  defeat  for
Brownell  and  Hoover.  The  Department  of  Justice  bill,  H.R.
408, by Reed  (R.
(
 N.Y.), chairman of the  full  committee, would
permit  wire-tapping  without  a  court  order,  on  the  sole  ap-
proval of the  Attorney  General.  Wire-tapping  seemed to  have
bogged  down  between the  Department's  insistence  on  a  free
hand  and   Congressional   reluctance   to   allow   wire-tapping
without  judicial  supervision.  Then  Keating  executed  a  flip-
flop.  On  Saturday,  March 27, after  a  luncheon  with Brownell
and  Hoover, he issued  a statement reversing  himself,  accom-
panied  by the  draft  of a  new bill  giving the  Attorney General
the  power to authorize  wire-tapping in "security" cases.
Political   gossip   on  the   Hill   attributed   the   reversal   to
Keating's  ambition  to  run  for  Governor  of  New  York when
and  if  Dewey  decides to  bow out.  Keating  himself  said  in  his
statement  that  conferences  with  Brownell and  Hoover  "have
convinced  me  that  in  the  limited  field  of  treason,  sabotage,
espionage  and  sedition,  our  crime detection  and  law  enforce-
ment officials  would be seriously  hampered in bringing  to  jus-
tice the  enemies of our country if  they were required to  obtain
court  approval  before  tapping  a  wire."   The  implication is
that  even  the  courts  cannot  be  fully  trusted.   The  further
implication is that  the  FBI  and the Attorney General can.  In
the  police state, the  police alone are  pure.
In  an  address on March  18 before the  National Civil  Liber-
ties Clearing  House here in Washington,  the Attorney  General
made  a  plea  for  wire-tapping.   He  pictured  an  "interlocking
web" of  Communist  activity  and  said  "As  a  matter  of  neces-
sity,  they  turn  to  the  telephone  to  carry  on  their   intrigue.
When  they  will  next  strike,  who  will  be  their  victim,  what
valuable  government  secret  will  be  the   subject  of  a  new
theft,  where a  leading fugitive conspirator  is being concealed
—these  are  all  matters  that  Communist  agents  talk  about
Stop  Press  Bulletin
Capitol  Hill-That  dispute—the  one  between  Senator
Mundt and the  American Bar  Association—is still  hold-
ing  up  important  government  business.   One  Senator,
from  Wisconsin,  claims  that  until  this  controversy  is
resolved  he  cannot  go. ahead  with  hearings   on,  alleged
infiltration  in Alaska, among the  Eskimos.
A  grocery  store  keeper  at  Point  Barrows,  according
to  an  informant  whose  identity  cannot  be  disclosed,  is
said to have planted  the  seeds  of  subversive  doctrine by
wrapping  fish  for  Eskimo  purchasers  all  through  the
summer  of   1943  in  pages  torn   from   copies   of   Das
Kapital  in  the  original  Russian.*
The  merchant, who changed  his  name from  Boris  to
Igor  to  avert  suspicion,  is  said  to  figure  in  sensational
testimony  already  taken  in  executive  session  from   a
former  member  of  the  Alaskan  Politbureau  converted
to  capitalism by  Roy  Cohn.
According-  to  this  ex-Communist,  the  merchant  alyly
assured  his  customers  that  by  wrapping  their  fish  in
those  book  pages  he was giving them  surplus  value!
* That  Das Kapital  was  originally  written  in  Russian
and  not  as  hitherto  supposed  in  the  language  of  our
God-fearing  German  allies  will  also be disclosed  by  the
McCarthy  committee  as  soon as  hearings  resume.
over telephones today, knowing that they cannot be confronted
in  a  criminal  proceeding  with  what  they   say."
This belongs in Bulfinch's  Age of  Fable.  It  conveys the  im-
pression  that  men  desperate   enough  to   steal   government
secrets  discuss  their  activity  on  the  telephone  and  that  the
FBI  must  listen  in  helplessly  because  "they  cannot  be  con-
fronted  in a criminal proceeding with what they  say."   It  may
not  be  possible  to  "confront  them  with  what  they  say*'  but
that  is  principally  because  it  is  difficult  to  make  crime  of
conversation.   It  is  certainly  possible  to  confront  them  with
evidence of what they do, if  they really  do  it.
In  his  own statement  Keating  said  he had been  "authorita-
tively  informed"  that  intercepted   communications  "have  al-
ready   yielded  information  about   serious  crimes  involving
1
disloyalty  to  our  country."   The  italics  are  added,  and  the
word  chosen  may  be  significant.   "Disloyalty"  can  be  conver-
sational.   Keating  also  says  that  while  he  favors  the  court
order  for  wire-tapping  he  has  become  "convinced  that  »n
exception  must  be  made  in  the   case   of  evidence  obtained
against  potential  traitors,  saboteurs,   espionage  agents  and
seditious conspirators."   Again the italics are added.  If  a man
is only a "potential" traitor,  etc., he has not yet committed a
crime  and  has  only given evidence of  opinions or  associations
some  people  may  consider  dangerous.
This  is  the  kind  of  evidence  which  can  be  obtained  by
listening  in  on people's  telephones,  and  may  be  enough  in  a
period like this to  obtain convictions for  such vague if  sinister
charges  as  "seditious  conspiracy,"  "conspiracy  to  advocate"
under  the   Smith   Act,  and  failure  to  register  under   the
treacherously  loose  provisions  of  the  Foreign  Agents  Regis-
tration  Act.  The new Keating bill  would permit  wire-tapping
in  suspected violations  of  these  statutes.   They  are  an  easy-
vehicle  for  the  transplantation   to  the  courts,  via  the  con-
spiracy  doctrine,  of  the  kind  of  evidence  as  to  opinions  and
associations  which have figured  so notoriously in  loyalty  pro-
ceedings.   This  may  prove to  be the  real purpose of  wire-tap
legislation  if  it  passes;  those  engaged  in  real  crimes  do  not
chat  about  them  over  the  telephone.
Personal  Note:  IPS  will  speak  in  Los  Angeles  April  22
under  the  auspices  of  the  Citizens  Committee  to  Preserve
American  Freedom and  in  San  Francisco April  23 under  the
auspices  of  Californians for  the  Bill  of  Bights.  The  subject
will  be a  general  report  on McCarthyism  and the  witch  bunt.
4  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,   April   S, 1954
Treason Amendment Too  Reactionary  for  Pentagon
Capitol  Hill—That    current     Republican     line     about
"twenty  years   of   treason"  would   be   transposed   from   the
realm  of  rhetoric  to  that  of  prosecution   by  a  sweeping  new
amendment  to  the  treason  clause of  the  Constitution.
This  would  make  it   treason  to  "collaborate"  with "any
agent  or  adherent"  of  a  foreign  nation  "in  working  for  the
overthrow   or  weakening  of   the  Government   of   the  United
States,   whether   or   not   by   force   and  violence."     (Italics
added).    This  is  vague  and  broad  enough  to   hale  into  the
courts  some  of  those  unfortunate  diplomats  the  China  Lobby
has  blamed  for  Chiang's  downfall.
Despite  the  revolutionary  character  of  this  proposal,  it  has
been  launched  here  in  almost  "top secret"  fashion.    It  was
given   a  "public"  hearing  on   February   3  but   no   one  was
heard  but   the  two  Congressmen,  Keating  (R., N.Y.) and
Bennett  (D., Fla.)   supporting   it.    The  hearing  was  before
a  subcommittee  (No. 4)  of  the  House  Judiciary  Committee,
but  many  members of  the  full  committee  are unaware of  the
measure.    The  hearing is not  being  printed  and  the  reporting
firm  cannot  sell  copies  of  the  transcript  because,  almost  two
months  later,  it  has not  yet  been  "corrected."
Perhaps  one  reason  for  not  printing  the  hearing  is  that  the
record,   unnoticed  by  the  press,  contains  a  letter  from   the
Department  of  Defense strongly  opposing the  proposed  amend-
ment.   It  had been submitted  to  the Department  by  Commit-
tee  Chairman  ReeH  (R.,  N.Y.) for  an  advisory  opinion.    H.
Lee White, Assistant Air  Force  Secretary,  signed  the letter.
"Treason," the  Defense  Department  letter  said,  "is  the  only
offense  which  is  specifically  named  in  the  Constitution  itself.
An   exclusive  definition   is  given   for   the   offense,   and   the
method  of  obtaining  a conviction  is then  set  out  in  meticulous
detail.    Such  deep  concern  with  this  one  crime  came  about
partially  as  the  result  of   the  insidious  nature  of   the  crime
itself,   and   partly   because   experience    had   shown   that   an
extremely   broad  power  to  punish  for   treason  might  become
an  instrument  of  oppression."   (Italics  added).
The  Defense  Department  suggested  that  the  lesser political
offenses  the  treason  amendment  would  cover  be  handled  by
ordinary  legislation.    There   was  a  similar  hint  in  the  letter
from  the  Department  of  Justice,  by  Assistant  Attorney Gen-
eral  William  P.  Rogers.    He  said  the  Justice Department pre-
ferred   to   make  no  comment   on  whether  the   amendment
should  be  approved  but   said  the  Judiciary  Committee "may
wish  to  consider  whether  it  is  possible  to  attain  the  worthy
objectives   of   these   resolutions   by   the   ordinary   legislative
process."
The   origin   of   this   amendment,  which   has  already   been
touted   by   such  columnists  as  George   Sokolsky,  is   obscure.
It  was  first  introduced  in  1949 by  Bennett.     Originally,  it
broadened  the  definition  of  treason  and  deleted  the   constitu-
tional  provision   requiring  two  witnesses  to  each  overt act.
Later,  as  a  result  of  criticism,  Bennett  took  out   this  latter
portion  of  the  measure.  But  this  year  Keating  introduced  the
bill  in  its  original  form.    Bennett's  measure  is  H.J. Res. 8.
Keating's  is H.J. Res.  4J.
At  the  hearing,  Bennett  was  subjected  to  sharp  question-
ing  by  another  member  of   the  subcommittee,  Meader   (R.,
Mich.).   Meader wanted  to  know  whether  an  American  who
advocated  world  government  and  worked  to  strengthen   the
UN   might   not   be  accused  of   treason,  since  this  would  be
"weakening"   the  American  government.
"I  may  say," Bennett  replied,  "that  I  think  that  a  person
who  collaborated  with  an  agent  of  a  foreign  country  along
the  lines  you  have  suggested,  frankly  for   the  weakening  of
the  U.  S. government,  for  the  building  of  a  strong sovereign
power  in  the  UN,  in  my  opinion  would  be  guilty  of  treason
and  should  be  tried  for   treason  and  convicted  of  treason."
The   Constitution    strictly   defines   the   crime   of   treason
as   giving   aid  and  comfort   to  an  enemy  in   time  of war.
Keating  told  the  House  Judiciary  Subcommittee  the   Consti-
tution  embodies an "unrealistic  definition . . . coupled  with an
unworkable standard of  proof."   But  Madison in  the Federalist
Papers  explained that  the  treason  clause was so strictly  worded
because  "new fangled   and  artificial  treasons  have  been   the
great  engines  by  which  violent   factions  .  .  .  have  usually
wreaked   their   alternate   malignity  on   each   other."     The
Framers,  as Henry  Adams wrote,  "feared  despotism more  than
they  feared   treason."
We'll  Be Glad  to  Send  Free Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue to  Your  Friends
This  Is  Expiration  Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      —————————————————————————————
Street   _____________________________
City__Zone-
State..
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
(To)   Name
Street
City!____________  Zone___  State____
L  F. Stone'5 Weekly
Room  205
301 £.  Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED