I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954oct18.pdf

============================================================

Earl  Browder Reveals His Past  Relations With  Dewey  and  Taft,  Page 2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER 37
OCTOBER  18,  1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Ike  Puts  Chiang  on  That  Leash  Again
In  Washington  steps  toward  peace are taken  surreptitiously,
as  if   slightly   obscene.   The   Eisenhower  Administration   has
just  reinstated,  temporarily  at  least,  the  Truman  Administra-
tion   policy  on  Formosa.   Chiang's  bombing  attacks  on  the
Chinese  mainland  have  suddenly   been   called  off   on   orders
from   Washington.    The   Republicans,   though  campaigning
as  the  peace  party,  seem  afraid  to  take  credit  for  what  they
have  done.   The  Democrats,  though  they  attack  the  Republi-
cans  for  recklessness in  foreign  policy,  seem  equally  afraid  to
boast  that  Eisenhower  has  been  forced  to  reinstate  Truman
policy.
Frustrated,   Formosa  has  opened  an  attack  on  Washington
instead.   The  news  that  the  bombings  were  being  called off
was  "leaked"  from  Taipeh  and  dressed  up,  in  smart  propa-
gandistic fashion, with  talk  that  the  U.S.  was creating another
"privileged  sanctuary."   Walter  S.  Robertson,  Assistant  Sec-
retary  of  State  for   Far  Eastern  Affairs,   so  sick  with  ulcers
that   he  was  forbidden   by  his  doctor  to  attend   the  Manila
conference,  flew  off  to  Formosa  with  two  top  aides  secretly
last  Friday  night  a  week.   His  departure  was  not  announced
until  the  following  Monday  just   about   the  time  he  arrived
in   Formosa.   The   head  of   the   State   Department's    "China
desk"  and  the  latter's  opposite  number  in  the  Foreign  Opera-
tions  Administration  accompanied  Robertson.   The  presence
of  the  FOA  man  indicates that  Chiang  may  be  mollified  with
promises of  additional aid.  No  great  Power  was  ever  so  afraid
of  its  own  satellite.
Jenner  Picks  Up  from  McCarthy
The   first   bomb   dropped  on  Washington   by   the  Chinese
Nationalists   was  a  blast   by   Jenner.    The   Senate's   No.   1
witch  hunter   (now  that  McCarran   is  dead  and  McCarthy
in dry-dock)  declared that  there had  been "a  mysterious meet-
ing  of  the  National  Security  Council  in  Denver  on  the  ques-
tion  of  defending  Quemoy"  and  asked  in  his  best  hobgoblin
fashion,  "Did   someone in  our  government  send  word  to  Red
China,  that  the  United  States  would  not  defend  these  step-
ping  stones  to  Formosa,  as  someone  sent  word  to  Red  China
in   1950  that  we  would  not  attack  the  Red  Chinese  if   they
went   into   the  war   against   us  in  Korea?"   The  latter,   the
pumped  up  myth   of   the  MacArthurites,  is  stated   as  fact.
Jenner  went  on  to  as paranoid a  charge  as has  yet  been  heard
even  in  this  haunted  capital.
If  this  were  anyone  else  but  an  important  Republican  Sen-
ator,   chairman   of   the   Internal   Security   subcommittee,    it
could  be  ignored  as crackpot.   But  here  it  is,  in  Jenner's  own
words:  "I  have been  told  that  the Red attack  on Quemoy  and
the  other  islands  is  part  of  a  secret  plan  to  let   Nationalists
expend  their  ammunition in heavy firing against  the  mainland.
Then  someone  in  the  American  government   will   forget   to
replenish   the  equipment  and  ammunition,  or  will  replenish
everything  except  one or  two  vital  components.   There  is  no
way   to   substantiate   such   a   charge.    But   remember—the
heaviest  tanks  or  the  newest  jet  bombers  can  be quietly  sabo-
taged  by  lack  of  a  few  parts.   Our  only  danger  will  come
from   moves  so  delicate  that  they  cannot  be  seen  or  heard."
This  fear  of  the  impalpable  has  the  flavor  of  old  Salem.
Clears  Ike  of  Treason
In  demanding  that  the  President  "tell  the American  people,
immediately,  what  individual,  in  what  agency,  made  such  a
decision," Jenner  was threatening  to  take  up  where  McCarthy
left  off.   "Of  course,"  Jenner  said,  generously,  "I  know  that
President  Eisenhower,  Secretary  Wilson  and  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  Staff  would  have  no  smallest  pan   in  any  such  treasonable
deception."   But   below  them?   "Our   military  policy   is  not
made  by our military  leaders ... It  is made  by a network of
boards  and  agencies.   They  weave  a  spider-web  of  laws  and
directives  .  .  .  All  these  spider-web  connections  are meshed
into  the UN  Charter ... A few men in our government can
tie  the whole  military program  of  the  U.S.  into  knots ... in
the  dark  weighting  down  every  bullet  with  UN's    policy."
In  addition  to  holding  back  Chiang,  they  have—according  to
Jenner—limited  Rhee's  ammunition to  a  two-day  supply,  lest
he "defend  himself."
Fortunately   (perhaps because it  was  not  published  in  their
Bible,  The  Daily  Worker)   no  one  on  the  staff  of  his  Internal
Security  subcommittee   tipped  Jenner  off  that  Americans  for
Democratic   Action  only  a  few  days earlier  issued  a  statement
demanding  that  the  Administration  "refer  the  fighting  in  the
Formosa  straits  to  the  UN  with  the  object  of  obtaining an
immediate  cease-fire."   Had  they  done  so,  he  might  have  tied
Ike  directly   to  the  ADA.   Its  anti-Communism  would  not
fool  him.   On  October  6  Jenner  told  a  meeting  in  Columbus,
"The   really  dangerous Communists  in  this  country  look  like
Germany's  Dr.  John   before  he was found  out  .  .  .  employes
in  the  executive  branch  will  never  catch  the  really  big fish—
the  'anti-Communist'  leaders  who  are  working  high  in  our
government  to  destroy   us."
The   only   safety,  Jenner   told   his  Ohio  audience,   was  in
"vigorous,  continuous  investigation  by  Congress."  This  is  the
man  who  opened  the  campaign which  finally  destroyed   Gen-
eral  Marshall's  usefulness.   If  Jenner  could   destroy   Marshall,
he  could  destroy  the  conservative  business  men  like  Wilson
and  Humphrey  and  the  lesser  military  men  who  have  opposed
Admiral  Radford  and  the  adventurers  in  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff.    These  ravings  are  serious.   Until  such   statesmen   are
retired   to   the   booby-hatch,   and   Chiang's   infiltration    of
Washington  ended,  peace  will  not  be  secure.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 18, 1954
An  Indispensable  Document  in  Fighting  Loyalty  and  Security Cases
Earl  Browder  Reveals That  in  the  30's  Dewey  and Taft, Too . . .
By  Earl  Browder
The  closing  days  of  the  83rd  Congress  showed  Republicans
and  Democrats,  conservatives  and  liberals,  competing  wildly
for  the  honors of sponsoring the  most extreme  anti-Communist
legislation.  Coming on top of the  Oppenheimer decision, which
declared our leading  atomic scientist a "security risk" because
of  associations  with   Communists  during  the  late  '30s  and
early  '40s,  this  seems  to  leave  no  doubt  that  the  American
Communist  Party  is,  even   if  in  an  indirect   and   distorted
way,  the  dominant  issue  in  American  politics  this  year.
Now it just happens that  I was one of the principal  leaders
of  the  American  Communist Party for  a  quarter  of a  century
(1921-1945), was  its  chief  spokesman for  twelve  years   (1934-
1945), and  was  its  candidate  for  President  in  1936  and  1940.
I  am not a  Communist now.  I  broke my relations  with  the
Party  in  1945,  when  it  made  a  big  change  in  policy which  I
could  not  accept.   The  Communists say  they  kicked  me  out,
which  is  accurate  enough  for  practical  purposes;  my  books
are   outlawed   among  the   Communists,  and  in  their   purge
trials  behind  the  Iron  Curtain  men have  been  hung  for  con-
fessing  their  possession.  It  is  one of  those  weird  items  that
make the  post-war  world  seem like  a madhouse that  the Com-
munists  say  the  American  State  Department  published  my
books  in  Europe  to  subvert  their  governments,  while  Senator
McCarthy  uses  the   same  books  as  evidence  of  Communist
subversion  in the  State  Department.  Thus  I  am on the black-
list  in  both  Moscow  and  Washington.
Before  The  Cold  War
It  was  not  always  so.  For  years  I  was  a  welcome  visitor
in  both  these  cities,  and  treated  with  great  respect;  I  was
one  of  the  channels  of  cooperation between these  two  centers
of  the  communist  and  and  capitalist  worlds.   That  was  in  the
old days before the  Cold War,  when both  sides  seemed to want
to  make friends  instead  of  denouncing each  other  at  the  top
of  their  voices.
It  is,  of  course,  quite  true that  there  was  a  great  deal of
cooperative  relations  between  the  American  Communists and
people  in  public  life,  Democrats  and  Republicans,  over  the
years  of  the  Roosevelt  Administration.   It  is  also  true  that
the  Communists,  in  the  main,  supported  Roosevelt  and  his
policies,  and that their  help  was  welcomed  and  sought  by  the
Roosevelt  camp.
What  is  difficult  for  most  people  to  remember  today, when
the  terms  "Communist"  and  "outlaw"  have  become  identical
in  the  public  mind  and  Communists are  hunted  down  like
rabbits, is that  this is  something  new, that for  some 12 years
the  Communists  were  "respectable"  collaborators  in  public
life,  "just  another  political  party"  as  the  saying  goes,  even
if  a  bit  unorthodox  and  peculiar.   Yet  precisely  that  fact
needs  to  be  remembered  now,  if  our  nation  is  to  keep  its
balance,  keep  its   sense   of  historical   perspective,   and   not
become hysterical.
Today  the  climate  of  public  opinion  outlaws  the  slightest
association  with  Communists, and  this  is  being  enforced  by
more  and  more  Draconian  laws.   But  only  a  few   yesterdays
ago  the  climate  of  public  opinion  was  quite  otherwise.   This
fact  may be illustrated  by a  relatively  unimportant  incident:
When  Dewey  Asked  for  Help
In   1937  an  ambitious   and  able  young  Republican  named
Thomas  E.  Dewey  made  his  first  election  campaign  for  the
position  of  District  Attorney  of  New York  County, tradition-
ally  strongly  Democratic.   His  organization  felt  the  need  to
gather  votes  wherever  they  were  to  be  found,  and   solicited
Communist  support.   The  issue  came  to  me,  and  I  said, of
course,   support   Dewey.   This   was   done  through   a  Trade
Union  Committee, headed by  a  well-known Communist named
Louis  Weinstock.  When  Dewey  won  the  election  that  Com-
mittee   gave   him  a   "victory  banquet,"  at   which  he  was
photographed  arm-in-arm   with  the  toastmaster,   Weinstock.
Of  course,  Dewey  was  as  innocent  in  this  association  as
Oppenheimer  was  in  his  which  began  about  the  same  time,
though  the  motive was  different.  It  was a  political  marriage
without  love  on either  side, purely  one  of  expediency.  Dewey
got  his  office,  and  the  Communists got  some  racketeer  enemies
cleaned  out  of the  New York Painters  and  the  Food  Workers
Unions,  which  enabled  us,  together  with  our  allies,  to  lead
these  unions for  the  next  eight  years.
We  might   equally  well  illustrate  this  climate   of  public
opinion  favorable  to  Communist  participation   in  public  life
from   1934  to  1945,  by  another  incident  equally  unimportant
in  itself.   Today  the  Attorney   General's  list  of  "subversive
organizations,"  association with which  in the  past  may cause
any  worker  to  lose  his  job  in  defense  industry,  or  any   sci-
entist  to  be placed  "before  a  blank  wall,"  is  the  name  of  the
American  Youth  Congress.
In   1938  this  organization   held  its  annual  national   get-
together  in  Cleveland,  in  the  municipal  auditorium,  with  a
great  mass  meeting  to  open  the  proceedings,  at  which  I,  the
General  Secretary  of  the  Communist  Party,  was   advertised
as a featured  speaker.  It  was in the midst of the  congressional
election  campaign  and  Robert  A.  Taft  was  then  running  for
the  Senate  for  the  first  time.  His campaign manager,  Charles
Taft,  approached  the  Youth  Congress  officials  and  asked  that
Robert  be  invited  to  address  the  same  mass  meeting;   the
answer  was  that,  of  course,  he would be  invited  if  assurance
was  given  that  he  would  not  object  to  speaking  on  the  same
platform   with   Browder.   That   assurance   was   given,   and
Taft  and  I  both  spoke,  being  photographed  grinning  at  each
other  in a most brotherly  fashion.
What  a  far  cry this was  from  1950, when  Millard  Tydings
Explanatory  Note—A  Case  of  Informing  In  Reverse
For  many  years  the  government  has  been  bringing  pres-
sure  on  Earl  Browder,  once  head  of  the  American Com-
munist  party,  to  turn  him  into  an  informer.   As  readers of
the  Weekly  know  (see  Vol. I,  No.  8,  "The Man Who  Refused
to  Be  a  Budenz"  and  Vol.  II,  No.  26,  "Memo  to  the  New
York  Times  and  the  Alsops"),  a  perjury  indictment  was
obtained  against  Browder  and  his  wife  by  Roy  Cohn  when
the  latter  was  in  the  U.S.  Attorney's  office  in  New  York,,
and  then  word  sent  Browder  that  all  would be  well  if  only
he  would  "cooperate" with the  government.  Mrs.  Browder's
illness  prevented the  case  from  being  tried,  but  the indict-
ment  has  since  been  severed  and  Browder  will  soon  face
trial  alone  on  a  trumped-up  charge  arising  out   of  Mrs.
Browder's  application  for  citizenship eight  years  ago.
In  this  article,  Browder  finally  "informs"—but  not  the
way  Roy Cohn  wanted it    He "informs" on Dewey and Taft
to  illustrate  the  different atmosphere  which  existed  in  this
country  in  the  30's  and  early  40's—and  to  criticize current
"security"  standards.   For  a  hounded man, with  no  organi-
zational  support,  treated  as  a  pariah  by  the  Communists
and  with  suspicion  by  the  anti-Communists, it  took  great
courage  to  write  this  article.   Magazines  which  would have
been  happy   to   buy  a  different   kind   of   "memoirs"  from
Browder  turned this  down,  and he  sent  it  to  the  Weekly in
desperation.  We are happy  to  print it.  We believe  it  is  use-
ful   ammunition  for  loyalty  and  security  proceedings.   And
we  take  the  unusual step  of  suggesting  that  those  readers
who  like  it,   and  appreciate  what  it   represents,  can  help
Browder fight his  case by making a contribution and sending
it  to him direct at his home, 7 Highland Place, Yonkers, N. Y.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 18,1954
3
Scientists,  Government  Workers  and Writers  Now  Blacklisted  for  Much  Less
. Asked  For,  and  Obtained, Support  from  the  Communist  Party
was  defeated  for  the  Senate  by  a  faked  photograph  osten-
sibly  showing  him  in  my  company,  a  photo  manufactured
from  two separate pictures by,, so I  am  told,  Mr. Don Surine
of   Senator   McCarthy's  staff!   But  today  any  scientist  who
was  so unfortunate  as  to  be a  youth in  1938,  and  was  caught
in  that  photo  with  Robert  A.  Taft,  would  have  a  long  and
rough  path  to a  security  clearance.
Another  name  on the  Attorney  General's  "subversive  list"
is  the  League  of  American  Writers.  At  its  1937   convention
opening  in  Carnegie  Hall,  New York City,  featured  speakers
included  the  famous  novelist  Ernest   Hemingway, the  poet
and  later  Librarian   of  Congress,  Archibald  MacLeish,  and
the  then  Communist Earl  Browder.   Presumably  it  was  my
presence  on this  program  which later,  after   the organization
had  been  dissolved,  caused  the  Attorney  General to  list  it  as
subversive.   But  it  was  fully  in  the  spirit  of  its  times,  the
spirit which in the  same year  brought  Tom Dewey  into  active
collaboration  with  the  Communists and  which  the  next  year
brought  Taft  and  myself  onto  the  same  platform.  But  how
many  young  writers  whose  names  were  listed  as  members
have  been  harried  out  of  public  and  private  employment in
these later  years  for  following their example!
FDR,  Willkie  and Browder
Still  another  name  on  the  "subversive  list"  is  "The  Com-
mittee  to  Free  Earl  Browder."   I  had  gotten   into  trouble
with  the  Roosevelt  Administration  when  the   Second  World
War  broke  out.   Roosevelt  had welcomed our  previous  attacks
against  isolationism,  and  was  quite  angry  when  we changed
after   the   Soviet-Nazi  Pact.   Therefore  he  gave  the  green
light  to  members  of  his  cabinet  who  demanded  that  I  be
punished  for  the  change.  As  a  result  I  was  arrested  on  an
old  passport  case  dug  out  of  the  archives  of  the  Hoover  Ad-
ministration,   which  never  before   seemed  important   enough
to  prosecute,  and  sentenced  to four  years  in  prison.  Wendell
Willkie  won  the  Republican presidential  nomination  in  1940
in  a  campaign  which opened with  an  article  in which, among
other  things,  he criticized  Roosevelt  for  sending me to  prison
for  my  ideas  while pretending  it  was  for  my  acts.   The  gov-
ernment  itself   admitted  before  the  Supreme  Court  that  my
supposed  "crime"  was  one  of  those  "acts  not  in  themselves
wrong," that  it  did not injure any  person or  the government,
that  it  "did  not  involve moral  turpitude,"  and that  it  "must
be construed as  having no implication  of  evil purpose."
After  Pearl  Harbor  one of my friends  went to  Roosevelt to
ask  him to  order  my release  from  prison.  Roosevelt answered
that  he  was  very  angry  with  his  aids  for  the  kind  of  case
they  had  made  against  me,  but  that  he  was  surrounded by
enemies  even  in  his  own administration  and, therefore, could
no_t be in  a  position of interfering  with  a judgment of  a  court
without good reason  in public policy.  He said  it was  necessary
for  Browder's  friends  to  make  the  case  for  his  release  by
public  agitation   and  enlightenment   on  the   ground  of   ad-
vancing  thereby   the  nation's   war   effort.    When  that  was
done  he  could  and  would  act.
As  a  result  of  President  Roosevelt's  words,  the  Committee
to Free Earl  Browder was formed, issued millions of leaflets,
published   full-page   advertisements   in   two   dozen   of   the
country's  leading  newspapers, and  held a  national conference
in  Madison  Square  Garden,  New  York  City,  with  thousands
of  delegates  from  labor  unions and  men  in  public life  attend-
ing.   Over  9,000  seamen on the  Atlantic  Convoys  signed  peti-
tions  for   my  release.    When  these   results   were  placed  in
Roosevelt's  hands,  he  ordered  my  release  from  prison  as  an
act  to  help  consolidate  American  national  unity.   He  chose
the  time  for  his  action  under  the  advice  of  Mayor  LaGuardia
of  New  York  City  and  Senator  Elbert  Thomas, chairman of
the  Foreign  Relations  Committee, as  these  men  informed  me
personally  later   and  as  I  learned  from   other  sources.  The
Committee  to  Free  Earl  Browder  existed  for  less  than  six
months, its  aims  had  been  endorsed by  the  Republican presi-
dential  candidate,  by  the  chairman  of  the  most   important
Senate   Committee,  and  by  the  Mayor  of  America's  largest
city.   Then  it  had  been  acted  on by the  President,  granting
its  request.   But  years  later,  the  security  files  of  the   U.S.
Government  are  filled  with   accusations  against  individuals
based  on  their   association   with  that   Committee,  which  is
accepted  as  one of the  marks  of  a  "security risk."
The  League  Against  War and  Fascism
Another  organization  on  today's  "subversive  list"  is  the
American  League  for   Peace  and   Democracy,  one  of  those
named  subversive  long  after  it  was  dissolved,  not  when  it
was  active.   Congressman  Dies  recently  testified  that  it  had
six  or  seven  million members  and  that  nearly  every  Cabinet
member  during  the  Roosevelt Administration,  at  one time or
another,  spoke  under  its  auspices,  gave  letters  of  endorse-
ment  and  other  expressions  of encouragement to  it.   Mr. Dies
overestimates  its  real  membership,  which  never  went  much
above  five  million,  but  he  does  not  exaggerate  its   influence
which  reached  the  majority  of  the  country  at  its  peak,  and
its  lists  of  speakers   and  sponsors   look  like  a   cross-section
from  Who's  Who in  America.  I  was  &  national  vice-president
of  the  American  League  until  its  dissolution  at  the  end  of
1939;  this,  presumably, is  taken  as  justification  for  naming
it  as  "subversive"  long after  it  went  out of business.  Thereby
five  million  people  (or  seven  or  eight  million,  if  Mr.  Dies'
figures  are  accepted) are  on the  list  of  "security   suspects."
Up  until  after  1945, it  is  simply  an  inescapable  fact  of  life
that  not  even the  Communist Party  itself  was  considered  in
the  broad  circles  of  public  opinion  as  "subversive."   This  is
shown  by  one little  incident:
On  February  18,  1945,  a  telegram  was  delivered  to  me  in
my   office  at   Communist  Party  headquarters,   which  began:
"The  American Bar  Association wishes  to  invite  you to  par-
ticipate  in  its  new radio  discussion  program,  'Let's  Face  the
Issue',  Sunday,  March  Four   from   New  York  on  the   topic,
'Should  a  World  League  Permit  a  Nation  to  Veto  Sanctions
Against  Itself?'"  It  went  on  to  say that  my fellow  partici-
pant  probably  would  be  Senator  Jos.  Ball,  Sen.  Fulbright,  or
Philip  Jessup  of  Columbia  University.
Did  Not  Think  of  Themselves  as  Subversive
I  can add from  my own knowledge that  the  great  majority
of  Communist Party  members did not  consider their  tasks  as
subversion,  and  if  there  was  then  a  minority  of  a   different
mind, they  had to  keep their  opinions secret  or face  expulsion
from  the Party.
I  speak  of  the  Communist  Party  only  as  I  knew  it  from
being  its  principal  leader  until  1945.  In  that  year  the  Party
suddenly  changed  its  policy, following  an  intervention  osten-
sibly coming from French  Communist leaders.   I  opposed that
change,  and  warned  that  it  would cut  the  roots  of  the  Party
in  American  society  and  isolate  it.  I  was  expelled  from  the
Party  for  this  open  declaration  of  opposition  and  have  had
no connection with  it  since then.  Events  since that time  have
fully   borne  out   my  judgment.   The  vast   majority   of   its
members  soon left  it,  and it  lost all  serious  national influence.
What  happened  after   1945  is  another  story.   Events  have
proved  that  the  Communist Party's  break  with  the  policies I
had  given  it  was  one of  the  first  steps  toward  the  Cold  War
which I had foreseen  as a  possibility  and had done  everything
in  my  power  to  prevent,  considering  it  a  catastrophe   for
every  nation  involved.  I  hold  no  brief  for  the  later  actions
of   the   Communist  Party.   But  its   stupid  policies  have  so
isolated  it  as  to  destroy  any  capacity  it  might  conceivably
have  for  serious  harm,  except  in  its  role  as  a  spectre   to
frighten   the   timid   bourgeois  into  hysterics.   The  current
uproar  about  "outlawing"  the  Communist  Party  is  a  vulgar
comedy  unworthy  of  a  serious  self-respecting  and  powerful
nation.   And  the  confusion  worse  confounded  as  to  who  and
what  should be considered "subversive" is the greatest  internal
menace to  our  national  sanity.
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  October 18, 1954
The  Weird  Question  Posed  by  the  New  Lattimore   Indictment;
Can  A  Man's  Opinion  of His  Own  Opinions  Be  Perjury?
Washington—Legal  opinion  here   seems   agreed  that  the
new  indictment   obtained   by  the  government  against  Owen
Lattimore  is  likely  to  fare  more  poorly  in  the  courts  than
its  predecessor.   The  two  new  counts  merely  restate  in  new
form  the  old  Count  I  which  Federal  District  Judge   Young-
dahl  threw  out,  and  on  which  he  was  upheld  8-to-l  in  the
Circuit  Court  of  Appeals.
The  old  Count  I  said   Lattimore  lied  in  saying  that  he
had  "never  been  a  sympathizer  or  any  other  kind of  promotor
of  ...     Communist  interests."  The Circuit  Court  ruled  that
"even  if  'promotor
1
 were  a  perfectly  certain  term   (which we
do  not  decide),  the  presence  of  the  uncertain  word  ["sympa-
thizer"]  is  sufficient  to  destroy  the  count."
This  was  the  heart   of  the  indictment.   The  Government
could   have   appealed.    When  reporters   asked   the   Solicitor
General's  office  last  August  why  the  decision  was  not  being
appealed,  the  answer  was  to  "draw  your  own  conclusions."
The  Washington  Post  in  an  editorial   (Aug.  21)  commented,
"The  conclusion  which we draw  is that  the  Solicitor  General
felt  that  he could not  in good conscience defend  an  indictment
which  should  never  have  been  brought."   This  analysis  was
privately  confirmed,  lifting  the  curtain  for  one  peep  into  the
biggest   behind-scenes  story   of  all—the  fact  that   Solicitor
General   Sobeloff   to  his  credit  was  unwilling  to  appeal   the
decision  because  he agreed  with  it.
Doesn't   The  Government  Believe  Budenz?
The  alternative   was  to  bring  in  a  new  indictment.   The
obvious  move was  to  indict Lattimore  for  denying under  oath
what   Budenz  had  sworn—that  he  had  "heard"  Lattimore
referred   to  in  party  circles  as  a  Communist.  Budenz  was
summoned   before  the  new  grand  jury,  but  no  such   count
was  forthcoming.   Either  the  government  does  not  trust  its
own star witness,  Budenz, or Budenz is unwilling to say under
cross-examination  what  was only wrung  from  him  reluctantly
before  the  McCarran  committee.
Instead  of  thus  boldly  taking  the  heart  of  its   case   into
court  for  trial,  the  government did  a flimsy rewrite  of  Count
I.  It  created  one new count  by taking  out  the  word  "sympa-
thizer" from  the  old Count I  and  leaving  in "promotor."
Then  it  created  another  new  count  by  doing  what  it  had
been  refused  the  right  to do in the  courts.   The  Circuit  Court
said  "the  vagueness"  of  the  old  Count I  "cannot  be cured  by
a  bill   of  particulars."   What   the  new  Count  I   does  is  to
The  Only  Safety  Lies  In  Following
Party  Line  Counter  Clockwise
"This  indictment lays  bare  the  fact  that  this  prose-
cution  is  a  direct  and  immediate  threat  to  anyone  and
everyone  who  has  ever  written   or  spoken  on  foreign
affairs  and  whom  the  government  chooses to  attack  for
political  reasons  . . .  Under  this  indictment,  no writer
on  foreign  affairs  could be safe  from  prosecution  unless
during  the  past  20 years  he  had  always  opposed  every-
thing that  Russia  advocated."
—Owen  Lattimore,  on  his  new  indictment.
present   a   bill  of  particulars   but  to  change  the   allegation
from   "sympathizer"   to   "follower   of  the   Communist  line."
This  will  be challenged  as  equally  vague  in  a  new  motion  to
dismiss,  which  should  be  argued   before  the   same  District
Judge,  Youngdahl, unless  the  government  changes  the  rules
in  an  effort  to   get  Lattimore.   (See  note  on  Page  5)
Heresy,  Not  Perjury
The   indictment  does   not   allege   that   Lattimore   obeyed
party   directives,  or  was  part  of  some  conspiracy  to  carry
out  party  policy.  It  merely  says  that  he  lied  when  he  denied
that  he  "was  or  ever  had  been  a  follower  of  the  Communist
line."   This  is  a  matter  of  opinion,  and  in  this  case  of  Latti-
more's  opinion  of  his  own past  opinions.  This  is  a  long  way
from  those  questions of  fact  and  materiality  on  which  ordi-
nary  perjury  trials  depend.  Can  a  man's  opinion of  his own
opinions  be perjury?
The trial  will  indeed  be an  old-fashioned  heresy  proceeding
in  which  words  and  phrases   will  be  torn  from  voluminous
writings  to  prove  suspect  views.   An  example:  under  Topic
2,  Lattimore  is  accused  of  upholding  the  thesis  that   "The
Soviet  Union  is democratic."  But the  passage  cited  to support
this  does  not  deal  with  internal  policy  in  the  Soviet  Union.
The  passage  cited  is  a  1938  review  of  Chinese, Japanese  and
Soviet  press  opinion  of  Japanese   aggression   against  China
in  which  the  statement   is  made  that  by  contrast  with  the
Japanese   press,  the  Soviet  on  this  topic  is  "robustly   demo-
cratic,"  showing "fervent  sympathy  for  China."  This  is  mis-
splitting  a  very  far  fetched  hair.
Those  Nice  Little  German  Playmates  We Are  About  To Rearm
The  September  24 issue  of  The  (London)  Times  Literary
Supplement  prints  a  startling  document.  It  is  to  be  found
in  a  review  of  autobiographies  published  in  Germany  by
the  economist  M.  J.   Bonn  and  the  Protestant  theologian
F.  W.  Foerster.   Foerster  writes  in  his  "Erlebte   Weltges-
chichte" that whenever  he reads  Hitler  or  some pan-German
text  he  can  "only  say  that  there  are  two  totally   different
kinds  of  brain  in  the  German  people,  so  different  that  one
can  hardly  believe  them  to  belong  to  the   same   folk—the
Leibnitz-Bach-Goethe  brain  and  the   Ludendorff-Haushofer-
Hitler  brain."  Foerster  says that  the  relationship  between
them   "is  that   the   Leibnitz-Bach-Goethe  German   always
capitulates  to  the  barbarians."
Foerster  praises  Adenauer  highly, but fears  a  new capitu-
lation  of  this  kind may  follow  him.  He  sees  the  danger  of  a
new  "Leadership"   in   the   Haushofer   geopolitical   school,
which  now  has  its  center   in  Madrid.   Foerster   quotes  a
memorandum  it  issued  in  1951  "and  distributed  to  all  influ-
ential  quarters  in  Germany."   This  is the  quotation:
"The  present task  of  German  policy  can  only be to  regain
full  sovereignty   and  then,  step  by  step,  in  the  interest  of
all,  to  free  Europe  from  American  control  .  .  .
"The   policy  hitherto  followed  of  working  with  the  West
has become senseless.  But for a long time to come a  purpose-
ful   policy  of  neutrality,  combined with  a  policy of  working
closely  together  with  tn"e  East,  would be entirely   preferable
to  a  one-sided Russian  orientation.
"All  our  leaders  who knew  what  they  were  doing  always
recommended  close  cooperation with  Russia—Frederick  the
Great,   Baron   vom   Stein,   Bismarck,   von   Seeckt,   Count
Brockdorff-Rantzau—and,  in  the  past  thirty  years,  all  our
geopoliticians.
"At   the   end  of  1940  Hitler   thought   he  was   bound  to
break with this  pro-Russian tradition  because  he  needed  the
inexhaustible  eastern  supplies  of  raw  material  for  a  final
reckoning  with  the Anglo-American power  . . .
"Our  present  task  must  be to repair that blunder.  In  any
event we must  cease to be impressed  by the  stupid  American
talk  of  the  'Fight  of  Democracy  Against  Communism  .  .  .'
What  Germany needs  in  future  in  not  democracy.
"On the  contrary  she needs the  development of an  authori-
tative  state  power,  like  that  of  Soviet   Russia,  that   will
permit  the  military  and  political  elite  in  Germany  to  con-
centrate  the  industrial  potency  of  the  world  of  Europe,  and
to  use  the  military  strength  of  the  German  people  in  the
interest  of  the  rebirth  of  the   Nation   and  the  revival  of
Europe  as  the  power-center  of  the  whole  world."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  IS,  1951,
Notes  In  Defense  of Charlie  Wilson  and  other  Underdogs
A.   lot   of  Generals  at   the   Pentagon   would   be  happy  if
Wilson's  "dog"  remark  led  to  his  resignation.   A  blunt  and
honest  old  shop  foreman,  Wilson  has  been  quite  unawed  by
brass.  His  remark  about  kennel dogs  did reflect  the  self-made
man's  contempt  for  those  with  less  git-up-and-git.   But what
he  had  to  say  was  taken  out  of  context,  which  was  that  de-
fense  was  not  to  be treated  as  "just  something  to  dish  out  to
keep  somebody  busy."   Far   worse  than  anything  to  be  read
into  Wilson's  remark   is  the  way   the   labor  leaders  of  this
country  take  war  and  "war  work"  for  granted  as  a  way of
maintaining  employment.   Wilson  has  been  a  force  for  peace
in  this  capital,  and  that's  more  than   can  be  said  for   the
bloodthirsty  Meany or  the  equivocal Reuther  .  . .
A  judge  who  rules  against  the  government  is  ipsn   facto
biased.   This  seems  to  be  the  government's  position   in  the
motion   asking  Judge  Youngdahl   to   disqualify   himself   for
"prejudice"   in  the   Lattimore   case.    Since   the  Judge  was
upheld  8-to-l  on  the  main  count,  and  lost  S-4  on  minor   i>m.-s
in  the  Circuit Court of  Appeals,  presumably  tlic  eight  judges
who  supported him  are  biased,  too.   Having  failed  so  far   to
convict  Lattimore,  Brownell  would  like  to  convict  his judges.
Footnote  on  Those  New  Security  Risk  Figures: One  of  the
top  assistants  to  Bryant  W.  Bowles,  the  ox-Marine  sergeant
who is president of the  National Association  for  the  Advance-
ment  of  White  People,  is  Joseph   Mifflin   Danes,  of  Hartley.
Del., an  employe  in  Washington of  the  Navy  Department. Ho
was  one  of  the  three  original  incorporators  of  the  hate  asso-
ciation  and  is its  vice-president for  Delaware.   Asked whether
he  was  not  afraid  that  his  activities  might  get  him  fired  as
subversive,  Danes replied "Not  in  the  least."
As  important  as  the  Trieste  settlement  "normalizing" the
relations  between  Italy  and  Yugoslavia  is  the  little  noticed
normalization  of relations between  Moscow  ami  Tito.  In  both
cases  nationalism  has  triumphed.  In  the  former,  Italian  and
Yugoslav  nationalism  triumphed  over  economic  good  sense:
Trieste  will  wither  away  again  as  an  Italian  port,  and  can
thrive  only  as  a  free  port  for  Central  and  Eastern  Europe
(much  as  it  did  under  the  Hapsburgs).   In  the  latter,  na-
tionalism   triumphed  over   communism.    On   September  22,
Pravda  printed  a  long excerpt  respectfully  headed  "Declara-
tions  by the  President  of  Yugoslavia," the  first  such  coverage
since   1948   when   Tito  was  cast   into   outer   darkness  as   a
"Fascist."  Trade  and  diplomatic  relations  have  been  restored
between  Yugoslavia and   the   whole  Soviet  bloc.   If   Moscow
is willing to  co-exist with  its  own arch  heretic, it  will co-exist
with  anybody.  Query:  Will  Moscow  now be  less  draconian  in
The Late  Mr. Justice  Jackson
As  Best  Remembered
"Struggle to coerce uniformity  of sentiment in  support
of  some end thought  essential  to  their  time  and  country
have  been  waged  by  many  good  men  as  well  as  evil
men  .  . .  Those  who begin  coercive elimination of  dis-
sent   soon   find   themselves   exterminating   dissenters.
Compulsory   unification   of   opinion  achieves   only   the
unanimity  of the graveyard  . . .
"We  can  have intellectual  individualism  and  the  rich
cultural  diversity  that  -we owe to exceptional  minds  only
at  the  expense of occasional eccentricities  and  abnormal
attitudes  .  .  .  But  freedom  to  differ  is  not  limited  to
things  that  do not matter  much.  That  would  be a  mere
shadow  of  freedom.    The  test  of  its   substance   is   the
right  to  differ  as  to  things  that  touch  the  heart  of  the
existing  order.
"If  there  is  any  fixed  star  in  our  constitutional  con-
stellation,  it  is  that  no  official,  high  or  petty,  can  pre-
scribe  what  shall  bf   orthodox  in  politics,  nationalism,
religion  or  other  matters  of  opinion  or  force  citizens  to
confess  by word  or  act  their  faith  therein."
—Justice  Jackson  in  the  W.  Va.  Jehovah's
Witnesses  Flag  Salute  Case,  319   U.S.    624   (194S).
dealing  with  East  European  "little  Tito's"?   Will  it   some
day  learn  what  years  of imperial  experience  have taught  the
British—how  to  hold  the  reins  of  power  lightly  . . .
It   is  impossible  fully   to  assess  the  meaning  of  the  new
Russo-Chinese   accords   but   the   setting   and   circumstances
certainly  demonstrate  what  Washington  is  so  loathe  to  be-
lieve—the fact  that  China  is no mere East  European  satellite
of  Moscow.  Whether  Dairen  as  well  as  Port  Arthur  is  being
given  up  by  the  Russians  is  yet  to  be  answered.   What   wor-
ries  the  State  Department  most  is  the  joint  call  for  a  new
conference  to  unify   Korea.   The  well-informed  Constantine
Brown  reports   in  his  column  in  the  Washington  Star  last
Wednesday  that  it  is  feared  the  Communists  may  agree  to
free   elections  under  international   supervision,  and  that  a
formal  peace  in  Korea  would make  it  impossible  (1)  to  keep
Peiping  out  of  the  UN  and  (2)  to  maintain  the  7th  Fleet  in
the   Formosa   straits.   How  the   State   Department    misses
Stalin!    His   intransigence   kept   everything   in   such   nice,
comfortable  deep  freeze.
A  Fondness  for  Beef  Stroganoff   Figures  in Deportation
During  the  course  of  a  pending  deportation   proceeding,
the  Immigration  Service  called  a  witness  in  support  of  its
charge that  the  alien  advocates  world  communism.  Follow-
ing are  the  subjects covered by the  witness, who had  met  the
alien  just  once:
Football:
The  witness  testified that  the  alien had  expressed  a  pref-
erence  for  soccer  over  American  football.   On  cross-exami-
nation,  the  following  testimony was given:
"Q.  Now,  did  you  interpret   his  opposition  to  American
football  as  an  insult to  America?
"A.  Well—as  an  insult  to this country?
"Q.  Yes.
"A.  Certainly,  it's  not  in line with  the  thinking of  myself
and  other  Americans."
Refrigerators:
"Q.  Let me get  it  straight.  They  were against capitalism
and  they  were  down on this  country.   Is that  it?
"A.  They   made   sarcastic   remarks    about   the  United
States.
"Q.  OK  now.  What  were  these  sarcastic  remarks  which
they  made?  State  one  sarcastic  remark.
"A.  Well,  it  was  not  in  keeping  to  say  they  don't  believe
in  refrigerators  and  those  other  items.
Beef  StrogonofT:
"Q.  Are  you  able  to  recall  what  was  served  for  dinner?
"A.  Yes,  I  was.   I  believe ...  X  and  his  wife  told  me
what   they   would  have  for  dinner.   She  said   it  was   beef
Strogonoff.   Don't  ask  me how to  spell  it. ...  I  meant  to
say  too that  Mr. X  either  when  we were  served  or  when  we
were  eating  it,  he made mention of the  fact  that  this  was  a
favorite  dish  of Mao, as  I  recall.  It  might  be  Mel  or Mao, as
I  say I  recall  it  was  Mao."
Russian  Easter:
"Q.  When  X  said  that  they  celebrated  Russian   Easter
and  thought  it  was  much  better  than  Christmas,   did  you
think  that  she  meant  that  Communist  Easter  was   much
better  than  Christmas?  Is  that  what  you  thought?
"A.  I would say  probably  yes.
"Q.  You would  say  probably  yes.
"A.  Yes.   I  have  never  heard  of  Russian  Easter  before."
—American  Civil  Liberties  l/nion-News   (San  Francisco),   Oct.  '54
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  18, 195t
A  Way  Around  the  Stale  Russo-American   Veto-and-Inspection  Controversy
A  Practical  — and  Therefore  Disregarded  — Proposal  on  The  H-Bomb
When  Vannevar  Bush  appeared   before  the  Gray   board  in
the  Oppenheimer  case,  he  was  asked  (p.  562)  if  he  had  tried
to get  the  American  government  to  postpone  its first H-bomb
test.
"I  felt  strongly," the  famous scientist  admitted,  "that  that
test  ended  the  possibility  of  the  only  type  of  agreement  that  I
thought  was  possible  with  Russia  at  that  time,  namely,  an
agreement   to  make  no  more  tests."
Dr.   Bush  explained  that   since  it  was  possible  to  detect  A
and  H  bomb  explosions  anywhere  in  the  world,  "that  kind of
an  agreement   would  have  been  self-policing  in  the  sense  that.
if  it  was violated,  the  violation  would  be immediately known."
"I   still  think,"  Dr.  Bush  told   the  Gray  board,  "that  we
made  a  grave  error  in  conducting  that  test  at  that  time,  and
not  attempting  to  make  that  type  of  simple  agreement  with
Russia.   I  think  history   will  show  that  was  a  turning   point
that  when  we  entered  into  the  grim  world  that  we  are  enter-
ing  now, that  those  who  pushed  that  thing  through  to  a  con-
clusion   without  making  that  attempt   have  a  great   deal   to
answer  for."
Exploding  Our H  Bomb  Helped  the  Russians
So far  as I  know  no  one has  called  attention  to  this  passage
in  the  voluminous  testimony  nor  to  the  fact  it  discloses  that
at  one  point  in  the  history  of  the  H-bomb  the  new  monster
might  have been curbed  In a way  which would have cut  around
the  Russo-American controversy  about  effective  inspection and
the  veto  power.
Nor  has  anyone  dwelt  on  two  other  points  made  by  Dr.
Bush  in  support  of  his  position.   One  was  (p.  563)  that   the
explosion  of  an  American  H-bomb   would  at  once  enable  the
Russians  to  learn  (through  radiation  detection)   a  good   deal
about  how  we  made that  bomb.
The   other   point   made  by   Dr.   Bush  remains   as  terribly
revelant  today.   "To  us,"  the  scientist  testified  (pps. 5(54-5),
"with   500  KT   fission   [Atom]   bombs  we  have  very  little
need  for  a  10 megaton  hydrogen  bomb.   The  Russians,  on  the
other  hand,  have  the  great  targets  of  New  York  and  Chicago
... It  is of  enormous  advantage to  them."
In  other  words,  of  the  two  contending  great  Powers,   the
one which  has the  biggest  cities and  the  most highly developed
Let  Us Send A  Sample  Copy
industrial  system,  is  the  one  more  vulnerable  to  the   bigger
bombs  and  has  most   to  gain  by   stopping   the  race   toward
bigger  and  "better" varieties.
The  Burmese  Now  Make  a  Similar  Proposal
A  similar  proposal  to  which  little  attention  has  been  paid
by  either  the  Americans  or  the  Russians  was  put  before  the
General   Assembly  on  October   1  by  James  Barrington,   the
chief   delegate  of  Burma.   It  is  worth  reprinting  in  his  own
words.
"I  would  like  to  refer,"  Mr.  Barrington  said,  "to  a  matter
on  which  it  should  be  possible  to  reach  agreement  despite  the
cold  war.  This  is  the  question  of  the  cessation  of  all  further
experiments  designed  to  produce  bigger   and  better   thermo-
nuclear  and  atomic  weapons.   If  what  we  read  in  the  news-
papers   is  correct,   the   type  of   hydrogen   bomb   already   in
existence   has   sufficient   potency   to   extinguish   life   on   this
globe.
"To   continue  the   search  for   more  powerful  types,"  the
Burmese   delegate   observed,   "would   in   the   circumstances
seem   to   us   to   be  particularly  senseless.    Such  experiments
would   only   add   greatly   to   the   existing   tensions,   thereby
bringing  nearer  the  day  when  these  weapons  of  mass  destruc-
tion  might  be brought  into use.
"One   of  the  principal  obstacles   to   an  agreement  on dis-
armament  has  been  the  difficulties  inherent  in  inspection  and
control.    In   regard   to   new   experiments   with   atomic   and
thermo-nuclear  devices,  however,  it  seems  that  this  difficulty
does  not  exist  since  all  atomic  and  hydrogen  bomb  explosions
can  be  readily  detected.   Any  violaton  of  on agreement  to   sfop
further  experiments  would  therefore   become  known  at  once."
A  Focal  Point  for  Useful  Discussion
Here  is  a  way   at   least  to  ease  tension  by   stopping   any
further  tests  of  bigger  bombs.   We  will  return  to  it  in  future
issues  of  the  Weekly,  believing  that  the  unnoticed  Bush  testi-
mony  and  the  little  noticed  Burmese  suggestion  offer  a con-
structive   approach.   This  way  something  might   be  achieved
before   the   new  Russian  inspection   proposals   are  buried   in
another round  of  the  stale and  perhaps unresolvable inspection-
and-veto  controversy  between  Washington  and  Moscow.
of  This  Issue  Free  To  A  Friend
I.  F. Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the
Name.-........-..-———.—.  —....—...--.---
Street.. .............. ....—— .._.... —......   . ......_... .
City- .....— ,.....__  — ... .  — Zone... .... ........
Enter  this  gift  sab for  $4 more  (money
(To)  Name  ........................  _.  ..............
Street
City.. ................. _  — .  ... Zone........ .......
Wash. 3, D. C.
>  enclosed    $5:
State......——.
enclosed):
State......  .
10/18/54
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  ?05
301  E.  Capitol  St, S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  01
Second  Class Mall
Matter
Washington, D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED