I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jul19.pdf

============================================================

Memo to the New  York  Times  and  the  Aisops: How Informers  Are Made, Page 4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER  26
JULY  19,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Time  to  Save America  from  Fascism  Is  Now
The  atmosphere  here  in  Washington  is ludicrously
like  that  of  a  tottering  banana  republic  in  deadly  fear  of   an
imminent   Leftist   coup.     In   the   murky   July   heat   of   the
capital,  a  kind  of   frenzy   has  seized  on   the Administration.
It   is  pushing   hard   in   the  closing   days  of   Congress  for   a
repressive  program  so harsh  and  extensive  that  it  must amaze
the  foreign   observer.
The  House  on  July  8  passed  a  bill  so  draconian  it  aroused
the  misgivings  of  Martin  Dies,  a  bill  which widens the  defini-
tions  of   espionage  and   sabotage,   eliminates   any   statute  of
limitations  in  their  prosecution, makes death  a  penalty  even in
time   of   peace.     On   July   13  the   Un-American Activities
Committee  reported  to  the  House  a  bill  already  passed  by  the
Senate   requiring  all   "subversive"   organizations   to  register
their   printing   facilities,   even   their   mimeograph  machines.
So fearful  are  we  become  of  the  printed  word.
Under  pressure, long buried   "immunity"  bills to su-
spend  the  ancient  guaranties of  the  Fifth  Amendment against
self-incrimination  will  be  given  a  public  hearing  today   (July
19)   by  the  House  Judiciary  Committee.     The  heat  is  on  to
complete   the  final  stages  on  a  wiretap bill.
Somnolent  monstrosities  now   safely   bedded  in  committee
may  awaken  at  any  time:  one  of  them  would  set  up  a  postal
censorship   over  "subversive"  publications,  the  other—a   pet
Eisenhower   measure—would   deprive   of   citizenship   native
born  Americans  convicted  of  "conspiring   to  advocate"  radical
doctrines.    As  if  in  preparation  for   a  man-hunt,   the   House
July  7  passed  a  bill  imposing  savage  penalties  on  those  who
harbor   fugitives.
In  these  measures,    and  above all in  the Brownell  bills
to  blacklist  "subversives"  from  employment   and  to liquidate
or   brand   "Communist   infiltrated"    businesses,   trade  unions
and  other  organizations,  there  is  reflected  a  strange  despera-
tion.    It  is as if  we  were on  the  verge  of  a terror  by frightened
men  who  feel  power  slipping  from   their  hands.
So serious  has  the  situation  become  that  the  sober  Brother-
hood  of  Railroad  Trainmen  warned  in  the  July  12  issue of  its
newspaper,   "Americans   had   better   beware!     Legislation   is
pending  before  Congress  that  would  make  this  country  over
after  the  pattern  of  totalitarian  regimes,  with  a  government
•labor  front'  like  Hitler's  . .  ."
A  last-minute  awakening   of  the  labor  movement  is
taking  place.   The  A.F.  of  L.,  the  C.I.O. and  the  United  Mine
Workers   have  really  gone  to  work  "on  the  Hill."    Walter
Reuther  and  George  Meany  in  a  similar  appeal  to  the  House
Judiciary  Committee  have  succeeded  temporarily   at   least  in
getting   that   body  to  substitute  for  the  Attorney   General's
two  main  bills  a  proposal  that  the   President   appoint   a  bi-
partisan   committee  to  study  the   problem   of   "infiltration."
Those  who  wish  to  see the  strategy  and  the  target  of   the
Brownell  program  will find it  in  a little known  document pre-
pared  for   the  Senate  Republican  Policy  Committee   early  in
May   a   few   days   before   Brownell  launched  his  "security"
program.   This is called  the  "Republican  Pursuit  of  American
Communists"   (Supplement   to  Vol. II,   No.    18  of   Senate
Majority  Memo)  but  might  better  be  termed  the  Republican
blueprint  for  the  destruction  of  the  Democratic  party.
The  thesis of this Republican   policy committee study
is  simple.    It  is  that  the  Republicans won  the  Congressional
election  of  1946  and  the  Presidential  election  of  1952  on  the
Communist  issue  and  can  win  the  next  election  the  same way.
Like  McCarthy,  therefore,  it  says  that  despite  the  Eisenhower
victory   "Communism   remains   a   serious   and    fundamental
issue  in  1954,"  indeed that  "it  is even more  compelling  now."
It  echoes  the  20  years  of  treason  theme,  and  like  Joe  makes
them  appear  to  be  22.
It  says  that  under  Roosevelt  the  entire  government   "even
the  armed  services"  were  "infiltrated."  It  accuses  the  Truman
Administration  of  setting  up  "a  system  of  Executive  censor-
ship ... to obstruct  the investigation of  Communist  infiltra-
tion."   It  says every  major  Congressional  step  to  deal with  the
problem—it  lists  Taft-Hartley,  the  Internal  Security  Act  and
the   McCarran-Walter    Immigration   bill—had   to   be   passed
over  Truman  vetoes.   This  is the  perspective  in  which  to  read
the   Brownell   bill   to   liquidate   all  "Communist   infiltrated"
organizations.   The  Democrats  themselves  are  a  target.
A  minUSCUle,  discredited   and  spy-riddled  Communist
party  has  been  made  the  excuse  since  1946 of   a  deliberate
campaign  by  the  U.  S.  Chamber  of   Commerce   to  establish
thought  control  in  this  country.    The  Chamber  now  fears  in
view  of  the  improving  situation  abroad  and  the  dissatisfac-
tion   at   home   that—as  it   said  in  a  recent  bulletin—"1954
may  well  be the  last  chance."   The  main prize—the  pay-off—
is  the  labor  movement.     It  is  "infiltrated"  with  ex-Socialists
and   ex-Communists.    A   bill   giving   the  Attorney  General
power   to   liquidate   or   to  branj-by-registration   any   "infil-
trated"  trade  union  could  be  the  end  of  free  trade  unionism
in  this  country.    This  is  what   Lewis,  Reuther,  and  Meany
now   realize.     And   Democratic   politicians,   craven   as   they
mostly  are, are  beginning   to  see  that  they   lose  their   grass
roots  sources  for  a  come-back  if  labor  can  be  hobbled.
We  are  fighting  a  delaying  action,  hoping  for  the   recovery
of  sanity  in  this  country,  and  for  a  recrudescence  of   courage.
The  one  chance  at  the  moment   is  to  sidetrack  the  Brownell
bills  with  the  proposal  for  a commission  to  study  the  problem.
You  can  help  by  writing  your  Senators  and  your  Congress-
man.    Do it  now.  In  this  the  midsummer  of  1954,  American
liberty  may  be  lost.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  19,19S^
How  The  Lattimore  Decision  Menaces A  Free Press
Washington—"If   this  indictment   had  been  sustained  in
the  lower court," counsel for  Owen  Lattimore argued  in  their
brief  before  the  U.  S.  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,  "it  would
have  cleared  the  way .for  a  Congressional  committee  to  call
any  newspaper  editor,  ask  him  the  character   of  its   contri-
butors,  compel  him  to  evaluate  the  results  of  their  writing
on  political  issues  and  then  subject  him  to  an  indictment in
which  the  jury  would  be  permitted  to  speculate   as  to  the
sincerity  of  such  evaluations."    Unfortunately   that  is  pre-
cisely  what   the   reasoning  of  both   the   majority   and  the
minority  in  the  Lattimore  case  does.
From  the  standpoint  of  the  fight  to  clear  Lattimore  the
most  important  part  of  the  decision  was  that  which upheld
District  Judge   Toungdahl's  order  invalidating   Count  1  of
the  indictment.   Count 1  said  Lattimore  lied  in  denying  that
he  had  "sympathized"  with   Communism.    The  Court  held
7  to  1  that  this  was  too  vague.    "The  word  'sympathizer',"
Judge  Prettyman  ruled  for  the  majority,   "is  not  of   suffi-
ciently  certain  meaning  to  sustain  a  charge  of   perjury."
But  in  reversing  Judge  Youngdahl  on  Counts  3  and 4,  the
Circuit  Court  majority  made  a  ruling  which  casts  a  fearful
shadow  over  freedom  of  the  press,  though  of  but  minor  im-
portance  in the  Lattimore  case.   For  Lattimore,  the  heart  of
the  ease  against  him is  Count  1.   The  rest  may not  survive
trial.
But  the  law  as  laid  down  by  the  Circuit  Court  on  Counts
3  and  4  would  permit  the  Jenner  committee—the  Senate
Internal    Security    Subcommittee—and   probably   also   the
House  Un-American  Activities   Committee  to  subpoena  any
editor   and  question  him  about  the   political   views   of   his
contributors  and the  articles  he  has  published.
What  Were Counts  Three  and  Four?
Count  3  was  that  Lattimore  lied  in  denying  that  he  knew
a  certain  "Asiaticus" was  a  Communist  when  Lattimore  pub-
lished   his  articles   in  the  late  1930's.    Count  4  was   that
Lattimore  lied  in  denying  that,  except  for  contributions  by
Russians,  he   had  never   while   editor   of   "Pacific  Affairs"
published  an  article  by  a  man he  knew  to  be a  Communist.
Jndge  Youngdahl  threw  out  both  these  counts  as  in violation
(by  their  vagueness)  of  the  Sixth  amendment  and  (by  their
interference  with  free  expression)   of  the  First  amendment.
The Circuit  Court  overruled  him, splitting  5  to  4.
The  implications   for   freedom   of   the   press   were   fully
grasped   by  both   sides   when  the  case  was   argued.    The
government   argued  that  there  was  a  parallel   between  the
Lattimore  case  and  that  of  Barsky  and  the  Hollywood   Ten
(which  this  same  Court  of  Appeals  decided).   In  the  hitter,
the  government   urged,   "the  defendants   were  writers  who
moulded  public  opinion  through  the  motion  picture  industry
while  in  the  instant  case  the  defendant  was  an  important
figure  in  the  Institute  of  Pacific  Relations,  editor  of  one  of
its  official  publications,  'Pacific  Affairs' . . . and in a  position
to  influence  public  opinion."
The  defense  tried  to  distinguish  the  Lattimore  case  from
these  two  earlier  decisions.    The  defense  said  that  in  the
earlier  cases  the  Court  held  that  "direct  questions  on Com-
munist  affiliations were  tolerable,  despite  their  indirect  effect
on  First   amendment  freedoms,   because   the   international
emergency   permitted  Congress  to  conclude  that  it  was  in-
dispensable   to   know   who  were   Communists."    Here,   the
defense  said,  Lattimore  was  not  accused   of  being  a  Com-
munist;   "the   so-called  perjury  goes  only  to  the   political
belief   and  attitude   of  a  private  non-Communist  American
citizen."
This  finely  split  hair  attracted  neither  the  majority  nor
the  minority.    Jndge  Prettyman,  who  wrote  the  decision  in
the Barsky  case,  merely  said  for  the  majority  in  Lattimore's
that  "we  cannot  at  the  present  juncture  rule  as  a  matter  of
law  that  it  was  not material  to  the  study  being  made by the
Subcommittee  to  inquire whether  contributors  to  the  maga-
zine  were  or  were  not  Communists."
In  other  words,  the  majority  said  there  was  nothing  in
the  First  Amendment  to  prevent  a  Committee  of  Congress
from  questioning  an  editor  on the  views  of  his  contributors.
Whether a  specific  answer  in  a  specific case  constituted  per-
jury,  however,  would  depend on  the  facts  shown  at  the  trial.
The  minority  opinion  splits  some  hairs   on  its   own,  but
—as we  shall  see—does not  differ  in  principle.   The minority
opinion  makes  strange  reading  because   it  was  written  by
Edgertpn,  whose  dissent  in  the  Barsky   case  is  one  of  the
great  libertarian  landmarks  of  this  period.   In  that  dissent,
Edgerton  declared  ideological  inquisition  by  Congress  uncon-
stitutional.
Judge  Clark  Changes  Sides
Judge   Edgerton's  dissent  in  the   Lattimore   case   is   far
less  uncompromising,  no  doubt  because  one  of  the   judges,
Clark,  who  joined  him  in  that  dissent  was  the  same  judge
who  wrote  the  opinion upholding the  conviction  of  the  Holly-
wood  Ten.   Some  way  had  to  be  found  to  reconcile  Clark's
decision  against  the Hollywood  Ten with his  dissent  on behalf
of  Lattimore.    This  was  done  in  two  ways.    Edgerton  held
that  while  the  Hollywood   Ten  were  asked  objective  facts—
whether  they  were  members  of  the  Communist  Party  and
the   Screen  Writers  Guild—Lattimore  was  asked  about  the
"mental states" of  his  contributors.    Edgerton  also  held that
"Counts  III  and  IV  relate  exclusively  to  the  time  between
1934  and  1941,  before  the  commencement  of  the  'potential
threats  to  the  security  of  this  country*  with  which  Congress
and  the   courts  were   concerned  in   Barsky   and   Lawson."
The minority  challenges  the  authority  of  the  Senate  Internal
Security  subcommittee  to  interrogate  an  editor—but  only  on
the  events  of  the  pre-cold  war  period.
This  is  a  dangerous  distinction.    It  helps  Lattimore,  but
it  implies  that  interrogation   of  an  editor  about  his  current
contributions  and contributors  would be lawful.  The  minority
also  argues  that  "even  now"  what  makes  an  article  "sub-
versive"  is  not  whether  the  author  is  a  Communist  but  the
"content"  of  the  article.   This  reasoning  clears  the  way  for
investigation   of  articles  for  "subversive"  content  even  when
the  authors  are  admittedly  non-Communist.
Riunely  Case A  Weak  Reed
One  final  observation  is  in  order  if  we  are  fully  to  t>lumb
the  repressive  tendencies  implicit  in  the  Lattimore  decision.
Lattimore's  lawyers  cited  the  Btmtely   case  in  which  Judge
Prettyman  held  (197  F.  2d  166)  that  a  publisher  could  not
be made to disclose  the  buyers  of  his  books under the  Lobby-
ing  Act  because   "the   effect  of  public  embarrassment  is  a
powerful   interference   with  the  free   expression   of  views."
This  was  the  very  point  Edgerton  made,  dissenting  in  the
Barsky   case,   against   the   House   Un-American    Activities
Committee.
But  what  the  Circuit  Court  was  willing  to  do  on  behalf  of
a  reactionary  turned  publisher  it  may  not  be  willing  to  do
on  behalf   of  a  liberal  or  radical  editor.    For  as   Edgerton
admits  in his  Lattimore dissent, "In Rwmely  we distinguished
the Barsky, Lawson  (Hollywood  Ten)  and other  cases  on the
grounds  that  'Communism  and  the  Communists  are,  in  the
current   world  situation,   potential   threats  to  .the   security
of  his  country'  and  that  Congress  could  therefore,  interfere
with  freedom  of   expression   in   order   to   inquire  into   the
subject."   In  the  courts,  too,  anything  goes  so  long  as  it  is
garbed  as  anti-Communism.
If  this  reasoning  is  upheld  in  the  Supreme  Court,  editors
may  yet  run  a  double gauntlet  when  they  publish  views  the
witch  hunters   dislake.    They  can  be  put  into   the  pillory
by  a  Congresional  committee  and  they  may  be  indicted  for
perjury  on  the  basis  of  their  replies.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  19,  1954
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor   anH  Fvblither.  L f.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20),  101
£.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  1,  D.  C    Subscription  rates:  Domestic, $>
a   year;  Canada,  Mexico   and  elsewhere   io   the   Western  Hemisphere,   $<;
England   and  Continental  Europe,   $18  by  lit  class  mail,  $15   by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single   copy,   If   cents.    Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered   as  Second   Class  null
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
Vol. II,  Number 26
July  19, 1954
The  Scripps-Howard  Attack  On  McCarthy
We Remember Woltman As A 'Red'
We  hope a  personal  note  may  be forgiven  in  discussing  so
major  a  political  portent  as  the  anti-McCarthy  series  which
the  Scripps-Howard  press  began  publishing  last  week  .  . .
Years  ago,  in  the  early  30's,  we  wrote  editorials  defending
Frederick Woltman when he was fired as economics instructor
from  a college in Pittsburgh as a "Red"—the quotation  marks
are  used  because  he  was  never  actually  a  Communist, just
another  early  New Deal  radical  . . . The series  itself  is not
surprising,  since the  Scripps-Howard  papers  have been  going
after   McCarthy  editorially  .  .  .  But it  took  considerable
courage for Woltman to do that  series ... It  is  ably written
and  our hat  is  off to him for  it    ...
Is  Joe  A Liability?
Is  it  true,  as  Woltman  asserts  in  the  big  headlines,  that
McCarthy  "has  become  a major liability  to the  cause  of  anti-
Communism ... It  is true,  in a  sense ... In the sense  that,
in  any fundamental  conflict,  the two extremes tend  to  support
each  other ... It  is also true  in the  sense that  McCarthy by
his arrogance,  brashness and overweening  ambition  has  dram-
atized the consequences of the witch hunt, its  ultimate  menace
to all that  is sane  and orderly  in our society  . . . But by its
inner  logic,  the witch  hunt  cannot  be kept  in  bounds  .  .  .
Sooner  or  later  it  was  bound  to  breed  a  McCarthy,  a  man
ready  to  exploit  it  with  utter  unscrupulousness  for  his own
ends,  to   defile  and  defame  all  that  stands  on  his  way  to
power ...
No  Worse Than  Jenner
But  is  McCarthy any  worse than  Velde,  McCarran, Nixon,
Mundt or Jenner?  . . . Isn't it just that he is more dramatic?
.  .  .  Wasn't  Jenner  as dirty  in his attack  on General  Mar-
shall  . . . Aren't  Velde  and his colleagues of the  House Un-
American   Activities   Committee  as  ruthless   and   cruel   in
dealing  with  small,  helpless and obscure people?  . . .  Hasn't
McCarthy  in  many  cases   merely  thrown   on  the   national
screen  all  the unfairness and  unreliability  of FBI  loyalty  and
security  reports?  . . . And what  of Brownell  and his attack
on  Harry  White and the Democrats? . . . What of the  G.O.P.
Brownell  legislative   program   discussed  on page  one?  .  .  .
McCarthy  is  a  liability  in  this  sense  only  because  he  makes
it  easier  for  the  country to see what's happening,  because he
destroys  the pretense  and mummery of legality  . . .
Brownell  Is  Lower Morally
Morally,  in  our  opinion,  Elsenhower  and  Brownell  rank
lower  than  McCarthy  . . .  Eisenhower  didn't  have the manli-
ness to  back his lifelong friend  and patron,  General Marshall
. . . Brownell knows better  . . . McCarthy is just  an adven-
turer  .  . .  Don't  count him out too soon, though  at  least one
of  his  Texas  oil  millionaires  is  reported  to  have  run  out  on
him  . . . But if  they  knock  him out or quiet him down  for a
while,  it  will  only  make  the  path  to  Fascism  smoother,  by
disarming  an  aroused  public  .  .  .  Anti-Communism is the
G.O.P.'s  stock   in  trade,  both  parties  have  their  quota  of
paranoids . . . And the big interests who launched the Cham-
ber  of Commerce "through control" campaign  in  1946 want  it
to go on . . . Their  objective is to prevent  a New  Deal in this
country  .  .  .  That,  and not McCarthy,  is  the heart  of the
hurricane ...
McCarthy's  Advantage
McCarthyism  or  any  new variant  cannot  be fought  so  long
as  people forget that  there  can  be  no freedom  without  risk,
no stable  society without a modicum of faith,  no sane order  so
long as  we propagate  the  theory  that  Communists are  super-
natural  beings  with  occult  powers  subterraneously  engaged
in  "subverting"  our  society ...  If  that  is  to  be the  major
premise  of  American  thinking,  how  answer  McCarthy when
he  says  the  Republicans,  too,  are  "infiltrated"? ...  If  the
Communists  are  that  diabolically  clever,  why  shouldn't  they
mask  as  Republicans? . . .  How  answer  McCarthy when he
says  maybe  Wechsler  was  assigned  by  Moscow  to  make  be-
lieve  he was  an  anti-Communist so years  later  he  could  more
effectively fight McCarthy and J. Edgar  Hoover? ... Once the
mad  premise is accepted, the rest  follows  logically . . . Indeed
the  weirder  the  charge the  more  it  appeals  to  a  public led to
shiver  over a  diabolic  enemy . . . There is no way to keep the
United  States  permanently just  a  little  crazy  .  .  .  Either
sanity   will  be  restored   or  the  Fascist  mentality  will  take
power  . . . Freedom as we have know it and "security" as the
paranoids  preach  it are incompatible . . . This  is what  needs
to be driven  home  . . .
And  It's  Red Borsht, Too
P.S.  As  therapeutic  as  the  Woltman  series,,  perhaps  more
so,  since  a  little  laughter  is  the  best  solvent,  was  the  adver-
tisement  the  Ambassador  Hotel  Grill  put  beside  it  in  the
Washington   Daily   News  last  Wednesday  .  .  .  "Don't   Tell
Joe,"  the ad said,  "We Serve the  Best  Borsht  in  Town  . .  ."
Is  Paul  Crouch A Faithful  Reader  of  The   Weekly,
Or Was It  Our Crystal  Ball?
Our  issue   of   July   5  suggested  wryly  that   Brownell
might  be  afraid  to  act  against  his  professional   witness,
Paul   Crouch,  lest  this  upset  the  cases  in  which  Crouch
has  starred  for  the  government.    "Who  knows,"  we  also
wondered,  "what  Crouch might  say  about  Brownell  .  . .?"
Either   it's   that  crystal  ball  we  got  for  Christmas,  or
Crouch  is  another  of  the  Weekly's   growing  list  of  faithful
readers.   Because  four  days  later  the  New  York  Times  of
July  9  reported  from  Washington  that  Crouch  was  asking
a  Congressional   investigation   of  Brownell  and  asserting
that  any  action by  Brownell  against  him  "might  force  the
reopening  of  about  sixty  hearings  and  trials  in  which  he
had  been  a  principal witness."
Downight  clairvoyant  our  circulation  department  calls
it.  So why not  give  some  good friend  the benefit of  reading
so  pre-informed  a  publication  by  using  the  blank  on  the
reverse  side to give him a  gift  subscription?
—I.  F.  STONE.
P.S.  In  the  Brownell-Crouch  dispute  itself,  we  are  im-
partial.   We  believe  they  both  deserve  to  be  investigated.
1    0
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  19, 1954
A  Memo for  the New  York  Times  and the  Alsops:
The  Darker  Side  of  the  Picture — How  Informers  Are  Made
The  New  York   Times  in  a  survey  on  July  7,  the  Alsops
in  their  column  on  July   11,  performed  a  public  service  in
calling  attention  to  the  increased  use  of   informers   by   the
government  and  the  moral  issues  involved.    But  no  one  has
yet  discussed  the  way  informers  are made'by  the government
itself.    An  underworld  of  official  blackmail, trafficking  in  fear
and  misery,  waits  to  be  exposed.
Last  week  the  curtain  was lifted  on  it  a little  in  Washing-
ton  where  Bernard  Horwatt  called  in  newsmen and  told  his
own  story.   The  Department  of  Justice had  just  filed a  peti-
tion   in   Federal   court   accusing   him   of   having   failed   to
mention  in  his  1931  naturalization   proceedings  that  he  was
a  Communist.
That  was  23  years  ago.    Horwath,  now  an  electrical  con-
tractor  in  Falls  Church,  Ya.,   faces   loss  of   citizenship  and
deportation.     He  told  reporters   he  was  first  a  Socialise'and
then  a  Communist  in  the  30's,  leaving  the  party  in   1938.
Horwatt  said  that  he  had  been  questioned  by  the  FBI  four
times  but   refused  to  give  the  names  of  others  he  knew  in
the  Communist  party.    Then  the  FBI  asked  him  to   rejoin
the  Communist   party  and  provide   them  with  information.
"I'm   not  the  person  who  can  play  a  two-life   personality,"
Horwatt  explained  his refusal.   "I  just  couldn't  do it."    The
denaturalization  proceeding  followed.
The  only  difference  between  the  Horwatt  case  and  others.
is  that  most  people  caught  this  way  are  afraid  to  talk  of  it
even  if  they  have  the  nerve  to  refuse  the  request  that  they
inform  on  others.   The  screws  the  government  can  turn  are
particularly  severe  because  so  many  of  these  people  are  ex-
radicals  now  respectably  established.
Many  are  elderly  and  ailing,  no  longer  a  menace  to  any-
thing  even  by  witch  hunt  perspectives.    Of   3 JO  people now
in   process   of  deportation  or  denaturalization   or  both,   the
American  Committee  for  the  Protection of  the  Foreign  Born
says  more  than  90  are  65  years of  age or  over.
Roy  Cohn  Put  The  Screws  On Browder
A  particularly   striking   case  is  that  on  which  the  govern-
ment  finally  launched  in  the  Federal  District  Court  in  New
York  last  week  against  Earl  Browder,  the  former  leader  of
the   American  Communist   Party,   and  his  wife.     We  first
called  attention  to  the  indictment  in  an  article  "The   Man
Who  Refused  to  be a Budenz" in  our  issue  of  March  7,  1935.
The  government  has  been  holding  a  perjury  indictment  over
the  heads  of  the  Browders  in  an  effort   to  turn  him  into  an
informer.    Roy  Cohn  several  times  sent  word  that  all  would
be  well  if  only  Browder  would  "cooperate."
The   case  was  called  for  trial  when  Browder  still   refused.
He  has  chosen  honor  and  poverty  over  the  financial  rewards
that  might  have  been  nis  if  he  had  sold  his  memoirs  to   the
magazines  and  the  government.
The  alleged  perjury  occurred  in  1946  when  Mrs.  Browder
applied  for  American  citizenship.    They  both  denied  on  her
application  that  she  had   been  a  member  of   the   American
Communist  party.    This  had  been  certified   as  a  fact   two
years  earlier  by  the  Board  of  Immigration  Appeals  (two  of
whose  three .members  were  ex-Federal  judges)   when  she  was
granted  a  visa  as  a  quota  immigrant.    Paul  Crouch  is  now
prepared  to  testify  to  the  contrary.
It   should   not   require  much  imagination  to   realize   the
plight   of   the   Browders.    An   ex-Communist   leader   who
chooses  not   to  cash  in  on  his  past  is  a  lonely  figure  in  cold
war  America;  hatred  and  suspicion  wall  him  in  on  both  sides.
Add  Mrs.  Browder's  long  illness  and  concern  for  their  three
sons,  all  three  brilliant  mathematicians,  and  the  extent  of  the
blackmail  is  obvious.
In  every  American  paper  and  from  every  American  plat-
form  one  may  read  and  hear  that  we,  unlike  Them,  do  not
believe  the  end  justifies  the  means.    But  the  Department  of
Justice  is  as unscrupulous  as  any  Communist  Ministry  of   the
Interior   when  it   comes  to  using  fear  and  threat  to  obtain
pliant  tools  against  oppositionists.    It  is  time  that  vestigial
organ,  the  American  conscience,  the  vermiform  appendix  of
the  cold  war,  gave  a  few  twinges  on  this  subject.
I.  P.  Stone's Weekly, 301  E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed
Street.
City                                                      ZOHP              State .
Enter  this  gift  sub for  $4 more (money enclosed) :
(To)   Name...           ...  .              ...              .,,-...
Street
Cily                                         Zone               State....
.C.
$5:
—
7-19-54
let  Us Send A  Sample  Copy  Free  To Your  Meads
I.  F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D.  C
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED