I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jul12.pdf

============================================================

Witch  Hunt  Bulletin  From  Capitol  Hill;  Brownell's  Blitzkrieg,  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2, NUMBER 25JULY  12,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15 CENTS
Knowland's  Threat  Is  Against  Eisenhower
There  has  been  so  much  merriment,   of   the  hollow   ha-ha
variety,  about  Knowland's  threat  to  resign  as  majority leader
if   Red  China  is  admitted  to  the  UN,   that   too  little  atten-
tion  has  been  paid  its  real  significance.   The  threat  to  resign
is  not   aimed  at  our  Western   allies  but   at  the  White  House.
It   is  Eisenhower  on   whom  Knowland   has  served   warning.
Knowland  threatened  to  resign  as  majority  leader  because
he   feared    an   unspoken    understanding   in    the   Churchill-
Eisenhower  talks  for  Peking's admission to  the  UN.   The U.S.
would  look  the  other  way,  as in  Indo-China,  making gestures
of  resistance, but  in  the  end  acquiescing.  Thus  by  a combina-
tion   of   force   and   gentle  duckings,   a  slightly  cracked  old
Uncle  Sam  would  be  led  to  make  some  adjustment   to   the
realities   of   international  life.    The   new   British  diplomacy
would   be  to   pat   our  hand  during   the   operation   and say,
"There,  there  . .  ."
McCarran  Rang  The Alarm
The  Knowland  threat  becomes  clearer  if  one  looks  at   the
little  noticed   speech  McCarran   made  in  the  Senate  the  day
Churchill  was  being  interviewed  here  at  his  press  luncheon.
The    most   important   part   of   the   speech   was   not    its
criticism  of  the  British  but  its  warning  about  the  Eisenhower
Administration.    "There  are  those  in  authority  in  the  United
States  today,"  McCarran  said, "including  some  in  what  might
be  termed   the  middle  echelon  of   the  Department  of   State,
and  possibly  also  in  the  middle  echelon  of  the  White   House
as  well,  who  are  still  seeking  recognition  by  the  United  States
for  the  Communist   overlords  of  China."    McCarran  did  not
place  these "middle echelons" more  precisely,  nor  name names.
But  earlier  in  the  speech   the  China   Lobby's   most   astute
spokesman  did  touch  in  passing  on   someone  who  might   be
described  as in  that  "middle  echelon."    McCarran  said,  "It   is
significant,  I  think,  that  in  his  speech  to  the  House  of Com-
mons,  Mr.   Eden  warmly   and  equally  praised  Gen. Walter
Bedell  Smith,   United   States  Under   Secretary   of   State,   and
Mr.  Molotov,   the   Soviet   Foreign   Minister,   for   their  aid  at
Geneva."
"Obviously,"  McCarran   went   on,  "Mr.  Eden   feels   that
both  General  Smith  and Mr.  Molotov  aided  him,  and that  they
aided  him  in  substantially  the  same  degree.   It  is  not  think-
able,"  McCarran  continued,  thinking  it  aloud,  "that  he  could
have  meant  that  Mr.  Smith  and  Mr.  Molotov   were  wo/king
for  the  same  objectives."
This  must  be  read   against   the  background   of   the   China
Lobby's  vendetta   with   General   Marshall.    Smith,  like  Eisen-
hower,   is  a   Marshall   protege.    He   is  much   closer   to   the
President  than  Dulles  and  one  of  the  objectives  of  the  China
Lobby  has  been  to  cast  enough  doubt  on  Smith  to  make  it
politically  impossible  for  him  to  become  Dulles'  successor  as
Secretary  of  State.   The  report  on  "Interlocking  Subversion  in
Government   Departments"    issued   by   the   Internal    Security
Committee   of  the  Senate last  summer sideswiped  Smith.   The
chairman  of  that  committee  is  Marshall's  detractor,   Jenner,
and  its  ranking Democrat  is  McCarran.
Why  They  Want  to  Probe  CIA
One  of  the  reasons  the  China  Lobby  crowd  has  been  itching
to  bring  CIA  (Central  Intelligence Agency)  within  the  orbit
of  the  Congressional  witch  hunt  is  because  of  the  opportunity
this  would  afford  to  smear Smith, who  was  long  head  of CIA.
One  of  CIA's  functions  is  to  act  as  the  private  news  agency
of  the  White  House,  briefing  the  President  daily  on  the  world
situation.    This  gives  it  great  influence, since  policy  is  often
made  on  the  basis of  the  facts  as CIA  presents  it.
In  the  light  of  this  it  is important  to  call  attention  to  an
unnoticed   passage  in  a  second  speech  McCarran   made  to  the
Senate  last  week.    This  was  shortly  after  Knowland's   threat
to  resign  and  it  accompanied  McCarran's   introduction  of  a
resolution,  S.J. Res. 171,  directing  the  President  to  withdraw
the  U.S. from  all United  Nations  organizations  and  functions
if  Communist  China  were  admitted  to  the  UN.
McCarran   began   by   saying   there   was   a   plan   to   bring
Peking    into    the    General   Assembly    after    Congress    had
adjourned.    He  declared  that  while  he  was  "confident"  thnt
the  President  does  not  favor  this, "yet I  am  afraid  he  will  be
overpersuaded  on  this  matter,  and  permit   the  United  States
to  assent,  or  to  remain  silent,  while  this  Communist  coup  is
completed."     McCarran    said   he   was   also   "confident"    of
Dulles's  position.    But  "I  gravely  fear,"  he  went  on,  "that
Mr.  Dulles  will  not  demonstrate  the  courage  of  his  convictions
if   too   many   others   in   the   administration  take   a   different
viewpoint."
At  this  point  McCarran  went  on  to  make  what  seems  to be
a  veiled  reference  to  the CIA.  This  may  further  elucidate his
cryptic   remarks   about   the  "middle  echelons"  which   favor
admission  of  Red  China  to  the  UN.    "I  think,"  he  told  the
Senate,  (Con. Rec. July  1,  p.  9061),  "there  is  grave  danger
that  the National  Security  Council may  be persuaded,  by  those
to  whom  it  listens  most  carefully  and  who  have  the  largest
share in  preparing  and  filtering  the  language  of  its   pronounce-
ments  [italics added,  IPS] ; and on  the  basis of  such  persuasion,
may  counsel  that  the  Chinese  Communists"  be  admitted   to
the  UN.
The  Threat  of  a  New  Investigation
It  is the CIA, now under  Dulles's brother, Allen W. Dulles,
which  briefs  the  National  Security  Council.  Somewhere  in  the
"middle  echelons"  of  CIA  and  White  House,  the  language  of
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

l.F. Stontfs   Weekly, July  It, 19S4
National Security Council  pronouncements  is prepared  and,  to
use  McCarran's  well  chosen  word,  "filtered."    Now  if  one
turns back  to the speech a few days earlier,  in which McCarran
first  sounded  the  alarm, one will  see the  shadow of  his strategy
for  the  future'
McCarran  ended  that  first  speech  by  warning  the  Senate
(Con.  Rec. June  28,  p.  8592)   to  "beware  of  the  attitude
which  is  being  assumed more  and  more of  those in  important
posts  in  Government,  the  attitude  of  scoffing  at  the  danger
presented   by  that  group  who  are  security  risks  in  Govern-
ment  jobs."   McCarran  said  this  attitude  ignored  the  "estab-
lished  fact  that  it  was  through  the  advice  and  machinations
of  security  risks  in  Government  jobs  that  the  destruction  of
Nationalist  China  was brought  about."   This  was the  "fact"
as  "established" by  the  Internal  Security  Committee's   investi-
gation  of  the  Institute   of  Pacific  Relations  when  McCarran
was its  chairman.
McCarran   then   proceeded  to  an  oblique  warning  for  the
White  House.   "Let it  not  be  forgotten,"  he  advised, "that
because  of  this  group  of  security  risks  in  Government  jobs,
a   program   and  a  policy   favorable  to   Communist   aims  in
China,  and  prepared  initially  by  a  conscious  articulate  agent
of  the  Soviet  conspiracy  was  presented  to  a  President  of  the
United  States."
The  G.OJP, Too,  Is  "Infiltrated"
"Never  think  for  a  moment,"  McCarran  concluded,  "that
an  American  President   accepted  a  program  favorable  to  the
Communists, knowing  that  it  was a program favorable to  the
Communists,  or  knowing  that  it  was  Communist   inspired."
McCarran  thus  absolved Truman  while warning Elsenhower.
"Never forget  for  a moment," he went  on, "that  Communist
planners  have  not  ceased to  plan,  and  that  Communist  agents
continue  to  work  deviously  and  with  fiendish  cleverness  for
the   attainment   of   the   long-range   objectives  of   the  world
Communist   conspiracy."    And  then  he  ended  by  expressing
the view that  the G.O.P., too, was infiltrated.   "Do  not  doubt
for  a  moment,"  McCarran  finished,  "that  communism  still
has its  servants  and  dupes in  high  places."
This  speech  and  its  implications  are  to  be  taken  seriously.
They  assert—and  no  Republican  rose  in  the  Senate to  deny  it
—that  after   18  months  in   office   the  new   Administration,
like  its   Democratic   predecessor   and   despite   promises  of  a
cleanup,  still had in its  "high  places"  the "servants  and  dupes"
of  the  Communists.    The  prospect  of  admitting  Red  China
to  the UN  was portrayed  as  a "new  tragedy"  which  would be
due  to  their  handiwork.   That  this  came from  McCarran, the
Senate's  ablest  if  not  its  noisiest  Inquisitor,  was  notice  that
unless  the  Administration  fought  hard  against Peking's, admis-
sion, it  would  be investigated  and smeared in  its  turn.
This  is  the  atmosphere  in  which  national  policy  on China
must  be  made.   This,  too, clarifies  the  standards embodied in
and  the  purposes  achieved by  the  concept  of  a "security  risk."
Anyone  who  dares  advocate  recognition   of   realities  in   the
Far  East  is in  danger of  being regarded  as a  security  risk,  and
a  possible  Communist  conspirator.    This  is the  mechanism by
which  Chiang's  rump  regime on  Formosa  wields  in  Washing-
ton  the  power  it  lost  in  Asia.    The  American  civil  servant
quails  before  a  power  of  which  the  Chinese  peasant  has  rid
himself.   It  is  Washington  which  now  wears  the  pigtail.
Elsenhower  for  Co-Existence
Talk  of  co-existence has touched  a vital  nerve  in  Washing-
ton  because it  means co-existence with  Communist  China  and
must  lead  eventually  to  its  recognition  and  admission  to  the
US—either,  that,  or  war.  And  what  has  alarmed  McCarran
and  Knowland  and  those  who  are  reconciled  to  war  is  that
Elsenhower  basically,  and  to  a  greater  extent  than  Truman
and  Acheson,  is  prepared  to  accept   co-existence.    This  was
evident,  despite talk  of  not  appeasing and not  making anybody
a  slave,  in  his July  1 press  conference,  the  day  before  Know-
land's  threat  to  quit.    The  President's  answer  to  a  question
about  the   possibilities  of   co-existence  wobbled  and  wiggled
but   ended  by  saying,"  we  have  got   to  find  ways  of   living
together.    This  moves  in  an  entirely  different  direction   from
the  Truman-Acheson  "total  diplomacy,"  which  was based on
the premise that  co-existence was impractical  and unacceptable
and  that  the  only  way out  was to  build  up  to  such  strength
that  the  Russians must  either  surrender  or  be crushed. Mutual
possession  of  the  H-bomb  has  made  this  more  than  ever  a
fantasy.    And  Eisenhower  knows  it.
Eisenhower  uses  the  cliches  necessary  in  the  current  atmo-
sphere,  but  they  mean  little  in  practice  except   to  keep  the
public  (and himself)   confused.    Thus  in  the  wake  of  his
remark  about  not  being  a party  to  any treaty  making anybody
a  slave, he  was asked—but  denied—that  this  meant  he  would
not  cooperate  in  any  way  with  an  armistice  that   partitions
Vietnam.     Yet   partition   of   Vietnam,   in   this   vocabulary,
means  that  part  of  its  people  will  become  "slaves."   (The
rest   presumably   continue   in   a  happy   state  of   freedom  as
coolies for  the  Bank  of  Indo-China.)
Again  the  Democrats  Must  Save Him
For  the  China  Lobby  crowd,  it  looks  more  than  ever  like
the  last   chance  to  prevent   the  liquidation  of   the   Chiang
regime.   A bipartisan  alliance is at  work,  in  which  McCarthy
refreshed  may  soon  be  expected  to   figure.   The  atmosphere
is  so  bad  that  only  Lehman  and  Morse  had   the  nerve   to
challenge  Knowland  and  his  new  lieutenant,  the   Democratic
leader,  Lyndon  Johnson  of  Texas.    But  the  speech  of  George
last  Tuesday  was a  reminder  that  the  situation  was not  quite
as serious as it  appeared when both parties in  the  Senate seemed
to  be  speaking  in  one  voice.
Lyndon   Johnson,   like   Knowland,   fulfills    the   technical
details  which  devolve  on  party  leadership  in  the  Senate  but
neither  "leads"  his  party  colleagues  in  the  normal  sense  of
the  word.    Neither   has  the  prestige,   seniority,   capacity  or
force  for  that.    George,  on  the  other  hand,  is  one  of   the
natural  leaders of  the  Democratic  party  and  indeed  on  some
issues of  both  parties in  the  Senate at  this  time.   Like Lehman
and  Morse,  he  did  not  dare  go  beyond  the  pale  and  favor
recognition  of  realities  in  the  Far  East.    Like  them,  he merely
opposed  American  withdrawal  from  the  UN   if  China  were
admitted.    This  Southern  conservative  has  been  one  of   the
main  influences  against  military  involvement  in  Indo-China,
and  behind  him  enough  votes  can  certainly  be  mustered  to
defeat   the   McCarran   resolution   or   any   similar   moves  by
Knowland.    But  this  may  be  the  beginning  of  a  split  in  the
Republican  party  in  which  the  wild, men may try  to  take  the
reins  away from  Eisenhower whom  they  mistrust  and  despise.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  IS,  1954
Witch  Hunt  Bulletin  from  Capitol  Hill
BrownelTs  Blitzkrieg  To  Avoid  Public  Hearings
Capitol  Hill—The  Senate  Judiciary  Committee was  slated
to   open   public  hearings  last   Thursday   (July   8)   on  the
Brownell  bills  to  liquidate  "Communist-infiltrated"  organiza-
tions  and  to  set  up a  blacklist  of  "subversives"  in  industry.
The  Attorney  General,  who  has  never  testified  on  his  own
bills,  despite  their  revolutionary  character,  was  to  be  invited
to  appear  and to  answer  questions  about them.
Two  days  before  the  hearings   were  to  have  been  held,
Brownell  took  the  unusual  step  of  appearing before  an  execu-
tive  session  of  the  Committee.   Of  the  five  members reported
to  be  against  his  bills,  Hennings  (D.,  Mo.),  Johnston   (D*
S.  Car.),  Hendrickson  (R., N. J.),  Kilgore  (D.,  W.  Va.)  and
Langer  (R.,  S. D.),  only the latter  was  present.
As  a result  of the  Attorney  General's  surprise  appearance,
the  majority  voted  to  call  off  hearings   and  to  report  the
Brownell  "Communist-infiltrated'  bill  in  amended form.   This
was  a  partial  defeat  for  the  Attorney  General, since  the bill
as  reported next  day did not  give  him the  power he had origi-
nally  requested  to  name a  receiver  for  and  to  liquidate  any
business,  trade  union or  other  organization  he believed  to  be
"Communist-infiltrated."
Instead  the  bill  (8  3706)  would add a  new chapter  to  the
McCarran  Act,  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  Act
of  1950.  At  present  this Act  provides for  the  registration of
"Communist  action"  and  "Communist  front"   organizations
and  for   the   "yellow  badge"  labelling   of   publications  and
broadcasts  under  their  auspices.   The  new  bill  would  bring
under  the  same  provisions  any  "organization"   which   was
"infiltrated,"  though  not  necessarily  dominated or  controlled
by  the Communists.
As  we went  to  press,  the  text  of  the  bill  had not  yet  been
printed  but  the  committee report, (No.  1709)  was  available.
From  it  at  the  bottom of  this  page  we  reprint  the  standards
the  bill  would establish  for  determining whether  an organiza-
tion  was  "Communist infiltrated."
This  bill  would vastly  enlarge  the  inquisitorial  orbit  of  the
Subversive Activities  Control Board.  It  would give  the Board
power to  deny collective  bargaining  privileges  to  "infiltrated"
unions—the principal original  purpose.  But it is so sweepingly
written  that  any  organization  or publication  which has  aided
causes  also  supported  by  the  Communists  would  be  endan-
gered.
At  the  very  least  this  bill  would give  the  Board  authority
to  hail  before  it  any  trade  unionist,  business  man,   social
worker,  or  newspaperman  to  determine  whether  there  was
"Communist  infiltration"  in  his  organization.   It  could  thus
extend  the  witch  hunt  into  many  fields  Congressional  com-
mittees  have  hesitated  to  enter  because  their  power to  do so
is doubtful.
A  trade  union,  publication,  organization  or business  would
be  subject  to  the  sanctions  and liabilities  of  the  Subversive
Activities  Control  Board  if  at  any  time  within  five  years  it
had  been  "Communist  infiltrated."   It  would  have  to  wear
the  "yellow  badge"  of  registration  and labelling  as  "Commu-
nist  infiltrated."  This  would be enough in  most  cases to  drive
it  out  of  business.
The bill, according to the report, would lay  the  groundwork
for   sensational    "mass   trials"  since   it   would  permit   the
Attorney  General to  try  "two or more affiliated  organizations
to  be  named  as  joint  respondents."   Thus  also  the  sinister
reputation  of  one  could be used  to  reflect  on  others.
The  main  effect  of  the  bill  would  be  to  destroy  left-wing
unions,  and to  put  other  unions  on notice that  to  support  any
radical  or  pacifist  cause  was  dangerous,  since  this  might  be
adduced  as  evidence  of  "parallelism"  and  "infiltration."   The
same  goes for  publications  and businesses.  That  these  provi-
sions  may  easily  be  used  later  against  any  kind  of  militant
trade-unionism  is  recognized  by  CIO and  A.F. of L.,  both  of
which are on record against this  type  of legislation.   Unfortu-
nately  their  battle  against  it has been lukewarm because  they
see it  as a means of eliminating  left-wing rivals.
Only  a  last-minute  fight  in  the  Senate,  so  determined  that
it  would threaten  other  business,  can  block  this  police-state
legislation  now.  Write  or wire your  Senator.
How  "Communist-Infiltration"  Would  Be  Determined
"In  making  such  determinations   with   respect   to   any
organization,  the   Board  would  be  required  to   take   into
account—
"(1)   the  extent  to  which  the  effective  management  of
the  affairs  of  such  organization is  conducted  by  one or more
individuals  who  are,  or  within  five  years  have  been,   (A)
members,   agents,   or  representatives   of   any  Communist
organization,  any  Communist  foreign  government,  or  the
world  Communist  movement referred  to  in  section  2  of  this
title,  with  knowledge of  the  nature  and purpose  thereof,  or
(B)  engaged  in  giving  aid  or  support  to  any  such  organi-
zation,  government,  or  movement  with  knowledge  of   the
nature  and  purpose  thereof;
"(2)  the  extent  to  which  the  policies  of  such  organization
are,  or  within  five  years  have been,  formulated and carried
out  pursuant  to  the  direction  or  advice  of  any  member,
agent  or  representative  of  any  such  organization,  govern-
ment  or movement.
"(3)  the  extent  to  which  the  personnel  and  resources  of
such  organization  are,  or within  five  years  have been,  used
to  further  or  promote  the  objectives  of  any  such  Commu-
nist  organization,  government or movement;
"(4)  the  extent  to  which such  organization  within 5  years
has  received  from,  or  furnished  to  or  for  the  use  of,  any
such  Communist organization, government or movement any
funds  or other  material assistance;
"(5)  the  extent  to  which  such  organization  is,  or  within
five  years  has  been,  affiliated  in  any  other  way  with  any
such  Communist organization,  government  or movement;
"(6)  the  extent  to  which the  affiliation  of  such organiza-
tion,  or  of  any  individual  or  individuals  who  are  members
or who manage its  affairs,  with any such  Communist organi-
zaton,  government or  movement is  concealed  from  or is  not
disclosed  to  the  membership of  such  organization: and
"(7)  the  extent  to  which  such  organization  or  any  of  its
members  or  managers  are,  or  within  five  years  have  been
knowingly  engaged—
"(A)  in  any  conduct punishable  under  Section  4  or  15  of
this  act  or  under  chapter  37,  105,  or  115  of  title  18  of  the
VJS.  Code;  or
"(B)  with  intent  to  impair  the  military  strength  of  the
United  States or its  industrial  capacity  to  furnish  logistical
or  other  support  required  by  its  Armed Forces,  in  any  ac-
tivity  resulting  in  or contributing  to  such  impairment.
"Sections  4 and 15 of  the  act,  referred  to  in snbparagraph
(7)  (A)  of  the  foregoing  standards,  prescribe  criminal pen-
alties  for  the  violation  of  substantive  provisions  contained
in  the  [Internal  Security]  Act.   Chapters  37,  105,  and  115
of  title  18 of  the  U.S.  Code .. . are penal  in nature  and are
entitled  respectively  'Espionage and Censorship,' 'Sabotage,'
and Treason,' Sedition  and Subversive Activities.'"
—Mr.  Butter,  from   the  Senate  Committee  on  the
Judiciary     (Report     No.   1709)   to    accompany
S  8706,  to  amend  the  Subversive  Activities  Con-
trol  Act  of  1950  to provide for  the determination
of   the  identity  of  Communist-infiltrated    organi-
zations.
1   0  •
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  12,
Round  A  (Woozy)  Capitol  and  An  (Unsteady)  Globe
A  Justice  Department  source  says  that  Paul   Crouch  is
"through" as  a  government informer, but  is silent  on  perjury
action  .  .  .  The  State  Department  played  it  dirty  when   offi-
cials  claimed  the  U.S.  was  not  informed  about  French  plans
to  withdraw  from  the  southern  part  of  the  Red  River  delta;
the  plans  were  approved  in  advance  by  Gen.  O'Daniel,  head
of  the U.S. Military mission  in  Indo-China  . . . The decision
to  file  the  anti-trust  suit  against  United  Fruit  was  political,
timed  with an  eye to Guatemala.  At  the rate that the Justice
Department  is  handing  out  consent  decrees  in  Sherman  Act
cases,  United  Fruit has nothing  to fear ....
"Warmed   over  spy" was  promised  as  pre-election  bill  of
fare,   but   none  has   been   quite   as   often   warmed   over   as
Jenner's  new  investigation  into  the  Army's  World  War   II
Information    and   Education   branch    of   whose   anti-racist
pamphlets  John   Rankin  used  to  complain  .  .  .  One of  the
horrendous  revelations  at  the  opening  of  the  hearings  last
week  dealt  with  a  "GI  Plan  for  Postwar  America"  broached
by  students  at  a  convalescent  hospital  in  Camp  Pickett, Vir-
ginia.   A  Baltimore  insurance man  then  employed by  counter-
intelligence  testified that  he spotted  it  as  Red ...  A  look  at
the  document itself  showed that  on atomic  energy  what  these
"Reds"  advocated was  strict  international  control, ownership
and   inspection  of  atomic  energy,  i.e., the  Baruch  plan  .  .  .
Senator  Jenner  seemed  very  auspicious  of  the  fact  that  one
witness, Luke Wilson, had  no visible means  of support, wanted
to  know  if  he  got  money  from  subversive  sources  .  .  . The
committee's  tireless   researchers  did  not  seem  to  realize  the
\vitnuss  was  heir  to  one  of  Washington's  great  department
store  fortunes .  .  .  Probably  because  this  never  appeared  in
the  Daily  Worker  . . .
We  nominate  for  shipment  to  one  of  the   Soviet   Union's
worser  and  colder  labor  camps  the  bureaucrat  who "sat  on"
a  visa  requested  by Mrs.  Roosevelt  for  a writer  to  accompany
her  on her  projected  Russian  tour  .  .  .  They  wouldn't  take
the   responsibility  of   refusing  the   visa   but   failed   to   say
cither  "da" or  "nyet"  .  .  . Mrs.  Roosevelt  finally  called off
her  trip  in  protest  when  she couldn't  get  an  answer,  and  we
don't  blame  her  .  . . Plain  clunk-headed  rudeness  of this kind
has  hurt  Russian  relations with  the  outside  world for  a  long
time,  and  if  there  is  to  be  a  "new  look"  it  is  time  the  Soviet
bureaucracy  took a good  new look at  itself  . . .
Adenauer  in  his  latest  declared  the   German  people  had
"convincingly  demonstrated  their  reliability"  and  then  went,
on  to  say  that  unless  EDC  was  ratified  the  result  would  be  a
German  national  army,  and  "we,  as  so  many  others,  believe
this  would  unquestionably lead  to  German  militarism."  How
reliable  are  they,  if  they  can  so  easily  slip  into  militarism
again?    Even   the   State   Department's    European    experts
allowed  themselves  a  quiet  moue  over  that  one . . .
The  Hanoi  correspondent   of  the  Sunday   Times   (June  27)
of  London  presented  quite  a  different  picture,  said  the  Viet
Namese  nationalists  "are  convinced  that,  left  to  their  own
devices,  they  could  settle  with  the  Viet  Minh"  .  .  . "Nobody
here  pretends,"  he  wrote,  "that  if  elections  were  held  now
the  Vietnamese  Nationalists  could  win.  But  they  themselves
believe that,  once freed  from  the  French, they  could  capitalize
on  the  traditional  fear  of  China and  natural  anti-Communism
to  win  the  people  to  their   side.   Furthermore,"   he  added,
"they  do  not  dread  the  emergence  of  a  Ho  Chi-minh  regime,
for   the   Nationalists   and   the   Viet-Minh   alike  regard   Ho
Chi-minh  as  the  one  statesman   of  stature  their  country  has
produced  . . .
The  new  Guatemalan  regime  has  hit  on  the  way  to  safe-
guard  Latin  American regimes  from  "subversion"—take  the
right  to  vote  away  from  the  illiterate,  i.e., the  majority  of
the  people,  and jail  the "Reds,"  i.e., the intellectuals  . . . The
unkindest  cut  of  all  in  Washington  was  New  Zealand's  stand
for  admission  of  Red China  to  the  UN  .  .  .  Hats  off to  the
one  newspaper  publisher  in  America  who protested  the  ship-
ment  back  to  Formosa  of that  Chinese Marine who had  asked
asylum  here,  declaring  that  he  did  not  wish  to  go  back  to
Chiang's  police state . . . Said  in an editorial  that  Washington
was  as  embarrassed  as  Taipeh .since  "we  have  been  pouring
military   and   economic  aid   into   Formosa   and   acclaiming
Chiang  as  a  great  exponent  of  the  'democracy'  of  the   'free
world" "...  The  publisher  was  Colonel  McCormick  and  the
editorial  appeared  last  Wednesday,  July  7,  in  the  Chicago
Tribune  . . .
Of  all  the  organizations  and  witnesses  to  appear  in   the
hearings  being  held  by  the  Senate  Rules  Committee  on  the
reform   of   Congressional   investigations   only   the   Friends
attacked  the  principle  of  Inquisition-by-Committee.   Wilmer
A.   Cooper   for   the   Friends   said   they   seriously    question
"whether  congressional   committees   should  inquire  into   the
opinions  and  beliefs  of  individuals except  in  cases  involving
Senatorial  confirmation  of  appointments ...  It  is  a  funda-
mental  right  in  American  democracy  that  one  can   exercise
freedom  of  thought without  fear  of  punishment  for  the  ideas
he  holds"  . . . This,  and not the question  of procedure,  is the
issue  . . . The evils of the  Spanish  Inquisition would not  have
ended  by forcing  Torquemada  to be more  polite ...
Let  Us  Send  A  Sample  Copy  Free  To  Your  friends
I.  F. Stone's Weekly, sol  E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. c.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $3:
Name  .—..___....—_..._..___._..„..—.—.—...._......— —..__....
Street....-....——._._____._——__-___—..__......
City  ......—._—.....____._  Zone     ......... State  ......
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $1  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name  ..................__.__„._._____________
Street.___.__.____________...._,______.....
City  ......_.....__.._.._.._..  Zone
....  State  ...
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED