I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954mar08.pdf

============================================================

Special:  Better  "Rules" Won't  End  The  Witch  Hunt,  See  Page  Two
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2,  NUMBER  7
MARCH  8,   1954•        WASHINGTON,   D. C.
16 CENTS
McCarthy  Insists  On  Splitting  The  G.O.P.
The  key  to  the  situation  developing  in  Washington  is  that,
though   the  Eisenhower  Administration  wants  desperately   to
appease  McCarthy,  McCarthy  does  not  want  to  be appeased.
The  statement  made  by  the  President  at  his press conference
last   week  was  so  cautiously,  even  queasily   worded,  that   it
seemed  at  first  glance  ignominious.   The  President  had  never
seen  any  member  of  Congress  guilty  of  disrespect  toward   the
public  servants  appearing  before  it.    He  was  certain  that  no
one  in  the  government  wanted  to  have  his  utterances  inter-
preted  as questioning the  debt  we  owe  the  officers  and enlisted
men  of  the  army.   He  did,  indeed,  specifically  include General
Zwicker  in  that  tribute  but   he  said  not  one  single  word   to
which  McCarthy  needed  to  take  offense.    The  statement  was
designed  to  save  the  President's  face  with  his  subordinates   in
the  government  and  the  Army  and  with  the  decent  people  in
his party  aroused by  the  Stevens affair.    But  it  was  also  framed
to  avoid  a direct  conflict  with  McCarthy.
It  Almost  Looked  Like  Another  Crawl
Indeed  the  first  reaction  among  the  reporters  streaming  out
of  the  most  heavily  attended  press  conference  Eisenhower  has
held  was  one  of  disgust  and  disappointment.   It   looked   as  if
the   President   had   backed  away   from   a    fight.    The   weak
answer he gave when  asked  about  McCarthy's attack  on  Dulles
in  the  McLeod  affair  made  it  seem  to  many  present  that  he
was  joining  Stevens in  a crawl, and  that  the  State  Department
could  expect  as little  real  support  as the  Army  had  been  given
last  week  when  the  chips  were  down.
It  was  the  bold  effrontery   with  which  McCarthy   immedi-
ately  reacted  that  put  the  President's  statement  in  a new  light.
McCarthy  was insisting  on  a   fight.   He  declined  to  leave  the
President  any  way  out.    He  was  demanding  abject  surrender
or  a  fight  which  would  split  the  Republican  Party  wide  open.
For  while  Eisenhower  defended  the  loyalty  of  the  Army,  Mc-
Carthy  was  now  charging  that   Peress  had  been  the   "sacred
cow  of   certain   Army  brass"—this  implied   a  conspiracy    to
shield  a  Communist.    Where  Eisenhower  had  praised  Zwicker,
McCarthy   called  him  "a   stupid,   arrogant   or  witless   man."
The   words  McCarthy   used—"the  fact   that  he  might   be  a
General"—must  have  seemed  a warning  to  Eisenhower  himself.
The  most  remarkable event  of  the  day  was when  McCarthy
late  in  the  afternoon  "relented"  and  sent  out  a  message  that
he  wished  to  delete the  word  "now"   from  the  cheeky  sentence
which  said,  "Apparently   the  President  and  I  now  agree  on
the   necessity  of   getting   rid   of  Communists."    McCarthy's
nerve  commands admiration.    Who  else would  have  the  brass,
after   being  criticized   in  the  Stevens  affair   by  papers  as  far
right  as  the  Chicago  Tribune   and  his  own  doggedly  faithful
Washington   Times-Herald,  to  claim  that  he was the  victim of
an  unprecedented   mud-slinging   campaign   "by   extreme   left
wing  elements   of   press   and   radio?"    This  is  a  redoutable
gambler,  playing  for  the  highest  stakes.    His  match  is  not
yet  visible.
Does  McCarthy  Prefer  A  G.O.P.  Defeat  in  '54?
What   is  McCarthy's   strategy?   His  own   party   had   been
looking  to  him  as  its  main  card  in  the  Fall  elections.    The
political  strategists  of the Administration, Dewey and Brownell,
have  shown  themselves  as  unscrupulous  as  McCarthy;  Eisen-
hower  has twinges,  but  overcomes  them  easily,  as was  evident
from   his  cowardice  on  the  issue  of  General  Marshall  during
the  campaign.   It  looked  as if  McCarthy  could  have  exercised
a  position  of  leadership within  the  party.    Did  he  decide  that
he did not  want  to  carry  the  ball  for  the  Eisenhower Adminis-
tration?    Did   he   feel   that   with   a   recession   underway    the
Republicans  were  bound   to   be  defeated   this  year   anyway?
Does  he  prefer  a  fight  with  Eisenhower  which  can  make  it
possible  for  him  to  place  the  blame  for  an  electoral  defeat On
the  Eisenhower-Dewey  conservative  Eastern  leadership?     Does
he  want  to  clear  his  skirts   of  conservative  fiscal  policies  so
he  can  play  a  social  demagogue's  role  in  a  depression?    Does
he  dream  of  breaking  up  the  old  parties  and  emerging  with  a
movement  of  his own?
The  situation  has  its  advantages  for  the  fight  against   Fasc-
ism  in  America.    During  the  past  year  a  series  of  events  have
finally  begun  to  bring  home  the  meaning  of  the  witch  hunt
to wide  sections of  the  American people.    Earlier  only  a  fringe
of  radicals  and  intellectuals   had  been  affected.    The  Oxnam
hearing  and  the  J.  B. Matthews  charges  awakened  Protestants
to  the  danger;  Brownell's  Harry   White   charges   showed   the
Democrats  that  they  were  the  ultimate  target;  the  shameful
inflation  of  "security"  risk  discharges  by  the   Administration
angered  several million  government   employes  and  their  fami-
lies;  McCarthy's  cruel  bullying  of  Mrs.  Annie  Lee  Moss  and
her  respected  Negro lawyer has aroused  the Negro community;
the  Peress  affair  has  antagonized  the  Army  and  the  conserva-
tives.    Though  the  leadership  is  weak  and  compromised,   the
terrain  McCarthy  has  chosen  for  battle  is  advantageous.    For
the  first  time  the  possibility  of  a  broad  front   against  Fascism
is  beginning  to  shape  up  in  America.    This  is  the  hopeful   side
of  a  week's  events  that  literally  threaten  the  very  foundations
of  the  Republic,  making  it  seem  quite  possible  that  McCarthy
(like   Hitler)     may   one   day   "legally"   assume   power   in
America.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone't  Weekly,  March  », 1954
Feeble  and Evasive  Stuff
The  Javits  Bill: Reforming  the  Rules  of The  Witch  Hunt
Congressman  Jacob  K. Javits of New York is the only  liberal
Republican  in  the  House.   The  sincerity  of  his  opposition  to
the witch  hunt cannot  be questioned.  But the concurrent  reso-
lution he introduced last week to correct  the  evils of  McCarthy-
ism  embodies  a  popular  and  dangerous  fallacy.   This,  as  the
Congressman   himself  expressed   it  in  the  New  York  Times
Sunday  Magazine of February  28, is that  "the  problem  is  not
the  need  for  investigations,  but  the  methods."
This  is  a  popular  view  because  it  facilitates  evasion.   It
makes  unnecessary  any  frontal  and  fundamental  attack  on
the  witch  hunters.  It  would be a pity  if the current  revulsion
against  McCarthyism  were  detoured  into  support  of  legisla-
tion   reforming   the  rules  and  reorganizing   the   committees.
Senators  Morse  and   Lehman  have   long   advocated    similar
measures.   These  promise  no  real  relief,  as  analysis  of  the
Javits  bill  will  show.
The  "Reformers"  Would  Be  Picked  by  Nixon
Concurrent  Resolution  202, as  introduced  in  the  House last
week  by  Javits,  would  substitute  a  new  joint  committee  of
fourteen   members  for  the  existing  witch  hunt   committees.
But  there  is no assurance  that  the  membership  would be any
better, or  indeed much different  from, the  existing  committees.
The  seven  from  the  Senate  would be  appointed  by  its  Presi-
dent,  i.e.  by  Vice President  Nixon, from  the  Senate  Judiciary
Committee.   This  is  the  committee  of  Jenner  and  McCarran.
Both  as ranking  members of the  committee and  of its  Internal
Security   subcommittee  would  certainly   be  on  the  new  joint
committee.    The   House   Judiciary   Committee,  from  which
Speaker  Martin  would  choose  seven  members,  is  not  quite  as
reactionary  as  the  Senate's, but  its  chairman,  Reed,  is  almost
as  bad  as  Jenner.   The  shakeup  in  personnel  might  (tempo-
rarily)  get  rid  of McCarthy  and  Velde  but  their  successors—
especially  on  the  Senate  side—would  not  be  much  better.
There   would  be  four   Republicans  and   three   Democrats
named  to  the  joint  committee  from  each  house.  Eight  of  the
14'would constitute  a quorum.  There  is no provision  requiring
that  any  majority  decision to  be binding contain  one or  more
votes  from  the  minority party.   A  Republican majority would
dominate  the  joint  committee.   Since  this  is  the  party  of
Brownell  and Jenner  as  well as Velde and  McCarthy, it would
be  foolish  to  expect  much  from  it.
With  few  exceptions all the  rights  and safeguards  set  forth
in  the  bill  would depend on this  majority.   Majority  approval
would be required for  the  issuance of  subpoenas,  formal  inter-
rogations,   the   holding  of  executive  sessions,  the  release  of
secret  testimony,  and  the  issuance  of reports.  There  has  been
no difficulty  in  mustering  such a  majority  when needed on  the
Jenner,  Velde  and  McCarthy  committees.
At  The  Mercy of  a  G.O.P. Majority
A  witness  would not be allowed to have counsel  at  executive
hearings  if  the  majority  decided  otherwise.   A  witness  would
have  the right to file a supplementary  statement,  but  a  major-
ity  could keep it  from  the  record  as irrelevant.   Anyone named
adversely  at  a  hearing  would  have  the  right  to  testify  and
to  produce  witnesses  in  his  own  behalf—unless  the  majority
decided  otherwise.
Questions  could  be  submitted   by  the  aggrieved   person  to
hostile  witnesses  "unless  the  committee  by  a  majority   vote
shall  determine  otherwise."  No derogatory  information could
be  circulated   on  the  committee's   letterhead   against  indivi-
duals  or organizations  "except as  the committee by a  majority
vote  shall  so  determine."   This  is  a  good  point  at  which  to
recall  that  the  majority  of the  House Un-American  Activities
Committee  never  did  back  down from  the  circulation  of  false
and  defamatory  material  against  Bishop  Oxnam.
The  only  rights  conferred  by  the  Javits  resolution  which
would  not  be  subject  to  the  majority  are  rights  witnesses  in
practice  already  have: the right to counsel at  public hearings,
the  right  to know the  subject  under  inquiry,  the  right  to file
a  sworn  statement  rebutting unfavorable  testimony,  the right
to  shut  off radio  and  television  coverage,  the  right  to  buy  a
copy  of the transcript.  This last right is not  extended  by  the
Javits  resolution  to  executive  hearings  unless  this  testimony
"is  subsequently  used or  referred  to  in  a  public  hearing."
Two  Feeble  New  Reforms
The  Javits  resolution   would  introduce  two  new   reforms
both  extraordinarily   feeble.   "Where  practicable,"  says  Sec-
tion  5  (9),  "any  person  named"  in  derogatory  fashion  "in  a
public  hearing  .  .  .  who has not  been  previously  so  named,
shall,  within  a  reasonable  time  thereafter,   be  notified  by  a
registered   letter"  that  he  has  been  so named,  with  the  date
and  place of the  hearing,  the  name of the  person who so testi-
fied, the name of the  organization  with which he was identified
and  "a  printed  copy  of  the  Rules  of  Procedure  of  the  Joint
Committee."   He  might  have  to  wait  months,  however,  to  see
the  actual   testimony  against  him.   Since  this   covers   only
public  hearings,  the  accused  would  probably  see  the  news  in
the  papers  long  before  he got  the  registered  letter.
The other  reform  recalls  the  lucrative  magazine  and  lecture
business  Martin  Dies and  J.  Parnell  Thomas enjoyed in  their
time  as  chairmen  of  witch  hunt  committees.   The  Javits  bill
would forbid  committee members or employes to write articles,
deliver  lectures  or  make  any  broadcast  about  any  investiga-
tion  while  such  investigation  is  in  progress—"for  compensa-
tion,  other  than  necessary  expenses  actually  incurred."   They
could  still  carry  on  for  "expenses"  alone.
Javits  Accepts  The Inquisition
Of  such  feeble  stuff  are  the  reforms  compounded.  The  real
objection  to the  bill  lies  in its  fundamental grant of authority.
It  would give  this  joint  committee  exclusive  jurisdiction  "to
make   principal   investigations    of   all   subversive    and   un-
American  activities,  movements  devoted  to  the  growth   and
development  of  communism, fascism,   ultranationalism,  and
similar  ideologies and  political  ideas,  the  diffusion  within  the
United  States  of  subversive   propaganda  or  other  activities
instigated   from  foreign   countries   or  of  a   domestic   origin
seeking  changes  in  the  form  of  government   of  the   United
States  by  unconstitutional   means  or  by  force,  the  organiza-
tions   engaged   therein   and   all   other   questions   in   relation
thereto  that  would  aid  Congress  in  the  performance  of  its
powers  under  the  Constitution  . . ."  (My italics.)
This  is broad  enough to enable  a rightist majority  to  extend
the  inquisition into  every  organization  and  to  any  individual
with  whose views  it  disagreed.   What  is  "subversive"?   What
is  "un-American"?   The  bill  nowhere  defines  them.  They  are
undefinable.   They are  epithets  not  legal  standards.  To grant
the right to inquire into political  ideas  and their  dissemination,
to  determine  which  are  "un-American",   is  to  establish  a new
orthodoxy  and  support  a  new authoritarianism.  These  objec-
tives  and  not  the  methods  are  the  prime  evil;  the  more  polite
methods  of  McCarran  and  Jenner   did  not  keep  the   former
from   crucifying  Lattimore  nor  the  latter   from    slandering
Marshall.
Until  we recognize  that  Congress  under  the  First  Amend-
ment  has  no  more  right  to  pillory  a  man  for  his  political
views  than  it  has  to  question  him  about  the  Virgin  Birth  or
the  Immaculate  Conception,  the  witch  hunt  will  go  on, with
or  without  McCarthy.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  8,1954
I  E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  L  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  Ian  two  weeki  of  August  it  Room  205,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
>   year;  Canada,  Mexico   and  elsewhere  in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  $10  by   1st  clan  mail,  (If    by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  maU.
Single  copy,   H   cents.    Tel.:  LI  4-7017.    Entered   as  Second   Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
March  8, 1954
Vol. 2, No. 7
Round  This  Unsteady Globe
URGENT  BULLETIN: It  is terribly  important to  push for
the  appointment  of  an  observation   commission  representing
both  sides  in Korea to  police the truce lines.   Elsenhower  does
not  want  a  resumption  of  the  war  but  there  are   elements
which  do.   Pentagon   sources  are  feeding  out  a  weird  theory
to  favored  newspapermen.     Example:   Constantine  Brown's
column  in  the  Washington  Evening  Star  last  Tuesday  which
said  the  enemy  may  "infiltrate  several  thousand  North  Ko-
reans  in  some  spot  close  to  the  armistice  lines,  cause  them
to move north  and then  counterattack  . . . claiming  that Rhee
had  put   in  effect   his  many  open  threats."    This  poppycock
could  be  a  cover  for  an  attack  by  Rhee  to  upset  the   apple
cart before the  Geneva conference.
IF  J.  EDGAR HOOVER WEREN'T  A SACRED COW, Con-
gress would be demanding his head in the wake of the  shooting
by Puerto  Rican Nationalists.   That the  Nationalists  must  be
watched  by  the  police  as  terrorists  has  been  evident  from
their  doctrines, their attack  in  1937 on the  Federal  Judge who
convicted  Pedro   Albizu  Campos  and  their  attempt  in   1950
to  kill  Truman.   We  are  not  dealing  here  with   "subversive
ideas" but with fanatics who use murder  as a political weapon.
Yet  at  a  time  when  the  FBI  is  busily  collecting  evidence on
every  buck  contributed  to  Spain  in  1937,  has  informers  in
every  Left  or liberal  organization,  and  listens  in  on  countless
telephones, these  Nationalists  were  able  to attack  a  President
and   shoot   down  five  Congressmen.    David  Lawrence   and
Walter  Winchell say  the  FBI  knew  there  was  a  plot  to  kill
high   officials   of  the  government,  including  Elsenhower  and
Hoover.   As  we go  to  press  the  Washington  Daily  News  ap-
pears  with   flaring  headlines,  "FBI   GAVE  DETAILS   ON
TERRORIST  PLOT  TO  OVERTHROW U.S."     This   makes
it  all  the  stranger  that  this  time  (as  in  1950)  Puerto  Rican
terrorists  were   able  to  come  here  without   being  watched,
followed  or  spotted  until  they  opened  fire.  Where  was  the
FBI?     In   the   Congressional   Library,   reading   the   Daily
Worker?
IKE'S  TAX  PROGRAM  TO  COMBAT  RECESSION:   "In-
vestors  and  business  would  get  12 times  as  much  tax   relief
as individuals with  earned  incomes ... The average  individual
would get $6 in tax  relief, while the average dividend  recipient
would  get $200 . . . That is 33 times  as much.   But . . . less
than  4 percent  of the taxpayers receiving  dividends  get  more
than  75 percent  of all  dividends  . . .  less  than  1 percent of
all   American   families   own  80  percent  of  all   publicly   held
stock  . . . This  is 'trickle  down' with  a  capital  T.  It  outdoes
anything  of the  1920's ... It  will  never  solve  the  problem of
'stimulating  consumers  to  spend  more  money  and  business
men  to  create  more  jobs'."—Senator  Douglas   (D.,  111.)   and
Representative    Boiling   (D.,   Mo.)   in  the   Joint   Economic
Report.
"STRENGTHENING   THE FREE  WORLD"—When  I  read
about  the military  aid to Pakistan, I recall the  acres of  hovels
I  saw  outside  Karachi in  the  Fall  of  1950  where were  housed
some  of  the  millions  displaced  on  both  sides  of  the  border  by
Hindu-Moslem-Sikh  rioting.    I  think   of  the  millions  which
will  have  to  be  spent  by  poverty-stricken  Pakistan  (70  per-
cent  of  its  budget  already  for  military  purposes)  toward  the
upkeep  and  the  manning  of  the  equipment  we will  give  them.
I  think  of  the  arms  race  which  will  be  intensified   between
Pakistan  and  India,  and  of  the  smoldering  religous  hatreds
Nehru  has  struggled  so hard  to  damp  down.   I  think  of  our
quaint  theory  that  belief  in  God makes  for  more  stable  socie-
ties  and  that  military  aid  will  "strengthen  the  free  world."
What  nation  ever  spent  more  millions  with  less wisdom?
WHAT  IS  A  COMMUNIST?   This  is  the  question  raised
by  the  trial  which  began  in  Federal  court  here  last  week of
Ben  Gold,  president  of  the  Fur   Workers.    He  is  charged
with  making  a  false  statement  when  he  filed  his  non-Com-
muist  Taft-Hartley  Act  affidavit  on  August   30,  1950.    Gold
admitted that  he had.been  a  member  of the  Communist Party
for  30 years.   The prosecutor  made it  clear  that  the  govern-
ment  would  not try  to  prove that  Gold ever  paid  dues, carried
a  party  book  or  attended  party  meetings  after  the  date  of
the  affidavit.    Thus  the  case  points  toward  conviction  not  for
an  objectively  proven  fact  like  membership  but  on  the  basis
of  an  alleged  state of mind.   The  danger  lies in  the  establish-
ment  of a  precedent whereby  other  labor  leaders  and  radicals
who  are  not  or  never  have  been  Communist  party   members
may  be subjected  to punishment as "mental" Communists   It
will  be  a  sad  day  for  American  law  when  the  principle  is
established  that  the  government  may  tap  not  only  telephone
wires  but thought  waves.
GEE  WHIZ  DEPT.:  ".  .  .  the  startling  disclosure  by the
immigration  and  naturalization   service  that  on  some  days
as  many  as  100 Latin  American  Communists,  from  as   far
south  as  Guatemala,  sneak  through  disguised  as  'wet-backs'."
—Victor  Risel,  N.  Y.  Daily  Mirror,  March  1,  1954.   And  the
inspectors just stand there and clock them as they go through?
EINSTEIN'S BIRTHDAY: His seventy-fifth  will be  marked
by  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Committee  with  a  special
all-day  conference on  "The  Meaning  of  Academic  Freedom"
next  Saturday  at  the  Nassau  Tavern  in  Princeton.     Harvey
O'Connor  will  report  at  luncheon on his  nationwide  tour  and
the  committee  will  make  public  Professor   Einstein's  replies
to a  series  of questions.    The  Weekly  ventures to  send its own
birthday greetings in homage to one of the greatest and rarest
spirits who ever  walked  this earth.
Even  If  You  Can't  Read  The  Secrets  of  A  Pharoah's Tomb—
And  are  no  Egyptologist  and  can't  decipher  hierogly-
phics,  you  can  still  tell  from  the  not  so  esoteric   symbols
under  your  name  and  address  whether  your  subscription
has  expired.  Last  week's  mailing went  out  on  new  name
plates.   If  yours  is  still  the  old  one,  with  a  January  or
February  '54  date  on  it,  you'll  know  you've  forgotten  to
renew.   Please  do  so  now.  Henry  Luce  can  afford  to  send
eight or ten reminders, but I can't. The expense  of  soliciting
renewals  on the  usual  scale  is  beyond  the  Weekly's  means
and  will  be  for  a  good  many  months—at  least  until  c.t.r.
and  we,  too,  carry  advertisements   for  strawberries   and
cream.  So be a pal—turn over to the next page,  fill  out  the
coupon, attach  $5 and send it  in.  This  is  Vol. II,  No.  7, and
if   you  haven't  renewed  yet,  you're  already  seven  weeks
behind.   Why  burden  your  conscience*  and  my  budget  any
longer?
—I.  F.  Stone
* One way  to  ease  the  pangs  of  remorse  would be  to  add
a  gift  sub  for  a  friend.  Only  $4—less  than  the  cost  of  a
single  visit  to  a  psychoanalyst  (with  a  guilt  complex).
3  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March 8, 1954
Nightmarish  Loopholes  for  The  Unsuspecting  G.I.
Kafka  Might  Have Written  The  Army's  Loyalty  Form
In  the  hassle between  McCarthy  and  the  Army,  no  one has
bothered  to look up the loyalty form used in the armed services.
A  correspondent  has sent  a  copy  to  the  Weekly.   The  "Loyalty
Certificate"   (DD  1 Apr  50 98)  is divided  into  two  parts, one
covering  "conduct", the other   "associations."
The instructions  warn  that  "concealment  of  ...    or  failure
to  divulge  in  full,  conduct  or  associations of  the  character set
forth"  may  be  grounds  for  court  martial or  civil  prosecution.
"Consequently,"  they  advise  "you must  read  the  following
provisions  carefully  and  be  sure  you  understand  them."
This  is  not   easy.   The  form  might  have  been  drafted  by
Franz  Kafka.   It  contains  a  nightmarish  loophole.   This  says
"Conduct  which  may  be  considered  as establishing reasonable
grounds  for  invoking  appropriate penalties shall  include,  but
is  not  limited  to,  the  following ..."  Similarly  the  form  says
"associations  . . . include but are not limited to membership in,
affiliation,  or sympathetic  association with,  any . . .  association,
movement or group . . . having  the following  characteristics."
The  Soldier  Needs A Crystal  Ball
This  phrase,  "but not   being  limited  to",  makes  a  blank
check  of  the  certification.    Who  knows  for  what  other con-
duct  or  associations  the  signer  may later  be held  liable?  With
most  documents,  it  is  advisable  to  see a lawyer.  This one  calls
for  a clairvoyant.   The  final  provision  adds a touch  of wit.  "I
understand,"  it   says,  "the meaning  of  the  statements  made
in  the  certifications  above."   It  may  be  doubted  whether  the
Judge  Advocate  General himself  could  sign  that  honestly.
Even  without  this  legal  beartrap,  the  wording  is hazardous.
It  seems at one point  to revive the old common law of  construc-
tive  treason.   One  provision  covers  "writings  and  acts  which
can  reasonably  be considered as intended  to  encourage seditious
or  treasonable  opinions . . ."  This  recalls the crime  of  "imag-
ining" the death of  the King.
Another   provision   proscribes  "advocacy   of   revolution  or
of  force  or  violence to  bring  about  economic, political or  social
change."  This would  seem  to  cover non-violent changes which
are  "revolutionary"  only  in  the  metaphorical  sense.   Provision
This  Is  Expiration   Time
PLEASE  RENEW NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301 E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ...___________________________
Street   __._______________...__._.________
City___________.__  Zone.-__  State______
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
(To)   Name    _____________________________
Street    _________________________________
City____________  Zone___  State_____
3-8-54
(d)   also contains an innovation.   It  refers  to  unauthorized dis-
closure,  "under  circumstances which  may  indicate disloyalty",
of  information  "of  a  classified  or  non-public  character."  What
kind  of  information  is not  secret  but  "non-public"?   Anything
which  might  embarrass some  commanding general?
The  final  conduct  provision  is a dragnet.  It  specifies "Act-
ing,  attempting  to act,  or  knowingly  failing  to  act  when such
conduct  is calculated to  serve the  interests  of  another  govern-
ment."   One  has only  to  look  at  the  controversy  raging  over
Mr. Dulles's  conduct  at  Berlin  to  see how  impossible a standard
this  is.
Force,  Violence  or Intimidation
At  the  Pentagon  I  was told  that  a Form  98 A is supposed  to
be  appended.  This  names  the  organizations listed  by  the   At-
torney   General.   But  the  proscribed  organizations  are "not
limited  to"  these.   The  loyalty  form  covers  any  organization
which  can be regarded  "as seeking to  alter the  form  of  govern-
ment  of  the  United  States  by  unconstitutional  means  regard-
less of  practice, advocacy or  non-advocacy"  of  "force,  violence
or  intimidation."   Our  italics  underscore  another  Army  inno-
vation—adding  "intimidation"  to  "force  and  violence."   This
is  broad  enough  to  cover  McCarthy,  Cohn  and  Schine.   And
what  are  "unconstitutional   means"  in  the  absence of  "force,
violence  or  intimidation?"
Many  lawyers will  agree  that  those  like  Major  Peress  who
pleaded  the  Fifth  amendment  rather  than  fill  this  out   were
well  advised.  The  form  naively  says  that  those  who  invoke
the  Fifth   amendment  are  required  to  describe  "the specific
part  of  any  conduct,  membership,  or  association  about  which
claim is made."  If  taken literally  this would require the soldier
to  reveal what he was trying  to  keep from  disclosing.
Our   correspondent   writes   that   at   one  induction   center
soldiers  were lined  up  to  sign  this  form  en  masse.  When  one
soldier  said  he  would  like to  study  the  form  before signing  it,
he  was ordered to  sign  and  given an extra  copy  to  study  at  his
leisure.   A  Pentagon  press  officer   assured  me  this  could   not
have happened in  the  Army.
I.  F. StoneV Weekly
Room 205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED