I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jan18.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive: The ACLU Endorses The Jenner-McCarran Committee, Page 4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  1, NUMBER  50
JANUARY  18,  1954WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16  CENTS
Setback   for   McCarthy
McCarthy   has  suffered   a  setback.   The  Administration  is
putting  the  squeeze on him.  The  Republicans have a  majority,
of  course, on the  Senate Committee on Government  Operations
of  which  McCarthy  is chairman.  Yet  at  its meeting  last week
the  Committee  did  not  approve  the  three  contempt  citations
voted  four  days  earlier  by  its  permanent  subcommittee  on
investigations,  of  which  McCarthy  is  also chairman.  It  is  this
subcommittee  which  carries on  the  "McCarthy   investigation"
and  it  was this subcommittee which Corliss Lamont, Abraham
Unger  and  Albert  Shadowitz  defied.   The   subcommittee   on
January 7 voted to cite them for contempt  because they refused
to  answer  questions,  invoking  the  First   amendment  instead
of  falling  back  on  the  Fifth.   The  full  committee,  instead of
voting  the  citation,  as  it  did  in  the  similar  case  of  Harvey
O'Connor  last  summer,  took  an  unprecedented step.  It  voted
to  ask  the  Attorney   General's  advice  before recommending
that  the  Senate  cite  these  three  defiant  witnesses.
Last  summer the  Democratic  members of  the subcommittee
walked  out  in  protest  against  McCarthy's  "one-man" rule  and
his attack on  the  Protestant  clergy.  This  time they  have  been
joined  by  enough  of  their  Republican  colleages on  the   full
committee  to  hobble  McCarthy's  power in  his own little  king-
dom.    Either  Margaret  Chase  Smith  of  Maine,  who  dislikes
McCarthy  on  principle,  or  Karl  E.  Mundt  of  South  Dakota,
who  is  jealous  of  a  relative  Johnny-come-lately  in  the  witch
hunt,  would  be enough to  create  an  anti-McCarthy  majority
on  the full  committee.  The vote  to ask the Attorney  General's
advice  puts  McCarthy  at  the  mercy  of  the  Administration.
Eisenhower  sees a rival  and  an  enemy in  McCarthy.   Brownell
has  been  trying  to  put  McCarthy  in  the  shade.  The  Attorney
General  chose the Jenner committee as his forum for  the  Harry
Dexter White  charges.  If  Brownell  "advises"  the  Senate  com-
mittee  that  it  would  be wiser not  to  cite  Lamont,  Unger  and
Shadowitz  for  contempt,  other  witnesses  may  defy  McCarthy
in  the  same way.  The effect  would  be to  put  McCarthy  out of
the  witch  hunt  business.
Fact  is  (as we pointed  out  in printing  the  full  text  last  July
25  of   the  resolution   authorizing  the   Senate  Committee   on
Government  Operations)   McCarthy  and  his  colleagues  have
no  authority  to  engage in  ideological  inquisition.   This  is  the
old  Senate  audit   and  expenditures   committee   (nothing  has
been  changed  but   the  name);  its  jurisdiction   is  limited   to
government   operations   and  to   questions   of   "economy   and
efficiency."   A  witness  who  challenges  McCarthy's  authority
to  inquire  into  his  political  beliefs,  as  Lamont,  Unger  and
(Einstein  advised)  Shadowitz  did  is on  firm  ground  legally.  As
McCarthy  explained  lamely  at  a  press  conference   after   the
closed  meeting  of  his  committee  last  week,  some members felt
it  would  be "unfortunate  if  a well-known  Communist  should
be  cited  for  contempt  and  then  be  successful  in  winning  ac-
quittal  because  of  the  committee's  jurisdiction",  i.e.  its  lack
of  jurisdiction.
McCarthy  emerged  from   the  closed  meeting  sobered.   He
said  he  had  decided not  to  ask  for  an  additional  $100,000  or
$150,000  this  year with  which  to  double  his  staff  but  would
hold expenditures at  the  same level as last year, about  $200,000.
McCarthy  also  disclosed  that  in  the  future  his  investigating
subcommittee  would  be unable  to file reports until all  members
of  the-full  committee  had  been given an opportunity  to  study
them.   Obviously  somebody is trying  to  cut  him  down  to  size.
The  Alaskan  inquiry  on  which  he  has  launched  is  the  symbol
of  his "exile"  to  more  conventional  and  peripheral issues.
Embarrassment  for  the  Attorney  General
The  request  for  advice  on  the  three  contempt  citations  is
not without embarrassment for  the Attorney  General.  Suppose
he   advises   that   in   view   of   the   limited   authority   of    the
McCarthy  committee it would be best not  to risk a challenge—
and  a  defeat—in   the  courts.   Or   suppose  Brownell  and  the
committee  created  the  same  impression  by  letting  the  matter
of  action against  Lamont, Unger  and  Shadowitz quietly  drop.
What,  then,  happens to  the  prosecution  of  Harvey  O'Connor?
Last  summer  the  full  committee  approved  and  the  Senate
without  debate rubber-stamped  McCarthy's  demand  for  con-
tempt  action  against  O'Connor.  The  citation  was sent  to  the
Justice  Department,   an  indictment   was  dutifully   obtained.
Trial  is pending.   O'Connor  challenged  McCarthy's  authority
to  inquire as to his beliefs and associations on  the  same grounds
as Lamont,  Unger  and  Shadowitz.   If  there is no  legal  ground
for  holding  them  in  contempt,  there  is  no  legal  ground   for
prosecuting  O'Connor  and  the Justice Department  was  wrong
in  obtaining  an  indictment.
But  No  Let-Up  In  The  Witch  Hunt
Action  to  curb McCarthy  does not, of  itself,  mean  a  let-up
in  the  witch  hunt.   Jenner,  McCarran  and  Bronwnell—and
Eisenhower,  as  indicated   by   his  new   message—are  fully   as
unscrupulous  as McCarthy in  using the  Red hunt  for  personal
2  0
and  political  aggrandizement.  But  the  fact  that  such  action
is  possible  reflects  the  growth  of  a  more  general  sentiment   in
both  parties and in the country  at large against"McCarthyism."
That  is  hopeful.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  18, 1951
Storm-Cellar  Bulletin:  The  Worst  May  Be  Over
Ike's  Program  and  The  Outlook
A  shrewd  French  diplomat  once told  me in  Cairo  that  the
key  to  Egyptian  politics  is that  nothing  is  what  it  seems  to
be.   At  the  moment this applies  to  Washington.
Item:  That  proposal  in the  President's  message  to  deprive
Communist  "conspirators"  of  their  citizenship.   For   once,
McCarran  was  right;  he  called  it  "half-baked."   But  from
Elsenhower's point  of view this is a bright attraction distrac-
tor  to  protect  his  right  flank  as  he  moves  cautiously  toward
peace  and  trade  with  the  Soviet  bloc.  A  gesture  of  "tough-
ness"  against   Communists  at   home—not  very   meaningful
when  examined  and  of  dubious  constitutionality—covers  a
drift  toward trade  and co-existence with  Communism  abroad.
Item:  That  Mac Arthur  style  bluster  by  Duties  before  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  last  Wednesday  on  not
stopping next  time  at  the  Yalu.  This  covers  with  belligerent
headlines  a  quieter  and  more  important  statement  made  by
Dulles  to  the  committee,  "If   either  country   should  initiate
an  armed  attack  against  any  territory  not  under its adminis-
trative  control  when the Treaty  was signed  . . . the [Korean-
American  Mutual  Defense  Treaty]  would  not  apply."  Since
North  Korea  is  not  under  Rhee's  administrative  control,  this
covers  an  attempt  at  unification  by  force.   Senator  George
(D.  Ga.)  told  the  press  Eisenhower   approved  a  proposal
to  have  the  Senate  spell  this out before  ratifying  the  treaty.
Item:  Ditto for  the big talk  about our readiness  to retaliate
anywhere  in  the  world.   This  covers  the  beginnings  of  with-
drawal  from Eurasia and  the beginnings of a  slow demobiliza-
tion  from  present  military  levels.   The  key  concepts  of  the
Eisenhower  Administration   may  be  found   in  two  passages
of  the  Dulles  speech before the  Council on Foreign  Relations:
(1)  that  it  was not  "sound  strategy" permanently  to  commit
United  States  land  forces  to  Asia  to a  degree  that  leaves  us
with  no  strategic  reserves  and  (2)  that  it  was  "not sound
to become permanently  committed  to  military  expenditures so
vast that they  lead to practical bankruptcy."   This  is the  sub-
stitution  of  the  Hoover-Taft  idea  of  a  Fortress  America  de-
pendent  on  airpower  for  the  Acheson-Dulles  idea  of  "build-
ing  up  strength"  for  "liberation"  by  ultimatum.
Item:  The  talk  about  Republican  readiness  to  prevent  a
recession.  The men running  the  show in  Washington  are  not
fools,  however  illiterate  some  of  their  fronts  may  be.   The
combination  of  military  retrenchment   and  their  new  farm
policies   means   deflation,  recession,  a   "shakedown"   of   the
economy.  They  want  hard  money.  They  speak  for  interests
which benefit by downturns as well as upturns  in the  business
cycle:  cash  is  potent  when  prices  fall,  the  big  ones  gobble
the  little  ones  in  hard  times.  They  feel  labor  has  grown  too
powerful  and want to  shake it up; they want  a little "healthy
unemployment".   This  is  the  way  to  get  a  "sound  dollar"—
their primary  object.  Hence, the  combination of peace  abroad
with  socially  reactionary  policies  at  home.
Hemmed  In  On  AH Sides
In  seeking  to  achieve this program,  the  real  leaders of  the
Republican  party  find  themselves   hemmed  in  oh  all  sides.
Recent  statements  by  Nixon and  Knowland show how  power-
fully  entrenched  the  China  Lobby  crowd  still  is,  and  how
inimical  to  peace  in  Asia.   The  farm  bloc  will  not  take  to
Ike's  new program  because  "flexible supports"  and  "modern-
ized  parity"  mean  less  money  for  fanners;  here  the  middle
farmers  stand  with  the  small  farmer  against  the  big  opera-
tor.   The  labor  movement is too strong to  allow the  G.O.P.  to
go whole hog with the  National  Association  of Manufacturers;
the  hostile  reaction  of  Ivea  (R., N.Y.) shows  that  labor's
voting  power in  industrial  States  will  make it  di,  .cult  to  put
over  those  portions  of  Ike's  labor  program  which  (mildly)
threaten  to  curb  labor's  power.   The  ballot—democracy—the
processes  of  a  free  society—are  an  insuperable  obstacle  and
Ike  dishes  up  a  compote of  mildly  reactionary  measures  and
mildly  New  Deal  style  reforms.
No  Way  Out
The  Democrats  will  win  the  next  Congressional  election.
The  public is  bored  with  Reds,  and  "warmed  over  spies"  will
not  overcome protest  over  real  distress  in  the  farm  country
and  rising  unemployment.  The farm  situation  is the  key and
the  Eisenhower farm  message provides a vivid glimpse  of  the
terrible    problem   of   overproduction   with   which   American
society  must  deal  once it  can  no  longer  maintain  prosperity
by  fighting  wars  or  cleaning  up  the  devastation  left  in  their
wake.  Ike's  talk  of  "school  lunches"  as  a  means  of  sopping
up  stupendous surpluses  is  wistful;  on  wool, he  adopts "the
Brannan  plan"  to  let  prices  seek  their  natural  level  while
paying  the  farmer  enough  to  make  up  the  difference  needed
for  a  decent living standard.   Ike puts  a  New Deal mask  on a
Herbert  Hoover  program;  Hooverism,  however,  is  dead  and
the  U.S. irretrievably   accustomed  to  subsidizing  the  under-
privileged.   "Socialism"   continues  to  creep  up  on  us  under
Eisenhower,  and  the  alternative   is  still  between  war  and
greater  intervention,  more planning,  wider  public ownership.
Prediction
That  Ike  will  fail  to  get  his  program  through  Congress;
that  unemployment  by  Fall  will  be  serious;   that  the  Red
scare will begin to'die out; that  as  it  does,  and  liberal  econo-
mists  begin  to  emerge  from  their  storm  cellars,  discussion
will  pick  up  where  it  left  off  in   1939—on  the  problem  of
planning  American  society  for   peace-time  prosperity.   The
Democrats  at  the  moment are  a  vacuum,  and  show  no  signs
of  any  real  program  to  deal  with  the  economic  crisis, but  the
vecuum will fill up quickly, as it  did in the early  30's.   Political
weather-vane:   McCarthy  a  few  weeks  ago  put  the   farm
problem  ahead  of  Reds  as  No.  1  issue,  and  turned  up  last
week  in  a  new demagogic  sector  with  a  proposal  for  100 per-
cent parity.  The worst  may be  over.
Last  Year  This  Time—It  Seemed  An  Incredible  Goal
Ever  to  reach Vol. 1, No.  50,  but here  it  is, the  final  issue  of  our  first  year.  (We  publish,  as  you
know, only 50 weeks  a year, taking the  last two weeks  of  August  as  vacation).   When  the  New  York
Dally  Compass  closed down  in November,  1952, I  never  dreamed  I  had so busy,  useful  and fruitful  a
year  ahead  of  me.  Thanks  to  you, the  Weekly  enters  its  second  year  solidly  established.   This  issue
will  reach—by  mail  and  news  stand—almost  twice  as many  readers  as the  first.  An Index  of Vol. 1 is
being prepared for  your  convenience  and will be published soon as a supplement.
Be sure to  get  it  (if  you have not yet  renewed)  by  using  the  blank  on the  reverse  side.  Or,  better
;
 still,  use the  prepaid  business  reply  envelope  accompanying  the  "second  round"  mailing  last week  of
our  "success story"  promotion letter to  all  readers.  If you have already renewed, or if  your  subscription
does  not  expire  this  month,  or  you  are  one of  our  many  new  readers,  please  pass  that  letter  and  the
reply envelope on to  some other  friend who would  enjoy the  Weekly.
With  many  thanks,        I.  F. Stone
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   18,  1954
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  Ian  two  week*  of  August  at  Room  205,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  If
a   fear;   Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere  in   the   Western  Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10   by   1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  clan  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15   cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-70S7.   Entered  as  Second  Clast  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.   C.                                •        •
January  18, 1954
Vol.  1,  No.  50
Civil  Liberties   Before  the  Supreme   Court
Judicial  Hot  Potato
Though   the   House   Un-American  Activities  Committee
has  been  running an  ideological  inquisition  for  16 years,  not
until  last  Tuesday  did  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  hear  argu-
ment  on  whether  this  is  contrary  to  the  First  amendment.
The  occasion  was  the  appeal  of  Julius  Emspak,  secretary-
treasurer  of the  United Electrical  Radio  and  Machine Work-
ers  (U.  E.),  from  a  conviction for  contempt.
Sharp  questioning from  the  bench by  Justices  Frankfurter
and  Jackson  indicated that  the  conviction  would  probably  be
reversed   but   without   passing   on   the   First  Amendment
question,  an  issue  the  Court  has  been  evading  ever  since  it
refused   to  hear  the  Hollywood  Ten.    Emspak  had  invoked
the Fifth  as well  as the First amendment in failing  to answer
68  questions  about  his  beliefs  and  associations.
Justice  Frankfurter   seemed to  reflect  the  grounds on which
the  case would  be decided by two questions  to  David  Scribner,
counsel  for  the  U. E.   One was  whether  Emspak's  invocation
of  the  Fifth  as  well  as  the  First  was  intended  to  cover  all
68  unanswered  questions;  Scribner  replied  that  it  was.   The
other   question   was  how  the   Emspak  case   differed,   then,
from  the  Blau  case   (340  U.S.  159).    In  that  Justice  Black
for   a  unanimous  court   (Clark  abstaining)   held  that  with
the  Smith  Act  on  the  statute  books  a  witness  could  not  be
compelled  to  answer   questions   showing  possible  links  with
the  Communist Party.
The  differences  between  the  Emspak  and  Blau  cases   are
highly  technical.    Emspak  did  not   specifically   invoke  the
Fifth  each  time  he  evaded  a  question.    Moulder   (D.  Mo.),
who  presided  at  the  House  Committee  hearing,  did  not—as
a  judge  would—direct  the  witness  each  time  to  answer,  on
pain  of  contempt.   The  Court  is  likely  to  give  Emspak,  not
Moulder,  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  on  this.
At  one  point  in  the  argument,  Frankfurter   seemed  to  be
saying  that  the  Fifth   was  asserted  automatically  when  a
witness  declined  to  furnish  information  which  might  tend
io  incriminate.    At  another  point  he  interjected  the  barbed
comment  on  argument  by  Acting  Solicitor  General  Robert  L.
Stern  that  only  a  "Seventeenth  century  lawyer"  would  re-
quire  repetition  of a  set  verbal  formula.   During one  passage
Justice   Frankfurter   commented   angrily,   "You   tell   your
Department  [Justice]  that the  Fifth  was intended  to protect
the   innocent  as  well  as  the  guilty"  and  said  a   contrary
impression  was  being  spread  by  "people  who know  better."
Decision  of the  case  on Fifth  amendment grounds  is  easier
than  on  First.   To  reverse  on  the  latter  is  to  decide  what
questions  a  Congressional  committee  has  the  right  to  ask.
This  would  involve  a  frontal  clash  with  the  witch   hunters.
Last March in  U.S. v. Rumely  (see the  Weekly  for  March 21,
"When  A  Big  Business  Lobbyist  Defies  A  Committee"),  the
Court  did  rule  unanimously that  a  Congressional  committee
investigating   lobbying  did  not  have  the  right   to  ask  the
secretary   of  the   Committee  for   Constitutional  Government
the  source  of  $2,000,000  in  funds  spent  on  anti  New  Deal
propaganda.  But that was a  powerful  big money  organization
at   odds  with   a   left-of-center    Congressional   investigating
committee.
Emspak  will  be lucky to  escape on technicalities.   Perhaps
in  the  pending  Harvey  O'Connor  case  (where  only the  First
was  pleaded)  the  Court  will  begin  to  pass  upon  what  the
brilliant  defense  brief   in  the  Emspak  case  called   "a  new
Inquisition  poised  to  conquer  .the  liberties  of  a  nation."  The
issue is whether  Congress  may use the  power  of investigation
as  a  pillory  to  intimidate  radicals  and  enforce   conformity
by  fear  of  obloquy and  unemployment  This  is  the  hot  potato
the  Court  is  still  ducking.   It  grows  hotter  with  the  years.
Even  A  Would-Be  Informer
Robert  Norbert  Galvin, a Mexican  resident  in  this  country
35 years, married  to  an  American  and  father  of  four  Ameri-
can  children,  joined  the  Communist  Political  Association  in
1944  and  dropped  out  after   the  war  when  it   became   the
Communist  Party  again.   When  a  woman  informer   tipped
off   the  Immigration   Service  some  years  later,  he   admitted
his  past  membership,  insisted  that  he  was   anti-Communist
and  offered  to  rejoin  the  party  as  an  informer  to  prove  it.
He  was  nonetheless  ordered  deported  on  the  grounds  of  past
membership.    The  case,  argued  last  week  before  the   U.S.
Supreme  Court,  shows  to  what  lengths  the  government   is
going  in  its  deportation   drive.    It  also  shows  just  how  far
a  man  must   go  in  demonstrating  anti-Communism  before
the  American  Civil  Liberties Union will  defend  him.   For  the
ACLU  appeared  as  counsel  for  Galvan,  with  A.  L.  Wirin of
the  Southern  California  branch  in  court  and  the  name  of
Morris L. Ernst  on the brief.
The brief  said  Congressional  reasons  for  making past mem-
bership   grounds  for  deportation   "all   relate  to  the  danger
from  persons  at  present  active  in  and  assisting  the  Commu-
nist  movement;  we  do not  doubt,"  it  continues,  "that  aliens
who  are,  in  reasonable  likelihood,  in this  class  can be deemed
undesirable  residents  and  deportable  as  such."  (Our italics).
But,  the brief  continues,  to deport all past members,  whatever
their  reasons for  joining and whatever  their  later  "change  of
heart,"  bears  no  reasonable   relationship  to   these   purposes
and  is  unconstitutional.    This  mode  of  argument  acquiesces
in  the  use of  deportation  as  a  weapon  against  political  ideas,
and   in  the  deportation   of  persons  thought  "in  reasonable
likelihood"   to   share   those   ideas.    Not   a   very   stalwart
libertarian  position.
"Mexicans  Are  White  Men"
This  remark,  which  some  circles  in  the  Southwest  would
consider  subversive,  was  made  by  the  Attorney  General  of
Texas   (just   for   purposes   of  argument,   we  hasten  in  his
defense  to  add)  in  another  case heard  by the  Supreme  Court
last  week,  Hernandez  v.  Texas.    Hernandez  was   convicted
of  murder  and  seeks  reversal  on the  ground that  there  were
no  Mexicans  on  the  jury.    This  would  give  Mexicans  the
benefit  of  the  rule  laid  down for  Negroes  in  the  Scottsboro
case.    Though  Mexicans  are  "white  men"   in  Texas   (for
purpose  of  argument,  anyway),  they  never  seem  to  get  on
juries.    The  State  admitted  by stipulation  that  for  26 years
there had never  been  a  person  with  Mexican or  Latin  Ameri-
can  name  on  a  jury  commission,  grand  jury  or  petit  jury
in   Jackson   County,   Texas,   where   Hernandez  was  tried.
Sounds   like   a   citadel   of   Anglo-Saxon   white   Protestant
supremacy.
Search  And  Seizure
The  Court's  only  opinion  of  the  week,  hardly  a  blow  for
liberty,  was  a  decision—on  a  gambling  raid   in  Maryland
without  a  warrant—which  weakens  constitutional   protection
against  search   and  seizure.   Justice  Douglas  was  the   sole
dissenter.
Hat's Off
This  week  to  Saul  Grossman,  secretary  of  the   Michigan
Committee  for  Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born,  for  refusing
to  turn   over  the  records  of  its   members  and   contributors
to  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.    We  had
hoped  to  interview  him  but  as  we went  to  press  he was  still
in  the  District  of  Columbia  jail,  waiting  to  get  $3,000  bail.
2   0  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   January  18,  1954
The  ACLU  Endorses   the  Jenner-McCarran  Committee
The  ACLU  filed  a brief  amicus with  the  Supreme Court  last
week  in  the Emspak  case.  The  reasoning enables one to  watch,
as on  some  spiritual seismograph,  the  inner  quakes which shake
the  organization.   The  brief  begins  by  suggesting   that  "Con-
gress can  and should  enact  such  additional legislation  as might
be  necessary  to  deal  with  the  menace  of  genuine  acts  of  sub-
version."  The  ACLU  says "Congress has a  right  to  investigate
this   menace."
After  these  genuflections  the  ACLU  takes a deep breath and
charges  that  the  House  Un-American   Activities    Committee
"represents  in  itself  a  threat  to  American  democrarcy  both  in
general  and  in  this  specific  case."   A  moment  later,  it   begins
to  backtrack.  The  ACLU  says,  "We have  been  opposed  to  the
committee   because  of  its  past  arbitrary procedures,  but  in  all
fairness  to  the committee  we must  point  out  that  their  hearing
procedures have recently  improved."  (Our italics).  This seems
to  have  been  too  much  for  some  in  the  ACLU  to  stomach.   A
footnote   was  hastily  added  admitting  that  the  ACLU   only
recently  criticized  the  chairman  for  his "conduct  in  the  Agnes
Meyer  case"  and  the  committee  for  "continued  political  par-
tisanship"  in  the  Oxnam  hearing.    There  is  no  footnote   to
the  footnote   to  explain  just  where  the  improvement  was.
The  ACLU's  Thin  Line  in  The  Emspak  Case
The  ACLU  position  in  the  Emspak  case  is  that  the  House
Committee    was   established   to   investigate     "un-American"
propaganda  and  that  "threats  to  the  exercise  of   freedom  of
speech  or  association  solely   in  an  effort  to  investigate  propa-
ganda  strikes  us  as  an  obvious  invasion  of  the  First  amend-
ment."   The  italics  are ours.'   What  follows   shows  how  im-
portant  is the  loophole  implied  by  the word  "solely".  "It  might
be  argued,"  the  brief  continues,  "that  such  a result  should  be
tolerated  if  it  is  necessary  for  the  legislature   to  make  such
a  broad inquiry.   But  we  submit  that  it  is entirely  unnecessary,
as  the  Congress  itself   has  shown."   An  endorsement  of   the
Jenner-McCarran  committee   follows.
"Sen.  Res. 366, 81st   Congress,"   the   ACLU   brief   says,
"created   what  is  popularly  known   as  the  subcommittee  on
internal   security  of   the   Senate  Judiciary  Committee.    The
subcommittee's  purpose  is  not  to  investigate  propaganda, but
to  investigate  subversive  acts,  and  the  administration of   the
internal  security  laws.   We  have  never  opposed  the   charter
of  this  subcommittee,  for  we  believe  that  Congress has a  right
to  investigate  genuine  subversive  acts."
Is  "Subversive" Any Less  Vague?
The  ACLU  in its  brief  says it  opposed  the House  Committee
"from   its   inception   because  of   the  vagueness   of   the   term
'un-American' in  its  charter."   But  is  the  "subversive"  in  the
charter  of   the  Jenner-McCarran  committee   any  less  vague?
What  does  the  ACLU   mean  by  "genuine   subversive   acts"?
What   "genuine   subversive   acts"   were   alleged   against   the
teachers  the  Jenner-McCarran  committee  has hounded?
"Subversive"  and  "un-American"   are equivalent  in  vague-
ness.   The  new  always  seems  alien  and  "subversive."   Shifting
judgments  and quick  political  passion  are reflected  in  the term;
it  is  a  political  epithet,   not  a  legal  yardstick.   Congressman
Doyle   (D.   Penna.)   a  member  of   the  House   Un-American
Activities   Committee,   once   elicited   an  admission  from   its
counsel  that  it  had  never  adopted  a definition  of  either  "sub-
versive"   or   "un-American."     There  are, the   Congressman
commented,   "as  many   definitions   of   'subversive'  and  'un-
American'  as  there  are committee   members."
The  ACLU  says  inquiry  into beliefs and associations violates
the  First  Amendment,  but   adds  pointedly—"whatever  may
be  this  court's  eventual  finding  on  the  question  of   whether
inquiries  may  be  made into  beliefs  and  associations by  a  com-
mittee  designed  to  investigate  subversive  acts."   The  ACLU
has  already  decided  the  question  in  its  own  mind.    It  terms
the  Senate  committee   "consistent   with  civil  liberties."
Thus  the  price  paid  for  the  brief  amicus  is  a  high  one. The
ACLU   attacks  Velde  but  at  the  price  of   embracing   Jenner
and  McCarran.   The  committee  which  made  itself  the delight
of  the  China  Lobby  by  gutting  the  Institute.of  Pacific  Re-
lations,  driving  John  Carter Vincent  and John Stewart Service
out   of   the  government   and  attempting   to   crucify   Owen
Lattimore  is  given  the  nervous  imprimatur of  the  ACLU.
let  Us Send A  Sample  Copy   of   This  Issue  to  A  Friend—Or,  Better  Yet,  Start  A  Gift  Sub  With  This  fssue
Doift   Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed SS:
Name     ______'.—————————————————
Street   .________________________——
CHy____________  Zone..___  State.._..._..
Enter  thb  gift  sab   for  $4  mare  (money  enclosed):
CTo)  Name     ————————————————————————
Street      ———————————————————————————
City______________   Zone            State -...._-
1-18-64
I.  F. Stone'5 Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED