I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954nov22.pdf

============================================================

Corliss  Lamont  Tells Why  He  Launched New  Bill  of  Rights  Fund,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER 42
NOVEMBER  22,  1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
How  Chiang  and  His  Henchmen Made  Money  on  the  Korean  War
The  Hottest  Question  McCarthy  Ever  Evaded
Why  don't  the  Korean  war  generals  now  flocking  to  Mc-
Carthy's  standard,  men  like  Stratenwyer  and  Van  Fleet,  ask
McCarthy  to  explain  the  soybean  speculation  he  financed  so
successfully  just  before  Communist   China  intervened  in  the
Korean  war?  This  question,  touched  on  gingerly  by  the  Gil-
lette  committee,  is  the  hottest  of  all  the  questions   McCarthy
has  so far  evaded.
Very  few  people  know  that  on  the  eve  of  the  Korean  war
Chinese  Nationalist   interests   established  a  virtual   corner  on
soybean  futures  as if  they  knew  what  was  coming;  that  they
cleaned   up   $30,000,000   on   their   strange   foresight;    that
Senator  McCarthy   through  a  friend  financed  a  flier  in  soy-
beans  later  that  year,  just   before  the  Chinese  Communists
entered  the  war;  that  the  funds  he  used  were  loaned  him  for
anti-Communist   purposes;   and  that  one  of  the  questions  he
never  answered  was whether  he had "confidential  information"
with  respect  to  soybean  futures.
Here  is  the  story.  This  is  the  time  to  tell  it.   And  this  is
the  time,  when  McCarthy  is wrapping  himself  in  the  mantle
of  patriotism,  for  some  Senator  to  get  up  on  the  Senate  floor
and  ask McCarthy  to  explain.
The  story  begins four  months  before  the  Korean  war  broke
out.   At  that  time  the  long-term  prospect  for  soybean  prices
was  downward.   China,  with  the  civil  war  over  on  the  main-
land,   was  resuming  her  old  role   as  a  major  producer   and
exporter.  In  February,  1950, Standard  and Poor's, the  authori-
tative  survey  of   financial   and   commodity   markets,   said  of
soybeans,  "the  long-term  outlook  is  for  lower  prices  as  world
supplies  become  normal."
Yet  in  March of  1950  the  Commodity Exchange  Authority
of   the  U.S.  Department   of  Agriculture  began  to  get   com-
plaints  of  excessive trading  in  soybeans.  There were  complaints
that  non-speculative  producers  were  being  put  out  of  business
and  that  farmers  were  getting  no  benefit  out  of  the  splurge
because  they  had  already  disposed  of  their  crop.
A  Report Too  Long Ignored
The  complaints and  what  follows  are  taken  from  an  official
report  on  "Speculation in  Soybeans'* which  the  Department  of
Agriculture   issued  on  August   10,  1950.   It  was  ignored  and
buried  at  the  time,  but  now merits  resurrection  in  the  light of
the  McCarthy   debate  and  the  more  belligerent   Far  Eastern
policies   being   demanded  by   pro-Kuomintang   Senators   like
Knowland.
The  Commodity  Exchange  Authority  began  to  investigate.
It  found  on March  27,  1950,  three  months  before  the  Korean
war  began,  that  87  percent   of  the  holdings  in  the  futures
market  were  speculative  and  not  for  normal  price  hedging.
It  was  found  that  Chinese  names  and  firms  in  this  country
and  Hong  Kong  were prominent  among  the  speculators.
The  CEA  reported,   "The   continued  growth  in   accounts
with  Chinese  names in  soybean futures  led to  a special  investi-
gation  of  such  accounts  at  the  end  of  May,"   i.e.  just  four
weeks  before  the  war  began.   The  CEA  found  that  Chinese
accounts  held  a third  of  the  July futures  on  the  long  side  (i.e.
those  betting  that  prices  would  be higher  in  July).  On  June
30, five days after  the war  began,  the  CEA  found  that  in  the
intervening  month  the  number  of  such  Chinese  accounts  had
risen  to   56  and  that   they  now  held  almost  half   the  July
futures  on  the  long  side,  and  almost  one-fifth  of  all  soybean
futures.
The   Commodity   Exchange  Authority   said  speculation  in
futures  by Chinese was not  unusual, but  it  added "No  previous
instance  has  been  found,   however,  in  which  Chinese  held  as
large  a  proportion  of   the  total  open  contracts  in  any   com-
modity  as in  the  1950  July  soybean  future."    Did  these  Chi-
nese Nationalist  interests  in this country  and Hong Kong  know
the  war  was  coming?   Their  foreknowledge,  if  such  it  was,
paid  oS.   From  March  until  July,  1950,  the  July  future  on
soybeans  rose  from   $2.34%  a  bushel  to   $3.45 }•£,  a  rise  of
49  percent.
The  report  said  foreign  traders  were  not,  of  course,  barred
from  our  commodity  markets.   "Such  traders  would  be subject
to  sanctions,"  it   said,  "only  in  the  event  that  it   could  be
proven  that   their   activities  were  manipulative,  or  in  some
other  manner  in  violation  of  the  Commodity  Exchange   Act."
The  report   said  that  "From  the  investigation  as  so  far  de-
veloped  such  proof  had  not  appeared."
Just  a  Speculative  Splurge?
The  report  asked no questions—did  not  even take note  of—
the  strange  coincidence that  this  Chinese Nationalist  gambling
in  July,  1950,  futures  paid  off  only  because  the  outbreak  of
the   Korean  war  on  June   25  disrupted   the   world   soybean
market.   The  report  ended  with  the  complacent  observation
that  the  soybean  affair  appeared  to  be  just  another   "classical
"speculative  splurge.'"
Some   people   thought    it   more   than   just   a   speculative
"splurge."   When  Secretary  of  State  Acheson  was  before  the
MarArthur  inquiry  the  following  year,  the  late  Senator  Mc-
Mahon  questioned  him  about  reports  that  "a  year  ago  last
June"  certain   Chinese  interests  had  cornered   the  market  in
soybeans.   Acheson  said  he  had  discussed  it  with  Secretary of
Agriculture   Brannan.   It   is  not   often   that   a  Secretary  of
State  takes  the  time  to  discuss  a  speculative splurge  in  a  grain
market  with  the  Secretary  of   Agriculture.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  S2,19H
The   discussion,  however,  left   curiously  little  impress  on
Acheson's memory.  Acheson  replied,  "No  sir,"  when  asked  by
McMahon  "You  do  not  know  the  relationship  at   this   time
between  the  so-called China lobby  crowd  and  this  operation."
Though  Senator,  then  Representative,  Mike  Mansfield  had
already  suggested  two  years  earlier   (Aug.   25,   1949)   that
Congress  investigate  to  see whether  grants  of  aid  to  Nation-
alist  China  were  being  used  to  finance  attacks  on  the  State
Department,  and  Senator  Morse had  been  questioning  Acheson
along  the  same  lines,  the  Secretary  of  State  showed  a  discreet
disinterest  in  the  subject.
A  Slap  on the  Wrist  From  Agriculture
His  appearance  before  the  MacArthur  inquiry   committee
was  on  June   8,  1951.   Senators  McMahon  and  Morse  asked
him  to  report   back  on  the  activities  of  Chinese    Nationalist
agents.  The  only  result  seems  to  have  been  that  the  Depart-
ment  of Agriculture  finally  decided to  take  some action  against
these   speculators.
On  August   15,  1951,  it  was  announced  that  "firm  limits"
were  being  placed  on  speculative  trading  in  soybean  and  egg
futures.   (China  is a  big  factor  in  the  world  egg  market;  ap-
parently  there  had  also  been  Chinese  Nationalist   speculation
in  eggs).   The   Associated   Press  reported   vaguely   that   the
limits  were  being  imposed  as  a  result  of  testimony   earlier  in
the  year  at  some  Congressional  hearings.   It  made  no, mention
of  the  Chinese angle.  But  the United  Press  (see the  New  York
Herald-Trilnine,  August  16,  1951)   said  the  action  was  being
taken  as a  result  of  the  MacArthur hearings and  that   Chinese
"cleared  an  estimated  $30,000,000  on  a  sharp  rise  in  soybean
prices."                                              '      ,
•    The  "firm  limits,"  to  take  effect  on  October   1,  turned   out
to  be  ludicrous—a  limit  of  1,000,000.bushels  was  set  on  the
amount  of  soybeans futures  which  could  be bought  by  any  one
man  on  any  one day  on  any one contract  market.   The  CEA's
own   report  indicated  that  large  buyers  were   already  using
"dummies"  to  avoid  buying  in  any  such  large quantities.
In  the  meantime  nobody  in  Congress  or  anyone  else  had'
taken  up  a hint  dropped by  Secretary of  Agriculture Brannan
when  he  gave  out   the  CEA  report  on  soybean  speculation.
Brannan  told  reporters  he  "might   disclose  names  of   traders
and  further  details  of  the  trading  if  requested  to  do  so  by
Congress."    (N.  Y.  Times,  Aug.  11, 1950.)
It  was  not  until  November  26,  1952,  when  the   Gillette
committee  began  to  investigate  reports  that  McCarthy,   too,
had  been  speculating  in  soybeans during   1950  that  Brannan
was  asked  for   and   released   to  the  committee   and  the  press
(which  ignored  it)    the  names  and  addresses  of  the  Chinese
traders  in  soybean  futures   "who   were  referred  to,  but   not
identified,  "in  the  CEA  report  of  August,  1950.  This  showed
two  Nationalist  Chinese family  corporations  (Franconia  Trad-
ing  and  Oriental  Fine Arts)  among  the  speculators.
No  one bothered  to  investigate  the  names, nor  to  ask  them
how  they  came  to  buy  soybean  futures  just  in  time  to  make a
killing  on  a  war  which  was  officially  a  "surprise"  to  the  U.S.
and  the  West.   The  fact  that  McCarthy  was  involved   only
made  members  of  Congress  afraid  to  look  into  the  subject.
Speculation  in  soybeans  (and  apparently  also in  eggs)   con-
tinued  to  be  a  favorite  with  Chinese  Nationalist   speculators.
Both  commodities  stood  to  be affected  by  the  course  of  hostili-
ties  with  the  Chinese  mainland.  The  Chiang  crowd  was  in  a
Bored  With  Joe—and  Nixon
"The   American  people  showed  what  Eric  Sevareid,
the   news  commentator,  calls   their  low  boring   point
in  the  November 2 elections.   What  they  got  bored  with
was  McCarthyism.   Senator   McCarthy  said   he  would
support  every  Republican  except  Clifford  Case  . . . Case
won.  Three  strong  supporters  of  McCarthy—Congress-
men   Kersten   in   Wisconsin,   Busbey   in   Illinois   and
Clardy  in Michigan—were  defeated  . . .
"Carefully   picking  his  spots,  Vice  President   Nixon
adopted  McCarthy  tactics  in  Oregon,  Wyoming, Mon-
tana  and  New  York.   Result:  Democrat  Richard  Neu-
berger  was   elected   Senator   from   Oregon,   Democrat
Joseph  O'Mahoney was  elected  Senator  from  Wyoming,
Democrat  James   Murray   was   elected   Senator   from
Montana,  and  Democrat  Averill  Harriman  was  elected
Governor  of  New  York.
"If  the   1954  elections  proved  anything,  it  was  that
Senator  McCarthy's  political  sun  is  nearing  permanent
eclipse."
—A:  F.  of  L.  News-Reporter,  Nov.  12
position   to  know  a  good  deal  about  this,  and  to   affect   the
course  of  events.
What  The  Gillette  Committee Found
The   Gillette  committee   found   that  in   September,   1950,
McCarthy  took   $10,000  from   special  funds  loaned  him   for
anti-Communist   purposes  and  passed  the  money  on  to  an  old
friend,  Henry J.  Van Straten, who in turn deposited  the  money
with  a  brokerage  firm  and  used  it   between  October   2  and
October  27  to  buy  30,000 bushels  of  January  futures  in  soy-
beans.   With   the   advance  to   the   Yalu   in   November   and
Chinese  intervention,  soybeans rose  sharply  again.  By  January
2,  a profit  of  $17,000 had  been  made on  the  $10,000  invested.
The   Gillette   committee   wanted   to   know,   among   other
things  in  connection  with  this  transaction,  "Did   Senator  Mc-
Carthy  have confidential information  with  respect  to  the  trend
of  the  soybean  future  market?"   The  committee  in  a  paren-
thesis  referred  to  the  Commodity  Exchange  Authority  report
on  Chinese  Nationalist  activity  in  soybean futures  but  seemed
afraid  to  go  into  the  subject.   In  its  section  on  reported  rela-
tions  between  McCarthy  and  the  China  lobby  it  said,  "in  the
face  of  the  reasons which  the  Senator  has  used  in  refusing  to
cooperate with  the  subcommittee,  namely,  because S. Res.  187
was  Communist  inspired  and  any  criticism  or  investigation  of
him  was  an  aid  to  Communism—the  subcommittee  has  been
reluctant  to  conduct  any  extensive  inquiry  of  this  matter  or
Io  discuss  it  in  this  report."   A  more  abject  statement  would
be  difficult  to  find.
To   sum  up,   these   Chinese  Nationalists,   Chiang  and  his
family   henchmen,  made  some   $30,000,000  on  July,   1950,
soybean  futures  because  they  "guessed"  right  that  the  Korean
war  was coming at  the  end of  June.  If  they  knew  the  North
planned  to  attack,  they  were  culpable  in  not  informing  our
government.   If  Chiang  and  Rhee  were  preparing  to  provoke
an  attack  from   the  North   in   order   to  divert   the   Chinese
Communists  from  an  attack  on  Formosa  and  to   strengthen
Rhee  at   home,   they   are  even   more   culpable.   The   Chiang
crowd  stood  to  gain  politically  and financially by  the  outbreak
of  the  war.  It  is time  the  country  got  a complete  look  at  their
financial  operations  and  at  their  relations  with  Senators  like
McCarthy.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  S2,  1851
A  Desire to  Do More Than  "Study  and  Deplore"
Why  The  New  Bill  of Rights  Fund  Is  Being  Established
BY  CORLISS  LAMONT
The  Bill  of  Rights  Fund  was  established  November  4  with
initial  assets  of  $50,000.   The  organizers  of  the  Fund  hope
eventually  to  raise  a  million  dollars.
The  Fund  is  non-profit;  its  officers  serve  without  pay;  and
its  administrative  expenses  will  amount  to  very  little.  While
recognizing  the  value  of  research  projects  of  the  sort  under-
taken  by  the  fifteen-million-dollar  Fund  for  the  Republic  set
up  by  Henry  Ford  II—projects  that  "study  and  deplore"  the
present  state  of  civil  liberties—the  Bill  of  Rights  Fund  will
stress  direct  donations,  both  to  organizations   fighting   effec-
tively  for  freedom,  and  to  individuals whose rights  have  been
violated  and  who need financial aid.  We  do not  intend  to  ham-
string  the  operations  of  the  Fund  by  so  limiting  our  type  of
gifts   that  we  would  be able  to  obtain  tax   exemption.
The  Fund's  First  Grants
At  the  first  meeting  of the  Executive  Committee on Novem-
ber  11, donations were  voted  for  one church,  for  one militant
branch  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties   Union,  and  for   the
legal   defense   of   two   individuals  whose   defiance  of   Con-
gressional  investigating  committees  raises basic  constitutional
issues.   No part of the  Fund will be used for  my own  contempt
of  Congress  case.
The  first  grant that  we made  was  $1,000 to  the  First  Uni-
tarian   Church  of  Los  Angeles  to  assist  in  that  institution's
court  battle against the  California  Levering  Act,  which  makes
the  signing  of  a  loyalty  oath  by  religious,   educational,  and
charitable   organizations  a  condition  for  further   tax  exemp-
tion.   The  First  Unitarian   Church  is  one  of  a  number  of
religious  organizations  which  have  refused  to  sign  the  oath
on  the  ground  that  it  violates  the  First  Amendment's  pro-
vision  establishing   separation  between   church  and  state.
The  Fund's  initial  announcement made  clear  that  we shall
not  render  support  to any organization that  has  compromised
on  fundamental civil liberties  principles.
The  Bill  of  Rights  Fund  will  be  particularly   interested  in
cases  that  test  in  the  courts  the  constitutionality  of  recent
repressive   legislation.
Aid  to  Individual Victims
One  of  the  worst  features   of  the  present  situation  is  that
when  you  are   dismissed  from  a  job  in  the  United  States
Government  or  private  business  for,  say,  standing  on  your
constitutional  rights  before  a  Congressional   committee,  you
are  likely  to  be  widely  blacklisted  and  to  find  it  all  but  im-
possible  to  obtain  fresh  employment.
This  is  why  the  Bill  of  Rights  Fund  also  aims  to  render
financial aid to victims  in the  civil liberties  struggle who have
lost  their  jobs.   Here,  however,  as  in  helping  out  with  legal
expenses  in  important  cases,  we  shall  in  general  expect  the
individual   concerned   to   match,   in   contributions   from   his
particular  circle  of relatives, friends  and  acquaintances,  what-
ever  amount the Fund puts up.
The  Bill  of  Rights   Fund  is  not  intended  to  duplicate  or
compete  with  any  existing  civil  liberties  organizations.   The
Fund  will  not  undertake  activities  beyond making grants  for
the  defense  of  the  Bill  of  Rights.
The  Fund  is  not  following  the  usual  pattern  of  obtaining
a  long  list  of  prominent  persons  for  its  letterhead.    We be-
lieve that in this  age  of suspicion  such a  letterhead  may  make
people  less  willing  to  give;  that  a  small   Executive   Com-
mittee will be more efficient  in the  administration  of the  Fund;
and  that  it  will be less  likely to  develop the  bitter  dissensions
that  have  so  crippled  other   civil  liberties  organizations   in
recent  years.
The  Executive  Committee
The  Executive  Committee  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  Fund,  with
the  advice  of  the  Fund's  counsel,  Philip  Wittenberg,  decides
on  what  grants  are  to  be  made.  That  Committee  consists  of
myself  as  Chairman;  Mr.  Augustus  M.  Kelley,  of  New  York
City,  grandson   of  the   well-known   social   worker,   Florence
Kelley,  as  Treasurer;   and  Miss  Edna  Ruth  Johnson,  Man-
aging  Editor  of  The  Churchman,  as  Secretary.
The  substantial  mail  returns  during  our  first  two  weeks of
operation,  with  very  little  promotion,  lend  support   to  our
belief  that  this  enterprise  will  have  a  wide  popular   appeal.
All  subscriptions  over  $5,000  are   to  remain   in  escrow  ac-
counts from  which the  donor may  give  direct  to  an  individual
or  organization   on  the   recommendation  of  the   Fund's   Ex-
ecutive  Committee.  Under  this  arrangement  the  donor  has
the  right  not  to  follow  the  Committee's  recommendation.  He
will  not  become  subject  to  a  Government gift  tax  from  the
mere  fact  of  setting  up  a  large  escrow  account,  but  only  if
any  one  donation  from  that  account  totals  more  than  $6,000
(if  the  donor is married)  or  $3,000  (if  the  donor is single).
I  myself  have  subscribed   $50,000,  not  only  to  provide  a
good  send-off   for  the  Fund,  but  also  to  stimulate  others  to
contribute  large   sums.   Public-spirited   Americans  of  means
have   long   given   generously   to   education,   hospitals,   and
charity  in  general.   I  believe that  they  should  develop  similar
habits  of  giving  for  the  defense  of freedom.
Is  Paul  Sweezy  a  Victim  of  the  China  Lobby?
It   was  Paul   Sweezy  who,  with   Leo  Huberman   as  co-
editor,  first  called  attention   in  the  October,  1951,   issue  of
their  Monthly  Review  to  the   political  implications  of  the
soybean  speculation  by  the  China  Lobby  crowd  on  the  eve
of  the  Korean war.  Now Sweezy—who lives  in  Wilton, New
Hampshire—faces  jail  for  contempt  in  refusing  to  answer
questions  put  by his  State's  'Little  McCarthy,'  its  Attorney
General  Louis  Wyman.
Wyman, a  graduate  like  Scott  McLeod  of Senator  Bridges'
staff,  was  himself  closely  linked  to  the  China  Lobby  crowd.
His  wife  served  in  1950  on  the  board  of  directors  of  Fran-
conia Trading  Corporation, one of the  concerns  named by  the
Department  of  Agriculture  as  a  participant  in  the  soybean
speculations  discussed  on  pages  one  and  two  of  this  issue.
Did  Sweezy  make  himself  a  marked  man  by  his   soybean
revelations?
If  the  real  interests  of this country  were  decisive,  Sweezy
would  be  investigating  Wyman  instead   of  Wyman  investi-
gating   Sweezy.   At  a  meeting   under  the   auspices  of  the
American  Association  of  University  Professors  at Columbia
last  Monday  (under  the  chairmanship  of  Professor  Ernest
J.  Simmons, himself  a  McCarthy target  in last  year's  "book
hunt")  Sweezy  had  a  chance  to  explain  the  issues  involved.
Sweezy  refused  to  name  members  of  the  Progressive  Party
or  to  submit  to  interrogation  about  a  lecture   he  gave  on
socialism  at  the  State  university.
A  victory  in  his  case  will  help  to  set  back  similar  inquisi-
tions  in  other  States.   At  a  public  meeting  at  the  Cornish
Army  Hotel  in  New York next  Monday night,  November 29,
Sweezy  will  repeat  the  lecture  on  socialism  which  gave  the
witch  hunters  their  excuse  in  New Hampshire;  Leo  Huber-
man  will  give  the  facts  of  the  case;  Prof.  Broadus  Mitchell
will  talk  on  its  impact  on  teaching;  Raymond  Walsh  will
chair  and  I  will  have  some  more  to  say  about  this  China
Lobby  angle,  and  Wyman's  claim  that  he  can  investigate
any  political  party  in  order  to find out whether  it  has  been
"infiltrated."    All  readers  are   invited.    Make  it   a   dem-
onstration.   The  Weekly  is  co-sponsor  of  the   meeting.
!   7 3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  **,  1954
The  Preventive  War  Crowd  Really  Believes  in   Communism
The   apparent   confusion   in  Washington   is  not   confusion
at  all.  On   the  contrary,  much  is  being  clarified.   What  is
happening   reflects   the  slow  return   to   sanity  at   home  and
abroad.   In  the  process,  the  assorted  screwballs,  Fascists  and
preventive   war  crowd  are  being  clearly  separated  from   the
sane  conservative   elements  of  our   society.   McCarthy's  im-
pending  break  with  the  Republican  party,  Knowland's  frantic
attack  on  the  idea  of  co-existence, marks their  desperation.
It  looks  now  in  retrospect  as  if  the  J.  B.  Matthews   affair
last  August,  alarming the Southern  Democrats  with  its slur on
Protestantism,   was  the  beginning  of  the  anti-McCarthy   tide.
In  this  respect  the  amazing number  of  priests and  nuns  among
the  McCarthy  claque  in  the  galleries of  the  Senate  last  week
did  not  help endear him  to  the  Southerners.
It  was  a  Roman  Catholic  Senator, Chavez,  however,  who
really  handed  McCarthy  his  most  stinging  rebuke.  This  came
on  November  11 when McCarthy objected to  Lehman putting
a  eulogy  of  John  Paton  Davies  in  the  Congressional  Record-
Chavez  said  he knew Davies and  his  family  and  added, "They
are  just   as  patriotic—which   is  not   saying  much—as   the
Senator  from   Wisconsin."
The  "Sore  Elbow" Won't  Help
A  compromise  on McCarthy  seems  to be out.  It  might  have
been  possible but  for  his attitude.  He  treats  his own  followers
with  contempt,  as was shown  when he  walked  out  on  Senator
Goldwater's   speech,   and   his  manners  grate  even  on   those
impelled  to  defend  him.  Butler of  Maryland, for  example, who
owes   his   seat   to   McCarthy    and   shares  McCarthy's   views
is  nevertheless  a  gentleman, courteous  to  witnesses,  willing  to
• hear  the  other  side.  McCarthy's  "sore  elbow"  is  a  feeble run-
out  device to  stall for  time.
The  Knowland  speech  on  co-existence was a veiled  threat  to
the  White  House  that  unless  it   makes  new  concessions   to
Chiang  Kai-shek  it  may  not  be  able  to  win  censure  of  Mc-
Carthy.    The   immediate  reaction   from   Dulles   and   Wilson
showed  that  the  Administration  feels  strong  enough  to  "go
it  alone"  without  Knowland.  Dulles,  who  agrees much  more
with  Knowland  than  Elsenhower,  was  forced   to  go  to  bat
for  the  White  House.   Wilson  has  been  for  "co-existence"  all
along.  What  Knowland was  threatening  in  effect  was  a Con-
gressional  investigation  which  would  allow  Radford,  Carney
and  Twining  to  air  their  grievances  against  Eisenhower.
The  serious aspect  of  the  situation  was the  readiness of  some
Democrats  to  join  hands with  Knowland.  Douglas's  immediate
approval  was  not  surprising;  his  speech  of  January  15,  1951,
advocated  the  "massive  retaliation"  approach  long  before  it
was  formulated  by  Dulles.   Douglas  was  for  "no  squeamish-
ness"  in  wooing  allies  like  Chiang  and  Franco,  warned  long
before  Nixon  against  "nibbling  operations"   though   without
using  that  term,  and  said  that  at  the  next  act  of   "aggression
by  a  satellite"  we ought  to  strike  "at  the  eye of  the  octupus
itself."  Symington,  who  also  welcomed  the  Knowland speech,
has  long  been  a  spokesman  for   air  force  interests  smarting
under Republican "economy."  But  it  was a little disappointing
to  see Lehman  chime in, too;  it  was left  to  another  Democrat,
Hennings  of  Missouri, next  day  to  reprimand  the Republican
majority  leader for  failing  to  support  a  Republican  President.
How  long  can  Knowland  stay  as a majority leader?
The Real Answer to  Knowland
The   real  answer  to  Knowland  and  the  real  question  was
put   by  Senator  Fulhright.   "I   wonder,"  he  said,  "why the
Senator  feels  that  under what  he  calls  co-existence  and  atomic
stalemate   the  Communists  are  bound   to  win."  Knowland
never  did answer that  question.  The fact is that  the  preventive
war  crowd  have no  faith  either in  democracy  or  "capitalism"
to  solve  basic  problems;  they  really believe in  communism  and
its  efficacy;  that  is  why  they  hate  it  so,  see War as  the  only
way  out,  even  if  war  means  suicide.
But  in  Western  Europe  where  there  has  been  co-existence
and  stalemate  since  the  war,  the  Communist  parties  have  lost
ground   wherever   democratic   parties   have   been   powerful
enough  with  American  aid  to  bring  about  recovery,  to  meet
popular  aspiration  halfway   and  to  make  some  modicum  of
reform.   The  big  exception  is  Italy,  and  Italy  is  the  big  ex-
ception  because its  capitalist  class  is"  so corrupt  and  decadent,
its   feudal  hangovers  so  strong,   the   power  of   the   Catholic
Church  so  great,  as  to  make  progress  impossible  at  anything
more  than  a  snail's  pace.
Please  Get  Your  Renewal  In  Early  and  Send  A  Gift  Sub to  A  Friend
L F. Stone's Weekly, Ml
Please renew  (or enter) my
Name
Street ______ _______
E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C
sub for the enclosed |5:
>«•              Rtat*
Enter  this gift  sob for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
^TWk  K«n«
Street
CHy                           .  .           Z«
in*             Rtete
ll/M/64
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Boom  209
NI  K. Capitol St, &E.
Washington  «,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class Mall
Multoi
1
Washington, D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED