I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954sep06.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on the  New Anti-Communist  Law
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 31SEPTEMBER   6,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
The Panic of A Mob on Capitol Hill
The   day  Congress   passed   its   new   anti-Communist    law,
Senator   Morse  said   the   Senate's  earlier  unanimous  vote   to
outlaw  the  Communists was "a  tremendous psychological blow
against  communism in  the  world."   Of  all  the  confusions  in
that  confused  week  of  debate,  this  deserves  to  be  singled  out
as  the  most  confused.
Congress  did  not  deliver  a  blow  at  the  Communist  world.
It  paid  that  world  the  highest  compliment  it  could.   Congress
said  that  the  richest  and  most  powerful  country  of  the  non-
Communist  world  was  so afraid of  its  tiny  minority  of   Com-
munists*  that  the  United  States  was  turning  its  back  on  its
own  traditions.  For  the  Communists,  outlawry  is  not  a signal
of  strength  but   of  weakness.   In  the  three  countries  where
communism  has come to  power  on its  own,  in Russia,  in China
and  in  Yugoslavia,, persecution  and  outlawry  of  various  kinds,
far  more  stringent   and  savage  than  anything  yet   attempted
here,  was  the  prologue  to  victory.   It  was  underground  that
Lenin,  Mao and  Tito  found  the  path  to  power.
The   blow   Congress  struck   was  at   those   non-Communist
countries  which  have  looked  to  the  United  States  as  a  center
of  stability  and  of  support.   It  is  not  so much  Congressional
enactment,  bad  as that  was; it  is Congressional  behavior  which
must  stir  the  deepest  misgivings.   For  the  shifting  and  tem-
pestuous  debate  demonstrated  how  badly  the  situation  in  this
country  has  deteriorated.   No  one  can  say  there  is  not   fear
in  America when  one  sees  how  liberals  in  Congress  stampeded
and   jettisoned   their   principles  like   so  much   baggage  in  a
shipwreck  lest  they  be  termed  pro-Communist.
Humphrey   of  Minnesota,  who  led  the  liberal  Democratic
panic,  said  self-defensively  at  one  point,  "we  are  not   organ-
izing   vigilantes."    They  were  not  organizing   vigilantes   but
they  certainly  acted   like  a  mob.   The  liberals  voted  for  an
outlawry   measure  they  privately   realized   would   undermine
the  Constitution.   The  rightists  were  afraid  not  to  vote  with
them   though   this   measure   threatened   to   undermine   their
prize  achievement,  the  Internal  Security   Act  of   1950.   The
momentum  of  panic  and  moral  disintegration  was  evident.
The  other  countries  of  the  non-Communist   world  must  ask
themselves  how  dependable and  safe  is  alliance with  a country
where  the  Congress  is  imprisoned   by  anti-Communist    dem-
agogy.   How  can  rational  action  be  expected  of  it  if  fear  of
seeming  "soft   on  Communism"  is  so  powerful?
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  main  reason  for  the   Hum-
*The "findings  of fact" framed  by Senators Humphrey,  Doug-
las,  Kennedy  and  Morse  might  lead  one  to  suppose  that  the
Communists  were  to  be  outlawed  because  they  showed  little
sign  of  ever  succeeding!  "The  Communist  party,"  the  findings
recite,  "is  relatively   small  numerically,  and  gives  scant  indi-
cation  of  capacity  ever  to  attain  its  ends  by  lawful  political
means."
phrey-Douglas-Kennedy-Morse  outlawry   bill  was  to   provide
a  measure so extreme that  it  would  block  effective  anti-Com-
munist   legislation,  particularly  the   Butler-Brownell   bill   to
subject  trade  union   and  other   "Communist   infiltrated"   or-
ganizations   to    the   Subversive   Activities    Control    Board.
Humphrey  and  his  collaborators  did  indeed  offer  their  measure
when  the  Magnuson  resolution  was  defeated  31  to  57.   This
resolution  was  intended  to  delay  action  on  the  Butler   bill
until  a  Presidential  commission  of  inquiry   could  study   the
subject.   When  that  failed, Humphrey  produced  the  outlawry
bill  as  a  substitute  for  the  Butler  bill.   But  that  same  night
when  Daniel  of  Texas  tacked  the  Butler  bill onto  the   Hum-
phrey  outlawry  measure, the  only  supporter  of  the  Humphrey
bill  who voted  "no"   was Lehman of  New  York.  AD the  other
liberal  Democrats   forgot   their   supposed   objective   and   the
Senate  voted   85  to   1  for  the  Daniel   amendment   and   then
85  to  0  for  the  combined  bill.
Competition  in  Red-Baiting
The   real  motivations  were  unmistakable.   "I   am  tired,"
Humphrey   said   in  introducing   the   outlawry   measure,   "of
reading  headlines about  being  a  leftist."   Morse,  in  seconding
him,  said  the  purpose  of  the  bill  was  "to   remove  any  doubt
in   the   Senate  as  to  where  we  stand  on   the   issue  of   com-
munism."  A  few  days  later,  when  the  White  House  inter-
vened  against  the  outlawry  bill,  Morse  gloated  on  the   Senate
floor,  "Let   the  public  understand  who  is  trying  to  save  the
Communists  in  this  country  from  prosecution,   individual  by
individual,  for  the  conspiracy  to  which  they  belong.   It  now
appears  that  the  White  House  thinks  the  Senator  from   Min-
nesota  is  a  little   too  harsh  on   the  Communists."   The   day
the  anti-Communist   law  finally   passed,  Morse  was  jubilant.
"Last  Thursday,"   he  told  the  Senate,  "the   Republicans   were
surprised  and  shocked  because  they  discovered  that  what  was
up  to  that  time  obviously  to  be  one  of  the  smear  tactics  of
the  oncoming  campaign had fallen flat on its face  .  .  .  After
Thursday   they   could  not  very   well  argue  that  the   liberals
were  soft  on communism . . ."
II
There  do  not   seem  to  be  any  liberals—in   the   real  sense
of  the  word—left  in  the  U.S.   Senate.   A  striking  feature  of
the  week's  debate  was  the  absence of  appeal  to  the  traditional
doctrines    of   liberalism,   as   expounded   from    Jefferson    to
John-Stuart  Mill.   Kefauver,  the  only  Senator  to  vote  against
the  outlawry  bill,  was  the  only  Senator  to  mention  Jefferson.
But  the  familiar  words  Kefauver  quoted—about  "the    safety
with  which  error  of  opinion  may  be  tolerated  when  reason  is
free   to  combat   it"—was  not   the  main  premise  of  his  own
opposition.
Kefauver   said  he  took   "a   most   unpopular   position"   in
voting   against   outlawry   because   this  "would   confuse   the
operation  of  the  Smith  Act,   which   I  supported   and  voted
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  6,  1954
Humphrey  and  Morse Led  The  Liberal  Pack  for Outlawry...
for  as  a  House  member  and .  .  .  that  it  would  nullify  the
registration  provision   of  the  Internal   Security   Act."    Two
days   earlier   Kefauver  had   explained   to  the   Senate   that
"while  I  did not vote  for  the  internal  security  bill,  I  now feel
it  may  do some  good  .  .  ."  This  lone  champion  of  American
liberalism  voted  for  the  anti-Communist  bill  in  its  final  form
because "I  have  now been  assured  that this will  not  adversely
affect  prosecutions  under  the  Smith  Act  or  adversely   affect
the  Internal  Security   Act."    In  other   words,  Kefauver  was
objecting  to  one  form  of  punishing  people  for  their   ideas
on  the  ground  that  it  might  interfere   with  other   ways  of
punishing  them  for  the  same  ideas!
Strange  Oracle  for  Liberals
Kefauver   did  not  sustain   himself   in  his   lonely  position
with  Milton  or  Madison.  The  oracle  he  consulted  was  of  a
different  variety.  "I  talked  at  great  length,"  Kefauver  told
the  Senate,  "with  a  top  official  in  the  Department  of  Justice.
I  cannot  give  his  name,  because  it  was  a  personal  conver-
sation,  but  I  know,  after  talking  with  him,  that  the  Depart-
ment  of  Justice,  and  I  am  sure  it  reflects  the  views  of  Mr.
[J.  Edgar]  Hoover,  felt  that  the  bill  which  I  voted  against
the  other  day  would  .  .  .  undo  everything  which  had  been
done  over  a  period  of four  and a  half  years.  .  . . This  official
complimented  me  on  my  vote  against  it."   Kefauver  went  as
far  as  he  could to  indicate  just  how august  this  imprimatur
was  when  he  said,  "I   have  talked   in  days  past  with   Mr.
Hoover.   Today  I  talked  at  length  with  a  top  official  of  the
FBI  .  .  .  "We  have  come  to  a  strange  time  when  the  only
Senator  who votes  against  outlawry  of  the  Communist party
defends   himself  by  citing,  not   the  venerable   principles  of
a  free  society,  but  the  views of the  secret  police.
The   conversation   Kefauver   reported    (it   may   be   found
on  page   14398  of  the   Congressional   Record  for   Thursday,
August   19)  illuminates  the  real  difference  between  the  op-
posing forces.  Morse and the liberal  Democrats  in the  Senate,
like  Dies  in  the  House,  wanted  to  make  it  a  crime  to  be  a
Communist.   They  wanted  an  outlawry   bill  under  which  it
would  be  possible  to  send  a  man  to  jail  because  he  was  ad-
judged  to  be a  Communist.  The Administration, the  rightists
like  McCarran  and  the  FBI,   wanted  to  proceed  indirectly.
Instead-of   sending  a  man  to  jail  for  being  a  Communist
under  an  outlawry  statute,  they  would  send  a  man  to  jail
for   failing   to  register   as  a  Communist.   The  reasons   for
preferring  this  method, which  Congress  finally  adopted, were
set  forth  by  Kefauver.
"This  official   told  me,"  Kefauver  reported   to  the  Senate,
"that  punishment  for  political  beliefs  would  make  martyrs
of  many  Communists . . . He felt  that  certain  persons  might
go  to  the  defense  of  such  persons  and  thus  give  communism
some  respectability.   The  Communist  party  has  already  an-
nounced  that  it  is not going  to  register  and that  its  members
are  not  going  to  register.. By  refusing  to  do  so  they  will
outlaw  themselves.   They  can  then  be  prosecuted,  not   for
what  they  think,  but  for  failure  to  register.   World  public
opinion  will  be  on  our  side  if  we  handle  this  problem  as  Mr.
Hoover  suggests.   We will  lose  it  by  prosecution  for  political
beliefs  per  se."
The  Consequences  of  Registration
There   is  monumental  naivete  in  the   assumption  that  so
transparent   a   subterfuge   will   evoke  the   approval   of   the
world.   A  man  who registers  as  a  Communist  will  read  him-
self   out  of  society.   He  will  become  a  second  class  citizen,
barred  from  government,  defense  industry  and  many  other
types  of  employment.  He  will  lose  the  right  to  a  passport.
If   he  does  not  immediately  forego  the  right  to  practice  a
profession,  he  will  certainly   lose  most  of  his  clientele.    He
will  become  an  outlaw  and  outcast.   Can  our  rightists  really
believe  that  the  world  will  say  this  is  not  prosecution  for
opinion?
The  registration  procedure  is  like  the  outlawry  procedure
in  a  vital  respect.   In, either  case  it  will  be  assumed  that
persons   who  are   Communists  will  hide  their   views  rather
than   undergo  the  penalties  for  their  beliefs.   Under  either
mode   of  procedure  it  'therefore   becomes  necessary   to  de-
termine  who is  a  Communist, either  to  send  him  to  jail  for
being  one  or  for  failing  to  register  as  one.
This  is  the  nub  of  objection  to  anti-Communist  legislation.
As  the  Communists are  driven  underground,  it  is  assumed
that  they  will  not  dare  take  revolutionary  positions  publicly.
They  can  only  be  spotted  by  watching  to  see  if  they  take
non-revolutionary  positions  on  public  questions  which  paral-
lel  those  of  Communist literature  and  the  Communist  move-
ment.   It  then  becomes  the  task  of  the  government  to  de-
termine  whether  someone who  supports  a  35-hour  week,  let
us  say,  does  so  because  he  believes  in  a  35-hour  week  or  be-
cause  he  is  secretly  a  Communist.   In  such  an   atmosphere,
it  becomes  dangerous  to  advocate  social  reform.   This  is  why
the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce so long  campaigned  for  what
finally   become   (via   the   successive   Mundt-Nixon,   Mundt-
Ferguson   and  McCarran   bills)   the   Internal   Security   Act
Dept.  of  Confusion:  When  Is  An  Outlaw  Not  An Outlaw?
Mr.  KEFAUVER. . . . The bill,  as it  is  presently  written,
does  not  actually make the  Communist party  illegal.  Is  that
not  correct?
Mr.  BUTLER.  In  my  opinion,  the  bill  outlaws  the  Com-
munist  party  and  makes  it  illegal.   It  strips  the  Communist
party  of  all  its  rights,  privileges,  and  immunities  under  the
Constitution   of  the  United  States  and  all  the  laws  of  the
Unted  States  . . .
Mr.  KEFAUVER.  I  had  understood  that  the  Department
of  Justice  was  satisfied  on  the  theory  that  the   House  bill
even  with  the  Butler  amendments  does  not  actually  outlaw
the  Communist  party;  and  on  the  theory  that  the  bill  does
not  outlaw  the  Communist party, the  Department  feels  that
it  can  still  force  registration  under  the  Internal   Security
Act.   But  the   legislative   intent   now  being  stated   by  the
Senator  from  Maryland might  be  to  the  effect  that  the  bill
outlaws and declares  illegal  the Communist party ...
Mr. BUTLER . . . The bill  does  not outlaw  the Communist
party  by  making  its  activities  criminal.   It  makes  the  Com-
munist  party  impossible.   It  destroys  all  of  its  rights,  privi-
leges  and  immunities, and  strips  it  of  all  legal  rights  under
the  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  the  United  States.
Mr. KEFAUVER. That  is  not  what  the  Senator  said  a few
minutes  ago.
Mr.  BUTLER.   That  is  precisely  what  the  Senator   from
Maryland  said  a  few  minutes  ago.
Mr.  KEFAUVER.  The  Senator   said   a  few  minutes  ago
that  it  completely  outlaws  the  Communist  party.
Mr.  BUTLER.   It   does.   The  Senator  from   Tennessee  is
equivocating  with  words . . .
Mr. KEFAUVER. I  do not  want  to  vote  for  anything which
will  void  the  registration  provision  of  the  Internal  Security
Act,   I  want  to  give  it  an  opportunity.   So  a  person   could
be  a  member,  and  he  would still  have  to  register  under  the
Internal  Security  Act?
Mr.  BUTLER.  That  is true ...
Mr. KEFAUVER. By what  legal  conception  could  a  person
be  a  member of  something  which legally  could  not  exist?
Mr. BUTLER.  I  did not  hear  the  question.
Mr. KEFAUVER. How can  one  be  a  member of  an  organi-
zation  which  by  law  cannot  exist?
Mr.  BUTLER.  I  assure   the  Senator  I  am  not  going  to
worry  about  that.
—UJS.   Senate,  Aug.  17,  from   Con.  Rec.
pages  14079-82.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  6,  1954
...Kefauver,  The  One  Dissenter, Consulted  the  FBI  for  Advice
of   1950.   The  registration  provisions,  like  direct   outlawry,
would  make  all  agitation  for  change  hazardous.
Humphrey at His Silliest
In  one  of  the  silliest  moments of  the  whole debate,  Hum-
phrey  said  a  man  "does  not  have  to  become  a  member  of
the  Communist  party  to  express  unorthodox  ideas.   Let  him
become  a  member  of  other  parties  or  of  the  Republican  or
the   Democratic  party,   if  he  wants  to  express  unorthodox
ideas."   The  answer  is  that  under  the  original   standards
established  by  the  Internal  Security  Act  and  under  the  new
standards   added  by  Humphrey  a  man  or  an  organization
may   honestly  be   Republican  or   Democratic  and   still   be
penalized  as  "communistic."   The  original  act  sets  up  as one
standard  for  measuring  a  Communist  front  "the  extent  to
which  the  positions  taken  or  advanced by  it  do  not  deviate
from  those  of any  Communist-action organization  . .  ."
The  Humphrey amendment (text  at  page  14090 August  17
Con.  Eec.)   goes  much  further   than  the  carefully  framed
Internal   Security  Act.   Among  the  standards  to  be  applied
by  a  jury  "in  determining  membership  or  participation  in
the  Communist party"  under  the  Humphrey  amendment is
whether  the  accused  person  "has  indicated by  word,  action,
conduct,  writing,  or  in  any  other  way  [What  other  way  is
there?    Does   Senator   Humphrey  believe   the  Communist
underground  may  use telepathy?]  a  willingness  to  carry  out
in  any  manner  and  to  any  degree  the  plans,  designs,  objec-
ti\jps  or  purposes of  the  organization."   The  words  in  italics
are   sweeping  enough   to  cover  the   ADA   (Americans  for
Democratic  Action)  of  which  Humphrey is  a  vice-president,
or  even to  endanger  a  Taft.   It  was Langer  who recalled that
Taft  had  been  called  a  Communist because  he  favored  low
cost  public  housing  and  slum  clearance.
Let Them Dig Ditches ...
Par   from  ending  the   problem  by  getting   rid   of  Com-
munists,  such  standards   must   widen  the   witch  hunt  and
the  terror,  and  serve  the  purposes  of  the  extremists.    The
total  nature  of  their  objectives may  be  seen  in  two  speeches
by  Senator  Jenner  at  pages  13761-65  of  the  Congressional
Record  for  August  14.  "There  is  no place  in  American  life,"
Jenner  said,  "for  agents  of  the   Soviet  Union.  There  is  no
place  in  American life  for  anyone  who  has  ever  collaborated
with  the  Soviet  fifth  column  . .  .  There  is no place  even for
innocents  who scattered the Soviet  word mines ... If  they  are
foreigners,  let  us  send  them  home.   If  they  are  American
citizens,  let  us  deprive  them  of  the  right  they  despise.  Let
them   earn   their   living   as   dishwashers  or   ditch   diggers,
but  not  in  places  where they  can poison our  minds."  (Italics
added).
This  is  the  witch  hunt  in  full   flavor.   Note  the  fear  of
"word  mines"  and  of  "poisoning  our  minds."    This   is  the
Would  You  Repeat  That,  Senator?
"The   reason   why  the   present   requirement  is   im-
possible   is   that   it   requires   removal   of   'persons  de-
termined   by  this  section  to   be   Communists,'   but   no
persons  are  or  can  be  determined  by  this  section   to
be   Communists;   and  no   persons   can   be   determined,
under  or  pursuant  to  this  section,  to  be  Communists,
unless  it  is  construed  that  this  means  persons  deter-
mined   to   be   members   of   the   Communist-infiltrated
organization,  in  which  case  the  condition  is  still  im-
possible,   because  if   the   members   of   the  organzation
are  removed,  no  one  is  left  to  petition."
—Sen.  Butler  (R.  Md.),  Aug. 18,
Con. Rec. p.  13S87.
noxious  climate  which  bred  the  Internal   Security   Act,  an
attempt  to  extend  into  the  world  of  ideas  the  principles  of
pure  food  and  drug  legislation.   For  faith  in  free  discussion,
common   sense   and  truth,   it   substitutes   a   governmental
mechanism  for  labelling  dangerous ideas  people  might  other-
wise  swallow;  the  Internal   Security  Act  not  only  requires
Communists  to  register  but  to  label  their  publications  and
broadcasts.  The  assumption  is  that  people  are  too  stupid  to
be  trusted.   A  secular  index  expurgatoriux   must  be  set  up
to  guide  them.  The  philosophy of  the  Internal  Security  Act
is that  of  clerical  authoritarianism.
Ill
The  extent  to  which  the  situation  has  deteriorated  in  the
past  four  years  becomes  clear  if  one  glances  back  at   Sep-
tember  of  1950,  when  the  Internal   Security  Act  was   first
passed.  Then it was denounced by Attorney  General McGrath
as  hysterical,  and  vetoed  by  President   Truman.   This  time
the  new law  expanding the  Internal  Security  Act  (for  that
is  what   the   Congress  finally  did)   was  supported  by  the
President  and  the  Attorney  General,  while  the  liberal  Dem-
ocrats   asked  a  more  severe  measure.   In  the  House  there
were   only  three   votes  then  for   upholding  the  President's
veto   (Burdick,  R.  N.  Dak.;  Javtts,  R.  N.Y.,   and  Marcan-
tonio);  this  time,  there  were  two  (Burdick  and  Multer,  D.
N.Y.).   In  the  Senate  there  were  ten  votes  then  to  uphold
the   veto    (Chavez,   Douglas,   Graham,   Green,   Humphrey,
Kefauver,  Kilgore,  Leahy,' Lehman  and  Murray);  this  time
the  vote  on  the  final  measure  was  unanimous.
There  was  a  similarity  in  liberal  tactics.  Four  years  ago
the  liberal  Democrats  led  by  Kilgore   (D.  W.  Va.)  tried  to
block the  Internal  Security  Act by proposing instead  that  the
President   be   allowed  to  throw   all   suspected   Communists
Dept.  of  Confusion:  Deliberative Assembly  at  Work
Mr.  BUTLER ...  I  have consulted with  the  Senator  from
Minnesota  [Mr. Humphrey]  about  the  amendments  and  he
approves  of  them.
Mr.  HUMPHREY.   Oh,  Mr.  President, I  ask  the  Senator
to  wait;  no, no.
Mr.  BUTLER.   Then,  let   me  say  that  the  Senator  from
Minnesota  is  willing  to  accept  them.
Mr.  HUMPHREY.  No,  no.  I  am  unhappy  about  them  .  .  .
********
Mr.  KEFAUVER.   I  must  say  the  Senator  from  Michigan
has  not  contributed  much  toward  clarifying  the  matter;  if
in  one  place  it  is  not  a  political  party,  and then  later  it  is
stated  it  shall  be  treated as  a  political  party.
Mr.  FERGUSON.   I  am  saying just  the  opposite.
Mr.  KEFAUVER.   Is  this  not  all  the  more  reason  why  we
should  be  able  to  read  the  material?
Mr.  FERGUSON.   The  Senator  had  the   paper.
Mr.  KEFAUVER.   I  know;  but  I  could  not  keep  it  long,
because  there  is  only one  copy  for  96 Senators.
********
Mr.  HENNINGS ...  My inquiry  is  whether the Adminis-
tration  approves   of  the   action  proposed  to   be  taken  and
of  the  amendments  which  hare  been  submitted here  tonight.
Mr.  BUTLER.  Yes.   The  Attorney  General  is  cognizant of
all  these  amendments and  concurs  in  them.
Mr.  HENNINGS.   Then  he  approves,  too,  I  take  it,   the
philosophy  and  the  objectives  of  this  proposed legislation.
Mr.  BUTLER.   I  think  I  can  safely  say  that  the  adminis-
tration  is  certainly not  opposed to  this  bill.  Whether I  can
say it is  for it  or not, I do not know ...
—Senate   debate  on  the   Communist   control
bill,  Aug. 18,  Con. See.  13988-90.
I  2  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September   6, 1954
Will  That  Sleeping  Giant,  Labor,  Awaken  Too  Late?
into  concentration   camps  on  a  declaration  of  national  emer-
gency.   The  result  was  that   Congress  finally,  passed   both
measures:  the  detention  camp  provisions  were  added  to  the
original   McCarran   bill.   The  difference   is  that  we  were  at     -
war   in  Korea   in   1950  while  in  1954 with   the   end  of   the
Korean  and  Indo-Chinese wars  there  is  relaxation  of  tension.
Another  difference  is  that  this  time  the  storm  arose  over  a
bill  which  was  opposed  by  the  entire  labor  movement.   The
Butler  bill  was  intended  to  cap  the  Internal  Security  Act
of   1950  by  bringing  labor  unions  under  the  jurisdiction   of
the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.
A  Noose  for  the  Labor Movement
No  one  is  quite  sure  what  the  rest  of  the  new  legislation
means.   The  excerpts  reprinted  in  this  issue  from  the  debate
show  that  many  members  of  Congress  did  not  really  know
what  they  were  voting.   No  official  copy  of  the  bill  as  passed
is  yet  available   as  we  go  to  press.   There  is  some   reason
to   believe  that  the   sections   dealing   with   Communists  do
not  really  change  the  situation  as  it  exists  today  under  the
Internal   Security  Act. But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  right
has  won  a  sizeable  victory  in  the  provisions bringing  labor
under  the   Board.   The  Ives  amendment  does  not, as  some
suppose,  exempt  CIO,  A.F.   of  L.,  minors  and  the  railroad
workers.   It   merely-  says  membership   in  these   federations
shall  be  regarded   as  "prima  facie"   evidence  of  loyalty  and
non-subversion.   A  "prima   facie"  finding  is  rebuttable;   it
is   not   conclusive.    This   will  wreck   the   Left   unions  and
lay  the  foundations  for   a   Red  hunt   in  other   unions.   All
of  them  are  "infiltrated"  by  ex-Communists.   Labor  opposed
the  bill  because  it  feared  that  the  same  thing  would  happen
before   the  Board'  as  has  happened  in  government    loyalty
proceedings.   They  begin  with  Communists  but  end  with  any
non-conformist.
"A  Plague  on  Both  Their  Houses"
Those foolish  enough to  be complacent  about  the  liquidation
of  the  Left-wing  unions  and  prepared  to  dismiss  as  purely
theoretical   the  danger  to  the  rest  of  labor  face   a  bitter
awakening.   The  battle  between  the   U.E.  and  the   I.U.E.,
between   Emspak   and   Carey,   played   its  part   in   bringing
on   this   legislation,   as   did  the   Humphrey-Morse  proposals
earlier   to   give   the   National   Labor   Relations   Board   the
same  power  to  decide  which  unions  wore  ideologically pure
enough  for  collective  bargaining.
In  the  Humphrey subcommittee  report  of  March  2,  1953,
on   "Public   Policy  and   Communist   Domination   of  Certain
Unions,"  attention  was   called  to  "an   attitude   reflected   in
certain  statements  issued by General  Electric . . . The essence
of  the  theme  is  that  there  is  little  to  choose  from  between
leftwingers    and   rightwingers.   'We    believe"—the    General
Electric  has  said—'they  have  in  the  end  the  same  objectives.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Nnme_______ ___________.______  _
Street_._.___.___.________________
City____._.________   Zone ____  State.._____
Enter  this  gift  sub  for   $•_  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name.___________________._______
Street___'.___________________________
City___________"__  Zone_.___  State__._
9-6-64
We  believe  that  what   each  side  advocates  would  result,  in
the  long  run, in  substantially   the  same  thing  for  our  em-
ployes,  our  company,  and  our  country" "  (Con.  Rec.  p.  13456,
Aug.  11, 1954).  That  is capital's handwriting  on labor's  wall.
This  is  the   prize  bill  the  U.S.   Chamber  of  Commerce
so fervently  desired.   This  is what  the  Chamber  had  in  mind
when  it  warned   some  months   ago  that  1954  might  be  the
last  chance  to  get  such  legislation.   This  is  a  noose  for  the
labor  movement.   Senator  Lehman  in  the  Senate  on  August
11  pointed  up  the  sardonic  aspect  of  the  spectacle   when  he
said:
"It  strikes   me  as   exceedingly   strange  that  the   very
members  of  this  body  who  express  the  greatest  distrust
of  Government  and  of  bureaucracy  in  regard  to  measures
designed  to  advance  the   welfare  of  working  people,  are
the  first  to  demand  the  intervention of  Government  .  .  .
to  restrict  and  control  the  activities  of  working  people.
The  pending  bill  would  give  to  the  government  .  .  .  the
power  and  authority  to   decide   which  unions  are  sound
and  patriotic  and  which   are   Communist  infiltrated   and
hence  should  be  liquidated."
IV
The  United  States,  with  this  new  legislation,  moves  closer
tciward  Fascism.  The movement  is  as  slow  as  it  is  inexorable.
We  stand  on  the  threshold  of  a  new  period  in  which  a  legal
offensive  is  possible  against  that  sleeping  giant,  the  Amer-
ican   labor   movement,  the   only   potential   organized   mass
opposition  to  an  American  corporate  State.   The  Democratic
party  is  in  complete  moral  collapse,  as  far   from   Jefferson
as  the  Republican party  is from Lincoln.
Freedom  has  been  corroded  at   its  very  foundations  and
the  American  people  are   badly  in   need   of  re-education  in
the   fundamental   principles    on   which   the    Republic   was
established.   The  fight  must  be  carried  on  in  terms  of  these
principles  and  not  cowardly  tactics.   The  case  against sup-
pression  of  the  Communists is  not  that  this  will  make  them
martyrs,  or  weaken  existing  legislation,  or  make  the  work
of  the  FBI  more  difficult.   The  case  against  such  suppression
is  that  it  is  unworthy  of  our  traditions,   that  it  dishonors
America's  great  past,  that  there  can  be  no  freedom  without
risk,  that  liberty  is  indivisible,  that  any  exception  of  any
political party  or  theory  must whittle  away  the  Bill  of Rights
and  stop  up  these  channels  of free  discussion  on which peace-
ful  change  and  the  orderly  satisfaction  of  human  aspirations
depend.    Those  who  persist   through   these   dark   times   in
affirming  these  principles  will  be  doing  their  duty  by  their
country  and  will  earn  an  honorable  place  in  its  history.   It
is  in  this  spirit  that  we  must  all  carry  on.
Next  Week:  The  Senate  and  the  First  Amendment in
the  Lament,  Unger,  Shadowitz  Contempt  Cases.
I. F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Moil
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED