I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954nov08.pdf

============================================================

Adenaucr  Does  A Churchill On Dulles's  Very Doorstep,  See Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    II,  NUMBER 40
NOVEMBER  8,  1954WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16 CENTS
On Adlai's Accusing  Ike  of  Marxism
In  the  closing days of  the  campaign, a real  issue was  touched
upon.    This   was   when   Stevenson    accused   Eisenhower   of
affirming  that  our  prosperity   "has  been  achieved  in  the  past
only at  the  price of  war  and  bloodshed"  and thereby of  echoing
"standard  Communist   propaganda."   This   effort   to   picture
the  President  himself  as  a  security  risk  was  the  high  point  of
a  campaign in  which  Republicans and  Democrats  accused each
other  of  being  Communists,  an  accusation  unfair  to  all  three.
Now  Eisenhower,  who  probably  has  trouble  distinguishing
Karl from  Harpo,  did not  exactly  say what  Stevenson  charged.
The' President  had  said  in  Cleveland  the  night   before  that
unemployment  today  was  far  less  than  in  1949  and  19JO  and
one-third  what  it  was in  1940.  He  added  that  those  who  got
work in  1950 and  1940 "got  it  only  when we went  to  war and
they  went  either  into  uniform  or  into  war  plants."   And  he
asked,  "Now   do  we want  war  in  order  to  solve our  economic
difficulties?"    Though    loaded   and   leading,   it   was   a   good
question.
It  would  be  ignoring  the  giant  accomplishments of  Ameri-
can  capitalism  in  mass  production  and  mass  distribution   to
picture  it  as  a  vampire,  capable only  of  living  on  blood.   But
it  is  a  fact  that  the  New  Deal  had  failed  to  end  mass  unem-
ployment   when  the  Second  World  War   came  along,  that  a
postwar  recession  was  precariously  ebbing  when  the  Korean
war   broke   out,   and  that   a  new   recession   began  once   the
Korean  fighting  ended.
Stevenson's  Silly  Season
It   was  a  silly  bit   of   question-begging   for   Stevenson   to
orate  in  reply,  "let   me  say  to  our  friends  and  our   enemies
beyond   the   seas  that   no  one  who  sincerely  believes  in   free
capitalism  can  believe that  we  can  only  be prosperous  when  at
war."   This  was yodelling,  not  discussion.  Few people anywhere
any  longer  believe  in "free  capitalism";  most  people  have  come
around  to  the  view  that   the  market   must  be  managed  by
private  or  public  means or  both  if  it  is  to  operate  efficiently.
How  manage  it  so that  the  pump  can  be  primed  peacefully?
That  is the  question.
What  are we going  to  do if  world  tension  dies down?  In  the
calendar  year  1953, one  dollar  out  of  every  five  spent  in  this
country  was  spent  by  the  military.   Total  disposable  income
was  250  billions.  "Major  national  security"  expenditures  were
52  billions.  The  current  slump was brought  on  by  a  reduction
of   only   $6  billions   in   military   expenditure.    What   would
happen   to   business  if   those  expenditures  were  cut   in  half,
or  by  disarmament eliminated altogether?
Neither  Eisenhower nor  Stevenson  show  the  slightest  readi-
ness  to  discuss  the  kind  of  spending  for  peaceful  reconstruc-
1  1 *
tion  at  home  and  abroad  which  could  possibly  replace   such
huge   sums.    Highways,   schools   and   hopitals—the    favorite
topics  touched  on  by  both  parties—would  not  come  anywhere
near  filling  the  gap.   Judging  by  the  experience  of  the  New
Deal, pump-priming  for  peace would  require  measures of  quite
a  different   order:  new  TVA's,  giant   regional   quasi-socialist
development  projects,  the  clearance not  only  of  urban  but  of
rural  slums,  the  reconstruction  of  American  agriculture,   and
finally  genuine  economic   planning   for   the   maintenance  of
employment.  This  is  the  spirit  in. which  we ought  now  to  be
taking  a  good  look  at  the  enormous  expansion  of   productive
capacity  which   took   place  under   the   stimulus  of  military
demand  since  1940.
Comfortably  Assuming Endless Trouble
On  the  contrary  all  the  economic  studies  being  made inside
the  Administration  and  by  the  New  Dealers  outside  assume
with  complacency  that  world  tension  will  continue  for  many
years  and  provide  a  crutch  for  American  business.   Whether
one  looks  at  the  Staff  Report  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  the
Economic  Report,  at  the  Department  of  Commerce  study  of
Markets  After   the  Defense   Expansion,  the  National  Planning
Association  projection  to   1960  or  the   President's   Materials
Policy  Commission  projection  to  1975—everywhere  one  finds
assumed  a  standing  army  of  three  to  four  million  men,  with
annual  "defense"  expenditures  of  not  less  than  40  billion   dol-
lars  a year.  The  stability  of  American  capitalism  is  predicated
on  the  very  formula  it  suspects  the  Soviet  bloc  of  applying,
a  policy  of  neither  war,  nor  peace.
To   speak  of  this  as  a  defense   problem   is  semantic   de-
ception.   The  Democrats   talked  as  if  we  were  dealing  with
certain  fixed  amounts  of  necessary  expenditure  on  which  the
Republicans  werre  foolishly  "skimping."   A   more   accurate
figure  is  that  of  an  international  poker  game,  in  which  the
sky  is  the  limit.   The  problem  has  direction   and   momentum
as  well  as  magnitude.   Each  boost   in  "defense"  on  one  side
forces  a similar boost  on  the  other.   An  arms race  is  an  ascend-
ing  spiral  of  expenditure  and  fear  which  can  end  only  in  war.
The   Republicans,   frightened   by   the   slump,   have   already
given  up trying to  slow the race down  a little.  The  Democrats
would  speed  it  up  again.  This  is the  sense  in  which   American
business  has been  made  dependent  on  war;  the  sense  in  which
American  society  will  slip  into  war  as an  easy  way  out.   This
is  the  process  we  must  somehow  reverse.   How  to  do  so  is  a
challenge  to  American  business  enterprise  and  political  leader-
ship  which  cries  out  for  study,  now  that  the  wackiest  of  all
recent  election  campaigns  is  over,  and  sensible  discussion  may
be  possible  again.
1  6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   8,  195b
Balance  Sheet  of An  Election  Which Failed  to  Add  Up
What  Happened?    Nobody  knows.  The  President  in  the
final  spurt  stressed  "peace."   The  Democrats  stressed  "jobs."
There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  either  issue  was  as  potent
as  many  of  us  would  like  to  believe.  Neither  was  that  other
major  issue,  the  slump  in  farm   prices.   Nor   the  aging  Red
bogey.    How   put   the  Gillette  defeat   in  the  farm   country,
Thurmond's  write-in   victory   in  South  Carolina,  the  ALP's
low  vote  in  New  York,  Ferguson's  loss in  Michigan into  any
consistent   pattern?    The  fact  is  that   local  and  State  issues
and  irritations  were  as or  more  important  than  national  issues
in  many   areas.   Economic  distress  is  obviously  not   as  wide-
spread  or  important  as  the  Democrats  thought,  nor  peace as
vital  a  concern  as  Ike's  advisers  imagined.  The  election  will
make  little  difference,  even  though   as  we  go  to  press Neu-
berger's  victory  in  Oregon  promises  a  Democratic  Senate  as
well   as  House.    On   some  issues  Ike  will   find  a  Democratic
Congress  more   amenable  than   a  Republican.    The  aviation
lobby  will  be happier  with  its  friends,  the  Democrats,  in con-
trol  of  Congress.   And  Low  Blow  Joe, almost  saved  by   the
squeak  through  of   Case,  the  one  Republican  he  would   not
support,   will   lose   his   committee   chairmanship,  i.e.  if   the
Democrats  organize  the  Senate.   They  seem  reluctant  to  take
responsibility,  have  no  real  leadership,  not  much  program.
In the  House:  With   the  return   of   the  Democrats   to
control,  it  is  sobering  to  realize  that  only  one  liberal,  Celler,
will  take  over   a  major  committee  chairmanship,  in  his  case
Judiciary.   Of  the  12  major  chairmanships,  nine  go  to  South-
erners: Howard  W.  Smith  (Va.)  of  the  "Smith  Act"  becomes
chairman  of  the  powerful  Rules  committee;  Barden of  North
Carolina,  whom  the  labor  movement  detests,  takes  over   the
Labor  committee.   Barden  is  to  the  right  of  Eisenhower  on
revision  of  Taft-Hartley;   Smith  is  to  the  right  of  him  on
practically  everything.   An  item   for  students  of  our "two
party"  system  is  the  shift  in  the  chairmanship of  Agriculture,
where  Cooley  of  North  Carolina  will  succeed  Hope  of  Kansas.
Both  opposed  Ike's flexible price support program.
Death  Knell  for  the  Un-Am?  One  bright  spot  on  the
House horizon lies in  the announcement by  Walter  of  Pennsyl-
vania  that  he  will  ask  for  the  abolition  of   the  House   Un-
American   Activities  Committee.    Since  Walter  is  slated  to
become  chairman  of  this  committee  and  is  one  of   the  most
respected   and  influential  conservatives  in  the  House,   a  move
by  him  to  abolish  the  Committee   would  have  a  real  chance
of  passage.   Velde's  effort   as  chairman  to  subpoena  Truman
was  the  finish  for   Democratic   members  of   the   committee.
Walter's  move  would  not  mean  the  end  of  the  witch   hunt
in  the  House.   He  would  shift  the  search  for  "subversion"   to
a  subcommittee  of  Judiciary  (like  the  Senate Internal  Security
subcommittee  of  Judiciary).  Walter  is the  single most  power-
ful   member  of  Judiciary;   a  conservative  rather  than   a  re-
actionary;   a  man  with  a  deep  respect   for  law  which  made
him  an  unexpected ally  last  session  in  key  civil liberties battles,
notably  against  the  Butler bill  which  he  almost blocked.
Now  the  Democrats  Will  Investigate: Whatever hap-
pens  to  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  the  emphasis
in  investigations  will  shift  this  next  session.  The  Democrats,
still  smarting   from   Brownell's   attacks  on  Truman   in   the
Harry  White  "revelations,"  are out  to  dig  up  the  dirt  on  the
Republicans.   The  Dixon-Yates   power  contract   is  No.   1  on
the  list;  No.  2 is the  inquiry launched by  Senator  Hennings  of
Missouri  into  the Brownell-Rover  attempt  to  intimidate  Judge
Youngdahl  in  the  Lattimore  case.   No.  3  will  be  a  thorough
debunking  by  House  Civil  Service  of  the   "numbers   game"
phyed   by   the   Republicans,  especially  Nixon,   in  juggling
security  risk  discharge  figures.  Walter  touched  on  this  when
he  told  the  United  Press  there  was  a  "strong  temptation"   to
continue  the  Un-American  Activities Committee  in  order  to
investigate  the  Nixon  charges "but,"  he  added,  "I   feel  it  is
more  important  to  abolish  the  committee."    The  thought  of
seeing  Nixon  grilled  by  Walter  is most engaging.
Liberal  Balance  Sheet:   Pleasant  to  record  are  the  re-
turn  of  O'Mahoney  (Wyo.),  Murray   (Montana),  Kefauver
(Tenn.)   to  the  Senate.   It  is  disappointing  that  Condon  was
defeated  in  California  and  that  Glen  Taylor  did  not  make  it
in  Idaho.  We  still  hope  for  Case's election  in  N.  J.  and  deeply
regret   John   Sherman   Cooper's   defeat   in   Kentucky.    The
Democratic    sweep   in   Pennsylvania   brought    a
 v
 promising
liberal,  George  M.  Leader, into  the  Governorship,  and  in  New
York, Javits, one of  the  few  genuine  liberals in  the  Republican
party   showed   a  vote-getting    power  for   Attorney   General
that  will  make  the  Old  Guard  sit  up  and  take  notice.   The
idea  of  having  an  Attorney  General of  a  party  different  from
the   Governor's   is   an   excellent   one, as  current   experience
here  shows where  Brownell  is  treating  the  Attorney  General-
ship  as  a political rather  than  a  law  enforcement  office.
Not  A  Murmur:   Government  is the  big  industry  of  the
District  of  Columbia.   Every  newspaper  in  it   has  a  special
column   devoted   to   the   interests   of   government    employes.
Not  a newspaper in it  but  has protested  at  one time  or  another
some  outstanding  idiocy  or  injustice  in  the  security  program.
Such incidents  are innumerable and  a constant  topic  of  govern-
ment  gossip.   Yet  not  one  newspaper  took  note  of  what  was
for  Federal  workers  the  biggest  whopperoo  of  the  campaign,
Eisenhower's statement at  Cleveland October  29, "Throughout
the  government  from  top  to  bottom  there  has  been  applied  a
security  program  that  is tough  and  thorough,  but  is absolutely
fair.   No  one man  can  say that  his  civil  rights  have  been  un-
justly  damaged  through  the  operation  of  that   security pro-
gram."   The   President's   ignorance  of   all  factual  matters  is
notorious, but  no paper wondered  who on his staff  would  write
a  script  for  him  containing  such  an  offensive  falsehood.    Nor
did  any  paper  notice  that   the  best  Stevenson  could  say  in
rejoinder  over  CBS two  nights  later  was  his "me, too" refer-
ence   to  "the  orderly   search   for   disloyalty   among  Federal
employes   which,   listening   to   the   Republicans,   you   would
hardly  know  was started five years before  they  came to  Wash-
ington."  The  Democrats  want  to  be sure  and  share the  credit!
For  New   York   Readers
Recommended:  the  series  of  lectures  being  given  by  that
grand  old  timer,  Scott  Nearing,  at  the  Cornish  Arms  Hotel/
311  W.  23rd  St.,  each  Tuesday  night  this  month,  at  6:30
p.m.   on  the  Social  Crisis  and  at  8:30 p.m. on  World  Events.
I  can  remember  the  days  when  Nearing  took  on  Bertrand
Russell  and  Professor   Seligman  of  Columbia  in  defense  of
socialism,  and   he  remains  as  salty,  vigorous   and   inde-
pendent  as  ever.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  8,
Why  Were  Owen  Lattimore's  British  Publishers Interrogated?
I  hope some  member  of  the  British  House of  Commons  will
press the  Home  Secretary  for  more specific  information  on the
cooperation  between  the  English  police  and  the  FBI  in  the
Lattimore  case.   The  written  reply  given  by  the  new  Home
Secretary,    Major    Lloyd   George,  to   the   questions   in   the
House  October 28 was  far  from  complete.
Major  Lloyd  George admitted that  on two  occasions British
publishers  of  books  by  Lattimore  had  been  questioned  at  the
request  of  the  FBI.   The  first  occasion  was  in  1952,  when  a
U.S.  Embassy  representative  was   allowed  to  question  one
British  publisher with  an  English  police  officer   present.
The   Home   Secretary   said   the   second  occasion  was  last
September  when  New  Scotland Yard  received  a  request  from
the  FBI  "to  obtain  certain  information"  in  connection  with
the  prosecution  of  Lattimore  for  perjury.   A  British  police
officer   saw  the  principal  members of  two  publishing  houses
and  asked  for  the  names of  witnesses  who could  testify  as  to
the  number  of  copies  printed  in  England  and  the   countries
in  which  these  copies  had  been  sold.   The  policeman  was  in-
formed,  according  to  Major  Lloyd  George, that  neither  firm
would  cooperate.
It  was  not  explained just  how information on  the  number
of  copies printed  in  England  and  the  countries  in  which  sold
could  possibly have  a  bearing  on  a  prosecution  for   perjury
in  America.   The  Home  Secretary   was  less  informative   in
discussing  the   earlier   incident.   He  did  not   disclose  what
questions  were  asked,  or  what  was  then  the  excuse  for  the
interrogation.
In  this  country,  calls  of  this  kind  have  become   familiar.
Ex-Communists  who  decline  to  "cooperate"  with  the   FBI
often  find  that  the  refusal  has  cost  them  their  jobs.  An  FBI
man  merely  need  call  on  their  employer  "for    information."
The employer only has  to learn  his employe's background  and
to  know  that  the  FBI  is  watching  him  to  dispense  with  his
services.   This  is  the  mechanism that  drops  the  guillotine.
Our   embassies   abroad   are   not  bashful   about  trying   to
interfere  with  books they  do not  like.  A  call  from  the  police
might  intimidate  a  publisher.   "Ordeal  by  Slander,"  Latti-
more's own story  of his experiences  at  the hands  of  McCarthy,
was  published  in  England  in  1952  by  MacGibbon &  Kee.   It
helped  to awaken  readers  abroad  to the  witch  hunt  here.  Was
MacGibbon  &  Kee  by  any  chance  the  publisher  involved  in
the  1952 •interrogation,  and  did  "Ordeal  by  Slander"  figure
in  it?
A  Serious  Setback  for  the  FBI  In  England
The  questions  raised   in  the   House  about  the   Lattimore
case  have  already  had  one  good  effect.   The  Home  Secretary
in  his  answer  of  October  28  explained  that  there  was   "a
standing  arrangement   whereby  the   police  in  this   country
assist  the  police  of  any   other   friendly   country   in  making
inquiries  in  criminal  cases."
Major   Lloyd  George  said  that  the  action  taken  "in  this
case  was  so  much  regarded  as  a  routine  response"  that  the
matter  was  not  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Home   Office.
"I  have  given  instructions,"  he  added, "which  should  ensure
that  in  any  comparable case  which  might  arise  in  future  no
action  will be  taken  by  the  police  in  this  country  until  there
has  been an  opportunity  for  the  matter  to  be considered at  a
high  level."
This  implies  that  requests  for  aid  from  the  FBI  will  no
longer  be  taken   at  their  face  value  and  automatically   re-
sponded  to.  In  any  "comparable"   case,  the  matter  will  first
be considered "at  a  high level."
This  recalls  the  Eisler  case  in  1949  when  a  London magis-
trate declined to permit that fugitive's  extradition  to  America.
Sir   Laurence   Dunne  ruled  "in  no  circumstances   whatever
could  the  offense  of  which  he  [Eisler]  was  convicted in  Amer-
ica  come under the  technical head of perjury  in  this country."
Actually  there   is  no  difference   in  legal   theory   between
the  crime  of perjury  in  England  and  the  crime  of  perjury  in
America.   The  only  difference  is  in  the  current  practice  here
of  using  indictments  for  perjury  as  vehicles  for  political  per-
secution.  What  Sir  Laurence  Dunne recognized  as  a  magis-
trate,  Major  Lloyd  George  recognizes  as  England's  top  ad-
ministrative   official  for  police  matters.
What  The  British  Press  Does  Not  Yet Realize
The  British  press  is  exercised  over  the  Lattimore  case  and
welcomed  the  Home  Secretary's  statement.   The  New  States-
man  and  Nation  of  October  30 sees  the  case  as  a  "Battle  for
the  Soul of America"  and  says that  Attorney  General Brown-
ell  is  "no  longer  able  to  distinguish  between  a  court  of  law
and   the   kangaroo   courts   of   Senators   McCarthy  and  Mc-
Carran.
The  august  London  Times   said   in  an   editorial   October
26  that  the  facts  "arouse  an  uneasy  feeling  of  persecution
rather  than  of  prosecution."   The  Manchester  Guardian  said
on   October   28:   "The   British   police  ought   never  to   have
allowed   themselves   to   be   used   in   an   American   political
vendetta."
But  the  Manchester  Guardian  failed  to  grasp  the  full   sig-
nificance  of  the  Lattimore  affair  when  it  said  "the   case  has
been  an  exception—a shocking and  disgraceful exception—and
is  far  from  typical  of  American  procedure."
The  Lattimore  case  is  indeed  exceptional  when  looked  at
against  the  background  of  our  American  past.   But  when
examined  against  the  foreground  of  recent  legislation,  it  will
be  seen  that  this  is  the  exception  which threatens  to become
the  rule.
If   the   courts   uphold  the   registration   provisions  of   the
Internal   Security  Act  of  1950,  especially  as  amended by  the
new   Anti-Communist  Control   Law   fathered   by   panicky
Democrats  last  August,  the  Lattimore  case  will  become  the
prototype  for  a  new heresy-hunting  era.
Lattimore   is   not   accused   of  perjury   for   denying  some
simple  fact.   He  is  accused  of  perjury  for  denying  that  he
followed  Communist party  line.   The  trial  of  such  an  issue
must  become  a  contest   in  casuistry   with  a  jury   asked   to
determine  from  selected  bits  and  pieces  of  voluminous writ-
ings  whether  Lattimore  was  by  current  American  standards
a  heretic.
If  the new laws  are upheld, writers like Lattimore  who deny
that  they  are  Communist party  liners  need  not  be  tried  for
perjury   where  the   prosecution  is  hampered  by  the  tradi-
tional   safeguards  which  Anglo-American  law   provides  for
those  accused of this  crime.  Writers  may be brought  to  court
and  convicted  more  easily  for  failure  to  register  themselves
as  Communists, a crime for  which the penalty  may be as much
as five years  in  jail  and  a  $10,000 fine.
The  importance  of  the  Lattimore  case  does  not  lie  only  in
its  test   of  the  China  Lobby's  power  to  pervert   American
justice   and   of   Attorney   General   Brownell's   readiness   to
enlist  without  scruple  in  that  enterprise.
To  read   the   voluminous  documents  submitted  to  Judge
Youngdahl  on  October  28 in  support  of  the  motion to  dismiss
the  new  indictment  is  to  get  a  preview  of  what  lies  in  store
for   other   American  liberal  and  radical   writers  under  the
Internal  Security  Act  and  its  1954 amendments.
The  agonizing task  of trying  to  set  the  writings  of  a  busy
lifetime  in  the  perspective  of  other  times  and   atmospheres,
the  humiliating  effort  to  prove  that  one  was  not  a  Commu-
nish,  the  painful  task  of  reconstructing  in  context  the  odd
bits  and  pieces torn  from  one's  writings by the  prosecution—
this  will  become  the  fate  of  a  whole generation   if  the  new
laws  are  upheld.
Copies  of  this  issue  are  being  gent  to  leading  British
editors  and  members  of   Parliament.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  8,  1954
Those  Ungrateful  Germans  Already  Show  Signs  of   Independence
Adenauer  Does A  Churchill  on  Dulles's  Very  Doorstep
Washington—No  less than  rhree  times  the  packed  assem-
blage  of  newspapermen,  advertising   agents  and  lobbyists   at
the  National  Press  Club  gave  Adenauer  a  rising  ovation.   He
was  hailed for  his  "labors  day  and  night  in  the  cause of  world
peace"  and  "in  the  common  cause  of  freedom."   He  was  de-
scribed  as  the  "iron  willed  Chancellor"  and  compared  inevi-
tably  to  Bismarck,  that   other   iron   Chancellor.*   Adenauer
seemed  extraordinarily sturdy  for  a man  of  his years.  His  face
is  round  and  flattish,  his  brow  high  and  fringed  with   gray,
his  complexion  a  pale white,  his  voice pleasantly  soft.
Though  fresh  from  signing  a  treaty  of  friendship  and  com-
merce  with  Secretary  Dulles,  Adenauer  went  off  the  reserva-
tion.  The State Department  might  have forgiven his statement
that  Germany  had  "a  special  interest"  in  "normalizing"  rela-
tions with  the  Soviet  bloc  "because  only  through  such  normali-
zation  can  Germany's  reunification  in  peace  and  freedom  be
brought   about."    This   was   safely   vague.    But   when   the
Chancellor   again   spoke,   as  he  has  in   the   past,  of   a non-
aggression pact between the Western and Eastern blocs,  the De-
partment  let  reporters  know  this did not  accord  with  its  views.
In  his personal relations with Dulles,  Adenauer  is as obsequi-
ous  as  only  a  German  can  be.   But   here  he  was  following
Churchill,  not  his  American  benefactor.   Adenauer's  proposal
for  a non-aggression agreement between East  and  West  all  but
used  the hated word  "Locarno."  Herr  Felix  von Eckhardt,  the
West  German  press  chief,  tried  to  repair  the  damage with  a
hastily   summoned  press   conference   in   which   he  explained
lamely  that   Adenauer  had   used  the   word   "abkommen,"   a
vaguer  term  for  agreement,  rather  than  the  stronger   words
"vetrag"   or   "pakt.''    What   difference   this  made  never  did
become   clear.   Actually   Adenauer   used  the   German  words
"vertraglich  geregelie  beziehungen"   (relations  regulated  by
agreement)    when   he  spoke  of   an  East-West   "relationship
which   would   offer   all   those   participating   security   against
aggression."
The  implications, like those of  the  Churchill  Locarno,  rankle
with  Dulles.   For  they  imply  that  the  Russians, too, may  have
genuine  fears  about  their  security  which  need  to  be  allayed.
•The  Germans   alone   seem   to   favor   "iron"  as  the   material   for   their
statesmen.
Please  Get  Your  Renewal  in  Early
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or enter)
Stnwt
fSty
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
7m»                   «5t»+»
Enter this  gift  snb for $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(To)  Nurno
Stw*,*
fSty
Zonp               Stnto
11/8/64
This  does  not  at  all  accord  with  that  Manichean vision  Dulles
nurtures  of  the Western  forces of  light  combatting  the  Eastern
forces  of  darkness.   In  any  case  he  has  not  yet  given  up  his
dream  of  "liberation"  in  which  the  rearmed  Germans are  cast
to  play  the  role  of  liberators.   This  he  made  clear  in  that
interview  with  C.  L.  Sulzberger  which  the  New  York   Times
printed  October  30,  all  adrip  with  the  Secretary's  character-
istic  and  oleaginous  religiosity.   (One might  think  he  spent
his   life   at   Sullivan  &  Cromwell   as   a   corporation   parson,
available  on  hire  to  open  directors'  meetings  with   prayer.)
The  Secretary  indicated  he  would  never,  never  agree  to  co-
existence  under  conditions  which   would  leave  the  Poles  and
Czechs  "enslaved."   This  implies  that  he  wants  the  Russians
"pushed  back"  to  their  old  borders.   The  Germans  are  to  be
rearmed  to  do the  pushing.
Adenauer  may  have  other  ideas.   The  one  sentence  in  his
address  which  will  mean   most   at   home  was: "Korea   and
Indochina   are   examples  containing   a   special,  unmistakable
warning  to  all  Germans."   It  is  not  natural  sentiment   alone
which  make  reunification  Germany's  first  concern.   It  is  the
fear  of  becoming  another  and  bigger  Korea.   This,  and  not
"liberationism,"  is  the   mentality   to   which   Adenauer  must
address himself.  And it  is to  this mentality  that  the "Locarno"
conception  appeals,  with  its  promise  of  a  Germany  protected
by  the  U.S.  yet  at  peace with  the  East.   Adenauer  this  early,
in  response  to  inner  German  political  necessities,  was  already
showing  himself  an  unreliable  satellite.
The  first  question  asked  Adenauer  was  the  No.  1  question
of  contemporary  German  politics,  and  he never  did  answer  it.
"Under what  conditions short  of  war,"  it  was put  to  him,  can
Russia  ever  be  expected   to  acquiesce  in  German  unification
once  West  Germany  is  armed?"   This  set  the  Chancellor  off
into an extraordinarily long,  verbose  and  non-responsive  reply,
which  tailed off weakly into  the statement  that  the problem  was
"just  one  part  of  the  world  tension   today  and  if  the  world
tension  will  decrease,  and  I  believe  it  will  decrease  some day,
then  the  time  will  have  arrived  for  the  resettlement   of  the
problem  of  the  reunification  of  Germany."  This  pie-in-the-
sky  reply,  which  was not  reported  in  the  American  press,  will
read  sourly  back  home  auf   deutsch.
and  Send  A  Gift  Sub to  A  Friend
I. F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St, &E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED