I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954aug16.pdf

============================================================

Britain's New Atomic Energy Act Takes Public  Power for  Granted,  Page  Four
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER 30
AUGUST  16,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15 CENTS
Farewell  to  the  5th  Amendment?
The  Senate,  which  likes  to  call  itself   the  world's   greatest
deliberative   assembly,   never   acted   more   ignominiously   the
rubber  stamp  than  last  Wednesday morning.   Without   debate,
without  a  record  vote,  with  only  one  objection—and  that  an
extraordinarily  weak  one—it   voted   to   end   a  privilege   300
years  old.   On   motion   of  McCarran   (D.,  Ncv.),  by   voice
vote,  it   approved  S 16  as  amended  by   the  House,   a  bill   to
compel  witnesses  to  testify  against  themselves on  promise  of
immunity.   The  nature  of  the  one  objection  illuminated  the
quality  of  the  vote.   Senator  Lehman  (D.,  Af.Y.)   rose  to  say
that  he was not  objecting  to  the  bill  itself,  but  that   sufficient
time  had  not  been  allowed  to  study  the  House  version.
Last   year   when   the   original   McCarran   immunity   bill
passed  the  Senate   (see  the  Wei'kly   for  July  18,  19J3,  "Last
Refuge   of   Dissenters   in  Danger"),    it   was   also  on   a   voice
vote   but   Lehman  and   nine  other   Senators  asked   to   be  re-
corded    against   the   bill.    They   included   one  Republican,
Cooper   (Ky.)    and  eight   Democrats,   Stennis   (Miss.),  Mc-
Clellan    (Ark.),    Magnuson   and   Jackson    (Wash.),   Kerr
(Okla.),   Hennings   (Mo.),   Murray    (Mont.)    and   Hayden
(Ariz.).   Last  week  the  other  nine  sat  silent  as a fundamental
Anglo-American  right  which   goes  back  to  the   Cromwellian
Revolution  went  down  the  drain.  Senators,  like  Flanders,  who
wax  eloquent  on   the  menace  of  McCarthyism,  failed   to  see
why   it   made  the  Fifth   amendment   privilege   all  the   more
important.   The   independent,  Morse,  who  was  so  concerned
a  week  before  about   due  process  for  McCarthy,   was   less  of
a  legal  purist  about   his  victims;  last  year  he  facilitated  the
passage   of   S 16,   this   year   he   voiced   no   objection   to   the
House   substitute.
The  House  Did Better
The   House,   which  is  no  great   deliberative   assembly,  and
often  sounds  more  like  the  assembly  line  in  a  packing  plant,
shone  by  comparison.   There  last   week,  though  the  Demo-
cratic  leadership  voted  for  the  immunity bill,  51  Democratic
rebels,  3  Republicans  and  the  House's  lone  Independent  voted
against   it   under   the   leadership  of   Celler   (D.,  N.Y.),   the
chamber's  one  consistent   civil  libertarian.   Less  striking   but
important  was  the  subtle  job  done  on  the  original  McCarran
bill   by  House  conservatives  under  the  leadership  of  Walter
(D.,  Pi?.).   The   bill  as  passed  was  quite  different   from  that
sponsored  by  McCarran  or  asked  by  Attorney  General  Brown-
ell.   The  former  wanted  Congressional  committees,  the  latter
the  Attorney  General,  to  have  unrestricted   power  to   compel
testimony.     The  bill  as  passed sets  up  a  procedure  so cumber-
some  that  there  is  gossip  in  the  cloakrooms  that  it  will   never
be  used.  This  is too optimistic.   In  the  case  of  witnesses  before
Congressional   committees,   the  bill  provides  (1)   for  a   two-
third  vote  of  the  committee,   (2)   the  serving  of  notification
on  the  Attorney   General  and   (3)   the  securing  of  an  order
from   a  District  Court.   This  procedure  obviously   does   not
suit  the  purposes  of  headline-hunting  investigators,  but   pun-
ishment  for  contempt  is  also  slow—that  does  not  deter  them
from  using  it.   The  chances  that  this  will  be  declared  uncon-
stitutional  are unfortunately  slim;  not  only  the  atmosphere of
the  times  but  past  precedents  upholding  more  limited  immu-
nity  powers  are against  it.   But  a  witness  under  this  procedure
may  argue  and  appeal  other   issues  of   relevance,   materiality,
and  the  authority  of  the  committee  more  effectively  than  on
appeal  from  a  contempt   conviction.   And  if  he  loses,  he  can
always  refuse  to  answer  and  commit  contempt.
We  are  slipping  back  to  the  days  before  the  privilege  was
won  when  those  who  resisted   Elizabeth's  High  Commission,
Britain's  own  Inquisition,  had  no  alternative but   jail  or  flight
when   put   under   oath   and   questioned   about   the  heretical
views  of  themselves  and  their  families.   This  is  where,   when
and  why  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  began  to  leave  for  Holland  and
later  for  America.   They  did  not  choose  to  be informers.   The
right  the  Congress  has voted  to  withdraw  was  the  right  John
Lilburne  went   to   jail  to  establish.    It   will  have   to  be  re-
established  in  the  same  manner  by  the  heretics  and  freedom
lovers  of  this  generation.
Two Who Would  Not  Tell
There  was  thus  an  almost  symbolic  propriety   in  the  fact
that  the  same  day,  on  the  unanimous  consent  calendar,  this
same  Senate  without  objection  passed  two  McCarthy   resolu-
tions  of   contempt   against  two   Harvard   faculty  members,
Wendell   H.  Furry  and  Leon  J.  Kamin.   Both,   declining  to
plead   the  Fifth   before  McCarthy,  had  admitted  past   Com-
munist   membership  but   declined  on  moral  grounds  to  name
others.   Furry  himself  had  been  named  before  the  House  Un-
American   Activities   Committee   by   Robert   Gorham   Davis
of  Smith  College  and  by  Granville  Hicks.   Unlike  them,  he
did  not   choose  safety   for   himself   at   the  expense  of  others.
Furry  said  that  if  called  before  a  grand  jury  which  was  in-
vestigating  "actual  crime,  not  just ^political  crime  or   crime
of  opinion"  he  would  tell  everything   he  knew.   "I   will  not
give  them,"  he  told  McCarthy  when  asked  for  names,  "when
it   involves   political    persecution   only."   Kamin   said.   "My
conscience  won't  let  me  traffic  in  the  names of  former  politi-
cal  associates whom  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  were  guilty  of
criminal  activities."
This  is  Lilburne's   challenge  repeated   three  centuries   later,
and  now  again  the  challenge  is  not  to  the  judges  or  the  law
but  to  the  juries  and  to  the  political  arena.   The  fight  for  the
privilege   not   to   be  a  political   informer   is  with   this   new
legislation   back   on   the   bedrock   of   individual   conscience.
Furry  and  Kamin  deserve  emulation  and  support.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  IB,  1954
From  the  Hectic Last Hours  of An  Overheated  Congress
The  House  of  Representatives  honored  itself .last  Tuesday
in  honoring  the   memory   of  Vito  Marcantonio.   Mr.   Celler
spoke  eloquently  in  his  praise  when  the  House  met,  and  he
was followed  by  three  other  members  of  the  Democratic  dele-
gation  from  New York  City,  Multer, Klein  and  Keogh.   Three
other  Democrats  joined  them:  McCarthy   (the  other  one)  of
Minnesota,  Eberharter  of  Pennsylvania  and  Blatnik  of  Min-
nesota.   The  biggest  surprise  of  all  was  that  Clare   Hoffman
of  Michigan,  a  Republican  of  the  far  right,  asked  permission
for  an  extension   of  remarks  in  tribute  to  Marcantonio.   No
man  ever  fought   with  greater  ability  and  devotion   for  the
people  he  represented  and  the  ideas  in  which  he  believed.   He
deserved   the  tribute  paid   him,  but  it  was  nonetheless   an
unexpected   demonstration   of   courage   and   magnanimity   in
these  difficult  times.
Will  McCarthy  get  it  this  time?   One source, in  close touch
with  the  Senate,  thinks  he  will.   This  is  the  situation  as  he
sizes  it  up:  The  men  who  really  run  the  Senate,  the  inner
core  of  conservatives,  are  fed  up  with  McCarthy.   The  Senate
is  a  select  body,  with  no strict party  discipline, which depends
on  mutual  confidence  and  a  high  level  of  courtesy.   It  is  too
small  for  boors.   Much  of  its  discussion  is  private,  and  much
of  the  inner  life  of  the  Senate must  freeze  up  if  Senators  can
no  longer trust  each  other.  McCarthy  and  his  handful  of fol-
lowers  have  begun  to  apply  to  fellow  Senators  the  same  kind
of  espionage  and  blackmail  they  use  in  dealing   with  other
departments  of  the  government.  When  he  spoke  of  Flanders
as  "senile," he  offended  important  Senators,  many  of  them  in
their  70's  or  more.   When  he  called  Fulbright  "half-bright,"
he  was  exercising   a  gutter  wit  that  made  McCarthy's  col-
leagues  wince.   The  new  committee  to  consider  the  charges
against  him  is  backbone  America—Protestant,  small  town,
Middle  West  and  South.  They  will  treat  McCarthy fairly  but
they  will  censure  him  in  the  end,  with  not  more  than  one  or
perhaps  two  dissenting  votes.
I  myself  am  doubtful.  The  Senator  chosen chairman,  Wat-
kins  (R.,  Utah)   seems  the  weakest  of  the  lot.   His announce-
ment that  the  hearings will be conducted as  a judicial  inquiry
is  disturbing.    McCarthy  will  be  there  with  defense  counsel
and   the  right  of  cross-examination,  but  who  would  be  the
prosecutor   to   present   the   charges?     And   how   speak   of
"charges"  when  the  question  is  whether  McCarthy  has  en-
gaged  in  conduct  unbecoming  a   Senator?    I  fear  that  Mc-
Carthy  will prove  too wily for  this  committee  and  bog  it  down
as  he  has  others  in  the  past.   Does  this  mean  a  victory  for
McCarthy?   Not  at   all.   This  succession   of  hearings   keeps
him  on  the  defensive,  whittles  him  down,  erodes  his  reputa-
tion.  People  begin  to  conclude  that  anyone  who is  constantly
being  investigated   must  somehow  be  of  doubtful  reputation.
Our  Fifth  Amendment  Senator  is  slowly  to  suffer  from  that
where-there's-smoke-there's-fire   axiom  he  applies   to   others.
This  new  inquiry  may  not  be conclusive,  but  it  will  give Low
Blow  Joe  another   push  downhill.
In  foreign  policy, the  President's  pronouncements are  hope-
New  Bit   of  A-Bomb  History
"When  the  late  President  Roosevelt   and  our  Prime
Minister  met in Quebec during the war, President  Roose-
velt,  so  I  am  given  to  understand, suggested  that  our
Russian  allies  should  be  informed  of  the  new  weapon
which  was  then  contemplated  and  on  which  work  had
already  started.   It  was  our  own  Prime  Minister  who
argued  against  the  disclosure.   Subsequently  the   two
sat  at  the  same  table  with  Mr. Stalin.  Not  a  word  was
said  about  the  work  then  being  done on  the  weapon.
"I  have  often  wondered  what  Mr.  Stalin  must  have
thought  as  he  looked  upon  the  representatives   of   the
two  allied  nations,  for  even  at  that  date  he  knew  the
nature  of  the  work  which  was  going  on  because,  as  we
now. know,  Fuchs  had  told  him.  It  seems   to  me  that
much  of  the  fear  between  East  and  West   originated
from  that  policy  of  mutual  deception."
—Beswick  (Lab.)  during  debate  in the  Commons on
the  British  Atomic Energy  Act,  280 Hansard  939.
ful.   His  remarks  at  press  conference  last  week  on  the  im-
possibility  of  preventive war  imply some kind of  co-existence;
his  remarks  the  week  before  approving  the  American  As-
sembly   statement   on  the   danger   of  too  rigid   an   attitude
toward  Red  China were  equally encouraging,  as  was  his  talk
on  the  need  for  thinking in terms  of  partnership  rather  than
leadership.    But   in  domestic  policy,  under  the   influence  of
Brownell,  the  White  House  has  thrown  its  weight   into  the
scales  on  the  side  of  the  witch  hunt.   Last  Monday  the  ma-
jority  leader,  Knowland,  spoke  as  if  the  Brownell  "security
package"   bills  were  of  secondary  importance.    His  attitude
changed  on  Tuesday  after   the  legislative  conference  at  the
White  House  and  on  Wednesday he  was  putting  on  the  heat
for   S 3607,  the  Butler-Velde  bill   (See  box  below)  •  HR  9580,
the  espionage  and  sabotage   death   penalty  bill,  and   S 3428,
the  bill  to  set  up  a blacklist  in  industry.
A  group  of  ten  Democrats  and  one  Independent   Senator
(Magnuson,   Hennings,   Green,    Mansfield,   Murray,   Gore,
Morse,  Lehman, Kilgore,  Jackson  and  Gillette)   introduced  a
resolution  on  August  C for  a  Presidential  commission  of  in-
quiry  on  security  like that  introduced  by  Walter  (D.,  Pa.)  in
the   House.   The  purpose  in  both  cases  was   to  put   off  the
Butler  bill  and  similar  legislation  until  a  full  study  could  be
made.  The  plan  was  to  move the  Magnuson  resolution  up  as
a  substitute  for  the  Butler  bill  in the  Senate, and  Walter  was
fighting  hard  to  stop  the  companion  Velde  bill  in  the  House.
The  Administration,  however,   is  intent  on  having  itself   a
sensational   Red  hunt  before  the   elections  and   needs   more
legislative   short-cuts   to   conviction.   The   U.S.   Chamber  of
Commerce  is desperately  anxious  to  get  the  Butler  bill  passed
this  year.   The  next  few  days  will  tell.
An  Un-American  Activities  Committee  Minority
Protests  the  Butler-Velde  Bill  to  Put  Unions  Under  SACB
From  the  minority  report   (HR   Kept.  2651  pt.  2)  fled   by  Walter   (R.,  Pa.)   and  tvio  other  Democratic  members  of
the  House  Un-American   Activities  Committee,  Doyle  (Cal.)  and  Frazier  (Tenn.),  objecting   to  the  Butler-Velde  bill   (HR
9838)  which would force  "Communist  infiltrated"   trade  unions  to  register  with  the  Subversive  Activities  Control   Board:
"It  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  this  bill  is  a  step  toward  Government  licensing  of  trade  unions.    Such  a
step  should be taken only  after  the  most  careful consideration  and  the  clearest   demonstration of  its  necessity.    Once  the
power  of  life  and death  over  unions  is  vested  in  a  Federal  agency, there is  always the  danger that  it  may be  misused.  The
danger,  too,  cannot  be  overlooked that  the  bare  existence  of  such a  power in the  Federal government will intimidate  unions,
and  tend  to  make  them  subservient to  the  political  ends  of  whatever administration may  be  in  power."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  16,  1954
Herbert  Hoover,  The  Uncommon  Man  and  I. G.  Farben
The  dearest  wish  of  the  right  is  to  destroy  FDR  and  build
up  Herbert  Hoover  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  American
people.    The  hoopla  which  attended   Hoover's  80th  birthday
was  part  of  an  unending  campaign.    We  do  not   begrudge
an ex-President his birthday  honors.  Indeed as a  Rooseveltian,
we  are   grateful   to  him  for  the  ample  self-exposure  of  his
birthday   speech.    Mr.  Hoover  has  changed  not  at   all,  but
the  country  has.    His  party   could  not  elect  a   dog-catcher
were  it  to  follow  the  implications  and  echo  the  tone  of  his
Iowa  address.
The  implications  point  toward   a   repeal   of  all  that   the
New  Deal  and  the  Fair  Deal  did,  including farm  price  sup-
ports,  social  security   and  collective  bargaining.     The  tone
is   one   of   contempt  for   the   herd.    Mr.   Hoover   sees   the
"fuzzy-minded"   concept   of  the   Common  Man  as   "another
cousin  of  the  Soviet  proletariat",  as  it  is—for communism,
social  democracy and  the  welfare  state  spring  alike from  the
determination  of the  many to  free  themselves  from  unbridled
exploitation  by  a  powerful  big  propertied few.  The  "Uncom-
mon  Man"  Mr.  Hoover  invoked  is  on  the   other  hand  too
uncomfortably   cousin   to  that   Nietzschean    Superman   who
inspired  such  recent  technological advances  as  human  crema-
toria.   It  is  in  keeping  with  the  pattern  of  his  thinking  and
the  unregenerate  arrogance   of  his  spirit  that  Mr.  Hoover
should  have  reasserted  his  attitude  toward  World  War   II.
He  still  believes  we  should  have  stood  aside  from  the  con-
flict,  at  the  risk  of  letting  that  Uncommon Man  with   the
toothbrush   moustache  have  his  way  with  the  world.
Our Pal,  I. G. Farben
Speaking  of  crematoria,  there  are   some  interesting  pro-
visions  in  S  3423,  the  bill  by  Dirksen,  Jenner,   Butler  and
Langer  to  return   German  and  Japanese  properties   seized
during  the  war.    A  talking  point  of  its  advocates  is  that  it
forbids   restoration   of  property  to  war   criminals   but   the
bill  contains  two  jokers  in  this  regard.   The  first  is  that  it
is  careful  to  set  up  this  bar  only  against  "natural"  persons,
so  that  I.  G. Farben  (which  made  so many  interesting com-
mercial  experiments  in  the  camp,  discovering new  Sources of
soap)  would  be  eligible  to  recover  the  biggest   plum  of  all,
its  American  subsidiary,  General  Aniline  &  Film.
The  second  is  that  in  committee  someone  took  out   the
phrase  "by  Allied  Occupation  Tribunals  or  by  German   de-
nazification   courts"   after   the   words   "any   natural   person
convicted  of  war  crimes,"  and  added  instead  "as  hereinafter
defined."   The  definition  provided later  in  the  bill  would  give
a  Vested  Property  Commission power  to  decide whether   such
convictions  had  been  by  "a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction."
This   loophole,  well   greased,  might   prove  big   enough   for
many  war  criminals.
Mr. Dulles  Is  "Confused"
We  applaud the  President  for  turning  thumbs down on  this
pending  legislation   and  note   with   pleasure  the   confusion
to  which  his  Secretary  of  State  thereupon  confessed  at  press
conference  last   week.    Mr.  Dulles,   on  most   occasions  an
endless  fountain   of  moralisms  and  legalisms,  in  this  case
advised  the   Senate   Judiciary   Committee  that  it   ought   to
ignore   the  Paris  Reparations   Agreement   of   1946  and   the
War   Claims  Act  of   1948  and  pass  the   Dirksen  bill.    The
former   embodied  an  agreement   with   our   West  European
allies  to  retain  vested   German  properties  as  compensation
for   unrecovered  loot  taken  by  the  Germans.   In  the  latter
Congress forbade  the  return  of  these  properties  and provided
that  proceeds  from  their  sale  should  go to  reimburse  Amer-
ican  victims  of  German  and  Japanese  prison  camp  hostility.
We  recognize  the  idyllic  vanished  loveliness  of  the  Nine-
teenth   century   international   law  which  reflected  a  world
which  knew  not  total  war  and  provided  for   the  return  of
enemy  property  after   a  conflict  was  over.    But  we  see  no
reason  to  reward   a  giant  German  trust  like  I.  G.  Farben
which  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  rise  of  Hitler  and
in  the  efficacy  of  war  plans  designed  to  destroy  that  world
forever.     General   Aniline   &  Film   was   worth   $30,000,000
when  the  war  began.    Fattened  by  war  profits  on  this  side,
it  is  worth  $100,000,000 today.   Why  should  Hitler's  biggest
industrial  collaborator  be  allowed  this windfall?
There   is  another   consideration,  brought   to   mind  by  an
unctuous  reference   in  Chanceller  Adenauer's   letter  to   the
President   to   reviving   those   "business   connections"  which
formed   "the   traditional  bridge   of  friendship"   between   the
U.S.  and  Germany.    Has  everybody  so  soon  forgotten   what
the  Truman  committee  hearings   and  the   Thurman  Arnold
testimony  in  1941  showed?   GAF was  a  principal   instrument
of  German  economic warfare,  a  means  of  stifling  American
development  of  the  synthetic  rubber   (and  other   products)
we  needed  so  badly  when  Malaya  and  the  Indies  were  cut
off   by  the  Japs.
The  55  Congressmen  Who  Voted  Against  the  Immunity  Bill
Fifty-five  Congressmen  led  by  Celler  (D.,  N.Y.)   last  week
voted  against the  immunity bill  in the  House, the  largest vote
yet   cast  against  any  witch-hunt  measure  in  this   Congress.
We   give  their   names,  party  affiliations  and   States   below,
and  are  asking readers to check the  list.  If  your Congressman
is  one  of  the  brave  55  will  you  give  him  a  gift  subscription
to  the  Weekly  and  let  us send  it  to  him  with  a  letter  from
you  expressing  your  appreciation  for  his vote?
It will  make a  lot of difference in reaching these  Congress-
men—all  of  whom  ought  to  see the  Weekly  regularly—if  they
get  it  as a  gift  from  someone  in their  own  district, especially
with  a  note  of  appreciation  for  their  vote  in  defense  of  the
Fifth  amendment.  Check the  list  and  act  now.   If  there  are
duplications,  the  money will  be  returned  but  the  letters  will
be  sent  on  to  the  Congressmen.
The  next  two  weeks are  vacation.  The  Weekly  is published
only  50  weeks  a  year,  all  but  the  last  two  weeks  in August.
We  hope to  find  letters and  subs for  all  55  on our return  and
will  report the  results  in  September.  We  go  off  on  vacation
confident  in the Weekly's  next year  of  publication.  We  thank
our  readers for  having  made  this possible.
—I.  F. Stone.
Aspinall,  D., Colo.
Barrett, D., Pa.
Blatnik,  D., Mir.n.
Bowler,  D.,   III.
Buchanan,  D., Pa.
Burdick,  R., N.  D.
Byrne,  D., Pa.
Celler, D., N. Y.
Chudoff,  D., Pa.
Condon, D., Cal.
Dawson,  D.,  III.
Dodd,  D.,  Conn.
Dollinger, D., N. Y.
Eberharter,  D., Pa.
Fine,  D., N. Y.
Gordon,  D.,  III.
Grar.ahan,  D., Pa.
Green,  D., Pa.
Hart, D., N. J.
Hoys, D., Ark.
Holifield,  D.,  Cal.
Hovvell, D., N.  J.
Javits,  R., N.  Y.
Jones, D.,  Ala.
Karsten,  D., Mo.
Kean,  R., N.  J.
Kelley, D., Pa.
Kelly,  D., N.  Y.
Keogh,  D., N. Y.
Kirwan,  D., Ohio
Klein,  D., N. Y.
Klucynski,  D.,  III.
McCarthy,  D., Minn.
Mack,  D.,  III.
Madden,  D., Ind.
Magnuson,  D., Wash.
Marshall,  D., Minn.
Metcalf, D., Minn.
Miller,  D., Kans.
Multer, D.,  N. Y.
O'Brien,  D.,   III.
O'Hara,  D.,   III.
Patten, D.,  Ariz.
Philbin,  D., Mass.
Price,  D.,   III.
Reams,  Ind., Ohio
Rhodes,  D.,  Pa.
Rogers,  D.,  Colo.
Shelley,  D.,  Cal.
Sieminski,  D.,  N. J.
Smith,  D., Miss.
Sullivan,  D., Mo.
Whitten,  D., Miss.
Wier, D., Minn.
Williams,  D., Miss.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  IS, 1954
Britain's  Tory  Government  Takes  Public  Power  for  Granted
No  "Give-Away" in  England's  New Atomic  Energy  Act
The  American  press  has  almost  completely  disregarded  the
new  British  atomic  energy  act.   It  went  into  effect  August  1
while  our  "give-away"  bill  was  being  pushed  through   Con-
gress.   The  British  legislation,  designed  like  our  own  to  speed
peacetime  development  of  the  atom,  had  been under  debate in
the  Commons  since  last  December,  but  few  if  any  American
correspondents   touched  on  it  in  their  dispatches.   The  British
bill was just  a little  too—shall  we say?—"un-American."
What  the British did not  do may be gathered from  the  wist-
ful  remarks  of  one Conservative  M.P.,  Charles Ian  Orr-Ewing,
who  quoted   from   Gordon   Dean's   "Report  on   the  Atom"
during  debate in  the  Commons.  Orr-Ewing  read  that  passage
in  which  Dean  explained  that  the  American  Atomic  Energy
Commission  had  set  up  "a  system  under  which virtually  all of
the  scientific  and  industrial  work  was  performed  by  private
contractors."
Orr-Ewing  said  he  was  "disappointed"  in  the  government's
bill.  "I  would  have  preferred,"  he declared, "that  the  Atomic
Energy  Authority  should  supervise  but  leave  all  these  things
to  industry."   Instead,  though  framed  by  a  Conservative gov-
ernment  and  voted  by  a  Conservative  majority,  the  new  act
gives  the  Atomic  Energy  Authority  full  power  "to  produce,
use  and  dispose   of   atomic  energy"   and  "to   manufacture  or
otherwise  produce,  buy or  otherwise  acquire  .  .  .  any  article
.  . . required  for  use in connection  with  the production or  use
of  atomic  energy  . . ."
How  Atomic  Electricity  Will  Be Handled
Sir David  Eccles,  Minister  of  Works,  explained on  behalf  of
the  government  that  while  the  new  Authority   would  design
and  build  prototype  plants  for  atomic  power,  "It   will  not
compete  with  the  electricity  authorities in  the  supply  of  elec-
tricity  to  the  public."  The  British  Electricity  Authority  will
take over  the  power, but  the  B.E.A. is a government  monopoly
controlling  all  supply  of  electricity  to  the  public  in England
and  Wales.  That  kind  of  "socialism" Britain's Tories  take  for
granted.
The  new  British  act  is  indeed  designed  to  draw  the  univer-
sities   and   private   industry  into  wider  collaboration  in   the
application  of  atomic energy to  civilian  purposes.  One  speaker
pictured  "British  engineers and British firms . . .  going about
the   world   in   the  next   few  years  installing  atomic  energy
plants."   A flexible partnership  between  government  and  in-
dustry  is  envisaged but  not   (as  in  the  U.S.  bill)  on  the  basis
of  tying the  government's  hands, and offering  favored  concerns
a  preferred  position  at  the  public  expense.
Britain  sees swift  development  of  atomic energy  as essential
if  she is to  compete  successfully in  world  markets.  Dwindling
coal  supplies  and  inadequate  hydro-electric  possibilities  haunt
her  future.   There  must  be  an  increased  use  of  power  in  in-
dustry, and the atom  must  supply  it.
Where  Laborites  and  Tories  Agreed
The  Conservatives   as a  whole  were  as ready  as  the  Laborites
to   accept   a  framework   of   public  ownership,  control   and
direction;  the  Laborites  were as ready as the  Tories  to  recognize
the  need  for  utilizing  the  energies  of  private  industry  in  this
historic  task.
The  differences  between  the  two  parties  were not  over  these
issues.   The  Laborite  spokesman,  George  Strauss,  objected  to
the   establishment  of   a  new   Authority   for   peacetime  uses;
thought  the  task  were  better  left  with  the  capacious Ministry
of  Supply, which has hitherto  handled it;  disliked  the  "divided
ministerial   responsibility"   he  saw  in   the   bill   and   predicted
wasteful  duplication in  separating  civil  from  military  develop-
ment.    In   transatlantic   perspective,  the   disagreements  seem
minor.
On  one  issue, Labor  scored  a  victory.   Over  here,  Congress-
men  Holifield  and Price  [see  the  Weekly  for  August  2, "What
The  Atomic  Filibuster  Was All About"]  fought in  joint  com-
mittee  and  on  the  floor  of  the  House  for  establishment  of  a
labor-management  committee  to  ease  the  chronic  and growing
headache of  atomic  labor  problems.   They  were  defeated.
But  over  there  the  House  of  Commons  accepted a  Laborite
amendment  providing  that  at  least  one member of  the  Author-
ity's directing board  should  be a person  who  had  "wide  experi-
ence  of,  and  shown  capacity  in,  the  organization of  workers."
In  this,  too,  Britain's  Tories  showed our  own  a "bad"  example.
We  Sign  Off  For  Two  Weeks'  Vacation—Next   Issue  Will  Be September  6
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
N«n»
Street
nty
Enter  this  gift  snb  for $
(To)  Name          _._.._.._.  -
City
301 E.  Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
_  Zone   „  .    State-  .. .
1  more  (money  enclosed):
Zone. ..._......  State    ......
8-16-54
I.  F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
N
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington, D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED