I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954nov15.pdf

============================================================

The  New  Supreme  Court  Justice  and  the  "Clear  and  Present  Danger" Doctrine,  See  Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER  41
NOVEMBER  15,  1954.       WASHINGTON, D. C.15  CENTS
McCarthy  Falls  Back  on  The  Lunatic  Fringe
Whether  in  desperation  or  self-destructive  folly,  McCarthy
has  sealed  his  own  fate  by  the  type  of  tactics  he  is  using  in
the  Senate.   The  19-page  pink-bound  pamphlet  of  photostatic
reproductions  from  the  Daily  Worker  with  which  he  plastered
the   Senate  chamber  represented  about  as  silly  a  move  as  he
could  have  chosen.   Even  his  Senate  supporters  were  appalled
and  the  heading  on  the  pamphlet,   "Throw  The  Bum   Out,"
was  too  apt  for  comfort.   It  is  not  dignified  for  a  Senator  to
advertise  the  fact  that  someone  has  called  him  a  bum.   It  is
especially  maladroit   in  a  situation   where  he  is  about  to  be
censured  for  bad  manners and  boorish  conduct,  i.e.  for  being
exactly  what  the  Worker  called  him.
The   eulogies  for   the  late  Senator  Hunt  of   Wyoming   as
the   censure  debate   opened  did  not   help   McCarthy.    They
served  to  remind  Senators  of  a  colleague  who  was  driven   to
his  death  by  threats  of  political  blackmail,  involving  smears
against  his  family.  The  charge  that  the  Watkins  committee
and  the  Senate  itself  were  tools  of  a  Communist  conspiracy
was  cut  from  the  same  cloth.   The  simple issue is whether  the
Senate  will  permit  McCarthy   to  use  against  its  members  and
its integrity  as an institution  exactly  the  same kind  of  methods
he  has used  to  terrorize  the  State  Department  and  the  Army
and  other  branches  of  the  government.   The  answer  is that  it
will  not  do  so;  the  leaders of  both  parties  are  agreed  on  cen-
sure.   McCarthy  has  cut  his  ties  with  the  conservatives  and
must  fall  back  upon  the  lunatic  fringe  where  he  belongs.
His   coming   defeat  is  given  added  importance  because  it
will  also  constitute  a  defeat  for  the  Fascist-minded  wing  of
the  Catholic   hierarchy.   Cardinal  Spellman,  who  manages  to
embrace  Franco  and  McCarthy   in  his  episcopal  affections,  is
going  to  have  to  disown  that  Monsignor  who  charged  that  a
$5,000,000  fund  has  been  raised to  drive  McCarthy  from  the
Senate because of  his "Catholic ideals."   A man  who encourages
false   witness,  slanders  without   proof,   and  runs  away  from
serious  questions  about  his  financial  speculations  is  hardly  the
embodiment   of  any  religious  ideal.   The  question  raised  with
Monsignor  Martin  by  the  seven  Cornell faculty  members,  "Do
you   really   want   the  American   people   to   believe  that   the
Catholic  Church  identifies  the  widespread  concern  over  pres-
ervation  of  the   Bill  of  Rights   with   opposition   to   Catholic
ideals?"  will  reverberate  until  McCarthy  is disowned.
It   is  our   good  fortune  that   we  see  only   a  caricature  of
Fascism.   The  screwballs  coming  into  town  with  such  people
as  Rabbi  Schultz  to  support  McCarthy  are  a  poor  copy  of  a
March  on  Rome.   McCarthy's  declaration  that  the  nation's
fate  is tied  to  his own  would  come  fittingly  from  Der  Fuehrer
or  II  Duce  but  just  sounds  a  little  wacky  from  an  American
imitator  who has grown  too big  for  his britches.   The  ultimate
significance   of  what   is  happening  is  simply  that  American
big  business, unlike  German  or  Italian,  is  not  in  the  decadent
and  frightened  state  where  it   needs  to  call  in   psychopathic
and  gangster elements  to protect it, nor is the American middle
class  in  any  mood  for  Fascist  adventures.  McCarthy's  decline
indicates  that  American-style  Fascism,  which  masquerades  as
"hard"  anti-Communism,   has  passed  its  peak.   "Others  who
might  otherwise  have  been  enlisted,"  as McCarthy  said,  "will
be  discouraged from  joining  us."   That  is  true.
That  B-29 Incident—An  Opportunity  for  Peace
Those  who  are  interpreting  the  latest  B-29  incident   as  a
deliberate  attempt  by  the  Russians  to  make  the  U.S.  lose  face
in  the  Orient  are  talking  nonsense.  If  Moscow  was  thinking
in  such  terms,  it  would  not  be  going  out  of  its  way  to  woo
American  good will  and  to  moderate  past anti-American  prop-
aganda.   The  tone  of  the  November  7  celebration  was  one of
peace,  not  only  toward  Western  Europe  but  toward  the  U.S.
as  well.   The  B-29  affair  was  an  accident.   Neither  side  has  a
monopoly  on  mistakes and  on  trigger-happy  airmen.   My  guess
is  that  those  responsible  for  shooting  down  the  U.S.  B-29  on
November  7  are  in  plenty   trouble.
If  the  Russians  are  well-advised,  they  will  take  advantage
of  the  incident  for  peace.  The  President  went  out  of  his  way
in his speech  to  the National  Council  of  Catholic  Women  next
day  and  again  at  his  press  conference  on  Wednesday  to  take
a  conciliatory  attitude  in  marked  contrast  to  his  own  Senate
majority  leader,  Knowland,  and  the  Congressional  fire-eaters.
A  Russian  offer  to  permit  a  neutral  commission  to investigate
these  border  incidents  and  to  interrogate   the  airmen  of  both
sides, coupled with  a promise in advance to  accept  the  decisions
of  such  a  commission,  would  make  a  major  contribution  to
better  relations  with  the  U.S.   Such  an  offer  should  be accom-
panied with  a promise, if  the  U.S. would do the  same,  to  punish
any  airmen  held  accountable  and  to  pay  damages.
If  it  is true,  as  the  Russians have  charged,  that  U.S.  planes
have  been  engaging  in  photographic  reconnaisance of   Soviet
territory  from  the  borders  of  the  U.S.S.R.,  an  international
commission  of  inquiry  would  be  a  good  forum  in  which  to
air  such  complaints.  On   the  other   hand,  if   the   Soviets,  as
seems   reasonable   to   believe,   have   sometimes   also   had    too
quick-on-the-trigger  airmen,  nothing  would  do  more  to  im-
prove  the  atmosphere than  to  determine the  truth  and punish
those  responsible.
(Continued  on  Page   Three)
',    6    /
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  15, 1054
The  New Supreme  Court  Justice  and  the  "Clear  and  Present  Danger"  Doctrine
No  Sign  of A  New  Marshall or  A  Harlan  in  John  Marshall  Harlan
Tristram  Shandy's  father   (who  believed  in  the  power  of
a  name  and  therefore  baptized  his  son  Hermes  Trismegistus
Shandy)  would  have  been  delighted  with  the  choice  of  John
Marshall   Harlan  for  the  Supreme   Court.   A  man   bearing
the  names  of  both  John  Marshall  and  John  Marshall   Harlan
would  have  seemed  to  him  fated  from  the  baptismal   fount
for  the  highest  bench.
But  the  bearer  of such fragrant  names  need  not  necessarily
be  a  judicial  rose.  There  is  no reason  at  the  moment  to  ex-
pect  that the  new appointee will turn  out  to  have  the  stature
of  a Marshall.  There  is good reason  to believe  that  he will  not
prove  to  have  that  noble  passion   for  minority   rights  and
civil  liberties   which  made  his  grandfather   and   namesake
one  of  the  greatest  libertarian  judges  ever  to  sit   (1877  to
1911)   on the  U.S.  Supreme  Court.
The  grandfather's   glory  colors  the  view  of  the   grandson.
It  is  unconsciously assumed  that  he  will  see  the   segregation
issue  as  the  grandfather  did in  his  anti  Jim  Crow  dissent  in
Plessy  v.  Ferguson.   Perhaps  he  will.  But  in  other  respects
parallels  are  already  foreclosed.
Last  Wednesday,  for  example,  in  welcoming  the  new  ap-
pointment,  the  Chicago  Tribune  recalled  that  on  its  Tribune
Tower  are  inscribed  the  words  of  Justice  Harlan's  famous
dissent  in  Patterson  v.  Colorado,  "I  cannot  assent  to  that
view, if it be meant that the legislature  may impair  or abridge
the  rights  of  a  free  press  and  of  free  speech  whenever  it
thinks  that  the  public  welfare  required  that  to  be  done.  The
public  welfare  cannot  override constitutional  privileges  .  .  ."
Precisely  the  opposite  view  has  already  been  urged  by  the
grandson.
Three  weeks  ago  on  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  in  New
York, Judge  Harlan  wrote  the  opinion which upheld  the  con-
viction  of  Elizabeth   Gurley  Flynn  and  the  "second  string"
Communist  leaders  under  the  Smith  Act.   The  elder  Harlan
would  have  thought  a  peacetime  sedition  act  and  a conviction
under  it  for  "conspiracy  to advocate"  completely un-American
monstrosities.
But   the   grandson   in  a   drearily  written   and   obscurely
reasoned   opinion   not  only  upheld  the   convictions  but   put
forward   a   new  interpretation   of   the   "clear   and   present
danger"  rule  which  further  undermines  the  First  Amend-
ment.  As we  pointed out  in  the  Weekly  for  October  25, Judge
Harlan   ruled  in   effect  that  the  danger  need  not  be  either
"clear"  or  "present"  but  only  "potential"  to  warrant   Con-
gress interfering  with free  speech and  free  press.
Judge  Harlan  wrote  that  the  rule  "connotes  no  more  than
that  the  setting  in  which  the  defendants   have  conspired  is
such  as  to  lead  reasonably  to  the  conclusion that  their  teach-
ings  may  result  in  an  attempt   at   overthrow."    This   takes
us  back  to  the  law  of  constructive  treason  in  the  worst  days
of  the  English  common  law.*
It  is  always  hazardous to  be  dogmatic  about  what  a  man
will  do  once  he  is  on  the   Supreme  Court.   All  of  us  left  of
center   protested   in   1930  when   Hoover   appointed   Charles
Evans   Hughes  only  to  see  that   "Wall   Street   corporation
lawyer" write  some of  the  best  decisions in  defense  of  funda-
mental  rights  ever  to come from  the  Court.  But  there is little
reason  to  expect  any  similar  surprise  from  this  new  recruit
from  the  highest  reaches  of  the  New  York  corporate  bar.
A  prime  factor   in  the  appointment   seems  to  have  been
the  new Judge's  personal  acquaintance with  Ike  in  war-time
London  when Harlan  was  an  Air  Force  officer.   The  best  that
can  be said  of  him  is that  unlike  some of  the  cronies Truman
put  on  the  Circuit  and  Supreme  Court  benches,  Harlan   is
at  least  a  lawyer  of  ability  and  reputation.   As  an  unknown
quantity  also,  he  seems preferable  to  a  Dewey,  a  Dulles  or  a
Brownell.
Had  Judge  Harlan  written  an  opinion on the  Circuit  Court
which   threatened   property   rights   as   his   Flynn    opinion
threatens  freedom  of  political  expression,  he  would  of  course
be  subjected  to  sharp  questioning  by  the  Senate   Judiciary
Committee  and  have  trouble  getting  himself  confirmed.   But
who  cares  about  the  First  Amendment!  We'll  be  surprised
if  the  committee  even  bothers  to  hold  a  hearing.
* Judge  Harlan   did  show   a   laudable   independence  of   the   government
day  after  his  appointment  when   he  joined  in   rejecting   a  motion  which
would  have  revoked   bail  for   Miss  Plynn  and  her   co-defendants.
For  Chicago Readers
Lecture  Note:  I.  F.  Stone  (and  Carey  McWilliams of
The  Nation)   will speak on "The  True Nature  of Internal
Security  and  How It  Is  Threatened" at  2 p.m.  on Satur-
day,  November  20,  in   the   Congress   Hotel,   Chicago,
during  the  National  Lawyers  Guild  convention.   There
will  be  a  panel  discussion  under  the  chairmanship of
Prof.  Malcolm  R. Sharp.  The public is invited,  as it  also
is  to  hear  Alvarez  del  Vayo  on  the  prospects  for  co-
existence  at  the  Guild's annual banquet  Saturday  night.
The   111 Effects  Can't  Last  Longer  Than  5,000  Years
MR.   ARTHUR   HENDERSON   (Rowlcy   Rcgis   and   Tipton,   Lab.)
asked   the   Prime   Minister   whether,   in   view   of   the   further    nuclear
explosions  in  Russian  territory,  he  would  propose to  President  Eisenhower
and   Mr.   Malenkov   that   all   nuclear   and   atomic   explosions   should   be
suspended  pending  the  outcome of  the subcommittee of  the United Nations
Disarmament  Commission.
SIR   WINSTON   CHURCHILL   (Woodford,   Cons.)—We   should   all
be  much  happier  if  there  were  no  need  for  nuclear  and  atomic  explosions.
There   are  several   proposals  regarding  these  weapons   before   the  United
Nations;  it  is  there  that  a  solution  should  be  sought  at  the  present  time,
and  I  am  not  at  present  persuaded  that  Mr.  Henderson's  suggestion  would
aid  the  solution.
MR.  HENDERSON   said  the  suspension  of  nuclear  and  atomic  explo-
sions  would  greatly  lessen  the  suspicion  and  mistrust  which  was making
the  achievement  of   a  world  disarmament  agreement  so  difficult.
SIR   WINSTON    CHURCHILL   replied  that   he   was  not  convinced
that   a  cessation,  wholly   or   partly,  of   those  explosions  would   be  best
achieved   by   our   intervention,  or   by   his  personal  intervention,  at   the
present  time.
VISCOUNT   HINCHINGBROOKE    (South    Dorset,   Cons.)    asked
whether  the  Prime  Minister  would  be  prepared  to  make  clear,  at  some
suitable   time,  his  attitude  on  the   question  of   a  treaty  or  pact  of   re-
nunciation  by  the  leading  world  powers  on  the  first  use  of   the   atomic
or  hydrogen bomb.
SIR  WINSTON  CHURCHILL   said  he  considered  that  should  be  con-
sidered  along  with  all  other  proposals  to  lift  the  cloud  of  peril  from   the
world.
MR.  PHILIP  NOEL-BAKER (Derby  South,  Lab.)  asked  whether  that
suggestion   had   not   been   embodied   in   the   Anglo-French memorandum
which  the  United Nations Commission  was now considering.
SIR  WINSTON  CHURCHILL.    That  is very  good.
MR.  PAGET   (Northampton,  Lab.)   asked  how  many  of  those  explo-
sions  it  would  take  to  make  the  atmosphere  lethal,   and  whether  they
were  cumulative.
SIR  WINSTON  CHURCHILL   said  he  believed they  were  cumulative,
and  certainly  an  undue number  of  them  might  have  very  serious  effects.
He  was  informed,  however,  that  5,000  years  was  about  the  limit  of   the
time  during  which  the  atmosphere would  be  afflicted.
There  was  some  laughter  at  this,  and  Sir  Winston  Churchill  added  that
he  did  not   mean  to  treat  in  a  facetious  manner  what  was  perpetually
in  everybody's  mind.
—Parliamentary  Report,  House  of  Commons,  Nov.   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  15,  1954
White  House  Leaks  The  Story:  How  Ike  Vetoed  Bombing  of China
(Continued  from  Page  One)
We  would  never  stand  for  Russian  planes  coming  as  close
to  our  borders  as  our  planes  have  been  coming to  Soviet  ter-
ritory.   Fifteen  miles  is  very  little  in  the  days  when  planes
make  600 to  700 miles  an  hour.   General  Elsenhower  has  the
good  will  in  the  current   atmosphere   to  suggest  that  our
planes   had   been   operating    in   disputed   territory.    Were
Moscow  to  match  this with  an  equally  conciliatory  statement,
something  might  be  achieved.
The  situation  here  is this:  the  election  returns  are  suscep-
tible to  any  number  of interpretations,  none very  substantial.
The White House  staff  believes  (1)  that but  for  Elsenhower's
last-minute  intervention  there  might  have  been  a  Democratic
landslide  and  (2)  that  it  was  the  peace  issue which prevented
a  Republican debacle.   Whether  true  or  not,  it  has  strength-
ened  the  President's  very  genuine  personal  desire  for  peace
and  created  a  more  favorable   situation  than  existed  before.
Ike  believes that  he  may  win  in  1956  if  he  can  show  progress
toward  world  peace.
An  index  of  what  is  going  on was  provided by  the  "leak"
Io  the  Washington  Post  from  the  White  House Monday  of  a
sensational  story.  This said that  in the  Quemoy  affair  Eisen-
hower  vetoed  a  3-1 recommendation  from  the  Joint  Chiefs of
Staff,  endorsed  by  Duties,  to  allow  Chiang  Kai-shek  to  bomb
inland   China  and  if  there  were   an  attack  on  Quemoy  to
permit  American   planes  to  join  in  the  bombing.    Admirals
Radford  and  Carney,  and  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff   General
Twining  favored  the  recommendations.   Ridgway,  as  in  the
case  of  Indo-China,  was  the  one  voice  on  the  JCS  against
intervention.   So  was  then  Undersecretary   of  State  Walter
Bedell  Smith.   And  oddly  enough  in  this  case,  according  to
the  Washington  Post, so was  Nixon, who felt  such  an  attack
would undercut  the  G.O.P.  "peace"  campaign.
Chalmers  Roberts,  who wrote  the  Post  story,  as  he  did  its
earlier  expose of the  Indo-China  affair,  reported  "the  Quemoy
affair   has  spurred   the  President  to  seek  a  way  out  of  the
impasse  of  American  policy  in  Asia  in  relation  to  Red  China.
This is what  has  been behind  Mr. Elsenhower's  recent  foreign
policy  statements  with  their  strong  accent  on the  search  for
peace."   Ike  denied at  press  conference that  Chiang  had  been
"ordered" to  desist  from  attacks  on the  mainland; he  did not
deny  that  Chiang  had  in  fact   been  "requested"  to  do  so.
Surely in this juncture,  perhaps through  Britain  or India, new
progress  toward  settlement  may  be  achieved.
The  Teapot  Dome of  the  1956  Campaign: The  biggest  issue
shaping  up  for   1956,  and  one  which  threatens  to  ruin  the
Republicans,  is  the  Dixon-Yates  deal.   Only  the  surface  has
yet  been  scratched   and  when  the  full   story   is  known  it  is
likely  to  wreck  several   members  of  the   President's    official
family,  including the  man  on whom he  most  relies  in  atomic
matters,  Lewis  Strauss.   This  is  not  meant  to  imply  that
Strauss  has  done  anything  illegal,  but  that  his  rightist  anti
public  power  preconceptions have  led him to  run  interference
enthusiastically  for  one  of  the  strangest  contracts  and  busi-
ness  affairs   in  government  annals.    Some  smart   promoters
have  thought  to  make  hay  from  the  G.O.P.  hatred  of  TV A,
the  symbol  of  the  first  successful  large-scale  experiment  in
socialist  methods and  regional  planning in  American  history.
Spy  Sensation  Fizzles: That  pre-election  spy  sensation,  the
Peterson  case, which was  wrapped in  so much  mystery,  began
to fizzle out last  week  once the  government was  forced  to file
a  bill  of  particulars.  The  Chinese  radio  code  he  was  alleged
to  have  unlawfully  possessed  at  his home can be purchased  at
the  Chinese  embassy  here  for  commercial  use,  and  the  army
decoding  machine he  is  charged  with  having  in  his  home  can
also be purchased  (it  turns  out)  from  Army  surplus  authori-
ties.  He  is  also  accused  of having taken  notes  on the  govern-
ment's  success  in  breaking  the  Dutch  secret  code,  but  is  not
alleged   to  have   passed   this  information   on  to  the   Dutch
authorities.   By  the  time  this  case  gets  to  trial,  it   promises
to  be  a  considerably  marked-down   sensation.
Luce's  Disappointment  in  Toynbee:  Although  the   Russian
revolution  occurred  in  one of  the  world's  most  religious  coun-
tries   and  the  largest  Communist  party  of  the  West   is  in
Catholic  Italy,  some  people  have   been   sold   the   idea  that
religion  insulates  people's  minds against  communism.  As long
as  Arnold  Toynbee  preached  a  kind  of  Christian  eschatology
in  history,  he  was  their  pet.   But  now that  Toynbee  in  his
final volumes  and  last  week  here  at  the  National  Press  Club
preaches  co-existence,  he  has  lost  favor.   Thus  Life,   which
dabbles  constantly   and  nauseatingly   in  a  fake  religiosity,
said  bitterly   of  him  in  its   issue   of  November   8,  "In   his
practical   advice  to  his  fellow  mortals,   Toynbee  can  be  as
shallow  and  commonplace  as  the  next  pundit."   Life    seems
to  object  even  to  co-existence  with  other  religions,  deploring
"an  exaggerated   respect  for  that  of  others."  It  says  "Great
actions  are  now required  of us"  (an  atomic war?)  and  wants
no   faint-hearts    interfering   with    emotional    mobilization.
Fuchs  and  the  H-Bomb:  A  valuable  aid  in  deflating  spy
hysteria   is  the  article  on  "Fear   and  Information"   in  the
November  issue  of  the  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists  by
L.  W.  Nordheim,  a  theoretical  physicist  who  was  director  of
the  physics laboratory  at  Clinton and  adviser  to  Los Alamos.
Nordheim  was  present  at  the  famous  1946  conference  on  the
H-bomb  which  Klaus  Fuchs   also  attended.   While  not  dis-
paraging   the  need  for  security,  Nordheim  feels  that  "blab-
bing"  is  a  greater  menace  than  espionage  and  that  we  over-
estimate  what  can  be  stolen  in  the  way  of  secrets.   Of  the
successful   Russian  thermonuclear   explosion  in   1953,   Nord-
heim  writes,  "From  what  we  know  of  it,  this  device  clearly
represents  the  result  of  an  independent development  of  their
own,  which  may  or  may  not  have  been  started  before  our
great  debate  at  the  end of  1949, but  certainly  not  much later.
Considering  the  time  factor?  involved,  it  simply  cannot  have
been  the  outcome  of  treasonable  transmittal  of   information
from  our  side."
Guess  Who,  Or How Unconscious Can A Senator  Get:  "Like
Thomas  Jefferson he  waged  an  unrelenting  war  on  all  forms
of  tyranny  over  the  minds of men.  He  championed  unpopular
causes  and  espoused  unorthodox  views  regardless  of  political
consequences.   He  insisted   on  the  same  right  for  others."—
Tribute  to  McCarran  by  McCarthy,  Senate,  last   Tuesday.
A  Teacher  of  Philosophy  in a Well Known College Writes—
In  a  letter  asking  that  we  send  another  phil-
osophy  teacher  a  sample  copy  of  our  October  11
issue on the Hunter  College  trials ". . . and may I
say  I  know  of  no  publication  in  America   today
more  useful to  educators  who will take  advantage
of  it  than f.  F. Stone's Weekly.  The ethics  involved
in  your  choice  of  coverage  and  in  your  comment,
and  the  adequate  documentation,  make  it  invalu-
able.  I regularly direct my students  in social  ethics
to it,  and am in process of persuading the members
of  the local American Civil Liberties Union here that
they  cannot  afford  to  be without   it."
Our thanks to that kind reader.  Why  not help us
reach others by sending a gift subscription today to
a  friend,  and  by  using  the  blank  on  the  reverse
side to  get your renewal in early.     —I. F. STONE
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  15, 1954
They  Finally  Got John  Paton  Davies—On  The  Ninth  Try
The  Need  for A  Double Jeopardy  Clause  in  Loyalty  Proceedings
John  Paton   Davies,  Jr.,  was  tried   nine   times  on  loyalty
charges,  and  finally  cashiered  for  "indiscretion"  on  the  ninth
try.   John  Stewart  Service  had  been  cleared  once  by  a  grand
jury  and  six  times  by  the  State  Department  Loyalty  Security
Board   when  he  was  fired—on  the  eighth  try.  John  Carter
Vincent   had   been   cleared  three  times  when   he  was  finally
"retired"  on  the  fourth  turn  round.
Just  by  the  law  of  averages  any  government   can  get  any
man  if  it  can  try  and  try  again.   The  evil  is  not  limited   to
government    officials.   Edward  U.  Condon,  once  head  of   the
Bureau  of  Standards  but  now  in  private  employment,  is being
put   through  the  hoops  of  another  investigation  after  having
been  four   times  cleared.
William  W.  Remington,  after  being  cleared  in  loyalty  pro-
ceedings,  was  tried  for  perjury.   When  the  conviction  was
reversed  the  government   tried  him  again—this  time  on  the
ground  that  he had  lied  in  the  course  of  his  first  trial.
Harry  Bridges,  whom  the  government   has  been  trying   to
deport  since he led the  San Francisco waterfront  strike in  1934,
is  now  the  subject  of  a  fifth  try  by  the  government,  in  the
guise  of  a suit  for  denaturalization.   But  substantially  it  is  the
same  case  the  government  lost  four  times  before.
In  various  ways,  by  various  subterfuges,  the  government
is  violating  the  spirit  if  not   the  letter   of  one  of   the   most
ancient  safeguards  of  the  Bill  of  Rights.   This  was  designed
to  save  people  from  the  pain,  expense  and  risk  of  being  prose-
cuted,  or  sued,  over  and  over  again  for   the  same   offense—
until  the  desired  conviction  was  obtained.   Without  it,  just
by  the  law  of  averages,  any  government   can  eventually "get"
any  man.
The  provision in  question  is  that  part  of  the  Fifth  amend-
ment  which  says  no  person  shall  "be   subject   for   the   same
offense   to  be  twice  put  in  jeopardy of  life  or  limb."  This  is
the   famous   "double   jeopardy"  clause  which   is  supposed   to
prevent  the  government  from  trying  or  punishing  any  man  a
second  time  for  the  same  offense.
Of   all  the  provisions  of   the  Bill  of  Rights,  none  is  older
than  this.   It   was  solidly  established  in  the  common  law   as
far   back  as  the   days  when  Norman   French   was  still   the
language  of  the  courts.
Said  an  early Federal  decision  (42  Fed.  590),  "we  will  find
no  principle  of  the  common  law  grounded  upon  the  rock  of
the  Magna  Charta  more  firmly  rooted  than  that  no  man  shall
be  twice  vexed  with  prosecutions  for  the  same  offense."    An-
other  early  State  decision  (17  Pa.  126)  said  the "right  not  to
be  put   in  jeopardy  a  second   time  for   the  same  cause  is  as
sacred  as  the  right  of  trial  by  jury,  and  is  guarded  with  as
much  care by the  common  law and  the Constitution."
A  committee  of  lawyers would  perform  a  public  service  if
they  made  a  study  of  the  way  this  safeguard is  being  eroded
in  contemporary   political   prosecutions,   and  suggested  some
means  of  extending  it  to  loyalty  proceedings.
Ostensibly   these  are  purely  administrative  and   carry   no
penalty  and  are  therefore  outside  the  scope  of   the   "double
jeopardy"  clause.   But  in  fact  discharge  for  disloyalty  is more
serious  than  many  types  of  criminal  convictions;   lives   and
careers are blasted  forever.
A  Choice of  Fictions
While  the law acquiesces in  the  fiction that  such proceedings
are not  serious enough  to  warrant  the  protection  of  the double
jeopardy  clause,  apologists  for  what  is  happening  urge   that
loyalty  proceedings  are  too  serious  to  be  accorded   constitu-
tional  safeguards.
Thus  the  New  York  Herald  Tribune,  approving  the  Davies
ouster,  said editorially  (Nov.  7),  "To  provide  maximum  safe-
guards  against infiltration,  subversion  and  error,  doubts  of  the
reliability  of  a  government  servant  are  to  be  resolved  in  favor
of  national secuity,  rather  than  of  the  individual concerned."
This  view  threatens  to  reverse centuries  of  struggle.   Had  it
prevailed,  there  would have been  no  Bill of  Rights  at  all. The
excuse  of  "national   security,"   the  harsh  treatment   of "sub-
version  and  error,"  the  relegation  to  secondary  place  of  indi-
vidual  rights  and justice—these were the  familiar  standards by
which  in  earlier  times  heretics  were  burned  for  the  good  of
society  and  their  own  presumed salvation.
Please  Get  Your  Renewal  in  Early  and  Send  A  Gift  Sub to  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $
Strop*
«ty                                     7on«              St»t«
Enter  this  gift  sob for  $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(Tn)  Nnmi.
Street
Pity                                       Zone             Stilt*
c.
5:
11/16/54
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
SOI  E. Capitol  SU S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington, D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED