I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954nov01.pdf

============================================================

Is A "Temporary" Return to  Fascism  Being Prepared  in Italy?  See Page  4.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 39
NOVEMBER  1,  1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Fatal  Decisions  Have  Akeady  Been  Made
The  picture  in  our  minds  of  the  atom  bomb is of  something
that  we have stockpiled  in  a kind  of  dark  closet, which  can  be
taken  out   and  used  if  we  so  choose.    But  enough  is  known
to  indicate  that  this  is  misleading,  that   the  atom  bomb  is
not  just  another  new  weapon  which  can  be  held  in   reserve
like  poison  gas  or  germs;  it  is  a  revolution  in  warfare.
There   is  now   a   whole   growing   family   of   atomic   and
hydrogen  weapons  adapted  for  use  in  various  situations   by
various   branches   of   the   armed   services.     And   if   atomic
weapons  are  being  adapted  to  the  strategic  and  tactical  needs
of  the  various  services,  then   these  services  in  turn  must  be
adapted  to  the  use of  atomic  weapons.
If  one prepares  to  wage  atomic  war,  one  must  recast  one's
army,  navy  and  air  force  radically.    This  means that  we  are
confronted   with   a  decision  of   policy   quite   different   from
taking  a  bomb  out  of  a  stockpile.    Once  the  basic  decision
is  taken  to  make  the  next  war  atomic,  many  other  decisions
follow  which  make  the  first  difficult,  and  perhaps in  practice
impossible,  to  reverse.   For  the  war  begins with  armies, navies
and  air  forces  trained  to  attack  with,  and  defend  themselves
against,  fission  and  fusion  weapons.   The  die  that  may  mean
the  destruction  of  civilization  is  not  only  cast  but  loaded  in
advance.
What  Montgomery Revealed
It  is against  this background  that  attention  should  be called
to  a  talk  given  in  London  a  week  ago  by  Field-Marshal Lord
Montgomery.    With  Generals Gruenther  and  Norstad,  Mont-
gomery is one of  the  triumvirate  which  commands the  NATO
forces.    He  spoke on  "A  Look  Through  A  Window  at  World
War  III."     And what  he said, according  to  the  London  Times
next  morning   (Oct.  22)  was  that  "at   Supreme  Allied  HQ
they  were basing all their operational planning on using atomic
and  thermonuclear  weapons  in  their  defense,  and  this  called
for   a   certain   reorganization   of   their   forces   and   in   their
strategy."
It   is  sometimes  assumed  that   we  will   not   use  nuclear
weapons  unless the  enemy does.   But  Montgomery  made  clear
in   London,   as  he  did   in   a  speech  a  few   weeks  earlier   at
Ankara,   that   we   would   use  nuclear   weapons  for   defense
against  attack,  whether  that  attack  was atomic  or not.    The
decision  has  been  made,  the  armed  forces  shaped, for   atomic
war.
In  the  light  of  these  military  realities,  the  renewed  debate
at  the  UN   over  atomic  disarmament  between  the  U.S.  and
the  U.S.S.R.  takes on  a new  significance.    This  debate is again
plunged  into  another  lengthy   and  arid  veto-and-inspection
controversy.    This  controversy—pitched  in   these  terms—is
insoluble.    For  there  is  no  way  to  convince  either  side  that
any  system  of  inspection  and  control  may  not  be  evaded  or
abused  by  the  other.
Unreal  But  Poisonous  Controversy
The  whole  controversy  in  some  ways  is  nonsense.   Atomic
weapons  cannot  be  made  in  washtubs,  nor  launched  without
the  most  extensive  measures of  mobilization,   dispersion,   and
defense  in  preparation for  the  retaliatory  blow  from  the  other
side.    As  Montgomery  said,  the   purpose  of   having   active
forces   "in   being"  in  peacetime  "would   make  it   impossible
for  the  east  to  launch  an  attack  successfully  without   a  pre-
paratory   build-up  of   their   forces,  which   we  would   know
about."   No  iron  curtain  could  hide  the  preparatory measures
required  to  launch  an  atomic  world  war.
Nevertheless  there  is  no  way  to  convince  the   American
public  that  the  Russians might  not  make  and  catapult  bombs
in  secret  from  some  hide-away  in  Siberia,  nor  convince   the
Russians  that  the  Americans  might  not  utilize  inspection  to
spy  out  the  prime  bombing  targets  of  the  U.S.S.R.    In  this
atmosphere    to   debate   veto-and-inspection,   as   Lodge   and
Vishinsky  now  are  doing,  is  worse  than  hopeless.   The  world
public   is  lulled  into   a  false   sense  of   complacency   by   the
debate,  while  the  real  decisions have  already  been  taken,  the
military  vested  interests  on  both  sides built  up,  a  juggernaut
created  which  can  move  in  one way  only,  the  way  of  the  A,
the  H  and  soon  the  C  bomb.
It  is  this  which  makes  the  Krishna  Menon  proposal  of  last
week  so  crucial.    There  was  a  kind  of  cosmic  comedy  in  the
way  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  hastily  joined  hands  in  shelving  and
thus   shutting   off   General   Assembly  debate  on   the   Indian
proposal  for   a  "truce"  in   the   testing   of   new   atomic   and
hydrogen   weapons.    This   proposal,   which   was   first   made
by  Nehru  last  April  and  endorsed  by  Indonesia  and  Burma,
alone  offers  a  simple and  enforceable way  to  put  a  stop  to  the
atomic  arms  race,  to  ease  tension  and  thereby  to  create   an
atmosphere  in  which  further  agreement  may  become  possible.
A "truce on tests" is self-enforceable  because the  new  weapons
are so powerful that  if  exploded their  radioactivity  is detectible
anywhere  on  earth.
India  spoke for  mankind when  its  representative   challenged
the  criminal  rubbish on our  side  about  using the  atomic  bomb
"only  in  defense  against  aggression."    Both  sides in  every  war
always  claim to  be aggressed.   Menon uttered  what  may  prove
to  be  the  prophetic  epitaph  of  our  civilization   when  he  said
use  of  H  bombs  would  prove  "suicide  for  the  nations  who
used  them,  genocide  for  those  against  whom  they  were  used,
and  infanticide  for  posterity."   If  there  is  still  a  peace  move-
ment  left  in  America,  this  must  be  its  platform.    As  a  first
step  away  from  mutual  destruction,  no  more  tests.
1  1
1  5  j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  1,
New  AEC  Commissioner  Is Pro-Oppenheimer, But  Anti-Russian
General  satisfaction  has  been  expressed  with  the  appoint-
ment  of  Dr.  John  Von  Neumann as  the  new  member  of  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission.  His  scientific qualifications  are
indeed   dazzling.   Dr.   Von  Neumann  is   one  of   the   great
mathematicians  of  our  time,  with  a  record  of  past  accom-
plishment  in  the  development  of  the  atomic  and  hydrogen
bombs.   His  defense  of  Oppenheimer before  the  Gray  board
and  his  criticism  of  security  standards  last  June  before  the
House  Government Operations  Committee  (in  testimony  just
released  on October 19) will make the  appointment a  pleasing
one  to  the  scientific community.
At  the  same time Dr. Von Neumann has  other qualifications
which   may   explain   his   choice  by   AEC   Chairman   Lewis
Strauss.   The  co-author  of  the  abstruse  "Theory  of  Games"
has  no  moral  qualms  about  the  H  bomb.  When  asked  about
the  morality  of  the  H  bomb  during  the  Oppenheimer  hear-
ings,  Dr.  Von  Neumann  replied  "My  view  on  that  is  quite
hard-boiled."  He  was  one of  the  few  scientists  who was  for
the  building  of  the  H  bomb  from  the  start.   Dr.  Von  Neu-
mann  was  also  one  of  the  few  who  was  never  friendly  to
Left.   "I  must  say,"   he  told  the  Gray  board,  in  discussing
security  standards   during  the  last  war,  "that  I  considered
Russia  an  enemy from  the  beginning to  the  end, and  to  now,
and  the  alliance  with  Russia  as  a  fortunate  accident  that
two  enemies had  quarrelled."
Dr.  Von  Neumann's  background  explains  this  early  anti-
Communist  orientation.   He  is  of  Hungarian  origin,  and  his
family  fled  the  country  "very  "soon  after   the  Communists
took  power"  just  after  World  War  I.  "As  you grew  up,"  he
was  asked  during  the  Oppenheimer hearings,  "did  you  and
your  family  regard  Russia  as  a  sort  of  natural  enemy of
Hungary?"   He  answered  frankly,  "Russia  was  traditionally
an  enemy  of  Hungary ...  I  think  you will  find  generally
speaking  among Hungarians  an  emotional fear  and  dislike of
Russia."   Dr.  Von Neumann will  have  no  trouble  getting  his
appointment   confirmed.
Judge  Youngdahl  Refused  to  Be Intimidated
U.S.   Attorney   Leo  Rover,   a   little   bantam   of   a   man,
pounded  the  lectern  and  told  the  Judge  he should be  "Ameri-
can  enough"  to  step  out  of the  Lattimore  case.  Judge  Luther
W.  Youngdahl,  silver-haired,   with   a   ruddy  Scandinavian
complexion,  sat  high  above  him  listening  with  a  face  like  a
rock.   Rover  sounded like  a  District  Attorney  haranguing   a
jury  in  an  old-time  Wobbly  prosecution.
The  high—or  low—point  of  his  attack  on  the  Judge  for
bias  and  prejudice  came  when  Rover  cried,  "I  am  afraid  we
are  developing  a  system  of  legal  philosophy in  this  country
that  seems  to  be'concerned  only  with  the  defendant  .  .  ."
This  new-fangled philosophy is  sometimes referred  to  as  the
presumption  that  a  man  is  innocent  until  proven guilty.
Though  upheld  on  appeal  by  David  Lawrence  and  George
Sokolsky,  Rover  affronted   the  entire  bench  in  this  district.
So   did   Brownell   by  having  one   of   his   special  assistants
certify  that the  affidavit  of bias and prejudice was filed in good
faith.   The law,  as  stated  in the  leading  case,  Berger  v.  U.S.,
is  very  clear  that  such  an   affidavit   must  be  "based  upon
something  other  than  rulings  in  the  case."   The  affidavit  is
also  supposed  to  be  "timely."   This  one  was  not  filed  until
after  the  Judge  had  been upheld by the  Circuit  Court.
Were  lawyers  allowed to  act  as  the  government  did in  this
case,  they  could  ask  a  judge  to  disqualify  himself  if  they
did  not  like  his  rulings  on the  preliminary  motions  before  a
case went to trial.  The motion in the  Lattimore  case  deserved
its   dismissal  as   "scandalous."    Rover's   argument   was   an
aspersion  not  only  on  Youngdahl but  on  the  respected  Chief
Judge  Laws  of  the  district  who  had  again  assigned  Young-
dahl  to  the  case.
Lawrence  and  Sokolsky made  much  of  Rover's   argument
that  Youngdahl  had  no  right  to  refer  to  the  Tydings  and
McCarran  committee  hearings  for  background  in  throwing
out  the  main  count  of  the  first  Lattimore  indictment.   But
the  Court  of  Appeals  in  upholding Youngdahl  said  the  gov-
ernment  "not  only  referred  to  but  quoted  extensively  from
the  hearings"  of those two committees in  arguing  the  appeal,
as  the  record  shows  that  it  also  did  in  the  District   Court.
A  feebler  legal  case  could hardly  have been imagined, and  an
attempt  to  intimidate  met  with  a  Judge  who  would  not  be
frightened  from  doing  his  duty.  The  country  is  indebted  to
him.
A  Quick  Look  Round  A Troubled  World
Israel:  The  latest  issue  of  the  Jerusalem  Post  (Sept.  27)
to   arrive   here  carries   a   dispatch  from   its   well-informed
London  correspondent,  George  Lichtheim  warning,  "Every-
thing  that  is  known  about  the  official  Anglo-American view-
point  suggests  that  as  soon  as  the  American  Congressional
elections  are   safely  over  pressure  will  be  applied  to  make
Israel  accept  both  frontier  readjustment  and  financial  repa-
rations  to  the  refugees,  while  the  Arabs  will  be  asked  for
nothing more than  the  signature  of  a  peace treaty."
Soviet  Bloc  Justice:   Improving.   The  release   of  Herman
Field  by  Poland  on  the  heels   of  the   public  confession  of
frame-up   by  the   defector,  Joseph   Swiatlo,  is  encouraging.
Now  the  question  is—what  happened  to  his  brother,  Noel,
who  disappeared  in  May,  1949,  in  Prague,  and  later  Noel's
wife,  Herta?   There  is  no  reason  whatsoever  why  "building
socialism"  requires  the  kind  of  secret  police  frame-ups   ad-
mitted  in  Russia,  Hungary  and  now  Poland  since  the  death
of  Stalin,  nor  why  accused  persons  should  not  have the  same
right  of  public trial,  legal  counsel and  appeal that  exists  in
the  West.   One  item  that  would  grace  Moscow's agenda  in
improving relations would be to clear the name of Anna Louise
Strong,  so  rudely  branded  a   spy  and  expelled  without  a
hearing  of  any  kind.
Indo-China:  An  undercover  struggle  is  going  on  between
the  U.S.  and  France  over  South  Vietnam.  The Pentagon  and
the  State  Department  would  like  to  deal  directly  with  the
present  government  there,  and  to  build  up  its  armed  forces
to  the  point  where  it  could  put  down  popular   dissatisfaction
and  disunity.  If  the  State Department has  its  way, there  will
be  no  elections  in  1956,  as  promised  by  the  Geneva  accord.
Those  elections  would  almost  certainly   be  won  by  Ho  Chi-
minh  and  lead  to  the  unification  of  the  country  under  his
rule.   Despite  everything,  Washington  still  thinks  of  Indo-
China in military terms and is blinded by its  own propaganda
about  "enslaved  millions."   One  observer  has  just  reported,
"Practically  every  American  who  witnessed  the Communist
occupation  of  Hanoi  testifies  that  it  was  orderly  and  that
the  people  genuinely  welcomed the  Communists."   This  quo-
tation,  which  illustrates  what  official  opinion refuses  to  see,
is not from  the Daily  Worker but  from  the  October 29 issue  of
David  Lawrence's  U.  S.  News  and  World  Report.
Signs of the  Times: Labor's  League for  Political  Education,
A.  F.  of  L.,  did  not  include  the  vote  on  any  civil  liberties
bill  in  the  compiled  Senate  and  House voting  record   (1947
through  1954)  it  sent  out  just  before  election.   Neither  the
votes  on  wire-tapping  nor  the  amendments subjecting  labor
unions  to  the  Subversive  Activities  Board  nor  the immunity
bill  was  thought  important  enough  to  include though  labor
union  representatives  opposed  all  three.   By  contrast   space
was  found  for  the  vote  on  the  George motion of  1949  which
would  have  cut  $200,000,000  from  the  Military   Assistance
Act.  Labor  listed  a  vote  for  this  motion  as  "wrong."
The  Elections:  We went  to  press  the  Thursday  before  the
results  were  in,  and  will  report  on them  next  week.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  1,  195%
That   Humphrey-Morse   Amendment   Which  So  Alarmed   the   Press  Last  August
Little Attention  Paid  to  First  Test  of New  Thought  Control Law
Washington—When  the  late  Mr.  Justice  Jackson  was  the
chief  counsel for  the  U.S.  in the  prosecution  of  the  Nazi crim-
inals  at  Nuremberg,  he  said  of  the  legal  system  devised  by
the  Hitlerites,   "Laws  were  enacted  of  such  ambiguity  that
they  could  be  used  to  penalize  almost  any  innocent   act."
The  characterization   as  aptly   applies  to  the  Communist
Control  Act  hastily  introduced  in  the  closing  days  of  the  last
Congress  by panicky  Democrats,  particularly  to  the  Humph-
rey-Morse amendment, now  Section  5 of that  Act  (the  official
text may  be found  in  our  September  16 issue).  This  amend-
ment  established  13 criteria  for  determining  who  is  a  Com-
munist   These  are  so vague  that  they  brought  alarmed  pro-
test  at  the  time from many quarters.
The papers  which were so alarmed  last  August  are  already
indifferent  in  October.   Only  a  handful  of  persons  were  on
hand  here  last  week  when these  new provisions  were  argued
for  the  first  time  before  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals.   The
case  was  the  appeal  of  the  Communist party  from  an  order
of  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  requiring  it   to
register.   Three   judges,  Prettyman,  Bazelon  and   Danaher
heard  the  appeal  last  spring  but  ordered  the  case  reopened
for  argument  on  September  13 to  determine  the  effect  of  the
new  legislation.
This  case  is  a  time-bomb.  If  the  registration  order  against
the  Communist  party  is  finally  upheld,  any  Communist  who
fails  to  register  will  face  a  fine  of  not  more  than  $10,00(J  or
imprisonment  for  not  more than five years, or  both.
How  Do  You  Tell?
How  to  determine who is  a  Communist?  This  is  where  the
Humphrey-Morse  Amendment comes  in.   Its  criteria  do  not
require normal proof, a membership book, paying dues,  attend-
ing  meetings.   Instead  they  set  up  standards   which  would
make  it  possible to  convict  anyone  of  membership  who  had
ever  done  anything  "to  carry  out  in  any  manner  and  to  any
degree  the  plans,  designs,  objectives  or  purposes  of  the  or-
ganization."
It  would  not be necessary to  prove that  a man was  directed
by  the  Communists.  It  would  only be necessary  to  show that
at  some  time  and  in  some  degree  he  had  helped  to  further
some  objectives of  the  Communist party.
The  Act  does  not  say  that  these  must  be  unlawful  objec-
tives.   It  covers  any  objectives.   Since  the  Communists  have
favored  almost  every  social reform  from  collective  bargaining
to  old-age  pensions,  this  covers  a  territory  wide  enough  to
enable  a  future  government imbued with  McCarthyite  stand-
ards  to  send  all  kinds  of  people to jail  for  failing  to  register
themselves  as  "Communists."
The  dilemma  that  will  face  non-Communist  radicals  and
liberals  if  this  law  is  upheld was  vividly  pictured  by  defense
counsel  for  the' Communist party,  John  J.  Abt  and  Joseph
Forer  (the  late  Vito  Marcantino  was  chief  counsel).
Even  the  Hermit   Unsafe
"If  such an individual  decides not to register," they  told  the
court,  "he  must   of  course  take   every   precaution   to  avoid
doing  anything  that  can  be  used  as  evidence  of  membership.
He  must  not  express  a  view  on  any  question  until  he  has
first   ascertained   petitioner's   [i.e.   the   Communist  party's]
position.   Thereafter,   he  must  either  give  voice  to  the  con-
trary opinion or  remain  silent.  He must  abstain  from  associ-
ation  or  communication with  any  person  who is  a  member of
petitioner.  And  since  he has  no way  of  determining  who may
be  found  to  be  a  member,  he  must  shun  association  or  com-
munication  with  all men.  Prudence therefore  dictates  that  he
live  the  life  of  a  hermit.   But  there  is  no safety  for  him  even
in that course.  Since  the criteria  of Section  5 are  unlimited as
to time, he may be dragged  from  his hermitage  to be tried  and
convicted  on  the  basis  of  some "incident  in  his  remote  past."
When this case was first argued last Spring, the  government
insisted  that  the  only  issue  involved was whether  it  could re-
quire  the  Communist party  and  Communists  to  register,  as
foreign  agents  are  required  to register.
But  a  man  who registers  as  a  Communist  faces  a  quite
different  situation  from  one who registers as  a  foreign  agent
with  the  Department  of Justice.  All  kinds of  publicity  firms,
advertising   agencies,  writers   and  speakers  are   registered
with  the  Department  as  foreign  agents.   The  fact  of  regis-
tration  as   such  carries  neither   disgrace   nor  private  and
public  sanctions.
Self-Outlawry  by  Registration
But  to register  as  a  Communist under  this  Act and  in  this
atmosphere  is to  outlaw  oneself  from  society.  Under the  Act,
it  is  made  a  crime  for  a  Communist  even  to  apply   for  a
passport.  It  becomes a crime for a Communist (under the new
amendments  of  last  August)   to  hold   office   or  employment
with  any  labor  union  or—on  the  other  side  of  the  fence—"to
represent  any employer"  before the  National  Labor  Relations
Board.   In  addition  any  organization   in  which  a  registered
Communist works is itself  in danger of being forced  to register
as  "Communist  infiltrated."
This far  from  exhausts  the roster  of penalties  which face  a
man  who registered  as a  Communist.  All kinds  of laws,  state
and  federal,  subject  Communists to  many  kinds  of  prosecu-
tion  for  sedition  and  conspiracy;  provide  for  their  deporta-
tion  and  denaturalization;  bar   them  from  housing  projects
and  other  benefits.  Communists may  be  disbarred  or  refused
the right to  practice  their  professions.  Finally few  employers
in  any  business  would  hire  a  man who was a  registered  Com-
munist.   His  plight  will  be  that  of  a  "non-Aryan"   in  the
Third  Reich, forced  to wear  the  badge of  shame  and  suffer  all
the  liabilities  of  second-class  citizenship.
The  government's  own  lawyers  showed  themselves  queasy
about  the  new legislation  in  their  argument.   Their  strategy
has  been  to  try  and  evade  as  many  issues  as  possible.   Last
spring  they  tried  to  avoid  the  broader  questions  of  constitu-
tionality.  When the  court  ordered the  case  reopened, govern-
ment  counsel  touched last  and  lightly  on  Section  5,  and  hur-
ried  on as  if  the  less  said  about  it  the better. Their  argument
was  that  Section  5  "merely  lists  certain  matters  of  circum-
stantial  proof  to  be  considered  by  a  jury"  and  that  "such
evidence  would not, by  any  means,  necessarily  be conclusive."
A  non-Communist  radical  or  liberal  would  in  other  words
be  free  to  rebut  the  inferences  drawn  by  the  prosecution.
He  would be free  to  try  and  prove that  his  advocacy or  pro-
motion  of  certain  Communist  causes  did  not  mean  that  he
was  a  Communist. But this would  also  mean that  the burden
of  proof  would be  on  him.
Section  5 vividly  illustrates the  dangers  for  non-conformist
political  thought  of  an  act  which  singles  out  one  party   for
outlawry,  lumps  together  lawful  and  illegal   activities,   pro-
scribes   both  alike,  and  then  having  driven  the  Communists
underground  must   snoop,  prod  and  speculate   on  who  is  a
Communist.  This  is  the  evil  Truman  foresaw  when  he vetoed
the  Internal  Security  Act  in  1950,  and  this  is  the  evil  which
is  inescapable  when  a  government  sets  out  to  police  ideas
instead  of  confining  itself  to  prosecuting  crimes.
OUR  3rd  BIRTHDAY COMING
The  beginning of  our third successful year  of
publication  is  in  sight  and  some  readers  have
already  begun to  send  in their  renewals. Those
who  can  do  so  early  will  earn  our  thanks.
And don't forget that with your $5 renewal you
can send a gift sub to a friend for  only $4 more.
Use the blank on the reverse page.
1  6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  1, 1954
Is  The  Guatemalan  "Free  World"  Farce  to  Be  Played  in  Italy,  Toot
Lippmann  Reports  Talk  of "Temporarily" Resorting  to  Fascism Again
Two  reports  by  Walter  Lippmann last  week  from  Italy  are
disturbing.    They  reflect  a  readiness to  relapse into  a  Fascist
solution  for  Italy's  problems.   He  found  (Oct. 19)  that  the
Christian  Democratic  party  lacks  "the will,  the  energy,  the
purpose  and  a  good  reputation   for  integrity."   By  contrast,
the  Communists  and  the  Left  Socialists  are  not  only  a  power
among  the  workers  and  the  South  Italian  peasantry  but  have
acquired  "great   support  and  influence  in  the  middle  class."
Lippmann  reports  the  possibility  that  the  Left  might  win
an  election.   But  he  says  the  non-Communist  parties  control
the  State,  the  army  and  the  police  and  are  determined  not  to
give  up  power  "if   they  fall  behind  in  the  count  of  heads."
The   phraseology  is  instructive.    The   high   rhetoric   of   the
democratic   mystique   is  suddenly   deflated,   and   we   have  a
mere "count  of  heads."
Mr.  Lippmann  reported  (Oct.  21)  a  talk  with  an  Italian
official.   This   official  after  telling  about  the  decision  not   to
give  up  power  if  voted  out,  added:  "of   course  the   answer
will  require  actions  which  will  in  fact  put  in  charge  of  our
affairs  soldiers,  policemen  and  men  who  are  temporarily  akin
to  the  Fascists."
The  next  remark  indicated   that  his  interlocutor   himself
was  not  so sure about  the  "temporarily."  He  went  on  to  tell
Mr. Lippmann, "So we shall avert  the  Communist  danger  but
the  price  may  be  the  loss of  our  democracy  and  our  liberties."
Mr.  Lippmann is  a  responsible journalist  with  access  to  the
highest  circles.  The  talk  reflects  an  attitude  of  mind  which  is
very  dangerous.  It   accepts  the  failure  of  democratic  forces
to  deal  adequately with  Italy's  problems  and  acquiesces again
in  the  use of  the  bludgeon  and  terror.
Is  this  a  trial  balloon  to  prepare opinion  for  a  new  rightist
dictatorship  in  Italy?   Mr.  Lippmann  is  ready  to  enlist,  and
thinks  only  "the basic  decision  should  be  brought   into   the
open."  He  does  not  give the  answer Mr.  Justice  Holmes  once
gave  in  a  famous  case.  "If  in  the  long  run,"  Holmes  said  in
Gitlow  v.  New  York,  "the beliefs  established  in  proletarian
dictatorship   are  destined  to   be  accepted   by   the   dominant
forces  of  the  community,  the  only  meaning  of  free  speech is
that  they  should  be  given  their  .chance  and  have  their   way."
This  is  too  exhilirating  a  faith  for  syndication.
LET  US  SEND  A  SAMPLE
Ungrateful  Germans
"Near  Kaiserslautern  some  30  atomic  cannon  from
the  United  States  have  been  installed,  able  to  fire  at  a
range  of  many  miles  (some  say  80),  using  shells  like
the  Hiroshima bomb.  Dr.  Adenauer  thanked  the   U.S.
for  these  guns.   The  inhabitants  of   Mannheim,  Lud-
wigshaven,  Mainz,  living  80  miles  west  of  those  guns,
have  not."
—Berlin  dispatch,  Peace  News  (London),  Oct.  IS.
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street.
Pity
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
7nn«               Stnto
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
(To)  Nflmp
Street                                   /
City..
Zone               StatP
11/1/64
Now,   as  Mr.  Lippmann  recognizes,  there  is  probably  not
going  to  be  a  revolution  in  Italy.   Moscow  will  do  its   best
to  prevent  it,   because  a  revolution   in  Italy   would  almost
certainly  bring  World  War  III.  The  Soviet  Union   is  more
interested  in  obtaining  a  breathing  spell  for  its  own  industri-
alization and China's.
But  and  this  is  the  real  point,  the  mood  Mr.  Lippmann  re-
ports  lets  the  Italian  capitalist  and  landowning  class  know  in
advance  that  they  need  make  no  reforms  because the  govern-
ment  will  use force  to  put  down  discontent.  To  do  this  is  to
remove  whatever  pressure  there  is  on  the  most  backward  and
corrupt  ruling  class in  Western  Europe.  The  liberal  reformers
and  the  Fanfani  left  of  the  Christian  Democrats  will  lose  all
leverage.
A  free  society  must  live  dangerously  or  it  cannot   live  at
all.   It  cannot  be  half   free.   Its  health  depends  on  a   tug-of-
war   in   which   revolutionaries   may   play   a   useful   role   by
frightening  ruling  class  elements  into  necessary  reforms.   To
say  in  advance that  the  "count  of  heads"  will  be disregarded
by  force  is  in  turn  to  do  more  than  block  the  peaceful way
to  power  of  the  revolutionaries.   It   requires  by  its  dynamic
and  logic—-the  logic  of  Fascism—the  suppression  of   all ele-
ments  which  favor  social  change  or  criticize   repression.
Mr.  Lippmann reflects  an  attitude  of  mind  which   threatens
again  to  make  people  in  Italy  choose  between  dictatorship  of
the right  or left.  In  the  context  of  Italy, where  the  latter—as
Mr.  Lippmann  also  recognizes—at   least   can  provide   social
reform  and industrial  development,  there  is no doubt  on  which
side  the majority will  be.  The  path  sketched  out  by  Mr.  Lipp-
mann  can only  lead  to  disaster,  or  to  creating  in  Italy  another
and  bigger Guatemala  to  disgrace "the  free  world."
COPY  TO  A  FRIEND
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol St, S.E.
Washington  S,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED