I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954aug02.pdf

============================================================

Justice  Department Counter-Attacks in  Defense of  Informers,  Page 4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 28AUGUST  2,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
IB  CENTS
What  The  Atomic Filibuster Was  All About
The  Atomic Energy  Bill and  Foreign  Policy
1.  In  its  foreign  policy  aspects  the  new  atomic  energy  bill
is  a  fraud.   Its  main  purpose  is  popularly  supposed  to  lie  in
the   President's  proposal  last   December   of   an  international
atomic  pool for  non-military  purposes.  Actually  the  Republi-
cans  in  Congress  have  by  this  bill  tied  the  President's  hands
and  made  the  creation of  such  a  pool  more  difficult.
In   his  message  last   February   on   revision   of   the   atomic
energy  law,  General  Eisenhower  said  "Consideration   of  addi-
tional  legislation  which may be need  to  implement  that  [pool]
proposal  should  await  the  development  of  areas of  agreement
as  a  result  of  our  discussions  with  other  nations."   Instead of
waiting   for  "the development  of   areas  of   agreement,"   the
Republican  leadership  has  rushed  in  sharply  to  restrict   the
President's  freedom to  negotiate.
This  effort  to  restrict  the  President's  treaty  making  powers
is,  I  believe,  unprecedented and  unconstitutional.   The  Senate
may  modify  or  reject  a  treaty.   Congress  itself  cannot  in  ad-
vance  tell  the  President how  he  must  negotiate.   This  it  tries
to  do  by  a  neat  bit  of  flim-flam.  The  bill  carries  a  section
(124)   called  "International   Atomic  Pool."   This  authorizes
the  President  "to  enter  into  an  international  agreement  with
a  group  of  nations  providing  for  international  cooperation  in
the  non-military  aspects of  atomic  energy  . . ."
A  Triple  Joker
But  there  is  a  triple  joker  hidden  here.   In  the  first  place
the  President  needs  no special authority  to  make international
agreements.   This  provision,  while  giving  him  a  power  he  al-
ready  possesses,  in  fact  restricts  the  operation  of  that  power.
It  does  this  in  two  ways.   Section Ilk  defines  international
agreement  restrjctively  to  mean  only  an  agreement  approved
by  Congress or  a treaty  (subject  to  Senate approval)  and adds
"but   does  not  include  any  agreement   for  cooperation." i.e.
presumably  any  other  Presidential  agreement.
In  addition  Section  124 says,  "Provided,  however,  that  the
cooperation  is  undertaken pursuant  to  an  agreement  for  co-
operation  entered into  in  accordance with  section  123." This
is  the  most important joker of all. For  under  section  123 only
bilateral  agreements  are  permitted.   The  President  under  this
section  is  not  permitted  to  negotiate  with  a  "group   of  na-
tions."   He  can  only  negotiate with  them  one  by one.
Just  as in  dealings  between employer  and  employe, bilateral
agreements  reduce  the  bargaining  power  of  the  weaker  side.
The   Republicans   in   Congress  are  as  opposed   to   collective
bargaining  in  international as  in  labor  relations.   This  section
would  prevent  the  President  from   dealing  with  the  United
Nations,  or  with  such  a  group  of  West  European  countries
as are now building its  own nuclear research  center  in  Switzer-
1  1
land  or  even  with  NATO.   Each  nation  must  step  into  our
front  office  alone and  bargain  alone to  obtain  atomic  informa-
tion,  whether  civilian  or  military.   The  net  result  would  not
be  an  international  pool  but  a  series  of  bilateral  agreements.
2.  In  the  civilian,  as in  the  military  field,  this  bill  reflects
the  continued  hangover  of  the  great  American  delusion  that
somehow  we  alone have the  secret  of  atomic  energy  and  that
other  nations  will  and  must  accept  our  terms  if  they  are  to
share  it.   The  bill  gives  very  little  yet  makes  it  possible   to
demand  much  in  return.
Tells  Little to  "Foreigners"
As  Cole  (R.  N.Y.),  chairman  of  the  Joint  Committee  on
Atomic  Energy  told  the  House  July  23  (Con.  Rec.  p.  11022)
"when  you  hear  talk  that  this  bill  proposes  to  give  vital  in-
formation  away  to the peoples of the world,  to foreigners  . . .
just  tell those people who talk  that  way  to  look  at  the  record.
The  bill  does  no  such  thing.  It  scarcely  enlarges  the fiield of
the  exchange  of  information  beyond  what  is  presently   au-
thorized  by  law."
The  present  law  already  allows  the  exchange  of  information
on  the  refining  of  source  material,  on  reactor   development,
on  the  production  of  special  nuclear  material  and  on  research
and  development.   Obviously   this  is  not  enough  to  satisfy
other  nations,  or  countries  like  Belgium  would  not  be  threat-
ening  to  cut  off uranium  supplies  unless given  more  informa-
tion.   The  new  bill  only  adds  two  new  categories—data  with
respect  to  health  and  safety,  and  data  on  industrial  and  other
applications.
To  get  this  information,  a  foreign  country   must   accept
a  whole  network  of  restrictions,   including  a  guaranty  that
none of  the material or information  would  go into the  research
or  development of  atomic weapons, that  none  would  be  trans-
ferred   to  unauthorized  persons  and  "a  guaranty  by  the  co-
operating  party  that  security  standards  and  safeguards  as set
forth  in the agreement for cooperation  will be maintained  . . ."
Troublesome  Guaranties
Such  guaranties may entail  more  trouble  than  the  informa-
tion  is worth.  How  guarantee,  for  example,  that  any material
or  information  from   the  U.S. will  not   be  used  for  atomic
weapons?   How   keep  such  things  in  airtight   compartments?
The  problem  would  be simplified  if  recipient  countries allowed
us  to  make atomic weapons while  they  concentrated  on  peace-
time uses.  But  no important  countries  will  accept  a  permanent
status of  military inferiority.  And  how assure such  a  guaranty
and the guaranty against passing information  to  "unauthorized
persons"  without   considerable interference  in  their   domestic
affairs  by the United  States?
This  question  is  raised even  more  strongly  by  the   provision
on   security.    If   their   security   standards   must   satisfy   the
(Continued  on  next   page)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  2,  1954
Atomic  Energy  Commission and/or  the  Defense  Department
(as  the  bill  provides),  the  American  witch  hunt  may  be  ex-
ported.  Will every Belgian  who was anti-Franco  be proscribed
and  every  Frenchman  who is  anti-capitalist  become suspect?
3.  In  the  military,  as  in  the  civilian  sphere,  the unspoken
assumption  of  the  bill  is  that  we  would  be  the  givers  and
have  nothing  to  gain  by  exchange.   Yet  on  the  civilian  side
there  is  a  real  fear  here  in  Washington  not  only  that  the
Russians  are  ahead  of us  on civilian  uses  but  that  some West
European  countries  will  soon be, too.  We would  like  to  break
up  the  West  European   nuclear   research   pool  and   prevent
the  formation  of  similar  regional  pools, substituting   a  kind
of  atomic  Marshall  Plan  in  which  we  would  dominate  the
atomic  scene  in  return  for  our  largesse,  though  the  largesse
in  this case  is not very  large.
The  Atom  Trigger  Remains  a  Secret
On  the  military  side,  for  example, the  bill  would give  even
less  than  on  the  civilian.   The  exchange  of  information  on
weapons  is   limited  to  "external  characteristics,"  and  ex-
cludes  internal   construction   and  trigger   mechanisms.    In
their  able  and  exhaustive  minority  report  with  the  bill  (Rpt.
No.  2181)  Congressmen  Holifield  (D.  Cal.)  and  Price  (D.  III.)
say  "it  is  obvious  that  we  do  not  intend  to  deliver  any  of
these  weapons  to  any  military   ally  for  their  own  use,  as
knowledge  of  the  internal  working  would  be  necessary   for
such  use  or  adjustment  in  case  the  weapon  failed  to  'work'
just prior to release."
"Therefore,"   Holifield   and   Price   conclude  of  these   pro-
visions,  "we  must  acknowledge that  the  bill  does  not  imple-
ment the  use of our  atomic or  hydrogen weapons by  our  allies
on  behalf  of  the  defense  of  the  free  world.   It  does  not  make
it  possible to  include  such  armament  in  the  common  arsenal
of  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  forces,  except  as
they  are  retained  in  our  sole  custody."
The  training  envisaged by  the  bill  for  allied  forces,  as  the
two  dissenters  pointed out, would  be "in  attaching  or  install-
ing  such weapons in  delivery vehicles or  devices."   A  kind of
international  Jim   Crow  system   is  foreshadowed,  in  which
allied  forces  would  be  considered good  enough  for  transport
and   labor   service  in  atomic  warfare.    We  would   hold  the
weapons  and  we  alone  would  know  how to  shoot  them.   This
is  not  how to win  an  international  popularity  contest.
"Those  who fear  vital  disclosure  of  security   information,"
Holifield  and  Price  wrote,  "need  have  but  little  fear.   Those
who hope for  wider dissemination of nuclear  information  have
but little grounds  for  hope."
II
The  Atomic Energy  Bill  And  Domestic  Policy
In  its  domestic  aspects,  the  new  atomic  energy  bill  is  a
steal, in  sober  fact  probably  the  greatest  steal  in the  history
of  the  American people.  A few  simple observations  will  show
how   shrewdly   it   has   been  drafted   to   subordinate   public
interest  to  private.
1. "It  is  common  practice,"  as  Jackson   (D.,  Wash.)   told
a  sleepy  Senate  early  in  the  morning  of  July  22, "for  large
industries   requiring   substantial   blocks   of   power   to   build
their  own  generating   stations."   The  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission  is  the   world's  largest  single   consumer  of  electric
power;  it  uses more than  the  New England  States combined;
its  consumption of  power  may  soon  reach  8  to  10 percent  of
the  nation's  total,  with  an  outlay  of  from  150 to  200 .million
dollars  a  year.   Yet  the  bill,  as  originally  drafted  and  as
passed  by the  House, forbids  the  Atomic  Energy Commission
to  provide  for  its  own power  needs  from  atomic  energy!
Power  Now  Going to  Waste
A  substantial  portion  of  the   AEC's  needs  could  be  met
from  the  heat  which  today  goes  to  waste  in  nuclear  fission.
Such   production  would  give   the   AEC   the   same  kind  of
"birchrod  and  yardstick"  which the  TVA provides  in  dealing
with   hydro-electric   power.    Section   7   (d)   of   the   present
Act,  the  McMahon  Act,  provided  that  the  Commission  could
use  such  energy  and  sell  the  surplus  "to  public  or  private
utilities."   The  new bill,  as  the  majority  report  said  in  sub-
mitting  it  to  Congress,  "does  not  permit  the  Commission  to
enter  into  the  power-producing  business."
2.  If  the  government  is worried  about falling  behind  in  the
race  for  peacetime atomic power, it  has chosen a strange way
to  get  ahead.   The  technical  capacity  of  private  industry  is
important  in  that  race,  but  nothing  could  be more dangerous
than  to  give the  great  electrical  companies control  of  a  com-
peting energy  source which might  make much of their  present
investment  obsolete.  Yet  this  is  precisely  what  the  new bill
will  do  if  in  conference  committee  the  Administration  suc-
ceeds  in knocking out the  unwelcome public power amendment
by  Johnson  (D.,  Col.)  which the  Senate  attached  to  it.
In  their  minority  report,  Congressmen Holifield  and  Price
argued  that just  as  the  Atomic Energy  Commission  now has
a  statutory  Division of  Military  Application, and  a  Military
Liaison  Committee, so  it  should have  a  statutory  Division  of
Civilian  Power  Application, with  an  Electric  Power  Liaison
Committee.
Just   as   the   Military  Liaison   Committee   facilitates   co-
operation  between  the  AEC  and  the  armed  services,  so  the
Electric  Power  Liaison  Committee would  facilitate   coopera-
tion  between  the  AEC  and  those  Federal   agencies  like  the
Federal   Power   Commission,  the   Rural   Electrification   Ad-
ministration,  the  TVA,  the  Bureau  of  Reclamation  and  the
Corps  of  Engineers  which are  concerned with  power develop-
ment.  But  amendments for  these purposes were voted down in
committee and on the floor. The private  power interests  are  to
rule  atomic  energy  undisturbed.
A  Few  Big  Companies  Have  the  Inside  Track
3.  In  the  absence  of  public  competition,  it  becomes all  the
more  important  to  avoid  monopoly, otherwise  the  appeal  to
private  enterprise  becomes a  farce.   At  present  a  handful of
great  companies  which  have  been  acting  as  contractors   for
the  AEC have  the  inside track.
The  present   act  by  Section  7   (c)   gives  the  Commission
affirmative  responsibility,  in  consultation  with  the  Attorney
General,  to  refuse  licenses  or  to  attach  special  conditions
for  the  avoidance of  monopoly.  The  new  bill  omits  this  pro-
vision  and  substitutes  another  which  says  that  the  Commis-
sion  "may"  suspend or  revoke  a  license if  a  licensee has been
found   guilty  of  violating  the  anti-trust  laws.   Considering
the  fact  that  electric   companies  are  more  or  less  natural
monopolies  and  that  anti-trust  proceedings  are  lengthy  and
cumbersome, this  substitution  invites  monopoly  abuses.
4.  The  same  weakening  of  safeguards  against  monopoly  is
apparent  in  the  related  sections  on  patents.   The   President
himself  in  his  message  last  February   said  that  until  more
companies entered  the  atomic field "considerations  of  fairness
require  some  mechanism  to  assure  that  the  limited  number
of   companies,  which  as  Government  contractors   now  have
access to  the  program,  cannot build a  patent  monopoly which
would  exclude others  desiring  to  enter  the  field."
The  bill  as  reported  provided  for  compulsory licensing  of
non-military  patents   during  the  next  five  years  but  under
such  cumbersome terms  that  as  the  Holifield-Price  minority
report  said  "the  patent  attorneys  may  derive  more  satisfac-
tion"  from  them  "than  the  would-be user  of  the  invention."
Chairman   Cole  objected  even  to  these  terms.   "Compulsory
licensing," he said  in  a  dissent  with  Van  Zandt  (R.,  Penna.),
"is  not  creeping  socialism;  it  is  socialism  run  rampant."
The  Giveaway  of  All  Giveaways
In  the  House  on July  23,  Cole  moved a  substitute  amend-
ment  to  eliminate  any  kind  of  compulsory  licensing.   "This
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August i, 1954
3
is  the  giveaway of  all  giveaways,"  Holifleld  protested.  "This
not  only denies the  government the right to participate  in  the
production  of  power  with  the  substance   owned  by  the   tax-
payers,  but  this  gives  the  right  to  a  few big  corporations  to
come  in  and  put  patent  rights  on  large  programs  owned  by
the  people  and  exclude other  private  business men from  using
their   patents."    The   House   nevertheless   passed   the   Cole
amendment,  137  to   113.    Its   fate   is  up  to  the  conference
committee.
5.  This  bill  not  only  hands  over  the  fruits  of  a  12 billion
dollar  public  investment  to  the  private  power  companies  but
under  conditions which  give  them a  hidden subsidy.
This  is  how  it  •works.   Power  is  produced in  the  course  of
making   nuclear   material   which   is   principally   of   use   in
weapons.   The   problem   is  how  to   dispose  of  this   surplus
nuclear  material   left   over  after   power   is   produced.   The
problem  is  solved  by  declaring  this  material   the  exclusive
property  of  the  government   (no  one  else  wants  it  at   the
moment  in  any  significant  quantity).
Private  Enterprise  de  Luxe
The  government  in  turn  guarantees  the  private  operator  a
"fair  price" for  all  he  produces.  The fair  price  is  to  be  uni-
form  so that,  as  Holifield  and  Price  noted,  "the  highest  cost
and  least  efficient  producer  will  set  the  pace  on  price  sched-
ules."  At  the  same  time the  government is  thus  obligated  to
go  on paying for  this  stuff  even  if  mounting surpluses  should
reduce  its  value  "to  virtually  nothing."  And there  is nothing
in  the  bill  which  would  prevent  the  private  operator   from
thus  writing  off his  costs  at  the  expense  of  the  government.
This  is  indeed  private  enterprise  de  luxe,  cushioned  against
any  real  risk.
6.  Despite  all  this,  in  the  sale  of the  power produced, these
private  companies  will  be  subject  to  none  of  the  safeguards
so  painfully  won  for  electricity  consumers  over  the  past  half
century.   The  system  of  accounting  safeguards,  and  of  pref-
erences  for  public  bodies  and  cooperatives, to  be  found  in  the
Federal  Power  Act  and  in  the  Flood  Control  Act  of  1944  are
wholly  absent  from   the   bill  as   passed  by  the   House,  the
version  favored  by  the  Republican high  command.
The bill, as the minority report protested,  "is  barren  of any
recognition  of  the  public  interest  in  securing  electric  energy
from   this  new  resource  at  the  lowest  possible  rate."   The
Federal  Power  Commission's  advice was brushed aside.  If  the
Republicans  have  their   way   in  conference  committee,  the
REA  and  the  municipal  power  systems  of  the  West  will  not
have  the  same  preference  in  buying  atomic  power  that  they
have  in hydroelectric power.  This  is a  Grab with  a  capital  G.
Labor  and  the  AEC
7.  A minor  point  at  the  moment  may  loom  larger  with  the.
years.  Serious labor  problems have  arisen  in  connection with
atomic  plants.   "Chronic  discontent  and  frequent  strife,"  as
Holifield  and  Price noted, have marked their  operations.  They
suggested  and  with  Congressman  Shelley   (D.,  Cal.)   offered
from  the  floor  an  amendment which would have  established  a
labor  management  committee in  the  ABC to  ease  problems of
labor  relations  and  labor  dislocation.
This  would  also  serve  to  meet  a  complaint  voiced  at  the
hearings  on  the  bill  by  the  A.  F.  of  L.  representative.    He
wanted  to  know why  in  choosing the  personnel  of  the  AEC,
"corporation   lawyers,  investment   bankers,   government   bu-
reaucrats  would  seem  to  be  blessed  in  some  mysterious  way
with  a  genius for  administering trade  union  affairs  denied  to
trade union officials  and leaders."  The AEC is chastely  upper
class,  and  labor  unions  feel  very  much  on  sufference  in  their
dealings  with  it.   The  labor  amendment  was,  however,  voted
down.
Ill
The  Outlook: Remember Muscle Shoals
In   the  next  25  years  the   consumption   of  power  in  this
country  is  expected  to  triple.   A  pound  of  uranium  costing
about  $20 contains  as  much  energy  as  1,500  tons  of  coal;  at
$8  a  ton,  this  is   $12,000.   Installed  kilowatt  capacity   for
uranium  by  present  production means  are  already  less  than
double  those  of  a  coal  plant.   We  may  be  on  the  verge  of  a
second  industrial  revolution.  This  bill  would  give  control of
it  to  the  same  private  power  interests  who fought  TVA and
the great Western  hydroelectric projects.  This  is the backdrop
against  which  Morse  and  the  liberal  Democrats  staged  their
filibuster  in  the  Senate.
The fight may flare up  again  if  in conference  committee  the
Republican  leadership  seeks  to  eliminate  those  few  hard-won
improvements  like the  Johnson amendment which  were  added
in   the   Senate.    But   even   the   Johnson   amendment, which
would  enable a  progressive-minded AEC to establish  a nation-
wide  chain  of  atomic  TVA's,  would be  a  dead  letter  in  the
hands  of  the  present  Atomic Energy  Commission.  There  the
chairman,  Lewis  Strauss,  in  virtue  of  his  dual  capacity   as
presidential  atomic  adviser  and  AEC  head,  has  shown  his
determination  to  make  the  Commission  an  arm  of  the  power
trust,  as  he  did  in  the  Dixon-Yates  contract  which created  so
much  uproar  during  the  debate,  and  threatens  to undercut
TVA  and  power power.
Is  McCarran,  Too,  a Muscovite?
There  is  involved  here  a  greater  steal  by  far  than  tide-
lands.   Its  appeal  to  the  voting  public  in  the  power-hungry
regions  of  the  West  and  the  TVA-fertilized  regions  of  the
South  may  be  seen  by  the  fact  that  McCarran  and  Mundt
joined  George,  Russell,  Byrd  and  Stennis  in  voting  for  the
Johnson  amendment.  What   Dewey  earlier  this  year   called
"the    Moscow  concept"  of  public  power   seems   to  have   an
appeal  far  beyond  the  Left.   Every  region  which  has  tasted
its  benefits  becomes its  advocate,   irrespective   of  party  and
right-left  divisions.
Remember  Muscle Shoals.  The victorious Republicans  after
World  War  I  shut  off  its  potential  for  public  power.   Ulti-
mately  12  years  later,  this  was  one  of  the  issues  on  which
FDR  won  election.  Under  a  leadership  quite  different  from
the  nerveless  Lyndon Johnson,  the  atomic  energy  steal  is  an
issue  on  which  the  Democrats  could  win  their  way  back  to
power.   If  only  they  had  a  man  with   Morse's   energy   and
fighting capacity  to  lead  them  .  .  .  He in  the  Senate and
Holifield  in  the  House  deserve  applause  for  the  hard  fight
they  have  just  led—and  will  some  day  win—in  the   public
interest.
Dirge  to  a  Delinquent  Subscriber
If  you  are  one  of  those  delinquent  few  who  have  not  yet  renewed,  we  offer  a  morbid  thought—if   most
of   our  subscribers  were  like  you,  the  Weekly   would   have  passed  out  of  existence  months  ago.  As  it  is,  the
Weekly  flourishes  and   looks  forward  to  its  third  year  of  publication  with  confidence.  Take  up  your  pen  and
turn  to  the  coupon  on  the  next  page  and  send  us your  renewal  now. We  hate  to  lose  a  reader.  We  want  to
reach  more  people,  not  less.   We  are  growing  steadily,  even  in  the  dog  days.   You  helped  to  get  us started.
Keep  us growing  with  your  renewal,  and  you  can  ease  that  guilty  feeling  for  only  $4   more  by  adding  a
subscription for  a  friend.                                                                                                                             —I.  F.  STONE.
P.S.  Why   not  a  gift  subscription  for  your  minister,  local   editor,  town  library   or  Congressman?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  August  2, 1954
"Suppressing"  What  Blackstone   Really  Said  On The  Subject
The  Justice Dept.  Sets  Out  to  Make Informing  Respectable
A  new  campaign   to   make  informing   respectable   opened
July  23  with   a  little   noticed   speech  by  Assistant   Attorney
General  Warren  Olney  III.  He  spoke  on  "The Use of  Former
Communists  as Witnesses  in  Federal Trials"  before  the  Michi-
gan  Association  of  Prosecuting  Attorneys  at  Mackinac  Island.
Mr.  Olney   said  the  Department   "has been  the  target   re-
cently   for   an   unprecedented   barrage  of   abuse,  emanating
mostly from  certain newspaper columnists  . . ." He complained
that   the   use  of  informers  had   been  denounced   as  "a   sharp
departure  from  American  tradition   of  law."  He  proceeded
to  make  it  appear  that  the  use  of  informers  was  an  ancient
and  honorable,  almost  venerable,   institution.
The   Assistant   Attorney   General   said  "Law  enforcement
officers  have  made  use  of  informers  from  early  times.   Their
value  in  ferreting  out   crime  was  recognized   in  the   ancient
practice   of   English  medieval  law  known   as  approvement."
A  man  accused of  treason  or  felony  might  confess and  obtain
a  pardon  by  turning  witness  against  his  accomplices.   "If   the
accused  were  proved  guilty,"  Mr.  Olney  went  on,  "the  ap-
prover  was entitled  to  his  pardon.   On  the  other  hand,  if  the
accused  were  acquitted,  the  approver  was hanged."
A  footnote  at  this  point  in  the  mimeographed  copy  of  the
speech  cites  4  Blackstone  Commentaries   30  as  its  authority.
But  Mr.  Olney  did  not  tell  his  listeners  that  Blackstone   also
said  that  the  practice  of  approvement  had long been  abandoned
because  it  created  the  same kind  of  abuses as the  current  crop
of  political   informers.
What  Blackstone  Actually  Said
The  Assistant  Attorney  General  did  not  quote  Blackstone's
remark  that  "in  fact,  it  [approvement]  has long  been  disused,
for  much  mischief  arose  to  good  men,  by  false  and  malicious
accusations  thus  made."
In  Holdsworth's  history  of  English  law  (Vol. Ill,  p.  609)
it  is  said  that  approvement  was  "open  to  obvious  abuses"  and
did  not   survive  the  medieval  period.   Pollock   and  Maitland
are  cited   as  authorities  for   the  fact  that   even  in  the 13th
century  a  man  of  good  repute  in  his  own  community  did  not
have  to  answer  the  accusations  of  an  approver.
Holdsworth  also quotes Hale's venerable Pleas  to  the Crown,
as  saying  (ii. 226) of  approvement  pretty  much   what   the
New  York  Times  and  the  Alsop  brothers  have  been  saying
of  Brownell's  informers,  "The  truth  is,  that   more  mischief
hath  come  to   good  men  of   these  kind  of   approvements  by
felon   accusations  of   desperate  villains,  than   benefit   to   the
public  by  the  discovery  and  conviction  of  real  offenders."
There  is  dramatic  propriety  in  this  appeal  by  the  Depart-
ment  of  Justice  to  the  abandoned  precedents  of  a barbarous
age.   The  Attorney   General's  campaign  to  compel  testimony
from   witnesses  is  also  aimed  at   one  of   the   earliest  barriers
erected  by  modern  English  law  against  medieval  inquisition
and  denunciation.  The  attack  on  the  Fifth  amendment  and
the  defense  of  informers  spring  from  the  same soil.
Confusing  Perjury  with  Patriotism
The  evidence  in  a  series  of  recent  loyalty   and  deportation
cases   have  caught   some   of   the   Justice  Department's   best
known   informers  in  what   a   Neu>  York   Times   editorial  of
July  8  called  "direct  contradictions  .  .  .  that   smell  strongly
of  perjury."   The  New   York   Times  said  that  if  the  Depart-
ment  "feels  it  essential  to  use informers  in  the  conduct  of  its
anti-Communist   prosecutions ... it has the unmistakable duty
to  follow  up  relentlessly   any  indication   that  they   may  not
be telling  the truth."
This,  the  crucial  question,  Mr.  Olney  passed over  in silence.
Instead  he  dwelt  oratorically  on  the  sacrifices  of  men  "whom
certain  columnists  have  had  the  gall  to  call  'stool  pigeons'."
The  fact  is,  he  went  on  righteously,  "ever  since  the  time  of
Nathan   Hale  .  .  .  the  American  people  have  felt  only  grati-
tude  and  admiration"  for  such men.
This  effort   to  equate  the  Department's  stable  of  ex-Com-
munists with a great  revolutionary  war hero  is inept. If  Nathan
Hale  had  brought  back  as much  misinformation,  and  done as
much  damage  to  our  own  side  as  some  of  these  prize  speci-
mens,  he  would  never  have  been  hung  by  the  British.   We
would  have  shot him.
Why  Not Let Us Send o Sample  Copy  to a  Friend?
I. F. Stone's Weekly, 301  E. Capitol, Wash. 3, a  c.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name———————————————————————————
Street__.________________-______———
City__________Zone  ..-.--..  State-
Enter  this gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name..._._._........  ._.._.__._.....___________
City__...__......_.............  Zone    ......  State .....
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED