I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jun28.pdf

============================================================

Hushed  Up  By  The Press:  Ike's  Naivete  on  Guatemala—Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2, NUMBER  23
JUNE  28,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Made  To  Order  (By Brownell)  For  McCarthy
Capitol  Hill—There  were  no  television  cameras
in  Room  346  Old  House  Office  Building last Wednesday morn-
ing.     When   the   hearing   began,   a   member   of   the   House
Judiciary  Committee,   Walter   (D.,   Pa.)   scolded  the  witness
for  giving  out  his  testimony   to  the  press  in  advance.    The
Congressman  might  have  saved  himself  the  trouble  if  he  had
noticed  that  while  the  statement  was on  the  press  table,  there
were  only  one  or  two  reporters  present  to  receive  it.     The
almost  empty  hearing  room  in  which  Russell  Nixon,  legisla-
tive   representative   of    the   United   Electrical   Workers   of
America  (UE)   addressed  himself to  HJ  Res.  527  and  528 was
in  stark   and  eloquent   contrast   to  that  other  hearing  room
where  the   Senator   from   Wisconsin   had  starred.    That   the
chamber   should  have  been  so  empty   testified   to  how  little
the  McCarthy  hearings had  educated the  public and  the  Presi-
dent.     For   these   two   bills,   framed   by   Attorney   General
Brownell,  were  made to  order  for  McCarthy.
To  understand  their  full  meaning,  imagine  an  America  in
which  McCarthy   has  come   to   power.     Imagine   McCarthy
intent  on  preserving  a  facade of  legality.   Imagine that  these
two  Brownell  bills have  become law.   It  would  then  be within
McCarthy's  power  legally under  HJ  Res.  528  to  put  a special
receiver   in  charge  of   their   businesses  and  organizations,  to
seize  their  financial  assets  and  to  liquidate  them.    He  would
also  be  able  (under  HJ   Res.  527)  to  set  up  a  blacklist which
would  bar  opponents  from  employment   almost,  anywhere  in
American  industry  under  penalty  of   $10,000  fine  or   5 years
in  jail.
To  read  these  two  Brownell  bills  in   the   light   of
McCarthy's  record—and  indeed  the  Attorney  General's  readi-
ness  to  impute  treason  to  the  Democratic  opposition—is  to see
what  power  for  evil  they  would  give  the  unscrupulous.  Under
HJ   Res.  528, the  Attorney  General  could  go  before  the   Sub-
versive  Activities  Control  Board   and  move  to  liquidate  any
private  business,  trade  union  or  other  organization  which  he
believes  has  been  "infiltrated"   by   members  of    "Communist
action"   organizations.
It  would  not  be necessary   to   show   domination   and
control.   The  standard  would  be  "the   extent  to  which"  the
positions   taken   by   the  organization   "do   not   deviate   from
those  of"  Communists  and  "the  extent  to  which"  the  organ-
ization  or  business  was  "in  a  position  to  impair  the   effective
mobilization  or  use  of  economic  resources  or  manpower"  for
defense.    The  use to  which  such  vague  standards  could  be  put
by  a  McCarthy  should  not  be  difficult   to  imagine.
Under  HJ  Res.  527,  any  time  a  President   "finds ...  that
the  security  of  the  United  States  is  endangered   by  reason  of
.  . .  subversive  activity ... or threatened   disturbance  of the
international  relations  of  the  United  States"  he  may  bar  from
employment   in   "defense   facilities"    (as   broadly   defined   to
cover  virtually  all  civilian  industry)   any  "individuals  as  to
whom  there  is  reasonable  ground  to   believe  that   they   may
engage  in  sabotage,  espionage,  or  other  subversive  acts."
This  is  crystal  ball  legislation;  it  requires  a  determination
of   prospective   future   guilt.     While   a   hearing   would   be
accorded,  nothing  would  be  "deemed  to  require any  investiga-
tory   organization  of   the  U.   S.  Government  to   disclose  its
informants  or  other   information  which  would  endanger  its
investigatory  activity."    Hearings  would  be  held  in  the  dark.
These  are  the  key  bills  of  the  security  program  Eisenhower
in  his  broadcast  of  June  10  termed  "protection  against  Com-
munism,  without  any  degree  damaging or  lessening  the  rights
of   the  individual  citizen  as  guaranteed  by  our  laws  and   the
Constitution."    It  is  difficult   to  describe such  a characteriza-
tion  politely.   Ferguson  (R., Mich.),  who introduced  the bills
in  the  Senate, spoke  more  honestly  when  he  said  of  them  in  a
speech  on  June  17  that   they  went  "contrary  to  our  nature
and  traditions.  .  .  We  are groping  along  paths unaccustomed
to  most  Americans."    These  are in  sober fact  the paths toward
Fascism.
The  silence  and  apathy    which  surround  the  effort  to
rush   these   bills   through   Congress   should   dispel   any   easy
illusions  about  the  therapeutic   effect  of  the  McCarthy  circus.
The   Wall   Street   Journal   (June   1),   the  Louisville  Courier-
Journal  (May  12), and  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch   (May  20)
have  been  critical,  but   most  papers,  organizations and  trade
unions  are  afraid   to   oppose  anything  which  comes  wrapped
as  anti-Communism.     There   is  danger  of  what  Nixon  in  his
able  testimony*   called  a  "sneak  blitz".
The  UE  has Paul  Revered  enough  pressure  to  get  the  House
hearings  extended.     Congressmen   Eberharter   (D.,  Pa.)   and
Condon   (D.,   Cal.)   will  testify   against  the   bills.     In   the
Senate, where  Langer  (R.,  S. Dak.),  chairman  of  the  Judiciary
Committee,  is  opposed   to  the  bills,  a  similar   measure   (Mc-
Carran's  S.  23)   was  reported   out   by  a  ruse   and   called   up
on  the   consent   calendar  last   week   by   the  majority   leader,
Knowland  (Cal.).    Objections   by  Gore  (D.,  Tenn.),  Morse
(Ind.,  Ore.),  Hendrickson  (R.,  N.  J.),   Lehman   (D.,  N.  Y.)
and   Magnuson   (D.,  Wash.)   blocked   passage.    No   hearings
have  been  held  in  the  Senate;  Brownell  has  not  testified  on  his
bills.      Everyone    who   has   learned    anything    from    those
McCarthy   hearings  should  do  their  bit  to  rally  protest.  This
is  urgent.
* Copies  of   it   and  the  appended  legal  memoranda  may  be  obtained   as
ammunition  from  the  UE  national  office,  11  E.  51  St.,   New  York  22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  S8,1954
A  Story  The Newspapers Suppressed
Hushing  Up  Ike's  Honest  Naivete  On  Guatemala?
United  Nations,  N.  Y.—Though  anything  about  the  Presi-
dent  is  news,  not  a  single  newspaper  seems  to  have  reported
the  extraordinary  story  told  about  Eisenhower  by the  Guate-
malan   representative   at   the   special   session   of   the   UN
Security  Council  last  Sunday,
According  to  this  story,  the  President  last  January  pro-
posed  the  formation  of  a  joint  commission  to  take  up  dis-
putes  between  the  U.S.  and  Guatemala.   When  informed  of
the  role  played  by  United  Fruit  and  of the  relations  between
the  company and  Secretary  of  State  Dulles  and  then  Assist-
ant   Secretary  for   Inter-American    Affairs   John   M.  Cabot,
Eisenhower  suggested  these  two  officials  be  left  off  the  com-
mission !
Here  is  the  story,  as  told  by  the  Guatemalan   delegate,
Castillo-Arriola,  to  the  Security  Council:
"Mr.  Toriello  Garrido,  Guatemalan  Ambassador  in  Wash-
ington,   had  a  farewell  interview  of  several   minutes   with
President   Eisenhower  [last  January  IPS].  It  is  interesting
to  note  that  in  those  few  moments   President   Eisenhower
.knew  nothing  about,  or  had  entirely   different   information
on,  the  state  of  the  United  Fruit  Company's  business  in  my
country.
"The    former   Guatemalan   Ambassador    [now    Foreign
Minister]  informed  him  fully   of  the  manner  in  which  the
United  Fruit  Company  and  other   U.S.  monopolies had  been
operating  in  Guatemala, with  full  control  over  all  our  ports
and  communications  and  in  occupation  of vast tracts of terri-
tory,  with  Guatemala's  national   economy  virtually   subject
to their  interests.
"President  Eisenhower  told  Ambassador  Toriello that that
situation   could  not  continue  in  the  same  form  and  that  it
would  be  necessary  to  come  to  an  arrangement.    Mr.  Toriello
then  informed  President  Eisenhower  of  the  implications  of
the  fact  that  both  Mr.  John  M.  Cabot,  Assistant  Secretary
for  Inter-American  Affairs  and  Mr.  Foster  Dulles, the  Secre-
tary  of  State,  himself  had  close  connections  with  the  fruit
monopoly.
"In   view  of  that   situation,   'President   Eisenhower    sug-
gested  the  formation  of  a  joint  commission which  wauld  not
include  those   officers,   to  study  the  problem  and  work  out
just  solutions."
As  pointed out  in  the  last  issue  of  the  Weekly,  Mr.  Cabot's
family   is  a  major   interest  in  the  United  Fruit   Company
Bank,  First  National  of  Boston,  and  Mr.  Dulles's  law  firm,
Sullivan  &  Cromwell, represents   the  United  Fruit  railroad,
International  Railways  of  Central  America.
Cabot  Transferred   to  Sweden
On  February  11,  a  few  weeks  after  this  reported  conver-
sation  at  the  White  House,  Mr.  Cabot  was  appointed  Am-
bassador  to Sweden.  Henry  Cabot Lodge, the  U.S.  representa-
tive  at  the  Security  Council,  in  his  rejoinder  to  the  Guate-
malan  delegate,  made no reference  to  the  story  of  this  inter-
view  at  the  White  House.
The press  also  passed  over  the  charges  made by the  Guate-
malan  delegate  to  the  Council against  a  former  U.S.  Ambas-
sador  and  Mr.  Lodge's  answer  to  those  charges.
The   delegate   said  Richard  Patterson,   the   former   U.S.
Ambassador   to   Guatemala,   "announced   openly   that   the
Government  then  headed by  Dr. Juan  Jose  Arevalo  [Arbenz's
predecessor]  would  be  overthrown  as  the  result  of  interna-
tional  pressure;   incited  various  groups   of  conspirators   to
engage   in   subversive   activities  against  the   constitutional
regime   and   expressed   to  high   officials   of   the  Guatemalan
government  the  opinion  that  the  Guatemalan  problem  was
a  matter  which  could  easily  be  settled,  as  it  represented  a
just  claim  and  involved  only  a  few  million  dollars,  but  that,
if  the  United  States  were  to  give  way  in  the  case  of  Guate-
mala,  it  would  be  obliged  to  do  so  elsewhere,  which  would
mean  a  loss  of many thousand  million  dollars."
Just  One of  Those  Democrats
Mr.  Lodge's  reply  to  this  was,  "Mr.  Patterson  does  not
hold   office   under  this   administration;   he   has   never   held
office   under  this   administration."     The   U.S.   delegate   also
did  not  reply  directly  to  the  charge  that  operations  against
the   Guatemalan  government   were   directed  by  the   former
chief   of  the  U.S.  Military  Aviation  Mission  to  Guatemala,
who  asked  for  his  discharge  from   the  U.S.  Army  in   1952
"and   then  came  to  live  and  work  in  Guatemala."
Mr.  Lodge   (and  the  press)   also  passed  over  the  Guate-
malan's  reply  to  Secretary  Dulles'  statement  of  June  8,  "If
the  United  Fruit  matter  were  settled,  if  they  gave  a  gold
piece  for  every  banana,  the  problem  would  remain  just   as
it  is  today  as  far   as  the  presence  of  communist  infiltration
in  Guatemala is  concerned."
"Mr.   Dulles  did  not  consider,"  the  Guatemalan   delegate
told  the  Security  Council, "that  there  is a  reverse  side to this
medal.   I  could  tell  him—and  tell  him  truthfully—  that  if
tomorrow  the  Communist  party   (which  has  a  following  in
Guatemala  because  Guatemala is  a free  country  which  allows
freedom  of  thought)  were  to  be outlawed by  the  Guatemalan
government   and  all  its   members  deported,  a   new.  pretext
would  be found  for  the  campaign.   For  the  purpose  is  to  aid
the  monopolies  . . . which  have  lost  their  sources  of exploita-
tion  by Guatemala's  exercise of its  sovereign  rights  . . . The
agrarian  reform, for  instance,  is  a  piece  of  legislation  which
has  been  introduced in  my  country  quite  legitimately   and  in
according  with  the  principles of  the  United  Nations."
Indo-China  and  Guatemala
The   press   also   ignored   the   part   played  by   the   Indo-
Chinese  crisis  in  the  Security  Council  session  on  Guatemala.
The delegates  from  Honduras,  Nicaragua,  Brazil  and Colom-
bia  "ran   interference"    (as  they  say  in  football)   for   U.S.
policy, with  a  resolution  referring  the  Guatemalan  complaint
to the  Organization of American States.
The  French  delegate  upset  the  U.S.  plans.   M.  Hoppenot
rose  to  recall  the  words  used  by  Mr.  Lodge two  days  earlier
in  bringing  the  Thai  request  for  intervention  in  Indo  China
before  the  Security   Council  against   the  wishes  of  France.
This  was  the  French  way  of  retaliating".
"The  United  States  was  a  small  country  for  a  long  time,"
M.  Hoppenot quoted  Mr.  Lodge  as  saying,  "and  still  looks  at
many  things  from  the  standpoint  of  a  small  country.   I  hope
that  I  will  never  live  to  see  the  day  when  a  small  country
comes  to  the  United  Nations  and  asks  for  protection  against
war  and  is  simply  greeted   with  the  question:  What  is  the
hurry?"
M.  Hoppenot thereupon  amended the  resolution  to  call  for
a  cease-fire and  asked  for  a  separate vote  on the  amendment.
When  the  sponsors  insisted  that  the  resolution  be  accepted
or  rejected  as  a  whole, it  was  vetoed  by the  Soviet  Union.
M.  Hoppenot  then   offered   the  cease-fire  resolution   as   a
substitute  and  it  was  unanimously  adopted.   Mr.  Lodge   sar-
castically  disparaged  the  importance of  the  cease-fire  resolu-
tion  at  the  close  of  the  session  and  said  sourly,  "I  commend
the  representative  of  France  for  having  been  able to  find  the
lowest  common  denominator."
The  French  were  opposed  to  the  Thai  request  for  a  peace
observation  mission  as  a  step  toward  internationalization  of
the  Indo-Chinese war.   The  cease-fire  resolution   they  spon-
sored  made unanimous action  possible, instead  of  leaving  the
Soviet  Union  in  the  position  of  "blocking  peace"  by  a  veto.
The  cease-fire  also  left  the   door  open  to  a  new  appeal  by
Guatemala  to  the   Security   Council.   The  Latin    American
Republic  had  asked  for   an  observation   mission.   The   U.S.
favored  such  a  mission  for  Thailand  but  not  for  Guatemala.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  28, 1954
Nobody  Seems  to  Like  John  Foster  Dulles
Round  The  Capitol And  The  Globe
"Massive   Retaliation"—Against   Little  Guatemala:   John
Foster  Dulles's  "banana  war"  against  Guatemala  is  liable  to
end  with  the  overthrow  of  Dulles as  Secretary  of  State.  The
repercussions  throughout  Latin  America  are  unfavorable  to
the  U.S.   The  hypocrisy of  the  State  Department  was  never
more  transparent  than  in  its  appeals  at  the  United  Nations
to  keep  the  Guatemalan  dispute  "within  the  family."   The
Guatemalan  delegate  to  the  UN  behaved  with  great  dignity
and  spoke  with  impressive  restraint  at  last  Sunday's  session.
The  rebels  are  not  taken  seriously;  there  is  little  likelihood
that  they  can  succeed  without  an  Army  coup  d'etat  inside
Guatemala  and that  does  not  seem to  be in  the  United  Fruit
Company's cards.  The war  itself,  on the  heels  of our demand
to  search  ships  on the  high  seas,  left  an  unpleasant  impres-
sion  on  public  opinion  in  friendly  Western  nations,  the  im-
pression  of  a  clumsy  and  arrogant   diplomacy, prepared  to
change  the  rules  at  our  convenience, even rules  for  which the
U.S.  has  itself  fought  long  and  hard—like  freedom   of  the
seas.   Respect  for  Dulles was  never  lower.
The New Mendes-France Government: The French Embassy
here .blames  Dulles for  the  fall  of the  Laniel  government  and
Bidault's  loss  of  the  Foreign  Ministry.   The  Embassy  feels
there  was  no  need  for  Dulles  suddenly  to  make  so  brutally
plain  that  the  U.S.  was  no longer  interested  in  Indo-China,
thus  destroying  Bidault's  bargaining  power  at  Geneva  and
Paris.  The fact  is, however, that a subtle game was going on.
Bidault   did  not  want   American  intervention;   he  wanted
American  threats  to  intervene  which  would  strengthen   his
own  hand  in   negotiating   a   peace  which   would  maintain
French  position  in  Indo-China.   Dulles  understood  this.   He
was  not  interested  in  making it  possible  for  Bidault  to make
as  good  a  peace  settlement  as  possible.  Dulles was  anxious
to  keep  the  war  going,  to  take  over  the  Associated  States
from  France  if  necessary  and  to  create  another  South  Korea
in  Indo-China.   When  it  became  clear  that  Bidault  did  not
share  these  objectives,  Dulles  dumped  him.   The  realization
of   this  helped  Mendes-France  with  the   French  right.   Bi-
dault's  fall   has   ended  the  Catholic  MRP  monopoly  of  the
French  Foreign   Office  since  the  war,  and  with  it  may  have
ended  an  era  in  American  relations  with  Western  Europe
which  were  based  on  a  "Little  Catholic"  Europe.
Behind  the  Churchill Visit: Another  sector in  which  trouble
is brewing for  Dulles is in Anglo-American relations.  Neither
Churchill  nor  Dulles  like  Eden  and  a  main  purpose  of  the
visit  is  to  establish  direct  contact  with  Eisenhower.   Church-
ill's  ties  with  Eisenhower  are  old  and  close  and  the  State
Department  crowd  does  not  relish  being  short-circuited  by
the  Prime  Minister.   The  fear   is  that  Churchill  is  coming
in  an  effort  to  'sell  the  President  the  idea  that  China  can  be
weaned  away  from  a  too  close  dependence on  Russia  if  doors
to  the  West  begin  to  open,  first  in  a  relaxation   of  trade
restrictions,  then   (when  public  opinion  has  been  prepared)
in  recognition.
Eccles  for  Recognizing  Red China:  The  British  still  do not
seem  to  realize  how powerful is  the  hold  of  the  China Lobby
on   American  politics.    The   only  national   figure   in  many
months  who  has  dared  suggest  recognition   of  Red  China  is
Marriner  S.  Eccles,  former  chairman  of  the  Board  of  Gov-
ernors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  "Nothing  is  solved,"
he  told  the  National  Association  of  University  Presidents  in
a  speech last  May 3, "by  our  denial of the fact  that the Com-
munist  Government  is  the  Government of  China.  In  fact  our
attitude   toward  China  only  serves  to  weld  the  Communist
world   more   closely  together.   A  solution  of   the   involved
problems  of  Korea  and  Indochina,  which  so  directly   affect
Red  China  and the  free  world  .  .  .  will  not  be  hastened  by
Mr. Dulles' refusal  to either  speak or look at  Mr.  Chou  En-lai,
Red  China's  premier,  as  recently  reported  by  the   United
Press."
7
Frankness  on  Capitol  Hill
Washington—For the  second year in a row, the  House
Republican  leadership  has  rejected  an  Eisenhower  re-
quest  for  a small appropriation ($185,000 asked for  the
1954  budget,  $100,000  for  the  1955 budget)  to  establish
a  Federal-State  program to  help  migratory  labor.  The
Labor,  Health,  Education  and  Welfare  appropriations
bill  did  include  a  $1,500,000  Mexican  farm  labor  pro-
gram.
Van  Zandt  (R.  Pa.)  on June 9  tried  unsuccessfully  to
amend  the  bill  to  provide the  $100,000 asked  for  Eisen-
hower,  saying  that  the  welfare of  a  million American
migratory  farm  families  was  at  stake.   O'Konski   (R.
Wis.)  supported  him,  pointing  out  that  the  bill  con-
tained  15 times  as  much  "for  Mexican  migratory work-
ers  as  for  American migratory  workers."  This  brought
an  unusually   frank   reply   from   Bosbey   (R.   I1L),   the
chairman  of  the  subcommittee  which  was  in  charge  of
this  portion of  the  appropriations  bill.
Busbey  said  "the  money  that  is  appropriated in  this
bill for the Mexican farm  labor program is  not appropri-
ated for the benefit  of  Mexican labor.  It is  appropriated
to  recruit Mexican  labor  for  the  farmers who need this
stoop-back  labor  in  this  country  and cannot  get  it  any
place  else.   The  crops could  not  be  harvested  unless  we
appropriated  this  money  to  recruit  that  Mexican  farm
labor."
Maury  Maverick  on Dienbienphn: Among those in  Congress
and  out  who  had  a  good  word  to  say  in  death  for   former
Congressman  Maury  Maverick,  none  mentioned  one  of   his
last  public  statements.   In  this.  Maverick  took  issue  with
Senator  Knowland,  who  had  likened  the  defenders  of  Dien-
bienphu  to  the  defenders  of  the  Alamo.   Maury, outspoken
and  warm-hearted  to the last  in  his  sympathy  for  the  under-
dog,  told  the  San  Antonio  Light   (May 9)  that  this  was  an
insult  to  the  Texans.   "The  defenders  of  the  Alamo,"  Maury
said,  "were  free  men  fighting  for  liberty.   The  defenders of
Dienbienphu  were  all  mercenaries,  fighting  for  French  colo-
nialism.   They  were  defending  the  most  disgraceful  and  cor-
rupt  administration  in  Asia."   This  was  worthy  of  Maury,
who  led  the  first  mixed  delegation  in  history  from  Texas  to
a   Democratic  national  convention  in   1952.    We  salute  his
passing,  and   send   our  warmest   sympathy   to   his   family.
Maury  Maverick was  the  kind  of  man  the  name  American
once  denoted.
Right  of  Asylum  in  Britain:  It  is  hardly  a  secret  among
Left  intellectuals  that  a  whole generation  of  American  refu-
gees  is beginning  to  grow  up  abroad  as  repression  increases
at  home.  It  is thus  of interest to note  the wide support in  the
British  press  given to  Dr. Cort, an American lecturing at  the
University  of  Birmingham, who has  appealed  for  asylum  in
England  after   his  passport  was  lifted  by  the  Embassy   in
London.  The ever generous New  Statesman  and Nation  came
to  Dr.  Cort's defense  with  a  long leader  in  its  issue  of  June
19.  More surprisingly,  the  London  Times  in  a  leader  on  the
same  date  also  expressed  sympathy.   "The  existence  of  close
and  friendly  relations  with  a  foreign  state," the  Times  said,
"is,  in  principle,  no  reason  for  refusing  political  asylum  to
its  subjects.   There  can  be no  geographical  boundary  or  bias
upon  this  boon."   It  was  England's  glory  in  the  Nineteenth
century  to  shelter  exiles  from  older  forms  of  despotism,  and
in  the  Twentith  Century  to  give  a  home  to  those  fleeing  op-
pression  in the  Fascist States and in the  Soviet bloc.  We hope
the  same principle  will be upheld in the  case of refugees  from
the  brand  of  Fascism  developing  in  America.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  28, 195i
The  Debate Which  May Have  Killed  The  Wiretap  Bill
A  Southern  Democrat  Warns  Against Thought  Control
On  June  11,  Morse  (Jnd.  Ore.)  rose  in  the  Senate  to deliver
the  second  in  a  series  of  address  he  has  been  giving against
wiretapping.    The  surprise  was   the   speech   which  followed
from  Johnston  of  South  Carolina,  a  ranking  member  of   the
Judiciary  committee  and  one   of   the   conservative   Southern
Democrats  who  wield  so  much  power  in  the  Senate.   Though
little  attention  was  paid  by  the  press  to  what  was  said,  this
debate   seems   to   have   ended  Attorney   General   Brownell's
hope  of  getting  legislation  permitting  the  FBI  legally  to  tap
wires.
Mr.  JOHNSTON  of  South  Carolina.    As  a  member  of  the
subcommittee   which  is  holding  hearings  on  the  bills  relating
to  wire-tapping,  I  have  become  very  much  interested  in  this
question.    My  convictions   are  deep-seated.    Whatever   pro-
posals  of  a  permissive  nature  may  come  from  the  Judiciary
Committee   as  a   result   of   its   consideration   of   the   several
measures  before  it,  it  will  not  meet  with  my  approval.    I  am
against  them  one  and  all.    Every  one  of  them  does  violence
to  my  concept  of  the  democratic  way of  life.  . .
We  shall  be  asked   to  support   a measure  permitting   our
every  expressed   thought   to  become   public  property.    Make
no  mistake  about  that.    Look  out  for  the  day  when  mechan-
ical  mind-readers  shall  be  employed  to  search  for   and  reveal
our   contained   thoughts.     The   proposals   in   these  measures
are  only  entering   wedges.    Later  on   we  must   amend  and
amend  and  amend.    When  amendments  are  over,  total   sur-
render  of  all our  rights  will  have  been  accomplished.  .  .  .
This   proposed   legislation  gives  every   government    official
under  the  Attorney   General  a  license  to  become   a'  peeping
torn. ... He  will  take  his ill-gained  knowledge  and with  it
the  remains  of  every  remnant  of  a  priceless inheritance  under
our  Bill  of  Rights.    No  threat,  peril,  nor  imminent  national
disaster  appear  on  our  horizon  which  would  justify  this  kind
of  sacrifice on our part.  .  . .
I  do  not  know  whether  the  Senator  has  ever  seen-  an  FBI
report or not,  but  I think it  would  awaken many  people in  the
United  States  if  they  knew  just  how  the  FBI  obtains  records,
and  how  it   goes  about  wiretapping  at  the  present   time.    I
think  it  should  be prevented  from  wiretapping.  .  .
Mr.  WELKER.     I  certainly  agree  with  the  Senator  in  his
conclusion  that  all  private  wiretapping  should  be  eliminated.
However  when  our  country  is  in  danger,  and  espionage agents
are  working  day  and  night,  it   seems  to  me  that  we  should
not  put  roadblocks  in  the  path  of  our  police  officers  and  open
the  gates  for   subversives,  saboteurs  and  espionage  agents.
Mr.  JOHNSTON  of   South   Carolina.    That   is  where  I
differ  with  the Senator  from  Idaho.  .  . I  believe the security of
our  country  can  be  very  well  protected  without  such  a prac-
tice.  . . I do not  believe  anyone  should  be allowed to  tap wires,
even  with  the consent  of a judge.  . .
Mr.   WELKER.     How,   on   God's   green   earth,   could   an
innocent   man   object   to  his  wire  being   tapped  if,   in   fact,
J.  Edgar  Hoover  felt  that  the  man  was a subversive?
Mr.  MORSE.    I  may  say  most  respectfully,  in  the  vein  of
two  lawyers  disagreeing, that  I  think  it  is highly non-sequitur
argument  on  the   whole  issue  of   protecting   the  privacy  of
Americans   to   say,  'If   you  do  not   have  anything  to  hide,
what  objection  do you have  to giving  up your  privacy?'  . . .
The  privacy  of  the  home, which  is  the  castle  of  a  free  man,
is  so precious  to  freedom,  that  I  do  not  believe any American
ought  to  be  forced  by  law  to  give  it  up  simply  on  the  basis
of  the  argument,  'What  do  you  have  to  hide?'    The  answer
to  the  argument  is, 'Nothing;  but  what  I  want  to  preserve  is
my  right  to complete privacy.' ...
Mr.  JOHNSTON  of  South  Carolina.    Mr.  President,  from
this  discussion I  think  it  can  be  seen  that  there  will  be  differ-
ences  upon  methods  of  handling  the  situation,  but  I certainly
believe,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  that  wiretapping should  be
prohibited  in  any  form.
When  this  is  done  we  will  begin   to  restore   a  measure  of
freedom  to  a  people  encircled  by  fear  and  hysteria.    We  will
begin  the  task  of  making  more  secure  all  the  protective   pro-
visions  of  our  Bill  of  Rights.     We  will  begin  the  work—so
long   neglected—of   protecting   the  individual  in   the   rights
he  has  won  through   the  struggle  of  the  centuries.    We  can
then   proclaim   freely   to  the  world:   'Others  may   lose  their
individual  rights  but  we  intend  to  preserve  ours."
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly, 301  E. Capitol,
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  thi
Name
Street       .    ...                                ...  .    .....  .......
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money
(To)  Name
Street       ..............
City                                      Zone
Wash.  3, D. C.
2  enclosed   $5:
State __ -
enclosed) :
State _ .— ...
6-28-54
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED