I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954may03.pdf

============================================================

Justice  Douglas  on The  Right  of  Radicals to  Work, Page Two
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2, NUMBER 15MAY  3,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Talking  Tough, While  Brandishing  A  Twig
The  issue of  Newsweek  dated  April  26  described  the  Eisen-
hower  Administration  in  the  Indo-Chinese  crisis  as "calm  but
implacable."     The   Washington   Post   of   Sunday,  April   2J,
had  carried  an  eight  column  streamer,  "U.S.  Will  Be Playing
Strong  New  Hand  at  Geneva."    This  was  the  general  im-
pression  created  by  Dulles  and  Nixon.    But  overnight  some-
thing  happened.   "U.S.   Spurns  More  Active  Indo  Rule,"  said
the  same  paper's  headlines  next  morning.    "Loss  of  Country
to  Reds  Regarded  as Preferable  to  Belligerent  Status."   That
same  day  the  President,  addressed  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Com-
merce  in  a quite  different  key from  that  of  his Vice  President
and  his  Secretary  of  State.    Eisenhower expressed  the  "hope
that  the  logic  of  today's  situation  would  appeal  to  all peoples,
regardless  of  their  ruthlessness"  to  "see  the  futility  of  depend-
ing   upon  war  or   the  threat   of   war"   and  that   at   least  a
"modus   vivendi"   might   be   reached   in   Geneva.     "Modus
vivendi"  means  a  way  of  living  together,  i.e.  of  co-existence.
Perhaps  the  President  was  afraid   to  say  this  in  a  language
more  Congressmen  could understand.
The  climbdown  continued.    On  Tuesday  Nixon  explained
to  a  conference  of  state  governors  that  the  Eisenhower  Ad-
ministration  does  not  want  to  send  troops  into  Indo-China
"but  we  can't  let  the  Russians know  that."    Presumably the
Air  Force  had  strict  orders  to  shoot  down  all  carrier  pigeons
carrying  copies  of  that  day's  newspapers to  Moscow.    Next
day   David   Lawrence  reported   from   Geneva,  that   nobody
wanted   war   but   that   "the   new   development   which  has
Soviet  Russia  guessing  is  that  American  representatives talk
as if  they  are prepared  to  go the  limit  to  save  Southeast  Asia."
Lawrence  went  on  to  add  in  an  aside  not  meant  for  the  ears
of  the  Kremlin,  "But  it  should be  clearly understood  America
has  not  the  slightest  intention  of  'going  it   alone'  and  will
enter  a local war  in  Southeast Asia only if  all the  other nations
agree   to   collective  action."    What   had  happened  to   that
talk  of  taking  any  risk  to  prevent  Indo-China   from  going
Communist?    The  Eisenhower  Administration  had   reversed
Teddy  Roosevelt's  maxim  about  walking  softly  but  carrying
a  big  stick.   It  talked big,  and  unsheathed an  undersized twig.
The  G.O.P. Preferred  A Bipartisan  War
Washington  has  never  looked  sillier  than  in  last week-end's
reversal.    Some  of  the  factors  which  played  a  part   may  be
spelled  out.    There  was  first  of  all  an  unsuccessful  effort   by
Dulles  and  Admiral  Radford  to  sell  two  forms  of  interven-
tion  to  Congressional  leaders.   The  first  was limited  interven-
tion  by  airpower  from   U.S.   carriers  in  Indo-China  waters.
The  second  was  for  a  Congressional  resolution   giving  Eisen-
hower  a blank  check  in  advance to  intervene  in  Indo-China  as
he  saw   fit.   Many  Republicans,  still  deeply  isolationist,  hung
back.     Many   Democrats,    interventionist    by    conditioning,
were  willing  to  go along on  Indo-China  [Senator  Ed  Johnson,
see  his  speech  on  page  3,  is  an  exception]   but   only  if   the
Administration  took  the  responsibility  for  "Ike's  war."     The
Republicans  preferred  to  share  the  honors.
Dulles  and  Nixon  set  out  to  prepare  the  public  mind  for
war,  but   only  succeeded  in  waking  the  popular   desire   for
peace.    There  was  a  flood  of  mail  against  intervention,   and
as  we went  to  press  the  House  leadership  was  trying  hard  to
beat  down  an  appropriations  rider  by  Congressman  Coudert
(R.,   N.Y.)   forbidding  the  President  to  send  troops   abroad
without   Congressional  approval.    The   China  Lobby   crowd
was  finding  few  takers  for  its  line  that  no  American   boys
would  be  needed  since  we  could  "release  the  armed  forces  of
the   free  nations  of   Asia"   (Jenner),  placing  at   our   service
"the  fourth  and  fifth  largest  armies  on  earth,  the  Nationalist
Chinese  and  the  South  Koreans"   (Bridges  to  the  D.A.R.),
who  would   do  the   fighting   for   us  "more  than   1,100,000
strong"  (Knowland).  No  doubt  the  possibility of  an  alliance
with  Chiang  and  Rhee  played  its  part  in  the  next  big  failure
of   the   Dulles-Radford  team—the   inability   to   sell   "united
action"  in  London  and  Paris.
Peace  By Some  Miracle . . .
One  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  that  Peiping  let  it  be
known   that   it   would  intervene  in   Indo-China  if   we  did.
The  risks  of  going  it  alone  politically  at  home  and  militarily
abroad  weighted  the  scales  against  Dulles  and  Radford.    In
any  case  there  is  little  reason  to  believe  that  more  men  and
materiel,  even  if  they  could  be  gotten  into  the  Indo-Chinese
jungles,  would  turn  the  tide.   According to  Senator Mansfield
(D.,  Mont.)   the  French  Union  forces  are  losing  though   they
have  a  5-3  edge  over  the  rebels  in  manpower  and  are  getting
ten  times  as much  tonnage  from  us  as  Ho's  forces  get  from
the  Chinese.    Dien  Bien  Phu  was  given  up   some  time  ago.
The  real  worry  is  whether  the  French   can  hold   on  in   the
North,   or   at   least  make  an  orderly  withdrawal  along   the
single  road   and   rail   line  which   connects   Hanoi   with   the
South,  and which are constantly being cut  by  the  rebel  forces.
Except  for  Radford,  the  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  been  opposed
to  intervention,   though  ready  to  be  "united"  if  Dulles  and
Radford  could  find  other  nations  to  supply  the  "action."    In
this  they  reflect  the  national  mood;  we  have  no  objections
to  policing  the  world  so long  as it  can  be done by  pushbutton.
We  are  ready  to  fight  Communism  everywhere,  if  others  will
carry   the   guns,   and  especially   if   only   Asians   (whom  we
regard  as  bargain  basement  warriors)   will  fight  Asians.   So
with  the  backdown  at  Geneva,  peace  by  some  miracle  has  a
fighting   chance.
6  ;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
n
May   3, 1954
Can  Dissenters  Be  Deprived  of  Profession  and  Livelihood?
Only  A  Supreme  Court  Minority  Upholds  Their  Right  to Work
As  part  of  the  American thought  control  drive  blueprinted
by  the  U.S. Chamber  of  Commerce  in  1946,  radicals  are  being
deprived  of  the right  to work and  to practice their  professions.
Last  week  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  touched  upon   the  issue
in  the  case  of  Dr. Edward  A.  Barsky,  a noted  New  York  sur-
geon,  who  has  been  hounded  ever  since  he  served  in   Spain
and   became   chairman  of   the   Joint   Anti-Fascist     Refugee
Committee.
T)r.  Barsky   had  appealed   to  the  Supreme  Court  against  a
six  month  suspension  from  practice imposed  upon  him  by  the
New  York  Board  of  Regents.   The  penalty  was  the  result  of
his  conviction (and  six  months  sentence) for  contempt  of  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  in  1946 when  he
refused    to  turn  over  the  records   of   the  Joint  Anti-Fascist
Refugee   Committee.  The  Supreme  Court, 6-3, upheld  the  sus-
pension.
Because  of  the  importance of  the  ease  and  because  even  the
New   York   Times  did  not  give  text,  we  are  reprinting   the
heart  of   the  separate  dissents  by  Justices  Frankfurter   and
Black  and  the  text  of  the  dissent  by  Justice  Douglas, which
we  believe  will  prove historic.
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter,  dissenting,  in  Barsky  v.  Regents:
"It  is  one thing  thus  to  recognize  the  freedom   which  the
Constitution   wisely  leaves  to  the   States   in  regulating  the
professions.   It  is  quite  another  thing,  however, to  sanction
a  State's  deprivation  or  partial  destruction  of  a  man's  pro-
fessional   life   on  grounds   having  no   possible   relation   to
fitness,  intellectual  or  moral,  to  pursue  his  profession."
Mr.  Justice  Douglas,  dissenting,  with   whom   Mr.  Justice
Black  concurs:
"Mr.  Justice  Holmes,  while  a   member  of   the  Supreme
Judicial   Court  of  Massachusetts,  coined  a  dictum  that  has
pernicious   implications.    'The  petitioner   may  have  a  con-
stitutional  right  to  talk   politics,'  he. said,  'but  he  has  no
constitutional  right .to  be  a  policeman.'   See  MeAuliffe      v.
New  Bedford,    155  Mass.  216,  220, 29 N.E.  617.   By  the  same
reasoning  a  man has no constitutional right  to teach, to work
in  a  filling  station,  to  be  a  grocery  clerk,  to  mine  coal,  to
tend  a  furnace,  or  to  be  out  on  the  assembly  line.   By that
reasoning  a  man  has  no  constitutional  right  to  work.
"The  right  to  work, I  had assumed,  was the  most  precious
liberty  that  man  possesses.    Man has  indeed as  much  right
to  work  as  he has  to  live,  to  be  free,  to  own property.   The
American   ideal  was   stated   by  Emerson  in   his   essay  on
Politics,  'A  man  has  a  right  to  be  employed,  to  be  trusted,
to  be  loved,  to  be  revered.'   It  does  men  little  good  to  stay
alive  and  free  and  propertied,  if  they  cannot  work.   To work
means  to  eat.    It  also means to  live.   For  many  it  would be
better  to  work in jail  than  to  sit  idle  on the  curb.   The great
values  of  freedom  are  in  the  opportunities   afforded  man  to
press  to  new horizons, to  pit  his  strength  against  the  forces
of  nature,  to  match  skills  with  his  fellow  men.
.  "The  dictum  of  Holmes  gives  a  distortion  to  the  Bill  of
Rights.    It  is  not  an  instrument  of  dispensation  but  one of
deterrents.   Certainly  a  man  has  no affirmative  right  to  any
particular  job  or  skill  or  occupation.   The  Bill  of  Rights does
not  say  who  shall  be  doctors  or  lawyers  or  policemen.    But
it  does  say  that  certain  rights  are  protected,  that  certain
things  shall  not  be  done.   And  so  the  question  here  is  not
what  government  must  give,  but rather what  it  may not take
away.
"The  Bill  of  Rights  prevents  a  person  from  being  denied
employment  as  a  teacher  who though  a  member  of  a  'sub-
versive'   organization   is   wholly   innocent   of   any   unlawful
purpose  or  activity.    Wieman  v.   Updegraff,     344  U.S.   183.
It  prevents  a  teacher  from  being  put  in  a  lower  class  scale
than  white  teachers  solely  because  he  is  a  Negro.   Alston
v.  School  Board,  112  F.   2d  992.   Those  cases  illustrate  the
real  significance  of  the  Bill  of  Rights.
"So far  as  we can tell  on the  present  record,  Dr.  Barsky's
license  to  practice  medicine has  been  suspended, not  because
he  was  a  criminal,  not  because  he  was  a  Communist,  not
because  he  was  a  'subversive,'  but  because  he  had   certain
unpopular  ideas  and  belonged  to  and  was  an  officer   of  the
Joint  Anti-Fascist  Refugee  Committee, which  was  included
in  the  Attorney  General's  list."    If,  for  the  same   reason,
New  York  had  attempted  to  put  Dr.  Barsky  to  death  or  put
him  in jail  or to  take  his property, there  would  be a  flagrant
violation  of  due  process.    I  do not  understand  the  reasoning
which  holds  that  the  State  may  not  do  these  things,  but
may  nevertheless   suspend  Dr.  Barsky's   power  to   practice
his  profession.   I  repeat,  it  does  a  man  little  good  to  stay
alive  and  free  and  propertied,  if  he  cannot work.
"The   distinction   between  the   State's   power   to   license
doctors  and  to  license street  vendors  is  one of  degree.   The.
fact  that  a  doctor  needs  a  good  knowledge of  biology  is  no
excuse  for  suspending  his  license  because  he  has  little  or
no   knowledge  of   constitutional    law.    In   this   case   it   is
admitted  that  Dr.  Barsky's   'crime'  consisted   of  no  more
than a justifiable mistake concerning his constitutional rights.
Such  conduct  is  no  constitutional   ground  for  taking  away  a
man's  right  to  work.    The  error  is  compounded  where,  as
here,  the  suspension  of  the  right  to  practice  has  been  based
on   Dr.  Barsky's  unpopular   beliefs   and   associations.    As
Judge  Fuld,  dissenting  in  the  New  York  Court  of  Appeals,
makes  clear,  this  record  is  'barren  of  evidence  reflecting on
appellant  as  a man  or a  citizen, much  less  on  his professional
capacity   or   his   past   or   anticipated   conduct   toward   his
patients.'
"Neither  the  security  of  the  State  nor  the  well-being  of
her  citizens  justifies this infringement  of fundamental rights.
So far  as I know, nothing  in a man's political  beliefs  disables
him  from  setting  broken  bones  or  removing  ruptured  appen-
dixes,  safely  and  efficiently.    A practicing  surgeon  is unlikely
to  uncover  many  state  secrets  in  the  course  of  his  profes-
sional  activities.   When a  doctor  cannot  save lives in America
because  he is  opposed 'to Franco  in  Spain,  it  is  time to  call  a
halt  and look critically at  the neurosis  that has  possessed  us."
Mr. Justice Black, with  whom  Mr. Justice  Douglas  concurs:
"This  record  reveals,  in  my  opinion,  that  New  York  has
contravened-the Constitution  in at  least  one, and possibly two
respects.   First,  it  has  used  in  place  of  probative  evidence
against  Dr.  Barsky  an  attainder  published  by  the  Attorney
General  of the  United States in  violation  of  the   Constitution.
.  . . the lawyer  of the Regents  introduced  evidence that the
Refugee   Committee  headed  by  Dr.  Barsky  had  been  listed
by  the  Attorney  General  of  the  United  States  as  subversive.
Pages  and pages  of the  record  are  devoted  to  this  listing,  to
arguments   about  its   meaning  and  to   other   innuendoes  of
suspected   Communistic  associations   of  Dr.  Barsky  without
a  single  word  of  legal  or  credible  proof  .  .  .  This   Ccxurt,
however,  has   held  that  the   Attorney   General's   list  was
unlawful,  Joint  Anti-Fascist  Refugee   Committee v.  McGrath,
341  U.S.   123.    My  view  was  and  is  that  the  list  was  the
equivalent  of  a  bill  of  attainder  which  the  Constitution  ex-
pressly   forbids.    The  Regents'  own  reviewing   Committee
on  Discipline  recognized  the  illegality  of  the  list  and  advised
the  Regents  that  no weight  should  be  given  to  it  ...    The
Regents,   however,  accepted   and   sustained   the   [contrary]
determination  of the  Grievance  Committee  .  . . New York's
highest  court  said  it  was without  power  to  review  the  use of
the  Attorney  General's  list.   Our  responsibility  is,  however,
broader  . . . Dr. Barsky had a constitutional  right  to be free
of  any imputations  on account of this illegal list  That reason
alone  should  in  my judgment  require  reversal  of  this  case."
The Textual Documentaries on  These Two Pages Are Examples of  Coverage
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  S,  1954
Senator  Johnson's  Historic  Anti-War Speech
Free  World  vs. Communism?   "I Wish  It  Were  That  Simple"
On  Monday,   April   19,  after    the  Nixon   "off    the   record?'
speech,  Senator  Ed  Johnson  (D.,  Col.) rose  in  the  Senate  to
say  that  "as  a  guest  at  a private  party  in  the  company  of  a
large  group  of  Democratic Senators  some  weeks  ago, I  heard
the  Vice  President,  Mr.  Nixon,  'whooping  it  up  for  war'  in
Indo-China."    The  Senator  promised  a  more  extended   state-
ment  in  a  few  days,  saying  only  at  that  time  "I  am  against
sending  American  GI's  into  the  mud  and  muck  of  Indo-China
on  a  blood-letting  spree  to  perpetuate  colonialism and  white
man's   exploitation  in   Asia."    The   "extended   statement,"
last   Monday,   was   the   first  forthright   anti-war   speech   in
the   Senate   during   the   crisis  and   those   who   want   peace
should  arm  themselves with  copies  for  their  friends.   Because
too  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  speech  (not  a  line
in  the  Nation  of  May  1  or  the  New  Republic  of  May  3)  we
are  devoting  this  page  to  the  text   of   the   principal   points
made  by  Senator  Johnson:
A  Half Million  American Lives
'This  present  crusade  to  send  troops  to  Indo-China,  with
its  uncalculated  cost  for  an  uncalculated  result,  is  the  most
foolhardy  venture in all American history.  It  is my guess that
it   would   mean,  at   the   very   minimum,   500,000  American
casualties  and  a  very  minimum  of  $100  billion  of  borrowed
money  [which would  mean] ...  a  25-cent  dollar  instead of
our  50-cent  dollar ...
"Such  a  war  could  last  ten  years,  or  it  could  touch  off and
spawn  a  world  war  which  would  have  to  be  fought  for  100
years  without  victory.    It  could  drive  the  brown and  Malay
races into the arms  of the  Communists in a solid front  against
the  white  race  in  a  death  struggle,  which  eventually  would
destroy  all  civilization.  .  .  .
"The  other  day  a  Senator  whose sound judgment  I  respect
greatly   questioned   whether   military   intervention   by   the
United  States  in  Indo-China  would  not  give  Red  China  the
excuse  it  wants  also  to  intervene.   There  are  no  reasons  to
doubt  that  result  .  . .  Such  an  American-Chinese war  would
be  fought  not  in  a  place  of  our  own  choosing,  but  in  China's
back-yard  and  7,000  miles  from  the  shores  of  America  .  .  .
Our  McCarthyite Diplomacy
"A  few  hours  ago  the  President  said  in  Kentucky that  re-
gardless  of  how this  war  started,  it  was  now the  free  world
versus  communism.  I  wish it  were that  simple . . .  Edward
R.  Murrow  says  that  Senator  McCarthy thinks  every  critic
is  a  Communist.   In  world  affairs,  our  diplomats  seem  also
to be making that basic  McCarthy error . . .
"I  am unable to  support  the  belief  that the  conflict  between
the  French-supported  Viet Nam  and the rebel  Viet  Minh  is, in
truth,  a  war  of  the  forces  of  freedom,  on  the  one hand,  and
the  forces  of  communism,  on  the  other  hand.    Soviet  com-
munism,  with  its  contempt  for  the  rights  of  the  individual,
is a  despicable  tyranny.   But it  is  not the  only tyranny.   Un-
bridled imperialism, the law of the jungle that says the  strong
shall  devour the weak, the  'haves'  shall  exploit  the  'have-nots'
is  no less  .  .  .  the  uncompromising enemy  of  our American
principles . . .
Peace  Is  Voiceless  in  the  USA
"Forces are  at  work  to  get this nation  committed  to war in
Asia.   Some  of  these  forces we know to  be our  enemies  .  .  .
Unfortunately, there seems to be no articulate force in  Ameri-
ca  determined to  keep  us  out  of  war.    But  because  it  is  not
articulate,  do  not  think  for  a  moment  that  this  force  is  not
present.    Congress  must  give  it  a  voice  that  will  be  heard
and  that  will  be heard  in time  . . .
"Our  press   and  radio  during  the  past  few  weeks  have
pulled  no punches ... in describing France's  Indo-China  ene-
mies, the  Viet  Minh as 'the  Communist forces!  This war  has
been  going  on for  nearly  eight  years.   As recently  as  5 years
ago  the  Viet  Minh  were  not  labelled,  even  by  the  less  re-
sponsible  press,  as  Communists.   As  recently   as  5  months
ago,  they  were  not  so  identified,  even  by  the  French.    In
fact,  even 90 days  ago  dispatches  from  Saigon  discreetly  and
consistently  called  them  the  Communist-led  Viet  Minh,  but
never  the  Communist forces,  or  the  Communist Viet  Minh.
"At  what  point,  and  to  what  degree,  has  this  war,  which
every  record shows  to  have  been  a  war  for  freedom  and  in-
dependence,  a  war  against  imperialism,  at  what  point  did  it
suddenly  become  a  war of  Communist  aggression?  .  .  .
"Asia  is  in revolution—revolution  against  colonialism.  The
promulgation  of  what  we  in   America   believe  are   the   in-
alienable rights of every  man, and the  right to walk  as equals
with  dignity  in  the  world  community  is  sweeping  Asia  .  . .
The  astonishing  victories  of the Japanese Army in China . . .
taught  Asiatics  for  the  first  time  that  the  Western   powers
were  not invincible .  .  .  The inspiration  of Japan's  success,
coupled  with  the  arms  provided  by Japan's  surrender,   liter-
ally  all  over  Asia,  supplied the  two  essentials  for  these  na-
tionalist  movements ... It  was largely  on the  crest  of  this
popular  tide  that  Mao Tse-tung  rode  to final  victory  .  .  .
Russia  was  not  a  factor   in  Mao's  success;   in  fact,  it  did
nothing for him until  after  Chiang's  defeat  . . .
We  Thwart What We  Inspired
"Nationalism,   inspired   originally   by   America,   is  being
thwarted  by  America,  with  the  aggregate  effect   of  drivng
independence  movements  to  Moscow ...  In  the  minds  of a
great  many  Asiatics   and  Europeans,  and  members  of  the
Arab  States  as  well,  America  does  not  quite  know what  it  is
for,  and only  faintly  what  it is against  . . .
". . . They  [our  European  and Asian  allies]  know that the
war  in  Indo-China  is  not  a  war  of  Communist  aggression.
They  know  that  the  forces  opposing  France's  colonial  rule
in  Indo-China are just.   They  know  . . .  [that  American aid
to  France]  from  their  point  of view might  well justify  China
in  helping her  southern  Asiatic  neighbor  with  traffic  in  arms
and  munitions.
"Suppose,  for  example,  Mexico were  conquered and  held  by
an  Asiatic  power.  Suppose  the  people  of  Mexico  rose  up  and
struck  down  their  oppressor.   Then suppose an  even stronger
Asiatic  power  intervened,  to  support  the  status  quo .  .  .
Would  not  we  feel  obligated  in  the  name  of  freedom  to  give
our   Mexican   neighbor   revolutionists   all   aid  and  comfort?
And  if  the  other  Asiatic  power  embarked  troops  in  Mexico,
would  not  we also feel  justified  in  sending  our  forces  to  drive
them  out?
What  Sense  In  Such  Slaughter?
"Whether  every  one  of  24 million  people  of  Viet  Nam  is  a
Communist  or whether  not one of them  is, is not  the  question.
If  all  of them  are  Communists, what  is to be  accomplished by
sending  10 American  divisions there,  to  make  them  live  as
we  want  them  to?  The  only  way to  combat  an  idea  is  with  a
better   idea.    What  better  idea   is  being   advanced   by  our
sending  tanks  and  bombers  to  slaughter  the  people of  Indo-
china?  . . .  Have  we so completely  abandoned the principles
of  freedom?  .  . .  What  kind  of  people have  we become?
"If   we  want  to   make  Communists  of   all   the   people  of
Asia ...  if  we  want  to  bleed  ourselves  of  all  principles and
vigor ... let us join  the jungle war . . . But ... if we mean
to  restore  America  to  the  place  it  has  held  for  nearly  180
years  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  men, let  as  demand  peace
with  honor,  now, for  France in  Indochina before it  is  too late.
The  negotiations  beginning today  in  Geneva  give  us  one  last
chance.   May  we  have  the  wisdom  to  make  the  most  of  it."
Important  to  Peace  and  Liberty  You  Will  Not  Find  As  fully   or  At  All Elsewhere
5
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May S, 1954
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Pity  It  Took  Army  to  Tie  the  Can to Joe
I  am  not  of  those  who  believe  that   because  nothing
much  is apt  to happen at  the McCarthy-Army  hearing  nothing
much  is happening  to  Joe McCarthy.    True,  when the  strange
show  is  over  he still  will  be chairman  of  the  permanent Senate
subcommittee   for   investigations,   furnished  with  the   ample
funds  his colleagues  were afraid  to deny him;  he may be minus
Cohn  and  certainly  will  be  minus  Schine,  but  ferrets  of  this
order  always  can  be  found.    He  will  be  ready  to  start  rum-
maging  for  Reds  again under  the  beds  of  his  betters.    Withal
he  will  not  be  able,  I  think,  to  stir  up  the  dust  he  has  been
able  to  stir  up  in  the  past.
This is not  because he  himself  has  been  put  on  the  ducking
stool nor  even.because  the  Elsenhower  administration  is deter-
mined—as  in  the  Dr.   Oppenheimer  case—to  take  the   play
away  from  him.    These  things  have helped,  especially in giving
to  large  sections  of  the  press  timidly  tolerant  of  McCarthyism
in  the  past  the  opportunity  to  grow  a backbone.   But  the real
cloud  that  is  spreading  over  McCarthy's   fetid  fireball  is  the
popular  awakening,  in  this  pause,  to  the  folly  of  the  witch-
hunt  and  the  too-widely  shared  shame  of  the  nation  that  has
let  its  self-confidence  be  shaken  by  arrant  and  spiteful   fear-
mongers.
Those  of  us  who  never  have  forsaken   the  Ameri-
can  tradition  of  freedom  of  the  mind  all  along  have  had  to
assume that  the  good sanity  in  which  our foundation  principles
were  written   would  return.    That  at   some  time   when  we
should  have  a  moment  to  recollect  and  to  re-assess we  would
slough  off  the  sickness  of  suspicion  and  panic  with  which  so
many  have  been  possessed. That  the  values of  fearless  thought
and  open  speech  and  choice  of  association  would   come  back
in  the  land.
The  time-out  from  the  witchhunt  for  the  McCarthy-Army
"who  lied"  inquiry  has  allowed  that  interlude  for   reflection,
and  the  signs  of  sanity  are  mending.    Later  on,  loosed  on  us
again,  McCarthy  will  not  be  able  to  pull  out  of  his  hat  any
sensation  that  will  not  appear  to  us  all  shoddy  theater,  class
B  and  second-run.
The  copy-cat  witchhunters  also, at  the  moment,  have
been  headed in;  and  there  is  no  room  for  regret  in  the  whole
matter—save  that  the  tribe  could  not  have  been  brought   to
bay   on   the   issue  itself:   the   rights   of   the  individual  in  a
democracy.
The  Army  is great  and  powerful  in  our  day, and  great  and
powerful   interests  in  our  land  which  have  not  bothered   to
intercede  for  lowly  citizens fallen  prey  to  congressional calum-
niators  have found  it  possible  and prudent  to  stand  up against
McCarthy  when  the  turn  of  slander  has  begun  to  threaten
military  "morale."   Perhaps  one  should  not  quibble;  perhaps
tactically   this  is  the  point  at  which  the  stand  against  the
witchhunt  most  advantageously  could  be  made.    Yet,  meas-
ured  by  the  height  of  our  principles, it  is a pity  that  the  rally
could  not  have come where "only" the  morale,  the  good name,
the   civil   rights   of   some  one   American—college   professor,
scientist,  government  clerk  or  simple "leftist"  housewife—was
at  stake.
The  issue  is  not  clear:  whether  McCarthy  lied  or
whether   the  Pentagon  lied  has  nothing   to  do  with   political
persecution.    The  fight  is a  diversion;  yet  the  fight  is  impor-
tant  as a diversion,  permitting  all  eyes to  view more  objective-
ly  the  body  of  the  real  crime  in  the  field  from  which  Mc-
Carthy  has  been  drawn.    The  chances  are  that  during   the
by-play  at  Washington   the  nation  will  grow  up  again.
Watch  for  Our Forfhcoming Story  on A Visit  With  Hank  Greenspun  at  las   Vegas
Why  Not  Send  a  Gift   Sub  Note?
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     ____——————————————————————
Street   _________________________
City____________  Zone___  State_____
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name   _________________________
Street   __________________________
City____________   Zone          State_____
1-3-U
I.  F.  StoneV  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington 3, D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Mattel
Washington,  D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED