I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954may17.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive;  How Wire-Taps  May Be "Forged" and  Churchill's  Was, P.  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2, NUMBER 17MAY  17,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
What Kind  of  Independence  Do We Offer  in  Southeast  Asia?
Free  Elections  in  Indochina  Now?  Mr. Dulles  Says  "No"
It   would  be  foolish   to   imagine,  because  of   the  setbacks
suffered  by  Mr.  Dulles,  that   the  danger  of  American  inter-
vention   in  Southeast  Asia  is  over.    The   United   States  has
almost  always  gone  to  war  reluctantly,  and .after  assurances
by  its  leaders  that  they  would  keep  us  out  of  war.    But  the
interventionists  seem  to  manage  ultimately  to  have  their  way,
whether  it   be  in  a  good  cause  or  a  bad.
As  Republicans  and  Democrats  begin  to  draw  together  in
a  revival  of  bipartisanship (see survey  on  page  two)   and  the
conditioning  of   the   public   mind  for   intervention   is   con-
tinued  by  the  State  Department,  it  would  be  well  to  focus
attention   on   the   question   of   "independence."     Every   war
has  to  be a  crusade.   It  must  find  a high  purpose.    The  emo-
tional  mobilization  requires  some  glittering  conception   as  its
center.    The  liberals  and  the  idealists  need  its  bright  sheen
to  mesmerize  themselves into  the  proper  frame  of  mind  for
another  outburst  of  human  slaughter.    The  key  concept  in
this  case  seems  to  be  that  of  independence.    All  our  liberals
repeat  that  if  only  the  French  would  give  the  Indochinese
their  independence .  .  .  The  implication  is  that  this  would
make  it  a  "good"  war,  a  war  in  which  w«  might  join  with
clear   conscience.
The  Questions Nobody  Faces
That  there  is  something  phoney  in  this  is  indicated  by  the
fact  that  no  one  stops  to  analyze  what  independence  means.
An   independent   people   has  a   right   to   determine  its   own
destiny.   But  no  one  stops  to  ask  what  we  should  do  if  the
Indochinese,  on   being   set   free   by   France,  were   to  decide
that  they  preferred  peace to  war,  even at  the  expense  of  com-
promising  with  their  own  Communists.    No  one  stops  to ask
what  we  should  do  if  Indo-China,  on  becoming  independent,
were  to  establish  a  coalition   regime.    After  all  Bao  Dai  has
been  at  various  times  the  puppet  of  the  French,  the  Japanese
and   of  Ho  Chi-tmnh  himself.    What  if   he  were  to  settle
for   an  Imperial  throne  over   a  coalition   government?     Or
what  if  there  were  to  be  an  election  and  Ho  Chi-minh  were
to   win?    Everyone   who  knows   Indochina   seems   to   agree
that  Ho  is  regarded  with  reverence  as  a  national  hero  even
by  his  opponents.
We  tried  to  draw  Mr.  Dulles  out  on  these  questions  at  his
press   conference   last   week,   and   believe  his   answers  were
revealing,  though  few  if  any  papers  reported  them.   We  give
them  as  he  made  them,  except  that  we  do  so  as  required  by
State  Department   rules,   in   indirect   discourse.     The   first
question   was  whether   the   Secretary   would   favor   genuinely
free  elections  in  Indochina.    Mr.  Dulles  replied  that  he  would
favor  genuinely  free  elections  under  conditions   where  there
would  be  an  opportunity   for  the  electorate  to  be  adequately
informed  as  to  what  the  issues  are.    At  the  present  time,  he
continued,  in  a  country  which  is politically  immature,  which
has  been  the   scene  of   civil   war   and  disruption,  he  would
doubt  whether  the  immediate  conditions  would  be  conducive
to  a  result  which  would  really  reflect  the  will  of  the  people.
His  answer,  in  other  words,  was    "No."
This,  on  reflection, is  a  bit  puzzling.    If  those  in  rebel-held
territories  are  victims  of  Communist  oppression,   as  we  insist
they   are,   then   surely   they   would   vote   against   Ho   in   a
genuinely  free  election.   If   the  rest  are  menaced  by  aggres-
sion,  as we insist they  are, then  they  would  surely  vote  against
their  aggressors  in   a  genuinely  free  election.    Here  we  are
being  asked  to  intervene  and  "save"  the  Indochinese—yet  the
Secretary  of  State is not  sure that  they  want  to  be  saved,  i.e.,
that  they  would  vote  right  if  given  a  chance.    On  the  other
hand,  if  he  regards  them  as politically immature—the  phrase
is  his,  as  the   official   transcript  will  verify—then   how  does
he  differ  from  the  French  colonialists  who  think  that  Indo-
China  is part  of  their  white  man's burden?
The  next  question  we  put  to  Mr.  Dulles  was  this:  he  had
said   it   was  government   policy   to   oppose  any   Communist
advance  in  Southeast  Asia   "by   whatever  means"  achieved.
What  would  be  his  attitude  toward  the  victory  of  Ho  or  a
coalition  in  a  free  election.    Would  he  recognize  such  a  gov-
ernment?    Mr.  Dulles  ducked  the  question  the  first  time  but
when  it  was  pressed  again  he  replied  that  he  had  just  said
that  he  did  not  think  present  conditions  conducive  to  a  free
election  there  and  he  did  not  care  to  answer the   hypothetical
situation  that  might  result  if  they  did have  elections.
Since Bao Dai  for  the  Vietnamese is now  proposing  elections
as a solution, the  question  is hardly  hypothetical  in  any  distant
sense.    It   seems  to  me  that   the  answers  indicate   that   Mr.
Dulles  does not  like  the  idea of  free  elections  in  Indochina  and
is  not  at  all  sure  that  the  rebels  would  lose.
Just  Like  Eastern  Germany?
A  little  later   we  put   another   question   which    followed
naturally  from  what  had  already  been  said.    We  asked—Mr.
Secretary,  if   you  regard   the   Indochinese   people  as  too  im-
mature  politically   for   free  elections,   do  you  regard   them  as
politically   mature   enough   for   independence   at   this   time?
Mr.  Dulles  replied  that  he  did  not  say  that  the  people  were
too  immature  for   free  elections.    He   asserted  that  he  had
said  that  conditions  were  not  conducive  to  them.   He  went
on  to  say  that  when  we  had  the  discussion  of  the  possibility
of  having  elections  in  the  eastern  part  of  Germany,  it  was
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
G    j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  17, 1954
Puncturing  Some  Delusions  About  A  "Great  Debate"
Democrats  on  Foreign  Policy:  Not  A  Voice  for  Peace
Capitol   Hill—A   week's   burst   of  Democratic   oratory  on
foreign   policy  has  made  clear   (1)  that  the  Democrats   are
not  a  peace  party,  (2)  that  they  have  no real  foreign  policy,
and  (3)  that  they  are  ready   and  eager  to  associate   them-
selves  with  Eisenhower's,  though  neither  they  nor  he  seem
to  know  just  what  that  policy  is.
The   principal   criticism   made   by  the   Democrats   of   the
Republicans  is  that  they  have  alienated  our  Western  allies.
But  there  is  no  indication  that  the  Democrats  are  any  more
ready  than   the  Republicans  to  amend  the  attitudes  which
created   the  rift.    Mr.  Dulles  went  to  Geneva  the  way  Mr.
Acheson  went   to   a  whole  series  of  conferences,  ready   to
negotiate  nothing  but  unconditional  surrender.
If  Mr.  Dulles  can  be  accused  of  "unilateralism,"  here  too
he  was  but  carrying  on  the  pattern.    It  was  Mr.  Acheson
who  (after  private  negotiations  with  Dr.  Adenauer)  sprang
German  rearmament  on  Britain  and  Prance  in  the  autumn
of   1950  without  advance  consultation.    It   was   under  Mr.
Acheson's   aegis  that   Mr.   Dulles   crammed   an  unpopular
Japanese  treaty  and  the  prospect  of  Japanese  rearmament
down  the  throats  of  reluctant  allies.
There   was   no  indication  in   Democratic   oratory   of   any
readiness  to  see  the  British  point  of  view  on  recognition  of
Communist  China  or  any  French  view  but   M.  Bidault's   on
Indo-China.    The  Democrats   did  not   advocate   negotiation,
compromise  or  conciliation,  and  they   talked   by  and  large
as  if  the  Indo-.Chinese  war  were  a  simple  matter  of Chinese
aggression.
At  the  Jefferson-Jackson  Day  conference,  Senator  Gillette
of  Iowa  said  Mr.  Dulles'  hands  at  Geneva  were  tied,  but  he
showed  no  readiness  to  untie  them.    "We  could  have  hauled
the  Red  aggressor  before  the  bar  of  public  opinion," Gillette
said,  "but   we  preferred   to  revert  to   outworn  methods  of
military  intervention."   Senator  Green  of  Rhode  Island  spoke
of  McCarthyism's  bad   influence  on  the   foreign  service   but
provided  no  line  on  policy.   Texas  Senator  Lyndon  Johnson's
highly  overrated  speech  derided  Mr.  Dulles  for  not  standing
up  to  the  Communists at  Geneva.
Humphrey  Still  Believes  In  Navarre
In  the  Senate  next  day  Mansfield  of  Montana  got  up  to
say  that  "to  withdraw  now,  to  negotiate  a  settlement  which
would   lay   open  all   of  Indochina  to   the   conqueror's   heel,
would  be  to  break  faith  with  those  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  who
gave  so  much."    Humphrey  of  Minnesota  rose  to  commend
him,  saying  "there  is  still  time."   "General  Navarre,"  Hum-
phrey  said,  "has   a  long  range  plan  of  military   operations
which,  if   given  an  opportunity  to  be  worked  out  and   put
into  effect,  can  and  should  lead  to  ultimate  victory."   Hum-
phrey   ended  by  saying,   "I   plead  with  the   Administration
to  share  its  burden,  to  share  its  information,  and  to   share
its  responsibility."    The Democrats are  ready  to  enlist.
Kefauver   of   Tennessee   on  Monday   implied  that   if   the
Republicans  had  not  been  so  critical  of  intervention  in  Korea
' it  would  have  been easier  for  them  to  manage  intervention  in
Indo-China.  "Echoes  of such phrases  as  'Mr. Truman's  war,'"
he  told  the  Senate,  ".  .  .  helped  to  make  this  great  nation
ineffective  in  dealing  with  the  threat  of  Communist  aggres-
sion  in  Indo-China."
One Republican, Flanders  of  Vermont,  and  the  Independent,
Morse  of  Oregon, joined  in that day's  assault.   Flanders  was
incredibly  confused.    At  one moment he  praised  the  Colombo
conference  and  in  the  next  criticized  Nehru  for  saying  that
in  America  every  issue  was  seen  in  simple  terms  of  "black
and  white."   Nehru  "must  understand,"  Flanders  said,  illus-
trating  the  Indian's  point  beautifully,  "that  when  the  moral
values  are  scorned  and  the  souls  of  men  are  attacked  there
can  be  no  neutrality."
Morse  rose  to  say  that  it  was  "reassuring"  to  listen  to
all  this  "common  sense."    He  said  that  "following  Dulles
would  be  following  the  Administration  into  war   in  Asia"
but  he  himself  is  for  military  intervention  in  Indo-China  if
we  can  go  in  "as  part  of  a  United  Nations  program."
The  prize  for  pathos   goes  to  Smathers  of  Florida  for  the
speech  he  made later that  same  afternoon.  Smathers  thought
the  time  had  come  "to  reinforce  those  ancient  and  honored
but  tired  and  worn  allies  of the  Old World, with  the  vigorous,
young  forward   looking  nations  of  the  New  World."    (Like
Peron's  Argentina?)
"While  Dien  Bien  Phu,"  he told  the  Senate,  "marks  a point
of  despair,  and  Geneva makes us  feel  alone and  naked  before
the   world,  when   we   come   home  and   embrace   again   the
friends   and  neighbors   who  surround  us,  we  must  admit  a
warm  secure  feeling."    Not  a  single  Senator  rushed  to  the
rail,  so hardy  are  now the  stomachs of the  Conscript Fathers.
It  was  in  the  course  of  arguing  for  this  alternative  policy
that  Smathers  committed what  was  probably the  finest  mixed
metaphor  in  the  history  of  the   Senate,  the  world's   richest
source   of   these   literary   treasures.     Smathers  complained
that Venezuela "one of the  closest friends of the  United States
and  a  country  which pays  cash  for  what  it  needs"  (how we
love  the  bosom friends  who pay  cash!)  had  to  buy  destroyers
recently  from  Britain  although  in  this  country  "there   are,"
Smathers   observed   solemnly,  "acres  of  destroyers  in  moth
balls."
Kennedy's  "Ideal" Solution
Kennedy   of  Massachusetts,  made  a   speech   in   Princeton
Tuesday  night  in  which he  suggested  that  if  Bidault's  terms
were  rejected  the  ideal  solution  would  be  resumption  of  the
war,  and   training   of  more  native   troops   "with   additional
assistance   by  the  United  States,"  though  it  might   be  two
years    (he   said)   before   these   native   troops   were   strong
enough  to  allow  French  withdrawal.    Kennedy  urged  larger
defense  appropriations   and  a  greater  air  force  and  confessed
"It   is  difficult   for  a  Democrat  not  to  rise  to  his  feet   and
cheer  when  the  President  speaks  of  'unleashing'  Chiang  Kai-
•  shek  .  . ." Byrd  of  Virginia,  in  his  speech  here  Monday night
to  the  plumbing contractors, was  the  only one of these Demo-
cratic   Senators   to  say  that  "as   of  now  I  am  of  the  firm
conviction  that  we  should  not  become  a  fighting  participant
in  the   Indochina  war."     Even   with  him  the   "as   of   now"
qualifies  the   "firm."
Mr.  Truman's   visit   was  pleasant;  the  man  who  seemed
a  pigmy  after   FDR  seems  a  scholar   statesman  beside  his
successor.  But  his  speech  to  the  press  club  offered  little  on
foreign  policy  beyond  those   cliches  about  partisan   politics
stopping  at  the  water's  edge.   Bipartisanship  in  war  may be
patriotic  and  necessary,  but  bipartisanship   on  foreign  policy
in  peace  time  means  withdrawing  from  discussion  and  demo-
cratic  decision  the  most  fateful  decisions  of  our  time.   Why
should  there  be  bipartisanship   on  the   China  question  or  on
the  H-bomb?    The  result  is  to  leave  national   policy  to  be
made by the  State  Department  and  the  military   bureaucracy.
Senator  Knowland  got  in  the  last  word  on  the   Truman
plea  for  bipartisanship   when  he  recalled  to  the  Senate  last
Friday that  neither  the  Republican  opposition  nor  the  Demo-
cratic  leadership  was  consulted  by Mr. Truman  in the  making
of  the  decisions  which  led  to  intervention  in  Korea.
Ready  to  Join "Ike's War"
Though  the  Republicans  made  much of  "Truman's  war"  in
the  1952  election,  all  the  signs  indicate  that  the   Democrats
will  go  along  loyally  and  willingly  with  Ike's,  any  time  he
gets  up  nerve  enough  to  take  the  plunge.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  17, 1954
Brownell's  Developing  Program  for  War  and  Fascism
Two  New  Police  State  Bills  by  Ike's  Chief  "Political  Assassin"
Former  President  Truman  referred   to  Attorney  General
Brownell  as  a  "political   assassin."   The  Attorney  General
came forward last week with two new police state bills, S.3427
and  S. 3428.   These  are  (like the  detention  camp provisions
of  the  Internal   Security  Act)  in  the  developing  pattern  of
legislation  designed  to  punish  people  not  for  wrongful   acts
or  even  for  ideas  deemed  wrongful  but  for  acts  they  are  held
"likely   to   commit"   some  time   in   the   future.   Prospective
guilt  has  not  hitherto  been  an  Anglo-American  legal  con-
ception.
S. 3427  is to liquidate "Communist-controlled" corporations,
labor  unions  or  other  organizations  "which  are  in  a  position
to  affect   adversely  the  national  defense  or  security."   The
Internal  Security  Act already  sets  up the  categories  of  "Com-
munist   action"   and   "Communist  front"   organizations.   To
this,  the  bill  would  add  a  third,  "Communist-infiltrated" or-
ganizations.   These  may  be  thrown  into  liquidation  by  the
Subversive  Activities  Control Board,  without  proof  that  they
have  ever  done  anything unlawful.
S.  3428  is  designed  to  bar  from  industrial  establishments
"individuals  believed  to  be  disposed  to  commit  acts  of  sab-
otage,  espionage  or  other  subversion,"  the  last  named  term
being  as  usual   undefined.   Brownell  slickly  explained  that
this  bill  by  requiring  "specific charges  and  hearings"  guaran-
teed  due  process.   But  Section  3  (b)  says  nothing contained
in   the   Act  "shall   be  deemed  to  require  any   investigatory
organization   of  the   United  States  Government  to  disclose
its  informants  or  other  information  which  in  its  judgment
would  endanger  its  investigatory  activity."  This  means  that
as  in  loyalty cases  the  source  and  content of  accusations may
be  withheld from  the  accused,  leaving him  to  defend  himself
in  the  dark.
The    loose   charges    and    political   mendacity   for  which
Brownell  has  distinguished  himself  should  be  enough  to  put
the  Democrats on  notice as  to  the  danger  of  giving this  man
such extraordinary powers over people and institutions he may
attack  as  "Communistic."  But  there  is  no  sign  that  Demo-
cratic  leadership  in  Congress  has  the  nerve  to  oppose  any
legislation  which purports  to  be against  Communism.  S.  3427
is  thinly  sugar-coated  with  a  provision  repealing  the  non-
Communist   oath   provisions   of   the   Taft-Hartley    Act   (as
recommended  last  year  by the  House Un-American Activities
Committee!)   It  is  appalling  that  even  so liberal  a  Democrat
as  Murray  of  Montana, in  the  debate  which  saw  the  defeat
of   the   bill   to   amend  the   Taft-Hartley   Act,  criticized   the
amending  legislation because it  failed  to  do anything  "about
the  problem  of  Communism in  the  labor  unions."   Brownell
has  now come forward  with  his  own solution.  The  Butler  bill
would  subject "communistic"  unions to the  Subversive  Activi-
ties  Control Board.  Brownell would  liquidate them  altogether.
Contempt  Charged  Against  Gold's  Lawyer
Whether   as  another   means  of  intimidating   lawyers  who
defend  radicals,  or  as  backfire  to  the  jury-tampering  charges
against  the  government  in  the  Ben  Gold  case,  the  Depart-
ment   of   Justice   has   initiated   criminal   contempt   charges
against   Gold's  counsel,  Harold   I.   Gammer   for   sending   a
questionnaire  to  the  grand  jury  which  indicted  Gold.   Cam-
mer's  purpose was  to  determine the  effect  of  the  loyalty  pro-
gram  on jurors  who  are  Federal  employes.  The  use  of  such
questionnaires  derives  from  the  Dennis  contempt  case  (339
U.S.  162)  in  which  the  Supreme  Court  refused  to  hold  that
a  jury of government employes could  not give  a radical  a  fair
trial  but  said  "The  way is  open in  every  case to  raise  a  con-
tention  of bias from  the realm of  speculation to that of  fact."
This  meant  that   such  jurors   could   be  disqualified   if   the
defense  was  able  to  prove  that  the  atmosphere  made  fair
consideration  impossible.
A  questionnaire was  used  by  the  defense  in  challenging
the  presence of  Federal  employes on  the  jury  in  the  Case of
Scientist X  (Weinberg)  last year.  The defense in the  Bmspak
case   made   a   similar  jury   challenge.   The  government  in
opposing  a  hearing  on the  jury  issue,  argued  "There  is  not
the  slightest  indication  in  the  long motion  and  offer  of  proof
that  an  attempt  had  been  made to  interview  a  single  one of
the  persons,"  i.e.  of  the  grand  jurors  who  indicted  Emspak.
Cammer  is  now  charged  with  criminal  contempt  for  doing
in  the   Gold  case  what  the  government  complained that  de-
fense  counsel failed  to  do in  the  Emspak  case.
Senate  Testimony  on  How Easily  Wire-Taps May  Be  "Forged"
Senators  Told  How  A  Famous  Churchill  Speech  Was  Distorted
Almost   unnoticed,  despite  its   sensational   character,  was
the   testimony   given   by  Hon.  Robert   Coar,  director,  Joint
House-Senate  Radio Facility,  U.S. Congress,  on May  6   before
the  special  subcommittee  of  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee
considering  legislation  to  authorize  the  use  of  wire-taps   as
evidence.   We  give  the  most  important   -portions  here:
MR.  COAR.   Some  20 years  ago  I  was  District  Plant  Engi-
neer   for  the   New  York  Telephone  Company,  and  in  that
capacity  one  of  my  assignments  was  to  make  searches   for
wire-taps  .  .  .  Subsequent  to  that,  I  have,  prior  to  coming
to  Washington  and shortly  after  . . . some 19 years  ago, done
some development work for  the  FBI  in  design  of wire-tapping
equipment. . . .
MR.   COLLINS.   Mr.  Coar,  when  you  play  back  and   record
the  information obtained, can that tape  recording  be  altered?
MR.  COAR.  Yes, I have a graphic  demonstration  of that . . .
Simply  by  playing  it  back  on to  a  plastic  tape,  recording  on
the  tape  and  re-recording  from  the  tape  back  to  the  wire,
there  is  no way  at  all  that  anyone  can  tell  that  there  have
been  changes  made in what  was on the original  wire . . .
You  may  recall  that  when  Winston  Churchill  addressed
the  House  we  made  a  tape  recording  of  his  speech,  and  he
had  just  had  some  new  teeth  put  in,  and  so  the   reporters
missed  some of  it,  and  asked  if  they  could  come  up  and  hear
the  recording  of the  tape.
You  may  recall  that  he  said:  "I  came  not  to  ask  you  for
money.  I  came to  ask for  military  aid.  We English  are  put-
ting  out  all  we  can  towards  this  effort."   And  so  on  and  so
forth.   Mr. Clark  changed  it  around  so that  Mr. Churchill  in
very  good  voice  and  without  any  detecting  it  said:  "I  came
here  to  ask  you  for  money.  The  English  do  as  they  please.
What  we  do with  your money is  our  business."
So  the  reporters  came  in  the  room  and  started  to  take
down  this  testimony  and  continued  taking  it   down  with  a
straight  face,  exactly  as  we  had  it  on  the  tape.  We stopped
them  after  two or  three  minutes,  because  we knew they  were
busy.   It  just   shows  what  can  be  done.   And  these  people
were  right  there in the Chamber when that was said.  . . .
SENATOR   WILEY.   With   all  this  scientific  work  that   has
been  done  you mean  that  there  is  no  way  to  know  that  the
second  tape  is  phoney?
MR.  COAR.  That  is  right,  sir.
SENATOR  WILEY.   Then  it  all  goes  to  the   question  of   the
integrity  of  who  is  tapping  the  wire,  the  integrity  of  that
fellow?
MR.  COAR.  That is right,  sir.  . . .
7  .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  17, 1954
The  Familiar Answer to  Colonial Aspiration Everywhere
Mr. Dulles  Thinks Indochina  Too  Immature  Politically
(Continued  from  Page One)
the  plan—the  so-called  Eden  plan—that  the  elections  should
not   take  place  until   there  had   been  a  preparatory    period,
because  it  was  felt  that  the  people  were  so  terrorized,  so  mis-
informed  that  quick  elections  held  there  under  existing  condi-
tions   could   not   be  expected   accurately  to   reflect   the  real
views  of   the  people  and  their  intelligent   judgment.    If   we
felt  that  way, Mr.  Dulles  concluded,  as  regards  Eastern Ger-
many,  certainly  we  are  entitled  to   feel  the   same  as  regards
Indochina.
This  reply  will  also  bear  study.    We  had  been  told  that
the  people  of  Eastern  Germany  are  so  full   of  hate  for   the
occupying   power  and   their   Communist   puppets   that  only
force   holds   them   down.     Under   the   circumstances,   why
should   a   preparatory   period   be   necessary   to   register   their
"intelligent"  judgment?
Says  Bao  Dai  Doesn't  Want  Independence  Now
Our  final  question  was, then  do  you  favor   independence
for   Indochina   at   this  time?    The  answer  in  effect   was  no.
But  we  shall  let  Mr.  Dulles  give  the  answer  his  own way.
He   began   by  saying  that  he  believed   that   their   complete
independence  should  be  absolutely  assured.   But  he  continued
by  saying  that  now  the  question  as to  the  exercising  of com-
plete  independence is another  matter.    He  said  he  had  spoken
to  their  representatives.    He   said  he  had  a  long  talk  with
Bao  Dai.  They  don't,  any  of  them,  Mr.  Dulles  continued,
feel  at  the  moment  they  would  want  the  French  to  withdraw
or   want   to   sever   their   relations   with   the   French   Union
because  they  know  that  there  would  have  to  be  a  transitory
period  during  which  they  are  able  to  build  up  the   strength
necessary   to  exercise  independence.
Today,  Mr.  Dulles went  on,  if  they  attempted  to  be wholly
independent  and  if  the  French  were withdrawn, which  is  the
Vietminh  proposal,  their  independence would  not  last probably
for   more  than  a  few  days.    And  just  as  the  United  States
would  not  have  granted  independence  to  the  Philippines  in
the  middle  of  the  Second  World  War, it  would  be  foolish  to
expect  and  in  fact  the  governments of  these  countries  do  not
expect,  that   they   can  instantly   exercise  full  independence.
But  there  should  not  be any  doubt  whatever,  Mr.  Dulles con-
cluded,  but  what  their  independence  is  assured  them  under
times  and  conditions  so  that   they  will  actually  be  able  to
exercise  it  and  enjoy  it.
This  is agile, if  not  succinct.    The  analogy with  the  Philip-
pines  is  clever  but  specious  and  serves only  to  confuse.     The
Philippines  were  occupied   by  the  Japanese  in  the  middle  of
.  the  Second  World  War.   The  analogy  would  be  closer  if  in
the  Philippines  we  had  been  helping  the  Japanese  and   their
war-time  puppet  government  to  hold  the  country   against  a
popular  resistance   movement.    In   Indochina   we  have   been
supporting   the   occupying   power,   France,   and  its   puppet,
Bao Dai, against  the  resistance movement  which  fought  first
the  Vichy  French  and  then  the  Japanese during  the  war  and
the  French  since.    In  this  context   it  is natural  to  fear,  and
correct  to  assume, that  if  Bao Dai, the  puppet  of  these  suc-
cessive  foreign  powers,  were  cut  adrift  and  real  independence
granted  the  country,  his  regime  could  not  survive  more  than
a  few  days.    Popular  sentiment   is  largely  on  Ho's side,  and
even  on  the  far  right  against  Bao  Dai.
Mr.  Dulles  is  against  independence  for  Indochina  or   free
elections  there  until  he  feels  sure  its  people  can  be  counted
for  "the free  world."    But  it  must  seem  to  Asians  an  odd
kind  of  free  world  that  fears  free  elections  and  independence.
This  talk  of  "political  immaturity"  is  familiar in  Asia.    It
has  for  many  years  been  the  answer  of   the  West   to   every
colonial   demand   for    freedom.     This   is   the   language   of
Kipling,  and  Kipling  is  not  exactly  the  Bible  of  any  colored
or  colonial people.   He  is the  poet  laureate  of  white  supremacy.
These   answers  by  Mr.  Dulles  deserve  a  better  fate  than
to   gather   dust   in  the   State  Department's  files  during   the
weeks   ahead   when   we  may   be  asked   to   send   our   sons   to
Indochina,  to  safeguard  its  "independence,"  and  to  preserve
its  "freedom."     We  ask  our  liberal  friends,  before  they   are
sucked  into  the  maelstrom  of  war  emotion,  are  you  prepared
to  defend  Indochina's  right  to  real  independence,  even  if  that
means  letting  its  people  choose  Ho  Chi-minh  over  Bao Dai?
Why  Not  Send  a  Gift   Sub  Now?
I.  F. Stone's Weekly, 301  E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. c.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   —___________._________________
Street    _.______________________________
City_____________   Zone____   State_______
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
(To)  Name   ________________:_________
Street   ______________________________
City_________
__  Zone____  State-
6-17-64
I.  F. Stone'j Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St, S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED