I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954oct25.pdf

============================================================

The  Sinister Precedents  in  The  New "Second String" Smith Act  Ruling,  Page 2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 38
OCTOBER  26,  1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
Why  I  Cast  My Vote  for Ike
I   believe  that   the  United   States  and  the  world   will  be
better  off  if  the  Republicans  stay  in  power  a  little  longer.   I
think  this  important   for   two  reasons,  one  in  the   sphere  of
foreign  policy,  the  other  domestic.
The  overriding  issue is that  of  peace.  If  the  Democrats  had
been  in  power  we  might  still  be  at  war  in  Korea,  we  might
have   been   drawn   into   open   intervention    in   Indo-China.
Despite  Dulles  and  Radford,  Knowland  and Nixon,  the  Eisen-
hower  Administration   did  end  the  fighting  in  the  one  place
and  keep  out  of  the  fighting  in  the  other.   Adlai  Stevenson
said  at  San  Francisco  on  October   16,  "While  the   President
talks   about   peaceful   co-existence   witK    the    Communists,
Senator  Knowland  talks  of  war  with  Red  China.   When  he
publicly   demands  that   we  sever   diplomatic   relations   with
Russia, the President  has to  issue a quick  and angry 'No'."  The
point   Stevenson   dodges  is  that   Elsenhower   does   make   the
final  decision  for   co-existence.
Adlai,  Too, Grows Reckless
While   Stevenson  endorses  what  Dulles  did  in  Guatemala,
applauds  the  rearmament  of  Germany  and  hails  the  SEATO
pact,  he  talks  vicious  nonsense  about   Indo-China,   saying  of
the  peace that  there  "the   free  world  suffered  its  greatest  dis-
aster  since  the  fall  of  China."   He  says  irresponsible  Repub-
lican  talk  has  made our  allies  afraid  of  American  recklessness.
They  can  be  no  less  afraid  to  hear  Stevenson  talking  of   "the
growing  attraction  of  monstrous  China"  and  saying  as  he  did
in  that  same  speech  at  San Francisco,  "But   co-existence  with
our  obnoxious,  aggressive  and  perfidious  neighbors  can  never
be  peaceful."    Nor   can  they  be  less  worried  when  they  hear
Stevenson  declaring   in  the  best  Acheson-Truman  tradition,
"Negotiation  without  strength,  which  some  of  our  European
friends  seem  to  want,  is madness."
Of  course,  "negotiation  without  strength"  would  be  "mad-
ness"  but   no  one  is  proposing   any   such   negotiation.   The
U.S.   and  the  West  are  hardly  "without  strength."   Behind
the   Stevenson   phrases  is  masked  quite   a   different   policy.
"Negotiating  from  strength"  was  really  a  policy  of  speeding
up  an  armament  race  instead  of   negotiating.    Its   hope  was
for    unconditional    surrender   not    negotiation.    That   was
really  madness  in.  today's  world.   I  much   prefer   to  it   what
Eisenhower  said  here  at  Catholic  University  last   November,
"Those  who  seek  peace  in  terms  of  military  strength   alone,
I   am  certain   are  doomed   to  end  up  in  the   agony   of   the
battlefield."
The  Democratic   leaders  are  so  obsessed  with   the  need   to
clear  themselves of  any  suspicion of  Communism,  they  and  the
trade  union  leaders  supporting   them  are  so  ready  to  relapse
into  an  arms race  as an  easy means of  pump-primng  that  they
have   become   the   war  party.   Thus   the   1954   Democratic
Fact   Book  for   the  campaign  criticizes   Eisenhower,   not   for
his  dramatic   order   13  days  after  inauguration   "unleashing"
Chiang but  for  the  secret  agreement  which  followed  requiring
Chiang  to  "stay  put  on  Formosa."   The  G.O.P.  is  criticized
because  it  "refused   even  to  send  planes  to  aid  France  in  the
Indo-China   war."
The  Democrats  are  as unwilling  out  of  power  as  they  were
in  power  to  seek,  recognize  or  welcome  relaxation  of  tension.
The   Korean  peace,  the   Indo-Chinese   settlement,   a  Russian
policy  so  changed  that   Moscow   is  willing   even  to   co-exist
with  its  own  arch  heretic  and  ex-satellite  Tito—all  these  do
not  exist  for  the  Democrats.   The  Administration  by  contrast
has  been  easing  up  on  East-West  trade  to  the  extent  of  re-
moving   600  items   from   the   embargo  list   and   challenging
Moscow  (see  the  speech last  Tuesday  in  Boston  of  the  Deputy
Assistant   Secretary   of   International   Affairs)    to   permit   a
"substantial  increase"   in  trade  across  the  Iron  Curtain!    It
would  be better if  the Republicans stayed in power  long  enough
to  permit  the  tide  toward  peace  to  become  stronger.
The  give-away  issue  does not  impress me  because the  Demo-
crats  are  as  bad  as  the  Republicans  in  the  greatest  give-away
of  all—the  give-away  of  our  fundamental  liberties  and  safe-
guards in  the witch  hunt.  The  Democrats  boast  of  their  Smith
Act   prosecutions,   of   their   part   in  framing   the   new  anti-
Communist   legislation  and  of   their   record   in  enlarging   the
FBI.   The  Bill  of  Rights  is a more  precious  heritage  than  tide-
lands  oil,  TVA  or  Hell's  Canyon.    Here   there   is  little  to
choose  between  the  two  parties,  except  that  so  many  of  the
Democrats  are  "liberals"  and  therefore  are  to  be judged  more
harshly.   I  am  convinced  that  if  peace is achieved,  the  miasma
at  home  will  clear  up  since  its  roots   are  fed  by  the   Great
Power  struggle  between  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  and  draw  no  real
sustenance  from  domestic  issues.
Cutting  McCarthy  Down to  Size
This  brings  me  to  the  second  reason  why  I  prefer  to  see
the  Republicans   stay  in  a  little  longer:   McCarthy  and  the
wild  men.   So  long  as  the  G.O.P.  was  out  of  power,  it  was
content  to  use  these  Fascist  demagogues  against  the  Demo-
crats.  Once in power,  it  was forced to  fight  them—not  because
it  wanted  to,  but   because  men  like  McCarthy   are  out   for
complete  power.   Their  temperament  must  bring   them  into
collision  with  whomever  is  in  power.   The  G.O.P.  has  been
forced  to  begin  to  cut  McCarthy  down  to  size  and  to  down-
•   grade  his  Senatorial  supporters.   It  is  an  asset  in  the   struggle
against  McCarthy  to  have  it  fought  out  within  the  Republi-
can  party  instead of  between  the  two  parties.  When  McCarthy
has  been  put   in  his  place  and  peace  more  firmly  established,
Democrats  could  safely   come  back  and  pick  up  where   the
New  Deal  left  off.
1   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'*  Weekly,  October SS, 1954
The Press Is Silent  As Sinister Precedents Are Set
The  Danger  to  Liberty  in  The  New  Smith  Act  Decision
Pew  people  in this  country  are  any  longer Intrepid  enough
to  defend  the  rights  of  actual  Communists.   Most  Americans
thoughtful   enough  to  understand   nervously  look  the   other
•way,;*? good  Germans  looked  the  other  way  when  some poor
Jew  was  being  set  upon  by  Brown  Shirts.
Those  few  liberals  who  still  command an  audience  on  the
air  or  in  the  press  confine  themselves  to  cases  of  mistaken
identity,  or  the  defense  of  persons  with  so  "spotless"  a  past
as  to  be virtual  political  idiots  or  to   plead  for  forgiveness  of
those so foolish  as  to have  been somewhat  radical  in the  past.
This  may  help  us  to  understand  how the  Spanish  Inquisi-
tion,  despite many  ups-and-downs  in the  earlier  years,  estab-
lished  itself  so   firmly.  There  were  men  brave  enough  and
politically powerful enough  to  defend, and  sometimes  to  save,
the  wrongly  accused.   But  no one  defended  the  right  to  be  a
heretic.    The  opponents  of  the  Inquisition  acquiesced  in  its
basic  principles.    And  so it  is  in  America  today.
. Yet  it  is  as  true  today  as  it  was  then  that  the  evils  of
the  Inquisition,  the distrust  it  spread  between  man and man,
the  terrible  penalties  it  imposed for  the  slightest  appearance
of  non-conformity,  the  pall  it  cast  upon  society,   could  only
be fought  by asserting  the  right  of men to  think  and worship
as  they  pleased,  however  dangerous  or  subversive  that  might
appear  to  the  majority.
The  occasion  for  these  reflections  is  the  silence  which  has
greeted  the  decision  of  the   U.  S.  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals
last  week upholding the  conviction of Elizabeth  Gurley Plynn
and  the  "second  string"  Communist leaders  under  the  Smith
Act
Against  McCarthyism But—
Consider:  Three  New  York  City  newspapers,  the   Times,
the  Post,  and  the  Wall  Street  Journal  have  been  critical  of
many  aspects  of  the  witch  hunt.   Two  others,  the   Herald-
Tribune   and   the    World-Telegram,   have   been   critical   of
McCarthy.   Yet  not  one  of  them  has  examined  this decision
and  discussed  its  implications for  the  basic  liberties  they  have
defended   from   time  to   time  in   their   respective   fashions.
True,  it  is  about  as  arid  and  dreary   an  opinion  as  any
editor   was  ever  called   upon  to  read.    But  it   is  arid   and
dreary   because  so  many  fundamental  battles   of   principle
have  been lost  in these  Smith  Act  cases that  the  defense was
pushed  back  into  the  murkier  regions  of  legal   metaphysics.
The  main argument  centered  around  the fine  spun  question
of  intent.   How  is  intent  to  be  determined  in  a  prosecution
for  conspiracy  where  without  proof  of  individual  intent  the
statute  would  concededly  be  invalid ?   The  discussion  of  this
in  the  briefs   and  the   opinion  is  as  abstruse  as   medieval
argument about the  number  of angels who could dance  on  the
head  of a  pin.
The  other,  simpler,  question  was  when  dang_er   becomes
so  "clear"  and "present" that  Congress  may  punish  men  for
their utterances  despite the First  Amendment?   No medieval
schoolman  could  have  been  more  wHy  in  his  dialectics  than
our  judges  in  reading  that  Amendment  as  if  it  restricted
the  liberties  it  was  supposed  to  protect.
Both  these  questions   involve   every   one's   freedom.    The
answers  given  to  them  by  the  Circuit   Court  weaken  tradi-
tional  safeguards  of  political   liberty  and  fair   trial.    This,
briefly  stated,  is  how they  do so.
A Law Aimed  at  "Dangerous Thoughts"
The  Smith  Act,  under  which  these Communists  were tried,
makes  it  a  crime   (1)  to  advocate  revolutionary   doctrines,
(2)  to  "print,  publish,  edit,  issue,  circulate,  sell,  distribute
or  publicly  display" any  such  writings,  (3)  to  organize,  join
or  "affiliate  with" any  group  which  teaches  such  doctrines  or
(4)  to  "conspire"  to  do  any  of  these  things.
'  The  law  is  so ioosely  drawn  that  only  under   {2)  does  it
require  that  there  be  intent  to  overthrow   the  government.
Without  the intent  clause,  it  would  be a  crime  to  publish  the
Declaration  of  Independence.
Beginning   with  Judge   Medina,  the   courts   held  that   as
written.the  Act  was  defective,  and  must  be  read  as  if   it
required  "intent  to  overthrow"   in  all  cases.    Otherwise   a
college  teacher  discussing  Marx  with  his  pupils  would  be  in
danger  of  prosecution  under  the  Smith  Act.
How  prove  intent?    Here  it  gets  complicated.   It  is  com-
plicated   first   of  all  by  the  fact  that  none  of  these  people
were  convicted  of  advocating   revolution.
Where  the  government  cannot  prove  that  a  crime  is  com-
mitted,  it  often  falls   back  on  ihe  easier  task  of  alleging
that  there  was  a  "conspiracy"  to  commit  the  crime  at  some
later  date.   So these  people  were  convicted  of  conspiring  at
some  future  date  to  advocate  overthrow  of  the  government.
Short-Circuiting  Normal  Rules  of  Evidence
Now  one  of  the  advantages  of  a  conspiracy  prosecution  is
that  ordinary  rules  of  evidence  are  short-circuited.    It   be-
comes  possible  to  prove  one  person's   intent   by  what  some
other  member of  the  alleged  conspiracy  said.
Here  for  example  one  of  the  proofs  of  intent  was  what.
Harvey  Matusow  testified  that  he  heard  a  Beatrice  Siskind
say  in  1948  in  teaching  a  class  in  political  economy.   Miss
Siskind  was  not  a  defendant,  and  there  was  no  proof  that
any  of  the  defendants knew  what  she  was  teaching.
We  cannot  enter  into  the  subtleties  of  the  argument.    But
we  will  pause  a  moment to  summarize it  for  lawyer  readers.
Others may skip  it.
The  defense  brief  by  Mary  Kaufman   and  Harry   Sacher
brilliantly  argued  that  the  rule  allowing  third  party  state-
ments  to  be  admitted  as  evidence  of  state  of  mind  in  con-
spiracy  prosecutions  rested  on  a  "fiction"  derived  from   the
.law of agency  (Holmes), that  "such  declarations are  admitted
upon  no  doctrine  of  the   law  of  evidence,  but   of  the   sub-
stantive  law  of crime"  (Learned  Hand)  and that  they  cannot
be  used  in  this  type  of  prosecution,  where  the  statute  would
be invalid under the First Amendment unless  actual individual
intent   to  overthrow  were  proven.    The  Circuit   Court  re-
jected  this   argument.
All  this  far-fetched  hair-splitting   adds  up  to   something
very  serious.   If  this  decision  stands,  then  someone who  has
helped  advance  a  Communist  cause   may  be  in  danger  of
prosecution  as  a  co-conspirator   even  though  he  was  not  a
member.   And  his  criminal  intent  to  overthrow  the   govern-
ment  may  be  inferred  from  remarks  or  writings  of  which  he
may  never  have  been  aware.
No  Longer  "Clear" or "Present"
We  come  now  to  the   second  point.   For   30  years,  until
these  Smith  Act  cases,  the  courts  had held  that  expressions
of  opinion could not  be  punished  as  sedition  or  seditious ^con-
spiracy  unless  there  was really  a "clear  and present  danger"
to  the  government.
In  the  first  Smith  Act  cases,  Judge  Learned  Hand    (and
later  the  Supreme  Court)   changed  this  to  the  much  vaguer
rule,  "In   each  case   [courts]  must  ask  themselves   whether
the  gravity  of the  evil,  discounted i>y  its  improbability,  justi-
fies such  invasion of  free  speech .as  is  necessary  to  avoid  the
danger."
But  in this  "second  string"-prosecution,  the  Circuit  Court
last week went further.  It  said the "clear and present danger"
rule  "connotes   no  more  than  that  the  setting  in  which  the
defendants  have  conspired  is  such  as  to  lead  reasonably  to
the  conclusion that  their  teachings  may  result  in  an  attempt
at  overthrow."
In  Bther  words,  the  danger   need  be  neither  "dear"  nor
"present"—it  need  only  'be  potential—to  warrant  Congress
and  the  courts   in  abridging  freedom  of  speech   and  of   the
press.   Some  day  the  country  will  wake  up  to  these  sinister
precedents,  but  perhaps  too late.                                                              "
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

L-F.  Siontts  Weekly,   October  SS, 1954
A  Quick  Look  'Round  the  Capitol  and  Globe
Some  Personal  Choices in  the  Election: If  we were  in  Cali-
fornia,  we'd  vote  for   Condon  and  against   Sam  Yorty;  in
Oregon,  for  Diek  Neuberger;   in  Idaho,  for  Glen  Taylor;  in
Minnesota,  against  Hubert   Humphrey;  in   Illinois,   against
Paul  Douglas,  not  only  because  of  his  betrayal  of  liberalism
on  repressive  legislation  but  because  of his  consistent  pro-war
attitudes;  in  Kentucky,  for  John  Sherman  Cooper,  in  many
ways  the  best  libertarian  in  the  Senate;  in  Tennessee,  for
Kefauver;  in  Pennsylvania, for  George  M. Leader,  the  Demo-
cratic  State  Senator   now running  for  Governor,  who  voted
against  the  Pechan  "loyalty"  Act and  didn't  apologize for  it;
in  New  Jersey,  for   Case,  to  strengthen   the   anti-McCarthy
liberals in the  Republican party;  in  New York, we'd  split  our
ticket  several  ways,  casting  a  protest  vote  for  McManus  on
the  ALP ticket,  a vote for  Javits for  Attorney  General  as one
of  the  genuinely  liberal  Republicans, and  if  we  were  in  that
district,  for  Elizabeth  Gurley Flynn, just  as  a  way  of  voting
against  the  Smith  Act,  and  for  a  grand  old  lady  who  used
to  be  a  Wobbly  and  still  carries  over  some  anarchistic  salt
and  savor  among  the  often  insufferably  pious Reds.
We'd  vote  for  every  one  of  the  55  Congressmen who voted
against  the  immunity  bill  (you  can  find  their  names  in  our
August  16 issue);  for  Burdick  of  North  Dakota  and  Multer
of   Brooklyn,  the   only   two   Congressmen  to   vote   against
the   new  anti-Communist  control  legislation,   and  of  course
for   "Manny"  Celler  of  Brooklyn  who  worked  so  hard   and
fought  so  hard  on  so  many  liberal  issues.    One  of  the  best
things  about  the  expected  Democratic  victory  in  the  House
is  that  Celler  will  again  become  chairman  of  the   Judiciary
Committee.
Why  Withheld  So  Long?    Notice  that  just  released  testi-
mony  by  Vannevar  Bush,  John  von  Neumann  and   others
criticizing  security  standards  for  scientists  was  given  before
the  House Government  Operations  Committee last June.   The
Gray  board  decision  on  Oppenheimer became  known  at   the
beginning  of June, the  AEG  decision  against  him was  handed
down  at   the  end  of  June.    Though  this  had  an  important
bearing   on  the   issues,  it  was  withheld  four  months   until
public  discussion  of  the   Oppenheimer  case  had  died  down.
McCarthy:  Under  guidance  from  his  lawyer,  Edward  Ben-
nett  Williams, who is  also an  A.F.  of  L. attorney,  may be  try-
ing  out  a  "new  look"  for  the  coming  fight  over  censure.   On
the  air  the  other  night  he  was  the  grave  elder   statesman,
above  the  battle,  loyal  to  his  party,  though  hurt  by  attacks,
sorry  (as  he  hopes)  that  it  will  be  defeated  in  the  election,
concerned  over farm  prices,  ready  (if  only asked)  to  lead  the
Republicans  out  of the  wilderness  .  .  .  The "Adelaide  Case"
affair   (there  now  seem  to  have  been  three  of  her)   shows,
however, that  Low Blow  Joe  is  still  at  the  same  old business,
Portrait  Of  A  Liberal  Statesman
"The  most  extreme  example  of  this  liberal  conform-
ism  is  the  new  anti-Communist  law  which  goes   far
further   in  its  threat  to   civil  liberty   than    anything
McCarthy   proposed—promoted   by   two   of   the   most
eminent   liberal   Democrats,   Senators   Humphrey   and
Paul  Douglas.
"When  I  asked  Douglas  about  this  measure,  he  re-
plied  very  fiercely that  the  Republican  party  does  not
really  want  to  destroy  the  Communist  Party.    'They
keep  it   in  existence,'  he  said,  'and  use  it   to   smear
Democrats  like  myself.   We  liberals  must  destroy  the
Communists  if  this  dirty  game  is  to  stop.'
"Is  it unfair  to suggest that  his attitude  is not  unlike
that  of  the  Germans  in  the  late  1920's  who  tolerated
Jew-baiting in  order  to  preserve  the  Weimar Republic ?
—R.  H.  S.  Croasman:  "The  Plight  of  American  Liber-
alism,"   the   London   New   Statesman   and   Nation,
Oct. 16.
BULLETIN
Washington—The  price  being  demanded  by the  Brit-
ish,  French  and  Germans  for  ratification  of the  German
rearmament   agreement   is  a  renewal   of  negotiations
With  Moscow  for  reunification of  Germany.   The  Euro-
peans,  including  Churchill,  want  a  Big  Four   meeting
with   Malenkov.   The  State  Department   is  trying  to
stave  off pressure  by  agreeing  to  a  meeting  instead  of
the  Council of Foreign  Ministers.   Whether  the  meeting
of  heads of state comes off or not,  the  Foreign  Ministers
are  now  expected   to  meet  late  this  year  or  early  in .
January.
and  that there is  some kind  of underground  among  the  witch
hunters  which  enables  them  to  pool  their  files  for   smear
purposes  when  dirt  is  wanted  against  somebody  they  have
marked  for  political   destruction.
Petersen: There  are  indications  that  the  arrest  by the  FBI
of  the  "secret  code"  expert,  Petersen,  was  intended  to  pro-
vide  a  background  for  the  coming  McCarthy censure  fight,
sensationally  illustrating  the "infiltration" of military   security
agencies  as   often   charged  by  Joe.    The  case,  however,  is
already  fizzling  out,  and  may  collapse  altogether,    despite
that  advance  ballyhoo about  secrets  so  secret  the  prosecutor
had  to  go  through  special  clearance  before  he  was  allowed
to  know what  it  was  all  about.   If  this  sort  of nonsense con-
tinues,  we'll  live  to  see  cases  so "secret"  they'll  be  heard  in
star   chamber   before   specially   cleared   judges,    guaranteed
(unlike  Youngdahl)  to  have  the  right  biases.
Coincidence  Dept.:  Neither  side  of  the  Iron  Curtain  seems
to  have  a  monopoly  of  peoples  living  in wonderful  unanimity.
Recent  elections  in  East  Germany,  like  those  in  Guatemala,
brought  in  a  99  percent  verdict  in  favor  of  the  government
.  .  .  Washington  is  worried  by  the  sudden  friendliness  of
Radio  Moscow to Turkey . . .
Liberation in Korea: Walter  Simmons, the  Chicago  Tribune
correspondent,  visited   New  Hope  Village   in   a   portion  of
North  Korea  above  the  38th  Parallel  which  is  under  Rhee's
control,  and reported  "American military  police have  to  drive
through  the  streets  of  New  Hope  Village  every  half  hour
to  keep  pillaging   South  Korean  soldiers  out."    The  article
was  headed, "South  Korean  Army  is  Tough  on" Own  People.
It  Preys  on Refugees Who Return  Home."
Hopeful  Note:  The  admission in  Budapest  October  14 that
"many"  people  there  had  been  jailed  on  false  charges  by
secret   police  using   "criminally   improper   and   provocative
methods and false  charges  and statements" and the  reappear-
ance  in  Hungarian   public  life  of  many  "purged"   officials,
some of them condemned in the  Rajk trial.
Contempt:   The  three   new  "first   amendment"   contempt
indictments  against  Lament,  Unger  and  Shadowitz  will  de-
pend  in  large  part  on  the  outcome  of  the  Harvey  O'Connor
case.    O'Connor was  to  go  on  trial  after  the  Supreme  Court
had  heard  the  reargument  of  the  Emspak  case  and  decided
that.   But  last  week  the  Court  took  the  Emspak  case  off  the
calendar  until  a  new  judge  is  appointed  to  succeed  Jackson.
One  of  the  latter's  last  judgments  was  that  in  which  the
court  reinstated  Abe Isserman  in  the  Supreme  Court  bar  and
granted  a rehearing on his  disbarment  in New Jersey.   Isser-
man  is  the  second of  the  two  lawyers—the  other  was  Harry
Sacher—disbarred   in  the   wake   of  the   first   Foley   Square
Smith  Act  trials  whose  reinstatement  to  practice  was  thus
indicated  by  the  Court.
Next  Week:  As  we  go  to  press   (Thursday  morning)  the
new   anti-Communist  law   and  its   impact  on  the   Internal
Security  Act  were  about  to  be  argued  in  Circuit  Court here
today  and  the  Youngdahl  bias  motion  in  the  Lattimore  case
tomorrow.   Watch next  week's  issue for  coverage^
1    5        .-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  tS,  1954
What Senator Mansfield  Failed  to See In  Indo-China
How  Expect  Corruptionists  to  Correct  Social Inequity?
On   October    15  Senator  Mike  Mansfield   (D.,   Mont.)    re-
leased  a  report  on  his  recent  visit  to  Indo-China.   The  report
was  given  little  attention  by  most  papers,  and  did  not  even
make  the  pages  of   the  New   York   Times.    It   is  a   gloomy
document.
The  observers,  diplomatic  and  military,  on  whom  our  gov-
ernment  relies  obviously are not  competent.  The  Senator  notes
that   when   he  was  in   Indo-China   a  year   ago   "experienced
observers"  were  "almost  unanimous"  in  predicting  that  joint
Franco-American-Vietnamese   efforts   "could   serve   to   check
the  Communist   drive."    The  U.  S.  spent   $2,600,000,000  in
the  fiscal  years  1950-54 on  that  bad  guess.
As  in  China,  a  substantial  portion  of  these  sums  ultimately
went  to  help  the  Communists.     Some  2 5 percent  was  invested
in  the  areas  which  have  been  ceded  to  them,  including  im-
provements  at  the  Hanoi  airport  where  we built  a runway  big
enough  to  "handle  heavy  bombers  capable  of  striking  at  our
bases  in  the  Philippines."
"None ... Is Broadly Based  in the People"
South   Vietnam  is  in   a  political   crisis   and   the   situation
there   "could   give   way   to   complete   internal   chaos"   even
before  elections are  held in  1956 under  the  Geneva  agreement.
The  Senator  writes,  "There  is  still  the  same  short-sighted
struggle   for   immediate   gain   among   the   various   political
groups,  sects  and  factions.    Each  of  these  elements  possesses
some   aspects  of   power   in   its   organization,   armaments  or
heritage of  authority.   None, however,  is broadly  based  on  the
people."     (Italics  added.)
Senator   Mansfield   pictures   Saigon   the   capital   of   South
Vietnam,   as  seething  with  intrigue:  "The   political   plotting
goes  on in  army  circles,  government   circles  .  .  .  and even in
the  demi-monde  of  ill-disguised   gangsters,  pirates  and  extor-
tionists."
The  head  of  the  government,  Diem,  is  praised  by  Mansfield
but  is  described  as "a  virtual  prisoner  in  his  residence."    His
program  calls  for  "the  elimination  of  some of  the  most  brazen
aspects  of  corruption   and  social  inequity"  but   this   "remains
largely  a  paper  program."   Note  the  word  "some."
The  Prime  Minister  does  not  control  the  Army   "nor   does
he  have  power  over  the  Surete  or  the  police  in  the   Saigon-
Cholon   area."   The   reason  is  that   "by   special   arrangement
with  Bao Dai,  the  latter  two  are operated  by  the  Binh  Xuyen,
a  demi-monde  organization  which  also  controls  gambling,  and
other  questionable   concessions  in  Saigon-Cholon."    In   other
words,   Bao  Dai   farmed   out   control   of   the   police   in   the
capital  to  the  ring  which  operates  its  vice  resorts.
The   Prime   Minister   depends  for   support   on  "a   tenuous
alignment   with   two  quasi-religious   sects,  the  Cao  Dai  and
Hoa  Hao,  each of  which has a military  force  of  some thousands
of  men  responsive  to  its  command."   The  kind  of  "religious"
these  are is indicated  by  a biographical sketch  of  the  Hoa  Hao
leader  to  be found  in  the  appendix  (p. 45).   This  says  of  him,
"He   has  a  long  police  record  of  thefts  and  assaults,  dating
from  his  days  as  river-boat  skipper  or  pirate  and  head  of  a
gang  of  local   ruffians."
How Square  the Circle?
Senator  Mansfield  repeats  from  his  last  year's  report  that
the  basic  problem  is for  the  non-Communist   government   "to
put   down  firm  roots"  among  the  people.    He  says  this  can
only   be  done   "if   they   deal  competently   with   such   basic
problems  as illiteracy, public health, excessive population in  the
deltas,  inequities  in  labor  and  in  land  tenure,  and  village  and
agricutural  improvement.     Finally,   it  is  essential  that   there
be a  constant  raising of  the  ethical  standards  of  government."
Here   even  our   best  observers  like   Mansfield   firmly   shut
their  eyes.    Although   Madison  and  Hamilton  did,  it  is  not
respectable  in  America  today  to  analyze  situations  in  terms of
economic  classes.   Nor  to  recognize  that  some  things  can  only
be  accomplished by  revolution.    Revolution  is a dirty  word  in
America,  except  possibly  on  July  4.
But  isn't  it   folly  to  expect  rotten  old  brooms   to   sweep
clean?    Where  the  "Emperor"  himself  draws  profit  from  the
vice  rackets,  how fatuous to  lecture  his government  on  raising
ethical  standards?    And  how  expect  political  factions  whose
only  base is among  the  native  usurers,  landowners  and  capital-
ists  to  correct  "social  inequity"?
LET  US  SEND  A  SAMPLE  COPY  TO  A  FRIEND
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street.
Pity                                     7ono
Enter this  gift  snb  for  $4 more  (money
fTo)  Namp
Street
City                                        Zone
State
enclosed):
State ____
10/25/64
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
801  E. Capitol  St, S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  at
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED