I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jul05.pdf

============================================================

.How  Dulles  Reacted  When  Hitler  Wrecked  Locarno,  Page  3
IF. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2,  NUMBER  24JULY  6,  1954
WASHINGTON, D. C.15  CENTS
Why  Churchill  Talks  Like Henry  Wallace
The  huge  and  garish  Presidential  Room  at  the  Statler  was
jammed.   The  Marine  Band, in  red  coats  and  white  trousers,
added  to  the  din  with  the  kind  of  music  one  hears  at  the
circus.   There   was   the   excitement   of   a  super  gladiatorial
event:  Sir Winston  had  agreed  (or  seemed to  have agreed)  to
take  on  questions  from   all  comers,  no  holds  barred.   Mrs.
Trollope would have been  charmed with  the  scene and  rushed
home  to  add  a  new  chapter  to  the  Manners  and  Customs of
the  Americans.    The  block  long  dais was  crowded  with  the
cream  of  the  press  corps,  i.e.  its  leading  trained  seals,  whited
sepulchres,  and  housebroken  oracles.   There  was   (or   seemed
to  be)   one  Negro  on  the  dais,  though  the  National  Press
Club  is  still  Jim  Crow,  but  he  turned  out  to  be  the  Ambas-
sador  from  Ceylon,  and  thus  by  protocol  lily-white.
Sir  Winston,  with  that  big  cigar,  looking  more  and  more
like  the  late  W.  C.  Fields,  brought  the  house  down  when  he
appeared,  followed  by  Anthony  Eden,  who  had  the   pleased
and  incredulous  look  of  a  small  boy  allowed  to  go  along  and
watch  a  gifted  grandpa  do  card  tricks.   Churchill  was  mag-
nificent.   I  never  expect  in  my  lifetime  to  hear  and  see a
greater  man.  Beyond the  puckishness  and  the  hamming, there
came  through  with  tremendous  sincerity  'the  last,  desperate
effort  of  a  noble  old  man  to  stem  the  tide  toward  war.  His
plea  for  "a  good hard try"  at  peace and co-existence could  not
have  been  spoken  in  a  more  unfavorable  context;  such  talk
has  long  been  regarded  here  as  subversive.   The  atmosphere
was  vividly  indicated   for   all  time  when  Churchill   felt   it
necessary  to  assure his audience that  he was not  a  Communist!
I  blush  for my  country.
Why  does  Churchill  now  speak  the  language  we  used  to
hear  from  Henry  Wallace?   The  basic pattern  is  the  familiar
one  of  balance-of-power  politics.   After  the  war,  a  Russo-
American  settlement  would  not  have  been  to  Britain's  inter-
est.   The   two  giants  would  have  divided   the   world   over
London's  head.   Funds  for  reconstruction   in  Britain   could
only  be obtained  from  Congress  by  anti-Communist  scare  and
alarm.  More recently,  as the  value of  American aid has  fallen,
its  risks  have  risen.  British  recovery  has  made  greater  inde-
pendence  possible;  the  threat  of  losing  more British  spheres of
influence  to  the  U.S.   (as  in  Iran)   has  made  greater   inde-
pendence  necessary.  An  H-bomb  war  would  ruin  Britain.
At  the  same time,  tension  between Moscow and  Washington
makes  possible  a  profitable mediatorial role  for  London,  espe-
cially  in  the  China  trade.   Churchill's  passion  is  Britain,  not
anti-Communism.    He  sees  a  chance  to  get  the  best  of  both
worlds  for  his  country.   He   sees  its  desolate  end  in  a  new
war.   He  is  also,  with  a  seer's  vision  and  a  poet's  tongue,
anxious  at  death's  door  for  one last  exploit  in  the  service  of
humanity.    His  has  been  an  unquenchable  thirst  for  glorious
achievement.   But  how  FDR  would  have  been surprised  and
pleased  at  Cousin  Winston's  change  of  tune!
The  Meaning  of Locarno: Eden, Dulles  and  Munich
Eden  was  introduced  to  the  audience  as  the  man  who re-
signed  rather  than  acquiesce  in  Munich.  To that  audience  it
seemed  an  implied  rebuke;  was he not  now engaged  in  a  new
chapter in appeasement in the Far  East?  Eden and Churchill
represent  conservatives who were not prepared  to make their
peace with  Hitler;  Dulles  (as  can  be  seen  on page  3)  repre-
sents  the  conservatives  who were  not  only for  appeasing  the
Axis,  but  applauded  its  aims.   Like  so many  of  those  now in
positions   of  power  in  this  country,  Dulles  was  then  pro-
Munich,  pro-German, anti-British.   (He  still  is).   Churchill's
earlier  pro-Fascism, like his  recent  anti-Communism, stopped
where   British   interests   and   the   balance   of   power   were
endangered.
The  difference  between  the  two  sets  of  men  now  is  this.
The  British  see a  Far  Eastern  Locarno  as  a  means  of  sta-
bilizing  the  situation  and  saving  Malaya.   The  Dalles  crowd
does  not  want  the  situation  stabilized.   A  Locarno   means
recognition  of  Peking,  the  abandonment  of  Chiang  Kai-shek
and  the  ultimate  restoration  of  Formosa  to  China.  The void
in  the  White  House  and  the  cowardice  elsewhere  have  made
this  American policy.  But this  policy is being  destroyed  by a
veritable  revolution  in  world  affairs  signalized  by  Churchill's
shift,  the  fall  of  the  Catholics  from  control  of foreign  policy
in  Paris,  the  triumphal  'appearance  of  Chou  En-lai  on  the
world  stage.  The  Nehru-Chou  meeting  dramatizes  the liber-
ation  of  Asia  and  the  colored  races  from  four  centuries  of
white domination.  The axis of world power  is shifting  funda-
mentally;  the  process  can only be  stopped  if  America, like  a
blinded  Samson, brings  down the  whole house of humanity  in
common  ruins.   The  U.S.  is  being   pushed   screaming,  but
inexorably,  toward  co-existence.
Toward A  New  Colonialism  of Our  Own
The  process  will  take  time,  and  will  be  turbulent.   The
possibility  of  war  through  misstep,  miscalculation   or  just
plain  mischief  will  never  be absent.  The next stage may be a
West  European  revolt  against  .a  new  colonialism—the  colo-
nialism  represented  by  American air  bases  in  England  and
France.  Ever  since  the  Dulles  "massive  retaliation"  speech,
London  and  Paris  have  been  haunted  by  the  fear  that  one
day,  without  consulting  them,  the  U.S.  might  plunge  into  an
atomic  war  which  would bring  immediate  strikes  by  Russia
at  West  European  air  bases.  So long  as the bases are  there,
whether  used  in  the  first  attack  or  not,  England  and  France
are  fatally  at  the  mercy  of  any  American  adventure.   They
9   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  5,  1954
cannot  stay  out  of  a  Russo-American  war  even  if  they  want
to.  This  will  become a  more  serious  problem  for  them  as, if
and  when the  steady  deterioration  of  American  government
and  opinion  brings  closer  to  full  power  a  combination  of  the
military,  the  China  Lobby  Senators  and  the  crypto-Fascists
like  McCarthy.
The pattern  of events  in  Iraq  and  Syria  may  repeat  them-
selves  in  this  new context.  Just  as  the  British  and  French
established  bases  in  these  colonial countries  as  allies  against
dometic  revolt  and  foreign  attack, and  stayed  on to  dominate
their  political  life,  until  they  were  forced  out,  so  the   U.S.
came  to  Western  Europe  as  an  ally  but  may  end  up  as  an
unwelcome  guest.  What  if  a  new American  government  uses
these  bases  to  interfere   in  internal  politics,   or  refuses  to
relinquish   the  bases,  standing  on  "contractual  rights"  as
Britain  and  France  have  in  Egypt  and  Morocco?
This  will  not  sound  as  fantastic  a  few  years  hence  as  it
may  now.  A  deepening of  xenophobia, a  mood  of  bitterness,
and  an  intensification  of  the  trend  toward  a  closer   society
may  be  expected  in  the  wake  of  a  Far  Eastern  settlement.
The  wild  men  will  use  the  loss  of  Indo-China  against  the
conservative  Eisenhower Republicans  as the  Republicans used
"the   loss  of  China"  against  the  Democrats.    An-  unfriendly
attitude   toward   Western   Europe,   an   orientation    toward
Japan  and  Germany,  will  be  the  trend.  Remember that  the
wild  men are  pre-war  American  Firsters.
But  bitterness  against  England  and  France  is  not  limited
to  their  ranks.  During  the  debate  in  the  Commons  on  June
23 after  the  Eden "Locarno" speech, a Mr. Donnelly, a  Labor -
ite  from  Pembroke,  made a  remark  which will  illuminate  the
difference  in  attitude  on the  two  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  While
praising  Eden's  work  at  Geneva, Donnelly  said  maintenance
of  the  Anglo-American  alliance  "was  vital  because  it  gave
us a  chance to influence  and guide the  American government's
policies."   He  said  that  "if  broken  the  chance  of  preventing
American   policies  doing  irreparable   damage  to  the   world
would  be lost."  There  is  bitterness  here  in the  State  Depart-
ment  if  not  the  White  House  because  the  Anglo-American
entente  has  worked  in just  this  way.
Though  there  has  been  no agreement  on the  Far  East,  the
British   have  succeeded  again   (as  Attlee  did  at   a   crucial
moment  in  the  Korean  war)   in  restraining  the  Americans
from  recklessness.  This is what  rankles  in  Dulles"  grumbling
about  operating   under  a  British   veto  which  in  turn  may
reflect  a veto by Nehru.  Dulles is  accustomed  to act  unilater-
ally, and to  get  obedience—as he has  been getting it  in Latin
America.   In  this  unfortunately  he  faithfully   reflects   the
dominant  mood  in  Congress:   if  these  foreigners  won't  go
along  with  us  on  EDC  or  the  Far   East  or  Guatemala,  we
shut  off the money . . .
After  Guatemala,  the  Hemispheric Police  State
With   the   success  of  the   revolt   staged   by  the   U.S.   in
Guatemala  and  in  the  mood  of  "disillusion"  with  Europe,  the
"Fortress  America"  isolationists  will  join  hands  with  those
who would like  us to retire into the  Western  Hemisphere and
"cultivate our own garden."  The real  trouble  with  this  meta-
phor  is  that  the  Western  Hemisphere  below  the  Rio  Grande
is  a  garden  we  regard   as  full  of  weeds,  lesser  and  darker
breeds  we  must   flatter   and  control.   They  don't   especially
care  for  the  gardener,  but  the  masses  are  easily  ruled  by  a
few  thousand  armed  men whose allegiance  can  be  bought  or
manipulated  as  in  Guatemala.
The  Guatemalan  counter-revolution   carried  out  the  new
principle  laid  down  by  Dulles  at   Caracas—that  we  would
intervene  against   internal   "subversion"   as  well  as  foreign
aggression.  This implies a hemispheric police state, with  inter
American  control of travel, the  mail .and thoughts  to keep  out
the  dangerous.  It  is  all there in the  recommendation at  Car-
acas  that  member  governments  enact  "measures  to  require
disclosure"  of  the  identity,  activities  and  source  of  funds  of
persons  "spreading"  Communist propaganda  and  to  control
their  movements.  The  tactic  of  the  Un-American  Activities
Committee  and  the  authority  of  the  FBI  must  become hemi-
spheric  (the latter  already  is).  As the  Communists go under-
ground,  we  must  be  prepared  to  screen  the  political  life  of
Latin  America to  sift  out  hidden "subversion."  This  will, of
course, make it  easy to get rid  of anyone who agitates against
banana,  copper  or  oil companies.
Oppenheimer  and  The  Brain-Washing  of  U.S.  Intellectuals
As the  sun of freedom  begins  to rise elsewhere,  it  is  setting
here.   For  the  cruel  savagery   of  the  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission  verdict  on  Oppenheimer,  one  must  go  to  the  great
Moscow trials where the  Old Bolsheviks  were  entrapped  in  a
spider  web woven  by  the  secret  police.  Brpwnell's  attack  on
Harry  White last  winter,  the  Oppenheimer proceeding  now,
represent  another  stage  in  the  adoption  here  of  the  Russian
practice   of  rewriting   history  to  defame  the  opposition,  to
terrorize  critics,  to  impose  total  conformity  and  to  brain-
wash the  intellectuals.
Notice  that  the  heart  of  the  case  against  Oppenheimer  is
that  he failed  to  cooperate fully  with  the  secret  police.   This
runs  like  a  sinister  thread  through  the  majority  opinions—
the  intellectuals  must  learn  to  obey their  police masters,  and
to  obey  without  question.  The  FBI  is  to  be as  sacred  here  as
the  NKVD  in  Russia.
We  hope to  discuss  the  Oppenheimer report  in  more  detail
later  but  would  warn  now  against  sentimental   expectation
of  a  revolt  of  scientists.  Scientists,  like  most  human  beings,
tend  to  follow  the  line  of  least  resistance;  personal  comfort
and  safety  outweigh moral  and  political  considerations.   The
crucifixion  of  Oppenheimer will  serve  as  a  sensational  warn-
ing to the younger men that they had better toe the mark and
eschew  social  consciousness.  The  ideal  scientist  is  to  be,  as
indeed  our  engineers  have long tended  to  be,  a, kind  of  more
mobile  though  less  dependable  IBM  machine.   "Security"  is
to  be  the  watchword  and  "security"  is  a  watchword  incom-
patible  with   a  free  society.   Defeat  abroad  is  turning  us
inward,  and  it  is  fitting  historically  that  the Oppenheimer
decision  should  come  on  the  heels  of  Churchill's  rebellion.
Bulletin  on  the  Brownell  Police  State  Bill
Now  is  the  time,  as  they  say  in  the  typing  classes,  for  all
good  men  to  come  to  the  aid  of  those  fighting  to  maintain  a
free  America.  The  battle  is  not  lost  if   only  enough  of  us
will  rise  up to fight it.  Which brings  us to the  Brownell  bills
discussed  in  last  week's   issue—one  to  set  up  a   gigantic
blacklist  for  virtually  all  industry,  barring  the  subversive
from   employment;  the  other  giving'the  Attorney   General
power to  seize and liquidate  trade  unions, other  organizations
and  businesses  he  considers  "Communist  infiltrated."    (We
are  to  get  the  same  treatment   we  are  giving  Guatemala.)
The  A-  F.  of  L.  and  the  C.I.O.  joined  in  the  protest  against
those bills last week.  There is  growing  distrust and  dislike of
Brownell  in  Congress.   The  Senate  Judiciary   Committee  is
opening  hearings  on  Thursday.    Get  your  organization   to
make  an  appearance.   The  bills  can  still  be  blocked  if  there
is  enough  pressure.
Hot-Weather  Gremlins in last week's  issue  garbled  a  refer-
ence  to  Churchill  and  Eden  both  disliking  Dulles,  made  it
read that  Churchill and  Dulles  both  disliked  Eden!  Sorry.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.-F,  Stone's  Weekly,  July  5, 1954
When  Eden  Balked  at  Munich,  John  Foster  Advocated  Appeasement
Dulles  and  Locarno: A  Revealing  Bit  of History
The  Locarno treaty  of  1925. was a  mutual  guarantee  of  the
Western   frontiers   as   established   at   Versailles.   Germany
agreed  not to  invade  France  and  Belgium.  Britain  and Italy
agreed  to  come  to  the  defense  of  the  victim  if  either  side
struck  at the other  across  the Rhine.  In this treaty, Germany
also  promised  not  to  violate  Articles  42  and  43  of  the  Ver-
sailles  Treaty.
These  were  the  articles  which  sought  to  buttress  the  dis-
armament  of  Germany by  providing  for  the  demilitarization
of  the  Rhineland.  "In  case  Germany violates  in  any  manner
whatever  the  provisions  of  Articles  42 and  43,"  the  Locarno
pact  said,  "she  shall  be regarded  as  committing  a  hostile  act
against  the Powers signatory  . . . and as calculated to disturb
the  peace of the  world."
Ten  years  later  Hitler  tore  up  the  disarmament provision
of  the  Versailles  pact  and  reconstituted  the  German General
Staff.   When  neither  France  nor  Britain  acted,  it  was  clear
that  the  Locarno settlement  was  dead.  The  following March
Hitler   formally  repudiated  Locarno  and  marched  into  the
Rhineland.
These  events  were  discussed  by  John  Foster   Dulles  in
an  article  called  "The  Road  to  Peace."   It  was  published by
the  Atlantic  Monthly   in  October,  1935,  just   seven  months
after  Hitler  put  into  effect  his  "Law  for  the  Reconstruction
of  the  National  Defense  Forces."
Not  So Moral,  Then
Today  all  Mr.  Dulles's  utterances  are  heavily larded  with
morality.  But  he  did not then  view the  scene  in moral  terms.
He set  out  on a  quite different  line of argument.  He began by
enumerating  the  treaties—the  League  Covenant, the Kellogg
pact, the  Locarno Treaty—with  which  the  world after  World
War  I  sought to prevent  war.   He noted that  "in  the  face of
all  this,  we  sense  that  we  are  inevitably  moving on  toward
war."
"Faced  by  a  situation  which  superficially  seems  so  inex-
plicable,"   Mr.  Dulles  went  on,  we  adopt  the  time-honored
expedient of postulating  a  'personal  devil'.  Hitler,  Mussolini,
and  Japanese  war  lords  in  turn  became  the  object  of  our
suspicion."
This implies that the menace represented  by these men was
somehow  unreal,  a  figment  of  the  imagination.   Mr.  Dulles
said, "We forget  that  isolated individuals  [Fuehrer  and Duce
were  just  "isolated   individuals"—IPS]  could  never  prevail
against  world  sentiment  for  peace,  except  as  they  are  the
instrumentalities   of  powerful  underlying  forces.  It  is  these
which we must  identify and counteract  . .  ." _
And  what  were  these  "powerful  underlying forces"  which
had  to  be  counteracted?  "The  true  explanation  of  the  immi-
nence of war,"  Mr. Dulles continued, "lies  in  the  inevitability
of  change  and  the  fact  that  peace  efforts   have  been  mis-
directed  toward  the  prevention  of  change."
The  trouble  with  peace  plans,  Mr.  Dulles  wrote,  is  that
they  fail  to  take  into  account  "the  present  lack  of  any  ade-
quate  substitute   for   force  as  an  inducement  to   change."
If  only—Mr. Dulles implied—France, Poland, Ethiopia, China
could  be  induced  to   accept  "change,"   force   would   not   be
necessary ...
Peace  Downright Selfish
"It  is  easy,"  Mr.  Dulles  said,  warming  up  his  theme,  "to
explain  the  confounding  of peace with stability.  Those whose
lives  fall  in  pleasant   places  contemplate  with  equanimity
an   indefinite   continuation  of  their   present   state.   'Peace'
means to them that they  should be undisturbed.  'Aggression'
becomes  the  capital  international   crime  and  'security'  the
watchword.  The popular  demand for  peace  is thus capitalized
by those who selfishly  seek to have the  world continue as it  is."
"It  is  not  mere  coincidence," Mr.  Dulles  goes  on, "that  it
is  the  presently  favored  nations—France,  Great  Britain  and
the  United States—whose governments have been most active
in   devising  plans  for   perpetual  peace.   If   other   countries
like Germany, Italy and Japan," he continues suavely, "adhere
only  reluctantly  if  at  all  to  such, projects,  it  is  not  because
these  nations  are  inherently  warlike  or  bloodthirsty.   They
too want  peace, but  they  undoubtedly feel  within  themselves
potentialities   which  are  repressed  and  they  desire  to  keep
open  the  avenues of  change."
The  effect  was  to  picture  France,  Great  Britain  and  the
United  States  as  somehow in  the wrong.  Germany, Italy  and
Japan  were  not  "inherently  warlike  or  bloodthirsty."   They
just  wanted  "change."
It  was  in the light  of these  principles that  Mr.  Dulles  sur-
veyed  existing  treaties.   The  trouble  with  the  Covenant  of
the  League, he  said,  was  that  if  observed  "existing  frontiers
would  be  perpetuated  for  all  time,  save  as  one  state  freely
ceded  its  territory to  another."   This was "both   impracticable
and  undesirable."   The  Kellogg  pact  was  "perhaps  the  most
futile  of  all  peace  efforts"  because "force  is  thereby  forever
renounced  as  an  instrument  of  national  policy."
China,  Not Japan, Was At  Fault
Mr.  Dulles included  in his criticism  the  Stimson  doctrine of
"nonrecognition  of  the  fruits  of  aggression"   as   enunciated
"with  reference  to  the  situation  brought  about  by Japan  in
Manchuria."   (Note  the   delicacy  and  tact  of  Mr.   Dulles's
phrasing.)   He  did not  know  "whether  such  changes  as  have
been  occurring in the  Far  East  are  warranted  by the  facts"
but  he  thought  it  "at  least  conceivable  that  they  reflect  a
logical  and  inevitable  tendency."  If  so,  Mr.  Dulles  went  on,
he  saw  no reason why they  should  be  "held  in  suspense  until
that   hypothetical   date   when   China  was  prepared    freely
to  acquiesce  therein  so  that  the  change  could  no.longer  be
treated  as 'aggression'."
Rape  might  be  defended  the   same  way  by  saying  that
natural   passion  could  not  be  held  in   suspense  until  that
hypothetical  date  when  the  victim  was  prepared  freely   to
acquiesce  therein.
Mr.  Dulles  proceeded  to  contrast   such  ill-advised   efforts
to  "stabilize the  peace"  (his quotation marks, of course)  with
other  "events,  not  so  labelled,  which  have  perhaps  been  a
more  genuine contribution  to  peace."   He begins  with  British
renunciation  of  naval  supremacy, and  goes  on to  "the  return
to  Germany  of  the  Saar."   The  benefits  of  this  to  Franco-
German relations,  however, were "offset" by French insistence
on  German  disarmament.
Here  Mr.  Dulles  finally  came—among  these  "genuine  con-
tributions  to  peace"—to  what  Hitler  was  doing,  and  this  is
how  he phrased  it.  "Germany,"  Mr. Dulles said,  "had  become
increasingly  restless  . . . The time  had come  to  release her
from  the  treaty  limitations.   This  was  not  done,  with  the
result that  Germany, by unilateral  action, has now taken  back
her  freedom  of  action."  That's  all.
What  of  the  Locarno  Pact?   Mr.  Dulles  disparaged  it  as
"another   instrument   which   seeks   peace  by   perpetuating
frontiers."   But  it  at  least  had  the  virtue  of  being  limited.
"It  relates  only to  boundaries between  France,  Belgium  and
Germany.   Many  changes  can   occur   consistently   with   its
terms,  and  the  fact  that  the  parties  were  willing  to  make so
limited  a compact was interpreted  as implying the  possibility
of   changes  in  other  quarters.   Thus,  by  indirection,"  Mr.
Dulles  concluded,  "the  Locarno  Pact  may  have  served   the
peace."
This  veiled and  subtle  language  requires  some explanation.
The  Germans  at   Locarno  refused  to  include  their  eastern
frontiers  in  the  system  of  mutual  guarantees.  Poland  and
Russia  felt  that  Locarno was  a  menace because  it  left  open
the  door  to  German  aggression  eastward,  i.e.  to  pick up  Mr.
Dulles's  language,  it  implied  "the   possibility  of  changes  in
other quarters." Then as now, Mr. Dulles was for "liberation."
But  it would be hard to match the lush cynicism of the  double-
talk  with  which he then  served  as  apologist  for  appeasement.
9  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'a  Weekly,  July  S, 1954
The  Case  Against Paul  Crouch
Is Brownell  Afraid  of  Being  "Hoist  By  His  Own  Perjurer"?
The extent to  which the  government has become en-
meshed  in  the  toils  of  its  own  informers  may  be  seen  in  the
briefs  filed  with  the  Board  of  Immigration  Appeals  last  week
in  the  case  of  Jacob  Burck.    "Jake"  Burck  of  the   Chicago
Sun-Times  is one of  the  country's most  distinguished  cartoon-
ists,   the  recipient  of  many  honors,  including   the   Pulitzer
Prize.    He  has  been  ordered  deported  to  the  Poland  he  left  at
the  age  of  ten  because  two  decades  ago  he  was  for   a  short
time  a  member  of  the  Communist  party  and  a  cartoonist  for
the Daily  Worker.
Though  a  long  list  of  distinguished  men,  including Bishop
Sheil  of  Chicago,  have  come  to  his  aid, Burck  is  in  serious
danger  of  banishment  and  separation  from  his  American  born
wife  and  children.    Unlike  dozens of  obscurer  folk  being  put
through  the  deportation  mill on  the  grounds of  present or  past
membership  in   the   Communist   Party,   Burck   has  had   the
resources  to  counter-attack.     The  Immigration  and  Natural-
ization  Service  has  a  stable  of  ex-Communists  employed  as  in-
formers   in   deportation   cases.    The   two   produced  against
Burck   were   Paul   Crouch   and   Maurice   Malkin.    Burck's
lawyers  have  filed  separate  briefs  analyzing  the  confusions,
contradictions   and  perjuries  in   the  past   testimony  of   these
hired  witnesses.
The  kind  of  men  thus employed   may  be  seen  in  the
brief's  thumb-nail  biography  of  Malkin.    "He   entered   Sing
Sing   upon   conviction   for   a   particularly   brutal,   felonious
assault.   By his own  admission,  he obtained  citizenship  fraudu-
lently.    He  voted  illegally  for  many  years;  is  a  perjurer  by
his  own  admission and  the  finding  of  a  criminal  court   jury;
and  was  discharged  from  the  WPA  on  grounds  of   forgery,
fraud  and  falsification  of  time  sheets.    By  his  own  admissions
subject  to  denaturalization  and  guilty  of  espionage,  he con-
tinues  a  citizen and  unprosecuted  as he  continues  to   testify."
In  calmer  times,  the  testimony  of  such  witnesses would  be
rejected   as  tainted—not   merely  because  they   are  paid   to
testify  as  they  do,  but  because  if  they  ever  refused  to  testify
they   themselves  would   be   in   danger   of   prosecution   and
deportation.    Pay  and  blackmail shadow  their  words.
This  is  neither  the  end  nor the  worst  of  the  evil.
As  in  other   criminal   enterprises,   the   tool   can   menace  its
master.    This  was  demonstrated  when  Roy  Cohn introduced
in   the   McCarthy   hearings   a   seven-page  memorandum  by
Crouch  on  alleged  infiltration  of  the  armed  forces  by  Com-
munists.    The  man  employed  by  Brownelt  to  convict  scores
of    the    helpless   turned-   up    to    supply   ammunition    for
McCarthy's  attack  on  the  Eisenhower Administration.
The  27  affidavits  attached  to  the  Crouch  brief  in  the Burck
case  provide  a damning  record  of  perjury  by  this  professional
informer.    "I   am  amazed,"   Judge  Holtzoff   said  in  Federal
District  Court  here  after  Crouch   testified   in  the   Weinberg
case, "that  the  Immigration  and Naturalization  Service should
enploy him  as a member of  its staff."   An  honorable  Attorney
General  would  have  fired  Crouch  and  cleaned  out  that  stable
oi  informers long  ago.
But  the  momentum  of  events  has  put   Brownell  and   the
government  in  a position  where they can  no  longer  shake loose
from  their  hirelings.   Among  the  cases studied in  the  Crouch
brief  are  the  two  Steve Nelson  trials  in  Pennsylvania, at  least
one  Smith  Act   prosecution,  several  deportation  actions,   the
Bridges   trial   and   the   government's   registration    proceeding
against  the  Communist  Party  before  the  Subversive  Activities
Control   Board.    This  windbag,  this  self-confessed  cultivator
of  fantasy,  has  starred  in  all  of  them.    To  try  Crouch  now
for  perjury,  even  to  drop  him  from  the  payroll  without pun-
ishment,  would  admit  that  there  was  tainted  testimony  in  all
these  proceedings.
The man who hires a killer soon fears  for  himself.
So it  is with  the  man  who  hires  a  liar.    Crouch  has  powerful
friends  among  those  he  has  served  in  Congress.    He  testified
for  McCarthy   in  the  Government   Printing   Office   inquiry;
for  Eastland,  in  smearing  the  Durrs  and  Joseph  Lash.
Who  knows   what   Crouch   might  say  about   Brownell   if
Crouch  were  now  to  be  cashiered?   Who  knows  what  stories
he   might   furnish   McCarthy?     To   paraphrase  Gospel,   one
might  say  that  those  who  take  up  perjury  shall   themselves
perish  by  it.
Let  Us  Send  A  Sample  Copy  Free  To  Your  Friends
I.  F. Stone's Weekly, 301 E. Capitol,
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for th<
Name
Street.                              .              ...
City                                            7nn«-
Enter  this gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money
(To) Name
Street
City                                     7nne
Wash.  3, D
s  enclosed
State--
enclosed) :
State   . .
7-1
. c.
$5:
5-54
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  Se,  S.E.
Washington 3, D.  C
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED