I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jun14.pdf

============================================================

A  Bill  to  Curb  Freedom  of  the  Press  "Legally"—See  Page  Four
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2,  NUMBER  21
JUNE  14,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Split  Is  Over World  War  m,  Not  Indo-China
The   split   within   the   Elsenhower   Administration   is  not
merely  a  split  over  what  to  do  about  Indo-China.    The  divi-
sion  of  opinion   is  more  fundamental.    It   is  between  those
who  think  World  War  III  unavoidable,  and  those  who  believe
peace  is  possible.
Those  who  think  World  War  III  unavoidable  believe  the
U.S.  will  lose  it  unless  war  is  precipitated  before  the  Russians
have  a  long  range  continental  bomber  and  an  ample  supply
of  H-bombs.   This,  by  their  calculation, is two  or  three years.
The  Pentagon  Is  Also Divided
In   assessing   the   situation,  some  familiar   stereotypes   are
deceptive.   The  "Pentagon" and "the  military" are not  in  this
meaningful  concepts.    The  Army  Chief   of   Staff,  Ridgway,
and  the  Army  generally  (Van  Fleet  is  the  exception,  as  was
Mac Arthur)   tends  to  take  a  conservative  view,  quite  unlike
Radford  and  most  of  the  Air  Force  and  Navy  crowd.
There  is  one  report  in  Congressional  circles  that  Ridgway
was  so  strongly  opposed  to  intervention  in  Indo-China  that
he  threatened  at  one point  to  resign.    The  Army  view  reflects
the  thinking  of  the  infantry,  and  the  feeling  that  after   the
glamor   boys  of   the   Air   Force   get   through   it   is  still   the
foot   soldier  who  has  to   do  the  dirty   work   and   take   the
terrain.    Eisenhower,  as  an  Army  man,  shares  this  view.
The   conflicting   reports,   statements   and   speeches  out   of
Washington  become  less  confusing  if  read  not   as statements
of   policy,   but   as  efforts—by   sharply  differing    officials—to
win  public opinion  to  their  side.   Nixon,  Knowland,  Radford,
Carney   and  Dulles  have  all  been  trying   to   condition   the
public  mind  for  war.
"Big  Business" Also  Not  Single Minded
Another   deceptive  Leftist  stereotype  links  "big   business"
with  war.   "Wall  Street"  is also divided.   As  a matter  of  fact
the  only  organized  opposition  to  war  at  the  moment   comes
from   this  sector.    Its  two  spokesmen  in  the  Cabinet,   Secre-
tary  of   the  Treasury   Humphrey   and   Secretary   of  Defense
Wilson,  are  both  on  the  side  of  peace.   This  contrasts  sharply
—despite  another  stereotype—with  the  belligerence  or  cowed
silence  of  our  labor  leaders.
The  Carney  speech  was  an  indirect   reply  to  that  made  a
few   days  earlier  by  Secretary  Humphrey   at  the   Farm-City
Conference  in  New  York  City  where  he  received  a  Govern-
ment  Economy  Award  along  with  Hoover  and  Senator  Byrd.
The  Humphrey  stress  was  on  the  need  for  a  sound  economy:
"the  worth  of  our  defense  must  be  measured not  by  its  cost,
but  by  its  wisdom."    More  important   than  the  speech  were
the private talks in which Humphrey,  Hoover  and Byrd rallied
support  against  a  reckless  military   policy.
Wilson  Returns Unconvinced
The  Carney  speech,  though  cleared  only   as  a  "personal"
utterance,   made  page  one  headlines.    The   press  buried   the
more  important   address  last  week  by  Secretary  Wilson,  his
first   on  returning   from   the  Far  East,   though  it   reflected
dominant  policy.    It  got  a  big  play  in  the  British  press,  but
ours  is  so  conditioned   to  war  alarms  that   it   missed   what
Wilson  was saying.
Wilson  was prevailed  upon  by  the  "wild  men"  to  go out  to
the  Far  East  and  see for  himself  in  the  hope  that  he  might
change his mind  about  intervention.    He  came  back,  as might
have  been  expected,  more  strongly   confirmed  in  the  views
that  he  had  when  he  left.    He  is  stubborn,  shrewd  and  plain
spoken,  with  a  good  shop  foreman's  instinct  for  the  tangible
and  distrust  of  big  vague talk.
At  his  last  press conference  before  leaving,  Wilson  argued
against  an  oversimplified  view  of  the  Indo-Chinese  war.     "I
know,"  he  told   the   press,  "that  wars  aren't   things   to  be
quickly   rushed  into   and   it   is  going   to   require   a   lot  of
patience  and  understanding and  effort   to  avoid  war,  and  it's
worth   the  try."     He  warned  against  trying   to   police  the
world  alone and  ended by  asking  the  reporters,  "Do  you  think
the  American  people  think  we  ought  to  intervene  over  there
and  send  ground  troops  in  and  take  over  the  war?"
In  his  speech, Wilson struck  themes on  which  he  has  dwelt
before.    "War  and  the  preparation   for   war,"   Wilson   said,
"can   never  be  real  prosperity,   for   such  military  programs
absorb  materials  and   the   efforts   of   millions  of   people   that
could   otherwise  be  used   for   raising  the   standard   of  living
of  the  people."
Wilson  warned that  a  third  world  war  was not  the  answer
to  communism,  that  "even  a victory" in  such  a war  would  set
back  human  progress  and  that  after  it  was  over  we  would
still  be  faced  with  "the  problem  of  what  to  do."     He  sug-
gested  that  we  "strive  to  figure  out  what  it  would  take  to
win  the  peace  even  after  a  third  disastrous  war  in  the  hope
that  by  putting  those  policies  into  effect  now  before  such  a
war  the  war  itself   could  be  averted."    Nobody   in   govern-
ment  has spoken  quite  this way  since Wallace.
Duties  In  A  Slump
Despite   offstage   noises  by  Knowland,  the  interventionists
and  the  preventive  war  crowd  are  for  the  moment  defeated.
This  may  explain  the  apathetic  attitude  of  Secretary   Dulles
at  press  conference  last  week.    The  starch  has  gone  out  of
him.    But   the  situation   is  still  fluid,  the  enemies  of   peace
determined.    Miscalculations at  Geneva  or  in  Indo-China  may
yet  give  the  wild  men  their  chance.
8  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

t. F. Stone's Weekly,  Jitne  14,1954
As  Pressure  Builds  Up In the  Wake  of  the  McCarthy Hearings
Liberal  Democrats  Present A Fair  Play  Code Worth  Support
Capitol  Hill—That  joint  resolution  introduced  last  week
by  eighteen  Democrats  (and  one Independent)  in  the  Senate
and  six  in  the  House  for  reform  of  investigating  committee
procedure  is  worth  support,  and  would really  give  witnesses
some  protection   against  slander-by-investigation.    Pressure
for  a  "fair  play"  code  has  been  building  up  steadily  in  the
wake  of  the  McCarthy hearings.
The  obstacles:  despite  the  growing  Eisenhower-McCarthy
feud,  the  Republican  Senate   leadership  is  in  no  mood  to
curb  McCarthy's  powers;  the  White  House  either  hasn't  tried
or  can't  change  that  picture  (the  former  is  more  likely);
McCarthy's  friend,  Jenner,   is  chairman  of  the  Rules  com-
mittee;   and  the  Democratic  leadership  can't  make  up  its
mind.    "A  month  ago,"   said  one  Democrat   in  close  touch
with • this   picture,   "the   leadership   would  have  turned   ua
down   flat.   Now,  after   the  stir  caused  by  the  McCarthy
hearings,  they  aren't  quite  sure."   Factors  in  this indecisive
attitude:  a  disinclination  to  tangle  .with  McCarthy  and.an
unwillingness  to  curb committees  which will  be run  by Demo-
cratic  witch-hunters  like  McCarran  and  Eastland  if  the  Re-
publicans  lose  control  of  the  Senate  in  November.
The  Missing  Names  Are  The  Tip-Off
The tip-on* on the  situation  in the  Senate  lies  in the names
of  the  sponsors.   An  effort  was  made,  but  without  success,
to get  Republican support for  a bi-partisan  measure.   On the
Democratic  side,  only  "liberals"  could  be  marshalled.    Only
two  Democrats  from  the  South,  Sparkman  and  Hill  of  Ala-
bama,  were  among  the  sponsors,  and  neither   of  them   are
Southerners  who "really  count."   The party  leadership  today
is  with  the  Southern  conservatives;   Byrd  (Va.),  and  Russell
and  George  of  Georgia.    They  and  those  close  to  them  are
conspicuous  by  their  absence.    Beside  Morse  and  the  two
Senators  from  Alabama, the  sponsors were Kefauver  (Tenn.),
Lehman   (N.  Y.),  Douglas   (111.),  Anderson  (N.  M.),  Hum-
phrey   (Minn.),  Mansfield   (Mont.),  Green   (R.  I.),  Gillette
(Iowa),   Chavez   (N.  M.),  Hunt   (Wyo.),  Murray   (Mont.),
Neely  (W. Va.), Magnuson  (Wash.),  Gore  (Tenn.),  Hennings
(Mo.),  and  Pastore  (R.I.).   None  of  the  three  Democrats  on
the  McCarthy committee, neither  McClellan  (Ark.),  Syming-
ton  (Mo.) nor  Jackson  (Wash.)  were  among  the  sponsors.*
Yet  if  ever  there  was  an  opportune  time  for  a  campaign
to curb investigating  committees,  this is it.   The demand  was
strong  enough  to  make  the  Senate  Republican  Policy  Com-
mittee  go through  the  motions of reform  earlier  this  session.
The  7-point  program  announced  by  Knowland  for  the  com-
mittee  last  March  10  (see  this  year's  Con.  Rec.  p.  2795  for
text)   would  do  no  more,  however,  than  curb  one-man  rule
of  committees.   The  only  "right"  it  accorded  witnesses  was
one   they   already   have,   the   right   to   be  accompanied  by
counsel.   The joker in this  program  was  that  the Republican
Policy  Committee did  no  more than  authorize  its  chairman;
Ferguson  (Mich.), "to transmit" these  rules  as  "suggestions"
to  the  various  committee chairmen,  including  McCarthy.
Knowland  Wants  Action  Put   Off
Since  then  Knowland has  said  that  Republican  leadership
will  support  a  uniform  code  for  all  investigating  committees
but  he  wants  action  put  off  until  next  year.    Last  Monday,
in  an  effort  to  anticipate  the  Democratic  proposals,  a Repub-
lican,  Bush  (Conn.)  introduced a  proposed  .code,  but  without
the  support  of  his  party  leaders.    This  goes  far  beyond  the
7-point  program  in  curbing  one-man  rule  and  would  also
give   some   limited   rights   of   rejoinder,   explanation    and
written  interrogation  of hostile witnesses  to  persons involved
in  testimony or  releases  which  "may  tend  to  defame,  degrade
or  incriminate"  them  (text  Con. Rec.  May  24  pps.  6606-7).
* The  sponsors  on  the  House  side  are  Celler   (N.Y.).  Roosevelt   (N.Y.),
Yates   (111.),  Howell  (N.J.),  Rhodes  (Pa.),  and  Evins  (Tenn.).
The  liberal  Democratic  proposals  are  more comprehensive
and  more carefully  prepared  than  anything  yet  proposed  in
Congress.    They  also  have  the  distinction  of  providing  for
the  first  time  some  means  of  enforcement—a  Senate com-
mittee  of  five  members  to  which  complaints  could  be  made
of  unfair  procedure.    This  committee  in  turn  could  present
its  findings  to  the  Senate,  "with   such  recommendations  for
remedial  and  disciplinary   action,  if  any,  they  deem  appro-
priate."
The  proposed  "Code  of  Fair  Committee Procedure"  would
end  one  of  McCarthy's  favorite  practices—the  leak  of  one-
sided  accounts  from  executive  sessions.    It  would  forbid  the
issuance  of  any  testimony  "or  summary  thereof"  from   ex-
ecutive   sessions  without   majority   vote   of  the   committee.
Any  testimony  adversely   affecting   a   person  could  not   be
released  unless  "the  complete  evidence  or  testimony   offered
in  rebuttal  thereto" were  released  at  the  same  time.
Counsel  Allowed  Objections
For  the  first  time  defense  counsel  would  be  allowed  "to
make  brief   objections  to  the  relevancy  of  questions  and  to
procedure."     A  person  adversely  affected   would  have   the
right  to  recall  his  accuser  within  30 days,  to  cross-examine
him  (in  person  or  by  counsel)  and  "subject  to  the  discretion
of  the  committee"   to  subpoena  "witnesses,   documents  and
other  evidence  in  his  defense."
A  person  adversely  affected  by material  obtained  in  execu-
tive  session  would be given  the right  to  inspect  such  material
or  testimony  in  advance  if  it  were  to  be  made  public.   A
hostile  witness,  "may  be  required  by  the  committee to  dis-
close  his  sources  of  information,  unless  to  do  so  would  en-
danger  the  national   security."
Witnesses   would   be   given   the   right   to   explain   their
answers  briefly.    "At  least  24  hours"   before  testifying   a
witness  shall  be  given  a  copy  of that  portion  of  the  resolu-
tion  scheduling  the  hearing  and  stating  its  subject,  with  a
statement  of  "the   subject  matters  about  which  he  is  to  be
interrogated."    (This  notice  is  much  too  short   a  time  in
which  to  obtain  counsel  and  prepare  a  defense,  especially
since  counsel  for   such  purposes   are   not   easily   obtainable
in  this  atmosphere  and  charges  often  go  far   back  into  the
past  making  preparation  of  a  defense  difficult).    Insofar  as
practicable  adverse  material  before  its  release  "shall  be  first
reviewed  in  executive  session  to  determine  its  reliability  and
probative  value  and  shall  not  be  presented  at  a  public  hear-
ing  except  pursuant  to  majority  vote  of  the  committee."
It's  Sen.  Res. 256
These  are  the  high-lights .of  the  measure,  enough  to  show
that  unlike so many previous  proposals  these  would  begin  to
give  witnesses   some  substantial   protection.    (It   is  a  pity
the  sponsors  did  not  also  add  a  provision  permitting   wit-
nesses to be heard  through  counsel before a  contempt citation
is  voted).   The  "code"  would  not  end  the  witch  hunt—this
has  its  roots  in  the  confusion   which  permits  a   committee
of  Congress  to  engage  in  ideological  inquisition  and  to  oper-
ate  as  a  public roving  grand  jury  for  the  exposure  of  crime.
The  former   violates   the  First,  and  the  latter  the   Sixth,
amendment  to  the  Bill  of  Rights.
But  this  code  would  put   a  curb   on  the   worst   evils  of
McCarthyism and give victims greater power to  defend  them-
selves.   Now is the  time to write  your Congressman and your
Senators  for  action.    The  McCarthy hearings  are  educating
a  large  public  and  something  should  be  done  now  before
the  effects  wear  off.   S.  Res.  256 is  the  number  of  the  Fair
Procedure   Resolution.    Copies  can   be  obtained   from   any
sponsor  or read  at  pages  6812-13  of the  Congressional  Record
for  May  27.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  June  U, 1954
Witch  Hunt Bulletin; McCarran's Latest  Reported  Out
Right  to  Work  and Free Union  Elections  Endangered
Capitol   Hill—Without   a  dissenting   vote,   the   Senate
Judiciary  Committee has  favorably  reported  to  the  Senate
S.  23  by  McCarran,  which  would  make  it  unlawful  for  a
member  of  a  Communist  organization   (as  defined  by  the
Internal  Security  Act)  to  hold an  office  or a  job  in  a  labor
union  "and  to  permit the  discharge  by  employers  of  per-
sons  who are  members of  organizations designated  as sub-
versive  by  the  Attorney  General of  the  United  States."
Communist  "organizations,"  as  defined  by  the  Internal
Security  Act,  include both  "action"  organizations like  the
Communist  party  itself,  and  "fronts"   which  may  be  or-
ganized  for  lawful  purposes.   The  basic  premise of  the  bill
is  that  members  of  labor  organizations  cannot  be  trusted
to  choose  their  own  officials  and  that  the  State  may  void
an  election  won  by  a  Communist or  "frontier."
The  McCarran  bill  was  one  of  three  similar  measures
(the   other  two,  S.   1254  by   Goldwater   and  S.   1606  by
Butler)   on  which  hearings  were  held  earlier  this  year.
These   bills  raise  two  questions   for  the  future.   If   the
government  may  bar  Communists  from  labor  union  jobs,
can  it   also  bar  others  whose  views  may  be  considered
"subversive"?   The  other  is:  if  labor  union  members can-
not  be  trusted  to  choose  their  own  officials  by  ballot,  if
the  State  may  interfere  with  free  choice  to  bar "subver-
sive"  candidates,  can  it   interfere   with  free  choice  and
screen  candidates  for  Congress  or  other  public  office?    If
the  principle  is  allowed  in  the  one  case,  it   would   seem
equally  applicable in  the  other.
The  second  half  of  the  McCarran  bill,  according  to  the
description  by  the  Judiciary  Committee,  would  "permit"
employers  to  discharge  any  employee  who  is  a  member
of   an  organization  on  the   Attorney   General's  list,  who
conceals  such  membership, or  refuses  to  answer  questions
about  such membership put  by  a  duly  constituted  congres-
sional  committee.   The  bill  itself,   however,  merely  says
nothing  in  it  or any  other  act  "shall  preclude  an  employer
from   discharging"  an   employee  of   this   kind  "without
liability."
Until   now,  though   the  ambit  of   the  witch  hunt  has
widened  from  government  employment  to  defense   plants
to   port   facilities,   there   has   always  been   some   special
excuse  of   "security"  for  denials  of   the   right   to   work.
This  measure  applies  political  discrimination  nakedly  in
all  employment  to  members  of  any  organization  on   the
Attorney  General's  list.  The Committee in  its  report  says
naively  that  the  bill  involves  "no curtailment  of  the  right
to  work" because it  applies  only to those  who "voluntarily"
continue  their  membership in  such  organizations.   In  fact,
however,  the  worker  would  have  to  choose   between   his
daily  bread  and his  political  freedom.
Miscellany:  Dien  Bien Phu  Fell and  Mrs.  Nixon  Hit  The  Jackpot
Stiffening   Resistance   in  the  West:  "Because   of  a  party
held   at  the  French  Embassy  yesterday  afternoon,    $15,000
will  be  sent  to  the  wounded in  Indo-China.  It  wasn't  a  gay
dancing party such as the ball would have been that was origi-
nally  planned  for  last  night.  The  tragedy  of  Dien  Bien  Phu
changed  all  that.  But  it  was  a  charming  gathering  of  the
Capital's  creme  de  la  creme  society   who  had  paid  $25  per
and  were  concentrating  like  school  children   on  walking  off
with  one of  the  prizes  contributed  to. the  benefit  .  .  .  Mrs.
Nixon  hit  the  jackpot.   She won a  case  of French  champagne,
Schiaperelli  perfume,  a  compact  and Canadian  whiskey  .  . .
For  the  second  time  in  a  row  Mrs.  Joseph  E.  Davies  won a
fur   capelet—this  one a  blue  fox.   And  the  top  prize,  a  dia-
mond,  sapphire  and  gold  pin  from  Cartier's  went  to  Mrs.
Arthur  Woods,  niece  of  J.  Pierpont  Morgan."—Washington
Star  society  column, May 22.  Who dares say  the  "free world"
does  not  offer  rewards  as  glittering  as  those  of Communism
to  keep  up  the  spirits  of its  partisans?
Dies  Agrees  With  Sidney  Hook: "I  would  defend,"  said  the
Texan  in  a  radio  interview  with  Congressman   Stuyyesant
Wainwright  May  23,  "the  right  of  anyone  to  believe  in  and
to  preach  communism  as  such,  or  socialism,  or  any  other
heresy,  or so-called  heresy.  It  isn't that.  It's  the fact  that the
people  who now belong  to  the  Communist party  have  shown
by  their  deeds  that  they  are  criminals."   The  New  Republic
picked  another  advocate  of this "heresy, yes—conspiracy,  no"
line,  Sidney  Hook, to  review  Henry  Steele  Commager's  new
book  defending  civil  liberties.   The  result   was  about  what
might  have  been  expected.   The  New York   Journal-American,
which  not  so  many  years  ago  was  attacking  Hook's   right
(as  a  Marxist)  to  teach, reprinted  the  review  on its  editorial
page  May  28  under  the  heading,  "What  'Liberals'  Forget."
Hook   thought   Commager   paid   too  little  attention   to   the
problem  of security  risks,  and  the  NR,  of course,  did not point
out  that  by prevailing  standards  Hook  is a  security  risk,  too.
Page  Velde:  A  State  circuit  court  judge  in  Alabama  has
declared  unconstitutional  a  textbook  labelling law  much  like
that  suggested   by  Chairman  Velde  of  the  House  Un-Ameri-
can   Activities   Committee  for   all   books  in  the   Library  of
Congress.   The law would  have required  all  textbooks  to carry
a  statement  "indicating  clearly  and  with  particularity"  not
only the  answer  to the  $64 question  about  the  author  but  also
whether  the  author  of  "any  book  or writings  cited  therein  as
parallel  or additional  reading  is or is not a known advocate of
communism or Marxist socialism," a Communist  or a  member
of  a  "front"  organization.   Though  the  law  passed  with  only
one  dissenting  vote,  the  State  has  decided  not  to  appeal  the
decision.   A  survey  had  shown  that  at  Alabama  Polytechnic
alone,  the  law would have required  labelling  of  150,000  books
and  checking  some  42,000,000  other  authors   cited  in  them.
The court  called  the  act  "completely  unworkable."
Civil  Liberties  a  la  Hollywood: The militant  Southern  Cali-
fornia  branch of the  American  Civil Liberties  Union  recently
acquired  an  advisory   council  on  which  the  most   glamorous
name  is that  of  Dore  Schary.   Schary's  first  "advice" was  to
threaten  his resignation  unless the  ACLU cancelled the  meet-
ing  of  May  28  last  at  which  Corliss  Lament  was  to  have
spoken  on  Congressional   inquisition.   P.S.   The  meeting  was
cancelled, though  Lamont protested  that  in  30 years of public
speaking  he had  only  once before  had  a  meeting  cancelled  on
him.
Mystery:  Last  August  23 Robert  A.  Vogeler  filed  suit  for
$500,000  in  New York  against  I.  T.  & T.  "for  what  I  went
through"  during   and  after   his  imprisonment  in   Hungary
where  he  was  arrested  for  espionage.   The  suit  was  settled
out  of  court  last  week,  reportedly   for  $55,000.   Puzzle:  if
Vogeler  was  unjustly  accused,  how was  I.  T.  & T.  liable  for
what  happened  to  him in  Hungary?
All  He  Needs:  "Finally  we  should  let   Chiang  Kai-shek,
who now has  23 divisions of well-trained  soldiers  on  Formosa,
know  he  has  our  approval  if  he  decides  to  return  with  his
troops  to  the  mainland   of  China"—Joe  McCarthy,   Senate
floor,  May  19.
Pitfalls   of  Prophecy:   The  June   11  issue   of  U.S.  News,
which  appears  on the  newstands  June  8, featured  an  article,
"Why   Stocks   Are   Higher."   That   same   day  the   market
suffered  the  sharpest  break  in four  years.  Peace  jitters?
Recommended:   "What    Every    American    Should   Know
About   Indo-China"   in   the   June,   1954,   issue   of   Monthly
Reveiw, 66 Barrow  St.,  N. Y. 14 . . .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  U, 1954
The St.  George Bill  for  a Postal  Censorship
A Way  to  End  Freedom  of the  Press  "Legally"
HR  9317  is a  bill  to  prohibit "the  transmission  through
the  mails  at. less  than  cost"  of  papers,  magazines,  books  and
films  "containing  material  contrary  to  the  best  interests  of
the  United  States."   The  phrase  "less  than  cost" refers  to  the
special  second   class,  bulk   mail  and   book   rates  allowed   for
various   types  of  printed   matter.    These   rates  are  so  much
below   ordinary   rates   that   few   publications   could   survive
the   loss  of   their   second   class  mailing  privileges.    This  is  a
bill  to  drive  radical  papers,  films  and  books  out  of  business.
The  sponsor  of  HR  9317  is  Mrs.  Katherine  St.  George,  an
upstate  New  York  Republican.    In  introducing   the  bill,  she
said  she favored  the  exclusion  of  such  material from  the  mails
altogether.     "But,"   she   said,   "objections   have   been  raised
against  such  a  sharp  departure  from  past  policy."    (Freedom
of  the  press?)    Mrs.  St.  George  went  on  to  explain  that  these
objections  were  based on hostility  "to  censorship which  would
of   necessity  be  a  part  of  the  administration  of  such  a  pro-
hibition."    She  herself   seems  to  regard  this  innovation  with
equanimity,  and  indeed  told  the  House  she  sees  her  bill  as  "a
first  step,  a  long  first  step"  toward  exclusion.
In  this she did  not  exaggerate.  This   bill  involves
censorship   by   the   postal   authorities  in   as  full   a  degree  as
would  a bill  to  exclude from  the  mails.   The  Postmaster  Gen-
eral  would  be  instructed  to  revoke  or  deny  the  special  mail
rates" to  any  "publication,  book,  film  or  printed  matter"  con-
taining   (the  actual  words  deserve  careful  reading)   "Material
which  advocates,  advises,  or  teaches,  or  explicitly   or  by  im-
plication   favors   the   political,   economic,  international,  and
governmental  doctrines  of  communism  or  any  other  totalitar-
ian  form   of  government,  or  the  establishment  in  the  United
States or any  foreign  state  of  a Communist  or other  totalitarian
dictatorship."
These  words  have  the  full  flavor  of  dementia  americana.
One   can  see  brigades  of  postal  inspectors,   specially  certified
by  the  literary  division  of  the  FBI  as  politically  pasteurized
for  their  delicate task,  determining what  magazines  and  books
may  "by  implication"   favor  "the   political,  economic,  inter-
national   and   governmental   doctrines   of   communism."     A
book  or  paper  which  pleads  for  peace  might  be  open  to  loss
of   postal   privilege   as  by   implication   favoring   one  of   the
"international  . . .  doctrines  of communism."    And if  people
like Westbrook  Pegler  had  their  way  (and Mrs.  St.  George  is a
Peglerite),  a  paper  favoring   the  income   tax   would   also  be
vulnerable,  since  the  income  tax   (as  we  are  constantly  being
reminded)   was  advocated   by   the   Communist   Manifesto  a
century  ago,  and  is  therefore  Communist  economic  doctrine.
The  bill would  make discussion  of  foreign  policy
hazardous.    It   would   apply  to  anything  favoring  "commu-
nism  or  any  other  totalitarian  form  of  government"
(
 and  to
the  establishment  of  such  government  not  only  in  the  United
States  but  in  "any  foreign  state."   A  newspaperman or  writer
who  had  a  good  word  to  say  for  Communist  China  would  be
in  danger  of  losing  his  postal  privileges—as  would  one  who
praised Franco Spain or  those  dictatorial  Latin  American  good
neighbors  of   ours.
Mrs.  St.   George   herself   gave  the   House   a  list  of  papers
and  magazines which  would  at  once  be  affected.    No   rightist
publication,  even  of  the  most  paranoid  type,  was  on  her  list.
All   those  she  named  were  Leftist  of   one  kind  or  another,
including  the  Lawyers  Guild  Review   (but  not—touch  wood
—this  Weekly).   The  postal  ban  would  apply  at  once  to every
publication  on  the  House  Un-American  Committee's   notori-
ous  "Guide,"  America's  own  index  expurgatorius;  to  those  on
the  Attorney  General's  list  and  to  publications  of  any  organ-
ization  ordered  to  register  under  the  Internal  Security   Act.
The  Guide  and  the  "list,"  of  course,  are  drawn  up  without
hearings  of  any  kind.
A Postmaster General under a McCarthyite Presi-
dent   could  use  these  powers  effectively  against  a  wide  range
of  opposition  papers.    This  is  one  of  the  devices which  could
some  day  be  used—it  is  not  too  early   to  think  about   such
things—to  end   freedom  of   the  press  in  America  "legally."
The   scheduled  hearing   on   this  bill  last  Tuesday   was  sud-
denly  postponed,   but   the   more  protest   the  better,  and  as
many organizations as possible  should ask to  be heard against  it.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301  E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my. sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name._____
Street____________
City___________
Zone...,___  State._
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name_____.___.__..________________
Street___________________.________
City-
Zone____.  State_._._
t-14-54
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  20$
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED