I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954aug09.pdf

============================================================

Special  from Paris:  The  True  Meaning of  the  John  Affair,  Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 29AUGUST  9,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
The  High  Cost  of the  Anti-Communist   Mania
There  was  one  scene,  in  the  final  minutes,  before  the  tense
galleries,  after  three  days  of  debate on  McCarthy,  with  tired
and  impatient  Senators crying  "vote,  vote",  that  would  have
entranced   the   creator  of   Babbitt.     Capehart,   that   rotund
Midwestern  business  man,  was  on  the  floor  in  a  final  plea
to  table  any  resolution  of  censure.   "There  have  been  times,"
Capehart   told   a  Senate  which   could   not   have   cared  less,
"when,  if  I  could  have  gotten  hold  of  him,  I  think  I  would
have  thrown  him  out.    There  have  been  other  times  when  I
thought,  'by  golly,  there  is  a  great  guy'."    Capehart  was
maneuvering  into  position  to  agree with  both  the  pro's  and
the  anti's  when  he  got  back  to Indianapolis.
It  was comic, as comic as Welker's  assurance that  McCarthy
must  be  a  good  man  because  he  loved Welker's  children  "and
he  loves  the  children  of  almost  every  other  Senator."     But
amid  the  burlesque, Capehart's  main  point  faithfully   reflected
the  confusions  which  haunt  Main  Street.    Capehart  declared
"out   of  one  corner  of  our  mouths"  we  say  we  want  billions
of  dollars  to  fight  communism.    We  say  "We  are  going  to
send  your  boys  all  over  the  world.    You  may  have  a  third
world  war."    Yet,  Capehart  continued,  "on  the  other  hand"
we  say  "We  do  not  like  McCarthy  because  he  is  a  little  too
rough  and  a  little  too  tough  with  these  so-called  Commun-
ists."    How  explain  that  in  South  Bend  or  Little  Rock?
How  Fight McCarthy?
This  is  the  heart  of  the  Senate's  difficulty.     This  is  why
for  the  sixth  time  in  six  years  (since  the  Malmedy  inquiry
in  1949)  the  Senate is wearily setting  up  yet  another  commit-
tee  to  investigate  charges  against  McCarthy  with   no  more
prospect  than  in  the  past  of   a  decision.    McCarthy   is  re-
sourceful,  unscrupulous  and  wily,  but   the  Senate  is  full  of
politicians  as  deft  and  clowns  as  crafty.    They  would  have
brought  him  down  long  ago if  it  were  not  for  the  dilemma
created  by  our  own  demonology.    If  Communists  are  some
supernatural  breed  of  men,  led  by  diabolic  master  minds  in
that   distant   Kremlin,  engaged   in   a  Satanic  conspiracy   to
take  over   the  world   and  enslave  all  mankind—and   this  is
the  thesis endlessly propounded  by  American liberals  and  con-
servatives  alike,  echoed  night  and  day  by  every  radio  station
and  in  every  newspaper—the  thesis  no  American  dare  any
longer   challenge  without   himself   becoming   suspect—then
how  fight  McCarthy?
If   the  public  mind  is  to  be  conditioned  for  war,  if  it  is
being  taught  to  take  for  granted  the  destruction  of  millions
of   human  beings,  few  of  them   tainted  with   this   dreadful
ideological  virus,  all  of  them  indeed  presumably  pleading  for
us  to  liberate  them,  how  can we  argue that  it  matters  if  a few
possibly  innocent   men   lose  jobs  or   reputations   because  of
McCarthy?     Is  not   this  additional   cost  too  slight,  are  not
the   stakes   too   great?     How   contend    for     constitutional
niceties  while acquiescing in  the  spread  of  poisonous  attitudes
and  panicky emotions?
How  Resist  Rhee?
Similar   questions  were  raised  by   that   other   momentous
scene  of   the  past  week,  when  the  Congress  in  joint  session
greeted   with  shocked  silence  Syngman  Rhee's  summons   to
preventive  war.    The  common  currency  day  in  and  day  out
of  Congresional  discussion  is  the  impossibility  of  dealing with
the  Russians, the  wickedness of  recognizing  the  Chinese,   the
danger  in  permitting  East-West   trade,   the  impossibility   of
reconciling   communism  and   capitalism,  the   wickedness  of
those  who  speak  of  co-existence.   If  these  are  the  assumptions
of   our  national  policy,  how  avoid  the  Syngman  Rhee  logic
which flows from  them?   Is it  not  better  to  fight  now?    Will
not  the  struggle  be  worse  the  longer  it  is delayed?
The   silence   which  so  pained  Rhee  indicated   eloquently
that  behind  the  febrile  rhetoric   are  sober  men,  prepared  in
fact   to  reconcile  themselves  to  the  co-existence  whose  pos-
sibility  they  deny.    The  danger  in  the  rhetoric  is  that   they
dare  not  admit  publicly,  indeed  hardly  avow  to  themselves,
the  saner  calculations  of  their  actual  policy.    They  are  thus
prevented   from   building  up   public   support   for   the   very
policies  their  silence  implies.   They  can  still  say  "no"   unmis-
takably  when  this  maniacal  old  man  from  Korea plainly  puts
the  proposition  for  war.    But  the  atmosphere  they  help  every
day  to  thicken  makes  it  more  difficult   to  say  "no"   if  Rhee
goes  back  home  and  puts  the   question  more  slyly.    If   he
creates  an  incident,  or  stages a  provocation,  if  he  precipitates
war,  how  refuse  to  support  him?   Who  will  dare  say in  any
situation  that  the  Communists   were  not  to  blame?    Have
we  not  placed  ourselves  more  and  more  at  the  mercy  of  a
Rhee  abroad,  as of  a  McCarthy  at  home,  by  the  steady  pro-
pagation  of  paranoid  attitudes  on  Communism?
Writ  in  the  skies  of  the  H-bomb  era  is  the  warning  that
mutual  destruction  is  the  alternative  to  co-existence.   Until
there  is  a  national   leadership  willing  to   take   a   pragmatic
view  of  revolution,   a  charitable  and  Christian   view  of   the
misery  that  goes  with  the  great  rebirths  of  mankind,  a  self-
respecting  view  of  the  example a free America  can  set  and  the
constructive   leadership  an  unafraid  America   can   give,  we
cannot  fight  the  drift  to  Fascism  at  home  and  war  abroad.
We  cannot   inculcate   unreasoning  hate  and  not  ultimately
be  destroyed  by  it  ourselves.    We  who  prate  constantly  of
"atheistic  communism"   forget  that  this  is what  all  the  great
Teachers  of  mankind have taught.   There is a retribution that
lies  in  wait  for  the  arrogant  and  the  self-righteous.    'Where
is  the  man  big  enough  to  reach  the  American   people  with
this  message before  it  is too  late?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  9, 1954
A French Expert on German Affairs  Discusses Dr. John's Flight  Eastward
Behind  The  Scenes  of  German  Intelligence
By  Bertrand  Ferney
Special  Writer  on  German  Affairs  for  L'Observateur
Paris—Western Germany has three organizations  of  espion-
age:   (1)  the  Federal  office  for  the  protection  of the  Constitu-
tion  at  Cologne, of which  Otto John  was  the  director,   (2)  the
organization    headed   by   the   ex-Hitlerite   General   Gehlen,
situated  at  Pullach,  near  Munich,  (3)  the  counter-espionage
section  of the  "Bureau  Blank," the  nucleus of the future  War
Ministry  of  the  Bonn  government.
The  first  was  created  in  1950.   Its   official  purpose  was  to
protect  the  young  German  republic   (established  in  the  Pall
of  1949),  against  the  threat  of  neo-Nazism  as  well  as  Com-
munist   infiltration   from  the  Eastern  zone.   Its  network  of
agents   was  not  allowed  to  operate   beyond  the  frontiers  of
Western   Germany.   German  rearmament  had  not  yet  been
decided  upon  and  it  was  then  out  of  the  question  for   the
Western  allies  to tolerate a  German espionage service  abroad.
Evidently  that  did not  prevent  the  four  occupying powers
from  utilizing "local talent" in their  own intelligence  services.
In  1954 the  Americans  captured  Brigadier  General Reinhardt
Gehlen  and  immediately  put  him  to  work.   During  the  war
Gehlen  had  been  the  chief  of  the  Nazi  espionage  section   for
the  Russian  front.   The  Americans  set  him  up  in  a  head-
quarters  near  Munich  covering  35 acres  entirely  surrounded
by barbed  wire  and  containing  its  own shops  and  schools.
Unlike  the   office   headed  by  Dr.  John,  that  which   was
established  under Gehlen was  planned for  offensive  purposes.
Ever  wider  tasks were  assigned  to  it.  At  present  its  network
of  agents  covers  not  only the  Soviet  zone  of  Germany but  the
"Popular  Democracies"  and  the  U.S.S.K.  and  extends  as  far
as  China.
Bitter  Rivalry Between Them
The  relations  among  these  three  agencies  were  bad.   In
addition  to  the  personal  rivalries  common in  this  type  of  or-
ganization,  there  existed  among  them  genuine  differences  of
principle.   Dr.  John   was   violently  opposed  to  the   Gehlen
organization   and  complained  regularly   to   Bonn  about  the
activities  of  this  espionage  center,  staffed  with  former  high
officials  of  the  Nazi  regime.  But  it  was  known  in  Bonn that
Dr.  John  did  not  have  the  ear  of  Adenauer.   Dr.  John  had
been  presented  to  the  Chancellor  before  his  appointment   to
office,  but  had  never been  received by  Adenauer since.
The   Chancellor  on  the  other  hand   is  very  proud  of  the
Soviet  bloc  intelligence  of  which  he  can  make  use  at  inter-
national   conferences,  thanks   to   the   Gehlen   organization.
Despite   the   occupation   statute,  this   American   espionage
center   communicates  directly   with   the   Western   German
government,  which  has  become  its  real  directing  authority.
Last  December  11  Gehlen  addressed  a  secret  session  of  the
Parliament  at  Bonn and  obtained  a  considerable  success.
The  authorities at  Bonn in  their  relations with  the  Ameri-
cans  make  much  of  the  role  they  can  play  in  Europe  by
virtue  of  the  fact  (1)  that  Western  Germany is free  of Com-
munism  and  (2)  that  it  possesses the best specialists and un-
equalled  sources  of  information   (Soviet   zone  contacts,  re-
patriated   war   prisoners,  etc.)   on  questions  pertaining   to
Russia.
Bonn's  Anti-Soviet  Ambitions
Bonn  believes  it  ought  to  handle  for  the  United  States  all
espionage   and   agitational   activities  within   the    European
portion  of  the  Soviet  bloc.   In  this  connection  the  Germans
have  recently  developed  their  contacts  with  various  groups
of  refugee  politicians from  Eastern  Europe;  according  to  the
Germans,   the   propaganda   of   the   American   organization
"Free  Europe"  has  almost  completely  failed.
No  less  than  11 institutes  for  the  study  of  East  European
questions  are   already  functioning  in  West   Germany.   The
Gehlen  organization  has  also  developed  an  internal  German
network  which had  begun  to  compete directly  with  the  work
of  Dr.  John's   organization.   Last  June  28,  Bonn's   Minister
of  the  Interior,  Dr.  Schroeder,  informed  the  latter  that  the
government  had  decided  to  do without  its  services.
The  Chancellor  had  never  pardoned  Dr.  John  for  having
furnished  several  months  ago  the  information  on  which  the
British  journalist   Sefton  Delmer  (Dr.  John's  former  chief
in  the  intelligence service  at  the  end  of  the  war)  in  a  series
of  articles   for  the   London  Daily  Express   had  exposed  the
return  of former  Nazis to important  posts  in the  Bonn  regime.
One  can  say  that  whatever   were  the   services   rendered
to  the  Federal  government  by  Dr.  John's  organization  (and
it  had  recently  been  accused  of  unlawful  surveillance    over
the   Chancellor's   personal   opponents),  it  was  slated   to  be
supplanted  finally  by the  Gehlen organization.
Why  The Flight  Eastward?
But  it  still remains to be known just why these  facts should
have led Dr. John  to East Berlin.  None of his detractors have
suggested  that  he  was  a  Soviet  agent.   Besides,  some  time
ago,  he  had  informed   the  British  authorities  in   Germany
that  a  former  Nazi  diplomat, Herr  Zu Putliz,  had  come  from
Eastern  Germany  to  ask  him  to  work  for  the  Russians.   Dr.
John  had  demanded that  they  arrest  Putliz.   Sefton  Delmer
said  of  Dr. John:  "I  know  that  he  detests  the  Soviet  system
even more than Hitlerism."
Dr. John's relations with  British  Intelligence  are  less  clear.
While it  is certain that the British favored  his appointment  in
charge  of  German intelligence,  it  is  also true that  the  official
responsible  for  the  appointment,  the  former  Bonn  Minister
of  the  Interior,  Dr.  Lehr,  said:  "I  made  my decision  without
pressure  from  any  of the  occupying powers."
There  is  one  fact  on  which  all  those  who  know  Dr.  John
agree—his hatred for  the  Nazis.   After  the frustration  of the
July  20  (1944)  plot  against  Hitler, he fled to  Spain  and from
there  to  Portugal  and  Britain.   His  brother  was  hanged  for
his  part  in  the  same  affair.   Those  who witnessed  the  recent
ceremony  in  Berlin  commemorating the  plot  noticed  the tears
and  even  sobs which drew reproachful  looks toward  him from
bystanders.   His  conduct from  the  time  of  his  landing at  the
Berlin   airdrome  was  very   strange:  in  the   course  of   the
official  reception he hardly responded  to questions and  did not
seem  to  recognize old  friends.
Feared  Return of  the  Nazis
Those  who  knew  him   well   are   convinced  that  his   dis-
appointment  in  the  continued  partition   of  Germany  and  in
the  return  to  power  of  ex-Nazis  in  ever  greater   numbers
pushed  him into fleeing beyond the  Iron  Curtain.  Karl Robson
of  the  London  News-Chronicle  tells  the  following  story:  "I
saw  him  enter  my  room  in  Bonn  one  day  last  year.   He
clicked  his  heels  and  gave  that  intensely  Prussian  half  bow
he so much  detested.  'Do not laugh,' he said, 'It is no laughing
matter.   They  are  coming  back,  and  believe  me,  they  have
learned  nothing.  I  am  terrified  when  I  think  of  Germany,'
John  told  me, 'and  with  all  the  Nazis  that  we  see  returning
to  important  posts,  I  would  not  give  much  for  my  chances
when  the  allies  have  left.'"
Sure  of  being  dismissed  when  the  occupation  ended,  seeing
himself  surrounded by hatred  or  contempt,  Dr. John  (accord-
ing  to   some  reports)   took  to  drink.   He  seemed  to   have
wanted  to  anticipate   his  ultimate   discharge  and  sought  to
create a  sensation.  Kemembering the  excitement  provoked  by
the  flight  of  the  British  diplomats  Burgess  and  MacLean  to
the  U.S.S.R.,  Dr.  John  wished  by  his  departure  and  his  dec-
larations  on the  East  Berlin  radio  to  awaken  the  conscience
of  his  countrymen and  to  warn  them  that  continued partition
of  the  Reich must lead  to  war.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  9, 1954
Celler  Leads  Minority  Protest  as  House  Passes  Immunity  Bill
"By This  Device ... We Turn  Men  of Conscience into  Informers"
A  complex immunity   bill  (S  16 amended)  was  reported  out
by  the  House  Judiciary  Committee  last  Tuesday   and  passed
293  to  55  after   a  scant  40  minutes  of  debate  the  following
day.   While  the  Democratic  leader,  Rayburn   (Tex.)  and  the
party   whip,  McCormack   (Mass.)  failed   to  vote,  Celler  (D.,
N.Y.), ranking  minority  member  of  the  Judiciary   Committee,
made   a  passionate   plea  against   passage   to  an      indifferent
chamber.  Multer   (D.,  N.Y.)  and  Dodd   (D.,  Conn.),  an  ex-
FBI  man,  joined  him  in  opposing  the  bill, assisted  by  friendly
questions   from   Klein    (D.,   N.Y.)   and   Javits    (R.,  N.Y.).
Multer   protested   that   the  House  was  being  rushed  into   a
vote  on  a  complicated  measure  without  adequate  time  to  ex-
amine  it  or  read  the  committee  report,  which  was  not  avail-
able  until  Wednesday  morning.
The   House   bill,  as  revised   by  Keating   (R.,  N.Y.)   and
Walter   (D.,  Pa.),  rejects   Brownell's  request  to  grant   the
Attorney  General  authority  in  all  cases  to  compel   testimony
on   grant    of   immunity    to   witnesses   before    Congressional
committees,  grand  juries  and  courts.,  Instead  it  provides  that
such  grant   can  be  made  only   on  application  to  a  Federal
district   court  judge,   and  in  cases  involving   danger  to  the
national  security  or defense.   It  differs    sharply  from  S  16, the
McCarran  bill  passed  last  year  by  the  Senate,  which  would
give   immunity    power   to   Congressional   committees.    This
difference     may    lead   to   a   clash  between   the   two   Houses,
blocking  passage  this  late  in  the  session.
We  here  present  the  heart  of  the  minority   report  filed  on
this  historic  measure  by  Congressman Celler  and  three  other
members  of  the  Judiciary   Committee,  Sidney   A.  Fine   (D.,
N.Y.),  Byron  S.  Rogers   (D.,  Colo.)  and  Usher  L.  Burdick
(R.,  N.D.).   There  is  still  time  to  write  your  Senator  and
help   block  this  measure  in  the  Senate.   The  excerpts   which
follow   are  from   House  Rep.  No.  2606,  to  accompany  S  16
amended:
"It  is  true  that  Congress  has  authorized  the  granting of
immunity  by  a   number  of  Federal   agencies   to   witnesses
appearing  before  such  bodies.  But  this  has  been  principally
confined  to  hearings  on  specific  violations  of  statutes  which
such  regulatory   authorities   are  entrusted   to  enforce  or  to
hearings   and   investigations   conducted  in  connection  with
specific statutory powers..  Furthermore the functions of these
agencies  are  generally  related  to  the  field  of  economic  regu-
lation  where  their  inquiries  touch  more  upon  the  rights  of
corporations,   to   Which   no   privilege   aganst   incrimination
attaches,  than  to  the  rights  of  individuals.   Moreover,  wit-
nesses  before  these  agencies  have  recourse  to  the  courts  in
matters  relating  to  their   immunization.   The  court  is  the
final  arbiter  . .  .
Congress  Is  Not  a  Grand  Jury
"What  legislative  lack  does the  reported  bill  fill?  It  is  not
the  function  of  Congress  to  expose  private   personal  guilt.
It  is  not the  function  of  Congress to  prepare  cases  for  prose-
cution.   It   is  not  the   function   of  Congress   to  relieve  the
executive  branch  of  the  Government  of  its  constitutional   re-
sponsibility   of   law   enforcement.    When   a   committee   of
Congress  investigates,  it  does  so  to  gather  evidence  for   its
own  purposes, that  of  legislating  wisely  and  adequately.   The
investigations  of Pearl  Harbor,  Teapot  Dome, the  work  of  the
Truman  Defense  Committee and  the  La  Follette  Civil  Liber-
ties  Committee did  not  suffer  for  lack  of  congressional power
to  immunize  witnesses.   In  the  areas   of  treason,   sabotage,
espionage,  sedition, the  Communist conspiracy,  etc.,  the  Con-
gress has  not heretofore  hesitated  to legislate, though  lacking
power  of  immunization,  session  after  session  in  its  history.
"The  sought  after  evidence  of  the  recalcitrant  witness  can
now  give  up—what?   More  of  the  same  thing?   The  facts  of
the  evil  and danger  of the international Communist conspiracy
have  been  spread  before  Congress  by  a  march  of  voluntary
witnesses, ranging from  employes of the  FBI  to  the  ubiquitous
ex-Communists.  Beyond that lie only the  exposure  and  prose-
cution  of  guilt, which  is  the  business  of  the  executive.
"Neither  court  nor  grand  jury,  the  Congress,  through  its
investigating   committees,  grants  its   witnesses   neither  the
judicial  safeguards   of  the  courts,  nor  the  secrecy  of  grand
jury  proceedings.   The  committees'  simulation   of  both  court
and  grand jury,  strengthened  by the  provisions  of this  bill,  is
derogatory   of  both  the  Congress  and  the  witness.   The  com-
mittee  may  throw  the  cloak  of  immunity  around  the  witness
and  preclude  his  prosecution,  but  no  shield  stands  between
the  witness  and  the  social  ostracism,  the  loss  of  employment,
the  denial  of  a  passport,  or  housing  in  a  Federal  project,  or
membership  in  a  trade  union  or  association,  all  possible  con-
sequences flowing from  forced  testimony.   Remember,  we  are
dealing  here  with   the  helplessness   of  an  individual   before
the  power  of  an  arm  of  the  state,  the  very  base  upon  which
the  constitutional  prohibition  against  self-incrimination  rests.
Joseph   N.  Welch,  counsel  for  the  Army  in  the   Army-Mc-
Carthy  hearings, has  eloquently  stated:
Joseph  N.  Welch  on  the  5th  Amendment
" 'Our  Founding  Fathers  were  familiar  enough  with  the
history   of  the  Middle  Ages  to  know  that  "justice"  in  that
time  took  some  peculiar  forms.   They  knew  that  the  formal
trial  of  a  citizen  often  began  by placing  him to  torture, with
someone  standing  by to take  down that  era's equivalent  of  a
stenographic   transcript  of  the  "confession"   he  made  in  his
agony.   The  transcript  was  then   piously   and   lugubriously
produced  in  court  as  proof   of  the   poor  devil's  guilt.   The
framers   of  the   Bill  of  Rights   were   determined   that  this
should  never  happen  in  this  fair  country  of  ours  and  in  this
spirit  they wrote the Fifth  Amendment. . .'
"By  this  device  to  compel testimony,  we turn  men  of  con-
science  into  informers.   This  is  nasty  business.    There  are
those  who in  the  1920's, misunderstanding  or  disbelieving  the
nature  of  the  Communist evil,  flirted  for  a  period  with  Com-
munist   and  Communist  front   organizations.    In    testifying
they  retreat  behind  the  wall  of  the  Fifth   amendment,  not,
as   some  have  said,  to  hide  their  own  involvement,  but   to
shield  from  public  expose  friends  and   neighbors   who  may
have  been  similarly  and  innocently involved.
"Human  frailty  is  such that  compulsory testimony  can  and
has  acted in the past to idemnify  rogues,  encourage  those who
wish  to  curry  favor   with  the   examiners,   and  to   open  up
avenues  leading  to  speculation,  exaggeration  and  lies.   The
malevolent,   the   wicked   and   frightened    would   testify   as
desired ...
The  Price  of  Freedom
"It  is  admitted  that  there  are  those  who testifying   before
Congressional  committees   abuse  the  privilege  against   self-
incrimination  accorded  by  the   Constitution.   Yet  we  know
many do not  now answer who would  do so if  they  were  assured
of  fair  treatment  by  the  committee.   These  witnesses  refuse
to  subject  themselves  to  abuse.   A  committee  conscious of  the
rights of witnesses and  operating under  rules  to protect  those
rights  would  elicit  much  information  now  denied  them.   We
could  then  see how unnecessary  the  proposal  before  us  would
be.  There  are  those  who always will  abuse  this  privilege  but
this  is  the  price  we  must  pay  for  the  maintenance  of  our
liberties.
"We  are  dealing  here  with  the  elements  of  the  First  as
well  as  the  Fifth  amendment of  the  Constitution.  We  cannot
legislate   outside  of  the   context   of  our  climate   of  opinion.
There  is presently  an  unbecoming shrillness, fed  into hysteria
by  political would-be saviors,  in  our  approach  to  problems  of
internal   communism.  It   is  our  legislative   responsibility  to
bring  this problem  back  into focus  into its  proper  dimensions,
free  of  exaggerations   and  obsessiveness.   S  16 is  a  denial  of
that  responsibility."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  9,  1954
Round  A  (Woozy)  Capitol  and  An  (Unsteady)  Globe
During  debate  on the  McCarthy resolution,  Senator   Jenner
may   have   thrown   some  light   on  why   McCarthy  was   so
anxious  to  investigate  communism in  the  government  print-
ing   office.    Jenner  complained   that  when  the   Senate sub-
committee  on  privileges  and  elections   drew  up  its   famous
report  on  McCarthy  "they  hand-carried  the  requisition [for
the  printing]  down  to  the  Public  Printer,  and  a  man  who
holds  a  high  position  in  the  Government  Printing  Office  was
so  concerned   about   seeing  that   the   report  was  delivered
promptly,  so  that  it   could  be  circulated   over  the  country,
that  he  personally  rode  on  the  truck  which  delivered   the
report  to the  subcommittee"  . . .  Next  time  there's  a  report
on   McCarthy   the   Public   Printer   will   know   better.     If
patriotic   (or  at  least  discreet),  he'll  just  lose  the  copy.
When  Flanders,  in  opening  the  debate,  criticized  McCarthy
for   ill-treatment   of   General   Zwicker,  he  was   interrupted
by  Welker  who  asked  whether  Flanders  had  seen  an   INS
report  of  a  speech  made  by  the  General  at   MIT  June  11
when  146 seniors  were  commissioned as  Reserve  officers  .  . .
"General  Zwicker,"  the  report  on his  address  began,  "believes
democracy   and   communism   must,   find   a   means   of   co-
existence ..." Welker  seemed  to  imply that  a  General who
believed  in  co-existence could  not  be treated  too  harshly.
American  and  French  colonial  propaganda  have  built  up  a
picture  of  helpless  folk  fleeing  from  "slavery"  in  Northern
Indo-China  which  heavy  censorship  is  striving   to  maintain
but   .  .  .  the  Washington   Star,  the  AP's "home  organ"
which  publishes  practically  the  entire  Associated  Press  file,
ran  a dispatch  from Hanoi August  1 most papers  ignored . . .
"Many  Frenchmen  in  Hanoi,"  the  headline  said,  "Apathetic
About  Evacuation.   Vietnamese  Even  Slower  to  Register  to
Leave  Vietnam  Before Viet  Minh  Take  Over." ... A delayed
OFNS  dispatch  from  Hanoi in  the  Jerusalem  Post  of  July  30
helped  to  explain  why:  it  declared  French  were  cheered  by
Viet  Minh  assurances  on French  cultural  and  economic  inter-
ests,  and  said  "The French  Chamber of  Commerce met  here
this  afternoon  to  discuss  plans for  continuing business  after
the arrival of the Viet Minh in Hanoi" ...
There   is   suspicion   of   Eisenhower's   choice  of   an   Army
engineer  to  be chairman  of  TVA because the  Army engineer-
ing  corps  has  usually  been  the  ally  of  private  power  inter-
ests  . . . Watch  for sharp  questioning at  the hearings  on the
nomination   which   begin   today   before   the   Senate   Public
Works  Committee . . . General Motors profits  rose to a record
high   in  the   first   six  months  of  1954,  despite  a  22  percent
decline  in  defense  orders  .  .  .  That  decline  speaks  well  for
Charles  E.  Wilson  and  upsets  the  Left  stereotyped  picture
Mouthful   Dept.
".  .  .  let  us  think  twice  before  we  adopt  a  code  of
ethics  such  as   is   proposed,  because   no  matter  what
kind   of   code  may  be  adopted,  it   cannot  make  a  bad
chairman  good."
—Welker  (R.,  Idaho),  speech  to  the  Senate  in   defense
of  McCarthy,  Aug. 2 (Con. Rec. p.  12329)
"I  am  not  contending that  it  is  inconceivable that  an
innocent  man  should   be  damaged  as   the   result   of   a
congressional  investigation."
—McCarthy,    testifying     against   regulation   of com-
mittee   procedure  before    the   Senate  Rules  Committee,
July   27.
of   a  GM  executive  using  the   Secretaryship   of  Defense  to
ladle  out  more  defense  work  to  GM .  .  .  Best  comment on
the   Eisenhower   tax   bill   is  that   the   one  Republican  who
has  been  carrying   on  a  crusade  against  tax  corruption  and
abuses,  Williams  of  Delaware,  was  one  of  the  three  Repub-
licans  who voted  against  the tax  bill  in the  Senate  . .  . The
Robert M. Harris  to whom the Woodring letter about  Marshall
was  addressed  is  the  famous  cotton  broker  who was  so  prom-
inent  among  Father  Coughlin's  backers.
The  country  is  indebted  to  those  sixty  prominent  men  at
the  American  Assembly  for  daring  to  talk  a  little  sense  on
China,  and  to  oppose  a  rigid  bar  against  Peking's   entrance
to  the  UN  .  .  .  They  also  stressed  the  importance  of  the
war  against  poverty,  praising  the  UN  Technical  Assistance
Program  as  a  major  weapon  .  .  .  "Its  potential  power  to
destroy   the   influence   of  communism  on  the   minds  of  men
is  as  great,"  their  joint  report  said  (N.Y.  Times,  Aug. 3),
"as  the  power  of  the  hydrogen  bomb  to  destroy  the  bodies
of  men"  .  .  .  They  did not  add that  while  we have  already
invested   12  billion  dollars   in  that  power  to   destroy,   the
Administration  is  having  difficulty  in  getting   $9,000,000  out
of   this   Congress   to   meet   our   share   of  this   year's   UN
Technical  Assistance   program  .  . .
Creeping  Socialism  Dept:  The  American  Legion,  otherwise
stoutly  anti-collectivist,  opened  a  campaign  last  week  against
the   A.M.A.  for   attacking   those   "socialistic"  hospital   and
medical  services  the  government  provides  veterans  .  .  . The
U.S.  might  be  defined   as  a  country  in  which  every  group
is  opposed  to  "socialism", i.e. government  aid  and  protection,
except  for themselves ...
Why  Not  Let Us Send a  Sample  Cop/  fo  a  friend?
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301  E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Str«>t
rity                                        Znn*
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money
(To)  Name
Street
Pity                                           Znnp
State-
enclosed) :
State __ .... ...
8-9-54
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED