I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954mar29.pdf

============================================================

The Witch Hunt Moves South;  Jennings Perry  Reports from  New Orleans
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2, NUMBEE  10
MARCH  29,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
Eisenhower  (Like  Bao Dai)  Could Use  Some  Outside Help
The idea that other countries have a right  to intervene when
internal  conditions  become  a  danger  to  world  stability  was
recently   made  explicit  at   Caracas.    It   is  written   into  the
North  Atlantic  Pact,  which  brings   the  alliance  into   play
when  the  "political independence" of  a member State is threat-
ened  by  "internal  aggression."    The  UN  Charter,  perhaps  be-
cause  the  German  experience  was  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the
framers,  gives  the  Security  Council  a power  to  act  against any
"threat  to  the  peace"  broad  enough  to  deal  with  the  rise  of
some  new  Hitler.    It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  world   combination
of  powers  strong  enough  to  apply so ready a remedy  to  Wash-
ington.   Eisenhower  (like  Bao Dai)  is beginning  to  need  out-
side  help.
This conceit,  of  course,  is not  meant  to  be taken  too  serious-
ly.  Though  so much  has been  done  in  recent  years  to  cultivate
mutual  suspicion  and  distrust  in  this  country,  Americans are
a  long  way  from  taking  up  arms  against  each  other.    The
courts  still  operate.   The  roads are safe.   The  police  and Army
are politically  loyal.   McCarthy  is a  long  way  from  being  the
threat  to  this  Republic  that  Hitler  was  to  Weimar  in  1932,
or  even  in  1928.    But  a political  development  which  deprives
the   government   of   the   world's   most  powerful  country  of
capacity  to  act  efficiently  and  sensibly is a  development  which
endangers  world  peace  and  security.
Life  and  Death  in Flabby  Hands
The  U.  S.  is  the  leader,  organizer  and  paymaster  of  a  huge
coalition in a world  split  in two.   It  holds  in its hands the  most
terrible instruments  of  destruction  ever developed  by  the  mind
of  man  and it  claims the  right  to use these for  "instant  retalia-
tion" under certain  circumstances, yet  those  hands show  them-
selves  increasingly  shaky  and  incompetent,   the  will  behind
them  is flabby  and  at  the  mercy of  emotional  tides which make
sober  reasoning  ever  more  difficult.
A  government   which  insists  that  in  some  circumstances  it
must  have the right  to unleash hell on earth without  consulting
its own people or others; the right  to judge quickly and perhaps
fatally  obscure  questions of  aggression on  some distant border;
this   government   cannot   pull   itself   together   sufficiently   to
make  one  upstart  Senator  and  a  brash  young  lawyer  stand
aside while it  settles a cheap and scandalous little affair  in  which
they  have  tried  to  bulldoze  the  Army.
"Instant" Action—and  Nine Retrials
The  Secretary  of  State  who  announced  the  "instant  retalia-
tion"  policy  is  so poorly  equipped  to  make  independent  deci-
sions against  sinister  pressure that  after  prolonged  study  he has
ordered  an accused young diplomat, John P. Davies,  to  undergo
another  trial—a ninth trial—on  "subversive" charges  so spuri-
ous they  would  have  been  thrown  out  of  court  in  any  stable
country  long  ago.    The  difficulty  here  fs  more  than  moral—
a  favorite  term  of  the  unctuous  Secretary's.    It  is  political.
Davies was one victim  of  the  secret  power  Chiang Kai-shek has
exerted  to  drive  out   of  Washington   all  those  who  took   an
astringent  view  of  his  regime  and  a  sober  attitude  toward  the
great  convulsion  in  the  Far  East.    This  was McCarran's  vic-
tim,   and  behind  McCarran  is  the  China  Lobby,  and  because of
its  power we move toward  Geneva unable  to  recognize  realities
in  China  or  Indo-China.
On  every  hand  there  is evidence of  terror  in  American  life,
freezing  into fearful  inaction  all those  on  whom  an  alternative
policy  might  be  based.   Though  there is instinctive resistance
to  intervention  in  Indo  China,  there  is  no  peace  movement,
there  are  no  peace  meetings.    The  undertow  toward  a  new
intervention   grows  more  powerful   despite  the  President.    A
situation  is  building  up  in  which  inept  men  may  be  pushed
by  some  unexpected  turn  of  events  into  terrible  decisions  in
sheer  funk.
Afraid  to  Talk  Peace
An  example is at  hand, of  the extent to  which  sane  thinking
in  America has  been made almost impossible.   The  great  Super
H   bomb  has  just  been  exploded  in  the  Pacific.    The  Alsop
Brothers  last  Wednesday  had  a  column  discussing  its  signifi-
cance.  They  reported  that  a Civil Defense study  showed  that a
modern  nuclear attack  on  this  country  would  leave 22,000,000
injured  and  9,000,000  dead.   The  official  who  made  the  esti-
mate  asked  helplessly,  "Just  as a  practical  matter  how  in  hell
are  you  going  to  bury   9,000,000  dead?"    The  answer,   ac-
cording  to  the  Alsops,  "is  that  this  kind  of  mass  slaughter
simply  cannot  be permitted  to  happen."   They  see "only  one
way  to  prevent  it."     The  only  sure  way  to  prevent  it  is  to
remain  at  peace,  but  this  idea  is "subversive";  there  is a  block
against  it.    The  Alsop  solution  is  "to   get  the  people  out  of
the  cities  before  the  bombs  fall,"  if  necessary  on  foot!
This  sort  of  thinking  is  not  confined  to  the  Alsops.    It  is
omnipresent.    Everyone  has  another  solution—some  a  bigger
air  force,  others  a  radar  fence  around  the  country,  etc.,   but
no  one  says,  "Look,  the  situation  is  so  terrible  we've   simply
got  to  live  in  peace  with  the  Russians."    No  one  talks  that
way  any  more,  at  least  no  one  who  can  reach  more  than  a
handful  of  people.   The  country  is afraid  to  talk  of  peace.    It
is being conditioned  for  war,  and  war  will  engulf  all  mankind.
This  atmosphere,  this  growing   impotence   in  Washington,
is one no army of  intervention  could cure, but  it  is a far  greater
threat  to  world  peace and  security  than  the  petty  conflicts  in
Indo-China  or  Korea.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  S9,  1954
An  On-The-Scene  Report  from  New  Orleans  by Jennings  Perry
The  Congressional  Inquisition  Moves  South  . . .
By  Jennings  Perry
New  Orleans—While  the  major  banners  in  the  press  clung
to  the  McCarthy-Army  entanglement,   the  great  latter-day
witch-hunt  quietly  moved  south  and  opened  here  last  week
under  the   sole  management  of  Sen.  James   O.  Eastland,  of
Mississippi.
For  three  days  at  New  Orleans,  Eastland,  as  a  one-man
"task  force"  of the  Jenner  Internal  Security  Committee, held
hearings  into  the  possibility  that  the  Communist conspiracy
has  been  "masquerading behind the  facade  of a  humanitarian
educational  institution"   in  Dixieland—the  Southern  Confer-
ence  Educational  Fund.  The fund  is  an  offshoot  or  outgrowth
of  the  old  Southern  Conference  for  Human Welfare,  founded
in  the  depression  years  and  dissolved  in  the  '40s.
The  hearings  were  conducted  in  a  federal  district   court
room   at   the   New  Orleans  postoffice,   a   dark-panelled   hall
embellished,  on  the  wall  behind  the  high  bench, with  the  em-
blematic  scale  of  justice,  in  precise,  even  balance.   Through-
out  the  hearings  the  emblem  managed   stolidly  to  keep  its
balance  only because  it  is  carved  in wood.
Statesmen  at  Work
At  the  very  beginning  of  the  hearing,  Eastland  emphati-
cally   informed   counsel   for   the   several   witnesses   present
under  subpoena that  the  right  of  cross-examination  was  un-
known  in  congressional inquiries and that, as  for  other  rules,
the  chairman would  announce  them  as  occasion required.   At
that  first  look,  it  struck   some  in  the  room  that  of  the  two
principals  on  the   bench,  Eastland  and  Richard  Arens,  the
committee's   counsel,  Arens,  with   snowy  hair   and   knitted
brows,  had   the  statesmanlike  appearance.   Later  however,
as Arens began to chomp gum, where the  Senator  only chewed
his  cigar, this  impression  was  altered.
The  announced purpose  of  the  hearing—to  inquire into  the
activities   of  the  fund—got   no  notice,  once  the  proceedings
began.   Leo  Sheiner,  an  attorney,  and  Max  Shlafrock,  con-
tractor,  both  of  Miami,  the  first  witnesses  called, refused  to
say  whether  or  not  they  ever  had  heard  of  the  fund.   Both
claimed  protection  of  the  Fifth  Amendment,  though  Sheiner
also  insisted  upon  his  rights  under  the  First,  Second,  Sixth,
Eighth,  Ninth  and  Teji  Amendments, a  move  Eastland  took
as  an  affront.   Recognizing the  appeal to the  Fifth,  he roared,
"All  the  rest  of  that  stuff  is  bunk!"
These  witnesses were stood aside;  Dr.-James  A.  Dombrow-
ski, executive directr of the  fund,  was called; and immediately
the   force  of  the  reasons  which  have  been  given  by   other
witnesses  for  "taking  the  Fifth"  began  to  appear.   It  was
known  that  Dombrowski  would  not  take  the  Fifth.
A   soft-voiced   scholar,  whose  work  always   has   been  in
opposition  to  racial  discrimination, he  repeatedly  attempted
to  explain  the  activities  of  the  fund,   which  were supposed
to  be  in  question.   Instead   he  was  pressed  hour  after   hour
upon  his  indorsements  of  peace  pleas,  amnesty  pleas,   etc.,
without  number, and  his  reason  for  such  indorsements.   His
reply that "if  it was for  peace, I probably signed it"  again and
again  amused  the  committee counsel.
Refuses  to  Name  Contributors
As  to  the  amnesty  pleas,  he  at  one point  quietly  lectured
his  inquisitors,  "It  apparently  is  difficult  for  you to  imagine,
but  there  are  people  who  speak  for  mercy  to  others  for  no
other  reason  than  mercy."  He  answered  willingly  any  ques-
tions  put  about  himself  and  the  fund,  but  in  the  end  denied
on  the  grounds  of  "the  rights  of ethers"  to  produce  a  list of
contributors  to  his   organization.
At  the  end  of  the  first  day,  the  witnesses  still  to  be heard
were' Aubrey Williams,  president  of  the  fund,  Virginia  Durr
and  Miles  Horton,  officers  of  the  fund.   The  courtroom  had
been  orderly,  though  among  the  spectators  at  the  back  hard
looks  could  have  been  seen  and  deprecatory  whispers   passed
behind  screening  hands.
One  newsman,  mistaken  for  a  witness,  was  approached
in  the  corridor  by  a  woman who had  sat  tensely  forward  on
her  bench  during  the  proceedings.   "You  want  to  rule  the
world,  don't  you?'  'she  said  between  clenched teeth.  Outside,
in  Lafayette  Square,  the  azalias  and  camellias  were  in  full
springtime   flower.   The   weather   had   improved   and   New
Orleans  went  about  its  vast  business  largely   unmindful  of
the  inquisition  shaping  up  at  the  federal  building.
The  Witnesses Against Williams
Friday  morning,  Williams  was  called.   He  identified  him-
self  at  Arens  request:  publisher  of  the  Southern  Farm  and
Home  Magazine, circulation  800,000, former  National  Youth
Administrator,  before that  deputy  administrator  of the WPA.
He  is  president  of  the  educational  fund.   He  asked  no  im-
munity  under  the  fifth,  testified  freely,  save  that,  like  Dom-
browski, he  refused  to  give  the names of  those  who have  con-
tributed  to  the  fund.   Eastland  and  Arens  were  cautious  and
courteous.  Their  chief  "friendly"  witness,  Paul  Crouch, took
the  stand;  he claimed  to  have  been  introduced to  Williams by
Communists.   John   Butler,   the   committee's   other    witness
was next;  he said he had met Williams as "comrade  Williams"
at  an  event  12 years  ago,  and later  had  attended  a communist
party  meeting at  which  Williams had  been  present.
Williams  branded  both  statements   as  lies,  challenged  the
witness  to  come  out  into  the  corridor  and  in  the  presence  of
newsmen repeat  the statements,  "I'll  sue for  everything  you've
got."   But  Eastland  intervened.   Neither   Baker  nor  Crouch
would  accept  William's  challenge  repeated  at   the  adjourn-
ment  of  the  session.
All  of  the  accusations  of  party  ties  at  this  hearing  were
made   by   Crouch   and   Butler.   Both   are    ex-Communists.
Crouch  claims  a  party  membership  of  17  years.  He  gives  his
address as  Honolulu  and  smirkingly  admits  that  he is  a "pro-
fessional  witness."  Butler  is an  earthworm  of a man for whom
it  is possible to have compassion.  Crouch is different;  tall  and
once  robust,  he  has  a  pudgy  face  browned  by  many  hours
under  kleig  lights  on  the  witness   chair.
Served  Two Years  At  Alcatraz
Courtmartialed  for  inciting  to  disaffection  among  the   sol-
diers  at  Schofield  Barracks,  Crouch was  sentenced  and  served
two  years  at  Alcatraz.   He  recites  'with  relish  all  the  inci-
dents  of  an  infamous  career.  He wears  rimless  glasses  which,
as  he  waits  in  the  witness  benches  to  do  his  next  denounce-
ment,  catch  the  light  with  the  glitter  of  a  monocle.  He  has
spent  "5,000  hours"  relating  his past  to  the  FBI  "and  is not
through  yet.""
Evidently,  a  great  part  of  Crouch's  confessional  has  been
rehearsal   for  appearances   as  a  committee   witness   in   sub-
versive   hearings.    He  is  mechanically   glib,  speaking   in  a
quaint   sing-song   you  would  expect   of  a   Hollywood  extra
impersonating  a  Canton  coolie.  He  appears  to  enjoy  hugely
the   mental   strain   put   upon  those   whose  honor   and   self-
respect  his  testimony  impugns.
According  to  his  own  word,  he  was  a  "top  flight"   Com-
munist  organizer  in  the  South  in  the  days  of  the  New  Deal.
He  is  a  sort  of juke box in  which many  recordings  have  been
filed;  committee  counsel  has  only  to  press  a  button  marked
with  any  name  and  Crouch  instantly  gives  with  his  tale.   It
was  during  his  accusation  of  Williams  that  he  was  touched
off  by  Arens  with  regard  to  Clifford  Durr.
Clifford  Durr,  Rhodes  scholar,  sometime lecturer  on  law  at
Princeton,  former  member  of  the   Federal   Communications
Commission,  had  come  to  Eastland's  hearing  as  counsel  for
his  friend  and  neighbor  Williams, and  also for  Miles Horton,
founder   and   teacher   at   Highlander   Folk   School   in   the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  March  S9, 19S4
. . . Smearing  Aubrey  Williams and The Durrs
Tennessee  mountains.   He  is,  of  course,  the  husband  of  Vir-
ginia  Durr  and  a  resident  of  Montgomery,  Alabama.  He  is
quiet  of  manner,  with  sensitive  features  in  which  sincerity
is  indelibly  written.
Durr  Cross-Examines   Crouch
In  the   course  of  Williams  testimony,  Eastland   suddenly
decided to  permit  Croucli to be examined.  Durr  asked  Crouch,
"Can   you  prove  you  are  not  a  Communist?"   Crouch  said
he  could  and  Arens  leaned  from  the  bench,  "Is  Mr.  Durr  a
Communist?"
"I  do not know whether  he still  is,"  Crouch  replied.
"Do you know that he  was?"
"Yes."
Whereupon  Durr  himself  requested  to  be  sworn  as  a  wit-
ness;  his  client  Williams left  the  chair,  and  young  attorney
Ben  Webb,  of  New  Orleans,  who  had  come  to  the  hearing
to  represent  Dombrowski,  stepped   forward  to  ask  permis-
sion  to  appear  now also  as  the  attorney  for  Durr.
"Like  Trying  to  Catch  an  Eel"
The  interchange  now was  keenly  dramatic.   With  question
after   question   Durr   sought  to  pin  down  Crouch  to  names,
places,   times—even   approximate   times—at   which   Crouch
claimed he had  seen Durr  in Communist company.  It  was  like
trying  to  catch  an  eel  with  buttered  fingers,  and  Durr  did
not  succeed.
On  the  last  day  of  the  hearing,   Myles  Horton,  who  pre-
viously  had   been   questioned  in  executive   session   and   had
demanded  hearing  in  public, was  called.' When  he  refused  to
discuss   names   other   than  his   own,  Eastman   ordered  him
thrown  out, and  he was  ejected  physically from the  room still
trying  to  put  into  the  record  a  comment on  civil  rights—by
Pres. Elsenhower.  Durr, left  without his client, and trembling
with  indignation,  moved to  the  witness  benches.
Eastman  was  ready  to  round  out  and  wind  up  his  show.
Crouch  was  returned  to  the  chair  and,  in  a  long  statement
disclaiming  any   intent   in   previous   testimony   linking   the
late  President   Roosevelt,  Mrs.  Roosevelt  and  Justice  Black
with  the  Southern   Conference  "to  attack  the  patriotism  of
any  of  these   people"  made  the  additional  declaration  that
"Mrs.  Virginia  Foster  Durr,  Justice  Black's  sister  in law,  had
full  knowledge of  the  Communist  conspiracy  and  its  work"
when  she  allegedly  persuaded  Black  to  address  the  organiza-
tional  meeting  of  the  Conference  in  Birmingham  in   1938.
Durr  Leaps  at  Crouch
It  was  too  much  for  Durr.   Whipping  around  the  railing
in  front   of  the  witness  benches  and  crying  "You  say  that
about  my wife!"  he threw  himself  at  the grinning  Crouch  "to
kill  him  with   my  bare   hands."   He  was   restrained—with
gentleness  and  understanding   even  by  the  brawny  marshals
who  had  with   evident   relish,  earlier,  manhandled   Horton
from  the  room.  Durr  was  taken  to  the  hospital  because  of  a
heart condition from  which  some time ago he had  suffered.
And  Senator  Eastland's hearing  in  New Orleans  was  over.
Writer  Richard  English,  of  California,  a  well-fed  citizen  not
otherwise  involved  in  the  inquiry,  had  been  put  on the  stand
to  discuss   Communist  methods   in  a  genteel  manner.   Mrs.
Durr,  on the  advice of her  Montgomery  counsel, John  P.  Kohn,
had  refused   to  give  more  than  her  name  and  to  deny  any
Communist  tie—now  or ever—, giving  in response to  all  other
questions  "I  stand  mute"  for  answer.
The committee's  "trained  dog"  witnesses, Crouch  and Baker,
had   asked  for  and  been  assured  police  protection   till   they
could  get  out  of  the  city.  In  a  cab  with  them  on the  way  to
their  hotel,  one of the  policemen assigned  to  accompany  them,
Joseph   H.  Klein,  a  member  of  the  New  Orleans   force  for
27 years, collapsed  and  died.
The question remained  and will be debated  in  the  South this
spring  of  why Eastland  staged  his  inquiry  at  this  time,  why
he  came  into  the  deep  south  to  match  his  zombie  witnesses
against  fellow  southerners  and  close neighbors  like  the  Durrs
and  Aubrey  Williams,  why  no  other  member  of  the  Jenner
Committee  would come with  him.
Rankin's  Forays  Recalled
Southern  newsmen  inevitably recalled that in  other  election
years  Congressman  John  Rankin,  also  of  Mississippi,   always
could  be  counted  on to  discover  that  the  "Jews  and  niggers"
were  about  to take  over  the world, beginning  with  Mississippi.
This  year  Eastland  is  up  for  reelection  with  strong  opposi-
tion  from  young  Lt.  Gov.  Carroll  Gartin.   He  has  let  it  be
known  that  other  "task  force"  hearings  into  the  Communist
conspiracy  in  the  Land  of  Cotton  will  be held  in  May  or June
in  Birmingham.  New Orleans  is  a  stone's  throw  from  Missis-
sippi  on the  south,  Birmingham  a  stone's  throw  on  the  east.
News  of  the  Senator's  brave  deeds  in  defense  of  "security,"
it  is  pointed  out,  well  could be  depended upon  to  travel  that
far,  and  fast.
The Press Is  Called
On  the  last  day  of  the  hearings,  Fred  Andersen,  assistant
managing  editor   of  the  Montgomery  Advertiser,   circulated
among  the  nine  reporters  who  had  covered  the  inquiry  the
following  query:
"On  the  basis  of  what  you  have  seen  and  heard  here,  who
of  the  principals  represents  the  greatest  threat  to  American
ideals?"
There  were  four  votes  for   Sen.  Eastland,  two  for   Paul
Crouch, one for  Dr. Dombrowski, one for  Shlafrock, the Miami
contractor,  and  one  for  Richard  Arens,  chief  sub-committee
counsel.
Henry  Luce  (That  Other Weekly Publisher)  and I
Agree  (I  am  sure)  that  the  bane  of  publishing is  that
minority  of  readers who  need to  be  urged, prodded,  coaxed,
cozened,  cooed and billed when  renewal time comes  around.
Life,   Time  and  Fortune  send  no  less  than  eight   notices,
each  more beautifully  and colorfully  printed than  the  other
to  the  laggards and some of their renewals  finally  cost  more
than  the  money  they  bring  in.   Bat  Mr. Luce  can  make  up
the  difference  out  of  advertising  revenue.  I  can't.
This  is   the   situation.   Thanks   to   the   majority  of   our
readers,  we  are  solidly  in  business  for  another  year.   But
like  other  publications  we  find  that  we  hare  a  minority
(among  them  some  of  our best friends)  who just  don't  seem
able  to  get  around  to  renewing.  We  cannot  afford  to  send
eight  notices;  we  just  haven't  the  energy  to  spare,  much
less  the  money.
Your expiration date is  marked on your name-plate.  Turn
the  page  and  take  a  look.   If  your  sub  has  expired,  please
renew  TODAY.   You  can  use  that  business  reply  envelope
I  sent  all  "expires"  a  week  ago  and  save  the  trouble  of
finding  a  stamp.  And you  can  make  amends  for  your tardi-
ness  by  sending  a  gift  sub  to  a  friend,  or  to  your  local
library, minister, or newspaper for  only $4 extra.  But  please
do  it NOW.
—I.  F.  Stone
4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  S9,  19S4
Mundt  Follows Parnell  Thomas in  Letting Slip The Truth
More  Evidence  of Liaison Between  The  FBI  and  the  Witch Hunt
Evidence  of  liaison  between  the  FBI  and  the  witch  hunters
is  accumulating.   In  last  week's  issue  we  quoted  a  statement
made by J.  Parnell Thomas when  he was chairman of  the  House
Un-American  Activities  Committee.   This  week  we  offer  one
from  Senator  Mundt  (R.,  S. D.),  who  succeeded  Thomas  as
acting  chairman  of  that  committee  when  Thomas  was  prose-
cuted  for  a  "kick-back."
The  Mundt   statement   was  made  public  by  Senator  Ful-
bright  (D., Ark.) but  ignored  by  most  papers.    Mundt,  the
ranking   Republican   on   the   McCarthy  committee,   made  a
speech  last  November  in  Salt  Lake  City.    In  that  speech  he
said   (Salt   Lake  City  Tribune,  Nov. 22), ".  . .  these  probes
are  a  valuable  supplement  to  the  investigative  work  of   the
FBI.    The  FBI  may  compile  much  evidence  on   Communist
infiltration,  but   not  enough   to  justify   indictments.     Often
in  such  cases,  said  the  Senator,   the  FBI  will  tip   off   a  Con-
gressional  Committee  as  to  a  situation  where  it  is  convinced
American  security   is  endangered.    The  committee's  inquiry
makes  it  possible  to  bring the  case into the  open  and, with  the
suspected  Communist  spy  usually  taking  refuge  in  the  Fifth
amendment's  protection  against  incriminating  himself,  it  is
possible  to  eliminate  that  particular  threat."
Mundt  speaks of  situations  in  which  the  FBI  does  not  have
enough  evidence  "to   justify  indictments."    The  purpose  of
the  grand  jury  system,  particularly   the  secrecy  which sur-
rounds  it,  is. to  protect  accused  persons  from   the  obloquoy
and  expense  of  a  public  trial  unless  there  is  enough evidence
to  warrant  it.    In  this  way  weak,  dubious  or  unfounded  ac-
cusations  can  be  disposed  of.
Undercutting  the  Grand Jury  System
Here  we have Mundt  saying  that  when  the  FBI cannot  get
an  indictment   because  it  has  insufficient   evidence,  it   "often
in  such  cases"  tips  off  a  Congressional  committee.   Thus   the
FBI  circumvents  the  grand  jury  system,  and  destroys  in  the
public  pillory  those  whom  it  cannot  fairly indict  and  convict.
They  lose  jobs  and  reputation  and  are  as effectively  destroyed
as  if  they  had  been  sent  to  jail.   This  is  obviously  what hap-
pened  with  those whom  the FBI was unable  to  indict  with  the
testimony  of  Elizabeth  Bentley.
Mundt   made  quite  a  revelation  in  that   Salt  Lake  City
speech  but  so  powerful  is  the  FBI  that  even  men  and  papers
fighting  McCarthy  are afraid  to  look  at  the  full   implications.
Senator  Fulbright  himself,  in  giving  this  out  last  week  to  a
largely  indifferent  press,  said  that  he  was  "concerned  that  the
FBI,  as  our  foremost  safeguard  against  subversive  activities,
not  be  destroyed  by  the  misuse of  its  confidential  material."
This is putting  it  in  reverse.   The  misuse is the  misuse of Con-
gressional  investigating  committees  by  the  FBI  to   terrorize
all  whom  the  secret  police regard  with  disfavor  or  suspicion.
But  how  get  editors  and  judges  to  look  at  this  gangrenous
growth  on  a  free  society  when  they  themselves  have  grown
afraid  of  this  same  power,  and  of  the  dirt  which  may  be hid-
den  in  its  swollen files?
The  FBI  and  the  China  Lobby
The  mail  evoked  by  Senator  Fulbright's  daring  in   lifting
the  curtain  on  this  situation has  also  brought  him  evidence of
possible  links  between  the  FBI  and  private  witch  hunters.    A
reader  in  Boston contributed  page twelve  of  the  Boston Herald
of  March  15.   On  the  same page with  Brownell's  denial,  "Mc-
Carthy  Access  to  FBI  Tips  Denied."   The  Herald  ran  a  story
on  the  speeches  at  a  New  England  Anti-Subversive  Seminar
conducted  by  the  American  Legion  with  Kohlberg,   Victor
Lasky,  J.  B.  Matthews  and  Bella  Dodd  among  the  speakers.
"I  have  seen  FBI files on  several  persons  still operating  in  the
[State]  Department,"  Kohlberg  was  quoted  as  saying.
The   other   speakers,  incidentally,   covered   a  wide   swath.
Lasky  saw  "seeds  of  treason"  among  business  men  who  want
more  East-West   trade,  Matthews  spoke  on  Communist   in-
filtration   in   religion   (mainly  Protestant,   of   course)   while
Dodd  was  quoted  as saying, "the  only  thing  we  have  to  fear
in  this  country  is  the  educated  man."   We  can  already see
that  FBI  man  asking  the  neighbors,  "Does  he  read?    I  mean
books  . .  ."
We'll  Be Glad  to  Send Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends
This  Is  Expiration   Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    _____________________________
Street   _____________________________
City______________  Zone____  State_____
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name     ________________________
Street  _____________________'
City_
. ZoneState_
3-29-64
I.  F. Stone'5 Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED