I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954may24.pdf

============================================================

Jennings Perry;  "Ike  Passes Political  War Buck to the  Holy Joes"—See  page 4
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
VOL,  2, NUMBER 18
MAY  24,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16  CENTS
The  Negro  Strides  Toward  Full  Emancipation
For  weeks  on  Mondays,  when  opinions  are  handed  down,
the  Supreme  Court  press  room  had  drawn  a  full   house,  in-
cluding  an  unusually  large  number  of  Negro  reporters.    Last
Monday,  after  we  had  all  begun  to  give  up  hope  of  a  school
segregation   decision   that   day,   an  unusual  event   occurred.
Ordinarily   opinions   are  given  out   in   the   press  room   after
word  comes  down  the  pneumatic  chute  that  they  have  been
read  in  the  courtroom   above.    This  time  the  light flashed
and  there  was  a  different   kind  of   message.    The   press  aide
put   on  his  coat  and  we  were  all  shepherded  into  the   court
chamber  to  hear the  opinion  read  and  receive  our  copies  there.
In  that  tense  and  crowded  marble  hall,  the  Chief  Justice
was  already  reading  the  opinion  in  Brown  et  al.  v.  U.S.    He
read  in  a  firm,  clear  voice  and  with  expression.   As  the  Chief
Justice  launched into  the  opinion's  lengthy  discussion  of  the
Fourteenth   Amendment,   the   reporters,   white   and   Negro,
edged   forward   in   the   press   boxes,  alert   for   indications   of
which  way  the  decision  was  going.    "We   come  then,"  the
Chief  Justice  read,  "to  the  question  presented:  Does  segrega-
tion  of  children  in  public  schools  solely  on  the  basis  of  race,
even  though  the  physical facilities  and  other  'tangible'  factors
may   be  equal,  deprive  the  children  of   the  minority   group
of   equal  educational  opportunities?"     In   the   moment   of
suspense   which   followed  we   could   hear   the   Chief   Justice
replying  firmly,  "We  believe  that  it  does."    It   was  all  one
could  do  to  keep from  cheering,  and  a  few  of  us  were moved
to  tears.
There  was one  quite  simple  but  terribly  evocative  sentence
in  the  opinion.    For  Negroes  and  other  sympathetic  persons
this  packed  the  quintessence of  the  quieter  misery  imposed  on
members of  a  submerged  race.    "To  separate them,"  the  Chief
Justice  said  of  Negro  children,  "from  others  of  a  similar  age
and  qualifications solely  because of  their  race  generates  a  feel-
ing  of  inferiority  as  to  their  status  in  the  community   that
may   affect   their  hearts  and  minds  in   a  way   unlikely   ever
to   be  undone."    So  the   J8-year   old   ruling   of   Blessy    v.
Ferguson  was  reversed  and  the  court   ruled  "Separate  educa-
tional  facilities  are inherently   unequal  .  .  .  segregation  is a
denial  of  the  equal  protection  of  the  laws."
Among  the  audience  streaming  out  of  the  Chamber  when
the  Chief   Justice  had  ended,  the   lawyers  for   the  NAACP
suddenly   began   to   embrace  each  other   outside   the   doors.
They  had  achieved  a  giant  stride  toward  the  full   emancipa-
tion   of  their  people.     The   growing  political   power   of   the
Negro  had  prevailed  over  the  growing  wealth  of  the  Repub-
lican  party's  newest  recruits,  the  Texas  oil  millionaires.    In
a   showdown,  American   democracy   had   proven   itself   real.
It  was  the  votes  which  counted.
The  unanimous  ruling  seemed  too  explicit  to  be  whittled
away  in  the  enforcing  decree.   The  rehearing next  Fall  on  the
form  of  that  decree,  the  invitation  to  the  Southern  States  to
be heard, offer  a  period  in  which  tempers  may  cool  and  bigots
be  allowed  second  thoughts.   At  the  best,  Jim  Crow  will  not
be  ended  overnight.    The  clue  to  what  is likely  to  happen  in
most  cities,  North  and  South,  may  be  found  in  a  clause  of
the  questions  on  which  the  Court  will  hear  argument  in  the
Fall.
The  Court  is to  consider  whether  "within  the  limits  set  by
normal   geographic   school  districting"   Negro  children   shall
"forthwith    be  admitted   to   schools  of   their   choice"  or   a
gradual   changeover   be   arranged.     Since  most   Negroes   in
most   cities  already  lived  in   more  or   less   segregated  Negro
sections,  these  will  still  have  largely  Negro  schools.    It  is  on
the  borderlines  that  mixing will  begin;  ultimately  the pattern
of   segregated  schools  will  break  down  with   the  pattern  of
segregated  Negro  housing  areas.   The  ultimate  impact   must
revolutionize  race  relations  and  end   the   system  of   inferior
status  and  inferior  education  which  has  kept   the   ex-slave
a  menial.
The  decision  may  be enough  to  ensure a Republican  victory
in  the  Fall  elections.     If   we  have  not  blundered  into  war,
if   there  is  not   serious  unemployment,   the   reaction   of   the
Negro  to  the  segregation  case  may  be decisive in  many  indus-
trial  areas.   This  is  especially  so  if  there  is  a  prolonged   out-
burst  of  bitterness  in  the  South.    Were  the  Democratic  party
not   irremediably   split   on   the   race   question,   the   issue  of
Federal  aid  to  education   and  a  Federal  school  building  pro-
gram  might  give  the  Democrats  a  chance  to  steal  the  G.O.P.'s
laurels  and  make  inroads  among  the  building  trades.    But  of
such  a  strategy  there  is little  prospect.
The  Drift  Toward  War  Continues
Some  basic  observations   may   be  useful   guides   amid   the
confusing   day-to-day   news  from   Geneva,  Washington  and
Indochina.    The  first  was  well  stated  by  Nehru  in   opening
the  foreign  policy  debate  in  the  Indian  parliament  last  week.
Nehru  said  the  contending  forces  in  the  world  were  now  so
evenly  matched  that  neither   could   impose  its  terms  on  the
other.    "If  there  is  to  be  a  settlement,"  he  declared,  "it  has
to  be  a  negotiated  settlement  and  not  by  imposition."
The  second   observation  is  that  only  one  side  feels  it  can
afford  peace.    While  the  two  hostile blocs are evenly  matched
at   the  moment,   one  of   them   will  fall  apart  if   there  is  a
negotiated  settlement  and  real  peace.    The  world  Communist
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   May  24, 1954
movement    and   its   dictatorships    can   hold   the   Soviet    bloc
together  even  if  there  is  peace.    But  only  the  danger  of   war
can  cement   the  much  more  loosely  organized  American  bloc.
Given  a  settlement   between   the   U.S.   and   the  U.S.S.R.  and
consequences  must  follow   which  will  dissolve  the  American-
organized  alliance.   Without  a  sense of  tension  and  fear,   Con-
gress  cannot   be  counted   on   to   keep   up  the   flow   of  dollars
abroad   and   military   appropriations   at   home.     Most   of   our
allies—perhaps  all  of  them  except  Turkey—do  not  feel  imme-
diately  threatened   by   the   Soviets.     Most   of   these  allies   are
concerned   with  older,  nearer  and  easier  rivalries:  the  French
with  the  German,  the  Italians  with  the  Yugoslavs,  the  Arabs
with  the  Israeli,  the  Pakistani  with  the  Indians.
The  Germans  and  the  British  are  the  only  ones  who  have
a  history  of   rivalry   with  the  Russians,  and   neither   are  any
longer  strong  enough  to  stand  the   gaff   of  prolonged   tension
(the  cold  war)   or  a  new  world  war.    The  somewhat   milder
tone  of  the  Kremlin  since Stalin  died  and  the  risky  character
of  American  policy  have  been  enough  to  bring  London   and
Bonn   (and  of   course  Paris)   closer   to  Moscow.     Churchill's
change  of  attitude   is  the   most   striking  evidence  of   this;  he
obviously   feels  that   he  did  not   become   Her   Majesty's  First
Minister   in   order   to   liquidate  the   Empire  as  an  American
satellite  in  a  new  world  war.
This  accounts  for  much  of   the  confusion  and  desperation
evident   in   Washington's  shifting   policy   on   Indochina.     So
much   more  than   Indochina  is  involved.     A   chain   reaction
threatens,    has   indeed   begun.      In    Germany,   Adenauer   is
already  having  trouble  holding  back  his  right  wing  and  big
business   allies  who  want  to   deal  directly  with  Moscow   for
trade  and  for  the  reunification  of  the  Reich.    At  Bonn,  as  in
Paris,  the  moderate  Catholics  on  whom  our   policy  depended
in  the   construction   of   a  "Little   Europe"  are  slipping  from
power.     The   rift   between   London    and   Washington   over
Geneva   is  serious.     But   should   fighting   flare   up,   the  British
would   be  swept   in   behind   us   to   protect   Hong   Kong   and
Malaya.   That  is why  we  are drifting  again  toward  the  policy
of  the  fait   accompli.    Chiang  may  create  the  situation;  new
air   fighting   off  the  China  coast   will  bear  watching.
There  is  a  third  observation,  perhaps   the  most   important
one   of   all.     It   is  that   the   leadership   of   American  society
basically  has  no  faith  in  the  capacity  of  our  system  to  stand
up  in  peaceful  competition  and  co-existence  with   the  Soviet
bloc.     The   Soviet  bloc   needs  peace  and  its  leaders  feel  sure
that   eventually   the   rest   of   the   world   will   go   their   way
without  there  having  to  do  much  about  it.    The  dictatorship
of   the  proletariat  is  in  many  ways  the  most  effective  device
yet  invented   for   compulsory   saving  and  the   exploitation   of
labor,   i.e.   the  diversion  of  huge  sums  from   consumption   to
capital  accumulation  and  investment.     Our   leadership  fears
the  swift  pace  of  Communist  industrialization;  the  increased
military  power  it  will  bestow;  and  the  trading  benefits it  can
offer  the  in-between  powers  like Germany  and  Japan.    Wash-
ington  fears  that  given  ten  or  twenty  years of  peace,  and  the
Soviet  bloc   will  become  too  strong   to  be  defeated.    A   pro-
found  defeatism  and  pessimism, perhaps a subconscious admira-
tion  for  communist  dictatorship,  lie behind  the  views of  those
like  Dulles  and  Radford  who  think  it  is  now  or  never.
Against   that   background   one  must   place  Indochina.     As
long  as  the  war  between  the  French  and  Ho  promised  to  go
on,  we  were  not  excited  about  it.     The  prospect  of  a  settle-
ment  upset  Washington  because  a  settlement  meant  a  French
withdrawal   and  a  victory  for   Ho.     An  extension  of   Com-
munist  power  southward  to  Haiphong  and  Saigon   portended
another  shift  in  the  balance of  power  to  the  advantage  of  the
Soviet  bloc.    This  is  more  than  Washington   can   take.
The  British  who  have  more maturity,  better  nerves, a  longer
experience  and   less  money  to  spend   believe  rightly   that   the
longer  a settlement  with  Ho  is delayed  the  worse  the  ultimate
terms  will  be.   They  think  such  a  settlement  necessary  before
a  new   line  and   a  new  balance  can   be  achieved  and   the   Far
Eastern   situation   stabilized.    But   for   the   reasons   outlined
above  our  leadership  is  not  sure  it  wants  the  situation   stabi-
lized.     We  did   not   recognize   the   revolution   in   Russia   for
15  years,  and  hope  that  by  not  recognizing  the  revolution  in
China  maybe  it  will  go  away,  or  crumble,  or  that  Chiang  can
do.from  Formosa  with  250,000 men  what  he  could  not  do  in
China  with  5,000,000  men.
Thus  a  neurotic   great  power,  unsure  of   itself,   goaded   by
extremists  at  home,  with  its  peace  movement  gagged,  and  still
(despite  Korea   and  Indochina)   under   the  delusion   of  quick
and  easy  victory   by  airpower,  drifts  toward   war.     It  would
be  unwise to  underrate  the  danger  where  such  weak  hands  are
on  so  skittery  a  wheel.
Of  (McCarthyite)  Cabbages  and  (Banana)  Kings
The  decision  to  continue   the  McCarthy  hearings  is  a  deci-
sion  to  carry  the  fight  between   the  Eisenhower   Administra-
tion  and  McCarthy  to  a  final  showdown   in  which    (barring
some  accident  like  war  to  bring  about  a  party  reconciliation)
one  must  destroy  the  other.    This  is  not  a  fight  McCarthy
can  win, and  the  result  must  be  to  drive  him  out  of  the  party
and   toward   the   leadership  of   some   minority   fringe   group.
Prediction   seems  hazardous   in   assessing  a  combat  between   a
man   as  resourceful   as  McCarthy  and  one  as  weak  as  Eisen-
hower  but  more than  personalities  are now involved.   McCarthy
took'on  the Army  and the party  too soon.  .  . .
The   State   Department   and  the  Pentagon  have  begun  to
indulge  in  some  pretty  shabby  "documentation"  to  condition
the  public  mind  for  war.    An  indication  on  a  smaller  plane of
how  foolish   they—and  the  White  House—can  become  is  the
outburst   over  supposed   arms  shipments   to  Guatemala.     The
whole   affair   has  stirred   derision   in   Latin   American   circles
here,  though   none  of  it  is  openly  expressed.    The  fact   seems
to  be  that  Guatemala,  denied  arms  by  the  United   States  and
allied  countries,  has  been  shopping  elsewhere.    As  a  sovereign
government,   it   has   a  right   to   buy   arms   where   it   pleases.
What  we  are  really  trying  to  do  is  to  enforce  an  illegal   arms
embargo  against  Guatemala  because  it  is engaged  in  a  dispute
with  the  United   Fruit  Company.    The  actual  facts  of   the
present  affair  are  still  in  doubt.    As  we  go  to  press,  the  owners
of  the  Swedish  vessel  have  denied  in  Stockholm  that  it  carried
arms  from   Stettin.    In   much   the   same  hysterical   vein  was
the  attempt   by  Dulles   to   link   the  Honduras   strike  with
Guatemala.     The  fact  is  that  Honduras  has  no  labor  legisla-
tion  whatever,  and  labor  unrest  there  was  long  overdue.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  24, 1954
Around  the  Capitol
Wire-Tapping   Can  Be  Beaten:   It   may  already  be  dead
insofar  as this  session  is concerned.   The able and  exhaustive
series  of  speeches  against   wire-tapping   of  any  kind  begun
by  Morse  (Ind.,  Ore.)  in  the  Senate  last  Tuesday  is  indica-
tive.   Morse's  relations  with  McCarran  are  friendly  and  the
latter,  ranking   Democrat  on  the  Senate  Judiciary  Commit-
tee,  is  as  hostile  to  Brownell  on this  issue  as  are  the  liberal
Democrats.    With  Morse,  there  is  a  clear  majority  against
wire-tap  legislation   altogether   or   for   the   McCarran  bill,
which   provides    severe    penalties   for   unauthorized  wire-
tapping.    The  Justice  Department  prefers   no  legislation  to
this   measure,   since  its   operatives   admittedly   tap   wires.
Hostility  to  Brownell  and  pressure  from  the  more  militant
Students  for  Democratic  Action  led  the  ADA  this  year  to
reverse  itself  and  oppose  wire-tapping  of  any  kind.   So  did
the  CIO.  The  ACLU  this  year  at  last  was  ready  to  accept
limited   wire-tapping   ("there  is   no  such  thing   as  limited
wire-tapping,"    Morse  told   the   Senate)   under   safeguards.
Morse  put  into  last  Tuesday's  Congressional  Record  the  full
text   of  a  report  by  the   Chicago  Bar   Association  recom-
mending  the   defeat  of  all  wire-tap   bills.
Knowland  on  Munich:  Dulles'  latest  speech  on  the  impos-
sibility   of  co-existence   "between   freedom   and   despotism"
will  recall   to  many  persons  his  readiness  to  co-exist  with
Axis despotism  before  the  war.   But  few  know  that  his com-
rade-in-arms   Knowland  was  also  an  "appeaser"  vis  a  vis
Fascism.    The   May    15   issue    of    the   London   Economist
(p.  533)   digs  up  the  editorial  on  Munich  published  by  the
Oakland,  Calif.,   Tribune,  the  Knowland  family  newspaper
which  the  Senator  was  helping  to  run  at  the  time.    The
paper  praised   Chamberlain  for   his  decision  to   meet  with
Hitler  and  a  few  days  later  said,  "To  those  responsible  for
today's  conference  at   Munich   too  much  credit   cannot  be
accorded ... It  may be necessary  for  sacrifices to  be made
in  certain  quarters  but  when  the  alternatives  are  countless
human  lives  and  the  destruction  of  untold  millions  in  prop-'
erty   values,   such   sacrifices  are   worthwhile.    This   is   an
eventful  day  in  world  history."    The  real  question  in  the
minds  of  people  like  Dulles  and  Knowland  is  not   "freedom
or  despotism"  but  revolution  or  counter-revolution,   and  dic-
tatorship  is  acceptable, whether  Hitler's  or  Chiang*s,  as  long
as  it  serves  to  hold  back  revolutionary   change.
Our   Last   Major   Peace   Movement:  By  contrast   the  old
America  First  crowd,  now  reorganized  as  For  America,  is
as  opposed  to a  war  against  communism as  it  was to a  war
against  Fascism.    In  this   it   follows  the   line  of  its   chief
sponsor,  Colonel  McCormick  of  the  Chicago  Tribune.    Since
this   crowd  would  be  McCarthy's   chief   base   in  the   event
of  a  complete  break  with  the  Republican  party   leadership,
and  he  is  out  to  oppose  whatever  Eisenhower  wants,  do  not
exclude the  possibility  that  McCarthy may take  a  demagogic
line  in  opposition  to  intervention  in  Indo-China,  as  he  has
taken  a 100 percent parity line with  the farmers.    McCarthy's
obsession  is  not  communism  but  power.
God  Is  Still  Being  Protected  by  the  FBI: While  an  uproar
from  the  Protestants  forced  McCarthy  (and  later  Velde)  to
drop  J.  B. Matthews, J.  Edgar  Hoover is  still  spreading  the
gospel  according  to  J.  B.   While  Hoover  does  not  take  the
line  that  the  Protestant  churches  are  the  chief   danger,  he
continues  to  picture  (as  in  his  recent   speech  here  to   the
Military  Chaplains  Association)  a  Communist  plot  to   infil-
trate and  take  over  the  churches.   Since  such  plotters  would
hardly  preach  plain  and  simple communism from  the  pulpit,
all  who  preach  the  social  gospel  or  voice a  social  conscience
must  be  suspect.    Conclusion:   The  pulpit  must  be  policed
by  the  FBI  against  dangerous  doctrine  and  dangerous  think-
ing  as  evidence  of  subterranean  conspiracy.
And  Speaking  of  Plots:  The  Jenner  committee  last  week,
opening  a  new  series  of hearings  on the  strategy  and  tactics
of  communism,  put   on  a  prize  witness,  an  anti-Communist
Russian   professor   on  leave   of   absence  from   Georgetown
University   to  organize   underground   struggle  against   the
Soviets.    His  testimony:  that  Moscow  was  plotting  to  drag
the   U.  S.  into  another   Asian  war.     Does  this  mean  that
Dulles,   Nixon,   Knowland  and   Radford   are   Red  plotters,
or  just  dupes?
Why  Excommunicate  A  Blessing  in  Disguise?
A  Glimpse  of the  Real  Italian  Attitude Toward  Communists
All  who  love  Italy,  and  appreciate  the  subtlety  and  kindly
cynicism  of  the  Italian,  will  be  charmed  by  a  dispatch  from
Rome,  "When  Catholics  Turn  Communist,"  published  in  the
May  7  issue  of  the  Catholic weekly,  The  Commonweal.  The
Pope  four  years  ago  issued  a  decree  excommunicating  Com-
munists.    The  dispatch  deals  with  a  report   on  the   results
published  by  "the  venerable fortnightly  of the  Italian  parish
clergy,  La, Palestra  del  Clero."
The  decree   seems  to   have   succeeded  neither   in   driving
Catholics   out  of  the  Communist  party  nor  in  making  them
anti-religious.    The report  shows that  in  the  four  years  since
the   decree   1,626,957   "more   baptized   Italians   have   voted
Communist  or  pro-Communist, which  brings  the  total  number
of  'Catholic  Communists' to  nearly  ten  million"  or  more  than
one-third   the   total   vote  cast.    On  the   other   hand,   "the
amazing   thing—and  this  is   the   difference   between  Italy
and  France—is  that  a  great  proportion  of  the  people  who
regularly  vote  Communist have  proved  (particularly   in  the
countryside)  to  be  as  attached  to  their  religious  traditions
as  to Communism."
"It   is  natural,"   the   report   in   the   Commonweal  says,
"that  the  Italian  parish  clergy  are  most  disturbed  by  this
overlapping  between  Communism and  Catholicism.   But  it  is
asked  if  a  more  rigorous  policy  would  be  of  any  avail.    Is
it   possible  to  treat  approximately  one  out  of  every  three
Italians  as   if  he  were  personally   excommunicated?"
So  Italian  Communists continue to  receive  the   sacraments
and   Italian   anti-Communists,   being   Italians,   are   sharp
enough  to  see  the  advantage  of  having  Communists around.
If  it  were  not  for  the  Communist  danger  the  correspondent
reports,  "Italy  would  not  have  received  half  the  American
aid  which  in  fact  has  been  given."   A  right-wing   cartoonist
in  Rome  "recently  represented  Italy  as  a  machine, fed  with
American  dollars,  producing Communists  who  in  turn  stimu-
late  Uncle  Sam  to  pour  more  dollars  into  the  machine."
That  is  not  the  end of the  covert  blessings  the  Italian  sees
in  the  Red  Menace.   Thanks  to  it,  "one  out  of  every  three
soldiers  is  politically  unreliable."    This  and  "the  number of
Communists  in  the  Italian   factories   and  ministries,  means
that  in  case  of war  the  West  would  use  the  Italian  army  and
Italian  factories  as little  as possible . . . Consequently, unless
Italy  was  to  become  a  theatre  of  war,  which  is  unlikely,  she
would  be  safer  from   destruction   than   she  would  be  if   the
Communists  were  not  there."
So,  according  to  the   Commonweal's  Rome correspondent,
the  Italians  feel  that   the  presence  of  a  large  Communist
minority  serves  to  protect  Italy  from    a.  future  war.    "The
non-Communist  Italians  .  .  .  rightly  refuse  to  call  it  con-
sciously   Machiavellian   policy,  for   it   is   not.   They  simply
consider  it   to  be  luck,  the   luck  which  Italy  has   so  often
had—'la  stellone  d'ltalia,' Italy's big lucky star."   So II  Pape
winks  at  the  padre  and  the  padre  winks  at  his Communist
parishioner  in  this  typically  Italian   tableau.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  «4,  1S54
JENN1NGS   PERKY
Ike  Passes  Political  War  Buck  to  the  Holy  Joes
Despite  the  occasional  envy  of  their  home-keeping  brethren
of  the  cloth,  the  life  of  our  military  chaplains is not  all  inter-
esting   travel  and  soft  billets.     It   has  not   been  made  easier
by  the  President's   recent  injunction   to  them  to  do  a  better
job  of  seeing to  it  that  every  American  soldier  knows what  he
is  fighting  for.  Indeed  it  is  not  beyond  the  mercy  of  under-
standing  to  suppose that  even  after  their  commander-in-chief"s
directive,  and  time  for  prayerful  meditation  upon  it,  the  good
chaplains  may be it  a  loss  as to  just  how  to  proceed.
The   task   laid  out   for   them  in  Mr.  Eisenhower's  address
to  the  22nd  annual  convention  of  their  association  is  specifi-
cally   that  of   instilling  in   the   soldiers   the   religious   values
vital  to   "defend   freedom   against  totalitarianism."     Such  a
ministry  to  soldiers  naturally  would  have  for  aim  the  im-
provement  of  the  fighting  quality  of  the  troops.    It  is  a  job
delegated   in   some  other   modern   armies   to   political com-
missars.    What   must   give  pause  to  our  chaplains  is,  first,
the  necessity  of  selecting  only  those  religious   tenets  which
strengthen   a  man's  spirit   and   arm   for   battle,   since  many
religious   teachings   are  downright    pacifistic,  and, next,  an
inevitable  doubt   as  to   the  practical   merit   of   any   religious
motive as a tactical  support  in  armed  conflict.
In  other  times,  it   is  true,  the   levies  could  be  sent   forth
under  the  Cross  or  the  Crescent  with  the  cry  "In   this  sign
conquer!"  and  great  deeds  of  valor  were  done  both  by   the
true   believers  and  the  dogs  of   infidels,  and  great   loot   was
taken.    But  in  warfare  in  our  day  the  tough  admonitions  of
the  sergeant  rather  than  the  counsels  of  the  clergy  seem  to
steel  the  recruit.    And  at  Dien  Bien  Phu,  now  gazetted   for
glory,   the   heroic   tenacity   of   a   mixed   garrison   composed
largely  of  Foreign  Legion  adventurers  of   all  faiths  and   no
faiths   admittedly  was  due   to   two   quite  secular  factors—
discipline  and  desperation.    Gen.  de  Castries'  last  report  was
to  his  commanding  superior,  his  last  salute  "Vive  la  France."
The  nameless soldiers  who fought  to  the  end  with  "matchless
courage"  could  have  done  no  more  for  lofty  ideals  than  they
did  in  the  wan  hope  of  keeping  their  heads  alive  upon  their
shoulders.
Considering   the   forces   whose  military   effectiveness   was
exemplified   at   Dien   Bien  Phu, our   chaplains   well   may   be
disturbed   by   the   reflection   that   the   other   side,   with   or
without   benefit  of  clergy   (and  without  a  plane  to  cover  its
.  heads)   fought   bravely  too: and   that   in   all  wars  one  side
as  much  as  the  other  will  be  convinced  that  its  cause  is  the
just.
These  things  cancel.    The  chaplains  are  of  course  part  of
the   armies   whose   uniform   they   wear,   and   as  adequately
imbued  with  patriotic  bias  as  their  fellow  officers.    They  do
not  have  to  be  told  to  preach  crusades  any  more  than  they
have  to  be  told  that  if  they  should  perchance  so yield  to  the
promptings  of  conscience  as  to  dwell on  those  religious values
vital  to   defend   mankind  against  all  thought   of  war, they
would  not  long  continue  in  uniform  and  rank.
They  have  a  proper  function   in  the  camps  and  behind  the
battle  lines—consolation, whenever it  will  be received.   When-
ever  they   become  propagandists,  they  are  apt   to   place .the
dieties  they  serve  in  very embarrassing situations.    "Gott  mit
uns"  is  a  dangerous doctrine.    It  has  not  been  long  since,  in
our  own  land,  partisan  clergy  devoutly   blessed  one   section
and  damned another  . . .  Which  no doubt  is why my veteran
grandfather,   in   his  age, preferred   Kipling   to   Beecher   and
nodded  knowing  assent  to  Fuzzy-Wuzzy  the  "pore  benighted
heathen,  but  a  first  class fighting man."
Wanted
One   thousand  more  readers  before   summer  sets  in.
Will  you  help   by  renewing   now  if  you  have   not  yet
done  so or  by  sending  a  gift  subscription  to  a   friend?
—I.  F.  Stone
Why  Not  Send  a  Gift   Su6  Now?
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  soi  E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. c.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed $5:
Name   ___—__._.____________________
Street    __..__..__.___._______________________
City____________  Zone___  State______
Enter  this gift  sab  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name   __.__________________________
Street._._______________________________________
City_____________   Zone____  State.
6-24-14
I.  F. Stone'.  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington 3, D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED