I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jan02.pdf

============================================================

What  About The  Doctors'  Plot  Now That  Beria  Is  Dead?   See Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   1,  NUMBER  48
JANUARY  2,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Outlook  for  1954:  Precarious,  But  Peace
The  most  important  event  of  1953 was  the  announcement
in  August  that  the  Soviet  had  the  H-bomb.   The  effect  was
to  give the  Soviet  Union  technological  equality  in  war-making
with  the  United  States,  and  to  underscore  the  fact  that  the
two  great  powers  were  now  so evenly  matched  with  weapons
of  such  transcendent  destructiveness  as  to  make  co-existence,
settlement  and  peace a mutual  necessity.
Ranking  next  to  it,  though  much  farther  down  in  the  his-
toric  scale,  was  the  return  to  power  of  the  Republican  party
in   the   United   States.    This   brought   to   ascendancy   those
spokesmen  for  the financial community  who fear  the  garrison
State  as an entering  wedge for  socialism  (see,  for  example,  the
leading  article  in  Barron's  for  November   16,  "Nose  in   the
Tent—Defense  Plans  Hide  a  Lot  of  Socialism"),  who  want
above  all  a  balanced  budget  and  a  return  to  fiscal  conserva-
tism.  They  realize that  this  can be achieved only  by  reduction
of  the  military  establishment  and  relaxation  of  tension.   The
Korean  truce  in  July  was the  first  major  achievement  of  these
"Wall  Streeters"—achieved  against  the  opposition  of  the  mili-
tary,  and the  China  Lobby,  with  its McCarthyite  puppets.
The  combination of  Soviet strength and  conservative long-
ing  for  "sound  money"  has  led  to  some extraordinary  devel-
opments.   In   September,   on  his  return   from  abroad,  Adlai
Stevenson  seemed  politically  foolhardy  when  he  suggested  in
an  interview  with  Newsweek  that  we must  co-exist  with  the
new  China.   But  two  days after  Christmas,  Drew  Pearson  re-
ported  an  interview  with  former  President  Hoover  in  which
the  latter  said  we could  not  go on  "forever  ignoring  Commu-
nist  China"  and  expressed  the  opinion  that  as business contin-
ued  to  fall  off  there  would  be  an  increased  demand  for  trade
with  it.   Hoover   added  that  he  considered   Syngman  Rhee  a
"menace"—a remark Hearst's New  York  Daily  Mirror  dropped
from  the  Pearson  column.
As striking  are the  views unexpectedly  expressed in  Cottier's
for  January 8 by Senator H.  Styles Bridges of  New  Hampshire,
another  member  of  the  Old  Guard,  who  is  president  pro  tern
of   the  Senate  and  chairnTan  of  its  powerful  Appropriations
Committee.   The   Bridges  article  is  called  "Where   Do  You
Stand  on  the  Gravest  Question  of  Our  Time?"  Bridges  asks,
"Should  we  fence  ourselves  in  with  radar  and  rocket?    Or
concentrate  on  the  world's  mightiest   retaliatory  force,  as  a
deterrent?   Or  prepare  for  all eventualities?   If  not,"  he  adds,
"there's  a fourth  choice—which  nobody  likes  to  mention."  It
turns  out  that  the  fourth  choice  is co-existence.
The  Senator does not  commit  himself.  "I  know  no one,"  he
writes,  "willing  to  step  up  and  be  as forthright  politically as
some  are  privately,"  but   a  certain  "they"  believe  the  U.  S.
"must  acknowledge  that  when two  major  powers have hydro-
gen  weapons,  recourse to  war  is out, whatever the    differences."
Coming  from  a  Senator  who  in  the  past  has  often  been  allied
with  the  China  Lobby,  this—guarded  though  it  be—is  sensa-
tional.   How  welcome  too  is  the  Senator's  remark  in  passing,
"The  truth  of  the  matter  is that  many  responsible  leaders  are
tired  of  panic  arguments!"
Against  this background it  is  easier  to  understand the  deci-
sion  to  withdraw   two  divisions  from  Korea  and  the   "new
look"  military  plans  in  which  the  Army  and  Navy  are  to  be
reduced  and  the  air  force  increased.   This  is  disentanglement,
a  signal  to  Communist  China  that  while  no  solution  to  the
Korean  question  can  be  found  which  will  satisfy  either  side,
the  status  quo  may  be  stabilized  and  tension  relaxed  by  slow
mutual  withdrawal from  the  Peninsula.   The  sour  reactions  of
Rhee,  General  Maxwell  D.  Taylor  and  David  Lawrence  are
music  to  the  ears of  all  who  desire  peace.
In  this  connection  it  is useful  to  call attention  to a dispatch
published  by  the  Sunday  Times of  London  (Dec.  20)  from  its
well-informed  Tokyo  correspondent,  Richard  Hughes.  Hughes
reported  that  the  State  Department  "with  the  concurrence  of
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff",  (ours  is  a  government   of  almost
independent  feudal  style  principalities),  vetoed   plans  for  an
alliance  between  Chiang  Kai-shek   and  Syngman  Rhee  just
before  the  latter's  trip  to  Formosa  and  "firmly   rejected  pro-
posals by Chiang  and  Rhee that  the  Chinese  Nationalist  troops
be  allowed  to  use South  Korean  bases for  raids  on  the  Chinese
mainland."
In  this  context,  is  there  some  hope  of  agreement  between
U.  S. and  U.  S.  S. R.  on  control  of  atomic  weapons?  At   first
glance,  the  "new  look" strategy  would  seem  to  be in  the way
—the  idea  is  to  save  money  on  manpower  by  relying  on  the
deterrent  fear  of  atom-armed planes, an attractive solution  for
an  unwarlike  people  casting  about  for  easy pushbutton  meth-
ods  to  establish  a  pax  americana.   But  it  is  interesting  to see
that  while  the  Chicago  Tribune  last  week  hailed  the   "new
look" as an  acceptance  by  Eisenhower  of  Taft-Hoover  defense
views,  it   also  suggested   in  a  Christmas  Day  editorial   that
"realization  on  both  sides"  of  how destructive  the  new  bombs
are "may  lead in the long run  to a prohibition  of such weapons"
and  suggesting that  the U. S. would regain  the  advantage of  its
"impressive  industrial  superiority"  if  the  possibility of  atomic
attack were  eliminated.
The Russians, after  their first angry reaction  to Elsenhower's
proposals, were shrewd enough to  change their  tune and tactic.
The  Eisenhower  "atomic  pool"  plan  is a glittering  bauble  but
will serve a useful  purpose if  it  leads to  confidential  talks.  The
obstacles to peace are great; its enemies are desperate.   Germany
seems  as  insoluble  a  problem  as  Korea,  given  the  attitudes  of
U.  S.,  U.  S. S. R.  and  their  respective satellies.  But  peace  does
seem  to  be  breaking out.   This  is the  happy  tidings  for   1954.
,1  9  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  t, 1854
Has  the  Soviet  Secret  Police  Always  Been  Run by  Traitors?
Some  Unanswered  Questions  in  the  Beria  Case
Yagoda,  head  of  the  Soviet  secret  police  in  the  30'a,  the
man  who staged  the  great  show  trials,  was  himself  brought
to trial and  executed  (in  March,  1938)  as a lifelong  agent of
foreign  intelligence  services.  Yezhov, his  successor, who pre-
pared   Yagoda  for  trial,  was  later  executed  on  the   same
charges.  He  was  succeeded in  1939  by  Beria  and  now  Beria,
too,  has  been  executed  as  a  foreign  agent.  Thus,  if  Moscow
is  to  be  believed,  the  successive  heads  of  the  Soviet  secret
police  in  the  last  two  decades,  have been traitors  and  foreign
spies.   The  question  then   arises—were  the   many   famous
Russians  they  purged  and  prosecuted  the  victims  of  foreign-
directed   deviltry?
The  premise  once accepted,  stranger  questions  follow.   The
Soviet  war  effort  was  managed  by a  State  Defense  Commit-
tee  of five men:  Stalin, Molotov, Voroshilov, Beria  and  Malen-
kov.  Beria  was  in  charge  of  domestic  policy.   How  did  the
Soviets manage to  survive  the  war  if  the  director  of the  home
front  was a foreign  agent?
Is  Malenkov  Also  Tainted?
Were  Stalin,  Molotov  and  Malenkov also  tainted?   It  was
' Stalin,  a  fellow  Georgian,  who  gave  such  sweeping  power
to  the  Georgian  traitor,  Beria.   Molotov's  right  hand  man in
the  Foreign  Office  all through  the war was Dekanozov, another
of  the  Georgians  executed  as  a  traitor  with  Beria.   And who
nominated  Malenkov  to  be  head  of  the  Soviet  government
after  Stalin  died?  That  same  foreign  agent,  Beria.
A  Swing  Back to  Repression?
Twice,  in  1939  and  in  1953,  Beria's  accession  to  power  as
head  of  the  secret  police,  was  followed  by  events  which  re-
laxed  the  terror.   His  assignment  in  1939  was to  "purge  the
purgers"—five  important  NKVD officials  in the Ukraine  were
tried  and  executed  for  criminal  abuse of their  powers   Many
persons  were  released  from  jail  and  rehabilitated  on  the
ground  that  there  had  been  "a  deplorable  misunderstanding"
—the  phrase  was  standard.    Beria  made  a  speech  at  the
Communist  party  Congress  in  March,  1939,  in  which  he  at-
tacked  the  tendency to  blame failures  in the  economic sphere
on  "hostile and  disruptive forces"  instead  of on poor manage-
ment.
This  year,  too,  Beria's  accession  to  control  of  the   secret
police  was  followed  by  reforms.   On  March  27  a  decree  was
issued  providing  an  amnesty  for  many  kinds  of   prisoners,
including  all  women  with  children  under  ten  years  of  age,
pregnant  women  and  young  persons  under  18  (in  itself   no
flattering  sidelight  on  the  Soviet  penal  system).   A  revision
of   the   criminal   code  was   promised  which  would  abolish
criminal  responsibility   for  certain   types  of  malfeasance  in
farm  and  factory  work  and  management—a  reform  which
recalls  the  1939  speech  by  Beria.
This  was  followed on April 3 by the  sensational  announce-
ment  reversing  the  previous  verdict  in  the  "doctors'  plot,"
asserting that  the  supposed confessions had  been  obtained by
illegal   means  and  declaring  that  the  secret   police  officials
responsible  were  to  be  punished.   Pravda  underscored  the
significance  of  this  by  concluding, "Every  worker,  every  col-
lective farmer,  every  member of  the  intelligentsia,  can  work
safely  and  without  fear  that  his  civic  rights  are  guarded."
Four months  later, on July  9, Beria  fell  from  power.
What  Happened  to  Reform of  the  Criminal Code?
When  the  amnesty  decree was  announced on March 27,  the
Ministry  of Justice  was "instructed  to draft  appropriate  pro-
posals" for  the  reform  of  the  criminal  code and  submit  them
to the  Council of Ministers  and the  Presidium  of the  Supreme
Soviet  within  a  month.   Nothing more has  been  heard  of  the
promised  reform.
What  Now  in The  Case of  The  Doctors?
Most  of  the  doctors  whom  Beria  cleared  were  Jews;   the
American  Joint  Distribution  Committee,  an  American Jewish
organization,  had  been  accused in  January  of directing  these
doctors  to  poison  high   officials   of  the   Soviet  government.
In  reversing  that  decision  and  punishing  those  responsible,
was Beria  acting  as a foreign agent? Was the charge  he made
merely  a'frame-up  of  innocent  secret  police  agents?
The  Soviet communiques, as  usual,  cast  little light  on  these
real  questions.   Pravda last  July  in  announcing his  removal
and  arrest  said  "Being  obliged  to  carry  out  the  instructions
of  the  central  committee  of  the  CPSU  and  the  Government
with  respect  to  strengthening  Soviet  law  and  ending certain
instances   of  lawlessness  and  arbitrary   action,   Beria   de-
liberately  hindered the carrying  out of these instructions  . .."
Just  how he  hindered  them  was  not  specified.
This  sounds  as  if  the  reversal  of  the   doctors'  plot  was
carried  out  on  orders.   But  Pravda  on  December  17,  in  an-
nouncing  that  Beria  was  to  be  tried  for  treason  under  the
Kirov  law,  said  he  and  his  fellow  "conspirators  were  per-
secuting  and  harassing  honest  workers  of  the  Ministry  of
Internal  Affairs  who refused to carry out the  criminal  orders
of  Beria."   This  begins  to  sound differently.
Pravda  also  said  on  December  17,  "Beria  had  chosen  as
his  main  method  slander,  intrigue  and  various  provocations
against   honest  Party  and  government  workers  who  stood
in the way of his designs ..."  Was the April  announcement
on  the  "doctors' plot," then,  only "slander" of  honest  govern-
ment  workers?   This  question,  too,  is  left  unanswered.   One
tantalizing   detail  underscores  the  question.    The  Marshal
Koniev who presided at  the  Beria trial was  one of those whom
the  doctors  were  accused of  trying  to  poison!
Reversion  to Demonology?
The   Pravda-   announcement   last  July   said   "irrefutable
facts"   proved  that  Beria  had  "ceased  to  be  a  Communist,
that  h»  has  developed  into  a  bourgeois  renegade,"  and  that
he  was  guilty  of  attempting  to  substitute   "in  place  of  the
party's  policy  worked out  over  many  years,  a  policy  of  capi-
tulation  which,  in  the  final  analysis,  would  have  led  to  the
restoration   of   Capitalism."
This  seems  to  reflect  a  bitter  dispute  over  policy.   Beria
seems  to  have  been  associated  with  a  more  "liberal"  point
of  view  on  personal  rights  and   on  the  rights  of   national
minorities.   The  phrasing  seems  the  echo  of  a  real  debate,
not  an  exercise in  demonology.
There is a  different  tone in the  Pravda  article of December
17.    This  no  longer  speaks  of  policies  which  "in  the   final
analysis"  would  lead  to  the  restoration   of  capitalism.    All
is  now gross  and  melodramatic.   Beria  was  a  foreign  agent
from  the early  20's and tried  to place the  Ministry of Internal
Affairs  "above the Party and the  Government, with the objec-
tive  of  restoring  capitalism  and  re-establishing  the  rule  of
the  bourgeoisie."    (Where was  Beria'going  to  get  the  bour-
geoisie  to  restore?    From  the  nearest cemetery?)
A  Few  "Bourgeois"  Reforms  Would  Help
The  Soviet  government  owes  world  public  opinion  an  ex-
planation  of  where the  case  of  the  doctors  stands  now that
the  man who exposed it  as  a  frame-up  and  a fraud  has been
executed.
A  government which  periodically discovers that  the  heads
of  its  secret  police are  monsters is badly in  need  of  "bourgeois
style"  reforms  to  protect  its  citizens.
If   these  were  the  kind  of  reforms  Beria  was  trying  to
effect,  his  execution  is  a  setback   for  the  hopes  of  a  more
moderate  regime  in  the  Soviet  Union.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  S, 1954
I.  F. Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  list  two  week)  of  August  at  Room  201,  J01
E.  Capitol  St., S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere   in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  $10   by   1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single   copy,   15  cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered   at   Second   Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
January  2,  1954
Vol.  1,  No.  48
Once  Lightly  Round
The  Three  C's—Minus Two of  Them.   We note  the  celerity
with  which  the  Republican  "new  look"  NLRB  intervened  to
give  the  racket-ridden  ILA  the  quick  waterfront  election   it
wanted  in  New York.   The  Republicans were  going  to  clean
up  "Crime,  Corruption  and  Communism" but  not,  it  appears,
when  crime  and  corruption  are  linked  with  big  business  and
useful  politically.   No  doubt  we  shall  soon  be  reading  a  red
hot  column  on  this  theme  by  Westbrook  Pegler,  our  leading
crusader  against labor corruption,  probably tracing the  Eisen-
hower  Administration's   lapse  directly  to  the   dastardly  in-
fluence  of  Mrs. Roosevelt.
Good  News,  If  True,  Dept:    Business  Week  (Dec. 26)  re-
ports  from  Washington,  "Immunity  for  witnesses  .who  tell
of   their   subversive   activities   won't   be   voted.    Congress
doesn't  like  deals  between  government  and  suspects.    Evi-
dence obtained by wire-tapping  isn't likely to be  O.K.'d  either.
Many  Congressmen are  lawyers.   They see this as  an invasion
of   liberties."
Revising  The  King  James  Version  to  Fit  The  Cold  War.
The  Washington  Post  celebrated  Christmas  with  an  editorial
learnedly  discussing  the   original   Greek  text  of  "peace  on
earth,  good  will  toward  men"  and  suggesting  that  it  means
only good will toward those men who are  already  ("eudoxias")
well-disposed.  To  keep  the  text  consistent  and  (up-to-date)
we  suggest  a  similar  passage  be revised  to  read,  "Love  thine
enemy,  but  only  after  he  has  been  vaporized."  (And just  to
make  Ike's  Attorney  General  more  comfortable  at  church,
why  not,  "Blessed  are the  persecutors  .  .  .  "?)
Soliciting  Insurance,  Not  Secrets:    The  real  soory  about
Harry  Hyman that  "balky  witness" of McCarthy's  who made
"400  to  600" telephone  calls  in  the  last  two  years  to  various
defense  installations  is  that  he  was  soliciting  life  insurance,
not  secrets.    Hyman  is  one  of  the  country's   top  insurance
agents  and  is  said  to  have  sold  about  $1,000,000  worth  last
year  alone.
"Jenner  Says  Soviet  Still  Has  25  Spy  Rings  in  the  U.S."
Our  own oujia  board  tells  us  23.
The  Advance  of Piety:   Catholic  priests have  been granted
two hours a week to  teach the  catechism  in  the  public schools
of  Formosa,  according  to  the  Rev.  Louis  J.  Dowd,  a  Jesuit
missionary  expelled  from  China  by  the  Communists in   1951.
Father  Dowd  told  the  Sodality  of  Our  Lady  at  Georgetown
University  the  State  Department  is  completely  "befuddled"
because it does not realize that "communism is not a flesh-and-
blood organization ... the power we are fighting is the devil."
Now  that  we  have  the  enemy  spotted,  perhaps  we  ought  to
extend  the  Point  Four  program  to  hell.
The  Oder-Neisse, The  Vatican and  The  Shadow  of  A  New
Rapallo: In an interview with Claude Bourdet's L'Observatewr
(Dec. 17), M. Andre Denis, the  one Catholic (M.R.P.)  member
of  the  French  parliamentary  delegation  which  just  visited
Poland  says  the  Vatican's  refusal  to  nominate  Bishops  for
the  new  Oder-Neisse territory  of  Poland  provoked  an  out-
burst   of  ill-feeling  "among  those   elements  of   the   regime
which  had  banked  on  collaboration  with  the-Church."   Mr.
Denis  said  all  sectors  of  Polish opinion,  at  home  and abroad,
are  agreed on the  necessity  of  retaining  the  Oder-Neisse  ter-
ritory  to give Poland the  economic  resources  and access  to  the
Baltic  essential  to  a  balanced  economy.   "It  seems  to  me,'
M.  Denis  said,  "that  they  also fear, without wishing  to avow
it,  that  confronted by a  rearmed Western  Germany  the  Rus-
sians—to  save the  peace and as  the  price of  a  new  Rapallo—
might  consider  a  deal  with  Germany on  these  territories  at
the  expense of Poland ..."
The  Plot  Thickens:  Henry Wallace  in a letter  to  UJ3.  Newt
and  World  Report  (Dec. 4)  protests that Harold Ware (whom
the  Jenner  committee report  describes  as  the  original  organ-
izer  of the  first  Communist cell  in the  government)  was  never
employed by the  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture or  the  AAA
while  Wallace  was  Secretary.    "His   service  to  the  Depart-
ment,"  Wallace  writes,  "was  while  Hyde  was  Secretary  of
Agriculture  and Hoover was  President."
Comrade  Aldrich  Among  Them:  And  the  labor  economist,
T.  Balogh,  in  a  letter  to  the  London  New  Statesman  and
Nation  (Nov. 28)  suggests that  Harry  D. White's  support of
the  drive for  convertability  of sterling  at  Bretton  Woods was
a  Communist plot.  If  a  desire  to  achieve  convertability  of
sterling  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  war  was  proof  of  you-
know-what, the  whole of  Wall  Street  from  Winthrop  Aldrich
down  must  have  been  Marxist.
Will the  FBI  Please Check Mark Twain's File Right Away?
The  first  Marine  from  the  Washington,  D.C.,  area  to  return
from  captivity  in  Korea, describes  a friend  of his  who  elected
to  stay  with the  Communists:  "He  was  soft-spoken  and  very
religious.    He  was  the  kind  who'd  read  anything  he  could
get  his  hands  on.   But  all  they  gave  him  was  Communist
propaganda  and  stuff  that was  always  about  the  poor  people,
the   Negro  situation   and  racial  discrimination.     They  had
Howard  Fast  and Mark Twain."
Recommended:   For  the  light  it  throws  on  much  that  is
happening  today  and  as  the  engrossing  story  of  one  of  the
bravest   American  journalists  of  our  time,  George   Seldes's
memoirs, "Tell  The  Truth  and Bun"  (Greenberg:  $3.75);  for
the   urbane  reflections   and  penetrating   observations   of  a
Socialist  scholar  in  a  vanishing  tradition, 'Paul  M.  Sweezy's
collected  essays, "The Present As  History"   (Monthly  Review:
$5);  and for  sheer  engrossing  adventure,  physical  and spirit-
ual,  "Vagrant  Viking,"  the  autobiography  of  a  great  Danish
explorer  and  newspaperman,  Peter  Freuchen  (Messner:  $5).
Best  Reporting of  the  Year: Murray  Marder's  coverage  of
the  McCarthy  circus  at  Fort  Monmouth  for  the  Washington
Post.
Our  Annual  Silly Ass  Award:   To Rebecca West for  nomi-
nating   Whittaker   Chambers'8   Witness   as   book-of-the-year
"because   it   followed   the   great   Anglo-Saxon  tradition  of
illuminated  dissent."
JUST   LIKE  PORNOGRAPHY  . . .
One  of  our Washington   news  stand  dealers  tells  us that  we  have  a  lot  of  "free  riders"  in  the  capital—readers  who
come  along  in the  evening  and  in the  light  of the  shop window  next  door  stop  and  furtively  read  the  Weekly  on  the  stand,
peeping   through   its  political  heresies  as  other  readers  do  the  disrobed  girls  in  the  "art"  magazines.   Unlike  the  haunted
government  employes  of  Washington,  you  need  not  be  a  political  peeping  torn.   Keep  the  bare  truth  coming  to  your  door
by  renewing  your  subscription  on the  reverse page—and  send  a  gift  sub to a  friend  if  you  can.
I.  F.  STONE
3  *
•1  9  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  g,  1SS4
Any
"Subversion" In  This Picture Is BrownelFs
Originally   the  Attorney   General's  list  of  "subversive"  or-
ganizations was a secret  list  for  the  guidance of  administrators
in adjudging "loyalty".  At  least it  did not  affect  persons  out-
side  the  Federal  government.   Under  Tom  Clark,  the  list  was
made  public  and  began  to  cast  a  shadow  on  basic  rights  of
association  and  assembly.  A  broader  purpose  is  avowed  in
Attorney  General  Brownell's  complaint  against  the  National
Lawyers  Guild.  Listing,  it  is  there  stated,  "makes  it  possible
for  uninformed  loyal  citizens  to  disassociate  themselves  from
such  groups at  the  earliest  possible moment."
Thus  this  becomes  a  means  of  breaking  up  organizations
by  government  blacklist.   The  listing  derives  from  an  execu-
tive  order,  not  a  statute,  and  the  standard—"subversive"—
is undefined,  if  not  undefinable.   Only  one thing  is clear.   The
standard  has  to  do  with  ideas  alone.   The  National  Lawyers
Guild  complains in  the  application  for  an  injunction,  rejected
here  last  week by  Federal Judge  Keech, "there is no  suggestion
anywhere  that  plaintiff  at  any  time  participated  in  any illegal
action or  even in  the  advocacy of  any prohibited  doctrine."
The  determination, until now, has been made without  notice
or  hearing.   As  a  result  of   the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
the  Joint  Anti-Fascist  Refugee   Case  (341  U.S. 123) it  be-
came clear that such procedure would be regarded as of  dubious
legality.  But  the  National  Lawyers Guild  case shows that  any
change  since  has  been  of  form  alone.   As  pointed  out  in  the
Weekly  at  the  time  (see No.  31,  September  5),  the  Attorney
General  first  announced  an  unfavorable  verdict   against   the
Guild   (in  a  speech  to  the  rival  American  Bar  Association)
and  then  gave it  notice  and  a  chance to  ask  for  a  hearing.
An  examination of  the  new  Brownell  regulation  will  show
how  inadequate is  the  notice  and  hearing  provided.   The  or-
ganization  must  file  notice  within  ten  days  or  be held  to  have
acquiesced  in  the  designation as subversive.  Within  sixty  days
after  an  appeal,  the  Attorney  General  supplies  "a  statement
of  the  grounds"  and "written  interrogatories."
The  hearing  procedure  is  peculiar.   The  hearing  board  or
officer  may  decide to  conduct  it  without  taking any evidence,
relying  instead  on  the  written  interrogatories.  The  Attorney
General,  on  the  other  hand,  may  introduce  evidence  "at  his
election."  "The ordinary  rules  of  evidence  need  not  be  ad-
hered  to"  and  the  Attorney  General  may  submit  his evidence
"in  summary form  or  otherwise,  without  requiring  disclosure
of  classified  security  information  or  the  identity  of  confiden-
tial  informants."  If  witnesses  are heard,  they  "shall  be  subject
to   cross-examination,   provided   that   no   witness  on  behalf
of  the  government  shall  be  required  to  disclose  classified  se-
curity  information or the identity  of  confidential informants."
The   interrogatories   submitted   to   the   Guild   show  how
hazardous  is the  path  to  this  Star  Chamber style  court.   Sixty-
sixty  interrogatories  were sent  the  Guild,  some so voluminous
and  covering  events  so far  back  that  it  is difficult  to  see how
they  could be answered in  the 60-day limit  set by  the  Attorney
General's  order.   Interrogatory   No.  50  asks  (a)   whether  the
Guild  knows  or  has  any  reason  to  believe  "that  any  of  the
present  or  past  members of  any  branch,  local,  club  or  chapter
of  the  NLG is now or ever has been" a Communist  and  (b)  if
so,  to  identify  them.   No.  50  asks  whether  any  branch  ever
provided   information  to  any  Communist   publication.    Ap-
pended  to  the  interrogatories  is a notice  that  any  false  reply  is
punishable  by  $10,000 fine or five years in  jail or  both.
The  interrogatories  vividly  illustrate  the  dangers  to  radical
and  non-conformist  opinion.   Has  the  Guild  opposed  universal
military  training  since  1948?  Why  didn't  the  Guild   support
the  UN   action   against  North  Korea  until  two  and  a  half
months after  the war  broke out?  What  position  did the  Guild
take  on  the  Mindszenty   case?   On   expropriation   of   oil  in
Mexico?   On  admission of  Red  China  to  the  United  Nations?
On  atomic  energy  control,  the  FBI,  the  Smith  Act  and  the
non-Communist   oath  requirement  of  the  Taft-Hartley  Act?
What  has been its  position  on  legalized wire-tapping?   On  the
McCarran  bill  to  compel  testimony  by  granting   immunity
to  witnesses  before  Congressional  committees?
•The  Guild  is  appealing in  its  fight  to  enjoin  the  Attorney
General.   Can  any  lawyer  fail  to  see  how  subversive  of  fair
procedure  and  constitutional   liberty   is  the  conduct  of   the
Attorney  General?  The  measure of  support  mustered  by  the
Guild  will  be  the  measure of  the  extent  to  which  the  bar  has
already  been  cowed  by  him.
Let  Us Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue to  A  Friend—Or,  Better  Yet, Start  A  Gift  Sub  With  This  Issue
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE   RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     .—————————————————————:—————
Street    _______________.—————————————
City____________  Zone..___  State_____
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name   ___________:—————.————:—
Street    ____________—_———————————-
City_Zone___  State.__...... _
1-2-64
I.  F. Stone'5 Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED