I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954mar01.pdf

============================================================

Special  Double Issue:  Bevan  on the  Berlin  Conference,  Lamont  on  the  ACLU
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2,  NUMBER  5  & 6
MARCH  1,  1954>•       WASHINGTON,  D. C.15  CENTS
Mr. Molotov's  Time-Bombs
One  of  the  principal  comments  on  the  Berlin   conference,
repeated   parrot   fashion   in   the  American  press,  is  that   the
parley   served   to   show  that   nothing   has  been   changed   by
the  death  of  Stalin.    There  could  hardly  be  a  sillier observa-
tion.     For   Russia,  the   question   of   German  rearmament  is
fundamental.    Were  Malenkov  to  follow  Stalin  to  the  grave,
were  the  entire  Communist  regime  to  disappear,  were  Keren-
sky or  a Czar  to  return,  Russia  reaction  to  this  question would
be  unaffected.    No  Russian  government  would  relinquish  its
hold  on  one  half  of  Germany  to  permit  its  reunification   and
rearmament  as  part  of  a  hostile  bloc,  knowing  that  the  re-
armed  Reich's  first  demand  would  be  revision  of  its  Eastern
frontiers  at  the  expense  of  territories  now  held  by  Russia  and
Poland.
The  magisterial  Times  of  London  spoke  with  more  objec-
tivity.  "It  is now  clear,"  it  said  on February  19, "that  neither
Russia   nor   the   West   can   agree  to   German  unification  on
terms  compatible with  their  national  interests.    The  linch-pin
of   western  defense—west   German  cooperation—remains   the
hard  core  of  Russian  fears;  and  the  main  western  anxiety—
Russian   armies  in  the   heart   of  Europe—is,  in   the   Russian
view,  the  indispensable condition  of  Soviet  security.    In   the
state  of  the  world  today,  neither  fear   can  be  discounted  as
mere  propaganda."     Few  American  newspapers  would  have
the  capacity,  fewer  still  the  courage,  for  so impartial  a  state-
ment.    Its  expression by  Britain's  leading newspaper is,  how-
ever,  no  accident.   On  the  contrary,  the  complacent  tone  and
detached   analysis  reflect  Britain's  own  position,  which  is  to
try   and  make  the  best  of  two  possible  worlds,  to  enjoy  the
financial  benefits of  a  close entente with  the  U.S.  while striv-
ing  to  enlarge  its  trade  with  the  U.S.S.R.
A  Treacherous  "Linch-Pin"
It  is  this  which  explains the  readiness  to  fall  in  with  some
dubious   propositions.     The   notion   that   "the   linch-pin   of
Western   defense"   is  the   rearmament   of   Western   Germany
panders  to  a  cliche  of  American  politics.   It  cannot  be recon-
ciled  with   political   reality.     When   Acheson   and  Adenauer
sprang  this  idea  on  Bevin  and  Schuman  in  the  Fall  of  1950,
they  had  great  difficulty   in  selling  it.    There  was  then  one
good   military   argument   for  it.     Were   the  Korean   war  to
expand  into  a  world   war,   as  then   seemed   possible,  it   was
important   to   confront   Russia   in   the  West  with    German
forces.    It  was the  logic  of  the  Korean  war  which  alone made
West  German  rearmament  at  all palatable,  and  it  is the  ending
of  the  war—and  not  some  magic  spell  laid  on  by  Moscow—
which  has  done  more  than  anything   else  to  take  the  steam
out  of  E.D.C.
While  the  ending  of  the  war  has  shown  that  the   Soviet
bloc  is  in  no  mood  for  risky  political  or  military  adventures,
the  German  question  bristles  with  dangers.    No  peace  treaty
can  be  signed  without   tackling  the  question   of  the   eastern
frontiers;   the   stronger   Germany   becomes   the   greater   the
demands  it  will  make;  a "united  Europe" must  either  support
those  demands  or  break  with  Germany;  to  break  with   Ger-
many  would  risk  another  and  more  dangerous  version  of  the
tactic  Germany  pursued  at  Rapallo and  again with  the  Nazi-
Soviet  Pact.    Germany  would  become  the  arbiter  of   Europe.
Once  united,  it   cannot   be  kept  from   rearming.    Once  re-
armed,  it  cannot  be  kept  by  any  device  from  resuming  the
course  natural  to  a centeral power,  i.e.  to  play  one side against
the  other.    No   defense  system  on  either   side  could  have  a
more  treacherous  "linch-pin."  An  unnamed  French  provincial
paper  quoted   by  the  London  Times   (Feb.   20)   said  "it  was
chimerical   to   expect"   that   either   East   or   West   at   Berlin
"would   seriously  envisage  abandoning  their   piece  of   Ger-
many"  and  asked,  "Is  not  our  best  guarantee  of  security  to
be  found  in  this  division  more  than  in  the  juridical  precau-
tions  of  E.D.C.?"    A  majority  of  Frenchmen  would  almost
certainly  agree.
The  Unsigned,  Invisible  but  Potent  Pact
Beneath  the  surface  of  contemporary  politics,  essentials  of
geography  and  strategy—the  essentials  which  drew  Czar  and
Third  Republic  together  in  1894—have  reasserted themselves.
Though  Russia  and  France today  belong  to  hostile blocs,  their
unspoken  cooperation  has  succeeded  for  almost  four  years  in
blocking  German  rearmament.    From  one  point  of  view,  the
French  idea  of  a  European  Army  as  a  means of  rearming  the
Germans without  permitting  the  rebirth  of  the  German  Gen-
eral  Staff  was  a  brilliant  self-deception;   the  German  General
Staff   has  already been  reborn,  and  once  the  Germans  are  re-
armed  no  scrap  of   paper  will  inhibit   them  from  marching
on  their  own  when  they  wish  to  do  so.    But  from   another
point  of  view,  the  E.D.C.  idea  was  an  ingenious  device  for
delaying  a  decision;  Acheson  was  dazzled   by  it,   Adenauer
was  kept  dangling—and  the  debate  in  the  Chamber  of  Depu-
ties  goes  on.    It  will  not  be  speeded by  events  at  Berlin.
American  public  opinion  is poorly  informed  on  Berlin.  This
conference  was  an  example,  not  of  secret  but   of   half-truth
diplomacy,  which  is  considerably  worse.    The  Big  Four  met
behind   closed   doors   and   press   officers    of   each   afterward
"briefed"  his  own  nation's  correspondents.    This  was the  sys-
tem  used  at  Panmunjom.   The  method  encourages  each  par-
ticipant  to  re-arrange  the  liberetto  to  make  himself  the  hero.
What  the  American  people  read  was  not  so  much  the  news
of   the  conference   as  a  "line"  handed  out   each  day  to   the
correspondents.    The  result   is  propaganda,  not   news.    This
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  1,  1954
is  the  system used  at  the  State Department  and  by  the  Depart-
ment's  officers  in  the  corridors  of  the  UN,  but   there  and  in
Washington   are  other   sources   of   information.     In   Berlin,
there  was little  but  this  unnourishing  pap—and  the  bare  text
of  speeches—for  hungry   correspondents   to  feed  upon.
Not  As  Unified  As  They  Seem
The  American   point   of   view  on  international   questions
tends  to  be as simple-minded  and  self-righteous  as the  Russian.
All  the  emphasis  on  "Western  unity"  at  the  conference  gets
in   the  way  of   understanding   what  happened,  because  this
must  begin  with  some  appreciation  of  the  different  approaches
to  the   conference   on  the  part  of  the  British,  French,   and
Germans.  The  British  thought  an  isolated conference on  Ger-
many  bound  to  fail,  and  were  anxious  only  that  it  not  break
up  in  ill-feeling.    The  French   were  chiefly  concerned  with
using  Berlin  as  a  means  of  opening  a  way  to  peace  in  Indo-
China.    The  majority  of  the  Germans  wanted  some  progress
toward  unification  of   their  country.    None  of  our  "allies"
shared  the  main  preoccupation  of  Mr.  Dulles,  which  was  to
demonstrate  as  rapidly  as  possible  that  agreement  could   not
be  reached  and  thus  presumably  speed  ratification  of  E.D.C.
and  West  German  rearmament.   Mr.  Dulles  put  through  his
demonstration   in  one,  two,   three  order,  but   the  result  will
not   be  to   speed  up  his  object   because  British,  French   and
German   reactions   are   as   different   from   his   as   were   their
initial  expectations.
The  rearmament of  Germany  is  Dulles's  great  passion,  but
Western  Europe  feels  no  urgency  about  it.    The  British,  on
his  prodding, will  make a  new  token  payment on  account  to-
ward   E.D.C.   but   their   pledge  of   cooperation  will  not   be
enough  to  satisfy  the  French.    At  the  moment,  in  Egypt  and
Iran   particularly,   Washington   is  a  greater  menace  to   the
Empire  than  Moscow,  and  Britain  has  no  desire  to  sink  into
the  role  of  a  European  power,  linked  uneasily  in  a  European
Army with  the  Germans.   The  improvement  in Mr.  Molotov's
manners  has  been  enough  to  appease  the  British;  if  they  must
haggle  with  the  Russians  they  would  rather  haggle  over  trade
than   the   Oder-Neisse  frontier.    As  for   the  Germans,  they
show  no  great  enthusiasm  for  rearmament.   The  Social  Demo-
crats,  who  would  be  the  strongest  party  in  a  reunited  Reich,
thought   unification  should  have  been  bartered  for   abandon-
ment  of  E.D.C.    Powerful  sections  of  the  British  Labor  and
French    Socialist    parties    agree.    The    special   meeting   of
the  Socialist  International at  Brussels will  see a  strong demand
from  all  three  countries for  postponement  of  German  rearm-
ament  until   the   possibility  of   such   a  deal  has  been  fully
explored.
Trapped  by  His  Own Haste
In  his  haste  to  get  the  Berlin  meeting  over  with  as  quickly
as  possible, Mr.  Dulles  allowed  Mr.  Molotov  to  plant  a  whole
series  of  time  bombs.   The  failure  to  explore  many  questions
fully  will  give Soviet  propaganda an  advantage.   At  one  point
the  Soviet Foreign  Minister offered  the  idea  of  a  plebisicite  in
which   the   Germans  could   choose  between   unification   and
E.D.C.    It  was  quickly  hooted  down,  but  this  will  look  like
an  attractive  proposition  to  many  Germans  in  the  wake  of
a  conference which  leaves the  Reich  divided  indefinitely.    An-
other   example  is   the   unresolved   question   of   the   proposed
European  security  pact  and NATO. Molotov  attacked NATO
but  only  made  the  abandonment  of  the  E.D.C.  (i.e.  German
rearmament)   a  condition   for  the  treaty.    Unofficial  Russian
spokesmen  said  NATO would  not  be  incompatible  with  such
a  treaty.    Whether  real  or  illusory,  the  prospect  of  combining
a  continental  security pact  with Russia and an Atlantic  secur-
ity  pact  with  the  U.S.  will  attract  many West  Europeans and
seem  well worth  the  abandonment  of  so dubious  a  proposition
as  a  rearmed  Germany.
Austria  is  another  example.    Mr.  Dulles  broke  off  negotia-
tions  just  when  they  began  to  seem  promising.     Obviously
the  Russians  will  not  give  up  the  right  to  station  troops  in
Austria  (and  thus  their  right  to  keep  troops  along  the  supply
route  across  satellite  Hungary   and  Rumania)   as  long  as  the
West  has  forward  bases  of  its  own  in  Germany  and  Trieste.
But  Molotov  showed  a  readiness  to  reduce  this  to  token  pro-
portions and to  give Austria more freedom than  before,  though
less  than  full  sovereignity.    Also  unexplored  was  the  Molotov
proposal  for  removing  foreign  troops  from  German  soil,  and
permitting  four  power  supervision  of  the  withdrawal  and  of
the  zonal  police  forces  which  would  maintain  order.    At  any
normal  conference  such  offers   would  have  been  the  spring-
board  of  negotiation.    What  they  reflected  was  simple.    The
Russians  are  unwilling  to  give  up  their  hold  on  Austria  and
East  Germany  but  they  are  willing  to  ease  the  grip  of  occu-
pation  on  both  countries.
Why  They  Were  Unexplored
These  possibilities  were  not  explored  because  relaxation  of
tension  suits   the  interests  of   the  Russians  but   not   of   Mr.
Dulles  and  Herr  Adenauer.    For  it  is  only  by  maintaining
some  sense  of  urgency  and  danger  that  they  can  prevail  on
the  West  Germans to  rearm,  on  the  Americans to  finance  that
rearmament   and  on  the  rest  of  Western  Europe  to  acquiesce
in  it.    In  this  sense,  the  final  decision  of  the  conference  was
a  victory  for  Mr.  Molotov.    The  resumption  of  negotiations
on  Korea, the  opening  of  talks  on  Indo-China,  the  recognition
in  fact  of  Communist  China's  pivotal  position  in  world  poli-
tics—these  must   further   relax   tension   and   make  German
rearmament  seem  all  the  less  urgent.
Why,  then,  did  Mr.  Dulles  agree  to  it?    There  seem  to  be
several  reasons.    One  is  that  the  "liberationist"  views  which
lie  behind  his  anxiety   to   rearm  the   Germans  have   become
anachronistic  in  the  Eisenhower  Administration;   the  budget
cannot  be  balanced  if   tension  increases  and  what   matter   a
few  more  German  divisions  in  the  new  A-bomb  and  H-bomb
strategy?    Another is that  Mr. Dulles  had  no  choice.  Accord-
ing  to  the  French  press,  Mr.  Molotov  in  his  private  conversa-
tions with M. Bidault  had  offered  to  mediate  directly  between
Ho   Chi-minh   and   France.    In   the   Chamber   of   Deputies,
M.   Mendes-France   has  been   arguing   cogently   that   France
would   be  better  off  to   negotiate   directly   than   to  involve
Indo-China  in  the  insoluble  Korean  problem  and  the  political
idiocy  fomented  in  Washington  by  the  China  Lobby.     The
alternative  to   Geneva,  where  Mr.  Dulles  may  still   exercise
some veto  power  over  an Indo-China  settlement,  were separate
negotiations  between  Paris  and Peiping.    It  is this which  must
make  Senator  Knowland's  tantrums  seem so ungrateful  to  the
Secretary  of  State.—I.  F.  S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   March  1,  1S54
Both  Sides  to Blame -  "We  Must Not Despair"
By  Aneurin  Bevan
The  responsibility  for  the  failure  of  the  Berlin  Conference
to  agree  on  a  plan  for  the  future  of  Germany  must  be  shared
equally  by  both  sides.
Neither   side  seemed  to  have  come  to  the  Conference  with
any  disposition  to  make  a  compromise.    Each  merely  repeated
the  position  it  had  previously  taken  up.
Mr.  Molotov  insisted  that  the  Eastern  German  Government
should  rank  in  equal  status  with  that  of  Western   Germany.
For  their   part   the   three  Western   allies  made  it   clear   that
united  Germany  should  be  free  to  join  any  alliance it  chose—
which  the  Russians  know  quite  well  would  mean  a  German
reinforcement  of  NATO.
It  passes  comprehension  that  the  Allies  should  believe  the
Russians  would  agree  to  that.    What  would  they  get  in  re-
turn?    Precisely  nothing.
The  Allies  would  get  the  integration  of  the  whole  of   Ger-
many  into  the  Western   Bloc;  German  ascendancy  would  be
firmly  established in  Western  Europe  and  soon  Russia  would
find  herself  defending her  satellites  against  German  claims  for
a  revision  of  the   frontiers.
Elections  a  Secondary  Issue
Much  was  said  at  the  conference  about  .the  method  of  hold-
ing  elections  and  the  nature  of  the  supervision  of  them.    All
that  is very  important,  of  course, but  it  is of  secondary  signifi-
cance  compared  with  the  main  issue  which  still  remains:  who
is  to  command  Germany's  resources,  and  if  neither  side  is  to
enjoy   them   can   they   both   agree  that   Germany  should   be
neutralized  until  some  future  date?
The  answer  to  that  appears to  be that  the  Western  powers
have  reconciled  themselves  to  the  division  of  Germany.
Judged  from  that  angle  the  Berlin  Conference  was  merely
a  formal  procedure  preliminary  to  the  creation  of  the  twelve
German  military  divisions  upon  which  Foster  Dulles  and  Mr.
Eden  have set  their  hearts.
Or   are  they  still  as  enthusiastic  about  them  as  they  once
were?    Not  long  ago the  twelve  German  divisions were  looked
on  as  absolutely essential  in  order  to  counteract  the  weakness
of   France.
The  United   States  military  advisers  saw  the   problem   in
simple  terms.    France  is  engaged  in  a  wasting  war  in  Indo-
China.    America  supports  her  with  money  and  military  sup-
plies.   This  leaves France  too  weak  to  man  the  Western  wall
in  Europe.
The  solution  to  this  was  to  give  Western  German   permis-
sion  to  create  and  equip  a  limited  army.    France  objected  to
this  on  the  ground  that  it  would  make  Germany  once  again
the  master  of  Western  Europe.    The  United  States,  however,
insisted.
France  was  sore  beset  because  of  the  war   in  Indo-China,
and  her  domestic  economic  problems  made  her  sensitively  de-
pendent  upon  American  financial  aid.   It  was  at   this  point
that  France  made  a  slip.
It  occurred  to  some Frenchmen  that  the  influence  of  a  re-
armed  Germany  might  be  kept  in  check  if  two  things  could
be  accomplished.
First,  the  creation  of  a  European  Defense  Community   in
which  national  military  contributions   could  be  merged.    By
ingenious  arrangements  it  could  be  made  impossible  for  any
one  nation  taking  part  in  this  to  possess  a  completely   auto-
nomous  military  establishment.    Only  the  E.D.C.  as  a  whole
would  be  a  complete  military  unit.
The  United  States  jumped  at  the  suggestion.    This  was  the
birth  of  the  idea  of  E.D.C.  and  it  has  haunted  France   ever
since.
The   second   condition   was  that   Britain   should   agree   to
forming  part  of  it.    In  this  France  was  encouraged  by  some
vague  phrases  of   Sir  Winston  Churchill's.
Britain,  however,  has  never  accepted   this  view.    She  holds
that  her  commitments  are  world-wide  and  that  therefore  she
cannot  tie  down  her  forces  only  in  Europe.
Atomic  Warfare  and  A  German Army
It  may  be that  the  new  conception  of  atom  warfare  which
has  been  developed  in  the  United   States  does  not  now  place
such  an  emphasis  on  German  ground   forces,  although   they
would  still  be  welcome.
The  U.S.A.  values  much  more  the  air  bases  she  enjoys  in
Western   Germany  from  which  she  could  deliver  atom   bombs
in   great   numbers   against  the   Russian  satellites  and  against
Russia  herself.
This  shift  in  the  technique  of  war  has  also  brought  about
new   thoughts   in  Germany  itself.     Obviously   large  ground
forces  are  not   going  to   be  as  important  as  they  once  were
and  this  fact  for  the  time  being  at  least  reduces   Germany's
military  value.   It   also  blunts  the  edge  of  Germany's   eager-
ness  to  rearm.
In  an  atom  war  Germany  would   be  at  the  receiving  end
of  atom  bombs  from  Russia.   With  the  memory  of  saturation
H.E.   bombing  still  vivid  in  German  minds  she  can  hardly be
complacent  about  the  prospect  of  hydrogen  bombs.
It  is therefore  not  surprising  to  find  that  the  German Social
Democrats  are  prepared  to  bargain  a  neutralized  Germany  in
return  for  unity.    It  is true  the  Social  Democratic   leader  did
not  go as far  as that  in  his actual statement,  but  he went  very
near.
He   said  that  Germany   should   be  prepared   to   renounce
E.D.C.  provided  Russia  would  agree  to   free  elections  for   a
united  Germany.   But,  as he is not  a party  to  the  negotiations,
the  views  do  not  prevail.
His  point  of  view  does,  however,  highlight  the  conclusion
that  the  chief  obstacle  to  the  unity  of  Germany  is  simply  the
desire  of   the   Western   powers   to  number   Germany   among
their  military   assets.    It   has  all  along  been  obvious  that  no
solution  of   the  German  problem  could  be  realized  on  these
lines.
Unity  on  the  basis  of  neutrality: that  seems  the  only  way
out.   It  will  be  argued.it  is  not  possible  to  keep  a  nation  of
the  importance of  Germany permanently disarmed.   It  would
inflict  on  her  an  inferior  status which  she  would  resent.
Quite  right,  although  it  would  be  a  little  anodyne  to  her
feelings  that  by  it  she  might  be  exempted  from  the  horrors
of  atom  bombing.    It  is clear  that  a  disarmed Germany  could
be made  tolerable  only  if  it  is regarded  as preparatory  to  gen-
(Continued  on Page  Six)
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'g   Weekly,  March  1,  1354
Corliss  Lament's  Inside  Story After  21 Years . . .
EDITOR'S  NOTE:  In  a "grass  roots" revolt  at  the biennial
conference   of   the  American  Civil  Liberities  Union  in   New
Forfc    City    over    the    Lincoln's    Birthday     week-end,   t he
A.C.L.U.'s  Affiliates    forced  its  National  Board  to  withdraw
proposed  new  statements  of  policy  and  to  aecept  a  substitute
reaffirming      the   organization's    traditional    position.     The
Weekly   last  October 31  exposed  the  internal  fight  within  the
A.C.L.U.  and  in  an  exclusive  article  alerted  many   A.C.L.U.
members  to  what  was  going  on;  that  and  succeeding  articles
in  the  Weekly  were  referred   to  during  debate  at  the   confer-
ence.    Scant  attention  has  been  paid  the  conference   in  the
press.     We   asked   Corliss  Lamont,  retired   from   the  Board
after   21  years,  to  tell  the  story   of  the  internal  fight  within
the  organization  for  our  readers.
Lament's  retirement  and  the  new  members  chosen  by  the
self-perpetuating    Board  of  Directors  do  not  promise  a  mili-
tancy   to  match   the   policy  statement   forced   on  it   by   the
Affiliates.      The  new  members  are  New   York   City  Council-
man  Earl  Brown,  a  Repiiblican;  Lewis  Galantiere,  program
director  of  Radio  Free  Europe;  John  Jessup,   chief   editorial
writer  of  Life   magazine,  and  C.  Dickerman  Williams,   once
assistant  to  Samuel  Seabury   and  a  former   solicitor  of   the
U.  S.  Department   of  Commerce.   In  the  February   22  issue
of    the   ultra-rightist   The   Freeman,   Mr.   Williams'  has   an
article  supporting  "immunity"   legislation  to compel  testimony
before   Congressional  investigating    committees.—I.F.S.
By  Corliss  Lamont
As  one  who  served  on  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Civil
Liberties  Union  from   1932  to  1954  and  participated   actively
in  its  long  drawn  out  debates  on  policy  over  the  past  two
years,  I  feel  concerned  over  the  developments  reported   at
the  Biennial  Conference  of  the  A.C.L.U.    The  basic  question
is  whether  the   determined   stand   of   the   affiliates   at   this
Conference  will  be  sufficient  to  halt  and  reverse  the  growing
tendency  of the  National Board to  inject  irrelevant  Cold  War
considerations  into  decisions  on  fundamental   civil  liberties
issues,  to  compromise  more  and  more  on  the  original   free
speech  principles of  the  A.C.L.U.  and  to  put  across  unsound
policies  by  thwarting  democratic procedures  in  the  organiza-
tion  as  a  whole.
The   Affiliates,   in   all  but   unanimous  revolt   against   the
vacillating   behavior  of  the  Board,  won  a  significant  victory
in  obtaining the  withdrawal  of  three  new  policy  statements
that  undercut  the  traditional   position  of  the   A.C.L.U.  on
civil  liberties.    They  also  recommended the  elimination  of  the
monstrous  provision in  the  A.C.L.U.  By-Laws  permitting  the
Board  of  Directors  to  set  aside  the  results  of  national  refer-
endums  and  to  veto  all  amendments  to  the   by-laws.
In  one  of  the  policy  statements   rejected  by  the   Biennial
Conference  the  Directors  in  effect  threw  overboard  the  Fifth
Amendment's safeguard  against  self-incrimination.  They  dis-
regarded  the  recommendations  of  the  Union's  excellent  Aca-
demic  Freedom  Committee.   The  Committee  wished to  defend
teachers  who on constitutional  grounds  decline to  answer  the
inquisitorial questions of Congressional  Committees.  For  more
than  a  year  the  Board  has  given  the  run-around  to  its  Aca-
demic  Freedom  Committee.    Members  of  this  Committee  in-
clude  such  civil  liberties  stalwarts  as  Arthur  C.  Cole,  Pro-
fessor  of  History  at  Brooklyn  College;  Helen  M.  Lynd,  Pro-
fessor   of   Social   Philosophy   at   Sarah  Lawrence;   Broadus
Mitchell,   Professor   of   Economics  at   Rutgers;   and   H.   H.
Wilson,  Professor  of  Politics  at   Princeton.
In this  same statement  on the Fifth  Amendment the Nation-
al  Board  also  turned  down  the  recommendations  of  its  Spe-
cial  Committee on  International   Civil  Liberties,  of  which  the
moving  spirit  was  Mr.  Roger  N.  Baldwin,  former  executive
director  of  the  A.C.L.U.    This  Committee  had  urged  a  pro-
test  against  investigations  into the  political  beliefs  and  asso-
ciations  of  American  members  of  the  United  Nation  staff  as
inquiries  which  violated  both  the  U.  S.  Constitution  and  the
UN   Charter.
The  A.C.L.U.  and  the  McCarran   Act
Another  of  these  policy  statements  of  the   A.C.L.U.   Na-
tional  Board  compromised the  defense  of  the  Bill  of  Rights
by  a  long,  violent  and  irrelevant  attack  on  the  Communist
Party.   This  embodied the  spirit  of  the  introductory   sections
of  the  Internal   Security   (McCarran)   Act.    This  statement
paves  the  way  for  the  government  to  prosecute  Communist
Party  members under  the  Foreign   Agents  Registration    Act.
It  undermines the  A.C.L.U.'s  formal  opposition  to  the  Smith
Act  and  the  Internal   Security   Act  by  implying  that  most
Communists  are  guilty  of  conspiracy  and  illegal  acts.   It  ex-
tends  the  witch hunt  to  so-called  Communist  fellow-travellers
and  sympathizers  and  it  gives  general  encouragement  to  the
McCarthyism   and   McCarranism   which   mortally   threaten
civil  liberties  today.
Another  fundamental  objection  to  the  statement  on  the
Communist  Party  is  that  it  takes  the  Civil  Liberties  Union
into  a  realm  of  sweeping  judgments  on  domestic  politics  and
international  affairs where  it  has  no business.   The Directors
and   other   officials   of  the   A.C.L.U.   are   not  supposed   to  be
experts    on   international    relations   and   political    systems.
They  are  united  in  the  Civil  Liberties  Union for  the  defense
of  American  civil  liberties.   We  may  hope that  they  possess
some  degree  of  expertness   in  that   field.   But  it  is  not  the
function  of  the  A.C.L.U.  to  describe,  analyze  and  judge  the
inner   nature   of  the   organizations   whose   civil  liberties   it
defends,  any more than  it  is its function  to determine  whether
some individual deprived  of free  speech  has  really been telling
the  full  truth  or  is  faithful  to  his  wife.
What  the  Statement  under  discussion  does  is  to  turn  the
American  Civil  Liberties  Union  from   an  organization   con-
centrating   on  civil  liberties  to  one  engaged   in  the  general
battle  against  world  communism.  It  enlists  the  A-.C.L.U.  in
BEFORE —
Excerpts  from  the  proposed  new  policy  statements  ap-
proved  by  the  National  Board  of  the  ACLU  and   rejected
by  the  Affiliates  at  the  biennial  conference:
".  .  .  But:  (1)  It  is  not  a  violation  of  civil  liberties  to
take  into  account  a  person's  voluntary  choice  of  associa-
tion  when that  choice  is  relevant  to  a  particular  judgment
—providing that  such  a  judgment  is  not  indiscriminate  or
automatic,  but  specific  and  comprehensive  in  weighing  all
relevant  factors  . . . This  is not to condone "guilt  by asso-
ciation"  in  the   reprehensible  sense  of  holding   a  person
guilty  of  believing  or  doing  what  someone else  with whom
he  is  (often  remotely)  connected  believes  or  does.
".  .  .  On the  other  hand,  the  Union  will  continue,  for
example:   (1)  to  recognize  the  indispensability   of  police
measures  to  prevent  and  punish  actual  subversive  acts  at
the  earliest  moment they  can  be identified  as  acts, and  the
necessity in drawing the line of "clear and present danger"
—of   taking  more  factors   into  account  with   respect   to
the  free  speech  of a  secret  conspiratorial  group  aiming  at
sabotage  than  with  respect  to  the  open-air  preaching  of
a  single  anarchist."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  1,  1954
. . . The  "Grass  Roots  Revolt" in The  Civil  Liberties Union
the  Cold  War.   We do not  object  to  militant  anti-Communists
being  officers  of  the  A.C.L.U.    We  must  strenuously   object,
however,  -when  they  attempt  to  make  the  struggle  against
communism  that   organization's    chief   aim   instead   of   the
struggle  for  civil  liberties.    There  are  a  thousand  and  one
other  organizations,  which  anyone  can  join  or  support,  dedi-
cated  to  fighting  communism  and  winning  the   Cold   War.
An  Internal  Filibuster
The  Board  of  Directors   debated   the   three   policy  state-
ments from  December  1952 to June 1953, and kept the national
office   busy  mimeographing  and   distributing   endless   memo-
randa   and   reformulations  during  these   six  months.    The
normal  day-to-day  work  of  Executive   Director,  Patrick  M.
Malin,  and  his  staff  was  seriously  disrupted  during  this  long
period.   And the  Board  itself  became demoralized.   What  the
Cold  War   group  really  did  was  to  conduct  a  six  months'
filibuster  in  which  it  would  not  permit  the  Board  to  carry
on  with  its  regular  business.    Thus  the  large  final  vote  for
the  three  resolutions  was  due  primarily  to  fatigue,  boredom
and  the  feeling  on  the  part  of  many  Directors  that  com-
promise  was  the  only  way  to  make  the   non-stop  talkers
cease  and  desist.
After  the  Board  had  adopted  the  statements,   I  and  nine
other   members   of   the   Corporation    initiated   a   national
A.C.L.U.  vote  on  them  according  to  the  provision  of  the  By-
Laws  providing  for   such  a  referendum  by  petition  of  ten
members.  In   the   first   week  of   September   the   referendum
documents  went  out  to  the  full  Corporation:  the   Directors,
the  members  of  the  National   Committee  and  the   Affiliates.
Some  six  weeks  later  the  referendum   was  concluded  and
Mr.  Malin sent  out  an  official  report, referring  to  October 16
as  "the  deadline."    Much  to  everyone's  surprise  the  negative
had  won  by  a  small  margin.    The  vote  of  the  Affiliates  was
decisive,  13  of  them  having  voted  in  the  negative  and  only
3  of  the  smaller  ones  in  the  affirmative.    Instead  of  accept-
ing  this  democratic  decision, the  Board  group  which had  or-
iginally   forced   through   the  three   statements    immediately
started  maneuvering to  set  aside  the  referendum.
Two weeks later a  report  came  through  from  the  A.C.L.U.
office  that  the  Chicago  Affiliate  had  switched   its  vote  from
negative  to  affirmative  and that  therefore  the  statements  had
been  adopted.    I  objected  to  this  procedure  on  the  ground
that  it  was  improper  to  change  the  ballot  totals  after  the
referendum  had  been  officially  concluded.   I  also  discovered
that  the  Chicago  switch  had  taken  place  as  the  result  of  a
hasty  and  incomplete poll  of  its  Board  members by  telephone.
Accordingly,  I  phoned  the  Chicago   Affiliate   and  protested.
My protest  went  before  the  next  meeting  of  its  Board,  which
declared  that  the   whole  business   of  a   "second   vote"  was
unacceptable,  withdraw  the  results  of  its  telephone  poll  and
reported  its  referendum  vote  again  in  the  negative.    Hence
on  November  13  Mr.  Malin  had  to  return  to  his  original
report  that  the  negative  had  won  the  national   referendum.
The  Decision  to  Over-Ride
But  the  Cold  War  group  on the  National  Board  was  deter-
mined  to  have  its  way;  and  shortly  afterwards   put  through
a  Board  decision  (the  first  of  its  kind  in  the  34-year  history
of  the  organization)  to  over-ride  the  referendum  under  cover
of  a  special  veto  provision  slipped  into  the  new  By-Laws  of
1951.     The  three  policy  statements  stood   adopted    officially
by the  American  Civil Liberties  Union.   I  argued  against  the
over-riding  as  a  violation   of  democratic   procedure  in   the
A.C.L.U.  by  an  inner  Board  dictatorship  and  pointed   out
that  an  organization  dedicated  to  democracy  and  civil  liber-
ties  should  be  the  last  one  in  the  world  to  abrogate  the
democratic  process  in  its  own functioning.   I  stated  that  the
disregarding  of  the  referendum  was  unjust  to  the   Affiliates
and  the  National   Committee  and  made  a   mockery  of  our
whole  machinery  allowing  appeal  from  Board  decisions.
Meanwhile,  some  of  the  Directors  had  become  increasingly
annoyed  over  my  continued  opposition  to  the  three  policy
statements   and  my  drastic  criticism   of  Board  tactics.    Al-
though  I  had  been  a  Board  member  in  good  standing  since
1932,  the  Nominating  Committee  did  not  include  my  name
among  the  nominees for  the  1953-56  term.    Nonetheless,   the
Board  early  in  November  amended  the  Committee's  report
and  nominated  me.   Then  the  storm  broke.   Heavy  pressure
was  suddenly brought  on  me  to  withdraw  from  the  nomina-
tion  because  several   Directors   were  threatening  to  resign
if  my  name  went  on  the  ballot  and  to  publicize  current  con-
troversies in the  A.C.L.U. as a great Left-Right  battle center-
ing  around  me.   It  was  the  Cold War  group  in  action  again.
I  refused  to  withdraw,  taking  the  position  that  the  cam-
paign  against  me  was  based  on  untrue  and  unjust   assump-
tions,  and  that  it  was  highly  improper  and  violative  of  demo-
cratic  procedures  for  a  minority  group  of  Directors  to  try
to reverse a Board  decision through  devious  threats and pres-
sures.     At   the   next   meeting   of  the   Board,   however,   the
majority  yielded to  these  factional  tactics  and  rescinded  my
nomination.   A  minor  factor  in  this  decision  was  that  some
of  the  Directors  were  furious  about  my telephone  call  to  the
Chicago  Affiliate  which  resulted  in  the  negative  finally  win-
ning  the  referendum  and  made  necessary   the   Board   veto
power  as  the  only  method  of  putting  the  three  policy  state-
ments  into  effect.    My  answer  here  was  that  I  was  merely
doing  my duty  as  a  Director,  that  my protest to  Chicago  had
prevented  the  Board  from  putting  through  an   unprincipled
and  unpardonable  action,  and  that  if  we believed  in  freedom
of   speech  within  the  Civil  Libeties  Union,  then  a  Director
had  the  right  to  discuss  Union  affairs   confidentially  with
any  other  member  of  the   Corporation.
During  my  21 years  of  service  as  an  A.C.L.U.  Director  I
had  leaned over backwards  to keep confidential Union matters
within   the   A.C.L.U.  family  of  Board,  National   Committee
and  Affiliates.   But  the  right-wing,  anti-civil  liberties  group
(Continued  on  Page   Six)
— AFTER
Excerpts  from  the  substitute  statement  of policy  drafted
by  former  Senator   Frank  P.  Graham,  Professor   Robert
Lynd  and  Morris  Rubin,  overwhelmingly approved  by  the
affiliates  and  finally  accepted  unanimously at  the  biennial
conference:
"The   American   Civil  Liberties   Union  is  gravely   con-
cerned  over  the  extent  to  which  the  suppression   of  basic
liberties  and  the  corruption   of  historic   safeguards   have
replaced  legitimate  police and  judicial  procedures required
to  safeguard  the  security  of  the  country.    We  therefore
stand   against  guilt  by  association,   judgment  by  accusa-
tion,   the   invasion   of  privacy  of  personal   opinions  and
beliefs  and  the  confusion  of  dissent  with  disloyalty—all
of  which  are  characteristic   of  the  totalitarian  tyrannies
we  abhor  .  .  .
".  .  . the American  Civil  Liberties  Union  . .  .  pledges
itself   to  continue   to  defend  and  champion  the   rightful
civil  liberties  of any  person  or  organization,  the  essentials
of  academic freedom, fair  hearings  and  due process,  what-
ever  be  the  issues  of  the  hour,  the  temper  of  the  times,
the  alarms  of  crises  and  the  pressure  of  groups."
2   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  March  1,  19S^
What  The  Cold  War  Has Done to the ACLU  . . .
(Continued  from  Page  Five)
on  the  Board  had  again  and  again  been  responsible  for  direct
leaks  to  the  press of confidential  Board  decisions, often  giving
out  the  precise  vote  recorded.    Most  frequently  these  leaks
appeared  in  stories  run  by  the  New  Leader,  the  New   York
Journal  American  and  the  New  York   World  Telegram.   And
sure  enough it  happened again  in  reference  to  the  rescinding
of  my  nomination when  someone  in  the  inner  circles  of  the
A.C.L.U.  leaked the  news to  Frederick  Woltman  of  the  World
Telegram  and  Sun  who  ran   a  story  on  December  11,  1953,
headed  "Lament's  Leftist   Ideas   Rouse   A.C.L.U.:   Director
Taken  Off  Ballot."
A  group  of  rank-and-file  members  of  the  A.C.L.U.  in  New
York  City  were  anxious  that  I  permit  them  to  nominate  me
as  & Director   through   the   special   section  of  the   By-Laws
making  provision for  such nomination  by  25 regular  members
of  the  organization. I  declined  this  suggestion  on the  grounds
that  the  situation  had  become  too  confused   and  unpleasant
for  me  to  go  on waging  a  minority  battle  at  present   within
the  A.C.L.U.    Furthermore,  as  I  said  in  a  statement  to  the
Board  of  Directors  itself:   "If   I  were  renominated  now,  the
same  high-handed  group  that  forced  the  withdrawal   of  my
Board  nomination  would  in  all  probability  renew  the   con-
troversy   and   create   a   terrible   furor   which  would   again
plunge  this  organization  into  bitter  dissension.    I  am  tired
of  all  this.   I  believe  that  I  can  be more  helpful  to  the  cause
of  civil  liberties  by  giving  over  my  energies   directly  to  the
fight  against  McCarthy  and  McCarthyism  than  by  endlessly
debating  my  able  and  eloquent  opponents  on this  Board."
The  strange  history  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Civil
Liberties  Union during the  recent  past must  make us  cautious
about  placing  too  much  store  on  the  successes  scored  by  the
Affiliates   as  the   Biennial  Conference.    Only  time  will  tell
whether   the   headstrong   Board   of  Directors   has  truly   re-
formed  or  is  temporarily  bowing  to  the  pressure  of  20-odd
militant  Affiliates  meeting  together  for  the  first  time  in  three
years.
The  pressures  from  the  Right  on the  Board  and  within  the
Board  are  very  heavy.   The  American  Legion  has  repeatedly
called  the  A.C.L.U.  a  Communist  front  and  demanded  that
it   be  investigated.    Many  Board  members  have  succumbed
to  hysteria.
Where  the  Trouble  Began
As  Professor  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  ever  alert  member of
the  Executive  Committee of  the  Northern  California  Affiliate
and  ablest  civil  libertarian  within  the  ranks  of  the  A.C.L.U.,
pointed  out  in  a  brilliant  analysis  of  the  three  policy  state-
ments,  the  trouble  started  with  the  National  Board's  famous
resolution  of  February,  1940.    That  ill-conceived   declaration
barred   as  officers  of  the  Union  or  members  of  its  staff   any
person  "who  is  a  member  of  any  .political  organization   •which
supports  totalitarian  dictatorship  in  any  country  or  who by
his  public  declarations  indicates  his  support  of  such  a  prin-
ciple."    This   not   only  involved  the   A.C.L.U.   in  issues  of
foreign   affairs,  but   also  in  practice  made   anti-Communist
militancy  and  purity  the  main  qualification  for  the  nomina-
tion  and  election  of individuals to  the  Board  of  Directors  and
National  Committee.
The  1940  Resolution,  which  I  never  ceased  to  oppose,  was
in  essence  the  first  Loyalty  Oath  which  a reputable  American
organization  put  into  effect.    In  adopting  it  the  Civil  Liber-
ties  Union  set  the  worst  possible   example  for  the   nation.
New  York's  Predominance
The  fact  that  the  headquarters  of  the  A.C.L.U.  is  in  New
York  City and that all  Directors, in  order  to be able to attend
the  Board  meetings  every  other  week,  must  live  in  the  city
or  vicinity  is  a   significant   factor   in  the   evolution   of   the
organization.    New  York  is   also  the  headquarters   of   the
Communist  movement  and  many  of  the  Directors  have  had
unhappy  first-hand  experiences  with  the  Communists.   This
is  one  reason  for  a  fanatical   anti-communist  spirit  on  the
Board  which  does  not  exist  on  the  executive  committees  of
the   Affiliates.     The  more  bitter  anti-Communist   Directors,
often  sincere,  likable  and brilliant individuals,  are  so wrapped
up  in  the  world-wide  struggle  against  communism that  they
are   unable  to  concentrate   on  the  special  task  of  the  Civil
Liberties   Union,  which  is  to  support   the  American  Bill  of
Rights;  they  find  it  difficult  to  think  clearly  on  civil  liberties
issues  affecting   Communists and  radicals  in  general.
While  the  Cold  War  group  on  the  Board  consists  of  almost
half  the  Directors, the  most  energetic  and  vocal  of these  per-
sons  has   probably   been  Norman  Thomas,  the   outstanding
figure  in  the  Socialist  Party  of  the  United  States during  the
past  25  years.    An  amiable   enough   man   personally,  Mr.
Thomas  obviously has  a  political  bone to  pick  with  the  Com-
munists   and  burns   with   righteousness   and   Gospel   fervor
when  he  gets  going  on  the  Communist  menace.    It  was  he
who  publicly  initiated  the  campaign  for  the  1940  Resolution.
He  was  a  prime  mover  in  forcing  through   the   1953  policy
statements.   Thomas  was  always  finding  signs  of  dangerous
Communist  plots  within   the  Civil  Liberties  Union.    When
the  three  policy statements  were  rejected  in  the  national   ref-
erendum,  he  immediately began  muttering  about  "interpene-
tration  by  Communists  and  fellow-travellers."
My  conclusion  is  that  the  future   of  the  American   Civil
Liberties  Union  and  especially  of  its  Board  of  Directors  still
remains  in  doubt.    But  we  can  be  confident  that  whatever
happens   on   the   National   Board,   the   score   of    Affiliates
throughout  the  country  will  maintain  the  original  principles
of  the  A.C.L.U.
Bevaii  on  Berlin: "The  Chief  Hope  of Mankind"
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
eral disarmament.
This  is why  I  have  always  insisted  that  the  solution  of  the
German  problem  can  be  considered  only  in  a  wider  context.
Germany  is too important in  the  strategy of  the  Great  Powers
to  be  the  subject of  a partial settlement.
To  many  this  will  appear  to  be  a  gloomy  conclusion,  be-
cause  disarmament   seems  so  far   away  and   all  attempts   to
achieve  it  have  been  lost  in  a  morass  of  procedural  difficulties
and  bitter  recrimination.
But  there  is  a  new  situation,  full  of  fresh  urgency.   A  final
appeal  to  the  atom  bomb  is  now  universally regarded  as  sui-
cidal  for  mankind.    Unfortunately,  it  cannot   be  ruled   out
merely  because of  that.
Suicidal  impulses  might  supervene  on  the  strain  of  delayed
decision.   That  is why  the  failure  to  reach  a  satisfactory  set-
tlement  of  the  German  problem  must  not  be  allowed  to  cause
despair.
There  is  hope  in  the  fact  that  private  discussions  have  oc-
curred  over  the  Eisenhower  proposal   to  consider  the  pooling
of  fission  materials.    This  proposal  unites  in  itself  two  main
aspects  of  the  world  problem  which  must  always  be  studied
together  if  anything  useful  is  to  emerge.
Those  are  disarmament  and  assistance  for  the   underdevel-
oped  areas.    In   the  unity  of   these  two  conceptions  lies  the
chief  hope  for  mankind.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  1, 1954
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and  Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20i,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington 3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a   year;  Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere  in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $6;
England   and  Continental  Europe,  $10   by   1st  class  mail,  $1!   by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single   copy,   1!   cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered   as   Second   Class  mail
smatter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
March  1, 1954
Vol.  2,  No.  5  &  6
AROUND  THE  CAPITOL
THE  HISTORIAN,  with  more  leisure  than  we,  will  dwell
with  irony   (we  hope)  on  the  interminable  debate   over   the
Bricker   amendment,  now  in  its  fourth  week  in  the  Senate.
In  this  topsy-turvy   America,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the
lengthiest   speeches  of  our  time  on  the  menace  to  constitu-
tional  liberty  should  be  delivered  by  cryto-Fascists  engaged
in  undermining  what  they  purport  to  defend.  The basic  issue
itself  is  hopelessly  entangled,  and  the  opposing  sides  might
easily  exchange  positions were  an  isolationist  rather  an  inter-
nationalist  President  in  power.   The  fact  is  that  Presidents
for  some  time  have  circumvented  the  Constitution  by  using
the  semantic  device  of the  "executive  agreement" to  avoid the
provision   requiring   submission   of   international   pacts   for
Senate  approval.   The fact  also  is that  the  supporters  of  the
Bricker  amendment  are  generally  fearful,  not  of  restricting,
but  of  expanding  fundamental  human  rights  by  international
agreement,   particularly   the   rights   of   Negroes   and   other
minorities.   Incidentally,  this  is  an  issue  on which  the  Ameri-
can  right  and  the  leftist  Russians  agree—on  the  menace  to
national   sovereignty  lurking  in  such  documents  as  the  UN
Declaration  of  Human  Rights.
THE    COWARDICE   OF   THE    RESPECTABLE     ELE-
MENTS  in  our  society is  one  of  the  principal  features  of this
period,  as  it  was  of pre-Nazi  and  Nazi Germany.  As  we  went
to  press,  there  was  to  be  another  test  of  just   when   high
placed  worms  would turn  and  fight.  Secretary  of  the  Army
Stevens  was  to  face  McCarthy  (with  that  brave  disciple  of
Wild  Bill  Hickok  discreetly  silent  as  usual  under  the  bed  in
the  Lincoln  Room  at  the  White  House)   in  a  showdown  to
determine  just  how mean  McCarthy  can  be  to  Generals  and
get  away  with  it.   So far,  as  the  testimony  published  in  our
last  issue  on  The   Affair   of  the   Siberian  Pamphlet   shows,
the  Army  has  always  knuckled  under.   Behind  this  affair  is
not  only  McCarthy's  monumental  effrontery  but  the  under-
cover  feud  long  waged  by  the  FBI  against  military  intelli-
gence,   CIA  and  the  capital's  other   gumshoe  agencies.   Mc-
Carthy  is  paying  off some  scores  for  J.  Edgar  Hoover.
Apparently  the  Army  has  on  several  occasions  dared  to
find unreliable  the  information  supplied  by  some  of the  FBI's
pet  informers.   The Annie  Lee  Moss case  seems  to  have  been
an  instance.   The most  nauseating  moment  in  the  hearing  at
which that was  aired  came when  McCarthy  claimed  that other
witnesses   named  as  Communists  by  Mrs.  Mary   Markward,
the  FBI  informer,  had  all  taken  refuge  in  the  Fifth   amend-
ment.   When  Senator   Jackson   (D.  Wash.)   interjected   that
they  had  not  claimed the  Fifth  when  asked  about  Mrs.  Moss,
McCarthy  accused  him  of  breaching  the  rule  against  disclos-
ing  testimony  taken  in  executive  session!
JOURNALISTIC  PORTENT:  The  New  York   World-Tele-
gram,  in  printing  a  dispatch  on  February  12 about  Jenner's
speech  accusing  the  Democrats of  deliberately  seeking  defeat
in  Korea,  took  an  unusual  step.   It  played  the  story  on  page
one  with  a  two  column  head  but  put  in  this  warning  to  the
reader:  "Editor's  Note:  The  World-Telegram  and  Sun  prints
the  following  dispatch  because  it  is  a  statement  by  a  United
States  Senator.   It  should be  pointed  out,  however,  that   Sen.
William  E.  Jenner   offered  no  facts  to  substantiate  his  irre-
sponsible  charge." When the  Weekly  phoned Executive Editor
Lee  Wood,  he  explained  the  italic  precede  was  suggested  by
Assistant   Managing  Editor  Richard  Starnes  and  okayed  by
Wood.   We  applaud  this  episode  in  honest  journalism,   but
suggest  the  office  boy  be instructed  to  keep  a  sharp  eye  open
for  subpoena  servers  from  the  Jenner  committee.   Although
their  boss,  Roy Howard, has  been underground  on Park  Aven-
ue  for  many  years,  he  is  reliably  reported  by  confidential  in-
formants   whose  identity  cannot  be  disclosed  to  have  been
the   lifelong   associate   of   a   radical   newspaperman   named
Scripps.
THAT  STUPID  JOKE  being  circulated  by  the   Democrats
reveals  more  than  intended  and  will  boomerang.   It  is  about
a  farmer  with  three  sons  who voted for  Eisenhower  and now
has  his  three  boys  back, one from  Korea—the  other  two from
Detroit.    This  corrosive  cynicism  reflects  a  really   bankrupt
point  of  view.   If   the   two  boys  in  Detroit   cannot   be  kept
working  unless  the  third  brother  goes  on  risking  his  life  in
Korea,  parents  may  conceivably prefer  to  get  all  three  back,
even  at  the  cost  of  doubling  up  at  home.  We  prefer  Defense
Secretary  Charles  E.  Wilson's  wholesome evangelism  on  the
theme that  we can have prosperity  without  war  to  this  sneer
at  the  Korean  truce.
FOR  YOUR  CATHOLIC FRIENDS:  Father  John  Fearon's
discussion  of  "Congressional  Investigations  and  Moral  Theo-
logy"  in  the  February  19  issue  of  The  Commonweal.    A  Los
Angeles  priest,  a  member of  the  Dominican Order  of  Preach-
ers,  argues  the  moral  case  for  the  Fifth  Amendment's  priv-
ilege   against   self-incrimination   and   discusses   the   moral
limitations  on any  obligation  to  "volunteer  information  about
Communistic  activities."  Also recommended in the  same  issue,
William  V.  Shannon's  article,  "The  Administration  and  Civil
Liberties."
H'M,  WE  NEVER  KNEW  THEY   HAD  TO  THINK   IT
OVER:  "The  Veterans  of  Foreign  Wars  made  their   choice
long  ago  between  freedom  and  Communism."—Speaker  Jo-
seph  W.  Martin,  Jr.,   at  the  V.F.W.'s  Washington  Birthday
celebration  in  Alexandria,  Va.
HAT'S  OFF:   To  Robert   M.  Hutchins,  and  the  editors  of
Look,  for  a  bravely  outspoken  article  in  its  March  9  issue,
"Are   Our  Teachers   Afraid  to  Teach?"
Some  Personal  Chatter  by  the  E.  and  P.
An  operation  for  deafness  forced  suspension  of  publica-
tion  last  week.  This  double  issue   takes  the  place  of  the
one  missed.   We  hope  you  enjoy  its  special  features.   The
Bevan  article  gives  you a  point  of  view  rarely  heard in  this
country  where "neutralism" has  been made  almost as horrid
a  word  as  c———ism.   Corliss  Lament's  story  speaks  for
itself.   Even  the  liberal  weeklies  have  shied  away  from  the
internal   fight   inside  the  ACLU.   The  Indo-Chinese  war
glimpses  are   from   the   diary   of  a  French  soldier  which
created  a  stir  when  it  was  published in  Paris  last  winter
by  Editions  de  la  Table  Ronde.   We  wonder  how  many  of
you  saw  the  two  column ad about this  special  issue  on page
four  of  the  Review  of  the  News  section  in  the  New  York
Times  of  Sunday,  February  21.   First  returns  were  good.
Many  thanks  to  those  who  sent  their  best  wishes  on  the
operation.   It  will  be  a  week or  so  before the  ear  clears  up
and  then  we'll  give  you  a  news  bulletin.   In  the  meantime,
those  of  you who still  lag, don't forget  those  renewals.  Use
the  blank  on  the  next  page, and  don't  put  it  off  any  longer,
please.
2    1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  1, 1954
The  Indo-Chinese  War—As  Seen  in  A  French  Soldier's  Diary
By  Phillippe  de  Pirey
Two columns  moving  towards  Cao-Thon  . . . Muddy  flags
of  rice  paddies  surround  us,  villagers  file  past,  people  bent  in
two,  hands  joined,  endlessly mumbling  entreaties  and  prayers.
We  fearsome  warriors  do  harden  our  eyes  as  we  look   down
upon  the  women  with  domineering  self-assurance.
The  advance elements of  the  first  column,  in which  I happen
to  be,  are  met  by  a  shower  of  bullets  on  the  outskirts  of  the
village  of  Co-Quan.   The  deeper  rat-tat  of  a sub-machine  gun
seems  to  dominate  the  orchestra.
When  we finally reach  the  first  canhas  (huts)  it  is too  late,
the  Viet-Minhs  have  vanished.   Only  a  few  women  and  im-
potent  old  men  remain.    Orders  to   burn   the   place   down.
Walking   up  to  a  rather  clean  and  propserous-looking   hut,  I
find  in  it  a  man.   True,  he  is  paralyzed  from  the  waist  down
and  drags  himself   around  on  a  rough  pair  of  crutches.    His
French  is  correct  as he  repeats  ceaselessly: "I  am  poor,  do  not
burn  my  house."   I  ask  him  where  the  V.M.  are,  he  does  not
know;  they  are  gone.   Lajose  turns  up  holding  a torch  and  sets
fire  to  the  straw  roof.   The  man  crawls  out  to  the  yard  and
just  stands  there,  stunned;  tears  run  slowly  down  his  cheeks.
All  I  can  find  to  say is:  "Well,  you  know,  war  is  war."
*          *         *
At  3  a.m.  several  rifle  shots  ring  out.   In  a flash every  man
is  at  his post,  throwing  grenades and  firing.  Cries  of  "Alert—
alert."   Mortars  and  machine  guns  join  the  dance,  echoed  by
the  Ao-Trach   artillery.   Lt.  Gonzales  voice  behind me:  "There
they  are!  Fire  at  will!" We  do not  need  to  be told,  shell-bursts
a  few  inches  from  our  fox-holes  are  incentive  enough,  espe-
cially  as  my  platoon  is  in  the  first  firing  line.   We  never  stop
firing  until  daybreak.
I.do  not  think  it  is strange not  seeing anything  in  the  stark
light  of  flares  and  rockets,  but  as we  have  plenty  of  ammuni-
tion,  I  decide  we  might  as  well  be  over-cautious.   At   dawn,
however,  officers  and  men  are  slightly  embarrassed  by  the  dis-
covery  that  they  have been  shooting  at  shadows all night.   All
the  ammunition   is  gone,  the  Ao-Trach  batteries  fired  3,000
rounds ....  With  calm  restored, it  was easy  to  see how the
mistake  was  made.  The  third  line  of  defene  threw  grenades;
these,  exploding  just  under  the  first  line  of  holes,  led  us  to
think  an  attack  was on.
For  this  great  feat  of  arms we  rate  an  official   communique,
relayed  by  press  agencies as  follows:  "Violent  V.M.  counter-
attack  on  Peak  4  during  the  night  of  January  22d.   Franco-
Vietnamese  forces  successfully  repulsed  every   assault."
*          *          *
Feverish  activity  this morning on  the Ao-Trach  post.  Very
intriguing.   We  are  soon  to  learn  the  cause  of  it:  the  immi-
nent  arrival  of  the  Secretary  of  Associated  States.   My  com-
pany  is  asked  to  supply  two  platoons  of  21  men.   Our   uni-
forms  are  in  rags  and  our  shoes  have  no  soles.   So what!    The
company  commander organizes  an  amazing flea-market.  From
those  remaining  behind  we  glean every  decent-looking  piece of
gear,  and  in  no  time  42  apparently  well-dressed  men  line  up
on  the  road.  The  others, with  bare feet  or .bare  buttocks,  will
just  have to wait  for the return  of their  boots  and trousers  . . .
Soon,  the  official  convoy draws up  with  an impressive escort
of  tanks,  scout  cars  and  half-trucks.   M.  Letourneau  alights
from  a  de-luxe  red  Willys.   He  has  got  himself  dressed  up  as
a  GI  for  the  occasion,  complete  with  olive  drab  field  jacket
from   American  surplus  stores.    He   is  flanked  by   Generals
Salan   and  de  Linares  while  more  brass  falls  in  behind.    An
American   information  mission   and   a  Viet-Namese   Colonel
supply  the  international note.
For  the  next  ten  minutes  reporters'  flash-bulbs  replace  the
usual   105  salute.   Colonel  de  Quincerot,   with  monocled   eye,
presents  the  troops  in  a guttural  tone.
Then  comes  the  patriotic  speech,  inevitably   pompous  and
flowery.   The   Minister   has  just   reached   the   crucial  point,
France's  undying  gratitude for  our  splendid  action  on  R.C.   6,
when  he  is  interrupted  by  a  sharp  detonation   from  our  hill-
station.    Anguished  looks  as  all  eyes  turn  in  that   direction.
A  radio-man is dispatched to  report:  someone threw  an  empty
can  and  it  hit  a  mine.   Smiles,  everybody  relaxes.  M.  Letour-
neau  can  resume  his  speech.
—Operation  Cachis  (Operation  Waste), Table  Ronde  (Paris).
We'll  Be  Glad  to  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of   This  Issue  to  Your   Friends
This  Is  Expiration  Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301  E.  Capitol, Wash. 3,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    _.___._._._______________________
Street   _.._._-_-._._._._..._____________________
City.________________  Zone_..__  State___.__
Enter  this  gift   sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name  __.__
Street  ..__._—_____
City—___._._-_—-___
Zone___  State__
3-1-54
I.  F. Stone'*  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED