I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954apr12.pdf

============================================================

Psychiatric  Study:  Addled Week in an  Addled Congress,  Pages 2  and  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2,  NUMBER 12
APRIL  12,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
Did  Dulles  Tell  The  Truth  On  Indo-China?
The  drift  toward  war  is taking  on  momentum.    The  straw
at  which  the  hopeful  grasp  is  the  President's  statement  that
we  will  not  go  it  alone.    But  only  a  few  weeks  ago  he  was
saying  that  we  would  not  intervene  altogether.    The  Secre-
tary  of  State and  not  Mr.  Eisenhower  seems  to  be at  the  helm,
and  Mr.  Dulles  is building  up  support  for  unilateral  interven-
tion  if  necessary.   His  statement  to  the  House  Foreign   Affairs
Committee   was  inflammatory  and  may  have  been unreliable.
Our  authority  for  casting  doubt  on  his  word  is  the  curious
and  little  noticed  contradiction  between  what  he said on  Mon-
day  and  what  Senator  Kennedy   (D.,  Mass.)   next   day  told
the  Senate.    The   difference   between  their  versions  of  what
is  happening  in  Indo-China   is  crucial.
Mr.  Dulles  said  the  Chinese  "are  coming  awfully  close"  to
active  intervention  in  China.    He  claimed  to  have  an  intelli-
gence  report  which  said  that  Chinese  officers   were  advising
the  Viet  Minh  attackers at  Dien  Bien  Phu  and  Chinese soldiers
manning  the  radar  and anti-aircraft  guns.    It  would be  inter-
esting  to  know  whether  the  Pentagon   considers  this   report
reliable,  and   whether  the  source  is  our   own  intelligence  or
Chiang  Kai-shek's.    Obviously  Kennedy,  who  is remarkably
well  informed  on  Indo-China,   does  not   believe  this  because
he  told  the  Senate  next  day,  "I  think  the  Senate  should  know
whether  the  call  by  the  United  States  for  united  action  is due
to  the  fact  that  the  Vietminh  forces  are perhaps now  stronger
than  the  Vietnam  forces,  or  whether  it  is  due  to  the  extent
of  the  Chinese  assistance to  the  Vietminh."
Kennedy  Disagrees  With  Dulles
If   Secretary  Dulles  is  to  be  believed,   the  strength  of   the
Vietminh  is  due  to  greater  Chinese  assistance.    Senator  Ken-
nedy  disagreed.    "I   believe,"   he  told  the  Senate,  "it   is  the
former.    I  believe  it  is  because  the  forces  of  the   Vietminh
have  become  so  powerful  that  they  are  pressing  hard  on  the
French,  and  therefore   it  is to  assist  in  a civil  war  that  the  call
for  united  action  has  been made."   This  power,  as  was  noted
in  the  Senate  debate,  is a  power  of  spirit  and  not  of  numbers.
Senator   Mansfield   (D.,  Ohio),  who  also  knows  Indo-China
at  first  hand,  pointed  out  that  the  rebels  are winning  though
outnumbered   almost   two  to  one;   they   have  291,000   men,
as against the  591,000  men  marshalled  by  the  French.
Senator  Kennedy's  reply  to  this  was  a  grave  warning  few
if  any  papers  reported.   These  were  his words.    "If  the  United
States  intervenes,"  he said,  "in  order  to  save the  present  situa-
tion,  prior  to  a massive  intervention  by  the  Chinese  from  the
North—and  it  appears  that  such  intervention  may  be  neces-
sary  on  the  present   basis  because  the   Vietminh   seem  to  be
winning—the  Chinese  will  send  in  additional  manpower,  and
our  intervention  would  be  useless."
The  choice  would  then  be  between  another   bloody  repeti-
tion  of  the  Korean  struggle  or  "massive  retaliation"  against
China,   the  open   door   to  World   War  HI.    Yet   aside  from
Stennis   (D.,   Miss.)   and  Dirksen   (R.,   111.)   there   were   no
voices   raised   against   intervention.      The   Democrats   are  if
anything  more  ready  to  line  up  for  it  than  the  Republicans,
except  for  Knowland  (R.,  Cal.)  and  the.other  China   Lobby
Senators.     The   only   newspaper   of   importance   which   has
spoken  up  against  intervention  is  the  Chicago  Tribune.
Bi-Partisanship  for  Repression,  Too
The  gravity  of   the  international  situation   is  matched  by
that  of  the  domestic.    No  one  who  heard  the  President  speak
last   Monday  night   and  the   McCarthy   answer  to   Murrow
Wednesday  night  could  fail  to  be  struck  by  the  contrast  be-
tween  the well-meaning but  intellectually feeble weakling who
is  President  and  the  evil  genius  who  is  struggling   to  wrest
from   him  control  of  the  party  and  the  country.   The   syn-
thetic  soft-soap  of  Mr.  Eisenhower's  well-drilled  recitation  is
a   poor   substitute   for   leadership.    While   he  somewhat   dis-
paraged  talk  of  a  Red  menace  at  home  his  Attorney   General
was  preparing  a  quite  different  sort  of  speech  and  is  rushing
through   Congress  a  program   of   repressive  legislation   which
must  endanger every  citizen  who  has ever  been active  in  social
protest  or  reform.   The  celerity  with  which  the  House moved
toward  passage of  the  wire-tap  bill is indicative.    The  Republi-
cans  are  out  to  make  a  record  of  "anti-Communist"  legisla-
tion  and  the  Democratic   leadership  is  as  anxious  to  be   "bi-
partisan"  for  repression  as for  war.
The  developing   atmosphere  is  conducive  to  the  panic  and
paranoia  on  which  McCarthy  fattens.    Had  it  not  been  for  a
question  by  Miss  May  Craig  of  the  Guy  Gannett   newspapers
and  the  quick  reaction  of  the  Boston  press,  his  own  adherent,
Sears,  might  have  been   chosen   to  investigate  his  row  with
the  Army.   A  reactionary   lawyer   from   Tennessee   has   been
substituted,   but  McCarthy   himself  is  off  to  fresh  fields  and
pastures  new,  as  in  his  extraordinarily  mendacious  charge  of
an  18-month  delay  on  the  H  bomb.    This  seems  to  be  a  lie
made  up  out  of  whole  cloth,  like  his  assertion  that  Murrow
was  once  a  Wobbly;  its  audacity  is  breath-taking.   This  ill-
shaven man with  the veiled  eyes is on his way to fresh  triumphs;
the   possibility  of  his  some  day  coming   to   power   must   be
taken  very  seriously;  the  hierarchy  of  the  Catholic Church, as
indicated   by  Cardinal   Spellman's  approving  presence  at  his
address  to  the  New  York  police  Holy  Name  Society,  is  more
openly  lining  up  behind  this  unscrupulous  adventurer.   Be-
sprinkled   with  a  little  holy  water,  he  may  be  an  American
Franco,  another   devoted  son  of  the  Church,  ready  to  make
America  unsafe  for  heretics.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  12,. 1954
Is There A Psychiatrist  in the House? . . .
EISENHOWER IS NOT NECESSARILY TO BE CLASSED
AS A FELLOW TRAVELLER, but the  Communists may have
taken  over.  This  is  the  considered  opinion of  no  less  an  au-
thority  than the  ever vigilant Senator  MeCarran, famous from
here  to  Madrid.  Just  a  few hours  before  the  President  went
on TV and  radio last  Monday night  in his  effort  to allay  fear,
the  Nevadan  rose  in  the  Senate  with  alarming   news.   He
began  by calling  attention  to testimony given  earlier  this  year
by  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  The FBI  chief  said  Communist  activity
in this country  during the  past  year  had four  main  objectives
—a  settlement  in  Korea,  the  recall  of  American  troops  from
abroad,  a five power  peace pact  to  include Red China  and  the
resumption  of East-West trade.  MeCarran called the  Senate's
attention  to  the  fact  that  these are  all  on their  way to  being
attained.  He said a  settlement  was in sight  in Korea,  that our
troops  were  being  withdrawn,  and that  East-West  trade, was
picking up.  As for  the  Geneva  conference,  Senator MeCarran
said, "whether  a five power pact,  including Communist China,
comes out  of  that  meeting remains to  be seen" but  he added,
"I  would  not  bet  a  plugged  nickel  against   it."   Those  were
strong  words  for   a   Senator   from   Nevada,  where  betting
begins  in  the  cradle.
Unlike  some  of  his  Republican colleagues, this  firm  Demo-
crat refrained  from  accusation.  "I  do not mean to say," he told
the  Senate, "that  everything which  has  been  done  in  further-
ance of any  one of these four Communist objectives has  neces-
sarily  been  done  for  Communist  purposes ... Nor do I  say
that the fact that certain Communist objectives  appear to have
been attained in this  country, or to be well on the  way towards
attainment,   means  that   the   Communists  are   running   the
country.   I  have  simply  wanted  to  point  out  certain   facts
which the people  of this  Nation may wish  to  take  into  account
in  drawing  their  own conclusions  . .  ."  The conclusion seems
to  be that a vote  for  the  G.O.P. is a  vote for  Moscow.
SO SUBTLE ARE  THE  DANGERS  ABOUT  US that  even
Senator  MeCarran  may  have fallen  into a  trap.  The  govern-
ment  has  been  busily engaged for  months  in proving that  the
Communists  are  plotting  so  steadfastly  for  its  overthrow by
force  and violence as  to constitute  a  clear  and present  danger.
A  dozen Smith Act  cases  are  in various  stages  of  prosecution.
The  head  of  the  FBI  chose  this  moment  to  advise  that  the
main   objectives   of  the   Communists  are   world  peace  and
greater  trade.   Naturally  Mr.  Hoover  speaks,  or  claims   to
speak,  as  an  anti-Communist but  how damaging  if  his  testi-
mony turns up to confute  the government in Smith Act trials ?
Any  lesser holdover from  the  Democrats would be  subpoenaed
to  explain  himself.
THE  SPREAD  OF  COMMUNISM  UNDER  THE  GOP  was
also  noticed  by  sharp  eyes  in  the  House.  During  the  debate
on  the  Eisenhower  public  housing  program,  .two  Democrats
rose to  warn  their  Republican colleagues and  the  nation.  Mr.
Colmer  of  Mississippi  found  it  "unbelievable"  that  so many
Republicans  were  prepared  to  vote  for  public  housing.  "It  is
my  considered  judgment,"  he told the  House  on April 2, "that
this   so  called  public  housing  is  the   most  inimicable   (sic)
to  the  continuation  of  the  Republic.  It  strikes  at  the  very
bulwark  of  the  Republic.  It  is  un-American.  It  is  socialistic
in the truest sense of the word."  Mr. Colmer  said, "down in my
country" when a  man's  eight  hours  of work are  over  "he  goes
home and with his own hands  and often  with  the  assistance of
his  wife,  builds  himself  a  modest  home  out  of  his  savings."
Mr. Colmer said the notion that "the Federal  government  owes
it  to  any  minority  group  of  normal  people  to  furnish  them
housing"   could  "in   the   end  only   destroy   our   system   of
government."
Mr.  Dies  of  Texas   rose  to  say  that  advocates  of   public
housing  "believe  that  the  end  justifies  the  means."  He  told
of  how  hard   he  had  fought  such  ideas  under  Franklin  D.
Roosevelt.  "I  remember one night," Dies  said  of those  parlous
times, "I  could not sleep.  I just broke out in sweat."  And now,
under  a  Republican  President,  he  found   himself   bathed  in
perspiration  again.  "The  people  elected  you,"  Dies reminded
his  Republican  colleagues,  "because  they  believed  that  you
believed  in  private  enterprise  . . .  But now the President of
the  United  States  has  recommended public housing  and  you
are  confronted  with  a  very,  very  unpleasant  situation  . .  ."
Mr.  Dies said he  despised  the  man  who voted  against  his con-
victions  on the  excuse  of  party  loyalty.  "There  is  no dishon-
esty," Mr. Dies said, "worse than  intellectual dishonesty."  The
Republicans,  stung  by  such  words,  rallied  against  their own
President's  housing program.   The  crypto-Communism  of  the
White House was defeated.  But it was a close call.  Mr. Colmer
recalled  that  last  year  when  the  House  killed  off  the  public
housing program,  only 23 of the  more than  200 Republicans in
the   House  voted  for   public  housing.   This  year,  however,
despite the  appeals  of  Messrs.  Colmer and  Dies,  51 of the  201
Republicans  in  the  House  went  on  record  for   a  four  year
program.  It  was defeated,  but  twice  as  many  Republicans as
last  year  were for  public  housing.  Thus  does  Marxism slowly
engulf  the  Grand Old Party.
THE  DEMOCRATS, THOUGH STILL TAINTED BY NEW
DEALISM  (there  were  124 Democrats  for  and  only  61 Demo-
crats  against  public  housing),  proved  their  loyalty  in  a  bril-
liant  tactical  maneuver.  The  minority leader,  McCormack of
Massachusetts,   offered   an   amendment  which   showed   how
careless  or  indifferent   the  Administration   is  to  ideological
purity  in housing, else this  provision would already have  been
in  the  bill.   The  MeCormack   amendment  provides  that  no
Federal  agency  shall  make  "any  loan, grant,  annual  contribu-
tion,  advance  or. other  financial  assistance" to  housing  of  any
kind,  public  or  private,  unless  the  owner  or  buyer  obligates
himself  not  to  allow  anyone to  occupy the  housing until  "the
prospective  occupant  or  purchaser"  has  supplied  a  certificate
that he is not  (presently)  a  member  of any  organization  listed
by  the Attorney General as  subversive.  The maximum  penalty
for  false  statement  would be ten  years  in jail  and  $5,000 fine.
This  provision,  if  accepted  by  the  Senate,  will  be  an  endless
headache,  requiring   loyalty  investigations  for   all  kinds  of
housing and mortgage  transactions.  One member, a  Mr. Hugh
D.  Scott,  a  Representative   from  Philadelphia,  though  a  Re-
publican,  was irreverent  enough to  interrupt  Mr. McCormack
with a snide question.  "I am curious," Mr. Scott said, "to know
how  much  this  overall  brain  washing  will  cost  the  Federal
government."  (Mr.  Scott,  as  might  have  been  expected,  was
one  of  those  Eisenhower  Republicans  who  later  voted   for
public  housing).   The  question  was  brushed  aside  and  this
patriotic  amendment adopted  without  debate  or  roll  call,  but
not  without  an  egalitarian  twist  worthy  of  the  great  party
of  Jefferson  and  Jackson:
Mr.  HAYS  of  Ohio.  As  I  understand  it,  the   gentleman's
amendment  applies  to  Communists  all  up  and  down  the  eco-
nomic  scale,  not just  to  those  at  the  bottom  of  it.
Mr. McCORMACK.  It  applies to  all of them.  A Communist
is a Communist whether he has not got a nickel or has a million
dollars.
NOBODY  TO  THE  LEFT  OF  CARDINAL  SPELLMAN
seems entirely  free  nowadays  from  a  kind of political  anxiety
which  impels  him to  prove that  he  is  not  a  Communist.  The
Republicans  began  a  real  push  last  week  for  the  passage of
a  series  of  repressive   measures   which  they  can  cite  when
and   if   accused  of  coddling,  harboring   or  furthering   Com-
munism.  But  Mr.  McCormack  again  beat  them  to  it.   Bright
and  early  Monday  morning,  when a  House  Judiciary  subcom-
mittee  opened  hearings  on  11 bills  (no  less)  to  outlaw  the
Communist party, there was the minority leader in the witnesi
chair,  from  which he  could  not  politely  be  removed  until  he
had  put  himself  on record  in  favor  of  them.  The  rotund  bald
and   bespectacled   chairman,   Mr.  Graham   of  Pennsylvania,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  12,   1951f
. . . An Addled  Week  In  Our Addled  Congress
was  considerably  annoyed when  Mr.  McCormack  slipped  into
a  stump  speech  on  the  evils  of  Communism  before  a  single
Republican  could  say  Karl  Marx.   Mr.  McCormack  testified
that  he  had  been  trying  to  outlaw  Communists  as  far  back
as   1934.   "As  you  remember,"  Mr.  McCormack  reminisced,
"the  activities of a  gentleman  named  Hitler  were very  promi-
nent  in  those  years.  Hiding  behind  them  were  the  activities
of  atheistic  communism."   In  a  passage  which  would  have
delighted   Cotton   Mather,   Mr.  McCormack  warned   of   the
Communists,   "We  are   not   dealing   with   ordinary   human
beings."   It  was  a  little  disappointing  that  he  did  not  bring
with  him  any  stereopticon   slides  showing  Elizabeth   Gurley
Flynn  flying  over  Foley  Square  on  a  broomstick  during  the
last  full  moon.
A  SUBVERSIVE NAMED  NORMAN  THOMAS  appearing
on  behalf   of  the  notorious  Americain  Civil  Liberties  Union
followed  Mr. McCormack on the  witness  stand  and tried  hard,
but  without  success,  to  confuse  the  committee.   Mr.  Thomas
said he had been  fighting  Communism  long before that became
fashionable,  but  urged  the  committee  not  to  outlaw  the  Com-
munist  party.   He  said that  while the  Communist  movement
is  "indeed  conspiratorial,"  outlawry  would  merely  eliminate
"that  part  of  the  communist  movement which  holds  conven-
tions,  adopts  platforms,  nominates  or  endorses  candidates,  is
engaged   in  a  legitimate  and  essential  feature  of  our  demo-
cratic  way  of life."   Thomas  said  that  in  the  Fort  Monmouth
inquiry  one  scientific  worker  had  been  suspended  because  he
had  been  a  member  of  the  Young  People's  Socialist  League
between   1936  and   1939.   "In  view  of  such  circumstances  as
these,"  Thomas  declared,  with  a  flash  of  his  old-time  fire,  "I
should  expect  our  reactionaries  and  neo-fascists  to  do  their
utmost  to  stretch  a  bill  outlawing  the  Communist  party  into
the  outlawry  of  any  party  which  might  believe  that  water-
power  belongs  to  the  nation  and  should  not  be  turned  over
to  private  utility  companies."
The  committee  members  sat  there with  the  furrowed  brows
of  men  confronting  a  profound  problem.   But  they  could  not
understand how the  witness  could  brand  the  Communist party
as  bad and yet  plead  for  its  right  to  live.  It  was  obvious from
their  questions that  Jefferson  has  been  dead  a  long  time.  If
a man was a burglar, one committee member suggested, should
he  not  be outlawed ?  Thomas  objected  to "oversimplified anal-
ogies in  dealing with complex problems."  If  a  man committed
burglary,  he  countered, arrest  him  for  burglary,  but  do not
pass a law forbidding  him to be  good to his mother.  This  was
another   reference   to  the  legitimate  activities  of  the  Com-
munist  party,  but  some  committee  members  seemed  startled
at  the  thought that  a  man could be a  Communist  and  still be
good  to  his  mother.   Thomas  had  objected   in  the  course  of
his  testimony  to  those  ads  which  show  Communism  and  So-
cialism  as  two  twins,  but  by  the  time  he  had finished it  was
clear  that  most  committee  members  felt  that  Thomas  was
just  like that  with  the Kremlin.
ONE  BIT  OF  THAT  TESTIMONY should  have  disturbed
them.   Communism's  oldest  political  antagonist  in  this  coun-
try  said that he could testify  "from  my own personal contacts
that  within  recent  months  there  is  not  more  but  less  under-
standing  of  the  real  evils  of communism  in  the  United  States,
not  less  but more sympathy  with  it."   Thomas  predicted,  "The
outlawry  of  the  party  will  strengthen  this  movement  of  sym-
pathy  among  thousands  of  persons  who  doubtless  will  not
voice  it  openly, but  whose  secret  sympathy  would,  nonethe-
less,  be  hurtful  to  the   growth  of  sound  understanding  of
communism  and its  threat  to   freedom."
To  most  committee  members  this  probably  made  it  seem  all
the  more  urgent  to  pass a  law punishing  Communism; intel-
lectually  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  seems  to  be  full
of   Romanoffs.   The  bills  would  make  that  task  easy;  they
would  enable  the  government  to  send  people  to  jail  not  only
4  *
for  mere ideas but  on suspicion that they had the  wrong  ones.
In  a  time  when  charges  of  communism are  made  as   loosely
as  they  are  today,  the  dangers  should  be  obvious.
One  bill  would  make  it  a  crime  to  collaborate  with  an
"adherent"  of a  foreign  nation  to  "weaken"  the   government
of  the  United  States  and  Thomas  wanted  to  know what  hap-
pened  if  he had a  talk  with  the  French  Ambassador  and then
made  a  statement  opposing  EDC.  Would  he  be  guilty  of  a
crime?   Had  there  been  a  roll  call,  there  would  have  been  a
majority  for  conviction.
IT  WAS  A  BAD WEEK  FOR  HAROLD  LASKI.   Tuesday
morning  there  was  a  tantalizing  item  on  the  ticker.   The
Jenner  committee  (of  which  Mr.  Thomas'  colleagues  on  the
ACLU  executive  think  so  highly)  was  about  to  interrogate
Jonathan  Mitchell,  once  on the  New  Republic  and  New  York
World,  about  Harry  Dexter  White  and  Henry.  Morgenthau.
It  looked  like  hot  stuff  coming  up.  What  came  up  was  this:
In  1939  Mitchell  wrote  some  speeches  for  Morgenthau  on  the
need  for  venture  capital.   The  speeches  were  not   delivered.
In  1944  Mitchell  went  to  the  Institute  for  Advanced   Study
in  Princeton  where  he  stayed  for  four  years.  There  he heard
that  White  had  undue  influence  over  Morgenthau  and  began
to  suspect  that  maybe  White's   influence  had  blocked  those
speeches.  In  1945 he arranged to  have  lunch with  White.  The
speeches  were  not  discussed,  but  Laski's  Faith,  Reason  and
Civilization  was.   Mitchell  said  White  became   overwrought
and  tried  to  hit  him when Mitchell  spoke disparagingly  of  the
book.   Charles  Grimes, the  Jenner  committee's  new  Deweyite
counsel,  depicted  the  Laski  book  in  cross-examination  as  a
work  which held that  capitalism  and  Christianity  were  dying
faiths,  to  be  replaced   by  Bolshevism  (a  jazzed  up  version
which  would  make  Laski  turn  over  in  his  grave).   Mitchell
was  led  on  to  the  question:  Had  not  White  by  his  attitude
toward  the  book  shown  100 percent  acceptance of communism?
The  witness  said  the  word  communism had  never  figured  in
the  conversation.   This  was  a  disappointing  denouement  to
this inquiry ten years later into one dead man's remarks  about
another  dead  man's  books.
Thereupon  while  Mitchell sat  there  looking more and  more
uncomfortable  the  committee's  research  director,  Benjamin
Mandel,  once  business  manager  of  the  Daily  Worker,  read  a
collection  of  thrice  used  "documents"  into  the  record.   There
were  selections  from  Hull's  memoirs  saying  that  White  had
been  "emotionally  upset"  by  Hitler's  persecution  of  the  Jews
and  had  authored  the  Morgenthau  plan  to  cripple  Germany.
The Jenner  committee was back on a favorite theme: to rewrite
the  history  of  World  War  II.   The  outlines  of  an  American
Hitler  myth  were  visible.   Laski, a  Jew,  wrote  that  Christian-
ity and capitalism were finished; White, another  Jew,  admired
him  and  tried  to  ruin  our  main bulwark  against  Bolshevism.
Der  Fuehrer  was  the  victim  of  a  plot.  The committee seemed
to  have contacted  Goebbels on its  ouija board.   One document,
a  translation   from  an  article  in  War  and  the  Working  Class
in  Moscow  showed that  at  Bretton  Woods White  was  passion-
ate  about  beating  the  Russians  at  volley ball!
THAT  SAME  NIGHT  on  the  Ed  Murrow  program,  Laski
came  up  again  when  McCarthy  "revealed"  that  Laski  dedi-
cated  one  of  his  books  to  Murrow.  If  Laski  were  not  dead,
there would be a demand for  his extradition.  This  is the mood
of  our  Mad  Hatter  Congress.
I.  F.  Stone  Speaks  on the  Witch Hunt
In   Los  Angeles,  at   Embassy  Auditorium,  Ninth  and
Grand,  April  22,  8:15 p.m.
In  San  Francisco,  at  California  Hall,  Polk  and  Turk
Streets,  April  23,  8  p.m.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April   IS,
News and  Comment  of  the  Week
Stephen  Mitchell  Imitates  Pontius Pilate
"On  the  other  hand,"  Democratic   National    Chairman
Stephen  A.  Mitchell  wrote  to  California  National   Committee-
man  Paul  Ziffren  last  week,  "serious  and  continuing  charges
concerning   the  loyalty  or  reliability  of  a  Democratic  candi-
date  for  Congress  must  be  dealt  with  as  real  problems  of  our
political   life."     Mr.  Mitchell's  recipe   for   dealing  with  real
problems   seems  to  be  to  run  away  from  them.
In   making   public   a  letter   refusing   aid  to   Congressman
Robert   L.  Condon,  a  California   Democrat,  in  his  campaign
for  reelection,  Mr.  Mitchell  sets  up  the  premise  that  a  man
is  to  be  considered  guilty  until  he  proves  himself  innocent.
Condon  was  barred  from  an  A-bomb  test  as a  "security  risk"
last  year  on  the  basis  of  just  the  kind  of  false  or  trivial  rub-
bish  which  figures  in  most  loyalty  proceedings.    Condon  de-
nied  under  oath   that   he  was  a  Communist   but   has  never
been  given  a  chance  to  know  or  face  his  accusers.
How   can  Mitchell  talk  against  McCarthyism  and  fail   to
face  up  to  this  typical  witch  hunt  situation?   The  precedent
can  be most  dangerous to  the  party.   There are many  occasions
much/  less  spectacular than  A-bomb  tests  in  which  Congress-
men  obtain  confidential information.    Is the  orbit  of  the loyal-
ty  purge  to  extend  into  Congress?   Is  the  voter's  choice  to be
subject  to  the  veto of  FBI  investigation  and  clearance?    And
is  the  Democratic  party  under  such  cowardly  leadership  that
it  will  not  defend  the  right  of  an  accused  Congressman  even
to  a fair  hearing in  which he can confront  his accusers?   These
are the  real  issues and we hope  that  California  voters  will turn
in  a more  manly  answer on  them  than  has Mr.  Mitchell.
One  Way  to  Frighten  Juries
In  Remmer  V. U.  S.   decided   March   8,   the   Supreme
Court  reversed  a  conviction   for  evasion  of  income  taxes  be-
cause  unbeknownst  to  the  defendant  the  FBI had  investigated
the  jury  while  the  trial  was  on.   "A  juror,"  the  court   held,
"must  feel  free  to-exercise  his  functions  without  the  FBI  or
anyone  else  looking  over  his  shoulder."    The  FBI  questioned
three  jurors  during  the  trial  of  Ben Gold  of  the  Fur  Workers
on  Taft-Hartley  oath  charges  without  the  knowledge  of  the
defense.    Other  jurors  were  also  told  of  the  FBI   inquiries.
Five  members  of  the  jury  were  government   employes,  easily
susceptible  to  intimidation.    Two  jurors  were  dismissed   but
a  mistrial  was  denied.    Gold  was  found  guilty  of   being  a
member  and  of  supporting  the  Communist  party  at  the  time
he  took  his  T-H  oath.
It  is  difficult  enough  for  a  radical  to  get  a  fair  trial  in  the
District   of   Columbia   before  a  jury  on  which   government
employes  serve.    It  will  become  impossible  if  the  Department
of  Justice  and  the  FBI  are  encouraged  by  the  complaisance
of  the  courts  to  go  around  interrogating  jurors on  one  excuse
or  another  while  they  are  trying  a  case.    The  excuse  in  the
Gold   case  was  thin  and  we  hope  it   will  be  aired  on  appeal.
When  it  is  remembered  that  most  of  the  witnesses  were  ex-
Communists  now   employed   by   the   Department   of   Justice
as  professional  informers,  one  can  see the  extent  to  which  the
cards  are  stacked  against  the  defendant  in  cases  of  this  kind.
Right  to  Counsel  Strengthened
The  Supreme  Court  struck a  blow  in  favor  of  the
fast   disappearing  right  to  counsel  when  it  reversed  the dis-
barment   of  Harry   Sacher  for   contempt   in   the   first   Foley
Square  Smith  Act  trials.   The  judges  ruled  6-2  that  in  view
of  Sacher's  record  "permanent   disbarment  in  this  case  is  un-
necessarily  severe"  and  remanded  it  to  the  lower  courts  where
a  temporary  suspension  order  is  thus  indicated.    Pending  be-
fore  the court  is a petition for  rehearing  in  the  case of Abraham
J.   Isserman,  the  other   Foley   Square  trial   counsel  who  was
disbarred  in  the  wake of  a  contempt  citation  by  Judge  Harold
S.  Medina.   The  severity  visited  on  these  defenders  of Com-
munists  contrasts  with  the  public  treatment  of  Judge  Medina
who  spent  $7?,000  of  his  own  money  defending  the   rights
of  Nazi  collaborators  in  the  Cramer  treason  case  during  the
last  war  without  creating  a  ripple  of  disapproval.
We'll  Be Glad to  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  rour Friends
I.  F. Stone'* Weekly
This  It  Expiration   Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     ————————————————————————————-
Street   __________._________________
City._.___—_....____..  Zone._._..  State _._...__
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name  _.__..'__________________
Street    ___________________________•——
City ______._____._   Zone ._
State.
4-12-64
Room  205
301 E. Capitol Su, S.E.
Washington  3, D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED