I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954feb15.pdf

============================================================

The  Poor  U.  S.  General  Who Didn't  Think  Stalin  Always  Lied,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    2,  NUMBER 4
FEBRUARY  15,  1954»»       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Case  of  The  California  Bookie
Newspaper  coverage  of  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  last
week  in  Irvine  v.   California   overlooked  the  disturbing  light
it  sheds on  two  kinds of  repressive legislation pending  in  Con-
gress.    These  are  the  bills  to  authorize  wire-tapping  and  to
compel  witnesses to  give up  their  privilege against self-incrimi-
nation.     Though   wire-tapping  is  forbidden   by   the  Federal
Communications  Act   of   1934  and   by   Section   640  of   the
California  Penal  Code,  in  this  case  the  law  was  circumvented
by  the  use  of  other  listening  devices.    A  "bug"   was installed
'near  Irvine's  phone  and  officers  listened  in  from  a  garage  half
a  block  away  as he  made  book  on  the  horses.   Justice  Jackson
for  the  majority  expressed horror.   "Science,"  he  noted,   "has
perfected  instruments  of  surveillance and  invasion  of  privacy,
whether  by  the  policeman,  the  blackmailer  or  the  busybody."
But  he  held  that  this  did  not  violate  the  law  because  "there
was  no interference with  the  communications  system ... no
interception  of  any  message."
The  Act  Says Nothing of  'Taps'
This   does  not   necessarily  follow  from   the   words  of   the
statute.   The  Communications  Act  says nothing  about  "inter-
ference."    It  does not  use the  term  "wire-tapping."  It  forbids
"interception,"  whether of  telegraphic  or  telephonic  communi-
cations.   To  say  that  interception  is  illegal  only  if  the  wire is
actually  tapped  is  to  render  the  law  futile   at  a  time  when
there  are  new  electronic  devices  for   listening  in  without  a
direct  physical  tap.
Jackson  as  Attorney  General  was  one  of  the  first  to  allow
the  FBI  to  tap  wires despite  the  law  on  the  specious  grounds
that  the  words  "intercept  and  divulge"   permitted   intercep-
tion  but  not  divulgence.    As  Supreme  Court  Justice,  he has
fathered  a  comparable  sophistry.     His  words  open  the  way
for  the  first  time  to  use of  evidence  obtained  by  these  newer
listening  devices;    Should  wire-tapping  be  authorized  by  Con-
gress  under  restrictions,  the  restrictions  could  be  circumvented
by  using  these  alternative  methods.     Under  Jackson's  inter-
pretation  neither  a  Judge's  order  nor  the  Attorney   General's
approval  would  be  required   for  the  use  of  listening  devices
which  do  not  physically  "tap"   the  wire  itself.
A  Succession  of   Accidents
The  Irvine  decision  shows  how  little  reliance  can  be placed
on  such  protective  safeguards  anyway.    Another   section  of
the  California  code  makes  it  a  crime  for   a  police  officer   to
use  a  listening  device  of  any  kind  without  the  consent  of  the
chief  of  police or  the district  attorney.   During  the  oral  argu-
ment,  a  question  from  Chief  Justice  Warren  to  the  Assistant
Attorney  General  of  California  elicited  an  admission  that  no
such  consent  had  been  obtained'in  the  Irvine  case.    Thus  the
Supreme  Court  in  upholding  the  conviction  not  only  allowed
..    -                                                                                                1 7
the  police  to  circumvent  Federal  and  State  law  against  wire-
tapping  but  to  violate  a  State  law  restricting  the  use of  other
listening   devices.     Indeed   the   violation   would   never   have
come  to  light  but  for  a  succession  of  coincidences—a  chance
question  from  the  bench  in  the  final  stage  of  the  case,  put  by
a  Chief  Justice  who  happened  to  be  familiar  with   the  law
because  he  was  once  himself  a  California  prosecutor.
The  Irvine  decision  also  throws  light  on  pending  "immun-
ity"  legislation.    The  penal  code  of  California  does  not  allow
a  witness  to  plead  his  privilege  against  self-incrimination  if
asked  about  gambling,  but   he  cannot  be  prosecuted  on   the
basis  of  his  testimony.    One  of  the  questions  put  to  the  Su-
preme  Court   on  appeal  was  "Whether  a  defendant  may  be
tried  and  convicted  in  the  State courts  upon  evidence  obtained
by  compulsion of  a  Federal  Statute,  and  thereafter  introduced
in  evidence against  an  accused  in  the  State  court."
This  was the  background  of  the  question.    A  19 Jl  Federal
law   makes  it   a  crime  to  run   a  gambling  business  without
reporting  to  the  government  and  buying  a  Federal   wagering
tax  stamp.  Irvine made the  disclosure and paid  the  tax.   When
the  tax  stamp  was  found  in  his  home,  it  was  entered  in  evi-
dence  against  him.    His  lawyer  protested  that  under  such  a
system,  "You   confess   or  you  go  to  Federal  prison;   having
confessed  you  now  go  to  State's  prison."
A  Spurious Immunity
The  question  put  to  the  Court  has  wide  ramifications.    If
pending  immunity  legislation  is  passed,  will  it  confer  immun-
ity   against  State  prosecution?     A  liberal  or  radical  may  be
compelled  to  admit* associations  and  activities   which   can  be
used  for  prosecution  under  State  sedition  or  criminal  syndical-
ism  laws.    The  Struik  and  Nelson  cases  show  how  little  be-
yond  mere  exercise  of  free  speech  may  be  enough  for   such
prosecutions.     The  "immunity"  conferred   is  then  spurious.
The  Court  dodged  the  question  in  the  Irvine   case  on  the
ground  that  it  was  raised  too  late  in  the  proceedings.    But
Justice   Black,  with  Douglas  concurring,  protested,  "So  far
as  this  case  is  concerned  it  is  enough  for  me  that  Irvine  was
convicted   in  a  state  court  on  a  confession   coerced   by   the
Federal  Government.   I  believe," he went  on, "this   frustrates
a  basic  purpose  of  the  Fifth  Amendment—to  free   Americans
from  fear  that  federal  power  could  be  used  to  compel  them
to  confess  conduct  or  beliefs  in  order  to  take  away  their  life,
liberty  or  property."
Unfortunately  this  is a  minority  view.  The  State  court  in
the  Irvine  case  permitted  his  "confession"  to  be  used  against
him  despite   the   State   immunity   law  as  well   as  the   Fifth
Amendment!   "Licensing  such   easy  evasion   of   the   Amend-
ment,"  Justice  Black  said,  "has  proven  a  heavy  drain  on  its
vitality    although   no   such   debilitating    interpretation   was
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone'g  Weekly,  February  IS,  1954
given  the  Amendment by this  Court  until  it  decided  U. S.  v.
Murdoch   in  1931,  one  hundred  and  forty  years  after   the
Bill  of  rights  was  adopted."
False  Analogies  and  Fake Precedents
It  would be  hard  to  match  the  fallacious  character  of  the
analogy   drawn  by  Justice  Butler   for  the  majority   in  the
Murdock  case.    "The  English  rule  of  evidence  against  com-
pulsory   self-incrimination,   on  which  historically  that  con-
tained  in the Fifth  Amendment rests," Butler  ruled, "does  not
protect  witnesses  against  disclosing   offenses   in  violation  of
the  laws  of  another  country."    California  or  any  other  of
the  47  States  is  hardly  "another  country."    Two  English
cases  w«re cited, with  a great  show of learning  and  authority,
but  neither  covers  the  situation  here  and  one Queen v.  Boyes,
(I   B.  & S.  311)   is  not  even  in  point,  though  our  law  books
continue  solemnly  to  cite  it  as  if  it  were.*
Brownell  Knows Better
This  is  nevertheless  the  law  as  it  now stands.   Yet  Attor-
ney  General  Brownell in his  letter  last  week to  the  chairman
of  the  House Judiciary  Committee said  the  "immunity"  legis-
Another  of  Those Holdovers
Justice  Frankfurter  ended  his  dissenting  opinion  in
Irvine  v.  California  with  a  quotation   from   an  unex-
pected  libertarian source.
"Our   people,"  he  quoted,  "may  tolerate   many  mis-
takes  of  both  intent  and  performance, but  with  unerr-
ing  instinct,  they  know  that  when any  person  is  inten-
tionally  deprived  of  his  constitutional  rights  those  re-
sponsible  have  committed  no  ordinary  offense.   A  crime
of  this  nature,  if  subtly  encouraged by  failure  to  con-
demn  and  punish,  certainly   leads  down  the   road  to
totalitarianism."
The quotation was  from  the  September, 1952, issue of
the  FBI  Law Enforcement  Bulletin  and the  words were
those  of—guess  who?—'•   Edstar   Hoover.   w
e
  suggest  a
loyalty  check.
*When  I  found  the  case, it  turned  out to  involve a  different
question.'  A  man  accused  of  bribery  in  an  English  election
declined  to  testify  though  granted  a  pardon  in  advance.   He
pleaded   unsuccessfully  that   under  the   Act  of   Settlement,
12  &  13  W.3,  he  was  still  subject,  despite  that  pardon,  to
possible  impeachment by  the  House  of  Commons.   This  is  a
beautiful   example  of  juristic   flummery;   the   case  does  not
cover  the  point  for  which  Butler  cited  it,  much  less  the  real
question  before  the  Court,
lation  he favors  "affords  to  a  witness  as  broad  a  protection
against  prosecution  as  the  constitutional  privilege  which  he
is  required  to  surrender."  This  is  untrue,  except  in  the  most
disingenuous  sense,  as  Brownell  well  knows.    None  of   the
pending "immunity"  bills to  compel witnesses to  give  up their
privilege   against   self-incrimination   would   give   them   im-
munity  from  State  prosecution.    They  would  thus  make  a
fundamental   breach  in  the  Fifth  Amendment  and  facilitate
political  persecution.   This  is  one of  the  warning  signals  for
intellectuals  to  be  read  in  this  obscure  case  of  a  California
bookie,  in  which lawlessness  by  law  enforcement  officials  was
given  new encouragement by a majority  of the  U.  S. Supreme
Court.
The  Poor  U.  S. General  Who  Didn't  Think  Stalin  Always  Lied
Washington—Under  the  engaging  title,  "Communist Infil-
tration  in the  Army",  the  McCarthy  committee has just made
public  the  transcript  of  the  executive  session  at  which  Gen.
Richard  C. Partridge,  G-2, U.  S. Army, was  interrogated  last
,  Fall  about  that  Army  pamphlet  on  Soviet   Siberia.
Gen.   Partridge  seems  to  have  rubbed  McCarthy the  wrong
way  from  the  start.    The  General  said  the  pamphlet   was
designed  to  give as  objective a  picture  as  possible  of how peo-
ple  in  Soviet  Siberia  felt  about  the  Communist  regime  and
"not   give  the  idea  of  the  Communist  government   and  the
situation  in  Russia  as  seen  from  the  United  States."
McCarthy  charged  into  the  fray   immediately.    "Do  you
know,"  he  asked,  "that  this  book  quotes  verbatim  from  Joe
Stalin,  without  attributing  it  to  him, as  a  stamp  of  approval
of  the   U.  S.  Army?"    Gen  Partridge  said  he  didn't  know
that  it  did.
Instead  of  nailing  the  culprit  by  triumphantly  producing
the   offending   passage,  McCarthy  asked,  "Don't  you  think
before  you  testify  you  should  take  time  to  find  out  whether
it  quotes Joe  Stalin  and  other  notorious  Communists?"   The
witness   never  got  a  chance  to  answer  that  question.    Mc-
Carthy   himself   didn't   seem  to  know  just  what   had   been
quoted  from   Stalin   and   where.
For  a  Senator  who aspires  to  be an  unofficial  Secretary  of
State,  McCarthy  is  in  need  of  briefing.    His  next  question
referred  to  "the   Soviet  embassy  in  Moscow."   "If  you  were
to  learn,"  McCarthy  asked  Gen.  Partridge,  "that  the  book
quotes   from   Mr.   Simmons   (Prof.  Ernest  J.   Simmons  of
Columbia),  without  showing  what  part  is  from  the  work  of
Mr.  Simmons;  that  Mr.  Simmons  wrote  work  under  direct
instructions  of  the   Soviet   Embassy   in  Moscow,  would  you
still  say  it  is  an  honest  attempt  to  give  an  accruate  picture
of  life  in  Communist   Russia?"
Gen.   Partridge  insisted   stubbornly,  "It   would  all  depend
on  what  was  said."
The  General  tried  to  explain  that  the  main  source  of  the
information  used  in  the  pamphlet  "were  returned  Japanese
POW's."    McCarthy  didn't  give  him  a  chance.    He  wanted
to  know  again,  "Do  you  think  books  with  authors   such  as
Simmons,  identified  as  a  Communist taking  orders  from  the
Moscow  Embassy  when  he  wrote  this,  carrying  articles  by
Corliss  Lamont,  Harriet  Moore,  Frederick   Schuman,  do you
think  that  type  of  book  should  be  used  to  indoctrinate   our
military?"
Gen.  Partridge  insisted  that  this  was not  an  indoctrination
pamphlet,  and  that  McCarthy was  talking  about  the  books
listed  in  the  bibliography.    McCarthy  brushed  the  explana-
tions  aside.   He wanted  to  know  whether  "a  book  like  that
should  be  withdrawn  or  used  to  indoctrinate   our  military."
The  General  was trapped  into  heresy.
GEN.   PARTRIDGE.  I'd  want  to  read  the  book  first.
THE   CHAIRMAN   (McCarthy).  Even  though   you  know  it
is  put  out  by  Communist authors?
GEN.   PARTRIDGE.  It  would  all  depend  on what  they  say.
THE   CHAIRMAN.  You  don't  object  to  Communist  authors
unless  you  first  see  what  they  say,  although   he  is  writing
books  under  the  instructions  of  the   Moscow  Embassy.    Is
that  correct?
The  General  was  an  intrepid  fellow,  and  had  led  with  his
chin.    McCarthy  later  in  the  hearing  again  brought  up  the
same  business  about  quoting  Stalin  verbatim,  and  wanted  to
know  whether  the  writer  of  the  pamphlet  in  quoting  Stalin
"was  trying  to  give  a  correct  picture."
"Whether   he  did,"   Gen.  Partridge   replied    incautiously,
"would  depend on what  he  quoted.   I  don't  think   everything
Stalin  says  is  a  lie.   He is  bound to  say  something true  once
in  a  while.    I  don't  know what  he  quoted  from  Stalin."
A  phone call to the  Pentagon  last week elicited the  informa-
tion  that  General Partridge was transferred  out of G-2 short-
ly  after   the  hearing  and  assigned   in  January  to  command
the  43rd  Infantry   Division  in  Europe.    The  Siberian   pam-
phlet  was  "declassified."    But  copies  are  no  longer  available.
"It  was  sent  back,"  the  officer  on  press  duty  said  obscurely.
"Sent  back  where?"  he  was  asked.   "I  have  no  idea,"  was
the  answer.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  is, 1954
I. F.  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publisher,  L F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20J,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription rates:  Domestic,  $5
»   year;   Canada,  Mexico  and  elsewhere   in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  SIO  by   1st  class  mail,  $1]  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   If   cents.   Tel.:  LI  4-7087.    Entered  as  Second  Clan  mail
matter.  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
February   IS,  1954Vol.  2, No.  4
BULLETINS
On  Indo-China
"A  severe  winter,  with  destitute  men,  women  and  children
frozen  to  death  in  Paris,  has  crystallized  public  opinion  into
a  great  outcry  to  end  the  colonial  war  in  Indo-China.   The
press  and  everyone  I  have  spoken  to  are  indignant  that  the
French  government  has  spent  seven billion  dollars  in  fighting
this  war  but  has  failed  to  build  housing  for  the   growing
population  of  Paris."    So  wrote  Henry  Wales  from  Paris
last  Wednesday  in  that  well-known  Mid-Western  organ  of
pacifism  and  radicalism,  the  Chicago   Tribune.
Here  in  Washington,   when  three  senior  Southern  Demo-
crats  with  the  committee  positions  and  prestige  of  Senators
Stennis   (Miss.),  Byrd   (Va.)  and  George  (Georgia)   attack
the  Administration  for  sending  air  force  mechanics  to  Indo-
China,  a  major  political  battle  is  impending.
During  the  debate  in  the  Senate  last  Tuesday,  the  two
most  important   points  made  by  the   Democratic   opposition
went  generally  unreported.   Stennis  said there were  Filipino,
Korean   and  Japanese   mechanics   qualified   to   service  these
planes, that their  use "was  considered, but . . . for one  reason
or  another,  the  idea  was  rejected  and  the  plan  to  use  U.  S.
Air   Force  mechanics  was  adopted."     Stennis   also   said  he
had   seen  French  mechanics   repairing  jet   engines  and  jet
planes  at   our  bases  in  France   and  asked  why  they  could
not  have  been  sent  instead.
What  the  Democrats  scent  is  a  deliberate  effort  to  involve
the  U.  S.,  first  through  "token" forces  of mechanics  and  then
with  troops.    As  to  this,  Mansfield   (D.  Mont.)  who  knows
the  Far   Eastern  situation   intimately   told  the  Senate  the
French  and  the  Associated  States  already  had  400,000 men
as   against  Ho  Chi-minh's   300,000.   "What   good   would   it
do,"  Mansfield  asked,  "to  send  any  more  men  from   outside
.  .  .  when  there  is a  superiority  not  only  in  manpower  but
in  equipment  as   well?"
Eisenhower   at   press  conference   Wednesday   and   Wilson
the   day  before  expressed   the  views  of  top   Administration
officials  fighting  a  rearguard  action  against  pressure   from
the  military  for  intervention.     The  China  Lobby  sees  Indo-
China  as  its  opportunity  and  Admiral  Radford,  chairman  of
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  is  ready  with  some  of  his   favorite
recipes   including  a   blockade   of   the   China  coast,  use  of
Chinese  Nationalist   forces   in   Indo-China   and   even  active
intervention  by  U.  S.  air  and  naval  units.    (Remember how
it  was  said  that  air  and  naval  support  would  be  enough  to
end  the  Korean  war?)
One little  noticed  remark by Wilson at  his  press conference
may  reflect an  argument  being  used by the military to belittle
the  risk  of  Chinese  intervention.    The  Secretary  of  Defense
said  the  terrain  and  logistic  situation  was  such  that  large-
scale  Chinese intervention  was  impossible.    (This  also  recalls
some  other  expert  advice  in  Korea).
On Korea
As we go to press, General  John Hull and  Special  Ambassa-
dor  John  Allison  have  just  flown  in  from  Korea.    Neither
State  nor  Pentagon  would  deny  or  confirm  a  story   carried
exclusively  last  week by  the  respected  Sunday  Times  of  Lon-
don  from  its  correspondent,  Richard  Hughes, in  Tokyo saying
that  Hull  and  Allison  were  on their  way  back  because  Syng-
man  Rhee  threatens  in  April  to  seize  that  section  of  North
Korea  just  above  the  38th  Parallel  on the  East  coast  which
is  under  General  Hull's  administration.     This   area,   with
65,000  people  and  some  of  the  richest  tungsten  mines  in  the
world,  is under  UN  control.    Rhee wants  to  take  it  over,  and
to  take  it   over  forcibly.    It   would  give  him  a  cheap  and
easy  "march  north"  at  UN  expense.
Give Me Your Poor—But Only  The  Docile  Ones
"I  just  do not agree  with  the  idea that my country  regard-
less  of  what  is  chiselled  on the  Lady  that  stands  out  in  the
Harbor   in  New  York,  wants  to  be  given  all  the  poor  and
downtrodden  people  of  other  countries.   My people  have  been
here  a  long  time—nearly  300 years—and  I  do  not  think  we
are  a  catchall  for  everyone  that  wants  to  come  here  .  .  .
On  this  wetback   proposition,  if  you  talk  with  a  Texan,  he
had  rather  have  a  laborer  from  down in  Mexico that  has  not
been  indoctrinated   by  communism  and   socialism—the  kind
that  the  Labor  government  sent  over  here  from  Mexico—he
had  rather  have  those   which  he  can  control  and  who  are
docile  because  they  make  better  field  hands."
—Congressman  Cliff   Clevenger,   (R.  Ohio),  at  page
192  House  Appropriations   Committee  Hearings  on
the  Justice  Department  Budget  for   1954.
Personal  Note:  The  E.  and  P.  was  being  operated   on  for
deafness  this  week-end.    No  interruption  of  publication   is
expected  but  should  some  complication  force  suspension   for
a  week,  all  subscriptions   will  be  automatically   extended  by
one  week,  assuring  50 issues  a  year.
You'll  Soon  Be  Dropped,  If  You  Haven't   Renewed
Some  explanations  are  in  order.    To  save  money  my  whole  name  plate  chain  is being  redone  at  once; that  is  why
your  expiration  date  has  not  yet  changed  even  though  you  have  renewed.   The  task  of  prodding  renewals  is  terribly
expensive;  frankly  it  could  have  broken the  Week/y  financially  and  I  am  terribly  grateful  to  our  readers  for  having  re-
newed  in  such  volume  and  with  so  many  gift  subs  without  such  prodding.    There  are  still  some  laggards.    If  you  are  hard
pressed  for  the  moment  and  would  like  to  have  me wait,  write  and  say  so and  I  will  keep  you  on  the  subscription  rolls
until  you  can  renew.   Otherwise I  must  now  go  ahead  with  the  making  of  a  new  chain  which  means  that  I  will  soon
have  to  drop  those  few  who have  not yet  renewed.   I  hate  to  drop  a  reader.    It's  like  losing  a  friend.    So renew  now if
you  can  and  if  you  can't  drop  me  a  line.    But do  it  today.                                                     —I.  F. STONE
P.S.  I  mailed  out 5,000  sample  copies  of  Vol  II,  NQ. 2,  the  special issue on the  Elsenhower  loss-of-citizenship  proposal.
There  were  some  duplications between  lists  used  and  and  my  own.   So  if  you  got  an  extra  copy,  don't  worry.    Just  pass
it  on.
2  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February   IS,
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Reds' Line  (See FBI) Already  Crowded  with  Patriots
In  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  latest  fill  in  (to  the  House  Appropria-
tions  Committee)   on  just  what   the  rugged  little  band  of
Communists   in  our  national  bosom  is  up  to  now, maverick
minds  must  find  much  for  sprightly   reflection.   Mr.  Hoover,
it  will  be  recalled,  is  the  one  for  facts,  leaving  evaluations  to
his  superiors—and  naturally,   since  the  facts  are  given out,
to  the  public  generally.    The  news,  as passed  to  the  congress-
men,  is  (a)   that  the  party  has  gone  deeper  underground  and
(b)   that  from  deeper  underground  its  principal  goals  are  as
follows:  settlement  of  the  Korean  war  and  the  return  home
of  our  troops,  a  big  power  peace  pact  including  Red  China,
and  U.  S. trade  with  the  Iron  Curtain  countries.    Also  repeal
of  the  Smith  Act, the  Taf t-Hartley  law  and  the  Internal  Se-
curity  Act  of  1950.
The  very  principal  goal  of  the  party,  it  must  be  assumed,
still   would  be  the  overthrow   of  our   government   by   force
and  violence, or  at  least  by  subversion;  though  apparently  Mr.
Hoover  felt  it  unnecessary to  bring  that  up  again.   And  the
estimate  that  remains  to  be  made,  now  that  Congress  and  the
common  intelligence  have  freshly  been  posted,  is  of  the  prac-
tical  relation  of   the  party's   program   not   only   to  its  own
horrible  ultimate  aim  but  to  the  purposes  of  other—unpro-
scribed—groups  of  unquestionable  loyalty.
The  Republican  party,  for  instance, or  at  any rate  a  faction
of  it   far   more  numerous  than   all  the  evanescent  Reds  and
their  fellow  travellers  together,   is  no  less  passionately   for  a
settlement  in  Korea,  and  for  "bringing  the  boys  home,"  two
divisions  at  a  time,  as  fast  as  possible.    Its  spokesmen  point
proudly,  and  with   reason,  to   the   cease-fire  as  the   greatest
accomplishment   of   the   Eisenhower   administration  to   date.
The  administration  is  moving—ponderously  but   as  fast  as  it
dares—to  end  the  antic  pretense  that  the  government  of  600
million  Chinese  does  not  exist.    And  American  business  in-
creasingly  chafes  under  strategic  trade  restrictions  the  busi-
nessmen  of  allied  Free  World  nations  already  impatiently  are
breaking  through.
In  whatever  crevices into  which  they  may  have disappeared
the  Communists  cannot  be  more  against  Taft-Hartley  than
the   great,   respectable   and   ostentatiously      anti-Communist
labor   organizations,   nor   more   against  the    holier-than-thou
sedition  laws  than  are Harry  S. Truman,  the  primitive  demo-
crats  and  the  Methodist   church.     The   question  follows  of
how   the   Communist   program   on   which   Mr.   Hoover   has
given  us  the  low-down  can  even  maintain  an  identity  in  all
of  this  concurrence?     And  room  can  be  made  for   considera-
tion  of  the  charming  possibility that  the  party  itself  has  not
been  able to  resist  ideological  assimilation  in  the  Melting Pot.
The   FBI  chief's   unadorned  facts  are—interesting—and  in
the  broad  picture  insignificant.   The  dutiful  but  congenitally
judicious  citizen  well  may  be  graced  for  failing  to  draw  from
them  whether  he  should  be  alarmed  anew  or  whether  indeed
his  mind  should  be  eased.    The  Communists  want  us  out  of
Korea,  but  Sen.  Vorys  (R.  Ohio)   insists  the  Democrats  put
us  into  war  there  to  heal  American  "joblessness."    Are  the
Communists  (and  Sen.  Vorys!)  trying  to  wreck  the  economy
by  getting  the  war  called off?—or  to  help  stabilize it,  Repub-
lican  fashion,  "without   war?"    The  judicious  citizen  hardly
need  lose  sleep over  it  either  way.
As  for  the  party's  retreat  deeper  underground,  it  is equally
•difficult  to  tell  whether or  not  this  is an eventuation  of  which
Mr.  Hoover—if  he  should  let  slip  an  evaluation—would  ap-
prove.    The   effect   of   the  new  laws  and  their   enforcement
(with  the  aid of  the  VFW)  is to  drive  the  party  into  further
hiding;  but  the  deeper  hid  the  more  difficult  the  enforcement
of   the  laws.    Even  now, Mr.  Hoover  reports   (complains?)
the  members  have  discarded  cards,  avoid  meetings  and  shun
use  of the telegraph  and telephone  . . .
And  here  is  the  one  part  of  the  report  that  beyond  doubt
is  cheerful.    For   if   the  party  has  given  up   the   telephone,
the  only  prop  is  out  from  under  the  commonly  abominated
wire-tap  bill  which  Mr.  Hoover,  and  his  boss  Mr.  Brownell,
have  up  to  now  been  pushing.
Copies  of  the  Special  Issue on Ike's Deprivaf ion-of-Citizenship  Bill Still Available
This  Is  Expiration   Time
PLEASE  RENEW   NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      —————————————————————————————.
Street    ._______——————____———————_-
City____________  Zone___  State______
Enter  this  gift  sab   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name   ._________________________
Street    ________________________________
City______.______  Zone—.__  State_ ___
2-15-64
I.  F. Stone's Weekly
Room  20$
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Mattel
Washington,  D.  C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED