I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954mar15.pdf

============================================================

EXTRA:   Liberal  Decision  Clears  Way  for  McCarran  "Immunity"  Bill,  Page 2
I, F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2,  NUMBER 8MARCH  15,  1954a,       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
But  It's  Not  Just  Joe  McCarthy
Washington
Buds  are  beginning  to  appear  on  the  forsythia,  and  welts
on  Joe  McCarthy.  The  early  arrival  of  spring  and  a  series of
humiliations  for  our  would-be  Fuehrer  have made this  a  most
pleasant  week  in  the  capital.
The  events of  the  week  are  worth  savoring.    Blunt  Charlie
Wilson  called McCarthy's  charges against  the  Army  "tommy-
rot"   and  for  once  Joe  had  no  come-back.    Next  day  came
the  ignominious   announcement  that   he  was  dropping   that
$2,000,000  suit   against  former   Senator   Benton   for   calling
McCarthy   a  crook  and  a  liar;  the  lame  excuse  promised   to
launch  a  nationwide  "I  Believe Benton"  movement.  Stevenson
followed   with  a  speech  calculated  to  impress  those  decent
conservatives  who  had  grown  disgusted  with  the  Eisenhower
Administration's  cowardice in  the  Zwicker  affair.
When  McCarthy  sought  to  answer  Stevenson,  the  Repub-
lican   National   Committee   turned   up   in   Ike's   corner  and
grabbed   the   radio  and  TV   time  away  from   him.    Nixon
was   to   reply,   and   McCarthy   was   out    (unless   somebody
smuggled  him  into  the  program in  place of  Checkers).  While
McCarthy  fumed   and   threatened,  his  own   choice  for   the
Federal  Communications  Commission,  Robert  E.  Lee,  ungrate-
fully   declared  he   thought   the  networks   had  done  enough
in  making  time  available  to  Nixon.   Next  day  a   Republican,
albeit   a   liberal  Republican,  Flanders  of   Vermont,   actually
got   up   on   the  floor  of   the   Senate  and   delivered   a  speech
against  McCarthy.    That  same  night  Ed  Murrow   telecast  a
brilliant  TV  attack  on  McCarthy.
Under  Stevenson's  leadership, Eisenhower rallied.    At  press
conference  he  endorsed  the  Flanders attack,  said  he  concurred
heartily  in  the  decision  to  have  Nixon   reply  to  Stevenson,
asserted  that  he. saw  no  reason  why  the  networks  should  also
give  time  to  McCarthy.    Like   an  escaped   prisoner,   flexing
cramped  muscles  in  freedom,  the  President  also  made it  clear
he   had   no  intention   of  turning   Indo-China   into   another
Korea  and  even  had  the  temerity  to  suggest  that  it  might  be
a   good   idea   to   swap  butter   and   other   surplus  farm   com-
modities  with Russia.
The   White  House   conference   was  no   sooner  over   than
Senator  Ferguson  as chairman of  the  Senate Republican  Policy
Committee   released  a  set  of   suggested   rules  for   Senate  in-
vestigating  committees  which  are  no  great  shakes  at   reform
but  would,  if  adopted,  make  it  impossible  for  McCarthy  any
longer  to  operate  his  subcommittee  as  a  one-man  show.  These
may  be small  enough  gains  in  the  fight  against  McCarthyism,
but  they  were  bitter  pills  for  McCarthy   to   swallow.
Still  Silence  in the  Senate
So  far   McCarthy's   colleagues  on  both   sides  of   the   aisle
have  been  lying  low.    When   Flanders  attacked  McCarthy,
the  Senate  was  as  silent  as  it   was  some  weeks  earlier   when
Ellender  of  Louisiana  made  a  lone  onslaught  and  Fulbright  of
Arkansas  cast  the  sole  vote  against  his  appropriation.    Only
Lehman  of  New  York   and  John  Sherman  Cooper   (R.)   of
Kentucky  rose  to  congratulate  Flanders.    Nobody  defended
McCarthy,  but  nobody  joined  in  with  those  helpful  interjec-
tions  which  usually mark  a  Senate  speech.    When  the  Demo-
cratic  caucus  met  in  closed  session,  the  Stevenson  speech  was
ignored.    Lyndon   Johnson   of   Texas,   the   Democratic   floor
leader,  is  frightened  of  McCarthy's  Texas  backers.
Need  One Be Fair With Satan?
Great   issues   are   rarely   resolved   by   frontal   assault;   for
every  abolitionist   prepared   to   challenge  slavery  as  a  moral
wrong,  there  were  dozens  of  compromising   politicians   (in-
cluding  Lincoln)   who  talked  as  if  the  real  issue  were  States
rights or  the  criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  Federal  courts  or  the
right   of   the  people   in  a  new  territory  to  determine  their
own  future.   In   the  fight  against  the  witch-mania   in   this
country   and  in  Europe,   there  were  few  enough   to  defend
individual  victims  but  fewer  still  who  were  willing  to  assert
publicly  that  belief  in  witchcraft  was  groundless.    So  today
in  the  fight  against  "McCarthyism."     It  is  sometimes  hard
to  draw  a  line  of  principle between McCarthy  and  his  critics.
If  there  is  indeed  a monstrous  and  diabolic  conspiracy  against
world   peace  and  stability,  then   isn't   McCarthy    right?    If
"subversives"  are  at  work  like  termites  here  and  abroad,  are
they  not  likely  to  be  found  in  the  most  unlikely  places  and
under  the  most  unlikely  disguises?    How  talk  of  fair  pro-
cedure  if  dealing  with  a  protean  and  Satanic  enemy?
To  doubt  the  power  of  the  devil,  to  question  the  existence
of  witches,  is  again  to  read  oneself  out  of  respectable   society,
to  brand  oneself  a  heretic,  to  incur  suspicion  of  being  oneself
in  league  with  the  powers  of  evil.    So all  the  fighters  against
McCarthyism   are  impelled  to  adopt  its  premises.    This  was
true  even  of  the  Stevenson  speech,  but   was  strikingly  so  of
Flanders.    The  country  is  in  a  bad  way  indeed  when  as  feeble
and  hysterical  a  speech  is haled  as  an  attack  on  McCarthyism.
Flanders  talked  of  "a  crisis  in  the  age  long  warfare  between
God  and  the  Devil  for  the  souls  of  men/'   He  spoke of  Italy
as  "ready  to  fall  into  Communist  hands," of  Britain  "nibbling
at  the  drugged   bait  of  trade  profits."    There  are  passages  of
sheer  fantasy,  like  this  one:   "Let   us  look  to  the  South.    In
Latin  America  there  are  study  strongpoints  of  freedom.    But
there  are  likewise,  alas,  spreading  infections   of  communism.
Whole  countries  are being  taken  over  .  .  ."    What  "whole
countries"?    And  what  "sturdy  strongpoints  of    freedom?"
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March*  lS
r
  1954
Justice  Black Wins A  Victory  for  The 5th  Amendment—
But  Clears The Way  for  McCarran's "Immunity" Bill
THE  LAST  CONSTITUTIONAL ARGUMENT AGAINST
THE   McCARRAN   IMMUNITY   BILL  was   destroyed   last
week  by  the  unanimous  decision  of  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court
in  Adams  v.  Maryland.   The  argument   was  that   Congress
could  not  compel  a  witness  to  give  up  his  privilege  against
self-incrimination  unless  it  conferred  upon  him  an  immunity
as  broad  as  the  privilege  itself.   Admittedly Congress  could
grant  immunity  from  Federal  prosecution.   But  could  Con-
gress  give  a   witness   immunity  from   State  prosecution?
The  answer—until  last  week—was  not  at  all  clear.    There
were  decisions  which  held  that   Congress  could  take  away
the  privilege  even  though  the  testimony  thus  elicited  might
later  be  used  against  the  witness  in  the  State  courts.   Last
Monday,  speaking  through  Mr. Justice  Black, the  Court  cited
Article  VI  of  the   Constitution  which  says  laws   made  in
pursuance    of   it  "shall   be  the   supreme  law   of  the   land,
and  the  judges  in  every  State  shall  be  bound  thereby,  any-
thing  in  the  Constitution  or  laws  of  any  State  to  the  con-
trary  notwithstanding   .  .  ."  For  the first  time  clearly and
unanimously  the  Court  held that  this  clause  empowered  Con-
gress  to   confer  immunity  from   State  as  well  as  Federal
prosecution.
The  case  involved  a  gambler  convicted  in  Maryland  courts
on  the  basis  of testimony  he  had  given  Senate  crime  investi-
gators.  The  conviction   was   reversed   on  the   ground   that
testimony   given  to  a  Congressional  investigating  committee
could  not  (under  an   1857  statute)  later  be  used  to  convict
him  of  crime  "in  any  court,"  including  (the  Supreme  Court
now  says)   any  State  court.    The  decision  may  help  clear
the  way  for  passage  of  S  16, the  McCarran  immunity  bill,
which  passed  the  Senate  last  July   (see  the  Weekly   of  July
18  last  for  text  and  a  full  account)  and  is  now  before  the
House  Judiciary  Committee.
Few  if  any  newspapers  seem  to  have noticed  that  Gambler
Adams,  in  appealing  to  the  Supreme  Court,  cited  controversy
over  S  16 as  his  final  and  clinching  argument  why  our  high-
est  court  should review  his  conviction. Though  the  McCarran
bill  was  not  mentioned  in  the  decision,  Black  did  say  "We
granted  certiorari  because  a  proper  understanding"  of  the
question  "is  of  importance  to  the  national   government,  to
the  States,  and  to  witnesses  summoned before  congressional
committees."
ONLY A  FEW  WEEKS AGO in Irwne  v. California,  Black
and  Douglas  dissenting  protested   the  conviction  of  a  Cali-
fornia   gambler  in  the  courts  of  that  State  on  the  basis  of
information  disclosed  under  coercion  to  the  Federal   govern-
ment,  despite  the   Fifth   Amendment  and   California's  own
"immunity"   legislation    (see  The   Case   of   The   California
Bookie in the  Weekly  for  February  15).  The majority dodged
the  question  in  that  case,  declaring  it  had  been  raised  too
late  in  the   proceedings.    This  time   Black  won  his  point,
but  it  may  prove  a  costly  victory.    Had  the  right  wing of
the   court   gone  the  other  way,  they  would  have  raised   a
serious  obstacle  to  "immunity"  legislation.
Even  so,  a  loophole  may  have  been  opened  by  a  passage
in  Justice  Jackson's   concurring  opinion.    He  said  of   the
ruling,  "It   does  not  say  Maryland  cannot  prosecute  peti-
tioner  .  .  .  she just  has  to  work  up  her  own evidence and
cannot  use  that  worked  up  by  Congress.   The  protection  to
the  witness  does  not  extend  beyond  the  testimony  actually
received."   Though  this  might   not  be  literally   true   of  a
broader  Federal  statute,  the  danger  is  still  there.    What  if
an  "immunized"  witness  testified  to  facts  which  could have
been  basis  for  prosecution  in  the  Federal  courts  under  the
Smith  Sedition  Act—and  then  Pennsylvania   (as  in  the  Steve
Nelson  case)  or  Massachusetts  (as  in  the  Dirk  Struik  case)
worked  up  evidence of  its  own to  support  prosecution   under
State  sedition  laws?    Would  a  majority   of  the   Supreme
Court  be  as  ready  in  that  event  to  defend  a  radical  as  it
was  to  rule  in  favor  of  a  Maryland  numbers  operator?
IN  ADDITION  TO THE  McCARRAN  BILL and  its  House
counterpart   (H.R.  6948  by  Wilson, D., Texas)  there  are  five
other  immunity bills  before  the  House Judiciary Committee.
The  most  extreme  HJR  11  (by  Boggs,  D.,  La.)  provides that
the   director   of  the   FBI   or  any  designated   assistant  may
compel  any  person  to  give  information  and  to  produce  docu-
ments   but   this   person   may   not  afterward   be  prosecuted
because  of  his  testimony  other  than  for  perjury  or  contempt.
Any  person  refusing  to  talk  may  be  haled  before  a  Federal
judge.  Presumably he could be jailed until he agreed  to  testify.
This  measure  is  unlikely, even  in  this  atmosphere,  to  get  out
of  committee.   Another  freak  measure   (HR  7658 by  Hosmer,
R.,  Cal.)  would impose a  $1,000 fine or  a  year  in jail  or  both
on  any  witness  who  invoked  his  privilege  under  the   Fifth
amendment  "when  he  either  does  not  in fact  fear  or  does  not
have reasonable  grounds to fear" self-incrimination.   Just how
this  could be  determined  without  forcing  the  witness  to  give
up  the  privilege  he was  invoking  is  a  mystery.
The  real  battle  will  be  joined  over  whether  the  Attorney
General   or   Congress   will  decide  when  immunity  is   to  be
granted.   HR  2737  (by  Norrell,  D.,  Ark.),  like  the  original
McCarran  bill,  would  shut  the  Attorney   General   out  alto-
gether.    HR   2829   (by   Battle,   D.,   Ala.)   would  give   the
Attorney  General  power  to  grant  immunity and  compel testi-
mony  in  court  and  grand  jury  proceedings,  but  not  before
Congressional  committees.    HR  6899  (by  Keating,  R.,  N.Y.)
would  give  the  Attorney   General  the   same  power  in  Con-
gressional  investigations  as well.   But  the Seating bill would
also  require  a  majority  vote  of  the  House  of  Congress  con-
cerned,  or  a  two-thirds  votes  of  the  full  investigating  com-
mittee  including  two  members  of  the  minority  party.
THE   KEATING  BILL  HAS  THE   BEST   CHANCE   OF
BEING  REPORTED  and  of  passing  the  House,  but  is  un-
likely  to  win  approval  in  the  Senate.    The  most  McCarran
would  accept  last  year  was  a  provision  requiring  that  the
Attorney  General  be  notified  a  week  before  any  witness  was
granted  immunity.   If  the  Attorney  General  did  not  assent
within  a  week,  immunity  could  nevertheless   be  granted  on
majority   vote  of  the   House  involved.   To  go  beyond  this
would  be  to  give  Brownell,  their  rival,  a  veto  power  over
McCarran  and  McCarthy.    The  latter,  as  we  have  already
reported,  is  not   enthusiastic   about  any  kind  of  immunity
legislation  and  prefers  the  easy  victories  to  be  won by  forc-
ing  witnesses  to invoke their  privilege  against  self-incrimina-
tion,  thus   adding  to   his  box  score  of  "Fifth  Amendment
Communists."    One  way  to  block  passage   this   year  is  to
demand  hearings.    It  is  a  scandal  that  legislation  making so
fundamental  a  change  in  American law  should  have  passed
the  Senate  without  hearings  of  any  kind.
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
of  a  European  army are  planning to  set  up  the  German  units
on  a  local  German  geographical   basis.    "Past  experience
with  the  refugee  politicians,"  the  Economist  says  "suggests
that  the  right  wing  have  in  mind  one  day  to  include  in  the
new  army  not  only Bavarian  divisions but  Silesian  and  East
Prussian."     The  new  German  army   is   being  planned  for
"liberationist"  purposes,  as  was  Hitler's.   But  what  if  again
they  strike  first  at  the  West,  this  time  outfitted   with  our
own   atomic  devices?    What   if   the   Japanese   join  them?
What traitors, dupes and fools the present  architects of Amer-
ican  policy will  seem  to  the  survivors  in  our  battered  cities!
MUST  READING—Alan  Earth's  "How  Good  la  An  FBI
Report?" in  the  March  issue  of  Harper's.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  15,  1954
I  E  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  list  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  201,  101
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  ),  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a  reu;  Canada,  Mexico  and  elsewhere  in   the  Western  Hemisphere,  $<;
England  and  Continental  Europe,   $10   by   1st  class  mail,   $11  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  (10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15   cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered  as  Second  Class  mail
matter.  Post  Office,  Washington,  O.  C.
March  15,  1954
Vol.  2, No. 8
What  Traitors,  Dupes  and Fools  .  . .
THE  STATE  DEPARTMENT'S  FAR  EASTERN  POLICY
MAKERS   ARE  APPALLED   by   Prime   Minister   Laniel's
speech  on  Indo-China  in  the  Chamber of  Deputies  last week-
end.    M.  Laniel  seems  seriously   to  believe  that  at  Geneva
the  French   can  sidetrack  Korea  for   Indo-China   and   then
make  a  deal  with  Peiping  and  Moscow.   Ho  Chi-minh would
be  sacrificed  in  return  for  recognition  of  Communist  China
and  the  withdrawal  of  American  troops   from   Korea.    The
tone  of  the  speech  and  this  "barter  arrangement"   at  which
it  hinted  indicates  how uniformed  it  is  possible for  one  allied
government  to  be  about  the  state  of mind existing in  another
capital.   M. Laniel is  operating  in  a  completely'unreal  world.
The  notion  that  a  colonial  revolt   with   as  wide  a  popular
base as  Ho's  could  be  snuffed  out  on signal  from  the Kremlin
is fantastic  enough, though not  quite  as  fantastic  as  the  idea
that  the  Eisenhbwer  Administration  could  possibly  enter  into
a  general  settlement  with  Communist  China  and  withdraw
from  Korea  at  this  time.    Arthur  Dean   destroyed   himself
politically   by   suggesting  that   perhaps   we   may   have   to
recognize   Communist  China  some  day.     Dulles   is   in   hot
water  because  he  agreed  even  to  sit  down  with  the  Chinese
Reds  at  Geneva.
M. LANIEL  SEEMS TO BELIEVE  THAT  FRANCE  CAN
AVOID  any   real   sacrifice  or  painful  adjustment   in   Indo-
China  while the  U.S.  pays  the  political  bill, buying  Ho's  head
on  a  platter.  The  fact  is  that  Washington   does  not  want  a
settlement  of  the  Indo-Chinese  war.    Washington  fears  that
given  peace  the  combination  of  nationalists  and  Communists
behind  Ho  would  ultimately  take  over  the  government.   This
belief  in  the  potency  of  the  Communists  would  make  peace,
real  peace,  impossible   anywhere.    The  American  right  has
long  thought  that  the  less  free  the  "free  world"  is,  the  less
danger  that  it  might  make the  wrong  choice.   In  Indo-China,
if  France  backs  out,  we  will  step  in,  as  we  stepped  in  to
replace  the  British  in  Greece.   There  is  little  doubt  that  the
White  House is  not  only opposed to  sending  troops  but  wants
to  get  those  American  technicians  out  of  Indo-China  as  soon
as  possible.    Nevertheless  the  chances  are  that  those  circles
in  the  Pentagon  which  believe  Indo-China  the  key  to  South-
east  Asia  will  yet  find  a  way  to   intervene.
SLICKEST OF  THE NEW  AGREEMENTS  WITH  JAPAN
is  that  "regarding  the  guaranty  of  investments."   This  has
been  represented  as  guaranteeing  American   investments  in
Japan   against   expropriation   or   non-convertibility   of   cur-
rency.    An  examination  of  the  text  as  released  here  by  the
State   Department    shows,   however,  that   this   agreement
merely   permits   the   American   government    to   guarantee
American  investors  against  loss  and  to  assume  their  assets
in  Japan.    Yen  amounts  so acquired  by  the  U.S.  government
"shall  be  accorded  treatment  not  less  favorable"   than  that
accorded  private  American  holdings  of  yen  at  the  time,  and
such  amounts  may  be  used  by  the  American  government  in
Japan—but   only  "for   non-military  administrative    expendi-
tures"!    There  is  nothing  in  the  agreement  which   would
prevent  Japan  from  expropriating   American  investments  or
making  their  proceeds  non-convertible.
THAT LAST "TWENTY  YEARS OF TREASON"  will  pale
beside  this  twenty  years  of  treason   as  the  American   gov-
ernment  hastens  to  rearm  Germany  and  Japan.   The  worst
thing   we  are   doing   is   to   destroy   in   both  countries   the
popular  resistance  to  remilitarization,  the   first   feeling  of
its  kind  in  many  years  and  the  only  basis  on  which  world
security  could  have  been  rebuilt.    As  Walter  S.  Robertson,
Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,  said
in   an   extraordinarily    fatuous   speech   at    Cleveland   last
February  6,  "Some  Japanese—as  well  as  some others  in  the
Far  East—are opposed to Japanese rearmament  because they
fear  it  would mean  a  recrudescence  of  the  military  caste  in
Japan.   I  believe they are too much influenced by the past.. .
The  Japanese  people  are   now  possessed  of  the   means  re-
quired  to  prevent   the  accumulation  of  power  in  the  hands
of  a military  caste.   They  have  free  elections  . . . they  have
a   free  press,"  etc.     That  free   press  is   busily  fighting  a
rearguard  action  against  a  legislative  tide  that  is  carrying
Japan  back  to  police  state  methods   and  monopoly;  we  will
intensify  the  tide  by  giving  the  military  arms  "for   internal
security" and  by  provisions  in  the  new agreements  which  re-
quire  a  tightening  of  "security" regulations  in  Japan.  These
have  a  sinister  history  in  that  country.
IN  GERMANY,  AS  IN  JAPAN,  THERE  IS  FEAR  OF
REARMING.     In  a   dispatch   to  the  Baltimore   Sun   from
Bonn  last   Monday,  Paul   W.  Ward   reported   astutely  that
"even  more  than  the  French  fear  the  Germans,  the  Germans
fear  themselves  .  .  .  They  have  no confidence  in the  ability
of  either  themselves  or their  compatriots  to  hold  the  military
in  check  by  democratic   process."    England  prepares  to  go
along  with   German  rearmament   but  not   out  of  conviction.
It  is  not  surprising  to  read  the  warnings  of  G. D. H.  Cole in
last  week's  New  Statesman  and  Nation  but  it  is  surprising
to  find  forebodings   in  the  pages  of  the   London   Economist,
which  has  been  a  supporter  of  American  policy.   The  Econ~
omist  says  that  while  the  German  people  are  either  passive
or  antagonistic  and   the   German  business   community  un-
enthusiastic  about  rearmament  "in  the  background   of  Dr,
Adenauer's  right  wing  coalition  partners  are  generals  who
believe  that  the  Nazi  New  European  Order  and  the  Viking
Division  of  the   Waffen   SS  were  the   models  for   the  anti-
Communist  Europe  of  tomorrow."   It   is  disturbing   to   sec
that the  German  military  while  paying lip service  to the  idea
(Continued  on Page  Two)
(With  Apologies to  Maimonides) Our Own Guide  to  the  Perplexed
Do  you  often  wonder how  the  deadly  barrage  of  stereo-
types  on  press,  radio  and  TV  could  be  combatted?  How
news  and information of  the  kind  available in  this  Weekly
could  reach  a  wider  audience and thus  be  made  more  effec-
tive?  Why  not  place it  in  the  hands of  your Congressman,
your  Minister,  your  local  editor?  Give  any  one  or  all  of
them  a  gift  subscription  at  our  special  rate  of  $4  a  year,
and  help  bring  the  fresh  air  of  dissent  and  independent
reporting into the inner councils of  yonr  community.   (An-
other  idea  is  to  subscribe  for  your  local  library.)    Why
not  turn  the  page  and  send  such  a  gift  subscription  to-
day?    Can you  think  of  an  easier  and less  expensive  way
to  influence  a  speech,  a  sermon  or  an  editorial?
—I.  F.  Stone
3  *
3   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  IS,  19S^
How  Stem Witch  Mania While Acquiescing  in  Demonology?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Flanders  pictured  the  Iron  Curtain  drawn   tight  about   the
U.S.  and  Canada,  the  rest  of  the  world  captured  "by  infiltra-
tion  and  subversion."   Flanders  told  the  Senate,  "We  will  be
left  with  no  place  to  trade  and  no  place  to  go  except  as we
are  permitted  to  trade  and  to  go  by  the  Communist  masters
of   the  world."
The  center  of  gravity  in  American  politics  has  been pushed
so  far   right   that  such  childish  nightmares  are  welcomed  as
the   expression   of   liberal  statesmanship.    Nixon   becomes  a
middle-of-the-road   spokesman   and   conservative  papers  like
the  Washington  Star  and  New  York  Times  find  themselves
classified  more  and  more  as  parts  of  the  "left   wing  press."
In  this  atmosphere  the  Senate Republican  reply  to  McCarthy's
silly  "Communist   coddling"  charges  against  the  Army  is  to
launch a formal investigation  of  their  own  through  Saltonstall
and  the  Armed  Services  Committee.    This  will  be  the  Re-
publican   and  Army  analogue  of   the   Tydings  inquiry  into
the  charges  against  the  State  Department   and  will  be  greeted
with   the   same  cry   of  whitewash   by   the  growing  lunatic
fringe   behind  McCarthy.
Pandering  to  Paranoia
There  are   some   charges   which  must   be  laughed   off   or
brushed  off.    They  cannot   be  disproved.    If  a  man  charges
that  he  saw  Eisenhower  riding  a  broomstick  over  the   White
House,  he  will  never  be  convinced  to  the  contrary  by  sworn
evidence  that  the  President  was  in  bed  reading   a- Western  at
the   time.     Formal   investigations   like   Saltonstall's   merely
pander  to  paranoia  and  reward  demagogy.    What  if  McCar-
thy  were next to attack  the  President  and the  Supreme Court?
Are  they,  too,  to  be  investigated?   Is  America  to  become  a
country  in  which  any  adventurer  flanked  by  two  ex-Com-
munist  screwballs  will  put  any  institution  on  the  defensive?
McCarthy  is  personally  discomfitted,  but  McCarthyism  is
still  on  the  march.  Acheson  fought  McCarthy,  but  preached
a  more  literate  variation  of  the  Bogeyman  Theory  of  History.
Eisenhower  fights  McCarthy,  but   his  Secretary   of   State  in
Caracas  is  pushing hard  for  a  resolution  which  would  spread
This  Is  Expiration   Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    ......_.._....._.._._____.___..„_____._.....„_„_..___.„_....__.__;
Street  .._.................___......    ...........„.._.„„„.„.:______
City................   ....................  Zone   ......   State..._....._._
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name  .......................        ........._..................__
Street   ..................__.._............................_..„•._____•——
City...  ...........    .....................  Zone  ._..__..  State__„._
8-16-2*
McCarthyism  throughout   the  hemisphere,  pledging  joint  ac-
tion  for  "security"  and  against  "subversion."    Nowhere  in
American  politics  is  there  evidence  of  any  important  figure
(even  Stevenson)   prepared  to  talk  in  sober,  mature  and  re-
alistic  terms  of  the  real  problems  which  arise in  a  real  world
where  national   rivalries,  mass  aspirations  and  ideas  clash  as
naturally  as  the  waves of  the  sea.   The  premises  of  free  soci-
ety  and  of  liberalism  find  no  one  to  voice  them,  yet  McCar-
thyism   will   not  be  ended  until   someone  has  the   nerve   to
make  this  kind  of  a  fundamental  attack  upon  it.
What  are  the  fundamentals  which  need  to  be  recognized?
The  first  is  that  there  can  be  no  firm  foundation  for   free-
dom  in  this  country   unless  there  is  real  peace.    There  can
be  no  real  peace without  a  readiness for  live-and-let-live,  i.e.
for  co-existence  with  communism.    The  fear  cannot  be  ex-
tirpated  without  faith  in  man  and  freedom.    The  world  is
going  "socialist"  in  one  form  or  another  everywhere;   com-
munism   is  merely  the  extreme  form   this   movement  takes
when  and  where  blind  and  backward  rulers   seek  by   terror
and   force   to  hold  back  the   tide,   as  the  Czar   did   and  as
Chiang  Kai-shek  did.
The  Need  for  "Subversion"
There  must  be  renewed  recognition  that  societies  are  kept
stable  and  healthy  by  reform,  not   by  thought   police;  this
means  that  there  must  be  free  play  for  so-called  "subversive"
ideas—every  idea  "subverts"  the  old  to  make  way  for   the
new.    To  shut  off  "subversion"  is  to  shut  off  peaceful  prog-
ress  and  to  invite  revolution  arid  war.    American  society  has
been  healthy  in  the  past  because  there  has  been  a  constant
renovating  "subversion"  of  this  kind.    Had  we  operated  on
the  Bogeyman  Theory  of  History,  America  would  have  de-
stroyed  itself  long  ago.    It  will  destroy  itself  now  unless  and
until  a  few  men  of  stature  have  the  nerve to  speak  again  the
traditional  language  of  free  society.    The  business of  saying,
"Of   course  there  are  witches  and  their  power  is  dreadfully
pervasive  and  they  are  all  around  us,  but  we  must  treat  sus-
pects  fairly  .  .  ."  is  not  good  enough.    To  acquiesce in  the
delusions  which  create  a  panic  is  no  way  to  stem  it.
I.  F. Stone'* Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED