I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954sep20.pdf

============================================================

Special:  Circuit  Court  Upsets  Brownell  Red  Hunt  Plans,  See  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS»        VOL. II,  NUMBER 33
SEPTEMBER  20,  1954
The  G. O. P. Prepares  to  "Run"  The  Late  Harry  White
Under  Mr.  Brownell,  the  Department  of  Justice  has  been
elevated  to  an  arm  of  the  Republican  National   Committee.
The  morning after  the  Maine elections, the Department  sought
to  steal  the  headlines  from  the  Democrats  and  cheer  up  the
dispirited   Republicans  by   leaking  a   detailed   story   to   the
Washington  Evening  Star  on  the  indictments  it  hopes  to  get
from  the  special  grand jury  impanelled  recently  in  the  capital.
Grand  jury  proceedings are  supposed  to  be  secret  but  some-
one  in   the   Department   seems   to   have   discussed  with   the
Star's  reporter  a  long  list  of  persons, many  of  them associated
with  the  late  Harry  Dexter  White  whom  it  hopes  to  indict.
The  Star  is not  the  kind  of  paper which  would print  this  sort
of  thing  without  being  certain of  its  source.  The  "leak"  and
the  names,  the  links with  Chambers and  Bentley, indicate  that
"20  Years of Treason"  will be the  theme song of  the compaign.
The   leak   recalls   similar   leaks   from    the   Department   of
Justice with which the Democrats hoped  in  1948  to  demoralize
the  Wallaceites.   At   that   time,  with  the  same  Bentley  and
Chambers  testimony  available,  grand  jury  proceedings  failed
to  live  up  to  the  advance  headlines  and  the  government  had
to  be  satisfied   as  a  consolation prize  with  the  indictment  of
the   12  top  American  Communists  for  "conspiracy  to  advo-
cate."   Perhaps  the  government  will  do better  this  time.
In  the  story  leaked  to  the  Star,  emphasis was  placed  on  the
new  immunity  law  as  a  means  of  forcing  witnesses  to  talk.
But  those  accused may have nothing to  tell  about  crimes, may
have  nothing  to  hide  but  political  associations  now  regarded
as  criminal.  The  Star  says  that  under  the  new  law  making
death  the  penalty  for  espionage in  peacetime,  the  government
can   rehash  pre-war   stories  a  la  Chambers.    But   this   is  an
error.  The  new  law  did  not  amend  the  statute  of   limitations,
and  does  not   allow  the  prosecution   of  crimes  on  which   the
statute  has  already  run.
The  real weapons in  the  hands of  the  government  are  those
new  laws  which  permit  even  native  born   Americans  to  be
stripped  of  their  nationality for  "conspiracy  to  advocate"  and
to   be  deported    (or   placed  under   lifetime   parole   as  second
class  citizens)  for  past  membership in  the  Communist  party.
These   are  weapons  of   terror   and   squeeze  with   which   the
government   may  manufacture  new  informers,   prepared   to
testify  as required in  return  for  protection.   From  this  quarter
surprises  are  possible.
The   Republicans  are   desperate.    They    feel   themselves  a
minority  party.   They  must  defame  and  destroy  the  memory
of  New  Deal  and  Fair  Deal.  They  need  sensations,  and  if  not
sensations   then   at   least  victims.    "Warmed  over   spy,"   the
promised  piece  de  resistance  of   the   campaign,  is  made   the
more  necessary  by  the  unexpected  action  of  the  U.  S.  Court
of  Appeals  in  the  District  of  Columbia  last  week   (see  page
three)  which  has  upset  plans  for  using  the  new  anti-Commu-
nist  law.
If  nothing  else,  the  Department  may  produce  another   in-
dictment   in   the   Lattimore   case,  which   is   becoming   the
perpetuum   mobile  of   American  jurisprudence.    It   can   send
to  jail  for  contempt   a  few  people  who  will  refuse  to  talk,
despite  preferred  immunity.  At  the  very  least it  can  hope  for
an  indictment  good  enough  to  hold  up  sensational  headlines
until  after  election.   The  next  few  weeks  will  see the  Repub-
licans  use  grand  juries  and  courts  as instruments  of  publicity
and  politics  for  campaigning  purposes.   And  in  one   respect,
Eisenhower,  Nixon  and  Brownell  will  certainly  succeed.   This
is  in  their  anxiety  to  prove  that  the  Administration   can  do
just  as  good  a  job,  or  better,  than  McCarthy.
A  Dangerous  Time  and  Place  for  "Guessing"
The  fact  that   the  Republicans  are  beginning   to  run  not
just  "scared"  but  frantic  adds  to  the  precarious  character  of
the  situation  in  the  Far  East.   There  is little  reason  to  believe
that  the  Chinese  Communists  are  "bluffing"  about   Formosa.
They  have  been  building  up  a  popular  campaign  which   can
hardly  be  thrown  into  reverse  even  by  a  total  distatorship
without  serious  consequences.   No  doubt  the  Russians  would
like  to  hold  the  Chinese  back,  but  they  cannot  give  orders  to
Peking.
The  situation  is  made the  more  serious  because of  the   con-
fusion   in   American   policy   on   Formosa.    At   one   moment
Washington  says  that  Formosa  is  necessary  to  America's  stra-
tegic  defenses.  At  the  next,  we  speak of  Formosa  as a  jumping
off   place  for  the  "liberation"  of  China.   These   are   different
propositions.   On  the  other  side of  the  Pacific,  the  former  may
look  as  ludicrous  as  if  the  Russians  claimed  Catalina  Island  as
necessary  to  their  defenses.   Yet  America,  like  Japan,  might
"get   away with"  the  long-time  occupation  of  Formosa.
But  it  is  impossible  to  have  peace  in  the  Far  East  while
arming,   supplying,  directing   and  protecting   a   rival  rump
Chinese  government  in  persistent   attacks  upon  the   mainland.
That  way  lies  war,  whether  it  is  precipitated   at  Big or  Little
Quemoy,   or  on  Formosa   itself.    The  Administration   would
rather  have a balanced  budget  than  war with  China, but  what
if  it  thought  just  a little  fighting  at  Quemoy  might  help  the
election?   This  is  the  really  serious   guessing   in  this  childish
guessing   game.   The   7th   Fleet   has  orders  to   give  Chiang
"logistic  support"  only  at  Quemoy,  but  what  if  more  Ameri-
cans   are  killed,  or   American   naval   vessels   bombed   in   the
fighting?    Is  Chiang  guessing   that  this  might   draw   us  at
last  into  the  war  he  has long  wanted?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September to, 1954
The  5th  Amendment  Senator  Makes A  '1st  Amendment"  Plea
The main  "contempt" charge  against  McCarthy is that  six
times  he  refused  to  answer  questions   put   'by  the   Gillette-
Hennings  subcommittee  in   1952.    McCarthy's  principal  de-
fense  is that  his  refusal  to  answer  cannot  be considered con-
tempt   because   (in  his  opinion)  the   subcommittee  was  ex-
ceding  its  lawful  powers.    This  argument   implies  in  turn
that  the  Senate  will  not  vote  a  contempt  citation  merely  on
a  committee's  say-so but  will  examine the facts  independently
But  this, as  Senator  Case—a  member  of the  Watkins com-
mittee—was  quick  to   point   out,  was   exactly   the  defense
McCarthy  and  his  supporters  rejected   when  the  contempt
resolutions   against   Corliss  Lament,  Abraham   Unger  and
Albert  Shadowitz  came  up  in  the  Senate  two  weeks  earlier.
McCarthy's   leading   supporter    in   the   debate,    Senator
Morse,  then  argued   (see  box  at  the  bottom  of  this  page)
that  it  was  the  Senate's  duty  to  vote  any  contempt  resolu-
tion  for  which one  of  its  committees  had  made  out  a  prima
facie  case.  Thereupon  the  Senate  voted  the  resolutions  with
but  one  dissenter   (Lehman)  on  Shadowitz  and  Unger  and
but  three  (Lehman,  Langer  and  Chavez)  on  Lamont.
Like  the  Harvey  (XConnor  Case
In  all  three the  defense will  be that  no contempt  was com-
mitted   because   (1)   the  questions   they   refused  to   answer
were  outside  the  orbit  of  the  powers  conferred  on  the  Mc-
Carthy  committee  by  the  Senate,  and   (2)   invaded  rights
guaranteed  by  the  First  Amendment.
In  the  Shadowitz  case,  the  McCarthy  committee  claimed
to  be  investigating  possible  espionage  in  the  Federal  Tele-
communication  Laboratories.   Shadowitz  refused  to  answer
questions  about  his  political  views  and  associations  on First
Amendment  grounds,  citing  the   advice  given  him  by  Ein-
stein.   He  also  objected  to  questions  about  espionage  on  the
ground  that  such  matters  were  outside  the  McCarthy com-
mittee's  authority  under  the  1946  statute  establishing  it.
Nevertheless—a  fact  few  papers  reported—Shadowitz  did
say  under  oath,  "I  never  in  any  way  violated  any  of  of  the
security regulations" and "I  have never  engaged  in  espionage
... I  am not aware  of espionage  on anyone  else's  part.  .  ."
"Efficiency"  Uber  Alles
When   the   Shadowitz  resolution   came  up,   Senator   Case
pointed  out  that  under  the  1946  act  authority  over  all  mat-
ters "relating  to bankruptcy,  mutiny,  espionage  and  counter-
feiting"   was  given  the   Senate  Judiciary   Committee.  Mc-
Carthy,  in  reply,  claimed  that  if  a  government   department
hired   anyone  guilty   of  espionage   or  unwilling   to   answer
questions  about  espionage,  that  was  evidence  of  inefficiency.
And  his  committee  on  government  operations   is  empowered
to  investigate  all  questions  of   efficiency.
The  same  argument  would enable the  McCarthy  committee
to  invade  the   province  of  the   Senate   Finance   Committee
or   the  Joint   Congressional  Committee   on  Atomic   Energy
or   almost   any   Senate   committee.    McCarthy  might   ask
whether  Treasury   tax   rates  were  being  framed   efficiently
and  whether  the  Atomic  Energy   Commission was  handling
the  atom  bomb  efficiently
The  Unger   case  involved  the   same  issue  in  a   different
form.  Abraham  Unger,  a  New York  lawyer,  was subpoenaed
by  McCarthy.   The  hearing  was  on  Communist  infiltration
into  the  American  staff   of  the  United  Nations.   This  was
itself   an   invasion   (for  headline  getting  purposes)   of   the
The  Issue  in  the  Lamont  Case
".  . .  whether if  the  Senator  or I  should  write a  book
or  make  a  speech,  and  the  Government should  use  a
paragraph  from  the  speech  or  from  the  book  with  the
idea   of   instructing  the   military  or  some  other  sub-
division  of  the  Government,  we  could  then  be  subpoe-
naed  before  a  committee  and  ordered  to  answer ques-
tions  concerning our  personal  views.  That, as  I  under-
stand  it,  is  the issue  raised by Lamont in this  instance."
—Sen. Saltonsall  (R.  Mass.), Con. Rec. Aug. 16 p. 13969.
".  .  .  the  inquiry  which  was  conducted had absolutely
nothing  whatever to  do with  the  legitimate  field  of  in-
quiry  of  a  congressional  committee.  None  of  the  ques-
tions  which  Mr. Lamont was  asked bear  in  the  slightest
degree  on his  participation in  a  conspiracy."
—Sen.  Lehman  (D.  N.Y.)  same  p.  13968
jurisdiction  of  the  Internal  Security  subcommittee  and  the
Foreign  Relations  committee.   Unger  was   asked   about  a
United  Nations  employe  who  was  for  a  time  employed  by
him  to  do  legal  research  in  connection with  the  first  Smith
Act  prosecution   of  the   11  top   Communist  leaders.   Unger
answered   all   questions   asked   about  this   employe  but  de-
clined  to  answer  questions  about  his  own political  views  and
associations.
Strange  Alliance
The  shocking  aspect  of  the  debate  on  Lamont  was  the  way
in  which  Morse  took  over  McCarthy's   defense  against  the
attack   launched  by  Lehman   and  Langer.   As  the   debate
neared   its   close,  the   Independent  from   Oregon  turned   to
McCarthy  and  said,  "this  is  but  another  illustration  of  the
consistency  of  the  Senator  from  Oregon  in  protecting  pro-
cedural  rights."  He recalled that  "on  the floor of the  Senate
not  so many  nights  ago I  sought  to protect the  Senator  from
Wisconsin   from   the   standpoint   of  procedure"   (Con.  Rec.
P.  13975).   The  reference  was  to  the  fact  that  Morse  had
helped  to  defeat  the  censure  resolution   against   McCarthy.
But  this  Galahad  of  due  process  had  no  difficulty  in  swal-
lowing what  Langer  assailed  as the  most  unfair  aspect of the
Lamont  case.   Lamont  testified  in  executive  session  and  was
then  subpoenaed  for  a  public  session.   When  this  met,  Mc-
Carthy  first  explained  to  the  Senate,  "I  called  to  see  if  he
(Lamont)  was  in  the  room,  knowing that  he  had  been  noti-
fied  that  he  could  purge  himself  of  contempt  on  that  day,
if  he  wanted  to  do  so,  and  that  if  he  did  not  want  to  do so,
his  case  citing  him  for  contempt  would  be  submitted  to  the
Senate."  (Con.  Rec. p.  13,963).
Langer   protested  that  Lamont  had  been  informed  three
days  earlier  by  telegram  that  his  public  hearing  had  been
indefinitely  postponed.  When  Morse, too,  asked  why  Lamont
had  not  been  notified   and  given  a  chance  to  come  in  and
purge  himself,  Slippery  Joe  reversed  himself  and  said,  "He
had  no  right  to  come  before  the  committee  and  purge  him-
self  of  contempt."   (Con. Rec.  p.  13972).   No  one  challenged
McCarthy  on  the  contradiction,  but  this  failure  to  notify  is
the   kind  of  procedural  error   on  which  Lamont  may   win
in  the  courts.
Should  the  Senate Rubber-Stamp
Morse  said  "Yes": "I  say  to  the  Senator  from  Wisconsin
that  I  have  never  voted  against  a  contempt  citation   reso-
lution  in the  Senate ... I  think  we, as  Senators,  owe it to
our   committees  to  support  them  when  they   come  to   the
floor of  the  Senate  and  make a  prima  facie  case  in  support
of  ,a contempt citation."  (Con. Rec. p. 13971).
Lehman  said  "No":   "I  can  very  well  understand  that  an
inimical  or  unfriendly  committee  could ask  a  witness  ques-
McCarthy  Contempt  Citations?
tions  which  for  many  good  reasons  he  could  properly  re-
fuse  to  answer.   Yet,  if  we  agree  with  a  committee  every
time  it  asks  us to cite  a  witness  for  contempt  of the  Senate,
without  carefully  scrutinizing  the  facts   in  the   case,  we
would  be  laying  ourselves  open  to  a  dangerous  course  of
action,  to  which I  would  not  be  willing  to  subscribe."  (Con.
Ree. pps.  13972-3).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  20, 1954
The  Communists Aren't  The  Only  Ones "Off  Balance"
Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  Upsets  Brownell's  Plans
Attorney   General  Brownell  had  hardly  finished  boasting
to  his  fellow  members  of  the  General  Society  of  Mayflower
Descendants  at  Plymouth  last  Monday  that  he  had  the Com-
munist  conspiracy  "off  balance"*  when  the  Circuit  Court  of
Appeals  in  the  District  of  Columbia threw  the   Department
of  Justice off balance  in its  plans  for  a  pre-election  Red hunt.
Use  of  the  new  anti-Communist law  against  individuals
and   Communist  "infiltrated"  labor   unions  depends  on  the
case  argued  by the  government  last  April  before  the  Circuit
Court  of  Appeals  ordering  the  Communist Party  to  register
under  the  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950.  The  new  legislation
hectically  passed  by  Congress  in  its  closing  hours  took  the
final  form  of  an  amendment to  that  Act.   The  whole  struc-
ture  would  collapse  were  the  Circuit  Court  to  rule  against
the  constitutionality  of  the  registration  order.
What  Right Wingers Feared
A  decision  had  been  long  expected  when  the  Circuit  Court
last  week  took the  unusual step  of  reopening  the  case  for  ar-
gument  on  its  own  motion.  The  court's  order  confirmed  the
fears  of  right-wingers  who  opposed  this  new  legislation  in
Congress,  though  as  fearful  as  the  liberals  of actually  voting
against  anything  labelled  anti-Communist.   One  of  the  two
points  on  which  the  Circuit  Court  wants  to  hear  argument
is  "the  effect,  if  any,  of  the  Communist Control  Act  of   1964"
upon  the  case.
The  other  point  shows the  new legislation  has  already  had
its  effect.   The  government  last  April   argued  that  only  a
registration  order  was  before  the  court,  that  this  was  not
an  outlawry  measure  and that  it  was  unnecessary   therefore
to  argue  whether   it   constituted   an   infringement   of   free
speech.   The new  amendments  make this  all  the  more  difficult
to  maintain.
The  court  has  in  effect  rejected  the  government's  conten--
tion  by  asking   argument   on  "the   validity   of  the  Internal
Security  Act  of  1950 if  it  be  deemed to  be not  merely  a  regis-
tration  statute, i.e.  if  it  be considered  as  an integrated  whole,
including  the  so-called  sanctions  provisions  .  .  ."   This was
how the late Vito Marcantonio  (with  John  J.  Abt and  Joseph
Forer  assisting)  argued  the  case last  April.  The government
will  now be  forced  to  answer  the  defense  claim  that  this  in
effect  outlaws  the  Communists and  is  unconstitutional  in that
it  imposes  criminal  sanctions   for   political   activities  which
(as  the  government  admits**)  may  not  be  criminal.
New  Move  Against  Informers
At  the  same  time,  in  another   blow  at  the   government's
plans   for   swift   and   sensational    prosecutions,   the   Court
granted  a  second defense  motion  to  reopen  the  case  for  new
evidence.   This  motion  called  the   Court's  attention  to  the
extent  of  the  government's   dependence  in  the  case  on  three
informers  whom  it  has   since  ceased  to  employ.   They   are
Paul  Crouch,  Manning Johnson  and  Harvey  Matusow.   The
* The  speech,  turgid  even  for  Mr. Brownell, was  noteworthy
chiefly  for  a  cryptic passage  in  which  he  seems  to  imply  that
Communist  conspirators  are  also  responsible  for  juvenile  re-
volt against  parental authority, a phenomena hitherto thought
to  antedate  the  establishment  of  the   Cominform.   "We  have
seen   them,"  Mr.  Brownell  told   the   Mayflower   descendants,
"seek   to  increase  the  rebellious  spirits  of   children  against
constituted  authority."   No  doubt  the  FBI  has  found   traces
of  Marx  in  Mother  Goose.
**  ".  .  .  petitioner  can  validly  be  required  to  register  if  in
fact  it  does  act  pursuant to  and  in  furtherance  of  the  world
Communist  organization, even though  every  act  it  actually did
pursuant to  such directives or in furtherance  of  such objectives
was  innocent."—p.  72, brief  for  the  government, Com. Party   v.
Subversive  Activities  Control   Board.
first  two  have  been  dropped  from  the  government   payroll
after   their  contradictions  became  too  notorious.    The  last,
Matusow,  seems  to  have  repented   and  is  trying  to  find  a
market  for  a  book  entitled  "Blacklisting   (or  Blackmailing)
Was  My  Business."
No  Action Yet  On Bunche's Accuser
The  defense  motion  points  out  that  the  chairman  of  the
International   Organizations  Employe  Loyalty  Board  in  the
Ralph  J.   Bunche  case  has  asked  that  Johnson's   exploded
testimony  against  Dr.  Bunche  be  investigated  by  the  De-
partment  for  perjury.   The  airing  given  Paul  Crouch's   per-
juries  by  the  Alsop  brothers  led the  Department  last  May 28
to  cancel  his  scheduled  appearance  as  a  witness  before  the
Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  against  the  Veterans  of
the  Abraham  Lincoln  Brigade.  Crouch in  an  angry  letter  to
J.  Edgar  Hoover demanded an  investigation  of  the  Attorney
General's   office  and  predicted  that  the  promised  inquiry  into
his  credibility  would  upset  some  60  Communist prosecutions,
including the  one before  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals.
Circuit   Court   Judges   Prettyman,  Bazelon  and  Danahar
set  October  21  as  the  date  for  argument  on  both  the  new
tainted  informer  evidence  and  on the  two  legal  points  speci-
fied.  Briefs  must  be  filed  by  October  8  and  reply  briefs  by
October  19.
Democratic  Strategy  May  Boomerang
The  reopening  of the  Communist case  may turn  the  Demo-
cratic  anti-Communist  maneuver  into  a  political   boomerang,
since  the   effect   of  the  new  legislation  is  to  slow  up  and
hamper,   perhaps   to   wreck,   much  of  the   Red  hunt.   The
Republicans  may now argue that  their  more  carefully  drawn
legislation  as  enacted  in  1950  was  ruined  by  the   Democratic
sponsored  "outlawry"  amendments.
The  government's  greatest  difficulty  may  lie  in  Section  5
of  the  new law  (see  official  text  as  published here  last  week)
—the   so-called   "Humphrey-Morse"   amendment.   This   sets
forth   standards  for  determining  who  is  a  Communist—and
therefore  subject  to prosecution  for  failure  to register.   These
are  so vague  and sweeping that as the New  York  Post  pointed
out  it  could  be  used  to  proscribe  Humphrey  and  Lehman  as
vice-presidents  of  Americans  for  Democratic  Action.
Labor  Union Cases  May  Be  Delayed
Until  the  registration  order  against  the  Communist  party
has  finally  been   upheld,  the   government   cannot   prosecute
individual  Communists  for  failure  to  register.   It  will   also
be  difficult   to  proceed  against  labor  unions  for  the  lesser
offense   of  being  "Communist  infiltrated"   until   the   Courts
have  decided  the  basic  case  against   the  Communist  party.
• The  Democrats may  now find themselves  attacked  in  paranoid
terms for  "sabotaging" the  Red hunt.
Vol.  II,  Number  33
September  20,  1954
I.  F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  205,  101
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  'Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a   year;   Canada,  Mexico   and  elsewhere  in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  (10   by  1st  class  mail,  $lf   by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15   cents.   Tel.:  LI  4-7087.    Entered   as  Second   Class   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  to,  1954
Peeping  Over  The  Shoulders  of The  World's  Editors
NEWS    THE    WELL-BEHAVED    PAPER    DOESN'T
PRINT:  PDR, Jr.'s unmentionable  difficulty  in  New  York  is
that  the  "Power  House"  (political  slang  for  Cardinal  Spell-
man's  official   residence)   has  turned   thumbs  down  on  him.
The  Cardinal,  like the  rest  of the  East  Coast  hierarchy,  hated
the  father  and fears  the  magic  of the  name  in  the  son .  .  .
REPUBLICAN   GENERAL   BITES   FASCIST   DOG  BUT
FAILS  TO  MAKE  NEWS:  General  Jose  Asensio,  Assistant
Secretary  of  War  in  the  Spanish  Republic, testified  unnoticed
before  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  in  New  York
last  week  as  the  first  witness  for  the  defense of  the  Veterans
of  the  Abraham   Lincoln  Brigade  .  .  .  ITEM  YOU WON'T
FIND  IN  THOSE   EDITORIALS   ON  THE   MENACE  OF
TOTALITARIANISM   TO   THE    RIGHT   TO   WORSHIP
GOD  AS YOU PLEASE: "Spain  Ignores  U.S.  Protest,  Keeps
Baptist  Church  Shut"  (AP  from  Madrid,  Sept.  13)    ...
NEWS   IT  WAS  THOUGHT  JUST  AS  WELL   TO  IG-
NORE:  The  New  York  Herald-Tribune   September   13  (p.  4)
carried   a   London  Observer  Foreign   Service   dispatch   from
Taipeh,  Chiang's  capital,  "Traits  of  Police  State  Are  Found
on   Formosa."    But   the   same   dispatch   published   by   the
Jerusalem   Post   September   10  shows  the   New  York   paper
omitted   (1)  that  Chiang's  new  Acting  Chief  of  the  General
Staff,  Lieut.  Gen.  Peng   Meng-chi  "is  not  considered   one of
the   Nationalists'   most   capable   military   leaders,"  but  was
formerly  a  "top echelon  anti-subversion  policeman"  and  (2)
that  Chiang's  troops  are  not  only  unready  for  any  attack on
the  mainland but  "it  is  doubtful  whether  they  are  fully  pre-
pared   to  put   up  even  an   effective   defense   of  their   island
base  . .  ."
NO PATRIOTIC  DENUNCIATIONS came from  the  right-
ist  press  when  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  in  New  York
recently  reversed  the  conviction  for  treason  of  John  David
Provoo,  who  collaborated  with  the  Japanese  during  the  war
and  broadcast  for  them  from  Tokyo.  Nor  did  anyone  call  for
the  disbarment  of the  lawyers the  Court praised  for  defending
him  without compensation,  nor  cite this as  an  example of  the
need  for  a  stronger  treason amendment, along the  lines  of  the
anti-Left   proposals  which   died   in  the   last   session  of  Con-
gress  . . .
WATCH  FOR  THE   CAMPAIGN  OF  HATE   which  will
be  whipped  up  when   Algei-  Hiss  leaves  Lewisburg  Peniten-
tiary  November  27.  Ruth  Montgomery's  column  in  the  New
York  Daily  News   September  11  dealt  with  the   forthcoming
release  of  "the  most notorious traitor  since  Benedict  Arnold."
Doubleday   and   other   publishers   will  be   pressured   not   to
publish  the  book  Hiss  has  been preparing  in  his  own  defense.
The  vested  interest  of  the  right,  the   Republicans   and   the
FBI  in the  Hiss  case  and "Yalta" is  enormous and crucial...
BLACKMAIL:  "One of McCarthy's  Senate  foes  has  a  brother
(working  on  atomics)  who  often  entertained   Alger  Hiss"—
Walter  Winchell,  New York  Mirror,  Sept.  13   ...
ANOTHER KIND OF INFLATION:  The Chicago  Tribune
correspondent  in  Saigon  reported  in  last  Wednesday's  issue
that  Viet-Namese  figures  on the  refugees  "fleeing  slavery" in
the  Northern  part  of  the  country  were  '"blown  up  by includ-
ing  military   outfits   in  the   effort   to  show  that  the   people
prefer  the  anti-Communist south."  He  gave  the  Viet-Namese
totals  as  200,000; the local  American  estimate  at  74,000 . . .
NEW  RECRUIT  FOR  THE  NEW  HOLY  ALLIANCE:  The
Ottawa   correspondent   of  the   Washington   Star,   reporting
September   12  on  the  bitter  reaction   among  Canadian   war
veterans  over  the   freeing  of  Nazi  Gen.  Kurt   Meyer,  who
ordered  at  least  144  Canadian  prisoners   of  war   murdered,
says:  "Canadian  staff   officers  visited  him  in  prison   seeking
advice on how to fight  Russians"  and  notes  that  the  Canadian
government   has    "consistently    sidestepped    answering"    in
Parliament  whether  Meyer is "as  has  been  hinted,  earmarked
to  serve  in  a  new Wehrmacht to  defend  Western   democracy."
THE  "FACTS"  AS  GIVEN  BY  FACTS  FORUM:  Sample
of  impartial  presentation  by  Facts  Forum  from  latest  report
by  Congressman  Hays  (D.,  Ohio)  :  "Today,  all  over  the  globs,
people  are   promoting  the   philosophy  of  government  which
they  like  to  call  liberal  and  progressive,  but   which   in   its
essence  is  a  return  to  the  dark  ages ...  It  is  a philosophy
which  holds that  government has  the  power and  responsibility
to  do  something for  the  people  .  .  ."   PORTRAIT  OF  AN
OFFICIAL  TALKING  TO  HIMSELF   ON  A   STOCKPILE
OF  A  AND  H  BOMBS:  "I  deeply  believe that  the  Creator
did  not  intend  for  man  to  evolve through  the  ages  up  to  this
point  only  now to  destroy  himself."   (AEC  Chairman  Lewis
L.  Strauss,  breaking ground for  first  full-scale nuclear  power
plant,  Sept.  G).   A  little  more  such  loose  talk  and  Strauss
is  liable  to lose his clearance  for  moral  scruples  .  .  .  NEWS
WE   DIDN'T  SEE   ELSEWHERE:   "Stockholm,  Aug.  31—
The   Foreign   Ministers  of  Sweden,  Norway,  Denmark   and
Iceland  called  today  for  the  admission  of  Communist  China
to  the  United  Nations."—AP  in  London  Times,  Sept.  1    ...
ON  THE  RIGHT  TO  TRAVEL
Next  week's  issue  will  carry  a  full  report  on  two  key
passport   cases   now   in   the   Federal   district  court  in
Washington,   one   brought   by   Federal   Judge   William
Clark,  the  other  by  Dr.  Otto  Nathan.
LET  US  SEND  A  SAMPLE  COPY  TO  A   FRIEND
I.  P.  Stone's Weekly, 301  B. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. c.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name-___:___._._____.._.____________.
Street. _______,. _....._  .._._____:_________
City____._._______   Zone___...._  State...........
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name ______..._,.._._.__......_...  _.._._,_...
Street_________ __.   ___.________.
City-
State__,__
9-20-54
I.  F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St- S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  at
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED