I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jan25.pdf

============================================================

A  New Approach to  the  Problem of  Atomic Inspection.  See  Page Two
^    I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2, NUMBER 1
JANUARY  25,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
How  Freedom  of  Choice  Was  Assured   POW's
(from  the  Neue Zuricher  Zeitung,  Switzerland,  Jan.  12, p.  2, col.  1)
Stockholm,  January  9  (United  Press):  Gunnar  Wessman, m ember  of   the   Swedish  delegation   on  the   United  Nations
Neutral  Repatriation  Commission, reported  here  today  on the   difficulties  which  the  Commission  encountered  in  investigat-
ing  acts  of  atrocity  and  of  terror  in  the  camps  of  those  prisoners  who did not  wish to  be repatriated.
Wessman  related  how anti-Communist  prisoners tortured  and   murdered  one  of  their  fellow  prisoners  who  wanted   to
return  home.   The  heart  of  the  murdered  man  was  cut  out  and   cooked  and  all  the  inmates  of  those  respective   camps
forced  to  eat  a  piece  of  it.                                                                                                                                                                    . i
"The   investigation   of  this   incident   was   very   difficult," Wessman  explained.    "At  first  the  corpse  was  hidden   under
a  tent,  but  when  several  prisoners  were  interrogated  about  the  murder,  other  prisoners  took  the  corpse  into  the  kitchen
and  burned  it.   To camouflage the  odor  of  burning  flesh,  they  threw  old shoes  in  the  fire."
Since  the  body was entirely  burned  up, there was no way to  prove that the murder had taken  place.   When the  prisoners
were questioned  about  the  incident, they answered "I  have bad  eyes"  or  "I  can't  hear  properly."
An  Ugly  Record  of  Lawlessness
The  story  in  the  box  above is horrible.    We  reprint  it  after
careful  checking.   The  New  Zuricher  Zeitung  is  one  of  Eu-
rope's  most  respected  newspapers.   We  found  the  same  story
on  page  one  of  Sweden's  leading  paper,  the  Dagens   Nyheter,
for  January   10.   In  this  Gunnar  Wessman  was  identified  as
an  "Associate  Judge"  of  the  Swedish  courts.    The   account,
thus  coming from  a  Swedish  judge,  just  returned  home  from
service  on  the  UN   Repatriation  Commission  in  Korea,  on
which  the  Swedes  and  Swiss  were  the  "anti-Communist   neu-
trals,"  throws a  dreadful  light  on  the  "freedom  of  choice"  we
were  supposed  to  be enforcing in  the  POW  camps.
We  came  across  this  story  after  several  attempts  to  obtain
a  copy  of  the  report  turned  in  on  December  28  by  the   UN
Repatriation  Commission.  This  report  seems  strangely  to  have
disappeared.    Correspondents  at  the  UN  in  New  York  have
been  trying  to  obtain  a  copy  for  weeks.   They  were  finally
told  that  under  the  Commission's  terms  of  reference  this  was
a  U.S.  "unified  command"  military  document  and  not  a  UN
report.
When  inquiry  was  made  at  the  Pantagon  by  the   Weekly,
a  reverse version  was  encountered.    First,  it  was  said  that  the
report  was  "classified,"  though  correspondents  in  Korea  had
already  filed  stories  on  it  the  day  it  was made.   Then,  it  was
said  that  this  was  a  United  Nations  Document.    We  believe
this  report  has  not  been  made  available  to  the  press  because
too  much  of  it  is unpalatable  to  the  American  authorities.
Two  weeks  ago  we  did  succeed  in  obtaining  at  State  De-
partment  a  portion  of  the  conclusions.     These  disclosed   (see
our  issue  of  Jan.  11)  that  the  minority  report  by  the  Swedes
and  Swiss on  the  Commission  declared  that  violence  and  mur-
der  in  the  anti-Communist   compounds  had  prevented   free-
dom  of  choice,  "prisoners  who desired  repatriation  .  . .  often
had  to  apply  for  repatriation clandestinely and  in  fear  of  their
lives."   It  was in an effort  to obtain  more from  the  Swiss  lega-
tion   and   the   Swedish  embassy  here  that   Judge   Wessman's
gruesome  account  came  to  light.   Somehow  it  has  been  kept
out  of  the  American  press.
This  story  provides  a  fitting  epilogue  to  the  final  "freeing"
of   the  POWs,  a  unilateral  act  which  might  have  provoked
renewed  warfare  if  the  Chinese  Communists  had  not   swal-
lowed  this new  slight—as  they  have many  previous  affronts—
in  their  desire  for  peace.    As  we  go  to  press,  the  AP  from
Panmunjom  reports  a  final  revealing  scene  (Wash.  Star,  Jan.
20),  "The  Indians attempted  to  cull  out  a few  prisoners  they
believe  want  to  return  to  the  Communists,  but  were largely
prevented  by  the  anti-Communist  majority."
We  put   the  word  "freeing"   in  quotation   marks  because
these men  are being herded into  the  South  Korean  and  Chinese
Nationalist  armies.   As  the  New  York  Times  reported   (Jan.
20)   from  Seoul,  "instead  of  getting  their  complete  freedom
now  they  are being  taken  to  army induction  centers."
The  POW  issue,  on  which  the  peace  of  the  entire  world
might  well  have  depended,  was  a  fraud,  an  example  of  arro-
gant  high-handedness  on  the  part  of  our  military  in  dealing
with   the   prisoners   and  with   the  American   public.    As  I
showed  in  the  New  York  Daily  Compass  May  27,  1912  and
in  the  Weekly  last  February  7,  two  Red  Cross  reports  criti-
cizing  the  way  our  military   conducted   the  screenings  were
effectively   suppressed  and  kept  from  public   knowledge.
"Voluntary"  repatriation   was  rejected   in  the  framing  of
the  last  Geneva  convention   on  prisoners  of  war.    There  was
a  moral  right  not  to  go home  but  there  was also a moral  right
to  a  real  choice,  free   from  the  coercion  of  captivity.    We
trampled  on the latter  while trumpeting  self-righteously  about
the  former.    The  moral  issue  was made  the  smoke-screen   for
a  conspiracy  to  allow  Chiang  Kai-shek  and  Syngman  Rhee  to
recruit   soldiers  and  stage   affronts   which   might  have   upset
the  truce  they  hated.    When   the  full   story  is  known  and
told,  it  will  be  seen  just  how  brazenly  the  American  people
were  gulled,   how  many  boys   died  unnecessarily   while   the
military  for  months  delayed  a  truce  over  our  "moral  duty"
to  the  POWs.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  25,  1954
A  New  Approach  to  the  Problem  of Atomic  Inspection
James  R.  Newman,  counsel  to  the  McMahon  committee  in
the  framing  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Act,  author  (with   Byron
S.   Miller)   of   the   authoritative,   "The   Control  of   Atomic
Energy",    offers    a  fruitful    new   approach   to  the  problem of
atomic  inspection  in  a  letter  on  the  Elsenhower  atomic  pool
published  by  the  Washington  Post  (January   9).   Because of
its  importance and  because  it  has not  attracted  the  attention
it  deserves, we reprint  the salient  portions here:
By  James  R. Newman
The President,  striving  to  avoid  thorny  paths,  stressed  the
fact that his plan  does not require the  creation  of a  system of
inspection   and  control.    The  Soviet  reply   may  be  said   to
accommodate itself  to this more limited  objective by proposing
a  bare convention  outlawing  the  use of  atomic weapons.
Thus,  unfortunately,  what  most  needed  to  be  said  was  left
unsaid.  For  if  our generation  is  ever  again  to breathe  easy—
let  alone  survive—nothing  will  suffice  short  of  an   agreement
which  will  mitigate  the  danger  and  fear  of  a  sudden  holo-
caust.  We  cannot  escape  the  necessity  of  a  control  system
made  effective  by  some  form  of  inspection.
. The  fundamental  objective  of  a  prudent  control  plan  must
be an  agreed  level of atomic and  conventional  armaments,  and
of  armed  forces,  a  level which  would not  permit  the  surprise
unleashing  of  a  major  attack,  not  to  say  the  waging  of  a
major  war.   Proof  that  this  level  has  been  established  and
maintained   should  be  furnished   by   an   inspection   system
directed  to  key  points  of national  activity, which would inevi-
tably  reflect clandestine  preparations for  war.
Is  Such A  System  Possible?
It  is  commonly  supposed that  the  operation  of  an  effective
inspection   system  entails  almost  insurmountable   difficulties.
It  is  assumed,  for  example,  that  a  very  large   inspectorate
would  be  needed for  each  country  and  that  would  seriously
hamper   the   conduct  of  internal   affairs—government   and
private.   These  assumptions  are  unjustified.
The several inspectorates  need  not be large.  A small  group
of  inspectors  at  key  points  can  keep  major  production activi-
ties  under  surveillance.   It  is  not  important  to  know  every-
thing;  it  is  important  only  to  know  important  things.   It  is
important  to know if  a country  is  mobilizing.
If   an  international   agreement  fixes  levels  of  armaments
production  . . . these  levels will be reflected in certain  critical
indices:  steel  and  aluminum production,  the  use  of  electric
power,  shipbuilding,  mining  of  strategic  metals,  the  manu-
facture  of machine tools,  airframes,  jet  and  internal combus-
tion  engines, electronics  equipment.
Any  significant  departure  from  agreed-upon  levels  of  pro-
duction  can be detected.   It  is unnecessary  to  keep  every mine
and  factory  under  observation.   The  economy  of  a  large  in-
dustrial  nation  is  so integrated,  its  parts  are  so  interdepen-
dent,  that  a  sharp  increase  in  rate of  output  at  one point  is
visible  at  every  point.  The inspectors  need not  concern them-
selves  over  leaks;  their  task  is  to  watch  for  floods.  War  mo-
bilization  is  a  flood.  The  notion  of  hidden  preparations  for
a major war is absurd.  . . .
Illegal  Manufacture  of  Fissionables
There  are  three  essentials  to  keep  in  mind.  First,  both
conventional  and  atomic  weapons  are  needed  to  wage   war.
Second,  small-scale  illegal  production  of  weapons  in  either
category  is  pointless  as  a  preparatory  measure;  simply  not
worth  the  risk   of  detection.   Third,  illegal  manufacture  of
fissionables  is  no  more  difficult  to  detect  than  illegal  manu-
facture of any other item, requiring  a large  industrial  effort. ..
What  is  sought  is  a  practical  alarm  system  which  would
give  weeks or  months  of warning of  a  planned  attack,  rather
than  minutes  or  hours.
The  people  of  the  United  States have been  told  that  Russia
has  or  soon  will  have  a  sufficient  atomic  stockpile  to  destroy
30  or  40 major  cities,  inflict  20  to  30  million  casualties  in  a
single  assault.  They have  been  told that  the  present  warning
system  is  capable  at  best  of  giving  one  cr  two  hours  notice
of  attack,  but  more  likely  only  16  minutes.
A  vast  and  costly  continental  defense  system  might  extend
the  grace  period  to  six  hours,  and  make  possible  the  inter-
ception  of,  say,  50  percent  of  the  invading  bombers  instead
of  10  or  20  percent.   It  is  admitted  that  the  bombers  that
got  through  would  probably   suffice  to  destroy  the  cities,  but
the  lengthening  of  the  warning  period  would  allow  some of
the inhabitants to  save their lives by fleeing to the  hills.
Not  A Rational Solution
This  is  not  a  rational  solution  to  the  problem  of  our  own
survival,   much  less  the  survival  of  the  nations  of  Western
Europe.   Therefore,  the  United  States  continues to  place  pri-
mary  reliance  on  the  deterrent  effects  of  our  atomic  bombs.
It  is not claimed, to be sure, that American or  European  lives
would  be  saved  by  destroying  Russian  lives;  nor  is  it   al-
together  certain  that  deterrents  can  be  relied  on  to  deter.
Fear is more apt to drive men to war than to keep them  peace-
ful.    Moreover,  it   is  unsafe  to  depend  on  the   widespread
realization  that  an  atomic  war  would  be  mutually   suicidal.
A  world war  is more likely to start  accidentally  as the  result
of  a  small  conflict,  than  by deliberate  design.  ; . .
When  Kit  Clardy  Himself  "Pleaded  The  Fifth"
In  his  campaign  for  renomination  in  the  Sixth  District,  Michigan,  Congressman  Kit  Clardy  (R.)  will  open  hearings
in  Detroit  February 22  as  chairman of  a  House Un-American Activities  subcommittee.   More  than  100  subpoenas  have
been  issued  for  teachers,  business  men,  lawyers  and  union  leaders.  Hearings will follow in Lahsing and Flint, the principal
towns  in  Glardy's  district.                                                  .                                                  :
Approach  of  the  Michigan hearings  makes it  relevant  to  recall  when  Clardy  himself  "pleaded  the  Fifth."   Clardy  was
one  of  five  members on the  Michigan Public Utilities  Commission in  1934  when  charges  were  filed  against   him  and  two
fellow  Commissioners for  "gross, wilful  and habitual neglect  of  duty."
Among  the  charges  were failing  to  act  on a rate  reduction  petition  against  the Michigan Gas & Electric  Company, favor-
ing  the  common  carriers  against  the  small  private  operators  in  administering bus  and truck  regulations,  and  "extending
credit"  contrary  to  law  to  big  trucking  concerns.   These  companies  at one time were allowed to  "owe" the state  more than
$25,000  in  highway  and other  fees.
Governor  Comstock  held  a hearing on the  charges  but  Clardy  refused  to testify.   A lawyer appeared for  him and entered
technical  objections.  When the  Governor dismissed  Clardy, the  latter  appealed  to the  courts.  The final decision  of  the  case
may  be  found reported  at  268 Michigan  Reports  196.
Chief  Justice  Nelson Sharpe of  the Michigan Supreme Court ruled for a unanimous bench that  the  people of  the  State had
a  right  to  "good  faith and  right  action" on he  part of  their  officials,  that  "there  was  competent  evidence  to  establish  the
truth  of  these  charges"  against  Clardy  and that  "in  the  absence  of  any  denial  or  explanation"  on  his  part,  the  court  had
no  recourse  but  to  uphold  the  dismissal.  '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  25,  1954
I  E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  Ian  two  weelu  of  August  at  Room  20!,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  $10  by  In  class  mail,  $15  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single   copy,   15  cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered  as  Second  Clan   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
January  25,  1954
Vol. 2, No. 1
Round  the  (Unsteady)  Globe
Outlook  at  Berlin:  "Dulles  Sees  Failure  at  Berlin  if  Soviet
Tries  to  Split  Allies."    The  Allies  were  split  before  the  con-
ference   started.    The  conference  opening  today  was   only
Dulles's  way  of  appeasing  Churchill.   Dulles  is  anxious  to
prove  as  rapidly  as  possible that  unification  by  agreement  is
unattainable.   The British  and French  agree  that  it  is at  the
moment unattainable;  they  need  no conference  to  prove what
is  obvious.   They  are  going to  Berlin with  other  objectives—
the   relaxation   of   East-West   tension   and   the   renewal  of
relations  with  Russia  as  a  balance  of  power  counterpoise  to
the  reawakening  German  monster.
The  authoritative   London  Times  in  a  "leader" January  14
reflected  the  view that while unification  could  not be achieved,
fruitful  minor "practical" agreements  might  be arrived  at  to
improve  travel  and  trade  between  the  Eastern  and  Western
zones  of  the   Reich.    "Scrutator",  the  foreign   affairs  com-
mentator  of the  London  Sunday  Times, put  forward  a  similar
view  on January  17.
When  we  asked  Dulles about  this  British  point  of  view  at
his  final  press  conference  before  Berlin,  he  replied  that  he
had  not  given  up  hope  of  achieving  unification.   It  does  not
suit  the  State  Department's  book  to  have  the  conference end
in  "small  ameliorations,  such as  lessen  friction."*   Dulles and
Adenauer  need  to  have  the  conference  end  with  a  big  and
resounding  bang,  clearing  the  way  for  rearmament  of  the
Reich  (at  American  expense)  either through  EDO,  NATO  or
directly.     Thus  at   the   very  beginning  of  the   conference,
the  perspectives  of  Bonn  and  Washington  were  not  the  same
as  those of  London and  Paris.
This  is  all  to  the  good.   Western  "unity",  one of  the  shib-
boleths  of  current  American  policy,  is  an  obstacle  to  peace;
it  would leave  no one to  play  the  broker's role between  U. S.
and  TJ.S.S.R.  (It  is  a  pity  that  the  Poles  and  Czechs do not
have  enough  freedom  of  action  on  the  other  side  to  play  a
similar  role).   The  Dulles position  is  one  of  no  concessions;
the  Russians  would  have  to  give  up  Eastern  Germany only
to  see a  hostile  armed  bloc move  several  hundred miles  closer
to  Soviet  borders;  the  concession would  only  whet  German
appetite  for  the  next  morsel  in  Western  Poland.
On  the  other  hand, the  Russians  also  enter  the  talks  with
* Scrutator
hardened  positions,  still  demanding  equality  for  their  East
German  puppets  in  an  all-German   provisional   government.
There  seems  to  be  less  maneuvering  power  than  ever  at  the
talks  now  beginning.    In  this  juncture  it  is  the   duty  of
London  and Paris to search  for  minor  agreements  with  which
to soften  the  shock of another  Great  Power  disagreement, and
leave  the  door  ajar  for  the  future.    As  for  German  unifica-
tion,  it  has  many liabilities.   Perhaps  it  is just  as  well  that
the  Reich  remain  divided;  there  is  no  sign  whatsoever  that
a  united  Reich  would not  set  off again  as  arrogantly  as  ever
on  the  same  old path.
The  Djilas Affair:  This  has  two  aspects,  one international,
the  other  domestic.    Historically,  as  a  Slav  people  situated
between  East  and  West,  the   Serbs  have  swung  back  and
forth  between  Moscow  and  Western  Europe.    Tito  has  im-
proved  his  relations  with   Russia   since  Stalin's  death;  his
most  advantageous  position  is  to  keep  doors  open  on  both
sides;  the  kind  of  democratic  regime   envisaged   by  Djilas
might  leave  Tito  with  no  alternative  Eastward   if  squeezed
too  hard  by  the  West.
The  internal  angle  is  more  interesting.    When  I  was  in
Yugoslavia  in  the  Fall  of  1950,  I  found  Yugoslav  leaders
quick  to  criticize  Russia  for  "bureaucratism"  and  "dictator-
ship"  but  quite  unwilling  to take  steps  necessary  to  prevent
a   similar   situation   from   developing  in  their   own  country.
Every  time  the  question  of  habeas  corpus  was  raised  as  a
fundamental  reform  with  which to curb  the  secret  police and
bureaucratic   excesses,  there  was  a  blank  response.
Yugoslav  leaders  fear  that  it  may be unwise to  loosen  the
bonds  of  dictatorship  until  they  have  succeeded in  industral-
izing and  socializing their  country.   They  also show a  natural
human unwillingness to give up power and the pleasant  fruits
of  power.    The  Djilas  affair  dramatizes  again  some  of   the
fundamental  problems of  socialism.   How to  get  the  State  to
wither  away?   How prevent  the  bureaucracy  from   establish-
ing   itself   as  a  new  ruling   class?     How  adapt   the  great
juristic  achievements of  the  capitalist-liberal  era  to  Socialist
society?
When  one  sees  a  monstrosity  like  the  Kirov  law,  under
which  treason  charges,  as  in  the  Beria  case,  may  be tried  in
secret  urithout  the  presence  of   the  accused,  it   is  time  for
Marxists to  study  Madison's Notes  and the Federalist  Papers,
There  is  much  in  them  which  embodies fundamental  justice
for  any  society,  capitalist  or  socialist.  This was the  line  along
which  Djilas was thinking;  these  are  the  dangerous thoughts
of  Socialist  society  in  Yugoslavia,  as  in  the  Soviet  bloc.
The  Silence  of  the  Cowed:  Not  a  single  voice  was  raised  in
the  Senate   (or  elsewhere  in  Washington)  to  defend  Special
Ambassador  Arthur  H.  Dean  when  he  was  given  a  tongue-
lashing  by  Senator  Welker  (R.  Idaho)  for  daring  to  suggest
in  newspaper  interviews that  it  was time for  a. "new  look"  at
China policy.
Lecture  Footnote:  IFS  speaking  at  Carnegie  Recital  Hall,
N.  Y.,  Fri.,   Jan.  29, under  the  auspices  of  the  Emergency
Civil  Liberties  Committee,  on  the  witch hunt  legislation  now
before  Congress.
Happy  Birthday—Our  New Year  Begins—This  is Vol.  II,  No. 1
In  publishing,  as in marriage, the  first  year  is the  hardest  and  we  have  weathered  ours.   Most  of
you have already  renewed and—thanks to  new subs—we expect  to emerge from our first renewal cam-
paign  considerably  above  last  year's  level.  An index  to  Vol.  I  has been prepared (by yours truly) and
will be published soon as a supplement; this will be an  annual  feature.  You will  be  as surprised  as we
were  to  see how  much  (and  how  much not  to  found  elsewhere)  has been  packed  into  these  four  pages.
Missing  issues can still be obtained at  15 cents to  complete  any  gaps  in  your  file.   If  you  have  not  yet
renewed,  you  are  in  a  minority  of  stragglers;  celebrate the Weekly's birthday by renewing now,  using
the  blank  on  the  reverse  page  or  the  prepaid  envelope you received with our "second round" mailing.
If  you have renewed, pass that  letter  and envelope on  to  a  friend.   And  thanks  for  the  many,  many
"happy  returns" we  have already  received  from so many of  you,                  _I.  p.  STONE
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Sterne'8  Weekly,  January   25,  1954
Bulletin  from  Capitol  Hill;  The  Witch  Hunt  Bills
Ike  and  the  G.O.P. Take  Over  An  Old  Czarist  Custom
Capitol  Hill—Wire-tapping  legislation  may  bog  down;
there  is considerable hostility  to it  in  Congress.  The  immunity
bill might  be blocked  by rivalry between  the  Attorney  General
and  Congressional investigators.  The  McCarran  bill,  as passed
by  the  Senate  last  year,  would  let  Congressional  committees
decide  when witnesses could  be compelled  to  testify.   Brownell
wants  legislation  which  would  grant   the  power  of   decision
to   the  Attorney   General.   This  would  give  Brownell  final
jurisdiction  over  recalcitrant  witnesses  and  a  veto  over Con-
gressional   investigations.    A   measure  embodying   Brownell's
views  may  pass the  House,  but  would  encounter  rough   going
with  the  Senate.   McCarthy   is  sour  on  immunity  legislation
not  only  because of  the  power sought  by  Brownell but  because
invocation   of   the  Fifth   by   witnesses  gives  McCarthy   easy
victories.
Only  "Liberal" Voice McCarran's?
Except  for  a  hostile  comment  by  McCarran,  there  is  as  yet
no  vocal  opposition  to  Elsenhower's  proposal  to  deprive Com-
munist  "conspirators"  of   their   citizenship.    The   panic  and
mindlessness  of  some  Senate  "liberals"  is  reflected  in  the   fact
that   the  legislation  should  be  co-sponsored    (with  Ferguson,
R.,  Mich.)   by  Margeret  Chase  Smith  of  Maine,  an  opponent
of  "McCarthyism".
This  is  the  background  of  the  measure.  Until  the  passage
of   the  McCarran-Walter  Immigration  and  Nationality   Act
in  1949 over  Truman's  veto,  a  native  born  American  could
lose  his  nationality  only  by  renouncing it—by  obtaining  na-
turalization  in  a  foreign state or  swearing  allegiance to  it.
The  McCarran-Walter  Act   added  eight  other   provisions.
Under  these   (Section  1481  USCA)   a  native  born  American
can  lose  his  nationality by  serving  without  permission  in  the
armed  forces  of  a  foreign  power,  accepting  such  employment
in a foreign  state  as requires allegiance to it,  voting in a  foreign
election,  renouncing nationality  abroad, renouncing  nationality
at  home  in  time  of  war, deserting  the  armed  forces  in  time
of  war,  leaving  or  staying  out  of  the  U.S. to  dodge  military
service  and  "committing   any  act   of  treason  against,  or   at-
tempting   by   force   to   overthrow,   or   bearing   arms  against
the  United  States ..."
First  Time in  The  History  of  the  Republic
In  these  provisions,  for  the  first  time  since  the  foundation
of  the  Republic,  divestiture  of  nationality became  a  punish-
ment  for  certain  offenses.   But  there  is  this  much  to  be  said
for  the  McCarran-Walter  Act.  Its  provisions at  least  bear  a
relationship  to  the  older  concept  that  nationality can  only  be
lost  by  an  act  of  renunciation.   Where  this  is implied,  the  im-
plication  is clear.   A  man  who  deserts the  army  or  dodges  the
draft  knows what  he is doing;  treason or attempt  to  overthrow
the  government  requires  overt act.
But  the  Eisenhower-Ferguson-Smith  bill,  makes  it   possible
to  lose nationality by "advocating" or "conspiring  to  advocate"
revolutionary  doctrine.   Here  the  crime  is  a  long  way  from
overt  acts,  and  conviction  depends  upon  the  shifting  judg-
ments  of  a jury  and  the  climate  of  opinion.   One  of  the  com-
panion  House  bills  (by  Kersten,  R.,  Wisconsin)  goes  one  step
further  and  provides  for   loss  of  nationality  for  membership
in  any  organization  proscribed  as  a  "Communist  action"  or-
ganization  by  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board!
Police State  Practice
The  Eisenhower-Ferguson-Smith  bill  would  also  add  a  new
provision  to  that   section   (USC title  8,  sec. 12J1) of   the
McCarran-Walter  Act* which  provides  for  deportation   and  if
that  is  impossible  for   police  surveillance  or  detention   as  an
undesirable  alien.  This  measure would  import  into  the  United
States the  same system  of  "internal  exile", outlawry  and  police
registration  of  radicals  as was  developed  by  Czarist  Russia  and
has  since  been  taken  over  by  Communist  Russia  in  handling
suspected   "counter-revolutionaries".    Ike   talks   vapidly   of
"Wild   Bill"   Hickok,  but   his  real   inspiration   seems   to  be
"Wild  Bill"  Vishinsky.
let  Us Send A Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  A Friend—Or,  Better  Yet, Start  A  Gift  Sub With  This  Issue
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name       ———————————————————————————
Street      ———————————————————————————
City_____________  Zone___  State_______
Enter  this  gift  sob   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name   _________:_____________
Street    _________________________________
City-
State.______
1-25-64
I.  F. Stone'* Weekly
Room  205
M>1  E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington, D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED