I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954feb08.pdf

============================================================

Ike  Adopts The New Deal, But  Will  That  Be Enough?   See Page Two
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2, NUMBER 3FEBRUARY  8,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Silence In The  Senate
The  Senate,  particularly its  Democratic  membership,   pre-
sented  an  appalling  spectacle of  cowardice  during  the  debate
which  ended  with  approval  of   $214,000  for  the  McCarthy
committee.   Not  a single voice  was raised  in  support  of  Ellen-
der's  (D.  La.)  one-man  fight  to  cut  McCarthy's   funds  and
force  him  to  confine  the  Government  Operations  Committee
to  the  limits  established  by  the  Reorganization  Act  of  1946.
Langer  (R.  N.  Dak)  defended  McCarthy  against  the  charge
of   duplicating   the  work  of  the  Jenner  committee.    Cooper
(R.  Ky.)   alone  suggested  weakly  that  the  Senate  could  not
long  escape  the  responsibility  of  providing  some  code  of   fair
procedure  for  these  committees.   Morse  (Ind.  Oregon)   there-
upon  objected  to  making  any  such  rules  a  condition  of   the
appropriation  and  insisted  that  McCarthy   had  made  out   a
"primie  facie"  case  for  the  funds  he  asked.   This  year,  like
last,  Morse  put   a  spoke  in  the  wheels  of  Ellender's  one-man
crusade.   Most  shamefully  of  all,  though  McCarthy  taunted
them  with  "twenty  years of  treason,"  not  a  single  Democrat
rose  to  defend  the  party  and  Fulbright   (D.  Ark.)   cast  the
only   vote   against  the   appropriation.    The   Ft.   Monmouth
hearings  have   been   thoroughly   discredited,   yet   except   for
Ellender  no  Senator  dared  question  them.  One  has to  go back
to  Tacitus  and  the  Roman  Senate in  its  more  degenerate days
to  match  what  happened  here  last  Tuesday.
Subverted  Into  Stability?
Yet  the  Democrats  had  a  ready  answer.   On  the  plane  of
political  campaigning,  the  Republicans  offer   "warmed   over
spy"—the notion  that  the  New  Deal  period  was one in  which
America  was  infiltrated,  betrayed  and  subverted.   But  when
the  Eisenhower  Economic  Report  swings  into  a  pep  talk  for
business   men   to   counter   what   have   been   termed    "Com-
munistic"  efforts  to  undermine  business,  what  does  it  cite  as
"Basis  for   Confidence"?    Insurance  of  bank  deposits,  curbs
on  speculation,  jobless  insurance,  farm  price  supports,   social
security,  Federal  aid  to   housing.   These,  in   the   opinion  of
Eisenhower  and  his advisers, have made America more immune
to  depression, more  stable.   Yet  these  reforms  were  the  handi-
work  of  those  same  "traitors."  It's  an  odd  kind  of  subversion
that  subverts  a  country  into  greater  stability.   And  it's  even
odder  to  have the  men  who  accomplished this and led America
to  victory  against  Hitler  called  treasonable by  a  Senator  who
had   the   effrontery   to   defend   the   SS  men   who   butchered
American  prisoners after  the  Battle of  the Bulge.
The  Molotov  Kettle  and  the  Dulles  Pot
At   Berlin  last  Tuesday  Dulles  said  Molotov  was  not   in-
fallible,  citing  the  Russian's  speech  of  October  31,  19 39,  con-
demning  France  and  Britain  as the  aggressors in  the European
war.  But  three  days  earlier on  October  28,  1939,  Dulles made
a  speech  in  New  York  in  which  he  blamed  the  war  on   the
"resentment,  bitterness  and  desperation"  felt  by  the  Germans,
Italians  and  Japanese  over  the  "inequalities"   to  which   they
have  been  subjected  and  declared  that  the  U.S.   could   only
build   a   peaceful    world   by   staying   out    of   the    conflict
(NY   Times,  Oct.  29,  1939).   Earlier,  in  March  of  that  year,
he  joined  Burton  K.  Wheeler  in  declaring  (NY   Times,  March
23,   1939)  that  the  prospects  of  peace  would  be  worsened  if
we  supported  Britain  and France  against  the  Axis.   His  biggest
claim  to  a  fallibility as great  as Molotov's  is  the  speech  Dulles
made before the  Economic  Club of  New  York  in March,  1939,
saying  "only  hysteria  believes  that  Germany,  Italy  or  Japan
contemplates  war  against  us."   (New   Yorker,  Sept.  2,  1944).
German  Blueprint
The  Germans  hope  not  only  for  the  failure  of  the  Berlin
conference   (pretty   much   a  foregone  conclusion)   but   also
for  worsened  relations  between  the  U.S.  on  the  one  hand  and
the  British  and  French  on  the  other.   They  hope  the  U.S.  will
look  to  Germany  as its  main ally in  Europe.   In  an  atmosphere
of   "disillusion"  with   France   and   annoyance  with   Britain,
Bonn   believes  it   can  achieve  two   major   objectives.   One  is
for   a  large-scale  American  loan  to  finance  rearmament  and
the  other   is  for   the   return   of   the   key  German   chemical,
drug  and  dye  firms  seized  here  during  the  war.   A   Senate
Judiciary   subcommittee   issued  a  report   last   week  implying
that   seizure  of   such  concerns   as  General  Aniline  &   Film,
General  Dyestuffs  and  Schering  was  the  handiwork  of  Harry
Dexter   White   and  other   "plotters",  that  it   undercut   our
interest  in  building  "a  strong  Western  Germany  and  Japan
as   bulwarks   against   further   Communist   aggression"    and
that  these  companies should  be  returned.
Suspicious  Character
There's  a  fellow  over  at  the  Pentagon  who  has  us  worried.
Last  May  19  he  told'a  Senate  Appropriations  subcommittee
the  Soviet  air  force  was  primarily  defensive.   Just   recently,
on  January  28,  in  a  speech  before  the  Women's   Forum   on
National   Security,   he  said  he  was  getting  "impatient   with
people  who   seem   to  think  that   blood  spilling   and  jobs  are
synonymous."   Then  last   week  at   press  conference   he  said
too  many  Americans  were  guilty   of  "rattling   the   atomic
bomb."  It's  fortunate for  him that  he is not  only  Secretary of
Defense  but  also former head  of  General Motors  or  there  would
have   been  a  flood  of   subpoenas.   We   take  our   hat   off   to
Charles  E.  Wilson.    In  his  case  what  was  good  for   General
Motors  is  proving  good  for  the  country.  That's  a  humbling
paradox  for  some  of  our  more  simple-minded  radicals.
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  8,  1954
Ike  Adopts The  New Deal—But  Will That  Be Enough?
The  Economic Report  and  The  Economic  Outlook
The  Worse  The  Better?    Some  people  on  the  Left  look
forward  to  a  depression  as  a  solution  for  current  political
problems.  They believe hard  times  will  revive  labor  militancy
and  progressivism.   But  a  severe  slump  would  offer  a  boom
market   for   those   witch-hunters    prepared   to   add   social
demagogy   to   their   political   repertoire.   The   recovery  of
sanity in  American  society  is  more  likely  to  follow   successful
readjustment  to  a  peacetime  economy.
The  Hopeful  Side:  of  the  new  Economic Report  and  of  the
President's  message  submitting  it  to  Congress  lies  (1)  in  its
stress  on the  possibility  of "a  prosperity  based  on peace" and
(2)  its  whole-hearted  adoption  of the  New Deal  point  of  view.
Elsenhower  takes for  granted  that  government  "must  use its
vast   power  to   help  maintain   employment  and   purchasing
power" and talks  of building "a  floor  over  the  pit  of  personal
disaster."
The  Real  Questions:  Are  (1)  whether  the  group  of  men
who make up the  Eisenhower  Administration  have the  resolu-
tion  and the  leadership  capacity to  apply  New Deal  principles
against  a  slump  strongly  and  soon  enough  and  (2)  whether
New  Dealism  is  enough  to  cope  with  economic  crisis.
Pollyanna,  Not  Cassandra: The  new Economic Report,  like
its  predecessors,  is  as  vague,  wordy  and  ambivalent  as  any
ancient  oracle.   It  opens  a  la  Pollyanna,  and  only  allows  the
Cassandra  to  peep  out  in  the  latter  pages  and  in  the  statis-
tical  tables,  perhaps  on the  assumption  that  our  businessmen
are  too  sensitive  and  high  strung  to  be told  the  truth  all  at
once and will not have the intellectual patience to read beyond
the  opening  pages.
The Farm  Crisis: Thus the  Economic Report  does not really
get  down  to  brass  tacks  on this  until  page  89.  There  it  ap-
pears that  since  1947  (despite price  supports  and the  Korean
war)  real  net  farm  income  per  farm  has  fallen  one-third.
The  New  Deal  system  of  parity  support  prices  seems  to  be
no  more  than   an  emergency  palliative,  intensifying   basic
difficulties  and  doing little for  the  poorest  strata  of  farmer.
Fundamental  Imbalances:  Are   illuminated   by   one  vivid
passage.  Price  supports  are  based  on  1910-14  cost  price  re-
lationships.  But  since  that  "parity"  period  "the  cost  in man-
hours  of  producing  a  bushel  of  wheat  declined  more  than
two-thirds, the  cost  of  producing  a  bale  of  cotton  nearly  one-
half."  The  failure  of  support  prices  to  reflect  this  has  been
pricing  both  out  of  the  world  market.  "In  1953,"  the  report
says,  "our  wheat  production  was  1,169  million  bushels,  com-
pared  with  an  annual  average  of  724 million in  1910-14.  Yet
annual  food  consumption  of  wheat  was  virtually  the   same
(about  400 million  bushels)  in  1953  as  forty  years  earlier."
Only  in  world  wars  can  we  dispose  of  these  huge  surpluses.
•  "The  same is true  for  cotton," the  report  goes  on.  "Produc-
tion  in  19B3 was  2.2  million  bales  greater  than  the   1910-14
average  but,  during  the  current  year,, domestic consumption
plus  exports  is  expected  to  be  1.9 million  bales  LESS  than
four  decades  ago . .  ."   Substantial  increases  have  occurred
in  the  per  capita  consumption  of  fibres  but  these  have been
captured  by  the  synthetic  fibres.
The  problems  of  wheat  and  cotton  require  more  complex
measures  of  planning  than  those  applied  by  the  New  Deal.
In  a  socialist  society,  the  problem  would not  be met  by  sub-
sidizing  high  cost  production   nor  by  diverting   acreage  to
other  crops, already  in  ample  supply  but  by providing  greater
industrialization  to  draw  unnecessary  labor  power  away  from
the  wheat  and  cotton  fields.
Maldistribution  and  the  Untouched  Rural  Poor:  The New
Deal farm  program  was geared to the status quo.  The results
may  be seen  in  the  Economic Report  (p. 92).  In  1949,  22  per-
cent  of  the  nation's  farms  accounted  for  73  percent  of  the
Nation's  gross  cash  farm  marketings.   At  the  same  time,  at
the  bottom, 29 percent  of the  nation's farm  families  had  cash
incomes  of  less  than  $1,000  a  year  and  these  "produced  too
little for  sale to benefit  appreciably  from  farm  price supports,
however  high."
An  Inventory  Slump?   The  Eisenhower  Administration  is
willing  to  be  more  realistic  about  the  longer  range  farm
problem than  the  immediate problem  of peacetime prosperity;
the  industrial  and financial groups  so influential  in  the  G.O.P.
have  long  been  opposed  to  supports  for  agriculture.   The
Economic  Report  provides  no  such  drastic  sidelight  on  the
Understatement  of  the   Year
"Employment  in  January,  1954,  is  somewhat  lower
than  in  January,  1953.  There  seems  to  be  a  connection
between  this fact and the  fact that in January,  1953, w«
were still  fighting  in Korea  and are not doing so today."
—Elsenhower's  Message  on  the  Economic Report
question  of  utilizing  our  vastly  expanded  industrial  capacity
for   peacetime  civilian  markets.   The  recession  which  began
last  year  is  rather  wistfully  pictured  as  a  mere  slump  in
spending  for  inventories.   On the  contrary—
An  Almost  Instinctive,  Organic  Reaction   seems  to  have
taken  place in  the  economic system  on the  approach  of  peace,
Discussing last year's  shrinkage in the labor  force, the  report
discloses  (pages  150-51)  that in April  of last  year  "following
the   sudden   and   well-publicized  yielding   of   China  on   the
prisoner-repatriation    issue  on  March  28,  the  civilian   labor
force,  instead  of  rising  as  usual  by  500,000  in  that  spring
month,  fell  by  300,000—a  net  decline  in  the  seasonally  ad-
justed  labor  force  of  800,000 ...  An  earlier  instance  under
somewhat   analogous   circumstances,"    the   report   goes   on,
"occurred  in early  1945, at  about  the  time the  German  armies
were  breaking  up  ...      Some  of  the  withdrawals  and  the
failure  to  enter  seasonally   were  by  persons   expecting   an
early  return  of  husbands, brothers,  sons  or  fiances."
The  Unemployment Figures  understate   the   loss  of   pur-
chasing  power  to  the  market.   While  1.9 million  people  are
listed  as  jobless  in  December,  1953,  about  350,000 youths  had
gone back to  school and  800,000 women back  to  keeping  house
in  that  month.  The  real  shrinkage,  in  terms  of  the  market,
was  a  decline of  more than  3,000,000 in  the  number  of wage-
earners.
How  Cushion  A  Slump:  The  Economic  Report,  facing  a
slump,  recognizes  that  the  New  Deal  cushions  on  which  it
depends  are  not  as  extensive  or  deep  as  they  should  be.  Of
48,000,000   non-agricultural    workers,   only   36,000,000   are
covered  (inadequately)  by  jobless  insurance  and  only  28,500,-
000 by (inadequate) minimum wage laws. The report suggests
higher  jobless  insurance  but  stops  short  on  the  threshold  of
suggesting  an  increase  in  the  present  75 cent  an  hour  mini-
mum  wage  law.
Prognosis:  Business   may   bounce  back  on  its   own,  but
judging  by  the  experience  of  the  past  three  decades  there
may  be a real  slump ahead.  The  day  of bank  panics  and  soup
kitchens are  over, but  the  public works on which the Economic
Report   principally   relies  for   pump-priming  would  be  too
puny  a  weapon.   For  all  the  New  Deal's  efforts,  it  took  a
world war  to wipe out the  unemployment of the thirties.  The
war  and  the  cold  war  greatly  expanded  industrial  capacity,
intensifying  the  old problem  of want  amid plenty.  The  G.O.P.
has  been  converted  in  theory  to  New  Dealism,  but  is  still
laiegez  faire  by  instinct.   It  will  act,  but  almost  certainly
with  too little  and  too late.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  8, 1954
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publisher,  L  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  lut  two  weeki  of  August  at  Room  20?,  J01
E.  Capitol St.,  S.E.,  Washington 3,  D.  C.   Subscription rates:  Domestic,  $f
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere  in   the   Western  Hemisphere,    $(;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by   1st  clan  mail,  $15  by  air;  for
Israel,  Aria,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  clan  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   11   cents.    Tel.:   LI  4-7017.    Entered   as  Second  dan     mail
matter.  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
February  8, 1954VoL  2,  No.  3
A  Brave Lawyer Passes
Whatever  one  may  think  of  the  way  the  Rosenberg cam-
paign  was  waged, their  lawyer,  Emanuel  H.  Bloch,  showed
a  courage and  a  devotion  in  their  defense  which was  in  the
best  tradition  of  his  profession.  His  sudden death  is tragic;
he  wore  himself  out  in  the  Rosenberg  case.   No  doubt  the
disciplinary proceeding begun against  him by the Association
of  the  Bar  of the  City of  New York added  to  the  strain.  This
proceeding  was  a  scandal.   At  a  time  when  so few  members
of  the  American  bar  are  willing  to  defend  unpopular  clients,
Bloch  deserved  commendation  not  discipline.   Is  there  some
way  to  force  the  Bar  Association  to  go  through  with  this
proceeding  posthumously, and  to  rally  in  Bloch's  defense  the
kind  of  testimonial he  deserved?
Glittering Evasion
The  Pennsylvania  Supreme  Court  in  the  Nelson  case  said
the  extreme unpopularity of the  defendant  made it  "especially
incumbent"  on his  judges  to  "scrutinize  the  record  with  ut-
most  care" but  then  proceeded  to  dodge  the  questions raised.
Nelson  was  not  given  adequate  time  to  obtain  counsel.  The
trial  judge was a  leading  spirit  in  a  Pittsburgh  witch  hunt-
ing  organization  which  had  demanded  Nelson's  indictment.
The  chief  witness  against  him  was  a  judge  of  the  court  in
which  he  was  tried.
With  all  these  infractions  of  due  process,  the  Court  said
"we need not  now be concerned."   It  held that  Pennsylvania's
State  sedition  law  of  1919 under  which Nelson had  been  sen-
tenced  to  20 years  in  prison  was  superseded  by  the  Federal
Smith  Act  of  1940,  under  which  Nelson  has  been  separately
sentenced to five years  in jail.  The Court relied  principally on
Hines  v. Davidowitz  (312 U.S. 52)  in which the  U.S. Supreme
Court  held  that  Pennsylvania's   Alien  Registration   Act  of
1939  was  suspended by  the  Federal  alien  registration  act  of
1940  (another  part  of  the  Smith  Alien  and  Sedition  Act).
The  State  Court  also  held that  under  Article  IV,  Section  4,
of  the  U.S.  Constitution,  guaranteeing   every  State  in  the
Union  a  Republican form  of  government,  sedition is  the  spe-
cial  province  of  the  Federal  government.
Were  this  a  U.S.  Supreme  Court  decision,  there  would  be
ground  for jubilation;  several  dozen  State sedition  and  crimi-
nal   syndicalism  laws  would  be  invalidated.   Unfortunately
the   Pennsylvania  decision  is  being  appealed,  and  there   is
slight  chance of mustering a majority  to uphold it  on the  U.S.
Supreme  Court.  The defendant  is  a  hounded  man;  the  mea-
sure  of  the  sensational  charges  made  against  him  is  to  be
found   in  the  vagueness  of  the  State  "seditious  utterance"
and  Federal  "conspiracy  to  advocate"  charges  on  which  he
has  been  prosecuted.   Nelson  deserved  something  better  from
Pennsylvania's  highest  court  than  this  glittering  evasion of
fundamental   issues.    Nelson  did  not  get  a  fair  trial;  the
"sedition"  charged  was  spurious;  the  state  law  as  applied
is  an  unconstitutional interference  with  freedom  of  political
opinion.
Freedom  of the  Press Note
One   of  this  year's  recommendations by  the   House  Un-
American  Activities  Committee  is  that  the  use  of  the  U.S.
mails  under  the  second  class  mailing  privileges  be forbidden
"to  subversive  publications  emanating  either  from   foreign
sources  or  from  sources  within  the  United  States"  and  that
the  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950  be  amended to  permit  the
citing  of  such publications as  "subversive."  The  Act  already
provides  for  the  labelling  of  Communist  publications.    The
"subversive"  label  would  extend the  process  one step  further.
Fustest  With  The Leastest
Of  course old  General  Bedford  Forrest  was right.  Anyone can win a battle who gets there "fastest
with the ntostest"  men.   The real feat is to get there  "fastest  with the  leastest."  Though  a  one-man  fob
playing  the  field  against  well-staffed   competitors/  the Weekly  has been getting there "fastest with the
leastest"  over  and  over  again.
Example: The New  Republic  for  February  1 tells  the  story  about  the  early  relations  between  the
new  Federal  Communications  Commissioner  Robert  E. Lee and  McCarthy.   The Weekly  told  the  story  in
its  issue of  last  October  17, "The  Man  Who  Rescued  McCarthy."
Example: The Nation for  January  30  published  the  first  of  two  excellent  articles  by  Norman  Red-
lich,  "The  Truth  About  Spies  in  Government."  The Weekly told the same  story  (publishing many of  the
same  details  for  the  first  time)  in a  series of  three  issues  beginning  last  November   14.
Example:  The New  York  Times  in  a  series  of  three  arficles  by that  first-rate  reporter, Peter  Kihss,
on  January  11,  12,  13  debunked  McCarthy's  Fort  Monmouth hearings  as did Walter Millis and Murray
Marder  earlier  in the New  York  Herald-Tribune  and  The Washington  Post.   The Weekly  beat  all  three
of  them with "McCarthy's Hoax  and the  Real  Radar  Scandal"  in  its  issue of  October  24.   And no  paper
has yet  dared touch the  story we  printed  in the  same  issue on  how  RCA got  the  secret  of  radar  out  of
Fort  Monmouth and then tipped  it  to the Axis before the  war.
The  Weekly  is "leastest" in manpower  but often  "fastest"  in  news  coverage  out  of  Washington,
especially  on  Issues others  find  to© hot  to  handle.  But  we  still  need  the  "mostest"  possible  readers.
If  you haven't yet  renewed, please  do so today  (we  will  soon begin  dropping those  who have failed  to
do  so).  If  you  have  renewed,  send a  gift  sub to  a  friend.  Use the  blank  on  the  reverse  side.
P.S. We  have extra  copies of  last  week's  Issue  on  Ike's  bill  to  turn  native  born  radicals  into  de-
portable  aliens  available  for  distribution.   That  was  another  "beat"  by  the  Weekly,  like  our  special
issue  on the McCarran  immunity bill  last  July  18.  Help alert  others  to the  danger  by sending out extra
copies  of  last week's  issue.                                  —I.  F.  STONE
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February   8,  1954
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Turncoatism  Depends  on Whose  Coat Turned
As  good  Americans, all, we  must  of  course trust  that before
the  country  gets  the  case  of   Cpl.  Edward  S.  Dickenson  off
its  conscience  a  great  many  compassionate  and  willing  diag-
nosticians  are  enabled  to  take  a  whack  at  it,   but  especially
Rep.    William  C.   Wampler.    For   the   Virginia  congressman
(Rep.)   has  an  approach  as  striking  as  it  is  humane:  to  him
the  corporal,  who  once  decided  to  stay  with  the  Reds  and
then  thought  better  of  it,  is  "a mere  country  boy  victimized
by  a  shrewd  propaganda  technique."
This  is a  line  of  defense  which  opens  to  all  sorts  of  possibili-
ties.  Here  was Ed,  growing  up  out  in  the  hills  and  just  of  an
age  to  begin  the  pursuit  of  happiness  in  earnest,  when  along
came  the  great  nation  and  plucked  him  out  of  his  sheltered
place  at  Cracker's  Neck  and  sent  him  into  the  world  and  its
temptations.    Had   he  been  left   alone  he  never  would  have
heard   mention   of  Marx  (Who would   have  dared?),   never
would  have  been  held  and  wooed  under  the  Hammer  &  Sickle.
Evidently,  the  congressman is  prepared to  show  that  it  was
not  the  corporal's  fault  that  he  was  exposed  to  the  "shrewd
propaganda  technique,"  and  to  make  for  him  a  plain  case  of
service-connected   disability.    To   show   that  if   he  had con-
tracted   the  fever,  the  dysentery  or  the  ring-worm   (to   all
of  which  he  as wejl  might  have been  exposed  without  his let),
the  same  great  nation now  would be ministering to  him  gently
and  gratefully,  and  for  the  rest  of  his  life  if  need  be.
The   contention   is  reasonable  and  deserves  respectful con-
sideration—though  it   is  capable   of  cutting   a  wider   swath
than  Rep. Wampler  has  in  mind.   The  corporal  turned   coat
twice  and  came  home,  but   21  other  American  soldiers  have
stopped  with  the  Reds.   All  21  have  been  given  dishonorable
discharges.   But  if  Wampler's  case  for  Dickenson   stands  up
why  the  "dishonorable"   in  the  other  cases?   All  were  country
boys   alike,  so  to   speak.   Could   not   all  have  been  equally
"victimized"—and  still  be?
And  the swath must  be wider than  that, it  seems, unless the
congressman's  sweet  and  trenchant  reasoning is  to  apply only
to  the  case  of  his  own  constituent  or,  at  most,  to Americans.
The   other  side  had  far  more  turncoats  than  ours—by   the
thousands   .  .  .  boys  drawn  from  Chinese  Cracker's  Necks
and  Korean Cracker's  Necks  with  no  more  say  in  the  matter
than  Cpl.  Dickenson  had, who  were  held  in  our  prison camps
and  exposed  to  shrewd  (one  must  assume)   propaganda  tech-
niques.   Are  these  thousands  to  be  left  tarred  with  the  same
tar  we  put  on  the  Americans,  being  turncoats  also?
The   present  adherence  of   these  prisoners   to   our   side  has
been  hailed  by  the  Voice  of  America  as establishing "the right
to  freely  choose."   Ambassador  Henry  Cabot   Lodge,  Jr., has
said  the  event  was  "victory  for  freedom  everywhere."   Well
and  good  .  .  . But  are we to  recognize  a virtue  in  free  choic^
only  when  the  side  chosen is our  own?  And  is desertion  to  be
stigmatized  only  when  our  own  soldiers  desert?
Personally,  I  like  the  plea  Rep. Wampler  is  developing  i.
behalf  of  Cpl. Dickenson  and  which  he  declares himself  ready
to  advance in  any  court-martial.   The  corporal's  disability,  if
any,  is  service-connected.   He  was—like  millions  of  others—
a  mere  country  boy,  and  has  a  right  to  ask  the  nation  which
plucked  him  out  of  his  backwoods,  and  especially  those  who
judge  him  who  do  not   know   the   difference   between   their
armchair  at  home  and  a  prisoner-of-war   camp  at  the  end  of
the  world,  to  accord  him  at  least  as fair  a  standing  as is with-
out  question  accorded  the  thousands  of  turncoats  who  were
yesterday's  mortal   enemies.
Our  conscience cannot  avoid  the  issue  when  reason  refuses
to  be  "victimized."   For  we  may  say  it  is  the  military  rule
which  must  be  upheld.   But  whose  military  is  it?   And  what
rule  of  any  instrument   of  a  democracy  is  so  vested  that   an
elemental  sense  of  fair  play  should  not  overrule   it?
When  we  proclaim  to  all  the  world  "the right   to  freely
choose,"   we  cannot  decently   at   the  same  time  impose  trial
and  disgrace  upon   those  who  have  dared  to  take  us  at  our
word  and  have chosen  to  the  best  of  their  ability.
If  You Have  Not  Yet  Subcribed  or Renewed, Please  Help By Doing  So  Now
This  Is  Expiration   Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      _——————————-————————————————
Street     ___—————————————————_________
City————————
__  Zone..__  State..
Enter  this  gift  sob   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name   ___________________________
Street     _———————————————————————————
City_____________  Zone____  State__......__
2-8-54
I.  F. Stone'.  Weekly
Room 205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED