I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954apr26.pdf

============================================================

Extra:  Martin  Dies  and  Two Ex-FBI Men Oppose Wiretapping, Page 2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2, NUMBER 14
APRIL  26,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Free To  Do Anything  But  Make  Peace
The  free  world  enters  the  Geneva conference today  free  to
do  anything  it  pleases  except  make  peace.   The  united  front
of  freedom  has been  achieved by  denying its  members freedom
of   choice.    Whether   in  Indo-China,  France  or   the   United
States,   decisions  are  being  taken  in   complete  and   scarcely
concealed  disregard  for  the  wishes  of  their  peoples.    This  is
what  the   Nixon   speech  to   the  newspaper  editors  revealed.
Dulles  had  already  made  it  clear  that  we  would  not  take
into  account   the  wishes  of  the  Indo-Chinese  or  the  French
people.    Compromise  of  any  kind,  partition,  coalition  or   free
elections,  was  foreclosed  when  Dulles  said  we  would  oppose
any   communist    advance   in   southeast   Asia   "by    whatever
mean"  accomplished.   Now  Nixon  has made it  clear  that  the
administration  is equally indifferent—and  prides  itself  on  be-
ing  able to  be indifferent—to  what  the  American people want.
New Variant  of the  Public Be Damned
These  are  his  words,  as  reported  next  morning  in  indirect
discourse  by  the  New   York   Times.    Nixon  said  the  United
States  was "the  only  country  that  is strong  enough  politically
at  home  to  take  a  position  that  will  save  Asia."    What  do
these  shrewd  words  mean?    They  mean  that   the  American
government,  unlike  the  British  and  French,  is  strong  enough
to  disregard  the  popular  demand  for  negotiation   and  peace.
The  Administration  regards   the  American   people   as  un-
informed  and  does not  intend  to  be  governed  by  their  wishes.
Here   are  Nixon's  words  again.    "With  regard  to  the  view
that  it  might  be politically  expedient  to  agree  to  negotiations
with   Red  China,"  the  report  of  his  speech  continued,   "he
said  that  if  the  United  States  left  its  policy  to  an  uninformed
public  opinion,  it  would  go  down  the  long  road  to  disaster."
This  is  a  new  varient  of  "the   public   be  damned."    The
philosophy  of  big  business  is  being  applied  by  a  government
of   big  business.    "With  or  without   the  support   of   public
opinion,"  the  report   continued,  "if   the  situation   in   Indo-
China  requires  that  American  troops  be  sent  there  to  prevent
area  from  disappearing  behind  the  iron  curtain,  the  Admin-
istration must  face the  issue  and send  the  troops, he declared."
A  Profound   Distrust  of   Democracy
The  leaders  of  a  democratic  country  have  rarely   been  so
transparent   in  revealing  their   contempt   for  democracy   and
their  lack  of  faith  in  it.    Nixon  said  the  communists  would
never  agree  to  free  elections  in  Korea  because  they  would  lose
the  election.   But  apparently we, too,  will  not  risk  the  verdict
of  free  choice.
Touching  upon  negotiations  for  partition  or  for   free  elec^
tions  in  Indo-China  in  which  communists  might  win  a  place
in   the   government,   Nixon   said  "negotiations   in   any   form
would  end  up  in  communist  domination of  a vital  new  area."
This  implies  a  curious  faith  in  the  potency   of   communism.
A  New Colonialism
How  can  this  faith  in  communist   potency  be  reconciled
with   our   criticism  of   French   colonialism?    Were  this   the
reasoning  of  the  British  and  the  Dutch,  they  would  still  be
fighting  to  deny  India  and  Indonesia  their  independence  lest
they  fall  prey  to  communism and  what  kind  of  independence
are  we  offering  Vietnam,  Laos  and  Cambodia  if  they  are  to
be  independent   only   to   follow   dictation,  eschewing  peace,
negotiation  and  free  elections?
This  distrust  of  the  popular will is  reflected  in  that  portion
of  the  Nixon   talk  which  inadvertently   cut  the  ground  out
from  under  the Administration's own  propaganda about  meet-
ing  aggression  in  Asia.    He  said  even  an  alliance  would   not
"meet   the  real  danger  in  Asia,  which  is  not   aggression   but
internal   subversion."
This  kind  of  a  foreign  policy  comes  naturally  to  the  co-
author   of   the  Mundt-Nixon   bill,  which   later   became   the
internal  security  act  of   19JO,  setting  up  our  first  subversive
activities   control   board.    The  implication  of  what   we  are
doing  at  home is  also  the  direction  of  policy  abroad.     (U.  S.
News  and  World  Report  last  week  said  we  would  help  die
French   build  a  new  "constabulary"   in  Indo-China   to   deal
with   local  "trouble-makers.")     Like  Japan  before  the  war,
we   are  proposing   to   police   East   Asia   against   "dangerous
thoughts"  and  communism.
A  New  Co-Prosperity  Sphere
Nixon   disclosed  more   fully   than  ever  before   the   degree
to  which  this  Administration  sees  East  Asia  through  Japan's
eyes,  as  it   sees  East  Europe  through  Germany's.    The   main
target  of  the  communists,  Nixon  said,  was Japan,  not  in  the
sense  that  they  might  take  over  Japan  but  that  they  might
take   over   those   trading   areas   on   which   Japan    depends.
Of  Korea  and  Indo-China,  Nixon  said,  "conquest  of  area—
so  vital  to  Japan's  economy  would  reduce  Japan  to  an  eco-
nomic  satellite  of  the  Soviet  Union."
Having   fought   one  war  to  free   the  East  from   Japanese
domination,  we  are  now  being  led  back  into  another  war  to
make  it   safe   again  for   Japanese  exploitation.     Just   as  the
Russians  are  to  be  "rolled  back"  in  Europe  to  give  the   Ger-
mans  Lebensraum,  so  the  fighting  is  to  go  on  until   Southeast
Asia  can  become part  of  Japan's  co-prosperity  sphere.    We  are
picking  up  where  the  Axis  left  off.   This  is  why  we  are  io
anxious  to  bolt  the  doors  at  Geneva  against   peace.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   April  S6, 1954
Not  An "Anti-Traitor" But  An  "Eavesdropping" Bill
Martin  Dies  and Two  Ex-FBI  Men  Oppose   Wiretapping
Capitol  Hill—Ever  since  1940,  the  Department  of  Justice
has  tried  to  get  Congress  to  authorize  wire-tapping.   Twice
before,  in  1940  and  1942,  bills  passed  the  House  only  to  die
in  committee  when  they  reached  the  Senate.   A  wire-tapping
measure  has  again  passed  the  House this  year,  the  first  item
in  the  Brownell  witch hunt  program  to  achieve  passage,  but
may  again  die in the  Senate.   The debate in  the  House showed
how  well  the   basic  issues   are   understood  and  how  deeply
wire-tapping    is  feared.    Though   only   10  members*   voted
against  the  bill  on final passage,  the result was  a  blow to  the
prestige  of  FBI  Chief  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  The  House was  told
that  Hoover  preferred  no  bill  at  all  to  a  bill  which  required
a  court  order  before  wires  could  be tapped.   Yet the  Adminis-
tration  bill  was  rewritten  on the floor to  make  a  court  order
necessary   for  future   wire-tapping.
The  most  unexpected and  one  of  the  best  speeches against
wire-tapping  was  made by Thomas J.  Dodd,  a  Democrat  from
Connecticut, one of  two  ex-FBI  men who opposed  the  original
bill.   The  speech  which  revealed   most   about   Congressional
opposition  to  wire-tapping  came   from   another   unexpected
source
—Martin   Dies  of   Texas.    This  threw   new  light  on
why  Dies  "voluntarily  retired"  from  Congress  in  1945  and
also  put  our  earliest  Congressional  witch  hunter  in  the  posi-
tion  of  a  severe  critic  of the  way loyalty  cases  are  tried.  Dies
complained  that  three  years  ago  when he  defended  a  former
Texas  official  of  the  NLRB  against  charges  of Communism,
the  hearing  panel "refused  to present  a bill of particulars  . . .
they  notified  us that the burden of  proof  was  on the defendant
.  .  .  the  board  refused  to  give  us  one  iota,  one scintilla  of
information  that  would  acquaint  us  with  the  nature  of  the
charge  or  the  identity  of  the  accusers."
Dies  Called  Pro-Hitler
This  reflected  some  painful  experiences  of  his  own.   Dies
told  the  House  his  own  telephone  had  been  tapped  during
the  war  and that he saw "a  brochure" of more than  100 pages
containing  his  purported  conversations.  "There   were  public
officials,"  he complained,  "who  said  I  was  subversive ... In
fact,  one  of  them  said  I  was  the  agent  of  Hitler."
Dies  appealed  to  the  Republicans.  He  asked  them,  "If  Mr.
Biddle   were  Attorney  General  today—would   you   for   one
moment  consider  this  legislation?"
Dies   also  advanced   the   cleverest   argument   against   the
bill  during  the  debate.   The  Texan  argued  that  after   the
passage  of  the  bill  "there  is  not  a  spy  of  any  country  on
earth,  however  benighted  that  country  may  be,  who  would
risk  the  telephone."  Since the  FBI  does tap  wires  at  present,
Dies argued, "you  are  denying to  the FBI  sources of informa-
tion  which are  now available to  them."   Rogers  (D.  Col.)  dis-
posed  of  this  altogether  by  telling  the  House  "former  Com-
munist   agents   have   testified   that   individuals   engaged   in
espionage  or  treason  are  trained  never  to  discuss  important
matters   over  the  telephone."   It  was  Rogers  who  suggested
that  the  bill  ought  to  be termed  an  "eavesdropping   bill",  not
an  "anti-traitor"  measure.
Official  Lawlessness
The  ex-FBI  man,  Dodd, was  the  first  of  several  speakers
to  take  exception  to  the  cheap  semantics  of  calling  the  wire-
tap   bill  an  "anti-traitor"  measure.    Dodd  wanted  to  know
whether  the  purpose  was  to  label  as  "protraitor"  those  who
had  the  temerity  to  vote  against  the  bill.  Dodd said  the De-
partment   of  Justice   "for   many  years  with  its   tongue   in
cheek"  had  flouted  the  legislative  intention   of  the  Federal
•  Condon   (D.  Cal.).  Curtis   (R.  Mo.).  Kelley   (D.  Pa.).  Keogh  (D.  N.T.).
Klein  (D.  N.Y.).  Multer  (D.  N.Y.),  Powell  (0.   N.Y.),  Reams  (Ind.  Ohio).
Thomas  (D.  Tex.)    and  Wier   (D.  Minn.).
Communications  Act  "by  claiming  the  disclosure  of  wiretap
information  as  between  employes  of  the  Department  of  Jus-
tice  is  not  disclosure  at  all."   He  charged  that  "what  public
officials   do  in  New  York .under  the  wiretapping   authority
of  the  State  of  New  York  is  forbidden  under  the   Federal
Communications  Act"  and  should  be  prosecuted  by  the   At-
torney  General.  He added that there  would be no such  prose-
cutions  because  "the   Federal  government  has  dirty  hands."
Dodd  protested  that  the  bill  failed  to  make  wiretapping
by  "private  snoopers"   illegal  and  that  it  did  not  cover  the
two  crimes  in  which  telephones  are  used—kidnapping   and
extortion.  He objected to the two hour  debate  limitation  under
which  the   House  was  being  asked   "to   weigh  these  great
constitutional   questions  against  this   request   for   new  and
terrible  police  powers."    .
Breeds  Corruption  and  Blackmail
Yates   (D.  111.)  said  he  did  not  doubt that  a  great  deal of
additional  evidence  could  be  obtained  by  wiretapping  as   it
can  be "by  other  familiar  totalitarian  law  enforcement mea-
sures,  such  as  brutality,  the  third  degree,  and  illegal   search
and   seizures."    He  quoted  a  recent  Columbia  Law  Review
study  (Vol. 52, pps.  164,  196-97)  as  finding  that  "corruption,
blackmail,  misuse of  warrant  procedures,  failure  to  prevent
unauthorized  wiretapping,  and  loss  of  general  confidence  in
the  security  of  the   telephone  as  a  medium  of  communica-
tion,"  had  been  the  result   of  New  York's  experience  even
under  judicial supervision.
Another  ex-FBI  man,  McCulloch  (R.  Ohio)  rose  to  say,  "I'
know  the  temptations that  police problems present."  He said
that  "one  of  the  worst  features  of  police  power"  was   "the
ability  to  intercept  and  interfere  with  private  wire  communi-
cations."   He  warned  that  the  bill  before  the   House  was
"the   explosive  trigger  which  can   set   off   by  chain  reaction
the  destruction  of  our  American  democracy  and  leave  us  in
the  ruins  of  a  police  state  dictatorship."
The  Brownell-Hoover argument  against  requiring   a  judi-
cial  order  was  that  this  might  lead  to  "leaks".  "It  horrifies
me,"  said  Willis  (D.  La.),  "to  think  that  when  the  Attorney
General,  his  assistants,  a  stenographer   in  this   department,
a   mechanic,  an    official    of   the   telephone   company—when
people  will  be assigned  to  listen  in  to  these  conversations  for
months  at  a  time, when they  can  all be in on this business,  we
then  do not want  a  Federal  judge  to  get  in  on it  because we
do  not  trust  him."
"Search  and  Seizure  of  The  Mind"
One  of  the  strange  features  of  the  debate  was  the  reversal
in  position  of  two  leading  members  of  the  House  Judiciary
Committee.  Keating  (R.  N.Y.),  under  pressure  from  Hoover
and  Brownell, had  given  up  his  long  fight  to  prevent   wire-
tapping   without  a   court   order   and  was  urging  that   the
Attorney  General  be given  this  power.   Celler  (D.  N.Y.)  who
had  sponsored  the  1940  and  1942  bills  giving  this  power  to
the  Attorney  General  without  judicial   supervision   now  led
the  fight  for  a  court  order.   Celler  said  there  would  always
be  the  temptation  to  use the  taps  for  political  purposes,  that
FBI   reports   were  already   being  used  "by  certain   officials"
for   such  purposes,  and  that  wiretapping  was  "search  and
seizure  of  the  mind."
But  by far  the  most  revealing  remark  in  the  entire  debate
was  made by  a  proponent  of  wiretapping  under  court  order,
Forrester,  (D.  Ga.)  who  spoke—in  one  breath—of   "the   do-
gooders  and the traitors."  The do-gooder, the  social  reformer,
is  the  same  as  a  traitor  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  advocate
repression.   The  wiretap  bill  is  framed  to  make  easier  the
surveillance  of  liberal  and  Leftist  opinion,  not  of  crime.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  26,  1954
I  E  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and  Publisher,  L  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20!,   SOI
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a   year;  Canada,  Mexico   and   elsewhere  in   the   Western  Hemisphere,   $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,   $10  by   1st  class  mail,  $1!   by   air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single   copy,   15  cents.   Tel.:  LI  4-7087.    Entered  a   Second   Class   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,   D.  C.
Vol.  2,  Number  14
April  26, 1954
Round  This  (Unsteady)  Globe
Though  ordinarily  not  deficient  in  humanity,  our  favorite
headline  of  the  past   week   (it   appeared  after  the  Army's
bill  of  particulars  against  McCarthy, Cohn,  Carr  and  Shine
was  published)   is  "Cohn  Rips  'Leak'  of  One-Sided Smear."
We  would be happy  to  see  one  of  our  better  bar  associations
investigate.    Hasn't  it  often  been  pointed  out  that  one way
to  spot  a  you-know-what lawyer  is  by  his  violence  in  criti-
cizing  the   procedures  of   Congressional   investigating  com-
mittees?
We are  grateful  to  Bishop Sheil for  his  speech against Mc-
Carthy.    It  would  be tragic  for  the  Church  and  it  would  be
tragic  for  America  if  clerics  like  Cardinal  Spellman  were  to
succeed  in  identifying McCarthyism  with  Roman Catholicism.
In  these  days,  when  there  is  often  the  anguished  feeling  of
seeing  the  end  of  the  American  Republic,  one  really  begins
to  appreciate  the  atmosphere  and  the  ideals  which made this
a  nation  of  nations,  a  country  in  which  men  of  all  races,  of
all  faiths  and  none, managed  to  live  together  in  considerable
peace  and  to  approximate  in  their  lives  that  equality  which
has  been  our  basic  faith.    One has  only  to  remember  Prank
Murphy  to  realize  that  a  pious  Catholic can be a  great  liber-
tarian.   One has  only  to  remember  Al  Smith  to  realize  that
a  Catholic can be a  social reformer.  These things  need already
to  be  said.   The  weakness  of  McCarthy in  the  South  derives
from  anti-Catholicism.    Bishop  Sheil  is  wiser  than   Cardinal
Spellman.    Our  hat  is  off  to  him.
France's   leading  newspaper,  Le  Monde,  carried  two  inter-
esting  dispatches  from   Indo-China  on  April  8.    These  con-
cerned  the  sensational  charge  made  by  Secretary   of  State
Dulles  on  April  5  that  a  Chinese  Communist  General,  Li
Chen-hou, was  at  the  Dienbienphu  headquarters  of the  rebels.
Both  dispatches  were  by  Agence  France  Presse,  the   official
French  news  agency.   The earlier, from  Saigon,  said  French
military  quarters  would  not  comment  on  this  charge,  but  it
was  made  clear  that  the  information  used  by  Dulles  did  not
come  from  French  military  intelligence.    Later  in  the  day,
there- was  a  second  dispatch,  this  time  from   Hanoi, which
quoted  a  member  of  the  French  high  command  as  saying
more  tactfully  that  the  Ho  forces  were  using  Chinese  mili-
tary  methods and that  there  might  be a  Chinese general  with
them  but  that  there  had  been  no  contact  with  Chinese  in
the   Indo-Chinese war.    As  for   General  Li   Chen-hou,  this
same  source  identified   him  only  as  a  Kuomintang   general
who  had  been  in  Indo-China in  1945  when  Chiang's  armies
of   occupation  held  the  country  north  of  the   16th   parallel.
Israel  needs  peace,  peace with  its  Arab  neighbors,  peace  in
the  world.    A  distinguished  committee  linked  with   Nation
Associates  last  week  produced  an  excellent  plan  for  a  Re-
gional   Resources  Development  Board  for  the   Middle  East
and  a  program  for  the  resettlement   of  the  Arab   refugees.
Unfortunately  the  report  seeks  to  curry  favor  with  cold  war
policy  by  attacking  the  Arabs  as  neutralists  while  Israel
5   3
"would  stand with the democracies were freedom   endangered."
The  trouble  is  that  Russia  will  go  on  blocking  Arab-Israel
peace  as  long  as  she  feels  that  if  peace  were  once made  the
entire area  would become a military  base against  the  U.S.S.R.
The  trouble  also  is  that  the  Arabs   feel  that  if  they   sulk
long  enough  the  United  States  may  sacrifice  Israel  to  their
desire  for  revenge.    Should  war  come,  the  Middle  East  and
its  oil  resources   will  be  the  first  proving   ground   for   the
H-bombs  of  both  sides.    There  can  be  stability  only  if   the
area  is  neutralized;  only  neutrality   can  safeguard  its  Holy
Places.    Israel  is  too  small,  too  weak,  too  easily  extinguish-
able  to  play  the  dangerous  game  hinted  at  in  this  report.
Its   friends   would   be  better   advised  to  help  build   public
understanding  of  the  need  for  the  neutralization   of  the  Mid-
dle  East  as  a  linchpin  of  world  peace  than  to talk  as  if  the
tiny  Yishuv,  established  at  the  cost  of  so  much  sacrifice,  is
worthy  of  support  because  it  offers  itself  as  a  military  ally
for  a  new  war  which  would  snuff  out  its  life  in  an  instant
whichever  side won.
In  our  March  8  issue   ("Kafka   Might  Have  Written   The
Army's  Loyalty  Form")  we  published  for  the  first  time  the
Loyalty  Certificate   Form  D  D98  used  in  the  armed  forces.
This  has  now  been  supplemented  by  Defense  Directive  No.
5210.9,  effective  April  1,  which  makes  it  "the  duty  of  every
member  of  the  Armed  Forces  to  report  to  his  commanding
officer   any  information  coming to  his  attention   which  indi-
cates  that  retention  of  any  member  of  the  Armed  Services
is  not  clearly  consistent  with  the  interests  of  national   se-
curity."  "In  future,"  the  London New Statesman  said of this,
"it  will  be  the  duty  of  every  American  soldier ...  to  spy
on  his  comrades  and  to  inform  against  them  if  ever   they
express  an  unorthodox  political  opinion."    It  suggests  that
the next step should be Political  Commissars for  the American
armed  forces.   Anybody  who ever  belonged to  or  was  closely
associated   with  any  "front"   organization   on  the   Attorney
General's list,  or  of  any  organization which fronted  for  such
an  organization,  will  be  debarred  from  any  but  "non-sensi-
tive"  duties  at  the  lowest  rate  of  pay  and  if  separated   will
be  denied  an  honorable  discharge.    The  armed  services   are
ordered   to   cooperate   with   Federal   investigative    agencies
"and  will  avoid  action tending  prematurely  to  warn  suspects
that  they  are  under  suspicion or  to  compromise  confidential
sources of information."   The witch  hunt has badly disrupted
the   State   Department   and   other   civilian   agencies   of   the
government.   It  can  easily  do as  much for  the  Armed  Serv-
ices.    There  is  a  law  which  makes  it  a  crime  to undermine
the  morale  of  the  armed  services,  and  to  create  disaffection
among them.   It  ought  to be applied  to the  man who thought
up  these  Army  loyalty  procedures.    We  can  think  of  no  bet-
ter  way to  serve an  enemy than  to make  the  Army  a  stamp-
ing
1
  ground  for   snoopers  and   stoolpigeons.
The  ordeal  of  Owen Lattimore  showed what  could  be done,
Inquisition   style,  in  tripping   up  a  witness   during  a  pro-
longed  interrogation.    The  longer  a  man  is  questioned,  the
easier  it  is to trap him into contradictions.    At  present  these
contradictions  can  be  utilized  in  a  perjury  prosecution  only
if  the  government  can  prove  one of  the  two  statements  false.
Attorney  General  Brownell,  who  seems  to  think  the  purpose
of  legal  reform  is  to  make  life  easier  for  prosecutors,  has
introduced  a  proposal  which  would  make  the  contraditcory
statements  themselves  sufficient.    Though  the  contradictions
would  have  to  be  "willful,"  that  safeguard   is   metaphysical
and  illusory.    In  practice,  a  witness  who  changed  his  mind
or  refreshed   his  recollection  would  be  in  danger  of  going  to
jail  for  perjury  merely  on the  basis  that  he had  contradicted
himself.    Since  perjury   is  now  a  favorite   device  for   cir-
cumventing  the  statute  of limitations  and "getting"  radicals,
this  proposal  will  bear  watching.    As  presented,  it   applies
only  to  grand  jury  and  court  proceedings  but  could easily  be
amended  to  include  Congressional   committees.    This  would
really  give  the  witch  hunters  a  holiday.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  ge, 1954
A  Sermon  No  Pulpit  Dares  to J?reach
Last  week-end  Easter  and  Passover  coincided.   These  are
the  two   spring  festivals  of  what  is  so  often  referred  to  as
Judaeo-Christian  civilization.    This  is  the  civilization   whose
values  we  are  getting  ready  to  defend  against  those  who  do
not  believe  in  God,  think  the  end  justifies  the  means,  place a
low  value  on  human  life,  deny  the  existence  of  spirit,  and  do
not  hold—as  we  do—that  man  is  sacred  because  made  in  the
image of  his  Creator.
The   dual  occasion   provoked   an   outpouring   of   sermons.
There  were  even  sermons  in  unexpected  precincts.   Popular
magazines  meditated  for   a  moment—in   full   color—on   the
Meaning  of  the  Resurrection.   Columnists  who  prided  them-
selves  on  being  intellectuals  wrote   (rather  ostentatiously)  on
going  to  mass or  seder.   But  amid  this  chorus  of  piety  I  did
not  notice  that  anyone dealt  with  what  I  should have thought
an  obvious  but  striking  theme.  This was the  inclusion,  among
the  charges  against  Dr.  J.  Robert  Oppenheimer,  of  the  allega-
tion  that  he  had  opposed  the  making  of  the  hydrogen   bomb
on  "moral  and  political"  grounds.
*           *           »
I  suppose that  on the basis of rendering unto  Caesar  what
is  Caesar's,  the  Church   could  excusably  shy  away  from  any
comment  on  the  latter  half  of  this  indictment.    To  say  that
Dr.  Oppenheimer   opposed  the  H-bomb  on "political"  grounds
is  in  any  case  too  terrifying;  it  seems  to  imply  that  out  of
some   affinity   he  wickedly   objected   to  blowing   the   enemy,
ideology  and  all,  to  smithereens.
But  the  "moral"  half  of  the  indictment  is  another  matter.
Is not  morality  the  province  of Church  and  Synagogue?  Have
we  not   been  told  over  and  over  again  of  the  dangers  which
flow from  divorcing  science  from  morality  and  morality  from
religion?    When   a  scientist   is  accused  of   objecting   to   the
H-bomb  on  "moral"  grounds,  it  begins  to  sound  as  if  there
were   circumstances   under   which   the   government   regards
morality  as  subversive.
*           *           *
We  have  seen  many  conversions  in  our  time.   What  if
Dr.  Oppenheimer  should  get  up  at  his  hearing  and  say  that
after  long  thought  he  had  returned  to  the  faith  of  his fathers
and  now  took  literally  the  injunction  "Thous  shalt  not  kill?"
What  if  the  hearing  board  were  forced  to  bar  him  from  all
defense  work  on  the  ground  that  he  took  the  Ten  Command-
ments literally?
Or  what  if  Dr.  Oppenheimer  got  up  and  said  that  after
long  brooding  he  had   been  drawn  to   Jesus  and   become  a
Christian  and  felt  impelled  to  live  by  the  injunction,  "Love
your  enemies .  .  .  resist  not  evil?"   What  if  he  were  to say
that  he  could  not  reconcile  the  making  of  newer  and  bigger
bombs  with   his  new   found   religious   belief?    How   embar-
rassing  if  the hearing  board  were forced  to  declare Dr.  Oppen-
heimer  a  security  risk  because he  had  become  a  Christian.
*           *           *
What  if  the  learned  judges  were  to  say to  him, "But
Dr.  Oppenheimer,  we  too  are  believers.  We,  too,  honor  these
injunctions.    Yet   not   to  make  the   most   powerful   weapon
possible  is to  run  the  risk  that  the  enemy  may  overcome us."
And  what  if  he  were  to  answer,  "I  no  longer  believe  the  end
justifies  the  means?"
What  if  Dr.  Oppenheimer  were  to  say,  "I  do  not   believe
that  preparations  for  the  mass  immolation  of  human  beings,
the  innocent  and  the  guilty,  the  civilian  and  the  soldier,   the
young and the old, the  believer and  the  unbeliever,  can  morally
be  justified   by  any  rationalization?  Have  we  not   said   that
we  believe  each  individual  precious   as  a  spark  struck   from
some  greater  Anvil,   the   vessel  of   Spirit,  the  image  of   his
Creator?"
How  embarrassing  if  the  Board  is  compelled  to  rule  that
holding  such beliefs,  though not  necessarily  proof  of  disloyalty,
nor  even  intrinsically  subversive,  does make  a  man  something
of  a security  risk?
*           *          *
And  what  if  Dr.  Oppenheimer   takes  none  of   these
extreme  and  radical  attitudes,   does  not   speak  as a  Tolstoyan
or  a  pietist  but  merely  admits  that  he  opposed  the  H-bomb
because  he  felt  that  slaughter  on  so  vast  a  scale  was—to  use
an   unscientific,  an   old-fashioned,   a   simple-minded    term—
wrong?  Suppose he thus  pleads guilty by admitting  he  opposed
the  H-bomb  on  moral  grounds?
We'll  Be Glad to  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends
Why  Not  Send  a  Gift   Sub  Note?
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    _____________________________
Street
City_
State
Enter  this  gift  snb  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name    _______________________
Street   ____________._________________
4-26-M
I.   •"  Stone's  Weekly
Ttoom 20$
•"•  5- Capitol St, S.B.
Washington  3, D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED