I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954may10.pdf

============================================================

Ho  Chi Minh's  Career  and  How  He  Worked With Chennault.  Page  Two
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2, NUMBER  16
MAY  10,  1954WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 CENTS
Chiang's  Secret  War  Plan
The  Red  River  delta  in  northern  Indo-China,  and  its  port
of  Haiphong,  is  the  natural outlet  to  the  sea of  the  adjoining
provinces  of  South  and  Southwest  China.    It   was  for   cen-
turies  a  Chinese  sphere of  influence  until  the  French  ousted
the  Chinese  from  the  area  about  70  years  ago.    Its  strategic
importance  was  enhanced by  the  construction  of  the  French
railroad  line  from  Haiphong  to Kunming in  the  Southwestern
Chinese  province  of  Yunnan.    Before  the  war,  after  the  fall
of  Canton,  this  railroad  became  Chiang's  life-line until  it  was
shut  off by  the French in  their  anxiety  to  appease the  Japanese.
After  the  war,  one  of  the  conditions  for  Chinese withdrawal
from  Northern  Indo-China  was  the  establishment  of  a  free
port  at  Haiphong.    Only  last  week  a reliable  source  in  Tokyo
reported   that   Communist   China   had  secretly   sounded  the
French  on  a  settlement  which  would  involve  recognition  of
Peiping  and  the  grant   to  it  of  the  right  freely   to  use  the
railway  system,  the  Red  River  and  the  port  of  Haiphong.
Chiang's  strategic  dream  is  to  reverse  the  historic  pattern
and   use  Haiphong,   the  railroad  and   the   Red  River   as  his
inlet  to  China.    Intervention  in  the  Indo-Chinese  civil  war
would  give  him  a  bridgehead  on  the  mainland,  a  protected
landing  place,  and  then  a  base  of  operations  from  which  to
penetrate  Yunnan  and  Kwangsi  provinces.    "United  action"
would  provide  for  the  use  of  his  troops.    Their  task  would
be  to  seal  off  the  Chinese  border.    If  this  brought  the  Com-
munist  Chinese  into  the  Indo-Chinese  war,  as it  almost  cer-
tainly  would,  Chiang's  line  is that  with  strong  aerial  support
he  might  be  able  to  establish  himself  across  the  border  and
begin  on  the  job  of  "rolling  back"  the  Communists.    This
grandiose  scheme  is  being  sold  as  a  form  of  "letting  Asians
fight  Asians."    It  is  argued  that  it  would  not  involve  any
need  for  American  ground  troops,  that  Chiang  would  require
only  logistic  naval  and  air  support,  and  that  he  could  by  this
means  establish  a  cordon sanitaire  in  the  South  which  would
really  contain  the  Communists.    So runs  the  siren  song  from
Formosa.
A  Hint Was  Enough  for  London
It  was  the  hint  of  just  such  concrete  planning  rather  than
the  more  generalized  question  of  "united  action"  which  led
the  British so firmly  to  rebuff  Duties.   The  plan  is unpopular
with  all  sides  in  the  Indo-Chinese  dispute.   The  French,   like
the  British,  fear  it  would  be  the  beginning  of  what   Chiang
has  all  along  wanted—a  World  War  III  to  restore  him  to
power.    The  French  do  not  in  any  event  relish  the  idea  of
handing  over  the  northern  part  of  their  colony  to  the  Chinese
pretender.    The  Vietnamese—right  and  left—had   their  fill
of  Chiang  during  the  period  in  which  his  troops  occupied  the
territory  north  of  the  Sixteenth   parallel.    One  reason  Ho  is
said  to  have  accepted  the  Hanoi  agreement  of  March  1946
for   a  Vietnamese  Republic  within  the  French  Union,  with
temporary  re-entry  of  French  troops,  was  so he  could  get  rid
of   the   Chinese,  whom  the   Annamites  have   long   regarded
somewhat  as  Poles  do  the  Russians  and  Irish  do  the  British.
Both  sides  in  Vietnam  seem  to  oppose  "internationalization"
of  the  conflict  and  to  oppose  partition  as  only  another  way
of  setting  the  stage  a  la  Korea  for  international  conflict  at
their  expense.
Chiang's  scheme is making headway in  Washington,  despite
its  obvious dangers.   Secretary  of  Defense  Wilson,  who  is  a
moderating  influence,  has  been  persuaded  to   visit   Formosa
soon  to  judge  for  himself  the  capability  of  Chiang's   troops.
Dulles  and Radford in  the  Administration,  Nixon  and  Know-
land  in  Congress,  are strongly  in  favor  of  such  an  adventure.
Eisenhower  is  being  drawn  weakly along  in  tow.    His  state-
ment  to  Senator  Flanders  that  "no  military  operation  would
be  undertaken alone  unless  it  had  the  support  of  the  people
of  the  region—unless  we  were  fighting  for  them"  has  been
misconstrued   as  reassuring.    On   the  contrary,  it   envisages
American  intervention  without   Western  aid  if  it  had   "the
support  of  the  people  of  the  region."    What  is  the  region?
Obviously  not  East  Asia  as  a  whole,  which  opposes  interven-
tion.   Is it  hoped that  an "independent"  Bao Dai,  with  French
control  cast off, may gravitate  to  the  American  orbit  and  call
for  "help?"   What  is  the  restive  Syngman  Rhee  supposed  to
do  if   Chiang's  troops  and  America's  planes  go  into  action
in  the  South?   Resumption  of  the  Korean  war  would  suit  his
temperament  and  the  necessities  of  such  a  conflict—providing,
of  course,  he  did  not  collapse  if  left  to  hold  his front  alone.
Only  Way to  "Stop Communism"
The  liberals  who  write  lugubriously  of  Dulles's   defeat  at
Geneva  as  some  kind  of  national  catastrophe  ought   to  have
their  noggins  examined.   The  revolt  against  the  reckless  and
faltering  leadership of  Washington   is  the  one  hope  not   only
of   world   peace  but,   if   we  must   use  invidious   phrases,  of
"halting  the  march  of  Cummunism  in  Asia."   For  it  is  only
by  recognizing   Communist   China   and  ending   the   hopeless
attempt  to  squelch  native  aspiration  in  French  Indo-China
that  stability  may  be  restored  and  a  firm  line  drawn,  not  for
war   but   for  peace  and  co-existence.    It   is  only  on  such  a
basis  that  the  great  Asian  neutrals  may  be  led  to  underwrite
and  stabilize  a  settlement.    This  is  London's  perspective,  but
here  the  liberals quail  at uttering  such  suspect  words  as   "com-
promise,"  "negotiation,"  "coexistence"  and  "peace."    With
few  exceptions,  as  the  hasty  defeat  of  the  Coudert  amend-
ment  last  week  showed,  only  rightists  dare  to  speak  up  for
military   non-involvement  and  diplomatic  sobriety.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 10, 1951
Long  Secret State  Dept.  Report  Reveals  That in  World  War  II
Ho  Chi Minh  Worked With  Chennault  to  Rescue  U.S. Fliers
In  the Library  of  Congress we  came across a mimeographed
once  secret  State  Department  intelligence  report  (UB   250.-
USS)   on  Indo-China,  dated   October  25,  1945, declassified    in
1947.   We  reprint  major  portions  for  the  light  it  throws  on
the  remarkable  career of  Ho-Chi-Minh  and  for  its  tantalizing
glimpse   of   the   cooperation   between  Ho   and   Chennault   in
rescuing  American  fliers  during  the  war, and between Ho and
an  unidentified   American  group  against  the  Japanese.   The
report   refers    to  him-  under  his  original  name,   Nguyen-Ai-
Quoc,  "now  known  as  Ho-Chi-Minh."
Son  of  a  Mandarin
Nguyen-Ai-Quoc is reported  by source to be the  most experi-
enced  and  intelligent  of the  Annamite  Nationalist-Communist
leaders.  Born  1892,  he  is  the  son of  a  mandarin  in  Nghe-An
Province  of  Annam,  where  the  revolutionary  tradition  was
strong.   He  received  his  education  in  Hue  at   the  famous
College  Quoc-Hoc.   From  his  earliest  childhood   (which  was
said  to be not very  happy—his father  was  an  alcoholic addict,
and  later  dismissed  from  his   administrative  position),  he
resented  the  servility  of  the  mandarinate  to  the  French.  As
a  youth,  source says, he had a strong desire for  knowledge and
travel.  In  1911  he  is  said  to  have  left  his  home in  Saigon  at
the  age  of  nineteen   and  worked  his  way  around  the  world.
Described  as  possessing  a  natural  gift  for  languages,  he was
able  during his  peregrinations to learn  English  in  New York,
French  in  Marseille  and  Russian  on  Montparnasse  (Paris).
In  Paris,  he  practiced  several   different   trades  but   spe-
cialized  in  photo-finishing.  According  to  source,  he  lived  an
austere  life,  used  his  savings  to  buy  books  and   magazines
which   contained  extremist  treatments   of  politico-economic
and  social  questions,  and  associated  with  the  French  Com-
munists ...
Pleaded  for  Annam  at  Versailles
At  the  end  of  the  First  World  War,  he  is  said  to  have
drawn  up  a list  of Annamite  claims and  to have presented  it
to  the  Versailles  delegates.   He  founded  in  Paris  the  Inter-
national  Union  of  Colored  Peoples  .  . .
Ai-Quoc was  one of the  leading exponents of  a  "new trend"
in  Communist  policy  which,  after   1923,  advocated  attacking
European  countries  through  their  colonies  and   establishing
an  alliance with  Sun  Yat-sen.  In  1923  Ai-Quoc went  to  Mos-
cow  as  the  representative  of-  Indochina  to  the   International
Peasant  Conference.  He remained there  several  years  study-
ing  the  Bolshevist  doctrine  and  revolutionary  methods  and
associating  with  Soviet  leaders,  who were  said  to respect him
for   "his   remarkable   intelligence."    When  "thoroughly   pre-
pared,"  he  was  sent  to  Canton  to  work  in  the  press  bureau
of  the   Soviet  consulate.    There  he  said   to  have  founded  a
branch  of  the  League  for  Oppressed  People,  and  the   Society
of   Young   Revolutionary   Annamites,   which   was   the   first
Communist  organization   for   Annamites  in   China.   In  1926
he  published,  Le  Prods  de  la Colonisation Francaise  (Paris)
in  which he violently  attacked  colonial  policy  . . .
Emphasized  Nationalism
The orientation  Ai-Quoc gave to his program  is  said  to  have
been  nationalistic  rather  than  communistic;  he  regarded  the
latter  as  a  subsequent  stage.   Recognizing the  Annamites'
love  for  property   and  their  patriarchal   family   system,   as
well   as   the   numerical   and   intellectual   weakness   of   the
proletariat,  he  planned,  according to  source,  first  to  assure
Aftnam's  independence under  a  democratic-bourgeois  regime
and  then,  by  a  second  step,  to  integrate   it  into  the   Soviet
Union.   Under  his  direction,  syndicates  [trade  unions]  of
students  and  workers  were  organized,  and  he  founded   the
Annamite  sectieii  of  the  "League  Against  Imperialism  and
Colonial  Oppression . . ." In  Cochin  China he organized syndi-
cates  among workers  in  the  Franco-Asiatic  Petrol  Co.,  in  the
arsenal,   in  the   electric  plants  of  Cholon  and   Saigon.    In
Tonkin,  the  workers  of  the  cotton  and  silk  mills  of  Haiphong
and  elsewhere  were  organized.   In  Annam,  the  same  thing
occurred  in the  railroad  companies, the  forest  service  and  the
schools.
Jailed  In  Hong  Kong
In   1931,  when  the  Communist party  was  at  its  period of
greatest  strength   (six  years  after   its  birth  in  Indochina),
it  numbered  1,500  members  with  100,000  affiliated   peasants.
Ai-Quoc  was  termed  its  "founder,  mentor  and  savior."   That
same  year,   however,  he  was  arrested   in   Hong   Kong,   re-
portedly   through  the   cooperation   of  the  British   police  on
6  June  .  .  .  He  escaped  from   Hong  Kong  to  Canton  .  .  .
However,  shortly  thereafter   he  passed  through  Hong  Kong
on  his  way  to  Saigon.   This  time  he  was  arrested  and  sen-
tenced  to  two  years  imprisonment.   He  made  an  appeal  to
London,  and  while  awaiting  its  result,  he  was  held  at  the
prison  hospital  because  of  his  precarious  health.   Source  says
he  was  cared  for  in  prison  with  a  devotion that  can  only  be
attributed  to  the  fear  that  his  death   (he  was  very  ill  with
tuberculosis)   would  make  him into  a  popular  martyr  .  .  .
Another   source  reports  that   after   his   prison   sentence,
Ai-Quoc  was  released  through  the  efforts  of  Mr.  Loownsby,
an  English  attorney.   Under  the  name  of  Ho-Chi-Minh  he
went to Fukien  where  he stayed  some months,  then  to  Shang-
hai,  and  finally  back  to  Indochina.   During  his imprisonment
and  thereafter   until   1942,  he  and  the  League  were  active
underground.   In  this  year,  he  went  to  China  as  the  repre-
sentative  of  the  Viet-Minh  League.   Immediately  upon  cross-
ing  the  frontier,  he  was  imprisoned  by  the   Chinese  for  13
months.
Worked  With  Gen. Chennault
After  his  release  at  Liuchow,  he went  to  Kunming to  con-
tact  the  Chinese  and  Americans,  and  his  own underground
organization.    While  there,  he  did  some  translating  for  the
Office   of  War   Information.    From  Kunming,  after   having
been  in  contact  with  General   Chennault,  he  flew  to  Poseh
and  went  from  there  with  an  AGAS  team  to  Caobang.   He
worked  with  this  team  and  its  organization,  establishing  a
network  all  over  Tonkin Province  to  aid  American  pilots  who
were  forced  down  in  French  Indochina.  This  work  continued
until  the  end  of  the  war,  but  an  additional  American  group
worked  with  him against the Japanese  in July  1945 . . .
Ai-Quoc was  reported by Paris newspapers  on 2  September
1945  to  have  assumed  the  title  of  President  of  the  Viet-Nam
Republic,  following  the  abdication   of  Bao  Dai,  Emperor  of
Annam ...  On 17 September   Ai-Quoc was  quoted  as  saying
that his government  is willing to  accept  "even  French 'advice,
so  long  as   the   French   come  as   friends   and   not  as  con-
querors." . . .
According  to  De  Gunzberg,  representative  of  the   French
press,  and  Thorpe,  of  the  Associated   Press,  who  have  had
interviews  with  him,  Ai-Quoc  made  a  favorable  impression
upon  them.   He  appears  to  be  a  sincere   and  capable   man.
Jean  Dorsenne  in   L'e  Peril  Rouge  en  Indochine,  gives   his
physical  description  as  follows:  "Ai-Quoc has the.appearance
of  a  Russian  nihilist;  he  has  a  high  and  well-formed  fore-
head;  his  deep-set  eyes  are  soft  and  reflect  the  incurable
melancholy  so  natural  in  certain  types  of  Dostoyevsky;  his
high   and   hollow  cheeks   reveal   the   inner  flame  and   are
feverishly   colored;  a  line  of  bitterness  deforms  somewhat
his  mouth."   Another   source  describes  him  as  "mystic  and
ascetic."   All  sources,  however,  agree  he  has  a  remarkable
degree  of  organizing  ability.  . . .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  10, 1954
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  P.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  it  Room  20!,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription rates:  Domestic,  $5
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western  Hemisphere,   $<;
England   and  Continental  Europe,   $10   by   1st  class  mail,   $15   by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air mail.
Single   copy,    15   cents.    Tel.:   LI  4-7087.   Entered   as   Second   Class   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
Vol.  2,  Number  16
May   10,  1954
The  Week  in Washington
Best  news  of  the  week  was  the  order  handed  down  by  the
U.S.   Circuit  Court   of  Appeals  here  against   the   Attorney
General  in  the  National  Lawyers'  Guild  case.  The  decision
was   by   two   conservative  members  of   the   Circuit  bench,
Wilbur  K.  Miller  and  Prettyman.    It  will  force  Brownell  to
hold   up   his   kangaroo  court   proceedings  for   putting   the
Guild  on  his  subversive  list  while  the  courts   pass   on  the
Guild's  contention  that  the  Attorney  General  has  no  lawful
power  to  draw  up  such  a  list   anyway.
The  Attorney   General's   list,  begun  privately   by   Francis
Biddle,  made  public  by  Tom  Clark, has  become  an  American
Index   used  in   ever   wider  circles  to   deny   employment  to
persons   suspected  of  subversive  association,  whatever  that
means.     Only   a  few  days   ago  it   was  announced  that  in-
surance  agents   in  the   District  of  Columbia  would  have  to
obtain   loyalty   clearance;   the  list  figures  in  this.    Earlier
listings  were  made  by  the  Attorneys  General  without   hear-
ings  of  any  kind.   In  belated  response  to  a  Supreme  Court
decision  of  several  years  ago  Brownell  set  up  ersatz hearings
like  that  in  loyalty  proceedings. Interminable   interrogatories
must  be  answered   (under  penalty  for  false  statement)   to
qualify  for  the  hearing  and  in  this  there  is  no  right  to know
the  exact  charges  or  to  examine  accusing  witnesses.
The  ever  widening  tendency  to  exclude  men  from  profes-
sions  and  employment was  touched  on in  a  little  noticed  dis-
sent  by  Douglas  and  Black  the  other  day  from   a  Supreme
Court  order  upholding  the  interstate  compact  by  which  New
York  and  New  Jersey  govern  the  employment  of  longshore-
men.    Conviction  for   a  crime,   affiliation   with  Communists
or  being  held  "a   danger   to  the  public  peace  or  safety"   is
enough  to  debar  one from  employment.   The  order  does  not
foreclose   constitutional    challenge  later,   but   Douglas   and
Black  felt  the  terms  should be "tested  at  the  very  threshold."
Herbert  Brownell's  unscrupulous manipulation  of falsehood
and  melodrama  in  his  attacks  on  the  Left  were  again  exem-
plified   this  week   by  the   way   the   Department   of  Justice
launched  its  action  before  the  Subversive  Activities   Control
Board  to  have  the  Veterans  of  the  Abraham  Lincoln  Brigade
listed   as  a   Communist  front   under  the  Internal   Security
(McCarran)  Act  of  1950.   This hounded  mutual  aid  organiza-
tion   representing  that  brave   handful  of  men  who   fought
Fascism  in  Spain will  some day again  be accorded  the  respect
it   deserves.    The  Department   came  up  with  the   headline-
catching floozie that  the real  purpose  of the  Abraham  Lincoln
Brigade  was  to  train  Communist  soldiers  for  "der  Tag"   in
this  country!
Another  bit  of  Brownelliana:  In  a  plea  for  wiretap  legisla-
tion   on  March   18  (as   readers  will  recall)   the   Attorney
General  said  "When  they  will  next  strike,  who  will  be  their
victim,  what  valuable  government  secret  will  be  the  subject
of  a  new theft  .  .  .  these  are  all matters  that   Communist
agents  talk  about   over   telephones   today."    But   browsing
5  *
through  the  1955  Justice  Department  budget  hearings  before
the  House  Appropriations  Committee  we  came across  (pages
162-3)   this   testimony  of  J.   Edgar   Hoover,   "The    security
measures  which  the  Communist  party  have  taken   in  order
to  thwart  the  efforts  of the  FBI  have  been many  and  detailed
in  character  .  .  .  The use  of  the  telephone  and  telegraph  is
avoided  .  .  .  They  communicate through  couriers  and  avoid
the  use of written  communications."   Brownell  ought  to  start
by  tapping  Hoover's  wires  so he  could get  his  facts  straight.
The  Senate's  investigating   committee   in  the   McCarthy-
Army row ought  to summon J.  Edgar  Hoover  to testify  about
the  mysterious letter  suddenly produced by  McCarthy.   From
the  queasy  disclaimer given  by  Hoover  to  a  committee  aide,
it  is  clear  that  McCarthy's  document is  substantially   a  copy
or  summary  of  a  letter   sent  by  Hoover  in  January   1951  to
the  then  Army Intelligence  Chief  about  "dangerous"   security
conditions  at  Fort  Monmouth.   Since  extensive   inquiry  has
failed  to  turn  up  even  a  "Fifth  Amendment"   case  at  Fort
Monmouth,  the  document  would  seem  to  reflect  an  unflatter-
ing  light  on FBI  processes.   It  is useful  to  recall  at  this  point
that  the  Mrs.  Annie Lee  Moss  case  also  involved  a  letter  by
Hoover  to  Army  intelligence  warning  that  this  poor  woman
was  a  security  risk  and  that  the  committee  hearings,   like
the  Army's,  weighed  Mrs.  Moss's  word  against  those  of  Mrs.
Markward,  Hoover's  informer,  and  found   in  favor   of  Mrs.
Moss.    We  have  long  thought  there  was  an  undercover  feud
between  FBI  and  Army  Intelligence  in  which  McCarthy was
being  used.   It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  one  on  the  Senate  com-
mittee  (or  anywhere  else  in  Washington)  with  the  nerve  to
question  Hoover  about  the  leak  to  McCarthy of  FBI  material
damaging  to  the'Army.
As  for   the   McCarthy  circus   itself   (watching   the   TV  is
becoming  a  morbid  national   affliction)   the  important   thing
is  not  so much  what  happens  in  Washington  as  in  the  minds
of  the  beholders  around  the  country.    Since  we  have  sub-
scribers  in  every  State  of  the  Union, we'd  like  to  make  our
own  informal  survey.    Would  readers  kindly  send  us  what
information  they  have  on  public reaction  in  their  area  for  a
roundup  story?     If  you  have  a  suppressed  desire  to  be  a
reporter,  here's  your  chance.
Mexicans,  who have fewer  votes  and  therefore  fewer  rights
even  than   Negroes   in  this   country  won  a   victory   in   the
Supreme  Court  last  week when  a  unanimous ruling  by  Chief
Justice  Warren  in  the  Hernandez  case   (see  the  Weekly   for
last  January   18)  reversed  the  conviction  of  a  Mexican  for
murder  because  there  were  no  Mexicans  on  the  jury.   This
is  a  blow  to  Anglo-Saxon  white  supremacy  in  its   stronghold,
Texas.
The  weakness  of  anti-war  sentiment  in  Congress  may  be
seen   in   the   swift   and   summary   defeat    (377-58)   of   the
Coudert  amendment  to  the  defense  appropriation   bill  which
would  have  forbade   the  President   to  use  American   troops
abroad  (except  in  self-defense  or fulfilment  of  existing treaty
obligations)  without  a  vote  of  Congress.  The  mood  of  most
members:   they  don't  want  to  take  responsibility  either  for
war  or  for  measures  to  safeguard  peace.   A  liberal  Repub-
lican,  Javits  (N.Y.)   led  the  fight  against  Coudert  and  only
one  liberal  Democrat   (Condon  of  California)  had  the  nerve
to  support  Coudert  in the  debate.  (Franklin  D. Roosevelt,   Jr.,
made  a  long  speech  that  same  day  on  the  need  for   giving
more  milk  to  soldiers-^-to  sop  up  the  milk  surplus—but  was
silent  on this anti-war  amendment.)    Only an  ultra-conserva-
tive  like  the  New  York  corporation  lawyer,  Coudert,  dares
fight war  involvement  these  days;  the  liberals  are  too  scared.
Remembering  the  Rapp-Coudert  witch  hunt  in  the  New  York
schools,  some  teachers  may have  noted  wryly that  colleagues
have  gotten  into  trouble  for  sentiments  less  radical   than
those  Coudert  himself  voiced—to  his  credit—last  week.
Clairvoyant  remark  as  the  Taft-Hartley  debate  begins  in
the  Senate:  "1954 might well  be the last chance for  a number
of  years  to  improve  the  Taft-Hartley  Act"—U.S.  Chamber
of  Commerce Washington  Report,  April  23,  1894.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 10, 1954
How  Vulnerable  Are  We  to  Atomic  Attack?
Enlightening  Session  With  Wilson  and  Radford
Mr.  CANNON.    We  were  told  about   two  years  ago,  Mr.
Secretary,  that  if  Russia  should  send  over  10  planes  carrying
atomic  bombs,  7 of  them  would  get through ...
"What  is the situation  now with  respect  to that? ...
Secretary  WILSON.    Admiral  Radford  is  going  to   appear
before  you  tomorrow,  or  whenever  you  want  him,   and  he
has  a  good   analysis  of   the   situation—how  many  we  could
stop.    It  would  depend  partly  on  the  time  of  day  they  came.
It   would   depend  upon   how  much  warning  we  had  and  it
would  depend  upon  whether  they  did  it  now,  or  3 years  from
now.
I  will  say  this,  my  analysis  would  indicate  that  the  Rus-
sians  have  been  much  more  afraid  of  us  than  we  are of  them,
and  their  buildup  has been  a defensive  buildup.  .  .  .
Mr.  CANNON.  But  going  back  to  the  real  point  at  issue,
whether  under  modern  conditions  with  the  Russians  starting
10  planes  from  a  Russian  airfield  at  the  time,  and  under   the
circumstances   they   considered   most   favorable,   how   many
would  reach  their  targets  in America?
Secretary  WILSON.   Well, I  would  like  you to have  Admiral
Radford  answer  that  question ... I  do not want  to get into
the  category  of  people  who  express  opinions  off  the   cuff.
Mr.   CANNON.
        %
  To   a  Secretary   of   Defense  such   a  vital
subject  should  not  be off the  cuff  .  .  .  You  would  not say
that  none  would  get  through?
Secretary  WILSON.    No,  I  would  not  say  that.    I  would
rather  say  that  I  do  not  expect  the  Russians  to  try  in  the
near  future ...
Mr.  CANNON.  Then,  while  you  will  not  say  that  none  of
these  Russian  planes  will  reach  their  target,  you  think   fear
of   retaliation  rather   than   the   difficulty   of  getting   through
might  prevent  such  an attack?
Secretary   WILSON.    Yes.   But   they   would   lose   many
bombers  and  trained  crews  and  I  do  not  believe  they  could
keep  it  up.    IT  WOULD  BE A  TERRIBLE  THING  FOR
OUR   PEOPLE   TO   TAKE   FOR  A  WHILE.     [Emphasis
added.]
This   is  what   happened   when  Admiral   Radford     appeared:
Whg  Not  Send  a  Gift   Sub  Now?
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      —————————————————————————————
Street    ———————————————————
;
————————
City____________  Zone___  State_____
Enter  this  gift  sob  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name   ________________________
Street   ___________________________
City____________  Z<»e___  State_____
6-10-64
Mr.   MAHON.    The   American  public  is  attracted   to   the
spectacular  possibility  of  an  atomic  blitz.    Everybody  thinks
in  those  terms . . .
Admiral  RADFORD.  I  would  like  this  answer  off  the  record.
(Discussion  off  the   record.)
Mr.  MAHON.    If  a  Member  of  Congress  goes  to  his  district
and  makes  a  speech   and  yields  for   questions,  which  many
Members  do,  one of  the  very  first  questions  that  the  audience
will  ask  is,  "Congressman,  how  vulnerable is  this  country   to
an  atomic  attack?"
That  is  the  question  that  Congress  is  interested  in  and  the
country   generally.
What  can  you  say  about  our  vulnerability  to  atomic  at-
tack?    I  am  not  saying  there  is a  probability  or  the  likelihood
of   an   atomic   attack,   but   my   question  is  how   vulnerable
would  we  be  if   someone  in  his  foolhardiness,   shall  we say,
should  undertake  an  atomic attack?
Admiral   RADFORD.    I  would  like  to  answer  that   off  the
record.
Mr.  MAHON.    On  the  other  hand,  if  you  could  say  some-
thing  on  the  record  that  would  be  appropriate,  I  think   it
would  be  good.
My  point  is,  in  World  War  II,  9$  percent  of  our  bombers
got  through  to  their  targets,  I  believe.   That  is a  conservative
figure.    Well,  if  we  should  be  attacked  today,  could  95  per-
cent   of   enemy   bombers,   under   favorable   conditions,    get
through  perhaps on  a one-way  raid?   I  am trying  to  get  some
kind  of  an  over-all  estimate.
Admiral   RADFORD.    Off  the  record.
Mr.  MAHON.    I  would  like  for  you  to  discuss  the  degree
of  vulnerability  of  this  country  to  atomic  attack,  what  the
possibility  would  be of  enemy  planes getting  through   to  their
targets,  and  so  forth,  in  the  event  of  an  all-out   emergency.
I  realize that  you  will  have  to  use discretion  in  putting cer-
tain  information  on  the  record.
(Discussion  off  the   record.)
—House  Appropriations  Committee  Hearings  on  the  1955
Defense  Department  budget,  Pps. 71-},  1)9-40.
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room 205
301 E. Capitol St, SJ.
Washington  3, D. C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington, D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED