I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954oct04.pdf

============================================================

How  Jog  The  Numbed  Conscience  of  the  American  Press?  Page 2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 35
OCTOBER  4,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15 CENTS
Guilty— Of Being  A Bully  and  A  Boor
The   unanimous  report  of   the  Watkins   committee   repre-
sents  one  of  the  rare  occasions  in  recent  years  when  the  con-
servative  forces  in  American  society  have  fulfilled  their  moral
and  political  obligations.   One  of  the  main  objectives  of  any
Fascist   movement  must   be  to   break   down  the   interwoven
fabric  of  tradition,  dignity  and  respect  which  makes  orderly
government   possible.   The   safeguarding'  of   these   inherited
values  and  attitudes  should  be  of  special  concern  to  the  true
conservative.   In  this  respect  the  six  members  of  the  Watkins
committee  lived  up  to  their  responsibility.
The  Senate will  follow  them  in  censuring  McCarthy.   There
will  be a bitter  fight,  but  that  fight  will serve only  to separate
conservatives   from   reactionaries  and   Fascists,  and   to   show
how  few  Senators  are  in  the  latter  categories.  When  a  Senator
George  approves  and  a  Senator  Jenner  denounces,  the  line  of
battle  is  clear.   It  is  not   one  on  which  McCarthy   can  win
more  than  a  handful  of  votes,  and  the  death  of  Senator  Mc-
Carran  has  deprived  him  of  the  only  supporter  who  had  any
considerable  sphere  of  influence  in  the  Senate.
Basically  it  may  be  said  that  McCarthy   is  being  censured
only  for  being a bully and  a boor.  But  the Watkins  committee
acted  wisely in  so limiting  itself. The  life  of  the  Senate  depends
on  free  debate,  and  there  can  be  no  free   debate  without   a
latitude  in  which  abuses  may  occur.   The  Senate  has  no  right
to  sit  in  judgment on  the  ideas  of  a  Senator,  but  it  has  a  right
to  censure  him  for  conduct  which  infringes  on  its  honor  and
dignity.   This  is  the  distinction  the  Watkins  committee  drew,
and  the  Senate will  accept.
When  Is McCarthy  Going  To  Answer  Those  Questions?
The  country   is  indebted   to   Senators  Flanders,  Fulbright
and  Morse  for  their  part  in  bringing  charges,  to  former  Sen-
ator  Benton  who  initiated  the  original  investigation  into  Mc-
Carthy's  finances,  and  to   Senators  Hayden,   Hennings   and
Hendrickson  who  went  through  with  the  original  investiga-
tion  when  other  Senators  got  cold  feet.  The  questions  put  by
Senator  Hennings  to  McCarthy   in  November,  1952,  are  still
unanswered  by  our  Fifth  Amendment  Senator,  and  we  hope
they  will  be  pressed  in  the  censure debate  and  after.
Did  McCarthy  divert  to  his  personal  advantage funds  con-
tributed  to  him  for  his  campaign against  Communism?  Did
he  use friends and  associates "to  secrete  receipts,  income,  com-
modity  and  stock  speculation  .  .  .?"   The  most   important
question  of   all  was  "Whether   your   activities  on   behalf  of
certain   special  interest   groups,   such   as  housing,   sugar   and
China,  were  motivated  by  self-interest."   The  answer  to  this
would  begin  to  unravel  the  real  conspiracy  in  this  country—
the  conspiracy  by  the  Kuomintang  and  its  agents  to  destroy
freedom   in   America   and   draw   us  into  war   on   behalf   of
Chiang.
McCarthy's   function   has  been  to  terrorize  into  silence  all
those  in  government   and  out   who  were  critical   of   Chiang
Kai-shek.   In  this  task,  he  and  McCarran  were  comrades  in
arms.   The  McCarran-Jenner  committee  investigation  of   the
Institute   of  Pacific  Relations,  the  McCarthy   attack   on   the
State  Department   were  the  twin   instruments   of   the   China
Lobby  and  of   those  pro-Fascist   forces  which   wished   to   re-
verse  American  war-time  policy,  to  defame  the  past,  to  make
Franco   Spain   and   a   new   reactionary   Germany   our   main
allies.  McCarran and McCarthy  and  their  clerical  allies  sought
and  still  seek  World  War  III.   And  though  McCarran  is  dead
and  McCarthy  may  be  on  the  skids,  the  forces  which   they
served  are far  from  defeated  . The  paranoiac atmosphere  they
helped  create  is  far  from  being   dissipated.
The  McCarthy  censure is in  a  way  the  fruit  of  the  Repub-
lican  victory  at  the  last  election.   Had  the  Democrats   won,
the  Republicans would  have  been  happy  to  exploit  and  follow
him  in  opposition.   But  once  his  own  party  came into  power,
McCarthy's  arragonce,  conceit  and  ambition  would  not  allow
him  to  play  a secondary  role.  He  dreamed of  being  a dictator,
and  would   not   suffer   patiently   the   role  of   a   conventional
politician.   His  German-schooled  advisers  urged  the  dynamic
course  congenial  to  his  temperament  and  so he  was  forced  to
gamble  on  a  clash  with  his  own  party,  with  the  President  he
helped  elect,  with  the  army  and  with  the  conservative  forces
of  American  society.   The  gamble  is  being  lost.   The  Repub-
licans,  having turned  on him,  must  smash him  now.   Unfortu-
nately  they  believe  that  to  do  they  must  prove  that  they  are
in  no  way  "soft  on  communism."  The  result  is  Brownellism,
and   the  kind  of   competition   in   anti-Communism    between
Democrat  and  Republican  which  disgraced  the  last  few  weeks
of  Congress.   The  next  few  weeks  will  see  a  step-up  in   the
witch hunt.
Is The  Country  Growing  Bored With  Hobgoblins?
Yet  in  the  context  of  the  political  fight  which  this  report
will  precipitate,   must  not   the  witch  hunt   lose  a  good   deal
of  its  steam?   Can  McCarthy  be  bumped  off  without   at   the
same  time  making  McCarthyism  a  political  liability?   Doesn't
the  observed  lack  of  interest  in  McCarthy,  the  sheer   boredom
which  is  beginning   to   envelop   him  in  the  public  mind,  a
boredom  which  also  extends  to  the  witch  hunt?   Isn't  it  de-
generating  into  the  private  passion  of  a  frenetic  few?   These
are  the  questions  which  give  one  hope,  though  the    Belfrage
deportation  case on the next  page  shows we still  have  far  to  go.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'*  Weekly,  October 4, 1854
The  Government  Moves  to  Deport a  Radical  Editor at  McCarthy's Bidding
How  Jog The  Numbed  Conscience  of  the  American  Press?
New  York—When  Cedric  Belfrage's   biography  of  the  Eev.
Claude  Williams,  "South  of  God,"  (published  in  England   as
"Let  My People  Go")  appeared  in  1940, it  got  an  almost  uni-
formly   enthusiastic   press.    The   New    York    Times   said
"Claude  Williams  strives  to  make  Christianity  mean  what  he
believes  its  Founder  intended  it  to  mean,  and  fights  to  save
Christian  democracy  from  its  American  enemies."   The Mew
York Herald-Tribune  called  the  Southern  preacher  "one  of  the
spiritual  heroes  of  America  today"  and  the  Chicago  Tribune
thought  the  book "Stirring, invigorating, thought-provoking."
The  lone  dissenter  was  Gerald  L.  K.  Smith, who  assailed  the
book  as  communistic.
The  old  reviews  are  a  measure  of  how much  the  American
climate  has  changed  in  less  than  a  decade  and  a  half.   Last
Monday,  in  the  huge  grimy  headquarters  of  the  U.  S.  Immi-
gration  and  Naturalization   Service  at   63rd  and  Columbus
Avenues,   the   Rev.  Williams   appeared   as  the  first  witness
for  the  defense  of  his  biographer.   The  preacher   himself  is
appealing   his   conviction   for   heresy   by   the   Presbyterian
Church  in  Michigan.   Belfrage,   English-born   editor   of   the
National  Guardian, is  up  for  deportation.   1940's  heroes  have
become  1950's pariahs.
Cheerful  Note
"Sen.   McCarthy,  as  friends  picture   him:   The  Ked
hunter   is  in  the  dumps.   He's  tired,  physically,  from
the  two  inventigations.    And  he's  whipped  down,  too,
mentally.   The  friends  he thought  he  had  in  the  Senate
aren't  so  many.   Few  requests  are  being  made  for  his
political  assistance.   He  sees  no  end  to  the   inquiries
aimed  at  his  conduct—even  if  the  GOP  wins  in  No-
vember.   If  the  Democrats  take  over,  he  will  lose  his
chairmanship  and  face  still  more  investigations  of  his
conduct."
—Washington  Outlook, Business  Week,  Sept.  25
Belfrage's  deportation  is  sought  on the  charge that  he was
in  1937-38  a  member  of  the  Communist  party.  But  the  spec-
tacle  of  the  government trying  to  deport  an  editor  for  politi-
cal  views occasions little  flurry.  The hearing opened in  a  low-
ceilinged  square  room,  with  five  reporters  and  two  elderly
ladies  present.   One of  the  reporters  was  from  the  Guardian,
a  second  was  a  girl  from  Renter's,  a  third  was  IFS  and  the
other  two  were  from  the  UP  and  AP.
The  Rev.  Williams, a  tall,  thin,  elderly  man  with  graying
hair  worn  en  brosse, testified  in  a  soft,  cultivated  voice.   His
testimony   contradicted  that  of  the  government's  key  wit-
ness, Martin  Berkeley, as to the  time,  place  and circumstances
of  a  meeting  at  which  Williams  spoke  in  Belfrage's   home  in
•Hollywood.
Berkeley,   an   ex-Communist   who  turned   informer    after
having  himself been identified before the  House  Un-American
Activities  Committee, had  said  that  in late  1937 or  early  1938
he  heard  Williams  speak  at  a  closed  Communist  meeting  of
about   12  persons  at   Belfrage's   home  on  Ogden  or  Oakden
Avenue  in  Hollywood.
Williams  testified  that  this  meeting  at  which  he  spoke  was
public,  that  some  65 or  70 persons  attended,  that  it  was  not
arranged   by  or  through  the  Communist party,  that  it  was
held  in  May or June  of  1938  and  that  it  was  at  7777  Fierenzi
drive.   The  purpose  was  to  collect  money for  Commonwealth
College  in  Arkansas,  of  which  Williams  was  then  director.
Identified  With  "George Oakden"
A  second  defense  witness,   a  well-known  handwriting  ex-
pert,  Miss  Elizabeth  McCarthy testified that there  was  "very
real  doubt"  that  the  signature,  "George   Oakden"   on  two
Communist  party  membership  books  for   1937  and  1938  was
the  signature  of  Cedric  Belfrage.   The  books  had  been   ob-
What  the  Germans  Didn't  Tell  Dulles
"Though    official   circles   in   Bonn   had   persistently
lulled   the  people  and  their   representatives   into   the
belief  that  somehow  EDC  would  yet  be  a  success—in
reality  hope  had   been   given   up.  about   a   year   ago.
General  Adolf  Heusinger  was  already  complaining  last
year  that  the  Amt  Blank  (Rearmament  Bureau)  knew
that  it  worked  on EDC plans  in vain,  and that  these in
their   elaborated   form  would  never   come   to  fruition.
They  continued  working  only  on  account  of  the  Amer-
icans,  so that  they  should not  get  the  impression  that
the  German  government  had  lost  interest  in   EDC."
—Der  Spiegel   (W.  Germany's  leading  news  weekly),
September  8.
tained  by a  Los Angeles police spy working  as  an  agent  inside
the  Communist party.   Berkeley  had  testified  that  Belfrage
used  the  name  "Oakden"   in  the  party  and  in  writing  for
the  New  Masses.
Berkeley  testified  earlier  that  he  himself  used  the  name
Martin  Porter  but  when  shown  an  article  in  the  New  Masses
signed   "by  Martin  Porter  and   George  Oakden"   could   not
recall  that  he  had  ever  collaborated  with  Belfrage.   The  de-
fense  submitted  evidence that  Belfrage  had  written  for  the
New  Masses  at  the  time  under  his  own  name—and  showed
that  the  magazine  then  carried  many  articles  by  non-Com-
munists,  including  Ralph  Bunche,  Robert  Benchley  and   Sir
Stafford   Cripps.
A  Cohn-Schine Tableau
All  this  dreary  and  dubious  business  was  dredged  up  as
a  result  of  a  summons from  McCarthy.   Belfrage   appeared
before  the  McCarthy  committee  in  May,  1953,   in  a  Cohn-
Schine  tableau   designed  to  make  it   appear  that   postwar
occupation  effort  to  democratize  the  German  press  had  been
a  Communist plot.   Belfrage  was  Press  Control  Officer   for
SHAEF  in  Germany in  1945.
Roy  Cohn  announced  during the  McCarthy  hearing that  at
the   Senator's   request   there   was   an   immigration     official
present  "to  do something  about  this  immediately."   Deporta-
tion  proceedings   followed,  first  against  Belfrage   and  then
against  his   ex-wife,  who  has   since   been   allowed  to   leave
voluntarily  for  her native  England  after  stating that  she had
no  desire  to  continue  living  in  the  United  States.   Mrs.  Bel-
frage  said  she  had  been anti-Communist  for  ten  years.
Only  a  press  with  a  badly  numbed  conscience  could  let
such  an  affair  pass without  protest.  If  an  alien  editor  can be
deported  for  past  membership—real  or  framed—in  the  Com-
munist  party,  a  naturalized  editor  can  be  denaturalized  and
deported  on  the  same  grounds.   A  native  born  editor  (under
the  new  citizenship  law)  may  be  deprived  of  his  nationality
in much the  same way.  The precedent  is a  sinister  one, but  no
one  seems  to  care.   The  same  press  which  hails  the  recom-
mended  censure  of  McCarthy hasn't a  word  to  say  in  defense
of  an  editor  who  is  his  victim.
Propaganda  Antidote
"Visiting  the  camps  one  gets  a  somewhat  different
impression  of  the   facts   from  those  commonly  publi-
cized.   Why  had  they  wished  to  come  south,  your  Cor-
respondent   asked   a   group   of  refugees    [from    North
Vietnam].  We did  not  ask  to  come  south,  but  the  Gov-
ernment  told  us  to  come  and  so we had  to  come, was  the
reply  from  one  man,  with  much  nodding  of  heads   in
the  circle.   The  observation   that  they  were   supposed
to  be  in  flight  from  Communism produced  puzzled  looks
of  incomprehension.
—Report  from  Saigon,  The  Times  (London),  Sept.   tS
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October J,  195.4
State  Department's  New  Passport  Hearing  Procedure  Called  Sham
Star  Chamber  Methods  of Loyalty  Probe Applied  to  Travel  Applicants
Washington—Dr.  Otto  Nathan  is  an  internationally known
economist,  now  a   professor   at   New  York  University.    In
Germany, under  the  Weimar Republic, he  served  for  12 years
as  an  economic adviser  to  the  Federal   government.   In  this
country  he was  an  adviser  to  President  Hoover's  Emergency
Committee  on  Employment  in   1931,   and  held  several  posts
later  under  the  New  Deal.   He  became  a  naturalized   citizen
in   1939.   He  travelled  abroad  on  an  American  passport  in
1939,  and  again  every  year  from  1945  to   1949.
On  December  24,  1952,  twenty  months  ago,  Dr.   Nathan
applied  for  a  new  passport.   The  application  stated  that  he
was  going  abroad  for  a  relatively  short  time  to  obtain  mate-
rial  for  a  work  on  which  he  was  engaged   and  in  the  hope
of  making  arrangements   in  Western   Europe  for   remunera-
tive  writing  on  economic  subjects.
Three  months  after   making  his  application,  Dr.   Nathan
received  a  letter  from   Mrs.  Ruth  B.  Shipley,  the   director
of  the  passport  office,  asking  for  a  statement  under  oath  as
to  whether   he  was  or   ever   had   been  a   Communist.   Dr.
Nathan  replied that  he  objected  as  a  matter  of  principle  but
nevertheless   enclosed  an   affidavit   saying,   "I   am   not  now
and  never  have  been . . ."
Proceedings  A  La  Kafka
This  affidavit,  instead  of  settling  the  matter,  only  led  into
an  interminable  Kafka-ish  labryrinth  of  correspondence  and
"hearings"  in  which  Dr.  Nathan  was  asked  such   questions
as  whether  he  had  ever  signed  a  petition  supporting  a  victim
of  a  Congressional  committee  and  whether  he  had  ever  cor-
responded  with  Oscar  Lange,  a  Chicago  University  professor
of   economics  who  became  Polish  Ambassador  to  the   U. S.
The  complaint  he  filed  in   Federal   District   Court   here
against  the  State  Department  relates  that  on  one  occasion
Mrs.  Shipley's  assistant,  Ashley Nicholas, said  to  Dr.  Nathan
that  he  was  "too  good  to  be  turned  down  and  too  bad  to  be
given  a  passport."  Just  what  was  "bad"  was  not  specified.
Mr.  Nicholas is  also  alleged  to  have  commented at  one point,
"You  have made many  good  friends  among many fine people
in  this  country,  but  you also  have  many friends  on the  left."
The  suit  Dr.  Nathan  brought  after   a  year  and  a  half  of
exasperating  delays  is  the  first  legal  challenge   to  the  new
passport   rules  and  procedure  belatedly  adopted  by  the  De-
partment  after  the  Baiter  case.
The  Department  had  for  a  long  time  been  denying  pass-
ports  on  the  vague  grounds  of  "the   best  interests  of  the
United  States"  when  in  Bauer  us.  Acheson,  106  F.   Supp.
445,  a  3-man  court  decided  that  no  such  absolute   discretion
Even  The  Hoover  Commission  Critical
"The  autonomous manner  in  which  the   [State]  De-
partment's  Passport  Division  functions  have  been  con-
ducted,   however,   has   been  subject   to   criticism   from
time  to time. That the  Division  acts  rather as  a law unto
itself  is  generally the  reason  for  the  criticism,  and as  a
practical   matter  there   is   some   justification   in   this
censure."—Hoover  Commission  Report.
existed.   As  a  result,  in   September,   1952,  the   Department
issued  new rules,  setting up standards for  denial  of passports
and  a  Board  of  Passport  Appeals.
But  this  turned  out  to  be a  mere  gesture.   No  Board  was
appointed.  It  was not  until  December 23, 1953,  fifteen  months
later   (as  this  Weekly   reported   exclusively  at  the  time,  see
Vol.  I,  No.  49)  that  the  threat  of  a  suit  by  the  physicist
Martin  Kamen forced  the  Department  to  appoint  the  Board.
Even   then   the   names   of  the   Board   members   were   never
made  public, and  (as  inquiry  last  week  disclosed)  the  names
of  the  members,  the  number  of  cases  processed   and  every-
thing  else  about  its  activities  are  still  withheld  by  the  De-
partment  from  the  press  as   "confidential."
Foggy  Rules  in  Foggy  Bottom
The  rules  set  up  by  the  Department  in  passport  cases  are
as  foggy  as  the  mists  which  give  their  name  to  the  Foggy
Bottom  in  which  the  State  Department   building  stands  in
Washington.   Dr.  Nathan  found  himself  confronted  by  the
same  kind  of  vague  standards  and  star  chamber  hearings
on  undisclosed  evidence  as   have  grown  customary   in  em-
ploye  loyalty  cases.
Indeed   in  their  reply   to  Dr.  Nathan's  lawyer,   Leonard
Boudin,  government  counsel  drew  an  analogy  with   loyalty
proceedings,  and  made  the  sweeping  claim,  "The   Secretary
of  State  has wide  discretion  .  .  .  Once  that  discretion  has
been  exercised,  it  is  submitted,  the  Court  should  not  review
the   evidence  on  which  the   discretion   was  exercised."    In
effect,  this  would  make  Mrs.  Shipley's  ipsa  dixit  the  law  in
passport  cases.
In  the  William  Clark  case  we  discussed  last  week,   Mrs.
Shipley denied him a passport because  (as  in Paul  Robeson's)
she  disapproved  of  what  he was  likely  to  say  abroad.   In  the
Nathan  case,  she  denied  a  passport  because  she  did  not  like
some  of the  applicant's  associations  and  statements  at  home.
The  issue  before  the  Federal  court  is  whether  freedom  of
speech must  be relinquished to  obtain  a  passport.
The Charges Made Against the  State Dept. In the Nathan Passport Case
"When  the  judicial  recognition  of  the  arbitrary  character
of  these  [passport]  policies  occurred  in  the  Baner  case,  the
State  Department  had  two  possible  alternatives:  It  could
reform,  or  it   could  pretend  to  do  so.   It  chose  the  latter
course.   The  result  was  an  extraordinary concoction of  regu-
lations  which  were:  (a)   couched  in  vague,  subjective  and
polemical  terms,  rather  than  legal  ones;  (b)  in  violation of
basic  First  Amendment  rights  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring
the  containment  of  any  person  with  •  vestige  or  even  past
history  of  liberal  activity  in  the   New  Deal  or   otherwise;
and  (c)   even  in  conflict  with  the  will  of  Congress  as  ex-
pressed  in  the  Internal  Security  Act  of 1950.
"Never  during  the  period  1789 to  1950 did  Congress  ever
establish  a  political  screen  for  citizens  desiring  to  travel
abroad.   In  1950 it  passed  the  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950.
Section  6  (a)  of  that  law  denies  passports  to  a  single  cate-
gory:  members  of  organizations  registered   or  required  by
a  final  order to  register  under  the  Act.  To date, no organiza-
tion  is  the  subject  of  a  final  order  as  defined  in  the  Act,
although  proceedings seeking a  final  order  against  the Com-
munist  Party  of  the  United  States  are  now  pending  in  the
Court  of  Appeals  of  this  Circuit.   In  that  connection  it  will
be  noted  that  (a)  the  statute  refers  to  present,  not  past,
membership,  and  (b)   plaintiff   [Dr.  Otto  Nathan]   executed
an  affidavit  denying  both  past  and  present  membership.
"The  defendant's  [State  Department's]  standards  are man-
ifestly   different   from  those  imposed  by  Congress.   Where
the   Congress   banned   current   members  in    organizations
found  after  hearing  to  be  illicit,  the  defendant   bans   past
members  in   an  unlimited  number  of   organizations   which
were  never  required to  register.  In  addition  defendant  pro-
poses  to  assess  •  complex of  activities  in  one's  life,  to  de-
termine  whether  his  presence  at  public  meetings,  his  trade
union  membership, his  friends  and  associations  put  him  be-
yond  the   pale."                                                         :
1  0
—Otto  Nathan  v.  John  Fatter  Dullei,  UJS.  DMrict  Court  (D.  of  C.),  Civil  Action No.  M79-H
143
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  StoneV  Weekly,  October  4,  1954
The  Misadventures  of  America's  Own "Poet  Laureate"
Oh,  Sweet  Security  and  Political Purity, Of  Thee  We  Sing
The  Times  of  London  publishes  what  is  by  far  the  world's
best  literary  weekly  supplement.   Its  latest  of  Sept.   17,  just
arrived   here,  is  an  elephantine   special  number,   containing  a
100-page  study  of  American writing  today,  an extraordinarily
able,  just  and  friendly  survey.   One  of  its  revelations  is  that
American  "poets  laureate"  must  now  be  cleared  by  the  FBI.
The  American  equivalent  of  a  poet  laureate  is  the  Poet  in
Residence  annually  chosen  for  the  Library  of  Congress.   The
post  figures  in  an  article,  "Prophets  Without   Honour?   The
Public  Status  of  American  Writers" in  which  the  Times  dealt
with  the  impact  of  the  witch  hunt  on  literature.  The  article
disclosed  that  the  chair  of  poetry  at  the  Library  of  Congress
has  been  vacant  for  two  years  "because  the  last  poet   nomi-
nated  for  the  position  failed  to  receive  a  security  clearance."
In  its  swift  and  majestic  way,  the  Times  did  not  pause  for
so  mundane  a  detail  as  the  poet's  name.   But  the  tantalizing
brief   reference  was  noted   by  a  sharp-eyed  'Washington  Star
reporter,   Mary  McGrory.   What   she  discovered  made  page
one  of  her  paper  Sept.  26,  but   does  not   seem  to  have  been
picked   up   by  other   papers  and   the   wire   services,   though
surely  it   is  news  that  poetry,  too,  must  now  be  politically
pasteurized  in  the  U.S.A.
The  Muse  Is Counter-Attacked
The   poet   turned   out   to   be  the   estemed   William   Carlos
Williams.   He  was  picked  for  the  Library  post  in  19J2  by  a
group  which  included  T.  S. Eliot,  W.  H.  Auden,  Archibald
MacLeish  and  Thorn ton  Wilder.   Dr.  Williams  (he  is  a  phy-
sician  in  Rutherford,   N.   J.)   was  delighted,  wound  up  his
personal  affairs  and  rented  a house in  Washington.  Dr. Luther
H.   Evans,   then   Librarian  of   Congress,   now   director   of
UNESCO,  signified  his  approval.
But  Dr.  Evans  took  fright  when  Dr.  Williams was attacked
in  rightist  circles on  political  grounds.  Counter-Attack  pub-
lished   3  list   of   allegedly  subversive  causes   to   which    Dr.
Williams  had  lent  his  name.
Dr.  Williams  was  supposed  to  have  taken  his  post  in  the
Fall  of  1952.   In  December  a  letter  informed  him  that  a  pre-
liminary  FBI  report  had  occasioned  the  Library  to  ask  for  a
full   investigation.     In  January  of  1953  Dr.  Evans revoked
the  appointment.
I.  F. Stone's Weekly, 301
Please  renew  (or  enter) my
N.m*
Street
City                                                             Z<
E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
»1M»             Stat*
Enter this  gift  rab  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed) :
(To)  Name
8tr**t
City                                    ftone ————  State ————
10-4-64
Warning  To  Do-Gooders
Science  Service's  News  Letter  reported  recently  that
at  least  50 eminent  scietists  had  been  refused  visas  into
the  U.S.  during  the  past  two years. Last  week the  State
Department  announced  via  difficulties  had  been  cleared
up  in  two  cases:  those  of  the  famous  Cambridge  physi-
cist,   Dirac,   and   the   Australian    physicist,    Oliphant.
Typical   of  the   Department   is  that   both   visas   were
granted  long  after  both  scientists  gave  up  and  changed
heir  plans—Dirac  to  attend  the  Institute  for  Advanced
Study   in  Princeton,   Oliphant   for  a  transit   permit   to
to  enable  him to  touch  at  Honolulu  en  route  to  Canada.
Oliphant  was  supposed  to  have  passed  through  Hawaii
on  September   3.   The  Washington  Post  reported   Sept.
24  that  an  unnamed  State  Department   official   said  of
Oliphant:  "He  still  is  inadmissible  .  .  .  (he is)  a do-
gooder,  one  of  the  boys  who monkey around  with  pinkos
.  . .  Oppenheimer  case  . . .  that  sort  of thing."
This  led to  protest  from  Dr.  Williams  and  his  friends.   The
former,  through  counsel, insisted that  the  FBI investigate him
"relentlessly."   The  FBI,  "astonished,"   said  it  could  not  do  so
because  Dr.  Williams  was  no  longer  on  the  civil  service  rolls.
In  April  of  1953  Dr.  Evans  again  appointed  Dr.  Williams  to
the  post  as  of  May   15  "or   as  soon  thereafter  as  loyalty  and
security   procedures   are  successfully  completed."   That  was
18  months  ago  and  Dr.  Williams  is still  waiting.
The  saddest  aspect  of  this  affair  is the  reaction  of  Dr.   Wil-
liams.    Circumstances   which   would   have   evoked   a   noble
thunder  from  a Milton,  Shelley or  Whitman  *  bring  from  our
present-day  poet  only  a  self-defensive  bleat.   He  denied  that
he  was  ever  a  Communist  or  a  Communist  sympathizer  but
admitted   he   signed   various   appeals   for   various   causes.    "I
don't  think  much," he told  the  Star, pathetically,  "of  the  way
the  Communist  party  takes  advantage  of  an  unguarded  citi-
zenry."
Next  time  our  poet  feels  a  generous  humanitarian  inspira-
tion,   he   will   no   doubt   check   first   with   the   nearest  FBI
office.   We  can  hear  the  lovely  melody  now  of  that  Ode  to  a
Skylark   (With  Q  Clearance).
* Footnote   for   Investigators:   John   Milton.   Percy   Bysshe   Shelley   and
Walt  Whitman,  all  notorious  radicals,  but  none  believed  likely  to  apply  in
the  near  future  for  government  employment.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St, S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington, D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED