I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954sep27.pdf

============================================================

Must  Free  Speech  Be  Given  Up  to  Get  a  Passport?  See  page  3
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTSVOL.   II,  NUMBER  34              SEPTEMBER  27,  1954
Rallying  Point: A  Cease-Fire  For  Formosa
The  most  constructive  news  of  the  week  was  the  proposal
put   forward   by   the  American  Association  for   the   United
Nations  for  a  cease-fire  on  the  Formosa  straits.   Though   this
was   made  to   the   U.S.   delegation  on   the   eve  of   the   new
meeting  of   the   General  Assembly,  there  is  no   reason   why
some  neutral   delegation  should  not   take  the   initiative  and
formally  move  a  resolution  for   a  cease-fire.   The   air  of   un-
reality  which   lies  like  a  thickening   haze  over  the  UN   will
deepen  if  it  putters  about  dozens  of  minor  issues  while  im-
potently ignoring  the one point  where  world  peace is in  danger.
At   the   same  time   for   those  Americans  who   have  been
eager  for  some  way  to  do  something about  peace,  the  AAUN
resolution  offers   a  focal  point  for  grass  roots  action.   Among
the  46  organizations  represented  in  the  AAUN  in  drawing
up  the  cease-fire  and  other   resolutions  were  the  A.F.   of  L.,
C.I.O.  and  the  Machinists;  Hadassah,  the   B'nai  B'rith,   the
American  Jewish  Congress   and  the  American  Jewish   Com-
mittee;   AMVETS   and  the   American   Veterans   Committee;
the   Methodist   Board   of   World   Peace   and   the   American
Friends  Service  Committee.   A  series  of  local  meetings  under
AAUN  auspices  to  discuss  the  danger   and  the  issues   would
make  a real  contribution   to  peace.
The  AAUN   resolution    says,   "The    United   States   should
join  in  sponsoring  or  supporting  a  proposal  that   the  United
Nations,  without  regard  to  the  question  of  recognition,  a* to
which  its  members  are  presently  divided,  should  at  once  call
upon  both  the  authorities  now  in  control  of  the  government
on  Formosa  and  the  government  now  in  control   of  the   gov-
ernment  on  the  mainland  of  China  to  cease  the  use  of  armed
force  against  each  other  in  this  area  in  the  interest  of   world
peace,  and  further   to   accept   the  proposition   that   Formosa
and  the  mainland  of  China  shall  not  be  united  by  force  nor
without  the  free  consent  of  the  people  of  Formosa  and  under
conditions  approved  by  the  United  Nations  as consistent  with
world  peace,  security  and  justice."
The  wording  is  roomy  enough  to  save  face  all  around  and
provide  a  breathing  spell  in  solving  the  problem.   It  will  not
escape  attention  that   the   cease-fire  will   chiefly  affect   those
who  have  been  doing  most  of  the   firing—that   is  the   Chiang
forces,  acting  under  American  naval  and  air  protection.   The
constant   raids  and   bombings  by   the   Nationalist   forces,  if
continued,  must  force  the  Chinese  Communists  into  war  on
Formosa,  whether  they  and  their   Russian   allies  want   it   or
not.    In  the  current   political  atmosphere  this  means  to  risk
World  War  III.   A "limited" war  between  the  U.S.  and  China
would  not  be  very  limited  very  long,  with  Russian  supplies
pouring  in  and  our  trigger-happy  military  maniacs  pushing  a
la  MacArthur  for  atomic  attack  on  a  Soviet  "sanctuary."
Are  The  Democrats  for  War  or  Peace?
The  idea  of  the  cease-fire  should  also  be  put   up  to  local
candidates   of   both   parties.    Last   week   Nixon   challenged
Adlai  Stevenson  to  say  where  he  and  the  Democrats   stand.
The  Democrats  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  duck  that  chal-
lenge.  Every  one  knows  where  Nixon  stands.   If  he  had  had
his  way  last   spring   we  would   have  had   war   with   China.
Fortunately   the   conservative  wing  of  the  party   and  Elsen-
hower  decided  against  him.   But  what  would  the   Democrats
have  done  about  Indo-China?   What   do  they  propose  to  do
about  the  Formosa  fighting?
The  value  of  the  AAUN   resolution  is  that  it  narrows  the
issue  sharply.   It  puts  to  one  side  the  question  of  what  shall
ultimately  be  done  about  Formosa.   It   focusses  on  one  basic
issue:  stop   the   shooting   from   both   sides  over   the  Formosa
straits  to  prevent  a  new  war  from  breaking  out.    Where  do
the  Democrats  stand   on  that?
If  the  Democrats  were  not  in  such  a  cowardly  and  dema-
gogic  mood,  their  answer  would  be  clear.   This  would  be  an
issue  made to  order  for  them.   After  all,  the  cease-fire merely
proposes  a  return   to  the  Truman   Formosan  order  when   (on
paper  at  least)   we  imposed  peace  on  the  straits,  throwing   a
protective  screen  over  Chiang  Kai-shek  but  at  the  same  time
forbidding   him  to  attack  the  mainland.   A  politic   formula
protecting   both  Formosa   and  world   peace  is  possible  within
these  confines.
Such  sanity,  unfortunately,   seems  to  be  beyond   even   the
best  of  the  Democrats  at  the  moment,  a  fact   which   should
have  some  weight  with  the  voters.   Whatever  else  may  be
said  about  Eisenhower,  he  did  make  peace  in  Korea  and   he
did  not  go  to  war  over  Indo-China.   Bur  the  Democrats  who
are  so ready  to  support  him  on  domestic  measures,  never  seem
to  be willing  to  support  him  on  steps  toward  peace.   Stevenson
fatuously  intervened  in  France  in  support   of  EDC  and  Ger-
ran  rearmament  but   his  speech  at  Indianapolis  was  disgust-
ingly  dishonest  when  it  touched  on  the  Far  East.
Stevenson   spoke  of   the   "familiar  contradictions"  of   Re-
publican  policy  and  "the   tough,  noisy  talk"  but  he  made  the
same  kind  of  talk,  filled  with   the  same  contradictions.   The
climax   of   disingenuous   demagogy   was  the   statement,   "In
Asia  the  Communist  triumph  in  Indo-China   and  the  ominous
preparations  across  the   Formosa   strait   remind   us  that   the
President  thought  the  armistice  in  Korea  would  be  a  fraud  if
it  helped  the  Communists   to  advance  elsewhere."
Those  of  us  who  cheered  for  Stevenson  in  1952  must  blush
for  such  twisted  phrases.   The  armistice  in  Korea  did  lead  to
an   armistice   in  Indo-China.   This,  far   from   being   a   Com-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  September  27, 19U
munist  triumph,  was  an  armistice in  which  the  Indo-Chinese
revolutionists   were  high-pressured   to   accept  much   less   by
negotiation   than   they   could  have  taken   by   force—a   fact
now  being  thrown  up  at  them  by  the  South  Vietnam  Na-
tionalists  in  their  recent  radio  broadcasts.   As for  the  Formosa
straits,  what  is  "ominous"  there  are  not  the   "preparations"
on   the   mainland—these   are   still   a  matter   of  speculation.
What  is  ominous  is  the  constant  attacks  being  made  on  the
mainland  by  Chiang  with  American  arms,  ships  and  planes;
this  is  ominous,  because  no  government,  even  one  as  patient
as  Peking  has  shown  itself  to  be,  can  long  take  this  kind  of
offensive   action  without   retaliating.
Even  more  ominous  is  the  continued  deterioration   morally
in  the  United  States.  We  do  not  seem  to  realize that  we  are
not  watching a  ball  game, that  people are  being  killed  in  the
Chinese  coastal cities  by  the  air  and  artillery attacks we  make
possible.   Our  imaginations are  so  atrophied,  our   conditioned
reflexes  so set,  we  have  all  become such Pavlovian  dogs  of  the
China  Lobby,  that  no  one  asks  sensibly  how  we  should  feel
if  New  York  or  San  Francisco  were  being  subjected  to  such
attack   by   rebel  forces  from   offshore   islands.   And   even  a
man  as  big  in  vision  as  Stevenson,  a  man  courageous  enough
to  advocate  the  admission of  Communist  China  to  the  UN
two  years  ago,  now  talks  such  cheap  nonsense  and  indulges
in  such  tricky  rhetoric  on  foreign  policy.
What  Makes  John  Foster  Run  (So Foolishly)?
Mr.  Dulles's  deliberate  snub  to  Paris  on  his  trip  to  Europe
was  so silly  as  to  make  one  wonder  who  is  advising  the  Secre-
tary  of  State.   The  French  position  is  a  powerful  one.   West
Europe  cannot  be held  from  Germany  and  the  Low  Countries.
France  is  the  essential  bridgehead  from  a  military  point  of
view.   In  addition  the  French  have effective  me,ans  of  vetoing
German  rearmament.   It  is not  merely  a  question  of  the  legal
veto  they  possess  as  a  member  of  NATO.   They  occupy  one
zone  of  Germany.   We  cannot  give sovereignty  and  an  Army
to  the  British  and  American  zones  alone.  The  Reich  would be
split  in  three,  instead  of  in  two,  as  at  present.   This explains
why  the  German  press,  instead  of  welcoming  the  rude  treat-
ment of  the  French,  was appalled by  it.   One  can  only  suspect
that   Mr.   Dulles   and   the   brainstorm   idea   of   overturning
Mendes-France  by  pressure from  Washington  and  Bonn  were
inspired   by  the  bitterness  of  Schumann  and  Bidault,  whose
judgment   seems  to  have  cracked  under  the  strain  of  losing
their  Catholic  monopoly  of  the  Foreign   Office.
The  State  Department  continues  to  misread French  politics.
With  de  Gaullists  calling   for  new  negotiations  with  Russia
on   a   unified   and   neutralized   Germany  and   the    pro-EDC
Socialists  bitterly  opposed  to  a German  national army, Mendes-
France  is not  the  saboteur  of  German  rearmament  but  a  man
desperately  trying  to  find  some  formula  which  will  at  one
and  the  same  time  appease  Washington   yet  command  a  ma-
jority  in  France.   To  pursue the  present  attitude  in  the  present
frame  of  mind  leads straight  in  the  direction  of  reviving  the
Franco-Polish    and   Franco-Soviet   pacts,   the   only    effective
French  protection  against the  danger  that  a reviving  Germany
may  again make a  deal with  the  Soviet  East.
The  whole  idea  of  rearming  Germany  as protection   against
anything  is  criminal  folly.   This  is  like  hiring  a  gangster   to
protect  one  against  a  competitor,  in  this  case  a  gangster  who
has  twice  looted  and  wrecked  one's  own  establishment.    The
publication  in  England  last  month  of  Lord  Russell  of  Liver-
pool's  terrible  The  Scourge  of   the  Swastika,  a  Short   History
of   Nazi   War  Crimes  may  serve  as  a  grisly  reminder  of   epi-
sodes  Mr.  Dulles  would  like  us  to  forget.   We  are  preparing
to  rearm  people  in  too  large  measure  still  governed  by   the
same  men  who  created  Dachau  and  Buchenwald,  the  crema-
torium  and  human  soap.   Behind  and  around   the  Old   Fox
from   Cologne  are  the  remnants  of  the  same  Nazi  and  mili-
tarist   crew.
Will  We  Give  The  Germans  The  Atom  Bomb,  Too?
The  point   which  most  needs  watching  is  the  question  of
whether  German  sovereignty  as  demanded  by  Adenauer  and
supported  by  Dulles  would  include  the  right  to  make  atomic
/weapons.  A  Germany armed with  A  and  H  bombs would soon
be  a  world  menace  again  because  her  military  leaders  would
be  far  less  hesitant  than  those  of  Russia  and  the  U.S.  to  use
the  total  weapon  when  it  served  their  purposes.
It  is  important  to  recall  that  in  the  Japanese peace  treaty,
which  was  almost  completely  Dulles's  handiwork, and  where
we  had  to  pay little  attention  to  the  views of  our  allies, there
is  no  restriction  on  the  right  of  Japan  to  make  atom  bombs.
When  Senators Green  and  McMahon  questioned Dulles about
this in January,  1952, during  the  hearings on  the  treaty  before
the   Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,   Dulles   said   such
restrfctions  would  have  been  "offensive  to  the  Japanese"  be-
cause  it  would  have  created  "a  second  class  sovereignty."
Dulles  tried  to  disarm  the  Senators  by  saying  that   there
were  no  fissionable  materials  in  Japan  and  "in   view  of   the
very  close  control  exercised  by  what  we  call  the  free  world
over  that,  Japan,  as  a  practical  matter,  could  not  engage  in
atomic   weapons  without   our   consent."    At   the   time   the
Senate  committee  commented in  its  report  on  the  treaty  that
"the   United  States  would  be  very  much  concerned  if  such
research  turned  in  the  direction  of  weapons  of  destruction."
But  Atomic  Energy  Commissioner Murray last  week  proposed
that  as  "a  dramatic  and  Christian  gesture"  we  give  a  power
reactor  to  Japan.   The  rest  of  the  East,  which  remembers  the
Japanese  attack  as  vividly  as  France  remembers  the  German
invader,  may  think  this  gesture,  like  so  much  of  the  West's
Christianity,  a  sour  joke.
The  negotiators  at  London  had  better  ask  Dulles  whether
he  thinks it  would be subjecting the  Germans  to  "second  class
sovereignty"  if  they  were forbidden  to  make atomic  weapons.
Our  European  allies  may  otherwise  wake  up  one  day  to  learn
that   we  have  given  the  Germans  a  reactor,   too.    Reactors
produce  power,  but  they  also  produce  plutonium.   Plutonium
makes  bombs,  and  it  seems  .1  little early  to  trust  the  Germans
with  such  toys.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  27, 1954
State  Department's  Iron  Curtain  Challenged  in  Federal  Court
Must  Free  Speech  Be Abandoned  as The  Price  of A  Passport?
Washington—Two   challenges   to  the   State   Department's
own  Iron  Curtain  are  now  before  Federal  Judge  Schwein-
haut  in  District  Court  here.   One  was  brought   by  former
Federal  Judge  William  Clark,  who  was  refused  a  passport
to  revisit  Germany  where  he  had  been  Chief  Justice  of  the
Allied   High   Commission   Courts.    The  other,  the   first  suit
to  test  the  Department's  new  passport   appeals   procedure,
was  brought  by  an   internationally    known   economist,   Dr.
Otto  Nathan,  who  was  denied  a  passport  though   he  signed
the   non-Communist   affidavit   required   by  the   Department.
The   Clark   case   is  of  particular  interest   because   it   in-
volves  the  application  to  a  respectable*  of  the  Department's
ruling  against  Paul   Robeson.    The  famous  singer's   pass-
port  was  cancelled  in  1950  "because"   (as  the   government's
brief   put   it   in  Robeson  v.  Acheson,  198  F    &d   985),    "the
Department   disapproved   of  the  political  thoughts  .  .  . ex-
pressed   by   appellant    at    meetings    outside    the    United
States."
Robeson's   appeal   was   dismissed   as   moot.    Most   people
looked  the   other  way  because   of  his  pro-Communist   repu-
tation.    Few   stopped   to   consider   the   precedent    implied.
Now   it   is  being   used  against   a   conservative   jurist  who
disagreed  sharply  with   occupation   policy.
Government    "counsel   told   Judge   Schweinhaut    that   if
Clark  were  given   a  passport  to  visit   Germany  he   would
criticize  the  soft   policy  towards  ex-Nazis   and   added  that
this  was  the  same  accusation  "made   by  Otto  John."   The
U.S.  Attorney  cited  the  Robeson  case  as   precedent.
Clark,  perhaps  suspecting  that  his  passport   application
would  be  refused,   appended   to  it   a  statement   saying,   "I
would  be  less  than  frank   if  I  did  not  state  that  I  reserve
to   myself   my  fundamental  right  of  free   speech.    I   shall,
accordingly,  if  I  am  asked  to  do  so,  make  such   comments
as  I  see  fit  upon  the  recent  controversy   between  me  and
the  State  Department.   I  shall  feel  free  to  object  again  to
the  State  Department's   having   dismissed   me  and   having
me  deported  from  Spain.  I  shall  feel  free  to  explain   again
my  defense  of  the  rights  of  American  citizens  in   Germany.
I   shall  not  refrain   from  stating  my  well-known   position
* The   Chicago  Tribune   July   18  protested   the   denial   of   a   passport   to
Clark  and  said,   "If   the   rights   of  citizens  abroad  can  be  limited   in  this
way,   it   is   difficult   to  see  why  the   government   cannot   assume  the   same
n
er  at  home,  forcing  us  all  to  root  for  its  foreign  policy,  whether  we  like
r   not."
State  Dept.  Rejects  Bauer  Decision
More  than  two  years  ago,  on  July  9,  1952, a  three  man
Federal  court held for  the  first  time in Bauer v. Acheson
(106  F.  Supp.  445)  that  the  State  Department's  power
to   issue   or  revoke   passports   was  not   unlimited,  but
subject  to  due  process.
The  Department  did  not  appeal,  but  now  in  the  pend-
ing  William  Clark  passport  case  it  argues  that  the  Bauer
case  was  "incorrectly decided" and that  the  requirement
of  a  hearing  before the  invalidation  of  a  passport  "could
result  in  irreparable  damage  to  the  United  States."
The  government  cites  the  hypothetical  case  of  a  citi-
zen  who  was  indicted  "for  the  crime  of  advocating  the
overthrow  of   our  government" while  travelling  abroad
and  says  he  might  "flee  behind  the  iron  curtain"  if  his
passport  could  not  be  revoked without  a  hearing!
on   the   right   of   bail   and   speedy   trial   in   general,   and
particularly   for   American   citizens   residing   in   Germany,
and   my   equally    clear   position    decrying   discrimination,
against  members  of  minority   groups,  in  this  instance   par-
ticularly  the  Jews  of  Germany."
Form  of   Censorship
Morris   L.   Ernst,   Clark's   counsel,   argued  .that    under
the  power  claimed  by  the  State  Department   "any   reporter
or  writer  was  in  danger  of  being  recalled  if  he  was  critical
of   the   government    or   of   its   foreign    policy."    He   added
that  under  this  rule,  "McCarthy   could  not  travel  abroad,
nor   Adlai   Stevenson."
The   Department    took   the   position   that   if   Clark  with-
drew   the   appended  statement,  he   could  have  a  passport.
Clark   offered   to   withdraw   the   statement   if   the   Depart-
ment  withdrew   any  implication  that  his  freedom  of   speech
abroad   was   limited.    The  Judge   suggested  that   the   two
parties  work  out  some  compromise  along  this  line,  but   as
we  went   to  press  no  compromise  had   been   reached.   The
difficulty  on  the  Department's  side  is  that  it  does  not  wish
in  any  way  to  imply  that  it  cannot   revoke  a  passport  if
it   does  not  approve   of  what  an   American   abroad  says.
Next   week:   The   Nathan   ease—Can   Undisclosed   Charges
Be   Used   in  Denying   Passports?
Epilogue  in  Guatemala: As  Seen  by  C.I.O. and  A.F.  of  L.
".  .  .  Associate   Director  of  International   Affairs,   Daniel
Benedict  .  .  has  just  returned  from  a  second  trip  to  Guate-
mala   since   the    overthrow   of   the  Communist-dominated
Arbenz  government.
"On the  first  visit,  Benedict  . . . visited  the  new President,
Carlos  Castillo  Annas,  and  heard  his  'repeated  assurances
that  there  would  be  no  attempt  to  hinder  the  development
of  free  trade  unionism  and  no  attempt  to  destroy  the  land
reform  gains  of  the  peasants.'
"'Yet  non-Communist workers  known for, or  suspected  of,
strong  trade  union  feelings  have  been  and  are  now  being
fired by  the  scores'  he  (Benedict)  said  at  the  time.  Upon  his
return   from  the  second  trip,  late  in  August,   Benedict  re-
ported  finding  arrests  of  workers with  strong  union  senti-
ments   continuing.   Juridical   recognition  of   many   unions
from  which  the  Communist leaders  had  been  removed  .  .  .
has  been  withdrawn,  he  said  .  .  .
"The  land  reform  program,  which  the   Communists  under
the  Arbenz  dictatorship had  exploited,  is   being  wiped  out,
he  reported.   Many  Indian  peasants  have  been  driven  from
their  small  farms by  threats  and intimidation by  the  former
owners,  he  said,  thus  laying  the  ground-work  for  a  revival
of  Communist  strength."
—News  from  CIO, Int'l  Ed.,  Sept.  10
"Unfortunately,  this  wave  of  anti-Communism threatened
to sweep  away  the labor movement itself ... The new Guate-
malan  government  had  made  an  exception  to  this  pledge  of
maintaining  the  legal  status  of  the  unions  by dissolving  the
Teachers',  the  Railway  Union  called  SAMP,  which  was  the
strongest   in  the  country,  and  two  labor  syndicates  in  the
United  Fruit  Company's  banana  plantations  .  .  .  The  three
dissolved  industrial  unions  operated  in  the  jurisdiction  of
the  United  Fruit  Company  and  of  its  subsidiary, the  Inter-
national  Railway  of  Central  America.
"It  was,  from  all  points  of  view,  a  serious  blunder  which
damaged  the   prestige  of  the  government  among non-Com-
munist   trade-unionists    and  cast   unfavorable   reflections—
to  put  it  mildly—on  the  policy  of  the  two  American  firms.
It  is  generally accepted that  the  decree dissolving the  banana
workers'  and the  railway  workers' unions  .  .  .  was  issued  at.
the  insistent  request  of  the  American  companies .  .  .
"Another   factor   which  threatens  .  .  .  free   trade   union
activity ...  is  the  policy  of  wholesale  dismissals   adopted  by
a  number  of  large  concerns.  They  plan  to  eliminate  .  .  .  not
only   Communist   elements   but   also   all   those   whom   they
classify   as  'agitators'  .  .  ."
—Report   on  Guatemala, by  Seranno  Romualdo,  AJ?.  of   L.
Rep.  for  Latin  America, American  Federationist,  Sept.  1954
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   September   *7,   1954
A  Satire  Dedicated  to  the  Embattled  Teachers  Union  of  New  York
On  The  Need  for  A  New  View  of  Judas  Iscariot
The   New   York   City   Board   of   Education   is  split.   The
question  is  whether  teachers  shall  be  required  to  inform  on
others  in  order  to  keep  their  jobs,  despite  an  earlier  promise
that  they   need  only  answer  questions  about   their  own   poli-
tical  past.
So  great   is   the   confusion   and   so  persistent   the   feeling
against  informing   that  even  Mr.  William  Jansen,  the  super-
intendent  of  schools,  himself  one  of  the  prime  movers  in  the
scholastic  Red  hunt,  seems  to  falter  at  imposing  this  require-
ment.  This  queasy attitude  puts  these recalcitrants  in  conflict
with  Mr.  J.  Edgar  Hoover.
If   the  FBI  is  to  fulfill   the  enormous  tasks  now  imposed
upon  it,  there  must  be  a  change  in  the  attitude  toward   in-
formers.   The  job  of  keeping  subversives  out  of  government,
industry,   communications,   the   arts,   the   sciences   and   the
professions,  requires  a  multitude  of  dossiers.   These   can  only
be  accumulated  if  from  their  earliest  days  in  school   Ameri-
cans  are  trained  to  report   those  tell-tale  symptoms  of   non-
conformity   among  their  fellows  which  may  indicate   hidden
subversion  or   conspiracy.
This  new  attitude  can  hardly  be  inculcated  in   American
youth  if  their  teachers  are  allowed  with  impunity   to  indulge
the   old-fashioned  prejudice  against   informers.    The   need  is
evident  for   a  campaign  of   re-education.
As  the  Weekly's  own  contribution  to  these  patriotic  neces-
sities,  we  would   like  to  touch   upon  a  delicate  subject.   Far
more   influential  than  the  gangster   movies  which  teach   con-
tempt  for  the  stoolpigeon  are  those  first  Sunday  school  lessons
which  portray  an  informer,  Judas  Iscariot,  as  the arch-villain
of. the  Saviour's  appearance on  earth.   To  be  called  "a  Judas"
is  to  make  men's  spirits  shrivel  on  the  very  brink  of   their
new   obligations  •
At   first   glance   this   formidable  block   seems  irremovable
unless   one   were,   like   the   German   Fascists,   to   attack   the
Christian  religion  altogether.as  a  source  of  womanish   scruples.
Such   extreme   measures  I   believe   unnecessary.   A   study  of
the  Gospels  and  the  Church   Fathers  will  show  that   with  a
little  thought  and  effort   the  common  view  of  Judas  Iscariot
may  be  recast.   I  throw  out,  on  a  purely  amateur  basis,  a  few
leads  which  skilled  theologians might   utilize.
From    earliest   times   there   was   dissatisfaction   with    the
notion  that  Judas  betrayed  his Master for  a  handful  of  silver.
We   learn  from   two   of   the   Church   Fathers,   Irenaeus  and
Epiphanius,  that  there  was  a  lost  Gospel  of  Judas  which  pic-
tured   the   Informer   as  the   greatest   of   the   Apostles,    "the
perfect  Gnostic."
As  one  modern   writer   (S.  Baring  Gould:  The   Lost  and
Hostile   Gospels)    has   summarized   their   view:   "The    other
apostles,  narrowed  by  their  prejudices,  had  opposed   the  idea
of  the death  of  Christ  .  .  .  But Judas,  having  a  clearer  vision
of   the  truth,  and   the  necessity  for   the  redemption  of   the
world  by  the  death  of  Christ,   took  the  heroic   resolution   to
make   that   precious   sacrifice   inevitable."    Thus   the   whok
great   Drama   of   Salvation  was  only   made   possible  by   the
sacrifices  of  this  far-seeing  Informer.
De  Quincey  in  a  little  known  essay  on  Judas  Iscariot  also
rejected   "the   vulgar  reading  of   the   case"   and  saw  in  him
"a  spasmodic effort  of  vindictive  patriotism  and  of   rebellious
motive."    De   Quincey   suggested   that   Judas   informed   on
Jesus  only   in  order  to  precipitate  a  national  revolt   against
the  Romans.   This  would   picture   the   Great   Informer   as  a
tragic  patriot.
Another  possibility  is opened  up  by  a  recent  secular  author.
His   interpretation   is  said   to   be  that   Judas   was   a   leading
Palestinian   liberal  won   to   the   new  faith   in   the   mistaken
belief   that  it   was  only  heresy.   When   party  slogans  about
making  Jesus  "King  of  the  Jews"  opened  his  eyes  to  realities,
he  went  and  did  his  duty  as  a  loyal  Roman   subject.
According    to   this   version,   probably   apocryphal,    Judas
manfully  summed  up  his  position  to  the  Romans  in  words  as
succinct  as  anything  in  Tacitus,  saying  "Heresy,  Yes.    Con-
spiracy,  No ..."
Surely   from   such   elements   some   public-spirited    divine,
perhaps  aided  by  an  FBI  fellowship,  could  fashion  a  whole-
some  picture  of  Judas  for  our   youth.
LET  US  SEND  A  SAMPLE  COPY  TO  A  FRIEND
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name       .
CfroAt
City
301 E. Capitol, Wash.  3, D
my  sub  for  the  enclosed
7nn<>                 Stafp
. c.
$5:
Enter this  gift  sob for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name   .
<9fr»»i
City
..  Ton*            State
9-27-64
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
SOI  E. Capitol St,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mall
Matter
Washington, D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED