I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954dec20.pdf

============================================================

The Nightmare  at  Louisville:  A  Frame-Up  Raw as Mountain  Whiskey,  Page 4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  II,  NUMBER 46
DECEMBER  20,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  CIO At  Last  Offers  Some  Leadership
Time  for  Counter  Attack  on  The  Civil  Liberties  Front
The  resolution  on  civil  liberties  finally  adopted  at  the  CIO
convention   was  much  stronger   than  the  position   taken  by
Walter  Reuther  in  his annual report.  Indeed  for  the  first  time
the  CIO  now  offers  what  we  have  all  hoped  for—a  lead  by  a
mass  organization,  with  political  power.   "Now   is  the  time,"
the  resolution   declares,  "for   a  counter   attack  on  the   civil
liberties front."  The  concrete  proposals,  ignored  in  most  news-
paper  coverage,  provide  a  rallying   point   around  which,   for
the first time in many years, an effective  resistance to  the witch
hunt  may  be built.
These  are  the  proposals  and  we  urge  every  reader  to  press
for  action  on  the  CIO  program  in  his own organizations.  The
first  is that  the  Judiciary  Committees  of  the  House  and Senate
appoint  a  joint  committee   "for   the  purpose  of  investigating
infractions   of   civil  liberties  throughout  the  land"  and  to
recommend  "ways  and  means of  combatting  these infractions
which  are  weakening  the  fabric  of  our  society  and  our  world
leadership."   The  second  is  that  this  joint  committee   "review
all  Congressional  legislation  over  the  past  forty  years  dealing'
with   the   Communist   problem."   The   CIO   resolution   asks
that   this  review  be  made  with  two  purposes  in  mind.   One
is  to   ensure  that   Federal   legislation   "contain   all   necessary
powers  to  deal  with  espionage  and  sabotage."   The  other  is
that  "all   Federal  legislation  limiting  what  people  can  think
and  say  be  removed  from  the  statute  books."   Such  a   Con-
gressional  inquiry  could  become  an  historic   turning-point.
No  Mention  of  "Subversion"
It  is  heartening  to  see that  the  CIO  limits  its  concern  for
protective  legislation  to  the  concrete  crimes  of  "espionage  and
sabotage,"   omitting   altogether    the   indefinable   bogeyman
pseudo-crime  of  "subversion"  which  has  begun  to  haunt  our
law  and provides  an excuse for  the  policing  of  ideas.  The  CIO
proposal  is  broad  enough  to  cover  a  campaign  to  repeal  all
legislation which makes it  possible  to punish or  proscribe  people
for  their  ideas, as in  the  sedition  provisions  of  the  Smith  Act,
and  the registration  provisions of  the McCarran Act,  tightened
to  the  point  of  political   lunacy   by  the  Humphrey-Morse-
Douglas  amendments last  August.   The  resolution  attacks  the
outlawry  of  the  Communist  party  in  the  new  legislation  as
"a  sign  of  weakness."  It  says  that  portion  of  the  new  Com-
munist  Control  Act  which  calls for  "the  branding  and busting
of  'Communist-infiltrated'  unions  constitutes  a dangerous  first
step toward  state  control of  all trade unions."
The  resolution,  like  the  Reuther  report,  steps warily around
the  First  and  Fifth  amendments.   One  wonders  why  the  CIO
can't  quite  mention  them.  But  the  resolution  does attack  the
most  important   limitation   on  free  speech  in  our  time.   This
is  not  sedition  and  registration  laws,  bad  as they  are,  but   the
fear  engendered  by  the  Twentieth   Century  public  pillory—
the  Congressional  committee  "investigating" radical  ideas.  We
put  the word in quotation marks because even  the  investigation
of  ideas  was  long  lost  sight  of  in  a  planned  campaign  to   ter-
rorize  intellectuals  of  all  kinds  into  abject  conformity.    The
resolution  warns that  "the  public revulsion  against McCarthy"
is  not   necessarily  the  end  of  McCarthyism  as  practiced   by
others,  declares  that  the  investigating  committees  have  gone
beyond  "their  legitimate  function   of  obtaining  information
for   legislative  purposes"  and  calls  on  Congress   to   adopt   a
code  of  fair  procedure  limiting  their  scope  and  ensuring  fair
treatment  of  witnesses.
A Chance to  End  Soliloquoy
These  sentiments,  while  so  familiar  to  us  as  to  seem  trite,
are  not  to  be measured by  their  degree of  novelty.   They  offer
a  chance to  broaden out  what  has  too  long  been  a  soliloquoy.
This  program  reflects  the  CIO's  alarm  over  that  invasion  by
the  witch  hunt  of  the  factory  to  which  we  called  attention
in  last  week's  issue.  The  security  program  in  the  trade  union
movement  is  no  longer  the  concern  only  of  the  besieged  Left
unions and the  government  employees.  It  now begins  to  affect
workers  in  most  of  industry,  and  the  opportunity   is  offered
of  mobilizing  a  substantial  political  force  against  the  thought
control drive.  The  roll  call of  the resolutions committee which
drafted   this  program  indicates  its   potential.    McDonald  of
the   steel  workers,  Curran   of   the   NMU,   Potofsky   of   the
Amalgamated,  Rieve  of   the  Textile  Workers,   Quill   of   the
TWU,  Mazey  of   the   Auto  Workers   and  Helstein  of   the
Packinghouse  Union  were  among  the  f ramers.
When   it   is   remembered   that   the   labor   movement   in
America  is  fat  with  success,  that  its  leaders  are  part  of  the
upper  crust  in  our  great  industrial  cities,  that  the  rank-and-
file  are  only  now  beginning  to  stir  after  the  Golden  Era  of
New  Deal  and  Fair  Deal,  this  call  for  a  "counter  attack"
in  the  field  of  civil  liberties  may  be  seen  in  its  proper  per-
spective.   Here  is  a  chance  to  reach  a  wider  audience  with  a
message  for  which  the  system  of  security  clearances  on   the
docks  and  in  the  mills  has  prepared  the  minds  of   workers.
The  chance  comes  just  when  McCarthy's  exposure  and   con-
demnation   by   his   own   colleagues   has   made  the    country
wonder  about  the  witch  hunt.   And  not  the  least  important
reason  for  swinging  behind  the  CIO  program  is  that  it  may
shame labor's  liberal Democratic  allies in  Congress  into making
amends   for   their   cowardly   abandonment   of   dignity   and
principle  last  August.
1   8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  SO, 19S^
The  CIO Turns A Flip-Flop At  the  Last  Moment and  Supports  Ike
A  Surprising  Postscript  to  Reu therms  Report  on  Foreign   Policy
The  Reuther  report on foreign  policy to the  CIO convention
was  pretty  standard   Democratic  party  and  ADA  line.   Mili-
tary  security  was  linked  with  "protection  from  internal  sub-
version"  by  the  CIO  president.    Like  Symington  he  echoed
the  Air  Force  lobby, and  even  went  so far  as  to  speak  as  if
the  judgment   of  the  Joint   Chiefs  of   Staff   was   something
sacrosanct.  Here is a typical  passage: "In  the field of military
defense,   budgetary  rather  than   defense  requirements  have
seemed  to  be the  basic  criterion.   Cuts  in  military  appropria-
tions," Reuther  said, "especially  the Air  Force, were urged  and
adopted  without  the  approval  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff."
. This  is  loose and  feeble stuff,  which reflects the  labor  move-
ment's  tendency  to  regard  large  military  appropriations  as
a  useful  means  of maintaining employment.  This  is what  has
been  leading  it  into  alliance with  the  aviation  lobby  and  the
military  bureaucracy.   The talk  about  budgetary  rather  than
defense  considerations  being  the  criterion  is  loose;  Reuther
knows  how  wasteful  the  military  services  can  be,  and  how
insatiable  is  their  appetite.   As  for  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,
it  only  reflects  the  bureaucracy  it  heads.   This  is  the  same
Joint  Chiefs  which  had  a  majority  last  summer  for  war  in
Indo-China  and  more recently  for  a  blockade of China.
Nothing  more  completely reveals  the  inadequacy of  Leftist
stereotypes  in  the  analysis  of  the  present  situation  than  the
contrast between this kind of talk  from  the  leader  of  Detroit's
auto  workers  and  the  activities  of  Reuther's  old  antagonist,
Charles  Wilson  of  General Motors, as  Secretary  of  Defense.
The  head  of  the  largest  defense  contractor   in  the  country
cuts  the  military  budget  and  helps  the  President  veto  the
belligerence  of  the  military  while the  head  of  the  CIO  defers
to  the  Joint   Chiefs  of  Staff!   The  capitalist   cuts  war   ex-
penditures  while  the  labor  leader  deplores  the  reduction  in
"defense  spending"!
Reuther  Frightening, Too
An  ambivalence like  that  of  the  liberal  Democrats  marks
Reuther's  discussion  of  the  world  situation.   On the  one hand,
he  says  Dulles "frightened  . . . the free world with his talk of
massive  retaliation."    On  other  hand,  Reuther  goes  on  im-
mediately to  say, "but  in  Indo-China,  America's  policy seemed
closer  to  appeasement  than  to  all-put  militant   resistance."
What  does this  mean, if  anything?  "Massive  retaliation"  was
a  form  of  "all-out  militant  resistance."   How  could  you  have
"all-out   militant  resistance"   in  Indo-China without sending
in  American  troops  to  resist—the  desire  of  the  natives  for
independence?
As  for  frightening  our  free  world  allies,  they  must  be  a
good   deal   more   frightened  when  they   hear   this   kind  of
talk  coming from  America's ablest  and  most  intelligent labor
loader.   What  does he  mean  by  "appeasement"?   The  French
"appeased"  Ho by giving up  North  Vietnam, but  Ho appeased
the  French  by  giving  up  South  Vietnam when  it  was  his  for
the  taking.  Both  sides  gave  something for  the  sake  of  peace,
as  was  done  in  Korea.   If  this  mutual  adjustment  is  to  be
stigmatized  as  "appeasement,"   how  can  there  ever  be  peace
in  the world?
Reuther  accuses  the  Administration  of  "bluster" but  shows
no  inclination for  a  more  reasonable  policy himself.  This  is
evident  in  his  attitude  toward  co-existence  where  his  words
are  hardly  distinguishable from  the  paranoid  utterances  of
senators  like  Jenner.   Reuther  sees  the  co-existence  line  "as
a  device  to  ensnare  and  entrap  millions  of  men  and  women
throughout  the  world  who  live  in  poverty  and  without  im-
mediate  hope  of  improving  their  living  standards  and  their
status  in  society."
Suffers  from  The  Same Rigidity
Yet  a  few  lines later  in  his  report  Reuther  is  accusing  the
Administration  of  "rigidity"  in  foreign  affairs  and  of  giving
millions  of  people  in  the  world  "the  totally  false   impression
Case  Study  in "Liberation"
"In  Latin  America we  supported  the  overthrow  of  a
government  in  which  there  had  been a  marked  degree of
Communist  infiltration;  bat  once  the  Communists were
uprooted  the  Administration gave  aid  and  the  prestige
of  its  support  to  a  regime  which  can  only  be  described
as   anti-democratic.    Guatemalan   democrats   have  been
placed  in  jail  because they believe in  democracy.   Demo-
cratic   trade   unionists   in   Guatemala,   fighting   to   re-
establish   their   unions  on  a  clean  basis,   have    been
harassed  by  their  government, which  much  of  the  time
seems  far  more  sympathetic to  the  profit  hopes  of  the
United  Fruit  Company  than to  the  legitimate aspirations
of    the   great   majority    of   Guatemalan   workers   and
farmers."—Reuther's  Annual  Report  to  the  CIO.
that  it  is  America  that  is  belligerent   and  the  Soviet  Union
that  wants  peace."   Well,  isn't  it  rigidity  to  take  the  same
attitude  toward  a conciliatory  Soviet policy, as toward  a  belli-
gerent  one?  And what  else  are  people to think  when  even  the
head   of  the   CIO  sees  mysterious  dangers   in  co-existence?
If  he  doesn't  want  co-existence,  does  he  want  war?   And  if
he doesn't want war, then  doesn't  he have to take  co-existence?
The  Reuther  report   is  full   of  brave   words  about   Point
Four   and   spending  money  abroad   to   lighten   the   lives  of
common  people so they  will  not  succumb to  Communism.   But
how  is  this  to  be brought  about  without  relaxation  of tension
and   co-existence?   If   the  world  is  to  live  in  tense   enmity,
piling  up  armament  in  a  deadly  race,  how much  money  and
labor  power will be left  for  social reforms  and improvements?
The  labor  movement  is  going  to  have  to  wake  up  soon  to
its  own  stake  in  a  relaxation  of  world  tension.   The  witch
hunt  that  is  beginning  to  be  a  bread  and  butter  matter  for
the  worker  in  the  shop  and  on  the   dock  owes  much  of   its
origin,  direction  and  planning to  the  shrewd  master-minding
of  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce.  Its   1946  report  on  Com-
munism  and  Socialism  blueprinted  the  thought  control  drive,
and  the  ultimate  objective  of the  drive  was  to  wreck  the  labor
movement  and  turn  back  the  clock  of  social  progress.
Why  Labor Needs Co-Existence
But  that  plan  could  not  have  succeeded except  against  the
background   of  tension  between  the   U.S.   and  the   U.S.S.R.
Should  tension  flare  up  again,  the  witch  hunt  will  be  intensi-
fied  and   every  labor  leader  who  was   once  allied  with   the
Communists   or   sympathetic  to   socialism  will  come  under
suspicion  of  those watching for  "infiltration."   Tension abroad
is  indissolubly  linked with  tension  at  home.  The  fight  for   a.
peaceful  world  is  also  the  fight  for  a  free  America  in  which
the  labor  movement can  thrive.
P.S.  That  the  labor movement  only  indulges  in  this  kind  of
demagogy   as  long  as  it  seems  safe   is  evident  from   the  CIO
foreign   policy  resolutions,   particularly   No.  40  on  the   Far
Eastern  Crisis.   These  were  written  after   the  Reuther  report
and  since  the  clash  between  Eisenhower  on  the  one  side  and
Knowland  and  the  Joint  Chiefs   of  Staff    on  the  other  over  the
question  of  blockading  China.
The  CIO  resolution  says  a  blockade  might  bring  war  and
declares  "President   Eisenhower   has  demonstrated   restraint
and   realistic   understanding   which   reflects    the   thinking   of
the  overwhelming  majority   of  the  American   people  and  our
allies."   Says   the  CIO,  "We   recognize,  as  do  sensible   men
everywhere,  that  the  answer  to  these  problems  does  not  lie
in  preventive   war;  in  blockades that  can  only  heighten  ten-
sions  and  create  the  atmosphere  in  which  international   inci-
dents  can  set  off  atomic  war."   So  the  CIO is  itself   "ensnared
and  entrapped"  by  co-existence, after  alll
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. f.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  SO,  1954
Notes  On  The  News
No  "deal"  will,  of  course,  be made  to  swap  the  35  Chinese
students  we  hold  for  the  airmen  the  Chinese  have  accused  of
espionage;  we  occidentals  are  as  sensitive  about  "face"  as
the  Orientals.   But  this  does not  preclude the  possibility  that
we might  hasten  their  clearance  if  Peiping  on  its  side  should
grant  the  airmen  an  amnesty.   We  can  be  as  subtle  as  Bret
Harte's  "heathen  Chinee"  when  the  occasion  arises.   Anyway
these  subtle  interstices  between  the apparently  rigid  attitudes
of  both  capitals  is  where  the  British  and  the  Russians  hope
to get their  respective  partners  off their  high  horses  . . .
The  American  press  is  underplaying  the   gravity   of  the
split  between  British  and  American  opinion  over the  question
of  using  atomic  weapons.   Recent  speeches  by  Montgomery
and   Gruenther   have   alarmed   British   opinion   because   if
atomic  weapons  are  used  the  Russians  would  strike  first  at
atomic  air  bases  in  Britain.  That  might  well mean the  end of
Britain.   The  U.S.,  however,  is  far   more  deeply  committed
to  atomic warfare  than  the  American  public realizes  and  un-
willing to subject  use of tactical and  strategic  atomic weapons
to  political  control  . . .
Another   crucial  subject   on  which  the   public  here  is  ill
informed  is  the  real  nature  of  the  new Japanese  "caretaker"
government  and  the  ugly  forces  rising  behind  it.   All  the
news  dispatches  dutifully  refer  to  the  new  Prime  Minister
Hatoyama  as "pro-American"  as  if  the  repetition  would  make
him  so.   He  still  smarts,  however,  from  the  fact  that  Mac-
Arthur  purged  him  as  pro-Fascist  in  1946,  and  is  riding  a
wave   of   anti-Americanism.    This   springs   from   discontent
with  continued  occupation,  and  the  extent  to  which  Japan
is  tied  to the  dangerous kite  of  American  foreign policy.  The
Left,   which  applauds  the   friendlier  feelings  toward  Com-
munist  China which accompanies this  wave  almost  as  a  corol-
lary, shuts its  eyes  to  other  aspects.   When  Colonel Masanobu
Tsuji,   the   conqueror  of   Singapore,   can   win   applause   by
attacking   President   Truman   (as  he  did  recently)   as   "the
World's  Number  One War  Criminal"  the  danger  signals  are
obvious  and  it  is time  American  public opinion became  aware
of  them.
New  Trap  for  Libertarians
There  could  be  no  greater  trap  for  the  Left  and  for  those
who  believe  in  liberty  than  to  acquiesce  in  the  newly  adver-
tised  plans  of  the  House Un-American  Activities  Committee
and  the  Department   of  Justice  to  go  after  rightist  "hate"
groups   and   publications.    This   could   only   fasten   thought
control more firmly upon the country  by giving it the enhanced
status  of a  respectable  impartiality.   Remember that  the  Un-
American   Committee  began  as  a  misguided  effort  from   left
of  center   (Dickstein-McCormick)  to  police  Fascist  ideas  and
within  two  years  was  being  used  against  the  New  Deal.
The  Second  Hand  Piano  Dealer
The  Case  of the  Second  Hand  Piano  Dealer  may  yet  become
famous.  The  issue  in  the  case  of  William  Shonick  is whether
business   men   may   be   denied   licenses   purely   on  political
grounds.   A  teacher  who  lost  his  job  after  an  FBI   informer
named  him  as  a  Communist, Shonick  has  been  a  second  hand
piano  dealer  here  for  three  years.   Police  conceded  that  he
had  complied with  all  regulations  but  this  year  denied  him
his annual  renewal  of license.   The factual  grounds cited were
like  those  in  a  loyalty  case:  that  he  was  present  at  a  public
meeting  against  discrimination  addressed  by  Paul  Robeson
in   1949,  that  he  had  attended  a  public  meeting   in   1951   to
defend  victims  of  the  Smith  Act,  that  he  went  to  a  private
party  to  raise  funds  for  the  defense  of  a  Federal  employe
accused  of false  statement, and that  he had  pleaded  the  Fifth
last  year  when  asked  if  he were  a  Communist.
The  police  officer  who  recommended  that  his  license  not  be
renewed  made an  interesting  witness.  He  said  he didn't  think
anybody  should  be  penalized  for  pleading  the  Fifth  and  he
also  volunteered  that  he  didn't  think  a  man's  political  ide-
ology  had  anything  to  do with  trade  in  second  hand  pianos.
He  claimed, however, that  denial  of  the  license  was  required
by  one  of  the  findings  in  the  preamble  to  the  new  Anti-Com-
munist  Control  Law.   This  says  that  "unlike   other  parties"
the  Communist party  recognizes  "no  constitutonal   or  statu-
tory  limitation"  on  its  conduct.   Ergo,  a  man  named  as  a
Communist   could   not   be  certified  as   of  that    law-abiding
character  required  of  licensees.
Perpetual  Imprisonment?
The  Smith  Act  makes  it  a  crime  to  advocate  overthrow of
the government, to circulate  literature  teaching  such  doctrines
or  to  belong  to  any  group  which  so  advocates.   In  the  first
Foley  Square  prosecution  of  the  11  top  Communist  leaders
they  were  indicted  for  "conspiracy  to  advocate"  and  also  for
"membership"   in   the   Communist  party.   The   government
shelved  the  latter  indictment,  perhaps  because  it  feared  that
the outlawry  of a party per se might not stand up in the courts.
Now,   however,  detainers   for  trial  on  the  second  indictment
have been filed against  the eleven,.and Irving Potash,  the  first
to be released,  was  arrested  before  he left  the  prison  grounds
at  Leavenworth  and  transferred   last  week  to  a  jail  in  New
York.  The  re-arrest  shockingly  violates  the  spirit  if  not  the
exact  letter  of  the  constitutional   safeguard   against  double
jeopardy.
We  salute   the  passing  of  a  great   lawyer  and  a    lifelong
champion  of  civil liberty  in  the death  of Arthur  Garfield   Hays.
Wishing  You  All  A  Merry  Xmas  and  A  Happy  New  Year
I  want  to  thank  each and every  reader for  two  wonderful
years,  and  for  the  certain  prospect   (as  judged  by  the  first
response  on  renewals)  of  a  third.   I  hope  the  New  Year will
be  a  happier  one  for  all  who  believe  in  peace  and  freedom.
I  think  it  will.
Now  for  a  personal  note.   The  Weekly  has  been  a success
and  in  the  black  (1)  because of  your  support  and  (2)   be-
cause  it  has  been  a  one-man  job.   It  will  have  to  continue
such  until   I   can  push  circulation  up   by   another   couple
thousand.   I  was  warned  that   a  weekly  of  this  kind  was  a
back-breaking  job.  It  is.
All  this  leads  up  (as  nervously  as an  office  boy  asking  the
boss for  a day  off to  see the  ball-game)  to  the announcement
that  I  am  taking  two  weeks  off for  a badly  needed and  '(if  I
may  say  so)  well-earned  rest  over  the  holidays.
The  Weekly   goes  to  press  on  Thursdays  and  is  dated   the
following  Monday.  This  means  it  will  not  go  to  press  the
Thursday  before Xmas and  the  Thursday  before New  Year's.
It  will  resume  the  first  Thursday  in  January,  for  the  issue
dated  Monday,  January  10.  You  will  still  get  JO issues this
circulation  year,   but   in   the  future   the   Weekly   will   be
published  only  48  times  a  year,  allowing  two  weeks  off  at
the  end  of  August,  two  weeks at  the  end  of  December.
I  will  be  back  on  the  job  fresh   as  the  proverbial  daisy
when  Congress  reconvenes  on  Wednesday,  January  5.   Till
then,  again,  a Merry  Xmas and  Happy  New  Year.  Those  of
you who have already put  gift  subs in  the  Weekly's  stocking,
my  thanks.   Give  the  Weekly   to  a  friend  for  the  holidays,
and  help  me  by  getting  your  renewal  in  early.
With  warmest  greetings,
—I.  F.  STONE
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F; Stone's  Weekly,  December tO, itS4
Thanks  to  Kinsey,  The  Baby-Sitter  Escaped  Subversion
Carl  Braden  Convicted:  The  Nightmare  at  Louisville
The  affair   at   Louisville   is  one  of  those  nightmares  we
thought  could  no  longer  happen.  It  has  the  flavor  of  Nine-
teenth  Century  labor  frame-ups.   We  have  been  accustomed
to more sedate prosecutions.   This is as raw  as the home made
whiskey still being  distilled in the  Kentucky hills.
A  group  of  friends,  a  tiny  band  of  the  assorted  radicals
to  be  found  even  now in  almost  every  American  city,  helped
a  Negro  buy  a  house  in  a  white  neighborhood.   They  joined
together  to  defend  him  when  he  became  the  target  of  mys-
terious   shootings.   When  the  house  was  dynamited,  six  of
them  were  indicted  for   sedition   under   state  law  and  one
accused   of   blowing  up   the   house  himself.    The  supposed
motive:   to  stir  up  racial   discord.   Among  the  six  was  a
Louisville  newspaperman,  Carl  Braden,  and  his  wife.  Braden
was  the  first  to be tried.
The  most  disturbing  aspect  of  the  Louisville  affair  is  the
way  the  resources  of  the  FBI  were  mobilized  to  help  the
Kentucky  authorities  put  over  as  palpable  a  fake  as  any-
thing  in  the  annals  of  American  radical  prosecutions.
Before   the  jury  which  convicted  Braden  last  week  and
sent him to jail for  15 years  (and a  $2,500 fine) were  paraded
some  of  the  most  notorious  informers   employed  by  the  im-
migration  service  and the  FBI.   Ben Gitlow,  Matt  Svetic  and
Maurice  Malkin  were  on  hand  to  testify  on  the  nature  of
the  Communist conspiracy  and the literature  seized in  a  raid
on  the  homes of the  indicted.  "Mere  possession  of  such  liter-
ature,"  the   Commonwealth's   Attorney,   Hamilton,   argued,
"raises a  presumption  of guilt."
Bunche's Accusers Also  Turned  Up
Among  the  ten  professional  ex-Communists  or  FBI  spies
who testified  at  the trial were the  two,  Manning Johnson  and
Leonard  Patterson,  who  were  accused  of  perjury  after   they
called  Ralph  Bunche a Communist  at a United  Nations  loyalty
hearing.   Patterson  at  least  still  claimed  to  be  a  per  diem
consultant  for the Justice Department.  Manning Johnson  told
the  jury  the  Communists  planned  to  establish  a  Black  Re-
public  in  which  all  property  owned  by  whites  would  be  ex-
propriated  and  given  to  Negroes.
This  fit  the  mental climate  established by the  first  prosecu-
tion  witness,  an  FBI  undercover  agent  named  Mrs.  Martha
Edmiston,  who  testified   that   Communists, were   taught   to
incite  racial  trouble  whenever  possible.    Mrs.  Edmiston,  a
star  performer   in  the  past  before  the   Ohio  Un-American
Activities   Committee,  thought  the  Communist  party  of  the
U.S.  was  founded  in  1915  and  the  Russian  "I  should  say  in
the  1860's" and  offered  this sensation:
Q.  Was  an  actual  revolution planned?
A.  Yes.   It  was  planned  for  Jan.  12, 1941.
Another  FBI  informant,  Arthur  Paul  Strunk,  of  Dayton,
Ohio,  finally  admitted   under  cross-examination  that  there
was nothing in the constitution  of the  Communist party  about
overthrowing  the  government  by  force  and  violence.
Strunk:  I  don't see  anything ... It  was in the by-laws.
Defense  Counsel:  Yon say  it  was  in  the  by-laws?
Strunk:  I  wouldn't say  straight  out.
Braden  A Lifelong Socialist
Braden  denied  that  he was  or  ever  had  been  a  Communist
but  admitted  to  being a  lifelong  socialist, interested  in  many
labor  and peace causes.  "They  want us to disarm," the prose-
cutor  said  in  his  summation to  the  jury, "so we can be taken
over  without  much  difficulty."
The  prosecutor  asked  the  jury  to  convict  and  make  the
case  "a  milestone"  in  ending  "this  setting   whites  against
blacks  .  .  ."  But neither  the  Kentucky  authorities  nor the
local  FBI   office  seem  to  have  done  much  about  the  bombing
of  the  Negro home in a white neighborhood which precipitated
the  affair.
Even  in  this trial,  tantalizing  bits  of  evidence cropped  up.
The  Wades, a  Negro  family,  had  moved  into  a  white  neigh-
borhood.  A  fiery  cross  had  been  set  off to  warn  them.   Shots
had   been  fired  through  their  wondows.   According  to   the
testimony  of  a  county  patrolman,   when  the   explosion  oc-
curred,  "In  a  matter  of  a  few  minutes,  there  was  a  lot of
people there, mostly police" but "There  were no neighbors that
I  know  of."
The explosion occurred at  12:30 a.m.  It  seems very  strange
that  no  neighbors  showed  up  unless  indeed  they  knew  some-
thing  was  in  the  wind  and  stayed  away  lest  they  be  impli-
cated.  Wade testified, "We got  threats  a  week  or  two  before
that  they  were  going to  bomb the  house."
The  prosecution  and  trial  stayed  as  far  away  as  possible
from  the  bombing.  Braden  was  a  copy  reader  on  the  Louis-
ville   Courier-Journal    and   extended   testimony   was   even
allowed  on whether he had  ever "slanted" copy.  His  colleagues
swore  that   he  had   not.    A  baby-sitting   neighbor   of   the
Bradens  was  questioned  closely  on  whether   they  had   ever
tried  to  subvert  her.   She had  come through  her  experiences
as  sitter  among  the  Braden  books  unscathed.   "I  just  read
three  books,"  she  testified,  "a  couple  of  those  Dr.  Kinsey  sex
books,  and  some poems."
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  301
Please  renew  (or  enter) my
Knmo
City
Enter  this gift  sub for  $4 m<
E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
sub for  the enclosed  $5 :
Zone ——— State ————
>re  (money  enclosed) :
«,,„«*
City
Zone ___  State ————
12/20/M
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED