I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954nov29.pdf

============================================================

The Meaning of the  Field  Affair;  The  Soviet Bloc Needs a  Bill  of Rights,  Too,  Page 4
I.F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL,  II,  NUMBER 43
NOVEMBER  29,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Only  Way  Out  of The  Impasse  Over  Germany
Perhaps  the  best  place  to  begin  in  an  effort  to  understand
the  growing  conflict over  Germany  is with  a remark  made  by
a  British  Laborite  during   the  debate  on  ratification  of   the
Paris  and  London  agreements  for  German  rearmament.   The
Parliamentary  Report  next  morning  in  the  Times  of  London
only  gave  him  two  sentences,  but   they  said  more  than  any
other   speech  in   the   House.    "MR.    HOBSON    (Keighley,
Lab.),"  it  reported,   "welcomed   the  treaties.   Without  them,
he   said,  Washington   and   Bonn  would   have  controlled    the
defenses  of  Europe."
It  was  no  enthusiasm  for  a  military  partnership  with  Ger-
many,  it  was  the  fear  that  a  Washington-Bonn   axis  would
replace  the  Atlantic  alliance,  which  spurred  London  and  Paris
into  action  after   the  collapse  of  E.D.C.   This  was  the  club
which  belabored  the  Anglo-French  donkey  behind  the  smoke-
screen  of  "partnership."  But  there was also a carrot.  The  car-
rot  was that  if  the  English  and  French  went  along  with  our
desire  to  rearm  Germany,  we would  then  go  along  with  their
desire  for  a  new  conference  on  the  reunification  of  Germany
with  the  U.S.S.R.
Why  is American  policy  at  one  and  the  same  time  drifting
toward   co-existence,  yet   insisting   on  German  rearmament?
Logically  the  two  may  seem  incompatible,   since  the  remili-
tarization  of  Germany  threatens  to  revive  German  expansion-
ism.  The  answer, it  seems  to  me, is quite  simple.    The  prime
molders  of  American  policy  are  big  business  interests  with  a
huge  stake  in  the  Reich.   They  want  to  anchor  it  firmly  on
the  Western   side.   They  are  prepared  for   co-existence   with
the  Soviet  bloc.   But  they  believe  that -they  will  "co-exist"
with  greater  bargain  power  if  they  have  a  half  million  Ger-
man  soldiers on  their  side.  The  calculation  may  be  dangerous;
the  anchor  may  prove  unstable;  the  game  is  the  same  game
which  brought  on  two  world  wars.  But  there  it  is.
The  Russians  Are  Too Late
The  Russians fear  that  the  rearmament of  Western  Germany
is  only  the  beginning.   Once  Western  Germany  is  rearmed,  it
will  be too  late  to  turn  back  the  clock.  It  is too  late  already.
Just  after  the  war  ended,  the  Russians  might  have  exchanged
withdrawal  from  East  Germany  and  free  elections  for  a  long
term  treaty  demilitarizing  the  Reich,  something  like  the  40-
year  pact  Byrnes  once  proposed.   But  that  is  no  longer   prac-
tical  American  politics   today.   No  American   Administration
could   conceivably   give  up  German   rearmament;   it   is  hard
enough  to  sell  co-existence  and  beat  back  the  preventive  war
crowd.   But  what  the  Russians  see is  that  after  rearmament,
there  will  be  pressure  for   revision  of  the  Oder-Neisse   line.
What   cards  can  the  Russian  play  within   the   framework
of   the   unfortunate   political   realities?    One   was   shrewdly
hinted   at   by  Mendes-France  in  his  United   Nations    speech
last  week—to  the  obvious  displeasure of  Washington   and  the
real  or  pretended  disapproval  of  London.   It  was  simply  that
Molotov   go  ahead   and  organize  the   tighter  East   European
military  bloc  he  threatens,  and  then  let  the  two  blocs  nego-
tiate.  "If  by  similar  arrangements,  the  Soviet  Union  and  the
states   associated  with   it   adopted   formulae   symmetrical    to
ours,   and  provided   that   they   included   a  certain   degree  of
publicity,"    Mendes-France   suggested,   "an    important    step
forward   would   have  been   taken   toward   our   goal.    Later,
exchanges  of  information  and  mutual  assurances  could  take
place  between  the  two  systems.   Perhaps,  even,  the.  limita-
tions  or  controls  might  take on  a -contractual  form.   A flexible
regional  plan  would  thus  gradually  be  set  up,  with  the  field
of  the  application  of  the  limitations,  reductions   and  control
increasing  progressively."                                                         ..
East-West  Pact  on  Germany  Possible                                '
In   this   context   East-West   negotiation    could   take   place;
and  limitation   be  placed  from  both  sides  on  German  rearm-
ament.    Mendes-France,  reflecting  French   political   realities,
even  proposed  that  a  conference  be  held  on  the  subject   in
May,    as  soon  as  the  unpleasant  pill  of  ratification  had   been
swallowed  and  months  before  a  German  army  could  be  or-
ganized.   Here   lies  the  best  hope  at  the  moment.    Nowhere
in  the  West   is  public  opinion   strongly   enough   opposed   to
German  rearmament  to  block  it.   The  best  bet  is  to  bring
about  negotiations  as  soon  as  possible  on  the   basis  of   ratifi-
cation;  the  fewer  Germans  under  arms  when  the  conference
meets,  the  easier  it  will  be  to  put  some  limits  on  them.
The  only  other  alternative  fits  neither  the  current  pattern
of  Soviet  policy  nor  Russia's  own  long  range  security  heeds.
This  alternative  would  be  a  withdrawal  into  armed  isolation
with   an  East  European  army  in  which   East   German    con-
tingents   served;  to  let  world   tension   and  the   pace  of   the
arms  race  speed  up  again;  to  move  toward  war.   In  such  a
context,   the   West   German   army   would   grow   larger   and
more  threatening.   Once  more,  as in  1939, the  Russians  would
have  the  choice  of  preventive   war  against  Germany   or  an
illusory   deal  (again  at  Poland's   expense)   with  the  hope  of
turning  the  German  cannon  toward  the  West.   I  do  not  be-
lieve  the  Russians  will  make  the  same  mistake  again.   I  be-
lieve  that  there  will  be  negotiation  next  spring  after   ratifica-
tion  but  before  there  is  a  German  army  in  being,  and  that
on  the  basis  of  accepting  a  limited  German   rearmament   the
Russians  may  settle  for  something   not   so  unlike  Churchill's
new   Locarno   and   their   own   "European   security   system,''
but  with  American  participation  through the Atlantic  alliance.
This  way  something  may  yet  be  achieved.
1   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  29,  1954
A  Bulletin  of Warning  from  Capitol  Hill
Do  not  underestimate  the  importance  of  Jenner's  proposal
for  a  Senate  Bureau  of  Investigation,  a  kind  of  Little  FBI
to  harry  and  intimidate  liberal   Senators   and  purge  their
staffs  on  Capitol  Hill.  When  McCarthy accused  the  Watkins
committee  of  being  the  "unwitting" instruments  of  the  Com-
munist  party,  he  was  hoping  to  deflect  the  censure  debate
into  an  investigation   of  the   Senate   itself,   beginning   with
the  relations  between  Flanders  and  the  Committee  for  An
Effective   Congress,
The  Jenner   speech  of  November  15  took  up  the  cue  and
the  "reply"  made  by  Ed  Johnson  the  following  Thursday
showed  how  dangerously  effective  this  line  may  prove  to  be,
whatever  the  immediate outcome on censure.  Jenner  charged
the   Communists  and   the   labor   movement  generally   with
"maneuvering"  so  as  to  plant  "a   militant   group   of   pro-
Communist  workers"   in  the  districts  of  Congressmen  they
•wished  to  defeat.   He  asked  for  a  resolution  to  authorize  the
Rules   committee,  of  which  he  is  chairman,  "to   submit  a
report  of  the  criteria  to  determine  if  and  when  any  Senator
elect  should  be  refused  admission to this  body because he  had
been  elected  as  a  result  of  a  deal  with  the Communists."
This  would  extend  the  notion  of  a  Communist  conspiracy
to  elections   themselves,  take  the  first   step  toward  investi-
gating  voters   in  liberal   or   pro-labor  areas,   and   lay   the
foundations  for  refusing  to  seat  members  of  Congress  they
elected.   Jenner  pointed  out  that  two  former  Congressmen,
De  Lacy  and  Bernard,  have  taken  the  Fifth  and that  Condon
of   California   had   been  linked  with   the   Communists.   He
said  we  needed an  investigation  to  determine  whether  mem-
bers  of  Congress  "like  Lee  Geyer,  of  California;  Savage,  of
Washington;    Adolph  Sabath,   John   Tolan,   Glenn   Taylor,
Samuel   Dickstein,  John   M.  Coffee,   Ernest   Lundeen,  Jerry
O'Connell  and  Claude  Pepper   have  given  aid  and  comfort
to  the  conspiracy  initiated  in  Moscow."
Jenner   said  "We  have  followed   the  trail  of  Communists
into  our  colleges,  into  the  United  Nations,  into  our  cultural
Land  of  the  Free,  Home  of  the  Brave
Washington—A  young  music  teacher   turned   piano
dealer  was  refused  a  license  here  last  week  to   sell
second-hand  pianos  because  he  had  pleaded  the   Fifth
amendment  before  the  House  Un-American  Activities
Committee.
agencies  like IPR,  into  trade  unions and farming  areas  . . .
But  we  have  done  almost  nothing  to  disclose  the  degree  of
influence  over  Congress  and  the  legislative  process."   He  in-
dicated  that  to  oppose  such  an  inquiry  would  be  to  make
oneself  suspect.  "There  is not  a member of this  body,"  Jenner
declared,  "unless  he  is  a  secret  Communist  [italics  added],
who  is  neutral  in  this  contest."
Four   days  after   this  proposal,   Johnson   of   Colorado,   a
member   of   the   Watkins   committee,   rose   and   offered    an
amendment   to  the   McCarthy  censure  resolution  on  behalf
of  himself  and  Byrd  of  Virginia  and  Daniel  of  Texas.   The
amendment  said   it  was  the   sense  of  the   Senate  that  the
Communist  party  was  part  of  a  deadly  international   con-
spiracy.   "Accordingly  the   Senate's   appropriate   committees
should   continue   diligently   and   vigorously   to    investigate,
expose and combat this  conspiracy  and  all  subversive elements
and    persons    connected   therewith."     Including    Senators
themselves?
This  kind  of  tactics,  by  accepting  the  premises  of  Jenner,
opens  the  Senate  door  to  snoop brigades.   This  is  the  logical
end  of  the  loyalty-security  mania, which  assumes  that people
must  be  screened before they  are  allowed  even  to  be  govern-
ment  clerks  or  stevedores.  Why, then,  leave  them unscreened
in  more  important  functions?  Should a  "disloyal"  citizen  be
allowed  to  vote?   To  work  for  a  Senate  committee?  To  ,sit
in  the  Senate  itself?   This,  which  sounds like  fantasy   today,
may  be  reality  tomorrow.
Hearst  and  the  Hearst  Press  Do  An  About  Face  on  Co-Existence
Within   the   space   of   a   week,  young  William  Randolph
Hearst,  Jr.,  and  the  Hearst  press  have  done  an  almost  com-
plete  about-face  on  co-existence.  The  sharp  change  deserves
attention  not  only because the  Hearst  press, is  important  but
because  it  is  another  indication  that  powerful  interests  are
exerting  pressure  for  peace.
On  Sunday,  November  14, Hearst  papers  featured  a  sour
dispatch   by   their    top   Washington   correspondent,   David
Sentner,  headlined  "Ike   Plans  to  Make  A  Try  at  Co-Exist-
ence" and  an "Editor's  Report" by William Randolph  Hearst,
Jr.,  "Red  Dove  of  Peace  Hides War  Feathers."
Hearst  in  his  own  weekly  commentary   said  the   Kremlin
peace  campaign  was  just  a  "transparent  tactical  device, im-
plied  that  he  thought  Ike  was  being  deceived   by  it   and
warned  that  there   was   a   crisis   coming  over  Formosa   in
which  "the   Eisenhower  Administration  may  be  sorry  that
it  fell  in  with  the  Russian  'peace'   campaign."
Exactly  one  week  later,  in  the  Hearst   Sunday  papers  of
November  21,  the  tune  changed.  "I  think  the  entire  nation
will  agree  with  President  Ike,"  Hearst  wrote,  "that  in  this
era  of  potentially  total  destruction,  there  is  no  genuine  al-
ternative  to  peace."
Fear  of co-existence had  dissipated.  Hearst  began  to sound
like  a  paraphrase  of Henry Wallace  in  the  old days.  "There's
no  reason  to  believe,"  Hearst  assured his  readers,  "that God-
fearing  democracy will  not  prevail  in  a  long-range  showdown
with  God-less  Communism   even  though  we  move  into   the
phase   of  'peaceful   co-existence.'   This  conflict  between   the
two  dogmas,"  Hearst  continued,  "will  be  the  basis  on which
the  Cold  war  will  be fought  in the  immediate future."   Peace-
ful  competition!
The  Villains
"There are a number of  indications that several White
House  advisers  take  kindly  to  this  Soviet  bait  [of  co-
existence].    These   include   particularly   Gen.   Eisen-
hower's   unofficial   but   highly   influential   counsellors:
Milton   Eisenhower,  president   of   Pennsylvania   State
College;  Lucius  Clay,  president  of  American  Can Com-
pany;   and  John   McCloy,   chairman  of   the   Board  of
Chase  National Bank."
—Constantine  Brown,  Washington  Star,  Nov.  17.
The  papers  of  the  21st   also  featured   a  Washington   dis-
patch  on  the  subject  of  co-existence by  Howard  Handleman,
chief   of   the   Hearst   International   News   Service   Bureau,
"Soviet   Soft-Pedals   Atomic  Power  in  Its   New  Cold   War."
Handleman   told   readers  the   "Russian   propaganda   cam-
paign  for   'peaceful   co-existence'  appears   to  be  a  new  set
of  unwritten  'ground  rules'  for  the  cold  war."   Atomic  war-
fare  would  be  "all   but  ruled  out"  while  both  sides  instead
tried  out  on  each  other  "the  subtle  weapons  of  intrigue,  in-
filtration,  propaganda  and  subversion."
But   unlike   Knowland   and   Jenner,   Handleman   did   not
assume   this   would  favor   fhe   Communists.   "U.S.    officials
are  not  opposed  to  the  new  rules,"  he  reported,   "because
they  are   confident   America  and  her  free  world  allies   will
win  that  kind  of  struggle."
When  the  peace  bug  bites  the  Hearst  paper,  that's   news.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  29,  1954
One  Way  Local  Witch  Hunts  Might  Be  Ended  and  Little  McCarthys  Sorbed
Louisville  and  Miami Illustrate  the  Importance  of  the  Nelson  Case
Washington—Events  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  Miami,  Pla.,
underscore  the  crucial  importance  of  the   appeal   the   U.S.
Supreme  Court  has  agreed  to  hear  in  the  Steve  Nelson  case.
The  appeal  was brought  by Pennsylvania  against  the decision
of  its  own  Supreme  Court.   If  the   U.S.  Supreme  Court  up-
holds  the  ruling  of  the  State  court,  it  will  at  one  stroke  end
the  growing number of  instances  in  which State  sedition  acts
are  being  used  for  local  witch  hunts.
None  more  shockingly  illustrates  the   easy  abuse  of  such
statutes   than   the   Louisville,   Kentucky,   case.    There   the
prosecutor  declares  himself  unable  to  find  any  clue  to  the
men  who dynamited a  Negro  home.  Instead  he  is  putting on
trial  today  (Nov.  29)  six  white  defendants  who  helped  the
Negro  buy  that  home  in  a  white  neighborhood.  The  charge
is  sedition,  but   the  real  crime  is  an   affront   to  white  su-
premacy.
In  Miami  a  local  witch  hunt  with   distinct  anti-Semitic
overtones   received  a   setback  last  week  when  the   Florida
Supreme  Court  reversed  contempt  citations  against  14  de-
fendants  who  had  pleaded  the   Fifth   amendment  before  a
special   Red-hunting  grand   jury.    Seventeen   others   have
appealed  to  the  court  against  similar  contempt  convictions.
The  prosecutor  now asserts that  he will  seek  their  indictment
under  the  Florida  sedition  law.   This  provides  that  persons
may  be sent  to jail  for  20 years  for  belonging  to  any  organi-
zation  designated  "subversive."
The   Pennsylvania   Supreme   Court   reversed   the   20-year
sedition  sentence  imposed  on  a  well-known  Pittsburgh  Com-
munist   organizer   and   Spanish    civil   war   veteran,    Steve
Nelson.   It   held  that  by  passing  the  sedition  provisions  of
the  Smith  Act  in  1940, Congress  had  superseded  State  legis-
lation  on  the   subject.    This  ruling,   if   upheld,  would  limit
sedition  prosecutions to the  Federal  courts.
State  Attorneys  General  Alarmed
The witch hunters have  been quicker to  see the  significance
of  this  than  civil  libertarians.   The  Attorneys  General  of  27
States  have  joined in  a  brief  amicus  curide  filed  by  Louis  C.
Wyman,  Attorney  General  of  New  Hampshire,  who  (as  we
explained  in last  week's  issue)  has  been prosecuting the  econ-
omist   and   teacher,   Paul   M.  Sweezy,  for   contempt   in   an
investigation  under  that  State's  sedition  act.
One  of  the  States  joining  in  the  appeal  to  the  Supreme
Court  to  reverse  the  Pennsylvania  decision is  Massachusetts.
In  a  separate  brief  it  cites  the  effect  which  a  failure  to  re-
verse would have on three  pending prosecutions in that  State.
These  are  the  still  untried  1951  indictment  of  Prof.  Dirk  J.
Struik  of  M.I.T.  and  a  Maiden  business  man  for  sedition;
the  indictment  last  April  of  Otis  Archer  Hood  for  member-
ship  in  a  subversive organization;  and  the  May indictment of
Hood  and  others  for  "conspiracy  to   advocate."
The quality  of  the  Wyman brief  and  the  frenetic  character
of  the  pleading  may  be  gathered   from  Wyman's   argument
that  to  uphold  the  Pennsylvania  ruling  would  be  to  "take
from  the  States  their  basic  right  to  make  criminal  attempts
to  destroy  their  sovereignty,  kill  their  loved  ones  if  need  be,
and  seize  their  homes."
But  sedition  is  an  ancient  crime  which  seeks  to  punish  the
expression  of  ideas  considered  dangerous   by  the  State.   To
The  Dangers  of  "Sedition"
"In  de   Jfonge    v.  Oregon,  299  VS.   253,  Chief  Justice
Hughes,  speaking  for  a  unanimous  court,  wisely  coun-
selled  that  "The  greater  the  importance  of  safegarding
the  community  from  incitements to  the  overthrow of  our
institutions  by  force  and  violence,  the  more imperative
is   the   need  to   preserve  inviolate  the   constitutional
rights  of  free  speech,  free  press  and  free  assembly  in
order   to   maintain  the   opportunity   for   free   political
discussion,  to  the  end  that  government  may  be  respon-
sive   to   the   will   of   the   people   and  that   changes,  if
desired,  may  be  obtained  by  peaceful  means.  Therein
lies  the  security  of  the  Republic,  the  very  foundations
of  constitutional  government.'  Surely, no  more  impres-
sive admonition could have been given to the judiciary of
our  country.   If  this  counsel  is  to  be  heeded  faithfully,
it  is  essential  that  criminal  sanctions  for  conduct  hostile
to   our   Federal  government  be   promulgated,  imposed
and   controlled  uniformly   for   the  Nation  as  a  whole.
And  that  only  the  central  government  can  accomplish."
—Penna.  Supreme  Court  in  the  Nelson  Case
take from  State  governments  the  power  to  deal  with  sedition
would  leave  untouched  the  criminal   laws  which  punish  un-
lawful   acts.   Sedition  statutes  are  not  needed  to  deal  with
attempts  to  "destroy  their  sovereignty  .  .  .  kill  their  loved
ones  . . . seize their  homes."
Parallel  in  an  Alien  Case
The  Pennsylvania  court  pointed  out  that  the  alleged  sedi-
tion  by  Nelson  was  against  the  Federal  government,  not  the
State; that prosecution  therefore  should be left  to the  Federal
government;  that  he had also been  convicted under the  Smith
Act;  that  Pennsylvania's statute  books  had  ample  laws   "ade-
quate  for  coping  effectively  with  actual  or  threatened   civil
disturbance,"   and  that   the   Supreme   Court   (in   Hines   v.
Davidauritz,  312  U.S.  52)  had  already  held  void  on  similar
grounds  a  State  law  which  duplicated  another  part  of  the
Smith  Act.
The  Smith  Act,  as  passed  in  1940,  carried  provisions  for
the  registration   of  aliens  as  well  as  for  the  punishment of
sedition.   Pennsylvania  passed  an  Alien  Registration   Act  of
its  own  but  this  was  declared  unconstitutional  by  the  Su-
preme  Court on the ground  that  Congress  had pre-empted  the
field  of  alien  registration.
The   problem  of  determining  how  and  where  State   and
Federal  legislation  may  overlap  is  a  delicate  one.   The  U.S.
Supreme  Court  in  outlawing  the  Pennsylvania   alien  regis-
tration  act  said  that  in  determining  the  question  "it  is  also
of   importance  that  this  legislation   deals   with   the  rights,
liberties  and  personal  freedom  of  human beings,  and  is  in  an
entirely   different  category  from   state  tax  statutes  or  state
pure  food  laws."   Adopting  the   same  standard,  and   con-
struing  State  power  narrowly  where  basic  liberties  are  con-
cerned,  the  Pennsylvania  court  held  that  the  sedition  provi-
sions  of  the   Smith  Act  had  similarly  superseded  the  State
sedition  law.
I  Need  Your  Help—And I  Need  It  Now
Week  after  week/  I  print  news  and  material  you  can find
nowhere   else,  defend   causes   others  are  afraid  to  tackle.   I
need  more  readers  and I  need  them  now as I prepare  for my
third  year  of  publication.
I  am always  surprised  when  I  go oat on a  speaking  date  to
find  old  friends  and  readers  who  have  not  yet  gotten  around
to  subscribing.   They  approve  what  I  am  doing.   They  want  me
to  go  on  with  it.   But they  have  never  stopped  to  think  that
my  voice  would   have   been  stilled  long  ago  if   others   were
as  dilatory  as  they  about  subscribing  and  renewing.
I  am  sure  you,  too/  know   such  people.   Won't  you  help  me
now  in  the  renewal  season  by  making  yourself   a  Committee
of  One  to  prod   such  laggards  with  a  phone  call  or  over  the
luncheon  table  to  subscribe?  Or  help  me  reach  a  new  reader
by  giving  someone a  gift  subscription  with  your  own  renewal?
And  please  get  your  own  renewal  in  now,   today,  while  you
think  of  it.   Thanks.                                                 I.  F.  STONK
7  /
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  29, 1954
The  Lesson  of  the  Field Affair  for  Those Who Believe  in Socialism
The  Soviet  Bloc, Too, Needs  A  Bill  of Rights
When   the   Budapest   radio   on   November   16   announced
the  liberation  of  the  Fields  it  said,  "It   has  not  been  possible
to  justify   the  charge  made  in  the  past  against  the  above-
mentioned   persons.   Therefore,   the  competent   state  agencies
have  announced   the   case  dismissed."    Those  who  believe  in
socialism  and  those  who  believe  in  law  may  fruitfully  ponder
that  laconic   announcement.
If  "it  has  not  been  possible  to  justify  the  charge  made  in
the  past"  against  the  Fields,  then  the  treason  confession made
by  the  Hungarian   Foreign   Minister   Laszlo  Rajk  before  he
was  executed in  1949 was  false.   Rajk  "confessed"   that  Field
was  one  of  the  secret  American  agents  with  whom  he  had
conspired.
Had  there  been a real trial, there might  have  been  a different
outcome.   The  accused  had  counsel  but   the  day  before  the
sentencing  of  Rajk  and  his  seven  co-defendants,  these  igno-
minious  lawyers  rose  and  told  the  court   their   clients  were
guilty  and  they  were  defending  them  only   as  a  matter  of
form.
A  Whole Series  of  Frame-Ups
These  seven  were  not  the  only  victims.    On  October  14
the  leading  Communist   paper  in  Budapest,  Szabad  Nap, an-
nounced   that   "many   comrades"   had   been   purged   during
1947-51  on  "invented"  charges  and  were  now  being  cleared
and  restored  to  duty.  On  November  21  the  Hungarian  radio
announced  that  Anna  Kethly,  secretary  general  of  the Hun-
garian   Socialist  party,   had   been  freed   after   four  years  in
jail.   Clearly  there  were  a  lot  of  frame-ups.
Now  let  us  return  to  the  Fields.   They  just  disappeared.
They  were not  produced  at  the  Rajk  trial,  obviously  for  fear
that  they  would not  support  his  confession.   They  were never
tried  at  all. They  were  held  incommunicado.  They  could  not
get  in  touch  with  relatives or  friends.  They  could  not  phone
a  lawyer.  They  were  sealed  up  in  a  living  tomb  as indeed  the
last   missing  Field,  Mrs.   Wallach,   seems  to   be  in   a   Soviet
prison.
The  Hungarian  and  Polish  governments  deserve  credit   for
freeing   the   Fields.   But   they   might   have  been   saved   the
humiliating  experience  of  appearing  to  act  only  in  response
to  the  revelations  of  the  defecting  Polish  secret  police   official
Swiatlo if  they  had  allowed  a  decent  minimum  of  legal  rights
to  start  with.
Injustice  Will Not  Wither Away
The  lesson  is  that  Communist  States  need  a  Bill  of  Rights
just  as  much  as  capitalist  States  do,  in  fact  more  so because
the   Communist   state   controls   livelihood,  press   and   trade
unions  and  leaves  no  interstices  for  the  individual  who  wants
to   fight   for   his   rights.   The  Nineteenth   Century   formula
about  the  ultimate  "withering   away  of  the  State" with  which
the  Communists  tried  to  meet  the  criticism  of  the  snarchists
is  not  enough.  Communism  is here, here  to  stay in  a  big  part
of  the  world.  There  has  been a  generation  of  experience with
it.  Let us try  to sum it  up.
Can  mistakes  be  made in  a  Communist  State?   Obviously.
Can  it  be  assumed  that  every  Communist   official   is  honest?
Obviously   not,   after   the   Hungarian,   the   Polish   and   last
winter's  Soviet  revelations  about  the  phoney  "doctors'  plot."
Is  it   therefore  possible  that   an  innocent   man  may  be con-
victed  in  a  Communist  court?   Obviously.   Is  it  possible that
he  might  even  be  framed?    Obviously.
Then  the  possibility  of  injustice  does  nor  vanish  with  the
abolition  of  private  property,  as  some  have  naively  assumed.
This  does  not  mean that  socialism is bad. It  does mean,  how-
ever,  that  it  does not  solve  all problems  and  even  creates new
ones.   It   means  that  the   same  basic  safeguards  which  help
to  enforce  justice  in  a  capitalist  State  are  needed  in  a Com-
munist   State:   habeas  corpus—the   right   to   get  out  of   jail
on  bond  and  obtain  a lawyer who  will  fight  instead  of  grovel;
the  right  to  demand  proof  and  confrontation  in  open  court;
a  tradition  of  an  independent  judiciary;  the  right  of  appeal;
and  newspapers which  will  print  things  of  which  the  govern-
ment  does  not  approve.
That  we  do  not  by  any  means live  fully  up  to  these  ideals
in our  own  society  does  not  mean that  the  ideals are not  good,
or  are  not   applicable  in  socialist  society.   'With  all  that  has
been  said—and  that   we  say  week  after  week  in   our  little
paper—a  Field  case  is  still  impossible  in  this  country  despite
the  anti-Communist  hysteria.
Please  Get  Your  Renewal  in  Early  and  Send  A  Gift  Sub to  A  Friend
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Str«.f
City
301 E. Capitol, Wain. 8, D. C.
my  sub for  the  enclosed  (5:
Tnnp             State
Enter  this  gift  sab for  $4 more  (money enclosed):
(To)  Name                ....
Rtrrot
City
7ntw»               St*t«.
11/28/64
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
Ml  E. Capital St, S.E.
Washington  8,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington, D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED