I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954mar22.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue With New Light  on the  Annie Lee Moss  Affair
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2, NUMBER  9MARCH  22,  1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
The  FBI,  McCarthy  and  the  Witch  Hunt
Perhaps the  biggest and certainly  the most  tantalizing  untold
story  of  this  whole  period  is the  part  played  by  the  FBI  in  the
witch  hunt.   Senator  Fulbright   (D.  Ark.),  the  only  Senator
to  vote  against  the  McCarthy  appropriation,  is  also  the  only
Senator  with  nerve  enough  to  talk  publicly   about  it.   The
Senator  told  an  Associated  Press  reporter  last  week  that  he
was  no  longer  giving  information  to  the  FBI  because  he  was
convinced  that  the McCarthy  committee  had  access to its files.
In  whatever  time  McCarthy's  sudden  access  of  out-of-town
speaking  engagements leaves  for  investigation,  this is one  ques-
tion  the  McCarthy  committee  will  not  explore.   Yet  there  is
evidence which suggests that  the  FBI has had  close, if  carefully
hidden,  links with  Congressional  witch  hunt  committees  ever
since  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  in   1946  launched  its
drive  to  purge  the  government,  the  movies,  the  air waves,  the
lecture platform  and  the arts,  sciences and professions generally
of  "reds" and "pinks."
There  are  indications  that  the  FBI  and  the  Congressional
witch   hunt   committees   were  synchronized  in   the   thought
control  drive, that  FBI men moved  in  to  staff  the  committees,
and  that  the  FBI's  informers  and  undercover  operatives  were
released  to  the  committees  as  witnesses  when  their   usefulness
as agents  had  been ended  by exposure,  failure  to  obtain  indict-
ments,  or  their  appearance in  court.
Publicizing  the  FBI  Files
Robert  K.  Carr  ventures  some  cautious  "general   observa-
tions" on  this  in  his authoritative  work  on  "The  House  Com-
mittee  on Un-American  Activities,  1945-50."  He  writes  that
"a  surprisingly  large number"  of  the hearings in  the  latter part
of  this  period  "made  public  information  already  well  known
to  the  FBI."    He  notes  "Often  the  leading   witness  in  such
committee  hearings  was  an  undercover   FBI  agent  who  had
infiltrated  the  Communist  movement."   Professor  Carr   con-
cludes,  "It  is quite  apparent  that  these  hearings  were  designed
to  serve  the  purpose  of  publicizing  information  in  FBI  files."
(Pages  168-9).
At  another  point   (p.  274),  Professor  Carr  observes,   "The
investigative  arm  of  the  committee's  staff  has  always  regarded
itself  as  a  'little  FBI.'   Ex-FBI  men  have provided  part  of  its
personnel,  and  its  methods and  interests have  been  comparable
to  those  of  the  FBI."
An  important  direct  bit  of  evidence  is  not  mentioned   in
the  Carr  book.   This  may  be found  in  the  Committee's   hear-
ings  in  July,  1948,  when Elizabeth  Bentley  was  first  heard  by
it.   In  the preceding  months,  her testimony  to  a special  Federal
grand  jury  had  failed  to  win  indictments.    Her  public  ap-
pearance  then  followed.   During  her  appearance  before   the
House  committee,  there  was  an  interesting   remark  made  by
its  chairman,  J.  Parnell  Thomas.
Parnell  Thomas Lets  Slip  The Truth
"The   closest  relationship,"   Thomas   said   (July   31,   1948,
Page  561,  Hearings  Regarding  Communist   Espionage  in  the
U.   S.  Government,   House   Un-Am.   Com.   80th   Congress.
2d  Session),  "exists  between  this  committee  and  the  FBI.    I
cannot  say  as much  as  (sic)  between  this  committee  and  the
Attorney   General's   office,   but   the  closest   relationship   exists
between  this  Committee  and  the  FBI.   I  think  there  is a  very
good understanding between us.  // is something, however, that
•we  cannot  talk  too  much  about."  (Italics  added.)
In  this  same  realm  of  "something ... we cannot  talk  too
much  about"  may  lie hidden  the  story  of  how  the   Committee
first  managed  to  obtain  Miss  Bentley and  Whitaker  Chambers
as  witnesses, how it  gathered  the  atomic  spy scare  information
it  used in  the  1948  campaign  after  this information  had  failed
to   stand   up   as  evidence  in   legal  proceedings,   and  how   it
learned  of  the  J.  Edgar  Hoover  letter  to  Secretary  of   Com-
merce  W.  Averill  Harriman  smearing  Edward  U.  Condon,
then  director of  the  National  Bureau of  Standards.   This,  too,
played its part in the attempt to  defeat  the  Democrats in  1948.
When  the  full  story  becomes known,  Clayton  Fritchie may
look  very  naive  for  that  rejoinder  he  made  last  winter  to  At-
torney  General  Herbert  Brownell  in  the  Harry  Dexter  White
affair.   Fritchie,  speaking  for  the  Democratic  National  Com-
mittee,  accused  Brownell  of  "dragging  the  FBI  into  politics"
by  producing  J.  Edgar  Hoover  as a  witness  before  the  Jenner
committee.    It  is doubtful  that  an  official  so powerful  as  Mr.
Hoover  may  be dragged against  his will  into  anything  he  does
not  wish  to  enter.    From  his demeanor  before  the  committee,
there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  there  had  been  prior  co-
ercion  in  the  dungeons of  the Department  of  Justice.   On  the
contrary,  Mr. Hoover sounded  like a man  who had  been  saving
up  a long  time  for  just  this  occasion.
Hoover Always in the  Anti New Deal  Corner
The  head  of  the  FBI "stayed  out  of  politics"—at  least  pub-
licly—during  the  Roosevelt  and  Truman  Administrations   be-
cause  such  intrusion   might  have  cost  him  his  job;   his  own
anti-liberal  preconceptions  were  notorious within  the  two  Ad-
ministrations.   But  material  from  his files, and  witnesses  from
the   FBI's   private   stables,   began   to   help   the   Republicans
smear  the  Democrats  after  the  war.
The  career  of  Robert  E.  Lee,  our  newest  Federal  Communi-
cations  Commissioner,  may  throw  some  light  on  this  relation-
ship.    Lee had  risen  within  the  FBI  to  be  administrative   as-
sistant to J.  Edgar  Hoover in  1941.    According to the biogra-
phy  Lee  supplied   the   Senate  Commerce   Committee  in   the
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'g  Weekly,  March  «2, 1954
"Something  .  .  . That  We  Cannot  Talk  Too  Much  About"
(Continued  from  Page  One)
recent  hearings  on  his  appointment,  he  "was   also  a  public
relations   representative  for   the   FBI   and   made   over  200
speeches  on  the  work  of  the  Bureau  before  civic  organiza-
tions"   (p.   2.  Lee  Hearings,   Sen.  Com.  Com.  83rd  Con.  2d  .
Sess.)   In  1946 Lee was  "loaned"  (the word is his)  by Hoover
to  the  House  Appropriations   Committee.  It   seems  to  have
been  a  loan  to  the  Republicans.  When  the  Republicans  won
control  of  the  House  in  1946,  Lee  became  chief  of  staff   for
the  Appropriations   Committee.   When  the  Republicans  lost
control  of  the  House  in  1948,  he  became their  minority  clerk.
In  1947  Lee went  into  the  State  Department  files  for  the
Appropriations   Committee  and   compiled  that  list   of  108
"subversives"  which  later  supplied  the  material   for  McCar-
thy's sensational rehash  in  1950.   The text of the  original  may
be found in the  appendix  to the  Tydings  Committee  hearings
(State Dept. Employe Loyalty  Investigation,  Hearings  Before
a  Subcommittee  of  the  Senate  For.  Rel.  Com.  81st   Con. 2d
Sess.  Pt.  2.  pp.  1771-1813).
Those  who think  there  is  any  difference  between  FBI  and
Congressional  witch  hunt  standards  should  study  this  com-
pilation,  including the  suspect  in  whose raincoat  pocket  were
found  Russian  lessons,  the  official  of  whom it  was  "revealed
that... he held an  office  in  the  American Newspaper  Guild,"
the  man  who was  "a  member  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties
Union,"  the  subvert  who  "apparently  belonged  to  question-
able  groups  in  college.   His  parents  are  both  Russian  born"
and the man who signed a petition "requesting right of asylum
for  John  Strachey, well-known British  radical"!
Lee's material  was culled  from  the  State Department's own
files,  and  not  directly   from   the   FBI.    It   may  be  doubted
whether  Hoover  or  his  assistants  have  been  rash  enough  to
allow  a  Congressional  committee  direct  access  to  FBI  files.
But  when  so  many  of  the  committee  personnel  are   former
FBI  men,  especially  FBI  men  "on  loan,"  they  have  contacts
through  which  they  can  get  and  check  information.    They
also  bring  with  them  a  good  deal  of  knowledge.   There  are
many  discreet  ways  a  committee  can  be  "tipped  off" by  the
FBI  without  making  any  move which  would  provide  an  em-
barrassing  record.
Heart  party.   If  a  fresh  staff  is  needed impartially  to  investi-
gate  the  Army  charges  against  McCarthy,  Cohn  and  Carr,
some  other  agency  should  be  available  to  investigate  should
the  possibility  of  perjury  or  some  other  crime  arise  from  the
coming  inquiry.
Smearing  Other  Intelligence   Agencies
A  genuine and  comprehensive  investigation   would  look  into
whether  the  FBI  has  used  the  Congressional  committees  as
a  means  of  smearing  rival  intelligence   agencies,   especially
the  CIA and  those of the  armed  services.   Much of McCarthy's
work,  in  the  case  of the  Army's  Siberian  pamphlet  and  in  the
Fort  Monmouth  inquiry,  seems  to  have  derived  from  under-
cover  sniping and jealousy.   There  is  also  indication that  the
FBI  has used the committees to revenge  itself  when the  loyalty
boards  of  Federal   agencies  or  grand   juries  have  failed   to
take  its  informants  seriously.
How  thin  and  spurious  these  charges  may  be  was  demon-
strated  by  the  case  of  Mrs.  Annie  Lee  Moss.   This  elderly
colored  woman  was  named as  a  Communist by an  FBI  under-
cover  agent,  Mrs.  Mary  S.  Markward,  who  claims  to  have
wormed  her  way  into  a  leading  position  in  the  Communist
party  in  the  District  of  Columbia while working  for  the  FBI
from  1943 to  1951.   What  the  press  generally  has  overlooked,
however,  is  the  light  this  case  sheds  on  how  vindictive   the
FBI  can  be  and  on how sloppily  it  can  collect  its  allegations.
The  charges  against  Mrs.  Moss  made  by  Mrs.  Markward
were  examined on three occasions by loyalty  agencies  without
the  latter's  presence  as  a  witness  and  dismissed  on  each  oc-
casion,  the  last  being  in  1951  by  the  army's  loyalty  review
board.   This  seems  to  have  rankled  with  the  FBI.    The Mc-
Carthy  hearings  brought  out  that  in  the  Fall  of  1951   after
Mrs. Markward had been produced as a witness  in New York's
"second  echelon"  Smith  Act  prosecution,   Hoover  wrote   the
Army, offering to produce Mrs. Markward as a witness against
Mrs.  Moss.   The Army,  however,  did not  reopen  the  case,  but
recently  the  House Un-American  Activities  Committee  (under
the  ex-FBI  man  Velde)  held  executive  hearings  from  which
the  McCarthy  committee   snatched   it.
McCarthy's  Close  Liaison  With  Hoover
This  seems  to  be  particularly  true  in  the  case  of  the  Mc-
Carthy  committee.    McCarthy  seems  to  have  closer  liaison
with  Hoover than  any  of  McCarthy's  predecessors  in  witch-
hunting.    Last  year,   after   the   Democrats   insisted  on  the
ousting  of J.  B. Matthews  as  staff  director,  McCarthy  was in
the  tightest  spot  he had  yet  hit.   He let  it  be known that  he
was  conferring  with  Hoover  on the  choice of  a  successor  and
as  a  result  of these  conferences Francis  Patrick  Carr,  super-
visor  of  the  New  York  office  of  the  FBI   resigned  to  become
McCarthy's   staff   director.   .That  was  in  July.    In   August
there  followed  that  interview  with  the  San  Diego  Evening
News  (Aug.  22)  in  which there  were  accents  of  almost  hero-
worshipping  admiration  for  McCarthy.
"McCarthy  is  a  former  Marine,"  Hoover  said.  "He  was  an
amateur  boxer.   He's  Irish.   Combine  those,  and  you're  going
to  have  a  vigorous  individual,  who is  not  going  to  be pushed
around. ... I  never  knew  Senator  McCarthy until  he  came
to  the   Senate.    I've   come  to  know  him  well,  officially   and
personally.   I  view  him  as  a  friend  and  believe  he  so  views
me.  .  .  .  He is  earnest  and he is honest."   It  would  appear
that just  as  Hoover's  ties  were  with  the  Republicans  in their
fight against the  Democrats,  so his sympathies  today  are  with
the  McCarthyite  against  the  Elsenhower  wing  of  the  Repub-
Unconvincing  Even  to  A  GOP Prober
It  is clear  now that had the Army reopened  the case to hear
Mrs.  Markward  in  person,  the  results  would  not  have  war-
ranted  a  verdict  against  Mrs.  Moss.   A  Republican  member
of  the  House Committee  told  the  press  after  hearing  her  and
other  witnesses  in  executive  session  that  he  did  not  feel  the
evidence was strong  enough to warrant public sessions.  When
the  McCarthy committee  held  a  public  session,  the  case  fell
apart  under  questioning  by  the   Democratic  members,  Mc-
Clellan   (Ark.),   Symington   (Mo.)   and   Jackson    (Wash.).
Mrs.  Markward was  positive in  naming  Mrs.  Moss  as  a Com-
munist  until  McClellan  asked  her  whether  she could  identify
Mrs.  Moss.   This was the  answer  elicited: "I  don't  specifically
recall  that  I  dc  know  her  as  a  person,"  Mrs.  Markward  ad-
mitted.  "I  don't  recall  that  I  don't  know  her  as  a  person,
either.    I  just  have  no  specific  recollection  on that  point."
A  typical  piece  of  dirty  McCarthy  business  at  the  public
hearing  came when he  said that  while  Mrs.  Moss  would deny
membership, fiv,} other  members  of  her  alleged  cell  would be
called  to testify.    McCarthy said  he assumed they  would plead
the   Fifth   amendment  when  asked   about   Mrs.  Moss.    The
implication  was  damning.   Senator  Jackson  interjected,  "As
you  recall,  they  did  not  take  the  Fifth   amendment  in  the
committee  as  to  knowing  her."     At  this  McCarthy  said  in-
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F, Stone's  Weekly,  March  SS,1954
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  L  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeki  of  Auguit  at  Room  205,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E., Washington  ),  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $1
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere   in   the   Western  Hemisphere,   )<;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by   1st  class  mail,  $11  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  (20   by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   II   cents.   Tel.:  LI  4-7087.    Entered  as  Second  Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.   C
March  22,  1954Vol.  2,  No.  9
Round  the  (Unsteady)  Globe
A  FEW MONTHS AGO, it  was  obvious that  this  was  going
to  be the  dirtiest  election  year  in  American  history,  but  who
dreamed  that  McCarthy  would  so  soon  be  on  the  receiving
end,  that  Nixon  would  be  on  a  nationwide  hookup  rebuking
McCarthy  for  exaggerating  the  menace of  Communism, and
that the  Army and Joe would be locked in a combat that must
end  in  his  humiliation?
THE  BRICKER AMENDMENT  has  been  revived  and  nego-
tiations   for  bases   in  Canada  further   slowed  up  by  Dulles'
insistence  at  press  conference last  week that  the  NATO and
Kio  pacts  give  the  President  the  right  to  make  war  without
consulting  Congress.    Many  opposed  to  the  amendment  will
now  see it  in  a  new light  and  its  revival  in  Congress  is  ex-
pected.   The  Dulles statement  will  also  strengthen  Canadian
opposition  to  American  bases.   The  speech  made by  Canada's
Secretary  for  External  Affairs  at  the  National  Press  Club
last  Monday reflected  a  twofold  fear  in  Canada.    One  is  of
being propelled into war  without that  "collective consultation"
which  Pearson  said  should  precede  "collective  action."   The
second  is  of  excessive  rigidity  in  American  policy,   especially
on  China.   This  lay  behind  Pearson's  polite  reference  to  "a
fear  that  seems  to  freeze  us  into  diplomatic  immobility  or
fire  us  into  something   almost  like  panic."    The  President's
confused  eifort  at  press  conference to  set  matters right  must
be left for later unravelling.   In actuality the "instant retalia-
tion"  policy  won adoption  as  a kind  of  smoke-screen  for  mili-
tary   retrenchment.
IN  HIS TV TAX ADDRESS, the  President  looked like a  man
who was performing  a  chore  in which he had  no real interest,
before  climbing  back  into  bed  with  that  Western.    His  eyes
.were  focussed  on  the  manuscript  behind the  cameras  instead
of  on the audience, and  like a  small  boy being taught  elocution
he  often  puts  his  gestures  and  winning  smiles  in  the  wrong
place.   His  tax  program  will  haunt  the  G.O.P.  by  Pall.  The
chances  are  that  the  Democrats  will  win  enough  support  to
pass  higher  income  tax  exemptions,  thus  getting  the  credit,
while  the  Republicans  must  bear  the  onus  of  a  Presidential
veto,  which  will  be  upheld.   The  idea  of  helping  business  by
reducing  taxes  on  dividends  instead  of  raising  exemptions in
the  lower  brackets  is  pure  1920  Hooverism,  which  will  an-
tagonize  not  only the  lower  and middle third  but  the business
community which depends on retail  sales and  consumer goods.
IT  WILL TAKE  A  PEW WEEKS for  the  news to  get  past
the  clouds  of  self-generated   praise  but  the  American  public
will  soon  begin  to  realize  that  Mr.  Dulles'  hit-and-run  visit
to  Caracas  was  no  triumph  and  left  a  bad  taste  in  Latin
America.    The  obsession  with  Communism while  we turn  a
blind  eye to  military  dictatorship  in  the  hemisphere  is  sourly
observed  below the  Rio  Grande.   The  invocation  of  the  Mon-
roe  Doctrine  makes  poor  reading  for  Latin  American  intel-
lectuals  aware that  Monroe and  Canning were  acting  against
a  reactionary   Holy  Alliance  much  like  the  Vatican-blessed
counter   revolution   now  being  waged  under  U.  S.  auspices.
The  question  below  the  border   is  not  whether   Communists
may  have  disproportionate  power  in  Guatemala  but  whether
the  same  excuse  may  be  utilized  for  intervention   whenever
some  other  Latin  American  country  gets tired  of  slipping  on
banana  peels.
THE  EISENHOWER  ADMINISTRATION  is  under  great
pressure  from  Britain  and  Prance  to  ease  up  on  East-West
trade,  and  privately  the  White  House  is friendly  to  the  idea,
though deathly afraid  of the  China  Lobby crowd.   The French
have  even  been  led to  believe  that  we might  possibly  ease  up
the  embargo  on  China  if  Peiping  agreed  to  a  settlement  on
Indo-China.    Eisenhower  and  Stassen  are  for  trade  relaxa-
tion.   The  President's  reference  to  butter  surpluses  a  week
ago  recalls  the  argument   advanced  "off  the  record"  in  an-
other  department  when the butter  deal was still pending  some
weeks  ago.    Officials  told  reporters  that  if  we  sold  butter  to
Russia,  that  would  hurt  NATO.   Why?    Because  it  would
cut  into  Denmark's  sales  of butter  to  Russia—and  Denmark
is  part  of NATO.
FOR  ALL THE  CHANGE in  American  policy,  Eisenhower
has not entirely forgotten  the war.   "I  understand,"  the Paris
correspondent  of  the   London  Sunday   Times   reported   last
week, "that at  Bermuda  Sir Winston Churchill  proposed  direct
German   rearmament   should  France  reject   EDO,  but  that
President   Eisenhower  would  not  agree."    The  news  from
the  Reich  reflects  a  resurgence  of  the  old German  arrogance.
When  the   Verband   Deutscher  Soldaten   (Union  of  German
Soldiers)   met  recently  at  Bonn  to  demand  the  release  of  all
war  criminals,  there  were  cheers  when  the  President  of  the
Bundestag,  Dr.  Ehlers,  said  "The  German  soldier  is  entitled
to  the  same  respect  for  his  task  as  are  the  soldiers  of  other
countries."   This  puts  the  task  of  sending  people  to  the  gas
chambers on a par  with  rescuing  them.
OUR  ATTORNEYS GENERAL steadily  degenerate  and  it
was  left  for  Tom  Clark,  speaking  for  the  U.  S.   Supreme
Court,  to  rebuke  Attorney  General  Brownell last  Monday for
the  habit  of  announcing  decisions  in  advance  of  hearings.
The  appeal  was  from  a  Joseph  Accardi  who  was  listed  by
Brownell  publicly  as  an  "unsavory  character"  and  set  down
for   deportation   in  advance  of  the   administrative   hearing.
Accardi  said  this  made  a  fair  hearing  impossible.   A  major-
ity   agreed;   Jackson,   Reed,  Burton   and   Minton   dissented.
The   decision   casts  an   interesting  light   on  the   litigation
brought  by the  National  Lawyers  Guild  against  the  Attorney
General  for  similarly  publishing his  verdict  first—and  hold-
ing  his  trial  afterward.    So Clark  upholds  due  process,  and
Nixon  calls for a curb  on witch-hunting  . . . and wonders (of
a  sort)  never  cease.
A  COMMITEE  OF  10,000  to  raise  $1,000,000 to  help  victims
of  the witch hunt  was launched  at  last week-end's   Emergency
Civil  Liberties  Conference to  honor  Einstein's  75th  birthday
in  Princeton.   We  will  make  a  fuller  report  on  the   project
soon.   Dr.  Horace  B.  Davis  of  the  University  of  Kansas  City
—a  Jenner  committee  victim—will  speak  for  the  Committee
next  Thursday in  New York, March 25, at 110 W. 48th  Street,
and   Harvey   O'Connor   will   report   on   his   Western  trip.
The  Old Fashioned  Gas Meter-
Went  off  when  the  quarter  expired.    We  can't  be
quite  as  ruthless  as  the  gas  company.   A  minority  of
readers,  as  the  old German  song  goes,  legt  mir im  her-
zen.   Please  use  that  business  reply  envelope  we  sent
laggards  last  week  and  renew  without  further   wooing.
You'll  feel  so much  better  when  it's   over.
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'*  Weekly,  March  *-,  19U
Though  the  FBI's  Informer  Was  So  Certain
There Seem  to  Be Three  Annie  Lee Mosses in Washington,  D. C.
Slippery  Cohn:  "Never
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
dignantly, "Let us keep the  record  straight.   If  we are  going
to discuss the  executive testimony,  I  would prefer  not to."
Cohn  thereupon  claimed that  there  were  other  informants,
still  in  "confidential"  status  and  gave  the  impression that he
had  the  run  of  the  FBI  files.
Senator  Jackson.   I  take  it  that  information  is in her  FBI
file?
Mr.  Cohn.   Yes, sir, it  is.
Senator  Jackson.    The  Annie  Lee  Moss  FBI  file?
Mr.  Cohn.   That  is  correct.   There  is  only one  Annie  Lee
Moss  FBI  file.  We have  ascertained  that  and  have  been told
that  the  Annie  Lee  Moss  Mrs.  Markward  is  talking  about  is
the  Annie  Lee  Moss that  the  file  deals  with,  and  there  is  no
other.
McCarthy  Ducked  Out  Early
But  when Mrs.  Moss  appeared  before  the  committee  last
week  in  an  unforgettable  session,  she  said  there  were  three
Annie  Lee Mosses in  the  Washington  directory.   First  Sena-
tor  McClellan  and  then  Senator  Symington  went  out  of their
way  by  sharp  questioning  to  demonstrate  their   indignation
and  sympathy and  to  protest  Cohn's putting  into  the  record
what   some  unnamed  witness   was   supposed  to  have   said.
McCarthy  left  early,  knowing  (after   an  executive  session)
what  was  coming and  the  acting  chairman,  Mundt, made no
effort  to  stop  the  applause  that  interrupted   McClellan  and
Symington  on four  occasions  when  they  made  points  in Mrs.
Moss's  favor.
The  most  striking  collapse  of  evidence,  and  the  strongest
testimony   to  sloppy  FBI   investigating  methods,  concerned
Mrs.  Moss's alleged  close relations with  Robert  Hall, formerly
Washington  correspondent   of  the  Daily  Worker.    It  turned
out,  however, that this  connection was limited  to  one occasion
in  1943 when  Hall  is  supposed  to  have  sold a  Sunday Worker
to  Mrs.  Moss's  family.   Mrs.  Moss did  admit  knowing a  Rob-
ert  Hall,  but  insisted  that  he was a  Negro.    Hall  is  a  white
man  and  Cohn  by  his  evasiveness  indicated  an  awareness  of
Inquired  Into  His  Race"
this  when  Robert  Kennedy, the  minority  counsel,  asked  him
about  it.    Kennedy  asked  Cohn  whether  Hall  was  a  Negro
or  a  white  man.
Slippery  Footwork  by  Cohn
Mr.  Cohn.   I  never  inquired  into  his race.   I  am not  sure.
We  can  check  that,  though.
Mr.  Kennedy  (with  some surprise). I  thought  I just  spoke
to you about  it.
Mr. Cohn.   My assumption has  been that he is a white man,
but  we can  check that.
Never  Heard  of  Karl  Marx
This  correspondent  then  sent  a  note  up  from   the  press
table  to  Senator  Symington assuring him that  Hall  is a  white
man.   Hall,  when  reached by  telephone in  New  York  at  the
Worker  office  after  the  hearing,  said  he  did  not  get  to Wash-
ington  until  1946 and  was  not  in  the  capital  during  the  war.
So  (1)  he was not here at  the  time,  (2)  he is a white man  and
(3)   as  a  one-man  bureau  for   the  Daily   Worker  he  would
hardly  have  had  time  to  go  around  selling  the  Worker per-
sonally.    None  of  these  facts  are  hard  to  establish.    In  all
these  years  and  after  three  loyalty  hearings  based  on  FBI
information,  the  FBI  either  had  not  learned  them  or  had
suppressed  them  to  strengthen   the  case  against  Mrs.  Moss.
No  one  who  heard  her  could  doubt  her  honesty.    This  poor
utterly  non-political  woman  ("Wazzat?"  she  cried  when  Sy-
mington  asked her  if  she had  ever  read  Karl  Marx)  has  been
cruelly  persecuted  and  ruined  by the  FBI  and the  McCarthy
committee  in  their  feud  with  the  Army.
The  truth   is  catching  up  with  McCarthy.   Cohn  will  not
survive  the  Army's  damning  memorandum on  his   interven-
tions  on behalf  of  Schine.   But  McCarthy and  the  FBI  man,
Carr,  will  probably  outlast  this  inning.   And in  the  uproar,
all  too few will  notice the  key role  the  FBI  has  been  playing
in  the  witch  hunt  from  J.  Parnell  Thomas  to  Joe  McCarthy,
and  will continue to play  behind the  scenes  as one  adventurer
succeeds  another  in  the  center  of  the  stage.
We'll  Be Glad  to  Send  Free Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends
Thi»  /•   Expiration   Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    —____________________________
Street   _________........___._...._________
City.._....___.._...____.  Zone...........  State ...._....„_
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name  _________.__.______.______
Street    __________________________________
City__________.._   Zone ___  State_____
8-22-64
I.  F.  Stone'5 Weekly
Room  20$
301 £.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED