I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954feb01.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  Ike's  Bill  to  Make  Deportable  Aliens  of  Native  Radicals
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2,  NUMBER 2
FEBRUARY  1,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
An  Old  Police  State  Custom
What  The  Administration   Bill  Would  Do
The   day  President  Eisenhower   proposed  that   Communist
conspirators  be deprived of  citizenship,  a bill  (S. 2637)  to  that
effect  was introduced by  Senator Smith  (R.  Maine).   But  this
merely  said  that  any  citizen  "convicted  of  conspiring  to  ad-
vocate  overthrow  of  the  Government ... by  the  use of  force
and  violence,  shall  forfeit  all   rights   of  citizenship  and  shall
be  ineligible  to  hold  any   office  of  trust   or  profit  under   the
United   States."     The   drafting  was  clumsy.     Under   this  a
man   could  advocate  overthrow   without   losing  these  rights;
only  "conspiracy  to  advocate"  would  be penalized.  The  effect
was  unclear.    Many  Federal  and  State  statutes  provide   for
loss of  citizenship  rights on  conviction  for  a felony.    Was  this
all  the  Administration intended?
The   question   was  answered   11  days  later.     A   new   bill
(S.  2757)  was introduced  on  that  day  jointly  by  Mrs.  Smith
and  Senator  Ferguson   (R.  Mich.).    This  had  been  carefully
drafted,  presumably by  the  Department  of  Justice.    Its  terms
(see  text   on  page  two)   disclosed   that   the   Administration
intended   more  than  deprivation   of   those   citizenship   rights
(jury  service, voting,  election  to  office,  etc.)   which  ordinarily
follow   conviction   of   a  crime.    The  intention   disclosed  was
to  go  the  whole  way  and  denationalize  or  expatriate  native
born   radicals,  turning   them   into   deportable   aliens,  subject
to  exile  or  lifetime   police  surveilllance  under  the   terms  of
the  Immigration  and  Nationality   Act  of   19 J2,  the  so-called
McCarran-Walter  Act.
Though  the  Ferguson-Smith  bill  covers   both  native  and
naturalized  citizens,  it  is  aimed  primarily  at  the  native  born.
In  practice,  no  new  legislation  is needed for  aliens or  natural-
ized  citizens  convicted   under  the  Smith  Act  for   advocating
or   conspiring   to   advocate   revolutionary   doctrine.     Aliens
are  deportable  on  such  conviction,  and  naturalized   citizens
are  subject  to  denaturalization  and  then  to  deportation.    The
device  is  to  charge  that  their  conviction  shows  they  obtained
their   naturalization   fraudulently,   i.e.,   by   concealing    their
political   views  and  taking  their  oath  of   allegiance    falsely.
The  Ferguson-Smith   bill  strictly   speaking  is  needed  only  in
the  event  that  a  naturalized  citizen  could  prove  that  he  did
not   become  a  radical  until  after  he  was  naturalized.     The
prime  objective  of  the  bill  is  to  get  at  native  born  radicals,
and  to  turn  them  into  stateless   persons.
II
What  Statelessness  Would  Mean
This  Statelessness,  under  existing  law,  would  be  more  than
a  sinister  abstraction.     Section   242   (d)    of   the  McCarran-
Walter  Act  is a  skilfully  designed  instrument  for  the  lifetime
harassment  of   radicals  who  cannot  be  deported   because  no
other  country  will  take  them.    It  provides  that  if  a  deport-
able  alien  has  not   been  deported  within  six  months,  he  is
thereafter  subject  to  supervision as long  as he  lives  or  remains
in  this country.    The  Attorney  General  is empowered  to  make
such  regulations   as  he  sees  fit  for   this  supervision.    But,  as
if  to  guard  against  the  chance appearance of  a liberal  Attorney
General,  the  law  says  "such  regulations shall  include"  certain
provisions.
The  stateless  alien  must  "appear  from  time  to  time"  before
an  immigration  officer.     He  must  "submit,  if   necessary,  to
medical  and  psychiatric  examination"—this  can  be  a  subtle
kind   of   torture.     He   must   "give  information  under   oath
as  to  his  nationality,  circumstances,  habits,  associations  and
activities,  and  such  other  information,  whether  or  not  related
to  the  foregoing,  as  the  Attorney  General  may  deem  fit  and
proper,"  i.e.  he  must  turn  informer,  and  inform  under  oath,
subject  to  the penalty of perjury.   He  must  "conform  to  such
reasonable  written   restrictions  on   his  conduct   or   activities
as  are  prescribed  by  the  Attorney  General in  his  case." Failure
to  obey  these  restrictions,  to  give  information,  to  submit  to
examination   or   to   obey   any   other  regulation  is  declared  a
felony,  punishable  by  a  fine  of  not   more  than   $1,000,  im-
' prisonment  for  not  more  than  one year,  or  both.
The  kind  of  regulations  the  Attorney  General  may  impose
is  described  in  Justice  Douglas's  indignant  opinion  in  Yanish
v.   Barber   (73   S.  Ct.    110 J)   handed  down   last   May   16.
An  alien  employe  of  the  People's  World   in  California,  after
3 5  years  in  this  country,  was  ordered  deported  to  Russia  as  a
Communist.    Since  Russia  will  not   take  deportees,   he  faced
perpetual  imprisonment  unless  released  on  bond.    Under   the
section   of   the   McCarran-Walter   Act   just   described,   the
Attorney  General  ruled  that  he  could  go  free  on  bond  only
under   certain   conditions.    Yanish   refused   to   accept    those
conditions,  filed  a  petition  for  habeas  corpus  but  was  refused
bail,   effectively   preventing   him   from   pursuing   his  appeal.
Justice  Douglas  granted  bail.
Among  the  restrictions  the  Attorney  General  seeks  to  im-
pose  in  this  case  is  that  the  alien  "shall  refrain  from  associ-
ating  with  any  person,  knowing  or  having  reasonable ground
to  believe that  such  person  is  a  member  of  or  affiliated  with"
the   Communist   party   and   shall   disassociate  himself    from
"support  or  other  activity ...  in  furtherance  of  the  doc-
trines  and  policies  of  the  Communist  party"  or  any   affiliate.
"Taken   literally,"   Mr.   Justice   Douglas    said,   this    would
"prevent  him  from  living  with  his Communist  wife  or  going
to  a  movie  with  his  Communist   son."     It   would   also,  Mr.
Justice  Douglas  added  "require  applicant  to  give  up  his  job
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   February   1, 1954
One  of  Hitler's  First  Measures  Was  to  Expatriate  Opponents
with  the   People's   World—a   job  which   so  far   as  the  record
shows  is  not   itself  an  illegal  undertaking   either   under   state
or  under  federal  law."     Should  the  Ferguson-Smith  bill  pass,
such  restrictions  could  be  imposed  on  native  born  as  well  as
alien  radicals.
Ill
The  Outlook  in  Congress
Unfortunately  the  chances  of  passage  are  good  unless  suffi-
cient   public   opposition    can   be   aroused.     The   tumultuous
applause  which  greeted  the  proposal  when  made  by  the  Presi-
dent   in   his  annual  message  shows   the   state   of   mind   that
grips   the   Congress.     If   the   bill   gets   out   of   committee,
passage  is  certain.    The  Congresssman  who  votes  against   it
will  have  to   explain  why  he  was  against   something    which
was   anti-Communist,     a   difficult    task   in   this   atmosphere.
The  mood  is much  the  same  as that  of  1940  when  the  Smith
Act   was  passed.    "The   mood   of  this  House,"   Congressman
T.  F.  Ford   (D.  Cal.)   remarked  at  that  time,  "is  such  that
if  you  brought   in, the  Ten  Commandments   today  and  asked
for  their  repeal and  attached  to  that  request  an  alien  bill,  you
could  get  it."     Substitute  Communist  for  alien  and  the  de-
scription  is  again  applicable.
The  chances  of  bor'ing  up  the   legislation   in  committee
are  almost  nil.    The  measure  has  full  Administration  support.
The  committee',  which  will  have  jurisdiction in  either   House
are  hardly  strongholds  of   liberalism.    The   chairman  of   the
Immigration  subcommittee of  the  House  Judiciary  Committee
is  Graham   (R.  Pa.),  no  xcnophile  or  libertarian.   The  other
members  are  Walter  (D.  Pa.),  Thompson   (R.  Mich.),  Hyde
(R.  Md.),  and  Celler  (D.  N.Y.).
The   Immigration   subcommittee   of   the   Senate   Judiciary
Committee  is headed  by  Watkins  (R.  Utah).   The  other  Re-
publican   members  are  Hendrickson   (N.J.),  Dirksen   (111.),
Welker   (Idaho),  and   Butler   (Md.).     The   Democrats   are
McCarran  (Nev.),   Kilgore  (W.  Va.),  Eastland   (Miss.),  and
Kefauver   (Tenn.).  This   is  not   a   heartening   array.
Except   for   the   ever   dependable  Celler,   the   few   liberal
Democrats   on   both   committees   have   kept   silent.    Kilgore's
office    said   he   was  waiting   for   the   hearings   and   Kefauver
could  not  be  reached.    It  is  a  measure  of  how  bad  the  bill  is
and   how  low  is  the  state  of  liberalism  that  the   only   vocal
How  Der  Fuehrer  Did  It
"The  law  of  Germany  adopted  July  14,  1933, is  espe-
cially  noteworthy  in  this  connection.   It  provides  that
any naturalization which took place  between  Nov. 9,1918,
and  Jan.  30,  1933, may  be  cancelled  if  it  is  not  regarded
as  desirable.  A  decree  of  July  26,  1933, lists  as  tests  of
.  desirability national  principles,  racial,  political,  and  cul-
tural  viewpoints,  and  provides  that  they  are   especially
applicable  to  Eastern  Jews,  unless   they  fought  at  the
front   in  the   war  or  have  rendered  special   service  to
German  interests.   This  decree  adds  as  another  group
who  may  not  be  regarded  as  desirable  those  who  have
been  guilty  of  severe  offenses  or  a  crime  or  who  have
acted  in  any  way  prejudicial  to  the  welfare  of  the  State
and  people."
—29  Am.  Journal International  Law  263
opposition  in  Congress   (again  except  for  Celler)   has  come—
mirabile dictu—from  McCarran  and Walter,  the  "co-authors"
of  the  so-called  McCarran-Walter  Immigration  and  National-
ity  Act.     McCarran  grumbled  that   the  President's   proposal
was  "half-baked"   and  Walter  declared  that  it  would  take  a
constitutional  amendment  to  deprive  a  native  born  American
of  his  citizenship.   In  this  he  agreed  fully  with  Celler's  view
that  the  bill  was  "ill-considered"  and   unconstitutional.
IV
Turning  Back  The  Clock
Like   so  much   of   the   legislation' being   spawned  in   this
period,  as  a  free  America  slips  further  down  the  road  toward
a  police  state,  the  Ferguson-Smith   bill   (which  ought   better
to  be  called  the  Eisenhower-Brownell  bill)  is a  sharp  departure
from   American  legal  and  philosophical   tradition.     For   more
than  a  century  and  a  half,  expatriation  was  regarded  by   the
American  republic  as  a  right,  not   as  a  means  of  punishment.
In  feudal  society,  man  was  either  a  serf  or  a  vassal;  his  status
was  fixed  by  custom,  necessity  and  law.    Under  monarchy,  he
was  a  "subject."     It   was  only   with   the  American   and  the
French  Revolutions  that  he  became  a  "citizen"  and  the  ques-
tion  of  citizenship  could  arise.
A  "subject"  could   not   free  himself   from   his   obligations
to  a  monarch  by  removing  to  another  country.    It  was  on
this  issue  that  the  American  Republic   found  itself   embroiled
Text  of  the  Administration  Bill
Introduced   by  Senators   Ferguson   (R.   Mich.)  and  Smith
(R.  Me.):  "To  amend  the  Immigration and  Nationality  Act
to  provide  for  the  loss  of  nationality  of  persons  convicted  of
certain  crimes.
"Be  it   enacted   by  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representa-
tives  of  the  United  States of  America  in  Congress   assembled,
That  this  Act  may  be  cited  as  the  'Expatriation  Act of  1954'.
Sec.  2,  Paragraph  (9)   of  subsection   (a)   of  section  349 of
the  Immigration and Nationality  Act  (66 Stat.  163,268;  U.S.C,
title  8, sec.  1481 (a)  (9))  is  amended  to  read  as  follows:
"(9)  committing  any  act  of  treason  against,  attempting  by
force   to   overthrow,  or  bearing   arms  against,  the   United
States,  violating  or  conspiring  to  violate  the  provisions   of
title  18, U.S.C.,  sees.  2383  or  2385,  or  engaging  in  a  conspiracy
in violation of  title  18, U.S.C,  sec.  2384, if  and when he  is  con-
victed  thereof  by  a  courtmartial or  by  a  court  of   competent
jurisdiction;  or".
"Sec.   3.  Subsection   (a)   of  section  241 of  the  Immigration
and  Nationality  Act  (U.S.C.,  title  8, sec.   1251  (a)  is  amended
(1)  by  striking  out  the  period  at  the  end  of  paragraph   (18)
and  inserting  ";or", and  (2) by inserting after  paragraph  (18)
a  new  paragraph  reading  as   follows:
"(19)  became  an  alien  by  reason  of  loss  of  United  States
nationality  under  paragraph  (9)  of  subsection  (a)  of  section
349  of  this  Act,  and  is  found  by  the  Attorney  General  to  be
an  undesirable  resident  of  the  United  States."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  1,  1954
...Even  McCarran  and  Walter  Are  Appalled  By  Ike's  Bill
from   the  very  first  moment  of  its  existence  with  European
monarchs.     One   of   the   complaints   in   the   Declaration  of
Independence  was that  George III  had obstructed  the naturali-
zation  laws  in  the  Colonies.    The  War  of   1812  was  fought
largely  over  the   issue  of  whether  Great  Britain  could  seize
naturalized   Americans  on   the   high   seas   and   impress  them
into  her  service  on  the  ground  that  a  Briton  could  not  law-
fully   give  up  his  status  as  a  subject.     (It   was  not  indeed
until  1870 that  British  law recognized  the right of  the  subject
voluntarily   to   renounce  his  allegiance  and   choose  another
country.)
As  a  nation   formed  of  emigrants  from   the   Old  World,
America  insisted  that  expatriation  was  a natural  right.  Jeffer-
son   (in   this—as  in  much  else—echoing  Locke)   drafted  a
famous  provision  of  the  Virginia  Code  in   1779  saying,  ex-
patriation  was  a  "natural   right   which  all  men  have  of   re-
linquishing  the  country  in  which  birth  or  other  accident may
have thrown  them."    (10 Hening, Statutes 129).   Eighteenth
Century  radicals harked  back  to  the  best  days  of  the  Roman
Law.   Cicero  in  a  famous  defense  of  a  naturalized  Spaniard
accused   of   falsely   acquiring  Roman  citizenship  successfully
argued  the  principle that  no man  could  be deprived  of  citizen-
ship against his will  and  that  every  man  had  a  right  freely  to
choose  his  citizenship,  calling  it  one  of  the  fundamentals of
Roman   liberty   (see  box  on  this  page).   Both  Madison  and
Monroe  denounced  the  English  doctrine  of  perpetual  allegi-
ance  in  the  controversies  which  led  to  the  war  of   1812.
Much  of  America's  diplomatic  correspondence  and  public
agitation  in  the  field  of  foreign  policy  during  the  Nineteenth
Century  revolved  around  our  insistence that  men  had  a  right
freely  to  choose  their  own  country.    "Popular  resentment of
British  prosecutions  of  naturalized American  citizens  partici-
pating  in  the  Fenian  rebellion  in  Ireland  resulted  in  Congress-
ional  enactment  of  the  statute  of   1868,  which  declared  ex-
patriation  to  be an  inherent  right."  (66  Harvard  Law Review
731).     There   were  acrimonious   disputes  with   the   Czarist
government  because  it  seized  naturalized  Americans  of  Rus-
sian  origin  on  their  return  to  Russia  and  refused  to  recognize
their  American  passport  and  nationality.
From   Privilege   to   Punishment
Thus  for  more  than  a  century   and  a  half  expatriation  in
this  country  was  regarded  as a natural  right  of  the  individual,
2,000  Years  As  a  Human  Right
"Article  11.(2)  Everyone  has  the  right  to  leave  any
country,  including his  own, and  return  to  his  country.
"Article  13. Everyone  has  the  right  to  a  nationality.
No  one  shall  be  arbitrarily   deprived  of  his   nationality
or  denied  the  right  to  change  his  nationality."
—United  Nations,  Declaration of  Human  Rights
"That  no  one  should  be  forced  to  change  his  citizen-
ship  against  his  will,  or  remain  in  it  against  his  will.
These  are  the  firmest  foundations  of  our  liberties."
—Cicero, In  Defense   of  L.  Cornelius  Balbus, 56 B.C.
a  privilege.    It  was  not  until  1940  that  it  was  written  into
the  law  as a punishment.   This  occurred  in  the  same  Congress
which   passed   the   Smith   Act,   our   first   peacetime   sedition
statute  since  the  Alien  and  Sedition  laws.    The  immigration
and  nationality  laws  were  being  codified;  an  amendment  on
the  Senate  side  added  a  novel  provision.    It   provided    [Sec.
349  (a)  (9)]  for  deprivation  of  citizenship whether  acquired
by  birth  or naturalization for  "committing  any  act  of  treason
against, or  attempting  by  force  to  overthrow, or  bearing arms
against  the  United  States,  if  and  when  he  is convicted  thereof
by  a  court  martial  or  by  a  court  of  competent   jurisdiction."
This  was carried  over  in  the  McCarran-Walter  Act.
Until  that   time,  a  native  born   citizen  was  held  to  have
lost  his  nationality  only  when  he  renounced  his   citizenship
and  swore  allegiance to  another  country,  or  took  some step—
enlisting  in  its  armed  forces, voting  in  its  elections,  or  serving
as  one  of  its  officials   are  examples—which  could  be  held   to
imply  renunciation of  citizenship.    Citizenship  was  something
the  native  born  could  only  renounce;  it  could  not  be  taken
away  from  them.    This  new  provision  was  sometimes  recon-
ciled  with  the  earlier  principle  by  asserting that  to  commit  an
act   of   treason,  to  attempt  overthrow   by  force  or   to   bear
arms  against  the  United  States  was  to  take  a  step  implying
renunciation  of  citizenship.*
Whatever  the  constitutionality  of  this  provision,  it   differs'
sharply   from   that    proposed   in   the   Ferguson-Smith   bill.
Treason—thanks  to  the  protection   which  the   Constitution
provides  for  individuals accused of  that  crime—requires  proof
*  Congressman  Walter  told  the  writer,  however,  that  he  did  not  make
this  distinction.  He  interprets  even  this  provision  as  merely  taking  away
rights  of   citizenship,  as  on  conviction  for   felony,  and  not   as  turning   a
native-born  citizen  into  a  deportable  alien.
What  The  Constitution  and  the  Supreme  Court  Say
"All  persons  born  or  naturalized  in  the  United  States, and
subject  to  the  jurisdiction  thereof,  are  citizens  of the  United
States  and  of  the  State  wherein  they  reside."
—Amendment  XIV,  US.  Constitution
"The  Fourteenth   Amendment,  while  it  leaves  the  power
where  it  was  before,  in  Congress  to  regulate   naturalization,
has  conferred  no  authority  upon  Congress   to  restrict  the
effect   of  birth,  declared  by  the  Constitution   to  constitute
a  sufficient  and complete right  to  citizenship."
v.  Wong  Kirn  Ark,  1S9 V£.  649  (189S)
i ;
"... while some of its  [i.e.  U.S.  v. Wong Kim  Ark's]  teach-
ings  seem  to  have  been  occasionally  forgotten   or  whittled
down  in recent  years,  it has never  been  overruled  . . . Con-
gress  has  been given control  over  only  one  means  of  creating
U.S.  citizenship,  namely by naturalization.   It  has  the  power
to  create  and  to  condition  that  grant  of  citizenship,  but  it
is wholly devoid of any power to destroy citizenship  by birth."
,   —Okimura  v.  Acheson,  99  F.  Supp.  587  (1951)
Vacated  on  other  grounds  341  US.   899  (1952)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'g   Weekly,  February  1,  1954
Logical  Next  Step—An  American  Siberia  .  .  . ?
of  overt  act   and  two  witnesses  to  each  act.  Bearing  arms
against   the   United   States  is  a  crime   too   clear   for   abuse.
Attempting  by  force  to  overthrow  the  government  is  quite
different   from  the  "advocacy"  or  "conspiracy   to   advocate"
which  is  made  criminal  by  the  Smith  Act.   The  former  re-
quires  overt   act   or   preparations   for   action;   the  latter,  as
current   prosecutions   show,   may  rest   on  extremely   tenuous
grounds.  No  Communist  has yet  been prosecuted  for  advocacy.
"Conspiracy  to  advocate"  is  a  cover  for  absence  of  proof  of
advocacy;  convictions  are  obtained  not  on  the  basis  of  what
the  defendants  advocated  but  by  linking   them  with   certain
books  by  Marx,  Lenin  and  Stalin.
For  conviction  under  the  conspiracy  provision  of  the  Smith
Act,  it  is not  necessary ever  to  have  "advocated."   The  only
proof   required  is  that  one  "conspired"  to  advocate  at  some
future   time.    It   is  not   necessary  to   be  a  member   of   the
Communist   party  to  be  linked  with   the  "conspiracy",  nor
even   to  agree  with   all  its  aims.    The  murky   law  of con-
spiracy  is  made  to  order  for  repressive  prosecutions;   anyone
who  furthers  a  conspiracy,  even  by   acts  otherwise  lawful,
may  be held  liable  as a co-conspirator.    To  provide  that native
born  Americans  may  be  declared  "stateless"  for   so  vague  a
political  oflfense  would  be  merely  to  take  over  into  American
law   the  common  practice  of   police  States,  whether  Fascist
or  Communist.   Hitler's  Reich,  and  Mussolini's  Italy,  Franco
Spain  and  Peron's  Argentina,  provide  grim  precedents.    The
Soviet  code  makes deprivation  of  citizenship one of  the  punish-
ments   for   a  long  list  of   political   crimes  and   for   political
opposition.     Eisenhower   and   Brownell  are  adopting   an  old
police  state  custom.
VI
What  Will  The  Courts  Do?
As  politics,  the  Ferguson-Smith  bill  represents  the  betrayal
of   American   democracy   by   the   respectables;   Eisenhower,
Brownell   and  these  two   Senators   seek   to  ensure  their   own
political  future  by  outdoing  McCarthy.    In  this  they  recall
the  precursors  of  Fascism  in  Austria,  who  sought   to   fight
the  Nazi  tide  by  dabbling in  anti-Semitism on  their own.  As
law,  it  begins  a  process  which,  once  permitted,  has  no  logical
limit  short of  the  severest limitations  on  dissent.   One example
will    suffice.      The   McCarran-Walter   bill   provides  for    the
deportation  of  any  alien  who  commits  contempt  of  a Con-
gressional  investigating  committee;  why  should  this  not  some
day  be  extended  to  denaturalization  and  expatriation?
What  will  the  courts  do?   Historically  and  currently   they
have  proven  poor  guardians  of  basic liberties.   The  Fourteenth
amendment  does  make  all  native  born  persons  citizens.     The
Supreme  Court  in  a  famous  decision  in  1898   did  hold (see
box  on  page  three)   that   this  means  Congress  has  no   right
to  deprive  a  native  born  American  of  his  nationality.
Among  some lawyers, on  the  basis of  rather  vague dicta,  the
Court  is  said  to  have receded  from  this  view  in  Mackenzie  v.
Hare  (239 U.S. 299) but   as  Judge  Magruder  in  the  First
Circuit  pointed  out  (161  F2d  860) even  in  that  decision  the
Supreme  Court   said  "It   may  be  conceded  that  a  change  of
citizenship   cannot   be  arbitrarily   imposed,   that   is,  imposed
without  the  concurrence  of  the  citizen."    A  Federal  District
Judge   in   Hawaii   recently   held  unconstitutional   (see same
box,  page 3)  those  provisions  of  the  1940 Act  which  deprive
a  native born  American of  his  citizenship without  clear  proof
of   voluntary  renunciation  but   this   was  remanded   by   the
Supreme  Court  and  the  point  is  still  open.
The   indivisibility  of   liberty   is  being   graphically   demon-
strated   to  our  generation.    For  a  half   century  the  law, in
dealing  with  the  alien  and  the  naturalized  citizen,  has  been
growing   increasingly  arbitrary   and   repressive;   the   exile  of
foreign   born  radicals  has  become  a  familiar  feature   of   the
legal  landscape.    Ugly   precedents  now  threaten   the   native
born  as  well;  this  new  Fergusori-Smith  bill  makes  the   fight
against   the  Walter-McCarran  Act   urgent   for  the  native  as
well  as  the  foreign  born.    The  move  to  deprive  "Communist
conspirators"  of  citizenship comes at  a time  when  it  takes very
little  in  the  way  of  non-conformity  to  provoke  suspicion  and
invite  attack  as  Communistic.   The  fight  against  this  bill  is
crucial  in  the  struggle  to  keep  our  America  free.
If  You  Have  Not  Yet  Subcribed  or Renewed, Please  Help  By Doing  So  Now
This  Is  Expiration  Time
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly, 301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Street  _
City
State
Enter  this  gift  sab   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name     ———————————————————————
Street    ____________________________
City ____________   Zone ___  State __ .__
2-1-64
I.  F. Stone'* Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington \ D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED