I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954sep13.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive:  The  Full  Official  Text  of  the  New Anti-Communist   Law;  Pages 2 and 3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 32                SEPTEMBER   13,  1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
War With  China  Could  Be Just Around  The  Corner
The  striking  aspect  of  the  situation  shaping  up  in  the  Far
East  is  the  numbness—the  fatalistic  indifference—of    Amer-
ican   public  opinion.   Though   Americans  are  shot   down  by
Russian   flyers   and   killed  by   Chinese  Communist   bombard-
ment,  no  voices  are  raised  for  war,  no  voices  are  raised   for
peace.   No  one  asks  why  American  planes  should  be patrolling
the  Soviet   coast   (they  don't  patrol  ours),  no  one  demands
that  American  personnel be withdrawn  from  the  two  Quemoy
islands  in  Amoy  harbor,  no  one  protests  the  needless  sacrifice
of  American  lives.  On  the  other  hand,  jingoism seems  as dead
as  pacifism.   Even  Knowland  goes  no  further  than  to  demand
that  we  break  off diplomatic  relations with  the  Soviet  Union.
A  generation  ago  there  would  have  been  a  different   response.
We  may  not  have  grown  wiser  as  a  nation,  but   we  are  cer-
tainly  more  apathetic.
Less  striking  but  no  less  important  is  the  contrast   between
the  basic  military  orders  in  the  Far  East  and  the   policy  in
regard  to  Formosa.   On  August   18  the  Defense  Department
announced  that  four  of  the  six  divisions  in  Korea  would  be
withdrawn.   On  August  25  Naval  Operations  Chief,  Admiral
Carney,  revealed  that  the  Pacific  Fleet  had  been  reduced  since
the  end  of   the  Indo-Chinese   fighting,   that   a  battleship  and
four   destroyers  had  already  returned   to  Atlantic  ports  and
that  more  withdrawals might  be  expected.   These  basic orders
would  seem  to  reflect  a  policy  of  disengagement.  But  it  does
not   make  sense  to  withdraw   troops   and  ships  while  at   the
same  time  giving  Chiang  more  arms,  encouragment  and  pro-
tection   in  attacks  upon   the   Chinese  mainland.   The   with-
drawal  orders  look  toward  peace,  the  Formosan  policy  toward
war.   Chiang  invites  attack,   and  we  are  pledged  to  protect
him.
This  Is  the  Navy's  Show
The  situation  is  made  the   more   dangerous   by   the  sharp
difference  in  temper  between  top  level  civilian  Administration
circles   and   those   directly   in   charge   of   operations   around
Formosa.   This  is a Navy  operation  and  whereas  the  Army  has
been  conservative  and  cautious,  the  Navy  has  been   bellicose.
The  Naval  chief,  Admiral  Carney;  like  Admiral  Radford,  the
chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  has  been  for  "standing
up"  to  Red  China  even  at  the  risk  of  a  new  world  war.   Ad-
miral  Stump,  who  serves  under  them  as  Commander-in-Chief,
Pacific,  and  in  that  post  commands  all  ground  and  air  as  well
as  naval  forces  in  the  area,  gave  out   those  recent  "be  quick
on  the  trigger"  orders.   The  interview   Admiral  Stump  gave
U.S.  News  and  World  Report  for  August  27,  was  provocative
and   showed   that   he  shared  the   China   Lobby   delusion  that
"an  effective  job  can  be  done  by  Asiatic  ground  forces  alone,
supported   by  American  naval  and  air  efforts."   This  bubble
would  burst  as quickly  in  a  war  with  China  as it  did  after  the
first  48  hours  in  Korea.   The  point  is  that  top  level  caution
may  prove  ineffective  when  the  men  directly  in  charge  show
a  small  boy  readiness for  making  big  boom  boom.   Wars  have
started  this  way  before.
Frightened  Out of  Its  Facts
The   hazards  are  increased   by   the   nervous    incompetence
of   the  State  Department,   which  no  longer   dares  to  notice
facts   which  run   counter   to  policy  lest   this  be  equated   as
disloyalty.   This  played  its  part  in  the  collapse  of  E.D.C.—
Dulles  is reported  to  have been  foolish enough  to  tell  Mendes-
France  to  his face  that  there  was  a  majority  in  the  Assembly
for  that  ill-fated  military contraption.. The  Department   sim-
ilarly  was  so  anxious  to  demonstrate   a  proper   fervor   in   the
destruction  of  that  naval  bomber  off  the  Siberian  coast  that
it  got  caught  with  its  facts  awry.   The  Department   was  so
afraid  of  being shot  down  by  Knowland that  without   checking
it  sent off two  hot  and hasty  notes.  It  said flatly in  the  second,
"at   no  time  did  the  U.S.   Navy   aircraft  open  fire  on   the
Soviet  aircraft"  and  then  two  days later  admitted  (NY   Times
Sept.  7,  p.  8)  that  the  U.S.  plane  had  fired  about  100  rounds
as  the  Soviet  planes  were  making  their  second  pass.  The   first
note  said  the  attack  took  place  "100  miles  east of  Vladivostok
and   44  miles  from   the  Siberian  coast."   The   day  after   the
note  was  published  "naval  officials   acknowledged,  with  some
embarrassment,  that  there is no  such  position."  (Walter  Kerr,
NY   Herald  Tribune   dispatch  in  Wash.  Post,  Sept.  7).  This
does  not  mean  that  the  Russians  may  not  be  to  blame.   On
the  other  hand, it  does show  that  the  facts  are far  from  being
certain.
Anything  may  happen  when   the  State  Department   is  so
nervously  quick  on  the  notepaper   and  naval  pilots  have  been
instructed  to  be  quick  on  the  trigger.  (Admiral  Stump  said
in  the  U.S.  News  interview  they  did  not  have  to  wait  to  be
attacked  before   firing).   Serious  trouble  with   Russia  is   un-
likely;  our  military  hotheads  are  spoiling  for  war  with  China,
not  Russia,  and  betting  that  the  Russians  will  not  join  in  if
we  attack   China.   This  is  the   silliest  estimate   of   all,   since
this  would  convert   it  into  a  larger  Korea  the  Russians  could
supply  from   the  sidelines  while  we  bog  down  in  the  bloody
quicksand   of  an  endless  Chinese   war.    Anyway   naval  pilots
can  quietly  be  ordered  to  keep  away  from  the  Siberian  coast
without   enraging   any  special  lobby.   The   situation   at   the
Quemoys  unfortunately    is quite  different.
Imagine  This  on Staten  Island  . . .
This  is  not  a  case  of  obeying  3  or  12-mile  limits  on  distant
patrols.  (Just  why  we  have  to  patrol  the  Siberian   coasts  is
not  clear;  if  the  Russians  were  patrolling  ours,  though   well
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
I    2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I..F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  IS,  1954
Full  Official  Text  of The New  "Anti  Communist" Law  . . .
EDITOR'S NOTE: Because no other publication, not  even
the  New  York  Times, has made available the  full     official
lext   (Public  Law  637—83d  Congress;  Chapter   *36—
2d  Session, 8)706)   of  the  new  anti-Communist  control
law,   because  of   its   historic   importance,   and  because
there  has been so much  confusion  about  its  actual  terms
not  least  among  those  -who  voted  it  in  Congress, we are
publishing  it  this  week  as a service  to  our  readers.   Extra
copies  are available at  the  regular price.   To  make  room
for   this  text  we  had  regretfully   to  hold  up  other  ma-
terial, including  an article  on the Lamont, Unger,  Shado-
witz  contempt  action  already  in  print.  This  will   appear
next  week.—I.F.S.
AN  ACT
To  outlaw  the   Communist   Party,  to  prohibit   members  of
Communist   organizations    from   serving  in   certain
representative  capacities,  and  for  other  purposes.
Be  it  enacted  by  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  of  the   United
States  of   America  in  Congress  assembled,  That  this  Act   may  be  cited  as
the  "Communist  Control  Act  of  1954".
Findings  of  Fact
SEC.   2.  The   Congress   hereby  finds  and  declares  that   the   Communist
Party  of  the  United   States,  although   purportedly   a  political  party,  is  in
fact   an  instrumentality   of  a  conspiracy   to  overthrow  the  Government  of
the   United   States.    It   constitutes   an  authoritarian   dictatorship   within  a
republic,  demanding  for  itself  the  rights  and  privileges  accorded  to  political
parties,  but  denying  to  all  others  the  liberties  guaranteed  by  the  Constitu-
tion.   Unlike   political   parties,  which   evolve  their   policies   and   programs
through  public  means,  by  the  reconciliation  »f  a  wide  variety  of  individual
views,  and  submit  those  policies  and  programs  to  the  electorate   at  large
for   approval  or  disapproval,  the  policies  and  programs  of  the  Communist
Party   are  secretly   prescribed   for   it   by  the  foreign  leaders  of  the   world
Communist  movement.   Its  members  have  no  part  in  determining  its  goals,
and  are not  permitted  to  voice  dissent  to  party  objectives.  Unlike  members
of   political   parties,  members  of  the   Communist   Party   are  recruited   for
indoctrination   with   respect   to  its   objectives   and  methods,   and   are  or-
ganized,   instructed,    and   disciplined   to   carry   into   action   slavishly   the
assignments   given   them   by  their   hiearchical   chieftains.    Unlike   political
parties,  the  Communist  Party   acknowledges  no  constitutional   or  statutory
limitations  upon  its  conduct  or  upon  that  of  its  members.   The  Communist
Party  is  relatively  small  numerically,  and  gives  scant  indication  of  capacity
ever  to  attain  its  ends  by  lawful  political  means.   The  peril  inherent  in  its
operation   arises  not  from  its  numbers,  but  from  its  failure  to  acknowledge
any  limitation  as  to  the  nature  of  its  activities,  and  its  dedication  to   the
proposition  that  the  present  constitutional  Government  of  the  United   States
ultimately   must   be  brought   to   ruin   by   any  available   means,   including
resort  to  force  and  violence.  Holding  that  doctrine,  its  role  as  the  agency
of  a  hostile  foreign  power  renders  its  existence  a  clear  pr«ent  and  continu-
ing  danger  to  the  security  of  the  United  States.   It  is  the  means  whereby
individuals  are  seduced  into  the  service of  the  world  Communist  movement,
trained  to  do  its  bidding,  and  directed  and  controlled   in  the  conspiratorial
performance   of   their   revolutionary  services.    Therefore,   the   Communist
Party  should  be  outlawed.
Proscribed     Organizations
SEC.   3.  Th«  Communist  Party   of   the  United  States,  or   any   successors
of  such  party  regardless of  the  assumed  name,  whose  object  or  purpose  is
to  overthrow  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  or  the  government  of
any   political   subdivision  therein   by   force   and  violence,  are  not   entitled
to  any  of  the  rights,  privileges,  and  immunities  attendant  upon  legal  bodies
created  under   the  jurisdiction   of   the  laws  of   the  United   States  or  any
political   subdivision   thereof;   and  whatever   rights,   privileges,   and   immu-
nities  which  have  heretofore  been  granted  to  said  party  or  any  subsidiary
organization  by  reason  of  the  laws  of  the  United  States  or  any   political
subdivision  thereof,  are hereby  terminated:  Provided,  however, That  nothing
in  this  section  shall  be  construed  as  amending  the  Internal  Security  Act  of
1950,   as  amended.
SEC.  4.  Whoever  knowingly  and  willfully  becomes or  remains  a  member
of   (1)   the  Communist   Party,  or   (2)   any  other  organization   having  for
one  of  its  purposes  or  objectives  the  establishment,  control,  conduct,   seiz-
ure,  or  overthrow  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  or  the   gov-
ernment   of  any  State  or  political  subdivision  thereof,  by  the  use  of  force
or  violence,  with  knowledge  of  the  purpose  or  objective  of  such  organiza-
tion   shall  be  subject  to   all  the  provisions   and  penalties   of   the   Internal
Security  Act   of  1950,  as  amended,  as  a  member  of  a  "Communist-action"
organization.
(b)  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  the  term  "Communist  Party"  means
the  organization  now  known  as  the  Communist  Party  of  the  United  States
of  America,  the  Communist  Party  of  any  State  or  subdivision thereof,  and
any  unit   or   subdivision  of   any   such   organization,  whether  or   not   any
change  is  hereafter  made  in  the  name  thereof.
SEC.   5.  In   determining  membership or  participation  in   the   Communist
Party  or  any  other  organization  denned  in  this  Act,  or  knowledge  of  the
purpose  or  objective  of  such  party   or  organization,  the  jury,  under  in-
structions   from   the   court,   shall   consider   evidence,  if   presented,  as   to
whether  the  accused  person:
(1)   Has  been  listed  to  his  knowledge  as  a  member  in  any  book  or  any
of    the   lists,   records,   correspondence,   or   any   other   document   of    the
organization;
(2)   Has  made  financial  contribution   to  the  organization  in  dues,  assess-
ments,  loans,  or  in  any  other  form;
(3)  Has  made  himself  subject  to  the  discipline  of  the  organization  in
any  form  whatsoever;
(5)   Has  acted  as  an  agent,  courier,  messenger,  correspondent,  organizer,
or  in  any  other  capacity  in  behalf  of  the  organization;
(6)   Has  conferred  with   officers  or  other  members  of   the  organization
in  behalf  of  any  plan- or  enterprise  of  the  organization;
(7)   Has  been  accepted  to  his  knowledge  as  an  officer  or  member  of   the
organization  or  as  one  to   be  called  upon  for   services  by  other   omcers  or
members  of  the  organization;
(8)   Has  written,  spoken  or  in  any  other  way  communicated  by  signal,
semaphore,  sign,  or  in  any  other  form  of  communication  orders,  directives,
or  plans  of  the  organization;
(9)   Has  prepared  documents,  pamphlets,  leaflets,   books,  or   any   other
type  of  publication  in  behalf  of  the  objectives  and  purposes  of  the   organi-
zation ;
(10)    Has  mailed,  shipped,  circulated,  distributed,  delivered,  or  in  any
other  way  sent  or  delivered  to  others  material  or  propaganda  of .any  kind
in  behalf  of  the  organization;
(11)   Has  advised,  counseled  or  in  any  other  way  imparted   information,
suggestions,  recommendations  to  officers  or  members  of  the  organization  or
to  anyone  else  in  behalf  of  the  objectives  of  the  organization;
(12)    Has  indioated  by  word,  action,  conduct,  writing  or  in  any  other
way  a  willingness  to  carry  out  in  any  manner  and  to  any  degree  the  plans,
designs,  objectives,  or  purposes  of  the   organization;
(13)  Has   in   any  other   way   participated   in   the   activities,   planning,
actions,  objectives,  or  purposes  of  the   organization;
(14)   The  enumeration  of  the  above  subjects  of  evidence  on  membership
or  participation  in  the  Communist  Party  or  any  other  organization  as  above
defined,   shall  not   limit   the  inquiry  into  and  consideration  of   any   other
subject  of  evidence on  membership  and  participation  as  herein  stated.
Subversive  Activities  Control  Act Amendment
SEC.  6.  Subsection  5  (a)    (1)   of  the  Subversive  Activitiet  Control   Act
of   1950   (50  U.  S.  C.  784)   is  amended  by  striking  out  the  period  at   the
end  thereof   and  inserting  in  lieu  thereof   a  semicolon  and   the   following:
"or
"(E)   to   hold   office   or   employment   with   any  labor   organization  as
that   term  is  defined   in  section  2   (5)   of  the  National  Labor  Relations
Act,  as  amended  (29  U.  S.  C.  152),  or  to  represent  any  employer  in
any  matter  or  proceeding arising or  pending under  that   Act."
Communist-Infiltrated    Organizations
SEC.  7.   (a)   Section  3  of  the  Subversive Activities  Control   Act  of  1950
(50  U.  S.  C.  782)  is  amended  by  inserting,  immediately  after  paragraph
(4)   thereof,  the  following new paragraph:
"(4A)  The   term   'Communist-infiltrated   organization*   means   any   or-
ganization  in  the  United  States  (other  than  a  Communist-action   organiza-
tion   or   a   Communist-front    organization)   which    (A)    is   substantially
directed,   dominated,  or   controlled   by   an  individual   or   individuals  who
are,   or  who  within  three  years  have  been  actively  engaged  in,  giving  aid
or  support  to  a  Communist-action  organization,  a  Communist  foreign  gov-
ernment,  or  the  world  Communist  movement  referred  to  in  section  2  of
this  title,  and   (B)  is  serving,  or  within  three  years  has  served,  as  a  means
for   (i)   the  giving  of  aid  or  support  to  any  such  organization,  government,
or   movement,   or   (ii)   the   impairment   of   the   military   strength   of   the
United   States  or   its   industrial   capacity   to   furnish   logistical   or   other
material  support   required  by  its  Armed  Forces:  Provided,  however,  That
any  labor  organization  which  is  an  affiliate  in  good  standing  of  a  national
federation   or   other   labor   organization   whose  policies   and   activities  have
been  directed  to  opposing  Communist  organizations,  any  Communist   for-
eign  government,   or  the  world  Communist  movement,  shall  be  presumed
prima  facie  not  to  be  a  'Communist-infiltrated  organization'."
(b)   Paragraph   (5)   of  such  section  is  amended  to  read  as  follows:
"(5)   The  term  'Communist  organization*  means  any  Communist-action
organization,  Communist-front   organization,   or  Communist-infiltrated    or-
ganization."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, September  13, 195$
. . . Which  Can Be Used  For Thought  Control and Union-Busting
(c)   Subsections  J   (c)   and  6  (c)   of  such  Act  are  repealed.
SEC.  8.   (a)   Section   10  of  such  Act   (JO  U.  S.  C.  789)   is  amended  by
inserting,  immediately  after  the  world  "final  order  of  the  Board  requiring
it   to  register   under   section  7",  the   words  "or   determining  that  it   is  a
Communist-infiltrated  organization".
(b)   Subsections  (a)   and   (b)   of  section   11  of  such  Act   (JO  U.  S.  C.
790)   are  amended  by  inserting  immediately  preceding   the  period   at   the
end  of  each  such  subsection,  the  following:   "or   determining   that   it   is  a
Communist-infiltrated  organization".
SEC.   9.   (a)    Subsection    12   (2)    of   such   Act    (JO   U.   S.  C.   791)   is
amended  by—
(1)   striking  out  the  period   at  the  end  thereof   and  inserting  in  lieu
thereof   a  semicolon  and  the  word  "and";  and
(2)   inserting  at  the  end  thereof   the  following  new  paragraph:
'(3)   upon   any  application  made  under  subsection   (a)   or   subsection
(b)   of  section  13A  of  this  title,  to  determine  whether  any  organization
is  a  Communist-infiltrated  organization."
(b)   The  section  caption  to  section  13  of  such  Act   (JO  U.  S.  C.  792)
is  amended   to   read   as  follows:   "REGISTRATION   PROCEEDINGS   BEFORE  THE
BOARD".
SEC.   10.  Such  Act   is  amended  by   inserting,  immediately  after   section
13  thereof,  the  following  new  section:
"Proceedings  With  Respect  To  Communist-Infiltrated
Organizations
"SEC.    13A.   (a)   Whenever  the   Attorney   General  has  reason  to  believe
that   any   organization  is   a   Communist-infiltrated   organization,   he   may
file  with   the   Board   and   serve  upon   such  organization   a  petition   for   a
determination  that   such  organization  is  a  Communist-infiltrated organiza-
tion.   In  any  proceeding  so  instituted,   two  or  more  affiliated  organizations
may   be  named  as  joint  respondents.    Whenever   any  such  petition   is  ac-
companied  by  a  certificate  of  the  Attorney   General  to  the  effect  that   the
proceeding  so instituted  is  one  of  exceptional  public  importance,  such  pro-
ceeding  shall  be  set  for  hearing  at   the  earliest  possible  time  and  all   pro-
ceedings  therein  before  the  Board  or  any  court  shall  be  expedited   to  the
greatest  practicable  extent.
"(b)   Any  organization  which  has  been  determined  under  this  section  to
be   a   Communist-infiltrated  organization   may,  within   six   months   after
such   determination,  file  with   the   Board   and   serve   upon   the    Attorney
General  a  petition  for  a  determination  that  such  organization  no  longer  is
a  Communist-infiltrated   organization.
"(c)  Each  such  petition  shall  be  verified  under  oath,  and  shall  contain
a  statement of  the  facts  relied  upon  in  support  thereof.   Upon  the  filing  of
any  such  petition,  the  Board shall  serve upon  each  party  to  such  proceeding
a  notice  specifying  the  time  and  place  for  hearing  upon  such  petition.   No
such  hearing  shall  be  conducted  within   twenty  days  after   the  service  of
such  notice.
"(d)   The   provisions  of   subsections   (c)    and   (d)   of   section   13  shall
apply   to   hearings   conducted  under   this   section,   except   that   upon   the
failure  of   any  organization  named  as  a  party  in  any  petition  filed  by  or
duly  served  upon  it  pursuant  to  this  section  to  appear  at  any  hearing  upon
such  petition,  the  Board  may  conduct  such  hearing  in  the  absence of  such
organization   and  may  enter   such  order   under, this   section   as  the   Board
shall  determine  to  be  warranted  by  evidence  presented  at  such  hearing.
" (e)  In  determining  whether  any organization  is a Communist-infiltrated
organization,  the  Board  shall  consider—
"(1)   to  what  extent,  if  any,  the  effective  management  of  the   affairs
of  such  organization  is  conducted   by  one  or  more  individuals  who  are,
or  within  two  years  have  been,  (A)   members,  agents,  or  representatives
of  any  Communist  organization,  and  Communist  foreign  government,  or
the  world   Communist   movement  referred   to  in  section  2  of  this  title,
with  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  purpose  thereof,  or   (B)   engaged  in
giving  aid  or  support  to  any  such  organization,  government,  or   move-
ment  with  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  purpose  thereof;
"(2)   to  what  extent,  if  any,  the  policies  of  such  organization  are,  or
within   three  years  have  been,  formulated  and  carried  out   pursuant   to
the  direction  or  advice  of  any  member,  agent,  or  representative  of  any
such  organization,  government,  or   movement;
"(3)   to  what  extent,  if  any,  the  personnel  and  resources  of  such  or-
ganization  are,  or  within  three  years  have  been,  used  to  further  or  pro-
mote   the  objectives  of   any  such  Communist  organization,   government,
or   movement;
"(4)  to  what  extent,  if  any,  such  organization  within  three  years has
received  from,  or  furnished   to  or  for  the  use  of,  any  such   Communist
organization,   government,   or   movement   any   funds   or   other   material
assistance;
" ( J)  to what  extent, if  any,  such  organization  is, or  within  three  years
has  been,  affiliated   in  any  way  with  any  such  Communist   organization,
government,  or  movement;
"(£)   to  what  extent,  if   any,  the  affiliation   of  such  organization,  or
of  any  individual  or  individuals  who  are  members  thereof   or  who  man-
age  its  affairs,  with   any  such  Communist   organization,  government,  or
movement  is  concealed  from  or  is  not   disclosed   to  the   membership  of
such  organization;  and
"(7)  to  what  extent,  if  any,  such  organization  or  any  of  its  members
or  managers  are,  or  within  three  years  have  been,  knowingly   engaged—
" (A)   in  any  conduct   punishable   under   section  4  or   15   of   this
Act  or  under  chapter   37,  10J,  or   11J  of  title  18  of   the  United
States  Code;  or
"(B)    with  intent   to  impair  the  military  strength   of  the  United
States  or   its  industrial   capacity   to   furnish   logistical   or  other   sup-
port   required,  by  its   armed   forces,   in   any  activity   resulting  in   or
contributing   to  any  such  impairment.
"(f)  After  hearing  upon  any  petition  filed  under  this  section,  the  Board
shall   (1)   make  a  report   in  writing  in  which  it  shall  state  its  findings  as
to  the  facts   and  its  conclusion!  with   respect   to  the  issues  presented   by
such  petition,   (2)   enter  its  order  granting  or  denying  the   determination
sought  by  such  petition,  and  ()   serve  upon  each  party  to  the  proceeding  a
copy  of  such  order.  Any  order  granting  any  determination  on  the  question
whether  any  organization  is  a  Communist-infiltrated   organization  shall  be-
come  final  as provided  in  section  14  (b)   of  this  Act.
"(g)  When  any  order  has  been  entered  by  the  Board  under  this  section
with   respect   to   any  labor   organization  or  employer   (as  these   terms   are
defined  by  section  2  of  the  National  Labor  Relations  Act,  as  amended,  and
which  are  organizations  within  the  meaning of  section   3  of  the  Subversive
Activities  Control  Act  of   19JO),  the  Board  shall  serve  a  true  and  correct
copy   of   such  order   upon   the   National   Labor   Relation   Board   and   shall
publish  in  the  Federal  Register  a  statement  of  the  substance of  such  order
and  its  effective   date.
"(h)  When  there  is in  effect  a  final  order  of  the  Board  determining  that
such  labor  organization  is  a  Communist-action   organization,  a   Communist-
front   organization,  or   a   Communist-infiltrated   organization,   such   labor
organization  shall  be  ineligible  to—
" (1)  act  as representative of  any  employee  within  the  meaning  or  for
the   purposes   of   section   7   of   the   National   Labor   Relations   Act,   as
amended   (29  U.  S.  C.   1J7);
"(2)   serve  as  an  exclusive  representative  of  employees  of  any  bargain-
ing  unit  under  section  9  of  such  Act,   as  amended   (29  U.  S.  C.  1J9);
"(3)  make,  or  obtain  any  hearing  upon,  any  charge  under  section  10
of  such  Act   (19  U.  S. C.  160);  or
"(4)   exercise any  other  right  or  privilege,  or  receive  any  other  benefit,
substantive  or  procedural,  provided  by  such  Act  for  labor  organizations,
"(i)   When  an  order  of  the  Board  determining  that  any  such  labor  or-
ganization  is  a  Communist-infiltrated   organization   has  become   final,   and
such  labor  organization  theretofore   has  been  certified  under  the  National
Labor  Relations  Act,  as  amended,  as  a  representative  of  employees  in   any
bargaining  unit—
"(1)     a   question   of   representation    affecting   commerce,  within    the
meaning  of  section  9   (c)   of  such  Act,   shall  be  deemed  to  exist  with
respect  to  such  bargaining unit;  and
"(2)   the  National  Labor  Relations  Board,  upon  petition  of  not  less
than  20  per  centum  of  the  employees  in  such  bargaining  unit  or  any
person   or  persons  acting  in  their  behalf,  shall  under  section  9  of   such
Act   (notwithstanding   any  limitation   of  time  contained  therein)   direct
elections  in  such  bargaining unit  or  any  subdivision  thereof   (A)   for  the
selection  of   a  representative  thereof   for   collective  bargaining   purposes,
and   (B)   to  determine  whether   the  employees  thereof   desire  to  rescind
any   authority   previously  granted   to   such   labor   organization   to  enter
into  any  agreement  with  their  employer  pursuant  to  section  g  (a)    (3)
(ii)   of  such   Act.
"(i)   When  there  is  in  effect  a  final  order  of  the  Board  determining  that
any  such  employer  is  a  Communist-infiltrated  organization,  such  employer
shall  be  eligible  to—
" (1)  file  any  petition  for  an  election  under  section  9  of  the  National
Labor  Relations  Act,  as  amended  (29  U.  S.  C.  1J7),  or  participate  in
any  proceeding  under  such  section;  or
"(2)    make  or  obtain  any  hearing  upon  any  charge  under  section  10
of  such  Act   (29  U.  S.  C.  1«0);  or
"(3)  exercise  any  other  right  or  privilege or  receive  any  other  benefit,
substantive  or  procedural,  provided   by  such  Act  for  employers."
SEC.   11.     Subsections   (a)    and    (b)    of   section   14  of   such   Act    (JO
U.  S.  C  793)  are  amended  by  inserting  in  each  such  subsection,   immedi-
ately  after  the  words  "section   13,"   a  comma  and  the  following:  "or  sub-
section   (f)   of  section  13A,".
SEC.   12.  If  any  provision  of  this  title  or  the  application  thereof  t«  any
person  or  circumstances   is  held  invalid,  the  remainder  of  the  title,  and  the
application  of  such  provisions  to  other  persons  or  circumstances,  shall  not
be  affected   thereby.
Approved   August   24,   1914,  9:40   a.m.,  M.S.T.
!  3 ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone'a  Weekly,  September  13, 1954
(Continued   from    Page One)
beyond   the  3-mile  limit,  we  would  hardly  bear  the  scrutiny
with  legalistic  detachment).   The  two  Quemoy  islands  are in
the  port  of  Amoy,  only  a  few  miles  off  shore.   A  comparable
situation   would  be  that  of  Staten  Island  if  it   were  held  by
forces   opposed  to  the  American  government,  if  those   forces
were  supplied  and  trained  by  the  Chinese  Communists  and  if
they  were  engaged  in  shelling  New  York  harbor  and  its  water
traffic.   Though  this  is  a  long  way  from  Formosa  and  outside
the   area  our  military  are   supposed   to  protect,  it   has  been
turned  into  a  particularly  provocative  kind  of  tourist   spec-
tacle  for  visiting   celebrities.
This  is  something   of  which   American   public  opinion   has
been  kept  unaware.   But   this  is  what   the  Hong  Kong cor-
respondent  of  the  London  Daily  Express   had  to  report  of  it
after   a   British   Skymaster   was   shot   down   accidentally   by
Chinese  Communist   planes  in  the  area  (quoted  in  the  London
Peace   News   for   July   30).   "Quemoy",   this    correspondent
reported,  "has become  such  a  showpiece,  such  a  symbol  of  re-
sistance,  that  it  is  a  must  on  the  itinerary  of  touring  Amer-
ican  senators  and  generals.   A  six  hour  trip  gives  VIPs  time
to  glower  at  the  Reds,  duck  an  occasional incoming  shell,  and
pull  the  lanyard  of  a  well-polished  artillery  piece  loaded  with
appropriately   inscribed   ammunition.    'A   present   for   Mao,'
'Send  a  splinter   to  Malenkov,'  sigh  out   across  the  strait  and
•burst  well  within  binocular  view."   This  is  a  dangerous  way
to  play  Coney  Island  shooting  gallery.
We  cannot  go  on  lobbing  shells  in  this  mindless  way  into
one  of  China's  great   port   cities.   The   Chinese  Communists
have  shown  extraordinary  patience,  but  no  government  could
go  on  indefinitely  taking  attack  of  this  kind.   This   is  what
makes  the  South  China'coast  the  world's  No.   1  trouble  spot.
Our  trigger  happy  military  have  made  the  Formosa guarantee
the  excuse  for  operations  of  this  kind  within  a  few   miles  of
the  mainland.   Some  who  regard  peace  as  appeasement  may
be  hoping   for   an  incident   which  will  give  them   an  excuse
for  war.  Chiang  wants  war  and  by  stepping  up  his  attack
may  make  it  harder  and  harder  to  avoid.   This   is  why   the
British   are   trying   hard   to   get   Eisenhower   to   rescind   the
one-sided  order  of  last  year  which  permits  Chiang   to  attack
the  mainland  while  we  protect   him  from  reprisal.  The  situ-
ation   is  more   serious   than   most   people   realize.   War   with
China  could  be  just  around  the  corner.
Capsulated  Tour  of a Troubled Globe
McCARTHY:  This  time  he's  going  to  get  it  (1)   because
the   overwhelming   majority   of   his  senate   colleagues   regard
him  as  .1 boor  and  a  bore,  and   (2)   because  Nixon  as  well  as
Eisenhower  now  feels  his  political  future  depends  on  destroy-
ing  Low  Blow  Joe  ...      GERMANY:   Dulles  and  Adenauer
torpedoed   British   plans   for   a  German   arms   conference   in
what   will   prove   to   be   the   most   foolish   misjudgment  of
French  politics  in  many  years:  they  have  been  encouraged   by
Bidault  to  believe  they  can  overthrow  Mendes-France  and  get
a  more  pliable  man .  .  . THE  ARMS  PLAN:  The  M-F arms
pool  plan  was  drafted  as  a  new   means  of  imposing  controls
on   the  Reich  and, more  important,   as  a  possible  means   for
bringing   Russia   and   Poland   back   into   the   mechanism  of
control.    The   French   would   like   "re-insurance"   with   the
Soviet   Union   against  Germany,  not   as  an   alternative,   but
as   a  complement   to   the   Atlantic  Pact.    This   makes  sense
strategically  for   France  but   Dulles   and  the  Germans  see  in
it  the end of his dreams of  a war of  "liberation"  eastward  . .  .
MOSCOW:  The  atmosphere  seems  to  be  lightening  for   freer
discussion  in  science  but   the  party  hacks  are  closing  down
again  on  literature  .  .  .  ISRAEL:  The  State  Department  goes
on   fantastically  misjudging   the   situation;    arms   for   Iraq
and  Egypt  mean  arms  for  war  against  Israel,  not  the  U.S.S.R.
The  two  Arab  countries  are  military flea-bites anyway,  from
a   Russian  point   of   view.   Iraq's  ruling   class  is  anti-Soviet
but   the  country   is  rotten;   Egypt   is  deeply  neutralist.    The
truth  is  the  Department,  especially  under  Dulles,  just  doesn't
like  Israel  .  .  .  SEATO:  Of  no  real  importance;   a  shadow
and   caricature  of  what  Chiang  wanted:   a  Pacific  Pact   in-
cluding  Nationalist  China   and  Korea.   Both   excluded   from
SEATO.  From  Asia's point  of  view,  the  West's  last  gasp effort.
LET  US  SEND  A  SAMPLE  COPY  TO  A  FRIEND
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name.. _  _________—————————————
Street__  ————————————____________
City_______—-
Zone_..__
State..
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name   -----_—._——————_._.._.— .__.
Street._-._...__.____ _.... ___.__.._  __.__.
City       __________   Zone-..___._  State  _
9-1S-64
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED