I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954oct11.pdf

============================================================

The  Hunter  College  Cases;  Mast  Teachers  Turn  Informers  to  Keep  Their  Jobs?  Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER  36
OCTOBER  11,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Our  Paris  Embassy  Linked  to  "L'Affaire   Dides"
The  Plot  to  Smear  Mendes-France
The   "Affair     Dides,"  now  the  sensation  of  French  politics,
has  two  main aspects.  One is how and  to what extent  military
secrets  were  leaked  to  the  Communists.   The  answers  must
await  the  outcome  of  the  current  investigation.   The  other,
hardly  covered  by  the  press  here  at  all,  concerns  the  alleged
links   between  the   U.S.   Embassy   in   Paris   and  undercover
French  rightist  elements feeding  false  information to  Ameri-
can  intelligence in  order  to  poison  Franco-American relations
and   to  obtain  American  aid  in  overturning  Mendes-France.
The  October  2  issue  of  L'Express,  a  French  liberal weekly
close  to  the  Mendes-France  government,  cites  two  instances
of  such  false  information.   It   says  the  American government
was  given a dossier on  a member of  the  government who  bears
the  same  name, but  is not  related to,  a well-known  "progress-
iste"   (fellow  traveller).   L'Express   declares  that  information
about  the  Leftist  was given as if  it  were  about the government
official  with  the  same name.  Another  example  L'Express  cites
concerns  an  official  sent  on  an  important  mission  to  Asia  who
encountered  an  unexpected hostility  on  the  part  of Washing-
ton.     L'Express    says   it   has  just   been  discovered  that   the
dossier  on  him  which  was  furnished   to  the  Americans was
made  up  in  large  part  of  information  about  a  business  man
linked  to  a  Soviet  bank  who  before  the  war  had  for  a  time
been  allied  by  marriage to  this  official's  family.
.Apparently  Senator  Wiley  had  been  getting  information
of  this  kind  on  his  trip.   L'Express   says  an  American Senator
who  came  to  Paris  at  the  end  of  September  had  among  his
papers  a  memorandum about  the  Mendes-France  government
which   described   as   "communisants"   '(Communist   sympa-
thizers)  the three Ministers, General Koenig, and MM. Chaban-
Delmas  and  Lemaire,  who  resigned  on  the  eve  of  the  Brussels
conference  rather  than  accept  the  E.D.C.  in  any   shape  or
•form.    All  three   are  followers  of   de  Gaulle.   "These  neo-
Cagoulards,"  L'Express   says  of   the  informants,  "have  "for  a
long  time so filled  up  our  American friends  with  falsehoods  as
to  create  a  veritable  cancer  of  mistrust  between  France  and
America."  The  name  applied  recalls  the  Fascist  "Cagoulards"
(Hooded  Men)  who  menaced the  French  Republic  before  the
war.
"The  New  Cagoule"
L'Express   asserts  that   the  "new   Cagoule"  is  made  up  of
politicians  whose  careen   are   based  on   a   demagogic  anti-
communism,  of  police  officials  whose record  was stained  during
the German  occupation,  and  of  financial  interests  which  have
their  base  in  North  Africa.    L'Express   says  that  "under   the
cover  of  anti-communism"  this group  has built  up  a network
in   intelligence  and  counter-espionage  calculated   to  keep  it
in  power, or  to  recover power  very quickly.   In  the  same issue.
The Academician,  Francois Mauriac, one of  the  leading  French
Catholic   writers   of   this   generation,   links   the   attack   on
Mendes-France  not  only  with   pre-war  Fascist  elements  but
with  certain  groups in  the  M.R.P.,  the  Catholic  party  which
lost   its   postwar   monopoly   of   the   Foreign    Office   when
Mendes-France  came  to  power.
One  of  the  main elements of  the  plot  against Mendes-France
was  to  make  it  appear  that  leaks  to  the  Communists  began
when  he  took  office.   L'Express   says  it  was  only  through  the
accident  of   the   arrest  of   the   police  official   Dides  that   the
government  learned  of  the  leaks  which  had  occurred  previ-
ously.   "Actually,"  L'Express   declares,  "neither  the  Ministry
of  the  Interior of  the  Laniel  government, nor  the  Ministry of
National  Defense,  nor  the  Prefect  of  Police  had  breathed  a
word  to  their successors  of  the  investigation which was under-
way  into these  earlier  leaks  and  the  dossiers  on  the  subject had
disappeared."
In  the  meantime,  copies  were  widely  circulated  in  political
circles  of  a report  alleged  to  have  been made  by  M.  Duclos  to
the  Politbureau  of  the  French  Communist  party  which  in-
cluded  the  minutes of  a National Defense  Committee meeting.
An  important  member of  Parliament called in  friendly  news-
papermen   and  told   them  that   since  M.  Mitterand  became
Minister  of  the  Interior  under  Mendes-France  defense  secrets
had  leaked  to  the  Communists.   "A  high  personage  declared
before  several witnesses,"  L'Express  says, "that  Mendes-France
and  Mitterand  must  be  brought  to  trial."   The  scandal  was
supposed  to  break  on  the  eve  of  the  London  conference  and
compromise  the  government,  but   plans  were  upset   by  the
arrest  of  M.  Dides,  with  the  alleged  report  by  M.  Duclos  io
his  possession.
The  OSS Saves  Dides
Much  interesting  additional  information  is  supplied  by  the
latest   issue  of  Claude  Bourdet's  weekly,  L'Observateur,  to
arrive  here.    The   issue  of   September   30   carries  a   lengthy
article,  "The  Truth  About  the  Dides  Affair,"  which  provides
sketches  of  both  M.  Dides  and  M.  Baranes,  the   Communist
journalist,   who  was  his  informer.   M.  Dides,  according   to
L'Observateur, "worked  at  the headquarters of  General Intelli-
gence,  of  sinister  memory"  during  the  occupation  and  would
have  been  purged  if  he  had  not  presented  an  affidavit  from
the  OSS saying that  he had played a "double game" under  the
Germans.  After  his own "clearance," M. Dides  devoted  a large
part of his leisure  time  to  the defense of his purged  colleeagues.
His  assignment  in  recent  years had  been  to "special  investiga-
tions,"  Le.  L'Observateur says,  "to  investigations   concerning
Communists and certain  politicians opposed to  the  government
then  in  power."
When  arrested,  M.  Dides  let  friendly  newspapermen  know
(Continued  on Ptge  ))
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F;  Stone's  Weekly,  October  11, 1954
Must  Teachers  Become  Informers to Keep  Their  Jobs? . . .
New  York—The  New  York  Herald  Tribune  applauded,  no
paper  in  New  York  protested,  the  dismissal  of  three  Asso-
ciate  Professors   at  Hunter  College  who  admitted  that  they
had   been   Communists  but   refused   to   inform   on  others.
They  pleaded  "conscience"  but  the  Herald   Tribune   (Oct.  2)
agreed  with  the  Board  of  Higher  Education  "that  no  sub-
ordinate  can  substitute  his  private  judgment  for  that  of  the
superior."    This  has  the  full  flavor  of  the  older  medieval  and
the  newer  totalitarian  inquisitions.
Must  teachers  become informers  to  keep  their  jobs?   This
is  the   question  being  decided  in  New  York.    New  York's
example  will  affect  the  whole  country.   The  Board  of  Educa-
tion  is  split  on  the  question   and  Dr.  William  Jansen,   the
superintendent   of  schools, who  began  the  Red  hunt  in  1949,
"has   taken   the  position  that  a  teacher's   refusal  to  name
others does  not,  by itself,  constitute  grounds  for   disciplinary
action"  (N.  Y.  Times, Sept.  18).
The  balance  of  forces  in  the  Board  of  Education  may  be
upset  by  the  Hunter   College  cases.    The  Trial  Committee
report  to the  Board of Higher  Education, which runs  the  city
colleges,  said  "the  precedents  now  to be established  . . .  will
outlast  these  particular  cases."   The  Board  of  Higher  Edu-
cation  by  voting  to  dismiss  has  ruled  as  did  the  Holy  Office
four  and  a  half  centuries  ago.
The Penitent  Had  to  Inform
Lea tells us in his  classic history  of the  Spanish  Inquisition
(Vol.  II,  pps.  577-8),  "One  of  the  most  essential   requisites
to  completeness  of  confession  was  the   denunciation  of   all
accomplices—that  is,  of  all  whom  the  penitent  knew  to  be
heretics  or  addicted  to  heretical  practices."    The  inquisitor
was  ordered  when  anyone  confessed  "to   examine  him  ex-
haustively   as  to  what  he  knew  of  his  parents,  brothers,
kindred  and  all  other  persons."  This was  entered  in registers,
alphabetically   indexed,  like  the   records  of  our  House  Un-
American  and  Jenner  committees,   for   the   use  of  the   in-
quisitorial   tribunals.
The  effect  was  to  dissolve  the  fabric  of  mutual  confidence
and  elementary  decency  binding  man  to  man.    "There  was
usually,"  Lea  relates,  "little  hesitation  on  the  part   of  the
penitent   to   incriminate  his   family   and  friends,  for   they
might,  for  all  he  knew,  be  themselves  under  trial  and  in-
forming  on him, so that any  reticence on his part exposed him
to  the  danger  of  being  a  diminuto  with  all  its  fateful  con-
sequences."   A  diminuto  was  a  penitent  who held  back  from
full  disclosure.   Then  the  penalty  was  the  stake,  today  the
ruin  of  one's  academic career.
The very language of the  Trial Committee report  resembles
that  of  a  Torquemada—or  a  Vishinsky,  denouncing  "devia-
tionists,"  as  in  the  purge  trials  of  the  30's.   The report  says
of  the  refusal  to  inform   "The  purpose  and  effect  were  to
continue  to  shield  from  surgery  this  malignant  cell  in  the
body  of  the  Hunter  College faculty  and  to  allow its  member-
ship  and  virus  to  continue  activity  undetected."    This  view
of  a  heretical  group  as  "malignant"  and  of heretical  views  as
a  "virus,"  threatening   to  infect  the  body  ecclessiastical  or
politic,   is   the   language   of  closed  societies,   of   overheated
minds  and  fearfully  hating  spirits.
Did  He  Fear  Bella  Dodd?
lit  this  atmosphere  to   confess   without  informing  is   to
render  oneself  suspect.   Perhaps  fearing  that  he had  already
been  named by  his  old  friend,  Dr.  Bella  Dodd,  Professor   V.
Jerauld  McGill, who  taught  philosophy  at  Hunter,  testified
before  an  executive  session.of  the  Senate  Internal   Security
•subcommittee  on  September   24,  1952,  that  he  had  been  a
Communist.   He  admitted  that  he  had  testified  falsely when
he  denied  party  membership  to  the  New  York  State  Rapp-
Douglas  Was Prophetic
"The  very  threat  of  such  a  procedure  is  certain  to
raise  havoc with  academic freedom.    Youthful  indiscre-
tions,   mistaken   causes,   misguided   enthusiasms—all
long   forgotten—become   the   ghosts   of   a   harrowing
present. ...
"Once  a  teacher's  connection  with  a  listed  organiza-
tion  is  shown,  her  views  become  subject  to  scrutiny  to
determine whether  her  membership in  the  organization
is  innocent or,  if  she  was  formerly a  member, whether
she  has  bona fide  abandoned her  membership.  The law
inevitably turns  the  school  system  into a  spying project.
"Where  suspicion  fills  the  air  and  holds  scholars  in
line  for  fear   of  their  jobs,  there  can  be  no  exercise
of  the  free  intellect.    Supineness  and  dogmatism  take
the  place  of  inquiry.   A  'party  line'—as  dangerous  as
the  'party  line'  of  the  Communists—takes  hold.   It  is
the  'party  line'  of  the  orthodox  view,  of  the  conven-
tional thought,  of the accepted approach. ... A deaden-
ing  dogma  takes the  place  of free  inquiry.  . . .
—Mr.   Justice   Douglas   dissenting   in   the   Feinberg
Law  Case
Coudert  investigating  committee  in   1941.    He  wrote  out  a
long  statement  abjuring  and  denouncing  Communism.    But
he  declined  to name others.
The  Senate  committee did not  make  an  issue  of this.   But
later  under  constant  pressure  from  Board  of  Higher  Educa-
tion  investigators,   McGill  prevailed  on  two  colleagues,  Louis
Weisner,  who taught  mathematics,  and  Charles  W.  Hughes,
who taught  music, to  come  forward and  admit they,  too,  had
been  Communists.   The  three  declined  to  name  others.    All
three  were  suspended  without  pay.
The conduct of the  three  dismissed professors  is  contrasted
with  that  of  Dr.  Bella  Dodd,  who  helped  form  the   Hunter
College unit, but  "had  openly  recanted  and had  confessed  her
associations . .  ."   The language  again  is  medieval—-the  duty
is  to  "recant"  the  noxious  doctrines  and to  "confess  .  .  .
associations,"  i.e.  to  inform.
Heresy  Oft  Goes  With  Witchcraft
Nefarious  practices  are  hinted  at,  for  heresy  oft  goes hand
in  hand  with  witchcraft.    "The   evidence  is  overwhelming,"
the  report  says,  "that  his  [Professor   V.  Jerauld  McGill's]
secret  group  of  Communists  first  in  Greenwich  Village  and
in  1938 at  Hunter  College had purposes  quite  other  and more
sinister   than   those   of  a   study  group   discussing   current
events.  . .  ."
What  these  "quite  other  and  more sinister" purposes  were,
or  just  what  the  "overwhelming"  evidence  of  them  was,  is
nowhere to be found  in the hundred pages  of the  Trial Report.
The  Report  does  unearth  from  book  reviews  by  the accused
when  they  were  Communists  in  the   30's   some  attacks  on
Dewey,   Herman   Levy,   Haldane   and   Einstein   which   are
squarely  in  the  tradition  of  that  cast-iron  dogmatism  which
passes  for  Marxism  in  the  Communist movement.
This  silly  stuff  serves  no  purpose more  sinister  than   self-
exposure.   It  does not  tell  us  what  the  Hunter  College  study
group  was  suspected   of  doing.    This  is  left  vague,  but  a
diabolic  cleverness  is  imputed.  "Testimony  by  outsiders  that
they  knew  of  no  objective  efforts   at   indoctrination  in   the
classroom,"  the  Trial  Committee said,  "is  of  little  practical
weight.".  A  Salem  court  might  as  lightly  have  dismissed
testimony  that  none  of  the  crones  before  it  had  been  seen
travelling  by  broomstick.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. jr.  Stone'*  Weekly,.  October  11, 1954
. . . The Hunter  College  Dismissals May Set A National  Precedent
The authorities cited by the  Trial  Committee for  this ruling
show  how high  and  far  the  paranoid  infection  has  spread  in
American  law.   "As  the  Preamble  to  the  Feinberg  Law and
the  Supreme Court  of  the  United  States  in  Adler  v.  Board
of   Education,  542   U.S.  485,  490,  have  both  declared,  such
influences  are  'sufficiently  subtle  to  escape  detection  in  the
classroom'."   So says  the  Trial  Committee  report.
When  the  multiplication  table  and  the  elementary  speller
are  often  too "subtle" to  be impressed  on the  youthful  mind,
how  do  these  practitioners  of  the   Marxist-Leninist  magic
succeed  in instilling  their more  abstruse  mysteries ?   What is
this  painless  intra-venous  injection  of  dialetical  materialism
into  close  students  of  the  Yanks  and  Dodgers?
It   is  the  premise  which  makes  this  a  witch   hunt—the
premise that the  Communists  are  men of supernatural powers
engaged in a  diabolic conspiracy all the  more sinister  because
so  vague.    Once  the  premise  is  accepted,  nothing  else  is  of
avail.    Professor  McGill  said  he  left  the  party  in  1941;  Pro-
fessor  Weisner that  he  left  in  1949;  Professor  Hughes that
he  left  in  1941.    Would  men  capable  of  such  deviltries  stop
at  a  lie?
Self-Flagellation   of  No  Avail
All  three  testified  at  length  to  their  present  disgust  with
the  Communist party.   "They  themselves,"  as  the  Trial Com-
mittee  Report  summarized it,  "use  such  terms  as  'secrecy
from   the   beginning',   'imprisonment',  'trap',   'narrowness',
mental 'inertia', fear  of 'reprisal',  'duplicity', 'casuistry',  'con-
cealment
1
, 'lack  of candor', 'perjury',  'false  names' . .  ."   This
flogging  of  their  dead  selves  and  flagellation  of  their   past
opinions  was  not  counted in  their  favor.   Might it  not  be  a
mere  ruse?
Two  fellow  Professors  at  Hunter,  Welch  and  O'Gorman,
testified   that   McGill   had   denounced   the   Korean  invasion.
Professor  Richard  McKeon  of  Chicago  testified that  McGill's
articles   in  Science  and  Society   ceased  to   show  a  Marxist
influence  in  the  middle 'Forties.   Professor Houston  Peterson
of  Rutgers  testified  that  two  of  them  were  completely non-
Marxist.    Professor   Margeret   Spahr   of  Hunter's   Political
Science  Department,  who courageously served  as  counsel  for
McGill  (along  with  Ernest   Angell),  testified   as  an   expert
in  political  theory  that  the  term  "Marxist"  included  non-
revolutionary   Marxists.
AH  was  turned  against  him.   "The  greater  his  mental and
academic  attainments,"  was  the  Trial  Committee's comment
on  these  witnesses,  "the  less  the  possibility  of  excusing  or
overlooking  his  criminal  and  immoral  course ...  his  high
standing   and  professional  reputation   vastly   increased   his
usefulness  to  the  Communist party."   Thus  the  Trial  Com-
mittee   Report-  conclusively   proves   what   it   unshakeably
assumes.
To a Trial  Committee operating  in this febrile  and haunted
frame   of  reference,  the  claim  of  "conscience"   is   naturally
infuriating.    McGill  "claimed,"  it  complains,  "that  his  'con-
science'  barred   disclosure  except  by  consent;  and  that,  for
all  he  knew,  such  persons  had  not  done  anything  wrong  or
harmful."    Even  if  it  could  be  believed,  the  report  says   at
another  point,  "that  kind  of  a  'conscience'  cannot  be  en-
trusted  with  teaching  Philosophy  at  Hunter  College."    By
this  standard  neither  could  a  Socrates  or  a  Kant.
Defense  of  Free  Speech  Subversive?
So  frantic  is  the  Trial  Committee  in  its  search  for  some
kind  of  evidence  to  rebut  the  claim  of  past  membership  that
it  even  cites  McGill's  signature  in  1948  of  a  statement  de-
fending  the  rights  of  the  Jefferson   School  "in  which  state-
ment,"  says  the  Trial  Committee  report,   "was  the  declara-
tion:  'We  believe  that  every  group,  including  Marxists,  has
the   right   under  the   American  Constitution   to  teach   and
propagate  its  ideas'."    Well,  don't  they?
Weisner, after  27 years  of  teaching, has  applied for  retire-
ment.    McGill  and  Hughes  will  appeal.    The  Feinberg  law
bars  members of the  Communist  party  from  teaching in  New
York  State.    The  appeal  will  determine whether  those  who
claim  past  membership  can  only  prove  their   bona  fides  by
acting  as  informers.   It  will  also  determine  whether  these
cases  are  to  be  governed  by  normal  rules  of  evidence,  or  by
occult  insights  and  esoteric  suspicions.
The  Hunter  college  cases,  like  the  Oppenheimer  case  [he,
too,  was  criticized  for  exercising  "private  judgment"  when
qustioned  by  the  secret  police]  reflects  a  changing  America,
acquiescing  in  the   extension  to  secular  affairs   of  Catholic
dogma  hostile  to  individual  conscience.   American  youth  is
being  taught   by  these  painful   brain-washings  of  a   whole
generation  that  is  the  part  of  wisdom  to  obey,  to  swallow
doubts,  to  conform  and  to  save  one's  own  skin  when  neces-
sary  at  the  expense  of  one's  friends.________
STATEMENT   REQUIRED   BT   THE   ACT   OF   AUGUST   24.   19U,   AS
AMENDED  BY  THE  ACTS  OF  MARCH  S,  19U.  AND  JULY  2.  194*
(Title  S9,  United  State*  Code.  Section  MS)  SHOWING  THE  OWNER-
SHIP.  MANAGEMENT  AND  CIRCULATION OF
I.  F.  STONE'S  WEEKLY  published  Weekly  at  Washington,  D.  C.   1.  The
names  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing  editor,  and  busineu
managers   are:   Publisher,   Editor,   Managing   Editor,   Business   Manager,
I.  F.  Stone,  6618 Nebraska  Avenue,  Washington,   D.  C.   2.  The  owner  is:
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Inc.,  801  E.  Capitol  Street,  Washington,  D.  C..  I.  F.
Stone,  Esther  M.  Stone,  Cella  M.  Gilbert.  Jeremy  J.  Stome,  C.  David  Stone.
6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  Washington.  D.  C.   8.  The  known  bondholders,  mort-
gagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more  of
total   amount  of   bonds,  mortgages,  or  other  securities  are:   (If  there  are
none,  so  state.)  None.   4.  Paragraphs  2  and  8  include.  In  cases  where  the
stockholder   or   security   holder   appears   upon  the   books   of   the   company
as   trustee   or   in   any   other   fiduciary   relation,   the   name  of   the   person
or  corporation  for  whom  such  trustee  ia  acting;  also  the  statements  in  the
two  paragraphs  show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and  belief   as  to  the  cir-
cumstances  and  conditions  under  which  stockholders  and  security   holders
who  do  not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock
and  securities  in  a  capacity  other  than  that  of  a  bona  fide  owner.   6.  The
average  number  of   copies   of   each   Issue  of   this  publication   sold   or  dis-
tributed,  through  the  malls  or  otherwise,  to  paid  subscribers   daring   the
12  months  preceding  the  date  shown  was  9,892.   (s)  I.  F.  Stone,  publisher.
Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before  me  this  6th  day  of  October.  1964.  (a)  Mary
A.  Weibley.  [Seal]  (My commission  expires  11/14/64).
(Continued  from  Page One)
that  the  evening  before  he  had  dined  "with  an  American
colleague  attached  to  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Paris."  By  thus
linking  himself  with  the  Embassy,  according  to  the  account
in  L'Express,  M.  Dides  made  it  possible  for  certain  French
papers,   soon  to  be  echoed  abroad,  to  print  the  report  that
the   Mendes-France   government   was   destroying   an   anti-
Communist  network  and  was  attacking  an  American  intelli-
gence  service.
The  informer  on  whom  M.  Dides relied,  M. Baranes,  made
contact  with  the  French  Suretg  at  the  end  of  1950.   "M.  Ba-
ranes  opened his  heart,"  according  to  L'Observatew, to   offi-
cials  there.  "Of  course, he was a  Communist.  But a  national
Communist.  He  led  an  opposition  group  which  was  Marxist
but   not  Russian."   He  wanted   to  organize  a   network  of
saboteurs  to  operate  in  the  event  of  a  Russian   occupation.
1  C *
He  accepted  200,000  francs  a  month  for  expenses.   He  regu-
larly  delivered  the  minutes  of  the  Politbureau  of  the  Com-
munist  party.  M. Brune, then  Minister  of the  Interior, could
not  resist  the  pleasure  of  contact  with  this  "bon  Francais."
But  a  successor  complained that  all  M.  Baranes  furnished
for  200,000 francs  could be  obtained  for  15 francs  by  buying
Figaro  which  runs  a  feature  called  "What  L'Humanitf    Is
Hiding  From  Its  Readers."   M.  Dides  was  switched  to  the
Prefect  of  Paris,  M. Baylot,  and  by  the  latter  to  M.  Dides.
Whether  M.  Baranes  was  a  double  (or  possibly)   triple
agent   remains   to   be   seen.    The   energetic   investigation
launched by Mendes-France is likely  not  only to  determine  the
source  of  "leaks"  but  the  men  and  forces  who  hoped  to  use
these  leaks  to  smear  the  French   government   in   American
eyes  and  to  destroy  the  one  man  who,  after   the   procession
of   mediocre  nonentities   in   power   since   de   Gaulle,   really
promises  France  a  New  Deal.
1   4   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  11, 1954
The  New  Soviet  Proposals  on  Germany  and  Nuclear  Inspection
The  Negative  Factors  in
We  in  this  country  have  been  so  blinded   by  propaganda,
our  commentators  have  become  such  trained   seals,  that  we
may find it  impossible objectively  to  assess the  negative  factors
in  the  German  arms  agreement  on  which   Molotov  counts
in  the  giant   diplomatic   duel  his  East  Berlin   speech  opened
last  week.
From  the  German  point  of  view,  the  negative  factors  are
obvious.   The  most  important  is  that  the  London  agreement
envisages  the  continued   occupation   of  the  Reich  until   the
end  of  this  century.   The  Germans  are  offered  a  kind  of  fire
sale  sovereignty—until  1998  they  will  be "free,"  but  British,
French  and  American  troops  will  remain  on  their  territory,
with  the  reserved  right  of  intervention  against  "subversion,"
with extensive  powers of  inspection  to  enforce  limits  on  arms
production,  and  a  "voluntary"  German  promise  to  forswear
atomic,  bacteriological  and  chemical  warfare.  It  is this  which
explains  the  cool  reception  given  Adenauer  in  Bonn  on  his
return  from  London.
Americans  do  not  realize  that  while  Germans  are  divided
on  whether   to  rearm,  they  are  overwhemingly  in  favor  of
reunifying   their   country.    A  rearmed  West   Germany  will
bring  a  full  rearmed East  Germany,  and  that  threatens  a  new
and  greater  Korea  in  the  heart  of  Europe.
It   is  the   fear  of   becoming  another,   bigger  and   bloodier
Korea,   plus  the   obvious  common   sense   of   the   suggestion,
which  explains the  failure of  the  Germans to  react  against  the
Dehler  proposal.   Thomas  Dehler,  chief  of  the  right  wing  Free
Democrats,  the  second largest  party  in  the  Adenauer  coalition,
proposed  that   as  the  price  of  unification  the  Germans  even
accept  "un-free"  elections in  the  East  zone.  He  contends that
an  all-German parliament could  easily  "digest"  a  minority  of
Communist  delegates so elected.
Not   much  less  obvious,  if  one  permits  oneself  open-eyed
examination  are  the  negative  aspects for  the  Western  powers.
The  British  are  faced  with  the  prospect  of  keeping  four  divi-
sions  in  Germany for  the  rest  of  the  century  at  the  cost  of
about   100,000  pounds  a  year.   The  French  recall  the  paper
promises  and   the  inspection  system  of  the   Versailles  agree-
the  London  Agreement
ment.  Both  are faced  with  the prospect  of  a "little  arms race"
in  that  uncomfortable "little  Europe"  as they  keep  pace  with
German   arms  expansion.   The   nonsense   about   arming   the
Germans  to  protect  Western  Europe  becomes  clear  when  we
look  and  see that  the  British  are pledged  to  keep  troops  on  the
Continent   for  a  half  century  to  protect  France  against  the
rearmed  Germans!
Free  To  Do  Anything  We Pleased
The  complex  provisions  of  the  London  agreements  reflect
fear  of  Germany,  not  fear  of  Russia.  The  safeguard against
Russian  expansionism is American  power,  not  a rearmed  West
Germany.   To  rearm  the  one  dissatisfied  power  on  the  Conti-
nent  is not  to insure peace but  to  insure war.  The  British  and
French  have  gone along on  this  because  they  could  not   afford
to  antagonize  the  U.S.  and  lose  the  dollars  they  still  need.
This  is  the  reality  behind  the  contrived  chorus  in  our  press
about   how  this  was  a  purely  European  agreement.    Dulles
left  Eden  and  Mendes-France  free  to  make  any  agreement—
if  it  were  an  agreement  to  rearm  the  Germans.
To  exploit   these  negative   factors  Molotov  has  more  time
than  most  American  newspaper  readers  realize.   The  London
agreements  are  only  "in  principle."  The  details  are  yet  to  be
worked  out  and  the  pacts  ratified.   The  French  will  vote  in
November,  but   Adenauer  must   talk   with   them   about   the
Saar  first  in  October.   The  future  of  this  territory,   which
will  determine the  balance of  power  in  iron  and  steel  between
Germany  and France, must  be settled  first  to  French  satisfac-
tion.   In  England,  the  vote  for  German  rearmament  at  the
Labor  party  conference  (the  Economist  of  Oct.   2  calls  it  a
victory  "as  thin  as a  wood  shaving"),  shows how  divided  the
British  remain.  Here,  of  course,  no  one  dares  think   on   the
subject.   German  rearmament  is  a  sacred  dogma,  our   own
American  "party  line."
Against   this  background,   Molotov's  willingness  to   discuss
free  elections  and  Vishinsky's  willingness  to  accept  the  prin-
ciple of  continuous  inspection  to  enforce nuclear  disarmament
represent  a change in  the  Russian position  which  it  will  prove
impossible  to  reject  without  exploration.
Help  Us Reach More  Readers  by  Sending Us the  Names  of  Your  Friends  for  Sample Copies
I. F. Stone's  Weekly, 301
Please  renew  (or  enter) my
N.m.
S«r«*t
«ty                              7,
Enter this  gift  tub  for  $4 mi
(T») Num.
fltr«*t
City                                                   7*
E. Capitol, Wash. 3. D. C.
sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:
»ne ————  State  _____
»re  (money enclosed) :
10-11-64
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
SOI  E. Capitol St, 8.E.
Washington  S,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mall
Matter
Washington, D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED