I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jun07.pdf

============================================================

By  Prof.  Ralph  Barton Perry:  A  Plea  for  A  Live-and-Let-Live  World—See  Page  4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  2, NUMBER 20
JUNE  7,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Meaning  of The  Oppenheimer Verdict
The  underlying  assumption  of  the  Oppenheimer ver-
dict  is  that  he  and  other   scientists  like  him  are  no   longer
needed.    His  past  Communist  associations  and  radical sym-
pathies  were fully  known to  General Groves when Dr.  Oppen-
heimer  became  his  right  hand  man   in   the  building  of   the
A-bomb.    The  report   of   the  special  hearing  board  says   "a
calculated  risk"  was  taken.    Indeed  the  report   discloses  for
the   first   time  that   the   alternative  considered  by   those  in
charge  of  security  was  "to   open  up  the  whole  project   and
throw  security  to  the  winds  rather  than  lose  the  talents of
the  individual."    "What  we  have  learned  in  this  inquiry,"
the  report  observes, however,  "makes  the  present  application
of  this principle  [of  the  calculated  risk]  inappropriate  in  the
instant  case."    This  says  obscurely  what  has  been evident  for
some  time  from  a  close scrutiny  of  official  utterance,  that  the
H-bomb  is  believed  to  be just  about  the  limit  of  destructive
power  which  can  be  safely  used.    The  problem  is  no  longer
one  of  theoretical physics in  the  discovery  of  new  and  vaster
weapons,  but   of  applying  known  theory   to   the   perfection
and  accumulation of  fissionable  and  thermonuclear  weapons.
But   this,   if   true,   is  only   true   if   one   believes  that   no
adequate  defense  is  possible,  or  even  worth  exploring  on  any
scale  comparable  to  that  expended  on  the  A  and  H-bomb.
The  assumption  that  men  like  Dr.  Oppenheimer  can  be dis-
pensed  with  is interlocked  with  the  assumption  that  the  only
real  defense  is  overwhelming  offensive   power.    This,  too, is
implied  by the report.   For it  says that in  "evaluating  advice"
from  a  scientist,  government  officials  concerned  with  military
matters  "must   also  be  certain  that  underlying  any  advice  is
a  genuine conviction  that  this  country  cannot  in  the  interest
of   security  have   less  than   the   strongest   possible   offensive
capabilities  in  a  time  of  national  danger."
This is  the  Air  Force  doctrine,  schrecklichkeit   in  a
new   guise.    The  unfavorable  verdict   in   this   respect   echoes
the  indictment  brought  against  Dr.  Oppenheimer  by  the  Air
Force.    As  was  charged  in  the  May, 1953,  issue  of  Fortune
in  an  article  reflecting  the  Air  Force   point   of  view  ("The
Hidden   Struggle   for   the  H-Bomb"),   "he   [Oppenheimer]
and  his followers have  no  confidence in  the  military's  assump-
tion   that   SAC   [Strategic   Air  Command]   as  a  weapon  of
mass  destruction   is  a  real  deterrent  to  Soviet  action."    The
"General   Considerations"   with   which   the   report   seeks   to
establish  principles  for  future  cases  makes  this  the   orthodox
standard   and  says  advice  which   conflicts   with   it   is  to  be
regarded  as suspect.    In  this  guide  to  heresy  hunting,  it  is  the
Air  Force on  which  infallibility  is  conferred.
II
The   full   implications  of   this  deserve  the   widest   debate.
It  is well  to  recall  that  the  decision  to  make the  H-bomb was
taken  without  consulting  Congress  or  the  public;  it  was  only
a  chance  indiscretion  by  a  Senator  which  leaked  the  news  in
the   fall   of   1949.   Now   a  further   decision  is  taken   by   a
hearing  board  which  went  beyond  its  sole constituted  purpose
—the  Oppenheimer  case.   Without   special military  hearings,
without   listening   to  the  opposing  views  in  the  Army  and
Navy   and   perhaps  the   Air   Force  itself,  conformity   with
the  point  of  view  of  the  Strategic  Air  Command  is  made  the
standard   for   adjudging   whether    scientists   and   others   are
"security risks."
Thus  another  fundamental  decision  of  military  policy,  on
which  nothing   less  than  the  life  and  death  of  our  country
itself   may  depend,  is  in  danger  of   being  foreclosed.    "The
strongest   possible  offensive   capabilities"  means~that  nothing
is  to  detract  from   the  main  job  of  mounting  the   offensive.
The  psychology  of  that  attitude  was  made vivid  by  Oppen-
heimer  himself  in   the   July,   1953,   issue   of  Foreign     Affairs
("Atomic   Weapons   and  American  Policy")   when  he  lifted
the  curtain  a  little  on  a  bitter  intra-mural  dispute.    Oppen-
heimer  reported,  "A  high  officer  of  the  Air  Defense Command
said—and   this   only   a   few   months  ago,  in   a  most   serious
discussion   of   measures  for   the   continental   defense  of    the
United   States—that   it  was  not   our  policy   to  attempt   to
protect   this  country,  for  that  is  so  big  a  job  that  it  would
interfere  with  our  retaliatory  capabilities."     Here  we  are  at
the  heart  of  the  real  controversy  which  led  to  Oppenheimer's
disgrace  and  banishment.
III
But  do the  people  of  this country   want   to  give  up
the  job  of  finding  new  and  perhaps  adequate  defenses  against
A  and  H   bombs?    Are  they  to  acquiesce  like  sheep  in  so
fundamental   a  matter?    Is  the  theory  correct  that  massive
and   overwhelming   retaliatory   power   will   ensure   peace   by
frightening   the   other    side  into   submission?    There   is   a
passage  in  the  same section  of  the  report  which  suggests  that
history   has  already  shown   that   this   is   false.     The   report
discusses Oppenheimer's  moral  qualms and "emotional involve-
ment"  in  having  helped  "to  unleash  upon  the  world  a  force
which  could  be  destructive  of  civilization."   Then  it  says—
and  these  are  the  words  every  American  should  ponder  closely
—"Perhaps  no  American  can  be  entirely  guilt-free,  and, yet,
these  weapons did  not  bring  pence nor  lessen the  threats  to  the
survival  of  our  free  institutions."     (My  italics).
This  is  quite  a  confession.    If  the  hearing  board  does  not
think  the  A-bomb  brought  peace  when  we  had  a   monopoly
8        ••
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  7, 1954
of  it,  what  makes  the  board  think  bombs  can  bring  peace
when  both  sides  have  the  power  to  destroy  the  other?  .  This
was  the  point  made  by  Oppenheimer's  famous  simile  in  the
same  Foreign   Affairs     article   when  he   compared   U.   S.  and
U.S.S.R.  to  two  scorpions  in  a  bottle.    As  for  lessening  "the
threats  to  the  survival  of  our  free  institutions,"  those  threats
are  certainly  internal   as  well   as  external.     And   this  whole
report  shows  how  the  spirit  of  our  free  institutions  are  being
poisoned   from   within   by   the   increased   fear,  hysteria   and
suspicion   the  fatal  gift  of  nuclear  fission  brought   with   it.
IV
To  cope with the  dangers    from  the Pandora's  box we
ourselves   unlocked,   we  must   now   seek  "absolute   security"
(as  the  report  puts  it)   and  in  that  search  resolve  all  doubts
against  the  individual  and  in  favor  of  the  State.    This  is  the
first  premise  of  totalitarian  society.   Just  how  far  the  shadow
of   this   case  may  fall  when  extended  by  this  means  will  be
evident   on  reflection.     All   who   agreed  with  Oppenheimer
that   the  H-bomb  should  not  be  built  must   become  suspect
with  him.    The  Atomic  Energy  Committee  was  3-2  against
the   H-bomb;   David   Lilienthal,   Sumner  T.   Pike   and   Dr.
Henry  D.  Smyth  agreed  with  Oppenheimer.    The  AEC  Gen-
eral Advisory  Committee  was unanimously against  an H-bomb
"crash"  program.     According   to  the  Fortune  article,  of   all
the  scientists  only  Enrico  Fermi  of  the  University  of  Chicago
"forthrightly   sided"  with  the  AEC  minority,  Lewis  Strauss
and  Gordon  Dean.    Do  all  these  become  security  risks  or  at
least  men  whose  advice is suspect?
The  infection  of  the  heresy reached  into  the  hearing  board
itself.    The  one-man  dissenter,  Professor  Ward  V.  Evans  of
Loyola   University,    who   thought   Oppenheimer's    clearance
should  be  restored,  said  of  the  scientist's  qualms:  "Only  time
will  prove  whether  he  was  wrong  on  the  moral  and  political
grounds."    And  what  of   those  men  in  the   Administration,
of   Secretary   of   the   Treasury   Humphrey   and   Secretary   of
Defense  Wilson  and   of  Eisenhower  himself  who  have  been
cutting  Air  Force  appropriations  and  believe balanced  forces
and   a  healthy   economy  important   to   true   defense?     The
theory  made  the  orthodox  standard  by  the  hearing  board  is
not  the  theory  on  which  this  present  Republican  Administra-
tion  has  proceeded, nor  the  theory  implied  in  the  President's
famous  atomic  message  of  last  winter.     Can  there  be  true
debate  and  honest  advice,  mutual  trust   and  respect,  in  the
atmosphere  this  report  reflects  and will in  turn  deepen?
The   impossible   search  for   "absolute   security"   is  incom-
patible  with   a   free   and  healthy  society.     If   this  is  to  be
national  policy,  why  should  anyone  be  trusted?    There  is  a
momentum  here  which  plays  into  the  hands  of   those  who
are  prepared  to  be  most  unscrupulous  and  extreme  in  pander-
ing   to   a   growing   paranoia.     One   of   the   charges  against
Oppenheimer  is  that  he  testified  for  others  who  were security
risks.    Shall  we,  then,  trust  the  long  list  of  men  who  testified
on  his  behalf?    They  included  some of  the  most  distinguished
names  in  American  banking,  business,  education  and  science.
But   will  this  protect  them  from  a  Jenner  or  a  McCarthy?
Will  the  men  who  smeared  General  Marshall hesitate  before
these  lesser  lights  in  their  struggle  to  achieve power  by  panic?
The  way  is  cleared  for  them  by  the  draconian  rhetoric  of
the  report.    "There  can  be  no  tampering,"   it   says,  "with
the  national security, which  in  times of  peril  must  be  absolute,
and  without  concessions  for  reasons  of  admiration,  gratitude,
reward,  sympathy  or  charity."    This   is  resonant  with   the
fanaticism  of  Terror;  this  is  the  spirit  in  which  Robespierre
sent  Danton  to  the  gallows,  and  Stalin  condemned  Trotzky
and  Zinoviev.    Neither  "gratitude"  nor  "charity"  is  to  stand
in  the  way  of  "security."    The  only  difference  is  that   the
wrinkled   face  of'  the   counterrevolution,   frightened   of   the
future,   peeps  out   from  between  these  fallacious  lines.
Why  fallacious?    Because they  carry  terrible  and famil-
iar  hidden  assumptions.    "Security"  is  set  up  as  a  standard,
as if  it  were a known quantity,  easily weighed  and  determined.
But  actually  where  does  security  lie  and  who  is  to  determine
it?    The  answer  of   this  report,  if   read  closely,  is  that   the
military  and  the   secret   police  are  to  be  the  judges.    Not
Congress,   not   popular   discussion,  not   free   debate,  but   the
Generals  and  the  FBI  are  to  determine  what  "security"  is
and   make  the   rest   of   us  conform   to  that   standard.    The
society  sketched  out   by  this  report  is  a  combination  of   the
garrison   and   police   states.
Attention  is invited  first  to  the  final  section  of  the   "Gen-
eral  Considerations."     This  deals  with  "the   role  of  scientists
as  advisers in  the  formulation  of  government  policy."    It  says
that  officials  dealing with  security  and  officials  "charged  with
the  military  posture  of our  country" must  be certain  that  the
advice  they   seek  "appropriately   reflects   special  competence
on  the  one  hand,  and  soundly  based  conviction  on  the  other,
uncolored  and  uninfluenced by  considerations  of  an  emotional
character."
This  is naive.   It  tacitly  assumes  that  somehow  the security
officers  and  the  military  men  do  approach  these  problems  with
objectivity  and  without  emotional  bias.    But  what  is  more
emotional  than  J.  Edgar  Hoover  talking  on  the  Red menace,
or  one  of  our  Generals  invoking  God  (as  they  do nowadays
in  all  their  speeches) ?   The  work  of  the  secret  police  and  of
the   military   breeds   special  types   of   mentality,  with   their
own   characteristic  professional   biases   and  emotional   colora-
tions.    These  things   are  unavoidable  in   these  special  tasks.
The  point  is that  in  a  free  society  special  biases  tend  to  cancel
off   in  free  debate,  and  that  special  constitutional   safeguards
are  set  up  to  prevent  control  by  those  very  types  of  men  on
which  this  report  relies.    The  very  structure  of  the  govern-
ment  was  designed  to  perpetuate  civilian  as  against  military
control,   and   the   main  bulwarks  of   the   Constitution   were
erected  against abuses by  the  police.
VII
We  have  come  full  circle  in  our  constitutional  devel-
opment.    One  of  the  tests  set  up  by  this  report  for  a  security
risk  is  whether  a  man  is  prepared  to  subordinate  his  private
judgment  to  that  of  the  security  police.    In  the  section  on
whether   a  man  may  be  loyal  and  still  a  security   risk,   the
report   says  a   proper   attitude   of   mind   "must   include   an
understanding  and  an  acceptance of  security  measures adopted
by  responsible  Government   agencies."    This  implies  that  the
government   knows   best  and  its  decision  must   be  accepted.
"It  must  involve,"  the  report  continues,  "an  active  coopera-
tion  with  all  agencies of  Government  properly  and  reasonably
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  7, 1954
concerned  with  the  security  of  our  country."    "Active  co-
operation" would  seem  to  be a euphemism  here  for  informing.
But  this  is  not   all.    The  report   goes  on  to  say  that   this
proper   frame   of   mind   "must   involve   a   subordination  of
personal  judgment  as  to  the  security  status  of  an individual
as  against  a  professional  judgment  in  the  light  of  standards
and   procedures  when  they  have  been  established  by   appro-
priate  process."    Finally,  the  report  says,  "It   must  entail  a
wholehearted  commitment  to  the  preservation  of  the  security
system  and  the  avoidance  of  conduct  tending  to  confuse  or
obstruct."    What  is  thus  called  for  is  complete  allegiance to
the   FBI.     Anything   which   might   "confuse   or   obstruct"
is  to  be  avoided.
On  the  altar  of  security  as  thus  established  all  else  is
to   be  sacrificed.     In   discussing  Oppenheimer's   readiness  to
defend  Dr.  Edward  U.  Condon*  and  his  continued  friendship
for   certain   security   suspects,   the   report   says   pompously,
"Loyalty   to  one's  friends  is  one  of  the  noblest  of   qualities."
But   it   adds  immediately   afterward,   "Being   loyal   to  one's
friends   above  reasonable  obligations  to  the  country   and   to
the  security  system,  however,  is  not  clearly  consistent  with
the  interests  of  security."
It  is  because  of  these  friendships  that  the  majority  found
Oppenheimer   a  security   risk,   though   loyal.    It   complains
that  several  times  Oppenheimer  declined  to  answer  questions
by  the  FBI  about  friends,  declaring  the  questions irrelevant.
It  uses  an  extraordinary  phrase to  condemn  Oppenheimer  for
this.    It  says "he  has  repeatedly  exercised an  arrogance of  his
own  judgment  with  respect  to  the  loyalty  and  reliability  of
other  citizens  to  an  extent  which  has frustrated  and  at  times
impeded  the  working  of  the  system."
A  medieval  inquisitor  might  have  used  that   phrase—
"the  arrogance  of  his own  judgment."    At  least  an ecclessias-
tical  court  would  have been  setting  up  over  private judgment
some  system  of  ancient   and  venerable  tradition.    This   sets
it   up   against   the   anonymous  judgment   of   a   notoriously
unreliable  and  politically  illiterate  secret  police.
VIII
A  striking  example  of  how  wrong,  unfair  and  vengeful
the  secret  police  can  be  is  afforded  by  this  report's  references
to   Joseph   W.   Weinberg,   once  notorious   as  "Scientist    X."
He  is  flatly  called  a  Communist  and  accused  of  having  been
involved  in  espionage.    Yet  nowhere  in  this  report  is  there
the  slightest  reference  to  the fact  that  when  Weinberg  denied
these  charges  under  oath  and  was  tried   for  perjury  here  in
the  District   of   Columbia  he  was  acquitted.    He  had  been
long  pursued   by  the  FBI  and  smeared  by  the  House   Un-
American   Activities   Committee    (in   its   1948   pre-election
special  Atomic   Espionage  report).    Yet  when  he  failed   to
plead   the  Fifth   and  the   government  finally  got  him  into
court,  the  government   failed  ignominiously  to  prove  a  case.
One  of  the  witnesses  against  Weinberg  was  the  same Paul
Crouch  who  gave  testimony   against  Oppenheimer.    Crouch
is  one  of   the   government's   stable  of   kept   witnesses.     His
testimony  is shot  through  with  distortions  and  contradictions,
and   typical   splurges   of   remembering   years   later   what   he
* The   report   does   not   call   Dr.   Condon   a  security   risk   but   criticizes
Oppenheimer    for   being   ready   to   defend    Condon   even   though   Condon
criticized    him.     Oppenheimer    is   condemned   for   not   being   vindictive!
McCarthy  Slips  On The  Banana
Mr.  Chavez.   At  the  beginning  of  the  address  of  the
Senator  from  Wisconsin—and  I believe  everyone agrees
with  him  that  we  should  prevent  enslavement  by  any
Communist    government—he    mentioned   Guatemala.
What  about the  enslavement  of  the  people of Guatemala
by  economic  pressure?    Would  the  Senator  from  Wis-
consin  care  to  give  us  his  ideas  on  that  subject?
Mr.  McCarthy.   Let me say  to  the  Senator  from  New
Mexico that  the  enslavement  of  people in  Guatemala is
the   same   as  Communist  enslavement   anywhere  else.
Guatemala  is  under  the  thumb  of  the  Communist  con-
spiracy,  which  at  this  time is  attempting  to  sweep  into
other  Central  and  South  American countries.
Mr.  Chavez.   That  is  bad;  but  what  about  enslave-
ment  by  the  United  Fruit Company?
Mr.  McCarthy.   I  cannot  answer  as  to  that.
Mr.  Chavez.   I  will tell  the  Senator  from  Wisconsin:
The  people  of  Honduras  and  Guatemala  are  starving
under  a  form  of  economic  enslavement.
—U.  S.  Senate,  May 19.
could  not  earlier  recall.    The  one  allegation  of   Communist
association  against  Oppenheimer  which  the  hearing  board  dis-
missed  as  "inconclusive"  was  Crouch's  story  that   the   Com-
munists  held  a  meeting  in  the  scientist's  home  with  Oppen-
heimer   in   attendance   in   the   summer  of   1941.*     Oppen-
heimer  presented  evidence  to  show  that  he  was  away  from
home  during  that   period  and  no  such   meeting   could  have
taken  place.    One  wonders  why  the  hearing  board  could  do
no  better  than  to  call  this  allegation  "inconclusive."    Was
this   an   example   on   its   own   part   of   that   wholehearted
acceptance  of  security  methods   (informers  and  all?)  which
it   sets  up  as  a  standard  for  judging  risks?
DC
Nothing  that  ever  came  from  the  pen of  Edgar  Allan
Poe  quite  matches  in  horror   the  full   report   of   the  special
hearing  board  in  the  Oppenheimer   case.    A  great  scientist,
a  sensitive man,  a  loyal  and  devoted  citizen   (by  the  board's
own  findings)  was  confronted   again  with  the  regurgitation
from  the  sewers  of  the  security  files.
But  perhaps  nothing  in  the  story  is  more horrible  than  the
defense   offered   in   the   dissenting  opinion.     Professor  Evans
said  there  was  not   '-'the  slightest  vestige  of  information"   to
indicate  that  Oppenheimer   was  not  loyal,  and  added—as  if
this  was  the  highest  recommendation—"He  hates  Russia."
Not  just  communism  alone,  but  "Russia,"  a  whole  nation,
a  historic  concept,  a  hundred  million  people.   But  where  but
in  present  day  Russia  could  one  match  the  standards,   the
police  state  philosophy,  the  suspicions  of  this  report?    Must
a   scientist  "hate  Russia"   to  be  respectable?    Is  it   not   his
province  to  try   and  understand  what  "Russia"  is?    Can  a
Christian  nation  thus  enforce  a  new  Gospel  of  Hate?    Can
a  nation  be  really  secure  which  demands  blind  unreasoning
hatred  instead   of  understanding?     Is  it  not   likely  this  way
to  blunder  into  war  and disaster?
*  Last  week   Crouch   threatened   to   file  a  $1,000,000   libel   suit   against
the  Alsop  brothers  for   exposing   him  in   their   columns  and  demanded   an
investigation   into   what   he   termed   a   conspiracy    by   the   Alsops,   Drew
Pearson,  the  Honolulu  Record,  the  Daily   Worker,   the  Nation  and  I.  F.
Stone's  Weekly   to  damage  his  reputation.
8  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  7,  195U
By  Ralph  Barton Perry: A  Plea  for  A  Live-and-Let-Live  World
Because  of  its  urgent   timeliness,  we  are  reprinting   from
the  New   York   Times  of  May  27  a  letter  by  Ralph  Barton
Perry,  Professor   Emeritus  of  Philosophy  at  Harvard,  which
we  believe deserves  to  be  circulated  as  widely  as  possible  by
peace  groups  here  and  abroad.—1FS.
Some  years  ago  the  country   was  persuaded  to  adopt   the
policy  of  "negotiation  from  strength," and during  the interval
the  strength  has  been  achieved  and  published   at  home  and
abroad.    This  policy  was taken  to  mean  that  when  it  became
apparent  that  our  policy  was  not  dictated   by  weakness  the
emphasis  would   be  shifted   to  negotiation.     But   this  is  not
what  has happened.    In  proportion  as our  military  and  indus-
trial  power  has  been  increased  we  have  become  increasingly
disposed  to  threaten  and  to  lay  down  ultimata.
In  order  that  their  political  support  may  be  obtained  the
American  people  have  been  encouraged  to  believe  that   they
can  have their  way in  the  world  provided  only  that  they  keep
ahead  in  efficiency  of  atomic  weapons  and  in  the  size  of   the
stockpile.    We  are  increasingly  dictatorial  in  relation  to  our
associates  and  increasingly  bitter  and  suspicious  toward  our
opponents.    This  attitude  of  mind  is  unrealistic  and  fatuous.
The  world  is  likely  for  some decades to  come  to  be divided
into  two  opposing  camps  so  evenly  balanced  that  open  war,
implemented  by  modern  technology,  would  be  so devastating
as  to   prevent   the   realization   of   the   aims  of   either   party.
There  is  no  possibility  of  peace  by  force  in  any  constructive
sense  of  the  term  "peace";  in  the  sense,  namely,  of  a  resump-
tion  of  the  social  and  cultural  progress  through  goodwill  and
cooperation.    The  only  alternative  to  a  peace  by  negotiation
is  a  prolonged  stalemate  or  an  era  of  violence  in  which  all
parties  are  ruined   altogether.
Peace  Requires  Patience  and  Mutual   Concessions
Peace  by  negotiation  does  not   mean  the  abandonment  of
principle.   It  means  that  the  realization  of  the  kind  of  world
which  we  desire,  and  rightly  desire,  must  be  postponed  until
it   can   be  realized  by   peaceful   persuasion;  as  is  now,   after
centuries  of  wasteful  bloodshed,  recognized  in  the  sphere  of
religion.    Meanwhile  we  must  live  together  on   the   surface
of   the  same  planet  with  those  with   whom  we   profoundly
disagree  and  whose  creed  we  hope  and  believe  will  ultimately
be  rejected  by  the  suffrage  of  mankind.
Peace  by  negotiation  implies that  there  shall  be  a  flexibility
of  policy  adapted  to  time,  place and  circumstance.    It  implies
making   concessions   as  well  as  demanding  them.     The   door
to   negotiation   is   closed   by   every   absolute   laid   down   in
advance,  such  as  the  nonrecognition  of  Communist  China,  or
the  nonadmission  of  Communist  China  to  the  United  Nations,
or  the  nonpartitioning   of  Korea,  Germany  or  Indochina.
Peace  by  negotiation  implies  a  residue  of  comity,  patience
despite  provocations.    It  implies a will  to  agree,  never silenced
or  weakened  by  the  acrimony  of  dispute.    Peace  by  negotia-
tion  implies  that  the  initiative  and  leadership in  worU  affairs
pass  from  the  bitter-enders,  however  strong,  and  the  Utopians,
however   idealistic,   to   statesmen    who   contrive    workable
formulas  of  settlement.
Officials  Imprisoned  By  Their  Own  Propaganda
The  diplomatic  agencies are said  to  be imprisoned by  public
opinion  and  by  domestic  policies.    This  is  undoubtedly  true,
but  it  is  often   forgotten  that  these  agencies  themselves  are
largely   responsible   for   the   imprisonment.     Public    officials
themselves  create political  forces and  popular  attitudes.   They
are  the  principal  instruments  not  only  of  political  action  but
of  political  education.    Through  their  perpetual  harping  on
the   menace   of   communism   they   have   created   a   political
atmosphere  in  which  anti-communism  has  become  the  chief
condition   of   social  prestige   and  of  appointment   or  election
to   office.
In  this  atmosphere  paramount  political  power  is  exercised
by  full-time  career  anti-Communists  who have  no  other  asset
or  qualification  whatsoever—no  ideas,  no  solutions  of  prob-
lems,  no  enlightenment,  nothing  but  the  tedious  reiteration
of  this  negative  appeal  to  fear  and  suspicion.
Strength  means  not  only  bargaining  power,  but   also  mag-
nanimity.    A  powerful   America   can  afford   to  make   con-
cessions  without   loss   of   pride.     There  is  a  kind   of   pride
which  manifests itself  in  self-congratulation,  boasting  or  the
brandishing  of  weapons,  and  which  has  to  be  excited  by  a
tribal  war  dance.    This  is  the  pride  of  the  weak.    The  pride
of  the  strong  manifest's  itself   in  the  steady  pursuit  of  long-
range  objectives  of  the  sort  which  can  be  achieved  only  by
understanding  and   generosity.
Extra  Copies  of  This  Issue  Are  Available—Why  Not  Distribute   Some?
Why   Not
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street
City
Renew  Now?
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Znn*            Stilt*
Enter  this gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  N«me
Street      .      ...       ......
City
_  Zone            _  State.
6-7-64
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED